ADOLESCENCE 


ADOLESCENCE 

ITS 

PSYCHOLOGY 

AND   ITS    RELATIONS   TO 

PHYSIOLOGY,   ANTHROPOLOGY,    SOCIOLOGY 
SEX,   CRIME,   RELIGION 

AND 

EDUCATION 

BY 

G.  STANLEY   HALL,   Ph.D.,   LL.D. 

PRESIDENT  OF   CLARK    UNIVERSITY   AND    PROFESSOR   OF 
PSYCHOLOGY  AND   PEDAGOGY 


VOLUME  I 


NEW   YORK    AND    LONDON 

D.  APPLETON   AND   COMPANY 
1917 


\^'i'5^f 


Copyright,    1904,   by 
D.    APPLETON    AND    COMPANY 


SCIENCE 

HQ 


3S 

Hz 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


PREFACE 


This  book  is  based  on  the  author's  Psychology,  now  in 
preparation,  which  should  logically  have  been  published  first. 
The  standpoint  of  the  latter  is  roughly  and  provisionally 
indicated  in  Chapter  X,  with  which  it  is  hoped  any  reader 
with  philosophic  interests  will  begin.  This  point  of  view  is 
further  set  forth  in  the  last  part  of  Chapter  XVI,  and  some 
of  its  implications  appear  in  Chapter  XII,  which  should  fol- 
low. That,  recognizing  fully  all  that  has  hitherto  been  done 
in  this  direction,  the  genetic  ideas  of  the  soul  which  pervade 
this  work  are  new  in  both  matter  and  method,  and  that  if  true 
they  mark  an  extension  of  evolution  into  the  psychic  field  of 
the  utmost  importance,  is  the  conviction  of  the  author.  Al- 
though most  of  even  his  ablest  philosophical  contemporaries, 
both  American  and  European,  must  regard  all  such  concep- 
tions much  as  Agassiz  did  Darwinism,  he  believes  that  they 
open  up  the  only  possible  line  of  advance  for  psychic  studies, 
if  they  are  ever  to  escape  from  their  present  dishonorable 
capitivity  to  epistemology,  which  has  to-day  all  the  aridity, 
unprogressiveness,  and  barrenness  of  Greek  sophism  and 
medieval  scholasticism,  without  standing,  as  did  these,  in  vital 
relations  to  the  problems  of  their  age. 

Idealism,  metaphysics,  and  religion  spring  from  basal 
needs  of  the  human  soul,  and  are  indispensable  in  some  form 
to  every  sound  and  comprehensive  view  of  it,  as  well  as  neces- 
sary to  a  complete  science.  But  these  are  now  volatilized  for 
both  theory  and  practise  by  the  present  lust  for  theories  of 
the  nature  of  knowledge,  which  have  become  a  veritable  and 
multiform  psychosis.  To  a  psychology  broad  enough  to 
include  all  the  philosophic  disciplines,  this  extravasation  of 
thought,  especially  in  a  practical  land  like  ours,  presents  a 
challenging  problem.  In  academic  isolation  from  the  throb- 
bing life  of  the  great  world,  with  but   faint  interest  in  or 


vi  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

acquaintance  with  nature,  afield  or  even  in  the  laboratory,  in 
habitual  communion  with  the  second-hand  sources  of  knowl- 
edge found  in  books,  in  the  solitude  of  the  study,  the  seden- 
tary and  mentally  pampered  thinker  has  lost  reality  and 
devotes  himself  to  a  passionate  quest  of  it  as  if  it  were  a 
Golden  Fleece  or  a  Holy  Grail  to  be  rediscovered  or  a  sacred 
sepulcher  to  be  won  from  the  paynim  scientists.  With  little 
experience  in  willing  and  far  less  with  the  floods  of  feeling 
that  have  irrigated  the  life  of  the  man  in  the  past,  the  "  experi- 
ence "  of  the  adult  consciousness  he  so  persistently  analyzes 
is  at  best  but  a  provincial  oracle  of  the  soul  which  is  incal- 
culably older,  vaster,  or  more  organized  than  it.  These 
searchers  still  think  in  a  pre-evolutionary  age,  and  if  they 
do  not  have  recourse  to  pure  apriorism  or  creationism  are 
peculiarly  prone  to  lapse  to  some  savage  type  of  thought  like 
spiritism,  telepathy,  or  transmundane  irruption,  and  their 
interest  in  the  soul  is  both  impelled  and  guided  by  the  im- 
perious question  of  its  survival  after  death,  which  is  not,  and 
probably  never  can  be,  a  problem  of  science.  It  is  they  who 
have  given  us  a  bankrupt  psychology  without  a  soul.  Be- 
ginning with  Berkeley's  ephebic  dreamery  about  the  existence 
of  the  external  world,  and  Hume's  satirical  and  not  very 
sincere  corollary  of  negation  of  the  self,  which  Kant  took 
in  grim  German  earnest,  they  re-edit  the  latter  with  countless 
variants  to  find  new  patent  ways  out  of  an  agnosticism  that 
belongs,  if  anywhere,  more  to  senescence  than  to  adolescence. 
Just  as  infancy  and  senility  have  a  certain  correspondence, 
as  does  each  stage  of  individual  evolution  and  devolution, 
and  as  youth  needs  to  anticipate  the  problems  of  old  age  and 
even  of  death,  so  the  young  need  to  feel  by  anticipation  the 
great  problems  of  reality,  but  not  so  seriously  as  to  endanger 
losing  their  souls  and  the  world  which  is  so  much  easier  to 
teach  than  how  to  find  them  again.  Just  as  it  is  only  a  crip- 
pled belief  in  God  that  rests  on  theological  arguments  for  his 
being,  so  at  the  age  when  the  whole  heart  of  youth  goes  out 
to  reality,  it  is  only  those  made  prematurely  old  by  the  peda- 
gogy of  doubt  that  need  the  cheap,  artificial  confirmation  of 
epistemology  in  order  to  face  life  with  resolution  and  en- 
thusiasm. The  studies  of  the  mind  need  new  contact  with 
life  at  as  many  points  as  possible.     The  psychic  activities  of 


PREFACE  vu 

childhood  and  youth  and  of  the  common  average  man,  often 
the  horror  of  previous  philosophy  and  the  actually  as  distinct 
from  the  theoretically  practical,  are  worthy  of  all  scientific 
honor. 

While  inanimate  nature  and  even  the  lower  forms  of 
animal  life  are  relatively  stable,  some  of  the  latter  having 
persisted  from  remote  geologic  ages,  man  is  rapidly  changing. 
His  presence  on  the  globe,  his  dominion  over  animals,  his 
diffusion,  and  the  historic  period,  are  a  series  of  increasingly 
recent  events.  While  his  bodily  form  is  comparatively  stable, 
his  soul  is  in  a  transition  stage,  and  all  that  we  call  progress 
is  more  and  more  rapid.  Old  moorings  are  constantly  broken ; 
adaptive  plasticity  to  new  environments — somatic,  economic, 
industrial,  social,  moral  and  religious — was  never  so  great; 
and  in  the  changes  which  we  hope  are  on  the  whole  truly 
progressive,  more  and  more  human  traits  are  too  partially 
acquired  to  be  permanently  inherited.  All  this  suggests  that 
man  is  not  a  permanent  type  but  an  organism  in  a  very 
active  stage  of  evolution  toward  a  more  permanent  form. 
Our  consciousness  is  but  a  single  stage  and  one  type  of 
mind :  a  late,  partial,  and  perhaps  essentially  abnormal  and 
remedial  outcrop  of  the  great  underlying  life  of  man-soul. 
The  animal,  savage,  and  child-soul  can  never  be  studied  by 
introspection.  Moreover,  with  missing  links  and  extinct 
ethnic  types,  much,  perhaps  most,  soul  life  has  been  hopelessly 
lost.  Thus,  the  adult  who  seeks  self-knowledge  by  intro- 
version is  banausic,  and  his  system  is  at  its  best  but  one 
human  document  or  return  to  the  eternal  but  ever  unanswered 
question  what  man  can  know,  what  he  should  do,  and  how 
he  most  truly  feels.  From  this  it  follows  that  we  must  turn 
to  the  larger  and  far  more  laborious  method  of  observation, 
description,  and  induction.  We  must  collect  states  of  mind, 
sentiments,  phenomena  long  since  lapsed,  psychic  facts  that 
appear  faintly  and  perhaps  but  once  in  a  lifetime,  and  that 
in  only  few  and  rare  individuals,  impulses  that,  it  may  be, 
never  anywhere  arise  above  the  threshold,  but  manifest  them- 
selves only  in  automatisms,  acts,  behavior,  things  neglected, 
trivial  and  incidental,  such  as  Darwin  says  are  often  most 
vital.  We  must  go  to  school  to  the  folk-soul,  learn  of  criminals 
and  defectives,  animals,  and  in  some  sense  go  back  to  Aristotle 


via  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

in  rebasing  psychology  on  biology,  and  realize  that  we  know 
the  soul  best  when  we  can  best  write  its  history  in  the  world, 
and  that  there  are  no  finalities  save  formulae  of  development. 
The  soul  is  thus  still  in  the  making,  and  we  may  hope  for 
an  indefinite  further  development.  Perhaps  other  racial  stocks 
than  ours  will  later  advance  the  kingdom  of  man  as  far  beyond 
our  present  standpoint  as  it  now  is  above  that  of  the  lowest 
savage  or  even  animals.  There  are  powers  in  the  soul  that 
slumber  like  the  sleepers  in  myth,  partially  aroused,  it  may 
be,  in  great  personal  or  social  crises,  but  sometime  to  be 
awakened  to  dominance.  In  a  word,  the  view  here  represents 
a  nascent  tendency  and  is  in  striking  contrast  to  all  those 
systems  that  presume  to  have  attained  even  an  approximate 
finality.  But  the  twilight  is  that  of  dawn  and  not  of  evening. 
It  is  the  morning  hours  of  beginning  and  not  that  of  com- 
pleting the  day  of  work,  and  this  can  appeal  only  to  those 
still  adolescent  in  soul. 

Holding  that  the  child  and  the  race  are  each  keys  to  the 
other,  I  have  constantly  suggested  phyletic  explanations  of 
all  degrees  of  probability.  Some  of  these,  I  think,  have  been 
demonstrated  so  far  as  is  now  possible  in  this  obscure  and 
complicated  domain.  Realizing  the  limitations  and  qualifi- 
cations of  the  recapitulation  theory  in  the  biologic  field,  I 
am  now  convinced  that  its  psychogenetic  applications  have 
a  method  of  their  own,  and  although  the  time  has  not  yet 
come  when  any  formulation  of  these  can  have  much  value, 
I  have  done  the  best  I  could  with  each  instance  as  it  arose. 
Along  with  the  sense  of  the  immense  importance  of  further 
coordinating  childhood  and  youth  with  the  development  of 
the  race,  has  grown  the  conviction  that  only  here  can  we 
hope  to  find  true  norms  against  the  tendencies  to  precocity 
in  home,  school,  church,  and  civilization  generally,  and  also 
to  establish  criteria  by  which  to  both  diagnose  and  measure 
arrest  and  retardation  in  the  individual  and  the  race.  While 
individuals  differ  widely  in  not  only  the  age  but  the  sequence 
of  the  stages  of  repetition  of  racial  history,  a  knowledge  of 
nascent  stages  and  the  aggregate  interests  of  different  ages 
of  life  is  the  best  safeguard  against  very  many  of  the  preva- 
lent errors  of  education  and  of  life. 

Modern  conceptions,  which  increasingly  make  all  mental 


PREFACE  IX 

processes  efferent  in  their  psychophysical  nature,  suggest  a 
now  impending  synthesis  that  may  give  to  our  practical  age 
and  land  the  long-hoped-for  and  long-delayed  science  of  man. 
To  help  bring  these  tendencies  to  their  maturity  is  the  task 
to  which  organic  thinkers  should  address  themselves.  Util- 
izing to  the  utmost  the  lessons  of  the  past,  they  should  free 
themselves  alike  from  excessive  subjectivisms  and  from  the 
limitations  of  old  systems  and  methods,  and  feel  it  their 
highest  duty  to  enter  upon  the  less  critical  and  more  con- 
structive work  of  building  larger  philosophic  mansions  for 
the  soul.  If  truth  is  edification,  the  highest  criterion  of  pure 
science  is  its  educative  value.  The  largest  possible  aspect  of 
all  the  facts  of  life  and  mind  is  educational,  and  the  only 
complete  history  is  the  story  of  the  influences  that  have 
advanced  or  retarded  the  development  of  man  toward  his 
completion,  always  ideal  and  forever  in  the  future.  Thus 
psychology  and  the  higher  pedagogy  are  one  and  inseparable. 
Not  only  the  beautiful  and  the  good,  but  the  true,  can  have 
no  other  test  of  validity  than  that  they  appeal  to  and  satisfy 
certain  deep  needs;  and  these  are  many.  From  this  general 
view-point  I  have  tried  to  show  how  truth  about  things  of  the 
soul,  in  an  unique  sense,  is  never  complete  or  certain  till  it  has 
been  applied  to  education,  and  that  the  latter  field  is  itself 
preeminent  and  unlike  all  other  fields  of  application  for  either 
scientific  or  philosophic  conclusions. 

The  years  from  about  eight  to  twelve  constitute  an  unique 
period  of  human  life.  The  acute  stage  of  teething  is  passing, 
the  brain  has  acquired  nearly  its  adult  size  and  weight,  health 
is  almost  at  its  best,  activity  is  greater  and  more  varied  than 
ever  before  or  than  it  ever  will  be  again,  and  there  is  peculiar 
endurance,  vitality,  and  resistance  to  fatigue.  The  child  de- 
velops a  life  of  its  own  outside  the  home  circle,  and  its  natural 
interests  are  never  so  independent  of  adult  influence.  Per- 
ception is  very  acute,  and  there  is  great  immunity  to  exposure, 
danger,  accident,  as  well  as  to  temptation.  Reason,  true 
morality,  religion,  sympathy,  love,  and  esthetic  enjoyment  are 
but  very  slightly  developed.  Everything,  in  short,  suggests 
the  culmination  of  one  stage  of  life  as  if  it  thus  represented 
what  was  once,  and  for  a  very  protracted  and  relatively  sta- 
tionary period,  the  age  of  maturity  in  some  remote,  perhaps 


X  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

pigmoid,  stage  of  human  evolution,  when  in  a  warm  dimate 
the  young  of  our  species  once  shifted  for  themselves  inde- 
pendently of  further  parental  aid.  The  qualities  now  devel- 
oped are  phyletically  vastly  older  than  all  the  neo-atavistic 
traits  of  body  and  soul,  later  to  be  superposed  like  a  new  and 
higher  story  built  on  to  our  primal  nature.  Heredity  is  so  far 
both  more  stable  and  more  secure.  The  elements  of  person- 
ality are  few,  but  are  well  organized  and  on  a  simple,  effective 
plan.  The  momentum  of  the  paleopsychic  traits  is  great,  and 
they  are  often  clearly  distinguishable  from  those  to  be  later 
added.  Thus  the  boy  is  father  of  the  man  in  a  new  sense  in 
that  his  qualities  are  indefinitely  older  and  existed  well  com- 
pacted untold  ages  before  the  more  distinctly  human  attributes 
were  developed.  Indeed,  there  are  a  few  faint  indications  set 
forth  in  the  text  of  a  yet  earlier  age  nodality  or  meristic 
segmentation,  as  if  amid  the  increased  instabilities  of  health 
at  the  age  of  about  six  we  could  still  detect  the  ripple-marks 
of  an  ancient  pubic  beach  now  lifted  high  above  the  tides  of 
a  receding  shore-line  as  human  infancy  has  been  prolonged. 
I  have  also  given  reasons  that  lead  me  to  the  conclusion  that, 
despite  its  dominance,  the  function  of  sexual  maturity  and 
procreative  power  is  peculiarly  mobile  up  and  down  the  age- 
line  independently  of  many  of  the  qualities  usually  so  closely 
associated  with  it,  s6  that  much  that  sex  created  in  the  phylum 
now  precedes  it  in  the  individual. 

Rousseau  would  leave  prepubescent  years  to  nature  and 
to  these  primal  hereditary  impulsions  and  allow  the  funda- 
mental traits  of  savagery  their  fling  till  twelve.  Biological 
psychology  finds  many  and  cogent  reasons  to  confirm  this 
view  if  only  a  proper  environment  could  be  provided.  The 
child  revels  in  savagery,  and  if  its  tribal,  predatory,  hunting, 
fishing,  fighting,  roving,  idle,  playing  proclivities  could  be 
indulged  in  the  country  and  under  conditions  that  now,  alas! 
seem  hopelessly  ideal,  they  could  conceivably  be  so  organized 
and  directed  as  to  be  far  more  truly  humanistic  and  liberal 
than  all  that  the  best  modern  school  can  provide.  Rudimen- 
tary organs  of  the  soul  now  suppressed,  perverted,  or  delayed, 
to  crop  out  in  menacing  forms  later,  would  be  developed  in 
their  season  so  that  we  should  be  immune  to  them  in  maturer 
years,  on  the  principle  of  the  Aristotelian  catharsis  for  which 


PREFACE  M 

I  have  tried  to  suggest  a  far  broader  application  than  the 
Stagirite  could  see  in  his  day. 

These  nativistic  and  more  or  less  feral  instincts  can  and 
should  be  fed  and  formed.  The  deep  and  strong  cravings  in 
the  individual  to  revive  the  ancestral  experiences  and  occu- 
pations of  the  race  can  and  must  be  met,  at  least  in  a  second- 
ary and  vicarious  way,  by  tales  of  the  heroic  virtues  the  child 
can  appreciate,  and  these  proxy  experiences  should  make  up 
by  variety  and  extent  what  they  lack  in  intensity.  The  teacher 
art  should  so  vivify  all  that  the  resources  of  literature,  tradi- 
tion, history,  can  supply  which  represents  the  crude,  rank 
virtues  of  the  world's  childhood  that,  with  his  almost  visual 
imagination,  reenforced  by  psychonomic  recapitulatory  im- 
pulses, the  child  can  enter  upon  his  full  heritage,  live  out  each 
stage  of  his  life  to  the  fullest,  and  realize  in  himself  all  its 
manifold  tendencies.  Echoes  only  of  the  vaster,  richer  life  of 
the  remote  past  of  the  race  they  must  remain,  but  just  these 
are  the  murmurings  of  the  only  muse  that  can  save  from  the 
omnipresent  dangers  of  precocity.  Thus  we  not  only  rescue 
from  the  danger  of  loss,  but  utilize  for  further  psychic  growth 
the  results  of  the  higher  heredity,  which  are  the  most  precious 
and  potential  things  on  earth.  So,  too,  in  our  urbanized  hot- 
house life,  that  tends  to  ripen  everything  before  its  time,  we 
must  teach  nature,  although  the  very  phrase  is  ominous.  But 
we  must  not,  in  so  doing,  wean  still  more  from,  but  perpet- 
ually incite  to  visit  field,  forest,  hill,  shore,  the  water,  flowers, 
animals,  the  true  homes  of  childhood  in  this  wild,  undomes- 
ticated  stage  from  which  modern  conditions  have  kidnapped 
and  transported  him.  Books  and  reading  are  distasteful,  for 
the  very  soul  and  body  cry  out  for  a  more  active,  objective 
life,  and  to  know  nature  and  man  at  first  hand.  These  two 
staples,  stories  and  nature,  by  these  informal  methods  of  the 
home  and  the  environment  constitute  fundamental  education. 

But  now  another  remove  from  nature  seems  to  be  made 
necessary  by  the  manifold  knowledges  and  skills  of  our  highly 
complex  civilization.  We  should  transplant  the  human  sap- 
ling, I  concede  reluctantly,  as  early  as  eight,  but  not  before, 
to  the  schoolhouse  with  its  imperfect  lighting,  ventilation,  tem- 
perature. We  must  shut  out  nature  and  open  books.  The 
child  must  sit  on  unhygienic  benches  and  work  the  tiny  mu§- 


XII  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

cles  that  wag  the  tongue  and  pen,  and  let  all  the  others,  which 
constitute  nearly  half  its  weight,  decay.  Even  if  it  be  pre- 
maturely, he  must  be  subjected  to  special  disciplines  and  be 
apprenticed  to  the  higher  qualities  of  adulthood,  for  he  is  not 
only  a  product  of  nature,  but  a  candidate  for  a  highly  devel- 
oped humanity.  To  many,  if  not  most,  of  the  influences  here 
there  can  be  at  first  but  little  inner  response.  Insight,  under- 
standing, interest,  sentiment,  are  for  the  most  part  only  nas- 
cent, and  most  that  pertains  to  the  true  kingdom  of  mature 
manhood  is  embryonic.  The  wisest  requirements  seem  to  the 
child  more  or  less  alien,  arbitrary,  heteronomous,  artificial,  fal- 
setto. There  is  much  passivity,  often  active  resistance  and 
evasion,  and  perhaps  spasms  of  obstinacy,  to  it  all.  But  the 
senses  are  keen  and  alert,  reactions  immediate  and  vigorous, 
and  the  memory  is  quick,  sure,  and  lasting,  and  ideas  of  space, 
time,  and  physical  causation,  and  of  many  a  moral  and  social 
licit  and  non-licit,  are  rapidly  unfolding.  Never  again  will 
there  be  such  susceptibility  to  drill  and  discipline,  such  plas- 
ticity to  habituation,  or  such  ready  adjustment  to  new  condi- 
tions. It  is  the  age  of  external  and  mechanical  training. 
Reading,  writing,  drawing,  manual  training,  musical  tech- 
nic,  foreign  tongues  and  their  pronunciation,  the  manipu- 
lation of  numbers  and  of  geometrical  elements,  and  many 
kinds  of  skill  have  now  their  golden  hour,  and  if  it  passes 
unimproved,  all  these  can  never  be  acquired  later  without  a 
heavy  handicap  of  disadvantage  and  loss.  These  necessities 
may  be  hard  for  the  health  of  body,  sense,  mind,  as  well  as 
for  morals,  and  pedagogic  art  consists  in  breaking  the  child 
into  them  betimes  as  intensively  and  as  quickly  as  possible  with 
minimal  strain  and  with  the  least  amount  of  explanation  or 
coquetting  for  natural  interest  and  in  calling  medicine  confec- 
tionery. This  is  not  teaching  in  its  true  sense  so  much  as  it  is 
drill,  inculcation,  and  regimentation.  The  method  should  be 
mechanical,  repetitive,  authoritative,  dogmatic.  The  auto- 
matic powers  are  now  at  their  very  apex,  and  they  can  do 
and  bear  more  than  our  degenerate  pedagogy  knows  or  dreams 
of.  Here  we  have  something  to  learn  from  the  schoolmasters 
of  the  past  back  to  the  middle  ages,  and  even  from  the 
ancients.  The  greatest  stress,  with  short  periods  and  few  hours, 
incessant  insistence,  incitement,  and  little  reliance  upon  inter- 


PREFACE  xui 

est,  reason,  or  work  done  without  the  presence  of  the  teacher, 
should  be  the  guiding  principles  for  pressure  in  these  essentially 
formal  and,  to  the  child,  contentless  elements  of  knowledge. 
These  should  be  sharply  distinguished  from  the  indigenous, 
evoking,  and  more  truly  educational  factors  described  in  the 
last  paragraph,  which  are  meaty,  content-full,  and  relatively 
formless  as  to  time  of  day,  method,  spirit,  and  perhaps  envi- 
ronment and  personnel  of  teacher,  and  possibly  somewhat  in 
season  of  the  year,  almost  as  sharply  as  work  differs  from 
play,  or  perhaps  as  the  virility  of  man  that  loves  to  command 
a  phalanx,  be  a  martinet  and  drill-master,  differs  from  fem- 
ininity which  excels  in  persuasion,  sympathetic  insight,  story- 
telling, and  in  the  tact  that  discerns  and  utilizes  spontaneous 
interests  in  the  young. 

Adolescence  is  a  new  birth,  for  the  higher  and  more  com- 
pletely human  traits  are  now  bom.  The  qualities  of  body 
and  soul  that  now  emerge  are  far  newer.  The  child  comes 
from  and  harks  back  to  a  remoter  past;  the  adolescent  is 
neo-atavistic,  and  in  him  the  later  acquisitions  of  the  race 
slowly  become  prepotent.  Development  is  less  gradual  and 
more  saltatory,  suggestive  of  some  ancient  period  of  storm 
and  stress  when  old  moorings  were  broken  and  a  higher  level 
attained.  The  annual  rate  of  growth  in  height,  weight,  and 
strength  is  increased  and  often  doubled,  and  even  more.  Im- 
portant functions  previously  non-existent  arise.  Growth  of 
parts  and  organs  loses  its  former  proportions,  some  perma- 
nently and  some  for  a  season.  Some  of  these  are  still  growing 
in  old  age  and  others  are  soon  arrested  and  atrophy.  The  old 
moduli  of  dimensions  become  obsolete  and  old  harmonies  are 
broken.  The  range  of  individual  differences  and  average 
errors  in  all  physical  measurements  and  all  psychic  tests  in- 
creases. Some  linger  long  in  the  childish  stage  and  advance 
late  or  slowly,  while  others  push  on  with  a  sudden  outburst 
of  impulsion  to  early  maturity.  Bones  and  muscles  lead  all 
other  tissues,  as  if  they  vied  with  each  other,  and  there  is 
frequent  flabbiness  or  tension  as  one  or  the  other  leads.  Na- 
ture arms  youth  for  conflict  with  all  the  resources  at  her 
command — speed,  power  of  shoulder,  biceps,  back,  leg,  jaw, 
— strengthens  and  enlarges  skull,  thorax,  hips,  makes  man 
aggressive  and  prepares  woman's  frame  for  maternity.     The 


XIV  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

power  of  the  diseases  peculiar  to  childhood  abates,  and  liabil- 
ity to  the  far  more  diseases  of  maturity  begins,  so  that  with 
liability  to  both  it  is  not  strange  that  the  dawn  of  the  ephebic 
day  is  marked  at  the  same  time  by  increased  morbidity  but 
diminished  rates  of  mortality.  Some  disorders  of  arrest  and 
defect  as  well  as  of  excessive  unfoldment  in  some  function, 
part,  or  organ  may  now,  after  long  study  and  controversy, 
be  said  to  be  established  as  peculiar  to  this  period,  and  diseases 
that  are  distinctly  school-  and  city-bred  abound,  with  appar- 
ently increasing  frequency.  The  momentum  of  heredity  often 
seems  insufficient  to  enable  the  child  to  achieve  this  great 
revolution  and  come  to  complete  maturity,  so  that  every  step 
of  the  upward  way  is  strewn  with  wreckage  of  body,  mind, 
and  morals.  There  is  not  only  arrest,  but  perversion,  at  every 
stage,  and  hoodlumism,  juvenile  crime,  and  secret  vice  seem 
not  only  increasing,  but  develop  in  earlier  years  in  every  civ- 
ilized land.  Modern  life  is  hard,  and  in  many  respects  in- 
creasingly so,  on  youth.  Home,  school,  church,  fail  to  recog- 
nize its  nature  and  needs  and,  perhaps  most  of  all,  its  perils. 
The  cohesions  between  the  elements  of  personality  are  loos- 
ened by  the  disparities  of  both  somatic  and  psychic  develop- 
ment, and  if  there  is  arrest  at  any  stage  or  in  any  part  before 
the  higher  unity  is  achieved  there  is  almost  sure  to  be 
degeneration  and  reunion  on  a  lower  level  than  before.  One 
of  the  gravest  dangers  is  the  persistent  ignoring  by  femininists 
of  the  prime  importance  of  establishing  normal  periodicity  in 
girls,  to  the  needs  of  which  everything  else  should  for  a  few 
years  be  secondary. 

The  functions  of  every  sense  undergo  reconstruction,  and 
their  relations  to  other  psychic  functions  change,  and  new 
sensations,  some  of  them  very  intense,  arise,  and  new  asso- 
ciations in  the  sense  sphere  are  formed.  Haptic  impressions, 
appetite  for  food  and  drink,  and  smell  are  most  modified.  The 
voice  changes,  vascular  instability,  blushing,  and  flushing  are 
increased.  Sex  asserts  its  mastery  in  field  after  field,  and 
works  its  havoc  in  the  form  of  secret  vice,  debauch,  disease, 
and  enfeebled  heredity,  cadences  the  soul  to  both  its  normal 
and  abnormal  rhythms,  and  sends  many  thousand  youth  a 
year  to  quacks,  because  neither  parents,  teachers,  preachers, 
or  physicians  know  how  to  deal  with  its  problems.    Thus  the 


PREFACE  XV 

foundations  of  domestic,  social,  and  religious  life  are  often- 
est  undermined.  Between  religion  and  love  God  and  nature 
have  wrought  an  indissoluble  bond  so  that  neither  can  attain 
normality  without  that  of  the  other.  Secondary  sexual  qual- 
ities are  shown  to  have  an  ever-widening  range,  and  parent- 
hood to  mean  more  with  every  upward  step  of  development. 
The  youth  craves  more  knowledge  of  body  and  mind,  that 
can  help  against  besetting  temptations,  aid  in  the  choice  of 
a  profession,  and  if  his  intellect  is  normal  he  does  not  vex 
his  soul  overmuch  about  the  logical  character  of  the  universe 
or  the  ultimate  sanction  of  either  truth  or  virtue.  He  is  more 
objective  than  subjective,  and  only  if  his  lust  to  know  nature 
and  life  is  starved  does  his  mind  trouble  him  by  in-growing. 
There  are  new  repulsions  felt  toward  home  and  school,  and 
truancy  and  runaways  abound.  The  social  instincts  undergo 
sudden  unfoldment  and  the  new  life  of  love  awakens.  It  is 
the  age  of  sentiment  and  of  religion,  of  rapid  fluctuation  of 
mood,  and  the  world  seems  strange  and  new.  Interest  in 
adult  life  and  in  vocations  develops.  Youth  awakes  to  a  new 
world  and  understands  neither  it  nor  himself.  The  whole 
future  of  life  depends  on  how  the  new  powers  now  given 
suddenly  and  in  profusion  are  husbanded  and  directed.  Char- 
acter and  personality  are  taking  form,  but  everything  is  plastic. 
Self-feeling  and  ambition  are  increased,  and  every  trait  and 
faculty  is  liable  to  exaggeration  and  excess.  It  is  all  a  mar- 
velous new  birth,  and  those  who  believe  that  nothing  is  so 
worthy  of  love,  reverence,  and  service  as  the  body  and  soul 
of  youth,  and  who  hold  that  the  best  test  of  every  human 
institution  is  how  much  it  contributes  to  bring  youth  to  the 
ever  fullest  possible  development,  may  well  review  themselves 
and  the  civilization  in  which  we  live  to  see  how  far  it  satisfies 
this  supreme  test. 

Never  has  youth  been  exposed  to  such  dangers  of  both 
perversion  and  arrest  as  in  our  own  land  and  day.  Increasing 
urban  life  with  its  temptations,  prematurities,  sedentary  occu- 
pations, and  passive  stimuli  just  when  an  active,  objective  life 
is  most  needed,  early  emancipation  and  a  lessening  sense  for 
both  duty  and  discipline,  the  haste  to  know  and  do  all  befitting 
man's  estate  before  its  time,  the  mad  rush  for  sudden  wealth 
and  the  reckless  fashions  set  by  its  gilded  youth — all  th^s^ 


XVI  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

lack  some  of  the  regulatives  they  still  have  in  older  lands  with 
more  conservative  traditions.  In  a  very  pregnant  psycholog- 
ical sense  ours  is  an  unhistoric  land.  Our  very  Constitution 
had  a  Minerva  birth,  and  was  not  the  slow  growth  of  prece- 
dent. Our  ideas  of  freedom  w^ere  at  the  outset  fevered  by  the 
convulsion  of  the  French  Revolution.  Our  literature,  customs, 
fashions,  institutions,  and  legislation  were  inherited  or  copied, 
and  our  religion  was  not  a  gradual  indigenous  growth,  but 
both  its  spirit  and  forms  were  imported  ready-made  from 
Holland,  Rome,  England,  and  Palestine.  To  this  extent  we 
are  a  fiat  nation,  and  in  a  very  significant  sense  we  have  had 
neither  childhood  nor  youth,  but  have  lost  touch  with  these 
stages  of  life  because  we  lack  a  normal  development  history. 
It  is  not  merely  that  we  have  no  antiquity  rich  in  material  and 
spiritual  monuments  that  is  the  best  nursery  of  patriotism  in 
the  young,  but  our  gallery  of  heroes  is  largely  composed,  not 
of  glorious  youth  but  of  sages  advanced  in  age  or  old  in 
wisdom  for  their  years.  Our  immigrants  have  often  passed 
the  best  years  of  youth  or  leave  it  behind  when  they  reach  our 
shores,  and  their  memories  of  it  are  in  other  lands.  No  coun- 
try is  so  precociously  old  for  its  years.  Few  as  these  are,  the 
senescence  of  the  original  American  stock  is  already  seen  in 
abandoned  farms  and  the  in  fecundity  of  graduates,  so  that  if 
our  population  had  been  unreplenished  from  abroad  for  the 
last  century  we  should  be  to-day  not  merely  stationary,  like 
France,  but  retrogressive.  In  this  environment  our  young 
people  leap  rather  than  grow  into  maturity.  Our  storm  and 
stress  strenuousness  too  often  imparts  at  least  the  narrow 
nervous  intensity  of  an  individuation  that  is  biologically  an- 
tagonistic to  genesis  and  that  is  less  ephebic,  as  we  fondly 
think  it  to  be,  than  ephebeitic.  We  are  conquering  nature, 
achieving  a  magnificent  material  civilization,  leading  the  world 
in  the  applications  though  not  in  the  creation  of  science,  com- 
ing to  lead  in  energy  and  intense  industrial  and  other  activities ; 
our  vast  and  complex  business  organization  that  has  long  since 
outgrown  the  comprehension  of  professional  economists,  ab- 
sorbs ever  more  and  earlier  the  best  talent  and  muscle  of  youth 
and  now  dominates  health,  time,  society,  politics,  and  law- 
giving, and  sets  new  and  ever  more  pervading  fashions  in 
manners,  morals,  education,  and  religion;  but  we  are  pro- 


PREFACE  xvii 

gressively  forgetting-  that  for  the  complete  apprenticeship  to 
life,  youth  needs  repose,  leisure,  art,  legends,  romance,  ideal- 
ization, and  in  a  word  humanism,  if  it  is  to  enter  the  kingdom 
of  man  well  equipped  for  man's  highest  work  in  the  world. 
In  education  our  very  kindergartens,  which  outnumber  those 
of  any  other  land,  by  dogma  and  hyper-sophistication  tend  to 
exterminate  the  naive  that  is  the  glory  of  childhood.  Every- 
where the  mechanical  and  formal  triumph  over  content  and 
substance,  the  letter  over  the  spirit,  the  intellect  over  morals, 
lesson  setting  and  hearing  over  real  teaching,  the  technical 
over  the  essential,  information  over  education,  marks  over 
edification,  and  method  over  matter.  We  coquet  with  chil- 
dren's likes  and  dislikes  and  can  not  teach  duty  or  the  spirit  of 
obedience.  In  no  civilized  land  is  teaching  so  unprofessional 
or  school  boards  at  such  a  low  level  of  incompetence.  No- 
where are  the  great  traditions  of  the  race  so  neglected,  the 
high  school  so  oblivious  of  either  the  nature  or  the  needs,  or 
both,  of  the  adolescent  stage  of  life.  The  American  college 
is  half  universitized  with  methods  and  matter  prematurely 
specialized,  and  half  bound  to  the  recitation,  marking  methods 
and  discipline  of  the  school,  while  the  apex  of  our  educational 
system  is  still  in  Europe,  where  hundreds  of  our  best  gradu- 
ates go  yearly  to  find  the  advanced  and  special  training  we 
are  still,  in  most  departments,  unable  to  supply. 

In  religion,  which  was  grafted  from  an  alien  ethnic  stock, 
we  lack  scientific  sincerity.  Statistics  show  more  sects  and 
more  clergymen  per  capita  of  population  than  in  any  other 
land,  and  a  rapidly  progressive  ignorance  by  the  rising  gen- 
eration of  the  very  Bible  we  profess  to  revere.  Churches, 
charities,  missions  abound,  but  our  slums  are  putrefying  sores 
whose  denizens  anthropologists  believe  lower  in  the  moral  and 
intellectual  scale  than  any  known  race  of  savages,  and  the  per- 
centages of  juvenile  crimes  and  the  average  age  of  first  com- 
mitment grows  steadily  earlier.  We  have  vastly  simplified  poli- 
tics by  separating  Church  and  State  and  by  our  voluntary  sys- 
tem, but  we  have  also  permitted  a  chasm  to  yawn  between  our 
secular  and  religious  life,  between  science  and  theology,  till 
even  seminaries  for  the  training  of  clergymen  neglect  and  even 
suspect  the  study  of  nature  as  if  God  were  a  hypocrite  and 
did  one  thing  in  his  works  and  said  another  in  his  Word,  when 


xviii  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

in  fact  each  supplements  and  is  an  imperfect  thing  without 
the  other.  We  try  to  impose  not  only  our  civilization,  but  our 
religion,  upon  lower  races,  even  though  they  are  thereby  ex- 
terminated, and  fail  to  study  the  nature  and  needs  of  even 
those  we  try  to  help. 

All  this  is  hard  on  youth,  which  was  better  understood  in 
ancient  Greece  and  Rome  than  now,  for  it  is  profoundly  re- 
sponsive to  all  these  influences.  Despite  all  this  I  am  an 
optimist  root  and  core,  not  merely  because  an  evolutionist  must 
hold  that  the  best  and  not  the  worst  will  survive  and  prevail, 
but  because  in  most,  though  not  yet  in  all,  of  these  fields  I  see 
clearly  the  beginnings  of  better  things.  Even  in  education 
and  religion,  the  strongholds  of  conservatism,  there  are  new 
and  better  ideals  and  efforts,  and  these  are  less  exceptional 
and  are  growing  in  power  and  influence  and  are  represented 
by  more  and  better  men.  In  vigor,  enthusiasm,  and  courage 
we  are  still  young,  and  our  faults  are  those  of  youth.  Be- 
cause they  have  been  great  our  suffering  has  been  also  great, 
and  pain  is  the  world's  best  teacher  whose  lessons  are  surest 
to  be  laid  to  heart.  The  very  fact  that  we  think  we  are  young 
will  make  the  faith  in  our  Juture  curative,  and  we  shall  one 
day  not  only  attract  the  youth  of  the  world  by  our  unequaled 
liberty  and  opportunity,  but  develop  a  mental,  moral,  and 
emotional  nurture  that  will  be  the  best  preparation  for  making 
the  most  and  the  best  of  them  and  for  helping  humanity  on 
to  a  higher  stage. 

As  for  years,  an  almost  passionate  lover  of  childhood  and 
a  teacher  of  youth,  the  adolescent  stage  of  life  has  long  seemed 
to  me  one  of  the  most  fascinating  of  all  themes,  more  worthy, 
perhaps,  than  anything  else  in  the  world  of  reverence,  most 
inviting  study,  and  in  most  crying  need  of  a  service  we  do  not 
yet  understand  how  to  render  aright.  Socrates  knew  that 
there  was  no  such  companionship  or  inspiration.  In  minis- 
tering to  it  the  higher  instincts  of  parenthood  culminate  and 
age  renews  its  youth.  This  should  make  teaching  the  most 
humanistic,  the  noblest,  and  the  most  satisfying  vocation  of 
man,  as  well  as  the  surest  safeguard  against  pessimism.  These 
years  are  the  best  decade  of  life.  No  age  is  so  responsive  to 
all  the  best  and  wisest  adult  endeavor.  In  no  psychic  soil,  too, 
does  seed,  bad  as  well  as  ^ood,  strike  such  deep  root,  grow 


PREFACE  XIX 

so  rankly,  or  bear  fruit  so  quickly  or  so  surely.  To  love  and 
feel  for  and  with  the  young  can  alone  make  the  teacher  love 
his  calling  and  respect  it  as  supreme.  That  it  may  directly 
and  indirectly  help  the  young  to  exploit  aright  all  the  possibil- 
ities of  the  years  from  fourteen  to  twenty-four  and  to  safe- 
guard them  against  the  above  insidious  dangers  is  the  writer's 
chief  desire.  Hence  the  book  attempts  a  pretty  full  survey 
of  pedagogic  matter  and  method  for  the  age  treated,  and  also, 
to  some  extent,  for  earlier  and  later  years.  To  motor  educa- 
tion, grouped  under  four  great  divisions,  and  will-training, 
one  of  the  longest  chapters  (III)  is  devoted.  The  last  part 
of  Chapter  XV  and  Chapter  XVI  treats  of  the  pedagogy  of  the 
English  literature  and  language,  history,  drawing,  normal  and 
high  schools,  colleges  and  universities,  and  philosophy,  and 
Chapter  XII  is  devoted  to  that  of  nature  and  the  sciences 
most  commonly  taught.  Menstruation  and  the  education  of 
girls  occupies  two  chapters  (VII  and  XVII),  hygiene,  crime, 
and  secret  vice  one  each  (IV,  V,  and  VI),  social  and  religious 
training  have  each  a  chapter  (XV  and  XIV,  respectively), 
and  the  education  of  the  heart  is  described  not  only  in  XI,  but 
in  XV,  XII,  and  elsewhere. 

This  is  essentially  the  author's  first  book.  It  has  grown 
slowly  under  successive  repetitions  and  amplifications  as  a 
lecture  course  to  graduate  students.  It  constitutes  the  first 
attempt  to  bring  together  the  various  aspects  of  its  vast  and 
complex  theme.  In  revising  these  lectures  for  publication,  I 
have  eliminated  much  that  was  technical  and  detailed  and  tried 
to  bring  the  subject-matter  of  each  chapter  within  the  reach  of 
any  intelligent  reader.  In  writing  it,  I  have  been  most  in- 
debted, especially  in  the  second  volume,  to  my  own  pupils 
past  and  present.  I  have  been  throughout  also  under  special 
obligation  to  the  librarian  of  the  University,  Louis  N.  Wilson, 
who  has  for  years  had  my  themes  in  mind  and  not  only  ob- 
tained books  difficult  of  access,  but  often  found  valuable  refer- 
ences that  I  should  not  otherwise  have  known.  Miss  Florence 
Chandler  has  not  only  typographed  most  of  the  book  and  made 
the  name  index,  but  made  me  in  countless  ways  a  debtor  to  her 
intelligence  and  interest.  Lastly,  Miss  Alice  Thayer,  A.  B., 
has  read  the  entire  proof  in  both  galley  and  page  form,  and 
brought  her  special  training  in  psychology  to  bear  in  correct- 


XX  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

ing  many  errors  not  only  of  commission  but  of  omission. 
To  all  these  my  debt  can  never  be  repaid.  Few  authors  have 
ever  been  more  fortunate  in  their  helpers,  and  I  do  not  like 
to  think  what  these  volumes  would  have  been  without  their  aid. 

G.  Stanley  Hall. 

April,  1904. 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Preface v-xx 


CHAPTER    I 
Growth  in  Height  and  Weight i 

CHAPTER    II 
Growth  of  Parts  and  Organs  during  Adolescence    .       .       •      51 

CHAPTER    III 
Growth  of  Motor  Power  and  Function 129 

CHAPTER    IV 
Diseases  of  Body  and  Mind    .        .        .        .       ^        .        .        .    137 

CHAPTER   V 
Juvenile  Faults,  Immoralities,  and  Crimes 325 

CHAPTER    VI  / 
Sexual  Development  :  Its  Dangers  and  Hygiene  in  Boys  .       .411 

CHAPTER    VII 
Periodicity 472 

CHAPTER   VIII 

Adolescence  in  Literature,  Biography,  and  History  .        .        -513 

xxi 


CHAPTER  I 

GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT 

Individual  growth  recapitulates  the  history  of  the  race — Rate  of  prenatal  growth 
in  height  and  weight — Statistical  methods — Prenatal  growth  in  animals — 
Causes  that  favor  and  hinder  it — Lessened  rate  at  eight  to  twelve,  also  at 
seventeen  and  eighteen — Delay  and  compensation — Last  stages  of  growth — 
Advantages  of  size — What  is  growth  ? — National  differences — New  genetic 
theories  of  retardation  and  the  period  of  increment — Augmented  size  and 
power  of  the  human  race — A  later,  higher,  new  story  superposed  on  the  older 
foundations  now  represented  in  boyhood. 

The  beginning  of  individual  life,  or  the  age  of  zero  for  all 
sexed  animals,  is  when  the  male  cell  penetrates  the- ovum. 
Their  attraction  for  each  other,  which  Maupas  thinks  a  relic  of 
the  psychochemic  tropism  of  agamic  generation,  is  the  bio- 
logical basis,  as  the  karyonomic  rejuvenation  thus  caused  is 
the  goal  of  love  in  the  ascending  stages  of  life.  By  their  fusion 
in  impregnation  these  two  master  cells,  the  bearers  of  heredity, 
acquire  the  momentum  of  growth,  which  next  to  love  is  per- 
haps the  most  interesting  and  important  fact  in  the  world  of 
organic  nature  and  the  key  to  most  of  its  problems.  The  new 
tensions  and  dominants,  to  use  the  terms  of  Reinke  and  Mor- 
gan, thus  set  free  and  given  definite  direction,  begin  to  develop 
a  new  individuality,  to  which  the  parental  one,  which  now  be- 
gins to  wane,  is  subordinated.  With  ontogeny  in  successive 
generations  the  immortal  germ  plasm  puts  on  mortality, 
somewhat  as  lost  limbs  in  lower  or  tissues  in  higher  forms  of 
life  are  regenerated.  The  marvelous  phenomena  of  impreg- 
nation, in  which  pleasure,  which  all  creatures  seek,  culminates 
and  in  the  interest  of  which  beauty,  spring-time,  blossoms,  or- 
nament, courtship  in  the  animal  world,  and  all  physical  and 
psychic  secondary  sexual  qualities  and  even  the  life  and  death 
of  the  individual  find  their  key  and  motive,  thus  start  the 
long  series  of  anagenic  processes  that  end  in  complete  ma- 
turity. 

As  the  germ-cell  begins  to  increase  in  size,  its  mass  or  sub- 
2  I 


2  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

stance  does  so,  of  course,  at  a  faster  rate  than  does  its  surface, 
so  that,  since  all  nutrition  must  first  be  absorbed  from  without, 
a  limit  is  soon  reached,  and  either  equilibrium  or  death  by  star- 
vation must  ensue.  This  result,  however,  is  avoided  by  cell 
division  which  begins  at  the  nucleus  and  proceeds  by  very  com- 
plex processes,  which  cytologists  have  lately  made  great  prog- 
ress not  only  in  tracing  but  even  in  explaining.  The  first  divi- 
sion results  in  two  smaller  daughter-cells  of  equal  size,  each  of 
which  grows  in  bulk  and  weight  but  does  not  separate  to  form 
each  a  new  individual,  as  do  the  primitive  unicellular  organisms, 
but  divides  again,  so  that  their  numbers  tend  to  increase  in 
geometrical  ratio.  These  successive  generations  of  daughter- 
cells  which  constitute  the  adult  body  are  thus  all  descended 
from  a  single  ovum,  and  frequency  of  cell  division  mainly 
determines  the  rapidity  of  growth.  The  rate  of  the  latter  is 
high  when  the  generations  of  cells  succeed  each  other  rapidly, 
and  low  if  the  intervals  between  successive  divisions  are  long. 
The  number  of  cells  thus,  as  Minot  has  pointed  out,^  depends 
ideally  upon  the  number  of  generations,  each  division  effect- 
ing in  some  degree  a  rejuvenation,  and  an  individual  or  biad 
being  simply  a  group  of  cells  produced  from  a  single  egg. 

In  this  process  the  individual  in  a  general  way  repeats 
the  history  of  its  species,  passing  slowly  from  the  protozoan 
to  the  metazoan  stage,  so  that  we  have  all  traversed  in  our 
own  bodies  ameboid,  helminthoid,  piscian,  amphibian,  anthro- 
poid, ethnoid,  and  we  know  not  how  many  intercalary 
stages  of  ascent.  How  these  lines  of  heredity  and  growth 
along  which  all  the  many  thousand  species,  extant  and 
extinct,  these  viatica  of  the  holy  spirit  of  life,  the  consum- 
mate products  of  millennia  of  the  slow  travail  of  evolution, 
have  been  unfolded,  we  know  scarcely  more  than  we  do 
what  has  been  the  impelling  force,  or  will  to  live,  which 
seems  so  inexhaustible  and  insistent.  Certain  it  is  that  the 
cellular  theory  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  assuming,  both 
in  the  organism  as  a  whole  and  in  the  species,  powers  that 
can  not  be  derived  from  the  cells.  Probably,  too,  the  original 
cause  of  phylogenetic  evolution  was  no  inherent  and  specific 

^  Minot,  C.  S.  Ueber  Vererbung  und  Verjungung,  Biol.  Centralbl.,  August  i, 
1895.  Growth  as  a  Function  of  Cells,  Proc.  Nat.  Hist.  Soc,  March  5,  1879. 
Also  Senescence  and  Rejuvenation,  Jour,  of  Physiol.,  i8gi,  No.  2. 


GROWTH  IN   HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  3 

nisus,  but,  as  we  know  it,  was  due  to  a  struggle  for  survival 
forced  upon  organisms  by  their  environment. 

The  early  stages  of  growth  are  telescoped  into  each  other 
almost  indistinguishably,  so  that  phylogenetically  the  embryo 
lives  a  thousand  years  in  a  day,  and  the  higher  the  species 
the  more  rapid  relatively  is  the  transit  through  the  lower 
stages.  This  law  of  tachygenesis  may  perhaps  be  expressed 
somewhat  as  follows:  Heredity,  which  slowly  appears  as  a 
substitute  for  the  external  causes  that  have  produced  a  given 
series  of  characters,  tends  to  produce  that  succession  with 
increasing  economy  and  speed  and  also  to  become  in  a  way 
more  independent  of  the  causes  which  originally  deter- 
mined it. 

The  human  ovum,  when  ripe  for  impregnation,  has  a 
diameter  of  about  0.2  mm.  Miihlmann  ^  has  averaged  the 
four  best  measurements  of  the  monthly  embryonic  growth  in 
length.  To  find  the  prenatal  monthly  rate  of  growth  in 
weight,  he  assumes  Welcker's  ^  estimate  of  0.00008  milli- 
gram as  the  weight  of  a  red  blood-corpuscle  measuring 
0.007  mm ;  then  an  embryo  of  the  above  size  would  weigh 
0.00228  milligram.  Assuming  with  Miihlmann  0.003  milli- 
gram as  its  weight,  these  results  appear  in  the  following  table : 

Prenatal  .-nonth.                        i.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.  8.  9.  10. 
Length  of  the  embryo  in  mm. 

at  the  end  of  the  month .. .       7.5  14.4  77  136  230  315  362  415  452  490 

Monthly  increase  in  per  cent.  3,650  92  434  77  70  37  15  14  9  8 

Prenatal  Grozvth  in  Weight 
Month.  o.        I.     2.     3.      4.       5.       6.  7.  8.  9.         10. 

Absolute  weight  at  begin- 
ning of  each  month  in  gr.  0.000003  12    88  284  634  1,218  1,834  2,235  2,717 
Increase  in  per  cent 633  223  123        92        51        22        21 

Thus  at  the  end  of  the  first  month  we  have  the  enormous 
growth  in  length  of  3,650  per  cent.  If  we  except  the  third 
month,  when  there  seems  to  be  another  considerable  out- 
burst of  growth  in  length,  the  rate  of  increase  is  less,  though 
with  oscillations  in  the  ratio  of  decline  each  month  up  to 
birth.  Weight,  according  to  the  above  table,  increases  from 
impregnation  to  birth  905,600,000  fold.  Here,  too,  the  law 
of  progressive  decline  is  clear.    During  the  first  three  months, 

'  Ueber  die  Ursache  des  Alters.     Wiesbaden,  1900,  p.  44  et  seg. 
*  Zeits.  f.  rat.  Med.,  vol.  xx. 


4  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

weight  increases  400,000,000  per  cent ;  during  the  next  three, 
5,182  per  cent;  and  during  the  three  preceding  birth,  but  252 
per  cent.  Thus  the  new-born  child  is  milHons  of  times 
heavier  than  the  ovum  in  which  it  started,  while  in  the  next 
twenty-five  years  the  adult  will  become  only  about  twenty 
times  heavier  than  at  birth.  At  the  third  month  the  cells 
must  therefore  have  divided  twenty-two  times  if  we  assume 
their  size  and  weight  equal.  Such  estimates,  of  course,  are 
only  approximate  and  more  or  less  conjectural,  but  it  is  cer- 
tain that  the  growth  per  cent  steadily  diminishes  during  each 
foetal  month.  It  is  as  if  the  nourishment  of  some  of  the  cells 
began  to  suffer  very  early,  and  this  may  perhaps  be  ascribed 
to  their  differing  remoteness  from  nutritive  material.  On 
Roux's  hypothesis  of  a  struggle  for  survival  between  the  tis- 
sues, organs,  and  cells  of  the  same  body  for  the  available 
food-supply,  some  have  sought  to  explain  even  the  develop- 
ment of  cavities,  folds,  and  divisions  as  due  to  atrophic  degen- 
eration of  those  cells  far  from  the  blood-supply.  Indeed, 
Miihlmann  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  there  is  no  otljer  cause 
in  pathology  for  necrotizing  processes,  than  imperfect  nutri- 
tion. From  Weismann's  premise  that  multicellular  organisms 
are  differentiated  from  unicellular  by  the  fact  of  death,  he 
infers  that  this  latter  is  due  to  the  symbiosis  of  the  cells,  and 
says  "  the  organism  dies  because  it  grows."  Growth  results 
in  death,  or  "  is  constantly  digging  its  own  grave."  He 
also  infers  that  the  function  of  cells  is  determined  by  their 
morphologic  position  in  an  organism,  that  it  represents  noth- 
ing more  than  a  phenomenon  of  growth,  and  that  current  tele- 
ological  points  of  view  are  irrelevant.  He  even  reaches  the 
surprising  conclusion  that  some  of  the  chief  structural  parts  of 
the  body,  such  as  the  skeleton,  muscles,  and  nervous  system,  are 
products  of  defective  nutrition,  and  their  growth  is  really  a 
regressive  accumulation  of  inferior  products.  Folds,  con- 
strictions, hollows,  the  separation  of  organs  one  from  another, 
which  are  phenomena  of  growth,  may  thus  be  due  to  the 
abortion  or  non-development  of  cells  which  are  beyond  the 
reach  of  food.  The  difference  of  distribution  of  nutritive 
material  also  causes  great  variations  in  the  rate  of  growth 
of  the  different  organs  after  they  are  once  differentiated. 
Thus  growth  develops  their  diverse  functions. 


GROWTH  IN   HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  5 

At  birth  the  child  is  cast  Hke  a  shipwrecked  mariner  by 
angry  waves  on  a  strange  and  unknown  coast,  and  finds  itself 
in  a  new  and  rigorous  climate.  Instead  of  the  conditions  of 
fluid  pressure  equal  on  all  sides,  it  is  now  in  a  stereometric 
world.  Its  nascent  senses  are  assailed  by  new  stimuli;  the 
alimentary  canal  now  comes  into  full  function;  the  lungs 
are  first  inflated  with  a  gasp,  the  occurrence  of  which  is  one 
of  the  most  easily  established  and  important  medico-legal 
facts,  connected,  perhaps,  with  the  characteristic  first  note 
of  the  human  voice,  which  philosophers  since  Kant  have  vari- 
ously interpreted  as  a  sign  of  pain,  a  shout  of  triumph  and 
joy,  or  a  purely  mechanical  insentient  automatism.  It  is  not 
strange,  therefore,  that  the  new-born  child  rarely  gains,  and 
often  loses  weight  during  the  first  few  days,  small  and  espe- 
cially prematurely  born  infants  usually  losing  more  than  large 
ones.  Indeed,  with  all  these  profound  readjustments,  the 
marvel  is  that  the  loss  is  not  greater. 

At  birth  the  average  and  maturely  born  child,  about  19^ 
inches  long,  has  a  little  over  one-third  the  length  of  body  it  will 
attain  when  adult,  but  its  weight  must  increase  nineteen-  or 
twentyfold.  During  the  first  year,  it  grows  about  nine  inches 
in  length  and  gains  about  thirteen  pounds,  or  increases  less  than 
one-half  its  length,  but  much  more  than  doubles  its  weight.  In 
both  respects  the  absolute  gain  of  the  first  year  is  greater  than  it 
will  be  in  any  other  year  of  life.  During  the  second  year  the 
child  should  grow  in  height  a  trifle  over  five  inches  and  gain 
four  or  five  pounds,  and  by  tw^o  and  one-half  years  of  age 
should  have  about  one-half  its  adult  height  and  nearly  one-fifth 
its  adult  weight.  From  this  point  on  to  the  prepubescent  accel- 
eration, which  begins  at  eleven  or  twelve  in  girls  and  nearly 
two  years  later  in  boys,  the  percentage  of  growth  in  both  height 
and  weight  is  rather  constant.  There  is  perhaps  a  little  in- 
crease at  seven,  and  a  certain  and  almost  universal  retardation, 
most  marked  about  the  tenth  year,  but  extending  over  several 
years ;  this  depression  in  the  curve  some  have  wrongly  thought 
complemental  to  its  elevation  during  the  period  of  pubertal 
increase.  Many  children  sufifer  slight  and  more  or  less  pro- 
longed diminution  in  both  rates  during  dentition,  while 
some  show  a  retardation  and  others  an  acceleration,  ascribed 
to  the  change  of  habits  beginning  with  school  life.    At  eight- 


6  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

een  there  is  a  decided  abatement  of  the  energy  of  growth 
and  an  increase  of  sickness,  but  one  or  two  years  later  in  boys, 
especially  if  under  favorable  conditions,  there  often  comes  a 
last  period  of  increase,  tapering  off,  some  think,  asymptoically, 
but  generally  with  irregularities,  a  period  imperfectly  known 
but  of  the  very  greatest  interest,  to  final  height  in  the  early 
twenties.  Girls  are  usually  slightly  less  than  boys  in  both 
weight  and  height,  and  twins  than  single  births.  Despite  Fas- 
bender's  ^  conclusions  to  the  contrary.  Boas  finds  that  first-born 
children  exceed  those  born  later,  first-born  girls  excel  others 
from  six  to  maturity,  and  first-born  boys  excel  from  five  to 
fifteen,  and  perhaps  later.  The  average  superiority  of  the 
former  is  lo  mm.  in  height  and  1.6  pounds,  and  that  of  the 
latter  7  mm.  and  1.2  pounds. 

A  literature  of  some  threescore  very  valuable  memoirs 
and  tabulations  of  human  grow^th  is  now  accessible,^  to  say 
nothing  of  a  far  larger  number  of  miscellaneous  records  kept 
in  schools,  gymnasia,  homes,  institutions  for  special  classes, 
etc.  Boas  has  summed  up  more  comprehensively  than  any 
one  else  averages  for  the  rate  of  growth  in  height  of  Amer- 
ican children,  based  upon  five  of  the  best  special  studies  of 
large  numbers,  viz.,  in  Boston,^  St.  Louis,^  Milwaukee,^ 
Worcester,^  Toronto,'^  and  Oakland,  representing  in  all,  45,151 
boys  and  43,298  girls.  With  a  very  sHght  modification  of 
the  age,  these  results  are  presented  in  the  following  table, 
which  explains  itself: 


'  Zeits.  f.  Geburtshlilfe,  vol.  iii,  p.  286. 

'  Consult  for  descriptive  bibliography  as  well  as  for  the  most  comprehensive 
summary  of  results  Growth  of  Children  in  Height  and  Weight,  by  Frederic  Burk, 
Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  April,  1898,  pp.  253-326. 

*  The  Growth  of  Children,  by  H.  P.  Bowditch.  Eighth  Annual  Rep.  Mass. 
State  Board  of  Health. 

*  Growth  of  St.  Louis  Children,  by  William  T.  Porter.  Rep.  Acad,  of  Science 
ef  St.  Louis,  vol.  vi,  pp.  263-380. 

*  The  Growth  of  Children,  by  George  W.  Peckham.  Sixth  Annual  Rep.  Wis. 
State  Board  of  Health. 

«  Anthropometrische  Untersuchungen  iiber  die  Schulkinder  in  Worcester,  Mass., 
»on  Gerald  M.  West.     Archiv  f.  Anthropologic,  vol.  xxii,  1894,  pp.  13-48. 

■f  The  Growth  of  Toronto  Children,  by  Franz  Boas.  Rep.  U.  S.  Com.  of  Ed., 
1896-97,  p.  1541. 


GROWTH  IN   HEIGHT  AND    WEIGHT  7 

Table  I 


Number  of 

Boys. 

Number  of 

Girls. 

Approx- 

imate 

average 

age. 

observa- 
tions. 

Average 
height  for 

Absolute 
annual 

Perc'tage 
annual 

observa- 
tions. 

Average 
height  for 
each  year. 

Absolute 
annual 
increase. 

Perc'tage 
annual 

Inches. 

Inches. 

Inches. 

Inches. 

5i... 

1.535 

41.7 

2.2 

5-3 

1,260 

41-3 

2.0 

4.8 

6i... 

3,975. 

43-9 

3,618 

43-3 

2.1 

4 

8 

2.4 

5-5 

7i... 

5.379 

46.0 

4,913 

45.7 

2.8 

6 

I 

2.0 

4.4 

8i... 

5,633 

48.8 

5,289 

47-7 

1.2 

2 

5 

2.0 

4.2 

Qi... 

5.531 

50.0 

5,132 

49-7 

1.9 

3 

8 

2.0 

4.0 

loi... 

5. 151 

51-9 

4,827 

51.7 

1-7 

3 

3 

2.1 

4.1 

Hi... 

4,759 

53-6 

4.507 

53.8 

1.8 

3 

4 

2.3 

4-3 

I2i... 

4.205 

55-4 

4,187 

56.1 

2.1 

3 

8 

2.4 

4-3 

i3i... 

3,573 

57-5 

3,411 

58.5 

2.5 

4 

3 

1.9 

3-2 

i4i- • • 

2,518 

60.0 

2,537 

60.4 

2.9 

4 

8 

1.2 

2.0 

i5i... 

1,481 

62.9 

1,656 

61.6 

2.0 

3 

2 

0.6 

I.O 

i6i... 

753 

64.9 

1,171 

62.2 

1.6 

2 

5 

0-5 

0.8 

I7i... 

429 

66.5 

0.9 

I 

4 

790 

62.7 

i8i... 

229 

67.4 

The  growth  of  742  different  Amherst  students  (classes 
1885-1901)  measured  twice  a  year  by  Hitchcock,  the  Amer- 
ican pioneer  in  this  work,  shows  the  following  results  for 
later  years: 


Age. 

Number  at 
each  age. 

Height. 

Weight. 

Actual  in  mm. 

Per  ct.  increase. 

Actual  in  kilos. 

Per  cent. 

16 

30 

134 

244 

153 

73 

49 

27 

12 

13 

7 

37-23 
20.76 
13.12 

7-99 
7.69 
6.40 
5.22 
4.92 
3-30 
4.28 
12.76 

2.15 

I.I5 

.70 

•43 
•50 
•34 
.29 
.26 
.16 
2.42 
.70 

8.01 
5-30 
4-56 
3.18 
3-31 
2.87 
3^98 
2.03 
1.92 

3^67 
4.19 

14.51 

17 

9-23 
7.41 

18 

iq 

5-49 
5^29 
5.60 

5.34 
3.15 
3.02 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

2S 

6.18 

Average 

8^45 

8 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


The  majority  of  observers  find  the  most  rapid  growth  in 
height  from  fourteen  to  fifteen.  This  is  especially  apparent  in 
the  latest,  and  in  some  respects,  the  most  satisfactory,  measure- 
ments, because  all  were  made  on  the  same  lOO  boys  from  thir- 
teen and  one-half  to  eighteen/  living  under  uniform  conditions 
in  a  military  school. 

Burk  has  massed,  from  some  of  the  data  cited,  the  weights 

of  24,500  children  of  Boston,  34,500  children  of  St.  Louis, 

and  9,600  children  of  Milwaukee,  making  69,000  in  all,  in 

such  a  way  that  at  each  age  the  number  of  children  from 

each  city  has  been  proportionately  represented  in  the  result 

in  the  following  table: 

Table  H 


Boys. 

Girls. 

Age. 

Average  for 
each  age. 
Pounds. 

Absolute 
annual 
increase. 
Pounds. 

Annual 
increase. 
Per  cent. 

Average  for 
each  age. 
Pounds. 

Absolute 
annual 
increase. 
Pounds. 

Annual 
increase. 
Per  cent. 

6i 

7i 

H 

9i 

lOi 

"i 

I2i 

13* 

I4i 

I5i 

m 

i7i 

i8i 

45 
49 
54 
59 
65 
70 
76 
84 
95 
107 
121 

2 

5 
5 
6 

4 

7 
9 

8 
2 

4 
0 

4 

5 
5 
5 
5 
6 

7 

10 
12 
13 

3 
0 
I 

8 

3 
2 

9 
4 
2 
6 

9 
10 

9 
9 
8 
8 

10 
12 
12 
12 

5 
I 
3 
7 
I 

7 
3 
3 
8 

7 

43 
47 

52 

57 

62 

69 

78 

88 

98 

106 

112 

"5 

114 

4 
7 
5 
4 
9 
5 
7 
7 
3 
7 
3 
4 
9 

4 
4 
4 

5 
6 

9 
10 

9 

8 

5 
3 

3 

8 

9 
5 
6 
2 
0 
6 

4 
6 
I 

9-9 
10. 0 

9-3 

9.6 

10.5 

13-2 

12.7 

II. 9 

8.5 
5.2 
2.8 

The  results  embodied  in  the  above  tables  are  graphically 
presented  in  the  chart  on  page  9. 

N.  V.  Zak,^  e.  g.,  measured  the  height  and  chest  girths  of 
1,434  pupils  of  Moscow  Real-schools  and  2,811  from  classical 
gymnasia..  He  finds  that  height  decreases  during  the  day 
slightly  at  eleven,  much  more  at  fourteen,  and  less  at  eighteen, 
while  weight  increases  also  most  at  fourteen.     At  every  age 

*  P.  Godin.  La  Croissance.  pp.  224,  Paris,  1903.  His  results  are  more  fully 
discussed  in  the  next  chapter. 

*  In  a  volume  in  Russian,  entitled  Physical  Development  of  Children  in  the 
Secondary  Educational  Institutions  of  Moscow.  1892,  pp.  271.  The  chief  points 
and  tables  have  been  translated  for  me  by  M.  de  Perott. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  9 

these  boys  are  markedly  taller  than  peasant  boys.  The  pubertal 
increment  of  growth  in  height  at  from  thirteen  to  fourteen  is 
more  rapid  than  that  of  English,  Swedish,  or  Boston  boys,  but 


Age  5     6     7     8     9    10  11    12    13    14    15   16   17    18    19 

07 

G6 

05 

64 

03 

03 

61 

60 

59 

58  120 

57 

50  110 

55 

54  100 

53 

52    90 

51 

50    80 

49 

48    70 

47 

40    60 

45 

44    50 

43 

42    40 

1  - 

S    f 

J3       3 

§  a 

e    .3 

A 

s 

1 

2 

a 
.3 

3 

•a 
§ 

1 

3 
o 
o. 
a 

t 

14 
13 
12 

10  1 
9  = 

6   1  w 

4  5  .§ 
3  §    ° 

2 1  i 

^-! 

11  S 

10 

9   6 

8   5 

4 

3 

3 

1 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

^ 

r'l 

i 

J 

y 

/ 

1 

// 

c 

// 

/ 

D- 

,'j 

1 

• 

' 

/ 

/ 
J 

f 

it 

' 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

''/ 

/ 

E 

J 

1 
1 

/ 

/ 

y 

^ 

/ 

/ 

// 

A 

/ 

I' 

/ 

y 

// 

/ 

// 

1 

// 

/ 

1 

/ 

\ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

J 

> 

V 

r 

^-' 

^ 

<v 

/ 

\ 

/ 

ly 

^' 

■"" 

\ 

f; 

\ 

F 

^ 

7< 

\ 

.-- 

^ 

\ 

\ 

/ 

,H 

^ 

s, 

G- 

1 

^ 

N 

/i-~ 

— 

1 

/ 

\ 

/ 

1 

T\ 

y 

\ 

^ 

\ 

/ 

\ 
\ 

/• 

/ 

\ 

'  V 



,  ^ 

k 

/ 

^ 

^ 

\ 

r 

:.'s^ 

'S. 

V? 

_j 

_j 

\ 

s 

Boys 


.^   Girls 


lO  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

the  decline  of  rate  from  sixteen  on  is  most  marked  yet  with  a 
tendency  to  resume  growth  at  twenty-one.  Up  to  eighteen, 
the  more  years  had  been  spent  in  school  the  greater  the  average 
height.  The  yearly  increase  in  height  fell  off  from  nine  to  ten, 
and  then  slowly  increased,  reaching  a  marked  maximum  from 
thirteen  to  fourteen,  and  thereafter  falling  off  more  rapidly  than 
it  rose.  Puberty  began  from  one  and  one-half  to  two  years 
earlier  among  the  gymnasiasts  than  among  the  rural  popula- 
tion, and  Jewish  boys  began  their  increase  in  height  earliest, 
and  from  thirteen  to  fourteen  exceeded  all  others  in  rate,  but 
were  then  overtaken  by  the  Orthodox  Russians,  whose  yearly 
increment  thereafter  exceeded  to  eighteen  or  nineteen. 

Prince  N.  W.  Viasemsky,^  on  measurements  embracing 
4,872  individuals,  not  only  found  periods  of  acceleration  alter- 
nating with  those  of  retardation,  but  thought  the  latter  charac- 
teristic of  the  period  of  the  development  of  the  reproductive 
organs,  which  modify  profoundly  the  equilibrium  between 
assimilation  and  expenditure  of  energy.  He  conceived  puberty 
as  an  acute  crisis,  and  that  bad  heredity  tended  either  to  prema- 
turity or  retardation,  as  well  as  to  intermittence.  School  had 
no  influence  upon  those  wdio  were  robust,  but  for  the  feeble  it 
was  helpful  in  approximating  their  manner  of  growth  to  that  of 
those  who  were  strong,  or  making  it  more  regular.  On  the 
whole,  he  thought  school  retarded  puberty,  and  also  that  a 
period  of  arrest  was  compensated  by  one  of  more  rapid  growth. 
He  also  found  that,  while  there  existed  a  certain  correlation  be- 
tween different  measurements,  it  was  of  a  purely  individual 
character  "and  could  not  be  expressed  by  any  general  formula, 
and  that  in  his  physical  proportions  man  did  not  acquire  his 
true  type  until  this  stage  of  life.  The  age  of  eighteen,  he  found 
unfavorable  and  critical  in  the  development  of  the  human 
organism,  generally  involving  arrest  and  diminution  of  activ- 
ity, as  if  the  energies  of  growth  were  exhausted  and  needed 
reparation. 

In  Europe  height  and  weight  have  been  determined  in 
most  of  the  leading  countries  for  yet  larger  numbers:   In 

^  Ismenenia  organisma  v  periode  sformirovania,  or  modifications  of  the  organ- 
ism during  the  period  of  puberty  from  the  age  of  ten  to  twenty.  278  tables.  43 
diagrams.     St.  Petersburg,  1902. 


GROWTH   IN   HEIGHT   AND   WEIGHT  II 

England,  for  over  40,000;  ^  in  Denmark,  on  17,134  boys  and 
11,250  girls;  ^  in  Freiberg,  on  10,343  boys  and  10,830  girls ;^ 
in  Sweden,  on  15,000  boys  and  3,000  girls;'*  in  Saalfeld,  on 
4,699  boys  and  4,807  girls  ;^  in  Moscow,  on  3,212  boys  and 
1,495  girls ;^  in  Turin,  on  1,048  boys  and  968  girls'^  in  Lau- 
sanne, on  2,000  children;^  in  Hamburg,  on  515  boys;^  in 
Gohlis,  on  1,386  boys  and  1,420  girls. ^'^  These  references 
might  be  indefinitely  extended.^ ^ 

Unless  we  except  the  unscientific  effort  of  Lange,^^  whose 
data  include  various  races  for  height  with  little  discrimina- 
tion, and  are  not  worked  up  according  to  the  scientific  meth- 
ods of  modern  statistics,  there  has  been  no  attempt  to  mass 
the  measurements  of  all  these  138,224  children,  and  indeed, 
this  would  have  still  less  value  than  the  above  totalizing  of 
returns  from  different  American  cities,  on  account  of  the  still 
wider  diversity  of  race  and  conditions. 


'  Report  of  the  Anthropometric  Committee  of  the  British  Association  for  1883, 
Francis  Galton  ;  and  Manual  of  Anthropometry,  Charles  Roberts.     London,  1878. 

*  Report  of  the  Danish  Commission,  Axel  Hertel. 

'  Die  Grossenverhaltnisse  der  Schulkinder  im  Schulinspektionbezirk,  Arthur 
Geissler  und  Richard  Uhlitzsch.  Freiberg,  Zeits.  des  K.  Sachs.  Statistischen 
Bureaus,  vol.  xxxiv,  1888,  pp.  28-40. 

*  Laroverkskomitens  Betankande  III.  Bilage  E.  Redogorelse  for  den  hygieniska 
undersokningen  afgiven  af  komitens  ledamot  Axel  Key.  Stockholm,  1885,  i,  p. 
528,  with  appendix  of  several  hundred  tables  and  curves.  Condensed  by  Burger- 
stein.     Schulhygien.  Untersuch.     Leipzig,  1889. 

*  Die  Korpergrosse  und  das  Gewicht  der  Schulkinder  des  Kreises  Saalfeld, 
Emil  Schmidt.     Archiv  f.  Anthropologic,  vol.  xxi,  1892-93,  pp.  385-434. 

*  Die  Schulhygiene  auf  der  Jubilaumsausstellung  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  Beforde- 
rung  der  Arbeitsamkeit  in  Moskau,  Fr.  Erismann.  Zeits.  f.  Schulgesundheitspflege, 
1888,  pp.  347-373.  393-419- 

'  Die  Entwickelung  des  Menschen  in  den  der  Geschlechtsreife  vorangehenden 
spateren  Kinderjahren  und  in  Jiinglingsalter  von  7  bis  20  Jahren,  Pagliani. 

*  Korperlange  und  Wachstum  der  Volksschulkinder  in  Lausanne,  Combe. 
Zeits.  f.  Schulgesundheitspflege,  1896,  pp.  569-589. 

'  Die  Korperverhaltnisse  der  gelehrten  Schiller  des  Johanneums  in  Hamburg, 
L.  Kotelmann.     Zeits.  des  K.  p.  s.  Bur.,  1879. 

^^  Messungen  von  Schulkindern  in  Gohlis-Leipzig,  Arthur  Geissler.  Zeits.  f. 
Schulgesundheitspflege,  1892,  pp.  249-253. 

"  Consult  on  the  whole  question  of  growth  in  height  and  weight  the  admirable 
article  and  bibliography  of  Burk,  Am.  Jour,  of  Psychol.,  vol.  ix,  p.  315  et  seq, 

^^  Die  normale  Korpergrosse  des  Menschen,  Emil  von  Lange.  Miinchen,  1896. 
He  has  also  constructed  a  somewhat  elaborate  Skala-Messtahelle  for  use  in  families 
and  schools  to  show  the  variations  within  what  he  deems  normal  limits  from  birth 
to  the  twenty-fifth  yean 


12  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

From  birth  to  three  and  one-half,  and  indeed  up  to  five  years, 
or  the  beginning  of  school  life,  we  have  measurements  on  rela- 
tively very  few  children.  Toldt  and  Hecker  are  still  our 
standards  for  length,  and  Schroder  and  Fehling  for  weight, 
during  prenatal  stages.  While  there  have  been  many  meas- 
urements at  birth,  Quetelet  and  Zeissing,  Camerer,  Dafner, 
and  Schmidt-Monnard,  the  former  based  on  only  ten  of  each 
age  and  sex,  and  all  on  but  very  few,  are  our  only  authorities 
for  growth  during  the  first  and  second  years.  So,  too,  most 
of  the  studies  of  large  numbers  stop  before  the  last  stages 
of  growth,  for  which  we  are  perhaps  still  further  from  having 
reliable  norms.  The  English  commission  and  Pagliani  began 
at  three  and  one-half,  Peckham  at  four  and  one-half.  Bow- 
ditch,  West,  and  Roberts  at  five  and  one-half,  but  most 
begin  at  six  or  seven,  soon  after  the  age  of  entering  school, 
and  at  thirteen  and  one-half  some  of  the  most  important 
of  these  measurements  end.  From  the  middle  teens  on  to 
maturity  there  are  far  fewer  numbers,  so  that  data  begin- 
ning for  the  pre-adolescent  increment  and  the  preceding  low- 
ered rate  of  growth  are  based  on  the  largest  numbers. 
Combe,  Geissler,  Uhlitzsch,  and  Landsberger  stopped  at  thir- 
teen, Carstadt  and  Hertel  at  sixteen,  Gilbert  and  Erismann 
at  seventeen,  Bowditch  and  Peckham  at  eighteen,  Pagliani, 
Porter,  Kotelmann,  Key,  and  Quetelet  at  nineteen  or  twenty. 
Those  that  continued  weighed  and  measured  small  numbers, 
and  even  at  eighteen  results  begin  to  be  uncertain,  while  after 
twenty  they  become  not  only  increasingly  variable,  but  some- 
times contradictory  and  even  anomalous,  some  even  suggest- 
ing a  shortening  of  stature  or  else  early  mortality  among 
tall  people.  Baxter's  ^  study  of  over  a  million  recruits,  on  the 
other  hand,  actually  indicates  an  increase  up  to  thirty-four. 

From  the  standpoint  of  modern  statistical  theory,  not 
only  the  methods  of  massing  large  results,  but  many  of  the 
more  comprehensive  studies  of  height  and  weight  leave  very 
much  to  be  desired.  There  is  often  lack  of  uniformity  in 
taking  measurements,  especially  where  this  is  done  by  teach- 
ers. Age  determinations  are  often  too  inaccurate,  and  fre- 
quency of  measurements  vary.     It  makes  a  great  difference 

'  Statistics  of  the  Provost-General's  Bureau,  2  vols.,  Washington,  1875. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  13 

also  whether  measurements  through  the  successive  years  are 
taken  upon  the  same  or  upon  different  children.  As  Boas, 
perhaps  our  best  American  authority  on  the  treatment  of 
these  statistics,  points  out,  "  the  younger  groups  contain 
many  individuals  who  will  not  reach  the  adult  stage,  while  the 
older  classes  contain  only  few  individuals,  who  will  die  before 
becoming  adults."  Those  who  are  remote  from  the  average, 
whether  too  large  or  too  small,  approach  pathological  condi- 
tions and  so  are  more  likely  to  die,  and  where  their  measure- 
ments are  included  variations  are  greater,  as  is  illustrated 
in  the  curious  decrease  in  brain  weights  of  males  after  twenty, 
due  to  the  exceptional  mortality  of  those  with  very  large 
brains  at  about  this  age.  Again,  statistics  of  large  numbers 
contain  more  of  the  poorer  classes  who  are  smaller  at  the 
same  age,  and  among  whom  there  is  greater  mortality,  while 
the  more  favored  classes  found  in  high  schools  and  colleges 
are  larger.  Perhaps,  again,  weak  or  small  children  go  to 
school  longer  than  those  that  are  strong,  or  stay  longer  be- 
cause more  slowly  promoted,  so  that  the  older  school  children 
will  include  an  undue  proportion  of  those  who  are  dull  and 
have  been  sickly.  Again,  if  many  children  of  slow  growth 
should  die  during  adolescence,  this  might  affect  the  overlap- 
ping of  the  curves  of  boys  and  girls,  for  the  amount  and  dura- 
tion of  the  latter's  superiority  is  smaller,  the  more  favorable  the 
conditions  of  life.  Once  more,  there  is  a  wide  difference  be- 
tween a  mean  and  a  type.  Children  of  the  same  racial  stock, 
like,  for  instance,  the  tall  Swedes,  represent  a  type,  as  would 
the  smaller  Italians  or  the  yet  smaller  Japanese,  but  the  mean 
of  the  two  races  might  find  its  analogue  in  an  average  between 
dogs  and  horses  which  would  represent  no  individual.  Every 
generalization  of  heterogeneous  persons  suppresses  facts  con- 
cerning individuals,  and  to  seek  a  cause  for  every  variation 
from  an  average  is  folly.  A  type,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a 
norm  to  which  every  individual  in  a  really  homogeneous 
group  tends  to  approach  or  to  vary  from,  and  in  a  pure  race 
the  average  persons  should  be  most  frequent,  and  around 
them  others  should  be  grouped  closely  as  well  as  symmetric- 
ally. Any  individual,  although  far  from  a  miscellaneous  aver- 
age, may  represent  a  type  and  illustrate  some  tendency  away 
from  the  average  in  some  new  direction,  or  may  even  be  a 


14  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

sport  leading  to  a  new  type.  Still  again,  race,  climate,  pov- 
erty or  riches,  which  are  known  to  cause  difference  for  the 
same  age,  would  almost  violate  the  law  of  social  type;  and 
the  theory  of  least  squares  has  suggested  many  more  or  less 
complicated  and  interesting  modes  of  treating  statistics  to 
determine  their  real  significance  so  as  not  only  to  present, 
as  e.  g.,  by  percentile  grades,  but  even  to  evaluate,  the  dif- 
ferent degrees  of  departures  from  the  mean. 

It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  some  of  the  most  valuable 
measurements  are  those  made  upon  a  single  child  or  upon 
a  very  few.  This  method  is  perhaps  best  illustrated  by 
Weiner's  ^  measurement  of  the  height  of  each  of  his  four  sons 
from  birth  to  the  age  of  twenty-five  years.  In  the  graphic  illus- 
tration of  these  results  on  the  opposite  page,  A  represents  the 
growth  curve  of  the  three  older  sons,  and  B  the  absolute  annual 
increase;  the  heavy  line  is  the  oldest,  the  light  the  second, 
the  dotted  the  third  son;  figures  on  the  left  apply  to  curves 
A,  and  on  the  right,  to  curves  B.  The  fourth  son,  by  a  differ- 
ent mother,  taller  and  older  than  the  first,  follows  a  different 
curve  in  both  height  and  weight. 

Camerer,^  too,  has  studied  his  own  children,  and  with  the 
most  exact  methods,  to  determine  their  metabolism,  although 
his  best  work  has  been  done  on  infants.  Landsberger,^  fol- 
lowed a  few  boys  for  seven  years. 

It  is,  however,  quite  remarkable  that  whether  individuals 
or  large  groups  are  studied,  the  main  characteristics  of  the 
curves  of  growth  remain  the  same  for  both  height  and 
weight,  so  that  we  have  the  following  established  results: 
first,  as  shown  in  every  study  since  Quetelet,  a  marked  pre- 
pubescent  acceleration  in  both  height  and  weight;  second, 
precedence  of  girls  in  this  accelerated  growth  by  a  year  or 
two;  third,  a  period  of  slightly  diminished  growth  centering 
about  the  ages  from  eight  or  nine  to  ten  or  eleven ;  fourth, 
a  gradual  and  probably  irregular  tapering  off  of  growth  in 
height   at  about  eighteen  or  nineteen,   and   to  a  degree,  of 

'  Das  Wachstum  des  menschlichen  KSrpefs,  Christian  Wiener.  Karlsruhe,  1890. 

'  Untersuchungen  liber  Massenwachsthum  und  Langenwachstum.  Jahrb.  f. 
Kinderheilkunde,  1893,  pp.  249-293. 

'  Das  Wachstum  im  Alter  der  Schulpflicht.  Archiv  f.  Anthropologie,  vol.  xvii, 
pp.  229-264. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT 


15 


weight  a  few  years  later,  concerning  which  much  remains  yet 
to  be  learned ;   and,  fifth,  as  shown  in  many  but  not  in  all  of 


Age     1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13    14     15    10     17    18     19     30 

175 

170 

160 
150 

140 

130 

120 

110 

100 

90 

80 

70 

60 
55 

1 
a 

6 

^^^^ 

-^ 

---■ 

T 

25 
21 
23 

22 
21 
20 
19 
18 
17 
10 
15 
14 
13 
12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 

,^ 

-^ 

^ 

/f' 

'/ 
/ 

/. 

7/ 

//,' 

/ 

v/ 

/ 

/, 

Y 

'/ 

\ 

A; 

/ 

\ 

/ 

/ 

[ 

1 

/ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

I'm 

/ 

f 

1 

/ 

1 

/ 

/ 

/ 

1/ 

''l\ 

!l 

1        \ 

/ 

'' 

\ 

\ 

r~ 

s 

t 

/ 

1 

A  / 

1 

N 

\  J 

/ 

/ 

I  \ 

1 

N 

A 

-\ 

B 

yl 

\ 

A 

\ 

\ 

f/ 

^ 

_ 

V 

T 

' ! 

> 

/  y 

\ 

\ 

\ 

N 

'/ 

1 
1 

\\ 

V 

\ 

1 

\i 

y 

\ 

v\ 

\ 
\ 

\ 

>\ 

\ 

N 

'^v 

these  studies,  a  very  slight  retardation  near  the  period  of  school 
entrance  with  an  acceleration  shortly  after.  These  are  cen- 
ters of  interest  for  our  purpose  to  be  considered  in  some 
detail. 


l6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Bowditch  ^  found  that  the  relation  of  weight  and  height 
in  growing  children  is  such,  that  at  heights  below  58  inches, 
boys  are  heavier  than  girls  in  proportion  to  their  stature;  at 
heights  above  this,  the  reverse  is  the  case.  By  a  supplemen- 
tary application  of  Galton's  methods  to  his  data  still  later,  he  ^ 
found  that  the  period  of  pubescent  acceleration  of  growth 
occurred  at  an  earlier  age  in  large  than  in  small  children,  or 
that  large  children  achieve  their  most  rapid  growth  at  an 
earlier  age  than  small  ones;  that  this  growth  period  differs 
in  larger  boys  from  that  in  small  boys  in  duration  rather  than 
in  intensity,  and  that  in  girls  this  difference  is  not  apparent. 
He  also  found  that  at  eleven  there  is  a  remarkably  slow 
growth  in  weight  and  height  in  both  girls  and  boys,  less, 
in  fact,  than  for  several  years  preceding  or  subsequent  to  it, 
and  that  in  girls  a  similar  but  less  marked  period  of  retarded 
growth  occurs  at  nine,  but  the  rate  of  increase  in  weight 
decreases  less.  The  period  of  female  superiority  in  height 
was  found  to  be  less  in  tall  than  in  short  children,  while  the 
female  superiority  in  weight  was  found  to  be  more  marked 
in  heavy  than  in  hght  children.  The  author  concludes  by 
desiderating  annual  measurements  of  not  only  growth  but 
strength,  especially  during  adolescence,  besides  annual  school 
examinations,  not  only  the  purpose  of  recording  power  and 
size,  but  to  find  whether  pupils  are  progressing  physically 
under  the  environment  of  instruction,  regime,  etc. 

The  Milwaukee  studies  led  to  the  conclusion  that  boys 
are  taller  till  the  twelfth  and  heavier  till  the  thirteenth  year, 
but  from  thirteen  to  fifteen  girls  are  both  taller  and  heavier; 
that  after  fifteen  boys  exceed  in  both  weight  and  height,  and 
that  girls  almost  cease  to  grow  at  seventeen. 

Key  found  that  Swedish  boys  grow  rapidly  in  the  seventh 
and  eighth  year.  From  the  ninth  to  the  thirteenth  year  their 
rate  of  growth  diminishes,  and  they  may  reach  almost  a 
standstill  at  the  tenth  year,  which  falls  about  midway  be- 
tween two  periods  of  growth  acceleration.  The  curve  of  in- 
crease at  the  fourteenth  year  is  steep  and   for  height,  con- 

•  Boston  Med.  and  Surgical  Journal,  October  ig,  1872. 

'  The  Growth  of  Children  studied  by  Galton's  Percentile  Grades,  by  H.  P. 
Bowditch.  Twenty-second  Annual  Report  Mass.  State  Board  of  Health,  1890,  pp. 
479-525. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  1? 

tinues  through  four  years,  reaching  its  maximum  at  the  fif- 
teenth and  ending  with  the  seventeenth  year.  Weight 
increases  during  all  this  period,  but  at  first  not  so  fast,  and 
reaches  its  maximum  of  rate  at  the  sixteenth  year,  or  one 
year  later  than  the  fastest  growth  in  height.  Swedish  boys 
grow  heavy  fastest  in  the  sixteenth  and  through  a  part  of  the 
seventeenth  year.  At  seventeen,  and  on  at  least  to  twenty, 
boys  grow  in  weight  more  than  in  height.  At  eighteen  the 
curve  of  growth  decreases  rapidly  to  a  much  slower  rate.  Key's 
results  showed  that  schoolboys  pass  through  three  distinct 
periods  of  growth:  a  moderate  increase  in  the  sixth  and 
seventh  years,  a  weaker  growth  from  the  ninth  to  the  thir- 
teenth year,  and  a  much  more  rapid  increase  in  height  and 
weight  from  the  fourteenth  to  the  sixteenth  year.  The 
growth  of  his  girls  is  also  periodic,  but  comes  a  few  years 
earlier  than  that  of  boys.  Swedish  pass  American  boys  in 
height  and  weight  in  the  nineteenth  year.  The  period  of 
growth  begins  earlier  with  the  well-to-do  than  with  the  poorer 
classes,  but  is  more  rapid  when  it  does  come,  with  the  latter. 
The  period  of  diminished  growth  for  girls  is  like  all  the 
other  stages,  earlier  and  less  marked.  Their  year  of  min- 
imum growth  is  nine.  The  great  acceleration  in  growth- 
rate  for  height  begins  at  the  tenth  year  in  Swedish  girls  from 
well-to-do  families  and  lasts  five  years,  reaching  its  maximum 
at  the  twelfth,  or  three  years  earlier  than  with  boys.  At  fif- 
teen the  curve  of  growth  falls,  first  slowly  and  then  rapidly, 
and  at  seventeen  nearly  reaches  zero.  Growth  in  weight 
begins  at  twelve  and  lasts  four  years  with  the  maximum  at 
fourteen,  which  is  the  year  of  most  vigorous  growth  in  girls. 
Weight  continues  to  increase  rapidly  during  the  seventeenth 
year,  and  sinks  nearly  to  zero  at  twenty,  when  girls  seem  to 
have  reached  nearly  the  limit  of  their  physical  development. 
The  first  menstruation  appears  from  one  to  two  years  after 
the  maximum  growth  in  height.  For  both  sexes  growth  in 
height  precedes  that  in  weight.  The  superiority  of  girls  over 
boys  in  both  height  and  weight  lasts  five  years,  or  from  the 
twelfth  to  the  seventeenth  year,  which  is  much  longer  than 
other  observers  have  found.  Danish  girls,  according  to  Her- 
tel,  increase  in  height  most  rapidly  from  twelve  to  fourteen, 
and  boys  from  thirteen  to  sixteen  ;  and  in  weight,  girls  increase 
3  - 


1 8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

most  from  twelve  to  fifteen,  and  boys  from  about  thirteen 
to  sixteen  or  seventeen,  and  before  and  after  growth  is 
less  rapid. 

There  is  much  consensus  among  investigators  that  from 
eleven  (Bowditch,  Geissler,  Uhlitzsch,  Combe)  or  twelve, 
(Key,  Hertel)  till  fourteen  (Combe)  or  even  sixteen  (Key, 
Hertel),  girls  are  taller  than  boys  and  are  then  overtaken  by 
them.  This  is  by  some  thought  to  be  true  of  all  races  and 
classes  of  society.  Only  Lange,  Quetelet,  Liharzik,  and 
Wiener,  all  of  whom  measured  small  numbers,  think  that  in 
length  of  body  girls  remain  always  behind  boys  of  the  same 
age.  Lange  points  out  that  the  period  of  excess  of  girls 
over  boys  has  been  most  marked  by  observers  who  have 
studied  the  hard-working  classes,  and  that  it  may  be  excep- 
tional if  not  abnormal  and  can  not  be  called  as  yet  estab- 
lished independently  of  mode  of  life  and  social  station.  While 
on  the  whole,  the  evidence  seems  to  us  to  point  pretty  clearly  to 
a  more  or  less  prolonged  superiority  of  girls,  the  question  as  to 
whether  they  actually  exceed  boys  is  of  much  less  import 
than  that  they  have  a  period  of  rapid  increment  and  that  it 
precedes  that  of  boys. 

Only  Quetelet,  writing  before  modern  refinements  of 
method  and  dominated  by  mathematical  theory,  who,  as  we 
saw,  measured  only  ten  individuals  of  each  sex  for  each  year, 
failed  to  note  this  sudden  outburst  of  growth  in  height  or 
weight.  It  is,  however,  not  only  demonstrated  by  all  careful 
studies  wnthin  the  last  thirty  years  and  patent  to  common  obser- 
vation, but  it  is  found  in  savage  man  and  has  been  observed 
in  several  species  of  animals.  Prof.  C.  S.  Minot  tells  me 
he  noticed  this  in  his  elaborate  weighings  of  guinea- 
pigs,^  in  which  puberty  occurs  at  the  age  of  about  four 
months.  A  much  less  marked  post-pubertal  retardation  was 
also  noticed.  Prof.  C.  F.  Hodge  tells  me  he  has  noticed  the 
acceleration  in  dogs,  and  Dr.  Stewart  also  found  it  in  rats 
and  squirrels.  Prof.  A.  H.  Yoder,  who  weighed  white  rats 
daily  for  a  long  time,  writes  me:  "I  found  they  grew  about 
three  to  four  days  and  then  rested  about  the  same  time.  I 
also  found  there  was  an  acceleration  of  growth  at  puberty. 

*  See  also  his  Senescence  and  Rejuvenation,  p.  133. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  1 9 

Besides  physiological  changes,  the  hair  grows  coarse  and  is 
often  slightly  tinged  with  brown,  and  there  is  a  noticeable 
change  in  the  motions  and  general  appearance."  Moon  believes 
that  "  a  corresponding  fact  is  true  in  regard  to  horses  and  some 
other  quadrupeds,"  and  compares  boys  to  Indian  corn,  which 
grows  most  in  height  when  it  "  shoots  and  tassels,"  or  reaches 
its  age  of  puberty. 

Of  all  single  measurements,  height  is  the  most  valuable. 
It  is  easily  taken,  is  relatively  constant,  and  not  liable  to 
much  fluctuation.  Along  with  weight  it  is  the  truest  expres- 
sion of  the  energy  of  growth,  the  best  index  of  health,  and 
gives  a  datum  from  which,  by  the  use  of  current  norms  and 
standards,  many  other  data  can  be  approximately  inferred. 
It  is,  moreover,  the  most  distinctly  human  dimension,  as 
man  alone  has  assumed  a  fully  erect  attitude.  Some  anthro- 
pometrists  think  growth  in  height  to  be  more  or  less  antag- 
onistic to  growth  in  girth.  Hall  ^  formulates  the  following 
law:  "  When  the  vertical  dimension  of  the  human  body  is 
undergoing  an  acceleration  of  its  rate  of  growth,  the  hori- 
zontal dimensions  undergo  a  retardation  of  their  rate  of 
growth,"  and  conversely.  The  two  certainly  vary  independ- 
ently, and  excess  of  either  may  tend  to  arrest  of  the  other. 
Height  is  usually  quite  complete  before  twenty-five,  while 
weight  may  augment  indefinitely  afterward,  and  during  the 
years  when  both  are  increasing,  each  appears  to  have  its  own 
season,  and  the  maximum  of  one  more  or  less  coincides  with 
the  minimum  of  the  other.  Weighing,  on  the  other  hand, 
gives  no  index  of  qualitative  change.  Decay  in  the  most 
important  tissues  may  be  compensated  by  fat  or  water,  and 
weight  may  increase  from  imperfect  elimination  of  waste. 
Height  once  attained  can  not  be  reduced  save  by  the  slight 
intervertebral  compression  of  cartilage  and  muscle,  relaxa- 
tion of  fatigue  restored  daily  (more  than  half  an  inch,  as  Bishop 
and  Bradford  found  by  recumbency  at  night),  and  by  old  age; 
but  weight  is  subject  to  diurnal  and  seasonal  fluctuations 
and  may  be  reduced  fifty  per  cent  by  disease  and  regained, 

'  W.  S.  Hall.      Changes  in  the  Proportions  of  the  Human   Body  during  the 
Period  of  Growth.     Jour,  of  Anthropol.  Inst,  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  1895. 


20  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

the  brain,  e.  g.,  in  progressive  starvation  remaining  about 
as  little  diminished  as  the  bones.  Most  tissues,  however,  are 
subject  to  many  changes  and  increase  slightly  in  weight 
with  age,  as  the  proportion  of  solid  to  fluid  matter  is  aug- 
mented. 

Imperfect  nutrition  checks  growth  in  weight  more  than  it 
does  in  height,  but  whether  growth  in  either  of  these  dimen- 
sions is  preparatory  for  and  conditions  growth  in  the  other; 
whether  spring  growth  in  height  conditions  the  autumnal 
thickening  of  the  body  more  than  the  latter  conditions  the 
former;  whether  height  is  a  more  vital  growth  than  normal 
weight;  whether  we  have  here  two  manifestations  of  one  and 
the  same  energy,  or  whether  the  fact  of  independent  vari- 
ability means  that  there  are  two  distinct  principles  or  tend- 
encies, we  do  not  know.  If  the  number  of  individuals  of  a 
given  age  is  distributed  over  uniform  intervals  of  height  and 
weight,  as  by  the  method  of  percentile  grades,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  age  of  greatest  growth  coincides  with  that  of  great- 
est mean  variation  from  the  average  size.  Although  the 
range  of  individual  deviations  from  any  mean  is  great,  very 
large  or  very  small  persons  in  both  dimensions  are  extremely 
rare,  and  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which  every  deviation  be- 
comes abnormal  and  unhealthful.  In  general,  while  growth 
in  height  is  one  of  the  most  desirable  expressions  of  vital 
energy,  but  few  would  deny  that  symmetry  and  proportion 
are  of  at  least  no  less  importance.  Young  people  who 
grow  very  tall  and  fail  to  develop  proportionately  in  thick- 
ness later  are  handicapped  in  the  race  of  life.  Porter  well 
says  that  the  lack  of  proper  relations  between  height  and 
other  physical  dimensions  is  itself  ill  health.  Great  height 
involves  increased  work  for  the  heart  and  for  the  skeletal 
muscles,  and  a  greater  loss  of  heat,  because  the  surface  of  the 
body  is  larger  in  tall  than  in  short  people  of  the  same  weight 
and  bulk.  Even  on  the  average,  the  relation  of  surface  to 
weight  is  only  about  three-eighths  in  the  adult  of  what  it  is  at 
birth.  The  exceptionally  tall  person,  therefore,  if  not  rela- 
tively developed  in  other  dimensions,  although  he  may  have 
sufficient  income  of  vitality  to  meet  the  demands  of  life,  will 
fail  under  strain.  Insurance  companies  discriminate  against 
tall  and  slender  men. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  21 

From  May,  1882,  to  February,  1886,  Malling-Hansen,* 
director  of  the  deaf-mute  institution  at  Copenhagen,  daily 
weighed  130  of  his  boys,  and  for  the  last  two  years  of  that 
period,  daily  measured  them  with  well-elaborated  precautions 
to  secure  uniformity  and  accuracy.  He  found  that  the 
weight  of  an  average  boy  from  nine  to  fifteen  passed  three 
annual  periods  of  change.  The  period  of  greatest  growth 
was  from  August  to  the  middle  of  December.  During  the 
second  four  and  one-half  months  till  the  end  of  April,  growth 
was  of  average  rate,  and  it  was  least  for  the  next  three 
months  ending  with  July.  During  the  maximal  period  the 
daily  gain  was  three  times  as  great  as  in  the -middle  period, 
while  nearly  all  the  gain  of  the  latter  was  lost  in  the  minimal 
period.  For  growth  in  height,  the  minimal  period  begins  in 
August  and  lasts  till  near  the  end  of  November,  the  middle 
period  lasts  four  months  till  the  end  of  March,  and  the 
maximal  period  lasts  four  and  one-half  months  to  the  middle 
of  August.  In  the  middle  period  the  daily  increase  is  twice, 
and  in  the  maximal,  three  times  as  great  as  in  the  minimal 
period.  Boys  grow  thick  most  slowly  while  they  are  growing 
tall  fastest,  and  vice  versa.  Increase  in  weight  varies  with 
local  temperature,  so  that  all  these  changes  the  author  as- 
cribes ultimately  to  the  sun. 

According  to  these  conclusions,  spring  growth  in  height 
leads  with  very  slight  autumnal  increment  in  thickness,  and 
a  year  or  two  later,  the  latter  predominates  and  the  former 
ceases.  During  the  annual  as  distinct  from  the  longer  peri- 
odic changes  in  rate  of  increase,  the  season  of  most  rapid 
growth  in  height  is  also  the  period  of  least  growth  in  weight, 
and  vice  versa.  To  secure  this  later  thickening  of  the  body 
to  due  proportions,  so  as  to  prevent  the  wastes  and  dangers 
of  tallness  and  slenderness,  is  one  of  the  most  important 
desiderata  of  hygiene  and  body  training.  To  win  back  the 
due  proportions  between  height  and  thickness  and  to  cor- 
rect those  rarer  cases  when  the  converse  relation  exists,  Mal- 
ling-Hansen  suggested  that  children  who  are  in  danger  of 
remaining  too  short  and  thick  go  gradually  south  to  warmer 

'  Perioden  im  Gewicht  der  Kinder  und  in  der  Sonnenwarme.     Fragment  III,  Ai 
Kopenhagen,  1888,  pp.  208.     Fragment  III,  B,  Atlas,  44  Taf. 


22  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

climates  toward  the  end  of  summer,  when  the  period  of  max- 
imal growth  in  weight  comes,  and  so  be  removed  from  the 
influence  of  the  maximal  period  of  growth  in  thickness.  Con- 
versely, a  tall,  slender  child  must  be  removed  from  the  influ- 
ence of  the  maximal  period  of  growth  in  height  by  being 
taken  slowly  north  in  April.  Travel,  he  suggested,  might 
thus  be  prescribed  to  control  growth  liy  following  spring  or 
autumn,  as  height  or  thickness  respectively  is  desired.  The 
practicability  of  this  remains  yet  to  be  tested. 

Again,  adults  probably  tend  to  grow  thin  at  the  same 
period  when  children  tend  to  grow  tall,  and  also  to  grow  thick 
when  children  grow  heavy.  By  choosing  the  former  period 
for  cures,  fleshy  people  can  aid  nature.  School  vacations 
should  come  at  the  time  of  the  periods  of  most  rapid  growth. 
Even  trees  grow  tall  in  May  and  thick  in  June,  resting  in  one 
dimension  while  the  other  grows.  Finally,  children  eat  most 
in  the  winter,  beginning  in  December,  and  reach  a  maximum 
in  March,  when  growth  in  height  begins,  so  that  growth 
does  not  immediately  follow  an  increase  of  food-supply.^ 

Camerer  corroborates  Hansen's  facts  of  seasonal  fluctua- 
tion, rejecting  his  cause.  Wahl  found  that  Danish  children 
gained  in  weight  during  the  summer  half-year  more  than 
during  the  winter  half-year,  and  that  for  children  below 
school  age  there  was  also  a  slight  difference  in  the  same  direc- 
tion, which  was,  however,  greatly  accentuated  at  puberty. 
These  conclusions  do  not  quite  agree  with  those  of  Wretkind, 
the  first  in  this  field,  wdio  found  that  girls  over  nine,  in  three 
Swedish  schools,  grew  in  weight  relatively  more  in  the  three 
vacation  months  of  summer  than  they  did  in  the  other  nine 
months  of  the  year,  and  this  fact  he  ascribed  to  the  retarding 
influences  of  the  school.      Vierordt "   finds   weekly   or   half- 

*  Hansen  expended  vast  labor  in  connection  with  these  studies  to  establish  a 
curious  but  now  quite  discredited  theory  that  growth  periods  in  children,  tempera- 
ture changes  in  grown  women,  etc.,  correspond  to  a  slight  periodicity  in  tempera- 
ture. This  occurrence  he  thought  world-wide  and  due  to  the  revolutions  of  the  sun 
every  twenty-seven  and  one-half  days,  and  he  constructed  an  outline  of  the  solar 
corona  of  a  shape  needed  for  his  hypothesis.  His  own  voluminous  curves  are,  how- 
ever, mostly  twenty-five-day  periods,  while  many  of  them  can  hardly  be  distinguished 
from  the  lunar  periods  of  twenty-eight  days. 

'  Physiologic  des  Kindesalters,  von  K.  Vierordt.  Gerhardt's  Handbuch  de| 
^inderkrankheiten,  vol.  i,  pp.  228-236. 


GROWTH  IN   HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  23 

weekly  periods  repeating  themselves,  so  that  healthy  chil- 
dren are  constantly  fluctuating. 

Many  studies  show  a  diminished  rate  of  growth  in  both 
height  and  weight  during  a  few  years  preceding  adolescence. 
In  general,  the  decrease  begins  at  six  or  seven  and  continues 
with  various  oscillations  until  about  ten  in  girls  and  twelve 
in  boys.  Various  observers  find  a  period  ending  at  the  sev- 
enth or  eighth  year,  when  the  brain  has  about  ceased  to  grow 
in  weight.  Peckham  and  Vierordt  make  this  age,  which  about 
coincides  with  second  dentition,  a  period  by  itself.  Up  to  its 
close,  despite  the  fluctuations,  there  is  relative  uniformity  of 
rate,  and  boys  and  girls  differ  but  little.  West  found  this 
age  of  retarded  growth  rather  uniform,  but  thought  the  great 
diversities  that  begin  with  pubescent  growth  due  to  heredity 
and  environment.  Nearly  all  the  best  researches  reveal  this 
diminished  rate  of  growth  in  height  and  also  in  weight.  Even 
although  the  absolute  increment  is  maintained  during  these 
minimal  years,  the  percentage  rate  is  usually  diminished.  The 
same  retardation  is  also  manifest  in  nearly  all  returns  for 
weight,  although  it  can  not  be  determined  whether  height  or 
weight  have  precedence  in  this  retardation,  and  this  holds  for 
individual  as  well  as  mass  measurements. 

Vierordt  thought  he  discriminated  seven  growth  periods; 
Liharzik,^  twenty- four;  Zeissing,  three;  Cohn,  two;  Key  and 
Lange,  four.  On  Minot's  assumption  of  senescence  as  a  con- 
stantly increasing  arrest  of  growth  culminating  in  degenera- 
tion, these  rhythms  may  be  conceived  as  oscillations  between 
two  opposing  tendencies.  This  author  does  not  use  his  hypoth- 
esis, however,  to  account  for  rhythms,  nor  is  there  ground  to 
urge  that  retarded  growth  at  ten  or  eleven  suggests  senescence 
so  much  as  a  diversion  of  growth  energy  from  other  fields.  It  is 
a  little  as  if  the  processes  of  assimilation  made  a  sudden  ad- 
vance, extending  their  conquest  over  non-living  substance,  and 
then  paused  to  organize  the  new  acquisition ;  or  else,  if  it  be  es- 
tablished that  periods  of  increased  food  consumption  precede 
growth  increments  by  a  considerable  period,  as  if  the  ashes 
and  cinders  of  the  biological  furnace  are  first  removed  with 
exceptional  thoroughness  to  prepare  for  the  extension  of  life's 

'  Pas  Gesetz  des  Wachstums  und  der  Bau  des  Menschen,  etc.    Vienna,  186?. 


24  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

combustion  to  new  fuel,  so  that  vitality  is  first  thus  raised  to 
a  higher  level,  itself  an  expensive  process,  and  then  the  mass 
it  animates  is  augmented.  This  is  different  from  the  decay 
of  old  age,  when  many  cells  die  from  overspecialization,  in 
that  it  is  not  compensated  and  it  also  is  arrest  at  the  bottom 
rather  than  at  the  top  of  the  scale  of  complexity.  Even  in 
the  segmentation  of  the  ovum,  there  is  a  rhythm  of  fast  and 
slow  and  a  marked  oscillation  about  the  sixth  fetal  month. 
Pauses  may  be  to  permit  adaptation  of  new-grown  cells,  tis- 
sues, or  organs  to  each  other  and  to  the  environment.  That 
the  amount  and  time  of  retardation  is  exactly  compensated 
during  periods  of  augmentation  is  a  theory  that  at  present 
lacks  confirmation,  approximate  as  this  may  be  for  normal 
individuals.  Moreover,  there  seem  to  be  norms  of  rates  and 
seasons  of  growth  from  which  organisms  can  only  with  diffi- 
culty be  much  diverted  without  distinct  compensatory  tenden- 
cies. As  in  convalescence  not  only  lost  flesh  but  growth  is 
often  made  up,  so  hardship,  malnutrition,  etc.,  may  retard 
for  a  time,  only  to  be  followed  by  compensatory  acceleration, 
all  the  more  rapid  if  the  delay  has  been  prolonged  up  to  a 
certain  point,  a  point  probably  itself  variable.  As  to  whether 
causes  that  result  in  excessive  and  premature  growth  tend  to 
react  in  stationary  periods,  the  evidence  is  less  clear.  We  also 
often  see  what  seems  to  be  an  illustration  of  the  law  laid 
down  by  St.  Hilaire,  that  growth  in  size  and  in  function  are 
inversely  to  each  other,  so  that  when  either  is  progressing 
rapidly  the  other  tends  to  be  stationary,  and  the  alterations 
here  are  often  rhythmic,  like  those  between  growth  in  size 
and  in  weight. 

Will  retarded  growth  be  made  up  or  compensated  for 
later?  Key  thinks  that  where  children  grow  slowly  owing 
to  hard  conditions  during  their  earher  years,  they  will  catch 
up  later  and  end  their  growth  with  others  who  have  been 
more  favored.  All  who  have  weighed  and  measured  large 
numbers  in  such  a  way  that  their  results  bear  on  this  ques- 
tion, indicate,  as  we  have  seen,  a  certain  elastic  resilient  tend- 
ency, at  least  to  resume,  if  not  to  complete,  interrupted  or 
delayed  growth,  somewhat  as  the  emaciation  of  disease  is 
compensated.    There  is  reason  to  believe  that  weight  gained 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  25 

near  the  normal  period  for;  its  most  rapid  increment  is  more 
likely  to  be  retained  permartently,  especially  if  the  muscles  are 
mainly  concerned,  than  if  it  is  won  later.  We  should  infer 
that  growth  was  most  advantageous  when  it  was  most  timely 
and  when  the  latent  energy  of  tissue-producing  power  was 
normal.  The  opinion  which  some  have  held  that  where  one  or 
even  several  generations  have  been  kept  down  by  hardship,  their 
descendants  tend  to  regain  the  former  height  of  their  race  if 
conditions  become  favorable,  rests  on  too  slight  evidence,  and 
indeed  seems  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  phenomena  of 
alternation  of  generations. 

Concerning  the  later  stages  of  growth,  the  data  are  insuf- 
ficient and  opinions  are  contradictory.  Quetelet,  influenced 
again,  no  doubt,  in  part  by  his  mathematical  formulae  of 
growth,  thought  both  sexes  might  continue  to  grow  a  little 
in  height  till  twenty-five,  and  in  weight  till  perhaps  thirty. 
Liharzik  thought  growth  continued  in  both  sexes  till  twenty- 
four  or  twenty-five,  Villerme  till  twenty-three.  Zeissing 
thinks  twenty-one  is  the  time  of  cessation  in  growth  of  both 
sexes.  Venn  finds  moderate  growth  in  height  in  male  stu- 
dents at  Cambridge,  England,  up  to  twenty-three,  and  in 
weight  to  twenty-four.  Hall  finds  that  boys  drop  to  a  very 
slow  rate  of  increase  in  height  at  eighteen,  but  continue  to 
grow  at  about  that  rate  for  three  years;  and  that  in  weight, 
their  rate  of  increase  is  retarded  from  eighteen  to  twenty 
and  then  starts  up  again.  The  Anthropological  Committee 
concludes  that  after  a  retardation  at  eighteen,  boys  increase 
in  weight  at  nineteen  or  twenty  and  continue  to  grow  till 
twenty-three  or  twenty-four,  and  that  girls  pause  at  nine- 
teen without  entirely  ceasing  to  grow,  but  go  on  a  little  more 
at  twenty  or  twenty-one.  Key  finds  not  an  entire  cessation  of 
growth,  but  a  distinct  retardation  in  weight  and  height  at 
eighteen  or  nineteen,  with  indication  of  later  increment. 
Roberts  asserts  an  "  entire  cessation  "  of  growth  in  the  non- 
laboring  classes  of  England  at  nineteen,  but  thinks  in  the 
artisan  class,  growth  is  more  uniform  and  extends  to  the 
twenty-third  year.  Smedley  ^  found  that  girls  grew  in  height  at 

'  Report  of  the  Department  of  Child  Study  and  Pedagogic  Investigation, 
Chicago,  No,  2. 


26  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

a  rather  uniform  but  reduced  rate  from  fourteen  to  seventeen, 
when  they  had  practically  attained  their  highest  stature,  and 
that  from  just  before  nineteen  until  after  they  were  twenty,  boys 
did  not  grow  in  height.  Beyer  thinks  that  the  naval  cadets  at 
Annapolis  for  thirty  years  show  an  almost  steady  increase  in 
weight  from  fifteen  to  twenty-three,  amounting  in  all  to  thirty- 
seven  pounds,  and  that  growth  in  height  shows  marked  retarda- 
tion at  eighteen;  that  then  comes  another  increase,  closing 
at  twenty-one,  and  later  a  third  increase,  ending  perhaps  with 
growth  of  span  of  arms  at  twenty-three.  He  also  infers  that 
tall  boys  complete  their  growth  earlier  than  short  boys,  but 
that  tall  and  heavy  boys  are  more  likely  to  increase  under 
the  influence  of  gymnastics  than  those  that  are  small,  and  that 
the  ratio  of  increase  in  height  and  girth  is  different  in  these 
two  classes.  Lange  thinks  there  may  normally  be  an  infin- 
itesimal growth  till  senescence,  and  that  it  tapers  off  asym- 
ptotically, and  one  writer  conjectures  that  by  this  increment, 
civilized  man  is  slowly  growing  larger,  and  that  we  should 
so  live  as  to  keep  on  growing  till  the  age  of  forty-nine,  when 
Plato  thought  man  attained  his  highest  development.  Early 
Amherst  reports  showed  that  students,  as  a  rule,  do  not  grow 
in  height  from  eighteen  to  nineteen,  but  that  some  increase 
up  to  twenty-five.  Several  of  the  best  American  colleges  report 
cases  of  growth  of  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  a  little  over 
one  inch  in  half  a  year  after  eighteen,  a  result  that  is  ascribed  to 
physical  training.  Large  boys  seem  not  only  to  achieve  their 
adolescent  growth  earlier  than  small  ones,  but  are  more  likely 
to  keep  on  growing. 

Dr.  Edward  Hitchcock,  who  still  measures  Amherst  stu- 
dents and  has  made  many  reports,  while  admitting  the  meager- 
ness  of  his  numbers  for  the  later  years  of  growth,  writes  me : 
"  I  can  only  say  that  growth,  in  our  observations,  continues 
up  to  twenty-six  years  of  age,  whether  longer  or  not  our 
data  do  not  show."  Beyer,  perhaps  our  most  competent  au- 
thority upon  this  point,  writes  me  that  in  a  list  of  height 
averages  based  upon  8,000  accepted  recruits,  it  appears  that 
while  there  is  no  increase  from  twenty-four  to  twenty-five 
(nearest  birthday),  there  is  an  increment  of  one-tenth  of  an 
inch  at  the  twenty-sixth  year,  but  that  the  height  then  attained 
is  iipt  exceeded  by  any  age  up  to  thirty-five,  which  is  as  far  as 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  ^^ 

his  work  has  been  carried.  He  says  we  know  "  that  exercise 
has  been  followed  by  a  very  slight  increase  in  height  in  some 
rare  instances  at  a  late  period  in  life,"  and  suggests  that,  if 
poor  personal  hygiene  or  bad  conditions  prevented  men  from 
attaining  predestined  height  during  the  usual  periods  of 
growth,  the  change  to  more  favorable  influences  "  may  cause 
a  reawakening  of  dormant,  undeveloped  centers  and  in  this 
manner  aid  nature  in  making  up  for  lost  opportunities  at  a 
later  period  than  is  usual." 

Dr.  D.  A.  Sargent,  of  Harvard,  whose  data  published  and 
unpublished  are  of  the  highest  value,  writes :  "  Men  usually 
cease  growing  in  height  at  about  twenty-three,  but  continue 
to  increase  in  weight  up  to  fifty.  It  is  a  question,  however, 
whether  most  of  the  weight  accumulated  after  twenty-five 
is  not  more  or  less  abnormal.  It  may  be,  however,  that  this 
is  nature's  way  of  conserving  the  body's  heat  and  storing  up 
excessive  carbon  to  meet  the  demands  of  advancing  age." 

Prof.  J.  W.  Seaver  writes  me  that  from  his  data  based  on 
Yale  men  he  can  "  not  find  an  age  when  there  is  not  a  small 
increment  in  height  or  weight,  although  this  is  very  small 
after  twenty-three  years  of  age.  The  growth  curves  of  the 
mass  taper  off  gradually,  but  those  of  individuals  nearly  all 
show  spasmodic  growth.  As  the  periods  of  growth  and  rest 
come  at  irregular  intervals  in  different  individuals,  I  think 
they  tend  to  neutralize  each  other  in  the  mass.  Persons 
taking  the  least  exercise  grow  least,  but  the  opposite  is  only 
partially  true.  The  athletes  grow  more  than  '  high  stand  ' 
men  taking  certain  severer  courses  that  are  confining  in  their 
nature.  These  show  slight  or  no  average  growth,  the  slight 
gain  in  the  few  being  neutralized  by  the  loss  in  the  others." 

From  data  and  opinions  so  diverse,  no  inferences  of  scien- 
tific validity  can  be  drawn,  and  we  have  little  settled  knowl- 
edge of  the  laws  of  growth  after  eighteen.  That  there  is  a 
general  retardation  about  this  age  is  probable.  That  there  is 
a  later  upward  tendency  in  weight  in  boys  can  hardly  be 
doubted,  and  the  same  is  probable  to  a  much  less  extent  in 
height.  Growth  seems  also  to  have  a  far  wider  range  of  indi- 
vidual variation  as  its  momentum  diminishes  near  its  ter- 
minal stages,  than  earlier  in  life.  It  is  not  unlikely,  too, 
^hat  as  a  spent  ball  is  more  easily  stopped  or  turned,  so  th^ 


28  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

later  stages  of  growth  are  more  easily  prevented  by  improper 
diet  or  hygienic  conditions,  excess  or  defect  of  exercise,  ex- 
citement, overpressure  in  school,  vice,  or  possibly  they  are 
transformed  into  some  kinetic  equivalent  of  function,  reproduc- 
tive, motor,  or  assimilative,  etc. 

It  is  hard  to  realize  the  complexity  of  processes  involved 
in  the  term  growth,  and  yet  there  is  a  point  beyond  which 
oversubtle  methods  of  weighing  and  even  measuring  are  mere 
pedantries.  If  a  child  lived  in  a  glass  case  on  the  arm  of 
a  sensitive  balance,  and  every  respiration  and  all  its  insen- 
sible perspiration,  as  well  as  all  food  and  secretions,  could 
be  weighed,  measured,  and  chemically  analyzed  with  the 
utmost  accuracy,  tentative  determinations  already  made  in 
this  direction  show  that  we  might  be  able  to  estimate  to  an 
extent  as  yet  by  no  means  attained,  how  much  loss  of  each 
kind  was  caused  by  emotional  strain  or  by  mental  activity, 
and  just  when  and  under  what  functional  and  other  condi- 
tions, growth  occurred.  But  even  this  interesting  physical 
biography  could  never  tell  us  what  organs  were  growing 
large  or  heavy,  or  what,  if  any,  small,  or  which  took  up  and 
vitalized  the  ingesta,  and  in  which  loss  exceeded  profit  in  the 
chemical  bookkeeping  of  metabolism.  The  body  contains 
matter  in  all  degrees  of  organic  assimilation,  from  food  just 
taken  and  excrement,  up  to  the  most  controlling  parts  of  the 
cells  in  the  highest  tissues.  Cell  nuclei  or  nucleoli,  leuco- 
cytes, or  other  invisible  and  hypothetical  chemical  compo- 
nents, perhaps  brain-cells  or  the  reproductive  elements,  or 
whatever  else  may  be  thought  to  be  at  the  high-water  mark 
of  organization,  and  so  most  vitalized  and  dynamic,  represent 
a  very  different  level  of  life  and  are  perhaps  as  much  above 
simple  and  lower  structures,  like  bone  and  connective  tissue,  as 
these  are  above  fat,  or  fat  itself  above  the  chip  pile  of  products 
of  decomposition  awaiting  removal.  Individuals  differ  im- 
measurably in  their  nutritive  plane;  and  water  and  fat,  urea 
and  other  low-level  and  waste  products  may  accumulate  by 
reason  of  imperfect  elimination.  Growth  is  really  the  forma- 
tion of  new  cells,  the  development  of  cells  from  granules  or, 
as  is  more  common  near  the  end  of  the  growth  period,  the 
further  increase  in  size  of  cells  already  well  developed.     It 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  29 

is  these  processes  that  are  chiefly  sought,  and  other  factors 
included  in  growth  in  weight  are  not  true  growth  but,  in  a 
sense  and  in  varying  degrees,  errors  to  be  overcome. 

Of  what  actually  goes  on  in  the  body,  then,  we  know 
relatively  little.  No  admittance  is,  as  some  one  has  said,  the 
sign  which  nature  hangs  out  to  the  physiologist.  Could  we 
weigh  or  measure  the  gain  or  loss  on  any  of  its  higher  planes, 
we  might  find  very  different  laws  of  growth.  We  may  conceive 
our  ego  as  limited  by  the  dermal  surface  and  as  scarcely  even 
perforated  by  the  twenty-two  foot  alimentary  canal.  We  can 
not  say  just  when  the  food  we  take  becomes  no  longer  a  for- 
eign substance  to  be  acted  on,  but  part  of  the  true  physical  self, 
and  endowed  itself  with  assimilative  power,  nor  can  we  say 
when  tissues  on  the  down  road  of  decay  cease  to  be  so,  any  more 
than  the  psychologist  can  tell  when  the  matter  of  apperception 
becomes  an  organ  of  it.  The  suggestion  is  obvious,  how- 
ever, that  seasons  of  rest  between  growth  periods  may  be 
times  of  the  greatest  qualitative  improvement,  when  what  we 
may  call  the  higher  digestion  augments  the  complexity  of 
structure  and  assimilative  processes  are  carried  on  upon  a 
higher  plane,  and  all  by  the  same  growth  impulse  as  its  kinetic 
equivalent  of  augmentation  in  bulk.  Of  such  changes,  how- 
ever extensive  or  important,  determinations  of  the  mass  of 
the  body  as  a  whole  can  give  no  intimation.  Of  the  laws  and 
processes  of  growth  in  individual  tissues  and  organs,  our 
knowledge  is  but  limited,  and  of  those  in  chemical  com- 
plexity, we  know  still  less,  and  yet  it  is  not  improbable  that 
these  more  specific  and  higher  changes  are  more  closely  re- 
lated to  psychic  development  than  is  growth  in  height  and 
weight.  Mass,  cytological  change,  and  chemical  complexity 
and  functions,  then,  are  the  three  factors  or  dimensions  of 
growth,  and  many  of  the  mysteries  in  which  it  is  now  shroud- 
ed will  remain  unsolved  till  we  know  more  of  the  last  two 
and  of  their  relations.  Studies  of  fatigue  and  all  we  know  of 
metabolism  indicate  that  the  second  factor  is  far  more  vari- 
able, especially  within  short  periods,  than  mass,  as  well  as 
far  more  closely  associated  with  function. 

The  rate  of  growth  is  a  result  of  many  determinants. 
Race  and  heredity  seem  to  decree  for  every  individual  being 


30  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

an  approximate  ultimate  size,  and  the  way  in  which  total 
growth  is  distributed  over  the  years  in  which  it  occurs,  is  one 
of  the  most  characteristic  expressions  of  heredity.  This  seems 
to  prescribe  and  ordain  almost  with  an  aspect  of  fatality,  as  if 
every  person  and  part  strove  to  attain  a  certain  size  decreed 
by  ancestral  ids  and  determinants,  which,  although  due  to  a 
less  fundamental  momentum  than  that  which  determines  the 
species,  is  hard  to  modify  much  by  training  or  even  environ- 
ment. In  this  factor  many  anthropologists  are  chiefly  inter- 
ested and  many  general  and  special  anthropometric  inquiries 
are  undertaken  in  quest  of  purer  and  more  aboriginal  race 
types.  The  Patagonians,  the  North  American  Indians,  espe- 
cially the  Mississippi  tribes,  and  the  Scotch  are  perhaps  the 
tallest,  with  Swedes,  Norwegians,  and  white  Americans  as 
close  seconds;  while  the  African  dwarfs,  Japanese,  Eskimos, 
South  Italians,  Bushmen,  West  Africans,  Malays,  French, 
and  Spaniards  are  among  the  shortest  races  of  men.  So  far  as 
we  know  not  only  after,  but  before  puberty  these  relations 
are  tolerably  maintained.  Next  at  least  to  hair  and  eyes, 
stature  is  thought  to  be  fundamentally  determined  by  race. 
Women  more  nearly  attain  the  stature  of  men  among  savages 
than  among  civilized  races,  a  fact  against  the  theory  of  pro- 
gressive equalization  of  the  sexes.  Natural  as  distinct  from 
forced  emigrants,  Ripley  ^  thinks  taller  than  the  "  stay-at- 
homes."  Long-headed  or  dolichocephalic  races  are  taller 
than  brachycephalic  or  broad-headed  races,  and  the  former 
seem  to  have  been  on  the  whole  represented  by  the  more 
energetic  and  civilized  peoples,  and,  some  anthropologists  add, 
are  characterized  by  more  vigor  of  limb  and  energy  of  action. 
While  city  life  tends  to  shorten  stature,  the  city  is  fed  by  the 
tallest  youth  from  the  country.  Most  of  the  human  race  are 
between  five  feet  and  five  feet  ten  inches,  so  that  with  all  the 
causes  of  variation,  the  human  species  is  quite  uniform  as 
compared  with  many  animal  types.  According  to  Bowditch, 
American  boys  are  taller  and  heavier  than  English  boys  of  the 
non-laboring  classes  in  public  schools  and  universities,  the 
superiority  being  somewhat  greater  in  weight  than  in  height. 
He  also  found  that  the  greater  height  and  weight  of  Amer- 


>  Racial  Geography  of  Europe.     New  York,  1900. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  ^l 

lean  over  Irish  children  was  due  more  to  race  than  to  occu- 
pation. Incidentally  Peckham  found  that  urban  life  tends 
to  decrease  stature  and  that  intermarriages  between  Germans 
and  Americans  were  advantageous  because  children  tend  to 
reach  the  height  of  the  tallest  parent. 

While  American  boys  are  taller  and  heavier  than  others 
during  pubescent  years  they  excel  only  for  a  few  years,  and 
at  nineteen  are  overtaken  and  surpassed  by  Swedish,  Danish, 
and  Dutch  boys,  while  Belgian  boys  and  those  of  northern 
Italy  remain  the  smallest  of  those  whose  growth  has  been 
carefully  studied.  In  the  same  way,  Swedish  girls  excel  those 
of  other  nationalities,  both  in  height  and  weight,  except  dur- 
ing a  few  pubescent  years.  Key  thinks  for  both  sexes  and 
in  both  height  and  weight,  growth  ceases  earlier  in  Italy  and 
America  than  elsewhere.  Retardation  by  poverty  is  most 
marked  in  Italy  and  England,  and  least  so  in  the  United 
States.  Racial  influences  upon  both  weight  and  height  seem 
to  assert  themselves  strongly  at  puberty. 

It  has  long  been  held  that  increase  of  comfort  increases 
stature  and  weight.  Quetelet  was  the  first  to  demonstrate 
this  by  comparing  the  measurements  of  factory  children  with 
those  of  others  more  favored.  Key  concludes  that  in  nearly 
all  lands  "  the  weak  period  of  development  before  puberty  is 
lengthened  for  the  poorer  children  to  their  cost,"  and  that  the 
prepubescent  growth  comes  later  but  is  more  sudden,  so  that 
poor  and  well-to-do  children  end  their  growth  about  the 
same  time.  Some  infer  that  boys  are  more  influenced  by 
this  than  girls,  as  they  seem  to  be  by  many  other  of  the 
factors  of  environment.  Bowditch  concluded  that  the  superior 
size  of  children  of  American  parentage  in  the  Boston  schools 
is  partly  due  to  the  greater  comfort  and  partly  to  race,  but 
thinks  the  former  more  potent  than  the  latter.  In  England, 
Roberts  found  that  in  the  better  classes,  prepubescent  growth 
began  a  year  or  two  earlier  than  among  laborers,  and  that  the 
former  were  more  variable  in  height  and  at  least  two  inches 
taller.  The  anthropometric  committee's  study  in  England 
found  that  boys  from  the  better  classes  at  ten  were  3.31  inches 
taller  and  10.64  pounds  heavier  than  industrial  schoolboys, 
and  at  fourteen  they  were  6.65  inches  taller  and  21.85  pounds 


3^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

heavier.  In  Leipzig,  children  paying  eighteen  marks  school- 
fees  are  superior  in  height  to  those  paying  nine  marks,  and  gym- 
nasia boys  exceed  those  of  the  Real  and  Burger  schools  for 
the  same  reason.  The  same  difference  has  been  found  very 
marked  in  Russia,  Stockholm,  and  Turin.  As  Burk  well 
points  out,  however,  the  poorer  classes  from  ten  to  seven- 
teen, the  ages  best  studied,  grow  at  quite  as  rapid  and  often 
a  more  rapid  rate  than  those  of  the  favored  classes.  Their 
absolute  increment  may  be  the  same  or  even  greater,  but 
the  conditions  existed  earlier  and  they  were  already  smaller 
before  observation  began,  so  that  defective  nutrition  may 
have  its  chief  effects  in  the  earher  years  or  even  during  embry- 
onic life,  but  figures  are,  however,  too  small  to  warrant  con- 
clusions for  these  earliest  years.  Weight  seems  at  least  quite 
as  much  if  not  more  affected  by  social  condition  than  height, 
although  its  chief  effects  are  manifested  in  both  after  the  period 
of  pubertal  acceleration. 

When  we  turn  to  the  effects  of  different  kinds  of  food 
upon  growth,  results  are  difficult  of  interpretation.  Hansen 
studied  in  a  deaf-mute  asylum  in  Copenhagen  the  effects  of  a 
change  of  diet,  from  one  consisting  chiefly  of  black  bread  and 
beer  to  one  made  up  of  bread  and  milk  and  richer  in  albumen. 
The  seventy  boys  together  gained  105  pounds  more  under  the 
new  diet,  but  did  it  all  in  the  six  weeks  from  October  eleventh 
to  November  twenty-second.  All  the  rest  of  the  six  months' 
growth  was  unaffected,  so  that  on  the  whole  he  thinks  food  had 
no  effect  and  he  urges  that  weight  is  no  true  index  of  essential 
growth.  It  has  also  been  demonstrated  in  many  cases  that  poor 
children  brought  into  a  better  nutritive  environment  grow  more 
rapidly  than  those  who  remain  in  unchanged  conditions.  In 
Russia,  an  elaborate  experiment  on  the  relative  growth  of 
weight  in  about  fifty  infants  fed  exclusively  from  the  breast 
and  those  fed  artificially,  seemed  on  the  whole  rather  favorable 
for  the  latter  food,  but  this  may  have  been  because  the  former 
was  scanty. 

That  perverse  or  defective  nutrition  tends  to  retard 
growth  and  to  delay  the  characteristic  growth  periods  and  also 
that  the  final  size  attained  is  thus  reduced,  seems  also  estab- 
lished with  great  probability.  Excessive  functional  activity 
probably  has  the  same  tendency,  as  growth  and  work,  while 


GROWTH  IN   HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  33 

mutually  helpful  up  to  a  certain  very  variable  point,  become 
antagonistic  beyond  it.  Disease  retards,  while  health  and 
growth  go  together.  Some  seasons  make  for  growth  and 
others  for  retardation.  Combe  thinks  that  boys  born  be- 
tween September  and  February  are  shorter  than  those  born 
between  March  and  August,  while  girls  born  from  De- 
cember to  May  are  shorter  than  those  born  during  other 
seasons. 

Thus  we  must  conceive  growth  as  due  to  an  impulse  w^hich, 
despite  its  marvelous  predeterminations,  is  exceedingly  plas- 
tic to  external  influences,  a  few  of  which  can  be  demonstrated 
and  more  have  to  be  assumed.  The  Heraclitic  fire  of  life 
as  thus  observed  is  like  a  sensitive  flame  burning  now  high, 
now  low;  swerving  under  various  influences;  its  combustions 
or  oxidizations  now  faster,  now  slower ;  always  true  to  its  own 
laws,  but  in  its  rhythms  infinitely  more  delicately  responsive 
to  everything  in  the  environment  than  we  have  dared  to  dream. 
To  the  inner  assimilative  and  dissimilative  processes,  which 
physiological  chemistry  alone  can  ever  hope  to  unravel  and 
which  underlie  all  morphologic  and  perhaps  even  functional 
changes,  there  is  strong  reason,  as  we  shall  see  later,  to  ascribe 
a  susceptibility  of  incredible  fineness,  due  at  bottom  to  the 
growth  impulse  in  conflict  with  the  vast  variety  of  obstacles 
on  which  it  impinges. 

The  effects  of  climate,  which  have  been  insufficiently 
studied,  are  sometimes  difficult  to  separate  from  those  of 
work  and  rest.  Low  temperatures  involve  kinetic  energy  to 
maintain  heat,  and  larger  quantities  of  food  must  be  pro- 
vided. Its  indirect  influence  in  affecting  mode  of  life,  food, 
etc.,  must  be  of  itself  great,  while  the  earlier  age  of  puberty 
in  most  warm  climates  would  suggest  earlier  completion  of 
growth.  No  doubt  there  is  an  optimum  temperature  most 
favorable  to  the  highest  human  development  and  also  a  limit 
of  variation  beyond  which  retardation  is  caused.  The  studies 
of  the  effects  of  temperature  upon  the  growth  of  lower  animal 
forms  are  interesting  here.^ 

'  See  also  The  Migratory  Impulse  vs.  Love  of  Home,  by  L.  W.  Kline  (Am. 
Jour,  of  Psy.,  October,  1898),  which  shows  the  inferior  stature  of  the  inmates  of 
truant  schools,  and  how  low  nutrition  breeds  discontent  and  the  tendency  to  run 
away. 

4 


34  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

In  view  of  all  we  know  of  the  influences  affecting  growth, 
the  problem  whether  ultimate  size  can  be  otherwise  much 
controlled,  except  by  avoiding  certain  known  causes  of  ar- 
rest, need  not  concern  us.  Interesting  as  it  is  and  despite  Han- 
sen's suggestion  above  of  migration,  it  may  seem  to  some  to  lie 
rather  in  the  realm  of  some  modern  analogue  of  Plato's  republic 
than  in  that  of  science.  But  Boveri  found  that  each  half  of  a 
fertilized  ovum  in  lower  forms  produced  a  complete  individual 
but  of  half  size.  Bizzozero, '  Yung,  De  Varigny,  and  others 
have  found  that  by  increasing  heat  and  blood  pressure,  or- 
gans of  growing  animals  could  be  greatly  increased  in  size, 
and  that  the  ultimate  size  of  snails  and  tadpoles  was  increased 
with  the  size  of  the  vessel  containing  them.  The  results  of 
thyroid  feeding;  the  greater  size  of  plain  dwellers  as  com- 
pared with  their  congeners  among  the  hills,  and  of  boys  bred  in 
the  country  over  those  in  the  city;  all  the  results  which  La- 
marckians  claim  for  use  and  disuse,  and  those  urged  by 
physical  trainers  for  college  youth  as  the  results  of  judicious 
exercise;  the  effects  of  the  misery  spots  of  the  world;  the 
increase  of  size  claimed  to  follow  the  increased  prosperity  of 
a  country;  the  tendency  of  offspring  of  mixed  races  toward 
the  size  of  the  tallest  parent ;  and  other  facts  of  this  order, 
suggest  hopeful  auguries  for  the  future  when  man  shall  have 
more  fully  domesticated  himself  in  the  school  of  civilization; 
the  home,  city,  and  nation  of  Hygeia  shall  become  a  reality; 
and  also  all  known  principles  of  human  stirpiculture  in  select- 
ing partners  and  in  marriage  regimen  shall  be  put  in  practise. 

Is  the  race  or  are  Americans  growing?  Dr.  Anderson,  the 
physical  instructor  of  Yale,  thinks  that  the  Yale  men  of  to-day 
average  nearly  an  inch  taller  than  those  of  twenty  years  ago, 
also  that  they  are  heavier  and  more  muscular.  Mr.  Goldie,  for 
thirty-four  years  gymnastic  director  at  Princeton,  says  that 
thirty  years  ago  the  average  student  was  five  feet  seven  or 
seven  and  one-half  inches  tall  and  weighed  about  one  hundred 
and  forty  pounds,  whereas  to-day  the  average  student  measures 
five  feet  eight  or  eight  and  one-half  inches  and  weighs  not  less 
than  one  hundred  and  forty-five  pounds,  and  goes  so  far  as  to 
predict  that,  if  this  rate  of  development  is  maintained,  in  1950 
the  average  student  will  be  six  feet  tall  and  will  weigh  one 


GROWTH  IN   HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  35 

hundred  and  sixty  pounds.  Prof.  P.  C.  Phillips,  of  Amherst, 
thinks  that  the  young  women  in  our  colleges  to-day  are 
"  almost  certainly  an  inch  taller  and  four  or  five  pounds  heavier 
than  they  were  ten  years  ago."  ''  The  young  man  of  to-day," 
he  says,  "  at  every  age  is  taller  and  heavier  than  the  man  previ- 
ous to  1894,  the  difference  as  a  rule  amounting  to  an  inch  in 
height  and  three  pounds  in  weight."  The  average  height  of  the 
American  soldier  is  five  feet  seven  and  one-half  inches  in  his 
stockings.  He  is  both  heavier  and  taller  and  has  larger  chest 
girth  than  the  soldier  of  any  other  country  save  only  Scandi- 
navia. Professor  Donath's  statistics  suggest  that  in  most  Euro- 
pean lands  height  and  weight  are  slightly  decreasing.  These 
opinions  we  must  accept  with  caution,  for  not  only  must  meas- 
urements be  very  carefully  correlated  with  age,  often  increas- 
ing in  college,  but  with  the  fact  that  college  environment  is  more 
and  more  favorable  to  growth,  and  we  must  also  have  homo- 
geneous classes  and  races  as  a  basis  of  comparison.  Certainly 
an  inch  or  even  half  an  inch  in  twenty  years,  which  would  make 
five,  or  two  and  one-half  inches  per  century,  is  quite  incredible. 
If  man  has  developed  from  a  pigmoid  and  is  still  growing,  it 
must  be  at  a  vastly  slower,  and  probably  with  data  at  hand,  an 
almost  insensible  rate. 

Is  a  period  of  rapid  growth  advantageous  or  would  it  be 
better  if  the  curve  of  height  and  weight  were  a  straight 
line,  as,  previous  to  the  measurements  above  described,  it  had 
been  generally  supposed  to  be?  While  this  question  can  not 
be  answered,  it  suggests  important  theoretical  and  practical 
considerations.  If  there  were  danger  of  stagnation  or  of 
becoming  hidebound  on  the  lower  level  of  ten  to  twelve 
years,  if  an  equilibrium  within  and  without  were  liable  to  be 
established  here,  it  is  not  impossible  that  there  might  be 
physiological  advantage  in  growing  part  by  part  or  by  the 
method  of  what  is  known  as  nascent  periods.  If,  for  instance, 
the  bones  grow  first  and  tense  the  muscles  causing  growing 
pains,  as  often  occurs,  the  latter  are  thus  stimulated  to  fur- 
ther growth.  If  fundamental  joints  and  muscles  grow  first, 
then  the  apparatus  of  the  finer  accessory  system  is  stimu- 
lated to  restore  the  old  proportion  so  that  we  can  act  as 
deftly  when  we  are  large  as  we  do  when  we  are  small.     Fat 


36  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

accumulation  often  precedes  growth  in  height,  especially  in 
girls,  as  if  the  body  were  provisioning  for  an  advance  move- 
ment. Structure  and  function,  body  and  mind,  weight  and 
height,  may  thus  each  act  as  a  leverage  for  the  increment  of 
the  other,  if  we  assume  a  tendency  always  to  restore  the  lost 
equilibrium,  and  after  a  fall,  to  find  at-one-ment  on  a  higher 
plane.  Thus  it  may  be  that  if  we  could  measure  kinetically 
all  the  energies  of  growth,  their  summation  would  still  be 
represented  by  a  straight  line,  and  the  height  and  weight  aug- 
mentation be  only  an  accident  of  our  as  yet  inade- 
quate knowledge  and  methods  of  measuring  all  the  expres- 
sions of  growth.  On  the  other  hand,  phenomena  like  acro- 
megalia and  perhaps  genius  in  one  direction  with  defect  in 
others,  and  many  other  morbid  phenomena,  indicate,  as  we  shall 
see  later,  that  growth  may  be  disequilibrated  and  become 
so  excessive  in  one  part  or  function  that  others  can  not  be 
brought  into  harmony  with  it  or  they  may  even  retrogress  be- 
cause left  too  far  behind  in  the  intersystemic  competition  for 
nutriment  or  power. 

/Is  the  utmost  possible  growth  desirable?  This  presents 
a  vast  but  hitherto  unsolved  problem.  On  the  one  hand, 
Bohannon  ^  has  shown  that  children  who  are  especially  tall 
or  heavy  for  their  age  are  dressed  and  treated  as  if  they 
were  older,  associate  with  those  more  mature,  and  more  is 
expected  of  them  on  account  of  their  size.  They  are  more 
likely  to  be  leaders,  to  have  undue  attention,  and  are  so 
treated  as  to  bring  early  maturity.  Children  unusually  small 
of  their  age,  on  the  other  hand,  often  associate  with  and  dress 
like  those  younger  than  they,  and  less  is  expected,  so 
that  retarded  development  often  results.  Thus,  if  Porter's 
inference,  that  large  children  are  intellectually  superior  to 
small  ones,  is  confirmed,  it  may  be  at  least  partly  due  to 
artificial,  and  not  to  natural  causes,  and  the  popular  concep- 
tion that  rapid  growth  is  likely  to  be  attended  by  sluggish 
mentality  may  yet  be  true  to  nature. 

The  Chicago  studies  of  Christopher  and  Smedley  in  gen- 
eral   favor    Porter's    conclusions.     Although    often    the    best 

'  Ped.  Sem.,  vol.  iv,  p.  3  et  seg. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  37 

pupil  in  a  room  is  the  smallest  and  perhaps  the  youngest, 
these  constitute  a  class  by  themselves,  deserving,  like  all  ex- 
ceptions, special  consideration.  Christopher  says :  "  Such 
children  can  not  be  considered  normal,  and  I  venture  the 
assertion  that  the  true  explanation  of  them  will  be  found  to 
be  of  greater  medical  than  pedagogical  interest." 

Porter  found  that  children  who  make  the  best  progress  in 
their  studies  are  on  the  average  larger  in  girth  of  chest  and 
width  of  head  than  children  whose  progress  is  less  satisfac- 
tory. Successful  pupils  are  larger  than  unsuccessful,  but  the 
comparative  rate  of  growth,  the  age  at  which  increase  begins, 
and  the  point  where  girls  most  exceed  boys  is  about  the  same 
for  dull,  mediocre,  and  precocious  children,  at  least  from 
seven  to  sixteen  years  of  age. 

Professor  Beyer  ^  concludes  that  "  the  relationship  be- 
tween physique  and  mental  abiHty  is  such  that  the  training 
of  the  one  will  indirectly  and  favorably  influence  the  growth 
and  development  of  the  other,  when  the  training  of  either  is 
kept  within  physiological  limits."  He  supports  Porter's  con- 
clusion that  "  precocious  children  are  heavier  and  dull  chil- 
dren lighter  than  the  mean  child  of  the  same  age,"  against 
Boas,  who  states  "  in  fact,  an  investigation  which  I  have 
carried  on  in  Toronto  with  the  same  object,  but  according  to 
a  different  method,  gives  just  the  reverse  results.  The  data 
were  compiled  by  Dr.  G.  M.  West,  who  found  that  the  chil- 
dren pronounced  by  the  teacher  bright  were  less  favorably 
developed  than  those  called  dull."  Beyer  ^  examined  and 
marked  76  applicants  for  positions  as  navy-yard  apprentices, 
and  concluded  that  for  them,  weight  has  great  significance  in 
judging  the  physique  of  a  young  person  and  consequently 
his  capacity  for  mental  work,  again  supporting  Porter's 
studies  of  precocity  and  dulness. 

Desirable  as  generous  size  is,  it  has  its  limits.  Large 
animals  move  slowly,  are  inexact,  clumsy,  with  less  fine  con- 
trol, so  that  size  often  seems  at  the  expense  of  function. 
Galton  found  tall  men  somewhat  less  fertile  than  short  men. 
Giants  not  only  lack  vigor  of  mind,  body,  or  both,  but  are 

'  Jour,  of  the  Boston  Soc.  of  Med.  Sciences,  April,  1901. 

*  The   Relation  between   Physique  and   Mental  Work.     Jour,  of  the  Boston 
Med,  Soc,  February  20,  1900. 


38  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

often  marked  by  stigmata  of  degeneration  or  reversion,  while 
restricted  growth  in  both  the  brute  and  human  world  often 
coincides  with  great  activity.  It  is  not  demonstrated  that 
the  largest  brains  as  such  are  best,  or  that  large  views,  great 
moods,  and  wide  ideas  are  more  natural  in  large  bodies.  Size 
has  certainly  great  natural  advantages  not  only  among  ani- 
mals and  savages,  but  among  civilized  races.  It  insures  a 
certain  natural  prestige  and  authority  and  awakens  in  others 
the  necessity  of  recognizing  leadership,  favors  dominating 
manners,  and  inclines  to  the  assumption  of  superiority  and 
the  subordination  of  others.  Large  men  can  put  forth  more 
strength  absolutely  than  small  men,  but  whether  relatively,  is 
very  doubtful.  It  is  a  wdde-spread  opinion  among  army  sur- 
geons that  small,  slight  men  can  endure  hardships  best*;  that 
large,  muscular  men  are  more  likely  to  succumb  to  epidemics 
and  to  other  diseases;  that  even  slightly  undersized,  if  sound, 
men  are  best  for  hard  service.  In  many,  if  not  most  diseases 
incident  to  army  life,  and  particularly  fevers,  large  men  are 
sick  longer  and  are  more  liable  to  die.  On  the  Greely  expe- 
dition most  of  the  large  men  died  and  nearly  all  the  sur- 
vivors were  small.  Well-proportioned  "  doughboys,"  or  raw 
infantry  of  middle  weight,  are  said  to  endure  more  time  work, 
hunger,  heat,  and  exposure  than  large  athletic  men,  although 
the  latter  may  put  forth  most  active  energy  for  a  limited  time. 

Small  as  well  as  homely  and  insignificant  men  have  a  special 
motive  to  assert  themselves  functionally  to  offset  their  dis- 
advantages of  structure.  Large  men  are  more  frequently 
found  among  natural,  self-made  pioneers,  chiefs,  bosses,  cap- 
tains of  industry,  and  perhaps,  though  neither  is  demon- 
strated, experts  and  specialists  are  on  the  average  smaller 
and  possibly  less  handsome  and  well  proportioned,  frequent 
as  the  exceptions  are.  Small  men  certainly  are  apt  to  be 
quick  in  their  rhythms,  while  large  men  move  slowly  in  mind 
and  body  but  carry  more  momentum.  On  the  whole,  perhaps 
we  may  conclude  that  in  the  economy  of  nature,  height  and 
weight  much  above  the  average  are  liable  to  be  bought  at 
too  great  a  cost  of  function.  As  Beyer,  whose  opinion  is  enti- 
tled to  great  weight,  writes  me,  the  results  of  the  battle  of  life 
"  point  to  the  average  of  the  race  as  being  the  goal  to  strive 
for  with  regard  to  growth."    On  the  other  hand,  as  he  adds: 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND   WEIGHT  39 

"  If  we  find  the  leaders  of  a  race  which  is  on  the  march  to 
a  higher  plane  of  human  development  to  be  larger  than  the 
average  or  the  fifty  column  in  percentile  grades,  then  the  lat- 
ter acquire  a  different  significance ;  instead  of  being  the  fittest 
to  survive  they  only  do  so  by  virtue  of  the  protection  afford- 
ed them  by  the  superior  qualities  of  the  advanced  guard,  with- 
out which  they  would  have  to  retreat  with  numerical  losses. 
According  to  this  same  figure,  those  below  the  average  would 
represent  that  portion  of  the  population  that  is  unable  to 
keep  up  with  the  procession  owing  either  to  hereditary  or 
accidental  causes,  and  for  whom  we  build  hospitals,  asylums, 
sanatoria,  etc."  Dr.  Sargent  writes  me :  "  In  my  opinion,  the 
greatest  possible  development  of  body,  mind,  or  '  soul '  is 
undesirable,  inasmuch  as  neither  condition  can  be  attained 
in  man,  a  composite  being,  without  dwarfing  or  impairing  the 
condition  of  the  other  two.  For  this  reason,  to  quote  your 
own  language,  *  physical  culture  should  be  chiefly  directed  to 
building  up  average  dimensions  '  of  the  masses  that  are  in 
our  schools  and  colleges.  By  pursuing  this  method  I  think 
the  best  results  may  be  eventually  attained  for  the  race  if  not 
for  the  individual." 

In  discussing  the  desirability  of  maximal  growth  we  must 
reflect,  on  the  one  hand,  that  if  the  earlier  stages  of  growth 
relatively  represent  what  man  has  in  common  with  animals, 
and  its  last  stages  raise  him  above  them  and  make  him 
most  distinctively  human,  then  this  question  must  be  an- 
swered in  the  affirmative,  because  the  most  perfect  individual 
is  the  one  most  completely  evolved.  Certainly  we  want  all 
that  our  heredity  entitles  us  to,  and  perhaps  a  little  extra  for 
progress  or  even  for  selfishness  of  the  Max  Stirner  type. 
Indeed,  one  might  ask  why  man  should  stop  growing  at  all, 
and  not  progress  at  least  slowly  to  near  the  end  of  his  life  like 
extinct  Saurians ;  as,  indeed,  his  heart  often  does.  On  the 
other  hand,  as  we  have  seen  giants  and  monsters  become  unfer- 
tile and  we  are  unable  to  bring  at-one-ment  between  the 
greatest  individual  development  and  the  highest  interest  of 
the  race  to  which  it  should  be  subordinated.  Possibly  man- 
kind may  sometime  learn  the  secret  of  progressively  harmo- 
nizing the  two.  Meanwhile  egoism  can  only  say  that  max- 
imal growth  is  desired  if  it  is  in  every  way  proportionate  and 


40  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

harmonious,  and  if  it  is  chiefly  growth  of  the  best  tissues,  be 
they  reproductive,  cerebral,  or  muscular.  To  assert  that  maxi- 
imal  mass  growth  for  the  individual  or  for  our  race  in  the 
future  is  desirable,  would  involve  the  evaluation  of  all  the 
functions — physical  and  psychic — that  make  human  life.  Al- 
though growth  upward  out  of  the  womb  of  nature  is  the  one 
miracle  of  the  world  and  its  direction  is  the  only  clue  to  human 
destiny,  yet  progress  and  the  highest  human  evolution  may, 
for  aught  we  know,  be  carried  too  far  for  other  greater  issues, 
so  that  on  the  whole  we  are  hopelessly  agnostic  in  the  pres- 
ence of  this  question.  If  it  be  found,  as  Beyer,  Galton,  and 
others  think,  that  most  of  the  present  leaders  of  mankind 
are  somewhat  above  the  average  height  and  weight  on  the 
percentile  scale,  so  that  the  large  people  are  bearing  the  bur- 
den of  the  forward  march  of  humanity,  it  would  indeed  appear 
that  those  below  the  average  size  are  followers  and  are  some- 
what sheltered  and  protected  in  the  wake  of  these  leaders, 
and  if  so,  then  the  race  is  tending  slowdy  but  surely  upward  in 
size,  and  if  the  reverse  be  true  it  is  tending  downward. 

According  to  current  biological  conceptions  the  soma 
or  cells  which  make  up  the  organs  of  the  body,  in  contrast 
with  those  devoted  to  reproduction,  become  specialized  for  par- 
ticular purposes,  very  gradually  in  the  evolutionary  processes 
and,  somewhat  in  proportion  as  they  do  so,  slowly  lose 
reproductive  power.  In  the  mitosis  involved  in  tachygenesis 
cells  continue  to  divide,  but  with  ever  less  rejuvenative  energy. 
Even  in  the  child,  each  cell  can  produce  only  a  few  genera- 
tions of  daughter-cells,  and  as  differentiation  and  integration 
proceed,  the  momentum  given  to  them  at  impregnation  is 
gradually  lost.  In  old  age  the  body  desiccates,  specific  gravity 
increases  as  does  low-level  connective  tissue,  and  thus  death 
or  a  corpse  of  lived-out  organs  is  evolved.  Even  in  maturity, 
body  cells  repair  lost  tissue  in  man  and  lost  limbs  in  animals, 
as  they  recover  from  fatigue,  etc.  All  this  is  in  progressive  con- 
trast with  the  capacity  for  indefinite  reproduction  in  the  lowest 
forms  of  life  and  in  the  sexual  elements  in  man  which  are 
relatively  immortal,  because  these  cells  continue  to  multiply 
by  division  indefinitely. 

From  this  familiar  consideration  it  follows  that  in  the 


GROWTH   IN   HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  4^ 

earlier  processes  of  the  evolution  of  the  soma  there  must  be 
many  cells  which  have  already  acquired  some  definiteness 
by  departure  from  the  general  type,  and  which  although 
already  more  or  less  set  apart  for  particular  functions  have 
not  entirely  lost  the  germinant  expansion  of  the  purely  repro- 
ductive elements,  and  under  certain  conditions  may  revert  to 
it.  Many  lower  forms  reassume  growth  if  reproductive 
activity  is  checked,  while  the  latter  tends  to  arrest  growth. 
Hard  conditions  favor  early  sexual  maturity,  and  overnutri- 
tion,  as  is  well  known,  may  diminish  reproductive  vigor. 
Thus  genesis  and  individuation  beyond  a  certain  point  are 
in  inverse  ratio  to  each  other.  Giants  and  monsters  among 
men  and  animals  have  low  generative  activity,  while  both 
precocity  and  early  dissipation  are  unfavorable  for  growth. 
Hence  we  can  insist  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  growth 
of  the  soma  itself  may  almost  be  regarded  as  a  secondary 
sexual  quality,  and  growth  can  be  conceived  in  a  large  way 
as  a  product  of  reproduction,  or  the  latter  as  a  special  or  primi- 
tive form  of  growth.  From  the  flagella  up,  hunger  and  love 
preside  over  the  evolution  of  the  body.  Special  organs  are 
developed  either  to  reach  food,  hold  it,  digest  it,  etc.,  or  else 
to  reach  or  hold  the  female  for  impregnation  or,  irradiating 
more  widely,  with  w^hich  to  fight  for  mates  or  to  charm  them 
as  by  colors,  wattles,  antlers,  plumes,  and  all  the  love  antics  of 
animal  or  human  courtship.  Not  only  this,  but  man's  pris- 
tine and  deepest  psychic  instincts  are  developed  primarily  to 
serve  the  rising  generation  by  providing  food,  shelter,  nurs- 
ing, education,  and  instruction ;  and  even  the  length  of  life,  as 
Weismann  has  shown,  is  so  adjusted  as  to  be  continued  be- 
yond the  age  of  greatest  fertility  only  just  as  long,  on  the 
average,  as  is  necessary  to  bring  the  young  to  full  maturity. 
Thus  not  only  the  form,  organs,  and  functions  of  the  adult, 
but  his  term  of  life  is  regulated  to  meet  the  necessities  of  repro- 
duction and  of  education,  which  are  in  a  sense  a  continuum. 

Bearing  these  general  considerations  in  mind,  let  us  now 
proceed  to  inquire  whether  we  can  offer  any  explanation  of 
the  singular  but  almost  universal  retardation  just  before  the 
pubescent  outburst  of  growth,  and  of  the  great  increment 
which  follows  it  in  the  earliest  teens.  First,  all  measurements 
agree,  as  we  have  seen,  that  girls  precede  boys  in  the  period 


42  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

of  maximal  growth  if  not  in  that  of  retardation  just  before. 
No  one,  to  my  knowledge,  has  seriously  attempted  to  account 
for  this  interesting  and  challenging  fact.  Lange  says  it  is 
accidental ;  several  have  vaguely  intimated  that  it  may  have 
been  nature's  design  that  the  human  female,  charged  with 
larger  functions  and  organs  of  reproduction  than  the  male, 
was  intended  to  be  larger  than  he,  as  in  the  case  of  the  queen 
bee  and  many  other  lower  forms  of  life.  She  is  anabolic, 
and  should  normally  not  have  only  preceded  but  exceeded 
man  in  height  and  weight  through  life,  but  from  some  un- 
known cause,  this  tendency  is  arrested  and  man  reassumes 
the  lead  in  the  middle  teens.  This  view  is  purely  speculative 
and  we  need  hardly  consider  it  here,  because  this  would  make 
man  an  exception  to  the  almost  universal  law  of  mammalian 
life,  where  the  female  is  inferior  in  size. 

We  may,  however,  look  in  another  direction  for  an  at  least 
hypothetical  explanation.  If  man  has  developed  from  an  ani- 
mal stage  of  existence  to  savagery,  it  seems  plausible  from 
what  we  know  of  primitive  races,  phallicism,  etc.,  that  the 
female  would  at  first  be  prematurely  impregnated,  at  least 
as  soon  as  she  became  attractive  to  the  other  sex,  on  account 
of  the  hypertrophied  sex  passion  in  the  human  male,  and 
would  have  been  forced  to  assume  maternal  functions  before 
nature  had  completed  her  preparations  therefor.  Many  of  the 
institutions  of  higher  and  even  of  savage  life,  however,  later 
came  in  that  would  tend  to  postpone  fertilization.  Thus  we 
should  have  an  early  stimulus  of  the  reproductive  function 
followed  phyletically  by  a  more  or  less  gradual  postponement 
of  it.  With  this  delay,  the  cell  development  that  had  formerly 
gone  to  genesis  would  turn  back  to  individuation,  and  the 
vitality  that  had  made  the  fetus  and  decidua  would  now  make 
for  somatic  growth.  On  this  view,  part  of  the  sudden  and 
early  increment  in  girls  is  a  trace  of  ancient  but  now  deferred 
maternity  due  originally  to  premature  male  aggression,  but 
now  turned  to  personal  augmentation  by  male  restraint  and 
female  coyness.  This  view  at  least  is  entirely  congruent  to, 
and  even  favored  by  the  above  current  biological  conceptions, 
while  anthropology  is  rich  in  facts  that  indicate  progressive 
delay  of  motherhood  with  emergence  from  animal  to  higher 
human  stages. 


GROWTH    IN    HEIGHT   AND    WEIGHT  43 

Natural  selection  suggests  another  partial  explanation. 
Sexual  desire  normally  develops  progressively  to  a  maximum 
during  years  of  greatest  fertility,  while  the  instincts  of  female 
coyness  and  reserve  are  strongly  developed  earlier.  Thus 
the  largest  and  most  vigorous  girls  would  be  able  most  suc- 
cessfully to  resist  fertilization,  even  in  an  age  of  animal  vio- 
lence, by  not  only  their  mates  of  near  their  own  age  of  the 
opposite  sex, 'who  were  coming  to  maturity  and  whom  they 
would  see  most  of,  but  also  especially,  if  the  advantages  of 
the  upright  position  in  this  respect  be  also  considered,  would 
have  increased  power  to  protect  their  chastity  from  older 
males.  The  weaklings  who  failed  to  do  so  would  produce  weak, 
because  immature,  offspring,  while  those  who  were  large 
and  strong  would  transmit  this  variation  to  their  female  chil- 
dren. Hence  this  augmentation,  which  now  seems  in  the 
course  of  nature  and  without  any  direct  advantage  of  utility, 
may  in  the  past  have  performed  a  very  important  service  for 
heredity  in  helping  man  on  to  a  higher  plane  of  greater  ma- 
turity. The  very  size,  due  in  part  originally  to  too  early 
maturity,  may  now  be  utilized  as  an  instrument  to  prevent  it. 

Possibly,  indeed,  we  may  go  back  much  further  and 
suggest  an  ulterior  explanation  not  only  of  this,  but  of  far 
earlier  stages  of  somatic  growth.  It  may  all  be  due  to  the 
momentum  of  ancient  modes  of  reproduction,  now  super- 
seded and  abortive,  but  the  tides  of  which  still  swell  every 
tissue  and  cell,  or  as  a  kind  of  incipient  internal  incubation. 
All  these  energies  that  now  enlarge  the  individual,  formerly, 
and  before  the  specialization  of  sperm  and  germ  elements, 
proceeded  to  the  very  fecund  formation  of  new  generations 
by  budding,  division,  etc.  Now  they  are  specialized  and 
coordinated  for  functions^  some  more  and  some  less  directly 
auxiliary  to  a  more  effective  and  less  wasteful  method  of 
insuring  offspring  and  of  bringing  each  to  a  more  complete 
maturity.  Nature  and  education  thus  may  have  a  new  bio- 
logic explanation  and  meaning,  and  a  deeper  import,  as 
limitation  in  fecundity  is  supplemented  by  the  later  functions 
of  parenthood,  which  are  transfigurations  of  what  was  origi- 
nally more  primitive  than  sex  itself,  so  that  secondary  sexual 
qualities  were  once  primary  but  are  now  diverted  to  higher 
uses.     The  ministry  of  nursing,  protecting,  providing  for,  and 


4+  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

teaching  the  young  is  thus  performed  by  the  same  impulses, 
now  sterihzed  and  diverted,  that  once  produced  offspring. 
Thus  the  augmented  individuahty  of  adolescence  is  devel- 
oped in  the  interest  of  the  species  for  the  sake  of  which  sex 
itself  originally  arose,  and  to  serve  which  art,  science,  and  re- 
ligion came  into  being,  together  with  all  the  institutions  which 
the  powers  acquired  at  this  age  have  since  created. 

No  explanation,  however,  of  the  stage  of  acceleration  is 
complete  without  considering  the  lower  plateau  of  growth 
at  the  age  of  from  eight  or  nine  to  eleven  or  twelve,  which 
precedes  it.  Some  have  argued  that  the  later  growth  was  a 
compensation  for  the  preceding  retardation  and  have  even 
thought  the  two  curves  similar,  though  inverse.  It  has  been 
urged  that  nature  paused  a  while  only  to  catch  up  later,  and 
this  has  never  been  thought  to  demand  any  explanation  save 
the  commonplace  view  that  first  the  organism  husbands  its 
resources  to  make  a  spring  forward  later.  I  think  we  must 
seek  a  cause  for  both  these  variations  from  a  straight  line  of 
increment,  and  it  is  certain  that  the  curves  are  not  comple- 
mental,  but  that  the  later  increase  in  rate  is  far  more 
marked  than  the  earlier  decrease,  and  therefore  can  not  be 
accounted  for  as  merely  making  up  for  lost  time. 

The  genetic  explanation  I  propose  here  is  the  following: 
The  period  of  retardation  represents  a  relative  balance  be- 
tween assimilation  and  expenditure  and,  what  is  far  more 
important,  between  fundamental  growth  of  the  large  bones 
and  muscles  and  the  accessory  development  of  the  smaller 
and  more  peripheral  parts  and  functions.  Indeed,  the  boy  of 
ten  or  eleven  is  tolerably  well  adjusted  to  the  environment 
of  savage  life  in  a  warm  country  where  he  could  readily 
live  independently  of  his  parents,  discharging  all  the  functions 
necessary  to  his  personal  life,  but  lacking  only  the  repro- 
ductive function.  In  his  instincts,  amusements,  and  associa- 
tions, his  adjustment  to  such  an  environment  is  quite  stable? 
his  activity  is  at  its  greatest  both  in  amount  and  variety,  as 
studies  to  be  later  considered  show.  We  shall  later  also  see 
in  how  many  of  his  ways  he  resembles  the  savage  and  how 
each  furnishes  the  key  for  understanding  both  the  good  and 
bad  points  in  the  other's  character.  All  this  suggests  on  the 
recapitulation    theory    some    long    stationary    period    during 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  45 

which  Hfe  had  been  pretty  fully  unfolded  and  could  be  led 
indefinitely  and  with  stability  and  security  in  some  not  too 
cold  Lemuria,  New  Atlantis,  Eden,  or  other  possible  ciiiiabti- 
lum  gentium.  This  arrest  may  even  suggest  the  age  of  senes- 
cence in  some  post-simian  stage  of  ancestry.  This  short  pause 
would  thus  be  the  present  echo  of  a  long  phyletic  stage  when 
for  many  generations  our  prehuman  forebears  were  pigmoid 
adults,  leading  short  lives  and  dying  at  or  before  the  pubic 
growth  increment  now  occurs.  It  is  no  argument  against  this 
view  that  the  boy  of  this  age  can  not  perpetuate  his  species, 
for  this  function  is  most  of  all  mobile  up  and  down  the  age 
scale  by  causes  to  some  extent  known  and  in  some  degree 
controllable. 

Not  only  this,  but  hard  conditions,  like  homelessness, 
imperfect  food  and  health,  and  now  sexual  precocity  develop 
strong  tendencies  to  revert  to  or  to  remain  in  this  stage. 
Kline  has  shown  that  truants  are  not  only  smaller  but  more 
akin  to  nomadic  races  than  others ;  Dawson  and  many 
others,  whose  work  will  be  later  discussed,  have  pointed  out 
how  criminality  is  a  product  of  augmentation  of  instincts 
normal  at  this  age,  but  where  the  power  to  inhibit  and  repress 
does  not  develop,  while  the  former  grows  to  dangerous  dimen- 
sions. Thus  man,  adult  in  years  and  stature,  is  constantly 
prone  to  drop  to  this  lower  level,  development  above  which 
becomes  a  little  more  precarious  than  the  preceding  stages 
had  been.  The  latter  periods  of  growth  are  different  and 
more  insecure  because  newer  and  more  unstable. 

On  this  hypothesis  we  can  perhaps  inventory  some  of  the 
influences  which  have  contributed  to  the  ascent  of  man  to  a 
more  ample  growth.  First  of  all,  selection  favors  large  races 
and  individuals;  the  latter  would  overcome  others  in  the  con- 
flicts of  sexual  competition  and  win  the  most  desirable  wives 
as  well  as  the  best  food  and  all  other  advantages  that  strength 
could  procure.  Moreover,  as  migration  has  led  man  west  and 
north  into  more  rigorous  climates,  the  tallest  and  largest 
have  preceded  as  they  still  continue  to  go  west.  Perhaps 
competition  is  at  first  more  severe  in  new  regions  and  in  high 
latitudes,  where,  as  we  have  seen,  men  are  usually  larger, 
or  these  may  have  been  the  more  enterprising  in  leading  such 
advances  of  the  race,  just  as  tall  dolichocephalic  men  still 


4^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

now  most  frequently  forsake  the  country  for  urban  life. 
Again,  the  struggle  with  the  saber-toothed  tiger,  the  great 
cave  bear,  mastodon,  Irish  elks,  gigantic  sloths,  and  extinct 
vertebrates  of  the  Quaternary  age,  may  have  been  a  factor  in 
stimulating  greater  growth  in  man.  The  advent  of  the  father 
to  the  family  after  the  long  period  of  matriarchate  and  per- 
haps the  prolonged  domestication  of  savage  youth,  who  had  be- 
fore tended  to  become  feral  at  the  dawn  of  adolescence 
due  to  paternal  influences  and  subjection,  the  growth  of  the 
home,  all  agencies  that  tended  to  defer  marriage,  as  civiliza- 
tion with  its  arts  increased,  while  numbers  and  intensified 
struggle  slowly  augmented ;  these  and  many  other  factors 
need  not  have  come  altogether,  but  only  to  have  been  un- 
evenly distributed  in  order  to  constitute  a  curve  of  accel- 
eration. 

Once  more,  adolescence  is  a  period  of  rich  and  poly- 
morphic variations  almost  suggesting  sports  in  all  that  per- 
tains to  both  primary  and  secondary  sexual  qualities.  Vir- 
chow  states  that  variations  often  thought  pathological  are 
normal  at  this  age.  The  organism  reassumes  its  more  prim- 
itive power  of  all-sided  development  as  if  ids  or  determinants 
essentially  contrary  were  struggling  for  survival  or  prepo- 
tency among  themselves  in  the  same  individual.  These  vari- 
ables later  become  less  independent  and  their  range  is 
reduced.  This  is  all  seen  in  the  psychic  field.  The  various 
equilibria  of  forces  thus  accurring,  constitute  the  great  oppor- 
tunity for  the  environment  and  for  education.  Cope,  Scott, 
Bateson,  Dollo,  De  Vries,  and  others,^  dissatisfied  with  the 
doctrine  of  gradual  origin  of  species,  have  gathered  facts  from 
many  fields  suggesting  that  the  variations  which  produce 
new  species  are  sudden  and  discontinuous,  and  that  these  muta- 
tions, which  may  not  be  in  only  one  but  many  directions  at 
once,  tend  to  show  themselves  in  a  species  at  certain  periods 
separated  by  long  intervals,  when  symptoms  of  a  tendency 
to  multiform  variations,  that  are  qualitative  and  not  merely 
quantitative,  arise  and  produce  many  individuals  of  a  new 
kind  within  a  short  interval  of  time,  so  they  can  perpetuate 
themselves.     The  parent  species  then  settles  to  its  old  lines, 

*  Cf.  especially  De  Vries.     Entstehung  der  Arten  durch  Mutation,  1901. 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  47 

possibly  later  to  suffer  competition  and  even  extermination 
by  their  transpeciatecl  descendants.  However  this  may  be  for 
plants  and  animals,  such  mutation  periods  suggest  something 
like  an  adolescence  of  the  species  in  which  they  occur,  and  are 
analogous  to  the  changes  that  take  place  in  both  the  body 
and  soul  of  youth  at  this  age  of  all-sided  and  saltatory  deyel- 
opment,  when  new  traits,  powers,  faculties,  and  dimensions, 
which  have  no  other  nascent  period,  arise.  Galton  ^  sup- 
poses that  his  midparent  contributes  two-thirds  the  pecul- 
iarity in  height  and  that  any  peculiarity  tends  to  regress  to 
mediocrity.  Thus  again  we  come  upon  a  suggestion  that  ado- 
lescence abounds  in  cases  that  need  special  explanation  not 
covered  by  general  laws. 

We  must  therefore  regard  the  preadolescent  increment 
of  growth  as  representing  not  only  a  later  stage  in  the  phy- 
logeny  of  modern  man,  but  as  marked  off  from  previous 
stages,  a  little  as  the  successive  geologic  strata  are  differen- 
tiated. Relatively  to  the  periods  that  precede,  man  is  now  in 
a  recent  epoch,  prolonged  as  it  may  have  been,  in  which  a 
new  story  has  been  added  to  his  nature,  so  that  he  is  now  a 
super-man  to  his  ancient  forebears.  A  new  being  is  born  out 
of  and  superposed  on  the  old,  and  in  a  new  sense  the  boy  is 
father  to  the  man,  and  far  older. 

All  this  comports  well  with  the  greatly  increased  physical 
and  mental  instability  which  we  find  here.  Young  children 
grow  despite  great  hardships,  but  later  adolescence  is  more 
dependent  upon  favoring  conditions  in  the  environment,  dis- 
turbances of  which  more  readily  cause  arrest  and  prevent 
maturity.  Not  only  is  the  range  of  variation  in  growth  now 
increased,  but  there  is  far  greater  liability  to  reversion.  As 
we  advance  to  the  later  stages  of  adolescence,  all  these  liabil- 
ities are  greatly  increased,  as  is  the  predisposition  to  sickness. 
The  young  pubescent,  achieving  his  growth  in  the  realm  of 
fundamental  qualities,  dimensions,  and  functions,  comes  up 
to  adult  size  at  eighteen  relatively  limp  and  inept,  like  an  insect 
that  has  just  accomplished  its  last  molt,  and  is  therefore  far 
more  in  the  need  of  protection,  physical  care,  moral  and  intel- 
lectual guidance;   and  in  general,  as  will  be  considered  later  in 

•  Family  Likeness  in  Stature.     Proc.  Royal  Soc.  of  London,  vol.  xl,  p.  42. 


4^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

detail,  this  last  great  wave  of  growth  throws  the  child  up  on  to 
the  shores  of  manhood  or  womanhood  relatively  helpless  as 
from  a  second  birth,  rejuvenated,  as  if  every  cell  in  his  body 
had  striven  to  revive  for  the  last  time  its  failing  reproductive 
potency.  Through  all  these  later  stages  of  his  growth,  we 
can  almost  fancy  that  in  the  individual  arrests  and  accelera- 
tions that  make  up  its  minor  rhythms,  we  detect  the  ripple- 
marks  on  successive  old  shore-lines  which  represent  once 
final  stages  of  emergence  to  maturity,  but  which  are  now  suc- 
cessively transcended. 

This  view  will  be  strongly  confirmed  when  we  consider 
later  the  relatively  independent  character  of  boy  life  as  com- 
pared with  that  of  pubescence.  Boys  of  ten  lead  a  life  with 
and  for  each  other  with  less  interest  in  adult  Hfe,  yielding 
with  what  grace  they  may  to  the  domination  of  "  the  Olym- 
pians," or  adults,  whose  thoughts,  purposes,  and  deeds  often 
seem  falsetto,  unreal,  and  afar;  but  with  adolescence,  they 
become  intensely  susceptible  to  a  wide  range  of  adult  influ- 
ences. Possibly  some  of  the  perturbations  in  the  curve  of 
growth  for  earlier  years  may  mark  yet  older  eons  of 
maturity.  Our  adolescent  phenomena  may  sometime  be  rep- 
resented by  a  series  of  oscillations  between  anagenic  and  cat- 
agenic  processes,  such  as  we  now  see  in  the  perturbations 
at  the  age  of  six  or  seven,  which  suggest  the  ripple-marks 
of  an  old  pubic  beach,  now  at  nearly  every  point  submerged ; 
so,  too,  our  present  period  of  maturity  may  sometime  shrivel 
to  a  rudiment  like  the  pause  and  finer  adjustment  at  from 
nine  to  eleven  or  twelve,  as  childhood,  youth,  and  apprentice- 
ship to  life  become  prolonged  in  some  ascendent  super-race 
of  the  future.  How  many  accelerations  and  retardations  in 
height  and  weight  are  traces  of  ancient  nodes  where  new  buds 
were  once  set  ofif  we  can  not  now  tell,  but  I  think  that  an 
indefinite  perspective  of  these  may  sometime  be  determined. 
The  pedigree  of  the  horse  is  now  pretty  well  traced  from  the 
polydactylous  hippops,  the  size  of  a  rabbit,  up  through  the 
Eocene  orohippus,  the  size  of  a  fox,  the  miohippus  of  the 
Miocence  age,  the  size  of  a  sheep,  the  archihippus  and  proto- 
hippus  of  the  Pliocene,  the  size  of  an  ass,  etc.,  with  every  indi- 
cation that  at  least  its  period  of  immaturity,  if  not  its  average 
age,  has  also  increased.     We  can  not  prove  that  modern  man 


GROWTH  IN  HEIGHT  AND  WEIGHT  49 

was  once  adult  at  the  size  of  the  pigmy  and  that  the  boy  repre- 
sents the  height  and  weight  of  our  forebears  in  a  remote  past, 
any  more  than  we  can  disprove  that  he  sprung  from  some 
extinct  anthropoid  the  size  of  our  smaller  apes.  Indeed,  in 
the  processes  of  evolution  large  phylogenetic  stages  may  be 
represented  by  smaller  ontogenetic  ones,  and  our  childhood 
be  analogous  to  a  dwindled,  rudimentary  organ.  Our  ances- 
tors may  possibly  have  been,  as  an  eminent  anthropologist 
thinks,  of  Anakim  size  and  perhaps  have  lived  to  a  corre- 
spondingly great  age.  It  is,  of  course,  not  demonstrably 
impossible  that  he  may  have  had  both  a  smaller  stature  and 
shorter  life  and  then  grown  larger  and  lived  longer  than  now, 
and  again  diminished,  so  that  both  increase  and  decrease  in 
these  respects  may  be  atavistic  or  reversionary.  However 
this  be,  two  things  seem  more  certain :  first,  that  the  relative 
size  and  age  of  reproduction  must  have  been  a  factor,  and, 
in  some  way  not  yet  known,  a  concomitant  variant;  and, 
second,  that  at  every  stage,  and  especially  since  the  period 
when  the  evolutionary  struggle  began  to  be  predominantly 
psychic  instead  of  physical,  it  is  in  psychic  yet  more  than  in 
physical  rudiments  that  we  must  seek  the  key  to  unlock  the 
enchanting  but  baffling  mysteries  of  man's  past  in  these 
respects,  of  which  the  soul,  even  more  than  the  cells  and  organs, 
is  full  of  dim  echoes  and  reverberations. 

Dominant  in  all  these  aspects  of  adolescence  is  the  note 
of  an  equilibrium  relatively  less  secure  than  what  has  pre- 
ceded, of  an  old  anchorage  broken,  of  elements  less  harmo- 
nized, of  coordinations  yet  incomplete,  of  adjustments  to  the 
environment  less  fine  and  less  settled,  of  insecurity  and  ever- 
impending  danger  of  mental  or  physical  relapse,  and  at  the 
same  time,  of  the  promises  and  potencies  of  a  slow  but  ever 
higher  development.  Hence  there  is  need  of  the  most  careful 
study  of  consummate  practical  wisdom,  in  providing  the  most 
favorable  environment  and  eliminating  every  possible  cause  of 
arrest  or  reversion.  This  is  indeed  the  practical  problem  of 
this  book. 

Could  we  solve  the  problems  of  adolescence,  which  these 
aspects  of  growth  alone  propound,  and  justly  evaluate  the 
cause  of  its  great  advance,  we  should  thus  best  be  able  to 
settle  the  deeper  problems  of  education  in  the  large  sense 


50  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

that  considers  it  as  coextensive  with  all  the  environment. 
Tentative  as  is  now  our  knowledge,  it  is  sufficient  to  gen- 
erate a  deep  optimism  in  the  hope  that  man  is  yet  in  the 
making,  that  the  best  things  have  not  yet  happened  in  his 
history,  and  that  perhaps  his  present  stage  is  at  the  same  time 
the  point  of  departure  of  a  yet  higher  one  related  to  all  that 
adolescence  now  gives,  as  it  is  to  the  stages  that  have  pre- 
ceded. Assummg  the  bionomic  law,  infant  growth  means 
being  loaded  with  paleoatavistic  qualities  in  a  manner  more 
conformable  to  Weismannism,  embryonic  growth  being  yet 
purer,  while  the  pubescent  increment  is  relatively  neoata- 
vistic.  From  this  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  the  more  com- 
plete and  established  the  maturity  before  offspring  are  pro- 
duced, the  greater  the  probability  of  phyletic  progress  in 
successive  generations.  It  would  also  seem  to  be  probable  that 
the  environment,  the  influence  of  which  is  augmented  somewhat 
in  proportion  as  maturity  is  attained,  would  be  felt  by  advan- 
cing the  species,  infinitesimally  though  it  be  in  each  generation, 
toward  a  more  perfect  development  of  its  higher  and  later  ac- 
quired powers.  On  Cope's  view,  the  influence  of  the  environ- 
ment in  producing  acquired  characters  transmissible  by  heredity 
is  greatest  on  the  soma  during  adolescence.^  At  any  rate,  for 
those  prophetic  souls  interested  in  the  future  of  our  race  and 
desirous  of  advancing  it,  the  field  of  adolescence  is  the  quarry 
in  which  they  must  seek  to  find  both  goal  and  means.  If 
such  a  higher  stage  is  ever  added  to  our  race,  it  will  not  be 
by  increments  at  any  later  plateau  of  adult  life,  but  it  will 
come  by  increased  development  of  the  adolescent  stage,  which 
is  the  bud  of  promise  for  the  race. 

*  Primary  Factors  in  Organic  Evolution,  p.  446. 


CHAPTER    II 

GROWTH    OF    PARTS    AND    ORGANS    DURING    ADOLESCENCE 

Change  of  Proportions — Growth  of  Bones  ;  Arms  ;  Legs  ;  Thighs  ;  Pelvis  ;  Sitting 
Height  and  Trunk  ;  Skull ;  Neck  ;  Jaw ;  Teeth  ;  Muscles  ;  Heart ;  Veins 
and  Arteries  ;  the  Blood  ;  Changes  in  Circulation  ;  Lungs  and  their  Capacity  ; 
the  Vital  Index  ;  Brain  ;  Dermal  and  Intestinal  Surfaces ;  Glands  and  their 
Action  —  Abnormalities  of  Growth ;  Harmonious  Development  and  its 
Meaning. 

When,  instead  of  considering  the  body  as  a  whole,  we  now 
pass..within  it  or  seek  to  weigh  and  measure  single  parts  and 
organs,  we  are  confronted  by  yet  more  difficult  problems. 
Many  of  these  determinations  can,  of  course,  be  made  only 
on  the  cadaver,  and  the  data  are  still  far  too  few  for  many 
final  conclusions.  Even  the  external  measurements  of  parts, 
limbs,  joints,  etc.,  are  less  numerous,  too  often  less  accurate 
and  less  accordant  with  each  other  than  those  of  the  body  as 
a  whole.  Very  significant  and  practical  facts,  however,  are 
already  established. 

First :  The  parts  do  not  grow  in  equal  ratio.  If  they  did 
so,  the  infant  would  become  a  monster  adult  with  an  enor- 
mous head,  with  legs  and  arms  too  short,  the  body,  espe- 
cially the  belly,  too  thick,  the  trunk  too  long.  The  following 
table   from   Vierordt,^   although   known   to   be   inaccurate   in 

Fold. 

Testes 60 

Muscles 48 

Pancreas 28 

Skeleton 26 

Lungs 20 

Stomach  and  alimentary  canal ....  20 

Milts 18 

Liver 13.6 

Ovaries 13 

Heart 12.5 

some  parts,  is  still  as  a  whole  the  best  we  have  to  show  how 
manifold  the  weight  of  certain  organs  increases  from  birth 
to  maturity.    The  lungs,  stomach,  and  milts  only  grow  about 

*  Physiol,  des  Kindesalters,  p.  254, 

5< 


Fold. 

Kidneys 12 

Skin 12 

Salivary  glands 10.7 

Spinal  cord 7 

Thyroid  gland 4.5 

Brain  ...    3 

Eye I 

Suprarenal  capsules o 

Thymus 


52 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


as  much  as  does  the  body  as  a  whole;  while  testes  and  mus- 
cles greatly  exceed,  the  thymus,  eye,  etc.,  grow  far  less  than 
the  total  body.  Many  rudimentary  parts,  not  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  table,  of  which  Wiedersheim  describes  several  score 
which  make  the  body  like  an  old  curiosity-shop,  decline,  and 
some  even  vanish  with  increasing  age,  so  that  at  maturity 
our  component  parts  are  normally  very  dififerent  in  their 
relative  size  from  what  they  are  at  birth.  Were  we  able  to 
construct  an  analogous  table  showing  the  relative  increase 
of  organs  from  the  first  intrauterine  month  to  the  mature 
fetus,  we  should  find  very  different  and  greater  changes  as 
well  as  more  in  number.  Where  single  parts  continue  to 
grow  too  fast  or  exceed  their  normal  proportions,  and  others 
fall  behind  or  cease  to  grow,  we  have  data  for  the  very  inter- 
esting science  of  teratology,  in  which  the  due  balance  and 
harmony  of  growth  has  been  disturbed,  and  some  parts  are 
hypertrophied  and  others  atrophied. 

This  is  also  seen  although  in  general  to  a  less  extent  in  ex- 
ternal dimensions. 


Growth  in  Lengths. 


Vertex  to  the  orbital  margin .  . 
Orbital  margin  to  the  larynx. . 

Larynx  to  the  axilla 

Axilla  to  the  crest  of  the  ischium 

Upper  arm 

Lower  arm 

Hand 

Sum  of  the  above  three  .... 
Ischial  crest  to  the  knee  . . . 

Knee  to  the  foot  sole 

Length  of  foot 


Age. 


At        _ 
birth.      °~3. 


6.6 

7.5 

6.0 

20.  r 

15-2 

9.1 
8.1 


2.6 
4.4 

4.7 
6.8 

9-3 

8.0 

4.2 

21.5 

14.7 

13-3 

5 


3-6. 


O, 
I. 
I, 
I. 

3. 
4. 
0.7 

8.4 
9-3 
4.6 

3 


^. 


o 

I.I 

1-3 

1.3 

0.6 


(1-3) 
4.9 
2.4 

2.5 


o 

0.6 
1.4 
2.1 

3.5 
2.3 
1.9 
7.6 

8.1 
5-8 
4 


Total 
growth 
to  15th 

year. 


Further 
growth. 


O.I 

1-5 
2.2 

4-5 
2.2 


6.9 
6.1 

3-9 
1.9 


Growth  in  Breadths.- 

Age. 

Total 
growth 

Further 

At  birth. 

0-3. 

3-6. 

6^. 

9-15. 

to  15th 
year. 

growth. 

Head 

9.7 
6.6 

13-7 

10.5 

10.5 

3-3 

3.3 

2.7 

1.2 

0.8 
3.8 
2.6 

2.4 
0.6 

1-4 

0.6 

0.8 
5-2 

3.8 

4.0 
0.7 
0.6 

0.8 
0.3 

4 

3-6 

2.8 

1.3 

I 

5."; 

1.4 

Neck 

0 

9 

5 

I 

3 
? 

6 

3 

5 
8 

3 

7 

2 
22 
15 
17 

5 
5 

5 
3 
5 
3 
9 
7 

2.8 

Shoulders 

14.4 

Thorax  at  the  level  of  the  praecordia 
Hips  at  the  level  of  the  trochanter. 
Greatest  breadth  of  calf 

5-2 
6.2 

3.4 

Greatest  breadth  of  foot 

0.6 

Yrs.  MO. 


AvERAc.E  Growth  Measurements. 

,  foot ;  b,  neck  ;  c.  upper  half  of  head  ;  r/,.length  of  face  ;  e,  transverse  diameter  of  head ;  /,  head ;  g,  head  diameter,  front  to  back  ;  /(,  sternum  ; 
I,  lower  arm  ;  j,  depth  of  chest ;  /•,  abdominal  girth  ;  /,  head  length  over ;  /«,  upper  arm ;  «,  breadth  of  male  hip  and  shoulder  ;  o,  breadth  of 
female  hip  ;  />,  length  of  arm  ;  </,  head  girth  ;  r,  leg  length  ;  s,  thorax  expanded. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  53 

The  table  on  page  52  (Zeissing-Vierordt)  shows  the  abso- 
lute growth  in  length  and  breadth  in  centimeters. 

The  opposite  chart  is  a  combination  of  two  from  Vierordt 
(Physiol,  des  Kindesalters,  pp.  271, 274)  showing,  on  the  basis 
of  Liharzik's  measurements,  nineteen  dimensions  for  four  ages, 
viz. :  at  birth,  one  year  and  nine  months,  fourteen  years  and 
three  months,  and  twenty-five.  This  is  drawn  to  scale  in  such 
a  way  that,  starting  from  the  left  vertical  line  the  distances 
along  the  four  horizontal  lines  are  in  each  case  one-fifth  those 
of  the  average  individual. 

Dr.  W.  W.  Hastings  ^  concludes  that  "  the  nearer  an  indi- 
vidual approaches  mean  development  in  height,  the  more  nearly 
will  he  conform  to  an  absolute  standard  of  symmetry  in  his 
entire  development.  But  there  is  a  typical  development  and 
standard  of  symmetry  for  each  height  of  each  age,  a  standard 
which  is  attainable  and  to  which  the  muscular  development  of 
the  individual  of  that  height  may  be  made  to  conform  very 
closely  through  the  aid  of  systematic  physical  training  and 
general  care  of  health." 

A  good  picture  of  the  growth  of  the  body  as  a  whole  and 
of  its  special  external  dimensions  is  presented  in  the  cut  on  page 
54  from  Godin,^  who  sought  to  determine  the  adolescent 
type  at  different  pubescent  years  by  36,000  measurements  on 
one  hundred  French  schoolboys,  followed  individually  from 
thirteen  to  eighteen  years  of  age.  By  comparing  the  eighteen 
points  de  repcre  here  represented  by  dots,  the  changes  of  pro- 
portion can  be  traced  and  measured  on  a  millimetric  scale. 

Second:  Few  parts  grow  steadily,  so  that  their  develop- 
ment is  represented  not  by  straight  lines  but  by  curves  which 
differ  greatly  one  from  the  other  in  the  same  person  and  also 
differ  in  different  individuals  in  whom  the  summative  meas- 
ures of  gross  height  and  weight  may  coincide.  The  brain, 
e.  g.,  almost  ceases  to  increase  in  size  or  weight  before  pu- 
berty, when  reproductive  organs,  hips,  and  muscles  then  grow 
at  an  augmented  rate.    The  age  of  most  rapid  growth  in  any 

*  See  his  Manual  for  Physical  Measurements,  with  anthropometric  tables  for 
each  height  of  each  age  and  sex  from  five  to  twenty  years,  and  vitality  coefficients. 
1902.     The  best  manual  of  its  kind. 

*  Recherches  Anthropom^triques  sur  la  croi^sanqe  des  diverses  parties  du  corps 
P»ris,  1903,  pp.  242. 


54 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 


part  is  called  its  nascent  period.  While  pubertal  growth 
reaches  more  or  less  simultaneously  nearly  every  part  of  the 
body,  even  its  energies  focus  upon  certain  organs  more  than 

Millimeters 

160  120  80  40  0  160  120  80  40  0  160 120  80  40  0  200  160 12080  40  0  200 160 120  80  40  0  200  ISO  12080  CO  0 


ACE  13  '/2  14 


nVi 


Others,  and  not  a  few  sequences,  to  be  later  noted,  are  estab- 
lished, and  more  detailed  and  accurate  measurements  will 
probably  add  to  this  number.     To  determine  these  periods, 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  55 

not  only  for  different  parts,  but  for  different  traits  and  powers 
of  the  soul,  is  one  of  the  chief  quests  of  genetic  study,  and 
where  estabhshed,  the  result  is  fraught  with  most  important 
practical  results. 

Third:  Not  only  do  different  parts  reach  their  maximal 
size  at  different  ages,  but  some  continue  to  grow  well  on  into 
old  age.  A  recent  writer  concludes  that  the  kidneys  are  at 
their  largest  in  the  third  decade,  the  muscles,  skeleton,  intes- 
tines, and  liver  in  the  fifth,  the  heart  and  lungs  in  the  eighth ; 
and  from  this  it  would  seem  almost  as  if  each  organ  has  its 
youth,  maturity,  and  old  age,  and  that  these  do  not  coincide 
either  with  each  other  or  w^ith  the  stages  of  body  growth  as  a 
whole.  The  motor  organs  as  the  heaviest  give  to  growth  its 
chief  character,  so  that  what  we  call  maturity  is  the  period  of 
their  greatest  development.  The  body-weight  as  a  whole  sinks 
in  old  age  despite  the  growth  of  lungs,  intestines,  heart,  and 
liver,  chiefly  because  the  muscles  and  bones  decline.  Man  is 
therefore  not  old  because  all  the  parts  of  his  body  are  old,  but 
because  his  heaviest  organs  decline.  There  is  therefore  no  ab- 
solute standstill  of  growth,  and  age  is  relative,  some  organs  re- 
maining young,  and  some  achieving  their  highest  rate  of 
growth  and  nearly  or  quite  ceasing  before  others  attain  their 
most  rapid  rate. 

Fourth:  It  is  well  to  remember  that  from  a  larger  bio- 
logical view,  every  higher  animal  is  not  only  composed  of 
organs  phyletically  old  and  new,  but  that  the  order  of  their 
development  may  even  be  changed.  Basal  and  lapidary  as 
is  the  great  biogenic  law  that  the  individual  recapitulates 
the  growth  stages  of  his  race,  the  work  of  Appel,  Keibel,  Meh- 
nert,^  and  many  others  has  demonstrated  abundant  inver- 
sions of  it.  The  heart,  e.  g.,  in  the  individual  develops  be- 
fore the  blood-vessels,  but  this  reverses  the  phylogenetic 
order.  The  walls  of  the  large  vessels  develop  before  the  blood- 
corpuscles,  while  the  converse  was  true  in  the  development 
of  the  species.  Ontogenetic  age  in  all  such  cases  is  an  index 
only  of  the  intensity  of  cenogenetic  energy.  Retarded  devel- 
opment of  an  organ,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an  indication  of 
regressivity,  and  many  writers  have  collected  cases  showing 

•  See  especially  his  Biomechanik.     Jena,  1898. 


56  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

that  abbreviation  and  retardation  of  the  different  organs  of 
a  creature  which  is  their  bearer  are  ontogenetic  processes 
that  are  constantly  operative.  The  latter  may  affect  the  date 
of  the  first  appearance  of  an  organ,  the  differentiation  of  its 
tissues  among  each  other,  or  the  entire  processes  of  growth 
of  a  part  or  all  of  them.  Organs  are  progressive  according 
to  the  degree  of  their  vitality.  The  rapidity  of  the  growth  of 
a  part  is  directly  as  the  degree  of  development  acquired  by 
the  phyletic  process.  Owing  to  this  heterochrony,  every  ani- 
mal, man  included,  is  a  mixture  of  high  and  low,  new  and  old 
qualities,  so  that  in  certain  respects  not  a  few  animals  excel 
man,  and  we  are  slowly  gaining  and  slowly  losing  traits.  In 
general,  we  may  say  with  Jordan  that  "  if  the  history  of  an 
individual  is  an  epitome  of  the  history  of  the  group  to  which 
the  individual  belongs,  then  adaptive  characters  appearing 
late  in  the  growth  of  the  individual  must  have  appeared  late 
in  the  history  of  the  group."  ^  But  this  is  only  a  part  of  the 
fact,  for  as  Hyatt  ^  states  the  matter,  "  all  modifications  and 
variations  in  progressive  series  tend  to  appear  first  in  the 
adolescent  or  adult  stages  of  growth,  and  then  to  be  inherited 
in  successive  descendants  at  earlier  and  earlier  stages  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  acceleration,  until  they  either  become  em- 
bryonic or  are  crowded  out  of  the  organization  and  replaced 
in  the  development  by  characteristics  of  later  origin."  Cope  ^ 
has  modified  this  law  by  suggesting  that  "  the  accelerations 
in  the  assumption  of  a  character  progressing  more  rapidly 
than  the  same  in  another  character  must  soon  produce  a 
type  whose  stages  were  once  the  exact  parallel  of  a  perma- 
nent lower  form;  the  condition  of  inexact  parallelism." 
Hence  he  infers  that  acceleration  has  occurred  in  some  traits 
and  qualities,  but  also  that,  as  each  type  has  had  its  time  of 
culminating  perfection,  retrogression  and  retardation  have  also 
occurred,  till  some  characters  have  been  lost.  Thus  in  on- 
togeny or  the  development  of  the  individual,  we  often  have 
characters  that  occurred  simultaneously  in  the  ancestral  or- 
ganism appearing  successively.  Indeed,  many  variations  of 
parts  and  functions,  both  those  of  excess  and  defect,  may 

•  Jordan.     Foot-notes  to  Evolution,  p.  2io. 

•  Smithsonian  Contributions,  No.  673,  Preface,  p.  ix. 

•  Origin  of  the  Fittest,  p.  142, 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  57 

have  a  morbid  origin.  Virchow,  describing  the  differences 
between  diathesis,  Anlage,  and  variations,  makes  the  former 
permanent,  but  holds  that  the  latter  especially  may  arise 
from  a  pathological  inception.^ 

Weisbach  -  thinks,  e.  g.,  that  the  measurements  of  sav- 
ages show  that  ape-like  traits  are  not  concentrated  in  any 
race,  but  are  scattered  among  different  races,  and  that  some 
are  found  even  among  Europeans.  Turner^  infers  that  no 
one  race  is  inferior  or  superior  to  all  others  in  all  traits.  He 
finds,  e.  g.,  that  while  the  Lapps  and  Eskimos  most  approach 
apes  in  the  proportions  of  thigh  to  upper  arm  and  of  shaft  of 
lower  to  upper  limb,  they  are  among  all  races  one  of  the  most 
widely  removed  from  apes  in  the  no  less  important  ratio  of 
forearm  to  upper  arm  and  of  leg  to  thigh.  In  other  re- 
spects, the  Fuegians  are  among  the  most  ape-like  of  men,  yet 
in  pelvis  and  sacrum  they  rank  high.  While  on  the  whole, 
in  the  important  skeletal  character  of  skull  and  pelvis,  the 
Europeans  are  more  removed  from  the  general  type  of  mam- 
mals, it  is  by  no  means  as  yet  proved  that  the  higher  races 
have  been  derived  by  graded  perfection  of  all  structure  from 
the  black  or  any  other  existing  race  or  from  the  Simian  type. 
In  some  respects  the  so-called  low  races  are  more  developed 
out  of  and  even  opposite  to  the  pithecoid  type  than  are  the 
most  civilized. 

Fifth:  In  the  present  state  of  the  question  between  pre- 
formation and  epigenesis  we  shall  assume  that  the  earlier 
stages  of  life  are  more  conformable  to  Weismannism,  and  the 
later  to  the  views  of  Hertwig.  The  eozooic  or  paleoatavistic 
bases  of  heredity  are  the  formative  principles  of  fundamental 
organs,  condition  all  others,  and  are  constant  and  more  inde- 
pendent of  recent  environment  both  in  the  time  and  degree 
of  their  development.  But  even  if  we  assume  the  monophyletic 
origin  of  animal  life,  it  will  still  follow  that  as  maturity  and 
on  the  whole  death  are  longer  delayed  as  we  ascend  the  scale 
of  being,  more  and  more  weight  must  be  assigned  to  those 
qualities   which   are  later  acquired   than  to  those  which  are 

*  Verh.  Acad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  i8g6. 

'  Reise  der  Novara.  Anthropol.  Theil.     1867,  p.  269. 

^  Voyage  of  the  M.  S.  Challenger.     Zool.,  vol.  xvi.     Bones  of  the  Human 
Skeleton. 


58  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

earlier  and  more  stable.  Even  if  we  admit  that  the  rudiments 
of  all  the  chief  characteristics  possessed  by  the  species  lie 
dormant  in  the  egg,  this  does  not  compel  us  to  infer  that  there 
is  no  inherited  congenital  indefiniteness,  to  say  that  all  is 
predetermined,  that  there  are  no  latent  energies  to  be  not 
only  set  off  but  guided  by  stimulation,  or  that  the  only 
limitation,  to  the  opening  of  new  lines  in  all  directions,  pre- 
viously fixed  in  the  constitution  of  germ-plasm  is  that  by  devel- 
oping some  modes  of  reaction,  certain  others  become  impos- 
sible. All  we  need  to  assume  is  that  there  are  neoatavistic 
factors,  and  that  the  later  part  of  each  individual  life  is  more 
characterized  by  the  evolution  of  acquired  qualities.  Promi- 
nent among  the  epigenetic  elements  are  the  effects  of  use, 
which  increase  from  birth  onward,  while  organs  not  needed 
tend  to  atrophy  or  become  rudimentary  as  their  functions 
cease.  Not  only  the  relations  between  these  two  functions, 
but  recent  biological  discussions  repeat,  in  many  respects, 
those  which  Locke  inaugurated  concerning  innate  ideas,  and 
the  issue  of  the  two  discussions  is  also  analogous.  Each  of 
these  principles  will  have  abundant  illustrations  in  this 
chapter. 

A.  The  Grozvth  of  the  Bones. — To  secrete  solid  sub- 
stances is  one  of  the  primitive  powers  of  animal  organisms, 
as  is  seen  in  all  of  the  siliceous  and  calcareous  shell- 
made  oozes  (pteripod,  globigerina,  radiolarian,  diatome, 
etc.)  that  cover  so  deeply  the  primitive  ocean-bed  upon  which 
they  are  always  snowing  down,  in  the  form  of  coral  formations, 
molluscan  shells,  Crustacea,  articulata,  the  bony  coats  of  insects, 
the  carapaces  of  exoskeletal  mammals,  etc.  Although  this 
tegumentary  framework  is  now  represented  in  man  only  by 
hair,  nails,  and  perhaps  the  dermal  bones  of  the  head  and  secon- 
dary or  outer  skull,  suggestions  and  recrudescences  of  it  are 
still  often  seen  in  abnormal  and  monstrous  individuals,  not 
only  in  defects  of  the  endoskeleton,  but  in  various  forms  of 
outer  callosity 

In  vertebrates,  the  axial  system  is  both  ontogenetically 
and  phylogenetically  first  to  appear,  and  can  be  detected 
within  the  first  month  of  fetal  life.  The  development  of 
the  appendicular  system  of  limbs  of  all  kinds,  first  in  the 
membranous  and  then  in  the  bony  stage,  is  later  very  grad- 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  59 

ual,,  and  in  general  proceeds  from  the  larger  to  the  smaller 
bones,  and  from  the  central  or  fundamental  to  the  distal  or 
accessory  part,  the  limb-fingers,  toes,  etc.,  coming  after 
arm  and  leg  bones.  Here,  too,  the  force  of  heredity  is 
stronger  and  truer  in  the  early  stages,  so  that  congenital  de- 
formities and  insufficiency  are  more  liable  for  the  parts  that 
develop  late  than  for  those  that  develop  earlier.  This  general 
law,  however,  has  frequent  exceptions.  The  skull,  as  we  go 
up  the  vertebrate  scale,  has  grown  at  the  expense  of  the 
cervical  vertebrae,  and  strangely,  the  first  bone  in  the  embryo 
to  ossify  is  commonly  the  clavicle,  which  has  so  important  a 
function  in  expanding  the  shoulders  in  the  erect  position, 
frees  the  arms  from  locomotive  functions,  and  gives  them 
a  power  and  range  of  lateral  movement  almost  equal  to  that 
in  the  mesial  plane. 

Just  before  and  after  puberty  there  is  a  great  increase 
in  the  growth  of  bones,  and  at  the  close  of  the  adolescent 
ferment  the  skeleton  is  considerably  extended  and  also  much 
consolidated  and  joined  together.  This  growth  is  much 
accentuated  in  the  larger  and  especially  in  the  longer  bones, 
which  have  been  chiefly  measured.  Kotelmann,  Hall,  and 
Moon  have  shown  that  they  grow  in  thickness  as  well  as  in 
length,  adding  new  periosteal  layers.  The  motor  apparatus 
in  men,  consisting  of  223  bones  and  about  316  muscles,  con- 
stitute by  weight  some  i^^/^j-  of  the  adult  body,  so  that  its 
increase  is  the  chief  factor  of  growth.  Augmenting  twenty-six 
fold  from  birth  to  maturity,  the  weight  of  the  skeleton  varies, 
with  no  yet  fully  determined  law,  from  thirteen  to  twenty- 
three  per  cent  that  of  the  body,  declining  both  relatively  and 
absolutely  in  old  age.^  For  the  prepubertal  stages  of  growth  it 
is  still  impossible  to  give  exact  data.     Miihlmann  ^  can  find  but 


'  Vierordt.     Daten  u.  Tabellen,  p.  17. 

'  Ueber  die  Ursache  des  Alters.     Wiesbaden,  1900,  p.  150. 


6o  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

six  careful  attempts  to  weigh  the  skeleton  at  different  ages,  and 
from  these  constructs  the  table  for  males  on  page  59. 

In  the  following  cut,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  my 
colleague  Professor  Sanford,  the  skeleton  of  an  infant  is  mag- 
nified to  the  approximate  length  of  that  of  an  adult,  to  show 


C  B  A 

a,  skeleton  jf  an  adult:  b,  skeleton  of  a  new  born  infant  on  the  same  scale;  c,  the 
same  irifant's  skeleton  magnified  photographically  to  approximate  the  length 
of  the  aililt  skeleton. 

how  monstrous  maturity  would  be  if  the  bones  grew  in  equal 
proportions  i-n  all  their  dimensions.  The  skull  and  face  would 
be  enormous,  the  neck  long,  the  shoulders  low  or  almost  absent, 
the  thorax  narrow  laterally  but  deep  from  front  to  back  like  a 
quadruped,  the  arms  and  especially  the  legs  short,  the  hips  small 
and  feeble,  etc, 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  6i 

(a)  Sitting  and  Standing  Height. — Important  and  interest- 
ing is  the  relation  between  the  growth  of  the  upper  and  lower 
lengths  of  the  body,  or  the  trunk  from  the  vertex  to  the  hip, 
as  compared  with  that  of  the  leg.  Unfortunately,  there  have 
been  discrepancies  in  taking  these  measurements,  so  that 
results  are  as  yet  unsatisfactory.  Zeissing  ^  found  individual 
differences  here  so  great  that  the  proportions  of  some  chil- 
dren at  four  were  like  those  of  others  at  fourteen,  while 
Liharzik  thought  this  ratio  so  distinct  for  each  period  of  life 
and  so  uniform  for  all  that  he  could  approximately  determine 
the  age  by  it  alone.  Landsberger  -  measured  this  relation 
only  from  the  age  of  six  to  that  of  twelve  years,  and  found 
the  percentage  of  lower  length  to  increase  from  56.1  to  59.3 
per  cent  of  the  entire  length  of  the  body. 

While  the  middle  of  the  body  by  length  slowly  descends 
with  growth,  the  center  of  gravity  descends  relatively  with 
growth,  but  ascends  absolutely,  and  in  the  adult  male  is  in  the 
pelvis  just  above  the  hip-joint.^  Weber  found  the  center  of 
gravity  in  a  male  body  166.92  centimeters  long,  to  lie  8.77  cen- 
timeters above  the  axis  of  rotation  of  the  head  of  the  femur ; 
0.87  centimeter  above  the  promontorium ;  94.77  centimeters 
above  the  heel;  72.15  centimeters  below  the  sinciput.  Accord- 
ing to  Vierordt,*  if  the  body  were  divided  at  the  level  of  the 
crista  of  the  ischium  (the  lower  part  of  the  hip-bone)  and  the 
total  be  divided  into  1,000  parts — 

At  8  the  upper  body  will  measure  397,  and  the  whole  603  ; 
At  13  "  "  "  "  "  382,  "  "  "  618; 
At  60 "        "         369,    "      "        "      631. 

Liharzik,  who  divided  a  little  lower  at  the  pubic  symphi- 
sis, found  that — 

At    7^  the  upper  length  was  63.5  centimeters,  and  the  lower  63.5  centimeters  ; 
At  18      "        "  "         '•     75  "  "      "        "       88  " 

At  24      "        "  "         "     81  "  "      "        "       94 

W.  S.  Hall  ^  found  that  at  nine  years  the  height  of  the 
pubes  was  exactly  equal  to  that  of  the  body,  and  at  twenty- 

*  Vierordt.     Physiol,  des  Kindesalters,  p.  267. 

*  Das  Wachsthum  ins  Alter  der  Schulpflicht,  p.  245. 

*  Ueber  den  Schwerpunkt  des  menschlichen  Korpers.   W.  Braune  u.  O.  Fischer, 
Leipzig,  1889. 

*  Daten  u.  Tabellen,  p.  il.  '  Jour.  Anthropol.  Inst.,  1895. 


6a  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

three,  when  the  middle  of  the  body  had  moved  down  to  that 
of  the  symphysis,  it  was  fifty-one  per  cent. 

Moon  ^  concluded  that  at  fifteen  the  hmbs  are  relatively 
longer  in  proportion  to  the  body  than  those  of  the  man  or  the 
boy  of  eleven.  In  sitting  height,  or  the  length  of  the  vertebral 
column,  there  is  a  retarded  stage  of  growth  relative  to  height 
during  the  entire  period  from  eleven  to  fifteen.  Later  ^  he 
found  that  growth  of  sitting  height  was  independent  of  the 
approach  of  puberty.  This  increases  for  a  year  or  two  before 
as  well  as  afterward.  In  fine,  the  legs  tend  to  outstrip  the 
other  components  of  height  during  early  youth,  but  afterward 
increase  more  slowly;  while  the  sitting  height  increases 
rapidly. 

Bowditch  ^  says  "  women  appear  to  be  relatively  longer 
in  body  and  shorter  in  the  legs  than  men."  By  measuring 
1,546  girls  and  324  men,  mostly  college  and  normal  students, 
he  found  the  average  sitting  height  to  be  53.24  per  cent  of  the 
total  height  without  shoes.  Sargent  has  made  this  a  trifle 
less,  viz.,  52.7  per  cent.  Ranke  •*  takes  the  relatively  greater 
body  length  of  woman  for  granted  and  infers  that  she  is  thus 
embryologically  lower  than  man,  and  Huxley  states  that  long 
thigh  and  forearm  are  distinctively  human  traits.  Hitch- 
cock,^ however,  compared  measurements  of  500  students  each 
of  Amherst  (male)  and  Mount  Holyoke  and  Wellesley  (fe- 
male) ,  where  the  average  age  of  entrance  is  nineteen,  and  found 
that  while  each  sex  had  about  1.9  pound  weight  for  every  inch 
in  height,  and  that  while  the  females  excelled  a  trifle  in  length 
of  head  and  neck,  the  males  were  seven  per  cent  taller  and  the 
male  trunk  was  eleven  per  cent  longer  than  that  of  the  female, 
and  that  even  the  distance  from  pubis  to  navel  was  twelve  per 
cent  longer  in  the  male.  This  surprising  result,  so  con- 
trary to  the  common  opinion  that  the  female  trunk  is  rela- 

'  The  Growth  of  Boys.  Proc.  Am.  Ass'n  for  Advancement  of  Phys.  Education, 
1896. 

*  The  Question  of  Growth  at  Puberty.     Am.  Phys.  Ed.  Rev.,  Sept.,  1899. 

*  Beitrage  zur  Anthropol.,  p.  490.     Munich,  1883. 

*  Arch.  f.  Anthropol.,  vol.  xv,  1884,  p.  171. 

'  Comparative  Study  of  Measurements  of  Male  and  Female  Students  at 
Amherst,  Mount  Holyoke,  and  Wellesley  Colleges.  Journal  of  Physical  Education, 
▼ol,  i,  p.  90. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  63 

tively  the  longest,  can  not  yet  be  interpreted.  It  is  possible 
that  these  girls  are  not  average  representatives  of  their  sex, 
but  more  mannish.  There  is  some  reason  to  believe  that 
relatively  long-bodied  women  are  higher  and  better  mothers 
and  that  relatively  long-limbed  girls  are  decadent,  as  we 
shall  see  later. 

Dr.  G.  M.  West  ^  concluded  from  the  measurements  of 
3,250  Worcester  school  children  that  girls'  sitting  height 
began  to  rise  rapidly  at  twelve,  before  which  age  it  had  been 
very  slight,  and  rose  for  two  years.  From  the  fifteenth  to 
seventeenth  year  inclusive,  the  growth  of  boys  rises,  but  drops 
the  next  year.  His  curves  suggest  that  up  to  the  twelfth  year 
in  girls,  and  to  the  fifteenth  year  in  boys,  a  large  part  of  the 
growth  in  stature  is  made  in  the  lower  limbs,  while  after 
these  ages  it  is  made  largely  in  the  trunk.  During  all  the 
period  from  five  to  eighteen  the  limbs  of  boys  grow  more 
rapidly  than  the  trunk,  while  with  girls,  the  period  of  greater 
comparative  growth  is  divided  about  equally  between  the 
extremities  and  the  trunk.  The  trunk  is  relatively  longer  in 
girls  than  in  boys,  except  from  the  seventh  to  the  tenth  year, 
while  after  the  thirteenth  year,  girls'  bodies  are  relatively  still 
longer.  After  the  twelfth  year  the  annual  increase  in  sit- 
ting height  is  less  than  before,  though  boys  maintain  a  more 
uniform  rate  during  all  the  period  of  acceleration;  while  both 
sexes  make  greater  annual  growth  after  than  before  twelve, 
yet  girls  make  the  greatest  absolute  increase  before,  and  boys 
after  that  period. 

Porter  ^  concluded  from  his  measurements  on  33,500 
children  that  sitting  height  in  girls  attained  its  fastest  rate 
of  growth  at  thirteen  and  in  boys  at  fifteen,  and  that  the 
period  during  which  girls  exceed  boys  in  size  is  longest  in 
sitting  height.  Hrdlicka  ^  found  that  the  greatest  length 
of  lower  limb  in  the  sexes  taken  together  was  attained  from 
the  thirteenth  to  the  sixteenth  years,  and  that  thereafter 
the  body  gains  slightly  on  the  limbs.  He  also  suggested 
that  the  chief  defect  in  the  growth  of  badly  nourished  chil- 

^  Science,  January  6,  1893. 

'  Acad,  of  Science,  St.  Louis,  March,  1893.  ; 

•  Special  Report  of  New  York  Juvenile  Asylum,  / 


64  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

dren  is  found  in  the  under  growth  of  the  lower  hmbs,  but 
thought  that  colored  children  relatively  excelled  white  in 
this  respect. 

Peckham  ^  infers  from  the  measurements  of  about  10,000 
children  from  four  to  eighteen  that  the  growth  of  the  body 
and  of  the  lower  extremities  takes  place  in  such  a  way  that 
the  length  of  the  body  of  the  girl  is  less  than  that  of  the  body 
of  the  boy  until  the  tenth  year  and  thereafter  greater  until 
the  sixteenth  year.  From  fifteen  to  eighteen  the  bodies  of 
girls  grow  only  two  inches  and  the  bodies  of  boys  over  four 
inches.  For  the  lower  extremities  at  nine  years  of  age,  those  of 
the  girls  are  longer  (as  compared  with  the  boys),  at  eleven 
shorter,  and  from  twelve  to  fourteen  again  longer.  At  four- 
teen the  lower  extremities  of  the  girls  almost  cease  growing, 
while  those  of  the  boys  increase  by  four  inches  between  the 
ages  of  fourteen  and  nineteen. 

The  Chicago  measurements  ^  show^ed  that  in  sitting  height 
girls  at  fifteen  began  to  increase  more  slowly  and  at  eighteen 
appeared  to  have  reached  their  maximum,  while  the  Chicago 
boys  grew  steadily  in  body  length  till  after  eighteen,  and  then 
at  a  rather  uniform  but  reduced  rate  until  twenty  and  a 
half,  when  this  census  ended.  The  last  Chicago  percentiles 
show  that  while  girls'  sitting  height  is  growing  rapidly  from 
ten  to  fourteen  and  almost  ceases  from  sixteen  to  eighteen,  it 
increases  rather  faster  than  net  height  from  thirteen  to  fourteen 
and  decidedly  more  slowly  from  eight  to  ten.  In  boys  from 
sixteen  to  seventeen,  sitting  height  augments  more  than  net 
height  and  from  nine  to  ten  distinctly  less.  In  other  words,  in- 
crease in  pubertal  trunk  growth  in  both  sexes  both  begins  later 
and.  relatively  to  limb  growth,  continues  longer.^ 

Dafifner,  who  measured  distances  below  and  above  the 
navel  from  ten  to  twenty-two,  found  that  at  birth  the  navel 
was  2.3  centimeters  below  the  middle  of  the  body;  that  be- 
tween the  age  of  one  and  one  year  and  a  half  it  was  at  the 
middle  length ;  then  the  lower  part  began  to  exceed  the  upper, 
so  that  at  ten  it  was  21  centimeters;  at  eleven,  22  centimeters; 

'  Sixth  Report  of  the  State  Board  of  Health  of  Wisconsin. 
'  Report   of  the   Department   of  Child   Study  and   Pedagogic   Investigation. 
Chicago,  No.  2. 

•  Ibid.    No.  3,  igoo-'oi. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  65 

at  twelve,  14  centimeters;  at  thirteen,  28  centimeters;  at  four- 
teen, 31  centimeters;  and  at  twenty-two,  nearly  34  centi- 
meters farther  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  navel  than  from 
the  navel  to  the  crown  of  the  head. 

(b)  Arms  and  Legs,  Thorax  and  Pelvis. — The  limbs  prob- 
ably originate  polymerously  as  outgrowths  of  primitive 
body  segments,  and  precede  in  their  development  the  pelvic 
and  pectoral  girdles  that  support  them.  From  approximate 
identity  in  the  fish  the  fore  and  hind  limbs  diverge  in  struc- 
ture and  function,  as  we  ascend  the  evolutionary  scale.  In 
the  embryo  the  development  of  the  bones  of  the  limbs  pre- 
cedes those  of  both  the  above  girdles,  but  whether  the  pu- 
bertal increment  follows  this  order  is  not  yet  determined. 
From  data  compiled  from  the  latest  works  on  anatomy,  the 
following  seem  to  be  the  chief  adolescent  changes  in  the  bones 
of  the  limbs: 

The  epiphyses  of  the  humerus  join  the  shaft  at  about 
twenty,  the  nucleus  of  the  external  condyle  appears  between 
thirteen  and  seventeen,  that  of  the  internal  condyle  joins  the 
shaft  at  about  eighteen  and  the  other  members  at  sixteen  or 
seventeen.  The  superior  epiphyses  of  the  tibia  join  the  shaft 
at  seventeen  or  eighteen,  and  the  inferior  epiphyses  at  eight- 
een. The  metacarpal  bones  and  phalanges  have  epiphyses 
which  join  about  twenty.  The  epiphyses  of  the  clavicle  ap- 
pear about  the  eighteenth  year  and  join  the  shaft  about  the 
twenty-fifth  year.  The  coracoid  process  of  the  scapula,  which 
ossifies  from  two  centers  which  join  from  the  sixteenth  to  the 
eighteenth  years,  assists  the  clavicle  in  rotating  the  fore  limbs 
outward  farther  from  the  trunk  and  in  giving  them  greater 
freedom  of  motion.  The  gradual  recession  of  the  shoulders 
from  the  head ;  the  gradual  transformation  of  a  fore  foot  into 
a  hand  and  the  greatly  increased  contact  with  the  environ- 
ment thereby,  the  reduction  of  a  prehensile  to  a  human 
foot  with  growing  mesial  and  degenerating  external  func- 
tions; the  opposite  bend  of  knees  and  elbows;  the  modifica- 
tion of  the  hip-bones  for  effective  and  varied  motion,  seem 
well-attested  lines  of  evolution,  but  whether  the  pubescent 
bone  changes  are  an  advance  along  these  lines  or  diversions 
from  them,  or  neither,  more  genetic  studies  must  yet  de- 
termine. 

6 


66  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Landsberger  ^  found  the  span  between  the  tips  of  the 
longest  finger  slightly  less  for  most  ages  than  body  length. 
He  also  found  that  the  forearm  plus  hand  grew  slightly  less 
from  six  to  thirteen  than  the  upper  arm.  Quetelet  -  found 
it  slightly  longer,  and  Zeissing  still  longer.  The  "  acromial 
breadth  "  of  Landsberger  or  span  minus  length  of  arms 
increased  regularly,  but  if  this  was  measured  from  shoulder  to 
shoulder  in  front,  this  anterior  acromial  breadth  increased 
much  faster. 

In  bone  girths  at  the  instep,  elbow,  and  wrist,  Sargent 
found  boys  from  thirteen  to  sixteen  to  distinctly  exceed  girls; 
he  also  found  that  the  length  of  the  upper  arm  of  girls  from 
thirteen  to  sixteen  is  one-fifth  of  an  inch  less  than  that  of  boys, 
while  the  forearm  and  hand  is  three-fifths  of  an  inch  shorter. 

W.  S.  Hall  found  that  while  the  total  height  was  increas- 
ing fastest  the  forearm  was  retarded,  but,  like  the  lower  leg, 
at  twenty-three  resumed  the  same  relations  to  total  height 
that  it  had  at  nine.  Moon  says:  "  In  length  from  shoulder 
to  elbow,  the  rate  of  growth  appears  to  increase  after  the 
age  of  twelve,  while  in  length  from  elbow  to  tip  there  is  little 
variation  till  the  age  of  fourteen,  when  the  growth  is  relatively 
quickened."  In  span  of  arms,  Porter  found  a  marked  increase 
in  boys  at  thirteen,  which  was  greatest  from  fourteen  to  fif- 
teen, slightly  less  from  fifteen  to  sixteen,  and  diminishing  to 
eighteen.  The  year  of  greatest  growth  for  girls  he  found  to 
be  from  twelve  to  thirteen,  the  time  during  which  the  span 
of  girls  exceeds  that  of  boys,  in  the  main  coinciding  with,  but 
lasting  a  little  less  than  their  superiority  in  height.  Sargent 
found  that  among  men  the  stretch  of  arms  of  only  lo  per 
cent  was  less  than  the  total  height,  but  that  this  was  true  of 
over  35  per  cent  of  women. 

In  the  legs  the  femur  often  has  the  greatest  growth,  both 
relatively  and  absolutely,  and  in  giants  and  sometimes  in  acro- 
megalia is  generally  the  bone  most  in  excess  of  the  normal.  The 
epiphyses  join  the  shaft  in  the  inverse  order  of  their  appearance. 
The  small  trochanter  joins  at  seventeen,  the  great  at  eighteen, 
the  head  at  nineteen,  and  those  of  its  lower  extremity  are 

'  Untersuchungen  Tiber  die  Korperliche  Entwickelung  der  Fabrikarbeiter  in 
Zentralrussland.     Tubingen,  1889,  p.  94. 

*  Das  Wachsthum  im  Alter  der  Schulpflicht. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  t] 

solidified  at  about  twenty.  In  the  tibia  the  lower  epiphyses 
join  the  shaft  at  eighteen  or  nineteen,  and  the  upper  about  three 
years  later.  In  the  fibula  the  same  process  takes  place  at  the 
lower  and  later,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  shaft,  but  two  or  three 
years  after  the  corresponding  processes  in  the  tibia.  The  car- 
tilage of  the  patella  is  fully  ossified  only  at  puberty. 

It  has  been  often  observed  that  the  shin-bone  or  tibia 
is  bent  backward  near  its  upper  end  and  that  its  joint  surface 
is  inclined  and  enlarged ;  Renter  ^  thinks  this  due  to  pres- 
sure in  the  fetal  position.  H.  Charles  ^  thinks  that  it  is 
known  to  be  caused  by  the  habit  of  squatting  or  sitting  on 
the  heels,  so  common  among  primitive  peoples ;  Retzius  ^ 
finds  it  far  more  common  in  embryos  than  in  adults,  and 
thinks  that  these  peculiarities  are  acquired  characters  inher- 
ited from  an  almost  universal  custom  before  chairs  were  used 
and  found  in  the  early  stages  of  life  in  about  all  fetuses,  but 
that  it  is  gradually  corrected  among  civilized  races  during 
growth. 

W.  S.  Hall  found  that  the  increase  in  the  height  of  the  knee 
was  relatively  retarded  during  the  three  years  when  the  mod- 
ulus or  total  height  was  rapidly  increasing,  but  at  twenty- 
three  it  had  the  same  relation  to  it  as  at  nine.  Comparing 
the  thigh  with  the  crus,  the  latter  reached  its  limit  at  the 
end  of  the  sixteenth  year,  while  the  former  continued  to 
grow  for  at  least  three  years.  Moon  found  growth  in  height 
of  knee  retarded  from  eleven  to  sixteen,  while  length  of  body 
was  rapidly  increasing,  and  perhaps  also  while  the  thigh  was 
growing  fastest.  If  it  is  among  the  first  lengths  to  feel  the 
pubertal  increment,  it  resumes  after  a  comparative  pause,  and 
is  also  among  the  last  bone  lengths  to  grow.  Landsberger 
found  that  from  six  to  twelve  the  length  of  leg  increased 
from  60  to  80.6  centimeters.  His  figures  agree  very  closely 
with  those  of  Liharzik,  although  both  are  somewhat  greater 
than  the  measurements  of  Zeissing  and  less  than  those  of 
Quetelet.  He,  too,  found  leg  growth  greatest  in  the  upper 
thigh. 

Sargent  found  the  difference  in  height  between  boys  and 

'  Anat.  Studies.     Virchow  Archiv,  1863. 

•  Jour,  of  Anat.  and  Physiol.,  April,  1894. 

•  Biol.  Studies.     Neue  Folge,  vii,  p.  61. 


68  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

girls  from  thirteen  to  sixteen  to  be  largely  due  to  the  com- 
parative shortness  of  the  thigh-bone  in  girls.  "  Although  the 
body  length  is  greater  than  that  in  boys,  the  difference,  as 
shown  by  the  sitting  height,  is  largely  due  to  the  greater 
length  of  neck  and  head  in  girls,  as  shown  by  the  superiority 
in  boys  in  the  height  of  the  sternum." 

Sargent  says  that  the  mean  girth  of  the  knee  is  about  the 
same  in  both  sexes,  but  the  girth  of  the  calf  is  two-thirds  of  an 
inch  greater  in  girls. 

Moon  measured  bone  girths  of  boys  from  eleven  to  fifteen, 
and  found  that  for  knee,  ankle,  instep,  elbow,  and  wrist, 
there  was  relative  retrogression  from  eleven  to  thirteen,  and 
afterward  an  advance  till  fifteen.  In  these  dimensions  the  boy 
at  fifteen  has  grown  relatively  larger  than  the  man,  except 
in  the  case  of  the  instep,  but  this  increase  puts  him  still  farther 
from  the  proportions  he  will  have  when  mature.  W.  S.  Hall, 
too,  found  that  from  fourteen  to  eighteen  joint  girths  in- 
creased faster  than  bone  lengths.  Sargent  found  that  from 
thirteen  to  sixteen  boys  have  the  start  of  girls  in  length  of  foot 
by  half  an  inch,  and  in  stretch  of  arms,  by  fully  two  inches. 

In  the  OS  calcis,  the  junction  of  the  epiphyses  and  bone 
occurs  at  about  fifteen  or  sixteen.  The  tarsal  bones  and  even 
the  metatarsals  and  phalanges  show  distinct  progress  in  ossi- 
fication about  and  soon  after  puberty.  The  instep  is  a  trifle 
more  arched,  the  sole  some  think  distinctly  broader,  and  the 
great  toe  seems  to  lose  power  of  opposition  and  to  become 
confirmed  in  its  structure  as  well  as  in  its  function  of  sup- 
porting the  body  and  springing.  Jager  thinks  certain  changes 
in  the  form  and  position  of  the  human  foot  are  acquired  and  not 
inherited.  At  birth  the  foot  is  oblique,  so  that  only  the  outer 
edge  touches  the  floor;  it  is  drawn  upward  from  its  right- 
angular  position,  so  that  the  heel  would  first  touch,  and  is  very 
flat.  When  first  used,  it  must  be  placed  squarely  down  over  all 
its  surface,  and  the  anterior  metatarsi  are  also  pressed  against 
the  basis  of  support.  If  thus  every  irritation  of  the  periosteum, 
on  which  lateral  growth  is  assumed  to  depend,  and  of  the  car- 
tilaginous disks  between  the  diaphysis  and  the  epiphyses,  on 
which  longitudinal  growth  is  known  to  depend,  increases  the 
production  of  bone  substance,  then  the  progressive  changes 
in  the  form  and  position  of  the  human  foot  must,  he  thinks, 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  69 

be  explained  as  the  results  of  experience  and  not  of  congen- 
ital influence. 

After  puberty  two  small  epiphyses  appear  both  in  the 
head  and  tubercle  of  the  ribs  and  join  the  main  bone  by  the 
twenty-fifth  year.  The  sternum  ossifies  progressively,  begin- 
ning with  the  complete  union  of  the  third  and  fourth  members 
of  the  body,  leaving  the  cartilage  below  the  manubrium 
to  be  ossified  soon  after  puberty.  The  carcinoid  process  joins 
the  body  of  the  scapula,  and  epiphyses  appear  from  the  four- 
teenth to  the  sixteenth  years,  coalesce,  and  join  the  spine  six 
or  seven  years  later.  If  we  regard  the  scapula,  clavicle,  and 
ribs  as  the  thoracic  girdle,  it  is  phylogenetically  sinking, 
owing,  perhaps,  to  the  upright  position.  Cervical  ribs  are 
now  only  found  in  man  in  abnormal  cases  and  the  upper  rib  is 
beginning  to  degenerate,  but  the  decay  at  the  lower  part  of  the 
thorax  is  more  rapid  than  at  the  upper  part.  Even  the  eleventh 
and  twelfth  ribs  are  rudimentary,  and  there  are  abundant 
traces  of  former  supernumerary  ribs  below,  where  in  the 
horizontal  position  they  were  needed  to  support  the  viscera. 
Thus  as  the  thorax  has  flattened  from  front  to  back  and  broad- 
ened laterally  as  man  became  erect,  a  change  also  marked 
from  infancy  to  maturity,  the  adolescent  chest  growth  is 
mainly  lateral,  while  its  length  becomes  relatively  less. 

Marro's  measurement  of  chest  circumference  shows  little 
increase  from  ten  to  twelve  years,  then  a  development  reaching 
its  maximum  rate  at  fifteen,  but  continuing  to  nineteen.  For 
the  total  period  from  eleven  to  nineteen  years  the  augmenta- 
tion was  from  0.62  to  0.76  meters.  Kotelmann  concluded  that 
the  circumference  of  the  thorax,  which  in  adults  is  one-half 
the  length  of  the  body,  does  not  attain  that  relation  until 
about  nineteen,  and  grows  most  rapidly  at  puberty.  Hrd- 
licka  found  it  relatively  deepest  from  front  to  back  in  infancy, 
and  that  it  grew  broad  and  flat  with  age  up  to  the  early 
teens.  Porter  found  chest  girths  nearly  equal  from  thirteen 
on  for  two  or  three  years,  but  that  boys  excelled  girls  at  all 
ages  in  chest  expansion,  girth  of  chest  being  usually  about 
equal  to  sitting  height. 

The  pelvic  girdle,  as  if  also  in  response  to  a  downward 
tendency  of  the  center  of  gravity,  is,  as  it  were,  slowly  creep- 
ing up  the  spine.     At  any  rate,  the  trunk  was  once  longer 


^0  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

and  the  upper  sacral  vertebrae,  the  incorporation  of  which 
with  the  hip-bone  is  later  than  with  the  lower  vertebrne,  have 
left  us  now  a  trifle  uncertain  whether  man  has  twenty-five  or 
twenty-six  presacral  vertebrae.  This  relative  approximation  of 
the  upper  and  lower  bony  girdle  is  easier  because  both  are  de- 
veloped later  than  the  skeleton  of  the  limbs.^ 

The  pelvic  region,  especially  in  girls,  undergoes  impor- 
tant pubertal  changes.  The  iliac  arches  broaden,  the  Y  car- 
tilage, separating  the  three  parts  of  the  hip-bone,  begins  to 
ossify  from  several  centers  about  the  age  of  puberty,  and  the 
epiphyses  about  the  crest  of  the  ilium  unite  with  the  main 
bone  at  from  twenty-three  to  twenty-five  years  of  age.  Com- 
plementary and  intercalary  bony  points  develop  and  join,  espe- 
cially the  newly  discovered  cotyloid  bone  of  Albinus  between 
the  pubis  and  the  ilion,  which  join  at  eighteen.  There  is  en- 
largement in  like  manner  in  the  region  of  the  symphysis 
pubis,  and  sometimes  so  great  as  to  noticeably  rotate  the 
neck  of  the  femur  and  toes  outward  in  girls.  The  transverse 
diameter  of  the  pelvis,  which  before  is  often  less  than  the 
antero-posterior,  now  becomes  greater  and  the  inclination 
of  the  pelvis  is  decreased.  These  changes  give  firmer  support 
to  the  large  iliac  and  gluteal  muscles,  better  sustain  the 
viscera,  and  make  balance  easier,  especially  laterally,  and 
may  cause  noticeable  modification  in  posture  and  carriage. 
The  five  sacral  and  four  coccygeal  bones  unite  at  from  eight 
to  ten  years,  but  are  fully  fused  into  one  at  fifteen  or  eighteen. 
The  sacrum  and  coccyx  are  often  not  completely  joined  at 
twenty-five,  and  the  mobility  of  the  latter,  particularly  its 
lower  members,  which  is  maintained  very  late  in  women,  plays 
an  important  role  in  confinement.  The  female  pelvis  is 
broader  horizontally  relatively  to  that  of  the  male.  The 
dimensions  of  the  iliac  fossae  are  less  in  the  female,  the  dis- 
tance of  the  OS  pubis  is  greater,  and  it  has  an  inclination  to 
the  horizon  of  at  least  five  degrees  more  than  that  of  the  male. 

The  development  of  the  female  pelvis  is  one  of  the  most 
exact  expressions  of  puberty,  coinciding  in  time  and  follow- 
ing completely  the  growth  and  needs  of  the  organs  it  con- 
tains. The  parallel  between  the  development  of  the  two  is 
as  close  as  that  of  the  sexual  organs  themselves  and  the 

*  Wiedersheim.     Structure  of  Man,  1895,  p.  32  et  seq. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  71 

breasts.  All  the  many  points  of  differentiation  from  the  male 
pelvis  seem  to  be  increasing  in  civiHzed  lands,  and  pelvic 
dimensions  increase  with  the  degree  of  cephalization  at  birth, 
in  which  racial  differences  are  so  well  pronounced.  Sexual 
dimorphism  is  nowhere  so  marked  in  the  pelvic  region  as  in 
man.  Complete  pelvic  development  is  rarely  attained  till  well 
into  the  twenties  for  women,  and  is  of  profound  importance 
for  normal  maternity.  In  this  respect,  the  sexes  seem  to  be 
growing  unlike  in  many  communities  instead  of  alike,  and 
from  the  mechanism  of  this  part  alone  we  see  how  every  kind 
of  physical  training  involving  its  activity  should  be  modified 
for  women  during  and  after  pubescence.^  Sargent^  found  that 
the  girth  of  hips  from  thirteen  to  sixteen  is  one  and  three-fourth 
inches  larger  in  girls  than  in  boys,  and  that  they  were  more 
than  two  inches  larger  in  the  girth  of  thighs.  From  seven  to 
twelve  Landsberger  found  that  the  greatest  breadth  of  hips  in- 
creased from  18.2  to  21.9  centimeters. 

(c)  Growth  of  the  Head. — The  development  of  the  face  is 
a  long,  slow  process,  and  to  fully  trace  it  we  must  begin  as 
low  down  as  the  lamprey,  where  the  skull  appears.  The  fantas- 
tic faces  of  fishes  and  even  ophidians,  which  often  suggest 
so  many  kinds  of  ugliness  to  us,  have  very  little  expression. 
The  head  moves  but  little,  independently,  and  the  movements 
of  jaws  and  eyes  constitute  the  only  expression.  This  is  true 
even  in  birds.  As  we  ascend  the  animal  series,  we  see  the 
snout  slowly  forming  and  developing  to  a  nose,  at  first  em- 
bryonic; the  lips  acquire  increasing  and  independent  mobil- 
ity; the  superciliary  ridges,  crests,  brows,  and  eyebrows  de- 
velop; the  cheek-pouches,  jaws,  and,  last  of  all,  the  nose  and 
chin  appear.  In  many  animals,  ear  movements  seem  to  be 
those  most  expressive  of  inner  states  of  mind ;  in  others, 
the  tail ;  in  still  others,  secretions — excretory,  salivary,  etc. 
The  circulatory  system  becomes  very  expressive,  and  blushing, 
paling,  and  changes  of  heart  rate  respond  to  every  flit- 
ting change  in  the  psyche.  Again,  respiration  is  a  delicate 
register,    as    is   the   voice.      Pupils,    patella    tension,    delicate 

'  Some  of  these  later  differences  are  very  briefly  summed  up  in  Bierent's  La 
Puberte,  1896.  See  chiefly,  however,  the  standard  texts  on  human  anatomy,  in 
which  the  above  data  are  found. 

'  The  Physical  Development  of  Women.     Scribner's  Magazine,  i88g. 


^^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

changes  in  the  timbre  of  the  voice,  in  the  depth  and  form 
of  respiration,  in  the  movement  of  the  eye  and  all  its  adjacent 
parts,  the  posture  of  the  head,  the  permanent  expression  and 
the  range  and  kind  of  mobility  of  nostril,  forehead,  and 
mouth,  constitute  a  very  comprehensive  repertory  of  ex- 
pression, the  development  of  which  is  an  interesting  chapter, 
the  richness  of  which  the  superficial  current  treatises  on 
expression  in  no  wise  suggest,  but  conceal. 

Perhaps  no  part  of  the  body  has  been  so  much  measured 
and  discussed  as  the  skull.  Its  philogenetic  origin  and  rela- 
tion to  the  vertebra  is  a  problem  the  solution  of  which  Goethe 
suggested,  and  it  seems  to  have  perennial  interest.  Cranial 
capacity  is  measured  in  various  ways.  Torok  ^  enumerates 
535  skull  measurements.  Benedict  ^  insists  that  his  many 
score  of  cathetometric  determinations  shall  be  made  "  with 
crystallographic  exactness,"  and  Rieger  ^  sees  in  studies  of 
skull  dimensions  a  power  of  distinguishing  ethnic  stocks 
almost  comparable  to  the  value  ascribed  by  phrenologists 
to  its  curves  as  exponents  of  mental  and  moral  traits. 
While  there  is  some  reason  to  surmise  that  the  long-headed 
races  tend  to  excel  the  round-  or  broad-headed  races  in  the 
competition  seen  in  civilized,  and  particularly  in  urban  life 
(Schlitz  concluded  that  dark  and  long-headed  pupils  stood 
highest,  although  he  found  a  mixture  of  long  and  broad 
heads  superior  to  pure  types),  there  are  so  few  problems  in 
this  field  yet  solved  that  the  very  great  number  of  cranio- 
metric  measurements  sometimes  insisted  on  seem  at  present 
little  more  than  an  affectation. 

The  length  of  the  face  from  the  middle  of  the  chin  to  the 
beginning  of  the  hair  Landsberger  found  to  increase  between 
six  and  thirteen  years  from  14.7  to  16.5  centimeters.  Quetelet 
found  it  to  increase  between  six  and  maturity  from  16  to  18.6 
centimeters,  and  to  grow  most  rapidly  during  puberty.  This 
dimension,  therefore,  increases  more  rapidly  during  school 
age  than  any  other  head  measurement.  While  the  face  grows, 
the  upper  arch  of  the  head  remains  almost  stable.     Porter 

'  Ueber  einen  universalen  Kraniometer.     Leipzig,  1888. 

•  Kraniometrie  und  Kephalometrie. 

•  Ueber  die  Beziehungen  des  Schadellehre  zu  Physiologic,  Psychol.,  u.  Ethqolo* 
gie. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  73 

found  that  the  height  of  face  from  the  hair  Hne  to  the  point 
of  the  chin  in  boys,  whose  superiority  was  greatest  at  six, 
decHning  at  eleven  or  twelve,  underwent  marked  augmenta- 
tion at  thirteen,  was  increased  still  more  from  fourteen  to 
fifteen,  and  was  also  marked  from  fifteen  to  sixteen ;  and  that 
in  girls  there  was  a  slight  increase  in  the  rate  of  this  growth 
from  twelve  to  fourteen,  when  till  fifteen  they  equaled  or 
exceeded  boys,  only  to  be  surpassed  by  them  in  the  next  two 
years.  He  found  that  the  superiority  of  boys  decreased  from 
six  to  thirteen,  when  girls,  having  undergone  augmentation, 
almost  equaled  them  for  a  time,  only  to  be  excelled  still  more 
by  them  after  fourteen,  the  girls'  development  in  this  re- 
spect having  nearly  ceased  at  sixteen,  when  boys  were  still 
increasing  rapidly.  The  distance  from  the  root  of  the  nose 
to  the  point  of  the  chin  in  boys  was  distinctly  augmented 
from  fourteen  to  fifteen,  while  in  girls  this  acceleration  was 
from  ten  to  thirteen  or  fourteen.  In  width  of  face.  Porter 
found  that  boys'  superiority  over  girls  declined  from  thirteen 
to  sixteen,  when  there  was  closest  approximation,  girls' 
faces  growing  broad  rapidly  from  fourteen  to  fifteen,  boys' 
too,  showing  distinct  pubertal  broadening.  West  found  that 
in  width  of  face  boys  excelled  girls,  but  were  almost  equaled 
by  them  at  twelve,  from  which  age  to  twenty-one  they 
increased  steadily,  except  for  a  slight  drop  at  nineteen,  at  a 
faster  rate  than  girls,  the  latter  reaching  their  maximum 
at  eighteen. 

Head  form  is  relatively  uninfluenced  by  climate  and  food, 
and  is  one  of  the  clearest  of  all  permanent,  hereditary  differ- 
ences. The  best  of  the  head  measurements  is  perhaps  the 
ratio  between  length  and  breadth,  above  eighty  being  usu- 
ally classed  as  brachycephalic  or  broad-headed,  and  below 
seventy-five  being  classed  as  dolichocephalic  or  long-headed. 
Ripley  ^  concludes  that  the  basal  population  of  Europe  in 
the  stone  age  was  composed  of  long  heads,  the  Eskimos 
being  a  relict  of  the  old  Cromagnan  stock.  Round  heads 
came  in  from  Asia,  slowly  driving  the  long  heads  upland  and 
producing  the  vast  diversity  in  small  space  that  characterizes 
the  western  part  of  the  Old  World.     Since  then  nationality 

*  Popular  Science  Monthly,  Feb.,  1897,  et  seq. 


74  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

and  language  have  no  longer  been  founded  on  race,  the  more 
relatively  permanent  mold  of  true  and  really  pure  types 
was  broken,  and  the  mixture  caused  a  ferment  which  under 
the  name  of  social  and  political  progress  tends  toward 
progressive  mediocrity.  He  concludes  that  America,  be- 
ing still  further  mixed  and  standing  betwen  the  Asiatic 
breadth  of  skull  and  Western  length,  should  persist  in  the 
serene  impartiality  of  mongrels,  be  terrified  at  no  conclu- 
sion, etc. 

Beginning,  then,  at  the  vertex,'  and  passing  down,  we 
note  that  there  is  a  gradual  increase  in  the  breadth  of  the 
skull  in  both  sexes;  in  girls  at  least  to  the  eighteenth  year, 
while  in  boys  this  development  does  not  seem  to  be  com- 
plete at  twenty-one.  This  increase  is  most  rapid  in  boys  from 
fourteen  to  eighteen,  and  from  about  twelve  to  fifteen  in 
girls.  Growth  in  length  of  skull  from  the  glabella  to  the 
farthest  occipital  point  is  greater  not  only  absolutely  but 
relatively,  and  the  pubertal  increment  is  more  marked,  being 
greatest  from  thirteen  to  fifteen  in  boys,  but  continuing  at 
least  till  twenty,  and  being  slower  but  more  evenly  distributed 
from  twelve  to  eighteen  in  girls.  In  these  measurements,  but 
most  in  length,  boys  exceed  girls  at  all  ages ;  but  in  all,  girls 
gain  on,  and  most  nearly  approximate  boys  from  ten  to  thir- 
teen, and  in  all,  the  adolescent  increment  is  distinct  but  not 
great.*  From  twelve  to  nineteen  the  average  distance  between 
the  eyes  increases  from  about  fifty-two  to  sixty-two  milli- 
meters. 

The  diploe  and  sinuses  of  some  of  the  bones  of  the  skull 
are  often  found  growing  as  late  as,  and  even  after  puberty. 
The  basi-occipital  may  be  joined  to  the  basi-sphenoidal  bone 
by  cartilage  as  late  as  the  twentieth  year,  when  ossification 
takes  place  and  completes  the  union  in  about  two  years.  The 
air-cells  in  the  temporal  bone  are  not  developed  till  near 
puberty,  and  the  stylohyoidal  process  grows  with  sudden 
rapidity  at  puberty,  but  only  joins  late  in  life.  At  this  age, 
too,  the  spongy  bones  which  appear  at  birth  join  the  body  of 


'  For  these  head  and  face  measurements,  see  G.  M.  West,  Anthropometrische 
Untersuchungen  iiber  die  Schulkinder  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  Arch.  f.  Anthropoln 
1893,  P-  13  et  seq. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  75 

the  sphenoid.  The  laminae  of  the  vomer,  too,  are  completely 
united  with  it  only  at  puberty.^ 

The  greatest  skull  diameter  from  front  to  back,  according 
to  Quetelet,  increases  from  six  to  maturity  from  17.8  to  19.  i 
centimeters;  according  to  Liharzik,  from  17.5  to  21  centi- 
meters; according  to  Landsberger,  from  16.5  to  17.5  centi- 
meters at  the  age  of  thirteen,  when  his  measurements  end. 
Landsberger  holds  that  the  growth  of  the  skull  is  independent 
of  that  of  body  length  and  follows  laws  peculiar  to  itself. 
The  greatest  diameter  of  the  skull  from  seven  to  thirteen 
he  found  to  increase  only  from  14.6  to  14.7  centimeters,  or 
almost  nothing  during  school  age. 

The  sagittal  diameter  of  the  head  from  the  vertex  to  the 
middle  of  the  chin,  often  called  height  of  head,  increases 
from  thirteen  to  sixteen,  and  in  girls  is  but  one-fifth  of  an  inch 
below  that  in  boys.  According  to  Landsberger,  whose  figures 
are  slightly  higher  than  those  of  Quetelet  and  less  than  those  of 
Liharzik,  it  is  from  20.7  to  21.7  centimeters. 

Sargent  found  that  the  mean  girth  of  the  head  in  girls 
from  thirteen  to  sixteen  is  but  one-fifth  of  an  inch  below  that 
in  boys. 

In  length  of  head.  West  found  boys  always  superior  to 
girls,  but  their  relative  increase  was  greatest  in  this  respect 
from  eighteen  to  twenty.  In  width  of  head,  he  found  boys 
to  always  excel,  but  to  gain  upon  girls  almost  steadily  from 
eighteen  to  twenty-one.  Porter  found  that  from  fourteen  to 
sixteen  there  was  a  marked  augmentation  in  the  increase  of 
the  length  of  head  in  boys ;  that  in  girls  a  similar  augmentation 
began  at  twelve,  and  was  still  in  force  at  sixteen.  He 
found  that  while  boys  were  superior  to  girls  in  length  of  head 
at  all  ages,  they  were  much  more  so  from  six  to  eleven,  and 
that  from  that  age  to  fifteen  girls  gained  almost  steadily  upon 
boys;  and  that  almost  the  same  was  true  for  width  of  head, 
only  the  differences  and  gains  were  less  marked. 

In  apes  and  lower  races  of  men  the  sutures  of  the  skull 
unite  first  in  the  frontal,  then  in  the  parietal,  and  last  in  the 
occipital  region,  while  in  civilized  man  this  order  is  reversed. 

*  See  Quain,  Elements  of  Anatomy,  gth  ed.,  vol.  i,  p.  68  et  seq.\  also  Henle, 
Handbuch  der  Knochenlehre,/ajji/w. 


76  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Whether  this  is  atavistic  or  developmental  is  uncertain.  Wie- 
dersheim  thinks  that  an  original  independence  of  ossification 
centers  inherited  from  lower  ancestors  may  be  sometimes 
retained  in  the  interest  of  the  progressive  development  of  the 
anterior  lobes.  Venn's  ^  measurements  indicate  a  "  small 
but  decided  "  increase  in  head  measurements  after  nineteen 
in  all  students,  but  this  gain  is  distinctly  more  in  honor  than 
in  poll  men.  Galton  ^  found  that  258  higher  honor  English 
university  students  had  distinctly  larger  skulls  than  poll  men, 
in  the  ratio  of  241  to  230.5.  But  while,  according  to  his 
computation,  the  brain  of  the  former  increased  only  three  per 
cent  during  their  college  course,  that  of  the  poll  men  increased 
six  per  cent.  In  all  cases  the  head  grew  after  the  age  of  nine- 
teen. Honor  men  thus  seemed  more  precocious.  Measure- 
ments do  not  yet  tell  us  in  what  part  of  the  skull  the  later  stages 
of  growth  are  greatest,  but  by  long-continued  individual 
methods,  starting  from  fixed  points,  this  problem  does  not 
seem  inaccessible.  While  the  relation  of  the  volume  of  the 
brain  to  the  cranial  capacity  varies  greatly,  and  may  be  twenty 
per  cent  less,  it  would  seem  a  reasonable  inference  that  in  grow- 
ing periods  the  correspondence  is  closer  and  that,  as  we 
know  the  brain  to  be  erethic,  pressure  from  within  may  be 
one  cause  of  cranial  growth  late  as  well  as  early  in  the  devel- 
opment period. 

Dr.  Warner  ^  found  that  cranial  abnormalities,  including 
asymmetry,  and  also  skulls  too  large  or  too  small,  were  the 
most  important  defects  in  development.  They  were  not  only 
most  numerous,  but  had  the  widest  correlation  with  low  nutri- 
tion, nervousness,  ordosis,  epicanthus,  bad  balance  of  head, 
overcorrugation  or  overmobility  of  frontal  muscles,  and  even 
defects  of  speech  and  form  of  ear. 

In  what  we  may  conceive  as  the  long  developmental  strug- 
gle for  existence  between  the  cranial  and  the  facial  parts  of  the 
skull,  the  latter  would  prevail  till  massive  jaws,  teeth,  and 
muscles  at  the  entrance  of  the  alimentary  canal  were  overcom- 

•  Cambridge  Anthropology,  by  J.  Venn.  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Insti- 
tute,  November,  1888. 

»  Head  Growths  in  Students  of  University  of  Cambridge,  by  F.  Galton.     Ibid. 

»  An  Inquiry  as  to  the  Physical  and  Mental  Condition  of  School  Children. 
Brit.  Med.  Jour.,  March  12  and  19,  1892. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


11 


pensated  in  value  for  survival,  by  brain  power.^  Between 
eleven  and  twenty-five  four  pairs  of  permanent  teeth  are  ac- 
quired in  the  lower  jaw.  Welcker's  table  of  second  dentition  is 
as  follows : 


Month  of  Appearance. 


Name  of  tooth. 

Year  of  change. 

First  molar  tooth. 

7 

Inner  incisors. 

8 

Outer 

9 

Front  premolars. 
Eye-teeth, 
Back  premolars. 
Second  molar  teeth. 

lO 

11-13 

11-15 
13-16 

Third  molar  teeth. 

18-30 

6-8  (under  jaw  first) 

7-9        "       "      " 

12-15  

16-20  

ao-24 


Daffner  ^  concludes  that  the  permanent  incisors  begin  to 
appear  at  about  six  years  and  nine  months  of  age ;  that  the  per- 
manent eye-teeth  and  buccal  teeth  appear  between  eleven 
and  twelve;  that  the  permanent  molars  are  cut  early  in  the 
fourteenth  year;  and  that  the  wisdom  teeth  appear  on  the 
average  at  about  the  age  of  twenty-one  years  and  six  months, 
although  this  age  varies  four  or  five  years  in  different  indi- 
viduals. In  general,  these  teeth  appear  first  on  the  lower 
jaw.  The  deciduous  teeth  are  more  primitive  in  type,  and  the 
molars  are  less  useful  in  warfare,  but  suggest  a  change  of 
food  habits,  and  involve  greater  length  of  jaw  to  make  room 
for  them  and  greater  strength  of  muscle.  Hence  pubertal 
increase  of  the  lower  jaw,  which  is  often  specified  in  our 
returns,  may  perhaps  be  assumed.  Increased  prominence  of 
the  chin,  breadth  of  lower  jaw,  propensity  to  chew,  to  bite 
hard  things,  or  to  perform  feats  of  strength  with  the  teeth 
and  jaws,  the  frequency  with  which  clenching  the  teeth  is 
mentioned  in  our  anger  returns,  which  shows  a  great  pubertal 
development  of  irascibility,  teaches  how  clearly  jaw  ten- 
sion, once  a  chief  factor  in  battles,  is  still  associated  with  pug- 
nacity.   This,  too,  is  a  theme  inviting  further  research. 

Our  questionnaire  returns  also  show  that  it  is  a  very  con- 
mon  impression  that  the  lower  jaw  grows  in  size  during  pu- 

*  The  Structure  of  Man  an  Index  to  his  Past  History,  by  G.  R.  Wiedersheim, 
1895. 

'  Das  Wachstum  des  Menschen.  Leipzig,  1897.  See  also  Vierordt.  Phyciolo- 
gie  des  Kindesalters. 


78  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

bescent  years,  most  specifying  that  the  chin  becomes  more 
prominent,  others  that  it  widens  at  the  outer  angle,  grows 
deep,  strong,  and  more  firmly  set.  This  change,  I  think,  has 
been  pronounced  in  boys  under  my  observation,  and  has  given 
the  face  an  aspect  of  strength  and  character.  It  would  be 
natural  to  expect  that  the  growing  width  of  the  face  in 
the  molar  region  would  involve  increased  width  in  the 
lower  jaw,  where  the  inferior  ends  of  the  same  muscles 
are  attached.  No  adequate  measurements,  however,  have 
yet  been  published  upon  this  point,  although  one  careful  mem- 
oir ^  shows  that  the  lower  jaw  in  man  is  heavier  between 
twenty  and  forty-five  than  it  is  later,  and  that  it  is  always 
heavier  in  man  than  in  woman,  both  absolutely  and  rela- 
tively to  the  weight  of  the  skull.  Further  research  is  also 
needed  on  this  point.  It  may  be  here  added  that  Dr.  Schlitz,^ 
in  studying  1,413  children  between  twelve  and  fourteen  in 
Heilbronn  to  determine  race  types,  found  that  all  measure- 
ments involving  the  chin  formation  were  defective  because 
of  its  imperfect  development.  The  facial  index,  too,  he 
thought  unserviceable,  because  the  face  was  not  yet  com- 
pletely grown  in  length. 

The  nasion,  or  depression  on  the  level  of  the  eyes  be- 
tween the  root  of  the  nose  and  the  beginning  of  the  glabella 
above,  is  often  said  to  fill  out  during  puberty  in  a  way  to 
straighten  the  line  joining  nose  and  forehead.  This  is  a 
thing  so  frequently  specified  by  intelligent  parents  in  our  ques- 
tionnaire returns  that  it  deserves  attention.  Dr.  F.  Boaz 
has  made  this  region  an  object  of  study  by  taking  many 
drawings,  using  flexible  strips  of  lead,  plaster,  etc.,  with 
Worcester  school  children. 

That  the  nose  itself  grows  is  generally  believed  by  those 
making  returns,  increase  in  length  being  most  often  speci- 
fied, prominence  next,  and  breadth  least  often. 

Some  think  that  the  upper  jaw  comes  forward  in  the 
region  of  the  alveolar  point,  but  more  think  that  together  with 
the  upper  lip  it  grows  in  vertical  length.     Some  state  that  the 

*  Gurriesi  e  Masetti.     Influenza  del  sesso  e  dell'  eti  sur  peso  del  cranio  el  della 
mandibola.     Revis.  Sperimen.  di  Frenatria,  1895. 

*  Correspondenz-Blatt  fUr  Anthropologic,  September,  1899. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  79 

coronal  suture  now  hardens;  others  that  the  vertical  depth  of 
the  skull  in  the  bregma  region  increases ;  others  that  the  occipi- 
tal point  grows  prominent  or  they  think  they  first  detect  bilateral 
asymmetries,  that  the  eyes  come  more  to  the  front  as  if  their 
sockets  were  more  parallel  as  they  were  growing  farther  apart ; 
that  the  palate  grows  more  or  less  arched,  etc.  Such  data 
indicate  a  wide  range  of  individual  variation,  and  the  need 
of  many  further  measurements.  Their  value  is,  of  course, 
chiefly  suggestive  till  confirmed  by  a  large  number  of  meas- 
urements. 

Another  change  often  specified  in  our  returns  is  a  marked 
increase  in  the  volume  of  the  neck,  seen  in  its  circumference 
and  especially  in  the  region  of  the  opisthion.  The  growth  in  the 
circumference  of  the  neck  between  six  and  twelve  years  increases 
from  24.9  to  27.9  centimeters.  Sargent  found  the  neck  of  girls 
from  thirteen  to  sixteen  about  two-fifths  of  an  inch  smaller 
than  that  of  boys.  The  popular  impression  of  relation  between 
fulness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  neck  and  lower  posterior  skull, 
involving  the  occipital  bone  and  the  region  of  the  atlas,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  sex  on  the  other,  has  found  expression  in  many 
ways.^  In  Brittany  and  Algeria,  two  ends  of  a  thread  are  held 
between  the  teeth  and  the  loop  is  drawn  tight  over  the  back  of 
the  neck.  If  this  loop  can  be  made  to  pass  over  the  head,  the 
girl  is  declared  fit  to  marry  and  the  boy  must  pay  taxes,  bear 
arms,  etc.  Popular  vagaries  like  those  of  Dr.  Damm,  a  Ger- 
man therapeutist,  who  assumes  that  each  nation  has  a  normal 
life  of  one  thousand  years,  and  that  progressive  slenderness  in 
the  nape  of  the  neck,  which  increases  with  ethnic  age,  is  the  best 
index  of  how  far  the  senescence  of  a  race,  nation,  family, 
or  individual  has  proceeded,  reflect  the  same  vulgar  notion. 
Whether  changes  really  occur  in  this  region  which  are  related 
to  the  sex  is  doubtful,  and  that  bone  growth  is  involved  is  very 
improbable. 

(d)  Abnormalities  and  Morbidities  connected  with  Bone 
Grozi'th,  and  its  Hygiene. — The  increased  volume  of  blood  and 
physiological  work  which  centers  about  the  various  bony 
epiphyses  at  this  period  of  augmented  growth,  where  ossifica- 
tion is  taking  place  so  rapidly  at  so  many  points  and  gradually 
fusing  bones  into  solid  individuality,  is  also  increasing  the 

'  The  Child  and  Childhood  in  Folk-Thought.     Alex.  Chamberlain,  p.  95. 


8o  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

proportion  of  solid  matter  in  those  parts  of  bones  previously 
ossified.  Bibra's  opinion  that  the  proportion  of  carbonate  of 
lime  in  the  bones  increases  toward  nineteen,  to  diminish  later, 
while  that  of  phosphate  of  lime  conversely  decreases  at  that 
age  and  increases  later,  lacks  confirmation.  Although  the 
bones,  because  they  are  the  hardest  parts  of  the  body  and 
the  last  to  decay,  are  our  chief  data  for  interpreting  the 
past  of  paleontology,  they  are  nevertheless  the  framework 
of  the  body  only  in  a  mechanical  and  not  in  a  morphological 
sense;  their  development  is  not  only  later  than  that  of  the 
soft  parts,  but  is  dominated  by  them.  Bones,  like  all  other 
tissues,  are  composed  of  cells,  penetrated  by  nerves  and 
blood-vessels,  are  very  plastic  both  to  the  normal  forces  of 
growth  and  to  external  influences,  and  are  subject  to  many 
diseases.  Ossification  may  be  premature  or  excessive,  and 
the  bones  become  too  large,  dense,  or  heavy.  The  processes 
of  mineralization  may  even  encroach  on  cartilages,  arteries, 
heart,  muscles,  etc.,  until  they  decay  from  overcalcification, 
or  they  may  invade  the  joints  until  they  become  rigid.  On  the 
•other  hand,  bone  growth  by  which  the  skeleton  is  completed 
may  be  deferred  and  insufificient  in  its  later  stages,  and  its 
parts,  its  connections,  or  both,  may  be  arrested,  while  in  a 
group  of  diseases  of  defect,  bone-cells  may  be  broken  up  and 
bone  even  discharged  by  suppurative  processes,  and  again, 
bones  may  grow  perversely  in  form,  proportion,  or  chemical 
composition.  In  rickets,  the  skeleton  grows  into  many  irreg- 
ular shapes,  owing  in  part  to  abnormally  compensated  muscle 
tonus.  Too  much  phosphate  and  carbonate  of  lime  may  make 
the  bones  so  brittle  as  to  cause  spontaneous  and  recurrent  frac- 
ture from  the  weight  of  the  body.  Defect  of  the  mineral  salts 
and  excess  of  gluten  and  chondrin  make  them  too  soft  and 
flexible.  Finally,  bones  are  not  exempt  from  extremely  well- 
marked  types  of  invasion  by  micro-organisms. 

If  growth  is  excessive,  there  are  often  two  kinds  of  so- 
called  growing  pains :  First,  that  located  in  epiphyses  or  grow- 
ing centers  of  the  bones,  which  are  supplied  with  nerves  and 
may  become  the  seats  of  inflammation.  These  pains  may  seem 
seated  in  the  bones,  limbs,  and  perhaps  most  often  near  the 
neck  of  the  femur  and  tibia,  although  almost  no  part  of  the 
body  is  entirely  exempt  from  them.     Adolescent  tarsalgia  and 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  8l 

arthralgia  have  been  described.  The  rapid  bone  growth  fol- 
lowing fever  may  be  attended  with  painful,  though  mild 
osteitis,  periostitis,  medullitis,  and  even  hyperosteogenic  ex- 
ostosis, especially  in  boys  between  eleven  and  twenty-two.  Sec- 
ond, the  bones  may  grow  faster  than  the  muscles  or  the  skin ; 
the  latter  then  suffer  from  abnormal  tension  and  are  stretched 
and  perhaps  bloodless,  especially  on  the  thighs,  because  growth 
in  the  various  tissues  involved  is  not  proportionate.  This,  too, 
is  often  acutely  painful. 

Very  interesting  is  the  intimate  relation  between  sex 
organs  and  bones,  as  seen  in  cases  of  osteomalacia  conse- 
quent upon  ovarian  or  testicular  defect  or  removal,  and  still 
more  so  in  acromegalia.  In  this  disease  the  bones  of  the 
face  and  limbs,  after  having  reached  their  normal  size,  con- 
tinue to  enlarge  so  as  to  greatly  change  the  features  and  form. 
The  hands  and  limbs  are  sometimes  enormous.  Changes  in 
the  thyroid  gland,  sex  organs,  and  their  functions  and  gen- 
eral nutrition  are  also  common.  Although  these  changes 
may  be  noticeable  and  become  more  rapid  after  thirty,  they 
seem  usually  to  originate  at  puberty,  and  by  some,  following 
Marie,  are  ascribed  to  disturbance  in  the  pituitary  body.  It 
has  been  suggested  that  the  normal  growth  of  puberty  is 
acromegalic,  and  that  this  process  is  a  late  recrudescence  or 
continuation  and  excess  of  the  rapid  evolution  of  hands  and 
feet,  face,  and  limbs  at  the  awkward  age.  I  can  find  no  more 
interesting  case  on  record  than  one  photographed  and  de- 
scribed at  length  by  Marro,^  of  a  precocious  boy  who,  besides 
the  large  bones  characteristic  of  this  disease,  was  at  nine  years 
and  six  months  of  age  practically  a  mature  man  in  beard, 
voice,  intelligence,  etc.,  and  who  four  months  after  semi- 
castration  lost  his  beard  and  some  other  signs  of  abnor- 
mality. 

Souza-Leite  gives  a  brief  history  ^  of  conceptions  of  acro- 
megalia since  it  was  first  recognized  at  the  Salpetriere  in  1886. 
It  is,  as  the  name  indicates,  a  marked  augmentation  of  the 
extremities,  and  often  of  the  head.  The  rings,  gloves,  shoes, 
and  hat  are  too  small ;  the  jaw,  nose  and  cheeks  enlarge;  mus- 


•  La  Purbete,  pp.  184,  185. 

*  Revue  scientifique,  1890,  p.  801  et  seg. 


82  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

cular  force  is  at  first  increased  and  then  decreased;  the  voice 
becomes  deep,  urination  is  profuse,  and  genital  functions  de- 
cHne,  and  all  these  symptoms  never  occur  in  childhood,  but 
always  after  puberty.  After  a  long  period  of  evolution  it  may 
remain  stationary,  but  it  rarely  recedes.  Patients  generally 
grow  feeble,  rachitic,  and  perhaps  die  in  syncope.  Its  chief 
activity  is  not  only  in  the  bones  of  the  extremities,  but  at  the 
extremity  of  the  bones.  The  thymus,  instead  of  disappear- 
ing as  it  should  with  youth,  increases. 

Excessive  strain  and  tension  at  this  period  tend  to  vari- 
ous curvatures,  lordosis,  scoliosis,  etc.,  so  that  too  high  pil- 
lows, sleeping  in  one  position,  ill-adjusted  seats  at  school  or 
on  the  bicycle,  lacing,  occupations  that  strain,  confine,  or 
require  unnatural  postures,  are  especially  to  be  avoided  at 
this  age.  It  is  necessary  that  the  muscles  should  be  used 
enough  to  keep  them  both  flexible  and  growing  with  the 
bones,  so  that  insufficient  muscular  development  be  avoided. 
They  should  not,  however,  be  used  enough  to  cause  contrac- 
tures, for  unequal  or  abnormal  tension  may  warp  the  bones. 
Children  should  never  be  made  to  feel  ashamed  of  their 
height,  which  they  often  form  crouching  habits  to  conceal,  but 
should  be  proud  of  it,  and  stand  and  sit  as  erect  as  possible,  and 
habitual  cross-legged  attitudes  should  be  avoided.  The  thorax 
suffers  from  such  easily  avoidable  causes  perhaps  even  more 
than  the  pelvis,  which  may  be  contracted  in  the  coccygeal 
aperture  by  sitting  too  low  down  on  the  back;  while  many 
young  people  who  might  go  through  life  with  strong  chests 
and  good  busts  fail  to  develop  them  and  remain  on  a  lower 
plane  of  vitality,  unable  to  breathe  deeply  and  well.  Brain- 
work,  if  excessive  or  ill  directed,  may  cause  modifications  of 
muscular  tenacity  that  affect  bone  growth  and  bodily  form  and 
symmetry  generally.  Normal  muscle  tensions  are  thus  of 
great  importance  during  these  plastic,  and  therefore  vulner^ 
able,  years. 

So  plastic  are  they  that  Jager  *  thinks  the  following 
illustrative  of  Meyer's  law  that  pressures  and  tensions  exert 
great  influence  on  the  development  of  the  human  skeleton. 
The  length  of  each  vertebra  in  child  and  man  he  found  to 

'  The  Longitudinal  Growth  of  the  Human  Bones,  by  Gustav  Jager.     In  his 
Problems  of  Nature.     New  York,  1897,  p.  154. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  S3 

increase  steadily  downward  from  the  second  cervical  to  the 
fifth  lumbar  (except  from  the  second  to  the  sixth  dorsal, 
which  he  ascribes  to  the  arms).  Reckoning  the  body  weight 
as  nearly  two  pounds  per  inch,  each  vertebra  would  have  less 
weight  to  sustain  than  the  one  above  and  more  than  the  one 
below  it.  This  increase  is  therefore  ascribed  to  the  stimulus 
of  increased  pressure. 

Bone  growth  needs  lime,  and  our  returns  abound  in  ac- 
counts of  eating  chalk,  pencils,  plaster  of  Paris,  and  even 
mortar.  These  appetites  are  most  often  specified  when 
growth  is  most  rapid,  as  after  a  fever.  Some  think  these 
freaks  of  appetites  are  less  in  hard-water  regions,  and  that 
bone  growth  is  retarded  if  only  soft  water  is  used.  Some 
physicians  hold  very  strong  views  upon  this  subject.  Per- 
haps at  this  stage  of  growth  children  need  lime  somewhat  as 
cattle  need  salt;  that  their  milk,  etc.,  should  have  slight 
lime  admixtures,  and  that  all  foods  and  drinks  of  acidulous 
character  need  such  compensation.  Perhaps  the  nicotine 
and  other  alkaloid  habits,  to  which  this  age  is  so  prone,  may 
also  owe  part  of  their  strength  to  nutritive  needs,  which 
might  be  better  interpreted  and  thus  lose  their  morbid 
character. 

Interesting  in  this  connection  is  the  wide-spread  beHef  in 
the  western  parts  of  this  country  that  hard  water  causes 
sterility.  Especially  in  soda  regions  we  are  often  told  that  chil- 
dren are  few,  and  many  cases  are  cited  where  children  in 
such  places  are  born  only  to  households  where  the  water  is 
distilled. 

B.  Groivth  of  Muscles. — The  epithelial  muscle  plates  are 
developed  from  the  primitive  segments  of  the  central  wall  of 
the  mesothelium.  These  cells  elongate  in  the  direction  of  the 
embryonic  axis,  and  from  them  the  circa  two  hundred  and  forty 
skeletal  or  voluntary  muscles  arise.  These  show  their  charac- 
teristic structure  early  in  fetal  life,  and  fibrillation  appears  soon 
after.  The  details  of  the  development  of  the  muscles  is  one  of 
the  most  obscure  chapters  of  embryology.  It  seems  clear,  how- 
ever, that  both  nerve  and  muscle  fibers  are  well  along  in  their 
development  before  they  unite.  In  lower  vertebrates  the 
muscles  are  more  or  less  segmented  into  myotomes  by  parti- 
tions and  sclerotomes  which  cross  them  at  each  vertebra;  but 


84  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

in  man  this  is  seen  only  in  the  deeper  muscles  nearest  the 
spine.  In  general,  the  energy  of  the  contraction  of  a 
muscle  varies  with  the  number,  and  its  range  with  the  lengths 
of  its  fibers.  There  is  so  wide  a  field  of  individual  variation 
that  Wiedersheim  states  that  new  muscles,  not  down  in  the 
text-books,  can  be  found  in  nearly  every  human  subject.  He 
finds  three  classes  of  variations,  viz.,  retrogressive  and  ves- 
tigial muscles,  occasional  or  atavistic,  and  progressive  or 
slowly  developing  muscles.  Abnormalities  are  so  frequent, 
and  so  completely  connect  man  with  normal  apes,  that  he 
concludes  that  the  chasm  which  separates  them  is  entirely 
bridged  so  far  as  the  muscular  system  is  concerned,  although 
this  perhaps  can  not  be  so  confidently  stated  of  other  systems. 
Variations  are  more  frequent  in  the  limbs  than  in  the  body, 
in  the  arms  than  in  the  legs,  and  in  the  hands  than  in  the 
arms,  suggesting  here  again  that  man  breeds  truer  in  the 
more  fundamental  than  in  the  later  acquired  or  accessory 
parts,  which  are  less  indispensable  to  life. 

During  pubescent  growth  the  muscles  increase  in  both 
length  and  thickness  in  both  sexes,  especially  in  boys,  and 
their  points  of  attachment  to  the  bones  become  more  pro- 
nounced. Oppenheimer  thinks  that  at  this  period  the  mus- 
cular grows  faster  than  any  other  tissue,  unless  it  be  fat  in 
girls.  Muscle  growth  is  not  only  in  the  length  and  thick- 
ness of  fiber,  but  it  can  no  longer  be  doubted  that  new  fibers 
are  formed  besides  the  primitive  ones  in  animals  and  perhaps 
in  man.  In  girls  muscular  growth  is  less  pronounced,  with 
the  important  exception  of  the  uterine  muscles,  which  acquire 
most  of  their  development  during  these  years. 

In  the  human  body  of  the  adult  male,  considerably  more 
than  half  the  muscles,  or  18,682  grams  out  of  the  total  of 
30,574  grams,  are  connected  with  the  legs;  8,016  grams  with 
the  arms;  and  1,708  grams  with  the  back.  The  relation  of 
the  extensors  of  the  forearm  and  head  to  that  of  the  con- 
tractors is  as  42  to  58. 

We  have  no  data  to  show  just  how  much  individual  mus- 
cles grow  with  age.  Several  have  attempted  to  determine  the 
weight  of  the  entire  muscular  system.  Upon  the  six  cases 
of  Bischof  and  the  much  better  work  of  Theile,^  Miihlmann 
*  Theile.    Nova,  acta  der  Kaiserl.  Leip.  Akad.  des  Naturforscher.    Halle,  1884. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


85 


concludes  that  at  eight  the  muscles  weigh  27.2  per  cent  of 
the  entire  body;  at  fifteen,  32.6  per  cent;  at  sixteen,  44.2  per 
cent;  at  twenty-six,  45  per  cent;  and  at  none  of  the  inter- 
mediate years  he  gives  do  they  reach  so  high  a  proportion,  but 
fall  of¥  slowly,  and  rapidly  after  forty-five,  with  the  slight  ex- 
ception of  the  age  of  forty-two,  when  they  reach  the  doubtful 
ratio  or  49  per  cent. 

Of  all  the  special  measurements  of  growing  boys  in  this 
respect  the  best  are  still  the  girths  of  arms  and  legs  made 
by  Kotelmann,  as  follows,  the  figures  being  centimeters: 

Upper  Arm 


Age. 


9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
19 


Extended. 


16.89 
17.41 
17-93 
18.53 
18.94 
20.08 
25.04 


Yr.  abs.  increase. 


0.52 
0.52 
0.60 
0.41 
1. 14 


Bent. 


18.43 
18.87 
19.61 
20.34 
20.82 
22.24 
28.32 


Yr.  increase. 


0.44 
0.74 

0.73 
0.48 
1.42 


Lower  Leg 


Age. 


Extended. 


Muscles  of  calf. 


Yr.  increase. 


Bent. 


Calf. 


Yr.  increase. 


9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
19 


24.65 
25.42 
26.23 
27.08 
27.65 
29.30 
34-60 


0.77 
0.81 
0.85 

0.57 
1.65 


26.38 
27.26 
28.00 
29.14 
29.62 
31-45 
36-94 


0.88 
0.74 
1. 14 
0.48 
1-83 


These  measurements  were  made  6n  the  left  upper  arm 
at  the  upper  third  of  the  biceps  region,  and  at  the  upper 
third  of  the  calf  when  both  limbs  were  straight  and  also  at 
their  maximal  flexion.  The  relatively  less  increase  of  the 
leg  as  compared  with  the  arm  he  thought  not  normal,  and 
ascribed  to  sitting  in  school.  In  muscle  girths  at  hips, 
thigh,  calf,  biceps,  and  forearm,  Moon  found  that  "  the 
boy  at  fifteen  is  relatively  to  height  superior  to  the  boy  at 


86 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


eleven,  and  more  nearly  the  equal  of  the  man."  The  growth 
of  these  girths  follows  closely  that  of  bone  girths,  only  the 
period  of  acceleration  begins  a  year  earlier  in  the  muscles 
of  the  leg — that  is,  at  twelve  instead  of  thirteen.  In  these 
muscle  girths  the  boy  is  relatively  to  height  inferior  to  the  man. 


Age. 


16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

Total 


Number 

of  men 

measured. 


70 
326 

735 


824 

434 
296 

155 
100 

74 


4,890 


Girths. 


Right 
thigh. 


502 
504 
512 
514 

524 
525 
526 
526 
527 
519 


3-5 


Left 
thigh. 


498 
504 
505 
510 

514 
524 
521 
521 
522 
524 
515 


4.1 


Right 
calf. 


342 
339 

344 
347 
340 
353 
354 
356 
356 
355 
351 


3-1 


Left  calf. 


339 
338 
342 

345 
348 
351 
353 
347 
355 
352 
350 


2.9 


Upper 
right  arm 
c'ntract'd 


279 
282 
290 
296 
300 
305 
308 
300 
310 

3" 
305 


6.6 


Upper 
right  arm. 


250 
250 

255 
258 
262 
266 
262 
262 
270 
270 
265 


4.9 


Age. 


16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

Total 


Upper 
left  arm. 


240 
242 
248 
252 
256 

259 
256 
258 
258 
265 
259 


5-9 


Girths. 


Right 
forearm. 


253 
255 
260 
261 
263 
266 
268 
264 
269 
268 
267 


2.5 


Left 
forearm. 


249 
247 

252 

254 
257 
260 
261 

257 
262 
262 
260 


2.6 


Neck. 


106 
107 
108 
109 
109 

no 
no 
no 
III 
III 
III 


4.0 


Breadths. 


Shoulder. 


418 
426 
429 
433 
437 
442 
443 
439 
446 

445 
447 


3-9 


Nipples. 


188 
190 
192 

195 
197 
201 
203 
200 
206 
208 
205 


4-4 


Waist. 


246 

247 
252 
252 
253 
258 
260 
258 
264 
266 
261 


3-2 


Hips. 


320 
322 

323 
326 

327 
328 
336 
329 
333 
333 
335 


3-2 


The  best  data  for  showing  the  growth  in  the  size  of  the 
larger  voluntary  muscles  are  those  by  Dr.  Hitchcock,  who 
has  measured  Amherst  students  for  many  years  and  who 
gathers  into  the  above  table  the  average  girths  and  breadths 
found  among  the  students  for  each  age.  The  numbers  are  mil- 
limeters :   In  the  lower  line  above  I  have  added  from  the  same 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  87 

authority  the  gain,  of  each  student,  in  each  of  the  dimensions 
named,  during  his  four  years  in  college,  most  of  them  eighteen 
on  entering,  and  twenty-two  on  leaving.  Comparing  these 
figures  with  those  available  from  five  other  American  col- 
leges, the  difference  in  each  respect  is  very  slight,  so  that 
we  have  here  the  best  account  yet  accessible  of  the  growth 
of  these  muscles  during  the  above  years,  a  growth  which  is 
greatest  in  the  upper  arm,  both  flexed  and  relaxed.  The  neck, 
chest,  and  shoulder  muscles  seem  here  also  to  grow  more  than 
the  waist  and  hip  muscles,  and  those  of  the  upper  arm  more 
than  those  of  the  thigh  or  calf.  Although  most  of  these  meas- 
urements have  been  regularly  taken  on  American  college  girls, 
I  can  learn  of  no  treatment  of  the  data  to  show  growth. 

Kotelmann's  ^  measurement  of  boys  in  a  Hamburg  gym- 
nasium between  the  ages  of  nine  and  twenty-one  showed 
many  interesting  results.  He  found  that  the  difference  of  girth 
between  the  relaxed  and  contracted  muscles  of  the  upper  arm 
at  the  point  of  greatest  expansion  of  the  biceps  constantly  in- 
creased with  age;  also  that  this  absolute  increase  was  "dis- 
tinctly greatest  at  the  age  of  puberty  and  decreased  more  and 
more  backward  to  nine  and  forward  to  twenty-one."  Both 
bent  and  contracted,  the  relative  increase  of  girth  became  an- 
nually greater  to  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  less  and  less 
to  twenty-one.  He  also  found  that  while  the  growth  of 
the  muscles  of  the  lower  thigh  as  measured  by  girth  increased, 
it  was  steadily  less  relatively  to  that  of  the  upper  arm  with 
increasing  years,  or  the  older  the  pupil  the  more  the  rate 
of  increase  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  extremities  fell  behind 
those  of  the  upper;  this  he  ascribed  to  sitting.  When  the 
difference  in  girth  of  thigh  contracted  and  relaxed  was 
measured,  this  disadvantage  of  the  leg  to  the  arm  was  still 
greater.  These  muscles  were  growing  less  contractile  just 
at  the  age  when  those  of  the  upper  arm  were  growing  most. 
Yet  in  each  respect  puberty  was  the  age  of  most  rapid  relative 
and  absolute  annual  increment,  this  being  greatest  at  fourteen 
and  less  both  before  and  after. 

From  the  estimates  of  Wertheim,^  it  seems  that  the  co- 
efficient of  elasticity  of  the  muscles  diminishes  in  a  marked 

'  Die  Korperverhaltnisse  der  Gelehrtenschule.     Berlin,  1879. 
'  Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  vol.  xxi,  1847,  p.  385. 


88  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

and  rather  steady  way  from  infancy  to  old  age,  falling  from 
0.857  to  0-352 ;  from  twenty-one  to  thirty  years  in  cohesion 
from  0.040  to  0.026  in  kilograms  pro  i  min. ;  and  that  for 
later  years  at  least  a  marked  decline  in  both  these  respects  holds 
for  the  same  qualities  of  nerves. 

Sometimes  the  muscles  grow  in  length  more  slowly  than 
the  bones,  and  then  occur  the  "  growing  pains  "  so  character- 
istic of  this  age,  especially  in  boys,  as  we  have  seen.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  muscles  may  grow  more  rapidly  than  the 
bones,  and  then  the  flexibility  of  joints  often  so  extreme  at 
this  period  of  life  is  seen.  The  range  of  movements  in  joints 
is  sometimes  increased,  though  in  some  persons  it  is  diminished. 
Sometimes  muscular  growth  is  not  well  distributed  or  is 
asymmetrical,  and  then  new  and  perhaps  abnormal  positions 
of  the  body  and  limbs  and  new  expressions  of  the  face  are 
seen.  In  morbid  cases,  arrest  of  growth  of  muscles  may,  like 
contractures,  cause  distortion  of  bones.  Probably  the  most 
common  disproportion  in  muscular  development  arises  from 
the  fact  that  the  larger  and  more  fundamental  muscles,  which 
move  the  greater  joints,  precede  in  their  development  the 
smaller,  finer,  or  accessory  muscles  which  move  fingers, 
throat,  lips,  and  make  all  the  more  delicate  adjustments. 
This,  along  with  the  disproportion  between  bone  and  muscle 
growth,  is  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  characteristic  clumsi- 
ness of  adolescent  boys. 

For  the  development  of  muscular  function,  see  the  next 
chapter,  which  is  devoted  to  the  subject. 

C.  Grozvth  of  the  Heart  and  Blood-Vessels. — The  heart, 
which  seems  to  be  phylogenetically  a  remnant  of  the  prim- 
itive body  cavity  arising  in  vertebrates  as  a  fissure  in  the  meso- 
derm, according  to  Biitschli,  begins  its  development  in  the  em- 
bryo independently  of  the  arteries  and  veins,  and  soon  joins 
them,  but  not  until  after  it  has  begun  to  beat.  It  is  first  a 
straight  tube,  and  connects  with  the  arterial  system  at  its 
cephalic,  and  with  the  yolk  or  food  supply  at  its  caudal  end. 
Gradually  it  becomes  free,  except  so  far  as  is  needful  for  sup- 
port, and  begins  its  evolution  toward  the  adult  form  by  blend- 
ing and  twisting  till  all  its  chambers  and  valves  are  developed. 
The  blood-vessels  arise  from  a  network  in  the  area  vasculosa, 
where  groups  of  cells  slowly  aline  themselves  and  become 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  89 

hollow.  The  first  red  blood-cells  are  probably  proliferated 
and  liberated  cells  from  the  endothelial  lining  of  the  vessels. 
These  first  elements  of  the  blood  slowly  become  flat,  uniform, 
colored,  and  multiplied  by  division. 

From  their  origin  on  to  maturity  the  circulatory  ele- 
ments are  probably  the  most  variable  of  all  the  great  ana- 
tomical systems,  not  excepting  even  the  muscles.  Indeed, 
variations  in  the  form,  position,  and  arrangement  of  the 
blood-vessels  are  so  great  that  in  all  but  the  most  funda- 
mental respects  it  is  often  hard  to  tell  what  is  normal  and 
what  is  abnormal.  Vascular  variations  constantly  repeat  not 
only  fetal  but  prehuman  animal  arrangements.  In  general, 
the  development  is  from  fundamental  to  accessory,  and  arte- 
ries constantly  compensate  each  other,  not  only  in  structure 
but  in  function,  so  that  collateral  circulation  is  easily  devel- 
oped, if  not  especially  provided  for  as  in  many  plexi,  the  cir- 
cle of  Willis,  etc.  Moreover,  the  heart  continues  to  grow 
even  to  advanced  age,  although  less  rapidly  after  twenty- 
eight  or  thirty.  Capillary  changes  are  probably  still  more 
variable.  Minot  ^  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  "  the  immediate  an- 
cestors of  the  vertebrates  had  no  capillary  vessels,  but  only 
a  few  large  afferent  and  efferent  trunks  with  a  few  anasto- 
moses," so  that  if  variability  and  growth  are  inversely  as 
either  size  or  as  ordinal  development,  a  large  field  of  un- 
known possibiUties  awaits  exploration  here.  How  much  of 
this  progressive  capillary  vascularity  is  pubertal  we  do  not 
yet  know. 

This  circulatory  variability  is  nowhere  so  great  as  in  those 
parts  connected  with  the  reproductive  functions.  We  need 
but  to  instance  the  changes  in  the  spermatic  and  ovarian 
blood-vessels  as  the  testes  and  ovaries  descend,  the  changes 
in  the  vaginal  and  uterine  plexi,  the  pudic  vessels,  especially 
those  going  to  and  in  the  corpus  spongiosum  and  the  corpus 
cavernosum,  the  mammary,  and  most  of  all,  the  umbilical  ves- 
sels, which  are  involved  in  both  growth  and  function. 

The  mature  heart  ought  to  weigh  about  ten  ounces  in  the 
male  and  eight  in  the  female,  or  be  from  jj^  to  ytt  oi  the 
weight  of  the  body,  and  should  be  about  the  size  of  the  tightly 
closed  fist,  increasing,  according  to  Vierordt,  to  thirteen-fold 

*  Human  Embryology,  p.  229. 


go 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


its  size  at  birth  in  males  and  twelve-fold  in  females.  Before 
puberty  the  volume  of  the  heart  is  nearly  the  same  in  both 
sexes,  but  between  fifteen  and  twenty  Benecke  found  its  vol- 
ume to  increase  from  an  average  of  i6o  to  225  cubic  centi- 
meters; this  increase  being  from  25  to  30  cubic  centimeters 
greater  for  males,  but  continuing  only  about  one  cubic  centi- 
meter per  year  for  the  next  thirty  years.  This  growth  is 
not  only  in  mass,  but  in  the  number  of  contractile  fibers.  Per- 
haps the  best  table  here  is  that  of  Miihlmann,  who,  on  the  basis 
of  Thoma's  elaborate  figures,^  brings  together  the  results  of 
four  elaborate  measurements. 


Age. 

Body  weight. 

Weight  of  heart. 

Rel.  weight  of  heart. 

10 

Gr. 
24,150 
26,250 
29,000 
32,800 
36,700 
40,600 
44,400 
48,850 
51,850 
54,850 
56,850 
57.750 
58,850 
59,850 

60,500 

Gr. 
"5 
130 

147 
165 
184 
205 
218 
230 
240 
248 

254 
260 
265 
270 
274 
278 

Per  cent. 
0.47 
0.49 
0.50 

II 

12 

I-j 

0.50 

14 

0.50 

IC 

0.50 

16 

0.52 

17 

18 

0.47 
0.46 

10 

0.45 

20 

0.44 

21 

0.45 

22 

0.45 

21 

0.45 

24 

2S 

0.46 

During  the  age  of  growth  the  increase  of  the  heart  keeps 
pace  rather  closely  with  that  of  the  body,  and  this  appears  to 
be  true  for  nearly  all  countries  in  Europe  where  these  meas- 
urements have  been  made,  and  where  the  heart  remains  about 
0.48  per  cent  of  the  body  weight.  This  continued  increase 
may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  of  all  organs  the  circulatory  are 
in  the  most  favorable  position  to  receive  nourishment  and 
oxygen  from  the  blood.  This  increment  may  be  so  great  as 
to  seem  almost  pathological.  After  puberty  hypertrophy  of 
the  heart  is  almost  twice  as  frequent  in  males,  and  atrophy 
predominates  in  females.  The  heart  now  takes  on  the  char- 
acter and  does  the  work  of  an  adult  organ,  and  normally 

'  Untersuchungen  (Iber  die  Grosse  und  das  Gewicht  der  anat.  Bestandtheile  des 
menschl.  Korpers.     Leipzig,  1883, 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  9^ 

responds  well  to  the  increased  activity  imposed  upon  it  by  the 
expansion  of  the  circulatory  area.  If  there  be  temporary 
hypertrophy,  which  seems  beyond  normal  limits  in  certain 
dimensions,  this  is  soon  compensated  in  normal  individuals, 
and  development  becomes  proportional. 

The  frequency  of  heart-beats  is  reduced  at  adolescence, 
but  here  again  data  differ  widely.  One  writer  computed  a 
falling  of  from  eight  to  eleven  beats  per  minute  between  the 
ages  of  ten  and  fifteen.     Guy's  figures  are  as  follows : 


Age. 

Males. 

Females. 

8-12 

79 
76 

73 

92 

82 

14-21 

21-28 

80 

Some  conclude  that  there  is  a  diminished,  and  some  that 
there  is  an  increased  variation  between  minimal  and  maximal 
rates  for  a  time.  How  much  of  the  retardation  is  due  to 
increased  size  of  the  heart,  which  sometimes  grows  in  a  salta- 
tory way  a  fourth  in  a  single  year,  how  much  to  the  tem- 
porary weakening  of  its  power  thus  caused,  how  much  to 
changed  relations  between  general  vascular  capacity,  or  ten- 
sion, and  the  total  amount  of  blood,  or  to  other  causes,  is  un- 
known. It  is,  however,  due  more  to  increase  in  height  than 
to  age,  for  the  pulse  averages  slower  in  tall  than  in  short 
people.  Volkmann  and  Ramenaux  have  given  mathematical 
formulas  to  express  this  retardation,  and  it  has  been  found 
that  the  increase  in  frequency  of  heart-beats  that  follows  the 
scale  of  decreasing  stature,  when  carefully  averaged  for  many 
cases,  approximated  the  results  obtained  by  calculation.  De- 
ductions of  height,  however,  from  the  number  of  pulsations, 
even  though  they  could  be  made  with  a  far  greater  degree  of 
accuracy  than  has  yet  been  attained,  for  averages  will  be  found, 
besides  having  a  certain  theoretical  interest,  to  be  of  some  value 
as  a  basis  from  which  to  measure  the  wide  range  of  individual 
variations.  Curiously,  the  ratio  of  diminished  pulse  to  increas- 
ing height  is  nearly  the  same  whether  computed  for  the  differ- 
ent stages  of  growth  or  for  adults  of  different  height. 

The  strength  of  the  heart-beat  measured  by  the  force 
of  its  blow  against  the  thoracic  wall  was  found  by  Poatain* 
^  Clinique  Medicale  de  la  Charite.    Paris,  1889. 


92 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


to  be  greater  at  puberty.  Whether  the  growth  of  this  wall 
renders  it  more  elastic  or  the  heart-beat  grows  really  stronger 
as  it  is  reduced  in  frequency,  whether  there  is  a  new  relation 
slowly  established  between  elasticity  of  its  walls  and  the  vigor 
or  mode  of  its  contraction,  is  unknown.  The  frequent  pal- 
pitations and  unaccountable  variations  in  rate  and  mode  of 
action  and  other  functional  disturbances,  which  often  awaken 
a  cardiac  consciousness  so  disquieting,  without  any  danger- 
ous structural  derangement,  are  among  the  more  common 
experiences  of  this  age,  and  are  due,  in  part  at  least,  to  the 
change  in  size  of  the  heart  as  compared  with  the  lumen  of  the 
cardiac  and  other  large  arteries. 

Although  Gilbert's  tests  were  only  carried  to  the  age 
of  sixteen,  his  "  data  point  very  distinctly  to  the  accelera- 
tion of  the  pulse  during  the  age  of  puberty  for  both  sexes, 
both  in  the  curves  of  normal  pulse  and  pulse  subsequent  to 
fatigue.  This  effect  at  puberty  seems  more  marked  for  boys 
than  for  girls." 

The  blood-vessels  can  not  be  isolated  for  weighing,  so 
that  their  circumference  becomes  the  most  important  meas- 
urement. It  is  inferred  that  the  growth  of  the  larger  vessels 
and  that  of  the  smaller  capillaries  in  general  coincide,  although 
only  the  former  have  been  measured.  Vierordt's  table  is  as 
follows: 


Age. 

Height. 

Arteria 
pulmo- 
nalis. 

Aorta 
ascendens. 

Aorta  tho- 
racica. 

Iliaca 

com. 

dextra. 

Carotis  com. 
dextra. 

Subclavia 
dextra. 

Years. 

6-6t 

144-16 

18-21 

24-31 

47-71 

cm. 
109 
150 
164 
161 
171 

mm. 
43 
51 
59 

64 
67 

mm. 

39 
48 

54 
60 

73 

mm. 
28 
34 
41 
43 
54 

mm. 
12 

17 
20 
21 
27 

mm. 
14. 1 
16.8 
17.8 

17-5 
20 

mm. 

15-9 

19.7 

22 

27 

29 

The  following  is  the  best  available  table  of  diameters; 


Age. 

Arteria  pul- 
monalis. 

Aorta 
ascendens. 

Aorta 
renalis. 

Carotis_ 

communis 

dextra. 

Sub- 
clavia 
dextra. 

Renalis 
dextra. 

Femoralis 
dextra. 

Years. 

5-10 

17-20 

23-29 

15-7 

21.3 

24.0 

I5-I 
20.7 
22.4 

7.8 
II. 2 

13-3 

5-0 

5-9 
6.7 

3-7 

5-2 

6.2 

3-2 

4.8 

5-3 

3-4 

50 

6.2 

PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE  93 

The  arteries  continue  to  grow  in  size  till  at  least  the  age  of 
sixty.  The  best  of  all  measurements  of  them  begins  at  the  age 
of  twenty.^  The  thickness  of  the  arterial  walls  increases  with 
age,  but  this  probably  occurs  after  the  period  of  maximal 
increase  of  size,  and  involves  diminished  elasticity  and  ere- 
thism of  most  organs  and  tissues. 

Of  profound  and  far-reaching  significance  is  the  fact  that 
before  puberty  the  blood-vessels  are  large  and  the  heart 
small.  The  latter  now  undergoes  a  great  and  often  sudden 
relative  increase.  Landois  says  that  from  infancy  to  puberty 
the  heart  is  small  and  the  vessels  relatively  large,  but  in  the 
adult,  conversely,  the  heart  is  large  and  the  arteries  relatively 
narrow;  so  that  there  is  a  conversion  of  the  relation  existing 
between  the  size  of  the  heart  and  the  cross-section  of  the 
arterial  system,  taken  as  a  whole.  At  birth  the  relation  of 
heart  to  arteries  is  as  25  to  20;  at  the  dawn  of  puberty  it  is 
as  140  to  50;  and  in  full  maturity  it  is  as  290  to  61.  The 
pulmonary  artery  is  relatively  large  in  infancy  as  compared 
with  the  aorta,  but  at  puberty  the  two  approximate  the  same 
diameter.  Benecke  ^  also  thinks  that  before  puberty  the 
arterial  system  is  larger  relatively  to  the  heart  than  after- 
ward, and  sums  up  his  view  by  saying:  "  The  larger  the  heart 
relatively  to  the  vessels,  the  higher  the  blood-pressure,  and 
the  earlier  this  becomes  the  case,  the  earlier,  stronger,  and 
more  complete  is  the  development  of  puberty."  A  recent 
text-book  sums  up  the  matter  by  saying  that  the  relation 
between  the  size  of  the  heart  and  the  width  of  the  arteries  is 
in  children  the  reverse  of  what  obtains  in  adults.  "  The  ratio 
of  the  volume  of  the  heart  to  the  width  of  the  ascending  aorta 
before  puberty  is  approximately  as  56  to  20,  while  after 
puberty  it  is  as  97  to  20."  This  means  that  there  is  almost 
double  the  volume  to  the  heart's  capacity,  and  as  the  arterial 
lumen  is  for  a  time  unchanged,  there  is  great  increase  of 
blood-pressure.  This  view  is  that  the  ratio  of  the  weight  of 
the  blood  to  that  of  the  body  is  increased  after  puberty.^ 

*  Schiele-Wiegand.     Virchow's  Archiv,  vol.  Ixxxii. 

'  Die  anat.  Grundlagen  der  Constitutionsanomalien  der  Menschen.     Marburg, 
1878. 

•  Exercise  during  Adolescence,  by  Walter  Truslow.     Am.  Jour,  of  Physiology, 
III,  2,  p.  114. 


94  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Arterial  tension  is  also  modified  and  blood-pressure  is 
considerably  augmented  during  adolescence,  except  in  the 
lungs,  where  it  is  somewhat  lowered  in  adults.  Along  with 
this  goes,  too,  the  slight  increase  of  temperature  at  puberty, 
amounting  on  the  average,  according  to  the  best  estimates, 
to  about  ^°  F.  Vierordt's  figures  give  for  the  ages  between 
three  and  fourteen  an  increase  of  from  138  to  171  millimeters 
quicksilver;  in  adults  it  is  200,  while  the  measurements  that 
indicate  the  lowest  results  give  a  rise  from  three  to  thirteen 
years  of  from  97  to  113  millimeters.  This  suggests,  especially 
when  we  consider  the  frequent  anemia  and  chlorosis  of  this 
age,  so  common  in  girls,  that  while  there  is  a  distinct  rise  of 
pressure  there  is  now,  as  in  so  many  other  respects,  a  widened 
range  of  variation  not  only  between  individuals  and  sexes,  but 
in  the  same  person  at  different  times. 

By  the  constant  tension  or  tonicity  of  the  walls  of  the  ar- 
teries, which  is  maintained  by  the  vaso-constrictor  nerves,  a 
high  pressure  of  blood  is  always  maintained  in  the  arteries. 
As  these  divide  toward  the  capillaries,  the  total  cross-section 
of  which  is  some  six  hundred  times  that  of  the  aorta,  pressure 
decreases  and  the  rate  of  movement  becomes  very  slight  in  the 
small  and  often  negative  in  the  large  veins.  Blood-pressure 
changes  not  only  with  every  pulse-beat  and  respiration,  but 
follows  the  longer  and  .so  far  unexplained  curves  of  Traube 
and  Hering,  and  also  the  seasonal  changes  lately  demon- 
strated by  Zadek.  With  this  increment  of  pressure  at  adoles- 
cence, together  with  a  considerable  increase  of  arterial  cali- 
ber and  the  rise  of  temperature,  is  associated  not  only  the 
increased  metabolism  and  increased  growth  rate,  but  the 
J  necessity  of  mental  and  physical  activity,  the  psychic  inten- 
sity, need  of  excitement,  and  emotional  prodigality  so  char- 
acteristic of  the  erethism  of  pubescent  muscles,  brain,  stom- 
ach, and  other  organs,  and  the  range  of  vascularity  also 
widens.  The  importance  of  this  action  gives  some  counte- 
nance to  the  adage  that  a  man's  health  and  age  are  as  that 
of  the  walls  of  his  blood-vessels. 

In  the  new-born  child  oncTnineteenth  of  the  body's  weight  is 
blood.  This  proportion  decreases  to  one-thirteenth  or  one- 
fourteenth  at  maturity.  It  is  never  so  variable  in  all  its  ele- 
ments as  at  this  age.     About  29.2  per  cent  of  all  the  blood  is 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


95 


found  in  the  muscles  at  rest,  but  this  amount  is,  of  course, 
greatly  increased  by  their  action ;  29.3  per  cent  is  found  in  the 
liver;  22.76  per  cent  in  the  heart,  lungs,  and  great  blood- 
vessels; 8.24  per  cent  in  the  bones;  6.3  per  cent  in  the  intes- 
tines; 2.1  per  cent  in  the  skin;  1.63  per  cent  in  the  kidneys; 
1.24  per  cent  in  the  brain  and  spinal  cord.  In  the  very 
young  child  a  very  large  part  of  the  total  quantity  of  blood  cir- 
culates in  the  skin.  In  hemorrhage  or  anemia  it  may  be,  at  any 
age,  reduced  or  increased.  In  general,  as  Madden  says  in  sub- 
stance, a  new  balance  is  struck  in  the  allotment  of  blood  to  the 
different  parts  of  the  body  at  this  period,  involving  in  some 
parts  congestion  and  in  others  discharge,  the  last  relieving  the 
former.  This  is  connected  with  an  increase  in  the  relative 
amount  of  blood  and  the  increased  power  of  producing  it,  with 
menstruation  and  all  of  the  other  profound  changes  of  ado- 
lescence. 

Tables  show  that  with  adolescent  growth  between  the  age 
of  fourteen  and  maturity  there  is  a  retardation  in  the  time  of 
circulation  of  the  blood,  an  increase  of  from  97.4  to  180  grams 
thrown  out  by  one  systole,  and  at  the  same  time  an  increase  of 
from  141  to  218  grams  in  the  amount  per  second  that  passes 
the  aorta.  The  work  of  the  left  chamber  of  the  heart  is  still 
more  increased  from  0.3134  to  0.5668  kilometers,  while  the 
blood  that  circulates  per  minute  through  a  kilogram  of  the 
body  is  reduced  from  246  grams  to  206  grams. 

Of  the  many  determinations  of  red  and  white  blood-cor- 
puscles, Schwinge's  is  the  best.     It  is  as  follows  for  men: 


Red. 


White. 


I-io  yrs 
10-20  " 
20-30  " 
30-40  " 
40-50  " 
50-60  " 
60-70  " 
70-80  " 


4,516,000  per  cubic  mm. 

5,225,000  "  "  " 

5,278,000  '•  "  " 

5,063,000  "  "  '* 

5,455,000  "  **  *• 

5,397,000  "  "  " 

5,003,000  "  "  " 

5,478,000  "  "  " 


12,940 
8,711 

7.915 
5.882 

6,554 
8,576 

8,541 
10,165 


Thus  while  the  red   or  white  corpuscles  seem  to  hold 
their  own  or  perhaps  slightly  increase  with  slight  variation, 


*  Quain.     Med.  Die. 


96  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

the  white  corpuscles  or  leucocytes  decrease  in  the  thirties 
and  forties,  but  increase  again  later. 

The  number  of  red  blood-corpuscles  per  cubic  millimeter 
is  high  at  birth  (5,368,000).  It  seems  to  decline  at  five  or  six 
years  and  perhaps  to  reach  its  maximum  in  the  later  teens  and 
twenties ;  but  all  these  determinations  are  still  uncertain.  The 
extinction  coefficient  of  hemoglobin,  which  is  very  high  dur- 
ing the  first  week  of  life,  seems  to  rise  with  the  development 
of  puberty,  as  perhaps  does  the  relative  number  of  white  to 
red  corpuscles.  The  number  of  white  corpuscles  is  enor- 
mously increased  in  leucocythemia  and  in  the  process  of 
inflammatory  reaction  to  certain  inflective  diseases,  and  by 
digestion,  and,  as  like  the  red  corpuscles  they  are  constantly 
breaking  down,  their  numbers  may  be  very  greatly  reduced  and 
their  vigor  impaired  by  age. 

The  ancient  idea  that  blood  is  the  best  index  of  an  eu- 
genic race  seems  to  have  a  certain  confirmation  in  the  studies 
that  have  been  made  on  its  specific  gravity  since  Lloyd 
Jones's  first  important  memoir^  in  1887.  According  to 
Sorensen,  beginning  with  about  1,050  in  both  sexes  in  the 
third  year,  this  rises  on  the  average  in  boys  till  the  seven- 
teenth year  to  1,058,  with  little  change  thereafter  till 
old  age,  when  it  falls.  In  girls  it  rises  till  the  fourteenth  year 
to  1,055,  ^t  seventeen  drops  a  little,  and  remains  some  three 
points  below  that  of  man  till  about  forty-five.  The  plasma 
alone,  however,  in  woman  has  a  slightly  higher  specific  grav- 
ity than  in  man,  with  a  distinct  rise  at  puberty  not  seen  in 
males.  A  sexual  difference  thus  becomes  evident  at  the 
dawn  of  adolescence.  Menstruation  both  at  its  first  onset 
and  at  each  periodic  return  causes  a  slight  reduction  of  the 
specific  gravity  of  the  blood.  The  period  between  fifteen 
and  twenty-two,  when  variations  in  the  specific  gravity  of 
the  blood  in  girls  are  great  and  when  it  may  fall  very  low, 
is  called  by  Dr.  Jones  the  age  of  anemia,  and  suggests  that 
the  chlorosis  so  characteristic  of  that  period  is  an  exaggera- 
tion of  a  state  normal  in  old  age.  That  specific  gravity  rises 
in  women  after  the  age  of  child-bearing  is  only  another  indi- 
cation that  this  sexual  difference  is  associated  with  the  repro- 

'  On  the  Variations  in  the  Specific  Gravity  of  the  Blood  in  Health.    Journal  of 
Physiology,  1887. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


97 


ductive  functions.  Variability  in  the  quantity  of  serum, 
fibrin,  alkali,  carbonic  acid,  and  hemoglobin,  is  known  to  be 
great,  but  so  far  these  fluctuations  have  not  been  definitely 
associated  with  puberty. 

D.  Grozvth  of  the  Lungs. — Lungs  and  chest  share  to  a 
marked  degree  in  the  augmented  development  of  adolescence. 
This  is  true  whether  inferred  from  girths  of  the  chest  expand- 
ed or  contracted  (which  do  not  consider  the  movements  of 
the  diaphragm,  which  have  not  been  measured),  or  by  deter- 
mining the  weight  of  the  lungs  from  the  cadaver  at  different 
ages,  or  by  recording  the  maximum  amount  of  air  that  can 
be  expelled  into  a  spirometer.  In  the  following  table  I  have 
brought  together  averages  from  various  tables,  many  of 
which  are  now  at  hand : 


■£  '. 

.£ 

^  1 

"5 

0' 

J3 

_- 

i^ 

V 

Age. 

£11 

0   tn 

0.0  0 

0. 

i^ 

S 
X 

§2 

to    2.  0 

i'^ 

0)  t«  0 

%s^ 

0  <^'k 

•3  §^8 

'So  1!   . 

'Sj 

-•£.1 

•s.a§ 

'u^ 

-3-5> 

g-^l 

2M  ^ 

^28 

J3 

§^ 

jT'SiS 

^ 

^" 

> 

u 

> 

> 

CJ 

u 

S 

m 

9 

357-6 

371-7) 
430.0V 

1,500 

1.325 

lO 

486.8 

596.2 

.... 

1,650 

1,450 

II 

465.8 

490.0) 

.... 

1,800 

1,600 

1.80 

12 

415.0 

672.2 

.... 

1-950 

1,750 

2.00 

13 

458.7 

.... 

2,200 

1.925 

2.13 

14 

698.1 

507-5 

.... 

2,450 

2,100 

2.36 

15 

750.3 

684.1 

771.3 

.... 

2,800 

2,225 

2.80 

29-95 

i6 

747-3 

675-6 

1,362.2 

3.91 

3.300 

2,300 

858 

897 

31.10 

17 

772.9 

703-2 

1,001.2 

4.01 

3,575 

2,350 

857 

886 

31.84 

i8 

867.0 

677.4 

1,148.2 

4. II 

3,850 

2,425 

867 

917 

32.68 

19 

990-5 

843.7 

1. 143-7 

4. II 

3,825 

2,500 

882 

925 

33-25 

20 

962.5 

803.1 

1,804.2 

4.23 

3,825 

2,550 

889 

924 

33.58 

21 

943-9 

903-5 

1,621.10 

4.27 

4,221 

4,221 

901 

941 

33-65 

22 

998-3 

784.1] 

896.9  y 

4.35 

46 

223 

409 

949 

33-77 

23 

946.0 

1.655.5 

4.36 

4,100 

2,600 

899 

944 

33.87 

24 

961.6 

884.9 

4-38 

915 

959 



25 

994-9 

875-ij 

4.38 

917 

957 



26 

4.75 

894 

949 



Averaging  records  of  Amherst  students  for  twelve  years, 
Hitchcock  found  that  during  their  four  years'  course  the  in- 
crease was  7.1  per  cent  of  their  lung  capacity  on  entering.  It  is 
certain  that  the  lungs  continue  to  grow  in  weight  until  old 
age.  In  youth  they  constitute  from  i^  to  2  per  cent  of  the 
body  weight,  while  in  mature  years  from  2^  to  3f  per  cent. 
Thus  they  outgrow  the  body,  especially  the  alveolar  cells 
8 


98 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


which  are  vigorous  and  growing  in  extreme  age,  when  the 
elastic  fibrous  tissue  has  begun  to  degenerate.  According 
to  Smedley,  girls  increase  most  rapidly  in  vital  capacity  from 
twelve  to  fourteen,  after  which  the  increment  is  at  a  dimin- 
ished rate  and  appears  to  end  before  twenty.  Boys  take  a 
sharp  start  upward  at  fourteen,  increasing  most  rapidly  for 
two  years  thereafter,  but  continue  a  rather  rapid  rise  till  at 
least  nineteen  and  a  half.  Smedley  says  that  the  difference 
between  the  greatest  amount  of  air  that  can  be  expired  after 
a  forced  inspiration  into  a  wet  spirometer  has  very  marked 
increment  during  adolescence;  is  much  greater  in  those 
trained  to  physical  exercise;  decreases  with  the  amount  of 
activity;  and  if  taken  in  connection  with  size  is  an  index  of 
the  rate  of  metabolism.^  In  boys  the  rate  of  annual  increase 
in  this  respect  reaches  its  first  maximum  at  fourteen;  shows 
a  very  slight  decline  at  fifteen;  and  reaches  its  highest  maxi- 
mum at  sixteen.  Among  all  twelve-year-old  children  tested 
it  was  found  to  be  much  greater  the  higher  their  standing  in 
the  grades,  and  to  be  distinctly  inferior  in  boys  in  a  school 
for  laggards. 

In  Chicago  the  greatest  percentile  differences  in  the  vital 
capacity  of  boys  is  at  sixteen,  when  it  ranges  from  2,400 
to  4,200  cubic  centimeters,  and  in  girls  at  fifteen.  In  both, 
this  is  naturally  just  after  the  year  of  greatest  aggregate 
measure. 


Yearly  increase. 

Relation — 

Agb. 

Of  the  circumference 
of  the  thorax  to 
vital  capacity. 

Of  body  lengrti. 

94 
157 
155 

93 
226 
261 

495 
301 

26.9 
27.6 
29.1 
30.5 
314 
32.8 

43-5 

13.8 

10 

14 
14 
15 
15 
16 

23 

3 

II 

2 

12    

6 

i-i    

9 

TJ,          

8 

je 

16    

17 

18 

IQ 

3 

'  Report  of  the   Department  of  Child  Study  and   Pedagogic   Investigation. 
Chicago,  1900.     No.  2. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


99 


Increase  of  thoracic  capacity,  on  which  the  strength  of  the 
body  architecture  is  so  dependent,  seems  from  the  measure- 
ments of  Kotehnann,  Roberts,  PagHani,  Pesskoff.  Erismann, 
Schnepf,  and  Wintrich  to  be  of  great  significance,  and  to  fol- 
low the  curve  of  weight  increment  more  closely  than  that  of 
height.  Correlating  the  figures  of  four  of  these  writers,  we 
have  the  results  in  the  table  on  opposite  page. 

The  normal  enlargement  of  the  heart  at  puberty  is  so 
great  as  to  materially  lessen  the  vital  capacity.  Careful 
measurements  show,  however,  that  this  reduction  is  more 
than  compensated  by  the  enlargement  of  the  thoracic  space, 
due  to  growth,  and  more  yet  by  increase  in  the  surface  of  the 
pulmonary  tissue,  which  in  a  man  is  about  200  square  meters. 
Between  twenty  and  thirty  the  right  lung  of  the  male,  which 
^'s  smallest  at  birth,  becomes,  according  to  Boyd,  about  one- 
third  heavier  than  in  the  female.  One  of  the  now  somewhat 
extended  list  of  diseases,  which  are  less  liable  to  appear  during 
pubescent  acceleration  of  growth,  is  consumption,  although 
whether  adolescent  development  can  regenerate  pulmonary 
tissue  already  lost,  as  Lancaster  ^  thinks,  is  a  question  which 
must  for  the  present  be  left  in  abeyance. 

The  following  is  the  interesting  table  of  vital  capacity 
from  Pagliani :  ^ 


Years. 

M. 

F. 

Circumference  of 
thorax.    Boys    (cm.). 

8 

1,660 
1,700 
1,860 
2,045 
2,100 
2,445 
2,485 
2,660 

3,115 
3,125 

1,240 
1,290 
1,500 

1,585 
1,766 
1,930 
2,100 
2,233 
2,223 
2,300 
2,325 

q 

10 

61.0 

II 

61. 2 

12 

62.8 

13 

65.2 

14 

66.4 
69.5 
70.3 
71.6 
72.6 
74.2 

ic 

16 

17 

18 

iq 

Kotelmann  ^  found  the  circumference  of  the  thorax  at  the 
nipple  to  increase  most  rapidly  in  the  fifteenth  year;  next 

^  Lancaster.     Psychology  and  Pedagogy  of  Adolescence,     Ped.  Sam.,   vol.  v, 
No.  I,  p.  61. 

*  Luigi.     Sopra  Alcuni  Fattori  dello  Sviluppo  Umano.     Turin,  1876,  p.  54. 

•  Die  Korperverhaltnisse  der  Gelehrtenschule.     Berlin,  1879. 


100 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


most  rapidly  in  the  year  before  and  the  two  years  after;  and 
then  to  decline  up  and  down  the  age  scale  to  nine  and  twenty- 
one,  and  this  both  absolutely  and  relatively.  This  in  adults 
is  about  half  the  height,  but  for  boys  chest  girth  is  more  than 
half  the  height  and  increasingly  so  to  fourteen,  and  then 
approximates  the  adult  norm.  As  compared  with  body 
weight,  on  the  other  hand,  chest  girth  increases  more  and 
more  slowly.  He  found  that  vital  or  lung  capacity  meas- 
ured on  the  spirometer  increases  most  rapidly  during  the 
sixteenth  year,  and  declines  absolutely  and  relatively  up  and 
down  the  age  scale.  How-ever  chest  girth  be  taken — in  inspi- 
ration, expiration,  or  rest — vital  capacity  increases  more  rap- 
idly than  it.  This  increases  more  rapidly  than  height,  but 
slower  than  weight.  The  relation  between  chest  girths  in 
maximal  inspiration  and  expiration  decreases  with  age,  show- 
ing progressively  less  elasticity. 

Beyer's  ^  table  of  chest  circumference  is  as  follows : 


Age. 


Cadets,  4,541. 

Men,  3,44 

29.95 

30.07 

31.10 

30.40 

31.89 

31-34 

32.68 

31.80 

33.25 

32.00 

33.58 

32.50 

33.65 

33-14 

33-77 

33-62 

33-87 

34.00 

15 
16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 
32 
23 


Moon's  data  for  the  ages  below  sixteen  years  are  continued 
by  the  Amherst  figures  based  on  742  students,  where  the  same 
men  in  the  classes  from  1885  to  1901  were  measured  for  three 
and  one-half  years : 

Moon 

Capacity 
Years.  of  lungs. 

11-12 1.80 

12-13 2.00 

13-14 2.13 

14-15 2.36 

15-16 2.80 

'  Beyer,  H.  G.  The  Value  to  Physiology  of  Anthropometric  Tests  and  Meas- 
urements in  the  Form  of  Statistics  and  their  Importance  to  Education.  Reprinted 
from  the  Journal  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Medical  Sciences,  May,  1901,  vol.  v,  pp, 

482-495. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


101 


Amherst 


Age. 

Numbers. 

Chest  Repose. 

Lung  Capacity. 

Actual  in  mm. 

Per  cent. 

Actual  in  liters. 

Per  cent. 

l6 

17 

i8 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

Average  . 

30 
134 
244 

153 
73 
49 
27 
12 
13 
7 

54-46 
39-70 
31.76 
23-56 
29.13 
19.46 
20.70 
13.08 
20.61 
25.85 
30-39 

6.63 
4.76 

3-73 
2.71 
3-32 
2.20 
2.2g 

1.50 
2.18 
3-01 
3-50 

•59 
•43 
•32 
.29 
.26 
•15 
•15 
.11 

-13 
.26 

.31 

17-37 
II. 81 
8.30 
7.22 
6.78 
3-82 
3.61 
3-43 
3-39 
6.86 
8.36 

31 

15 

33 

36 

40 

41      - 

47 

46 

44 

40 

22 

Sargent  found  that  while  there  was  little  difference  in  the 
natural  chest  of  the  sexes  from  thirteen  to  sixteen,  boys  show 
superior  expansive  power.  In  lung  capacity  he  found  girls 
from  thirteen  to  sixteen  to  be  seventy  cubic  inches  behind  boys, 
and  far  weaker  in  strength  of  expiratory  muscles.  Porter 
found  that  in  the  power  of  mean  expansion  of  the  chest,  boys 
gained  over  girls  almost  steadily  from  eight,  but  with  a  slight 
gain  in  the  rate  of  their  superiority  from  twelve  to  seventeen. 
In  chest  girths  he  found  the  year  of  most  rapid  growth  in 
boys  to  be  from  fourteen  to  fifteen,  and  that  it  continued  to 
be  rapid  to  eighteen.  In  girls,  he  found  the  years  of  great- 
est increase  In  chest  girth  to  be  from  twelve  to  fourteen. 

In  vital  capacity  the  Chicago  boys  increased  steadily  but 
little  from  six  to  twelve.  The  next  two  years  showed  a 
marked  increase,  and  from  fourteen  to  sixteen  came  the  great- 
est rate  of  increase,  followed  by  diminution  during  the  next 
two  years.  In  vital  capacity,  the  increment  of  Chicago  girls 
was  manifest  before  eleven,  greatest  for  the  next  three  years, 
with  progressive  decline  from  fourteen,  and  especially  from 
fifteen  to  seventeen. 

Moon  found  that  chest  power,  which  increased  but  little 
from  eleven  to  thirteen,  underwent  very  marked  increase  be- 
tween fourteen  to  sixteen,  when  his  tests  ended,  as  did  lung 
power,  although  the  latter  was  less  marked.  Strength  of 
expiratory  muscles  and  legs  he  found  to  develop  earlier  than 
those  of  back  and  forearm.  \ 

Landsberger's  measurements  show  increase  during  the  ages     *. 


102  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

from  six  to  thirteen  from  52.3  to  60.5  centimeters  in  the  cir- 
cumference of  the  body  at  the  navel,  but  at  a  rate  less  and  less 
each  year  than  the  height.  Sargent  found  that  girls  from  thir- 
teen to  sixteen  were  i|  inch  smaller  at  the  waist  than  boys. 

Zak  1  finds  the  circumference  of  the  chest  increasing  fastest 
in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  years,  viz.,  4.1  and  3.6  centimet- 
ers respectively.  An  increased  rate  of  chest  girth  began  at  thir- 
teen and  one-half,  and  from  sixteen  and  one-half  it  was  less 
rapid  but  marked  to  eighteen  and  one-half,  when  it  became  slow 
but  continued  to  increase  to  twenty-two  and  one-half,  when  his 
census  ended.  At  all  ages  after  twelve  it  was  greater  abso- 
lutely than  that  of  rural  and  peasant  children,  whose  most  rapid 
increment  was  later  and  continued  a  year  longer,  viz.,  to  nine- 
teen and  one-half.  Of  thirteen  of  the  best  measurements  made 
in  various  lands  the  Russian  choir  boys  of  Vasilyew  excel  all 
others  from  ten  to  fourteen,  and  the  English  boys  of  Roberts 
from  fourteen  to  eighteen.  Up  to  nineteen  chest  circumfer- 
ence is  less  than  half  the  height  and  thereafter  greater.  From 
eleven  to  fourteen,  both  inclusive,  it  is  nearly  four  centimeters 
less  than  half  the  height,  this  difference  being  greatest  at  thir- 
teen. In  factory  boys  and  in  all  other  classes  this  inferiority 
of  chest  girth  to  half  height  either  did  not  exist  or  was  less 
marked  at  all  ages  to  seventeen.  No  measurements  have  shown 
such  marked  inferiority  of  chest  development  in  school-going 
youth. 

Ling  wished  young  men  to  increase  one  hundred  and  fifty- 
four  cubic  centimeters  semiannually  for  a  few  years,  and  there 
are  cases  where  running  has  increased  chest  capacity  over  three 
hundred  cubic  centimeters  in  three  months.  Some  think  exer- 
cise also  gives  increased  efficiency  of  a  respiratory  surface  of  a 
constant  size.  Deep  breathing,  however  caused,  no  doubt  acts 
against  auto-intoxication,  gives  increased  power  to  resist  dis- 
ease, is  the  root  of  endurance  under  effort,  and  is  of  great 
and  hitherto  unsuspected  importance  in  determining  the  level 
or  intensity  of  life,  one  of  the  chief  variables  with  which  the 
rate  and  completeness  of  normal  oxidation  of  the  blood  is  cor- 
related. The  ratio  of  lung  capacity  to  weight  is  very  properly 
called  the  vital  index.  Training  largely  consists  in  taking  off 
weight  and  adding  lung  power.     In  the  interests  of  effective 

'  Op.  cit.,  p.  141  ctseq. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


103 


respiration  there  is  much  to  be  said  against  the  mihtary  position 
required  at  the  command  "  attention,"  because  it  so  restricts  the 
action  of  the  diaphragm. 

Frequency  of  respiration,  Hke  so  many  other  functions, 
is  very  dependent  upon  size.  The  rhinoceros  breathes  six, 
and  the  rat  two  hundred  and  ten  times  per  minute.  The  human 
infant  begins  hfe  with  from  thirty-five  to  forty- four,  and  at  fif- 
teen has  settled  to  eighteen  or  twenty  respirations  per  minute 
when  at  rest.  For  a  score  of  years  thereafter  the  rate  normally 
varies  but  little. 

Vierordt  compiles  the  following  interesting  table  show- 
ing the  relation  of  vital  capacity  or  the  respiration  content 
to  height  as  follows: 


Age. 


cm.*  for  I  cm. 


Height. 


8-10. 
10-12. 
12-14. 
14-16. 
16-18. 
18-20. 
20-25. 
25-30. 
40-50. 


11.40 
12.00 
14.17 
16.44 
20.65 
23.40 
23-25 
22.98 
21.00 


9-1 1 
11-13 
13-15 


Hastings,  on  the  basis  of  5,496  children,  gives  the  follow- 
ing interesting  bases  for  comparison: 


Lengths  (cent.). 

Breadths  (cent.). 

Depth 
(cent.) 
chest. 

Girths 

Strengths 

Age. 

Height 
sitting. 

Span  of 
arms. 

Head. 

Chest. 

Waist. 

(cent.) 
chest  ex- 
pansion. 

lung 
capacity 
(hters). 

5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

59-32 
61.35 
64.08 
66.00 
68.00 
70.04 
71.64 
73.59 

75-21 
78.06 
81.68 
85.21 

102.44 
108.18 
114.28 

119-34 
124.70 
I 30 . 06 

135-64 
140.42 
146.02 

152.43 
160.33 
168.21 

14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
14 
15 
15 

21 
24 

33 
44 
51 

53 
58 
69 
73 
89 
00 
14 

18.10 
18.43 
18.92 
19.44 
19.78 
20.26 
20.98 

21.57 
22.11 
22.78 
23.68 
25.04 

16.52 
16.69 
17.14 
17.66 
18.04 
18.29 
18.92 
19.56 
20.18 
21.00 
22.00 
23.19 

12.39 
12.83 
12.91 
12.89 
13.21 
13.29 
13.89 
14.17 
14.38 
15.07 
16  07 
16.80 

3 
4 

4 
5 
6 

7 
7 

7 
8 
8 
8 
8 

42 
29 
58 
95 
55 
00 
36 
80 
29 
46 

44 
80 

.67 

-83 

-99 
1-15 
1-33 
1.48 
1.66 
1-83 
2.03 
2.30 
2.64 
3-14 

The  blood  is  freed  from  certain  impurities,  especially  car- 
bon dioxide,  by  the  lungs,  where  it  is  supplied  with  oxygen, 
which  is  the  most  immediate  and  imperative  need  of  all  cr^a- 


104 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


tures  that  breathe.  A  deep  instinct  demands  an  abundance 
of  free  air  space  all  about,  and  if  this  is  limited,  a  peculiar 
class  of  fears,  viz.,  of  narrow  or  close  places,  being  choked, 
dreams  of  being  buried  alive,  and  other  acute  panics,  consti- 
tute a  complete  psychosis  by  themselves,  which  I  have  else- 
where described/  may  arise.  The  best  age  determination  we 
have  is  still  that  of  Gavarret  for  boys,  in  1843,  ^^  follows : 


Age. 


10. 
II. 
12. 


Gr. 

5 

6.8 
7.6 
7-4 


Gr. 

8.3 

8.2 

8.7 

16^ 10.2 


Age. 
13- 
14. 

15. 


Age.  Gr. 

17 10.2 

18 II. I 

19 II. 2 

20 II. 2 


The  number  of  grams  of  carbon  burned  or  exhaled  from 
the  lungs  per  hour  depends  largely  upon  the  development  of 
the  muscular  system.  In  girls  Gavarret  found  it  never  to 
amount  to  quite  seven  grams  per  hour  from  the  age  of  ten  to 
forty-five,  except  at  fifteen  and  nineteen  in  subjects  with 
good  muscles.  This  important  difference  between  the  sexes 
becomes  much  more  marked  at  puberty,  and  menstruation 
may,  as  Marro  suggests,  tend  to  check  this  increment.  From 
Scharling's  table  it  would  appear  that  while  a  girl  of  ten 
expires  but  19.1  grams  of  carbonic  acid  per  hour,  or  0.88 
gram  per  kilo  of  weight,  a  girl  of  nineteen  expires  25.3  grams, 
or  0.45  gram  per  kilo  of  weight.  A  boy  of  nine  expires  20.3 
grams,  or  0.92  gram  per  kilo  of  weight,  while  one  of  sixteen 
expires  34.3,  or  0.59  gram  per  kilo  of  weight.  These  very 
diverse  results  can  not  yet  be  coordinated. 

Although  the  female  organism  needs  less  air  than  the 
male,  and  needs  it  less  imperatively,  and  although  the  adult 
woman  produces  but  little  more  than  one-half  the  carbonic 
acid  evolved  in  the  male  body,  both  have  about  the  same 
temperature.  The  frequency  of  respiration  in  the  two  sexes, 
however,  does  not  vary  greatly,  the  difference  being  found 
in  respiratory  capacity.  The  chief  pubertal  change  is  from 
the  abdominal  characteristic  of  all  children  to  the  costal  type, 
which  girls  assume  during  adolescence.  This  view,  which  has 
long  been  held  to  be  a  natural  difference,  has,  however,  been 
lately  challenged  by  studies  upon  savages  and  peasant  wom^ 
en,  which  suggest  that  the  difference  may  be  due  to  corsets 

*  A  Study  of  Fears,  p.  132,  Sec.  IIL     Fear  of  Closeness. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         105 

or  tight  lacing.  That  corseted  mature  women  breathe  more 
frequently  than  men  is  clear,  but  the  difference  in  respiratory 
type  due  solely  to  age  and  sex  is  probably  less  than  has  been 
hitherto  taught.  Landois  thinks  that  the  vesicular  murmur 
of  respiration,  which  is  somewhat  raucous  in  early  childhood, 
grows  softer  at  puberty,  owing  to  the  widening  of  the  pul- 
monary alveoli. 

E.  Grozvth  of  the  Brain. — According  to  the  tables  of 
Vierordt,  the  brain  increases  between  twofold  and  threefold  in 
weight  during  the  first  year  of  life;  not  far  from  ten  per  cent 
more  during  the  second;  no  less  and  a  little  more  during  the 
third.  During  the  fourth  year  alone  it  increases  more  than 
it  will  during  all  the  rest  of  life,  and  is  nearly  done  growing 
by  the  sixth  year.  After  eight  it  will  grow  but  little,  although 
the  body  has  only  one-third  its  mature  weight.^  Increase,  how- 
ever, continues  ,very  slowly  till  about  twelve  or  fourteen  years 
of  age,  when  it  about  reaches  its  maximal  size,  although  recent 
minute  determinations  by  Mies  and  Pfister  indicate  a  very 
slight  growth  to  between  twenty  and  thirty.  In  old  age  it 
gradually  loses  weight  and  size.  In  the  average  man  it  begins 
to  decline  by  fifty-five,  according  to  Bischoff,  while  in  emi- 
nent men  it  may  actually  increase  to  sixty-five  before  the 
senescent  shrinkage  and  atrophy  begins.  Individuals,  no  doubt, 
differ  widely  in  this  respect.  The  brain  nearly  fills  the  skull, 
more  completely  in  women  and  children  than  in  adult  men. 
Cranial  capacity,  however,  may  continue  to  increase  till  the 
volume  of  the  brain  lacks  from  ten  to  twenty-five  per  cent  of 
filling  it.  Thus  at  the  beginning  of  school  life  the  brain  has 
nearly  ceased  growing,  and  soon  after,  or,  as  some  think,  a  few 
years  before  puberty,  has  reached  its  greatest  weight.  The 
skull-  continues  to  grow  in  length  and  breadth,  at  least  till 
twenty,  an  increase  that  is  divided  between  scalp,  bone,  and 
space  inside,  so  that  the  size  of  the  head  is  no  sure  index  of  the 
size  of  the  brain.  From  birth  to  maturity  the  weight  of  the 
brain  increases  about  three-and-a-half-fold  and  that  of  the 
spinal  cord  between  sevenfold  and  eightfold.  The  cord  be- 
comes relatively  to  the  brain  twice  as  heavy  between  early  in- 
fancy and  manhood. 

*  Am.  Text-Book  of  Physiol.,  p.  726  et  seq.     See  Spitzka's  Brain  Weight  of 
q6  Famous  Men.     Phil.  Med.  J.,  May  2,  1903. 


io6 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


The  following  table  shows  its  absolute  and  relative  growth 
in  both  sexes  up  to  seventy,  according  to  the  data  of  Vie- 
rordt,  correlated  by  Miihlmann  with  the  results  of  other  in- 
vestigators and  his  own  :  ^ 


Brain  Weight. 


In  general  terms,  therefore,  we  may  say  the  brain  in  most 
persons  nearly  pr  quite  ceases  to  gain  in  weight  at  or  before 
the  dawn  of  adolescence,  its  declining  increment  almost  sug- 
gesting insufficiency,  and  to  one  writer  degeneracy.  It  has 
long  been  supposed  that  some  important  modulation  in  the 
method  or  direction  of  growth  occurs  at  this  important  epoch, 
evolution  of  mass  passing  over  to  involution  of  texture. 
Changes  in  structural  complexity  may  continue  indefinitely; 
or,  again,  certain  parts  may  diminish  in  mass  and  others 
increase  in  equal  ratio;  or,  yet  again,  changes  in  chemical 
constitution  may  be  characteristic  of  increasing  age. 

The  processes  of  cell  division  in  the  brain  seem  to  end 

•  Op.  cit. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         107 

three  or  four  months  before  birth.  During  the  prepubertal 
period,  according  to  the  careful  studies  of  Kaiser,  the  number 
of  cells  that  pass  from  the  small  undeveloped  stage  to  full 
maturity  is  nearly  equal  to  that  functioning  at  birth,  so  that 
the  number  of  active  cells  nearly  doubles  by  the  end  of  the 
fourteenth  year.  In  the  boy  of  fifteen,  the  volume  of  cell 
bodies  is  already,  on  the  average,  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
four  times  their  size  at  birth,  and  by  thirty  will  have  increased 
to  one-hundred-and-fifty-fold.  New  cells  are  perhaps  not 
formed  at  all,  but  developed  out  of  granules,  many  of  which 
never  do  develop,  but  suggest  possibilities  in  the  neural  ele- 
ments yet  unrealized.  Donaldson  ^  concludes  that  the  amount 
of  increase  in  the  mass  of  individual  nerve-cells  "  ranges  be- 
tween zero  and  fifty-thousand-fold,"  and  assumes  in  the  three- 
fourths  of  the  total  volume  of  the  central  nervous  system, 
which  he  thinks  is  nerve  tissue  proper,  that  there  are  3,000,- 
000,000  cells,  most  of  which  are  probably  more  or  less  devel- 
oped. Thus  Kaiser's  increase  in,  e.  g.,  the  cervical  enlarge- 
ment of  from  104,270  at  birth  to  211,800  at  fifteen  is  really  an 
increase  in  the  number  of  developed  cells,  no  intrinsically  new 
ones  being  formed.  Cells  constitute  but  a  very  small  part  of 
the  total  brain,  so  that  they  can  increase  many  fold  and  not 
greatly  affect  its  total  size  or  weight. 

Cajal  ^  has  suggested  that  the  energy  of  the  division  of 
cells  in  the  embryonic  period  may  be  later  transformed  into 
the  work  of  developing  collaterals  and  finer  processes,  upon 
which  he  assumes  not  only  the  number  of  associations  but 
the  size  of  the  cells  depend. 

Of  prime  importance  for  adolescence  are  these  recent  lines 
of  study,  of  which  the  first  is  upon  the  tangential  fibers  which 
connect  different  parts  of  the  cortex,  with  which  the  names 
of  Vulpius,-"'  Kaes,^  and  Flechsig  are  associated.  After  the 
projection  system  has  penetrated  the  cortex,  several  systems 
of  fibers  among  the  cortical  cells,  themselves  at  right  angles 
to  the  afferent  and  efferent  fibers,  slowly  develop,  some  of 
them  continuing  to  do  so  well  on  into  the  third  or  fourth 

^  Growth  of  the  Brain.     London,  1895, 
'  Archiv  f.  Anat.,  1896,  p.  191. 
•  Archiv  f.  Psych,  u.  Nervenkrank.,  1892. 
•Deutsche  Wochenschrift,  10,  11,  i8g8. 


io8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

decade  of  life  at  least.  These,  which  Kaes  calls  the  second 
and  third  association  layers  of  Meynert,  and  the  lamina  of 
Baillaryer,  all  of  which  Vulpius  calls  the  middle  layer,  be- 
gin an  augmented  development  in  the  occipital  and  in  parts 
of  the  parietal  regions  at  about  seventeen  or  eighteen  years,  and 
continue  to  increase  in  definiteness  for  at  least  two  decades. 
This  is  best  seen  in  the  convexities  of  the  convolutions,  and  less 
in  their  median  and  lower  surfaces,  except  for  radial  fibers. 
They  may  represent  Hughlings  Jackson's  highest  level.  These 
superradial  or  tangential  fibers  seem  to  grow  steadily  in 
caliber  and  perhaps  in  number  from  the  age  of  eighteen  on, 
the  short  fibers  maturing  earlier  than  the  long  ones.  Kaes 
thinks  the  brain  increases  enormously  in  complexity  after  six- 
teen or  seventeen,  the  brain  of  his  man  of  thirty-eight  being 
nearly  twice  as  rich  in  fibers  here  as  that  of  his  boy  of  eight- 
een, and  he  holds  that  medullations  and  increase  of  brain 
power  may  continue  at  least  till  fifty.  Kaes  and  Vulpius  are 
in  impressive  agreement  that  the  age  of  the  later  teens  is 
epochful  for  the  development  of  the  middle  layer,  which  then 
begins  a  new  and  prolonged  period  of  growth.  This  causes 
increased  thickness  of  the  parietal  and  central  regions,  some 
in  the  temporal,  and  is  probably  followed  by  growth  in  the 
frontal  regions  last,  all  this  occurring  in  regions  that  were 
far  less  rich  in  fibers  in  early  adolescence.  The  development 
of  these  fibers  seems  to  follow  more  closely  than  any  other 
brain  structure  we  know  the  growth  of  intelligence.  They 
decline  in  numbers  with  old  age;  their  growth  is  checked  by 
poor  nutrition,  and  they  reach  their  maximum  in  the  centers 
for  sight  and  hearing  by  the  end  of  the  second  year,  while  in 
the  speech  area  they  increase  rapidly  till  the  eleventh  and 
slightly  till  the  thirty-third  year.  Of  the  three  layers  of  these 
fibers,  the  middle,  although  beginning  in  the  ninth  month 
and  having  the  least  fibers,  makes  no  marked  increase  till  the 
beginning  of  adolescence,  and  grows  fastest  during  the  years 
of  early  adult  manhood  and  womanhood,  continuing  till  thir- 
ty-eight at  least.  Kaes  thinks  there  is  an  arrest  in  their 
rate  of  growth  at  about  forty.  The  outer  layer  of  tangential 
fibers  is  normally  far  smaller  than  the  inner,  save  in  idiots, 
where  it  is  very  large,  as  it  also  is  in  reptiles  before  the  pro- 
jection system  is  much  developed,  and  of  which  it  may  have 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         lOQ 

been  a  functional  precursor.  Kaes  holds  that  these  idiots 
revert  to  an  ancient  type,  fibers  closest  connected  with  smell 
(which  is  the  oldest  cortical  structure)  being  best  developed. 
Perhaps  the  rule  is  that  the  finer  the  structure  the  later  on 
in  life  it  continues  to  develop.^ 

The  second  recent  line  of  brain  study  bearing  upon  ado- 
lescence has  been  opened  by  Flechsig,  which  may  be  con- 
cisely summarized  as  follows:  A  considerable  part  of  early 
growth  of  the  brain  before  and  after  birth  is  due  to  the 
increase  of  medullation,  myelinization,  or  the  sheathing  of  the 
fibers,  which  is  generally  held  to  be  the  surest  concomitant 
of  the  development  of  their  function.  The  various  bundles 
of  fibers  acquire  this  sheath  not  all  together,  but  strand  by 
strand.  First  come  the  fibers  connecting  adjacent  centers 
in  the  spinal  cord,  which  mediate  reflexes  of  the  same  level 
or  segment,  which  medullate  the  last  part  of  the  fifth  fetal 
month.  Next  come  the  fibers  connecting  different  vertical 
levels  of  the  cord;  then  the  sensory  column  of  Gall  and  Bur- 
dach;  then  the  pyramidal  or  volitional  bundles.  Nearly  all 
the  cord,  save  this  column  of  fibers,  is  medullated  by 
the  time  of  birth,  but  the  brain  is  very  undeveloped;  so 
that  the  new-born  child  is  a  spinal  creature.  Passing  up, 
he  finds  three  sheafs  of  sensory  fibers  connecting  with  the 
brain  which  mature  at  different  times,  and  carrying  tactile 
and  kinesthetic  sensations  to  the  central  convolutions,  the 
latest  of  which  connects  with  the  speech  centers.  Of  the 
senses  judged  thus  by  medullation,  smell  comes  first  and 
hearing  develops  last.  Not  only  this  method  of  reasoning, 
but  the  results  of  these  researches  are  now  more  or  less 
widely  accepted. 

The  novel  and  even  revolutionary  part  of  the  above  pub- 
lication of  Flechsig,  however,  is  his  claim  that,  whereas  it 
has  generally  been  held  that  all  parts  of  the  cortex  were  con- 
nected with  the  lower  centers  of  sense,  two-thirds  of  it  has  no 
such  connection.  Only  one-third  of  the  gray  cerebral  mantle 
"  has  any  direct  connection  with  the  processes  which  bring 


'  See  V.  Burk.  From  Fundamental  to  Accessory  in  the  Development  of  the 
Nervous  System  and  of  Movements.  Pedagogical  Seminary,  October,  1898,  p.  8 
et  seq. 


no  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

sense-impression  to  consciousness  and  excite  the  muscles  and 
mechanism  of  movement."  The  rest  of  it,  more  or  less  de- 
tached from  sense  and  motion,  has  the  functions  of  reason, 
science,  judgment,  moral  and  esthetic  feeling,  etc.  This  two- 
thirds  is  reduced  to  one-half  in  the  higher  apes  and  in  idiots, 
and  vanishes  in  the  rodents.  It  is  almost  inevitable  to  ask 
whether  this  higher  two-thirds  does  not  come  into  predomi- 
nant function  during  adolescence,  or,  at  least,  if  there  is  then 
an  increased  prepotence  of  it. 

Again,  Hughlings  Jackson,  as  is  well  known,  has  long 
held  that  the  central  nervous  system  was  made  up  of  three 
superposed  levels  closely  correlated,  but  maintaining  so  much 
independence  that  each  might  be  more  or  less  separately 
involved  in  an  epileptic  attack.  His  lowest  level  consists  of 
the  gray  cells  of  the  cord,  medulla,  and  pons.  If  this  only  is 
involved  in  disease,  the  limb  may  be  convulsed,  or  there  may 
be  respiratory  spasms,  etc.,  while  the  higher  powers  are  not 
much  affected.  The  next  higher  or  mid-level  receives  sense- 
impressions  indirectly  from  and  its  motor  discharges  are  indi- 
rect through  the  lowest  level,  and  comprises  the  basal  gan- 
glia, the  centers  for  special  sense,  and  the  central  convolu- 
tions of  the  cortex.  The  epilepsies  of  this  level  are  more 
complex  and  widely  irradiated,  and  instead  of  involving  syn- 
chronous convulsions  of  remote  parts,  may  progress  regu- 
larly from  one  to  another  as  they  are  structurally  connected, 
and  loss  of  consciousness,  if  it  comes,  is  later,  but  more  un- 
certain and  incidental.  So  accurate  was  this  view,  and  so 
exact  can  diagnosis  by  its  aid  now  be,  that  many  an  opera- 
tion in  the  lateral  convolution  is  correctly  indicated  and  suc- 
cessfully made.  Jackson's  highest  level  is  connected  with 
the  second  much  as  that  is  with  the  first,  and  may  be  said  to 
approximately  coincide  with  Flechsig's  higher  two-thirds  of 
the  brain  front  and  back,  which  has  no  direct  pyramidal  con- 
nections. When  epilepsy  occurs  here  consciousness  is  lost  at 
first  in  such  an  attack.  In  this  scheme  the  simplest  structures 
and  functions  are  the  oldest.  The  lowest  stratum  represents 
reflex  movements  of  limbs,  of  eyes,  tongue,  digestion,  etc., 
and  the  highest  uses  these  same  organs  and  motions  for  voli- 
tion, gesture,  facial  expression,  words,  and  emotion.  The 
lowest  is  presentation,  the  middle  layer  is  representation,  to 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         m 

use  the  terms  familiar  in  Scotch  philosophy,  and  the  top 
level  is  for  re-representation. 

Each  of  these  structures  has  its  nascent  period  when  the 
energies  of  growth  tend  to  focus  not  exclusively  but  only 
with  more  or  less  predominance  upon  it,  and  I  think  we  may 
say  that,  at  last,  we  seem  to  have  within  our  reach  some  con- 
ception of  what  brain  changes  are  involved  in  adolescence.  It 
appears  to  be  the  period  of  acceleration  for  the  mid-stratum 
of  tangential  fibers  of  Vulpius  and  Kaes,  for  Flechsig's  two- 
thirds  of  the  brain  that  lacks  direct  connection  with  the  pro- 
jection system,  and  for  Jackson's  highest  level.  Certain  types 
of  insanity  are  rare  before  puberty,  because  the  child  can  not 
reason  according  to  adult  standards  until  fourteen,  the  age 
at  which  Aristotle  would  begin  the  education  of  reason.  Be- 
fore this  comes  the  age  of  the  spinal  reflex  and  automatic 
nascency  of  the  late  prenatal  life  and  the  early  months  of 
infancy.  Then  comes  the  stage  of  controlled  muscular 
actions — walking,  plays — when  drill,  habituation,  memory,  and 
instinct  culminate,  which  is  associated  with  the  mid-level 
regions  of  the  brain.  Lastly  comes  the  age  of  rational 
thought,  higher  logical  correlation,  personal  opinion  and 
conviction,  higher  esthetic  enjoyments,  deliberate  choice, 
and  willed  action.  One  common  and  now  most  interesting 
form  of  arrest  here  is  to  be  discussed  at  length  in  Chapter 
IV.  Each  lower  level,  however,  must  have  its  full  develop- 
ment, for  it  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the  unfoldment  of  the 
higher.  Logical  methods,  on  the  other  hand,  if  too  early,  tend 
to  stultify  and  violate  the  law  that  fundamental  must  always 
precede  accessory  structures  and  functions. 

Again,  on  this  view,  thought  is  more  independent  of  mus- 
cular activity  or  motor  innervation  than  we  have  considered  it 
to  be,  and  the  sphere  of  gymnastic  and  motor  education  is  per- 
haps more  restricted.  The  field  of  sense-training  and  object- 
lesson  methods  are  also  limited.  We  can  train  the  sense  centers 
and  cultivate  eye  and  ear  mindedness  in  the  regions  contigu- 
ous to  the  Rolandic  fissure  by  manual  or  athletic  culture, 
but  all  this  only  supplies  the  data  and  lays  the  foundation  for 
the  education  of  the  highest  level.  The  dawn  of  reason, 
marked  by  the  appetency  for  crude  logical  processes,  the 
shadowy  grasping  of  new  and  great  conceptions,  and  the 


Hi 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


silent  reverie  and  dreams  of  dawning  adolescence  which  we 
shall  trace  later  w^ien  the  senses  and  muscles  are  inert,  may 
be  the  first  psychic  function  of  new  neural  parts.  At  first, 
their  activity  is  tentative,  intermittent,  incidental,  dim,  and 
unformulated;  but  they  are  designed  later  to  dominate  more 
and  more  of  life,  and  to  subordinate,  and  in  abnormal  devel- 
opments even  to  precede  and  arrest  the  lower  levels.^ 

F.  Growth  of  Skin  and  Internal  Tract. — Of  several  care- 
ful measurements  of  the  dermal  surface,  that  of  Meeh,"  who 
laid  on  strips  of  paper  to  follow  the  folds  and  changes  of  level, 
is  perhaps  the  best.  Even  this  method  was  by  no  means 
exact.  His  table  from  the  ages  of  nine  to  twenty-six  is  as 
follows: 


Age. 

Height  in  cm. 

Weight  in  g. 

Surface  in  cm. 

No.  of  cm.  surface 
to  I  kg.  weight. 

Yrs.     Mos. 

9      lo 

13       li 

15        9l 

17        9 

20        7 

26       3i 

HI. 5 

137-5 

152 

169 

170 

162 

19.313 

28,300 

35.375 
55,750 
59.500 
62,250 

8,855 
11,883 
14,988 
19.205 
18,695 
19,204 

458 
420 
421 
344 
314 
308 

^  Copious  and  bewildering  as  is  the  recent  literature  upon  the  embryology  of 
the  brain,  its  structure  and  growth  in  lower  animals,  localization,  and  especially  the 
anatomy  of  the  adult  brain,  one  examines  not  only  most  of  the  recent  comprehen- 
sive text-books,  Ramon  y  Cajal,  van  Gehuchten,  Kblliker,  Barker,  Retzius,  Edinger, 
etc.,  but  the  new  neurological  Jahresbericht  and  the  files  of  the  Centralblatt, 
almost  in  vain  as  yet  for  studies  upon  brain  growth  during  youth  which  would 
seem  to  be  more  promising  of  practical  results  than  work  in  any  other  field,  and 
which  must  be  ere  long  the  center  of  the  highest  scientific  interest  when  evolu- 
tionary lines  of  research  attain  the  importance  that  belongs  to  them.  Only  Vulpius, 
Kaes,  Flechsig,  and  Jackson  shed  distinct  light  on  it.  See  Kaes,  Archiv  f.  Psychia- 
tric u.  Nervenkrankheiten,  Bd.  xxv,  p.  695.  Neurol.  Centralblatt,  Bd.  x,  p.  456, 
and  Bd.  x,  p.  119;  Bd.  xiii,  p.  410.  MUnchen  Wochenschrift,  Bd.  xliii,  p.  100. 
Wiener  med.  Wochensch.,  1895,  pp.  1734-1770.  Vulpius,  Arch.  f.  Psych.,  1891, 
p.  775.  Edenger,  Vorlesungen,  6th  ed.,  1900,  p.  424.  Flechsig.  Gehirn  u.  Seele, 
1896,  p.  112.  Etudes  sur  le  Cerveau,  1898,  p.  221.  Neurolog.  Centralblatt.,  1894, 
p.  606;  1898,  p.  977;  1899,  p.  1000;  and  1895,  pp.  1118,  1177.  Localization  der 
Geistigen  Vorgange,  Leipzig,  1896.  Arch.  Ital.  de  Biol.,  1901,  p.  30.  Hughlings 
Jackson.  Brit.  Med.  J.,  1898,  vol.  i,  p.  65.  Apathy's  fibrillar  theory  that  since 
1897  invades  the  neuron  doctrine  ;  Dercum's  ameboid  make  and  break  theory, 
1896  ;  Loeb's  ion  theory  of  neuron  and  muscle  action,  1900,  and  many  late  studies 
in  neuropathology,  e.  g.,  by  Ceni,  Babinski,  Dejerine,  and  many  others,  have  added 
a  great  and  new  charm  to  all  this  field. 

*  Zeits.  f  Biologie,  vol.  xv. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         II3 


There  is  a  rapid  decline  in  the  relation  of  surface  to  weight 
between  birth  and  maturity  estimated  at  from  about  eight  hun- 
dred and  twelve  to  three  hundred  and  one  centimeters  square 
per  kilogram.  The  epidermis  is  quite  unlike  the  corium,  in  that 
it  continues  to  grow  until  at  least  sixty.  It  is  more  exempt 
from  atrophic  changes  than  the  cutis. 

As  the  skin  covers  the  body  from  without,  the  mucous 
surface  lines  it  within.  Owing  to  its  very  many  folds  and  the 
contraction  and  expansion  of  the  intestines,  its  area  can  be 
determined  with  even  less  accuracy  than  that  of  the  skin. 
Early  determinations  gave  the  conclusion  that  the  growth  of 
the  intestines  was  relatively  less  than  that  of  the  mass  of  the 
body,  but  Miihlmann's  careful  weighings  indicate  that  the 
converse  is  true,  save  perhaps  for  a  very  brief  period  in 
infancy.  The  mucous  surface,  however,  probably  continues 
to  grow  through  life.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  epithelial 
layer. 

Men 


Weight  in 
grs. 

Length. 

Intestinal  Weight. 

Intestinal  Length. 

Intestinal  as 

Age. 

Abs.  g. 

Rel. 
per  cent. 

Abs.  cm. 

Rel. 
per  cent. 

related  to 
bodily  weight. 

14 

16 

17 

19 

24 

29,050 

48,736 
42,997 
43.816 

42,588 

154 
157 
161 

177 

1,000 
1,460 
1,350 
1,527 
1,609 

3-4 
30 
3-0 
3-5 
3-7 

934 
1,063 
1,200 

930 

2.0 
2.4 
2.7 
2.2 

6!o 
6.7 
7-9 

5-2 

From  six  to  twenty  years  the  small  intestine  increases  to 
about  threefold  and  the  large  intestine  to  about  fourfold  its  ca- 
pacity at  birth.  The  length  of  the  latter  grows  from  about  one- 
sixth  that  of  the  former  in  infancy  to  one-fourth  in  maturity. 
The  total  length  of  the  digestive  canal,  which,  is  about  five 
times  that  of  the  body  in  the  adult,  increases  relatively  less  than 
stature,  for  at  birth  it  is  about  six  times  the  length  of  the  body. 
In  the  adult  its  surface  is  almost  equal  to  that  of  the  body, 
while  in  the  carnivorous  dog  it  is  half,  and  in  the  herbivorous 
horse  nearly  twice  its  body  surface.  We  have  little  exact  data, 
but  it  would  appear  from  those  at  hand  that  at  adolescence 
the  absorptive  surfaces  of  the  canal  increase  less  than  the 
body  surfac^,  and  if  so,  this  suggests  increased  animal  food 
9 


114 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


in  the  past,  at  the  phyletic  correlate  of  this  age.  At  the  age  of 
eleven  or  twelve  the  waist  of  boys  is  increasing  more  than  their 
height,  and  in  the  average  boy  continues  to  grow  till  at  least 
twenty-three.  The  area  of  chewing  surface  is  slowly  increased 
by  the  addition  of  the  later  molars,  and  as  we  saw  there  is 
increase  in  both  length  and  strength  of  jaw. 

Grozvth  of  Glands  and  Other  Organs. — We  shall  never 
understand  many  of  the  deepest  problems  involving  the  rela- 
tion of  the  mind  to  the  body  until  we  can  write  a  new  chap- 
ter of  psycho-physiology  on  glandular  psychology.  Secre- 
tions and  excretions,  both  internal  and  external,  including 
the  functions  of  what  we  may  still  call  the  sexual  glands, 
although  unlike  others,  they  secrete  only  living  cells,  condi- 
tion many  psychic  states  in  a  way  hardly  less  basic  than  they 
do  all  other  physiological  processes,  and  for  fundamental  feel- 
ings and  instincts  they  are  probably  quite  as  important  as  the 
brain  itself. 

Kidneys. — Both  the  volume  and  the  weight  of  the  kidneys 
increase  till  well  into  the  third  decennium  of  life,  but  their 
growth  relatively  to  that  of  the  body  weight  begins  to  fall 
behind  in  the  second  year  of  life.  Vierordt  has  compiled 
from  various  measurements  of  men  the  following  table, 
which  is  more  comprehensive  than  Benecke's  •} 


Age. 


II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 

18 

19 
20 
21 
22 

23 


Weight  of  both  Kidneys. 


Abs. 

Rel. 

171-5 

0.64 

157-5 

0.54 

212.9 

0.64 

233-7 

0.63 

239.7 

0.58 

247.7 

0.55 

274.9 

0.55 

271.6 

0,50 

273-9 

0.48 

296.4 

0.50 

323-5 

0.53 

306.9 

0.49 

281.8 

0.44 

During  most  of  the  life  of  the  individual  the  kidney  cells 
simply  replace  their  slight  loss  without  growing,  and  after  the 

third  decennium  usually  begin  to  atrophy. 

■ — • 

'  Constitution  und  constitutionelles  Kranksein  des  Menschen.     Marburg,  1885. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         US 

Urea  is  known  as  the  chief  nitrogenous  waste  and  prod- 
uct  of  the  proteid  element  of  food ;  it  is  chiefly  prepared  for 
ehmination  in  the  Hver,  the  largest  gland,  and  is  provided  with 
the  richest  blood  supply.  It  is  discharged  thence  into  the 
blood  and  taken  up  again  by  the  kidneys  for  final  elimina- 
tion. One  of  the  most  interesting  and  important  chapters 
in  modern  physiology  and  another  in  practical  medicine  are 
devoted  to  the  study  of  its  history,  and  a  well-marked  group 
of  diseases  are  traced  to  its  accumulation.  Despite  several 
careful  studies,  we  are  still  uncertain  concerning  its  relations 
to  adolescence.  Uhle  found  a  decrease  of  urea  from  eight  to 
eleven  years  of  age,  and  still  more  from  thirteen  to  sixteen,  at 
which  latter  age  the  amount  secreted  reached  about  the  normal 
adult  standard,  which  was  about  half  that  before  six.  Marro 
found  a  marked  increase  in  urea  and  also  in  urine  at  about 
twelve  in  girls,  and  again  at  fourteen,  with  a  later  decline, 
Uhle  and  Mosler  have  shown  that  there  is  a  marked  diminu- 
tion in  phosphoric  acid  secreted  in  the  urine  at  puberty,  which 
they  think  combines  with  bases  like  lime  to  form  bone,  which 
grows  so  rapidly  at  this  period.  Marro  ^  found  a  distinct 
augmentation  of  chlorin  at  fourteen  and  fifteen,  and  also  of 
H2SO4  and  of  P2O5.  As  under  the  influence  of  the  whip- 
stroke,  which  adolescence  applies  to  growth,  boys  exceed 
girls  in  the  amount  of  carbonic  acid  exhaled,  so  also  they  do 
in  azotic  urinal  deposits.  Physicians  report  occasional  cases 
of  albumen  in  the  urine  of  adolescents  to  an  extent  that  sug- 
gests Bright's  disease,  but  these  regulate  themselves  to  nor- 
mality later;  even  sugar  may  be  excessive.  On  the  whole, 
while  many  more  determinations  for  different  ages  are  needed 
before  kidney  secretions  can  be  correlated  with  growth,  it  is 
highly  probable  that  these,  like  so  many  other  functions, 
have  a  wider  range  of  average  and  also  of  individual  variation 
within  the  limits  of  normality  than  at  the  age  just  preceding 
the  growth  increment  or  at  any  subsequent  period  save  that 
of  senescent  involution,  which  is  in  so  many  ways  an  inverted 
picture  of  adolescence. 

The  increase  in  the  amount  of  urine  at  different  ages  is 
shown  in  the  following  table: 

*  La  Puberty,  p.  2a 


ii6 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


9 

lO 

II 

12 

13 


Amount  in  24  hours. 

To 

I  k.  weight. 

822 

40.2 

1,205 

53-6 

1,866 

65.7 

I|205 

46.9 

1,201 

43-5 

1,012 

36-9 

Micturitional  obscenities,  which  our  returns  show  to  be 
so  common  before  adolescence,  culminate  at  ten  or  twelve, 
and  seem  to  retreat  into  the  background  as  sex  phenomena 
appear.  The  former  are  of  two  classes,  fouling  persons  or 
things  secretly  from  adults  but  often  openly  with  each  other, 
and  less  often  ceremonial  acts  connected  with  the  act  or  the 
product  that  almost  suggests  the  scatological  rites  of  savages, 
unfit  for  description  here,  but  of  great  interest  and  impor- 
tance for  the  psychic  side  of  the  recapitulation  theory,  and 
although  rare,  sometimes  elaborately  developed.^  No  less 
significant  are  the  phenomena  of  what  we  may  call  urino- 
phobia,  sometimes  developed  at  this  age  of  fears,  which 
remind  us  of  the  many  centuries  when  urinomancy  and  urinos- 
copy  vied  with  astrology  as  the  chief  factors  in  a  physician's 
training.  Many  adolescents  whose  attention  is  called  to  the 
subject  by  the  scare  advertisements  perhaps  naturally  scan 
their  urine  daily  for  years,  sufifer  acute  and  generally  secret 
fears  as  they  find  it  now  cloudy,  turbid,  with  red  or 
white  deposits  or  with  iridescent  film,  test  its  odors  and 
imagine  incipient,  fatal,  and  offensive  diseases;  seek  conso- 
lation by  furtive  comparisons  with  that  of  other  persons; 
modify  their  diet,  exercise,  and  general  regimen;  associate 
this  with  the  yet  more  serious  sex  fears  later  described,  and 
sometimes  muster  up  courage  to  consult  friends  or  throw  them- 
selves into  the  hands  of  quacks.  Of  one  hundred  and  nineteen 
students,  all  but  five  confess  to  a  period  of  mild  or  intense  fear 
which  a  little  incidental  instruction  would  have  shown  to  be 
groundless.^ 

The  suprarenal  capsules  or  adrenals  are  ductless  glands 
largest  in  the  fetus,  where  they  exceed  the  kidneys  them- 
selves, and  become  steadily  smaller  at  least  to  forty,  according 

*  See  Burke.     Scatological  Rites. 

*  See,  e.  g.,  Sprengel  Geschichte  der  Arzneikunde,  B.  ii  passim  and  B.  iii,  p. 
314  et  seq. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         II 7 


to  Lorey,  Bischof,  and  Schwann.  Some  now  think  they  aid 
in  removing  the  toxic  products  produced  by  the  muscles  dur- 
ing exercise. 

The  liver  was  thought  to  continue  to  grow  well  on  into 
old  age,  but  later  determinations  indicate  that  it  grows  rela- 
tively very  slowly  after  fifteen,  and  from  that  age  on  to  senes- 
cence has  a  weight  progressively  less  compared  to  that  of  the 
body.     The  following  is  Miihlmann's  table  for  males: 


ACEi 


Weight  of  the  Liver. 


Abs. 

Rel. 

870.4 

3-22 

880 

3-03 

1,036 

3.13 

1,188 

3.20 

1,306 

3.17 

1.339 

2.95 

1,481 

2. 98 

1,509.6 

2.80 

1,644.6 

2.86 

1,560.8 

2.62 

1,626.9 

2.66 

1.675 

2.66 

1,528.5 

2.37 

1,847.7 

.... 

II 

12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 

23 
24 


Its  circulatory  mechanism,  so  inadequate  for  oxidization 
and  elimination,  may  account  for  the  great  amount  of  unoxi- 
dized  material  it  contains  and  why  it  deposits  fat  and  atro- 
phies so  easily.  It  receives  only  about  the  same  amount  of 
arterial  blood  as  the  kidneys,  although  it  weighs  about  six 
times  as  much  in  the  adult,  and  less  than  the  milt,  although 
it  is  a  Httle  over  nine  times  heavier. 

Ritter's  analysis  of  the  bile  at  different  ages  gives  the 
following  table: 


Age. 

Solid 
residuum. 

Matter. 

Natrium. 

Organic. 

Inorganic. 

Glycochol  acid. 

Taurochol  acid. 

14 

21 

23 

25 

131-4 
129.0 
117. 6 
128.2 

120.0 
118. 8 
III. 7 
122.2 

II. 4 
10.2 

5-9 

5-8 

41.9 
39-6 
40.9 
44.9 

29.1 
16.4 

25-1 
23-25 

The  salivary  glands  also  increase  in  size  and  function.     It 
has  often  been  noted  that  their  activity  is  aug^mented  with 


ii8 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 


intensity  of  the  sexual  life.  In  the  almost  epidemic  outburst 
of  venery,  which  travelers  describe,  as  the  arctic  spring  ad- 
vances after  the  long  winter  night,  not  only  is  the  liver  stim- 
ulated so  that  constipation  and  jaundice  cease  and  menstrua- 
tion becomes  more  profuse  and  frequent,  sometimes  with 
hemorrhage  from  the  mouth  and  nose,  but  saliva  flows  with 
great  and  offensive  exuberance.  When  temperature  rises, 
respiration  becomes  more  frequent,  bleeding  is  easier  in  this 
purest  of  all  airs,  when  spring  seems  full  of  premature  joy,  and 
distils  the  wine  of  action,  and  when  everything  quivers  with  the 
wild  passion  of  life  after  its  long  depressing  winter.^  The  jaws 
increase  in  size  and  power,  and  there  is  a  new  propensity  to  bite, 
chew,  smoke,  and  to  taste  various  stimulants  which  act  as  ptyal- 
agogues.  Questionnaire  returns  also  show  an  increased  dis- 
position now  to  spit  with  various  artistic  refinements  and  even 
competitions  as  to  distance,  accuracy,  method,  and  amount, 
while  idiots  become  offensive  by  drooling.  The  change  in  the 
sensitiveness  and  quality  of  tastes  and  appetites  later  discussed 
is  also  connected  with  adolescent  hypersalivation.  These  and 
certain  emotional  phenomena  also  indicate  a  wide  irradiation 
of  glandular  sympathy  at  this  age. 

The  milt  or  pancreas  continues  to  grow  till  old  age. 
Miihlmann  has  compiled  from  seven  measurements  the  follow- 
ing tables  for  males : 


Weight  of  Milt. 


Age. 


'  Cook.     Some  Physical  Effects  of  Arctic  Cold,  Darkness,  and  Light.     New 
York  Medical  Record,  July  12,  1897. 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         119 

The  pancreas,  like  the  spleen,  develops  from  the  wall  of 
the  intestinal  tract;  like  that  organ,  it  is  under  the  control  of 
special  nerves,  but  it  secretes  alkaline  as  the  spleen  does  acid 
products.  Its  maximal  secretion  is  during  the  first  hour  after 
eating,  and  its  minimal  three  or  four  hours  later.  The  pubes- 
cent growth  of  both  these  glands  is  far  greater  than  that  of  the 
body  as  a  whole,  so  that  some,  so  far  unknown,  significance 
for  this  age  seems  suggested. 

The  spleen  grows  yet  more  rapidly  during  adolescence. 
Roberts's  table  for  males  is  as  follows : 

Age.  Spleen,  02. 

4-7 1-85 

7-14 303 

14-20 5.14 

20-30 7.19 

30-40 712 

The  spleen  is  one  of  the  most  mysterious  organs  of  the 
body.  Unlike  any  other,  it  has  its  own  local  arrangement 
for  maintaining  circulation.  After  every  meal  it  increases 
greatly  in  size,  then  contracts  synchronously  with  diges- 
tive periods,  and  probably  has  a  shorter  rhythm  of  varo-dila- 
tion.  It  can  be  removed  without  serious  danger.  Probably 
it  aids  in  the  process  of  producing  red  blood-corpuscles,  and 
possibly  destroys  old  ones.  Vierordt  thinks  it  continues  to 
grow  till  at  least  the  forty-seventh  year.  It  need  hardly  be  said 
that  the  spleen  has  no  more  relation  with  the  psychic  quality 
which  suggested  its  name  and  was  once  thought  to  be  located 
in  it  than  sweetbread  has  with  sweetheart. 

The  sebaceous  glands  over  the  surface  of  the  skin,  which 
secrete  in  the  new-born  child  the  vernix  caseosa,  corresponding 
to  the  lanolin  of  sheep's  wool,  the  oily  matter  of  birds'  feathers, 
cerumen  or  ear-wax,  preputial  smegma,  etc.,  are  more  active  at 
puberty.  Their  secretions  about  the  hair-follicles  increase, 
some  think,  with  changed  quality.  They  are  often  obstructed  so 
that  sebum  accumulates,  causing  pimples  or  comedones.  In 
the  axillae  or  armpits  especially,  these  glands  reveal  their 
morphological  affinity  to  those  of  the  mammge,  and  the  fre- 
quent dryness  and  irritability  of  the  hands  and  sometimes  of 
the  entire  dermal  surface,  often  noted  in  states  of  nervous 
weakness  after  coition,  show  their  functional  sympathy  with 


120  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

testes  and  ovaries.  Their  odor  is  quite  sui  generis,  and  since 
Haller's  description  of  this  as  diie  to  the  more  volatile  parts 
of  this  sperm  diffused  through  the  flesh,  a  popular  concep- 
tion widely  diffused  has  ascribed  genital  odors  to  them  in  gen- 
eral, centering,  however,  in  their  peculiar  secretions  on  the 
organs  of  sex,  which  are  greatly  modified  by  function  and 
disease.  Jager's  vague  speculations  on  his  discovery  of  the 
soul  as  a  smell  rested  for  its  meager  basis  of  fact  largely  upon 
exploitations  of  the  facts  connected  with  the  action  of  these 
glands.  Pornographic  literature  abounds  in  suggestions  in 
this  field;  lewd  people's  dread  of  water,  certain  arts  of  breed- 
ers to  secure  cross-fertilization  between  species  that  nor- 
mally do  not  mate  at  all,  perfumes  used  to  make  birds  sing, 
and  a  distinct  odor  ascribed  to  puberty  in  savage  races  by 
anthropologists  may  also  be  recalled  here.  Many  of  our 
returns  specify  moisture,  clamminess,  or,  more  rarely,  dryness 
of  the  hand  in  adolescents,  along  with  heat  and  coldness,  when 
also  the  face  very  often  becomes  covered  with  indications  of 
abnormality  in  these  secretions.  Modifications  of  dermal  sensi- 
tiveness and  itching,  the  passion  for  being  stroked,  patted,  and 
caressed,  and  other  erogenic  phenomena  connected  with  the 
sense  of  touch,  to  say  nothing  of  laboratory  tests  of  hepatic 
sensibility  at  this  age  thought  to  be  connected  with  these  secre- 
tions, intimate  how  deep  is  the  rapport  between  them  and  the 
new  functions  of  sex. 

A  man  loses  about  as  much  sweat  as  he  does  urine,  and 
these  two  sources  of  outflow  are  complemental.  Each  have 
nervous  centers  in  the  medullary  region  which  are  adjacent  to 
each  other.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  while 
urine  is  a  true  secretion,  sweat  is  also  a  heat  regulator.  At 
puberty  the  amount  of  water  imbibed  and  given  out  in  both 
these  ways  is  increased.  Sweating  is  easier  and  more  pro- 
fuse, no  doubt  partly  from  the  increased  relative  weakness 
that  attends  rapid  growth.  Many  returns  state  that  the  odor 
of  perspiration  from  underwear  at  this  age  is  both  stronger 
and  different  than  heretofore.  Whether  these  modifications 
are  due  to  growth  of  the  glands  or  modifications  in  the  nervous 
control  to  which  they  are  subject  is  unknown.  Travelers  and 
anthropologists  have  thought  that  characteristic  national  odors 
so  marked  that  negroes,  Chinese,  and  even  Irish,  Germans,  and 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE 


121 


others  can  be  distinguished  by  the  aroma  of  their  sleeping- 
rooms,  underwear,  etc.,  and  which  are  far  more  marked  at 
puberty,  are  partly  sudoriferous. 

Pigmentation,  which  Laycock  ascribes  to  imperfect  oxi- 
.  dation.  undergoes  more  or  less  modification.  Sometimes 
the  hair  slightly  changes  its  hue,  in  such  cases  more  com- 
monly growing  a  shade  darker ;  the  eyes  are  often  thought  to 
change  color,  light  eyes  sometimes  grow  lighter  and  dark 
eyes  darker;  a  few  have  thought  they  detected  slight  color 
modifications  in  the  skin,  although  these  may  have  been 
accounted  for  by  changes  of  circulation  which  affected  only 
complexion.  Certain  it  is  that  the  sex  organs,  the  nipples, 
and  aureola  become  distinctly  darker.  In  mixed  races,  espe- 
cially in  mulattoes,  testimony  would  indicate  frequent  modi- 
fications both  ways. 

As  to  whether  the  lachrymal  glands  share  the  general  aug- 
mentation of  the  secretory  function,  we  find  no  evidence  save 
only  the  repeated  statement  that  weeping  is  more  frequent 
in  girls  for  a  few  years  after  the  dawn  of  puberty  than  before. 

The  following  is  Puech's  table  showing  the  average 
dimensions  of  the  ovaries  at  different  ages: 


Right. 

Left. 

Length. 

Height. 

Thickness. 

Length. 

Height. 

Thickness. 

New-born , . . 

6-1 1  yrs.. . . 

13-15    "•••• 

19-35    "•■■• 

26.7 
29.6 
36-5 

lg.8 
9 
15 

18 

4.4 
10 

13-7 

24 
25 

35 

18.2 

8.4 

16.7 

4-5 

8.3 

I3-I 

Miihlmann,  from  a  few  determinations,  gives  their  weight 
as  follows: 

Weight  of  both  Ovaries. 

Age. 

Abs. 

Rel. 

*     

I.O 

21.2 

2.n 

0.007 
0.041 
O.nnn 

18 

70 

He  has  also  weighed  the  testes  at  different  ages,  with  the 
following  results: 


T22 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


Weight  of  Testes. 


Some  think  that  in  contrast  with  the  ovaries,  which  after 
the  cHmacteric  are  reduced  greatly,  the  testes  continue  to  grow. 
That  they  do  not  share  the  general  post-climacteric  involu- 
tion which  comes  later  in  men  is  not  yet  sufficiently  estab- 
lished. 

On  the  other  hand,  two  secretory  organs  rapidly^  decHne 
in  size,  one  relatively  and  the  other  absolutely,  during  ado- 
lescence. The  mysterious  thymus  gland,  which  is  large  at 
birth,  is  reduced  one-half  and  sometimes  to  a  vestige  before 
puberty,  and  often  vanishes  between  twenty-five  and  thirty- 
five.  It  has,  however,  no  known  connection  with  this  age  save 
perhaps  through  its  relation  with  the  thyroid  gland  higher  up 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  neck.  The  latter  has  lately  come  to  be 
of  great  and  growing  interest,  through  its  relation  with  the 
blood  and  nutrition,  which  are  known  to  be  very  important, 
although  not  yet  well  understood.  At  birth  its  weight  is 
^^,  in  maturity  about  ywt'  that  of  the  body.  After,  but  not 
before  puberty,  it  can  be  extirpated  without  very  great 
danger.  It  is  larger  in  women  than  in  men,  swells  consid- 
erably at  the  first  and  somewhat  after  all  successive  men- 
struations, also  after  the  first  coitus  even  in  men.  To  measure 
the  neck  is  a  wide-spread  test  of  virginity  and  also  ceremo- 
nially of  nubility,  among  rude  and  savage  people.  It  enlarges 
also  during  pregnancy  and  lactation,  so  that  its  sympathy  with 
the  uterus  is  close.  Exophthalmic  goiter  and  myxedema, 
which  involve  extreme  facial  and  other  expressions  resem- 
bling fear,  seem  to  be  based  on  thyroid  troubles,  and  both 
diseases  often  occur  during  the  later  stages  of  puberty.  After 
thyroidectomy  the  pituitary  body  often  hypertrophies,  and 
the  suprarenal  bodies  are  affected.     Its  connections  with  sex- 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         123 

ual  functions,  especially  in  the  female,  and  its  close  and  neces- 
sary relation  with  nutrition,  which  have  in  recent  years  given 
rise  to  a  vast  body  of  literature,  are  both  accentuated  by  the 
fact  that  at  the  dawn  of  senescence  this  gland  is  peculiarly 
liable  to  degenerative  disease. 

Fat  seems  to  decrease  at  puberty  in  vigorous  boys.  If 
it  preexisted,  it  is  often  then  used  up  as  if  it  were  reserve 
material  accumulated  for  the  sake  of  growth.  Boys  are  often 
described  in  our  returns  as  lean,  spidery,  scrawny,  cadaver- 
ous, as  having  lost  their  plumpness  of  limb  and  feature  and 
their  good  looks.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  increased  relative 
prominence  of  the  joints  and  the  points  for  muscular  attach- 
ment. Not  only  are  the  curves  and  angles  sharper,  but  the 
limbs  are  relatively  longer  as  compared  with  the  trunk  than 
they  were  in  childhood,  and  this  adds  to  the  general  dishar- 
mony of  proportions.  A  chapter  might  be  written  on  the 
morphological  ugliness  of  the  boy. 

While  girls  also  often  grow  thin,  the  increase  of  cellular 
tissue  in  the  mammary  and  the  growth  of  the  pelvic  region 
in  its  horizontal  expansion  are  in  a  sense  complementary. 
The  hips,  thighs,  limbs,  shoulders,  and  arms  round  out  into 
contours  more  or  less  beautiful,  and  with  curves  always  pre- 
dominating over  angles,  while  not  only  on  the  bony  promi- 
nences, but  over,  between,  and  in  the  fibers  of  the  great  mus- 
cles themselves,  adipose  and  other  intracellular  tissue  pads 
all  parts  and  members  into  more  or  less  rounded  and  graceful 
outlines. 

The  thickness  of  the  subcutaneous  adipose  tissue  shows, 
of  all  parts  of  the  body,  most  irregular  development.  Kotel- 
mann  found  it  to  increase  up  to  nineteen  years  almost  exactly 
as  height  increases  and  along  with  muscle  growth.  In  relation 
to  weight,  it  maintains  a  pretty  constant  relation  of  from  three 
to  nine  per  cent. 

The  temperature  of  the  body  is  partly  due  to  nutrition 
and  partly  to  causes  not  yet  explained.  A  large  part  of  the 
total  energy  of  life  is  consumed  in  producing  bodily  heat. 
Loss  of  heat  varies  considerably  with  the  relation  of  surface 
to  mass  of  body,  which  in  the  adult  is  only  about  three-eighths 
what  it  is  at  birth,  although  the  determinations  of  the  effects  of 
sex  and  age  upon  calorification  are  not  yet  in  complete  accord. 


124  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

The  child  at  birth  has  a  slightly  higher  temperature  than 
the  uterus  of  its  mother.  After  a  considerable  fall  it  begins 
at  about  the  second  hour  after  birth  to  rise,  and  thereafter 
through  childhood  is  on  the  average  about  37. 5"^  C,  or  about 
0.3°  more  than  the  adult,  nearly  half  a  degree  warmer  awake 
than  asleep.  In  general,  however,  temperature  taken  in 
rectum,  mouth,  and  armpits  rises  a  little  between  the  ages 
of  five  and  nine.  Some  think  puberty  is  marked  by  a  distinct 
rise,  which  has  been  estimated  as  high  as  0.5°  F.  It  then  sinks 
slightly  from  the  fifteenth  to  the  twenty-fifth  year,  when  ado- 
lescence is  well  established,  and  falls  to  a  minimum  at  about  the 
fiftieth.  It  is  highest  a  few  days  before  menstruation,  and  may 
vary  normally  0.5°  or  even  1°  F.  Although  sexual  differences 
of  temperature  are  not  yet  well  established,  present  indications 
point  to  a  slightly  higher  temperature  in  males,  who  also 
present  greater  individual  variations.  Children  also  vary 
much  more  within  the  limits  of  normal  change  than  do 
adults.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  smaller  the  body  the 
greater  the  changes  caused  by  outer  temperature. 

Harmonious  Growth. — There  is  no  one  fixed  standard  of 
proportion  of  parts  or  of  beauty  either  in  art  or  in  anthropome- 
try. Even  Erismann's  law  that  "  During  the  development 
of  puberty,  the  squares  of  the  weights  in  different  ages  are 
related  to  each  other  as  the  fifth  power  of  the  length  "  is  only 
an  approximation.  Man  the  measurer,  who  has  in  the  past 
used  his  forearm  (cubit,  ell),  his  foot,  his  girth  (yard  from 
gyrdoii),  his  length  (fathom),  his  thumb  (pouce),  nail,  hand, 
as  standards  and  metric  units,  and  has  selected  some  dimension 
in  many  art  canons — length  of  face,  foot,  palm,  middle  fin- 
ger, ear,  nose,  etc. — as  a  modulus  (so  many  times  which  gave 
the  true  dimensions  of  other  parts),  has  always  been  and 
still  is  more  autotypic  than  he  knows,  reproducing  in  his  rep- 
resentation of  the  human  form  the  type  of  his  own  race. 
Some  of  these  schemes  of  proportion  have  been  elaborately 
and  even  mystically  wrought  out  in  detail,  treated  mathe- 
matically, and  applied  even  to  architecture.  The  special  part 
to  which  all  the  rest  sustained  occult  relation  has  sometimes 
been  thought  to  be  able  in  some  way  to  furnish  a  key  to 
unlock  the  secrets  of  our  being.  Anthropometry,  however, 
shows  that  a  true  type  is  something  very  different  from  all 


PARTS  AND   ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         125 

these  normal  figures.  The  modern  head,  e.  g.,  is  larger  than 
the  Greek  canons  permitted,  and  Fock  lately  proved  that  the 
only  length  of  the  upper  arm  that  corresponded  to  the  Apollo 
Belvedere  was  the  Ethiopian  type,  thus  suggesting  an  Egyptian 
origin  of  the  Greek  norm.^  True  beauty  in  the  human  form, 
the  type  of  the  divine,  can  not  be  absolute  or  uniform.  Apollo 
does  not  inspire  young  men  now  to  esthetic  ideals  of  art, 
while  the  type  or  mean  form  of  the  fifty  percentile  line  repre- 
sented, e.  g.,  in  Sargent's  casts,  at  the  Chicago  Exposition,  of 
the  average  male  and  female  collegian  is  positively  repellant. 
Young  men  especially  desire  to  develop  individuality  by  de- 
parting more  or  less  widely  from  standard  forms  without  be- 
coming distinctly  disproportionate.  Perfect  symmetry  of  body, 
then,  either  in  form  or  function,  is  rare  and  more  or  less 
asymmetry  is  the  rule. 

The  bilateral  halves  of  the  body  differ  in  size,  strength, 
rapidity,  and  in  temperature.  The  blood-vessels  are  of  dif- 
ferent size,  the  eyes  are  unlike  in  acuteness  and  in  mobility,  the 
two  hemispheres  of  the  brain,  the  number  of  fibers  in  the  pyram- 
idal decussation  are  unlike,  while  liability  to  disease  is  some- 
times greater  in  one  half  of  the  body  than  in  the  other.  It  is 
impossible  to  make  symmetrical  movements  with  both  hands, 
the  preferred  hand  always  making  the  greater  excursion.  Pages 
would  be  needed  to  simply  enumerate  the  asymmetries  in 
form  and  function  of  the  right  and  left  half  of  the  body  that 
have  been  specially  studied.^  Bolton  ^  found  that  children  were 
symmetrical  until  adolescence,  and  until  early  pubescent  years 
when  the  shoulders  or  head  tip  slightly,  the  spine  curves,  the 
two  sides  of  the  face  grow  unlike,  eyes,  hips,  feet,  legs  differ- 
entiate, the  relative  ambidexterity  declines,  and  the  dis- 
position to  lop  and  stoop  in  sitting  and  standing,  to  sleep 
on  one  side  in  preference  to  the  other,  and  in  general  to  spe- 
cialize the  two  halves  of  the  body,  is  augmented.     The  Am- 

'  See  Robert  Fletcher.  Human  Proportion  in  Art  and  Anthropometry.  Cam- 
bridge, 1885. 

Also  W.  S.  Hall.  Changes  in  the  Proportions  of  the  Human  Body  during  the 
Period  of  Growth.     Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  1895. 

*  See  Bilateral  Asymmetry  of  Function.  G.  Stanley  Hall  and  E.  W.  Hartwell. 
Mind,  xxxiii. 

*  Proceedings  of  the  Colorado  Teachers'  Association,  Session  1896. 


126  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

herst  measurements  show  that  the  right  thigh,  calf,  instep, 
upper  arm,  forearm,  breadth  of  shoulders  and  elbow  tip  are  at 
this  time  greater  than  the  left.  These  differences  are  greater 
in  men  than  in  women,  and  the  differentiation  of  the  bilateral 
structure  and  functions  is  accelerated  at  adolescence. 

Dr.  Hrdlicka  ^  found  among  i  ,000  children  that  the  max- 
imal number  of  abnormalities  occurred  at  the  age  of  from 
eight  to  nine,  and  then  distinctly  decreased,  puberty  tending 
to  diminish  them.  Massive  gums  common  in  children  are 
very  rare  after  this  age,  and  the  nose,  which  may  be  low  or 
broad  before,  then  assumes  ordinary  proportions.  The  au- 
thor says:  "All  habit  abnormalities  tend  to  increase  in  pro- 
portion as  we  advance  from  early  childhood.  From  my 
observations  on  adults  and  adolescents  outside  of  the  institu- 
tion, I  think  that  after  the  age  of  fifteen  or  sixteen  these 
abnormalities  tend  again  to  diminish,  a  certain  proportion  of 
them  being  spontaneously  corrected."  Genital  irregularities, 
particularly  adhesion  of  the  prepuce,  diminish  rapidly  after 
puberty. 

Smedley's  Chicago  Report  (No.  2)  shows  that  the  aver- 
age number  of  growth  abnormalities  seen  in  pupils  below 
grade  is  strikingly  more  than  in  those  at  or  above  grade, 
whether  this  difference  be  sought  among  children  of  differ- 
ent standing  in  the  same  school  or  whether  the  comparison  be 
between  the  averages  of  higher  grade  and  those  of  schools  for 
backward  children. 

Dr.  Francis  Warner  suggests  that  the  same  conditions 
that  caused  ill-proportioned  development  of  the  body  may 
also  have  caused  the  tendency  to  ill  balance  of  nerve-centers, 
and  that  even  the  converse  of  this  may  possibly  be  true. 
Overaction  of  the  frontal  muscles,  e.  g.,  may  go  with  cranial 
defect,  and  the  action  of  cause  and  effect  may  work  either 
way  or  indeed  both  ways.  Dr.  Warner  thinks  that  many  of  his 
new  nerve  signs  or  symptoms  go  with  disproportioned 
growth.  If  this  relation  of  past  structure  to  present  func- 
tion be  established,  environment  and  education  should  have 
power  to  control  to  some  extent  the  proportionality  of 
growth,  so  that  even  reversions  may  be  temporary.     Girls, 

'  Special  Report  of  Anthropological  Investigation  on  i,ooo  White  and  Colored 
Children  of  the  New  York  Juvenile  Asylum,  pp.  117-172. 


PARTS  AND  ORGANS  DURING  ADOLESCENCE         127 

although  less  often  abnormal  than  boys,  seem  more  influ- 
enced by  environment  if  they  are  defective.  Disordered 
nerve  states  appear  to  go  with  defective  bodily  structure. 
It  is  a  disadvantage,  again,  to  be  tall,  broad,  and  heavy  if 
the  lungs,  heart,  or  stomach  are  not  proportioned  to  the 
increased  size,  which  imposes  a  strain  upon  them,  and  they 
then  become  more  liable  to  collapse.  If  the  reproductive 
parts  and  all  the  complex  apparatus  connected  with  them, 
which  are  from  their  very  intricacy  so  peculiarly  liable  to 
arrest  by  fatigue,  excitement,  low  diet,  etc.,  are  subnormal, 
race  deterioration  is  certain  no  matter  how  complete  in  other 
respects  individual  development  may  be. 

From  these  data  we  see  that  sexual  maturity  involves 
changed  relations  of  parts  which  for  a  time  lessens  their  coor- 
dination and  unity.  Moreover,  if  we  include  rudimentary  or- 
gans in  our  survey,  we  see  that  many  parts  are  growing  less  and 
vanishing,  especially  in  childhood.  Some  grow  on  into  old 
age,  and  are  even  then  at  least  relatively  young.  Structures 
vary  in  size  more  or  less  independently  of  each  other,  and  the 
warring  equilibrium  of  proportionate  growth  is  more  or  less 
disturbed.  Some  parts  are  arrested  or  decline  while  others 
rapidly  increase.  Some  vary  directly  with  each  other,  some 
inversely.  Such  changes  are  far  more  numerous  and  more 
rapid  in  the  infant,  and  still  more  so  in  the  growth 
of  the  embryo;  but  in  these  respects  they  are  analogous 
in  their  nature,  although  later  growths  are  less  prede- 
termined, rapid,  or  transforming.  At  birth  respiration, 
phonation,  and  a  new  mode  of  alimentation  spring  into 
function.  In  teething  and  weaning,  new  forms  and  qual- 
ities of  food  involve  changes  in  saHvation  and  many  reflex 
disturbances.  So  puberty  is  not  unlike  a  new  birth,  when  the 
lines  of  development  take  new  directions.  The  range  of 
individuality  in  nearly  all  respects — size,  strength,  motion, 
mental  ability,  etc. — is  greatly  increased,  extremes  are 
wider  apart,  and  average  variations  ampler,  as  seen  in  wider 
distributions  among  the  percentile  grades.  This  means 
increased  plasticity  and  docility,  so  that  powers  of  acquisition 
are  increased  and  deepened.  There  is  much  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  the  influence  of  the  environment  in  producing 
acquired    traits   transmissible   by    heredity    is    greatest    now, 


128  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

although  perhaps  the  influence  of  experience  upon  the  germ- 
plasm  may  be  greatest  a  little  later.  Changes  of  ethnic  de- 
velopment best  occur  now,  and  the  point  of  departure  for 
higher  and  more  evolved  forms  is  adolescence  and  not  adult- 
hood, jiist  as  upward  steps  in  the  development  of  the  phylon 
have  not  been  from  the  terminal  types  of  earlier  periods,  but 
have  started  from  stages  farther  back. 

So,  too,  if  the  soul  grows  with  every  part  of  the  body, 
its  development  is  not  continuous,  uniform,  or  propor- 
tionate, but  with  successive  nodes,  the  earlier  stages  ever  a 
little  more  strange  and  alien  to  the  newer,  like  dimly  remem- 
bered past  lives  to  a  transmigrationist.  The  fact  that  coordi- 
nations are  a  little  loosened,  and  that  parts  can  vary  more  inde- 
pendently of  each  other  and  are  freer  from  the  control  of  the 
whole,  make  this  the  age  of  modification  and  plasticity  more 
than  the  few  years  that  precede  or  than  all  those  that  follow. 

It  is  the  age  of  reconstruction,  when  new  determinants 
come  to  the  front  and  also  the  point  of  departure  for  new  lines 
of  development.  It  is  the  age,  too,  when,  if  ever,  previous  tend- 
encies to  abnormality  may  be  overcome  both  by  nature  and 
by  treatment.  The  law  of  nascent  periods,  or  the  age  curve 
of  growth  of  each  organ  or  faculty,  is  one  of  the  first  desider- 
ata of  genetic  psychology ;  how  to  apply  it,  by  what  means  and 
to  what  degree  to  stimulate  each  part  in  its  stage  of  most  and 
least  rapid  growth,  and  how  to  apportion  training  of  mind 
and  body  between  developing  the  powers  that  excel  to  a 
degree  of  specialized  culture  that  corresponds  to  their  hered- 
itary possibilities,  or  educating  the  weakest  parts  and  powers 
in  order  to  improve  proportion  and  symmetry,  is  one  of  the 
chief  problems  of  individual  pedagogy. 


CHAPTER    III 

GROWTH    OF    MOTOR    POWER    AND    FUNCTION 

Educational  value  of  special  study  in  this  field  illustrated — Importance  of  muscle 
culture  for  the  development  of  mind  and  morals,  relations  to  sex,  the  lift  and 
pull — Growth  of  biceps  and  "putting"  power,  pressing  power  of  hands  and 
knees,  leg  strength,  grip  and  grasping,  maximal  rate  of  tapping,  growth  in 
accuracy,  precision  and  inhibition,  right-  and  left-hand  power,  fatigue,  second 
breath,  reaction  time,  reproduction  of  time  intervals,  fundamental  and  acces- 
sory power,  mobility  of  children,  automatic  movements,  their  meaning  and 
repression,  control,  motor  efficiency,  monotony,  motor  degeneration  of  modern 
man,  tendencies  to  motor  revival.  I.  Industrial  training,  monotechnic  and 
trade  schools  and  their  results.  II.  Manual  training,  its  defects,  criticism 
of  sloyd,  arts  and  crafts  movement,  motor  methods  illustrated  by  telegraphy 
and  drawing.  III.  Gymnastics :  (a)  ideal  of  doing  everything  possible  with  the 
body  as  a  machine,  the  movement  of  Jahn  ;  {/>)  ideal  of  volitional  control  ; 
(c)  ideal  of  economy  in  movement ;  (a')  ideal  of  symmetry  ;  calamity  of  rival 
systems,  effects  of  exercise  on  strength,  athletic  records.  IV.  Play  and  sport — 
A  new  theory  corrective  of  Groos,  ancient  Greece,  the  charm  of  play  traced  to 
the  piylon,  the  doll,  number  of  plays  and  games,  team  play  records,  rhythm, 
dancing,  plays  of  conflict,  the  duel,  student  honors,  military  training,  play 
and  sex,  cold  baths  and  swimming,  playgrounds,  regimentation  of  plays  and 
gam«s  and  professionalism,  play  and  work. 

Soon  after  graduating  from  a  college  where  the  chief 
studies  of  the  senior  year  were  under  a  president  who  summed 
up  the  great  questions  of  the  universe  in  a  finishing  way  that 
gave  a  sense  of  finality  unfavorable  to  further  progress,  I 
went  to  Leipzig  to  work  under  the  leading  physiologist  of 
Germany,  full  of  the  conviction  that  the  study  of  the  mind 
could  best  be  approached  through  that  of  the  body.  After 
hearing  my  case,  Professor  Ludwig  suggested  that  I  begin 
by  studying  certain  functions  of  one  of  nearly  a  score  of  the 
muscles — the  gastrocnemius — of  a  frog's  leg.  The  mild  dis- 
sipation of  a  somewhat  too  prolonged  general  culture  and 
a  little  taste  for  easy,  breezy  philosophical  speculation  caused 
at  first  a  strong  sense  of  repugnance  from  so  small  and  mean 

10  I2Q 


130  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

a  theme.  When  it  was  well  under  way,  however,  and  with 
the  daily  and  personal  guidance  of  this  master  in  devising 
methods  of  experiment,  planning  new  instruments  for  record 
and  stimulus,  suggesting  fertile  possibilities,  showing  the  de- 
tails of  all  the  technique,  suggesting  and  placing  in  my  hands 
new  reading,  etc.,  I  found  that  I  must  know  in  a  more  accu- 
rate way  than  before  certain  definite  points  in  electricity, 
which  was  the  agent  of  stimulation ;  in  mechanics,  for  the 
apparatus  was  complex,  and  there  were  possibilities  of 
improvement  and  invention  that  might  open  up  a  new  field 
of  myological  investigation ;  in  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of 
other  tissues  for  comparison;  in  chemistry  in  order  to  judge 
something  of  the  effects  of  the  artificial  blood  for  constancy; 
and  in  mathematics  in  order  to  compute  and  analyze  the  con- 
traction curve  into  its  components  and  to  construct  and  inter- 
pret the  records  and  tables.  As  the  year  progressed  the  history 
of  previous  views  were  studied  and  broader  biological  relations 
were  seen.  When  summer  came  I  packed  a  large  case  of  books 
and  read  with  might  and  main  at  a  little  summer  resort  on 
the  Baltic,  and  began  a  second  year  of  research  upon  this 
muscle  with  the  most  eager  curiosity  and  zest.  I  realized 
that  the  structure  and  laws  of  action  of  muscles  were  the 
same  in  frogs  as  in  men,  that  such  contractile  tissue  was  the 
only  organ  of  the  will  and  had  done  all  man's  work  in  the 
world,  made  civilization,  character,  history,  states,  books,  and 
words.  As  the  work  went  on,  I  felt  that  the  mysteries  not 
only  of  motor  education  and  morality,  but  of  energy  and 
the  universe,  centered  in  this  theme,  from  the  persistent  study 
of  which,  although  in  the  end  I  made  but  an  infinitesimal 
contribution  to  the  vast  body  of  certain  scientific  knowledge 
in  the  world,  I  learned  several  great  lessons,  viz. :  that  any 
object,  however  unattractive,  may  be  a  key  to  the  greatest 
themes;  that  narrow  specialization  is  now  hardly  possible, 
since  evolution  and  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy 
and  comparative  methods  of  study  in  every  field  have  given 
us  again  a  true  universe  instead  of  a  multi verse;  I  understood 
the  meaning  of  a  really  literal  education  and  of  a  special  as  dis- 
tinct from  a  professional  higher  education,  in  a  modern  as  op- 
posed to  a  medieval  sense,  and  I  felt  the  omne  tntit  punctum  of 
nature's  organic  unity  as  a  profound  conviction  that   the 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        131 

world  is  lawful  to  the  core.  In  fine,  in  the  presence  of  this 
tiny  object  I  had  gradually  passed  from  the  attitude  of  Peter 
Bell,  of  whom  the  poet  says  "  a  primrose  by  a  river's  brim 
a  yellow  primrose  was  to  him,  and  it  was  nothing  more,"  up 
to  the  standpoint  of  the  seer  who  plucked  a  '*  flower  from 
the  crannied  wall,"  and  realized  that  could  he  but  know  what 
it  was  "  root  and  all  and  all  in  all,"  he  would  know  what  God 
and  man  is. 

The  muscles  are  by  weight  about  forty-three  per  cent  of  the 
average  adult  male  human  body.  They  expend  a  large  fraction 
of  all  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  adult  body,  which  a  recent  esti- 
mate places  as  high  as  one-fifth.  The  cortical  centers  for  the 
voluntary  muscles  extend  over  most  of  the  lateral  psychic 
zones  of  the  brain,  so  that  their  culture  is  brain  building.  In  a 
sense  they  are  organs  of  digestion,  for  which  function  they 
play  a  very  important  role.  Muscles  ar.e  in  a  most  intimate  and 
peculiar  sense  the  organs  of  the  will.  They  have  built  all 
the  roads,  cities,  and  machines  in  the  world,  written  all  the 
books,  spoken  all  the  words,  and,  in  fact,  done  everything  that 
man  has  accomplished  with  matter.  If  they  are  undeveloped  or 
grow  relaxed  and  flabby,  the  dreadful  chasm  between  good 
intentions  and  their  execution  is  liable  to  appear  and  widen. 
Character  might  be  in  a  sense  defined  as  a  plexus  of  motor 
habits.  To  call  conduct  three- fourths  of  life,  with  Matthew 
Arnold;  to  describe  man  as  one-third  intellect  and  two-thirds 
will,  with  Schopenhauer;  to  urge  that  man  is  what  he  does  or 
that  he  is  the  sum  of  his  movements,  with  F.  W.  Robertson; 
that  character  is  simply  muscle  habits,  with  Maudsley ;  that  the 
age  of  art  is  now  slowly  superseding  the  age  of  science,  and  that 
the  artist  wnll  drive  out  with  the  professor,  with  the  anony- 
mous author  of  "  Rembrandt  als  Erzieher  " ;  that  history  is 
consciously  willed  movements,  with  Bluntschli ;  or  that  we 
could  form  no  conception  of  force  or  energy  in  the  world 
but  for  our  own  muscular  effort;  to  hold  that  most  thought 
involves  change  of  muscle  tension  as  more  or  less  integral 
to  it — all  this  shows  how  we  have  modified  the  antique  Cice- 
ronian conception  viverc  est  cogitari,  to  vivere  est  velle,  and 
gives  us  a  new  sense  of  the  importance  of  muscular  develop- 
ment and  regimen.^ 

*  See  my  Moral  Ed.  and  Will-Training.     Ped.  Sem.,  ii.,  pp.,  72-89. 


132  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Modern  psychology  thus  sees  in  muscles  organs  of  expres- 
sion for  all  efferent  processes.  Beyond  all  their  demonstrable 
functions,  every  change  of  attention  and  of  psychic  states 
generally  plays  upon  them  unconsciously,  modifying  their 
tension  in  subtle  ways  so  that  they  may  be  called  organs  of 
thought  and  feeling  as  well  as  of  will,  in  which  some  now  see 
the  true  Kantian  thing-in-itself  the  real  substance  of  the  world, 
in  the  anthropomorphism  of  force.  Habits  even  determine 
the  deeper  strata  of  belief,  thought  is  repressed  action,  and 
deeds,  not  words,  are  the  language  of  complete  men.  The 
motor  areas  are  closely  related  and  largely  identical  with  the 
psychic,  and  muscle  culture  develops  brain-centers  as  nothing 
else  yet  demonstrably  does.  Muscles  are  the  vehicles  of  ha- 
bituation, imitation,  obedience,  character,  and  even  of  manners 
and  customs.  For  the  young,  motor  education  is  cardinal, 
and  is  now  coming  to  due  recognition,  and  for  all,  education 
is  incomplete  without  a  motor  side.  Skill,  endurance,  and 
perseverance  may  almost  be  called  muscular  virtues,  and 
fatigue,  velleity,  caprice,  ennui,  restlessness,  lack  of  control 
and  poise,  muscular  faults. 

For  men,  as  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,  and  for  animals, 
the  age  of  sexual  maturity  is  marked  by  an  outburst  of  mus- 
cular growth,  and  also  by  great  changes  in  its  direction  and 
distribution.  It  is  the  age  when  males  engage  in  conflicts 
for  females  and  develop  organs  of  combat  and  also  of  pre- 
hension. There  is  a  very  close  and  but  little  understood 
relation  between  sexual  and  motor  vigor,  and  many  new 
notions  and  kinds  of  activity  arise.  The  definite  determina- 
tion of  these  changes  is  a  new  and  very  promising  field  of 
scientific  activity.  We  first  summarize  the  more  important 
measurements  of  the  motor  changes  typical  of  this  age.  Im- 
portant as  these  are.  they  all  leave  much  to  be  desired. 

Most  of  the  common  strength  tests  made  in  gymnasia  are 
hardly  more  available  as  data  for  scientific  measurement 
than  are  athletic  records,  and  yet  from  both,  interesting  and 
valuable  facts  can  be  gathered,  and  there  have  been  a  num- 
ber of  special  studies  of  much  worth. 

Beginning  with  the  lift,  where  the  part  played  by  back, 
legs,  hips,  and  arms  is  not  distinguished,  Quetelet's  table, 
where  both  hands  were  used,  is  as  follows: 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        133 


Age. 


Men. 


Women. 


Annual  Gain. 


Men. 


Women. 


10 
II. 
12, 

13 
14 
15 
16. 

17 
18, 
19. 
20, 
21, 
22, 
23 
25 
27 


45 
48 
52 
63- 
71 
80 

95 
no 
118 
125 
132 
138 
143 
147 
153 
154 


31 

35 
39 
43 
47 
51 
57 
63 
67 
71 
74 
76 
78 
80 
82 
83 


3 

4 

II 

8 

9 

15 

15 

8 

7 
7 
6 

5 
4 
6 
I 


From  this  table  it  appears  that  the  Hfting  power  of  girls 
from  the  ages  of  ten  to  twenty-seven,  while  constantly  increas- 
ing, absolutely  declines  relatively  to  that  of  boys  from  1.4  to 
1 .9 ;  that  this  difference  increases  fastest  from  fifteen  to  eight- 
een, viz.,  from  29  to  51  kilograms.  Both  boys  and  girls  gain 
most  rapidly  at  sixteen  and  seventeen,  but  the  gain  of  boys  is 
more  grouped  about  pubescent  years,  so  that  their  increment 
curve  is  then  greater,  and  also  they  continue  to  gain  longer 
than  girls. 

Marro  found  the  power  to  pull  up  on  the  Regnier  dyna- 
mometer according  to  the  following  table  of  kilograms: 


Age. 


Boys. 


Girls. 


II-I2 
12-13 
13-14 

14-15 
15-16 
16-17 
17-18 
18-19 


56.8 

36.1 

59-8 

35-7 

60.3 

37-4 

64.7 

40.0 

70.0 

46.0 

83.1 

48.0 

105.0 

46.7 

105.0 

50.4 

From  this  table  it  appears  that  from  the  sixteenth  to  the 
eighteenth  years  there  is  a  sudden  gain  in  boys  and  a  less 
marked  access  of  strength  in  girls  in  their  sixteenth  and  nine- 
teenth years. 

Hitchcock  measured  742  Amherst  students  on  entering 


134 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 


college  and  the  same  men  three  and  a  half  years  later  with 
the  following  results: 


Age. 

Number  measured. 

Actual  number  of  units. 

Per  cent  of  gain. 

l6 

30 

134 

244 

153 

73 

49 

27 

12 

13 

7 

1.60 

2.16 

1.48 

1.50        ■ 

1.79 

1.34 

1.25 

1.83 

•15 

.85 
1. 61 

32.28 

33.74 
26.56 
27.69 
20.32 
21.61 

17 

l8 

in 

20 

21 

22 

18.51 
21.88 

21 

24 

.70 

38.51 
26.68 

2K 

Average 

From  this  table  it  appears  that  boys  who  enter  college  at  six- 
teen and  seventeen  gain  most  during  the  course,  but  that 
all  gain  much.  These  results  must  be  connected  with  the 
fact  that  most  of  them  practised  gymnastics  during  their 
course. 

Hitchcock's  averages  for  4,000  Amherst  students'  back 
lift  showed  greatest  gain  at  seventeen  and  eighteen,  with  no 
gain  but  slight  loss  from  sixteen  to  seventeen,  and  reduced 
gain  at  twenty-one,  a  sharp  rise  at  twenty-two,  and  no 
increase  from  twenty-three  to  twenty-six.  From  seventeen 
to  twenty-three  the  average  gain  runs  from  128  to  156.2 
kilograms.  Moon  found  the  greatest  increase  of  strength 
of  back  from  fifteen  to  sixteen  (91  to  102  kilograms,  when  his 
table  ends),  and  next  most  from  fourteen  to  fifteen  (82  to  91 
kilograms).  With  Erismann,^  the  lifting  power  of  arms  and 
back,  beginning  with  82  at  fourteen,  reached  136  at  nine- 
teen, and  then  increased  more  slowly  to  a  maximum  of  151 
at  thirty-three,  some  eight  or  nine  years  later  than  the  max- 
imal clinching  power.  The  greatest  rate  of  gain  was  in  the 
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  years,  and  he  thought  strength 
generally  increases  fastest  between  fifteen  and  nineteen,  but 
continues  to  gain  at  a  diminishing  rate  to  a  maximum  at 
from  twenty-four  to  thirty-five,  and  then  declines.  Venn 
thought  his  pull,  which  was  in  large  part  a  back  movement, 
reached  the  maximum  at  twenty-three.     Several  observers 

*  Ueber  die  Korperliche  Ent  n-ickelung  der  Fabrikarbeiter  in  Zentralrussland. 
Tubingen,  1889. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        135 


have  expressed  the  opinion  that  for  a  time  muscles  of  hips 
and  back  are  not  exceeded  in  growth  rate  by  any  others, 
whether  measured  by  girth  or  strength. 

The  strength  of  the  upper  arms  in  the  biceps  region  is 
remarkably  augmented.  According  to  Moon,  at  sixteen  it 
is  nearly  fivefold  what  it  is  at  eleven,  and  nearly  doubles  from 
fifteen  to  sixteen,  increasing  but  very  little  from  thirteen  to 
fourteen.  Hastings's  measurements  of  5,476  children  are  as 
follows: 


Age. 


5 
6 

7 

8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 


Strength  of  forearm,  r. 

Strength  of  forearm,  1. 

Kilos. 

Kilos. 

4.89 

4.72 

6.98 

5-70 

9.18 

8.53 

10.63 

9-53 

13.14 

11.77 

14.74 

14.06 

18.02 

16. II 

19.68 

18.44 

22.59 

20.49 

25-37 

23.05 

28.85 

24.68 

33-31 

29.64 

According  to  the  Amherst  tables,  while  strength  in  this  part 
does  not  gain  very  rapidly  after  sixteen,  it  gains  rather  steadily 
to  twenty-two.  From  sixteen  to  seventeen  the  forearm  at  Am- 
herst is  gaining  on  the  upper  arm,  and  reaches  the  highest  point 
at  twenty-three,  suggesting  that  its  period  of  strength  incre- 
ment may  be  a  little  later  than  the  biceps,  especially  if  we 
compare  it  with  Moon's  tables.  The  power  to  pull  the  body 
up  at  Amherst  increased  fastest  from  seventeen  to  eighteen, 
with  years  of  low  gain  and  often  loss  intervening,  and  reach- 
ing its  maximum  at  twenty-three,  as  did  dip.  The  latter 
increased  by  far  the  most  rapidly  from  eighteen  to  nineteen, 
when  pull  not  only  did  not  increase,  but  fell  off.  It  gained 
from  twenty-one  to  twenty-two.  There  was  also  a  year  of  loss 
in  power  to  pull  up. 

Basing  on  the  weight  and  the  distance  and  height  to 
which  it  was  thrown,  Vierordt  computed  the  expenditure  in 
"  putting  "  for  different  ages,  and  found  a  great  increase  from 
the  ages  "of  ten  to  eighteen.  This  was  both  percentile  and 
absolute  for  each  two-year  period.    Roberts,  Porter,  and  Gil- 


136  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

bert  have  tested  wrist  and  arm  lifts  from  six  and  a  half  to 
nineteen  years.  From  these  researches  the  very  significant 
result  is  reached  that  boys  acquire  about  one-half  of  their 
sixteen-year-old  strength  after  eleven. 

Gilbert  tested  about  fifty  boys  and  fifty  girls  from  six  to 
nineteen  in  lifting  from  the  wrist,  and  found  that  from  six 
to  ten  this  ability  nearly  doubled  in  both  sexes.  From  ten 
to  nineteen  it  increased  nearly  threefold  in  boys  and  nearly 
twofold  in  girls.  From  fourteen  to  seventeen  it  nearly 
doubled  in  boys.  The  lifting  power  of  the  arm  was,  of  course, 
far  greater  ( 171.9  kilograms  :  2^  kilograms  boys  at  nineteen), 
but  here  also  boys  exceeded  girls  at  all  ages,  and  at  nineteen, 
as  with  the  wrist,  they  lifted  nearly  twice  the  weight  girls 
could.  The  mean  variations  increased  most  during  the  period 
of  most  rapid  growth. 

With  the  dynamometer,  Kotelmann  ^  found  that  the 
power  of  the  hands  to  press  together  against  each  other  was 
nearly  twice  that  of  the  arms  to  pull  apart  in  a  horizontal 
direction ;  that  the  former  increased  relatively  to  the  latter 
to  fourteen,  and  from  that  age  to  twenty-one  suffered  rela- 
tive but  irregular  decline.  In  both  respects,  "  puberty  is  a 
marked  turning-point."  The  pulling  power  of  the  arms  rose 
steadily  to  fourteen,  and  then  showed  a  great  and  sudden 
augment,  and  thereafter  increased  at  a  constantly  slower  rate 
to  twenty-one.  The  same  was  true  of  this  increment  rela- 
tively. The  muscles  of  the  upper  arm  gain  in  strength  more 
each  year  than  does  their  girth,  so  that  if  the  girth  did  not 
gain,  this  increase  in  power  would  be  more  each  year  up  to 
twenty-one.  At  first  the  power  of  the  arms  to  press  together 
is  nearly  twice  this  power  to  pull,  but  the  latter  increases 
faster,  so  that  at  twenty-one  the  two  are  nearly  equal.  The 
clinching  power  of  the  hands  is  at  all  ages  greater  than  the 
pressing  power  of  the  arms,  and  from  ten  to  twenty-one  the 
former  gains  upon  the  latter  till  at  twenty-one  it  is  one  and 
three-fifths  times  greater. 

Passing  to  the  lifting  strength  of  legs,  Moon  found  that 
from  eleven  to  sixteen  boys  increased  from  125  to  213  kilo- 
grams, the  greatest  gain  being  at  the  thirteenth,  fifteenth, 
and  fourteenth  years  of  29,  24,  and  23  kilograms  respectively, 
*  Die  Korperverhaltnisse  der  Gelehrtenschule.     Berlin,  1879. 


GROWTH    OF   MOTOR    POWER   AND    FUNCTION        137 

as  against  1 1  kilograms  in  the  twelfth  year.  The  Amherst 
tables  show  greatest  average  gain  at  eighteen,  with  another 
distinct  increment  at  twenty-one  and  twenty-two,  with  de- 
cline after  twenty-three.  Vierordt,  basing  on  Ouetelet's 
tables  of  weight  and  the  highest  average  leap  for  boys  each 
age  from  ten  to  eighteen,  calculated  the  amount  of  impulse 
or  leg  force  for  each  two-year  period.  Beginning  at  ten  to 
twelve  with  25.61  kilometers,  at  twelve  to  fourteen  it  was 
36.92;  at  fourteen  to  sixteen,  52.41;  at  sixteen  to  eighteen 
it  was  72.67,  showing  marked  absolute  and  some  percentile 
gain.  Moon  found  a  marked  increase  between  twelve  and  thir- 
teen corresponding  with  the  growth  of  muscle  girth,  but  so 
much  greater  than  the  latter  as  to  suggest  that  the  nerve- 
centers  controlling  these  muscles  were  developing  faster  than 
the  muscles  themselves.  The  increase  in  the  strength  of 
the  legs  is  so  rapid  for  Moon's  boys  that  at  fourteen  and  fif- 
teen it  surpasses  that  of  men.  The  will  is  perhaps  unable 
to  excite  the  maximal  contractive  power  of  the  muscles. 
Rivalry  was  found  a  potent  stimulus  in  making  these  tests. 

By  placing  a  dynamometer  between  the  knees,  Kotel- 
mann  ^  measured  the  power  to  press  them  together.  He 
found  that  the  pressure  power  of  the  thighs  shows  a  pubertal 
increment  that  becomes  annually  greater  till  the  age  of  fif- 
teen, and  is  then  less,  this  increment  being  both  relative  and 
absolute.  This  increase  is  greater  each  succeeding  year 
compared  to  the  circumference  of  the  thighs.  The  right 
adductors  are  slightly  stronger  than  the  left.  In  general,  he 
found  that  the  older  the  pupil  the  more  the  muscular  develop- 
ment of  the  lower  lagged  behind  that  of  the  upper  extremi- 
ties. Sedentary  life  also  gave  the  muscles  of  the  leg  less 
contractibility  than  that  of  the  arms.  The  strength  of  the 
latter  increased  relatively  to  arm  girth,  while  that  of  the  legs 
declined.  Both  leg  girth  and  power  showed  distinct  puber- 
al acceleration. 

Vierordt  doubts  Kotelmann's  conclusion  that  strength 
increases  for  a  time  faster  than  cross-section,  falling  back  on 
the  old  law  of  their  proportionality  by  Weber  and  even  Bo- 

*  Die  Korperverhaltnisse  der  Gelehrtenschiiler  des  Johanneums  in  Hamburg, 
von  Dr.  Med.  u.  Philos.  L.  Kotelmann.  Zeitschrift  des  koniglich.  preus.  statis- 
tis.  Bureau,  1879. 


138  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

relli.  He  fails  to  recognize  that  a  law  true  of  the  excerpted 
muscle  under  artificial  stimulus  can  not  be  applied  to  mus- 
cles in  normal  connection  with  the  nervous  system,  and  that 
the  independent  increase  in  the  disposable  energy  of  the 
latter  might  account  for  Kotelmann's  increase  if  it  be  real. 
Dr.  Gulick,  a  leading  authority  on  physical  training,  informs 
me  that  near  the  dawn  of  puberty  there  is  a  distinct  decline 
in  the  power  to  climb  and  hang  and  otherwise  move  the  body 
by  the  use  of  the  hands.  This  comports  well  with  the  slow 
development  of  strength  at  the  dawn  of  puberty  just  before 
the  often  sudden  increment.  This  latter  Bierent  thinks 
directly  due  to  the  development  and  retention  of  seminal 
fluid.  Amherst  statistics  show  that  tall  students  are  best  in 
the  use  of  back,  legs,  and  forearm,  and  short  ones  in  lung 
power,  dip,  and  pull  up. 

As  far  as  any  inferences  can  be  based  on  these  not  entirely 
harmonious  data,  it  appears  that  lifting  power  increases  on 
the  average  fastest  at  sixteen,  but  hardly  less  rapidly  at  fif- 
teen and  seventeen,  and  reaches  a  maximum  at  twenty-three 
or  twenty-four,  with  a  decline  in  the  rate  of  augmentation  in 
the  later  teens.  Biceps  power  also  increases,  fastest  at  fifteen 
or  sixteen,  and  power  to  pull  the  weight  of  the  body  up 
increases  fastest  a  little  later,  from  seventeen  to  eighteen, 
power  in  forearm  having  its  fastest  increment  later  than 
biceps,  and  dip  later  than  pull,  as  power  of  the  arms  to  pull 
apart  comes  later  than  the  power  to  press  together.  Wrist 
power  augments  very  fast,  about  doubling  from  six  to  ten, 
and  nearly  doubles  again  from  fourteen  to  seventeen,  pull 
up,  dip,  and  forearm  reaching  a  maximum  at  about  twenty- 
three,  or  soon  after.  If  Moon  can  be  relied  on.  there  is  an 
almost  explosive  growth  of  leg  power  from  thirteen  to  fif- 
teen, and  the  Amherst  records  suggest  another  marked  aug- 
mentation at  eighteen.  All  these  directions  of  growth,  per- 
haps especially  that  of  leg  power,  seem  not  constant,  but  in 
periods  of  augmentation  and  diminution.  Leg  power  seems 
to  come  first,  then  biceps  and  back,  with  forearm  and  power 
to  repel  later,  and  twenty-three  is  suggested  as  a  culminating 
age.  These  inferences,  however,  are  insecure.  How  this 
almost  fulminating  growth  of  leg  and  biceps  power  is  related 
to  phyletic  flight,  pursuit,  modes  of  conflict,  or  sexual  selec- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        139 

tion,  is  a  suggestive  but  tantalizing  and  at  present  unsolv- 
able  problem.  The  rapid  growth  of  locomotive  organs  sug- 
gests early  migrations,  and  its  selective  advantages  are 
conceivably  manifold,  and  leg  power  is,  as  we  shall  see,  very 
closely  connected  with  sex.  If  sedentary  life  tends  now  to 
arrest  its  normal  later  development,  its  nascent  period  should 
be  more  utilized.  That  the  power  of  pulling  up  the  body  and 
of  otherwise  moving  it  by  the  arms  lags  behind  the  growth 
of  weight  suggests  that  at  this  age,  at  least,  the  phyletic  influ- 
ence of  anthropoid  arboreal  life  has  ceased,  or  perhaps  has  been 
surpassed  by  more  rapid  growth  of  weight,  while  the  sudden 
biceps  increment  suggests  manifold  possible  inferences  to 
prehistoric  acts  and  occupations  at  this  stage  of  development. 
That  such  inferences  are  now  little  more  than  conjectural 
is  freely  admitted.  At  best  they  are  only  suggestive.  But  if 
facts  in  both  the  history  of  the  development  of  the  race  and 
in  that  of  the  individual  have  their  chief  value  as  those  of  one 
series  shed  light  on  those  of  the  others,  suggestiveness  even 
has  an  illustrative  value,  because  present  studies  in  psycho- 
genesis  indicate  not  only  that  this  interval  will  be  bridged, 
but  that  the  arches  that  span  it  will  some  time  bear  a  heavy 
traflfic  of  scientific  work  and  thought  when  they  become  the 
foundation  of  educational  philosophy  and  practise. 

The  power  of  the  hand  to  grip  or  squeeze  is  an  interest- 
ing and  significant  measurement.  The  infant,  like  the  ape, 
grasps  with  the  fingers  acting  together,  pressing  inward  upon 
the  palm.  The  young  child  seizes  a  water  glass,  e.  g.,  by 
inserting  all  the  lingers  in  the  glass  and  squeezing  it  against 
the  palm,  the  root  of  the  thumb  remaining  outside  and  use- 
less, and  in  climbing  anthropoids  use  the  hand  as  a  hook. 
Slowly  and  relatively  late  in  the  child  and  the  race  is  the 
thumb  opposed.  The  dynamometer  measures,  although  in 
part  only,  its  power  of  acting  against  the  fingers.  This  power, 
although  well  developed  before,  undergoes  its  most  rapid 
acceleration  in  the  teens.  This,  all  tests  show,  although  they 
differ  from  each  other  in  many  details.  In  Quetelet's  table 
the  greatest  annual  increase  for  boys'  right  hand  is  from 
fourteen  to  fifteen,  and  the  next  greatest  increase  is  the  year  be- 
fore and  the  year  after,  but  w'ith  a  continued  but  diminishing 


140 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 


rate  of  increase  to  thirty.  Kotelmann's  table  ends  at  fourteen, 
but  the  greatest  increase  is  the  last  year  shown.  Pagliani  * 
found  the  greatest  increase  from  thirteen  to  fourteen  years,  but 
with  marked  annual  increment  to  nineteen,  when  his  table 
ends.  Porter  found  the  maximal  increase  from  fourteen  to 
sixteen.  Chicago  boys  increased  most  rapidly  from  fourteen 
to  sixteen,  but  continued  to  increase  to  twenty-one.  Grigo- 
rescu,^  in  testing  ten  boys  of  each  age,  found  that  from  ten 
to  thirteen  strength  of  grip  increased  only  from  42  to  48 
pounds,  but  that  at  fourteen  it  ran  up  to  59,  and  at  fifteen  to 
72.  Venn  ^  found  that  the  mean  squeeze  of  the  two  hands 
increased  from  nineteen  to  twenty-four  only  from  82  to  87.3 
pounds,  and  thought  that  the  power  to  both  squeeze  and  to 
pull  reached  its  maximum  at  about  twenty-three  to  twenty- 
four,  and  then  slowly  declined.  Erismann,*  in  testing  4,642 
factory  workmen  of  different  ages  in  central  Russia,  found 
grip  to  increase  in  form  most  rapidly  at  sixteen  and  seven- 
teen. After  nineteen  it  increased  more  slowly  to  a  maximum 
at  twenty-four  to  twenty-five,  and  then  slowly  declined, 
so  that  at  the  age  of  fifty-eight  it  equaled  the  strength  of 
eighteen. 


Age. 


16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21  . 

22 

23 

24 

25 

Average 


Grip. 


Numbers. 

Actual  in  kilos. 

Per  cent. 

30 

6.23 

21.23 

134 

6.50 

10.80 

244 

5-74 

15-53 

153 

5-32 

14-77 

73 

4.72 

14.24 

49 

5-29 

13-15 

27 

5-33 

14.30 

12 

7-37 

18.82 

13 

.50 

1-73 

7 

3-42 

g.2o 

5.62 

15-77 

'  Sopra  Alcuni  Fattori  dello  Sviluppo  Umana.     Turin,  1876,  p.  54. 

*  Zeits.  f.  Schulgesundheitspflege,  1892,  p.  127.     See  also  Compte  Rendu  de  la 
Society  de  Biologic,  July  4,  1891. 

'  Cambridge  Anthropology.     Journal   of  Anthropology  Institute,  November, 
1888,  p.  151. 

*  Untersuchungen    uber    die    Korperlehre    Entwickelungen    des    Russischen 
Arbeites,  1889,  p.  94. 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION   HI 

Erismann  sums  up  by  saying  that  in  general  the  most  rapid 
development  of  physical  power  occurs  between  the  ages 
of  fifteen  and  nineteen.  From  nineteen  on  the  increase  is 
slower,  and  twenty-six  seems  to  be  a  stationary  period. 
The  maximum  of  greatest  possible  development  of  energy 
occurs  from  twenty-four  to  thirty-five;  the  maximum  of  lift- 
ing power  comes  a  little  later  than  that  of  the  power  to 
squeeze  with  the  hands  and  also  lasts  longer.  After  thirty- 
five  there  is  a  gradual  decline,  which  should  not  be  marked 
before  fifty.  Although  there  is  a  remarkable  coincidence 
between  growth  in  weight  and  the  pressure  power  of  the 
hands,  this  parallelism  is  somewhat  disturbed  after  eighteen, 
pressure  power  growing  fastest,  while  from  fourteen  to  eight- 
een weight  increases  fastest.  Lifting  power  is  far  greater, 
and  is  in  general  related  to  power  to  squeeze  as  2|  to  i. 

In  general,  we  can  say  that  boys  almost  double  their 
eleven-year-old  strength  of  dynamometer  grip  by  the  time 
they  are  sixteen.  This  is  nearly  the  case  with  girls.  Neither 
will  ever  double  again,  but  boys  will  more  than  treble  their 
eleven-year-old  strength  and  girls  will  not.  Erismann  found 
a  remarkable  parallelism  between  increment  in  squeezing 
strength  and  in  weight,  except  between  fourteen  and  eight- 
een, when  the  former  fell  behind.  Porter  also  noted  this 
coincidence.  Kline  ^  concluded  that  the  available  power  of 
a  sudden  squeeze  was  in  proportion  to  the  habitual  vigor  and 
energy  of  mental  power  and  activity.  Fere  ^  thought  that  the 
educated  and  intelligent  classes  excelled  the  lower  classes 
in  this  respect,  even  though  the  latter  be  muscle  workers. 
It  is  now  pretty  well  established  that  civilized  man  has  greater 
strength  of  hand  as  tested  thus  than  savages,  and  that  adult 
men  excel  women  by  about  one-third.  If  we  compare  num- 
bers and  methods  there  are  indications  that  somewhat  favor 
fifteen  as  the  year  of  fastest  growth,  with  fourteen  and  then 
sixteen  as  ages  of  next  fastest  increment.  After  this  wave 
there  is  a  period  of  less  rapid  augmentation,  with  probably 
another  lesser  wave  of  increased  rate  in  the  very  early  twen- 
ties. The  first  period  of  increment  seems  to  come  later  in 
the  laboring  classes,  if  Erismann's  figures  are  typical.      Per- 

>  Ped.  Sem.,  Jan.,  1898. 

•  Rev.  Philos.,vol.  xli,  p.  623. 


14^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

haps  grip  precedes  biceps.  This  would  indicate  greater  power 
to  cHng  and  hang  than  to  move  about,  as  Robinson  found 
in  very  young  infants,  where  this  power  may  be  surprisingly 
developed.  Grip  is  perhaps  the  most  generalized  form  of 
hand  power,  and  the  phyletic  correlate  of  its  pubescent  incre- 
ment is  probably  without  suggestion  of  arboreal  life,  but 
reminiscent  of  the  later  development  of  hand  power  in  the 
race.  The  words  grasp,  apprehend,  comprehend,  etc.,  in  their 
etymologies  suggest  the  close  relation  between  mental  and 
manual  ability,  and  remind  us  of  Huxley's  statement  that 
man  excels  the  higher  anthropoids  no  more  in  varied  powers 
of  mind  than  he  does  in  those  of  the  hand. 

The  greatest  number  of  taps  that  can  be  made  in  a  given 
brief  time  interval  is  an  important  determination  for  the  de- 
velopment of  accessory  muscular  control.  The  time  between 
two  successive  taps  in  such  a  series  is  from  four  to  six  times 
greater  than  between  successive  vibrations  that  the  ear  can 
distinguish  before  sound-waves  fuse  into  a  note  or  than 
the  successive  impulses  that  cause  a  tetanic  muscular  con- 
traction, and  comes  nearer  that  of  a  simple  reaction  time. 
This  measurement  is  very  important,  and  marks  one  of  the 
factors  of  motor  ability.  Not  only  for  children,  but  even  for 
adults  further  tests  are  greatly  needed.  How  rapidly  two 
like  simple  volitional  contractions  can  follow  each  other  is 
perhaps  the  best  index  we  have  of  will  time,  and  is  not  much 
behind  the  rate  of  most  rapid  clear  articulation  of  successive 
syllables.  The  maximal  adult  rate  of  wagging  the  forefin- 
ger does  not  vary  much  from  that  of  trotting  the  leg,  whis- 
pering the  sounds  t  and  k,  vibrating  the  head  or  lower  jaw, 
but  none  of  them  have  been  tested  for  children. 

The  best  determination  of  maximal  tapping  rate  at  differ- 
ent ages  yet  made  is  that  of  Bryan. ^  This  he  sought  to  as- 
certain for  each  of  the  six  joints  from  finger-tip  to  shoulder, 
clamping  the  other  joints  in  each  test.  He  found  that  rate  in- 
creased almost  steadily  from  the  age  of  six  to  sixteen  in  boys, 
but  that  for  girls  there  was  a  falling  ofif  at  fourteen  or  fifteen, 
with  indication  of  a  subsequent  rise.     The  shoulder  was  the 

•  On  the  Development  of  Voluntary  Motor  Ability.     American  Journal  of  Psy. 
chology,  Nov.,  1892. 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION   HJ 

slowest  joint  for  all  ages  after  seven.  At  six  elbow  and  wrist 
were  both  decidedly  ahead  of  both  shoulder  and  finger,  the 
chief  tests  of  which  latter  were  made  with  the  knuckle-joint. 
At  sixteen  the  finger  had  overtaken  the  fastest  joint,  while 
the  shoulder  had  not,  suggesting  advance  of  this  power  down 
the  arms  with  advancing  age.  The  central  or  fundamental 
movements  of  the  shoulder  matured  earlier  than  the  more 
accessory  wrist.  The  lowest  mean  rate  was  17.5  taps  in  five 
seconds  in  shoulders  of  girls  at  the  age  of  six,  and  the  fastest 
was  at  the  age  of  sixteen  in  the  right  wrist  of  boys,  viz.,  35.9. 
The  rate  of  the  shoulder  increases  most  slowly,  of  the  elbow 
slightly  faster,  and  that  of  the  wrist  and  fingers  yet  more  rap- 
idly. At  six  the  finger-joint  in  boys  is  slowest,  but  at  sixteen  it 
has  surpassed  the  elbow.  Wrist  and  finger  movements  do  not 
grow  much  ahead  of  those  of  the  shoulder  till  the  eleventh 
year,  when  they  develop  at  a  rate  relatively  much  faster. 

Puberty  thus  seems  to  mark  the  chief  stage  of  nascency 
for  increased  rate  of  this  finger  movement,  a  point  of  great 
and  obvious  importance  for  many  kinds  of  hand  training. 
There  is  some  indication  that  this  development  is  not  con- 
tinuous, but  that  years  of  rapid  growth  are  interspersed  with 
years  of  slow  growth.  This  is  also  suggested  in  Gilbert's  ^  re- 
sults. He  found,  in  testing  the  greatest  number  of  taps  that 
could  be  made  in  five  seconds,  that  from  the  ages  of  six  to  nine 
girls  excelled,  but  for  the  next  ten  years  boys  surpassed  them, 
most  so  from  fourteen  to  fifteen.  During  the  whole  period  of 
thirteen  years,  boys  increased  from  22  to  36.7  taps.  The  mean 
variation  was  greatest  for  girls  at  ten  and  for  boys  at  thir- 
teen, and  there  was  great  difference  in  fatigue.  In  his  New 
Haven  ^  studies,  he  found  that  there  was  a  steady  increase 
of  both  sexes  to  twelve;  then  a  year  of  decline  for  boys  and 
two  for  girls;  after  which  there  was  a  steady  increase  of  the 
greatest  number  of  taps  per  second  to  sixteen  for  girls  and 
seventeen  for  boys. 

In  Chicago  from  thirty  to  fifty  children  of  each  sex  and  of 
each  age  from  eight  to  eighteen  tapped  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible for  thirty  seconds,  and  it  was  found  that  for  every  age 

'  Studies  in  Psychology.     Univ.  of  Iowa,  1897. 

*  Researches  on  the  Mental  and  Physical  Development  of  School   Children. 
Studies  from  the  Yale  Psy.  Lab.  vol.  ii. 


144  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

except  eleven,  girls  were  slightly  inferior  in  rate  to  boys. 
Boys'  greatest  increment  was  in  the  thirteenth  year,  while 
the  tenth,  thirteenth,  and  fifteenth  were  also  years  of  rapid 
gain.  The  continuity  of  development  seemed  to  be  slightly 
more  constant  with  girls. 

That  there  is  a  more  rapid  increase  in  this  power  at  or 
near  adolescent  years  seems  clear,  but  it  is  also  undoubted 
that  this  power  increases  rapidly  before  puberty,  and  per- 
haps it  would  be  found  to  increase  fastest  earlier  yet.  Much 
depends  upon  the  length  of  time  the  tapping  is  continued, 
and  this  effort  is  intense  and  always  very  rapidly  fatiguing, 
especially  for  the  young,  in  whom  it  would  probably  be  found 
that  tapping  for  two,  five,  ten,  and  twenty  seconds  would 
show  a  rate  greatly  reduced  as  the  periods  lengthen.  From 
available  data  it  would  seem  that  this  pubertal  increment  is 
much  less  than  for  grasping,  but  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that 
the  latter  may  have  had  greatly  increased  value  at  this  age 
in  phyletic  development,  but  this  is  not  so  apparent  for  tap- 
ping. To  infer  from  this  movement  ancient  modes  of  pad- 
dling, scratching,  digging,  or  masturbation,  as  one  writer 
suggests,  etc.,  may  seem  to  some  a  hazardous  conjecture, 
but  perhaps  hardly  more  so,  when  the  factor  of  thumb  opposi- 
tion is  considered,  than  to  see  in  grasping  a  survival  and 
development  of  a  power  so  highly  unfolded  in  arboreal  life. 
It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  complete  as  they  are 
both  are  elemental  movements  when  compared  with  all  the 
manifold  activities  into  which  they  enter  in  all  the  historic 
stages  of  human  life. 

Accuracy  of  movement  is  a  very  different  function  and 
marks  the  volitional  control  of  the  will,  and  the  inhibition  of 
irrelevant  spontaneous,  reflex,  or  automatic  movements.  It 
involves  conscious  effort  and  attention.  The  same  motions 
performed  with  precision  by  the  lower  reflex  centers  are  often 
at  first  performed  very  imperfectly  by  the  higher  conscious  and 
self-directed  powers.  Exactness  is  one  of  the  chief  products 
of  skill  and  practise,  and  is  probably  more  indicative  of  men- 
tal development  than  the  preceding  kinds  of  muscular  action. 
Motor  education  here  is  most  liable  to  cause  the  evils  of  pre- 
cocity, and  fatigue  has  special  dangers. 


GROWTH   OF  MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        1 45 

Many  methods  have  been  devised  for  testing  muscular 
control  and  precision  of  movement  in  adults,  but  we  have 
as  yet  few  studies  which  follow  the  changes  in  these  respects 
up  the  school  grades.  The  ataxiagraph,  in  which  a  pen 
attached  to  the  head  writes  on  a  frictionless  horizontal  plate 
above  the  involuntary  swayings  of  the  body  standing,  showed, 
according  to  Hancock,^  a  marked  increase  of  steadiness  from 
the  age  of  five  to  seven,  but  even  at  the  latter  age,  despite 
the  shortness  of  the  body  of  children,  it  was  greater  both  later- 
ally and  vertically  than  Bullard  and  Brackett,^  or  Hinsdale  ^ 
found  with  adults.  The  automatograph,  which  consists  of 
two  glass  plates  with  marbles  between  them  so  that  the  upper 
plate  moves  without  friction  and  writes  unconscious  move- 
ments when  the  hand  is  placed  on  it,  showed  a  marked  gain 
between  five  and  seven  in  ability  to  hold  the  hand  still,  but  at 
the  latter  age  these  movements  were  several  fold  greater 
than  with  adults.  The  tremograph,  a  thimble  attached  to  a 
pivoted  lever  moving  freely  in  all  directions,  showed  that 
children  could  not  hold  the  index-linger  still  for  half  a  min- 
ute, and  that  in  this  kind  of  control,  although  there  was  much 
gain  from  five  to  seven,  they  were  at  the  latter  age  still  fur- 
ther behind  adults.  Hancock's  conclusions  were  that  by 
young  children  "  fine  and  completed  movements  are  made  with 
difficulty.  Efforts  to  keep  quiet  produced  strong  symptoms 
of  nervous  irritation.  Movement  is  inhibited  only  in  part, 
and  awkward  swayings  and  twitchings  result.  Children  in 
normal  healthy  growth  show  a  lack  of  coordination  and  con- 
trol paralleled  only  by  ataxic,  choreic,  and  paralytic  patients." 
Girls  were  steadier  than  boys  before  puberty,  the  left  hand 
less  than  the  right,  and  the  ring-finger  less  than  the  others. 

In  testing  the  influence  of  voluntary  inhibition  by  an  ap- 
paratus in  which  a  hammer  threatened  to  strike  the  eye,  but 
was  arrested  just  in  front  of  it  by  a  glass.  Partridge  "*  counted 
in  583  boys  and  557  girls  from  the  ages  of  five  to  fifteen  the 
number  of  winks  necessary  before  such  control  was  gained  as 

'  A  Study  of  Motor  Ability.     Ped.  Sem.,  vol.  iii,  1894. 
'  Boston  Med.  and  Surg.  Journal,  vols,  i  and  ii  of  1888. 
'  The  Stature  of  Man.     Oregon  Med.  Journal,  vol.  xciii. 

*  Experiments  upon  the  Control  of  the  Reflex  Wink.    Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  Jan., 
1900,  vol.  xi,  pp.  246  and  247. 
11 


146  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

entirely  inhibited  the  reflex  wink.  He  found  that  this  was 
reach  much  sooner  by  boys  than  girls,  but  his  tables  showed 
in  general  a  marked  diminution  with  the  boys  from  eleven  or 
twelve  onward  in  the  number  of  trials  before  complete  control, 
indicating  the  increased  dominance  of  volition  over  reflex  im- 
pulses at  this  age. 

Precision  of  movement  may  be  measured  as  to  force,  as 
in  holding  a  weight  or  pressing  a  dynamometer  steadily  so 
as  to  maintain  a  constant  muscular  tension,  or  as  to  direc- 
tion, as  in  making  regular  movements,  as  in  drawing  a  straight 
line,  or  writing  in  ink  of  one  color  over  letters  in  another, 
etc.  The  best  tests  with  regard  to  age  have  so  far  been 
made  only  in  the  latter  class.  This  is  unfortunate  when  we 
consider  the  great  importance  of  accuracy,  the  many  devices 
which  have  been  applied  to  adults,  and  the  ease  with  which 
these  and  other  methods  might  be  used  for  the  study  of  the 
young. 

Kinesthetic  sensation,  and  delicacy  of  touch  and  perhaps 
of  eye,  are  closely  connected  with  precision  of  movement. 
Gilbert,^  on  averaging  results  of  one  hundred  children  for  each 
age  from  seven  to  seventeen,  found  that  lifted  weights  were  dis- 
tinguished more  finely  and  with  a  nearly  steady  increase  of 
accuracy  in  judgment  with  increasing  age,  and  that  at  thir- 
teen for  girls  and  fourteen  for  boys  this  discrimination  reached 
its  highest  point ;  that  it  fell  off  at  fifteen  and  sixteen ;  and  was 
slowly  increasing  at  seventeen,  but  had  not  regained  for 
either  sex  its  maximal  sensitiveness. 

Bryan  ^  applied  two  tests  which  gave  significant  results. 
Children  placed  a  metallic  stylus  in  the  open  arms  of  a  plat- 
inum V-shaped  figure  forming  an  acute  angle  of  2.2^  de- 
grees and  sought  to  bring  the  point  to  the  apex  of  the  V 
without  contact  with  the  arms,  failure  to  do  so  being  elec- 
trically recorded.  These  writing  movements  were  made  up, 
down,  and  with  both  hands.  In  all  cases,  as  the  apex  was 
approached  and  the  task  became  harder,  the  absolute 
number  of  errors  increased,  but  fewer  errors  in  proportion  to 

*  Researches  in  the  Mental  and  Physical  Development  of  School  Children. 
Studies  from  Yale  Psy.  Lab.,  vol.  ii. 

'  On  the  Development  of  Voluntary  Motor  Ability.  American  Journal  of  Psy* 
chology,  Nov.,  1892. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        147 

the  space  were  made.  The  most  striking  result  was  the  great 
rate  of  gain  between  the  ages  of  six  and  eight  and  the  rela- 
tively slight  gain  in  early  pubescence.  Curiously,  too,  in 
these  tests  the  average  superiority  of  the  right  hand  over 
the  left  was  greatest  at  six  and  eight,  and  rather  steadily  de- 
clined up  to  sixteen. 

Bryan's  second  test  for  accuracy  was  a  modified  clinical 
test  for  ataxia,  viz.,  putting  a  sharp  metallic  point  in  a  small 
hole  several  times  without  touching  the  edge.  Here  the  gain 
betw^een  six  and  eight  was  less  striking,  the  mean  deviations 
were  larger,  and  the  decrease  in  their  absolute  size  between 
six  and  sixteen  was  much  greater  than  in  the  V  movements. 

From  both  tests  it  appeared  that  accuracy  improved 
much  faster  during  the  first  two  or  three  years  after  the  age  of 
six  than  later.  This  was  especially  true  of  the  right  hand.  Al- 
though the  right  hand  is  superior,  the  left  improves  between  six 
and  sixteen  by  a  greater  absolute  amount.  This  is  true  for 
both  sexes,  and  there  was  slight  difTference  between  the  sexes. 
That  nearly  half  the  gain  from  six  to  sixteen  often  takes 
place  in  the  first  two  years,  and  that  puberty  has  an  almost 
relatively  retarding  efTect,  suggests  again  that  periods  of 
increase  in  strength  alternate  with  those  of  control  and  per- 
haps at  certain  stages  have  an  almost  inverse  ratio.  This 
is  of  the  greatest  significance  for  motor  education,  suggest- 
ing that  for  a  few  years  the  stress  should  incline  to  the  larger 
sthenic  or  coarser  strength  forms  of  development,  and  that 
precision  should  have  less  relative  emphasis.  Motor  activi- 
ties involving  accuracy,  which  may  be  accentuated  during  years 
that  precede  puberty,  should  now  yield  somewhat  to  those 
involving  fundamental  rather  than  accessory  development. 
The  dangers  involved  in  a  violation  of  this  rule  will  be  de- 
scribed later. 

There  are  many  facts  that  seem  to  suggest  that  in  ado- 
lescence the  right  hand  precedes  the  left,  and  is  not  usually 
quite  overtaken,  so  that  this  predominance  is  greater  after 
puberty.  If  this  be  so,  the  relation  of  the  two  hands  in  man 
is  somewhat  analogous  to  the  relation  between  the  male  and 
female  body  in  muscular  development. 

Quetelet  found  that  the  left  hand  was  always  behind  the 


148  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

right  in  strength  of  grip  from  one-sixth  to  one-eighth  or  less, 
but  that  it  was  most  behind  it  at  sixteen  and  at  the  two  years 
preceding  and  following,  and  that  at  twenty  and  twenty-one 
the  difference  between  them  was  again  increased,  this  differ- 
ence being  greater  in  boys  than  in  girls.  In  girls  he  found 
the  predominance  of  the  right  hand  was  more  marked  in  the 
early  teens  than  before  or  after. 

In  the  first  Chicago  Report  on  Child-Study  Investigation, 
Christopher  found  "  that  marked  differences  in  the  strength 
of  the  two  hands  does  not  occur  in  boys  till  after  fourteen, 
and  in  girls  till  after  thirteen,"  and  that  twelve-year-old  pupils 
in  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  showed  much  more  marked 
increment  of  strength  in  the  right  hand  than  those  in  the 
grades  below.  Thus  unidexterity,  although  developed  before 
school  age,  increases  rapidly  during  early  adolescent  years, 
and  as  there  appears  to  be  some  connection  between  unidex- 
terity and  speech,  which  is  innervated  from  the  same  hemi- 
sphere as  is  the  preferred  hand,  Smedley  raised  the  inter- 
esting question  whether  the  pubescent  increase  in  unidex- 
terity does  not  parallel  the  change  of  voice.  He  found  that 
with  the  increment  in  both  sexes,  the  superiority  of  the  right 
hand  over  the  left  was  more  and  more  marked  with  increase 
of  age  and  strength.  "  The  curve  representing  the  strength 
of  the  boy's  left  hand  runs  nearly  parallel  to  that  representing 
his  growth  in  weight,  and  in  the  earlier  years  of  adolescence 
the  curve  representing  the  strength  of  the  right  hand  gradu- 
ally approaches  the  curve  of  weight."  The  strength  of  grip 
in  the  right  hand  increased  most  rapidly  in  girls  at  thirteen 
and  in  boys  at  sixteen,  after  which  the  rate  of  increase  rapidly 
declined.  Of  twelve-year-old  pupils,  it  was  found  that  those 
in  the  higher  grades  excelled  those  in  the  lower,  and  also 
that  this  was  much  more  marked  in  the  right  hand  than  in 
the  left. 

The  brightest  Chicago  pupils  were  more  decidedly  uni- 
dextrous  than  the  average  pupils;  the  latter  more  so  than 
the  dull,  and  they  yet  more  so  than  pupils  of  the  Reform 
School.  This  was  found  to  be  the  case  both  on  the  basis 
of  strength  tests  and  on  those  of  the  greatest  number  of  taps, 
the  left  hand  more  nearly  approaching  the  right  in  both 
these  respects  the  lower  in  the  above  order  the  pupils  stood. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        149 

With  accuracy  alone  the  case  is  different.  Bryan  found 
that  with  his  tests  the  right  hand  improves  faster  the  first 
two  or  three  years  after  the  age  of  six  than  later.  This,  too,  in- 
dicates that  precision  or  control  follows  a  different  law  than 
growth  in  strength  or  speed.  Education  of  one  side  causes  in- 
direct education  of  the  other,  as  Scripture  and  others  have 
shown.  For  thirteen  days,  e.  g..  Miss  Brown  at  Yale  squeezed 
a  mercury  dynamometer  bulb,  and  thereby  increased  the 
strength  of  her  right  hand  from  28  to  48  points,  while  the  left 
hand,  without  exercise,  showed  a  gain  of  12  points.  Miss 
Smith  daily  inserted  a  needle-point  into  a  small  hole,  so  that 
error  was  electrically  recorded,  200  times  a  day  for  ten  days, 
and  reduced  her  error  from  39  to  12  per  cent.  Meanwhile  the 
untrained  left  hand  fell  from  50  to  24  per  cent. 

Here,  as  in  the  vast  body  of  clinical,  anatomical,  physiolog- 
ical, and  popular  literature  on  the  subject,  the  problem  of  bi- 
lateral asymmetry  is  suggestive  yet  tantalizing.  Attention  has 
more  influence  on  the  favored  side.  Up  to  a  certain  point 
excess  of  development  of  one  side  tends  to  bring  up  the 
other,  and  beyond  this  variable  and  indeterminable  point,  to 
increase  at  the  expense  of  the  weaker  side.  This  disparity 
has  great  practical  advantages  in  skill,  tools,  etc.,  and  can  not 
be  called  a  deformity  because  nature  gives  nowhere  any  inti- 
mation that  perfect  parity  of  form  or  function  was  intended. 
This  form  of  specialization  must  have  some  biological  ad- 
vantages analogous  to  those  of  nascent  periods  for  different 
organs  and  parts,  as  if  the  difficulties  in  growth  were  econom- 
ically overcome  when  the  energies  were  focused,  and  then 
when  a  point  of  higher  development  was  reached  in  one  direc- 
tion, this  was  a  stimulus  to  proportionate  growth  in  related 
parts.  The  vicarious  performance  of  the  functions  of  one 
half  of  the  body  by  those  of  the  other  suggests  analogies 
with  cases  where  fundamental  muscles  do  the  work  of  those 
that  are  accessory.  Probably  in  legs,  and  perhaps  in  other  parts 
and  functions,  adolescence  involves  a  marked  increase  of  dis- 
parity in  the  dual  halves  of  the  body.* 

Of  the  power  of  adolescents  to  resist  fatigue  we  still  know 
very   little  that   can   be   called   scientific.     Periods   of   rapid 

'  See  Bilateral  Asymmetry  of  Function.     Hall  and  Hartwell.     Mind,  xxxiii. 


x50  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

growth  are  commonly  thought  to  be  marked  by  increased 
fatiguabihty,  but  fatigue  has  very  different  forms.  Some 
individuals  have  great  power  to  suddenly  summon  their 
resources  for  a  very  concentrative  and  intense  efifort,  which 
leaves  them  soon  exhausted,  while  others,  lacking  this  sum- 
mative  power,  resist  fatigue  by  endurance  under  long-sus- 
tained effort.  The  power  to  summate  and  power  to  plod  rarely 
go  together,  but  seem  to  be  usually  distinct  diatheses.  There  is 
much  to  suggest  that  early  adolescence  develops  in  the  direc- 
tion of  spurty  rather  than  in  that  of  sustained  effort,  or  that  the 
latter  comes  later.  The  known  changes  in  circulation,  the  con- 
jectured modification  of  the  nervous  centers,  phyletic  anal- 
ogy with  the  longer  than  diurnal  rhythms  of  work  and  rest 
elsewhere  discussed,  and  common  observation  as  well  as  the 
general  concept  of  plasticity  to  be  shaped  by  culminative 
stresses  that  break  out  new  ways  across  old  ones — all  these 
suggest  this  temporal  primacy  of  erethic  over  plodding  incre- 
ment. 

The  ergogram  pictures  a,  very  specific  form  of  fatigue 
and  shows  a  very  wide  range  of  individual  differences.  In 
Chicago  the  ergograph  was  loaded  with  seven  per  cent  the 
weight  of  the  individual  and  lifted  with  the  right  middle  finger 
forty-five  times  in  ninety  seconds.  From  six  to  tw^elve  years 
of  age  both  boys  and  girls  increase  quite  steadily,  girls'  absolute 
endurance  and  also  their  rate  of  increase  being  less  than  boys'. 
From  twelve  and  a  half  to  eighteen  and  a  half  boys  increase 
much  more  rapidly  than  before,  gaining  fastest  from  fourteen 
to  seventeen.  In  Chicago  girls,  the -ergograph  increment  began 
at  ten  and  was  greatest  from  tw^elve  to  fourteen,  wnth  subse- 
quent marked  decline,  the  gain  from  fourteen  to  eighteen  being 
hardly  equal  to  half  that  of  from  twelve  to  fourteen.  In  endur- 
ance, as  measured  by  ergograms  as  well  as  in  the  strength  of 
grip,  "  boys  surpass  girls  at  all  ages,  and  this  differentiation 
becomes  very  marked  after  the  age  of  fourteen,  after  which 
girls  increase  in  strength  and  endurance  but  very  slightly, 
while  after  fourteen  boys  acquire  almost  exactly  half  of  their 
total  power  in  these  two  directions,"  these  curves  being  almost 
identical  with  those  of  vital  capacity.^  Muscular  differentia- 
tion of  the  sexes  practically  begins  at  thirteen. 

'  Child  Study  Report,  No.  2.     Chicago,  p.  72. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        151 

Fatigue  was  tested  by  tapping  forty-five  seconds  and 
comparing  the  number  of  taps  for  the  last  five  seconds  with 
those  for  the  first  five.  There  was  a  loss  of  power  to  resist 
fatigue  at  eight  years,  then  a  steady  increase  to  twelve  for  girls 
and  thirteen  for  boys,  with  a  year  of  subsequent  loss  followed 
by  another  of  gain,  both  reaching  their  maximum  at  fifteen 
and  showing  some  diminution  thereafter.  It  was  found  also 
that  "  muscle  sense,  force  of  suggestion,  voluntary  motor 
ability,  fatigue,  lung  capacity,  reaction,  reaction  with  dis- 
crimination and  choice,  time  memory — all  give  clear  indica- 
tions of  a  marked  change  in  the  development  of  this  period 
[puberty]."  ^ 

One  of  Christopher's  most  interesting  charts  shows  that 
the  extremes  of  strength  between  the  weakest  and  strongest 
pupils  are  almost  twice  as  great  in  the  two  upper  grades  as 
in  those  below.  This  greatly  increased  range  of  individual 
variation  in  early  puberty  was  no  less  marked  in  vital  capacity 
and  in  resistance  of  fatigue  as  tested  by  the  ergograph.  In 
vital  capacity,  still  more  in  strength,  and  most  of  all  in  en- 
durance as  tested  by  the  ergograph,  the  difference  between 
the  extreme  individuals  increases  very  rapidly  up  the  grades, 
sometimes  becoming  from  three  or  four  to  six  or  eight  times 
in  the  seventh  and  eighth  grades  what  it  was  in  the  first,  and 
being  in  these  respects  much  greater  than  the  similar  but 
marked  differentiation  between  extremes  in  weight  and  height. 

Partridge,^  in  his  study  of  second  breath,  had  one  hundred 
and  sixty-eight  cases  of  overplay,  abandon  to  mental  or  physical 
effort,  the  most  striking  of  which  were  between  the  ages  of 
fifteen  and  twenty,  although  his  data  demonstrated  nothing 
concerning  age  except  that  the  phenomenon  is  very  common 
at  this  stage.  The  descriptions  of  it  in  his  returns  by  girls, 
and  especially  by  boys,  in  whom  it  seems  more  common, 
is  far  more  graphic  and  detailed  at  this  age  than  before  or 
after.  When  one  runs,  skates,  dances,  works,  the  breath 
is  short  and  the  next  effort  seems  almost  impossible.  If  one 
still  persists,  a  point  is  soon  reached  when  all  fatigue 
has  passed  away  and  there  is  as  great  freshness  as  at 
first.     The  same  is  true  of  study  late  at  night  beyond  the 

^  Studies  from  the  Yale  Psy.  Lab.,  vol.  ii,  p.  40. 

'  Second  Breath,     Ped.  Sem.,  April,  1897,  vol.  iv,  pp.  372-381. 


152  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

usual  hour  of  sleep.  At  a  certain  point  sleepiness  ceases  and 
one  can  easily  work  with  perhaj^s  increased  clearness  and 
facility  far  into  the  night,  although  later  there  may  be 
marked  signs  of  reactionary  exhaustion.  The  same  is  found 
in  the  so-called  warming-up  curve  in  lifting  weights  with 
the  finger.  The  height  of  the  lift  declines  with  every  suc- 
cessive pull  by  a  rather  regular  curve  until  the  weight  does 
not  leave  its  support  at  all,  but  if  the  effort  is  continued  at 
each  rhythmic  interval  it  is  soon  lifted,  it  may  be,  as  high  as 
before,  with  perhaps  several  successive  periods  of  recovery 
and  loss.  Erethic  states  in  general,  very  likely  physiologic- 
ally akin  to  those  of  inspirationists  and  ecstatics,  are  probably 
connected  with  the  erethic  or  erectile  function  of  circulation, 
and  quite  likely  this  is  an  important  one  in  the  education  of 
adolescents,  which  is,  however,  not  yet  adequately  known. 

One  of  the  most  fruitful  of  the  methods  of  experimental 
psychology  has  been  that  of  time  reactions.  The  discovery 
of  Helmholtz  fifty  years  ago  that  the  time  of  a  stimulus-wave 
along  a  nerve-fiber  not  only  marked  an  epoch  in  demonstra- 
ting that  psychic  processes  were  not  timeless  nor  even  with 
electrical  velocities,  but  relatively  very  slow,  opened  one  of 
the  most  voluminous  chapters  in  psycho-physics.  By  means 
of  this  method-instrument  we  not  only  determine  the  com- 
pleteness of  reflex  organization,  but  measure  with  precision 
the  time  required  to  discriminate  forms  and  colors,  to  make 
associations,  to  recognize,  classify,  make  a  choice,  etc.  In 
general  this  time  is  inversely  as  complexity  and  practise, 
and  these  studies  reveal  the  very  composition  of  the  habit- 
plexus,  the  ruts  most  worn  by  repetition  in  thought.  That 
so  far  most  of  these  studies  have  been  confined  to  adults  is 
unfortunate,  for  the  reconstructions  and  mobilizations  of  this 
age,  with  its  new  interests,  suggest  that  the  chief  triumphs 
of  this  method  are  to  be  achieved  in  applying  it  to  mapping 
out  the  psycho-physic  organization  of  the  stages  of  childhood 
and  youth,  and  that  it  has  a  great  examination  function  in 
the  future.     All  of  value  yet  done  here  is  briefly  told. 

Herzen  ^  found  a  marked  reduction  of  reaction  time  for 
both  girls  and  boys  at  puberty.     His  table  is  as  follows : 

'  Le  Cerveau.     Paris,  1887,  p.  97. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        153 


Agk. 

Boys. 

GirU. 

e-IO -1 

Foot,    .548 
Hand,  .538 
Foot,    .343 
Hand,  .336 
Foot,    .318 
Hand,  .283 

Foot,    .535 

TO— I  ^ ■ 

Hand,  .525 
Foot,    .400 

After  15 ■ 

Hand,  .350 
Foot,    .400 
Hand,  .365 

From  this  it  appears  that  young  girls  react  quickest,  and 
Marro  ^  thinks  that  they  often  reach  a  high  point  and  are 
either  arrested  rather  suddenly  in  rate  or  often  decline  from 
a  high  point  which  they  can  not  maintain  and  develop  no 
further  through  life.  This,  he  says,  may  be  due  to  the  low- 
ered rate  of  oxidation  characteristic  of  this  age,  and  which, 
if  marked,  may  cause  hysteria,  or  it  may  be  due  to  the  greater 
distraction  of  attention  which  makes  the  concentration  of 
mind  necessary  for  this  test  now  harder. 

At  Chicago,  quickness  of  reaction  to  a  signal  was  found 
to  increase  rapidly  to  eight  years,  when  for  a  year  the  increment 
was  less,  followed  by  another  rise  for  both  sexes  to  twelve. 
Then  there  was  no  gain  for  boys  to  fourteen  and  little  for 
girls;  a  rapid  increase  of  both  to  sixteen,  with  no  gain  the 
following  year. 

The  time  of  thought  required  for  a  reaction,  plus  the  two 
mental  processes  of  discrimination  and  choice,  showed  a 
rather  steady  increase  to  ten;  then  a  positive  loss  for  a  year 
to  twelve  in  girls;  then  a  rather  steady  increase  to  thirteen 
in  boys,  followed  by  a  year  of  loss.  Girls  increased  rapidly 
from  thirteen  to  fourteen,  and  boys  from  fourteen  to  fifteen, 
after  which  the  rate  of  increase  was  less  for  girls  and  very 
slight  indeed  for  boys. 

Here,  too,  may  be  mentioned  the  studies  of  Seashore,^  who 
found  that  children  were  able  to  reproduce  small  time  inter- 
vals of  about  five  seconds  pretty  accurately  at  all  ages  from 
six  to  fifteen.  Intervals  of  ten  seconds  were  shortened  to 
8.2,  those  of  twenty  to  14.4,  and  those  of  thirty  to  13.5. 
From  eight  or  nine  years  on  the  improvement  in  reproducing 
the  longer  intervals  rapidly  increased. 


'  La  Puberte,  p.  37 

•  Studies  in  Psychology.     University  of  Iowa,  1899. 


154  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Adolescence  marks  a  new  relation  to  time  and  space.  The 
temporal  and  spatial  horizon  is  enlarged;  greater  wholes  are 
more  adequately  judged ;  more  complex  members  of  each  are 
grouped  into  unity;  the  relation  of  wholes  and  parts  is  better 
seen.  This  we  shall  see  more  fully  in  the  chapters  on  mental 
development. 

To  understand  the  momentous  changes  of  motor  func- 
tions that  characterize  adolescence  we  must  consider  other 
than  the  measurable  aspects  of  the  subject.  Perhaps  the 
best  scale  on  which  to  measure  all  normal  growth  of  muscle 
structure  and  functions  is  found  in  the  progress  from  funda- 
mental to  accessory.  The  former  designates  the  muscles  and 
movements  of  the  trunk  and  large  joints,  neck,  back,  hips, 
shoulders,  knees,  and  elbows,  sometimes  called  central,  and 
which  in  general  man  has  in  common  with  the  higher  and 
larger  animals.  Their  activities  are  few,  mostly  simultane- 
ous, alternating  and  rhythmic,  as  of  the  legs  in  walking,  and 
predominate  in  hard-working  men  and  women  with  little  cul- 
ture or  intelligence,  and  often  in  idiots.  The  latter  or  acces- 
sory movements  are  those  of  the  hand,  tongue,  face,  and  articu- 
latory  organs,  and  these  may  be  connected  into  a  long  and 
greatly  diversified  series,  as  those  used  in  writing,  talking, 
piano-playing.  They  are  represented  by  smaller  and  more  nu- 
merous muscles,  whose  functions  develop  later  in  life  and  repre- 
sent a  higher  standpoint  of  evolution.  Those  smaller  muscles 
for  finer  movements  come  into  function  later  and  are  chiefly 
associated  with  psychic  activity,  which  plays  upon  them  by 
incessantly  changing  their  tensions,  if  not  causing  actual 
movement.  It  is  these  that  are  so  liable  to  disorder  in  the 
many  automatisms  and  choreic  tics  we  see  in  school  chil- 
dren, especially  if  excited  or  fatigued.  General  paralysis  usu- 
ally begins  in  the  higher  levels  by  breaking  these  down,  so 
that  the  first  symptom  of  its  insidious  and  never  interrupted 
progress  is  inability  to  execute  the  more  exact  and  delicate 
movements  of  tongue  or  hand,  or  both.  Starting  with  the 
latest  evolutionary  level,  it  is  a  devolution  that  may  work  down- 
ward till  very  many  of  the  fundamental  activities  are  lost  be- 
fore death. 

Nothing  better  illustrates  this  distinction  than  the  differ- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        155 

(fVze  between  the  fore  foot  of  animals  and  the  human  hand. 
The  first  begins  as  a  fin  or  paddle  or  is  armed  with  a  hoof, 
and  is  used  solely  for  locomotion.  Some  carnivora  with 
claws  use  the  fore  limb  also  for  holding  as  well  as  tearing, 
and  others  for  digging.  Arboreal  life  seems  to  have  almost 
created  the  simian  hand  and  to  have  wrought  a  revolution  in 
the  form  and  use  of  the  forearm  and  its  accessory  organs, 
the  fingers.  Apes  and  other  tree-climbing  creatures  must 
not  only  adjust  their  prehensile  organ  to  a  wide  variety  of 
distances  and  sizes  of  branches,  but  must  use  the  hands  more  or 
less  freely  for  picking,  transporting,  and  eating  fruit,  and  this 
has  probably  been  a  prime  factor  in  lifting  man  to  the  erect  posi- 
tion, without  which  human  intelligence  as  we  know  it  could 
have  hardly  been  possible.  "  When  we  attempt  to  measure 
the  gap  between  man  and  the  lower  animals  in  terms  of  the 
form  of  movement,  the  wonder  is  no  less  great  than  when  we 
use  the  term  of  mentality."  ^  The  degree  of  approximation 
to  human  intelligence  in  anthropoid  animals  follows  very 
closely  the  degree  of  approximation  to  human  movements. 

The  gradual  acquirement  of  the  erect  position  by  the 
human  infant  admirably  repeats  this  long  phylogenetic  evolu-* 
tion.2  At  first  the  limbs  are  of  almost  no  use  in  locomotion, 
but  the  fundamental  trunk  muscles  with  those  that  move  the 
large  joints  are  more  or  less  spasmodically  active.  Then 
comes  creeping,  with  use  of  the  hip  muscles,  while  all  below 
the  knee  is  useless,  as  also  are  the  fingers.  Slowly  the  leg  and 
foot  are  degraded  to  locomotion,  slowly  the  great  toe  be- 
comes more  limited  in  its  action,  the  thumb  increases  in 
flexibility  and  strength  of  opposition,  and  the  fingers  grow 
more  mobile  and  controllable.  As  the  body  slowly  as- 
sumes the  vertical  attitude,  the  form  of  the  chest  changes 
till  its  greatest  diameter  is  transverse  instead  of  from  front  to 
back.  The  shoulder-blades  are  less  parallel  than  in  quadrupeds, 
and  spread  out  till  they  approximate  the  same  plane.  This 
gives  the  arm  freedom  of  movement  laterally,  so  that  it  can 
be  rotated  one  hundred  and  eighty  degrees  in  man  as  contrasted 
to  one  hundred  degrees  in  apes,  thus  giving  man  the  command 

'  F.  Burk  in  From  Fundamental  to  Accessory.    Pedagogical  Lessons,  vol.  i,  p.  29. 
*  Creeping  and  Walking,  by  A.  W.  Trettien,     Am.  Jour,  of  Psychol.,  Oct.i  igoo. 


I5&  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

of  almost  any  point  within  a  sphere  of  which  the  two  arms 
are  radii. 

On  the  principle  of  heterogeny,  by  which  movements  as 
well  as  structures  are  carried  on,  but  transferred  to  higher 
levels,  grasping  was  partly  developed  from  and  partly  added 
to  the  old  locomotor  function  of  the  fore  limbs;  the  jerky 
automatisms  as  well  as  the  slow  rhythmic  flexion  and  exten- 
sion of  finger  and  hand,  early  aimless  reflexes,  survivals  of 
arboreal  and  perhaps  even  earlier  aquatic  life,  are  coordi- 
nated, and  the  bilateral,  simultaneous,  and  rhythmic  mode  of 
movements  so  characteristic  of  larger  fundamental  parts  is 
supplemented  by  superposed  systems  of  exact  and  complex 
serial  activities,  which  are  less  determined  by  heredity  as 
ancestral  currents  grow  shallow  and  uncertain  near  the  end 
of  the  growth  period.  In  a  sense,  a  child  or  man  is  the  sum 
total  of  his  movements  or  tendencies  to  move,  and  nature  and 
instinct  chiefly  determine  the  basal,  and  education  the  acces- 
sory parts  of  our  activities. 

The  entire  accessory  system  is  thus  of  vital  importance 
for  the  development  of  all  of  the  arts  of  expression.  These 
smaller  muscles  might  almost  be  called  organs  of  thought. 
Their  tension  is  modified  with  the  faintest  change  of  soul, 
such  as  is  seen  in  accent,  inflection,  facial  expressions,  hand- 
writing, and  many  forms  of  so-called  mind-reading,  which, 
in  fact,  is  always  muscle-reading.  The  day-laborer  of  low  intel- 
ligence, with  a  practical  vocabulary  of  not  over  five  hundred 
words,  who  can  hardly  move  each  of  his  fingers  without  moving 
others  or  all  of  them,  who  can  not  move  his  brows  or  corru- 
gate his  forehead  at  will,  and  whose  inflection  is  very  monoto- 
nous, illustrates  a  condition  of  arrest  or  atrophy  of  this  later, 
finer,  accessory  system  of  muscles.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
child,  precocious  in  any  or  all  of  these  later  respects,  is 
very  liable  to  be  undeveloped  in  the  larger  and  more  fun- 
damental parts  and  functions.  The  full  unfoldment  of  each 
is,  in  fact,  an  inexorable  condition  precedent  for  the  normal 
development  to  full  and  abiding  maturity  of  the  higher  and 
more  refined  muscularity,  just  as  conversely  the  awkward- 
ness and  clumsiness  of  adolescence  mark  a  temporary  loss  of 
balance  in  the  opposite  direction.  If  this  general  conception 
be  correct,  then  nature  does  not  finish  the  basis  of  her  pyra- 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       157 

mid  in  the  way  Ross,  Mercier,  and  others  have  assumed,  but 
lays  a  part  of  the  foundation,  and,  after  carrying  it  to  an 
apex,  normally  goes  back  and  adds  to  the  foundation  to 
carry  up  the  apex  still  higher,  and  if  prevented  from  so  doing, 
expends  her  energy  in  building  the  apex  up  at  a  sharper  angle 
till  instability  results.  School  and  kindergarten  often  lay  a 
disproportionate  strain  on  the  tiny  accessory  muscles,  weigh- 
ing altogether  but  a  few  ounces,  that  wag  the  tongue,  move 
the  pen,  and  do  fine  work  requiring  accuracy.  But  still  at  this 
stage  prolonged  work  requiring  great  accuracy  is  irksome 
and  brings  dangers  homologous  to  those  caused  by  too  much 
fine  work  in  the  kindergarten  before  the  first  adjustment  of 
large  to  small  muscles,  which  lasts  until  adolescence,  is  estab- 
lished. Then  disproportion  between  function  and  growth 
often  causes  symptoms  of  chorea.  The  chief  danger  is  arrest 
of  the  development  and  control  of  the  smaller  muscles.  Many 
occupations  and  forms  of  athletics,  on  the  contrary,  place 
the  stress  mainly  upon  groups  of  fundamental  muscles  to 
the  neglect  of  finer  motor  possibilities.  Some  who  excel  in 
heavy  athletics  no  doubt  coarsen  their  motor  reactions,  be- 
come not  only  inexact  and  heavy,  but  unresponsive  to  finer 
stimuli,  as  if  the  large  muscles  were  hypertrophied  and  the 
small  ones  arrested.  On  the  other  hand,  many  young  men, 
and  probably  more  young  women,  expend  too  little  of  their 
available  active  energy  upon  basal  and  massive  muscle  work, 
and  cultivate  too  much,  and  above  all  too  early,  the  delicate 
responsive  work.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  best  physiological  char- 
acterization of  precocity,  and  issues  in  excessive  nervous  and 
muscular  irritability.  The  great  influx  of  muscular  vigor 
that  unfolds  during  adolescent  years  and  which  was  origi- 
nally not  only  necessary  to  successful  propagation,  but  an 
expression  of  virility,  seems  to  be  a  very  plastic  quantity,  so 
that  motor  regimen  and  exercise  at  this  stage  is  probably 
more  important  and  all-conditioning  for  mentality,  sexual- 
ity, and  health  than  at  any  other  period  of  life.  Intensity 
and  for  a  time  a  spurty  diathesis  is  as  instinctive  and  desirable 
as  are  the  copious  minor  automatisms  which  spontaneously 
give  the  alphabet  out  of  which  complex  and  finer  motor 
series  are  later  spelled  by  the  conscious  will.  Mercier  and 
others  have  pointed  out  that,  as  most  skilled  labor,  so  school 


158  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

work  and  modern  activities  in  civilized  life  generally  lay  pre- 
mature and  disproportionate  strains  upon  those  kinds  of  move- 
ment requiring  exactness.  Stress  upon  basal  movements  is 
not  only  compensating,  but  is  of  higher  therapeutic  value 
against  the  disorders  of  the  accessory  system ;  it  constitutes 
the  best  cure  or  prophylactic  for  fidgets  and  tense  states,  and 
directly  develops  poise,  control,  and  psycho-physical  equilib- 
rium. Even  when  contractions  reach  choreic  intensity  the  best 
treatment  is  to  throw  activities  down  the  scale  that  meas- 
ures the  difference  between  primary  and  secondary  move- 
ments and  make  the  former  predominate. 

The  number  of  movements,  the  frequency  with  which  they 
are  repeated,  their  diversity,  the  number  of  combinations,  and 
their  total  kinetic  quantum  in  young  children,  whether  we 
consider  movements  of  the  body  as  a  whole,  fundamental 
movements  of  large  limbs,  or  finer  accessory  motions,  is 
amazing.  Nearly  every  external  stimulus  is  answered  by  a 
motor  response.  Dresslar  ^  observed  a  thirteen  months  old 
baby  for  four  hours,  and  found,  to  follow  Preyer's  classifi- 
cation, impulsive  or  spontaneous,  reflex,  instinctive,  imita- 
tive, inhibitive,  expressive,  and  even  deliberative  movements, 
with  marked  satisfaction  in  rhythm,  attempts  to  do  almost 
anything  which  appealed  to  him,  and  almost  inexhaustible 
efferent  resources.  A  friend  has  tried  to  record  every  word 
uttered  by  a  four-year-old  girl  during  a  portion  of  a  day,  and 
finds  nothing  less  than  verbigerations.  A  teacher  noted  the 
activities  of  a  fourteen-year-old  boy  during  the  study  time 
of  a  single  school  day,^  with  similar  results. 

Lindley  ^  studied  897  common  motor  automatisms  in 
children,  which  he  divided  into  92  classes :  45  in  the  region 
of  the  head,  20  in  the  feet  and  legs,  19  in  the  hands  and  fin- 
gers. Arranged  in  the  order  of  frequency  with  which  each  was 
found  the  list  stood  as  follows  :  fingers,  feet,  lips,  tongue,  head, 
body,  hands,  mouth,  eyes,  jaws,  legs,  forehead,  face,  arms,  ears. 
In  the  last  five  alone  adolescents  exceeded  children,  the  latter 
excelling  the  former  most  in  those  of  head  and  mouth,  legs  and 

'  A  Morning  Observation  of  a  Baby.     Ped.  Sem.,  Dec,  1901. 

*  Kate  Carman.     Notes  on  School  Activity.     Ped.  Sem.,  March,  1902. 

*  A  Preliminary  Study  of  Some  of  the  Motor  Phenomena  of  Mental  Effort.    Am, 
Jour,  of  Psy.,  vol.  vii,  p.  491. 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       I5<? 

tongue,  in  this  order.  The  writer  beheves  that  there  are  many 
more  automatisms  than  appeared  in  his  returns. 

School  Hfe,  especially  in  the  lower  grades,  is  a  rich  field 
for  the  study  of  these  activities.  They  are  familiar  as  lick- 
ing things,  clicking  with  the  tongue,  grinding  the  teeth, 
scratching,  tapping,  twirling  a  lock  of  hair  or  chewing  it, 
biting  the  nails  (Berillon's  onychophagia),  shrugging  corru- 
gations, pulling  buttons  or  twisting  garments,  strings,  etc., 
twirling  pencils,  thumbs,  rotating,  nodding  and  shaking  the 
head,  squinting  and  winking,  swaying,  pouting  and  grima- 
cing, scraping  the  floor,  rubbing  hands,  stroking,  patting, 
flicking  the  fingers,  wagging,  snapping  the  fingers,  snuffling, 
squinting,  picking  the  face,  interlacing  the  fingers,  cracking 
the  joints,  finger  plays,  biting  and  nibbling,  trotting  the  leg, 
sucking  things,  etc. 

The  average  number  of  automatisms  per  lOO  children 
Smith  found  to  be  176,  in  adolescents  no.  Swaying  is  chiefly 
with  children ;  playing  and  drumming  with  the  fingers  is  more 
common  among  adolescents ;  the  movements  of  fingers  and  feet 
decline  little  with  age,  and  those  of  eyes  and  forehead  increase, 
which  is  significant  for  the  development  of  attention.  Girls 
excel  greatly  in  swaying,  and  also,  although  less,  in  finger  au- 
tomatism, and  boys  lead  in  movements  of  tongue,  feet,  and 
hands.  Such  movements  increase  with  too  much  sitting  inten- 
sity of  effort,  such  as  to  fix  attention,  and  vary  with  the  nature 
of  the  activity  willed,  but  involve  few  muscles  directly  used 
in  a  given  task.  They  increase  up  the  kindergarten  grades 
and  fall  off  rapidly  in  the  primary  grades ;  are  greater  with 
tasks  requiring  fine  and  exact  movements  than  with  those 
involving  large  movements.  Automatisms  are  often  a  sign  of 
the  difficulty  of  tasks.  The  restlessness  that  they  often  express 
is  one  of  the  commonest  signs  of  fatigue.  They  are  mostly 
in  the  accessory  muscles,  while  those  of  the  fundamental 
muscles  (body,  legs,  and  arms)  disappear  rapidly  with  age; 
those  of  eye,  brow,  and  jaw  show  greatest  increase  with 
age,  but  their  frequency  in  general  declines  with  growing 
maturity,  although  there  is  increased  frequency  of  certain 
specialized  contractions,  which  indicate  the  gradual  settling 
of  expression  in  the  face. 

Often  such  movements  pass  over  by  insensible  gradation 


1 60  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

into  the  morbid  automatism  of  chorea,  and  in  yet  lower  levels 
of  decay  we  see  them  in  the  aimless  palpation  of  the  sick,  in 
pselaphesis,  carphology,  and  lioccilation.  In  idiots  ^  arrest 
of  higher  powers  often  goes  with  hypertrophy  of  these  move- 
ments, as  seen  in  head-beaters  (as  if,  just  as  nature  impels 
those  partially  blind  to  rub  the  eyes  for  "  light-hunger,"  so 
it  prompts  the  feeble-minded  to  strike  the  head  for  cerebra- 
tions), rockers,  rackers,  shakers,  biters,  etc.  Movements  often 
pass  to  fixed  attitudes  and  postures  of  limbs  or  body,  disturb- 
ing the  normal  balance  between  flexors  and  extensors,  the  sig- 
nificance of  which  as  nerve  signs  or  exponents  of  habitual 
brain  states  and  tensions  Warner  has  so  admirably  shown. 
These  non-volitional  movements  of  earliest  infancy  and 
of  later  childhood  are  thus  sure  to  become  centers  of  intense 
and  deep  scientific  interest  in  the  near  future.  They  are  one 
of  the  richest  of  all  the  paleopsychic  fields.  I  think  we  may 
regard  most  of  them  as  rudimentary  impulses  to  do  acts 
which  in  some  prehuman  stage  were  of  all-conditioning  im- 
portance for  life.  They  are  not  anticipatory  of  future  useful 
activities,  as  Groos  says  they  are,  so  much  as  relics  of  past 
forms  of  utilities  now  essentially  obsolete.  Ancient  modes  of 
locomotion,  prehension,  balancing,  defense,  attack,  sensual- 
ity, etc.,  are  all  rehearsed,  some  quite  fully  and  some  only 
by  the  faintest  mimetic  suggestion,  flitting  spasmodic  ten- 
sions, gestures,  or  facial  expressions.  These  motor  odds,  ends, 
and  titbits  often  suggest  therotropic  or  regressive  acts  of  an 
almost  saurian  age,  like  the  swimming  movements  of  young 
infants,  old  modes  of  climbing,  hitting,  fighting,  hunting.  A 
few  that  were  once  accessory  now  seem  fundamental,  but  with 
more  the  converse  seems  true.  Each  one  of  them  is  rich  in 
suggestions  now  tantalizingly  unverifiable.  When  we  ap- 
proach the  origin  of  vertebrate  life,  they  are  mementoes  of  the 
highest  scientific  value,  and  in  their  sign  language,  w^hich  now 
seems  jargon,  genetic  psychology  will  one  day  read  its  title  clear 
to  pedigrees  that  are  lost,  while  their  further  record  and 
analysis  by  the  refined  methods  now  available  is  one  of  the 
richest  of  the  many  new  fields  opened  by  child  study.  They 
are  motor  analogues  of  the  stray,  segregated  psychoses  that 

*  G.  E.  Johnson.    Psychology  and  Pedagogy  of  Feeble-Minded  Children.    Ped. 
Sem.,  Oct.,  1895. 


GROWTH   OF  MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        iGi 

make  the  subconscious  activities  now  beginning  to  be 
studied.  Both  are  largely  vestigial  and  perhaps  semi  feral. 
They  are  the  partly  lapsed  and  unreclaimed,  partly  vir- 
gin and  never  cultivated  Bad  Lands  of  the  state  of  Man-Soul, 
and  if  their  area  becomes  too  extensive  or  their  growth  too 
rank  and  noxious,  may  become  a  source  of  danger,  but  they 
always  suggest  larger  possibilities  of  human  nature  when 
we  know  how  to  make  motor  education  utilize  them 
aright.  Thus  it  is  with  movements  a  little  as  Taine  thought 
it  was  with  impressions  and  ideas,  which  tend  to  grow  to 
delusional  intensity  unless  checked  and  balanced  by  others 
and  wrought  into  the  thought  plexus  of  true  perception  and 
reason.  This  view  I  believe  to  be  essentially  new,  and  if 
true,  its  practical  applications  are  important  and  its  theo- 
retical implications  yet  more  so. 

Abundance  and  vigor  of  these  movements  are  desirable 
and  even  a  considerable  degree  of  restlessness  is  a  good  sign  in 
young  children.  Many  of  what  are  now  often  called  nerve 
signs  and  even  choreic  symptoms,  the  fidgetiness  in  school  on 
cloudy  days  and  often  after  a  vacation,  the  motor  superfluities 
of  awkwardness,  embarrassment,  extreme  effort,  excitement, 
fatigue,  sleepiness,  etc.,  are  simply  the  forms  in  which  we  re- 
ceive the  full  momentum  of  heredity,  and  mark  a  natural  rich- 
ness of  the  raw  material  of  intellect,  feeling,  and  especially  of 
will.  Hence  they  must  be  abundant.  All  parts  should  act  in 
all  possible  ways  at  first  and  untrammeled  by  the  activity  of 
all  other  parts  and  functions.  Some  of  these  activities  are  more 
essential  for  growth  in  size  than  are  later  and  more  conscious 
movements.  Here  as  everywhere  the  rule  holds  that  powers 
themselves  must  be  unfolded  before  the  ability  to  check  or  even 
to  use  them  can  develop.  All  movements  arising  from  spon- 
.taneous  activity  of  nerve  cells  or  centers  must  be  made  in  order 
even  to  avoid  the  atrophy  of  disease.  Not  only  so,  but  this 
purer  kind  of  innateness  must  often  be  helped  out  to  some  ex- 
tent in  some  children  by  stimulating  reflexes ;  a  rich  and  wide 
repertory  of  sensation  must  be  made  familiar;  more  or  less 
and  very  guarded,  watched  and  limited  experiences  of  hunger, 
thirst,  cold,  heat,  tastes,  sounds,  smells,  colors,  brightnesses, 
tactile  irritations,  and  perhaps  even  occasional  tickling  and  pain 
to  play  off  the  vastly  complex  function  of  laughing,  crying, 
IS 


1 62  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

etc.,  may  in  some  cases  be  judicious.  Conscious  and  uncon- 
scious imitation  or  repetition  of  every  sort  of  copy  may  also 
help  to  establish  the  immediate  and  low-level  connection  be- 
tween afferent  and  efferent  processes  that  brings  the  organism 
into  direct  rapport  and  harmony  with  the  whole  world  of  sense. 
Perhaps  the  more  rankly  and  independently  they  are  devel- 
oped to  full  functional  integrity,  each  in  its  season,  if  we  only 
knew  that  season,  the  better.  Premature  control  by  higher  cen- 
ters, or  coordination  into  higher  compounds  of  habits  and  or- 
dered serial  activities,  is  repressive  and  wasteful,  and  the  mature 
will  of  which  they  are  components,  or  which  must  at  least 
domesticate  them,  is  stronger  and  more  forcible  if  this  serial 
stage  is  not  unduly  abridged. 

But,  secondly,  many,  if  not  most,  of  these  activities  when 
developed  a  little,  group  after  group,  as  they  arise,  must  be  con- 
trolled, checked,  and  organized  into  higher  and  often  more 
serial  compounds.  The  inhibiting  functions  are  at  first  hard. 
In  trying  to  sit  still  the  child  sets  its  teeth,  holds  the  breath, 
clinches  its  fists  and  perhaps  makes  every  muscle  tense  with  a 
great  effort  that  very  soon  exhausts.  This  repressive  function 
is  probably  not  worked  from  special  nervous  centers,  nor  can 
we  speak  with  confidence  of  collisions  with  "  sums  of  arrest  "  in 
a  sense  analogous  to  that  of  Herbart,  or  of  stimuli  that  normally 
cause  catabolic  molecular  processes  in  the  cells,  being  mysteri- 
ously diverted  to  produce  increased  instability  or  anabolic  labil- 
ity in  the  sense  of  Wundt's  Mcchanik  der  Nerven.  The  concept 
now  suggested  by  many  facts  is  that  inhibition  is  irradiation  or 
long  circuiting  to  higher  and  more  complex  brain  areas,  so  that 
the  energy,  whether  spontaneous  or  reflex,  is  diverted  to  be  used 
elsewhere.  These  combinations  are  of  a  higher  order,  more 
remote  from  reflex  action,  and  modified  by  some  Jacksonian 
third  level,  or  perhaps  in  part  by  Vulpius'  transverse  layer. 
Action  is  now  not  from  independent  centers,  but  these  are 
slowly  associated,  so  that  excitation  may  flow  off  from  one  point 
to  any  other  and  any  reaction  may  result  from  any  stimulus. 

The  more  unified  the  brain  the  less  it  suffers  from  localiza- 
tion, and  the  lower  is  the  level  to  which  any  one  function  can 
exhaust  the  whole.  The  tendency  of  each  group  of  cells  to  dis- 
charge or  overflow  into  those  of  lower  tension  than  themselves 
increases  as  correspondence  in  time  and  space  widens.     The 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION   16;^ 

more  one  of  a  number  of  activities  gains  in  power  to  draw  on 
all  the  brain,  or  the  more  readily  the  active  parts  are  fed  at  cost 
of  the  resting  parts,  the  less  is  rest  to  be  found  in  change  from 
one  of  these  activities  to  another,  and  the  less  do  concentra- 
tion and  specialization  prove  to  be  dangerous.  Before,  the  aim 
was  to  wake  all  parts  to  function;  now  it  is  to  connect  them. 
Intensity  of  this  cross-section  activity  now  tends  to  unity,  so 
that  all  parts  of  the  brain  energize  together.  In  a  brain  with 
this  switch-board  function  well  organized,  each  reaction  has 
grown  independent  of  its  own  stimulus  and  may  result  from 
any  stimulation,  and  each  act,  e.  g.,  a  finger  movement  of  a 
peculiar  nature,  may  tire  the  whole  brain.  This  helps  us  to  un- 
derstand why  brain-workers  so  often  excel  laborers  not  only  in 
sudden  dynamometric  strength  test,  but  in  sustained  and  long- 
enduring  effort.  In  a  good  brain  or  in  a  good  machine,  power 
may  thus  be  developed  over  a  large  surface,  and  all  of  it  applied 
to  a  small  one,  and  hence  the  dangers  of  specialization  are 
lessened  in  exact  proportion  as  the  elements  of  our  ego  are  thus 
compacted  together.  It  is  in  the  variety  and  delicacy  of  these 
combinations  and  all  that  they  imply,  far  more  than  in  the  ele- 
ments of  which  they  are  composed,  that  man  rises  farthest  above 
the  higher  animals,  and  of  these  powers  later  adolescence  is 
the  golden  age.  The  aimless  and  archaic  movements  of  in- 
fancy, whether  massive  and  complex  or  in  the  form  of  iso- 
lated automatic  tweaks  or  twinges,  and  perhaps  even  the  still 
more  microkinetic  gleanings  of  fibrillary  formications,  are 
thus,  by  slow  processes  of  combined  analysis  and  synthesis, 
involving  changes  as  radical  as  any  in  all  the  world  of  growth, 
made  over  into  habits  and  conduct  that  fit  the  world  of  present 
environment. 

But,  thirdly,  this  long  process  carried  out  with  all  degrees 
of  completeness  may  be  arrested  at  any  unfinished  stage.  Some 
automatisms  refuse  to  be  controlled  by  the  will,  and  both  they 
and  it  are  often  overworked.  Here  we  must  distinguish  con- 
stantly between  ( i )  those  growing  rankly  in  order  to  be  later 
organized  under  the  will,  and  (2)  those  that  have  become  feral 
after  this  domestication  of  them  has  lost  power  from  disease  or 
fatigue,  and  (3)  those  that  have  never  been  subjugated  because 
the  central  power  that  should  have  used  them  to  weave  the 
texture  of  willed  action — the  proper   language  of  complete 


164  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

manhood — was  itself  arrested  or  degenerate.  With  regard  to 
many  of  these  movements  these  distinctions  can  be  made  with 
confidence,  and  in  some  children  more  certainly  than  in  others. 
In  childhood,  before  twelve,  the  efferent  patterns  should  be  de- 
veloped into  many  more  or  less  indelible  habits  and  their  colors 
set  fast.  Motor  specialties  requiring  exactness  and  grace 
like  piano-playing,  drawing,  writing,  pronunciation  of  a  for- 
eign tongue,  dancing,  acting,  singing,  and  a  host  of  virtu- 
osities, must  be  well  begun  before  the  relative  arrest  of  acces- 
sory growth  at  the  dawn  of  the  ephebic  regeneration  and  before 
its  great  afflux  of  strength.  The  facts  seem  to  show  that 
children  of  this  age,  such  as  Hancock  ^  described,  who  could 
not  stand  with  feet  close  together  and  eyes  closed  without 
swaying  much,  could  not  walk  backward,  sit  still  half  a  minute, 
dress  alone,  tie  two  ends  of  a  string  together,  interlace  slats, 
wind  thread,  spin  a  top,  stand  on  toes  or  heels,  hop  on  each 
foot,  drive  a  nail,  roll  a  hoop,  skate,  hit  fingers  together 
rapidly  in  succession  beginning  at  the  little  finger  and  then  re- 
versing, etc.,  are  the  very  ones  in  whom  automatisms  are 
most  marked  or  else  they  are  those  constitutionally  inert,  dull, 
or  uneducable. 

In  children  these  motor  residua  may  persist  as  characteristic 
features  of  inflection,  accent,  or  manners ;  automatisms  may 
become  morbid  in  stammering  or  stuttering,  or  they  may  be  seen 
in  gait,  handwriting,  tics  or  tweaks,  etc.  Instead  of  disappear- 
ing with  age,  as  they  should,  they  are  seen  in  the  blind,  as  facial 
grimaces  uncorrected  by  the  mirror  or  facial  consciousness,  in 
the  deaf  as  inarticulate  noises,  and  they  may  tend  to  grow  mon- 
strous with  age  as  if  they  were  disintegrated  fragments  of  our 
personality,  split  off  and  aborted,  or  motor  parasites  leaving  our 
psycho-physic  ego  poorer  in  energy  and  plasticity  of  adapta- 
tion, till  the  distraction  and  anarchy  of  the  individual  nature  be- 
comes conspicuous  and  pathetic. 

At  puberty,  however,  when  muscle  habits  are  so  plastic, 
when  there  is  a  new  relation  between  quantity  or  volume  of 
motor  energy  and  qualitative  differentiation,  and  between  voli- 
tional control  and  reflex  activities,  these  kinetic  remnants 
strongly  tend  to  shoot  together  into  wrong  aggregates  if  right 

'  A  Preliminary   Study  of  Some  of  the   Motor  Phenomena  of  Mental  Effort. 
American  Journal  of  Psychology,  July,  1896,  vol.  vii,  pp.  Aql-Sl7 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        165 

ones  are  not  formed.  Good  manners  and  correct  motor  form 
generally,  as  well  as  skill,  are  the  most  economic  ways  of  doing 
things,  but  this  is  the  age  of  wasteful  ways,  awkwardness, 
mannerisms,  tensions  that  are  a  constant  leakage  of  vital 
energy,  perhaps  semi-imperative  acts,  contortions,  quaint  move- 
ments, more  elaborated  than  in  childhood  and  often  highly  un- 
sesthetic  and  disagreeable,  motor  coordinations  that  will  need 
laborious  decomposition  later.  The  avoidable  factor  in  their 
causation  is,  with  some  modification,  not  unlike  that  of  the 
simpler  feral  movements  and  faulty  attitudes,  carriage,  and 
postures  in  children,  viz.,  some  form  of  overpressure  or  misfit 
between  environment  and  nature.  As  from  the  years  of  four  to 
eight  there  is  great  danger  that  overemphasis  of  the  activities 
of  the  accessory  muscles  will  sow  the  seeds  of  chorea,  or  aggra- 
vate predispositions  to  it,  now  again  comes  a  greatly  increased 
danger,  hardly  existing  from  eight  to  twelve,  that  overprecision, 
especially  if  fundamental  activities  are  neglected,  will  bring 
nervous  strain  and  stunting  precocity.  This  is  again  the  age 
of  the  basal,  e.  g.,  hill-climbing  muscles,  of  leg  and  back  and 
shoulder  work,  and  of  the  yet  more  fundamental  heart,  lung, 
and  chest  muscles.  Now  again  the  study  of  a  book,  under  the 
usual  conditions  of  sitting  in  a  closed  space  and  using  pen, 
tongue,  and  eye  combined,  has  a  tendency  to  overestimate  the 
accessory  muscles.  This  is  especially  harmful  for  city  children 
who  are  too  prone  to  the  distraction  of  overmobility  at  an  age 
especially  exposed  to  maladjustment  of  motor  income  and  ex- 
penditure, and  it  constitutes  not  a  liberal  or  power-generating, 
but  a  highly  and  prematurely  specialized,  narrowing,  and  weak- 
ening education  unless  offset  by  safeguards  better  than  any 
system  of  gymnastics,  which  is  at  best  artificial  and  exag- 
gerated. 

As  Bryan  well  says,  "  the  efficiency  of  a  machine  depends 
so  far  as  we  know  upon  the  maximum  force,  rate,  amplitude, 
and  variety  of  direction  of  its  movements  and  upon  the  exact- 
ness with  which  below  these  maxima  the  force,  rate,  amplitude, 
and  direction  of  the  movements  can  be  controlled."  The  motor 
efficiency  of  a  man  depends  upon  his  ability  in  all  these  respects. 
Moreover,  the  education  of  the  small  muscles  and  fine  adjust- 
ments of  larger  ones  is  as  near  mental  training  as  physicaF  cul- 
ture can  get,  for  these  are  the  thought-muscles  and  movements. 


1 66  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

and  their  perfected  function  is  to  reflect  and  express  by  slight 
modifications  of  tension  and  tone  every  psychic  change.  Only 
the  brain  itself  is  more  closely  and  immediately  an  organ 
of  thought  than  are  these  muscles  and  their  activity,  re- 
flex, spontaneous,  or  imitative  in  origin.  Whether  any  of  them 
are  of  value,  as  Lindley  thinks,  in  arousing  the  brain  to  activity, 
or,  as  Miiller  suggests,  in  drawing  off  sensations  or  venting 
efferent  impulses  that  would  otherwise  distract,  we  need  not 
here  discuss.  If  so,  this  is  of  course  a  secondary  and  late 
function — nature's  way  of  making  the  best  of  things  and  utili- 
zing remnants. 

With  these  facts  and  their  implications  in  mind  we  can  next 
pass  to  consider  the  conditions  under  which  the  adolescent  mus- 
cles best  develop.  Here  we  confront  one  of  the  greatest  and 
most  difficult  problems  of  our  age.  Changes  in  modern  motor 
life  have  been  so  vast  and  sudden  as  to  present  some  of  the  most 
comprehensive  and  all-conditioning  dangers  that  threaten  civi- 
lized races.  Not  only  have  the  forms  of  labor  been  radically 
changed  within  a  generation  or  two,  but  the  basal  activir 
ties  that  shaped  the  body  of  primitive  man  have  been  suddenly 
swept  away  by  the  new  methods  of  modern  industry.  Even 
popular  sports,  games,  and  recreations,  so  abundant  in  the  early 
life  of  all  progressive  peoples,  have  been  reduced  and  trans- 
formed, and.the  play  age,  that  once  extended  on  to  middle  life 
and  often  old  age,  has  been  restricted.  Sedentary  life  in  schools 
and  offices,  as  we  have  seen,  is  reducing  the  vigor  and  size  of. 
our  lower  limbs.  Our  industry  is  no  longer  under  hygienic 
conditions,  and  instead  of  being  out  of  doors,  in  the  country,  or 
of  highly  diversified  kinds,  it  is  now  specialized,  monotonous, 
in  closed  spaces,  bad  air,  and  perhaps  poor  light,  especially  in 
cities.  The  diseases  and  arrest  bred  in  the  young  by  life  in 
shops,  offices,  factories,  and  schools  increase.  Work  is  rigidly 
bound  to  fixed  hours,  uniform  standards,  stints  and  piece-prod- 
ucts, and  instead  of  a  finished  article,  each  individual  now 
achieves  a  part  of  a  single  process,  and  knows  little  of  those  that 
precede  or  follow.  Machinery  has  relieved  the  large  basal  mus- 
cles and  laid  more  stress  upon  fine  and  exact  movements  that  in- 
volve nerve  strain.  The  coarser  forms  of  work  that  involve 
hard  lifting,  carrying,  digging,  etc.,  are  themselves  specialized, 
and  skilled  labor  requires  more  and  more  brain-work.     It  has 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        167 

been  estimated  that  "  the  diminution  of  manual  labor  required 
to  do  a  given  quantity  of  work  in  1884  as  compared  with  1870 
is  no  less  than  70  per  cent."  ^  Personal  interest  in  and  the 
old  native  sense  of  responsibility  for  results,  ownership  and  use 
of  the  finished  products,  which  have  been  the  inspiration  and 
soul  of  work  in  all  the  past,  are  in  more  and  more  fields  gone. 
Those  who  realize  how  small  a  proportion  of  the  young  male 
population  train  or  engage  even  in  amateur  sports  with  zest 
and  regularity,  how  very  few  and  picked  men  strive  for  records, 
and  how  immediate  and  amazing  are  the  results  of  judicious 
training,  can  best  understand  how  far  below  his  possibilities  as 
a  motor  being  the  average  modern  man  goes  through  life,  and 
how  far  short  in  this  respect  he  falls  from  fulfilling  nature's 
design  for  him. 

For  unnumbered  generations  primitive  man  in  the  nomad 
age  wandered,  made  perhaps  annual  migrations,  and  bore 
heavy  burdens,  while  we  ride  relatively  unencumbered.  He 
tilled  the  reluctant  soil,  digging  wath  rude  implements  where  we 
use  machines  of  many  man-power.  In  the  stone,  iron,  and 
bronze  age,  he  shaped  stone  and  metals,  and  wrought  with  in- 
finite pains  and  effort,  products  that  we  buy  without  even 
knowledge  of  the  processes  by  which  they  are  made.  As  hunter 
he  followed  game,  and  when  found,  he  chased,  fought,  and 
overcame  it  in  a  struggle  perhaps  desperate,  while  we  shoot 
it  at  a  distance  with  little  risk  or  effort.  In  warfare  he  fought 
hand  to  hand  and  eye  to  eye,  while  w^e  kill  "  with  as  much  black 
powder  as  can  be  put  in  a  woman's  thimble."  He  caught  and 
domesticated  scores  of  species  of  wild  animals  and  taught  them 
to  serve  him ;  fished  with  patience  and  skill  that  compensated 
his  crude  tools,  weapons,  implements,  and  tackle;  danced 
to  exhaustion  in  the  service  of  his  gods  or  in  memory  of  his 
forebears,  imitating  every  animal,  rehearsing  all  his  own  activi- 
ties in  mimic  form  to  the  point  of  exhaustion,  while  we  move 
through  a  few  figures  in  closed  spaces.  He  dressed  hides, 
wove  baskets  which  we  can  not  reproduce,  and  fabrics  which 
we  only  poorly  imitate  by  machinery,  made  pottery  which  set 
our  fashions,  played  games  that  invigorated  body  and  soul. 
His  courtship  was  with  feats  of  prowess,  and  skill,  and  meant 
physical  effort  and  endurance. 

*  Encyclopaedia  of  Social  Reform,  1898,  p.  1095. 


1 68  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Adolescent  girls,  especially  in  the  middle  classes,  in  upper 
grammar  and  high  school  grades,  during  the  golden  age  for 
nascent  muscular  development,  suffer  perhaps  most  of  all  in 
this  respect.  Grave  as  are  the  evils  of  child  labor,  I  believe 
far  more  pubescents  in  this  country  now  suffer  from  too  little 
than  from  too  much  physical  exercise,  while  most  who  suffer 
from  work  do  so  because  it  is  too  uniform,  one-sided,  accessory, 
or  under  unwholesome  conditions,  and  not  because  it  is  ex- 
cessive in  amount.  Modern  industry  has  thus  largely  ceased 
to  be  a  means  of  physical  development  and  needs  to  be  offset 
by  compensating  modes  of  activity.  Many  labor-saving  de- 
vices increase  neural  strain,  so  that  one  of  the  problems  of  our 
time  is  how  to  preserve  and  restore  nerve  energy.  Under 
present  industrial  systems  this  must  grow  worse  and  not  better 
in  the  future.  Healthy  natural  industries  will  be  less  and  less 
open  to  the  young.  This  is  the  new  situation  that  now  con- 
fronts those  concerned  for  motor  education,  if  they  would 
only  make  good  what  is  lost. 

Some  of  the  results  of  these  conditions  are  seen  in  average 
measurements  of  dimensions,  proportions,  strength,  skill,  and 
control.  Despite  the  excellence  of  the  few,  the  testimony  of 
those  most  familiar  with  the  bodies  of  children  and  adults, 
and  their  physical  powers,  gives  evidence  of  the  ravages  of 
modern  modes  of  life  that,  without  a  wide-spread  motor  re- 
vival, can  bode  only  degeneration  for  our  nation  and  our  race. 
The  number  of  common  things  that  can  not  be  done  at  all; 
the  large  proportion  of  our  youth  who  must  be  exempted 
from  many  kinds  of  activity  or  a  great  amount  of  any ;  the  thin 
limbs,  collapsed  shoulders  or  chests,  the  bilateral  asymmetry, 
weak  hearts,  lungs,  eyes,  puny  and  bad  voices,  muddy  or  pallid 
complexions,  tired  ways,  automatism,  dyspeptic  stomachs,  the 
effects  of  youthful  error  or  of  impoverished  heredity,  delicate 
and  tender  nurture,  often,  alas,  only  too  necessary,  show  the 
lamentable  and  cumulative  effects  of  long  neglect  of  the  motor 
abilities,  the  most  educable  of  all  man's  powers,  and  perhaps 
the  most  important  for  his  well-being.  If  the  unfaithful 
stewards  of  these  puny  and  shameful  bodies  had  again,  as  in 
Sparta,  to  strip  and  stand  before  stern  judges  and  render  them 
account,  and  be  smitten  with  a  conviction  of  their  weakness, 
guilty  deformity,  and  arrest  of  growth,  if  they  were  brought  to 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION   1^9 

realize  how  they  are  fallen  beings,  as  weak  as  stern  theologians 
once  deemed  them  depraved,  and  how  great  their  need  of  phys- 
ical salvation,  we  might  hope  again  for  a  physical  renaissance. 
Such  a  rebirth  the  world  has  seen  but  twice  or  perhaps  thrice, 
and  each  was  followed  by  the  two  or  three  brightest  culture 
periods  of  history,  and  formed  an  epoch  in  the  advancement  of 
the  kingdom  of  man.  A  vast  body  of  evidence  could  be  col- 
lected from  the  writings  of  anthropologists  showing  how  supe- 
rior unspoiled  savages  are  to  civilized  man  in  correct  or  esthetic 
proportions  of  body,  in  many  forms  of  endurance  of  fatigue, 
hardship,  and  power  to  bear  exposure,  in  the  development  and 
preservation  of  teeth  and  hair,  in  keenness  of  senses,  absence  of 
deformities,  as  well  as  immunity  to  many  of  our  diseases. 
Their  women  are  stronger  and  bear  hardship  and  exposure, 
monthly  periods  and  childbirth,  better.  Civilization  is  so  hard 
on  the  body  that  some  have  called  it  a  disease,  despite  the  arts 
that  keep  puny  bodies  alive  to  a  greater  average  age,  and  our 
greater  protection  from  contagious  and  germ  diseases. 

The  progressive  realization  of  these  tendencies  has 
prompted  most  of  the  best  recent  and  great  changes  motor- 
ward  in  education  and  also  in  personal  regimen.  Health-  and 
strength-giving  agencies  have  put  to  school  the  large  motor 
areas  of  the  brain,  so  long  neglected,  and  have  vastly  enlarged 
their  scope.  Thousands  of  youth  are  now  inspired  with 
new  enthusiasm  for  physical  development,  and  new  institutions 
of  many  kinds  and  grades  have  arisen,  with  a  voluminous 
literature,  unnumbered  specialists,  specialties,  new  apparatus, 
tests,  movements,  methods,  and  theories,  and  the  press,  the 
public,  and  the  church  are  awakened  to  a  fresh  interest  in  the 
body  and  its  powers.  All  this  is  magnificent,  but  sadly  inade- 
quate to  cope  with  the  new  needs  and  dangers,  which  are  vastly 
greater. 

In  the  lower  realms  of  culture,  sects  have  arisen,  each  with 
its  own  creed  and  cult,  and  perhaps  its  own  publications,  schools, 
apparatus,  etc.,  and  each  blind  and  perhaps  hostile  to  the  merits 
of  others.  Some  make  deep  breathing  central,  others  relaxa- 
tion and  passivity,  to  get  all  the  unconscious  tensions  out  of 
the  muscles  and  joints,  group  by  group,  with  special  exer- 
cises, postures,  etc.,  to  this  end.  Some  years  ago  a  laughing 
cult,  with  giggle  classes  and  a  so-called  philosophy  of  happiness, 


1 70  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

flourished  in  a  number  of  our  cities.  Others  aim  chiefly  at 
Delsartian  grace,  emotional  expression,  and  gesture.  One 
schemelet  cultivates  classic  poses  and  recommends  those  of 
famous  statues  of  antiquity,  in  the  attitude  of  some  of  which  the 
pupil  must  always  be  found.  Yawning  has  a  cult  and  a  little 
literature  all  to  itself,  and  so  has  artificial  crying  and  laughing 
and  stretching.  There  are  several  health-lift,  chest-expanding 
systems  and  apparatus,  and  trainers  with  secret  methods  ex- 
plained only  to  pupils.  I  have  a  book-shelf  full  of  graded  class 
and  personal  exercises  for  both  sexes,  all  with  copious  directions 
and  reasons,  collections  of  plays  and  games,  new  and  old,  edited 
and  arranged  according  to  principles  superior  to  what  has  been 
known  hitherto.  Sometimes  the  diaphragm,  or  the  regulation 
of  the  bowels,  the  liver,  sex,  and  lungs  are  chiefly  had  in  view ; 
these  apparently  for  the  most  part  by  adult  authors,  who  have 
suffered,  and  found  relief,  and  who  benevolently  offer  their 
cures  as  preventives  to  the  young.  Here  the  rankest  weeds 
show  the  richest  soil  of  need  and  opportunity. 

Higher  up  the  scale  of  ameliorative  efforts  are  far  more 
sane  and  beneficent  methods,  and  we  must  glance  at  a  few  of 
the  best  and  most  typical,  following  the  order :  ( i )  industrial, 
(2)  manual  training,  (3)  gymnastic,  and  (4)  sports  and  play 
games. 

I.  Industrial  education  is  now  imperative  for  every  nation 
that  would  excel  in  agriculture,  manufacture,  and  trade,  not  only 
because  of  the  growing  intensity  of  competition,  but  because  of 
the  decline  of  the  apprentice  system  and  the  growing  intricacy 
of  processes,  requiring  only  the  skill  needed  for  livelihood. 
Thousands  of  our  youth  of  late  have  been  diverted  from 
secondary  schools  to  the  monotechnic  or  trade  classes  now 
established  for  horology,  glass-work,  brick-laying,  carpentry, 
forging,  dressmaking,  cooking,  typesetting,  bookbinding, 
brewing,  seamanship,  work  in  leather,  rubber,  horticulture, 
gardening,  photography,  basketry,  stock-raising,  typewriting, 
stenography  and  bookkeeping,  elementary  commercial  train- 
ing for  practical  preparation  for  clerkships,  etc.  In  this  work 
not  only  is  Boston,  our  most  advanced  city,  as  President 
Pritchett  ^  has  shown  in  detail,  far  behind  F)erlin,  but  German 

'  The  Place  of  Industrial  and  Technical  Training  in  Public  Education.     Tech- 
nology Review,  January,  1902. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        I?! 

workmen  and  shopmen  are  slowly  taking  the  best  places  even 
in  England,  and  but  for  a  high  tariff,  which  protects  our  in- 
feriority, the  competitive  pressure  would  be  still  greater.  In 
Germany,  especially,  this  training  is  far  more  diversified  than 
here,  always  being  colored  if  not  determined  by  the  prevalent 
industry  of  the  region  and  more  specialized  and  helped 
out  by  evening  and  even  Sunday  classes  in  the  school  buildings, 
and  by  the  still  strong  apprentice  system.  Froebelian  influence 
in  manual  training  reaches  through  the  eight  school  years,  and 
is  in  some  respects  better  than  ours  in  lower  grades,  but  is 
very  rarely  coeducational,  girls'  work  of  sewing,  knitting, 
crocheting,  weaving,  etc.,  not  being  considered  manual  train- 
ing. There  are  now  over  1,500  schools  and  workshops  in  Ger- 
many where  manual  training  is  taught ;  twenty-five  of  these  are 
independent  schools.  The  work  really  began  in  1875  with  v. 
Kaas,  and  is  promoted  by  the  great  Society  for  Boys'  Hand- 
work. Much  stress  is  laid  on  paper  and  pasteboard  work  in 
lower  grades,  under  the  influence  of  Kurufa  of  Darmstadt. 
Many  objects  for  illustrating  science  are  made,  and  one  course 
embraces  the  Seyner  water-wheel.^ 

In  France  it  is  made  more  effective  by  the  equal  salaries  of 
teachers  everywhere,  thus  securing  better  instruction  in  the 
country.  Adolescence  is  the  golden  period  for  acquiring  the 
skill  that  comes  by  practise,  so  essential  in  the  struggle  for 
survival.  In  general  this  kind  of  motor  education  is  least  of 
all  free,  but  subservient  to  the  tool,  machine,  process,  finished 
product,  or  end  in  view,  and  to  these  health  and  development 
are  subordinated,  so  that  they  tend  to  be  ever  more  narrow  and 
special.  The  standard  here  is  maximal  efficiency  of  the  capaci- 
ties that  earn.  It  may  favor  bad  habitual  attitudes,  muscular 
development  of  but  one  part,  excessive  large  or  small  muscles, 
involve  too  much  time  or  effort,  unhealthful  conditions,  etc., 
but  it  has  the  great  advantage  of  utility,  which  is  the  main- 
spring of  all  industry.  In  a  very  few  departments  and 
places  this  training  has  felt  the  influence  of  the  arts  and  crafts 
movement  and  has  been  faintly  touched  with  the  inspiration  of 
beauty.  While  such  courses  give  those  who  follow  them 
marked  advantage  over  those  w-ho  do  not,  they  are  chiefly 

*  See  an  article  by  Dr.  H.  E  Kolk,  Education,  Dec,  1902. 


172  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

utilitarian  and  do  little  to  mature  or  unfold  the  physical  powers, 
and  may  involve  arrest  or  degeneration. 

Where  not  one  but  several  or  many  processes  are  taught, 
the  case  is  far  better.  Of  all  work-schools,  a  good  farm  is 
probably  the  best  for  motor  development.  This  is  due  to  its 
great  variety  of  occupations,  healthful  conditions,  and  the 
incalculable  phyletic  reenforcement  from  immemorial  times. 
I  have  computed  some  tlireescore  industries  ^  as  the  census 
now  classifies  them,  that  were  more  or  less  generally  known  and 
practised  sixty  years  ago  in  a  little  township,  which  not  only  in 
this  but  in  other  respects  has  many  features  of  an  ideal  educa- 
tional environment  for  adolescent  boys,  combining  as  it  does 
not  only  physical  and  industrial,  but  civil  and  religious  elements 
in  wise  proportions  and  with  pedagogic  objectivity,  and  repre- 
senting the  ideal  of  such  a  state  of  intelligent  citizen  voters  as 
was  contemplated  by  the  framers  of  our  Constitution. 

Contrast  this  life  with  that  of  a  "  hand  "  in  a  modern  shoe 
factory,  who  does  all  day  but  one  of  the  eighty-one  stages  or 
processes  from  a  tanned  hide  to  a  finished  shoe,  or  of  a  man  in 
a  shirt-shop  who  is  one  of  thirty-nine,  each  of  whom  does  as 
piece-work  a  single  step  requiring  great  exactness,  speed,  and 
skill,  and  who  never  knows  how  a  whole  shirt  is  made,  and  we 
shall  see  that  the  present  beginning  of  a  revival  of  interest  in 
muscular  development  comes  none  too  early.  So  liberal  is 
muscular  education  of  this  kind  that  its  work  in  somewhat 
primitive  form  has  been  restored  and  copied  in  many  features 
by  many  educational  institutions  for  adolescents,  of  the  Abbots- 
holme  type  and  grade,  and  several  others,  whose  purpose  is  to 
train  for  primitive  conditions  of  colonial  life.  Thousands 
of  school  gardens  have  also  been  lately  developed  for 
lower  grades,  which  have  given  a  new  impetus  to  the  study  of 
nature.  Farm  training  at  its  best  instils  love  of  country, 
ruralizes  taste,  borrows  some  of  its  ideals  from  Goethe's  peda- 
gogic province,  and  perhaps  even  Oilman's  pie-shaped  commu- 
nities, with  villages  at  the  center  irradiating  to  farms  in  all 
directions.  In  England,  where  by  the  law  of  primogeniture 
holdings  are  large  and  in  few  hands,  this  training  has  never 
flourished,  as  it  has  greatly  in  France,   where  nearly  every 

*  See  my  Boy  Life  in  a  New  England  Town.     Proc.  Am.  Antiquarian  Society, 
October,  1890. 


GROWTH   OF  MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        173 

adult  male  may  own  land  and  a  large  proportion  will  come  to 
do  so.  So  of  processes.  As  a  student  in  Germany  I  took  a  few 
lessons  each  of  a  bookbinder,  a  glassblower,  a  shoemaker,  a 
plumber,  and  a  blacksmith,  and  here  I  have  learned  in  a  crude 
way  the  technique  of  the  gold-beater  and  old-fashioned  broom- 
maker,  etc.,  none  of  which  come  amiss  in  the  laboratory,  and  I 
am  proud  that  I  can  still  mow  and  keep  my  scythe  sharp,  chop, 
plow,  milk,  churn,  make  cheese  and  soap,  braid  a  palm-leaf  hat 
complete,  knit,  spin  and  even  "  put  in  a  piece  "  in  an  old-fash- 
ioned hand  loom,  and  weave  frocking.  But  this  pride  bows  low 
before  the  pupils  of  our  best  institutions  for  negroes,  Indians, 
and  juvenile  delinquents,  whose  training  is  often  in  more  than 
a  score  of  industries  and  who  to-day  in  my  judgment  receive  the 
best  training  in  the  land,  if  judged  by  the  annual  growth  in 
mind,  morals,  health,  physique,  ability,  and  knowledge,  all  tak- 
en together.  Instead  of  seeking  soft,  ready-made  places  near 
home,  such  education  impels  to  the  frontier,  to  strike  out  new 
careers,  to  start  at  the  bottom  and  rise  by  merit,  beginning  so 
low  that  every  change  must  be  a  rise.  Wherever  youth  thus 
trained  are  thrown,  they  land  like  a  cat  on  all-fours  and  are 
armed  cap-a-pie  for  the  struggle  of  life.  Agriculture,  manufac- 
ture, and  commerce  are  the  bases  of  national  prosperity,  and  on 
them  all  professions,  institutions,  and  even  culture,  are  more 
and  more  dependent,  while  the  old  ideals  of  mere  study  and 
brain-work  are  fast  becoming  obsolete.  We  really  retain  only 
the  knowledge  we  apply.  We  should  get  up  interest  in  new 
processes  like  that  of  a  naturalist  in  new  species.  Those  who 
leave  school  at  any  age  or  stage  should  be  best  fitted  to  take  up 
their  life  work  instead  of  leaving  unfitted  for  it,  aimless  and  dis- 
couraged. Instead  of  dropping  out  limp  and  disheartened,  we 
should  train  "  struggle-for-lifeurs,"  in  Daudet's  phrase,  and 
that  betimes,  so  that  the  young  come  back  to  it  not  too  late  for 
securing  the  best  benefits,  after  having  wasted  the  years  best  fit- 
ted for  it  in  profitless  studies  or  in  the  hard  school  of  failure.  By 
such  methods  many  of  our  flabby,  undeveloped,  anemic,  easy- 
living  city  youth  would  be  regenerated  in  body  and  spirit. 
Some  of  the  now  oldest,  richest,  and  most  famous  schools  of 
the  world  were  at  first  established  by  charity  for  poor  boys  who 
worked  their  way,  and  such  institutions  have  an  un- 
dreamed-of future.     No  other  so  well  fit  for  a  life  of  respect- 


174  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

able  and  successful  muscle  work,  and  perhaps  this  should  be 
central  for  all  at  this  stage.  It  develops  the  muscular  activi- 
ties rendered  necessary  by  man's  early  development,  which  were 
so  largely  concerned  with  food,  shelter,  clothing,  making  and 
selling  commodities  necessary  for  life,  comfort  and  safety. 
The  natural  state  of  man  is  not  war,  but  peace,  and  perhaps 
Dawson  ^  is  right  in  thinking  that  three-fourths  of  man's 
physical  activities  in  the  past  have  gone  into  such  vocations. 
Industry  has  determined  the  nature  and  trend  of  muscular  de- 
velopment, and  youth,  who  have  pets,  till  the  soil,  build,  manu- 
facture, use  tools,  and  master  elementary  processes  and  skills, 
are  most  truly  repeating  the  history  of  the  race.  This, 
too,  lays  the  best  foundation  for  intellectual  careers.  The 
study  of  pure  science,  as  well  as  its  higher  technology,  follows 
rather  than  precedes  this.  In  the  largest  sense  this  is  the  order 
of  nature,  from  fundamental  and  generalized  to  finer  accessory 
and  specialized  organs  and  functions,  and  such  a  sequence  best 
weeds  out  and  subordinates  automatisms.  The  age  of  stress  in 
most  of  these  kinds  of  training  is  that  of  most  rapid  increment 
of  muscular  power,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  middle  and  later  teens 
rather  than  childhood,  as  some  recent  methods  have  mistakenly 
assumed,  and  this  prepolytechnic  work,  wherever  and  in  what- 
ever degree  it  is  possible,  is  a  better  adjunct  of  secondary 
courses  than  manual  training,  the  sad  fact  being  that  according 
to  the  best  estimates  only  a  fraction  of  one  per  cent  of  those  who 
need  this  training  in  this  country  are  now  receiving  it. 

II.  Manual  training  has  many  origins,  but  in  its  now  most 
widely  accepted  form  it  came  to  us  more  than  a  generation  ago 
from  Moscow,  and  has  its  best  representation  here  in  our  new 
and  often  magnificent  manual-training  high  schools  and  in 
many  courses  in  other  public  schools.  This  work  meets  the 
growing  demand  of  the  country  for  a  more  practical  education, 
a  demand  v^'hich  often  greatly  exceeds  the  accommodations. 
The  philosophy,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  that  underlies  the 
movement,  is  simple,  forcible,  and  sound,  and  not  unlike  Pesta- 
lozzi's  "  keine  Kentnisse  ohnc  Fcrtigkeiten,"  in  that  it  lessens 
the  interval  between  thinking  and  doing;  helps  to  give  control, 
dexterity,  and  skill  an  industrial  trend  to  taste ;  interests  many 

*  Am.  Phys.  Ed.  Rev.,  June,  1902. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        I7S 

not  successful  in  ordinary  school ;  tends  to  the  better  appre- 
ciation of  good,  honest  work;  imparts  new  zest  for  some 
studies;  adds  somewhat  to  the  average  length  of  the  school 
period;  gives  a  sense  of  capacity  and  effectiveness,  and  is  a 
useful  preparation  for  a  number  of  vocations.  These  claims 
are  all  well  founded  and  this  w(ork  is  a  valuable  addition  to  the 
pedagogic  agencies  of  any  country  or  state.  As  man  excels 
the  higher  anthropoids  perhaps  almost  as  much  in  hand  power 
as  in  mind,  and  since  the  manual  areas  of  the  brain  are  wide  near 
the  psychic  zones,  and  the  cortical  centers  are  thus  directly  de- 
veloped, the  hand  is  a  potent  instrument  in  opening  the  intel- 
lect as  well  as  in  training  sense  and  will.  It  is  no  reproach  to 
these  schools  that,  full  as  they  are,  they  provide  for  but  an  in- 
significant fraction  of  the  circa  sixteen  millions  or  twenty  per 
cent  of  the  young  people  of  the  country  between  fifteen  and 
twenty-four. 

When  we  turn  to  the  needs  of  these  pupils,  the  errors  and 
limitations  of  the  method  are  painful  to  contemplate.  The 
work  is  essentially  manual  and  offers  little  for  the  legs,  where 
most  of  the  muscular  tissues  of  the  body  lie,  those  which  re- 
spond most  to  training  and  are  now  most  in  danger  of  degener- 
ation at  this  age;  the  back  and  trunk  are  also  little  trained. 
Consideration  of  proportion  and  bilateral  asymmetry  are  prac- 
tically ignored.  Almost  in  proportion  as  these  schools  have 
multiplied,  the  rage  for  uniformity,  together  with  motives  of 
economy  and  administrative  efficiency  on  account  of  overcrowd- 
ing, have  made  them  rigid  and  inflexible  on  the  principle  that  as 
the. line  lengthens  the  stake  must  be  strengthened.  This  is  a 
double  misfortune,  for  the  courses  were  not  sufficiently  con- 
sidered at  first  and  the  plastic  stage  of  adaptation  was  too 
short,  while  the  methods  of  industry  have  undergone  vast 
changes  since  they  were  given  shape.  There  are  now  between 
three  and  four  hundred  occupations  in  the  census,  more  than 
half  of  these  involving  manual  work,  so  that  never  perhaps 
was  there  so  great  a  pedagogic  problem  as  to  make  these  natural 
developments  into  conscious  art,  to  extract  what  may  be  called 
basal  types.  This  requires  an  effort  not  without  analysis  to 
Aristotle's  attempt  to  extract  from  the  topics  of  the  market- 
place the  underlying  categories  eternally  conditioning  all 
thought,  or  to  construct  a  grammar  of  speech.     Hardly  an 


i?^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

attempt  worthy  the  name,  not  even  the  very  inadequate  one  of 
a  committee,  has  been  made  in  this  field  to  study  the  conditions 
and  to  meet  them.  Like  Froebel's  gifts  and  occupations, 
deemed  by  their  author  the  very  roots  of  human  occupations 
in  infant  form,  the  processes  selected  are  underived  and  find 
their  justification  rather  in  their  logical  sequence  and  coherence 
than  in  being  true  norms  of  work.  If  these  latter  be  attainable 
at  all,  it  is  not  likely  that  they  will  fit  so  snugly  in  a  brief 
curriculum,  so  that  its  simplicity  is  suspicious.  The  wards 
of  the  keys  that  lock  the  secrets  of  nature  and  human  life 
are  more  intricate  and  mazy.  As  H.  T.  Bailey  well  puts  it 
in  substance,  a  master  in  any  art-craft  must  have  a  four- 
fold equipment:  i.  Ability  to  grasp  an  idea  and  embody  it. 
2.  Power  to  utilize  all  nerve,  and  a  wide  repertory  of  methods, 
devices,  recipes,  discoveries,  machines,  etc.  3.  Knowledge 
of  the  history  of  the  craft.  4.  Skill  in  technical  processes. 
American  schools  emphasize  chiefly  only  the  last. 

The  de  facto  result  is  thus  a  course  rich  in  details  represent- 
ing wood  and  iron  chiefly,  and  mostly  ignoring  other  materials ; 
the  part  of  the  course  treating  of  the  former,  wooden  in  its  teach- 
ings and  distinctly  tending  to  make  joiners,  carpenters  and  cabi- 
net-makers, that  of  the  latter  iron  in  its  rigidity  and  an  ex- 
cellent school  for  smiths,  mechanics,  and  machinists.  These 
courses  are  not  liberal  because  they  hardly  touch  science,  which 
is  rapidly  becoming  the  real  basis  of  every  industry.  Almost 
nothing  that  can  be  called  scientific  knowledge  is  required  or 
even  much  favored,  save  some  geometrical  and  mechanical 
drawing  and  its  implicates.  These  schools  instinctively  fear 
and  repudiate  plain  and  direct  utility,  or  suspect  its  educational 
value  or  repute  in  the  community  because  of  this  strong  bias 
toward  a  few  trades.  This  tendency  they  even  also  fear  less 
often  because  unfortunately  trade-unions  in  this  country  some- 
times jealously  suspect  it  and  might  vote  down  supplies,  than 
because  the  teachers  in  these  schools  were  generally  trained  in 
older  scholastic  and  even  classic  methods  and  matter.  In- 
dustry is  everywhere  and  always  for  the  sake  of  the  product, 
and  to  cut  loose  from  this  as  if  it  were  a  contamination  is  a 
fatal  mistake.  To  focus  on  process  only,  with  no  reference 
to  the  object  made,  is  here  an  almost  tragic  case  of  the  sacri- 
fice of  content  to  form,  which  in  all  history  has  been  the  chief 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        177 

stigma  of  degeneration  in  education.  Man  is  a  tool-using 
animal,  but  tools  are  always  only  a  means  to  an  end,  the  latter 
prompting  even  their  invention.  Hence  a  course  in  tool  ma- 
nipulation only,  with  persistent  refusal  to  consider  the  product 
lest  features  of  trade-schools  be  introduced,  has  made  most  of 
our  manual-training  high  schools  ghastly,  hollow,  artificial  in- 
stitutions. Instead  of  making  in  the  lower  grades  certain  toys 
which  are  masterpieces  of  mechanical  simplification,  as  tops 
and  kites,  and  introducing  such  processes  as  glass-making  and 
photography,  and  in  higher  grades  making  simple  scientific  ap- 
paratus more  generic  than  machines  to  open  the  great  principles 
of  the  material  universe,  all  is  sacrificed  to  supernormalized 
method. 

As  in  all  hypermethodic  schemes  the  thought  side  is  feeble. 
There  is  no  such  control  of  the  work  of  these  schools  by  the 
higher  technical  institutions  as  the  college  exercises  over  the 
high  school,  so  that  few  of  them  do  work  that  fits  for  advanced 
training  or  is  thought  best  by  technical  faculties.  In  most  of 
its  current  narrow  forms,  manual  training  will  prove  to  be  his- 
torically as  it  is  educationally  extemporized  and  tentative,  and 
will  soon  be  superseded  by  broader  methods  and  forgotten  and 
obsolete,  or  cited  only  as  a  low  point  of  departure  from  which 
future  progress  will  loom  up. 

Indeed  in  more  progressive  centers,  many  new  departures 
are  now  in  the  experimental  stage.  Goetze  at  Leipzig,  as  a 
result  of  long  and  original  studies  and  trials,  has  developed 
courses  in  which  pasteboard  work  and  modeling  are  made  of 
equal  rank  with  wood  and  iron,  and  he  has  connected  it  even 
with  the  kindergarten  below.  In  general  the  whole  industrial 
life  of  our  day  is  being  slowly  explored  in  the  quest  of  new  edu- 
cational elements,  and  rubber,  lead,  glass,  textiles,  metallurgical 
operations,  agriculture,  every  tool  and  many  machines,  etc., 
are  sure  to  contribute  their  choicest  pedagogical  factors  to  the 
final  result.  In  every  detail  the  prime  consideration  should  be 
the  nature  and  needs  of  the  youthful  body  and  will  at  each  age, 
their  hygiene  and  fullest  development,  and  next,  the  closest  con- 
nection with  science  at  every  point  should  do  the  same  for  the 
intellect.  Each  operation  and  each  tool — the  saw,  knife,  plane, 
screw,  hammer,  chisel,  draw-shave,  sandpaper,  lathe — will  be 
studied  with  reference  to  their  orthopedic  value,  bilateral  asym- 
13 


ly^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

metry,  the  muscles  they  develop,  and  the  attitudes  and  motor 
habits  they  favor;  and  uniformity,  which  in  France  often  re- 
quires classes  to  saw,  strike,  plane  up,  down,  right,  left, 
all  together,  upon  count  and  command,  will  give  place  to  indi- 
viduality. 

Sloyd  has  certain  special  features  and  claims.  The  word 
means  skilful,  deft.  The  movement  was  organized  in  Sweden 
a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  as  an  effort  to  prevent  the  extinction 
by  machinery  of  peasant  home  industry  during  the  long  winter 
night.  Home  sloyd  was  soon  installed  in  an  institution 
of  its  own  for  training  teachers  at  Naas.  It  works  in  wood 
only,  with  little  machinery,  and  is  best  developed  for  children 
of  from  eleven  to  fifteen.  It  no  longer  aims  to  make  artisans, 
but  its  manipulations  are  meant  to  be  developmental,  to  teach 
both  sexes  not  only  to  be  useful  but  self-active  and  self-respect- 
ing, and  to  revere  exactness  as  a  form  of  truthfulness.  It  as- 
sumes that  all  and  especially  the  motor-minded  can  really  under- 
stand only  what  they  make,  and  that  one  can  work  like  a  peasant 
and  think  like  a  philosopher.  It  aims  to  produce  wholes  rather 
than  parts  like  the  Russian  system,  and  to  be  so  essentially  edu- 
cational that,  as  a  leading  exponent  says,  its  best  effects  would 
be  conserved  if  the  hands  were  cut  off.  This  change  of  its 
original  utilitarianism  from  the  lower  to  the  liberal  motor  de- 
velopment of  the  middle-  and  upper  classes  and  from  the  land 
where  it  originated  to  another,  has  not  eliminated  the  dominant 
marks  of  its  origin  in  its  models,  the  penates  of  the  sloyd  house- 
hold, the  unique  features  of  which  persist  like  a  national  school 
of  art,  despite  transplantation  and  transformation.^ 

Sloyd  at  its  best  tries  to  correlate  several  series,  viz., 
exercises,  tools,  drawing,  and  models.  Each  must  be  pro- 
gressive, so  that  every  new  step  in  each  series  involves  a  new 
and  next  developmental  step  in  all  the  others,  and  all  together, 
it  is  claimed,  fit  the  order  and  degree  of  development  of  each 
power  appealed  to  in  the  child.  Yet  there  has  been  hardly  an 
attempt  to  justify  either  the  physiological  or  psychological 
reason  of  a  single  step  in  any  of  these  series,  and  the  coordina- 
tion of  the  series  even  with  each  other,  to  say  nothing  of  their 
adaptation  to  the  stages  of  the  child's  development.    This,  if  as 

'  This  I  have  elsewhere  tried  to  show  in  detail.     Criticisms  of  Manual  Train, 
ing  and  Mechanic  Arts  in  High  Schools.     Ped.  Scm.,  June,  1902. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        179 

pat  and  complete  as  is  urged,  would  indeed  constitute  on  the 
whole  a  paragon  of  all  the  harmony,  beauty,  totality  in  vari- 
ety, etc.,  which  make  it  so  magnificent  in  the  admirer's  eyes. 
But  the  "45  tools,  72  exercises,  31  models,  15  of  which  are 
joints,"  all  learned  by  teachers  in  one  school  year  of  daily  work 
and  by  pupils  in  four  years,  are  overmethodic,  and  such  correla- 
tion is  impossible  in  so  many  series  at  once.  Every  dual  order, 
even  of  work  and  unfoldment  of  powers,  is  hard  enough,  since 
the  fall  lost  us  Eden,  and  woodwork,  could  it  be  upon  that  of  the 
tree  of  knowledge  itself,  is  incompatible  with  enjoying  its  fruit. 
Although  a  philosopher  may  see  the  whole  universe  in  its 
smallest  part,  all  his  theory  can  not  reproduce  educational 
wholes  from  fragments  of  it.  The  real  merits  of  sloyd  have 
caused  its  enthusiastic  coryphei  to  magnify  its  scope  and  claims 
far  beyond  their  modest  bounds,  and  although  its  field  covers  the 
great  transition  from  childhood  to  youth,  one  searches  in  vain 
both  its  literature  and  practise  for  the  slightest  recognition  of 
the  new  motives  and  methods  that  puberty  suggests.  Especially 
in  its  partially  acclimatized  forms  to  American  conditions,  it  is 
all  adult  and  almost  scholastic,  and  as  the  most  elaborate  ma- 
chinery may  sometimes  be  run  by  a  poor  power-wheel,  if  the 
stream  be  swift  and  copious  enough,  so  the  mighty  current 
that  sets  toward  motor  education  would  give  it  some  degree  of 
success  were  it  worse  and  less  economic  of  pedagogic  momen- 
tum than  it  is.  It  holds  singularly  aloof  from  other  methods 
of  efferent  training  and  resists  coordination  with  them,  and  its 
provisions  for  other  than  hand  development  are  slight.  It  will 
be  one  of  the  last  to  accept  its  true  but  modest  place  as  con- 
tributing certain  few  but  precious  elements  in  the  greater  syn- 
thesis that  impends.  Indian  industries,  basketry,  pottery,  bead, 
leather,  bows  and  arrows,  bark,  etc.,  which  our  civilization  is 
making  lost  arts  by  forcing  the  white  man's  industries  upon 
red  men  at  reservation  schools  and  elsewhere,  need  only  a  small 
part  of  the  systemization  that  Swedish  peasant  work  has  re- 
ceived to  develop  even  greater  educational  values,  and  the  same 
is  true  of  the  indigenous  household  work  of  the  old  New  Eng- 
land farm,  the  real  worth  and  possibilities  of  which  are  only 
now,  and  perhaps  too  late,  beginning  to  be  seen  by  a  few  edu- 
cators. 

This  brings  us  to  the  arts  and  crafts  movement,  originating 


i8o  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

with  Carlyle's  gospel  of  work  and  Ruskin's  medievalism,  de- 
veloped by  William  Morris  and  his  disciples  at  the  Red  House, 
checked  awhile  by  the  ridicule  of  the  comic  opera  Patience, 
and  lately  revived  in  some  of  its  features  by  Cobden-Sander- 
son,  and  of  late  to  some  extent  in  various  centers  in  this 
country.  Its  ideal  was  to  restore  the  day  of  the  seven 
ancient  guilds  and  of  Hans  Sachs,  the  poet  cobbler,  when 
conscience  and  beauty  inspired  work  and  the  hand  did  what 
machines  only  imitate  and  vulgarize.  In  the  past,  which 
this  school  of  motor  culture  harks  back  to,  work  was  indeed 
praise  for  which  our  degenerate  age  lacks  even  respect.  Refined 
men  and  women  have  remembered  these  early  days,  when  their 
race  was  in  its  prime,  as  a  lost  paradise  which  they  would  regain 
by  designing  and  even  weaving  tapestries  and  muslins;  ex- 
perimenting in  vats  with  dyes  to  rival  Tyrian  purple ;  printing 
and  binding  by  hand  books  that  surpassed  the  best  of  the 
Aldines  and  Elzevirs ;  carving  in  old  oak ;  hammering  brass ; 
forging  locks,  irons,  and  candlesticks;  becoming  artists  in 
burned  wood  and  leather ;  seeking  old  effects  of  simplicity  and 
solidity  in  furniture  and  decoration,  as  well  as  in  architecture, 
stained  glass,  and  to  some  extent  in  dress  and  manners;  and 
all  this  toil  and  moil  was  ad  majorem  gloriam  hominis  in  a 
new  socialistic  state,  where  the  artist  and  even  the  artisan  who 
does  take  his  rightful  place  above  the  man  who  merely  knows. 
The  day  of  the  mere  professor,  who  deals  in  knowledge,  is 
gone,  and  the  day  of  the  doer,  who  creates,  has  come.  The 
brain  and  hand,  too  long  divorced  and  each  weak  and  mean 
without  the  other,  use  and  beauty,  each  alone  vulgar,  letters 
and  labor,  each  soulless  without  the  other,  are  henceforth  to  be 
one  and  inseparable,  and  this  union  will  lift  man  to  a  higher 
level.  The  workman  in  his  apron  and  paper  hat,  inspired  by 
the  new  socialism  and  the  old  spirit  of  chivalry  as  revived  by 
Scott,  revering  Wagner's  revival  of  the  old  Deutschenthiim 
that  was  to  conquer  Christenthum,  or  Tennyson's  Arthurian 
cycle — this  was  its  ideal ;  even  as  the  Jews  rekindled  their  loy- 
alty to  the  ancient  traditions  of  their  race  and  made  their  Bible 
under  Ezra ;  as  we  begin  to  revere  the  day  of  the  farmer-citizen, 
who  made  our  institutions,  or  as  some  of  us  would  revive  his 
vanishing  industrial  life  for  the  red  man. 

Although  this  movement  was  by  older  men  and  women  and 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        l8l 

had  in  it  something  of  the  longing  regret  of  senescence  for 
days  that  are  no  more,  it  shows  us  the  glory  which  invests  racial 
adolescence  when  it  is  recalled  in  maturity,  the  time  when  the 
soul  can  best  appreciate  the  value  of  its  creations  and  its  possi- 
bilities, and  really  lives  again  in  its  glamour  and  finds  in  it  its 
greatest  inspiration.  Hence  it  has  its  lessons  for  us  here.  A 
touch,  but  not  too  much  of  it,  should  be  felt  in  all  manual  educa- 
tion, which  is  just  as  capable  of  idealism  as  literary  education. 
This  gives  soul,  interest,  content,  beauty,  taste.  If  not  a  poly- 
phrastic  philosophy  seeking  to  dignify  the  occupation  of  the 
workshop  by  a  pretentious  Volapuk  of  reasons  and  abstract  the- 
ories, we  have  here  the  pregnant  suggestion  of  a  psychological 
quarry  of  motives  and  spirit  opened  and  ready  to  be  worked. 
Thus  the  best  forces  from  the  past  should  be  turned  on  to  shape 
and  reenforce  the  best  tendencies  of  the  present.  The  writings 
of  the  above  gospelers  of  work  not  only  could,  and  should,  but 
will  be  used  to  inspire  manual-training  high  schools,  sloyd 
and  even  some  of  the  less  scholastic  industrial  courses,  but  each 
is  incomplete  without  the  other.  These  books  and  those  that 
breathe  their  spirit  should  be  the  mental  workshop  of  all  who  do 
tool,  lathe,  and  forge  work,  who  design  and  draw  patterns, 
carve  or  mold,  or  of  those  who  study  how  to  shape  matter  for 
human  uses,  and  whose  aim  is  to  obtain  diplomas  or  certificates 
of  fitness  to  teach  all  such  things.  The  muse  of  art  and  even  of 
music  will  have  some  voice  in  the  great  synthesis  which  is  to 
gather  up  the  scattered,  hence  ineffective  elements  of  secondary 
motor  training,  in  forms  which  shall  represent  all  the  needs  of 
adolescents  in  the  order  and  proportion  that  nature  and  growth 
stages  indicate,  drawing  with  this  end  supreme,  upon  all  the 
resources  that  history  and  reform  offer  to  our  selection.  All 
this  can  never  make  work  become  play.  Indeed  it  will  and 
should  make  work  harder  and  more  unlike  play  and  of  another 
genus,  because  the  former  is  thus  given  its  own  proper  soul  and 
leads  its  own  distinct,  but  richer,  and  more  abounding  life. 

I  must  not  close  this  section  without  brief  mention  of  two 
important  studies  that  have  supplied  each  a  new  and  important 
determination  concerning  laws  of  work  peculiar  to  adolescence. 

The  main  telegraphic  line  requires  a  speed  of  over  seventy 
letters  per  minute  of  all  whom  they  will  employ.  As  a  sending 
rate  this  is  not  very  difficult  and  is  often  attained  after  two 


182 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


months'  practise.  This  standard  for  receiving  rate  is  harder 
and  later,  and  inquiry  at  schools  where  it  is  taught  shows  that 
about  seventy-five  per  cent  of  those  who  begin  the  study  fail  to 
reach  this  speed  and  so  are  not  employed.  Bryan  and  Harter  ^ 
explained  the  rate  of  improvement  in  both  sending  and  receiv- 
ing, with  results  represented  for  one  typical  subject  in  the  fol- 
lowing curve. 

From  the  first,  sending  improves  most  rapidly  and  crosses 
the  dead-line  a  few  months  before  the  receiving  rate,  which 


Weeks  of  Practice 

140 

4 

8          13         16          20         34 

38         32 

36       40 

. 

1             1 

130 

- 

gen^ng^^ 

120 
fllO 

- 

^^^ 

|100 

- 

S.80 

i   60 
t-5   50 

- 

/         Slowest  JIain  Line  Rate          J 

i 

/            -;^^_^ 

V 

^^ ^^^^"^^ 

^** 

40 
30 

X 

'^/"^y^^ 

20 

-  //^ 

•^ 

10 

~/^^ 

may  fall  short ;  curves  i  and  2  represent  the  same  student.  I 
have  added  line  3  to  illustrate  the  three-fourths  who  fail.  Re- 
ceiving is  far  less  pleasant  than  sending,  and  years  of  daily 
practise  at  ordinary  rates  will  not  bring  a  man  to  his  maximum 
rate,  but  he  remains  on  the  low  plateau  with  no  progress  be- 
yond a  certain  point.  If  forced  by  stress  of  work,  danger  of 
being  dropped,  or  by  will  power  to  make  a  prolonged  and  in- 
tense effort,  he  breaks  through  his  hidebound  rate  and  perma- 
nently attains  a  faster  pace.  This  is  true  at  each  step,  and 
every  advance  seems  to  cost  even  more  intensive  effort  than 
the  former  one.  At  length,  for  those  who  go  on,  the  rate  of  re- 
ceiving, which  is  a  more  complex  process,  exceeds  that  of 
sending,  and  the  curves  of  the  above  figure  would  cross  if  pro- 
duced.   The  expert  receives  so  much  faster  than  he  sends  that 

*  Studies  in  the  Physiology  and   Psychology   of  the  Telegraphic  Language. 
Psychological  Review,  vol.  iv,  p.  27,  and  vol.  vi,  p.  345. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION       183 

abbreviated  codes  are  used,  and  he  may  take  eighty  to  eighty- 
five  v^ords  a  minute  on  a  typewriter  in  correct  form.  THe  motor 
curve  seems  to  asymptotically  approach  a  perhaps  physiolog- 
ical limit,  which  the  receiving  curve  does  not  suggest.  This 
seems  a  special  case  of  a  general  though  not  yet  explained  law. 
In  learning  a  foreign  language,  speaking  is  first  and  easiest,  and 
hearing  takes  a  late  but  often  sudden  start  to  independence. 
Perhaps  this  holds  of  every  ability.  To  Bryan  this  suggests  as 
an  hierarchy  of  habits,  the  plateau  of  little  or  no  improvement, 
meaning  that  lower  order  habits  are  approaching  their  maxi- 
mum but  are  not  yet  automatic  enough  to  leave  the  attention 
free  to  attack  higher  order  habits.  The  second  ascent  from 
drudgery  to  freedom,  which  comes  through  automatism,  is 
often  as  sudden  as  the  first  ascent.  One  stroke  of  attention 
comes  to  do  what  once  took  many.  To  attain  such  effective 
speed  is  not  dependent  on  reaction  time.  This  shooting  to- 
gether of  units  distinguishes  the  master  from  the  man,  the 
genius  from  the  hack.  In  many,  if  not  all  skills,  where  expert- 
ness  is  sought,  there  is  a  long  discouraging  level,  and  then  for 
the  best  a  sudden  ascent,  as  if  here  too,  as  we  have  reason  to 
think  in  the  growth  of  both  the  body  as  a  whole  and  in  that  of 
its  parts,  nature  does  make  leaps  and  attains  her  ends  by  alter- 
nate rests  and  rushes.  Youth  lives  along  on  a  low  level  of 
interest  and  accomplishment  and  then  starts  onward,  is  trans- 
formed, converted,  the  hard  becomes  easy,  the  old  life  sinks  to 
a  lower  stratum  and  a  new  and  higher  order,  perhaps  a  higher 
brain  level  and  functions  are  evolved.  The  practical  implica- 
tion here  of  the  necessity  of  hard  concentrative  effort  as  a  con- 
dition of  advancement  is  reen forced  by  a  quotation  from  Sen- 
ator Stanford  to  the  effect  of  early  and  rather  intensive  work 
at  not  too  long  periods  in  training  colts  for  racing.  Let-ups  are 
especially  dangerous.  He  says,  "  It  is  the  supreme  effort  that 
develops."  This,  I  may  add,  suggests  what  is  developed  else- 
where, that  truly  spontaneous  attention  is  conditioned  by  spon- 
taneous muscle  tension,  which  is  a  function  of  growth,  and 
that  muscles  are  thus  organs  of  the  mind ;  and  also  that  even 
voluntary  attention  is  motivated  by  the  same  nisus  of  develop- 
ment even  in  its  most  adult  form,  and  that  the  products  of  sci- 
ence, invention,  discovery,  as  well  as  the  association  plexus  of  all 
that  was  originally  determined  in  the  form  of  consciousness, 


i»4  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

are  made  by  rhythmic  alternation  of  attack,  as  it  moves  from 
point  to  point  creating  diversions  and  recurrence. 

The  other  study,  although  quite  independent,  is  in  part  a 
special  application  and  illustration  of  the  same  principle. 

At  the  age  of  four  or  five,  when  they  can  do  little  more  than 
scribble,  children's  chief  interest  in  pictures  is  as  finished  prod- 
ucts ;  but  in  the  second  period,  which  Lange  calls  that  of 
artistic  illusion,  the  child  sees  in  his  own  work  not  merely  what 
it  represents,  but  an  image  of  fancy  back  of  it.  This,  then,  is 
the  golden  period  for  the  development  of  power  to  create  artis- 
tically. The  child  loves  to  draw  everything  with  the  pleasure 
chiefly  in  the  act,  and  he  cares  little  for  the  finished  picture. 
He  draws  out  of  his  own  head,  and  not  from  copy  before  his 
eye.  Anything  and  everything  is  attempted  in  bold  lines  in 
this  golden  age  of  drawing.  If  he  followed  the  teacher,  looked 
carefully  and  drew  what  he  saw,  he  would  be  abashed  at  his 
production.  Indians,  conflagrations,  games,  brownies,  trains, 
pageants,  battles,  everything  is  graphically  portrayed,  but  only 
the  little  artist  himself  sees  the  full  meaning  of  his  lines. 
Criticism  or  drawing  strictly  after  nature  breaks  this  charm, 
since  it  gives  place  to  mechanical  reproduction  in  which  the 
child  has  little  interest.  This  awakens  him  from  his  dream  to 
a  realization  that  he  can  not  draw,  and  from  ten  to  fifteen  his 
power  of  perceiving  things  steadily  increases  and  he  makes 
almost  no  progress  in  drawing.  Adolescence  arouses  the  cre- 
ative faculty  and  the  desire  and  ability  to  draw  are  checked  and 
decline  after  thirteen  or  fourteen.  The  curve  is  the  plateau 
which  Barnes  has  described.  The  child  has  measured  his  own 
productions  upon  the  object  they  reproduced  and  found  them 
wanting,  is  discouraged  and  dislikes  drawing.  From  twelve 
on,  Barnes  found  drawing  more  and  more  distasteful,  and  this, 
too,  Lukens  found  to  be  the  opinion  of  our  art  teachers.  The 
pupils  may  draw  very  properly  and  improve  in  technique,  but  the 
interest  is  gone.  This  is  the  condition  in  which  most  men  re- 
main all  their  lives.  Their  power  to  appreciate  steadily  in- 
creases. Only  a  few  gifted  adolescents  about  this  age  begin  to 
develop  a  new  zest  in  production,  rivaling  that  of  the  period 
from  five  to  ten,  when  their  satisfaction  is  again  chiefly  in 
creation.  These  are  the  artists  whose  active  powers  domi- 
nate. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        185 

Liikens  ^  finds  in  his  studies  of  drawing,  that  in  what  he  calls 
his  fourth  period  of  artistic  development,  there  are  those 
"  who  during  adolescence  experience  a  rebirth  of  creative 
power."  Zest  in  creation  then  often  becomes  a  stronger  in- 
centive to  work  than  any  pleasure  or  profit  to  be  derived  from 
the  finished  product,  so  that  in  this  the  propitious  conditions 
of  the  first  golden  age  of  childhood  are  repeated  and  the  deepest 
satisfaction  is  again  found  in  the  work  itself.  At  about  four- 
teen or  fifteen,  which  is  the  transition  period,  nascent  faculties 
sometimes  develop  very  rapidly.  Lukens  ^  draws  the  following 
interesting  curve. 


3     4     5      6      7      8     9     10    n    12    13    14.   15    16    17    18    19    20 

Motor,  creative  or  productive  power. 
Sensory  or  receptive  interest  in  the  finished  product. 


The  reciprocity  between  the  power  to  produce  and  that  to 
appreciate,  roughly  represented  in  the  above  curve,  very  likely 
is  also  true  in  the  domain  of  music,  and  may  be,  perhaps,  a 
general  law  of  development.  Certain  it  is  that  the  adolescent 
power  to  apperceive  and  appreciate  never  so  far  outstrips  his 
power  to  produce  or  reproduce  as  about  midway  in  the  teens. 
Now  impressions  sink  deepest.  The  greatest  artists  are  usually 
those  who  paint  later,  when  the  expressive  powers  are  de- 
veloped, what  they  have  felt-  deepest  and  known  best  at  this 
age,  and  not  those  who  in  the  late  twenties,  or  still  later,  have 

*  A  Study  of  Children's  Drawings  in  the  Early  Years.  Ped.  Sem. ,  October, 
1896.  See  also  Das  Kind  als  Kunstler,  von  C.  Gotze.  Hamburg,  1896.  Draw- 
ing in  the  Early  Years.  Proceedings  of  the  Nat'l  Educ.  Assoc,  1899.  The  Gene- 
tic vs.  the  Logical  Order  in  Drawing,  by  F.  Burk.      Ped.  Sem.,  .September,  1902. 

'  Die  Entwickelungsstufen  beim  Zeichnen.     Die  Kinderfehler,  vol.  ii,  p.  166. 


l86  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

gone  to  new  environments  and  sought  to  depict  them.  All 
young  people  draw  best  those  objects  they  love  most,  and  their 
proficiency  should  be  some  test  of  the  contents  of  their  minds. 
They  must  put  their  own  consciousness  into  a  picture.  At 
the  dawn  of  this  stage  of  appreciation  the  esthetic  tastes  should 
be  stimulated  by  exposure  to,  and  instructed  in  feeling  for,  the 
subject-matter  of  masterpieces  and  instruction  in  technique,  de- 
tail, criticism,  and  learned  discrimination  of  schools  of  painting 
should  be  given  intermittently.  Art  should  not  now  be  for  art's 
sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  feeling  and  character,  life,  and  conduct ; 
it  should  be  adjunct  to  morals,  history,  and  literature;  and  in 
all,  edification  should  be  the  goal,  and  personal  interest,  and  not 
that  of  the  teacher,  should  be  the  guide.  Insistence  on  produc- 
tion should  be  eased,  and  the  receptive  imagination,  now  so  hun- 
gry, be  fed  and  reenforced  by  story  and  all  other  accessories.  By 
such  a  curriculum,  potential  creativeness,  if  it  exists,  will  surely 
be  evoked  in  its  own  good  time.  It  will,  at  first,  attempt  no 
commonplace  drawing-master  themes,  but  will  essay  the  highest 
that  the  imagination  can  bode  forth  ;  it  may  be  crude  and  lame  in 
execution,  but  it  will  be  lofty,  perhaps  grand,  and  if  it  is  original 
in  consciousness  it  will  be  in  effect.  Most  creative  painters 
before  twenty  have  grappled  with  the  greatest  scenes  in  litera- 
ture or  turning  points  in  history,  representations  of  the  loftiest 
truths,  embodiments  of  the  most  inspiring  ideals.  None  who 
deserve  the  name  of  artist  copy  anything  now,  and  least  of  all 
with  objective  fidelity  to  nature,  and  the  teacher  that  represses 
or  criticizes  this  first  point  of  genius,  or  who  can  not  pardon  the 
grave  faults  of  technique  inevitable  at  this  age  when  ambition 
ought  to  be  too  great  for  power,  is  not  an  educator  but  a 
repressor,  a  pedagogic  philistine  committing,  like  so  many  of 
his  calling  in  other  fields,  the  unpardonable  sin  against  bud- 
ding promise,  always  at  this  age  so  easily  blighted.  Just  as  the 
child  of  six  or  seven  should  be  encouraged  in  his  strong  in- 
stinct to  draw  the  most  complex  scenes  of  his  daily  life,  so 
now  the  inner  life  should  find  graphic  utterance  in  all  its  in- 
tricacy up  to  the  full  limit  of  unrepressed  courage.  For  the  great 
majority,  on  the  other  hand,  who  only  appreciate  and  will  never 
create,  the  mind,  if  it  have  its  rights,  will  be  stored  with  the 
best  images  and  sentiments  of  art,  for  at  this  time  they  are  best 
remembered  and  sink  deepest  into  heart  and   life;  now,  al- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR  POWER   AND   FUNCTION       187 

though  the  hand  may  refuse,  the  fancy  paints  the  world  in 
brightest  hues  and  fairest  forms,  and  such  an  opportunity  for 
infecting  the  soul  with  vaccine  of  ideality,  hope,  optimism, 
and  courage  in  adversity,  will  never  come  again.  I  believe  that 
in  few  departments  are  current  educational  theories  and  prac- 
tises so  hard  on  youth  of  superior  gifts,  just  at  the  age  when  all 
become  geniuses  for  a  season,  very  brief  for  most,  prolonged  for 
some,  and  permanent  for  the  best.  We  do  not  know  how 
to  teach  to  see,  hear,  and  feel  when  the  sense  centers  are  most 
indelibly  impressible,  and  to  give  relative  rest  to  the  hand  dur- 
ing the  years  when  its  power  of  accuracy  is  abated  and  when  all 
that  is  good  is  idealized  farthest,  and  confidence  in  ability  to 
produce  is  at  its  lowest  ebb. 

Finally,  our  divorce  between  industrial  and  manual  training 
is  abnormal,  and  higher  technical  education  is  the  chief  sufferer. 
Professor  Thurston,  of  Cornell,  who  lately  returned  from  a 
tour  of  inspection  abroad,  reported  that  to  equal  Germany  we 
now  need:  "  i.  Twenty  technical  universities,  having  in  their 
schools  of  engineering  50  instructors  and  500  students  each. 
2.  Two  thousand  technical  high  schools  or  manual-training 
schools,  each  having  not  less  than  200  students  and  10  instruct- 
ors." If  we  have  elementary  trade-schools,  this  would  mean 
technical  high  schools  enough  to  accommodate  700,000  stu- 
dents, served  by  20,000  teachers.  With  the  strong  economic 
arguments  in  this  direction  we  are  not  here  concerned ;  but  that 
there  are  tendencies  to  unfit  youth  for  life  by  educational  method 
and  matter  shown  in  strong  relief  from  this  standpoint,  we 
shall  point  out  in  a  later  chapter. 

III.  Under  the  term  gymnastics,  literally  naked  exercises, 
we  here  include  those  denuded  of  all  utilities  or  ulterior  ends 
save  those  of  physical  culture.  This  is  essentially  modern  and 
was  unknown  in  antiquity,  where  training  was  for  games, 
for  war,  etc.  Several  ideals  underlie  this  movement,  which  al- 
though closely  related  are  distinct  and  as  yet  by  no  means  en- 
tirely harmonized.     These  may  be  described  as  follows : 

A.  One  aim  of  Jahn,  more  developed  by  Spiess,  and  their 
successors,  was  to  do  everything  physically  possible  for  the 
body  as  a  mechanism.  Many  postures  and  attitudes  are  as- 
sumed and  many  movements  made  that  are  never  called  for  in 


1 88  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

life.     Some  of  these  are  so  novel  that  a  great  variety  of  new 
apparatus  had  to  be  devised  to  bring  them  out,  and  Jahn  in- 
vented many  new  names,  some  of  them  without  etymologies,  to 
designate  the  repertory  of  his  discoveries  and  inventions  that 
extended  the  range  of  motor  life.     Common  movements,  in- 
dustry, and  even  games,  train  only  a  limited  number  of  muscles, 
activities,  and  coordinations,  and  leave  more  or  less  unused 
groups  and   combinations,   so  that   many   latent   possibilities 
slumber,  and  powers  slowly  lapse  through  disuse.     Not  only 
must  these  be  rescued,  but  modern  progressive  man  has  new 
nascent  possibilities  that  must  be  addressed  and  developed. 
Even  the  common  things  that  the  average  untrained  youth  can 
not  do  are  legion,  and  each  of  these  should  be  a  new  incentive 
to  the  trainer  as  he  realizes  how  very  far  below  their  motor 
possibilities  most  men  live.     The  man  of  the  future  may,  and 
even  must,  do  things  impossible  in  the  past  and  acquire  new 
motor  variations  not  given  by  heredity.     Our  somatic  frame 
and  its  powers  must  therefore  be  carefully  studied,  inventoried, 
and  assessed  afresh,  and  a  kind  and  amount  of  exercise  re- 
quired that  is  exactly  proportioned,  not  perhaps  to  the  size  but 
to  the  capability  of  each  voluntary  muscle;  thus  only  can  we 
have  a  truly  humanistic  physical  development,  analogous  to  the 
training  of  all  the  powers  of  the  mind  in  a  broad,  truly  liberal, 
and  non-professional  or  non-vocational  educational  curriculum. 
The  body  will  thus  have  its  rightful  share  in  the  pedagogic 
traditions  and  inspirations  of  the  renaissance.     Thus  only  can 
we  have  a  true  scale  of  standardized  culture  values  for  efferent 
processes,  and  from  this  we  can  measure  the  degrees  of  de- 
parture, both  in  the  direction  of  excess  and  defect,  of  each  form 
of  work,  motor  habit,  and  even  play.     Many  modern  Epigoni 
in  the  wake  of  this  great  ideal,  where  its  momentum  was  nearly 
spent,   feeling  that  new  activities  might  be  discovered  with 
virtues  hitherto  undreamed  of,  have  almost  made  fetiches  of 
special  disciplines,  both  developmental  and  corrective,  that  are 
pictured  and  lauded  in  scores  of  manuals.     Others  have  had 
expectations  no  less  excessive  in  the  opposite  direction  and 
have  argued  that  the  greatest  possible  variety  of  movements 
best   developed    the   greatest    total    of   motor   energy.     Jahn 
especially  thus  made  gymnastics  a  special  art,  and  inspired  great 
enthusiasm  of  humanity,  and  the  songs  of  his  pupils  were  of  a 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       189 

better  race  of  man  and  a  greater  and  united  fatherland.  It  was 
this  feature  that  made  his  work  unique  in  the  world,  and  his 
disciples  are  fond  of  reminding  us  of  the  fact  that  it  was  just 
about  one  generation  of  men  after  the  acme  of  influence  of  his 
system  that,  in  1870,  Germany  showed  herself  the  greatest  mili- 
tary power  since  ancient  Rome,  and  took  the  acknowledged 
leadership  of  the  world  both  in  education  and  science. 

These  theorizations  even  in  their  extreme  forms  have  been 
not  only  highly  suggestive  but  have  brought  great  and  new 
enthusiasms  and  ideals  into  the  educational  world  that  admi- 
rably fit  adolescence.  The  motive  of  bringing  out  latent,  de- 
caying, or  even  new  powers,  skills,  knacks,  and  feats,  is  full  of 
inspiration.  Patriotism  is  aroused,  for  thus  the  country 
can  be  better  served ;  thus  the  German  Fatherland  was  to  be 
restored  and  unified  after  the  dark  days  that  followed  the  hu- 
miliation of  Jena.  Now  the  ideals  of  religion  are  invoked  that 
the  soul  may  have  a  better  and  regenerated  somatic  organism 
with  which  to  serve  Jesus  and  the  Church.  Exercise  is  made 
a  form  of  praise  to  God  and  of  service  to  man,  and  these  mo- 
tives are  reenforced  by  those  of  the  new  hygiene  which  strives 
for  a  new  wholeness-holiness,  and  would  purify  the  body  as 
the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  in  Young  Men's  Christian 
Association  training  schools  and  gymnasiums  the  gospel  of 
Christianity  is  preached  anew  and  seeks  to  bring  salvation  to 
man's  physical  frame,  which  the  still  lingering  effects  of  asceti- 
cism have  caused  to  be  too  long  neglected  in  its  progressive  de- 
generation. As  the  Greek  games  were  in  honor  of  the  gods,  so 
now  the  body  is  trained  to  better  glorify  God,  and  regimen, 
chastity,  and  temperance  are  given  a  new  momentum.  The 
physical  salvation  thus  wrought  will  be,  when  adequately  writ- 
ten, one  of  the  most  splendid  chapters  in  the  modern  history  of 
Christianity.  Military  ideals  have  been  revived  in  cult  and 
song  to  hearten  the  warfare  against  evil  within  and  without. 
Strength  is  prayed  for  as  well  as  worked  for,  and  consecrated  to 
the  highest  uses.  Last  but  not  least,  power  thus  developed  over 
a  large  surface  may  be  applied  to  athletic  contests  in  the  field,, 
and  victories  here  are  valuable  as  foregleams  of  how  sweet  the 
glory  of  achievements  in  higher  moral  and  spiritual  tasks  will 
taste  later. 

The  dangers  and   sources  of  error  in  this  ideal  of  all- 


190  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

sided  training  are,  alas,  only  too  obvious,  although  they  only 
qualify  its  paramount  good.  First,  it  is  impossible  to  thus 
measure  the  quanta  of  training  needed  so  as  to  rightly  as- 
sign to  each  its  modicum  and  best  modality  of  training.  In- 
deed no  method  of  doing  this  has  ever  been  attempted,  but  the 
assessments  have  been  arbitrary  and  conjectural,  probably  right 
in  some  and  wrong  in  other  respects,  with  no  adequate  criterion 
or  test  for  either  save  only  empirical  experience.  Secondly, 
heredity,  which  lays  its  heavy  ictus  upon  some  neglected  forms 
of  activity  and  fails  of  all  support  for  others,  has  been  ignored. 
As  we  shall  see  later,  one  of  the  best  norms  here  is  phyletic 
emphasis,  and  what  lacks  this  must  at  best  be  feeble,  and  if  new 
powers  are  unfolding,  their  growth  must  be  very  slow  and  they 
must  be  nurtured  as  tender  buds  for  generations.  Thirdly,  too 
little  regard  is  had  for  the  vast  differences  in  individuals,  most 
of  whom  need  much  personal  prescription. 

B.  In  practise  the  above  ideal  is  never  isolated  from  others. 
Perhaps  the  most  closely  associated  with  it  is  that  of  increased 
volitional  control.  Man  is  largely  a  creature  of  habit,  and 
many  of  his  activities  are  more  or  less  automatic  reflexes  from 
the  stimuli  of  his  environment.  Every  new  power  of  con- 
trolling these  by  the  will  frees  man  from  slavery  and  widens 
the  field  of  freedom.  To  acquire  the  power  of  doing  all  with 
consciousness  and  volition  mentalizes  the  body,  gives  control 
over  to  higher  brain  levels,  and  develops  them  by  rescuing 
activities  from  the  dominance  of  lower  centers.  Thus  mens 
agitat  niolcm.  This  end  is  favored  by  the  Swedish  commando 
exercises,  which  require  great  alertness  of  attention  to  translate 
instantly  a  verbal  order  into  an  act  and  also,  although  in  some- 
what less  degree,  by  quick  imitation  of  a  leader.  The  stimulus 
of  music  and  rhythm  are  excluded  because  thought  to  interfere 
with  this  end.  A  somewhat  sophisticated  form  of  this  goal  is 
sought  by  several  Delsartian  schemes  of  relaxation,  decomposi- 
tion, and  recomposition  of  movements.  To  do  all  things  with 
consciousness  and  to  encroach  on  the  field  of  instinct  involves 
new  and  more  vivid  sense  impressions,  the  range  of  which  is 
increased  directly  as  that  of  motion,  the  more  closely  it  ap- 
proaches the  focus  of  attention.  By  thus  analyzing  settled  and 
established  coordinations, their  elements  are  set  free  and  may  be 
organized  into  new  combinations,  so  that  the  former  is  the  first 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWtR  AND  FUNCTION       191 

stage  toward  becoming  a  virtuoso  with  new  special  skills.  This 
is  the  road  to  inner  secrets  or  intellectual  rules  of  professional 
and  expert  successes,  such  as  older  athletes  often  rely  on  when 
their  strength  begins  to  wane.  Every  untrained  automatism 
must  be  domesticated,  and  every  striated  muscle  capable  of 
direct  muscular  control  must  be  dominated  by  volition.  Thus 
tensions  and  incipient  contractures  that  drain  off  energy  can  be 
relaxed  by  fiat.  Sandow's  "  muscle  dance,"  the  differentia- 
tion of  movements  of  the  right  and  left  hand,  one,  e.  g.,  writing 
a  French  madrigal  while  the  other  is  drawing  a  picture  of  a 
country  dance,  or  each  playing  tunes  of  disparate  rhythm  and 
character  simultaneously  on  the  piano,  controlling  heart  rate, 
moving  the  ears,  crying,  laughing,  blushing,  moving  the  bowels, 
etc.,  at  will,  feats  of  inhibition  of  reflexes,  stunts  of  all  kinds, 
proficiency  with  many  tools,  deftness  in  sports — these  alto- 
gether would  mark  the  extremes  in  this  direction. 

This,  too,  has  its  inspiration  for  youth.  To  be  an  univer- 
sal adept  like  Hippias  suggests  Diderot  and  the  encyclopedists 
in  the  intellectual  realm.  To  do  all  with  consciousness  is  a 
means  to  both  remedial  and  expert  ends.  Motor  life  often 
needs  to  be  made  over  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  and  that  possi- 
bilities of  vastly  greater  accomplishments  exist  than  are  at  pres- 
ent realized,  is  undoubted,  even  in  manners  and  morals,  which 
are  both  at  root  only  motor  habits.  Indeed  consciousness  it- 
self is  largely  and  perhaps  wholly  corrective  in  its  very  raison 
d'etre.  Thus  life  is  adjusted  to  new  environments,  and  if  the 
Platonic  postulate  be  correct,  that  untaught  virtues  that  come  by 
nature  and  instinct  are  no  virtues,  but  must  be  made  products 
of  reflection  and  reason,  the  sphere  and  need  of  this  principle 
is  great  indeed.  But  this  implies  a  distrust  of  physical  human 
nature  as  deep-seated  and  radical  as  that  of  Calvinism  for  the 
unregenerate  heart,  against  which  modern  common  sense,  so 
often  the  best  muse  of  both  psycho-physics  and  pedagogy,  pro- 
tests. Individual  prescription  is  here  as  imperative  as  it  is 
difficult.  Wonders  that  now  seem  to  be  most  incredible,  both  of 
hurt  and  help,  can  undoubtedly  be  wrought,  but  analysis  should 
always  be  for  the  sake  of  synthesis  and  never  be  beyond  its 
need  and  assured  completion.  No  thoughtful  student  fully 
informed  of  the  facts  and  tentatives  in  this  field  can  doubt  that 
here  lies  one  of  the  most  promising  fields  of  future  develop- 


192  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

ment,  full  of  far-reaching  and  rich  results  for  those  as  yet  far 
too  few  experts  in  physical  training,  who  have  philosophic 
minds,  command  the  facts  of  modern  psychology,  and  whom 
the  world  awaits  now  as  never  before. 

C.  Another  yet  closely  correlated  ideal  is  that  of  economic 
postures  and  movements.  The  system  of  Ling  is  less  ortho- 
pedic than  orthogenic,  although  he  sought  primarily  to  correct 
bad  attitudes  and  perverted  growth.  Starting  from  the  respir- 
atory and  proceeding  to  the  muscular  system,  he  and  his  imme- 
diate pupils  were  content  to  refer  to  ill-shapen  bodies  of  most 
men  about  them.  One  of  their  important  aims  was  to  relax  the 
flexor  and  tone  up  the  extensor  muscles  and  to  open  the  human 
form  into  postures  as  opposite  as  possible  to  those  of  the 
embryo,  which  it  tends  so  persistently  to  approximate  in  sitting, 
and  in  fatigue  and  collapse  attitudes  generally.  The  head 
must  balance  on  the  cervical  vertebrae  and  not  call  upon  the 
musdes  of  the  neck  to  keep  it  from  rolling  off ;  the  weight  of 
the  shoulders  must  be  thrown  back  off  the  thorax;  the  spine 
be  erect  to  allow  the  abdomen  free  action;  the  joints  of  the 
thigh  extended ;  the  hand  and  arm  supinated,  etc.  Bones  must 
relieve  muscles  and  nerves.  Thus  an  erect,  self-respecting  car- 
riage must  be  given,  and  the  unfortunate  association,  so  diffi- 
cult to  overcome,  between  effort  and  an  involuted  posture  must 
be  broken  up.  This  means  economy  and  a  great  saving  of  vital 
energy.  Extensor  action  goes  with  expansive,  flexor  with 
depressive  states  of  mind;  hence  courage,  buoyancy,  hope, 
are  favored  and  handicaps  removed.  All  that  is  done  with 
great  effort  causes  wide  irradiation  of  tensions  to  the  other 
half  of  the  body  and  also  sympathetic  activities  in  those  not  in- 
volved ;  the  law  of  maximal  ease  and  minimal  expenditure 
of  energy  must  be  always  striven  for,  and  the  interests  of  the 
viscera  are  never  lost  sight  of.  This  involves  educating  weak 
and  neglected  muscles,  and  like  the  next  ideal,  often  shades  over 
by  almost  imperceptible  gradation  into  the  passive  movements 
by  the  Zander  machii^es.  Realizing  that  certain  activities  are 
sufficiently  or  too.  much  emphasized  in  ordinary  life,  stress  is 
laid  upon  those  which  are  complemental  to  them,  so  that  there 
is  no  pretense  of  taking  charge  of  the  totality  of  motor 
processes,  but  the  intention  is  principally  to  supplement  deficien- 
cies, to  insure  men  against  being  warped,  distorted,  or  deformed 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION       193 

by  their  work  in  life,  to  compensate  specialties  and  perform 
more  exactly  what  recreation  to  some  extent  aims  at. 

This  wholesome  but  less  inspiring  endeavor,  which  combats 
one  of  the  greatest  evils  that  under  modern  civilization  threatens 
man's  physical  weal,  is  in  some  respects  as  easy  and  practical 
as  it  is  useful.  The  great  majority  of  city  bred  men,  as  well 
as  all  students,  are  prone  to  deleterious  effects  from  too  much 
sitting,  and  indeed  there  is  anatomical  evidence  in  the  structure 
of  the  tissues,  and  especially  the  blood-vessels  of  the  groins,  that 
at  his  best  man  is  not  yet  entirely  adjusted  to  the  upright  posi- 
tion. So  a  method  that  straightens  knees,  hips,  spine,  and 
shoulders,  or  combats  the  school-desk  attitude,  is  a  most  salu- 
tary contribution  to  a  great  and  growing  need.  In  the  very  act 
of  stretching,  and  perhaps  yawning,  for  which  much  is  to  be 
said,  nature  itself  suggests  such  correctives  and  preventives. 
To  save  men  from  being  victims  of  their  occupations  is  often  to 
add  a  better  and  larger  half  to  their  motor  development.  The 
danger  of  the  system,  which  now  best  represents  this  ideal, 
is  -inflexibility  and  overscholastic  treatment.  It  needs  a  great 
range  of  individual  variations  if  it  would  do  more  than  increase 
circulation,  respiration,  and  health,  or  the  normal  functions  of 
internal  organs  and  fundamental  physiological  activities.  To 
clothe  the  frame  with  honest  muscles  that  are  faithful  servants 
of  the  will  adds  not  only  strength,  more  active  habits  and  effi- 
ciency, but  health,  and  in  its  material  installation  this  system  is 
financially  economic.  Personal  faults  and  shortcomings  are 
constantly  pointed  out  where  this  work  is  best  represented,  and 
it  has  a  distinct  advantage  in  inciting  an  acquaintance  with 
physiology  and  inviting  the  larger  fields  of  medical  knowledge. 

D.  The  fourth  gymnastic  aim  is  symmetry  and  correct  pro- 
portions. Anthropometry  and  average  girths  and  dimensions, 
strength,  etc.,  of  the  parts  of  the  body  are  first  charted  in  per- 
centile grades  and  each  individual  is  referred  to  the  apparatus 
and  exercises  best  fitted  to  correct  weaknesses  and  subnormali- 
ties.  The  norms  here  followed  are  not  the  canons  of  Greek 
art,  but  those  established  by  the  measurement  of  the  largest 
numbers  properly  grouped  by  age,  weight,  height,  etc.  Young 
men  are  found  to  differ  very  widely.  Some  can  lift  i,ooo 
pounds,  and  some  not  lOo;   some  can  lift  their  weight  between 

twenty  and  forty  times,  and  some  not  once ;  some  are  most  de- 
14 


194  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

ficient  in  legs,  others  in  shoulders,  arms,  backs,  chests.  By 
photography,  tape,  and  scales,  each  is  interested  in  his  own  bod- 
ily condition  and  incited  to  overcome  his  greatest  defects,  and 
those  best  endowed  by  nature  to  attain  ideal  dimensions  and 
make  new  records  are  encouraged  along  these  lines.  Thus  this 
ideal  is  also  largely  though  not  exclusively  remedial. 

This  system  can  arouse  youth  to  the  greatest  pitch  of  zest 
in  watching  their  own  rapidly  multiplying  curves  of  growth  in 
dimensions  and  capacities,  in  plotting  curves  that  record  their 
own  increment  in  girths,  lifts,  and  other  tests,  and  in  observing 
the  effects  of  sleep,  food,  correct  and  incorrect  living  upon  a 
system  so  exquisitely  responsive  to  all  these  influences  as  the 
muscles.  To  learn  to  know  and  grade  excellence  and  defect, 
to  be  known  for  the  list  of  things  one  can  do  and  to  have  a 
record,  or  to  realize  what  we  lack  of  power  to  break  best  records, 
even  to  know  that  we  are  strengthening  some  point  where 
heredity  has  left  us  with  some  shortage  and  perhaps  danger,  the 
realization  of  all  this  may  bring  the  first  real  and  deep  feeling 
for  growth  that  may  become  a  passion  later  in  things  of  the 
soul.  Growth  always  has  its  selfish  aspects,  and  to  be  constantly 
passing  our  own  examination  in  this  respect  is  a  new  and  per- 
haps sometimes  too  self-conscious  endeavor  of  our  young  col- 
lege barbarians,  but  it  is  on  the  whole  a  healthful  regulative, 
and  this  form  of  the  struggle  toward  perfection  and  escape  from 
the  handicap  of  birth  will  later  move  upward  to  the  intellectual 
and  moral  plane.  To  kindle  a  sense  of  physical  beauty  of  form 
in  every  part,  such  as  a  sculptor  has,  may  be  to  start  youth  on  the 
lowest  round  of  the  Platonic  ladder  that  leads  up  to  the  vision  of 
ideal  beauty  of  soul,  if  his  ideal  be  not  excess  of  brawn,  or  mere 
brute  strength,  but  the  true  proportion  represented  by  the  classic 
or  mean  temperance  balanced  like  justice  between  all  extremes. 
Hard,  patient,  regular  work,  with  the  right  dosage  for  this  self- 
cultural  end,  has  thus  at  the  same  time  a  unique  moral  effect. 

.  The  dangers  of  this  system  are  also  obvious.  Nature's 
intent  can  not  be  too  far  thwarted,  and  as  in  mental  training  the 
question  is  always  pertinent,  so  here  we  may  ask  whether  it  be 
not  best  in  all  cases  to  some  extent,  and  in  some  cases  almost  ex- 
clusively to  develop  in  the  direction  in  which  we  most  excel,  to 
emphasize  physical  individuality  and  even  idiosyncrasy,  rather 
than  to  strive  for  monotonous  uniformity.     Weaknesses  and 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        I9i 

parts  that  lag  behind  are  easiest  overworked  to  the  point  of  re- 
action and  perhaps  permanent  injury.  Again,  work  for  cura- 
tive purposes  lacks  the  exuberance  of  free  sports,  and  it  is  not 
inspiring  to  make  up  areas,  and  therapeutic  exercises  imposed 
like  a  sentence  for  the  shortcomings  of  our  forebears  bring  a 
whiff  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  hospital,  if  not  of  the  prison,  into 
the  gymnasium. 

These  four  ideals,  while  so  closely  interrelated,  are  as  yet 
far  from  harmonized.  Swedish,  Turner,  Sargent,  and  Ameri- 
can systems  are  each,  most  unfortunately,  still  too  blind  to  the 
other's  merits  and  too  conscious  each  of  the  other's  short- 
comings. To  some  extent  they  are  prevented  from  getting  to- 
gether by  narrow  devotion  to  a  single  cult,  aided  sometimes  by 
a  pecuniary  interest  in  the  sale  of  their  own  apparatus  and  books 
or  in  the  training  of  teachers  according  to  one  set  of  rubrics. 
The  real  elephant  is  neither  a  fan,  a  rope,  a  tree  nor  a  log,  as  in 
the  fable  the  blind  men  contended,  each  thinking  the  part  he 
had  touched  to  be  the  whole.  This  inability  of  leaders  to  com- 
bine causes  uncertainty  and  lack  of  confidence  in  and  of  en- 
thusiastic support  for  any  system  on  the  part  of  the  public. 
Even  the  radically  different  needs  of  the  sexes  have  failed  of 
recognition  from  the  same  partizanship.  All  together  repre- 
sent only  a  fraction  of  the  nature  and  needs  of  youth.  The 
world  now  demands  what  this  country  has  never  had,  a  man 
who,  knowing  the  human  body,  gymnastic  history,  and  the  va- 
rious great  athletic  traditions  of  the  past,  shall  study  anew  the 
whole  motor  field,  as  a  few  great  leaders  early  in  the  last  cen- 
tury tried  to  do ;  who  shall  gather  and  correlate  the  literature 
and  experiences  of  the  past  and  present  with  a  deep  sense  of 
responsibility  to  the  future ;  who  shall  examine  martial  training 
with  all  the  inspirations,  warnings,  and  new  demands,  and  who 
shall  know  how  to  revive  the  inspiration  of  the  past  animated 
by  the  same  spirit  as  the  Turners,  who  were  almost  inflamed  by 
referring  back  to  the  hardy  life  of  the  early  Teutons  and  trying 
to  reproduce  its  best  features ;  who  shall  catch  the  spirit  of,  and 
make  due  connections  with,  popular  sports  past  and  present, 
study  both  industry  and  education  to  compensate  their  debili- 
tating effects,  and  be  himself  animated  by  a  great  ethical  and 
humanistic  hope  and  faith  in  a  better  future.  Such  a  man,  if  he 
ever  walks  the  earth,  will  be  the  idol  of  youth,  will  know  their 


196  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

physical  secrets,  will  come  almost  as  a  savior  to  the  bodies  of 
men,  and  will,  like  Jahn,  feel  his  calling  and  work  sacred,  and  his 
institution  a  temple  in  which  every  physical  act  will  be  for  the 
sake  of  the  soul.  The  world  of  adolescence,  especially  that  part 
which  sits  in  closed  spaces  conning  books,  groans  and  travails 
all  the  more  grievously  and  yearningly,  because  unconsciously, 
waits  for  a  redeemer  for  its  body.  Till  he  appears,  our  culture 
must  remain  for  most  a  little  hollow,  falsetto,  and  handicapped 
by  school-bred  diseases.  The  modern  gymnasium  performs  its 
chief  service  during  adolescence  and  is  one  of  the  most  benefi- 
cent agencies  of  which  not  a  few  but  every  youth  should  make 
large  use.  Its  spirit  should  be  instinct  with  euphoria,  where 
the  joy  of  being  alive  reaches  a  point  of  high,  although  not 
quite  its  highest,  intensity.  While  the  stimulus  of  rivalry  and 
even  of  records  is  not  excluded,  and  social  feelings  may  be  ap- 
pealed to  by  unison  exercises  and  by  the  club  spirit,  and  while 
competitions,  tournaments,  and  the  artificial  motives  of  prizes 
and  exhibitions  may  be  invoked,  the  culture  is  in  fact  largely 
individual.  And  yet  in  this  country  the  annual  Tnrnerfcst 
brings  4,000  or  5,000  men  from  all  parts  of  the  Union,  who 
sometimes  all  deploy  and  go  through  some  of  the  standard  ex- 
ercises together  under  one  leader.  Instead  of  training  a  few 
athletes,  the  real  problem  now  presented  is  how  to  raise  the 
general  level  of  vitality  so  that  children  and  youth  may  be 
fitted  to  stand  the  strain  of  modern  civilization,  resist  zymotic 
diseases,  and  overcome  the  deleterious  influences  of  city  life. 
The  almost  immediate  effects  of  systematic  training  are  sur- 
prising and  would  hardly  be  inferred  from  the  annual  incre- 
ments tabled  earlier  in  this  chapter.  Sandow  was  a  rather 
weakly  boy  and  ascribes  his  development  chiefly  to  systematic 
training. 

We  have  space  but  for  two  reports  believed  to  be  typical. 
Enebuske  reports  on  the  effects  of  seven  months'  training  on 
young  women  averaging  22.3  years.  The  figures  are  based 
on  the  50  percentile  column. 


Lung     Strength 
capacity,  of  legs. 

Strength 
of  back. 

Strength 
of  chest. 

Strength  of 
r.  forearm. 

Strength  of     Total 
1.  forearm,  strength. 

Before  training  . . 
After  six  months. 

■      2.65          93 
.       2.87         120 

655 
81.5 

27 
32 

26 

28 

23              230 

25              293 

By  comparing  records  of  what  he  deems  standard  normal 
growth  with  that  of  188  naval  cadets  from  sixteen  to  twenty- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        197 

one,  who  had  special  and  systematic  training,  just  after  the 
period  of  most  rapid  growth  in  height,  Beyer  concluded  that 
the  effect  of  four  years  of  this  added  a  little  over  an  inch  of 
stature,  and  that  this  gain  was  greatest  at  the  beginning.  This 
increase  was  greatest  for  the  youngest  cadets.  He  found  also 
a  marked  increase  in  weight,  nearly  the  same  for  each  year 
from  seventeen  to  twenty-one.  This  he  thought  more  easily 
influenced  by  exercise  than  height.  A  high  vital  index  or  ratio 
of  lung  capacity  to  weight  is  a  very  important  attribute  of 
good  training.  Beyer  ^  found,  however,  that  the  addition  of 
lung  area  gained  by  exercise  did  not  keep  up  with  the  increase 
thus  caused  in  muscular  substance,  and  that  the  vital  index 
always  became  smaller  in  those  who  had  gained  weight  and 
strength  by  special  physical  training.  How  much  gain  in 
weight  is  desirable  beyond  the  point  where  the  lung  capacity 
increases  at  an  equal  rate,  is  unknown.  If  such  measurements 
were  applied  to  the  different  gymnastic  systems,  we  might  be 
able  to  compare  their  efficiency,  which  would  be  a  great  de- 
sideratum in  view  of  the  unfortunate  rivalry  between  them. 
Total  strength,  too,  can  be  greatly  increased.  Beyer  thinks 
that  from  sixteen  to  twenty-one  it  may  exceed  the  average  or 
normal  increment  fivefold,  and  he  adds,  *T  firmly  believe  that 
the  now  so  wonderful  performances  of  most  of  our  strong  men 
are  well  within  the  reach  of  the  majority  of  healthy  men,  if 
such  performances  were  a  serious  enough  part  of  their  ambition 
to  make  them  do  the  exercises  necessary  to  develop  them." 
Power  of  the  organs  to  respond  to  good  training  by  increased 
strength  probably  reaches  well  into  middle  life. 

It  is  not  encouraging  to  learn  that,  according  to  a  recent 
writer,^  we  now  have  seventy  times  as  many  physicians  in  pro- 
portion to  the  general  population  as  there  are  physical  directors, 
even  for  the  school  population  alone  considered.  We  have 
twice  as  many  physicians  per  population  as  Great  Britain,  four 
times  as  many  as  Germany,  or  2  physicians,  1.8  minister,  1.4 
lawyer  per  thousand  of  the  general  population ;  while  even  if 
all  male  teachers  of  physical  training  taught  only  males  of  the 
military  age,  we  should  have  but  0.05  of  a  teacher  per  thousand, 

^  See  H.  G.  Beyer.     The  Influence  of  Exercise  on  Growth.     Am.    Phys.  Ed. 
Kev.,  1896,  p.  76. 

*  J.  H.  McCurdy.     Association  Seminar,  March,  1902. 


198  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

or  if  the  school  population  alone  be  considered,  20  teachers  per 
million  pupils.  Hence,  it  is  inferred  that  the  need  of  wise  and 
classified  teachers  in  this  field  is  at  present  greater  than  in  any 
other.  But  fortunately  while  spontaneous,  unsystematic  ex- 
ercise in  a  well-equipped  modern  gymnasium  may  in  rare  cases 
do  harm,  so  far  from  sharing  the  prejudice  often  felt  for  it 
by  professional  trainers,  we  believe  that  free  access  to  it  without 
control  or  direction  is  unquestionably  a  boon  to  youth.  Even 
if  its  use  be  sporadic  and  occasional,  as  it  is  likely  to  be  with 
equal  opportunity  for  out-of-door  exercises  and  especially 
sports,  practise  is  sometimes  hygienic  almost  inversely  to  its 
amount,  while  even  lameness  from  initial  excess  has  its  les- 
sons, and  the  sense  of  manifoldness  of  inferiorities  brought 
home  by  experiences  gives  a  wholesome  self-knowldge  and 
stimulus. 

In  this  country  more  than  elsewhere,  especially  in  high 
school  and  college,  gymnasium  work  has  been  brought  into 
healthful  connection  with  field  sports  and  record  competitions 
for  both  teams  and  individuals  who  aspire  to  championship. 
This  has  given  the  former  a  healthful  stimulus  although  it  is 
felt  only  by  a  picked  few.  Scores  of  records  have  been  estab- 
lished for  junning,  walking,  hurdling,  throwing,  putting, 
swimming,  rowing,  skating,  etc.,  each  for  various  shorter  and 
longer  distances  and  under  manifold  conditions,  and  for  both 
amateurs  and  professionals  who  are  early  accessible.  These  in 
general  show  a  slow  but  steady  advance  in  this  country  since 
1876,  when  athletics  were  established  here.  In  that  year 
there  was  not  a  single  world's  best  record  held  by  an  Amer- 
ican amateur,  and  high-school  boys  of  to-day  could  in  most, 
though  not  in  all  lines,  have  won  the  American  championships 
twenty-five  years  ago.  Of  course,  in  a  strict  sense,  intercolle- 
giate contests  do  not  show  the  real  advance  in  athletics,  because 
it  is  not  necessary  in  order  for  a  man  to  win  a  championship 
that  he  should  do  his  best,  but  they  do  show  general  improve- 
ment. 

We  select  for  our  purpose  a  few  of  those  longest  kept.  Not 
dependent  on  external  conditions  like  boat-racing,  or  on  im- 
proved apparatus  like  bicycling,  we  have  interesting  data  of 
a  very  different  order  for  physical  measurements.  Inter- 
collegiate data  down  to  present  writing — revised  to  December, 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        199 

1902 — are  as  follows:  For  the  100-yard  dash,  every  annual 
record  from  1876  to  1901  is  10  or  11  seconds,  or  between  these, 
save  in  1896,  where  Wefers'  record  of  9!  seconds  still  stands. 
In  the  220-yard  run  there  is  slight  improvement  since  1877, 
but  here,  too,  the  record  of  1896  (Wefers,  21^  seconds)  has 
not  been  surpassed.  In  the  quarter-mile  run,  the  best  record 
was  in  1899  (Long,  49!  seconds),  but  in  1891  this  was  nearly 
equaled  ( Shattuck,  49I  seconds) .  The  half-mile  record,  which 
still  stands,  was  made  in  1890  (Dohm,  i  minute  57^  seconds)  ; 
the  mile  run  in  1895  (Orton,  4  minutes  23!  seconds). 
Hurdling  under  fixed  conditions  shows  more  steady  improve- 
ment, the  best  record  being  in  1900  for  the  120-yard  race,  and 
in  1898  for  the  220-yard  race.  The  running  broad  jump  shows 
a  very  steady  improvement,  with  the  best  record  in  1899 
(Kraenzlein,  24  feet  4^  inches).  The  running  high  jump 
shows  improvement,  but  less,  with  the  record  of  1897  still 
standing  (Windsor,  6  feet  3  inches).  The  college  record  for 
pole  vaulting,  corrected  to  January,  1902,  is  11  feet  10^  inches 
(Clapp)  ;  for  throwing  the  16-pound  hammer  in  a  seven-foot 
circle,  54  feet  4^  inches  (Plaw)  ;  for  putting  the  16-pound 
shot,  44  feet  8^  inches  (Sheldon)  ;  the  standing  high  jump,  5 
feet  i^  inches  (Crook)  ;  for  the  running  high  jump,  6  feet  5f 
inches  (Page)  ;  for  the  one  mile  run,  4  minutes  23!  seconds 
(Orton).  We  also  find  that  if  we  extend  our  purview  to  in- 
clude all  kinds  of  records  for  physical  achievement,  that  not 
a  few  of  the  amateur  records  for  activities  involving  strength 
combined  with  rapid  rhythm  movement  are  held  by  young  men 
of  twenty  or  even  less. 

In  putting  the  16-pound  shot  under  uniform  conditions  the 
record  has  improved  since  the  early  years  nearly  10  feet  (best 
at  present  writing,  fall,  1902 — in  1900  Beck,  44  feet  3  inches). 
Pole  vaulting  shows  a  very  marked  advance  culminating  in 
1899  (Clapp,  II  feet  5  inches).  Most  marked  of  all  perhaps 
is  the  great  advance  in  throwing  the  16-pound  hammer.  Be- 
ginning between  70  and  80  feet  in  the  early  years,  the  record 
is  now  154  feet  4  inches  (Plaw,  1900).  The  two-mile  bicycle 
race  also  shows  marked  gain,  partly,  of  course,  due  to  improve- 
ment in  the  wheel,  the  early  records  being  nearly  7  minutes, 
and  the  best,  including  1901.  being  5  minutes  18^  seconds 
(Goodman,   1894).     Some  of  these  are  world  records,  and 


200  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

more  exceed  professional  records.  These,  of  course,  no  more 
indicate  general  improvement  than;  the  steady  reduction  of  time 
in  horse-racing  suggests  betterment  in  horses  generally. 

In  Panhellenic  games  as  well  as  at  present,  athleticism  in 
its  manifold  forms  was  one  of  the  most  characteristic  ex- 
pressions of  adolescent  nature  and  needs.  Not  a  single  time  or 
distance  record  of  antiquity  has  been  preserved,  although  Grass- 
berger  ^  and  other  writers  would  have  us  believe  that  in  those 
that  are  comparable  ancient  youthful  champions  greatly  ex- 
celled ours,  especially  in  leaping  and  running.  While  we  are  far 
from  cultivating  mere  strength,  our  training  is  very  one-sided 
from  the  Greek  norm  of  unity  or  of  the  ideals  that  develop  the 
body  only  for  the  sake  of  the  soul.  While  gymnastics  in  our 
sense,  with  aparatus,  exercises,  and  measurements  independ- 
ently of  games,  was  unknown,  the  ideal  and  motive  were  as  dif- 
ferent from  ours  as  was  its  method.  Nothing,  so  far  as  is 
known,  was  done  for  correcting  the  ravages  of  work,  or  for 
overcoming  hereditary  defects,  and  until  athletics  degenerated 
there  were  no  exercises  for  the  sole  purpose  of  developing 
muscle. 

On  the  whole,  while  modern  gymnastics  have  done  more  for 
the  trunk,  shoulders,  and  arms  than  for  the  legs,  it  is  now  too 
selfish  and  ego-centric,  deficient  on  the  side  of  psychic  impul- 
sion, and  but  little  subordinated  to  ethical  or  intellectual  devel- 
opment. Yet  it  does  a  great  physical  service  to  all  who  cultivate 
it,  and  is  a  safeguard  of  virtue  and  temperance.  Its  need  is 
radical  revision  and  coordination  of  various  cults  and  theories 
in  the  light  of  the  latest  psycho-physiological  science. 

Gymnastics  allies  itself  to  biometric  work.  The  present 
academic  zeal  for  physical  development  is  in  great  need  of 
closer  affiliation  with  anthropometry.  This  important  and 
growing  department  will  be  represented  in  the  ideal  gymna- 
sium of -the  future — First, by  courses,  if  not  by  a  chair,  devoted 
to  the  apparatus  of  measurements  of  human  proportions  and 
symmetry,  with  a  kinesological  cabinet  where  young  men  are 
instructed  in  the  elements  of  auscultation,  the  use  of  calipers,  the 
sphygmograph,  spirometer,  plethysmograph,  kinesometer  to 
plot  graphic  curves,  compute  average  errors,  and  tables  of  per- 
centile grades  and  in  statistical  methods,  etc.    Second,  anatomy, 

*  Gymnastik  der  Alten  Helenen. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        201 

especially  of  muscles,  bones,  heart,  and  skin,  will  be  taugiit,  and 
also  their  physiology,  with  stress  upon  myology,  the  effects  of 
exercise  on  the  flow  of  blood  and  lymph,  not  excluding  the  de- 
velopment of  the  upright  position,  and  all  that  it  involves  and 
implies.  Third,  hygiene  will  be  prominent  and  comprehensive 
enough  to  cover  all  that  pertains  to  body-keeping,  regimen, 
sleep,  connecting  with  school  and  domestic  and  public  hygiene 
— all  on  the  basis  of  modern  as  distinct  from  the  archaic  physi- 
ology of  Ling,  who,  it  is  sufficient  to  remember,  died  in  1839, 
before  this  science  was  recreated,  and  the  persistence  of  whose 
concepts  are  an  anomalous  survival  to-day.  Mechanico-thera- 
peutics,  the  purpose  and  service  of  each  chief  kind  of  apparatus 
and  exercise,  the  value  of  work  on  stall  bars  with  chest  weights, 
of  chinning,  use  of  the  quarter-staff,  somersaults,  rings,  and  in- 
ometer,  clubs,  dumb-bells,  work  with  straight  and  flexed  knees 
on  machinery,  etc.,  will  be  taught.  Fourth,  the  history  of  gym- 
nastics from  Greece  to  the  present  is  full  of  interest  and  has  a 
very  high  and  not  yet  developed  culture  value  for  youth.  This 
department,  both  in  its  practical  and  theoretical  side  should  have 
its  full  share  of  prizes  and  scholarships  to  stimulate  the  seventy 
to  seventy-five  per  cent  of  students  who  are  now  unaffected  by 
the  influence  of  athletics.  By  these  methods  the  motivation  of 
gymnastics,  which  now  in  large  measure  goes  to  waste  in  en- 
thusiasm, could  be  utilized  to  aid  the  greatly  needed  intellectuali- 
zation  of  those  exercises  which  in  their  nature  are  more  akin  to 
work  than  play.  Indeed,  Gutsmuth's  first  definition  of  athletics 
was  "  work  under  the  garb  of  youthful  pleasure."  To  so  de- 
velop these  courses  that  they  could  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  sat- 
isfy the  requirements  for  the  A.  B.  degree,  would  not  only  be 
to  coordinate  the  work  of  the  now  isolated  curriculum  of  the 
training-schools  with  that  of  the  college  and  thus  broaden 
the  sphere  of  the  latter,  but  besides  its  culture  value,  which 
I  hold  very  high,  such  a  step  would  prepare  for  the 
new,  important,  and  as  we  have  seen  very  inadequately 
manned  profession  of  physical  trainers.  This  has,  moreover, 
great  but  yet  latent  and  even  unsuspected  capacities  for 
the  morals  of  our  academic  youth.  Grote  states  that  among 
the  ancient  Greeks  one-hali  of  all  educations  was  devoted  to  the 
body,  and  Galton  urges  that  they  as  much  excel  us  as  we  do  the 
African  negro.    They  held  that  if  physical  perfection  was  cul- 


202  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

tivated,  moral  and  mental  excellence  would  follow,  and  that 
without  this  national  culture  rests  on  an  insecure  basis.  In 
our  day  there  are  many  new  reasons  to  believe  that  the  best 
nations  of  the  future  will  be  those  which  give  most  intelligent 
care  to  the  body. 

IV.  Play,  sports,  and  games  constitue  a  more  varied,  far 
older,  and  more  popular  field.  Here  a  very  different  spirit  of 
joy  and  gladness  rules.  Artifacts  often  enter  but  can  not  sur- 
vive unless  based  upon  pretty  purely  hereditary  momentum. 
Thus  our  first  problem  is  to  seek  both  the  motor  tendencies  and 
the  psychic  motives  bequeathed  to  us  from  the  past.  The  view 
of  Groos  that  play  is  practise  for  future  adult  activities  is  very 
partial,  superficial,  and  perverse.  It  ignores  the  past  where  lie 
the  keys  to  all  play  activities.  True  play  never  practises  what 
is  phyletically  new,  and  this,  industrial  life  often  calls  for.  It 
exercises  many  atavistic  and  rudimentary  functions,  a  number 
of  which  will  abort  before  maturity,  but  which  live  themselves 
out  in  play  like  the  tadpoles  tail,  that  must  be  both  developed  and 
used  as  a  stimulus  to  the  growth  of  legs  which  will  otherwise 
never  mature.  In  place  of  this  mistaken  and  misleading  view, 
I  regard  play  as  the  motor  habits  and  spirit  of  the  past  of  the 
race,  persisting  in  the  present,  as  rudimentary  functions  some- 
times of  and  always  akin  to  rudimentary  organs.  The  best  in- 
dex and  guide  to  the  stated  activities  of  adults  in  past  ages  is 
found  in  the  instinctive,  untaught,  and  non-imitative  plays  of 
children  which  are  the  most  spontaneous  and  exact  expressions 
of  their  motor  needs.  The  young  grow  up  into  the  same  forms 
of  motor  activity,  as  did  generations  that  have  long  preceded 
them,  only  to  a  limited  extent,  and  if  the  form  of  every  human 
occupation  were  to  change  to-day,  play  would  be  unaffected  save 
in  some  of  its  superficial  imitative  forms.  It  would  develop  the 
motor  capacities,  impulses,  and  fundamental  forms  of  our  past 
heritage,  and  their  transformation  into  later  acquired  adult 
forms  is  progressively  later.  In  play  every  mood  and  movement 
is  instinct  with  heredity.  Thus  we  rehearse  the  activities  of 
our  ancestors,  back  we  know  not  how  far,  and  repeat  their 
life  work  in  summative  and  adumbrated  ways.  It  is  reminis- 
cent, albeit  unconsciously,  of  our  line  of  descent,  and  each  is  the 
key  to  the  other.     The  psycho-motive  impulses  that  prompt  it 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        203 

are  the  forms  in  which  our  forebears  have  transmitted  to  us 
their  habitual  activities.  Thus  stage  by  stage  we  reenact  their 
hves.  Once  in  the  phylon  many  of  these  activities  were  elab- 
orated in  the  life  and  death  struggle  for  existence.  Now  the 
elements  and  combinations  oldest  in  the  muscle  history  of  the 
race  are  re-represented  earliest  in  the  individual,  and  those 
later  follow  in  order.  This  is  why  the  heart  of  youth  goes 
out  into  play  as  into  nothing  else,  as  if  in  it  man  remembered 
a  lost  paradise.  This  is  why,  unlike  gymnastics,  play  has  as 
much  soul  as  body,  and  also  why  it  so  makes  for  unity  of  body 
and  soul  that  the  proverb  "  man  is  whole  only  when  he  plays  " 
suggests  that  the  purest  plays  are  those  that  enlist  both  alike. 
To  address  the  body  predominantly  strengthens  unduly  the  sar- 
cous  elements,  and  to  overemphasize  the  soul  causes  weak- 
ness and  automatisms.  Thus  understood,  play  is  the  ideal  type 
of  exercise  for  the  young,  most  favorable  for  growth,  and  most 
self -regulating  in  both  kind  and  amount.  For  its  forms  the 
pulse  of  adolescent  enthusiasm  beats  highest.  It  is  uncon- 
strained and  free  to  follow  any  outer  or  inner  impulse.  The 
zest  of  it  vents  and  satisfies  the  strong  passion  of  youth  for  in- 
tense erethic  and  perhaps  orgiastic  states,  gives  an  exalta- 
tion of  self-feeling  so  craved  that  with  no  vicarious  outlet  it 
often  impels  to  drink,  and  best  of  all  realizes  the  watch- 
word of  the  Turners,  frisch,  frei,  frohlich,  from. 

Ancient  Greece,  the  history  and  literature  of  which  owe 
their  perennial  charm  for  all  later  ages  to  the  fact  that  they 
represent  the  eternal  adolescence  of  the  world,  best  illustrates 
what  this  enthusiasm  means  for  youth.  Jager  and  Guilder- 
sleeve,  and  yet  better  Grassberger,  would  have  us  believe  that 
the  Panhellenic  and  especially  the  Olympic  games  combined 
many  of  the  best  features  of  a  modern  prize  exhibition,  a  camp- 
meeting,  fair,  Derby  day,  a  Wagner  festival,  a  meeting  of 
the  British  Association,  a  country  cattle  show,  intercollegiate 
games,  and  medieval  tournament ;  that  they  were  the  "  acme  of 
festive  life  "  and  drew  all  who  loved  gold  and  glory,  and  that 
night  and  death  never  seemed  so  black  as  by  contrast  with  their 
splendor.  The  deeds  of  the  young  athletes  were  ascribed  to 
the  inspiration  of  the  gods,  whose  abodes  they  lit  up  with  glory, 
and  in  doing  them  honor  these  discordant  states  found  a  bond 
of  unity.     The  victor  was  crowned  with  a  simple  spray  of 


204  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

laurel ;  cities  vied  with  each  other  for  the  honor  of  having  given 
him  birth,  their  walls  were  taken  down  for  his  entry  and  imme- 
diately rebuilt ;  sculptors,  for  whom  the  five  ancient  games 
were  schools  of  posture,  competed  in  the  representation  of  his 
form ;  poets  gave  him  a  pedigree  reaching  back  to  the  gods, 
and  Pindar,  who  sang  that  only  he  is  great  who  is  grea,t  with 
his  hands  and  feet,  raised  his  victory  to  symbolize  the  eternal 
prevalence  of  good  over  evil.  The  best  body  implied  the  best 
mind ;  and  even  Plato,  to  whom  tradition  gives  not  only  one  of 
the  fairest  souls,  but  a  body  remarkable  for  both  strength  and 
beauty,  and  for  whom  weakness  was  perilously  near  to  wicked- 
ness and  ugliness  to  sin,  argues  that  education  must  be  so  con- 
ducted that  the  body  can  be  safely  entrusted  to  the  care  of  the 
soul  and  suggests,  what  later  became  a  slogan  of  a  more  de- 
generate gladiatorial  athleticism,  that  to  be  well  and  strong  is 
to  be  a  philosopher — valare  est  phUosophari.  The  Greeks  could 
hardly  conceive  bodily  apart  from  psychic  education,  and  phys- 
ical was  for  the  sake  of  mental  training.  A  sane,  whole  mind 
could  hardly  reside  in  an  unsound  body  upon  the  integrity  of 
which  it  was  dependent.  Knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  from 
this  standpoint,  is  a  dangerous  superstition,  for  what  frees  the 
mind  is  disastrous  if  it  does  not  give  self-control ;  better 
ignorance  than  knowledge  that  does  not  develop  a  motor  side. 
Body  culture  is  ultimately  only  for  the  sake  of  the  mind  and 
soul,  for  body  is  only  its  other  ego.  Not  only  is  all  muscle 
culture  at  the  same  time  brain-building,  but  a  book-worm  with 
soft  hands,  tender  feet,  and  tough  rump  from  much  sitting, 
or  2{n  anemic  girl  prodigy,  "  in  the  morning  hectic,  in  the 
evening  electric,"  is  a  monster.  Play  at  its  best  is  only  a  school 
of  ethics.  It  gives  not  only  strength  but  courage  and  confi- 
dence, tends  to  simplify  life  and  habits,  gives  energy,  decision, 
and  promptness  to  the  will,  brings  consolation  and  peace  of 
mind  in  evil  days,  is  a  resource  in  trouble  and  brings  out 
individuality. 

How  the  ideals  of  physical  preformed  those  of  moral  and 
mental  training  in  the  land  and  day  of  Socrates  is  seen  in  the 
identification  of  knowledge  and  virtue,  "  Kennen  imd  Konnen." 
Only  an  extreme  and  one-sided  intellectualism  separates  them 
and  assumes  that  it  is  easy  to  know  and  hard  to  do.  From 
the  ethical  standpoint,  philosophy,  and  indeed  all  knowledge,  is 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND   FUNCTION       205 

the  art  of  being  and  doing  good,  conduct  is  the  only  real 
subject  of  knowledge,  and  there  is  no  science  but  morals. 
He  is  the  best  man,  says  Xenophon,  who  is  always  studying  how- 
to  improve,  and  he  is  the  happiest  who  feels  that  he  is  im- 
proving. Life  is  a  skill,  an  art  like  a  handicraft,  and  true 
knowledge  a  form  of  will.  Good  moral  and  physical  develop- 
ment are  more  than  analogous,  and  where  intelligence  is  sepa- 
rated from  action  the  former  becomes  mystic,  abstract,  and 
desiccated,  and  the  latter  formal  routine.  Thus  mere  conscience 
and  psychological  integrity  and  righteousness  are  allied  and 
mutually  inspiring. 

Not  only  play,  which  is  the  purest  expression  of  motor 
heredity,  but  work  and  all  exercise  owe  most  of  whatever 
pleasure  they  bring  to  the  past.  The  first  influence  of  all  right 
exercise  for  those  in  health  is  a  feeling  of  well-being  and  ex- 
hilaration. This  is  one  chief  source  of  the  strange  enthusiasm 
felt  for  many  special  forms  of  activity,  and  the  feeling  is  so 
strong  that  it  animates  many  forms  of  it  that  are  hygienically 
unfit.  To  act  vigorously  from  a  full  store  of  energy  gives  a  re- 
flex of  pleasure  that  is  sometimes  a  passion  and  may  fairly  in- 
toxicate. Animals  must  move  or  cease  growing  and  die. 
While  to  be  weak  is  to  be  miserable,  to  feel  strong  is  a  joy  and 
glory.  It  gives  a  sense  of  superiority,  dignity,  endurance,  cour- 
age, confidence,  enterprise,  power,  personal  validity,  virility, 
and  virtue  in  the  etymological  sense  of  that  noble  word.  To  be 
active,  agile,  strong,  is  especially  the  glory  of  young  men.  Our 
nature  and  history  have  so  disposed  our  frame  that  thus  all  phys- 
iological and  psychic  processes  are  stimulated,  products  of  de- 
composition are  washed  out  by  oxygenation  and  elimination,  the 
best  reaction  of  all  the  ganglionic  and  sympathetic  activities  is 
aroused,  and  vegetative  processes  are  normalized.  Activity  may 
exalt  the  spirit  almost  to  the  point  of  ecstasy,  and  the  physical 
pleasure  of  it  diffuse,  irradiate,  and  mitigate  the  sexual  stress 
just  at  the  age  when  its  premature  localization  is  most  delete- 
rious. Just  enough  at  the  proper  time  and  rate  contributes  to 
permanent  elasticity  of  mood  and  disposition,  gives  moral  self- 
control,  rouses  a  love  of  freedom  with  all  that  that  great  word 
means,  and  favors  all  higher  human  aspirations. 

In  all  these  modes  of  developing  our  efferent  powers,  we 
conceive  that  the  race  comes  very  close  to  the  individual  youths 


2o6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

and  that  ancestral  momenta  animate  motor  neurons  and  muscles 
and  preside  over  most  of  the  combinations.  Some  of  the 
elements  speak  with  a  still  small  voice,  raucous  with  age.  The 
first  spontaneous  movements  of  infancy  are  hieroglyphs,  of 
most  of  which  we  have  as  yet  no  good  key.  Many  elements 
are  so  impacted  and  felted  together  that  we  can  not  analyze 
them.  Many  are  extinct  and  many  perhaps  made  but  once 
and  only  hint  things  we  can  not  apprehend.  Later  the  re- 
hearsals are  fuller,  and  their  significance  more  intelligible,  and 
in  boyhood  and  youth  the  correspondences  are  plain  to  all  who 
have  eyes  to  see.  Pleasure  is  always  exactly  proportional  to 
the  directness  and  force  of  the  current  of  heredity,  and  in  play 
we  feel  most  fully  and  intensely  ancestral  joys.  The  pain  of 
toil  died  with  our  forebears ;  its  vestiges  in  our  play  give  pure 
delight.  Its  variety  prompts  to  diversity  that  enlarges  our  life. 
Primitive  men  and  animals  played,  and  that  too  has  left  its 
traces  in  us.  Some  urge  that  work  was  evolved  or  degen- 
erated from  play,  but  the  play  field  broadens  as  wath  succeed- 
ing generations  youth  is  prolonged,  for  play  is  always  and 
everywhere  the  best  synonym  of  youth.  All  are  young  at  play 
and  only  in  play,  and  the  best  possible  characterization  of  old 
age  is  the  absence  of  the  soul  and  body  of  play.  Only  senile 
and  overspecialized  tissues  of  brain,  heart,  and  muscles  know 
it  not. 

Gulick  ^  has  urged  that  what  makes  certain  exercises  more 
interesting  than  others  is  to  be  found  in  the  phylon.  The 
power  to  throw  with  accuracy  and  speed  was  once  pivotal  for 
survival,  and  non-throwers  were  eliminated.  Those  who  could 
throw  unusually  well  best  overcame  enemies,  killed  game,  and 
sheltered  family.  The  nervous  and  muscular  systems  are 
organized  with  certain  definite  tendencies  and  have  back  of 
them  a  racial  setting.  So  running  and  dodging  with  speed 
and  endurance,  and  hitting  with  a  club,  were  also  basal  to  hunt- 
ing and  fighting.  Now  that  the  need  of  these  is  less  urgent  for 
utilitarian  needs,  they  are  still  necessary  for  perfecting  the 
organism.  This  makes,  for  instance,  baseball  racially  familiar, 
because  it  represents  activities  that  were  once  and  for  a  long 
time  necessary  for  survival.  We  inherit  tendencies  of  muscular 
coordination  that  have  been  of  great  racial  utility.     The  best 

*  Am.  Phys.  Ed.  Rev.,  June,  1902. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION       20;- 

athletic  sports  and  games  are  composed  of  these  racially  old  ele- 
ments, so  that  phylogenetic  muscular  history  is  of  great  impor- 
tance. Why  is  it,  this  writer  asks,  that  a  city  man  so  loves  to  sit 
all  day  and  fish  ?  It  is  because  this  interest  dates  back  to  time 
immemorial.  We  are  the  sons  of  fishermen  and  early  life  was  by 
the  water's  side,  and  this  is  our  food  supply.  This  explains  why 
certain  exercises  are  more  interesting  than  others.  It  is  because 
they  touch  and  revive  the  deep  basic  emotions  of  the  race. 
Thus  we  see  that  play  is  not  doing  things  to  be  useful  later,  but 
it  is  rehearsing  racial  history.  Plays  and  games  change 
only  in  their  external  form,  but  the  underlying  neuro-muscular 
activities,  and  also  the  psychic  content  of  them,  is  the  same. 
Just  as  psychic  states  must  be  lived  out  up  through  the  grades, 
so  the  physical  activities  must  be  played  off,  each  in  its  own  time. 
The  best  exercise  for  the  young  should  thus  be  more  directed 
to  develop  the  basal  powers  old  to  the  race  than  those  peculiar  to 
the  individual,  and  it  should  enforce  those  psycho-neural  and 
muscular  forms  which  race  habit  has  handed  down  rather  than 
insist  on  those  arbitrarily  designed  to  develop  our  ideas  of 
symmetry  regardless  of  heredity.  The  best  guide  to  the  former 
is  interest,  zest,  and  spontaneity.  Hereditary  momenta  really 
determine,  too,  the  order  in  which  nerve  centers  come  into  func- 
tion. The  oldest,  racial  parts  come  first,  and  those  which  are 
higher  and  represent  volition  come  in  much  later.^  As  Hugh- 
lings- Jackson  has  well  shown,  speech  uses  most  of  the  same  or- 
gans as  does  eating,  but  those  concerned  with  the  former  are 
controlled  from  a  higher  level  of  nerve-cells.  By  right  mastica- 
tion, deglutition,  etc.,  we  are  thus  developing  speech  organs. 
Thus  not  only  the  kind  but  the  time  of  forms  and  degrees  of  ex- 
ercise is  best  prescribed  by  heredity.  All  growth  is  more  or  less 
rhythmic.  There  are  seasons  of  rapid  increment  followed  by 
rest  and  then  perhaps  succeeded  by  a  period  of  augmentation, 
and  this  may  occur  several  times.  Roberts'  fifth  parliamentary 
report  shows  that  systematic  gymnastics,  which,  if  applied  at  the 
right  age,  produce  such  immediate  and  often  surprising  develop- 
ment of  lung  capacity,  utterly  fail  with  boys  of  twelve,  because 
this  nascent  period  has  not  yet  come.  Donaldson  showed  that  if 
the  eyelid  of  a  young  kitten  be  forced  open  prematurely  at 

*  The  Influence  of  Exercise  upon  Growth,  by  Frederic  Burk.     Am.  Phys.  Ed 
Rev.,  1899,  p.  340. 


208  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

birth  and  stimulated  with  Hght,  niedullatioii  was  premature  and 
imperfect;  so,  too,  if  proper  exercise  is  deferred  too  long,  we 
know  that  little  result  is  achieved.  The  sequence  in  which  the 
maturation  of  levels,  nerve  areas,  and  bundles  of  fibers  develop 
may  be,  as  Flechsig  thinks,  causal ;  or,  according  to  Cajal, 
energy,  originally  employed  in  growth  by  cell  division,  later 
passes  to  fiber  extension  and  the  development  of  latent  cells ; 
or,  as  in  young  children,  the  nascent  period  of  finger  move- 
ments may  stimulate  that  of  the  thumb  which  comes  later,  and 
the  independent  movement  of  the  two  eyes,  their  subsequent  co- 
ordination, and  so  on  to  perhaps  a  third  and  yet  higher  level. 
Thus  exercise  ought  to  develop  nature's  first  intention  and  ful- 
fil the  law  of  nascent  periods,  or  else  not  only  no  good  but 
great  harm  may  be  done.  Hence  every  determination  of  these 
periods  is  of  great  practical  as  well  as  scientific  importance. 
The  following  are  the  chief  attempts  yet  made  to  fix  them, 
which  show  the  significance  of  adolescence. 

The  doll  curve  reaches  its  point  of  highest  intensity  be- 
tween eight  and  nine.^  and  it  is  nearly  ended  at  fifteen,  although 
it  may  persist.  Children  can  give  no  better  reason  why  they 
stop  playing  with  dolls  than  because  other  things  are  liked  bet- 
ter, or  they  are  too  old,  ashamed,  love  real  babies,  etc.  The 
Roman  girl,  when  ripe  for  marriage, hung  up  her  childhood  doll 
as  a  votive  offering  to  Venus.  Mrs.  Carlyle,  who  was  compelled 
to  stop,  made  sumptuous  dresses  and  a  four-post  bed,  and  made 
her  doll  die  upon  a  funeral  pyre  like  Dido,  after  speaking  her  last 
farew^ell  and  stabbing  herself  with  a  penknife  by  way  of  Tyrian 
sword.  At  thirteen  or  fourteen  it  is  more  distinctly  realized 
that  dolls  are  not  real,  because  they  have  no  inner  life  or  feel- 
ing, yet  many  continue  to  play  w^ith  them  with  great  pleasure, 
in  secret,  till  well  on  in  the  teens  or  twenties.  Occasionally 
single  women  or  married  women  with  no  children,  and  in  rare 
cases  even  those  who  have  children,  play  dolls  all  their  lives. 
Gales's  ^  student  concluded  that  the  girls  who  played  with  dolls 
up  to  or  into  pubescent  years  were  usually  those  who  had  the 
fewest  number,  that  they  played  with  them  in  the  most  realistic 

1  A  Study  of  Dolls,  by  G.  Stanley  Hall  and  A.  C.  Ellis.  Fed.  Sem.,  Dec, 
1896,  vol.  iv,  pp.  129-175. 

*  Studies  in  Imagination,  by  Lillian  H.  Chalmers.  Fed.  Sem.,  April,  1900, 
vol.  vii,  pp.  111-123. 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       209 

manner,  kept  them  because  actually  most  fond  of  them,  and 
were  likely  to  be  more  scientific,  steady,  and  less  sentimental 
than  those  who  dropped  them  early.  But  the  instinct  that  "  dolli- 
fies  "  new  or  most  unfit  things  is  gone,  as  also  the  subtle  points 
of  contact  between  doll  play  and  idolatry.  Before  puberty  dolls 
are  more  likely  to  be  adults ;  after  puberty  they  are  almost  al- 
ways children  or  babies.  There  is  no  longer  a  struggle  between 
doubt  and  reality  in  the  doll  cosmos,  no  more  abandon  to  the  doll 
illusion ;  but  where  it  lingers  it  is  a  more  atavistic  rudiment,  and 
just  as  at  the  height  of  the  fever,  dolls  are  only  in  small  part 
representatives  of  future  children,  the  saying  that  the  first  child 
is  the  last  doll  is  probably  false.  Nor  are  doll  and  child  compa- 
rable to  first  and  second  dentition,  and  it  is  doubtful  if  children 
who  play  w-ith  dolls  as  children  with  too  great  abandonment  are 
those  who  make  the  best  mothers  later,  or  if  it  has  any  value  as  a 
preliminary  practise  of  motherhood.  The  number  of  motor 
activities  that  are  both  inspired  and  unified  by  this  form  of  play 
and  that  can  always  be  given  wholesome  direction  is  almost 
incredible,  and  has  been  too  long  neglected  both  by  psycholo- 
gists and  teachers.  Few  purer  types  of  the  rehearsal  by  the 
individual  of  the  history  of  the  race  can  probably  be  found  even 
though  we  can  not  yet  analyze  the  many  elements  involved  and 
assign  to  each  its  phyletic  correlate. 

In  an  interesting  paper  Dr.  Gulick  ^  divides  play  into  three 
childish  periods,  separated  by  the  ages  three  and  seven,  and 
attempts  to  characterize  the  plays  of  early  adolescence  from 
twelve  to  seventeen  and  of  later  adolescence  from  seventeen  to 
twenty-three.  Of  the  first  two  periods  he  says,  children  before 
seven  rarely  play  games  spontaneously,  but  often  do  so  under 
the  stimulus  of  older  persons.  From  seven  to  twelve  games 
are  almost  exclusively  individualistic  and  competitive,  but  in 
early  adolescence  "  two  elements  predominate — first,  the  plays 
are  predominantly  team  games,  in  which  the  individual  is  more 
or  less  sacrificed  for  the  whole,  in  which  there  is  obedience  to 
a  captain,  in  which  there  is  cooperation  among  a  number  for 
a  given  end,  in  which  play  has  a  program  and  an  end.  The 
second  characteristic  of  the  period  is  with  reference  to  its  plays, 
and  there  seems  to  be  all  of  savage  out-of-door  life — hunting, 
fishing,   stealing,  swimming,   rowing,   sailing,  fighting,  hero- 

^  Some  Psychical  Aspects  of  Physical  Exercise.     Pop.  Sci.  Mo.,  1898. 
15 


2lO  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

worship,  adventure,  love  of  animals,  etc.  This  characteristic 
obtains  more  with  boys  than  with  girls."  "  The  plays  of  ado- 
lescence are  socialistic,  demanding  the  heathen  virtues  of  cour- 
age, endurance,  self-control,  bravery,  loyalty,  enthusiasm." 

Croswell  ^  found  that  of  2,000  children  familiar  with  700 
kinds  of  amusements,  those  involving  physical  exercises  pre- 
dominated over  all  others,  and  that  "  at  every  age  after  the 
eighth  year  they  were  represented  as  almost  two  to  one,  and 
in  the  sixteenth  year  rose  among  boys  as  four  to  one."  The 
age  of  the  greatest  number  of  different  amusements  is  from  ten 
to  eleven,  nearly  fifteen  being  mentioned,  but  for  the  next  eight 
or  nine  years  there  is  a  steady  decline  of  number  and  pro- 
gressive specialization  occurs.  The  games  of  chase,  which  are 
suggestive  on  the  recapitulation  theory,  rise  from  eleven  per  cent 
in  boys  of  six  to  nineteen  per  cent  at  nine,  but  soon  after  decline, 
and  at  sixteen  have  fallen  to  less  than  four  per  cent.  Toys  and 
original  make-believe  games  decline  still  earlier,  while  ball  rises 
steadily  and  rapidly  to  eighteen,  and  card  and  table  games  rise 
very  steadily  from  ten  to  fifteen  in  girls,  but  the  increment  is 
much  less  in  boys.  "  A  third  or  more  of  all  the  amusements 
of  boys  just  entering  their  teens  are  games  of  contest — games 
in  which  the  end  is  in  one  way  or  another  to  gain  an  advan- 
tage over  one's  fellows,  in  which  the  interest  is  in  the  struggle 
between  peers."  "  As  children  approach  the  teens,  a  tend- 
ency arises  that  is  well  expressed  by  one  of  the  girls  who  no 
longer  makes  playthings  but  things  that  are  useful."  Parents 
and  society  must,  therefore,  provide  the  most  favorable  condi- 
tions for  the  kind  of  amusement  fitting  at  each  age.  As  the 
child  grows  older,  society  plays  a  larger  role  in  all  the  child's 
amusements,  and  from  the  thirteenth  year  "  amusements  take 
on  a  decidedly  cooperative  and  competitive  character,  and 
efforts  are  more  and  more  confined  to  the  accomplishments  of 
some  definite  aim.  The  course  for  this  period  will  concen- 
trate the  effort  upon  fewer  lines,"  and  more  time  will  be  de- 
voted to  each.  The  desire  for  mastery  is  now  at  its  height. 
The  instinct  is  to  maintain  one's  self  independently  and  ask 
no  odds.  At  fourteen,  especially,  the  impulse  is  in  manual 
training  to  make  something  and  perhaps  to  cooperate. 

*  Amusements  of  Worcester  School  Children.     Pad.   Sem.,   September,    185^ 
vol.  vi,  pp.  314-371.  . 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND    FUNCTION        2il 

McGhee  ^  collected  the  play  preferences  of  15.718  children, 
and  found  a  very  steady  decline  in  running  plays  among  girls 
from  nine  to  eighteen,  but  a  far  more  rapid  rise  in  plays  of 
chance  from  eleven  to  fifteen,  and  a  very  rapid  rise  from  six- 
teen to  eighteen.  From  eleven  onward  with  the  most  marked 
fall  before  fourteen,  there  was  a  distinct  decline  in  imitative 
games  for  girls  and  a  slower  one  for  boys.  Games  involving 
rivalry  increased  rapidly  among  boys  from  eleven  to  sixteen 
and  still  more  rapidly  among  girls,  their  percentage  of  pref- 
erence even  exceeding  that  of  boys  at  eighteen,  when  it  reached 
nearly  seventy  per  cent.  With  adolescence  specialization  upon 
few  plays  was  markedly  increased  in  the  teens  among  boys, 
whereas  with  girls  in  general  there  were  a  large  number  of 
plays  which  were  popular  with  none  preeminent.  Even  at 
this  age  the  principle  of  organization  in  games  so  strong  with 
boys  is  very  slight  with  girls.  Puberty  showed  the  greatest 
increase  of  interest  among  pubescent  girls  for  croquet,  and 
among  boys  for  swimming,  although  baseball  and  football,  the 
most  favored  for  boys,  rose  rapidly.  Although  the  author 
does  not  state  it,  it  would  seem  from  his  data  that  plays  pecul- 
iar to  the  different  seasons  were  most  marked  among  boys,  in 
part  at  least,  because  their  activities  are  more  out  of  doors. 

Ferrero  and  others  have  shown  that  the  more  intense  activi- 
ties of  primitive  people  tend  to  be  rhythmic  and  with  strongly 
automatic  features.  No  form  of  activity  is  more  universal 
than  the  dance,  which  is  not  only  intense  but  may  express 
chiefly  in  terms  of  fundamental  movements,  stripped  of  their 
accessory  finish  and  detail,  every  important  act,  vocation,  senti- 
ment, or  event  in  the  life  of  man  in  language  so  universal  and 
symbolic  that  music  and  poetry  seem  themselves  to  have  arisen 
out  of  it.  Before  it  became  specialized  much  labor  was  cast 
in  rhythmic  form  and  often  accompanied  by  time-marking  and 
even  tone  to  secure  the  stimulus  of  concert  on  both  economic 
and  social  principles.  In  the  dark  background  of  history 
there  is  now  much  evidence  that  at  some  point,  play,  art,  and 
work  were  not  divorced.  They  all  may  have  sprung  from 
rhythmic  movement  which  is  so  deep-seated  in  biology  because 
it  secures  most  joy  of  life  with  least  expense.     By  it  Eros 

*  A  Study  in  the  Play  Life  of  Some  South  Carolina  Children.     Ped.  Sem.,  De- 
cember, 1900,  vol.  vii,  pp.  459-478. 


212  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

of  old  ordered  chaos,  and  by  its  judicious  use  the  human  soul 
is  cadenced  to  great  efforts  toward  high  ideals.  The  many 
work-songs  to  secure  concerted  action  in  lifting,  pulling,  step- 
ping, the  use  of  flail,  lever,  saw,  ax,  hammer,  hoe,  loom, 
etc.,  show  that  arsis  and  thesis  represent  flexion  and  extension, 
that  accent  originated  in  the  acme  of  muscular  stress,  as  well  as 
how  rhythm  eases  work  and  also  makes  it  social.  Most  of  the 
old  work-canticles  are  lost,  and  machines  have  made  work  more 
serial,  while  rhythms  are  obscured  or  imposed  from  without  so 
as  to  limit  the  freedom  they  used  to  express.  Now  all  basal, 
central,  or  strength  movements  tend  to  be  oscillatory,  automat- 
ically repetitive,  or  rhythmic  like  savage  music,  as  if  the  waves 
of  the  primeval  sea  whence  we  came  still  beat  in  them,  just 
as  all  fine  peripheral  and  late  movements  tend  to  be  serial, 
special,  vastly  complex,  and  diversified.  It  is  thus  natural  that 
during  the  period  of  greatest  strength  increment  in  muscular 
development,  the  rhythmic  function  of  nearly  all  fundamental 
movements  should  be  strongly  accentuated.  At  the  dawn  of 
this  age  boys  love  marching,  and  as  our  returns  show  there  is 
a  very  remarkable  rise  in  the  passion  for  beating  time,  jigging, 
double  shufiling,  rhythmic  clapping,  etc.  The  more  prominent 
the  factor  of  repetition  the  more  automatic  and  the  less 
strenuous  is  the  hard  and  new  effort  of  constant  psychic  ad- 
justment and  attention.  College  yells,  cheers,  rowing,  march- 
ing, processions,  bicycling,  running,  tug-of-war,  calisthenics 
and  class  gymnastics  with  counting,  and  especially  with  music, 
horseback  riding,  etc.,  are  rhythmic;  tennis,  baseball  and  foot- 
ball, basket-ball,  golf,  polo,  etc.,  are  less  rhythmic,  but  are  con- 
certed and  intense.  These  latter  emphasize  the  conflict  factor 
best  brought  out  in  fencing,  boxing,  and  wrestling,  and  lay  more 
stress  on  the  psychic  elements  of  attention  and  skill.  The  effect 
of  musical  accompaniment,  which  the  Swedish  system  wrongly 
rejects,  is  to  make  the  exercises  more  fundamental  and  auto- 
matic, and  to  proportionately  diminish  the  conscious  effort  and 
relieve  the  neuro-muscular  mechanism  involved  in  fine  move- 
ments. 

Adolescence  is  the  golden  period  of  nascency  for  rhythm. 
Before  this  change  many  children  have  a  very  imperfect  sense 
of  it,  and  even  those  who  march,  sing,  play,  or  read  poetry  with 
correct  and  overemphasized  tempo,  experience  a  great  broaden- 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION   213 

ing  of  the  horizon  of  consciousness,  and  a  marked,  and,  for 
mental  power  and  scope,  all-conditioning  increase  in  the  carry- 
ing power  of  attention  and  the  sentence-sense.  The  soul  now 
feels  the  beauty  of  cadences,  good  ascension,  and  the  symmetry 
of  well-developed  periods,  and  all,  as  I  am  convinced,  because 
this  is  the  springtime  of  the  strength  movements  which  are 
predominantly  rhythmic.  Not  only  does  music  start  in  tempo, 
the  drum  being  the  oldest  instrument,  but  quantity  long  took 
precedence  of  sense  and  form  of  content,  both  melody  and 
words  coming  later.  Even  rhythmic  tapping  or  beating  of 
the  foot  (whence  the  poetic  feet  of  prosody  and  meter  thus  later 
imposed  on  monotonous  prose  to  make  poetry)  exhilarates, 
makes  glad  the  soul  and  inspires  it  to  attack,  gives  compulsion 
and  a  sense  of  unity.  The  psychology  of  rhythm  shows  its 
basal  value  in  cadencing  the  soul.  We  can  not  conceive  what 
war,  love,  and  religion  would  be  without  it.  The  old  adage 
that  "  the  parent  of  prose  is  poetry,  the  parent  of  poetry  is 
music,  the  parent  of  music  is  rhythm,  and  the  parent  of  rhythm 
is  God  "  seems  borne  out  not  only  in  history,  but  by  the  nature  of 
thought  and  attention  that  does  not  move  in  a  continuum,  but 
flies  and  perches  alternately,  or  on  stepping-stones  and  as  if 
influenced  by  the  tempo  of  the  leg  swinging  as  a  compound 
pendulum. 

Dancing  is  one  of  the  best  expressions  of  pure  play  and  of 
the  motor  needs  of  youth.  Perhaps  it  is  the  most  liberal  of 
all  forms  of  motor  education.  Schopenhauer  thought  it  the 
apex  of  physiological  irritability  and  that  it  made  animal  life 
most  vividly  conscious  of  its  existence  and  most  exultant  in  ex- 
hibiting it.  In  very  ancient  times  China  ritualized  it  in  the 
spring  and  made  it  a  large  part  of  the  education  of  boys  after 
the  age  of  thirteen.  Neale  thinks  it  was  originally  circular 
or  orbicular  worship,  which  he  deems  oldest.  In  Japan,  in  the 
priestly  Salic  College  of  ancient  Rome,  in  Egypt,  in  the  Greek 
Apollo  cult,  it  was  a  form  of  worship.  St.  Basil  advised  it; 
St.  Gregory  introduced  it  into  religious  services.  The  early 
Christian  bishops,  called  praesuls,  led  the  sacred  dance  around 
the  altar,  and  only  in  692,  and  again  in  16 17,  was  it  forbidden 
in  church.  Neale  and  others  have  shown  how  the  choral  pro- 
cessionals with  all  the  added  charm  of  vestment  and  intonation 
have  had  far  more  to  do  in  Christianizing  many  low  tribes, 


214  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

who  could  not  understand  the  language  of  the  church,  than 
preaching.  Savages  are  nearly  all  great  dancers,  imitating 
every  animal  they  know,  dancing  out  their  own  legends,  with 
ritual  sometimes  so  exact  that  error  means  death.  The  char- 
acter of  people  is  often  learned  from  their  dances,  and  Moliere 
says  the  destiny  of  nations  depends  on  them.  The  gayest 
dancers  are  often  among  the  most  downtrodden  and  unhappy 
people.  Some  mysteries  can  only  be  revealed  in  them,  as  holy 
passion-plays.  If  we  consider  the  history  of  secular  dances,  we 
find  that  some  of  them,  when  first  invented  or  in  vogue,  evoked 
the  greatest  enthusiasm.  One  writer  says  that  the  polka  so 
delighted  France  and  England  that  statesmen  forgot  politics. 
The  spirit  of  the  old  Polish  aristocracy  still  lives  in  the  polo- 
naise. The  gipsy  dances  have  inspired  a  new  school  of  music. 
The  Greek  drama  grew  out  of  the  evolution  of  the  tragic 
chorus.  National  dances  like  the  hornpipe  and  reel  of  Scotland, 
the  Rcihen  of  Germany,  the  rondes  of  France,  the  Spanish 
tarantella  and  chaconnc,  the  strathspey  from  the  Spey  Valley, 
the  Irish  jig,  etc.,  express  racial  traits.  Instead  of  the  former 
vast  repertory,  the  stately  pavone,  the  graceful  and  dignified 
saraband,  the  wild  salterrcllc,  the  bourree  with  song  and  strong 
rhythm,  the  light  and  skippy  bolero,  the  courtly  bayadere,  the 
dramatic  plugge,  gavotte,  and  other  peasant  dances  in  costume, 
the  fast  and  furious  fandango,  weapon  and  military  dances ;  in 
place  of  the  pristine  power  to  express  love,  mourning,  justice, 
penalty,  fear,  anger,  consolation,  divine  service,  symbolic  and 
philosophical  conceptions,  and  every  industry  or  characteristic 
act  of  life  in  pantomime  and  gesture,  we  have  in  the  dance  of 
the  modern  ballroom  only  a  degenerate  relict,  with  at  best  but  a 
very  insignificant  culture  value,  and  too  often  stained  with  bad 
associations.  This  is  most  unfortunate  for  youth,  and  for  their 
sake  a  work  of  rescue  and  revival  is  greatly  needed,  for  it  is 
perhaps,  not  excepting  even  music,  the  completest  language 
of  the  emotions  and  can  be  made  one  of  the  best  schools 
of  sentiment  and  even  will,  inoculating  good  states  of  mind 
and  exorcising  bad  ones  as  few  other  agencies  have  power  to 
do.  Right  dancing  can  cadence  the  very  soul,  give  nervous 
poise  and  control,  bring  harmony  between  basal  and  finer 
muscles,  and  also  between  feeling  and  intellect,  body  and  mind. 
It  can  serve  both  as  an  awakener  and  a  test  of  intelligence,  pre- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       215 

dispose  the  heart  against  vice,  and  turn  the  springs  of  character 
toward  virtue.  That  its  present  decadent  forms,  for  those  too 
devitahzed  to  dance  aright,  can  be  demorahzing,  we  know  in 
this  day  too  well,  although  even  questionable  dances  may  some- 
times work  off  vicious  propensities  in  ways  more  harmless  than 
those  in  which  they  would  otherwise  find  vent.  Its  utilization 
for  and  influence  on  the  insane  would  be  another  interesting 
chapter. 

Very  interesting  scientifically  and  suggestive  practically  is 
another  correspondence  which  I  believe  to  be  new,  between  the 
mode  of  spontaneous  activity  in  youth  and  that  of  labor  in  the 
early  history  of  the  race.  One  of  the  most  marked  dis- 
tinctions between  savage  and  civilized  races  is  in  the  longer 
rhythm  of  work  and  relaxation.  The  former  are  idle  and 
lazy  for  days,  weeks,  and  perhaps  months,  and  then  put  forth 
intense  and  prolonged  effort  in  dance,  hunt,  warfare,  migration, 
or  construction,  sometimes  dispensing  wnth  sleep  and  manifest- 
ing remarkable  endurance.  As  civilization  and  specialization 
advance,  hours  become  regular.  The  cultured  man  is  less  des- 
ultory in  all  his  habits,  from  eating  and  sleeping  to  performing 
social  and  religious  duties,  although  he  may  put  forth  no  more 
aggregate  energy  in  a  year  than  the  savage.  Women  are 
schooled  to  regular  work  long  before  men,  and  the  difficulty 
of  imposing  civilization  upon  low  races  is  compared  by 
Biicher  *  to  that  of  training  a  cat  to  work  when  harnessed  to  a 
dogcart.  It  is  not  dread  of  fatigue  but  of  the  monotony  of 
method  that  makes  them  hate  labor.  The  effort  of  savages  is 
more  intense  and  their  periods  of  rest  more  prolonged  and  inert. 
Darwin  thinks  all  vital  function  bred  to  go  in  periods,  as  verte- 
brates are  descended  from  a  tidal  ascidian  (Descent  of  Man. 
i,  p.  204  et  seq.).  There  is  indeed  much  that  suggests  some 
other  irregular  rhythm  more  or  less  independent  of  day  and 
night,  and  perhaps  sexual  in  its  nature,  but  not  lunar  and 
for  males.  This  mode  of  life  not  only  preceded  the  indus- 
trial and  commercial  period  of  which  regularity 'is  a  prime 
condition,  but  it  lasted  indefinitely  longer  than  the  latter  has  yet 
existed ;  during  this  early  time  great  exertion,  sometimes  to  the 
point  of  utter  exhaustion  and  collapse,  alternated  with  seasons 
of  almost  vegetative  existence.    We  see  abundant  traces  of  this 

^  Arbeit,  u.  Rithmus.     Leipzic,  1896. 


2l6  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

psychosis  in  the  muscle  habits  of  adolescents,  and  I  think  in  stu- 
dent and  particularly  in  college  life,  which  can  enforce  regular- 
ity only  to  a  limited  extent.  This  is  not  reversion,  but  partly  an 
expression  of  the  nature  and  perhaps  the  needs  of  this  stage  of 
immaturity,  and  partly  the  same  instinct  of  revolt  against  uni- 
formity imposed  from  without,  which  rob  life  of  variety  and  ex- 
tinguish the  spirit  of  adventure  and  untrammeled  freedom, 
and  make  the  savage  hard  to  break  to  the  harness  of  civiliza- 
tion. The  hunger  for  fatigue  too  can  become  a  veritable  pas- 
sion and  is  quite  distinct  from  either  the  impulse  for  activity 
for  its  own  sake  or  the  desire  of  achievement.  To  shout  and 
put  forth  the  utmost  possible  strength  in  crude  ways  is  an 
erethic  intoxication  at  a  stage  when  every  tissue  can  become 
erectile  and  seems,  like  the  crying  of  infants, to  have  a  legitimate 
function  in  causing  tension  and  flushing,  enlarging  the  caliber 
of  blood  vessels,  and  forcing  the  blood  perhaps  even  to  the  point 
of  extravasation  to  irrigate  newly  growing  fibers,  cells,  and  or- 
gans which  atrophy  if  not  thus  fed.  When  maturity  is  complete 
this  need  abates.  If  this  be  correct,  the  phenomenon  of  second 
breath,  so  characteristic  of  adolescence,  and  one  factor  in  the 
inebriate's  propensity,  is  an  ontogenetic  expression  of  a  rhythm 
trait  of  a  long  racial  period.  Youth  needs  overexertion  to 
compensate  for  underexertion,  to  undersleep  to  offset  oversleep 
at  times.  This  seems  to  be  nature's  provision  to  expand  in  all 
directions  its  possibilities  of  the  body  and  soul  in  this  plastic 
period  when  without  this  occasional  excess  powers  would 
atrophy  or  suffer  arrest  for  want  of  use,  or  larger  possibilities 
would  not  be  realized  without  this  regimen  peculiar  to  nascent 
periods.     This  is  treated  more  fully  elsewhere. 

Perhaps  next  to  dancing  in  phyletic  motivation  comes  per- 
sonal conflicts,  such  as  wrestling,  fighting,  boxing,  dueling,  and 
in  some  sense,  hunting.  The  animal  world  is  full  of  struggle 
for  survival,  and  primitive  warfare  is  a  wager  of  battle,  of 
personal  combat  of  foes  contesting  eye  to  eye  and  hand  to 
hand,  where  victory  of  one  is  the  defeat  and  perhaps  death  of 
the  other,  and  where  life  is  often  staked  against  life.  In  its  more 
brutal  forms  we  see  one  of  the  most  degrading  of  all  the  aspects 
of  human  nature.  Burk  ^  has  shown  how  the  most  bestial  of 
these  instincts  survive  and  crop  out  irresistibly  in  boyhood, 

^  Teasing  and  Bullying.     Fed.  Sem. ,  1896,  p.  336. 


GROWTH  OF   MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       217 

where  fights  are  often  with  desperate  abandon.  Noses  are 
bitten,  ears  torn,  sensitive  places  kicked,  hair  pulled,  arms 
twisted,  the  head  stamped  on  and  pounded  on  stones,  fingers 
twisted,  and  hoodlums  sometimes  deliberately  try  to  strangle, 
gouge  out  an  eye,  pull  off  an  ear,  pull  out  the  tongue,  break 
teeth,  nose,  or  bones,  or  dislocate  jaws  or  other  joints,  wring 
the  neck,  bite  off  a  lip,  and  torture  in  utterly  nameless  ways. 
In  unrestrained  anger,  man  becomes  a  demon  in  love  with  the 
blood  of  his  victim.  The  face  is  distorted,  and  there  are  yells, 
oaths,  animal  snorts  and  grunts,  cries,  and  then  exultant 
laughter  at  pain,  and  each  is  bruised,  dirty,  disheveled  and  pant- 
ing with  exhaustion.  For  coarser  natures,  the  spectacle  of 
such  conflicts  has  an  intense  attraction,  while  some  morbid  souls 
are  scarred  by  a  distinct  phobia  for  everything  suggestive  of 
even  lower  degrees  of  opposition.  These  instincts,  more  or 
less  developed  in  boyhood,  are  repressed  in  normal  cases  before 
strength  and  skill  are  sufficiently  developed  to  inflict  serious 
bodily  injury,  while  without  the  reductives  that  orthogenetic 
growth  brings  they  become  criminal.  Repulsive  as  are  these 
grosser  and  animal  manifestations  of  anger,  its  impulsion  can 
not  and  should  not  be  eliminated,  but  its  expression  trans- 
formed and  directed  toward  evils  that  need  all  its  antagonism. 
To  be  angry  aright  is  a  good  part  of  moral  education,  and  non- 
resistance  under  all  provocations  is  unmanly,  craven,  and 
cowardly.^  An  able-bodied  young  man,  who  can  not  fight 
physically,  can  hardly  have  a  high  and  true  sense  of  honor, 
and  is  generally  a  milk-sop,  a  lady-boy,  or  a  sneak.  He  lacks 
virility,  his  masculinity  does  not  ring  true,  his  honesty  can  not 
be  sound  to  the  core.  Hence,  instead  of  eradicating  this  in- 
stinct, one  of  the  great  problems  of  physical  and  moral  ped- 
agogy is  to  rightly  temper  and  direct  it. 

Sparta  sedulously  cultivated  it  in  boys  and  in  the  great 
English  schools,  where  for  generations  it  has  been  more  or  less 
tacitly  recognized,  it  is  regulated  by  custom,  and  their  literature 
and  traditions  abound  in  illustrations  of  its  man-making  and 
often  transforming  influence  in  ways  well  appreciated  by 
Hughes  and  Arnold.  It  makes  against  degeneration,  the  essen- 
tial feature  of  which  is  weakening  of  will  and  loss  of  honor. 
Real  virtue  requires  enemies,  and  women  and  effeminate  and 

*  See  my  Study  of  Anger.     American  Journal  of  Psychology,  vol.  x,  1899. 


5il8  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

old  men  want  placid,  comfortable  peace,  while  a  real  man  re- 
joices in  noble  strife  which  sanctifies  all  great  causes,  casts  out 
fear,  and  is  the  chief  school  of  courage.  Bad  as  is  overpug- 
nacity,  a  scrapping  boy  is  better  than  one  who  funks  a  fight, 
and  I  have  no  patience  with  the  sentimentality  that  would 
here  pour  out  the  child  with  the  bath,  but  would  have  every 
healthy  boy  taught  boxing  at  adolescence  if  not  before. 
The  prize-ring  is  degrading  and  brutal,  but  in  lieu  of  bet- 
ter illustrations  of  the  spirit  of  personal  contest  I  would  in- 
terest a  certain  class  of  boys  in  it  and  try  to  devise  modes  of 
pedagogic  utilization  of  the  immense  store  of  interest  it  gener- 
ates. Like  dancing,  it  should  be  rescued  from  its  evil  associa- 
tions and  its  educational  force  put  to  do  moral  work,  even 
though  it  be  by  way  of  individual  prescriptions  for  specific  de- 
fects of  character.  At  its  best,  it  is  indeed  a  manly  art,  a 
superb  school  for  quickness  of  eye  and  hand,  decision,  force  of 
will,  and  self-control.  The  moment  this  is  lost  stinging  punish- 
ment follows.  Hence  it  is  the  surest  of  all  cures  for  excessive 
irascibility  and  has  been  found  to  have  a  most  beneficent  effect 
upon  a  peevish  or  unmanly  disposition.  It  has  no  mean 
theoretic  side  of  rules,  kinds  of  blow  and  counters,  arts  of 
drawing  out  and  tiring  an  opponent,  hindering  but  not  injuring 
him,  defensive  and  offensive  tactics,  etc.,  and  it  addresses  chiefly 
the  fundamental  muscles  in  both  training  and  conflict.  I  do 
not  underestimate  the  many  and  great  difficulties  of  proper  pur- 
gation, but  I  know  from  both  personal  practise  and  observation 
that  they  are  not  unconquerable. 

This  form  of  personal  conflict  is  better  than  dueling  even  in 
its  comparatively  harmless  German  student  form,  although  this 
has  been  warmly  defended  by  Jacob  Grimm,  Bismarck,  and 
Treitschke,  while  Paulsen,  Professor  of  Ethics,  and  Schrempf, 
of  Theology,  have  pronounced  it  but  a  slight  evil,  and  several 
Americans  have  thought  it  better  than  hazing,  which  it  makes 
impossible.  The  dark  side  of  dueling  is  seen  in  the  hyper- 
trophied  sense  of  honor  which  under  the  code  of  the  corps 
becomes  an  intricate  and  fantastic  thing,  prompting,  accord- 
ing to  Ziegler,^  a  club  of  sixteen  students  to  fight  over  two 
hundred  duels  in  four  weeks  in   Jena  early  in  this  century. 

*  Das  Deutsche  Student,  1895,  p.  88.  vSee  also  H.  D.  Sheldon:  History  and 
Pedagogy  of  American  Student  Societies,  N.  Y.,  1901,  p.  31  et  seq. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER  AND   FUNCTION        219 

It  is  prone  to  degenerate  to  an  artificial  etiquette  demanding 
satisfaction  for  slight  and  unintended  offenses.  Although  this 
professor,  who  had  his  own  face  scarred  on  the  mensur,  pleaded 
for  a  student  court  of  honor,  with  power  to  brand  acts  as  in- 
famous and  even  to  expel  students,  on  the  ground  that  honor 
had  grown  more  inward,  the  traditions  in  favor  of  dueling  w^ere 
too  strong.  The  duel  had  a  religious  romantic  origin  as  reveal- 
ing God's  judgment,  and  means  that  the  victim  of  an  insult  is 
ready  to  stake  body,  or  even  life,  and  this  is  still  its  ideal  side. 
Anachronism  as  it  now  is  and  degenerating  readily  to  sport  or 
spectacle,  overpunishing  what  is  often  mere  awkwardness  or 
ignorance,  it  still  impresses  a  certain  sense  of  responsibility  for 
conduct  and  gives  some  physical  training,  slight  and  specialized 
though  it  be.  The  code  is  conventional,  drawn  directly  from  old 
French  military  life,  and  is  not  true  to  the  line  that  separates 
real  honor  from  dishonor,  deliberate  insult  that  w-ounds  normal 
self-respect  from  injury  fancied  by  oversensitiveness  or  feigned 
by  arrogance ;  so  that  in  its  present  form  it  is  not  the  best  safe- 
guard of  the  sacred  shrine  of  personality  against  invasion  of  its 
rights.  If,  as  is  claimed,  it  is  some  diversion  from  or  fortifica- 
tion against  corrosive  sensuality,  it  has  generally  allied  itself 
with  excessive  beer-drinking.  Fencing,  wdiile  an  art  suscep- 
tible of  high  development  and  valuable  for  both  pose  and  poise 
and  requiring  great  quickness  of  eye,  arm,  and  wrist,  is  uni- 
lateral and  robbed  of  the  zest  of  inflicting  real  pain  on  an 
antagonist. 

Bushido^  W'hich  means  military-knightly  ways,  designates 
the  Japanese  conception  of  honor  in  behavior  and  in  fighting. 
The  youth  is  inspired  by  the  ideal  of  Tom  Brown  "  to  leave 
behind  him  the  name  of  a  fellow  who  never  bullied  a  little  boy 
or  turned  his  back  on  a  big  one."  It  expresses  the  race  ideal 
of  justice,  patriotism,  and  the  duty  of  living  aright  and  dying 
nobly.  It  means  also  sympathy,  pity,  and  love,  for  only  the 
bravest  can  be  the  tenderest,  and  those  most  in  love  are  most 
daring,  and  it  includes  politeness  and  the  art  of  poetry.  Honor 
is  a  sense  of  personal  dignity  and  worth,  so  the  bushi  is  truth- 
ful without  an  oath.  At  the  tender  age  of  five  the  samurai  is 
given  a  real  sword,  and  this  gives  self-respect  and  responsi- 

*  Bushido :  The  Soul  of  Japan.     An  exposition  of  Japanese  thought,  by  Inazp 
Nitob^.      Philadelphia,  igoo. 


220  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

bility.  At  fifteen,  two  sharp  and  artistic  ones,  long  and  short, 
are  given  him,  which  must  be  his  companions  for  hfe.  They 
were  made  by  a  smith  whose  shop  is  a  sanctuary  and  who  be- 
gins his  work  with  prayer.  They  have  the  finest  hilts  and  scab- 
bards, and  are  besung  as  invested  with  a  charm  or  spell,  and 
symbolic  of  loyalty  and  self-control,  for  they  must  never  be 
drawn  lightly.  He  is  taught  fencing,  archery,  horsemanship, 
tactics,  the  spear,  ethics  and  literature,  anatomy,  for  offense  and 
defense;  he  must  be  indifferent  to  money,  hold  his  life  cheap  be- 
side honor,  and  die  if  it  is  gone.  This  chivalry  is  called  the 
soul  of  Japan,  and  if  it  fades  life  is  vulgarized.  Jt  is  a  code  of 
ethics  and  physical  training. 

Wrestling  is  a  form  of  personal  encounter  which  in  an- 
tiquity reached  a  high  development,  and  which,  although  now 
more  known  and  practised  as  athletics  of  the  body  than  of  the 
soul,  has  certain  special  disciplinary  capacities  in  its  various 
forms.  It  represents  the  most  primitive  type  of  the  struggle 
of  unarmed  and  unprotected  man  with  man.  Purged  of  its 
barbarities,  and  in  its  Greco-Roman  form  and  properly  subject 
to  rules,  it  cultivates  more  kinds  of  movements  than  any  other 
form — for  limbs,  trunk,  neck,  hand,  foot,  and  all  in  the  upright 
and  in  every  prone  position.  It,  too,  has  its  manual  of  feints, 
holds,  tricks,  and  specialties,  and  calls  out  wariness,  quickness, 
strength,  and  shiftiness.  Victory  need  involve  no  cruelty  or 
even  pain  to  the  vanquished.  The  very  closeness  of  body  to 
body,  emphasizing  flexor  rather  than  extensor  arm  muscles, 
imparts  to  it  a  peculiar  tone,  gives  it  a  vast  variety  of  possible 
activities,  developing  many  alternatives  at  every  stage,  and 
tempts  to  many  undiscovered  forms  of  permanent  mayhem.  Its 
struggle  is  usually  longer  and  less  interrupted  by  pauses  than 
pugilism,  and  its  situations  and  conclusions  often  develop 
slowly,  so  that  all  in  all,  its  character  among  contests  is  unique. 
As  a  school  of  posture  for  art,  its  varieties  are  extremely  mani- 
fold and  by  no  means  developed,  for  it  contains  every  kind  of 
emphasis  of  every  part  and  calls  out  every  muscle  group  and  at- 
titude of  the  human  body;  hence  its  training  is  most  generic 
and  least  specialized,  and  victories  have  been  won  by  very  many 
kinds  of  excellence. 

Perhaps  nothing  is  more  opposed  to  the  idea  of  a  gentle- 
man than  the  scova  animi  tempcstas  of  anger.    A  testy,  quarrel- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND    FUNCTION       22 1 

some,  mucky  humor  is  antisocial,  and  an  outburst  of  rage  is 
repulsive.  Even  non-resistance,  turning  the  other  cheek,  has  its 
victories  and  may  be  a  method  of  moral  combat.  A  strong 
temper  well  controlled  and  kept  in  leash  makes  a  kinetic  char- 
acter; but  in  view  of  bullying,  unfair  play,  cruel  injustice  to 
the  weak  and  defenseless,  of  outrageous  wrong  that  the  law  can 
not  reach,  patience  and  forbearance  may  cease  to  be  virtues 
and  summary  redress  may  have  a  distinct  advantage  to  the 
ethical  nature  of  man  and  to  social  order,  and  the  strenuous 
soul  must  fight  or  grow  stagnant  or  flabby.  If  too  repressed, 
righteous  indignation  may  turn  to  sourness  and  sulks,  and  the 
disposition  be  spoiled.  Hence  the  relief  and  exhilaration  of  an 
outbreak  that  often  clears  the  psychic  atmosphere  like  a  thunder- 
storm, and  gives  the  peace  that  passes  understanding  so  often 
dilated  on  by  our  correspondents.  Rather  than  the  abject  fear 
of  making  enemies  whatever  the  provocation,  I  would  praise 
those  whose  best  title  of  honor  is  the  kind  of  enemies  they  make. 
Better  even  an  occasional  nose  dented  by  a  fist,  a  broken  bone, 
a  rapier-scarred  face,  or  even  the  sacrifice  of  an  occasional  life 
of  our  best  academic  youth  than  stagnation,  general  cynicism 
and  censoriousness,  bodily  and  psychic  cowardice,  and  moral 
corruption,  if  this  indeed  be,  as  it  sometimes  is,  its  real  alter- 
native. 

So  closely  are  love  and  war  connected  that  not  only  is  indi- 
vidual pugnacity  greatly  increased  at  the  period  of  sexual  ma- 
turity, when  animals  acquire  or  develop  horns,  fangs,  claws, 
spurs,  and  weapons  of  offense  and  defense,  but  a  new  spirit  of 
organization  arises  which  makes  teams  possible  or  more  perma- 
net.  Football,  baseball,  cricket,  etc.,  and  even  boating  can  be- 
come schools  of  mental  and  moral  training.  First,  the  rules  of 
the  game  are  often  intricate,  and  to  master  and  observe  them  ef- 
fectively is  no  mean  training  for  the  mind  in  controlling  the 
body.  These  are  steadily  being  revised  and  improved,  and  the 
reasons  for  each  detail  of  inner  construction  and  conduct  of  the 
game  require  experience  and  insight  into  human  nature.  Then 
the  subordination  of  each  member  to  the  whole  and  to  a  leader 
cultivates  the  social  and  cooperative  instincts,  while  the  honor 
of  the  school,  college,  or  city,  which  each  team  represents,  is 
confided  to  each  and  all.  Group  loyalty  in  Anglo-Saxon  games, 
which  shows  such  a  marked  increment  in  coordination  and  self- 


222  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

subordination  at  the  dawn  of  puberty  as  to  constitute  a  distinct 
change  in  the  character  of  sports  at  this  age,  can  be  so  utihzed 
as  to  develop  a  spirit  of  service  and  devotion  not  only  to  town, 
country,  and  race,  but  to  God  and  the  Church.  Self  must  be 
merged  and  a  sportsmanlike  spirit  cultivated  that  prefers  defeat 
to  tricks  and  secret  practise,  and  a  clean  game  to  the  applause 
of  rooters  and  fans,  intent  only  on  victory,  however  won.  The 
long,  hard,  fight  against  professionalism  that  brings  in  husky 
muckers,  who  by  every  rule  of  true  courtesy  and  chivalry  be- 
long outside  academic  circles,  scrapping  and  underhand  advan- 
tages, is  a  sad  comment  on  the  character  and  spirit  of  these 
games,  and  eliminates  the  best  of  their  educational  advantages. 
The  necessity  of  intervention,  which  has  imposed  such  great 
burdens  on  faculties  and  brought  so  much  friction  with  the 
frenzy  of  scholastic  sentiment  in  the  hot  stage  of  seasonal  en- 
thusiasms, when  fanned  to  a  white  heat  by  the  excessive  interest 
of  friends  and  patrons  and  the  injurious  exploitation  of  the 
press,  bears  sad  testimony  to  the  strength  and  persistence  of 
warlike  instincts  from  our  heredity.  But  even  thus  the  good  far 
predominates.  The  elective  system  has  destroyed  the  class 
games,  and  our  institutions  have  no  units  like  the  English  col- 
leges to  be  pitted  against  each  other,  and  so,  as  colleges  grow,  an 
ever  smaller  percentage  of  students  obtain  the  benefit  of  practise 
on  the  teams,  while  electioneering  methods  often  place  second 
best  men  in  place  of  the  best.  But  both  students  and  teachers 
are  slowly  learning  wisdom  in  the  dear  school  of  experience. 
On  the  whole,  there  is  less  license  in  "  breaking  training  "  and 
in  celebrating  victories,  and  even  at  their  worst,  good  probably 
predominates  while  the  progress  of  recent  years  bids  us  hope. 
Finally,  military  ideals  and  methods  of  psycho-physical  edu- 
;  cation  are  helpful  regulations  of  the  appetite  for  combat,  and  on 
the  whole  more  wholesome  and  robust  than  those  which  are 
merely  esthetic.  Marching  in  step  gives  proper  and  uniform 
movement  of  legs,  arms,  and  carriage  of  body,  the  manual  of 
arms,  with  evolution  and  involution  of  figures  in  the  ranks, 
gives  each  a  corporate  feeling  of  membership,  and  involves  care 
of  personal  appearance  and  accouterments,  while  the  uniform 
levels  social  distinction  in  dress.  For  the  French  and  Italian 
and  especially  the  German  and  Russian  adolescent  of  the  lower 
classes,  the  two  or  three  years  of  compulsory  military  service 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION       223 

is  often  compared  to  an  academic  course,  and  the  army  is  called, 
not  without  some  justification,  the  poor  man's  university.  It 
gives  severe  drill,  strict  discipline,  good  and  regular  hours,  plain 
but  wholesome  fare  and  out-of-door  exercise,  exposure,  travel, 
habits  of  neatness,  many  useful  knacks  and  devices,  tourna- 
ments and  mimic  or  play  battles;  these,  apart  from  its  other 
functions,  make  this  system  a  great  promoter  of  national  health 
and  intelligence.  Naval  schools  for  midshipmen,  who  serve  be- 
fore the  m.ast,  schools  on  board  ship  that  visit  a  wide  curricu- 
lum of  ports  each  year,  cavalry  schools,  where  each  boy  is  given 
a  horse  to  care  for,  study  and  train,  artillery  courses  and  even 
an  army  drill-master  in  an  academy,  or  uniform,  and  a  few  ex- 
terior features  of  soldierly  life,  all  give  a  distinct  character  to  the 
spirit  of  any  institution.  The  very  fancy  of  being  in  any  sense 
a  soldier  opens  up  a  new  range  of  interests  too  seldom  util- 
ized, and  tactics,  army  life  and  service,  military  history,  battles, 
patriotism,  the  flag,  and  duties  to  country,  should  always 
erect  a  new  standard  of  honor.  Youth  should  embrace  every 
opportunity  that  offers  in  this  line,  and  instruction  should 
greatly  increase  the  intellectual  opportunities  created  by  every 
interest  in  warfare.  It  would  be  easy  to  create  pregnant  courses 
on  how  soldiers  down  the  course  of  history  have  lived,  thought, 
felt,  fought,  and  died,  how  great  battles  were  won  and  what 
causes  triumphed  in  them,  and  to  generalize  many  of  the  best 
things  taught  in  detail  in  the  best  schools  of  war  in  different 
grades  and  lands. 

Play  and  Sex. — A  subtle  but  potent  intersexual  influence  is 
among  the  strongest  factors  of  all  adolescent  sport.  Male 
birds  and  beasts  show  off  their  charms  of  beauty  and  accom- 
plishment in  many  a  liturgy  of  love  antics  in  the  presence  of  the 
female.  This  instinct  seems  somehow  continuous  with  the 
growth  of  ornaments  in  the  mating  season.  Song,  tumbling, 
balking,  mock  fights,  etc.,  are  forms  of  animal  courtship.  The 
boy  who  turns  cartwheels  past  the  home  of  the  girl  of  his  fancy, 
is  brilliant,  brave,  witty,  erect,  strong  in  her  presence,  and  else- 
where dull  and  commonplace  enough,  illustrates  the  same  prin- 
ciple. The  true  cake-walk  as  seen  in  the  South  is  perhaps  the 
purest  expression  of  this  impulse  to  courtship  antics  seen  in 
man,  but  its  irradiations  are  many  and  pervasive.  The  pres- 
ence of  the  fair  sex  gives  tonicity  to  youth's  muscles  and  ten- 


224  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

sion  to  his  arteries  to  a  degree  of  which  he  is  rarely  conscious. 
Defeat  in  all  contests  is  more  humiliating  and  victory  more 
glorious  thereby.  Each  sex  is  constantly  passing  the  exami- 
nation of  the  other,  and  each  judges  the  other  by  different 
standards  than  its  own.  Alas  for  the  young  people  who  are  not 
different  with  the  other  sex  than  with  their  own! — and  some 
are  transformed  into  different  beings.  Achievement  proclaims 
ability  to  support,  defend,  bring  credit  and  even  fame  to  the 
object  of  future  choice,  and  no  good  point  is  lost.  Physical 
force  and  skill,  and  above  all,  victory  and  glory,  make  a  hero 
and  invest  him  with  a  romantic  glamour,  which,  even  though 
concealed  by  conventionality  or  etiquette,  is  profoundly  felt  and 
makes  the  winner  more  or  less  irresistible.  The  applause  of 
men  and  of  mates  is  sweet  and  even  intoxicating,  but  that  of 
ladies  is  ravishing.  By  universal  acclaim  the  fair  belong  to  the 
brave,  strong,  and  victorious.  This  stimulus  is  wholesome  and 
refining.  As  is  shown  later,  a  bashful  youth  often  selects  a 
maiden  onlooker  and  is  sometimes  quite  unconsciously  domi- 
nated in  his  every  movement  by  a  sense  of  her  presence,  stranger 
and  apparently  unnoticed  though  she  be,  although  in  the  intel- 
lectual work  of  coeducation  girls  are  most  influenced  thus. 
In  athletics  this  motive  makes  for  refinement  and  good  form. 
The  ideal  knight,  however  fierce  and  terrible,  must  not  be  brutal, 
but  show  capacity  for  fine  feeling,  tenderness,  magnanimity, 
and  forbearance.  Evolutionists  tell  us  that  woman  has  domesti- 
cated and  educated  feral  man  and  taught  him  all  his  virtues 
by  exercising  her  royal  prerogative  of  selecting  in  her  mate  just 
those  qualities  that  pleased  her  for  transmission  to  future  gen- 
erations and  eliminating  others  distasteful  to  her.  If  so,  she  is 
still  engaged  in  this  work  as  much  as  ever,  and  in  his  dull,  slow 
way  man  feels  that  her  presence  enforces  her  standards,  ab- 
horrent though  it  would  be  to  him  to  compromise  in  one  iota 
his  masculinity.  Most  plays  and  games  in  which  both  sexes 
participate  have  some  of  the  advantages  with  some  of  the  dis- 
advantages of  coeducation.  Where  both  are  partners  rather 
than  antagonists,  there  is  less  eviration.  A  gallant  man  would 
do  his  best  to  help,  but  his  worst  not  to  beat  a  lady.  Thus,  in 
general,  the  latter  performs  her  best  service  in  her  true  role  of 
sympathetic  spectator  rather  than  as  fellow  player,  and  is  now 
an  important  factor  in  the  physical  education  of  adolescents. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION       225 

How  pervasive  this  femininity  is,  which  is  slowly  trans- 
forming our  schools,  is  strikingly  seen  in  the  church.  Gulick 
holds  that  the  reason  why  only  some  seven  per  cent  of  the  young 
men  of  the  country  are  in  the  churches,  while  most  members 
and  workers  are  women,  is  that  the  qualities  demanded  are  the 
feminine  ones  of  love,  rest,  prayer,  trust,  desire  for  fortitude  to 
endure,  a  sense  of  atonement — traits  not  involving  ideals  that 
most  stir  young  men.  The  church  has  not  yet  learned  to  ap- 
peal to  the  more  virile  qualities.  Fielding  ^  asks  why  Christ 
and  Buddha  alone  of  great  religious  teachers  were  rejected  by 
their  own  race  and  accepted  elsewhere.  He  answers  that  these 
mild  beliefs  of  peace,  non-resistance,  and  submission,  rejected 
by  virile  warrior  races,  Jews  and  ancient  Hindus,  were  adopted 
where  women  were  free  and  led  in  these  matters.  Confucian- 
ism, Mohammedanism,  etc.,  are  virile,  and  so  indigenous,  and 
in  such  forms  of  faith  and  worship  women  have  small  place. 
This  again  suggests  how  the  sex  that  rules  the  heart  controls 
men. 

Too  much  can  hardly  be  said  in  favor  of  cold  baths  and 
swimming  at  this  age.  Marro  quotes  Father  Kneipp,  and 
almost  rivals  his  hydrotherapeutic  enthusiasm.  Cold  bathing 
sends  the  blood  inward  partly  by  the  cold  which  contracts  the 
capillaries  of  the  skin  and  tissue  immediately  underlying  it, 
and  partly  by  the  pressure  of  the  water  over  all  the  dermal 
surface,  quickens  the  activity  of  kidneys,  lungs,  and  digestive 
apparatus,  and  the  reactive  glow  is  the  best  possible  tonic  for 
dermal  circulation.  It  is  the  best  of  all  gymnastics  for  the  non- 
striated  or  involuntary  muscles  and  for  the  heart  and  blood 
vessels.  This  and  the  removal  of  the  products  of  excretion 
preserve  all  the  important  dermal  functions  which  are  so  easily 
and  so  often  impaired  in  modern  life,  lessen  the  liability  to 
skin  diseases,  promote  freshness  of  complexion,  and  the  moral 
effects  of  plunging  into  cold  and  supporting  the  body  in 
deep  water  is  not  inconsiderable  in  strengthening  a  spirit  of 
hardihood  and  reducing  overtenderness  to  sensory  discom- 
forts. The  exercise  of  swimming  is  unique  in  that  nearly  all 
the  movements  and  combinations  are  such  as  are  rarely  used 
otherwise,  and  are  perhaps  in  a  sense  ancestral  and  liberal 
rather  than  directly  preparatory  for  future  avocations.     Its 

'  The  Hearts  of  Men,  chap.  xxii. 
16 


226  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

stimulus  for  heart  and  lungs  is,  by  general  consent  of  all  writers 
upon  the  subject,  most  wholesome  and  beneficial.  Nothing  so 
directly  or  quickly  reduces  to  the  lowest  point  the  plethora  of 
the  sex  organs.  The  very  absence  of  clothes  and  running  on 
the  beach  is  exhilarating  and  gives  a  sense  of  freedom.  Where 
practicable  it  is  well  to  dispense  with  bathing  suits,  even  the 
scantiest.  The  warm  bath  tub  is  enfeebling  and  degenerative, 
despite  the  cold  spray  later,  while  the  free  swim  in  cold  water  is 
most  invigorating. 

Happily,  city  officials,  teachers,  and  sanitarians  are  now 
slowly  realizing  the  great  improvement  in  health  and  temper 
that  comes  from  bathing  and  are  establishing  beach  and  surf, 
spray,  floating  and  plunge  summer  baths  and  swimming  pools ; 
often  providing  instruction  even  in  swimming  in  clothes,  un- 
dressing in  the  water,  treading  water,  rescue  work,  free  as  well 
as  fee  days,  bathing  suits,  and,  in  London,  places  for  nude  bath- 
ing after  dark;  establishing  time  and  distance  standards  with 
certificates  and  even  prizes ;  annexing  toboggan  slides,  swings, 
etc. ;  realizing  that  in  both  the  preference  of  youth  and  in  health- 
ful and  moral  effects,  probably  nothing  outranks  this  form  of 
exercise.  Such  is  its  strange  fascination  that,  according  to  one 
comprehensive  census,  the  passion  to  get  to  the  water  outranks 
all  other  causes  of  truancy,  and  plays  an  important  part  in  the 
motivation  of  runaways.  In  the  immense  public  establishment 
near  San  Francisco,  provided  by  private  munificence,  there  are 
accommodations  for  all  kinds  of  bathing  in  hot  and  cold  and 
in  various  degrees  of  fresh  and  salt  water,  in  closed  spaces  and 
in  the  open  sea,  for  small  children  and  adults,  with  many  ap- 
pliances and  instructors,  all  in  one  great  covered  arena 
with  seats  in  an  amphitheater  for  two  thousand  spectators, 
and  many  adjuncts  and  accessories.  So  elsewhere  the  presence 
of  visitors  is  now  often  invited  and  provided  for.  Sometimes 
wash-houses  and  public  laundries  are  annexed.  Open  hours 
and  longer  evenings  and  seasons  are  being  prolonged. 

Prominent  among  the  favorite  games  of  early  puberty  and 
the  years  just  before  are  those  that  involve  passive  motion  and 
falling,  like  swinging  in  its  many  forms,  including  the  May-pole 
and  single  rope  varieties.  Mr.  Lee  reports  that  children  wait 
late  in  the  evening  and  in  cold  weather  for  a  turn  at  a  park 
swing.    Psychologically  allied  to  these  are  wheeling  and  skat- 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR  POWER  AND   FUNCTION       227 

ing.  Places  for  the  latter  are  now  often  provided  by  the  fire  de- 
partment, which  in  many  cities  floods  hundreds  of  empty  lots 
Ponds  are  cleared  of  snow  and  horse  plowed,  perhaps  by  the 
park  commission,  which  often  provides  lights  and  perhaps  ices 
the  walks  and  streets  for  coasting,  erects  shelters,  devises  space 
economy  for  as  many  diamonds,  bleachers,  etc.,  as  possible. 
Games  of  hitting,  striking,  and  throwing  balls  and  other  ob- 
jects, hockey,  tennis,  all  the  courts  of  which  are  usually  crowded, 
golf  and  croquet,  and  sometimes  fives,  cricket,  bowling,  quoits, 
curling,  etc.,  have  great  "  thumogenic  "  or  emotional  power. 

Leg  exercise  has  perhaps  a  higher  value  than  that  of  any 
other  part.  Man  is  by  definition  an  upright  being,  but  only 
after  a  long  apprenticeship.*  Thus  the  hand  was  freed  from 
the  necessity  of  locomotion  and  made  the  servant  of  the  mind. 
Locomotion  overcomes  the  tendency  to  sedentary  habits  in  mod- 
ern schools  and  life,  and  helps  the  mind  to  helpful  action,  so 
that  a  peripatetic  philosophy  is  more  normal  than  that  of  the 
easy  chair  and  the  study  lamp.  Hill-climbing  is  unexcelled  as  a 
stimulus  at  once  of  heart,  lungs,  and  blood.  If  Hippocrates 
is  right,  inspiration  is  possible  only  on  a  mountain-top.  Walk- 
ing, running,  dancing,  skating,  coasting  are  also  alterative 
and  regulative  of  sex,  and  there  is  a  deep  and  close  though 
not  yet  fully  explained  reciprocity  between  the  two.  Arm  work 
is  relatively  too  prominent  a  feature  in  gymnasia.  Those  who 
lead  excessively  sedentary  lives  are  prone  to  be  turbulent  and 
extreme  in  both  passion  and  opinion,  as  witness  the  oft-adduced 
revolutionary  disposition  of  cobblers. 

The  play  problem  is  now  fairly  open  and  is  vast  in  its  rela- 
tion to  many  other  things.  Roof  playgrounds,  recreation  piers, 
schoolyards  and  even  school-buildings,  open  before  and  after 
school  hours ;  excursions  and  outings  of  many  kinds  and  with 
many  purposes,  which  seem  to  distinctly  augment  growth ;  oc- 
cupation during  the  long  vacation  when,  beginning  with  spring, 
most  juvenile  crime  is  committed;  theatricals,  which  according 
to  some  police  testimony  lessen  the  number  of  juvenile  delin- 
quents; boys'  clubs  with  more  or  less  self-government  of  the 
George  Junior  Republic  and  other  types,  treated  in  another 
chapter;  nature-study;  the  distinctly  different  needs  and  pro- 

^  See  A.  W.  Trettien.     Creeping  and  Walking.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  vol.  xii, 
p.  I  et  seq. 


228  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

pensities  of  both  good  and  evil  in  different  nationalities;  the 
advantages  of  playground  fences  and  exclusion,  their  disciplin- 
ary worth,  and  their  value  as  resting  places ;  the  liability  that 
"  the  boy  without  a  playground  will  become  the  father  without  a 
job  " ;  the  relation  of  play  and  its  slow  transition  to  manual 
and  industrial  education  at  the  savage  age  when  a  boy  abhors 
all  regular  occupation ;  the  necessity  of  exciting  interest,  not 
by  what  is  done  for  boys,  but  by  what  they  do ;  the  adjustment 
of  play  to  sex ;  the  determination  of  the  proper  average  age  of 
maximal  zest  in  and  good  from  sand-box,  ring-toss,  bean-bag, 
shuffle-board,  peg-top,  charity,  funeral  play,  prisoner's  base, 
hill-dill ;  the  value  and  right  use  of  apparatus,  and  of  rabbits, 
pigeons,  bees,  and  a  small  menagerie  in  the  playground ;  tan- 
bark,  clay,  the  proper  alternation  of  excessive  freedom,  that 
often  turns  boys  stale  through  the  summer;  the  disciplined 
"  work  of  play  "  and  sedentary  games;  the  value  of  the  wash- 
board in  rubbing  and  the  hand  and  knee  exercise  of  scrubbing, 
which  a  late  writer  would  restore  for  all  girls  with  clever  and 
Greek-named  play  apparatus;  as  well  as  digging,  shoveling, 
tamping,  pick-chopping,  and  hod-carrying  exercises  in  the 
form  of  games  for  boys;  the  relations  of  woman's  clubs 
parents'  clubs,  citizens'  leagues  and  unions,  etc.,  to  all  this 
work — such  are  the  practical  problems. 

The  playground  movement  encounters  its  chief  obstacles  in 
the  most  crowded  and  slum  districts,  where  its  greatest  value 
and  success  was  expected  for  boys  in  the  early  teens,  who  with- 
out supervision  are  prone  to  commit  abuses  upon  property  and 
upon  younger  children,^  and  are  so  disorderly  as  to  make  the 
place  a  nuisance,  and  who  resent  the  "  fathering  "  of  the  police, 
without,  at  least,  the  minimum  control  of  a  system  of  permits 
and  exclusions.  If  hoodlums  play  at  all,  they  become  infatuated 
with  baseball  and  football,  especially  punting ;  they  do  not  take 
kindly  to  the  soft  large  ball  of  the  Hull  House  or  the  Civic 
League,  and  prefer  at  first  scrub  games  with  individual  self-ex- 
hibition to  organized  teams.  Lee  sees  the  "  arboreal  instincts  of 
our  progenitors  "  in  the  very  strong  propensity  of  boys  from 
ten  to  fourteen  to  climb  in  any  form ;  to  use  traveling  rings, 
generally  occupied  constantly  to  their  fullest  extent;  to  jump 

•  Constructive  and  Preventive  Philanthropy,  by  Joseph  Lee.    New  York,  1902, 
chap.  X  and  xi. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION       229 

from  steps  and  catch  a  swinging  trapeze ;  to  go  up  a  ladder  and 
slide  down  poles;  to  use  horizontal  and  parallel  bars.  The 
city  boy  has  plenty  of  daring  at  this  age,  but  does  not  know 
what  he  can  do  and  needs  more  supervision  than  the  country 
youth.  The  young  tough  is  commonly  present,  and  though  ad- 
mired and  copied  by  younger  boys,  it  is,  perhaps,  as  often  for  his 
heroic  as  for  his  bad  traits. 

Dr.  Sargent  and  others  have  well  pointed  out  that  athletics 
afford  a  wealth  of  new  and  profitable  topics  for  discussion  and 
enthusiasm  which  helps  against  the  triviality  and  mental  vacuity 
into  which  the  intercourse  of  students  is  prone  to  lapse.  It 
prompts  to  discussion  of  diet  and  regimen.  It  gives  a  new 
standard  of  honor.  For  a  member  of  a  team  to  break  training 
would  bring  reprobation  and  ostracism,  for  he  is  set  apart  to 
win  fame  for  his  class  or  college.  It  supplies  a  splendid  motive 
against  all  errors  and  vices  that  weaken  or  corrupt  the  body. 
It  is  a  wholesome  vent  for  the  reckless  courage  that  would 
otherwise  go  to  disorder  or  riotous  excess.  It  supplies  new 
and  advantageous  topics  for  compositions  and  for  terse,  vigor- 
ous, and  idiomatic  theme-writing,  is  a  great  aid  to  discipline, 
teaches  respect  for  deeds  rather  than  words  or  promises,  lays 
instructors  under  the  necessity  of  being  more  interesting,  that 
their  work  be  not  jejune  or  dull  by  contrast;  again  the  busi- 
ness side  of  managing  great  contests  has  been  an  admirable 
school  for  training  young  men  to  conduct  great  and  difficult 
financial  operations,  sometimes  involving  $100,000  or  more, 
and  has  thus  prepared  some  for  successful  careers.  It  fur- 
nishes now  the  closest  of  all  links  between  high  school  and 
college,  reduces  the  number  of  those  physically  unfit  for  col- 
lege, and  should  give  education  generally  a  more  real  and  vigor- 
ous ideal.  Its  obvious  dangers  are  distraction  from  study  and 
overestimation  of  the  value  of  victory,  especially  in  the  arti- 
ficial glamours  which  the  press  and  the  popular  furor  give  to 
great  games ;  unsportsmanlike  secret  tricks  and  methods,  over- 
emphasis of  combative  and  too  stalwart  impulses,  and  a  dis- 
position to  carry  things  by  storm,  by  rush-line  tactics ;  friction 
with  faculties,  and  censure  or  neglect  of  instructors  who  take 
unpopular  sides  on  hot  questions ;  reaction  toward  license  after 
games,  spasmodic  excitement  culminating  in  excessive  strain 
for  body  and  mind,  with  alternations  of  reaction;  "  beefiness  "; 


23°  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

overdevelopment  of  the  physical  side  of  hfe,  and,  in  some  cases, 
premature  features  of  seniHty  in  later  life,  undergrowth  of  the 
accessory  motor  parts  and  powers,  and  erethic  diathesis  that 
makes  steady  and  continued  mental  toil  seem  monotonous,  dull, 
and  boresome. 

The  propensity  to  codify  sports,  to  standardize  the  weight 
and  size  of  their  implements,  and  to  reduce  them  to  what  Spen- 
cer calls  regimentation,  is  an  outcrop  of  uniformitarianism  that 
works  against  that  individuation  which  is  one  of  the  chief  ad- 
vantages of  free  play.  This,  to  be  sure,  has  developed  old- 
fashioned  rounders  to  modern  baseball,  and  this  is  well,  but  it 
is  seen  in  the  elaborate  Draconian  laws,  diplomacy,  judicial 
and  legislative  procedures,  concerning  "  eligibility,  transfer, 
and  even  sale  of  players."  In  some  games  international  con- 
formity is  gravely  discussed.  Even  where  there  is  no  tyranny 
and  oppression,  good  form  is  steadily  hampering  nature  and 
the  free  play  of  personality.  Togs  and  targets,  balls  and  bats, 
rackets  and  oars  are  graded  or  numbered,,  weighed,  and  meas- 
ured, and  every  emergency  is  legislated  on  and  judged  by  an  au- 
tocratic martinet,  jealous  of  every  prerogative  and  conscious  of 
his  dignity.  All  this  separates  games  from  the  majority  and 
makes  for  specialism  and  professionalism.  Not  only  this,  but 
men  are  coming  to  be  sized  up  for  hereditary  fitness  in  each 
point  and  for  each  sport.  Runners,  sprinters,  and  jumpers,^ 
we  are  told,  on  the  basis  of  many  careful  measurements,  must 
be  tall,  with  slender  bodies,  narrow  but  deep  chests,  longer  legs 
than  the  average  for  their  height,  the  lower  leg  being  especially 
long,  with  small  calf,  ankle,  and  feet,  small  arms,  narrow  hips, 
with  great  power  of  thoracic  inflation,  and  thighs  of  small  girth. 
Every  player  must  be  studied  by  trainers  for  ever  finer  indi- 
vidual adjustments.  His  dosage  of  work  must  be  kept  well 
within  the  limits  of  his  vitality,  and  be  carefully  adjusted  to 
his  recuperative  power.  His  personal  nascent  periods  must  be 
noted,  and  initial  embarrassment  carefully  weeded  out. 

The  field  of  play  is  as  wide  as  life  and  its  varieties  far  out- 
number those  of  industries  and  occupations  in  the  census. 
Plays  and  games  differ  in  seasons,  sex,  and  age.     McGhee  ^ 

'  C.  O.  Bemies.  Physical  Characteristics  of  the  Runner  and  Jumper.  Am. 
Phys.  Ed.  Rev.,  1900,  p.  235. 

*  A  Study  in  the  Play  Life  of  some  South  Carolina  Children.  Ped.  Sem.,  1900, 
p.  459. 


GROWTH  OF  MOTOR  POWER  AND  FUNCTION   23 1 

has  shown  on  the  basis  of  some  8,000  children,  that  running 
plays  are  pretty  constant  for  boys  from  six  to  seventeen,  but 
that  girls  are  always  far  behind  boys  and  run  steadily  less 
from  eight  to  eighteen.  In  games  of  choice  boys  showed  a 
slight  rise  at  sixteen  and  seventeen,  and  girls  a  rapid  increase 
at  eleven  and  a  still  more  rapid  one  after  sixteen.  In  games  of 
imitation  girls  excel  and  show  a  marked,  as  boys  do  a  slight, 
pubescent  fall.  In  those  games  involving  rivalry  boys  at  first 
greatly  excel  girls,  but  are  overtaken  by  the  latter  in  the  eight- 
eenth year,  both  showing  marked  pubescent  increment.  Girls 
have  the  largest  number  of  plays  and  specialize  on  a  few  less 
than  boys,  and  most  of  these  plays  are  of  the  unorganized  kinds. 
Johnson  ^  selected  from  a  far  larger  number  440  plays  and 
games  and  arranged  the  best  of  them  in  a  course  by  school 
grades,  from  the  first  to  the  eighth,  inclusive,  and  also  according 
to  their  educational  value  as  teaching  observation,  reading  and 
spelling,  language,  arithmetic,  geography,  history,  and  biog- 
raphy, physical  training,  and  specifically  as  training  legs,  hand, 
arm,  back,  waist,  abdominal  muscles,  chest,  etc.  Most  of  our 
best  games  are  very  old,  and  Johnson  thinks  have  deteriorated. 
But  children  are  imitative  and  not  inventive  in  their  games,  and 
easily  learn  new  ones.  Since  the  Berlin  Play  Congress  in  1894 
the  sentiment  has  grown  that  these  are  of  national  importance 
and  are  preferable  to  gymnastics  both  for  soul  and  body. 
Hence  we  have  play-schools,  teachers,  yards,  and  courses,  both 
for  their  ow-n  value  and  also  to  turn  on  the  play  impulse  to  aid 
in  the  drudgery  of  school  work.  Several  have  thought  that  a 
well-rounded,  liberal  education  could  be  given  by  plays  and 
games  alone  on  the  principle  that  there  is  no  profit  where  there 
is  no  pleasure  or  true  euphoria. 

Play  is  motor  poetry.  Too  early  distinction  between  play 
and  work  should  not  be  taught.  Education  perhaps  should 
really  begin  with  directing  childish  sports  aright.  Froebel 
thought  it  the  purest  and  most  spiritual  activity  of  childhood, 
the  germinal  leaves  of  all  later  life.  Schooling  that  lacks  recre- 
ation favors  dulness,  for  play  makes  the  mind  alert  and  its  joy 
helps  all  anabolic  activities.  Says  Brinton,  "  the  measure  of 
value  of  work  is  the  amount  of  play  there  is  in  it,  and  the 
measure  of  value  of  play  is  the  amount  of  work  there  is  in  it." 

*  Education  by  Plays  and  Games,     P^d.  Sem. ,  1894,  p.  97  et  sea. 


232  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Johnson  adds  that  "  it  is  doubtful  if  a  great  man  ever  accom- 
phshed  his  Hfe  work  without  having  reached  a  play  interest  in 
it."  Sully  ^  deplores  the  increase  of  "  agolasts  "  or  "  non- 
laughers  "  in  our  times.  In  merry  old  England  ^  every  one 
played  games,  and  laughter,  their  natural  accompaniment, 
abounded.  Queen  Elizabeth's  maids  of  honor  played  tag  with 
hilarity,  but  the  spirit  of  play  with  full  abandon  seems  taking 
its  departure  from  our  overworked,  serious,  and  tense  age.  To 
requote  Stevenson  with  variation,  as  laborari,  so  liidere,  and 
joculari  orarc  sunt.  Laughter  itself,  as  Kiihne  long  ago 
showed,  is  one  of  the  most  precious  forms  of  exercise,  relieving 
the  arteries  of  their  tension.^ 

The  antithesis  between  play  and  work  is  generally  wrongly 
conceived,  for  the  difference  is  essentially  in  the  degree  of 
strength  of  the  psycho-physic  motivations.  The  young  often  do 
their  hardest  work  in  play.  With  interest,  the  most  repellent 
tasks  become  pure  sport,  as  in  the  case  Johnson  reports  of  a 
man  who  wanted  a  stone  pile  thrown  into  a  ditch  and,  by  kin- 
dling a  fire  in  it  and  pretending  the  stones  were  buckets  of 
water,  the  heavy  and  long-shirked  job  was  done  by  tired  boys 
with  shouting  and  enthusiasm.  Play  from  one  aspect  of  it  is 
superfluous  energy  over  and  above  what  is  necessary  to  digest, 
breathe,  keep  the  heart  and  organic  processes  going,  and  most 
children  who  can  not  play,  if  they  have  opportunity,  can  neither 
study  nor  work  without  overdrawing  their  resources  of  vitality. 
Bible  psychology  conceives  the  fall  of  man  as  the  necessity  of 
doing  things  without  zest,  and  this  is  not  only  ever  repeated  but 
now  greatly  emphasized  when  youth  leaves  the  sheltered  para- 
dise of  play  to  grind  in  the  mills  of  modern  industrial  civiliza- 
tion. The  curse  is  overcome  only  by  those  who  come  to  love 
their  tasks  and  redeem  their  toil  again  to  play.  Play,  hardly 
less  than  work,  can  be  to  utter  exhaustion,  and  because  it  draws 
upon  older  stores  and  strata  of  psycho-physic  impulsion  its  ex- 
haustion may  even  more  completely  drain  our  kinetic  resources, 
if  it  is  too  abandoned  or  prolonged.  Play  can  do  just  as  hard 
and  painful  tasks  as  work,  for  what  we  love  is  done  with  whole 

'  An  Essay  on  Laughter,  1892,  p.  427  et  seq. 
'  See  Brandt's  Antiquities. 

'  See  Professor  AUin's  and  my  Psychology  of  Tickling,    L&ughing,  and  the 
Comic.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  vol.  ix,  p.  i  et  seq. 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        233 

and  undivided  personality.  Work,  as  too  often  conceived,  is 
all  body  and  no  soul,  and  makes  for  duality  and  not  totality. 
Its  constraint  is  external,  mechanical,  or  it  works  by  fear  and 
not  love.  Not  effort  but  zestless  endeavors  is  the  tragedy  of 
life.  Interest  and  play  are  one  and  inseparable  as  body  and 
soul.  Duty  itself  is  not  adequately  conceived  and  felt  if  it  is 
not  pleasure,  and  is  generally  too  feeble  and  fitful  in  the  young 
to  awaken  much  energy  or  duration  of  action.  Play  is  from 
within  from  congenital  hereditary  impulsion.  It  is  the  best 
of  all  methods  of  organizing  instincts.  Its  cathartic  or  pur- 
gative function  regulates  irritability,  which  may  otherwise  be 
drained  or  vented  in  wrong  directions,  exactly  as  Breuer  ^ 
shows  psychic  traumata  may,  if  overtense,  result  in  "  hysterical 
convulsions."  It  is  also  the  best  form  of  self-expression  and  its 
advantage  is  variability,  following  the  impulsion  of  the  idle, 
perhaps  hyperemic,  and  overnourished  centers  most  ready  to 
act.  It  involves  play  illusion  and  is  the  great  agent  of  unity 
and  totalization  of  body  and  soul,  while  its  social  function  de- 
velops solidarity  and  unison  of  action  between  individuals. 
The  dances,  feasts,  and  games  of  primitive  people,  wherein 
they  rehearse  hunting  and  war  and  act  and  dance  out  their 
legends,  bring  individuals  and  tribes  together.^  Work  is 
menial,  cheerless,  grinding,  regular,  and  requires  more  precision 
and  accuracy  and,  because  attended  with  less  ease  and  pleasure 
and  economy  of  movement,  is  more  liable  to  produce  erratic 
habits.  Antagonistic  as  the  forms  often  are,  it  may  be  that,  as 
Carr  says,  we  may  sometimes  so  suffuse  work  with  the  play 
spirit,  and  vice  versa,  that  the  present  distinction  between  work 
and  play  will  vanish,  the  transition  will  be  less  tragic  and  the 
activities  of  youth  will  be  slowly  systematized  into  a  whole  that 
better  fits  his  nature  and  needs ;  or,  if  not  this,  we  may  at  least 
find  the  true  proportion  and  system  between  drudgery  and 
recreation. 

The  worst  product  of  striving  to  do  things  with  defective 
psychic  impulsion  is  fatigue  in  its  common  forms,  which  slows 
down  the  pace,  multiplies  errors  and  inaccuracies,  and  develops 

1  Breuer  and  Freud.     Studien  iiber  Hysteric.     Wien,  1895.     See  especially  p. 
177  ei  seq. 

2  See   a   valuable   discussion    by    H.   A.   Carr.     The    Survival  Value    of  Play, 
Colorado  Investigation,  November,  1902. 


234  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

slovenly  habits,  ennui,  flitting  will  specters,  velleities  and 
caprices,  and  neurasthenic  symptoms  generally.  It  brings  rest- 
lessness, and  a  tendency  to  many  little  heterogeneous,  smatter- 
ing efforts  that  weaken  the  will  and  leave  the  mind  like  a  piece 
of  well-used  blotting-paper,  covered  with  traces  and  nothing 
legible.  All  beginnings  are  easy,  and  only  as  we  leave  the  early 
stages  of  proficiency  behind  and  press  on  in  either  physical  or 
mental  culture  and  encounter  difficulties,  do  individual  differ- 
ences and  the  tendency  of  weak  wills  to  change  and  turn  to 
something  else  increase.  Perhaps  the  greatest  disparity  be- 
tween men  is  the  power  to  make  a  long  concentrative,  persever- 
ing effort,  for  In  der  Beschrankimg  ceigt  sich  dcr  Meister. 
Now  no  kind  or  line  of  culture  is  complete  till  it  issues  in  motor 
habits,  and  makes  a  well-knit  soul  texture  that  admits  concen- 
tration series  in  many  directions  and  that  can  bring  all  its  re 
sources  to  bear  at  any  point.  The  brain  unorganized  by  train- 
ing has,  to  recur  to  Richter's  well-worn  aphorism,  saltpeter,  sul- 
fur, and  charcoal,  or  all  the  ingredients  of  gunpowder,  but 
never  makes  a  grain  of  it  because  they  never  get  together.  Thus 
willed  action  is  the  language  of  complete  men  and  the  goal  of 
education.  When  things  are  mechanized  by  right  habituation, 
there  is  still  further  gain,  for  not  only  is  the  mind  freed  from 
further  and  higher  work,  but  this  deepest  stratum  of  motor  as- 
sociation is  a  plexus  that  determines  not  only  conduct  and 
character,  but  even  beliefs.  The  person  who  deliberates  is  lost, 
if  the  intellect  that  doubts  and  weighs  alternatives  is  less  com- 
pletely organized  than  habits.  All  will  culture  is  intensive  and 
should  safeguard  us  against  the  chance  influence  of  life  and  the 
insidious  danger  of  great  ideas  in  small  and  feeble  minds.  Now 
fatigue,  personal  and  perhaps  racial,  is  just  what  arrests  in  the 
incomplete  and  mere  memory  or  noetic  stage.  It  makes  weak 
bodies  that  command,  and  not  strong  ones  that  obey.  It  di- 
vorces knowing  and  doing,  Kcnnen  and  Konncn,  a  separation 
which  the  Greeks  could  not  conceive  because  for  them  knowl- 
edge ended  in  skill  or  was  exemplified  in  precepts  and  proverbs 
that  were  so  clear  cut  that  the  pain  of  violating  them  was  poig- 
nant. Ideas  must  be  long  worked  over  till  life  speaks  as  with 
the  rifle  and  not  with  the  shotgun,  and  still  less  with  the  water 
hose.  The  purest  thought,  if  true,  is  only  action  repressed  to 
be  ripened  to  more  practical  form.     Not  only  do  muscles  come 


GROWTH   OF   MOTOR   POWER   AND   FUNCTION        235 

before  mind,  will  before  intelligence,  and  sound  ideas  rest  on  a 
motor  basis,  but  all  really  useless  knowledge  tends  to  be  elim- 
inated as  error  or  superstition.  The  roots  of  play  lie  close  to 
those  of  creative  imagination  and  idealism. 

The  opposite  extreme  is  the  factitious  and  superficial  moti- 
vation of  fear,  prizes,  examinations,  artificial  and  immediate  re- 
wards and  penalties,  which  can  only  tattoo  the  mind  and  body 
with  conventional  patterns  pricked  in,  but  which  lead  an  unreal 
life  in  the  soul  because  they  have  no  depth  of  soil  in  nature  or 
heredity.  However  precious  and  coherent  in  itself,  all  subject- 
matters  thus  organized  are  mere  lugs,  crimps,  and  frills.  All 
such  culture  is  spurious,  unreal,  and  parasitic.  It  may  make  a 
scholastic  or  sophistic  mind,  but  a  worm  is  at  the  root  and,  with 
a  dim  sense  of  the  vanity  of  all  knowledge  that  does  not  be- 
come a  rule  of  life,  some  form  of  pessimism  is  sure  to  super- 
vene in  every  serious  soul.  With  age  a  civilization  accu- 
mulates such  impedimenta,  traditional  flotsam  and  jetsam,  and 
race  fatigue  proceeds  pari  passu  with  its  increasing  volume. 
Immediate  utilities  are  better,  but  yet  not  so  much  better  than 
acquisitions  that  have  no  other  than  a  school  or  examina- 
tion value.  If,  as  Ruskin  says,  all  true  work  is  praise,  all  true 
play  is  love  and  prayer.  Instil  into  a  boy's  soul  learning  which 
he  sees  and  feels  not  to  have  the  highest  worth  and  which  can 
not  become  a  part  of  his  active  life  and  increase  it,  and  his  fresh- 
ness, spontaneity,  and  the  fountains  of  play  slowly  run  dry  in 
him,  and  his  youth  fades  to  early  desiccation.  The  instincts, 
feelings,  intuitions,  the  w^ork  of  which  is  ahvays  play,  are  super- 
seded by  method,  grind,  and  education  by  instruction  which  is 
only  an  effort  to  repair  the  defects  of  heredity,  for  wdiich,  at  its 
best,  it  is  a  vulgar,  pinchbeck  substitute.  The  best  play  is  true 
genius,  which  always  comes  thus  into  the  world,  and  has  this 
way  of  doing  its  work,  and  all  the  contents  of  the  memory 
pouches  is  luggage  to  be  carried  rather  than  the  vital  strength 
that  carries  burdens.  Gross  well  says  that  children  are  young 
because  they  play,  and  not  vice  versa :  and  he  might  have  added, 
men  grow^  old  because  they  stop  playing,  and  not  conversely, 
for  play  is,  at  bottom,  growth,  and  at  the  top  of  the  intellectual 
scale  it  is  the  eternal  type  of  research  from  sheer  love  of  truth. 
Home,  school,  church,  state,  civilization,  are  measured  in  one 
supreme  scale  of  values,  viz.,  whether  and  how,  for  they  aid  in 


236  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

bringing  youth  to  its  fullest  maturity.  Even  vice,  crime,  and 
decline  are  often  only  arrest  or  backsliding  or  reversion. 
National  and  racial  decline  beginning  in  eliminating  one  by  one 
the  last  and  highest  styles  of  development  of  body  and  mind, 
mental  stimulus  of  excessive  dosage  lowers  general  nutrition. 
A  psychologist  that  turns  his  back  on  mere  subtleties  and  goes 
to  work  in  a  life  of  service  has  here  a  great  opportunity,  and 
should  not  forget,  as  Horace  Mann  said,  "that  for  all  that 
grows,  one  former  is  worth  one  hundred  reformers." 


CHAPTER    IV 

DISEASES    OF    BODY    AND    MIND 

Physical  and  mental  ailments  and  diseases  of  adolescence  a  new  field  of  pathology — 
Neglect  of  age  determination  between  childish  and  the  better  defined  diseases 
of  maturity  —  Mindenvertkigkeit  —  Disparate  growth  of  psychic  elements 
loosens  cohesion — Health  tables  from  schools — Prevalent  disorders — Death 
rate  and  morbidity — Indigestion  and  changes  of  appetite — Heart  troubles  and 
their  psychic  effect — Curvatures— Consumption  — Stuttering — Eye  defects — 
Chlorosis — Typhoid  fever — Nerve  signs — Sleep — Catatonia — Hebephrenia — 
Age  of  first  insanity — Tables — Circular  and  periodic  troubles  and  epilepsy — 
Melancholy — Idiocy — Hysteria  and  sex-psychoses — Anxiety — Impulsiveness — 
Neurasthenia — Folly  of  doubt  and  Grubelsucht — General  paralysis — Special 
views  of  many  authors — Modern  concepts  and  forms  of  dementia  praecox  by 
Wille,  Marro,  Kraepelin,  Trommer,  Ilberg,  Seglas,  Serieux,  Serbski,  Chris- 
tian, etc. — Criticisms  of  Kraepelin — Ten  traits  in  nornTal  youth  exaggerated 
in  dementia  praecox — Genius  and  insanity — Some  general  causes  of  pre- 
cocious decay. 

Until  recent  years  there  has  been  a  remarkable  gap  in  the 
medical  literature  and  knowledge  concerning  health  and  disease 
during  adolescence.  Pediatrics,  which  treats  of  the  diseases  of 
infancy  and  early  childhood  and  which  has  lately  become  a 
prominent  specialty,  usually  leaves  the  child  at  eight  or  ten, 
and  in  the  text-books  of  Heneoch,  Stenzl,  Spitzner,  Burns, 
Striimpell,  and  Mobius,  or  other  standard  authors  or  in  the  files 
of  the  special  journals  devoted  to  children's  diseases,  one  finds 
little  attention  paid  to  even  the  early  stages  of  puberty.  So  too 
the  diseases  of  senescence  and  the  menopause,  although  not  a 
specialty,  have  a  copious  and  valuable  literature.  A  striking 
illustration  of  this  relative  neglect  and  ignorance  by  the  pro- 
fession of  the  morbific  peculiarities  of  pubescent  life  is  seen  in 
the  fact  that  until  well  within  the  last  decade,  writers  often  in- 
ferred morbidity  from  mortality  tables  and  many  were  thus 
strangely  misled,  because  early  adolescence,  while  the  most 
healthful  period  of  life,  if  measured  by  death  rates,  which  are 
then  lowest,  is  most  prone  to  many  ailments,  and  is  therefore 
marked  by  a  high  percentage  of  ill  health. 

237 


238  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

The  general  reason  for  this  neglect  is  that  medicine  has  been 
chiefly  concerned  with  the  study  and  practical  treatment  of 
pronounced  diseases  and  has  not  yet  come  to  rest  on  the  broad 
basis  of  biology,  which  is  its  natural  and  scientific  foundation. 
Practitioners  too  have  been  occupied,  both  at  home  and  in  hos- 
pitals, with  grave  cases  and  have  had  little  time  and  less  motive 
to  consider  preventive  medicine  or  the  more  general  problems 
of  regimen  and  hygiene,  personal,  domestic,  of  public.  Per- 
haps occupation  with  flagrant  symptoms  tends  to  give  di- 
minished interest,  if  not  distaste,  for  the  milder  and  incipient' 
manifestations  of  disease  which  require  sharper  diagnosis  and  a 
higher  quality  of  mind  to  detect ;  and  this  perhaps  could  only  be 
overcome  by  some  such  philosophic  device  as  having  physicians 
insure  the  health  of  their  patients,  be  mulcted,  if  they  are  ill, 
and  lose  caste  if  they  become  so  by  their  neglect.  Again,  dur- 
ing nearly  all  its  history,  medicine  has  chiefly  busied  itself  with 
the  diseases  of  adults  in  whom  the  same  disorders  are  often  ex- 
pressed by  very  different  symptoms,  and  which  have  different 
prognosis,  relations  to  heredity,  treatment,  etc.  Plato  may  have 
had  some  degree  of  justification  in  urging  that  the  ideal  doctor 
must  himself  not  be  too  well,  but  must  have  been  schooled  by 
experiences  of  sickness  in  his  own  person  to  rightly  under- 
stand the  diseases  of  his  patients.  If  this  be  so,  the  treatment 
of  adolescents  would  be  hardly  less  difficult  than  that  of  chil- 
dren, and  would  be  quite  as  different,  because  maturity  means 
the  obliteration  of  nearly  all  traces,  physical  and  mental,  of 
this  stage  of  metamorphosis  and  transition.  Another  cause  of 
the  hitherto  inadequate  recognition  of  the  general  abnormalities 
of  adolescence  is  that  its  sexual  and  a  certain  few  salient 
nervous  phenomena,  which  alone  have  a  copious  literature,  have 
absorbed  attention  to  the  neglect  of  the  other  and  far  more 
numerous  symptom  groups  peculiar  to  this  age. 

The  recent  advance  of  interest  and  knowledge  in  this  latter 
direction  has  come  for  the  most  part  from  special  studies  of  large 
numbers  by  statistical  methods.  Some  of  these  researches  have 
concerned  health  and  sickness  generally,  have  selected  a  group 
of  chronic,  acute,  or  contagious  diseases,  or  else  they  have  spe- 
cialized upon  eye,  ear,  curvature,  circulatory,  digestive,  or  other 
troubles.  In  looking  over  this  recent  literature  one  is  struck 
by  the  following  facts :  First,  that  age  tables  have  been  too 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  239 

often  neglected.  Five-  and  even  ten-year  periods  only  instead 
of  single  years  are  sometimes  shown,  or  children  are  grouped 
by  the  class  in  school  which  they  attend,  and  the  numbers 
studied  are  generally  far  too  few  to  show  reliable  age  proclivi- 
ties. Secondly,  wherever  these  latter  are  plotted  on  a  suffi- 
ciently broad  basis  of  numbers,  for  almost  every  trouble  grave 
and  slight,  there  are  indications  that  there  is  some  character- 
istic modification  of  the  curve  at  or  near  puberty,  whatever  the 
nature  of  the  trouble.  These  data  of  age  liability  are  now  seen 
to  be  so  fundamentally  important  that  it  can  be  said  with  confi- 
dence that  we  have  no  adequate  scientific  knowledge  of  any 
youthful  disease,  unless  this  has  been  presented.  It  must  be 
recognized  that  our  knowledge  of  but  relatively  few  of  these 
diseases  yet  conforms  satisfactorily  to  this  criterion.  As 
puberty  approaches,  most  of  the  diseases  to  which  childhood  is 
most  prone,  like  meningitis,  scarlatina,  diphtheria,  acute  bron- 
chitis, and  a  number  of  epidemics  decrease,  while  rheumatism, 
disorders  of  bones,  muscles,  nerves,  heart,  and  circulation  in- 
crease. Goubert  ^  concludes  that  diathesic  diseases  (as  opposed 
to  those  like  dysentery,  typhoid,  etc.,  due  to  bad  hygiene)  de- 
crease, although  his  tables  are  based  on  death  rates.  Recurrent 
circular  and  periodic  troubles  are  especially  liable  to  begin  at 
puberty.  The  characteristic  adult  diseases  to  which  youth  is 
now  becoming  liable,  without  having  ceased  to  be  exposed  to 
those  of  childhood,  are  often  more  simple  with  less  evolved 
symptoms.  Illusions  are  less  systematized  than  they  will  be 
later,  when  mental  phenomena  are  more  complex  and  more  de- 
veloped. Insanities  are  more  emotional,  and  Moreau's  etat 
mixtc,  which  is  neither  health  nor  sickness,  but  on  or  near  the 
border  line  that  separates  them,  indicates  how  in  this  transition 
stage  youth  is  still  exposed  to  most  early  diseases,  although 
their  assault  is  with  diminished  violence,  while  most  adult 
troubles  are  beginning  to  lay  hold  upon  him  but  can  not  yet 
exert  their  full  power.  This  is,  as  we  shall  see  later,  also  the 
age  of  incipiency  for  what  Prichard  was  the  first  to  character- 
ize as  moral  insanity,  and  for  the  Mindcrzvcrthigkcit  of  Koch, 
Triiper,  and  others,  a  term  which  designates  anomala  or  anti- 
nomia  of  character  and  conduct  which  are  not  normal  nor 
yet  insane,  but  suggest  the  difficulty  and  liability  of  failure  to 

'  Les  maladies  des  enfants  k  Paris,  1891,  p.  95  et  seq. 


^4°  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

pass  successfully  and  completely  to  the  adult  stage.  Brethean  * 
was  one  of  the  first  to  recognize  this  aspect  of  these  critical 
years  during  which  the  resistance  of  different  parts  of  the 
organism  to  morbid  influences  varies  greatly.  The  diseases 
he  thought  most  liable  to  appear  at  this  stage  are  chlorosis, 
anemia,  goiter,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  and  a  peculiar  form  of 
chorea.  The  point  of  departure  for  each,  if  not  its  cause,  he 
found  in  the  physical  changes  which  characterize  sexual  evolu- 
tion, but  he  thought  that  many  symptoms  which  do  not  develop 
into  complete  morbid  entities  had  their  root  in  the  digestive 
perturbations  peculiar  to  this  age. 

That  nutritive  processes  are  influenced  by  climate,  seasons, 
and  geographical  location,  has  often  been  pointed  out.  Mili- 
tary statistics  show  that  the  size  of  adults  varies  greatly  in 
different  parts  of  this  country,  suggesting  thus  that  growth 
may  also  be  very  sensitive  to  outer  conditions.  Such  con- 
siderations led  Dr.  Bowditch  to  inquire  if  the  accurate  deter- 
mination of  the  normal  rate  of  growth  of  children  would  not 
throw  light  on  the  nature  of  the  diseases  to  which  they  were 
subject  and  also  guide  to  proper  curative  measures.  Denti- 
tion is  known  to  retard  growth.  Many  special  cases  seem  to 
show  that  loss  of  weight  or  arrest  of  growth,  at  the  age  when 
it  should  be  most  rapid,  is  a  danger-signal  of  peculiar  value  be- 
cause it  precedes  all  others.  Loss  of  weight  may  precede  by 
months  the  characteristic  cough  of  consumption,  and  the  advent 
of  other  especially  constitutional  and  inherited  diseases,  and 
even  measles  may  be  thus  heralded  by  some  loss  of  weight. 
This  is  an  argument  for  weekly  weighings,  but  it  must  not  be 
inferred  that  diminution  of  growth  is  always  a  morbid  symp- 
tom, as  this  is  subject  to  oscillation  the  curves  and  limits  of 
which  are  not  yet  sufficiently  understood.^ 

As  we  know  more  of  adolescence,  it  will  probably  be  ap- 
parent that  many,  if  not  indeed  most  of  its  minor  disorders  are 
due  to  disproportionate  development.  If  increase  in  height  is 
too  rapid  and  excessive,  not  only  growing  pains  in  the  limbs 
due  to  failure  of  the  muscles  to  develop  pari  passu  with  the 

*  De  la  Pnbert^  chez  la  Femme.     Paris,  1865,  p.  38. 

'  See  I  Fattori  della  Statura  Umana.  Arch,  di  Statistica.  Rom.,  1877. — Bow. 
ditch.  The  Relation  between  Growth  and  Disease.  Transactions  of  the  Am 
Med.  Ass'n,  1881. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  H^ 

bones,  but  venous  disturbances,  particularly  varicosities  in  the 
legs,  now  so  common,  and  even  aortic  disorders  may  be  caused, 
to  say  nothing  of  curvatures  and  torsi'ons,  because  young  people 
become  self-conscious  and  perhaps  ashamed  of  their  sudden 
height,  and  the  fully  upright  posture  is  hard  to  maintain.  Acro- 
megalia, or  excessive  development  of  the  limbs  or  bones  of  the 
face,  probably  illustrates  this  same  disturbed  equilibrium. 
Some  headaches  and  eye  troubles  have  here  their  cause.  Closely 
related  too,  no  doubt,  are  some  forms  of  heterotopy  and  still 
more  heterochrony  or  anomalous  changes  in  the  direction  or 
order  of  the  various  growth  stresses.  We  must  probably  here 
too  invoke  the  principle  laid  down  by  Roux  that  different 
organs  and  tissues  or  determinants  compete  for  the  available 
nutritive  material  in  the  blood,  and  some  for  a  time  get  ahead 
of  others  in  this  internal  struggle  for  survival  among  the  dif- 
ferent parts  or  independently  variable  growth  units.  If  func- 
tions or  tissues  that  ought  to  develop  at  the  age  of  twenty  ap- 
pear at  fifteen,  or  earlier,  we  have  here  on  a  small  scale  what, 
if  excessive,  constitutes,  from  an  evolutionary  standpoint,  the 
very  interesting  body  of  facts  treated  in  teratology.  We  shall 
later  see  how  this  principle  must  be  appealed  to  in  genius,  in 
some  aspects  of  insanity  and  crime  as  well  as  in  sexual  and 
mental  precocity.  Its  more  restricted  range  Is  a  matter  of  com- 
mon observation  as  seen  in  children,  who  are  precocious  and  be- 
lated in  one  or  many  respects.^  We  know  too  from  the  fact  of 
tachygenesis  as  described  by  Cope,  and  also  from  the  manifold 
data  which  already  have  a  rich  literature  showing  how  ontogeny 
often  reverses  the  order  of  phylogeny,  that  there  is  great  tempo- 
rary plasticity  and  interchange  of  forces  here,  the  brain  and 
eye — e.  g.,  appearing  in  the  human  embryo  far  earlier  than 
their  place  in  the  phyletic  sequence.  Assuming  that  our  per- 
sonality is  compound  and  made  up  of  many  elements,  as  Hirt 
suggests,  into  which  disease,  traumata,  hypnotism,  etc.,  may 
partially  resolve  it,  as  seen  in  the  phenomena  of  multiplex 
personality,  we  must  regard  the  adolescent  stage  as  especially 
characterized  by  either  a  loosening  of  the  bonds  between  the 
manifold  factors  of  our  ego,  somatic  and  psychic,  or  else  by  a 
sudden  and  independent  growth  of  single   elements  which 

'  Baur,   Die  korperliche  und  geistige  Friih-  und  Spatentwickelung.     Zeits,  f, 
Schulgesundheitspflege,  1899,  p.  707. 
17 


H2  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

leaves  their  former  associative  bonds  relatively  weakened, 
or  perhaps  by  both  together.  The  fact  that  the  growth  fac- 
tors are  increased,  some  more  and  some  less,  and  thus 
brought  into  new  relations  with  each  other,  makes  this  the 
most  favorable  field  for  the  genetic  study  of  character  and 
temperament,  whether  mental,  as  seen  in  the  now  recognized 
difiference  of  eye,  ear,  motor-minded,  etc.,  or  emotional  and 
active,  as  seen  in  the  dominance  of  different  classes  of  tem- 
peraments, so  apparent  in  the  observation  of  individual  and 
particularly  of  peculiar  and  exceptional  children  or  adults. 
Thus  again,  as  from  so  many  standpoints,  we  come  to  the  sug- 
gestion of  ancestral  prepotencies  struggling  with  each  other  for 
predominance,  checking  and  favoring  each  other  in  a  way  that 
suggests  the  Herbart-Taine  concepts  of  collisions  and  impacts 
at  all  angles,  with  sums  of  arrest  and  reenforcements.  These 
perhaps  when  we  understand  the  laws  of  heredity  we  shall  find 
due  in  part  to  the  mingling  of  different  ancestral  stocks,  the 
elements  of  which  are  more  or  less  compactly  knit  together  in 
proportion  to  the  time  in  which  they  have  been  associated  in 
the  phylum,  as  we  trace  man's  ancestral  tree  backward  and 
downward  further  toward  its  earliest  roots. 

Clouston  suggests  that  the  tissues  that  mature  slowly  are 
most  liable  to  be  afifected  by  hereditary  disease,  and  others  have 
intimated  that  growth  energy  itself  may  do  harm  unless  rightly 
distributed  and  proportioned,  so  that  each  determinant  gets  its 
full  share  of  this  momentum,  so  that  height  be  not  at  the 
expense  of  weight,  or  the  nervous  system  left  arrested,  im- 
mature, etc.  We  have  seen  in  Chapter  II  that  boys  are  more 
likely  than  girls  to  grow  unsymmetrically,  and  there  are  many 
cases  where  even  bilateral  symmetry,  especially  of  limbs  and 
shoulders,  is  lost  for  a  time  and  then  regained,  as  if  boys  grew 
first,  and  most  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other.  Indeed  all  the 
facts  that  support  the  doctrine  of  nascent  periods  show  that  for 
a  time  growth  tends  to  focalize  upon  one  group  of  qualities  and 
then  upon  another,  and  the  newer  developments  even  in  brain 
anatomy  suggest,  as  we  saw,  a  difference  between  the  period 
of  development  for  the  projection  system,  which  reacts  through 
the  senses  and  muscles  to  the  outer  world,  and  the  associative 
functions  which  combine  these  capsular  and  sensory  centers 
with  each  other  into  new  and  higher  unities. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  243 

Dr.  HerteP  examined  3,141  boys  in  14  schools  in  Copen- 
hagen, and  found  1,900  healthy,  978  sickly,  and  236  uncertain. 
18  per  cent  were  sickly  on  entering  school;  after  two  years 
this  number  increased  to  30  per  cent;  and  just  before  pu- 
berty, had  reached  40  per  cent,  when  it  dropped  to  30,  where 
it  remained  for  a  few  years.  Of  1,21 1  girls  between  the  ages  of 
five  and  sixteen,  640  were  healthy,  433  sickly,  and  the  rest  not 
returned.  The  percentage  of  sickness  for  girls  rose  rapidly  from 
the  first  to  the  third  school  year,  from  12  to  32  per  cent.  From 
twelve  to  sixteen  sickness  increased  till  the  ill  outnumbered  the 
well  by  10  per  cent,  except  at  fourteen,  when  there  was  a  slight 
change  for  the  better.  At  about  twelve  and  one-half  years  there 
was  a  sudden  increase  of  illness  due,  as  he  thought,  to  the  im- 
pending development  of  adolescence.  Before  puberty  he  found 
scrofulous  diseases  most  common,  and  after  it  anemia,  nervous- 
ness, headache,  and  eye  diseases.  Hertel  says :  "  We  must  put 
aside  all  illusions  and  confess  that  the  present  generation  of 
young  girls  is  weakly,  anemic,  and  nervous  to  an  extraordinary 
degree."  He  scores  the  ignorance  and  stupidity  of  teachers 
about  health,  when  they  are  possessed  by  the  demon  of  educa- 
tion, which  is  causing  an  appalling  national  invalidism  as  well 
as  juvenile  serfdom.  The  best  pupils  he  thinks  are  thus  often 
made  the  slowest  and  most  vacant  minded.  From  thirteen  to 
fifteen  great  reduction  of  school  work  for  both  sexes,  but  chiefly 
for  boys,  should  be  insisted  on.  No  one  should  be  allowed  to 
go  to  school  at  all  without  nine  hours  of  sleep  and  a  hearty  appe- 
tite, for  even  presence  in  school  impairs  nutrition,  arrests 
growth,  starts  neurotic  habits,  and  especially  checks  the  de- 
velopment of  the  highest  powers,  which  are  the  last  to  unfold. 
He  almost  agrees  with  Dr.  Pilger,  who  had  urged  that  the 
youth  of  Germany  had  degenerated  mentally,  morally,  and 
physically,  and  who  thought  that  only  a  few  exceptional  boys 
should  be  allowed  to  attend  school  at  all  after  eighteen. 
Teachers,  he  says,  are  incompetent  k)  judge  of  the  health  of 
pupils  and  could  hardly  be  trusted  for  unbiased  opinions  were 
they  competent.  All  nervous  girls  need  very  careful  individ- 
ual study  and  the  greatest  degree  of  consideration  at  this  period. 
Household  duties,  if  moderate,  are  a  good  regulator.  Girls 
must  be  taught  to  endure  disappointment,  to  relish  the  common 

*  Overpressure  in  the  High  Schools  of  Denmark.     London,  1885. 


H4-  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

homely  joys  of  life,  to  be  content  and  hopeful  as  they  now  rarely 
are,  to  avoid  extreme  fatigue,  excitement  or  exposure,  high 
diet,  etc.  He  concludes  by  recommending,  as  better  means 
against  threatened  decadence,  a  health  report  book  for  each 
child,  such  as  Hornemann  had  proposed. 

Soon  after  the  first  publication  of  Hertel,  the  Danish  Gov- 
ernment in  1882  appointed  a  commission  which  examined 
16,889  boys  and  1 1,225  g^^^s,  and  found  29  per  cent  of  the  boys 
and  41  per  cent  of  the  girls  sickly,  the  highest  per  cent — nearly 
50 — being  reached  at  the  age  of  twelve  and  thirteen. 

In  1885  Key  published  the  report  of  a  Swedish  commission, 
of  which  he  was  the  head,^  and  which  was  chiefly  devoted  to 
examining  the  health  of  15,000  boys  in  the  Swedish  middle 
schools  and  3,000  girls  in  private  schools.  Key's  studies  were 
made  in  March  and  April,  and  showed  a  far  greater  percentage 
of  poor  health  than  in  Denmark,  where  Hertel's  data  were  gath- 
ered in  the  fall.  At  the  beginning  of  the  school  year,  children 
are  more  lively,  stronger,  and  more  healthful  than  in  winter. 
Toward  spring  and  near  the  end  of  the  school  year,  morbidity 
reaches  its  maximum,  so  that  the  school  is  then  most  detrimen- 
tal to  health. 

Eliminating  all  acute  and  all  chance  illness  and  studying 
only  chronic  troubles,  states,  and  feebleness,  special  curves  were 
constructed  by  Key  for  pallor  or  anemia,  headache,  near- 
sightedness, other  eye  troubles,  nosebleed,  loss  of  appetite, 
scrofula, nervousness,  spinal  curvature, and  other  slow  diseases. 
The  high  percentages  of  these  diseases  and  their  generally  rapid 
increase  were  alarming.  Over  13  per  cent  of  the  boys  suffered 
from  frequent  headache  and  nearly  13  per  cent  were  anemic. 
From  the  first  to  the  second  school  year,  5  per  cent  of  illness  in- 
creased to  36  per  cent,  and  in  the  fourth  school  year  reached 
40  per  cent.  There  was  a  great  increase  in  the  percentage  of  ill- 
ness near  the  beginning  of  puberty.  As  soon  as  this  is  well 
begun,  the  rate  of  illness  sinks  term  by  term.  The  increment 
of  weight  has  closer  relation  to  health  than  height,  for  these 

^  Laroverkskomit^ns  Betankande  III.  Stockholm,  1885,  2  vols.  With  elabo- 
rate tables.  This  is  greatly  condensed  and  most  of  the  elaborate  tables  are  omitted 
by  Burgerstein  in  a  work  entitled,  Schulhygienische  Untersuchungen,  1899.  See 
also  Key:  Die  Pubertats  Entwickelung,  Verhandl  des  Internat.  Med.  Congres  zu 
Berlin.      Vol.  i,  1890,  p.  67  et  seq. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  245 

diseases  decrease  almost  pari  passu  with  increase  of  weight. 
Just  when  weight  is  increasing  fastest,  there  is  least  liability  to 
illness ;  but  as  the  growth  rate  declines,  the  sickness  rate  rises 
steadily  to  a  second  maximum  in  the  nineteenth  or  twentieth 
year.  The  seventeenth  is  the  healthiest  of  all  years  for  boys, 
yet  the  eighteenth  is  sickly.  When  the  body  grows  slowly  at 
an  age  when  it  should  grow  fast,  it  offers  least  resistance  to 
disease,  and  while  children  are  growing  fast  they  are  least 
liable  to  these  illnesses.  The  weak  period  just  before  puberty 
seems  exceptionally  liable  to  disease.  While  in  general  the  re- 
sults agree  with  Hertel's,  they  still  lack  confirmation  in  other 
lands,  although  there  is  no  reason  to  think  them  peculiar  to 
Sweden  and  Denmark. 

Key's  studies  of  girls  were  based  on  those  from  the  upper 
classes  of  society,  but  he  found  6i  per  cent  more  or  less  sickly. 
Of  these,  36  per  cent  were  anemic  and  nearly  the  same  num- 
ber had  habitual  headache,  10  per  cent  had  spinal  curvature,  and 
5  per  cent  scrofula.  This  illness  curve  rises  to  its  maximum  of 
nearly  65  per  cent  in  the  thirteenth  year.  Illness  of  girls  con- 
tinues to  increase  awhile  after  the  beginning  of  the  period  of 
puberty,  but  soon  slowly  ceases  to  rise  and  then  falls,  although 
at  no  age  under  60  per  cent,  to  rise  again  after  the  period  of  in- 
crease weight  growth  is  passed.  That  these  girls,  whose  health 
is  so  impaired  at  the  beginning  of  the  increment  period,  do  not 
decidedly  improve  during  its  later  stage  is  a  ground  for  the 
gravest  apprehension,  and  shows  according  to  Key  that  modern 
methods  of  educating  girls  are  radically  and  dangerously 
wrong,  perhaps  in  being  too  much  like  the  methods  applied  to 
boys.  It  is  not  safe,  however,  to  reason  directly  from  the 
pubertal  phenomena  of  one  sex  to  those  of  the  other. 

Hertel,^  who  later  compared  the  results  of  the  two  com- 
missions in  two  very  suggestive  articles,  drew  many  practical 
conclusions,  and  found  that  of  children  who  studied  more  than 
the  normal  time,  7  per  cent  more  were  ill  than  of  those  who 
worked  less  than  this  time.  Key  determined  the  average  time 
devoted  to  study  by  2,000  Stockholm  Gymnasium  pupils,  living 
under  uniform  conditions,  and  found  that  over  5  per  cent  more 

*  Neure  Untersuchungen  iiber  den  allegemeinen  Gesundheitszustand  der 
Schuler  und  Schulerinen.  Schulgesundheitspflege,  1888.  Nos.  6  and  7,  pp. 
167-183;  201-315. 


246  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

of  those  who  studied  over  this  average  were  ill  than  of  those 
who  devoted  less  time  to  study.  In  lower  classes  this  difference 
was  between  7  and  8  per  cent,  for  young  children  have  less  pow- 
er to  resist  disease  than  pubescents.  The  injury  caused  by  ex- 
cessive brain  work  in  the  latter  class,  although  less  manifest  in 
actual  sickness,  is  probably  no  less  insidious,  and  is  thus  very 
likely  greater  and  its  evils  more  lasting.  Rousseau  long  ago 
suggested  the  crude  corrective  of  withholding  Emile  from 
study  till  he  was  twelve,  but  surely,  says  Key,  after  that  age 
the  school  is  very  liable  to  squander  in  childhood  the  vigor  of 
the  future  man.  Key  thought  younger  school  children  should 
sleep  from  eleven  to  twelve  hours,  and  that  in  children  of  all 
ages,  and  perhaps  especially  during  puberty,  the  need  of  the 
system  for  sleep  is  very  rarely  met  in  modern  civilized  lands. 
The  time  spent  in  bed  is  by  no  means  the  same  as  that  in 
sleep,  although  so  estimated.  The  latter  decreases  in  almost 
exact  proportion  as  the  time  given  to  study  increases.  In- 
stead of  decreasing  steadily,  as  children  go  up  the  classes  and 
study  harder,  the  amount  of  sleep  should  increase  with  the 
growth  of  mental  activity  until  the  body  is  mature,  and 
should  be  distinctly  augmented  at  puberty. 

In  about  2,000  children  in  Lausanne,  Combe^  found  the  per- 
centage of  morbidity  (chiefly  anemia,  headaches,  catarrhs, 
indigestion,  and  respiratory  troubles)  as  follows,  from  which, 
comparing  annual  increase  in  height,  he  inferred  that  mor- 
bidity and  growth  increased  together.  To  this  we  have  added, 
in  the  lower  row  of  figures,  the  results  of  Nesterofif's  ^  test  of 
216  boys  in  a  Moscow  gymnasium. 

Age 8  9  10  II  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20 

Boys,  per  cent  ill 64  43  42  40  3s  29  34 

Girls 88  75  60  60  68  61  39 

Moscow  boys 29  58  57  100  61  57  46  50  59  67  64  25 

The  diseases  of  the  Russian  children  in  the  lower  row  in 
the  order  of  frequency — nervous  troubles  being  excluded — • 
were  throat  troubles,  15  per  cent;  general  disturbance  of  di- 
gestion, 10  per  cent;  sight,  8;  chronic  lung  trouble,  7;  spinal 

1  Korperlange   u,   Wachsthum,    etc.     Zeits.    f.    Schulgesundheitspflege,    1896, 

p-  569- 

*  Die   moderne   Schule  u.   d.   Gesundheit.     Zeits.    f.   Schulgesundheitspflege, 

1890,  p.  213  et  seq. 


DISEASES   OF   BODY  AND   MIND  247 

curvature,  6  per  cent.  Of  all  these  children  71  suffered  from 
nervous  troubles,  which  increased  very  steadily  from  8  per  cent 
on  entering  to  69  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the  eighth  year.  Dur- 
ing Nesteroff's  four  years'  record  he  found  that  each  pupil 
needed  a  doctor  on  the  average  about  five  times  a  year,  most 
often  for  colds  and  nervous  troubles,  and  that  there  were  two 
ages  of  maximal  illness,  viz.,  twelve  and  seventeen. 

Zak  ^  finds  among  4,245  Moscow  secondary  pupils  the  fol- 
lowing percentage  of  nervousness : 

Age 10   II   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20 

Nervous 8.3   20  16.6   20   2$    9  S3   66.6  55.5  77.7  42.8 

Lesgaft  found  very  frequent  swelling  of  the  veins  of  the 
seminal  cord  among  the  St.  Petersburg  pupils,  especially  in  the 
middle  and  higher  grades. 

Dr.  Schmidt-Monnard,-  a  specialist  in  children's  dis- 
eases, investigated  the  chronic  disorders  of  5,100  boys  and 
3,200  girls  as  to  anemia,  chlorosis,  headache,  nervousness, 
sleeplessness,  defect  of  appetite,  digestive  troubles,  nosebleed, 
chronic  inflammation  of  the  cornea,  and  abnormal  refraction  of 
the  lens.  In  the  middle  schools  among  2,100  boys,  he  found 
nine  and  twelve  the  most  sickly  years,  where  morbidity  from  all 
causes  reached  30  and  35  per  cent  respectively,  and  that  sleep- 
lessness culminated  at  the  age  of  twelve.  Among  1,900  girls 
in  the  same  class  of  schools,  the  year  of  maximal  sickness  for  all 
diseases  was  thirteen,  where  it  reached  nearly  50  per  cent; 
at  the  same  period  headaches  reached  30  and  nosebleed  8  per 
cent  and  sleeplessness  reached  its  maximum,  while  as  with  the 
boys  morbidity  decreased  materially  the  year  after  its  maxi- 
mum. In  higher  private  schools  for  girls,  sickness  increased 
rapidly  from  the  twelfth  to  the  fifteenth  year,  when  it  reached 
57  per  cent,  and  slightly  increased  for  the  two  following  years, 
as  did  nervous  troubles,  while  sleeplessness  at  sixteen  had 
reached  nearly  10  per  cent.  In  the  Real  schools  and  Gymnasia, 
the  maximum  of  40  per  cent  was  reached  at  seventeen  for  those 
who  had  no  afternoon  session,  and  the  maximum  of  over  70 
per  cent  was  reached  at  sixteen  for  those  who  studied  after- 

>  op.  cit.,  p.  g. 

*  Die  chronische   Kranklichkeit   in  unseren   mittleren  und  hoheren   Schulen. 
Zeits.  f.  Gesundheitspflege,  1897,  pp.  593  and  666. 


248  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

noons,  while  headaches  alone  considered  culminated  at  seven- 
teen and  sleeplessness  at  eighteen.  The  differences  in  all 
ages  were  strikingly  in  favor  of  those  who  did  no  evening 
work. 

Schmidt-Monnard  also  attempted  to  compare  normal  with 
actual  hours  of  sleep  for  each  age  for  boys. 

Age 7  10  14  18-20 

Normal 12  Ii>^-i2  li  8)^-9 

Actual 11-11%  10-10^  9-9}(  7/4-^ 

Cephalgic  congestion  increases  with  brain-work,  and  thus 
causes  school  headaches,  or  as  Charcot  called  it  cephalgia 
adolescentium,  and  nosebleed.  Key  and  Becker  have  shown 
that  this  increases  in  the  upper  Gymnasia  classes,  and  while 
there  are  other  etiological  factors,  overpressure  is  one,  though 
perhaps  not  the  chief.  Both  pain  and  hemorrhage  are  greatly 
increased  by  the  neuropathic  diathesis. 

In  a  study  of  the  death  rates  in  the  school  population  of 
Boston,  which  for  the  years  1885  and  1890  numbered  70,000 
between  the  ages  of  five  and  fifteen  when  the  average  annual 
number  of  deaths  was  471,  Dr.  HartwelP  found  that  the 
period  from  ten  to  fifteen,  which  was  characterized  by  the  most 
rapid  increase  in  height  and  weight,  was  also  that  in  which 
the  fewest  deaths  occurred.  For  girls  the  year  of  lowest  death 
rate  or  power  to  resist  disease  was  the  twelfth ;  for  boys  the 
thirteenth.  These  years  were  thus  at  once  the  period  of  ac- 
celerated growth  and  of  accentuated  specific  intensity  of  life,  or 
in  other  words,  this  is  the  period  at  which  Boston  school  chil- 
dren attain  and  pass  the  flood-tide  of  growth  as  measured  by 
their  power  to  resist  death.  Acceleration  of  growth  and  life 
intensity  begin,  culminate,  and  decline  about  a  year  earlier  for 
girls  than  for  boys.  This  result  was  presented  in  the  table 
comparing  Bowditch's  result  for  weight  and  height  with  the 
specific  intensity  of  life  for  1875,  1885,  and  1890.  For  our  pur- 
poses it  is  compared  in  the  following  table  with  other  standards 
and  the  age  of  least  mortality,  which  ranges  from  eleven  to 
fourteen : 

*  See  Report  of  the  Director  of  Physical  Training  of  Boston.     School  Docu 
ment  No.  8,  1894,  p.  46  et  seq. 


DISEASES  OF   BODY  AND   MIND 


249 


fdy- 
age. 
ears 
and. 

rate 
,000 
and 
ales, 

each 
f  aga 
Life 

1893- 

mor- 

per 

a  t 

year 

11^ 

"1 

°-=  '^Ih 

Death 
per 
(Engl 
and  W 

i8Si-'9 

.5  0  J!  .r 

.— *   *j 

m-o 

Age. 

Dying 
year 
(Mas 
Tabl 

'97)- 

Annus 
tality 
u  n  I 
each 

Death 
of 
chil 

1875, 
1890. 

(-.SU.C1 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

M. 

F. 

8 

9-5 

9.6 

9 

71 

8.1 

10 

5.735 

2.0 

1-7 

123 

120 

.00326 

.00349 

6.3 

5-1 

II 

5.207 

1.8 

1.6 

IIO 

"3 

.00292 

.00306 

5-0 

5-2 

12 

4.933 

1.8 

1-7 

104 

"3 

.00277 

.00307 

3-H 

3-2 

n 

4,891 

2.0 

2.0 

III 

123 

.00297 

.00336 

3-9 

4-3 

14 

3.040 

2.4 

2.4 

135 

146 

.00362 

.  00400 

5-2 

6.2 

i^; 

5.359 

2.9 

2.9 

159 

172 

. 00428 

.00473 

4-9 

5-^ 

16 

5,811 

3-4 

3-5 

181 

195 

.00489 

•00539 

5-b 

5-7 

17 

6.6 

6.6 

TournE 

il  of  Ad 

olescenc 

e,  October,  1900, 

PP-  55-56. 

The  following  table  ^  shows  the  mortality  of  each  age  and 
sex  in  Prussia  on  the  basis  of  i,ooo  inhabitants: 


Years. 


0-  I 

1-  2 

2-  3 

3-  S 
5-10 

10-15 
15-20 
20-25 
25-30 
30-40 
40-50 
50-60 
60-70 
70-80 


225.0 

64.0 

26.3 

14-3 

5-8 

2.9 

4.8 

5-9 

7-1 

10.8 

18.3 
30.0 

55-3 
112. o 


S  6 


■S  "^ 


64.0 

33-5 
20.5 
9.1 
4.0 
5-1 
7-9 
7-3 
9.1 

14-3 

25.0 

50.0 

112.0 


82 

39 

23 

9 

3 

5 

7 

10 

14 
21 

33 

59 

"5 


192.0 
63.0 

25-4 

14.0 

6.0 

3-2 

3-8 

5-2 

6.2 

8.2 

II. 2 

18.4 

40.5 
94.0 


62.0 

32.0 

20.0 

8.9 

4-3 
4.6 
6.0 

7-7 

9.6 

II. 9 

21.0 

47.0 


79.0 
390 

24.0 

9.8 

4.1 

4.6 
6.7 

8.8 

II. o 

13- 1 

21.5 

43-5 
99-5 


Symonds  found  for  his  table  of  American  Life  Insurance 
Societies  that  mortality  is  less  for  girls  than  for  boys  in  the 
period  preceding  and  following  puberty  in  the  ratio  of  1.68 
to  1. 18. 

The  expectation  of  life  for  men  at  different  ages  ^ 

'  Compiled  from  several  tables  in  the  Deutsche  Vierteljahrschrift  f.  off.  Ge- 
sundheitspflege,  Bd.  3,  1899.      Supplement,  pp.  50-53. 

^  Monatsblatter  fiir  die  Vertrauensarzte  der  Lebensversicherungsbank  Gotha  I. 
1886.     No.  2.,  p.  15. 


250 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   .\DOLESCENCE 


Completed 
year  of  life. 

Number  living. 

Number  of 
those  dying 

Probability  of  death. 

Average   dura> 
tion  of  life  in 

next  year. 

years. 

25 

10,000 

53 

.00532 

38.66 

26 

9.947 

54 

•00543 

37.87 

27 

9.893 

55 

.00556 

37.07 

28 

9.838 

56 

.oo5b9 

36.28 

29 

9.782 

57 

.00584 

35.48 

30 

9.725 

59 

.00600 

34.69 

In  the  chart  on  p.  251,  from  Engelman/  curve  A  repre- 
sents the  percentage  of  morbidity  for  prepubescent  Danish  girls 
from  Key  and  Hertel,  as  we  have  no  good  and  comprehensive 
American  data.  It  is  adapted  to  American  girls  by  giving  it 
the  same  relation  to  the  period  of  prepubertal  development,  here 
averaging  13.8  years  (indicated  by  the  short  vertical  line  near 
the  bottom),  that  it  bears  to  the  time  of  first  menstruation  in 
Denmark,  which  is  i|  years  later.  B  is  Hartwell's  curve  of 
life  intensity  or  the  power  to  resist  lethal  influences,  which  is  an 
expression  of  the  nutritive  activity  of  the  organism  during  its 
period  of  greatest  and  most  rapid  growth,  and  is  based  on 
the  ratio  of  the  number  living  to  the  number  dying.  This 
curiously  enough  conforms  generally  to  the  curve  of  morbidity, 
C  is  the  mortality  curve,  which  is  almost  diametrically  opposite 
that  of  morbidity,  i.  e.,  just  during  those  years  from  eight  or 
nine  to  thirteen  or  fourteen,  when  American  girls  are  most 
likely  to  be  sick  they  are  least  liable  to  die.  D  is  the  curve  of 
growth  in  weight,  and  E  represents  the  percentage  of  stuttering 
as  indicating  augmented  nervous  excitability. 


We  now  pass  to  consider  the  special  morbidities  of  ado- 
lescence. Very  prominent  among  the  physiological  disturb- 
ances of  this  age  are  those  of  indigestion  and  disorders  of  the 
alimentary  canal,  and  especially  of  the  stomach.  The  rapid 
bone  growth  requires  more  lime,  the  blood  needs  iron,  the  in- 
creased metabolism  more  oxygen  and  more  fats  for  heat,  per- 
haps the  brain  more  phosphorus,  the  muscles  require  more 
protein  and  muscle  work  more  inogen  and  myosin  to  break 
down,  and  normally  the  food  supply  is  increased  with  height 
and  weight,  and  the  chemical  bookkeeping  of  income  and  ex- 
penditure readjusted.     Gamgee  suggests  that  the  ingesta  may 

*  The  American  Girl  of  To-day ;    Pres.  Address.     Gynecological  See,  1900. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND 


251 


be  raised  to  a  plane  of  higher  complexity.     However  this  be, 
the  body  in  general  may  be  conceived  as  a  machine  for  the  con- 


50 
48 

7 

^ 

/ 

r 

\ 

\ 

\ 

/ 

N 

\ 

>. 

\ 

1 

1 

/ 

\ 

\ 

c 

14  44 

i 

/ 

D 

\ 

^ 
^ 

\ 

/ 

/ 

^ 

\ 

13  43 

— 

\ 

— 

/ 

V 

:^ 

/_ 

/ 

r 

^ 

— 

— 

A 

330 

13  40 
11  38 

— 

\ 

^ 

/ 

/ 

— 

1 

/ 

7 

\ 

\ 

— 

300 
380 

> 

\\ 

1 

/ 

1 

1 

10  36 
9  34 
8  33 

7  30 

/ 

\ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

\ 

/ 

360 
340 

330 

/ 

\ 

f 

\ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

I 

/ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

A 

'  J 

/ 

1 

\ 

\ 

' 

\ 

^ 

300 

/ 

1 

\ 

1 

— 

\ 

6  38 
5  36 

I 

1 

\J 

Y 

•^ 

180 
160 

1 

A 

> 

/ 

^ 

1 

1 

\ 

/ 

4  24 

fE 

\ 

c 

/ 

/ 

/ 

140 

1 

\ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

3  33 

J 

\ 

/ 

130 

/ 

S  30 

/ 

/ 

Pl 

ber 
3.8 

y 

100 

/ 

1  t 

/ 

4 

80 

/ 

■    a 

J 

3  ^ 

/ 

60 

Age   6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

13 

13 

14 

15 

servation  of  energy  which  it  receives  originally  from  the  sun, 
from  which  its  every  element  came,  and  of  which  we  are  all 
children,  and  indirectly  from  chlorophyl,  which  is  our  kinetic 


252  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

basis  like  a  bent  bow.  In  a  high  sense  every  organ  is  a  digest- 
ive organ,  even  the  brain  itself,  and  thought  perhaps  has  a  di- 
gestive function.  Man  is  v^hat  he  eats  and  what  he  does  with 
it,  through  all  the  intricate  formul?e  of  physiological  chemistry. 

There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  basal  will  to  live  is  simply  the 
will  to  eat  and  in  which  this  latter  is  the  basis  of  psychology. 
Nearly  three-fourths  of  the  total  energy  of  the  body,  expressed 
kinetically,  probably  goes  to  digestion  and  half  the  struggle  of 
life  is  for  food.  The  very  cells  of  our  embryo,  as  they  grow 
large  so  that  their  surface  diminishes  relatively  to  their  content, 
must  divide  or  die  of  starvation.  Most  of  the  movements  of 
every  form  of  life  that  has  ceased  to  be  sessile  are  to  get  food ; 
organs  of  locomotion  are  to  get  to  it  or  to  escape  being  eaten  by 
enemies.  In  the  primitive  struggle  for  survival,  when  two  hos- 
tile creatures  meet,  one  is  destined  to  be  the  food  of  the  other. 
The  first  fear  is  that  of  being  devoured ;  the  first  form  of  prop- 
erty is  accumulated  food.  Almost  every  living  being  is  the  food 
for  some  other,  even  the  organs  of  our  body  struggle  in  rivalry 
for  the  food  which  the  blood  brings,  and  every  form  of  disease 
and  death  itself  is  caused  by  cutting  off  the  food  supply  from 
some  group  of  cells.  Sleep  is  to  feed  and  build  up  again  the 
nuclei  of  cells,  which  under  the  microscope  are  seen  to  have  been 
worn  away  by  activity,  and  to  remove  the  chip  pile  of  dead  mat- 
ter. Fungoid  growths  are  low  level  metabolisms,  where  the  ex- 
creta or  clinkers  in  the  human  furnace  are  not  removed.  What 
we  call  hunger  is  the  massed  and  unconscious  desire  of  every 
cell  for  the  food  it  needs,  and  death  in  every  form  may  be  in 
a  sense  said  to  be  due  to  progressive  local  or  general  starvation. 

These  general  considerations,  which  I  conceive  to  be  the 
basis  of  the  new  genetic  psychology  of  the  future,  may  serve  to 
give  us  due  appreciation  of  the  special  importance  for  adoles- 
cence of  the  general  law  that  there  is  a  trophic  or  nutritive 
background  to  everything  and  to  suggest  that  the  profound 
metamorphoses  of  puberty  involve  adjustments  far  more  radi- 
cal than  are  usually  imagined.  Almost  all  returns  to  our 
food  questionnaires,  to  be  elsewhere  more  fully  reported  on, 
show  that  the  appetite,  which,  if  natural,  is  like  a  compass  point- 
ing to  the  true  pole  of  our  somatic  needs,  is  often  gravely  dis- 
turbed at  this  period.  Nearly  all  report  changed  appetite. 
Foods,  very  prominent  in  the  habitual  dietaries  before,  are  now 


DISEASES  OF  BODV  AND  MIND  153 

neglected  and  new  favorites  arise.  This  change  is  especially 
marked  with  regard  to  sweets,  acids,  fruits,  meats,  and  stimu- 
lants. There  is  a  new  tendency  to  experiment,  not  only  with 
new  dishes,  but  often  with  things  strange  and  even  offensive. 
Boys  dare  each  other  to  taste,  eat,  or  swallow  offensive  and 
sometimes  harmful  things,  or  force  their  mates  to  do  so,  some- 
times with  disastrous  results,  not  infrequently  suggesting  the 
nauseous  anthropological  chapter  of  scatology.  Boys  some- 
times affect  or  boast  of  their  achievements  in  eating,  and  girls 
affect  daintiness,  become  exceedingly  discriminating  in  sweet- 
meats, bonbons,  summer  drinks,  etc.  Boys  have  eating  and 
drinking  matches  and  duels,  and  intemperance  very  generally 
takes  its  rise  here.  Lancaster  reported  ninety-one  spontaneous 
reconstructions  of  appetite  in  his  returns.  It  is  irregular,  fast- 
ing and  feasting  perhaps  alternate,  strange  whims  or  picse 
arise  with  sometimes  extreme  dislike  of  some  one  and  passion- 
ate fondness  for  other  kinds  of  foods.  Taste  seems  to  acquire 
a  more  inward  and  independent  quality  of  its  own,  and  junkets 
dainty-mouthed  and  perhaps  stealthily,  on  titbits.  Girls  in 
particular  become  squeamish,  fastidious,  and  lickerish,  and  per- 
haps develop  a  sweet  tooth  of  disproportionate  dimensions.  It 
is  never  so  hard  to  establish  a  well-balanced  dietary,  and  yet 
this  is  the  nascent  period  for  it.  Perverse  tastes  may  grievous- 
ly interfere  with  health,  and  the  rectification  of  appetite  may  be 
hard  just  in  proportion  as  plasticity  of  this  age  passes  into 
settled  bad  eating  habits  of  later  life. 

I  am  convinced  that  one  of  the  causes  of  diseased  cravings, 
which  may  lead  to  wrong  food  habits  and  to  intemperance,  is 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  normal  changes  of  appetite  for  both 
quality  and  quantity  of  food  are  perversions  of  normal  appe- 
tite so  often  unnoticed  and  unmet.  Now  judicious  oversight, 
perhaps  eked  out  by  a  little  wholesome  authority,  does  more 
to  push  the  psycho-physic  organism  on  to  pass  safely  over  the 
immature  stages  and  dangers  of  arrest  and  to  come  to  full  ma- 
turity with  a  real  maximum  of  utilized  nutrition,  than  almost 
any  other  influence.  Very  many  of  the  failures  of  middle  and 
later  life  are  due  to  avoidable  errors  of  diet,  and  the  arrest  thus 
caused.  We  know  that  many  larvae  and  embryos  of  the  lower 
forms  stop  at  various  stages  of  immaturity,  if  food  is  not  abun- 
dant and  fit,  taken  properly  at  due  intervals,  etc.     Not  malaria, 


254  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

as  Morel  thought,  but  perverted  appetites,  sometimes  aided  by 
adulterations  and  bad  cooking,  are  one  of  the  causes  of  human 
degeneration,  because  man,  who  ought  to  be  polyphagous  and 
can  only  with  increased  difficulty  adopt  a  new  food  after  the 
period  of  sex  development,  is  really  not  fed  according  to  his 
physiological  needs.  This  is  not  only  the  cause  of  many  break- 
downs among  pupils  and  students,  anemias  and  most  of  the 
maladies  of  malnutrition  so  common  at  adolescence,  but  of  that 
disquiet,  weakness,  and  lust  for  stimulants,  which  in  part  di- 
rectly and  in  part  indirectly  causes  the  appetite  for  drink,  by 
producing  either  the  extreme  fatigue  under  only  normal  strain, 
that  often  has  recourse  to  it,  or  else  this  craving  is  due  to  lack  of 
proper  exercise  which  so  strongly  prompts  to  the  quest  of  arti- 
ficial excitement. 

The  wisdom  teeth  too  are  now  forming,  and  the  chin  and 
lower  jaw  and  the  muscles  of  mastication  are  growing.  Biting 
sticks,  toothpicks,  pencils,  etc.,  is  an  automatism,  the  curve  of 
which  now  undergoes  a  marked  rise.  The  propensity  for  gum 
chewing,  which  partially  gratifies  this  instinct,  may  contribute 
to  digestive  troubles  by  provoking  salivary  secretions,  which  are 
not  utilized  for  digestion,  and  which  thus  introduce  an  ele- 
ment of  discord  into  the  manifold  symphony  of  these  processes. 

Dr.  Pitt  ^  describes  slight  cardiac  failure,  shortness  of 
breath,  dyspnoea,  palpitation,  and  other  symptoms  of  cardiac 
dilation  at  puberty.  The  languor  and  feeble  pulse,  discomfort, 
and  other  symptoms  which  attend  it  rarely  last  long  and  ought 
soon  to  be  compensated  by  growth.  The  heart,  as  we  saw, 
nearly  or  quite  doubles  in  size  during  the  development  of 
puberty,  and  this  increase  may  all  be  within  a  year  or  may  be 
extended  over  several.  Dr.  Pitt's  tables  of  the  normal  volume 
of  the  heart  at  different  ages  and  its  rate  of  growth  are  of  great 
value.  The  area  of  the  pulmonary  artery  grows  from  52  c.  mm. 
at  the  age  of  thirteen  to  61  c.  mm.  at  fourteen,  and  the  volume 
of  the  heart  from  120  to  215  c.  cm.  during  the  same  years. 
While  the  heart  during  its  most  rapid  growth  in  the  first  year 
of  life  increases  only  15-16  c.  cm.,  during  puberty  it  increases 
from  95-115  c.  cm. 

'  On  Cardiac  Dilation  at  Puberty  and  its  Frequent  Occurrence  in  Girls.     Brit- 
ish Medical  Journal,  1886. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  255 

Dr.  E.  Kisch,  of  Prague,  in  a  valuable  article  describes  the 
heart  troubles  of  pubescent  girls  somewhat  as  follows :  The 
most  common  form  is  nervous  palpitation,  which  often  and 
sometimes  in  violent  form  precedes  by  a  few  weeks  or  months 
the  first  menstruation,  and  generally  ceases  as  these  periods  be- 
come well  established.  Diminution  of  appetite,  indigestion, 
constipation,  flatulence,  irritability,  inertia,  and  sleeplessness 
often  occur,  due  in  part  to  reflex  excitation  from  the  uterus  and 
in  part  to  oversensitiveness  of  the  psyche.  Another  form  of 
heart  distortion  is  seen  in  cases  of  great  delay  of  first  menstru- 
ation or  in  long  continued  irregiflarity  of  this  function,  and 
seems  to  be  due  to  the  chlorotic  composition  of  the  blood.  A 
third  and  far  rarer  form  is  seen  where  unusually  rapid  growth 
has  just  preceded  menstruation,  and  in  girls  who  are  not 
anemic  or  nervous,  but  strikingly  lean  and  slender.  It  goes 
with  a  sense  of  fulness,  short  breath,  and  hypertrophy  of  the 
left  ventricle,  and  this  is  due  to  a  circulatory  storm  incident  to 
puberty,  which  obliges  the  heart  to  act  against  increased  resist- 
ance. These  cases  are  most  frequent  among  the  non-labor- 
ing classes,  and  are  aggravated  by  garments  in  the  least  degree 
tight  about  the  waist. 

Irregularity  of  heart  action  or  arhythmia  is  far  more 
common  among  children  than  was  previously  supposed.  It 
is  usually  transient  and  may  be  due  to  many  causes;  it  be- 
comes serious  only  as  senescence  approaches.^  It  is  most 
frequent  in  anemic  children  who  are  growing  rapidly  at 
puberty  and  seems  often  due  to  relatively  narrow  arteries  and 
overpressure,  and  hypertrophy  may  follow.  Chronic  heart 
troubles  often  begin  in  insufficiency  of  action,  while  arrhythmia 
appears  only  late  in  valvular  diseases.  Nervous  heart  troubles 
are  due  to  imperfect  development  of  the  neural  regulative  ap- 
paratus. Idiopathic  heart  irregularities  seem  more  common 
among  boys  than  among  girls.  Sometimes  the  pulse  at  puberty 
is  exceptionally  slow,  and  sometimes  very  rapid  for  a  season. 
Loss  of  a  beat  by  deep  inspiration  may  occur.  Irregularity 
may  be  for  a  time  habitual  during  sleep,  while  fright,  worms, 
bowel  trouble,  a  cold  bath,  nausea,  etc.,  may  produce  this  same 
effect.     Guidi  ^  has  called  special  attention  to  the  frequency  of 

*  O.  Heubner.     Herzarythmia  im  Kindesalter.    Zeit.  f.  Klin.  Med.,  1894,  p.  492. 
'Arch.  Ital.  di  Pediatria,  1892, 


25^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

palpitation   in   growing  sciiool  children   between  fifteen   and 
eighteen. 

Very  many  children  now  become  morbidly  conscious  of  their 
heart,  anxiously  feel  their  pulse,  count  the  beats,  and  not  a  few 
in  our  returns  work  themselves  into  a  state  of  high  tension, 
fearing  that  they  are  doomed  to  die  and  that  the  heart  may 
cease  to  pulsate  at  any  moment.  This  might  almost  be  called 
a  characteristic  phobia  of  adolescence.  In  extreme  cases  for 
months,  and  even  years,  the  fingers  are  on  the  wrist  on  every 
occasion,  and  ingenious  methods  of  concealing  this  watch  from 
others  are  invented.  Especially  at  night,  when  after  reclining 
its  beats  are  slightly  feebler  and  at  longer  intervals,  this  chronic 
solicitude  may  occasionally  reach  a  sudden  panic  that  the  end 
has  come,  and  this  starts  it  bounding  again.  Some  read  medical 
books,  devise  pretexts  for  comparing  rate  and  intensity  with 
that  of  their  friends,  imagine  twingings.  gurgles,  stoppages, 
and  obstructions,  dread  violent  exercise,  modify  their  regi- 
men, all  this  perhaps  without  betraying  their  fears  to  any 
one,  and  entirely  outgrowing  them  later.  One  boy  of  four- 
teen never  dared  lie  on  his  back  or  left  side ;  another  feared  to 
take  a  deep  breath  and  felt  it  necessary  for  his  safety  to  assume 
a  peculiar  bending  attitude  in  sitting  or  standing.  Usually, 
however,  these  solicitudes,  although  very  common,  are  slight 
and  transitory. 

Many  studies  have  lately  been  made  of  the  forms  of 
scoliosis,  or  spinal  curvature,  peculiar  to  adolescents.  Eulen- 
burg  had  found  that  of  300  cases  of  scoliosis,  most  occurred  be- 
tween six  and  fourteen,  and  of  these  53  per  cent  between  seven 
and  ten,  23  per  cent  between  six  and  seven,  and  12  per  cent  be- 
tween ten  and  fourteen.  Krug  found  that  of  181  cases,  most 
or  35  per  cent  occurred  between  thirteen  and  thirteen  and  three- 
quarters  years ;  that  next  to  most,  or  28  per  cent,  occurred  from 
eleven  to  eleven  and  three-quarters  years  ;  that  27.5  per  cent  oc- 
curred between  twelve  and  twelve  and  three-quarters  years; 
and  that  5  per  cent  of  the  rest  occurred  between  fourteen  and 
sixteen  and  three-quarters  years  of  age.  Its  advent  is  so  slow 
and  insidious  that  it  is  often  unnoticed  for  years,  or  it  is  thought 
to  be  merely  a  bad  habit  of  posture.  The  same  leg  is  crossed 
over  the  other  instead  of  reversing  the  position.     In  standing 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  257 

the  weight  is  chiefly  on  one  foot  and  perhaps  always  the  same, 
rather  than  equally  divided  or  alternating.  One  elbow  is  leaned 
on,  the  head  is  tipped  to  one  side,  vicious  attitudes  are  assumed 
in  writing,  studying,  etc.  Reiser  ^  recommends  the  use  of  the 
scoliometer  at  this  age  to  detect  the  beginnings  of  asymmetry  of 
function.  Most  frequent  is  right  dorsal,  and  next  comes  left 
lumbar  curvature.  Both  may  be  either  cause  or  effect  of  habit- 
ually sitting  with  more  pressure  on  one  flank  than  on  the  other. 
Whether  the  various  scolioses,  including  cyphosis  and  lordosis, 
are  primitive  and  purely  hereditary,  still  admits  of  some  doubt. 
The  deformity  of  the  thorax  is  often  attended  by  and  perhaps 
causes  irregularities  of  heart  beat,  respiration,  and  digestion. 
More  or  less  torsion  of  the  spine  and  muscular  insufficiency  are 
often  causes,  and  osseous  theories  alone  are  at  least  inadequate 
to  explain  most  cases,  as  are  the  muscular,  nervous,  or  ligamen- 
tary  theories  so  often  exploited  in  connection  with  orthopedic 
methods.  Most  of  the  latter  now  agree  in  disapproving  of 
corsets  and  all  constant  physical  restraints  of  the  freedom  of 
motion,  save  in  extreme  cases,  because  immobility  enfeebles. 
The  accentuation  of  these  asymmetries  at  adolescence  is  to  be 
expected  from  the  rapidity  of  growth  under  unfavorable  condi- 
tions of  heredity,  environment,  or  habit,  for  one  side  of  the  body 
develops  more  nervous  innervation  and  muscular  tension,  or 
more  rapid  metabolism,  than  the  other,  and  the  equilibrium 
which  characterizes  perfect  normality  and  health  is  upset. 
Finer  modern  measurements  show  that  nearly  all  persons  are 
more  or  less  unsymmetrical. 

The  great  work  of  Alexander  James  ^  shows  that  the  great- 
est mortality  for  consumption  occurs  from  the  ages  of  twenty- 
five  to  thirty.  If  we  assume  with  Clouston  that  infection  with 
this  disease  began  on  the  average  five  years  earlier,  we  could  in- 
fer that  consumption  begins  under  twenty-five,  and  this  would 
agree  with  James's  law  that  "  tubercular  deposit  tends  to  occur 
in  various  tissues  at  periods  when  the  excessive  nutritive  power 
required  for  growth  is  becoming  or  has  become  exhausted." 
Clouston^  adds  that  "lung  tubercle  first  shows  itself  in  any  de- 

'  La  Scoliose  Essentielle  des  Adolescentes.     Paris,  1897. 
*  Pulmonary  Phthisis. 
•The  Neurosis  of  Development,  p.  91. 
18 


258 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


gree  in  14  per  cent  of  persons  living  near  the  beginning  of  re- 
productive power,  viz.,  fifteen  years  of  age.  It  doubles  its  viru- 
lence about  twenty,  reaching  34  per  cent,  and  gets  to  38  per  cent 
at  twenty-five  and  to  40  per  cent  at  thirty,  thus  killing  most  of 
its  victims  during  the  developmental  ages  and  reaching  its 
maximum  just  at  the  age  of  completed  development."  Clous- 
ton  has  described  a  special  kind  of  mental  disease,  which  he  calls 
phthisical  insanity,  beginning  during  or  just  after  adolescence, 
when  he  thinks  the  body  is  in  a  state  of  reduced  nutritive  con- 
dition favorable  to  tubercular  infection.  This  innutrition  he 
deems  one  form  of  trophic  neurosis,  and  thinks  the  special  pul- 
monary innutrition,  that  admits  of  the  tubercle  bacillus  finding 
a  nidus  in  the  lungs,  results  in  a  developmental  failure  in  the 
epithelium  of  their  alveoli.  He  bases  this  inference  very  largely 
upon  the  coincidence  of  the  maximal  age  of  infection  for  both. 
Suggestive  in  this  regard  are  the  mortality  tables  for  tubercu- 
losis for  the  different  ages  and  sexes  in  Prussia  calculated  in 
percentages  on  a  basis  of  10,000  inhabitants,  as  follows:  ^ 


Age. 

10-15 
M.            F. 

15-20 
M.              F. 

20-25 
M.              F. 

25-30 
M.              F. 

30-60 
M.              F. 

1895 
1896 
1897 

4-99     8.77 
4.77     8.30 
4-99     9-04 

16.65      17.51 

15-74     i7-3t 
15.54     16.64 

27.04     21.94 
26.81      22.17 
27.21      22.49 

29.08     26.84 
25-81      25.31 
25-92      25.15 

41.02      29.87 
36.81      29.33 
37-60     27.75 

Stuttering  is  a  spastic  disorder  of  coordination  in  the 
muscles  of  speech  and  is  most  liable  to  occur  at  pauses  or  initial 
consonants,  especially  if  they  are  explosive.  The  three  factors 
of  expiration  and  vowel  production  by  action  of  the  vocal  cords 
and  consonantal  activity  of  lips  and  tongue,  which  are  involved 
in  articulation,  are  not  harmonized,  and  tonic  or  clonic  cramps 
occur.  The  impediments  may  sometimes  all  remit  and  speech 
be  normal  for  a  time,  but  they  are  aggravated  or  often  caused 
by  mental  tension  and  bad  training.  Stammering  differs  from 
stuttering  in  lacking  the  spontaneous  by-movements  and  in 
being  a  failure  of  pronunciation  rather  than  of  speech,  while 
the  latter  is  a  kind  of  chorea  of  the  muscles  of  utterance,  and 
breathing  is  usually  at  fault.  It  is  especially  liable  to  occur  at 
the  age  when  mechanical  reading  is  taught,  and  the  speech 

*  Jahresbericht  auf  die  Fortschritte  u.  Leistungen  auf  dem  Gebiete  der  Hygiene, 
1898.      Supplement,  p.  42. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  259 

processes  long  circuited  from  ear  and  mouth  to  eye  and  hand. 
It  is  favored  by  shyness  and  fatigue  in  the  child,  and  by  too 
great  urgency  on  the  part  of  the  teacher,  so  that  the  child  ac- 
quires a  speech  consciousness.  Both  are  very  contagious  and 
with  proper  initial  training  could  probably  be  very  greatly  re- 
duced. Hartwell's  valuable  table  ^  shows  that  averaging  the 
six  best  German  studies  of  252,312  children,  in  all  1.12  per 
cent  were  stutterers,  as  against  0.77  per  cent  among  Boston 
children  and  1.57  per  cent  among  Russians.  Next  to  the  age 
of  second  dentition,  the  onset  of  puberty  is  most  susceptible  to 
this  form  of  nervous  disturbance.  He  found  the  largest  per- 
centages in  girls  at  seven,  twelve,  and  sixteen,  and  in  boys  at 
eight,  thirteen,  and  sixteen ;  and  finding  that  these  ages  nearly 
corresponded  with  those  of  the  highest  specific  intensity  of  life 
or  immunity  from  death,  he  concluded  that  the  irritability  of 
the  nervous  system  of  which  stuttering  is  an  expression  was 
bound  up  with  the  nutritive  activity,  which  resisted  lethal  in- 
fluences.   He  advocates  special  breathing  exercises  at  this  age. 

Dr.  Cullack^  thinks  many  of  the  weaknesses  and  other  eye 
troubles  peculiar  to  puberty  really  originate  in  the  sexual  modi- 
fications of  that  period,  especially  in  girls.  Eye  strain  and  re- 
tino-choroiditis,  hemorrhage  of  the  eye,  etc.,  he  describes  as 
due  to  nature's  seeking  an  outlet  at  this  age  which  elsewhere  is 
denied  it  or  is  found  to  be  inadequate.  These  troubles  he  found 
are  often  removed  when  menstruation  is  normally  established. 
Clouston,  too,  holds  several  visual  neuroses  to  be  essentially 
developmental  neuroses. 

The  following  table,  adapted  from  Seggel,^  who  tested  two 
or  three  times  a  year  for  sixteen  years,  is  perhaps  the  best  for 
German  schools,  and  shows  clearly  the  increased  rate  of  myopia 
during  adolescent  years.  Key  on  the  other  hand  found  that 
at  fourteen  and  again  at  seventeen  the  increase  of  myopia  was 
lessened.  Other  tables  have  shown  no  difference,  so  that  on  the 
whole  we  must  infer  that  if  the  influence  of  puberty  on  near- 
sightedness is  not  yet  conclusively  established,  a  rather  steady 
increase  through  the  period  of  sexual  maturation  is  certain. 

'  Rep.  of  Director  of  Physical  Training.     Boston,  1894,  p.  69,  et  seq. 
» The  Eye  at  the  Age  of  Puberty.     Gaillard's  Med.  Jour.,  New  York,  beginning 
June,  1885. 

'  Eulenberg  u.  Bach.  Schulgesundheitslehre,  1900,  p.  669  and  771. 


26o 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


Age. 

Class. 

Per  cent  of  short- 
sighted. 

Per  cent  increase. 

V 

f  ^ 

I 

2.8 

P 

7 

2 

4.6 

1.8 

in  J 

8 

3 

7.8 

3-2 

^ 

9 

4 

11.7 

3-9 

O 

lO 

5 

12. 1 

0.4 

> 

.»! 

6 

15-3 

3-2 

12 

I 

17.0 

1.7 

13 

II 

22.5 

4-5 

•K 

14 

III 

29.7 

7.2 

c  J 

IS 

IV 

36.0 

6.3 

1. 
O 

i6 

V 

41.7 

5-7 

17 

VI 

47-7 

6.0 

l8 

VII 

51-5 

3.8 

J9 

VIII  and  IX 

68.0 

16.5 

(boys  only) 

Key  gives  the  following  statistics  showing  the  age  liability 
of  Swedish  girls  to  greensickness  or  chlorosis : 


Age. 


Per  cent  of  pupils  hav-  (^ 

ing  greensickness ) 

Yearly  increase  in  weight. 


15-4 
7-5 


i8-3 
4.2 


23.8 
S-5 


31-9 

5-S 


13 

39-7 


38.2 
"•5 


33-3 
9.0 


40.2 
66.2 


41.4 
6.6 


40.6 
3-7 


39.6 

2-4 


48.0  63.6 
0.6     ? 


Both  Biinge  and  Marro  found  a  slight  excess  of  iron  in  the 
blood  during  early  pubescent  years,  which  they  conjectured 
was  nature's  way  of  providing  against  the  special  liability  to 
chlorosis  and  to  anemia  at  this  age. 

Among  the  many  miscellaneous  nosological  peculiarities  of 
adolescence  we  may  probably  reckon  increased  liability  to 
typhoid  fever,  Ziemsen's  percentage  being  as  follows :  Be- 
tween the  ages  of  sixteen  and  twenty  may  be  found  19  per  cent 
of  all  cases ;  between  twenty-one  and  thirty,  58  per  cent ;  and 
between  thirty-one  and  forty,  16  per  cent.  In  malaria  several 
writers  have  urged  that  tertian,  quotidian,  and  other  inter- 
mittent, periodic,  and  recurrent  forms  were  more  liable  at  and 
soon  after  puberty. 

Berillon  ^  concludes  that  onychophagia,  or  nail-biting, 
reaches  its  maximum  frequency  at  about  the  age  of  greatest 
danger  of  masturbation. 

Both  Ireland  ^  and  Kind  think  that  if  idiots  can  remain  in 


'  Monograph  on  the  subject,  1894. 

•  Mental  Affections  of  Childhood  and  Youth,  1898,  p.  356 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  26 1 

schools  for  their  benefit  only  four  to  five  years,  they  will  receive 
most  profit  between  the  ages  of  twelve  to  sixteen..  Some 
writers  think  this  age  prone  to  a  type  of  cataleptic  lethargy/ 
to  simulation  of  diseases,  and  to  many  psychic  contagions. 
Partridge  ^  found  that  morbid  blushing  was  prone  to  begin  or 
to  become  greatly  intensified  at  this  age. 

Dermal  eruptions  and  muddy  complexions,  characteristics 
of  several  of  the  many  skin  diseases,  are  now  common, 
especially  with  abnormalities  of  menstruation  during  the  years 
of  its  first  establishment. 

While  the  suicide  curve  rises,  there  is  also  a  new  and  off- 
setting horror  of  death  not  felt  before.  Clouston's  "  barking' 
cough  of  puberty  "  has  been  often  recognized  by  subsequent 
writers.^ 

Troubles  that  seem  minor  now  may  become  grave  later,  and 
it  is  probable  that  this  is  the  sprouting  garden  of  many  more 
chronic  and  hereditary  troubles  that  become  fatal  later  than  is 
recognized ;  so  that  the  germs  of  death  are  now  taking  root  like 
tares  among  the  forces  of  the  budding  vernal  life;  all  this 
makes  adolescence  a  process  of  assay  and  ordeal  for  the  alloy 
of  morbid  predisposition.  Now  the  robust  often  become  deli- 
cate, or  vice  versa. 

Liveing  thinks  megrim  in  girls  has  three  periods  of  onset, 
each  about  equally  liable,  from  seven  to  thirteen,  at  the  dawn 
of  puberty,  and  during  adolescence. 

Warner,  whose  very  suggestive  studies  were  made  with 
singular  disregard  of  age,  with  little  apparent  consideration  of 
the  work  of  other  writers  on  related  lines,  and,  I  think,  with- 
out a  single  indication  that  he  had  considered  any  work  not 
written  in  English,  found  that  of  100,000  London  school  chil- 
dren,* 9)777  had  defects  in  development  of  various  kinds  and 
8,323  were  otherwise  defective  or  sick,  leaving  only  81,900 
without  visible  defect  or  not  reported  dull.  Of  all  10,355 
showed  nerve  signs. 

*  See  a  valuable  characterization  by  Rothmann  and  Nathanson  in  the  Arch.  f. 
Psychiatrie,  1899,  pp.  283-319. 

'Blushing.     Ped.  Sem.,  Apr.,  1897,  vol.  4,  pp.  387-394. 

*  Neurosis  of  Development.     1891,  p.  66. 

*  Report  on  Scientific  Study  of  Mental  and  Physical  Conditions  of  Childhood. 
London,  1895. 


262  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Warner  found  cases  of  developmental  defect  more  frequent 
in  males,  but  under  the  effects  of  their  environment  more  apt 
to  be  harmful  to  girls  than  to  boys.  The  former  were  more 
liable  to  acquire  nerve  disorders,  mental  dulness,  and  low  nu- 
trition. 

Combe  thought  girls  more  prone  to  eye  defects  than  boys 
in  the  proportion  of  twenty-one  to  twenty-seven,  and  about 
seven  per  cent  more  so  in  the  city  than  in  the  country. 

Most  determinations  of  the  time  either  actually  given  or 
needed  for  sleep  at  different  ages  show,  as  we  saw,  a  decline 
near  puberty,  and  most  of  our  returns  show  that  for  a  time 
sleep  was  at  first  restless  and  perturbed  and  afterward  settled 
into  a  state  described  as  better  or  worse,  as  if  there  were  a  new 
adjustment  or  balance  struck  between  the  processes  of  restora- 
tion and  of  expenditure.  The  sexual  organs  now  often  make 
themselves  felt  in  dreams  of  a  new  character,  and  the  advent  of 
this  new  function  is  sometimes  first  announced  in  sleep.  Green- 
wood thinks  the  function  of  dreams  is  to  enlarge  our  imagi- 
native knowledge  of  the  fields  of  life,  and  Manaceine  thinks 
that  where  mental  development  is  not  highly  advanced  dreams 
are  more  likely  to  be  racial  rather  than  personal.  Spitta,  Radi- 
stock,  De  Santis,  and  others  have  suggested  that  some  diseases 
make  their  first  symptomatic  advent  into  consciousness  in  dream 
life,  and  many  have  held  that  some  "  nocturnal  syndrome  "  may 
be  the  bud  of  a  second  personality;  that  dream  life  may  en- 
force or  check  tendencies  in  the  waking  consciousness ;  that 
the  latter  is  often  brightened,  darkened,  predisposed,  or  ren- 
dered averse  to  many  things  by  reason  of  the  psychic  activities 
of  sleep ;  or  that  dreaming  is,  in  Wundt's  phrase,  a  "  normal 
temporary  insanity,"  and  may  even  affect  the  form  of  perma- 
nent insanity  if  the  latter  come  later.  The  spontaneous  dreams 
not  due  to  the  momentum  of  waking  life  are  often  thought  to 
have  more  or  less  value  as  a  revelation  of  individual  character. 

However  all  this  may  be,  I  am  convinced  that  the  dawn  of 
adolescence  is  marked  by  much  emotional  intensification  of 
dream  life,  and  that  at  no  age  is  its  influence  so  important  upon 
the  moods  and  dispositions  of  waking  consciousness.  Som- 
nambulism often  first  appears  at  this  age  and  trancoidal  states 
of  inner  absorption  midway  between  sleeping  and  waking  are 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND 


263 


now  most  frequent.  The  new  emotional  life  seems  if  not  to 
create  and  project,  at  least  to  take  command  of  mental  imagery 
and  association,  and  indeed  this  may  be  a  part  of  nature's 
method  of  making  the  intellectual  sphere  better  fit  that  of  in- 
stincts. In  some  of  our  cases,  dreams  are  so  intense  as  to  be  one 
cause  of  the  chronic  fatigue  and  even  morning  tire  common  in 
the  teens.  Sometimes  young  people  wake  with  the  soul  suffused 
with  a  sense  of  nameless  and  unaccountable  rapture  from  nearly 
or  quite  forgotten  dreams,  or  perhaps  with  a  new  and  strong 
predisposition  toward  some  person  of  the  other  sex  unattractive 
before,  which  lingers  hours  and  perhaps  days  before  it  fades. 
These  presentiments  and  previsions  of  love,  which  often  first 
arise  spontaneously  and  naturally  in  sleep,  seem  to  illustrate  the 
old  trope  that  the  stars  of  other  and  larger  systems  come  out 
best  when  the  sun  of  our  own  personal  consciousness  has  set. 
Indeed  in  the  reverie  and  day  dreaming  common  at  this  stage, 
when  the  soul  transcends  its  individual  limitations  and  ex- 
patiates over  the  whole  field  of  humanity,  past,  present, 
or  future,  it  is  perhaps  quite  as  near  the  world  of  our  habitual, 
but  generally  unremembered  dreams,  as  it  is  to  the  waking 
world  of  memory.  In  the  new  horizon  now  opening  to  the 
mind,  unconscious  cerebration  generally  has  a  larger  role  and 
for  a  time  is  more  uncontrolled  by  the  consciousness,  over  into 
which  it  shades  by  imperceptible  gradations.  Many  psychic 
processes  are  so  absorbing  as  to  be  almost  a  narcosis  akin  to  the 
dreamy  states  that  Crichton-Browne  characterizes,  so  that  if 
at  first  the  soul  falls  to  sleep  with  a  great  drop  from  waking 
life,  the  two  states  are  later  brought  into  manifold  rapport  and 
perhaps  linked  into  unity. 

Warner  thinks  the  hours  of  work  and  sleep  should  be  as 
follows : 


Age. 

Hours  of  work  per  week. 

Hours  of  sleep  per  night. 

Between 

8-9 

15 

12 

8-10 

20 

llVz 

lO-II 

25 

II 

11-12 

30 

10% 

12-14 

35 

10 

14-15 

40 

9)4 

15-17 

45 

9 

17-19 

50 

8K 

264  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Our  returns  show  great  reason  for  believing  that  near  the 
dawn  of  sexual  life  there  is  not  only  a  new  balance  struck  be- 
tween the  processes  of  repair  and  anabolism  and  those  of  kata- 
bolic  expenditure  of  energy,  but  that  there  is  a  marked  tendency 
to  irregularities  in  sleep.  Sometimes  a  sense  of  fatigue,  lassi- 
tude, and  sleepiness,  rarely  narcoleptic,  may  supervene,  and  the 
time  of  actual  sleep  for  days,  weeks,  or  greater  periods  be  pro- 
longed, but  wakeful  tendencies  and  special  aversions  to  re- 
tire and  to  sleep  follow  and  alternate.  Some  rebel  at  this  period 
against  the  necessity  of  losing  so  much  time  from  the  life  of 
active  consciousness,  dread  night,  and  rejoice  every  morning  on 
waking  up  that  they  have  a  long  day  before  sleep  is  again  im- 
perative. There  are  almost  always  spells  of  sitting  up  late  and 
sometimes,  though  far  more  rarely,  of  preposterously  early 
rising  to  utilize  the  maximum  of  time.  Normal  adolescent 
boys  especially  wish  to  explore  night  out-of-doors,  to  rove  about 
perhaps  with  adventurous  or  romantic  thoughts,  and  on  moon- 
light nights  particularly  there  is  a  pathos  about  the  necessity  of 
rest.  A  part  of  this  suggests  an  atavistic  recrudescence  of  what 
may  have  been  in  primitive  man  the  need  of  watchfulness,  the 
custom  of  predatory  adventures  or  amatory  excursions  of  an- 
cient courtships  by  night,  still  reverberating  in  the  attenuated 
form  of  periods  of  nocturnal  restlessness.  The  child's  fever 
of  early  candle-light  is  metamorphosed  by  puberty  into  the 
youth's  impulse  to  use  darkness  as  a  motive  of  abandon  and 
license,  as  if  the  responsibilities  of  the  day  could  be  dispensed 
with  by  night  in  roving  nocturns  of  riotous  freedom  analogous 
to  the  start  on  falling  to  sleep,  due  to  the  sudden  removal  of  the 
habitual  cerebral  repression  upon  the  lower  spinal  and  midbrain 
centers.  This  passion  to  occasionally  be  out  or  to  work  late 
nights  shades  down  the  psycho-physical  scale  into  increased 
dream  activity  and  power  to  work  evenings.  The  wonted 
irregularity  of  the  diurnal  rhythm,  no  matter  how  well  estab- 
lished before,  is  now  like  every  other  function  for  a  time  dis- 
turbed.^ 

Passing  now  to  the  mental  and  nervous  troubles,  the  pro- 
found effect  of  adolescence  in  producing  disturbances  of  the 

'  See   Reactions  to  Light  and   Darkness,  by  G.  S.  Hall  and  T.  Smith.     Am. 
lour,  of  Psy.,  Jan.  1903,  pp.  21-83. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  265 

nervous  system  and  of  the  mind  is  recognized  in  many  a  custom 
and  belief  of  savages,  and  has  been  recorded  through  the  entire 
history  of  medicine.  Hippocrates  describes  a  girl  who  at  the 
dawn  of  pubescence  saw  a  vision,  leaped  and  tried  to  throw  her- 
self into  a  well  and  then  to  hang  herself,  deeming  death  more 
desirable  than  life.  Such  cases  in  his  day  dedicated  fine  articles 
of  cloth  to  the  goddess  Diana,  usually  on  the  advice  of  sooth- 
sayers. The  Arab  physicians  noted  the  predisposition  of  pu- 
bescents  to  fall  into  religious  melancholy.  The  Middle  Ages 
abounded  in  ecstatics  and  convulsionaircs,  which  religious 
leaders  honored  and  knew  well  how  to  utilize,  so  great  was  the 
popular  superstition  and  reverence  for  them.  In  the  great  de- 
lusions which  Hecker,  McKay,  and  others  have  described,  in  the 
children's  crusade  in  witchcraft,  stigmatization,  animal  mag- 
netism, the  dancing  and  sweating  manias,  trance,  lycanthropy, 
demonology,  and  especially  in  revivals  and  other  great  re- 
ligious movements,  and  in  the  general  conceptions  of  insanity 
down  into  the  present  century,  we  detect  disposition,  humors, 
enthusiasm,  and  fanaticism,  St.  Medardisms,  frenzies,  and 
calentures,  and  sometimes  somatic  symptoms  which  were  clearly 
marked  with  pubic  and  adolescent  features,  without  the  need  of 
assuming  that  the  world  w^as  in  a  more  juvenile  stage  than 
now.  It  was,  however,  reserved  for  recent  decennia  to  make 
these  phenomena  objects  of  scientific  investigation,  and  al- 
though great  progress  has  been  made  there  are  still  many  obser- 
vations that  will  grow  clear  only  with  advancing  knowledge  of 
the  more  nearly  normal  metamorphoses  of  this  stage  of  life.  It 
is  striking  to  note  the  cases  where  the  predispositions  peculiar 
to  this  age  exist  in  greatly  magnified  form.  Many  of  the 
most  successful  malingerers,  simulators,  and  even  dissimula- 
tors, that  often  defy  both  judicial  and  medical  experts;  the 
most  preposterous  impostors  famous  in  history,  from  Alex- 
ander of  Abonuteichos  ^  to  modern  spirit  mediums;  the  great 
seeresses  from  Joan  of  Arc  to  Katherine  Emreich,  who  was 
spontaneously  marked  with  the  sacred  stigmata  of  the  cross, 
if  we  may  accept  the  medical  opinion  on  which  Gabriel  Max 
based  his  idealization  of  her  in  a  painting  as  the  "  ecstatic 
virgin  ";  telepathic  girls,  like  the  Creery  sisters,  who  for  years 
misled  the  best  members  of  the  English  Society  of  Psychic 
>  Zeller.     Vortr.  u.  Abh.  II.,  pp.  154-188, 


266  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Research;  the  most  dithyrambic  of  the  boy  preachers;  the 
visionaries  who  communicate  most  famiharly  with  the  other 
world  and  its  denizens;  patients  that  puzzle  the  doctors  with 
weird  new  symptoms  and  often  victimize  them,  as  the  recent 
history  of  hypnotism  and  hystero-epilepsy  illustrates  in  an 
anthology  of  striking  cases — all  these  have  been  adolescents 
in  whom  the  tendencies  and  characteristics  normal  to  this 
age  are  here  seen  only  in  persistent  or  exaggerated  forms. ^ 

Rich  as  is  the  story  of  many  of  the  early  religious  sects  and 
of  the  great  delusions  and  superstitions  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
fascinating  as  are  several  periods  and  departments  of  the  history 
of  medicine  as  told  in  Sprengel's  monumental  volumes,  and 
copious  as  are  the  illustrations  of  these  phenomena  in  a  great 
science  yet  to  be  developed  which  I  may  call  the  pathology  of 
religion,  the  careful  and  fruitful  study  of  ephebic  psychosis  is 
of  recent  date. 

Psychoses  and  neuroses  abound  in  early  adolescent  years 
more  than  at  any  other  period  of  life.  This  causes  great  emo- 
tional strain,  which  some  have  described  as  a  kind  of  repressed 
insanity  that  is  nevertheless  normal  at  this  period.  To  keep 
down  morbid  impulses  is  often  a  very  difficult  matter  in  this  age 
of  stress.  There  is  an  intense  antagonism  betw^n  egoistic 
and  racial  motives.  One  writer  -  would  almost  have  us  believe 
that  the  relative  reduction  of  the  individual  involves  a  latentiz- 
ing  of  energy  which  builds  up  the  great  organs  involved  in 
reproduction  w^hich  are  not  now  used  but  only  prepared  for  the 
future.  This  expenditure  of  energy  is  not  immediate,  but  the 
race  ought  to  carry  the  day  and  accumulate  energy  not  imme- 
diately spent.  On  this  view  pubescence  to-day  probably  in- 
volves great  waste  of  energy  that  should  be  stored  up  into 
active  channels,  and  hence  a  tendency  toward  slow  progressive 
race  failure.  This  is  also  the  most  plastic  period  of  life  as  seen 
in  the  very  wide  differentiation  of  size,  brightness,  dulness,  etc. 
Thus  in  a  sense  the  child  is  not  completely  born  until  he  has 

*  Sorcellerie,  Magnetisme,  etc.,  par  Paul  Regnard.  Paris,  1887.  Das  Wahn- 
sinn  in  den  vier  letzen  Jahrhunderten.  Tr.  from  Calmeil  by  Dr.  R.  Leusbuscher. 
Halle,  1898.  See  also  Gurney's  Phantasms  of  the  Living.  Early  Proceedings  of 
the  English  Psychic  Research  Society.  Lourdes,  Anon.  Paris,  1894.  Delbriick: 
Pathologische  Luge  und  Schwindler.   1891.   Hecker:  Epidemicsof  the  Middle  Ages. 

*  W.  S.  Christopher :  Adolescence  from  the  Physical  Standpoint.  Trans,  of 
-the  111.  Soc.  for  Child  Study.     July,  1902,  p.  196  et  seq. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  267 

achieved  this  great  revolution  and  estabhshed  a  law  of  division 
between  stored  and  used  energy. 

In  1838  Esquirol  and  Morel  discussed  whether  the  weak- 
mindedness  that  sometimes  supervenes  in  youth  was  acquired 
or  constitutional;  this  condition  Pinel  had  noticed  in  1809. 
Schneider,  in  his  voluminous  discussion  of  the  neuralgias  of 
puberty  in  1842,  declared  that  the  involutions  which  belong  to 
old  age  might  occur  earlier,  but  in  a  long  article  of  Hecker's  ^ 
in  187 1,  on  the  basis  of  fourteen  cases  in  his  own  asylum  at 
Gorlitz,  we  have  the  first  description  of  a  mental  disease  pecul- 
iar to  adolescence,  for  which  he  proposed  the  name  hebe- 
phrenia, or  the  insanity  of  puberty.  He  assumed  that  in  a 
disease  so  mild,  relatively  few  cases  needed  asylum  treatment, 
and  those  few  are  seen  there  only  in  the  later  stages.  As  the 
symptoms  are  so  protean,  it  was  not  strange  that  its  features 
were  not  very  exactly  defined  or  that  its  existence  as  a  morbid 
entity  especially  in  other  lands  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most 
questionable  products  of  the  German  school  of  clinicians. 
Hecker  conceived  it  as  a  psychic  crippling  that  tended  strongly 
to  eventuate  in  some  degree  of  imbecility,  but  in  other  respects 
he  found  it  hard  to  distinguish  between  what  was  general  in  its 
nosology  and  what  was  due  to  individual  difference  of  char- 
acter. Moreover,  the  symptoms  are  not  stationary,  but  all 
rapidly  progressive  toward  either  recovery,  or,  more  commonly, 
to  psychic  decay.  He  sought  to  connect  its  abnormal  manifes- 
tations with  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  the  Flcgcl  or  Liimmel- 
jahre  of  boys  and  the  Backfisch  age  of  girls  with  its  fanaticism, 
romanticizing,  overtension,  and  superlativeness.  At  first  there 
was  crass  rawness,  angularity  of  thought  and  movement  and  a 
dissociation  that  threatened  the  integrity  of  the  ego,  and  later, 
at  the  age  of  eighteen  or  nineteen,  came  a  tendency  to  collect 
and  concentrate.  The  strife  of  opposite  moods  leads  to  dys- 
thymia  or  else  to  a  passion  for  simulation,  which  is  the  easiest 
form  of  the  coexistence  of  two  dififerent  states. 

In  another  epoch-making  work,  which  has  ever  since  and 
especially  in  the*  last  few  years  been  much  discussed  by  German 
clinicians,  Kahlbaum  ^  described  a  symptom  group  which  he 

*Virchow's  Archiv,  vol.  53,  p.  394. 

*  Klin,  Abhand.     Ueber  psych. — Krankh.     Heft  I.     Berlin,  1874. 


268  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

named  catatonia,  or  the  insanity  of  tension,  and  illustrated  its 
various  phases  by  twenty-six  cases.  He  distinguished  it  from 
atonic  melancholy,  some  phases  of  which  resemble  it,  in  that  the 
depressive  is  prone  to  be  followed  by  an  excited  stage,  and  there 
is  danger  of  terminal  psychic  impairment.  Sometimes  thought 
stagnates,  or  there  is  a  rapid  flux  of  ideas,  incessant  repetitions, 
use  of  diminutives,  patheticism,  a  strained  intellectual  effort, 
religious  exaltation,  etc.  He  thought  it  related  to  the  preach- 
ing mania  found  among  the  convulsionaircs  described  by  Cul- 
meil,Leubuscher,and  Jessen,and  found  it  most  common  among 
the  children  of  teachers,  and  often  associated  with  sexual  abnor- 
malities; he  also  thought  that  it  was  most  frequent  from  the 
dawn  of  puberty  to  early  middle  life,  and  that  heredity  was  a 
less  dominant  influence  in  its  causation  than  in  most  other  forms 
of  psycho-neural  disease.  The  characteristic  features  of  pro- 
nounced cases  are  an  immobility  that  resists  efforts  to  produce 
passive  movements  and  the  state  of  waxy  flexibility  character- 
istic of  catalepsy.  In  this  state,  repetition  of  movements,  or 
in  the  acute  form,  of  words  often  occurs,  and  monotony  or 
motor  inhibition  is  very  typical. 

For  years,  while  alienists  often  referred  to  the  subject,  little 
additions  were  made  to  the  knowledge  of  these  psychoses.  In 
1880  Fick  ^  urged  that  hebephrenia  is  a  disease  of  degener- 
ation and  that  all  affected  by  it  are  more  or  less  idiotic.  It 
may  be  latent  during  infancy  and  crop  out  only  when  more 
activity  is  demanded.  The  process  of  renewal  of  the  ego  that 
then  takes  place  is  the  first  serious  strain  to  which  the  psycho- 
physical organism  is  subjected.  It  differs  from  other  mental 
diseases,  all  of  which  may  occur  at  this  age,  in  being  an  arrest 
of  development  caused  by  a  degenerative  basis,  and  we  may 
conclude  that  wherever  there  is  hereditary  mental  defect,  hebe- 
phrenia is  the  most  common  of  all  psychic  diseases.  Save  in 
the  absence  of  characteristic  cramp  it  differs  little  from  cata- 
tonia and  verbigeration.  Favorite  special  phrases,  obstinate 
silence,  peculiar  attitude,  refusal  of  food  are  common  to  both ; 
but  the  latter  is  often  curable,  the  former  is  almost  hope- 
less. 

'  Beitrage  ziir  Kentniss  des  Jugendirreseins.     Allg.  Zeits.  f.  Psychiatric,  l88cn 
p.  490-520. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  269 

During  the  tumult  of  the  first  stages  of  puberty,  which  often 
threatens  decomposition  of  the  personahty,  and  before  the  new 
orientation,  the  psycho-physic  organism  is  pecuharly  sensitive. 
The  critical  faculties  are  often  hardly  able  to  supply  reductives 
of  extravagant  impulses  or  of  visions,  etc.  Ideas  flow  rapidly 
but  are  very  superficial,  and  so  great  is  the  vulnerability,  that 
outside  influences  which  would  be  ordinarily  healthful,  may 
break  up  the  slow  progress  toward  reorganization  and  leave 
their  mark  in  exaggerated  religiosity,  or  paranoeic  symptoms 
and  perversions  of  many  kinds.  Especially  in  natures  of  mor- 
bid heredity,  the  soul  seems  to  lapse  to  a  lower  plane  and  ordi- 
nary prudence  and  judgment  are  superseded.  Clouston  said 
that  if  fifty  such  individuals  were  on  a  savage  island,  they 
would  not  sow  or  reap  and  would  die  of  hunger. 

Seppelli  ^  found  that  out  of  6,000  insane  only  400  cases,  or 
less  than  seven  per. cent,  became  so  between  twelve  and  twenty- 
two  years  of  age.  For  these  he  laid  great  stress  upon  heredity, 
particularly  from  the  mother,  and  also  upon  precocious  mental 
work  and  emotional  strain.  He  also  found  that  melancholia 
was  rarer  than  mania,  but  that  such  cases  frequently  took  on  a 
circular  and  periodic  character,  and  easily  passed  to  stupor  or 
even  dementia.  There  were  frequent  signs  of  degeneration, 
perversions  of  the  ethical  sentiments,  some  cases  of  hysterical 
and  moral  insanity,  but  none  of  Kahlbaum's  hebephrenia. 

Hammond  ^  thought  puberty  a  more  efficient  cause  of  in- 
sanity in  girls  than  in  boys.  While  the  latter  have  no  sudden 
physical  sign  like  menstruation  to  mark  the  advent  of  puberty, 
he  judged  that  delayed  spontaneous  emissions  in  rare  cases 
may  be  like  a  delayed  first*  period  in  girls,  a  cause  of  mental 
alienation.  He  opined  "  reasoning  mania  "  to  be  most  com- 
mon in  boys  of  this  age.  The  subject  is  ready  with  specious 
excuses  for  bad  conduct.  He  runs  away,  is  spied  on,  thinks 
every  woman  is  in  love  with  him.  Emminghaus  ^  held  that 
hereditary  forms  of  insanity  most  frequently  develop  between 
beginning  puberty  and  the  twentieth  year;  he  said  that  girls 


'  Delia  psicosi  della  puberta.     Atti  del  V.  Congresso  della  Soc.  Fren.  1886,  p. 
321. 

•Treatise  on  Insanity,  p.  II2  et  seq. 
•Psycho-pathology,  p.  321,  also  p.  307. 


270  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

inherit  it  most  often,  and  that  while  they  are  most  commonly 
affected  by  the  insanity  of  the  mother,  they  are  more  intensely 
influenced  by  it  in  the  father  than  are  boys.  In  girls  he  thinks 
melancholy  more  common  and  that  it  easily  develops  under 
proper  conditions  into  acute  nostalgia,  and  religious  and  moral 
perversity.  Maudsley  ^  described  as  a  common  trait  of  this 
period  the  craving  of  something  objective  to  attach  to,  which 
inclines  the  mind  to  idealize  unfit  persons,  or  even  to  create 
imaginary  ones.  Girls  are  most  prone  to  it  because  the  affective 
overtops  the  intellectual  life.  Sex  organs  are  larger  and  more 
dominant,  and  woman's  range  of  activity  is  more  limited,  society 
insists  on  more  conventionalities  and  restrictions,  and  their 
periodicity  constantly  obtrudes  this  part  of  their  natures. 
Pertness,  self-conceit,  and  caprice  are  largely  automatic,  so 
that  they  are  only  "involuntary  wilful."  Dr.  Campbell  Clark^ 
agrees  with  Trousseau  that  chlorosis  is  a  nervous  disease, 
originating  at  puberty,  that  anemia  and  menstrual  irregular- 
ities are  sequential  to  it,  and  that  it  colors  nearly  all  the  in- 
sanities of  early  womanhood,  and  distinctly  diminishes  sexual 
feeling.  Regis  and  Berkhan  thought  pubertal  insanity  more 
often  depressive  than  maniacal,  and  Levinstein  thinks  pu- 
berty a  frequent  cause  of  melancholy  in  females,  and  that  at 
this  period  and  in  senescence  the  latter  sex  predominates, 
while  in  advanced  age  both  are  equally  liable.  Blanford  and 
Clouston  held  mania  far  more  common  at  puberty  than 
melancholy. 

Out  of  1, 800  insane,  Clouston^  found  230  between  four- 
teen and  twenty-five  years  of  age;  49  between  eighteen  and 
twenty;  157  between  twenty-one  and  twenty-five  years  of  age. 
Fink*  reported  that  of  1,892  inmates  of  the  Wurzburg  Hos- 
pital 228  were  under  twenty-nine,  12.5  per  cent  males  and  11.5 
per  cent  females.  Cullerre  ^  found  in  France  that  4.7  per  cent 
of  all  were  between  fourteen  and  twenty,  and  8.8  per  cent  be- 
tween twenty  and  twenty-five.  Hagen's  ^  figures  on  the  age 
of  the  first  attack  of  insanity  were  as  follows : 

*  Pathology  of  Mind,  p.  449. 

'Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1888,  p.  385. 

'Alienist  and  Neurologist,  1892.     Quoted  from  Wille,  pp.  403-405. 

*Beitrage  zur  Kentniss  des  Jugendirreseins,  Bd.  2. 

'  Traits  pratique,  Paris,  1890.  *  Psych'iat  Untersuchungen,  1876. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND 


1/' 


Inmates. 

16  Males. 

II  Females. 

Total,  27. 

To   15 

25 

7 

32 

16-20 

79 

90 

169 

21-25 

115 

100 

215 

26-30 

126 

105 

271 

31-35 

114 

106 

270 

36-40 

132 

64 

196 

All  of  these  tables  show  a  marked  increase  during  puberty. 
The  danger  is  always  more  grave  if  the  accented  physical  symp- 
toms are  severe,  as  bodily  weakness,  palpitation,  headache, 
chorea,  irregular  menstruation.  Females  are  on  the  whole 
more  disposed  than  men  because  the  changes  are  greater  and 
because  nutritive  complications  like  anemia  and  chorea  are 
more  common.  The  great  effect  of  heredity  is  shown  by 
Hagen,  who  estimates  that  of  cases  inheriting  mental  abnor- 
malities forty-two  per  cent  of  all  first  occur  between  sixteen 
and  twenty.  Savage  holds  that  while  psychoses  are  readily 
transmitted,  if  those  who  inherit  them  reach  puberty  safely 
they  are  more  likely  to  recover  than  those  attacked  for  the  first 
time  at  this  age  without  heredity.  Too  strict  or  too  negligent 
education  before  the  age  of  personal  responsibility,  overwork 
with  the  brain,  which  tends  to  overlabile  equilibrium,  are  as  bad 
for  the  cultivated  as  abnormalities  of  nutrition  are  for  the 
lower  classes,  and  are  also  prominent  causes.  The  state  of 
overirritability  of  brain  often  produced  by  high  pressure  can 
weaken  all  bodily  functions  and  arrest  growth.  Matusch  * 
holds  that  grave  symptoms  at  puberty  portend  serious  and  per- 
haps similar  complications  at  senescence.  Regis  thinks  that 
puberty  is  less  dangerous  in  girls,  because  when  once  regularly 
established  menstruation  has  a  curative  effect  that  makes  dis- 
tinctly for  sanity.  Circular  and  periodic  psychoses  usually  be- 
gin in  these  years,  and  Wille  thinks  seventy  per  cent  and 
Clouston,  sixty-six  per  cent  recover.  Brosius  urges  that  these 
pubertal  abnormalities  may  mark  a  fortunate  episode  during 
which  earlier  hindrances  to  psychic  development  may  be 
obviated.  Changes  may  be  advantageous  and  permanent. 
Many  of  these  psychoses  are  very  fugitive  and  the  recupera- 
tive power  is  greater  than  in  later  life. 

» All.  Zeit.  f.  Psych.     Bd,  46. 


I']! 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


A  good  estimate  of  age  liability  was  lately  compiled  on  a 
basis  of  1 16  men  and  107  women  as  follows :  ^ 


31 

1 

28 

37 

26 
—125 

36 

35 

[23 

33 
30 
19 

[18 

18  „ 

M 

142 

13  s 

^^ 

12  5 

11°- 

10 

10 

h 

6 

7 
6 

r 

4 

4 

_. 

1           111 

r^                  "n  n  n 

1 
0 

■"""T-L, 

Age  12  15  18  21  24  27  30  33  30  39  42  45  48 

13  15  18  21  24  27  30  33  30  39  42 

Men 

Women 

Schiile,^  on  the  other  hand,  not  only  doubts  the  existence  of 
this  disease,  but  still  more  that  of  a  katatonic  motility  neurosis 
and  would  preserve  the  adjective  form  of  the  word  as  a  col- 
lective or  heuristic  term  for  many  kinds  of  symptoms  of  motor 
stimulus  and  inhibition.  It  also  lacks  a  psychic  character  of  its 
own  such  as,  e.  g.,  epilepsy,  hysteria,  etc.,  have,  from  which 
other  troubles  can  be  clearly  distinguished. 

Marro  ^  tabulated  the  age  of  the  first  appearance  of  in- 
sanity in  1,649  males  and  1,257  females  in  the  asylum  at  Turin 
during  the  decennium  i886-'95,  and  presents  his  results  in  the 
table  on  p.  273,  in  which,  however,  he  included  idiots  and  cre- 
tins, and  all  forms  of  arrested  or  perverted  development.  The 
age  of  most  rapid  increase  is  from  about  sixteen  to  twenty,  and 
at  twenty-five  the  age  of  greatest  liability  is  already  passed. 

Some  special  forms  of  insanity  are  particularly  prominent 
at  this  age.  The  epileptic  neurosis  tends  to  discharges  of  ex- 
plosive or  fulminating  violence,  which  by  undue  forcing  of 

'  Gustav  Aschaffenburg :  Die  Katatoniefrage.  Allg.  Zeits.  f.  Psychiatric,  1897, 
p.  102 1. 

*  Zur  Katatonie-Frage.  Ibid,  pp.  512-552.  See  also  Nolan,  who  accepts 
Aschaffenburg.     Jour,  of  Mental  Science,  Oct.,  1892,  p.  531. 

'  La  Puberta,  p.  233. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND 


5^73 


tiascent  nerve  tracts  do  great  damage  to  unstable  nerve  sys- 
tems. In  its  grave  forms  it  is  a  kind  of  universal  spasm  and 
much  depends  on  the  momentum  of  the  discharge,  whether  it 
originates  in  the  higher  areas  and  begins  with  loss  of  conscious- 
ness, or  whether  it  begins  in  more  basal  and  reflex  centers  and 
spreads  upward  to  these  later.  There  are,  therefore,  as  many 
epilepsies  as  there  are  seats  of  the  difficulty,  and  in  its  milder 
forms  it  shades  down  to  a  yawn,  hiccough,  sneeze,  momentary 
shudder,  a  faint  lapse  of  consciousness  seen  in  petit  mal,  etc.  In 
the  preparoxysmal  stage  there  are  various  symptoms — gloom, 


restlessness,  dread,  confusion,  delusion,  and  just  before  the  fit 
comes  various  aurae  or  warnings,  the  nature  of  which  is  of  great 
significance.  There  may  be  flashes  of  light,  subjective  sensa- 
tions of  touch,  taste,  smell,  or  hearing,  or  of  organic  life.  After 
the  convulsion  there  is  a  stage  of  exhaustion  and  confusion, 
and  hysterical  symptoms  are  often  complicated  throughout.  In 
the  epileptic  state  instincts,  impulses,  or  automatic  acts,  often 
complicated,  may  appear  without  full  consciousness  in  sub- 
sequent memory,  and  this  makes  the  medico-legal  relationships 
of  the  disease  difficult.  Scientifically,  epilepsy  is  one  of  the 
most  interesting  and  instructive  of  diseases,  still  more  so  as  it 
is  easy  to  feign. ^ 

Of  fifty-eight  cases  of  epilepsy  observed  by  Sieveking,^ 
forty  were  first  developed  before  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  he 

^  For  a  good  characterization  of  this  state,  see  Bevan  Lewis's  Text-Book  of 
Mental  Diseases,  p.  221. 

'On  Epilepsy,  etc.     London,  1858,  p.  gt. 
19 


274 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


says  that  it  appears  that  "  the  greatest  prodivity  to  epi4epsy  is 
to  be  found  in  the  period  of  puberty,  a  fact  upon  which  there  is 
scarcely  any  difference  of  opinion  among  writers,"  although 
the  age  of  greatest  mortality  from  this  cause  comes  a  little 
later.  Reynolds,^  from  his  own  and  other  cases,  concluded 
that  "  the  period  of  first  arriving  at  puberty  is  in  regard  to 
age  the  most  powerful  predisposing  condition  to  epilepsy  " ; 
that  the  proclivity  of  females  before  ten  was  slightly  greater 
than  males ;  that  from  ten  to  twenty  there  was  little  difference ; 
that  after  twenty-one  nearly  four  times  as  many  males  as 
females  were  attacked ;  and  that  although  no  age  is  exempt, 
the  probability  of  becoming  epileptic  is  less  each  decennial  after 
twenty.  J.  Langdon-Down  -  quotes  approvingly  West's  con- 
clusion, that  "  it  is  usually  with  development  of  the  sexual  sys- 
tem that  hysteria  shows  itself,"  and  Trowbridge  ^  thinks  it 
often  closely  associated  with  chorea. 

Of  1,288  cases  collected  by  nine  French  authorities,  486 
begin  between  the  tenth  and  twentieth  years.  Gowers's  1,450 
cases  were  distributed  as  follows:'* 


Under  lo 422 

10-20 665 

20-29 224 


30-39 87 

40-49 31 

(21  cases  later.) 


Between  ten  and  twenty  nearly  one-half  of  the  total  num- 
ber of  cases  or  46  per  cent  occurred.  More  specifically  these 
cases  when  tabulated  for  each  year  show  that  those  appearing 
the  first  year  are  5^  per  cent  of  the  whole,  that  the  number  falls 
at  three,  and  reaches  a  minimum  at  five.  "  From  this  there  is  a 
considerable  rise  at  seven,  the  commencement  of  the  second 
dentition,  then  a  fall  at  eight,  and  from  this  a  maximum  is 
reached  at  fifteen  and  sixteen,  at  each  of  which  84  cases  or  5f 
per  cent  of  the  total  number  occur.  From  this  period  we  have 
a  rapid  fall  to  twenty-one,  when  only  22  per  cent  of  the  whole 
occurred,"  and  from  here  on  there  is  a  general  decline.  The 
maximum  number  for  males  is  at  thirteen,  and  for  females  at 
sixteen.     In  the  second  decade  the  females  are  18  per  cent  and 

*  Epilepsy:  its  Symptoms,  Treatment,  etc.     London,  l86i,  p.  126  et  seq. 
'On  some  of  the  Mental  Affections  of  Childhood  and  Youth.      London,  1887. 
'  Relations  between  Chorea  and  Epilepsy,  Alienist  and  Neurologist,  Jan.,  1892, 

P-45- 

*A.  M.  Hamilton.     Pepper's  System  of  Medicine,  p.  470. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  275 

in  the  third  12  per  cent  in  excess  of  the  males.  The  maximum 
of  hereditary  cases  occurred  one  year  earher  than  that  for  non- 
hereditary  cases.  The  percentage  of  hereditary  cases  distinctly 
declines  with  age.  The  hysteroid  or  coordinated  form  of  the 
convulsions  is  greater  at  every  age  for  females.  With  them 
this  form  reaches  its  maximum  in  the  second  decade  and  after 
adolescence  it  is  about  twice  as  frequent.  Cases  traceable  to 
exciting  causes  are  most  frequent  in  males  after  ten,  and  of 
these  causes  fright,  excitement,  and  anxiety  are  most  common 
and  mostly  occur  early  in  life,  while  the  prospect  of  cure  is  some- 
what better  in  cases  that  commence  under  ten  than  in  those  that 
commence  between  ten  and  twenty.  Those  beginning  under 
twenty  are  considerably  less  curable  than  those  beginning 
later.^ 

Donath  ^  seeks  to  establish  an  epileptic  impulse  to  wander 
off,  posiomania,  and  some  of  his  most  interesting  cases  were 
adolescents.  A  fourteen-year-old  boy  started  off,  in  an  epi- 
leptic state,  seven  times  in  three  years  to  make  long  journeys, 
while  a  less  impulsive  girl  of  nineteen  took  money  and  made 
other  preparations  for  such  trips.  Hypnosis  recalled  the 
normal  consciousness.  Denomme  ^  has  given  the  literature 
of  such  cases. 

Bruns  holds  that  while  in  young  children  hysteria  is  about 
as  frequent  among  boys  as  girls,  that  "  the  nearer  puberty  ap- 
proaches the  more  girls  preponderate."  ^  The  childish  form 
of  hysteria  is  most  common  between  seven  and  fourteen.  That 
it  is  not  a  disease  of  overculture,  he  thinks  proved  because  the 
most  severe  cases  are  found  in  country  children.  This  has 
especially  been  the  case  in  the  epileptoid  and  also  in  the  conta- 
gious forms.  In  its  causation,  most  writers,  and  especially 
those  of  the  Charcot  school,  have  perhaps  assigned  too  pre- 
dominant a  role  to  heredity  both  for  its  direct  and  homolo- 
gous forms.     However,  as  Clouston  thinks,  much  depends  on 

'  Gower's  Epilepsy,  pp.  13,  15,  244. 

*  Der  epileptische  Wandertrieb.     Arch.  f.  Psychiatric,  1899. 

'  Des  impulsions  morbides  a  la  deambulation  au  point  de  vue  m^dico-ldgal. 
Lyon,  1893. 

*Die  Hysteria  im  Kindesalter.  Samml.  zwangloser  Abh.  der  Nerven  und  Geis- 
teskrankheiten.      1897,  vol.,  p.  26. 


276 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


whether  we  "  go  on  Charcot's  lines  and  look  out  for  local 
anesthesias  and  irregular  motor  symptoms  chiefly,  or  take  in 
perverted  conduct  and  character  or  diminished  control,"  ab- 
normal feelings,  etc.  At  or  soon  after  puberty  its  character 
becomes  more  distinguishable  for  chorea,  its  provocations 
change  in  both  kind  and  degree,  and  hypnotism  is  less  helpful. 

The  literature  and  history  on  early  symptoms  of  hysteria 
is  well  digested  up  to  1880  by  Smidt  ^  and  Emminghaus  ^ 
emphasizes  its  slight  and  transient  forms  and  its  relations  to 
epilepsy  and  catalepsy,  chorea,  etc.  Moreau,^  on  the  other 
hand,  ascribes  little  influence  to  first  menstruation,  while  Klein 
out  of  fifty-eight  hysterical  children,  found  all  between  ten 
and  fifteen. 

The  age  distribution  of  first  attacks  of  hysteria  by  the  two 
best  French  authorities  is  as  follows : 


Landouzy. 

Briquet. 

Under  lo 

4 

66 

10-15 

48 

98 

15-20 

105 

140 

20-25 

80 

71 

25-30 

40 

24 

30-35 

38 

9 

35-40 

15 

9 

In  a  recent  study  of  the  dreams  of  hysterics  and  epileptics, 
De  Santis  found  that  those  of  the  former  were  most  frequently 
of  pain,  next  of  fear,  and  were  less  often  erotic.  Dreams  of 
large  animals  predominate,  while  in  alcoholism  those  of  tiny  ani- 
mals or  microzooscopic  dreams  were  most  frequent.  With  his 
epileptics,  who  are  mostly  men,  the  dreams  are  usually  brief  and 
simple  as  opposed  to  the  complex  and  romantic  cliaracter  of 
those  of  the  hysterical  patients.  At  bottom  both  are  regarded 
as  determined  by  sex,  which  often  rises  to  great  prominence  in 
dream  life  at  puberty. 

Janet  finds  a  peculiar  cerebral  exhaustion  frequent  at 
puberty,  which  he  describes  as  "  a  special  moral  weakness  con- 
sisting in  the  lack  of  power  on  the  part  of  the  feeble  subject  to 
gather  and  condense  his  psychological  phenomena  and  assimi- 

*Arch.  f.  Kindeskrankheiten.     N.  S.     Vol.  15,  p.  i  et  seq. 

'Die  Psychischen  Storungen  des  Kindesalters.      1887,  p.  2^6  et  seq. 

•  Das  Irrsinn  im  Kindesalter.      1889,  p.  291. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  277 

late  them  to  his  personahty."  He  summarizes  his  views  as  fol- 
lows :  "  There  is,  above  all,  an  age  which  in  this  respect  is  par- 
ticularly critical — the  age  of  puberty.  We  speak  here  not  of 
physical  puberty,  which  has,  however,  a  great  influence,  but  of  a 
state  which  comes  a  little  later  and  which  might  justly  be  called 
moral  puberty.  It  is  an  age  slightly  variable  according  to 
countries  and  surroundings,  when  all  the  greatest  problems  of 
life  present  themselves  simultaneously;  the  choice  of  a  career 
and  the  anxiety  about  making  a  living;  all  the  problems  of 
love,  and  for  some  the  religious  problems.  These  are  preoc- 
cupations which  invade  the  mind  of  young  people  and  com- 
pletely absorb  their  feeble  power  of  thought.  These  thousand 
influences  manifest  a  psychological  insufficiency  which  remains 
latent  during  the  less  difficult  periods.  In  a  mind  predisposed 
by  hereditary  influences,  this  psychological  insufficiency  de- 
velops, takes  a  special  form,  and  presently  manifests  itself  by 
an  ensemble  of  symptoms  which  we  call  hysteria."  ^  Although 
the  primitive  meaning  of  the  word  hysteria  has  much  changed, 
he  would  preserve  the  word,  because  "  it  has  so  great  and  so 
beautiful  a  history."  He  conceives  it  as  mental  diseases  of 
brain  fag  characterized  by  reduced  nutrition  and  various  moral 
symptoms,  especially  weakened  synthesis,  a  contracted  field  of 
consciousness,  and  a  tendency  to  complete  and  permanent  divi- 
sion of  personality.  This  weakened  synthesis  favors  the  devel- 
opment of  parasitic  ideas  which  manifest  themselves  in  many 
forms,  sometimes  apparently  only  physical. 

Janet  finds  that  obsessions  and  psychasthenias  manifest 
themselves  most  frequently  between  sixteen  and  twenty,  al- 
though his  predecessors  in  these  statistics  found  that  the  years 
from  eleven  to  fifteen  were  most  liable.  All  authors  admit  the 
enormous  influence  of  puberty  upon  all  troubles  of  this  class. 
Du  Saulle  held  that  those  who  were  hereditarily  predisposed 
could  not  go  through  puberty  without  grave  dangers.  Falret 
held  that  very  frequently  something  like  a  bifurcation  then  took 
place,  some  suffering  arrest  and  tending  toward  debility,  and 
another  class  toward  reasoning  manias  and  phobias.  Baillarger 
declared  that  doubting  mania  almost  always  made  its  debut 
at  the  epoch  of  puberty.  Janet  adds  that  the  development  of  the 
monthly  periods  with  the  female  is  often  marked  by  phobias 

*The  Mental  State  of  Hystericals,  by  Pierre  Janet.     N.  Y.,  1901,  p.  526. 


278  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

and  obsessions.^  Many  young  people  at  this  age  lose  courage, 
live  as  if  a  veil  were  spread  over  their  entire  personality,  grow 
indifferent,  apathetic,  easily  fatigued,  and  agitated.  Some  of 
Janet's  cases  show  very  clearly  the  dangers  either  of  precocity  or 
of  unwonted  delay  of  puberty.  In  the  former  case  there  is 
sometimes  terror  at  the  new  physical  developments  peculiar  to 
this  age,  attempts  to  obliterate  every  trace  of  them  and  aversion 
to  every  thought  of  marriage,  while  in  cases  of  abnormal  retar- 
dation, agitation  and  anxiety  predominate. 

Sexual  psychoses  are  plainly  coming  to  play  a  greatly  in- 
creased role  in  the  psychology  of  the  present  and  the  future. 
They  imply  unique  coordination  between  the  cerebrospinal  and 
the  sympathetic  system,  and  involve  both  in  all  their  interre- 
lations as  do  no  other  phenomena,  are  especially  prominent  in 
the  sexual  epochs  of  adolescence,  marriage,  menopause,  etc., 
and  are  rejustifying  the  lately  suspected  appropriateness  of  the 
etymology  of  the  term  hysteria.  The  work  of  Gattel,  Mobius, 
Breuer,  Freud,  Scott,  Ellis,  Moll,  Geddes,  and  many  others  show 
the  wide  irradiation  of  this  function  into  normal  and  abnormal 
psychic  life.  Although  we  can  not  agree  with  Mobius  that  all 
hysteria  is  of  ideational  origin,  much  of  it  doubtless  is,  and 
much  depends  upon  the  balance  between  overexcitation  and 
repression  of  sexual  functions.  Far  more  than  has  hitherto 
been  suspected  depends  upon  the  maintenance  of  normal  tension 
in  this  sphere,  and  nothing  is  so  vicarious,  protean,  and  poly- 
morphic in  its  expressions.  Psychic  lesions  here  readily  be- 
come physical  lesions,  and  vice  versa.  Mental  pain  becomes 
acute  and  local  neuralgia,  moral  disgust  becomes  nausea,  anx- 
iety becomes  contraction  or  cramp  if  shunted  downward,  and  so 
through  a  long  list  of  psycho-physic  kinetic  equivalents  which 
with  all  their  wealth  of  symbolism  is  yet  to  be  fully  worked  out. 
Such  metamorphoses  constitute  the  mystery  of  the  domestic  de- 
mon of  hysteria,  and  account  for  many  adolescent  symptoms. 

Strong  and  sudden  impressions  amounting  to  psychic  lesions 
or  traumata,  especially  in  women,  particularly  in  this  instable 
period,  and  above  all  in  the  sex  sphere,  are  thus  liable  to 
entail  long,  very  complex,  and  obscure  results.  Prompt,  normal, 

*  Les  Obsessions  et  la  Psychasthenic,  par  P.  Janet.     Vol.  i,  p.  613.     See  also 
Vol.  2,  by  F.  Raymond  and  P.  Janet,  Paris,  1903,  pp.  s^,  253,  370,  470. 


DISEASES   OF  BODY  AND   MIND  279 

and  adequate  reactions  to  such  experiences  there  is  now  great 
reason  to  beheve  are  often  necessary  to  prevent  such  morbid 
transformation.  Excessive  stimuH  must  be  reacted  on  and 
their  effects  must  stream  out  in  some  normal  channel,  or  else 
they  will  become  seated  and  act  as  a  foreign  body  with  long 
persistence  and  transference,  and  gradually  ,  when  perhaps 
lapsed  almost  beyond  the  reach  of  recall,  accrete  into  a  sub- 
conscious, nascent,  alien  kind  of  personality,  subcharged  it 
may  be  with  emotional  and  motor  intensity.  At  this  stage 
they  may  break  out  in  many  kinds  of  anomalous  discharges 
of  accumulated  morbidities  of  a  hysteroid  or  epileptoid  nat- 
ure, while  the  ideational  factors  are  more  or  less  hidden  from 
consciousness  and  beyond  volitional  control.  Excessive  re- 
pression may  arouse  a  "  Ccgcwzville  "  when  control  is  fatigued, 
so  that  the  patient  does  impulsively  or  imperatively  the  exact 
opposite  of  what  is  willed. 

It  is  upon  this  general  conception  that  an  interesting  theory 
and  cure  has  been  developed.^  Hysterical  patients  are  ques- 
tioned as  to  the  original  cause  of  their  troubles,  and  where  it 
is  more  or  less  forgotten,  light  hypnosis  is  evoked  till  they  can 
live  over  again  and  with  the  greatest  detail  and  emotional  in- 
tensity all  the  circumstances  of  the  inception  of  their  troubles, 
and  state  it  or  act  it  out  with  dramatic  fervor.  This  "  talking 
cure  "  opens  a  normal  outlet  of  a  confessional  sort,  although 
with  no  priestly  absolution,  and  in  many  cases  completely  re- 
stores from  hysteria,  even  though  it  be  pronounced  and  has  en- 
dured for  years.  The  nature  of  these  psychic  causes  (and  in  all 
but  one  of  the  cases  reported  it  is  a  sexual  shock)  is  such  as  to 
preclude  reaction  or  confessing,  and  abnormal  susceptibility, 
and  perhaps  fright,  causes  a  changed  consciousness  with  a 
highly  affective  content.  Suppression  makes  it  more  deeply 
seated,  involves  perhaps  temporary  local  paralysis,  convulsions, 
or  anesthesia  in  some  other  sphere,  while  the  new  symptoms  and 
lapse  of  time  before  the  new  effects  dissociate  them  from  this 
cause,  make  them  perhaps  migratorv  disturbances  appearing  in 
different  spheres  successively,  or  else  they  accrete  into  sensor- 
motor  groups  and  unfold  as  another  submerged  consciousness. 
In  order  to  pluck  out  these  raised  sorrows  it  is  necessary  on  this 
theory  to  reproduce  their  status  nasccndi  with  hallucinating 
*  Studien  ueber  Hysteric.     Dr.  I.  Breuer  und  S.  Freud.     Wien,  1895. 


28o  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

clearness  and  vividness,  and  to  give  vent  and  outlet  through 
speech  and  natural  gesture,  inducing  trancoidal  states  if  ques- 
tionings fail,  for  language  may  be*an  adequate  reflex.  Expres- 
sion  relieves  the  tension  and  reestablishes  poise  and  peace. 

Whether  as  a  therapeutic  theory  this  be  more  or  less  partial, 
it  is  highly  suggestive  of  the  need  at  adolescence,  when  all  the 
adjustments  between  sex  and  mentation  are  mobilized,  of  shelter 
from  all  forms  of  shock  that  are  so  liable  and  may  be  so  dis' 
astrous,  and  of  the  need  of  wise  mentors  and  advisers  whose 
character  invites  the  fullest  confidence  to  forefend  the  dangers 
of  a  too  cryptogamic  development  that  in  our  civilization  are  so 
many  and  great.  What  part  of  the  intensity  of  pubescent 
years,  of  its  occasional  proneness  to  confessionism  and  secrecies, 
of  its  frequent  eccentricities  and  anomalous  acts,  is  nature's  ef- 
fort to  relieve  strains  of  this  sort,  and  how  many  of  its  reticences 
aggregate  the  evils  of  excessive  repression,  we  do  not  know, 
but  there  is  great  reason  to  look  to  sex  for  the  key  to  far  more 
of  phenomena  of  both  body  and  soul  at  this  as  at  other  periods 
of  life,  than  we  had  hitherto  dreamed  of  in  our  philosophy. 

Sidis,  White,  and  Parker  have  described  some  exquisite 
symptoms  which  are  most  frequent  at  this  age,  the  importance 
of  which,  unlike  Janet,  they  do  not  adequately  appreciate. 
Some  of  Sidis's  work,  nevertheless,  is  suggestive  and  important 
here.  Especially  is  this  true  of  the  great  stress  he  lays  upon 
"  reassociation  or  synthesis  and  dissociated  symptoms  or  groups 
in  the  active,  personal  consciousness,"  and  this  synthesis  which 
he  is  able  to  effect  by  hypnosis  is  therapeutic.  He  also  rightly 
claims  that  functional  psychoses  and  insanities,  especially  where 
disaggregation  has  not  gone  too  far,  should  be  more  carefully 
studied    by   psychopathologists.      He    imagines    dissociations 

somehow   correlated   with 
disaggregation  of  the  neu- 
ron system  in  a  way  hardly 
consistent   with   the   very 
timely       precautions       of 
J.  V.  Kries,^  concerning  inferences  either  way  between  psychic 
processes   and   neural   structure   or   function.     Pedagogically 
helpful,  nevertheless,  is  his  diagram  illustrating  the  new  rela- 

^  Ueber  die  materiellen  Grundlagen  der  Bewusstseinserscheinungen.     Tubin- 
gen, 1901,  p.  54. 


fir^zi 

a     a                      a    a 

i      \i 

U   [ill      1 7 

1 

[  h    Ar 

DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  28 1 

tions  between  consciousness  and  the  various  subconscious  strata, 
which  are  so  pecuharly  haMe  to  occur  at  this  age. 

Here  the  waves  on  the  upper  Hne  a  a  may  stand  for  the 
usual  stream  of  consciousness.  The  waves  b  b  illustrate  erup- 
tion into  the  first  lower,  and  the  waves  c  c  into  the  second  lower 
stratum.  Thus  a  b  c  b  a  would  represent  a  psychopathic  cycle. 
The  second,  third,  and  fourth  horizontal  lines  would  represent 
various  thresholds.  If  the  b  waves  were  omitted  and  the  third 
stratum  reached  by  leaping  the  second,  we  should  have  the 
germs  of  a  dual  personality.  This,  as  Sidis  adds,  is  analogous 
to  what  we  find  in  biology,  where  a  species  is  developed  by 
eliminating  intermediary  variations  and  the  survival  of  the 
last  link  of  the  series  after  the  missing  ones  are  gone.  The 
above  figure  is  reproduced  here,  however,  chiefly  to  illustrate 
something  quite  different,  viz.,  the  tendency  at  adolescence  to 
what  may  be  called  transliminal  modes  of  psychic  action.  The 
horizontal  lines,  representing  thresholds,  might  be  multiplied, 
we  know  not  how  far,  and  new  thought  plexuses,  which  run 
up  and  down  what  was  before  a  pretty  well  fixed  series  of  limi- 
tations, may  even  become  habitual,  upper  levels  being  sub- 
merged and  lower  ones  denuded,  so  that  psychic  adolescence 
might  be  conceived  as  the  indefinite  distortion  of  these  line 
levels  and  the  gradual  establishment  of  very  different  ones,  so 
that  what  were  at  first  waves  illustrating  dips  deep  down  into 
unconsciousness  become  shorter  waves  of  the  a  a  form.^ 

Down  "  says  "  as  puberty  approaches  attacks  of  mental 
aberration  assume  a  special  character ;  there  is  frequently  un- 
natural introspection  and  a  critical  hyperconscientiousness  be- 
comes prominent."  He  describes  five  good  and  studious 
children  who  from  eleven  to  thirteen  became  moody ;  had  con- 
scientious scruples  as  to  their  motives;  could  never  make 
positive  statements ;  grew  anxious  lest  they  might  not  have  con- 
veyed the  precise  idea  intended ;  became  confused  or  anxious 
about  moral  standards,  and  detailed  things  in  a  non-sequential 
way.  One  boy  was  troubled  when  he  saw  a  dirty  beggar,  man  or 
boy,  lest  he  should  contaminate  his  mother  by  thinking  of  her 
immediately  afterward.    All  these  mental  disquietudes,  he  says, 

'  Psychopathological  Researches,  by  Boris  Sidis.     1902.      Chapter  IV.     The 
Psychogenetic  Law. 

^  Mental  Affections  of  Childhood  and  Youth.     London,  1887,  p.  93  et  seq. 


282  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

are  increased  if  there  is  any  sexual  deviation.  Destructive  ener- 
gies are  vented ;  there  is  a  passion  for  creating  astonishment 
and  consternation  by  mischief,  great  cleverness  in  concealing 
delinquencies  by  lies,  no  natural  affection  and  no  conscience; 
yet  even  these  cases  after  the  wrench  of  these  years  of  transition 
is  passed  often  settle  down  to  respectable  and  tolerably  useful 
lives.  Some  are  "  idiot  savants  "  and  draw,  paint,  reckon,  re- 
member preternaturally  well,  but  they  may  also  have  a  passion 
for  theft  or  setting  fires,  are  cruel  and  have  various  malforma- 
tions. Most  standard  writers  like  Ireland,  Seguin,  Warner, 
Voisin,  Sollier,  Henderson,  and  many  others,  who  treat  of  men- 
tal defects  in  the  young  ignore  puberty. 

Arno  Fuchs  ^  well  urges  that  our  conceptions  of  mentally 
and  morally  defective  youth  are  obscured  and  confused  be- 
cause writers  have  so  generally  failed  to  distinguish  between 
the  pre-  and  the  post-pubertal  age.  He  says  that  while  the 
stadium  of  puberty  is  revolutionary  for  the  normal  persons,  it  is 
still  more  so  for  defectives.  "  Idiots  animalize,  imbeciles  be- 
come violent,  egoistic,  coarse,  and  vulgar,  and  the  weak-minded 
grow  unsettled  in  their  moral  feelings  and  are  without  resist- 
ance to  sensations  that  now  erupt  within  them."  Abnormal 
children  often  sink  in  the  new  sphere  of  sexual  feeling  or,  if  not 
this,  emerge  from  the  pubertal  storms  that  rage  through  their 
inner  being  with  profoundly  changed  characters.  Thus  descrip- 
tions and  treatment,  valid  on  one  side  of  this  line,  are  invalid  on 
the  other  side  of  it,  and  this  painstaking,  judicious,  and  unusu- 
ally competent  writer  expressly  limits  himself  to  the  earlier 
period  and  insists  that  both  his  admirable  descriptions  of  indi- 
vidual cases  and  his  methods  of  treatment  have  no  application 
to  the  pubertal  and  subsequent  stage  of  development.  In  this 
he  sets  a  most  suggestive  example  for  pedagogues,  as  well  as 
for  experts  in  this  field,  who  should  learn  to  profit  by  it. 

When  in  1828  Kaspar  Hauser  mysteriously  appeared  at  the 
Nuremberg  gate,  a  well  formed  and  featured  defective  in  the 
teens,  it  was  a  challenge  to  German  savants  to  explain 
him.  He  was  no  idiot  with  phenomenal  memory,  no  prodigy 
in  arithmetic  or  music,  no  homo  sapiens  ferns,  did  not  slaver  or 

*  Schwachsinnige  Kinder.     GUtersloh,  1899,  p.  298. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  283 

ruminate,  was  fairly  well  nourished,  had  no  eclampsic  symp- 
toms or  stigmata  of  degeneration,  was  not  ineducable  or 
irresponsible,  and  it  was  easy  to  interpret  his  few  words  and 
acts  as  expressions  of  peculiar  sagacity.  The  interest  he  excited 
was  profound  and  wide-spread  and  he  was  studied  as  no  other 
representative  of  his  class  has  ever  been.^  That  he  was  ex- 
tremely conscious  of  the  interest  he  excited  and  of  the  many 
interpretations  put  upon  his  acts  and  traits  as  an  animal  boy  or 
a  disguised  prince,  a  truant  schoolboy,  the  victim  of  "  a  crime 
against  a  human  soul,"  as  his  chief  defender  designated  his 
wrongs,  that  he  was  vain,  egotistic,  a  subtle  and  oft-confessed 
liar  with  a  passion  for  deception,  makes  him,  whatever  else  he 
was,  a  very  unique  adolescent  defective.  Many  children, 
thought  normal  before,  are  first  found  wanting  at  this  age. 
They  are  neither  silly  nor  half-witted,  but  can  no  longer  fully 
profit  by  school.  Their  minds  develop  irregularities,  their 
educability  ceases;  perhaps  they  need  to  be  sifted  out  of  school 
for  both  its  good  and  for  their  own ;  they  begin  to  suffer  in  dis- 
position from  being  teased  by  those  more  intelligent  than  them- 
selves, and  become  dead  weights  in  their  classes  because  their 
brief  period  of  docility  is  ended.  Some,  as  Langdon  Down 
says,  "  may  by  careful  management  be  tided  over  the  climacteric 
period  of  puberty  and  then  all  may  go  well." 

Masselon  -  emphasizes  the  incapacity  to  systematize  ideas 
and  the  effacement  of  images.  The  three  chief  traits  of  ado- 
lescent mental  enfeeblement,  according  to  this  writer,  are  the  re- 
tardation of  psychic  processes,  the  progressive  effacement  of 
memory,  and  the  weakening  of  the  power  of  mental  synthesis. 
Aboulia,  he  describes,  as  due  to  weakening  of  desires.  Nega- 
tivism often  alternates  with  docility.  The  twelve  cases  that  he 
fully  describes  well  illustrate  the  fundamental  nature  of  the 
above  characterization.  Sollier^  bases  his  classification  of  idiots 
and  imbeciles  on  the  degree  of  attention  and  deems  its  impor- 

^  For  the  fullest  summary  of  this  case  and  the  voluminous  literature  upon  it, 
see  A.  V.  d.  Linde :  Kaspar  Hauser;  Eine  neugeschichtliche  Legende.  Wies- 
baden, 1887,  2  vols. ;  and  the  True  Story  of  Kaspar  Hauser,  by  the  Duchess  of 
Cleveland.  London,  1893;  also,  The  Story  of  K.  H.,  by  E.  E.  Evans.  London, 
1892. 

'  Psychologic  des  dements  precoces.     (Th^se  de  Paris.)     Paris,  1903. 

'  Psychologic  de  I'ldiot  et  de  I'lmbecile.     Paris,  1901. 


284  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

tance  cardinal.  Its  preoccupation  and  instability  is  inversely  as 
educability  and  disciplinability. 

Many  crimes  and  immoralities  of  early  adolescence  are  from 
a  blind  impulse  on  which  consciousness  does  not  act  at  all. 
In  the  psychic  evolution  of  the  sexual  impulse  there  is  often  at 
first  a  period  of  general  perturbation  before  the  brain  reacts 
on  the  sex  organs.  In  idiots  and  in  cases  of  retarded  develop- 
ment this  stage  may  be  distinct  and  prolonged.  Itard  watched 
with  the  greatest  interest  for  the  first  manifestation  of  this  in- 
stinct in  the  young  savage  of  Aveyron  ^  whom  his  studies  have 
made  so  famous  among  feral  men.  Congenitally  good- 
natured,  he  developed  periods  of  turbulence,  agitation,  and 
almost  desperation,  when  he  would  break  out  in  tempests  of 
rage,  scream,  bite,  scratch,  bleed  at  the  nose  and  ears,  and  could 
be  only  slowly  and  with  great  difficulty  tranquilized.  At  times 
he  showed  preference  for  the  female  sex  and  would  sit  beside 
some  one  and  take  her  hand,  but  as  his  general  excitement  grew 
he  would  move  away  to  another.  Other  idiots  at  this  period 
stroke  or  lick  the  hair,  embrace  the  head  and  take  out  hairpins ; 
one  held  a  girl  down  in  a  frenzy  of  erotic  excitement  but  at- 
tempted nothing  more,  being  ignorant  of  the  ways  and  means 
of  satisfaction.  Beginning  with  fifteen  there  is  a  marked  in- 
crease in  the  number  of  congenital  idiots  who  are  sent  to  asy- 
lums owing  to  the  increase  of  general  perturbations  which  be- 
come dangerous  at  this  age.  This  diffused  excitement  is  often 
attended  by  orgasms  but  with  no  knowledge  of  sex.  There 
is  activity  and  general  disturbance  reacting  into  depression.  I 
have  myself  received  written  accounts  of  four  weak-minded 
boys  between  eighteen  and  twenty-one  described  as  nearly  nor- 
mal but  with  entire  failure  of  development  in  the  sexual  organs. 
In  two  of  these  cases  spells  of  great  excitability  and  of  apathy 
were  described  as  having  developed  since  the  normal  age  of 
puberty.  This  stage  may,  as  Marro  suggests,  correspond  to 
that  of  prepuberty. 

Many  psychiatric  studies  have  seemed  to  establish  a  "  neu- 
rosis of  anxiety  "  as  a  quite  distinct  symptom  group  of  psychic 
abnormality.  It  has  a  vast  variety  of  expressions  and  is  readily 
associated  with  somatic  disturbances  like  palpitation,  sweating, 
dizziness,  tremors,  congestion,  paresthesias.     The  attacks  of 

'  Itard.     Rapports  et  memoires  sur  le  sauvage  d' Aveyron.     Paris,  1893, 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  285 

anxiety  may  supervene  slowly  or  very  suddenly,  and  may  be 
mild  or  very  acute.  Freud  ^  was  the  first  to  insist  that  all 
forms  of  morbid  anxiety  were  closely  associated  with  the  vita 
sexiialis,  and  always  arose  in  cases  of  retention  of  the  libido. 
This  might  occur  in  adolescents  and  was  common  where  sex- 
uality was  excessively  or  abnormally  frustrated  or  restrained, 
whether  after  or  before  normal  experiences.  Lowenfeld  ^ 
doubted  this  on  the  basis  of  six  cases,  and  Binschwanger  does 
not  ascribe  very  great  prominence  to  sexual  causes.  Gattel,^ 
however,  made  a  very  careful  individual  study  of  one  hundred 
cases  and  concludes  that  anxiety  always  results  from  some  of 
the  many  forms  of  retention,  whether  overrestraint,  abstinence, 
or  imperfect  exercise  of  the  function,  and  that  neurasthenia  on 
the  other  hand  is  always  due  to  the  opposite  cause  of  excess  and 
especially  to  masturbation.  These  troubles  occurred  at  the  age 
of  greatest  reproductive  activity,  and  as  would  be  expected, 
the  anxiety  neurosis  was  relatively  more  common  in  women 
than  in  men.  If  this  be  true,  a  normal  sexuality,  wide  as  are  its 
individual  differences,  is  necessary  to  steady  life  between  these 
two  grave  disturbances,  either  of  which  may  originate  in  the  in- 
dividual without  the  aid  of  hereditary  predisposition,  and  if  the 
sexual  life  is  absolutely  normal  the  physician  must  be  slow  to 
diagnose  a  real  neurosis.  Perhaps  no  recent  studies  suggest  so 
strongly  the  fundamental  importance  for  health  of  all  vital  and 
social  functions  of  normal  sexual  life. 

Magnan's  lowest  group  of  sexual  perverts  he  calls  spinal. 
I  knew  a  young  dement  in  a  Baltimore  hospital,  whose  intelli- 
gence was  almost  entirely  obliterated,  who  grew  more  and  more 
perturbed  through  the  week,  but  was  always  quiet  and  docile 
after  the  Sunday  visit  of  his  wife,  and  whose  whole  condition 
was  determined  by  the  degree  of  sexual  tension,  of  the  nature 
of  which  he  seemed  to  have  lost  all  knowledge.  In  normal 
adolescence,  if  entirely  uninstructed,  the  evolution  of  this  func- 
tion begins  as  something  entirely  new  in  the  experience  of  the 
individual,  but  so  strong  that  it  will  more  or  less  dominate  the 
life.  At  first  it  is  a  widely  irradiated  physiological  increase 
of  activity,  then  come  local  voluptuous  sensations  due  to  spon- 

'  Neurol.  Centralblatt,  1892. 

'Miinchen  med.  Wis.  Abh.,  1895,  No.  13. 

■Die  sexuale  Ursache  der  Neurasthenic  in  den  Neurosen,  1898. 


lB6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

taneous  activity  of  hitherto  unused  organs,  while  it  is  pure  sen- 
suousness  as  a  general  psychic  tonus,  but  as  yet  without  knowl- 
edge. Instinct  has  not  yet  associated  these  gratifications  defi- 
nitely with  the  other  sex.  I  believe  that  it  is  in  this  stage  of 
development  that  sexual  perversions  of  certain  classes  are 
rooted.  Indeed  it  seems  hardly  going  beyond  the  facts  of  sex 
fetishism  now  well  established  by  Moll,  K.  Ebbing,  Tarnowski, 
and  others,  to  draw  the  momentous  inference  that  tJic  sexual 
glow  may  come  to  be  associated  with  almost  any  act  or  object 
zvhatever  and  give  it  an  unique  and  otlwrivise  inexplicable 
prominence  in  the  life  of  the  individual,  and  that  even  the 
Platonic  love  of  the  eternally  good,  beautiful,  and  true  is 
possible  because  of  this  early  stage  of  indetermination  and 
plasticity.  This  hypothesis  I  suggest  as  the  key  to  many  such 
phenomena  to  be  later  described. 

Venturi  ^  described  two  forms  of  pubertal  perversions 
which  he  deems  true  insanity.  The  first  is  cortical  chorea  due 
to  defective  genital  development,  manifested  in  erotic  delirious 
impulsiveness,  fixed  ideas,  melancholia  and  mania,  pyromania, 
neurasthenia,  doubt  and  agaraphobia.  This  he  thought  closely 
related  to  absence  or  undue  delay  of  seminal  discharge,  defect- 
ive ovulation,  and  particularly  to  onanism.  The  second  is 
hebephrenia,  which  occurs  later,  between  eighteen  and  twenty- 
three,  and  reflects  difficult  psychic  evolution  and  irregular 
emancipation  of  social  life  and  is  often  attended  by  katatonic 
symptoms. 

Dr.  Edes  ^  thinks  the  "  New  England  invalid  "  a  some- 
what unique  type  and  that  her  troubles  arise  from  a  relative  im- 
pairment or  non-development  of  the  reproductive  functions  or 
organs.  No  specialist  can  escape  such  a  case,  for  she  has  an 
ailment  for  every  organ.  After  the  surgeon  has  removed  all 
he  can,  she  returns  to  the  general  practitioner,  needing  only  to 
be  "  built  up."  It  is  hard  enough  for  him  to  hear  her  tale  of 
symptoms,  but  for  the  members  of  her  own  household  to  hear 
the  tensions,  borings,  thrillings,  accusations  of  selfishness,  and 
the  more  trying  confessions  of  repentance,  ostentatious  resig- 
nation of  one  doomed  to  be  eternally  misunderstood,  the  craving 
for  sympathy,  etc.,  there  is  no  eScape  or  consolation.     Dr. 

'  Le  degenerazioni  sessuali.     Turin,  1892,  p.  ^20  et  seq. 

»The  New  England  Invalid.     Shattuck  Lecture,  1885,  by  R.  T.  Edes,  M.  D. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  287 

Edes  classifies  one  thousand  of  his  patients  as  follows :  Ma- 
lingerers, exaggerators,  constitutional  neurotics,  hysterically  ex- 
citable, neuromuscular,  confirmed  neurominetics,  tense  neuras- 
thenics, limp  neurasthenics,  melancholies,  and  his  characteriza- 
tion of  each  class  is  of  interest  and  value,  not  merely  as  a 
medical  treatise,  but  as  a  culture  study.  A  large  proportion  of 
these  cases  are  teachers  and  older  pupils;  they  study  not  to 
know  but  to  pass  examinations,  not  because  they  are  interested, 
but  because  others  have  done  so ;  their  aim  is  for  the  glorification 
of  their  sex,  that  they  may  show  that  girls  are  equal  to  boys  and 
see  in  the  curriculum  an  enemy  to  be  put  behind.  Sometimes 
such  patients  seem  to  grow  proud  of  their  own  cases,  and 
love  to  recite  their  symptoms  as  if  to  defy  the  doctor  to  cure 
them,  until  he  may  develop  the  tact  to  make  them  think  that 
their  restoration  would  be  still  more  phenomenal  and  inter- 
esting. 

The  pleasure-pain  threshold  is  easily  upset  and  depression 
or  hilarity  may  be  excessive  and  unbalanced.  While  we  re- 
serve adolescent  suicide  for  more  special  treatment  in  the  next 
chapter,  we  must  not  fail  to  note  here  the  frequency  of  the 
melancholy  that  chiefly  predisposes  to  it.  This  in  general  may 
be  conceived  as  due  to  two  groups  of  causes,  first  trouble,  disease 
from  objective  influences.  Misfortunes  may  follow  so  fast  as  to 
kill  the  joy  of  life  in  the  most  healthful  and  buoyant  tempera- 
ments. The  second  cause  is  hereditary  weakness  or  predispo- 
sition. Where  this  is  not  too  controlling  it  may  appear  in  the 
early  discouragement  that  easily  loses  heart  and  gives  up  the 
battle  of  life  with  very  inadequate  cause,  but  this  may  be  so 
fateful  and  dominant  that  the  love  of  life  succumbs  with  no 
trace  of  objective  motivation.  As  hyperemia  or  melancholy 
is  no  longer  regarded  as  a  morbid  entity  but  a  symptom  with  a 
wide  variety  of  morbid  accompaniments,  that  may  reach  morbid 
intensity,  -Cve  have  no  good  statistical  data  concerning  its  fre- 
quency, and  various  form.s  of  it  are  discussed  in  several  chapters 
of  this  work.  It  must  sufifice  here  to  note  that  in  its  milder 
forms  no  psychic  symptom  is  more  common  at  some  stages  of 
adolescence  and  that  its  liability  is  increased  in  a  marked  degree 
at  the  early  teens,  although  it  reaches  morbid  intensity  more 
often  later  in  life.     In  youth  it  has  certain  marked  features, 


288  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

especially  in  suddenness  and  intensity  of  onset.  Its  impulsive 
and  passionate  forms  predominate,  and  reactions  to  sanity  are 
far  more  probable  with  health  and  heredity  in  favor  of  re- 
covery, and  less  so  if  the  latter  is  the  chief  causative  factor. 
Youth  is  easily  plunged  into  despair,  but  reemerges  with  resili- 
ence if  the  stock  and  blood  are  good.  Degrees  and  symptoms 
that  would  be  grave  in  mature  life  are  not  only  more  easily 
cured,  but,  other  things  being  equal,  are  less  hopeless. 

In  his  careful  study  of  the  subject,  Mairet  ^  argued  that 
lypemaniac  stupidity  in  certain  cases  can  have  absolutely  no 
other  cause  than  puberty,  especially  when  its  onset  is  during 
this  period.  This  malady  is  usually  to  be  found  in  nervous  acci- 
dents and  in  troubles  of  general  nutrition  and  circulation.  Its 
symptoms  are  very  variable,  but  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases 
there  is  maniacal  agitation,  sensory  perversion,  fears,  visual 
hallucinations,  etc.  He  notes  the  frequency  of  cases  where  ex- 
cited and  active  states  suddenly  supervene  after  a  period  of 
stupidity.  The  insanity  of  pubescence  involves  arrest  of  in- 
tellectual development  and  the  maniacal  symptoms  may  be 
either  choreic,  impulsive,  or  hysterical.  The  stupid  form  is 
often  complicated  in  its  prodromal  stage  with  chloro-anemia, 
and  sometimes  connected  with  physical  fatigue,  palpitation,  and 
cerebral  erethism,  anomalies  of  character,  alternations  of  ex- 
citement and  depression.  Its  debut  is  sometimes  sudden, 
febrile,  and  delusional,  and  then  a  stage  of  stupor  often  follows 
in  which  the  muscles  are  relaxed,  circulation  sluggish,  the  tem- 
perature low,  menstruation  suspended,  and  sensation  dull.  In 
this  state  abrupt  outbreaks  of  perturbation  may  occur  with  great 
incoherence.  The  choreic  form  may  be  simple  or  halluci- 
natory. In  these  cases  the  mania  is  not  subordinated  to  the 
chorea  as  has  been  usually  assumed,  but  rather  both  are 
branches  of  the  same  trunk,  the  former  acting  on  the  mind,  the 
latter  on  the  muscles ;  both  alike  are  caused  by  puberty,  which 
is  at  least  the  chief  pathogenetic  agent  and  which  gives  to  these 
morbid  symptoms  its  own  peculiar  physiognomy.  Its  onset  is 
usually  sudden. 

A  single  case  of  a  young  man  in  some  respects  typical,  and 

1  Folic  de  la  Pubert^.    Am.  Med.  Psych.,  1888,  p.  337,  368;    1889,  pp.  27,  34, 
309,  353. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND 


289 


for  the  account  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  C.  P.  Bancroft, 
of  the  New  Hampshire  Asylum,  must  here  suffice  to  ilkistrate 


the  resiHency  of  youth  against  heavy  odds.     The  melancholy 
began  shortly  before  he  was  twenty,  and  eighteen  months  prior 
to  commitment.     There  was  an  history  of  insanity  in  both 
20 


^90  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

parental  lines ;  he  had  attempted  suicide  both  with  a  razor  and 
with  Paris  green.  Later  every  possible  suicidal  effort  was 
made — refusing  food,  cutting  his  throat,  dashing  his  head 
against  the  wall,  throwing  himself  down  a  lightshaft — but  all 
without  fatal  effect,  or  even  serious  injury.  Slowly  he  began 
to  respond  to  dietic  and  medical  treatment.  The  recovery 
progressed  rapidly.  The  first  picture  represents  his  state  No- 
vember I,  in  the  height  of  the  attack,  the  second  December 
1 6,  when  improvement  began,  the  third  convalescence,  and 
the  last  January  31,  when  he  was  discharged  recovered. 

Neurasthenia  was  first  characterized  and  named  by  a  bril- 
liant American  physician  who  was  prematurely  cut  off  at  the 
point  of  his  highest  promise.^  European  experts,  who  have 
lately  widely  enlarged  our  knowledge  of  it,  grant  his  priority, 
and  often  speak  of  it  as  especially  an  American  disease. 
Cowles,^  who  has  given  us  several  careful  studies,  describes  it. 
as  morbid  irritability,  depression,  weakness,  introspection,  ap- 
prehension, and  inattention,  in  which  often  the  sense  of  fatigue 
is  itself  fatigued  so  that  the  victims  of  it  constantly  overdo,  be- 
cause this  usual  check  is  gone.  It  is  a  kind  of  pathological 
fatigue  following  civilization  and  the  intense  and  competitive 
life  of  struggle.  It  may  be  due  to  regressive  metabolism 
caused  by  the  accumulation  of  autotoxins  and  ptomaines,  and 
it  is  to  be  treated  by  rest-cures,  heightened  elimination,  and 
abundant  and  nutritive  food.  Kaan  ^  has  shown  how  impera- 
tive ideas  and  anxiety,  a  sense  of  inner  conflict  and  emotional 
perturbation,  may  be  due  to  neurasthenia,  and  that  although 
this  state  has  no  hallucinations  and  may  last  a  lifetime,  it  never 
issues  in  dementia.  It  is  most  often  connected  with  fears  of 
storms,  wat€r,  height,  dread  of  standing,  being  poisoned,  con- 
tact, impotence,  of  doing  improper  things,  especially  of  an  ob- 
scene or  sacrilegious  character,  of  being  laughed  at,  of  blushing, 
etc.  Although  neurasthenia  falls  chiefly  in  a  somewhat  later 
stage  of  life,  not  only  do  its  symptoms  very  commonly  begin 
to  appear  at  puberty,  but  Binswanger.'*  who  has  up  to  date 

^  G.  M.  Beard.     Neurasthenia.     New  York,  1888. 

'  Neurasthenia.     Shattuck  Lecture.     Boston,  1891 ;  and  The  Mental  Symptoms 
of  Fatigue.     N.  Y.  State  Med.  Ass'n,    1893. 
'  Die  neurasthenische  Angst-effect,  1893. 
*  Neurasthenic.      1896,  p.  336. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  29 1 

given  the  fullest  exposition  of  it,  describes  a  special  pubertal 
form,  which  although  not  very  frequent  is  more  prone  to  de- 
generation. He  says  that  neurasthenic  symptoms  occurring  at 
puberty  are  often  strongly  suggestive  of  mental  instability  and 
imperatively  call  for  such  care  as  may  prevent  the  development 
of  actual  insanity.  He  draws  special  attention  to  the  parallel- 
ism between  fatigue  and  the  symptoms  of  neurasthenia,  and 
thinks  that  the  latter  is  overfatigue  due  to  congenital  weakness 
of  nerves,  and  is  peculiarly  liable  to  become  a  settled  diathesis 
during  the  period  of  sex  evolution.  Saville  ^  thinks  that  al- 
though any  age  could  be  affected,  "  young  male  adults  were 
slightly  predisposed." 

Dr.  Scholz  -  characterized  "  pubertal  weak-mindedness  "  as 
real  retrogression  rather  than  as  arrested  development.  The 
latter  he  designated  as  imbecility.  The  former  develops  often 
rather  suddenly,  and  without  acute  symptoms,  in  individuals  of 
previously  fairly  good  health.  It  may  be  attended  by  much 
psychic  irritability  of  expansive  form  resembling  hebephrenia, 
or  it  may  have  a  more  depressive  and  paranoeic  character.  It 
can  proceed  to  any  stage  of  mental  decay  and  may  occur  without 
hereditary  predisposition.  What  cerebral  changes  accompany 
it  is  unknown,  but  puberty  is  the  causal  occasion  or  basis  to 
which  this  psychosis  owes  many  of  its  peculiar  symptoms. 

Again, that  the  insanity  of  doubt,  which  Legrand  du  Saulle,^ 
Kovalevski,^  Cowles,^  and  many  since  have  studied  under 
various  names,  with  its  Griibelsucht,  hyperscrupulosity,  impera- 
tive and  oft-repeated  repetition  of  the  commonest  acts,  miso- 
phobia, oiko-,  claustro-,  agara-,  acu-,  sito-,  and  all  the  score 
of  instinctive  phobias,  etc.,  is  characteristic  of  the  later  stages 
of  adolescence  there  can  be  no  question,  although  age  statis- 
tics have  been  strangely  neglected  by  the  authorities.  Bail- 
larger,^  however,  collected  twenty  interesting  cases  of  one  form 

*  Neurasthenia.     London,  1899,  p.  48. 

*  Ueber    Pubertalsschwachsinn.     Allgemeine    Zeits.   f.   Psy.  u.   Psy.   Gerichtl, 
Med.,  1897.     Hefts  5-6. 

'  La  Folia  du  Doute.     Paris,  1875. 

*  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1887,  p.  209  ;    1888,  p.  524. 

*  Insistent    and    Fixed  Ideas.       Am.    Jour,    of   Psy.,    Feb.    1888,  vol.   I,  pp. 
222-270. 

•Folio  du  doute.     Arch.  Clin,  des  Mai.  Mentales.     Paris,  188 1. 


292  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

of  a  malady  thus  connected  which  is  prone  to  make  its  debut 
at  puberty.  We  can  not  here  consider  ah  disorders.  It  is 
probably  not  too  much  to  say  that  very  nearly  if  not  quite 
every  psychosis  or  neurosis  of  defect  or  excess,  if  not  manifest 
before  puberty,  will  appear  or  at  least  begin  its  incubation  at 
this  time;  these  beginnings  the  statistics  of  insanity  always 
place  too  late  because  the  early  stages  are  not  seen  by  physicians 
and  appear  at  institutions  still  later  during  the  ephebic  period. 
If  they  do  not,  it  can  be  said  that  the  tension  of  this  period  is 
safely  and  healthfully  passed  and  maturity  well  achieved ;  that 
then  there  follows  a  stage  of  relative  immunity  during  which 
much  can  with  impunity  be  both  done  and  endured,  and  which 
only  exceptional  strain,  shock,  organic  lesion,  or  other  external 
non-infectious  cause  or  else  early  senescent  decline,  can  destroy. 

At  variance  with  the  older  view,^  there  is  now  some  indi- 
cation that  general  paralysis  of  the  insane  has  a  distinct  tend- 
ency to  begin  between  the  ages  of  thirteen  and  sixteen,  al- 
though its  curve  rises  higher  at  a  later  age.  Since  the  valuable 
monograph  of  Alzheimer,^  who  collected  forty-one  well-de- 
scribed cases,  Liihrmann,  Infeld,  Hoch,  and  Stewart  ^  have  col- 
lected many  more.  Most  of  these,  of  course,  but  not  all,  are 
asylum  cases.  They  were  not  idiots  or  infantilists,  but  had  de- 
veloped intelligence,  and  retrogressed  toward  dementia  as  the 
disease  progressed.  From  fifteen  to  sixteen  is  the  most  com- 
mon age  of  onset.  This  dreaded  disease  makes  puberty  a 
critical  period,  especially  if  there  is  any  syphilitic  or  luetic  taint. 
The  sexes  seem,  so  far  as  an  opinion  can  be  based  on  the  above 
limited  number  of  cases,  to  be  about  equally  liable — a  fact  which 
differentiates  the  adolescent  form  of  this  disease  in  a  very 
marked  manner  from  the  vast  preponderance  of  cases  among 
males  in  adult  life.  Although  some  ninety  per  cent  of  all  are 
syphilitic,  this  taint  is  nearly  always  inherited  and  not  acquired. 
The  psychic  symptoms  are  progressive  dulness,  apathy,  and 
perhaps  stuporose  states  in  children  who  have  been  normal  or 

*  E.  G.  W.  I.  Mickle:   General  Paralysis  of  the  Insane,  p.  249. 
'Alzheimer:   Die  Fruhform  der  Allg.  Prog.  Paralysis.     Allg.  Zeits.  f.  Psych., 

1895.  P-  583- 

•  See  especially  P.  Stewart :   General  Paralysis  of  the  Insane  during  Adoles. 
cence.     Brains.     Spring  Number,  1898,  p.  39  ff  seq. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  293 

even  supernormal  in  intelligence.  In  adolescents  the  grandiose 
ideas  so  characteristic  of  this  disease  in  adults  are  absent,  and 
delusion  and  hallucination  if  they  exist  at  all  are  mild  and 
"  never  of  the  extravagant  type  met  with  in  adults."  Growth 
and  especially  sexual  devlopment  is  arrested,  and  there  are  con- 
gestive attacks  and  perhaps  the  fibrillary  tremors  of  tongue, 
face,  and  fingers,  with  slovenly,  slurring  articulation,  weakness 
of  limbs,  an  ataxic  or  sometimes  a  spastic  gait.  The  post- 
mortem brain  changes  do  not  differ  from  those  found  in  adults. 
Maudsley's  conception  of  adolescent  insanity  ^  rests  on  the 
general  conception  that  reason  is  an  apparatus  of  restraint, 
superposed  upon  intense  and  brutal  impulses,  and  that  in  char- 
acteristic outbreaks  this  curb  is  broken,  and  all  the  bonds  be- 
tween the  many  wild  factors  of  our  nature  which  constitute  the 
ego  are  also  ruptured,  so  that  all  that  later  ages  of  civilization 
and  even  higher  barbarism  have  superposed  is  gone  and  de- 
humanization  ensues.  All  the  high  social  reflexes  being  lost, 
diffidence  and  reserve  give  place  to  pertness,  self-will,  turbu- 
lence, aimless  iteration,  etc.  This  is  illustrated  by  tickling  and 
by  the  sex  act,  both  of  which  begin  in  volition  and  go  on  to  con- 
vulsion and  orgasm,  as  they  pass  from  cerebral  down  to  spinal 
control.  The  progress  from  capricious  acts  to  catalepsy  is 
analogous.  The  "  jumpers,"  who  when  suddenly  told  to  jump 
or  seize  a  hot  iron  or  a  friend's  throat,  or  do  any  other  absurd 
or  even  criminal  act,  obey  convulsively  and  on  the  instant: 
frights  that  result  in  fascination  and  perhaps  imitation  of  the 
cause,  especially  if  it  is  with  animals,  illustrate  the  same  bou- 
lepsy.  Again,  from  each  act  of  the  body  impressions  are  pour- 
ing in  upon  the  brain,  and  the  muscle  sense  should  give  tone  to 
the  will ;  but  among  the  insane  its  disorder  is  connected  with  the 
sense  of  motor  impotence.  The  abdominal  organs  normally 
contribute  an  euphoria  of  a  peculiar  intensity,  and  no  one  with 
abdominal  disease  can  be  cheerful,  while  those  with  thoracic 
complaints  commonly  are  so.  The  sex  organs,  too,  contribute 
their  own  contingent  to  the  brain  and  to  the  sum  of  somatic 
feelings ;  and  the  latter  respond  to  every  change  of  the  former. 
The  tumultuous  changes  which  occur  in  pubescent  insanity  are 
conditioned  by  changes  either  of  unusual  amount  or  rapidity  in 

•  See  Pathology  of  Mind,  pp.  145  and  387. 


294  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

these  functions,  and  if  the  brain  is  weak  it  can  not  bear  the 
strain  thus  imposed. 

In  the  transition  from  the  grub  to  the  butterfly  state,  the 
female  is  most  Hable  to  become  psychologically  upset,  because 
her  reproductive  organs  and  functions  are  not  only  larger,  but 
the  changes  are  more  rapid.  In  her,  Maudsley  thinks  love  and 
religion  are  most  often  blended.  In  trances,  stupors,  or  contor- 
tions, girl  lunatics  are  most  prone  to  symptoms  of  erotomania, 
or  even  nymphomania.  There  is  almost  sure  to  be  alternation 
from  depression  to  excitement,  and  vice  versa,  in  adolescent  in- 
sanity. Frequent  and  repeated  oscillations,  especially  the  oc- 
currence of  lucid  intervals,  is  a  bad  sign.  Menstruation  pre- 
disposes women  to  this  cyclic  upsetting  of  equilibrium.  If  in- 
stead of  slowly  lapsing  to  dementia,  the  patient  recovers,  she  is 
unconcerned  about  previous  attack,  and  "  the  two  selves,  the 
sane  and  insane,  pursue  their  respective  courses  apart."  In 
depression  there  are  the  usual  fears  of  being  suspected  of  ill- 
doing,  of  being  followed,  watched,  poisoned,  wrongly  dieted, 
slandered,  and  of  being  guilty  of  things  never  done.  Although 
the  symptoms  seem  superficial  and  histrionic,  they  are  as  real 
as  the  limited  strength  of  mind  and  brain  can  make  them,  and 
the  suicidal  impulses  may  be  carried  out.  Feelings  that  are 
not  directed  normally  to  love,  marriage,  and  motherhood  are 
always  liable  to  devastation,  and  timely  and  happy  wedlock 
may  improve  such  cases.  All  adolescent  insanities  imperatively 
require  change  of  surroundings,  and  too  much  sympathy  is 
often  the  very  food  they  feed  and  grow  strong  on.  Here,  too, 
belong  the  religious  fasters,  ecstatics,  feigners  of  strange  dis- 
eases and  interesting  symptoms,  the  diabolically  clever  liars  and 
false  accusers,  mischievous  tricksters,  and  moral  imbeciles  of 
divers  types. 

Wille,^  whose  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  cases  seem  to  bear 
out  his  view,  holds  that  there  is  no  specific  pubertal  insanity,  but 
that  puberty  gives  a  peculiar  character  to  other  psychoses,  all  of 
which  may  occur  at  this  period,  yet,  as  we  should  expect,  with  a 
special  prevalence  of  atypic  and  mixed  forms.  Instead,  there- 
fore, of  regarding  set  symptoms  and  laying  stress  on  the  mode 
of  termination,  he  well  urges  that  psychiatry  should  take  ac- 
count not  only  of  causes,  but  of  characteristic  changes  in  the 
*  Die  Psychosen  der  Pubertatsalters.      Leipzig,  1898,  p   2l8. 


Females. 

Males. 

15 

6 

18 

II 

8 

I 

7 

3 

2 

2 

3 

6 

8 

29 

3 

6 

I 

3 

DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  295 

course  of  diseases,  and  that  this  should  be  true  not  only  of  those 
which  occur  at  puberty  or  the  age  of  sexual  evolution,  which  he 
places  between  fourteen  and  twenty-three,  but  at  the  age  of  in- 
volution or  senescence.  He  classifies  his  cases  (during  the 
preceding  fifteen  years  at  the  asylum  of  Basle)  as  follows : 

Cases. 

'Melancholy 21 

Mania 29 

Simple  Acute  dementia 9 

psycho-       -  Acute  hallucinations  ) 

neuroses.       Insanity ) 

Confusion lo 

^  Paranoea 4 

["Primary  chorea,  dementia 9 

Organic       |  Combined  neuro  and  toxic  psychoses, ..  37 

psychoses.  1  Heredity 9 

^.Hereditary  weakness 4 

135  65  70 

Common  hebephrenic  traits,  Wille  thinks,  are  present  and 
color  all  these  diseases,  which  become  typical  somewhat  ac- 
cording to  the  degree  of  development  toward  adult  life  at 
which  they  occur.  Superficiality,  stupid  jests,  and  jollity  in 
the  midst  of  lamentation  and  world  pain,  the  most  bizarre  turns 
of  thought,  theatrical  reference  to  a  spectator,  fanaticism,  the 
sharpest  contrasts  and  conflicts  of  owlish  wisdom  and  fatuity, 
selfishness  and  altruism,  idle  distraction  and  great  concen- 
trative  energy,  savagery  and  tenderness,  hypersensitiveness  and 
obtuseness,  growth  and  development  concentrated  upon  any 
organ  and  function,  so  that  there  is  hypertrophy  here  and 
atrophy  there,  sex  organs  and  instincts  enormously  and  pre- 
maturely developed  or  arrested,  exotic  virtue  and  brutal  crime, 
exaggerated  selfishness  and  no  less  extreme  generosity  and  self- 
abnegation,  resistance  to  authority  and  exceptional  plasticity, 
fantastic  views  of  life,  abhorrence  of  work  or,  above  all,  of 
regularity  in  occupation,  lunacy  with  misleading  lucid  inter- 
vals, impulsiveness,  scrupulosity  and  reflection  on  trifles  which 
may  be  paranceic — all  these  occur  in  different  cases  and  a  sur- 
prising number  may  follow  each  other  in  one  individual. 
Krafft-Ebing,  who  held  that  great  need  of  activity  and  self- 
confidence  were  often  combined  with  chorea  and  catalepsy,  that 
exaltation  and  a  sense  of  greatness  alternated  with  a  deep  sense 
of  demerit  and  unworthiness ;   Regis,  who  thought  that  pubes- 


296  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

cent  insanity  was  more  often  moral,  showing  itself  in  morbid 
acts  and  impulses  rather  than  in  the  intellectual  sphere ;  Savage, 
who  compared  the  abnormalities  of  this  age  with  those  of  early 
childhood,  although  holding  the  former  to  be  more  pronounced, 
and  thought  dysmenorrhea  never  so  liable  to  produce  intellectual 
weakness ;  Blanford,  who  deemed  that  violence  was  mojre  char- 
acteristic than  illusions,  and  that  irregular  and  uncontrolled 
and  perhaps  choreic  movements  were  rarely  absent;  Trow- 
bridge, who  emphasized  the  distinction  between  simple  psychic 
neuroses  of  short  duration  and  true  psychoses,  and  thought  the 
latter  only  incurable — all  these  and  other  conclusions  may  be 
legitimate  inferences  from  different  groups  of  cases,  but  can  not 
yet  be  final. 

Marro  ^  does  not  accept  a  distinct  pubertal  form  of  insanity. 
He  found  that  at  this  period  the  exigencies  of  growth  had 
greatly  reduced  both  the  albumin  and  the  salts  of  the  blood, 
and  conceives  that  at  this  their  nascent  period  sex  organs  and 
nerve  centers  come  into  the  closet  rapport;  that  the  mind  is 
being  rapidly  developed;  that  sense  is  evolving  into  affection; 
that  the  nervous  hyperesthesia  is  peculiarly  exposed  to  in- 
fluences from  the  gradually  unfolding  sex  functions,  and  that 
very  slight  causes  may  upset  sanity.  In  his  twenty-eight  fully 
described  cases,  fatigue,  a  glass  sliver  in  the  toe,  constipation, 
toothache,  and  failure  to  pass  examinations,  a  mild  flogging, 
etc.,  caused  symptoms  of  the  utmost  variety,  nearly  always 
transitory  although  often  acute,  that  threatened  the  ultimate  in- 
tegrity of  the  whole  psychic  organism.  These  "  phenomena  of 
first  reflexion  "  are  often  forms  of  epilepsy,  and  indeed  the 
period  of  fifteen  to  sixteen  has  few  others.  The  intelligence,  al- 
ways more  or  less  radically  changed,  is  easily  and  permanently 
injured  by  too  intense  and  extreme  perturbations  of  feeling  or 
of  conscience,  but  much  of  this  is  needed  to  deploy  and  stretch 
out  the  soul  to  its  full  dimensions.  In  the  erratic  acts  of  these 
cases,  scratching,  biting,  screaming,  chanting,  butting,  running 
aimlessly  about,  stripping  off  clothing,  eroticism,  spasmodic 
hilarity,  pugnacity,  exhibitionism,  passionate  vagrantism 
and  vagabondage,  solitude  and  soliloquy,  self-torture,  praying, 
shouting,  obscene  and  profane  words,  taciturnity,  anorexia  and 
polyphagia,  filthy  acts,  etc.,  we  seem  to  see  the  vigor  and  variety 

*  La  Puberta,  p.  loi  et  se(j. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  297 

of  the  elements  that  compose  our  nature  and  which  are  normally 
broken  and  harnessed  to  service  of  common  sense,  escaped  from 
control,  and  suggesting  in  an  unmistakable  way  the  subhuman 
origin  of  the  crude  material  of  human  nature.  Many  of  these 
are  given  us  in  great  abundance  at  adolescence,  and  the  problem 
of  moral  and  religious  education  is  whether  we  can  thoroughly 
civilize  these  barbaric  and  bestial  proclivities  and  bring  them 
into  the  harmony  and  unity  of  completed  character. 

Marro  ^  describes  the  morbid  congenital  instability  at  this 
age  as  follows  :  "  When  we  consider  young  people  with  heredi- 
tary taints,  the  picture  may  represent  considerable  variety.  At 
one  time  they  are  torpid,  obtuse,  taciturn,  without  expansion, 
little  given  to  society,  indifferent  to  affection,  but  petulant,  irri- 
tated, the  reaction  has  no  measure,  they  cease  from  their  state 
of  torpor  to  give  way  to  outbursts  of  an  unbounded  violence, 
entirely  disproportioned  to  the  injury  received.  At  other  times 
they  are  unquiet,  turbulent,  without  physical  and  moral  firm- 
ness, always  in  motion  without  determined  aim,  incapable  of 
attention  and  reflection,  dominated  by  instantaneous  impulses 
which  they  do  not  know  how  to  resist,  incapable  of  persevering 
in  any  occupation ;  impelled  by  whims  which  follow  each  other 
without  any  plausible  motive  to  explain  the  first  sympathy  and 
the  following  aversion ;  they  are  always  inclined  to  lamenta- 
tion, tormented  by  a  sense  of  ill-feeling  which  spoils  their  pleas- 
ures and  magnifies  the  difficulties  which  they  are  about  to  face. 
The  instinctive  impulses  and  moral  impressions  find  in  them 
little  or  no  power  of  resistance,  and,  according  to  the  particular 
conditions  of  life  and  special  circumstances,  they  become  so 
many  candidates  for  prison  or  the  insane  asylum." 

In  Marro's  middle  period  of  adolescence,  from  sixteen  to 
twenty,  the  psychic  changes  predominate.  There  is  great  and 
frequent  alternation  of  mood  from  grave  to  gay,  extreme  exag- 
geration, little  power  of  resistance.  In  abnormal  cases  this  is 
the  age  of  gastric  catarrh,  sudden  alterations  of  body  tempera- 
ture, nutritive  disturbances  particularly  favored  by  mastur- 
bation, epigastric  sensations  of  weight,  hardness,  heat,  etc., 
chloroses,  sitophobia,  abnormal  urinal  deposits,  and  perhaps  in- 
flammation in  parts  not  predisposed  to  it,  auditory  and  visual 

'  La  Puberta,  p.  2x8. 


298  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

hallucination,  erotic  and  religious  delusion,  and  a  general  lack 
of  horizon  for  consciousness. 

Marro  examined  1,643  males  and  1,257  females  in  the  luna- 
tic asylum  of  Turin.  Of  those  between  the  ages  of  twelve  and 
fourteen  he  found  only  a  few  cases  of  psychoneuroses,  and  still 
fewer  epileptics.  Between  fourteen  and  seventeen  was  the  age 
of  most  epilepsies,  which  abound  also  during  the  next  few 
years.  From  twenty  to  twenty-three  for  males  and  from 
twenty  to  twenty-two  for  females  was  the  age  of  most  psy- 
choses, and  by  twenty-five  these  had  nearly  ceased.  Boys  were 
more  prone  to  melancholia  and  girls  to  mania,  the  latter  ac- 
quiring less  power  to  check  reflexes.  The  moral  perversions 
of  boys  are  prone  to  take  the  form  of  cruelty  and  crime,  while 
girls  are  more  liable  to  shameless  and  erotic  perversity,  and 
egoism  and  self-satisfaction  is  common  to  both  sexes.  He 
found  direct  morbid  heredity  in  one  hundred  and  forty-five 
cases  between  eleven  and  twenty-five,  ancestral  heredity  in  fifty- 
four  cases,  and  that  paternal  was  to  maternal  heredity  as  eight 
to  five.  The  effects  of  old  age  in  the  father  was  found  in 
forty-one  per  cent  and  in  the  mother  in  twenty  per  cent  of 
the  adolescent  cases.  Heredity  made  itself  felt  more  at  this 
period  than  later,  especially  from  the  father,  and  more  so 
the  earlier  it  appeared.  Of  psychic  causes  he  found  fear  and 
other  affections  and  thwartings  of  the  instincts  of  self- 
preservation,  which  were  relatively  more  prominent  before 
puberty,  to  give  place  to  insults  and  other  injuries  of  self-re- 
spect, religious  feelings,  love,  etc.  Failure  in  examination 
sometimes  reacted  into  almost  maniacal  exaltation  and  de- 
fiance, and  the  alienation  seemed  to  be  a  natural  evolution  aided 
by  no  external  cause. 

He  ^  describes  interesting  typical  cases;  one  of  a  bright 
student  of  sixteen,  whose  character  seemed  to  change  till  he  be- 
came visionary  and  fantastic,  who  wrote  to  the  king  and  queen 
claiming  to  be  their  son,  but  was  at  once  sequestered,  severely 
lectured,  and  recovered.  Another  began  with  an  extravagant 
dream  of  pistons  working  disharmoniously  within  him,  which 
was  continued  for  four  years,  with  illusions  of  dual  personality. 
He  had  an  exaggerated  sense  of  mental  and  physical  ineffi- 
ciency, passed  just  before  intended  marriage  to  aversion  to  his 

^  La  Puberta,  p.  164  et  seq. 


DISEASES   OF  BODY  AND  MIND  299 

bride,  alternating  from  passion  to  repugnance.  Another  slowly 
became  a  stutterer  and  feared  that  every  act  of  his  might  have 
fatal  consequences.  A  girl  had  delirium  of  sin,  tried  to  give 
herself  to  God  so  passionately  that  no  other  could  be  thought  of, 
and  so  intense  was  this  eroticism,  where  religion  took  the  place 
of  sex,  that  gastric  and  respiratory  symptoms  often  supervened 
during  a  long  period  of  abnormal  pubertal  evolution.  Another 
girl  developed  causeless  hatred  for  her  mother,  grew  gushy, 
sentimental,  and  familiar  to  partial  strangers,  was  excitable, 
dirty,  flushed  and  pale  by  turns,  and  became  too  religious.  An- 
other gave  himself  up  to  extreme  self-abuse  on  the  view  that  he 
must  thus  rid  his  system  of  a  poison,  and  often  before  others 
as  a  sign  of  contempt  for  them,  etc. 

Most  of  the  psychoses  of  this  period  appear  as  symptoms  of 
exhaustion,  so  that  prolonged  repose  in  bed  may  do  great  good. 
Moral  and  physical  development  go  hand  in  hand  at  this  age  as 
at  no  other,  and  it  is  very  rare  to  find  anomalies  of  one  without 
those  of  the  other.  Marro  lays  chief  stress  upon  disciplinability 
and  sociability,  and  to  these  adds  the  power  of  continuous  work 
and  the  power  to  pursue  a  predetermined  line  of  conduct. 
These  for  defectives  and  criminals  should  be  chiefly  cultivated. 
The  perfection  of  the  organism  and  the  solidity  of  moral  quali- 
ties can  not  be  divorced.  If  there  is  rapid  growth  in  mind, 
while  the  secondary  sexual  qualities  do  not  develop  in  propor- 
tion, the  critical  period  is  not  yet  passed  and  there  is  danger. 
Prevision  for  self  and  for  others  is  cultivated  by  economy.  He 
commends  Dr.  Wine's  system  of  marks  to  teach  those  exposed 
to  these  dangers  proper  care  of  their  own  natures  and  interests, 
to  say  nothing  of  those  of  others. 

Dr.  Pickett  ^  has  tabulated  cases  of  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
seven  young  men,  obtaining  personal  histories  wherever  this 
was  possible.  He  concludes  that  from  the  standpoint  of  prog- 
nosis the  puberty  modifications  of  insanity  are  first  a  tendency  to 
dementia  as  if  the  potentiality  of  mental  life  were  exhausted. 
Only  one- fourth  of  Pickett's  cases  left  the  hospital  restored,  and 
even  they  remained  more  or  less  psychic  cripples.  His  para- 
noeics  were  a  little  older  than  the  others,  or  as  Bevan  Lewis 
said, "the  delusional  cases  are  older  than  merely  maniacal  ones." 

'  A  Study  of  the  Insanities  of  Adolescence.     Jour,  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Dis- 
wise,  Aug.,  1 90 1. 


300 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 


This  suggests  that  age  braces  the  hysterical  temperament  and 
increases  the  assertiveness  of  the  individual,  "  so  that  one  who 
at  sixteen  sinks  into  catalepsy  under  a  burden  of  imagined 
troubles  would,  if  he  had  escaped  until  he  reached  the  age  of 
thirty,  have  risen  above  his  persecutions  in  the  form  of  egoistic 
delusions,  solely  on  account  of  the  change  in  temperament 

wrought  by  mature 
age."  He  believes 
that  hebephrenia  to- 
day "  includes  those 
cases  of  dementia  prae- 
cox  which  are  not  dis- 
tinctly paranoeic,  and 
not  katatonic;  it  is  a 
group  of  the  unclassi- 
fied members  of  de- 
mentia praecox."  "  To 
omit  all  reference  to 
the  peculiar  types  of 
adolescence  seems  like 
rejecting  our  birth- 
right— an  heritage  of 
the  labors  of  master 
workmen  in  the  field 
of  psychiatry. 

His  age  table  is  as 
shown  in  the  adjoin- 
ing diagram. 

According  to  Se- 
rieux,^  who  traces  its 
history  to  Morel,  the 
various  forms  of  pre- 
cocious dementia  are 
followed  after  variable  time  by  a  special  state  of  psychic  en- 
leeblement.  The  delirious  ideas  are  slowly  attenuated  and  per- 
haps entirely  lost,  so  that  at  its  termination  the  patient  has  very 
little  in  body  and  mind  that  is  not  stereotyped.  He  distin- 
guishes four  distinct  forms:  simple,  delirious,  katatonic  and 
paranoeic — and  three  periods,  that  of  its  debut,  characterized 

'  La  Demence  pr^coce.     Rev.  de  Psychiatric,  June,  1902. 


-1 

! 

28 
27 
26 
25 
24 
23 
22 
21 

i 

1= 

■       ■! 

20 

B    |B 

19 
18 

B    BB 

B    BB 

17  ^ 
16  i 

15^ 

!■.£!■ 

zwHin 

^1 

BBBI 

14  ii 

13  g 
i2| 
11 
10 

9 

8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 
5 

■■ 

BBI 

■■■ 

BBI 

■■■ 

[immmm 

BBI 

rfHai 

BBI 

^■■B 

BB 

..  ■■■■■ 

BB 

^■■■■■1 

BB 

llaBBHI 

BB 

!■■■■■ 

H 

■■■■■■■ 

Afe-e 

■ 

12 

■ 

13 

1 

14 

1 

15 

■ 
■ 

16 

■ 
■ 

17 

1 

18 

1 

19 

■ 

20 

■ 
■ 

21 

■ 

22  23  24  2 

DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  ^6i 

by  general  neurasthenia,  hysteria,  perhaps  preoccupation  and 
other  neuropathic  manifestations;  the  second  is  acute  or  de- 
hrious,  perhaps  with  ideas  of  greatness,  persecution,  hallu- 
cination, excitement,  etc.,  and  the  third  is  terminal  dementia. 
The  clinical  species  or  groups  and  the  distinction  between 
primary  and  secondary  symptoms  is  a  work  of  the  future, 
but  the  tendency  is  now  everywhere  to  substitute  clinical 
species  with  well-determined  stages  of  evolution  for  merely 
symptomatic  groups.  This  alone  can  give  a  natural  in  place 
of  an  artificial  classification. 

V.  Serbski  ^  would  restrict  the  term  to  those  forms  that 
have  the  following  traits :  First,  where  the  onset  is  not  later 
than  the  adolescent  period,  and,  second,  where  there  is  distinct 
development  of  enfeeblement.  He  points  out  the  important 
fact  that  it  may  be  secondary  to  some  other  acute  psychic  dis- 
ease and  lays  little  stress  on  physical  signs.  It  is  very  hard  to 
diagnose  and  especially  to  differentiate  from  secondary  de- 
mentia of  adolescence.  Kraepelin's  theory  of  autointoxication 
by  products  of  the  sexual  organs,  he  deems  mistaken. 

J.  Seglas  ^  agrees  with  Kraepelin  that  katatonic  symptoms 
are  of  psychic  origin  and  not,  as  Kahlbaum  thought,  simple 
muscular  spasms.  They  are  automatic,  independent  of  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  patient,  and  without  relation  to  any  illusions 
or  delusions,  but  automatisms  can  only  be  corollaries.  The 
substratum  always  is  insufificiency  of  cohesion  between  the  ele- 
ments of  personality.  He,  too,  holds  that  negativism  goes  well 
with  aboulia. 

To  Kraepelin  belongs  much  credit  for  the  great  and  grow- 
ing interest  in  this  subject,  due  to  a  serious  effort  to 
clear  up  the  previous  confusion.  In  the  later  editions  of  his 
text-book,  and  especially  in  the  sixth,^  he  gives  a  brilliant  and 
comprehensive  clinical  characterization  of  dementia  pr?ecox,  in- 
cluding most  of  the  abnormal  symptoms  of  this  age  that  issue 
in  degeneration,  on  the  basis  of  296  cases  and  under  three  forms 
— hebephreniac,  katatonic,  paranoid.     The  age  liability  of  his 

'  On  the  Question  of  Dementia  Praecox.  Jour,  of  Mental  Pathology,  Vol.  2, 
No.  4.     Abstracted  from  a  paper  published  in  Russian,  Jan.,  1902. 

*  D^mence  pr^coce  et  Katatonic.  Nouvelle  Iconographie  de  la  Salpetri^re, 
1902,  No.  4. 

'  Psychiatric,  1899,  vol.  ii,  ch.  5.     Die  Dementia  Praecox,  pp.  137-214. 


302 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 


cases  is  represented  in  the  following  cut,  but  of  the  first 
form  seventy-two,  of  the  second  sixty-eight,  of  the  third 
forty  per  cent,  and  of  all  together  over  sixty  per  cent  occur 
before  the  twenty-fifth  year.  Its  manifestations  are  ex- 
tremely diverse  and  include  symptoms  of  almost  all  other 
insanities.  In  the  hebephreniac  form  the  development  is  to- 
ward final  stupidity  more 
or  less  pronounced,  with 
subacute,  more  often  than 
acute,  mental  disturbance. 
The  katatonic  form  is  more 
likely  to  be  characterized 
by  negativism,  stereotyped 
movements,  and  suggesti- 
bility of  expression  and 
acts,  while  the  paranceic 
type,  which  he  has  added 
later,  is  marked  by  delu- 
sions, sometimes  slightly 
systematized,  especially  in 
older  cases,  and  by  sensory 
illusions,  which  may  per- 
sist for  years  along  with 
tolerable  sanity  in  other  respects.  In  the  most  youthful  cases 
the  progress  is  toward  simple  dementia,  while  in  katatonic  and 
especially  paranceic  forms  illusions  are  more  likely  to  play  the 
dominant  role  in  the  later  adolescent  stages ;  for  this  differ- 
ence he  can  offer  no  explanation,  but  illusions  seem  germane  to 
the  somewhat  later  age,  which  he  found  a  little  more  prone  to 
them  when  will  and  ideation  are  more  developed.  The  degen- 
eration, which  marks  all  form  of  this  disease,  he  thinks  can  not 
be  explained  as  mere  arrest,  for  he  strangely  asks  what  do  we 
conceive  to  be  arrested,  and  so  he  proposes  autointoxication, 
perhaps  due  to  sexual  elements  as  a  chemical  agent,  to  account 
for  the  fact  and  the  rapidity  of  deterioration.  Kraepelin's 
former  student,  Trommer,^  has  summarized  these  views  with 
additional   clinical  details  and  theoretical  suggestions,  while 


35  — 



30  — 

— 

85  — 



H 

— 

15  — 

10  — 

— 

5  — 

_ 

_J 

h 

0 

L-L-^ 

Age 

15 

20 

25    30 

35    40 

45 

50 

53 

*  Das  Jugendirresein,  von  E.  Trommer.      Samm.  Abh.  Nerven-  und  Geistes- 
krankheiten,  Vol.  3,  Part  5.      Halle,  1900. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND 


303 


Ilberg/  whose  twenty  cases  began  on  the  average  at  twenty-one 
and  a  half  years,  perhaps  best  describes  the  earher  stages  of  the 
disease. 

As  to  the  frequency  of  dementia  praecox,  we  have  the  fol- 
lowing very  diverse  data : 

Hecker   found    14     cases    among    500   insane,  or   3.0    per  cent. 


Schiile 

K.  Ebing 

Sterz 

Finck 

Tschisch 

Scholz 

Christian 

Kraepelin 


5 

12 

12 

17 

14 

6 

100+ 

296 


600 
5,000 
1,000 
1,900 
688 
530 
2,000 


•3 

.25 
1.2 

.84 
2.03 
1. 13 


"  14.15    "       •• 
(5-6  hebephreniac  andkata- 
tonic  and  the  rest  paranoeic 
forms. 


2,159 


Meyer        "      151  men, 

173  women, 
fimple  and  paranoeic. 
51   men, 
40  women, 
Katatonic. 

Kraepelin's  work  in  this  field  has  proved  a  very  fresh  and 
invigorating  stimulus  to  younger  alienists.  It  marks  some  ad- 
vance from  an  artificial  toward  a  natural  system  in  a  field  where, 
unlike  that  of  most  somatic  diseases,  temporary  symptoms  are 
protean  and  misleading,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  diagnose  to  the 
basal  processes,  because  in  its  relatively  long  duration  there  are 
so  many  phases  that  are  hard  to  differentiate  from  other  mor- 
bid types,  especially  neurasthenia,  which  it  often  resembles,  al- 
though the  latter  cases  are  more  readily  controlled  intellectually 
by  physicians  and  less  prone  to  issue  in  mental  weakness.  Some 
of  its  manifestations  suggest  general  paralysis,  but  this  more 
affects  the  memory  and  brings  special  defects.  The  latter  trou- 
ble, which  now  has  a  well-established  pathology,  is  one  of  the 
best  differentiated  of  diseases,  while  dementia  prsecox  has  far 
more  varied  forms  and  less  specific  symptoms,  and  its  neural 
pathology,  despite  several  hopeful  tentatives,  remains  yet  to  be 

'  Das  Jugendirresein,  von  G.  Ilberg.  Volkmann's  Samm.  Klin.  Vort.  No. 
224,  1898.  See  also:  Ueber  Hebephrenie,  etc.,  von  Daraskiewicz.  Dorpat,  1892; 
De  la  D^mence  Pr^coce  des  Jeunes  Gens,  von  J.  Christian.  Ann.  M^d. -Psychol., 
1899.  Beginning  Jan. -Feb.,  1899,  and  continuing  through  five  numbers;  Die 
Katatonie,  von  Tschisch.  Monatsch.  f.  Psychiatric  u.  Neurologic,  1899.  See  also 
a  convenient  compend  in  a  small  volume  by  G.  Deny  and  P.  Roy.  La  D^mence 
Prdcoce,  Paris,  1902,  p.  96. 


304  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  Of  ADOLESCENCE 

developed.  As  compared  with  epilepsy,  too,  its  symptoms  are 
far  less  sharply  marked,  while  its  relations  with  all  the  prob- 
lems of  psychic  development  constitute  so  vast  a  field  that  no 
single  investigator  can  repeat  here  the  triumphs  of  Hughlings 
Jackson,  although  many  think  that  it  should  now  take  its  place 
with  these  two  morbid  symptom  groups  as  already  next  best 
established.  Dr.  Adolf  Meyer,  our  most  competent  American 
authority,  says  in  a  personal  letter  that  '*  the  adaptation  to  the 
sexual  life  of  the  adult  age  is  very  often  a  prominent  difficulty 
in  these  cases,"  and  that  "  the  disorder  is  frequently  fore- 
shadowed in  the  teens  or  may  come  on  before  in  rare  cases,  but 
the  majority  develop  mental  derangement  between  twenty  and 
twenty-five."  In  general,  periodic  types  of  insanity  seem  more 
endogenous  to  the  third  decennium  of  life ;  parancea  to  the  third 
and  fourth ;  general  paralysis  to  the  fourth  and  fifth ;  melan- 
cholia to  the  climacteric ;  and  senile  dementia  to  a  still  later 
stage  of  life.  To  fully  understand  these,  as  well  as  the  diseases 
most  liable  to  earlier  periods  of  life,  now  under  consideration, 
we  must  have  as  a  basis  the  fullest  possible  knowledge  of  the 
normal  life  in  each  age. 

While  no  alienist  has  so  carefully  studied,  presented,  and 
grouped  clinical  symptoms  on  a  basis  of  so  many  cases  as  Krae- 
pelin,  and  while,  in  showing  from  this  standpoint  the  peculiar 
liability  of  the  transformation  stage  of  adolescence  to  fail  of 
achieving  psychic  maturity  and  to  lapse  toward  dementia,  he 
has  made  a  contribution  of  great  value  to  our  knowledge  of  this 
age,  neither  these  nor  his  experimental  studies  have  enabled 
him  to  escape  the  fallacy  of  modern  psychiatric  specialization 
and  recognize  the  larger  relations  of  the  morbid  to  the  normal 
changes  of  which  most  of  the  former  are  only  exaggerated 
forms.  In  this  respect  the  broader  and  robust  common  sense 
of  Maudsley,  the  more  numerous  and  comparative  methods  of 
Marro,  and  in  some  respects  even  the  conservatism  of  Wille, 
show  sounder  psychological  insight.  Hughlings  Jackson's 
genius,  which  as  some  one  has  said  makes  even  his  guesses  more 
valuable  than  many  a  man's  demonstrations,  while  shown  in  his 
theory  of  levels,  has  contributed  no  less  to  establish  his  type  of 
epilepsy  by  tracing  its  diathesis  through  all  its  gradations  up 
into  experiences  common  in  every  normal  life.  This  is  always 
possible  and  must  always  be  the  clinician's  goal,  and  just  in  pro- 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  3<^5 

portion  as  normal  psychology  is  developed  on  a  sound  empirical 
and  genetic  basis,  it  will  become  the  indispensable  clue  to  guide 
and  the  shibboleth  and  touchstone  by  which  to  test  every  con- 
clusion of  the  alienist,  who  even  without  the  genius  of  insight 
will  walk  sure-footed  just  in  proportion  to  his  knowledge  of  it. 

The  terms  dementia  prsecox,  insanity  of  youth,  primary 
dementia,  hebephrenia,  and  katatonia  are  all  partial  and  none  of 
them  are  entirely  satisfactory.  These  troubles  do  not  by  any 
means  invariably  issue  in  dementia,  but  if  all  did,  the  processes 
that  produced  and  preceded  the  lesions,  and  not  their  efifect, 
should  furnish  a  truly  scientific  principle  of  characterization 
and  nomenclature.  Hegel  said  of  Schelling's  absolute,  as  many 
since  might  have  said  of  Hartmann's  unconscious,  that  it  was 
not  a  true  philosophic  principle,  because  "  all  cows  look  alike  in 
the  dark,"  meaning  that  a  purely  negative  principle  can  never 
be  an  adequate  explanation.  We  may  say  the  same  of  dementia 
prsecox,  which  faintly  suggests  the  propriety  of  giving  to 
general  paresis,  which  almost  always  has  a  fatal  termination,  a 
designation  like  thanatic  dementia,  based  upon  this  fact.  Early 
mental  death  is  a  result  of  the  morbid  processes  we  have  here 
to  study,  but  so  it  is  of  others.  With  senile  dementia  both  the 
facts  and  the  propriety  of  the  name  are  very  different. 

There  are  two  missing  links  indispensable  to  a  full  acquaint- 
ance with  the  many  forms  of  precocious  mental  decay;  first 
and  chiefly,  knowledge  of  the  actual  changes  during  the  stage 
of  puberty  and  later  adolescence,  which  go  on  within  the  limits 
of  sanity.  This  age  has  often  been  characterized  as  that  of 
mental  and  moral  inebriation  and  of  psychic  madness,  and 
from  my  studies  of  its  phenomena  I  am  convinced  that  nearly 
all  of  its  symptoms  can  be  paralleled  in  the  inner  and  outer  life 
of  youth  who  do  not  lapse  toward  the  terminal  imbecility, 
but  develop  to  sane  and  efficient  maturity.  Here  we  may  de- 
mand that  the  normal  psychologist  shall  help  to  contribute  a 
sound  basis  to  the  student  of  disease,  while  the  alienist,  who 
deals  only  with  salient,  flagrant,  or  ostensive  instances  where 
natural  tendencies  are  "  writ  large  "  and  who  does  not  know 
the  genetic  and  natural  history  of  the  soul,  can  not  solve  the 
most  fascinating  problems  presented  by  clinical  pictures. 

The  other  gap  is  the  absence  of  record  or  available  knowl- 
edge of  the  early  stages  in  the  development  of  the  disease  be- 
21 


3o6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

fore  cases  come  to  asylums,  for  of  this  disease  even  more  than 
of  many  others  it  is  certain  that,  if  all  .were  known,  its  mani- 
festations would  be  found  to  be  numerous  in  proportion  as  they 
are  mild,  and  that  the  vast  majority  who  are  slightly  impaired 
by  the  ferment  of  this  storm  and  stress  period  of  life  never 
come  under  any  kind  of  medical  observation.  For  one,  I  in- 
cline to  the  opinion  that  just  in  proportion  as  these  gaps  are 
filled,  we  shall  have  less  need  of  recourse,  with  Kraepelin,  to 
toxic  or  to  other  chemical  causes.  Since  in  both  these  fields 
and  in  the  disease  itself,  sexual  factors  often  play  a  very  im- 
portant role,  a  leading  contingent  of  our  knowledge  of  these 
cases  must  come  with  every  advance  in  the  psychology  of  sex, 
now  so  lamentably  undeveloped  and  till  lately  neglected.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  paradigms  of  premature  decay  reveal  a  body 
of  phenomena  of  the  highest  importance  for  normal  genetic 
psychology,  and  it  should  already  be  asserted  that  no  parent, 
judge,  family  or  army  physician,  and  especially  no  teacher, 
should  be  ignorant  of  these  morbid  forms,  which  in  their  mild 
degrees  are  so  common  and  the  key  to  so  much  that  is  normal, 
but  which  are  generally  concealed  to  others  and  often  uncon- 
scious to  self. 

Dr.  Meyers^  suggests  that  like  alcohol  this  may  be  nature's 
way  of  weeding  out  the  unfit,  and  that  as  general  paresis  is  now 
by  many  traced  to  infection,  so  early  dementia  may  be  in  part 
due  to  preventable  causes.  He  protests  against  the  frequent 
acceptance  of  hereditary  tendencies  or  fatalism  which  even  the 
young  sometimes  now  use  as  an  excuse  for  their  bad  conduct. 
He  would  distinguish  sharply  between  forms  due  to  consti- 
tutional inferiority  and  poor  endowment  and  those  due  to 
adolescence  itself  and  its  disharmonies  of  thoughts,  habits,  and 
interest.  This  cause  of  stunting  and  perversion  is  less  due  to 
overwork  or  stress  of  diseases  of  metabolism.    He  says  : 

"  Before  all  I  miss  a  sense  for  actuality,  a  living  with  life  as  it  is  and  an 
enjoying  of  the  opportunities  that  are  within  reach.  Where  flights  of  tb&Ught 
rise  above  indifference  in  such  individuals,  they  naturally  suffer  from  not 
being  adapted  to  actuality.  In  the  ambitious  we  see  the  features  of  day- 
dream rather  than  of  strength.  Virtue  and  social  emotions  remain  ab«trac»: 
and  in  exalted  words.     Many  of  these  weaklings  become  conscious  of  the  con 


'Address  at  Child  Study  Section  of  the  New  England  Association,  July,  190J. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  307 

trast  between  their  words  and  their  nature.  They  become  self-conscious, 
suspicious  of  being  discovered,  and  drift  into  soHtude.  Abnormal  hanker 
ings  fail  to  be  corrected  there  by  a  healthy  spirit  of  social  and  other  activity; 
the  touch  with  actuality  is  lost  more  and  more,  and  over  a  shock  or  some  dis- 
appointment or  a  setback  in  general  health  the  poor  frame  of  judgment  gives 
way,  and  the  person  loses  balance.  The  eagerness  with  which  hypnotism, 
mesmerism,  mystic  powers,  and  the  unreal  are  elaborated  into  delusions  and 
depended  upon  for  explanation  of  the  peculiar  sensations  connected  with  dis- 
ordered circulation,  nervous  heart,  the  nervous  excitability  shown  by  in- 
creased reflexes,  feelings  of  uneasiness  and  anxiety,  and  unusual  intestinal 
and  sexual  sensations,  seem  sto  me  to  show  the  great  danger  of  all  half-under- 
stood things  which  are  not  brought  to  the  test  of  actuality.  An  aversion  to 
actuality  seems  to  lie  in  the  trend  of  much  modern  teaching. 

"  The  emphasis  of  nature  study  does  perhaps  much  to  bring  a  healthy 
turn  into  education.  But  we  need  more  ;  we  need  greater  wholesomeness  in 
the  training  for  human  relations  and  aspirations  ;  a  better  knowledge  of  what 
is  likely  to  rouse  a  sound  interest  even  in  those  who  are  naturally  careless  and 
indifferent  and  otherwise  tickled  merely  by  the  sensational  or  by  what  grati- 
fies crude  emotions  ;  we  need  a  preparation  for  actual  life,  not  for  dream  ex- 
istence. What  is  called  '  new  thought,'  though  to  a  large  extent  a  mere  revival 
of  the  food  for  the  eternal  gullible,  does  much  good  where  it  incidentally  en- 
courages healthy  instinct.  But  it  is  like  strong  wine,  a  questionable  article 
of  food,  sometimes  a  useful  drug,  but  really  unfitting  one  for  a  good  digestion 
and  assimilation  of  what  makes  man  the  master  of  nature.  Too  many  suffer 
from  the  effects  of  intoxication  or  the  untimely  use  of  these  mental  stimulants. 

"  The  greatest  stumbling-block  is  undoubtedly  that  which  stands  in  the 
way  of  the  development  of  sexual  maturity  in  that  broad  and  lofty  sense  of 
becoming  the  originators  of  a  better  race.  That  which  in  actuality  is  the 
center  of  the  highest  altruistic  possibilities  of  mankind  is  allowed  to  be  a  social 
playground  of  chance,  fed  by  dime  novels  and  literature  of  doubtful  adventures  ; 
fashions  in  dress  and  in  social  customs  usher  the  young  precociously  into  a 
world  in  which  even  too  many  adults  fail.  Abnormal  responses  lead  to  ab- 
normal seclusiveness,  and  quack  literature  nurtures  a  fear  and  hopelessness, 
and  frequently  wrecks  the  chances  of  a  timely  reconstruction. 

"  Do  not  let  us  say  that  this  is  merely  one  of  nature's  methods  of  weeding 
out  the  unfit.  Among  the  25,000  persons  who  are  to-day  in  the  public  and 
private  institutions  of  New  York  State  alone,  there  are  many  brilliant  hopes 
buried,  largely  owing  to  a  lack  of  knowledge  of  what  some  people  need  in  the 
way  of  social  and  personal  hygiene.  Remember  that  some  of  the  most  illus- 
trious members  of  the  race  have  been  dangerously  near  the  borderland  of  in- 
sanity and  seem  to  have  been  great  although  they  showed  obvious  traces  of  the 
same  misled  instincts  that  have  completely  wrecked  others.  Are  such  people 
not  worth  our  help?  Should  not  the  home,  the  press,  and  the  school  mind 
some  of  the  dangers  and  shape  their  ethics  and  methods  accordingly  ? 

"  This  is  the  practical  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  theory  of  degeneracy 
which  is  spread  into  immature  minds  as  a  doctrine  of  fatalism,  so  that  even 
high-school  pupils  excuse  themselves  in  some  such  way  as  :  '  I  can't  help  this. 
It  is  hereditary  in  the  family.'  Part  of  this  may  be  sadly  true.  But  it  is  the 
duty  of  pedagogy  and  of  psychiatry  to  distinguish  what  is  to  be  accepted  with 
fatalism  from  what  is  open  to  correction.  We  have  faith  in  gymnastics  for 
the  correction  of  physical  defects.  Let  us  devise  more  efficient  gymnastics 
which  lead  us  to  heartily  enjoy  actuality,  to  instinctively  shrink  from  anti 
social  ideas  and  abnormal  friction,  and  to  get  time  for  an  unsophisticated 
growth." 


3o8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Many  of  the  phenomena  are  those  of  overaccentuation  of 
processes  normal  at  puberty,  which  I  have  for  years  called 
ephebeitic,  although  this  term  can  with  less  propriety  be  applied 
to  many  of  the  negative  symptoms  of  defect.  The  germs  of 
many  of  these  disturbances  lie  in  the  common  faults  of  child- 
hood, which  are  now  studied  under  the  name  of  pedagogical 
pathology,  to  be  treated  in  the  next  chapter.  Some  are  the 
premature  Phaethon  flights  of  genius  spoiled  by  the  heat  of  its 
own  fermentation,  and  others  are  definite  symptom  groups  seen 
in  the  schoolroom  and  not  always  yet  incompatible  with  its 
work.^  Conformably  to  this  view-point  we  must  seek  the  key 
to  these  perversions  by  addressing  ourselves  to  the  larger, 
underlying,  and  preliminary  problem  of  determining  the  natural 
forms  of  psychic  and  somatic  transitions  from  childhood  to 
maturity,  and  study  what  puberty  and  adolescence  really  mean 
as  developmental  stages  of  human  life,  which  it  is  the  purpose 
of  this  work  to  investigate. 

Adolescence  begins  with  the  new  wave  of  vitality  seen  in 
growth ;  in  the  modifications  of  nearly  every  organ  ;  the  new  in- 
terests, instincts,  and  tendencies ;  increased  appetite  and  curios- 
ity, so  that,  as  elsewhere  described,  it  is  a  physiological  second 
birth.  The  floodgates  of  heredity  seem  opened  and  we  hear 
from  our  remoter  forebears,  and  receive  our  life  dower  of  en- 
ergy. On  the  other  hand,  the  expenditures  of  energy  are  greatly 
increased,  so  that  it  is  a  crucial  period  for  the  recomposition  of 
all  the  hereditary  forces.  Passions  and  desires  spring  into 
vigorous  life,  but  with  them  normally  comes  the  evolution  of 
higher  powers  of  control  and  inhibition.  The  momentum  of  in- 
heritance may  be  insufficient,  and  Binschwanger  conceived  the 
psychic  morbidities  of  this  age  as  due  to  exhaustion  or  lack  of 
capital.  Thus,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  will  to  live  is 
greatly  reenforced,  there  is  often  an  overcompensation  of  waste 
from  debilitating  causes,  so  that  the  higher  plateau  that  should 
be  attained  by  the  knitting  together  of  all  the  new  and  old 
factors  of  personality  under  the  law  of  prepotence  may  not  be 
reached,  and  nature  may  seem  to  refuse  or  be  inadequate  to  this 
final  step.  New  prepotencies  give  a  new  direction  and  a  new 
distribution  of  the  factors  of  organic  and  psychic  evolution,  and 

'  See  many  of  these  in  Spitzner,  Psychogene  Storungen  der  Schulkinder,  Leip 
zic,  1899. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  309 

just  as  an  infant  who  grew  equally  in  all  directions  would  be  a 
monster,  so  the  pubescent  who  developed  all  the  faculties  which 
are  normally  given  at  this  age  without  due  subordination  and 
unity  would  be  at  once  many  kinds  of  both  criminal  and  lunatic. 
Indeed,  one  need  accept  in  detail  none  of  the  current  theories 
of  the  nature  of  genius  to  understand  that  it  largely  consists  of 
keeping  alive  and  duly  domesticating  by  culture  the  exuberant 
psychic  faculties,  of  which  this  is  the  nascent  period,  and  that 
just  as  domestic  animals  and  plants  easily  revert  to  wildness, 
so  our  faculties  if  not  duly  recomposed  and  harmonized  to  the 
new  and  higher  life  of  altruism  must  retrograde.  Personality 
is  always  more  or  less  multiplex  and  at  best  is  a  kind  of  moving 
equilibrium  of  forces  which  check  each  other,  so  that  ado- 
lescence means  a  new  system  of  tensions  where  many  a  nisus, 
innervation,  and  tendency  is  offset  by  others,  and  all  in  the 
normal  mind  are  so  well  integrated  that  their  separate  elements 
are  commonly  lost  to  consciousness,  which  shows  only  result- 
ants and  diagonals  of  composition  of  many  forces.  The  adult 
knows  nothing  of  the  crude  raw  forms  in  which  psychic  data 
are  so  copiously  given  at  this  age.  Youth  is  a  period  of  asso- 
ciations between  many  factors  and  contents  of  life,  and  this 
conception  is  the  only  cue  which  can  aid  us  in  threading  the 
labyrinthine  mazes  of  this  aggregate  of  diseases. 

Roux's  conception  of  a  competitive  struggle  among  the 
different  organs  or  tissues  of  the  body  for  nutrition  in  order  to 
explain  excessive  or  premature  growth  of  bone,  sexual  parts, 
limbs,  etc.,  with  complementary  defect  elsewhere,  is  also  sug- 
gestive here  and  has  some  explanatory  power  in  the  psycholog- 
ical interpretation  of  these  phenomena.  Early  adolescence 
brings  sudden  spring  freshets  of  growth  impulse  in  all  di- 
rections, and  these  initial  momenta,  now  given  like  an  inher- 
itance turned  over  to  a  ward  on  attaining  his  majority,  are  at 
first  more  or  less  incoordinated  in  all,  and  in  defectives 
especially  prone  to  be  perverted  and  unbalanced,  so  that  we  have 
the  obvious  picture  of  offsetting  deficiencies,  each  of  which  tends 
to  intensity  almost  inversely  as  the  strength  of  the  other.  As 
Taine  has  shown,  every  concept  or  presentation  strongly  tends 
to  become  vivid  until  it  reaches  delusional  intensity,  so  that 
sanity  is  a  complex  system  of  mutually  arrested  and  repressed 
illusions.     Herbart,    despite    the    fantastic,    mechanical,    and 


3 10  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

mathematical  affectations  of  his  system,  deserves  credit  for  the 
effort  of  attempting  to  work  out  the  sum  of  arrests  which  ideas 
acting  and  reacting  upon  each  other  produce,  with  all  the  various 
degrees  of  contradiction  from  diametrical  up  to  perfect  agree- 
ment and  reenforcement.  At  this  stage  of  life,  the  earlier  con- 
sciousness of  childhood  is  to  a  great  extent  deciduous  and  a 
new  one  is  being  slowly  organized.  Youth  tends  to  do  every- 
thing physically  possible  with  its  body  considered  as  a  machine 
in  the  tentative,  to  explore  every  possibility  of  action  and  in- 
nervation, and  to  give  the  soul  a  newer  and  higher  control. 
It  is  plastic  to  every  suggestion ;  tends  to  do  everything  that 
comes  into  the  head,  to  instantly  carry  out  every  impulse; 
loves  nothing  more  than  abandon  and  hates  nothing  so  much 
as  restraint.  It  is  the  age  that  can  withstand  no  dare  or  stump ; 
loves  adventure  and  escapade ;  tends  to  let  every  faculty  go  to  its 
uttermost ;  and  seems  to  have  a  special  tendency,  as  the  pre- 
vious curve  of  morbidity,  which  here  reaches  its  highest  point, 
shows  is  true  of  somatic  troubles,  to  every  psychic  disease. 
There  is  over-innervation  and  tonicity,  which  may  issue  in  any 
fulminating  and  furibund  manifestation,  and  which  responds  to 
all  new  and  intensified  impulsions  from  within  and  suggestions 
from  without. 

We  see  traces  of  these  molimena  of  nature  toward  a  higher 
level,  this  hunger  for  a  fuller  and  larger  life  even  in  the  midst 
of  degenerative  phenomena.  Youthful  dements  wrestle  with 
great  problems  and  ideas ;  their  delusions  are  of  royalty,  celes- 
tial and  infernal  beings,  telepathy,  hypnotism,  spiritism,  great 
inventions,  the  highest  themes  of  politics  and  religion,  but  their 
powers  are  inadequate  and  they  grow  mentally  dizzy,  confused, 
and  incoherent.  Again,  as  if  they  unconsciously  felt  the  need 
of  control,  we  see  the  reticence  normal  to  this  age  of  conceal- 
ment, when  the  soul  strives  to  segregate  itself  and  protect  and 
nurse  a  new  individuality,  overdone  to  taciturnity  or  reflected 
in  constrained  acts  and  postures ;  or  the  new  impulses  to  action 
may  crop  out  in  exaggerating  or  fantastically  varying  the  most 
common  movements  of  walking,  eating,  dressing,  speech,  wri- 
ting, etc.  In  many  of  the  rich  clinical  details  which  Kraepelin 
has  so  admirably  gathered,  it  is  easy  to  see  the  germs  of  genius 
of  many  kinds,  for  this  is  the  crude  ore  of  which  the  great  pro- 
ductions of  art,  invention,  heroism,  and  moral  and  religious 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  3II 

reform  would  be  made  if  the  processes  of  elaboration  and  the 
supreme  Greek  virtue  of  temperance  or  avoidance  of  excess 
were  adequate.  The  soil  is  always  rich  to  profusion,  insemi- 
nation abundant,  choice  exotics  and  all  the  flora  of  culture 
strike  root,  but  weeds  are  rank  and  choke  them,  and  decay  may 
be  the  direct  resultant  of  superfetation.  There  are  spots  or 
periods  of  excessive  fecundity  offset  by  intervals  or  desert  areas 
of  arrest  or  decay ;  hence  the  psychic  diseases  of  youth  abound 
in  surprises  and  contrasts. 

Sometimes  intellectual  defect  first  appears.  The  student 
can  not  command  his  attention  or  fails  to  comprehend,  under- 
stand, and  associate,  and  despite  every  effort  falls  behind  his 
mates ;  is  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  weakness  and  inability  to 
meet  the  expectations  or  ambitions  of  friends  and  parents. 
Here  probably  belong  most  of  the  two  hundred  and  eighty-nine 
Prussian  school  children  who  committed  suicide  between  1883 
and  1888,  from  fear  of  examinations,  punishment,  non-promo- 
tion, etc.^  In  these  cases  the  first  outcrop  of  disease  often  ap- 
pears to  be  depressive  or  melancholic.  Sometimes  impulsion 
fails  and  the  subject  grows  apathetic,  indifferent,  loses  interest, 
and  does  not  respond  to  ordinary  ambitions  for  his  own  future, 
all  inner  impulse  and  spontaneity  abate,  and  he  ceases  to  care. 
The  leading  motive  of  life  and  the  mainspring  of  all  high  en- 
deavor is  gone.  Then,  sometimes,  the  very  absence  of  the  ten- 
sions previously  felt  has  the  psychical  action  of  a  vacation,  and 
produces  an  exalted  and  hilarious  state  of  mind.  Whichever 
the  prodromal  stage  of  incubation,  there  is  always  great  strain 
or  anxiety  at  first,  generally  reflected  in  loss  of  flesh,  which  is 
gained  later  when  the  weakened  faculties  and  decimated  activi- 
ties settle  to  some  kind  of  adjustment  on  a  lower  plane. 

As  many  of  the  more  specific  psychic  traits  of  puberty  are 
more  fully  considered  in  later  chapters,  it  will  serve  our  purpose 
to  enumerate  here  only  a  few. 

I.  Inner  absorption  and  reverie  is  one  marked  characteristic 
of  this  age  of  transition.  Who  has  not  had  spells  of  mental  in- 
volution and  absent-mindedness,  when  thoughts  went  "  wool- 
gathering "  and  the  soul  was  haunted  by  automatic  presenta- 

*  Schungestindheitslehre.     (Eulenberg  u.  Bach).     1900,  p.  1143. 


312  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

tions  that  take  the  reins  from  the  will  and  lead  us  far  away  in  a 
rapt  state,  now  reminiscent,  now  anticipatory,  into  a  world  of 
dreams  or  ghosts  ?  As  we  muse  and  brood,  we  seem  to  lapse 
to  some  unknown  past  that  "  hath  elsewhere  had  its  setting," 
of  which  "  the  present  seems  a  mere  semblance,"  or  to  peer  far 
into  the  future  and  "  see  the  beauty  of  the  world  and  all  the 
glory  that  shall  be."  In  these  weird  seizures,  we  lose  touch 
with  the  world  and  move  about  "  in  a  world  not  realized." 
Sometimes  these  states  suggest  the  intellectual  aura  or  volumi- 
nous mentation  of  epilepsy,  and  the  day-dreamer  goes  about 
dazed  like  a  somnambulist,  and  should  be  admitted  to  be  legally 
irresponsible,  because  every  act  proves  an  alibi  for  attention. 
This  may  be  the  germ  of  some  ancillary  personality  and  lead 
to  a  double  housekeeping  of  consciousness,  or  it  may  be  in- 
cipient lunacy  and  suggest  Lamb's  remark  to  Coleridge,  that 
no  one  knows  the  grandeur  of  fancy  till  he  has  been  crazy.  It 
may  issue  in  the  exotic  and  traditional  states  so  religiously  re- 
vered in  the  case  of  neurotic  girls,  and  constitutes,  as  Partridge  ^ 
has  shown,  one  of  the  charms  of  many  drugs  and  intoxicants. 
This  preliminary  expatiation  of  the  soul  over  a  vast  realm,  ac- 
tual and  possible,  of  life  and  mind,  somewhere  within  which  it 
will  lay  down  the  limits  of  its  personality,  is  good  for  the  strong 
and  healthful,  but  dangerous  for  weak  or  bclastct  youth  in  this 
callow,  pin-feather  age.  When  we  are  wise  enough  to  con- 
trol "  mental  metabolism,"  we  may  be  able  to  prescribe  the 
place  and  function  of  these  "  voluminous  mental  states  "  to  fit 
each  individual  need.  The  normal  soul  always  soon  comes 
back  to  the  world  of  reality,  perhaps  wakes  with  a  start,  or  may 
slowly  ebb  back,  and  is  as  powerless  to  revisit  this  subthalamic 
realm  at  will  as  it  is  to  see  stars  or  sea  phosphorescence  in  sun- 
shine.^ As  Browne  has  well  shown,  if  this  efflorescence  of  medi- 
tativeness  or  introspection  has  been  too  rank,  prolonged,  or  fre- 
quent, the  subject  may  fall  to  thinking  on  emerging  from  them, 
as  Blood  did  on  emerging  from  the  influence  of  drugs,  or  Davy 
from  the  long  inhalation  of  dilute  gas,  or  the  hashish  eater,  that 
nothing  is  real  but  thought,  feeling,  and  sensation,  and  thus  he 

*  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Alcohol,  by  George  E.  Partridge.  Am.  Jour,  of 
Psy.,  April,  1900,  vol.  ii,  pp.  318-376. 

'See  James  Crichton-Browne's  Dreamy  Mental  States.  Cavendish  Lecture, 
1895.     London. 


DISEASES  OF   BODY  AND   MIND  313 

may  be  predisposed  to  becon^e  an  adept  in  the  occultism  of  epis- 
temology,  if  not  solipsisism ;  or  he  may  lose  the  certainty  or  even 
sense  of  his  personal  identity  and  pinch  himself  to  know  if  he  is 
awake,  wonder  if  he  really  lives,  who  he  is,  and  where,  and  if  the 
actual  world  is  really  real. 

2.  Puberty  is  the  birthday  of  the  imagination.  This  has  its 
morning  twilight  in  reverie,  and  if  brilliant  and  vivid,  supple- 
ments every  limitation,  makes  the  feeble  athletic,  the  beggar 
rich,  knows  no  limitations  of  time  or  place,  and  is,  in  a  word, 
the  totalizing  faculty.  In  its  world  all  wishes  are  actualized, 
and  hundreds  of  our  returns,  elsewhere  reported,  show  that  in 
many  sane  children,  their  own  surroundings  not  only  shrivel 
but  become  dim  and  shadowy  compared  with  the  realm  of 
fancy.  This  age  is  indeed  sadly  incomplete  without  illusions, 
and  if  the  critical  faculties  which  are  later  to  slowly  decompose 
them  are  not  developed,  the  youth  is  rapt,  apart,  perhaps  oblivi- 
ous of  his  environment,  and  unresponsive  to  its  calls,  because 
his  dreams  have  passed  beyond  his  nascent  and  inadequate 
power  of  control  and  become  obsessions.  Many  states  that 
become  trancoidal  and  absorptive  are  best  described  as  the 
drunkenness  of  fancy,  a  state  which  may  become  habitual  and 
passionate,  but  which,  true  to  its  secret  nature,  is  unrevealed  to 
others  save  in  certain  katatonic  attitudes  and  a  clumsiness  to 
mundane  reactions,  such  as  Plato  ascribes  to  the  true  philoso- 
pher. Here,  near  the  verge  of  normality,  belong  many  of  the 
long-continued  stories,  imaginary  companions,  fancied  but  per- 
haps zoologically  impossible  animals,  and  romances,  of  which 
the  maker  is  always  the  center,  which  are  at  this  time  intensely 
real,  but,  obeying  the  law  of  all  psychic  phenomena  of  pubes- 
cence, are  transitory,  so  that  scenes  are  always  soon  shifted  for 
another  play. 

The  ingenuous  youth  sees  visions  or  dreams  dreams  some- 
what according  as  he  is  ear-  or  eye-minded.  The  optical  centers 
are  especially  sensitized  to  new  harmonies  of  form  and  espe- 
cially color ;  the  mode  of  thought  is  pictorial  and  by  images ;  and 
the  ear  now  feels  music  and  harmony,  is  attuned  to  sound, 
and  is  amazingly  sensitive  to  voices,  tone-color,  inflections,  etc. 
Both  the  auditory  and  optic  areas  come  into  new  connections 
with  thought,  and  speech  music,  phonisms,  photisms,  and  prob- 


3 14  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

ably  number  forms  and  exceptional  psychic  structures  are  now 
developed.  Thought  and  the  two  higher  senses  are  never  so 
vivid  and  intense  because  they  are  just  ready  to  bifurcate,  each 
to  lead  its  own  life,  so  that  the  two  are  now  peculiarly  liable  to 
be  confused,  intellectual  processes  to  take  sense  forms,  and 
vice  versa.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  hallucinations,  false  sight, 
and  especially  hearing,  is  most  common ;  but  in  brains  tainted 
by  morbidity  the  faculty  for  discriminating  mental  from  sense- 
forms  is  undeveloped,  and  dreamy  conditions  may  become 
habitual,  so  that  we  see  here  the  natural  budding  of  insane  per- 
ceptions. Perhaps  the  persistence  in  colleges  of  that  form  of 
critical  philosophy,  which  devotes  itself  to  discriminating 
the  real  from  the  phenomenal  in  sense-perception,  is  a  hyper- 
trophied  relic  of  a  long  travel  of  the  race  to  maintain  this 
distinction  for  the  practical  purposes  of  life  and  is  necessary 
for  those  who  recjuire  years  of  sanifaction  to  fully  recover  from 
the  strain  of  pubic  aberrations.  Our  returns  give  abundant 
illustration  of  an  attitude  of  early  pubescence  when  the  gracious 
lies  of  fancy  shade  by  strictly  imperceptible  gradations  into  the 
clear  light  of  objective  fact. 

3.  As  the  child's  absorption  of  objects  slowly  gives  place  to 
consciousness  of  self,  reflectiveness  often  leads  to  self-criti- 
cism and  consciousness  that  may  be  morbid.  He  may  become 
captious  and  censorious  of  himself  or  others.  Ultimate  ques- 
tions that  present  the  mysteries  of  things — why  was  I  born? 
who  made  God?  what  is  soul,  matter,  good? — press  for  an- 
swers. Conscience  becomes  so  oversensitive  that  "  anxiety 
about  doing  right  exhausts  the  energy  that  should  go  to  action, 
trifles  are  augmented  to  mountains,  or  debate  with  oneself 
as  to  what  is  right  is  carried  so  far  as  to  paralyze  decision," 
and  the  "  natural  hue  of  resolution  is  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale 
cast  of  thought."  ^  Such  boys  rewrite  a  page  rather  than  erase 
a  false  cross  or  dot,  will  never  use  a  caret,  stop  in  plowing  if  a 
single  weed  is  missed,  or  in  harvesting  if  a  single  head  of  wheat 
is  lost.  Details  are  exaggerated,  irritability  and  pride  of  ap- 
pearance and  ideals  of  absolute  perfection  are  seen.     A  girl 

^  G.  A.  Coe:    The  Morbid  Conscience  of  Adolescents.     Trans.   Ill    Soc.   for 
Child  Study.     Ill,  2,  p.  99. 


DISEASES   OF   BODY  AND   MIND  315 

would  never  take  a  pin  or  pick  a  flower  without  asking,  or  say- 
ing thank  you  for  each  flower.  The  shghtest  hint  or  frown  of 
disapproval  by  others  causes  depression.  A  youth  could  never 
decide  the  smallest  matter  promptly  without  arguing  the  pros 
and  cons.  Another  was  horrified  at  flitting  fancies  of  crimes 
he  might  possibly  commit.  Sometimes  imperative  ideas  crop 
out  or  uncontrollable  fears  arise.  Others  struggle  intensely 
with  secret  religious  doubts.  Innocent  things  are  sometimes 
magnified  into  sins  of  deepest  dye.  "  Should  I  become  a  min- 
ister, a  missionary,  have  a  warm  bed  when  others  have  a  cold 
one,  etc.,"  and  even  more  trivial  queries  may  become  morbidly 
intense.  The  avoidance  of  fatigue,  an  adviser  who  really 
understands  the  case,  and  fit  religious  training,  are  cardinal 
needs.  To  love  and  care  for  these  awkward,  often  unattractive 
neophytes  is  a  specialty,  and  I  believe  is  one  of  the  types  of 
genius  which  is  never  found  among  those  who  have  extermi- 
nated in  themselves  too  successfully  the  impulsion  of  youth. 

4.  Another  trait  is  the  overassertion  of  individuality.  This 
is  germane  to  a  state  of  nature  when  the  child  no  longer  needs 
the  parental  protection  but,  in  primitive  life  and  warm  coun- 
tries, breaks  away  and  shifts  for  himself.  Hitherto  he  has  been 
the  center  in  his  environment,  has  been  fed,  sheltered,  and 
taught,  and  with  all  the  flush  of  morning,  and  springtide  hopes, 
goes  out  to  maintain  subsistence,  and  ultimately  to  become  the 
center  of  another  family;  all  this  before  the  longer  apprentice- 
ship to  life  which  civilization  has  enforced  was  known.  It  is  the 
time  for  large  views  and  plans ;  life  problems  now  press  upon 
him ;  ambition  and  self-afifirmation  are  never  of  such  high  select- 
ive value.  His  ego  must  be  magnified  and  all  in  the  new  envi- 
ronment subordinated  to  it.  Strife  and  labor,  intensified  and 
prolonged,  are  imperative.  It  is  now  or  never,  the  impulsive- 
ness of  youth  can  not  wait  and  its  ambition  is  never  so  exorbi- 
tant. Now,  instead  of  head  hunting,  winning  a  new  name, 
wrestling  alone  with  spirits  or  other  of  the  drastic  initiations 
of  savages,  the  civilized  and  more  sedentary  youth  must  vent 
his  intensification  of  personal  feeling  in  dreams  of  greatness — 
and  who  has  not  at  this  season  been  prince,  millionaire,  hero, 
walked  with  the  great  of  earth  or  heaven,  in  reverie  ?  Perhaps 
the  very  repressions  of  modern  life  have  given  added  color  and 


3l6  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

range  to  the  ideal.  The  youth's  powers  are  now  tested,  and 
who  knows  but  he  may  become  the  greatest  among  men  ?  The 
whole  soul  is  now  protensive,  and  there  is  no  life  but  in  the 
realm  of  the  possible,  for  the  real  is  not  yet.  The  sane  man 
burns  or  distils  these  vaporings,  and  they  are  unsuspected  to 
tliose  about  him,  and  fade  like  shadows  as  the  sun  of  reality 
rises,  or  are  relegated  to  the  realm  of  poetry  and  fiction.  But  if 
the  reductives  are  undeveloped,  or  the  energy  of  production 
overintense,  they  appear  as  delusions  of  greatness,  so  common 
and  so  manifold  in  precocious  dementia,  or  they  may  culminate 
in  impudence,  contradiction,  and  perhaps  even  in  aggressiveness 
of  the  born  criminal  type,  or  may  repel  others  by  excessive  irri- 
tability which  becomes  almost  senile  in  pettishness  and 
negativism,  that  is  not  only  chronically  cross,  but  that  re- 
fuses to  conform  to  every  suggestion  of  friends  by  a  contrary 
impulse  so  well  characterized  by  Tarde  in  his  Opposition  Uni- 
verselle. 

5.  Again,  in  this  age,  when  everything  is  most  uncertain, 
imitation  reaches  its  acme,  if  we  include  its  psychic  as  well  as  its 
merely  attitudinal  and  motor  forms.  Youth  must  ape  positions, 
expressions,  gait,  and  mien  in  order  to  understand,  and  the  new 
psychology  of  imitation  shows  that  it  is  the  basis  of  the  social 
instinct  of  which  also  this  age  is  the  springtime.  Every  peculi- 
arity is  mimicked,  and  parodied,  whether  of  phraseology, 
manner,  or  mood.  Every  youth  has  a  more  or  less  developed 
stock  of  phrases,  acts,  and  postures,  expressive  of  mimetic  love, 
anger,  fear,  many  occupations  or  vocations  of  infancy  and  old 
age,  of  the  other  sex,  and  he  is  plastic  and  suggestible  to  an 
amazing  degree  to  everything  of  this  kind  in  his  environment. 
He  catches  the  idiosyncrasies,  accents,  and  inflections  of  teachers 
and  fellow  pupils,  and  reenacts  incidents;  a  little  older,  he  is  be- 
mastered  by  the  style  of  great  authors  he  has  read,  and  is  an 
adept  at  dialect  and  the  personation  of  national  types.  Thus 
when  the  precocious  dement  apes  other  patients,  perhaps  follow- 
ing them  about  the  wards  to  do  so,  as  he  is  prone  to  in  echo- 
praxia,  or  repeat  words  in  echolalia,  or  illustrates  the  automa- 
tism to  command,  so  that  any  psychic  influence  about  him  may 
become  a  source  of  contagion,  he  is  only  an  extreme  type  of 
what  belongs  to  this  age  as  one  of  its  most  integral  traits,  and 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  3^7 

merely  lacks  the  higher  power  of  coordinating  it  with  the  oppo- 
site motive  of  self-affirmation  and  independence. 

6.  Partly  its  imitative,  and  partly  its  pragmatic  nature  makes 
youth  dramatic,  fond  of  assuming  roles  and  poses,  of  affecta- 
tions and  mannerisms,  of  attitudes  and  special  movements,  ges- 
tures, perhaps  stereotyped,  that  may  become  as  significant  as 
slang.  Normally  these  roles  succeed  each  other  and  seem  to  be 
circumnutations  of  the  instinct  to  explore  all  the  possibilities  of 
life  in  feeling  and  expression,  as  well  as  aids  to  sympathetic 
comprehension  of  situations  and  types  of  character.  But  just 
as  speech  may  lose  its  higher  function  and  lapse  to  not  only 
slang  but  even  interjectional  forms,  so  poses  may  slowly  be- 
come fixed  postures,  and  even  contractures,  or  a  limited  reper- 
tory of  stereotyped  acts  may  develop  on  a  basis  of  the  natural 
automatisms  of  Lindley.^  These  manifestations  are  another 
of  the  characteristics  of  this  degeneration. 

7.  Youth  is  the  age  of  folly.  Its  self-consciousness  makes  it 
peculiarly  susceptible  to  criticism  and  suspicion  that  all  its  acts 
and  sayings  may  be  ridiculous.  This  is  especially  felt  for  the 
sentiments  new-born  at  this  age.  Hence,  partly  to  disguise 
these,  and  partly  from  the  very  different  propensity  of  lapsing  to 
the  lower  plane  of  banality,  we  have  silliness  as  a  marked  feature 
of  adolescent  witlings.  College  songs,  the  absurdities  of  cork 
minstrelsy,  the  infantilism  of  Mother  Goose,  the  eccentricities 
of  enfeebled  intelligence,  so  strongly  entrenched  on  the  variety 
stage,  with  its  exaggerated  oddities,  freakishness,  and  idiocies, 
foolish  and  funny  acting,  with  every  kind  of  grimace,  have 
frequent  illustrations  in  the  lives  of  normal  youth,  with  whom 
all  this  is  spontaneous  and  intentional.  This  tendency  is  deep- 
seated  in  our  organism,  as  I  have  elsewhere  "  tried  to  show. 
But  we  have  in  the  early  dements  copious  illustrations  of  the 
ebullitions  of  unpremeditated  and  unrepressed  folly,  the  most 
fatuous  manifestations  of  which  we  should  only  laugh  at  were 
there  but  the  power  of  voluntary  self-restoration. 

'Some  Mental  Automatisms.  (With  G.  E.  Partridge.)  Ped.  Sem.,  July, 
1897,  vol.  V,  pp.  41-60. 

*  The  Psychology  of  Tickling,  Laughing,  and  the  Comic.  Am.  Jour,  of  Psy., 
Oct.,  1897,  vol.  ix,  pp.  I -4 1. 


3i8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

8.  Youth  normally  comes  into  a  new  attitude  toward  speech 
at  puberty.  The  vocabulary  is  enlarged;  meanings  are  re- 
adjusted; words  seem  different;  there  is  always  a  new  speech 
consciousness ;  interest  in  new  terms  shows  that  in  some  cases 
we  have  loquacity  which  becomes  almost  verbigeration ;  diaries 
and  letters,  and  even  stories  and  treatises  are  scribbled  at  great 
length.  We  often  observe,  too,  an  inverse  ratio  between  thought 
and  speech,  so  that  as  the  former  becomes  scanty  and  indefinite 
the  stream  of  words  flows  more  copiously  and  smoothly ;  and 
conversely,  as  meanings  deepen  the  vocabulary  becomes  more 
select  and  the  lapse  of  speech  and  pen  more  restrained.  In 
other  normal  types  the  mass  of  new  inner  experiences  of 
thought,  motive,  and  sentiment  prompt  concealment  and 
reticence,  and  the  subject  becomes  dumb-bound,  silent,  and 
perhaps  seems  to  brood,  or  the  range  of  expression  is  very 
confined  and  narrow.  Both  these  tendencies  have  asylum  out- 
crops in  Forel's  "  word-salad  "  or  Krafft-Ebing's  "  word- 
husks  "  on  the  one  hand,  or  in  mumbling  and  taciturnity,  even 
speechlessness,  on  the  other. 

9.  Normally  this  is  the  social  age  where  friendships,  inter- 
ests, and  sympathies  with  others  ought  to  be  at  their  strongest 
and  best ;  but  many  a  normal  youth  is  shy,  solitary,  bashful,  and 
inclines  to  withdraw  from  the  world  and  nourish  his  individ- 
uality in  isolation.  It  is  the  age  when,  whatever  we  may  hold 
regarding  adult  life.  Godfernaux's  ^  conception  of  the  domi- 
nance of  sentiment  over  thought  is  not  only  true,  but  an  admi- 
rable characterization.  No  stage  of  life  is  so  prone  to  religious 
perturbations,  which  tend  to  become  erratic  as  well  as  extreme. 
Speculation  is  trying  its  callow  wings  ;  sense  solicitations  are  in- 
cessant and  pervasive ;  competition  makes  tense  every  power  of 
mind  and  body;  the  other  sex,  which  had  hardly  existed  before, 
now  turns  on  its  subtle  magnetism  and  establishes  a  new  polar- 
ity ;  art,  science,  and  literature  reveal  their  inner  charm ;  the 
great  elective  system  of  the  manifold  vocations  beckons  in  many 
directions  at  once ;  adult  life,  which  had  before  seemed  hazy  and 
afar,  because  boyish  interests  expand  horizontally  along  their 
own  age  level,  now  becomes  a  cynosure  of  fascinating  absorp- 

'  Le  Sentiment  et  la  Pens^e,  1894. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  319 

tion ;  a  limbo  of  new  temptations  beckons  or  impels  to  the  in- 
dulgence of  passion  or  in  the  loss  of  orientation  to  truth,  duty, 
health  ;  all  the  possible  permutations  and  combinations  of  error 
are  illustrated  in  the  aberrations  of  this  formative  period,  so 
that  the  acceptance  of  any  classification  or  systemization  of 
its  phenomena  would  be  premature,  and  therefore  unfortunate, 
for  both  knowledge  and  practise. 

10.  Even  in  graver  cases  orientation  in  time  and  place  may 
be  unimpaired ;  school  knowledge  may  be  tolerably  well 
preserved ;  the  memory  plexus,  although  in  parts  distorted 
and  shot  through  by  veins  or  delusionary  eruptions,  may  be 
tolerably  maintained  and  many  old  skills  intact.  Unfavor- 
able as  the  prognosis  is  for  mental  restoration  at  any  stage,  it  is 
extremely  favorable  for  life.  The  temperature  fluctuates  be- 
tween wide  extremes  and  may  become  exceptionally  low ;  the 
heart  and  arteries,  which  normally  undergo  such  rapid  changes 
at  this  stage,  are  often  modified  in  their  action,  and  perhaps 
cyanosis  or  dermography  show  the  disorders  of  circulation. 
Pain,  and  especially  megrim,  most  common  in  girls  of  fourteen 
or  fifteen,  reflects  vaso-motor  irregularities.  Excessive  wake- 
fulness and  sleepiness,  gormandizing  or  persistent  refusal  of 
food,  which,  like  sadness  and  jollity,  may  alternate,  exhibit  the 
larger  periodicities,  while  repetition,  chewing,  dancnig,  rock- 
ing and  swaying  show  the  disturbances  of  the  shorter  rhythms, 
to  both  of  which  this  period  is  normally  strangely  susceptible. 

As  these  troubles  have  far  more  mild  than  grave  forms, 
we  probably  see  the  effect  of  their  taint  in  hoodlums,  rowdies, 
hoboes,  vagrants,  vagabonds,  dudes,  spendthrifts  with  no 
money  sense,  ne'er-do-wells,  egoists,  cases  of  moral  insanity, 
juvenile  criminals,  and  hosts  of  people  whose  early  life  promised 
well,  but  who  disappoint  the  expectation  of  fond  parents  and 
friends  and  drop  into  contentment  with  very  humble  stations, 
the  limited  duties  of  which  they  just  manage  to  perform.  For- 
nelli  ^  has  described  with  great  vividness  the  disappointed  ex- 
pectations concerning  children,  which  is  one  of  the  sad 
observations  of  the  school-teacher.    We  see  them  in  the  gilded 

»  Die  Kinderfehler,  1901,  pp.  208  and  24I. 


326  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

youth  who  hve  for  the  moment ;  who  can  never  have  serious 
thoughts  of  the  future;  who  are  selfishly  unmindful  of  others' 
rights,  interests,  convenience,  pleasures ;  who  live  to  eat,  drink, 
dress,  and  study  girls. 

While  we  are  familiar  with  the  dangers  of  the  overstimula- 
tion of  school  to  produce  precocity,  we  greatly  need  to  be  re- 
minded that  the  school  may  also  be  a  distinct  cause  of  arrested 
development,  which  follows  directly  from  injudicious  methods 
of  teaching,  as  Dr.  W.  T.  Harris  ^  has  shown.  If  wonted  to  a 
habit  that  belongs  to  a  lower  stage  of  development,  as  by  over- 
severe  drill  in  sense-perception  or  mechanical  memory, the  child 
is  thereby  held  back  on  a  lower  plane  and  the  normal  growth  of 
classification  and  the  search  for  cause,  that  ought  to  come  next, 
will  be  prevented.  This  is  the  effect  of  overthoroughness,  ex- 
cessive devotion  to  detail,  or  incessant  analysis  of  processes  that 
never  ought  to  be  dissected,  because  thus  we  take  apart  what 
should  grow  together  to  ever  higher  unities.  Memory  is  often 
inversely  as  thought,  and  incessant  appeals  to  sense  also  dis- 
tract from  it.  Baur  ^  concisely  characterizes  the  causes  and 
effects  of  premature  and  belated  development  of  mind  and  body. 

Many  writers  since  Lelut  and  Nisbet  have  recognized  a 
certain  close  analogy  between  genius  and  insanity.  Both  are 
prone  to  eccentricity;  often  have  a  disordered  emotional  basis 
or  an  insane  temperament ;  are  likely  to  produce  inferior  chil- 
dren ;  to  occur  in  the  same  family,  etc.^  Whether  mattoids  or 
sports,  geniuses  are  always  the  apotheosis  of  adolescence.  At 
this  age  all  may  be  said  to  be  normally  geniuses,  some  in 
slight  and  some  in  high  degree,  some  for  a  flitting  moment 
and  some  for  life.  Then  at  least  the  approximation  to  genius 
is  closest,  and  those  who  blossom  into  full  the  efflorescence 
of  creativeness  do  so  by  virtue  of  the  energy  that  nature  gives 
only  then.  Plato  said  delusions  may  be  good  if  from  the  gods, 
and  at  the  genius  period  of  youth  many  a  great  man  has  been 

'  Education,  April,  1900. 

'  Korperlich  u.  geistige  Friih-  und  Spatentwickelung.  Zeitsch.  f.  Schulge- 
sundheitpflege,  1899,  p.  707. 

^  Radestock :  Genie  und  Wahnsinn,  1884,  p.  76;  Joli :  Psychologic  des 
Grandes  Hommes,  1883  ;  Lombroso  ;  The  Man  of  Genius ;  Windelband  :  Patho- 
logie  der  Genie  in  Holderlein ;  Morselli :  Genie  Neurosi,  1892;  Hirsch:  Genie 
und  Entartung,  1894,  p.  340. 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND  MIND  321 

more  or  less  melted  atid  perhaps  remolded  by  the  heat  of  his 
own  soul.  According  to  the  severe  and  minute  criteria  of  the 
Lombroso  school,  perfect  sanity  is  a  painfully  limited,  common- 
place, and  stupid  thing,  which  very  few  of  the  great  and  good 
of  the  world  have  enjoyed.  Like  every  conception  based  on 
averages,  it  is  lacking  in  all  individualizing  traits,  and  has  lost 
sight  of  variation.  More  than  almost  any  other  writer  on 
abnormalities,  this  author  lacks  all  appreciation  of  adolescence, 
which  always  involves  more  or  less  psychic  inebriation.  He 
fails  to  see  that  excess  of  normal  vitality  not  only  safely  can 
but  must  explore  the  beginnings  of  many  morbidities,  both  to 
know  the  more  varied  and  intense  possibilities  of  human  life 
and  to  evoke  the  sanifying  correctives,  etc. 

Genetic  psychology,  both  morbid  and  normal,  urgently 
needs  better  tables  of  age  liability  of  all  psycho-neural  diseases ; 
and  for  its  larger  development  and  truer  and  deeper  insight, 
psychiatry  needs  them  no  whit  less,  while  at  present  both  are 
handicapped — the  one  by  the  speculative  and  introspective  tra- 
dition of  philosophic  schools  and  outgrown  problems,  and  the 
other  by  too  exclusive  attention  to  clinical  symptoms.  The 
old  prejudices  between  these  departments  should  now  give  place 
to  a  new  and  cooperative  unity. 

Among  the  chief  external  causes  of  the  diseases  of  this  age 
are  all  those  influences  which  tend  to  precocity,  e.  g.,  city  life 
with  its  earlier  puberty,  higher  death  rate,  wider  range  and 
greater  superficiality  of  knowledge,  observations  of  vice  and 
enhanced  temptation,  lessened  repose,  incessant  distraction, 
more  impure  air,  greater  liability  to  contagion,  and  absence  of 
the  sanifying  influences  and  repose  of  nature  in  country  life. 
At  its  best,  metropolitan  life  is  hard  on  childhood  and  especially 
so  on  pubescents,  and  children  who  can  not  pass  these  years  in 
the  country  are  robbed  of  a  right  of  childhood  that  should  be 
inalienable,  and  are  exposed  to  many  deleterious  influences 
which  jeopardize  both  health  and  morals.  Civilization  with  all 
its  accumulated  mass  of  cultures  and  skills,  its  artifacts,  its 
necessity  of  longer  and  severer  apprenticeship  and  special- 
ization, is  ever  harder  on  adolescents,  and  even  in  a  republic  the 
submerged  fraction  of  the  population  not  adequate  to  achieve 
success  in  its  ever  fiercer  competitions,  who  drop  limp  and  ex- 
hausted in  body  and  soul  to  a  condition  acknowledged  by  many 


322  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

anthropologists  to  be  essentially  inferior  to  that  of  most  of 
the  lowest  savages,  increases,  and  institutions  for  defectives  and 
those  who  live  on  charities  multiply.  Modern  industrialism 
makes  poverty  ever  more  unendurable.  When  we  add  to  these 
predisposing  causes  the  small  and  decreasing  families,  the  later 
marriages,  so  that  more  and  more  are  born  of  post-mature 
parents  and  thus  physiologically  tend  to  precocity ;  the  over- 
nurture  of  only  children  who  are  so  prone  to  be  spoiled  and 
ripened  still  earlier  by  unwise  fondness ;  the  mixture  of  distinct 
ethnic  stocks  that  increase  the  ferments  of  adolescence  by  mul- 
tiplying the  factors  of  heredity  and  so  increasing  its  instability, 
we  no  longer  wonder  that  many  in  these  most  vulnerable  years 
make  more  or  less  complete  shipwrecks  at  every  stage  of  these 
hothouse  demands,  which  in  the  entire  life  of  our  race  are  so 
recent. 

Under  these  provocations,  some  instincts  spring  into  activ- 
ity with  a  suddenness  that  is  almost  explosive,  and  so  prema- 
turely, that  as,  e.  g.,  with  sex  and  drink,  the  strong  and  com- 
plex psychic  mechanism  of  control  has  no  time  to  develop  and 
forbidden  pleasures  are  tasted  to  satiety,  till  the  soul  has  some- 
times not  only  lost  its  innocence  before  it  understood  what 
purity  and  virtue  really  mean,  but  life  is  blase,  a  burnt-out 
cinder,  admiration,  enthusiasm,  and  high  ambitions  are  weak- 
ened or  gone,  and  the  soul  is  tainted  with  indifference  or 
discouragement.  An  English  alienist  gives  as  one  of  the  chief 
traits  of  sanity  what  he  terms  tension — i.  e.,  strong  passions 
held  in  strong  control,  as  if  it  were  a  kind  of  potential  necessary 
for  great  achievement  or  great  endurance;  and  physiologists 
have  conceived  inhibition,  and  even  the  brain  itself,  as  a  regu- 
lator of  reflexes,  as  a  method  of  storing  up  energy  for  either 
outer  or  inner  work,  so  that  if  this  is  lacking  there  is  incessant 
leakage,  since  the  repose  of  good  manners  checks  the  waste  of 
the  many  automatisms — giggling,  swaying,  grimacing,  im- 
perative impulses  to  say  or  do,  expression  of  feelings  of  anger, 
pride,  selfishness,  fear,  etc.,  and,  in  a  word,  tames  man,  who  at 
this  stage  is  ever  prone  to  lapse  to  feral  traits  or  even  animal- 
ism. Not  only  will,  but  attention,  means  repression  in  all  but 
the  one  direction  to  which  all  available  energy  is  focused.  As 
the  decapitated  animal  plays  off  a  convulsive  ''  clotted  mass  of 
motion,"  the  stimuli  to  many  if  not  all  of  which  were  before 


DISEASES  OF  BODY  AND   MIND  323 

present  but  repressed,  and  as  the  somnolent  man  starts  as  he 
falls  asleep  because  the  repressions  of  the  higher  zones  which 
act  in  waking  are  removed  in  this  "psychic  decapitation" ;  so  if 
these  superior  levels  are  not  developed,  reflex  susceptibility  not  ■ 
only  to  the  environment  but  responsive  expressiveness  to  every 
inner  impulse  is  instant.  The  patient  dramatizes  every  chance 
suggestion,  creeps,  yells,  gallops,  jabbers,  spits,  sings,  lisps, 
whispers,  utters  or  does  nameless  obscenities  at  any  time,  place, 
or  in  any  presence,  is  made  drunk  by  minimal  drams  because  he 
is  constitutionally  near  to  inebriation  by  loss  of  higher  impul- 
sions and  the  intensification  of  lower  ones.  His  talk  is  shot 
through  by  cross-thoughts  that  make  verbal  incoherence  or 
"  Bill  Prattisms  " ;  ^  movements  to  one  purpose  are  diverted  to 
another;  and  flightiness,  chaos,  balderdash,  and  galimatias 
dominate  sense  and  sentence.  Or  again,  the  mechanism  runs 
down  and  there  are  incessant  repetitions ;  movements  are  slow 
and  clumsy  as  if  weights  were  attached  to  the  limbs  as  in  Krae- 
pelin's  athetoid  ataxia ;  and  in  rare  cases  there  are  poses  resem- 
bling the  waxy  flexibility  of  catalepsy  and  perhaps  even  result- 
ing contractures. 

Judgment  and  even  common  sense  begin  in  and  rest  on 
associations  that  reflect  the  ever  irradiating  correspondences  in 
time,  place,  and  cause.  These  processes  are  as  different  from 
those  above  as  associate  fibers  (both  ends  and  the  entire  course 
of  which  are  within  the  brain)  are  from  the  projective  system 
of  afferent  and  efferent,  or  sensory  and  motor  fibers.  These 
functions,  whatever  their  neural  basis,  come  into  dominance 
later  than  the  sensori-motor  activity  of  the  internal  capsule. 
Their  cerebral  elements  may  for  our  purpose  here  be  roughly 
said  to  connect  different  brain  areas,  and  thereby  to  establish 
psychic  unity  among  the  discrete  factors  of  our  personality 
Now  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  begin  to  be  eliminated, 
and  thought  harmonizes  and  knits  into  unity  the  elements  of 
psychic  life.  We  balance,  compare,  infer,  and  reason,  and  the 
brain,  or  at  least  the  soul,  acts  more  as  a  whole.  We  criticize 
our  acts ;  apply  logical  and  ethical  tests ;  deliberate,  plan,  act  • 
to  a  purpose,  and  hear  from  outlying  regions  of  our  psycho- 
physic  plexus.  Of  these  faculties,  as  of  so  many  others,  adoles- 
cence is  the  nascent  period,  and  their  failure  to  develop  marks  an 

>  Bill  Pratt.     The  Savv-Buck  Philosopher.     Williamstown,  1895. 


324  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

important  characterization  of  juvenile  degeneration.  The  city 
of  "Man-soul,"  without  any  such  government  and  regulative 
function,  becomes  a  wild  mob  of  lawless  passion,  desires,  or 
blinder  impulses  and  impressions,  till  from  sheer  anarchy,  with 
no  other  specific  agency,  it  speedily  lapses  to  lower  plateaus, 
where  the  surviving  elements  fall  into  some  crude  modus 
Vivendi,  which  constitutes  a  chance  personality  very  different 
from  any  earlier  stage  of  development.  One  thing  is  certain, 
that  if  Morel's  ^  pessimistic  vaticinations  are  true  and  our 
race  is  to  degenerate  again,  it  wnll  not  be  through  ignorance 
of  our  idolatrized  school  knowledge,  by  impiety,  war,  pesti- 
lence, luxury,  or  even  vice,  or  by  the  shortening  of  adult  life 
as  shown  in  tables  of  average  longevity,  or  even  by  the  abate- 
ment of  adult  activity,  or  all  of  these  together,  but  it  will  be 
by  the  progressive  failure  of  youth  to  develop  normally  and 
to  maximal  maturity  and  sanity,  and  these  other  proximal 
causes  will  be  deleterious  just  in  proportion  as  they  affect  this. 
If  regeneration  is  ever  to  lift  us  to  a  higher  plane,  the  adoles- 
cent nisus  will  be  its  mainspring. 

>  Traits  des  d^generescences  physiques,  intellectuelles  et  morales  de  I'esp^ce 
humaine,  et  des  causes  qui  produisent  ces  variet^s  maladives,  pp.  700  with  an 
atlas.     Paris,  1857. 


CHAPTER    V 

JUVENILE    FAULTS,    IMMORALITIES,    AND    CRIMES 

Increase  of  youthful  crime — Age  statistics — Forms  of  juvenile  crime — Causation- 
Degeneration  and  the  criminal  types — Nature  and  genesis  of  crime — Its 
biologic  aspect — Children's  faults — School  conduct  and  punishments — Rela- 
tions to  weather — Truancy  and  the  migratory  instinct — The  psychology  of 
lying  and  its  forms — Anger  in  adolescence — Revenge — Envy  and  jealousy — 
Fighting,  psychic  rudiments  and  atavism — Bullying  and  torturing — ^Sponta- 
neous  social  organization  of  gangs  and  clubs — The  Mafia  and  Camorra — Theft 
and  its  psychology — Pyromania — Alcoholism — Prostitution — Rape  and  age  of 
consent — Suicide  and  its  motivation  and  frequency  in  youth — Pauperism  and 
crime — Contagion  of  vice  and  crime — Relation  of  crime  to  the  menstrual 
period — Schemes  of  classification  of  crime — Punishment  and  juvenile  penology 
■ — Its  theory  and  practise  in  different  ages  and  lands — Age  of  responsibility  in 
ancient  and  modern  times — Reformatories — Probation  and  conditional  sen- 
tences— Flogging — Degrees  of  corrigibility  and  recidivism — The  larger  view — • 
Suggestions  for  academic  ethics. 

In  all  civilized  lands,  criminal  statistics  show  two  sad  and 
significant  facts :  First,  that  there  is  a  marked  increase  of 
crime  at  the  age  of  twelve  to  fourteen,  not  in  crimes  of  one, 
but  of  all  kinds,  and  that  this  increase  continues  for  a  number  of 
years.  While  the  percentages  of  certain  grave  crimes  increase 
to  mature  manhood,  adolescence  is  preeminentl}'^  the  criminal 
age  when  most  first  commitments  occur  and  most  vicious  ca- 
reers are  begun.  The  second  fact  is  that  the  proportion  of 
juvenile  delinquents  seems  to  be  everywhere  increasing  and 
crime  is  more  and  more  precocious.  Although  vice  is  very 
different  from  crime,  and  although  but  a  relatively  small  pro- 
portion of  all  offenders  are  caught  and  sentenced,  the  number 
of  convictions  affords  one  of  the  best  indexes  of  the  general  state 
of  morality  at  any  age.  Hence  the  significance  of  these  facts 
for  ethics,  sociology,  genetic  psychology,  and  for  the  efficiency 
of  education  and  religion,  as  well  as  for  the  success  of  a  form 
of  civilization,  is  profound  and  complex.     We  shall  take  space 

325 


326 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


here  for  only  a  few  of  the  most  typical  statistical  illustrations 
of  the  above  facts. 

In  Italy,  where  crime  is  so  abundant  and  so  well  studied, 
an  average  for  the  year  1886,  which  I  choose  as  typical,  shows 
the  following  percentage  frequency  by  ages  : 


Men. 

Women. 

ow  14 

1.29  per  cent 

1. 4 1  per  cent 

tween  14-18 

6.04        " 

6.02 

18-21 

13.29 

10.05 

21-35 

46.91 

39-38 

"        35-50 

23.29 

30.94 

50-70 

8.40 

11.63 

er  70 

0.68 

0.57 

The  age  of  maximal  criminality  in  men  in  Italy  is  about 
twenty-five,  but  as  this  is  the  age  of  most  active  maternity  in 
woman  her  age  of  greatest  crime  is  about  thirty-five.  Rossi 
found  that  of  46  criminals  40  began  their  criminal  career  be- 
fore twenty-six,  and  that  their  abuse  of  wine  and  their  sexual 
precocity  was  hardly  less  marked.  In  India  young  children 
are  often  most  expert  in  crime.  N.  David  found  that  of  43-835 
sentenced  German  criminals,  41  per  cent  were  under  twenty-one 
years  of  age.  Corre  ^  shows  that  in  France,  from  1876-80 
there  were  as  many  sentences  for  youth  between  sixteen  and 
twenty-one  as  between  twenty-one  and  forty,  and  for  the  next 
five  years  very  nearly  the  same  ratio  was  maintained,  although 
severer  penalties  predominated  for  the  older  criminals.  The 
increment  of  crime  with  age  he  shows  by  the  following  table, 
giving  the  distribution  of  7,475  cases  of  young  delinquents : 


Boys. 

Girls. 

Total. 

Before  8 

14 

6 

20 

8-IO 

159 

37 

196 

II-I2 

425 

117 

542 

12-14 

1,214 

269 

1.483 

14-16 

1.739 

409 

2,148 

16-18 

1.765 

385 

2,150 

18-20 

714 

209 

923 

Over  20 

3 

^ 

11 

Sikorski,   commissioned   by  the   Russian    Government   to 
study  the  pupils  of  the  military  gymnasium  who  presented 


1  Crime  et  Suicide.      Paris,  1891,  p.  307. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES      3^7 


anomalies   of  character,   that  made  their  education   difficult, 
found  these  distributed  by  ages  as  follows : 

II   years 2.5  percent. 


12 
13 

15 
16 

17 


6.1 

■23-7 
.20.0 
.21.0 
.  6.2 
.   1.2 


In  the  58  juvenile  reformatories  of  the  United  States,  ac- 
cording to  the  eleventh  census  of  1890,  there  were  14,846  in- 
mates, of  which  3,31 1  were  females.  The  average  age  of  both 
sexes  was  14.23;  of  the  males  14.09,  and  of  the  females  14.71 
years.  The  lowest  average  for  both  sexes  is  found  in  the 
South  Central  States  for  children  of  foreign  parents,  and  is 
12.49  years;  and  the  highest  in  the  South  Atlantic  States  for 
children  of  unknown  nativity,  when  it  is  16.  Most  of  these  in- 
stitutions receive  offenders  from  five  to  twenty-five.  The  fol- 
lowing table  shows  the  distribution  between  the  ages  of  seven 
and  twenty-one : 


Age. 

Males. 

Females. 

7 

63 

27 

8 

143 

59 

9 

260 

78 

10 

466 

116 

II 

265 

127 

12 

1,182 

189 

13 

1,478 

290 

14 

1,76c 

381 

15 

I. 751 

466 

16 

1,626 

543 

17 

921 

480 

18 

420 

234 

19 

213 

96 

20 

103 

57 

21 

25 

15 

The  above  figures  must  not,  of  course,  be  interpreted  to 
mean  a  decline  in  criminality  after  puberty,  for  the  propor- 
tionate number  of  convictions  continues  to  rise,  but  older  crim- 
inals are  not  sent  to  reformatories,  but  to  prisons  and  other  in- 
stitutions. The  rise  of  these  numbers  to  15  shows  the  real 
pubescent  increment  of  crime,  which  augments  pretty  steadily 
during  all  the  earlier  and  later  periods  of  adolescence,  not  only 


328  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

in  number  but  in  gravity.  Jolly  ^  ascribes  the  growing  pre- 
cocity in  crime  seen  in  most  countries  to  the  many  causes  in 
modern  life  which  hasten  maturity,  and  says  that  the  great  ma- 
jority of  criminals  first  convicted  are  adolescents.  Juvenile 
crime  has  lately  become  a  more  or  less  independent  department 
of  penology  and  presents  many  new  problems  of  absorbing  in- 
terest and  prime  importance.  To  determine  with  certainty  the 
increase  in  precocity,  the  age  tables  of  prisoners  should  be  com- 
pared with  those  of  the  population  at  large,  and  the  number  of 
each  age  in  prison  divided  by  the  total  number  of  each  age. 
This  calculation,  Mr,  F.  H.  Wines  lately  wrote  me,  has  not 
yet  been  made  in  this  country.  In  Russia,  however,  crime  be- 
tween fourteen  and  twenty-one  has  increased  much  faster  than 
the  relative  growth  of  the  population.  In  Germany,  from  1871 
to  1890,  the  rural  population  decreased  from  63  to  53  per  cent. 
The  large  cities  increased  from  4.8  to  over  10  per  cent,  and 
cities  of  all  lesser  sizes  increased.  This  Schultz  ^  thinks  favor- 
able for  youthful  crime.  He  finds  at  this  stage  of  life  a  grow- 
ing distaste  for  both  discipline  and  knowledge,  and  especially 
for  religion,  from  which  he  infers  only  a  gloomy  future.  In 
the  German  empire  since  1892,  when  46,496  juvenile  convicts 
were  reported,  this  class  had  increased  50  per  cent  in  1895. 
About  40  per  cent  of  the  annual  convictions  in  England  are  of 
those  under  twenty-o'ne.  In  1886  the  number  convicted  be- 
tween eighteen  and  twenty-one  years  was  16  per  cent  of  the 
prison  population  of  England,  while  6  per  cent  were  between 
fifteen  and  eighteen,  and  3  per  cent  between  twelve  and  fifteen.^ 
In  Austria,  in  1890,  the  number  of  juvenile  ofifenders  from 
eleven  to  fourteen  for  the  ten  years  ending  1895  averaged  693 
yearly,  and  those  from  fourteen  to  twenty  averaged  5.729,  a 
total  of  21.82  per  cent  of  all  convicts.  In  this  country  the  aver- 
age age  of  all  juveniles  in  reformatories  was  14.23  years.  Of 
these  6,930  were  for  ofifenses  against  society,  of  which  4.515 
were  against  property,  petty  larceny  being  the  predominating 
form  of  crime.  In  the  New  York  reformatory  94  per  cent  were 
for  ofifenses  against  property  as  against  87  per  cent  in  the 

*  La  France  Criminelle,  p.  179  et  seq. 

*  Giftquellen  fiir  die  landliche  Jugend.     Leipzig,  1896. 
'  Drahms  :  The  Criminal.      1900,  p.  2^2  et  seq. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES      3^9 

English  reformatories.  From  eighteen  to  twenty-four,  accord- 
ing to  Drahms,  is  the  criminal  age  in  England,  the  number  of 
commitments  reaching  its  maximum  between  sixteen  and 
twenty-one;  while  the  average  age  in  this  country  is  a  little 
over  two  years  later. 

Of  about  200,000  boys  and  girls  in  the  Gcuicindc  schools 
of  Berlin,^  in  the  year  1899,  298  boys  and  2>7  gii'ls  were  con- 
victed by  the  courts  of  some  olTense  against  law.  Of  the  boys 
35  were  twelve  years  of  age ;  140  were  thirteen ;  and  123  were 
thirteen  or  over.  Of  these  232  were  convicted  of  stealing  and 
the  rest  were  distributed  among  17  different  rubrics.  Only 
108  of  the  boys  were  imprisoned;  199  were  reproved  by  the 
judge,  and  3  were  fined.  Most  of  the  imprisonments  were  for 
a  m.onth  or  less,  and  only  9  for  over  six  months. 

Ferri  -  says  that  there  is  a  continual  increase  of  precocious 
criminals  in  Italy,  and  that  precocity  is  most  frequent  in  those 
natural  crimes  and  offenses  common  among  born  criminals. 
He  finds  increased  frequency  among  females  of  precocious 
crimes  against  person,  and  among  males  against  property,  and 
that  precocity  is  closely  attended  by  relapse  which  follows  its 
own  laws  at  this  age  as  it  does  later  in  life.  Born,  like  habitual, 
criminals  generally  confine  themselves  mostly  to  serious  crimes, 
while  occasional  criminals  are  prone  to  minor  offenses.  A 
distinguished  French  magistrate  finds  that  in  fifty  years  the 
criminal  percentage  of  the  population  in  France  has  passed 
from  227  to  552  for  every  100,000  inhabitants,  an  increase  of 
33  per  cent,  and  that  this  increase  is  most  marked  among 
young  persons,  and  he  concludes  that  the  recent  free  obligatory 
and  lay  education  has  not  supplied  the  place  of  the  old  system 
of  apprenticeship. 

Corre  and  others  give  many  representative  cases  of  grave 
crime  in  early  puberty  in  strongly  motive  temperaments  before 
knowledge  and  power  of  control  have  developed.  A  young 
nurse,  e.  g.,  having  no  sense  of  the  value  of  life  poisoned  a 
child  with  phosphorus  from  matches  in  order  that  she  might  go 
out  and  seek  amusement.  A  boy  of  fourteen  stabbed  a  play- 
mate who  had  reproached  hiin.    Another  of  the  same  age  killed 

^  Padagogische  Zeitung,  March  28,  1901. 
*  Criminal  Sociology,  p.  32. 


33°  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

a  comrade  to  rob  him  of  ten  centimes,  and  another  violated  and 
strangled  a  girl  of  nine,  imagining  an  elaborate  romance  to 
escape  the  police.  One  of  nine  killed  his  brother  of  eight  to 
get  his  new  shoes.  Another  shot  his  two  sisters,  aged  fourteen 
and  sixteen,  because  jealous  of  the  preference  shown  them  by 
his  parents.  Emulation  of  crimes  of  acquaintances  or  of  those 
heard  or  read  of  is  often  a  motive.  Two  boys  plotted  and 
killed  an  old  man  "  to  amuse  themselves."  Eleven  boys  banded 
together  to  steal  and  rob,  partly  for  sheer  mischief,  stealing 
nothing  of  value.  Two  boys  of  fifteen  fought  a  duel  with 
pistols,  with  seconds  of  the  same  age.  A  lad  of  eighteen 
stabbed  a  strange  girl  who  refused  his  advances  in  the  street. 
Such  cases  could  easily  be  multiplied  indefinitely  from  the  cur- 
rent chronicles  of  crime.  Dr.  Wigan  in  his  unpublished  wri- 
tings, as  quoted  by  Winslow,  gives  an  account  of  crimes  com- 
mitted without  any  object  by  young  people  from  sixteen  to 
eighteen.  These  are  often  crimes  against  people  for  whom 
they  have  had  no  animosity.  Many  of  these  cases  had  epi- 
staxis.  Winslow  gives  interesting  cases  of  latent  insanity  in 
adolescence.  Such  children  are  by  turns  sad,  and  grow  wild  and 
ungovernable.  They  can  neither  apply  themselves  nor  submit 
to  rules.  Some  are  successively  apathetic  and  volatile.  Some- 
times there  are  spasmodic  attacks  after  a  long  incubation  period. 
In  some  cases  the  strangeness  is  manifested  only  in  inability  to 
assume  any  fixed  position  in  life.  Alienation  in  youth  is  serious 
because  so  often  hereditary.  Moral  insanity,  which  sometimes 
precedes  and  sometimes  comes  out  at  puberty,  is  characterized 
by  incapacity  for  education,  distaste  for  family  life,  marked 
peculiarities  of  character,  extreme  cleverness  in  certain  di- 
rections, bad  sexuality  and  criminality.  The  more  passionate 
and  instinctive  men  are,  the  more  they  resemble  children  in  these 
respects  and  the  more  egoistic  they  are. 

As  to  the  nature  of  juvenile  crime  in  general,  Drahms  esti- 
mates it  as  in  the  proportion  of  fifteen  to  one  against  property, 
and  all  statistics  show  that  crimes  against  persons  reach  their 
maximum  later.  Marro  ^  constructs  the  curve  on  the  next  page 
to  show  this  relation. 

In  Germany  it  was  found  that  of  30,902  thieves,  45  per  cent 

*  La  Puberta,  p.  224. 


JUVENILE    FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     331 


were  under  twenty-one.  Out  of  every  100,000  inhabitants,  29 
were  convicted  under  twelve ;  261  between  twelve  and  sixteen ; 
321  between  sixteen  and  twenty-one;  245  between  twenty-one 
and  thirty;  about  one- fourth  of  convicted  thieves  were  under 
sixteen ;  and  about  one-third  of  all  those  convicted  of  breaking 
and  entering  were  be- 
tween eighteen  and  twen- 
ty-one. Between  twelve 
and  fifteen  theft  leads  all 
other  forms  of  crime ;  be- 
tween twenty-one  and 
twenty-five  crimes  against 
persons  predominate ; 

while  offenses  against 
public  morals  are  rare  at 
twenty.  Sometimes  when 
the  sexual  impulse  has 
been  delayed  and  breaks 
out  suddenly,  it  leads  to 
suicide  and  crime;  but 
more  frequently  sex  acts  indirectly  at  first  and  crimes  due  to 
jealousy  come  relatively  late  in  adolescence.^ 

In  a  table  Marro  presents  the  following  per  cents :  ^ 


/^, 

\ 

Crimes  against  persons 

J    \ 

1 

1 

h 

u          11     "property 

( 

• 
1 

'"■\ 

1 

1 
1 

S 

^t:--X_ 

in 

0 

S 

0 

CO 

g 

0 

i5 

s 

s 

0 

5D 

g 

0 
I- 

s 

-0 

Cl 

^ 

CO 

§g 

■* 

« 
-* 

10 

s 

CO 

s 

t^ 

t> 

„ 

*^ 

„ 

a 

a 

c 

0 

be  ui 

—! 

a  V 

u 

a  c 

£? 

s 

"6^3 

T3 

£2 

■a 

3 

c 

0 

•c  " 

•C  o< 

•C  o< 

.a 

^ 

I? 

0 

S 

U 

u 

H 

b 

'- 

Before  26 

8.8 
66.1 

10.9 

56-7 

2.9 
44.1 

13-5 
45-9 

2.7 

66.6 

15-5 
57-2 

2.8 

60.0 

17.0 

26-40 

47.0 

After     40 

24.9 

32.2 

52.9 

40.5 

30.5 

27.1 

37.1 

36.0 

Morrison  ^  estimates  that  more  than  one-half  of  the  chil- 
dren below  fourteen  sent  to  corrective  institutions  are  for  of- 
fenses such  as  truancy,  begging,  incorrigibility  and  refractory 
disposition,  which  he  would  group  as  nomadic,  or  at  least  with 
a  strong  factor  of  vagrancy,  and  that  to  reformatory  schools, 

^  Wille  :   Pubertats  Psychose,  p.  3  et  seq. 

*  La  Puberta,  p.  344. 

3  Juvenile  Offender,  pp.  64-71. 


33^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

from  fourteen  to  sixteen,  hardly  one-tenth  are  sent  for 
such  offenses.  Here  more  serious  theft  commonly  leads. 
Morrison  says  "  crimes  of  violence  against  the  person  are  not 
half  so  numerous  among  young  children  under  sixteen  as  they 
are  among  youths  between  sixteen  and  twenty-one.  Crimes 
against  morals  are  between  three  and  four  times  more  numer- 
ous among  youth  between  sixteen  and  twenty-one  as  among  the 
juvenile  population  under  sixteen.  Crimes  in  the  nature  of 
burglary,  house-breaking,  and  shop-breaking  and  the  like  are 
four  times  more  frequent  among  youths  over  sixteen  than 
among  juveniles  under  that  age."  Juveniles  are  not  seriously 
addicted  to  drink,  but  there  are  more  indictments  among  them 
in  proportion  to  the  juvenile  population  than  there  are  among 
those  between  thirty  and  forty,  when  the  influence  of  drink  is 
far  greater.  Instead,  therefore,  of  drink  and  crime  going  to- 
gether, as  is  often  said,  "  there  is  less  indictable  crime  among 
the  drunken  than  among  the  sober  section  of  the  population." 
Although  the  size  and  intelligence  of  children  prevent  them 
from  becoming  criminals  except  in  the  way  of  vagrancy  or 
petty  theft,  we  must  not  regard  these  offenses  as  less  grave,  be- 
cause it  is  thus  that  every  criminal  career  begins,  and  the  effort 
of  society  should  be  to  prevent  this  evolution  into  the  habitual 
class. 

The  following  table  according  to  the  census  of  1890  shows 
the  cause  of  condemnations  in  the  juvenile  reformatories  of  this 
country:  3^^^_  ^^^^  ^^^^^ 

Assassination,  murder 232  58  290 

Violation  of  morals 213  193  406 

Theft 4,136  711  4.847 

Lying  and  vagabondage 1,260  305  1, 5^5 

Disobedience  of  parents 1,055  278  i,333 

Other  crimes 138  11  148 

I  have  also  computed  the  table  on  p.  333  from  the  census 
of  1890  (Crime  and  Pauperism,  Part  II,  pp.  586-569),  ar- 
ranging the  years  in  order  of  frequency. 

From  this  table  it  appears  that  of  the  above  offenses,  truancy 
is  the  first  juvenile  offense  to  be  punished  by  sentences  to  these 
institutions,  and  that  these  cases  constitute  the  youngest  class, 
more  of  whom  are  thirteen  than  any  other  age.  Fourteen  is 
the  maximal  age  for  incorrigibility  and  malicious  mischief  and 
trespass ;  fifteen  for  petty  larceny,  vagrancy,  disorderly  conduct 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     333 


Both  sexes. 
Age. 


7  

8 

9 

lo 

II , 

12. ...  

13 

14 

15 

i6 

17 • 

i8 

19  

20 

21 

Total.. 

of  which  females  = 


401 
532 
645 
59' 
598 

385 
196 
95 
66 
14 


23 
45 
104 
222 

286 
426 

499 
48s 
266 


4,046 
918 


2,497 
225 


19 

34 

52 

84 

130 

•59 

195 

203 

185 

130 

62 

32 

19 

4 


1,310 
214 


J3  " 


63 
172 

340 

621 

1,045 

1.365 

1,764 

1.829 

1,796 

1,160 

537 

254 

133 

33 


5 

25 

33 

56 

89 

142 

255 

309 

380 

338 

168 

67 

43 


and  assaults ;  sixteen  for  larceny,  burglary,  and  public  intoxi- 
cation ;  and  seventeen  for  fornication.  Thus  from  about  twelve 
to  fifteen,  and  even  from  fifteen  to  twenty,  crimes  against 
property  are  more  frequent,  and  these  are  in  close  connection 
with  the  primal  instinct  of  self-conservation ;  while  crimes 
against  persons,  except  rapes,  attain  their  maximal  from 
twenty-one  to  twenty-five,  and  these  are  due  to  self-esteem  and 
to  an  exaggerated  sense  of  personality.  The  general  instability 
of  this  period  so  often  emphasized  in  defectives  is  seen  in  fre- 
quent change  of  occupation,  which  Marro  estimates  to  be  more 
than  twice  as  common  among  the  disequilibrated  as  among  the 
normal.  This  is  common  among  criminals.  Crimes  against 
property  among  the  degenerates,  he  thinks,  reach  their  maxi- 
mum between  twenty-one  and  twenty-five. 

Juvenile  crime  shows  thus  the  great  difficulty  which  youth 
finds  in  making  adjustment  to  the  social  surroundings,  and  so 
far  as  the  law  takes  cognizance  of  it,  it  very  often  begins  as  the 
outcrop  of  the  vagrant  instinct  which  the  requirements  of  the 
modern  school  bring  out  in  a  strong  light.  Next  and  closely 
connected  with  the  reversion  to  nomadic  life,  in  the  evolution 
of  the  antisocial  life  of  crime,  comes  resistance  to  the  institu- 
tion of  property.  In  passing  from  home  to  the  new  conditions 
of  industrial  life  with  its  severer  code,  control  is  increasingly 


334 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


difficult,  and  this  epoch  for  the  boy  is  not  unHke  that  of  the 
sudden  emancipation  of  the  negroes  in  the  South,  when,  instead 
of  being  members  of  the  planter's  family  where  pilfering  was 
treated  leniently  or  punished  at  home,  they  found  themselves 
liable  to  arraignment  and  imprisonment  for  every  petty  theft. 
Third,  and  later,  as  a  rule,  are  evolved  crimes  against  person. 

Taking  1883  as  a  typical  year,  Corre  ^  presents  the  follow- 
ing instructive  table : 


Boys. 

Girls. 

Total. 

Under  8  years 

14 

36 

20 

8-IO     " 

159 

37 

196 

IO-I2      " 

425 

117 

542 

12-14     " 

1,214 

269 

1,483 

14-16     " 

1.739 

409 

2,148 

16-18     " 

1.765 

385 

2,150 

18-20     " 

714 

209 

923 

Above  20     " 

3 

8 

II 

In  turning  now^  more  specifically  to  the  cause  and  nature  of 
adolescent  crime,  we  confront  the  vast  field  of  modern  criminol- 
ogy, a  w^hole  new  university  department,  w'hich  comprises  both 
science  with  a  myriad  of  details  and  new  methods  and  a  philos- 
ophy opening  from  a  new  standpoint  into  the  largest  problems 
of  society,  morals,  biology,  pedagogy,  and  life  and  mind  gener- 
ally. Unsatisfactory  as  his  school  is  as  a  finality,  we  must  ascribe 
great  and  epoch-making  significance  to  Lombroso  for  first  at- 
tempting the  greater  fundamentality  so  necessary  and  so  inevi- 
table. He  intimates  that  even  some  plants  have  criminal  traits, 
and  finds  them  in  abundance  in  the  rage  and  slaughter  of  carniv- 
orous animals ;  in  their  war-waging  cannibalism  ;  in  their  mur- 
ders for  love  and  luxury ;  in  their  destruction  of  the  newly  born 
and  the  aged;  in  their  slyness  and  cunning;  in  thefts  and 
in  the  outcasts  from  their  social  organisms,  etc.  Savages  for 
him  are  essentially  criminal,  and  he  greatly  exaggerates  their 
cruelty,  abortions,  robbery,  slaughter  for  vengeance,  ambition, 
greed,  etc.,  ignoring  the  fact  that  modern  anthropology  finds 
most  savages  amiable,  kindly,  and  virtuous,  often  according  to 
standards  like,  as  well  as  others  unlike,  our  own.  Far  sounder 
and  more  helpful  is  his  suggestion  that  normal  children  often 

'  Crime  et  Suicide.     Paris,  1891,  p.  309. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     3.U 

pass  through  stages  of  passionate  cruelty,  laziness,  lying,  and 
thievery.  He  reminds  us  that  their  vanity,  slang,  obscejiity, 
contagious  imitativeness,  their  absence  of  moral  sense,  disre- 
gard of  property,  and  violence  to  each  other,  constitute  them 
criminals  in  all  essential  respects,  lacking  only  the  strength  and 
insight  to  make  their  crime  dangerous  to  the  communities  in 
which  they  live.  We  are  told  that  to  magnify  the  soul  of  the 
child  before  its  more  animal  instincts  are  reduced  to  due  pro- 
portion and  control  by  conscience  and  reason,  would  give  us  the 
most  truculent  and  menacing  forms  of  criminality;  just  as  to 
magnify  all  parts  and  organs  of  the  infant's  body  in  equal  pro- 
portion would,  as  we  have  seen,  product  deformity  and  mon- 
strosity. 

He  finds  that  criminals  in  general,  tested  anthropometric- 
ally,  have  smaller  brains,  larger  jaws,  less  facial  expression; 
are  more  prone  to  certain  hyperemias,  to  asymmetries,  prog- 
nathism, defects  of  the  ear ;  are  particularly  prone  to  have  their 
bodies  tattooed  with  various  symbolic  devices,  love  sententious 
phrases  or  obscene  images,  to  which  adolescents  have  a  special 
predilection ;  that  their  periodicities  are  perturbed ;  their  gen- 
eral sensibility  is  below,  and  their  disvulnerability  above  the 
normal;  they  are  generally  lacking  in  pity;  their  life  is  short; 
mancinism  is  more  common  among  them ;  in  most  mental  tests 
they  are  inferior ;  they  are  very  proud  of  their  accomplishments 
and  achievements  in  crime ;  make  revenge  a  virtue ;  are  carnal 
in  their  love;  and  are  often  highly  religious  in  an  atavistic 
way.  The  chief  lesion  in  criminal  psychology,  according  to  the 
Lombroso  school,  concerns  not  so  much  the  intelligence  as  the 
sentiments.  Criminals  are  generally  of  a  very  bright  and  buoy- 
ant humor,  and  fond  of  all  kinds  of  revelry  and  raillery. 
Thieves  perhaps  are  most  inferior,  and  among  the  most  highly 
specialized  types  of  delinquents,  who  become  very  expert  and 
professional,  and  have  such  instinctive  horror  of  murder  that 
they  can  not  kill  even  to  save  their  own  lives.  An  interesting 
trait  of  mind  is  their  fondness  for  symbolic  and  hieroglyphic 
signs,  which  have  been  made  a  study,  as  they  are  portrayed 
upon  their  bodies,  on  prison  walls,  in  their  letters,  etc.,  and 
which  are  psychologically  akin  to  their  argot. 

Degenerate  children  are  neurotic,  irritable,  vain,  lackmg  in 
vigor,  very  fluctuating  in  mood,  prone  to  show  aberrant  tend- 


33^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

encies  under  stress,  often  sexually  perverted  at  puberty,  with 
extreme  shyness  or  bravado,  imitative,  not  well  controlled, 
"  dashing  about  like  a  ship  without  a  rudder,  fairly  well  if  the 
winds  be  fair  and  the  sea  be  calm,  but  dependent  on  the  ele- 
ments for  the  character  and  the  time  of  the  final  wreck."  In- 
vention, poetry,  music,  artistic  taste,  philanthropy,  intensity, 
and  originality,  are  sometimes  of  a  higher  order  among  these 
persons,  but  desultory,  half-finished  work  and  shiftlessness  are 
much  more  common.  With  many  of  them,  concentrated, 
sustained  effort,  and  attempts  to  keep  them  to  it,  are  impos- 
sible. Their  common-sense  perception  of  the  relations  of 
life,  executive  or  business  faculty  and  judgment,  are  seldom 
well  developed.  The  memory  is  now  and  then  extraordi- 
nary. They  are  apt  to  be  self-conscious,  egoistic,  and  mor- 
bidly conscious.  They  easily  become  victims  of  insomnia, 
neurasthenia,  hypochondria,  neuroticism,  hysteria,  or  insanity. 
They  offend  against  the  proprieties  of  life  and  commit  crime 
with  less  cause  or  provocation  than  other  persons.  While 
many  of  them  are  among  the  most  gifted  and  attractive  people 
in  their  community,  the  majority  are  otherwise,  and  possess  an 
uncommon  capacity  for  making  fools  of  themselves,  and  of  be- 
ing a  nuisance  to  their  friends  and  of  little  use  to  the  world."  ^ 
They  are  often  very  imitative ;  their  feelings  are  fervid  but 
shallow;  intense  and  sudden  likes  and  dislikes,  and  frequent 
alternations  between  love,  enmity,  and  indifference  occur. 
When  the  body  is  well  made,  nervous  disorders  are  less  fre- 
quent, but  often  occur  with  normal  physical  development. 
Nerve  strain  may  affect  nearly  every  organ  and  process.  Tal- 
bot agrees  with  Ewald  in  thinking  that  mercyism  or  cud- 
chewing,  bulimia  or  bovine  appetite,  acoria  or  lack  of  satiety 
in  eating,  and  a  certain  kind  of  catarrh  may  be  directly  due  to 
this  cause. 

What  Demoor  ^  calls  degenerate  evolution  exists  every- 
where in  both  the  biological  and  the  social  field.  Often  the 
adult  stage  is  suppressed,  especially  in  pedogenesis,  where 
sexual  organs  ripen  and  function  prematurely.  When  the 
social  organism  is  decaying,  it  does  not  readily  and  completely 
disappear,  but  drags  a  trail  of  debris  from  the  past,  and  degen- 

*  Degeneracy :   Tts  Causes,  Signs,  and  Results,  by  E.  S.  Talbot.     London,  1899, 

p.  155.        'Evolution  by  Atrophy.     New  York,  i8gq. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES      337 

crate  forms  soon  lose  the  power  to  reacquire  the  conditions  nor- 
mal to  their  more  perfect  ancestors,  as  Magnan  has  shown ;  so 
that  the  degenerate  condition  is  not  attained  by  simply  going 
backward  down  the  line  of  ascent,  but  is  a  new  point  of  de- 
parture, and  retrogression  is  therefore  a  somewhat  misleading 
term.  The  nauplius,  which  was  originally  a  crustacean  lead- 
ing an  independent  and  free  swimming  life  when  it  is  a  parasite 
on  the  crab,  w^hich  is  its  host,  loses  legs  and  senses,  and  can  by 
no  cultivation  or  environment  regain  the  original  nauplius  form. 

Another  of  the  most  extreme  biological  degenerations  is 
that  of  the  sea-squirt,  which  in  its  larval  state  is  a  verte- 
brate, but  when  it  matures  is  only  an  ascidian.  Lancaster 
shows  how  many  organisms  slide  down  the  phyletic  scale  and 
react  to  an  ever  less  complex  environment.  The  idiot  brain 
may  be  arrested  in  a  stage  very  similar  to  that  of  the  anthropoid 
or  even  the  saurian.  In  giantism  the  human  skeleton  may  re- 
vert to  a  state  that  suggests  that  of  the  gorilla.  This  is  also 
illustrated  in  some  of  the  degenerate  families  that  have  been 
studied  and  laboriously  traced,  in  whom  the  power  of  self-help 
is  hopelessly  gone.  A  good  illustration  of  this  principle  is  seen 
in  the  descendants  of  a  family  stem  explored  back  to  about 
1790,  and  some  indeterminable  time  after  that  represented  by 
thirty  families  with  sixty-two  individuals.  In  the  sixth  gener- 
ation a  total  of  1,750  persons  was  traced  of  an  estimated  total 
of  5,000,  and  with  an  amazing  percentage  of  vice,  crime, 
pauperism,  and  disease,  with  thousands  of  pages  of  history  in 
charity  society  records,  and  with  the  cost  to  the  communities  in 
which  they  lived  of  probably  several  hundred  thousand  dollars.^ 
The  same  is  true  of  other  notorious  families,  so  many  of  which 
have  lately  been  studied,  e.  g.,  the  Jukes,  the  Binswangers, 
Margarets,  Aubry's  Kerangal  family,  which  Zola  made  the 
basis  of  his  Rougons-Macquarts. 

We  saw  in  Chapter  II  that  many  monstrosities  are  due  to 
arrest  of  some  part  or  organ.  Cleft  palate,  wide-open  sutures, 
caudal  appendages,  etc.,  are  normal  at  certain  stages  of  embry- 
onic development,  and  many  structures  regularly  occurring  in 
the  lower  members  of  the  group  to  which  man  belongs  may  per- 
sist in  him  even  up  to  maturity.     We  know,  too,  that  certain 

*  The  Tribe  of  Ishmael,  by  O.  C.  McCulloch.     Proc.  Nat.  Confer«nce  of  Char- 
ities, Buffalo,  1888. 
23 


33 8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

races  of  men  are  ascendant,  and  others,  like  the  Bushmen  and 
Austrahans,  are  decadent  stocks.  Thus,  not  only  species,  in- 
cluding man,  but  his  various  organs  and  functions  are  evolving 
or  retrograding  to  some  extent  independently  of  each  other. 
From  this  biological  point  of  view  we  should  expect  that  excep- 
tional characters  and  conduct  would  be  found  correlated  with 
bodies  marked  by  anomalies,  disproportions,  lack  of  symmetry, 
and  stigmata  of  degeneration  and  hypertrophy.  Such  general 
considerations  led  to  and  have  been  justified  by  the  results  of 
criminal  anthropometry.  Poverty  and  crime  are  closely  cor- 
related with  starvation  of  body  and  of  mind,  so  that  both  are 
prone  to  arrest,  and  both  heredity  and  environment  cooperate  in 
producing  modifications  of  physical  structure  and  psychic 
powers.  Dawson  ^  found  among  boys  and  girls  in  reformatory 
institutions  a  tendency  to  shorter  stature,  lighter  weight,  dimin- 
ished strength  in  the  muscles  of  the  hand,  greater  sensitiveness 
to  pain,  small,  broad  heads,  broad  faces,  deformed  palates  and 
skulls,  defects  of  sight  and  hearing,  dulness  of  touch,  and  in- 
feriority in  attention,  memory,  and  association.  Degeneration 
of  mind  and  morals  is  usually  marked  by  morphological  devia- 
tions from  the  normal.  Face,  jaws,  mouth,  nose,  arms,  feet, 
legs,  trunk,  neck,  head  and  its  parts  may  be  too  small  or  too 
large  in  proportion  to  the  rest.  Among  functional  deviations 
are  abnormal  innervation  on  one  side  or  of  special  muscles  or 
of  vaso-motor  nerves,  developmental  irregularities  in  dentition, 
in  learning  to  walk  and  sit,  enuresis,  inclination  to  epileptic  and 
other  attacks,  incongruity  between  age  and  appearance ;  while 
the  psychic  stigmata  following  Meyer's  -  classification  are  ab- 
normal habits,  ideations,  actions,  sex  psychoses,  emotional  atti- 
tudes, egoism,  disequilibration,  imperative  ideas,  associated 
movements,  explosive  activity,  periodicity,  etc.  Clouston  says 
all  sorts  of  postponement  of  developmental  processes  and  all 
forms  of  asymmetry  about  the  head  and  face  should  be  consid- 
ered as  moral  danger-signals. 

Criminals  are  much  like  overgrown  children — egoistic,  fop- 
pish, impulsive,  gluttonous,  blind  to  the  rights  of  others,  and 
our  passions  tend  to  bring  us  to  childish  stages.     Goethe  de- 

*  A  Study  in  Youthful  Degeneracy,  by  George  E.  Dawson.     Ped.  Sem.,  Dec, 
1896,  vol.  iv,  pp.  221-258. 

*  American  Journal  of  Insanity,  Jan.,  1896. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     339 

clared  that  every  one  has  committed  crimes,  and  it  is  a  frequent 
remark  in  the  hterature  of  the  new  criminology  that  every  one 
would  be  in  prison  if  he  had  his  just  deserts,  and  that  if 
all  laws  were  exactly  enforced  there  would  soon  be  none  out- 
side its  walls  to  enforce  them.  Brouardel  describes  the  Paris 
gamin  as  loving  orgy,  excitement,  and  mischief,  even  his  play- 
fulness being  full  of  peccadillos,  precociously  bright  and  active 
from  about  eight  to  thirteen,  but  at  sixteen  plump,  lazy,  effemi- 
nate in  form  and  habits  and  often  partially  or  completely  bla:^e 
or  sexually  impotent.  Taverni  describes  the  youth  of  criminal 
children  as  marked  by  resistance  to  lessons.  They  are  refrac- 
tory to  the  moral  environment  and  without  response  to  educa- 
tional influences ;  almost  always  morally  blind  and  often  very 
superstitious ;  generally  with  good  appetites  and  sleeping  well, 
etc.  Dr.  Wines  wrote  me,  "  With  regard  to  the  kind  of  temp- 
tation which  exerts  the  greatest  influence  over  the  child's  mind, 
I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  criminal  habit  commences  in  most 
young  persons  either  with  illicit  sexual  indulgence  or  with  ex- 
travagance and  the  contracting  of  debts."  The  power  of  self- 
control  is  latent  and  undeveloped,  and  its  necessity  must  be 
slowly  learned.  If  he  is  degenerate  or  of  a  criminal  type,  or 
if  his  surroundings  are  unfavorable,  the  young  criminal  fails 
to  acquire  this  power  and  falls  a  victim  to  the  same  appetites 
and  impulses  which  all  normal  persons  feel,  but  repress.  Per- 
haps the  animal  part  of  his  nature  is  abnormally  and  congeni- 
tally  disproportionate  to  the  intellectual,  so  that  there  is  no 
inner  opposition  to  the  gratification  of  his  desires.  But  grow- 
ing insight  shows  the  futility  of  crime  and  leads  to  prudence, 
so  that  the  percentage  of  criminals  at  heart  in  early  life  is 
lessened  during  later  adolescence.  Indeed  it  seems  very  clear 
that  much  of  the  art  of  living  consists  in  self-control,  the  devel- 
opment of  which  in  the  individual  is  the  unconscious  but  per- 
haps primary  purpose  of  family,  church,  state,  laws,  customs, 
and  most  social  institutions,  and  that  the  "  progress  of  the 
world  and  the  advance  of  personal  liberty  is  just  in  proportion 
as  the  power  of  self-control  has  been  developed  in  the  com- 
munity at  large."  If  this  is  so,  magnanimity  and  a  large  in- 
dulgent parental  and  pedagogical  attitude  is  the  proper  one  to- 
ward all,  and  especially  toward  juvenile  offenders. 

Low  as  the  intelligence  of  criminals  often  is  when  measured 


340  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

by  conventional  or  educational  standards,  they  are  almost 
always  unusually  sly  and  cunning,  childish,  and  even  animal. 
Parasites  on  society  like  those  on  animal  bodies  need  a  peculiar 
kind  of  adaptation,  and  we  may  perhaps  say  that  their  intelli- 
gence is  on  a  low  plane,  but  is  extremely  well  developed.  This 
has  been  well  brought  out  by  Ferriani.^  It  is  the  insight  of  the 
street  boy  highly  developed,  and  those  accomplished  in  crime 
often  have  a  well-developed  philosophy  of  life,  strange  and 
bizarre  to  normal  minds,  but  full  of  fascination  and  with  stand- 
points, facts,  and  dialects  which  are  remarkably  adapted  to  sur- 
vival, but  perhaps  on  the  whole  not  so  very  much  nearer  that  of 
culture  and  refinement  than  to  the  sagacity  of  the  higher  ani- 
mals. The  contagion  of  this  psychosis  for  a  mind  innately 
criminal  is  great.  The  young  offender  soon  comes  to  feel  him- 
self an  enemy  of  society ;  to  regard  legitimate  business  as  legal- 
ized theft  and  robbery;  religion  as  a  cloak  for  hypocrisy; 
clergymen  as  paid  to  preach  or  labor  with  prisoners;  doctors 
kill  or  cure  as  is  for  their  interest ;  lawyers  are  licensed  robbers 
or  cunning  knaves ;  purity  is  a  mere  pretense ;  the  world  is 
ruled  by  selfishness ;  the  courts  or  justice  shops  are  shams ;  and 
those  who  prey  upon  the  weaker  sides  of  human  nature  know 
the  foibles  of  even  the  good  only  too  well.  The  seasoned  young 
criminal  feels  himself  superior  to  the  plodder  who  labors  legiti- 
mately because  he  lacks  the  wit  or  adroitness  to  do  otherwise. 
All  who  live  comfortably  seem  to  him  rich,  and  all  the  rich  are 
so  by  robbery  of  the  poor,  who  may  thus  justly  take,  if  they 
can,  their  own.  Man  wants  only  a  bottle,  pipe,  a  mistress, 
warmth,  clothing,  and  food ;  and  this  the  world  owes  every  one. 
His  view  he  profoundly  believes  to  be  the  right  and  true  one, 
but  society  outvotes  and  the  police  can  overpower  him.  Hence 
it  is  well  sometimes  to  sham  virtues,  penitence,  and  even  re- 
ligion. We  have  not  yet  in  all  the  interesting  literature  of 
criminology  any  adequate  presentation  of  what  may  be  called 
the  philosophy  of  feral  mankind,  who  live  in  the  midst  of 
civilization  but  are  undomesticated  by  it,  and  until  we  have  we 
can  not  realize  the  infatuation  which  the  first  contact  with  it 
has  at  a  certain  stage  upon  the  minds  of  youth  not  duly 
fortified  against  it. 

Extreme  views  of  the  abnormality  of  crime  may  well  make 

'  Schlaue  und  gliickliche  Verbrecher.     Berlin,  1899. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     34 1 

US  pause,  when  we  reflect  on  its  relativity.  Socrates  and  Jesus 
were  criminals  according  to  the  legal  standards  of  their  day. 
We  confine  and  kill  those  who  in  the  days  of  Abraham  and 
Ulysses  or  in  positions  of  power  and  influence  would  be  heroes. 
Of  the  ten  chief  crimes  of  the  Hebrews  of  old,  only  one  is  now 
a  crime.  Many  of  the  knights  and  barons  of  the  Middle  Ages 
were  brigands,  but  were  not  then  outlawed  by  public  sentiment 
as  abnormal.  There  is  deep  and  wide-spread  feeling  in 
every  community  that  in  extreme  hunger  all  things  belong  to 
all.  The  thought  of  killing  our  own  fathers  or  children  is 
monstrous,  but  we  kill  the  fathers  and  children  of  other  people 
with  impunity  in  war.  Many  of  our  greatest  criminals  would 
have  been  normal  and  perhaps  eminently  useful  citizens  in  other 
ages  and  places.  Judged  by  severe  and  inner  standards  of 
morals,  most  of  us  have  committed  every  crime.  None  can 
read  such  histories  of  crime  as  Pike  or  Pelham  without  realiz- 
ing how  large  an  area  of  conduct,  now  thought  legitimate,  has 
been  punished  as  crime,  and  even  how  much  that  was  once  for- 
bidden is  now  allowed.  There  is  a  pregnant  truth  in  the  say- 
ing that  every  society  has  just  the  kind  and  number  of  criminals 
that  it  deserves.  Ideally  we  can  well  conceive  that  a  state 
might  be  constructed  to  produce  within  large  limits  any  percent- 
age of  crime  required,  just  as  almost  any  degree  of  mortality 
could  be  controlled  by  hygienic  arrangements.  Morally,  too,  it 
is  a  truism  that  no  act  in  itself  may  not  become  either  ex- 
tremely virtuous  or  extremely  vicious,  according  to  its  set- 
ting in  circumstances  and  environment.  It  is  from  this  point 
of  view  that  the  question  of  pure  criminal  types  should  be  ap- 
proached. The  refinements  of  the  Bertillon  measurements,  it 
will  then  be  seen,  are  just  as  likely  to  differentiate  a  butcher, 
tailor,  drummer  type  of  man,  as  a  thief  and  murderer  type, 
each  with  more  or  less  well  marked  and  characteristic  physical 
and  psychic  traits.  Several  forms  of  crime  require  supernor- 
mal powers  of  body  and  mind,  and  it  seems  an  insufferable  and 
provincial  assumption  that  our  conventionalities,  our  moral 
ideas,  and  still  less  our  laws  are  so  exact  and  perfect,  that  all 
who  transgress  them  are  monsters.  Vice  and  crime  are  so 
manifold  and  diversified,  so  highly  colored  with  genuine  human 
interests,  and  open  such  wide  fields  of  originality  and  differen- 
tiation of  human  varieties,  that  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  feral 
traits  of  primal  man  often  seem  so  attractive  to  children  and 


34^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

even  to  women,  compared  to  the  more  monotonous,  tamed,  and 
toned  down  humdrum  Hfe  of  good  citizenship.  There  is  a 
certain  fascination,  even  for  adults,  in  reading  the  chronicles  of 
crime  which  often  stir  the  blood  more  than  romance,  because 
truth  is  stranger  than  fiction.  They  awaken  in  every  candid 
heart  the  confession  that  it  might  have  consented  to,  if  not  have 
committed,  most  of  the  recorded  moral  aberrations,  and  sug- 
gest a  regret  that  modern  youth  prefers  the  stories  of  more  cor- 
rupting private  vices  to  the  more  roistering  crimes  of  old, 
which  certainly  had  more  blood  and  iron  in  them.  Effrontery, 
audacity,  supercleverness  in  committing  crime,  escaping  de- 
tection, or  evading  punishment  always  win  a  certain  admira- 
tion, especially  in  youth.  When  we  have  an  ideal  system  of 
teaching  ethics  at  this  stage,  we  shall  have  learned  how  to  utilize 
criminology  which  can  be  turned  to  far  higher  ethical  utility 
than  the  current  theories  about  the  abstract  nature  of  goodness 
or  the  hedonistic  calculus,  and  just  in  proportion  as  civiliza- 
tion and  practical  sociology  become  developed,  they  will  enable 
the  state  and  community  to  utilize  most  of  the  energy  now 
wasted  in  crime  by  devising  more  wholesome  and  natural  ex- 
pressions for  the  instincts  that  now  motivate  it.  One  thing  is 
certain  that  the  great  body  of  crime  is  not  to  be  essentially  re- 
duced by  criminal  codes,  however  skilfully  drawn,  but  only  by 
bettering  the  individual  and  social  conditions  of  the  community 
at  large. 

The  greatest  need  of  the  penologist  and  the  criminologist 
is  the  further  study,  by  expert  methods,  of  individual  cases  and 
their  relations  to  the  social  environment.  We  must  fathom  and 
explore  the  deeper  strata  of  the  soul,  personal  and  collective, 
to  make  our  knowledge  really  preventive,  and  recognize  the 
function  of  the  psychologist,  pedagogue,  and  the  physician, 
which  should  be  far  more  prominent  for  youth  than  for  older 
offenders.  If  the  ideal  pauper  is  feeble  and  idiotic,  the  ideal 
criminal  is  a  brave  man  in  the  prime  of  life,  who  plans  and 
executes  great  crimes  and  not  only  escapes  detection,  but  con- 
vinces the  community  that  he  is  not  only  honest,  but  noble.^ 
The  fact  is  that  "  crime  and  honesty  run  in  the  lines  of  greatest 
vitality,  and  the  qualities  that  make  contrivers  of  crime  are  sub- 
stantially the  same  that  will  make  men  successful  in  honest  pur- 

*  See  Dugdale :  The  Jukes,  pp.  47  and  53. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     343 

suits."  Burglary,  e.  g.,  requires  a  strong  body,  a  cool  head, 
presence  of  mind,  a  high  degree  of  physical,  and  what  in  a 
better  cause  would  be  called  moral  courage.  Wherever  there 
is  vitality  and  especially  growth,  there  can  be  reform  or  inter- 
changeability  of  careers,  for  many  criminals  have  the  qualities 
that  are  essential  to  success  in  normal  careers,  and  need  only  a 
new  direction  and  sphere  of  effort.  Here  we  need  not  only  the 
pettifogging  pedagogy  of  school  methods,  but  the  largest  edu- 
cational philosophy  based  on  a  study  of  physical  and  mental 
character,  which  can  measure  the  decay  of  will  which  lapses 
so  much  easier  and  earlier  than,  e.  g.,  erotic  passion  in  unregu- 
lated character  3 ;  which  can  learn  the  means  of  developing  the 
element  of  continuity  lacking  in  criminals ;  that  can  take  large 
views  of  life  and  estimate  the  difference  between  the  formative 
influences  of  precept  and  example  which  predominate  in  youth 
and  those  of  experience  and  social  compulsion,  which  become 
more  efficient  factors  of  conduct  after  twenty;  that  under- 
stands how  the  development  of  character,  like  everything  else, 
is  in  the  line  of  least  resistance ;  which  can  study  and  compare 
the  modes  of  drawing  off  energy  from  vice  to  industry ;  and 
which  can  metamorphose  character  during  the  later  stages  of 
adolescence  to  a  degree  hitherto  unsuspected,  if  prison  life  has 
not  broken  down  independence  and  institutionalized  character. 
Families  like  the  Jukes,  which  have  now  been  studied  in  half  a 
dozen  leading  countries,  are  marked  by  great  vitality,  igno- 
rance, and  poverty.  The  social  damage  they  inflict,  measured 
by  the  cost  of  police  and  prison  alone,  is  vast,  and  Dr.  Guy 
estimates  their  probable  mental  unsoundness  as  thirty-four  times 
that  of  the  average  in  communities.  Dr.  Bruce  Thomson,  who 
studied  their  diseases,  says  that  in  all  his  experience  he  never 
has  seen  such  an  accumulation  of  morbidities  as  their  post- 
mortem examinations  reveal.  Few  die  of  one  disease,  and 
often  almost  every  organ  is  tainted,  and  he  adds  that  although 
their  intellects  are  inferior  they  are  all  excessively  cunning. 
Arrested  development  perhaps  tends  to  produce  fit  fulness  of 
character,  and  if  we  accept  the  estimate  that  "  for  small  crimes 
there  are  about  lOO  to  150  offenses  to  one  conviction,  and 
for  big  jobs  five  offenses  to  one  conviction,"  we  shall  realize  the 
magnitude  of  the  problem. 

The  relations  of  crime  to  atavism,  heredity,  moral  anomala, 


344  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

insanity,  degeneration,  temperament,  sex,  race,  age,  climate, 
food,  ignorance,  vice,  sin,  misery,  imitation,  society,  passion, 
free-will,  constitute  problems  vast  enough  for  any  academic 
department.  When  we  add  to  these  themes  those  of  penology 
and  treatment  generally,  to  say  nothing  of  anthropometry,  we 
shall  find  that  we  are  dealing  with  almost  all  the  diseases  of 
society  and  the  state  besides  many  that  center  in  the  person.  Per- 
haps no  single  writer  has  treated  these  latter  themes  in  a  broader 
and  more  thorough  way  than  Proal,  whose  broad  philosophy 
of  the  relations  between  crime  and  suffering  and  whose  special 
study  of  suicide  are  both  admirable  illustrations  of  the  spirit 
and  method  proper  for  such  work  (and  are  worthy  the  aca- 
demic coronation  which  the  former  received),^  from  their  sug- 
gestive, comparative  standpoint  of  law  and  ethics.  He  has 
little  sympathy  with  the  many  theories  that  would  separate 
legal  and  moral  responsibility,  or  with  the  excessive  solici- 
tude which  extreme  determinists  feel  for  criminals.  Atten- 
uated responsibility  has  its  place,  and  he  defends  remorse  from 
the  criticisms  now  so  often  made  against  its  legitimacy ;  would 
reserve  a  large  place  for  premeditation  among  the  motives  of 
crime ;  criticizes  the  extreme  Darwinistic  theory  of  race  purga- 
tion by  the  death  penalty;  everywhere  vindicates  the  utility, 
necessity,  and  virtue  of  free-will ;  and  insists  upon  the  rigor  of 
social  and  moral  expiation  which,  however,  should  never  pass 
the  exigencies  of  public  security,  but  should  always  be  effective 
for  intimidation  and  prevention. 

We  are  here  concerned  with  the  great  field  of  criminology 
only  so  far  as  it  sheds  a  rather  direct  light  upon  juvenile 
crime,  and  this  especially  requires  us  to  consider  more  fully 
its  embryology  in  childhood,  and  as  was  also  the  case  with  in- 
sanity, to  dwell  upon  its  relation  to  normal  moral  life.  For 
this  purpose,  we  find  in  the  newly  opened  field  of  pedagogical 
pathology  suggestive  beginnings  that  must  hereafter  be  con- 
sidered with  care  and  interest.  This,  which  in  some  sense  orig- 
inated in  Striimpell's  publication  of  that  name  in  1890,  was  not 
much  advanced  by  the  arid  Herbartian  conceptions  which  he 
used,  but  it  was  reserved  for  Kraepelin,  Demoor,  Bauer,  and 

*  La  Crime  et  la  Peine.     Paris,   1894,  pp.  548;  Le  Crime  et  I9  Suicide  Fas- 
^ionnels.     Paris,  1900. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     345 

especially  Ufer,  Triiper  and  the  contributors  to  their  journal 
devoted  to  the  faults  of  children  to  really  develop  here  a  center 
of  great  interest.  Strumpell  found  314  faults  mentioned  and 
realized  that  "  crimes  are  faults  writ  large  and  idiocy  is  but 
the  extreme  of  dulness."  Siegert  ^  groups  children  of  prob- 
lematical nature  into  the  following  sixteen  classes :  the  sad,  the 
extremely  good  or  bad,  star-gazers,  scatter-brains,  apathetic, 
misanthropic,  doubters  and  investigators,  reverent,  critical,  ex- 
ecutive, stupid  and  clownish,  naive,  funny,  anamnesic,  disposed 
to  learn,  and  bla::c;  patience,  foresight,  and  self-control,  he 
thinks,  are  chiefly  needed. 

An  unique  and  interesting  study  was  undertaken  by  Kozle^ 
by  collecting  and  studying  thirty  German  writers  on  pedagog- 
ical subjects  since  Pestalozzi,  and  cataloguing  all  the  words 
they  use  describing  the  faults  of  children.  In  all,  this  gave 
914  faults,  far  more  in  number  than  their  virtues.  These 
were  classified  as  native  and  of  external  origin,  acute  and 
chronic,  egoistic  and  altruistic,  greed,  perverted  honor,  self- 
will,  falsity,  laziness,  frivolity,  distraction,  precocity,  timidity, 
envy  and  malevolence,  ingratitude,  quarrelsomeness,  cruelty, 
superstition,  and  the  latter  fifteen  were  settled  on  as  resultant 
groups,  and  the  authors  who  describe  them  best  are  quoted. 

Bohannon  ^  on  the  basis  of  questionnaire  returns  classified 
peculiar  children  as  heavy,  tall,  short,  small,  strong,  weak,  deft, 
agile,  clumsy,  beautiful,  ugly,  deformed,  birthmarked,  keen  and 
precocious,  defective  in  sense,  mind,  and  speech,  nervous,  clean, 
dainty,  dirty,  orderly,  obedient,  disobedient,  disorderly,  teasing, 
buoyant,  buffoon,  cruel,  selfish,  generous,  sympathetic,  inquisi- 
tive, lying,  ill-tempered,  silent,  dignified,  frank,  loquacious, 
courageous,  timid,  whining,  spoiled,  gluttonous,  and  only  child, 

Marro  ^  tabulated  the  conduct  of  3,012  boys  in  gymnasial 
and  lyceal  classes  in  Italy  from  eleven  to  eighteen  years  of  age 
(see  next  page).  Conduct  was  marked  as  good,  bad,  and  in- 
different, according  to  the  teacher's  estimate,  and  was  good  at 
eighteen  in  74  per  cent  of  the  cases;  at  eleven  in  70  per  cent; 

*  Problematische  Kindernaturen.     Leipzig,  1889. 

*  Die  p'adagogische  Pathologie  in  der  Erziehungskunde  des  19  Jahrhunderts. 
Giitersloh,  1893,  p.  494. 

^Peculiar  and  Exceptional  Children.     Ped.  Sem. .  Oct.,  1896,  vol    iv,  pp.  3-60 

*  La  Puberte.     Tafala  Graf.     I,  p.  52. 


346 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


ige 

11 

12 

U! 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

74 

73 

72 

71 

70 

69 

»  68 

|67 

1  66 

64 
63 
63 
61 
60 
59 
58 

r 

/ 

( 

y 

-\ 

/ 

\ 

r^ 

\ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

^ 

J 

\y 

\ 

r 

\ 

/ 

r 

f 

\/ 

\J 

Number 
of  Cms  < 

362 

409 

4;3i 

4:34 

427 

314 

ayo 

345 

at  seventeen  in  69  per  cent ;  and  at  fourteen  in  only  58  per 
cent.    !n  positively  bad  conduct,  the  age  of  fifteen  led,  thirteen 

and  fourteen  were  but 
little  better,  while  it  im- 
proved at  sixteen,  seven- 
teen, and  eighteen.  In 
general,  conduct  was 
good  at  eleven ;  declined 
at  twelve  and  thirteen; 
sank  to  its  worst  at 
fourteen ;  and  then  im- 
proved in  yearly  incre- 
ments that  did  not  dif- 
fer much,  and  at  seven- 
teen was  nearly  as  good 
as  at  eleven,  and  at 
eighteen  four  points 
better. 

He  computed  also 
the  following  percentage  table  of  the  causes  of  punishments  in 
certain  Italian  schools  for  girls  and  boys  near  pubescent  ages : 

Boys.  Girls. 

Quarrels  and  blows 53-90  17.4 

Laziness,  negligence 1.80  '      21.3 

Untidiness 10.70  24.7 

Improper  language 41  14.6 

Indecent  acts  and  words i.oo  .24 

Refusal  to  work 82  1.26 

Various  offenses  against  discipline. . . .  ig.oo  19-9 

Truancy 9.60  .0 

Plots  to  run  away 1.70  .0 

Running  away 72  .0 

Mr.  Sears  ^  reports  in  percentages  statistics  of  the  punish- 
ments received  by  a  thousand  children  forthefollowingoffenses : 
Disorder,  17^;  disobedience,  16;  carelessness,  13^;  running 
away,  I2f;  quarreling,  10;  tardiness,  6f ;  rudeness,  6;  fight- 
ing, 5^;  lying,  4;  stealing,  i  ;  miscellaneous,  7;\.  He  names 
a  long  list  of  punishable  offenses,  such  as  malice,  swearing, 
obscenity,  bullying,  lying,  cheating,  untidiness,  insolence,  in- 
sult, conspiracy,  disobedience,  obstinacy,  rudeness,  noisiness, 
ridicule;  injury  to  books,  building,  or  other  property:  and 
analyzes  at  length  the  kinds  of  punishment,  modes  of  making  it 

'  Home  and  School  Punishments.     Ped.  Sem.,  March,  1899,  vol.  vi,  pp.  159- 
187. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     347 

fit  the  offense  and  the  nature  of  the  child,  the  discipline  of 
consequences,  lapse  of  time  between  the  offense  and  its  punish- 
ment, the  principle  of  slight  but  sure  tasks  as  penalties,  etc. 

Triplett  ^  attempted  a  census  of  faults  and  defects  named  by 
the  teacher.  Here  inattention  by  far  led  all  others.  Defects 
of  sense  and  speech,  carelessness,  indifference,  lack  of  honor  and 
of  self-restraint,  laziness,  dreamy  listlessness,  nervousness,  men- 
tal incapacity,  lack  of  consideration  for  others,  vanity,  affecta- 
tion, disobedience,  untruthfulness,  grumbling,  etc.,  follow. 
Inattention  to  a  degree  that  makes  some  children  at  the  mercy 
of  their  environment  and  all  its  changes,  and  their  mental  life 
one  perpetual  distraction,  is  one  which  teachers,  of  course,  nat- 
urally observe.  Children's  views  of  their  own  faults  and  those 
of  other  children  lay  a  very  different  emphasis.  Here  fighting, 
bullying,  and  teasing  lead  all  others;  then  come  stealing,  bad 
manners,  lying,  disobedience,  truancy,  cruelty  to  animals,  un- 
tidiness, selfishness,  etc.  Parents'  aspect  of  this  subject  Trip- 
lett found  still  different.  Here  wilfulness  and  obstinacy  led  all 
others  with  teasing,  quarreling,  dislike  of  application  and  effort, 
and  many  others  following.  The  vast  number  of  faults  men- 
tioned contrasts  very  strikingly  with  the  seven  deadly  sins. 

In  a  suggestive  statistical  study  on  the  relations  of  the 
conduct  of  children  to  the  weather.  Dexter  ^  found  that  ex- 
cessive humidity  was  most  productive  of  misdemeanors ;  that 
when  the  temperature  was  between  90  and  100  the  probability  of 
bad  conduct  was  increased  300  per  cent,  when  between  80  and 
90  it  was  increased  104  per  cent.  Abnormal  barometric  pres- 
sure, whether  great  or  small,  was  found  to  increase  misconduct 
50  per  cent;  abnormal  movements  of  the  wind  increased  it 
from  20  to  66  per  cent ;  while  the  time  of  year  and  precipita- 
tion seemed  to  have  almost  no  effect.  While  the  effect  of 
weather  has  been  generally  recognized  by  superintendents  and 
teachers  and  directors  of  prisons  and  asylums,  and  even  by 
banks,  which  in  London  do  not  permit  clerks  to  do  the  more  im- 
portant bookkeeping  during  very  foggy  days,  the  statistical 
estimates  of  its  effect  in  general  need  larger  numbers  for  more 
valuable  determinations.     Temperature  is  known  to  have   a 

*  A  Study  of  the  Faults  of  Children.      Ped.  Sem.,  June,  1903,  p.  200  et  seq. 
'The  Child  and  the  Weather,  by  Edwin  G.  Dexter.     Ped.   Sem.,  April,  1898, 
vol.  V,  pp.  512-522. 


348  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

very  distinct  effect  upon  crime,  especially  suicide  and  truancy. 
Workmen  do  less  in  bad  weather,  blood  pressure  is  modi- 
fied,  etc.^ 

In  his  study  of  truancy,  Kline  -  starts  with  the  assump- 
tion that  the  maximum  metabolism  is  always  consciously  or 
unconsciously  sought,  and  that  migrations  are  generally  away 
from  the  extremes  of  hot  and  cold  toward  an  optimum  tempera- 
ture. The  curve  of  truancies  and  runaways  increases  in  a 
marked  ratio  at  puberty,  which  probably  represents  the  age  of 
natural  majority  among  primitive  people.  Dislike  of  school, 
the  passion  for  out-of-door  life,  and  more  universal  in- 
terests in  man  and  nature  now  arise,  so  that  runaways  may 
be  interpreted  as  an  instinctive  rebellion  against  limitations  of 
freedom  and  unnatural  methods  of  education  as  well  as  against 
poor  homes.  Hunger  is  one  of  its  most  potent,  although  often 
unconscious  causes.  The  habitual  environment  now  begins  to 
seem  dull  and  there  is  a  great  increase  in  impatience  at  re- 
straint. Sometimes  there  is  a  mania  for  simply  going  away 
and  enjoying  the  liberty  of  nomadic  life.  Just  as  good  people 
in  foreign  parts  sometimes  allow  themselves  unwonted  liber- 
ties, so  vagrancy  increases  crime.  The  passion  to  get  to  and 
play  at  or  in  the  water  is  often  strangely  dominant.  It  seems 
so  fine  out  of  doors,  especially  in  the  spring,  and  the  woods  and 
fields  make  it  so  hard  to  voluntarily  incarcerate  oneself  in  the 
schoolroom,  that  pubescent  boys  and  even  girls  often  feel  like 
animals  in  captivity.  They  long  intensely  for  the  utter  aban- 
don of  a  wilder  life,  and  very  characteristic  is  the  frequent  dis- 
carding of  foot  and  head  dress  and  even  garments  in  the  blind 
instinct  to  realize  again  the  conditions  of  primitive  man.  The 
manifestations  of  this  impulse,  if  read  aright,  are  grave  arraign- 
ments of  the  lack  of  adaptability  of  the  child's  environment  to 
his  disposition  and  nature,  and  with  home  restraints  once  broken 
the  liabilities  to  every  crime,  especially  theft,  are  enormously 
increased.  The  truant,  although  according  to  Kline's  measure- 
ments slightly  smaller  than  the  average  child,  is  more  energetic 
and  is  generally  capable  of  the  greatest  activity  and  usefulness 

^  Psychic  Effects  of  the  Weather,  by  J.  S.  Lemon.  Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  Jan., 
1894,  vol.  vi,  pp.  277-279. 

^  Truancy  as  Related  to  the  Migrating  Instinct,  by  L.  W.  Kline.  Ped.  Sena., 
Jan.,  1898,  vol.  V,  pp.  381-420. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    349 

in  more  out-of-door  vocations.  Truancy  is  augmented,  too, 
just  in  proportion  as  legitimate  and  interesting  physical  ex- 
ercise is  denied. 

The  vagrant,  itinerant,  vagabond,  gadabout,  hobo,  and 
tramp,  that  Riis  has  made  so  interesting,  is  an  arrested,  degen- 
erate, or  perverted  being  who  abhors  work;  feels  that  the 
world  owes  him  a  living ;  and  generally  has  his  first  real  nomad 
experience  in  the  teens  or  earlier.  It  is  a  chronic  illusion 
of  youth  that  gives  "  elsewhere  "  a  special  charm.  In  the  im- 
mediate present  things  are  mean,  dulled  by  wont,  and  perhaps 
even  nauseating  because  of  familiarity.  There  must  be  a 
change  of  scene  to  see  the  world ;  man  is  not  sessile  but  loco- 
motor; and  the  moment  his  life  becomes  migratory  all  the  re- 
straints and  responsibilities  of  settled,  life  vanish.  It  is  possible 
to  steal  and  pass  on  undiscovered  and  unsuspected,  and  to  steal 
again.  The  vagabond  escapes  the  control  of  public  sentiment, 
which  normally  is  an  external  conscience,  and  having  none  of 
his  own  within  him  thus  lapses  to  a  feral  state.  The  constraint 
of  city,  home,  and  school  is  especially  irksome,  and  if  to  this 
repulsion  is  added  the  attraction  of  a  love  of  nature  and  of 
perpetual  change,  we  have  the  diathesis  of  the  roadsman 
already  developed.  Adolescence  is  the  normal  time  of  emanci- 
pation from  the  parental  roof,  when  youth  seeks  to  set  up  a 
home  of  its  own,  but  the  apprentice  to  life  must  wander  far  and 
long  enough  to  find  the  best  habits  in  which  to  set  up  for  him- 
self. This  is  the  spring  season  of  emigration,  and  it  should  be 
an  indispensable  part  of  every  life  curriculum,  just  before  settle- 
ment, to  travel  far  and  wide,  if  resources  and  inclination  per- 
mit. But  this  stage  should  end  in  wisely  chosen  settlement 
where  the  young  life  can  be  independently  developed,  and  that 
with  more  complacency  and  satisfaction  because  the  place  has 
been  wisely  chosen  on  the  basis  of  a  wide  comparison.  The 
chronic  vagrant  has  simply  failed  to  develop  the  reductives  of 
this  normal  stage. 

Crime  is  cryptogamous  and  flourishes  in  concealment,  so 
that  falsehood  not  only  facilitates  but  certain  types  of  lies  often 
cause  and  are  caused  by  it.  The  beginning  of  wisdom  in  treat- 
ment is  to  discriminate  between  good  and  bad  lies.  My  own 
study  ^  of  the  lies  of  300  normal  children,  by  a  method  care- 

'  Children's  Lies.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  Jan.,  1890,  vol.  iii,  pp.  59-70. 


35^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

fully  devised  in  order  to  avoid  all  indelicacy  to  the  childish 
consciousness,  suggested  the  following  distinct  species  of  lies. 
It  is  often  a  v^ell-marked  epoch  when  the  young  child  first 
learns  that  it  can  imagine  and  state  things  that  have  no  objec- 
tive counterpart  in  its  life,  and  there  is  often  a  weird  intoxi- 
cation when  some  absurd  and  monstrous  statement  is  made, 
while  the  first  sensation  of  a  deliberate  break  with  truth  causes  a 
real  excitement  which  is  often  the  birth  pang  of  the  imagi- 
nation. More  commonly  this  is  seen  in  childish  play,  which 
owes  a  part  of  its  charm  to  self-deception.  Children  make  be- 
lieve they  are  animals,  doctors,  ogres,  play  school,  that  they  are 
dead,  mimic  all  they  see  and  hear.  Idealizing  temperaments 
sometimes  prompt  children  of  three  or  four  to  suddenly  assert 
that  they  saw  a  pig  with  five  ears,  apples  on  a  cherry-tree,  and 
other  Munchausen  wonders,  which  really  means  merely  that 
they  have  had  a  new  mental  combination  independently  of  ex- 
perience. Sometimes  their  fancy  is  almost  visualization  and 
develops  into  a  kind  of  mythopeic  faculty  which  spins  clever 
yarns  and  suggests  in  a  sense,  quite  as  pregnant  as  Froschmer 
asserts  of  all  mental  activity  and  of  the  universe  itself,  that  all 
their  life  is  imagination.  Its  control  and  not  its  elimination 
in  a  Gradgrind  age  of  crass  facts  is  what  should  be  sought  in 
the  interests  of  the  highest  truthfulness  and  of  the  evolution 
of  thought  as  something  above  reality,  which  prepares  the 
way  for  imaginative  literature.  The  life  of  Hartley  Cole- 
ridge, by  his  brother,  is  one  of  many  illustrations.  He  fancied 
a  cataract  of  what  he  named  "  jug- force  "  would  burst  out  in  a 
certain  field  and  flow  between  populous  banks,  where  an  ideal 
government,  long  wars,  and  even  a  reform  in  spelling,  would 
prevail,  illustrated  in  a  journal  devoted  to  the  affairs  of  this 
realm — all  these  developed  in  his  imagination,  where  they  ex- 
isted with  great  reality  for  years.  The  vividness  of  this  fancy 
resembles  the  pseudo-hallucinations  of  Kandinsky.  Two  sisters 
used  to  say,  let  us  play  we  are  sisters,  as  if  this  made  the  relation 
more  real.  Cagliostro  found  adolescent  boys  particularly  apt  for 
training  for  his  exhibition  of  phrenological  impostures,  illus- 
trating his  thirty-five  faculties.  He  lied  when  he  confessed 
he  had  lied,  said  a  young  Sancho  Panza,  who  had  believed  the 
wild  tales  of  another  boy  who  later  admitted  their  falsity.  Sir 
James  Mackintosh,  near  puberty,  after  reading  Roman  history, 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    35 1 

used  to  fancy  himself  the  Emperor  of  Constantinople,  and  car- 
ried on  the  administration  of  the  realm  for  hours  at  a  time.  His 
fancies  never  quite  became  convictions,  but  adolescence  is  the 
golden  age  of  this  kind  of  dreamery  and  reverie  which  supple- 
ments reality  and  totalizes  our  faculties,  and  often  gives  a 
special  charm  to  dramatic  activities  and  in  morbid  cases  to 
simulation  and  dissimulation.  It  is  a  state  from  which  some 
of  the  bad,  but  far  more  of  th'e  good  qualities  of  life  and  mind 
arise.  These  are  the  noble  lies  of  poetry,  art,  and  idealism, 
but  their  pedagogic  regimen  must  be  wise. 

Again  with  children  as  with  savages,  truth  depends  largely 
upon  personal  likes  and  dislikes.  It  is  for  friends,  and  lies  are 
felt  to  be  quite  right  for  enemies.  The  young  often  see  no 
wrong  in  lies  their  friends  wish  told,  but  may  collapse  and 
confess  when  asked  if  they  would  have  told  their  mother  thus. 
Boys  best  keep  up  complotted  lies  and  are  surer  to  own  up  if 
caught  than  girls.  It  is  harder  to  cheat  in  school  with  a 
teacher  who  is  liked.  Friendships  are  cemented  by  confidences 
and  secrets,  and  when  they  wane,  promises  not  to  tell  weaken 
in  their  validity.  Lies  to  the  priest,  and  above  all  to  God,  are 
the  worst.  All  this  makes  special  attention  to  friendships, 
leaders,  and  favorites  important,  and  suggests  the  high  value  of 
science  for  general  veracity. 

The  worst  lies,  perhaps,  are  those  of  selfishness.  They  ease 
children  over  many  hard  places  in  life,  and  are  convenient 
covers  for  weakness  and  vice.  These  lies  are,  on  the  whole, 
judging  from  our  census,  most  prevalent.  They  are  also  most 
corrupting  and  hard  to  correct.  All  bad  habits  particularly 
predispose  to  the  lie  of  concealment,  for  those  who  do  wrong 
are  almost  certain  to  have  recourse  to  falsehood,  and  the  sense 
of  meanness  thus  slowly  bred,  which  may  be  met  by  appeals 
to  honor,  for  so  much  of  which  school  life  is  responsible,  is 
often  mitigated  by  the  fact  that  falsehoods  are  frequently  re- 
sorted to  in  moments  of  danger  and  excitement,  are  easily  for- 
gotten when  it  is  over,  and  rarely  rankle.  These,  even  more 
than  the  pseudomaniac  cases  mentioned  later,  grow  rankly  in 
those  with  criminal  predispositions. 

The  lie  heroic  is  often  justified  as  a  means  of  noble  ends. 
Youth  has  an  instinct  which  is  wholesome  for  viewing  moral 
situations  as  wholes.     Callow  casualists  are  fond  of  declaring 


35 2i  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

that  it  would  be  a  duty  to  state  that  their  mother  was  out  when 
she  was  in,  if  it  would  save  her  life,  although  they  perhaps 
would  not  lie  to  save  their  own.  A  doctor,  many  suggested, 
might  tell  an  overanxious  patient  or  friend  that  there  was  hope, 
saving  his  conscience  perhaps  by  reflecting  that  there  was  hope, 
although  they  had  it  while  he  had  none.  The  end  at  first  in 
such  cases  may  be  very  noble  and  the  fib  or  quibble  very  petty, 
but  worse  lies  for  meaner  objects  may  follow.  Youth  often  de- 
scribes such  situations  with  exhilaration  as  if  there  were  a 
feeling  of  easement  from  the  monotonous  and  tedious  obliga- 
tion of  rigorous  literal  veracity,  and  here  mentors  are  liable  to 
become  nervous  and  err.  The  youth  who  really  gets  interested 
in  the  conflict  of  duties  may  reverently  be  referred  to  the  inner 
lie  of  his  own  conscience,  the  need  of  keeping  which  as  a  pri- 
vate tribunal  is  now  apparent. 

Many  adolescents  become  craven  literalists  and  distinctly 
morbid  and  pseudophobiac.  regarding  every  deviation  from 
scrupulously  literal  truth  as  alike  heinous,  and  many  system- 
atized palliatives  and  casuistic  word-splitting,  methods  of 
whispering  or  silently  interpolating  the  words  "  not,"  "  per- 
haps," or  "  I  think,"  sometimes  said  over  hundreds  of  times  to 
neutralize  the  guilt  of  intended  or  unintended  falsehoods,  appear 
in  our  records  as  a  sad  product  of  bad  methods. 

Next  to  the  selfish  lie  for  protection,  and  of  special  psy- 
chological interest  for  adolescent  crime,  is  what  we  may  call 
pseudomania,  seen  especially  in  pathological  girls  in  their  teens, 
who  are  honeycombed  with  selfishness  and  affectation  and  have 
a  passion  for  always  acting  a  part,  attracting  attention,  etc. 
The  recent  literature  of  telepathy  and  hypnotism  furnishes  many 
striking  examples  of  this  diathesis  of  impostors  of  both  sexes. 
It  is  a  strange  psychological  paradox  that  some  can  so  deliber- 
ately prefer  to  call  black  white  and  find  distinct  inebriation  in 
flying  diametrically  in  the  face  of  truth  and  fact.  The  great 
impostors,  whose  entire  lives  have  been  a  fabric  of  lies,  are 
cases  in  point.  They  find  a  distinct  pleasure  not  only  in  the 
sense  of  power  which  their  ability  to  make  trouble  gives,  but 
in  the  sense  of  making  truth  a  lie  and  by  decreeing  things  into 
and  out  of  existence. 

Ferriani  ^  personally  studied  500  condemned  juveniles  with 

'  Minderjahrige  Verbrecher.     Berlin,  1895,  p.  118. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     353 

reference  to  their  lying  habits,  and  found  that  their  falsehoods 
were  distributed  in  the  following  nine  classes :  472  lied  from 
instinct  and  weakness;  401  for  self-defense;  360  vanity  in 
getting  the  better  of  others;  231  imitation;  387  selfishness; 
195  jealousy,  envy,  and  revenge;  488  fancy;  370  laziness;  29 
nobility  of  soul.  Lies  of  fancy  thus  exceed  all  others,  and  those 
due  to  instinctive  weakness  and  self-protection  follow  hard 
after.  The  lively  mind  of  a  child  always  sees  the  marvelous 
side  of  things,  while  weakness  and  fear  always  tempt  to  con- 
cealment in  order  to  ward  off  blame  or  punishment. 

Heinroth  took  the  largest  view  of  this  subject  in  his  mental 
pathology,  when  he  conceived  all  diseases  and  sin  a  lie,  be- 
cause it  was  a  perversion  of  man's  true  nature,  which  in  these 
was  falsely  expressed,  while  Nordau  ^  finds  a  more  sensational 
verisimilitude  in  enumerating  the  many  conventionalities  which 
modern  society  has  devised  in  its  many  courfesies,  customs,  and 
transparent  hypocrisies.  The  sense  of  truthfulness  comes  hard 
and  late,  and  everything  depends  upon  distinguishing  the  radi- 
cally different  forms  of  falsehood  and  applying  the  remedy  fit 
for  each.  Robust  truth-speaking,  which  scorns  pretense,  false 
beliefs,  fears,  shames,  and  hopes,  will  never  act  a  part  or  fill  a 
place  in  life  for  which  one's  nature  is  not  fitted ;  which  finds 
none  of  the  titillation  that  neurotic  constitutions  derive  from 
mendacity ;  which  instinctively  shuns  extravagance,  even  in  the 
use  of  superlatives ;  that  wants  to  be  taken  for  what  it  really 
is  by  nature  and  heredity — this  is  a  high  attainment  and  psy- 
chologically not  unworthy  the  grand  old,  but  often  abused  term 
of  regeneration. 

Anger  ^  is  not  yet  sufficiently  studied  by  psychologists,  but 
the  large  vocabulary  in  the  English  language  designating  its 
states  is  itself  enough  to  show  it  a  strange  and  unique  thing  in 
human  nature.  A  friend  with  whom  we  have  lived  for  years 
grows  pale  or  red  on  some  provocation ;  clinches  the  fists ;  be- 
comes rigid ;  breathes  stertorously ;  emits  perhaps  some  barbaric 
and  inhuman  cry ;  has  horripilation  ;  shudders,  twitches,  stamps, 

*  Conventionelle  Luege.      See  also  La  Criminality  Compar^e,  ch.  iv,  civilization 
et  mensonge,  etc. 

^  See  my  Study  of  Anger.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  July,  1899,  vol.  x,   pp.   516- 
591. 

24 


354  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

taps,  writhes,  paws,  or  assumes  some  strange  attitude  or  pos- 
ture; may  butt  his  or  her  own  head  against  hard  objects;  makes 
faces ;  often  bites ;  in  many  of  our  returns  the  person  scratches, 
pinches,  pulls,  kicks,  hugs,  strikes,  and  possibly  kills;  says 
cruel  biting  things  in  a  hard,  strange  voice,  and  afterward 
is  weak,  limp,  perhaps  nauseated,  bilious,  sick;  full  of  re- 
grets and  it  may  be  apologies,  and  new  resolves  never  again  to 
fall  into  such  a  state  of  abandon.  Anger  is  indeed  a  brief  in- 
sanity, a  sava  aninii  tempcstas,  a  furor  suggesting  epilepsy 
or  the  eruption  of  an  alien  spirit.  It  makes  man  a  savage  beast 
to  his  fellow  man.  The  etymology  of  the  words  designating 
it  are  strangling,  writhing,  bursting,  tearing,  swelling,  yelling, 
crushing,  biting,  boiling,  inflammation,  convulsion,  conflagra- 
tion, storm,  rabies,  rancid,  acidity,  etc. 

Both  forensic  medicine  and  psychiatry  have  dealt  much  with 
the  iracundia  morbosa,  and  many  have  thought  that  the  anger 
mania  furnished  an  irresistible  impulse  which  obliterated  psy- 
chic freedom.  Friedreich  thinks  the  storm  of  this  passion  may 
temporarily  quite  obstruct  the  power  of  self-direction,  and 
Fuerbach  says  "  murder  in  the  moment  of  passion  is  a  crime 
possible  for  the  noblest  natures,"  and  urges  that  crimes  com- 
mitted in  sudden  anger  should  always  have  special  study. 
When  Job  was  tempted  to  curse  God  and  die;  when  we  are 
goaded  to  desperation  by  disasters  and  misfortunes  following 
swiftly  and  blighting  all  we  care  for;  when  the  criminal  in 
solitary  confinement  breaks  out,  yells,  smashes,  tears  clothes  and 
bedding ;  when  the  Malay  runs  amuck,  stripping  off  all  clothing, 
perhaps  greasing  his  body,  and  stabbing  every  one  in  reach  till 
he  is  killed  or  stunned,  because  pain,  grief,  and  gloom  have 
made  him  sick  at  heart — we  see  what  this  frenzy  may  be.  The 
Berserker  rage  in  the  Viking  Age  sometimes  vented  itself  in 
tremor,  gnashing  of  the  teeth,  frothing  at  the  mouth,  howling, 
and  perhaps,  like  Orlando  Furioso,  venting  frenzy  upon  inani- 
mate things.  Some  insane  monarchs,  whom  Ireland  has  de- 
scribed, seem  to  have  been  chronically  in  this  stage,  as  if,  like 
Mohammed  Toghlac,  who  had  a  passion  for  bloodshed  and 
torture,  their  object  was  to  exterminate  the  whole  human  race. 
Ivan  the  Terrible  was  simply  a  human  tiger,  in  one  case  causing 
some  27,000  children  to  be  slain  before  his  anger  was  placated. 

Anger  seems  sometimes  to  be  glad,  spontaneous,  breaking 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    355 

out  with  no  known  cause,  but  is  generally  provoked  by  cross- 
ing or  thwarting  a  strong  purpose,  by  contradiction,  invasion 
of  the  sacred  sphere  of  self,  limitation  of  freedom,  wounded 
pride,  jealousy,  personal  antipathies  to  dress,  habits,  automa- 
tisms; at  adolescence  nearly  if  not  quite  all  these  causes 
are  more  keenly  felt,  and  yet  anger  in  normal  cases,  after  a 
first  period  of  intensification,  slowly  becomes  more  suppressed 
and  internal.  The  motives  of  jealousy  and  wounded  personal 
dignity  increase  in  the  greatest  ratio.  With  puberty,  our  re- 
turns show  also  a  marked  increase  in  realizing  the  injury 
wrought  by  outbreaks  and  a  great  effort  at  self-control  by  many 
methods  and  devices.  Those  who  are  angry,  with  an  utter 
abandon,  and  were  spitfires  before,  begin  to  realize  both  the 
danger  and  the  ugliness  of  temper,  and  with  girls  who  have 
been  violent  before  there  is  always  a  very  powerful  apparatus 
of  repression  which  comes  into  operation  at  puberty.  The 
young  woman's  life  is  far  more  subjective  and  in  the  teens  she 
almost  always  learns  to  control  the  more  violent  physical  out- 
breaks, but  may  become  whining,  peevish,  or  use  her  tongue  in 
place  of  her  fists.  Anger  is  often  so  vigorously  suppressed  out- 
wardly that  it  strikes  in  and  vitiates  the  general  disposition. 
In  the  main  there  is  an  increase  of  self-feeling,  and  mortifica- 
tions, imagined  and  real,  are  never  so  stinging;  so  that  for 
both  sexes,  between  increased  susceptibility  on  the  one  hand  and 
increased  control  on  the  other,  there  is  a  new  psychic  tension 
which  may  now  become  a  potent  factor  in  the  life.  Indigna- 
tion is  restrained,  deferred,  and  when  vented  is  far  more 
dangerous,  not  only  because  of  the  increased  physical 
strength,  but  of  the  increased  deliberation  with  which  ven- 
geance is  executed.  Anger  should  be  a  great  and  diffused 
power  in  life,  making  it  strenuous,  giving  zest  and  power 
to  the  struggle  for  survival  and  mounting  to  righteous  indig- 
nation. Its  culture  requires  pro()er  selection  of  objects  and 
great  transformation,  but  never  extermination.  The  healthy 
and  complete  male  especially  will  never  be  an  entirely  peaceful 
creature,  and  cowardice  and  the  loss  of  courage  will  always 
mean  some  degree  of  psychic  emasculation.  It  was  for  this 
reason  in  part  that  I  advocated  boxing  in  Chapter  III  as  an 
essential  part  of  the  physical  education  of  adolescents,  because 
it  affords  a  wholesome  vent  for  anger,  the  psychology  of  which 


356  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

shows  that  it  must  find  or  make  some  way  of  escape  for  its 
energy,  and  that  physical  effort  is  the  most  instinctive,  while  it 
also  teaches  the  control  of  temper  because  any  loss  of  it  is  almost 
sure  with  a  skilful  antagonist  to  be  punished  by  a  stinging  blow, 
against  which  loss  of  control  always  weakens  the  guard. 

The  instinct  of  revenge,  however,  is  very  deep-seated,  and 
not  entirely  eradicable.  In  abnormal  cases  it  is  instantaneous 
and  perhaps  unconscious.  I  have  myself  talked  with  perhaps  a 
score  of  youthful  murderers  under  sentence  of  death,  who  I 
believe  were  in  every  way  as  good  by  nature  as  I  am,  but  who 
in  an  instant  of  fulminating  anger  struck  the  fatal  blow,  possi- 
bly harder  than  they  knew  or  because  a  weapon  was  at  hand, 
and  killed,  it  may  be,  their  best  friend  with  a  regret  no  less 
than  if  sudden  death  had  come  without  their  agency,  and  with 
a  self-reproach  equal  to  that  which  they  would  have  visited  upon 
any  wretch  who  had  slain  their  friend.  When  we  reflect  that  the 
entire  administration  of  criminal  law  up  to  recent  date  was 
based  upon  vengeance,  we  can  not  wonder  that  its  impulse  is 
so  strong  and  passionate  in  the  heart  of  man,  and  when  we 
read  the  horror  of  some  American  lynching  scenes,  we  realize 
that  collective  man  can  with  impunity  be  as  vindictive  as  those 
on  whom  we  inflict  the  worst  punishments. 

Thus,  like  nearly  everything  else  in  the  soul,  the  power  of 
indignation  is  greatly  deepened  and  strengthened  in  adoles- 
cence, and  the  problem  of  rightly  directing  and  habituating  it 
is  an  important  theme  in  juvenile  criminology.  All  boys  de- 
velop a  greatly  increased  propensity  to  fight  at  puberty,  and 
although  most  of  them  while  pretending  to  give  way  completely 
seem  very  terrible  in  their  rage,  perhaps  threatening  everything 
if  they  are  made  mad,  as  if  anger  were  a  demoniacal  posses- 
sion, they  nevertheless  do  not  quite  lose  the  power  of  discrimi- 
nating where  they  hit  and  how,  lest  too  great  injury  should  be 
done.  Anger,  and  even  hate,  uncaused  at  this  age,  is  some- 
times almost  spontaneous  and  even  against  every  motive. 
However,  this  stage  passes  as  if  it  were  slowly  realized  that  "  to 
kick  against  nothing  is  wrenching."  Those  whose  tempers 
are  strong  and  show  no  trace  of  this  inhibition  become  danger- 
ous ;  while  those  who  morosely  sulk,  brood,  and  nurse  their 
anger  till  it  corrodes  the  soul,  who  can  never  forget  or  forgive, 
who  are  taciturn  and  malevolent — in  these  the  seeds  of  injury 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     357 

may  slowly  grow  to  preposterous  and  even  insane  dimensions. 
The  spasmodic  type  is  far  more  complex,  and  simple  prophylac- 
tics, like  abundant  food  and  exercise,  are  sometimes  sufficient. 
Either  type  of  this  morbidity  is  augmented  by  humoring  or 
indulgence,  helped  by  drastic  or  judicious  treatment,  and  al- 
though neglect  may  have  its  efficacy  as  a  mode  of  treatment  in 
children,  the  impulse  must  now  be  taken  vigorously  in  hand. 
Plain  talks,  one  writer  suggests,  with  a  careful  and  judicious 
use  of  profanity  in  rebuking  this  damnatory  and  diabolical  in- 
stinct, may  be  effective  in  minor  cases,  but  the  infliction  of  the 
common  legal  penalties  usually  has  very  slight  efficiency. 

Envy  and  jealousy  constitute  another  prominent  factor 
in  juvenile  crimes.  Of  ninety-seven  offenses  by  minors  due  to 
this  impulsion,  Ferriani  finds  that  with  both  sexes  insults  were 
most  frequent;  next  followed  severer  injuries,  then  light  ones, 
false  accusations  and  libels,  attempted  or  successful  murder. 
Marro  ^  found  these  instincts  more  frequent  in  young  women 
than  in  young  men  in  the  ratio  of  17  to  i|.  It  is  hard  for  girls 
to  admit  that  others  are  more  beautiful,  witty,  cultured,  than 
themselves,  and  rivalry  often  drives  them  to  extreme  and  even 
desperate  acts.  Vents  of  this  passion  are  often  secret  and 
underhanded.  If  it  be  true  that,  as  in  matters  of  the  heart  in 
general,  women  are  more  susceptible  to  this  passion  than  men, 
it  may  well  be  doubted  whether,  if  it  be  broadly  interpreted, 
man  in  his  own  sphere  is  not  as  liable  to  it.  A  friend  reports 
an  authentic  case  of  a  normal  and  sweet  girl  seen  secretly  dan- 
cing on  the  fresh  grave  of  her  nearest  friend,  singing  exultant- 
ly, "  I  am  so  glad  she  is  dead  and  I  am  alive."  When  food  and 
dress  were  limited  and  communities  small,  this  passion  must 
have  been  more  intense.  It  is  probably  the  most  direct  ex- 
pression of  the  struggle  for  survival  and  competition  for  all  that 
is  best  in  the  world.  Its  roots  strike  deep  into  the  animal 
world,  and  it  is  the  rich  soil  in  which  prejudices  have  their 
recognized  growth.  It  gives  momentum  to  cruelty  and  self-con- 
sciousness, and  is  often  secretly  undermining  the  best  friend- 
ships. Indeed  Lombroso  and  Ferrero  insist  that  no  permanent 
friendship  between  two  adolescent  girls  can  withstand  its  influ- 

*  La  Pazzia  nelle  Donne,  1893.     See  La  Jalousie,  ch.  8,  in  Proal's  Le  Crime 
et  la  Suicide,  1900. 


358  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

ence,  and  that  it  is  always  made  conjectural  and  uncertain  by  it. 
Many  a  noble  and  even  great  man  has  confessed  that  mingled 
with  profound  grief  for  the  death  and  misfortune  of  their  best 
friends,  they  were  often  appalled  to  find  a  vein  of  secret  joy  and 
satisfaction,  as  if  their  own  sphere  were  larger  or  better.  It 
would  seem  as  if  this  feeling  must  have  had  its  culminating  de- 
velopment in  a  past  where  communities  were  smaller,  and 
where  the  means  of  subsistence  were  so  limited  that  every  cause 
that  lessened  numbers  meant  increased  supply. 

However  this  may  be,  we  find  that  with  puberty  begins  an 
age  of  great  intensification  of  rivalry  for  the  favor  of  the  other 
sex  expressed  in  animal  battles,  showing  ofif,  and  all  the  intri- 
cate processes  of  sexual  selection.  It  is  in  this  sphere  that 
rivalry  becomes  most  intense,  and  the  dawn  of  first  love  is 
always  marked,  if  not  directly  measured,  by  the  growth  of 
jealousy. 

Some  of  the  psychic  rudimentary  organs,  which  in  degener- 
ates often  develop  into  crime,  are  seen  in  the  teasing  and  bully- 
ing so  common  among  children.  It  is  perhaps  almost  normal  at 
a  certain  stage  of  human  life  to  take  pleasure  in  hectoring, 
plaguing,  pecking  at,  worrying,  etc.,  often  perhaps  to  test  the 
temper  or  cry  point.  Burk  has  collected  many  interesting  data 
and  proposed  a  provisional  classification  for  these  phenomena.* 
Children  stone,  pinch,  slap,  pull  the  hair  and  clothes  of  those 
younger  or  weaker  than  themselves  until  they  confess  that  they 
are  beaten  and  beg  for  mercy.  Jesse  Pomeroy,  the  notorious 
pubescent  murderer  and  torturer,  could  give  no  better  reason 
for  cutting  the  throat  of  one  of  his  girl  victims  than  to  see  what 
she  would  do.  If  children  were  to  grow  up  with  all  their  psy- 
chic propensities  developed  in  due  proportion  from  such  a  state, 
some  of  them  would  be  insane,  but  most  of  them  would  be 
criminals.  The  fighting  instinct,  which  is  so  strongly  reen- 
forced  by  the  dawn  of  sexuality ;  the  egoistic  assertion  of  tyran- 
nical power ;  the  appropriation  of  property ;  the  compulsion  of 
service,  and  obedience  of  those  weaker  by  bullying  and  some- 
times under  awful  threats  of  torture  or  of  the  black  man,  who  is 
invoked  for  many  a  form  of  juvenile  spoliation ;  the  tormentor 
who  makes  himself  especially  aggravating  by  insisting  upon  do- 

•  Teasing  and  Bullying,  by  Frederick  Burk.     Fed.   Sem.,  April,  1897,  vol.  iv, 
PP-  336-371- 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     359 

ing  precisely  that  which  is  most  objectionable  to  the  victim,  e.g., 
threatening  those  peculiarly  timid  of  snakes,  fire,  etc.,  with 
these  objects,  barring  the  passage,  jerking  away  chairs  as 
others  are  about  to  sit  in  them ;  all  these  illustrate  the  strange 
teasing  instinct  often  almost  irresistible  even  in  those  incapable 
of  rancor  and  who  are  overflowing  with  general  good-will. 
This  is  also  the  motive  in  threatening  and  almost  performing 
forbidden  and  perhaps  heinous  acts,  in  taking  and  hiding  prop- 
erty, calling  nicknames,  twitting  of  personal  peculiarities, 
arousing  disappointment  by  practical  jokes,  exciting  shame  or 
envy.  Burk  enumerates  from  his  empirical  data  a  long  list  of 
modes  by  which  the  tormentor  expresses  his  joy  at  the  suffer- 
ing of  his  victim,  and  suggests  that  these  aggressions  into  the 
rights  of  other  personalities  may  be  broken  neurological  frag- 
ments or  parts  of  old  chains  of  activity  involved  in  the  pursuit, 
combat,  torture,  and  killing  of  men  and  enemies.  They  may 
be  regarded  more  as  crystallized  instincts  than  as  conscious 
voluntary  activities,  as  the  causelessness  of  some  and  the  pur- 
poselessness  of  others  indicates.  If  they  may  be  fragments  of 
old  reflex  arcs,  it  is  vain  to  seek  any  well-defined  conscious 
motive.  "  Do  they  in  some  covert  or  concealed  way,  acting 
beneath  the  subliminal  range  of  consciousness,  aid  in  the  de- 
velopment of  useful  activities,  or  are  they  merely  a  dead  and 
useless  weight  continually  serving  as  a  drag  to  civilization,"  as 
if  they  were  first  intentions  of  nature?  Lombroso  deliberately 
assumes  that  criminal  instincts  are  general  in  children.  This 
is  an  easy  explanation  of  some  of  the  deeper  problems  of  crime, 
but  must  not  be  interpreted  as  an  indictment  of  childhood. 
There  is  a  sense,  however,  in  which  this  can  be  heartily  granted 
without  the  slightest  shock  to  modern  ethical  conceptions  of  the 
nature  of  right  and  wrong,  and  their  relations  to  each  other. 

The  child  torturer  is  only  an  extreme  and  abnormal  de- 
velopment from  the  arrant  teaser.  The  latter  lacks  acute  and 
tender  sympathy  for  the  sufferings  of  his  victim  over  which  he 
even  comes  to  gloat,  but  his  pleasure  passes  into  pain  when  the 
distress  reaches  a  certain  point.  The  tormentor,  on  the  other 
hand,  lacks  this  check.  Where  cruelty  is  abnormally  developed 
in  adolescent  years  so  that  there  is  rapture  in  inflicting  extreme 
pain,  where  the  most  bizarre  torments  are  inflicted  with  no  ap- 


3^0  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

parent  motive,  it  is  not  enough  to  say  that  there  is  mere  lack  of 
sympathy,  although  this  is  true.  We  wish  to  be  the  cause  of 
psychic  states  in  others,  to  be  an  agent  and  exercise  power,  and 
Ireland  holds  that  the  insanity  of  power  is  a  form  of  hypertro- 
phied  egoism.  But  we  must  reflect  that  primitive  man  was  at 
enmity  with  most  of  mankind,  his  own  family  and  race  being 
excepted.  The  savage  is  a  good  father,  perhaps  husband  and 
tribesman,  with  a  kindly  nature,  but  all  his  virtues  are  expended 
on  those  nearest  him,  and  for  all  others  he  has  suspicion,  enmity, 
and  bitter  hostility.  In  the  torturer  the  boundary  between  these 
two  sentiments  is  disturbed.  Just  as  there  is  individual  love,  so 
there  is  instinctive  individual  hate.  He  places  the  neighbor  in 
the  same  position  as  the  alien  and  enemy,  w^iom  he  would  cap- 
ture and  torture.  Most  can  only  love  a  few,  and  the  diffusion 
and  irradiation  of  fraternal  sentiments  outward  toward  ever 
larger  portions  and  finally  to  the  whole  race  is  a  matter  of  very 
slow  and  painful  growth.  Perhaps  now  even  the  best  of  us  still 
need  to  keep  alive  the  faculty  of  hate  for  what  is  bad  rather  than 
for  strangers.  At  any  rate  I  can  conceive  no  other  clue  by  which 
to  explain  the  sad  facts  of  certain  types  of  juvenile  torturers 
than  the  atavistic  one. 

Sheldon's  interesting  statistics  show  that  among  the  insti- 
tutional activities  of  American  children,^  predatory  organiza- 
tions culminate  from  eleven  to  fifteen,  and  are  chiefly  among 
boys.  These  include  bands  of  robbers,  clubs  for  hunting  and 
fishing,  play  armies,  organized  fighting  bands  between  sepa- 
rate districts,  associations  for  building  forts,  etc.  This  form 
of  association  is  the  typical  one  for  boys  of  twelve.  After  this 
age  their  interests  are  gradually  transferred  to  less  loosely 
organized  athletic  clubs.     Sheldon's  statistics  are  as  follows : 

Age 8       9     lo     II      12     13       14      15     16     17      Total 

No.     of    predatory  J453071         i         310         25  =  Girls 
societies.  |    4       2     17     31      18     22     (11)       7       i       o       iii  =  Boys 

Innocent  though  these  predatory  habits  may  be  in  small 
boys,  if  they  are  not  naturally  and  normally  reduced  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  teens  and  their  energy  worked  off  into  athletic 
societies,  they  become  dangerous.     "  The  robber  knight,  the 

1  Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  July,  1898,  vol.  ix,  pp.  425-448. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     3^1 

pirate  chief,  and  the  savage  marauder  become  the  real  models." 
The  stealing  clubs  gather  edibles  and  even  useless  things,  the 
loss  of  which  causes  mischief,  into  some  den,  cellar,  or  camp  in 
the  woods,  where  the  plunder  of  their  raids  is  collected.  An 
organized  gang  of  boy  pilferers  for  the  purpose  of  entering 
stores  had  a  cache,  where  the  stolen  goods  were  brought  to- 
gether. Some  of  these  bands  have  specialized  on  electric  bells 
and  connections,  or  golf  sticks  and  balls.  Jacob  Riis  says  that 
on  the  East  Side  of  New  York,  every  corner  has  its  gang  with 
a  program  of  defiance  of  law  and  order,  where  the  young  tough 
who  is  a  coward  alone  becomes  dangerous  when  he  hunts  with 
the  pack.  He  is  ambitious  to  get  "  pinched  "  or  arrested  and 
to  pose  as  a  hero.  His  vanity  may  obliterate  common  fear  and 
custom  as  his  mind  becomes  inflamed  with  flash  literature  and 
"  penny  dreadfuls."  Sometimes  whole  neighborhoods  are  ter- 
rorized so  that  no  one  dares  to  testify  against  the  atrocities  they 
commit.  Riis  even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  "  a  bare  enumer- 
ation of  the  names  of  the  best-known  gangs  would  occupy  the 
pages  of  this  book."  ^  The  names  are  sufficiently  suggestive — 
Hell's  kitchen  gang,  stable  gang,  dead  men,  floaters,  rock,  pay, 
hock  gang,  the  soup-house  gang,  plug  uglies,  back-alley  men, 
dead  beats,  cop  beaters  and  roasters,  hell  benders,  chain  gang, 
sheeny  skinners,  street  cleaners,  tough  kids,  sluggers,  wild  In- 
dians, cave  and  cellar  men,  moonlight  howlers,  junk  club,  crook 
gang,  are  some  I  have  heard  of.  Some  of  the  members  of  these 
gangs  never  knew  a  home,  were  found  perhaps  as  babies  wrapped 
in  newspapers,  survivors  of  the  seventy-two  dead  infants 
Riis  says  were  picked  up  on  the  street  in  New  York  in  1889, 
or  of  baby  farming.  They  grow  up  street  arabs,  slum  waifs,  the 
driftwood  of  society,  its  flotsam  and  jetsam,  or  plancton,  fight- 
ing for  a  warm  corner  in  their  resorts  or  living  in  crowded  tene- 
ment-houses that  rent  for  more  than  a  house  on  Fifth  Avenue. 
Arrant  cowards  singly,  they  dare  and  do  anything  together.  A 
gang  stole  a  team  in  East  New  York  and  drove  down  the 
avenue,  stopping  to  throw  in  supplies,  one  member  sitting  in 
the  back  of  the  wagon  and  shooting  at  all  who  interfered.  One 
gang  specialized  on  stealing  baby  carriages,  depositing  their  in- 
mates on  the  sidewalk.  Another  blew  up  a  grocery  store  be- 
cause its  owner  refused  a  gift  they  demanded.     Another  tried 

^  How  the  Other  Half  Lives.     1890,  p,  229, 


362  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

to  saw  off  the  head  of  a  Jewish  pedler.  One  member  killed 
another  for  calling  him  "  no  gent."  Six  murderous  assaults 
were  made  at  one  time  by  these  gangs  within  a  single  week. 
One  who  is  caught  and  does  his  "  bit  "  or  stretch  is  a  hero,  and 
when  a  leader  is  hanged,  as  has  sometimes  happened,  he  is 
almost  envied  for  his  notoriety.  A  frequent  ideal  is  to  pound  a 
policeman  with  his  own  club.  The  gang  federates  all  nationali- 
ties. Property  is  depreciated  and  may  be  ruined  if  it  is  fre- 
quented by  these  gangs  or  becomes  their  lair  or  "  hang-out."  A 
citizen  residing  on  the  Hudson  procured  a  howitzer  and  pointed 
it  at  a  boat  gang,  forbidding  them  to  land  on  his  river  front- 
age. They  have  their  calls,  whistles,  signs,  rally  suddenly 
from  no  one  knows  where,  and  vanish  in  the  alleys,  basements, 
roofs,  and  corridors  they  know  so  well.  Their  inordinate  vanity 
is  well  called  the  slum  counterpart  of  self-esteem,  and  Riis  calls 
the  gang  a  club  run  wild.  They  have  their  own  ideality  and  a 
gaudy  pinchbeck  honor.  A  young  tough,  when  arrested, 
wrenched  away  the  policeman's  club,  dashed  into  the  street, 
rescued  a  baby  from  a  runaway,  and  came  back  and  gave  him- 
self up.  They  batten  on  the  yellowest  literature.  Those  of  for- 
eign descent,  who  come  to  speak  our  language  better  than  their 
parents,  early  learn  to  despise  them.  Gangs  emulate  each  other 
in  hardihood,  and  this  is  one  cause  of  epidemics  in  crime. 
They  passionately  love  boundless  independence,  are  sometimes 
very  susceptible  to  good  influence  if  applied  with  great  wisdom 
and  discretion,  but  easily  fall  away.  What  is  the  true  moral 
antitoxin  for  this  class,  or  at  least  what  is  the  safety-valve 
and  how  and  when  to  pull  it,  we  are  now  just  beginning  to 
learn,  but  it  is  a  new  specialty  in  the  great  work  of  salvage 
from  the  wreckage  of  city  life.  In  London,  where  these  groups 
are  better  organized  and  yet  more  numerous,  war  is  often  waged 
between  them,  weapons  are  used  and  murder  is  not  so  very  in- 
frequent. Normally  this  instinct  passes  harmlessly  over  into 
associations  for  physical  training,  which  furnishes  a  harmless 
outlet  for  these  instincts,  until  the  reductives  of  maturer  years 
have  perfected  their  work. 

The  Mafia  is  a  secret  association  of  malefactors  that  most 
abound  throughout  nearly  the  whole  extent  of  Sicily.  It  has 
no  laws,  meetings,  chiefs,  or  regular  organization,  but  has 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES    3^3 

great  power  and  is  incarnate  like  an  instinct  in  the  Sicilians. 
It  has  a  clan  for  the  city  and  one  for  the  country.  The  urban 
Mafioso  steal,  assassinate,  etc.,  while  those  in  the  country  are 
brigands  who  go  in  bands  of  ten  or  a  dozen,  often  on  horse- 
back, and  are  masters  of  the  district  which  they  infest.  It  is  in- 
visible, and  any  one  condemned  by  it  is  usually  killed  within 
twenty-four  hours.  So  great  is  the  terror  it  inspires,  that 
judges  rarely  condemn  a  convict,  so  that  an  almost  unheard-of 
social  decomposition  is  caused.  It  extends  through  all  classes 
of  society,  and  many  whom  no  one  suspects  are  members  and 
may  secretly  do  all  its  bidding.  The  bands  share  all  profits 
and  separate.  This  association  has  novices,  usually  called 
Sgaraglioni,  who  must  prove  their  audacity  and  vow  to  God 
secrecy.  First,  they  pay  a  tribute  and  are  protected.  If  their 
conduct  is  disapproved  or  contrary  to  brigand  customs,  they  are 
declared  infamous. 

The  Camorra,  another  criminal  organization  of  Italy,  has 
a  hierarchy,  a  highly  developed  esprit  du  corps,  and  is  not  with- 
out humanitarian  aspirations.  Like  the  Mafia,  it  can  be  traced 
back  to  the  confusion  caused  by  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire 
and  the  subsequent  mixture  of  races.  The  Camorra  has  novi- 
tiate degrees.  First  and  lowest  are  the  Giovanne  di  Agarro. 
These  youth  have  little  to  do  but  collect  assessments  and  to 
serve  the  higher  officers.  They  then  become  Giovanni  d'  Onore 
and  can  take  part  in  the  criminal  activities  of  the  Camorra 
and  profit  by  its  operations.  The  third  stage  is  that  of  Camor- 
rista  who  have  received  a  baptism  of  blood.  Those  who  at- 
tain the  latter  grade  wear  an  elegant  uniform.  The  society 
has  its  own  vocabulary  and  something  like  a  jury,  and  is  much 
younger  than  the  Mafia.  Both  sanction  and  execute  the  ven- 
detta.^ These  societies  form  thus  perhaps  the  most  remarkable 
of  all  schools  of  crime,  and  account  for  the  high  rate  of  homi- 
cide, especially  in  Sicily. 

The  earliest  form  of  theft  is  due  to  ignorance  of  what 
ownership  is  and  means.  Primitive  man  under  the  tribal 
organization  had  most  things  in  common,  and  isolation  was 
such  that  where  every  community  was  surrounded  by  unap- 
propriated land  and  all  the  fruits  of  nature  and  animals  of  the 

*  Le  Brigandage  en  Italic,  by  A.  Dubarry.     Paris,  1875,  p.  369  et  seq. 


364  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

hunt,  individual  possession  had  a  very  limited  sphere.  Poach- 
ing was  impossible,  for  there  were  no  preserves.  Possession 
was  all  the  ten  points  of  law.  Children  are  reared  in  a  commu- 
nal state  in  all  good  homes.  Most  things  necessary  to  satisfy 
their  needs  are  their  own  to  take  and  use.  Food,  clothing,  and 
shelter  are  theirs  by  the  right  of  their  dependent  state,  and  it 
is  a  long,  hard  curriculum  to  understand  the  mcum,  tuum, 
suiim,  of  civilized  life.  Slaves  newly  emancipated  have  found 
this  a  hard  lesson  to  learn,  as  the  census  of  the  causes  of  im- 
prisonment of  the  colored  race  in  the  South  shows.  The  city 
child,  who  takes  edibles  freely  at  home,  has  to  learn  that  it 
can  not  do  so  from  the  stand  of  the  street  vender.  Hence  petty 
larceny,  as  nearly  all  statistics  show,  constitutes  more  than  half 
the  earliest  crimes  of  youth.  There  is  a  deep  instinct  that 
things  belong  to  those  who  most  need  or  can  best  use  them,  and 
the  finer  conceptions  of  the  sacredness  of  personal  property 
come  as  a  later  stage  of  evolution.  Theft  in  childhood  is  gen- 
erally to  satisfy  immediate  wants  and  desires,  and  it  is  inter- 
esting to  see  how  edibles,  or  thefts  of  money  to  procure  them, 
predominate. 

Later  comes  theft  by  fraud  and  stealth,  with  a  more  or  less 
developed  sense  of  its  nature.  Thieving  is  literally  furtive- 
ness,  and  in  civilized  society,  particularly  in  the  country,  ex- 
ploitation of  orchards  and  gardens  is  to  some  extent  licensed 
and  is  often  perpetrated  in  a  jocose  way,  where  the  pleasure 
lies  in  the  superior  cleverness,  stealth,  or  fraud  of  the  invader 
of  these  rights.  Thieving  becomes  often  a  passion  gratifying 
the  love  of  adventure  and  is  celebrated  in  song  and  story.  This, 
too,  is  no  doubt  an  atavistic  note  of  the  ancient  rights  of  the 
common.  Even  the  frauds  of  the  accomplished  and  adult 
swindler  are  often  condemned  less  severely  by  public  sentiment 
because  of  the  unconscious  traces  in  the  human  soul  of  the  old 
days  when  things  belonged  to  those  who  were  shrewdest  to  get 
them.  Robbers  and  footpads  are  very  few  in  numbers  until 
later  adolescence,  partly  by  reason  of  lack  of  strength  and  con- 
fidence, but  then  some  of  the  boldest  and  most  hardy  crimes 
against  person  appear  in  connection  with  the  forcible  appro- 
priation of  property. 

Marro  says  that  house  thieves  predominate  among  children 
under  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  the  innate  disposition  to  steal  to 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     365 

gratify  sense  and  vanity  shows  a  very  marked  increase  in  the 
beginning  of  the  teens.  Carrara  says  that  in  ah  times  and  by 
every  race  thievery  is  most  incurable,  and  that  women  are  less 
often  reformed  than  men.  Curiously  enough  the  latter  are  espe- 
cially prone  to  steal  during  menstruation.  Ferriani  ^  thinks  that 
boys  under  fourteen  are  more  likely  to  be  recidivists  because 
they  lack  circumspection,  and  their  thefts  are  petty,  but  that 
from  fourteen  on,  in  place  of  many  little  disconnected  thieveries 
larger  plans  are  made ;  that  repetitions  are  more  common  in  the 
city  than  in  the  country,  and  in  England  than  elsewhere.  Youth 
rarely  steals  from  avarice,  and  only  gradually  develops  into  the 
oily  tactician  or  "  flash  "  man.  Theft  slowly  develops  special- 
ization, and  all  thieves  develop  great  ingenuity  in  lying.  Theft 
to  satisfy  passion,  vice,  and  self-indulgence  is  far  more  com- 
mon than  to  satisfy  necessities,  and  the  daily  rhythm  of  life  is 
upset  and  periods  of  idleness  alternate  with  those  of  great  en- 
ergy. Moreover,  it  is  often  a  passion  with  young  adepts  to 
corrupt  others.  The  secret  dialect,  jargon,  or  cant  of  the 
thief,  which  is  so  interesting,  is  akin  to  that  of  the  vagrant 
and  the  mendicant,  and  has  been  repeatedly  made  the  object 
of  philological  study.  The  thief's  life  is  no  less  often  jolly 
and  rollicking  than  is  that  of  the  beggar,  and  most  thieves  can 
beg  and  most  beggars  steal.  In  England  and  in  Italy  schools 
for  instruction  in  thievery  have  been  devised,  and  the  excite- 
ment and  uncertainty  of  life  and  the  fresh  possibilities  of  each 
day,  which  may  end  in  a  feast  and  debauch  or  in  prison,  have 
a  certain  great  and  natural  charm.  It  was  precisely  in  those 
days  when  the  severest  penalties  were  meted  out  to  thieves, 
that  it  was  necessary  to  chain  cups,  knives,  forks,  books,  etc., 
and  even  now  theft  is  less  severely  condemned  by  the  moral 
sense  of  the  community  than  most  other  crimes. 

The  thief  has  been  described  by  the  Lombroso  schools  as 
marked  by  certain  physical  and  psychic  qualities  almost  as  if 
thieves  constituted  a  special  species  of  mankind.  Those  who 
have  sought  to  trace  the  embryology  of  crime  have  found  it 
among  animals.  MacDonald  ^  holds  that  simple  theft  is 
marked  by  certain  anthropometric  proportions.  While  this 
may  be  the  case  in  older  countries,  where  this  crime  has  become 

'  Minderjiihrige  Verbrecher.     Berlin,  1896,  p.  267. 
*Le  Criminel  type.     Paris,  1894,  p.  39  et  seq. 


3^6  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

more  of  a  profession,  one  can  not  visit  American  prisoners  or  in- 
spect the  faces  of  Byrnes's  ^  collection  without  the  conviction 
that  in  this  country  criminals  against  property  are  often  men 
of  fine  and  even  distinguished  form,  feature,  and  appearance, 
whom  it  is  doubtful  if  all  the  measurements  of  the  Bertillon  sys- 
tem of  identification  could  distinguish  from  the  honest  classes 
of  the  business  community.  No  class  of  crimes  is  more  relative 
than  those  against  property.  When  the  old  English  law  was 
striving  to  exclude  all  middle  men,  regrating,  which  was  simply 
buying  up  the  market  and  waiting  for  a  rise  in  price,  was 
severely  punished  and  forestalling  was  a  penal  offense,  as  were 
many  other  practises  now  common.  Many  letters  of  marque 
and  reprisal  were  only  licensed  piracy.  A  serf  or  villein  who 
went  where  he  was  not  told  was  held  to  have  stolen  himself.  ^ 

The  incendiaries,  especially  of  the  pyromaniac  type,  are  com- 
monly adolescents.  This  passion  begins  in  the  strong  instinct 
to  gaze  into  the  fire ;  in  the  pleasure  in  seeing  it  grow,  its  tongues 
fork  out  and  reduce  combustibles  to  smoke  and  cinders. 
With  the  adult,  this  often  has  a  soporific  and  almost  hypnotic 
power  and  stimulation  to  fancy.  A  bonfire  suggests  jubilation 
and  feasting,  and  is  glorious  at  night,  bidding  defiance  to  dark- 
ness. Perhaps  all  men  have  the  germs  of  fire-worshipers  in 
them,  and  of  all  chemical  processes  this  is  the  most  fascinating. 
Some  have  thought  it  an  epoch  in  an  infant's  life  when  it  de- 
velops a  passion  for  striking  matches  or  throwing  things  into 
the  fire  to  see  them  burn.  This  is  the  germ  from  which  pure 
pyromania,  if  there  is  such  a  thing,  springs,  of  which  the  in- 
stinct of  the  boy  to  run  to  fires  is  only  the  normally  repressed 
form.  Despine  ^  thinks  the  monomania  of  burning  for  its  own 
sake  is  a  neuropathic  inheritance  which  usually  emerges  at  this 
age,  and  he  distinguishes  it  from  incendiaries  for  vengeance, 
avarice,  jealousy,  etc.  Often,  when  the  fire  is  kindled,  the 
youthful  incendiary  runs  for  help,  strives  to  put  it  out.  and 
really  pities  those  who  suffer,  not  at  all  to  disguise  his  crime, 
but  because  his  human  sympathies  are  aroused.     This  is  very 

*  Professional  Criminals  of  America.     N.  Y. ,  1886. 

*  L.  O.  Pike  :    History  of  Crime  in  England. 

*  Psychologie  Naturelle.     Vol.  iii,  p.  133. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    3^7 

different  from  the  cases  where  halhicinatory  voices  command  to 
burn  and  in  early  youth  may  even  be  innocent. 

Another  juvenile  motive  for  setting  fires  is  the  love  of  the 
excitement  caused,  the  rattle  of  the  engines  and  the  spout- 
ing of  the  water,  the  rescue  of  property  and  perhaps  persons, 
the  breathless  crowds,  the  danger  and  novelty  of  which  makes 
the  nerves  tingle.  Youth  thus  often  magnifies  its  own  causative 
efficiency.  It  can  not  construct,  but  can  destroy,  and  thus  puts 
itself  in  the  place  of  fate  for  helpless  victims.  This  motive 
shades  into  the  former  and  others,  and  strikes  perhaps  a  root 
back  into  the  psychic  soil,  where  traces  of  ancient  experiences 
of  plunder,  devastation,  nightly  foray,  still  exist.  At  any  rate, 
this  is  radically  dififerent  from  the  secret  habits  of  revenge  and 
hate,  although  even  these  may  prompt  incendiarism  in  youth. 

The  psychology  of  alcohol  has  become  a  new  and  interesting 
theme  which  must  be  more  fully  explored  and  carefully  studied 
before  we  know  the  ethics  of  temperance.  The  intoxication 
habit  is  polygenetic.  Religious  intoxication  cults  abound  both 
among  civilized  and  savage  races,  on  the  theory  that  what- 
ever makes  the  nerves  crepitate  brings  the  soul  into  communion 
with  the  gods,  stimulates  visions,  expels  diseases  and  bad 
spirits.  Partridge,^  who  has  best  summed  up  this  theme,  shows 
how  common  the  use  of  intoxicants  has  been  in  puberal  rites 
among  the  American  Indian  tribes.  All  festivities,  even  death, 
are  celebrated  by  intoxicants  to  produce  artificial  excitement. 
Primitive  drinking  was  periodic  or  in  modern  terms  dipso- 
maniacal,  and  not  the  steady  drinking  of  the  drunkard.  Al- 
most no  tribe  is  known  that  has  not  had  some  stimulant  or  nar- 
cotic. Spencer  holds  that  temperance  first  arose  by  ofifering  a 
part  of  the  drink  to  the  gods.  Samuelson  holds  that  in  every 
nation  just  before  the  time  of  its  highest  culture  intoxica- 
tion was  prevalent,  and  in  Greece  the  Dionysian  orgies 
and  the  ecstatic  dithyrambs  of  wine-flushed  revelers  preceded 
the  golden  age  of  the  Greek  intellect.  All  stimulants  and  nar- 
cotics in  small  doses  or  in  their  initial  effects  stimulate  and 
later  in  large  doses  tend  to  narcosis,  although  whether  intoxi- 
cation is  the  paralysis  of  higher  controlling  cells  or  the  direct 

^  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Alcohol.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  April,  1900,  vol. 
ii.,  pp.  318-376. 


368  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

stimulus  of  lower  ones  is  not  known.  The  pleasure  of  intoxi- 
cation is  the  widened  range  and  increased  intensity  of  emotional 
life;  the  sense  of  larger  vitality;  exhilaration,  carelessness, 
confidence,  and  wider  social  feelings.  Inebriety  is  more  com- 
mon in  spring  and  early  summer,  and  least  in  the  fall  and 
winter,  and  many  interesting  weekly  and  monthly  curves  have 
been  traced.  In  general,  Partridge  concludes,  "  that  drinking 
does  not  begin  during  school  life,  but  in  the  great  majority  of 
cases  the  first  drink  is  taken  after  the  boy  has  left  school  and 
begun  to  associate  with  older  men.  The  beginning  was  almost 
always  social."  Many  habitual  drinkers  would  feel  disgraced 
to  drink  otherwise  than  socially.  Our  language  has  scores  of 
words  and  phrases  ^  designating  inebriate  states,  which  sug- 
gests how  interesting  they  have  always  been,  most  of  them, 
however,  being  terms  of  contempt  or  signifying  exaltation — 
such  as  artificial,  bended,  breezy,  canonized,  cozy,  electrified, 
fresh,  glided,  glorious,  heady,  irrigated,  inspired,  loaded,  mel- 
low, ossified,  plowed,  queered,  salted,  shot,  touched,  etc.  In- 
toxication has  been  much  besung  for  its  abandon  and  pleasure, 
from  the  days  of  Anacreon  to  the  quatrains  of  Khayyam  and 
modern  student  and  other  bibulous  songs. 

At  no  time  of  life  is  the  love  of  excitement  so  strong  as 
during  the  season  of  the  accelerated  development  of  adoles- 
cence, which  craves  strong  feelings  and  new  sensations, 
when  monotony,  routine,  and  detail  are  intolerable,  and  when 
the  breakings  out  both  of  students  and  prisoners  in  cells  are 
most  common.^  Prison  literature  shows  that  the  sudden  spells 
of  rage,  above  spoken  of,  when  convicts  feel  that  they  must 
shriek,  smash  everything,  tear  their  clothes,  butt  their  heads 
against  the  wall  until  they  are  exhausted,  are  most  common  in 
the  later  teens  and  early  twenties,  at  the  age  when  in  normal 
youth  the  craving  for  strong  and  new  sensations  is  most  in- 
stinctive. Among  primitive  people  and  especially  males,  life 
generally  has  a  rhythm  of  days  or  even  weeks,  in  which  a  spell 
of  unusual  energy  and  activity  is  succeeded  by  one  of  apathy. 
Indeed  the  impulse  for  intense  states  of  mind  has  perhaps  been 
useful  in  man's  excelsior  push  upward  to  ever  higher  forms  of 

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  345. 

*  Nowhere  better  described  than  in  the  remarkably  graphic  and  detailed  biog- 
raphy of  Jane  Cameron,  a  typical  female  convict  described  by  F.  W.  Robinson. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    3^9 

psychic  life,  and  also  has  been  in  rapport  with  sexual  impulse 
and  tension.  The  passion  for  strong  sensations  then  at  ado- 
lescence favors  greater  capacity  and  aids  mental  development, 
and  intoxication  is  a  psycho-kinetic  equivalent  and  aberrant  ex- 
pression of  man's  upward  impulsion.  Some  writers  have  even 
thought  that  stimulants  have  been  on  the  whole  useful  in 
making  wider  variations  of  life,  preserving  self-feeling,  and 
keeping  off  pain.  There  is  really  no  opposition  between  the 
view  that  craving  for  stimulants  is  an  expression  of  neuras- 
thenia, and  the  view  of  Beard  ^  that  the  most  energetic  liberty- 
loving  and  religious  people  with  the  greatest  passion  for  inde- 
pendence and  procreation  are  also  those  most  given  to  intoxi- 
cation, so  that  intemperance  is  a  by-product  of  mental  evolu- 
tion. 

"  Brain-workers,"  says  an  experienced  friend  of  prisoners,^ 
"  provide  the  most  hopeless  cases  of  dipsomania.  Increased 
brain  power,  more  brain  work,  more  brain  exhaustion,  more 
nervous  desire  for  a  stimulant,  more  rapid  succumbing  to  the 
alcohol  habit,  these  are  the  stages  that  can  be  noted  every- 
where among  those  who  have  had  more  '  schooling '  than 
their  fathers.  Australia  consumes  more  alcohol  per  head  than 
any  other  nation.  In  Australia  primary  education  is  more  uni- 
versal than  in  England,  and  yet  there  criminals  have  increased 
out  of  all  proportion  to  the  population." 

Rylands  ^  accounts  for  the  passion  of  drink  in  those  who 
hate  the  taste  of  liquor  and  yet  take  it  to  excess  by  "  a  condi- 
tion of  pathological  unrest  or  a  diseased  and  overpowering 
mental  and  physical  uneasiness,  which  it  is  impossible  to  de- 
scribe, but  which  demands  relief  even  at  the  price  of  adding  to 
the  trouble." 

Mr.  Partridge  found  that  in  65  cases  the  age  at  which  the 
first  drink  was  taken  was  in  all  but  four  cases  before  twenty- 
two,  and  sixteen  led  all  other  ages.  In  the  curve  on  the  next 
page,  based  on  498  cases  of  inebriety,  443  males  and  55  fe- 
males, he  shows  the  time  when  the  drinking  habit  was  formed. 

Most  habits  are  formed  between  fifteen  and  twenty-five,  and 
the  drinkers  career  usually  closes  in  about  twenty-five  years, 

^  Stimulants  and  Narcotics. 

'  Prisons  and  Prisoners,  by  J.  W.  Horsley.      London,  1898,  p.  50. 
'  Crime :   Its  Causes  and  Remedy,  by  L.  G.  Rylands.      London,  1889,  p.  92. 
25 


376 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


either  by  the  exhaustion  of  the  desire  or  by  death.  It  coincides 
nearly  with  the  vigor  of  sexual  life,  etc.,  and  very  few  cures  take 
place  under  twenty-five. 

The  psychology  of  prostitution  has  constantly  attracted 
more  and  more  attention  since  the  epoch-making  work  of 
Parent-Duchatelet.^      Ferriani  -  undertakes  a  rough  analysis 

of  the  causes  in  10,422  cases, 
which  are  as  follows,  in  order 
of  prevalence:  General  vice  and 
depravity,  2,752 ;  loss  of  hus- 
band and  parents  or  other  sup- 
porter of  a  family  and  from 
other  causes  of  misery,  2,139; 
seduction  by  lovers,  1,653;  by 
'  patrons,  employers,  and  others 
upon  whom  they  were  dependent, 
927 ;  desertion  by  husbands,  par- 
ents, etc.,  794;  luxury,  698;  in- 
citement of  those  loved  or  others, 
not  members  of  the  family,  666 ; 
by  parents,  husbands,  or  other 
members  of  their  family,  400; 
to  support  children,  parents,  or 
poor  or  sick  members  of  their 
family,  393.  Despine  ^  first  and 
later  Ferriani  best  undertook  to 
analyze  the  sense  of  shame  or 
instinctive  modesty,  and  both 
regard  its  loss  as  one  of  the  chief 
causal  factors.  Everything,  like 
family  life  in  one  room,  fami- 
liarity with  obscene  or  risque 
phrases,  stories,  pictures,  etc.,  tends  to  break  it  down  and  thus 
precludes  its  emphatic  normal  accentuation  at  puberty,  so  that 
an  effective  barrier  against  vice  is  lost.  Self-respect  is  another 
and  more  complex  preventive  agent,  and  whatever  diminishes 
a  proper  amour  proprc  and  a  sense  of  personal  dignity  predis- 

*  De  la  Prostitution  dans  la  ville  de  Paris.      Bruxelles,  183a. 
'  Minderjahrige  Verbrecher.     Berlin,  1896,  p.  169. 

*  Psychologic  Naturelle,  vol.  iii,  p.  207  et  seq. 


Number  of  Cases 

0   £   8   g   g   S 

Age 

10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
30 
31 
23 
33 
24 
25 
36 
27 
38 
29 
30 
31 
33 
33 
34 
35 
30 
37 
38 
39 
40 

/ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

'-' — 

- — 

\ 

_ 

- — 

^ 

s 

.^ 

\ 

y 

I 

\ 

/ 

/ 

-^^ 

, 

^-> 

f 

^v^ 

f 

—^ 

I 

\ 

JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES    37  ^ 

poses  to  the  fall  of  virtue.  Lack  of  the  power  of  foresight  or 
of  making  what  is  really  known  of  bad  consequences  effective 
in  preventing  them ;  shallow,  excessive,  and  easily  inflammable 
vanity;  idleness  and  distaste  for  effort  and  labor;  unattractive 
homes ;  excessive  or  premature  development  of  sense,  with 
objective  knowledge  and  images  of  its  modes  of  gratification — 
all  these  preform  the  soul ;  while  an  easy  conscience  that  makes 
lying  facile ;  a  love  of  gormandizing  and  gratification  of  the 
appetite;  turbulent  and  mobile  dispositions  that  upset  poise 
and  regularity ;  the  normal  rhythms  of  day,  week,  and  month ; 
slovenly  and  untidy  habits  of  dress  and  regimen,  and  bad 
body  keeping  generally ;  a  sentimental  disposition  which  passes 
over  by  ready  and  easy  stages  into  the  passional  state,  when 
control  is  temporarily  lost  and  with  it  responsibility;  a  dis- 
position to  emotional  prodigality  and  intensity  (which  favors 
the  amorous  obscession  which  can  focus  love  upon  a  person 
whose  unworthiness  is  a  measure  of  its  intensity) — this  is  the 
psychic  foundation  and  background  upon  wdiich  the  colossal 
and,  according  to  all  statistics,  now  increasing  and  ever  more 
youthful  evil  of  prostitution  is  built.  Many  recent  writers 
insist  that  the  victim  of  the  seducer  need  not  be  immoral  and  is 
often  pure  and  innocent,  and  that  the  entire  responsibility  rests 
with  him  and  with  society,  which  is  excessively,  if  not  hypo- 
critically, cruel  to  the  least  lapse  in  girls,  and  will  take  no  ac- 
count of  mitigating  circumstances.  The  results  of  this  social 
condition  for  young  girls  are  well  described  by  Augagneur,^ 
Ferriani,^  Lombroso,^  Berry,*  Taxil,^  and  Ascher,''  and  many 
others. 

Sighele  thinks  that  in  many  communities  there  are  certain 
families  from  which  corrupting  influences  irradiate  among  the 
young,  which  directly  tend  to  this  vice.  Some  hold  that  most 
girls,  who  do  not  come  from  good  hereditary  stock  or  good 
homes,  have  a  period  of  intense  and  precocious  passion  which 
exposes  them  to  peculiar  dangers  during  the  earliest   teens,  be- 

^  La  Prostitution  des  Filles  Mineures. 

*  Entartete  Mutter.      La  Infanticida. 
'  La  Donna  Delinquente. 

*  Les  Petits  Martyres. 

^  La  Corruption,  Fin-de-Si^cle. 

"  Grundsatze  der  vorbeugenden  und  der  correctionellen  Erziehung.     Wiea  und 
Leipzig,  1880. 


37^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

cause  unprotected  by  knowledge  which  comes  later,  although 
pleasure  in  vice  soon  fades  and  changes  to  disgust.  Others 
minimize  the  passional  element  or  emphasize  "  psychic  lazi- 
ness," ascribe  the  chief  causes  to  vanity,  the  reading  of  ro- 
mance, or  lay  stress  upon  other  factors.  Much  as  we  have  lately 
learned,  there  is  still  no  department  of  vice  so  little  understood. 
This  theme  has  a  singular  fascination  to  many  minds,  and  for 
the  most  diverse  reasons.  To  many  it  seems  paradoxical  that 
these  girls  should  cling  with  such  passionate  devotion  to  faith- 
less lovers  and  endure  their  blows  and  abuses.  Their  extreme 
pity  and  sympathy  for  each  other,  and  sometimes  for  children, 
animals,  and  even  relatives,  stands  out  in  glaring  contrast  with 
the  general  moral  callousness  which  not  only  public  sentiment, 
but  the  new  criminology  assigns  them.  Although  adepts  in 
hypocrisy,  and  most  of  them  clever  in  simulating  a  modesty 
and  shame  which  they  know  nothing  of,  they  have  not  only  an 
honor,  but  an  honesty  and  frankness  to  their  friends  which  is 
sometimes  extreme  and  admirable.  Some  of  them  are  very  re- 
ligious in  both  the  formal  and  emotional  meaning  of  that  term, 
and  not  a  few  cherish  the  tenderest  sentiments  toward  their 
abandoned  home,  parents,  and  the  memories  of  their  youth. 
Their  psychology,  too,  affords  the  evolutionist  profound  matter 
for  reflection  in  its  suggestiveness  of  conditions  of  ancient 
polyandrous  forms  of  society  as  well  as  being  symptomatic  of 
almost  every  imperfection  in  modern  social  conditions.  Its 
problems  will  never  be  understood  from  the  study  of  woman's 
nature  alone,  nor  from  that  of  the  present  status. 

In  Paris,  where  statistics  are  best,  the  minimum  age  of  in- 
scription in  the  police  registers  for  prostitutes  is  sixteen  years. 
Richard's  ^  tables  give  the  number  for  each  age  up  to  twenty 
years  of  age,  which  is  the  age  of  majority.  Venereal  disease 
is  at  no  age  so  active.  When  the  number  actually  registered  is 
considered  in  connection  with  the  reluctance  of  judges  to  con- 
vict on  first  offense,  and  with  the  fact  that  the  vice  does  not  nat- 
urally become  habitual  at  first,  and  that  if  it  does  it  is  not  usually 
known  to  the  police  for  some  time,  it  must  be  inferred,  as 
Roussel  has  urged,  that  the  moral  abandonment  of  young  girls 
in  large  cities  is  far  greater  than  any  data  show,  and  also 
probably  considerably  earlier. 

'  La  Prostitution  i  Paris.     Paris,  1890,  p.  192  et  seq. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     373 

In  his  valuable  study  of  rapes,  Tardieu  ^  shows  that  these 
crimes  are  increasingly  upon  young  girls,  and  that  particularly 
in  the  cities  the  age  of  victims  is  diminishing;  that  they  are 
much  more  common  in  May,  June,  and  July  than  in  any  other 
quarter,  and  least  so  in  November,  December,  and  January. 
The  age  of  632  victims  was  distributed  as  follows :  Under 
thirteen  years  of  age,  435;  from  thirteen  to  fifteen,  90;  from 
fifteen  to  twenty,  84;  above  twenty,  9;  age  not  given,  14. 
The  age  of  consent  by  the  law  of  1863  was  placed  at  thirteen 
years.  Corre  presents  a  very  instructive  curve,  showing  that 
violations  of  young  girls  have  increased  almost  steadily  since 
1830,  and  in  a  ratio  which  outstrips  that  of  any  other  crime.- 

Lord  Hale  defines  rape  to  be  *'  the  carnal  knowledge  of  any 
woman  above  the  age  of  ten  years  against  her  will,  and  of  a 
woman  child  under  the  age  of  ten  with  or  against  her  will." 
This  is  common  law  of  England,  and  hence  has  arisen  the  term 
"  age  of  consent."  In  general,  force  has  always  been  assumed 
by  courts  prior  to  this  age,  whereas  after  it  the  question  of  con- 
sent or  force  is  a  matter  for  the  decision  of  the  jury.  Thus  the 
higher  this  age  is  placed  and  therefore  the  longer  the  severer 
punishment  is  in  force,  the  greater  the  protection  for  girls.  H. 
L.  Bullock,  the  director  of  this  movement,  writes  me  January 
9,  1 90 1,  "  when  we  began  this  phase  of  our  work  about  twenty 
years  ago,  the  age  of  consent  was  not  above  ten  years  in  any 
State."  But  when  the  facts  were  known  and  a  distinct  move- 
ment made,  legislators  have  raised  this  age  little  by  little,  rarely 
over  two  years  at  a  time,  twenty-one  years  being  the  age  the 
Purity  Leagues  seek,  despite  the  legal  entanglements  that  some- 
times follow  from  marriage  contracts  made  under  eighteen. 
Long  ago  Dr.  Roberts  ^  had  urged  that  the  mind  of  young 
girls  are  so  unstable  and  their  consciences  so  elastic  that  our 
laws  fixing  the  "  age  of  consent  "  needed  change.  Although 
the  average  age  of  first  menstruation  is  perhaps  not  far  from 
fourteen,  there  is  an  individual  variation  of  five  or  six  years, 
and  this  and  the  younger  limit  of  the  marriage  age  have  to  be 
considered.  This  is  especially  true  when  we  reflect  that  every- 
thing indicates  that  the  majority  of  the  230,000  women  in  this 

•  Etude  Medico- Legale  sur  les  Attentats  aux  Moeurs.     Paris,  1878,  p.  23. 
•Crime  et  Suicide.     Paris,  1891,  p.  362. 

•  Physical  Maturity  of  Women.     Lancet,  July,  1885. 


374  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADLOESCENCE 

country,  who  are  known  to  professionally  invite  lust  and  the 
large  additional  number  that  yield  to  it,  begin  their  downward 
career  before  the  above  age,  which  it  is  sought  to  fix.  All  these 
considerations  too,  of  course,  enforce  the  great  desirability  of 
protecting  immaturity  from  all  libidinous  and  lewd  sugges- 
tion, and  our  consciences  may  well  be  stirred  when  Mr.  Corn- 
stock  assures  us  that  nearly  fifty  American  papers  are  excluded 
from  Canada  as  indecent. 

The  following  table  of  the  age  of  consent  is  revised  to  1900 : 

10  years.    Miss.,  N.  C,  S.  C. 

11  "  None. 

12  "  Ind.  Ter.  (for  Indians),  Ky.,  Nev.,  Va.,  W.  Va. 

13  "  None. 

14  "  Ariz.,  Conn.,  Ga.,  111.,  Ind.,  N.  Mex.,  Vt.,  Wis. 

15  "  Iowa  (raised  from  13),  Neb. 

16  "  Ala.  (raised  from  10),  Ark.,  Cal.  (raised  from  14),  Del.   (raised 

from  7  with  death  penalty  now  lightened),  D.  C,  Ind.  T. 
(for  whites).  La.,  Me.  (raised  from  14),  Mass.,  Minn., 
Mont.,  N.  H.  (raised  from  13),  N.  D.  (raised  from  14),  Ohio, 
Ore.,  Pa.,  R.  I.,  S.  D.,  Tenn.,  Tex.  (raised  from  15). 

17  "      None. 

18  "      Col.,  Fla    (raised  from   17  for  seduction),  Idaho,  Md.    (raised 

from  14),  Mich.,  N.  J.  (raised  from  16),  N.  Y.,  Utah 
(raised  from  13),  Wash,  (raised  from  12),  Wyo. 

19  "       None. 

20  "      None. 

21  "       Mo. 

The  statistics  of  suicide  constitute  one  of  the  chief  themes  of 
social  dynamics.  No  crime  is  more  completely  dependent  upon 
food,  business,  season,  time  of  day,  climate,  age,  sex,  etc. 
These  statistics  are  among  the  most  sensitive  of  many  indexes 
of  social  well  or  ill  being.  The  ancients,  especially  the  Stoics, 
assumed  that  any  one  had  a  right  to  make  away  with  himself  if 
he  did  not  choose  to  live.  It  is  only  in  modern  times  that  sui- 
cide has  generally  been  considered  as  a  crime.  The  motives  of 
suicide,  although  generally  difficult  to  ascertain,  constitute  one 
of  the  most  interesting  of  all  psychological  problems.  It  seems 
paradoxical  that  by  an  act  of  free-will,  one  should  be  able 
to  negate  the  will  to  live,  and  some  philosophers  have  thought 
it  the  most  courageous  of  acts  to  overcome  the  repugnance  to 
suicide  by  a  sense  of  duty  and  have  refused  to  be  convinced  that 
this  act  could  with  any  justice  be  called  self-murder.  When, 
however,  present  life  seems  mean  and  painful  and  a  glorious 
life  beyond  the  tomb  completely  assured,  it  is  easy  for  the  soul 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  LMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     375 

"  to  fling  the  dust  aside,  and  naked  on  the  air  of  heaven  ride." 
Hume  and  Schopenhauer  justified  it  even  as  an  experiment  or 
a  question  put  to  nature,  although  a  clumsy  one,  because  "  it 
abolishes  the  identity  of  the  consciousness  which  should  receive 
an  answer." 

There  is  a  kind  of  reciprocity  between  life  and  death.  In 
ages  and  races  that  have  been  eminent  and  successful,  present 
existence  has  seemed  delightful,  and  when,  e.  g.,  Rome  fell 
and  the  hope  of  the  race  went  out,  suicide  became  an  epidemic. 
For  one  falsely  accused  of  a  vile  act,  for  a  drunkard  coming 
out  of  a  debauch  and  realizing  that  he  can  never  be  cured,  or 
for  a  criminal  under  sentence  of  death,  suicide  is  not  hard ;  nor  is 
it  for  those  badly  equipped  by  nature,  cheated  by  heredity, 
whose  life  is  a  neural  torture.  Hartmann's  three  stages  of 
illusion  suggest  another  paradox.  He  postulates  a  primal  age 
when  all  men  in  their  youth  hoped  to  be  happy  before  they 
died.  Gradually  as  this  was  seen  to  be  impossible,  a  second 
stage  supervened  when  man  placed  his  hope  of  anticipated 
happiness  in  another  world.  This  slowly  faded,  and  evolution 
left  him  no  hope  for  himself,  but  only  that  his  remote  posterity 
might  attain  felicity  here.  This  third  recourse  of  optimism, 
however,  is  only  a  dream,  for  man  and  earth  are  both  mori- 
bund. The  race  must  sink  with  bubbling  groans  into  un- 
known depths  at  last.  This  bankruptcy  of  all  that  is  ideal  leads 
him  to  renew  the  suggestion  of  Novalis,  that  the  only  true  phi- 
losophy in  it  is  for  man  to  fix  upon  a  moment,  perhaps  a  few 
generations  hence,  when  the  whole  human  race  will  be  educated 
to  an  agreement  to  commit  suicide  with  a  one,  two,  three,  all 
together,  in  order  that  the  energy  which  man  has  monopolized 
from  the  earth  may  flow  back  into  and  rejuvenate  it,  and  a 
higher,  better  race  more  worthy  to  survive  be  evolved  ions 
hence.  This  view,  it  may  be  said  in  passing,  is  perhaps  a 
worthy  counterpart  to  the  ethics  of  Mailander's  book,  which 
finds  the  supreme  motive  to  morality  in  pity  for  God  called  ab- 
solute, who  has  somehow  been  treacherously  induced  to  break 
out  into  the  creation  of  worlds  as  measles  erupt  in  pimples,  and 
who  is  therefore  not  happy  and  blessed  but  miserable,  and  whom 
it  is  man's  highest  duty  to  rescue  from  his  transcendent  negative 
eudaemonism.  From  this  standpoint  the  only  philosophy  is 
that  of  negation,  and  virtue  for  both  the  individual  and  the  race 


376  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

is  progressive  self-immolation.  This  is  the  most  pretentious 
metaphysics  that  suicide  has  ever  had. 

One  of  the  most  common  psychological  motives  to  suicide 
among  young  children  is  to  punish  others  who  will  be  grieved 
at  their  death.  Anger  in  bodies  too  puny  to  inflict  physical 
harm  upon  those  who  have  injured  or  insulted  them  can  thus 
wound  and  punish  those  who  love  more  acutely  than  in  any 
other  way.  In  many  cases  a  scolding,  a  slight  punishment,  an 
affront  to  the  sense  of  honor  or  self-feeling,  which  may  be 
hypersensitive  and  act  from  causes  purely  imaginary,  may  be 
the  only  provocative.  A  youth  flies  to  suicide  as  a  mode  of  re- 
venge where  resentment  is  strong  and  intellectual  realization  of 
what  life  and  death  mean  is  inadequate.  These  young  suicides 
now  think,  say,  or  perhaps  write,  that  a  friend  or  relative  who 
has  done  him  harm  will  be  sorry  for  it,  and  life  is  sacrificed  be- 
cause revenge  seems  in  the  passionate  state  sweeter  yet.  This 
motivation  is  both  more  common  and  persists  later  in  life  with 
the  female  than  with  the  male  sex. 

The  next  cause  of  juvenile  suicide,  more  common  at  ado- 
lescence than  in  childhood,  is  due  to  disillusion.  Early  youth 
is  always  and  necessarily  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of 
great  expectations.  Life  is  mainly  in  the  future.  Its  high 
achievements  and  successes  are  more  apparent  than  the  tedious 
means  by  which  they  are  attained.  The  world  is  ideal,  and 
possibilities  are  vast.  Imagination  is  never  so  nearly  an  in- 
toxication. All  this  is  greatly  increased  in  a  country  where  the 
dominant  educational  ideals  and  methods  require  that  every 
boy  and  girl  should  be  trained  so  as  to  be  ready  to  fill  the  high 
stations,  and  where  the  latter  seem  so  accessible.  Never  have 
so  many  been  educated  above  their  sphere  or  above  any  destiny 
which  their  capacities  enabled  them  to  fill.  Youth  has  never 
been  so  inebriated  with  lofty  dreams  and  visions.  Schooling 
has  never  so  incapacitated  youth  for  the  humdrum  of  daily 
bread-winning  work.  Civilization  at  its  best  stimulates  none  to 
such  fever  of  hope  as  it  does  youth.  Thus  when  the  protected 
and  hyperstimulated  stage  of  schooling  is  ended  and  the  sterner 
realities  of  life  are  faced,  there  is  always  a  critical  period.  Girls 
who  return  to  plain  homes  with  high  school  diplomas,  youth 
who  must  begin  at  the  bottom  of  the  ladder  of  business  along 
with  few  who  have  had  their  advantages  and  perhaps  where 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     377 

their  precious  education  is  disparaged  and  seems  of  little  avail, 
find  themselves  tempted  and  their  mettle  tested.  Many  feel 
that  they  are  inadequate  to  the  duties  of  life;  some  are  more- 
over worried  by  an  evil  conscience ;  weakened  in  fact  or  fancy 
by  dissipation ;  strained,  it  may  be,  by  having  to  pass  through 
the  stages  of  religious  readjustment  of  the  creed  of  childhood ; 
find  life  tedious,  monotonous,  and  disappointing,  and  are  thus 
inclined  to  ennui  and  even  melancholy.  In  almost  all  lives  this 
change  comes  as  a  critical  stage,  and  to  weak  natures  it  seems 
tragic  and  may  be  nursed  into  a  sense  of  misery  and  a  desire 
to  give  up  the  fight  and  die.  Occasionally  there  is  recourse  to 
stimulants  or  sometimes  life  is  abandoned  to  pleasure  for  the 
sake  of  its  distraction,  and  not  infrequently  there  is  real  heredi- 
tary or  induced  insufficiency  of  health  or  positive  defect  which 
can  justify  only  gloomy  forebodings.  The  mind  has  been  cul- 
tivated and  the  will  weakened  by  inaction,  so  that  when  every- 
thing depends  upon  energy  it  collapses  in  despair.  As  the 
demands  of  life  become  complex  and  severe  with  advancing 
culture  and  civilization,  the  need  of  specialization  and  drud- 
gery, this  breaking  in  to  the  harness  of  business,  profession, 
and  the  conventions  of  society  seems  unreal  or  cruel  fate, 
against  which  the  soul  rebels.  All  these  conditions  are  co- 
piously illustrated  in  the  lives  of  adolescent  suicides,  and  rare 
is  the  earnest  soul  who  has  not  at  this  stage  at  least  coquetted 
with  thoughts  of  self-inflicted  death. 

One  of  the  ablest  professors  of  philosophy  I  know  told  me 
how  in  the  teens  the  burden  and  the  mystery  of  life  led  him  to 
purchase  a  pistol,  go  into  the  woods,  load  it,  place  its  cold 
muzzle  against  his  temple,  and  then  meditate  on  what  would 
happen  if  he  pulled  the  trigger,  which  he  never  really  intended 
to  do.  Another  friend  told  me  how  he  had  devised  a  scheme 
of  going  to  an  obscure  pond  in  Germany  that  he  had  seen  as  a 
boy,  and  weighting  his  body  and  leaping  in,  after  every  possible 
precaution  that  no  clue  whatever  should  be  left  behind.  I  have 
before  me  the  printed,  but  not  yet  published,  record  of  a  bril- 
liant youth  who  hung  himself  in  his  closet  just  before  he  was 
nineteen,  and  left  behind  an  elaborate  journal  of  his  states  of 
mind — his  thrilling  sensitiveness  to  everything  in  nature,  of 
which  he  was  passionately  fond ;  his  sense  of  inadequacy  to 
meet  the  demands  of  life ;  his  failure  to  find  what  he  was  born 


37^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

for ;  his  alternations  of  dreamy  sloth  and  energy ;  "  the  un- 
utterable loneliness  of  the  universe."  Of  thirty-seven  seniors 
in  a  New  England  college,  ten  had  toyed  with  suicide  at  some 
previous  period  of  their  lives,  and  all  but  one  seemed  to  belong 
to  this  class. 

Later  yet  comes  the  love  motive  in  suicide.  Love  seems 
more  closely  associated  with  thoughts  of  death  in  youth  tlian 
in  maturer  years.  It  involves  the  far-off  anticipation  of  the 
life  of  another  generation  for  the  sake  of  which  the  individual 
is  developed,  while  the  actual  culmination  is  rare.  While  the 
thanatic  sentiments  rarely  issue  in  violence  to  self,  wounded 
anger  that  another  is  preferred,  mortification  aggravated  by 
suddenness  of  refusal  or  bereavement,  breeds  chagrin  in  which 
sometimes  the  first  motive  of  punishing  the  loved  one  appears, 
but  more  often  the  utter  wretchedness  of  loss,  the  bitter  pang 
of  jealousy  that  another  and  perhaps  hated  rival  is  to  possess 
what  he  had  hoped  for,  breeds  an  impulse  to  escape  life  be- 
cause it  is  full  of  psychalgia. 

Youth  very  rarely  commit  what  may  be  called  philo- 
sophic suicides,  which  may  be  noble  and  in  every  way  justifiable 
if  there  is  no  escape  from  a  lingering  and  painful  death  for  self 
or  others,  and  where  it  is  certain  for  both  friends  and  self  to 
bring  real  relief.  Thus,  like  every  other  crime,  circumstances 
may  justify  this  and  even  turn  it  into  a  virtue,  where  refusal 
is  craven  cowardice.  This  Stoic  philosophy  has  been  the  re- 
source of  many  of  the  greatest  souls  of  the  world,  but  rarely 
occurs  at  this  stage  of  life.^ 

Taking  all  countries  together,  the  greatest  number  of  sui- 
cides usually  occurs  between  the  ages  of  forty  and  fifty.  The 
prevalence  of  male  suicides  over  those  of  females  is  least  in 
youth.  In  England  women  who  commit  suicide  between  fifteen 
and  twenty  exceed  by  more  than  one-tenth  the  men.  This  is 
ascribed  to  the  more  sudden  and  energetic  development  of  pu- 
berty, the  youth  of  man  lasting  longer  than  that  of  woman. 
In  the  great  cities,  the  curve  of  youthful  suicides  rises  to  a  great 
height.  From  twenty-three  or  twenty-four  criminality  gradu- 
ally diminishes,  and  suicides  increase  for  twenty  years. 

In  France  ^  we  have  the  following  table : 

*  Morselli :    Suicide,  p.  310. 

'Suicide  in  P'rance,  1889.     Rev.  Ser.,  1893,  p.  636. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     379 


Male. 

Female. 

Under  6  yrs. 

56 

suicides, 

or 

5  percent. 

21 

suicides,  or 

10 

per  cent. 

6-21 

242 

5       " 

150 

10 

21-25 

291 

5       " 

130 

7 

25-30 

436 

7      " 

"5 

6 

30-40 

915 

14      " 

241 

14 

40-50 

1,077 

17       " 

306 

17 

50-60 

1.293 

20       " 

332 

19 

60  and  over. 

2,008 

32       " 

486 

27 

For  twelve  years — 1885-'96- 
Italy  foots  up  as  follows  : 


-the  age  of  suicides  for  all 


Males. 

Females. 

Age 

10-15 

222 

15-20 
865 

All  ages 
15.838 

Age 

10-15 
80 

15-20 

397 

All  Ages 
3.763 

Proal  ^  states  that  for  many  years  the  number  of  suicides 
of  the  young  has  steadily  increased.  For  instance,  in  1880 
there  were  55  cases  under  sixteen  and  267  under  twenty-one 
years  of  age,  whereas  in  1892  these  numbers  had  risen  to  87  and 
475  respectively.  This  he  assigns  to  the  precocity  of  contempo- 
rary youth  in  love  and  libertinage.  Jealousy,  which  plays  a 
very  important  role  in  youthful  love,  is  also  a  prominent 
cause. 

Corre  ^  computes  from  three  authors  the  following  sad 
table,  showing  the  age  of  child  suicides : 


Age. 

Moron,  i87i-'75. 

Bataile,  i87&-'8o. 

Mace,  1877. 

Mace,  1881. 

7 

I 

l] 

8 

3 

4 

9 
10 

3 
5 

4 

33 

34 

II 

II 

21 

12 

21 

40, 

13 

22 

66 

,  . 

14 

42 

20 

33 

15 

67 

103 

31 

52 

Below  16 

175 

240 

84 

119 

At         16 

... 

57 

81 

'  Le  Crime  et  le  Suicide  Passionnels.      Paris,  1890,  p.  35.     See  also  Julliard's 
Les  Desp^r^s,  ch.  i,  Le  malheur  universel  et  I'aspiration  k  la  mort,  1897. 
'  La  France  Criminelle,  p.  313. 


38b 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 


De  Sanctos  and  B.  Vespa  have  gathered  the  age  statistics 
of  suicides  in  different  countries  for  the  quinquennium  1889- 
'93  to  show  its  relation  to  adolescence,  as  follows : 


France Under  . .  i6  yrs 

Switzerland..  "       ..20  " 

Belgium "       ..l6  " 

Holland "       ..20  " 

Prussia Up  to...  15  " 

Bavaria "     ...20  " 

Wurtemberg  .  From  10-20  " 

England Under..  15  " 

Scotland "       ..15  " 

Ireland "       ..20  " 

Sweden "       ..15  " 

Norway "       --I5  " 

Denmark....  "       --I5  " 

Spain Up  to...  15  " 

Japan "     16  " 


.   8-100 

■44 

-13 

■33 

.12 

.86 

■85 

-  5 

-  3 
.18 

-  4 

-  4 
.11 

-13 
.26-10 


16- 
20- 
16- 
20- 

15- 
21- 
21- 

15- 
15- 
20- 

15- 
15- 
15- 
16- 
16- 


21..  45-100 
30.. 169 
29.. 138 
•50..  501 
•20..  69 

■30..  1 59 
•40.. 319 
■20..  40 
20..  31 

-25--  95 
-20..  1 22 

-25--  52 
-20..  43 

-25.-257 
-20..  73-10 


31-25 80-100 

20-60 599 

25-40 236 

50  and  over. 45 1 

20-25 96 

31-40 155 

41-60 407-10 

20-25 63-100 

20-25 59 

25-35 161 

20-25 122 

25-35 "4 

20-30 114 

26-35 178 

20-30 213-10 


Leffiingwell  ^  shows  that  in  England  and  Wales  for  the 
ten  years  ending  1887,  suicides  were  most  frequent  in  the 
quarter  July  to  September,  least  so  in  January  to  March ;  that 
for  the  eight  years  ending  in  1887,  May,  June,  and  July  led  all 
months  in  the  number  of  lunatics  admitted  to  the  asylums  of 
Scotland,  while  least  were  in  the  winter  months.  Murders,  too, 
are  most  frequent  in  the  hottest  season  and  least  so  in  the 
coolest,  with  more  in  the  spring  than  in  the  fall.  The  same  was 
true  of  crimes  against  person  and  also  of  those  against  chas- 
tity. He  found  illegitimacy  in  the  United  Kingdom  most 
prevalent  where  thrift  and  prosperity  were  most  general,  and 
least  where  poverty  prevailed.  It  was  most  common  where  ele- 
mentary education  was  most  diffused,  and  least  among  illiterate 
communities.  Religion  seemed  one  of  the  most  potent  agents 
against  unchastity. 

There  is  one  stage  of  life,  and  only  one,  where  the  rate  of 
suicide  among  females  exceeds  that  of  males,  viz.,  from  fifteen 
to  twenty  years  of  age.  This  is  probably  due  to  the  evolution 
of  sex  life,  which  is  more  trying  than  the  analogous  change  in 
boys.  From  this  point  on,  the  excess  of  male  suicides  over 
female  increases  steadily,  with  a  slight  remission  from  forty- 
five  to  fifty-five,  during  the  climacteric.  During  the  second 
five  years  of  life,  suicide  has  always  been  rare,  but  of  late  seems 
steadily  increasing.    At  the  dawn  of  puberty  it  has  an  increase 

^  Illegitimacy  and  the  Influence  of  Seasons  upon  Conduct.     London,  i8g2, 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    3^* 

more  marked  than  at  any  other  quinquennium,  although  it 
generally  reaches  its  maximum  at  about  fifty.  Most  adults  who 
take  their  own  lives  resist  the  impulse  for  some  time,  but  with 
adolescents  it  is  more  apt  to  be  sudden  and  unpremeditated.^ 

Suicide  may  be  committed  for  trivial  causes,  and  often  by 
blind  and  sudden  impulse.  A  girl  of  fourteen  killed  herself 
because  reproved ;  a  boy  of  the  same  age  because  he  was  pun- 
ished; another  because  a  far  older  actress  did  not  return 
his  love;  a  girl  of  twelve  because  she  quarreled  with  her 
friend;  one  of  fourteen  killed  her  playmate  to  spite  the 
mother  of  the  latter ;  and  another,  so  as  not  to  be  parted  from 
a  companion  who  had  just  died.  Several  German  children  of 
from  thirteen  to  sixteen  have  slain  themselves  after  becoming 
slightly  infected  with  pessimism  from  disgust  of  life.  Some- 
times these  young  persons  commit  suicide  because  inspired  by 
imitation  to  slay  themselves  in  the  ways  they  have  read  of  in  the 
journals,  or  because  they  have  to  go  to  work  regularly,  although 
the  mitigation  of  the  apprentice  system  is  thought  by  some  to 
have  lessened  this  tendency. 

In  his  history  of  the  statistics  of  child  suicide,  Baer  ^  has 
shown  conclusively  that  during  the  last  few  decades  this  has 
increased  in  Great  Britain,  Italy,  France,  and  Germany.  Al- 
though still  much  less  for  girls  under  sixteen  than  for  boys, 
the  increase  of  the  former  has  been  greater  than  with  the  latter, 
although  youth  suicides  have  not  increased  as  rapidly  as  those 
of  adults.  The  effect  of  puberty,  Baer  shows  to  be  a  very 
marked  increase,  and  he  believes  that  an  increased  number  of 
youthful  suicides  escapes  the  official  statistician  because  of  the 
strong  tendency  of  parents  and  friends  to  assign  and  even  to 
believe  that  cases  which  admit  of  doubt  are  due  to  accident  or 
other  causes.  Mental  disorders,  although  often  the  cause  of 
child  suicides,  are  more  difficult  to  detect  than  with  adults,  and 
this  is  probably  true  both  where  the  act  is  planned  and  where  it 
is  sudden  and  instinctive.  Most  surely  morbid,  perhaps,  are 
those  cases  where  the  method  of  suicide  is  exceptional.  Ab- 
normal degeneration  is  a  frequent  cause,  constitutional  and  in- 
fective diseases,  psychopathic  weakness  of  the  brain  manifesting 
itself  in  violent,  stormy,  obstinate,  and  peculiar  conduct. 

*  Suicide  and  Insanity,  by  S.  A.  K.  Strahan.      London,  1893,  chap.  ii. 

•  Der  Selbstmord  im  kindlichen  Lebensalter.      Leipzig,  igoi. 


382  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

No  better  statistics  of  cause  can  be  found  than  those  of 
Prussia  from  1884-^98,  when  963  children  from  ten  to  fifteen 
committed  suicide,  as  follows : 


Cause. 


Regret,  shame,  and  conscience. 

Vexation  and  strife 

Mental  disease 

Passion 

Satiety  of  life 

Bodily  suffering 

Grief 

Vice 

Cause  unknown 


Boys. 


240 

75 

72 

23 

55 

21 

19 

3 

13 

3 

14 

4 

II 

2 

6 

3 

275 

62 

If  we  look  to  the  larger  environment,  the  absence  of  calm, 
slow,  and  natural  development  is  especially  seen  in  industrial 
and  city  life.  In  the  narrower  environment  of  the  home,  we 
find  in  the  lowest  classes  poverty,  mistreatment,  hunger,  and 
especially  child  labor,  enforced  in  the  German  empire  for  more 
than  half  a  million  children  out  of  eight  and  one-third  million 
under  fourteen  years  of  age.  Next  to  this  comes  the  precocity 
favored  by  the  environment  of  wealthy  children  and  the  luxury 
and  superfluity  of  physical  enjoyment,  early  habituation  to  the 
theater,  dance,  and  society,  which  leaves  them  indifferent  to 
more  innocent  pleasures,  so  that  the  seeds  of  religion,  philan- 
thropy, justice,  truth,  beauty,  patience,  and  good-will  to  others 
are  not  implanted,  and  selfishness  is  overgrown. 

The  school  is  thought  to  be  largely  responsible  for  child 
suicides  with  its  overpleasure,  anxieties,  and  strain  upon  the 
memory.  This  is  natural  because  this  is  the  school  age.  For 
the  five  years  ending  1888  there  were  289  suicides  of  school 
children,  of  whom  49  were  girls.  Of  the  210  in  the  lower 
schools,  45  boys  and  23  girls  committed  suicide  from  fear  of 
punishment.  Of  the  76  boys  in  the  higher  schools,  the  causes 
in  order  were  : 

Fear  of  examinations  and  unknown,  15  each. 

Wounded  honor  and  insanity,   1 1  each. 

Other  school  causes  and  satiety  with  life,  5  each. 

Unhappy  love,  4. 

While  suicide  in  youth  bears  a  very  small  proportion  to 
suicide  of  adults,  and  while  few  inferences  can  be  drawn  from 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    3^3 

such  meager  statistics,  there  is  a  growing  belief  that  the  school's 
share  of  responsibility  is  much  less  than  has  been  thought.  In 
1883,  seventeen  heads  of  institutions  for  the  insane  reported  to 
the  Prussian  Minister  of  Education  that  insanity  was  no  more 
common  among  the  pupils  of  the  middle  schools  than  among 
others  of  their  age,  and  that  perhaps  mental  training  was  a  pro- 
duction rather  than  a  cause  of  insanity,  while  very  rarely  indeed 
was  the  school  a  cause  of  suicide.  Even  if  unknown  causes  be 
charged  up  against  the  school,  the  absolute  number  is  very 
small.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  that  examinations  are  a 
great  strain.  Dr.  Ignatieff  ^  found  that  seventy-nine  per  cent  of 
pupils  lost  weight  and  hence  concluded  that  "  examinations  in 
their  effect  upon  the  youthful  organism  were  like  a  grave  disease 
which  resulted  in  serious  disturbances  of  nutrition  and  the 
tissues,"  especially  the  brain.  Dr.  Kosinzoff  ^  from  more  data 
found  that  three-fourths  of  the  children  lost  weight  during  ex- 
aminations, and  that  this  was  most  marked  in  the  higher 
classes. 

Unrequited  love  already  plays  its  role  here,  often  with  ex- 
treme sentimentality.  A  typical  case  is  that  of  a  fourteen-year- 
old  girl  whose  sister  seemed  more  attractive  to  the  boy  of  her 
choice  than  she.  A  letter  was  left  behind  wishing  her  sister 
and  her  lover  long-married  happiness,  bequeathing  them  her 
skates  and  directing  that  she  be  buried  in  a  white  dress,  with 
hair  combed  smooth,  and  her  Bible  and  hymn-book  in  her  hand 
upon  her  breast.  A  girl  of  twelve  decided  to  freeze  to  death 
for  love,  because  Edouard  loved  a  richer  girl  than  she,  and 
wished  to  be  buried  where  ultimately  he  would  lie. 

The  power  of  imitation  as  a  suggestive  motive  in  ado- 
lescent suicides  is  often  seen ;  so  is  vanity  which  can  not  be 
gratified ;  so  is  experimentation  with  nooses  and  pistols  to  see 
how  the  approach  to  death  feels. 

In  the  literature,  child  suicide  has  almost  always  been  de- 
scribed as  something  not  only  pathetic  but  anomalous  and 
monstrous,  because  occurring  at  an  age  when  the  love  of  life 
is  supposed  to  be  strongest.  A  few  writers  have  recognized 
the  fact  that  for  very  young  children  it  may  be  favored  by 

*  Der  Einfluss  der  Exainina  auf  das  Korpergewicht.     Zeits.  f.  Schulgesund- 
heitspflege,  1898,  p.  240. 

•  Ibid.,  1899.  p.  205, 


2H  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

ignorance  of  what  death  really  means,  or  the  vivid  imagery  of 
the  attractiveness  of  another  life.  While  superstition  more 
often  makes  it  dreaded,  it  may  cause  it  to  seem  attractive.  The 
fact  is,  however,  that  more  or  less  dwelling  upon  death  and 
suicide  is  probably  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  with  chil- 
dren in  the  early  teens.  Anger,  love,  and  religion  especially 
predispose  to  reveries  of  death.  Children  often  have  spells  of 
musing  upon  how  they  would  feel  or  look  to  others  as  corpses 
or  during  the  act  of  death.  They  imagine  themselves  lying  in 
the  coffin  and  fancy  the  remarks  that  their  relatives  and  friends 
would  make  about  them.  Often  heroic  sacrifices  of  life  are 
planned,  generally  without  great  emotional  depth.  In  one 
census  sixty  per  cent  confessed  to  these  experiences.^  In  an- 
other where  eleven  children,  and  in  another  where  fifty  an- 
swered, all  confessed  these  fancies  which  culminate  in  early 
adolescence.  The  cause  is  found  in  the  fact  that  up  to  this  period 
life  has  been  more  or  less  self-centered  and  served  by  others,  but 
now  begin  premonitions  of  the  subordinations  of  the  ego  to  a 
life  of  service.  Love,  specifically,  and  altruism,  generally,  favor 
it.  Plato  defined  philosophy  as  dwelling  upon  death,  meaning 
that  familiarity  with  ideas  lessens  the  hold  of  the  soul  upon  indi- 
vidual and  personal  objects  and  is  a  kind  of  diffusion  motive. 

If  this  can  be  assumed  as  a  normal  stage  of  development, 
the  problem  of  suicide  in  youth  in  seen  in  a  new  aspect,  for  it 
is  only  a  rarely  culminating  expression  of  a  very  general  tend- 
ency which  can  hardly  in  itself  be  called  pathological.  Pre- 
cocity, whether  of  feeling,  will,  or  intellect,  aggravates  it  be- 
cause it  brings  the  motives  which  limit  individuation  before  the 
latter  is  complete.  To  assume  the  responsibilities,  ideas, 
amusements,  and  passions  of  adults,  when  character  is  plastic 
and  unformed,  gives  an  unconscious  sense  of  having  been 
robbed  o/  the  just  rights  and  immunities  due  to  childhood, 
and  makes  demands  upon  its  feeble  powers  which  can  not  be 
met.  From  these  prematurities,  childhood  should  be  protected. 
Reflection  should  not  come  too  soon  lest  the  heart  be  poisoned 
by  negations.  Passion  must  not  be  roused  before  the  powers 
which  control  it  are  developed.  "  Other-worldness  "  should  not 
be  too  intense.  Care,  partizanship,  sensibility,  vanity,  and  every 
specialization  which  interferes  with  harmony  and  symmetry 

•  Scott:   Old  Age  and  Death.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  vol.  viii,  p.  98  et se^. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     3^5 

of  all-sided  development  predispose  to  morbid  states  which 
tend  to  renunciation.  A  committee  of  Swiss  physicians  lately 
petitioned  for  a  law  to  prohibit  the  printing  of  suicides  to 
avoid  suggestion,  A  school  system,  which  intensifies  rather 
than  shelters  the  young  from  the  intense  desires,  ambitions, 
worries,  and  mortifications  of  life,  is  a  forcing  machine  and  a 
perversion  of  the  purposes  and  etymology  of  the  very  word 
school. 

Bartley  ^  in  his  chapter  on  youth,  or  the  third  age  of  a 
pauper,  or  the  period  of  life  between  the  school  age  and  that 
of  matrimony,  thinks  it  especially  marked  by  a  desire  for  inde- 
pendence, and  that  a  good,  strong,  average  lad  has  no  wants 
beyond  his  mere  food  and  dress.  He  is  generally  let  alone  by 
the  church  and  his  employer  takes  no  care  of  him,  and  unless 
he  is  very  exceptional  he  will  follow  the  well-beaten  track  of 
spending  every  penny  he  earns,  dressing  like  a  swell,  resenting 
advice,  and  in  a  reckless  way  passing  the  heyday  of  youth,  dur- 
ing which  he  might  with  proper  guidance  lay  the  foundations 
of  future  independence  and  comfort.  Young  persons  of  this 
class  never  look  ahead ;  rarely  or  at  least  reluctantly  contribute 
to  the  support  of  their  parents,  almost  never  to  their  grand- 
parents ;  and  are  often  gotten  up  extravagantly  when  their  par- 
ents are  on  the  parish.  Utterly  reckless  carelessness  of  youth  in 
money  matters,  this  writer  thinks  especially  characteristic  of 
those  who  will  join  the  million  paupers  on  the  parish  rolls  of 
England.  Adolescents  of  both  sexes,  if  able-bodied,  rarely  re- 
ceive either  outdoor  or  indoor  relief,  but  their  life  is  a  prepara- 
tion for  pauperism  in  that  they  carefully  avoid  learning  any 
habits  which  will  prevent  it,  and  systematically  live  from  hand 
to  mouth  and  for  present  and  immediate  enjoyment,  with  no 
forethought.  They  perhaps  justify  the  folly  of  doing  nothing 
to  provide  for  a  rainy  day  by  the  argument  that  only  thus  are 
they  sure  of  receiving  the  benefit  of  what  they  earn.  Thrift, 
on  the  other  hand,  at  this  age  is  one  of  the  greatest  antidotes 
to  drink,  and  the  duty  of  inculcating  it  should  be  brought  home 
to  parents  and  teachers.  Crime  indicates  in  general  more  vigor 
and  vitality  than  does  pauperism,  although  the  latter  is  more 
fixed  and  hereditary.     Crime  is  misdirection  and  amenable  to 

*  The  Seven  Ages  of  a  Village  Pauper.     London,  1874,  p.  81. 
2ft 


386  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

discipline,  while  pauperism  is  hopeless  and  often  diseased,  more 
persistent  among  men  than  among  women,  most  common  with 
the  youngest  child  of  a  family,  etc.^ 

Corre  ^  holds  that  the  more  pronounced  is  civilization,  the 
more  critical  the  epoch  of  puberty  becomes  when  heredity  and 
predispositions  appear,  and  when  prostitution  is  enormously 
augmented.  The  adolescent,  he  seems  to  think,  has  always  at 
the  bottom  of  his  nature  the  dross  of  villainy;  is  prone  to  idle- 
ness, and  has  a  weak  side  for  low  pleasures;  is  jealous,  vindic- 
tive, liable  to  drink  and  debauchery ;  and  if  criminal  is  sometimes 
very  grossly  so,  and  his  cruelty  is  restrained  by  no  sentiment  of 
pity  or  shame.  He  describes  the  bands  of  precocious  male- 
factors that  often  pillage  gardens  and  furnished  but  unoccupied 
houses,  and  do  not  scruple  to  commit  crimes  of  violence,  if 
necessary  for  their  safety  or  even  for  their  pleasure.  After 
giving  a  long  list  of  flagrant  crimes,  he  declares  that  "  such 
facts  repeated  every  day  in  the  newspapers  give  us  but  a  feeble 
idea  of  the  criminality  of  minors  "  or  those  who  are  debutantes 
in  adolescence  and  have  the  wit  to  escape  police  vigilance.  The 
motives  of  their  crimes  seem  usually  very  inadequate,  and  ado- 
lescents at  present  have  a  singular  incapacity  to  endure  the  least 
effort  or  restraint.  Corre  enumerates  youthful  murders  and 
tortures  inflicted  for  no  other  reason  than  that  the  victim  was 
displeasing,  troublesome,  that  the  young  criminal  felt  romantic 
and  wished  to  do  something  signal,  or  to  imitate  some  outrage 
which  had  been  read  of. 

Bon j can -^  thinks  that  in  this  age  children  strongly  tend 
to  revolt  against  their  parents  and  that  the  latter  are  culpable 
for  the  consequent  progressive  disorganization  of  the  family 
and  its  social  results.  His  elaborate  tables  show  that  with  some 
slight  exceptions  vagabondage,  mendacity,  theft,  destruction  of 
property  and  rebellion  have  steadily  increased  in  the  depart- 
ment of  the  Seine  during  recent  decades,  although  for  the  few 
later  years  of  his  review  the  number  of  arrests  had  slightly  de- 
creased. This  he  believes  to  be  chiefly  due  to  the  laxity  of 
justice,  and  he  holds  that  impunity  and  impenitence  go  together, 

1  A.  H.  Bradford  :   Heredity  and  Christian  Problems,  p.  142  et  seq. 

*  Crime  et  Suicide.     Paris,  1891,  p.  309. 

•  Enfants  r^volt^s  et  Parents  coupables.     Paris,  1895. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     3^7 

especially  with  minors.  We  can  not  "  sterilize  the  bouillon  of 
culture  of  the  microbes  of  vice  and  crime  "  except  by  whole- 
some parental  correction,  and  our  problem  he  conceives  to  be 
how  to  transform  youth  with  dangerous  tendencies,  which  if  un- 
corrected will  make  them  parasites  of  society,  into  useful  mem- 
bers of  it.  This  he  deems  the  gravest  aspect  of  the  decay  of 
the  family  and  its  cult  in  France. 

Sighele  ^  lays  great  stress  upon  moral  contagion  of  all 
degrees  from  suggestion  a  deux  to  psychic  epidemics  of  crime, 
and  shows  how  a  crowd  is  a  medium  in  which  the  microbe  of 
evil  develops  more  readily  than  that  of  good.  In  large  and 
small  bodies,  whether  parties,  sects,  or  mobs,  mimetism  and  psy- 
chic ferment  may  lead  to  a  kind  of  moral  drunkenness  in  which 
the  most  degenerate,  foolish,  and  even  criminal  influences 
dominate,  and  where  a  spirit  of  extreme  cruelty  may  dictate 
acts  which  every  individual  member  of  the  group  would  abhor. 
Sudden  and  unpremeditated  crimes,  which  are  selfish,  without 
reflection,  and  therefore  not  entirely  responsible,  indicate  al- 
most a  kind  of  hypnotic  state.  Collective  masses  are  especially 
prone  to  barbarism  of  an  atavistic  kind,  and  instability  and 
caprice  often  increase  almost  directly  as  numbers. 

The  reading  of  romance  has  great  influence  upon  the  de- 
velopment of  youthful  passion.  Werther  has  created  a  distinct 
psychosis  known  as  Wertherism,  just  as  Anthony  has  pro- 
duced Antoninism.  Stendhal  not  only  admires  passional  crime, 
but  almost  revels  in  murder  because  it  indicates  energy.  He 
admires  aptitude  for  violent  and  dangerous  action,  loves  the 
beautiful  color  of  blood,  salutes  assassins,  thinks  it  a  bad  sign 
that  France  has  less  passional  crimes  than  other  nations. 
Barres  eulogizes  Spain  because  it  can  be  at  once  exalted  and 
fierce,  mystic  and  cruel.  Some  of  these  "  professors  of 
energy  "  ^  consider  crime,  especially  phrenetic,  often  "  not  as 
an  insanity  but  as  a  sane  idea,  almost  a  duty  or  at  least  a  noble 
protestation."  Lacenaire  declares  that  all  assassins  are  cour- 
ageous and  have  admirers  and  disciples. 

Those  who  commit  crimes  by  irresistible  impulse  are  very 
rare,  and  their  offenses  are  mostly  against  persons,  so  Lombroso 
calls  occasional   criminals  criminaloids.     We  have   abundant 

'  La  Foule  Criminelle.     Paris,  1901.     Second  edition,  radically  revised. 
'  Proal,  op.  cit..  p.  464. 


388  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

classifications  based  upon  the  curative  and  defensive  influences 
of  punishment,  but  less  upon  organic,  and  fewest  on  psycho- 
logical characteristics.  In  most  countries,  the  grave  crimes  are 
steady  and  constant,  and  minor  crimes  are  marked  by  steady 
increase;  it  is  especially  these  which  civilization  has  made 
and  not  correctionalized.  Although  there  are  often  rapid 
oscillations  of  crimes  in  unstable  lands,  like  Ireland,  there 
is  an  increase  in  the  aggregate,  according  to  Ferri's  law, 
of  criminal  saturation.  He  says  it  is  with  penal  laws  as  with 
steam,  compression  increases  the  expansive  force,  for  crime 
and  punishment  belong  to  two  very  different  spheres. 

Lacassagne  has  prepared  an  interesting  criminal  calendar  to 
show  the  monthly  and  other  periodicities  of  crime,  how  those 
against  person  are  in  direct  proportion  to  the  elevation  of  the 
temperature  and  the  length  of  the  day ;  those  against  property 
to  the  length  of  the  night  and  low  temperature.  Garraud  and 
Bernard  ^  have  shown  that  offenses  of  chastity  against  chil- 
dren, which  have  been  very  steadily  increasing  and  at  a  rapid 
rate  since  the  beginning  of  the  second  quarter  of  the  last  cen- 
tury, are  most  frequent  in  the  month  of  June,  and  least  so  in 
November,  following  thus  the  law  of  rut  in  the  animal  world 
and  of  fecundation  in  plants.  Ferri  has  traced  the  variations 
in  crime  which  follow  the  thermometer ;  others  find  the  price  of 
corn  and  cereals  a  standard,  according  to  which  they  can  pre- 
dict its  amount.  It  follows  wars,  hard  and  flush  times,  hu- 
midity, altitude,  urban  or  city  life,  with  concomitant  variations 
as  Oettingen  ^  has  shown  statistically,  so  that  all  cosmic  in- 
fluences affect  ethics  in  a  way  which  to  many  seems  to  threaten 
human  freedom.  In  suicides  these  telluric,  seasonal,  finerstial, 
diurnal,  and  social  causes  seem  so  contributory  as  to  challenge 
faith  in  human  freedom. 

Crime  ^  is  often  committed  in  or  near  the  menstrual  state, 
and  Krafft-Ebbing,  Westphal,  Tuke,  Pelmann,  Mabille,  Phi- 
loindicus,  Bartel,  Ball,  Kirn,  Flugo  Miller,  Girand,  and  others 

'  Des  Attentats  k  la  Pudeur  et  des  Viols  sur  les  Enfants. 

*  Die  moralstatistik  in  ihrer  Bedeutung  fiir  eine  Socialethik.  Erlangen,  1882, 
p.  700  <?/  Sf<^. 

*  For  a  thoroughly  detailed  state  of  two  typical  cases,  see  The  Menstrual  State 
and  Menstrual  Psychoses,  by  Prof.  P.  I.  Kovalevsky,  in  the  Arch,  de  Psychol., 
Khartkof,,  1894,  i,  pp.  73-131. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     389 

have  collected  many  cases,  illustrative  of  the  nerve  and  soul 
storms  that  break  out  near  this  period  or  are  connected  with 
its  delay,  suppression,  or  excess.  Excitement,  rising  some- 
times to  mania,  depressing  states  shading  toward  suicide,  tics, 
aches,  tensions,  flaccidities,  pains  local  and  general,  imperative 
ideas,  impulsive  acts  as  violence  to  others,  setting  of  fires, 
perversion  of  appetite,  prsecordial  anxiety,  sleeplessness,  de- 
lusion of  persecution,  nervous  coughs,  irritability,  etc.,  and 
crimes  done  in  epileptoid  and  more  or  less  unconscious  states, 
fear  and  vague  dreads,  aptly  characterized  by  Cowles  as  fear 
of  fear,  religious  states  of  consciousness  of  abnormal  intensity 
or  kind,  a  series  of  such  phenomena  more  or  less  pronounced 
and  repeated  with  great  uniformity  every  twenty-eight  days 
for  years,  or  as  in  other  cases  so  protean  that  no  two  periods  are 
alike,  sometimes  preceding,  sometimes  during,  and  sometimes 
after  the  flow  itself,  gravely  complicate  all  classes  of  legal  re- 
sponsibility. 

Tarde,  who  thinks  that  most  of  the  traits  peculiar  to  crimi- 
nals are  due  to  the  professional  exercise  of  crime,  and  who  thus 
magnifies  the  acquired  in  comparison  with  the  instinctive  and 
hereditary  factors,  would  by  no  means  ignore  the  connection 
between  negroid,  mongoloid,  mattoid,  or  epileptoid  types  of 
crime. 

Ferri  makes  three  great  types  of  delinquents  with  two 
minor  varieties.  All  have  the  common  traits  of  impulsiveness 
of  abnormal  action  with  either  absence  or  feebleness  of  resist- 
ance. These  are  as  follows  :  ( i )  Criminals  by  birth  or  instinct 
with  hereditary  absence  of  moral  sense,  without  feeling  for  the 
suffering  of  their  victims,  with  cynicism,  indifference,  and  ab- 
sence of  remorse  afterward,  and  with  improvidence  of  the  con- 
sequence of  their  actions.  (2)  The  insane  criminal,  a  variety  of 
the  preceding  class.  In  these  cases  there  may  be  good  conduct 
preceding  the  crime,  but  with  a  fixed  idea  of  repulsion  to  it 
and  with  efforts  to  subdue  it,  and  great  fury  in  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  act  itself.  The  victims  may  be  chosen  from  among 
friends  with  no  obvious  motive,  such  as  vengeance  or  cupidity. 
(3)  The  criminal  of  passion,  personal  or  social,  involving  love, 
anger,  honor,  and  followed  often  by  a  sincere  and  deep  re- 
gret.    (4)  The  occasional  criminal,  a  variety  of  the  passional, 


39°  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

characterized  by  feebleness  of  the  moral  sense  and  with  a  consti- 
tution which  makes  him  the  victim  of  circumstances.  (5) 
The  habitual  criminal,  an  intermediate  type  often  developed 
from  the  occasional  criminal,  with  the  moral  sense  finally  ef- 
faced owing  to  an  imperfect  constitution  or  unfavorable  envi- 
ronment. 

Lombroso  finds  two  general  types  of  criminals — first,  those 
impelled  by  causes  external  to  their  own  organization,  whether 
occasional  or  habitual,  and  here  he  includes  those  led  to  crime 
by  passion.  A  second  class  comprises  criminals  by  organic 
defects  and  includes:  (I)  Those  with  acquired  defects,  whether 
due  to  special  diseases,  paralysis,  hysteria,  or  to  common  dis- 
eases like  consumption,  syphilis,  or  those  caused  by  senility, 
druffs,  alcohol,  or  those  with  an  insane  taint,  monomania,  mel- 
ancholia,  acquired  epilepsy,  etc.  (II)  Criminals  by  internal  or- 
ganic defect,  and  of  these  he  makes  four  subdivisions:  (i) 
Epileptic,  degenerative,  asymmetrical,  those  with  obtuse  touch 
and  pain  sense,  color  blind,  lascivious,  irascible,  hyper- 
religious,  delirious,  impulsive,  ferocious.  (2)  Moral  imbeciles, 
often  macrocephalic,  without  beard  and  with  abnormalities  of 
nose,  ears,  hair,  etc.,  with  a  psychic  character  like  that  of  epilep- 
tics, but  less  pfonounced.  (3)  Criminals  with  innate  psychotic 
traits,  mattoids,  idiots,  cretins,  monomaniacs,  but  not  quite 
imbeciles.  (4)  Born  criminals,  thieves,  assaulters,  violators, 
etc.,  each  with  their  own  peculiar  traits. 

Marro's  categories  are  three:  (i)  Criminals  by  external 
causation,  whether  predisposing  or  determining.  These  are 
usually  lazy,  quarrelsome,  and  perhaps  vagabonds,  neuropathic, 
precocious,  consumptive  or  alcoholic,  with  few  marks  of 
somatic  degeneration,  with  no  grave  lesions  of  sensation  or 
motility.  They  are  impulsive  and  affectionate,  with  average 
intellect,  may  be  very  religious,  and  are  usually  curable.  (2) 
Criminals  in  whom  external  or  internal  causes  counterbalance, 
many  recidival  thieves,  participants  in  graver  crimes,  with  bad 
heredity,  cupidity  of  wealth  and  pleasure,  frequent  deformi- 
ties of  skull  and  face,  rickety,  with  frequent  alternations  of 
sensibility  and  intelligence,  now  normal  and  now  defective, 
with  precocious  malice,  feeble  will,  and  doubtful  courageability. 
(3)  Criminals  in  whom  internal  causes  predominate  markedly 
over   external:    (a)    where   the    internal    causes   are   hered- 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     39 1 

itary,  prone  to  crimes  of  luxury,  incendiarism,  wounds  without 
premeditation,  crimes  in  unusual  age  or  youth,  with  special  sus- 
ceptibility to  seasonal  changes  and  to  momentary  impulses,  often 
blond  and  sanguine  in  temperament,  with  signs  of  arrested  de- 
velopment in  body,  obtuse  senses,  dementia,  ignorance,  and 
rarely  curable;  (b)  criminals  in  whom  the  predominant  internal 
causation  is  morbid,  thieves  committing  rapine  and  depredation, 
murder  with  premeditation,  of  delincjuent  parentage,  addicted  to 
alcoholism,  fondness  for  orgy  and  vengeance,  with  physical  de- 
velopment usually  normal  but  the  facial  bones  excessively  large, 
lesions  and  scars  not  uncommon,  fierce  physiognomy,  tattooing, 
deformities  of  the  skull,  exaggerated  reflexes,  low  sensibility 
and  a  high  degree  of  tolerance  for  alcohol,  intelligence  perhaps 
normal  but  moral  sense  degraded,  suicidal  tendencies,  cynicism, 
and  usually  incorrigibility;  (c)  criminals  who  are  such  by 
coincidence  of  internal  causes  and  those  morbidly  acquired, 
murderers  and  assassins,  drunkards,  epileptics,  prone  to  ex- 
alted and  rapt  states,  mental  lesions,  etc.,  these  constituting 
the  most  dangerous  and  incurable  types  of  all.^ 

The  extreme  severity  of  penalties  in  the  past,  the  cross, 
stake,  torture  chamber,  the  lash,  the  scavenger's  daughter,  the 
iron  maiden,  mutilations,  branks,  stocks,  hulks,  the  arena, 
early  prisons,  transportations,  penal  colonies,  etc.,  indicated 
not  that  man  had  a  deeper  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin  in  the 
past  than  now,  but  that  these  were  relics  of  a  yet  more  barbaric 
and  cruel  age  when  man  could  readily  become  a  wolf  to  his  fel- 
low man.  No  animal  has  equaled  man  in  ferocity,  and  yet  we 
must  believe  that  in  their  time  many  of  these  abominations  were 
necessary  for  the  devlopment  of  society.  Sometimes  the  latter 
went  down  and  the  worse  elements  terrorized  over  the  best.  So 
falsely  has  the  line  between  the  licet  and  the  non-Ucct  often  been 
drawn,  that  our  sympathies  are  frequently  with  the  great  but 
wicked,  and  sometimes  even  with  those  who  have  deemed  it  a 
shame  not  to  be  infamous ;  with  those  who  have  regarded  temp- 
tation as  an  inspiration ;  or  with  heroes  like  Hercules  and 
Ulysses,  if  not  most  of  the  great  in  antiquity,  perhaps  including 
even  Jesus,  who,  if  they  undertook  to  live  out  their  lives  in  any 
modern  metropolis,  would  speedily  find  their  way  to  prison. 

1  See  A.  Corr^:   Les  Criminels.     Paris,  1889. 


392  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Prison  psychology,  it  may  be  said  in  passing,  is  yet  to  be 
written,  but  the  ghmpses  of  it  which  we  have  in  penological  lit- 
erature are  interesting.  Some  convicts  wear  a  mask  consistently 
through  their  entire  term.  They  are  more  or  less  adaptable  to 
all  the  rules,  to  moral  and  even  religious  influences,  and  the 
chaplain  often  has  hopes  of  them,  but  is  utterly  deceived.  All 
idealize  their  past,  and  often  slowly  evolve  romances  about  it 
that  are  tissues  of  criminal  idealization  and  which  make  the  old 
life  attractive  by  a  lurid  and  diabolical  glamour.  When  they  go 
out  all  the  prison  life  seems  pallid  and  unreal  and  like  a  long 
nightmare.  The  day  of  release  is  one  of  palpitating  anticipa- 
tion, and  the  best  resolutions  wilt  in  a  moment,  like  hothouse 
plants  when  exposed  where  they  are  unacclimated.  They  re- 
vert with  organic  fatality  to  a  freedom  which  is  the  liberty  of 
wild  beasts.  The  sex  tension  is  often  extreme  and  may  gener- 
ate erotic  illusions  and  hallucinations.  Some  cynics  say  every 
one  will  lie  about  sex  because  it  is  simply  impossible  to  tell  the 
truth,  and  it  is  certain  that  prisoners  evolve  the  most  false  and 
lascivious  images  and  stories.  Here  we  see  the  crankiness  and 
freakiness  so  characteristic  of  the  masturbators,  who  always 
have  some  kink  in  their  social  relations,  and  the  moralization 
of  the  debauchee,  who  as  he  approaches  eviration  prates  of  how 
women  and  wine  relax  all  moral  fiber  and  of  the  honor  of 
wives,  mothers,  daughters  as  a  tissue  of  moonshine  that  vanishes 
and  leaves  not  a  rack  behind  when  passion  finds  freedom.  We 
find  strange  paradoxes  in  the  prison  world — murderers  who  are 
in  for  life  are  proverbially  the  best  behaved,  while  those  who  are 
the  best  men  outside  often  have  the  worst  prison  records.  The 
most  heartless  assassin  is  often  most  tender  to  sweetheart  and 
mother,  or  agonizes  over  sparrows  he  had  tamed,  and  almost 
dies  if  they  do.  The  whole  heart  of  a  prisoner  in  solitary  con- 
finement may  go  out  to  a  tender  plant  that  grows  between  the 
paving-stones  of  his  yard,  as  did  that  of  Pellico,  who  watched 
and  tended  it  daily  as  a  mother  ministers  to  a  puny  child. 
Some  women,  amenable  enough  outside,  can  not  be  subdued, 
and  will  literally  die  rather  than  be  tamed.  Some  nurse  re- 
venge and  plan  a  vendetta.  Some,  previously  virtuous,  take  a 
revengeful  delight  in  degrading  themselves.  Some  harlots  pray 
daily  for  pardon  for  sins  that  they  charge  up  to  cruel  circum- 
stances and  for  dear  ones  in  a  home  they  love,  but  never  wish  to 


JUVENILE    FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     393 

see  again.  Some  break  out,  scream,  and  smash  everything,  not 
always  periodically,  but  whenever  many  crosses  accumulate 
and  reach  a  saturation  point,  as  when  the  Malay  runs  amuck. 
To  all  not  fully  in  their  confidence,  nearly  all  prisoners  lie,  till 
one  inexperienced  would  think  prisons  were  built  for  the  pure 
and  innocent.  It  is  not  well,  as  I  have  learned  from  much  ex- 
perience with  prisoners,  in  addressing  them  collectively  to  speak 
of  courts  of  justice,  and  many  have  a  deep  feeling  that  religion 
is  a  sham  and  virtue  either  an  ideal  or  a  pretense.  Not  only 
men  but  women  pall  in  a  schoolgirl  mash,  but  women  can  not 
organize  or  complot.  Thieves  are  sometimes  enthusiastically 
in  love  with  their  vocations,  and  regard  all  business  as  thievery 
and  without  principle.  Some  become  political  reformers,  and 
one  bequeathed  his  hair  for  plaster,  his  bones  for  lime,  his  skin 
for  a  drumhead  to  arouse  the  people  against  their  oppressors, 
and  his  intestines  for  fiddle  strings  to  enliven  their  hearts. 
The  new  penology  is  no  longer  actuated  by  vengeance,  and 
does  not  look  at  the  moral  gravity  of  the  offense,  but  solely  at 
the  protection  of  society,  which  must,  not  so  much  punish,  as 
protect  itself.  "  Judge  not  "  is  its  maxim.  In  place  of  the  old 
prison,  which  was  a  moral  pesthouse  and  incubator  of  crime  by 
contagion,  we  have  the  moral  hospital,  the  director  and  of^cers 
of  which  become  in  a  sense  compurgators  for  working  such  re- 
forms in  the  prisoner  that  he  will  be  no  longer  dangerous  to 
society.  The  special  type  of  crime  no  more  classifies  it  than  do 
the  specific  acts  of  a  lunatic  indicate  his  form  of  insanity. 
Courts,  too,  have  changed,  and  it  is  now  a  commonplace  that  if 
punishment  is  sure  it  need  not  be  half  as  severe  to  work  the 
same  deterrents  as  if  its  severity  were  doubled  on  one-half  the 
offenders,  while  the  other  half  escaped.  Justice  now  is  asking 
with  great  earnestness  after  the  state  of  mind  and  body  of  the 
accused.  Individual  study,  which  begins  with  the  external  details 
of  the  Bertillon  system,  is  now  postulated  for  all  the  deeper  and 
more  inward  instincts,  history,  heredity,  etc.,  while  preventive 
education,  which  is  perhaps  the  very  best  test  of  any  pedagogic 
system,  has  led  penologists  and  criminologists  last  of  all  to  focus 
their  attention  upon  juvenile  crime  as  needing  special  consid- 
eration and  as  most  susceptible  to  all  reformatory  influences.^ 

'  Ferriani.    Minderjahrige  Verbrecher.    Strafgesetzgebungen.p.  30,and  Ueber  du 
Bestrafung,  p.  409  ;   F.  H.  Lowe's  Punishment  and  Reformation,  ch.  xiii  and  xiv. 


394  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Despine  ^  conceives  natural  psychology  as  that  of  instinct, 
and  this  he  would  characterize  for  each  age,  sex,  race,  etc.  The 
intellect  he  regards  somewhat  in  the  sense  of  Horwicz,  as  an 
instrument  to  express  and  to  aid  in  the  modification  of  the 
deeper  and  all-dominant  instincts.  We  think  as  we  feel.  The 
young  often  can  not  think  a  thing  without  saying  or  even  doing 
it,  so  that  even  dissimulation  may  be  a  form  of  self-con- 
trol. These  instincts  include  sentiments  and  passions,  but  the 
mind  being  made  to  serve  it,  can  not  act  against  instinct,  at 
least,  unless  there  is  a  special  moral  sense,  which  is  lacking  in 
malefactors,  so  that  they  can  have  no  free-will,  and  therefore  no 
guilt,  and  thus  moral  treatment  and  not  penalty  is  necessary. 
Superposed  culture  may  even  stand  in  the  way  of  real  psychic 
development,  and  ignorance  is  as  good  a  point  of  departure 
as  Cartesian  doubt.  In  his  final  and  summary  statements  he 
quotes  approvingly  Janet's  dictum,  that  in  philosophy  igno- 
rance is  favorable  to  invention ;  and  Lemoine's  argument,  that 
the  thought  of  a  man  of  good  sense,  who  is  ignorant  although 
knowing  that  he  is  so,  is  an  admirable  point  of  departure  for 
the  most  precise  and  profound  philosophic  researches. 

On  this  view,  rigorously  applied,  we  should  have  to  accept 
perhaps  the  most  drastic  of  all  the  cures  of  crime  and  degener- 
ation generally,  which  is  that  suggested  by  McKim.-  His 
plan  is  "  the  gentle  removal  from  this  life  "  of  defectives  and 
degenerates,  committers  of  heinous  crimes  or  chronic  recidi- 
vists for  less  grave  crimes,  and  all  others  whose  bodily  and 
mental  characters  and  ancestry  show  them  to  be  hopelessly  in- 
corrigible. Idiots,  and  especially  moral  imbeciles,  most  epilep- 
tics that  are  hopelessly  degenerate,  and  perhaps  the  worst  habit- 
ual drunkards,  should  be  selected  for  extinction,  though  not 
without  a  physical  and  mental  examination.  The  essential 
question  should  be,  to  what  degree  the  candidate  is  dangerous 
to  society.  Great  discretion  should  always  be  used.  Perhaps 
nocturnal  house-breakers,  who  are  more  ruthlessly  regardless 
of  human  rights  than  almost  any  others,  should. be  included. 
Such  have  forfeited  self-ownership  and  should  come  under  the 
absolute  control  of  the  state,  w^hich  should  administer  gentle  and 
painless  death.     "  In  the  United  States,"  he  says,  "  we  have 

'  Psychologic  Naturelle.     3  vols.      Paris. 

'  Heredity  and  Human  Progress,  by  W.  Duncan  McKim.     N.  Y. ,  1900. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     395 

gone  up  from  1,449  murders  in  1886,  to  14,000  murders  in 
1896,  an  average  of  38  murders  a  day,"  so  that  unless  some 
drastic  remedy  is  adopted  we  shall  soon  come  to  live  in  sham- 
bles. Ultimately,  his  cure  would  so  purify  society  that  the  cure 
itself  would  be  no  longer  necessary.  The  world  is  hardly  ready 
yet  for  this  method. 

Moral  responsibility  has  generally  been  interpreted  to  be- 
gin at  the  age  when  right  and  wrong  can  first  be  distinguished. 
There  is,  of  course,  no  exact,  but  only  an  arbitrary  age,  when  it 
can  be  said  to  begin,  and  none  when  it  can  be  said  to  be  com- 
plete, and  yet  legislation  has  to  assume  an  age  for  both,  which 
differs  much  in  different  lands. 

In  Roman  law,  the  child  was  entirely  exempt  from  penalty 
up  to  its  seventh  year,  and  between  this  stage,  called  infantia, 
and  puberty,  there  were  two  stages,  infant  ice  proximi  and  the 
pubcrtati  proximi.  Circumstances  and  the  nature  of  the  act 
decided  whether  the  punishment  should  approximate  that  of  the 
child  or  the  adult.  Canon  law  fixed  this  at  seven  years  of  age ; 
the  law  of  Italy  at  eight;  Austria,  Holland,  and  Sweden  at 
nine;  Germany  at  eleven;  and  England  at  sixteen.  French 
law  later  decreed  that  when  an  offender  had  not  yet  reached 
the  tenth  year,  it  should  be  especially  investigated,  whether  or 
not  he  acted  with  "  discernment."  In  185 1  Prussia  copied  this 
determination,  and  most  German  states  followed,  although 
Thuringia  fixed  upon  the  twelfth,  and  Nassau  and  Austria  upon 
the  fourteenth  year  as  the  age  below  which  children,  unless 
there  were  special  inculpating  circumstances,  should  not  receive 
public  punishment.^  The  criminal  code  of  the  new  German 
empire  now  excludes  from  legal  responsibility,  but  not  from 
guilt  or  from  moral  responsibility,  those  below  twelve,  while  for 
those  between  twelve  and  eighteen  legal  responsibility  is  made 
conditional.  This  code  gives  a  distinct  place  to  reproof  and  ad- 
monition for  first  offenses. 

In  1833  Wichern,  aided  by  his  mother,  founded  the  Rauhe 
Haus,  near  Hamburg,  for  poor  and  exposed  children,  with  the 
fundamental  idea  of  the  family.  As  his  institution  grew,  he 
did  not  enlarge  the  house  already  in  use,  but  built  a  second,  and 
later  still  other  houses,  and  thus  grew  an  institution  which  has 

'  Die    I>ehre  von  den  jugendlichen  Verbrechern  im  gemeinen  deutschen  Straf- 
recht  und  Strafprozessrecht :    Hans  von  Slupecki,  Tubingen,  1895. 


39^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

set  the  pattern  for  very  many  others.  Wichern  was  a  great  be- 
hever  in  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God  and  in  music.  Every 
birthday  in  the  house  must  be  commemorated,  and  no  teacher 
who  could  not  enter  into  the  plays  of  childhood  was  considered 
fit  to  come  in  contact  with  them.  In  France  the  Colonic 
Penitentiare  Agricole  of  Mettray,  founded  by  Demetz,  was  the 
pattern  upon  which  many  others  w-ere  developed,  though  none 
of  them  were  equal  in  elaborate  organization  to  it.  These 
marked  an  epoch  in  methods  of  juvenile  reformation. 

In  most  German  states,  legal  responsibility  begins  with  the 
completion  of  the  twelfth  year,  but  up  to  the  eighteenth  miti- 
gating circumstances  are  often  taken  into  account.  This  period 
is  divided  into  two  equal  parts  at  fifteen,  and  for  both  these 
periods  crime  increased  at  a  greater  rate  than  the  population 
for  the  decennium  ending  1890,  w^hen  15,654  children  for  the 
younger,  and  26,346  for  the  older  triennium  were  in  various 
houses  of  detention.  In  1890  out  of  381,450  prisoners,  103,641 
were  between  twelve  and  twenty-one.  For  offenders  during 
both  these  periods,  petty  thefts  led  all  other  offenses,  and  then 
came  in  order,  concealment,  bodily  injury,  graver  thefts,  dam- 
age to  property,  insults,  falsification  of  documents,  threats,  in- 
cendiarism, etc.^  In  most  countries,  ten  or  twelve  years  marks 
the  beginning  and  sixteen  (France)  or  eighteen  years  (Ger- 
many) the  completion  of  responsibility  for  young  delinquents. 
Before  this  age  special  houses  of  detention  for  juvenile  offenders 
have,  in  most  civilized  lands,  been  provided.  As  has  often  been 
pointed  out,  the  power  to  know  good  from  evil  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  the  power  to  do  the  right  that  is  recognized,  and  the 
former  may  be  a  small  factor  in  the  restraint  of  what  Despine 
was  the  first  to  describe  as  the  passional  state,  or  in  overcoming 
hereditary  predisposition.  Before  the  first  age  children  are 
supposed  to  be  irresponsible,  and  in  some  cases,  after  the  latter 
the  severest  penalties,  such  as  death  and  deportation,  are  rarely 
inflicted.  Special  penalties  for  this  youthful  period  only  some- 
times exist  as  reproof  in  Germany  or  custody  at  large  in  Italy. 
Not  only  are  judges  usually  lenient,  but  in  the  actual  infliction 
of  penalties  early  age  is  a  ground  of  mitigation,  and  special 
courts,  often  with  privacy,  are  instituted,  and  educational  con- 

'  Was  konnen  die  Schule  und  die  Behorden  thun,  die  Zunahme  der  jugendlichen 
Vergehen  und  Verbrechen  zu  verhiiten  ?  W.  Pfeifer.     Gutersloh,  1894. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    397 

ditions  are  often  enforced  in  houses  of  detention  for  all  under 
a  certain  age.  In  Gerrriany  youthful  offenders  are  often  sent 
to  reform  schools  for  a  definite  period  after  the  completion  of 
the  sentence  of  confinement,  and  the  duration  of  this  compul- 
sory education  is  left  to  a  special  board,  which  makes  it  de- 
pendent upon  the  progress  and  conduct  of  the  pupil.^ 

The  right  of  the  state  to  assume  the  educational  functions 
of  the  parents  wherever  there  is  grave  danger  of  moral  desola- 
tion, w^hether  the  child  has  done  a  penal  act  or  not,  is  now  gener- 
ally insisted  upon  in  Germany.  Aschrott  ^  pleads  for  raising 
the  age  of  legal  responsibility  to  the  end  of  the  fourteenth 
year,  and  for  compulsory  education  of  all  youth  beween  four- 
teen and  eighteen,  who  thus  come  under  the  control  of  the 
state. 

Rylands  concludes  that  "  there  is  one  way,  and  one  only, 
by  which  embryo  criminals  may  be  caught  and  dealt  with  before 
inherited  tendencies  have  had  time  to  develop  or  evil  example 
to  make  itself  felt,  and  that  is  for  the  State  to  take  under  its 
own  absolute  control  all  children  found  in  the  streets  without 
visible  means  of  subsistence,  or  who  seem  to  be  neglected  by 
their  parents.  If  the  State  is  to  interfere  in  the  matter  at  all, 
it  can  not  logically  stop  short  of  this."  Enforced  habits  of 
regular  industry  are  his  panacea. 

Reddersen  ^  deems  it  indispensible  for  the  reduction  of 
crime  and  the  development  of  virtue  and  civilization,  that  all 
bad  and  stupid  or  recalcitrant  children,  even  one  of  which  may 
sap  a  teacher's  energy,  should  be  removed  at  once  from  the 
school  before  they  poison  the  spirit  of  an  entire  class.  In  their 
growing  numbers  and  abandon,  he  sees  the  chief  cause  of  the 
progressive  feralization  of  our  youth.  Perhaps,  he  thinks,  a  res- 
toration of  some  of  the  stern  patria  potestas  of  ancient  heathen 
Rome  might  be  a  wholesome  tonic,  but  pleads  that  the  moral 
education  of  the  child  is  not  a  subjective  private  right  of  the 
parent,  but  his  first  and  highest  ethical  duty  to  the  child,  to 
society,  and  to  the  state.    If  he  fail,  the  latter  must  intervene. 

*  Holtzendorff  u.  Jagemann:     Handbuch  des  Gefiingnisswesens.     Vol.    ii,  p. 
320. 

*  Die  Behandlung  der  verwahrlosten  und  verbrecherischen  Jugend  und  Vor- 
schlage  zur  Reform  P.  F.  Aschrott.      Berlin,  1892. 

^  Die  Behandlung  verwahrloster  Kinder  und  jugendlicher  Verbrecber.    Bremen 


398  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Appelius  ^  has  drawn  up  a  rather  elaborately  motivated 
scheme  of  a  new  law  for  the  punishment  of  juvenile  criminals, 
according  to  Vk^hich  the  local  administration  may  transfer  any 
child  up  to  the  age  of  sixteen  to  some  educational  establishment 
or  to  a  family,  and  there  compulsory  education  may  be  contin- 
ued up  to  eighteen.  Decision  in  this  important  matter  must  be 
based  upon  a  careful  examination,  made  by  experts,  and  at 
which  also  the  father  or  guardian  must  be  heard.  Imprison- 
ment for  less  than  a  year  must  be  severely  solitary.  Those 
sentenced  for  more  than  a  year  may  be  released  provisionally 
under  certain  conditions.  When  imprisonment  and  education 
are  combined,  the  first  may  be  reduced  one-half  at  discretion. 
Actual  crime  need  not  have  been  done  to  cause  committal  to 
these  institutions. 

Krohne  ^  lays  down  the  following  principles :  Reform 
schools  should  never  be  connected  with  youthful  prisons.  The 
former  should  be  collective  and  patterned  as  far  as  possible 
after  the  family.  In  such  schools,  not  only  the  sexes,  but  the 
different  confessions  should,  if  possible,  be  separated.  The  life, 
food,  etc.,  should  be  plain  and  severe,  but  not  actually  without 
enjoyment  to  which  children  have  a  right.  Both  hand-work 
and  field-work  should  be  provided,  and  the  preponderance  of 
one  over  the  other  should  be  an  individual  problem.  Very  care- 
ful personal  records,  measurements,  and  observations  should  be 
kept  for  each  child,  special  attention  should  be  given  to  health, 
and  all  should  be  in  an  atmosphere  of  religion.  Music  and 
drawing  should  predominate,  and  communication  with  outside 
friends  should  be  determined  by  individual  considerations.  The 
officers  of  these  schools  should  first  of  all  be  good  teachers,  and 
all  those  connected  with  female  institutions  should  be  women. 

Hartmann  ^  insists  upon  brief  sentences  to  very  strict  super- 
vision, labor,  or  study,  as  the  case  may  be,  for  juveniles,  and 
would  go  to  any  extent  to  prevent  the  contagion  of  crime  from 
contact  with  older  criminals.  He  devised,  in  juvenile 
houses  of  detention,  the  following  stages  of  discipline :    re- 

*  Die  bedingte  Verurtheilung  und  die  anderen  Ersatzmittel  fiir  kurzzeitige  Frei- 
heitsstrafen.  Cassel,  1891.  See  also  Die  Behandlung  jugendlicher  Verbrecher 
und  verwahrloster  Kinder.     Berlin,  1892. 

'  Lehrbuch  des  Gefiingnisskunde.     Stuttgart,  1889. 

'  Carl  C.  Hartmann  :  Der  jugendliche  Verbrecher  im  Strafhause.  Hamburg, 
1892. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES     39^ 

proof;  refusal  of  the  free  hour  in  the  court;  refusal  of  the 
right  to  converse  upon  walks ;  removal,  in  whole  or  in  part,  of 
the  disposition  of  products  of  their  own  industry  in  overtime 
work ;  forbidding  the  latter ;  forbidding  letter-writing ;  no  re- 
ception of  visits ;  forcing  to  sleep  on  a  hard  board ;  refusal  of 
light;  isolation;  arrest;  dark  cell;  and  fetters. 

In  England  "  there  appears  to  be  a  very  general  conclusion 
that,  both  on  grounds  of  mercy  and  expediency,  the  short  and 
sharp  punishment  of  a  whipping  with  a  birch  rod  may  in  many 
cases  be  even  preferable."  ^  This  is  said  to  conform  to  "  the 
double  characteristic  of  all  good  repression  of  crime — the  mini- 
mum of  punishment  with  the  maximum  of  intimidation."  Hu- 
manity especially  requires,  this  report  claims,  a  vigorous  and 
uncompromising  suppression  of  the  cruel  and  ruffian  class  of 
young  scuttlers,  who  have  increased  in  English  cities,  and  who 
are  intolerable  nuisances,  known  in  Australia  as  larrikins,  in 
the  United  States  as  hoodlums,  and  in  Sweden  as  young 
leaguers.  No  trifling  is  suitable  for  this  class,  who  require 
either  flogging,  a  cell,  or  prolonged  industrial  discipline.  These 
young  men  are  intrusive  in  public  places  of  recreation,  and  their 
language  is  often  exceedingly  offensive,  particularly  to  women 
and  to  children.  Vigorous  exercise  and  games  are  also  recom- 
mended. Probation  officers  can  do  little  with  these  juvenile 
ruffians. 

In  England,  reformatories  are  for  older  youth  who  have 
actually  committed  felony  and  undergone  brief  preliminary 
imprisonment,  and  are  distinguished  from  industrial  schools 
for  younger  offenders  mostly  under  twelve,  who  have  not  been 
imprisoned.  To  the  former,  children  under  sixteen  may  be 
sentenced,  at  the  magistrate's  option,  from  two  to  six  years, 
after  they  have  been  imprisoned  ten  days  or  longer.^  On 
entering  the  school  the  superintendent  has  a  serious  talk,  tell- 
ing the  young  culprit  that  the  prison  has  punished  his  fault, 
and  that  now  he  has  a  chance  to  reform,  learn  a  trade,  etc. 
To  the  industrial  school,  children  who  beg,  as  well  as  criminals, 
may  also  be  sent,  but  only  by  order  of  a  judge.  In  France, 
parents  who  wilfully  neglect  their  children  or  whose  bad  con- 

^  Juvenile  Offenders.     A  Report  based  on  an  inquiry  by  the  Committee  of  the 
Howard  Association,  1898.     London,  p.  8. 

'The  State  and  its  Children,  by  Gertrude  M.  Tuckwell.     London,  1894. 


460  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

duct  causes  them  to  be  taken  in  charge  by  the  state,  thereby  for- 
feit all  right  and  control,  and  can  not  even  visit  their  children, 
whom  the  state  has  taken  for  its  wards,  unless  their  character 
shows  improvement.^  This  principle  is  in  successful  operation 
in  many  States  in  this  country.  When  children,  trained  in  these 
institutions  or  by  the  boarding-out  principle,  complete  their 
stay,  their  instructors  seek  to  find  for  each  one  a  patron  or 
special  friend  in  the  neighborhood,  who  may  be  willing  to  find 
him  employment  and  give  him  some  kindly  oversight,  and  be- 
come a  not  merely  nominal  godfather  or  godmother.  In  the 
day  feeding-school  system,  four  hours  of  lessons,  five  of  manual 
industry,  and  three  good  meals  constitute  each  day's  routine, 
but  if  the  child  does  not  attend  the  forenoon  school,  dinner  is 
forfeited,  and  if  the  afternoon  work  is  missed  he  has  no  supper. 
This  has  the  advantage  of  helping  without  breaking  up  the 
family  life.  Some  religious  instruction  is  insisted  on  in  almost 
all  English  reformatory  institutions.  In  1896  there  were  in 
Great  Britain  30,104  boys  and  24,845  girls  in  her  48  reforma- 
tory and  144  industrial  schools.^ 

The  Massachusetts  probation  system  is  as  follows :  It  was 
developed  by  citizens  who  visited  the  police  court  to  seek  out 
offenders  who  could  be  released,  for  whom  they  became  sureties 
to  the  court,  and  whom  they  endeavored  to  reclaim.  After 
some  years  of  experiment,  in  1878  a  law  was  passed  requiring 
the  appointment  of  a  probation  officer.  This,  in  1891,  was  made 
mandatory  in  every  town  and  by  each  police  and  district  court. 
In  1898  the  appointment  of  these  officers  was  given  to  the 
Superior  Court.  It  is  now  proposed  to  provide  a  Bureau  of 
Records  to  coordinate  the  work  of  these  officers  and  the  police, 
and  allow  probation  for  all  persons  fined,  if  they  need  time  for 
payment,  which  may  be  in  instalments  and  to  these  officers. 
This  would  keep  out  of  prison  many  who  should  never  go 
there.^  Upon  this  plan,  a  judge  is  empowered  on  the  request 
of  an  agent  to  commit  any  person  under  the  age  of  seventeen, 

^  Penological  and  Preventive  Principles,  by  William  Tallack.     London,  1889, 
p.  356  et  seq. 

*  See  Fortieth  Report  of  these  institutions  in  the  Parliamentary  Blue  Book  foi 

1897- 

^  For  detailed  working  of  this  system,  see  The  Charities  Review,  April,  1900, 
p.  84  et  seq. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    4^i 

convicted  before  him  to  the  charge  of  the  Board  of  Health, 
Lunacy,  and  Charity,  until  he  or  she  shall  attain  the  age  of 
twenty-one,  but  with  authority  to  discharge  him  at  any  time. 
The  board  has  great  power  in  such  cases.  The  child  may  be 
left  with  a  warning  under  the  supervision  of  a  parent,  who  is 
usually  fined  a  small  sum ;  but  if  there  is  no  improvement  in 
this  state  of  probation,  the  child  is  removed  from  home.  More 
than  three-fourths  of  the  children  committed  are  thus  returned. 
The  board  can  remove  the  child  from  the  parent  and  commit 
it  to  a  State  school,  which  is  not  a  criminal  institution,  and 
to  which  no  magistrate  has  the  power  to  commit.  The  child 
may  be  sent  to  a  reformatory  or  boarded  out,  with  or  without 
payment,  in  carefully  selected  homes;  orphans  may  be  placed 
for  adoption,  but  only  after  trial;  or  the  board  can  appoint  a 
guardian  with  full  parental  powers  up  to  twenty-one,  nulli- 
fying the  power  of  the  real  parents.^  Thus  it  is  sought  to 
lift  these  youth  out  of  the  criminal  and  pauper  class  by  means 
of  agents,  who  are  unpaid  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  intelligence, 
and  are  thus  made  the  arbiters  of  the  children's  fate. 

Juvenile  criminals,  as  a  class,  are  inferior  in  body  and  mind 
to  normal  children,  and  despite  the  extravagances  of  the  Lom- 
broso  school,  they  are  no  doubt  more  likely  to  be  defective  or 
abnormal,  and  their  social  environment  is  no  less  inferior.  As 
to  their  treatment  Morrison  ^  thinks  them  more  likely  to  be  un- 
justly judged  by  courts  than  adults,  and  commends  societies 
for  their  legal  defense,  which  shall  study  each  case  and  bring 
all  circumstances  before  judges.  A  special  office  for  this  pur- 
pose has  been  created  in  Michigan  and  elsewhere.  In  England, 
up  to  1847,  jnvenile  crime  was  punished  as  severely  as  when 
committed  by  the  most  hardened  criminals.  The  very  severity 
of  the  penalties  caused  judges  often  to  let  children  go  free. 
The  antiquated  practise  of  fixing  a  minimum  penalty  for  each 
ofifense  should  be  banished  from  all  penal  codes  for  children 
and  ofifenders  in  early  adolescence,  and  the  largest  discretion 
given  to  the  court.  We  must  also  commend  the  Belgian  sys- 
tem of  conditional  sentence,  by  which  the  law  warns  before  it 
strikes,  and  which  often  saves  youth  from  the  brand  of  con- 


'  Children  of  the  State,  by  Florence  Davenport- Hill.     N.  Y.,  1899,  p.  226. 
'Juvenile  Offender,  p.  189  et  seq. 

'in 


402  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

viction.  A  sentence  is  conditional,  when,  if  there  is  no  fresh 
offense  within  a  given  time,  it  is  not  executed,  and  statistics 
show  that  such  an  impending  sentence  is  more  deterrent  than 
actual  imprisonment.  Fining,  too,  is  for  many  cases  of  juvenile 
delinquency  one  of  the  best  of  legal  penalties.  It  is  unique  in 
that  it  can  be  made  good  if  error  is  discovered.  Moreover,  it  is 
economical  to  the  state  and  is  more  and  more  taking  the  place 
of  imprisonment.  Of  course  it  chiefly  falls  on  the  parent,  but 
may  be  paid  in  instalments.  The  alternative  sentence  of,  e.  g., 
ten  dollars  for  ten  days  should  be  so  modified  that  five  days  and 
five  dollars  can  be  accepted,  instead  of  as  now  requiring  the 
whole  fine  to  escape  a  single  day  of  confinement.  Fining  in 
work  to  be  done  for  the  city  is  found  wise  in  some  places, 
and  industrial  schools,  for  day  work  only,  in  others. 

There  is  very  much  to  be  said  in  favor  of  corporal  punish- 
ment for  young  offenders.  Although  gradually  passing  into 
disuse  with  capital  and  other  severe  forms  of  punishment,  flog- 
ging is  still  a  part  of  the  criminal  law  in  England,  Scotland, 
Norway,  Denmark,  and  several  colonies.^  .  Flogging  usually 
has  special  safeguards  in  the  form  of  medical  examiners,  laws 
regulating  the  form  and  size  of  the  rod,  etc.,  the  number  of 
strokes,  the  presence  of  friends  and  parents.  Save  in  Great 
Britain  the  prevailing  sentiment  is  probably  against  it,  but  there 
is  much  to  be  said  in  favor  of  it  for  certain  offenses  among 
boys  in  the  early  teens  and  younger.  Dermal  pain  is  far  from 
being  the  pitiful  evil  that  sentimental  and  neurasthenic  adults 
regard  it,  and  to  flog  wisely  should  not  become  a  lost  art, 
whether  with  criminals  or  in  normal  families,  although  of 
course  other  very  different  influences  should  supplement  it.  Im- 
prisonment is,  as  a  rule,  the  severest  penalty  for  the  young. 
To  be  deprived  of  liberty  of  motion  and  contact  with  the  social 
and  material  world  is  bad  enough,  but  such  isolation  at  this  age 
brings  temptation  to  a  special  form  of  vice,  while  the  contagion 
of  crime  among  prison  associates  and  the  stigma  almost  inef- 
fa(^eable,  which  may  actually  compel  the  young  convict  after  his 
release  to  revert  to  companionship  where  imprisonment  is  no 
disgrace,  are  worse  yet.  Slavery,  banishment,  prohibition  to 
live  in  certain  places  or  permission  to  reside  only  in  others, 
interdicting  residence  in  large  cities  for  the  young,  all  kinds 

'Juvenile  Offender,  p.  212. 


JUVENILE  FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    4^3 

of  individualization  of  punishment,  sumptuary  preceptors,  mu- 
tilation, all  preceded  the  modern  prison,  which  seems  to  have 
been  evolved  from  the  monastic  rule  of  sequestering  recalci- 
trant monks  in  a  cell,  as  early  as  the  sixth  century.^  Perpetual 
solitude  and  silence  by  day  and  night  is  a  crime  against  the 
soul  for  adults ;  but  is  still  worse  for  the  immature.  Amelio- 
rating the  severities  of  life  and  shortening  the  term  of  detention 
for  good  conduct  is  one  of  the  best  of  modern  developments, 
and  the  increasing  tendency  to  return  to  crime  and  to  the  bar  of 
justice,  which  seems  to  bear  some  direct  proportion  to  the  com- 
fort of  prison  life,  is  one  of  the  worst.  As  Morrison  well  urges, 
the  prisoner  has  all  his  needs  provided  for  as  if  he  were  a 
child,  but  generally  he  has  become  a  criminal  simply  because 
he  could  not  satisfy  these  needs ;  hence  the  danger  that  a  good 
prisoner  will  make  a  bad  citizen  because  the  personal,  industrial, 
and  social  discipline  is  not  such  as  to  adjust  him  to  life  in 
society,  and  imprisonment  is  less  effective  for  social  security 
than  it  should  be,  and  for  adolescents  is  very  inefficacious. 
All  authorities  agree  that  the  age  of  responsibility  and  liability 
should  be  as  late  as  is  compatible  with  social  welfare,  and  that 
even  while  awaiting  trial  great  care  should  be  exercised  and 
special  places  provided  for  this  detention. 

For  children  all  offenses  are  simply  forbidden  things,  and 
the  distinction  between  what  is  wrong  or  forbidden  and  what 
is  criminal,  and  the  perspective  that  differentiates  between 
different  crimes  comes  late,  but  moral  comes  even  later  than  in- 
tellectual maturity.  Again,  if  children  are  imprisoned  young 
enough,  so  that  they  can  return  to  school  later,  the  fascination 
of  their  schoolmates  and  the  imitation  impulses  endanger 
others.  Young  offenders,  too,  need  exceptional  care  that  their 
physical  system  should  not  deteriorate  and  become  still  more 
unfit  to  bear  the  strain  of  life  than  when  they  entered.  As  a 
class  they  are  badly  nourished  and  weakly,  and  this  is  a  potent 
factor  in  recidivism.  They  should  come  out  not  only  able,  but 
disposed  to  do  a  regular  day's  work.  Habits  of  industry  are  rare 
in  this  class,  and  regularity  is  an  irksome  yoke,  and  houses  of 
detention  of  all  kinds  for  the  young  should  strive  to  develop 
habits  of  regular  labor.  Lack  of  occupation  makes  the  mind  as 
dead  and  apathetic  as  the  surroundings  are  dull,  and  active  and 

'  Morrison,  p.  230. 


404  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

stated  effort  is  the  only  surety  against  this  sad  result.  The 
closest  relations  with  outside  friends  should  be  cultivated; 
especially  the  first  hours  and  days  of  confinement  are  the  golden 
time  for  reconciliations,  when  self-respect  is  dejected,  and  when, 
besides,  memories  of  friends  are  most  natural.  The  trouble  is 
that  prisons  were  made  for  adults,  and  all  the  institutions  are 
primarily  adapted  for  them,  but  as  Morrison  again  wisely  says, 
while  the  guardians  of  mature  criminals  need  a  disciplinary  at- 
titude, those  of  the  young  should  cultivate  an  educative  temper, 
and  officers  should,  if  possible,  be  parents,  and  of  children  of 
similar  age.  Hence  on  every  ground  differentiation  of  build- 
ings, regimen,  occupation,  and  supervision  are  needed.  Ad- 
ministration should  be  tested  not  by  conduct  within,  but  its 
effects  upon  restoration  to  society.  To  minimize  the  great  and 
never  entirely  avoidable  dangers  of  the  first  period  of  liberty, 
gradual  and  conditional  liberation  has  already  proven  its 
beneficence. 

Professor  Yoder  ^  insists  that  there  are  no  children  in- 
capable of  being  amended.  He  found  that  the  age  of  most  fre- 
quent commitments  to  reform  schools  in  10,000  cases  was 
fifteen,  and  that  the  age  did  not  differ  for  boys  and  girls.  He 
was  unable  to  determine  whether  incorrigibles  leave  school  be- 
cause of  their  own  condition  or  that  of  the  school,  but  deems  it 
unfortunate  that  the  age  of  transition  from  grammar  to  high 
school  comes  at  the  stress  of  adolescence.  He  is  inclined  to 
agree  with  Swift,^  that  a  period  of  semicriminality  is  normal 
for  all  healthy  boys;  that  those  whose  surroundings  are  bad 
will  continue  it,  but  others  will  grow  away  from  it  as  they  ap- 
proach maturity.  The  incorrigible  often  seeks  the  society  of 
younger  children,  whom  he  dominates,  because  he  has  a  new 
passion  for  leadership  which  the  teacher  should  give  better  di- 
rection. The  instinct  to  be  an  initiative  power  needs  apprecia- 
tion and  direction.  The  spiritual  soil  in  which  such  have  been 
trained  is  exhausted  and  they  need  transplanting.  It  is  never 
so  irksome  to  do  over  and  over  again  things  familiar.  In  many 
a  schoolroom,  a  boy's  incorrigibility  saves  him ;  the  fussy  mar- 
tinet and  the  red  tape  of  school  are  objects  that  provoke  revolt 

'The  Incorrigibles.     Journal  of  Childhood  and  Adolescence,  Jan.,  1902,  pjx 
22-34. 

»Ped.  Sem.,  March,  1901. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND   CRIMES    405 

in  the  healthy  soul.  It  is  significant  that  sixteen  is  the  age 
when  children  are  most  influenced  by  their  teacher.^  The  boy 
feels  that  his  day  has  come;  he  is  becoming  a  man  and  the 
girl  a  woman.  Just  as  gregarious  animals  are  easiest  tamed,  so 
the  very  gang  instinct  itself  is  almost  a  cry  of  the  soul  to  be  in- 
fluenced, and  this  instinct  can  be  made  to  lead  to  the  good  as 
well  as  to  the  bad. 

Adolescence  is  the  best  key  to  the  nature  of  crime.  It 
is  essentially  antisocial,  selfishness,  refusing  to  submit  to  the 
laws  of  altruism.  As  the  social  demand  for  a  larger  mutual 
helpfulness  increases,  prohibitions  multiply.  Hence  the  in- 
crease of  juvenile  crime,  so  deplored,  is  not  entirely  due  to  city 
life  or  growing  youthful  depravity,  but  also  to  the  increasing 
ethical  demands  of  society.^ 

De  Fleury,^  in  his  interesting  discussion  of  fatigue,  indo- 
lence, melancholy,  anger,  etc.,  believes  that  many  of  the  dis- 
tempers of  youth  are  especially  susceptible  to  the  douche  at 
different  temperatures,  to  static  electricity,  to  friction  with  the 
hair  glove,  massage,  and  sun  and  air  cures,  and  that  mechanical 
stimulation  has  great  power  in  neurasthenic  subjects  to  awaken 
vitality,  especially  when  they  are  downcast  and  irritable  and  in 
the  later  stages  of  digestion.  He  pleads  for  a  new  kind  of  med- 
ical morals,  and  holds  that  pessimism  or  the  sense  that  the  sum 
of  evil  surpasses  the  sum  of  good  is  found  in  civilized  man  "  in 
direct  proportion  to  the  learned  notions  or  to  the  sensations  of 
art  accumulated  in  his  brain,  and  in  inverse  proportion  to  the 
intellectual  labor  expended."  The  latter  only  expands  self  in 
a  healthful  way.  Thus  laziness  tends  to  moral  decay,  and  all 
weakness  brings  misery,  and  neuropathic  symptoms  need  to  be 
met  by  toning  up  the  muscles.  He  believes  it  is  possible,  in 
ways  hitherto  unrealized,  to  supply  new  sources  of  human 
energy  and  to  strengthen  feeble  minds  to  live  with  intensity, 
for  morality  does  not  consist  in  qualitative  changes  of  states  of 
mind,  but  in  ardor  and  energy  of  living,  and  thus  he  holds  to 
a  higher  hygiene  that  is  to  be  the  morals  of  the  future,  give  a 
better  normal  tone,  bring  out  latent  qualities,  and  cure  many 
moral  perversities. 

^  Bell.     Ped.  Sem.,  Dec,  1900. 

'  A.  C.  Hall :   Crime  and  Social  Progress.     N.  Y.,  1902,  p.  393. 

'  Medicine  and  the  Mind.     London,  1900. 


406  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

The  causation  of  crime,  which  the  cure  seeks  to  remove,  is 
a  problem  comparable  with  the  origin  of  sin  and  evil.  First,  of 
course,  comes  heredity,  bad  antenatal  conditions,  bad  homes, 
unhealthful  infancy  and  childhood,  overcrowded  slums  with 
their  promiscuity  and  squalor,  which  are  always  near  the  border 
of  lawlessness,  and  perhaps  are  the  chief  cause  of  crime.  A 
large  per  cent  of  juvenile  offenders,  variously  estimated  but 
probably  one-tenth  of  all,  are  vagrants  or  without  homes,  and 
divorce  of  parents  and  illegitimacy  seem  to  be  nearly  equal  as 
causative  agencies.  If  whatever  is  physiologically  wrong  is 
morally  wrong,  and  whatever  is  physiologically  right  is  morally 
right,  we  have  an  important  ethical  suggestion  from  somatic 
conditions.  There  is  no  doubt  that  conscious  intelligence  dur- 
ing a  certain  early  stage  of  its  development  tends  to  deteriorate 
the  strength  and  infallibility  of  instinctive  processes,  so  that 
education  is  always  beset  with  the  danger  of  interfering  with 
ancestral  and  congenita]  tendencies.  Its  prime  object  ought  to 
be  moralization,  but  it  can  not  be  denied  that  in  conquering 
ignorance  we  do  not  thereby  conquer  poverty  or  vice.  After 
the  free  schools  in  London  were  opened  there  was  an  increase 
of  juvenile  offenders.  New  kinds  of  crime,  such  as  forgery, 
grand  larceny,  intricate  swindling  schemes,  were  doubled,  while 
sneak  thieves,  drunkards,  and  pickpockets  decreased,  and  the 
proportion  of  educated  criminals  was  greatly  augmented.^  To 
collect  masses  of  children  and  cram  them  with  the  same  unas- 
similated  facts  is  not  education  in  this  sense,  and  we  ought  to 
confess  that  youthful  crime  is  an  expression  of  educational 
failure.  Illiterate  criminals  are  more  likely  to  be  detected,  and 
also  to  be  condemned,  than  are  educated  criminals.  Every  an- 
thropologist knows  that  the  deepest  poverty  and  ignorance 
among  primitive  people  are  in  nowise  incompatible  with 
honesty,  integrity,  and  virtue.  Indeed  there  is  much  reason  to 
suspect  that  the  extremes  of  wealth  and  poverty  are  more  pro- 
ductive of  crime  than  ignorance,  or  even  intemperance.  Edu- 
cators have  no  doubt  vastly  overestimated  the  moral  efficiency 
of  the  three  R's  and  forgotten  that  character  in  infancy  is  all 
instinct ;  that  in  childhood  it  is  slowly  made  over  into  habits ; 
while  at  adolescence  more  than  at  any  other  period  of  life,  it 
can  be  cultivated  through  ideals.     The  dawn  of  puberty,  al- 

*  North  American  Review,  May,  1899. 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES     40  7 

though  perhaps  marked  by  a  certain  moral  hebetude,  is  soon 
followed  by  a  stormy  period  of  great  agitation,  when  the  very 
worst  and  best  impulses  in  the  human  soul  struggle  against 
each  other  for  its  possession,  and  when  there  is  peculiar  prone- 
ness  to  be  either  very  good  or  very  bad.  As  the  agitation 
slowly  subsides,  it  is  found  that  there  has  been  a  renaissance  of 
either  the  best  or  the  worst  elements  of  the  soul,  if  not  indeed 
of  both. 

Although  pedagogues  make  vast  claims  for  the  moralizing 
effect  of  schooling,  I  can  not  find  a  single  criminologist  who  is 
satisfied  with  the  modern  school,  while  most  brinp-  the  severest 
indictments  against  it  for  the  blind  and  ignorant  assumption 
that  the  three  R's  or  any  merely  intellectual  training  can  moral- 
ize. By  nature,  children  are  more  or  less  morally  blind,  and 
statistics  show  that  between  thirteen  and  sixteen  incorrigibility 
is  between  two  and  three  times  as  great  as  at  any  other  age.  It 
is  almost  impossible  for  adults  to  realize  the  irresponsibility 
and  even  moral  neurasthenia  incidental  to  this  stage  of  develop- 
ment. If  we  reflect  what  a  girl  would  be  if  dressed  like  a  boy 
and  leading  his  life  and  exposed  to  the  same  moral  contagion, 
or  what  a  boy  would  be  if  corseted  and  compelled  to  live  like  a 
girl,  perhaps  we  can  realize  that  whatever  role  heredity  plays, 
the  youth  who  go  wrong  are,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases, 
victims  of  circumstances  or  of  immaturity,  and  deserving  of 
both  pity  and  hope.  It  was  this  sentiment  that  impelled  Zarna- 
delli  to  reconstruct  the  criminal  law  of  Italy,  in  this  respect,  and 
it  was  this  sympathy  that  made  Rollet  a  self-constituted  advo- 
cate, pleading  each  morning  for  the  twenty  or  thirty  boys  and 
eight  or  ten  girls  arrested  every  day  in  Paris. 

Those  smitten  with  the  institution  craze  or  with  any  extreme 
correctionalist  views  will  never  solve  the  problem  of  criminal 
youths.  First  of  all,  they  must  be  carefully  and  objectively 
studied,  lived  with,  and  understood  as  in  this  country  Gulick, 
Johnson,  Forbush,  and  Yoder  are  doing  in  different  ways,  but 
each  with  success.  Criminaloid  youth  is  more  sharply  individ- 
ualized than  the  common  good  child,  who  is  less  differentiated. 
Virtue  is  more  uniform  and  monotonous  than  sin.  There  is 
one  right  and  many  wrong  ways,  hence  they  need  to  be  individ- 
ually studied  by  every  paidological  method,  physical  and 
psychic.     Keepers,  attendants,  and  even  sponsors  who  have  to 


408  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

do  with  these  children  should  be  educators  with  souls  full  of 
fatherhood  and  motherhood,  and  they  should  understand  that 
the  darkest  criminal  propensities  are  frequently  offset  by  the 
very  best  qualities;  that  juvenile  murderers  are  often  very 
tender-hearted  to  parents,  sisters,  children,  or  pets ;  ^  they 
should  understand  that  in  the  criminal  constitution  there  are 
precisely  the  same  ingredients,  although  perhaps  differently 
compounded,  accentuated,  mutually  controlled,  etc.,  by  the  en- 
vironment, as  in  themselves,  so  that  to  know  all  would,  in  the 
great  majority  of  cases,  be  to  pardon  all ;  that  the  home  senti- 
ments need  emphasis ;  that  a  little  less  stress  of  misery  to  over- 
come the  effects  of  economic  malaise  and,  above  all,  a  friend, 
mentor,  adviser  are  needed. 

I  incline  to  think  that  many  children  would  be  better  and 
not  worse  for  reading,  provided  it  can  be  done  in  tender  years, 
stories  like  those  of  Captain  Kidd,  Jack  Sheppard,  Dick  Tur- 
pin,  and  other  gory  tales,  and  perhaps  later  tales  like  Eugene 
Aram,  the  ophidian  medicated  novel,  Elsie  Venner,  etc.,  on  the 
principle  of  the  Aristotelian  catharsis  to  arouse  betimes  the 
higher  faculties  which  develop  later,  and  whose  function  it  is 
to  deplete  the  bad  centers  and  suppress  or  inhibit  their  activity. 
Again,  I  believe  that  judicious  and  incisive  scolding  is  a  moral 
tonic,  which  is  often  greatly  needed,  and  if  rightly  administered 
would  be  extremely  effective,  because  it  shows  the  instinctive 
reaction  of  the  sane  conscience  against  evil  deeds  and  tenden- 
cies. Special  pedagogic  attention  should  be  given  to  the  senti- 
ment of  justice,  which  is  almost  the  beginning  of  personal 
morals  in  boys,  and  plays  should  be  chosen  and  encouraged  that 
hold  the  beam  even,  regardless  of  personal  wish  and  interest. 
Further  yet  benevolence  and  its  underlying  impulse  to  do  more 
than  justice  to  our  associates ;  to  do  good  in  the  world ;  to 
give  pleasure  to  those  about,  and  not  pain,  can  be  directly  cul- 
tivated. Truth-telling  presents  a  far  harder  problem,  as  we 
have  seen.  It  is  no  pedagogical  triumph  to  clip  the  wings  of 
fancy,  but  effort  should  be  directed  almost  solely  against  the 
cowardly  lies,  which  cover  evil,  and  the  heroism  of  telling  the 
truth  and  taking  the  consequences  is  another  of  the  elements  of 
the  moral  sense,  so  complex,  so  late,  and  so  often  permanently 
crippled.     The  money  sense  by  all  the  many  means  now  used 

*  Holzendorff :   Psychologic  des  Mordes. 


1 


JUVENILE   FAULTS,  IMMORALITIES,  AND    CRIMES    4o9 

for  its  development  in  school  is  the  surest  safeguard  against  the 
most  common  juvenile  crime  of  theft,  and  much  can  be  taught 
by  precept,  example,  and  moral  regimen  of  the  sacredness  of 
property  rights.  The  regularity  of  school  work  and  its  in- 
dustry is  a  valuable  moralizing  agent,  but  entirely  inadequate 
and  insufficient  by  itself.  Educators  must  face  the  fact  that  the 
ultimate  verdict  concerning  the  utility  of  the  school  will  be  de- 
termined, as  Talleck  well  says,  by  its  moral  efficiency  in  saving 
children  from  personal  vice  and  crime. 

Wherever  any  source  of  pollution  of  school  communities 
occurs,  it  must  be  at  once  and  effectively  detected,  and  some 
artificial  elements  must  be  introduced  into  the  environment. 
In  other  words,  there  must  be  a  system  of  moral  orthopedics. 
Garofalo's  ^  new  term  and  principle  of  "  temibility  "  is  perhaps 
of  great  service.  He  would  thus  designate  the  quantum  of  evil 
feared  that  is  sufficient  to  restrain  criminal  impulsion.  We  can 
not  measure  guilt  or  culpability,  which  may  be  of  all  degrees 
from  nothing  to  infinity  perhaps,  but  we  can  to  some  extent 
scale  the  effectiveness  of  restraint,  if  criminal  impulse  is  not 
absolutely  irresistible.  Pain  then  must  be  so  organized  as  to 
follow  and  measure  the  offense  by  as  nearly  a  natural  method 
as  possible,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  rewards  for  good  con- 
duct must  also  be  more  or  less  accentuated.  Thus  the  problem 
of  criminology  for  youth  can  not  be  based  on  the  principles  now 
recognized  for  adults.  They  can  not  be  protective  of  society 
only,  but  must  have  marked  reformatory  elements.  Solitude  ^ 
which  tends  to  make  weak,  agitated,  and  fearful,  at  this  very 
gregarious  age  should  be  enforced  with  very  great  discretion. 
There  must  be  no  personal  and  unmotivated  clemency  or  par- 
don in  such  a  scheme,  for,  according  to  the  old  saw,  if  mercy 
pardon  those  who  kill,  it  becomes  a  murderer ;  nor  on  the  other 
hand  should  there  be  the  excessive  disregard  of  personal  adjust- 
ments, and  the  uniformitarian,  who  perhaps  celebrated  his 
highest  triumph  in  the  old  sentence,  "  kill  all  offenders  and  sus- 
pects for  God  will  know  his  own,"  should  have  no  part  nor  lot 
here.  The  philosopher  Hartmann  has  a  suggestive  article  ad- 
vocating that  penal  colonies  made  up  of  transported  criminals 

^  La  Criminologie,  p.  310. 

*  See  its  psychology  and  dangers  well  pointed  out  by  M.  H.  Small :    Psychical 
Relations  of  Soeiety  and  Solitude.     Ped.  Sem.,  April,  1900,  vol.  vii,  pp.  13-69. 


410  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

should  be  experimented  on  by  statesmen  in  order  to  put  various 
theories  of  self-government  to  a  practical  test.  However  this 
may  be,  the  penologist  of  youth  must  face  some  such  problem 
in  the  organization  of  the  house  of  detention,  boys'  club,  farm, 
reformatory,  etc.  We  must  pass  beyond  the  clumsy  apparatus 
of  a  term  sentence  or  the  devices  of  a  jury,  clumsier  yet,  for  this 
purpose ;  we  must  admit  the  principle  of  regret,  fear,  penance, 
material  restoration  of  damage,  and  understand  the  sense  in 
which,  for  both  society  and  for  the  individual,  it  makes  no  prac- 
tical difference  whether  experts  think  there  is  some  taint  of  in- 
sanity, provided  only  that  irresponsibility  is  not  hopelessly 
complete. 

In  few  aspects  of  this  theme  do  conceptions  of  and  practises 
in  regard  to  adolescence  need  more  radical  reconstruction.  A 
mere  accident  of  circumstance  often  condemns  to  criminal  ca- 
reers youths  capable  of  the  highest  service  to  society,  and  for  a 
mere  brief  season  of  temperamental  outbreak  or  obstreperous- 
ness  exposes  them  to  all  the  infamy  to  which  ignorant  and  cruel 
public  opinion  condemns  all  those  who  have  once  been  detected 
on  the  wrong  side  of  the  invisible  and  arbitrary  line  of  recti- 
tude. The  heart  of  criminal  psychology  is  here,  and  not  only 
that,  but  I  would  conclude  with  a  most  earnest  personal  protest 
against  the  current  methods  of  teaching  and  studying  ethics  in 
our  academic  institutions  as  a  speculative,  historical,  and  ab- 
stract thing.  Here  in  the  concrete  and  saliently  objective  facts 
of  crime  it  should  have  its  beginning,  and  have  more  blood 
and  body  in  it  by  getting  again  close  to  the  hot  battle  line  be- 
tween vice  and  "virtue,  and  then  only  when  balanced  and  sani- 
fied  by  a  rich  ballast  of  facts  can  it  with  advantage  slowly  work 
its  way  over  to  the  larger  and  higher  philosophy  of  conduct, 
which,  when  developed  from  this  basis,  will  be  a  radically 
different  thing  from  the  shadowy,  fantom,  shablone  specula- 
tions of  many  contemporary  moralists,  taught  in  our  schools 
and  colleges. 


CHAPTER  VI 
SEXUAL  development:  its  dangers  and  hygiene  in  boys 

The  bio-psychology  of  sexuality — -Variability  of  parts — Pubertal  changes  in  hair — 
Sexual  elements — Mammae — Uterus — Ovaries — Testes — Other  parts — Castra- 
tion and  its  moral  and  physical  effects — Its  justification — Self-abuse :  its 
prevalence,  its  causes,  and  its  mental  and  physical  effects — The  problem  of 
masturbatic  insanity — Sexual  tension — The  question  of  special  sex  nerves  and 
centers ;  their  hierarchy  and  order  of  development  see  psychology — Repre- 
sentative experiences  of  victims  of  self-abuse — The  critical  point  in  the  devel- 
opment of  the  habit — Psychic  and  moral  effect  of  spontaneous  emissions- 
State  of  mind  which  leads  youth  to  quacks — Unique  opportunity  for,  and 
efficacy  of,  religion — Inadequacy  of  ethical  teaching  in  cases — Ignorance  and 
neglect  of  parents  and  preachers — Limited  insight  and  knowledge  of  physi- 
cians— Devices  of  quackery  and  the  extent  of  its  influence — Proper  food  and 
regimen — Kind  of  instruction  needed — Special  methods  of  amelioration  and  of 
prevention. 

For  biology  the  plasmata  in  general  and  the  protoplasms 
in  particular,  under  many  names  and  aspects,  occupy  a  posi- 
tion of  ever-increasing  interest  and  preeminence.  Unlike 
ether,  the  still  more  or  less  hypothetical  background  of  all 
physical  existence,  protoplasm  is  a  tangible  reality  accessible 
to  many  and  ever  more  subtle  methods  of  study,  and  like 
Schopenhauer's  basal  will  to  live,  its  all-dominant  impulse  is 
to  progressive  self-expression.  It  is  the  creator  of  the  as- 
cending series  of  types  and  species  of  plants  and  animals, 
which  become  its  habits  of  self-formulation,  although  all  that 
have  so  far  existed  do  not  yet  fully  express  it.  It  unites  suc- 
cessive generations  into  an  unbroken  continuum,  so  that  they 
bud,  the  later  from  the  earlier,  each  ontological  link  organiz- 
ing a  soma  of  gradually  lessening  vitality  doomed  to  death, 
while  it  remains  immortal  in  the  phylum.  Bonnet  speaks  of 
an  unique  animated  fluid  which  the  Architect  of  the  universe 
has  sown  through  living  bodies  as  he  has  sown  worlds  through 
the  celestial  spaces.  The  most  primitive  and  characteristic 
cellular  expression  of  protoplasm  is  in  the  spermatozoa  and 
ova  (which  it  is  now  thought  were  themselves  developed  out 

4K 


412  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

of  an  indifferent  or  intermediate  structure),  the  vast  num- 
bers of  which,  not  only  in  the  lower  forms  but  in  man 
himself,  illustrate  its  fecundity.  As  these  primitive  sex  ele- 
ments differentiate  one  from  the  other,  sex  organs,  secondary 
and  ancillary  to  their  needs  in  all  their  vast  variety  and 
beauty  of  form  and  exact  adaptation  to  each  other,  through- 
out the  plant  and  animal  kingdom,  are  developed.  Nerves 
and  brains  themselves,  and  all  their  functions,  from  the  most 
elemental  tropism  toward  light,  air,  food,  gravity,  etc.,  up 
through  instinct  to  conscious  soul,  are  the  mouthpieces  of 
germinant  living  substance  to  express  its  nature  and  needs 
and  to  light  its  way  onward.  Yet  while  the  individual  grows, 
thinks,  and  plans,  his  whole  organism  and  life  may  have 
a  higher  and  very  different  use  for  this  primitive,  vital  sub- 
stance than  the  ends  which  persons  or  races  consciously 
propose  or  even  than  those  which  their  instinctive  life  illus- 
trates. History,  and  perhaps  the  whole  life  of  all  known  or 
even  possible  species,  may  be  but  an  incident  in  its  develop- 
ment. Again  there  is  growing  reason  to  regard  it  as  not  only 
transcendent  in  this  sense,  but  as  a  storehouse  or  reservoir 
of  experiences,  so  that  heredity  itself  may  be  a  form  of 
memory  and  nothing  perhaps  be  ever  lost.  Thus  as  we  watch 
under  the  microscope  this  marvelous  substance  that  spins  out 
filaments,  foams,  develops  granules  or  films,  vibrates,  takes 
on  or  puts  off  various  forms  of  organization  in  its  ceaseless 
Heraclitic  becoming,  which  even  histological  methods  and 
stains  but  half  reveal  and  half  conceal,  w^e  can  not  repress 
some  degree  of  the  sentiment  which  declared  the  undevout 
astronomer  mad,  because  we  here  contemplate  the  one  un- 
broken physical  source  and  origin  of  all  life  which  makes  its 
most  diverse  forms  forever  akin.  As  variations  increase 
with  the  number  of  atoms  in  a  molecule,  there  may  be,  ac- 
cording to  Caley  and  Peirce,  "  billions  or  trillions  of  pro- 
toplasmic substances,  and  not  one  only,  as  was  once  as- 
sumed." 

As  most  closely  related  to  this  great  pleromal  sea  of  life, 
abounding  stand  in  the  higher  plants  and  animals  the  sexual 
organs,  which  in  ancient  phallicism  and  in  the  modern  love 
of  flowers  are  objects  of  great  esthetic  interest  and  curiosity. 
In  them  and  their  function,  life  reaches  its  maximal  intensity 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  4^3 

and  performs  its  supreme  function.  The  vita  sexualis  is 
normally  a  magnificent  symphony,  the  rich  and  varied  or- 
chestration of  which  brings  the  individual  into  the  closest 
rapport  with  the  larger  life  of  the  great  Biologos,  and  with- 
out which  his  life  would  be  a  mere  film  or  shadow.  As  this 
vast  subject  looms  up  to  the  psychologist  and  he  begins  to 
catch  glimpses  of  its  long-neglected  wealth  and  beauty  over- 
grown with  foul  and  noxious  fungoids  and  haunted  by  all  the 
evil  spirits  that  curse  human  life;  as  he  clearly  sees  to  what  a 
degree  art,  science,  religion,  the  home,  the  school,  and  civili- 
zation itself  suffer  from  this  degradation;  as  he  understands 
the  all-conditioning  importance  of  normality  of  primary  acts 
and  organs  and  the  hitherto  unsuspected  range  of  qualities 
that  are  now  coming  to  reveal  themselves  as  secondary  sexual 
both  in  their  origin  and  in  their  present  deeper  relationship, 
he  realizes  that  it  is  his  preeminent  prerogative  and  duty, 
from  which  it  would  be  base  cowardice  to  shrink,  to  sound 
a  cry  of  warning  in  terms  plain  enough  if  possible  to  shock 
both  quacks  and  prudes,  who  have,  the  one  perverted,  and 
the  other  obscured,  the  plain  path  of  life  for  adolescence, 

I.  The  sexual  organs  make  procreation  surer,  less  waste- 
ful, and  probably  far  more  hedonic  as  we  ascend  the  scale 
of  being.  In  the  human  fetus  the  testes  can  be  detected 
as  early  as  the  sixth  week,  and  at  the  close  of  the  third  month 
they  can  be  discriminated  from  the  ovaries.  The  genital 
tubercle  from  which  the  male  glans  is  to  grow  can  be  seen 
by  the  tenth  week.  Minot  ^  finds  that  the  male  and  female 
organs  have  seven  parts  in  common,  while  there  are  thirteen 
homologies  which  are  slowly  differentiated  as  the  embryo 
becomes  fully  sexed.  In  hermaphrodites,  which  Duval  and 
many  since  have  studied,  sexual  differentiation  which  ought 
to  take  place  in  embryonic  Hfe  has  been  incomplete,  and 
sometimes,  as  in  the  still  unparalleled  case  of  Leport,  who 
at  sixteen  was  predominantly  a  girl  and  at  sixty-five  a  man, 
the  qualities  of  the  two  sexes  are  nearly  balanced,  but  usually 
even  in  these  cases  one  predominates.  The  testes  of  the  frog 
grow  around  the  ovaries,  and  one  or  the  other  is  absorbed 

'  Human  Embryology,  p.  492. 


414  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

as  sex  declares  itself,  and  in  many  other  cases  we  now  know 
that  the  embryological  truth  of  Plato's  myth  of  the  bifurcation 
of  an  originally  bisexual  man  was  a  periphrastic  adumbra- 
tion. Geigel  ^  found  two  kinds  of  developmental  variability, 
one  group  being  due  to  more  or  less  rapidity  in  the  evolution 
of  the  parts  peculiar  to  each  sex,  which  he  referred  to  vary- 
ing local  nutritive  activity,  and  another  group  differentiated 
by  the  very  variable  time  of  the  disappearance  of  parts 
peculiar  to  the  opposite  sex,  due,  he  thought,  to  circulatory 
and  resorptive  differences.  In  the  animal  and  even  plant 
series  closely  allied  species  have  great  variability  of  sex  parts 
and  functions,  the  same  organs  sometimes  producing  al- 
ternately eggs  and  spermatozoa,  while  lower  down  we  find 
many  creatures  that  may  reproduce  either  by  fission  or  divi- 
sion or  sexually. 

Dr.  F.  N.  Seerley,  who  has  examined  over  2,000  normal 
young  men  as  well  as  many  young  women,  tells  me  that 
in  his'  opinion  individual  variations  in  these  parts  are  much 
greater  even  than  those  of  face  or  form,  and  that  the  range 
of  adult  and  apparently  normal  size  and  proportion  as  well 
as  function,  and  of  both  the  age  and  order  of  development, 
not  only  of  each  of  the  several  parts  themselves,  but  of  all 
their  immediate  annexes,  and  in  females  as  well  as  males,  is 
far  greater  than  has  been  recognized  by  any  writer.  This 
fact  is  the  basis  of  the  anxieties  and  fears  of  morphological 
abnormality,  to  be  discussed  later,  and  so  frequent  during 
adolescence.  Normal  development  here  is  a  physiological 
sine  qua  non,  conditioning  that  of  many  traits  of  mind  and 
body  not  usually  recognized  as  sexual. 

The  significance  of  the  normal  evolution  of  these  organs 
is  seen  in  the  great  preponderance  of  defect  due  to  both 
congenital  conformation  and  to  anomalies  of  evolution  seen 
in  defectives,  among  whom  variations  are  still  greater.  In 
507  delinquents  examined  by  ]\Iarro,-  over  10  per  cent  were 
abnormal  in  these  organs  as  compared  with  2  per  cent  among 
others.      Out  of  728  youthful  epileptics  and  idiots  studied 

'  Geigel,  Richard.    Ueber  Variabilitat  in  der  Entwicklung  der  Geschlechtsorgane 
beim  Menschen.     Wiirzburg,  1883. 
'  La  Pubert^,  p,  78. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  4^5 

by  Bourneville  and  Sollier/  262  had  anomalies  of  these 
parts,  a  percentage  which  they  call  "  enormously  more  "  than 
that  which  was  found  among  299,270  conscripts  from  all 
classes,  who  were  their  bases  of  comparison.  Varicocele, 
especially  prevalent  among  young  epileptics,  hydrocele,  epi- 
spadias, hypospadias,  and  other  defects  of  the  urinal  passage, 
cryptochordias,  and  other  testicular  imperfections,  especially 
on  the  left  side,  often  complicated  with  hernia  (130  cases), 
phimosis  and  other  abnormalities  of  the  prepuce,  and  various 
forms  of  arrest  or  defect,  with  occasional  hypertrophies,  both 
of  structure  and  of  function,  that  dwarf  other  lines  of  growth, 
are  the  chief  troubles.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how 
many  of  these  cases  had  reproductive  power. 

Puberty  literally  means  becoming  hairy.  Hair  first  de- 
velops in  the  pubic  region  at  about  fourteen  in  boys  and  thir- 
teen in  girls,  generally  before  menstruation,  later  under  the 
arm-pits  just  before  the  period  of  most  rapid  development  of 
the  breasts,  and  last  comes  the  beard  at  the  age  of  eighteen 
or  nineteen.  Tardiness  or  absence  of  the  latter  suggests  arrest 
of  the  other  later  and  higher  qualities.  Folk-lore  proverbs  and 
popular  opinion  warns  us  against  beardless  men.  Marro  (p. 
79)  publishes  the  following  percentages  of  absence  of  beard  at 
twenty  years  of  age  to  show  the  difference  between  criminal 
and  normal  persons: 


Assassins l6. 2 

Crime  against  persons 1 7.0 

Rape 8.3 

Brigands 12.0 

Incendiaries 16,6 


Swindlers 4.3 

Thieves ii.o 

Vagabonds 20.3 

Average 13.9 

Normal 1.5 


Anomalies  in  the  development  of  hair  are  common  in 
defectives,  but  beard  among  bearded  races  seems  a  sign  of 
mature  virility,  and  although  man  may  be  gradually  losing 
the  hairy  coat  of  his  anthropoid  ancestor,  defect  here  is,  at 
least  now,  a  stigma  of  degeneration.  The  hair  of  the  head 
often  changes  slightly  in  color  and  texture  and  may  become 
straighter  at  puberty,  and  baldness  and  grayness  increase 
fast  at  senescence.  Vigor  and  beauty  of  hair  and  beard, 
and   some  think   the  quality   and   odor  of  their  sebaceous 

'  Anomalies  des  Organes  g^nitaux  chez  les  Idiots  et  les  Epileptiques.     Prog. 
Med.,  1888,  p.  125. 


4l6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

glands,  which,  Hke  all  other  glands,  are  in  mysterious  rapport 
with  those  involved  in  reproduction,  are  sexual  charms. 
Beard  and  absence  of  hair  on  the  body  may  be  products  of 
sexual  secretion.  The  hair  is  normally  at  its  best  at  the 
acme  of  sexual  vitality.  Its  fetishisms  then  take  their  rise 
and  its  coiffure  among  savages  is  most  elaborate.  Just  what 
this  relation  means  in  the  present  and  in  the  evolutionary 
past  is  an  unsolved  problem. 

The  pubertal  changes  which  take  place  in  the  male  organs, 
besides  those  that  are  more  obvious  owing  to  their  external 
condition,  have  received  far  less  attention  than  has  been 
bestowed  by  morphologists,  physiologists,  and  gynecologists 
upon  those  of  the  female,  and  the  sympathetic  reverberations 
of  these  changes  upon  the  whole  organism  are  far  less  known. 
The  corpora  spongiosa,  and  still  more  the  corpora  cavernosa, 
increase  to  perhaps  double  their  length  and  thickness,  so 
that  their  vascularity  and  erethism  is  greatly  augmented. 
The  glans  become  larger  and  more  sensitive,  whether  by  in- 
crease in  the  size  or  number  of  the  end  bulbs  and  Pacinian 
corpuscles  of  touch  and  greater  irritability  of  nerve  centers, 
or  by  more  local  blood  supply,  is  not  known.  The  prepuce 
is  more  or  less  retracted  on  the  glans  and  more  mobile  upon 
it,  and  grows  more  in  circumference  than  in  breadth  or  thick- 
ness. The  glands  of  Tyson  become  active,  and  their  odorifer- 
ous secretions,  which  in  animals  play  an  important  role  for 
sex,  increase  or  sometimes  now  begin.  The  network  of 
lymphatics  grows  more  dense  and  active,  and  new  dangers 
of  uncleanliness  and  irritation,  both  of  which  may  cause  ab- 
normal states,  now  arise.  These  dangers  are  so  great  and 
obvious  that  many  primitive  races  have  practised  circum- 
cision at  this  age  as  a  preventive.  The  prostate  glands  and 
those  of  Cowper,  as  well  as  the  seminal  vesicles,  develop  in 
size  and  function. 

The  scrotum  expands  to  more  than  twice  its  former 
size,  the  spermatic  cord  lengthens,  the  testes  descend  fur- 
ther and  enlarge  greatly.  They  also  become  more  variable 
in  size  and  activity  with  the  conditions  of  the  vita  sexualis. 
The  testes  are  developed  in  the  abdomen,  beginning  just 
below  the  kidneys,  and  slowly  migrate  downward  toward 
the  scrotum  during  the  later  months  of  intra-uterine  life; 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  41? 

Normally  they  grow  at  the  same  time.  Arrest,  both  of 
descent  and  growth,  and  even  atrophy  and  absence  of  one 
or  both  may  occur,  as  the  comprehensive  monograph  of  E. 
Godard  ^  shows,  although  mature  function  without  descent 
may  occur.  Many  hypotheses  have  been  put  forth  to  explain 
the  descent,  its  relation  to  growth,  to  hernia,  disease,  ab- 
normal secretions,  all  the  many  anomalies  of  form,  and  their 
re-ascent  by  excess  or  shock  into  the  crural  canal,  the  perineal 
region,  or  even  to  the  iliac  fossa.  Non-descent,  common  to 
many  animals,  in  man  usually  implies  absence  of  function, 
and  puberty  is  the  last  stage  of  life  at  which  belated  descent 
can  be  hoped  for.  They  grow  rapidly  at  adolescence  to  an 
average  weight  of  i6  grams.  Scrotic  tonicity,  which  in 
part  determines  the  degree  of  pendency  of  the  testes,  is  in 
hardly  less  delicate  rapport  with  states  of  brain,  cord,  and 
psyche  than  in  the  knee-jerk  or  the  dilation  and  contraction 
of  the  iris.  General  debility  or  excessive  function,  like 
approaching  old  age,  may  cause  relaxation,  especially  on 
the  left  side,  which  is  lowest  in  most  men,  but  artificial  sup- 
port is  rarely  necessary.  The  scrotic  reflex  is  far  more  widely 
irradiated  on  the  thighs  and  abdomen  at  puberty.  The  veins 
of  the  scrotum  have  few  or  no  valves.  For  animals  that 
go  on  all-fours  and  have  no  pendency,  valves  are  unneces- 
sary, but  the  upright  position  and  pendency  together  are 
hard  on  these  veins,  and  varicocele  of  more  or  less  intensity 
and  often  transient  is  frequent  shortly  after  adult  size  is 
attained.  This  is  another  cause  of  fears  that  are  usually 
excessive,  for  this  trouble  has  little  and  probably  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  excess  of  sexual  function.  Again,  the 
motor-waves  of  the  scrotum  begin  at  this  age  and  are  anal- 
ogous to  the  peristaltic  action  of  the  intestines,  and  like 
them  reflect  psychic  states,  and  also  probably  general,  and 
not  merely  special,  sexual  tension.  They  decline  at  senescence 
with  the  decrease  of  the  secretions  that  are  thus  propelled 
along  the  epididymis  and  the  long  vas  deferens.  These 
changes  have  been  superstitiously  used  for  auguries  of  pro- 
creation, and  all  of  them  are  often  the  basis  of  groundless 
fears.     In  few  parts  and  functions  of  our  bodies  can  Nature 

•  Etudes  sur  la  Monochordie  et  la  Cryptochordie,  p.  164. 
28 


41 8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

be  more  complacently  trusted  if  allowed  to  work  out  her 
own  way  unmolested. 

The  chief  physical  fact  of  male  puberty,  about  which 
all  the  other  physical  changes  center,  is  that  now  true 
spermatozoids  are  formed.  The  seminiferous  canals,  hith- 
erto round  and  smooth,  become  turgid  by  the  development 
of  large  spermatophore  cells  which  produce  clusters  of 
spermatozoa.  The  processes  by  which  these  latter  arise 
within  the  walls  of  the  canals  has  for  a  quarter  of  a  century 
been  a  theme  of  continuous  research,  theory,  and  controversy. 
The  primitive  male  cell,  unlike  the  female  cell  which  long 
remains  stationary,  undergoes  many  divisions  before  true 
sperm  cells  are  formed.  Geddes  and  Thompson  prefer  the 
following  pedigree  and  nomenclature  (p.  113):  First,  the 
primitive  sex  cell  or  male  ovule;  this  is  modified  over  into 
the  mother  sperm  cell  of  spermatogonium;  this  divides  into 
spermatocytes,  and  from  these  descend  the  spermatides  or 
immature  cells  which  differentiate  into  spermatozoa.  The 
vast  complexity  and  obscurity  of  these  processes  is  only 
equaled  by  their  importance. 

When  spermatozoa  were  first  discovered  by  Hamm.,  a 
pupil  of  Leeuwenhoek,  at  Ley  den,  in  1677,  they  were  thought 
to  be  parasites,  and  only  near  the  middle  of  this  century  were 
their  origin  and  function  known.  They  are  only  about  -^^ 
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  according  to  Lode  ^  226,257,- 
000  are  produced  in  both  testicles  per  week,  or  339,385,- 
500,000  during  thirty  years  of  vigorous  sexual  life.  This 
vast  number  seems  a  relict  of  the  great  fecundity  of  lower 
forms  of  life  maintained,  perhaps,  because  of  their  small  size 
and  the  corresponding  improbability  of  any  single  cell  find- 
ing an  ovum.  Here,  if  anywhere  in  the  human  organism, 
life  still  remains  a  continuous  cell  division  from  one  genera- 
tion to  another,  and  as  in.  certain  protozoan  forms  of  life, 
there  is  no  death  and  no  corpse.  Every  other  physical 
process  and  every  act  of  life  may  be  regarded  as  but  the 
wriggle  of  flagella  to  bring  these  elements  to  their  highest 
maturity  before  and  after  their  union  with  ova,  to  effect  that 
union  under  the  most  favorable  terms,  etc.  At  any  rate,  the 
spermatozoa  and  ova,  the  elements  of  which  preexist  in  the 

'  Pflliger's  Archiv,  i8qi. 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  419 

infant  body,  but  which  come  to  maturity  at  puberty,  are 
elements  of  a  very  different  and  far  higher  biological  order 
than  any  other  tissue  or  organ.  To  their  interests,  could 
we  only  know  them,  all  others  whatsoever  should  yield,  and 
they  might  be  regarded  as  in  some  sense  the  highest  criteria 
of  every  act  or  mode  of  life,  whatever  our  views  of  Weis- 
mann's  theories. 

It  is  not  wholly  the  accumulation  of  sexual  fluid  in  and 
its  pressure  on  the  walls  of  the  vesicles  that  causes  the 
first  ejaculation  by  reflex  action.  Accessory  secretions  often 
precede,  and  the  phenomena  of  pro-spermatogenesis,  some- 
times not  without  much  pain,  often  precede  functional  matur- 
ity. The  first  spontaneous  but  perfectly  normal  activity 
of  the  sex  organs  at  puberty  constitute  a  group  of  psycho- 
physical phenomena  so  new  that  great  perturbations  are 
often  caused,  upon  which  quacks  know  so  well  how  to  play 
by  exciting  morbid  fears.  Sometimes  the  testicular  secre- 
tions, although  abundantly  produced,  do  not  appear  with- 
out, but  are  resorbed  in  situ,  partly  at  least  by  the  rich  plexi 
of  lymphatics  which  surround  these  canals,  and  this  seems 
one  of  Nature's  provisions  to  both  aid  and  to  utilize  chastity. 
The  influence  of  the  presence  of  spermatic  fluid  upon  the 
voice,  muscular  vigor,  hair,  growth,  etc.,  are  vast  and  ob- 
scure but  very  tempting  fields  for  research  and  theory. 
Beunis  thinks  the  first  secretions  of  sperm  begin  between 
ten  and  fifteen,  but  contain  no  spermatozoa.  These,  Mante- 
gazza  thinks,  do  not  normally  appear,  or  at  least  ripen, 
before  eighteen  or  twenty,  but  Bierent  thought  he  found 
them  in  sixty  cases  at  thirteen  to  fifteen,  which  conclusion 
agrees  with  that  of  Fredericq  and  Nuel,  and  from  this  he 
distinguishes  three  stages  of  adolescence:  a  premonitory, 
when  spermatic  secretions  occur;  a  period  of  first  ejaculation 
and  menstruation  usually  marked  by  much  perturbation;  and 
third,  the  age,  a  year  or  more  later,  of  maturity  and  repro- 
ductive power.  This  nearly  corresponds  with  Marro's  three 
stages  of  preparation,  acceleration,  and  perfection  of  ado- 
lescent development. 

II.  Passing  now  to  girls,  traces  of  the  mammae,  which 
give  their  characteristic  name  to  the  highest  group  of  ani- 


420  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

rnals,  first  appear  in  man  by  the  end  of  the  second  month 
of  intra-uterine  Hfe.  The  mammae  and  the  nipple  were  devel- 
oped by  the  grouping  to  one  orifice  of  many  glands  slowly 
differentiated  from  those  diffused  over  the  dermal  surface 
on  which  they  open  up  to  about  the  stage  of  the  mono- 
tremes,  traces  of  their  old  independence  still  being  seen  in 
slight  pimple-like  protuberances  about  the  nipple  and  prob- 
ably in  supplementary  mammae.  In  their  secretions  these 
resemble  the  sebaceous,  but  in  structure  the  sudoriferous 
glands.  At  first  in  the  human  female  they  secrete  not  milk 
but  colostrum,  and  as  Becquerel  and  Vernois  have  shown, 
there  are  more  salts,  butter,  caseins,  and  solids  before  twenty, 
but  the  water  and  sugar  ingredients  increase  after.  The 
profound  sympathy  of  the  mammae  with  the  vita  sexualis, 
both  physically  and  psychically,  is  well  known,  and  is  estab- 
lished at  this  age  when  both  their  sensitiveness  to  touch 
and  their  secretions  respond  acutely  to  psychic  and  nervous 
influences. 

Philogenetically  they  are  evolved  probably  not  from 
sebaceous  but  by  specialized  sweat  glands.  Up  to  ten  or 
twelve  years  of  age  the  internal  structure  and  the  outer 
form  of  the  breasts  is  nearly  the  same  for  boys  and  for  girls. 
At  puberty  they  begin  to  undergo  important  modifications 
in  females,  and  ever  thereafter  respond  in  the  most  sympa- 
thetic way  to  the  changes  in  the  pelvic  molimena.  Both  the 
galactophores  or  glands  and  the  supportive  areolar  tissue 
develop  rapidly  at  this  period,  but  the  latter  much  pre- 
ponderates until  pregnancy,  to  which,  in  this  respect,  puberty 
is  in  a  sense  preparatory,  when  the  former  rapidly  mature. 
Until  eleven  or  twelve  the  glandular  elements  continue  to 
divide  in  both  sexes,  but  without  forming  true  lobules.  At 
this  age,  development,  which  it  is  very  significant  to  note, 
is  sometimes  marked  and  even  excessive  in  the  male,  and 
sometimes  also  retrogression  occurs.  In  girls  the  circle 
around  the  nipple  or  the  areola  enlarges,  and  its  distinctly 
pink  color  deepens,  the  nipple  projects  and  grows  firm,  and 
the  orifice  of  the  separate  glands  appear  as  pimply  projec- 
tions, and  its  sensitiveness,  measured  by  reaction  to  mechan- 
ical stimulation,  increases.  Fat  also  develops  in  the  body  of 
the  breasts,  and  the  alveoli  enlarge  and  probably  new  ones 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  4^1 

are  formed.  The  gland  as  a  whole  grows  from  one-half  or 
three-fourths  of  an  inch  across  and  one-sixth  of  an  inch  in 
thickness,  the  size  at  which  it  remains  in  the  male,  to  an 
average  of  about  four  and  one-half  inches  wide  and  one-half 
an  inch  thick  in  the  female.  Arteries  and  veins  also  undergo 
adaptive  enlargement.  Very  rarely  there  is  a  slight  secre- 
tion and  discharge  at  puberty,  as  sometimes  in  early  infancy. 

These  are  among  the  more  variable  parts  of  the  body. 
Polymasty  or  supernumerary  breasts  occur  about  once  in  five 
hundred  persons.  These  may  be  outside  or  above,  but  are 
generally  caudad  and  suggestive  of  the  rows  of  dugs  in  many 
higher  vertebrates,  but  indeed  may  occur  on  almost  any 
part  of  the  trunk  or  even  limbs.  Charpy  finds  great  indi- 
vidual differences  beginning  at  puberty.  The  distance  of 
the  mammae  from  each  other  increases  somewhat  in  propor- 
tion to  the  curve  of  the  thorax  with  well-marked,  broad 
and  round,  especially  long  and  pear-shaped,  types  often  dis- 
tinguished as  racial  differences,  and  varying  with  the  form 
of  the  chest.  The  completeness  of  their  development  in 
structure  no  less  than  in  function  is  also  exceedingly  variable, 
and  is  influenced  by  everything  in  the  environment,  includ- 
ing  food,  regimen,  and  occupation,  error  here  tending  to 
retard  the  later  stages  of  their  development.  Few  organs 
suffer  more  from  avoidable  cause  of  arrest,  and  one  of  the 
earliest  of  the  long  degenerative  stages  which  mark  the  decay 
of  ethnic  stock  is  imperfect  mammary  function  and  inability 
to  nurse  offspring  sufficiently. 

The  changes  in  the  female  organs  of  generation  at 
puberty  are  very  marked  and  of  great  complexity  and  im- 
portance. The  mons  is  covered  with  hair,  which,  beginning 
in  the  central  part,  spreads  slowly  to  its  full  and  very  variable 
extent,  grows  for  several  years  in  density,  rigidity,  and  com- 
monly takes  on  a  darker  hue.  Adipose  tissue  is  developed 
and  the  integument  probably  thickens.  The  labia  majora 
also  thicken  by  the  same  process,  growing  more  over  the 
labia  minoria  and  reducing  the  rima.  At  no  period  of  life 
are  the  outer  labia  so  closely  approximated,  the  vulva  so 
entirely  closed,  and  the  inner  parts  so  hidden,  a  result  to 
which  the  rapid  growth  of  the  thighs  at  this  age  also  con- 
tributes.    The  dartos  tunic  of  unstriped  muscular  tissue  is 


422  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

enlarged  even  more  than  the  fat,  nerves,  and  glands  of  the 
labia  majora  at  puberty.  The  triangular  apex  of  the  minor 
labia  protrude  very  slightly,  changing  to  a  darker  hue,  and 
the  sebaceous  glands  of  this  part  develop,  while  those  of  the 
nympha  do  so  only  in  pregnancy.  The  distance  from  the  fossa 
to  the  mons  increases,  and  the  marked  racial  difference  in 
the  position  of  the  vaginal  opening  and  of  its  direction,  but 
slightly  manifest  before,  now  appear. 

The  pubertal  growth  of  the  clitoris  is  relatively  about 
equal  and  very  similar  to  that  of  the  corresponding  male 
organ.  It  acquires  now  its  power  of  erectility.  The  genital 
corpuscles  of  Krause,  and  those  of  Finger,  in  which  the 
nerves  which  stimulate  reflex  erectility  end,  no  doubt 
undergo  developmental  changes.  The  urethral  glands  and 
the  venous  plexi  of  all  the  erectile  tissues  enlarge  in  all  these 
parts,  which  together  are  the  homologues  of  the  prostate 
gland  in  man.  The  anterior  tubercle  of  the  vagina,  how- 
ever, which  surrounds  the  meatus,  diminishes  at  least  rela- 
tively, while  the  vulvo-vaginal  glands  grow  nearly  to  the 
size  of  an  almond,  and  secrete  reflexly  upon  excitation  of  the 
clitoris.^  Much  the  same  is  true  of  the  mucous  secretions 
of  the  vestibulary  and  urethral  follicles.  Whether  the  acidity 
of  these  secretions  is  increased,  or  only  their  quantity,  is  un- 
known. The  secretory  function,  too,  of  all  these  parts  is 
augmented  in  a  marked  degree. 

The  vagina  undergoes  a  great  increase  of  both  length 
and  breadth.  Its  muscular  tunic  thickens,  the  mucous  sur- 
faces redden  and  grow  active,  and  all  the  venous  plexi  enlarge 
as  the  circulation  in  these  parts  increases. 

The  uterus  is  small  in  children,  but  grows  immensely  on 
the  approach  of  womanhood  to  forty  or  fifty  grammes  in 
weight,  and  also  changes  from  a  cylindrical  to  its  character- 
istic pyriform  shape.  As  the  pelvic  cavity  enlarges  it  tips 
forward  and  its  anteflexion  is  slightly  diminished,  its  neck 
becomes  relatively  shorter,  and  the  orifices  toward  the  tubes 
become  longer  and  more  opened  as  the  cavity  grows  larger. 
The  arbor  vitse  shows  its  structure,  making  its  neck  resem- 
ble the  buccal  orifice.    The  muscular  walls  increase  greatly, 

»  See  Bierent,  La  Pubert^,  i8g6,  pp.  104-iai. 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  4^3 

partly  by  enlargement  of  preexisting  and  partly  by  the 
development  of  new  fibers,  and  the  mucous  surfaces  undergo 
very  important  changes  described  elsewhere  in  the  complex 
processes  of  nidification  and  menstruation. 

The  hymen  grows  in  both  thickness  and  tenacity,  but 
there  is  hardly  more  individual  variation  in  these  respects 
than  in  size  and  form  of  its  orifice.  Probably  its  form 
changes  at  puberty  from  the  previously  simpler  shape  and 
is  less  often  annular  and  more  often  corolliform,  and  it  is 
often  broken  by  several  rarely  symmetrical  notches  or  lobes. 
From  puberty  its  orifice  enlarges  slowly  till  full  nubility. 
The  bulbus  vestibuli  certainly,  and  probably  the  sphincter 
vaginae,  and  Kobelt's  pars  intermedia,  participate  in  the 
accelerated  growth  of  this  period.  So  too  must  the  nerves, 
if  we  can  infer  from  the  great  increase  of  sensitiveness. 

Puech  found  that  the  ovaries  grew  from  early  girlhood 
in  each  of  their  three  dimensions,  and  that  there  was  a 
marked  augmentation  of  rate  at  or  near  the  dawn  of  puberty, 
but  that  their  growth  normally  continued  for  some  years  after- 
ward before  they  attained  adult  dimensions,  the  right  always 
slightly  leading  the  left.  They  grow  soft  and  vascular,  but 
weight  increases  in  about  the  same  proportion  as  size,  or 
from  about  two  or  three  grams  before  puberty  to  five  or 
six  at  full  maturity.  Their  growth  in  length  is  greater  than 
in  their  vertical  and  transverse  diameters.  Up  to  ten  the 
ovaries  are  at  about  the  level  of  the  iliac  fossae,  but  they 
become  intrapelvic  and  more  or  less  mobile  at  puberty, 
owing  to  their  erectile  function  and  the  traction  of  the  uterus 
and  Fallopian  muscles.  A  slight  projection  at  a  single  point 
marks  the  ripening  of  the  first  Graafian  follicle,  the  monthly 
rupture  of  which  is  later  to  scarify  the  previously  smooth 
ovarian  surfaces.  The  parenchyma  of  the  ovaries  from  which 
the  ovules  germinate  is  not  only  enlarged,  but  becomes  the 
center  upon  which  the  pubertal  development  of  breasts  and 
uterus  is  especially  dependent.  The  medullary  substance 
grows  more  than  any  other  part  of  the  ovarian  tissue  at 
puberty,  and  is  enlarged  much  at  the  first  menstruation  and 
somewhat  at  each  later  one,  when  its  color  also  changes  to 
a  dark  slaty-red,  due  to  normal  congestion. 

Since  1827,  when  von  Baer  discovered  the  ovum  in  man. 


424  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

the  existence  of  which  had  long  been  known  in  animals,  there 
has  been,  as  Auvard  well  says,  a  revolution  in  genital  physi- 
ology. Ovulation  is  at  least  in  some  sense  a  secretion, 
although,  unlike  other  glands,  the  ovaries  and  testes  secrete 
living  cells.  The  process  is  spontaneous,  the  ova  emerging 
from  the  Graafian  follicle  at  the  surface  of  the  ovaries,  and 
being  conveyed  through  them  mainly  by  ciliary  motions  to 
the  uterus.  Normally  the  ovaries  lay  their  eggs  when  the 
nest  of  uterine  mucus  is  ready  to  receive  and  fix  them  if 
impregnated,  although  the  latter  is  broken  down  and  dis- 
charged if  not  needed.  These  two  processes,  however,  are 
somewhat  independent,  for  each  may  occur  without  the  other, 
although  normally  they  are  almost  as  coincident  as  the 
special  adjustment  of  the  vocal  cords  and  the  stress  of  the 
breath  used  to  produce  phonation.  The  growth  of  the  mu- 
cous surface  is  a  monthly  anabolic  surplus  upon  which  the 
ovum  can  live  for  a  time.  If  it  is  not  fertilized,  these  prepara- 
tions are  vain,  and  menstruation  is  an  expression  of  their 
failure.  When  the  cellular  detritus  frorn  the  inner  wall  of 
the  uterus  has  passed  ofi,  the  blood  ceases,  and  in  eight  or 
ten  days  the  lost  lining  is  replaced,  and  the  wounds  in  the 
ovaries  caused  by  the  bursting  of  the  follicle  and  the  libera- 
tion of  the  ova  are  healed,  leaving,  however,  scars  for  each 
period.  We  have  here,  then,  a  striking  case  of  the  rejuvena- 
tion of  the  tissue  by  proliferation  centering  about  reproduc- 
tion, which  may  itself  be  considered  as  the  very  highest 
degree  of  this  process.  Here,  too,  we  have  atavistic  sug- 
gestions of  a  great  but  now  lost  fecundity.  In  the  two 
ovaries  of  a  girl  of  eighteen  there  are  estimated  to  be  72,000 
primitive  ova,  of  which,  however,  only  about  400  mature 
during  life,  reaching  an  average  size  of  tIt  oi  an  inch.^ 

III.  Andrews  ^  has  undertaken  to  describe  the  effects 
of  castration  on  animals  as  follows:  Wethers  do  not 
grow  larger,  but  their  wool  is  less  oily  and  of  more  value, 
indicating  sympathy  of  the  testes  with  sebaceous  glands. 
Cats  grow  larger,  are  fonder  of  petting,  as  if  a  secondary 
sex  quality  was  increased,  and  remain  good  mousers.     The 

»  Lee.     American  Text-Book  of  Physiology,  pp.  §§7,  983. 
*  Am.  Med.  Jour. ,  January,  i8g8. 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  4^5 

horse  grows  larger  if  castrated  young,  suggesting  the  inverse 
ratio  of  individuation  to  genesis,  but  the  bridle  teeth  are  not 
modified  as  in  the  full  male,  indicating  less  vigor  of  jaw 
development  and  less  power  to  bite.  The  calf  is  larger  and 
taller  than  the  bull,  but  his  neck  and  fore-quarters,  effective 
in  sexual  conflicts  with  other  males,  are  smaller.  His  cere- 
bellum increases,  and  his  horns  are  longer  and  perhaps  even 
thicker,  but  on  the  whole  less  powerful  and  dangerous  than 
those  of  the  bull.  The  pitch  of  the  voice  is  higher,  not  in 
bellowing,  to  which  he  is  more  prone,  but  in  lowing.  The 
elks  experimented  on  did  not  shed  their  horns,  which  are 
accessory  sexual  in  function,  as  usual,  but  their  tips  were 
frozen  in  the  severe  winter,  and  when  they  came  off  numerous 
small  sprouts  grew  in  the  spring,  which  were  again  nipped 
the  next  winter,  until  large  bony  knobs  arose  which,  per- 
haps, if  protected  with  care,  would  have  attained  a  great 
size. 

The  influence  of  sex  seems  to  extend  in  some  mysterious 
way,  which  we  do  not  understand,  to  that  disappearance  of 
cartilage  which  marks  the  cessation  of  bone  growth.  The 
general  view  since  Haller  was  for  a  long  time  that  castration 
weakened  the  force  of  growth.  Springer  ^  holds  that  nutritive 
activity  is  checked  in  eunuchs,  and  that  they  have  especially 
small  and  arrested  legs  and  thin  thighs  like  old  men.  Lortet, 
however,^  who  has  examined  many  eunuchs  and  extended  his 
study  to  castrated  animals,  concludes  that  while  their  pelvic 
and  thoracic  regions  are  small,  most  bones  of  the  arms,  legs, 
feet,  and  fingers  are  long,  slender,  comparable  with  the  bones 
of  the  ox,  and  often  delicate,  and  that  this  is  especially  true 
of  the  legs.  May  it  be  that  there  is  an  inverse  relation 
between  length  of  limb,  especially  the  femur,  and  relative 
size  of  pelvis  and  sexual  vigor  and  maturity,  and  that  dis- 
proportionate length  of  upper  leg  is  a  bad  sign  for  maternity  ? 
This  operation  on  the  eunuchs  of  Cairo,  even  though  it  may 
have  been  performed  in  infancy,  does  not  cause  much  dif- 
ferentiation till  puberty,  but  they  attain  a  stature  of  nearly 
two  inches  more  than  the  average  of  their  race. 

'  La  Croissance,  Paris,  1899. 

*  Comptes  Rendus  de  I'Acad.  des  Sciences,  April,  1890. 


426  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Lancaster  ^  quotes  a  letter  from  "  a  well-known  professor 
in  a  New  England  College,"  who  spent  years  in  the  East 
among  Nubian  eunuchs,  as  follows:  "  There  is  no  question 
that  castration  at  an  earl^^  age  does  in  various  ways  modify 
physical  development,  though  I  do  not  think  it  modifies  it 
so  much  as  is  commonly  supposed.  The  difference  most 
likely  to  be  observed  was  in  the  voice.  Castration  does 
produce  an  immense  effect,  though  an  indirect  one,  upon 
the  character.  It  is  not  the  operation  in  itself,  but  its  effects 
upon  the  mind.  The  mind  broods  over  the  fact  that  the 
body  is  reproductively  impotent  and  is  filled  with  morbid 
resentment  and  jealousy.  No  other  physical  deformity  can 
so  far  distort  and  devilize  the  character.  As  far  as  I  can 
judge,  sex  feelings  exist  unmodified  by  absence  of  the  sexual 
organs.  The  eunuch  differs  from  the  man,  not  in  the  absence 
of  sexual  passion,  but  only  in  the  fact  that  he  can  not  fully 
gratify  it.  As  far  as  he  can  approach  a  gratification  of  it, 
he  does  so.  Often,  maddened  by  a  sense  of  impotence,  he 
wreaks  vengeance  on  the  irresponsible  object  of  which  he  is 
enamored.  .  .  .  The  eunuchs  have  all  the  adolescent 
phenomena.  I  have  watched,  for  example,  boy-eunuchs  of 
ten  or  eleven  years,  possibly  younger.  Early  conscious,  as 
they  are,  of  their  desexed  condition,  there  was  nothing  ap- 
parent in  their  moods  or  pleasures  different  from  other 
children  of  their  race.  They  took  the  same  delight  in  a 
perfume  or  a  flower,  or  a  pretty  baby,  as  any  other  boy  of 
their  race  would  have  done.  The  little  eunuch  is  more 
inclined  to  solitude  than  almost  any  Western  child,  but  per- 
haps no  more  than  his  compatriots.  As  to  rebelling  against 
authority,  I  have  more  than  once  seen  a  diminutive  eunuch 
do  that."  2 

Marro^  insists  on  the  close  relation  between  the  develop- 
ment of  organs  and  the  secondary  sexual  characteristics,  and 
gives  two  interesting  cases  where  the  former  atrophied  and 

■  Psychology  and  Pedagogy  of  Adolescence,  by  E.  G.  Lancaster.      Ped.  Sem., 
July,  1897,  vol.  V,  p.  61. 

*  Kroemer  [Zeitsch.  f.  Psychopath.,  135-52]  and  Krafft-Ebing  [Psych.  Arbeiten, 
ii.,  189],  recommend  it  guardedly  for  men  in  cases  of  sexual  hyperesthesia,  but 

the  latter  thinks  its  beneficial  effects  are  not  apparent  for  a  year  or  two. 

*  La  Puberty.     Bull-  de  la  Soc  de  Med.  de  Belgique,  1894,  p.  1575. 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  4^7 

the  latter  did  not  develop.  History  records  the  achievements 
of  many  eunuchs  of  great  ability — the  Marseilles  philosopher, 
Favorino,  the  Egyptian  general,  Aristonicus,  Narses,  the 
general  of  Justinian,  Salomon,  one  of  the  lieutenants  of  Beli- 
sarius,  Haly,  grand  vizier  of  Soliman;  but  Marro  thinks 
these  are  exceptions.  Eunuchs,  he  holds,  are  precocious 
and  never  live  to  great  age.  The  pulse  is  feeble,  and  they 
are  prone  to  varicosities  in  the  extremities  and  to  periodic 
hemorrhoids,  liver  troubles,  etc.  Like  animals  thus  muti- 
lated, they  are  more  docile.  In  Central  Asia,  Dr.  G.  Roberts 
reports  that  girls  are  often  castrated  to  act  the  role  of  and 
sometimes  to  be  sold  for  eunuchs.  Mojon  thinks  that  if  this 
operation  is  performed  upon  the  young,  those  bones  not  yet 
entirely  hardened  continue  soft  and  growing.  Osteomalacia, 
which  is  especially  a  disease  of  women,  and  consists  in  soften- 
ing of  the  bones,  is  arrested  by  extirpation  of  the  ovaries. 
Acromegalia,  which  is  also  closely  connected  with  the  sexual 
organs,  and  is  marked  by  extraordinary  development  of  the 
bones  of  the  face  and  those  of  both  the  upper  and  lower 
extremities,  sometimes  causes  girls  to  assume  a  virile  aspect, 
the  voice  to  deepen,  and  the  breasts  to  shrink,  the  thyroid 
gland  and  the  clitoris  to  increase,  and  the  genesic  desires, 
and  perhaps  the  periods,  to  diminish.  Marie,  Souza-Leite, 
Tamburini,  Tanzi,  and  Freund  think  this  trouble  closely  con- 
nected with  disorder  of  the  genital  functions  at  puberty. 
Indeed,  some  think  that  the  terminal  parts  of  the  extremi- 
ties grow  first  at  puberty,  the  hands  and  feet  becoming  less 
graceful  and  magnified,  and  their  muscles  and  even  fat  devel- 
oping out  of  proportion  to  the  rest  of  the  body  which  makes 
up  its  due  proportions  later.  If  this  be  so,  normal  puberty 
would  present  anomalies  similar  to  those  of  acromegalia. 

Flood  ^  thinks  that  if  castrated  young,  man  grows  taller, 
fatter,  and  has  a  larger  frame;  that  the  hair  on  pubes  and 
face  does  not  grow;  that  the  cheeks  look  round  and  promi- 
nent, and  the  chin  is  often  double;  that  the  voice  of  boys  is 
higher,  and  that  of  girls  lower.  Harris  ^  thinks  eunuchs  have 
longer  legs,  light  pelvis,  and  are  prone  to  be  undeveloped 

'  Notes  on  the  Castration  of  Idiot  Children.     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  vol.  x,  p.  296. 
"  Phila.  Med.  Jour.,  1898. 


428  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

in  chest  and  arms,  again  like  the  ox,  and  their  bones  are 
not  only  longer  but  more  hollow  and  so  weaker.  The  skin 
of  castrated  negroes  often  grows  several  shades  lighter  col- 
ored, as  if  the  color-type  was  weakened.  Eunuchs  are  said 
to  sufifer  less  from  gout  and  renal  calculus,  as  if  sex  was 
inversely  as  this  kidney  function,  have  a  weak,  slow  pulse, 
are  prone  to  hemorrhoids,  liver  troubles,  indicating  con- 
comitant decline  of  glandular  vigor,  rarely  live  to  old  age, 
and  resemble  animals  thus  operated  upon  which  are  more 
tractable  and  more  easily  domesticated. 

The  functional  castration,  practised  among  the  Pueblo 
Indians  to  fit  certain  young  men  for  religious  ceremonies  and 
also  for  pederasty,  is  performed  by  excessive  abuse  of  this 
function  in  unmentionable  ways  till  local  paralytic  impotence 
supervenes  and  becomes  permanent,  and  the  victims  are 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  "  mugenados  "  or  women-men, 
when  the  organs  atrophy,  the  beard  falls  out,  the  voice  grows 
feminine,  and  the  breasts  give  milk.  In  China,  where  the 
Emperor  used  to  keep  2,000  eunuchs,  the  operation  removes 
all  organs  by  a  single  stroke  before  adolescence,  and  the 
process  is  said  to  be  fatal  in  only  three  per  cent  of  the  cases. 
It  is  practised  by  certain  fanatical  religious  sects,  notably  the 
White  Doves  or  Skoptzi,  in  Russia,  to  insure  purity.  They 
are  described  as  a  very  vigorous  people  with  many  excellent 
qualities.  Ablation  of  the  ovaries,  still  practised  in  Bombay, 
suppresses  the  menses,  makes  the  voice  harsh,  the  breasts 
shrunken,  the  face  hairy,  the  character  forceful  and  mascu- 
line, and  the  form  angular  and  unattractive. 

In  general,  the  psychic  as  well  as  the  physical  effects  of 
castration  are  less  the  later  the  latter  operation.  The  ox  and 
gelding,  as  is  known,  do  not  entirely  lose  their  libido,  but  it  is 
greatly  reduced.  Guinard  has  shown  that  in  two  or  three 
per  cent  of  cases  castration  of  horses  does  not  prevent  coition. 
In  men  libido  of  a  falsetto  kind  may  occur.  Flood,  who 
operated  on  twenty-six  idiot  boys,  all  but  two  of  whom  were 
under  seventeen,  and  half  under  fourteen,  reports  sexual 
appetite  missing  in  all  but  two  cases,  and  in  these  being  only 
spasmodic,  although  erections,  and  in  one  case  masturbation, 
persisted  slightly  at  intervals.  In  all  instances  temper  was 
greatly  improved,  and  there  was  less  pugnacity,  obstinacy, 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  4^9 

self-will,  and  more  sympathy,  altruism,  and  normal  balance 
of  emotion.  Mobius,^  who  has  given  us  the  fullest  history  of 
the  effects  of  castration,  lays  emphasis  on  the  mental  enfeeble- 
ment. 

Facts  in  this  field  thus  show  the  dependence  of  a  very 
important  group  of  not  only  physical  but  psychic  qualities 
upon  the  presence  of  this  quasi-gland,  the  loss  of  which  seems 
to  change  both  the  intensity  and  the  nature  of  character 
more  than  the  loss  of  one  and  perhaps  both  legs,  or  any 
other  removable  part. 

There  has  been  much  recent  discussion  in  this  country 
concerning  the  desirability  of  this  operation.  On  the  whole, 
the  testimony  seems  conclusive  that  epileptic  seizures  may 
thus  be  made  both  less  frequent  and  less  severe.  All  but  two 
of  Flood's  cases  were  epileptics,  and  only  five  were  thought 
to  need  even  diminished  doses  of  bromide  after  the  opera- 
tion. Dr.  W.  O.  Henry  ^  designates  as  a  crime  of  medical 
men  their  failure  to  urge  legislation  to  prevent  the  marriage 
of  criminals,  or  else  to  have  them  castrated.  In  1897  a  bill 
was  introduced  into  the  Michigan  Legislature  to  insure  the 
castration  of  inmates  of  the  State  Home  for  the  Feeble- 
Minded  and  Epileptic  before  their  discharge,  in  the  case  of 
those  convicted  of  rape  or  of  a  felony  for  the  third  time, 
but  it  did  not  pass.  The  House  Committee  on  Public  Health 
of  the  Kansas  Legislature  lately  reported  favorably  on  a  bill 
doing  away  with  prison  for  rape  and  substituting  castration, 
and  was  supported  by  the  Social  Purity  League  of  Topeka, 
It  has  been  claimed  that  ten  other  States  would  follow  the 
lead  of  Kansas.  Dr.  Daniels,  of  Texas,  and  the  late  Dr. 
Wey,  of  Elmira,  have  urged  castration  for  sexual  perversion 
and  for  habitual  criminals,  and  Dr.  Boal,  of  Illinois,^  recom- 
mended it  and  ovariotomy  for  the  punishment  of  crime  and 
the  reformation  of  criminals.  It  has  also  been  often  urged 
of  late,  instead  of  lynching,  for  negroes  who  commit  rape  in 
the  South. 

This  may  well  give  us  pause.     The  case  of  dangerous 


>  Ueber  die  Wlrkung  der  Castration.      Halle,  1903. 

'  Medical  Herald,  June,  1866. 

*Jour.  Am.  Med.  Ass'n,  September,  1895. 


43^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

idiots  is  certainly  very  different  from  that  of  criminals.  Fel 
ony  has  no  fixed  meaning  and  varies  greatly  in  different 
lands  and  in  different  States,  and  few  jurists  would  venture 
to  define  it.  It  is  heinous  and  used  to  involve  loss  of  all  pos- 
sessions, but  now  often  includes  crimes  punishable  by  death 
or  imprisonment,  and  is  sometimes  due  to  excessive  vigor  in 
wrong  directions  which  subjective  inhibition  or  objective  de- 
terrents have  not  yet  repressed,  and  which  we  may  yet  learn 
to  divert  to  right  directions.  How  far  law  should  undertake 
human  stirpiculture  by  such  methods  involves  some  of  the 
deepest  problems  of  biology,  of  the  rights  of  personality  and 
of  society,  and  perhaps  penal  colonies  or  other  new  ways  of 
treating  crime,  the  possibility  of  new  human  varieties,  etc. 

This  operation  in  maturity  is  far  more  serious,  and  ac- 
cording to  Cabot  ^  is  very  liable  to  be  followed  by  mental  dis- 
turbance as  well  as  death  when  performed  on  the  aged  for 
enlarged  prostate.  While  those  subjected  to  it  early  in  life 
practically  lose  the  desire,  this  is  far  less  abated  in  those 
operated  on  in  later  years.  The  extreme  envy  and  jealousy 
charged  to  eunuchs  may  be  due  largely  to  their  fidelity  and 
zeal  in  defending  the  women  in  their  charge. 

When  this  operation  in  man  occurs  after  puberty,  normal 
congress  but  not  fecundation  is  possible,  and  probably  more 
often  so  in  men  than  in  animals.  Glaevecke  found  that  in 
females  castrated  after  maturity  sexual  desire  persisted  in 
twenty-two  per  cent,  was  diminished  in  thirty-seven  per 
cent,  and  extinguished  in  forty-one  per  cent.  Jayle,^  as  the 
result  of  a  questionnaire,  reports  that  out  of  thirty-three 
cases  of  ovarian  castration,  desire  was  unchanged  in  eight- 
een, diminished  in  three,  abolished  in  eight,  increased  in 
three;  pleasure  remained  the  same  in  seventeen,  was  dimin- 
ished in  one,  abolished  in  nine,  increased  in  five,  and  painful 
in  six.  In  thirteen  cases  of  utero-ovarian  castration,  desire 
was  unchanged  in  three,  diminished  in  two,  abolished  in  one, 
and  augmented  in  four,  while  pleasure  remained  the  same  in 
six,  was  increased  in  one,  was  hyperesthetic  in  one,  and  pain- 
ful in  one.     Auto-suggestion  that  after  the  operation  there 


*  Annals  of  Surgery,  September,  i8g6. 
»  Rev.  de  Gyn.,  1897,  p.  403. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  43'^ 

should  be  a  change,  he  says,  probably  played  a  great  role. 
This  appetite  often  survives,  and  may  even  increase,  after  the 
menopause.  Closely  connected  as  the  organs  are  with  desire, 
they  are  not  indispensable  to  it,  but  the  need  is  more  or  less 
diffused  throughout  the  entire  organism.  The  agitation  at 
puberty,  as  the  individual  prepares  for  the  perpetuation  of  the 
species,  is  not  only  often  not  localized  from  lack  of  knowledge 
of  organs  and  acts,  but  is  general  and  not  unlike  hunger, 
which  is  not  all  located  in  the  stomach  but  is  the  aggregate 
effect  of  the  nutritive  needs  of  all  the  cells  and  tissues.  The 
glandular  cells  along  the  digestive  tract  are  overcharged  and 
need  to  function,  as  do  overrested  muscles ;  so  "  we  love  with 
our  whole  body  and  not  a  single  anatomical  element  is  dis- 
interested in  the  function  of  reproduction,"  and  the  soul  as 
well  as  the  body  has  its  needs. 

Concerning  early  intersexual  vice  I  have  spoken  in  the 
last  chapter.  How  this  is  complicated  with  social  and  phys- 
ical disease  two  recent  researches  typically  show.  Baer,^  in 
a  very  valuable  study  of  twenty-two  murderers,  in  BerUn, 
between  the  ages  of  fourteen  and  eighteen,  notes  none  of 
Lombroso's  anatomical  signs,  but  finds  most  to  be  victims  of 
the  vicious  sexual  precocity  characteristic  of  young  criminals 
in  large  cities.  The  crime  was  in  most  instances  revoltingly 
brutal  and  without  remorse,  and  most  such  cases  are  deemed 
incorrigibly  defective  in  their  moral  if  not  their  intellectual 
nature.  Caldo  ^  finds  that  most  prostitutes  fall  between  the 
ages  of  fifteen  and  eighteen,  which  he  terms  the  period  of 
sexual  vulnerability  toward  which  chief  effort  should  be  di- 
rected. Diseased  women  are  always  more  dangerous  than 
diseased  men,  and  this  youthful  class  is  most  infectious.  Into 
this  vaster  field  I  can  not  enter  here.^ 

•  Ueber  jugendliche  Morder.      Arch.  f.  Crim.  Anthropol.,  Bd.  xi,  1903. 
"Venereologic  Sociale.     Le  Piogr^s  Med.,  April  11,  1903. 

'  An  interesting  and  valuable  illustration  of  the  awakening  sense  of  responsibility 
in  this  field  is  seen  in  a  comprehensive  German  report '  based  on  900  full  answers 
to  a  six-page  questionnaire,  with  70  cases,  showing  the  effects  of  church,  plain  speak- 
ing, and  scientific  literature  on  sex,  association,  and  the  dangers  from  soldiers,  who 

*  Die  geschlechtlich-sittlichen  Verhaltnisse  der  evangelischen  Landbewohner 
im  deutschen  Reiche.  i.  Band.  Ostdeutschland.  Von  Pastor  H.  Wittenberg  und 
Pastor  Dr.  E.  Huckstadt.     Leipzig,  1895,  pp.  309  and  236. 


432  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

IV.  One  of  the  very  saddest  of  all  the  aspects  of  human 
weakness  and  sin  is  onanism,  and  to  say  that  it  is  as  important 
in  treating  adolescence  as  it  is  painful  to  consider  is  to  say 
very  much.  Until  recently  it  has  been  met  on  the  one  hand 
with  either  prudery  and  painstaking  reticence  or  treated  in 
terms  of  exaggerated  horror,  as  in  the  "  scare  "  and  quack  lit- 
erature. It  still  requires  a  great  degree  of  moral  earnestness  to 
discuss  it  with  candor  and  the  requisite  plainness.  One  thing 
can  safely  be  assumed,  namely,  that  no  one  ever  fell  into  the 
habit  by  reading  a  serious  work  upon  it.  A  sentence  of 
Stuart  Mill's  has  been  well  quoted  ^  concerning  it,  viz.,  "  The 
diseases  of  society  can  be  no  more  checked  or  healed  than 
those  of  the  body  without  publicly  speaking  of  them."  To 
ignore  or  deny  the  wide  prevalence  of  the  evil,  in  the  way 
often  done,  is  sometimes  honest  ignorance,  but  is  also  often 
affectation  and  even  a  form  of  hypocrisy  and  cant.  While 
scientific  discussion  of  the  subject  may  not  be  meant  for  all 
the  young,  lest  they  form  too  poor  an  opinion  of  human 
nature,  it  is,  in  my  judgment,  imperative  for  educators,  and 
one  of  the  richest  scientific  quarries  opened  by  the  new  psy- 
chology. 

The  vice,  as  we  know  from  Aristophanes,  Ovid,  Horace, 
and  others,  abounded  in  ancient  Greece  and  Rome.  The 
treatise  of  Hippocrates,  380  b.  c,  which  ascribed  the  chief 
causal  role  to  the  spinal  cord  and  gave  it  a  fatalistic  tone, 
was  not  excelled  in  acumen  by  any  work  upon  the  subject 
until  the  epoch-making  treatise  by  Tissot,"  in  1760.  which 
was  classic  in  style  and  very  important  in  its  results.  It 
sought  to  make  headway  against  the  nameless  abuses  and 
vices  in  France  centering  in  the  court  of  Louis  XIV  and 
XV.     The  works  of  Simon  ^  and  Lallemand  *  described  the 

are  called  the  most  corrupting  agency.  Unmarried  officers  are  called  the  curse  of 
young  women.  Parental  neglect  is  the  first  cause  of  lapses.  On  the  whole,  this 
voluminous  and  very  comprehensive  report  presents  a  sad  monotone  of  iniquity, 
accented  now  and  then  by  incidents  of  exceptional  pathos. 

'  Die  Masturbation.  Eine  Monographic  fiir  Aerzte  und  Padagogen,  von  Dr. 
Med.  Hermann  Rohleder,  Berlin,  1899,  p.  319.  One  of  the  latest  and  best  trea- 
tises on  the  subject. 

•  De  rOnanisme,  Lausanne,  1760. 

*  Traits  d' Hygiene  applique  k  I'^ducation  de  la  Jeunesse,  Paris,  1827. 
*Des  Pertes  s^minales  involontaires,  Paris,  1836-42. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  433 

consequences  of  self-abuse  as  terrible — diseases  of  the  brain 
and  cord,  paralysis,  dementia,  blindness,  tabes,  etc.,  in  ways 
truer  to  the  needs  of  morality  than  to  science.  Indeed,  salu- 
tary as  were  these  works,  their  influence  is  still  seen  in  the 
lurid  effects  of  the  vice  as  described  in  much  of  the  current 
popular  literature,  and  has  tended  to  bring-  the  serious  efforts 
of  science  in  this  field  into  discredit.  The  two  comprehensive 
treatises  of  Pouillet  ^  brought  us  back  to  common  sense.  The 
fifth  International  Hygienic  Congress  at  Budapest,  in  1894, 
at  which  Cohn  ^  read  the  outlines  of  his  important  treatise, 
almost  marked  an  epoch  in  the  frankness  and  scientific 
mode  of  treating  the  subject,  as  Fournier's  ^  work  had  done 
in  France.  Tarnowsky,  Rosenbach,  Rohleder,  Fiirbringer, 
Lowenfeld,  Hosslin,  Ribbing,  Moll,  Lombroso,  Krafft-Ebing, 
I.  P.  West,  Hammond,  and  others  have  in  recent  years  shed 
much  light  upon  this  subject  and  the  broader  one  of  vita 
scxualis  in  general.  We  shall,  as  far  as  practicable,  confine 
ourselves  to  the  adolescent  aspects  of  the  subject. 

The  first  problem  is  the  extent  of  the  evil.  Cohn  pro- 
posed to  send  questionnaires  to  the  best  of  the  21,000  Ger- 
man physicians  and  the  8,000  German  students  of  medicine, 
requesting  anonymous  answers  based  upon  their  own  school- 
memories  and  observations,  but  the  scientific  academy  to 
which  he  appealed  for  the  expenses  of  this  research  (some 
$1,500)  has  not  yet  responded.  Until  some  such  compre- 
hensive investigation  is  made,  it  is  impossible  to  determine 
the  extent  of  the  vice.  Many  hold,  however,  that  it  is  the 
most  wide-spread  of  all  the  popular  diseases.  Blaschko,  a 
Berlin  expert,  estimated  in  1893  that  there  were  yearly  in 
that  city  over  30,000  cases  who  consulted  physicians,  and 
that  if,  in  the  four  student  years  reckoned  by  averages,  every 
patient  was  a  different  person,  every  student  was  treated  for 
diseases  indicating  excess.  Rohleder,  in  an  earlier  work  pub- 
lished in  1895,  estimated  that  ninety  per  cent  had  practised  it, 
and  the  next  year  concluded  that  about  all  men  once  at  least  in 

'  L'Onanisme  chez  rhomme,  1883.     L'Onanisme  chez  la  femme.    Tr.  from  the 
sixth  edition  in  eight  numbers  of  the  Med.  Times  and  Register,  1896. 

^  Was  kann   die   Schule  gegen  die  Masturbation  des  Kindes  thun,  von  Prof. 
Hermann  Cohn,  Berlin,  1894. 

'  De  rOnanisme,  Paris,  1893. 
29. 


434  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

their  lives  had  been  guilty.  Berger  ^  asserts  the  same.  Tis~ 
sot,  in  1759,  found  every  pupil  in  the  lycec  he  investigated 
guilty.  Benseman  asserts  its  enormous  prevalence  in  the 
English  high  schools.  Moll  quotes  approvingly  the  phrase, 
"  who  denies  it  has  forgotten,"  and  Cohn  is  cynical  enough  to 
say,  "  If  any  one  denies  that  he  ever  did  it,  he  does  it  now." 
Dr.  Seerley,  of  Springfield,  Mass.,  found  out  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty-five  academic  students,  eight  who  satisfied  him 
they  had  never  indulged  in  it,  and  of  three  hundred  and  forty- 
seven  who  answered  his  questions,  seventy-one  denied  having 
practised  it.  It  was  found  to  be  practised  without  a  single 
exception  in  a  certain  reform  school  known  to  the  writer, 
where  the  inmates  competed  and  the  one  who  could  consum- 
mate it  oftenest  daily  was  the  object  of  a  certain  hero-wor- 
ship. Because  it  is  so  dangerous,  and  liable  to  occur  in  indi- 
viduals who  lack  stamina,  it  has  its  octopus-grasp  in  nearly 
all  institutions  for  the  defective  classes.  It  is  known  to  be 
practically  ineradicable  in  institutions  for  the  feeble-minded, 
and  I  have  been  told  by  heads  of  schools  for  deaf-mutes,  and 
still  more  emphatically  by  officers  of  institutions  for  the  blind, 
that  in  these — perhaps  because  they  lack  the  normal  quantum 
of  sense  stimuli  and  are  less  active  and  objective  in  their 
habits — it  is  peculiarly  prevalent  and  tenacious. 

F.  S.  Brockman  ^  received  two  hundred  and  thirty-two 
replies  from  college  and  theological  students  at  an  average 
age  of  twenty-three  and  a  half  years,  to  the  question,  "  What 
was  the  severest  temptation  of  your  school  days?  "  One  hun- 
dred and  thirty-two  specified  masturbation,  and  ninety-two 
specified  other  sexual  temptations,  and  these  two  together  con- 
stituted five  more  than  all  other  temptations  combined.  In 
forty-two  papers  only  out  of  the  two  hundred  and  thirty-two 
was  there  no  clear  intimation  of  this  form  of  temptation. 
"  There  were  seventy-five  who  were  guilty  of  masturbation 
after  their  conversion,  and  twenty-four  after  they  had  decided 
to  become  ministers."  Some  specified  their  struggles  with  this 
temptation  at  great  length.     Brockman  sums  up  his  conclu- 


'  Archiv  fiir  Psych.,  1896. 

«  A  study  of  the  moral  and  religious  life  of  two  hundred  and  fifty-one  students 
in  the  United  States.     Ped.  Sem.,  vol.  ix,  p.  255. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  435 

sions  as  showing  an  alarming  extent  of  this  vice,  a  mor- 
bid state  of  mind  thus  occasioned,  the  stronghold  which  the 
habit  still  has,  and  the  uniformity  with  which  they  blame  their 
elders  for  not  having  warned  them.  The  hterature  upon  the 
various  modes  in  which  it  is  practised  and  the  methods  of 
imitation,  contagion,  and  the  seduction  of  younger  by  older 
boys  is  copious.  We  may  well  hope  that  these  estimates  are 
exaggerated,  and  the  writer  at  least  feels,  as  probably  every 
reader  will,  a  strong  disposition  to  discredit  with  indignation 
all  high  estimates  until  they  are  forced  home  by  statistics 
upon  methods  invulnerable  to  criticism.  Yet  it  must  be  con- 
fessed that  the  whole  literature  of  the  subject  attests  that 
wherever  careful  researches  have  been  undertaken,  the  results 
are  appalling  as  to  prevalence,  and  suggest  that  the  Occi- 
dent has  little,  if  any,  advantage  over  the  sad  records  of  the 
Orient,  and  that  civilized  man  is  on  the  whole,  to  say  the  least, 
no  better,  if  not  far  worse,  in  this  respect  than  his  savage 
brother. 

Strange  to  say,  this  perversion  is  not  peculiar  to  man;  for 
we  have  many  and  well-attested  reports  of  its  prevalence 
among  monkeys,  dogs,  blood  stallions,  elephants,  turkeys, 
etc.,  although  in  many  of  these  cases  the  climax  is  not  reached. 
Another  sad  chapter  is  that  which  describes  it  among  children 
of  tender  years.  There  are  well-authenticated  cases  where 
children  of  both  sexes  under  two  years  of  age  have  practised 
it,  and  far  more  cases  are  on  record  for  still  later  childish 
years.  In  some  cases  it  is  taught  by  nurses,  older  children,  or 
perverts;  but  there  is  abundant  evidence  that  even  with  the 
very  young,  and  still  more  with  those  older,  the  old  view  that 
it  was  not  spontaneously  learned,  but  due  to  example  and 
moral  infection,  was  wrong.  It  is  one  of  the  easiest  and  most 
spontaneous  of  all  vices,  and  in  very  young  children  many 
now  think  it  a  disease  more  frequent  among  girls  than  boys. 
Some  now  believe  that  sucking  the  thumbs,  fingers,  rubber 
or  other  artificial  nipples  predisposes  to  it.  It  certainly  does 
not  need  to  be  taught  and  may  be  spontaneous,  although,  in 
fact,  it  is  probably  in  most  cases  contagious.  All  agree  that 
the  early  years  of  puberty,  from  twelve  to  fourteen,  are  those 
in  which  it  is  most  common.  Sometimes  an  epidemic  of 
mutuaHsm,  or  some  other  form  of  it,  devastates  an  entire 


43^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

school,  and  many  cases  are  on  record  where  its  prevalence 
in  these  years  passes  all  non-expert  credence.  During  the 
teens  the  intensity  and  frequency  of  it  in  individual  cases, 
particularly  in  those  of  sanguine  and  choleric  temperament, 
is  no  less  difficult  to  believe.  It  sometimes  reaches  a  satyr- 
iasic  and  nymphomaniac  degree,  and  many,  if  not  most,  of 
the  perversions  originate  in  these  years. 

Its  causes  are  many  and  difficult  to  proportion.  Prominent 
among  these  is  precocious  mental  development  and  too  much 
psychic  and  too  little  physical  expression.  In  these  cases  the 
attention  of  the  child,  in  the  progress  of  self-knowledge  of  its 
own  body,  is  certain  to  be  instinctively  directed,  as  a  mere 
matter  of  curiosity,  to  its  sexual  parts,  and  this  is  very  greatly 
favored  by  a  sitting  position,  especially  if  long  maintained, 
which  of  itself  is  a  stimulus,  and  by  absence  of  other  intense 
interests.  Even  in  those  of  perfervid  fancy  the  habit  is  some- 
times formed  in  complete  ignorance  of  its  meaning.  With 
knowledge,  it  is  a  matter  of  the  strength  of  will,  and  wherever 
mental  overwork  weakens  this,  it  tends  to  that  irritable  weak- 
ness of  the  nervous  system  which  makes  the  rankest  ground 
for  onanism.  Whether  the  central  nervous  system  acts  most 
upon  the  organs  or  z'ice  versa,  a  question  much  discussed,  is 
no  doubt  largely  an  individual  matter,  for  probably  each  af- 
fects the  other,  but  in  different  degrees  in  different  stages  of 
development.  Wherever  children  mature  early  in  mind  there 
is  special  danger  of  a  wrong  direction,  and  therefore  need  of 
all  the  methods  of  control.  The  temperament  from  which 
hysteria  and  epilepsy  spring  is  volcanic,  and  makes  perhaps 
the  best  natural  psychic  constitution  for  the  development  of 
this  evil.  The  physical  processes  of  first  menstruation  pre- 
dispose to  it,  and  with  some  instruction  or  instinctive  fore- 
boding of  its  evil,  cause  violent  struggles  of  soul  which  are 
exhausting  in  themselves. 

A  long  list  of  skin  diseases — pruritus,  eczema,  urticaria, 
and  various  parasitic  disorders  like  scabies — increase  the  dan- 
gers. A  consumptive  heredity  is  a  powerful  predisposing 
agent.  This  insidious  disease  seems  to  act  on  human  nature 
like  a  worm  upon  fruit  in  producing  premature  ripeness  and 
activity  of  the  reproductive  function.  A  long  convalescence, 
piles,  habitual  constipation,  irritating  urinal  deposits,  malfor- 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  437 

mation  of  the  organs,  idleness  and  laziness,  weakness  of 
will  in  general,  and  doubtless  heredity,  play  important  etio- 
logical roles.  Among  the  external  causes  are  springtime, 
which  is  a  peculiarly  dangerous  season,  warm  climates,  im- 
proper clothes,  rich  food,  indigestion,  mental  overwork,  nerv- 
ousness, habits  of  defective  cleanliness,  especially  of  a  local 
kind,  prolonged  sitting  or  standing,  too  monotonous  walking, 
sitting  cross-legged,  spanking,  late  rising,  petting  and  indul- 
gence, corsets  that  produce  stagnation  or  hyperemia  of  blood 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  too  great  straining  of  the  mem- 
ory— the  causal  influences  of  all  these  are  expatiated  on  in 
detail  by  Rohleder  and  others. 

Prominent  among  predisposing  causes  are  often  placed 
erotic  reading,  pictures,  and  theatrical  presentations.  Cohn 
even  pleads  for  an  expurgated  Bible  and  dictionary,  and 
others  would  banish  the  Odes  of  Horace,  the  Satires  of  Juve- 
nal, to  say  nothing  of  Martial  and  Terence,  and  forbid  ballets. 
Certain  drugs,  like  phosphorus,  cocaine,  opium,  camphor, 
and  inhalation  of  oxygen,  are  now  known  to  have  stimulating, 
while  others,  like  digitalis,  saltpeter,  arsenic,  have  an  opposite 
effect.  Schiller  protests  against  trousers-pockets  for  boys,  as 
do  others  against  feather-beds,  while  even  horseback-riding 
and  the  bicycle  have  been  placed  under  the  ban  by  a  few 
recent  extremist  writers.  Indulgence  in  intoxicating  drink 
without  doubt  predisposes  to  it,  as  does  any  physical  or  psy- 
chic difficulty  in  access  to  closets,  solitude,  certain  perfumes, 
overeating,  fondling,  fur,  and  rocking-chairs. 

In  general,  while  for  a  healthy  child  under  good  influ- 
ences the  majority  of  these  causes  can  be  successfully  defied, 
like  other  of  the  ultra-refinements  of  modern  hygiene,  the 
greater  the  liability  of  the  disease  the  more  necessary  does  it 
become  to  attend  to  the  very  slightest  etiological  motives. 
While  some  are  more  or  less  frigid  to  the  great  majority  of 
these  favoring  influences,  the  delicate,  nervous  child  may  re- 
spond in  more  or  less  degree  to  them  all,  even  the  slightest; 
and  it  should  never  be  forgotten  that  early  adolescent  years 
are  sensitive  to  all  matters  pertaining  to  sex,  even  very  re- 
motely, to  a  degree  that  science  probably  does  not  yet  recog- 
nize and  about  which  the  ordinary  parent  is  densely  igilorant 
^nd  optimistic,  and  which  the  child  himself  does  not  begin, 


^8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

to  comprehend.  The  prurient  often  experiment  with  them- 
selves in  seeking  assurance  that  function  is  normal,  and  this 
leads  to  manipulation  and  then  to  masturbation  in  the  early 
teens,  which  is  often  carried  on  for  a  few  years.  The  new 
sense  of  virility  brings  a  certain  deep  elation  that  in  coarser 
natures  even  becomes  ostentatious  and  boastful  before  their 
mates,  and  sometimes  especially  before  younger  boys,  with  a 
vaunting  feeling  of  superiority.  The  first  orgasm,  especially 
if  forced  at  premature  age,  consists  in  a  general  and  diffused 
glow  and  exhilaration  of  the  sense  of  well-being  even  before 
emission  is  possible.  This  gives  a  heightened  sense  of  the 
value  of  life,  and  a  flush  of  ecstasy  and  joy  that  tinges  the 
world  with  a  glory  that  is  far  more  than  sensuous.  But  be- 
fore this  function  is  well  developed  the  Nemesis  of  depression 
follows  hard  after  these  exaltations,  and  both  states  arouse 
thought  and  fancy  in  new  directions  and  with  a  vividness  un- 
known before.  In  bright,  nervous  children  pubescence  often 
dawns  with  almost  fulminating  intensity  and  suddenness,  and 
sweeps  the  individual  into  pernicious  ways  long  before  moral 
or  even  intellectual  restraints  are  operative.  Excessive  dan- 
ger here  is  one  of  the  penalties  man  pays  for  that  inestimable 
tool  of  his  development  on  to  the  human  plane — the  hand. 
The  very  definition  of  precocity  involves  inversion;  the  order 
of  nascent  periods  has  been  reversed  in  both  sequence  and 
strength.  Wherever  this  occurs  the  race  deteriorates.  Yield- 
ing to  mere  and  gross  sensuous  pleasure  shortens  the  growth 
period,  and  the  only  way  to  prolong  it  and  attain  an  ever 
higher  and  fuller  maturity  for  the  race  is  by  the  plain  old 
virtue  of  self-restraint.  This  is  probably  the  field  of  most 
active  and  normal  natural  selection.  The  ascendant  individ- 
ual family  or  stock  is  the  one  that  refuses  to  yield  in  excess 
to  the  temptation  of  the  flesh,  and  the  descendants  are  those 
whose  instincts  for  selfish  gratification  preponderate  over 
those  of  race-conservatism.  These  are  the  sins  of  the  parents 
that  are  visited  on  their  children,  devitalizing,  arresting  their 
full  development,  and  finally  exterminating  them.  Honor  to 
the  unborn  by  parents  is  their  chief  claim  to  reverence  by 
their  children,  and  to  enfeeble  the  power  of  hereditary  trans- 
mission is  worthy  the  contempt  and  curses  which  recent  liter- 
ature has  often  represented  as  felt  by  degenerates  for  those 


SEXUAI>  DEVELOPMENT  439 

responsible  for  their  existence.  The  invective  of  a  decadent 
son  upon  a  sire  but  for  whose  private  vice  he  might  have  been 
well  born,  is  as  haunting  and  characteristic  a  note  of  our 
modern  culture  as  was  the  curse  of  Atreus's  time  for  ancient 
Greece. 

In  discussing  the  results  of  onanism,  we  must  first  of  all 
recognize  that  the  immediate  and  sensational  effects  often 
seriously  believed  in,  and  often  purposely  exaggerated  for  ped- 
agogic effects,  are  not  so  immediate  or  disastrous  as  repre- 
sented in  both  the  popular  and  the  earlier  literature.  The 
brain  is  not  literally  drained  away;  dementia,  idiocy,  palsy, 
and  sudden  death  are  not  imminent,  nor  is  there  any  peculiar 
infallible  expression,  attitude,  or  any  other  manifestation  in- 
stantly recognizable  by  experts.  Current  impression  to  this 
effect  has  much  to  do  in  causing  terror,  shamefacedness,  and 
some  of  the  bashfulness  and  solitude  sometimes  seen. 

Perhaps  the  most  common  psychic  result  is  a  sense  of  un- 
worthiness,  sin,  pollution,  and  the  serious  diminution  of  self- 
respect,  often  instinctively  covered  or  resisted  by  whimmish 
and  boisterous  self-assertion,  or  occasionally  hidden  by  al- 
most morbid  scrupulousness  and  convictions  of  foreboding 
disaster  or  penalty.  In  what  theologians  have  described  as 
the  conviction  of  sin,  this  plays  an  enormous  and  hitherto 
unappreciated  role.  Consciousness  of  a  vice  so  hated  and 
despised  is  a  potent  factor  in  youthful  melancholia,  taking 
away  the  joy  of  life,  and  sometimes  plunging  the  victim  into 
discouragement  culminating  in  a  sense  of  utter  despair.  It  is 
one  of  the  causes  of  most  of  the  morbid  types  of  self-con- 
sciousness or  introspection.  The  struggle  between  what  is 
felt  to  be  right,  pure,  honorable,  and  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 
is  always  hard  for  sanity,  so  that  the  physical  lassitude  and 
the  sense  of  inadequacy  to  meet  the  ordinary  burdens  of  life 
are  not  infrequently  overwhelming.  Now  there  is  resolution 
and  confidence  as  nature  repairs  lesions  and  buttresses  bud- 
ding manhood  and  womanhood  against  undermining  influ- 
enges  from  her  beneficent  and  inexhaustible  storehouse  of 
growth-energy,  but  a  lapse  plunges  into  the  depths  again,  so 
that  the  cyclic  psychoses  of  undue  elevation  and  exaltation, 
succeeded  by  depression,  are  established.  Struggles  for  abso- 
lute purity  and  perfection  germane  to  this  age  are  met  by 


440  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

the  influences  that  seem  to  spring  from  the  prince  of  dark- 
ness and  his  abode.  This  duaHsm,  which  strains  the  unity  of 
personality  and  makes  hell-fires  a  subjective  reality,  divides 
the  soul  against  itself  and  diverts  energy  otherwise  available 
for  study,  exercise,  and  normal  growth,  and  leads  to  many  a 
battle  with  Apollyon  absolutely  unsuspected  by  all,  so  that 
many  effects  thought  by  many  medical  writers  to  be  the  re- 
sults of  physical  laws  are  really  due  to  the  wear  and  tear  of 
psychic  struggles.  Disciples  of  Dupenlin  and  Hartmann,  Hke 
Mailouch,  Kiirnig,  and  others,  make  the  highest  human  vir- 
tue to  refrain  from  procreation,  and  not  a  few  of  them,  in  terms 
carefully  guarded  against  the  law,  praise  self-abuse,  sexual 
perversity,  abortion,  etc.,  as  midway  between  the  supreme 
merit  of  perfect  celibacy  of  body  and  soul  and  the  summum 
malum  of  bringing  children  into  the  world.  In  every  sane 
and  moral  mind  the  pessimistic  cynicism  of  such  views  needs 
no  refutation. 

Prominent  and  preliminary  in  the  study  of  effects  is  the 
problem  whether  self-abuse  is  more  pernicious  than  excess  in 
the  natural  way,  and  how  the  two  differ.  Here  authorities 
are  diametrically  opposed.  Some,  especially  those  of  a  decade 
or  two  ago,  have  declared  the  effects  to  be  the  same,  but  now 
I  find  no  competent  authority  who  does  not  assert  that  abuse 
is  far  more  injurious,  and  that  in  many  ways;  first,  because  it 
can  be  indulged  in  more  readily,  as  the  means  are  always  at 
hand.  This,  of  course,  makes  the  dangers  of  excess  far 
greater.  Again,  the  stimulus  is  very  different  and  more  con- 
centrated in  time  and  place,  and  therefore  tends  to  make  the 
act  more  precipitate  and  convulsive.  The  evils  of  masturba- 
tion are  due  to  the  fact  that,  being  unnatural,  it  requires 
greater  excitement  to  produce  the  same  effect;  the  action, 
moreover,  is  more  specialized  and  limited;  is  less  bound  down 
to  outer  conditions,  and  can  be  more  frequent;  favors  too 
early  discharge  and  spermatorrhea  and  lacks  the  normality 
of  gradual  approach  by  the  preliminary  excitation  of  all  the 
secondary  sexual  quaHties  of  mind  and  body.  All  the  irradia- 
tions of  touch,  sight,  gradual  approach,  the  long-circuit  stim- 
uli through  the  secondary  sex  qualities  are  lost,  and  the  act  is 
more  brutal  and  descends  far  lower  in  the  phylogenetic  scale 
of  animality.    The  normal  act  often  produces  an  exaggerated 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  44 1 

self-feeling  of  maturity,  of  being  especially  favored,  attractive, 
or  perhaps  irresistible,  while  abnormal  acts  impair  self-respect 
and  tend  to  a  sense  of  shame  and  of  being  an  outcast  to  the 
better  self  as  well  as  to  society.  This,  which  I  nowhere  find 
mentioned  in  the  medical  writers,  I  deem  central.  Generally, 
either  the  form,  presence,  or  more  often  some  particular  ob- 
ject connected  with  the  other  sex  is  imagined  with  the  utmost 
intensity.  What  sight,  hearing,  touch,  and  other  senses  per- 
form is  now  the  result  of  the  imagination,  which  is  fevered 
and  in  the  act  made  morbidly  intense  and  acute,  so  that  here 
I  believe  we  have  a  glimpse  of  the  cause,  not  only  of  the 
marvelous  intensity  of  the  lascivious  fancy,  but  of  certain  of 
the  morbid  perversions  which  have  never  yet  been  explained. 
The  imagination  is  subjected  to  a  most  excessive  strain  in 
order  to  produce  the  desired  climax,  and  sometimes  a  ritual 
of  forms  becomes  established  and  closely  associated  with  the 
voluptuous  sensations.  This  may  be  in  the  form  of  definite 
and  specific  pictures,  so  that  some  of  the  forms  of  erotic 
fetishism  are  begun,  or  it  may  take  the  form  of  almost  ritual- 
ized acts,  or  again  erotic  zones  may  be  developed.  The  psy- 
chic methods  of  arousing  adequate  stimuli  always  involve  a 
realism  of  fancy  of  which  youth  is  especially  capable  and 
prone  at  this  age,  and  for  this  time  and  purpose  place  the 
imagination  not  only  on  the  level  of  reality  in  vividness,  but 
above  it.  This  is  especially  seen  in  the  sad  and  well-known 
cases  of  mental  masturbation  which  are  not  infrequent.  The 
reciprocal  relations  between  this  vice  and  certain  of  the  per- 
versions of  the  power  of  imagery  in  youth,  showing  how 
easily  illusions  and  hallucinations  may  arise  in  this  soil,  where 
love  and  fancy  normally  celebrate  their  glorious  nuptials,  is 
one  of  the  most  inviting  chapters  I  know  in  the  whole  range 
of  the  new  psychology.  Not  only  the  relations  of  the  mind 
and  the  body  in  general,  but  the  connection  of  art  and  Eros, 
can  here  be  approached  with  a  rich  casuistic,  if  largely  mor- 
bid, material. 

We  know  that,  despite  the  enormous  number  of  sperma- 
tozoa in  the  average  individual,  the  loss  of  concentration 
of  albumin,  lecithin,  peptones,  etc.,  can  be  a  great  drain  upon 
the  system.  Moreover,  spermin  is  now  thought  to  play  a 
very  important  role  in  removing  products  of  decomposition. 


442  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Spermin,^  C5H14N2,  is  found  normally  in  considerable  quan- 
tities in  the  testes,  prostate,  thymus,  milt,  ovaries,  and  the 
blood,  and  is  thought  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  respira- 
tion of  tissues.  When  dissolved,  it  advances  interorganic 
oxidation,  and  is  a  ferment  which  helps  to  remove  the  prod- 
ucts of  the  regressive  metamorphoses  of  albuminous  sub- 
stances or  leucomains  (as,  since  Gautier,  all  nitrogenous  in- 
termediate products  of  such  change  are  called  which  are  not 
oxidized  as  far  as  urea).  These  are  formed  constantly  in 
both  normal  and  morbid  states,  and  at  least  many  of  these 
are  toxic,  like  ptomaines.  The  accumulation  of  these  pre- 
disposes the  system  to  infection  and  causes  other  diseases. 
Spermin,  according  to  this  view,  removes  these  products  by 
further  oxidation,  thus  preventing  disease.  Its  activity 
diminishes  with  the  alkalescence  of  the  blood.  The  adminis- 
tration of  testicular  and  other  extracts  of  spermin,  orally  or 
subcutaneously,  has  thus  beneficent  therapeutic  effects,  and 
the  reduction  of  it  by  masturbation,  excessive  venery,  or  dis- 
ease favors  all  the  disorders  due  to  the  accumulation  of  the 
above  products  of  decomposition.  Nerve  tissue  is  freshened 
and  self-feeling  increased,  and,  as  the  upholders  of  the 
spermin-therapeutics  hold,  without  any  aid  from  suggestion. 
No  doubt  individual  differences  in  this,  as  in  all  other  re- 
spects, are  great,  and  there  is  every  indication  that  every 
organ  suffers  from  the  excessive  loss  of  this  substance,  which 
is  perhaps  the  highest  and  most  complex  of  all  things  in  the 
physical  world. 

The  old  phrase,  post  coitus  triste,  is  illustrated  in  excess  of 
all  forms,  and  especially  in  self-abuse.  Weakness  always  brings 
more  or  less  depression,  and  in  some  cases  the  physical  ex- 
haustion of  muscles  and  nerves,  if  intensified  by  excess,  brings 
pain  and  traces  of  convulsion,  epilepsy,  palpitation,  and  pho- 
tophobia, differing  according  to  individual  predispositions 
and  powers  of  resistance.  Neurasthenia,  cerebrasthenia,  spinal 
neurasthenia,  and  psychic  impotence  generally  result  not 
more  in  the  loss  of  fluid  than  from  expenditure  of  physical 
force  and  often  by  tissues  connected  with  the  sympathetic 

•  A.  Poehl :    Einwirkung  des  Spermins  auf   den  Staflfumsatz.     Zeits.   f.   klin. 
Med.,  1894,  p.  135  ei s^g. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  443 

system.  Subjective  light  sensations,  optical  cramps,  perhaps 
Basedow's  disease,  intensification  of  the  patellar  reflex,  weak 
sluggishness  of  heart  action  and  circulation  seen  in  cold 
extremities,  purple  and  dry  skin,  lassitude  and  flaccidity, 
clammy  hands,  anemic  complexion,  dry  cough,  and  many 
digestive  perversions  can  be  often  directly  traced  to  this 
scourge  of  the  human  race.  The  onanistic  psychosis  seems 
especially  to  predispose  to  convulsive  disorders  like  epilepsy, 
to  which  it  is  so  akin,  but  weakness  of  memory  and  attention, 
paranoia,  agitation,  cachexia,  various  neuroses  of  the  stom- 
ach which  Preyer  and  Fournier  have  studied,  dwarfing  or 
hypertrophy  of  the  organs  themselves,  and  many  of  the 
lighter  and  transitory  forms  of  psychic  alienations,  are  pro- 
duced. 

One  of  the  most  direct  moral  effects  is  lying,  secretive- 
ness,  and  hypocrisy  which  conceals  or  denies  a  whole  area  of 
interests  very  real  to  the  subject,  and  this  is  closely  connected 
with  cowardice,  timidity,  egoism,  and  frivolity.  The  power 
of  pity  and  sympathy  is  often  almost  extinguished.  Self- 
control  and  will-power,  purposive  self-direction,  resolute  abil- 
ity to  grapple  with  diftiiculties  mental  or  physical,  to  carry 
work  that  is  begun  through  to  its  completion,  are  certain  to 
decline. 

Sometimes  from  excessive  prudery  the  opposite  state  of 
loss  of  modesty  may  follow  excessive  venery.  The  masturba- 
tor's  heart,  so  often  discussed,  is  weak  like  his  voice.  Dr. 
Seerley  diagnoses  a  murmur  which  he  thinks  an  almost  infal- 
lible sign.  Dr.  G.  Bachin  describes  the  "  masturbator's 
heart,"  based  on  six  interesting  cases.^  The  very  rise  of  tem- 
perature during  the  act  lapses  to  listlessness  and  frigidity,  and 
clamminess  afterward.  Too  great  tension,  which  may  pre- 
dispose to  convulsions  and  reach  an  almost  epileptic  degree, 
is  followed  by  an  exhaustion  which  makes  all  lesser  excita- 
tions seem  pale  and  uninteresting.  One  who  has  tasted  these 
forbidden  joys  of  youth  has  a  languid  appetite  for  the  larger, 
if  less  fevered,  pleasure  of  the  intellect,  of  friendship,  of  high 
enthusiasms,  and  lapses  to  a  nil  admirari  indifference  which 
is  one  of  the  worst  signs  in  youth. 

'Deutsche  Arch.  f.  klin.  Med.,  1895,  p.  201  et sf^. 


444  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

These  effects  might  perhaps  be  summed  up  as  phenomena 
of  arrest.  Growth,  especially  in  the  moral  and  intellectual 
regions,  is  dwarfed  and  stunted.  There  are  early  physical 
signs  of  decrepitude  and  senescence.  Gray  hairs,  and  espe- 
cially baldness,  a  stooping  and  enfeebled  gait,  the  impulsive 
and  narrow  egoism  which  always  goes  with  overindulgence, 
marks  of  early  caducity  which  may  crop  out  in  retina,  in 
cochlea,  in  the  muscular  or  nervous  system,  in  the  stomach — 
all  the  troubles  ascribed  to  this  cause  are  distinctly  senescent 
in  their  nature.  Life  has  been  lived  out  with  abandon;  its 
energies  have  been  overdrawn,  and  its  wheels  have  run  down 
like  the  mainspring  of  a  clock  the  regulator  of  which  has 
been  lost,  so  that  the  term  "  fast  "  has  a  profound  biological 
significance. 

While  it  can  not,  of  course,  be  mathematically  demon- 
strated, it  is  nevertheless  probable  that  worse  and  earlier  than 
any  of  these  psychic  effects  are  those  that  appear  in  the 
offspring.  Beginning  with  the  gradual  descendance  rather 
than  ascendance  of  the  long  line  of  posterity  in  proportion  as 
the  evil  has  become  more  intense,  its  effects  are  manifest, 
nearer,  perhaps,  in  the  incomplete  maturity  of  mind  and  body 
in  the  next  generation;  in  persistent  infantilism  or  overripe- 
ness  of  children.  If  more  intense,  it  affects  the  number  of 
posterity,  the  power  to  nurse  offspring  by  the  female,  and 
finally  ends  in  complete  sterility,  always  the  penalty  of  the 
excessive  selfishness,  the  greatest  and  most  unpardonable  of 
all  sins,  where  the  individual  uses  up  in  his  own  life  all  the 
energy  of  which  he  is  merely  the  pilot  and  guardian  and 
w'hich  is  meant  to  transmit  life  to  countless  generations. 
This  enfeeblement,  brain  instability,  and  all  the  deciduous 
phenomena  connected  with  this  vice ;  the  loss  of  higher  inter- 
ests ;  the  easy  fatigue ;  inertness  of  affection,  make  the  marital 
and  paternal  office  at  best  inadequate  and  all  high  enthusi- 
asms impossible,  even  though  it  were,  as  Schopenhauer  said, 
something  which  might  be  permissible  in  those  too  old  to 
become  parents.  The  whole  problem  is  so  difficult  and  at 
the  same  time  so  vital  that  we  are  all  liable  to  the  fallacy 
of  the  feeble  mind  which  grasps  a  problem  too  large  for 
it,  viz.,  to  have  recourse  to  extreme  superficial  views  and  to 
lay  undue   emphasis  upon   special  and  partial  causes,   cures, 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  445 

or  aspects  of  it.  But  although  the  best  may  be  mistaken, 
let  us  not  yield  to  the  temptation  of  cowardice  or  psychic  dis- 
honesty, and  ignore  or  deny  its  magnitude  or  importance. 
That  here  an  immense  problem  looms  up  for  all  who  study 
any  department  of  the  great  science  of  man,  whether  his  body 
or  his  mind,  will  now  be  generally  recognized. 

Another  question  much  debated  and  of  interest  here  is 
whether  self-abuse  itself  can  be  the  cause  of  a  distinct  type 
of  insanity.  The  opinions  of  experts  here  have  differed 
widely.  Some  believe  its  effects  are  seen  only  in  forms  of 
general  deterioration  and  arrested  development;  others  con- 
nect it  in  a  more  or  less  causal  way  with  one  or  more  of  the 
morbid  forms  of  sex  perversion,  or  hold  that  it  makes  a 
psycho-physical  soil  which  readily  bears  their  dread  fruit. 
Dr.  Clark,^  whose  interesting  demonstration  that  the  act  of 
self-abuse  was  attended  by  a  rise  of  temperature  of  one  or 
two  degrees  during  the  first  half-hour,  falling  slowly  later, 
and  who  thinks  it  rarely  self-learned,  doubts  the  existence  of 
a  true  masturbatic  insanity,  although  in  those  already  insane 
some  form  of  violence,  blind  fury,  heightened  automatisms, 
excited  movements  or  efforts  to  escape  often  follow  the  act. 
Restlessness  and  constant  mobility  he  holds  to  be  in  part  a 
predisposition  and  sometimes  an  effect.  Gowers  thinks  mas- 
turbation can  properly  be  called  a  cause  of  epilepsy  only  if 
the  arrest  of  the  habit  arrests  the  disease,  but  that  the  contin- 
uance of  the  disease  after  the  arrest  of  the  practise  does  not 
disprove  causality,  for,  once  established,  the  "  conclusive 
habit"  tends  to  continue.  He  inclines  to  think  it  more  fre- 
quently causes  untypical  attacks  than  true  epilepsy,  and  that 
self-abuse  is  a  cause  he  does  not  doubt. 

Spitzka  ^  believes  in  masturbatic  insanity,  the  onset  of 
which  he  thinks  marked  by  great  variations  of  symptoms 
from  day  to  day  and  week  to  week,  now  by  destructiveness, 
now  by  lethargy,  etc.  At  first  the  patient  is  listless  in  the 
morning  and  recuperates  during  the  day;  but  in  the  late  and 
hopeless  stages  the  patient  is  best  in  the  morning  and  grows 
silly,  irritable,  and  lapses  into  progressive  stupor  toward  night. 


»  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1888,  p.  388. 

•  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1888,  pp.  52  and  216, 


446  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Insanity  due  to  masturbation  he  thinks  five  times  as  common 
among  males  as  females,  because  for  the  latter  Nature  sets  no 
limits.  In  persons  of  sound  constitutions  and  heredity,  it 
must  be  begun  early  and  carried  far  to  produce  actual  vesania, 
and  he  agrees  with  Clouston  that  quack  advertisements  pro- 
duce nearly  as  much  insanity  by  their  appeals  to  fear  and 
remorse  as  self-abuse  itself.  The  symptoms  are  cerebral 
anemia,  atonic  muscles  and  expression,  clammy  hands,  alter- 
nating spells  of  gluttony  and  anorexia,  cowardice,  suspecting 
the  purity  of  all  others,  avoidance  of  rough,  manly  sports, 
neglect  of  toilet  and  dress,  spells  of  sulks,  pets  and  peevish- 
ness, tcedium  vita,  outrageous  selfishness,  cunning  self-accu- 
sation, cruelty,  maliciousness,  imperative  ideas,  morbid  fear, 
strange  somatic  sensations,  etc.  Katatonia  and  cataleptic 
stupor  may  be  episodes  in  insanity  of  this  type.  It  differs 
from  hebephrenia  as  original  paranoia  does  from  progressive 
dementia.  The  former  is  the  ruin  of  an  incomplete  mental 
edifice,  the  latter  is  an  edifice  improperly  founded  and  unsym- 
metrically  completed.  Spitzka  considers  sexual  excess  less 
dangerous,  because  self-abuse  is  begun  earlier,  can  be  carried 
to  greater  lengths,  and  is  not  limited,  like  the  former,  by  the 
erector  mechanism.  The  latter  is  usually  attended  by  more  or 
less  of  the  noble  emotion  of  love,  masculine  supremacy  is  as- 
serted, and  it  is  often  felt  to  be  an  object  of  manly  ambition 
while  secret  vice  is  only  shameful,  so  that  the  moral  effects 
of  the  two  are  almost  antithetical. 

Maudsley  ^  thinks  masturbatic  can  not  always  be  distin- 
guished from  pubescent  insanity,  and  that  active  alienation 
rarely  results  from  self-abuse  if  the  heredity  is  good.  The  vice 
he  thinks  most  common  and  most  severe  in  weak  boys  who  have 
been  most  carefully  protected,  and  been  least  among  vigorous 
boys  who  have  an  abundance  of  other  indulgences.  The  best 
help  lies  not  in  moral  and  religious  appeals,  but  in  stigmatizing 
it  as  dirty,  sure  to  show  in  the  face,  etc.,  because  vanity  and  a 
manly  tone  are  often  stronger  than  conscience.  He  regards 
the  morbid  mental  symptoms  from  this  cause  as  less  serious  if 
the  habit  breaks  out  early  in  pubescence  before  the  sexual  func- 
tion has  transformed  the  modes  of  thought  and  feeling,  than  if 

»  Pathology  of  Mind,  p.  399  et  seq. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  447 

it  occurs  later  when  sex  has  advanced  further  in  its  trans- 
formation of  character.  In  a  boy  of  seventeen  or  eighteen 
work  is  neglected,  done  in  a  slouchy  and  fitful  way;  he  is 
moody,  lazy,  devoid  of  interest  even  in  amusements,  sullen, 
morose,  self-sufficient,  solitary,  slovenly,  or  fastidious  and  ex- 
acting, hypochondriacal,  and  disposed  to  treat  his  imaginary 
ailments  with  special  forms  of  exercise  and  diet.  If  it  comes 
on  later,  society  and  especially  ladies  are  shunned;  there  are 
fancied  love  sentiments  and  dramas  with  those  very  slightly 
known ;  physicians  are  consulted  about  imaginary  symptoms  or 
some  sex  problem.  If  the  victim  becomes  engaged,  he  is  even 
fuller  of  scruples  about  his  fitness  to  marry,  fears  incompati- 
bility or  infidelity,  like  the  heroes  of  Ibsen's  Love's  Comedy, 
that  marriage  degrades  love,  and  so  passes  to  new  engagements. 
Sometimes  his  morality  is  superfine  and  scornful  of  the  base 
ways  of  the  world,  while  he  is  in  thought  and  fact  nasty  and 
sensual.  As  a  husband  such  an  one  is  apt  to  be  irascible,  tyran- 
nous, exacting,  suspicious,  and  sometimes  assaults  and  even 
murders  result.  As  he  does  not  really  respect  himself,  he  thinks 
he  has  lost  the  respect  of  others.  The  habit  of  self-abuse  is  less 
frequent  and  less  hurtful  in  women. 

Sturgis  ^  believes  that  masturbation  in  some  cases  is  the 
direct  product  of  an  hereditary  tendency  toward  nervous  and 
mental  disorders,  and  that  such  a  neurotic  condition  not  only 
predisposes  to  this  habit,  but  renders  such  subjects  particularly 
prone  to  the  evil  effects  which  result  from  it.  These,  for  the 
ordinary  healthy  young  adult,  he  believes,  as  a  rule,  are  very 
slight,  although  he  estimates  the  percentage  to  be  not  less  than 
eighty.  Thus  a  great  deal  of  the  evil  ascribed  to  this  habit  he 
holds  exaggerated  and  overdrawn.  The  fright  caused  by  be- 
lief in  a  derangement  in  this  part  of  his  nature  is  so  common 
and  great  that  he  declares  "  that  a  large  proportion  of  patients 
who  consult  the  surgeon  for  treatment  are  really  more  hypo- 
chondriacs than  sexual  cripples  ;  they  dwell  constantly  upon  the 
condition  of  these  organs."  Very  little  imagined  change  or 
peculiarity  "  produces  a  condition  of  nervous  irritation  which 
prevents  them  from  thinking  of  anything  else,  and  precludes 
them  from  pursuing  their  daily  occupations  with  the  ordinary 

'  Sexual  Debility  in  Man,  New  York,  1900,  p.  98  et  seq. 


44-8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

zest  and  vigor  with  which  they  have  been  accustomed  to  per- 
form their  duties."  Even  where  there  is  a  shght  real  cause  it 
would  often  play  but  a  small  role  but  for  the  mental  disturbance 
thus  produced. 

Aristotle  held  that  the  testes  maintained  a  tension  of  nerves 
and  veins  as  a  weaver's  weight  keeps  his  warp  tight.  Marro 
quotes  a  case  of  psychic  impotence  and  melancholy  due  to  lack 
of  development  of  one  testicle  that  was  completely  cured  by 
an  operation  which  inserted  a  silver  one  which  the  patient  sup- 
posed normal.  Two  views  are  now  prevalent  to  explain  the 
close  relation  betw^een  these  organs  and  the  general  vigor  of  the 
nervous  system.  One  is  that  it  is  biologico-chemical  and  medi- 
ated by  glandular  secretions.  This  was  held  by  Brown-Sequard 
and  led  to  his  spermal  injections,  and  is  strongly  advocated  by 
Poehl.  Many  men,  especially  in  various  stages  of  senescence, 
have  reported  great  benefits  from  this  treatment  in  increased 
energy  for  mental  and  physical  work  and  in  general  buoyancy 
of  spirits,  but  the  opinion  is  now  gaining  ground  that  this  is 
psychic  and  to  a  great  extent  due  to  suggestions.  The  other 
view  is  that  it  is  dynamic  and  mediated  by  means  of  the  nervous 
system  and  to  some  extent  by  consciousness.  In  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge  it  is  impossible  to  decide  between  these 
views ;  there  may  be  truth  in  both.  Certain  it  is,  however,  that 
the  spermatozoa  are  very  different  from  other  testicular  secre- 
tions, and  that  the  two  are,  to  quite  an  extent,  independent  vari- 
ables. In  his  History  of  Medicine,  Sprengel  describes  periods 
when  the  view,  still  met  with  among  the  ignorant,  was  felt  in 
medical  theory  and  practise  that  this  fluid,  like  phlegm,  might 
be  noxious  if  allowed  to  accumulate.  I  have  seen  letters  to 
quacks  in  which  it  was  regarded  as  an  excretion,  and,  like 
those  of  the  bladder  and  intestines,  something  to  be  got  rid  of. 
I  have  conversed  with  at  least  four  college  students  and  gradu- 
ates who  held  this  view  in  both  theory  and  practise  and  de- 
fended it.  It  hardly  need  be  said  that  everything  relevant  that 
we  know  in  biology  and  physiology  indicates  that  nothing  could 
be  more  false  and  pernicious. 

While  nothing  is  known  of  any  special  nerves  mediating 
afferent  sexual  impressions,  the  reflex  theory  has  long  assumed 
special  centers  for  sex  activities.  Gall  thought  the  cerebellum 
the  chief  central  organ  of  this  function.     Budge  thought  it  in 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  449 

the  lumbar  cord,  which  was  assumed  to  mediate  erection  and 
ejaculation.  Luys  urged  the  claim  of  the  pons;  Tarchanoff  of 
the  corpora  quadrigemina,  basing  his  conclusions  upon  experi- 
ments on  the  frog;  Albertoni  of  the  thalami  from  studies  of 
the  turtle,  which  did  suggest  their  importance  for  the  act  of  em- 
bracing. Magnan  assumed  a  hierarchy  of  four  centers,  viz., 
the  spinal,  mediating  immediate  reflexes,  as  in  the  onanism  of 
complete  idiocy  and  perhaps  identical  with  the  centers  of  Budge; 
the  posterior  spinal  cerebral,  limited  by  the  medulla  and 
mediating  visual  images  and  instinctive  and  brutal  orgasms 
evoked  by  sight ;  third,  the  anterior  cerebro-spinal,  mediating 
psychic  influences,  and  finally  the  anterior  part  of  the  cerebral 
centers  representing  the  state  of  ecstatics  and  entomaniacs. 
Loss  of  balance  and  harmony  between  these  four  accounts  for 
all  alterations  and  perversions.  The  center  has  also  been 
placed  in  the  olfactory  region,  and  Roux  thinks  it  is  the  Rb- 
landic  near  the  ending  of  the  nerves  of  general  sensibility. 

Rowe  ^  holds  that  the  primiim  niovcns  of  sexual  phenomena 
is  not  central  but  peripheral.  He  agrees  with  K.  Ebing, 
Beaunis,  Tarchanoff,  and  Delbeuf,  that  the  genesic  glands,  and 
more  specifically  the  seminal  elements  themselves,  are  the  points 
of  departure  for  sensations  absolutely  new  at  puberty  which 
profoundly  modify  intelligence, habit, and  character.  The  heart, 
lungs,  legs,  and  even  the  fore  brain  and  testicles  of  frogs  can 
be  removed  without  arresting  copulation  when  it  has  been  be- 
gun, while  section  of  the  seminal  vesicles  stops  it  at  once. 
Dilating  them  with  a  neutral  fluid  starts  up  afferent  nervous 
processes  which  create  artificial  desire.  This  latter  thus  rests 
on  the  impulse  of  organs  to  function.  The  well-established 
cases  of  precocious  maternity  before  menstruation,  and  the 
frequency  of  sexual  precocity  in  idiots,  which  Sollier  has  noted, 
show  that  the  desire  may,  in  exceptional  cases,  antedate  the 
complete  development  of  the  organs,  and  is  not  therefore  en- 
tirely dependent  upon  them. 

Wherever  the  higher  center  is,  it  is  the  seat  of  the  purely 
affective  state  which  precedes  any  intellectual  representation, 
which  makes  the  profound  metamorphoses  of  puberty,  that 
may  cause  an  indefinable  malaise,  to  sometimes  reach  the  in- 

»  J.  Rowe:    Psych,  de  I'lnstinct  Sexuel,  Paris,  1899,  p.  96. 
30 


450  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

tensity  of  an  obsession.  With  enamored  adults  there  is  often, 
besides  the  desire  of  pleasure,  the  very  different  desire  to  find 
quietude  and  surcease  of  excitation.  Representative  sex  life 
is  a  complex  of  many  kinds  of  sensations  and  images  differing 
vastly  according  to  habit  and  association.  Sexual  need  is  most 
closely  associated  with  sensation  of  the  organs.  In  the  sexual 
psychopathy,  which  is  due  to  precocious  need  before  organs 
are  developed,  this  association  is  not  effected.  Later  and  with 
experience  the  need  awakens  the  images,  and  following  Roux's 
terminology,  there  is  a  sexual  hunger,  or  conversely  the  images 
awaken  the  need  and  there  is  sexual  appetite,  and  the  primacy 
is  now  of  one  and  now  of  the  other.  In  the  next  stage  the 
opposite  sex  is  closely  felt,  but  without  personal  preference, 
representing  perhaps  Magnan's  spinal  and  posterior  cerebral 
stage.  Every  comely  girl  and  every  boy  are  attractive  to  each 
other,  but  there  should  be  no  falling  in  love.  Coquetting  on 
one  side  and  showing  off  on  the  other  impel  each  sex  to  a  higher 
ideal  and  make  each  a  stimulus  to  the  other.  Next  in  the  spinal 
and  anterior  cerebral'stage  sexual  selection  occurs,  and  here 
the  imagination  transcends  and  perhaps  transforms  reality ;  and 
finally  in  the  anterior  cerebral  stage  the  ideal  and  the  real  meet 
in  the  realization  of  the  needs  of  marriage  and  companionship. 
Moll  ^  assumes  as  the  basis  of  sexual  life  two  instincts,  one 
which  he  calls  contrectation  or  the  tendency  to  touch,  and  the 
other  the  instinct  of  detumescence,  or  that  to  change — espe- 
cially to  discharge — the  sexual  organs,  and  from  this  he  de- 
velops a  theory  which  has  much  explanatory  power  for  many 
abnormal  phenomena.  He  agrees  with  Carus,  and  cites  the 
philological  indications  gathered  by  Kleinpaul  ^  to  the  same 
effect,  that  sexual  life  begins  on  a  somatic  basis  with  these  two 
instincts,  that  there  is  a  stage  of  relative  undifferentiation  in 
early  puberty,  and  that  it  is  at  this  point  that  heterosexuality 
makes  itself  manifest.  At  this  time  love,  in  the  higher  romantic 
and  idealizing  sense  of  the  word,  can  also  develop.  With  men 
this  instinct,  for  physical  reasons,  is  more  in  the  foreground 
of  consciousness,  while  women  often  give  themselves  to  those 


>  See  both  his  Libido  Sexualis,  Berlin,  1898,  and  Kontrare  Sexualempfindung, 
Berlin,  1899. 

*  Die  Ratsel  der  Sprache. 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  45' 

they  love  with  relative  unconsciousness  of  the  physical  side, 
which  is  merged  in  higher  psychic  qualities.  Havelock  Ellis  ^ 
lays  great  stress  on  the  fact  that  these  organs  are  by  nature 
and  in  a  primitive  state,  like  the  blossoms  of  flowers,  thought 
most  beautiful  and  an  object  of  intense  and  concentrated  in- 
terest and  attention.  Dress  and  modesty  have  tended  to  divert 
this  interest  into  many  unusual  directions,  and  he  suggests  may 
have  tended  to  homosexuality. 

Whatever  the  analyses  and  localizations  of  the  factors  of 
this  instinct,  if  not  before,  certainly  and  at  the  latest  at  early 
puberty,  when  the  changes  normal  to  that  period  supervene 
with  attendant  new  sensations,  these  parts  for  a  time,  and 
especially  in  boys,  play  a  great  and  hitherto  not  adequately 
recognized  role  in  consciousness.  Owing  in  part  to  the  great 
variability  of  form,  size,  or  function,  or  all  together,  very  many 
boys  suffer  from  the  fear  that  they  are  abnormal  in  form  and 
not  infrequently  life  is  for  years  overcast  by  apprehensions. 
Incidental  comparisons  with  others  made,  for  instance,  in  bath- 
ing, are  very  apt  to  suggest,  as  variability  is  so  great,  individual 
abnormality.  Cases  are  given  where  several  boys  recently  de- 
veloped, on  seeing  others,  have  thought  themselves  deformed, 
and  suffered  acutely  with  manifold  forebodings  for  the  future. 
These  fears  often  deepen  into  phobias  when  connected  with  the 
new  activities  normal  to  this  period,  and  every  variation  is 
ascribed  by  a  hypersensitive  consciousness  to  abnormality  of 
function  or  sin.  From  cases  which  might  fill  a  small  volume, 
I  select  here  as  typical  one  only,  viz.,  that  of  a  doctor  of 
philosophy,  prominent  in  his  profession  and  a  father  of 
several  healthful  children,  who  writes  in  substance :  ^ 

The  one  greatest  fear  of  all  my  boyhood  was  connected  with  my 
sexual  organs ;  the  big  boys  would  expose  us  little  ones,  and  said  mine 
were  too  small.  I  began  to  brood  over  this,  age  eight;  felt  disgraced, 
and  haunted  with  forebodings ;  one  day  there  seemed  a  very  slight 
inflammation,  age  twelve ;  I  thought  I  had  done  a  nameless  sin,  and 
prayed  God  to  let  me  get  well,  which  I  soon  did,  but  a  morbid  asso- 
ciation between  it  and  a  hen's  neck  long  persisted;  I  read  literature 
on  lost  manhood,  self-abuse,  etc. ;  fancied  I  had  all  the  diseases,  and 
had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin ;  the  first  spontaneous  emission 

'  The  Psychology  of  Sex,  vol.  i,  p.  109. 

*  See  my  Study  of  Fears,  Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  January,  1897,  vol.  viii,  p.  225. 


45^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

nearly  paralyzed  me,  but  although  I  found  myself  still  alive,  felt  that 
my  days  were  numbered ;  I  corresponded  with  a  quack,  and  later  began 
to  study  my  urine  with  great  alarm,  and  found  plenty  of  marks  of 
disease;  there  were  reddish  and  whitish  settlings,  lack  of  color  and 
overcolor,  strong  smell  and  no  smell,  it  was  too  clear,  too  thick,  too 
copious,  too  scanty,  or,  worst  of  all,  had  an  iridescent  scum ;  when 
fourteen  I  gradually  settled  to  the  fact  that  I  was  sexually  abnormal, 
might  possibly  live  seven  years,  till  twenty-one,  and  then  find  what  I 
had  heard  was  a  sure  cure  in  marriage ;  I  found  encouragement  from 
quack  advertisements,  which  said  the  wretched  beings  sometimes  held 
out  for  years ;  I  lived  on,  and  people  said  I  was  in  robust  health,  but 
it  was  years  before  I  realized  that  I  was  perfectly  normal ;  Bible  pas- 
sages greatly  aggravated  my  fears,  such  as  one  in  Deut.  xxiii,  and 
others ;  as  I  look  back,  my  entire  youth  from  six  to  eighteen  was  made 
miserable  from  lack  of  knowledge  that  any  one  who  knew  anything 
of  the  nature  of  puberty  might  have  given ;  this  long  sense  of  defect, 
dread  of  operations,  shame  and  worry  has  left  an  indelible  mark. 

Dr.  Seerley  tells  me  he  sees  one  hundred  cases  a  year  of 
young  men  who  deem  their  case  hopeless.  One  typical  youth 
of  good  heredity  and  otherwise  normal  decided  that  he  would 
not  go  to  college,  was  ruined,  and  must  soon  inevitably  become 
insane.  Another  bought  a  revolver  and  planned,  after  a  fare- 
well visit  to  his  mother  in  a  distant  town,  to  shoot  himself  in 
despair.  Another  selected  a  spot  at  the  river  where  he  would 
drown  himself,  which  he  prepared  to  do,  but  almost  by  acci- 
dent met  a  physician  who  persuaded  him  after  two  hours  that 
he  was  all  right,  when  he  went  to  work  with  renewed  courage, 
and  now  seems  entering  upon  a  promising  career.  Another 
young  man  selected  a  cord,  which  he  carried  in  his  pocket  for  a 
long  time,  trying  to  muster  courage  to  hang  himself,  because  he 
could  only  disgrace  his  friends  and  his  parents,  who  had  made 
so  many  sacrifices  for  him.  Another  gave  up  a  promising 
career  and  shipped  on  a  long  voyage,  hoping  to  find  this  a 
cure.  Another  turned  on  the  gas  at  night,  but  was  discovered 
and  saved  in  time,  etc. 

Perhaps  masturbation  is  the  most  perfect  type  of  individual 
vice  and  sin.  Where  practised,  not  by  the  old  or  by  defectives 
as  mitigations  of  the  dangers  of  procreation  for  those  unfit 
for  it,  but  by  the  young,  it  is  perhaps  the  purest  illustration  of 
mere  sense  pleasure  bought  at  the  cost  of  the  higher  life.  It  is 
destructive  of  that  perhaps  most  important  thing  in  the  world, 
the  potency  of  good  heredity;  it  is  the  acme  of  selfishness; 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  453 

it  is  the  violation  of  the  restraint  perhaps  most  of  all  im- 
perative, and  yet  all  we  know  points  to  the  conclusion 
that  it  is  far  more  common  among  civilized  than  among 
savage  races,  owing  in  part  to  the  postponement  of  mar- 
riage. The  ideals  of  chastity  are  perhaps  the  very  highest 
that  can  be  held  up  to  youth  during  this  ever  lengthening 
probationary  period.  This  is  the  hard  price  that  man  must 
pay  for  full  maturity.  Idleness  and  the  protected  life  of 
students  increase  temptation,  so  does  overfeeding,  which 
also  increases  sterility,  so  that  enjoyment  and  the  power 
of  effective  parenthood  which  God  and  nature  united  part 
company  and  at  a  certain  variable  period  become  inversely 
as  each  other.  Although  the  facts  in  this  chapter  may  lessen 
respect  for  our  race  and  make  us  less  hopeful  of  its  future,  the 
saving  fact  remains  that  the  outburst  of  adolescent  growth  still 
precedes  that  of  sexual  maturity.  If  this  interval  were  to 
lessen  instead  of  to  increase,  so  that  the  race  tended,  as  do 
abnormal  individuals  in  it,  toward  a  development  of  the  sexual 
function  so  premature  and  intense  as  to  interfere  with  or  obvi- 
ate the  increased  rate  of  growth  now  normal,  this  would  mean 
sure  ethnic  devolution. 

V.  Whatever  the  facts  concerning  the  extent  of  this  vice, 
spontaneous  emissions  are  probably  as  universal  for  unmarried 
youth  as  menstruation  for  women.  Ignorance  of  this  fact, 
even  by  the  virtuous  and  normal,  causes  an  amount  of  mental 
anguish  in  young  men  perhaps  as  great  as  the  physical  suffering 
caused  by  lack  of  proper  instruction  to  young  women  beginning 
their  periods.  This  is  ilot  recognized,  and  even  the  realization 
of  it  is  often  an  immediate  and  unspeakable  relief  to  those 
who  would  be  pure.  Maturity  often  first  announces  itself  by 
nightly  experiences  that  rouse  the  soul  to  a  state  of  great  alarm, 
that  settles  to  a  brooding  anxiety.  First  let  us  look  at  the  facts 
as  seen  in  those  who  are  more  mature  in  their  sexual  life.  I  have 
in  my  possession  three  records  kept  by  three  unmarried  men 
not  far  from  thirty  of  their  nightly  spontaneous  discharges, 
one,  the  best  on  record,  by  a  virtuous,  active,  able  man  whom  I 
know  well,  lacking  but  six  months  of  eight  continuous  years, 
and  all  of  them  doctors  of  philosophy,  who  believed  them- 
selves to  be  normal.     The  best  of  these  records  averages  about 


454  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

three  and  a  half  such  experiences  per  month,  the  most  fre- 
quent being  5.14  for  July,  and  the  least  frequent  2.28  for  Sep- 
tember for  all  the  years  taken  together.  There  appears  also  a 
slight  rise  in  April  and  another  in  November,  with  a  fall  in 
December.  Frequency  varies  considerably  in  individuals. 
Here,  too,  we  find  a  distinct  psychic  male  cycle,  but  not  a  tend- 
ency to  monthly  groups,  as  in  Nelson's  case.  On  the  upward 
curve  there  is  growing  vigor  and  euphoria  and  a  progressive 
sense  of  the  intensity  of  life,  and  after  the  climax  a  brief  period 
of  reduced  energy.  The  variations  of  interval  for  the  month 
are  not  great,  and  for  the  year  in  this  best  eight-year  case  the 
minimum  number  is  thirty-seven  and  the  maximum  fifty. 
There  is  a  spring  and  summer  rise  corresponding  to  the  sea- 
sonal welling  up  of  life.  The  variations  in  the  amount  or  in- 
tensity of  the  climax  seem  to  be  quite  as  great  as  those  in  time. 
Fifty-nine  per  cent  of  all  were  of  an  interval  of  a  week  or  less; 
forty  per  cent  an  interval  of  from  one  to  four  days ;  thirty-four 
per  cent  an  interval  of  from  eight  to  seventeen  days,  the  long- 
est being  forty-two  days.  Poor  condition,  overwork  and  under- 
sleep  tend  to  infrequency.  Early  morning  is  the  most  common 
time.  Special  precautions  tend  to  delay,  but  their  influence 
seems  temporary.  In  low  conditions  or  with  unusual  fre- 
quency the  crisis  is  followed  by  depression,  although  normally 
there  is  a  sense  of  distinct  relief.  Thus  in  males  there  seems 
to  be  a  normal  curve. 

Very  interesting  in  these  data  is  the  suggestion  of  a  rather 
sharp  line  between  excess  and  defect,  of  which  it  would  almost 
seem  that  there  is  a  subtle  and  rather  acute  physiological  sense 
or  instinct,  as  if  the  body  or  the  soul,  or  both,  were  endowed 
by  nature  with  a  guiding  principle  which  can  be  developed  as 
a  regulative,  but  which  is  easily  obscured.  This  orienting  in- 
stinct, implanted  it  may  be  as  a  special  conscience,  appears  to 
respond  as  exquisitely  as  a  sensitive  flame,  and  despite  ab- 
normal habits  suggests  an  original  anchorage  that  is  still 
operative. 

Of  special  significance  are  the  records  of  dreams  and 
psychic  states  connected  with  the  orgasms.  Sometimes  the 
latter  are  so  entirely  lost  that  waking  consciousness  finds  no 
trace  of  them,  and  they  can  only  be  verified  by  physical  results. 
In  other  cases  there  is  a  full  drama  of  mentation  and  feeling 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  455 

which  can  be  recalled  and  written  down  with  much  detail.  In 
by  far  the  most  cases,  however,  consciousness,  even  when  the 
act  causes  full  awakening  from  sleep,  finds  only  scattered 
images,  single  words,  gestures  and  acts,  many  of  which  would 
perhaps  normally  constitute  no  provocation.  Many  times  the 
mental  activity  seems  to  be  remote  and  incidental,  and  the  mind 
retains  in  the  morning  nothing  except  perhaps  a  peculiar  dress 
pattern,  the  shape  of  a  finger  nail,  the  back  of  a  neck,  the  toss  of 
a  head,  the  movement  of  a  foot,  or  the  dressing  of  the  hair.  In 
such  cases  these  images  stand  out  for  a  time  with  the  distinct- 
ness of  a  cameo  and  suggest  that  the  origin  of  erotic  fetishisms 
is  largely  to  be  found  in  sexual  dreams.  Very  rarely  is  there 
any  imagery  of  the  organs  themselves,  but  the  tendency  to  irra- 
diation is  so  strong  as  to  reenforce  the  suggestion  of  so 
many  other  phenomena  in  this  field  that  nature  designs  this 
experience  to  be  long  circuited  and  that  it  may  give  a  peculiar 
ictus  to  almost  any  experience.  Where  waking  occurs  just 
afterward  it  seems  at  least  possible  that  there  may  be  much 
imagery  that  existed,  but  failed  to  be  recalled  to  memory,  pos- 
sibly because  the  flow  of  psychic  impressions  was  over  very 
familiar  fields,  and  this,  therefore,  was  forgotten,  while  any 
eruption  into  new  or  unwonted  channels  stood  out  with  dis- 
tinctness. All  these  psychic  phenomena,  although  very  char- 
acteristic of  man  in  his  prime,  are  not  so  of  the  dreams  of 
dawning  puberty,  which  are  far  more  vivid. 

We  have  another  very  interesting  suggestion  of  the  tend- 
ency to  irradiation  in  the  fact  that  the  inhibition  nisus  has 
become  so  frequent  and  strong  before  the  end  of  the  twenties. 
Before  the  mind  is  fully  roused  from  slumber  there  is  very 
often  a  blind  impulsion  to  arrest  the  process  or  check  it  in 
almost  any  stage.  Only  in  rare  cases  is  this  successful,  so  that 
sometimes  the  first  waking  experience  is  a  sense  of  loss,  waste, 
or  regret.  In  still  other  although  few  cases,  consciousness  on 
awaking  finds  nothing  but  a  vague,  diffused  glow  of  pleasure 
that  mounts  perhaps  almost  to  ecstasy,  a  sense  that  life  is  im- 
measurably richer  in  enjoyment,  that  there  are  higher  possi- 
bilities than  it  has  ever  entered  into  the  soul  before  to  con- 
ceive, that  life  has  hitherto  been  on  a  low,  dull  plain,  and  that 
everything,  or  in  other  cases  some  one  particular  thing,  has  a 
charm  or  beauty  about  it  hitherto  unsuspected,  as  if  the  cerebro- 


45 6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

spinal  system,  on  awakening,  found  itself  impelled  by  the  sym- 
pathetic system  to  a  fulness  and  completeness  of  function  which 
it  had  lost. 

Of  course  more  records  and  fuller  ones  are  needed  before 
anything  better  than  tentative  results  can  be  gained,  but  the 
value  of  such  data  consists  in  part  in  the  fact  that  they  sug- 
gest the  problem  of  how  the  reproductive  function  which  main- 
tains the  race  is  originally  related  to  the  intellectual  function 
which  represents  the  experiences  of  the  individual.  In  this 
field,  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  glimpsed  here  almost  for  the 
first  time,  it  would  be  perilous  to  construct  theories  until  more 
facts  are  forthcoming. 

In  his  present  state  there  is  no  doubt  that  man,  in  his  best 
years,  has  normal  spontaneous  emissions  far  more  frequently 
than  is  needful  for  the  purposes  of  procreation,  just  as  sper- 
matozoa, as  we  have  seen,  are  formed  in  vast  and  almost  incal- 
culable numbers.  Probably  in  man,  during  his  northward 
migration,  the  seasonal  intensifications  of  this  function  were 
originally  far  greater  than  at  present.  Protection  from  wind 
and  weather,  the  regulation  of  temperature,  comfort,  etc.,  like 
domesticity  in  the  animal  world,  tend  to  obliterate  seasonal 
rhythms,  and  it  would  appear  also  to  substitute  for  these  those 
of  the  sun's  rotation,  or  especially  of  the  moon  and  tides.  If 
there  have  been  tendencies  to  weekly  rhythms,  it  is  hard  to 
bring  them  into  relation  with  the  long  habit  of  rest  one  day  in 
seven,  where  perhaps  they  belong  in  average  male  maturity. 
Moreover,  if  man  was  originally  tropical,  it  would  appear  that 
seasonal  differences  would  have  been  less  and  not  over  compen- 
sated by  increasing  adjustments  by  means  of  clothing,  shelter, 
etc.,  as  he  penetrated  northward;  so  that  it  is  not  impossible 
that  the  seasonal  habit,  which,  as  is  well  known,  is  found 
among  races  dwelling  in  the  arctic  regions,  is  itself  derived 
from  shorter  periodicities  instead  of  vice  versa.  The  signifi- 
cance of  this  rhythm,  the  range  or  interval  between  its  two 
extremes  of  tension  and  release,  is  no  doubt  of  great  individual 
and  perhaps  racial  importance ;  while  everything  indicates  that 
in  general  the  longer  the  rhythm  the  better,  and  points  to  the 
one  conclusion,  that  restraint  is  indispensable,  and  that  during 
a  period  of  more  and  more  years  in  youth,  if  they  are  to  mature 
well  as  civilization  advances;  and  also  that  restraint  is  vastly 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  457 

easier  with  a  normal  nature  than  is  often  said  by  those 
who  are  neurotic  or  have  tasted  too  much  forbidden  fruit. 
Periodicity  is  probably  as  much  stamped  upon  sleep  and 
dream  life  as  upon  that  of  sex.  The  facts  show  also  even 
in  this  field,  where  all  problems  of  the  relations  of  body 
and  soul  and  the  primacy  of  either  or  the  concomitancy  of 
both  are  far  more  accessible  than  in  that  of  the  muscles  and 
will,  how  purely  and  abstractly  speculative  and  impossible  of 
solution,  as  immortality  itself,  are  such  theories  as  that  of 
Lange  and  James.  The  best  diatheses  are  those  that  gravitate 
toward  the  tense  state,  that  develop  all  the  vicarious  functions 
of  diversion,  work  of  body  and  mind,  exposure,  perhaps  exces- 
sive fatigue,  and  that  find  out  ways  of  utilizing  sexual  tension 
on  many  long  circuits.  Work  and  occupations  of  interest  that 
absorb  need  to  be  developed  during  the  critical  years  probation- 
ary to  procreation,  with  reference  to  normality  there.  When  we 
know  how  to  keep  tense  and  use  tension  in  this  field  we  shall 
have  solved  some  of  the  fundamental  problems  of  education  in 
all  its  largest  aspects.  Some  have  thought  they  found  utility  in 
a  regimen  of  imagery  more  or  less  lewd,  as  a  back  fire  or  men- 
tal inoculation  against  too  frequent  orgasms,  while  others,  let 
us  hope  more  normal  and  more  truly,  have  thought  they  found 
it  in  impulses  to  conceptions  which"  suffuse  the  soul  with  a 
higher  eroticism  of  the  good,  the  beautiful,  and  the  true. 

Now,  self-abuse  greatly  complicates  this  experience,  and 
makes  this  function  vastly  more  labile,  as  indeed  do  lascivious 
thoughts,  imagery,  and  especially  anxiety.  If  secret  vice  is 
practised  before,  the  later  teens  often  bring  revulsion.  Wis- 
dom from  within  and  without  has  by  this  time  developed  a 
sense  of  self-condemnation  or  fear,  and  reform  is  attempted 
and  often  achieved,  but  increased  tension  and  the  stress  of  the 
past  habit  augment  spontaneous  pollution  in  sleep.  This 
causes  fear,  sometimes  amounting  to  terror,  lest  control  be  lost 
and  life  now  given  over  into  the  hands  of  blind  and  lethal  pow- 
ers against  which  conscious  will  and  resolution  are  of  no 
avail.  Masturbation  is  felt  to  be  controllable  and  the  victim 
feels  that  he  can  stop  at  any  time,  but  spontaneous  emissions 
give  a  sense  of  being  powerless  in  the  hands  of  fate.  Free 
will  is  lost  and  the  youth  feels  helplessly  possessed  by  his 
automatism.      This    frequently   brings   a   dumb   despair  that 


458  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

saps  all  the  joy  of  life,  may  make  it  intolerable  and  lead  to 
suicide.  It  is  a  little  as  if  girls  were  led  to  feel  when  their 
periods  come  that  they  were  in  consequence  of  their  own  mis- 
doings. The  innate  modesty  of  the  young  soul  makes  it  all 
so  sacredly  secret  that  he  can  not  muster  courage  to  reveal  his 
condition  and  appeal  for  help.  Those  to  whom  he  should  turn, 
who  could  inform  and  help  by  veiled  hints  and  remote  sugges- 
tions (for  his  apperception  organs  in  this  field  give  him  pro- 
digious understanding), are  just  those  he  feels  it  hardest  to  ap- 
proach. Highly  sensitized  in  every  fiber,  he  fears  censure  or 
rebuke,  and  the  very  thought  of  that  from  those  nearest  and 
dearest  he  can  not  bear.  The  humiliation  would  be  too  great. 
Sometimes  he  tries  to  lead  up  to  the  topic  indirectly,  or  tells  his 
own  troubles  in  the  third  person,  or  elaborately  makes  openings 
for  conversation  or  instruction  upon  the  subject,  only  to  find 
that  his  elders  feel  positive  reluctance  to  talk  of  it,  or  he  asks 
directly  only  to  find  an  ignorance  equal  to  his  own.  Self-abuse 
is  often  common  knowledge  among  mates,  but  not  this  involun- 
tary experience.  Thus  he  is  twice  helpless  :  he  can  do  nothing  to 
save  himself,  and  he  has  learned  that  there  is  no  help  for  him  in 
his  natural  environment.  There  is  no  state  or  condition  in  life 
that  the  common  phraseology  of  personal  and  hereditary  sin 
and  depravity  fits  so  well  as  this.  The  young  man  is  fighting 
the  hottest  battle  of  his  life  with  the  devil  solitary  and  alone. 
Often  his  ill-judged  and  ignorant  precautions  themselves,  and 
always  and  especially  his  concern,  directly  aggravate  his 
troubles.  Literature  that  treats  of  any  aspect  of  sex,  and  often 
the  worst  sources  of  information  only  are  accessible,  is  devoured 
with  an  avidity  felt  in  no  other  subject.  There  is  a  great  hun- 
ger to  know  the  laws  of  life  and  reproduction.  Every  instinct 
impels  to  find  again  the  right  way.  There  is  a  self-loathing 
and  loss  of  respect  in  the  morning,  and  apprehension  at  night, 
that  put  a  heavy  strain  on  the  nervous  system,  and  that  associ- 
ate the  exercise  of  this  function,  which  should  be  the  focus  of 
all  pleasant  states  of  consciousness,  with  exquisitely  painful 
emotions.  These  latter  may  rise  to  such  strength  as  to  even 
blight  not  only  the  prospects  but  the  fruition  of  wedlock,  and 
plant  misery  in  the  center  of  the  garden  of  joy,  bringing  impo- 
tence, temporary  and  perhaps  permanent,  to  natures  that  would 
otherwise  be  healthful. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  459 

It  is  in  this  state  of  mind  that  youth  most  needs  father, 
pastor,  mentor,  or  mature  friend.  He  shrinks  from  the  doctor, 
for  that  means  fuller  revelation,  examination  or  full  detection, 
but  he  seeks  one  who  understands  his  trouble  from  afar,  knows 
his  symptoms  in  advance,  has  met  many  such  cases,  and  will 
give  him  not  general  hygienic,  religious  or  moral  advice,  but 
specific  and  especially  material  help.  Doses  and  even  appli- 
ances appeal  to  just  his  age,  and  so  youth  falls  into  the  cunning 
web  spread  so  alluringly  for  his  unwary  feet  across  the  ways 
he  most  frequents.  Lancaster  ^  found  a  single  New  York 
broker  who  had  3,000,000  confidential  letters  written  to  ad- 
vertising medical  companies  and  doctors  mostly  by  youth  with 
their  heart's  blood  and  under  assurances  of  secrecy,  which  are 
sold  at  fixed  syndicate  prices.  I  have  bought  1,000  of  them, 
and  estimate  that  I  could  purchase  at  least  7,000,000  if  I 
wished  to  go  into  this  business,  by  addressing  correspondence 
patients  who  had  left  other  practitioners  in  this  field  discour- 
aged but  who  were  ready  to  try  one  more.  That  some  try  a 
fifth  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  stated  price  per  thousand 
letters,  guaranteed  to  have  been  sold  but  four  times,  is  $5.  In 
these  announcements  the  young  man  finds  his  every  symptom 
and  experience,  and  many  more  enumerated  and  described. 

When  the  soul  has  entered  upon  this  gloomy  pathway  to 
Avernus,  everything  seems  to  help  it  onward  and  downward. 
The  fact  that  these  organs  are  so  much  in  his  consciousness 
greatly  stimulates  their  activity  on  the  principle  that  ubi 
stimulus  ibi  afHuxus.  In  every  part  attended  to,  blood  gathers, 
as  all  plethysmograph  experiments  show,  and  to  these  parts 
most  of  all.  A  mass  of  symptoms,  half  real  and  half  imag- 
ined, accumulates  and  slowly  becomes  organized  into  a  body 
of  delusions.  Ignorant  of  the  wide  range  of  normal  vari- 
ations in  the  male,  boys  observe  themselves,  sometimes  very 
consciously  and  methodically,  even  with  mirrors,  worry  over 
every  peculiarity  of  size,  direction,  shape,  unequal  pendency 
of  testes,  laxity  of  the  scrotum,  position  of  the  prepuce,  crook 
or  twist,  bilateral  asymmetry,  shade  and  color,  change  of 
vascularity,  and  become  anxious  urinoscopists,  and  the  first 


>  Psychology  and  Pedagogy  of  Adolescence.     Ped.    Sem.,  July,  1897,  toI.  v, 
pp.  61-128, 


460  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

spontaneous  discharge  produces  psychic  perturbations  that  are 
entirely  unnatural  and  often  wild.  Cases  of  the  slight  vari- 
cocele, not  uncommon,  especially  on  the  left  side  at  this  age,  are 
often  thought  to  be  a  product  of  vice  and  excessive  functions, 
with  which,  in  fact,  it  has  no  more  to  do  than  has  the  texture  of 
the  hair.  Youth  strongly  desires  to  be  sound  and  natural  sex- 
ually. The  changes  normal  at  this  age  attract  attention  in  all, 
and  in  those  of  unstable  temperament  and  heredity  the  new  con- 
sciousness centering  in  sex  has  many  symptoms  which  are  often 
brooded  over  very  secretly  and  affect  profoundly  the  whole  tone 
of  mind  and  body.  His  case  is  graver  than  he  had  fancied,  but 
however  serious,  there  is  hope  and,  better  yet,  sure  relief.  He 
is  told  (and  here  I  follow  circulars  of  what  are  to-day  the  lead- 
ing firms  in  this  line)  that  if  he  is  irritable,  discouraged,  fears 
his  manhood  is  lost  or  imperiled,  has  bad  dreams,  or  unreliable 
memory,  pimples,  blotches,  is  easily  fatigued,  is  bashful  in  the 
presence  of  the  other  sex,  has  lascivious  thoughts,  fancies,  etc., 
symptoms  some  of  which  are  inseparable  from  this  time  of  life, 
his  intellectual  fabric  is  in  jeopardy.  A  white  deposit  is  com- 
monly found  in  the  urine,  which  is  partly  a  normal  secretion  of 
the  kidneys  and  partly  mucus  discharged  as  constantly  from 
the  walls  of  the  bladder  as  from  the  inner  nasal  or  abdominal 
cavities.  This,  the  quack  labels  a  sign  of  premature  decay. 
The  coil  of  tubes  of  the  epididymis  is  easily  observable,  and  this 
is  the  seat  of  the  inflammatory  process  of  varicocele,  and  the 
subtlety  with  Vk'hich  these  practitioners  draw  attention  to  what 
would  often  be  unnoticed  and  describe  it  as  morbid,  is  one  of 
the  many  grave,  moral  indictments  against  them.  Is  one  of 
the  testes  lower  or  larger  than  the  other;  are  they  pendant 
or  tense,  of  different  tint  from  that  of  the  limbs;  is  the  prepuce 
long,  short,  retracted,  or  covering  the  glans ;  is  there  a  twist  in 
the  urinal  stream ;  is  the  organ  small,  too  flaccid,  turgescent  or 
oblique,  curved  or  twisted ;  is  there  pruritus,  moisture  or  dry- 
ness;  are  veins  visible;  is  there  peristaltic  movement,  a  sense  of 
heat  or  cold — all  these  are  lurid  danger  signals,  and  there  is  no 
time  to  lose.  Their  victims  are  often  told  that  emissions  occur 
in  the  urine,  and  one  so  far  juggles  with  anatomy  as  to  say 
the  vital  fluid  can  be  lost  through  the  bowels.  Every  detail  of 
form  of  each  organ  is  described  as  abnormal,  and  every  flush, 
twinge,  pain,  palpitation,  freak  of  appetite,  becomes  a  symp- 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  461 

tom  of  debility.  No  healthy  man  can  read  this  "  scare  "  hter- 
ature  without  finding  in  himself  a  dozen  ominous  symptoms. 
The  victims  thus  enmeshed  are  sometimes  sold  placebos  or 
harmless  drugs,  and  if  made  well  are  really  healed  by  faith  or 
by  alleviation  of  worry.  Perhaps  suggestion  is  never  so  po- 
tent as  for  those  in  this  case.  For  many  it  may  be  true  that  as 
they  believe  so  they  are,  and  this  leads  me  to  think  that  the 
bread-pill  theory  and  practise  would  often  be  benign  here  with 
the  added  psychic  treatment  suggested  below.  Bromides  are 
sometimes  given  or  general  tonics  sanctioned  by  the  regular 
practise.  Quacks  well  know  the  power  of  a  name,  and  so  call 
their  nostrums  by  such  suggestive  names  as  sexine  tablets. 
nerve  seeds,  Paris  vital  sparks,  etc.  Sometimes  the  drugs 
used  are  powerful  erotics  that  aggravate  and  bring  the  hapless 
youth  still  more  under  the  power  of  his  blind  and  greedy  guide. 
Most  of  the  apparatus  also  is  sold  at  exorbitant  prices,  that 
consume  the  savings  of  years  and  sometimes  prompt  to  theft. 
Some  are  pencils,  some  catheters  or  tubes,  the  use  of  which 
may  in  rare  medical  cases  do  good,  but  the  stated  use  of  which 
is  very  exciting.  Others  sell  wive  springs,  rubber,  etc.,  to  be 
wound  about  and  prevent  erethism  or  make  it  painful,  which 
are  always  dangerous  and  frequently  harmful ;  others  offer  so- 
called  electric  belts  or  suspensive  apparatus.  One  "  company  " 
sells  a  glass  cone  and  a  rubber  suction  bulb,  the  vacuum  thus 
produced  causing  an  excitement,  called  by  a  physiologist  far 
greater  than  that  possible  by  any  other  known  means,  normal 
or  abnormal.^  A  friend  of  the  writer,  an  unusual  specimen  of 
physical  purity  and  manhood  and  a  physician,  wrote  recently  in 
answer  to  an  advertisement,  that  while  he  was  otherwise  thor- 
oughly well,  a  hard  worker,  never  had  a  doctor,  and  had  an 
unusually  healthy  family,  he  had  a  marked  feeling  of  inertia 
every  morning  when  it  was  time  to  get  up,  and  if  he  lifted  a 
great  weight  with  his  maximal  effort  and  in  a  stooping  posi- 
tion, his  eyes  were  sometimes  momentarily  blurred.  The  let- 
ter in  response  stated  that  the  physician  had  called  a  special 
council  for  his  case,  which  w^as  a  striking  one  of  crypto-sper- 
matorrhea,  which  perhaps  might  be  not  past  cure  if  certain 
expensive  medicines  and  apparatus  were  vigorously  used  within 

'  Here  again  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Seerley. 


462  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

thirty  days.  A  visit  later  to  this  address  revealed  on  a  squalid 
house  the  name  of  a  physician,  on  whose  sign  it  was  stated  that 
his  practise  was  by  correspondence  only  and  he  could  not  be 
seen.  A  medical  expert  informs  me  that  in  some  thousands  of 
patients,  not  one  thought  they  had  received  any  benefit,  but 
many  confessed  that  their  fear  was  so  great  that  no  price  what- 
ever would  have  deterred  them. 

It  is  painful  to  dwell  upon  such  details,  which  could  be  easily 
multiplied  indefinitely.  Like  many  disagreeable  themes,  it  is 
very  rich  for  science,  but  the  sole  effort  and  desire  here  must 
be  ethical,  and  to  this  end  the  extent  and  the  reality  of  the  evil 
must  be  understood.  I  will  only  briefly  indicate  a  few  cases 
believed  to  be  typical.  A  young  convert  felt  that  he  was  losing 
his  mind  from  nocturnal  experiences,  but  found  a  motive  to  ex- 
ceptional and  incessant  religious  activity,  so  that  in  the  short 
time  left  before  he  became  an  utter  wreck  he  might  do  so  much 
good  and  cling  so  close  to  God  that  it  would  be  possible  for 
him  to  be  saved  after  his  mind  was  gone.  Another  struggled 
for  three  years  in  the  state  above  described  before  he  could  mus- 
ter courage  to  write  the  doctor,  had  abandoned  his  purpose  of 
entering  the  ministry  because  he  felt  unfit,  finally  staked  the 
question  of  suicide  on  the  results  of  the  examination  and  con- 
ference that  followed,  and  was  found  perfectly  normal.  An- 
other, who  had  sought  religion  as  a  refuge  and  been  converted, 
found  that  prayer  and  service  for  others  could  not  help  him, 
and  so  dropped  out,  gave  up  hope  of  ever  having  a  home  or 
family  of  his  own,  thought  he  had  lost  virility,  and  at  last,  after 
long  brooding,  visited  a  vile  house  to  make  the  one  experimen- 
tal test  of  his  life;  nausea  and  high-keyed  tension  combined 
seemed  to  confirm  his  worst  fears,  but  he  was  saved  by  a  long, 
frank  talk,  and  is  now  the  proud  and  happy  head  of  a  promising 
young  family.  Another,  who  had  not  realized  his  ambition  for 
studying  in  the  high  school,  felt  his  intellect  enfeebled  from  this 
cause,  abandoned  his  plan  of  going  to  college,  and  enlisted  as  a 
common  seaman  in  the  navy,  hoping  to  be  cured  by  a  life  of 
hardship.  His  friends  thought  him  a  youth  of  singular  ability 
and  promise.  A  freshman,  balked  in  his  aspiration  for  purity, 
threw  away  his  hopes  of  a  career  and  resolved  on  a  short  life 
and  a  merry  one,  and,  having  means,  became  in  fact  the  wreck 
he  at  first  only  fancied  himself  to  be.     One  sought  cure  by 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  4^3 

early  marriage,  faltered  and  fled,  almost  at  the  church  door, 
feeling  his  unworthiness.  The  honeymoon  could  not  over- 
come the  distaste  for  normal  sexuality  so  often  developed  in 
some  of  these  cases.  A  sound  and  vigorous  talk  by  a  medical 
sage  at  an  opportune  moment  may  vanquish  these  fixed  obses- 
sions of  impotence  and  all  be  well. 

VI.  Passing  now  to  sexual  pedagogy  and  regimen,  the 
world  presents  probably  no  such  opportunity  to  religion,  the 
moralist,  teacher,  the  wise  father,  the  doctor  who  is  also  a 
philosopher.  There  is  no  such  state  of  utter  plasticity,  such 
hunger  for  vital  knowledge,  counsel,  sound  advice.  Young 
men  in  other  respects  headstrong,  obstinate,  self-sufficient,  and 
independent,  are  here  guided  by  a  hint,  a  veiled  allusion,  a 
chance  word  of  wisdom.  The  wisest  man  I  know  in  these  mat- 
ters and  the  most  experienced,  a  physician  and  also  a  religious 
teacher,  goes  to  audiences  of  young  men  at  the  end  of  the 
academic  year,  who  have  been  unmoved  by  the  best  revivalists, 
who  are  losing  power  just  in  proportion  as  they  neglect  to 
know  or  prudishly  ignore  this  field,  and  wins  men  by  the  score 
to  both  virtue  and  piety.  I  have  sat  at  his  feet  and  tried  to 
learn  the  secret  of  his  method.  It  is  simple,  direct,  concise,  and 
in  substance  this :  In  these  overtense  cases  the  mind  must  first 
of  all  be  relieved  of  worry,  and  it  must  be  explained  that  ex- 
cessive anxiety  and  attention  is  the  chief  provocative  of  noc- 
turnal orgasms.  This  is  itself  often  a  cure.  Then  the  assur- 
ance that  such  experiences,  varying  greatly  with  different  indi- 
viduals in  frequency,  are  normal,  and  that  their  entire  absence 
would  be  ominous  for  sexual  health,  often  comes  as  a  gospel  of 
joy  to  victims  of  ignorance,  as  does  the  knowledge  that  their 
case  is  common  and  not  unique  and  exceptional.  Personal 
examination  by  one  who  has  seen  thousands  of  cases  and  who 
can  speak  with  an  authority  that  commands  confidence  in  most 
cases,  reveals  none  of  the  grave  or  even  mild  ailments  that  had 
grown  to  such  alarming  proportions  in  the  rank  soil  of  youthful 
fancy.  Diversion  to  objective  interests  or  tasks  that  are  active 
and  absorbing,  confirmation  of  wills  that  are  not  sufficiently 
established  against  occasional  lapses  by  showing  how  funda- 
mental sexual  health  and  its  irradiation  are  for  domestic  hap- 
piness, for  a  religious  life  and  altruism,  a  few  hygienic  pre- 


4^4  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

cepts  concerning  sleep,  food,  pure  air,  bathing,  exercise  and 
regularity,  and  perhaps  a  httle  carefully  selected  biological 
reading,  and  in  many,  if  not  most  cases,  a  wondrous  change 
is  wrought.  Some  describe  their  experience  as  having  a  great 
burden  rolled  off,  a  strain  or  chain  removed,  they  seem  to  walk 
on  air,  feel  themselves  men  again,  their  strength  renewed,  look 
back  with  self-pity  upon  their  former  folly,  etc. 

Ethical  culture  alone  is  very  inadequate,  and  preaching  or 
evangelistic  work  that  ignores  this  evil  is  unsuccessful.  Re- 
ligion best  meets  these  needs  because  it  deals,  if  true,  with  what 
most  affects  the  life  of  the  young  and  what  is  the  tap-root  of  so 
much  that  is  best  in  them.  Youth  takes  to  religion  at  this  age 
as  its  natural  element.  True  conversion  is  as  normal  as  the 
blossoming  of  a  flower.  The  superiority  of  Christianity  is  that 
its  corner-stone  is  love,  and  that  it  meets  the  needs  of  this  most 
critical  period  of  life  as  nothing  else  does.  It  is  a  synonym 
of  maturity  in  altruism,  and  a  religion  that  neglects  this  corner- 
stone, that  is  not  helpful  in  this  crisis,  that  is  not  entered  upon 
now  inevitably,  is  wanting.  He  is  a  poor  psychologist  of 
religion  and  a  worse  Christian  teacher  who,  whether  from 
ignorance  or  prudery,  ignores  or  denies  all  this,  or  leaves  the 
young  to  get  on  as  best  they  may.  Sex  is  a  great  psychic  power 
which  should  be  utilized  for  religion,  which  would  be  an  in- 
conceivably different  thing  without  it,  and  one  of  the  chief 
functions  of  the  latter  in  the  world  is  to  normalize  the  former. 
Error  blights  the  very  roots  of  piety  in  the  heart,  atrophies  the 
home-making  faculties,  and  kills  enthusiasm  and  altruism. 
Their  curves  of  ascent  and  decline  rise  and  fall  together  both  in 
age  and  in  normality,  and  very  many  church  communicants  are 
not  what  they  would  be  but  for  some  psycho-physical  handicap 
of  this  nature.  But  ubi  vims,  ihi  virtus.  God  and  nature  are 
benign,  and  recuperative  agencies,  in  these  years  so  super- 
charged with  vitality,  in  cases  that  seem  desperate,  often  act 
cito,  certe  et  jucunde.  The  very  excess  of  the  physiological 
fecundating  power  in  man  which  caused  man's  fall  is  so  abound- 
ing that  it  may  work  his  cure.  Grave  psychic  dyscrasias  due 
to  passional  states  generally  seem  to  be  completely  outgrown, 
and  even  gonorrhea  and  its  sometimes  persistent  sequel,  gleet, 
can  not  usually  long  withstand  nature's  vis  reperatrix  if  re- 
enforced  by  an  hygienic  habit  of  life. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  4^5 

That  this  department  of  sexual  hygiene  has  been  almost 
criminally  neglected,  none  can  doubt.  Family  physicians  are 
almost  never  consulted  by  boys,  and  the  great  majority  of  doc- 
tors know  almost  nothing  about  the  whole  subject  save  the 
standard  modes  of  treating  a  few  specific  diseases  with  overt 
symptoms;  while  clergymen,  who  should  be  spiritual  and  moral 
guides,  know  perhaps  still  less,  and  have  often  come  to  re- 
gard as  superior  ethical  purity  and  refinement  the  sloth  and 
cowardice  that  dreads  to  grapple  with  a  repulsive  and  festering 
moral  sore.  While  legislation  is  sadly  needed  for  the  protec- 
tion of  youth,  instruction  is  no  less  imperative  if  the  springs  of 
heredity  are  to  be  kept  pure.  The  blame  rests  mainly  with  the 
false  and,  I  believe,  morbid  modesty  so  common  in  this  country 
in  all  that  pertains  to  sex.  At  Williams  College,  Harvard, 
Johns  Hopkins,  and  Clark,  I  have  made  it  a  duty  in  my  de- 
partmental teaching  to  speak  very  briefly  but  plainly  to  young 
men  under  my  instruction,  personally  if  I  deemed  it  wise,  and 
often,  though  here  only  in  general  terms,  before  student  bodies, 
and  I  believe  I  have  nowhere  done  more  good,  but  it  is  a 
painful  duty.  It  requires  tact  and  some  degree  of  hard  and 
strenuous  common  sense  rather  than  technical  knowledge. 

The  medical  cures  of  masturbation  that  have  been  pre- 
scribed are  almost  without  number :  bromide,  ergot,  lupin, 
blistering,  clitoridectomy,  section  of  certain  nerves,  small 
mechanical  appliances,  of  which  the  Patent  Oflice  at  Washing- 
ton has  quite  a  collection.  Regimen  rather  than  special  treat- 
ment must,  however,  be  chiefly  relied  on.  Work  reduces 
temptation  and  so  does  early  rising,  while  excessive  mental  or 
physical  effort  easily  fatigues  before  the  power  of  resistance, 
caused  by  rapid  growth,  is  acquired.  Good  music  is  a  moral 
tonic.  Lycurgus  had  the  girls  play  before  young  men  to 
stimulate  them  to  their  exercise ;  the  Jesuits  in  Paraguay  pro- 
vided music  to  make  the  daily  work  of  the  Indians  more  toler- 
able and  agreeable.  Among  the  Romans  it  was  forbidden 
to  speak  freely  of  things  relating  to  sex  in  the  presence  of 
young  men  who  still  wore  the  toga  prcBtexta,  and  Senator 
Manilus  was  condemned  for  kissing  his  wife  in  the  presence 
of  his  daughter.  Where  the  attention  goes,  innervation  is 
roused  and  plethora  may  result. 

31 


466  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

The  mystery  of  sex  gives  it  a  great  attraction  to  youth. 
Kaan  ^  thinks  the  study  of  sex  organs  and  functions  should 
begin  in  plants,  and  that  thus  the  desire  of  learning  is  stimu- 
lated and  sexual  curiosity  given  an  intellectual  direction. 
Marro  holds  that  young  people  should  not  be  alone  or  build  air 
castles,  because  the  latter  loosens  the  mental  processes  of  asso- 
ciation, while  solitude  and  taciturnity  are  noxious,  and  when 
they  appear  adults  should  study  their  cause,  for  the  latter  often 
covers  the  slow  incubation  of  morbid  impulses.  Goudin  thinks 
early  betrothal  can  be  relied  on  to  check  the  allurements  of 
youthful  roving  loves. 

Sexual  activity  is  accompanied  by  increased  internal  heat 
and  masturbators  can  bear  surprising  exposures  to  cold,  but 
heat  means  precocity  and  exhaustion.  Young  Orientals  who 
exercise  marital  functions  at  thirteen  are  worn  out  at  thirty, 
and  have  recourse  to  aphrodisiacs.  Yet  cold  is  one  of  the  best 
of  all  checks  upon  sexual  excess,  and  in  high  latitudes  venery  is 
both  later  and  less  intense.  The  Spartan  boys,  when  at  twelve 
they  exchanged  the  toga  for  the  man's  pallium,  slept  on  straw 
or  hay  with  no  cover,  and  when  fifteen  slept  on  reeds.  Marro 
has  accomplished  remarkable  cures  by  cold  hip  baths  applied 
many  times  a  day,  serving  perhaps  the  purpose  of  Galen's 
lead  plates.  The  strain  is  greatest  upon  youth  vowed  to  monas- 
tic life,  in  whom  sedentary  habits  and  asceticism  with  insuffi- 
cient exercise  provoke  error.  Cold  washing  without  wiping 
has  special  advantages. 

Raciborski  well  calls  this  period  a  court  of  appeal  or  a  day 
of  judgment.  Marro  ^  advocates  that  the  proper  alimentation 
for  this  age  is  milk,  bread,  cereals,  and  vegetables  rich  in  pro- 
teins and  phosphorus,  and  little  meat.  Food  must  provide  for 
the  great  consumption  of  hydrocarbonates,  must  give  salt  for 
the  skeleton,  albumin  for  the  muscles,  and  fat  for  respiration ; 
bread,  milk,  a  little  meat  and  fruits  are  good,  while  a  diet  of 
eggs,  venison,  aromas,  coffee,  and  alcohol  exaggerate  disposi- 
tions now  dangerous.  He  recommends  a  great  deal  of  bathing 
and  swimming,  and  even  the  vulgarized  treatment  of  Kneipp, 
much  of  exercise,  plenty  of  society,  emulation,  and  rivalry. 
Marro  also  has  a  very  strong  belief  in  song  to  correct  nervous 

■  Psychopathia  Sexualis.     *  Med.  Rev.,  July  22,  1894. 


SEXUAL  DEVELOPMENT  4^7 

tensions  and  as  a  great  autosuggestive  power,  and  has  striven 
to  introduce  it  into  reformatories  for  the  young  in  Italy.  He 
deems  the  acquisition  of  habits  of  work  and  the  use  of  muscles, 
senses,  and  discipline,  helpful ;  and  would  correct  excessive 
presumption  by  due  apprenticeship  that  brings  a  skill  which 
develops  self-confidence  and  satisfaction,  but  there  must  be 
struggle,  effort,  and  perhaps  conflict.  Fear  for  girls  at  this 
stage  is  especially  noxious,  and,  as  Mosso  has  shown,  dimin- 
ishes sensibly  the  temperature. 

There  is  also  much  to  be  said  in  favor  of  circumcision, 
at  least  for  some.  Since  man  assumed  the  upright  position, 
and  especially  since  he  began  to  wear  clothing,  the  part  re- 
moved by  this  operation  is  less  needed  for  protection,  and  has 
become  a  rudimentary  organ  with  all  the  morbid  tendencies 
these  often  exhibit.  Arnold,  an  exceptionally  experienced 
"  Mohel,"  urges  that  the  foreskin  is  a  protection  from  fric- 
tional  stimulation  of  the  clothing,  which  may  become  a  dan- 
gerous temptation  if  this  natural  covering  be  removed.  The 
weight  of  opinion,  however,  is  conversely  that  removal  in- 
durates the  exposed  surface,  so  that  excitability  is  distinctly 
lessened.  While  uncleanliness  is  less  common  as  intelli- 
gence and  civilization  increase,  while  the  best  medical  thought 
now  inclines  to  the  view  that  its  dangers  have  been  much 
over-rated,  and  while  the  percentages  of  phimosis  are  less 
than  have  been  assumed,  what  may  perhaps  be  called,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  psycho-neural  arguments  for  circum- 
cision, appear  to  the  writer  to  have  great  force.  The  anal, 
urinal  and  general  reflex  disturbances  relieved  by  the  opera- 
tion reduce  liability  to  certain  local  diseases,  while  its  un- 
doubted restraining  influence  on  self-abuse,  its  tendency  to 
withhold  from  sexual  excess,  and  generally  to  stabilize  and 
give  poise  to  and  probably  to  prolong  the  vita  sexnalis,  should 
still  preserve  for  this  rite  a  unique  place  among  mutilations, 
unprejudiced  by  its  possibly  phallic  origin  or  its  historic  asso- 
ciation with  barbarism.  Moreover,  other  and  more  specific 
reasons  in  the  physiological  psychology  of  the  topic,  which 
can  not  be  entered  upon  in  a  volume  intended  for  general  read- 
ing, incline  me,  although  a  Gentile  of  Gentiles,  to  favor  circum- 
cision, if  individually  prescribed  and  if  safe-guarded  by  the 
anesthetics,  antiseptics,  and  other  resources  of  modern  surgery. 


468  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Trousers  should  not  be  too  highly  drawn  up  Dy  suspenders, 
as  boys  are  so  prone  to  do,  but  should  be  left  loose  and  lax. 
They  should  be  made  ample,  despite  fashions  often  unhygienic. 
The  irritation  otherwise  caused  may  be  an  almost  constant 
stimulus.  Undergarments  for  both  sexes  should  be  loose  and 
well  cut  away,  and  posture,  automatisms  and  acts  that  cause 
friction  should  be  discouraged.  Too  great  thickness  of  gar- 
ments here  is  harmful  in  another  way,  for  coolness  is  no  less 
essential.  Pockets  should  be  placed  well  to  the  side  and  not 
too  deep,  and  should  not  be  kept  too  full,  while  habitually 
keeping  the  hands  in  the  pockets  should  be  discouraged. 
Modern  garments  are  less  favorable  to  health  in  this  respect 
than  those  of  classical  antiquity,  the  Orient,  or  even  to  a  great 
extent  those  of  savage  races.  In  some  institutions  certain, 
and  in  others  all,  boys  must  wear  pants  open  only  at  the  sides. 
The  body  in  general,  and  especially  the  head,  hands,  and  neck, 
should  not  be  too  warmly  dressed  in  cold  weather.  Of  course, 
the  ungrown  body  has  more  surface  in  proportion  to  its  bulk 
than  that  of  a  larger  adult,  but  sufficient  cold  sends  the 
blood  inward  to  nourish  the  internal  organs,  stimulates  greater 
activity  and  generates  warmth.  Rooms,  too,  should  not  be 
kept  too  warm.  With  plenty  of  good  out-of-door  air,  high 
temperature  is  far  less  deleterious  than  in  close  rooms,  where 
the  atmosphere  is  not  in  motion  and  is  loaded  with  carbon 
dioxide. 

Beds  should  be  rather  hard  and  the  covering  should  be 
light,  because  too  much  not  only  produces  excessive  heat,  but 
presses  upon  the  body  and  reduces  the  effectiveness  of  circula- 
tory and  respiratory  processes.  Too  soft  a  bed  develops  a  di- 
athesis of  sensuous  luxury  and  tempts  to  remain  too  long  after 
awakening,  and  just  this  hour  is  probably  the  most  dangerous 
time  of  all.  We  may  not  agree  with  a  recent  Italian  writer 
who  says,  boys  that  lie  abed  late  are  almost  sure  to  be  mas- 
turbators,  but  the  habit  of  retiring  and  rising  early  is  by  far 
the  best  for  eyes  and  nerves  as  well  as  for  morals.  One  or 
more  windows  should  always  be  open  at  night  in  the  sleeping- 
rooms  of  adolescents,  and  the  temperature  kept  as  low  as  is 
compatible  with  health.  Each  should  have  at  least  a  bed,  if 
not  a  room  to  himself,  but  it  should  not  be  too  remote  and  not 
too  secluded    from   adult   observation.     Everything   possible 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  4^9 

should  be  done  to  favor  sleep  as  deep  and  sound  in  quality  and 
usually  as  long  in  quantity  as  possible,  and  everything  that 
seriously  interferes  w^ith  this  end  should  be  sedulously  avoided, 
for  in  normal  natures  this  conditions  and  is  in  direct  proportion 
to  the  vigor  of  waking  activities. 

Some  think,  at  least  for  girls,  all  that  is  needed  can  be 
taught  by  means  of  flowers  and  their  fertilization,  and  that 
mature  years  will  bring  insight  enough  to  apply  it  all  to 
human  life.  Others  would  demonstrate  on  the  cadaver  so  that 
in  the  presence  of  death  knowledge  may  be  given  without 
passion.  This  I  once  saw  in  Paris,  but  can  not  commend  for 
general  use.  An  evil  of  such  dimensions  will  be  cured  by  no 
newly  discovered  method  or  specific,  but  only  by  courageous 
application  for  generations  of  the  many  means  already  known 
for  strengthening  the  physical  and  moral  nature.  Some  would 
merely  give  simple,  direct,  and  honest  answers  to  honest  ques- 
tions, being  careful  to  go  no  further  than  to  satisfy  so  much 
curiosity  as  had  been  aroused.  Others  would  begin  at  eight 
or  ten,  before  passion  had  awakened,  and  with  no  reserve  tell 
everything  by  charts  about  the  origin  of  life.  Others  would 
make  it  all  mystic  and  symbolic,  and  some  would  leave  all  to 
nature  or  accidental  sources  of  information.  It  seems  clear 
and  certain  that  in  our  modern  life  something  should  be  taught, 
and  that  betimes.  This  should,  I  believe,  be  chiefly  personal, 
and  by  fathers  to  sons  and  by  mothers  to  daughters.  It  should 
be  concise  and  plain,  yet  with  all  needed  tact  and  delicacy  in 
well-chosen  words.  It  should  be  very  brief,  and  not  spun  out 
like  the  well-meant  and  goody  books  on  the  subject  that  should 
be  boiled  down  to  about  one-fiftieth  their  size  and  cost.  This 
probably  ought  to  be  the  most  inspiring  of  all  topics  to  teach, 
as  to  the  truly  pure  in  heart  it  is  the  most  beautiful  of  all. 
In  twilight,  before  the  open  fire,  in  the  morning,  in  some  hour 
of  farewell,  on  a  birthday,  or  any  opportune  confidential  time, 
this  most  sacred  topic  could  be  rescued  from  evil  or  be  given 
abiding  good  associations.  The  self-knowledge  imparted  that 
makes  for  health  is  perhaps  almost  the  culminating  function  and 
duty  of  parenthood.  It  may  be  that  in  the  future  this  kind  of 
initiation  will  again  become  an  art,  and  experts  will  tell  us  with 
more  confidence  how  to  do  our  duty  to  the  manifold  exigencies, 
types  and  stages  of  youth,  and  instead  of  feeling  bafiied  and 


470  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

defeated,  we  shall  see  that  this  age  and  theme  is  the  supreme 
opening  for  the  highest  pedagogy  to  do  its  best  and  most  trans- 
forming work,  as  well  as  being  the  greatest  of  all  opportunities 
for  the  teacher  of  religion. 

A  physician,  who  does  not  betray  his  identity,  elaborates  in  a  pamphlet  an 
address  he  gave  at  the  fifty-ninth  session  of  the  American  Medical  Association  ' 
which  was  heartily  approved  by  eight  well-known  practitioners  who  discussed  it. 
It  was  in  the  form  of  an  address  to  adolescent  boys.  He  says,  if  a  boy  friend 
boasts  to  you  of  his  sexual  experience  with  girls,  "  drop  acquaintance  with  that 
boy  at  once;  he  is  trying  to  corrupt  your  mind  by  lying  to  you."  If  a  boy  in  an 
unguarded  moment  tries  to  entice  you  to  masturbatic  experiments,  he  insults  you. 
"  Strike  him  at  once  and  beat  him  as  long  as  you  can  stand,"  etc.  Forgive  him  in 
your  mind,  but  never  speak  to  him  again.  If  he  is  the  best  fighter  and  beats  you, 
take  it  as  in  a  good  cause.  If  a  man  scoundrel  suggests  indecent  things,  "  slug  him 
with  a  stick  or  a  stone  or  anything  else  at  hand."  Give  him  a  scar  that  all  may 
see,  and  if  you  are  arrested,  tell  the  judge  all  and  he  will  approve  your  act,  even  if 
it  is  not  lawful.  If  a  villain  shows  you  a  filthy  book  or  picture,  snatch  it  and  give 
it  to  the  first  policeman  you  meet  and  help  him  to  find  the  wretch.  If  a  vile  woman 
invites  you,  and  perhaps  tells  a  plausible  story  of  her  downfall,  you  can  not  strike 
her,  but  think  of  a  glittering,  poisonous  snake.  She  is  a  degenerate  and  probably 
diseased,  and  even  a  touch  may  poison  you  and  your  children.  He  explains 
briefly  the  working  of  gonotoxin,  when  it  begins  and  when  it  reaches  heart,  kid- 
neys, joints,  eyes,  brain,  etc.,  describes  buboes  and  chancre,  and  explains  the  hor- 
rors of  the  latter,  warns  against  all  doctors  who  advertise,  and  tells  of  their 
methods. 

The  literature  upon  this  topic  falls  into  several  classes,  i.  Anthropological, 
treating  of  the  sexual  life  of  primitive  people,  like  Ploss,  and  shading  down  to 
Jennings,  Furlong,  and  writers  on  phallicism.  That  traces  of  the  latter — if,  as  is 
often  assumed,  it  was  general — have  been  carefully  scored  away,  makes  the  subject 
tempting  to  mystics  who  see  its  symbols  in  everything  uprighfor  circular.  Despite 
the  extravagances  of  this  school,  it  must  be  admitted  that  their  claims  for  the  per- 
vasiveness and  wide  and  fantastic  irradiations  of  sex  symbolism  have  some  support, 
or  at  least  analogy,  in  the  prurient  fancy  of  a  certain  stage  and  class  of  youth  to-day 
whose  sensitiveness  is  so  hypertrophied  that  they  see  indecent  allusions  in  almost 
every  form,  act,  and  word.  2.  The  studies  of  abnormal  phenomena,  like  those  of 
Tarnowsky,  Krafift-Ebing,  Ellis,  etc.  Here,  as  always,  morbid  are  often  normal 
phenomena  magnified,  and  from  the  literature  of  this  class  that  should  be  unread 
save  by  the  expert,  I  draw  this  momentous  inference,  that  I  have  nowhere  found 
stated,  viz.,  that  there  ts  almost  no  feature,  article  of  dress  ^  attitude,  act,  or  even 
animal  or  perhaps  object  in  nature,  that  may  not  have  to  some  morbid  soul  special- 
ized erogenic  and  erethic  poiuer.  If  this  be  true  even  to  any  considerable  extent, 
it  shows  that  the  eroticism  may  be  cut  loose  from  its  natural  excitants  and  be 
provoked  by  even  remote  accessories,  and  suggests  the  profoundly  significant  con- 
clusion  that  esthetic  pleasure  in  general  is  in  considerable  part  of  sexual  origin. 


*  The  Boys'  Venereal  Peril.  Chicago,  1003,  p.  35.  See  also  Harvard: 
Monograph,  The  Venereal  Peril ;  and  Fournier's  address  to  sons  on  attaining  their 
eighteenth  year. 


SEXUAL   DEVELOPMENT  47  ^ 

and  also  that  love  is  not  only  the  strongest  but  also  the  most  plastic  of  all  the  sen- 
timents, and  if  not  trained  to  the  very  highest  possible  objects  may  grovel  to  the 
lowest.  3.  Studies  of  normal  sexual  psychology,  like  those  of  Finck,  Scott,  Gu- 
lick,  Bell,  and  also  Ellis.  4.  The  vast  biological  literature.  5.  That  of  warning, 
like  Storer,  Howe,  M.  W.  Allen,  Sperry,  Blackwell,  Warren,  Richmond,  Stall, 
Wilcox,  Wilder,  and  Morley.  Most  of  these  are  too  long ;  however,  some,  written  by 
well-intentioned  religious  people,  have  had  wide  sale  and  brought  their  authors 
great  gain,  and  perhaps  on  the  whole  they  do  good.  Even  these  groups  do  not 
include  works  like  Ch.  Fere,  Auvard,  Marwedel,  Diickelmann,  Gamble,  Dantec, 
Bauer,  Rowe,  and,  perhaps  best  of  all,  Ch.  Wagner's  Youth. 


CHAPTER   VII 

PERIODICITY 

Periodicity  in  animals — Relation  to  seasons  and  length  of  life — Age  of  first  men- 
struation and  its  relations  to  climate  and  social  status — Precocity — Ideas  and 
practises  among  savages — Psychic  changes  during  the  lunar  month — Theories 
of  the  nature  of  menstruation — Wave  theories — Irradiation  in  other  parts — 
Changes  in  the  blood,  secretions,  pulse,  etc. — Psychic  states  in  normal  and 
morbid  girls — Menstrual  irregularities  of  excess  and  defect — Relation  to  crime 
and  insanity — Cases — Relations  to  tide  and  moon — Corresponding  rhythms  in 
men — Present  transitional  stage  of  gynecology — Needs  and  regimen — Impor- 
tance for  psychology — Lessons  for  education. 

Periods  of  rut  or  oestrus  are  frequent  and  regular  in  many 
of  the  higher  animals :  ^  monkey,  mare,  buffalo,  zebra,  hippo- 
potamus, four  weeks;  sow,  fifteen  to  eighteen  days;  sheep, 
two  weeks;  dog,  nine  to  ten  days.  In  the  latter,  ac- 
cording to  Ketterer,  mucous  congestion,  rupture,  extravasa- 
tion and  degeneration  of  tissues,  very  like  those  processes 
in  the  human  female,  occur.  In  wild  animals  these 
periods  are  seasonal,  usually  occurring  in  the  spring,  and 
are  in  abeyance  during  the  rest  of  the  year.  In  extremely 
northern  latitudes  the  return  of  long  days  and  warm  weather 
is  marked  by  an  outburst  of  venery,  which  becomes  almost 
a  rage,  in  which  all  the  glands  share,  although  during  the 
cold  arctic  night  this  function  is  almost  suspended.  Traces  of 
the  old  seasonal  rhythm  are  still  seen  in  women  by  tables  show- 
ing a  greater  frequency  of  conceptions  in  May  and  June,  and 
by  the  fact  that  statistics  attest  that  the  farther  south  we  go  the 
earlier  the  maximum  of  spring  impregnations  occur.  Domes- 
tication with  the  increased  regularity  and  abundance  of  food 
and  protection  has  increased  the  frequency  of  these  periods. 
Civilization  has  had  a  similar  effect  in  rendering  them  more 
pronounced  among  women.  Menstrual  phenomena  seem  to  be 
more  and  more  marked  as  we  pass  up  the  scale.     Lee  says  "  it 

•  See  the  valuable  presentation  of  this  subject  by  F.  S.  Lee  in  the  Am.  Text- 
Book  of  Physiology,  p.  898  et  seq.,  a.nd  passim. 
47? 


PERIODICITY 


473 


is  wholly  probable  that  the  menstrual  periods  of  women  are 
homologous  of  the  frequent  reproductive  periods  of  the  lower 
forms."  Similarly,  I  think,  we  may  interpret  the  vast  number 
of  ova  and  spermatozoa  to  be  a  survival  in  man  of  the  enormous 
fecundity  of  lower  species. 

Heape  ^  has  studied  with  unusual  care  the  menstruation  and  ovula- 
tion of  a  number  of  specimens,  each  of  two  species  of  monkey,  the 
Macacus  rhesus  and  the  Scinopithccus  cntcllus.  Their  periods  are 
marked  by  congestion  of  the  skin  of  the  abdomen,  legs  and  tail,  nipples, 
vulva,  and  face,  together  with  regular  flow  of  blood,  detritus,  etc. 
These  animals  have  a  definite  breeding  season,  differing  in  different 
parts  of  India,  but  in  the  non-breeding  season  ovulation  does  not 
occur  with  menstruation,  but  is  practically  suspended.  In  seventeen 
cases  there  was  no  sign  of  a  recent  rupture  of  a  follicle,  although  the 
other  phenomena  occurred.  Heape  thinks  the  human  species  once  had 
a  breeding  season,  and  that  traces  of  this  remain  in  those  periods  of 
the  female  unfavorable  to  conception,  and  that  at  least  ovulation  is 
independent  of  the  menses  and  may  be  suspended,  the  latter  remaining 
regular  as  usual  with  no  external  sign  that  the  most  essential  part  of 
the  function  has  ceased.  It  is  remarkable  that  there  was  no  trace  of 
blood  clot  in  the  ruptured  follicle  of  monkeys,  although  this  is  so 
distinct  in  the  human  female.  In  these  species  the  periods  occurred 
each  month,  and  lasted  about  four  days ;  and  although  breeding  occa- 
sionally occurred  at  all  seasons,  spring  had  the  marked  preference,  so 
that  the  time  of  gestation  does  not  vary  greatly  from  that  of  the  human 
species.  These  valuable  and  detailed  studies  were  chiefly  histological, 
and  shed  no  light  on  the  phenomena  attending  the  first  onset  of  the 
period,  but  show  that  not  only  in  the  tolerable  degree  of  regularity 


Animal. 


Dormouse 

Guinea-pig. ... 

Lop  rabbit 

Cat 

Goat 

Fox 

English  cattle. 
Large  dogs ... 

Horses 

Hog 

Hippopotamus 

Lion , 

Arab  horse  . . . 

Camel 

Elephant 


Age  of  adolescence. 


3  months 

7  months 

8  months 
I  year 
I  year  and  3  months. 

1  year  and  6  months. 

2  years 

2  years  

4  years  and  6  months. 

5  years 

5  years  

6  years 

8  years 

8  years 

30  years  


Length  of  life. 


4-5     years. 

6-7    years. 

8  years. 
12  years. 
12  years. 
13-14  years. 
18  years. 
15-20  years. 
30  years. 
30  years. 
30  years. 
30-40  years. 
40  years. 
40  years. 
100        years. 


1  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  vols,  liv,  Iviii,  Ix,  1890,  1894,  1896,  and 
Philos.  Trans.,  vol.  clxxxy. 


474 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


found  here,  but  also  in  the  nature  of  the  discharge  and  the  dangers 
attending  the  removal  to  cold  climates,  and  particularly  in  all  the 
details  of  the  internal  processes,  analogies  to  man  vastly  predominate 
over  differences.  So  far  as  it  marks  the  advent  of  possible  parent- 
hood, the  table  Chamberlain  computes  (The  Child,  1900,  p.  8)  is 
suggestive.     (See  preceding  page.) 

In  cows  it  occurs  every  three  v^eeks;  in  the  hippopotamus,  the 
guenon,  and  many  apes,  it  is  monthly.  A  baboon  averaged  six  weeks, 
but  the  intervals  were  more  frequent  in  late  autumn  and  winter  than 
in  summer.  In  the  chimpanzee,  Keith  says  it  occurs  every  twenty- 
three  to  twenty-four  days,  but  in  most  animals  it  frequently  undergoes 
great  seasonal  variation. 

The  first  onset  of  menstruation  in  the  human  female  is  very 
varied.  Sometimes  it  is  sHght  and  so  gradual  as  to  be  almost 
unobserved,  and  from  the  first  period  is  regular.  In  other 
cases  it  is  preceded  by  nervousness,  febrile  symptoms,  and  pain. 
The  interval  may  be  at  first  two  or  three  months,  and  a  year  or 
two  passes  before  regularity  is  established.  Sometimes  peri- 
odic pain  and  perhaps  leucorrhoea  precede  the  first  flow,  and  the 
latter  when  it  arrives  is  copious,  and  perhaps  with  cramps, 
hysteria,  chlorosis,  etc.  These  cases  are  not  so  rare  as  to  be 
necessarily  pathological.^ 

I.  Age  determinations  show  a  wide  range  of  both  individ- 
ual and  racial  variations.  Basset  found  the  average  age  of  first 
menstruation  in  4,815  cases  in  northern  Europe  sixteen  years 
and  three  months;  for  1,655  cases  in  sotithern  and  Oriental 
lands,  twelve  years  and  seven  months;  and  for  10,254  cases  in 
temperate  lands,  fifteen  years.  In  261  Italian  girls,  Marro 
found  first  period  in  61  cases  at  the  age  of  14,  54  at  15,  40  at 
16,  34  at  13,  29  at  16,  16  at  12,  12  at  18,  etc.  From  many 
other  observations  of  rather  small  numbers  he  thinks  the  above 
distribution  of  age  about  normal.  Pagliani  showed  that  in 
country  girls  the  first  menstruation  is  more  likely  to  occur  in 
the  spring  than  at  other  seasons. 

Other  comprehensive  studies  -  are  as  follows : 


Meyer,  Germany. 
6,000  observations. 


Rich. 
Poor. 


15.51 
16.31 


Kakuskine, 
Russia. 


Rich. 
Poor 


13.0 
13.0 


Meyer.  Germany, 
6,000  observations. 

City 15.98 

Country 14.20 


Kakuskine, 
Russia. 


City 14.9 

Country 15.3 


•  L.  Meyer:   Der  Menst.  Process,  Stuttgart,  1890,  p.  \6  et  seq. 

'  La  Femme  Criminelle,  par  Lombroso  et  Ferrero,  Paris,  1896,  p.  37  et  seq. 


PERIODICITY  475 

In  Hanover  2,129  observations  showed  for  cities  an  aver- 
age age  of  16.76  and  for  the  country  17.03.  Tarnowski  gives 
the  average  age  of  5,000  cases  in  Russia  as  16  years ;  Haeker  in 
Munich  found  it  16  to  17;  Boismont  in  Paris  found  it  14  to  15, 
or  averaging  14.4.  In  Parma,  Calderini  (277  cases)  found  it 
most  frequent  at  15,  next  at  14,  then  16  and  13.  PagHani 
found  280  cases  at  14,  219  at  15,  205  at  13,  116  at  12,  89  at  16, 
55  at  17,  14  at  18,  7  at  11,  and  20  at  10.  According  to  Du- 
Bois  and  Payot,  in  warm  chmates  the  age  is  from  11  to  14;  in 
temperate  chmates  from  13  to  16;  and  in  cold  cHmates  from 
15  to  18.  In  Italy  half  of  those  who  menstruate  at  13  are 
blondes,  and  only  one-fifth  brunettes. 

At  twelve  American  institutions  reporting  to  the  Massa- 
chusetts Labor  Bureau  and  representing  1,290  girls,  the  aver- 
age age  of  menstruation  was  13.62.  Krieger,  in  Berlin,  report- 
ing on  6,550  cases,  places  this  period  at  the  beginning  of  the 
fifteenth  year.  Kennedy,  basing  on  225  girls  in  the  United 
States,  places  it  at  13.7.  A.  F.  Currier  reports  14.5  years  as 
the  average  age  of  200  cases.  Lancaster  found  78  American 
girls  averaging  13.6.  Tuckerman,  in  New  York  city,  found  81 
cases  averaging  from  14  to  15.  In  Vienna,  Scukits  places  it  at 
15  years  8^  months.  Whitehead  fixes  upon  16  in  England, 
,  Weber  14^.  Tilt  thinks  it  is  a  little  over  13  in  hot  countries, 
over  14  in  temperate,  and  over  15  in  cold  climates.  Chadwick 
fixes  the  average  age  at  14^  in  U.  S.  A.,  light-haired  preceding 
dark-haired  girls  from  one  to  two  years. 

One  of  the  most  instructive  studies  of  the  age  of  first  men- 
struation is  that  of  Lullies,^  based  on  3,000  Prussian  girls. 
Although  more  cases  occur  at  fifteen  than  any  other  year,  or 
^^.  of  all,  the  average  age  obtained  by  dividing  the  sum  of 
the  ages  of  all  by  the  number  of  cases  gives  about  sixteen. 
Nearly  all  such  tables  show  that  large  girls  menstruate  earlier 
than  those  of  small  or  average  size.  Lullies  thinks,  in  opposi- 
tion to  most  earlier  observers,  that  the  strong  begin  this  function 
later  than  the  weak.  Nearly  all  agree  that  blondes  precede 
brunettes.  Thus,  first  of  all,  come  large  weak  blondes,  and  last 
come  the  middle-  or  small-sized  strong  brunettes.    Despite  sev- 


'  Ueber  die  Zeit  des  Eintritts  der  Mens.,  nach  Angabe  von  3,000  Schwangerenii 
etc.     Thesis,  Konigsburg,  1886. 


470 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


eral  tables  to  the  contrary,  Lullies  thinks  country  girls  are  at 
least  six  months  later  than  city  girls.  In  eighty-three  per  cent 
of  all  the  cases  the  periods  were  regularly  established  at  once, 
and  in  seventeen  they  were  irregular  for  a  time.  The  aver- 
age duration  of  the  flow  of  those  in  whom  it  occurred  regularly 
was  4.79  days.  Seven  and  especially  eight  days  are  unusually 
frequent. 


Lullies' s   Table  for  Prussia 
Year. 

10 6,  or  I 

II 16,  or  I 

12 81,  or  I 

13 279,  or  I 

14 476,  or  I 

15 529.  or  I 

16 458,  or  I 

17 470,  or  I 

18 275,  or  I 

19 242,  or  I 

20 122,  or  I 

21 55.  or  I 

22 19,  or  I 

23 15.  or  I 


24. 

25- 
26. 

27- 

28. 


4,  or  I 
I,  or  I 
I,  or  I 
I,  or  I 
I,  or  I 


600, 
187, 
37. 
n         II, 
n  6, 

n  5. 

n  7. 

n  7. 

n  II, 
n  12, 
n  25, 
n  54, 
n  158, 
n       200, 

n  750, 

n  3,000, 

n  3,000, 

n  3,000, 

n  3,000, 


Per  cent  of  all. 

or  0.17 

or  -53 

or  2.70 

or  9.30 

or  15.87 

or  17.63 

or  15.27 

or  14.00 

or  9.17 

or  8.07 

or  4.07 

or  1.83 

or  .63 

or  .05 

or  .13 

or  .03 

or  .03 

or  .03 

or  .03 


Dr.  Joubert  ^  thinks,  with  Playfair,  that  the  influence  of 
climate  on  menstruation  has  been  exaggerated,  and  constructs 
a  table  to  show  that  racial  differences  are  slight  if  other  condi- 
tions are  similar.  Precocity,  he  thinks,  is  due  to  too  early 
knowledge  and  sexual  excitement,  and  he  lays  great  stress  on 
the  contrast  between  the  ignorance  in  which  European  girls 
are  raised  and  the  utter  want  of  domestic  privacy  in  the 
East.  Everything  is  seen  and  known  in  India  by  girls  at 
eight  or  ten,  and  the  sexual  excitement  to  which  child-brides  are 
subjected  is  a  potent  factor.  Weber  lays  stress  upon  race 
more  than  climate.  Krieger  thinks  the  mode  of  life  has  less 
influence  than  altitude  above  the  sea.  Mosca  thinks  that  it  is 
earlier  in  higher  classes,  latest  in  peasants,  and  intermediate 
among  clergy,  merchants,  etc.  Weber  suggests  that  students, 
actresses,  and  teachers  report  earliest  ages. 


'  The  Supposed  Influence  of  Tropical  Climate  on  Menstruation  :  C.  H.  Joubert 
Indian  Med.  Gazette,  Calcutta,  April,  1895,  p.  129. 


PERIODICITY 


477 


Raciborski  *  compiled  with  indefatigable  industry  the  fol- 
lowing table  on  the  relation  of  the  average  temperature  and  of 
latitude  to  puberty : 


Place. 


Temperature  C' 


Beginning  of 
Menstruation. 


Latitude. 


So.  Asia 

Corfu 

Toulon 

Montpellier 

Florence  

Marseilles 

Nimes 

Madrid 

Lyons 

Sables  d'Olonne 

Rouen  

London  

Paris 

Vienna 

Strassburg 

(iottingen 

Manchester 

Copenhagen  

Warsaw 

Berlin 

Stockholm 

Christiania 

Kazan 

Lapland 


25.6 

18. 

16.75 

15-30 

153 

14-75 

14.32 

14.02 

12.44 

12.25 

11-57 
11.04 
10.50 
10. 1 
9.80 
9.1 
8.7 
8.2 
7-5 
7-03 
5-6 
5-6 
2.2 
o 


12 
14 
14 
14 
14 
13 
14 
15 
15 
14 
H 
14 
14 
15 
15 
16 

15 
16 

15 
16 

15 
16 

15 
16 


10 
o 
o 
I 
6 
7 
3 


9 
9 
II 


27 
o 

5 
26 

I 
24 

2 

13 
16 
II 

3 
19 

9 
15 
II 
10 
14 
25 

o 

5 
o 

15 
20 
27 


18°  56'  —  22°  35' 

39°  38' 

43°  7'  28' 

43°  36' 

43°  47' 

43°  17'  52" 

43°  50' 

40°  25'  (39-43) 

45°  45'  45" 
46°  29'  48" 
49°  26'  29" 
51°  31' 
48°  50'  13" 
48°  13' 
48°  30' 
51^32' 
58°  29' 
55°  41' 
52°  13' 
52°  30' 
59°  21' 
59°  54' 
55°  48' 
68" 


In  a  late  paper  Engelmann  reaches  remarkable  conclusions 
concerning  the  age  of  first  menstruation  on  the  Western  conti- 
nent. From  Matthews's  study  of  sub-arctic  Indians,  and  from 
his  and  others'  data  for  Eskimos  (12.6)  and  Robertson's 
study  of  plantation  negroes  in  Jamaica  and  Barbados  (15.6), 
etc.,  he  infers  "  an  early  puberty  at  the  pole  and  retarded  de- 
velopment near  the  equator,  conditions  diametrically  opposed 
to  what  has  hitherto  been  accepted."  ^  He  also  finds  American 
women  "  very  much  more  precocious  than  the  women  of  other 
continents  in  the  same  region  of  the  temperate  zone,  more  pre- 
cocious than  the  peoples  from  whom  they  have  sprung,  an 
average  of  14  on  this  continent  and  15.5  in  Europe."  The 
native  American  is  more  precocious  than  the  American  born 


^  Traits  de  la  Menstruation,  1868,  p.  200. 

*  The  Age  of  First  Menstruation  in  the  North  American  Continent.     Trans,  of 
the  Am.  Gyn.  Soc,  1901. 


478  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

of  foreign  parents,  and  only  one  year  behind  his  average  for 
southern  cHmates.  CHmate  here  has  practically  no  influence; 
race,  very  little.  This  is  due  chiefly  to  mentality  and  nerve 
stimulation,  which  also  hastens  the  development  of  the  red  and 
black  races.  Here,  too,  he  finds  the  difference  between  the 
development  of  girls  of  the  refined  and  those  of  the  laboring 
classes  to  average  less  than  half  a  year,  so  that  this  change 
takes  place  here  nearer  the  same  age  in  all  classes,  and  also 
there  is  found  to  be  less  individual  difference.  One  of  Engel- 
mann's  curves  gives  American  girls  at  14,  Irish  at  15,  and  Ger- 
man at  16.  The  influence  of  social  state  and  race,  which  seems 
established  at  least  in  Europe,  often  appears  on  this  continent 
to  be  overridden  by  that  of  nerve  strain.  The  jnilicu  stimulates 
"  the  psychic  phenomena  reverberating  clearly  in  the  genital 
plexus,"  suggesting  that  the  influence  of  environment  is  greater 
in  this  respect  than  that  of  heredity.  If  this  be  so,  a  cold  cli- 
mate must  be  ranked  with,  and  not  against,  mentality  as  a  cause 
of  acceleration,  and  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  education  in  a 
temperate  or  subarctic  zone  is  more  productive  of  precocity 
than  in  the  south,  and  if  general  nervous  stimulus  is  the  cause, 
the  same  schooling  is  more  dangerous  in  the  city  than  in  the 
country. 

In  rare  cases  this  function  may  be  very  premature.  Dr. 
Peeples  ^  reports  a  case  of  a  primipara  where  the  child  was 
beautiful,  well  grown,  and  in  the  best  of  health,  with  breasts 
and  reproductive  organs  remarkably  well  developed,  having  a 
full  and  proficiently  studied  menstruation  at  the  age  of  five 
days.  Dr.  I.  W.  Irons  ^  reports  a  girl  seven  days  old  who 
menstruated  from  December  to  August,  the  period  during 
which  it  was  under  observation,  regularly.  Dr.  P.  E.  Plumb  ^ 
deports  a  healthy  girl  who  began  to  menstruate  at  the  age  of 
six  weeks  and  continued  to  do  so  every  six  weeks  for  ten 
months,  or  up  to  the  date  of  this  report.  Dr.  Howe  *  de- 
scribes a  case  where  menstruation  began  at  three,  continued 
regularly  for  six  periods,  then  stopped  for  eight  months  and 

'  Dr.  D.  L.  Peeples:   New  York  Med.  Jour.,  March  30,  1885. 

*  N.  Y.  Med.  Jour.,  August  15,  1896. 
»  N.  Y.  Med.  Jour.,  July  5,  1897. 

*  Brit.  Med.  Jour.,  part  i,  vol.  ii,  1896,  p.  653. 


PERIODICITY  479 

resumed.  The  child  was  otherwise  normal,  but  looked  four 
or  five  years  older,  and  had  marked  sexual  development  of  a 
child  still  older.  Dr.  Price  ^  describes  a  remarkable  case  of  a 
girl  of  six  years  and  seven  months  who  was  mature  apparently 
in  every  respect.  Some  features  of  puberty  were  observed  at 
eighteen  months — pubic  and  axillary  hair — and  menstruation 
occurred  early  in  the  fourth  year.  In  reporting  a  case  of  men- 
strual precocity  at  the  age  of  four  years  and  nine  months,  Dr. 
Seuvre  ^  takes  occasion  to  gather  a  few  facts  from  literature 
and  from  his  own  observations  to  refute  the  general  impression 
that  precocity  usually  goes  with  early  cessation  of  the  powers 
of  maternity.  His  own  view  is,  that  the  earlier  the  sex  func- 
tion develops  in  girls  the  later  it  continues  and  the  greater  the 
probability  of  numerous  progeny.  Often  at  least  such  persons 
continue  to  bear  children  to  an  advanced  age.  Similar  cases 
could  easily  be  greatly  multiplied. 

Instead  of  being  seen  to  be  the  inflorescence  of  the  human 
plant,  like  its  analogues,  the  blossoms  and  ripeness  of  the  vege- 
table and  rut  in  the  animal  world,  both  its  first  and  its  subse- 
quent appearance  have  been  regarded  with  great  awe  and 
generally  with  aversion.  Among  some  primitive  races  ^  women 
wear  a  special  costume,  badge,  or  symbol  at  the  first,  and  often 
at  subsequent  monthly  periods.  The  forms  and  ceremonies 
that  mark  the  advent  of  this  sign  of  maturity  are  very  diverse, 
and  often  initiations  are  severe  and  are  intended  to  drive  out 
the  demon  of  uncleanness.  Tattooing,  isolation,  many  local 
operations,  fasting,  close  confinement,  nauseous  food,  etc.,  show 
that  these  phenomena  have  generally  seemed  to  primitive 
hygiene  not  only  mysterious,  but  that,  analogous  though  it 
seems  to  heat  in  animals  when  the  male  is  especially  attracted, 
it  has  had  a  repellent  effect  upon  man.  The  old  idea  was  that 
this  function  was  a  periodic  purification  to  rid  the  body  and 
soul  of  a  previous  contamination  of  original  sin.  Woman's 
reserve,  too,  is  increased  rather  than  diminished  at  these 
periods,  and  many  superstitions  of  infection  and  contagion 
augment  this  mutual  withdrawal  and  perhaps  taboo.     Every- 

'  New  Orleans  Med.  and  Surg.  Jour.,  August,  1896,  p.  104. 
*  Union  Med.  de  Nord.  Est.,  January  30,  1897. 
'  Ploss  :   Das  Weib,  pp.  228-285. 


4-8o  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Idling  known  upon  this  subject  seems  to  indicate  that  these  re- 
pellent tendencies  are  very  ancient  as  well  as  universal,  so  that 
it  is  impossible  to  determine  how  much  is  due  to  the  accumu- 
lated effects  of  immemorial  usage,  and  whether,  e.  g.,  the  de- 
pression and  perhaps  even  the  psychic  and  physical  pains  may 
be- inherited  effects  of  the  ages  of  ostracism  and  cruelty  suffered 
at  these  times.  What  we  are  coming  to  know  from  recent 
studies  of  hysteria  of  its  metamorphic  nature,  and  the  readiness 
with  which  psychalgia  passes  to  somatalgia,  and  even  vice  versa, 
inclines  the  writer  to  the  view  that  in  the  psycho-sensory 
changes  of  the  lunar  months  modern  women  recapitulate  atavis- 
tically  the  effect  of  ages  of  such  error  and  misuse,  and  that  few, 
if  any,  topics  in  the  whole  biopsychic  field  are  as  interesting, 
tantalizingly  baffling  though  they  are,  for  all  who  have  fully 
adopted  the  genetic  standpoint,  as  the  phenomena  and  usages 
that  center  about  the  menstrum  virginis  primum  and  the  sub- 
sequent catamenia  with  the  attendant  magic,  superstitions, 
usages,  surprises,  and  all  that  early  writers  comprised  under 
the  term  parthenologia. 

II.  Precisely  what  menstruation  is,  is  not  yet  very  well 
known.  It  was  not  long  ago  held  that  in  the  human  female  it 
can  not  be  the  homologue  of  oestrus  in  animals,  because  women 
then  have  no  desire,  and  men  are  repelled.  Desire  has  been  held 
to  be  relieved  by  the  flow,  which  Wiltshire  held  was  more  san- 
guineous the  higher  the  animal.  Dr.  Elizabeth  Blackwell  says 
the  flow  itself  is  a  competent  relief  of  sex  feeling,  and  Icard 
thought  that  thus  virginity  was  safeguarded.  Havelock  Ellis  ^ 
boldly  champions  the  view  that  normally  the  desire  and  flow 
coincide  in  time,  and  has  gathered  statements  of  women  con- 
firming this  view.  The  facts  on  which  the  aversion  theory 
rests,  he  thinks,  are  superposed  by  convention  upon  and  belie 
nature.  If  ardor  is  not  present,  it  may  be  due  to  languor  pro- 
duced by  the  process,  conformity  to  custom,  or  to  fear  of  arous- 
ing disgust  in  man,  who  superstitiously  thinks  it  dangerous  for 
him  or  for  the  offspring.     Here  again,  if  this  view  is  correct, 


^  In  his  valuable  chapter  on  Sexual  Periodicity,  in  his  Psychology  of  Sex, 
1900,  p.  53  et  seq.  See  also  Menstruation  et  F6condation  Physiologique  at  Patho- 
logique.     A.  Auvard,  Paris,  1895. 


PERIODICITY  481 

our  race  has  rebelled  against  its  own  nature,  and  in  this  instance 
the  medieval  Church  aided  the  revolt.  Indeed,  just  as  savages 
magnify,  but  civilized  races  hide  and  minimize,  the  organs  as 
centers  of  attraction,  as  Moll  says  has  occurred  in  secondary 
sex  qualities  like  the  beard,  so  it  may  be  menstruation  is  now 
magnified  in  importance  by  the  attention  it  receives,  and  in  an 
age  that  considers  it  less  it  will  lapse  to  a  less  regarded  and 
therefore  normal  place.  In  very  rare  cases,  apparently  normal 
(Ellis,  p.  54),  it  may  all  be  absent. 

Raciborski's  careful  and  still  valuable  work  ^  on  puberty  in 
girls,  that  was  stimulated  by  a  prize  offered  by  the  Royal  Acad- 
emy for  the  best  memoir  on  the  physiology  of  menstruation  and 
its  relation  to  diseases,  and  Bouchet's  treatise  ^  upon  this 
subject,  marked  the  first  advance  that  had  been  made  since 
Aristotle  and  Pliny.  Considering  the  methods  at  his  disposal, 
Raciborski's  contributions  to  the  subject  were  remarkable  and 
almost  epoch-making.  He  investigated  the  influence  of  cli- 
mate, temperament,  race,  urged  the  very  great  impressionability 
of  the  sex  organs  to  music,  the  development  of  the  Graafian 
follicles,  the  action  of  different  emmenagogues,  and  treated 
Malthusianism  also  with  great  sagacity,  the  improvement  of 
public  morality  by  early  marriage,  senescence,  superfoetation, 
hygiene,  etc.  In  1852  Tilt  found  that  of  1,000  girls  twenty- 
five  per  cent  were  totally  unprepared.  Many  were  frightened, 
thought  themselves  wounded,  washed  in  cold  water,  etc.  La- 
borde^  assumed  that  woman  is  what  she  is  by  virtue  of  the 
uterus,  thought  menstruation  a  peculiar  erectile  process,  won- 
dered that  man  did  not  share  it,  and  sought  to  trace  a  rapport 
between  the  diseases  of  puberty  and  those  most  liable  to  occur 
at  the  menopause. 

Bassat,^  in  his  comprehensive  thesis,  to  which  a  valuable 
and  copious  bibliography  is  appended,  defines  puberty  in  wom- 
an not  as  the  period  of  the  development  of  pubic  hair,  as 
the  etymology  of  the  word  suggests,  but  as  the  age  of  the 
growth  which  accompanies  the  maturation  and  escape  of  the 

^  La  Puberty  chez  la  Femme,  1844,  p.  520. 
^  Theorie  de  I'Ovulation  Spontanee,  1847. 

'  Quelques  Considerations  sur  la  Pubert^  chez  la  Femme  et  sur  la  Menopause. 
Th^se,  Paris,  i860. 

*  Etude  sur  la  Pubert6  chez  la  Femme.      Montpellier,  1867,  p.  134. 
32 


482  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

ovule,  and  his  motto  is,  "  The  whole  woman  is  in  the  ovaries." 
The  girl  ceases  the  play  of  a  child,  seeks  solitude  and  indulges 
in  reverie  and  contemplation,  is  joyous  and  sad  by  turns.  A 
new  timidity  and  modesty  appears;  she  seeks  strong  and  more 
special  friendships  with  her  companions,  or  would  forget  all 
else  in  a  more  ardent  love  of  her  mother.  These,  however,  do 
not  satisfy  her,  and  she  is  joyous  and  sad  by  turns.  The  other 
sex  seems  more  beautiful  and  attractive,  and  yet  perhaps  there 
is  a  new  shyness  in  the  presence  of  young  men.  Increased 
sensibility,  more  blushing,  vague  desires,  emptiness  of  heart, 
and  sometimes  a  disposition  to  follow  and  perhaps  brood  on  the 
changes  which  occur  in  body  and  soul  with  introspection, 
curiosity,  and  perhaps  awe,  are  noted.  There  are  often  ob- 
scure symptoms  of  disease  of  mind  and  body,  which  threaten, 
but  only  in  a  minority  of  cases  become  overt,  and  nature  usually 
is  able  to  slowly  establish  a  normal  rhythm  between  plethora 
and  anemia  on  which  the  hygienic  and  moral  future  depend. 
Each  sense  is  more  acute,  the  imagination  more  lively,  reveries 
more  frequent.  In  dress  she  blossoms  into  colors,  a  new  moral 
hygiene  is  slowly  added,  more  manifold  exercises  are  needed, 
and  increased  rest  in  sleep,  for  there  is  great  feebleness  at  this 
plastic  age.  This  paper  shows  how  far  knowledge  of  this  sub- 
ject had  progressed  before  what  may  be  called  the  modern 
period. 

But  we  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  history  of  the 
topic.  Both  physiologists  and  gynecologists  differ  widely  both 
as  to  the  causes  and  nature  of  menstruation.  Some  ascribe 
the  chief  or  primal  role  to  the  ovaries,  some  to  uterine  proc- 
esses, some  to  the  nerves ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  first  two 
can  and  often  do  act  independently  of  each  other.  Current 
views,  which  seem  to  the  writer  as  no  longer  incapable  of  har- 
monization in  our  higher  synthesis,  may  be  summarized  from 
their  leading  representatives  as  follows : 

Most  widely  held  now  is  probably  the  theory  of  Pfliiger's, 
that  the  significance  of  menstruation  is  not  to  escape  plethora, 
but  to  denude  a  fresh  uterine  surface  to  which  the  egg,  if  im- 
pregnated, can  graft  itself.  The  constant  ovarian  growth 
causes  a  reflex  stimulation  which  tumefies  the  uterus  and  prob- 
ably also  matures  a  Graafian  follicle.  Both  ovulation  and  the 
monthly  flow,  while  very  distinct  phenomena,  either  of  which 


PERIODICITY  483 

may  occur  without  the  other,  are  yet  both  due  to  this  congestion. 
By  one  process  the  nest  is  prepared,  by  the  other  the  egg  is  laid 
in  it.  If  the  ovum  is  fertihzed  and  attaches  itself  to  the  thick- 
ened uterine  wall,  then  the  menstrual  decidua  become  the  de- 
cidua  of  pregnancy,  and  are  not  detached  till  parturition,  of 
which  menstruation  is  the  homologue  and  forerunner.^  Pflii- 
ger  thus  holds  that  menstruation  and  ovulation  have  thus  only 
a  reflex  connection,  and  that  the  former  is  a  periodic  wounding 
of  the  surface  in  order  that  the  ovum  may  be  more  readily  at- 
tached to  it.-  This  view  is  not  inconsistent  with  that  which 
Virchow  was  the  first  to  suggest,  that  every  monthly  illness  is  a 
pregnancy  on  a  small  scale.  Aveling  long  ago  pointed  out  the 
difference  and  similarities  between  a  womb  and  a  nest,  and 
considered  menstruation  as  infecund  oviposition.  Changes  in 
the  uterine  mucus,  he  thought  preparatory  nidification.  The 
decidua  were  nidal  and  nidation  could  come  on  independently 
of  the  ovaries.  Occasionally  the  nest  was  ready  too  soon  or  in 
vain,  and  at  other  times  was  unfinished  and  too  early.  Hyper- 
nidation  sometimes  may  be  due  to  decline  of  nutrition,  and  may 
cause  sterility.  The  nest  may  be  expelled  whole.^  Jacobi 
thinks  it  the  homologue  of  parturition  and  perhaps  an  ontoge- 
netic relict  of  the  frequent  births  of  lower  forms. 

Lowenthal  *  thinks  that  the  unfertilized  ovum  causes  the  menstrual 
decay  of  tissue  which  its  impregnation  prevents,  and  opposes  the  idea 
that  the  relation  between  these  two  events  is  merely  temporal.  On 
this  view  the  periodicity  of  the  hemorrhages  depends  on  the  duration 
of  the  extra  follicular  life  power  of  the  imbedded  but  unimpregnated 
egg.  Menstrual  hemorrhage,  he  thinks,  is  not  physiological,  but  the 
natural  effect  of  the  non-impregnation  and  consequent  death  of  the 
ovum,  and  must  be  regarded  like  other  pathological  bleedings  and  the 
flux  be  reduced  to  a  minimum,  so  that  amenorrhea  is  not  always  a  dis- 
ease and  diapedism  is  the  least  morbid  way.  King  °  also  thinks  menstru- 
ation a  pathological  process,  and  that  women  live  abnormally  in  sex. 
Nature  requires  them  to  bear  children  throughout  their  sexual  life, 

1  See  Am.  Text-Book  of  Physiology,  p.  399.     Also,  Lee:    Reproduction,  p.  898. 

*  Untersuchungen,   1865. 

'  Nidation  in  the  Human  Female.  Obstet.  Journal  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 
land,  July,  1874,  p.  209. 

*  Eine  neue  Deutung  des  Menst.  Processes.  Arch.  f.  Gyniicol.,  1889,  pp, 
169-261. 

'  Am.  Jour,  of  Obstet.,  1875. 


4^4  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

and  thus  to  mostly  escape  menstruation.  Stemham '  says,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  it  is  a  physiological  adaptation  of  a  special  kind  to  keep 
the  uterus  in  functional  health,  and  while  it  is  pathological  in  bleeding 
and  degeneration,  it  is  otherwise  essentially  normal,  and  no  more  ab- 
normal than  the  excessive  production  of  ova.  It  seems  to  be  an  ad- 
justment, so  that  there  shall  be  times  favorable  and  others  unfavorable 
for  conception. 

Oliver"  approached  the  subject  in  a  somewhat  unique  and  philo- 
sophical way  by  assuming  that  the  molecular  world  is  in  a  condition 
of  highly  sensitized  vital  trepidation,  and  that  equilibrium  is  the  out- 
come of  inherent  powers  of  adaptation.  Both  structural  and  functional 
integrity  are  maintained  in  the  animal  body  by  the  dependence  of 
organs  upon  each  other,  and  every  tissue  and  part  is  thus  in  a  relation 
of  vicarious  compensation,  and  this  is  a  fundamental  law.  All  double 
organs  compensate,  growing  and  doing  extra  work  if  the  other  is 
incapacitated.  Uterine  changes  are  anticipated  by  spontaneous  ones 
in  the  nerve-centers,  perhaps  in  the  oblongata,  so  that  neural  symptoms 
may  grow  and  be  quite  developed  without  the  common  physical 
changes.  The  periodic  death  of  the  endometrium  does  not  start  in 
the  mucous  membrane,  is  not  the  analogue  of  the  loss  and  reproduc- 
tion of  limbs,  the  shedding  of  its  skin  by  the  serpent,  moulting,  etc. 
There  are  frequently  monthly  disturbances  of  the  psyche  with  menstru- 
ation, and  epilepsy  is  the  disease  which  most  effects  it.  This  nervous 
rhythm,  as  it  were  out  toward  the  next  generation,  is  due  to  some 
gradual  but  unknown  vital  energy  which  is  primary.  Ovulation  he 
too  saw  to  be  a  process  quite  distinct  and  apart. 

Westphalen "  believed  that  he  had  decided  finally  the  question 
whether  menstruation  is  a  shedding  of  the  outer  mucous  layer  and  the 
consecutive  regeneration  of  its  mucous.  He  concludes,  first,  that  diffuse 
fine  granular  infiltration  of  fat  is  at  all  times  a  frequent  finding  in 
normal  uterine  mucous  and  is  in  no  causal  relation  to  bleeding ;  second, 
that  the  shed  tissue  undergoes  fatty  degeneration ;  third,  at  the  end 
of  the  period  there  is  an  increased  tendency  to  fatty  metamorphosis 
of  the  protoplasm  in  the  upper  mucous  membrane.  This  fatification 
is  not  death  of  the  part,  for  it  can  be  resorbed.  As  to  whether  in 
different  phases  of  menstruation  the  conditions  for  the  insertion  of  an 
egg  are  differently  favorable,  and  what  time  is  most  so,  is  not  yet 
solvable.  From  his  studies  upon  extirpations  and  scrapings  of  fifty 
cases,  he  concludes  that  the  cells,  especially  those  of  the  epithelium, 
are  renewed  by  indirect  cell  division  periodically  from  six  to  eighteen 
days  after  the  beginning  of  menstruation,  and  from  the  eighteenth 
day  onward  no  proliferation  occurs.    The  decidua  are  simply  decadent 

*  Menst.  und  Ovulation  in  ihre  gegenstandliche  Beziehungen.  Gekronte  Preis- 
schrift,  Leipzig,  1890. 

*  Menstruation :  Its  Nerve  Origin  not  a  shedding  of  Mucous  Membrane.  Jour, 
of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  1886-67,  p.  378. 

^  Zur  Physiol,  der  Menstr.      Arch.  f.  Gynacol.,  1896,  p.  35. 


PERIODICITY  4«5 

growths,  broken  down  and  removed  after  they  are  dead  by  gravity,  a 
process  made  easy  and  economical  by  man's  upright  position. 

It  seems  that  man's  self-domestication  has  had  upon  his 
own  species  the  same  result  of  increased  fecundity  and  more 
frequent  reproductive  periods  that  it  has  had  upon  domesticated 
plants  and  animals.  Menstrual  phenomena  seem  more  pro- 
nounced in  the  higher  forms  of  animal  life,  and  it  has  even  been 
suggested  that  we  may  infer  that  in  woman  they  will  increase 
as  civilization  advances. 

Reinl  ^  held  menstruation  a  result  of  a  periodical  dis- 
turbance of  the  entire  circulatory  system,  and  describes  a 
growing  contraction  of  vessels  alternating  with  hypersemia, 
which  is  greatly  accentuated  by  puberty.  He  believed  in  the 
existence  of  this  rhythmic  period  in  men,  children,  and  old 
people  as  well  as  during  pregnancy  and  lactation.  Degen- 
eration and  removal  of  the  ovaries  does  not  affect  the  form  of 
this  wave,  and  menstruation  is  only  one  manifestation  of  it. 
The  wave  may  take  many  forms  and  even  be  reversed  in 
pathological  cases. 

Dr.  O.  W.  Johnston  ^  may  be  cited  as  the  best  represen- 
tative of  the  neuro-ovulation  theory.  The  ovaries  are  active 
before  birth  and  continue  to  form  folHcles  as  long  as  the 
woman  lives.  She  ripens  probably  four  or  five  a  year,  but 
this  has  nothing  to  do  with  rut.  The  latter  in  animals  occurs 
when  they  are  at  the  very  top  of  their  condition  and  never 
when  they  have  all  they  can  do  to  live.  As  civilization  has 
overcome  climate,  man  may  be  said  to  be  always  at  his  best. 
Thus  deer  rut  in  the  fall,  birds  in  the  spring,  etc.  All  animals 
have  desquamation  times  after  the  procreative  periods,  when 
hair,  antlers,  etc.,  are  shed.  Sex  ornaments  are  akin  to  the 
manufacture  and  decay  of  the  endometrium,  as  are  feathers, 
papillae,  and  other  sex  decorations,  arising  as  they  do  from 
the  same  embryonic  layer.  Thus  we  have  here  only  a  special 
case  of  karyokinetic  growth  and  of  the  regeneration  of  tissue 
by  which  all  wear  and  tear  is  supplied.     Remak's  view,  that 

^  Die  Wellenbewegung  der  Lebensprocesses  des  Weibes.  Samml.  klin.  Vor- 
trage  Gynacol.,  No.  67  (whole  No.  243). 

^  Relation  of-  Menstruation  to  Other  Reproductive  Functions.  Am.  Jour,  of 
Obstetrics,  1895,  p.  $^. 


486  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

the  sensory  motor  system  comes  from  the  epiblast;  the 
muscles,  bones,  excretory,  secretory,  and  generative  organs 
from  the  mesoblast;  while  the  hypoblast  is  largely  nutritive, 
is  said  to  favor  this  standpoint. 

The  first  really  careful  curves  of  temperature  were  plotted 
by  Dr.  Stephenson,^  w'hile  Dr.  Jacobi  established  the  first 
proof  of  a  nutritive  wave.  The  pulse  tension  curve  culminat- 
ing a  few  days  before  menstruation  is  generally  accepted  as 
another  part  of  the  well-marked  curve  of  vital  energy. 
Stephenson  held  that  equal  parts  of  the  curve  were  below  and 
above  the  line;  that  they  varied  with  individuals;  that  the 
temperature  wave  was  most  uniform  in  its  rise  and  fall,  and 
that  the  waves  were  more  or  less  independent  of  each  other. 

This  wave  may  be  further  described  as  follows:  From 
about  seventeen  days  after  the  cessation  of  the  flow,  the  pel- 
vis is  anemic  and  the  curve  is  a  low  level  plateau  with  few 
and  slight  modifications  and  but  a  very  gradual  ascent.  On 
or  near  the  eighteenth  day  the  rise  is  distinct  and  increas- 
ingly rapid,  reaching  its  greatest  angle  of  ascent  about  the 
twenty-third  day,  and  continuing  to  augment  till  hydrostatic 
pressure  causes  local  hemorrhage,  when  the  pressure  falls 
rapidly  and  the  process  is  repeated  twenty-eight  days  later.^ 
This  view  may  perhaps  harmonize  with  the  older  conception 
of  the  dominance  of  the  uterine  nerve  plexi  as  a  sort  of  pelvic 
brain,  analogous  to  the  solar  plexus,  often  called  the  abdomi- 
nal brain.  This  uterine  center  would  thus  be  a  sort  of  tele- 
phonic switchboard,  and  hysteria  would  be  due  to  derange- 
ment of  its  connections.  In  addition  to  the  above  blood  pres- 
sure curve,  there  is  a  closely  coinciding  urea  wave  and  a 
carbonic  acid  wave,  the  ash  and  smoke  respectively  of  the 
combustion  of  the  products  of  a  hyperanabolic  activity. 
These  are  indexes  of  the  increased  oxidation  just  preceding 
the  flux  necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  albuminoid  surplus  in  the 
blood,  produced  because  every  normal  female  constantly  pro- 
duces food  for  two.  Menstruation  is  a  vast  improvement 
upon  the  way  in  which  this  surplus  in  the  endometrium,  de- 

'  On  the  Menstrual  Wave.     Am.  Jour,  of  Obstetrics,  1882,  vol.  xv,  p.  287. 
'  Pathol.  Aspects  of  the   Stephenson  Wave.     0.  W.  Johnston,  M.D.,  Amer. 
Jour.  Obstet.,  vol.  xxxi,  1895,  p.  662. 


PERIODICITY  487 

posited  there  for  the  manufacture  of  the  placenta,  was  got  rid 
of  by  slow  absorption  before  the  erect  position  was  attained. 

The  Stephenson  wave  ^  thus  best  explains  vicarious  men- 
struation. It  is  a  process  in  upright  animals  akin  to  moulting 
or  yearly  loss  of  horns,  hair,  etc.,  and  is  a  great  biologic 
advance  over  the  process  so  common  among  the  lower  ani- 
mals of  slowly  removing  the  endometrium  through  the  lym- 
phatics. If  there  is  obstruction,  the  wave  is  thrown  to  whatever 
point  of  the  system  is  weakest.  Every  trouble  in  woman, 
which  is  aggravated  or  relieved  at  the  same  point  of  the 
menstrual  wave,  be  it  trough  or  crest,  demands  that  special 
attention  be  given  to  the  pelvis.  Dr.  Johnston  found  these 
periodicities  in  many  cases  of  indigestion,  constipation,  liver 
symptoms,  glycosuria,  certain  inflammation  and  congestion 
and  Bright's  disease,  Basedow's  disease,  loss  or  weakness  of 
voice,  tinnitus  aurium,  amblyopia,  choked  disk,  many  brain 
troubles,  etc.,  which  are  really  inexplicable  without  knowl- 
edge of  this  wave,  the  detection  of  which.  Dr.  Johnston 
thinks,  "  is  equaled  in  its  benefits  to  our  calling  only  by  Har- 
vey's immortal  discovery."  About  five  days  after  the  onset 
of  the  flow  is  the  best  time  to  perform  surgical  operations  in 
the  anemic  trough  of  the  wave.  Just  what  of  all  the  great 
number  of  periodic  phenomena  are  causative,  concomitant, 
or  resultant,  can  not  yet  be  told.  If  this  author  is  right,  that 
only  five  ova  ripen  each  year,  it  would  seem  that  the  ovarian 
factor  is. less  central  than  has  been  thought.  He  too  holds 
that  there  are  traces  of  such  a  wave  observant  in  males. 

The  curve  on  p.  488,  from  Engelmann,-  illustrates  almost 
equally  well  the  rise  and  fall  of  pulse,  temperature,  blood  pres- 
sure, muscular  force,  pulmonary  capacity,  morbid  nervous 
symptoms,  like  the  hystero-neuroses  and  the  anatomical 
changes  which  he  found  in  the  uterine  mucosa.  This  wave 
does  not  represent  the  amount  or  degree,  but  only  the  time  of 
these  undulations,  the  numbers  being  the  days  of  the  mensal 
period  and  the  shaded  days  those  of  the  flux. 

The  cyclic  theory  in  its  various  forms  assumes  nervous 
centers  in  the  walls  of  the  blood  vessels,  which  slowly  elab- 

*•  The  Clinical  Importance  of  the  Menstrual  Wave,  by  C.   A.  Johnston,  M.  D. 
Gynecol.  Trans.,  1896,  p.  57. 

»  The  American  Girl  of  To-day.     Am.  Physical , Ed.  Rev.,  November,  1901. 


488 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 


orate  power  and  contract  the  arterial  muscular  coats,  acting 
partly  by  their  own  law  and  partly  dependent  upon  higher 
nerve-centers,  and  thus  cause  a  slight  elevation  of  pressure 
throughout  the  entire  body,  till  in  certain  parts  best  adapted 
thereto  anatomically  the  hemorrhage  occurs  when  the  vascu- 
lar tension  becomes  sufficiently  high.  Even  in  pregnancy 
traces  of  these  periods  often  continue,  and  miscarriages  are 
more  liable  at  such  times.  No  surgical  operation  during  or 
just  preceding  the  monthly  epoch  should  be  performed.  Vi- 
carious menstruation  is  not  uncommon  and  flow  of  blood  is 


y 

/ 

- 

- 

N 

T^ 

fe 

«' 

y 

/ 

/ 

/ 

^ 

■^ 

"^ 

-^ 

/ 

/ 

V  '■' 

J ■  ^i 

1  a  5  ,1.  6  6  7  8  ,9  10  11  12  13  11  15  16  17  18  19  20  .21.28  23  24  25  26  27^8 


then  harder  to  stanch.  Sleep,  hibernation,  peristaltic  action, 
the  uterine  contractions  once  every  two  to  thirty  minutes, 
are  at  root,  like  menstrual  periodic  muscular  phenomena,  of 
nervous  origin.  Prepubertal  growth  is  hypertrophy  of  cer- 
tain tissues  dominated  by  trophic  nerves,  which  must  thus 
first  undergo  structural  development,  and  then  indirectly,  by 
affecting  circulation,  cause  the  larynx,  pelvis,  and  probably 
the  vascular  muscles,  walls,  etc.,  to  grow.  Motility  does  not 
ultimately  reside  in  the  non-striated  muscles  any  more  than 
it  was  thought  to  reside  in  the  voluntary  muscles  in  the  days 
when  the  doctrine  of  independent  muscular  irritability  pre- 
vailed. Congestion  thus  not  only  precedes,  but  actually 
causes  the  flow.  Growth  and  nutrition  are  thus  not  purely 
vegetative,  but  are  Indirectly  influenced  by  nerves.  This 
view,  it  is  claimed,  affords  a  principle  large  enough  to  explain 
erection,  vicarious  menstruation,  the  flushing  in  hemorrhage 
of  capillary  birthmarks,  excessive  swelling,  varicose  veins, 
nosebleed,  spitting  blood,  enlargement  of  the  thyroid  gland 


PERIODICITY  489 

and  spleen,  puffiness,  and  dark  coloration  under  the  eye,  and 
in  rare  cases  where  this  interesting  phenomenon  is  seen,  stig- 
matization  and  cutaneous  extravasation. 

Dr.  Schmey  ^  pleads  for  a  higher  standpoint  concerning 
menstruation,  and  assumes  monthly  plethora  in  both  sexes. 
In  men  wounds  often  bleed  periodically.  Hemorrhages  from 
the  lungs  are  often  monthly,  as  are  hemorrhoidal  and  other 
sores.  Senator  demonstrated  menstrual  hyperemia  of  the 
liver.  Both  menstruation  and  ovulation  are  signs  of  a  peri- 
odic fulness  of  blood  in  both  sexes,  at  the  height  of  which  in 
woman  the  Graafian  follicle  is  likely  to  be  emptied  and  men- 
struation to  occur.  There  is  a  cyclic  change  in  the  total 
amount  of  blood,  and  menstruation  is  a  chance  symptom  due 
to  the  sensitiveness  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  uterus. 
The  lunar  tide  theory  he  thought  suggestive. 

On  the  basis  of  careful  clinical  studies  upon  the  metabolism  of 
menstruation,  F.  Schroder  ^  found  that  in  both  urine  and  feces  less 
nitrogen  was  excreted  from  the  system  during  these  periods  than  dur- 
ing the  rest  of  the  month,  while  nutrition  remained  the  same.  This 
means,  of  course,  less  decomposition  of  albumin  and  the  formation 
of  less  urea.  The  monthly  hemorrhage  is  thus  attended  by  the  accu- 
mulation of  nitrogen  in  the  system,  and  not,  as  previous  very  tentative 
experiments  on  animals  had  indicated,  by  the  increased  decomposition 
of  albumin.  In  these  periodic  and  complementary  groups  of  processes 
the  blood  loses  albumin,  but  the  cells  of  the  body  demand  less  of  it, 
all  processes  thus  adapting  themselves  to  the  needs  of  the  sexual  life. 
It  is  surprising  to  see  how  many  of  the  studies  of  the  menstrual  curve 
of  urea,  nitrogen,  and  temperature  failed  to  take  account  of  either 
food  or  feces,  and  are  therefore  of  almost  no  value.  Whether  all  the 
monthly  variables  in  the  life  of  woman  can  be  connected  with  the 
catamenia  is  also  rarely  considered. 

Marro  ^  thinks  that  during  the  menstrual  epoch  the  girl  exhales  less 
carbonic  acid;  eliminates  less  urea  and  sulphuric  acid.  Calcic  phos- 
phate is  eliminated  in  less  quantities. 

Silva*  made  very  careful  observations,  although  only  on  a  few 
cases,  from  which  he  concludes  that  the  alkaline  reaction  of  the  blood 
in  normal  girls  is  less  during  menstruation ;  that  the  influence  of  elec- 

•  Zur  Theorie  der  Menst.  u.  z.  Behandlung  einiger  Mens.  Storungen.  Thera- 
peut.  Monatshefte,  February,  1897,  p.  93. 

'  Stoffwechsel  wahrend  der  Menst.     Zeitsch.  klin.  Med.,  1894,  pp.  72-90;    see 
also  Annali  di  Freniatria.     Turin,  1895. 
'  Annali  di  Freniatria.     Turin,  1898. 

*  Contribution  a  I'Etude  de  la  Physio-pathologie  de  la  Menst.  Arch.  Ital  de 
Biol.,  1896,  p.  435. 


490  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

trie  stimulation  of  the  vaso-motor  system  is  slight  during  the  flux, 
but  exquisite  during  the  rest  of  the  month.  The  same  he  finds  true 
for  the  influence  of  heat  and  cold.  Reaction  time  was  slower  and 
feebler.  Respiration  was  more  irregular  and  less  affected  by  external 
stimulation.  During  the  flow  a  strong  stimulus  less  readily  changed  the 
costal  to  the  abdominal  type  of  respiration.  Silva  holds  that  the  vaso- 
motor state  which  is  the  chief  defense  against  bacteria  has  a  real  effect 
upon  the  organism's  power  of  resistance ;  that  the  chemotactic  action 
of  the  leucocytes  probably  does  not  affect  the  state  of  the  vessels,  and 
that  in  low  nutrition  the  organism  is  easily  impregnated  by  poison. 
Menstruation  he  regards  as  somewhat  like  pyrexia,  and  calls  it  an 
embryonal  puerperal  process.  The  bactericide  power  of  serum  dimin- 
ishes with  alkalinity,  which  increases  the  consumption  of  albumin ; 
and  vice  versa,  immunized  animals  have  more  alkalinity.  This  com- 
ports with  Schroder's  view  that  during  menstruation  the  urine  and 
feces  excrete  about  one  half  less  azote,  its  budget  measuring  the  loss 
of  albumin. 

Normally  the  pulse  rate  increases  and  the  vascular  tension 
rises  as  the  period  approaches,  the  minimal  point  being  a  few 
days  after  the  cessation  of  the  flow  and  the  maximum  just 
before.  Temperature  may  increase  before  the  flow  as  much 
as  half  a  degree  F.  The  amount  of  urine  is  increased,  while 
the  urea  increases  just  before  and  after,  but  perhaps  falls  ofif 
a  trifle  during  the  flux.  The  thyroid  and  parotic  glands  and 
breasts  are  swollen,  and  the  Fallopian  tubes  congested.  Fin- 
klestein  showed  a  concentric  narrowing  of  the  field  of  vision 
beginning  one  to  three  days  before,  and  culminating  on  the 
third  or  fourth  day  of  menstruation,  and  vanishing  three  or 
four  days  later.  His  perimetric  tests  showed  this  narrowing 
of  the  field  for  red,  blue,  green,  and  yellow,  as  well  as  for 
white,  while  distinctness  of  vision  in  the  central  field  was 
also  slightly  impaired.  Traces  of  pigmentation,  so  marked 
at  this  period  in  the  anal  regions  in  some  monkeys,  where  it 
is  very  brilliant,  are  seen  under  the  eyes  and  around  the  nip- 
ples and  sometimes  on  the  renal  parts.  An  odor  quite  dis- 
tinct from  that  peculiar  to  the  organs,  and  aromatic,  is  often 
noticed,  and  the  voice  may  grow  dull  and  flat.  Women  are 
more  easily  hypnotized,  more  prone  to  jealousy,  ill-temper, 
and  confessionism,  can  make  less  accurate  and  energetic 
movements,  and  mental  activities  are  less  brilliant,  while 
these  powers  are  at  their  best  at  the  time  of  strongest  genitive 
impulses  and  greatest  conceptive  power. 


PERIODICITY  491 

The  total  period  of  twenty-eight  days  may,  according  to 
Minot,  be  approximately  divided  as  follows:  tumefaction  of 
the  mucosa  and  its  attendant  phenomena,  five  days;  men- 
strual flux,  four  days;  restoration  of  the  mucosa,  seven  days; 
resting  period,  twelve  days.  In  a  sense,  as  Ellis  ^  says,  a 
woman  during  her  reproductive  life  is  always  engaged  in 
menstruating.  Everything  she  does  or  says  must  be  judged 
by  its  exact  position  in  this  cycle  which  permeates  her  whole 
physical  and  psychical  organism ;  and  especially  in  unbalanced 
and  neurotic  persons,  even  guilt  for  crime  is  lessened,  so  that 
in  criminal  trials  this  should  always  be  considered.  This  is 
in  distinct  opposition  to  views  hke  those  of  Miss  F.  P.  Cobbe 
and  Mrs.  Fawcett,  the  latter  of  whom  declares,  in  contradic- 
tion to  Mr.  Harrison's  statement,  that  nearly  "all  women  are 
subject  to  functional  interruptions  absolutely  incompatible 
with  the  highest  forms  of  continuous  pressure,"  that  "the 
ordinary  healthy  woman  is  as  fit  for  work  every  day  of  her  life 
as  the  ordinary  healthy  man."  Miss  E.  B.  Gamble  asserts 
that  these  eternal  wounds  of  love  and  their  cicatrization, 
which  may  even  account  for  woman's  smaller  size  as  com- 
pared with  man,  which  fill  the  month  with  a  drama  which  has 
a  new  motive  each  day,  and  often  makes  her  an  invalid  one- 
fifth  of  the  time,  are  normally  pathological,  and  due  in  some 
way,  she  does  not  attempt  to  explain,  to  long  ages  of  man's 
brutality. 

Although  every  recurrent  period  has  the  closest  rapport 
with  the  neuro-psychic  functions,  the  few  first  and  last  men- 
struations have  a  far  greater  influence  upon  the  brain  and 
soul  than  do  those  when  the  sexual  rhythm  is  best  estab- 
lished. The  psychoses  caused  by  the  former  are  often  acute 
and  stormy.  The  first  periods  are  often  very  irregular  in 
time,  sometimes  occurring  once  in  three  to  five  months,  one 
in  two  years,  or  even  more.-  This  has  a  very  disturbing 
effect  upon  the  organism.  Esquirol  thought  one-sixth  of  all 
psychic  diseases  in  women  were  influenced  if  not  caused  by 
menstruation.    A  similar  view  also  led  Morel  to  ascribe  great 

'  On  these  points  see  Ellis:   Man  and  Woman,  p.  251  et  seq.,  also  p.  247. 
'  P.  I.  Kovalevski :    Des  Menstruations-Zustand   und  der    Mens.  Psychoseq. 
Med.  Wochensch-i  St.  Petersburg,  1894,  p.  216  et  seq. 


492  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

etiological  importance  in  insanity  to  the  way  in  which  first 
menstruation  was  established.  Headache,  tearfulness,  irrita- 
bility, relaxation,  and  indisposition  often  appear  two  or  three 
days  before  the  illness  is  due;  and  often  these  symptoms  are 
repeated  every  twenty-eight  to  thirty-two  days,  three  or  four 
days  before  the  flux  appears ;  or  again  after  the  latter  has  once 
appeared,  six  months  may  elapse  before  another  occurs, 
while  the  above  nervous  symptoms  occur  monthly. 

The  normal  woman  in  her  prime,  no  matter  how  healthy, 
is  more  sensitive,  more  prone  to  depression,  excitable,  moody, 
feels  more  fatigued,  distracted,  suffers  pain  more  or  less  in- 
tense in  different  parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  head,  is 
liable  to  discontent,  quarrelsomeness,  unstable  in  appetite  and 
sleep,  disappointed,  feels  oppressed,  and  can  do  less  work 
with  mind  and  body.  She  is  liable  to  nausea,  palpitation, 
paranoea  and  hyper^esthesia,  a  feeling  of  heaviness  of  body, 
sick  headache,  partial  and  temporary  paresis,  prosopalgia, 
fickleness,  changes  from  elation  to  depression,  local  chills 
and  flushes,  etc.  These  symptoms  gradually  diminish  and 
finally  the  "rules"  cease.  Then  "the  woman  is  born  anew. 
She  is  vigorous,  energetic,  joyful,  well.  Her  soul  is  clean  and 
ready  for  ceaseless  work."  The  pains  were  those  of  childbirth 
on  a  small  scale.  We  might  say  that  in  the  one  case  the  race 
is  renewed  through  pain ;  in  the  other,  the  individual.  She 
is  now  at  the  very  top  of  her  condition,  most  brilliant,  beauti- 
ful, attractive  to  men,  and  most  attracted  to  them.  Before, 
she  needed  the  greatest  tenderness,  delicacy,  and  sympathy, 
but  gradually,  as  the  month  advances  she  becomes  more  inde- 
pendent and  often  a  little  less  dominated  by  her  affections. 
These  processional  changes  in  a  strong  and  healthy  nature 
have  something  of  the  magnificence  and  awfulness  of  Nature's 
primitive  revelation. 

During  just  the  time  when  savages  isolate  woman  and 
call  her  unclean,  she  is  really  in  her  fullest  flower  and  glory, 
and  she  must  begin  by  reenforcing  her  self-respect  at  this 
period.  She  must  have  freedom  to  control  the  entire  environ- 
ment, and  thus,  perhaps,  to  some  extent,  the  time  of  her 
month.  With  the  birth  of  the  function  at  adolescence  comes 
one  of  the  most  wondrous  of  all  instincts,  namely,  just  how 
to  best  care  for  herself.     This  has  been  enfeebled  and  now 


PERIODICITY  493 

needs  more  or  less  help.  Man  can  never  understand  this,  and 
to  him  she  may  always  seem  somewhat  more  unique  and 
strange  then.  The  nerves,  feelings,  and  the  muscles  need 
a  regimen  varying  in  individual  women  more,  perhaps,  than 
the  whole  range  of  male  variability.  In  this  women  differ 
from  each  other  more  than  they  differ  from  man.  Into  this 
field  I  can  not  enter;  but  happy  she  who,  at  twenty-five,  has 
really  achieved  freedom,  intelligence,  and  true  self-knowledge. 
During  the  first  few  days  she  is  introverted  to  strange  sensa- 
tions which  ideally  are  not  painful,  but  deliciously  and  some- 
times almost  ecstatically  charming.  The  volume  of  her 
emotional  life  is  greatest,  as  is  its  depth  and  range.  Then, 
actually  though  unconsciously,  if  entirely  healthful,  she  is 
more  attractive  to  man;  and  as  the  wave  of  this  great  cosmic 
pulse  which  makes  her  live  on  a  slope  passes,  her  voice,  her 
eye,  complexion,  circulation,  and  her  very  dreams  are  more 
brilliant.  She  feels  her  womanhood  and  glories  in  it  like  a 
goddess.  Her  toilet  is  never  so  detailed,  even  where  it  is 
most  hidden,  to  any  other  eye  than  her  own.  The  flow  itself 
has  been  a  pleasure  and  the  end  of  it  is  a  slight  shock.  The 
instinct  to  conceal  is  a  part  of  female  coyness,  which  is  di- 
rected only  toward  others,  and  she  is  most  of  all  reserved 
toward  any  chosen  one.  In  the  earhest  stirrings  of  the 
adolescent  ferment,  she  has  first  dreamed  of  some  ideal  of 
manhood  and  is  altruistic,  and  only  later  comes  the  concep- 
tion of  selfhood.  Solitude  and  the  country  develop  ideals  of 
others,  and  society  and  the  city  tend  toward  the  self-center. 
So  far  from  ever  having  wished  herself  a  male,  she  exults  in 
her  womanhood  as  something  superior,  and  feels  it  worthy  of 
love,  reverence,  protection,  care,  and  service.  In  early 
adolescence  her  impulse  is  to  make  herself  absolutely  perfect. 
When  her  cycle  is  complete,  her  whole  life  must  be  regulated 
to  prepare  for  the  next.  She  develops  new  sentiments,  in- 
stincts, and  insights,  is  a  charm  to  herself  and  both  a  fascina- 
tion and  a  study  for  others;  and  because  these  days  are  not 
all  on  a  dull,  prosaic  level,  her  life  is  larger  and  explores  all 
the  possibilities  of  humanity,  so  that  she  is  less  in  need  of 
supplementing  her  own  individual  limitations  by  the  study 
of  the  alien  lessons  of  the  schools.  So  much  comes  to  her  by 
intuition  and  experience  that  her  way  of  wisdom  is  larger  and 


494  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

must  always  seem  more  esoteric  and  mystic  to  man.  Thus 
slie  illustrates  the  type  of  wholeness,  rather  than  halfness, 
which  a  German  scholar  has  suggestively  described.^ 

Every  day  of  the  twenty-eight  she  is  a  different  being, 
and  the  wide  range  of  circumnutation  which  explores  the 
pleasures  and  pains  of  life,  its  darkness  and  its  light,  its  de- 
pressive and  exalted  states,  its  hopes  and  fears,  its  sense  of 
absolute  dependence  and  of  independence,  sometimes  almost 
to  the  declaration  of  war  of  sex  against  sex,  reveals  her  as  a 
more  generic  creature  than  man,  less  consistent  than  he  if  we 
compare  days  or  hours,  more  so  if  we  compare  months  as  the 
units  of  her  life.  Is  all  this  health  or  disease,  normal  or  ab- 
normal, or  half-way  between,  is  a  question  often  asked,  but 
which  can  not  be  answered  till  we  know  whether  the  human 
race  realizes  its  ideal.  This  phenomenon  has,  perhaps,  had 
very  much  to  do  in  the  development  of  the  persistent  concep- 
tion that  man  is  suffering  from  the  effects  of  great  calamity 
or  error  in  the  remote  and  forgotten  past,  that  has  perverted 
and  left  its  mark  upon  his  nature. 

Very  different  are  the  phenomena  in  girls  handicapped 
by  morbid  nervous  periodicity.  All  the  preliminary  symp- 
toms are  exaggerated.  On  or  near  the  culminating  day  of 
first  menstruation,  a  slight  shock,  joy,  or  pain,  may  cause  an 
hysterical  outbreak,  and  if  the  normal  menstrual  endeavors 
are  thwarted,  abnormal  molimina  are  intensified.  Each  stage 
of  the  month  has  its  onset  of  feelings,  thoughts,  perhaps  acts, 
psychic  scenery  and  color  generally,  and  sometimes  the 
doubts,  disturbances,  and  comparisons  of  one  stage  from  the 
standpoint  of  another,  cloud  not  only  the  future  but  may 
tend  to  nervous  and  even  mental  weakness.  There  is  a  man- 
and  school-bred  kind  of  logical  consistency  to  impose  which 
upon  her  is  an  outrage  to  her  nature.  More  often  in  such 
cases  the  impulses  of  each  stage  may  break  away  from  con- 
trol by  the  others,  and  impulsiveness,  epileptic  symptoms, 
senseless  terrors,  prrecordial  anxiety,  pyromania,  the  assump- 
tion of  an  alien  role,  grave  illness,  one-half  of  which  is  real 
and  the  other  half  sometimes  consciously  feigned,  and  some- 

'  Die  Ganzen  und  die  Halben  :  Zwei  Menschheitstypen.     Deuts.  Rundschau, 
August,  1900,  pp.  213-242, 


PERIODICITY  49S 

times  honestly  fancied,  may  occur.  Hysteria,  more  often  in 
its  mild  form  of  uncontrollable  weeping,  laughing,  or  globus 
hystericus,  often  makes  its  first  appearance  at  the  time  of 
first  menstruation.  Slight  epilepsy  in  the  form  of  brief  faint- 
ing fits  is  liable.  The  girl  falls,  perhaps  with  a  cry,  has 
cramps,  staring  eyes,  rapid  pulse  for  a  few  minutes  and  recov- 
ers, and  then  is  as  usual  till  the  next  period.  First  menstrua- 
tions after  childbirth  and  those  at  the  beginning  of  sexual  life 
are  often  attended  by  similar  psychic  symptoms.  Occasion- 
ally it  may  cause  improvement  of  specific  troubles,  e.  g.,  of 
chorea,  and  when  it  first  appears  as  something  unknown  and 
unexpected,  the  dangers  to  psychic  equiHbrium  are  greater, 
as  also  when  there  is  a  tendency  to  specific  diseases,  as  of 
the  lungs,  heart,  etc. 

The  effects  of  menstruation  upon  previously  existing 
m.orbid  mentation  and  of  the  cessation  of  periods  upon  the 
onset  of  disease  and  its  return  with  convalescence,  do  not 
indicate,  as  is  usually  thought,  a  causal  relation  between  the 
two,  but  rather  both  are  perhaps  concurrent  and  independent 
effects  of  the  same  cause,  like  exhaustion  and  rest.  Some- 
times, indeed,  the  beginning  and  end  of  this  period  have  no 
efifect  on  the  progress  of  psychic  disease.  Selager,  Schroder, 
Krafft-Ebing,  and  Algeri  think  it  intensifies ;  and  Marci  and 
Kovalevski  hold  that  it  may  often  even  mitigate  the  intensity 
of  insane  states.  Abnormal  brain  conditions,  then,  must  be 
regarded  as  concurrent  symptoms  of  anomalous  menstruation, 
and  not  as  the  cause  of  it.  Periodicity  with  similarity  of 
symptoms  on  successive  months,  brief  duration  and  recovery, 
circular  insanity  with  attending  depression  or  exaltation,  and 
obscenity  in  word  or  act,  often  indicate  that  the  perversity  is 
of  menstrual  origin.  Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  mental 
disturbance  seems  the  direct  and  immediate  effect  of  arrest 
or  excess  of  fiux.  Some  psychoses  are  vicarious  for  men- 
struation. 

Very  characteristic,  although  rare,  are  cases  of  vicarious  puerperal 
bleeding  at  the  nose,  stomach,  and  elsewhere.'  This  is  far  less  alarm- 
ing and  far  less  common  than  periodic  hemorrhages  near  the  meno- 

•  See  a  good  typical  case  in  a  girl  of  fourteen,  in  the  New  Zealand  Medical 
Journal,  1895,  p.  157. 


4-9^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

pause.*  It  may  be  in  some  respects  compared  with  so-called  pregnant 
menstruation,  which  is  really  pathological  bleeding  and  perhaps  about 
as  infrequent.'  This  strange  reciprocity  is  complicated  by  the  curious 
clinical  fact  that  mental  disturbance  should  be  much  more  frequent 
at  the  natural  period  of  the  climacteric  than  when  the  menstrual  func- 
tion is  suddenly  inhibited  by  accidental  cause.^  Meyer  urges  that  the 
causes  of  abnormalities  and  their  results  are  "not  to  be  sought  alone, 
and  indeed  not  predominantly  in  the  sex  organs,  but  in  every  organ 
of  the  body." 

Menstrual  irregularities  which  seem  to  be  everywhere  increasing 
are  usually  grouped  under  three  heads :  disorders  of  defect,  or  amen- 
orrhea;  of  excess,  or  metrorrhagia;  of  perversion,  or  dysmenorrhea. 

(a)  Amenorrhea  may  be  partial^  involving  action  of  the  ovaries 
only.  In  such  cases  the  monthly  flux  may  be  regular  and  normal  in 
both  quantity  and  quality,  but  ovulation  does  not  occur.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  ovaries  may  do  their  part,  but  the  uterus  remains  inactive. 
In  such  cases  rhe  discharge  does  not  occur.  These  main  defects,  as  well 
as  under-functioning  of  the  Fallopian  tubes  and  vagina,  may  of  course 
occur  in  all  degrees,  from  complete  absence  up  to  normal  activity,  and 
even  be  well-proportioned  in  amount  and  properly  connected  in  time. 
Non-ovulation  is  very  hard  to  diagnose,  so  that  suppression  of  the 
flow  is  the  chief  fact.  The  latter  may  be  temporary  or  prolonged ;  so 
complete  that  almost  none  of  the  characteristic  sensations  or  symp- 
toms are  felt,  or  the  flow  may  be  only  a  slightly  paler  color,  at  a  little 
longer  interval  or  with  reduction  in  quantity.  In  such  cases  supple- 
mentary hemorrhages  often  occur.  Puech,  whose  statistics  are  still 
the  best,  found  these  complementary  escapes  of  blood  to  occur  in  the 
order  of  frequency  as  follows :  most  often  it  is  vomited  from  the 
stomach,  next  most  frequently  it  escapes  from  the  breasts,  then  come 
hemorrhages  from  the  lungs,  throat,  mouth,  nosebleed,  discharges 
from  the  lower  limbs,  trunk,  back,  walls  of  the  thorax ;  intestinal  piles, 
swollen  gums  or  eyelids,  lacrymal  glands,  urine,  hands,  hair,  ears, 
umbilicus,  salivary  glands,  cheeks,  etc.,  may  bleed.  Indeed,  spontane- 
ous supplemental  hemorrhages  may  occur  almost  anywhere  or  produce 
congestion  in  any  organ. 

The  causes  of  suppression,  besides  the  chief  uteropathies  and  preg- 
nancy, are  many,  some  well-established  and  others  obscure.  Of  all 
these  processes  the  ovaries  are,  biologically  considered,  the  center 
and  soul,  so  that  any  trouble  here  causes  hesitation  or  crepuscular 
menstruation,  and  may  slowly  and  entirely  check  it,  as  is  seen  in  cases 
where  the  ovaries  have  been  removed.  Among  the  non-genital  causes 
of  partial  or  total  suppression,  chlorosis  and  anemia  are  very  common. 
Consumption  has  a  gradually  suppressive  effect;  so  does  obesity,  and 
several  urinal  and  sexual  abnormalities.     Strong  or  sudden  emotion 

*  Cincinnati  Lancet-Clin.,  September  26,  1896. 
»  Levy.  Archiv  f.  Gyn.,  Bd.  15,  pp.  361-383. 
'  Barus.     Scalpel,  July,  1896. 


PERIODICITY  497 

can  prevent  or  almost  momentarily  arrest  the  flux,  and  psychic  states 
have  an  immediate  and  profound  influence  in  both  increasing  and 
diminishing  it.  The  face  itself,  which  grows  pale  or  flushed  with  every 
change  of  sentiment,  and  reflects  each  effect  of  pleasure  or  pain,  says 
Auvard  in  substance,  responds  no  more  delicately  to  every  change  of 
moral  and  intellectual  states  than  do  organs  involved  in  menstruation. 
Fear,  whether  sudden  or  chronic,  great  dread  or  desire  of  pregnancy 
in  young  married  women,  certain  hysterical  manifestations,  study  or 
worry  about  lessons,  bad  air,  constrained  positions,  improper  or  fluc- 
tuating temperatures  either  local  or  general,  change  of  diet,  of  regi- 
men, environment,  the  honeymoon,  medication,  many  unknown  and 
idiopathic  causes,  may  lead  to  the  same  results.  The  treatment  of  so 
complex  a  disorder,  it  need  scarcely  be  said,  should  be  mainly  directed 
to  the  removal  of  its  cause,  and  can  be  completely  restorative  only 
when  taken  before  bad  menstrual  habits  have  been  too  long  confirmed 
or  too  far  advanced. 

(b)  Metrorrhagia,  or  excessive  menstruation,  may  appear  in  ab- 
normal hemorrhages  from  almost  any  part  of  the  genital  organs.  If 
the  female  organs  in  all  their  varied  functions,  including  parturition, 
are  more  prone  to  hemorrhages  than  those  of  the  male,  the  former 
bear  the  loss  of  blood  far  better  and  seem  to  have  greater  spontaneous 
styptic  or  stanching  power,  and  woman's  more  anabolic  activities 
make  all  loss  good  sooner  and  with  greater  ease  than  does  the  male 
organism.  Excess  may  appear  in  quantity,  duration,  and  frequency, 
and  these  forms  often  have  an  intimate  reciprocity.  At  the  pubertal 
instauration  of  the  periods,  as  well  as  at  the  menopause,  various  forms 
of  excess  are  liable.  Excluding  local  mechanical  causes  and  also  those 
due  to  changes  in  the  composition  of  the  blood,  certain  cardiac  affec- 
tions, neuralgia  and  many  psychic  states  and  processes,  cause  uterine 
congestion,  and  may  aggravate  any  or  all  of  the  factors  of  menstru- 
ation. Abdominal  compression  is  prominent  among  the  disturbances 
that  cause  aggravation  of  these  disorders.  All  such  forms  of  excessive 
activity  of  course  involve  loss  of  vital  energy  and  keep  the  unfortunate 
subject  on  a  low  plane  of  vigor  and  emotional  tone,  check  the  later 
stages  of  mental  and  bodily  growth,  and  impair  the  power  of  normal 
procreation,  and  often  before  the  danger  is  fully  realized  condemn 
girls  to  a  life  of  semi-invalidism  that  might  have  been  avoided  by  a 
little  more  care  and  wisdom  at  the  critical  time  when  these  functions 
were  being  first  established  and  regulated. 

(c)  Dysmenorrhea,  the  third  form  of  abnormality,  is  often  marked 
by  colic,  which  is  to  the  smooth  or  involuntary  what  cramp  is  to  the 
striated  or  voluntary  muscles.  The  normal  contraction  of  the  uterine 
muscles  is  not  perceived,  but  their  painful  action  is  analogous  to  the 
discomfort  of  indigestion,  colic  of  the  kidneys,  or  palpitation  of  the 
heart.  Many  varieties  and  symptom-groups  have  been  proposed,  but 
most  features  are  common  to  all  forms.  The  pain  is  intermittent,  like 
the  contractions  which  cause  it.  It  is  ill-defined  as  lumbar,  abdominal, 
hypogastric,  crural,  etc.    It  is  worst  just  at  the  time  of  the  discharge 

33 


49^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

or  just  before,  and  often  hinders  sleep.  The  flux  may  be  serous,  or 
clotted,  may  contain  villosities,  the  detritus  of  decaying  tissue,  or  it 
may  be  scanty  and  thin.  The  importance  of  these  pseudo-menstrua- 
tions, says  Auvard,  is  secondary,  and  they  may  be  more  frequent  tnan 
is  suspected  in  less  observed  normal  cases.  Sometimes  the  pain  at  the 
crisis  is  so  great  that  the  next  recurrence  is  dreaded  almost  like  j)ar- 
turition,  and  its  discomforts  anticipated  by  those  endowed  with  v  vid 
imagination.  Often  such  accompaniments  as  bad  breath,  flushes  and 
pallor,  and  faintness  are  watched  for  with  apprehensions,  which  raay 
themselves  become  a  cause  of  depression  or  debility.  The  source  of 
this,  as  of  all  the  other  genetopathies,  may  be  congenital  or  even 
hereditary,  but  very  often  its  origin  is  in  the  nervous  system.  Vhe 
tubes,  ovaries,  or  vagina,  as  well  as  the  uterus,  may  contribute  to  dy:5- 
menorrhea. 

Many  of  the  disturbances,  which  are  hardly  less  complex  or  mani- 
fold than  the  causes  of  sterility,  have  been  themes  for  clinical,  surgical, 
and  physiological  study,  and  together  make  up  a  rich  body  of  data 
which  constitutes  the  science  of  the  gynecologists  and  fills  their  jour- 
nals. But  some  plain  and  simple  statement  of  the  significance  and 
dangers  of  these  periods  should  be  an  essential  part  of  the  educational 
equipment  of  every  girl  on  or  before  reaching  this  age. 

Dr.  C.  Clark  ^  held  that  there  were  no  forms  of  insanity 
expressive  of  particular  types  of  menstrual  irregularity.  Irri- 
tability, depression,  and  stupor,  the  three  types  of  psychic 
reflex  from  this  can  not  be  ascribed  to  special  forms  of  it. 
Icard  ^  has  constructed  a  table  of  great  value,  although  based 
upon  only  three  hundred  and  forty-nine  cases,  indicating  the 
relative  frequency  of  various  forms  of  psychic  perversion  ob- 
viously menstrual  in  character.  Most  common  is  a  group  of 
disorders  of  middle  life,  which  he  designates  somewhat  col- 
lectively as  acute  inania  and  impulsive  and  nameless  delirium. 
Next  most  common  come  religious  delusions,  quite  frequent 
near  the  menopause.  Then  follow  in  order  of  frequency, 
suicidal  impulses,  most  of  which  are  in  middle  life,  genesic 
excitation,  melancholia,  homicidal  impulses,  illusion  and  hal- 
lucination, pyromania  most  frequent  at  puberty,  kleptomania, 
dipsomania,  spells  of  jealousy,  lying,  and  calumny.  Icard 
concludes  that  the  menstrual  function  in  these  cases,  where 
predisposition   exists,   creates  a   psychological   state,    varying 

'  Jour,  of  Mental  Science,  1888,  p.  386. 

*  La  Femme  pendant  la  P6riode  Menstruelle,  par  D.  G.  Icard,  Paris,  1890^ 
p.  283. 


PERIODICITY  499 

all  the  way  from  simple  moral  malaise  or  disquietude  to  posi- 
tive alienation,  with  complete  loss  of  reason,  morality,  and 
responsibility.  In  such  cases,  those  who  know  most  will 
pardon  most.  Wherever  crime  occurs  in  such  states,  he  would 
persistently  raise  the  question  of  legal  accountability.  The 
sympathies  between  the  brain  and  reproductive  organs  are  far 
more  intimate  than  has  hitherto  been  suspected.  Even  hys- 
teria, epilepsy,  chorea,  chlorosis,  and  exophthalmic  goitre  are 
classified  among  the  neuroses  of  menstruation.  Abnormality 
of  this  function  is  a  predisposing  cause  to  any  of  the  obvious 
disturbances  that  heredity  or  the  nature  of  any  other  troubles 
of  body  or  mind  may  determine.  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain 
whether  psychic  disturbances  have  a  more  immediate  and 
profound  efifect  on  menstrual  disorders  or  vice  versa,  but  the 
relation  of  body  and  mind  is  nowhere  more  intimate  than 
here,  and  a  psychology  that  does  not  take  careful  account  of 
this  is  defective. 

In  an  important  article,'  a  large  number  of  cases  of  crime  in  the 
menstrual  state  are  quoted  from  Krafft-Ebing,  Tuke,  Pellmann,  West- 
phal,  Mabille,  Girand,  and  others.  As  typical  as  any  are  the  fol- 
lowing: 

Z.,  a  peasant  woman,  aged  twenty-two,  set  fire  to  her  own  hut. 
Up  to  the  age  of  ten  she  was  normal,  but  afterward  led  a  hard  life; 
menstruation  began  at  sixteen  and  was  attended  by  pain  in  the  head 
and  collapse.  She  married  at  twenty,  but  was  childless.  During  the 
summer  preceding  her  crime  the  courses  ceased,  but  in  their  place 
came  praecordial  anxiety  and  irritation,  headache,  restlessness,  loss  of 
sleep,  and  nameless  dread.  Her  husband's  relatives  beat  her,  and  she 
was  thought  stubborn  during  her  periods.  For  a  supposed  neglect  due 
to  her  confused  state  she  was  beaten  on  the  head,  and  broke  out  into 
a  fit  of  anger  that  made  her  violent  but  unconscious.  When  the  family 
had  retired  and  she  had  come  to  herself,  she  imagined  assaults  and 
other  terrible  things,  and  finally  fired  the  roof  and  felt  great  satisfac- 
tion. On  hearing  the  alarm  she  aroused  her  husband  and  helped  to 
extinguish  the  flames.  On  the  same  night  menstruation  appeared  and 
she  felt  reborn  to  a  new  life.  All  her  troubles  ceased  and  she  con- 
fessed everything  openly. 

Another  case  was  a  twenty-year-old  daughter  of  a  professor,  well- 
bred  and  trained  but  of  nervous  heredity,  and  who  had  convulsions  in 
childhood  but  no  disease.  With  the  first  menstruation  at  fourteen  came 
great  access  of  fear,  which  she  could  not  account  for  or  define  the 

'  The  Menstrual  State  and  Psychoses,  by  P.  I.  Kovalevski.  Russian  Archiv 
Psychiatrie.      Kharkov,  1894,  pp.  73-131. 


500  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

object  of.  She  was  restless,  ran  from  place  to  place,  sobbed,  prayed, 
but  when  she  knelt  blasphemous  words  forced  themselves  into  her 
mind  in  connection  with  the  Blessed  Virgin,  Jesus  and  his  saints,  until 
she  beat  her  head  against  the  wall  and  tried  to  spring  from  the  window 
and  choke  herself.  She  understood  well  that  it  was  all  disease,  but  it 
drove  her  to  resolve  on  suicide.  This  state  lasted  about  three  or  four 
days  and  ceased  with  the  flow,  when  she  became  again  cheerful,  only 
to  renew  all  these  symptoms  with  great  exactness  in  twenty-eight 
days,  the  first  being  the  most  painful.  Thus  in  a  year  and  a  half  there 
were  fifteen  such  attacks,  till  at  last  under  treatment  the  psychical 
troubles  ceased,  slight  symptoms  of  which  were  felt  two  years  later 
on  bereavement.  These  attacks  were  severest  in  September,  October, 
November,  and  March,  and  during  the  summer  were  mitigated  into  the 
form  of  sleeplessness,  uneasiness,  and  desolate  and  depressive  states 
of  mind.  This  condition  in  the  many  cases  of  which  this  is  typical 
usually  continues  up  to  the  climacteric. 

H.  Ellis  ^  says,  "  whenever  a  woman  commits  a  deed  of 
criminal  violence  it  is  extremely  probable  that  she  is  at  her 
monthly  periods."  Clouston  says  more  specifically,  "  the 
melancholiacs  are  more  depressed,  the  maniacal  more  rest- 
less, the  delusional  more  under  the  influence  of  their  delu- 
sions in  their  conduct,  those  subject  to  hallucinations  have 
them  more  intensely,  the  impulsive  cases  are  more  uncon- 
trollable, the  cases  of  stupor  more  stupid,  and  the  demented 
tend  to  be  excited,"  at  these  periods.  The  matter  is  by  no 
means  so  simple,  however.  Nacke  ^  concludes  from  a  careful 
study  of  ninety-nine  cases  of  chronic  psychoses,  that  in  regu- 
larity and  all  other  respects  these  periods  do  not  materially 
differ  from  those  of  normal  people,  and  that  this  influence  on 
the  course  of  such  disturbances  is  relatively  slight  and  incon- 
stant. In  sixty-five  cases,  no  influence  whatever  could  be 
detected.  Even  abnormalities  in  these  functions  had  no  greater 
influence  than  on  the  sane. 

Kiernan '  attempts  to  elaborate  and  further  illustrate  Moll's  con- 
ception of  mixoscopic  adolescent  states.  When  the  factors  that  make 
up  the  ego  are  disjointed,  primitive  instincts  often  arise  and  new  direc- 

'  Man  and  Woman,  p.  254. 

*  Die  Menst.  u.  ihre  Einfluss  bei  chron.  Psychosen.  Arch.  f.  Psychiatric,  1896, 
vol.  xxviii,  No.  1,  p.  169. 

'  See  articles  in  the  Alienist  and  Neurologist,  beginning  May,  1903,  en^'OtJ 
Mixoscooic  Adolescent  Survivals  in  Art,  Literature,  and  Pseudo-Ethics. 


PERIODICITY  501 

tions  are  taken.  Religious  ecstasy  may  become  associated  with  salac- 
ity. Algophily  may  become  love  of  seeing  pain  in  others  or  of  suffer- 
ing it  one's  self.  New  relations  between  the  cerebral  and  reproductive 
system  are  common.  Gross  ideas  of  sex  in  people  of  blameless  lives ; 
the  intensification  of  lust  which  may  grow  with  jealousy;  hypersensi- 
tiveness,  as,  for  instance,  "the  nervous  bladder" ;  philistine  conventions 
beside  erotic  imaginations  ;  prurience  in  prudery  ;  the  venting  of  sexual 
unrest  in  very  eccentric  ways,  as  in  the  case  of  Viola  Larsen,  who 
leaped  into  notoriety  in  the  West  by  stealing,  which  she  described  as 
wildly  intoxicating,  delicious,  beautiful,  wonderful,  a  girl  who  early 
burned  for  fame  and  took  delight  in  many  kinds  of  strange  antics — 
these  symptoms  illustrate  mixoscopia.  The  rapture  of  being  plunged 
into  the  waves  of  that  great  ocean  of  feeling  which  underlies  our  daily 
life  in  order  to  intensify  consciousness  and  feel  energy;  the  indulgence 
of  pungent  sexual  argot ;  in  "furtively  sniggering  over  indecency" ; 
the  depression  of  the  habitual  motives  of  modesty  into  the  realms  of 
the  unconscious;  the  "auto-erotism  of  the  Narcissus  type"  which 
sometimes  appears  as  a  result  of  excessive  use  of  the  mirror,  are 
further  outcrops. 

Gall  thought  there  were  periodic  changes  in  men  at  puberty 
analogous  to  the  twenty-eight-day  periods  in  women.  This  he 
held  was  noticed  chiefly  in  approaching  senescence,  especially 
in  the  feeble.  Their  complexions  grow  dull,  the  perspiration 
changes,  digestion  is  poorer,  and  there  may  be  periodic  sadness, 
discomfort,  and  inability  to  work. 

Sanctonius,  Keill,  and  Laycock  long  ago  held  this  view.*  Clark 
thinks  temperature,  and  Hammond  says  nosebleed,  headache,  excess 
of  uric  acid,  and  Clouston  that  the  nisus  generativus,  show  monthly 
rhythm ;  Ellis '  rather  inclines  to  accept  a  three-and-a-half  day 
period  as  the  unit,  with  weekly  and  fortnightly  cycles,  seen  perhaps 
also  in  pulse,  rate  of  respiration  and  weight,  although  even  his  very 
interesting  case  of  Perry-Coste  hardly  favors  a  strictly  lunar  period. 
We  should  expect  that  such  a  fundamental  rhythm,  if  it  existed,  would 
be  overlaid  by  many  social  and  auto-suggestions.  This  rhythm  may 
precede  and  survive  sexual  life,  and  menstruation  itself  may  be  a 
special  and  secondary  outcrop  of  a  more  basal  rhythm  that  extends 
from  the  cradle  to  the  grave  in  both  sexes. 

The  spells  of  discomfort,  distraction,  irascibility,  and  de- 
pression in  males  thought  to  be  of  this  character  are  probably 
much  more  common  than  is  generally  supposed.     Young  and 

>  See  Gould  and  Pyle  :   Anomalies  and  Curiosities  of  Medicine,  p.  28. 
»  Psychology  of  Sex,  p.  73  et  seq.,  and  Appendix  B,  p.  251. 


"yOl  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

robust  men  and  adolescents  are  often  subject  to  recurrent 
periods  of  wakefulness,  which  often  coincide  with  the  full 
moon,  and  may  be  due  to  its  light.  Indeed,  Mantegazza  holds 
that  the  menstrual  periods  were  established  because  moonlight 
nights  were  favorable  to  courtship,  and  later,  when  the  rhythm 
was  well  established,  they  became  independent  of  lunar  periods. 
The  Sabbath  had  a  great  influence  in  fixing  the  twenty-eight- 
day  period.  Koster  (Periodische  Irresein)  thinks  that  nearly 
all  periods  in  periodic  disease  are  compounded  of  various  mul- 
tiples of  seven  days,  and  that  the  anomalistic  period  of  physio- 
logical month  of  twenty-eight  days  makes  a  veritable  tide  in 
the  health  of  man,  so  independent  of  sea  tides  that  Darwin's 
suggestion  of  these  as  causative  of  the  menstrual  rhythm  is 
unnecessary.  The  moon  is  47-55  thousand  miles  nearer  the 
earth  in  perigee  than  in  apogee,  and  exerts  nearly  one-sixth 
greater  magnetic  and  gravitational  effect  upon  the  earth. 
Kern,  in  his  treatment  of  periodic  psychoses,  thinks  most  of 
those  with  prominent  psychic  symptoms  develop  at  adolescence. 
Sometimes  melancholy  and  mania  succeed  each  other  with 
lucid  intervals,  in  great  regularity.  Where  there  is  much  vari- 
ation averages  sometimes  bring  it  out,  and  where  other,  e.  g., 
seasonal  periods  are  more  prominent,  this  rhythm  is  neverthe- 
less present.  Bartel,  who  ascribed  one-third  of  the  cases  of 
female  insanity  to  this  cause,  classifies  periodic  diseases  into 
those  which  do  and  those  which  do  not  coincide  with  the  men- 
sal  unit  of  time. 

Nelson,^  who  was  a  good  dreamer,  and  whose  methods  and 
results  are  so  far  the  best,  habituated  himself  to  recording  im- 
mediately, without  rising  from  bed,  all  his  dreams  and  com- 
puting them  by  a  method  designed  to  show  the  amount  of 
dream  energy  each  night  for  thirty  months,  and  found  a  distinct 
mensal  period.  His  sexual  activity  during  sleep,  measured 
by  involuntary  emissions  or  "  ekboles,"  showed  a  still  more 
marked  monthly  rhythm.  His  major  climax  also  was  near  the 
summer  solstice,  near  which  Boring's  curves  show  the  maximal 
number  of  conceptions. 

It  is  singular  that  a  process  eternally  and  regularly  repeated 
in  the  life  of  woman  has  never  been  regarded  as  quite  normal 

>  A  Study  of  Dreams,     Am.  Jour,  of  Psy.,  vol.  i,  p.  367. 


PERIODICITY  503 

or  physiological.  It  is  somewhat  less  unaccountable  that  it 
should  have  been  everywhere  considered  as  a  badge  of  infe- 
riority or  a  basis  of  exclusion  or  disgust.  In  accepting  this 
view  woman  has  exposed  herself  to  the  constant  temptation  to 
a  dissimulation  that  too  often  becomes  constitutional,  by  try- 
ing in  every  way  to  conceal  it,  even  though  she  aggravate  its 
dangers  by  efforts  she  should  not  then  put  forth.  This  lack  of 
candor  and  naturalness  must  affect  character  in  the  direction 
of  frankness  and  honesty.  On  the  other  hand,  this  aversion 
has  been,  as  we  saw,  favorable  so  far  as  it  tended  to  secure  se- 
clusion and  rest,  so  that  in  this  respect  superstition  did  the 
work  of  science.  This  strange  chronometry,  in  mysterious 
rapport  with  moon,  tides,  reproduction,  race,  climate,  and  all 
the  environment  in  its  every  item,  has  contributed  not  a  little 
among  many  savages  to  make  woman  an  object  of  superstitious 
awe;  and  even  if  it  has  had  nothing  to  do  with  keeping  her 
stature  inferior  to  man's,  has  made  her  more  many-sided,  so 
that  she  may  have  thus  been  better  able  to  reduce  his  polyga- 
mous instincts  by  becoming  herself  in  the  course  of  the  month 
several  different  kinds  of  person  and  appealing  by  turns  to  his 
pity,  his  passion,  and  ruling  him  now  by  sympathy,  now  by 
service,  now  by  admiration,  while  her  repertory  of  changes 
gives  her  an  added  charm  and  ever-stimulating  interest. 

Ever  since  Hippocrates  the  period  of  first  menstruation  has 
been  thought  to  be  very  critical  for  the  development  of  the 
nervous  system.  The  entire  genital  organism  is  congested ;  the 
volume  of  the  uterus  and  ovaries  increases ;  the  Fallopian  tubes 
grow  turgescent ;  the  breasts  are  enlarged  and  tender ;  the  thy- 
roid gland  swells;  the  nerves  are  tense  and  irritable;  from  250 
to  500  grams  of  venous  and  often  clotted  blood  are  lost 
normally,  and  this  of  itself  in  girls  not  properly  instructed  may 
cause  great  alarm,  aggravated,  as  it  often  is,  by  idiopathic  hor- 
ror of  blood,  which  indeed  it  may  cause,  and  which  may  still 
more  prompt  unhygienic  and  even  dangerous  modes  of  con- 
cealment, removal,  stanching,  etc.  It  may  thus  lay  deep  in 
the  nervous  system,  the  foundation  of  psychic  perturbations 
at  every  period.  Few  more  pitiable  objects  exist  in  nature  than 
a  girl,  especially  if  nervous  or  overworked,  who  must  encounter 
this  experience  for  the  first  time,  uninstructed  or  alone.  The 
quality  of  motherhood  has  nowhere  a  more  crucial  test  than  in 


504  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

meeting  the  needs  of  this  epoch.  The  individual  variations  are 
so  very  wide  that  every  girl  should  be  a  special  case  by  herself, 
and  all  reasoning  from  one  person  to  another  is  apt  to  be  fal- 
lacious. All  of  the  physical  and  psychic  phenomena  are 
peculiarly  prone  to  abnormal  defect  or  perversion,  and  for  a 
considerable  time  everything  that  in  the  least  degree  jeop- 
ards the  harmony  and  balance  of  the  many  factors  involved 
in  the  settled  establishment  of  regularity  and  normality  should 
give  way.  Now  begins  a  great  and  ineradicable  difference  be- 
tween the  physical  and  psychic  life  of  woman  and  that  of  man. 
Gynecology  is  by  general  consent  the  largest,  with  the  pos- 
sible exception  of  neurology,  of  all  the  specialties  of  medicine. 
Few  departments  of  the  profession  are  more  important,  and  it 
can  boast  some  of  the  greatest  and  noblest  of  practitioners. 
But  the  limitations  in  this  field  are  peculiar.  They  are  seen  in 
the  complacency  in  partial  views  that  ascribe  everything  to 
some  one  simple  theory  which  is  utterly  inadequate  to  the  sub- 
tleties of  nature — nerve  cycle,  endometric  degeneration,  ovula- 
tion as  primal  and  all-conditioning  in  menstruation,  or  make 
pelvic  anomalies,  or  metritis,  or  engorgement  of  the  base,  the 
keystone  of  the  arch.  The  diversity  of  theories  is  probably  not 
so  wide  as  the  range  of  individual  variations,  and  while  the 
latter  graduate  into  each  other  by  imperceptible  gradations,  the 
former  remain  rigid  and  unmediated,  and  their  representatives 
sometimes  resemble  hostile  camps.  So  in  treatment,  what  Dr. 
Jacobi^  said  eighteen  years  ago,  is  still  too  true.  Some  pre- 
fer the  knife,  others  the  cautery,  others  the  curette  and  irriga- 
tion with  lotions  or  tamponing,  others  supports,  internal  and 
external,  pessaries,  etc.  In  the  present  confusion,  the  chief 
points  of  safety  should  be  to  avoid  heroic  or  premature  treat- 
ment until  we  know  more  what  constitutes  excess  or  chronicity ; 
what  is  the  pathological  significance  of  versions,  catarrh,  in- 
flammations; until  discussions  concerning  the  nature  of  the 
disease  are  at  least  as  discriminating  and  animated  as  those 
concerning  treatment.  There  is  a  classic  treatment  of  certain 
diseases  like  pneumonia,  typhoid,  and  nephritis,  but  the  whole 
field  of  uterine  troubles  has  been,  and  still  is,  one  of  great  dis- 
traction and  uncertainty. 

*  Studies  in  Endometritis.     Am.  Jour,  of  Obstetrics,  1885,  vol.  xviii.     Seven 
valuable  articles. 


PERIODICITY  505 

There  are  now,  happily,  signs  of  a  reaction  against  the  re- 
cent excessively  surgical  tendency,  which  has  been  too  domi- 
nant, toward  a  large  view  of  the  whole  life  of  woman.  Special- 
ists are  beginning  to  realize  that  they  must  broaden  their  view 
from  the  pathology  of  her  organs,  till  lately  so  often  doomed, 
if  she  once  consulted  them,  to  the  entire  problem  of  regimen, 
and  know  at  least  as  much  about  woman  as  about  her  pelvic 
diseases.  Indeed,  not  a  few  experts  are  beginning  to  recog- 
nize that  this  larger  field  is  relatively  unknown  to  them,  and  that 
they  must  begin  the  study  of  the  new  or  higher  gynecology 
with  something  like  a  Socratic  confession  of  ignorance.  As 
long  as  they  hold  any  exclusive  theory  which  consigns  to  either 
ovaries,  uterus,  tubes,  or  central  nervous  system,  the  exclusive 
dominance,  or  assume  that  either  the  psyche  or  soma  is  always 
primal  or  causal,  little  progress  can  be  made.  Each  of  the 
modern  views  is  partially  correct  and  must  always  be  consid- 
ered as  a  possible  aspect  of  each  case. 

To  understand  a  woman's  body  and  soul  is  a  larger  problem 
than  to  understand  a  man's.  It  is  true  of  her  more  than  of 
him,  that  to  know  a  part  we  must  know  the  whole ;  first,  because 
her  nature  is  more  generic  and  less  specific,  and,  second,  be- 
cause reproduction,  the  deepest  secret  of  animate  nature,  plays 
a  larger  role  in  her  life.  Illness  constitutes  a  greater  element 
of  her  existence  and  is  in  a  sense  more  a  part  of  her.  Each 
woman  is  a  more  adequate  representative  of  her  sex  than  a 
man  is  of  his,  so  that  to  know  one  well  more  involves  knowing 
all ;  hence  experts  and  specialists,  apparatus  and  particular 
processes,  while  often  helpful,  are  more  liable  to  be  an  insult 
to  the  deeper  laws  of  her  being.  Our  medical  science,  our 
psychology,  and  our  philosophy  are  still  inadequate  to  answer 
the  questions  her  nature  propounds.  If  the  male  doctor  could 
occasionally  be  a  woman,  as  Plato  thought  he  should  be  sickly 
to  more  sympathetically  understand  those  with  whom  he  deals, 
this  would  avail  much,  but  might  reveal  more  new  problems 
than  answers  to  old  ones,  for,  despite  the  great  and  real  recent 
advances,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  modern  woman,  with  her  pro- 
gressive complexity  and  sensitiveness,  is  evolving  new  symp- 
toms and  disorders  yet  faster.  Perhaps  it  is  this  that  has  kept 
gynecologists  so  bound  down  to  pressing  needs  as  they  arise 
that  they  have  had  little  time  to  generalize  on  the  facts  within 


5o6  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

their  ken,  and  little  strength  to  rebase  their  practises  upon  larger 
views  of  woman's  nature.  Perhaps  our  medical  schools,  now 
happily  becoming  endowed,  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  do 
their  duty  in  the  lines  of  research  that  are  so  inviting  here. 
American  woman  is  herself  unique  enough  to  furnish  many 
special  problems  that  almost  cry  out  for  investigation.  Her 
status  is  changing  more  rapidly  here  than  elsewhere,  and  the 
future  of  our  race  depends  on  whether  for  good  or  for  ill,  but 
this  we  can  not  clearly  see  till  medicine  broadens,  here  at  least 
where  need  is  greatest,  to  include  anthropology,  and  all  study 
of  woman's  diseases  is  made  on  a  broad  background  of  biology 
and  heredity. 

No  one  who  has  once  abandoned  himself  to  the  fascination 
and  suggestiveness  that  all  parts  of  this  field  are  now  acquiring 
can  fail  to  hope  that  a  new  and  higher  synthesis  is  impending 
which  will  not  coordinate  menstruation  with  pregnancy,  and 
adolescence  with  senescence,  but  will  bring  together  the  results 
of  the  changes  in  the  quantity,  pressure,  and  alkalinity  of  the 
blood,  in  pulse  rate,  in  the  rhythm  of  output  of  carbonic  acid 
and  urea,  temperature,  nerve  tension  in  brain,  medulla,  cord, 
and  pelvic  plexus  and  ovaries ;  homologize  the  loss  of  the  endo- 
metrium and  its  regeneration  with  the  moulting  and  subse- 
quent reproduction  of  new  organs ;  correlate  normal  with  mor- 
bid changes ;  and  show  the  true  relation  of  these  processes  to 
pubertal  growth  on  the  one  hand  and  to  sexual  desire  on  the 
other,  as  well  as  to  fecundity.  It  is  also  apparent  that  the  key 
that  is  to  unlock  the  secret  of  all  these  relations  is  to  be  found 
in  the  biogenetic  field.  That  the  challenge  that  this  condition 
now  issues  to  science  will  soon  be  taken  up  more  successfully 
and  its  difficulties  overcome,  we  must  hope.  It  is  certain  that 
any  marked  advance  here  will  mark  an  epoch  in  our  knowledge 
of  both  man's  body  and  soul,  and,  what  is  more  vital,  will  help 
us  to  bring  the  future  mothers  of  our  race  to  a  better  discharge 
of  their  functions. 

Meanwhile  we  must  hold  fast  to  the  basal  fact  that  this 
process  must  be  absolutely  normal  and  complete  in  all  its  details 
or  the  mental  and  physical  well-being  of  woman  is  jeopardized, 
and  that  a  healthful  performance  of  this  function  is  essential 
to  a  well-balanced  mind.  If  every  organ  has  an  independent 
nervous  mechanism,  these  must  be  combined  with  reciprocal 


PERIODICITY  507 

interaction  from  a  rhythmically  pulsating  center  as  real  as 
that  which  controls  respiration  or  heart-beat.  Ophthalmology 
has  vastly  widened  its  scope  in  recent  years  by  entering  the 
school  and  doing  a  great  preventive  work  for  the  young. 
Gynecology  should  profit  by  this  example.  Woman's  sphere 
has  vastly  widened  of  late,  yet  she  is  not  equipped  for  the 
boundless  field  opening  before  her,  but  is  handicapped  by  need- 
less fashion  and  inveterate  habits  of  antihygienic  life.  Vital 
as  the  distinction  may  be  for  diagnosis,  it  is  often  impossible 
to  tell  whether  the  mental  symptoms  are  caused  by  defective 
menstruation  or  vice  versa.  The  whole  problem  of  the  relation 
of  the  mind  and  body  is  here  involved. 

It  is  frequently  assumed  that  among  individuals  of  the 
same  race  and  environment  an  early  beginning  goes  with  a  late 
cessation  of  menstruation,  and  in  individual  cases  this  is  dem- 
onstrated, as  is  the  fact  that  a  retardation  of  the  development 
of  this  function  goes  with  early  senescence.  In  general,  the 
former  at  least  must  be  regarded  as  exceptional.  Commonly,  if 
it  is  accelerated  prematurely  it  is  followed  by  early  involution, 
as  women  in  hot  climates  are  often  old  at  thirty.  In  the  main 
it  is  probable  that  those  who  mature  late  age  late.  It  would 
certainly  seem  as  if  the  interests  of  racial  advancement  re- 
quired at  least  a  progressively  later  ripening,  if  not  a  later 
decay,  and  that  most  effective  propagation  be  kept  near  the 
acme  of  maturity.  The  duration  of  this  best  age  for  offspring 
may  not  increase  or  decrease  concomitantly  with  that  of  men- 
struation, but  may  fall  within  its  limits  by  a  variable  interval.^ 

In  fine,  puberty  for  a  girl  is  like  floating  down  a  broaden- 
ing river  into  an  open  sea.  Landmarks  recede,  the  water 
deepens  and  changes  in  its  nature,  there  are  new  and  strange 
forms  of  life,  the  currents  are  more  complex,  and  the  phe- 
nomena of  tides  make  new  conditions  and  new  dangers.  The 
bark  is  frail,  liable  to  be  tossed  by  storms  of  feeling,  at  the 
mercy  of  wind  and  wave,  and  if  without  chart  and  compass 
and  simple  rules  of  navigation,  aimless  drifting  in  the  darkness 
of  ignorance,  amidst  both  rocks  and  shoals,  may  make  of  the 

'  The  curves  on  p.  508  will  aid  us  in  stating  the  many  unsolved  problems  here. 
The  lower  line  represents  the  age  of  first  menstruation  ;  line  2,  the  age  capable  of 
producing  viable  children  ;  line  3,  the  age  of  most  effective  heredity.     The  three 


5o8 


THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 


weak  or  unadvised  wrecks  or  castaways.  The  change  itself  is 
exciting,  and  half  knowledge  or  popular  and  perhaps  prurescc-nt 
fallacies  only  augment  instead  of  allaying  the  strain.  Four  or 
five  days  a  month  for  some  thirty  years  the  girl's  system  will  be 
depleted,  and  there  will  be  lassitude  with  peculiar  susceptibility 
to  physical  or  mental  shock,  and  complex  problems  of  regimen 
that  even  with  the  best  instruction  must  receive  a  large  residu- 
ary personal  solution.  Shall  she  withdraw,  and  make  or  ac- 
cept excuses  which  seem  to  her  a  kind  of  implicit  confession 
which  is  so  hard  even  to  those  nearest  her?     Does  she  show  or 


curves  are  schematic  representations  of  the  fertile  age,  of  which  a  pictures  early 
maturity  and  decay  with  deficient  effectiveness  ;  b  represents  later  maturity  and 
prolonged  fertility  ;  c  a  late  short  period  of  very  effective  productivity.  The  short 
lines  just  above  each  curve  represent  children  7,  9,  and  4  in  number,  progressivity 
being  their  upward  direction.  Thus  the  first  and  last  child  of  a  are  decadent  ;  the 
second  and  sixth,  which  are  horizontal,  just  maintain  the  status  of  the  parent ;  the 
third  and  fifth  add  a  little,  and  the  fourth  adds  most,  while  the  four  children 
of  c  are  all  progressive.  Frequency  is  greatest  in  a  and  least  in  c,  which  excels 
also  in  regularity  of  interval.  While  such  a  curve  might  be  constructed  for  any 
fertile  mother  who  had  already  reached  the  menopause,  or,  better  yet,  for  a  fertile 
grandmother,  in  point  of  fact  we  can  not  construct  any  part  of  such  a  general  curve 


AeelO 


JT^ 


a/       °^      c 


15 


30 


25 


30 


35 


55 


from  any  other  given  part  of  it.  We  do  not  know  whether  those  who  begin  to 
menstruate  late  attain  full  fertility  sooner  or  later  or  within  the  same  interval  as  those 
who  begin  early.  Perhaps  curve  b  should  be  very  steep  at  first  and  reach  line  2 
almost  as  soon  as  does  curve  a,  instead  of  crossing  it  at  a  greater  interval  than  it 
rises  from  line  i.  Perhaps  curve  c  is  not  the  one  that  ascends  highest,  and  per- 
haps it,  and  not  b,  is  most  prolonged  at  its  greatest  altitude.  Curve  a  may  really 
fall  later  than  does  c.  Statistics  of  viability  of  offspring  suggest  quite  an  interval 
between  lines  i  and  2,  and  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  period  of  pre- 
nubility  and  adolescence  should  be  prolonged  above  the  latter,  but  above  line  3  we 
have  no  clue  save  that  of  vague  popular  impression  or  abstract  theory.  Whether, 
and,  if  so,  how  long,  the  curve  becomes  horizontal  on  top,  or  whether  those  that 
reach  the  highest  level  do  so  latest  and  decline  earliest,  as  is  often  commonly 
assumed  among  the  educated  classes,  or  whether  nature  decrees  that,  to  do  the  very 
best  that  birth  can  do  for  offspring,  preparation  must  be  begun  early  rather  than 
late,  we  are  ignorant. 


PERlODiCiTV  5^9 

can  she  conceal  her  state  at  least  from  strangers,  or  will  they 
suspect,  or  must  she  make  an  effort  to  be  natural  ?  Shall  she 
accept  corsets,  long  and  heavy  skirts,  the  rush,  crush,  and  bustle 
of  social  obligations?  Shall  she  seek  the  information  or  ad- 
vice she  feels  the  need  of,  and  how  and  of  whom?  There  is 
almost  always  some  pain,  reflex  or  direct,  and  this  is  a  nervous 
handicap  which  may  tend  to  feverish  instability.  After  a  few 
periods  and  a  little  knowledge  she  often  learns  to  be  more  or 
less  anxious  about  either  regularity,  duration,  or  quantity,  or 
all,  and  practises  little  expedients,  stumbling  onward  in  the 
pathway  of  self-knowledge.  In  the  dim  depths  of  her  soul  she 
vaguely  feels  how  paramount  this  function  is,  especially  in  its 
initial  stage  of  incipiency,  at  least  for  her  good  looks,  spirits, 
and  ease  of  daily  duties,  but  at  the  same  time  she  infers  from 
observation  of  others,  and  perhaps  from  the  very  paucity  of 
information  given  her,  that  the  less  concession  made  to  this 
instinctive  sense  of  its  importance,  or  to  her  feelings  or  her 
sense  of  waning  vigor,  the  better.  The  change  in  her  own 
psychic  state  naturally  suggests  that  the  periods  are  all-condi- 
tioning, but  the  sentiment  of  her  environment  is  to  ignore  them 
as  unimportant  if  not  shameful.  She  may  have  experienced  a 
nervous  shock  at  the  first  flow,  or  suffered,  as  experts  tell  us  so 
many  still  do,  from  applying  cold  water  as  if  to  stanch  a  wound, 
or  been  the  victim  of  unusual  exposure  or  activity  at  the  critical 
time ;  or,  as  our  returns  show,  she  not  infrequently  tides  herself 
over  by  unwonted  coffee,  tea,  or  even  vinegar  or  tablets  of  vari- 
ous kinds,  that  often  acquire  unsuspected  vogue  in  school  cir- 
cles, where  such  expedients  occasionally  are  almost  comparable 
to  the  errors  of  incompetent  obstetricians  later,  which  Engel- 
mann  says  furnish  the  gynecologist  half  his  patients,  or  the 
fad  of  operation  when,  for  a  period  just  closing,  experts  were 
"  blinded  by  the  glitter  of  the  surgeon's  knife."  Everywhere, 
whether  in  the  profession  or  among  adolescents,  the  greater  a 
non-  or  half-understood  subject  like  this  is  felt  to  be,  the  more 
rankly  fads  and  extreme  and  special  theories  and  practises  arise 
and  flourish  for  a  season.  This  phenomenon  of  Hdcs  qiiacrciis 
intellectus  is  nowhere  so  well  illustrated  as  in  every  aspect  of 
sex,  and  is  itself  a  most  tempting  psychological  theme. 

But  my  point  here  is  one  I  have  nowhere  seen  stated,  viz., 
that  menstruation  now  forces  a  most  challenging  set  of  ques' 


SIO  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

tions,  conscious  and  unconscious,  upon  the  girl's  mind,  that 
of  themselves  constitute  a  great  strain  and  demand  for  some 
time  a  good  share  of  all  her  power  of  mentation.  Because  her 
puberty  is  shorter  and  its  manifestation  more  ostensive  and  the 
function  now  born  more  central  for  her  life  than  for  the  boy, 
this  psychic  incubation  is  more  important  if  she  would  emerge 
into  full  womanhood  unscathed.  Perhaps  to  this  we  must  add 
another  unnoticed  factor,  viz.,  fully  assimilated  knowledge 
that  immediately  becomes  a  part  of  life  is  strength,  but  that 
which  is  undigested  and  not  transformed  into  carrying  power, 
but  is  a  burden  to  be  carried  in  memory,  is  an  added  cause  of 
tension  and  fatigue.  It  devitalizes,  augments  worry,  and  if 
there  is  no  introspection  may  be  permanently  de-educational. 
Because  girls  accept  with  more  patience  than  boys  learning  that 
is  merely  conventional,  they  are  especially  exposed  at  this  period 
of  conformity  to  harm  by  pedagogic  fooleries  that  have  only  a 
factitious  school  value,  and  to  be  victimized  by  spurious  mental 
interests  just  when  real  ones  would  steady  them,  in  their  time 
of  greatest  danger  from  emotional  instability.  Vital  and  nor- 
mal intellectual  work  and  zest  has  a  power  already  manifestly 
hygienic,  but  with  possibilities  in  this  direction  needing,  and 
therefore  certain  of,  great  further  development.  That  con- 
cessions are  progressively,  if  unconsciously,  made  with  the 
increasing  feminization  of  American  schools  is  seen,  happily 
for  the  girls  but  unhappily  for  the  boys,  in  both  the  matter, 
method,  and  quantity  of  work. 

Savagery  has  great  advantage  even  over  modern  educa- 
tional life  in  that  it  everywhere  recognizes  the  need  of  seclusion. 
The  tepee,  or  booth,  or  grot,  so  commonly  set  apart  for  men- 
struant  girls,  often  purposely  built  so  low  that  they  can  not  stand 
but  are  forced  to  sit  or  lie  down,  suggests  so  far  sound  ideas  of 
health,  although  other  requirements  are  often  deleterious.  In 
many  ancient  civilizations  withdrawal  was  divinely  ordained 
and  enforced  by  penalties.  False  as  was  the  idea  of  unclean- 
ness  or  contamination,  in  practise  it  wrought  good.  While  of 
all  influences  right  muscular  exercise  can  best  smooth  out  this 
wave,  even  it  must  cease  for  a  time  at  the  onset  of  puberty 
when  the  organism  first  enacts  the  minimized  pantomime  of 
parturition,  as  children  rehearse  in  play  with  toys  and  dolls  the 
serious  business  of  life.     This  system  at  least  did  not  turn  out 


PERIODICITY  S^' 

either  the  hectic  or  the  faded  fraud  that  once  was  proud  of  semi- 
invahdism  as  a  dehcacy  that  was  thought  to  be  interesting,  and 
later  cuUivated  the  Grecian  bend,  which  is  its  instinctive  pos- 
ture, and  now  is  content  with  a  nervous  sprightHness  and  vivac- 
ity as  if  restlessness  were  brilHancy.^ 

Instead  of  shame  of  this  function  girls  should  be  taught  the 
greatest  reverence  for  it,  and  should  help  it  to  normality  by  reg- 
ularly stepping  aside  at  stated  times  for  a  few  years  till  it  is  well 
established  and  normal.  To  higher  beings  that  looked  down 
upon  human  life  as  we  do  upon  flowers,  these  would  be  the 
most  interesting  and  beautiful  hours  of  blossoming.  With 
more  self-knowledge  woman  will  have  most  self-respect  at  this 
time.  Savagery  reveres  this  state  and  it  gives  to  woman  a 
mystic  awe.  That  after  the  almost  universal  pubescent  initial 
seclusion  practised  among  primitive  people  it  is  so  commonly 
ignored,  is  perhaps  one  cause  of  tribal  arrest  or  decline.  Civ- 
ilization differentiates  the  sexes  in  nearly  every  respect.  The 
time  may  come  when  we  must  even  change  the  divisions  of  the 
year  for  woman,  leaving  to  man  his  week  and  giving  to  her  the 
same  number  of  Sabbaths  per  year,  but  in  groups  of  four 
successive  days  per  month.  But  Sabbaths  they  should  remain 
— days,  superior  to  others,  devoted  to  leisure,  to  higher  over- 
thoughts,  religious  sentiments  and  suggestive  of  a  lost  paradise, 
the  idea  of  a  more  precise  expression  of  her  nature  and  needs  at 
this  time  than  the  weekly  cycle  man  accepted  for  his  norm  from 
his  God  and  has  imposed  on  woman.  When  woman  asserts 
her  true  physiological  rights  she  will  begin  here,  and  will  glory 
in  what,  in  an  age  of  ignorance  and  sense,  man  made  her  think 
to  be  her  shame.  The  pathos  about  the  leaders  of  woman's  so- 
called  emancipation  is  that  they,  even  more  than  those  they 
would  persuade,  accept  man's  estimate  of  this  state,  disapprove, 
minimize,  and  perhaps  would  eliminate  if  they  could  the  very 
best  thing  in  their  nature.    In  so  doing  it  is  the  feminists,  who 

'  See  Engelmann  :  The  Health  of  the  American  Girl,  Trans,  of  So.  Surgical 
and  Gynecological  Association,  1890.  Hatfield  :  Dynamics  of  School  Puberty, 
Jour,  of  Am.  Med.  Ass'n,  November,  1899.  L.  Meyer:  Der  Menstruations  Pro- 
cess, Stuttgart,  1890.  R.  H.  Smith :  Preventive  Gynecology,  Am.  Jour,  of 
Obstetrics,  May,  1900.  Schaeffer:  Einfluss  der  Psychosen  auf  den  Menstruations 
Vorgang.  Allg.  Zeitsch.  f.  Psychiatric,  1893,  p.  976  et  seq.  Axel-Key:  Die  Pu- 
bertats  Entwickelung,  Verhandl.  d.  Internal,  med.  Cong.,  Berlin,  1890,  p.  67. 


5^^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OP   ADOLESCENCE 

are  still  apishly  servile  to  man  even  in  one  of  his  greatest  mis- 
takes, which  has  done  woman  most  wrong.  She  will  not  pro- 
fane her  own  Sabbath  of  biological  ordination,  but  will  keep  it 
holy  as  to  the  Lord,  for  he  has  hallowed  it  as  a  day  of  blessing 
from  on  high.  Those  interested  in  Sabbath  psychology  and 
pedagogy  can  find  no  better  suggestions  for  its  right  keeping 
than  those  written  in  the  language  of  woman's  needs.  This  is 
one  of  the  several  reasons  why  she  is  more  religious  by  nature 
than  man,  because  at  these  seasons  her  frame  of  mind  inclines 
her  to  a  natural  piety  and  sense  of  dependence  and  of  being  an 
organism  in  the  hands  of  a  higher  power.  Details  for  its  better 
observance,  attitudes  and  exercises  of  soul  make  a  suggestive 
theme  for  noble  women,  who  are  emancipated  from  the  man- 
aping  fashion  now  just  beginning  to  wane,  and  will  no  doubt 
sometime  be  wrought  out.  It  will  not  be  a  Lord's  day  of  Puri- 
tan severity  or  of  ancient  taboos,  but  of  joy  and  pride,  and  those 
first  rightly  initiated  into  its  observance  will  learn  to  look  for- 
ward to  its  recurrence  with  pleasure,  and  later  in  life  will  look 
back  to  the  months  and  years  of  their  novitiate  and  all  its  glow 
of  idealism  and  aspiration  somewhat  as  Jehovah's  people  re- 
membered the  precious  promises  of  old. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE,   BIOGRAPHY,   AND  HISTORY 

L  Plato's  boys — Neoptolemus  and  Telemachus — Aristotle's  description  of  youth. 
II.  The  disciples  of  Jesus — Youth  of  the  saints — The  age  of  chivalry.  III. 
General  characterization  and  results  of  the  study  of  description  of  youth  in 
biography  and  literature.  IV.  Men  of  Science.  V.  Literary  women.  VI. 
Difference  between  the  accounts  given  of  their  adolescence  by  men  and  women 
— Literary  men :    English,  American,  German,  and  French. 

Romance,  poetry,  and  biography  furnish  many  admirable 
descriptions  of  the  psychic  states  and  changes  characteristic  of 
every  stage  of  the  ephebic  transformation,  and  now,  before 
passing  to  a  more  detailed  account  of  its  normal  aspects,  it  may 
be  well  to  pause  and  consider  a  few  silhouettes  of  representative 
types,  beginning  with  the  Greeks,  whose  athletic  ideals  and 
regimen  of  it  were  described  in  Chapter  III.  These  cases,  like 
returns  to  questionnaires,  are  in  part  either  data  or  illustrations 
for  some  of  the  conclusions  of  later  chapters  in  which  they  are 
often  cited. 

I.  The  Platonic  dialogues  are  among  the  best  of  all  literary 
sources  for  the  study  of  the  pedagogy  of  adolescence.  After 
many  years  of  teaching  them  and  reading  Jowett  in  seminary 
classes,  it  is  ever  clearer  to  me  that  some  of  the  best  of  them 
owe  much  of  their  charm  to  the  noble  love  of  adolescent  boys. 
At  most  of  the  dialogues  one  or  more  of  them  were  present,  and 
Socrates  found  much  of  his  inspiration  in  them.  In  the  Laws, 
where  only  old  men  appear,  in  the  Timaeus,  the  Cratylus,  the 
Crito,  and  perhaps  the  Critias  alone,  among  the  authentic  dia- 
logues and  in  the  lesser  Hippias,  it  appears  that  no  youth 
were  present,  and  most  of  these,  especially  the  longer  of  them, 
by  general  consent  are  the  most  uninteresting,  if  not  tedious,  to 
modern  taste.  Of  the  twenty-seven  dialogues,  which  Jowett 
accepts,  with  about  one  hundred  and  ten  characters,  twelve  or 
fourteen  are  obviously  adolescents,  although  not  all  of  them 
stand  out  very  clearly. 

34  SI3 


SH  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Charmides  is  perhaps  the  most  glorious  of  all  Plato's  boys. 
He  appears  in  the  Palaestra,  where  the  dialogue  which  bears 
his  name  is  held,  drawn  to  the  conversation  of  the  sages  con- 
cerning temperance.  His  friend  and  lover,  Chaerephon,  a 
crazy-brained,  impetuous  young  man,  had  pronounced  him  the 
reigning  beauty  of  the  day,  whom  all  his  companions  loved, 
and  he  was  always  followed  by  a  train  of  admirers.  "  There 
was  not  one,  not  even  the  smallest,  who  looked  in  any  other 
direction ;  all  gazed  upon  him  as  upon  some  sacred  statue."  He 
was  said  to  be  yet  fairer  in  form  than  in  face.  There  was  a 
flutter  when  he  entered,  and  all  made  place  to  have  him  sit  be- 
side them.  "  All  the  world  seemed  enamored  of  him,  and 
amazement  and  confusion  reigned  when  he  entered."  His  soul 
was  found  to  be  as  beauteous  as  his  body,  so  that  he  best  illus- 
trates the  Greek  ideal  of  a  fair  soul  in  a  fair  body.  As  Socrates 
delicately  proceeds  to  strip  and  cure  his  soul  by  conversing  with 
him  on  temperance,  the  chief  Greek  virtue,  he  appears  an  almost 
ideal  illustration  of  this  also. 

Lysis  seems,  with  his  shyness,  impulsiveness,  and  artless 
candor,  his  insatiable  eagerness  to  hear  more,  perhaps  the 
youngest  of  Plato's  boys.  He,  too,  is  of  noble  birth,  and  is 
found  in  the  Palaestra  with  his  pugnacious  friend,  Menexenus, 
and  his  praiser  and  idolizer,  Hippothales.  Among  his  mates, 
all  in  festive  array,  having  just  offered  sacrifice  and  playing  at 
knuckle-bones.  Lysis,  with  a  chaplet  on  his  head,  was  pre- 
eminent among  all  the  rest  for  beauty  of  form  and  grace  of 
action.  Socrates,  with  characteristic  sympathy,  easily  engages 
him  in  conversation.  Your  parents  love  you  and  want  you  to 
be  happy,  but  do  they  gratify  all  your  wishes?  When  he  re- 
plies No,  that  even  his  father's  hirelings  can  drive  the  horses 
which  he  can  not,  Socrates  expresses  surprise,  but  leads  on  to 
the  truth  that  men  are  trusted  in  things  they  know.  The  dia- 
logue on  the  nature  of  friendship  is  given  added  zest  by  the 
concealed  presence  of  Lysis's  unwelcome  lover. 

Cleinias  in  the  Euthydemus  is  a  youth  exposed  to  the  rough 
horse-play  of  the  eristic  sluggers,  who  teach  wisdom  and  also 
fighting  in  heavy  armor,  until  Socrates  must  repeatedly  come 
to  his  rescue  and  give  him  encouragement.  He  is  a  lad  of 
illustrious  name,  in  wdiose  future  all  Athens  felt  a  deep  interest. 
Socrates  seeks  to  relieve  him  from  his  painful  bewilderment 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^5 

that  he  may  form  sound  opinions  and  no  longer  need  the 
Sophists  or  any  one  to  teach  him,  and  finally  leads  up  to  the 
conclusion  that  as  wisdom  is  the  only  good  he  must  become  a 
lover  of  it  or  a  philosopher.    "  That  I  will,"  concludes  Cleinias. 

These  "  figures  upon  whom  our  attention  centers  belong  to 
the  flower  of  Athenian  youth,  and  bear  that  stamp  of  breeding 
which  seems  to  have  been  a  birthright  of  noble  parentage,  which 
goes  far  to  justify  the  aristocratic  predilections  of  Plato.  Free 
from  concern  as  to  their  own  reputation,  they  have  no  thought 
of  concealing  the  '  wonder,'  which  Socrates  prizes  as  an  '  affec- 
tion peculiar  to  the  philosophical  mind.'  All  alike  display  a 
charming  simplicity  and  genuineness,  which  are  the  more  re- 
markable because  of  the  admiration  lavished  upon  them  by 
young  and  old.  It  speaks  well  for  healthfulness  and  sym- 
metry of  Hellenic  influence  that  a  universal  adoration,  partak- 
ing almost  of  a  religious  character,  has  imparted  to  them  no 
trace  of  vanity  or  self-consciousness,  the  taint  of  which  must 
have  inevitably  diminished  their  zeal  in  the  pursuit  of  truth." 

Meno  is  another  golden  youth,  highly  sophisticated, 
charged  to  overflowing  with  the  finished  definition  philosophy 
of  the  nihilistic  Gorgias,  whose  sophistic  half-knowledge  Soc- 
rates so  well  exposes,  who  is  so  examined  as  to  show  the 
fallacy  of  this  tendency  of  thought,  and  is  almost  tenderly 
taught  that  virtue  can  be  imparted  by  no  such  method.  At 
first  Meno  has  no  idea  of  any  general  conception  of  virtue,  but 
only  of  that  of  a  man,  or  woman,  of  every  age  and  state.  Then 
he  conceives  it  as  delighting  in  things  honorable  with  the  power 
to  get  them.  When  this  definition  is  upset,  he  complains  that 
Socrates  acts  on  his  mind  like  a  torpedo  shock.  To  others  he 
can  talk  well  of  virtue,  but  in  his  presence  he  is  perplexed. 
Every  soul  has  a  germ  of  latent  knowledge,  and  from  one  of 
Meno's  slaves,  also  a  boy,  the  Pythagorean  theorem  is  elicited 
and  the  doctrine  of  the  preexistence  of  the  soul  inferred  there- 
from. In  this  sense  virtue  is  teachable,  but  alas !  there  are  no 
teachers.  The  character  of  Meno  has  little  to  do  with  the 
Meno  of  history.  He  is  a  spoiled  child  of  fortune,  eager  to 
learn  from  any  one,  and  Socrates's  cross-examination,  which  is 
half  playful,  shows  forth  the  shortcomings  of  his  teachers  who 
had  neglected  dialectics. 

Ion.  the  rhapsode,  who  had  just  won  the  first  prize  for  his 


5i6  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

impassioned  recitations  of  Homer,  is  also  a  youth,  and  his 
discussion  with  Socrates  on  inspiration  and  sacred  madness, 
in  which  his  teacher  reaches  the  well-known  conclusion  that 
poets  are  sacred  persons  who  should  be  treated  with  respect, 
but  are  touched  with  madness  and  should  not  be  tolerated  in  a 
well-ordered  state,  must  also  have  acted  as  a  shock  upon  this 
elocutionist's  transparent  childlike  enthusiasm.  His  assump- 
tion that  by  being  always  in  the  good  company  of  Homer,  to 
whom  his  skill  was  restricted,  brightening  up  when  he  is  men- 
tioned and  growing  sleepy  when  others  are  discussed,  he  par- 
ticipated more  or  less  in  the  creative  power  of  his  author,  and 
could  even  judge  of  war,  medicine,  and  prophecy,  as  well  as 
experts,  falls  prostrate.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  the 
sequel  of  this  shock, 

Polus  is  an  impetuous  youth,  a  runaway  colt,  bad-man- 
nered, violent,  angry  at  first,  having  never  heard  the  other 
side,  fascinated  and  astounded  by  the  rhetoric  of  his  master  and 
ready  to  maintain  his  position  against  the  world.  As  Soc- 
rates develops  the  view  that  rhetoric  is  flattery;  is  a  "  shadow 
of  a  part  of  politics  " ;  the  evil-doers  are  more  miserable  if  they 
escape  than  if  they  suffer  penalty,  Polus  laughs  outright,  but 
early  in  the  dialogue  he  heeded  Socrates's  injunction  to  be  less 
prolix,  and  almost  seems  to  acquiesce  in  the  end  that  it  is  bet- 
ter to  suffer  than  to  do  injustice. 

Philebus,  confused  as  youth  so  often  is  concerning  the  rela- 
tion of  pleasure  to  goodness  and  wisdom,  and  his  friend,  Pro- 
tarchus,  the  noble  son  of  Callias,  inspire  one  of  the  best  exposi- 
tions of  this  favorite  Socratic  topic.  Philebus,  who  had  been 
his  teacher  and  perhaps  his  lover,  had  left  him  still  a  partizan 
of  pleasure,  but  had  not  taught  him  that  pleasure,  like  color,  is 
both  one  and  many.  The  problem  of  pleasure,  always  a  burn- 
ing one  with  youth,  is  implicated  with  that  of  the  infinite  and 
the  finite,  the  one  and  the  many ;  and  its  ethical  nature  and  the 
relations  to  knowledge  and  to  the  good  are  taught  in  a  way 
suggestive  to  modern  pedagogical  methods  in  college  phi- 
losophy. 

The  most  radiant  and  conscious  boy  beauty  of  all  the  more 
or  less  juvenile  interlocutors  of  Socrates  was  Alcibiades,  who 
first  appears  in  the  brief  and  doubtful  dialogue  bearing  his 
name.     Here  he  is  very  young  and  about  to  enter  public  life, 


ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    51? 

and  would  persuade  the  people,  but  of  what  and  to  what  end? 
Socrates  leads  him  to  say  that  he  would  seek  justice  rather  than 
wealth  or  power.  Only  the  virtuous  deserve  freedom.  "  Are 
you  free?  "  and  he  replies,  "  I  feel  that  I  am  not,  but  I  hope, 
Socrates,  that  by  your  aid  I  may  become  free,  and  from  this  day 
forward  I  will  never  leave  you."  We  have  another  glimpse  of 
this  favorite  in  the  Protagoras,  where  we  are  told  his  beard  is 
just  appearing.  In  the  Symposium  he  seems  in  the  early  twen- 
ties, and  intrudes  intoxicated  and  with  his  followers  into  the 
assemblage,  lawless,  a  lion's  whelp,  but  already  known  as  one 
of  the  ablest  and  most  gifted  of  all  Greeks.  He  tells  of  his 
vain  effort  to  ensnare  Socrates,  the  Silenus-faced  master  of  dia- 
lectics, by  his  homosexual  blandishments,  and  then  proceeds  to 
the  most  brilliant  eulogy  of  his  character.  Here  his  own  traits 
are  well  set  off  by  those  of  the  other  fair  youth,  Agathon,  whose 
encomium  on  love  is  an  almost  dithyrambic  praise  of  the  gods 
for  his  gifts. 

In  the  Republic,  Polimarchus,  who  appears  in  the  early  part 
of  the  dialogue,  is  a  frank,  impetuous  youth,  who  would  de- 
tain Socrates  by  force  and  compel  him  to  tell  him  what  he 
knows  about  women  and  children.  Like  his  father,  Cephalus, 
he  is  "  limited  in  his  point  of  view  and  represents  the  pro- 
verbial stage  of  morality,  which  has  rules  of  life  rather  than 
principles."  He  has  not  felt  the  charm  of  the  Sophists,  and  is 
so  confused  by  Socrates  that  he  hardly  knows  what  he  says. 
In  the  Protagoras,  the  most  dramatic  of  the  dialogues,  Hippoc- 
rates, with  youthful  ardor,  pounds  upon  Socrates's  door  before 
dawn  to  make  the  momentous  announcement  that  Protagoras 
the  Great  is  in  town  at  the  house  of  Callias.  Socrates  knew 
his  "  courageous  madness,"  and  could  hardly  restain  him  from 
almost  making  an  assault  upon  the  great  sophister  to  relieve  him 
of  some  of  his  wisdom.  At  first  the  youth  is  fascinated  by  be- 
ing told  that  he  will  be  made  an  ever  better  and  wiser  man, 
but  perpends  as  his  hero  is  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  Socrates, 
and  as  his  unfitness  to  train  the  flower  of  Athenian  youth  and  to 
receive  their  pay  is  exposed.  In  the  Statesman,  an  unknown 
or  fictitious  "  Young  Socrates  "  is  a  somewhat  wooden  re- 
sponder  throughout.  In  the  Parmenides,  Socrates  himself  ap- 
pears to  be  rather  young  and  attacks  the  paradoxes  of  Zeno 
with  great  subtlety.     Phaedo,  in  the  dialogue  of  that  name. 


5i8  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

although  he  is  a  beloved  disciple  and  says  nothing,  is  evidently 
young  as  is  the  madman,  Apollodorus,  who  is  emotional  and 
whose  grief  is  violent.  In  the  Phaedrus,  Isocrates  is  still 
young  and  full  of  promise.  They  are  in  the  country,  and  fit- 
tingly end  the  discussion  of  the  relation  of  rhetoric  to  dialectics, 
with  a  prayer  to  Pan  for  inner  beauty  of  soul.  Euthryphro, 
the  religionist  and  definer  of  piety  as  doing  as  he  does  or  doing 
what  is  dear  to  the  gods,  is  thought  by  some  to  be  a  youth. 

Theaetetus  is  an  adolescent  Socrates  of  unattractive  exte- 
rior, and  who  might  be  described  as  that  weird  English  poet, 
Francis  Thompson,  speaks  of  a  plain  but  gifted  lady,  whose 
countenance  one  could  not  see  for  her  soul.  He  is  introduced  to 
us  as  striving  to  accomplish  the  Hercules  labor  of  passing  from 
mathematics  to  metaphysics,  and  seeking,  like  some  ingenuous 
academic  students  of  our  day,  to  make  an  Hegelian  voyage  of 
discovery  to  find  out  what  knowledge  really  is.  Socrates  can 
hardly  treat  seriously  the  callow  but  earnest  poetic  passion  of 
his  ephebic  ectype.  With  characteristic  irony  he  is  drawn  out 
and  lured  on,  each  crude  definition  being  welcomed  with  a 
gratitude  sometimes  effusive,  till  on  second  thought  the  inevi- 
table little  scruple  arises  which  shows  its  inanity.  When  told 
that  knowledge  is  sense  perception,  the  master  reflects  that  a 
tadpole,  a  pig,  or  a  dog-faced  baboon  may  then  have  true  knowl- 
edge ;  and  when  at  last  true  opinion  rightly  defined  is  proposed 
as  the  best  description  of  it,  doubts  thicken  as  the  thought-,, 
midwife  perpends,  till  the  pupil  is  told  that  there  is  no  escape 
from  the  domain  of  the  god  of  flux  and  Herakleitic  motion, 
and  that  his  mind  will  be  the  better  for  being  rid  of  the  embryo 
ideas  of  which  it  has  just  been  delivered,  and  that  they  are  of  no 
value,  but  should  be  exposed  like  monstrous  births.  The  end 
of  the  prolonged  dialectics  of  the  Theaetetus,  like  that  of  the 
other  dialogues  of  search,  is  negative  and  almost  collapsing, 
and  the  moral  is  an  at  least  tentative  but  most  tonic  confession 
of  nescience.  He  appears  again  in  the  Sophist,  but  is  no 
longer  young. 

Although  Socrates  abhors  every  form  of  afilatus,  he  is 
strangely  drawn  toward  ingenuous  boyhood,  as  if  by  its  very 
naivete.  It  is  perhaps  precisely  because  he  would  despoil 
them  of  their  unconsciousness  and  elevate  their  mental  im- 
pulses to  the  plane  of  reason.    In  a  land  and  age  of  unnatural 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE   AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^9 

lust,  he  passionately  strove  to  seduce  youth  only  to  wisdom 
and  to  discourse  solely  of  high  themes,  striving  to  do  and 
suffer  nothing  base,  knowing  that  to  love  boys  is  the  key 
to  their  education.  Their  presence  and  the  duty  of  adults 
to  inspire  and  set  noble  examples  turn  the  discourse  to  high 
thoughts  and  glorious  deeds.  While  he  felt  it  his  mission  to 
give  no  information  but  only  to  kindle  latent  genius  and  turn 
the  soul  toward  truth,  his  amplest  theme,  and  that  perhaps 
wherein  his  thoughts  ran  deepest,  was  that  in  which  youth 
has  a  strange  zest — love.  All  who  strive  are  lovers;  and  the 
only  true  love  is  of  knowledge  and  virtue  and  the  deathless 
beautiful-good,  which  is  so  impersonal  and  pure  that  wisdom- 
love  is  a  kind  of  dying.  And  yet  it  was  precisely  the  charge 
of  corrupting  youth  which  seems  to  have  had  great,  if  not 
chief,  weight  in  his  condemnation.  In  the  Apology,  he  ex- 
horts the  Athenians  to  trouble  his  sons  as  he  has  troubled 
them,  if  they  prefer  riches  to  virtue,  or  think  themselves 
something  when  they  are  nothing.  He  was  commissioned 
by  the  oracle  to  find  a  wiser  man  than  he,  and  therefore  had 
to  expose  pretended  wisdom,  and  was  obliged  to  meet  the 
"  stock  accusation  "  of  free-thinking  and  atheism,  when  all 
others  failed.  But,  as  represented  in  Plato,  he  has  always 
remained  an  ideal  teacher  of  philosophy  to  the  adolescent 
mind.  It  should  also  be  added  that  the  Platonic  myths  are 
pedagogic  masterpieces,  precisely  suited  to  this  stage  of 
psychic  development  when  sentiment  is  three-fourths  of  life, 
and  symbolism  and  parable  are  perhaps  chief  among  the 
methods  of  reason.  Altogether  Plato  presents  most  of  the 
chief  types  of  ephebic  perplexity  and  the  elucidation  of  each, 
as  if  he  considered  it  one  of  his  chief  missions  to  be  a  true 
intellectual  midwife,  presiding  over  the  new  birth  of  the  soul. 
Those  who  best  know  Plato  will  most  fully  realize  how  far 
inferior  our  own  age  still  is  in  understanding  the  real  nature 
of  youth  and  in  the  development  of  the  right  means  of  min- 
istering to  its  needs.  Greek  superiority  in  this  respect  may 
have  been  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  race  and  age  repre- 
sented a  more  youthful  stage  of  development  than  does  our 
own.  Could  Socrates  and  Plato  but  come  again  to  the  philo- 
sophical classes  of  our  modern  colleges  and  universities, 
would  they  find  us  modern  teachers  of  wisdom  anything  more 


520  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

than  modern  Sophists?  and  if  not,  as  I  often  fear,  what  would 
their  great  insight  into  the  mental  and  moral  nature  and 
needs  of  adolescent  mind  and  life  suggest  as  the  same  reform 
they  wrought,  put  into  the  language  of  our  modern  life  and 
needs? 

Neoptolemus  is,  in  the  opinion  of  Professor  Gildersleeve, 
next  to  Telemachus,  the  most  interesting  of  the  Greek  char- 
acterizations of  youth,  '*  not  only  young,  but  young  for  his 
years." 

Sophocles  introduces  this  son  of  Achilles  as  the  tool  of  Ulysses  in 
beguiling  Philoctetes  to  leave  his  lonely  island  of  Lemnos,  where  he 
had  passed  nine  weary  years  in  pain  from  his  gangrene  wound,  and 
bring  with  him  the  wondrous  bows  and  arrows  bequeathed  him  by 
Hector,  for  an  oracle  had  revealed  that  Troy  could  never  fall  but  by 
the  bow  of  Hercules  and  with  the  aid  of  a  son  of  Achilles.  Neoptole- 
mus was  a  mere  boy  in  far-off  Phthiotis  when  the  hero  was  deserted, 
and  so  was  guileless  of  this  treachery.  Ulysses  lands  with  him; 
explores  the  double-mouthed  cave,  keeping  himself  in  the  background 
for  fear  of  the  poisoned  arrows  and  sending  Neoptolemus  ahead,  who 
finds  the  bed  of  leaves,  the  rags  for  dressing  the  wounded  foot,  and 
only  at  the  last  moment,  when  it  is  too  late  to  withdraw,  the  man 
of  many  wiles  explains  to  the  youth  his  role.  He  must  pretend  to 
have  been  deprived  of  the  arms  of  his  father,  Achilles,  by  Ulysses, 
upon  whom  he  must  heap  reproach,  and  state  that,  stung  by  insult,  he 
is  on  the  way  home  and  will  give  Philoctetes  a  safe  passage  to  his 
own  land.  The  youth  at  first  revolts  at  this  treachery,  which  even 
in  word  he  loathed  to  hear,  for  his  nature  was  not  made  for  crooked 
guile,  although  for  the  great  end  of  conquering  Troy  he  would  take 
the  man  by  force.  Failure  is  better  than  a  foul  success.  Thus  he  is 
"  gallant,  impetuous,  open,  chivalrous,  the  true  son  of  the  ideal  knight 
of  Greek  romance,"  who  detested  "  as  the  gates  of  hell  "  one  who  dared 
think  one  thing  and  say  another.  At  last,  however,  the  plausible 
Ulysses  wins  against  the  better  feelings  of  his  comrade,  as  if  their 
end  would  sanctify  any  means.  When  Philoctetes  approached  pain- 
fully, Neoptolemus  acts  the  role  ascribed  him  and  tells  his  tale  and 
reports  the  news  of  Troy.  He  begs  to  be  taken  home;  Neoptolemus 
does  the  by-play  of  hesitation,  and  at  last  pretends  reluctant  assent. 
Other  messengers  from  Ulysses  arise  and  seek  to  hurry  them,  repre- 
senting that  Neoptolemus  is  pursued,  and  as  they  approach  the  ship 
Philoctetes  has  one  of  his  paroxysms  of  agony,  begs  his  friend  to 
smite  off  his  limb,  and  bids  him  hold  his  bow  and  arrows  during  the 
slumber  that  must  follow  such  pain,  and  into  which,  like  a  death-trance, 
the  sufferer  soon  sinks.  Before  he  awakes,  the  better  nature  of  Neop- 
tolemus has  conquered.  The  interest  in  the  Greek  cause  and  his  per- 
sonal renown,  prophesied  in  the  capture  of  Troy,  are  weighed  in  the 


ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    521 

balance  and  found  wanting,  and  he  confesses  his  abominable  role  and 
how  noisome  and  base  he  has  been  by  deserting  his  own  true  self. 
At  first  he  would  not  give  back  the  weapons,  however,  and  when  he 
makes  a  motion  to  restore  the  bow  Ulysses  intervenes.  At  last  Neop- 
tolemus  makes  up  his  mind  to  "do  the  right,  come  what  may."  The 
glory  of  taking  Troy  will  be  bought  at  too  high  a  price  if  self-respect 
is  lost.  He  braves  Ulysses  with  his  sword ;  gives  Philoctetes  back  his 
weapons ;  and  only  the  intervention  of  Hercules  in  the  air  saves  the 
life  of  Ulysses.  This  struggle  between  interest  and  duty  constitutes 
the  tragic  interest  in  the  drama,  and  in  the  sequel,  in  the  glory  of  his 
father's  armor^  it  is  this  pyrrhic  or  red-haired  youth  who  leads  the 
Greeks  to  the  storm  and  sack  of  the  city  by  night,  while  the  Trojans 
slept  or  held  council.  The  last  glimpse  of  the  young  hero  appears  in 
the  Andromache  of  Euripides,  where  the  Argive  prince  is  put  out 
of  the  way  for  coveting  Hermione. 

Perhaps  the  fullest  portrayal  of  adolescence  in  which 
Greek  life  and  Greek  ideals  are  symmetrically  mingled  is  that 
of  Telemachus,  the  only  son  of  Ulysses,  to  whom  a  large  part 
of  the  first  four  books  of  the  Odyssey  is  devoted. 

He  is  represented  as  a  rather  tame,  home-staying,  and  affectionate 
son,  who  had  to  have  strength  put  into  his  heart  by  a  visit  of  Minerva, 
who  roused  him  from  his  perhaps  Hamlet-like  musings  by  the  hearth- 
stone of  his  mother,  Penelope,  as  to  whether  his  father  would  return 
and  take  vengeance  on  the  insolent  suitors.  The  young  prince,  stirred 
by  this  visit  of  divine  wisdom,  awoke  to  his  responsibilities,  took  his 
place  again  among  the  revelers,  a  changed  man,  reminded  his  mother 
that  the  loom  and  distaff  were  woman's  kingdom  and  that  his  father's 
place  now  belonged  to  him,  and  warned  the  suitors  to  leave.  In  the 
council  of  the  rulers  the  next  day  his  mien  showed  forth  a  new  maj- 
esty in  contrast  with  his  former  supineness.  He  appealed  to  the  gods 
for  vengeance,  but  when  mocked  wandered  to  the  seashore,  prayed 
his  guardian  goddess  to  show  him  forth  the  true  son  of  his  father, 
and  was  helped  by  her  on  his  voyage  to  find  him  to  the  consternation 
of  the  suitors  at  his  bold  step,  to  the  grief  of  his  mother,  now  twice 
bereaved,  and  the  dismay  of  his  old  nurse,  Eurycleia. 

Fenelon  amplifies  the  story  of  his  search  for  his  father  in  his 
well-known  tale,  which  has  for  some  generations  been  a  standard 
text-book  in  French,  especially  for  young  ladies,  and  which  is  a  kind 
of  Wilhelm  Meister  or  typical  adolescent  experience  for  a  prince  in 
classical  times.  Perhaps  no  work  even  of  antiquity  describes  with 
such  detail  and  fidelity  to  nature  the  stirrings  of  youthful  impulses  and 
their  masterly  guidance  by  Mentor.  Fenelon  drew  richly  upon  all 
the  resources  of  Greek  culture.  His  hero,  by  the  aid  of  his  guide, 
resists  the  wiles  of  Calypso,  and  even  his  passion  for  her  nymph, 
Eucharis,  is  controlled.     He  becomes  a  slave  in  Ethiopia,  but  com- 


522  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

pels  the  love  and  admiration  of  all  about  him,  even  of  his  cruel  master. 
He  is  urgently  offered  the  crown  of  Crete,  establishes  a  new  govern- 
ment at  Salentum.  seeks  Ulysses  through  the  dreary  realms  of  Tar-  ' 
tarus,  falls  in  love  with  Antiope,  whom  he  rescues  from  a  wild  boar, 
teaches  good  government  to  a  reprobate  prince,  is  always  wisely 
counseled,  and  at  last,  just  before  meeting  his  father,  is  given  final 
parting  counsel  by  Mentor,  who  now  bids  him  farewell,  assuring  him 
that  his  apprenticeship  to  life  is  complete  and  he  must  now  guide  his 
own  actions.  Homer  completes  the  tale  in  the  seventh  book  with  his 
return  from  Sparta  to  Ithaca.  When  his  father's  rags  fell  off  and 
royal  robes  took  their  place  and  he  was  at  last  convinced  of  his  identity, 
the  suitors  planned  vengeance,  and  while  Ulysses  plied  his  wondrous 
bow  Telemachus  by  his  side  dealt  death  to  them  with  his  spear. 

Aristotle  has  given  the  best  ancient  characterization  of 
youth.     He  says: 

The  young  are  in  character  prone  to  desire  and  ready  to  carry  any 
desire  they  may  have  formed  into  action.  Of  bodily  desires  it  is  the 
sexual  to  which  they  are  most  disposed  to  give  way,  and  in  regard 
to  sexual  desire  they  exercise  no  self-restraint.  They  are  changeful, 
too,  and  fickle  in  their  desires,  which  are  as  transitory  as  they  are 
vehement ;  for  their  wishes  are  keen  without  being  permanent,  like  a 
sick  man's  fits  of  hunger  and  thirst.  They  are  passionate,  irascible, 
and  apt  to  be  carried  away  by  their  impulses.  They  are  the  slaves, 
too,  of  their  passion,  as  their  ambition  prevents  their  ever  brooking 
a  slight  and  renders  them  indignant  at  the  mere  idea  of  enduring  an 
injury.  And  while  they  are  fond  of  honor,  they  are  fonder  still  of 
victory;  for  superiority  is  the  object  of  youthful  desire,  and  victory 
is  a  species  of  superiority.  Again,  they  are  fonder  both  of  honor 
and  of  victory  than  of  money,  the  reason  why  they  care  so  little  for 
money  being  that  they  have  never  yet  had  experience  of  want,  as  the 
saying  of  Pittacus  about  Amphiaraus  puts  it.  They  are  charitable 
rather  than  the  reverse,  as  they  have  never  yet  been  witnesses  of  many 
villainies ;  and  they  are  trustful,  as  they  have  not  yet  been  often  de- 
ceived. They  are  sanguine,  too,  for  the  young  are  heated  by  Nature 
as  drunken  men  by  wine,  not  to  say  that  they  have  not  yet  experienced 
frequent  failures.  Their  lives  are  lived  principally  in  hope,  as  hope 
is  of  the  future  and  memory  of  the  past ;  and  while  the  future  of  youth 
is  long,  its  past  is  short;  for  on  the  first  day  of  life  it  is  impossible 
to  remember  anything,  but  all  things  must  be  matters  of  hope.  For 
the  same  reason  they  are  easily  deceived,  as  being  quick  to  hope.  They 
are  inclined  to  be  valorous,  for  they  are  full  of  passion,  which  excludes 
fear,  and  of  hope,  which  inspires  confidence,  as  anger  is  incompatible 
with  fear,  and  the  hope  of  something  good  is  itself  a  source  of  confi- 
dence. They  are  bashful,  too,  having  as  yet  no  independent  standard 
of  honor  and  having  lived  entirely  in  the  school  of  conventional  law. 
They  have  high  aspirations ;  for  they  have  never  yet  been  humiliated 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE   AND    BIOGRAPHY    5^3 

by  the  experience  of  life,  but  are  unacquainted  with  the  limiting  force 
of  circumstances;  and  a  great  idea  of  one's  own  deserts,  such  as  is 
characteristic  of  a  sanguine  disposition,  is  itself  a  form  of  high  aspira- 
tion. Again,  in  their  actions  they  prefer  honor  to  expediency,  as  it  is 
habit  rather  than  calculation  which  is  the  rule  of  their  lives,  and,  while 
calculation  pays  regard  to  expediency,  virtue  pays  regard  exclusively 
to  honor.  Youth  is  the  age  when  people  are  most  devoted  to  their 
friends  or  relations  or  companions,  as  they  are  then  extremely  fond 
of  social  intercourse  and  have  not  yet  learned  to  judge  their  friends, 
or  indeed  anything  else,  by  the  rule  of  expediency.  If  the  young  com- 
mit a  fault,  it  is  always  on  the  side  of  excess  and  exaggeration  in 
defiance  of  Chilon's  maxim  (iJ^i]8ev  ayav)  ;  for  they  carry  everything 
too  far,  whether  it  be  their  love  or  hatred  or  anything  else.  They 
regard  themselves  as  omniscient  and  are  positive  in  their  assertions; 
this  is^  in  fact.,  the  reason  of  their  carrying  everything  too  fair.  Also 
their  offenses  take  the  line  of  insolence  and  not  of  meanness.  They 
are  compassionate  from  supposing  all  people  to  be  virtuous,  or  at 
least  better  than  they  really  are ;  for  as  they  estimate  their  neighbors 
by  their  own  guilelessness,  they  regard  the  evils  which  befall  them 
as  undeserved.  Finally,  they  are  fond  of  laughter  and  consequently 
facetious,  facetiousness  being  disciplined  insolence.^ 

II.  Keim,  who  has  written  one  of  the  most  comprehensive 
and  scholarly  of  all  the  lives  of  Jesus,  thinks  that  many,  if  not 
most,  of  his  disciples,  when*  he  chose  them,  were  adolescents. 
He  says: 

Though  some  of  the  disciples,  as  well  as  of  the  women,  may  have 
been  married,  yet  an  age  of  not  much  more  than  twenty  years  is 
plainly  indicated  in  the  case  of  the  four  first  called,  notably  of  the  sons 
of  Zebedee,  and  also  of  James  the  younger,  of  the  youth  in  Judaea  and 
Gethsemane,  nay,  indeed,  of  most  of  them,  for  they  are  represented 
as  coming  directly  from  the  houses  of  their  parents,  and  Jesus  cautions 
them  against  preferring  their  parents  to  their  Teacher,  against  jealous 
fancies  and  ebullitions  of  temper,  and  administers  to  them  truly  pater- 
nal censures.  Just  such  an  attitude  was  assumed  by  the  Scribes  toward 
"  the  young  " ;  and  thus  might  Jesus  hope — as  did  Luther  in  more 
modern  times — to  win  the  old  and  to  tear  up  the  deeply  rooted  Phari- 
saic bondage,  by  means  of  the  fresh  and  vigorous  youths  whom  Juda- 
ism itself  looked  upon  as  the  guard  of  the  coming  Messiah.  He  might 
also  hope  to  find  in  youth  the  next  neighbor  to  that  innocent  and 
humble  childlikeness  to  which  he  could  promise  and  give  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.' 


•  Welldon  :    Rhetoric  of  Aristotle.      New  York,  1886,  pp.  164-166. 

*  Keim,  Theodor  :    The  History  of  Jesus  of  Nazara.     Translated    by  Arthur 
Ransom.     London,  1877,  vol.  iii,  p.  279. 


524  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

A  radically  different  type  and  ideal  of  adolescence  arose 
in  the  early  Christian  Church  and  persisted  for  centuries.  The 
mental  life  was  in  many  ways  narrowed  and  impoverished  by 
the  intense  struggles  for  purity  of  body  and  soul  which  the 
new  religion  had  inspired.  Instead  of  the  harmony  between 
them  that  pervaded  Greek  thought,  soul  and  body  were  now 
violently  sundered,  and  asceticism  assumed  that  the  transient 
life  of  the  body  must  be  subordinated  to  the  eternal  life  of 
the  spirit,  and  mortification  of  the  flesh,  visions,  and  ecstatic 
communion  with  the  divine  were  the  ideals.  The  most 
precious  and  abundant  data  for  illustrating  this  new  attitude 
are  fortunately  at  hand. 

The  first  two  volumes  of  the  Acta  Sanctorum,  or  Lives  of 
the  Saints,  by  the  Bollandists  or  Jesuit  editors,  appeared  in 
1643.  Each  contained  twelve  hundred  pages  in  close  print 
and  double  columns,  and  both  were  devoted  to  the  Saints  of 
January.  Seven  folios  were  devoted  to  May,  eight  to  Sep- 
tember, and  ten  to  October.  Fifty-seven  volumes  had  ap- 
peared in  1861.  The  new  Belgian  edition,  finished  in  1875, 
contained  sixty-one  folio  volumes.  Baring-Gould  has  se- 
lected about  thirty-six  hundred  liyes,  mainly  but  not  entirely 
from  this  source,  and  presented  them  to  us  in  twelve  volumes, 
one  for  each  month. ^  He  has  eliminated  many  of  the  most 
improbable  incidents.  The  various  calendars  and  martyrolo- 
gies  and  modes  of  apotheosis  have  all  been  considered,  but 
are  not  fully  treated  by  the  English  editor.  Indeed,  compara- 
tively few  saints  have  received  formal  canonization  at  Rome 
itself. 

Although  the  historical  character  of  the  records  may  be 
questioned,  in  detail,  they  show  how  strong  were  the  motives 
that  impelled  young  men  and  women  of  all  stations  to  take 
religious  vows  and  enter  upon  lives  of  sanctity.  Hence, 
monotonous  as  these  lives  seem  to  a  persevering  reader,  they 
are  a  precious  thesaurus  of  data  showing  the  profound  im- 
pression which  the  medieval  Church  made  upon  the  heart 
and  mind  of  youth.  Some  intimation  of  this  may  be  given 
by  a  list  of  names  and  incidents,  as  copious  as  our  limits  per^ 
mit,  taken  almost  at  random  to  be  the  more  representative. 

*  The  Lives  of  the  Saints,  by  S.  Baring-Gould.     Third  edition,  1877. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^S 

Theckla,  so  romantically  enamored  of  St.  Paul  in  the  apocryphal 
Acts  of  Paul  and  Theckla,  was  seventeen  or  eighteen. 

St.  Martian  (a.  d.  300)  at  eigtheen  retired  to  a  mountain  near  Cae- 
sarea,  where  he  lived  for  twenty-five  years  among  holy  solitaries, 
resisting  incredible  temptations,  especially  from  women. 

St.  Agnes  (303)  was  but  thirteen,  Augustine  says,  when  she  died, 
a  martyr  of  purity  and  chastity.  Rich  and  beauteous,  she  repulsed 
her  lovers  and  overcame  temptations. 

St.  Julian  (310),  of  noble  birth  but  precocious  piety,  when  called 
to  marry  at  eighteen  refused  for  love  of  the  devout  life,  but  being 
compelled,  chose  Basilissa,  and  they  kept  together  for  life  the  vows 
of  purity  made  in  the  nuptial  chamber,  with  a  supernatural  odor  of 
flowers  although  in  midwinter. 

St.  Antony  (356),  of  noble  birth,  well  reared  and  exclusive,  longed 
to  dwell  simply,  being  content  to  understand  the  blessed  Word.  At 
eighteen,  meditating  on  the  way  to  church  how  the  Apostles  had  left 
all,  he  heard,  "If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,"  etc. 
This  he  did  and  made  himself  poor,  taking  no  thought  for  the  mor- 
row, praying  continually,  and  observing  that  if  any  man  will  not  work 
neither  shall  he  eat. 

St.  Hilarion  (died  371)  was  reared  among  idolatrous  Romans  and 
well  trained  in  grammar  and  rhetoric.  He  early  turned  from  the 
madness  of  the  circus,  the  blood  of  the  arena,  and  the  luxury  of  the 
theater,  and  was  filled  with  longing  to  visit  St.  Antony  in  the  desert. 
As  soon  as  he  saw  him  he  changed  his  dress  and  the  order  of  his  life, 
became  prayerful  and  humble,  and  returning  gave  away  all  he  had. 
"  Naked,  but  armed  in  Christ,"  he  entered  the  desert  at  the  age  of 
fifteen  and  rejoiced  in  the  terrible  solitude  and  hardships,  so  that  the 
devil  who  tempted  his  senses  and  tried  to  wear  him  out  with  hunger 
and  thirst,  cold,  and  horrid  dreams  of  beasts  and  women,  was  himself 
finally  tormented  by  finding  that  he  was  conquered  by  a  boy,  who 
at  sixteen  built  a  little  cell,  4  X  5>  riot  unlike  a  tomb,  which  is  still 
shown. 

St.  Ephraem  the  Syrian  (378)  was  a  wild  boy  and  indulged  in 
various  escapades,  but  at  eighteen  felt  remorse,  was  baptized,  and 
began  to  discipline  his  body  and  soul  with  great  severity,  fasting  and 
lying  on  the  bare  ground  all  night  in  prayer. 

St.  Arlemas  was  in  a  heathen  school,  but  his  heart  was  full  of 
faith.  When  the  master  threatened,  he  defied,  until  his  schoolmates 
stabbed  him  to  death  with  the  iron  pens  used  on  their  wax  tablets. 

St.  Martin  of  Tours  (401 )  was  attracted  in  boyhood  to  a  monastic 
life,  though  his  parents  were  heathen.  His  father  enrolled  him  in 
the  army  at  fifteen.  Here  in  the  Roman  camp  he  learned  faithfulness 
and  hardihood.  At  eighteen,  one  bitter  winter's  day,  he  saw  a  beggar 
naked,  and  cut  his  mantle  in  two  and  gave  him  half;  but  the  next 
night  he  saw  a  vision  of  Jesus  Christ  on  his  throne,  surrounded  by 
a  host  of  heaven,  wearing  his  half  mantle.  Now  his  poor  beadsmen 
wear  as  their  livery  a  mantle  half  red  and  half  white. 


526  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

St.  John  Chrysostom  (407)  was  carefully  trained  by  his  pious 
mother,  and  only  her  gentle  influence  restrained  him  from  becoming 
a  monk  till  she  died,  when  he  entered  a  cave  till  his  liealth  failed, 
and  then  he  became  a  preacher. 

St.  Euphrasia  (410)  became  austere  at  twelve  and  refused  mar- 
riage, but  her  "  youthful  spirits  and  passions  were  in  effervescence  and 
she  was  cruelly  tormented  with  vain  imaginations  and  temptations  " ; 
humiliated  herself  by  obedience  to  degrading  commands,  and  gave 
away  her  property  to  the  poor.  Unlike  many  saints,  she  was  denied 
martyrdom,  but  had  special  power  of  working  miracles. 

St.  Euphrosyne  (470)  at  twelve  was  taught  by  her  father,  and  the 
fame  of  her  good  sense  and  beauty  was  wide-spread.  At  eighteen, 
visiting  a  monastery,  "  her  heart  began  to  be  solicitous  in  the  fear  of 
God,"  and  she  soon  had  her  head  shorn  and  entered  upon  the  de- 
vout life. 

St.  Benedict  (543),  of  illustrious  birth,  was  scarcely  fourteen  when 
he  renounced  fortune,  family,  and  worldly  joy,  plunged  into  wild 
gorges  over  savage  hills,  put  on  monastic  habit  of  skin,  and  took  up 
his  abode  in  a  dark  and  inaccessible  cave,  drawing  up  each  day  with 
a  cord,  when  warned  by  a  bell,  the  loaf  which  a  friend  provided.  Here 
he  lived  three  years,  and  when  shepherds  found  him  was  thought  a 
wild  beast  till  he  instilled  grace  into  their  rustic  souls.  He  was 
strongly  tempted  to  voluptuousness,  but  stripping  himself  naked  rolled 
in  a  clump  of  thorns  and  briers  "  till  his  body  was  all  one  wound, 
but  also  till  he  had  extinguished  forever  the  eternal  fire  which  in- 
flamed him  even  in  the  desert." 

St.  Kentigern's  (601)  childhood  abounds  in  legends.  Robins 
perched  upon  his  head  and  twittered  as  he  chanted  the  songs  of 
David,  and  when  killed,  revived  when  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross 
over  them.     He  early  betook  himself  to  a  cave. 

St.  Columbanus  (615)  was  well  trained  in  the  classics,  but  early 
resolved  on  the  ascetic.  Dreadful  were  his  struggles  to  forget  the 
pretty  faces,  bright  eyes,  and  winning  ways  of  the  Irish  girls,  which 
were  a  great  snare  to  his  studies,  so  that  he  finally  decided  to  fly  from 
them  to  solitude,  though  to  do  so  he  had  to  step  over  the  prostrate 
body  of  his  weeping  mother. 

St.  Walaric  (619),  among  the  volcanic  caves  of  Auvergne,  learned 
letters  from  a  psalter  while  pasturing  his  sheep.  His  cravings  to 
know  more  of  the  Great  Shepherd  gave  him  no  rest,  and  he  fled  to  a 
monastery,  carrying  with  him  "  the  freshness  of  his  mountain  air,  the 
sweetness  of  his  thyme,  and  became  a  paragon  of  modesty,  sweetness, 
and  gentleness." 

St.  Isidore  (636),  with  the  exquisite  sensitiveness  of  youth,  one 
day  when  he  had  run  away  from  school  saw  where  the  dropping  water 
had  worn  a  stone,  and  the  sight  was  to  him  what  the  Bow-Bells  were 
later  to  Whittington.  Dull  as  he  was,  with  diligence  he  became  an 
accomplished  scholar.  These  drops  were  God's  messengers  and  gave 
to  Spain  an  historian,  and  to  the  Church  a  doctor. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    5^7 

St.  Cuthbert  (687)  was  a  shepherd-boy  of  rare  vigor  and  boldness, 
but  prayerful  and  clearly  a  visionary.  At  fifteen  he  had  begun  his 
career  as  a  knight  attended  by  a  squire,  and  when  he  entered  the 
cloister  showed  rare  aptitude  for  cenobitic  life,  surpassing  all  others 
in  study,  prayer,  vigil,  and  labor,  traveling  and  preaching  far  and 
near. 

St.  Werburga  (eighth  century),  well  reared  and  preferring  Church 
offices  to  the  giddy  whirl  of  pleasure,  early  resolved  to  devote  herself 
to  virginal  purity.  Her  beauty  drew  crowds  of  suitors,  wealthy  and 
famous,  but  all  her  affections  were  weaned  from  earthly  things  and 
fixed  on  God. 

St.  Notker  Balbulus  (912)  stammered,  but  excelled  in  music.  The 
school  songs  at  St.  Gall  had  grown  very  corrupt,  "  for  Alpine  bodies 
with  their  thundering  voices  are  not  adapted  to  sweet  modulations 
of  tone."  His  youthful  soul  was  absorbed  in  the  rhythm,  cadence, 
and  words  of  Church  music,  which  he  reformed  and  to  which  he  made 
great  additions. 

St.  Dunstan  (968)  had  a  wondrous  dream,  when  a  boy,  that  he 
was  driving  off  dogs,  and  rushed  on  to  the  roof  of  the  church  and 
nearly  fell.  He  did  not  clearly  recall  it,  but  was  afterward  changed. 
As  a  page  at  court,  his  jealous  mates  ducked  him  and  set  the  dogs 
on  him.  He  fell  desperately  in  love  with  a  beautiful  girl  and  repelled 
the  entreaty  of  his  friends  that  he  should  renounce  her  for  the  woolen 
smock  of  a  monk,  but  soon  a  violent  and  irritating  eruption  impelled 
him  to  the  Church.  After  saying  the  first  versicles  at  Compline,  a 
great  stone  fell  near  him,  but  the  devil  missed  his  aim.  When  he 
hung  his  harp  near  a  window,  it  played  faint  .^^olian  music  as  a 
presage  of  his  greatness  and  sanctity. 

St.  Peter  Damiani  (1072)  as  a  boy  was  treated  almost  like  a  slave 
and  made  a  swineherd,  but  was  finally  sent  to  scool.  Here,  to  arm 
himself  against  the  allurements  of  the  devil,  he  began  to  wear  a  rough 
hair  shirt  under  his  clothes,  and  when  temptations  of  concupiscence 
arose,  would  leave  his  bed  and  plunge  into  the  river.  He  gave  to  the 
poor  all  he  had. 

St.  Anselm  (1109)  in  boyhood  felt  the  common  attractions  of  his 
age  for  monastic  life.  Then  came  a  reaction  for  pleasure  that  banished 
religion  and  even  his  early  love  of  study,  especially  when  his  Christian 
mother,  who  had  been  a  great  restraint  upon  him,  died,  "  the  ship  of 
his  heart  lost  its  anchor  and  drifted  off  altogether  into  the  waves  of 
the  world."  His  father's  harshness  drove  him  from  home,  but  finally 
he  followed  Lanfranc  to  Bee,  and  his  remarkable  life  was  lived  out  as 
the  world  knows. 

St.  Bernard  (1153)  at  the  age  of  twelve  had  a  vision  in  which 
his  just  dead  mother  urged  him  to  become  a  monk,  but  his  mind  was 
expanding;  the  schools  of  Paris  were  stimulating;  philosophy  began 
to  weave  its  wondrous  spell ;  and  it  was  only  after  a  long  struggle 
that  he  was  able  to  "  quell  the  fervent  straining  of  his  mind  for  intel- 
lectual activity  "  and  condemn  it  to  bondage  to  the  soul,  whose  welfare 


528  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

alone  he  resolved  to  cultivate.  So,  persuading  a  brother  to  desert  his 
young  wife,  they  fled  to  the  desert  and  cloister. 

St.  Hildegund  (1158)  lost  her  clothes  one  night  and  had  to  put 
on  those  of  a  boy,  w^hich  she  came  to  retain  all  her  life  because  of 
the  freedom  and  protection  they  afforded  her.  She  was  hung  and  left 
for  dead,  but  cut  down,  and  had  a  strange  vision.  She  was  page  and 
servant,  but  studied ;  received  the  tonsure ;  became  a  novice,  and  until 
her  death  no  one  knew  her  sex. 

St.  Ven  (1158)  early  dedicated  her  soul  and  body  to  God  and 
resisted  her  parents'  efforts  to  make  her  marry.  At  the  wedding, 
when  asked  if  she  would  take  this  man,  cried  out  before  the  whole 
church  that  she  would  not.  When  force  was  used  and  preparations 
again  made,  it  was  found  that  she  had  cut  off  her  nose.  Thus  she 
had  her  way. 

The  austerities  of  St.  Godrick  (1170)  knew  no  bounds.  He  lived 
on  roots,  leaves,  flowers,  and  berries,  and  oft'ered  the  food  his  friends 
brought  him  in  the  wilderness  to  ravens.  He  watched,  fasted,  and 
scourged  himself;  sat  even  in  winter  in  the  cold  waters  where  he  had 
hollowed  a  natural  bath  of  a  sunk  barrel ;  tilled  a  scrap  of  ground  and 
ate  his  grain  mingled  with  ashes.  When  asked  to  tell  of  his  life,  he 
declared  he  was  a  "  gross  rustic,  an  unclean  liver,  an  usurer,  a  cheat, 
a  perjurer,  a  flatterer,  a  wanderer,  pilfering  and  greedy;  now  a  dead 
flea,  a  decayed  dog,  a  vile  worm ;  not  a  hermit,  but  a  hypocrite ;  not  a 
solitary,  but  a  gad-about  in  mind ;  a  devourer  of  alms,  dainty  over 
good  things,  greedy  and  negligent,  lazy  and  snoring,  ambitious  and 
prodigal,  one  who  is  not  worthy  to  serve  others,  and  yet  every  day 
beats  and  scolds  those  who  serve  him — this,  and  worse  than  this,  you 
may  write  of  Godrick."  "  Then  he  was  silent  as  one  indignant,"  says 
his  biographer,  "  and  I  went  off  in  some  confusion,"  and  the  grand  old 
man  was  left  to  himself  and  to  his  God. 

St.  Dominic  (1221)  as  a  babe  would  creep  from  his  soft  couch  to 
lie  on  the  hard  ground ;  was  trained  as  a  student,  and  at  fifteen  en- 
tered the  University  of  Palencia,  but  in  a  famine  sold  his  clothes  and 
then  his  books  to  feed  the  poor,  for  he  said,  "  How  can  I  pursue  dead 
parchment  when  breathing  men  are  perishing?"  So  simple  and  pure 
of  heart  was  he  that  he  could  find  innocent  pleasure  "in  the  brignt 
prattle  of  young  girls  rather  than  in  the  querulous  gossip  of  old 
women ;  but  the  sweet  flower  of  his  childlike  modesty  was  never  in- 
jured, as  it  never  need  be,  by  such  associations." 

St.  Christina  the  Wonderful  (1224)  was  orphaned  at  fifteen  and 
fell  down  in  a  fit;  was  laid  out  and  taken  on  a  bier,  but  in  the  midst 
of  the  funeral  jumped  from  her  coffin,  ran  after  the  mourners  in  her 
winding-sheet,  and  climbed  up  a  pillar  to  the  roof,  where  she  sat  "  like 
a  bird."  In  her  trance  she  had  been  carried  to  hell  and  then  to  purga- 
tory, where  she  saw  many  acquaintances  and  friends,  whom  she 
warned  and  sought  to  liberate  by  doing  all  the  absurd  penances  by 
which  her  friends'  souls  had  found  purgation  in  her  vision.  She  had 
a  hysterical  loathing  of  the  scent  of  mankind,  especially  of  peasants, 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    5^9 

to  avoid  which  she  was  wont  to  climb  tree-tops  and  the  summit  of 
church  towers,  sometimes  balancing  herself  beside  the  weathercock. 
She  would  plunge  into  fire  and  scatter  brands  with  her  feet;  dive 
under  the  sluice  of  a  mill-wheel  and  go  through  the  conduit;  would 
suspend  herself  dangling  between  the  corpses  of  criminals  on  the 
gibbet;  scald  herself  with  hot  water;  coil  herself  into  a  ball  and 
straighten  herself  out  with  marvelous  flexibility. 

St.  Francis  of  Assisi  (1226)  as  a  child  acquired  the  French  tongue 
«o  easily  that  it  seemed  a  miracle,  although  he  did  not  speak  it  cor- 
rectly. In  early  youth  he  was  almost  miserly ;  loved  eating  and  drink- 
ing and  cheerful  society;  and  finally  developed  a  taste  for  arms,  but 
met  a  poor  warrior  vilely  clad,  to  whom  he  gave  his  armor,  being  re- 
warded by  a  better  one  in  a  dream  at  night.  He  fell  ill  and  heard  a 
voice  saying,  "  Francis,  whom  does  it  profit  most  to  follow,  the  master 
or  the  servant?"  And  he  replied,  "Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me 
to  do?"  He  gave  up  drinking,  frolic,  music,  laughter,  and  wooed  the 
muse  of  charity  and  self-denial. 

St.  Elizabeth  of  Hungary  (1231)  was  espoused  to  Prince  Ludwig 
when  she  was  nine  and  he  fifteen,  but  she  was  wretchedly  treated  by 
his  mother  Sophia.  At  a  ceremonial  before  the  crucifix  she  took  off 
her  coronet  and  knelt  weeping  in  an  ecstasy  of  devotion  despite  rude 
reproof.  At  ten,  having  thrice  drawn  St.  John  by  lottery,  he  was 
chosen  as  her  patron  sai'.it.  She  dreamed  that  she  was  visited  by  her 
dead  mother.  She  was  long  tormented  by  cruel  hints  that  her  prince 
was  tired  of  her  and  would  never  return,  although  he  was  true  and 
wedded  her  when  she  was  fifteen,  after  which  she  devoted  herself  to 
the  poor,  giving  from  her  own  stock  of  clothing,  miraculously  renewed, 
and  for  years  subject  to  the  influence  of  an  inquisitor,  Conrad  of 
Marburg.    She  died  at  the  age  of  twenty-four. 

St.  Edmund  (1242),  when  on  his  way  to  school,  saw  a  beautiful 
boy  who  greeted  him  by  name,  who  proved  to  be  the  child  Jesus,  and 
was  told  to  write  this  name  on  his  brow  with  his  finger  each  night 
and  he  would  be  kept  from  sudden  death.  Seeing  a  flock  of  rooks, 
he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  and  they  flew  off,  and  he  saw  that  they 
were  devils  waiting  to  carry  ofif  the  souls  of  sinners.  In  his  teens  the 
daughter  of  his  host  fell  in  love  with  him  and  stole  into  his  room  by 
night,  but  he  grasped  his  birch  rod  and  covered  her  back  with  purple 
wheals,  which  she  had  to  endure,  lest  if  she  screamed  her  parents 
would  find  her  out. 

St.  Clara  (1253)  in  the  middle  teens  heard  the  great  Francis,  and 
his  voice  and  enthusiasm  thrilled  her  heart  and  filled  her  with  the 
vehemence  of  love  and  a  passion  of  devotion  that  nothing  could  quench 
in  after  years.  She  had  dedicated  her  life  to  the  mendicants,  and 
when  she  was  eighteen  the  Bishop's  eye  rested  upon  her  in  the  cathe- 
dral, modest,  bashful,  standing  back  and  without  a  palm,  and  to  the 
amazement  of  all  he  stepped  down  and  handed  her  one.  This  was  her 
consecration.  She  fell  on  Her  knees  before  the  barefoot  friars;  tore 
off  her  jewels,  brocade,  and  velvet;  bowed  her  head  to  the  shears  and 
35 


53^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF  ADOLESCENCE 

received  the  coarse  gray;  and  enrolled  herself  among  the  champions 
of  poverty.  Thus,  despite  the  entreaties  of  her  friends,  she  persisted 
in  the  ascetic  life  and  proceeded  to  develop  her  order — The  Poor 
Clares. 

St.  Peter  Nolasco  (1256)  had  an  early  passion  for  matin  soon  after 
midnight  and  for  charity.  At  fifteen,  orphaned  and  rich,  he  began  to 
strengthen  in  himself  the  Christian  graces.  Being  urged  to  marry, 
he  cast  himself  before  the  crucifix  all  night  and  vowed  his  patrimony 
to  the  Church  and  himself  to  celibacy. 

St.  Juliana  (1258)  fasted  as  a  child,  and  when  punished  by  an 
order  to  kneel  a  few  minutes  in  the  snow,  did  so  so  gladly  that  it  was 
seen  that  she  was  born  for  a  life  of  austerity.  At  fourteen,  hearing  the 
first  strains  of  the  Vexilla  Regis,  she  shook  with  emotion ;  tears  flowed, 
and  she  gave  all  her  wealth  and  her  life  in  exchange  for  the  veil ;  and 
at  sixteen  began  to  have  visions,  and  later  became  a  famous  Superior. 

St.  Louis  (1270).  This  hero  and  ideal  of  youth,  who  pushed  the 
virtues  of  king,  hero,  and  man  combined  to  so  high  a  point,  "  allying 
the  majesty  of  the  throne  with  the  holiness  of  the  Gospel  and  the 
humiliations  of  penance,"  succeeded  his  father  at  the  age  of  twelve. 
At  fourteen  he  submitted  to  a  hard  tutor,  who  beat  him.  His  expres- 
sion was  so  sweet  that  none  could  see  him  without  love.  His  gentle- 
ness, sympathy,  passionate  love  of  justice,  truth,  and  honor  awakened 
very  early.  He  observed  all  fasts;  would  taste  fruit  but  once  a  year; 
wore  sackcloth  next  his  skin ;  submitted  to  the  cruel  discipline  of 
wire;  walked  on  pilgrimages  with  bleeding  feet;  washed  those  of 
beggars ;  and  even  bore  reproaches  with  meekness. 

St.  Ambrose  of  Sienna  (1287)  carved  little  crosses;  imitated  pro- 
cessions ;  furnished  a  room,  where  he  lodged  pilgrims ;  washed  their 
feet;  took  them  to  mass;  visited  hospitals  and  prisons  until  the  age  of 
seventeen,  when  he  entered  the  Dominican  Order  and  went  to  Cologne 
to  study  with  Albertus  Magnus  and  St.  Thomas. 

The  Blessed  Oringa  (1310),  a  peasant  girl,  so  kind  that  her  cows 
became  docile  and  obeyed  her  voice  in  all  things,  refused  marriage; 
disguised  her  beauty  with  walnut  juice,  took  service,  and  was  devoted 
to  ecstasy  and  prayer. 

St.  Frances  of  Rome  (1440)  from  childhood  longed  for  the  con- 
vent, and  when  at  twelve  she  learned  that  her  father  had  promised 
her  hand  to  a  nobleman  of  great  wealth  and  virtue  was  overwhelmed 
with  grief  and  with  great  difficulty  was  persuaded  by  her  director  to 
yield.  But  her  husband  encouraged  and  even  venerated  her  sanctity, 
and  her  life  brought  many  to  the  true  faith. 

St.  Colette  (1447)  at  the  age  of  seven  yearned  for  the  cloister; 
made  herself  a  little  oratory  in  the  back  yard  where  she  spent  hours 
in  communion  with  God,  and  to  this  she  fled  to  escape  her  youthful 
companions.  She  always  gave  her  food  to  the  poor,  and  at  twenty-two 
became  a  voluntary  recluse  in  an  anchorite  cell  built  against  the 
church  wall. 

St.  Catharine  (1463)  at  eleven  joined  the  Order  of  Poor  Clares 


ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    531 

and  entered  its  convent.  Her  fervor  of  soul,  gentleness,  and  obedi- 
ence, long  hours  of  prayer,  cheerfulness,  and  power  to  resist  tempta- 
tion were  themselves  almost  miraculous. 

The  Blessed  Veronica  (1497)  worked  in  the  fields  all  day  and  tried 
to  study  her  primer  at  night  until  the  first  apparition  of  the  Virgin 
told  her  to  leave  study  and  learn  but  three  letters — white  for  purity, 
black  for  the  dead  world,  and  red  for  meditation  on  the  passion,  and 
thus  she  advanced  on  the  way  of  perfection. 

St.  Francis  of  Paula  (1508),  at  twelve  in  a  convent,  voluntarily 
denied  himself  the  use  of  linen  and  meat;  soon  withdrew  a  mile  from 
town  to  a  cave  in  the  face  of  a  rock,  where  at  fifteen  he  shut  himself 
up  with  no  bed  than  the  rock,  and  no  food  but  herbs  and  what  his 
friends  sometimes  brought.  Before  he  was  twenty  others  had  joined 
him,  and  the  neighbors  had  built  three  cells  and  a  chapel,  where  they 
sang  God's  praises,  and  a  priest  joined  them  and  a  new  order  was 
founded.    His  later  history  fills  an  important  place. 

St.  Theresa's  (1585)  father  delighted  in  books  and  bought  them  in 
Spanish  that  his  children  might  read.  Her  mother  was  an  invalid. 
The  children's  minds  were  steeped  in  the  lives  of  the  saints,  and 
they  once  started  for  Morocco  in  the  hope  of  being  martyred.  When 
Theresa  was  twelve  her  mother  died,  and  with  prayers  and  tears  she 
adopted  the  Sovereign  Virgin  to  be  her  mother,  who  afterward  took 
care  of  her.  She  read  romance  secretly  from  her  father,  and  much 
injured  her  modesty  and  caused  her  many  hours  of  prayer  by  day  and 
night.  She  was  vain  of  her  hair  and  hands  and  fond  of  perfumes. 
Her  chosen  friend  was  flighty  and  vain.  At  fourteen  she  was  re- 
moved to  a  convent,  where  at  first  she  was  very  unhappy,  but  soon 
grew  tired  of  her  vanities,  confessed  often,  became  beloved  though 
was  tempted  of  the  devil.  After  eighteen  months  she  fell  ill  and  stayed 
with  her  uncle,  who  was  very  religious.  She  sufifered  from  fevers 
and  fainting  fits,  and  longed  to  enter  a  religious  order  against  her 
father's  will,  and  at  seventeen  ran  away  and  did  so.  At  eighteen  she 
became  a  novice  in  the  Carmelite  House  of  the  Incarnation.  The 
change  injured  her  health,  and  she  sought  to  convert  a  fallen  priest, 
but  soon  had  a  cataleptic  fit,  which  lasted  four  days,  and  at  one  time 
she  was  thought  dead.  She  had  bitten  her  tongue,  and  was  full  of 
nervous  and  hysterical  pains.  She  had  a  vision  of  the  Lord,  who 
looked  angrily  at  her.  She  perpetually  changed  her  confessors.  After 
reading  Augustine's  Confessions,  her  hysteria  took  the  form  of  ecstasy 
and  vision,  and  she  at  last  found  a  confessor,  who  told  her  these 
raptures  came  from  God,  and  she  must  henceforth  converse  with 
angels.  Once  she  saw  a  seraph  stab  her  with  a  dart  whose  point 
burned  with  fire.  She  often  saw  our  Lord,  gazing  at  his  wondrous 
beauty  and  sweetness,  as  she  said,  "  with  his  most  lovely  and  divine 
mouth."  Very  vividly  she  saw  and  described  the  place  the  devils 
had  prepared  for  her.  Whenever  she  saw  any  one  she  liked,  her  in- 
stant and  consuming  desire  was  that  he  should  give  himself  to  God. 
She  soon  began  to  form  her  first  convent  of  discalced  monks,  and  ii> 


53^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

1582,  when  she  died,  had  estabHshed  sixteen  of  these  foundations. 
Nine  months  later  her  body  was  found  "  perfect  and  uncorrupted." 
Seven  years  later  it  was  hardly  changed  save  a  few  parts  that  had 
been  cut  off  for  relics.  Now  her  dead  heart  at  Avila  glows  at  times 
with  such  ardor  and  devotion  as  to  break  a  glass  ball  under  which  it 
is  preserved.  At  Naples  her  scapula,  at  Paris  a  lump  of  her  flesh,  at 
Craco  two  large  slices  "  highly  scented,"  at  Rome  her  right  foot,  at 
Lisbon  her  left  arm,  at  Seville  her  fingers  are  venerated. 

St.  Rose  of  Lima  (1617)  was  named  from  her  complexion,  and 
so  added  the  name  Mary.  When  playing  with  her  brother,  he  plas- 
tered her  long,  rich,  brown  hair  with  mud,  and  when  she  sulked  he 
said,  "  You  little  know  what  a  frizzling  girl's  hairs  get  in  hell-fire  if 
they  are  vain  of  them."  So,  although  she  was  but  five,  she  shaved  her 
head,  to  the  grief  and  horror  of  her  parents.  Later,  when  in  festivals 
she  had  to  wear  wreaths  and  garlands  of  flowers,  she  proceeded  to 
bind  thorns  into  them.  When  her  mother  required  her  to  sleep  in 
gloves  to  make  her  hands  soft,  she  inserted  nettles,  till  they  were 
blotched  and  inflamed.  When  she  had  a  cold  and  plasters  were  ap- 
plied, she  would  not  remove  them  till  the  skin  fell  off.  When  her 
fingers  were  admired,  she  rubbed  them  with  lime  till  they  were  useless 
for  thirty  days.  She  pulled  the  flocks  from  her  pillows  and  stuffed 
them  with  chips ;  wore  a  crown  of  ninety-nine  thorns,  as  she  is  repre- 
sented in  art,  and  was  mystically  married  to  the  Infant  Jesus. 

St.  Francis  of  Sales  (1622)  at  the  age  of  eleven  implored  permis- 
sion to  take  the  tonsure.  At  seventeen  his  conscience  awoke  and  he 
felt  that  he  was  not  in  a  state  of  grace,  and  prayed  in  anguish  for 
six  weeks,  when  at  last  near  death  his  eye  caught  sight  of  the  famous 
prayer  of  St.  Bernard.  He  vowed  chastity,  and  the  clouds  lifted  and 
God's  favor  was  shown. 

St.  Vincent  of  Paul  (1660)  was  a  peasant's  child  watching  sheep 
and  swine,  but  would  secretly  climb  into  an  oak  to  say  his  prayers. 
Later  he  found  the  hollow  of  a  tree  and  used  it  as  a  cell,  and  this 
was  the  manner  of  his  calL 


The  knightly  ideals  and  those  of  secular  life  generally 
during  the  middle  ages  and  later  were  in  striking  contrast  to 
all  this;  in  some  respects  they  were  like  those  of  the  Greeks. 
Honor  was  the  leading  ideal,  and  muscular  development  and 
that  of  the  body  were  held  in  high  respect ;  so  that  the  spirit 
of  the  age  fostered  conceptions  not  unlike  those  of  the  Japa- 
nese Bushido  (Chapter  III).  Where  elements  o£  Christianity 
were  combined  with  this  we  have  the  spirit  of  the  pure  chiv- 
alry of  King  Arthur  and  the  Knights  of  the  Round  Table, 
which  afifords  perhaps  the  very  best  ideals  for  youth  to  be 
found  in  history,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  later. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    533 

In  a  very  interesting  paper,  entitled  Shakespeare  and 
Adolescence,  Dr.  M.  F.  Libby  ^  very  roughly  reckons 
"  seventy-four  interesting  adolescents  among  the  comedies, 
forty-six  among  the  tragedies,  and  nineteen  among  the  his- 
tories." He  selects  "  thirty  characters  who,  either  on  account 
of  direct  references  to  their  age,  or  because  of  their  love- 
stories,  or  because  they  show  the  emotional  and  intellectual 
plasticity  of  youth,  may  be  regarded  as  typical  adolescents." 
His  list  is  as  follows:  Romeo,  Juliet,  Hamlet,  Ophelia,  Imo- 
gen, Perdita,  Arviragus,  Guiderius,  Palamon,  Arcite,  Emilia, 
Ferdinand,  Miranda,  Isabella,  Mariana,  Orlando,  Rosalind, 
Biron,  Portia,  Jessica,  Phebe,  Katharine,  Helena,  Viola, 
Troilus,  Cressida,  Cassio,  Marina,  Prince  Hal,  and  Richard  of 
Gloucester.  The  proof  of  the  youth  of  these  characters,  as 
set  forth,  is  of  various  kinds,  and  Libby  holds  that  besides 
these,  the  sonnets  and  poems  perhaps  show  a  yet  greater, 
more  profound  and  concentrated  knowledge  of  adolescence. 
He  thinks  Vertus  and  Adonis  a  successful  attempt  to  treat 
sex  in  a  candid,  naive  way,  if  it  be  read  as  it  was  meant,  as 
a  catharsis  of  passion,  in  which  is  latent  a  whole  philosophy 
of  art.  To  some  extent  he  also  finds  the  story  of  the  Passion- 
ate Pilgrim  "  replete  with  the  deepest  knowledge  of  the  pas- 
sions of  early  adolescence."  The  series  culminates  in  Sonnet 
1 16,  which  makes  love  the  sole  beacon  of  humanity.  It  might 
be  said  that  it  is  connected  by  a  straight  line  with  the  best 
teachings  of  Plato,  and  that  here  humanity  picked  up  the 
clue,  lost,  save  with  some  Italian  poets,  in  the  great  interval. 

III.  In  looking  over  current  biographies  of  well-known 
modern  men  who  deal  with  their  boyhood,  one  finds  curious 
extremes.  On  the  one  hand  are  those  of  which  Goethe's  is  a 
type,  where  details  are  dwelt  upon  at  great  length  with  care- 
ful and  suggestive  philosophic  reflections.  The  development 
of  his  own  tastes,  capacities,  and  his  entire  adult  conscious- 
ness was  assumed  to  be  due  to  the  incidents  of  childhood  and 
youth,  and  especially  the  latter  stage  w^as  to  him  full  of  the 
most  serious  problems  essential  to  his  self-knowledge;  and  in 
the  story  of  his  life  he  has  exploited  all  available  resources  of 

•  Ped.  Sem.,  June,  igoi. 


534  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

this  genetic  period  of  storm  and  stress  more  fully  perhaps 
than  any  other  writer.  At  the  other  extreme,  we  have  writers 
like  Charles  Dudley  Warner/  a  self-made  man,  whose  early 
life  was  passed  on  the  farm,  and  who  holds  his  own  boyhood 
there  in  greater  contempt  than  perhaps  any  other  reputable 
writer  of  such  reminiscences.  All  the  incidents  are  treated 
not  only  with  seriousness,  but  with  a  forced  drollery  and 
catchy  superficiality  which  reflect  unfavorably  at  almost  every 
point  upon  the  members  of  his  household,  who  are  cari- 
catured ;  all  the  precious  associations  of  early  life  on  a 
New  England  farm  are  not  only  made  absurd,  but  from  be- 
ginning to  end  his  book  has  not  a  scintilla  of  instruction  or 
suggestion  for  those  that  are  interested  in  child  life.  Aldrich  - 
is  better,  and  we  have  interesting  glimpses  of  the  pet  horse 
and  monkeys,  of  his  fighting  the  boy  bully,  running  away,  and 
falling  in  love  with  an  older  girl  whose  engagement  later 
blighted  his  life.  Howells,^  White,^  Mitter,"'  Grahame,^ 
Heidi,"^  and  Mrs.  Burnett,^  might  perhaps  repre'sent  increasing 
grades  of  merit  in  this  field  in  this  respect. 

Yoder,^  in  his  interesting  study  of  the  boyhood  of  great 
men,  has  called  attention  to  the  deplorable  carelessness  of 
their  biographers  concerning  the  facts  and  influences  of  their 
youth.  He  advocates  the  great  pedagogic  influence  of 
biography,  and  would  restore  the  high  appreciation  of  it  felt 
by  the  Bolandists,  which  Comte's  positivist  calendar,  that 
renamed  all  the  days  of  the  year  from  three  hundred  and  sixty- 
five  such  accounts  in  1849,  '^Iso  sought  to  revive.  Yoder  se- 
lected fifty  great  modern  biographies,  autobiographies  pre- 
ferred, for  his  study.  He  found  a  number  whose  equipment 
and  momentum  have  been  strikingly  due  to  some  devoted  aunt, 
and  that  give  many  glimpses  of  the  first  polarization  of  genius 
in  the  direction  in  which  fame  is  later  achieved.  He  holds  that 
while  the  great  men  excelled  in  memory,  that  imagination  is 
perhaps  still  more  a  youthful  condition  of  eminence,  magnifies 
the  stimulus  of  poverty,  the  fact  that  elder  sons  become  prom- 

*  Being  a  Boy.  *  Story  of  a  Bad  Boy.  '  A  Boy's  Town. 

*  Court  of  Boyville.  »  The  Spoilt  Child.  ^  xhe  Golden  Age. 
^  Frau  Spyri.                         *  The  One  I  Knew  Best  of  All. 

•The  Study  of  the  Boyhood  of  Great  Men.     Fed.   Sem.,  October,  1894,  vol 
iii,  pp.  134-156. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE   AND   BIOGRAPHY    535 

inent  nearly  twice  as  often  as  younger  ones,  and  raises  the 
question  whether  too  exuberant  physical  development  does  not 
dull  genius  and  talent. 

One  striking  and  cardinal  fact  never  to  be  forgotten  in 
considering  its  each  and  every  phenomenon  and  stage  is  that 
the  experiences  of  adolescence  are  extremely  transitory  and 
very  easily  forgotten,  so  that  they  are  often  totally  lost  to  the 
adult  consciousness.  Lancaster  ^  observes  that  we  are  con- 
stantly told  by  adults  past  thirty  that  they  never  had  this  and 
that  experience,  and  that  those  who  have  had  them  are  ab- 
normal ;  that  they  are  far  more  rare  than  students  of  childhood 
assert,  etc.  He  says,  "  Not  a  single  young  person  with  whom  I 
have  had  free  and  open  conversation  has  been  free  from  serious 
thoughts  of  suicide,"  but  these  are  forgotten  later.  A  typical 
case  of  many  I  could  gather  is  that  of  a  lady,  not  yet  in  middle 
life,  precise  and  carefully  trained,  who,  on  hearing  a  lecture 
on  the  typical  phases  of  adolescence,  declared  that  she  must 
have  been  abnormal,  for  she  knew  nothing  of  any  of  these 
experiences.  Her  mother,  however,  produced  her  diary,  and 
there  she  read  for  the  first  time  since  it  was  written,  beginning 
in  the  January  of  her  thirteenth  year,  a  long  series  of  resolu- 
tions which  revealed  a  course  of  conduct  that  brought  the 
color  to  her  face,  that  she  should  have  found  it  necessary  to 
pledge  not  to  swear,  lie,  etc.,  and  which  showed  conclusively 
that  she  had  passed  through  about  all  the  phases  described. 
These  phenomena  are  sometimes  very  intense  and  may  come 
late  in  life,  but  it  is  impossible  to  remember  feelings  and  emo- 
tions with  definiteness,  and  these  now  make  up  a  large  part  of 
life.  Hence  we  are  prone  to  look  with  some  incredulity  upon 
the  immediate  records  of  the  tragic  emotions  and  experiences 
typical  and  normal  at  this  time,  because  development  has 
scored  away  their  traces  from  the  conscious  soul. 

There  is  a  wall  around  the  town  of  Boyville,  says  White,^ 
in  substance,  which  is  impenetrable  when  its  gates  have  once 
shut  upon  youth.  An  adult  may  peer  over  the  wall  and  try 
to  ape  the  games  inside,  but  finds  it  all  a  mockery  and  himself 


•  The  Vanishing  Character  of  Adolescent  Experiences.     North  Western  Mo., 
June,  1898,  vol.  viii,  p.  644. 

*  The  Court  of  Boyville,  by  William  Allen  White.     New  York,  1899,  p.  358. 


53^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   /\DOLESCENCE 

banished  among  the  purbHnd  grown-ups.  The  town  of  Boy- 
ville  was  old  when  Nineveh  was  a  hamlet;  it  is  ruled  by 
ancient  laws;  has  its  own  rulers  and  idols;  and  only  the  dim, 
unreal  noises  of  the  adult  world  about  it  have  changed. 

In  exploring  such  sources  we  soon  see  how  few  writers 
have  given  true  pictures  of  the  chief  traits  of  this  develop- 
mental period,  which  can  rarely  be  ascertained  with  accuracy. 
The  adult  finds  it  hard  to  recall  the  emotional  and  instinctive 
life  of  the  teens  which  is  banished  without  a  trace,  save  as 
scattered  hints  may  be  gathered  from  diaries,  chance  experi- 
ences, or  the  recollections  of  others.  But  the  best  observers 
see  but  very  little  of  what  goes  on  in  the  youthful  soul,  the 
development  of  which  is  very  largely  subterranean.  Only 
when  the  feelings  erupt  in  some  surprising  way  is  the  process 
manifest.  The  best  of  these  sources  are  autobiographies,  and 
of  these  only  few  are  full  of  the  details  of  this  stage.  Just  as 
in  the  mythic  prehistoric  stage  of  many  nations  there  is  a 
body  of  legendary  matter,  which  often  reappears  in  somewhat 
different  form,  so  there  is  a  floating  plankton-like  mass  of 
tradition  and  storiology  that  seems  to  attach  to  eminence 
wherever  it  emerges  and  is  repeated  over  and  over  again, 
concerning  the  youth  of  men  who  later  achieve  distinction, 
which  biographers  often  incorporate  and  attach  to  the  time, 
place,  and  person  of  their  heroes. 

As  Burnham  *  well  intimates,  many  of  the  literary  char- 
acterizations of  adolescence  are  so  marked  by  extravagance, 
and  sometimes  even  by  the  struggle  for  literary  effects,  that 
they  are  not  always  the  best  documents,  although  often  based 
on  personal  experience.  Confessionalism  is  generally  over- 
drawn, distorted,  and  especially  the  pains  of  this  age  are  rep- 
resented as  too  keen.  Of  George  Eliot's  types  of  adolescent 
character,  this  may  best  be  seen  in  Maggie  Tulliver,  with  her 
enthusiastic  self-renunciation,  with  "  her  volcanic  upheavings 
of  imprisoned  passions,"  with  her  "  wide,  hopeless  yearning 
for  that  something,  whatever  it  was,  that  was  greatest  and 
best  on  this  earth,"  and  in  Gwendolen,  who,  from  the  moment 
she  caught  Deronda's  eye,  was  "  totally  swayed  in  feeling  and 
action  by  the  presence  of  a  person  of  the  other  sex  whom  she 

'  The  Study  of  Adolescence.      Ped.  Sem.,  vol.  i,  p.  174  et  seq. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN   LITERATURE   AND   BIOGRAPHY    537 

had  never  seen  before."  There  was  "  the  resolute  action  from 
instinct  and  the  setting  at  defiance  of  calculation  and  reason, 
the  want  of  any  definite  desire  to  marry,  while  all  her  con- 
duct tended  to  promote  proposals."  Exaggeration,  although 
not  the  perversions  of  this  age  often  found  in  adult  charac- 
terizations, is  a  marked  trait  of  the  writings  of  adolescents, 
whose  conduct  meanwhile  may  appear  rational,  so  that  this 
suggests  that  consciousness  may  at  this  stage  serve  as  a 
harmless  vent  for  tendencies  that  would  otherwise  cause 
great  trouble  if  turned  to  practical  affairs.  If  Harmodius 
and  Aristogeiton,  the  adolescent  tyrant  slayers  of  Greece, 
had  been  theorists,  they  might  have  been  harmless  on  the 
principle  that  its  analysis  tends  to  dissipate  emotion. 

Lancaster  ^  gathered  and  glanced  over  a  thousand  biogra- 
phies, from  which  he  selected  200  for  careful  study,  choosing 
them  to  show  different  typical  directions  of  activity.  Of 
these,  120  showed  a  distinct  craze  for  reading  in  adolescence; 
109  became  great  lovers  of  nature;  58  wrote  poetry;  58 
showed  a  great  and  sudden  development  of  energy;  55 
showed  great  eagerness  for  school;  53  devoted  themselves  for 
a  season  to  art  and  music;  53  became  very  religious;  51  left 
home  in  the  teens;  51  showed  dominant  instincts  of  leader- 
ship; 49  had  great  longings  of  many  kinds;  46  developed  sci- 
entific tastes;  41  grew  very  anxious  about  the  future;  34  de- 
veloped increased  keenness  of  sensation  or  at  least  power  of 
observation;  in  32  cases  health  was  better;  31  were  passion- 
ately altruistic;  23  became  idealists;  23  showed  powers  of 
invention;  17  were  devoted  to  older  friends;  15  would  reform 
society;  7  hated  school.  These,  like  many  other  statistics, 
have  only  indicative  value,  as  they  are  based  on  numbers 
that  are  not  large  enough  and  upon  returns  not  always  com- 
plete. 

A  few  typical  instances  from  Lancaster  must  here  suffice. 
Savonarola  was  solitary,  pondering,  meditating,  felt  pro- 
foundly the  evils  of  the  world  and  need  of  reform,  and  at 
twenty-two  spent  a  whole  night  planning  his  career.  Shelley 
during  these  years  was  unsocial,  much  alone,  fantastic,  wan- 

'  Lancaster:  The  Psychology  and  Pedagogy  of  Adolescence.     Ped.  Sem.,  July, 
1897,  vol.  V,  p.  106. 


538  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

dered  much  by  moonlight  communing  with  stars  and  moon, 
was  attached  to  an  older  man.  Beecher  was  intoxicated  with 
nature,  which  he  declared  afterward  to  have  been  the  inspira- 
tion of  his  life.  George  Eliot  had  a  passion  for  music  at 
thirteen  and  became  a  clever  pianist.  At  sixteen  she  was 
religious,  founded  societies  for  the  poor  and  animals,  and  had 
flitting  spells  of  misanthropy.  Edison  undertook  to  read  the 
Detroit  Free  Library  through,  read  fifteen  solid  feet  as  the 
books  stand  on  the  shelves,  was  stopped,  and  says  he  has  read 
comparatively  little  since.  Tolstoi  found  the  aspect  of  things 
suddenly  changed.  Nature  put  on  a  new  appearance.  He 
felt  he  might  commit  the  most  dreadful  crimes  with  no  pur- 
pose save  curiosity  and  the  need  of  action.  The  future  looked 
gloomy.  He  became  furiously  angry  without  cause;  thought 
he  was  lost;  hated  by  everybody,  was  perhaps  not  the  son  of 
his  father,  etc.  At  seventeen  he  was  solitary,  musing  about 
immortality,  human  destiny,  feeling  death  at  hand,  giving  up 
his  studies,  fancying  himself  a  great  man  with  new  truths  for 
humanity.  By  and  by  he  took  up  the  old  virtuous  course 
of  life  with  fresh  power,  new  resolutions,  with  the  feeling  that 
he  had  lost  much  time.  He  had  a  deep  religious  experience 
at  seventeen  and  wept  for  joy  over  his  new  life.  He  had  a 
period  before  twenty  when  he  told  desperate  lies,  for  which 
he  could  not  account,  then  a  passion  for  music,  and  later  for 
French  novels.  Rousseau  at  this  age  was  discontented,  im- 
mensely in  love,  wept  often  without  cause,  etc.  Keats  had  a 
great  change  at  fourteen,  wrestHng  with  frequent  obscure 
and  profound  stirrings  of  soul,  with  a  sudden  hunger  for 
knowledge  which  consumed  his  days  with  fire,  and  "  with 
passionate  longing  to  drain  the  cup  of  experience  at  a 
draft."  He  was  "  at  the  morning  hour  when  the  whole 
world  turns  to  gold."  "The  boy  had  suddenly  become  a 
poet."  Chatterton  was  too  proud  to  eat  a  gift  dinner,  though 
nearly  starved,  and  committed  suicide  at  seventeen  for  lack 
of  appreciation.  John  Hunter  was  dull  and  hated  study,  but 
at  twenty  his  mind  awoke  as  did  that  of  Patrick  Henry,  who 
before  was  a  lonely  wanderer,  sitting  idly  for  hours  under  the 
trees.  Alexander  Murray  awoke  to  life  at  fifteen  and  ac- 
quired several  languages  in  less  than  two  years.  GifYord  was 
distraught  for  lack  of  reading,  went  to  sea  at  thirteen,  became 


ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE   AND   BIOGRAPHY    539 

a  shoemaker,  studying  algebra  late  at  night,  was  savagely 
unsociable,  sunk  into  torpor  from  which  he  was  roused  to  do 
splenetic  and  vexatious  tricks,  which  alienated  his  friends. 
Rittenhouse  at  fourteen  was  a  plowboy,  covering  the  fences 
with  figures,  musing  on  infinite  time  and  space.  Benjamin 
Thompson  was  roused  to  a  frenzy  for  sciences  at  fifteen;  at 
seventeen  walked  nine  miles  daily  to  attend  lectures  at  Cam- 
bridge; and  at  nineteen  married  a  widow  of  thirty-three. 
Franklin  had  a  passion  for  the  sea;  at  thirteen  read  poetry 
all  night;  wrote  verses  and  sold  them  on  the  streets  of  Bos- 
ton; doubted  everything  at  fifteen;  left  home  for  good  at  sev- 
enteen; started  the  first  public  library  in  Philadelphia  before 
he  was  twenty-one.  Robert  Fulton  was  poor,  dreamy,  mer- 
curial, devoted  to  nature,  art,  and  literature.  He  became  a 
painter  of  talent,  then  a  poet,  and  left  home  at  seventeen. 
Bryant  was  sickly  till  fourteen  and  became  permanently  well 
thereafter;  was  precociously  devoted  to  nature,  religion,  prayed 
for  poetic  genius  and  wrote  Thanatopsis  before  he  was 
eighteen.  JefTerson  doted  on  animals  and  nature  at  fourteen, 
and  at  seventeen  studied  fifteen  hours  a  day.  Garfield,  though 
living  in  Ohio,  longed  for  the  sea,  and  ever  after  this  period  the 
sight  of  a  ship  gave  him  a  strange  thrill.  Hawthorne  was 
devoted  to  the  sea  and  wanted  to  sail  on  and  on  forever  and 
never  touch  shore  again.  He  would  roam  through  the  Maine 
woods  alone;  was  haunted  by  the  fear  that  he  would  die  be- 
fore twenty-five.  Peter  Cooper  left  home  at  seventeen;  was 
passionately  altruistic;  and  at  eighteen  vowed  he  would  build 
a  place  like  his  New  York  Institute.  Whittier  at  fourteen 
found  a  copy  of  Burns,  which  excited  him  and  changed  the 
current  of  his  life.  Holmes  had  a  passion  for  flowers,  broke 
into  poetry  at  fifteen,  and  had  very  romantic  attachments  to 
certain  trees  in  particular.  J.  T.  Trowbridge  learned  German, 
French,  and  Latin  alone  before  twenty-one;  composed  poetry 
at  the  plow  and  wrote  it  out  in  the  evening.  Joseph  Henry 
followed  a  rabbit  under  the  Public  Library  at  Albany,  found 
a  hole  in  the  floor  that  admitted  him  to  the  shelves, 
and,  unknown  to  any  one,  he  read  all  the  fiction  the  library 
contained,  then  turned  to  physics,  astronomy,  and  chemistry, 
and  developed  a  passion  for  the  sciences.  He  was  stage- 
struck,  and  became  a  good  amateur  actor.     H.  H.  Boyesen 


540  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

was  thrilled  by  nature  and  by  the  thought  that  he  was  a 
Norseman.  He  had  several  hundred  pigeons,  rabbits,  and 
other  pets;  loved  to  be  in  the  woods  at  night;  on  leaving 
home  for  school  was  found  with  his  arms  around  the  neck 
of  a  calf  to  which  he  was  saying  good-by.  Maxwell,  at  six- 
teen, had  almost  a  horror  of  destroying  a  leaf,  flower,  or  fly. 
Jahn  found  growing  in  his  heart,  at  this  age,  an  inextinguish- 
able feeling  for  right  and  wrong — which  later  he  thought  the 
cause  of  all  his  inner  weal  and  outer  woe.  When  Nansen 
was  in  his  teens  he  spent  weeks  at  a  time  alone  in  the  forest, 
full  of  longings,  courage,  altruism,  wanted  to  get  away  from 
every  one  and  live  like  Crusoe.  T.  B.  Reed,  at  twelve  and 
thirteen,  had  a  passion  for  reading;  ran  away  at  seventeen; 
painted,  acted,  and  wrote  poetry.  Cartwright,  at  sixteen, 
heard  voices  from  the  sky  saying,  "  Look  above."  "  Thy  sins 
are  forgiven  thee."  Herbert  Spencer  became  an  engineer 
at  seventeen,  after  one  idle  year.  He  never  went  to  school, 
but  was  a  private  pupil  of  his  uncle.  Sir  James  Mackintosh 
grew  fond  of  history  at  eleven;  fancied  he  was  the  Emperor 
of  Constantinople;  loved  solitude  at  thirteen;  wrote  poetry 
at  fourteen;  and  fell  in  love  at  seventeen.  Thomas  Buxton 
loved  dogs,  horses,  and  literature,  and  combined  these  while 
riding  on  an  old  horse.  At  sixteen  he  fell  in  love  with  an 
older  literary  woman,  which  aroused  every  latent  power  to 
do  or  die,  and  thereafter  he  took  all  the  school  prizes.  Scott 
began  to  like  poetry  at  thirteen.  Pascal  wrote  treatises  on 
conic  sections  at  sixteen  and  invented  his  arithmetical 
machine  at  nineteen.  Nelson  went  to  sea  at  twelve;  com- 
manded a  boat  in  peril  at  fifteen,  which  at  the  same  age  he 
left  to  fight  a  polar  bear.  Banks,  the  botanist,  was  idle  and 
listless  till  fourteen,  could  not  travel  the  road  marked  out 
for  him;  when  coming  home  from  bathing,  he  was  struck  by 
the  beauty  of  the  flowers  and  at  once  began  his  career. 
Montcalm  and  Wolfe  both  distinguished  themselves  as  leaders 
in  battle  at  sixteen.  Lafayette  came  to  America  at  nineteen, 
thrilled  by  our  bold  strike  for  liberty.  Gustavus  Adolphus 
declared  his  own  majority  at  seventeen  and  was  soon  famous. 
Ida  Lewis  rescued  four  men  in  a  boat  at  sixteen.  Joan  of  Arc 
began  at  thirteen  to  have  the  visions  which  were  the  later 
guide  of  her  life. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    541 

Mr.  Swift  has  collected  interesting  biographical  material  ^ 
to  show  that  school  work  is  analytic,  while  life  is  synthetic,  and 
how  the  narrowness  of  the  school  enclosure  prompts  many 
youth  in  the  wayward  age  to  jump  fences  and  seek  new  and 
more  alluring  pastures.  According  to  school  standards,  many 
were  dull  and  indolent,  but  their  nature  was  too  large  or  their 
ideals  too  high  to  be  satisfied  with  it.  Wagner  at  the  Niko- 
laischule  at  Leipzig  was  relegated  to  the  third  form,  having 
already  attained  to  the  second  at  Dresden,  which  so  embit- 
tered him  that  he  lost  all  taste  for  philology  and,  in  his  own 
words,  "  became  lazy  and  slovenly."  Priestley  never  improved 
by  any  systematic  course  of  study.  W.  H.  Gibson  was  very 
slow  and  was  rebuked  for  wasting  his  time  in  sketching. 
James  Russell  Lowell  was  reprimanded,  at  first  privately  and 
then  publicly,  in  his  sophomore  year  "  for  general  negligence 
in  themes,  forensics,  and  recitations,"  and  finally  suspended  in 
1838  *'  on  account  of  continued  neglect  of  his  college  duties." 
In  early  life  Goldsmith's  teacher  thought  him  the  dullest 
boy  she  had  ever  taught.  His  tutor  called  him  ignorant  and 
stupid.  Irving  says  that  a  lad  "  whose  passions  are  not  strong 
enough  in  youth  to  mislead  him  from  that  path  of  science 
which  his  tutors,  and  not  his  inclinations,  have  chalked  out, 
by  four  or  five  years'  perseverance,  will  probably  obtain  every 
advantage  and  honor  his  college  can  bestow.  I  would  com- 
pare the  man  whose  youth  has  been  thus  passed  in  the  tran- 
quility of  dispassionate  prudence,  to  liquors  that  never  fer- 
ment,, and,  consequently,  continue  always  muddy."  Huxley 
detested  writing  till  past  twenty.  His  schooling  was  very 
brief,  and  he  declared  that  those  set  over  him  "  cared  about 
as  much  for  his  intellectual  and  moral  welfare  as  if  they  were 
baby  farmers."  Humphry  Davy  was  faithful  but  showed  no 
talent  in  school,  having  "  the  reputation  of  being  an  idle  boy, 
with  a  gift  for  making  verses,  but  with  no  aptitude  for  studies 
of  a  graver  sort."  Later  in  life  he  considered  it  fortunate  that 
he  was  left  so  much  to  himself.  Byron  was  so  poor  a  scholar 
that  he  only  stood  at  the  head  of  the  class  when,  as  was  the 
custom,  it  was  inverted,  and  the  bantering  master  repeatedly 
said  to  him,  "  Now,  George,  man,  let  me  see  how  soon  you'll 

»  Standards  of  Efficiency  in  School  and  in  Life.     Fed.  Sem.,  March,  1903. 


54^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

be  at  the  foot."  Schiller's  negligence  and  lack  of  alertness 
called  for  repeated  reproof,  and  his  final  school  thesis  was 
unsatisfactory.  Hegel  was  a  poor  scholar,  and  at  the  uni- 
versity it  was  stated  "  that  he  was  of  middling  industry  and 
knowledge  but  especially  deficient  in  philosophy."  John 
Hunter  nearly  became  a  cabinetmaker.  Lyell  had  excessive 
aversion  to  work.  George  Combe  wondered  why  he  was  so 
inferior  to  other  boys  in  arithmetic.  Heine  agreed  with  the 
monks  that  Greek  was  the  invention  of  the  devil.  "  God 
knows  what  misery  I  suffered  with  it."  He  hated  French 
meters,  and  his  teacher  vowed  he  had  no  soul  for  poetry.  He 
idled  away  his  time  at  Bonn,  and  was  "  horribly  bored  "  by  the 
"  odious,  stiff,  cut-and-dried  tone  "  of  the  leathery  professors. 
Humboldt  was  feeble  as  a  child  and  "  had  less  facility  in  his 
studies  than  most  children."  "  Until  I  reached  the  age  of 
sixteen,"  he  says,  "  I  showed  little  inclination  for  scientific 
pursuits."  He  was  essentially  self-taught,  and  acquired  most 
of  his  knowledge  rather  late  in  life.  At  nineteen  he  had 
never  heard  of  botany.  Sheridan  was  called  inferior  to  many 
of  his  schoolfellows.  He  was  remarkable  for  nothing  but  idle- 
ness and  winning  manners,  and  was  "  not  only  slovenly  in  con- 
struing, but  unusually  defective  in  his  Greek  grammar."  Swift 
was  refused  his  degree  because  of  "  dulness  and  insufficiency," 
but  given  it  later  as  a  special  favor.  Wordsworth  was  disap- 
pointing. General  Grant  was  never  above  mediocrity,  and 
was  dropped  as  corporal  in  the  junior  class  and  served  the 
last  year  as  a  private.  W.  H.  Seward  was  called  "  too  stupid 
to  learn."  Napoleon  graduated  forty-second  in  his  class. 
"  Who,"  asks  Swift,  "  were  the  forty-one  above  him?  "  Dar- 
win was  "  singularly  incapable  of  mastering  any  language." 
When  he  left  school,  he  says,  "  I  was  considered  by  all  my 
masters  and  by  my  father  as  a  very  ordinary  boy,  rather  be- 
low the  common  standard  in  intellect.  To  my  deep  mortifi- 
cation, my  father  once  said  to  me,  '  You  care  for  nothing  but 
shooting,  dogs,  and  rat-catching,  and  you  will  be  a  disgrace 
to  yourself  and  to  all  your  family.'  "  Harriet  Martineau  was 
thought  very  dull.  Though  a  born  musician,  she  could  do 
absolutely  nothing  in  the  presence  of  her  irritable  master. 
She  wrote  a  cramped,  untidy  scrawl  until  past  twenty.  A 
visit  to  some  very  brilliant  cousins  at  the  age  of  sixteen  had 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    543 

much  to  do  in  arousing  her  backward  nature.  At  this  age 
Pierpont  Morgan  wrote  poetry  and  was  devoted  to  mathe- 
matics. Booker  T.  Washington,  at  about  thirteen  or  four- 
teen (he  does  not  know  the  date  of  his  birth),  felt  the  new 
meaning  of  life  and  started  ofT  on  foot  to  Hampton,  five  hun- 
dred miles  away,  not  knowing  even  the  direction,  sleeping 
under  a  sidewalk  his  first  night  in  Richmond.  Vittoria  de 
Feltre,  according  to  Dr.  Burnham,  had  a  slow,  tardy  develop- 
ment, lingering  on  a  sluggish  dead  level  from  ten  to  fourteen, 
which  to  his  later  unfoldment  was  as  the  barren,  improving 
years  sometimes  called  the  middle  ages,  compared  with  the 
remainder  which  followed  when  a  new  world-consciousness 
intensified  his  personality. 

Lancaster's  summaries  show  that  of  loo  actors,  the  aver- 
age age  of  their  first  great  success  was  exactly  i8  years. 
Those  he  chose  had  taken  to  the  stage  of  their  own  accord, 
for  actors  are  more  born  than  made.  Nearly  half  of  them 
were  Irish,  the  unemotional  American  stock  having  furnished 
far  less.  Few  make  their  first  success  on  the  stage  after 
22,  but  from  i6  to  20  is  the  time  to  expect  talent  in  this 
line,  although  there  is  a  second  rise  in  his  curve  before 
and  still  more  after  25,  representing  those  whose  success  is 
more  due  to  intellect.  Taking  the  average  of  100  novelists 
when  their  first  story  met  with  public  approval,  the  curve 
reaches  its  highest  point  between  30  and  35.  Averaging  53 
poets,  the  age  of  most  first  poems  published  falls  between  15 
and  20.  The  average  age  of  first  publication  that  showed 
talent  he  places  at  18,  which  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the 
average  age  of  the  first  patent  of  inventors,  which  is  33  years, 

A  still  more  striking  contrast  is  that  between  100  musi- 
cians and  100  professional  men.  Music  is  by  far  the  most 
precious  and  instinctive  of  all  talents.  The  average  age 
when  marked  talent  was  first  shown  is  a  little  less  than  10 
years,  95  per  cent  showed  rare  talent  before  16,  while  the  pro- 
fessional men  graduated  at  an  average  age  of  24  years  and 
1 1  months,  and  10  years  must  be  added  to  mark  the  point  of 
recognized  success.  Of  53  artists,  90  per  cent  showed  talent  be- 
fore 20,  the  average  age  being  17.2  years.  Of  100  pioneers 
who  made  their  mark  in  the  Far  West,  leaving  home  to  seek 
fortunes  near  the  frontier,  the  greatest  number  departed  be- 


544  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

fore  they  were  i8.  Of  ii8  scientists,  Lancaster  estimates  that 
their  hfe  interest  first  began  to  glow  on  the  average  a  Httle 
before  they  were  19.  In  general,  those  whose  success  is  based 
on  emotional  traits  antedate  by  some  years  those  whose  re- 
nown is  more  purely  in  intellectual  spheres,  and  taking  all 
together,  the  curves  of  the  first  class  culminate  between  18 
and  20. 

IV.  While  men  devoted  to  physical  science,  and  their  bi- 
ographers, give  us  perhaps  the  least  breezy  accounts  of  this 
seething  age,  it  may  be,  because  they  mature  late,  nearly  all 
show  its  ferments  and  its  circumnutations,  as  a  few  almost 
random  illustrations  clearly  show : 

Tycho  Brahe,  born  in  1546  of  illustrious  Danish  stock,  was  adopted 
by  an  uncle,  and  entered  the  University  of  Copenhagen  at  thirteen, 
where  multiplication,  division,  philosophy,  and  metaphysics  were 
taught.  When  he  was  fourteen  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  occurred,  which 
aroused  so  much  interest  that  he  decided  to  devote  himself  to  the  study 
of  the  heavenly  bodies.  He  was  able  to  construct  a  series  of  inter- 
esting instruments  on  a  progressive  scale  of  size,  and  finally  to  erect 
the  great  Observatory  of  Uraniberg  on  the  Island  of  Hven.  Strange 
to  say,  his  scientific  conclusions  had  for  him  profound  astrological 
significance.  An  important  new  star  he  declared  was  "  at  first  like 
Venus  and  Jupiter,  and  its  effects  will  therefore  first  be  pleasant;  but 
as  it  then  became  like  Mars,  there  will  next  come  a  period  of  wars, 
seditions,  captivity,  and  death  of  princes,  and  destruction  of  cities, 
together  with  dryness  and  fiery  meteors  in  the  air,  pestilence,  and 
venomous  snakes.  Lastly,  the  star  became  like  Saturn,  and  thus  will 
finally  come  a  time  of  want,  death,  imprisonment,  and  all  kinds  of 
sad  things !  "  He  says  that  "  a  special  use  of  astronomy  is  that  it 
enables  us  to  draw  conclusions  from  the  movements  in  the  celestial 
regions  as  to  human  fate."  He  labored  on  his  island  twenty  years. 
He  was  always  versifying,  and  inscribed  a  poem  over  the  entrance 
of  his  underground  observatory,  expressing  the  astonishment  of  Urania 
at  finding  in  the  interior  of  the  earth  a  cavern  devoted  to  the  study 
of  the  heavens. 

Galileo*  was  born  in  1564  of  a  Florentine  noble,  who  was  poor. 
As  a  youth  he  became  an  excellent  lutist,  then  thought  of  devoting 
himself  to  painting,  but  when  he  was  seventeen  studied  medicine,  and 
at  the  University  of  Pisa  fell  in  love  with  mathematics. 

Isaac  Newton,'  born  in  1642,  very  frail  and  sickly,  solitary,  had  a 

'  See  The  Private  Life  of  Galileo.     Anon.     Macmillan,  1870. 
•  See  Brewster's  Life  of  Newton. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    545 

very  low  place  in  the  class  lists  of  his  school ;  wrote  poetry,  and  at 
sixteen  tried  farming.  In  one  of  his  university  examinations  in 
Euclid  he  did  so  poorly  as  to  incur  special  censure.  His  first  in- 
centive to  diligent  study  came  from  being  severely  kicked  by  a  high 
class  boy.  He  then  resolved  to  pass  him  in  studies,  and  soon  rose 
to  the  head  of  the  school.  He  made  many  ingenious  toys  and  wind- 
mills; a  carriage,  the  wheels  of  which  were  driven  by  the  hands  of 
the  occupants,  and  a  clock  which  moved  by  water;  curtains,  kites, 
lanterns,  etc. ;  and  before  he  was  fourteen  fell  in  love  with  Miss  Storey, 
several  years  older  than  himself.  He  entered  Trinity  College  at  Cam- 
bridge at  eighteen. 

Flamsteed,  born  in  1646,  as  a  youth  was  very  fond  of  highly  im- 
aginative romances,  but  at  twelve  resolved  to  leave  the  wilder  ones 
and  read  only  those  which  it  was  possible  to  picture.  By  fifteen  his 
reading  craze  had  taken  him  through  Plutarch's  Lives,  Tacitus,  etc., 
but  he  made  no  progress  in  arithmetic  before  he  was  ten.  Up  to 
eighteen  he  was  sickly,  and  had  to  live  in  the  chimney  corner  in 
winter.  At  nineteen,  in  despair  his  father  took  him  to  a  quack,  who 
"touched  and  stroked  him,"*  but  gradually  thereafter  he  grew  better; 
investigated  the  methods  of  casting  a  nativity,  but  later  found  astrol- 
ogy not  definite  enough. 

William  Herschel,  born  in  1738,  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Seven  Years' 
War,  when  he  was  eighteen,  was  a  performer  in  the  regimental  band, 
and  after  a  battle  passed  a  night  in  a  ditch  and  escaped  in  disguise 
to  England,  where  he  eked  out  a  precarious  livelihood  by  teaching 
music.  He  supported  himself  until  middle  age  as  an  organist.  In 
much  of  his  later  work  he  was  greatly  aided  by  his  sister  Caroline. 
When  he  discovered  a  sixth  planet  he  became  famous,  and  devoted 
himself  exclusively  to  astronomy,  training  his  only  son  to  follow  in 
his  footsteps,  and  dying  in  1822. 

Agassiz '  at  twelve  had  developed  a  mania  for  collecting.  He 
memorized  Latin  names,  of  which  he  accumulated  "  great  volumes  of 
MSS.,"  and  "  modestly  expressed  the  hope  that  in  time  he  might  be 
able  to  give  the  name  of  every  known  animal."  At  fourteen  he  re- 
volted at  mercantile  life,  for  which  he  was  designed,  and  issued  a 
manifesto  planning  to  spend  four  years  at  a  German  university,  then 
in  Paris,  when  he  could  begin  to  write.  Books  were  scarce,  and  a 
little  later  he  copied,  with  the  aid  of  his  brother,  several  large  vol- 
umes, and  had  fifty  live  birds  in  his  room  at  one  time. 

At  twelve  Huxley ''  became  an  omnivorous  reader,  and  two  or  three 
years  later  devoured  Hamilton's  Logic  and  became  deeply  interested 
in  metaphysics.  At  fourteen  he  saw  and  participated  in  his  first  post- 
mortem examination,  was  left  in  a  strange  state  of  apathy  by  it, 
and  dates  his  life-long  dyspepsia  to  this  experience.  His  training 
was  irregular;  he  taught  himself  German  with  a  book  in  one  hand 

>  His  Life  and  Work,  by  C.  F.  Holder. 

*  Life  and  Letters  of  Thomas  H.  Huxley,  by  his  son  Leonard  Huxley. 
86 


54^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

while  he  made  hay  with  the  other ;  speculated  about  the  basis  of  matter, 
soul,  and  their  relations,  on  radicalism  and  conservatism;  and  re- 
proaches himself  that  he  does  not  work  and  get  on  enough.  At  seven- 
teen he  attempted  a  comprehensive  classification  of  human  knowledge, 
and  having  finished  his  survey,  resolved  to  master  the  topics  one  after 
another,  striking  them  out  from  his  table  with  ink  as  soon  as  they 
were  done.  "  May  the  list  soon  get  black,  although  at  present  I  shall 
hardly  be  able,  I  am  afraid,  to  spot  the  paper."  Beneath  the  top 
skimmings  of  these  years  he  afterward  conceived  seething  depths 
working  beneath  the  froth,  but  could  give  hardly  any  account  of  it. 
He  undertook  the  practise  of  pharmacy,  etc. 

The  great  surgeon  Billroth  (1829-94),  a  man  of  immense  energy, 
illustrates  strikingly  a  second  vocation  remote  from  that  in  which  his 
fame  was  achieved.  As  a  youth  he  desired  to  devote  himself  to  music 
for  life.  He  felt  himself  to  be,  as  he  said,  "  truly  a  child  of  music  and 
the  stage."  Music,  says  Hemmeter,'  remained  his  tried  and  beloved 
companion  until  the  end  of  his  days.  Not  only  did  he  play  violin 
and  piano  well,  but  was  at  work  for  many  years  upon  his  volume, 
Wer  ist  Musikalisch,  only  part  of  which  was  published  during  his 
life,  and  which  is  one  of  the  most  suggestive  works  ever  written  upon 
what  might  be  called  the  physiological  psychology  of  music. 

Carl  Gegenbaur,"  in  his  autobiography,  describes  the  effect  of  his 
father's  removal  to  a  beautiful  country  region  when  the  son  was 
twelve,  how  deeply  the  lovely  face  of  nature  impressed  him  in 
the  trips  he  often  made,  and  how  susceptible  his  soul  was  to  the  in- 
fluences of  the  good  Catholic  pastor.  He  had  no  pleasant  memories 
of  his  gymnasial  life,  because  of  its  extreme  severity,  and  the  vaca- 
tions too  brief  for  his  loved  excursions.  In  these,  although  ostensibly 
for  the  purpose  of  hunting,  he  was  collecting  and  dissecting  small 
animals;  making  a  flower  calendar;  filling  his  hunting  pouch  with 
roots;  studying  local  myths,  heraldry,  medieval  history,  and  other 
allotria,  and  engaging  in  patriotic  celebrations ;  but  at  nineteen  had 
found  his  direction  in  the  medical  course  of  the  university,  where  he, 
too,  had  a  slight  religious  Aufklarung,  but  not  enough  to  cause  him 
to  break  permanently  with  the  old  associations. 

V.  Women  with  literary  gifts  perhaps  surpass  men  in 
their  power  to  reproduce  and  describe  the  great  but  so  often 
evanescent  ebulhtions  of  this  age;  perhaps  because  their 
later  lives,  on  account  of  their  more  generic  nature,  depart 
less  from  this  totalizing  period,  or  because,  although  it  is 
psychologically  shorter  than  in  men,  the  necessities  of  earn- 

'  Theodor  Billroth,  Musical  and  Surgical  Philosopher.  Johns  Hopkins  Hospital 
Bull.,  December,  1900,  No.  117. 

»  Ererbtes  und  Erstrebtes.     Leipzig,  1901. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    547 

ing  a  livelihood  less  frequently  arrest  its  full  development, 
and  again  because  they  are  more  emotional,  and  feeling  con- 
stitutes the  chief  psychic  ingredient  of  this  stage  of  life,  or 
they  dwell  more  on  subjective  states. 

Manon  Philipon  (Madame  Roland)  was  born  in  1754. 
Her  father  was  an  engraver  in  comfortable  circumstances. 
Her  earliest  enthusiasm  was  for  the  Bible  and  Lives  of  the 
Saints,  and  she  had  almost  a  mania  for  reading  books  of  any 
kind.  In  the  corner  of  her  father's  workshop  she  would  read 
Plutarch  for  hours,  dream  of  the  past  glories  of  antiquity,  and 
exclaim,  weeping,  "Why  was  I  not  born  a  Greek?"  She 
desired  to  emulate  the  brave  men  of  old. 

Books  and  flowers  aroused  her  to  dreams  of  enthusiasm,  romantic 
sentiment,  and  lofty  aspiration.  Finding  that  the  French  society 
afforded  no  opportunity  for  heroic  living,  in  her  visionary  fervor  she 
fell  back  upon  a  life  of  religious  mysticism,  and  Xavier,  Loyola,  St. 
Elizabeth,  and  St.  Theresa  became  her  new  idols.  She  longed  to  fol- 
low even  to  the  stake  those  devout  men  and  women  who  had  borne 
obloquy,  poverty,  hunger,  thirst,  wretchedness,  and  the  agony  of  a 
martyr's  death  for  the  sake  of  Jesus.  Her  capacities  for  self-sacrifice 
became  perhaps  her  leading  trait,  always  longing  after  a  grand  life 
like  George  Eliot's  Dorothea  Brooke.  She  was  allowed  at  the  age 
of  eleven  to  enter  a  convent,  where,  shunning  her  companions,  she 
courted  solitude  apart,  under  the  trees,  reading  and  thinking.  Artificial 
as  the  atmosphere  was  here,  it  no  doubt  inspired  her  life  with  per- 
manent tenderness  of  feeling  and  loftiness  of  purpose,  and  gave  a 
mystic  quality  to  her  imagination.  Later  she  experienced  to  the  full 
the  revulsion  of  thought  and  experience  which  comes  when  doubt 
reacts  upon  youthful  credulity.  It  was  the  age  of  the  encyclopedia, 
and  now  she  came  to  doubt  her  creed  and  even  God  and  the  soul,  but 
clung  to  the  Gospels  as  the  best  possible  code  of  morals,  and  later 
realized  that  while  her  intellect  had  wandered  her  heart  had  remained 
constant.  At  seventeen  she  was,  if  not  the  most  beautiful,  perhaps 
the  noblest  woman  in  all  France,  and  here  the  curtain  must  drop  upon 
her  girlhood.  All  her  traits  were,  of  course,  set  off  by  the  great  life 
she  lived  and  the  yet  greater  death  she  died. 

Gifted  people  seem  to  conserve  their  youth  and  to  be  all 
the  more  children,  and  perhaps  especially  all  the  more  in- 
tensely adolescents,  because  of  their  gifts,  and  it  is  certainly 
one  of  the  marks  of  genius  that  the  plasticity  and  spontaneity 
of  adolescence  persists  into  maturity.  Sometimes  even  its 
passions,  reveries,  and  hoydenish  freaks  continue.     In   her 


548  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

Histoire  de  ma  vie,  it  is  plain  that  George  Sand  inherited  at 
this  age  an  unusual  dower  of  gifts.  She  composed  many  and 
interminable  stories,  carried  on  day  after  day,  so  that  her  con- 
fidants tried  to  tease  her  by  asking  if  the  prince  had  got  out 
of  the  forest  yet,  etc.  She  personated  an  echo  and  conversed 
with  it.  Her  day-dreams  and  plays  were  so  intense  that  she 
often  came  back  from  the  world  of  imagination  to  reality 
with  a  shock.  She  spun  a  weird  zoological  romance  out  of 
a  rustic  legend  of  la  grande  bete. 

When  her  aunt  sent  her  to  a  convent,  she  passed  a  year  of  rebellion 
and  revolt,  and  was  the  leader  of  les  diables,  or  those  who  refused 
to  be  devout,  and  engaged  in  all  wild  pranks.  At  fifteen  she  became 
profoundly  interested  in  the  lives  of  the  saints,  although  ridiculing 
miracles.  She  entered  one  evening  the  convent  church  for  service, 
which  was  an  act  of  disobedience,  without  permission.  The  mystery 
and  holy  charm  of  it  penetrated  her ;  she  forgot  everything  outward 
and  was  left  alone,  and  some  mysterious  change  stole  over  her.  She 
"  breathed  an  atmosphere  of  ineffable  sweetness  "  more  with  the  mind 
than  the  senses ;  had  a  sudden  indescribable  perturbation ;  her  eyes 
swam ;  she  was  enveloped  in  a  white  glimmer,  and  heard  a  voice  mur- 
mur the  words  written  under  a  convent  picture  of  St.  Augustine,  To//c, 
lege,  and  turned  around  thinking  Mother  Alicia  spoke,  but  she  was 
alone.  She  knew  it  was  an  hallucination,  but  saw  that  faith  had  laid 
hold  of  her,  as  she  wished,  by  the  heart,  and  she  sobbed  and  prayed  to 
the  unknown  God  till  a  nun  heard  her  groaning.  At  first  her  ardor 
impelled  her  not  only  to  brave  the  jeers  of  her  madcap  club  of  harum- 
scarums  and  tomboys,  but  she  planned  to  become  a  nun,  until  this 
feverish  longing  for  a  recluse  life  passed  but  left  her  changed.' 

When  she  passed  from  the  simple  and  Catholic  faith  of  her  gri- 
sette  mother  to  the  atmosphere  of  her  cynical  grandmother  at  Nohant, 
who  was  a  disciple  of  Voltaire,  she  found  herself  in  great  straits  be- 
tween the  profound  sentiments  inspired  by  the  first  communion  and 
the  concurrent  contempt  for  this  faith  instilled  by  her  grandmother 
for  all  these  mummeries  through  which,  however,  for  conventional 
reasons  she  was  obliged  to  pass.  Her  heart  was  deeply  stirred,  and 
yet  her  head  holding  all  religion  to  be  fiction  or  metaphor,  it  occurred 
to  her  to  invent  a  story  which  might  be  a  religion  or  a  religion  which 
might  be  a  story  into  any  degree  of  belief  in  which  she  could  lapse 
at  will.  The  name  and  the  form  of  her  new  deity  was  revealed  to 
her  in  a  dream.  He  was  Corambe,  pure  as  Jesus,  beautiful  as  Gabriel, 
as  graceful  as  the  nymphs  and  Orpheus,  less  austere  than  the  Christian 
God,  and  as  much  woman  as  man,  because  she  could  best  understand 
this  sex  from  her  love  for  her  mother.    He  appeared  in  many  aspect* 

•  See  also  Sully  :   A  Girl's  Religion.     Longmans'  Mag.,  1890,  p.  89. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    549 

of  physical  and  moral  beauty ;  was  eloquent,  master  of  all  arts,  and 
above  all  of  the  magic  of  musical  improvisation ;  loved  as  a  friend' 
and  sister,  and  at  the  same  time  revered  as  a  god;  not  av^^ful  and 
remote  from  impeccability,  but  with  the  fault  of  excess  of  indulgence. 
She  estimated  that  she  composed  about  a  thousand  sacred  books  or 
songs  developing  phases  of  his  mundane  existence.  In  each  of  these 
he  became  incarnate  man  on  touching  the  earth,  always  in  a  new 
group  of  people  who  were  good,  yet  suffering  martyrdoms  from  the 
wicked  known  only  by  the  effects  of  their  malice.  In  this  "  gentle 
hallucination  "  she  could  lose  herself  in  the  midst  of  friends  and  turn 
to  her  hero  deity  for  comfort.  There  must  be  not  only  sacred  books, 
but  a  temple  and  ritual,  and  in  a  garden  thicket,  which  no  eye  could 
penetrate,  in  a  moss-carpeted  chamber  she  built  an  altar  against  a 
tree-trunk,  ornamented  with  a  wreath  hung  over  it.  Instead  of  sacri- 
ficing, which  seemed  barbaric,  she  proceeded  to  restore  life  and  liberty 
to  butterflies,  lizards,  green  frogs,  and  birds,  which  she  put  in  a  box, 
laid  on  the  altar,  and  "  after  having  invoked  the  good  genius 
of  liberty  and  protection,"  opened  it.  I,n  these  mimic  rites  and  de- 
licious reveries  she  found  the  germs  of  a  religion  that  fitted  her  heart. 
From  the  instant,  however,  that  a  boy  playmate  discovered  and  entered 
this  sanctuary,  "  Corambe  ceased  to  dwell  in  it.  The  dryads  and  the 
cherubim  deserted  it,"  and  it  seemed  unreal.  The  temple  was  destroyed 
with  great  care,  and  the  garlands  and  shells  were  buried  under  the 
tree.' 

Adeline,  Countess  Schimmelmann,^  was  born  in  1854  in 
a  Danish  castle.  Her  education  was  very  careful;  her  charac- 
ter strong-  and  early  developed.  As  a  girl  of  ten  she  was 
fond  of  climbing  trees,  bathing,  fishing,  and  rowing ;  was  early 
impressed  by  Schnorr's  great  Bible  pictures,  by  the  death  of 
her  grandmother,  and  especially  by  a  horrible  murder  of  his 
whole  family  by  a  desperate  man,  who  denied  his  guilt,  and 


*  Sheldon  (Institutional  Activities  of  American  Children  ;  Am.  Jour,  of  Psy- 
chol., vol.  ix,  p.  434)  describes  a  faintly  analogous  case  of  a  girl  of  eleven,  who 
organized  the  worship  of  Pallas  Athena  on  two  flat  rocks,  in  a  deep  ravine  by  a  streams 
where  a  young  sycamore  grew  from  an  old  stump,  as  did  Pallas  from  the  head  of  her 
father  Zeus.  There  was  a  court  consisting  of  king,  queen  and  subjects,  and  priests 
who  officiated  at  sacrifices.  The  king  and  queen  wore  goldenrod  upon  their  heads 
and  waded  in  streams  attended  by  their  subjects;  gathered  flowers  for  Athena; 
caught  crayfish  which  were  duly  smashed  upon  her  altar.  "  Sometimes  there  was 
a  special  celebration,  when,  in  addition  to  the  slaughtered  crayfish  and  beautiful 
flower  decorations,  and  pickles  stolen  from  the  dinner-table,  there  would  be  an 
elaborate  ceremony,"  which  because  of  its  uncanny  acts  was  intensely  disliked  by 
the  people  at  hand. 

»  Glimpses  of  My  Life.     New  York,  1896,  p.  210. 


550  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

for  whom  she  prayed  daily.  Just  before  his  execution  he 
confessed  his  guilt  and  experienced  religion,  all,  as  she  felt, 
in  answer  to  her  prayers.  She  grew  profoundly  religious, 
although  such  topics  were  carefully  avoided  in  her  family. 
At  fifteen  she  was  confirmed,  and  her  whole  religious  nature 
very  greatly  deepened,  but  she  entered  the  gay  life  of  her 
home  and  soon  was  presented  at  court,  and  for  eighteen  years 
was  maid  of  honor  to  the  German  Empress  Augusta,  by 
whose  character  she  was  greatly  impressed.^ 

Louisa  Alcott's  romantic  period  opened  at  fifteen,  when 
she  began  to  write  poetry,  keep  a  heart  journal,  and  wander 
by  moonlight,  and  wished  to  be  the  Bettine  of  Emerson, 

•  Her  subsequent  life  was  entirely  dominated  by  momentum  of  this  period,  and 
her  eccentricities  were  only  its  persistence  into  maturity.  By  the  death  of  her  father, 
she  became  possessed  of  a  considerable  fortune  and  then  resolved  to  devote  herself 
to  the  work  of  charity,  beginning  among  the  wild  and  abandoned  sailors  and  fisher- 
men of  the  Pomeranian  shore.  She  adopted  two  boys  of  low  birth,  one  of  them 
nearly  idiotic,  who  followed  her  wherever  she  went,  and  on  whom  she  lavished 
great  care  and  attention.  She  built  and  personally  conducted  a  seaman's  home 
at  Goehren,  often  cooking  and  furnishing  food  for  body  and  soul.  Her  piety  was 
so  extreme  and  her  charity  so  great,  that  her  relatives,  failing  to  abate  them,  had 
her  sequestered  in  an  insane  asylum,  where  she  remained  for  some  months  amid 
great  hardships  and  indignities  before  her  sanity  was  entirely  vindicated,  when 
she  returned  to  her  good  works  in  Berlin  among  the  lowest  classes,  where  her 
life  was  several  times  in  extreme  danger.  She  had  a  great  desire  to  save  one 
soul  for  each  of  the  magnificent  diamonds  in  a  necklace  which  she  possessed. 
The  wider  field  of  her  mission  for  which  she  is  still  laboring  and  collecting 
money  is  the  fishermen  of  the  Baltic,  the  sailors  of  all  nations  in  European  ports, 
and  the  distressed  and  troubled  elements  of  society'  everywhere.  Efforts  were 
made  to  prove  her  an  anarchist,  but  these,  too,  were  abortive.  She  imagines  a 
future  brotherhood  of  the  sea  reared  by  pious  bequests.  Failing  in  the  primal 
sensations  of  wife  and  mother  and  needing  an  atmosphere  of  warmth,  with  an 
overflowingly  good  heart  and  a  sound  head,  disdaining  the  soft  life  of  a  great 
lady,  she  determined  to  love  Jesus  and  devote  herself  to  his  work.  In  this  she 
was  sustained  by  her  friend,  the  good  pastor  Funcke.  As  sovereign  over  her  fish- 
ermen, their  worship  and  admiration  were  better  to  her  than  a  satin  bed.  She  was 
able  to  forbid  them  whisky.  During  the  dreadful  winter  of  1891-92  in  Berlin, 
she  penetrated  into  an  insurgent  mob  of  laborers  the  police  dared  not  approach,  at 
the  peril  of  her  life ;  distributed  money  ;  prayed  inwardly,  and  then  preached 
Jesus ;  sang  hymns ;  sold  her  country  house  to  buy  a  supply  yacht  from  which 
to  distribute  provisions  and  Bibles  in  the  North  Sea;  sought  to  break  the  monopo- 
lies that  ground  the  fishermen  ;  in  one  year  visited  five  hundred  vessels  and  dis- 
tributed twenty  thousand  Bibles  and  other  religious  books.  Her  work  has  been 
chiefly  with  rough  men.  She  loves  the  masculine  element  and  evokes  the  healthful 
rhivalry  of  men,  and  does  all  in  the  service  of  "  My  Jesus."  Her  work  may  not 
be  permanent,  but  it  is  beneficent. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    55 1 

in  whose  library  she  foraged;  wrote  him  letters  which  were 
never  sent;  sat  in  a  tall  tree  at  midnight;  left  wild  flowers  on 
the  doorstep  of  her  master;  sang  Mignon's  song  under  his 
window;  and  was  refined  by  her  choice  of  an  idol.  Her 
diary  was  all  about  herself. 

If  she  looked  in  the  glass  at  her  long  hair  and  well-shaped  head, 
she  tried  to  keep  down  her  vanity;  her  quick  tongue,  moodiness,  pov- 
erty, impossible  longings,  made  every  day  a  battle  until  she  hardly 
wished  to  live,  only  something  must  be  done,  and  waiting  is  so  hard. 
She  imagined  her  mind  a  room  in  confusion  which  must  be  put  in 
order ;  the  useless  thought  swept  out ;  foolish  fancies  dusted  away ; 
newly  furnished  with  good  resolutions.  But  she  was  not  a  good 
housekeeper;  cobwebs  got  in,  and  it  was  hard  to  rule.  She  was  smitten 
with  a  mania  for  the  stage,  and  spent  most  of  her  leisure  in  writing 
and  acting  plays  of  melodramatic  style  and  high-strung  sentiment, 
improbable  incidents,  with  no  touch  of  common  life  or  sense  of  humor, 
full  of  concealments  and  surprises,  bright  dialogues,  and  lofty  senti- 
ments. She  had  much  dramatic  power  and  loved  to  transform  herself 
into  Hamlet  and  declaim  in  mock  heroic  style.  From  sixteen  to 
twenty-three  was  her  apprenticeship  to  life.  She  taught,  wrote  for 
the  papers,  did  housework  for  pay  as  a  servant,  and  found  sewing  a 
pleasant  resource  because  it  was  tranquillizing,  left  her  free,  and  set 
her  thoughts  going. 

Mrs.  Burnett,'  like  most  women  who  record  their  childhood  and 
adolescent  memories,  is  far  more  subjective  and  interesting  than  most 
men.  In  early  adolescence  she  was  never  alone  when  with  flowers, 
but  loved  to  "  speak  to  them,  to  bend  down  and  say  caressing  things, 
to  stoop  and  kiss  them,  to  praise  them  for  their  pretty  ways  of  looking 
up  at  her  as  into  the  eyes  of  a  friend  and  beloved.  There  were  certain 
little  blue  violets  which  always  seemed  to  lift  their  small  faces  child- 
ishly, as  if  they  were  saying,  '  Kiss  me ;  don't  go  by  like  that.'  "  She 
would  sit  on  the  porch,  elbows  on  knees  and  chin  on  hands,  staring 
upward,  sometimes  lying  on  the  grass.  Heaven  was  so  high  and  yet 
she  was  a  part  of  it  and  was  something  even  among  the  stars.  It 
was  a  weird,  updrawn,  overwhelming  feeling  as  she  stared  so  fixedly 
and  intently  that  the  earth  seemed  gone,  left  far  behind.  Every  hour 
and  moment  was  a  wonderful  and  beautiful  thing.  She  felt  on  speak- 
ing terms  with  the  rabbits.  Something  was  happening  in  the  leaves 
which  waved  and  rustled  as  she  passed.  Just  to  walk,  sit,  lie  around 
out  of  doors,  to  loiter,  gaze,  watch  with  a  heart  fresh  as  a  young  dryad, 
following  birds,  playing  hide-and-seek  with  the  brook — these  were  her 
halcyon  hours. 

With   the   instability   of   genius,    Beth "   did   everything   suddenly. 

■  The  One  I   Know  Best  of  .-Ml.     A   Memory  of  the  Mind  of  a  Child.     By 
Frances  Hodgson  Burnett.     New  York,  1893. 
»  The  Befch  Book. 


552  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

When  twelve  or  thirteen  she  had  grown  too  big  to  be  carried,  pulled, 
or  pushed  ;  she  suddenly  stood  still  one  day,  when  her  mother  command- 
ed her  to  dress.  She  had  been  ruled  before  by  physical  force,  but  her 
will  and  that  of  her  mother  were  now  in  collision,  and  the  latter  real- 
ized she  could  make  her  do  nothing  unless  by  persuasion  or  moral 
influence.  Being  constantly  reproved,  scolded,  and  even  beaten  by 
her  mother,  Beth  one  day  impulsively  jumped  into  the  sea  and  was 
rescued  with  difficulty.  She  had  spells  of  being  miserable  with  no 
cause.  She  was  well  and  happy,  but  would  burst  into  tears  suddenly, 
which  seemed  often  to  surprise  her.  Being  very  sensitive  herself, 
she  was  morbidly  careful  of  the  feelings  of  others  and  incessantly 
committed  grave  sins  of  insincerity  without  compunction  in  her  effort 
to  spare  them.  To  those  who  confided  in  her  abilities,  praised  her, 
and  thought  she  could  do  things,  her  nature  expanded,  but  her  mother 
checked  her  mental  growth  over  and  over,  instead  of  helping  her,  by 
saying,  "  Don't  try,  you  can't  do  it,"  etc. 

Just  before  the  dawn  of  adolescence  she  had  passed  through  a  long 
period  of  abject  superstition  largely  through  the  influence  of  a  serv- 
ant. All  the  old  woman's  signs  were  very  dominant  in  her  life.  She 
even  invented  methods  of  divination,  as,  "  if  the  boards  do  not  creak 
when  I  walk  across  the  room  I  shall  get  through  my  lessons  without 
trouble."  She  always  preferred  to  see  two  rooks  together  to  one,  and 
became  expert  in  the  black  arts.  She  used  to  hear  strange  noises  at 
night  for  a  time^  which  seemed  signs  and  portents  of  disaster  at  sea, 
fell  into  the  ways  of  her  neighbors,  and  had  more  faith  in  incantations 
than  in  doctors'  doses.  She  not  only  heard  voices  and  very  ingeniously 
described  them,  but  claimed  to  know  what  was  going  to  happen  and 
compared  her  forebodings  with  the  maid.  She  "  got  religion  "  very  in- 
tensely under  the  influence  of  her  aunt,  grew  poor,  lost  her  appetite 
and  sleep,  had  heartache  to  think  of  her  friends  burning  in  hell,  and 
tried  to  save  them. 

Beth  never  thought  at  all  of  her  personal  appearance  until  she 
overheard  a  gentleman  call  her  rather  nice-looking,  when  her  face 
flushed  and  she  had  a  new  feeling  of  surprise  and  pleasure,  and  took 
very  clever  ways  of  cross-examining  her  friends  to  find  if  she  was 
handsome.  All  of  a  sudden  the  care  of  her  person  became  of  great 
importance,  and  every  hint  she  had  heard  of  was  acted  on.  She  aired 
her  bed,  brushed  her  hair  glossy,  pinched  her  waist  and  feet,  washed 
in  buttermilk,  used  a  parasol,  tortured  her  natural  appetite  in  every 
way,  put  on  gloves  to  do  dirty  work,  etc. 

The  house  always  irked  her.  Once  stealing  out  of  the  school  by 
night,  she  was  free,  stretched  herself,  drew  a  long  breath,  bounded 
and  waved  her  arms  in  an  ecstasy  of  liberty,  danced  around  the  mag- 
nolia, buried  her  face  in  the  big  flowers  one  after  another  and  bathed 
it  in  the  dew  of  the  petals,  vished  every  forbidden  place,  was  par- 
ticularly attracted  to  the  water,  enjoyed  scratching  and  making  her 
feet  bleed  and  eating  a  lot  of  green  fruit.  This  liberty  was  most 
precious,  and  all  through  a  hot  summer  she  kept  herself  healthy  by 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    553 

exercise  in  the  moonlight.  This  revived  her  appetite,  and  she  ended 
these  night  excursions  by  a  forage  in  the  kitchen.  Beth  had  times 
when  she  hungered  for  solitude  and  for  nature.  Sometimes  she  would 
shut  herself  in  her  room,  but  more  often  would  rove  the  fields  and 
woods  in  ecstasy.  Coming  home  from  school,  where  she  had  long  been, 
she  had  to  greet  the  trees  and  fields  almost  before  she  did  her  parents. 
She  had  a  great  habit  of  stealing  out  often  by  the  most  dangerous 
routes  over  roofs,  etc.,  at  night  in  the  moonlight,  running  and  jump- 
ing, waving  her  arms,  throwing  herself  on  the  ground,  rolling  over, 
walking  on  all-fours,  turning  somersaults,  hugging  trees,  playing  hide- 
and-seek  with  the  shadow  fairy-folk,  now  playing  and  feeling  fear 
and  running  away.    She  invoked  trees,  stars,  etc. 

Beth's  first  love  affair  was  with  a  bright,  fair-haired,  fat-faced 
boy,  who  sat  near  her  pew  Sundays.  They  looked  at  each  other  once 
during  service,  and  she  felt  a  glad  glow  in  her  chest  spread  over  her, 
dwelt  on  his  image,  smiled,  and  even  the  next  day  felt  a  new 
desire  to  please.  She  watched  for  him  to  pass  from  school.  When 
he  appeared,  "  had  a  most  delightful  thrill  shoot  through  her."  The 
first  impulse  to  fly  was  conquered ;  she  never  thought  a  boy  beautiful 
before.  They  often  met  after  dark,  wrote ;  finally  she  grew  tired  of 
him  because  she  could  not  make  him  feel  deeply,  sent  him  off,  called 
him  an  idiot,  and  then  soliloquized  on  the  "  most  dreadful  grief  of  her 
life."  The  latter  stages  of  their  acquaintance  she  occasionally  used 
to  beat  him,  but  his  attraction  steadily  waned.  Once  later,  as  she 
was  suffering  from  a  dull,  irresolute  feeling  due  to  want  of  a  com- 
panion and  an  object,  she  met  a  boy  of  seventeen,  whose  face,  like  her 
own,  brightened  as  they  approached.  It  was  the  first  appearance  of 
nature's  mandate  to  mate.  This  friendly  glance  suffused  her  whole 
being  with  the  "  glory  and  vision  of  love."  Religion  and  young  men 
were  her  need.  They  had  stolen  interviews  by  night  and  many  an 
innocent  embrace  and  kiss,  and  almost  died  once  by  being  caught. 
They  planned  in  detail  what  they  would  do  after  they  were  married, 
but  all  was  taken  for  granted  without  formal  vows.  Only  when  criti- 
cized did  they  ever  dream  of  caution  and  concealment,  and  then  they 
made  elaborate  parades  of  ignoring  each  other  in  public  and  fired  their 
imaginations  with  thoughts  of  disguises,  masks,  etc.  This  passion  was 
nipped  in  the  bud  by  the  boy's  removal  from  his  school. 

In  preparing  for  her  first  communion,  an  anonymous  writer '  be- 
came sober  and  studious,  proposing  to  model  her  life  on  that  of  each 
fresh  saint  and  to  spend  a  week  in  retreat  examining  her  conscience 
with  a  vengeance.  She  wanted  to  revive  the  custom  of  public  con- 
fession and  wrote  letters  of  penitence  and  submission,  which  she  tore 
up  later,  finding  her  mind  not  "  all  of  a  piece."  She  lay  prostrate  on 
her  prie-dieu  weeping  from  ecstasy,  lying  on  the  rim  of  heaven  held 
by  angels,  wanting  to  die,  now  bathed  in  bliss  or  aching  intolerably 
with  spiritual  joy,  but  she  was  only  twelve  and  her  old  nature  often 

»  Autobiography  of  a  Child.     London,  1899,  p.  255. 


554  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

reasserted  itself.  Religion  at  that  time  became  an  intense  emotion 
nourished  on  incense,  music,  tapers,  and  a  feeling  of  being  tangible. 
It  was  rapturous  and  sensuous.  While  under  its  spell,  she  seemed 
to  float  and  touch  the  wings  of  angels.  Here  solerrin  Gregorian  chants 
are  sung,  so  that  when  one  comes  back  to  earth  there  is  a  sense  of 
hunger,  deception,  and  self-loathing.  Now  she  came  to  understand 
how  so  many  sentimental  and  virtuous  souls  sought  oblivion  in  the 
narcotic  of  religious  excitement.  Here  at  the  age  of  twelve  youth 
began  and  childhood  ended  with  her  book. 

Pathetic  is  the  account  of  Helen  Keller's  effort  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  the  word  love  in  its  season.^ 

Is  it  the  sweetness  of  flowers?  she  asked.  No,  said  her  teacher. 
Is  it  the  warm  sun  ?  Not  exactly.  It  can  not  be  touched,  "  but  you 
feel  the  sweetness  that  it  pours  into  everything.  Without  love,  you 
would  not  be  happy  or  want  to  play.  The  beautiful  truth  burst  upon 
my  mind.  I  felt  that  there  were  invisible  lines  stretched  between  my 
spirit  and  the  spirit  of  others."  This  period  seems  to  have  come 
gradually  and  naturally  to  this  wonderful  child,  whose  life  has  been 
perhaps  the  purest  ever  lived  and  one  of  the  sweetest.  None  has 
ever  loved  every  aspect  of  nature  accessible  to  her  more  passionately, 
or  felt  more  keenly  the  charm  of  nature  or  of  beautiful  sentiments.  The 
unhappy  Frost  King  episode  has  been  almost  the  only  cloud  upon  her 
life,  which  unfortunately  came  at  about  the  dawn  of  this  period,  that  is 
perhaps  better  marked  by  the  great  expansion  of  mind  which  she  expe- 
rienced at  the  World's  Fair  in  Chicago  in  1893,  when  she  was  thirteen. 
About  this  time,  too,  her  great  ambition  of  going  to  college  and  enjoy- 
ing all  the  advantages  that  other  girls  did,  which,  considering  her 
handicap,  was  one  of  the  greatest  human  resolutions,  was  strengthened 
and  deepened.  The  fresh,  spontaneous,  and  exquisite  reactions  of  this 
pellucid  mind,  which  felt  that  each  could  comprehend  all  the  experi- 
ences and  emotions  of  the  race  and  that  chafes  at  every  pedagogical 
and  technical  obstacle  between  her  soul  and  nature,  and  the  great 
monuments  of  literature,  show  that  she  has  conserved  to  a  remarkable 
degree,  which  the  world  will  wish  may  be  permanent,  the  best  im- 
pulses of  this  golden  age. 

Marie  Bashkirtseff,^  who  may  be  taken  as  one  of  the  best 
types  of  exaggerated  adolescent  confessionalists,  was  of  rich 
and  noble  birth,  and  began  in  1873,  at  the  age  of  twelve,  to  write 
a  journal  that  should  be  absolutely  true  and  frank,  with  no  pre- 
tense, affectation,  or  concealment.     The  journal  continues  until 

*  The  Story  of  My  Life.     By  Helen  Keller.     New  York,  1903,  p.  30. 
•Journal  of  a  Young  Artist.     New  York,  i88g,  p.  434. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE   AND   BIOGRAPHY    555 

her  death,  October,  1884,  at  the  age  of  twenty-three.  It  may 
be  described  as  in  some  sense  a  feminine  counterpart  of  Rous- 
seau's confessions,  but  is  in  some  respects  a  more  precious  psy- 
chological document  than  any  other  for  the  elucidation  of  the 
adolescent  ferment  in  an  unusually  vigorous  and  gifted  soul. 
Twice  I  have  read  it  from  cover  to  cover  and  with  growing 
interest. 


At  twelve  she  is  passionately  in  love  with  a  duke,  whom  she  some- 
times saw  pass  but  who  had  no  knowledge  of  her  existence,  and  builds 
many  air  castles  about  his  throwing  himself  at  her  feet  and  of  their 
life  together.  She  prays  passionately  to  see  him  again,  would  dazzle 
him  on  the  stage,  would  lead  a  perfect  life,  develop  her  voice,  and 
would  be  an  ideal  wife.  She  agonizes  before  the  glass  on  whether 
or  not  she  is  pretty,  and  resolves  to  ask  some  young  man,  but  prefers 
to  think  well  of  herself  even  if  it  is  an  illusion;  constantly  modulates 
over  into  passionate  prayer  to  God  to  grant  all  her  wishes;  is  op- 
pressed with  despair ;  gay  and  melancholy  by  turn ;  believes  in  God 
because  she  prayed  Him  for  a  set  of  croquet  and  to  help  her  to  learn 
English,  both  of  which  He  granted.  At  church  some  prayers  and 
services  seem  directly  aimed  at  her;  Paris  now  seems  a  frightful 
desert,  and  she  has  no  motive  to  avoid  carelessness  in  her  appearance. 
She  has  freaky  and  very  changeable  ideas  of  arranging  the  things 
in  her  room.  When  she  hears  of  the  duke's  marriage  she  almost 
throws  herself  over  a  bridge,  prays  God  for  pardon  of  her  sins,  and 
thinks  all  is  ended ;  finds  it  horrible  to  dissemble  her  feelings  in 
public;  goes  through  the  torture  of  altering  her  prayer  about  the 
duke.  She  is  disgusted  with  common  people,  harrowed  by  jealousy, 
envy,  deceit,  and  every  hideous  feeling,  yet  feels  herself  frozen  in 
the  depth,  and  moving  only  on  the  surface.  When  her  voice  improves 
she  welcomes  it  with  tears  and  feels  an  all-powerful  queen.  The 
man  she  loves  should  never  speak  to  another.  Her  journal  she  re- 
solves to  make  the  most  instructive  book  that  ever  was  or  ever  will 
be  written.  She  esteems  herself  so  great  a  treasure  that  no  one  is 
worthy  of  her;  pities  those  who  think  they  can  please  her;  thinks  her- 
self a  real  divinity;  prays  to  the  moon  to  show  her  in  dreams  her 
future  husband,  and  quarrels  with  her  photographs. 

In  some  moods  she  feels  herself  beautiful,  knows  she  shall  succeed, 
everything  smiles  upon  her  and  she  is  absolutely  happy,  and  yet  in  the 
next  paragraph  the  fever  of  life  at  high  pressure  palls  upon  her  and 
things  seem  asleep  and  unreal.  Her  attempts  to  express  her  feelings 
drive  her  to  desperation  because  words  are  inadequate.  She  loves  to 
weep,  gives  up  to  despair,  to  think  of  death,  and  finds  everything  tran- 
scendently  exquisite.  She  comes  to  despise  men  and  wonder  whether 
the  good  are  always  stupid  and  the  intelligent  always  false  and  satu- 
rated with  baseness,  but  on  the  whole  believes  that  some  time  or  other 


55^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

she  is  destined  to  meet  one  true,  good,  and  great  man.  Now  she  is 
inflated  with  pride  of  her  ancestry,  her  gifts,  and  would  subordinate 
everybody  and  everything;  she  would  never  speak  a  commonplace 
word,  and  then  again  feels  that  her  life  has  been  a  failure  and  she 
is  destined  to  be  always  waiting.  She  falls  on  her  knees  sobbing, 
praying  to  God  with  outstretched  hands  as  if  He  were  in  her  room; 
almost  vows  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  one-tenth  of  the  way 
on  foot ;  to  devote  her  money  to  good  works ;  lacks  the  pleasures 
proper  to  her  age;  wonders  if  she  can  ever  love  again.  On  throwing 
a  bouquet  from  a  window  into  a  crowd  in  the  Corso,  a  young  man 
choked  so  beautifully  a  workman  who  caught  it  that  by  that  one  act 
of  strangling  and  snatching  the  bouquet  she  fell  in  love.  The  young 
man  calls  and  they  see  each  other  often.  Now  she  is  clad  from  head 
to  foot  in  an  armor  of  cold  politeness,  now  vanity  and  now  passion 
seem  uppermost  in  their  meetings.  She  wonders  if  a  certain  amount 
of  sin,  like  air,  is  necessary  to  a  man  to  sustain  life.  Finally  they 
vow  mutual  love  and  Pietro  leaves,  and  she  begins  to  fear  that  she 
has  cherished  illusions  or  been  insulted ;  is  tormented  at  things  unsaid 
or  of  her  spelling  in  French.  She  coughs  and  for  three  days  has  a  new 
idea  that  she  is  going  to  die ;  prays  and  prostrates  herself  sixty 
times,  one  for  each  bead  in  her  rosary,  touching  the  floor  with  her 
forehead  every  time;  wonders  if  God  takes  intentions  into  account; 
resolves  to  read  the  New  Testament,  but  can  not  find  one  and  reads 
Dumas  instead.  In  novel-reading  she  imagines  herself  the  heroine  of 
every  scene;  sees  her  lover  and  they  plan  their  mode  of  life  together 
and  at  last  kiss  each  other,  but  later  she  feels  humiliated,  chilled,  doubts 
if  it  is  real  love;  studies  the  color  of  her  lips  to  see  if  they  have 
changed;  fears  that  she  has  compromised  herself;  has  eye  symptoms 
that  make  her  fear  blindness.  Once  on  reading  the  Testament  she 
smiled  and  clasped  her  hands,  gazed  upward,  was  no  longer  herself 
but  in  ecstasy;  she  makes  many  programs  for  life;  is  haunted  by  the 
phrase  "  we  live  but  once  " ;  wants  to  live  a  dozen  lives  in  one,  but 
feels  that  she  does  not  live  one-fourth  of  a  life ;  has  several  spells  of 
solitary  illumination.  At  other  times  she  wishes  to  be  the  center  of 
a  salon  and  imagines  herself  to  be  so.  She  soars  on  poets'  wings, 
but  often  has  hell  in  her  heart;  slowly  love  is  vowed  henceforth 
to  be  a  word  without  meaning  to  her.  Although  she  suffers  from 
ennui,  she  realizes  that  women  live  only  from  sixteen  to  forty  and 
can  not  bear  the  thought  of  losing  a  moment  of  her  life;  criticizes  her 
mother;  scorns  marriage  and  child-bearing,  which  any  washerwoman 
can  attain,  but  pants  for  glory ;  now  hates,  now  longs  to  see  new 
faces ;  thinks  of  disguising  herself  as  a  poor  girl  and  going  out  to 
seek  her  fortunes;  thinks  her  mad  vanity  is  her  devil;  that  her 
ambitions  are  justified  by  no  results;  hates  moderation  in  anything; 
would  have  intense  and  constant  excitement  or  absolute  repose ;  at 
fifteen  abandons  her  idea  of  the  duke  but  wants  an  idol,  and  finally 
decides  to  live  for  fame;  studies  her  shoulders,  hips,  bust,  to  gauge 
her  success  in  life;  tries  target-shooting,  hits  every  time  and  feels 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    557 

it  to  be  fateful ;  at  times  despises  her  mother  because  she  is  so  easily 
influenced  by  her ;  meets  another  man  whose  affection  for  her  she 
thinks  might  be  as  reverent  as  reHgion  and  who  never  profaned  the 
purity  of  his  Hfe  by  a  thought,  but  finally  drops  him  because  the  possi- 
ble disappointment  would  be  unbearable ;  finds  that  the  more  unhappy 
any  one  is  for  love  of  us  the  happier  we  are;  wonders  why  she  has 
weeping  spells ;  wonders  what  love  that  people  talk  so  much  about 
really  is,  and  whether  she  is  ever  to  know.  One  night,  at  the  age  of 
seventeen,  she  has  a  fit  of  despair,  which  vents  itself  in  moans  until 
arising,  she  seizes  the  dining-room  clock,  rushes  out  and  throws  it 
into  the  sea,  when  she  becomes  happy.     "  Poor  clock  !  " 

At  another  time  she  fears  she  has  used  the  word  love  lightly  and 
resolves  to  no  longer  invoke  God's  help,  yet  in  the  next  line  prays 
Him  to  let  her  die  as  everything  is  against  her,  her  thoughts  are  inco- 
herent, she  hates  herself  and  everything  is  contemptible  ;  but  she  wishes 
to  die  peacefully  while  some  one  is  singing  a  beautiful  air  of  Verdi. 
Again  she  thinks  of  shaving  her  head  to  save  the  trouble  of  arranging 
her  hair;  is  crazed  to  think  that  every  moment  brings  her  nearer 
death  ;  to  waste  a  moment  of  life  is  infamous,  yet  she  can  trust  no  one ; 
all  the  freshness  of  life  is  gone;  few  things  affect  her  now;  she  won- 
ders how  in  the  past  she  could  have  acted  so  foolishly  and  reasoned 
so  wisely;  is  proud  that  no  advice  in  the  world  could  ever  keep  her 
from  doing  anything  she  wished.  She  thinks  the  journal  of  her  former 
years  exaggerated  and  resolves  to  be  moderate ;  wants  to  make  others 
feel  as  she  feels ;  finds  that  the  only  cure  for  disenchantment  with 
life  is  devotion  to  work;  fears  her  face  is  wearing  an  anxious  look 
instead  of  the  confident  expression  which  was  its  chief  charm.  Im- 
possible is  a  hideous,  maddening  word ;  to  think  of  dying  like  a  dog 
as  most  people  do  and  leaving  nothing  behind  is  a  granite  wall  against 
which  she  every  instant  dashes  her  head.  If  she  loved  a  man,  every 
expression  of  admiration  for  anything  or  anybody  else  in  her  presence 
would  be  a  profanation.  Now  she  thinks  the  man  she  loves  must  never 
know  what  it  is  to  be  in  want  of  money  and  must  purchase  everything 
he  wishes ;  must  weep  to  see  a  woman  want  for  anything,  and  find  the 
door  of  no  palace  or  club  barred  to  him.  Art  becomes  a  great  shining 
light  in  her  life  of  few  pleasures  and  many  griefs,  yet  she  dares  hope 
for  nothing. 

At  eighteen  all  her  caprices  are  exhausted ;  she  vows  and  prays  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  for  her  wishes.  She 
would  like  to  be  a  millionaire,  get  back  her  voice,  obtain  the  prix 
de  Rome  under  the  guise  of  a  man  and  marry  Napoleon  IV.  On 
winning  a  medal  for  her  pictures  she  does  nothing  but  laugh,  cry, 
and  dream  of  greatness,  but  the  next  day  is  scolded  and  grows  dis- 
couraged. She  has  an  immense  sense  of  growth  and  transformation, 
so  that  not  a  trace  of  her  old  nature  remains ;  feels  that  she  has  far  too 
much  of  some  things  and  far  too  little  of  others  in  her  nature ;  sees 
defects  in  her  mother's  character,  whose  pertinacity  is  like  a  disease ; 
realizes  that  one  of  her  chief  passions  is  to  inspire  rather  than  to  feel 


558  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

love;  that  her  temper  is  profoundly  affected  by  her  dress;  deplores 
that  her  family  expect  her  to  achieve  greatness  rather  than  give  her 
the  stimulus  of  expecting  nothing;  declares  that  she  thinks  a  million 
thoughts  for  every  word  that  she  writes ;  is  disgusted  with  and  some- 
times absolutely  hates  herself.  At  one  time  she  coquets  with  Kant, 
and  wonders  if  he  is  right  that  all  things  exist  only  in  the  imagination ; 
has  a  passion  for  such  "  abracadabrante  follies  "  that  seem  so  learned 
and  logical,  but  is  grieved  to  feel  them  to  be  false ;  longs  to  penetrate 
the  intellectual  world,  to  see,  learn,  and  know  everything;  admires 
Balzac  because  he  describes  so  frankly  all  that  he  has  felt ;  loves 
Fleury,  who  has  shown  her  a  wider  horizon;  still  has  spells  of  admiring 
her  dazzling  complexion  and  deploring  that  she  can  not  go  out  alone; 
feels  that  she  is  losing  her  grip  on  art  and  also  on  God,  who  no  longer 
hears  her  prayers,  and  resolves  to  kill  herself  if  she  is  not  famous 
at  thirty. 

At  nineteen,  and  even  before,  she  has  spells  of  feeling  inefificient, 
cries,  calls  on  God,  feels  exhausted ;  is  almost  stunned  when  she  hears 
that  the  young  French  prince  about  whom  she  has  spun  romances  was 
killed  by  the  Kaffirs ;  feels  herself  growing  serious  and  sensible ;  de- 
spises death ;  realizes  that  God  is  not  what  she  thought,  but  is  perhaps 
Nature  and  Life  or  is  perhaps  Chance ;  she  thinks  out  possible  pictures 
she  might  paint;  develops  a  Platonic  friendship  for  her  professor; 
might  marry  an  old  man  with  twenty-seven  millions,  but  spurns  the 
thought ;  finds  herself  growing  deaf  gradually,  and  at  nineteen  finds 
three  gray  hairs ;  has  awful  remorse  for  days,  when  she  can  not  work 
and  so  loses  herself  in  novels  and  cigarettes ;  makes  many  good  reso- 
lutions and  then  commits  some  folly  as  if  in  a  dream ;  has  spells  of 
reviewing  the  past.  When  the  doctor  finds  a  serious  lung  trouble  and 
commands  iodine,  cod-liver  oil,  hot  milk  and  flannel,  she  at  first  scorns 
death  and  refuses  all,  and  is  delighted  at  the  terror  of  her  friends,  but 
gradually  does  all  that  is  necessary;  feels  herself  too  precocious  and 
doomed ;  deplores  especially  that  consumption  will  cost  her  her  good 
looks ;  has  fits  of  intense  anger  alternating  with  tears ;  concludes  that 
death  is  annihilation ;  realizes  the  horrible  thought  that  she  has  a 
skeleton  within  her  that  some  time  or  other  will  come  out ;  reads  the 
New  Testament  again  and  returns  to  belief  in  miracles  and  prayer 
to  Jesus  and  the  Virgin;  distributes  one  thousand  francs  to  the  poor; 
records  the  dreamy  delusions  that  flow  through  her  brain  at  night  and 
the  strange  sensations  by  day.  Her  eye  symptoms  cause  her  to  fear 
blindness  again ;  she  grows  superstitious,  believing  in  signs  and  for- 
tune-tellers ;  is  strongly  impelled  to  embrace  and  make  up  with  her 
mother ;  at  times  defies  God  and  death  ;  sees  a  Spanish  bull-fight  and 
gets  from  it  a  general  impression  of  human  cowardice,  but  has  a 
strange  intoxication  with  blood  and  would  like  to  thrust  a  lance  into 
the  neck  of  every  one  she  meets ;  coquets  a  great  deal  with  the  thought 
of  marriage ;  takes  up  her  art  and  paints  a  few  very  successful  pic- 
tures ;  tries  to  g^-apple  with  the  terrible  question,  "  What  is  my  un- 
biased opinion  concerning  myself?"  pants  chiefly  for  fame.     When 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    559 

the  other  lung  is  found  diseased  the  diary  becomes  sometimes  more 
serious,  sometimes  more  fevered;  she  is  almost  racked  to  find  some 
end  in  hfe;  shall  she  marry,  or  paint?  and  at  last  finds  much  consola- 
tion in  the  visits  of  Bastien-Lepage,  who  comes  to  see  her  often  while 
he  is  dying  of  some  gastric  trouble.  She  keeps  up  occasional  and 
often  daily  entries  in  her  journal  until  eleven  days  before  her  death, 
occurring  in  October,  1884,  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  and  precipi- 
tated by  a  cold  incurred  while  making  an  open-air  sketch. 

The  confessional  outpourings  of  Mary  MacLane^  constitute 
a  unique  and  valuable  adolescent  document,  despite  the  fact 
that  it  seems  throughout  affected  and  written  for  effect ;  how- 
ever, it  well  illustrates  a  real  type,  although  perhaps  hardly 
possible  save  in  this  country,  and  was  inspired  very  likely  by 
the  preceding. 

She  announces  at  the  outset  that  she  is  odd,  a  genius,  an  extreme 
egotist;  has  no  conscience;  despises  her  father,  "Jim  MacLane  of 
selfish  memory  "  ;  loves  scrubbing  the  floor  because  it  gives  her  strength 
and  grace  of  body,  although  her  daily  life  is  an  "  empty  damned  weari- 
ness." She  is  a  female  Napoleon  passionately  desiring  fame;  is  both 
a  philosopher  and  a  coward ;  her  heart  is  wooden ;  although  but  nine- 
teen, she  feels  forty ;  desires  happiness  even  more  than  fame,  for  an 
hour  of»which  she  would  give  up  at  once  fame,  money,  power,  virtue, 
honor,  truth,  and  genius  to  the  devil,  whose  coming  she  awaits.  She 
discusses  her  portrait,  which  constitutes  the  frontispiece ;  is  glad  of 
her  good  strong  body,  and  still  awaits  in  a  wild,  frenzied  impatience 
the  coming  of  the  devil  to  take  her  sacrifice,  and  to  whom  she  would 
dedicate  her  life.  She  loves  but  one  in  all  the  world,  an  older  "  anem- 
one "  lady,  once  her  teacher.  She  can  not  distinguish  between  right 
and  wrong;  love  is  the  only  thing  real  which  will  some  day  bring  joy, 
but  it  is  agony  to  wait.  "  Oh,  damn  !  damn  !  damn  !  damn  !  every  living 
thing  in  the  world ! — the  universe  be  damned !  "  herself  included. 
She  is  "  marvelously  deep,"  but  thanks  the  good  devil  who  has  made 
her  without  conscience  and  virtue  so  that  she  may  take  her  happiness 
when  it  comes.  Her  soul  seeks  but  blindly,  for  nothing  answers. 
How  her  happiness  will  seethe,  quiver,  writhe,  shine,  dance,  rush, 
surge,  rage,  blare,  and  wreak  with  love  and  light  when  it  comes ! 

The  devil  she  thinks  fascinating  and  strong,  with  a  will  of  steel, 
in  conventional  clothes,  whom  she  periodically  falls  in  love  with  and 
would  marry,  and  would  love  to  be  tortured  by  him.  She  holds  im- 
aginary conversations  with  him.  If  happiness  does  not  come  soon  she 
will  commit  suicide,  and  she  finds  rapture  in  the  thought  of  death.  In 
Butte,  Montana,  where  she  lives,  she  wanders  among  the  box  rustlers, 
the  beer  jerkers,  biscuit  shooters,  and  plunges  out  into  the  sand  and 

>  The  Story  of  Mary  MacLane.     By  herself.     Chicago,  19,02,  p.  322. 


560  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

barrenness,  but  finds  everything  dumb.  The  six  tooth-brushes  in  the 
bathroom  make  her  wild  and  profane.  She  flirts  with  death  at  the 
top  of  a  dark,  deep  pit,  and  thinks  out  the  stages  of  decomposition 
if  she  yielded  herself  to  Death,  who  would  dearly  love  to  have  her. 
She  confesses  herself  a  thief  on  several  occasions,  but  comforts  herself 
because  it  was  given  to  the  poor.  Sometimes  her  "  very  good  legs  " 
carry  her  out  into  the  country,  where  she  has  imaginary  love  confabs 
with  the  devil,  but  the  world  is  so  empty,  dreary,  and  cold,  and  it  is 
all  so  hard  to  bear  when  one  is  a  woman  and  nineteen.  She  has  a 
litany  from  which  she  prays  in  recurrent  phrases,  "  Kind  devil,  deliver 
me  " — as,  e.  g.,  from  musk,  boys  with  curls,  feminine  men,  wobbly  hips, 
red  note-paper,  codfish-balls,  lisle-thread  stockings,  the  books  of  A.  C. 
Gunter  and  Albert  Ross,  wax  flowers,  from  soft  old  bachelors  and 
widowers,  from  nice  young  men,  tin  spoons,  false  teeth,  thin  shoes,  etc. 
She  does  not  seem  real  to  herself,  everything  is  a  blank.  Though  she 
doubts  everything  else,  she  will  keep  the  one  atom  of  faith  in  love 
and  the  truth  that  is  love  and  life  in  her  heart.  When  something 
shrieks  within  her,  she  feels  that  all  her  anguish  is  for  nothing  and 
that  she  is  a  fool.  She  is  exasperated  that  people  call  her  peculiar, 
but  confesses  that  she  loves  admiration ;  she  can  fascinate  and  charm 
company  if  she  tries;  imagines  an  admiration  for  Messalina.  She 
most  desires  to  cultivate  badness  when  there  is  lead  in  the  sky.  "  I 
would  live  about  seven  years  of  judicious  badness,  and  then  death 
if  you  will."  "  I  long  to  cultivate  the  element  of  badness  in  me." 
She  describes  the  fascination  of  making  and  eating  fudge ;  devotes  a 
chapter  to  describing  how  to  eat  an  olive;  discusses  her  figure.  "  In 
the  front  of  my  shirt-waist  there  are  nine  cambric  handkerchiefs  cun- 
ningly distributed."  She  discusses  her  foot,  her  beautiful  hair,  her 
hips ;  describes  each  of  the  seventeen  little  engraved  portraits  of  Napo- 
leon that  she  keeps,  with  each  of  which  she  falls  in  love ;  vows  she 
would  give  up  even  her  marvelous  genius  for  one  dear,  bright  day 
free  from  loneliness.  When  her  skirts  need  sewing,  she  simply  pins 
them;  this  lasts  longer,  and  had  she  mended  them  with  needle  and 
thread  she  would  have  been  sensible,  which  she  hates.  As  she  walks 
over  the  sand  one  day  she  vows  that  she  would  like  a  man  to  come  so 
be  that  he  was  strong  and  a  perfect  villain,  and  she  would  pray  him  to 
lead  her  to  what  the  world  calls  her  ruin.  Nothing  is  of  consequence 
to  her  except  to  be  rid  of  unrest  and  pain.  She  would  be  positively  and 
not  merely  negatively  wicked.  To  poison  her  soul  would  rouse  her 
mental  power.  "  Oh,  to  know  just  once  what  it  is  to  be  loved !  "  "I 
know  that  I  am  a  genius  more  than  any  genius  that  has  lived,"  yet 
she  often  thinks  herself  a  small  vile  creature  for  whom  no  one  cares. 
The  world  is  ineffably  dull,  heaven  has  always  fooled  her,  and  she 
is  starving  for  love. 

Ada   Negri   illustrates   the  other  extreme  of  genuineness  and   is 
desperately  in  earnest.'    She  began  to  teach  school  in  a  squalid,  dismal 

«  Fate.     Tr.  by  A.  M.  Von  Blomberg,     Boston,  1898. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    5^1 

Italian  village,  and  to  write  the  poetry  at  eighteen  that  has  made  her 
famous.  She  lived  in  a  dim  room  back  of  a  stable,  up  two  flights, 
where  the  windows  were  not  glass  but  paper,  and  where  she  seems 
to  have  been,  like  her  mother,  a  mill  hand  before  she  was  a  teacher. 
She  had  never  seen  a  theater,  but  had  read  of  Duse  with  enthusiasm; 
had  never  seen  the  sea,  mountains,  or  even  a  hill,  lake,  or  large  city, 
but  she  had  read  of  them.  After  she  began  to  write,  friends  gave 
her  two  dream  days  in  the  city.  Then  she  returned,  put  on  her  wooden 
shoes,  and  began  to  teach  her  eighty  children  how  to  spell.  The 
poetry  she  writes  is  from  the  very  heart  of  her  own  experience. 

She  craved  "  the  kiss  of  genius  and  of  light,"  but  the  awful  figure 
of  misfortune  with  its  dagger  stood  by  her  bed  at  night.    She  writes: 

"I  have  no  name — my  home  a  hovel  damp ; 
I  grew  up  from  the  mire  ; 
Wretched  and  outcast  folk  my  family, 
And  yet  within  me  burns  a  flame  of  fire." 

There  is  always  a  praying  angel  and  an  evil  dwarf  on  either  side. 
The  black  abyss  attracts  her,  yet  she  is  softened  by  a  child's  caress. 
She  laughs  at  the  blackest  calamities  that  threaten  her,  but  weeps  over 
thin,  wan  children  without  bread.  Her  whole  life  goes  into  song. 
The  boy  criminal  on  the  street  fascinates  her  and  she  would  kiss  him. 
She  writes  of  jealousy  as  a  ghost  of  vengeance.  If  death  comes,  she 
fears  "  that  the  haggard  doctor  will  dissect  my  naked  corpse,"  and 
pictures  herself  dying  on  the  operating-table  like  a  stray  dog,  and  her 
well-made  body  "  disgraced  by  the  lustful  kiss  of  the  too  eager  blade  " 
as,  "  with  sinister  smile  untiring,  they  tear  my  bowels  out  and  still 
gloat  over  my  sold  corpse,  go  on  to  bare  my  bones  and  veins  at  will, 
wrench  out  my  heart,"  probe  vainly  for  the  secrets  of  hunger  and  the 
mystery  of  pain,  until  from  her  "  dead  breast  gurgles  a  gasp  of  male- 
diction." Much  of  her  verse  is  imprecation.  "  A  crimson  rain  of 
crying  blood  dripping  from  riddled  chests  "  of  those  slain  for  liberty 
falls  on  her  heart ;  the  sultry  factories  where  "  monsters  of  steel,  huge 
engines,  snort  all  day,"  and  where  the  pungent  air  poisons  the  blood 
of  the  pale  weaver  girls;  the  fate  of  the  mason  who  fell  from  a  high 
roof  and  struck  the  stone  flagging,  whose  funeral  she  attends,  all  in- 
spire her  to  sing  occasionally  the  songs  of  enfranchised  labor.  Misery 
as  a  drear,  toothless  ghost  visits  her,  as  when  gloomy  pinions  had 
overspread  her  dying  mother's  bed,  to  wrench  with  sharp  nails  all  the 
hope  from  her  breast  with  which  she  had  defied  it.  A  wretched  old 
man  on  the  street  inspires  her  to  sing  of  what  she  imagines  is  his 
happy  though  humble  prime.  There  is  the  song  of  the  pickaxe  bran- 
dished in  revolution  when  mobs  cry  "  Peace,  labor,  bread,"  and  in 
mines  of  industry  beneath  the  earth.  She  loves  the  "  defeated  "  in 
whose  house  no  fire  glows,  who  live  in  caves  and  dens,  and  writes  of 
the  mutilation  of  a  woman  in  the  factory  machinery.  At  eighteen 
years  "  a  loom,  two  handsome  eyes  that  know  no  tears,  a  cotton  dress. 
37 


5^2  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

a  love,  belong  to  me."  She  is  inspired  by  a  master  of  the  forge  beating 
a  red-hot  bar,  with  his  bare  neck  swelled.  He  is  her  demon,  her  God, 
and  her  pride  in  him  is  ecstasy.  She  describes  jealousy  of  two  rival 
women,  so  intense  that  they  fight  and  bite,  and  the  pure  joy  of  a  guile- 
less, intoxicating,  life-begetting  first  kiss.  She  longs  for  infinite 
stretches  of  hot,  golden  sand,  over  which  she  would  gallop  wildly  on 
her  steed;  anticipates  an  old  age  of  cap  and  spectacles;  revels  in  the 
hurricane,  and  would  rise  in  and  fly  and  whirl  with  it  adrift  far  out 
in  the  immensity  of  space.  She  tells  us  "  of  genius  and  light  I'm  a 
blithe  millionaire,"  and  elsewhere  she  longs  for  the  everlasting  ice  of 
lofty  mountains,  the  immortal  silence  of  the  Alps;  sings  of  her  "  sad 
twenty  years,"  "  how  all,  all  goes  when  love  is  gone  and  spent."  She 
imagines  herself  springing  into  the  water  which  closes  over  her,  while 
her  naked  soul,  ghostly  pale,  whirls  past  through  the  lonely  dale. 
She  imprecates  the  licentious  world  of  crafty  burghers,  coquettes, 
gamblers,  well-fed  millionaires,  cursed  geese  and  serpents  that  make 
the  cowardly  vile  world,  and  whom  she  would  smite  in  the  face  with 
her  indignant  verse.  "  Thou  crawlest  and  I  soar."  She  chants  the 
champions  of  the  spade,  hammer,  pick,  though  they  are  ground  and 
bowed  with  toil,  disfigured  within,  with  furrowed  brows  She  pants 
for  war  with  outrage  and  with  wrong;  questions  the  abyss  for  its 
secret;  hears  moans  and  flying  shudders;  and  sees  phantoms  springing 
from  putrid  tombs.  The  full  moon  is  an  old  malicious  spy,  peeping 
stealthily  with  evil  eye.  She  is  a  bird  caught  in  a  cursed  cage,  and 
prays  some  one  to  unlock  the  door  and  give  her  space  and  light,  and 
let  her  soar  away  in  ecstasy  and  glory.  Nothing  less  than  infinite 
space  will  satisfy  her.  Even  the  tempest,  the  demon,  or  a  malevolent 
spirit  might  bear  her  away  on  unbridled  wings.  In  one  poem  she 
apostrophizes  Marie  Bashkirtseff  as  warring  with  vast  genius  against 
unknown  powers,  but  who  now  is  in  her  coffin  among  worms,  her  skull 
grinning  and  showing  its  teeth.  She  would  be  possessed  by  her  and 
thrilled  as  by  an  electric  current.  A  dwarf  beggar  wrings  her  heart 
with  pity,  but  she  will  not  be  overwhelmed.  Though  a  daring  peasant, 
she  will  be  free  and  sing  out  her  paean  to  the  sun,  though  amid  the 
infernal  glow  of  furnaces,  forges,  and  the  ringing  noise  of  hammers 
and  wheels. 

VI.  Literary  men  who  record  their  experiences  during  this 
stage  seem  to  differ  from  women  in  several  important  respects. 
First,  they  write  with  less  abandon.  I  can  recall  no  male 
MacLanes.  A  Bashkirtseff  would  be  less  impossible,  and  a 
Negri  with  social  reform  in  her  heart  is  still  less  so.  But  men 
are  more  prone  to  characterize  their  pubic  metamorphoses  later 
in  life,  when  they  are  a  little  paled,  and  perhaps  feel  less  need 
of  confessionalism  for  that  reason.  It  would,  however,  be  too 
hazardous  to  elaborate  this  distinction  too  far.     Secondly  and 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^3 

more  clearly,  men  tend  to  vent  their  ephebic  calentures  more  in 
the  field  of  action.  They  would  break  the  old  moorings  of  home 
and  strike  out  new  careers,  or  vent  their  souls  in  efforts  and 
dreams  of  reconstructing  the  political,  industrial,  or  social 
world.  Their  impracticalibilities  are  more  often  in  the  field  of 
practical  life  and  remoter  from  their  own  immediate  surround 
ings.  This  is  especially  true  in  our  practical  country,  which 
so  far  lacks  subjective  characterizations  of  this  age  of  eminent 
literary  merit,  peculiarly  intense  as  it  is  here.  Thirdly,  they 
erupt  in  a  greater  variety  of  ways,  and  the  many  kinds  of 
genius  and  talent  that  now  often  take  possession  of  their  lives 
like  fate  are  more  varied  and  individual.  This  affords  many 
extreme  contrasts,  as,  e.  g.,  between  Trollope's  pity  for,  and 
Goethe's  apotheosis  of  his  youth ;  Mill's  loss  of  feeling,  and 
Jeffries's  unanalytic,  passionate  outbursts  of  sentiment ;  the 
esthetic  ritualism  of  Symonds,  and  the  progressive  religious 
emancipation  of  Fielding ;  the  moral  and  religious  supersensi- 
tiveness  of  Oliphant,  who  was  a  reincarnation  of  medieval 
monkhood,  and  the  riotous  storminess  of  Miiller  and  Ebers; 
the  abnormalities  and  precocity  of  De  Quincey,  and  the  steady, 
healthful  growth  of  Patterson  ;  the  simultaneity  of  a  fleshly  and 
spiritual  love  in  Keller  and  Goethe,  and  the  duality  of  Pater, 
with  his  great  and  tyrannical  intensification  of  sensation  for 
nature  and  the  sequent  mysticity  and  symbolism.  In  some  it 
is  fulminating  but  episodic,  in  others  gradual  and  lifelong 
like  the  advent  of  eternal  spring.  Fourth,  in  their  subjective 
states  women  outgrow  less  in  their  consciousness,  and  men 
depart  farther  from  their  youth,  in  more  manifold  ways. 
Lastly,  in  its  religious  aspects,  the  male  struggles  more  with 
dogma,  and  his  enfranchisement  from  it  is  more  intellectually 
belabored.  Yet,  despite  all  these  differences,  the  analogies  be- 
tween the  sexes  are  probably  yet  more  numerous,  more  all-per- 
vasive. All  these  biographic  facts  reveal  nothing  not  found  in 
questionnaire  returns  from  more  ordinary  youth,  so  that  for  our 
purposes  they  are  only  the  latter,  writ  large  because  superior 
minds  only  utter  what  all  more  inwardly  feel.  The  arrange- 
ment by  nationality  which  follows  gives  no  yet  adequate  basis 
for  inference  unless  it  be  the  above  American  peculiarity. 
In  his  autobiography  from  1785-1803,  De  Quincey*   re- 

*  Confessions.     Part  I-      Introductory  Narrative. 


5^4  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

membered  feeling  that  life  was  finished  and  blighted  for  him 
at  the  age  of  six,  up  to  which  time  the  influence  of  his  sister 
three  years  older  had  brooded  over  him. 

His  first  remembrance,  however,  is  of  a  dream  of  terrific  grandeur 
before  he  was  two,  which  seemed  to  indicate  that  his  dream  tendencies 
were  constitutional  and  not  due  to  morphine,  but  the  chill  was  upon 
the  first  glimpse  that  this  was  a  world  of  evil.  He  had  been  brought 
up  in  great  seclusion  from  all  knowledge  of  poverty  and  oppression 
in  a  silent  garden  with  three  sisters,  but  the  rumor  that  a  female 
servant  had  treated  one  of  them  rudely  just  before  her  death  plunged 
him  into  early  pessimism.  He  felt  that  little  Jane  would  come  back 
certainly  in  the  spring  with  the  roses,  and  he  was  glad  that  his  utter 
misery  with  the  blank  anarchy  and  confusion  it  brought  could  not 
be  completely  remembered.  He  stole  into  the  chamber  where  her 
corpse  lay,  and  as  he  stood,  a  solemn  wind,  the  saddest  he  ever  heard, 
that  might  have  swept  the  fields  of  mortality  for  a  thousand  centuries, 
blew,  and  that  same  hollow  Memnonian  wind  he  often  had  heard 
since,  and  it  brought  back  the  open  summer  window  and  the  corpse. 
A  vault  above  opened  into  the  sky,  and  he  slept  and  dreamed  there, 
standing  by  her,  he  knew  not  how  long;  a  worm  that  could  not  die 
was  at  his  heart,  for  this  was  the  holy  love  between  children  that 
could  not  perish.  The  funeral  was  full  of  darkness  and  despair  for 
him,  and  after  it  he  sought  solitude,  gazed  into  the  heavens  to  see  his 
sister  till  he  was  tired,  and  realized  that  he  was  alone.  ThjJS,  before 
the  end  of  his  sixth  year,  with  a  mind  already  adolescent,  although 
with  a  retarded  body,  the  minor  tone  of  life  became  dominant  and 
his  awakening  to  it  was  hard. 

As  a  penniless  schoolboy  wandering  the  streets  of  London  at  night, 
he  was  on  familiar  and  friendly  terms  of  innocent  relationship  with 
a  number  of  outcast  women.  In  his  misery  they  were  to  him  simply 
sisters  in  calamity,  but  he  found  in  them  humanity,  disinterested  gen- 
erosity, courage,  and  fidelity.  One  night,  after  he  had  walked  the 
streets  for  weeks  with  one  of  these  friendless  girls  who  had  not  com- 
pleted her  sixteenth  year,  as  they  sat  on  the  steps  of  a  house,  he  grew 
very  ill,  and  had  she  not  rushed  to  buy  from  her  slender  purse  cordials 
and  tenderly  ministered  to  and  revived  him,  he  would  have  died. 
Many  years  later  he  used  to  wander  past  this  house,  and  he  recalled 
with  real  tenderness  this  youthful  friendship;  he  longed  again  to 
meet  the  "  noble-minded  Ann  "  with  whom  he  had  so  often  con- 
versed familiarly  "  more  Socratico,"  whose  betrayer  he  had  vainly 
sought  to  punish,  and  yearned  to  hear  from  her  to  convey  to  her  some 
authentic  message  of  gratitude,  peace,  and  forgiveness. 

His  much  older  brother  came  home  in  his  thirty-ninth  year  to  die. 
He  had  been  unmanageable  in  youth  and  his  genius  for  mischief  was 
an  inspiration,  yet  he  was  hostile  to  everything  pusillanimous,  haughty, 
aspiring,  ready  to  fasten  a  quarrel  on  his  shadow  for  running  before. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^5 

at  first  inclined  to  reduce  his  boy  brother  to  a  fag,  but  finally  before 
his  death  became  a  great  influence  in  his  life.  Prominent  were  the 
fights  between  De  Quincey  and  another  older  brother  on  the  one 
hand  and  the  factory  crowd  of  boys  on  the  other,  a  fight  incessantly 
renewed  at  the  close  of  factory  hours,  with  victory  now  on  one  and 
now  on  the  other  side;  fought  with  stones  and  sticks,  where  thrice 
he  was  taken  prisoner,  where  once  one  of  the  factory  women  kissed 
him,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  heart.  He  finally  invented  a  kingdom 
like  Hartley  Coleridge,  called  Gom  Broon.  He  thought  first  that  it  had 
no  location,  but  finally  because  his  brother's  imaginary  realm  was 
north  and  he  wanted  wide  waters  between  them,  his  was  in  the  far 
south.  It  was  only  two  hundred  and  seventy  miles  in  circuit,  and  he 
was  stunned  to  be  told  by  his  brother  one  day  that  his  own  domain 
swept  south  for  eighty  degrees,  so  that  the  distance  he  had  relied  on 
vanished.  Here,  however,  he  continued  to  rule  for  well  or  ill,  rais- 
ing taxes,  keeping  an  imaginary  standing  army,  fishing  herring  and 
selling  the  product  of  his  fishery  for  manure,  and  experiencing  how 
"  uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  He  worried  over  his 
obligations  to  Gom  Broon,  and  the  shadow  froze  into  reality,  and 
although  his  brother's  kingdom  Tigrosylvania  was  larger,  his  was 
distinguished  for  eminent  men  and  a  history  not  to  be  ashamed  of. 
A  friend  had  read  Lord  Monboddo's  view  that  men  had  sprung  from 
apes,  and  suggested  that  the  inhabitants  of  Gom  Broon  had  tails,  so 
that  the  brother  told  him  that  his  subjects  had  not  emerged  from 
apedom  and  he  must  invent  arts  to  eliminate  the  tails.  They  must 
be  made  to  sit  down  for  six  hours  a  day  as  a  beginning.  Abdicate 
he  would  not,  though  all  his  subjects  had  three  tails  apiece.  They 
had  suffered  together.  Vain  was  his  brother's  suggestion  that  they 
have  a  Roman  toga  to  conceal  their  ignominious  appendages.  He 
was  greatly  interested  in  two  scrofulous  idiots,  who  finally  died,  and 
feared  that  his  subjects  were  akin  to  them. 

John  Stuart  Mill's  Autobiography  presents  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  modifications  of  the  later  phases  of  adolescent  expe- 
rience. No  boy  ever  had  more  diligent  and  earnest  training 
than  his  father  gave  him  or  responded  better.  He  can  not  re- 
member when  he  began  to  learn  Greek,  but  was  told  that  it  was 
at  the  age  of  three.  The  list  of  classical  authors  alone  that  he 
read  in  the  original,  to  say  nothing  of  history,  political,  scien- 
tific, logical,  and  other  works  before  he  was  twelve,  is  perhaps 
unprecedented  in  all  history.  He  associated  with  his  father 
and  all  his  many  friends  on  their  own  level,  but  modestly 
ascribes  everything  to  his  environment,  insists  that  in  nat- 
ural gifts  he  is  rather  below  than  above  par,  and  declares  that 
everything  he  did  could  be  done  by  every  boy  of  average  capac- 


566  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

ity  and  healthy  physical  constitution.  His  father  made  the 
Greek  virtue  of  temperance  or  moderation  cardinal,  and  thought 
human  life  '*  a  poor  thing  at  best  after  the  freshness  of  youth 
and  unsatisfied  curiosity  had  gone  by."  He  scorned  "  the  in- 
tense "  and  had  only  contempt  for  strong  emotion. 

In  his  teens  Mill  was  an  able  debater  and  writer  for  the  quarterlies, 
and  devoted  to  the  propagation  of  the  theories  of  Bentham,  Ricardo, 
and  associationism.  From  the  age  of  fifteen  he  had  an  object  in  life, 
viz.,  to  reform  the  world.  This  gave  him  happiness,  deep,  permanent, 
and  assured  for  the  future,  and  the  idea  of  struggling  to  promote  utili- 
tarianism seemed  an  inspiring  program  for  life.  But  in  the  autumn 
of  1826,  when  he  was  twenty  years  of  age,  he  fell  into  "  a  dull  state 
of  nerves,"  where  he  could  no  longer  enjoy,  and  what  had  produced 
pleasure  seemed  insipid ;  "  the  state,  I  should  think,  in  which  converts 
to  Methodism  usually  are  when  smitten  by  their  first  '  conviction  of 
sin.'  In  this  frame  of  mind  it  occurred  to  me  to  put  the  question 
directly  to  myself:  'Suppose  that  all  your  objects  in  life  were  real- 
ized; that  all  the  changes  in  institutions  and  opinions  which  you  are 
looking  forward  to  could  be  completely  effected  at  this  very  instant; 
would  this  be  a  great  joy  and  happiness  to  you? '  And  an  irrepressible 
self-consciousness  distinctly  answered,  '  No.'  At  this  my  heart  sank 
within  me:  the  whole  foundation  on  which  my  life  was  constructed 
fell  down.  All  my  happiness  was  to  have  been  found  in  the  continual 
pursuit  of  this  end.  The  end  had  ceased  to  charm,  and  how  could 
there  ever  again  be  any  interest  in  the  means?  I  seemed  to  have 
nothing  left  to  live  for.  At  first  I  hoped  that  the  cloud  would  pass 
away  of  itself,  but  it  did  not.  A  night's  sleep,  the  sovereign  remedy 
for  the  smaller  vexations  of  life,  had  no  effect  on  it.  I  awoke  to  a 
renewed  consciousness  of  the  woful  fact.  I  carried  it  with  me  into 
all  companies,  into  all  occupations.  Hardly  anything  had  power  to 
cause  me  even  a  few  minutes'  oblivion  of  it.  For  some  months  the 
cloud  seemed  to  grow  thicker  and  thicker.  The  lines  in  Coleridge's 
Dejection — I  was  not  then  acquainted  with  them — exactly  described 
my  case: 

"  A  grief  without  a  pang,  void,  dark  and  drear, 
A  drowsy,  stifled,  unimpassioned  grief, 
"Which  finds  no  natural  outlet  or  relief 
In  word,  or  sigh,  or  tear." 

"  In  vain  I  sought  relief  from  my  favorite  books,  those  memorials 
of  past  nobleness  and  greatness  from  which  I  had  always  hitherto 
drawn  strength  and  animation.  I  read  them  now  without  feeling,  or 
with  the  accustomed  feeling  minus  all  its  charm;  and  I  became  per- 
suaded that  my  love  of  mankind,  and  of  excellence  for  its  own  sake, 
had  worn  itself  out.     I  sought  no  comfort  by  speaking  to  others  of 


ADOLESCENCE  IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^7 

what  I  felt.  If  I  had  loved  any  one  sufficiently  to  make  confiding  my 
griefs  a  necessity,  I  should  not  have  been  in  the  condition  I  was.  I 
felt,  too,  that  mine  was  not  an  interesting  or  in  any  way  respectable 
distress.  There  was  nothing  in  it  to  attract  sympathy.  Advice,  if  I 
had  known  where  to  seek  it,  would  have  been  most  precious.  The 
words  of  Macbeth  to  the  physician  often  occurred  to  my  thoughts. 
But  there  was  no  one  on  whom  I  could  build  the  faintest  hope  of 
such  assistance.  My  father,  to  whom  it  would  have  been  natural  to 
me  to  have  recourse  in  any  practical  difficulties,  was  the  last  person 
to  whom,  in  such  a  case  as  this,  I  looked  for  help.  Everything  con- 
vinced me  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  any  such  mental  state  as  I 
was  suffering  from,  and  that  even  if  he  could  be  made  to  understand 
it,  he  was  not  the  physician  who  could  heal  it.  My  education,  which 
was  wholly  his  work,  had  been  conducted  without  any  regard  to  the 
possibility  of  its  ending  in  this  result,  and  I  saw  no  use  in  giving  him 
the  pain  of  thinking  that  his  plans  had  failed,  when  the  failure  was 
probably  irremediable,  and,  at  all  events,  beyond  the  power  of  his 
remedies.  Of  other  friends,  I  had  at  that  time  none  to  whom  I  had 
any  hope  of  making  my  condition  intelligible.  It  was,  however,  abun- 
dantly intelligible  to  myself,  and  the  more  I  dwelt  upon  it  the  more 
hopeless  it  appeared." 

He  now  saw  what  had  hitherto  seemed  incredible,  that  the  habit 
of  analysis  tends  to  wear  away  the  feelings.  He  felt  "  stranded  at  the 
commencement  of  my  voyage,  with  a  well-equipped  ship  and  a  rudder, 
but  no  sail ;  without  any  real  desire  for  the  ends  which  I  had  been  so 
carefully  fitted  out  to  work  for :  no  delight  in  virtue,  or  the  general 
good,  but  also  just  as  little  in  anything  else.  The  fountains  of  vanity 
and  ambition  seemed  to  have  dried  up  within  me  as  completely  as 
those  of  benevolence."  His  vanity  had  been  gratified  at  too  early  an 
age,  and,  like  all  premature  pleasures,  they  had  caused  indifference, 
until  he  despaired  of  creating  any  fresh  association  of  pleasure  with 
any  objects  of  human  desire.  Meanwhile,  dejected  and  melancholy 
as  he  was  through  the  winter,  he  went  on  mechanically  with  his  tasks; 
thought  he  found  in  Coleridge  the  first  description  of  what  he  was 
feehng;  feared  the  idiosyncrasies  of  his  education  had  made  him  a 
being  unique  and  apart.  "  I  asked  myself  if  I  could  or  if  I  was  bound 
to  go  on  living,  when  life  must  be  passed  in  this  manner.  I  generally 
answered  to  myself  that  I  did  not  think  I  could  possibly  bear  it  beyond 
a  year."  But  within  about  half  that  time,  in  reading  a  pathetic  passage 
of  how  a  mere  boy  felt  that  he  could  save  his  family  and  take  the 
place  of  all  they  had  lost,  a  vivid  conception  of  the  scene  came  over 
him,  and  he  was  moved  to  tears.  From  that  moment  his  burden 
grew  lighter.  He  saw  that  his  heart  was  not  dead  and  that  he  still 
had  some  stuff  left  of  which  character  and  happiness  were  made ;  and 
although  there  were  several  later  lapses,  some  of  which  lasted  many 
months,  he  was  never  again  as  miserable  as  he  had  been. 

These  experiences  left  him  changed  in  two  respects.  He  had  a 
new  theory  of  life,  having  much  in  common  with  the  anti-self-con- 


568  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

sciousness  theory  of  Carlyle.  He  still  held  happiness  the  end  of  life, 
but  thought  it  must  be  aimed  at  indirectly  and  taken  incidentally. 
The  other  change  was  that  for  the  first  time  he  gave  its  proper  place 
to  internal  culture  of  the  individual,  especially  the  training  of  the 
feelings  which  became  now  cardinal.  He  realized  and  felt  the  power 
of  poetry  and  art;  was  profoundly  moved  by  music;  fell  in  love  with 
Wordsworth  and  with  nature ;  and  his  later  depressions  were  best  re- 
lieved by  the  power  of  rural  beauty,  which  wrought  its  charm  not 
because  of  itself  but  by  the  states  and  feelings  it  aroused.  His  ode 
on  the  intimations  of  immortality  showed  that  he  also  had  felt  that 
the  first  freshness  of  youthful  joy  was  not  lasting,  and  had  sought 
and  found  compensation.  He  had  thus  come  to  a  very  different  stand- 
point from  that  of  his  father,  who  had  up  to  this  time  formed  his  mind 
and  life,  and  developed  on  this  basis  his  unique  individuality. 

Laurence  Oliphant  ^  was  born  in  1829.  When  he  was 
twelve,  "  with  all  his  faculties  and  his  whole  being  agog  for 
novelty  and  incident,"  he  traveled  alone  from  England  to  the 
East  and  had  no  more  systematic  education.  But  his  active 
mind  was  immensely  stimulated  by  his  mother,  only  eighteen 
years  older  than  himself.  By  seventeen  he  was  a  confirmed 
"  rolling  stone,"  and  he  never  ceased  his  roving  habits.  He 
remained  an  adolescent  all  his  life.  He  was  intensely  inter- 
ested by  turns  in  all  sorts  of  political,  social,  artistic,  military, 
and  religious  matters,  and  a  citizen  of  three  continents.^ 


*  Memoir  of  the  Life  of  Laurence  Oliphant  and  of  Alice  Oliphant,  his  Wife. 
By  Margaret  O.  W.  Oliphant.     2  vols.     New  York,  1891. 

'  In  1867,  when  he  was  thirty-eight,  already  well  known  as  a  somewhat  Bohemian 
litterateur,  he  met  a  zealot  preacher  itinerating  in  England  and  followed  him  to 
America,  to  the  consternation  of  his  friends,  to  join  a  community  at  Brockton  or 
Salem  or  Erie  to  "  live  the  life."  He  was  sent  to  sleep  in  a  loft ;  to  clean  a  large 
cattle  stable,  wheel  dirt  and  rubbish  ;  could  speak  to  no  one ;  and  his  food  was 
conveyed  to  him  by  a  silent  messenger.  The  "  infernals  "  were  often  active  and 
infested  many,  who  were  brought  to  Harris,  the  leader,  who  could  cast  out  devils. 
To  bind  evil  spirits,  it  was  sometimes  necessary  for  victims  to  be  robbed  of  their 
sleep.  Men  were  assorted  in  groups  according  as  their  magnetism  helped  or  hin- 
dered each  other,  for  all  were  batteries  of  unseen  force.  Families  were  broken  up 
that  love  for  the  race  might  supplant  that  for  the  individual.  For  three  years  Oli- 
phant led  the  life  of  a  hard  laborer.  He  was  a  teamster  and  "cadged  strawberries  " 
along  the  railroad,  for  all  must  serve  a  two  years'  novitiate.  His  delicate  mother, 
Lady  Oliphant,  followed  her  son,  and  laying  aside  all  the  habits  of  her  life,  washed, 
scrubbed,  cooked,  and  cleaned  house  ;  but  though  in  the  same  community,  could  see 
her  son,  in  whom  her  life  was  bound  up  and  whose  every  serious  thought  she  shared, 
only  as  other  members  of  the  community.  After  three  years,  in  1870,  Oliphant 
returned  and  curiously  dropped  into  the  same  place  in  society  that  he  had  held  bC' 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE   AND    BIOGRAPHY    5^9 

Jeffries,  when  eighteen,  began  his  Story  of  My  Heart, 
which  he  said  was  an  absokitely  true  confession  of  the  stages  of 
emotion  in  a  soul  from  which  all  traces  of  tradition  and  learn- 
ing were  erased,  and  which  stood  face  to  face  with  nature  and 
the  unknown. 

His  heart  long  seemed  dusty  and  parched  for  want  of  feeling, 
and  he  frequented  a  hill,  where  the  pores  of  his  soul  opened  to  a  new 
air.  "  Lying  down  on  the  grass,  I  spoke  in  my  soul  to  the  earth,  the 
sun,  the  air,  and  the  distant  sea.  ...  I  desired  to  have  its  strength, 
its  mystery  and  glory.  I  addressed  the  sun,  desiring  the  sole  equiva- 
lent of  his  light  and  brilliance,  his  endurance,  and  unwearied  race.  I 
turned  to  the  blue  heaven  over,  gazing  into  its  depth,  inhaling  its 
exquisite  color  and  sweetness.  The  rich  blue  of  the  unobtainable 
flower  of  the  sky  drew  my  soul  toward  it,  and  there  it  rested,  for 
pure  color  is  the  rest  of  the  heart.  By  all  these  I  prayed.  I  felt  an 
emotion  of  the  soul  beyond  all  definition ;  prayer  is  a  puny  thing  to  it." 
He  prayed  by  the  thyme;  by  the  earth;  the  flowers  which  he  touched; 
the  dust  which  he  let  fall  through  his  fingers ;  was  filled  with  "  a 
rapture,  an  ecstasy,  an  inflatus.  With  this  inflatus  I  prayed.  ...  I 
hid  my  face  in  the  grass;  I  was  wholly  prostrated;  I  lost  myself  in  the 
wrestle.  ...  I  see  now  that  what  I  labored  for  was  soul  life,  more 
soul  learning."    After  gazing  upward  he  would  turn  his  face  into  the 


fore.  Still  enthusiastic  in  his  admiration  of  Harris,  he  urged  that  men  must  forsake 
all  for  the  cross  and  be  drudges  and  martyrs  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word  in 
order  to  embody  heavenly  ideas.  Both  had  found  peace  and  content  in  this  com- 
munity and  its  spiritual  atmosphere,  although  he  slept  on  straw  over  a  stable,  rose 
at  four  to  clean  and  feed  horses,  and  worked  till  eight  to  thrash  the  devil  out  of 
him.  He  still  regarded  Brockton  as  the  ideal  of  society.  Soon  after  returning,  a 
little  sobered  from  his  first  elation,  he  met  in  Paris  the  beautiful  and  accomplished 
Alice  le  Strange,  descended  from  a  long  line  of  country  gentlefolk.  She  was  a 
fine  musician,  full  of  inexplicable  charm,  vivacity,  and  beauty,  and  had  already 
tasted  all  the  applause  of  society  until,  like  Edward  Irving,  she  wanted  something 
larger  and  more  authoritative.  It  was  almost  love  at  first  sight,  and  in  1872  they 
were  betrothed,  despite  the  protest  of  her  friends.  He  infected  her  with  love  of 
his  American  scheme,  and  when,  after  some  postponements,  they  were  married,  she 
entered  enthusiastically  into  his  plans,  and  even  placed  the  whole  of  her  property 
in  the  hands  of  Harris.  The  year  1873  found  him  with  mother  and  wife  back  at 
Brockton  under  the  "father,"  who  separated  husband  and  wife,  and  finally  sent 
Alice  to  his  new  settlement  in  California.  After  some  wandering  on  his  part,  dur- 
ing which  he  tried  to  exploit  the  Dead  Sea  for  its  chemical  and  mineral  deposits,  if 
only  the  Sultan  had  consented,  the  husband  and  wife  were  reunited.  They  went 
to  Egypt,  then  to  Palestine,  always  writing  and  scheming,  and  composing  one 
strange  book,  "  Synpneumata, "  in  common,  till  at  last,  in  187S,  she  died;  her 
spirit  remained  with  her  devoted,  adventurous,  and  visionary  husband,  who  mar- 
ried again  in  1888,  and  died  shortly  after. 


SIO  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

grass,  shutting  out  everything  with  hands  each  side,  till  he  felt  down 
into  the  earth  and  was  absorbed  in  it,  whispering  deep  down  to  its 
centen.  Every  natural  impression,  trees,  insects,  air,  clouds,  he  used 
for  prayer,  "  that  my  soul  might  be  more  than  the  cosmos  of  life." 
His  "  Lyra  "  prayer  was  to  live  a  more  exalted  and  intense  soul  life; 
enjoy  more  bodily  pleasure  and  live  long  and  find  power  to  execute 
his  designs.  He  often  tried,  but  failed  for  years  to  write  at  least  a 
meager  account  of  these  experiences.  He  felt  himself  immortal  just 
as  he  felt  beauty.  He  was  in  eternity  already ;  the  supernatural  is 
only  the  natural  misnamed.  As  he  lay  face  down  on  the  grass,  seizing 
it  with  both  hands,  he  longed  for  death,  to  be  burned  on  a  pyre  of  pine 
wood  on  a  high  hill,  to  have  his  ashes  scattered  wide  and  broadcast,  to 
be  thrown  into  the  space  he  longed  for  while  living,  but  he  feared  that 
such  a  luxury  of  resolution  into  the  elements  would  be  too  costly. 
Thus  his  naked  mind,  close  against  naked  mother  Nature,  wrested 
from  her  the  conviction  of  soul,  immortality,  deity,  under  conditions 
as  primitive  as  those  of  the  cave  man,  and  his  most  repeated  prayer 
was,  "  Give  me  the  deepest  soul  life." 

In  other  moods  he  felt  the  world  outre-human,  and  his  mind  could 
by  no  twist  be  fitted  to  the  cosmos.  Ugly,  designless  creatures  caused 
him  to  cease  to  look  for  deity  in  nature,  where  all  happens  by  chance. 
He  at  length  concluded  there  is  something  higher  than  soul  and  above 
deity,  and  better  than  God,  for  which  he  searched  and  labored.  He 
found  favorite  thinking  places,  to  which  he  made  pilgrimages,  where 
he  "  felt  out  into  the  depths  of  the  ether."  His  frame  could  not  bear 
the  labor  his  heart  demanded.  Work  of  body  was, his  meat  and  drink. 
"  Never  have  I  had  enough  of  it.  I  wearied  long  before  I  was  satis- 
fied, and  weariness  did  not  bring  a  cessation  of  desire,  the  thirst  was 
still  there.  I  rode;  I  used  the  ax;  I  split  tree-trunks  with  wedges; 
my  arms  tired,  but  my  spirit  remained  fresh  and  chafed  against  the 
physical  weariness."  Had  he  been  indefinitely  stronger,  he  would 
have  longed  for  more  strength.  He  was  often  out  of  doors  all  day 
and  often  half  the  night;  wanted  more  sunshine;  wished  the  day  was 
sixty  hours  long;  took  pleasure  in  braving  the  cold  so  that  it  should 
be  not  life's  destroyer  but  its  renewer.  Yet  he  abhorred  asceticism. 
He  wrestled  with  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  his  soul  and  its  destiny, 
but  could  find  no  solution ;  revolted  at  the  assertion  that  all  is  designed 
for  the  best ;  "  a  man  of  intellect  and  humanity  could  cause  everything 
to  happen  in  an  infinitely  superior  manner."  He  discovered  that  no  one 
ever  died  of  old  age,  but  only  of  disease;  that  we  do  not  even  know 
what  old  age  would  be  like ;  found  that  his  soul  is  infinite,  but  lies  in 
abeyance;  that  we  are  murdered  by  our  ancestors  and  must  roll  back 
the  tide  of  death ;  that  a  hundredth  part  of  man's  labor  would  suffice 
for  his  support;  that  idleness  is  no  evil;  that  in  the  future  nine-tenths 
of  the  time  will  be  leisure,  and  to  that  end  he  will  work  with  all  his 
heart.  "  I  was  not  more  than  eighteen  when  an  inner  and  esoteric 
meaning  began  to  come  to  me  from  all  the  visible  universe,  and  inde- 
finable aspirations  filled  me." 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    57 » 

Interesting  as  is  this  document,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  sus- 
picion that  the  seventeen  years  which  intervened  between  the  begin- 
ning of  these  experiences  and  their  final  record,  coupled  with  the 
perhaps  unconscious  tendency  toward  literary  effect,  detract  more  or 
less  from  their  value  as  documents  of  adolescent  nature. 

Mr.  H.  Fielding,  author  of  The  Soul  of  a  People,  has 
since  written  a  book  ^  in  which,  beginning  with  many  defini- 
tions of  Christianity,  weighing  the  opinion  of  those  who  think 
all  our  advance  is  made  because  of,  against  those  who  think  it 
in  spite  of  Christianity,  he  proceeds  to  give  the  story  of  a  boy, 
probably  himself,  who  till  twelve  was  almost  entirely  reared  by 
women  and  with  children  younger  than  himself. 

He  was  sickly,  and  believed  not  in  the  Old  but  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment; in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  which  he  supposed  all  accepted 
and  lived  by;  that  war  and  wealth  were  bad,  and  learning  apt  to  be 
a  snare;  that  the  ideal  life  was  that  of  a  poor  curate,  working  hard 
and  unhappy.  At  twelve  he  went  to  a  boarding-school,  passed  from  a 
woman's  world  into  a  man's,  out  of  the  New  Testament  into  the  Old, 
out  of  dreams  into  reality.  War  was  a  glorious  opportunity,  and  all 
followed  the  British  victories,  which  were  announced  publicly.  Big 
boys  were  going  to  Sandhurst  or  Woolwich;  there  were  parties;  and 
the  school  code  never  turned  the  other  cheek.  Wars  were  God's 
storms,  stirring  stagnant  natures  to  new  life;  wealth  was  worshiped; 
certain  lies  were  an  honor;  knowledge  was  an  extremely  desirable 
thing — all  this  was  at  first  new  and  delightful,  but  extremely  wicked. 
Sunday  was  the  only  other  Old  Testament  rule,  but  was  then  forgotten. 
Slowly  a  repugnance  of  religion  in  all  its  forms  arose.  He  felt  his 
teachers  hypocrites ;  he  raised  no  alarm,  "  for  he  was  hardly  conscious 
that  his  anchor  had  dragged  or  that  he  had  lost  hold  "  of  it  forever.  At 
eighteen  he  read  Darwin  and  found  that  if  he  were  right  Genesis  was 
wrong;  man  had  risen,  not  fallen ;  if  a  part  was  wrong,  the  whole  was. 
If  God  made  the  world,  the  devil  seemed  to  rule  it;  prayer  can  not  in- 
fluence him ;  the  seven  days  of  creation  were  periods,  Heaven  knows 
how  long.  Why  did  all  profess  and  no  one  believe  religion  ?  Why  is 
God  so  stern  and  yet  so  partial,  and  how  about  the  Trinity?  Then 
explanations  were  given.  Heaven  grew  repulsive,  as  a  place  for  the 
poor,  the  maimed,  the  stupid,  the  childish,  and  those  unfit  for  earth 
generally. 

Faiths  came  from  the  East.  "  The  North  has  originated  only  Thor, 
Odin,  Balder,  Valkyres."  The  gloom  and  cold  drive  man  into  himself; 
do  not  open  him.     In  the  East  one  can  live  in  quiet  solitude,  with  no 


*  The  Hearts  of  Men.     London,  1891,  p.  324. 


572  THE   PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESCENCE 

effort,  close  to  nature.  The  representatives  of  all  faiths  wear  ostenta- 
tiously their  badges,  pray  in  public,  and  no  one  sneers  at  all  religions. 
Oriental  faiths  have  no  organization;  there  is  no  head  of  Hinduism, 
Buddhism,  or  hardly  of  Mohammedanism.  There  are  no  missions, 
but  religion  grows  rankly  from  a  rich  soil,  so  the  boy  wrote  three 
demands:  a  reasonable  theory  of  the  universe, a  workable  and  working 
code  of  conduct,  and  a  promise  of  something  desirable  hereafter.  So 
he  read  books  and  tried  to  make  a  system. 

On  a  hill,  in  a  thunder-storm  in  the  East,  he  realized  how  Thor 
was  born.  Man  fears  thunder ;  it  seems  the  voice  of  a  greater  man. 
Deny  eyes,  legs,  and  body  of  the  Deity,  and  nothing  is  left.  God  as 
an  abstract  spirit  is  unthinkable,  but  Buddhism  offers  us  no  God, 
only  law.  Necessity,  blind  force,  law,  and  a  free  personal  will,  that  is 
alternative.  Freedom  limits  omnipotence ;  the  two  can  never  mix. 
"  The  German  Emperor's  God,  clanking  round  the  heavenly  mansions 
wearing  a  German  Pickelhaube  and  swearing  German  oaths,"  is  not 
satisfactory.  Man's  God  is  what  he  admires  most  in  himself;  he 
can  be  propitiated,  hence  atonement ;  you  can  not  break  a  law,  but 
you  can  study  it.  Inquiry,  not  submission,  is  the  attitude.  Perhaps 
both  destiny  and  freedom  are  true,  but  truth  is  for  the  sake  of 
light. 

Thor  had  no  moral  code ;  the  Greeks  were  unmoral.  Jehovah  at 
first  asked  only  fear,  reverence,  and  worship.  This  gives  no  guide 
to  life.  Most  codes  are  directed  against  a  foe  and  against  pain.  Truth, 
mercy,  courtesy — these  were  slowly  added  to  reverence ;  then  sanitary 
rules,  hence  castes.  Two  codes,  those  of  Christ  and  Buddha,  tower 
above  all  others.  They  are  the  same  in  praising  not  wealth,  greatness, 
or  power,  but  purity,  renunciation  of  the  world,  as  if  one  fitted  one's 
self  for  one  by  being  unfitted  for  the  other  world. 

Is  heaven  a  bribe?  Its  ideals  are  those  of  children,  of  girl  angels, 
white  wings,  floating  dresses,  no  sheep,  but  lambs.  "  Surely  there  is 
nothing  in  all  the  world  so  babyish."  One  can  hardly  imagine  a  man 
with  a  deep  voice,  with  the  storm  of  life  beating  his  soul,  amid  those 
baby  faces.  If  happiness  in  any  act  or  attitude  is  perfect,  it  will  last 
forever.  Where  is  due  the  weariness  or  satiety?  But  if  happiness  be 
perfect,  this  is  impossible;  so  life  would  be  monotony  akin  to  annihila- 
tion. But  life  is  change,  and  change  is  misery.  There  is  effort  here, 
but  there  will  be  none  in  the  great  peace  that  passes  understanding; 
no  defeat,  therefore  no  victory ;  no  friends,  because  no  enemies ;  no 
joyous  meetings,  because  no  farewells.  It  is  the  shadows  and  the 
dark  mysteries  that  sound  the  depths  of  our  hearts.  No  man  that  ever 
lived,  if  told  that  he  could  be  young  again  or  go  to  any  heaven,  would 
choose  the  latter.  Men  die  for  many  things,  but  all  fear  the  beyond. 
Thus  no  religion  gives  us  an  intelligible  First  Cause,  a  code  or  a 
heaven  that  we  want.  The  most  religious  man  is  the  peasant  listen- 
ing to  the  angelus,  putting  out  a  little  ghi  for  his  God ;  the  woman 
crying  in  the  pagoda.  Thus  we  can  only  turn  to  the  hearts  of  men  for 
the  truth  of  religion. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    573 

Anthony  Trollope's  autobiography  is  pitiful.  He  was 
poor  and  disHked  by  most  of  his  masters  and  treated  with 
ignominy  by  his  fellow  pupils. 

He  describes  himself  as  always  in  disgrace.  At  fifteen  he  walked 
three  miles  each  way  twice  a  day  to  and  from  school.  As  a  sizar  he 
seemed  a  wretched  farmer's  boy,  reeking  from  the  dunghill,  sitting 
next  the  sons  of  big  peers.  All  were  against  him,  and  he  was  allowed 
to  join  no  games,and  learned,  he  tells  us,  absolutely  nothing  but  a  little 
Greek  and  Latin.  Once  only,  goaded  to  desperation,  he  rallied  and 
whipped  a  bully.  The  boy  was  never  able  to  overcome  the  isolation 
of  his  school  position,  and  while  he  coveted  popularity  with  an  eager- 
ness which  was  almost  mean,  and  longed  exceedingly  to  excd  in 
cricket  or  with  the  racquet,  was  allowed  to  know  nothing  of  them. 
He  remembers  at  nineteen  never  to  have  had  a  lesson  in  writing,  arith- 
metic, French,  or  German.  He  knew  his  masters  by  their  ferules  and 
they  him.  He  believes  that  he  has  "  been  flogged  oftener  than  any 
human  being  alive."  "  It  was  just  possible  to  obtain  five  scourgings 
in  one  day  at  Winchester,  and  I  have  often  boasted  that  I  have  ob- 
tained them  all."  Prizes  were  distributed  prodigally,  but  he  never 
got  one.  For  twelve  years  of  tuition,  he  says,  "  I  do  not  remember 
that  I  ever  knew  a  lesson." 

At  this  age  he  describes  himself  as  "  an  idle,  desolate  hanger-on 
.  .  .  without  an  idea  of  a  career  or  a  profession  or  a  trade,"  but  he 
was  tolerably  happy  because  he  could  fancy  himself  in  love  with  pretty 
girls  and  had  been  removed  from  the  real  misery  of  school,  but  had 
not  a  single  aspiration  regarding  his  future.  Three  of  his  household 
were  dying  of  consumption,  and  his  mother  was  day  nurse,  night 
nurse,  and  divided  her  time  between  pill-boxes  and  the  ink-bottle, 
for  when  she  was  seventy-six  she  had  written  one  hundred  and  forty 
volumes,  the  first  of  which  was  not  written  till  she  was  fifty. 

Gradually  the  boy  became  alive  to  the  blighted  ambition  of  his 
father's  life  and  the  strain  his  mother  was  enduring,  nursing  the  dying 
household  and  writing  novels  to  provide  a  decent  roof  for  them  to  die 
under.  Anthony  had  got  his  position  without  an  examination ;  knew 
no  French  nor  science ;  was  a  bad  speller  and  worse  writer,  and  could 
not  have  sustained  an  examination  on  any  subject.  Still  he  could  not 
bear  idleness,  and  was  always  going  about  with  some  castle  in  the  air 
firmly  built  in  his  mind,  carrying  on  for  weeks  and  years  the  same 
continuous  story;  binding  himself  down  to  certain  laws,  proprieties, 
and  unities;  always  his  own  hero,  excluding  everything  violently  im- 
probable. To  this  practise,  which  he  calls  dangerous  and  which  began 
six  or  seven  years  before  he  went  to  the  post-office,  he  ascribes  his 
power  to  maintain  an  interest  in  a  fictitious  story  and  to  live  in  an 
entirely  outside  imaginative  life.  During  these  seven  years  he  acquired 
a  character  of  irregularity  and  grew  reckless. 

Mark  Pattison  ^  shows  us  how  his  real  life  began  in  the  middle 

»  See  his  Memoirs.     London,  1855. 


574  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

teens,  when  his  energy  was  "  directed  to  one  end,  to  improve  myself  "; 
"  to  form  my  own  mind ;  to  sound  things  thoroughly ;  to  be  free  from 
the  bondage  of  unreason  and  the  traditional  prejudices  which,  when 
I  first  began  to  think,  constituted  the  whole  of  my  mental  fabric." 
He  entered  upon  life  with  a  "  hide-bound  and  contracted  intellect," 
and  depicts  "  something  of  the  steps  by  which  I  emerged  from  that 
frozen  condition."  He  believes  that  to  "  remember  the  dreams  and 
confusions  of  childhood  and  never  to  lose  the  recollection  of  the  curi- 
osity and  simplicity  of  that  age,  is  one  of  the  great  gifts  of  the  poetic 
character,"  although  this,  he  tells  us,  was  extraordinarily  true  of 
George  Sand,  but  not  of  himself.  From  the  age  of  twelve  on,  a  Fel- 
lowship at  Oriel  was  the  ideal  of  his  life,  and  although  he  became  a 
commoner  there  at  seventeen,  his  chief  marvel  is  that  he  was  so  im- 
mature and  unimpressionable. 

Mark  Rutherford '  learned  little  at  school,  save  Latin  and  good 
penmanship,  but  his  very  life  was  divided  into  halves — Sundays 
and  week  days — and  he  reflects  at  some  length  upon  the  immense  dan- 
gers of  the  early  teens ;  the  physiological  and  yet  subtler  psychic  pen- 
alties of  error ;  callousness  to  fine  pleasures ;  hardening  of  the  con- 
science ;  and  deplores  the  misery  which  a  little  instruction  might  have 
saved  him.  At  fourteen  he  underwent  conversion,  understood  in  his 
sect  to  be  a  transforming  miracle,  releasing  higher  and  imprisoning 
lower  powers.  He  compares  it  to  the  saving  of  a  mind  from  vice  by 
falling  in  love  with  a  woman  who  is  adored,  or  the  reclamation  of  a 
young  woman  from  idleness  and  vanity  by  motherhood.  But  as  a  boy 
he  was  convinced  of  many  things  which  were  mere  phrases,  and  at- 
tended prayer-meetings  for  the  clanship  of  being  marked  off  from  the 
world  and  of  walking  home  with  certain  girls.  He  learned  to  say 
in  prayer  that  there  was  nothing  good  in  him;  that  he  was  rotten  and 
filthy  and  his  soul  a  mass  of  putrefying  sores,  but  no  one  took  him  at 
his  word  and  expelled  him  from  society,  but  thought  the  better  of 
him.  Soon  he  began  to  study  theology,  but  found  no  help  in  suppress- 
ing tempestuous  lust,  in  understanding  the  Bible,  or  getting  his  doubts 
answered,  and  all  the  lectures  seemed  irrelevant  chattering.  An  infidel 
was  a  monster  whom  he  had  rarely  ever  seen.  At  nineteen  he  began 
to  preach,  but  his  heart  was  untouched  till  he  read  Wordsworth's 
lyrical  ballads,  and  this  recreated  a  living  God  for  him,  melted  his 
heart  to  tears,  and  made  him  long  for  companionship ;  its  effect  was  in- 
stantly seen  in  his  preaching,  and  made  him  soon  slightly  suspected 
as  heretical.' 

'  See  his  Autobiography,  edited  by  Reuben  Shapcott.     2  vols.     London,  1881. 

»  The  rest  of  the  two  volumes  is  devoted  to  his  further  life  of  a  dissenting  min- 
ister, who  later  became  something  of  a  literary  man ;  relating  how  he  was  slowly 
driven  to  leave  his  little  church,  how  he  outgrew  and  broke  with  the  girl  to  whom 
he  was  engaged,  whom  he  marvelously  met  and  married  when  both  were  well  on 
in  years,  and  how  strangely  he  was  influenced  by  the  free-thinker  Mardon  and 
his  remarkable  daughter.     All  in  all  it  is  a  rare  study  of  emancipation. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND  BIOGRAPHY    575 

John  Addington  Symonds,  in  his  biography,  describes  his  "  insect- 
like "  devotion  to  creed  in  the  green  infancy  of  ritualism.  In  his  early 
teens  at  boarding-school  he  and  his  mates,  with  half  sincerity,  followed 
a  classmate  to  compline,  donned  surplices,  tossed  censers,  arranged 
altars  in  their  studies,  bought  bits  of  painted  glass  for  their  windows, 
and  illuminated  crucifixes  with  gold  dust  and  vermilion.  When  he 
was  confirmed,  this  was  somewhat  of  an  epoch.  Preparation  was  like 
a  plowshare,  although  it  turned  up  nothing  valuable,  and  stimulated 
esthetic  and  emotional  ardor.  In  a  dim  way  he  felt  God  near,  but  he 
did  not  learn  to  fling  the  arms  of  the  soul  in  faith  around  the  cross 
of  Christ.  Later  the  revelation  he  found  in  Plato  removed  him  farther 
from  boyhood.  He  fell  in  love  with  gray  Gothic  churches,  painted 
glass,  organ  lofts,  etc. 

Walter  Pater  has  described  phases  of  ferment,  perhaps  largely  his 
own,  in  the  character  of  Florian  Deleal ;  his  rapture  of  the  red  haw- 
thorn blossoms,  "  absolutely  the  reddest  of  all  things,"  an  experience 
with  which  all  red  things  in  art  later  reminded  him;  his  times  of 
"  seemingly  exclusive  predominance  of  interest  in  beautiful  physical 
things,  a  kind  of  tyranny  of  the  senses  " ;  and  his  later  absorbing 
efforts  to  estimate  the  proportion  of  the  sensuous  and  ideal,  assigning 
most  importance  to  sensible  vehicles  and  occasions ;  associating  all 
thoughts  with  touch  and  sight  as  a  link  between  himself  and  things, 
till  he  became  more  and  more  "  unable  to  care  for  or  think  of  soul 
but  as  in  an  actual  body  " ;  comforted  in  the  contemplation  of  death 
by  the  thought  of  flesh  turning  to  violets  and  almost  oppressed  by  the 
pressure  of  the  sensible  world,  his  longings  for  beauty  intensifying 
his  fear  of  death.  He  loved  to  gaze  on  dead  faces  in  the  Paris  Morgue, 
although  the  haunt  of  them  made  the  sunshine  sickly  for  days,  and 
his  long  fancy  that  they  had  not  really  gone  nor  were  quite  motionless, 
but  led  a  secret,  half  fugitive  life,  freer  by  night,  and  perhaps  dodging 
about  in  their  old  haunts  with  no  great  good-will  toward  the  living, 
made  him  by  turns  pity  and  hate  the  ghosts  who  came  back  in  the 
wind,  beating  at  the  doors.  His  religious  nature  gradually  yielded 
to  a  mystical  belief  in  Bible  personages  in  some  indefinite  place  as  the 
reflexes  and  patterns  of  our  nobler  self,  whose  companionship  made  the 
world  more  satisfying.  There  was  "  a  constant  substitution  of  the 
typical  for  the  actual,"  and  angels  might  be  met  anywhere.  "  A  deep 
mysticity  brooded  over  real  meetings  and  partings,"  marriages,  and 
many  acts  and  accidents  of  life.  "  The  very  colors  of  things  became 
themselves  weighty  with  meanings,"  or  "  full  of  penitence  and  peace." 
"  For  a  time  he  walked  through  the  world  in  a  sustained,  not  un- 
pleasurable  awe  generated  by  the  habitual  recognition,  beside  every 
circumstance  and  event  of  life^  of  its  celestial  correspondent." 

In  D.  C.  Boulger's  Life  of  General  Charles  Gordon '  he  records 
how,  like  Nelson  Clive,  his  hero  was  prone  to  boys'  escapades  and 
outbreaks  that  often  made  him  the  terror  of  his  superiors.     He  was 

•  London,  1896,  vol.  i. 


57^  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

no  bookworm,  but  famous  ^s  the  possessor  of  high  spirits,  very 
often  involved  in  affairs  that  necessitated  discipline,  and  seemed  greatly 
out  of  harmony  with  the  popular  idea  of  the  ascetic  of  Mount  Carmel. 
As  a  schoolboy  he  made  wonderful  squirts  "  that  would  wet  you 
through  in  a  minute."  One  Sunday  twenty-seven  panes  of  glass  in 
a  large  storehouse  were  broken  with  screws  shot  through  them  by 
his  cross-bow  "  for  ventilation."  Ringing  bells  and  pushing  young 
boys  in,  butting  an  unpopular  officer  severely  in  the  stomach  with  his 
head,  and  taking  the  punishment,  hitting  a  bully  with  a  clothes-brush 
and  being  put  back  six  months  in  the  Royal  Military  Academy  at  Wool- 
wich ;  these  are  the  early  outcrops  of  one  side  of  his  dual  character. 
Although  more  soldier  than  saint,  he  had  a  very  cheery,  genial  side. 
He  was  always  ready  to  take  even  the  severest  punishment  for  all  his 
scrapes  due  to  excessive  high  spirits.  When  one  of  his  superiors  de- 
clared that  he  would  never  make  an  officer,  he  felt  his  honor  touched, 
and  his  vigorous  and  expressive  reply  was  to  tear  the  epaulets  from 
his  shoulders  and  throw  them  at  his  superior's  feet.  He  had  already 
developed  some  of  the  rather  moody  love  of  seclusion  that  was  marked 
later,  but  religion  did  not  strike  him  deeply  enough  to  bring  him  into 
the  Church  until  he  was  twenty-one,  when  he  took  his  first  sacrament. 
On  one  occasion  he  declined  promotion  within  his  reach  because  he 
would  have  had  to  pass  a  friend  to  get  it.  He  acted  generally  on  his 
impulses,  which  were  perhaps  better  than  his  judgments,  took  great 
pleasure  in  corresponding  on  religious  topics  with  his  older  sister, 
and  early  formed  the  habit  of  excessive  smoking  which  gravely  affected 
his  health  later.  His  was  the  rare  combination  of  inner  repose  and 
confidence,  interrupted  by  spells  of  gaiety. 

Williamson,  in  his  Life  of  Holman  Hunt,  tells  us  that  at  thirteen 
he  was  removed  from  school  as  inapt  in  study.  He  began  to  spend 
his  time  in  drawing  in  his  copybooks.  He  was  made  clerk  to  an 
auctioneer,  who  fortunately  encouraged  his  passion,  and  at  sixteen 
was  with  a  calico  printer.  Here  he  amused  himself  by  drawing  flies  on 
the  window  which  his  employer  tried  to  brush  off.  There  was  the 
greatest  home  opposition  to  his  studying  art.  After  being  rejected 
twice,  he  was  admitted  at  seventeen  to  the  Academy  school  as  a  proba- 
tioner, and  the  next  year,  in  1845,  ^s  a  student.  Here  he  met  Millais 
and  Rossetti  and  was  able  to  relieve  the  strain  on  his  mind  which  the 
worry  of  his  father  concerning  his  course  caused  him,  and  very  soon 
his  career  began. 

At  thirteen  Fitzjames  Stephen'  roused  himself  to  thrash  a  big 
boy  who  had  long  bullied  him,  and  became  a  fighter.  In  his  sixteenth 
year  he  grew  nearly  five  inches,  but  was  so  shy  and  timid  at  Eton 
that  he  says,  "  I  was  like  a  sensible  grown-up  woman  among  a  crowd 
of  rough  boys";  but  in  the  reaction  to  the  long  abuse  his  mind  was 
steeled  against  oppression,  tyranny,  and  every  kind  of  unfairness.  He 
read   Paine's   Age  of   Reason,   and  went   "  through    the   Bible  as   a 

*  See  his  Life.     By  his  brother,  Leslie  Stephen.     London,  1895. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    577 

man  might  go  through  a  wood,  cutting  down  trees.    The  priests  can 
stick  them  in  again,  but  they  will  not  make  them  grow." 

Dickens  has  given  us  some  interesting  adolescents.  Miss  Dingwall, 
in  Sketches  by  Boz,  "  very  sentimental  and  romantic  " ;  the  tempery 
young  Nickleby,  who  at  nineteen  thrashed  Squeers ;  Barnaby  Rudge, 
idiotic  and  very  muscular;  Joe  Willet,  persistently  treated  as  a  boy 
till  he  ran  away  to  join  the  army  and  married  Dolly  Varden,  perhaps 
the  most  exuberant,  good-humored,  and  beautiful  girl  in  all  the 
Dickens  gallery ;  Martin  Chuzzlewit,  who  also  ran  away,  as  did  David 
Copperfield,  perhaps  the  most  true  to  adolescence  because  largely 
reminiscent  of  the  author's  own  life ;  Steerforth,  a  stranger  from  home 
and  his  victim.  Little  Emily;  and  to  some  extent  Sam  Weller,  Dick 
Swiveller,  the  Marchioness,  young  Podsnap,  the  Artful  Dodger  and 
Charley  Bates,  while  Oliver  Twist,  Little  Nell,  and  Little  Dorrit,  Joe 
and  Turveydrop  in  Bleak  House,  and  Paul  Dombey,  young  as  they 
were,  show  the  beginning  of  the  pubescent  change.  Most  of  his  char- 
acters, however,  are  so  overdrawn  and  caricatured  as  to  be  hardly  true 
to  life.^ 

In  the  Romance  of  John  Inglesant,  by  J.  H.  Shorthouse, 
we  have  a  remarkable  picture  of  an  imusually  gifted  youth, 
who  played  an  important  role  in  the  days  of  Cromwell  and 
King  Charles,  and  who  was  long  poised  in  soul  between  the 
Church  of  Rome  and  the  English  party.  He  was  very  suscep- 
tible to  the  fascination  of  superstition,  romance,  and  day- 
dreaming, and  at  eleven  absorbed  his  master's  Rosicrucian 
theories  of  spiritual  existence  where  spirits  held  converse  with 
each  other  and  with  mankind.  A  mystic  Platonism,  which 
taught  that  Pindar's  story  of  the  Argo  was  only  a  recipe  for  the 
philosopher's  stone,  fascinated  him  at  fourteen.  The  philoso- 
phy of  obedience  and  of  the  subjection  of  reason  to  authority 
was  early  taught  him,  and  he  sought  to  live  from  within,  hear- 
ing only  the  divine  law,  as  the  worshipers  of  Cybele  heard  only 
the  flutes.  His  twin  brother  Eustace  was  an  active  worldling, 
and  soon  he  followed  him  to  court  as  page  to  the  Queen,  but 
delighted  more  and  more  in  wandering  apart  and  building  air 
castles.  For  a  time  he  was  entirely  swayed  and  his  life  directed 
by  a  Jesuit  Father,  who  taught  him  the  crucifix  and  the  rosary. 
At  sixteen  the  doctrine  of  divine  illumination  fascinated  him. 
He  struggled  to  find  the  path  of  true  devotion ;  abandoned  him- 

*  See  the  very  impressive  account  of  Dickens's  characterization  of  childhood  and 
youth,  and  of  his  great  but  hitherto  inadequately  recognized  interest  and  influence 
as  an  educator.     By  James  L.  Hughes,  New  York,  1901,  p.  319. 
38 


57^  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

self  to  extremely  ritualistic  forms  of  worship;  dabbled  a  little 
in  alchemy  and  astrology  to  help  develop  the  divine  nature 
within  him  and  to  attain  the  beatific  vision.  Soon  he  was  in- 
troduced to  the  "  Protestant  nunnery,"  as  it  was  called,  where 
the  venerable  Mr,  Ferran,  a  friend  of  George  Herbert's,  was 
greatly  taken  by  Inglesant's  accomplishments  and  grace  of 
manner.  Various  forms  of  extremely  High  Church  yet  Pro- 
testant worship  were  celebrated  here  each  day  with  great  devo- 
tion, until  he  became  disgusted  with  Puritanism  and  craved  to 
participate  in  the  ofifice  of  mass.  At  this  point,  however,  he  met 
Mr.  Hobbes,  whose  rude  but  forcible  condemnation  of  papacy 
restrained  him  from  casting  his  lot  with  it.  At  seventeen  he 
saw  one  night  a  real  apparition  of  the  just  executed  Strafford. 
The  last  act  of  his  youth,  which  we  can  note  here,  was  soon  after 
he  was  twenty,  when  he  fell  in  love  with  the  charming  and 
saintly  Mary  Collet.  The  rough  Puritan  Thorne  had  made  her 
proposals  at  which  she  revolted,  but  she  and  Inglesant  con- 
fessed love  to  each  other;  she  saw,  however,  that  they  had  a 
way  of  life  marked  out  for  themselves  by  an  inner  impulse  and 
light.  This  calling  they  must  follow  and  abandon  love,  and 
now  John  plunged  into  the  war  on  the  side  of  the  King. 

W.  J.  Stillman  ^  has  written  with  unusual  interest  and  candor  the 
story  of  his  own  early  life.  As  a  boy  he  was  frenzied  at  the  first  sight 
of  the  sea;  caught  the  whip  and  lashed  the  horses  in  an  unconscious 
delirium,  and  always  remembered  this  as  one  of  the  most  vivid 
experiences  of  his  life.  He  had  a  period  of  nature  worship.  His 
first  trout  was  a  delirium,  and  he  danced  about  wildly  and  fu- 
riously. He  relates  his  very  vivid  impressions  of  the  religious 
orthodoxy  in  which  he  was  reared,  especially  revival  sermons ; 
his  occasional  falsehoods  to  escape  severe  punishment;  his  bap- 
tism at  ten  or  eleven  in  a  river  in  midwinter;  the  somberness  of 
his  intellectual  life,  which  was  long  very  apathetic;  his  phenomenal 
stupidity  for  years;  his  sudden  insurrections  in  which  he  thrashed 
bullies  at  school ;  his  fear  that  he  should  be  sent  home  in  disgrace 
for  bad  scholarship;  and  how  at  last,  after  seven  years  of  dulness, 
at  the  age  of  fourteen.  "  the  mental  fog  broke  away  suddenly, 
and  before  the  term  ended  I  could  construe  the  Latin  in  less  time 
than  it  took  to  recite  it,  and  the  demonstrations  of  Euclid  were  as 
plain  and  clear  as  a  fairy  story.  My  memory  came  back  so  distinctly 
that  I  could  recite  long  poems  after  a  single  reading,  and  no  member 
of  the  class  passed  a  more  brilliant  examination  at  the  end  of  the  term 

•  The  Autobiography  of  a  Journalist.     2  vols.     Boston,  1901. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    579 

than  \;  and  at  the  end  of  the  second  term  I  could  recite  the  whole 
of  Legendre's  geometry,  plane  and  spherical,  from  beginning  to  end 
without  a  question,  and  the  class  examination  was  recorded  as  the 
most  remarkable  which  the  academy  had  witnessed  for  many  years. 
I  have  never  been  able  to  conceive  an  explanation  of  this  curious 
phenomenon,  which  I  record  only  as  of  possible  interest  to  some  one 
interested  in  psychology." 

A.  Bronson  Alcott '  was  the  son  of  a  Connecticut  farmer.  He  began 
a  diary  at  twelve ;  aspired  vainly  to  enter  Yale,  and  after  much  rest- 
lessness at  the  age  of  nineteen  left  home  with  two  trunks  for  Virginia 
to  peddle  on  foot,  hoping  to  teach  school.  Here  he  had  a  varying 
and  often  very  hard  experience  for  years. 

Horace  Bushnell's "  parents  represented  the  Episcopal  and  liberal 
Congregational  Church.  His  early  life  was  spent  on  a  farm  and  in 
attending  a  country  academy.  He  became  profoundly  interested  in 
religion  in  the  early  teens  and  developed  extreme  interest  in  nature. 
At  seventeen,  while  tending  a  carding  machine,  he  wrote  a  paper 
on  Calvinism.  At  nineteen  he  united  with  the  church,  and  entered 
Yale,  when  he  was  twenty-one,  in  1823.  Later  he  tried  to  teach  school 
but  left  it,  declaring  he  would  rather  lay  stone  wall,  worked  on  a 
journal  but  withdrew,  finding  it  a  terrible  life,  studied  law  for  a  year, 
became  a  tutor  at  Yale,  experienced  a  reconversion  and  entered  the 
ministry. 

A  well-known  American,  who  wishes  his  name  withheld, 
writes  me  of  his  youth  as  follows : 

"  First  came  the  love  of  emotion  and  lurid  romance  reading.  My 
mind  was  full  of  adventure,  dreams  of  underground  passages,  and 
imprisoned  beauties  whom  I  rescued.  I  wrote  a  story  in  red  ink,  which 
I  never  read,  but  a  girl  friend  did,  and  called  it  magnificent.  The 
girl  fever,  too,  made  me  idealize  first  one  five  years  older  than  I,  later 
another  three  years  older,  and  still  later  one  of  my  own  age.  I  would 
have  eaten  dirt  for  each  of  them  for  a  year  or  two;  was  extremely 
gallant  and  the  hero  of  many  romances  for  two,  but  all  the  time  so 
bashful  that  I  scarcely  dared  speak  to  one  of  them,  and  no  schoolmate 
ever  suspected  it  all.  Music  also  became  a  craze  at  fourteen.  Before, 
I  had  hated  lessons,  now  I  was  thrilled  and  would  be  a  musician,  de- 
spite my  parents'  protests.  I  practised  the  piano  furiously;  wrote 
music  and  copied  stacks  of  it;  made  a  list  of  several  hundred  pieces 
and  tunes,  including  everything  musical  I  knew;  would  imagine  a 
crowded  hall,  where  I  played  and  swayed  with  fine  airs.  The  vast 
assembly  applauded  and  would  not  let  me  go,  but  all  the  time  it  was 
a  simple  piece  and  I  was  a  very  ordinary  player.  At  fifty  years  this 
is  still  a  relic.    I  now  in  hours  of  fatigue  pound  the  piano  and  dream- 

•  See  his  Life  and  Philosophy,  by  Sanborn  and  Harris. 
•Theodore  F.  Munger:   Life  of  Horace  Bushnell.      Boston,  1899. 


580  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

ily  imagine  dazed  and  enchanted  audiences.  Then  came  oratory,  and 
I  glowed  and  thrilled  in  declaiming  Webster's  Reply  to  Hayne, 
Thanatopsis,  Byron's  Darkness,  Patrick  Henry,  and  best  of  all 
The  Maniac,  which  I  spouted  in  a  fervid  way  wearing  a  flaming  red 
necktie.  I  remember  a  fervid  scene  with  myself  on  a  high  solitary  hill 
with  a  bald  summit  two  miles  from  home,  where  I  once  went  because  I 
had  been  blamed.  I  tried  to  sum  myself  up,  inventory  my  good  and 
bad  points.  It  was  Sunday,  and  I  was  keyed  up  to  a  frenzy  of  resolve, 
prayer,  idealization  of  life;  all  grew  all  in  a  jumble.  My  resolve  to  go 
to  college  was  clinched  then  and  there,  and  that  hill  will  always  re- 
main my  Pisgah  and  Moriah,  Horeb  and  Sinai  all  in  one.  I  paced 
back  and  forth  in  the  wind  and  shouted,  '  I  will  make  people  know 
and  revere  me ;  I  will  do  something ' ;  and  called  everything  to  wit- 
ness my  vow  that  I  never  again  would  visit  this  spot  till  all  was  ful- 
filled." "  Alas  !  "  he  says,  "  I  have  never  been  there  since.  Once,  to  a 
summer  party  who  went,  I  made  excuse  for  not  keeping  this  rendez- 
vous. It  was  too  sacramental.  Certainly  it  was  a  very  deep  and 
never-to-be-forgotten  experience  there  all  alone,  when  something  of 
great  moment  to  me  certainly  took  place  in  my  soul." 

In  the  biography  of  Frederick  Douglass '  we  are  told  that  when 
he  was  about  thirteen  he  began  to  feel  deeply  the  moral  yoke  of  slavery 
and  to  seek  means  of  escaping  it.  He  became  interested  in  religion, 
was  converted,  and  dreamed  of  and  prayed  for  liberty.  With  great 
ingenuity  he  extracted  knowledge  of  the  alphabet  and  reading  from 
white  boys  of  his  acquaintance.  At  sixteen,  under  a  brutal  master 
he  revolted  and  was  beaten  until  he  was  faint  from  loss  of  blood,  and 
at  seventeen  he  fought  and  whipped  the  brutal  overseer  Covey,  who 
would  have  invoked  the  law,  which  made  death  the  punishment  for 
such  an  offense,  but  for  shame  of  having  been  worsted  by  a  negro 
boy  and  from  the  reflection  that  there  was  no  profit  from  a  dead 
slave.     Only  at  twenty  did  he  escape  into  the  new  world  of  freedom. 

Jacob  Riis "  "  fell  head  over  heels  in  love  with  sweet  EHzabeth  " 
when  he  was  fifteen  and  she  thirteen.  His  "  courtship  proceeded  at  a 
tumultuous  pace,  which  first  made  the  town  laugh,  then  put  it  out  of 
patience  and  made  some  staid  matrons  express  the  desire  to  box  my 
ears  soundly."  She  played  among  the  lumber  where  he  worked,  and 
he  watched  her  so  intently  that  he  scarred  his  shinbone  with  an 
adze  he  should  have  been  minding.  He  cut  off  his  forefinger  with  an 
ax  when  she  was  dancing  on  a  beam  near  by,  and  once  fell  off  a  roof 
when  craning  his  neck  to  see  her  go  round  a  corner.  At  another 
time  he  ordered  her  father  off  the  dance-floor,  because  he  tried  to  take 
his  daughter  home  a  few  minutes  before  the  appointed  hour  of  mid- 
night. Young  as  he  was,  he  was  large  and  tried  to  run  away  to  join 
the  army,  but  finally  went  to  Copenhagen  to  serve  his  apprenticeship 
with  a  builder,  and  here  had  an  interview  with  Hans  Christian  Ander- 


•  By  C.  W.  Chestnutt.  »  The  Making  of  an  American. 


ADOLESCENCE  IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^1 

Ellery  Sedgwick  tells  us  that  at  thirteen  the  mind  of  Thomas 
Paine  ran  on  stories  of  the  sea  which  his  teacher  had  told  him,  and 
he  attempted  to  enlist  on  the  privateer  Terrible.  He  was  restless  at 
home  for  years,  and  shipped  on  a  trading  vessel  at  nineteen. 

Indeed,  modern  literature  in  our  tongue  abounds  in  this  element, 
from  Childe  Harold  to  the  second  and  third  long  chapters  in  Mrs. 
Ward's  David  Grieve,  ending  with  his  engagement  to  Lucy  Purcell ; 
Thackeray's  Arthur  Pendennis  and  his  characteristic  love  of  the  far 
older  and  scheming  Fanny  Fotheringay ;  David  in  Allen's  Reign  of 
Law,  who  read  Darwin,  was  expelled  from  the  Bible  College  and  the 
Church,  and  finally  was  engaged  to  Gabrielle;  and  scores  more  might 
be  enumerated.  There  is  even  Sonny,'  who,  rude  as  he  was  and  poorly 
as  he  did  in  all  his  studies,  at  the  same  age  when  he  began  to 
keep  company,  "  tallered  "  his  hair,  tied  a  bow  of  ribbon  to  the  buggy 
whip,  and  grew  interested  in  manners,  passing  things,  putting  on  his 
coat  and  taking  off  his  hat  at  table,  began  to  study  his  menagerie  of  pet 
snakes,  toads,  lizards,  wrote  John  Boroughs,  helped  him  and  got  help 
in  return,  took  to  observing,  and  finally  wrote  a  book  about  the  forest 
and  its  occupants,  all  of  which  is  very  bien  trouvc  if  not  historic  truth. 


Two  singular  reflections  always  rearise  in  reading  Goethe's 
autobiographical  writings :  first,  that  both  the  age  and  the 
place,  with  its  ceremonies,  festivals,  great  pomp  and  stir- 
ring events  in  close  quarters  in  the  little  province  where  he  lived, 
were  especially  adapted  to  educate  children  and  absorb  them  in 
externals ;  and,  second,  that  this  wonderful  boy  had  an  extreme 
propensity  for  moralizing  and  drawing  lessons  of  practical  serv- 
ice from  all  about  him.  This  is  no  less  manifest  in  Wilhelm 
Meister's  apprenticeship  and  travels,  which  supplements  the 
autobiography.  Both  together  present  a  very  unique  type  of 
adolescence,  the  elaborate  story  of  which  defies  epitome.  From 
the  puppet  craze  well  on  into  his  precocious  university  life  it 
was  his  passion  to  explore  the  widest  ranges  of  experience  and 
then  to  reflect,  moralize,  or  poetize  upon  them.  Perhaps  no 
one  ever  studied  the  nascent  stages  of  his  own  life  and  elab- 
orated their  every  incident  with  such  careful  observation  and 
analysis.  His  peculiar  diathesis  enabled  him  to  conserve  their 
freshness  on  to  full  maturity,  when  he  gave  them  literary  form. 
Most  lack  power  to  fully  utilize  their  own  experience  even  for 
practical  self-knowledge  and  guidance,  but  with  Goethe  nothing 
was  wasted  from  which  self-culture  could  be  extracted. 

'  Sonny.     Ruth  McEnery  Stuart.     New  York,  1896. 


5»2  THE   PSYCHOLOGY  OF   ADOLESCENCE 

Goethe's  first  impression  of  female  loveliness  was  of  a  girl  named 
Gretchen,  who  served  wine  one  evening,  and  whose  face  and  form  fol- 
lowed him  for  a  long  time.  Their  meetings  always  gave  him  a  thrill 
of  pleasure,  and  though  his  love  was  like  many  first  loves,  very  spirit- 
ual and  awakened  by  goodness  and  beauty,  it  gave  a  new  brightness 
to  the  whole  world,  and  to  be  near  her  seemed  to  him  an  indispensable 
condition  of  his  being.  Her  fiance  was  generally  with  her,  and  Goethe 
experienced  a  shock  in  finding  that  she  had  become  a  milliner's  assist- 
ant, for  although,  like  all  natural  boys  of  aristocratic  families,  he  loved 
common  people,  this  interest  was  not  favored  by  his  parents.  The 
night  following  the  coronation  day  several  were  compelled  to  spend 
in  chairs,  and  he  and  his  Gretchen  with  others  slept,  she  with  her  head 
upon  his  shoulder,  until  all  the  others  had  awakened  in  the  morning. 
At  last  they  parted  at  her  door,  and  for  the  first  and  last  time  they 
kissed  but  never  met  again,  although  he  often  wept  in  thinking  of  her. 
He  was  terribly  affronted  to  fully  realize  that,  although  only  two  years 
older  than  himself,  she  should  have  regarded  him  as  a  child.  He  tried 
to  strip  her  of  all  loving  qualities  and  think  her  odious,  but  her  image 
hovered  over  him.  The  sanity  of  instinct  innate  in  youth  prompted 
him  to  lay  aside  as  childish  the  foolish  habit  of  weeping  and  railing, 
and  his  mortification  that  she  regarded  him  somewhat  in  the  style  of 
a  nurse  gradually  helped  to  work  his  cure. 

He  was  very  fond  of  his  own  name,  and,  like  young  and  uneducated 
people,  wrote  or  carved  it  anywhere;  later  placed  near  it  that  of  a  new 
love,  Annette,  and  afterward  on  finding  the  tree  he  shed  tears, 
melted  toward  her,  and  made  an  idyl.  He  was  also  seized  with  a  pas- 
sion of  teasing  her  and  dominating  over  her  devotedness  with  wanton 
and  tyrannical  caprice,  venting  upon  her  the  ill  humor  of  his  disap- 
pointments, and  grew  absurdly  jealous  and  lost  her  after  she  had  borne 
with  him  with  incredible  patience  and  after  terrible  scenes  with  her 
by  which  he  gained  nothing.  Frenzied  with  his  loss,  he  began  to  abuse 
his  physical  nature  and  was  only  saved  from  illness  by  the  healing 
power  of  his  poetic  talent ;  the  Lover's  Caprice  was  written  with 
the  impetus  of  a  boiling  passion.  In  the  midst  of  many  serious  events,  a 
reckless  humor  which  was  due  to  excess  of  life  developed  which  made 
him  feel  himself  superior  to  the  moment,  and  even  to  court  danger. 
He  played  tricks,  although  rarely  with  premeditation.  Later  he  mused 
much  upon  the  transient  nature  of  love  and  the  mutability  of  character; 
the  extent  to  which  the  senses  could  be  indulged  within  the  bounds  of 
morality ;  he  sought  to  rid  himself  of  all  that  troubled  him  by  writing 
song  or  epigram  about  it,  which  made  him  seem  frivolous  and  prompt- 
ed one  friend  to  seek  to  subdue  him  by  means  of  church  forms,  which 
he  had  severed  on  coming  to  Leipzig.  By  degrees  he  felt  an  epoch  ap- 
proaching when  all  respect  for  authority  was  to  vanish,  and  he  became 
suspicious  and  even  despairing  with  regard  to  the  best  individuals  he 
had  known  before,  and  grew  chummy  with  a  young  tutor  whose  jokes 
and  fooleries  were  incessant.  His  disposition  fluctuated  between  gaiety 
and  melancholy,  and  Rousseau  attracted  him.     Meanwhile  his  health 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE  AND    BIOGRAPHY    5^3 

declined  until  a  long  illness,  which  began  with  a  hemorrhage,  caused 
him  to  oscillate  for  days  between  life  and  death,  and  convalescence, 
generally  so  delightful,  was  marred  by  a  serious  tumor.  His  father's 
disposition  was  stern,  and  he  could  become  passionate  and  bitter,  and 
his  mother's  domesticity  made  her  turn  to  religion,  so  that  on  coming 
home  he  formed  the  acquaintance  of  a  religious  circle.  Again  Goethe 
was  told  by  a  hostile  child  that  he  was  not  the  true  son  of  his  father. 
This  inoculated  him  with  a  disease  that  long  lurked  in  his  system  and 
prompted  various  indirect  investigations  to  get  at  the  truth,  during 
which  he  compared  all  distinguished  guests  with  his  own  physiognomy 
to  detect  his  own  likeness. 

Up  to  the  Leipzig  period  he  had  great  joy  in  wandering  unknown, 
unconscious  of  self,  but  he  soon  began  to  torment  himself  with  an  al- 
most hypertrophied  fancy  that  he  was  attracting  much  attention ;  that 
others'  eyes  were  turned  on  his  person  to  fix  it  in  their  memories ;  that 
he  was  scanned  and  found  fault  with,  and  hence  he  developed  a  love 
of  the  country,  of  the  woods  and  solitary  places,  where  he  could  be 
hedged  in  and  separated  from  all  the  world.  Here  he  began  to  throw 
off  his  former  habit  of  looking  at  things  from  the  art  standpoint  and  to 
take  pleasure  in  natural  objects  for  their  own  sake.  His  mother  had 
almost  grown  up  to  consciousness  in  her  two  oldest  children,  and  his 
first  disappointment  in  love  turned  his  thought  all  the  more  affection- 
ately toward  her  and  his  sister,  a  year  younger.  He  was  long  consumed 
with  amazement  over  the  newly  awakening  sense  impulse  that  took  in- 
tellectual forms  and  the  mental  needs  that  clothed  themselves  in  sense 
images.  He  fell  to  building  air  castles  of  opposition  lecture  courses 
and  gave  himself  up  to  many  dreams  of  ideal  university  conditions. 
He  first  attended  lectures  diligently,  but  suffered  much  harm  from  be- 
ing too  advanced ;  learned  a  great  deal  that  he  could  not  regulate,  and 
was  thereby  made  uncomfortable ;  grew  interested  in  the  fit  of  his 
clothes,  of  which  hitherto  he  had  been  careless;  he  was  in  despair  at 
the  uncertainty  of  his  own  taste  and  judgment,  and  almost  feared  he 
must  make  a  complete  change  of  mind,  renouncing  what  he  had 
hitherto  learned,  and  so  one  day  in  great  contempt  for  his  past  burned 
up  his  poetry,  sketches,  etc. 

He  had  learned  to  value  and  love  the  Bible,  and  owed  his  moral 
culture  to  it.  Its  events  and  symbols  were  deeply  stamped  upon  him, 
so  without  being  a  pietist  he  was  greatly  moved  at  the  scoffing  spirit 
toward  it  which  he  met  at  the  university.  From  youth  he  had  stood  on 
good  terms  with  God,  and  at  times  he  had  felt  that  he  had  some  things 
to  forgive  God  for  not  having  given  better  assistance  to  his  infinite 
good-will.  Under  all  this  influence  he  turned  to  cabalism  and  became 
interested  in  crystals  and  the  microcosm  and  macrocosm,  and  fell  into 
the  habit  of  despairing  what  he  had  been  and  believed  just  before.  He 
conceived  a  kind  of  hermetical  or  neoplatonic  godhead  creating  in 
more  and  more  eccentric  circles,  until  the  last,  which  rose  in  contra- 
diction, was  Lucifer  to  whom  creation  was  committed.  He  first  of  all 
imagined  in  detail  an  angelic  host,  and  finally  a  whole  theology  was 


584  THE  PSYCHOLOGY   OF   ADOLESx^^NCE 

wrought  out  in  petto.  He  used  a  gilt  ornamented  music-stand  as  a 
kind  of  altar  with  fumigating  pastils  for  incense,  where  each  morning 
God  was  approached  by  offerings  until  one  day  a  conflagration  put  a 
sudden  end  to  these  celebrations. 

Hans  Andersen/  the  son  of  a  poor  shoemaker,  taught  in  a  charity 
school  at  the  dawn  of  puberty ;  vividly  animated  Bible  stories  from 
pictures  painted  on  the  wall;  was  dreamy  and  absent-minded;  told 
continued  stories  to  his  mates ;  at  confirmation  vowed  he  would  be 
famous,  and  finally  at  fourteen  left  home  for  Copenhagen,  where  he 
was  violently  stage-struck  and  worked  his  way  from  friendship  with  the 
bill-poster  to  the  stage  as  page,  shepherd,  etc. ;  called  on  a  famous 
dancer,  who  scorned  him,  and  then,  feeling  that  he  had  no  one  but 
God  to  depend  on,  prayed  earnestly  and  often.  For  nearly  a  year, 
until  his  voice  broke,  he  was  a  fine  singer.  He  wet  with  his  tears  the 
eyes  of  a  portrait  of  a  heartless  man  that  he  might  feel  for  him. 
He  played  with  a  puppet  theater  and  took  a  childish  delight  in  decking 
the  characters  with  gay  remnants  that  he  begged  from  shops ;  wrote 
several  plays  which  no  one  would  accept ;  stole  into  an  empty  theater 
one  New  Year's  day  to  pray  aloud  on  the  middle  of  the  stage ;  shouted 
with  joy ;  hugged  and  kissed  a  beech-tree  till  people  thought  him  in- 
sane ;  abhorred  the  thought  of  apprenticeship  to  Latin  as  he  did  to 
that  of  a  trade,  which  was  a  constant  danger ;  and  was  one  of  the  most 
dreamy  and  sentimental,  and  by  spells  religious  and  prayerful,  of 
youth. 

Georg  Ebers  ^  remembered  as  a  boy  of  eleven  the  revolution  of  '48 
in  Berlin,  soon  after  which  he  was  placed  in  Froebel's  school  at  Keil- 
hau.  This  great  teacher,  with  his  noble  associates,  Middendorf,  Barop, 
and  Langekhal,  lived  with  the  boys ;  told  the  stirring  stories  of  their 
own  lives  as  soldiers  in  the  war  of  liberation ;  led  their  pupils  on  long 
excursions  in  vacation,  often  lasting  for  months,  and  gave  much  lib- 
erty to  the  boys,  who  were  allowed  to  haze  not  only  their  new  mates 
but  new  teachers.  This  transfer  from  the  city  to  the  country  roused 
a  veritable  passion  in  the  boy,  who  remained  here  till  he  was  fifteen. 
Trees  and  cliffs  were  climbed,  collections  made,  the  Saale  by  moonlight 
and  the  lofty  Steiger  at  sunset  were  explored.  There  were  swimming 
and  skating  and  games,  and  the  maxim  of  the  school,  " Friede,  Freude, 
Freiheit," was  lived  up  to.  The  boys  hung  on  their  teachers  for  stories. 
The  teachers  took  their  boys  into  their  confidence  for  all  their  own 
literary  aims,  loves,  and  ideals.  One  had  seen  the  corpse  of  Korner 
and  another  knew  Prohaska.  "  The  Roman  postulate  that  knowledge 
should  be  imparted  to  boys  according  to  a  thoroughly  tested  method 
approved  by  the  mature  human  intellect  and  which  seems  most 
useful  to  it  for  later  life  "  was  the  old  system  of  sacrificing  the  inter- 
ests of  the  child  for  those  of  the  man.  Here  childhood  was  to  live 
itself  out  completely  and  naturally  into  an  ever-renewed  paradise.    The 

'  The  Story  of  My  Life. 

•  The  Story  of  My  Life  from  Childhood  to  Manhood. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN   LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^5 

temperaments,  dispositions,  and  characters  of  each  of  the  sixty  boys 
were  carefully  studied  and  recorded.  Some  of  these  are  still  little 
masterpieces  of  psychological  penetration,  and  this  was  made  the  basis 
of  development.  The  extreme  Teutonism  cultivated  by  wrestling, 
shooting,  and  fencing,  giving  each  a  spot  of  land  to  sow,  reap,  and 
shovel,  and  all  in  an  atmosphere  of  adult  life,  made  an  environment 
that  fitted  the  transition  period  as  well  as  any  that  the  history  of  edu- 
cation affords.  Every  tramp  and  battle  were  described  in  a  book  by 
each  boy.  When  at  fifteen  Ebers  was  transferred  to  the  Kottbus  Gym- 
nasium, he  felt  like  a  colt  led  from  green  pastures  to  the  stable,  and 
the  period  of  effervescence  made  him  almost  possessed  by  a  demon,  so 
many  sorts  of  follies  did  he  commit.  He  wrote  "  a  poem  of  the  world," 
fell  in  love  with  an  actress  older  than  himself,  became  known  as  fool- 
hardy for  his  wild  escapades,  and  only  slowly  sobered  down. 

In  Gottfried  Keller's  Der  griine  Heinrich,  the  author,  whom  R. 
M.  Meyer  calls  "  the  most  eminent  literary  German  of  the  nineteenth 
century,"  reviews  the  memories  of  his  early  life.  This  autobiography 
is  a  plain  and  very  realistic  story  of  a  normal  child,  and  not  adulterated 
with  fiction  like  Goethe's  or  with  psychoses  like  Rousseau  or  Bash- 
kirtseff.  He  seems  a  boy  like  all  other  boys,  and  his  childhood  and 
youth  were  in  no  wise  extraordinary.  The  first  part  of  this  work, 
which  describes  his  youth  up  to  the  age  of  eighteen,  is  the  most  im- 
portant, and  everything  is  given  with  remarkable  fidelity  and  minute- 
ness. It  is  a  tale  of  little  things.  All  the  friendships  and  loves  and 
impulses  are  there,  and  he  is  fundamentally  selfish  and  utilitarian;  God 
and  nature  were  one,  and  only  when  his  beloved  Anna  died  did  he  wish 
to  believe  in  immortality.  He,  too,  as  a  child,  found  two  kinds  of  love 
in  his  heart — the  ideal  and  the  sensual,  very  independent — the  one  for 
a  young  and  innocent  girl  and  the  other  for  a  superb  young  woman 
years  older  than  he,  pure,  although  the  personification  of  sense.  He 
gives  a  rich  harvest  of  minute  and  sagacious  observations  about  his 
strange  simultaneous  loves;  the  peculiar  tastes  of  food;  his  day-dream 
period;  and  his  rather  prolonged  habit  of  lying,  the  latter  because  he 
had  no  other  vent  for  invention.  He  describes  with  great  regret  his 
leaving  school  at  so  early  an  age;  his  volcanic  passion  of  anger;  his 
self-distrust;  his  periods  of  abandon;  his  passion  to  make  a  success 
of  art  though  he  did  not  of  life  ;  his  spells  of  self-despair  and  cynicism  ; 
his  periods  of  desolation  in  his  single  life;  his  habit  of  story-telling; 
his  wrestling  with  the  problem  of  theology  and  God ;  the  conflict  be- 
tween his  philosophy  and  his  love  of  the  girls,  etc. 

From  a  private  school  in  Leipzig,  where  he  had  shown  all  a  boy's 
tact  in  finding  what  his  masters  thought  the  value  of  each  subject  they 
taught;  where  he  had  joined  in  the  vandalism  of  using  a  battering-ram 
to  break  a  way  to  the  hated  science  apparatus  and  to  destroy  it,  feeling 
that  the  classical  writers  were  overpraised;  and  where  at  the  age  of 
sixteen  he  had  appeared  several  times  in  public  as  a  reciter  of  his  own 
poems.  Max  Miiller  returned  to  Leipzig  and  entered  upon  the  freedom 
of  university  life  there  at  the  age  of  seventeen.    For  years  his  chief 


586  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

enjoyment  was  music/  He  played  the  piano  well,  heard  everything 
he  could  in  concert  or  opera,  was  an  oratorio  tenor,  and  grew  more 
and  more  absorbed  in  music,  so  that  he  planned  to  devote  himself  alto- 
gether to  it  and  also  to  enter  a  musical  school  at  Dessau,  but  nothing 
came  of  it.  At  the  university  he  saw  little  of  society,  was  once  incar- 
cerated for  wearing  a  club  ribbon,  and  confesses  that  with  his  boon, 
companions  he  was  guilty  of  practises  which  would  now  bring  culprits 
into  collision  with  authorities.  He  fought  three  duels,  participated  in 
many  pranks  and  freakish  escapades,  but  nevertheless  attended  fifty- 
three  different  courses  of  lectures  in  three  years.  When  Hegelism  was 
the  state  philosophy,  he  tried  hard  to  understand  it,  but  dismissed  it 
with  the  sentiments  expressed  by  a  French  officer  to  his  tailor,  who  re- 
fused to  take  the  trousers  he  had  ordered  to  be  made  very  tight  be- 
cause they  did  not  fit  so  closely  that  he  could  not  get  into  them.  Dar- 
win attracted  him,  yet  the  wildness  of  his  followers  repelled.  He  says, 
"  I  confess  I  felt  quite  bewildered  for  a  time  and  began  to  despair  al- 
together of  my  reasoning  powers."  He  wonders  how  young  minds  in 
German  universities  survive  the  storms  and  fogs  through  which  they 
pass.  With  bated  breath  he  heard  his  elders  talk  of  philosophy  and 
tried  to  lay  hold  of  a  word  here  and  there,  but  it  all  floated  before  his 
mind  like  mist.  Later  he  had  an  Hegelian  period,  but  found  in  Her- 
bart  a  corrective,  and  at  last  decided  upon  Sanskrit  and  other  ancient 
languages,  because  he  felt  that  he  must  know  something  that  no  other 
knew,  and  also  that  the  Germans  had  then  heard  only  the  after-chime 
and  not  the  real  striking  of  the  bells  of  Indian  philosophy.  From 
twenty  his  struggles  and  his  queries  grew  more  definite,  and  at  last,  at 
the  age  of  twenty-two,  he  was  fully  launched  upon  his  career  in  Paris, 
and  later  went  to  Oxford. 

At  thirteen  Wagner  ^  translated  about  half  the  Odyssey  voluntarily  ; 
at  fourteen  began  the  tragedy  which  was  to  combine  the  grandeur  of 
two  of  Shakespeare's  dramas ;  at  sixteen  he  tried  "  his  new-fledged 
musical  wings  by  soaring  at  once  to  the  highest  peaks  of  orchestral 
achievement  without  wasting  any  time  on  the  humble  foot-hills."  He 
sought  to  make  a  new  departure,  and,  compared  to  the  grandeur  of  his 
own  composition,  "  Beethoven's  Ninth  Symphony  appeared  like  a  sim- 
ple Pleyel  Sonata."  To  facilitate  the  reading  of  his  astounding  score, 
he  wrote  it  in  three  kinds  of  ink — red  for  strings,  green  for  the  wood- 
wind, and  black  for  the  brass  instruments.  He  writes  that  this  over- 
ture was  the  climax  of  his  absurdities,  and  although  the  audience  be- 
fore which  an  accommodating  orchestra  played  it  were  disgusted  and 
the  musicians  were  convulsed  with  laughter,  it  made  a  deep  impression 
upon  the  author's  mind.  Even  after  matriculating  at  the  university  he 
abandoned  himself  so  long  to  the  dissipations  common  to  student  life 
before  the  reaction  came  that  his  relatives  feared  that  he  was  a  good- 
for-nothing. 

'  My  Autobiography,  p.  io6. 

•  Wagner  and  His  Works.     By  Henry  T.  Finck. 


ADOLESCENCE   IN  LITERATURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^7 

In  his  Hannele,  Hauptmann,  the  dramatist,  describes  in  a  kind  of 
dream  poem  what  he  supposed  to  pass  through  the  mind  of  a  dying  girl 
of  thirteen  or  fourteen,  who  does  not  wish  to  Hve  and  is  so  absorbed 
by  the  "  Brownies  of  her  brain  "  that  she  hardly  knows  whether  she  is 
alive  on  earth  or  dead  in  heaven,  and  who  sees  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the 
form  of  the  schoolmaster  whom  she  adores.  In  her  closing  vision  there 
is  a  symbolic  representation  of  her  own  resurrection.  To  the  passion- 
ate discussions  in  Germany,  England,  and  France,  whether  this  char- 
acter is  true  to  adolescence,  we  can  only  answer  with  an  emphatic 
affirmative;  that  her  heaven  abounds  in  local  color  and  in  fairy-tale 
items,  that  it  is  very  material,  and  that  she  is  troubled  by  fears  of  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  answer  enough  in  an  ill-used,  starving  child 
with  a  fevered  brain,  whose  dead  mother  taught  her  these  things. 

Saint-Pierre's  Paul  and  Virginia  is  an  attempt  to  describe 
budding  adolescence  in  a  boy  and  girl  born  on  a  remote  island 
and  reared  in  a  state  of  natural  simplicity.  The  descriptions 
are  sentimental  after  the  fashion  of  the  age  in  France,  and 
the  pathos,  which  to  us  smacks  of  affectation  and  artificiality, 
nevertheless  has  a  vein  of  truth  in  it.  The  story  really  begins 
when  the  two  children  were  twelve,  and  the  description  of  the 
dawn  of  love  and  melancholy  in  Virginia's  heart,  for  some 
time  concealed  from  Paul,  of  her  disquiet  and  piety,  of  the  final 
frank  avowal  of  eternal  love  by  each,  set  off  by  the  pathetic 
separation,  and  of  the  undying  love,  and  finally  the  tragic  death 
and  burial  of  each — all  this  owes  its  charm,  for  the  many  gen- 
erations of  readers  since  it  was  written,  to  its  merits  as  an  es- 
sentially true  picture  of  the  human  heart  at  this  critical  age. 
This  work  and  Rousseau  have  contributed  to  give  French  liter- 
ature its  peculiar  cast  in  its  description  of  this  age. 

"  The  first  explosions  of  a  combustible  constitution  "  in  Rousseau's 
precocious  nature  were  troublesome,  and  he  felt  premature  sensa- 
tions of  erotic  voluptuousness,  but  without  any  sin.  He  longed  "  to 
fall  at  the  feet  of  an  imperious  mistress,  obey  her  mandates  or  implore 
pardon."  He  only  wanted  a  lady  to  become  a  knight  errant.  At  ten 
he  was  passionately  devoted  to  a  Mile.  Vulson,  whom  he  publicly  and 
tyrannically  claimed  as  his  own  and  would  allow  no  other  to  approach. 
He  had  very  different  sensuous  feelings  toward  Mile.  Goton,  with 
whom  his  relations  were  very  passionate,  though  pure.  Absolutely 
under  the  power  of  both  these  mistresses,  the  effects  they  produced 
upon  him  were  in  no  wise  related  to  each  other.  The  former  was  a 
brother's  affection  with  the  jealousy  of  a  lover  added,  but  the  latter  a 
furious,  tigerish,  Turkish  rage.  When  told  of  the  former's  marriage, 
in  his  indignation  and  heroic  fury  he  swore  never  more  to  see  a  per- 


588  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ADOLESCENCE 

fidious  girl.  A  slightly  neurotic  vein  of  prolonged  ephebeitis  pervades 
much  of  his  life. 

"  In  order  to  comprehend  a  religion,"  said  Renan,  "  one  must  have 
believed  in  it  and  have  left  it."  He  bade  the  Church  farewell  in  1845, 
emancipated  at  fifteen,  which  "  is  the  critical  age  for  faith  in  French 
education."  ^  He  could  not  "  commit  the  sacrilege  of  serving  a  God 
who  still  possessed  his  heart  but  no  longer  mastered  his  reason.  Leav- 
ing religious  illusion  behind,  he  remembered  all  its  magic  spells  and  all 
its  evasions,  but  also  all  its  charm  and  all  its  benefit."  He  vowed  al- 
ways to  love  the  ideal  Jesus,  whatever  view  he  took  of  his  nature. 
Even  if  he  should  abandon  him,  it  would  be  to  him  a  pleasing  but  most 
costly  sacrifice.  He  was  greatly  troubled  before  he  was  eighteen  by 
the  persistent  query,  whether  or  not  holding  these  views  he  was  a 
Christian;  and  at  this  age  he  was  initiated  into  Goethe  and  Herder  and 
felt  that  "  he  was  entering  a  temple."  His  confession,  really  and  sub- 
stantially written  in  1848,  when  he  was  overflowing  with  illusions  and 
enthusiasm,  seemed  to  him  later,  when  he  saw  that  his  "  life  had  al- 
ways been  governed  by  a  faith  which  he  no  longer  possessed,"  the 
product  of  an  entirely  natural  state,  yet  living  solely  in  his  fevered  in- 
tellect. Like  Miiller,  he  turned  to  philology,  because  he  thought  it  the 
basis  for  philosophy. 

Pierre  Loti's  Story  of  a  Child  was  written  in  the  author's  old  age 
and  contains  hardly  a  fact,  but  it  is  one  of  the  best  of  inner  autobiogra- 
phies, and  is  nowhere  richer  than  in  the  last  chapters,  which  bring  the 
author  down  to  the  age  of  fourteen  and  a  half.  He  vividly  describes 
the  new  joy  at  waking,  which  he  began  to  feel  at  twelve  or  thirteen ; 
the  clear  vision  into  the  bottomless  pit  of  death ;  the  new,  marvelous 
susceptibility  to  nature  as  comradeship  with  boys  of  his  own  age  was 
lacking ;  the  sudden  desires  from  pure  bravado  and  perversity  to  do 
something  unseemly,  e.  g.,  making  a  fly  omelet  and  carrying  it  in  a 
procession  with  song;  the  melting  of  pewter  plates  and  pouring  them 
into  water  and  salting  a  wild  tract  of  land  with  them;  organizing  a 
band  of  miners,  whom  he  led  as  if  with  keen  scent  to  the  right  spot  and 
rediscovered  his  nuggets,  everything  being  done  mysteriously  and  as  a 
tribal  secret.  Loti  had  a  new  feeling  for  the  haunting  music  of  Chopin, 
which  he  had  been  taught  to  play  but  had  not  been  interested  in ;  his 
mind  was  inflamed,  by  a  home  visit  of  an  older  brother,  with  the  idea 
of  going  to  the  South  Sea  Islands,  and  this  became  a  long  obsession 
which  finally  led  him  to  enlist  in  the  navy,  dropping,  with  a  beating 
heart,  the  momentous  letter  into  the  post-office  after  long  misgivings 
and  delays.  He  had  a  superficial  and  a  hidden  self,  the  latter  somewhat 
whimsical  and  perhaps  ridiculous,  shared  only  with  a  few  intimate 
friends  for  whom  he  would  have  let  himself  be  cut  into  bits.  He  be- 
lieves his  transition  period  lasted  longer  than  with  the  majority  of 
men,  and  during  it  he  was  carried  from  one  extreme  to  another ;  had 
rather  eccentric  and  absurd  manners,  and  touched  most  of  the  perilous 

*  Darmesteter  :  Selected  Essays,  p.  186, 


ADOLESCENCE  IN  LltERAtURE  AND   BIOGRAPHY    5^9 

rocks  on  the  voyage  of  life.  He  had  an  early  love  for  an  older  girl 
whose  name  he  wrote  in  cipher  on  his  books,  although  he  felt  it  a 
little  artificial,  but  believed  it  might  have  developed  into  a  great  and 
true  hereditary  friendship,  continuing  that  which  their  ancestors  had 
felt  for  many  generations.  The  birth  of  love  in  his  heart  was  in  a 
dream  after  having  read  the  forbidden  poet,  Alfred  de  Musset.  He 
was  fourteen,  and  in  his  dream  it  was  a  soft,  odorous  twilight.  He 
walked  amid  flowers  seeking  a  nameless  some  one  whom  he  ardently 
desired,  and  felt  that  something  strange  and  wonderful,  intoxicating  as 
it  advanced,  was  going  to  happen.  The  twilight  grew  deeper,  and  be- 
hind a  rose-bush  he  saw  a  young  girl  with  a  languorous  and  mysterious 
smile,  although  her  forehead  and  eyes  were  hidden.  As  it  darkened 
rather  suddenly,  her  eyes  came  out,  and  they  were  very  personal  and 
seemed  to  belong  to  some  one  already  much  beloved,  who  had  been 
found  with  "  transports  of  infinite  joy  and  tenderness."  He  woke 
with  a  start  and  sought  to  retain  the  phantom,  which  faded.  He 
could  not  conceive  that  she  was  a  mere  illusion,  and  as  he  realized 
that  she  had  vanished  he  felt  overwhelmed  with  hopelessness.  It  was 
the  first  stirring  "  of  true  love  with  all  its  great  melancholy  and  deep 
mystery,  with  its  overwhelming  but  sad  enchantment — love  which  like 
a  perfume  endows  with  a  fragrance  all  it  touches." 

It  is,  I  believe,  high  time  that  ephebic  hterature  should  be 
recognized  as  a  class  by  itself,  and  have  a  place  of  its  own  in 
the  history  of  letters  and  in  criticism.  Much  of  it  should  be 
individually  prescribed  for  the  reading  of  the  young,  for  whom 
it  has  a  singular  zest  and  is  a  true  stimulus  and  corrective. 
This  stage  of  life  now  has  what  might  almost  be  called  a 
school  of  its  own.  Here  the  young  appeal  to  and  listen  to 
each  other  as  they  do  not  to  adults,  and  in  a  way  the  latter  have 
failed  to  appreciate.  Again,  no  biography,  and  especially  no 
autobiography,  should  henceforth  be  complete  if  it  does  not 
describe  this  period  of  transformation  so  all-determining  for 
future  life  to  which  it  alone  can  often  give  the  key.  To  rightly 
draw  the  lessons  of  this  age  not  only  saves  us  from  waste 
ineffable  of  this  rich  but  crude  area  of  experience,  but  makes 
maturity  saner  and  more  complete.  Lastly,  many  if  not  most 
young  people  should  be  encouraged  to  enough  of  the  confes- 
sional private  journalism  to  teach  them  self-knowledge,  for 
the  art  of  self-expression  usually  begins  now  if  ever,  when  it 
has  a  wealth  of  subjective  material  and  needs  forms  of  ex- 
pression peculiar  to  itself. 

04) 


Date  Due 

^^»9WWP^ 

#iMm 

<m..2r^ 

MAIU^ 

h 

jumK^ 

^m-^^ 

y'^^^'"^ 

HKfTS 

J)£S-^ 

>^^^. 

'  '---^r-^' 

i 

MAY  12  1! 

S65 

4'^  ^^  •  (1 

inO 

IFIBi^  t 

l£ 

Library  Bureau  Cat.  no.  1137 


5.H2:1 


3  5002  00309  4005 

Hall,  G.  Stanley 

Adolescence;  its  psychology  and  its  rela 


f^VCHOlOGVi,. 


Wo*^^-^^ 


