s 


SCARLATTI 


SlLt  IMG8  HAkkttPffAWr 


n 


} 


m 


[itiii 


^^J44M4 


Date  Due, 


FEE  • 

\-mi- 


Z    i987 


UiKSry  Buraau   Cat.  00.  1137 


ALESSANDRO 

SCAR  L AT  T I  : 

HIS   LIFE   AND    WORKS 


^^^/€^>A^z/jtfZ/to  ,::Zcci't/aylti^ 


LOND0M■:ErlA^?A"R."DARNOl,C;laO5  . 


ALESSANDRO 
SCARLATTI: 

HIS     LIFE     AND     WORKS 


BY 


EDWARD    J.     DENT 

FELLOW    OF    king's    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE 


WITH   PORTRAIT 


LONDON 
EDWARD    ARNOLD 

41   &  43  MADDOX   STREET,   BOND   STREET,  W. 
1905 

[All  rights  reserved] 


jCS  uiy/^-J^^^^y, 


t 


\l.\s%  Vj^ 


TO 

CHARLES  HARFORD  LLOYD 

M.A.,  MUS.DOC. ,  PRECENTOR  OF  ETON  COLLEGE 

THIS    BOOK 

IS    GRATEFULLY    AND    AFFECTIONATELY 

DEDICATED 

BY   ONE   OF   HIS    EARLIEST 
ETON   PUPILS 


PREFACE 

Considering  the  celebrity  which  Alessandro  Scarlatti 
enjoyed  during  his  lifetime,  and  the  important  position 
which  he  occupies  in  the  history  of  music,  it  is  strange 
that  so  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  him.  This  is 
partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  modern  period  of  careful 
research  in  matters  of  musical  history  which  produced 
Spitta's  Bach,  Chrysander's  Handel,  Jahn's  Mozart,  and 
Thayer's  Beethoven,  was  also  marked  by  a  decided  re- 
action against  that  enthusiasm  for  Italian  music  which 
flourished  in  the  days  of  Santini,  Kiesewetter,  Winterfeld, 
and  Fetis.  There  are,  however,  signs  of  a  revival  of 
interest  at  the  present  day  ;  the  labours  of  Dr.  Emil 
Voeel,  Dr.  Hu^o  Goldschmidt,  M.  Remain  Rolland, 
Professor  Kretschmar,  and  Sir  Hubert  Parry  have  done 
much  for  the  history  of  the  Italian  music  of  the  seven- 
teenth century. 

But  Alessandro  Scarlatti,  though  he  has  by  no  means 
been  forgotten  by  them,  has  not  been  treated  in  any  great 
detail ;  and  I  hope  that  this  biography,  if  it  does  not 
succeed  in  explaining  more  fully  his  relation  to  the  music 
that  preceded  and  followed  him,  may  at  least  serve  as  a 
useful  foundation   for  future  workers  in  the  same  field. 

To  give  a  list  of  books  consulted  seems  superfluous  ; 
for  the  general  history  of  Italian  music  in  the  seventeenth 
and  eighteenth  centuries  several  bibliographies  have  re- 
cently been  printed,  and  for  Alessandro  Scarlatti  there  are 
no  special  authorities.  Grove's  Dictionary  of  Music  and 
Musicians  gives  practically  all  the  information  that  previous 
biographers  have  recorded.  The  difficulty  of  collecting 
and  sifting  the  large  mass  of  scattered  biographical  material 
no  doubt  goes  far  to  account  for  the  incompleteness  not 
only  of  Florimo,  Villarosa,  and  Gennaro  Grossi,  but  also  of 


Vlll 


PREFACE 


Burney  and  Hawkins  ;  but  it  has  been  greatly  lightened 
by  modern  Italian  historians  of  the  musical  drama,  such 
as  Signor  A.  Ademollo  (/  teatri  di  Roma  nel  secolo  xvzi., 
Rome,  1888),  Professor  Benedetto  Croce  (/  teairi  di 
Napoli  nei  secoli  xv-xviii,,  Naples,  1891),  Professor 
Corrado  Ricci  (/  teatri  di  Bologna  nei  secoli  xvii.  e 
xviii.,  Bologna,  1888),  and  Cav.  Taddeo  Wiel  (/  teatri 
veyieziani  nel  secolo  xviii.,  Venice,  1892),  to  whose  labours 
I  am  much  indebted.  Wherever  possible,  however,  I 
have  consulted  original  documents,  and  have  given  exact 
references  to  them  throughout  the  book.  1  have  also 
derived  valuable  assistance  (though  less  directly)  from 
Vernon  Lee's  Studies  of  the  Eighteenth  Century  in  Italy, 
and  Professor  Corrado  Ricci's  Vita  Barocca  (Milan,  1904). 
The  catalogue  will  give  some  idea  of  the  large  number 
of  Scarlatti's  compositions  that  exist  in  manuscript.  Auto- 
graphs are  comparatively  rare  ;  but  contemporary  copies 
are  very  numerous,  made  for  the  most  part  by  three  or 
four  copyists  who  seem  to  have  been  regularly  employed 
by  Scarlatti,  and  whose  work  is  extremely  accurate.  Of 
modern  copies  the  most  numerous  and  the  most  important 
are  those  made  by  Fortunato  Santini.  The  originals  of 
many  of  these,  either  autographs  or  contemporary  copies, 
are  still  accessible,  but  for  much  of  the  church  music  we 
are  obliged  to  accept  Santini's  copies  for  want  of  anything 
better,  until  it  becomies  less  difficult  for  the  foreigner  and 
the  heretic  to  obtain  admission  to  Italian  ecclesiastical 
libraries.-^  They  are  not  very  accurate,  either  in  the  notes 
themselves  or  in  the  headings  and  titles,  which  are  some- 
times of  great  value  in  determining  the  date  of  a  com- 
position. Moreover,  Santini,  like  other  librarians  of  his 
time,  has  a  tendency  to  ascribe  to  Scarlatti  any  anony- 
mous composition  of  his  period,  and  to  give  the  title  of 
cantata  to  almost  any  secular  vocal  composition.       Other 

1  This  does  not  apply  to  the  Vatican  or  to   Montecassino,  where  every 
facility  is  offered  for  research. 


PREFACE  ix 

modern  manuscripts    are    comparatively    rare    and    nearly 
always  traceable  to  more  authoritative  originals. 

The  identification  of  libretti  and  of  detached  airs  from 
operas  has  presented  some  difficulty.  The  airs  seldom 
bear  the  name  of  the  opera  from  which  they  are  taken,  and 
from  1679  to  1709  the  libretti  of  Scarlatti's  operas  (and  by 
no  means  only  of  Scarlatti's)  hardly  ever  bear  his  name. 
We  may  expect  to  find  the  names  of  the  impresario, 
the  ballet-master,  the  scene-painter,  and  (less  often)  the 
poet ;  but  it  is  extremely  rare  to  find  the  name  of  the 
composer  of  the  music.  However,  with  the  help  of  the 
admirably  arranged  collections  of  the  libretti  at  Naples 
(R.  Conservatorio  di  Musica),  Bologna  (Liceo  Musicale), 
and  Brussels  (Conservatoire),  together  with  M.  Alfred 
Wotquenne's  invaluable  Catalogue  des  livrets  italiens  dtt 
XVI f  sihle  (Brussels,  1901),  and  an  alphabetical  index  of 
first  lines  of  arias  from  all  Scarlatti's  extant  operas,  which 
I  prepared  myself,  but  which  there  is  not  room  to  print 
here,  a  certain  amount  of  identification  has  been  done  ;  but 
several  hundred  airs  still  remain  that  I  have  not  been  able 
to  assign  to  their  proper  dates  and  places. 

It  only  remains  for  me  to  express  my  sincerest  thanks 
to  the  librarians  of  the  various  libraries  in  which  I  have 
worked,  a  list  of  which  precedes  the  catalogue,  not  for- 
getting the  much  valued  kindness  shown  to  me  in  some 
libraries — notably  at  Florence,  Bologna,  and  Naples — by 
subordinate  members  of  the  library  staff  To  Mr.  Barclay 
Squire  (British  Museum)  and  M.  Alfred  Wotquenne 
(Brussels  Conservatoire)  I  am  exceptionally  indebted  for 
continued  kind  assistance,  as  well  as  generous  contribution 
of  important  material.  My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Dr.  H. 
P.  Allen  (Oxford),  Mgr.  Azzocchi  {P^xfetto  delta  musica 
at  S.  Maria  Maggiore,  Rome),  Mgr.  Bartolini  {Ctistode 
Generale  d' Arcadia,  Rome),  Mgr.  Beccaria  (Palermo), 
Cav.  Antonio  D'Ali  (Trapani),  Miss  Dent,  Col.  H.  A. 
Douglas    (Rome),     Mr.     F.    G.     Edwards,     Mgr.    Fratta 

b 


X  PREFACE 

(Ferrara),  Mr,  H.  D.  Grissell  (Rome),  Comm.  Alessandro 
Kraus  (Florence),  Cav.  Giacomo  Leo  (Naples),  Prof. 
Alessandro  Longo  (Naples),  Comm.  Carlo  Lozzi  (Rome), 
Comm.  G.  Moriconi  (Rome),  Miss  Paget  (Florence),  Sir 
Walter  Parratt,  Prof.  A.  Scontrino  (Florence),  and  Dr. 
Voltz  (Darmstadt),  for  courteous  assistance  of  various 
kinds,  as  well  as  to  Messrs.  Breitkopf  and  Haertel  for 
kindly  giving  me  permission  to  reprint  (with  some  correc- 
tions) the  list  of  Scarlatti's  operas,  which  appeared  first 
in  the  Sammelband  der  Inter)iationale7i  Mus^kgesellschaft 
for  November   1902. 

By  the  kindness  of  Mr.  J.  S.  Shedlock,  I  was  recently 
allowed  to  inspect  the  manuscript  volume  of  Scarlatti's 
harpsichord  and  organ  music  described  by  him  in  the 
Sammelband  der  Internationale7t  Musikgesellschajt  for 
November  1904;  but  the  printing  of  this  book  was  then 
so  far  advanced  that  it  was  too  late  for  me  to  ask  per- 
mission to  discuss  it.  For  the  textual  criticism  of  this 
department  of  Scarlatti's  work  it  is  undoubtedly  the  most 
important  and  authoritative  manuscript  that  I  have  seen ; 
nevertheless,  except  for  the  organ  music,  which  shows 
us  Scarlatti  in  a  hitherto  unknown  capacity,  the  historical 
and  musical  value  of  the  pieces  peculiar  to  it  would 
not  have  much  affected  my  account  of  Scarlatti  as  a 
composer  of  instrumental  music. 

The  portrait  of  Alessandro  Scarlatti  which  forms  the 
frontispiece  of  this  book  is  reproduced  from  the  engraving 
in  the  Biografia  degli  Uomini  ilhistri  del  Regno  di  N^apoli 
(Naples  1 8 19).  This  engraving  seems  to  have  been  taken 
from  an  oil  painting  attributed  to  Francesco  Solimena,  now 
in  the  possession  of  the  R.  Conservatorio  di  Musica  at 
Naples,  for  the  direct  reproduction  of  which  I  regret  to 
say  that  I  was  unable  to  obtain  permission.  It  is  also  the 
source  of  various  unimportant  lithographed  and  engraved 
portraits  which  all  exhibit  the  mannerisms  of  their  day 
rather  than  fidelity  to  the  original.  r 


PAGE 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER   I 

EARLY  YEARS;  ROME,   1679-1684 i 

CHAPTER    II 
NAPLES,   1684-1702 34 

CHAPTER  III 
FLORENCE,   1702;    ROME,   1 703-1 706;    VENICE,   1707      .         71 

CHAPTER    IV 
URBINO,   1707;    NAPLES,   1708-1718 113 

CHAPTER   V 
ROME,   1718-1721;    NAPLES,   1722-1725        .         .         .         .       156 

APPENDIX 
THE  SCARLATTI  FAMILY 205 

CATALOGUE      OF      THE      EXTANT     WORKS      OF 

A.    SCARLATTI 206 

INDEX 233 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

CHAPTER    I 

EARLY  YEARS;    ROME,    1679-1684 

"The  Renaissance  of  Music"  is  a  name  often  given  to 
that  change  of  style  which  spread  over  the  art  towards  the 
end  of  the  sixteenth  century.  If  we  consider  the  move- 
ment in  its  initial  phase  only,  the  title  is  sufficiently  repre- 
sentative of  the  truth.  The  change  was  essentially  a 
return  to  nature,  and  was  intended  to  be  a  return  to  the 
musical  ideals  of  ancient  Greece.  That  the  new  spirit 
should  not  have  dominated  the  art  of  music,  even  in  Italy, 
until  the  other  arts  had  submitted  to  its  influence  for  a 
hundred  years  and  more,  need  not  surprise  us.  The  ten- 
dencies of  the  Renaissance  may  indeed  be  traced  dimly 
even  through  the  polyphonic  music  of  the  age  of  Palestrina  ; 
but  the  fact  that  the  Church  had  a  practical  monopoly  of 
scientific  music  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  lack  of  enterprise 
in  a  definitely  secular  direction.  Musicians  who  had  been 
brought  up  to  devote  their  skill  to  the  service  of  the  Church 
were  not  likely  to  be  much  affected  by  the  trend  of  general 
culture  in  the  direction  of  Hellenism.  Almost  always 
ecclesiastics  themselves,  their  learning  was  naturally  con- 
fined to  the  narrow  channel  of  their  own  trade,  and  they 
would  be  the  less  likely  to  attempt  radical  innovations 
when  they  were  in  possession  of  an  art  which  had  just 
reached  a  stage  of  technique  that  offered  an  apparently 
unlimited  vista  of  possible  development.  Painters  and 
sculptors  could  hardly  help  being  influenced  by  the  new 
learning ;     painting   and    sculpture    required    subjects]  to 

A 


2  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

illustrate,  and  the  truth  to  nature  of  their  representations 
could  in  most  cases  be  judged  by  the  eyes  of  all.  Music, 
which  even  with  all  the  resources  of  the  twentieth  century 
cannot  definitely  represent  any  visible  object  whatever, 
could  hardly  make  an  appreciable  appeal  to  its  audience  in 
that  direction  at  the  time  when  one  of  the  principal  means 
of  serious  expression  seems  to  have  been  the  making  of 
puns  on  the  Guidonian  syllables. 

The  first  decisive  step,  therefore,  was  made  not  by  the 
learned  contrapuntists,  but  by  a  body  of  amateurs.  The 
noble  Florentines  to  whom  we  owe  the  birth  of  the  musical 
Renaissance  brought  very  little  technical  ability  to  bear  on 
their  experiments  ;  but  they  brought  what  perhaps  only 
noble  Florentine  amateurs  could  have  brought — a  pure 
and  lofty  ideal  moulded  by  the  Hellenistic  influences  of 
contemporary  literature,  and  entirely  free  from  ecclesias- 
tical prejudice.  Yet  in  studying  the  history  of  music  from 
this  point  onwards,  we  must  beware  of  letting  ourselves  be 
misled  by  the  idea  that  the  Renaissance  of  music  followed 
a  course  exactly  parallel  to  that  of  the  Renaissance  of  the 
plastic  arts.  Peri's  "  Euridice"  may  be  said  to  exhibit  the 
technical  ability  of  a  Giotto  applied  to  the  expressive  inten- 
tion of  a  Botticelli ;  with  the  spread  of  the  "  new  music  "  to 
Mantua,  Rome,  and  Venice  fresh  influences  made  them- 
selves felt,  and  caused  the  art  to  develop  in  a  direction 
very  different  from  that  which  Bardi  and  his  friends  had 
imagined.  "  Dafne "  and  "Euridice"  were  literary  ex- 
periments addressed  only  to  cultured  audiences  ;  Monte- 
verdi and  Cavalli  seized  on  the  musical  and  spectacular 
elements  which  they  presented,  and  transformed  a  resusci- 
tated Greek  tragedy  into  Italian  opera,  a  new  creation  full  of 
its  own  natural  life  and  energy.  Freed  from  the  restraining 
influence  of  Florentine  Hellenists,  encouraged  either  by 
splendour-loving  courts  or  by  a  pleasure-seeking  populace, 
to  whom  spectacular  effect  counted  for  a  good  deal  more 
than  literary  elegance,  this  second  generation  of  composers 
catered  frankly  for  the  taste  of  their  time,  and  in  an  age 
notorious  for  extravagance  in  every  direction  were  deter- 


EARLY    YEARS  3 

mined  not  to  be  left  behind  by  the  exponents  of  the  sister 
arts.  Indeed,  so  successful  were  their  efforts  that  towards 
the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century  music  had  not 
only  overtaken,  but  to  some  extent  outdistanced  its  rivals 
in  importance  and  popularity. 

For  the  whole  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  history 
of  Italian  music  is  the  history  of  the  opera.  Other  forms 
were  cultivated,  but  to  a  comparatively  slight  extent,  and 
they  were  in  almost  all  cases  merely  tributaries  to  the  main 
stream  of  progress.  This  importance  of  the  musical  drama 
accounts  largely  for  the  strange  way  in  which  Italian  music 
developed  from  "Euridice"  to  "Don  Giovanni."  The 
opera  brought  music  into  immediate  contact  with  dramatic 
poetry  and  the  plastic  arts,  united  for  theatrical  purposes 
under  the  leadership  of  architecture.  We  have  only  to 
oflance  at  the  building-  of  the  ap;e  to  see  the  sort  of  in- 
fluences  to  which  music  was  being  submitted.  Florence 
still  preserved  some  remnant  of  her  ancient  traditions  of 
purity  of  style,  but  Venice  and  Rome,  followed  by  the 
smaller  capitals,  were  rioting  in  all  that  exuberance  of  the 
baroque  which  we  associate  with  the  names  of  Longhena 
and  Bernini,  Guido  Reni  and  Luca  Giordano.  Some 
courage  is  required  to  defend  the  baroque  style  of  archi- 
tecture at  the  present  day.  It  was  so  essentially  the 
expression  of  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  its  own  time  that 
the  modern  spectator,  unable  to  enter  into  the  details  of 
its  environment,  can  see  nothing  but  the  dismal  wreck  of 
its  mannerisms  and  affectations  in  its  faded  ceilings,  its 
crumbling  stucco,  and  its  mutilated  marbles.  But  churches 
and  palaces  are  only  a  small  part  of  the  life  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  and  though  to  us  they  are  its  most  con- 
spicuous monuments,  they  are  in  reality  not  the  most 
representative.  The  true  moving  spirit  of  the  baroque 
must  be  looked  for  in  the  social  life,  in  the  literature,  the 
drama,  and  the  music  of  the  period.  This  is  not  the  place 
to  treat  in  detail  of  the  social  history  of  "that  strange  and 
savage  century  in  which  all  was  baroque,  from  its  painting 
to  its  passions,   from  its  manners  to  its   crimes,   from   its 


4  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

feastings  to  its  funerals,  from  its  heroes  to  its  cowards," 
which  has  recently  been  depicted  by  Professor  Corrado 
Ricci,^  not  only  with  his  customary  learning,  but  also  with 
an  illuminating  sense  of  the  grotesque  that  throws  all  its 
characteristic  lights  and  shadows  into  the  sharpest  possible 
relief.  For  us  the  opera  sums  up  in  brief  all  the  most 
typical  features  of  the  baroque.  When  Venice  possessed 
seventeen  opera-houses,  when  Bologna  was  so  insanely 
devoted  to  music  that  the  despairing  Cardinal  Legate  was 
driven  to  issue  an  edict  (in  1686)  forbidding  any  woman, 
whatever  her  age  or  condition,  the  nuns  included,  to  receive 
instruction  in  music  from  any  man,  however  closely  he 
might  be  related  to  her,  when  Dukes  of  Modena  and 
Doges  of  Venice  were  quarrelling  in  public  over  the  affec- 
tions of  a  prima  donna,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the 
opera  being  the  most  important  art-form,  and  the  most 
characteristic  expression  of  the  ideas  of  the  period. 

And  this  is  only  the  natural  result  of  the  fact  that  of 
all  art-forms  the  opera  afforded  the  most  ample  scope  for 
the  realization  of  those  ideas.  To  the  minds  of  most  of 
us  the  baroque  is  represented  by  the  typical  church  facade 
of  the  seventeenth  century,  on  which  the  "  pious  orgies  " 
of  saints  and  angels  as  well  as  of  pillars  and  pediments 
are  petrified  for  all  time  in  the  decent  convulsions  of 
a  symmetrical  earthquake.  But  if  it  offends  us,  the  fault 
is  less  often  that  of  the  design  than  of  the  limitations 
imposed  by  the  material  ;  and  we  are  ourselves  frequently 
to  blame  for  not  regarding  it  with  the  necessary  eye  for 
the  grotesque.  We  are  brought  a  step  nearer  towards 
the  baroque  ideal  by  such  a  work  as  Fumiani's  famous 
ceilinof  in  the  church  of  S.  Pantaleone  at  Venice.  The 
architect  who  carried  out  his  designs  in  solid  stone 
and  marble  was  necessarily  limited  by  the  tiresome  con- 
sideration that  they  had  to  be  made  to  stand  firm  somehow 
or  other.  The  decorator  of  ceilings  might  freely  disregard 
the  laws  of  gravity  ;  but  even  his  advantages  were  slight 
compared  with  those  of  the  theatrical  scene-painter.     We 

^  Vifa  Barocca.     Milan,  1904. 


EARLY  YEARS  5 

need  only  turn  to  the  illustrations  that  adorn  the  more 
sumptuous  libretti  of  the  day,  or,  still  better,  to  the  original 
designs  to  be  found  in  many  public  collections,  to  see  what 
possibilities  were  offered  by  the  stage  to  the  unrestrained 
imagination  of  the  architect.  Paint  and  canvas  could  raise 
to  an  appearance  of  solidity  infinite  perspectives  of  galleries 
and  colonnades  magnificent  beyond  the  most  ambitious 
dreams  of  the  Pope  himself.  The  statues  that  adorned 
them  could  come  to  life  and  descend  from  their  pedestals 
to  take  part  in  a  ballet ;  and  before  the  open-mouthed 
spectators  had  had  time  to  weary  of  it,  the  scene  could 
vanish,  to  be  succeeded  by  another  and  yet  another,  each  if 
possible  more  surprising  than  its  predecessor  in  its  formal 
eccentricity  of  splendour. 

How  important  the  scenery  was  to  the  baroque  opera 
is  clear  also  from  the  names  of  the  scene-painters,  among 
whom  we  often  find  such  distinguished  artists  as  Bibbiena 
and  Antonio  Canale  ;  and  it  may  be  noted  that  their  names 
are  often  given  in  libretti  that  make  no  mention  whatever 
of  the  composer  of  the  music.  And  though  our  imagi- 
nations may  find  it  difficult  to  realize  the  enthusiasm 
which  their  wonderful  erections  aroused,  yet  they  are 
sufficiently  important  to  us  to  require  consideration  in 
some  detail  on  account  of  their  intimate  connexion  with 
the  music  of  the  period.  The  passion  for  building  which 
had  been  characteristic  of  the  best  period  of  the  Renais- 
sance was  still  strong  ;  the  characteristic  tendency  of  the 
baroque  was  the  strange  attempt  to  inspire  the  essential 
solidity  and  repose  of  architecture  with  the  restless 
animation  and  unrestrained  extravagance  that  marked 
the  whole  life  of  the  century.  The  ideal  creation  would 
have  been  an  architecture  not  only  of  unlimited  magni- 
ficence, but  alive  with  perpetual  movement  in  every 
part,  a  transformation-scene  that  should  include  the  whole 
of  time  and  space,  along  with  the  whole  range  of 
human  passions  and  emotions,  not  forgetting  the  antics 
of  Arlecchino,  Brighella,  and  the  Dottor  Graziano. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  to  the  modern  reader 


6  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

that  what  could  never  be  reaHzed  for  the  eye  might 
at  any  rate  be  brought  considerably  nearer  realization 
for  the  ear.  The  primitive  state  of  musical  technique 
at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  naturally 
made  it  impossible  at  first  for  music  to  attain  the  same 
level  of  impressiveness  as  the  other  arts  ;  but  progress 
was  rapid,  and  after  a  hundred  years  music  had  so  far 
advanced  as  to  be  fully  recognized  as  the  art  which 
most  completely  satisfied  the  needs  of  the  time.  Goethe's 
well-known  comparison  of  architecture  to  frozen  music, 
apt  enough  in  his  own  day,  though  less  intelligible  to 
modern  concert-goers,  was  still  truer  of  the  music  and 
of  the  architecture  that  preceded  him  by  two  or  three 
generations.  While  architecture,  on  the  stage,  was  adopt- 
ing every  expedient  to  produce  an  illusive  sense  of 
motion,  music,  which  if  it  cease  to  move,  ceases  to 
exist,  was  passing  through  a  phase  almost  aggressively 
architectural  in  the  severe  symmetry  of  its  forms.  The 
baroque  opera  is,  in  fact,  the  bridge  by  which  the 
artistic  emotions  of  Italy  passed  finally  from  architecture 
as  a  chief  means  of  expression  to  music,  thus  calling 
into  existence  the  classical  school  of  the  early  eighteenth 
century  in  which  Haydn,  Mozart,  and  Beethoven  were 
to  learn  the  first  principles  of  the  sonata  and  the  sym- 
phony. And  this  early  structural  development  of  music, 
although,  like  all  such  movements,  it  was  the  work  of 
many  hands,  owed  its  chief  greatness  to  Alessandro 
Scarlatti.  Architectural  in  principle  with  a  more  than 
Palladian  severity,  yet  always  vigorous  in  outline  and 
luxuriant  in  decorative  detail,  he  represents  the  baroque 
style  at  its  best,  and  his  working  life  of  nearly  fifty 
years,  during  which  he  never  failed  to  maintain  an 
astonishing  fertility  of  production  as  well  as  a  high 
standard  of  style,  covers  the  extremely  interesting  period 
of  transition  from  the  earlier  Renaissance  of  music  to 
the  decorous  classicism  of   the   eighteenth   century. 

It  has  been  generally  asserted  that  Alessandro  Scarlatti 
was  born  in  1659,  at  Trapani  in  Sicily.     No  record  of  his 


EARLY   YEARS  7 

birth  or  of  his  early  years  has  yet  been  found,  in  spite  of 
careful  search  in  Trapani  and  the  neighbourhood ;  the 
assertion  rests  solely  on  the  evidence  of  an  autograph 
score  of  the  opera  "  Pompeo,"  said  to  bear  the  inscription, 
"  Musica  del  Signor  Alessandro  Scarlatti  da  Trapam!' 
This  score  was  seen  by  Fetis  in  the  possession  of  Gaspare 
Selvaggi,^  but,  like  many  other  manuscripts  described  by 
him,  it  is  not  to  be  found  now.  Selvaggi's  collection  of 
music  was  bought  by  the  Marquis  of  Northampton,  and 
presented  by  him  to  the  British  Museum  in  1847  ;  but  the 
score  of  "Pompeo"  is  not  there.  There  is  a  score  of 
"  Pompeo  "  (the  only  one  known)  in  the  Fetis  collection, 
now  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Brussels  ;  but  it  is  not  auto- 
graph, and  it  does  not  mention  the  composer's  birthplace. 
In  the  records  of  the  Arcadian  Academy  at  Rome,  Scarlatti 
is  described  as  a  native  of  Palermo,  but  neither  the 
original  manuscript  list  of  members  nor  those  subsequently 
printed  can  be  relied  upon  for  absolute  accuracy  any  more 
than  the  Biographie  Uiiiverselle  des  Musiciens.  That 
he  was  a  Sicilian  is  quite  certain,  as  will  be  seen  later ; 
and  the  year  of  his  birth  (1658  or  1659)  is  deduced  from 
the  statement  on  his  tombstone  that  he  died  on  October 
24,    1725,  at  the  age  of  sixty-six. 

Of  his  parentage  nothing  whatever  is  known.  In 
order  to  account  for  the  absence  of  a  baptismal  register  at 
Trapani,  it  has  been  ingeniously  suggested  that  his  father 
must  have  been  a  soldier,  in  which  case  he  would  have 
been  baptized  in  the  chapel  of  the  fortress,  of  which  no 
records  were  kept.  But  it  seems  easier  to  suppose  that  he 
was  born  elsewhere.  The  name  Scarlatti  is  not  Sicilian 
at  all,  but  Tuscan.  If  he  was  of  Sicilian  origin,  his  real 
name  was  probably  Sgarlata  or  Scarlata,  both  fairly 
common  in  Sicily  then  and  now  ;  and  his  name  is  spelled 
Scarlati  in  the  archives  at  Naples  and  in  Conforto's  Diary. 

^  Florimo  also  professed  to  have  seen  it,  and  gives  the  inscription  as 
"Pompeo  del  Cav.  Alessajidro  Scarlatti  di  Trapani P  As  "Pompeo"  was 
composed  in  1683,  and  Scarlatti  does  not  appear  to  have  received  the  title 
of  Cavaliere  before  1716,  Florimo's  statement  hardly  deserves  very  much 
confidence. 


8  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

On  the  other  hand,  those  hbretti  that  mention  his  name 
invariably  print  it,  as  he  invariably  signed  it  himself, 
Scarlatti.  It  is  conceivable  that  he  came  of  a  Tuscan 
stock  ;  but  this  is  a  mere  conjecture.  It  may  be  noted  that 
he  hardly  ever  set  to  music  words  in  the  dialect  of  Naples  ; 
his  one  comic  opera  is  all  in  Italian,  though  composed 
after  a  long  residence  in  Naples,  for  a  theatre  which  for 
some  years  had  made  a  speciality  of  comic  operas  in 
Neapolitan.  Moreover,  his  early  life  appears  to  have 
been  spent  mostly  in  Northern  Italy. 

Before  1679  we  have  no  definite  information  about 
him.  Various  statements  have  been  made  with  regfard 
to  his  teachers,  but  none  are  supported  by  trustworthy 
evidence.  The  tradition  which  finds  most  credence  is^* 
that  he  was  a  pupil  of  Carissimi,  and  it  probably  repre- 
sents the  truth,  though  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
Carissimi  died  at  an  advanced  age  when  Scarlatti  was  only 
fifteen.  That  he  should  have  been  a  pupil  of  Giovanni 
Salvatore  and  Francesco  Provenzale  at  Naples  was  a 
natural  conjecture  for  those  biographers  who  believed 
Naples  to  have  been  his  birthplace.  But  there  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  he  had  any  connexion  with  Naples 
before  1684;  indeed  it  will  be  shown  later  that  he  was 
regarded  as  a  stranger  there  when  he  received  his  appoint- 
ment as  Maestro  di  Cappella.  Besides,  the  musical  life  of 
Naples  was  at  this  period  so  far  behind  that  of  Rome  and 
Northern  Italy  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  Scarlatti  should 
have  found  opportunities  there  for  developing  his  talents 
as  he  did.  The  first  operatic  performance  in  Naples  seems 
to  have  been  that  of  Monteverdi's  "  Nerone,"  given  in  1651 
by  the  Febi  Annonici,  a  company  of  Venetian  singers  who 
continued  their  representations  of  Venetian  operas  until 
Naples  was  able  to  start  a  school  of  its  own  under  the  lead 
of  Francesco  Provenzale.  His  "  Teseo  "  appeared  in  1658, 
and  his  last  opera,  "  Lo  Schiavo  di  sua  Moglie,"  in  1671  ; 
but  b^h  this  and  "La  Stellidaura  Vendicata"  (1670),  the 
only  operas  of  his  that  remain,  show  him  to  have  been  far 
inferior  to  his  Venetian  and  Roman  contemporaries. 


EARLY   YEARS  9 

The  early  compositions  of  Alessandro  Scarlatti  point 
clearly  to  the  influence  of  the  Roman  master  Carissimi, 
and  to  that  of  CavalH,  Cesti,  and  Legrenzi,  who  may 
legitimately  be  classed  as  Venetians.  He  was  also  much 
influenced  by  Stradella,  whose  work  seems  to  have  been 
done  mostly  in  Rome  and  Northern  Italy.  If  we  look 
at  any  of  the  contemporary  manuscript  collections  that 
include  early  chamber-cantatas  by  Scarlatti,  we  shall  be 
sure  to  find  him  in  Stradella's  company,  along  with  other 
north  Italian  composers,  such  as  Alessandro  Melani,  Perti, 
Gasparini,  and  Pier  Simone  Agostini.  And  no  sooner  had 
he  made  a  success  in  Rome  with  his  first  opera,  "  Gli 
Equivoci  nel  Sembiante,"  than  his  work  was  immediately 
in  demand  at  Bologna  and  Modena,  besides  smaller  places 
in  Northern  Italy,  probably  including  the  private  theatre 
of  the  Contarini  family  at  Piazzola  near  Venice. 

It  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  the  exact  chronology  of 
Scarlatti's  early  Roman  works.  Writing  to  Ferdinand  de' 
Medici  in  1705,  he  says  that  he  has  composed  eighty-eight 
operas  in  less  than  twenty-three  years  ;^  but  of  those  eighty- 
eight  only  thirty-five  have  survived,  and  not  all  of  them 
complete.  This  would  place  his  first  opera  soon  after 
1682,  when  he  was  twenty-three  years  old  ;  but  there  is 
no  doubt  that  "Gli  Equivoci"  was  produced  as  far  back 
as  1679.  It  is  indeed  possible  that  "Gli  Equivoci"  was 
not  his  first  opera  ;  it  is,  however,  the  earliest  that  has 
survived,  and  seems  to  have  been  the  first  that  brought 
him  fame. 

In  any  case  we  may  be  fairly  certain  that  some  of  the 
chamber-cantatas  date  from  still  earlier  years,  and  these 
are  of  such  importance  as  to  call  for  treatment  in  some 
detail.  The  immense  popularity  of  the  chamber-cantata 
during  the  whole  of  the  seventeenth  and  the  early  part  of 
the  eighteenth  century  is  a  phenomenon  for  which  musical 
historians  seem  to  have  had  some  difficulty  in  accounting. 
Even  Sir  Hubert  Parry ^  finds  it  "a  strange  puzzle  that  a 

1  Not  "thirty-three,"  as  erroneously  printed  by  Puliti. 

2  "  Oxford  History  of  Music,"  vol.  iii.  p.  393. 


lo  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

form  of  art  which  is  so  undeniably  long-winded  should 
have  been  so  popular."  But  the  puzzle  is  not  quite  so 
strange  when  we  consider  the  remarks  which  immediately 
follow.  "It  would  appear  to  have  been  the  main  staple 
of  domestic  vocal  music  for  many  generations,  and  it  is 
certainly  creditable  to  the  taste  of  the  prosperous  classes 
that  a  branch  of  art  which  had  such  distinguished  qualities 
should  have  been  so  much  in  demand  ;  for  the  standard 
of  style,  notwithstanding  obvious  defects,  is  always  high." 
It  may  seem  ridiculous  at  the  present  day  to  maintain  that 
music  which  is  acknowledged  to  be  o-ood  is  therefore  sure 
to  be  popular  ;  but  we  must  remember  that  music  in  the 
seventeenth  century  occupied  a  different  position  to  that 
which  it  occupies  in  the  twentieth.  The  music  of  the 
people  in  seventeenth-century  Italy  is  practically  unknown 
to  us  ;  the  music  that  has  survived  has  been  preserved  in 
the  libraries  of  princes  and  nobles,  or  in  those  of  churches. 
Students  of  seventeenth-century  Italian  music  know  how 
rare  it  is  to  find  more  than  a  single  manuscript  copy  of 
any  given  composition  ;  and  we  may  safely  assume  that 
the  chamber-cantata  was  cultivated  only  by  those  who  were 
ready  to  bring  serious  enthusiasm  to  bear  on  any  music 
that  they  could  get.  That  the  cantata  a  voce  sola  should 
have  been  the  favourite  musical  form  is  by  no  means 
strange.  To  understand  the  music  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  we  must  bear  in  mind,  above  all  things,  that  the 
supreme  executive  artist  of  the  time  was  the  singer.  Not 
only  was  the  technique  of  vocalization  by  far  the  most 
advanced,  but  a  very  much  higher  intellectual  standard 
was  expected  and  attained  than  modern  composers  even 
hope  for.  Justly  indignant  if  a  singer  presume  to  embellish 
Wagner  or  Brahms  with  extemporary  graces,  we  find  it 
inconceivable  that  Scarlatti  and  his  contemporaries  should 
have  expected  such  additions  as  a  matter  of  course ;  and 
we  can  hardly  realize  that  in  elaborating  his  written  melodies 
in  performance  with  such  exquisite  ornaments  as  Geminiani 
records,  Corelli  was  only  following  the  example  of  the 
great  singers  of  his  generation.     Before  Corelli  and   his 


EARLY   YEARS  ii 

school  had  shown  that  from  a  purely  musical  point  of  view 
the  violin  could  do  as  much  as  the  voice  and  a  good  deal 
more,  there  could  have  been  no  instrumental  competition 
against  the  singers.  The  cembalo  had  no  sustaining  power; 
the  large  organ,  besides  being  unwieldy,  was  confined  to 
the  churches,  and  the  resources  of  the  small  regals  and 
organi  di  legno  were  very  limited  ;  of  wind  instruments  the 
trumpet  alone  had  an  advanced  technique,  but  its  imperfect 
scale  necessarily  caused  it  to  take  a  subordinate  position. 
The  voice  was  the  only  instrument  for  which  chamber- 
music  of  a  really  advanced  type  could  be  written  ;  it  was  the 
only  instrument  which  combined  a  finished  technique  with 
the  greatest  variety  of  beautiful  tone-colour,  and  which  in 
the  majority  of  cases  was  governed  by  minds  of  a  high 
order  of  intelligence.  Besides,  the  spirit  of  the  Renais- 
sance had  not  yet  died  out,  and  the  ancient  Greek  principle, 
that  the  function  of  music  is  to  express  the  words  of  a  poet, 
was  still  fresh  in  the  minds  of  composers. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  need  not  surprise  us  to 
find  that  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  the 
chamber-cantata  was  at  the  climax  of  its  excellence  and 
popularity  among  serious  lovers  of  music  in  Italy  ;  indeed, 
it  is  to  the  seventeenth  century  what  the  violin-sonata 
is  to  the  nineteenth.  Alessandro  Scarlatti  is  at  once  its 
greatest  and  its  most  fertile  exponent.  His  extant  can- 
tatas number  over  five  hundred,  and  every  phase  of  his 
artistic  development  is  reflected  in  them.  They  are  of 
very  special  importance,  because  they  always  represent 
the  composer  in  earnest.  Some  are  dull,  but  not  one 
is  trivial  or  vulgar  ;  many  are  of  great  beauty,  and  the 
majority  of  them  are  deeply  interesting  as  studies  in 
composition. 

The  earliest  dated  cantata  belongs  to  1688,  but  there 
are  many  which  are  undoubtedly  some  ten  or  twelve  years 
earlier.  At  this  time  the  cantata  had  not  received  a 
sharply  defined  form.  It  was  originally  narrative  ;  Vin- 
cenzo  Galilei's  setting  of  the  story  of  Conte  Ugolino  is 
the    first    example    of   the    style,    although    according    to 


12  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

Burney  the  term  cantata  was  first  used  by  Benedetto 
Ferrari  in  1638.  But  the  lyrical  element  very  soon  came 
in,  and  by  Scarlatti's  time  it  was  the  more  important  part 
of  the  composition.  Still  there  is  nearly  always  a  pretence 
at  a  narrative,  or  else  the  poem  takes  the  form  of  a  dramatic 
monologue  put  into  the  mouth  of  some  classical  personage. 
Some  of  Scarlatti's  early  cantatas,  such  as  "II  Germanico  " 
("  Gia  ditrionfi  onusto  ")  and  "  II  Coriolano  "  ("  La  for  tuna 
di  Roma  "),  are  little  more  than  lectures  on  Roman  history 
set  to  recitative  with  an  occasional  aria.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  get  a  few  in  which  four  or  five  arias  or  ariosi 
succeed  each  other  directly,  with  only  a  short  recitative 
at  the  beginning  or  end.  This  irregularity  of  form  is  one 
of  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  Scarlatti's  early 
cantatas:  by  about  1690,  or  even  earlier,  he  had  adopted 
a  regular  alternation  of  recitative  and  formal  aria  from 
which  he  very  rarely  diverged.  To  this  early  period 
also  belong  airs  in  binary  forms,  airs  on  a  ground  bass, 
and  all  airs,  in  whatever  form,  that  have  two  stanzas  ;  and 
there  are  other  characteristics  of  the  early  style  that  are 
easily  recognized. 

The  cantata  '■'  Angellin  sospendi  i  vanni"  is  a  good 
specimen  of  this  period.  It  opens  with  a  little  air  of  two 
stanzas  in  f  time  in  C  minor  ;  this  modulates  first  to  G 
minor,  then  by  a  sequence  to  B  flat  major  and  B  flat  minor, 
and  returns  to  C  minor  by  a  repetition  of  the  two  previous 
phrases  in  G  minor  and  C  minor  respectively,  ending  with 
a  codetta.  The  melody  is  decidedly  awkward  and  angular, 
with  frequent  imitations  between  the  voice  and  the  bass. 
The  recitative  which  follows  soon  drops  into  an  arioso 
in  f  time,  and  here  the  struggle  with  technical  difiiculties 
is  very  obvious.  The  composer  is  unable  to  get  a  clear 
idea  of  a  key,  and  hovers  undecidedly  between  tonic  and 
dominant,  repeating  his  stiff  little  phrase  first  in  C  minor 
and  G  minor,  then  in  G  minor  and  D  minor,  and  finally 
returning  to  C  minor  only  to  end  at  once  in  G  minor. 
Next  comes  what  he  definitely  marks  as  '■'aria'' — two 
stanzas  in  C  minor  on  a  ground  bass.     Another  recitative 


EARLY   YEARS  13 

follows,  again  dropping  into  arioso  with  the  same  sort  of 
angular  imitations,  this  time  dividing  the  key  between 
tonic  and  subdominant.  After  this  the  first  aria,  '' Augellift 
sospeiidi"  is  repeated  :  then,  after  a  recitative,  comes  an- 
other "  aj^ia  "  of  two  stanzas  in  B  flat  in  a  still  more  curious 
form.  It  begins  with  a  short  section  in  common  time, 
evolved  bar  by  bar  with  some  difficulty,  which  runs  on 
into  a  longer  section  in  f ;  the  first  part  of  this  is  on  a 
ground  bass,  ending  in  the  dominant,  after  which  the 
figure  is  abandoned,  and  a  new  one,  more  freely  treated, 
takes  its  place.  Finally,  after  a  recitative  leading  to 
another  awkward  arioso,  the  first  air  is  again  repeated, 
and  the  cantata  ends  with  a  little  contrapuntal  ritornello 
for  two  violins  and  bass.^ 

Scarlatti's  want  of  fluency  in  the  early  cantatas  is 
very  curious,  the  more  so  since  in  his  later  works  his 
supply  of  melody  is  inexhaustible.  It  must,  of  course, 
be  remembered  that  at  this  time  the  vocabulary  of  monodic 
music  was  very  limited.  It  was  left  for  Scarlatti  himself  to 
invent  many  of  those  conventional  turns  of  phrase  which 
became  the  common  property  of  later  composers.  The 
ground  bass  was  no  doubt  considered  a  valuable  aid 
to  composition.  The  history  of  the  form  is  more  complex 
than  is  generally  imagined.  As  used  by  the  seventeenth 
century  Italians  in  vocal  music  it  has  very  little  in  common 
with  the  ckaconnes  and  passecailles  of  Bach  and  Handel. 
Probably  the  instrumental  movements  of  Monteverdi,  built 
up  on  sequentially  recurring  figures,'"^  are  the  real  ancestors 
of  the  ground  basses  of  Legrenzi  and  Scarlatti.  The 
chaconne  is  simply  a  set  of  variations,  each  clearly  defined, 
though  forming  a  continuous  movement ;  Legrenzi  and 
Scarlatti,  on  the  other  hand,  often  conceal  the  symmetry 
of    their    foundations    by    arranging    their    superstructure 

^  In  the  autograph  at  Berhn  the  ritornello  has  been  sketched  first  for  two 
viohns,  viola  and  bass.  No  other  manuscript  has  this  movement,  and  the 
vioHns  are  not  employed  at  all  before. 

^  For  a  full  analysis  of  these  see  "Z^zV  Instrumerttalstiicke  des  Orfeo,"  by 
Dr.  Alfred  Heuss  {^Sannnelband  der  Inteniationalen  Miisikgesellschaft,  Jahr- 
gang  iv.  2). 


14 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


on    different    rhythmical   principles.       It   is    obvious    that 
such  basses  as  these — 


Ex  I. 


Cantata,  '■''  Atigellin  sospendi  i  vajint." 


Allegro. 


Cantata,  "  Augellm  sospendi  i  vanni." 


Ex. 


'•  L'Ho;iesta  negli  Amori"  (1680). 

X- 


=g-^-^-^ 


^=i=x 


"Agar  et  Ismaele  esiliati"  (1683), 


Ex.  5.     Largo. 


Agar  et  Ismaele  esiliati  "  (1683). 


tepi 


tEEj^i^g 


taken  from  early  works  of  Scarlatti,  could  not  be  treated 
in  the  spirit  of  a  chacomte,  still  less  so  when  the  bass 
is  seldom  repeated  more  than  twice  consecutively  in 
the  same  key.  Thus  the  bass  in  Ex.  i  is  given  out 
four  times  in  the  tonic,  twice  in  the  dominant,  twice  in 
the  relative  major,  and  finally  three  times  in  the  tonic. 
The  first  statement  of  it  is  introductory,  the  third  is 
due  to  the  habitual  repetition  of  the  first  vocal  phrase, 
and  the  last  forms  a  coda.  The  treatment  of  Ex.  3  is 
more  elaborate.  After  a  single  introductory  statement 
by  the  contimw  alone,  the  bass  is  given  out  twice  in 
the  tonic  and  twice  in  the  dominant ;  two  entries  in  the 
relative  major  form  a  strongly  contrasting  second  section, 


EARLY    YEARS 


15 


after  which  it  is  heard  not  twice  but  eight  times  in  the 
tonic,  the  first  four  corresponding  to  the  four  entries 
in  tonic  and  dominant,  the  next  two  forming  a  vocal 
coda  and  the  last  two  a  ritornello  for  the  strings.  The 
scheme  may  be  represented  shortly  thus — 

B.  Introduction, 

B  B  Ftf  Fft.  First  section  ending  in  dominant, 

D  D.  Contrasting  second  section. 

B  B  B  B.    First  section  ending  in  tonic. 

B  B.  Vocal  coda. 

B  B.   Instrumental  ritornello. 

That  by  itself,  disregarding  the  voice  part,  is  a  very 
neat  piece  of  ternary  form  on  a  small  scale,  and  it  is 
clear  that  both  these  examples  are  akin  not  so  much 
to  the  variation  type  as  to  Monteverdi's  instrumental 
movements,  of  which  the  following  bass 


Ex.6. 


m^E^^E^E^^E^ 


p=tz: 


:^ 


:& 


Monteverdi,  "  Orfeo." 


=l^= 


:=± 


^^ 


^P^=3^3=ES 


-^^ 


:=1: 


shows  clearly  the  typical  structure.  It  will  be  noted 
too  that  the  basses  quoted  have  a  very  distinctive 
individuality  ;  indeed  Ex,  5  is  derived  directly  from  the 
initial  vocal  phrase — "  Chi  non  -sa  cJie  sia  dolore.''  This 
feature  of  Scarlatti's  early  work  is  noteworthy,  because 
it  helps  to  explain  the  origin  of  what  is  the  most  important' 
factor  in  all  modern  music,  from  Scarlatti  to  the  present 
day,  namely,  thematic  development,  Scarlatti  seems  to 
have  discarded  the  ground  bass  soon  after  he  went  to 
Naples,  and  with  good  reason.  In  his  early  years,  when 
a  good  phrase  was  a  rarity  to  be  made  the  most  of, 
he  saw  that  more  could  be  done  with  it  by  placing  it 
in  the  bass  than  by  giving  it  to  the  voice  alone ;  but 
as  soon  as  he  acquired  a  greater  fluency  of  inspiration, 
the  ground  bass  became  a  hindrance  rather  than  a  help 


i6 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


to  composition.  Besides,  it  subordinated  the  voice  to 
the  instruments,  a  state  of  things  at  all  times  undesirable 
(being  detrimental  to  the  highest  effects,  both  musical 
and  dramatic),  and  especially  so  in  an  age  when  instru- 
mental technique  was  very  immature.  He  therefore 
abandoned  it  in  favour  of  thematic  development,  which 
is  exhibited  to  advantage  in  all  his  chamber-music,  and 
to  a  less  extent  in  his  work  for  the  stage. 

The  influence  of  Carissimi  and  Cavalli  is  apparent 
in  his  early  recitative  and  also  in  his  contrapuntal  sense 
of  harmony.  If  his  arias  are  sometimes  awkward,  his 
recitative  is  generally  most  expressive  from  the  very 
outset,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  illustration,  from 
one  of  his  earliest  cantatas. 


Ex.  7. 


^ 


:ri^tT=^ 


Cantata,  "  Lagrinie  dolorose." 


-^~ 


La  -  o^rime       do 


lo  -  ro-se,    dagl'oc-chi 


IfiB! 


:s2: 


122: 


122: 


-p- a-    M 

-W- 

— M — Si— ha — 1*— 

~^=Si^ 

— # ^ 

-^-^*-*-^^ 

-   7-i* — ^-^Tfi 1 1 

4Hr-3       ^           ij^— ^-        1 

-r  1  ^^  j — 

t^=^ 

1  F— r— ^-^£^^-M 

miei     ve  -  ni  - 

te, 

ve  -  ni  ■ 

te,   ve 

-    ni  -  te, 

con  dop-pio 

/a\«    0f                                                                                 1 

1 

(rv.  If      /n 

vr>  ^                       ^ 

^ 

■^             (-J 

fiumead  in-on-dar 


mi  il    se-no, 


i 


m 


His  colorahwa  is  for  the  most  part  restrained,  thoroughly 
vocal  and  in  good  taste.  He  never  commits  such  extra- 
vagances as  are  found  in  the  cantatas  of  Stradella,   who 


EARLY    YEARS 


17 


often  gives  the  voice  figures  obviously  derived  from  the 
cembalo,  such  as  this  from  "  L'Ariana  " — 


Ex.  8. 


-I i — 

E  sog 


Stradella,  "  L'Ariana." 
0- -^ 


get 


ta  al         mio  fu 


::T 


?^^^=t=^ 


^^^^ 


^?=?E 


-^S^i 


^I=?q= 


■m   ^  J     1-^ — ^^" 


I-* — I— d — I — ^ 


§ 


:q- 


*-*-W 


=1=1^: 


=i=^ii 


-l^s**- 


-.=I=W- 


.-^ — ,^^^ 


fj 


-bbzb 


pJip_f:^g^-^^^2^ 


?.-iia-^:^pEFa:Si*"*--^->£^:?Sl 


r^^^ 


p;*-?^:^ 


bbti 


Scarlatti  shows  a  very  keen  sense  of  harmony  as  a 
means  to  dramatic  expression,  and  it  is  interesting  to  watch 
the  development  of  this  sense  in  his  later  work.  The 
feeling  for  harmonic  expression  remains,  but  the  methods 
employed  undergo  a  considerable  modification.  In  his 
early  work  he  still  adopts  the  attitude  of  his  predeces- 
sors, whose  harmonic  combinations  resulted  from  the  con- 
trapuntal  movement    of  parts.      Another    example   from 

B 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Stradella  will  show  a  progression  which  was  now  common 
property  : — 

Ex.  9. 


:p=r 


W==-W~- 


3=:t^=^— ^=^=t^: 


m 


Se    dol-cee'l  suo    Ian  -  gui  -  re, 

iij-  -^-  J-  -^-  li. 


:^: 


:^ 


se       vi  -  ta  e'l    suo     mo  - 

ti -ei 


ii^n^zzb: 


P=^^=!*- 


■^=t=3=k 


:^c^ 


£S 


±1; 


si,      si,         ch'io  sem  -  pre  sof    -   fri  -  ro. 


ri  -  re,       si,      si, 

-^— r— 1::^-"— r-f — F       i-g 


4    # 

Scarlatti  uses  it  at  first  like  every  one  else,  and  some- 
times goes  a  good  deal  farther  in  the  same  direction.  The 
early  motet  for  two  sopranos,  "  Vexilla  Regis,''  has  a 
characteristic  example : — 


Ex.  10. 


ful 


jet        cru 


ifcitz: 


f^?=r^r=f: 


Vex-il-la,        vex  -  il -la  Re-gis  pro-de-unt,  ful-get    cru-cis,cru- 


S^: 


:22: 


P:z^; 


:^=i^: 


5 


1 


ful   -   cret 


6 

#4 


CIS  mys  -  te 


W 


:^ 


=^^^ 


-I h 

cis,    ful-get  cru-cis  mys-te 


=t: 


^*:i^==^: 


i^:^ 


^ 


:^s=f^ 


-?= 


--=^: 


6       5      # 
4       4  3 


«6 


6      6       6 
4 


and  it  appears  in  an  even  more  curious  form  in  the  cantata 


EARLY   YEARS 


19 


''  Lagrime  dolorose,'"  the  second  time  rendered  additionally 
harsh  by  inversion  of  the  parts. 


Ex.  II. 


1 

Tivo 

#  rs—^ — w  w)  ^  ^  d-^ 

-^ — 1^   d    S-^-^^~J- 

-c:^ — ■ 

Violiiis. 

^_l^r_^ 

m             ^            ^ 

^                  •   ^    ^   ^   ^   ^      p      1           r    ^   --*. 

1 

\     -r                       ^          ,    rj 

Cofitiniio. 

&'r  J  1 — ^    r — 

— 1— — M! 

— -^^ — ■ 

^^_i^__^ j — 1 — 

1                            { 

CJ 

Ex.  I. 


: i I       I    L-2i   III     t? 


:^: 


-£3- 


These  asperities  are  for  the  most  part  confined  to  the 
chamber-cantatas.  In  opera  they  were  not  appropriate, 
and  since  opera  was  for  the  next  twenty  years  the  field  in 
which  Scarlatti  did  most  work,  they  soon  disappear  from 
his  music  entirely.  They  are,  however,  not  without  their 
interest.  It  is  in  connection  with  them  and  with  the 
recitatives  that  we  must  consider  the  early  ariosi, 
which  often  present  harmonic  treatment  of  great  dramatic 
value.  The  arioso  is  most  frequent  in  the  early  cantatas. 
In  the  very  earliest  it  is  singularly  awkward,  but  the 
composer  soon  finds  a  surer  footing,  and  the  next  few 
years  bring  us  many  beautiful  specimens,  such  as  the 
following : — 


Ex.  13. 


P=P=*=^ 


^^m 


-p-^^ 


v2=^t=^i^ 


-r-r^r-\ii=^\^~^ 


Co -si,      mentrebra-ma-i     dis-ciorquel-le  ca  -  te-ne      in  cui  men 


*== 


I 


20 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


:|?=1- 


=1- 


:p=^ 


N->^ 


5-^E^ 


Largo. 


^*g^ffl 


vi-vo,    vuo-le    rem-piamiasor-te  Che      ri  -  novi    il        na    - 


'i^v.it- 


P^ff 


■#^=^- 


:^ 


3: 


1==R 


A- 


it6 


:^=g^# 


t^=:s: 


--5;?= 


:s2: 


122: 


-^-S^- 


=?2: 


-I — r 


:?2=i=p:: 


It:: 


tal 


^4=^=1 


4p: 


del 


::^:.z'|^;ri?:^-t^ 


:g: 


fa      mia     mor 


:?2: 


r:^ 


•^— ^-^-Sf^-rs: 


i^^§i|il»^ 


-^-— 


m 


te, 


Che  ri 


)|:gj:tTf^    p    r^ 


-4g-A^-£- 


qq:f^2=« 


^^-r-p^f-^5tf^r,-,- 


:^ 


1 r-1--pfg^|::g£^=g:: 


S 


LfelEEfSi? 


32: 


rrzL 


1^=^ 


i^=^=^i: 


i^p 


no  -  vi  il    Na    -    tal 


del 


la    mia  mor 


2^ 


1^ 


r-  r  n^  ^ 


^- 


:?2=tr?2:g^: 


I       rJ- 


?^^: 


322: 


T^-p- 


l?S=^=^ 


?2: 


e 


122: 


te, 


del 


:s^: 


la  mia 


-7^H^^^^- 


3± 


jj^fe'jg^^ 


mor 


<s?  •■ 


S 


te. 


1C5: 


;»^ 


1^  ^J  I  g)  H*-  ^^  J  I  ^  ^zqg^p:^ 


EARLY   YEARS  21 

This  example  illustrates  several  characteristics  :  the 
broad  sweeping  line  of  the  melody,  the  co-ordinate  arrange- 
ment of  phrases,  as  well  as  the  keen  sense  of  contrast 
between  the  major  and  minor  modes.  That  eternal  diffi- 
culty of  the  student  of  musical  aesthetics,  the  melancholy 
effect  of  the  minor  mode,  will  probably  have  some  light 
thrown  upon  it  when  it  is  investigated  from  a  historical 
point  of  view.  Scarlatti  affords  important  material  for 
such  investigation,  being  probably  the  first  composer  who 
sharply  defined  the  emotional  difference  which  all  later 
composers  have  almost  invariably  adopted. 

It  is  these  ariosi,  more  than  the  arias  themselves,  which 
foreshadow  the  style  of  Scarlatti's  maturity.  The  arias  in 
the  early  cantatas  are  for  the  most  part  long  and  strag- 
gling, and  in  curious  forms,  which,  like  the  ground  bass, 
he  abandoned  later.  Although  ternary  form  is  as  old  as 
Monteverdi,  it  was  a  long  time  before  composers  realized 
the  subtler  applications  of  its  principle.  In  the  cantatas 
of  Luigi  Rossi,  Carissimi,  Stradella,  and  Scarlatti  we  may 
find  the  separate  movements  arranged  in  the  scheme  of 
a  rondo,  either  obviously,  as  in  Scarlatti's  ''  Augellin 
sospeiidi  i  vanni,''  or  disguised,  as  is  often  the  case  with 
Rossi,  by  the  recurrence,  not  of  the  same  movement,  but 
of  a  movement  of  the  same  character,  an  exact  parallel  in 
key  and  time,  sometimes  even  built  upon  an  identical  bass. 
Scarlatti's  motet,  "  Vexilla  Regis,''  furnishes  a  specimen 
of  this.  But  within  a  single  movement  the  alternation  of 
subjects  is  rare.  There  are  comparatively  few  airs  which 
conform  even  to  the  simplest  ternary  type  (ABA);  those 
that  are  more  organized  are  in  binary  forms,  in  which 
different  subjects  may  be  sharply  defined,  but  do  not 
alternate.  The  formula  AjB2Bj  is  a  convenient  repre- 
sentation of  the  type,  the  letters  representing  subjects 
and  the  figures  keys.  Variations,  such  as  A^A2B2B^  and 
AjBj^BjCgCj,  are  derived  from  the  first.  The  curious  thing 
is  that  the  types  A^BaAiB^  and  A^BaAgB^  are  conspicu- 
ously rare.  Probably  the  natural  desire  for  alternation 
was  felt  to  be  satisfied  by  the  immediate  repetition  of  the 


2  2  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

whole  scheme  sung  to  a  second  stanza  of  the  poetry.  This 
is  the  more  Hkely,  since  the  second  stanza  disappears  more 
or  less  simultaneously  with  the  air  in  binary  form.  Ternary 
form  also  admitted  of  greater  musical  expansion,  which 
would  have  been  too  long-winded  if  each  air  were  sung 
twice.  This  long-windedness  is  often  seen  in  Stradella, 
who  carries  repetition  of  phrase  to  excess,  and  rarely  uses 
ternary  forms. 

Scarlatti's  early  devotion  to  the  opera  is  undoubtedly 
an  important  factor  in  his  development.  The  chamber 
style,  as  has  been  shown,  admitted  and  even  encouraged 
a  certain  diffuseness,  but  the  necessity  of  stage  effect  forced 
him  to  be  concise,  and  to  pack  his  material  into  small  and 
clearly  organized  forms.  Moreover  the  large  number  of 
airs  required  for  a  single  opera  stimulated  his  invention, 
and  taught  him  to  economize  material.  We  shall  see  later 
that  it  also  led  him  to  write  a  great  deal  that  had  no 
permanent  value  ;  but  the  practice  and  facility  so  gained 
were  doubtless  of  great  importance  to  him,  and  also  to  his 
followers,  who  turned  his  musical  commonplaces  to  good 
account. 

Opera  was  being  carried  on  in  Rome  with  some  difficulty. 
The  first  Roman  opera-house  had  been  opened  in  1671, 
before  which  year  operas  had  been  given  frequently,  but 
only  in  private  houses.  This  theatre,  at  the  Tor  di  Nona, 
had  been  built  by  a  certain  Count  D'Alibert  before  1660, 
and  he  now  obtained  a  concession  from  Pope  Clement  X. 
that  whenever  musical  entertainments  were  allowed  to  be 
given,  open  to  the  public  on  payment,  they  were  to  take 
place  only  in  this  building.  The  count  was  a  Frenchman 
in  attendance  on  Queen  Christina  of  Sweden,  who  had 
made  Rome  her  residence  after  her  abdication  and  con- 
version to  the  Catholic  faith.  A  woman  of  strong  inde- 
pendent character,  thoroughly  religious,  yet  tolerating  no 
interference  even  from  the  Pope  himself,  she  was  a  liberal 
patron  of  literature  and  art,  and  her  original  personality 
exerted  its  influence  as  much  here  as  in  the  world  of 
politics.      Her  profession  of  Catholicism  at   Innsbruck  in 


EARLY   YEARS  23 

1655  was  celebrated  with  the  performance  of  an  opera  by 
Bernardo  Pasquini,  who  afterwards  became  her  Maestro 
di  Cappella,  and  when  In  Rome  she  was  an  enthusiastic 
supporter  of  the  musical  drama.  But  in  1676  Clement  X. 
was  succeeded  by  Innocent  XL,  who  immediately  began 
to  introduce  reforms  and  economies  of  all  kinds.  Of  his 
political  quarrels  with  the  queen  we  are  not  concerned 
here  ;  but  he  did  not  confine  his  innovations  to  politics. 
The  opera  was  the  object  of  his  special  aversion,  and  he 
issued  a  decree  absolutely  forbidding  all  public  perform- 
ances with  a  charge  for  admission.  He  even  tried  to 
suppress  private  and  gratuitous  performances,  by  forbidding 
those  who  had  sung  in  theatres  to  sing  in  churches,  and  by 
refusing  to  allow  women  to  appear  on  the  stage  at  all. 
The  decree,  however,  was  naturally  circumvented,  and 
things  appear  to  have  gone  on  much  the  same  as  before, 
except  that  the  female  parts  were  always  taken  by  casti'-ati. 
In  1677  this  came  to  the  queen's  ears,  and  with  character- 
istic impetuosity  she  sent  word  to  the  Pope  that  she  much 
regretted  having  allowed  Count  D'Alibert  to  make  use  of 
the  concession  granted  to  him  by  Clement  X.,  and  that  in 
future  she  should  feel  it  her  duty  to  burn  down  the  theatre 
if  operas  were  still  given  before  a  paying  public.  But  her 
severity  does  not  seem  to  have  lasted  long,  for  in  1678  she 
was  intercedinof  with  his  Holiness  for  Don  Benedetto 
Pamphili,  who  was  in  disgrace  for  having  secured  the 
services  of  the  Pope's  own  singers  for  a  performance  in 
which  they  appeared  in  female  costume.  To  any  one  who 
reads  the  libretti  of  these  operas,  Innocent  XI.  seems  to 
have  been  unnecessarily  prudish,  but  even  if  authors  and 
actors  were  blameless  the  audiences  certainly  were  not.^ 

Scarlatti's  first  known  opera,  "  L'Errore  Innocente 
ovvero  Gli  Equivoci  nel  Sembiante,"  was  produced 
privately  at  the  Collegio  Clementine  on  February  8,  1679. 
The  libretto  was  by  the  Abbe  Contini — ''  im  tale  architetto 

^  See  the  Avvisi  di  Roma  quoted  by  Ademollo  (/  Teatri  di  Roma  nel  Secolo 
XVII.),  and  the  same  writer's  articles  in  HOpinione,  Rome,  January  1882. 
Casanova's  memoirs  also  throw  a  curious  light  on  the  s-ubject. 


24  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

Contini^'  as  he  is  called  in  the  Avvisi  di  Roma.  The 
young  composer  was  evidently  in  high  favour  with  Chris- 
tina, judging  from  the  Avvisi.  "Her  Majesty,  who  was 
so  much  pleased  on  Sunday  by  Contini's  comedy,  that  she 
desired  to  hear  it  at  the  Collegio  Clementino,  desired  to 
hear  it  these  last  two  evenings  also  ;  and  since  the  Pope's 
Swiss  guard,  who  were  keeping  the  door  from  the  tumult 
of  the  people,  would  not  admit  the  lackeys  of  Cardinal 
Colonna,  who  was  in  attendance  on  her  Majesty,  his 
Eminence  ordered  them  to  enter,  which  they  did,  with 
many  blows  to  the  Swiss  guard.  It  is  commonly  known 
that  the  composer  of  the  music  of  the  said  comedy,  a 
Sicilian,  is  in  very  bad  odour  with  the  Court  of  the  Vicar 
on  account  of  the  secret  marriaQ^e  of  his  sister  with  an 
ecclesiastic.  But  the  Queen  sent  one  of  her  own  carriages 
to  fetch  him,  that  he  might  play  in  the  orchestra,  even 
when  the  Cardinal  Vicar  was  himself  in  attendance  on  her 
Majesty." 

"  Gli  Equivoci  nel  Sembiante  "  is  on  quite  a  small  scale, 
as  was  suitable  to  a  private  performance.  It  is  a  very 
innocent  little  drama,  containing  four  characters  only. 
Clori  is  in  love  with  Eurillo  and  Eiirillo  with  Clo7'i ;  but 
the  unexpected  arrival  of  Armindo,  Etirillds  exact 
"double,"  produces  confusion,  further  complicated  by  the 
jealousy  of  Lisetta,  and  it  is  only  after  three  acts  of  sighs 
and  recriminations  that  matters  are  cleared  up.  There  is 
not  much  scope  for  variety,  though  the  distribution  of 
voices  (two  sopranos  and  two  tenors)  was  decidedly  un- 
usual at  a  time  when  the  castrato  reigned  supreme  ;  but 
Scarlatti  at  least  provided  a  good  many  pretty  little  airs, 
and  even  attempted  character-drawing  to  an  extent  which 
he  himself  seldom  equalled  for  some  time  afterwards. 
Clori  and  Lisetta  are  as  distinct  as  Agatlie  and  Aennchen 
in  "  Der  Freischtitz  "  ;  indeed  Clori  is  an  even  more  insipid 
ingenue  than  the  heroine  of  Kind's  drama,  and  Lisetta  can 
only  be  described  as  a  spiteful  little  cat. 

The  airs   are   never  very  remarkable,   though    always 
pleasant.     One  recognizes  the  individual  Scarlatti  style  at 


EARLY   YEARS  25 

once,  especially  in  melodies  of  a  curious  half  pathetic,  half 
playful  type,  which  for  a  long  time  remained  very  charac- 
teristic of  him.  Perhaps  the  contemporary  hearer  did  not 
feel  them  to  be  as  pathetic  as  we  do,  for  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  the  prevalence  of  minor  keys  in  the  music  of 
this  time  was  the  result  of  modal  survivals  rather  than  of 
melancholy  temperaments.  The  best  numbers  are  the 
little  duet  in  Act  I.,  ''St,  si,  ti  voglio  amar,''  which  com- 
bines clever  characterization  with  great  neatness  of  form  ; 
Eurillds  air,  "  Se  ho  d'amar','  a  pleasing  example  of  the 
typical  Scarlatti  style,  as  is  also  the  air  for  Armindo,  "  Cara 
semplicita'  in  Act  III.,  and  Clori's  beautiful  melody, 
''  Dor  mi  pur  e  sogni  intanto.^''  The  third  act  has  also  an 
air  for  Clori,  "  Vaghi  rivi,''  which  although  binary  and  in 
two  stanzas  has  florid  coloratura  and  elaborate  string  parts 
that  seem  to  forecast  the  style  of  the  next  century. 

"Gli  Equivoci  "  was  followed  in  1680  by  "  L'Honesta 
negli  Amori."  The  opera  is  interesting  from  the  glimpse 
which  it  gives  of  the  composer's  personality.  The  libretto 
of  "  Gli  Equivoci,"  like  many  libretti  of  Scarlatti's  operas, 
makes  no  mention  whatever  of  the  composer  of  the  music  ; 
that  of  "  L'Honesta  "  is,  however,  unusually  full  of  informa- 
tion. The  Avviso  al  Lettore  informs  us  that  "the  music 
is  the  composition  of  Signor  Alessandro  Scarlatti,  called 
the  Sicilian,  Maestro  di  Cappella  to  the  Queen  of  Sweden, 
a  virtuoso  who  at  other  times  has  deserved  your  applause, 
and  for  whose  praise  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  in  the 
springtime  of  his  years  he  has  begun  where  many  of  his 
profession  would  be  proud  to  end."  ^ 

But  there  is  a  more  curious  allusion  to  Scarlatti  in  the 
opera  itself  In  the  third  act  there  is  a  scene  for  the  two 
comic  characters,  Banicco,  an  old  servant,  and  Saldino^  a 
page,  in  which  they  comment  on  the  events  of  the  preced- 
ing scenes,  Bacucco  saying  that  it  is  a  tragedy  rather  than  a 

^  "Za  compositione  della  Musica  e  del  Sig.  Alessandro  Scarlatti,  detto  it 
Siciliano,  Maestro  di  Cappella  della  Regina  di  Svetia,  Virtuoso,  che  altre  volte 
ha  meritato  i  tuoi  applaiisi,  per  lode  del  quale  bastera  il  dire,  che  nella  Prima- 
vera  della  sua  eta  ha  cotuinciato,  dove  molti  della  sua  professione  si pregiareb- 
bero  diJinireP 


26  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

comedy  that  they  are  acting.  Saldino  takes  up  the  word 
comedia,  and  adds  "  'tis  a  Sicilian  has  set  it  to  music "  ; 
Bactuco  continues — 

"  Ah  yes,  'tis  that  young  fellow — softly  now — 
This  is  the  same  that  wrote  a  year  ago 
That  opera  which  is  going  everywhere. 
The  songs  are  charming,  new,  of  sundry  kinds  ; 
They  tell  me  he  has  brought 
From  the  far  end  of  Christendom  itself 
A  whole  sack  full  of  airs."  ^ 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  "  Gli  Equivoci"  was  regarded 
as  a  great  success,  and  that  the  composer  was  a  very 
young  man,  the  evidence  of  the  tombstone  as  to  the  year 
of  his  birth  being  thus  corroborated.  It  also  seems  to 
imply  that  "Gli  Equivoci"  was  his  first  opera,  and  indeed 
the  first  work  of  his  to  bring  him  into  public  notice. 

"  L'Honesta "  is  a  good  deal  stronger  than  "  Gli 
Equivoci."  It  is  on  a  larger  scale,  being  of  the  type 
described  as  opet^a  semi-sei^ia.  It  has  several  airs  on  a 
ground  bass,  the  best  of  which  is  Blisds  "■  lo  per  gioco  vi 
mirai,^'  analysed  earlier  in  this  chapter  (Ex,  3),  and  an- 
other very  interesting  air  in  a  form  derived  from  the  ground 
bass — ''  Scogli  vol  die  vindtirater  It  is  accompanied  by 
the  strings  in  five  real  parts  from  beginning  to  end  except  for 
a  single  bar's  rest — a  most  unusual  style  of  treatment.    The 

gloomy  opening  phrase  (see  Ex. 

14  opposite)  is  repeated  at  once 

^--  j  =:^T=:^H -:^zqzizH  in  the  relative  major,  but  with 
^  '^'  a  different  bass  figure  (Ex.  15) 
and  modified  so  as  to  end  in  C  sharp  minor.     The  cadence 

1  "  Saldino.  E  in  musica  I'ha  posta  un  Siciliano. 

Baaicco.  Ah  si,  quel  Giovinolto  ;  oh  piano,  piano, 
Questo  e  quel,  che  compose  un  anno  fa 
Queir  opera  che  tanto  intorno  va. 
Son  le  canzone  belle,  nove  e  varie  ; 
Mi  dicon,  che  ha  portato 
Sin  dal  confin  della  Christianitci 
Un  sacco  pieno  d'  Arie." 

Scarlatti  omitted  these  lines  in  setting  the  libretto  to  music. 


EARLY   YEARS 


27 


I 


Ex.  14. 


i; 


:i^=ai: 


Sfrznes. 

^-« I 1 ^— d- 


=1^=^^* m - 

3:    |3:      5      f 


:g=|a=*=^ 


:?E=t 


^=4= 


#6 


-J J--, 


ROSMIRA 

n         (Contralto) 


'^ 


^-- 


r^ 


•  '    tf/ — ^ 


3tl^ 


g 


te. 


air 


\ 


-'^W 


-^^ 


>^ 


w 


vi^^ 


'i^^^^ 


-3ZL 


"^=r 


A 


-^m-- 


t^ 


-f^-^ 


^ 


-^^ 


CJ    . 


:^c=5==^ 


n^ 


rr 


^^^^^p^^^ 


2:^=t 


Ss* 


-    tar. 


d'on 


de  fre  -  men  -  ti, 


^fcd 


=q= 


M 


:?2: 


:p^ 


2i=iist 


^ff=^^^ 


=tf 


:?^ 


28 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


is  no  sooner  made  than  the  music  modulates  at  once  to  D 
major,  with  a  repetition  of  the  same  vocal  subject  on  the  new 
bass  figure,  ending  in  F  sharp  minor,  the  tonic.  Here  a  new 
subject  appears,  more  or  less  derived  from  the  first,  modu- 
lating strangely  to  E  minor  ;  and  it  is  immediately  repeated 
a  tone  lower,  to  end  in  the  tonic  by  an  audacious  change 
of  key.  The  litde  coda  finishes  the  movement  neatly. 
The  construction  of  this  last  section  presents  an  interest- 
ing parallel  to  the  opening  of  Brahms'  violin  sonata  in 
A  major,  where  an  analogous  device  is  used. 

Ex.  i6. 


-z^         ^-Jdzig^ 


^-- 


:W=i 


^- 


ta. 


per     -    der    la 


ta 


T  r  r  r  T  r  r  r 


x=x 


'W  '9- 


b-»-*H+* 


-^- 


£^ 


iftJ^ 


^^E^^^. 


e     non   po  -  ter,. 


e     non  po  -  ter  mo-  n 


E 


— — 1_^ — 1 — — ^-p_i — I — ^— 1-, 


:^ 


^^ \—^ ^— ^— J 1 ^-^-r-* — . '- 


I     I 


^6 


:»=^ 


::st 


Per  -  der  la     vi    -   ta 


m 


n=^- 


e= 


e  non  po- 


5: 


'      ,  I    '    i   I   I   '     I    I    1 1 
,1      I  J     I     I    J    I    I    i     I  JiJ- 


11,1     I  J    I    I  J   I   I   i    I  Ji*- V 


EARLY   YEARS 


29 


Apart  from  the  tragic  feeling  of  the  song  and  its 
strange  sense  of  oppression,  of  groping  in  darkness,  the 
structure  is  very  noteworthy.  In  regular  ternary  forms 
Scarlatti  is  almost  always  sure  of  his  key  at  this  time  ;  but 
in  his  airs  on  a  ground  he  modulates  on  different  principles 
and  covers  a  wider  area.  Here,  working  on  the  lines  of 
a  ground  but  not  observing  it  strictly,  he  seems  to  have 
lost  his  way  and  only  extricated  himself  by  sudden  modula- 
tions, as  beautiful  as  they  were  unexpected. 

Of  Scarlatti's  characteristic  charm  and  delicacy  of  treat- 
ment no  better  example  could  be  given  than  the  little  duet, 
"  Dite  amanti^^  perfect  in  finish,  with  a  wistful  expression 
that  culminates  just  before  the  Da  Capo  in  the  following 
beautiful  phrase : — 

Ex.  17. 


-r=r=^ 

^     -^ 

^f-r  ^f-^- 

— ^- 

^£E_P_-^ 

6^        t^        ^ 

^    k- 

i^  ^  ^  ^  r 

— 6^- 

—^ — 

Elisa.     S'e 

tor-  men  -to 

per  -  che 

1 
pia  -  ce,   s'^  pia  -  car, 

s'e 

pia  - 

^.--n ■ 

^w 1 

^ 

1 ^--           1 

fe-^-t^ 1 

IN 1 

~i f r~~ 

_-►_ 

— 77-d 

^  • 

-J *-= 

*' 

1 1 \ \ ' 

30 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


cer  per-che  tor-  men 


ta 


r^-t^= 


v^rr-nJ 


:^=Uri: 


Di-te  a-  man  -ti 


c^^T 


-    r 

Ali  (Tenor.)     Ui-te  a-man  -  ti 


:=1" 


^^^: 


:i^ 


^iH -^ ' _ 

"  Pompeo  "  (1683)  was  probably  Scarlatti's  first  attempt 
at  opera  seria.  It  contains  a  few  good  airs,  but  on  the 
whole  it  is  stiff  and  tedious.  Arioso  is  for  the  most  part 
avoided,  though  it  would  have  relieved  the  monotony  of 
the  recitative,  the  composer  not  yet  having  developed 
that  fine  declamatory  style  which  served  as  a  model  to 
all  succeeding  generations.  The  libretto  is  poor.  The 
librettists  of  this  period  are,  as  a  rule,  either  ignored  or 
ridiculed  by  modern  critics,  and  their  contemporaries  speak 
little  better  of  them.  Quadrio,^  although  he  devotes  con- 
siderable space  to  them,  and  finds  some  worthy  of  high 
praise,  begins  his  chapter  with  a  good  description  of  their 
style  : — 

"  He  who  would  justly  describe  what  a  Musical  Drama 
is,  should  say  that  it  is  a  strange  work  made  up  of  Poetry 
and  Music,  in  which  the  Poet  and  the  Composer,  each 
alternately  the  slave  of  the  other,  wear  out  their  brains  to 
make  a  bad  Opera ;  but  in  which  the  superior  is  servant  to 
the  inferior,  and  in  which  the  Poet  occupies  the  position  of 
a  Fiddler  that  plays  for  Dancing.  ,  .  .  Wherefore  truly 
never  did  Poetry  give  her  name  to  absurdities  more 
ridiculous  or  more  unendurable  than  these  ;  nor  could  any 
person  of  sense  tolerate  their  improprieties,  if  he  were  not 
enchanted  by  the  Musicians,  the  proof  of  which  is  suffi- 
ciently seen  in  the  fact  that  in  most  cases  the  recollection 
of  such  compositions  perishes  with  their  sound." 

Nevertheless  some  of  the  libretti  were  at  least  adequate 
for  their  purpose,  either  in  the  pastoral  or  the  heroic  style. 
"  Pompeo "  aims  at  the  heroic  ;  but  in  the  second  act  it 
lapses  into  a  stupid  intrigue  of  mistaken   identity  in  the 

^  Delia  Storia  e  della  Ragione  cP  ogni  Poesia,  vol.  iii.  p.  434. 


EARLY    YEARS  31 

dark,  which  is  not  even  amusing  as  farce.  The  best  move- 
ments are  Ses/os  charming  airs,  ''  Nofi  mi  ctiro  della  vita' 
and  ''  Da  quegli occhilmninosV' ;  the  well-known  '' O  cessate 
di piaga^niiV ;  and  a  very  interesting  study  in  expression, 
'*  Tonnentosa  geiosia,''  sung  by  the  half-civilized  king 
Mitridate,  whose  passionate  jealousy  is  well  suggested 
by  the  straining  syncopations.] 


Ex.  18. 


Tor  -  men-  to 


These  three  operas — "  Gli  Equivoci  nel  Sembiante," 
"L'Honesta  negli  Amori,"  and  "  Pompeo " — are  all  that 
remain  to  represent  Scarlatti's  first  period  of  dramatic 
composition.  But  although  it  has  not  been  possible 
hitherto  to  identify  any  other  libretti  set  to  music  by 
Scarlatti  before  he  left  Rome  in  1684,  there  can  be  hardly 
any  doubt  that  he  produced  several  other  operas  about  this 
time.  There  is  an  enormous  quantity  of  single  arias 
extant  which  certainly  belong  to  this  period,  mostly  in 
the  libraries  of  the  Conservatoires  of  Paris  and  Naples, 
and  in  the  British  Museum  (Harleian  MSS.).  There  is 
also  a  collection  of  "  Thirty-six  Ariettas "  by  Scarlatti, 
printed  in  London  towards  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  all  of  which  are  in  his  early  style,  some  being 
identified  as  belonging  to  operas  already  known. 

The  strongest  influences  in  Scarlatti  at  this  period  are 
those  of  Legrenzi  and  Stradella,  each  in  rather  different 
directions.  From  Legrenzi  Scarlatti  gets  his  dancino- 
dactylic  melodies,  and  many  other  characteristic  turns  of 
phrase  ;  even  more  important  than  these  is  his  conciseness 
and  clearness  of  form.  Here  Legrenzi  offers  a  great 
contrast  to  Stradella,  who  even  in  his  operas  is  con- 
spicuously wanting  in  this  respect.  He  is  by  no  means 
without  a  sense  of  form,  but  he  applies  it  almost  entirely 
to  the  detailed  development  of  small  figures,  neglecting  the 
larger  outlines  ;  and  the  result  is  that  nearly  all  his  airs  are 


32  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

interminably  straggling.  Yet  he  had  certain  characteristics 
which  Legrenzi  had  not,  and  which  Scarlatti  was  quick  to 
seize.  It  is  from  Stradella  that  Scarlatti  gets  his  charac- 
teristic charm  of  melody,  though  he  soon  surpassed  his 
predecessor.  Stradella's  best  melodies  are  often  very 
beautiful,  and  full  of  that  sunny  tenderness  of  expression 
which  is  very  typical  of  Scarlatti ;  but  they  are  always  so 
extremely  simple  that  a  whole  opera  in  this  style  strikes 
the  reader  as  almost  childishly  naive,  all  the  more  owing 
to  the  composer's  habit  of  stating  nearly  every  phrase 
twice  in  succession,  if  not  oftener.  Scarlatti  gets  rid  of 
much  of  this  repetition,  thus  simplifying  the  organization 
of  his  tunes,  and  also  shows  a  greater  fertility  of  invention 
as  well  as  a  deeper  poetic  feeling  in  the  melodic  themes 
themselves.  Stradella  is  also  greatly  superior  to  Legrenzi 
in  the  movement  of  his  basses.  Legrenzi,  though  he 
made  frequent  use  of  the  ground  bass,  seldom  shows  much 
character  in  this  most  important  part  of  his  music.  His 
basses  are  at  all  times  quite  uninteresting.  Stradella 
seldom  uses  the  ground  bass  ;  but  his  basses  are  generally 
full  of  life  and  individuality,  and  here  his  passion  for  the 
development  of  small  figures  shows  to  the  greatest  possible 
advantage.  He  seems  to  have  been  altogether  more  of  an 
instrumental  composer  than  Legrenzi,  using  his  violins  and 
trumpets  very  effectively,  though,  of  course,  not  at  all  in 
a  modern  spirit.  His  feeling  for  bass  movement  shows 
itself  again  in  his  recitatives,  which  are  often  founded  on 
thoroughly  logical  successions  of  chords,  besides  being  as 
a  rule  well  declaimed.  Indeed  the  general  style  of  his 
operatic  recitatives  is  rather  different  to  Legrenzi's,  and 
seems  to  have  served  as  Scarlatti's  model ;  though  here, 
as  in  everything  else,  the  younger  composer  soon  improved 
upon  it.  This  improvement,  however,  can  hardly  be  said 
to  have  taken  place  altogether  until  after  Scarlatti  left 
Rome.  His  early  operas  show  the  germs  of  his  great 
genius,  but  they  also  show  the  immaturity  of  youth ;  and 
considered  as  a  whole,  Stradella's  "  Floridoro  "  is  a  much 
better  opera  than  any  of  Scarlatti's  first  three. 


EARLY   YEARS  33 

The  strong  Influence  of  both  Stradella  and  Legrenzi 
on  the  young  Scarlatti  suggests  that  in  his  earHer  years  he 
may  have  had  some  connection  with  Modena.  The  BibHo- 
teca  Estense,  which  is  pecuharly  rich  in  manuscripts  of 
Stradella's  works,  also  possesses  many  of  Scarlatti's  early 
compositions,  including  the  autograph  parts  of  the  motet 
"  Vexilla  Regis,''  as  well  as  two  operas  of  Legrenzi,  which 
were  performed  at  the  court  theatre.  Information  about 
Stradella's  life  is  so  scanty  that  it  can  be  at  best  no  more 
than  a  plausible  conjecture  that  the  two  composers  may 
have  met  under  the  protection  of  Duke  Francis  II.  ;  it  is 
equally  possible  that  Rome  may  have  offered  similar  oppor- 
tunities. But  in  any  case  the  direct  influence  of  Stradella, 
like  that  of  Legrenzi,  though  strong  at  first,  did  not  last 
very  long.  Scarlatti's  own  individuality  matured  rapidly, 
and  with  the  transference  of  his  sphere  of  activity  to 
Naples  a  new  phase  began  which  led  to  a  change  of  style 
that  is  of  considerable  importance  in  the  history  of  his 
artistic  development. 


CHAPTER    II 

NAPLES,    1684-1702 

Naples  had  already  made  the  acquaintance  of  Scarlatti's 
music  with  "  Gli  Equivoci"  in  1680,  and  in  February  1684 
"  Pompeo "  was  performed  at  the  Royal  Palace.  The 
libretto  describes  Scarlatti  as  Maestro  di  Cappella  to 
Queen  Christina,  but  it  was  his  last  appearance  in  that 
capacity,  for  in  the  same  month  his  services  were  secured 
to  the  Court  of  Naples.^  On  February  17,  1684,  he  was 
appointed  Maestro  di  Cappella  on  the  retirement  of 
Pietro  Andrea  Ziani,  and  on  the  same  day  his  brother 
Francesco  was  appointed  a  violinist  of  the  royal  chapel. 
The  career  of  Francesco  Scarlatti  is  even  harder  to  trace 
than  that  of  Alessandro,  and  such  details  of  it  as  have 
been  recorded  may  conveniently  be  given  here.  His 
stipend  from  the  royal  chapel,  like  his  brother's,  was  paid 
him  for  a  year  only,  and  the  next  we  hear  of  him  is  that  in 
1699  his  oratorio  "  Agnus  Occisus  ab  Origine  Mundi  "  was 
performed  at  the  Vatican.  In  1715  he  turned  up  in 
Vienna,  and  applied  for  the  post  of  Vice- Kapellmeister. 
Fux  was  favourably  impressed  with  him  —  ^'  Ich  finde 
diesen  Supplicanien  wegen  seiner  virtu  vnd  sonst  beywoneten 
gutten  Aigenschafften  sehr  tauglickj'  he  reported  to  the 
Emperor ;  Francesco,  however,  did  not  get  the  appoint- 
ment, although  he  urged  that  his  sympathies  with  Austria 
had  lost  him  his  post  as  Maestro  di  Cappella  at  Palermo 
after  twenty-six  years'  service.^  This,  however,  was  pos- 
sibly an  invention  on  his  part ;  the  archives  at  Palermo 
make  no  mention  of  him,  and  Mongitore's  diary  expressly 

^  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato  :  Scrivania  di  Razione  e  Ruota  de^  Conti, 
vol.  iii.  fol.  82  verso. 

2  L.  von  Kochel,/.  y.  Fux,  Hofcompositor  und  Hofkapellmeister.  Vienna, 
1872,  p.  378. 


NAPLES  35 

names  one  Giuseppe  Dia  as  Maestro  di  Cappella  there  in 
1703.  He  then  seems  to  have  returned  to  Naples,  as  he 
was  on  the  staff  of  the  royal  chapel  in  1 7 1 9  ;  but  he 
was  not  there  long,  as  he  gave  a  concert  in  London  on 
September  i,  1720,  "the  greatest  part  of  his  own  compo- 
sition." He  advertised  himself  as  "  brother  to  the  famous 
Allessandro  [sic^  Scarlatti,"  and  no  doubt  was  encouraged 
by  the  presence  of  Domenico  in  London  for  the  produc- 
tion of  "Narciso"  at  the  Haymarket  in  17 19.  He  is 
supposed  to  have  resided  later  at  Venice. 

The  circumstances  under  which  the  two  Scarlattis 
received  their  appointments  were  peculiar.  The  Nea- 
politan diarist,  Domenico  Conforto,  tells  the  story  thus : 

"At  the  beginning  of  November  [[684]  the  Viceroy 
deprived  of  their  offices  and  disgraced  the  Secretary  of 
Justice,  by  name  Don  Giovanni  de  Leone,  Don  Emma- 
nuel .  .  .  ,  \_S2C^  the  chamberlain,  who  was  also  Governor 
of  Pozzuoli,  and  a  favourite  page,  for  holding  close  and 
illicit  intercourse  with  certain  actresses,  one  of  whom  was 
called  the  Scarlati  [i"/^],  whose  brother  was  by  this  Viceroy 
made  Maestro  di  Cappella  of  the  Palace,  though  there 
competed  other  virtiLosi  who  were  of  this  country.  For 
they  had  formed  a  triumvirate  to  dispose  as  they  pleased 
of  such  posts  and  offices  as  were  to  be  distributed,  getting 
them  filled  by  those  who  offered  and  gave  them  the  best 
price,  and  doing  other  unlawful  acts  to  make  money  and  to 

please    their actresses    {gradire    alle    loro    Pttttane 

Commedianti),  and  this  without  the  knowledge  of  the 
Viceroy,  who,  being  made  aware  of  everything,  deprived 
them,  as  has  been  said,  of  their  offices  and  disgraced  them  ; 
and  he  had  orders  given  to  the  Scarlati  and  her  companions 
that  they  should  either  leave  this  city  or  else  go  into  a 
convent ;  and  in  obedience  to  this  order  they  entered  the 
convent  of  S.  Antoniello,  near  the  Vicaria."^ 

We  have  already  seen  what  sort  of  a  reputation  Anna 
Maria  Scarlatti  had  at  Rome  in  1679.  In  the  following 
year  she  was  singing  in  Venice  at  the  Teatro  S.  Giovanni 

^  Giornali  del  Sig.  Dome7iico  Conforto  (MS.  in  the  Bibl.  Nazionale,  Naples). 


1^6  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

CrisostomOji  and  in  the  same  company  was  Giovanni  Fran- 
cesco Grossi,  called  Siface,  who  sang  the  part  of  JMitridate 
in  her  brother's  opera,  "  Pompeo,"  at  Naples.  The  Spanish 
Viceroy,  Don  Gasparo  d'Haro  y  Guzman,  was  only  adding 
hypocrisy  to  his  other  vices  when  he  vented  his  righteous 
indignation  on  the  protectors  of  "La  Scarlati"  and  her 
friends.  All  over  Italy,  Muratori  tells  us,^  opera  in  the 
most  sumptuous  style  was  the  fashionable  entertainment 
of  the  day.  The  courts  of  Modena  and  Mantua  vied  with 
each  other  in  the  extravagance  of  their  productions  and 
in  the  acquisition  of  the  most  celebrated  singers,  for  whom, 
by  a  strange  irony,  virtitoso  and  virtiwsa  became  the  recog- 
nized title.  The  court  of  Naples,  at  this  time  more  than 
ever  the  "  city  of  pleasures,"  though  it  had  not  yet  attracted 
composers  of  any  great  distinction,  had  at  any  rate  as  great 
a  reputation  as  any  for  its  liberal  appreciation  of  profes- 
sional "virtue."  It  was  the  fashion  to  have  opera-singers 
as  mistresses,  and  the  Viceroy  set  the  example  on  the  scale 
that  became  his  position.^ 

The  exact  history  of  the  affair  can  only  be  conjectured. 
We  may  be  fairly  certain  that  Anna  Maria  Scarlatti  de- 
pended less  upon  her  musical  ability  than  on  her  personal 
attractions  as  a  means  of  livelihood.  She  could  not  have 
been  singing  in  opera  at  Rome  in  1679,  as  no  women 
were  allowed  to  appear  on  the  stage.  Her  part  in  "  II 
Ratto  delle  Sabine  "  at  Venice  was  only  a  small  one,  and 
there  is  no  record  of  her  having  sung  in  any  other  opera. 
Even  in  her  brother's  "  Pompeo "  she  did  not  take  part, 
unless  it  were  in  the  chorus  or  the  ballet.  And  it  is  sig-ni- 
ficant  that  when  given  her  choice  either  of  leaving  Naples 
or  of  entering  a  convent  there,  she  preferred  the  latter 
alternative,  probably  having  little  chance  of  obtaining  a 
serious  musical  engagement  elsewhere. 

There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  "  Pompeo  "  was 

'  In  "  II  Ratto  delle  Sabine,"  of  Pietro  Simone  Agostini.      (A.  Wotquenne, 
Catalogue  des  livrets  italiens  dti  X 1 7/«  siccle. ) 
^  A  n7iali  d'  Italia^  anno  1690. 
^  Benedetto  Croce,  I  teatri  di  Napoli  nei  secoH  XV.-XVIII.     Naples,  1891. 


NAPLES  37 

a  great  success  at  Naples,  and  that  its  success  was  largely 
due  to  the  singing  of  Giovanni  Francesco  Grossi.  He  was 
the  most  celebrated  singer  of  his  time,  and  had  probably 
had  plenty  of  experience  of  Scarlatti's  style  when  singing 
in  Rome  under  the  protection  of  Queen  Christina.  He 
was  in  the  service  of  the  Duke  of  Modena,  but  much  in 
demand  everywhere  else,  in  spite  of  his  rather  capricious 
manners.  For  us  he  has  a  special  interest,  as  having  been 
sent  by  the  duke  to  his  sister  Mary  of  Modena,  wife  of 
James  H.  He  was  only  five  months  in  England  (January 
1 8  to  June  16,  1687),  and  suffered  considerably  from  the 
climate ;  but  he  had  time  to  acquire  some  considerable 
celebrity  there,  and  may  very  likely  have  helped  to  intro- 
duce Scarlatti's  music  to  English  audiences. 

Don  Gasparo  d'Haro  y  Guzman  made  every  effort  to 
retain  Siface  for  the  opera  at  Naples.  He  made  him 
write  to  the  Duke  of  Modena,  and  wrote  to  the  duke 
himself  as  well,  begging  him  to  allow  Siface  to  stay,  both 
letters  being  dated  from  Naples  on  February  19,  two  days 
after  the  appointment  of  the  two  Scarlattis.  How  far 
the  Viceroy  approved  of  the  appointment  cannot  be  said  ; 
probably  he  w^as  personally  inclined  towards  it,  in  view  of 
the  success  of  "  Pompeo,"  and  was  carefully  persuaded  to 
ratify  it  by  the  "triumvirate"  of  whom  Conforto  tells  us, 
in  spite  of  the  dissatisfaction  which  seems  to  have  arisen, 
according  to  Conforto,  from  the  post  being  given  to  one 
who  was  not  a  Neapolitan.  In  any  case  Anna  Maria 
Scarlatti  deserves  to  be  remembered,  since,  had  it  not  been 
for  her,  Alessandro  might  not  have  remained  at  Naples  to 
be  for  eighteen  years  the  leading  composer  of  operas 
there.  And  these  eighteen  years,  though  they  do  not 
represent  the  best  period  of  Scarlatti's  production,  are  of 
the  greatest  importance  for  his  own  career  and  for  the 
history  of  music  generally,  since  the  encouragement  that 
he  received  at  Naples,  in  spite  of  obvious  disadvantages, 
enabled  him  to  develop  his  style  steadily  in  one  direction 
in  a  way  that  he  could  never  have  done  under  other 
circumstances. 


38  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

It  was  probably  on  the  strength  of  this  appointment 
that  Alessandro  Scarlatti  married  a  certain  Antonia 
Anzalone,  by  whom  he  had  three  children,  of  whom 
Giuseppe  Domenico,  born  October  26,  1685/  was  the 
eldest.  He  apparently  received  no  stipend  after  February 
1685,  but  he  stayed  on  in  Naples  and  retained  his  title 
until  1702,  hardly  a  year  passing  in  which  he  did  not 
compose  at  least  two  operas,  most  of  which  were  produced 
either  at  the  royal  palace  or  at  the  royal  theatre  of  S. 
Bartolomeo. 

We  can  hardly  be  surprised  that,  under  such  circum- 
stances, he  soon  took  to  modelling  his  work  on  fixed 
patterns,  from  which  he  hardly  ever  departed.  But  the 
system  had  its  advantages  as  well  as  its  drawbacks.  It 
limited  the  composer's  sphere  of  action,  but  it  gave  him 
leisure  to  develop  this  style  to  the  utmost  within  the 
limits  imposed.  Thus  this  period,  which,  more  than  any 
other,  marks  the  first  step  to  the  final  decadence  of  old- 
fashioned  Italian  opera,  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in 
the  history  of  pure  music,  and  it  is  mainly  from  this  point 
of  view  that  it  will  be  treated  in  this  chapter. 

It  is  not  easy  for  the  modern  reader  to  form  a  clear 
conception  of  what  an  operatic  performance  was  like  at 
this  time.  The  modern  romantic  opera,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  modern  music-drama,  seems  to  have  nothing 
tangible    in    common    with    the   opera   of  Scarlatti.     The 

^  Parocchia  di  S.  Liboria  della  Carita  {Chiesa  di  Montesantd),  fol.  65  : 

Die  p'"'^  gmbre  1685.  lo  sud°  curato  (D.  Gius^  Sorrentino)  ho  batt°  uno 
figliuolo  nato  a  26  del  caduto  figlio  del  Sig^'  Alessandro  Scarlati  e  Sig=^  Antonia 
Anzalone  coniugi  hebbe  nome  Gius"^  Dom'^"  fu  tenuto  al  sacro  fonte  dalla  Sig'''^ 
D.  Eleonora  del  Carpio  Principessa  di  Colobrano,  e  dal  Sig""  D.  Domenico 
Martio  Carafa  Duca  di  Maddaloni. 

Fol.  97.  Catarina  Eleonora  Emilia  29  9^'''  1690  f^  di  Alessandro  e  Antonia 
Scarlati  Padrini  D.  Marino  Caracciolo  Ppe  di  Avellino  e  D.  Eleonora  Cardines 
Pssa  di  Colobrano  come  proc"^  della  Sig'^  D.  Emilia  Carafa  Duchessa  di 
Maddaloni. 

Fol.  107.  A  12  Maggio  1692  Carlo  Francesco  Giacomo  figlio  del  Sig'^' 
Alessandro  Scarlati  et  la  Signora  Antonia  Ansalone  \_s2c\  coniugi,  nato  a  5  d° 
fu  battezzato  p  me  D.  Nicola  Cuoci  sacrista  et  economo  li  Padrini  li  Sig"  Ecc"'' 
D.  Nicola  Gaetano  p  procura  in  nome  del  Sig'^^  D.  Carlo  Caracciolo  Duca  d' 
Ayrola,  et  la  Sig'-'^  D.  Aurora  Sanseverino. 


NAPLES  39 

descendants  of  Scarlatti's  operas  move  now  in  somewhat 
humble  circles,  but  they  still  keep  their  original  title — 
7tielodrama.  The  persecuted  heroine,  the  splendid  hero, 
the  heavy  father,  the  adventuress,  and  even  the  comic 
lovers,  familiar  to  us,  if  no  longer  on  the  boards  of  the 
Adelphi,  at  least  in  the  pages  of  Mr.  Jerome,  were  all 
stock  characters  at  the  ''Real  Teatro  di  S.  Bartolomeoy 
The  details  of  the  plot  may  vary,  but  there  is  hardly  any 
variation  in  the  characters,  and  none  whatever  in  the  love- 
making  which  is  their  one  and  only  occupation.  The 
author  may  cite  Aulus  Gellius  and  Polydore  Vergil  in  the 
most  learned  manner  in  the  avviso  al  lettore,  but  once  the 
curtain  is  up  history  retires  into  the  background,  and  for 
three  acts  we  do  nothing  but  watch  the  progress  of 
interminable  love  intrigues  between  personages  whose 
very  existence  is  often  no  more  than  one  of  the  poet's 
'^  accidenti  vei'isswiiT  The  scenery  too,  as  has  been 
already  pointed  out,  was  a  most  important  part  of  the 
entertainment,  there  being  generally  three  if  not  four 
separate  scenes  in  each  act,  each  no  doubt  of  a  most  ela- 
borate kind,  judging  from  the  designs  that  remain  ;  and 
many  operas  included  some  sort  of  transformation-scene. 

An  outline  of  "  L'Olimpia  Vendicata"  will  serve  to 
illustrate  the  type.  When  the  curtain  rises,  Olimpia,  a 
princess  of  Holland,  is  discovered  alone  on  a  desert  island 
in  the  Spanish  main,  where  she  has  been  left  by  her 
faithless  lover  Bireno,  prince  of  Zealand.  She  is  immedi- 
ately taken  prisoner  by  Araspe,  a  pirate  chief,  to  whose 
inquiries  she  answers  that  her  name  is  Ersilla.  The  scene 
now  changes  to  the  court  of  Spain.  The  king  Oberto 
wishes  to  marry  his  sister,  the  princess  Alinda,  to  Osmiro, 
prince  of  somewhere  else  (his  country  is  not  named)  ; 
Ahnda,  however,  refuses,  preferring  a  stranger  who  has 
just  arrived  in  the  guise  of  a  pilgrim.  At  this  juncture 
Araspe  appears,  having  been  cast  ashore  by  a  convenient 
storm,  and  Ersilla-Olimpia  is  given  to  Alinda  as  a  slave, 
ObeiHo  himself  immediately  falling  in  love  with  her.  This 
ends  the  first  act.      In   Act    II.    Alinda  receives  a  letter 


40  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

from  the  pilgrim,  revealing  himself  to  be  Bireno  in  dis- 
guise and  professing  his  love  for  her.  It  being  apparently 
one  of  ''Ersilla  s'  duties  to  read  Alindds  love-letters  aloud 
to  her,  and  write  the  answers  at  her  dictation,  Olimpia  is 
thus  made  aware  of  the  situation,  and  determines  to  avenge 
herself.  i??"r^7/ 6*  sees  her  and  recognizes  her.  He  attempts 
to  explain  his  rather  awkward  position  ;  she  cuts  short  his 
apologies  and  protests  that  she  is  not  Olimpia  but  Ersilla. 
Believing  himself  to  have  been  mistaken,  he  proposes  to 
elope  with  Alinda,  who  says  she  will  give  him  an  answer 
by  letter.  She  dictates  a  refusal  to  Olivipia,  but  immedi- 
ately tears  it  up,  and  the  act  ends  with  her  again  refusing 
Osmiro.  In  Act  III.  Olimpia  tells  Bireno  that  Alinda 
loves  Osmiro,  and  invites  him  to  surprise  them  together 
and  kill  his  rival.  Bireno  comes  at  the  appointed  hour, 
and  Olimpia  prepares  him  supper.  As  she  has  drugged 
the  wine  he  falls  asleep,  and  she  is  just  on  the  point  of 
murdering  him,  when  she  is  prevented  by  Alinda.  She 
then  reveals  herself  and  tells  the  story  of  her  desertion  ; 
Bireno  is  cast  into  prison,  OliiJipia  marries  Oberto,  and 
Alinda  consoles  herself  with  Osmiro. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  complication  of  the  plot  leaves 
very  little  opportunity  for  the  study  of  character.  Whether 
the  dramatis  personae  are  princes  and  princesses  of  medi- 
aeval Holland  or  of  ancient  Greece,  they  act  and  talk  and 
sing  in  precisely  the  same  way,  just  as  they  no  doubt 
wore  the  same  sort  of  costumes  in  front  of  the  same  sort  of 
scenery  ;  indeed  everything,  including  the  turgid  language 
of  the  libretti,  to  which  no  translation  could  do  justice, 
belongs  to  no  other  age  than  the  last  twenty  years  of  the 
seventeenth  century. 

Scarlatti  was  not  by  temperament  a  reformer  or  an 
iconoclast.  He  took  things  as  he  found  them,  and  did  the 
best  that  could  be  done  on  the  lines  of  his  predecessors. 
The  libretti  of  his  day  offered  him  any  quantity  of  heroic 
sentiments,  which  he  set  to  a  dignified  recitative,  as  well 
as  straightforward  obvious  emotions,  which  he  could  express 
in  a  neat  aria  at  the  end  of  each  scene.     He  soon  found 


NAPLES  41 

that  the  best  type  of  aria  for  his  purpose  was  the  ternary 
form.  It  satisfied  the  natural  aesthetic  need  of  contrast  and 
recognition  in  the  clearest  possible  way,  and  the  Da  Capo 
gave  the  singer  a  favourable  opportunity  of  exhibiting  his 
skill  in  extemporizing  variations,  as  was  expected  of  him 
by  both  audience  and  composer.  Writing  every  air  (and 
each  opera  would  contain  some  fifty  or  sixty)  in  the  same 
form,  Scarlatti  attained  a  wonderful  mastery  over  his 
material,  and  besides  displaying  an  infinite  variety  of  style 
within  the  given  limits,  he  gradually  developed  the  form  to 
a  very  high  degree  of  emotional  and  structural  organization. 
Outside  the  aria,  there  was  hardly  any  formal  music  in  the 
opera.  There  was  the  overture,  the  evolution  of  which 
will  be  discussed  in  detail  later  on,  and  there  were 
occasional  dances  and  marches.  The  marches  and  pageant 
music  are  all  written  by  Scarlatti  himself,  but  the  ballets 
are  frequendy  absent  from  the  score.  From  the  Indications 
given  In  the  libretti  they  seem  to  have  been  almost  always 
of  a  comic  nature,  and  sometimes  they  are  directly 
associated  with  the  comic  characters.  It  seems  probable 
that  they  were  not  regarded  as  an  integral  part  of  the 
opera,  and  that  the  ballet  music,  like  the  ballet-master,  was 
generally  Imported  from  France. 

The  descriptive  symphonies  which  are  so  Important  In 
the  earlier  Venetian  operas  find  no  place  In  Scarlatti. 
Musical  scene-painting  is  really  a  modern  growth.  In 
"  Der  Frelschutz "  and  "  Der  Fliegende  Hollander"  the 
orchestra  is  used  to  stimulate  emotions  which  the  stage 
carpenter  cannot  awaken.  The  music  throws  our  nerves 
Into  a  state  of  abnormal  excitement,  in  which  our  own 
imagination  can  easily  complete  the  illusion  which  the 
scenery  has  suggested.  The  emotional  aspect  of  land- 
scape Is  essentially  a  characteristic  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  and  In  connection  with  this  we  must  also  take 
Into  account  that  owlnaf  to  altered  circumstances  of 
theatrical  management,  scenic  arrangements  in  Weber's 
and  Wagner's  days  were  not  so  elaborate  as  in  the  seven- 
teenth century,  when  opera  was  the  plaything  of  princes. 


42  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

In  Scarlatti's  time  the  theatrical  architect  was  technically 
far  ahead  of  the  dramatic  composer,  whose  work  was  con- 
fined to  the  objective  expression  of  personal  and  individual 
emotion.     The  subjective  expression,  or  rather  suggestion, 
of  the  collective  emotions   of  the  audience  is  a  different 
thing,  and  is  certainly  not  older  than  Gluck.      It  is  very 
easy  to  think  that  it  existed  already  in  Peri,  Monteverdi, 
and  Cavalli,  but  we  must  beware  of  letting  our  modern 
romanticism  run  away  with  us.       It  is  not  reasonable  to 
suppose   that    because    Monteverdi    or    Purcell    happened 
accidentally  on  a  device,  be  it  structural  or  harmonic,  that 
to  our   ears  is  characteristic  of  Wagner  or   Tchaikovsky, 
they    or    their   audiences    necessarily   attached    the    same 
emotional  impression  to  it  that  we  do.      In  studying  the 
dramatic  music  of  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century 
we  must  always   remember   that,   however    anxious   com- 
posers might  be  in  theory  to  get  away  from  polyphony, 
vocal  or  instrumental,  they  were  obliged  to  fall  back  upon 
it  in  practice,  because  it  was  a  material  which  they  were 
accustomed  to  handling,  and  which  their  audiences  would 
understand  without  effort.      There  is  no  direct  connection 
between    the    choruses    and    descriptive    symphonies    of 
Monteverdi  and  those  of  Weber,  except  by  the  circuitous 
route  that  traverses  the  stony  asperities  of  French  opera. 
The  chorus  and  the  descriptive  symphony  disappear  simul- 
taneously from    Italian   opera   as   soon   as  composers  had 
acquired  sufficient  mastery  over  the  new  style  to  put  all 
they  wanted   into   the  solo   parts,   and  it  was   only   when 
instrumental    technique    progressed    in    advance    of   vocal 
technique  that  the  orchestra  began  to  be  used  for  indepen- 
dent dramatic  effects.      Scarlatti's  work  covers  exactly  the 
period  when  concerted  instrumental  music  was  beginning 
to  be  recognized  as  a  possible  rival  to  the  voice,  and  it  is 
interesting    to   trace    the   gradual   development   of  instru- 
mental  music  in   the  work  of  a  composer  whose    natural 
sympathies  were  all  with  the  singers,  but  who  was  quick  to 
take   advantage   of  any  other   means   that   facilitated    the 
expression  of  his  thought. 


NAPLES 


43 


There  are  many  places  in  Scarlatti's  operas  where  the 
recitative  is  interrupted  for  an  appreciable  time  by  some 
sort  of  action,  such  as  the  wrestling  match  and  the  lottery 
extraction  in  "  Olimpia  Vendicata,"  and  numberless  duels 
and  battles,  or  by  an  elaborate  change  of  scene  such  as 
takes  place  in  "  Massimo  Puppieno."  But  Scarlatti  never 
seems  to  think  it  necessary  to  fill  up  this  gap  with  descrip- 
tive instrumental  music,  unless  we  suppose  that  he  ex- 
temporized it  himself  at  the  cembalo.  That  is  conceivable, 
for  we  do  sometimes  find  a  battle  scene  accompanied  by  a 
direction  for  a  trumpet  fanfare,  which  is  very  rarely  written 
out  in  full.  But  he  more  probably  realized  that  such  music 
was  impracticable,  owing  to  the  great  difficulty  of  making 
it  synchronize  exactly  with  the  action  on  the  stage,  and 
also  owing  to  the  noise  that  would  be  made  by  the  energetic 
movements  of  combatants  or  scene-shifters,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  buzz  of  conversation  among  the  audience.  But  if 
the  stage  be  quiet,  and  it  be  desirable  to  produce  some 
sort  of  illusion  of  mystery,  he  is  ready  with  his  band. 
Thus  in  "  Massimo  Puppieno,"  when  Massimino  the  African 
king,  after  fighting  outside,  staggers  in  mortally  wounded 
to  die  on  the  stage,  the  few  bars  played  by  the  strings 
must  have  invested  the  action  with  a  simple  dignity  that 
would  lift  the  audience  for  a  moment  into  a  higher 
emotional  plane. 


Ex.  19. 


The  great  advantage  of  music  of  this  kind  is  that  it 
falsifies  our  sense  of  time.  The  Intermezzo  in  "  Cavalleria 
Rusticana  "  takes  some  three  or  four  minutes  in  perform- 
ance.      Suppose    that    in    "Cavalleria    Rusticana"    there 


44 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


were  no  inteDiiezzo,  the  curtain  falling  between  the  two 
scenes  ;  the  break  would  be  intolerable.  The  drama  is  so 
exciting  that  we  want  to  go  straight  on  ;  yet  a  certain 
amount  of  time  must  elapse  while  the  people  are  supposed 
to  be  in  church.  We  cannot  really  wait  all  that  time, 
whether  the  curtain  be  up  or  down  ;  and  if  there  was  a 
long  silence,  and  no  fall  of  the  curtain,  the  audience  would 
resume  their  talk — if  indeed  they  had  ever  interrupted 
it — and  lose  their  interest.  But  by  putting  in  the  intei"-- 
viezzo  our  attention  is  held  ;  we  are  able  to  keep  up  the 
religious  feeling  of  the  previous  scene,  and  at  the  end  we 
are  quite  willing  to  believe  that  thirty  minutes  have 
elapsed  instead  of  three.  Another  example  of  the  same 
thing  occurs  in  "  Fidelio,"  where  Florestan  falls  asleep  after 
his  solo,  and  the  orchestra  makes  us  forget  how  short  an 
interval  actually  elapses  before  Rocco  and  Leonora  enter. 
Scarlatti's  "  Olimpia  Vendicata  "  is  interesting  as  showing 
us  the  first  germs  of  this  idea  in  a  way  that  makes  it 
impossible  to  mistake  the  principle  which  guided  him. 
When  the  curtain  rises,  Olimpia  is  discovered  asleep  on 
her  desert  island,  and  speaks  a  few  unconscious  words 
before  she  awakes.^ 


Ex.  20. 


Larg-o. 


Two 
Violins. 


Continuo. 


|P= 


:tat 


r 


--^ 


^|iM^ 


-'^^^B 
=g^ 


^^ 


B=g 


A 


^^:#i^^iiE3=i= 


# 


7  6      +t 

6  #  5  _ 

^  The  original  has  two  flats  in  the  signature  ;  but  it  is  evidently  a  copyist's 
error,  since  the  E  flat  is  always  marked  as  an  accidental  wherever  it  is 
required. 


NAPLES 


45 


^ 


:2± 


a^^ii^zj-^ 


^^^ 


1= 


:^=i: 


6 
5 


:^: 


^^=K^ 


i^ 


^7 


9     8 


4     3 


Olimpia. 


idi 


^=r=aEg 


t 


=p=r^= 


Dol-ce  a-mor, 


dol-ce  a-mor,  ca^ 


3 zid-Rz±i±zzzi 


^ 


p:^^ 


¥ 


:i^^^P=«: 


-P--F 


'~W^=^ 


:U=!: 


^ 


=pd=g:^t^^^ 


s 


i^zi^: 


fc??^ 


:i=p: 


7    it 


7     6 


As  soon  as  she  awakes,  the  violins  leave  off,  and  she 
soliloquizes  in  recti ativo  secco.  The  example  quoted  is 
more  an  arioso  than  a  recitative  ;  but  in  the  third  act 
the  device  is  employed  again,  when  Bireno  falls  asleep 
after  having  been  drugged  by  Olimpia ;  and  here  we 
have  an  unmistakable  recitativo  stromentato,  the  earliest 
(i686)  that   I  have  been  able  to  find. 


46 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

Ex.  21. 


BiRENO 

(Alto). 


T7V0 

Violins, 

Viola., 

and 

Continuo. 


r-f* — ^*'- 


-.^->^^-> 


5,=^ 


-A — 1^3 — := — ^ — ^ — p« — ^s — ^-71—+^ — rn^ — I — I 


=«^ 


I 


Quanto,       quanto  tar-da -te  pi-gri  mo -men-ti,    ohDi-o! 


^-^ 


±7- 


p?2" 


^-- 


q»i=^s= 


=I^=S= 


:^J      d     J^^ 


^it=it 


Ma  qual  pos-sen-te  o  -  bli  -  o  le    pu  -  pil  -  le  m'ingombra? 


-^ 


-A- 


-9^ 


P: 


122: 


±^21 


-^?:^- 


:=!= 


t^ 


^5^H5E 


:S=|ii: 


J— J-J 


Por  -  ta  -  mi    o      son  -  no  in  om  -  bra      fra  i  tuoi  fan  -tas  -  mi    al 


m=gz 


?z: 


"TS' 


ZJ 


m 


-^r 


:st=^ 


^==S: 


-    men      I'i 


-t^ 


-J-       -J 


do  -  lo        mi    -    o. 


(s'addor)nenta). 


i 


-» H^ 


:it=s^: 


1^ 


!^ 


i^ 


:^ 


g 


:^=i 


NAPLES  47 

Nevertheless,  accompanied  recitative  is  rare  in  these 
Neapolitan  operas,  and  it  is  not  until  the  last  years  of 
Scarlatti's  life  that  it  becomes  the  rule  to  have  at  least  one 
example  in  each  opera.  One  reason  for  its  sparse  employ- 
ment is  that  it  would  have  been  far  more  tedious  than 
7'ecitativo  secco,  since  it  necessarily  was  sung  slower,  and 
took  a  still  longer  time  owing  to  the  pauses  for  the  instru- 
mental phrases.  It  could  hardly  ever  be  employed  except 
in  very  impassioned  soliloquies. 

The  disappearance  of  the  chorus  has  been  viewed  by 
historians  with  unnecessary  regret.  Like  the  descriptive 
symphony,  it  was  a  survival  of  the  polyphonic  period,  and 
it  was  all  the  better  that  it  should  die  down  and  be 
absorbed  into  the  soil  only  to  push  up  again  later  with 
new  vitality.  The  elaborate  choruses  of  the  earlier 
Roman  operas  ^  are  not  really  dramatic  at  all :  the  chorus 
is  merely  a  background,  not  a  factor  in  the  development 
of  the  plot.  Scarlatti,  in  confining  his  chorus  to  short  ex- 
clamations— shouts  oi''  evviva'  or  ''mora  il  iiraiiuo'' — such 
as  a  crowd  might  really  utter,  is  much  more  dramatic  than 
if  he  made  them  sing  long  polyphonic  movements.  The 
choral  finale  was  a  device  that  had  to  wait  many  years 
for  its  development.  The  choral  finales  of  the  earlier 
operas  were  traditional  survivals  of  the  madrigals  sung 
as  inte7'mezzi  at  the  dramatic  performances  of  the  previous 
century ;  and  Arteaga  points  out  that  when  it  became 
customary  to  have  a  different  scene  for  each  act,  it  was 
dramatically  absurd  that  the  same  chorus  should  always  be 
there.  Besides,  as  he  says,  by  clearing  away  the  chorus, 
the  composer  was  able  to  get  variety  by  ending  his  acts 
with  a  solo  or  a  duet.  The  customary  "  coro  "  at  the  end  of 
an  opera,  which  was  often  sung  by  the  principals  only, 
must  not  be  regarded  as  a  step  towards  the  "concerted 
finale"  of  Mozart.  Scarlatti  nearly  always  treats  it  in  the 
most  perfunctory  way  possible.  "  Gli  Equivoci  "  ends  with 
five  bars  of  quartet — just  the  words,  "  Oh  nozze  fortwiate, 

^  E.g.  the  scene  representing  a  fair  in  the  opera  of  Vergilio  Mazzocchi  and 
Marco  MarazzoH,  "Chi  soffre,  speri." 


48  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

oh  lieto  giorno  I ''  "L'Honesta"  ends  with  an  air  for  the 
heroine;  "  Clearco  in  Negroponte  "  with  a  recitative, 
"  Olimpia  Vendicata"  ends  with  a  quartet  of  some  length  ; 
but  it  has  no  dramatic  importance,  nor  is  it  developed  even 
to  a  purely  musical  climax.  It  is  to  the  final  scenes  of  the 
first  two  acts  that  we  must  look  for  the  first  tendencies 
towards  a  dramatic  ensemble. 

The  invention  of  the  concerted  finale  is  generally 
ascribed  to  Logroscino.  Logroscino  certainly  treated  it 
with  a  sense  of  humour  peculiarly  his  own  ;  but  it  had 
been  often  used  by  Leo  and  Vinci  several  years 
before.  It  was  only  in  comic  opera  that  the  form  could 
receive  any  vigour  of  treatment,  for  in  opera  seria  it  was 
regarded  as  a  gross  impropriety  that  one  personage  should 
interrupt  another.  A  duet  was  only  possible  when  the 
characters  taking  part  in  it  were  supposed  to  be  in 
harmony  of  sentiment.  But  Scarlatti  does  not  seem  to 
have  accepted  this  convention  entirely.  The  concerted 
movements  of  his  later  operas  will  be  discussed  in  detail 
in  a  subsequent  chapter  :  here  it  need  only  be  said  that 
though  he  had  a  very  much  more  vivid  feeling  for  ensemble 
than  his  immediate  successors  in  serious  opera,  he  hardly 
ever  places  a  serious  ensemble  at  the  end  of  an  act. 

The  reason  of  this  is  simple.  Comic  opera,  as  a 
separate  form,  of  the  type  of  Leo  and  Logroscino,  had  not 
yet  come  into  being,  and  the  serious  opera  or  dramma  per 
niusica  still  kept  up  its  parti  buffe.  Scarlatti  is  the  last 
composer  with  whom  the  comic  characters  are  essential  to 
the  opera  itself.  But  although  they  have  their  part  in  the 
development  of  the  play  they  are  already  sufficiently  con- 
ventionalized to  be  given  a  regular  scene  to  themselves  in 
each  act.^  This  scene  comes  at  the  end  of  the  first  two 
acts,  and  just  before  the  end  of  the  third.  The  finale 
therefore  of  the  first  two  acts  was  in  their  hands,  and  this 
accounts  for  the  history  of  its  development. 

It   is   not   necessary  to   trace   here   the    history  of  the 

^  In  some  operas,  e.g.  "  La  Caduta  dei  Decemviri,"  the  comic  characters 
have  two  scenes  in  each  act. 


NAPLES  49 

comic  characters  from  the  traditional  comedy  of  masks 
through  Vecchi  and  Banchieri  to  the  Roman  and  Venetian 
operas  of  the  seventeenth  century.  In  Scarlatti's  early 
operas  they  are  generally  an  old  woman  and  a  page  ;  but 
the  old  man  is  also  found.  The  soit-bretie  was  impossible 
in  the  early  Roman  operas,  because  women  were  not 
allowed  to  appear  on  the  stage.  The  tragic  female  parts 
were  sung  by  castraii,  and  from  all  accounts  it  was  fairly 
satisfactory;  but  a  soubrettes  part  could  obviously  be  taken 
only  by  a  woman. 

The  old  woman  was,  of  course,  always  sung  by  a  tenor. 
She  is  generally  the  heroine's  nurse — sometimes  a  lady- 
in-waiting,  in  which  character  her  grotesque  humour  and 
her  invariably  very  outspoken  desire  for  matrimony  must 
have  been  startlingly  incongruous.  But  Italian  audiences 
seem  to  have  enjoyed  a  touch  of  the  grotesque  at  the 
most  tragic  moments,  perhaps  realizing  that  the  tragedy 
was  thus  made  all  the  more  true  to  real  life.  So  in  "II 
Figlio  delle  Selve,"  when  Teramene,  the  dethroned  king 
in  disguise,  asks  for  news  of  his  queen  Arsinda,  who  is 
supposed  to  have  been  drowned,  though  really  wandering 
about  disguised  as  a  man,  Gobrina,  her  former  maid-of- 
honour,  replies — 

"  J^u  detto,  e  mi  rincresce, 
Che  atidasse  a  far  da  cetia  a  piu  dhm  pesce."  ^ 

This  juxtaposition  of  serious  and  grotesque  is  by  no 
means  confined  to  the  opera  of  the  period.  The  Ferragosto 
of  Zappi  and  Crescimbeni,  to  which  reference  will  be  made 
later,  is  a  good  example  of  its  literary  treatment.  In 
painting  we  can  trace  it  back  as  far  as  Paolo  Veronese, 
and  it  reaches  its  height  in  Tiepolo.  The  frescoes  of  the 
Palazzo  Labia  show  exactly  the  operatic  arrangement — a 
large  serious  composition  in  the  centre,  with  popular  types 
in  narrow  panels  at  either  side,  so  designed  as  to  be  yet 
continuous   with   the   main   picture ;    and    in    the   frescoes 

^  "  It  was  said,  and  I  regret  it,  that  she  went  to  make  a  supper  for  more 
than  one  fish." 

D 


50  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

from  the  life  of  Abraham  in  the  archbishop's  palace  at 
Udine  we  may  see  a  perfect  parallel  to  Scarlatti's  grotesque 
old  women  and  pert  little  pages  in  the  figures  of  Sarah, 
attired  as  a  fine  lady  of  the  seventeenth  century,  her  tooth- 
less mouth  convulsed  with  hideous  laughter,  and  the  very 
debonair  young  angel  who  hitches  up  his  gaily-patterned 
skirt  and  appears  to  be  almost  as  much  amused  at  the 
situation  as  she  is. 

The  most  amusing  of  Scarlatti's  old  women  is  Filocla, 
in  "  Clearco."  There  is  no  other  comic  character  in  the 
opera,  and  she  flits  across  the  stage  at  odd  times,  absurd 
under  all  circumstances.  At  the  end  of  the  second  act 
Asteria,  the  heroine,  has  an  air  in  which  she  invokes  the 
''horrid  spectres  of  Cocytus"  ;  Filocla  immediately  follows 
with  a  parody  of  it,  after  which  there  is  an  elaborate  comic 
ballet.  A  pavilion  rises  from  a  trap  during  the  aria,  and 
Filocla,  believing  it  to  be  occupied  by  a  young  man  on 
whom  she  has  fixed  her  affections,  "goes  to  open  the 
pavilion,  from  which  comes  forth  a  phantom,  and  Filocla 
wishing  to  escape  from  one  of  the  wings,  there  appears 
a  Moor,  and  the  same  thing  follows  at  the  others  \i.e.  she 
tries  to  escape  at  each  exit  in  turn,  and  on  each  occasion 
another  Moor  appears].  Finally,  she  hides  in  the  pavilion, 
whence  she  peeps  out,  while  the  said  Moors  dance  with  the 
phantom.  Filocla,  after  the  dance  is  finished,  thinks  that 
they  have  gone  away,  and  comes  out.  The  phantom,  who 
is  hidden,  takes  hold  of  her  by  her  dress  ;  she  tries  to 
escape,  leaves  her  dress  behind,  and  runs  away.  The 
phantom  follows  her."  There  is  not  a  note  of  music  to  all 
this,  nor  to  the  ballet  at  the  end  of  the  first  act,  which  is 
indicated  in  the  stage  directions. 

At  Naples  there  were  no  restrictions  on  female  singers, 
but  the  soubrette  does  not  appear  for  some  time.  The 
usual  types  are  the  old  man  and  the  old  woman,  bass  and 
tenor  respectively.  In  "  La  Caduta  de'  Decemviri"  (1697) 
the  old  nurse  Servilia  is  a  soprano,  but  the  first  real  soubrette 
appears  to  be  Lesbina  in  "  Odoardo "  (1700).  In  "La 
Caduta  de'  Decemviri "  the  comic  characters  are  very  pro- 


NAPLES 


51 


minent,  and  are  both  closely  concerned  with  the  abduction 
of  Virginia.  Flacco,  the  servant  of  Appio,  who  is  rather 
Vik^Leporello,  has  an  amusing  air  in  Act  I.  with  a  colascione, 
which  he  thrums  at  intervals  during  the  recitative.  The 
instrument  was  a  kind  of  lute  with  two  strings  tuned  a 
fifth  apart,  and  being  popular  in  South  Italy,  often  appears 
in  later  comic  operas.  Scarlatti  gives  it  a  characteristic 
figure  : — 


Ex.  22. 


S£ 


-w=^- 


fc=iit 


-^^=Ml 


~^z 


i 


There  is  a  good  scene  in  Act  III.,  where  Flacco,  dis- 
guised as  a  woman,  is  discovered  asleep  by  Servilia.  The 
song  which  he  sings  before  falling  asleep  is  a  very  clever 
study  of  a  yawn. 


Fl.ACCO. 


Continuo. 


1 


Ex.  23. 


:^=e=t 


.£2- 


=^=^ 


Mi 


Stl 


5B^^ 


ro, 

I 
■-t- 


sba 


di 

! 
•I 


'^ 


m. 


'^  ^^ 


6=t 


3ik 


glio,        mi  sfre 


go-lo   il    ci  -  glio  ; 


l^fTTrr^g 


m 


f  ^    r  ]/ 


f  0  , 


f^ 


=t^ 


-    to   di  son  -  no,  di      son 


no, 


W 


iL^^S'r^-\i_Xi 


— +^— ^ 


cr^-'r-   gr 


52 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


:^« — >r 


J    J    r 


^- 


to     di       son -no. 


i^rjb 


"f" 


As  a  contrast  to  this,  there  is  the  duet  "A/'on  ti  voglio,'' 
in  "  Tiberio  imperatore  d'Oriente"  (1702),  with  a  page  of 
breathless  "patter"  worthy  of  SulUvan. 


Ex.  24. 


Per  te  piango,per  te   peno,  M'esce  I'a  - ni-ma  dal  seno,  Per  te  manco,  per  te 


-ro,  Nonho  pa-ce    n&   ri-sto-ro,  Gio-ia    ca-ra,    vi  -  ta      mi  -  a, 


^=3! 


^ 


The  close  connection  of  the  parti  buffe  with  the  ballet 
may  be  seen  in  "  Odoardo,"  where  a  duet  between  Lesbma 
and  Adolfo  is  continually  interrupted  by  a  troop  of  crippled 
beggars.  On  the  exit  of  Lesbina  and  Adolfo  the  cripples 
dance  to  a  rather  stupid  little  tune  in  f  time,  after  which 
Lesbina  returns  dressed  as  an  old  beggar  woman,  and  the 
dance  is  repeated,  Lesbina  refusing  to  give  the  others 
anything.  Adolfo  returns  and  sings  a  ciacoiia,  which  is  a 
lively  movement  in  f  on  a  free  ground  bass,  after  sur- 
prising the  cripples  in  their  dance  and  giving  them  a 
beating.  Even  if  they  are  not  associated  with  a  regular 
ballet,  the  comic  characters  often  dance  themselves,  as 
in  "Tito  Sempronio  Gracco." 

There  being  never  more  than  two  comic  characters  in 
a  serious  opera,   it   is   obvious  that  the   nearest  Scarlatti 


NAPLES 


S3 


could  eet  to  a  concerted  finale  was  a  duet.  But  in  these 
duets  there  Is  never  any  dramatic  development.  In  the 
finales  of  Mozart  the  drama  is  still  in  progress  ;  the 
situation  at  the  end  is  not  what  it  was  at  the  beginning. 
In  the  finales  of  Leo  and  Logroscino,  which  are  in  one 
movement  only,  this  was  hardly  possible,  yet  we  can 
see  that  .they  were  dimly  working  towards  it.  .But  in 
Scarlatti's  comic  duets  we  must  be  content  to  find  the 
tendency  indicated  only  by  "a  conflict  of  interests.  His 
characters  quarrel,  but  he  does  not  go  so  far  as  to 
let  either-  win.  This  conflict  of  interests  may  easily  be 
illustrated  by  contrasting  a  serious  duet  such  as  this 
from  "Eraclea" — 


m 


§ 


Ex.  25. 


i^rn^ 


-p-=i- 


& 


Mo-rirperte  de-si  -  o, 


'■P^--^ 


-& 


r  1  r  ^- 


g 


fe 


^^5 


^Sat 


:^^ 


--^- 


W^ 


as 


^ 


Dehnonmorirper  me,      i-dolo,    i-dolo  mi  -  o  ! 


P=e: 


'-"^rw 


g 


&& 


iz*: 


« 


« 


with  a   duet   such   as  this  from   "  La  Teodora  Augusta," 
which  is  one  of  the  earliest  of  its  kind — 


NiSO, 
{a  page) 


Cleria, 

{ati  old 
womtui). 


Contiiiuo. 


Ex.  26. 


^— ^ 


Tu  troppo  m'  of-fendi,  troppo  m'  of-fen-di,  Da  me  che  pre- 


-V- 


^^^EE^p^?=^E^^=^: 


t: 


-t— 


54 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


:i^=?=35^- 


ii=i=i: 


?«=^ 


k=^^?^ 


^-^ 


K=^: 


3^: 


ig 


ten  -  di,  da  me  che  pre  -  ten  -  di,Sap  -  pia-mo-lo,  di,  sap  -  pia  -  mo-lo, 


i 


;^ 


di. 


I 


fe^=i^^^5^iiilEiiei^fei^^ 


Va  det  -  to  co-si,    va   det  -  to  co  -    si,         hai  ra-gio  -  ne. 


fal  - 


:^*j 


w^m^^^^m 


Oh      tu   vuoich'iotican-ti  la  sol- fa,  ti  can-ti  la 


K< ha — ^— la»— 1»^— ^— P- 


-[;?— ^— »>- 


done, 


for  -  ci  -  na  ! 


^P:^ 


^f-^ 


l|^E!^g#=s== 


^-- 


sol  -  fa,         mar-col  -  fa,  Ga  -  bri-na  ! 


I 


-l^=f 


Se    t'ar  -  ri  -  vo,    se    t'ar 


^^^=1'=^^ 


NAPLES 


5i 


mar  -  col  -  fa, 


Ga   -    bri-na! 


mar-col-fa, 


iiHiiMii^i^liM^^J^Illg 


ri  -  vo  ti  vu6fartonni-na,tivu6farton-ni-na,fal-do-ne,for-ci-na  !     fal  - 


i^ 


:=1: 


=1: 


g3[ 


:r^: 


:i=*: 


::p  ^  P —     ^1  r  r  ^  ^ 

-  bri-nal 

Ga-bri-na  !     marcol-fa,Ga- bri-na!                     marcol-fa,Ga 

iLA h. — ^ ^ ^ _^ -_ __ : _ 

-^  ^  r'  w  f  r  P  r 

"  ^  1^-S  ^  ^  to  ^ 

-     do-ne,       for-ci-na! 

fal-do  -  ne,  forci  -  na  ! 

"     1                            1 

-    1    - 

^5==^   =1  ^    ^     - 

^— F ^— ^ :^ 

:;^iz=: 

{segue  Ritornello). 


The  comic  duet  is  made  up  of  short  vigorous  phrases 
tossed  from  one  voice  to  another,  which  would  lend  them- 
selves to  thematic  development  on  a  larger  scale,  while  the 
serious  duet  is  really  no  more  than  a  simple  aria  divided 
between  two  voices.  Still,  the  division  of  a  single  melody 
between  various  voices  has  a  charm  of  its  own,  and  in 
this  same  opera,  "  Eraclea,"  there  is  a  very  interesting 
septet,  which  is  so  obviously  conceived  as  a  single 
melody,  not  a  combination  of  melodies,  that  the  copyist 
has  saved  space  by  trying  to  write  out  all  the  voice  parts 
on  one  stave.  He  has,  however,  mutilated  the  music  in 
so  doing,  and  I  give  it  here  in  score,  emending  the  obvious 
errors. 


56 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Marcello. 


Violins 
in  Unison. 


Continuo. 


Ex.  27 


It: 


:S=^ 


=^=^ 


Che     ma-es-ta  ! 


ife 


:tf^ 


:f:&W: 


che  bri  -  o  !       che  brio  !  che  lu-mi- 


/e--m*- 


fe^    -  J- 


K 


1*^ 


jg 


?se3 


:p=^P 


^^. 


p=p=^ 


3l 


li: 


^ 


^-1^ 


Kf:^ 


W^ 


±i^k^ 


->- 


-^^ 


se,  lu-mi-no  -  se         fa    -    ci ! 


Decio. 


i^dz: 


Non  mi  tra-dir,    ben  mi 


i 


4    3 


Eraclea. 


:^^=p: 


i^c^ 


^    f.  r.  V 


t^ 


^f=^ 


A  -  ma-mi, 


\r-^^^ 


■^-■^- 


ta    -    ci. 

Flavia. 


fe^ 


f 


t; 


Che    vaghe 


^ 


I r      bgg^L::,j 


^bJ^     !    J_^ 


-^-P- 


i=^ 


£ 


3ti=i^: 


^-=x 


Flavia. 


j^gEJEg^^ 


W 


la -bra  a  -  me 


±k 


ne  I 
Irene  {Co7ifraltd). 


r==: 


=^ 


gz=^— 1»-*^ 


:^ 


^^:^^^ 


^^ 


Che  dol  -  ci       rai     vi  -  va 


Iliso. 


Ingan-na- 


6     6 


s^ 


Damiro. 


^—^ 


z^zzts 


e=^^^^g=£=d£g^ 


Quan  -  to,  quan-to,  quan-to,  cor  mio,  mi     pia 


t=^ 


W^ 


■  trice  I  -  re  -  ne  ! 


S^=T^=^ 


^r  ^hcL^i 


*ES 


te^fe 


_-     .^ 


^ 


^-. 


±i: 


^ 


Eraclea. 


«   6    a 


^ 


r.  ^^r     - 


Vltej 


Marcello 


£S=& 


^ 


?fc^ 


A-mami, 


-r     ^    r  i 


t^=^ 


^^ 


Ser-vi,      e        ta  - 


:i=¥: 


E^ 


Che  maesta! 

Decio. 


chebri-o ! 


S=P 


=^=^ 


H^—- -i^ 


Non  mi  tra-dir, 


ben  mi  -  o  ! 


\x^ 


r=ft=p=: 


^=^^^^^' 


-a^'ar-j:^. 


**-:5l^^ 


id2 


^=^ 


l^i^ 


^ 


:?5:^e: 


:qnq=^ 


:e=^J:* 


m 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


:^:^=t: 


Damiro. 


ci 


I. 
Flavia. 


-r-=^ 


Quan  ••  -    to  mi  pia-ci ! 

Marcello. 
Q- zgr— ' 


^^E^ 


=F=F= 


^vl2: 


Che    vaghela-bra! 
Irene. 


Che  lu-mi- 


Che  dol  -  ci        rai  I 

ILISO. 


:S=^ 


n 


±zz 


^^^^^3^E^^ 


In-gan-na-tri-ce  ! 


;g=j=^ 


^^ 


-qq-Tj 


^=s 


iidi 


b 


e 


:r^=^=4 


^ 


i 


.Eraclea. 


f 


^==^:^:; 


E 


ta  -  ci. 


-'^*=^ 


^-^  ^  rr^ 


g^-g-rg 


:^^ 


^^ 


^=^- 


se,  lu-mi -no  -  se  fa  -    ci! 


yz: 


Si^ 


:3=«fc 


rtJ 


i 


-F- 1;-  f  -     r 


^■E^Z 


:^=zPiz:: 


4   3 


There  is  nothing  in  any  previous  opera  of  Scarlatti's  that 
in  the  least  leads  up  to  this.  It  was  hardly  the  sort  of 
thing  to  please  a  Neapolitan  audience,  except  by  its 
novelty,  and  the  composer  did  not  repeat  the  experiment 
until  nearly  twenty  years  later.  We  cannot  regard  it  as 
being  a  direct  ancestor  of  the  concerted  finale,  but  it  was 


NAPLES  59 

at  any  rate  an  interesting  contribution  to  the  technique  of 
ensemble  writing. 

It  was  during  this  period  of  Scarlatti's  activity  that  he 
definitely  settled  the  form  of  the  Italian  overture.  During 
the  seventeenth  century  the  opera  overture  had  been 
gradually  developed  and  extended,  mainly  by  the  Vene- 
tians ;  but  the  struggle  between  counterpoint  and  harmony 
was  still  undecided  by  the  time  that  Scarlatti  began  his 
career.  If  the  use  of  free  imitation  in  a  fugal  style  was  a 
convenient  aid  to  the  composition  of  vocal  chamber  music, 
it  was  still  more  so  in  writing  for  the  orchestra  alone.  It 
was  natural,  therefore,  that  when  composers  began  to  write 
quick  movements  as  introductions  to  operas  they  should 
make  use  of  contrapuntal  forms.  But  the  Italians  soon 
found  that  it  was  quite  sufficient  to  start  a  movement 
contrapuntally  and  then  abandon  counterpoint  as  soon  as 
all  the  voices  had  entered.  It  is  easy  to  sneer  at  them,  as 
Gounod  has  been  sneered  at,  for  "setting  out  with  a 
pompous  fugue  exposition  and  discarding  counterpoint  at 
the  moment  when  its  difficulties  begin."  But  in  dramatic 
music,  where  a  parade  of  learning  is  out  of  place,  and  a 
composer  is  bound  to  do  his  best  to  get  the  maximum  of 
effective  contrast  with  the  minimum  of  labour,  Cavalli  did 
quite  right  to  remember  that  the  fewer  the  parts  are  in  a 
contrapuntal  movement,  the  more  "contrapuntal"  it  will 
sound,  and  that  when  all  the  instruments  are  playing  their 
loudest  together,  plain  harmonic  successions  will  produce 
the  most  imposing  result.  With  Cavalli  and  his  immediate 
followers  there  is  no  regular  plan  for  the  connexion  of 
different  movements  in  an  overture.  The  fragmentary 
slow  movements  still  survived,  but  the  scheme  of  the  over- 
ture as  a  whole  was  not  clearly  organized.  The  tendency, 
if  any,  was  to  the  French  form,  though  the.  fugato  between 
two  slow  movements,  as  written  by  Cavalli  and  Agostini,  is 
still  far  removed  in  spirit  from  the  pompous  Lullian  type.^ 

1  For  a  more  detailed  treatment  of  the  subject  see  "  Die  Venetianischen 
Opern-Sinfonien,"  by  Dr.  Alfred  Heuss,  in  the  Saimnelband  der  Internationalen 
Musikgesellschaft,  Jahrg.  iv.  3. 


6o  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

Scarlatti's  early  overtures  are  still  experimental.  "  Gli 
Equivoci  "  has  a  slow  introduction,  not  stiffly  rhythmical, 
like  Lulli's,  but  built  up  of  organ-like  suspensions  in  the 
regular  Italian  manner,  followed  by  a  quick  movement  in 
f  time  in  a  rough  ternary  form  somewhat  obscured  by  its 
vagueness  of  tonality  ;  after  this  comes  a  "  ballettoy  This 
final  dance  movement  is  the  essential  characteristic  of  all 
Scarlatti's  opera  overtures  from  "Gli  Equivoci"  to  "  Gri- 
selda,"  It  appears  in  various  forms — minuet,  march  or 
gigue — and  occurs  in  some  of  the  oratorio  overtures  as 
well,  though  in  these  it  generally  wears  the  more  sober 
guise  of  an  allemande.  The  distinguishing  features  of  the 
movement  are  its  clear  division  into  two  parts,  each  re- 
peated, and  its  vigorously  rhythmical  character. 

The  balletto,  which  occurs  several  times  in  Scarlatti's 
early  works,  is  a  dance  of  quite  definite  character,  as  this 
example  from  "Gli  Equivoci"  will  show — 

Ex.    28.         A|       ,  >  ^_>  w^m  »-^        < 


.4^A^^M-^^--      ^^^z*^*   *^*   •^=    t^^    d^ji: 


-^f 


Its  characteristic  feature  is  the  "double  knock"  at  the 
beginning,  and  the  fact  of  this  being  the  first  type  of 
dance  tune  selected  by  Scarlatti  to  conclude  his  overtures, 
shows  how  much  importance  he  attached  to  the  insertion 
in  this  place  of  a  sharply  rhythmic  movement. 

"  Pompeo  "  begins  with  a  grave  of  fifteen  bars  in  a 
definitely  binary  form,  followed  by  two  dance  movements, 
a  balletto  and  a  corrente,  though  neither  is  expressly  so 
called.  "La  Rosmene "  (1688)  exhibits  a  similar  form. 
This  type  of  overture  is  found  also  in  some  of  the  early 
chamber  cantatas  with  instrumental  accompaniment ;  in 
these  a  solid  alleo-j^o  in  the  Qrrand  manner  would  have  been 
out  of  place.      The   oratorio  "Agar  et    Ismaele"  (1683) 


NAPLES  6 1 

brings  us  nearer  to  the  "Italian  overture"  type.  It 
begins  with  a  grave  in  a  very  clearly  binary  form 
(A1A2B0B1) ;  then  comes  a  presto  in  the  Venetian 
style,  starting  contrapuntally,  but  continuing  on  a 
harmonic  basis.  A  largo,  which  is  purely  transitional, 
leads  into  a  square-cut  movement  in  two  repeated  sections, 
followed  by  a  curious  little  coda  in  a  different  tempo.  This 
type  of  coda  never  occurs  in  the  opera  overtures,  but  in 
most  of  the  oratorios  and  serenatas  there  is  some  sort  of 
attempt  to  make  the  overture  run  straight  on  into  the 
work  itself  It  is  not  so  much  a  tail-piece  to  what  precedes 
as  an  introduction  to  what  follows,  and  seems  to  have  been 
designed  to  provide  a  new  nervous  stimulus  to  the  audience 
to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  one  which  they  would  have 
received  in  the  theatre  on  the  rising  of  the  curtain.  We 
find  much  the  same  form  in  "La  Rosaura "  (1690),  an 
analysis  of  which  is  given  in  the  "  Oxford  History  of 
Music,"  vol.  iii.  Two  serenatas  of  1696  ("  Genio  di 
Partenope "  and  "  Venere,  Adone,  Amore ")  give  us  a 
quick  movement  in  clear  binary  form,  both  preceded  by 
an  introduction  of  slow  suspensions  and  followed  by  a 
dance  movement ;  in  the  second  this  is  separated  from  the 
presto  by  fifteen  bars  of  ti^emolo  passing  through  various 
chromatic  chords  from  the  relative  minor  to  the  tonic. 
This  overture  marks  the  transition  to  the  new  style.  The 
first  example  of  it  is  the  overture  written  about  1696  for 
the  revival  of  "  Dal  Male  il  Bene."  The  slow  introduc- 
tion drops  out  altogether,  the  overture  beginning  at  once 
with  a  quick  movement  in  no  very  definite  form,  though 
more  or  less  ternary  as  regards  key  distribution.  K  grave 
of  eioht  bars  leads  from  the  relative  minor  to  its  dominant 
through  various  suspensions,  and  the  overture  ends  with  a 
minuet  in  two  repeated  sections.  From  this  date  the  over- 
ture form  is  fixed,  and  hardly  ever  varies.  The  first 
movement  gradually  develops  into  a  more  organized  struc- 
ture ;  the  second  fluctuates  between  a  mere  chromatic 
transition  passage  and  a  definite  slow  movement ;  the  third 
exhibits     all    varieties     of    rhythm — but    the    main    idea 


62 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


remains  the  same.  It  took  some  time,  however,  to  arrive 
at  a  clear  alternating  binary  form  (AiBoAiBi)  in  the  first 
movement.  In  "La  Caduta  de'  Decemviri"  Scarlatti  still 
retains  the  old-fashioned  arrangement  AiAoB^B^,  in  which 
the  subjects  do  not  alternate.  "11  Prigioniero  Fortunato  "  ^ 
provides  no  more  than  a  series  of  antiphonal  trumpet 
flourishes  ;  the  opportunity  for  colour  effects  provided  by 
the  use  of  four  trumpets  seems  to  have  distracted  the 
composer's  attention.  In  "  Eraclea"  there  is  more  definite 
organization,  though  the  type  is  more  that  of  a  rondo. 
The  first  subject  is  given  out  by  the  trumpets — 


Ex.  29. 


Trumpets 
in  Unison. 


Continue. 


te 


i^iig^^^ 


^^^^^^ 


e#E± 


:r-/*- 


i 


-^ 


and  immediately  repeated  by  the  flutes  and  oboes,  the 
trumpets  continuing  an  independent  part,  from  which  we 
may  infer  that  the  two  groups  balanced  in  tone,  though  we 
certainly  should  not  expect  them  to  do  so  now  if  playing 
forte.     This  is  followed  by  a  second  subject — 


Ex.  30. 

Tru7npets. 


Violins. 


after  which  the  first  reappears  in  the  violins,  in  its  original 
key.  The  second  subject  is  then  developed  in  various 
keys,  as  far  as  the  trumpets  will  permit,  and  finally  the 
first  subject  reappears  imitated  at  half  a  bar's  distance  by 
flutes  and  oboes  in  unison,  violins,  and  trumpets  in  turn, 


^  Extracts  are  to  be  found  in  Grove's  Dictionary  of  Music  and  Musicians, 
vol.  iii.  p.  620. 


NAPLES  62 

ending  with  two  and  a  half  bars  of  coda  on  the  tonic  and 
dominant.  The  whole  movement  occupies  only  twenty- 
bars,  and  is  a  very  neat  piece  of  construction. 

These  extracts  from  "  Eraclea "  will  also  show  the 
change  that  was  taking  place  in  Scarlatti's  melodic  style. 
Dealing  always  with  conventional  passions,  his  melodies 
get  conventionalized,  and  his  operatic  style  gradually  di- 
verges farther  and  farther  from  the  intimate  intellectuality  of 
his  chamber-music.  "  La  Rosaura,"  of  which  two  acts  have 
been  reprinted  by  the  Gesellschaft  fill'-  Musikforschung,  is 
very  characteristic  of  the  composer  at  his  best,  representing 
a  slightly  earlier  style,  and  one  that  approaches  more  nearly 
to  that  of  the  chamber-music.  It  was  performed  both  at 
Rome  and  Naples  in  1690,  but  though  there  is  no  definite 
evidence  of  date,  it  is  almost  certain  that  it  was  originally 
written  for  Rome  for  private  festivities  on  the  occasion  of 
two  marriages  in  the  Ottoboni  family.  It  is  eminently 
suited  for  a  private  performance,  being  on  the  same  sort  of 
small  scale  and  in  the  same  quiet  pastoral  manner  as  "  Gli 
Equivoci  nel  Sembiante."  It  seems  to  have  been  revived 
later,  as  the  only  two  complete  manuscripts  of  the  score 
show  considerable  differences,  especially  in  the  third  act, 
which  possibly  was  one  reason  why  the  recent  reprint  did 
not  include  more  than  the  first  two.  "  La  Statira,"  com- 
posed in  the  same  year,  is  a  very  fine  example  of  the 
grand  manner.^  The  libretto,  by  Cardinal  Ottoboni,  is  very 
typically  baroque,  but  is  on  the  whole  interesting,  and 
presents  several  good  situations.  Scarlatti  seems  to  have 
treated  it  with  more  care  than  usual,  and  has  drawn 
his  characters  very  clearly.  Not  only  are  the  principal 
figures  well  distinguished — the  youthful  and  magnanimous 
Alessandro,  Statira  magnificent  in  despair,  but  also  the 
minor  personages  —  Oronfe,  cherishing  a  secret  passion 
which  at  times  breaks  out  savagely  ;  Campaspe,  worldly  and 
frivolous,  yet  attractive  in  her  way  ;  Perinto,  the  boy  of 
inexhaustible  cheerfulness  ;  Demetrio,  the  rough  but  kind- 
hearted  old  soldier;  and ^/^//^,  the  rather  languishing  painter 

^  An  extract  is  printed  in  the  "  Oxford  History  of  Music,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  385. 


64  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

— all  are  quite  clearly  individualized.  There  are  no  comic 
scenes ;  Perinto  is  the  only  approach  to  a  parte  buffa,  and 
he  has  very  little  to  do  ;  but  all  through  there  runs  a  little 
vein  of  humour,  as  in  the  libretto  of  Scarlatti's  later  opera 
"  Tigrane,"  which  rather  seems  to  suggest  that  the  author, 
in  the  true  spirit  of  the  baroque,  caught  the  grotesque 
aspect  of  his  own  creations.  The  airs  are  for  the  most 
part  strikingly  good,  and  the  opera  is  also  very  interesting 
from  its  employment  of  recitativo  stromentato.  As  we 
have  already  seen,  the  device  had  been  used  by  Scar- 
latti before,^  but  in  "La  Statira"  it  is  employed  with 
great  dramatic  effect,  both  on  the  first  rising  of  the  curtain, 
when  Oronte  is  discovered  on  guard  with  the  Persian  army 
in  the  moonlight,  and  later  in  the  introduction  to  his  fine 
air  ^'  Re  trafitto''  {'' Crudo  cielo,  empio  fato''\  in  which 
Scarlatti  makes  use  of  a  more  vigorous  and  broken  style  of 
accompaniment  than  he  had  hitherto  attempted.  The 
whole  opera  has  that  sense  of  brilliant  effect  that  charac- 
terizes the  gorgeous  frescoes  with  which  the  school  of 
Guido  Reni  decorated  the  palaces  of  Rome  or  Bologna. 

"  Pirro  e  Demetrio  "  (1694)  is  perhaps  the  best  of  the 
earlier  Neapolitan  operas.  Its  airs  show  us  Scarlatti  in 
his  first  maturity,  after  he  had  definitely  shaken  off  the 
traditions  of  Stradella  and  Legrenzi,  and  begun  to  develop 
a  style  that  may  be  considered  as  really  his  own.  The 
opera  had  a  great  success,  and  even  reached  England  ; 
it  was  performed  in  London  in  an  English  version  in 
1708,  and  no  doubt  contributed  much  to  the  popularization 
of  Italian  opera  in  this  country.  Unfortunately  it  was  the 
only  one  of  Scarlatti's  operas  that  was  ever  given  in 
London  as  a  whole.  With  the  advent  of  Italian  singers 
came  the  custom  of  "  polyglot  opera,"  which  has  survived 
down  to  our  own  time,  though  we  have  for  the  most  part 
got  rid  of  the  ''■pasticcio''  as  the  favourite  type  of  operatic 

^  In  the  reprint  of  "  La  Rosaura"  published  by  the  Gesellschaft  fiir  Musik- 
forschung,  Professor  Eitner stated  that  the  recitativo  stro7nentato  in  Act  III. 
was  the  earUest  known.  It  cannot,  however,  be  even  anterior  to  that  in  "  La 
Statira,"  as  it  is  found  only  in  the  manuscript  representing  a  later  revival  of 
the  opera. 


NAPLES  6s 

entertainment.  Some  of  the  airs  in  "  Pirro  e  Demetrio  " 
are  well  known  still — ''  RiLgiadose,  odorose"  and  ''Ben  ti 
sta,  traditor^'  both  reprinted  fairly  recently,  are  typical 
examples  of  Scarlatti's  style  during  this  period. 

But  with  "  La  Caduta  dei  Decemviri"  (1697)  and  "  II 
Prigioniero  fortunato  "  (1698)  there  appears  a  new  element. 
Here  Scarlatti  either  languishes  to  cloying  airs  in  J^^-  time, 
all  charming,  and  all  exactly  alike/  or  else  stamps  across 
the  boards  to  music  of  that  straightforward,  square-cut 
character  that  one  would  naturally  describe  as  "  Han- 
delian."  They  remind  one  of  nothing  so  much  as  Sullivan's 
famous  parody  in  "Princess  Ida."  Needless  to  say,  the 
style  did  not  originate  with  Handel,  and  judging  from 
Handel's  early  Italian  compositions,  it  does  not  seem 
likely  that  Handel  got  it  altogether  from  Scarlatti.  Its 
inventor  was  probably  Giovanni  Bononcini,  of  whom  it  is 
very  characteristic.  His  opera,  "  II  Trionfo  di  Camilla,"  per- 
formed at  Naples  in  1697,  is  full  of  vigorous,  incisive  rhythms 
of  this  type ;  and  some  readers  will  perhaps  recollect  the 
once  very  popular  airs  in  a  similar  style,  ''  L'esperto  iiocchi- 
67-0  "  and  "  Vado  ben  spesso^'  both  from  his  opera  "  Astarto."  ^ 
It  was  the  kind  of  tune  to  which  even  a  viceregal  foot 
could  quite  easily  beat  time,  and  no  doubt  Scarlatti  re- 
ceived an  intimation  from  high  quarters  that  he  would  do 
well  to  apply  his  talents  in  that  direction.  He  did,  and 
between  1697  and  1702  provided  the  viceroy  with  as  much 
rubbish  as  the  most  exalted  patron  of  the  fine  arts  could 
desire  to  encourage.  Nothinof  could  be  more  tedious  than 
to  wade  through  such  operas  as  "  Odoardo,"  "  Tiberio 
Imperatore  d'  Oriente,"  and  the  first  version  of  "Tito 
Sempronio  Gracco."  They  were  evidently  written  in  a 
great  hurry,  with  the  thinnest  possible  scoring,  and  seldom 
contain  anything  worth  remembering  except  now  and  then 

1  " Povern  Pellt\s;rina^''  (from  "II  Prigioniero  fortunato"),  reprinted  in  Les 
Gloires  de  Vltalie,  is  an  easily  accessible  example. 

^  "  Vado  ben  spesso  "  has  sometimes  been  erroneously  ascribed  to  Salvator 
Rosa.  "11  Trionfo  di  Camilla"  is  attributed  in  M.  Wotquenne's  catalogue  of 
libretti  to  M.  A.  Bononcini ;  but  a  score  at  Miinster,  dated  1697  (Naples, 
Teatro  S.  Bartolomeo),  bears  the  name  of  his  brother. 

E 


66  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

a  comic  scene  of  some  humour.  They  seem,  however,  to 
have  been  successful,  as  many  airs  have  survived  in  manu- 
script ;  still  we  may  note  that  whereas  of  the  earlier  operas 
we  often  find  complete  scores,  sometimes  written  out  in 
the  most  beautiful  handwritings,  and  elaborately  bound, 
these  later  Neapolitan  operas  are  hardly  ever  to  be  found 
complete.  Of  most  of  them  we  possess  only  collections  of 
airs,  without  any  recitatives  to  connect  them  with  an  in- 
telligible story,  except  in  the  comic  scenes  ;  often  the 
instrumental  parts  are  omitted  with  the  exception  of  the 
bass,  and  the  handwriting  is  that  of  the  ordinary  copyist 
of  the  music-trade.  "Eraclea"  is  the  best  and  the  most 
characteristic  of  the  type;  "  Laodicea  e  Berenice"  (1701) 
seems  also  to  have  been  a  great  favourite,  no  doubt  on 
account  of  the  jerkily  pompous  style  of  most  of  its  airs. 

Not  only  at  the  theatres  of  the  palace  and  of  S.  Bar- 
tolomeo  was  Scarlatti's  work  in  demand,  but  also  for  the 
celebration  of  court  functions  and  the  entertainments  of 
the  nobility.  On  these  occasions  the  form  taken  by  the 
music  was  the  Serenata,  a  dramatic  cantata  for  from  two 
to  five  singers  accompanied  by  the  orchestra.  As  in  the 
operas,  the  chorus  hardly  ever  appears  at  all.  The  usual 
serenata  consists  simply  of  a  number  of  airs  and  duets 
strung  together  on  a  flimsy  thread  of  recitative.  The 
subjects  are  pastoral  or  mythological  ;  but,  as  with  the 
operas,  the  subjects  are  of  little  importance.  Arcadian 
love-making  at  the  beginning,  versified  politics  at  the 
end — one  could  scarcely  imagine  anything  less  inspiring. 
Conforto  has  many  very  vivid  descriptions  of  the  kind  of 
entertainment  for  which  it  was  evidently  the  proper  thing 
to  secure  the  services  of  the  royal  Maestro  di  Cappella, 
and  the  following  account,  though  it  certainly  tells  us  little 
about  the  actual  music,  gives  us  a  characteristic  glimpse 
of  the  social  surroundings  in  which  Scarlatti  was  obliged 
to  work  : — 

"  There  is  no  lack  of  change  to  be  seen  in  this  city,  the 
vanity  and  folly  of  both  the  nobles  and  the  people  having 
reached    its    highest ;    nor    do    they    care    if    they    reduce 


NAPLES  67 

themselves  to  poverty  to  satisfy  their  tastes.  Scipione 
Giavo  .  .  .  [obHteration  in  MS.]  posthumous  son  of 
Scipione  .  .  .  [obliteration  in  MS.]  not  wishing  to  do  less 
than  his  elder  brother,  who  wasted  all  his  inheritance  (and 
that  a  very  rich  one)  in  vain  extravagance  (wherefore  he 
is  reduced  to  living  in  some  straitness  on  nothing  but 
the  dowry  of  his  wife,  daughter  of  Captain  Peppo  Pepe), 
determined  that  he  too  would  ape  the  other's  ways  ;  where- 
fore, having  obtained  at  great  expense  from  the  Count 
Palatine  of  the  Rhine,  Duke  of  Neuburg,  the  title  of 
Marquis  of  Landskron,  of  which  he  took  possession  at  the 
Palace  in  order  to  enter  the  Chamber  of  Nobles,  he,  to 
this  same  end,  gave  an  entertainment,  lasting  several  days, 
in  a  house  of  his  near  the  fountain  of  Mont'  Oliveto,  in  the 
most  sumptuous  style,  inviting  ladies  and  gentlemen  of 
the  first  rank,  and  spending  indeed  some  thousands  of 
ducats.  Among  other  things,  on  Monday  of  last  week, 
the  eighth  of  this  month  [October  1691],  he  held  at  his 
house  a  most  lively  assembly,  with  the  choicest  music, 
consistinof  of  ten  instruments  and  four  of  the  best  voices  of 
this  city,  directed  by  the  Maestro  di  Cappella,  Alessandro 
Scarlati  [^/r]  ;  and  to  the  large  crowd  of  titled  persons, 
gentlemen,  and  ladies  that  attended,  he  caused  to  be 
offered  continuously  an  unspeakable  quantity  of  meats  and 
drinks  of  all  kinds,  with  various  fruits  both  fresh  and 
candied,  as  he  did  also  for  the  large  number  of  servants 
in  attendance  on  them.  His  palace  was  all  most  nobly 
decorated,  and  all  lit  with  wax  torches  as  far  as  the  court- 
yard ;  the  sideboard  consisted  of  two  long  tables  of  silver 
fairly  and  symmetrically  disposed,  and  there  was  visible 
in  the  distance  a  most  beautiful  fountain,  also  of  silver, 
which  for  seven  continuous  hours  spouted  perfumed  water, 
about  which  fluttered  a  large  number  of  live  birds.  There 
was  also  a  pavilion  of  crimson  damask,  under  which  were 
fourteen  superb  trionji^  of  fruit  both  fresh  and  candied,  as 
well  as  other  curious   inventions.     The   which   entertain- 

^  A  trio7ifo  was  an  erection  in  sugar,  &c.,  rather  after  the  manner  of  a 
modern  wedding-cake. 


68  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

ment  lasted  some  time  after  midnight,  the  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  according  to  their  usual  habit,  after  having 
hlled  their  bellies  and  their  bosoms  with  sweetmeats/  and 
having  had  every  pleasure  of  sight,  taste,  and  hearing, 
not  failing  to  scoff  and  make  a  mock  of  the  solemn  folly 
of  the  last  new  marquis." 

Evidently  the  music  was  quite  the  least  important 
feature  of  these  entertainments,  and  private  persons  merely 
imitated  the  extravagances  of  the  Spanish  court.  Yet, 
considering  the  occasions  for  which  they  were  written, 
Scarlatti's  earlier  Neapolitan  serenatas  are  fairly  good. 
The  most  charming  of  all  his  youthful  works  in  this  form, 
"  Diana  ed  Endimione,"  was  probably  written  before  he 
left  Rome,  as  it  is  in  the  careful  manner  of  his  earliest 
operas,  with  airs  on  the  smallest  possible  scale,  and  ac- 
companiments finished  with  a  delicacy  for  which  he  had 
no  time  at  Naples.  The  best  of  the  Neapolitan  serenatas 
is  one  composed  in  1696  for  the  birthday  of  the  viceroy's 
wife,  in  which  she  is  saluted  by  three  allegorical  represen- 
tatives of  Naples,  the  Genius  of  Parthenope,  the  Delight 
of  Mergellina^  and  the  Glory  of  Sebeto^"  Here  Scarlatti 
seizes  such  advantages  as  the  form  presented.  Not  being 
represented  on  the  stage,  there  was  more  scope  for  purely 
musical  treatment,  and  the  composer  could  approximate 
more  nearly  to  the  chamber  style  ;  at  the  same  time  the 
very  best  singers  were  available.  The  result  is  something 
half-way  between  the  chamber  and  the  sta^e,  and  this 
particular  example  contains  some  very  good  music,  the 
most  attractive  number  being  an  air,  ''Venticelli  lenti,  lenii,'' 
accompanied  by  the  concerto  grosso  and  two  concerli/ii,  one 
at  a  distance,  producing  the  effect  of  two  sets  of  echoes. 
The  final   air,   "  Godi  e  spera,''  in   which  the   Gloria  del 

1  "  Doppio  cfhaversi  empito  il  ventre  et  il  seno  di  candiii" — Conforto  seems 
to  mean  either  that  they  stuffed  sweetmeats  into  the  bosoms  of  their  dresses  to 
take  home  with  them,  or  perhaps  more  probably  that,  being  greedy  and  in  a 
hurry,  they  spilt  half  of  what  they  tried  to  eat. 

^  The  Mergellina  (the  extreme  part  of  the  Riviera  di  Chiaja,  before  the 
ascent  towards  Posillipo)  and  the  river  Sebeto  are  the  western  and  eastern 
boundaries  of  the  city. 


NAPLES  69 

Sebeto  expresses  the  hope  that  the  viceroy's  wife  will 
shortly  give  birth  to  a  son  and  heir,  is  also  extremely 
beautiful. 

Indeed,  in  writing  music  of  this  kind  Scarlatti  seems  to 
have  been  less  quickly  influenced  by  the  style  of  Bononcini 
than  in  the  opera.  Even  the  serenata,  "  Clori,  Dorino, 
Amore,"  composed  for  the  visit  of  Philip  V.  of  Spain  to 
Naples  in  1702,  and  sung  while  the  king  was  at  supper, 
though  it  contains  nothing  very  striking,  is  still  good 
on  the  whole.  It  is  not  until  we  reach  "  II  Giardino 
d'  Amore "  that  we  find  Scarlatti  descending  to  positive 
vulgarity.  The  date  of  this  serenata  cannot  be  definitely 
fixed,  nor  can  we  be  certain  whether  it  was  written  for 
Rome  or  Naples  ;  but  it  is  more  probably  Neapolitan, 
owing  to  the  inclusion  of  an  air  with  a  florid  violin  solo, 
which  also  occurs  in  "  Laodicea  e  Berenice,"  produced  at 
Naples  in  1701. 

But  although  the  chamber  style  still  afforded  Scarlatti 
an  opportunity  of  writing  serious  music,  as  will  be  shown 
in  the  next  chapter,  yet  Naples  was  becoming  more  and 
more  irksome  to  him.  He  was  probably  in  financial  diffi- 
culties, since  in  February  1699  he  had  written  to  complain 
of  his  stipend  being  four  months  in  arrear,  adding  that  he 
was  urgently  in  need  of  payment  owing  to  the  large  family 
which  he  had  to  support.^  He  no  doubt  earned  a  certain 
amount  by  his  operas  and  serenatas,  but  we  may  be  sure 
that  the  kind  of  patrons  whose  reckless  extravagance 
Conforto  describes  were  not  very  likely  to  have  been 
regular  in  payment  of  their  debts.  The  political  dis- 
turbances of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  may  very  well  have 
been  an  additional  reason  for  his  decidino-  to  leave  the 
capital  and  find  a  home  elsewhere.  The  struggles  for 
the  Spanish  succession  had  been  troubling  the  peace  of 
Europe    for  some  little   time,   and   in    1703   the  Austrian 

^  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato,  Matidati  dei  Vicerc,  vol.  313,  fol.  138.  From 
the  registers  of  the  church  of  Montesanto,  quoted  on  page  38,  it  would  appear 
that  \\\'s''''  7iumerosa  fainiglia"  consisted  of  three  children  only:  but  perhaps 
others  had  been  born  to  him,  and  baptized  elsewhere. 


70  ALESSANDRO  SCARLATTI 

claimant,  the  Archduke  Charles,  formally  assumed  the 
title  of  King  of  Spain  as  Charles  III.  On  May  5,  1705, 
he  was  proclaimed  king  at  Madrid,  and  on  July  7,  1707, 
Count  Daun  marched  into  Naples  at  the  head  of  the 
Austrian  troops,  being  appointed  viceroy  very  soon 
afterwards;  not,  however,  for  long,  as  in  July  1708  he 
was  sent  to  Piedmont  on  active  service,  and  was  succeeded 
by  Cardinal  Grimani,  a  Venetian.  We  shall  see  later  how 
favourable  a  reception  Scarlatti  obtained  when  he  yielded 
to  the  cardinal's  persuasions,  and  returned  in  1 709  ;  it 
therefore  seems  reasonable  to  connect  his  departure  from 
Naples  in  some  way  with  politics,  although  there  is  no 
means  of  knowing  whether  he  himself  took  any  active  part 
in  them. 


CHAPTER    III 

FLORENCE,    1702;     ROME,    1703-1706;    VENICE,    1707 

On  January  9,  1702,  Scarlatti  applied  for  ten  months' 
leave  of  absence  on  full  stipend  for  himself  and  his  son 
Domenico.  It  can  hardly  surprise  us  that  this  was  not 
granted  ;  nevertheless,  on  June  14,  he  succeeded  in  obtain- 
ing leave  for  himself  and  his  son  to  go  to  Florence  for  four 
months.^  At  Florence  he  was  under  the  protection  of 
Ferdinand  III.,  son  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  and 
though  he  never  held  any  regular  appointment  under  him, 
as  far  as  we  know,  he  was  employed  by  him  to  write  operas 
for  several  years.  The  prince  was  keenly  devoted  to 
music,  and  if  we  may  to  some  extent  trust  the  flattering 
letters  that  he  received  from  various  musicians,  he  possessed 
some  considerable  skill  in  the  art  himself. 

He  appears  to  have  been  a  good  performer  on  the 
harpsichord,  and  some  interesting  instruments  still  survive 
that  were  made  for  him  by  Bartolomeo  Cristofori,  the 
inventor  of  the  pianoforte.  Fired  with  enthusiasm  after  a 
state  visit  to  Venice  in  1687,  then,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
most  celebrated  city  in  Italy  for  operas,  he  built  a  theatre 
at  his  villa  of  Pratolino,  not  far  from  Florence,  and  started 
a  series  of  operatic  performances  there.  He  also  gave  his 
protection  to  the  opera-houses  of  Florence,  Pisa,  and  Leg- 
horn, and  probably  of  other  Tuscan  towns  as  well.  He 
took  the  most  detailed  personal  interest  in  the  performances, 
selecting  the  librettists  himself,  and  giving  the  most  minute 
directions  to  the  composers  as  to  the  style  in  which  he 
wished  them  to  be  set  to  music,  a  great  part  of  his 
voluminous  correspondence  being  still  preserved  in  the 
Archivio  Mediceo  at  F"lorence. 

1  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato,  Mandati  del  Vicere,  vol.  317,  foL  80  verso, 
and  vol.  318,  fol.  60. 


72  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

Scarlatti's  early  connection  with  Ferdinand  is  not  easy 
to  determine.  Probably  his  first  appearance  on  the 
Tuscan  stage  was  in  1688,  when  "  Pompeo "  was  given 
at  Leghorn.  The  same  year,  however,  he  produced  "  II 
Figlio  delle  Selve  "  at  Florence  in  the  Teatro  della  Pergola, 
rebuilt  at  the  prince's  direction  and  newly  opened  on  the 
occasion  of  his  wedding.  This  was  not  a  new  opera, 
having  been  given  at  Rome  in  1687,  and  possibly  earlier. 
It  is  a  ''favola  boscareccia,''  and,  though  rather  absurd, 
contains  some  good  music,  in  a  style  that  points  to  a  fairly 
early  date  of  composition.  Another  opera,  of  which  the 
title  is  not  known,  came  out  at  Pratolino  in  1690,  and 
in  1698  "  L' Anacreonte  Tiranno,"  which  had  appeared 
in  Naples  nine  years  before.  But  although  these  first 
operas  of  Scarlatti  performed  at  Pratolino  were  not  entirely 
new,  they  were  probably  much  rewritten.  The  sixteen 
airs  which  survive  of  the  version  of  "  Flavio  Cuniberto" 
given  at  Pratolino,  are  not  to  be  found  in  either  score 
or  libretti  representing  earlier  performances  ;  indeed,  the 
manuscript  describes  the  opera  as  ''  niiovainente  posta  in 
musical  It  was  probably  for  this  performance  that 
Scarlatti  went  to  Florence  in  1702,  Once  safely  out  of 
Naples,  he  had  no  intention  of  returning.  He  appears 
to  have  stayed  on  at  F^lorence  for  the  production  of 
"  Arminio"  in  the  following  year,  but  he  probably  found 
that  Ferdinand  was  not  inclined  to  give  him  a  permanent 
appointment,  as  he  went  to  Rome  at  the  end  of  the  year. 
He  nevertheless  continued  to  write  operas  for  Pratolino,  and 
during  the  next  few  years  carried  on  a  considerable  corre- 
spondence with  the  prince,  evidently  in  the  hope  of  obtain- 
ing some  more  satisfactory  position  than  he  held  in  Rome. 

On  the  recommendation  of  Cardinal  Pietro  Ottoboni, 
Archpriest  of  S.  Maria  Maggiore  {^Basilica  Liberiana)  at 
Rome,  the  chapter  of  that  church  had  on  December  31, 
1703,  appointed  him  assistant  Maestro  di  Cappella  to 
Antonio  Foggia.^     The  appointment  cannot  have  been  a 

1  Archives  of  S.    Maria   Maggiore.     This  is  the  only  occasion  on   which 
Scarlatti's  name  occurs  there. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  73 

very  lucrative  one  compared  to  that  which  he  had  held  at 
Naples,  at  least  if  his  salary  had  been  paid  him,  and  the 
subordinate  position  in  a  purely  ecclesiastical  establish- 
ment must  have  been  additionally  irksome  to  him.  Naples 
indeed  seems  still  to  have  held  out  some  hope  of  his  re- 
turning, as  his  post  there  was  not  officially  declared  vacant 
until  October  25,   1704.^ 

How  unsatisfactory  both  places  were  to  him  may  be 
seen  from  his  letters  to  Ferdinand  de'  Medici.  He  writes 
to  him  from  Rome  on  May  30,  1 705,  presenting  his  son 
Domenico,  whom  he  has  sent  on  a  musical  tour  with 
Nicolino,  the  singer: — 

"  I  have  removed  him  [Domenico]  by  force  from 
Naples,  where  his  talent  had  room  indeed,  but  it  was  not 
the  sort  of  talent  for  that  place  {dove  bene  he  avesse  luogo  il 
siw  talento,  non  era  talento  per  quel  huogo).  I  send  him 
away  from  Rome  also,  since  Rome  has  no  roof  to  shelter 
Music,  that  lives  here  in  beggary." "" 

Writing  again  (July  18,  1705)  about  his  opera,  "  Lucio 
Manlio,"  which  was  to  be  produced  at  Pratolino,  he 
says: — 

"  May  your  Royal  Highness  deign  to  regard  the  opera 
as  your  vassal ;  and  as  a  wandering  maiden  who,  with  no 
home  to  shelter  her  from  the  mocking  blows  of  fortune, 
kneels  at  the  feet  of  your  Royal  Highness,  and  invokes 
as  a  suppliant  the  mighty  shield  of  your  high  protection 
and  assistance,  as  in  a  safe  harbour  where  she  may  rest 
without  having  to  fear  the  violence  of  the  tempest."" 

This  flowery  language  appears  to  mean  that  neither  in 
Naples  nor  in  Rome  could  Scarlatti  find  an  opera-house  to 
produce  his  works  ;  and  this  was  very  probably  the  case, 
owing  to  political  disturbances  at  Naples,  and  at  Rome 
owing  to  clerical  hostility.  Pope  Innocent  XL,  as  we 
have  seen,  did  all  he  could  to  suppress  operatic  perform- 
ances,  although   they  were  carried   on  with   some  success 

1  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato,  Maiidati  dei  Vicere^  vol.  319,  foL  20. 
-  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filza  5891,  No.  502. 
^  Ibid.,  Filza  5903,  No.  165. 


74  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

by  various  noble  impresari  under  the  pretence  of  private 
entertainments.  The  short  pontificate  of  Alexander  VIII. 
(Ottoboni),  who,  being  a  Venetian,  was  known  as  Papa 
Pantalone,  as  his  Milanese  predecessor  was  called  Papa 
Minga^  was  more  favourable  to  opera,  especially  as  his 
great-nephew  Pietro,  whom  he  raised  to  the  purple  in 
1690,  cherished  ambitions  as  a  dramatic  composer.  The 
young  cardinal's  opera,  "Colombo,"  which  was  performed 
at  Rome  in  1692,  was  not  very  successful — an  amusing- 
satire  on  it  is  quoted  by  M.  Wotquenne  in  his  catalogue 
of  Italian  libretti — but  he  was  certainly  a  sincere  and 
enthusiastic  lover  of  music,  and  will  always  be  remembered 
gratefully  in  the  history  of  the  art  for  the  generous  en- 
couragement which  he  gave  to  Corelli,  Alessandro  and 
Domenico  Scarlatti,  Handel,  and  many  other  musicians. 
Alessandro's  friendly  relations  with  him  probably  dated 
from  1690,  when  he  set  his  libretto  of  "  La  Statira"  and 
also  composed  "  La  Rosaura"  for  festivities  at  the  French 
Embassy  in  honour  of  the  marriages  of  Marco  Ottoboni 
with  Tarquinia  Colonna  and  of  Urbano  Barberini  with 
Cornelia  Ottoboni.  Conforto  also  tells  us  that  when  the 
cardinal  and  his  father.  Prince  Antonio  Ottoboni,  a  general 
of  the  papal  army,  came  to  Naples  in  1694,  almost  the 
first  thing  they  did  was  to  go  and  hear  the  opera  at 
S.  Bartolomeo,  the  opera  being  Scarlatti's  "  Pirro  e 
Demetrio."  It  is  not  until  1707  that  we  have  definite 
evidence  of  Scarlatti's  being  his  Maestro  di  Cappella,"^ 
but  he  probably  received  the  appointment  immediately 
on  his  return  to  Rome  in  1703  or  1704.  The  cardinal 
seems  to  have  had  a  considerable  connexion  with  the 
French  government,  as  he  became  Protettore  del/a  Corona 
di  Francia  at  the  papal  court  in  17 10,  contrary  to  the 
will  of  the  Venetian  Senate,  who  for  this  offence  struck 
his  name  off  the  list  of  the  Venetian  nobility  and  deprived 
him  of  his  patrimony ;  and  it  may  have  been  partly 
through    his    interest    that    Lulli's    "  Armida "    was    per- 

^  Mitiga  is  a  Milanese  form  of  the  negative. 

-  He  is  so  described  in  the  Hbretto  of  "  Mitridate  Eupatore." 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  75 

formed  at  Rome  in  Italian  in  1690.  Innocent  XII.,  who 
became  Pope  in  1691,  was  not  favourable  to  opera,  but 
encouraged  oratorio ;  and  Alessandro  Scarlatti,  though 
principally  occupied  at  Naples,  composed  a  Christmas 
Oratorio  for  him  in  1695.  There  were  also  a  few  opera 
performances  during  his  reign,  including  Scarlatti's  "  La 
Teodora  Augusta"  (1693)  and  his  "  Gerone  Tiranno  di 
Siracusa "  (1694),  which  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
very  successful.  But  in  1697  ^^e  Pope  ordered  the  de- 
struction of  the  Tordinona  theatre  on  grounds  of  public 
morality — the  wits  of  Rome  quoting  the  psalm,  "■  Manus 
Uiae  fecerunt  ;;^^  et  sic  repente  praecipitas  me  " — since 
the  same  theatre  had  been  almost  entirely  rebuilt  earlier 
in  his  reign.  The  performances  were  also  forbidden  at 
the  Teatro  Capranica,  which  was  the  property  of  Count 
D'Alibert,  who  had  built  it  at  considerable  expense.  Even 
after  the  death  of  Innocent  XII.  things  were  little  better, 
there  being  no  performances  of  operas  that  year  on  account 
of  public  mourning.  During  the  next  two  years  (1701  and 
1702)  there  were  some  private  performances,  but  in  1703 
the  earthquake  again  put  a  stop  to  opera,  and  no  records 
of  further  operatic  productions  in  Rome  are  forthcoming 
until  1709,  when  the  Queen  of  Poland  (Marie  Casimir) 
took  Domenico  Scarlatti  into  her  service. 

Under  such  circumstances  Alessandro,  as  long  as  he 
remained  in  Rome,  was  inevitably  reduced  to  confining 
his  talents  to  the  chamber  and  the  church.  Fortunately 
Cardinal  Ottoboni  was  as  devoted  to  chamber-music  as  to 
the  opera,  and  it  was  at  his  weekly  music  meetings  that 
Scarlatti's  cantatas  were  in  the  greatest  demand.  An 
exceptionally  large  number  of  them  date  from  this  period, 
beginning  indeed  as  early  as  1701,  and  it  is  interesting  to 
see  that  while  Scarlatti  was  obliged  to  write  his  operas 
down  to  the  level  of  the  taste  of  the  Neapolitan  court,  he 
found  in  the  chamber-music  an  outlet  for  the  truer  utter- 
ances of  his  genius.  At  Rome  these  were  better  appre- 
ciated, and  the  more  genuinely  musical  atmosphere  of  the 
place,  as  well  as  the  influence  of  such  musicians  as  Corelli 


76 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


and  Francischiello  the  violoncellist  soon  made  itself  appa- 
rent in  the  steady  improvement  of  his  work  from  both  the 
poetical  and  the  technical  point  of  view. 

The  charming  cantata  "  Sarei  troppo  felice  "  is  one  of 
the  most  interesting  of  those  written  before  he  left  Naples/ 
It  is  rather  more  elaborate  in  form  than  most,  and  shows 
the  way  in  which  Scarlatti  was  constantly  using  the  cantata 
as  a  field  for  experiment.  It  begins  with  a  very  charac- 
teristic arioso, 


:4:: 


-^ ■.r-^=^^ 


-f» — 0-' 


1^3: 


fj' 


±±^=^ 


:k ^-^1=: 


Sa  -  rei     trop-po    fe  -    li  -  ce, 


W-- 


:^ 


=:d=t: 


t^4 
2 


^'-  u^  ^ -J— •(■ 


Sa   -  rei  trop  -  po  fe 


'^~- 


S'io   po  -  tes  -  si  dar  leg- go        al     mio    pen-sie     - 


=lv 


1 ^   <y  I  ^ — J 


t^^^^ 


ro.  Sa  -  rei     trop-po  fe  -    li  -  ce,  trop- po  trop- po    fe  - 


■•*^ — t — \ — F- 


The  autograph  bears  the  date  30  April  1702. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


77 


i^zz^: 


=:^s=«; 


li  -  ce,                S'io   po  -  tes  -  si  dar    leg  -  ge         al      mio  pen-sie 
,_f_-^L^^^, ^^f-^ ,-^_l ^/e^f: 


=£;i^ 


:e=^: 


fz^ 


*=t: 


I 


4     3 


J 


q^=!?^ 


£=^^r  •      ^g^g^ 


1^5- 


U*      >»     L^ 


e; 


S'io  po-tes  -  si  dar    leg 


ge  al    mio    pen  -  sie 


^fc3 


-^  u^- 


^ 


^ 


^E^ 


b6 


3^=^^ 


!^^ 


%-^-*-- 


dS 


>_^^ 


=5=? 


■;.   b  J '  ^  J .  ^ 


the  main  idea  of  which  is  repeated  several  times  in  the 
course  of  the  cantata.  These  repetitions  come  at  the  close 
of  the  recitatives,  and  are  all  much  curtailed  except  the 
final  one,  which  forms  the  conclusion  of  the  cajntata. 
Here  Scarlatti  treats  the  theme  at  greater  length.  I  iquote 
the  recitative  in  its  entirety,  so  that  the  scheme  of  key- 
relationship  may  be  understood.  The  preceding  aria  is  in 
G  minor. 


Ex.  32. 
Recit, 


^^ 


^  '  ^     ^ 


Js:=^ 


S=S 


^=r: 


^ 


•^^5^ 


^~^t 


Or  chi  bra-ma  go -der  tranquil-la      pa-ce,     pia-cer  fer-mo  e  sin- 


ee£ 


:^ 


78 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


5^ 


^at 


&-:^ 


it^   ^ 


^ 


^    ^    N     N- 


:t 


^S?^^ 


^izi 


te-ni  il  pen -sier,    se  v'e  ca-te- na  c'humanpen- 

I  I 

i d 


izz: 


It; 


■  ^^ '  ^  * 


:^^: 


qrzw^W 


5=5gB=^^^^ 


t^ 


H»q?=q«: 


3£SE? 


^k 


jt:^: 


sie-ro    in-ca-te-nar  si  van-ti  ;      io  per  me  lade-sio,    ma  non  la  spero. 


— &- 


^iId-^- 


~?=^ 


3^ 


:^ 


lS> 


M 


?fc 


:t=: 


4     3 


\ 


a  tempo. 


-^=^ 


:^ 


^=^ 


:^=i; 


i^z:^ 


Sa  -  rei      trop  -  po   fe    -    li  -  ce,    trop-po    fe  -  li    -    ce, 


i 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  79 


^_^L_^-r^_b^      J<^ 


:t^t2 


leg-ge         al     niio     pen  -  sie    -     ro,  al  mio  pen-sie-ro. 


rr-^'^w^m.    n  ■-^'^.*.  i        "^^—r 


43  "^ 

The  modulation  through  the  dominant  to  the  super- 
tonic,  as  soon  as  the  theme  ''  Sareitroppo  felice''  returns,  is 
unexpected,  the  hearer  being  accustomed  to  the  invariable 
return  of  the  theme  in  its  original  form.  But  the  variation 
is  welcome,  as  is  the  alteration  in  the  voice  part,  and  the 
return  to  F  major  is  made  all  the  more  striking  by  being 
deferred  and  brought  in  at  a  melodic  climax.  The  simple 
and  natural  use  of  a  sequence  and  a  deceptive  cadence  in 
the  last  five  bars  shows  Scarlatti's  easy  mastery  of  musical 
rhetoric,  and  still  more  so  does  the  final  fragment  of 
recitative  which  makes  a  characteristic  coda.  These  five 
notes  are  of  course  historically  a  survival  of  the  original 
narrative  idea  of  the  chamber  cantata,  when  it  was  usual 
to  end  with  a  recitative,  the  arias  being  considered  as 
merely  incidental.  But  here,  following  the  arioso,  they  give 
an  interesting  illustration  of  the  aesthetic  ideas  of  the 
period.  The  arioso  forms  a  complete  whole  in  a  quite 
modern  spirit,  but  it  wants  a  little  coda  of  some  sort  to 
round  it  off.  All  composers  since  Schumann  and  many 
before  him  would  have  given  this  coda  to  the  accom- 
paniment ;  we  feel  that  the  voice  part  has  come  to  its 
proper  end,  and  if  anything  more  has  to  be  said,  it  must 
be  said  differently.  Scarlatti  evidently  felt  exactly  the 
same :  but  for  him  the  cembalo  was  not  the  riofht  medium 
for  the  expression  of  such  ideas  as  Schumann  puts  into  his 
codas  for  the  pianoforte.  The  voice  alone  is  both  adequate 
and  available,  and  he  gets  over  the  difficulty  of  the  vitally 
necessary  differentiation  of  style  by  the  use  of  recitative, 
and  that  in  a  conspicuously  conventional  formula. 

Attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  sequence  and  the 
deceptive    cadence.       We    are    so    accustomed    to    these 


8o  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

devices    in    Bach    and    Handel    that    it    may    be   hard    to 
realize  how  gradual   is   their  adoption   by   Scarlatti.      But 
it  should   be  observed  that   both  of  them,   together  with 
various   other   rhetorical   devices,   receive   their   full   value 
only  when  used  in  conjunction  with  modern  tonality.     We 
have    already    seen    in    Scarlatti's    early    work    how    the 
influence    of   the    modes    was    still    comparatively    strong 
in   Italy  after  German  and   English  composers  had  almost 
entirely    shaken     it    off       The    more    rapid    progress    of 
Germany   and    England    in   this    direction   is   due   mainly 
to    the    healthy    influence    of    the     Reformation    and    the 
consequent    increase   of   serious    interest    in   the    squarely 
rhythmical    tunes    of   the    people.       Northern    composers, 
too,  have   always    had    more    sense   of  harmony  than    of 
melody,    and    it    will    easily    be    seen    how    the    study    of 
harmony,  in  connexion  with  simple  rhythmical  tunes  like 
German    chorales,    led     to     the    concise    organization    of 
harmonic   principles  on  a  sharply  defined   rhythmic  basis. 
The  air  from  a  wedding  cantata  of  Pachelbel,  quoted  in 
the    "Oxford    History    of   Music,"    vol.    iii.    p.    441,   is    a 
convenient  illustration  of  this.      It  is  to  some  extent  under 
Italian    influence  ;    but   it   is    thoroughly    German    in    the 
forcible  logic  of   its  harmonic  progressions  taken  in  con- 
junction with   its  straightforward   obviousness   of  rhythm. 
The  blunt  directness  of  its  style  could  never  have  been 
acquired     by    composers    who,    both    during    their     early 
training    and    in    later   life,   were    obliged,    owing    to    the 
traditions   of  the   Catholic  Church,   to  devote  themselves 
to    elaborate    contrapuntal    studies    on    the    pulseless    and 
drawling   rhythms   of  the   ecclesiastical   ca?ito  fermo,    that 
like 

"  the  serpent  sly 
Insinuating,  wove  with  Gordian  twine 
His  braided  train,  and  of  his  fatal  guile 
Gave  proof  unheeded." 

It  was  only  when  both  composers  and  audiences 
were  absolutely  certain  of  the  principle  of  tonic  relations 
that  even  the  easy  modulation  to  the  subdominant  could 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  8i 

be  employed  with  a  sense  of  security  as  a  necessary 
balance  to  the  influence  of  the  dominant,  to  say  nothing 
of  modulation  to  keys  more  remote. 

Returning  to  the  cantata  ''  Sarei  troppo  felice,''  the  arias 
offer  interesting  material  for  the  study  of  structural 
development.  The  first,  in  B  flat,  is  in  a  developed 
binary  form,  with  no  Da  Capo.  This  is  quite  exceptional 
in  the  cantatas  of  this  period,  and  indeed  the  structure 
of  the  whole  cantata  is  abnormal ;  but  its  variety  of 
forms  and  the  beauty  of  its  material  make  it  useful  for 
analysis  here.  The  words  of  the  air  consist  of  four 
short  lines  : — 

"  Tal  se  premo  sentiero  odorato, 
Dura  spina  che  pwige  il  mio  core 
Va  dicendo  :  costante  do/ore 
JS'on  vien  meno  fra  t  vezzi  del prato." 

The  normal  practice  is  to  divide  such  a  stanza  in  half, 
setting  the  third  and  fourth  lines  as  a  second  section,  after 
which  the  first  two  are  repeated.  In  this  case,  however, 
such  treatment  was  impossible,  owing  to  the  sense  not 
following  the  metre  ;  and  the  same  thing  has  happened  in 
the  second  aria,  thus  compelling  Scarlatti  to  abandon  the 
Da  Capo  form  in  both  cases.  This  is  no  doubt  the  reason 
why  he  has  seized  on  the  poet's  repetition  of  the  line 
*'  Sarei  troppo  felice  sio  potessi  dar  legge  al  into  pensiero  " 
in  the  recitatives,  and  extended  it  into  an  arioso  of 
sufficient  musical  importance  to  make  up  by  its  return 
for  the  want  of  the  Da  Capo  in  the  first  two  arias.  The 
third  aria  suits  the  conventional  plan  admirably,  and  the 
ternary  form  is  therefore  adopted  :  but  the  fact  that  the 
poet  has  supplied  two  stanzas  has  again  guided  the 
composer  to  a  particular  treatment  of  structural  details. 
As  in  almost  all  cases,  the  first  two  lines  are  sune  twice 
to  form  the  first  section.  Now,  if  a  composer  sets  the 
same  words  twice  over  in  one  continuous  section  of  a 
composition,  he  may  treat  them,  roughly  speaking,  in 
three  different  ways.  Excluding  the  case  in  which  the 
music    is    exactly    repeated,    under    which    circumstances 

F 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


the  composer  cannot  really  be  said  to  have  set  the 
words  twice,  he  may  make  his  second  setting  corre- 
spond to  the  first  in  rhythm,  but  not  in  melody ;  he  may 
make  it  correspond  in  both  melody  and  rhythm,  varying 
only  in  key,  or  he  may  make  it  definitely  contrast  in 
rhythm  as  well  as  in  melody  and  tonality.  In  the  aria 
before  us,  Scarlatti  adopts  the  third  plan.  It  is  obvious 
that  if,  in  the  formula  ABA,  A  can  be  represented  as 
a^b.>,(rj)^,  or  some  such  group,  the  repetition  will  be 
intolerable  when  the  orioinal  formula  ABA  is  itself 
immediately  repeated  in  its  entirety.  If  A  is  to  be 
heard  four  times,  we  can  afford  to  put  more  material 
into  it,  and  make  its  organization  more  subtle.  Scarlatti 
therefore  utilizes  the  contimto  as  a  means  of  unification. 
Its  introduction 


Ex.  To. 


m. 


ea 


=?2=i: 


:g=±: 


r=3- 


itz: 


m 


-m-  -^- 


:p=1: 


:t=i^: 


-^-- 


§ 


4  3  "2^' 


is  made  up  of  two  figures,  which  accompany  the  first  and 
second  statements  of  the  words  respectively, 


Ex.  34  (a). 


^^ 


^-- 


?=r=^ 


i^: 


-Fi 1 ^E 


:^: 


-I -■ 


II    pen  -  sie  -  ro 


e  un  prato  a  -  me -no       ove 


^ 


:^== 


n 


i — 2*- 


^ 


4    ^l 


Ex.  34  {b). 


.^= 


:^ 


^'- 


i3.-#i^ 


1 1     pen  -  siero  ^  un  prato  a 


-1 — 
tr 


no       ove   1       sen    -   si 


^f^=^^^=f^ 


^f^^^ 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


83 


both  being  developed  a  litde  beyond  the  quotations  given. 
The  second  phrase  naturally  is  made  to  end  in  G  minor, 
and,  as  usual,  a  little  coda  follows.  The  vocal  material  is 
new,  but  the  bass  is  not  : — 


Ex.35. 


:^==^ 


l3 


^ 


f-^-- 


-I*    J    <s- 


S^ 


±-a^. 


han 
-^n — ^^ 


i^'-"^=^-t=fl^=t=: 


^•:^r^ 


:^: 


han 

I  TT:  


2:^: 


4    3  6 


4  >3  7^6'^ 


--^- 


'-^-- 


no  il   con    -    fi 


-=j: 


\-^w--- 


^ 


^ 


6       b         6 
4 


and  the  continuo  adds  yet  another  coda  on  the  same  subject 
after  the  voice  leaves  off  The  form  cannot  in  any  way  be 
classed  as  a  ground-bass,  but  there  is  a  certain  analogy  with 
the  air  '^lo  per  gioco  vi  niirai'  analysed  in  Chapter  I.  The 
second  section  (B)  must  be  studied  in  connexion  with  the 
first.  Just  as  there  were  three  types  for  section  A,  so  for 
section  B  we  may  apply  much  the  same  system  of  classifi- 
cation. B  may  be  as  complete  a  contrast  to  A  as  possible 
both  in  melody  and  rhythm  (its  tonality  is  always  contrast- 
ing as  a  matter  of  course) ;  it  may  reproduce  A  more  or 
less  in  rhythm  or  melody,  or  both  ;  or  it  may  combine  both 
schemes,  as  it  does  here.  As  a  whole,  it  forms  a  complete 
contrast :  in  detail  it  is  almost  entirely  made  up  of  fragments 
of  A  worked  up  into  something  like  a  regular  modern 
"development  section."  This  is  complicated;  but  the 
complication  is  justified  because  the  poet's  two  stanzas 
cause  the  whole  movement  to  be  heard  twice. 

Let  us  now  turnback  to  the  first  aria — ''Tal  se prenioy 
Here  there  is  only  one  stanza,  and  no  Da  Capo.     Scarlatti 


84 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


can  therefore  treat  his  words  at  rather  greater  length,  and 
in  this  way  is  better  able  to  organize  the  aria  in  such  a  way 
as  to  combine  elaboration  with  lucidity. 

Ex.  36. 

A  tempo  giusto. 

' 1     I 


»^=^== 


Tal  se 


4  3 


d2j«: 


:ft-:2^ 


-^^ 


w. 


9 


j--t 


-F P- 


ftm^ 


-^ 


du  -  ra      spi  -  na, 


pre  -  mo  sen  -  tie  -  ro  o  -  do  -  ra  -  to, 


feigE^^^^ 


?2: 


i?pc 


:t 


fe 


>6 


6       6 


:^: 


Eg^gl 


:^=F 


:pz==fcii^ 


du  -  ra     spi  -  na     che  pun-ge  il   mio    co  -  re 


va        di 


--^- 


^^-^- 


^: 


'f  r^ 


^ 


5     6 


=^P=^?^ 


f5=^: 


^^ 


:g=^ 


H^--F 


1 1^-i M 


-ti-^ — 

va      di  -  cen  do,      co  -  stan  -  te  do  -  lo  -  re  non  vien 


-  cen -do 


g 


£= 


1^ 


■^ 


7     6   t^6    1; 


7      6 


^  vir< 


^=A- 


:« 


r^r^-pg 


:?^ 


^te 


^t3t 


:i^qii; 


tw- 


ist:^ 


me-no  fra  i  vez 


zi     del     pra 


2-^ 


P^ 


:^: 


^Ei^ 


i^tz; 


6ij6 


±t=t: 


r=^ 


6  r 
5 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


lW-~ 


t: 


nJiz: 


■cif~- 


^ 


Tal    se       pre-  mo  sen 


-t— -w 


■^-l^^ie- 


^ 


=r: 


t>  #6  # 


^ 


-^"~^   •     L^     -^-— ^ 


=P=F 


tie  -ro  o  -  do  -  ra  -  to, 


du  -  ra      spi  -  na     che  punge  il      mio 


:^: 


■^=^ 


^S»: 


^ 


2^ 


?^ 


I 


=^=F= 


:|^P 


E^ 


iii 


f^F^ 


^ 


]*=e: 


t 


22 


CO  -re  va      di  -    cen-do,  co  -    stan-te,  co  -  stan  -  te    do 


^S 


-,-«- 


I 


lo-re  non  vien  meno.non  vien  meno  fra  i  vez 


-^- 


:p=fe^ 


:^f^ 


te-     fe-       f-'^Jf:^.  ^^■. 


E=6d 


:t= 


d?»z= 


^ 


4  3 


!?4    3 


4    3       6       6    6      6 


■4— w. 


'r-^  r=> 


-^ 


i;S=f: 


zi      del     pra 


6^ 


r=*: 


r — ;^ 


liti?^ 


6     6 

17 


^-f- 
-^-P-^- 


86 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


^g^^Ss 


'-r-^ 


fra  i    vez 


zi      del     pra 


te 


335 


w--^ 


:5^ 


L5^ 


I 


^7 


6  6 


7      6 


6     6 
4      5 


:f:=tz: 


:^W: 


i^- 


fe^g 


2^: 


-P'  - 


I  have  quoted  the  aria  at  length  in  order  that  the 
variety  of  detail  and  the  relation  of  the  parts  may  be  fully 
appreciated.  The  four  lines  of  verse  are  cut  up  into  six 
groups  of  words,  each  of  which  is  quite  sharply  defined, 
though  together  they  form  a  melodious  wliole  of  singular 
beauty.  Lines  one  and  four  provide  what  we  may  call 
definite  first  and  second  subjects  of  strongly  contrasting 
character,  and  the  subsidiary  figures  taken  from  lines  three 
and  four  are  useful  for  purposes  of  modulation,  and  not 
without  an  individuality  of  their  own.  The  ingenuity  of  the 
construction  is  further  enhanced  by  the  vocal  coda  derived 
from  the  second  subject,  and  the  instrumental  coda  derived 
from  the  first  but  modified  so  as  to  ballast  the  whole  aria 
with  a  powerful  subdominant  influence.  At  the  same 
time  it  should  be  noted,  in  connexion  with  what  has  been 
said  about  the  use  of  the  subdominant  and  modern  tonality, 
that  the  aria  contains  no  example  whatever  of  a  deceptive 
cadence. 

;  The  second  aria  is  less  important.  It  is  shorter  than 
the  first,  but  is  definitely  organized  in  a  scheme  based  on 
the  formula  A  ABB.  The  first  strain  A  ends  on  the 
dominant ;  the  second  starts  again  on  the  tonic,  and  does 
not  modulate.  The  first  strain  B  is  in  the  relative 
minor  ;  the  second,  which  is  rather  extended,  starts  in  the 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


87 


supertonic  minor  and  returns  to  the  tonic.  There  are 
short  vocal  and  instrumental  codas.  Here  again  the  music 
is  unified  by  a  single  characteristic  figure  in  the  coiitinuo 
which  runs  all  through  against  both  subjects.  This  time  it 
is  more  definitely  instrumental : — 


Ex.  n. 

a  tempo  giusto. 


-t=: 


bEb±f  I  U 


and  we  frequently  find  in  the  cantatas  of  this  period  basses 
that  seem  to  demand  imperatively  the  assistance  of  a 
violoncello.  It  was  always  customary  to  play  the  continuo 
on  violoncello  and  cembalo :  but  in  the  earlier  cantatas  there 
is  nothing  distinctively  instrumental  about  the  basses. 
Later,  Scarlatti  acquired  the  reputation  of  writing  ex- 
ceptionally difficult  violoncello  parts,  and  it  is  to  the 
influence  of  Francischiello,  a  virtuoso  whose  playing, 
as  well  as  Scarlatti's  accompaniment  of  him,  excited 
Geminiani's  enthusiastic  admiration  at  Naples,  that  we 
may  safely  ascribe  such  development  of  instrumental  style 
as  is  apparent  in  the  following  examples. 


Ex.  -S. 


^^E^i^^E^^ 


:i^.-Tz^ 


Parte  il  pie   uia  resta   il       co  -  re. 


SE5ES 


T- 


m 


che 


.bl^tpTtt=t 


0L^^(^- 


'bibfaE^^rr^S 


^^f: 


I  n  I  p  I 


t: 


=^: 


— ^ 

dar  -  ti,  oh  Dio  ! 


-^1=^ 


:=q^=^ 


:Mz^z3ii 


oh        Dio  !  non 


6 


-^ 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Ex.  39. 

Adaoto. 


-* 


lgEr-g£5=^=ii^^g^i^:^g^^ 


Versero  mille  e   mil-le 


ealde  stil-le 


dal  tra-di  -  to  e  mes-to  cor 


w^ft 


The  refinement  of  violin  technique  in  Corelli's  time  was 
due  to  the  desire  to  emulate  the  example  of  the  singers, 
and  no  doubt  the  violoncello  felt  the  same  influence.  But 
as  early  as  1702  the  influence  of  the  instrumentalists  was 
beofinninof  to  react  in  the  converse  direction,  as  we  see 
from  the  following  extracts. 

Ex.  40. 

^   n    (  The  sluj-s  are  in  the  MS.) 


;ii"^ 


L'a-mor 


■      H 1 1- 


s^^iS^^is^ 


atE 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  89 

Here  we  can  still  say  that  the  influence  is  for  good  ; 
the  figure  is  as  apt  to  the  voice  as  to  the  violoncello. 
This  development  of  instrumental  style  is  important  also  in 
its  relation  to  structure.  The  arias  in  almost  every  cantata 
begin  with  an  introduction  for  the  continuo  -aXon^.  In  most 
of  the  earlier  cantatas  and  in  some  of  the  later  ones  this 
introduction  is  derived  from  the  opening  vocal  phrase,  and 
an  audience  would  no  doubt  watch  with  interest  to  see  how 
the  accompanist  would  treat  as  a  bass  what  in  the  majority 
of  cases  seems  more  adapted  to  harmonization  from  below. 
But  when  in  the  later  cantatas  the  voice  is  accompanied  on 
its  entry  by  a  contrasting  and  clearly  individualized  instru- 
mental figure,  it  is  this  figure  that  forms  the  introduction, 
and  it  often  becomes  easy  for  the  composer  to  use  it 
throughout,  independently  of  the  formal  scheme  of  the 
voice-part.  In  theory  a  mere  figure  of  accompaniment,  it 
gains  additional  thematic  importance  in  practice  from  the 
fact  that  the  whole  is  conceived  in  two-part  harmony;^  the 
examples  already  given,  as  well  as  those  to  follow,  will 
sufficiently  illustrate  its  value  as  a  structural  element. 

On  April  26,  1706,  Corelli,  Alessandro  Scarlatti,  and 
Bernardo  Pasquini  (then  organist  of  S.  Maria  Maggiore) 
were  admitted  members  of  the  Arcadian  Academy  under 
the  pastoral  names  of  Arcimelo,  Terpandro,  and  Prottco!^ 

1  The  bass  would,  of  course,  be  harmonized  on  the  cembalo,  but  its  thin 
metallic  sound  would  give  the  chords  a  jingling  elusiveness  that  we  can  hardly 
realize  on  a  modern  pianoforte.  For  us  it  is  better  to  treat  the  accompaniment 
polyphonically,  but  not  in  more  than  three  parts  ;  and  indeed  Scarlatti's  own 
polyphony  is  so  complete  that  it  is  often  difficult  enough  to  add  a  single  part 
in  a  worthy  style. 

^  The  entry  in  the  original  MS.  catalogue  runs  as  follows  : — 
Ragunanza  LXXX 

Chiamata  Generale 
Al x"  di  Targelione  stante  Panno  P  del  Olhnp.  DC XX I  ab  A.J.  Olitnp.  IV. 
An.  IV.  giorno  lie  to 

Furono  surrop-ati 


M 


ggo. 

Terpandro       Politeio — dalle  Cantp^  presso 

la  Terra  di  Politeia   in  Acaia 
Alessandro  Scarlatti  Palermitano 
Insiojte  Maestro  di  Musica. 


90  ALESSANDRO    Sf  ARLATTI 

Crescimbeni  gives  us  picturesque  glimpses  of  their  musical 
performances  in  his  curiously  "  precious|"  records  of  the 
early  Arcadian  meetings.  We  see  them  on  one  occasion 
taking  part  in  a  concert  at  the  house  of  Metaiu^eo— h\i2X^ 
Domenico  Riviera.^  It  was  arranged' by  Scarlatti,  and 
there  was  a  considerable  band  of  strings  and  wind.  First 
came  a  Sinfonia  of  Corelli  ;  then  two  cantatas  of  Pasquini 
to  words  by  Gian  Battista  Felice  Zappi  [Tirsi).  After 
this  came  a  duet  by  Scarlatti,  also  to  words  by  Zappi, 
followed  by  an  instrumental  piece  of  some  sort.  Scarlatti 
was  at  the  harpsichord,  but  managed 'at  the  same  time  to 
observe  that  Zappi  was  in  process  of  thinking  out  a  new 
poem.  He  begged  Zappi  to  produce'^  it ;  Zappi  agreed 
to  do  so  on  condition  that  Scarlatti  set  it  to  music  at  once. 
Scarlatti  assented,  and  "no  sooner  had  T'irsi  finished  his 
recital  than  Terpandro,  with  a  truly  stupendous  prompt- 
ness, began  to  transcribe  the  verses  recited,  with  the  music 
thereto  ;  and  when  these  had  been  sung,  the  souls  of  those 
present  received  of  them  so  great  delight,  that  they  not 
only  obliged  the  singer  to  repeat  the  song  again  and  again, 
but  also  urged  both  poet  and  musician  to  display  their  skill 
afresh."  After  some  pressing,  Zappi  and  Scarlatti  repeated 
their  impromptu  performance,  and  "  meanwhile  every  one 
was  astonished  to  see  how  two  such  excellent  Masters,  the 
one  of  poetry  and  the  other  of  music,  did  contend  ;  and 
their  contention  was  so  close  that  scarce  had  the  one 
finished  repeating  the  last  line  of  the  new  air  than  the 
other  ended  the  last  stave  of  his  music," 

Prince  Ruspoli  was  another  great  Arcadian  and  patron 
of  Scarlatti.  For  him  were  written  some  of  the  serenatas, 
a  form  of  composition  for  which  Scarlatti  was  much  in 
request  at  Rome.  They  were  probably  sung  at  entertain- 
ments, as  at  Naples,  rarely  as  serenades  beneath  a  lady's 
window,  though  there  are  a  few  solo  cantatas  with  some 
direction  indicating  the  latter  purpose.  In  such  cases  there 
is  nearly  always  some  characteristic  style  of  treatment,  as 
in  the  cantata  "  Hor  che  di  Febo  ascosi"  for  soprano  and  two 

^  Crescimbeni,  Arcadia,  Lib.  vii.  Prosa  v. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


91 


violins,  the  last  movement  of  which  is  irregular  in  form, 
with  a  curious  ending  that  makes  the  voice  and  violins 
vanish  like  ghosts  into  the  starry  distance. 

Ex.  42.  


Soprano. 


Two 

Violins. 


Coniimio. 


^= 


■^ 


*ra:ft&^: 


W^ 


dorma  il      vos  -  tro  splen-dor,      ch'io   par 


'    I      '    I 


-J^fL. 


S^- 


n 


i=e; 


n^-r/* 


'-t?t 


:c: 


:=!=t:: 


ad-di-o ! 


ad-di-o! 


:!=:- 


WX^ 


T  r    f^- 


31— —p 


£eB 


q^: 


^*m 


-P— F- 


-bzi=z:=lr-t- 


'=1: 


•'—I — *-P — P- 


The  larger  serenatas  have  little  intrinsic  interest,  though 
there  are  a  few  good  numbers,  such  as  "  Sento  tin  mira  "  from 
"  Endimione  e  Cintia."  But  they  sometimes  have  over- 
tures in  curious  experimental  forms,  and  the  treatment  of 
the  instruments  has  peculiarities.     The  orchestra  is  often 


92  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

divided  into  concerto grosso  and  concertino,  which  in  the  operas 
is  unusual.  It  is  moreover  in  these  serenatas  that  the  influ- 
ence of  Corelli  is  most  apparent.  To  what  extent  Scarlatti 
and  Corelli  were  personal  friends  it  is  difficult  to  say. 
According  to  Burney,  whose  information,  coming  from 
Geminiani,  ought  to  be  trustworthy,  Scarlatti  had  no  very 
great  opinion  of  Corelli  as  a  composer,  though  he  admired 
his  playing  and  his  direction  of  the  orchestra.  It  can 
hardly  be  doubted  that  Corelli  did  quite  as  much  for 
orchestral  playing  as  for  solo  playing  or  composition. 
How  great  his  reputation  as  a  leader  was  is  seen  from 
the  quaint  description  of  him  in  the  Ferragosto  of  Zappi 
and  Crescimbeni : — 

"  Or  vedi  lui,  cJi  al  Coro  almo  gentile 

Sovrasta,  e  par  la  destra  armi  di penne  ? 
Egli  e  a  se  solo,  e  a  null'  altro  simile. 
.    Degli  Angelid  Spirti  ei  gia  sostenne 

Le  melodie  ;  poscia  a  beare  il  suolo,  r 

Lascio  il  celeste  Coro,  e  a  noi  se?i  v en  tie  ; 
E  seco  trasse  dal  siio  chiaro  Polo 

Z'  unisonanza  no?i  piit  i?i  Terra  zidita  ; 
Onde  crediam  cento  stromenti  un  solo."  ^ 

To  his  influence  we  may  safely  attribute  the  develop- 
ment of  that  definitely  orchestral  style  which  made  its 
appearance  in  Scarlatti's  operas  after  his  second  return  to 
Rome ;  and  however  little  Scarlatti  may  have  professed 
to  admire  his  compositions,  he  at  any  rate  did  not  disdain 
to  imitate  them.  Indeed  the  lilt  of  Corelli's  gigues  seized 
him  like  a  St.  Vitus'  dance,  and  turns  up  everywhere, 
sometimes  in  the  most  unexpected  places. 

Geminiani's  well-known  story  (recorded  by  Burney)  of 
Corelli's  break-down  in  a  composition  of  Scarlatti's  at  Naples 

^  "  Seest  thou  that  gentle  soul  that  leads  the  quire, 
Bearing  as  'twere  a  feather  in  his  hand  ? 
Like  to  none  other  but  himself  alone, 
Once  of  the  angels'  holy  songs  he  bore 
The  tuneful  burden  ;  then  to  bless  the  earth. 
Left  the  celestial  quire  and  came  to  us  ; 
And  with  him  brought  from  his  bright  heavenly  home 
That  pure  concent  ne'er  heard  on  earth  before, 
By  which  a  hundred  instruments  seem  one." 


FLORENCE,    ROME,   VENICE  93 

is  hard  to  understand.  CorelH,  as  we  know,  was  never  a 
great  executant,  but  Scarlatti  is  hardly  likely"to  have  written 
difficult  passages  for  him  after  being  so  much  under  his  intlu- 
ence.  Indeed  in  the  whole  of  Scarlatti's  extant  works  there 
is  only  one  passage  of  violin  music  which  seems  intended 
for  a  display  of  virtuosity — the  introduction  to  the  air  "  Ti 
rendo  ancor  la  palvia''''  in  "  Laodicea  e  Berenice."  Fetis 
supposed  it  to  have  been  written  for  Corelli ;  but  as 
"  Laodicea"  came  out  at  Naples  in  1701,  and  Corelli  never 
visited  Naples  till  about  1708,  this  does  not  seem  very 
plausible.  The  passage  is  not  at  all  in  Corelli's  style,  and 
goes  a  good  deal  higher  than  he  was  accustomed  to,  besides 
including  a  trying  passage  across  two  strings  in  a  high 
position  ;  but  it  is  curious  that  Scarlatti  should  have  trans- 
planted the  entire  air,  solo  and  all,  into  the  serenata  "II 
Giardino  d'  Amore,"  especially  as  it  was  quite  contrary  to 
his  custom  to  dish  up  a  composition  a  second  time. 

It  was  hardly  possible  for  a  composer  to  live  in  Rome, 
especially  under  the  patronage  of  a  cardinal,  without 
writing  a  certain  amount  of  music  for  the  church.  It  was 
still  the  tradition  to  write  masses  ''  alia  Pale strina,''  and 
Scarlatti  accordingly  produced  the  "  Missa  Clementina  I." 
in  1703,  and  in  1706  a  mass  for  Cardinal  Ottoboni.  The 
first  is  well  written  and  contains  many  canons,  but  although, 
judging  from  the  number  of  copies  to  be  found,  it  seems 
to  have  excited  the  admiration  of  professional  contra- 
puntists, like  the  Mass  in  F,  which  is  all  in  canon,  it  is 
extremely  dry.  Of  the  ecstatic  feeling  of  Palestrina  there 
is  not  the  least  trace.  The  Ottoboni  Mass  ^  is  rather 
better  ;  it  has  a  sense  of  modern  tonality  and  a  certain 
amount  of  feeling.  But  Scarlatti  was  not  by  nature  a 
church-composer,    least  of  all    at    this    period    of  his  life. 

1  The  autograph  is  in  the  Vatican  library.  It  is  a  huge  folio,  with  the  music 
not  in  score  but  in  separate  parts  so  arranged  that  all  the  singers  could  sing 
from  the  same  book,  the  notes  being  very  large.  The  whole  manuscript  is  so 
beautiful  a  specimen  of  musical  caligraphy  that  one  could  hardly  believe  it  to 
be  the  autograph  of  a  great  composer  were  it  not  for  the  words  ^'■propria 
manu  scripsit  Alexajider  Scarhiiius"  on  the  title-page.  It  is  unfortunately  in  a 
very  bad  state,  the  ink  having  eaten  through  the  paper  so  that  the  pages  are 
literally  dropping  to  pieces. 


94 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


In  his  motets  and  oratorios  he  is  often  picturesque  and 
sometimes  quite  beautiful  ;  but  he  is  too  classical  in  spirit, 
too  much  of  a  poet,  to  write  such  music  as  is  usually  con- 
sidered to  be  devotional.  Of  the  early  oratorios  "Agar 
et  Ismaele  "  (16S3)  is  the  best;  like  the  early  operas,  it 
is  carefully  written,  with  great  attention  to  poetic  expres- 
sion. "II  Martirio  di  S.  Teodosia  "  (1685)  is  of  interest 
only  for  the  fine  fugal  chorus  which  concludes  it.  Ap- 
parently, however,  it  was  not  to  the  taste  of  the  audience, 
as  nothing  of  the  kind  occurs  in  the  later  oratorios. 

The  Concerti  Sac^d  published  by  Ktienne  Roger  at 
Amsterdam  probably  date  from  somewhere  about  1 700. 
These  are  a  series  of  ten  motets  for  from  one  to  four  voices, 
accompanied  by  two  violins  and  continuo.  They  consist 
mostly  of  Da  Capo  airs  and  recitatives,  with  an  occasional 
arioso  or  ground-bass ;  there  is  little  four-part  writing. 
The  style  is  generally  tlorid,  and  suggests  the  gay 
decorations  of  the  Italian  Jesuit  churches.  Sometimes 
it  is  positively  ludicrous  in  its  baroque  brilliance ;  and 
when  one  comes  across  a  passage  like  this — 


Alto. 


Violins. 


Continuo. 


;r 


-^- 


=ci: 


quitri-bu-it      mi-hi  in-tellec 


turn 


u 


fr^ 


-v^ 


lg^ 


76    % 


6    ##6 


.^E33g 


SI 


!=pn= 


J— t-^W-J^iM: 


-^M 


intellec 


-=1^1 


n^-r- 


:^ 


fgrr— Fggt^ 


^ 


#r^i 


S 


^^w-- 


:^d 


!=^3 


-t\^. 


;f^ 


^^ 


^^'^ 


5^. 


"^^^EE^ 


m. 


^^ 


6Jtit66 


itfebt 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


95 


k=3-?^-|^. 


^ — ^SS^i 


g^^^=^-^^:3: 


f^' 


turn, 


;=^i= 


r^^ 


^^ 


4^ 


mi 


-I — I — I — 


^ 


*t 


^^^i 


ii:^=^t 


6    # 


I 


:fl^^ 


w- 


:^=^ 


in-tel-Iec 


^^^ 


-  1      i^Sb" 


-=)- 


-=? 


Jti3t 


:^ 


^r^r: 


It: 


ittb 


H-^ 


£r  ^^^^^ 


r\^  r  r  7^ 


=^ 


6  C^        ^    6        C^     ^       6  6 

it  is  hard  to  believe  that  there  was  not  a  malicious  intention 
in  the  choice  of  such  peculiarly  grotesque  JioritMre.  Yet 
along  with  these  oddities  there  is  much  that  is  genuinely 
beautiful — the  peaceful  duet,  "  O  fluid  a  vita,'"  the  melodious 
pastorale,  "  O  uiinis  clara  lux,''  the  happy  grace  of  ''  Rorate 
coeli^'  as  well  as  the  bold  harmonies  and  passionate  earnest- 
ness of  "  Infirinata  zmlnerataT 
Largo. 


Contimio 


,6        ^6       6  6     J6 

t-4 


6    #6  6  67     6#4        #     #6 
5  6    5 


96 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Alto. 


:z]aa=h: 


-?«s— ]S— iv 


^^ggjE^^gg^^jE^^^p^ 


na  -  ta,  in-fir-ma-ta  vul-ne   -    ra-ta  pu- ro  de  -  fi-cit    a  -  mo-re 


--■S- 


*J 


5     6 
5 


^>if 


6    6       it  $4       $6  6    6      S6 


With  such  music  as  this  to  be  heard  in  the  churches,  it 
is  small  wonder  that  Benedict  XIV.  was  obliged  to  order 
that  the  consecrated  elements  should  be  kept  in  a  side 
chapel,  because  the  congregations  habitually  turned  their 
backs  on  the  high  altar  to  listen  to  the  singers  placed  in 
the  western  gallery  !  ^ 

The  papal  taste,  however,  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
too  severe,  at  any  rate  in  Scarlatti's  time.  He  produced 
several  oratorios  and  sacred  cantatas  while  in  Rome, 
mostly  for  performance  at  the  Vatican,  but  there  is  very 
little  serious  music  in  them.  They  are  generally  either 
dull  or  frivolous.      "II  Sedecia"  contains  a  beautiful  duet, 


^  G  retry,  Me  moires. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  97 

«'  Col  tuo  veld,''  ^  but  the  greater  part  of  the  oratorio  is 
extremely  tedious,  and  it  is  curious  that  it  should  have  been 
so  much  admired  as  the  number  of  extant  copies,  both 
contemporary  and  modern,  would  seem  to  attest.  The 
Annunciation  Oratorio  is  rather  better  ;  the  air  "  Verginella 
fortunata^'  in  which  the  angel  delivers  his  message,  is  pure 
and  dignified  in  style,  and  the  Virgin  has  a  very  beautiful 
air,  "  Stesa  a  pie  del  tronco  amaro^'  in  which  she  con- 
templates her  future  sorrows  with  a  fine  expression  of 
exalted  feeling.  The  work  is  also  interesting  from  a 
curious  arrangement  of  the  introductory  Sinfonia  which 
recalls  Mendelssohn's  "  Elijah  "  ;  indeed,  the  displacement 
of  the  movements  is  made  from  an  analogous  motive.  The 
overture  begins  with  an  allegro  of  fifteen  bars  in  G  minor 
ending  in  the  dominant  ;  this  is  immediately  followed  by 
the  Virgin's  air,  "  Sommo  Dio,"  which  is  in  a  calm  and 
serious  style.  The  rest  of  the  overture  is  then  played  ;  a 
short  passage  of  slow-moving  suspensions  and  an  allegro 
in  binary  form,  not  a  definite  dance-movement,  but,  as  is 
usual  in  the  oratorios,  strongly  rhythmical,  and  fulfilling 
the  same  aesthetic  purpose.  This  movement,  however,  is 
not  in  the  key  of  the  first,  but  in  F  major,  and  is  at  once 
followed  by  the  angel's  air  in  the  same  key  ;  Scarlatti 
seems  to  have  wished  to  effect  a  compromise  between  the 
conventional  overture-form  and  a  descriptive  symphony 
suggesting  the  angel's  arrival. 

As  a  rule  the  libretti  of  the  oratorios  are  not  very 
inspiring.  They  read  like  inferior  opera-books,  and 
indeed,  except  that  the  operas  are  in  three  acts  and  the 
oratorios  in  two,  the  only  difference  is  in  the  absence  of 
professedly  comic  characters,  and  of  the  formal  statement 
in  which  the  author  protests  that  the  words  Fato,  Dio, 
Delta,  &c.,  are  only  scherzi  poetici  and  imply  nothing 
contrary  to  the  Catholic  Faith.  Indeed,  when  in  the 
Ferragosto  of  Zappi  and  Crescimbeni  Alfesibeo  can  thus 

^  Published  (not  without  some  touching  up)  in  Carl  Banck's  '•'■  Duette  Alter 
Meister." 


98 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


explain  to  Tirsi  the  shaven  polls  and  hairless  faces  of  the 
papal  singers — 

"  ServoTio  al  sommo  Fan  quel,  che  vedesti 
Senza  le  chiome,  e  son  cafttor'  del  tempio, 
A  do  mi  di  pensier  saggi  e  modes  tt,"  ^ 

it  seems  almost  curious  that  an  analogous  protest  was  not 
required  for  the  oratorios  from  the  point  of  view  of 
Olympus. 

Scarlatti,  as  usual,  makes  the  best  of  a  bad  job. 
"  Humanita  e  Lucifero  "  is  rubbish  from  beginning  to  end, 
but  in  the  "Rosary"  oratorio  he  probably  delighted  his 
audience  by  giving  Penitence  an  air — "  Staro  nel  mjo 
boschetto  qual  dolce  ros7£-7mo/o  "^3iCcomp3iniQd  by  two 
violas  and  a  nightingale,  the  latter  being  treated  in  the 
toy-symphony  style,  at  the  player's  discretion  ;  and  the 
Assumption  oratorio  ends  with  a  duet  for  the  heavenly 
Bride  and  Bridegroom,  the  fascinating  grace  of  which 
could  only  be  paralleled  in  the  frescoes  of  Correggio. 


Violins. 


Continuo 


} 


r=^i^ 


e^- 


^^- 


3^Zit 


-^-w 


-^ 


:zS: 


;i2=?^zh?z-rp-^ 


t: 


=3: 


-^-^ 


:^E^?=^-^-^ 


=^=t.=U 


=1^ 


i-=M-i 


il^ — m-^ 


i-^lB- 


piano 


^ 


it^rtz 


\ 


^^ 


3^5t 


=|: 


=^-=1: 


z^-wtJ 


^^- 


-^ — J-J- 


^^- 


-^1— P- 


1  "  They  serve  great  Pan  whom  here  thou  dost  behold 

With  hair  and  beard  close  shorn  ;  chaste  are  their  thoughts 
And  wise,  for  in  the  temple  rites  they  sing." 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


99 


Sposo. 


Christmas  was  a  season  at  which  oratorios  were 
customary,  and  Scarlatti  shows  us  some  interesting 
examples  of  the  traditional  pastoral  style.  Besides  a  very 
attractive  solo  cantata,  "  Oh  di Betle7iime  altera''  (words  by 
Prince  Antonio  Ottoboni),  there  is  a  duet  for  two  shepherds 
— Arcadian,  needless  to  say — and  a  formal  oratorio,  in 
which  Abraham,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Daniel,  and  Ezechiel 
prophesy  the  birth  of  the  Messiah  in  a  series  of  charming 
airs,  the  cheerfulness  of  which  is  somewhat  tempered  by 
the  "  lacrimoso  Prof  eta  "  Jeremiah.  The  other  three 
prophets  remonstrate  with  some  curtness  in  recitativo 
secco,  but  to  no  purpose,  until  finally  Daniel  draws  their 
attention  to  the  hymns  of  the  angels  and  shepherds  at  the 
manger.  The  air  is  singularly  beautiful,  and  interesting 
as  the  prototype  of  the  "  pastoral  symphonies  "  of  Handel 
and  Bach. 


Ex.  46. 

Allegro. 
Oboes,  i*^*^ 


I     1     1 


:J 


lOO 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Violins. 


Daniele. 


fj 


Sen    -    ti! 
Viol  J       _J_>»J  .  Od.  r^^^  ,-         1^    i-^g^ 


-^ 


I 


K/^/. 


•=^: 
!=i; 


El=i=^ 


:^; 


iabi 


±=: 


;=lv: 


w=f^m- 


Sen  -  ti   che  lie-ti  in -tor 


no     al      bel  pre-se    -    pe    Viol.f*^,^ 


s 


-^ — 


^SiS 


Ob. 


&fe 


£=attz:=: 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


lOI 


:J=£ 


W=^ 


-te^-fe^- 


gl'an-gio-li  van 


can-tan 

r 


do, 

1   - 


gl'an-gio-li  van     can 


It: 


ii^zztz: 


:t: 


-ha — I       J — ^ 


tzzt 


-^ 


tan 


do 


pas    -    to  -  rel 


li. 


1= 


s 


-J 


6*^. 


=i 


Ei 


3^ 


-4^-H 


7     6 


Compositions  of  this  kind  were  always  performed  at  the 
Vatican  on  Christmas  Eve  after  vespers,  before  the  Pope 
and  the  cardinals  sat  down  to  a  banquet  decorated  with 
trionji,  representing  the  Nativity.^  Corelli's  once  very 
popular  Pastoral  Concerto  was,  no  doubt,  composed  for  a 
similar  occasion.  The  question  has  been  much  discussed 
as  to  whether  the  Pastoral  Symphony  in  "The  Messiah  "  is 
an  original  composition  of  Handel's  or  not,  and  I  believe 
that  the  word  "  Pifct "  with  which  he  headed  it  has  been 
sometimes  accepted  as  definite  proof  of  its  being  an 
actual  folk-tune.  It  seems  much  more  reasonable  to 
consider  the  movement  simply  as  an  imitation  of  the  tradi- 
tional style.  To  recover  the  precise  melodies  of  the 
zanipognari  of  Handel's  Roman  days  is  impossible ;  most 
probably  they  played  then  as  they  do  now,  tuneless 
melodies,  picturesque  enough  in  rhythm  and  colour  to 
make  the  passing  stranger  stop  and  listen  for  a  moment, 

^  Adami,  Osservazioni  per  ben  regolare  il  Coro  dei  Cantori  della  Cappella 
Pontificia.     Rome,  171 1. 


I02  '     ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

but  not  sufficiently  definite  in  character  for  a  composer  to 
utilize  without  modification.  The  variety  in  similarity 
displayed  by  the  numerous  specimens  in  Scarlatti's  works 
should  be  enough  to  prove  that  they  were  not  derived 
from  any  one  particular  traditional  tune.  The  most  we 
can  say  of  Handel's  Pastoral  Symphony  is  that  it  was 
very  probably  modelled  on  this  particular  air  of  Scarlatti, 
certainly  the  most  attractive  of  all  his  pastoral  movements. 

Rome  was  not  Scarlatti's  only  field  of  activity  at  this 
period.  His  dramatic  talent  found  scope  at  Pratolino, 
though  it  may  be  doubted  whether  his  work  there  was 
entirely  satisfactory  to  him.  An  "  Arminio "  was  per- 
formed at  Pratolino  in  1703,  but  there  is  not  sufficient 
evidence  to  identify  it  with  Scarlatti's  opera  of  that  name 
given  at  Naples  in  17 14.  But  it  is  fairly  certain  that 
"  Turno  Aricino "  was  the  drama  of  Stampiglia  which 
Scarlatti's  letters  prove  him  to  have  set  to  music  in  1704, 
althougfh  for  the  later  revival  at  Rome  it  must  have  been 
almost  entirely  composed  afresh.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
as  to  "  Lucio  Manlio  I'lmperioso"  (1705)  and  "  II  Gran 
Tamerlano  "  (1706).  The  music  to  all  four  operas,  except 
fragments  of  the  revised  version  of  "  Turno  Aricino,"  has 
entirely  disappeared,  a  loss  the  more  to  be  regretted  since 
Scarlatti  evidently  took  a  great  deal  of  trouble  over  both 
the  last  two,  and  seems  to  have  considered  them  as  the 
best  that  he  had  produced  up  to  that  time. 

His  correspondence  with  Ferdinand  throws  an  in- 
teresting light  on  his  ideas  and  his  methods.  The  opera 
performances  at  Pratolino  took  place  in  September ; 
accordingly  Ferdinand  sends  Scarlatti  the  first  act  of  Silvio 
Stampiglia's  drama,  "  Lucio  Manlio,"  on  June  9,  1705, 
Scarlatti  acknowledges  the  receipt  of  it  on  June  13,  with 
his  usual  compliments,  and  a  fortnight  later  sends  Ferdi- 
nand the  music.  "  I  have  paid  more  attention,"  he  writes, 
"to  the  mixed  character  of  the  audience,  than  to  the  natural 
impulses  of  my  own  insipid  pen,  precisely  as  the  author 
of  the  drama  seems  to  desire  ;  and  perhaps  the  music  will 
be  able  to  give  more  pleasure  to  those  who  like  to  take 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  103 

home  with  them  some  tune  that  they  can  easily  remember, 
and  that  all  can  sing."  A  year  before  he  had  assured 
Ferdinand  of  his  efforts  to  be  "  pleasant  and  tuneful,  rather 
than  learned  " ;  but  the  prince  seems  to  have  been  rather 
hard  to  please. 

"  Lucio  Manlio"  was  finished  on  July  18,  having  taken 
only  five  weeks  to  write.  "  I  humbly  lay  at  the  feet  of 
your  Royal  Highness,"  he  writes,  "the  third  act  of  '  Lucio 
Manlio '  set  to  music,  which  ends  the  opera,  but  not  my 
most  feeble  labours,  the  which,  in  blind  obedience  to  the 
revered  directions  of  your  Royal  Highness,  I  am  ready  to 
resume  with  untiring  devotion  ;  to  rewrite  the  whole  from 
the  beginning  in  such  a  way  as  may  best  satisfy  whatever 
commands  the  high  and  mighty  clemency  of  your  Royal 
Highness  shall  deign  to  impose  upon  me  ;  for  which  sole 
reason  (as  is  indeed  my  unforgotten  duty  as  well  as  the 
highest  honour  and  glory  that  I  could  ever  desire),  I  have 
changed  the  style  of  my  most  feeble  pen  ;  yet  have  I  not 
been  able  to  do  so  to  the  extent  of  abandoning  entirely 
that  character  which  it  has  by  nature.  This  pen,  however, 
overshadowed  by  a  new  spirit,  has  been  able,  with  a 
felicity  that  I  seldom  have  obtained,  to  render  me  so  fer- 
tile (especially  in  composing  this  third  act),  that  when  I 
thought  to  let  the  fruit  ripen  by  giving  it  more  time,  I 
saw  the  work  completed  with  rapidity  and  without  op- 
position from  my  imagination,  accustomed  though  it  be 
to  blame  my  pen's  ideas. ^  Nevertheless,  I  have  set  it 
before  myself  in  judgment  dispassionately,  and  have 
diligently  examined  it  with  regard  to  the  style  that  the 
author  of  the  words  desired,  and  which  he  has  repeatedly 
informed  me  to  be  the  amiable  will  of  your  Royal  Highness  ; 
and  I  think  that  in  this  third  act  at  any  rate,  if  not  in  the 
whole  opera,  I  have  found  means  to  fulfil  the  revered  com- 

^  '■'  Questa  [penfia\  perd  obuvibrata  da  nuovo  spirito,  ha  potato  con  felicita, 
7-are  volte  ottemita,  renderuii  ttna  tal  feconditd  di  specie  net  vestire  questo  ters" 
atto,  che  quando  credevo  di  viaturarne  il  parto,  colP  impiego  di  maggior  tempo, 
I'ho  veduto  posto  in  luce  con  z'elocita,  e  senza  opposizio7ie  delta  fantasia^  avvezza 
in  me  ad  accitsarne  le  idee^ 


104  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

mand  that  was  laid  upon  me.  Nevertheless,  I  may  have 
deceived  myself;  perhaps  from  the  vehemence  of  my 
desire  to  fulfil  it  in  that  form  which  should  best  succeed  in 
meeting  with  that  most  gracious  compassion  which  the 
noble  and  heroic  mind  of  your  Royal  Highness  has 
deigned  to  grant  me,  if  only  from  excess  of  the  inimitable 
clemency  which  there  occupies  its  rightful  throne.  Having 
complete  confidence  in  the  same,  I  take  the  liberty  of 
offering,  in  the  semblance  of  a  holocaust,  a  brief  epitome  of 
my  intentions  in  composing  the  music  of  this  opera,  al- 
though as  regards  the  two  preceding  acts,  I  can  say  little, 
not  having  them  by  me  ;  although  I  have  given  precise 
instructions  with  all  possible  clearness  to  the  author  of  the 
words  :  saying  that  where  the  music  is  marked  grave,  I  do 
not  mean  it  to  be  melancholy  ;  where  marked  andante,  not 
fast,  but  with  a  feeling  of  melody.  Where  allegro,  not  at  a 
headlong  rate  ;  where  allegrissivio,  not  in  such  a  style  as  to 
drive  the  singer  to  despair,  or  to  drown  the  words.  Where 
andante  lento,  in  a  style  that  should  not  be  pathetic,  but 
rather  tender  and  charming,  so  as  not  to  lose  the  sense  of 
melody  ;  and  in  all  these  airs  there  should  be  no  melan- 
choly.^ I  have  always  made  it  my  aim,  in  composing  for 
the  theatre,  to  make  the  first  act  resemble  a  child  that 
takes  its  first  steps  but  feebly  ;  the  second  a  youth  that 
walks  erect  and  sure  ;  and  the  third  should  be  like  a  young 
man,  swift  and  strong,  bold  of  undertaking  and  successful 
in  all  that  he  undertakes.  This  I  have  done  in  '  Lucio 
Manlio,'  an  opera  which  completes  the  number  of  eighty- 
eight  dramatic  works  composed  in  less  than  twenty-three 
years,  and  to  which  I  should  have  wished  to  give  a  crown 
as  being  the  queen  of  all  the  others.  If  I  have  not  had 
the  ability  to  make  it  such,  I  have  at  least  been  bold 
enough  to  attempt  to  do  so."" 

^  "  Dove  e  segnato grave,  non  znte?ido  vialenconico ;  dove  andante,  non presto, 
tna  arioso.  Dove  allegro,  non  precipitoso  j  dove  allegro,  tale  che  non  affanni  il 
Cantante,  ne  ajfoghi  la  parole.  Dove  andante  lento,  in  forma,  die  esclude  il 
patetico,  ma  sia  un  amoroso  vago,  che  non  perda  Parioso  j  ed  in  iutte  le  arie 
nessuna  maleitconicaP 

2  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filsa  5903,  No.  165. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  105 

This  lengthy  letter,  of  which  the  rest  has  already  been 
quoted  earlier  in  this  chapter,  is  of  interest  as  showing  us 
something  of  Scarlatti's  methods.  He  seems  to  imply  that 
composition  was  almost  a  mechanical  process  for  him,  and 
that  the  function  of  the  imagination  was  not  to  direct  but 
to  criticize.  And  indeed  the  process,  strange  as  it  may 
seem  to  a  generation  that  has  not  yet  been  able  to  shake 
off  the  false  sentiment  of  the  romantic  movement,  was  yet 
legitimate  and  natural  enough  to  a  composer  who  belongs 
to  the  severest  period  of  classicism,  when  beauty  and  purity 
of  style  were  still  considered  as  more  important  than 
originality  and  violence  of  expression. 

The  directions  given  as  to  style,  as  well  as  several 
passages  in  other  letters,  show  that  Scarlatti  was  any- 
thing but  indifferent  as  to  the  proper  interpretation  of  his 
music.  I  have  been  careful  to  give  the  original  Italian 
as  well  as  a  translation,  since  it  is  difficult  to  find  adequate 
equivalents  in  English  for  some  of  Scarlatti's  expressions. 
The  composer's  meaning  becomes  rather  clearer  if  we  re- 
member the  extent  to  which  singers  were  accustomed  to 
vary  the  melody  of  an  air.  Audiences  of  Scarlatti's  day 
must  have  been  sufficiently  familiar  with  this  habit  to  be 
able,  perhaps  half  unconsciously,  to  decipher  the  original 
melody  under  the  variations  of  the  singer,  or  at  any  rate 
to  form  an  idea  of  the  principles  of  its  construction  that 
would  suffice  to  give  them  a  logical  understanding  of  the 
performance.  It  is  however  obvious  that  a  singer  who 
was  not  a  good  musician  might  not  merely  extemporize 
bad  variations,  but  might  even  so  far  ignore  the  original 
melody  as  to  entirely  stultify  the  faculty  of  the  audience 
for  the  appreciation  of  musical  form.  Thus  the  word 
arioso,  which  we  now  use  conveniently  and  not  illogically 
to  denote  a  kind  of  music  between  recitative  and  air, 
was  used  by  Scarlatti  not  as  the  title  of  a  form,  but  as 
a  direction  to  the  singer  to  be  careful  to  preserve  the 
melodic  sense  in  music  which  at  first  sight  might  seem 
to  demand  the  declamatory  style  of  recitative  ;  and  it  was 
equally  natural   that  he   should  use  it  in  a  case  where  a 


io6  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

singer  might  have  been  tempted  to  take  too  many  liberties 
with  the  time  or  to  indulge  in  an  excess  of  extemporary 
coloratura.  His  insistence  on  avoiding  the  '' patetico''  and 
"  malenconico  "  shows  us  that  even  the  age  of  bel  canto  was 
not  free  from  singers  who  made  a  speciality  of  the  tearful 
and  mawkish  style. 

"  Lucio  Manlio"  was  Scarlatti's  eighty-eighth  opera: 
"II  Gran  Tamerlano,"  which  was  written  for  Pratolino 
the  following  year,  he  describes  in  a  letter  as  his  ninetieth. 
What  was  the  eighty-ninth,  and  for  what  theatre  was  it 
written  ?  No  trace  of  it  is  to  be  found,  unless  we  suppose 
Scarlatti  to  have  counted  as  an  opera  the  few  airs  which 
he  added  to  a  pasticcio  called  "La  Pastorella,"  composed 
by  Cesarini,  Giannino  (Giovanni  del  Violone  ?),  and 
Bononcini,  that  was  represented  by  marionettes — the  real 
singers  singing  behind  the  scenes — at  the  Palazzo  Venezia 
in  1705. 

"II  Gran  Tamerlano"  seems  to  have  given  Scarlatti 
some  trouble.  The  part  of  Rossane,  composed  originally 
for  a  contralto  who  had  sung  the  previous  year,  had  to 
be  rewritten  for  Signora  Tilla,  who  was  a  soprano  ;  and 
in  spite  of  all  efforts,  "Lucio  Manlio"  appears  to  have 
been  too  serious,  as  Ferdinand  wrote  to  Scarlatti  on 
April  2,  1706:  "I  shall  be  very  much  pleased  if  you  will 
make  the  music  [of  'II  Gran  Tamerlano']  rather  more 
easy,  and  noble  in  style  ;  and  if,  in  such  places  as  is  per- 
missible, you  will  make  it  rather  more  cheerful."  ^  Scarlatti 
was  very  much  pleased  with  the  libretto  (by  G.  A.  Salvi). 
"I  have  read  the  third  act  of  'Tamerlano'  and  find  it  all 
that  it  ought  to  be,  and  an  excellent  end  to  its  admirable 
beginning  and  continuation,  the  proof  of  which  is  that  in 
the  whole  course  of  this  beautiful  work  I  find  the  plot 
so  strong,  so  charming,  so  new  and  so  spirited,  that  the 
strength  and  quality  of  the  recitative  (in  which  the  scenic 
action  is  represented)  prevents  me  from  wishing  for  the 
airs,  as  is  generally  the  case." "     The  opera  was  finished 

^  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filza  5903,  No.  497. 
"  Ibid.,  Ftlza  5903,  No.  208. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE  107 

in  six  weeks,  and  Ferdinand  seems  to  have  been  satisfied 
with  it,  graciously  considering  it  quite  unnecessary  that 
Scarlatti  should  make  any  further  alterations.  It  appar- 
ently had  a  finale  of  some  special  interest,  as  Scarlatti 
acknowledoes  havina:  received  Ferdinand's  instructions 
on  this  point  through  Salvi ;  and  the  prince  especially 
mentions  that  the  finale  has  given  him  satisfaction. 
"  Tamerlano "  was  performed  at  Pratolino  in  September 
1706.  Whether  Scarlatti  directed  the  production  himself 
is  doubtful.  He  was  very  busy  in  Rome  during  that 
year  with  various  compositions,  and  he  would  hardly 
have  insisted  so  minutely  on  details  of  style  in  his  cor- 
respondence if  he  had  been  able  to  superintend  the 
rehearsals  in  person. 

Certainly,  however,  the  most  interesting  work  of  this 
period  is  the  opera  "  Mitridate  Eupatore,"  written  for 
Venice  and  produced  at  the  Teatro  S.  Giovanni  Crisostomo 
in  1707.  It  was  followed  by  a  second  opera,  "  II  Trionfo 
della  Liberta,"  in  the  same  year.  Both  are  entirely 
different  from  anything  that  Scarlatti  had  done  before, 
being  five-act  dramas  with  ballets,  but  without  comic 
characters.  The  poet.  Count  Girolamo  Frigimelica  Roberti, 
was  evidently  a  man  of  considerable  literary  ability.  He 
shows  a  close  familiarity  with  Greek  tragedy,  and  imitates 
its  methods  freely  ;  he  also  has  a  strong  dramatic  instinct 
and  an  eye  for  effective  situations.  Unfortunately,  he  is 
too  anxious  to  point  the  political  moral,  and  often  spoils 
good  work  by  being  didactic  ;  and  the  reader  soon  realizes 
that  dramatic  instinct  is  not  the  same  thino;  as  theatrical 
experience.  Roberti,  like  Scarlatti's  first  librettist  Contini, 
was  an  architect  as  well  as  a  poet,  best  known  to  us  as 
the  designer  of  the  Villa  Pisani  at  Stra,  between  Padua 
and  Venice  ;  and  indeed  we  may  see  in  the  opera  the  same 
intention  of  severe  grandeur,  and  the  same  effect  of  frigid 
immensity  that  characterize  the  palace. 

The  main  idea  of  the  plot  is  borrowed  from  the  "  Electra" 
of  Euripides.  Stj'atonica,  wife  of  Mitridate,  king  of  Pontus, 
has  murdered  her  husband  and  raised  her  paramour  Farnace 


io8  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

to  the  throne.  Her  son  Mitridate  Eupatore,  the  rightful 
heir,  has  disappeared,  and  his  sister  Laodice  has  been 
married  to  a  shepherd  to  get  her  out  of  the  way.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  opera  Stratonica  and  Farnace,  fearing  the 
return  of  Eupatore,  offer  a  reward  for  his  head.  Two 
strangers  undertake  to  bring  it ;  needless  to  say  one  of  the 
two  is  Eupatore  in  disguise,  and  the  other  is  his  wife 
Issicratea  in  male  attire.  The  brother  and  sister  have  a 
recognition-scene  in  the  classical  manner,  and  the  opera 
ends  with  the  death  of  Farnace  and  Eupatore  s  return  to 
his  kino-dom. 

Scarlatti  seems  to  have  done  his  best  to  produce  a 
masterpiece  worthy  of  the  glorious  traditions  of  Venetian 
opera.  The  style  of  "Eraclea"  is  not  altogether  aban- 
doned, but  the  airs  are  mostly  broader  and  more  dignified, 
besides  having  more  material  put  into  them.  The  charac- 
terization too  is  very  good.  Ezipatore  himself  is  perhaps 
a  rather  conventional  primo  uomo,  but  the  tyrant  Farnace^ 
cynical  and  cowardly,  is  well  drawn.  Still  finer  creations 
are  the  two  women.  Stratonica  is  an  eighteenth-century 
Ortrud — the  political  woman,  ready  to  commit  any  crime  to 
gratify  her  ambition.  Laodice,  however,  is  far  removed 
from  the  type  of  Elsa  or  any  other  namby-pamby  heroine 
of  early  German  romanticism  ;  hers  is  the  classic  grandeur 
oi  Leo7tora,  Donna  Anna,  and  IpJiigenie.  It  is  curious 
that  in  this  opera,  perhaps  the  finest  that  Scarlatti  ever 
wrote,  there  should  be  no  love  scenes.  The  most  passionate 
emotional  outburst  is  that  of  Laodice,  when  she  laments 
the  supposed  death  of  her  beloved  brother.  No  love-song 
of  Scarlatti's,  beautiful  as  his  love-songs  often  are,  can 
rival  the  intense  sincerity  with  which  he  has  painted  a 
sister's  affection  ;  is  it  too  fantastic  to  suppose  that  we 
have  here  a  touch  of  autobiography,  and  that  he  remem- 
bered Anna  Maria  in  the  convent  of  Sant'  Antoniello  at 
Naples — Anna  Maria,  who,  nearly  thirty  years  ago,  was 
singing  on  the  stage  of  this  very  theatre  ? 

The  fourth  act,  in  which  this  occurs,  opens  with  a 
solemn  march,  during  which  the  procession  starts  that  is 
to   carry  Eupatore  s  head   to   the  usurpers.     Two  muted 


FLORENCE,    ROME,    VENICE 


109 


trumpets  and  drums  lead  off,  echoed  by  two  trumpets  ^  and 
drums  from  the  ship  at  the  back  of  the  stage  : — 

Ex  47- 

Aciagio.  00 

Due  Trovibe    ^  ^  i-^glg:?:^l^^g^^«:g^S^rgif  g:g  g;|  g^^gjg 


) 


Tvnpano 

delle  Trovibe 

Sordine. 


— - — I <-h 


v^ 


t — ?-^- 


^=^ 


Trombe  inarine. 


\ 


^  "  ggggiTiT  n — t- 


Timpano  delle  Trombe  marine. 


after  which  the  strings  effect  modulations  to  the  dominant 
and  the  relative  minor,  ending  with  a  few  bars  of  coda  in  a 
brisker  tempo.  Handel  seems  to  have  remembered  this 
when  he  wrote  "  Saul,"  for  if  he  did  not  actually  hear  it 
performed,  he  may  very  likely  have  seen  the  score,  being 
thrown  much  with  the  Scarlattis  at  this  time. 

Laodice  enters.  She  takes  the  funeral  urn  from 
Eupatores  reluctant  hands,  and  pours  out  her  lamenta- 
tions on  it  in  a  magnificent  recitative,  too  long  to  quote 
here  entire. 

Ex.  48. 
Laodice 


i 


S-d d* ^S— d r— -P- 


gg  r  n^ 


^r^ 


^^=^^=^ 


^ 


s 


1^— ^— i?^ 

O      Mi-tri-da-te  mio  ! 

It-; = 


per  na-tu  -  ra  German,   mio  Re  per 


S:es± 


6 

>4 

Mt  is  hardly  conceivable  that  the  "  Trombe  marine^''  as  they  are  called  in 
the  score,  were  the  stringed  instruments  of  that  name,  although  the  parts  might 
have  been  played  on  them.  The  instrument  was  almost  entirely  obsolete  in 
1707,  and  at  the  height  of  its  popularity  was  practically  confined  to  Germany 
and  France. 


no 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

2p: 


gra  -  do,      Per     cu  -  ra,       per    e    -    ta 


^  o 


per    a-mor,      Fi-glio! 


:e=^ 


57 
5 


4      3 


Ex. 


49- 

O 

I 


:p=^l 


^ziit^ 


q^==^ 


:;ic:t*: 


g 


va  -  na     spe  -  me 

-&- 


=i 


frp: 


rot  -  ta     fe  -  de  ! 

.  I  ! 


o    bre  -  ve, 


-ii?i- 


:?2: 


»4 


lu  -  sin-ghie-ra,       fu  -  nes  -  ta,    em-pia  al-le-grez-za  !    Da  chi  piu 


cer-co  ai-u-to,      o  piu  con  -  for- to?     oincie-lo     o  in  ma-re  o  in  ter-ra, 


6 

S4 


:=^=^ 


:?!=?5: 


ik 


:|5=f* 


>-N- 


1  ^    J- 


->-^- 


6^—-*- 


a^zzit 


-^ 


^=^qf^=^ 


1^ 


o  neg-li  ab-bis-si  ? 


Ahi !    ahi !  Mi-tri-da  -  te 

J- 


'-^: h- .ili^^t^ ^ 


^ 


e  mor  -  to  ! 


6 

*4 


±t6 
ff4 


4     3     Segue 
rAria. 


FLORENCE,    ROME,   VENICE 


III 


The  air  "  Cava  to7nba  del  niio  diletto  "  which  follows 
is  worthy  of  J.  S.  Bach  at  his  best.  The  accompaniment 
of  plain  repeated  chords  for  the  strings  is  of  course  not  in 
his  style,  but  it  is  very  masterly — always  subordinate  to 
the  voice,  yet  full  of  feeling  in  the  fragment  of  violin  solo, 
and  the  numberless  suspensions  which  add  poignance  to 
the  sweeping  phrases  of  the  melody.  The  ritor^tello,  with 
its  broad  arpeggio  figure  climbing  from  agony  to  agony 
and  then  sinking  down  suddenly  to  an  unutterable  despair, 
makes  a  frame  well  worthy  of  the  picture. 


\ 


Ex,  50. 

Moderato  e  staccato. 
Viol.  I.     I" 

J ^ 


-^     I 


-^ 


^^s 


"^ 


fj 


(forte) 


l&E 


Cello      l"^"*., 
j-  Viola.-'^-  J      I 


Viol.  2. 


e-^ 


Viola  &c  'Cello  utiis. 


112 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


The  recognition  takes  place  directly  after  this,  and 
brother  and  sister  join  in  a  duet  that  strangely  expresses 
their  half-frightened  joy  ;  but  after  a  good  scene  between 
Laodice  3iU.6.  Stratonica  the  act  loses  in  interest.  The  last 
act  is  most  disappointing  ;  Scarlatti  makes  nothing  of  the 
fine  dramatic  situation  where  Eupatore  presents  Sti^atonica 
with  the  head,  not  of  her  son,  but  of  her  lover.  Still, 
although  "  Cara  toniba  "  stands  head  and  shoulders  above 
all  the  rest,  and  indeed  above  any  other  air  in  any  other 
opera  of  Scarlatti,  "  Mitridate  Eupatore"  contains  a  great 
many  very  fine  movements,  in  spite  of  its  inequalities. 
But  it  appears  to  have  been  rather  beyond  the  appreciation 
of  the  audience,  for  his  second  Venetian  opera,  "II  Trionfo 
della  Liberta,"  as  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  fragments 
that  remain,  was  far  inferior  to  its  splendid  predecessor. 


CHAPTER    IV 

URBINO,  1707;  NAPLES,   1708-1718 

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Scarlatti  went  himself  to 
Venice  to  direct  his  operas  ;  it  was  the  general  custom  for 
composers  to  preside  at  the  harpsichord,  at  any  rate  for  a 
first  production,  and  Scarlatti  is  not  likely  to  have  been 
absent  on  so  important  an  occasion  as  this.  If  further 
evidence  be  needed,  there  is  the  cantata  in  Venetian  dialect 
"■Dove  xesttL,  cor  iniof  which  he  is  not  likely  to  have 
written  anywhere  else.  He  probably  remained  at  Venice 
up  to  the  end  of  the  Carnival,  or  perhaps  not  so  long.  We 
hear  of  him  next  at  Urbino,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  he 
went  there  from  Venice  by  way  of  Ferrara.  Two  Misereres 
for  five  voices  and  strings  were  copied  by  Santini  at 
Ferrara  in  1824,  apparently  from  the  library  of  the  cathe- 
dral. One  is  dated  1705,  and  another  copy  by  Santini  of 
the  same  composition  is  dated  17 14.  The  latter  date  is 
quite  a  possible  one  as  far  as  the  music  itself  is  concerned, 
but  Scarlatti  seems  to  have  been  firmly  established  at 
Naples  then;  1705  is  an  equally  unlikely  date,  as  his 
correspondence  with  Ferdinand  de'  Medici  shows  him  to 
have  been  at  Rome  during  Lent  of  that  year.  It  is  only  in 
1707  that  there  is  a  decided  probability  of  his  having 
passed  through  Ferrara.  No  trace,  however,  of  the 
original  manuscript  is  now  to  be  found  in  the  library  of 
the  cathedral,  and  it  is  not  even  mentioned  in  a  catalogue 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  Why  he  should  have  visited 
Urbino  is  not  very  clear,  though  as  the  reigning  Pope 
(Giovanni  Francesco  Albani)  was  a  native  of  Urbino,  at 
that  time  no  longer  an  independent  duchy  but  incorporated 
with  the  Papal  States,  there  may  have  been  some  special 
reason  for  Scarlatti's  remaining  there  from  April  to  Sep- 

113  H 


114  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

tember.  The  length  of  his  stay  at  Urbino  is  proved  by  a 
manuscript  of  the  beautiful  duet-cantata  "  Questo  silenzio 
ombroso''  dated  ^' In  Urbmo,  ij  J^''^  ^707."  Another 
charming  duet-cantata,  ''A hi  che  sara  di  me,''  was  written 
on  September  2,  no  doubt  for  the  same  singers. 

Scarlatti  seems  to  have  been  in  financial  difficulties 
again,  as  far  as  can  be  deduced  from  his  correspondence 
with  Ferdinand.  He  wrote  to  the  prince  from  Urbino  in 
April,  sending  his  good  wishes  for  Easter  and  hinting 
obscurely  at  misfortunes  of  some  kind.  The  etiquette  of 
the  day  apparently  considered  it  indecent  to  allude  frankly 
to  money  matters  in  corresponding  with  royalty  ;  but  we 
gather  that  he  was  without  occupation  and  unable  to  support 
his  family.^  Ferdinand,  however,  must  have  been  convinced 
by  this  time  that  Scarlatti's  operatic  style  was  too  learned 
for  the  autumn  diversions  of  Pratolino,  and  had  no  intention 
of  appointing  him  permanently  as  Maestro  di  Cappella. 
Indeed  he  was  now  entirely  taken  up  with  Perti,  who  wrote 
the  next  four  operas  for  Pratolino,  and  who,  to  judge  from 
his  epistolary  style,  was  more  inclined  to  write  music  ac- 
cording to  Ferdinand's  taste  and  less  given  to  long-winded 
explanations.  Ferdinand's  answer  to  Scarlatti,  written  on 
April  23  from  Florence,  is  conventionally  polite,  but  not 
encouraging ;  he  contents  himself  with  saying  that  he 
is  sure  that  Scarlatti  will  always  meet  with  the  due  reward 
of  his  merit,  and  that  he  may  count  upon  his  sympathy  and 
his  prayers. 

Scarlatti  was  probably  back  at  Rome  for  Christmas, 
since  it  was  for  this  occasion  that  he  wrote  the  first  of  his 
two  masses  in  A  with  orchestral  accompaniment.  The 
work  is  interesting  as  being  one  of  the  earliest  of  its  kind  ; 
but  it  is  very  evidently  a  first  attempt  in  a  new  style  and 
not  altogether  successful.  The  second,  which  will  be  dis- 
cussed later  on,  is  very  much  better. 

Few  works  can  be  ascribed  to  1708.  Of  the  opera 
"  L'Humanita  nelle  Fere,"  which  was  probably  a  revival 
of  an   earlier  work  under  a  new  title,   the  music  is  lost, 

'  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filza  5903,  No.  287. 


URBINO,    NAPLES  115 

as  is  also  that  of  the  Passion  Oratorio,  unless  some  lucky- 
chance  brings  it  to  light  at  the  Biblioteca  Casanatense  in 
Rome  ;  as  not  infrequently  happens,  the  catalogue  names 
it,  but  the  manuscript  is  not  to  be  found.  Otherwise  the 
work  is  represented  only  by  the  libretto  and  by  a  score 
at  Dresden  attributed  to  Scarlatti,  but  which  from  the 
style  seems  rather  to  be  an  original  work  of  Scarlatti 
very  much  altered  and  expanded  by  a  later  hand, 
probably  Hasse's.  Four  cantatas  and  the  motet  ^^  Adorna 
thalamum "  are  the  only  other  known  compositions  of 
this  year. 

Scarlatti  was  still  in  correspondence  with  Ferdinand  de' 
Medici,  and  possibly  the  prince  had  changed  his  mind  and 
was  thinking  of  getting  Scarlatti  back  again,  as  he  appar- 
ently sent  him  money  both  in  April  and  October  1708. 
Scarlatti  outdoes  himself  in  fulsome  adulation,  but  we  may 
suspect  him  of  having  had  an  ironic  intention  (trusting  no 
doubt  to  Ferdinand's  being  too  vain  to  see  the  point  of  his 
sneer)  when  he  wrote  of  the  prince's  "  having  wished  to 
give  me  a  token  of  satisfaction  for  the  most  feeble  services 
that  I  have  rendered  with  various  musical  compositions, 
which  your  Royal  Highness  has  been  pleased  to  choose 
rather  from  mine  than  from  those  of  many  other  composers, 
much  better  than  myself,  any  one  of  whom  could  be  a 
master  to  me."  ^  And  again  in  October  he  writes:  "The 
more  I  enjoy  the  benefits  of  your  Royal  Highness' 
generosity,  the  more  I  am  confounded  by  the  sense  of 
my  own  unworthiness,  and  I  do  not  know  how  I  may  give 
proof  to  your  Royal  Highness  of  the  gratitude  of  my  heart 
for  such  great  and  lasting  kindness.  Silence,  respectful 
and  profound,  shall  best  speak  for  me,  accompanied  by  the 
most  feeble  though  incessant  prayers  of  myself  and  my 
family."^  It  was  evidently  not  worth  while  sending  Ferdi- 
nand serenatas  and  madrigals  by  way  of  polite  attentions,  as 
he  had  done  in  previous  years.  The  correspondence  ended 
with    this    letter  :    Ferdinand    remained    faithful   to    Perti 

^  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filza  5904,  No.  40. 
2  Ibid.,  Filza  5904,  No.  143. 


ii6  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

until  in  171 1  his  last  lingering"  illness  put  a  final  stop  to 
the  operatic  performances  at  Pratolino. 

According  to  Baini  ^  Scarlatti  resigned  his  post  at  S. 
Maria  Maggiore  in  1709,  having  succeeded  Antonio  Foggia 
as  principal  Maestro  in  May  1707,  But  it  seems  more 
probable  that  he  left  Rome  towards  the  end  of  1708,  since 
the  Gazzetta  di  Napoli,  mentioning  his  opera  "  Teodosio  " 
produced  at  the  Teatro  S.  Bartolomeo  on  January  28, 
1709,  says  that  he  "was  persuaded  by  His  Eminence 
during  the  last  few  months  to  return  here  from  Rome  to 
the  service  of  this  royal  chapel."  His  Eminence  was  of 
course  Cardinal  Vincenzo  Grimani,  then  Austrian  Viceroy 
of  Naples. 

Scarlatti's  precise  position  at  the  Neapolitan  court  is  a 
little  difficult  to  determine.  After  the  leave  of  absence 
granted  him  in  1702  had  expired  without  his  returning,  a 
certain  Gaetano  Veneziano  was  appointed  to  the  vacant 
post  on  October  25,  1704.^  Gaetano  Veneziano  was 
succeeded  on  December  5,  1707,  by  Francesco  Mancini.^ 
On  December  i,  1708,  Cardinal  Grimani  ordered  that 
Alessandro  Scarlatti,  having  been  obliged  to  give  up  his 
post  after  nearly  twenty  years'  service,  should  again  be 
admitted  to  the  service  of  the  royal  chapel  to  act  as  deputy 
first  organist  in  the  absence  or  illness  of  other  musicians.* 

It  was  only  natural  that  Scarlatti  should  feel  such 
favours  as  humiliating  ;  and  he  probably  refused  to  accept 
them,  since  on  January  9,  i  709,  the  cardinal  gave  instruc- 
tions that  Scarlatti  should  be  restored  to  his  original  office 
of  Maestro  di  Cappella,  and  that  his  stipend  should  be 
increased  from  thirty  to  forty-two  ducats  a  month  (about 
£,Z\  a  year),  Mancini  being  consoled  with  the  title  of  Vice- 
Maestro,  and  being  allowed  to  retain  his  original  stipend 
of  thirty  ducats  a  month  (about  £60  a  year),  with  the  duty 


'  MeDiorie  storico-critichc  della  vita  e  delle  opere  di  Giovanni  Pierhcigi  da 
Palestrina.     Rome,  1828. 

2  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato^  Mandati  dei  Vicer^,  vol.  319,  fol.  20. 
^  Ibid.,  Mandati  dei  Vicere,  vol.  322,  fol.  16. 
Ibid.,  Mandati  dei  Vicere,  vol.  324,  fol.  28  verso. 


URBINO,    NAPLES  117 

of  acting  as  Scarlatti's  deputy  in  his  absence  or  illness,  and 
the  right  of  eventually  succeeding  to  his  post/ 

Scarlatti  certainly  returned  to  Naples,  and  seems  to 
have  been  well  received  by  the  court,  since  in  addition  to 
"  Teodosio  "  (the  music  of  which  has  disappeared)  he  pro- 
duced an  oratorio  for  the  feast  of  St.  Joseph,  "  II  Trionfo 
del  Valore "  (also  lost),  at  the  palace  ;  in  May  appeared 
the  opera  "  L'Amor  Volubile  e  Tiranno,"  and  on  August  28 
a  cantata  for  four  voices  for  the  birthday  of  the  queen — 
Elizabeth,  wife  of  Charles  III.  But  it  seems  doubtful 
whether  he  was  definitely  reinstated  as  Maestro  di  Cappella, 
or  at  any  rate  whether  he  accepted  the  position,  since  in 
1713  (May  27)  the  new  viceroy.  Count  Daun,  repeated  the 
orders  given  by  the  late  Cardinal  Grimani  on  December  i, 
1708,  and  January  9,  1709,  with  regard  to  Scarlatti's  rein- 
statement and  increase  of  salary.^  This  time  he  must  have 
accepted  the  post  definitely,  since  on  July  22,  17 13,  the 
viceroy  allowed  him  an  additional  five  ducats  a  month  for 
the  servant  whose  duty  it  was  to  call  the  musicians  of  the 
chapel  together  for  the  ceremonies  in  which  they  took  part. 

It  is  possible  that  Scarlatti  did  not  establish  himself 
definitely  at  Naples.  He  is  described  as  Maestro  della 
Real  Cappella  in  the  libretto  of  "L'Amor  Volubile  e 
Tiranno"  (1707)  and  "  La  Principessa  Fedele  "  (17 10),  but 
during  the  next  three  years  he  does  not  seem  to  have 
written  anything  for  Naples.  In  171 2  he  produced  "II 
Ciro  "  at  Rome,  having  composed  it  in  the  previous  autumn, 
and  in  17 13  his  oratorio  "  S.  Filippo  Neri"  was  performed 
at  Foligno,  whether  for  the  first  time  may  be  doubted. 
But  the  confirmation  of  his  appointment  by  Count  Daun 
seems  to  have  been  definite,  and  for  the  next  few  years, 
at  any  rate,  Scarlatti  remained  at  Naples. 

"L'Amor  Volubile  e  Tiranno"  is  a  retrogression  towards 
the  style  of  "Eraclea";  no  doubt  Scarlatti  thought  that 
Neapolitan  taste  would  be  no  better  now  than  it  was  ten 
years  before.     But  with  "  La  Principessa'Fedele  "  he  enters 

^  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato,  Mandati  del  Vicere,  vol.  324,  fol.  39-40. 
^  Ibid.,  Mandati  di  Vicere,  vol.  331,  fol.  i  verso  and  2. 


ii8  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

definitely  upon  the  new  phase  to  which  "  Mitridate " 
looked  forward.  None  of  the  operas  of  this  period  rise  to 
the  height  of  "  Mitridate,"  but  they  show  a  continuous 
progress  in  technical  development.  One  of  the  most 
noticeable  features  is  the  treatment  of  accompaniments. 
In  the  early  operas  the  cembalo  is  almost  always  the 
principal  accompanying  instrument,  the  violins  being  used 
only  in  occasional  airs,  and  then  as  a  rule  only  for  colour 
effects,  like  the  trumpets  ;  it  is  very  rarely  indeed  that  they 
support  the  main  burden  of  the  harmony.  But  as  violin- 
playing  improved  Scarlatti  made  more  use  of  the  strings, 
sometimes  even  trying  experiments  in  dividing  them. 
These,  however,  are  less  modern  than  would  appear  at 
first  sight ;  for  the  object  of  Scarlatti's  division  of  the 
violins  into  four  parts  is  not  to  get  four-part  harmony  from 
them,  but  to  obtain  two  orchestras  which  play  antiphonally, 
as  for  instance  in  Appios  air,  '^Ma  il  mio  be?i  cJie  fa,  dov  e  f  " 
in  the  first  act  of  "  La  Caduta  dei  Decemviri."  In  most  of 
the  airs  in  "  Eraclea"  and  the  other  operas  of  this  time 
we  find  the  strings  accompanying  all  through,  as  well  as 
the  cembalo.  The  noise  must  often  have  been  consider- 
able, but  it  perhaps  suited  the  cast-iron  style  of  the  tunes. 
In  "  Mitridate,"  however,  there  is  a  tendency  to  get  rid 
of  the  cembalo,  and  during  this  further  period  it  becomes 
Scarlatti's  frequent  practice  to  accompany  the  voice  with 
violins,  violas,  and  violoncellos  alone — sometimes,  indeed, 
without  violoncellos,  or  even  violas — letting  the  ceifibalo 
and  double-basses  enter  in  the  intornelli  only. 

The  airs,  too,  contain  much  more  material  than  before. 
Then,  the  only  contrast  was  between  the  first  part  and  the 
second,  and  that  a  slight  one  at  the  best ;  now,  by  en- 
larging the  scheme,  Scarlatti  gets  quite  strongly  contrasted 
material  into  both  parts,  as  well  as  a  sharp  contrast  between 
the  parts  themselves.  The  theatrical  style  of  the  third 
period  is  still  kept  up,  and  considerably  developed,  but 
though  his  work  has  gained  in  vigour  and  incisiveness  of 
expression,  it  has  lost  much  of  its  old  tenderness  and 
charm.       He    uses    coloi'atiira   very    freely — sometimes,  it 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


119 


must  be  admitted,  in  rather  doubtful  taste,  but  generally 
with  a  keen  sense  of  dramatic  effect.  Two  examples  from 
"  La  Principessa  Fedele  "  will  illustrate  his  methods. 

The  first  is  in  the  vigorous  style,  and  calls  down 
the   vengeance  of  heaven  in  a  most  spirited  manner  : — 

Ex.  51. 


sul    tra  -  di     -      tor,  sul    tra 

Coloratura  employed  in  this  way  has  a  dramatic  value 
which  no  declamation,  to  however  elaborate  an  accompani- 
ment, can  equal.  Such  a  triumphant  rush  of  rapid  notes 
can  only  produce  its  proper  effect  when  sung.  The  modern 
plan  of  giving  the  coloratura  to  the  orchestra  and  de- 
clamation to  the  voice  makes  us  almost  always  feel  that 
the  singer  is  battling  against  the  instruments  instead  of 
leading  them. 

The  second  example  shows  a  different  use  of  coloratura, 
less  obvious,  but  none  the  less  beautiful.  The  "faithful 
princess  "  Ctmegotida,  disguised  as  a  boy,  is  asked  to  sing, 
to  soothe  the  sleep  of  the  Sultan  Aladino,  and  complies 
with  a  quiet  little  ditty,  which  she  says  was  composed  by 
a  lover  in  prison.  It  is  in  the  style  of  Scarlatti's  early 
Neapolitan  period,  and  contains  litde  coloratura  beyond 
delicate  flourish  which  marks  a  cadence  in  the  second 
section  ;  but  at  the  end  of  the  first  part  there  is  a  wonder- 
ful long,  lulling  passage  of  great  decorative  beauty — 


\ 


Ex.  52. 

CUNEGONDA   {Alto). 


^^ 


F=|5=W= 


h    te- 


<^  J  J  J- 


-9^— J 


e  ^  J 


■^-1^ 


spe-ra,  spe  -  ra,         ch'avrai  pres-to, 


presto,  pres  -  to    tua      bel 

^-^ff^ 


^^ 


-r—^  ^1 


:P3^ 


I20 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

I   r1   I— I —  J   I   I   I    I   I  J   j^  —I  J— I- 


m. 


^Wfz. 


-^-0- 


.ElSI 


which  is  not  virtuoso  music  at  all,  and  was  most  probably 
sungpiamssimo  in  a  tender,  dreamy  style.  The  idea  is  carried 
out  by  the  recitative  in  which  she  tells  the  story  of  the  song, 
quite  in  the  manner  of  a  chamber-cantata.  But  it  is  rare 
to  find  such  luxuriant  coloratura  used  in  this  way  ;  for 
later  composers  it  was  not  showy  enough,  though  there  is 
just  a  touch  of  it  in  Leo's  "  S.  Elena  al  Calvario."  We 
shall  find  a  truer  parallel  in  the  Choralvorspiele  for  the 
organ  of  Buxtehude  and  J.  S.  Bach. 

"II  Giro,"  begun  in  October  1711,  and  produced  in 
Rome  for  the  Carnival  of  17 12,  is  notable  for  its  ballets. 
Whether  they  are  all  Scarlatti's  cannot  be  said,  since  the 
autograph  score  has  been  much  altered  for  a  later  revival. 
But  some  are  undoubtedly  his,  being  in  his  own  hand- 
writing. They  are  for  the  most  part  curious  little  scraps 
of  music,  so  short,  even  with  the  repeats,  that  the  dance 
could  hardly  have  got  well  started  before  it  was  all  over. 
The  dances  of  Furies  at  the  end  of  Act  II.  are  typical  of 
the  style. 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


121 


VtoL 


Viola. 

Contiimo. 


£x.  53 

Ballo.  Presto. 


►^-H h 


M2 


za_?± 


1  r 


:t=— tz: 


i.  4- 


V — 1? — k 


i 


if 


diJ-*4J- 


i^^ 


=i=it 


? 


^IWH^ZI^ZPE 


-P-^-i 


VIJ^ 


:g:=p-r^-^=g: 


J,        ^J-^I     I  '^       I 


4       Jt3 


J  J   ^  J  ^ 


igU^'-i^ 


-f-^ 


r=r: 


T  -•-•- 


-J-  ..r^^.  -J-  i^^-J-. 


±i: 


^       ^ 


.i 


:^=:P: 


JJ^^-     -J 


>   6 

1  _n--^ 


^7 


-r-r 


:?^H«: 


^-^^^^^ 


-P-^- 


:•  •     ji 


--:i 


^^ 


:t^=^ 


-P— ^ 


122 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


=^=?==^J= 


"^^ 


tt 


q^ 


m-. 


^^  r 


p=?^ 


£^^^ 


^ 


^ 


►t;^ 


*^  •  ^  ♦ 


::^c:e: 


^ 


1= 


^ 


Such  quaint  little  movements  are  in  themselves  sufficient 
proof  that  the  ballet  in  Italian  opera  was  still  regarded 
as  necessarily  grotesque.  The  heading  of  the  second 
^^ presto  in  menuet^'  is  curious.  There  are  plenty  of  minuets 
in  Scarlatti's  operas,  and  it  is  clear  that  they  must  have 
been  danced  much  quicker  than  the  "'  menuet  de  la  cour''  as 
we  know  it  in  "  Don  Giovanni."  Indeed  Rousseau  in  his 
dictionary  tells  us  that  the  minuet  was  always  danced  faster 
on  the  stage.  But  we  can  hardly  conceive  Ex.  54 
being  played  as  fast  as  the  other  minuets  seem  to  require, 
although  its  rhythms  do  not  seem  very  suitable  to  the 
stately  movements  of  the  classical  dance.  It  must,  however, 
be  borne  in  mind  that  in  Scarlatti's  day  there  was  always 
less  difference  between  fast  and  slow  tempi  than  there  is 
now.  We  have  already  seen  how  he  protests  against  an 
extreme  interpretation  of  his  /f;7//(9-marks,  although  he 
wishes  careful  attention  to  be  paid  to  them.     As  M.  Saint- 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


123 


Saens  has  said  in  his  preface  to  Rameau's  Pieces  de 
Clavecin,  '' Jusquau  milieu  du  siecle  dernier  le  degr^  de 
vitesse  on  de  lenteiir,  si  important  a  notre  opaque,  navait 
probablement  pas  la  meme  i7nportance  qii  aujourd'hui ; 
d^ailleurs,  la  distance  entre  les  mouvements  extremes  ^tait  assez 
faible.  Tons  les  mouvements  devaient  itre  compris  entre  ce 
que  no7cs  appelons  actiLellement  V Allegro  moderato  et 
r Andante!'  He  might  have  added  that  we  shall  always 
get  nearer  to  the  spirit  of  the  older  composers  when  we 
translate  their  directions  quite  literally,  instead  of  giving 
them  the  conventional  values  which  the  same  words  bear 
in  modern  music.  Another  specimen  from  "  II  Giro"  shows 
how  indifferent  Scarlatti  was  to  the  exact  regulation  of 
pace  that  modern  composers  require.  It  is  a  dance  or 
march  of  priests,  accompanying  Elcino  (i.e.  Ciro  in  disguise) 
in  the  performance  of  a  sacrifice  to  Apollo.  The  same 
music  serves  both  as  ritornello  and  dance,  "  at  whatever 
pace  may  be  necessary." 


Ex.  55. 

Coro  di  Sacerdoti  che  portano  vittime  per  Sacrificio  accompagnando  Elcino 
con  ballo,  stiono,  e  canto. 

Ritori°  e  ballo  msieme.,  a  tempo  che  sara  necess",  o  grave,  0  allegro  a  piacere. 


Con  oubuoe 
air  unis.  de" 

Violini  se 
cost  piacera. 


I       I       N       I 


:$^ 


g^ 


=?2: 


:^ 


I 


.i=L  -^-        .c=i 


A 


:^ 


-^ 


1 


i 


^■-^ 


jl 


n 


p     - 


:^ 


^1-  ^ 


^^ 


2ttat 


s 


:p2: 


m^z^ 


:& 


r  •  (» 


:^ 


it6      i 


T 


J..-/4-sJ*=^^f-  -=  = 


:& 


124 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Although  called  "  ballo,''  it  can  hardly  have  been  any- 
thing less  stately  than  a  march.  It  is  followed  by  a  hymn, 
sung  by  Elcino  and  repeated  in  chorus,  which  seems  to 
anticipate  the  similar  scenes  in  "Alceste,"  "  Iphigenie  en 
Tauride,"  and  "  Die  Zauberflote." 

"  Tigrane  "  (1715)  is  the  most  famous  of  all  Scarlatti's 
operas,  and  though  no  doubt  it  owes  much  of  its  dictionary 
reputation  to  its  being  his  hundred  and  sixth  work  for  the 
stage,  it  certainly  is  the  best  representative  of  this  particular 
period.  It  has  the  great  advantage  of  a  clear  and  well- 
designed  plot,  which  in  addition  to  its  regular  parti  buffe 
has  a  vein  of  subtle  humour  running  all  through  ;  Tomiri 
makes  fun  of  her  lovers  as  she  plays  off  one  against  the 
other,  and  her  rival  Meroe  in  the  disguise  of  a  gipsy 
fortune-teller  makes  fun  of  everybody.  But  from  a  musical 
point  of  view  the  opera  is  not  equal  to  its  reputation.  It 
produces  a  general  impression  of  brilliance  and  mag- 
nificence ;  but  examples  of  really  deep  feeling  or  exalted 
musical  beauty  are  rare.  This  is  characteristic  of  the 
whole  of  this  period.  The  characters  are  striking,  the 
music  is  striking  ;  variety  of  expression,  brilliant  coloratura 
and    melodic    beauty    contribute    to    make    everything    as 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


125 


showy  and  effective  as  possible  ;  but  there  is  no  getting 
away  from  the  utter  unreaHty  of  the  whole  business.  The 
outrageous  incongruities  of  the  comic  scenes  are  a  positive 
relief;  crazy  as  their  characters  are,  they  are  very  much 
more  human  and  natural  than  the  heroes  and  heroines 
of  the  conventional  tragedy. 

The  comic  scenes  of  "  Tigrane  "  are  distinctly  good, 
and  are  also  notable  as  being  among  the  very  few  where 
dialect  is  employed ;  not  Neapolitan,  however,  but 
Bolognese,  and  that  only  for  a  few  sentences,  mixed  with 
the  absurd  Latin  of  Orcone  as  a  Dottor  Graziano,  and 
Dorillas  still  more  absurd  attempts  at  German.^  The 
final  scene  of  Act  I.  deserves  mention,  as  it  shows  a 
certain  sense  of  musical  parody  in  the  use  of  pompous 
recitativo  strojnentato  for  comic  purposes.  In  the  previous 
scene  Meroe  has  arrangfed  a  simulated  evocation  of  her  own 
ghost  for  Tigrane,  who  believes  her  dead  ;  the  part  of  the 
wizard  is  played  by  her  servant  Orcone.  During  the 
serious  interview  between  Tigrane  and  the  supposed  ghost 
of  Meroe,  he  has  gone  to  sleep,  but  wakes  up  after  they 
are  gone  and  is  discovered  by  Dorilla.  She  of  course  sees 
through  his  disguise,  and  wishing  to  have  some  fun  with 
him,  requests  him  to  raise  her  a  ghost ;  he  somewhat 
reluctantly  proceeds  to  perform  an  incantation,  stammering 
with  fear  lest  it  should  really  take  effect.  The  stammering 
is  a  rather  trite  form  of  humour,  but  contrasted  with  the 
solemn  movements  of  the  orchestra  it  becomes  absurdly 
ludicrous. 

Ex.  56. 
{Intanto  va  facendo  circolo  colla  verga,  s paiwoso.) 
Lento. 


Viol. 
1^2. 


Viola. 
Continue. 

^  Dorilla  fortunately  supplies  an  Italian  translation  herself  of  her  air, 
"  Ic  bin  lipaber,  iclibe,  libedu,"  which  turns  out  to  represent  "  Ichbin  Liebhaber, 
ich  liebe,  liebe  Du," — '"''iosono  afnante,  io  amo,  ama  tuP 


jtaecata. 


26 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


itsrs: 


if^ 


^  1  \w  T'T^'^ 


AlA^^l  ^ 


l^±5 


^^ 


:3=t: 


:^=^=r: 


6 
5 


S"=S 


Orcone. 


If  zp 


Ld2: 


IS 


-p- 


:^=i=p: 


:3^ 


^.  <^-a^ 


Dai  cu, 


cu,    cu,         dai  cu  -  pi     vor-ti-ci, 


rfc 


^^- 


y  r    1-^ 


i=^ 


-=1-^ 


-1-, 


-^-^-P      1  q  ^-^ 


^1 


-T^ 


g^F^ 


:a=a 


ei-^ 


1^=^ 


S=i:§q==: 


^Tlt 


S 


:|: 


?=^=^i:k 


^zfcfe 


^^^ 


^tziJ-i 


»-^ 


dai  cu-pi  vor-ti-ci  dell'  ombre  or-ri  -  bi-li. 


S 


m=^_ 


^^^=^ 


^  I   ^'      Li    I 


-^ 


.^J^ 


:fe=iz:^-S 


:^ 


-T^-i- 


6 


6       t{6 


^ 


"Tigrane"  is  also  interesting  as  being  the  first  of 
Scarlatti's  operas  that  shows  a  tendency  towards  modern 
orchestral  writing.  It  contains  a  good  many  little  dances 
and  marches,  but  these  are  generally  scored  thinly,  all  the 
upper  instruments  playing  in  unison,  or  at  most  in  two 
parts.  But  Tigrane  has  an  air  in  Act  I.  accompanied  by 
two  horns,  "  concerto  di oubuoe''  ^  {i.e.  oboes  and  bassoons  in 

1  The  spelling  ^''OKbuoe"  which  is  regularly  used  by  Scarlatti  and  his  con- 
temporaries, is  as  exact  a  representation  as  is  possible  in  Italian  of  the  French 
^^  hautdois"  as  it  was  pronounced  at  that  time. 


URBINO,    NAPLES  127 

three-part  harmony,  with  probably  several  instruments  to 
each  part)  and  strings,  in  which  the  horns  are  fairly 
prominent ;  and  there  are  also  airs  with  solo  parts  for  the 
lute  and  the  violetta  d'amore.  But  on  the  whole  the 
orchestration  is  old-fashioned,  and  it  was  not  until  later 
that  Scarlatti  adopted  a  style  which  we  can  recognize  as 
consistently  modern  in  spirit. 

In  1 7 18  Scarlatti  produced  his  one  comic  opera,  "II 
Trionfo  dell'  Onore,"  at  the  Teatro  de'  Fiorentini.  This 
theatre  had  for  some  years  made  a  speciality  of  comic 
operas  in  Neapolitan  dialect,  the  most  prominent  composer 
being  Leonardo  Vinci,  who,  if  not  actually  a  pupil  of  Scar- 
latti, was  very  much  under  his  influence.  It  must  be 
clearly  understood  that  these  comic  operas  were  not  inter- 
mezzi. It  is  true  that  by  this  time  it  had  become  fairly 
common  to  transplant  the  comic  scenes  from  one  opera  to 
another.  They  were  always  a  speciality  of  Naples,  and  if 
an  opera  by  a  stranger  was  to  be  performed  there,  some 
Neapolitan  composer  provided  these,  as  Vignola  did  for 
Handel's  "  Agrippina."  But  the  first  occasion  on  which  a 
series  of  comic  intermezzi  appears  to  have  been  recognized 
as  an  independent  organism  was  the  performance  of 
Pergolesi's  famous  "  Serva  Padrona  "  in  173  i,  although  we 
should  perhaps  give  the  honour  to  the  intermezzi  from 
Scarlatti's  opera  "  Scipione  nelle  Spagne  "  (Naples,  1714), 
which  was  revived  at  Bologna  in  1730  under  the  title 
of  "  La  Dama  Spagnuola  ed  il  Cavalier  Romano,"  and 
printed  in  a  separate  libretto,  not  incorporated  with  that 
of  any  other  opera. 

The  Neapolitan  '^  ctmtmedeja  in  museca,''  however,  is 
a  full-sized  opera  in  three  acts.  We  should  trace  its 
descent  from  the  pastoral  operas  and  ''favole  boscareccie^' 
such  as  "La  Rosaura"  and  "II  Figlio  delle  Selve,"  and 
since  the  first  recorded  example  of  the  new  type,  "  Patro 
Calienna  de  la  Costa  "  (1709),  seems  to  have  been  produced 
as  a  stop-gap,  accompanied  by  the  apologies  of  the  manage- 
ment, it  is  possible  that  it  was  mainly  written  in  dialect, 
because  there  was  no  time   to  turn  the  roueh  draft  into 


128  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

literary  Italian.  Being  a  success,  the  experiment  was 
repeated,  and  a  style  was  developed  that  depended  for  its 
interest  on  the  lively  presentation  of  popular  types  of 
character,  with  an  occasional  parody  of  the  turgid  style  of 
opei-a  seria.  In  the  early  comic  operas  all  the  characters 
talk  Neapolitan  except  those  who  are  held  up  to  ridicule 
as  Romans  or  Florentines  ;  later  the  number  of  dialect 
characters  is  reduced.  Scarlatti's  opera  presents  a  very 
curious  exception,  since  not  one  of  the  characters  talks 
Neapolitan  or  any  other  dialect. 

The  plot  has  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  that  of 
"  Don  Giovanni,"  except  that  the  hero  repents  at  the  end, 
without  supernatural  interference.  The  scene  is  laid  at 
Pisa,  and  the  time  was  probably  the  present  day  or  any 
period  that  happened  to  suit  the  costumier  s  convenience. 
Riccardo,  a  young  profligate  from  Leghorn,  while  visiting 
his  uncle  Fla7ninio,  arranges  to  elope  with  Doralice,  niece 
of  Cornelia,  an  old  lady  whom  Fla^nhiio  is  anxious  to 
marry  on  account  of  her  wealth.  The  elopement  is  frus- 
trated by  Leonora,  whom  Riccardo  has  deserted,  and  her 
brother  Erminio,  who  is  in  love  with  Doralice.  Leonora 
and  Er7ninio  are  not  unlike  Do7ina  Elvira  and  Don  Ottavio, 
but  Doralice  certainly  has  nothing  in  common  with  Donna 
Anna,  being  quite  ready  to  run  away  with  Riccardo. 
Rodi^narte  and  Rosina,  the  servants  of  Riccardo  and 
Cornelia  respectively,  are  ordinary  parti  buffe,  but  with 
more  part  in  the  general  action  than  usual ;  we  see  in 
them  the  prototypes  of  Leporello  and  Zerlina.  Musically 
they  look  as  far  forward  as  Rossini ;  even  Mozart  hardly 
arrived  at  such  exuberant  humour  as  we  find  in  their 
duets — "  Or  via  dameggia,''  with  its  absurd  parodies  of  grand 
opera,  and  ^^  Eerma,  ferma,  o  cospettaccio,''  a  string  of  short 
chattering,  giggling  phrases,  evidently  intended  to  be 
spoken  rather  than  sung,  unified  by  a  short  violin-figure, 
with  now  and  then  a  real  musical  phrase  to  round  off. 
a  cadence. 


UKBINO,    NAPLES 


129 


Ex.  57. 
Alles^ro. 


RODIMARTE. 


Oboes  4'"  Violins, 
iinis. 
Viola. 


Cofttintio. 


I 


tE^E 


iE: 


d 


=^*^5] _ 0- 


^- 


6    i? 

5 


Fer  -  ma, 


1 


ROSINA  {Cojiti-alto). 


che  cos'    e  ?  che  cos'  e  ? 


I^f*- 


^^S^^^^5^^ 


=^=^: 


b»— ^— P- 


fer-ma,     o  cos-pet-tac-cio  ! 


Scu-si,scu-si  I'er- 


-^- 


no,    no,  no,  no,  non  v6  ques-  to  ! 


fc^^ 


-   1-0  -  re,         ec-co  il  braccio,        il    braccio  ! 


Ig^ 


go-da 


I30 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


i^^t^r^^-^ 


:ff:^. 


_*_  ^ 


z: "  > 


pur,  go  -  da    pur   di  quest'  o  -  no  -  re,        lei    lo  pren-da,       lo 

t ^^^- 


•-•""2 


=1- 


:<^=p: 


=3 


s* 


^3=r-tz-^i 


">-Ai^ 


^^^»f=lt 


No,      no,    non  e  o  -  ne  -  sta  ! 


II^I-. 


j>s— ^ 


-^ 


-^— 


Vi  -  a  ! 

-i ^=iz:z^g= 


pren-da ! 


lei     si       ser-va, 


-A- 


fcs' 


-I— 


si  ser-va  ! 


# 


ti 


Of  the  rest  it  is  difficult  to  pick  out  single  airs  as 
illustrations.  The  music  is  always  full  of  life  and  humour, 
sometimes  in  the  orchestra,  as  when  Cornelia  scolds  Fla- 
viinio  for  making  love  to  her  servant  Rosina,  sometimes  in 
the  voice-part  itself,  as  in  some  of  Riccardds  airs.  This 
part,  which  is  for  a  soprano,  was  sung  by  a  woman,  not 
by  a  castraio,  and  its  florid  phrases  well  suggest  the  hero's 
vanity  and  profligate  cynicism. 

Rosinds  air  ''  Avete  nel  volto''  has  a  very  arch  effect  of 
aposiopesis  which  is  of  interest  from  a  technical  point  of 
view,  besides  exhibiting  the  characteristic  charm  of  Scar- 
latti's light  and  playful  style. 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


131 


Ex.  58. 

ROSINA 
{Contralto). 


Continiio. 


=1^- 
^ 


^. 


-^ — * 


— ^**" — ' 


^ — N — ^\- 


li^ZI^ 


.p_iS. 


A  -   ve   -   te    nel  vol-to,    ch'e    mol  -  to    vi-va-ce,      Si 

A 1 r-H d 


iEE 


:^: 


-45*1- 


1^=^ 


:Ei5^ 


:^=]*5f 


^i:^: 


dolce  at-trat-ti-va  ch'ar  -  ri  -  vaxhe  piace,  che 


--W=-% 


t?^ 


f^ 


:P=£- 


=iaLg^ 


ba-sta,  ba-sta  co  -  si 


:t==P: 


:=1= 


:ii 


Indeed  the  whole  opera  is  so  fresh  and  so  full  of  vitality 
that  under  favourable  circumstances  it  might  be  quite 
possible  to  revive  it,  especially  as  it  requires  no  elaborate 
scenery  or  stage  effects,  and  contains  no  part  for  a  castrato 
except  Erniinio,  which  is  a  very  small  one.  Certainly  its 
old-fashioned  methods  ought  not  to  stand  in  its  way  when 
we  see  "  La  Serva  Padrona"  still  remembered  and  per- 
formed in  Italy. 

Two  serenatas  belong  to  this  period — "  Pace,  Amor, 
Providenza,"  and  the  "  Seasons."  The  first  of  these 
appears  to  have  been  composed  for  the  Emperor's  name- 
day,  with  special  allusion  to  the  Peace  of  Rastatt  (17 14). 
The  libretto  is  more  than  usually  political.  Providence  quite 
early  in  the  work  informs  Peace  and  Love  that  it  is  all 
very  well  for  them  to  sing  "  Viva  amore,''  but  that  it  is  really 
owing  to  him  improvidence  is  a  bass)  that  Charles  is  firmly 
established,  not  only  on  the  throne  of  Naples,  but  on  several 
others  as  well.  Love,  however,  insists  that  it  was  he  who 
"smoothed  his  path  to  the  Iberian  throne  "  and  also  pre- 
sented Charles  to  "afflicted  Germany."  Peace  appears  to 
feel  rather  hurt  at  the  other  two  taking  to  themselves  all 
the  credit  of  the  recent  diplomatic  successes,  and  threatens 
to  go  away,  but  is  restrained  by  Providence,  and 

"  Now  that  the  Ebro,  Danube,  and  the  Rhine 
Haste  with  their  tribute  to  the  feet  of  Charles," 


132  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

we  end  with  the  usual  chorus  of  jubilation.  The  music  is 
of  little  interest. 

The  other  serenata  was  composed  in  17 16  for  the  birth 
of  the  Archduke  Leopold,  who,  however,  died  the  same 
year.  It  is  on  a  very  large  scale,  having  parts  for  five 
voices  (the  four  seasons  and  Jupiter)  and  being  scored  for 
what  was  then  a  large  orchestra.  With  regard  to  the  score, 
however,  there  is  some  confusion,  as  the  manuscripts  ex- 
hibit divergencies.  Each  part  is  preceded  by  a  sinfonia, 
the  second  having  only  the  last  two  movements  of  the 
conventional  form.  The  whole  composition  well  illustrates 
the  serenata  style,  which  was  intended  to  combine  the 
brilliance  of  the  stage  with  the  elaboration  of  the  chamber  ; 
but  although  it  sometimes  attains  to  a  remarkable  beauty, 
it  is  very  often  extremely  tedious,  especially  at  this  period 
when  Scarlatti's  "brilliant"  manner  was  occasionally  inclined 
to  superficiality.  Spring  has  an  attractive  air,  "  Canta  dolce 
il  Rosigmiolo^'  in  the  Siciliana  style,  the  flute  representing 
the  nightingale  with  an  unusual  simplicity  and  restraint, 
and  Azitumn  (contralto)  has  an  air  in  the  first  part,  ''  Fiior 
deir  urna  le  belle  onde,''  with  a  very  carefully  written 
accompaniment  for  violins  in  unison,  two  violas,  and  two 
violoncellos.  But  the  part  oi  Autumn  seems  to  have  been 
sung  by  a  singer  who  made  a  speciality  of  "  rippling  "  effects, 
and  by  the  end  of  the  serenata  they  become  most  weari- 
some. The  work  is  brought  to  a  conclusion  by  a  quintet 
in  rondo-form  ;  some  of  its  themes  are  graceful — it  was 
hardly  possible  not  to  be  graceful  in  ^^-  time — but  generally 
it  exhibits  Scarlatti's  curious  inability  to  grasp  the  possi- 
bilities of  choral  effect. 

The  birth  of  the  Archduke  was  also  celebrated  with  an 
opera,  "  La  Virtu  Trionfante  dell'  Odio  e  dell'  Amore,"  pre- 
ceded by  a  special  prologue  also  by  Scarlatti  ;  and  it  was 
probably  in  connexion  with  this  that  he  received  the 
honour  of  knighthood,  as  he  is  called  Cavaliere  for  the  first 
time  in  the  libretto  of  "  Carlo  Re  d'  Allemagna,"  produced 
at  the  Carnival  of  17 16.  It  has  been  suggested  that  he 
was  made  a  knight  of  the  Golden  Spur  by  the  Pope,  at  the 


URBINO,    NAPLES  133 

request  of  Cardinal  Ottoboni.  If  this  were  the  case,  it  is 
curious  that  he  should  not  have  been  knighted  earlier  when 
he  was  livinof  in  Rome  as  Cardinal  Ottoboni's  Maestro  di 
Cappella.  In  any  case  the  order  was  no  great  honour,  for 
Zedler  ^  tells  us  that  by  1677  it  was  sufficiently  common 
for  the  Venetian  ambassador  to  be  "  not  a  little  surprised  " 
at  receiving  it,  while  in  later  years  it  fell  still  lower  in 
value,  being  scattered  broadcast  by  all  Papal  nuncios  and 
many  other  dignitaries  of  the  Church.  The  Maltese  cross 
on  Scarlatti's  tombstone  suggests  that  he  was  a  knight  of 
Malta,  but  no  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  this 
has  yet  come  to  light. 

Two  oratorios,  "San  Filippo  Neri "  (17 13)  and  the 
"  Trinity  Oratorio  "  (17  15),  present  a  curious  contrast  that 
seems  to  illustrate  well  Scarlatti's  attitude  towards  sacred 
music.  The  libretto  of  the  latter  work  is  a  discussion  on 
the  nature  of  the  Trinity  between  Faith,  Divine  Love 
(soprano).  Theology  (alto).  Unbelief  (tenor),  and  Ti7ne 
(bass).  Whether  the  arguments  on  either  side  are 
particularly  convincing  is  not  a  question  for  the  musical 
historian  ;  but  however  sound  the  doctrines  may  be, 
the  operatic  stanza  is  hardly  a  convenient  literary  form 
for  their  presentation,  nor  does  the  subject  seem  at  all 
appropriate  to  musical  treatment.  Scarlatti  has,  if  pos- 
sible, surpassed  his  poet  in  dryness. 

"  San  Filippo  Neri,"  on  the  other  hand,  is  one  of 
his  best  oratorios.  There  is  a  real  feeling  of  sincerity 
about  it,  though  not  all  of  it  is  in  accordance  with 
modern  taste.  The  simile  of  a  ship  on  a  prosperous 
voyage  leads  St.  Philip  into  vocal  ripplings  which  are 
pretty,  but  rather  out  of  place,  and  in  the  air  "  Son  come 
destriero  "  the  pawing  and  champing  of  both  voice  and 
violins  throw  Handel's  frogs  quite  into  the  shade.  But 
where  grenuine  human  feelingf  comes  in  Scarlatti  rises  to 
the  occasion.  There  is  something  seraphic  in  the  brilliance 
of  Charity  s  high  soprano  airs  ;  Faith  speaks  with  a  large 
Handelian  dignity,  and  the  pathetic  recitativo  stronientato 

1   Universal-Lexicon ,  Halle  and  Leipzig,  1744. 


134 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


in     which    the    sufferings    of     the    crucified    Christ    are 
described 

Ex.  59.  

11 


Carita. 


Viol. 
I  and  2. 


EIZ 1 '^ — s,, — ^ L- 


s 


:t^: 


Con     mo -ri -bun-do        ci  -  glio 


e-gli  in 


) 


chi  -  na  la  fron  -  te  e  il  sen  pia-ga  -  to   mos  -  tra  e   par  die  ti 


:^=^_^_^^^ 


:tz^[^=r=t^=^-i^diBt=^iViili2 


^^W~W~Y 


Vi=^ 


laczTdjaz]?: 


V    gg  1.^  ^ 


'-f=^ 


di-ca         a-ma-mi,  a  -  ma-mi,  o    fi-glio!      a  -  ma-mi,  o    fi- glio!  chela 


spi-ne     eichio-di,       I'as  -  ta  cru-de  -  le    e       labe~vandaa-ma  -  ra, 


1== 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


ns 


is    worthily    followed   by  the    quiet   and    beautiful   air    in 
which  St.  Philip  acknowledges  the  divine  call. 

Two  masses  ''a//a  Palestrina"  (1710  and  17 16)  show  an 
advance  upon  previous  work  of  the  kind  in  the  healthy  feel- 
ing for  modern  tonality  and  the  free  treatment  of  discords. 


Ex.  60. 

mun 


di, 


(1710.) 
re      mi    - 


i 


=^: 


fE-3?^^^ 


I^ 


-W-m- 


*S= 


di,     mi 
di, 


re.. 


.C}- 


~r:>'- 


122: 


J-^ 


1 


--t^- 


-^- 


mun         -       di, 
se  -  re  -         re. 


se 
no 


bis. 


T=t 


itzat^^: 


-s::^^?- 


1^ 


3 


±ii. 


^ 


-<s- 


:^ 


:E3 


Ji 


i-i 


sE=e^ 


P 


:^ 


re     no 


— iS"- 


.p^=p 


-tS^ 


i. 

bis. 
bis. 


mi  -  se  -  re 


bis. 


The  Missa  Clementma  II.  (17 16)  is  the  better  of  the 
two.  Its  style  is  dignified,  with  a  firm  sense  of  tonic 
relation,  and  the  tv^o  fiigafo  movements,  '■'In  gloria  Dei 
Patris"  and  '' Et  vitam  ventztri,''  are  full  of  vitality  and 
breathe  a  thoroughly  modern   spirit.     The  same   modern 


136  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

spirit  is  shown  in  the  well-known  Laetatus  sum,  for  four 
voices,^  which  is  as  vigorous  as  any  work  of  Leo.  It  was 
probably  composed  as  a  study  in  counterpoint,  as  the  only 
contemporary  manuscript  has  no  words,  and  is  headed 
''  Modulatio  sexti  toni :  tres  cogitationes  unaqiie  Arinonia'' 
referring  to  the  three  subjects,  exhibited  first  separately 
and  finally  all  together.  The  Requiem  is  in  a  style  similar 
to  that  of  the  other  masses,  and  may  perhaps  be  ascribed 
to  this  period.  It  is  not  known  for  what  occasion  it  was 
written;  possibly  for  the  death  of  Clement  XI.  in  1721, 
though  the  mass  for  the  accession  of  his  successor,  Inno- 
cent XIII.,  was  merely  dished  up  from  old  work;  and  at 
so  late  a  date  we  should  expect  a  still  more  modern  style. 
The  Requiem  is  rather  unequal,  and  seems  to  vary  in 
quality  with  the  character  of  the  words.  Where  they  are 
merely  liturgical,  Scarlatti  is  dull ;  where  they  touch  some 
genuine  human  emotion,  as  in  the  Requiem  aeternam  the 
Sanctus  and  O sauna,  Scarlatti  is  genuinely  poetical.  The 
Dies  irae  is  not  set,  being  sung  to  the  traditional  plain-song. 

The  same  poetical  touch  is  seen  in  the  two  Misereres 
for  five  voices,  strings,  and  organ  in  E  minor  (17 15)  and 
C  minor  (17 16)."  These,  like  many  other  settings  of 
psalms,  are  rather  loose  in  tonality,  but  this  is  due  as  much 
to  looseness  of  form  as  to  modal  survivals.  Indeed,  form 
appears  only  in  a  free  balancing  of  rhythmic  sections  and 
in  the  recurrence  every  now  and  then  of  fragmentary 
phrases  which  make  for  a  vague  unification  of  the  whole, 
the  idea  being  to  express  the  words  just  as  they  come,  as  in 
Verdi's  Stabat  Mater,  though  there  the  strophic  character 
of  the  poem  necessarily  |^ave  a  more  symmetrical  disposition 
to  the  music  within  the  limits  of  single  sections. 

The  other  psalms  are  for  the  most  part  unsatisfactory. 
They  have  some  beautiful  moments,  but  are  very  un- 
equal. Generally  they  include  some  treatment  of  an 
ecclesiastical  canto  fermo,  so  that   the  trail  of  the  modes 

^  Printed  in  Proske's  JMusica  Divina, 

^  It  is  possible  that  these  were  written  some  ten  years  earher,  as  suggested 
at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter. 


URBINO,    NAPLES  137 

is  still  over  their  harmony,  and  though  the  style  of 
Palestrina  is  definitely  abandoned,  the  new  technique 
of  harmonic  counterpoint  is  not  yet  quite  perfected. 
Leo  has  a  complete  mastery  over  it,  but  Scarlatti 
does  not  always  realize  the  necessity  of  individualizing 
his  parts  in  a  polyphonic  choral  movement.  It  cannot 
have  been  due  to  lack  of  skill,  for  his  two-part  writing 
in  the  chamber-cantatas  is  not  surpassed  by  J,  S.  Bach 
himself,  and  the  Missa  Cieme^ttina  II.  shows  that  he 
saw  in  what  direction  choral  music  had  to  go — indeed, 
the  final  chorus  of  "  S.  Teodosia "  pointed  thither  as 
early  as  1685.  But  in  much  of  his  choral  writing  the 
parts  cross  and  recross  so  often,  and  contrast  so  little 
with  each  other,  that  the  listener  is  quite  unable  to  pursue 
the  development  of  a  particular  subject.  The  best  of  the 
psalms  is  the  Lmidate  p2teri  Dominuin  for  five  voices  and 
organ.  It  begins  with  a  bass  solo  in  E  minor,  practically 
in  unison  with  the  continuo,  varied  by  coloratura.  It  is 
not  in  the  style  of  an  aria,  but  has  the  character  of  a  fugue- 
subject,  and  immediately  gives  a  rough  suggestion  of  a 
fugal  answer  by  repeating  itself  in  the  subdominant ;  it 
then  returns  to  a  second  repetition  in  the  tonic,  extended 
by  a  coda.  The  other  voices  enter  at  "  Sit  nomen  Domini^'' 
sung  by  the  second  soprano  to  the  fourth  tone  as  a  canto 
fermo,  the  other  voices  having  free  imitations.  This 
movement  is  also  in  E  minor.  "  A  solis  ortu  "  and  "  Laud- 
abile  nomen  "  are  set  for  soprano,  alto,  and  tenor  only,  the 
first  theme  being  repeated  at  the  end  of  nine  bars,  after 
which  the  second  is  developed  for  twenty-five  bars  more. 
The  movement  is  gentle  and  melancholy  in  character,  and 
the  "  y^  solis  ortu"  has  a  despairing  expression  strangely 
out  of  place  in  so  cheerful  a  psalm  of  praise. 

Ex.  61. 

A   so-lis  or    -   tu  us  -  que  ad  oc-ca         -  -  sum. 


W^=nWf^^ 


-F-- 


A  so-]is     or  -  tu  us  -    que  ad  oc-ca  -  sum. 


138 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


The  ''  Excelsus  super  oni7tes''  forms  a  welcome  contrast, 
being  in  five-part  harmony  in  C  major,  and  the  next 
section,  ''  et  super  coelosj'  though  mostly  in  minor  keys,  is 
fairly  vigorous  and  massive.  It  ends  in  C  major,  after 
which  comes  a  duet,  "  Quis  sicut  DominiLs''  for  soprano 
and  alto  in  the  imitative  manner  of  the  chamber-duets. 
"  Suscitans  a  terra''  is  set  as  a  florid  soprano  solo,  treated 
in  a  fugal  spirit,  like  the  opening  bass  solo,  if  one  can 
conceive  of  a  fiigato  for  one  voice.  The  contijiuo  never 
imitates  it  at  all. 


Ex.  62. 


^g:^gggg^p 


ra         in  -   o 


4    #3 


—^5 ^^ — ^^ — 1-^ 


-^=J- 


•  *  J 


m 


pes,      sus 


citans       a 


& 


It  is  followed  by  a  well-developed ///^'^/^  on  "  nt  collocet 
eum  "  for  all  five  voices, 


Ex.  63. 


ut  col-lo-cet   eum  cum  prin  -  ci  -  pi-bus  po-pu  -  li    su  -  i       po 


^^^^^ 


^=^^=^=q^ 


m^ 


ut         col-lo-cet  e-umcumprin- 

contrasted  with  which  is  "  Qui  habitare  fecit^'  a  long 
movement  in  full  harmony,  falling  into  definite  rhythmical 
periods.  The  Gloria  is  given  out  by  the  first  soprano 
alone  in  a  sort  of  arioso;  ''sicut  eraf'  is  sung  to  imita- 
tions on  the  canto  fermo.  The  tonality  of  the  motet  is 
firm  throughout,  in  spite  of  the  use  of  an  ecclesiastical 
canto  fermo,  so  that  it  evidently  belongs  to  a  late  period  ; 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


139 


and  in  connection  with  this  clear  feeHng  for  tonic  relations 
the  oppressive  melancholy  of  the  work  is  the  more  strange. 
It  seems  so  sincere,  so  intimately  tragic,  that  one  cannot 
regard  it  as  a  mere  modal  survival.  Yet  to  interpret  it 
in  a  modern  spirit  as  the  expression  of  the  composer's 
personal  feeling,  strong  though  the  temptation  may  be  to 
arrive  in  this  way  at  a  plausible  explanation,  would,  I 
think,  be  false  psychology.  However  repugnant  it  may  be 
to  leave  a  work  of  art  as  a  wholly  unexplained  mystery,  we 
must  always  remember  that  we  have  no  right  to  attempt 
serious  analysis  of  what  we  may  imagine  to  be  its  emo- 
tional content  until  we  have  absolutely  and  entirely  mastered 
its  structural  organization  down  to  the  innermost  details. 

Three  motets  for  double  choir  may  safely  be  assigned 
to  this  period,  since  we  know  that  one  of  them,  '' O 
magnum  mysterium^'  was  written  in  1707.  The  '' Tu  es 
Petrus''  has  always  been  a  famous  composition,  and 
thoroughly  deserves  its  great  reputation.^  "  O  magnum 
mystermm  "  is  rather  more  archaic,  though  firm  in  tonality, 
while  "  Volo,  Pater''  is  a  perfect  specimen  of  the  modern 
style,  masterly  in  its  counterpoint,  yet  founded  on  a 
subject  that  might  have  come  from  a  chamber-cantata, 
so  melodious  is  its  flow. 


Ex.  64. 


Vo 


lo      Pa 


ter 


ut 


m^^- 


=*=^ 


^- 


i^= 


izi: 


Vo    - 


u    -  bi 


ter 


Operas  and  serenatas,  motets  and  oratorios,  are,  how- 
ever, left  far  behind  by  the  chamber-cantatas  that  are 
contemporary  with  them.  Scarlatti  had  been  appointed 
master  at  the  Conservatorio  dei  Poveri  di  Gesh  Cris/o  in 
1709,  and  it  may  have  been  his  occupation  as  a  teacher 

1  It  has  been  reprinted  several  times. 


140 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


that  stimulated  him  to  such  extraordinary  studies  in  ad- 
vanced harmony  as  the  chamber-cantatas  exemplify.  It 
was  in  17 12  that  he  made  the  celebrated  exchange  of 
cantatas  with  Francesco  Gasparini.  The  details  of  the 
correspondence  are  not  known.  Apparently  it  began  by 
Gasparini  sending  Scarlatti  a  setting  of  the  cantata 
''  Aiidate  0  miei  sospiri.''  Scarlatti  replied  to  this  com- 
position, which  is  remarkable  for  nothing  except  its 
dryness,  by  sending  two  settings  of  the  same  words. 
The  first  is  in  G  minor,  headed  "m  idea  Immana,''  and 
the  last  air  has  an  alternative  setting  ''per  intingoloT^ 
The  other  setting  is  in  F  sharp  minor,  ''in  ideain/iiwiana,' 
ma  in  regolato  Croinatico,  non  e  per  ogni  Prof essore!' 

The  "  human  "  cantata  may  fairly  be  taken  to  represent 
the  best  setting  of  the  words  that  Scarlatti  could  conceive. 
The  airs  are  melodious,  and  though  their  harmonies 
present  nothing  startling,  they  are  quite  modern  in  feel- 
ing. The  most  interesting  movement  from  a  historical 
point  of  view  is  the  introductory  ainoso  and  recitative. 


Ex.  65. 


Lar^o. 


=1: 


1^^ 


An  -  da 


te,      an-da 


liEii^fc^giii^ 


6   S6 


7   -6   -^ 
5 


=^: 


il-^i: 


t>7      6     3       6 

5      4 


^^i^"^_^i 


te  o     miei  sospi  -  ri, o  miei  sospi   -  ri al  cor       d'1-re-ne, 


b; 


6     ^^  t>6  -"^      J 

t!4     ^ 


^ 


6      1^6 


-kh-S^ — * — 
6       7        4    3 


^  Intingolo  =  a  ragout. 

^  Scarlatti's  habit  of  making  an  h  that  somewhat  resembles  an  E  (for  a 
good  facsimile  of  his  handwriting  see  the  catalogue  of  the  library  of  the  Brussels 
Conservatoire,  vol.  i.)  led  Burney  and  others  to  read  this  word  as  iiiEuiiuma, 
which,  it  was  suggested,  must  have  been  an  academic  pseudonym  ! 


i 


f 


^=3EK^ 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


141 


-^ 


-m>—^' 


5E^ae!£EE£ 


m 


an-da  -  te,  an-da  -  te,  an-da    -     te  o  miei  sospiri  o  miei  sos- 

i=EEt:=7t=:*zzz]V[:d=id^=^ 


Sip 


^=3=*= 


g 


t2it; 


-^ 


t56 


t>    t?7t>6    6  t]  b     6 


I 


^ 


S 


5^=P= 


:f*: 


:S=1^ 


!^- 


pi  -  ri  al    cor. 


al  cor         d'l-re-ne  : 


:tii 


7    6 


ig^^i=^^^^^^^gE^II 


es-so      delmiole    pe 


ne sappia,      sappiadavoi 


m 


#2: 


^^ 


«p:^ 


5^^ 


:t=± 


7     #        #6 
S  tt4 


This  is  comparatively  simple,  and  shows  at  once  that 
the  composer  has  just  began  to  realize  the  possibilities  of 
the  chord  of  the  diminished  seventh.  It  was  by  no  means 
a  new  chord  ;  but  Scarlatti  is  probably  the  first  composer 
who  grasped  what  might  be  done  with  it  considered  as  an 
absolute  chord,  not  as  a  suspended  discord  arrived  at  by  a 
contrapuntal  process  of  preparation.  And  in  the  above 
extract  there  are  more  diminished  sevenths  than  those 
marked  ^l  ;  the  second  chord  of  the  fourth  bar  may  be 
safely  regarded  as  implying  an  A  flat  and  not  a  G.  Scar- 
latti's figuring  is  always  rather  irregular  ;  but  by  comparing 
basses  with  voice-parts  it  is  found  to  be  a  fairly  general 
rule,  though  not  an  absolute  one,  that  g^  implies  the  third 
inversion  of  the  minor  ninth,  while  the  third  inversion  of 
the  dominant  seventh  is  generally  figured  |,  and  the  dis- 
cordant second  prepared.  The  last  bar  of  this  example, 
however,  supplies  an  exception. 


142 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


The  next  step  is  to  go   from  one  diminished  seventh 
straight  to  another  by  a  fall  of  a  semitone.      This  example 


Ex.  66. 


p=^ 


=]v 


1^^^ 


^^E^^z^^^- 


-^ — I — 


I\Ia      fin  -  ge  -  ra        qual     fin    ad      o    -    ra     ha    fin    -   to 


6 


^7 
5 


=^ 


d 


^=^: 


:i=3=t^ 


:t^=z:t2==^ 


ch'el  -  la    non   vi       co  -  no  -  see 


non    v'in  -  ten  -  de 


2=^: 


:^= 


-^^  7 ^  4        3 

5 

is  from  the  second  recitative  of  the  same  cantata.  A  single 
diminished  seventh  will  carry  a  modulation  a  fairly  long 
way  without  obvious  eccentricity  of  resolution,  but  two  or 
more  together  can  make  the  listener  lose  his  bearino-s 
so  completely  that  he  does  not  know  whether  the  next 
resolution  be  complicated  or  simple. 

The  second  cantata  was  written  with  the  deliberate  in- 
tention of  puzzling  Gasparini.  Indeed  to  the  modern  reader 
it  is  not  easily  intelligible  at  first  sight,  even  allowing  for 
modern  unfamiliarity  with  the  style  and  the  notation  ;  so  we 
can  imagine  how  Gasparini  must  have  been  bewildered  by 
its  amazing  successions  of  chromatic  harmonies,  especially  as 
Scarlatti,  with  a  characteristic  sense  of  humour,  has  started 
straight  off  with  a  third  inversion  of  the  supertonic  seventh 
in  the  key  of  F  sharp  minor,  and  has  left  the  bass  unfigured. 
This  at  any  rate  was  his  intention,  but  either  from  force  of 
habit,  or  possibly  with  deliberate  irony,  he  has  put  in  a 
harmless  figure  here  and  there  in  places  where  the  most 
elementary  pupil  would  have  had  no  difficulty  in  supplying 
them  instinctively. 

The  first  recitative  shows  his  methods. 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


H3 


Ex.  67. 

Andante. 


%SE£ES=^^^ 


=qv: 


S 


^^ 


^=1^1=^ 


:£Ee 


^-S^ 


S 


3^ 


An  -  da  -  te, 


da  -  te  o    miei     so  -  spi  -  ri  al 

4 


m 


^ 


E^*^ 


S 


q*s=^: 


::1v 


:at1 


:12= 


al       cor     d'l  -  re  -  ne, 


del     mio      le 


-.-i 


5=§$^ 


^ 


i^tz: 


i 


P=^. 


:pi^^: 


m 


^e^Ee5e^=| 


-s,— p. — — 

pe    -   ne       sap  -  pia    da     voi ; 


9-0- 


m^ 


-i^^ 


ben      lo      sa  -  pra 


g: 


^-- 


3221 


■^ — ^ y«i \^ ^ \^ s^-" 


=^=^^=^ 


-^ 


i — \-       I 


S 


di  -   te  che     per       a  -    ver     ri 


sto  -  ro  al  suo       do  -    lo 


w 


J^ 


i^=p 


^ — ^ — ^— • — ^- 


-^— ^ 


:t?=t2: 


g^^ 


^^ 


-F=— ^- 


tut  -  to    con  voi     sen    vie  -  ne      an 


I 


che  11  mio  co  -  re 


i i^_i 


An- 


^ 


144 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


i 


da    -    te, 


?=5r 


:»P3pE-: 


-^-^1 


:f^p- 


»i 


i3g 


Ei^= 


:=^: 


-    da 


quel     bel 


^ 


iggs^^^Eg^^ 


tan  -  to  ch'un  sol     al  -  me  -  no    es 


^^pS^ 


sa  n  ac  -  col  -  sa. 


pien  del  mio  fo  -  co 

I 

J— 


'-^-^-- 


^- 


"SF" 


5=Se: 


=i^=3: 


an    -  da  -  te, 


^  1 1^^     ^j     i4* 


( 


s^i^^ggi 


j^ig^^z^^ 


-^-^-^ 


^ 


«*=^ni^: 


da-te  al  cor  d'l-re  -  ne 


tt 


an  -  da-te  al  cor  d'l-re  -  ne,     o    miei  so-  spi-  ri  ! 


liS: 


^^ 


ii^^^l 


S-m 


It  is  at  once  apparent  that  the  accidentals  make  the 
music  look  more  complicated  than  it  really  is.  As  it  is, 
modern  notation  saves  several  of  these,  and  three  sharps 
to  the  signature  would  have  saved  several  more.  The 
sudden  change  to  flats  in  the  fourth  bar  might  have  been 
avoided  by  writing  the  second  bass  note  as  F  double- 
sharp.  Bar  8  shows  a  curious  treatment  of  a  2  chord,  and 
we  find  an  analogous  case  in  the  second  recitative,  which 
begins  unmistakably  on  the  second  inversion  of  the  chord 
of  C  sharp  minor,  and  resolves  it  on  to  a  chain  of  diminished 
sevenths  whose  basses  descend  by  semitones. 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


H5 


Ex.  68. 


ii^^^^^^^^ 


w 


it^z^r: 


Ma     di     che   mi  lu     -    sin  -  go  ?      oh  Dio  !  che    pen  -  so  ? 


Wl 


^ 


^: 


H 


:t=: 


The  diminished  seventh  is  the  key  to  the  rest.  But 
the  close  of  the  second  recitative  presents  more  striking 
progressions. 

Ex.  69. 


^^ 


zitz: 


'-w=^ 


^ 


e    pur     sa     quell'  in  -  gra  -  ta,         lo      sa    con  suo  pia-  cer  che 

J' — -  i  I  J. 


F 


^ 


K— is- 


«^ 


=^ 


:i=t2=t^ 


?3E:?3=F 


miei    voi     sie  -  te, 


a3r 


^p^4-k 


^g 


e  in  -  ten  -  de        (ma  s'in  -  fin  -   ge 


t 


i 


w 


r=frw^ 


:^-=^=^ 


qual  suo  bar-ba-ro  cor)  cio. . 


.^ 


^===^: 


i^^  ^P^^-  ^^  !j 


fe 


The  modulation  to  A  flat  two  bars  before  the  end  is 
extremely  bold.  The  explanation  must  be  sought  in  the 
words — though  not  merely  as  a  piece  of  eccentricity  on  the 
word  '' barbaro!'  The  sentence  includes  a  parenthesis — 
"  and  she  understands  (but  that  barbarous  heart  of  hers 
feigns  not  to  do  so)  that  which  ye  ask."  Scarlatti  has 
ingeniously  attempted  to  represent  this  rhetorical  figure  in 

K 


146 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


his  music,  for  if  we  cut  out  what  is  in  parenthesis,  the  music 
makes  sense  just  as  the  words  do,  '' intende  .  .  .  ^z'^  "  being 
on  the  same  chord.  Now  probably  Scarlatti's  first  instinct 
was  to  get  "  barbai'-o  "  on  to  a  diminished  seventh,  so  that 
we  should  read  E  natural  for  E  flat,  and  the  chord  of  F 
minor  for  that  of  A  flat  major.  This  would  be  a  very 
characteristic  progression.  But  the  jump  from  F  minor  to 
the  I  on  G,  which  is  attractive  enough  to  our  ears,  was 
probably  more  than  Scarlatti  could  manage.  He  would 
feel  that  the  bass  must  descend  to  G  from  A  flat.  But  the 
leap  from  E  natural  to  A  flat,  whether  the  latter  bears  a  | 
or  a  6,  was  awkward,  and  to  flatten  the  E  was  an  obvious 
way  out  of  the  difficulty.     Whether  the  G  on  the  fourth 

beat  should  bear  a  J-i  or  a  .t4,,  I  am  not  certain  ;  the  previous 

G  must  certainly  bear  a  ^4,  and  Scarlatti  probably  con- 
templated the  same  chord  following  the  parenthesis  ;  but  it 
is  possible  that  he  would  have  preferred  eventually  to 
soften  the  progression  by  using  an  inversion  of  his  favourite 
diminished  seventh. 

Another  progression  common  enough  to  us  but  unusual 
for  Scarlatti  is  the  resolution  of  the  Neapolitan  sixth  on 
the  first  inversion  of  the  supertonic  minor  ninth,  on  the 
word  ''placer''  in  the  preceding  example.  The  Neapolitan 
sixth  is,  of  course,  plentiful  in  Scarlatti's  work ;  indeed 
it  is  so  conspicuous  a  mannerism  of  his  that  it  may  well 
have  got  its  name  from  him.  It  appears  frequently  even 
in  his  earliest  work,  although  in  Stradella  and  Legrenzi 
it  is  employed  very  seldom,  and  even  then  with  some 
timidity.  The  flat  supertonic  from  which  it  is  derived  is 
characteristic  of  Neapolitan  folk-song,  as  may  be  seen 
from  the  canzonette  in  the  comic  operas  of  Vinci  and  Leo  ; 

Ex.  70.  Vinci,  "  Le  Ziten  Galera"  (1722). 


:^E=p: 


3^^ 


±2: 


:^:f: 


-P-^ 


\ 


Vor  -  ri 


ven-ta  -  re. . . .    so  -  re  -  cil  -  lo. 


^E^gSs 


Per  met-te-re  pa-  u-ra  a....  la  Sia  Anella,a  la  Sia  A-  nella, . . 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


147 


but  this  type  of  popular  song  had  not  yet  been  appropriated 
by  serious  composers.  The  rhythm  is  characteristically 
Neapolitan,  and  is  never  found  in  Scarlatti.  It  is  much 
more  probable  that  he  found  the  flat  supertonic  in  the  songs 
of  his  native  Sicily.  Scarlatti  was  too  good  a  musician 
to  be  much  affected  by  the  "  assumption  of  simplicity  by 
courtly  persons  who  had  become  artificialized,  and  wanted  a 
new  sensation,"  which,  as  Mr.  Fuller-Maitland^  well  points 
out,  was  a  fashionable  characteristic  of  the  early  eighteenth 
century,  and  which  we  can  observe  in  our  own  day  in  the 
recrudescent  craze  for  folk-song.  But  he  did  yield  to  it  on 
rare  occasions,  and  two  examples  have  survived  of  airs 
specially  described  by  Scarlatti  as  ''alia  siciliana,''  one  in 
the  opera  "  La  Donna  e  ancora  fedele,"  the  other  in  the 
cantata  "  Una  belta  cK  eguale."  Both  of  these  are  of  the 
type  which  we  associate  with  the  name  ''  Siciliana" 
flowing  melodies  in  ~-  time ;  but  that  rhythm  could  hardly 
have  been  the  essential  of  the  Sicilian  type,  since  the 
operas  and  cantatas  are  full  of  such  airs,  undistinguished 
by  any  special  title.  What  distinguishes  these  two  from 
the  others  is  the  frequent  appearance  of  the  flat  supertonic. 
The  characteristic  cadence  of  the  air  "  Non  mi  tradir  mai 
piu  "  in  the  opera  shows  it  only  tentatively  ;  the  raising  of 
B  flat  to  B  on  its  last  appearance  was  no  doubt  a  con- 
cession to  the  audience,  who  would  not  have  time  in  an 
opera  to  take  in  properly  so  unusual  a  melodic  progression. 

Ex.  71. 


Mai   piu, 


mai  piu   n^  men  per  gio  -  co,  per    gio 

^-  ^   ^   ff^         ^ 


i±Sr 


? 


^^^-k" 


=S 


-F-^ 


But  in  the  cantata  there  was  less  need  for  such  precau- 
tions, and  Scarlatti  has  treated  his  theme  much  more  freely. 
The  characteristic  interval  appears,  and  is  even  allowed  to 
distort  the  harmony  of  the  conventional  2  ^  cadence  ;  in- 

^  "  Oxford  History  of  Music,"  vol.  iv.  p.  63. 


148 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


deed  Scarlatti,  having  once  impressed  this  distortion  on 
the  Hstener,  shows  how  it  can  be  ingeniously  used  to  effect 
a  striking  modulation.  Yet  even  here  he  has  not  intro- 
duced it  at  the  end  of  the  air,  feeling  that  it  would  not 
give  a  sufficient  impression  of  finality.  The  air  is  so  in- 
teresting in  its  melody,  harmony,  and  form  that  it  is  worth 
quoting  entire. 


\ 


Ex.  72. 

Aria  alia  Siciliana. 


tJ 


ggfi^4g^^;ggEgg^g^^ 


:6     6 


Jf6 


#: 


w-- 


_f-_  ^^ 


■^-1 — 
Bel    -    la,  sevuoiperte far 


^^^^^^ 


^ 


:^=lv 


:^^ 


tt6 


*=g3 


_^=p-— 


^~-^-f^ 


■p: 


-P-^- 


1^ 


mi  langui     -     re, 


-^- 


t^^^E^^^^ 


-m 


bel 


i 


i^ 


■^-^~ 


S6 


S66 


la,  se  vuoi  per  te far  -  mi  langui    -  re, con     un      ])ia  -     cer. 


:^- 


:^tf^S¥ 


#    r^- 


tiz^ 


JI6 


S6    6 


=^^=^^ 


^^?^^^if^^ 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


149 


±^wf=^ 


^-==jgEPE^il^|;g^^^^ 


stf 


appaga  il  mio  pen-sier,. 


m^^s^^^^^m 


176       6  t>5 

4     3 


-=i^^=*:i^ 


:t2=t=l?^ 


^=£lgi"^E=S 


-p-^- 


mi  lan-gui    -    re e      poi  mo  -  ri    -  re, mo-ri     -  re. 


ii 


6 


i 


3 


^■r--r^- 


I50 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


-^-^ 


:P=^: 


? 


5-=^^ 


Bel-  la,  ap  -  pagail  mio  pensier,..  ..    se  vuoi  con  un  piacer far- 


:p^ 


\^- 


S6      56    3 


P^.^gP^ 


'-^W- 


^^ 


mi  lan-gui  -  re,  ....    ap  -  paga  il  mio  pensier,  ...       e      poi,  .  .       e     poi, e 


^ 


^— P- 


;^^ 


s 


qe=E:p: 


s 


i^^ 


#6 


:^=^ 


1(^2^ 


:ftt 


1 


^^1^^ 


^^±=t2 


poi  mo  -  ri    -  re, mo  -  n  -    re, 


mo  -  ri    -  re. 


f^ 


i 


? 


^; 


^ 


pcft^ 


^-tst=t2 


s^^^E^^ 


F 1 lar^- 


p:=gi: 


?f 


^ 


-I ^ 


^ 


Pi^p: 


3^ 


m 


^^ 


b6 


6         6  5 
4  3     4  3 


^fc*=_^ 


P 


=Ph« 


-f=^ 


poi     mo  -  ri      -      re, 


mo  -  ri      -      re. 


^=^ 


'^ 


3S: 


I  have  purposely  abstained  from  filling  up  the  har- 
monies of  the  accompaniment.  Scarlatti's  figuring  is  al- 
ways rather  sketchy,  and  naturally  so,  since  the  system  was 
in  theory  and  in  practice  one  of  convenience.     Rousseau  ^ 

1  Dictiomiaire  de  Musique,  art.  Accoinpagfieme7it. 


URBINO,    NAPLES  151 

and  Marcello^  tell  us,  each  in  his  own  characteristic  way, 
how  little  attention  was  paid  by  Italians  to  the  figures  in 
accompanying ;  and  composers  of  that  day  were  probably 
quite  reasonable  in  trusting  to  the  common  sense  and 
natural  artistic  instinct  of  players.  But  in  this  air  there 
are  several  places  where  the  bass  might  be  harmonized  in 
two  or  three  different  ways.  Probably  Scarlatti  would 
have  approved  of  any  of  them,  and  for  that  reason  I  have 
avoided  suggesting  that  any  particular  way  is  the  only 
right  one. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  identify  this  air  with  any 
recorded  Sicilian  folk-song,  although  it  has  a  decidedly 
Sicilian  character  in  its  rhythms  and  its  flat  supertonic.'^ 
The  Sicilian  type  of  melody  must  not  be  judged  by  the 
''  Sicili anas'"  of  J.  S.  Bach  and  Handel,  who  had  no  con- 
nexion with  Sicily,  and  merely  imitated  the  airs  in  ^-^  time 
that  are  common  throughout  Scarlatti's  work,  but  which 
never  bear  the  indication  '''alia  siciliana'"  \  Scarlatti, 
as  a  Sicilian,  realized,  as  his  imitators  did  not,  what 
characteristics  were  essential,  and  not  accidental,  to  the 
native  melodies  of  the  island. 

The  "  Cantata  inhzwiana"  represents  the  furthest  point 
to  which  Scarlatti  carried  his  harmonic  audacities.  In  his 
later  work  he  merely  shows  a  completer  mastery  over  the 
same  material,  with  the  result  that  it  is  less  startling  but 
more  beautiful.  There  are  no  extravarant  chords  or 
progressions  in  the  airs  even  of  '' Andate  0  miei  sospiri"  ; 
the  lirst  air  is  certainly  difficult,  but  its  difficulty  arises 
from  the  closeness  of  its  texture — the  modulations  are  so 
tersely  executed  that  the  hearer  has  to  make  haste  to  get 
a  firm  footing  in  one  key  before  Scarlatti  twists  him  into 
another.  Syncopations  too  and  suspensions  add  to  the 
complication.  The  second  air  is  remarkably  beautiful. 
In  this,  as  in  the  air  '' Cara  tojnba"  from  "  Mitridate 
Eupatore,"  the  harmony  gives  poignance  to  the  melody, 

^  //  Teatro  alia  Moda. 

2  I  owe  this  information  to  Prof.  E.  P.  Morello,  librarian  of  the  R,  Con- 
servatorio  di  Musica  at  Palermo. 


152 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


but  is  never  allowed  to  tyrannize  over  it,  as  it  does  in 
some  of  the  still  later  cantatas. 

A  very  beautiful  use  of  chromatic  harmony  is  to 
be  found  in  the  air  "  Quante  pe^ie "  from  the  cantata 
'' Lontananza  crudele"   (17 13);    such  a  phrase  as   this — 

Ex.  73. 


} — ^- 


=P^ 


^t^=t2i 


IP&"S 


-¥-^^ 


tor-men-to-sa  lon-ta  -nan-za,  tor-mento     •      sa     lon-ta  -  nan    -    za 


s^^is^g^ 


_n 


-p — ^^-^^ — ^ — '-^^ 

b6     7    6#6    6    tl6  b6  b6  6JJ6 

is  quite  in  the  spirit  of  Mozart,  and  there  are  many  that 
remind  us  of  J.  S.  Bach. 

Even  in  the  operas,  where  clearness  was  the  first 
consideration,  we  find  some  new  harmonic  effect.  Strange 
progressions  and  complicated  modulations  were  not  suit- 
able to  the  theatre;  but  Scarlatti  shows  in  "  Scipione  nelle 
Spagne  "  what  an  effect  can  be  made  with  a  cadenza  on  a 
diminished  seventh, 
Ex.  74. 


LUCEIO. 


Vwl. 

1  &^2. 


Violon- 
cello. 


3^ 


t. 


nol      deg  -  gio       dir,    nol      deg 


gio 


Ea 


^gSE 


£^-^ 


^^1^^^^ 


IS3^ 


W=4 


■^    -*-    -f- 


b*=^= 


^- 


-~S- 


^=¥^ 


i^tip 


:t2=t= 


dir, 


oh    Dio  ! 


P%Eg 


oh  Dio  !  nol  deg    -    gio      dir,       i 


fc^=i4 


m^^^- 


s 


F- 


H 


-=l-t^ 


-r-- 


t 


1^ 


^^-- 


URBINO,    NAPLES 


153 


^=^=V^ 


^^F=f^- 


^^ 


^- 


dol 


mio, 


oh   Dio  ! 


nol    deg  -  gio       dir. 


1^ 


E^S 


r 


-^ 
k 


i§*^ 


^ 


and  the  chord  is  made  all  the  more  striking  by  its  appear- 
ance as  the  resolution  of  a  deceptive  cadence.  There  is  a 
somewhat  similar  case  in  "  II  Trionfo  dell'  Onore,"  in 
Riccardd  s  air,  ''Si,  si^  che  tut  to  goder  mi  fard,''  where  a 
single  diminished  seventh  is  dwelt  upon  for  three  bars, 
and  is  additionally  emphasized  by  a  peculiarly  insistent 
rhythmic  figure. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  main  characteristic  of 
Scarlatti's  new  harmonic  developments  is  that  he  considers 
his  music  vertically  as  well  as  horizontally.  He  was,  of 
course,  far  from  being  the  first  composer  to  do  so,  and  he 
is  equally  far  from  being  among  those  for  whom  the 
vertical  aspect  of  composition  predominates.  But  he  is 
one  of  the  first  to  apply  the  vertical  principle  to  chromatic 
chords,  and  especially  to  chromatic  discords.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  he  was  influenced  in  this  direction  by 
the  development  of  keyed  instruments.  The  first  impulse 
was  given  by  the  organ,  under  the  hands  of  such  com- 
posers as  Frescobaldi,  and  from  the  organ  the  style 
extended  itself  to  the  cembalo.  The  invention  of  recita- 
tive, as  well  as  the  mechanical  development  of  the  instru- 
ment, must  have  greatly  increased  the  importance  of  the 
cembalo  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  voice,  the  lute 
gradually  retiring  into  the  background.  Alessandro 
Scarlatti's  compositions  for  the  cembalo  are  of  little  im- 
portance and  by  no  means  represent  him  at  his  best ;  but 
we  can  see  from  his  toccatas  how  he  grasped  the  possibili- 
ties of  the  instrument  in  this  direction.  The  contrapuntal 
style  was  the  normal  style  of  the  day,  and  he  therefore 


154  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

writes  mainly  in  contrapuntal  forms  ;  but  his  fugues  for  the 
cembalo  are  mere  hollow  shells.  A  subject  stands  out  here 
and  there,  and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  bustle  and  fuss,  but 
he  wastes  no  energy  on  inner  parts  which  would  never  be 
heard  clearly  whether  they  were  of  contrapuntal  value  or 
not.  If  his  fugues  sound  more  or  less  like  fugues,  that 
is  enough  for  him,  as  it  was  no  doubt  enough  for  most 
listeners.  And  scattered  here  and  there  among  the  quasi- 
contrapuntal  passages  we  come  upon  slow  successions  of 
thick  chords,  often  chromatic,  played  quite  ad  libitum, 
rattling  up  and  down  in  varied  arpeggios  from  one  end  of 
the  keyboard  to  the  other,  or  decorated  by  the  right  hand 
with  passing-notes  in  his  characteristic  dactylic  rhythms,^ 
whilst  the  left  hand  sustained  the  harmony,  giving  the 
audience  time  to  wonder  what  might  come  next,  and  into 
what  new  key  the  composer's  carefully  frenzied  inspiration 
might  take  him — surely  the  precise  musical  equivalent  of 
that  florid  luxuriance  of  adulation,  expressed  in  the  most 
extraordinary  jumble  of  metaphor,  which  he  pours  forth 
without  intermission  in  his  correspondence  with  Ferdinand 
de'  Medici. 

The  Regole  per  Principianti  {i.e.  in  the  art  of  accom- 
panying from  a  basso  continual  show  that  Scarlatti  was 
in  favour  of  a  free  style  of  playing,  perhaps  more  so  than 
his  contemporaries,  as  in  introducing  some  of  his  rules  he 
qualifies  them  with  the  words — "  at  any  rate  such  is  the 
style  of  the  present  writer,"  Most  of  the  rules  are  such 
as  are  familiar  to  us  all,  and  need  not  be  quoted  ;  and  his 
rules  for  filling  up  a  bass  that  is  not  figured  amount  to 
little  more  than  would  be  carried  out  instinctively  by  any 
modern  player  who  had  a  feeling  for  scholarship.  But 
there  are  two  rules  which  are  specially  interesting,  and 
which  he  seems  to  have  considered  peculiarly  character- 
istic of  his  own  style.  The  second  inversion  of  the 
dominant  seventh,  figured  6,  and  theoretically  considered 
as  a  concordant  second  inversion  of  the  "imperfect  triad," 
is  always  to  be  given  the  fourth  as  well  as  the  third  in 

^  He  gives  an  example  in  his  Regole  per  Principianti. 


URBINO,   NAPLES  155 

practice,  when  the  bass  descends  conjunctly.  When  the 
bass  ascends,  the  fourth  is  not  to  be  sounded.  He  adds 
as  an  excuse  that  the  fourth  prepares — or,  as  we  should 
rather  say,  anticipates — the  fifth  of  the  succeeding  bass 
note  ;  but  his  real  reason  seems  to  have  been  the  best  of 
all  reasons — "because  it  sounds  well."^ 

He  orives  the  same  reason  for  his  next  rule  : — 
"It  should  be  noted  that  for  an  agreeable  style  of 
playing,  every  time  that  a  perfect  cadence  is  made,  or 
when  the  bass  moves  up  a  fourth  or  down  a  fifth,  the 
minor  seventh  is  to  be  added  to  the  major  third  of  the 
bass-note  that  proceeds  in  this  way."^ 

Modern  scholars  have  generally  considered  both  these 
licenses  as  foreign  to  the  spirit  of  the  music  of  Scarlatti's 
time  ;  but  Scarlatti's  words  leave  no  room  for  doubt,  and 
are  further  confirmed  by  actual  examples  in  score  in  many 
of  his  works,  at  least  as  regards  the  first  of  these  two  rules. 
The  dominant  seventh  as  a  cadence  appears  only  in  the 
form  of  a  passing-note,  and  it  is  conceivable  that  he  also 
wished  it  to  be  regarded  as  such  in  playing  from  a  figured 
bass.  And  we  may  see  how  conscious  he  was  of  his  being 
in  advance  of  other  composers  in  the  words  that  follow 
these  two  rules — "  Other  accidental  circumstances  required 
by  the  harmony  of  the  style  of  the  present  writer,  and 
considered  by  him  to  belong  to  the  most  dignified  manner 
of  playing,  cannot  be  described  in  writing."  Indeed 
dignity,  notwithstanding  harmonic  licenses,  is  a  very 
essential  quality  of  his  style,  as  he  never  ceases  to  insist  on 
the  ''  nobile  poidamento  delle  niani." 

1  "  E  da  not  are  per  bella  majtiera  di  sonar e  {e  quest o  e  secondo  lo  stile  di  chi 
scrive  nello  presente  libra)  tutte  le  volte  che  accade  la  conso?ianza  di  6"  maggiore 
si  aggitinge  la  4"  sopra  la  3"  di  delta  consonatiza^  perche  fa  bel  sentire,  oltre  di 
essere preparativa  della  5"  7iota  del  basso  sussegtiente,  qiiando  questo  discende  per 
un  tuo7to ;  ma  quando  ascende  per  tin  tuono  non  si  aggiufige  delta  4'"  co/ne  si  e 
detto."  ^ 

^  "^  da  notarsi  similm^^  che  per  modo  grato  di  sonare,  tutte  le  volte  che  si 
fanno  cadenze  b  pure  movimento  del  basso  di  4"  in  sii  b  5"  in  giii,  alia  3" 
maggiore  della  nota  del  basso  cK  e  per  vioversi  di  d'^  maniera^  vi  si  aggiujige  la 
7"  mitiore  perche  fa  buon  sentire." 


CHAPTER  V 

ROME,  1718-1721;    NAPLES,  1722-1725 

Although  "II  Trionfo  dell'  Onore"  was  produced  at  the 
Teatro  de'  Fiorentini  in  17 18,  and  "  Cambise "  at  the 
Teatro  S.  Bartolomeo  the  following  year,  Scarlatti  seems 
during  these  years  to  have  had  more  interests  in  Rome 
than  in  Naples.  He  obtained  leave  on  October  18,  17 17, 
to  go  to  Rome  for  the  following  Carnival ;  ^  and  he 
apparently  stayed  on  there  for  the  next  few  years,  since 
he  received  no  stipend  as  Maestro  di  Cappella  at  Naples, 
although  he  retained  the  title — Francesco  Mancini  acting 
as  Vice- Maestro  until  Scarlatti's  death,  on  which  he  suc- 
ceeded by  right  to  the  post  of  Primo  Maestro. 

At  Rome  Scarlatti  produced  a  very  interesting  series  of 
operas  at  the  "  Sala  degli  illustrissimi  Signori  Capranica,'' 
and  it  is  probable  that  Prince  Ruspoli  was  also  concerned  in 
the  management,  since  the  autograph  score  of  "  Griselda," 
the  last  of  the  series — and  indeed  the  last  of  all  Scarlatti's 
operas — states  that  it  was  written  for  him.  The  first  of 
the  series  was  "  Telemaco,"  produced  in  17 18,  which  was 
followed  in  17 19  by  "Marco  Attilio  Regolo."  "Tito 
Sempronio  Gracco"  and  "  Turno  Aricino "  were  revived 
in  1720  with  so  much  new  music  that  they  may  be  counted 
as  new  operas, 

"Telemaco"  is  very  unequal.  Much  of  it  is  very 
tedious,  though  the  comic  scenes  are  among  the  best  that 
Scarlatti  ever  wrote.  But  we  see  the  beginning  of  a  new 
style  in  Calipsds  fine  opening  air,   "  Dio  del  77iar^'  which 

^  Naples,  R.  Archivio  di  Stato,  Mandati  dei  Vicere^  vol.  336,  fol.  44. 

156 


ROME,    NAPLES 


157 


has  a  Mozartian  breadth  of  melody,  and  still  more  in  the 
noble  duet  for  Minerva  and  Nettuno  in  the  prologue.  This 
movement  is  on  a  much  larger  scale  than  anything  that 
preceded  it,  and  was  evidently  written  with  a  large  theatre 
in  view.  Both  melody  and  harmony  are  remarkably 
dignified  and  simple,  and  produce  a  striking  effect  of 
grandeur  and  serenity — one  might  almost  say,  an  effect 
of  distance.  The  arrangement  of  the  orchestra  is  novel 
for  the  time  :  Nettuno  is  accompanied  generally  by  the 
main  body  of  the  strings,  and  Minerva  by  a  smaller  body 
of  strings  placed  on  the  chariot  in  which  she  descends 
from  heaven.  There  is  also  a  ''concerto  di  oiibiwe^' 
and  a  pair  of  horns.  This  is  the  first  time  that 
Scarlatti  uses  horns,  except  for  a  single  air  and  a  sort 
of  fanfare  in  "  Tigrane,"  and  he  turns  them  to  very  good 
effect  here ;  indeed  they  are  the  life  and  soul  of  the 
movement. 


Ex.  75. 


Orchestra 
(strings). 


■^ 


mmmm- 


.JSa 


-I I tSi — 


I      I 


J.  J.    A    -^-t4A 


a 


--^ 


-^ 


r 


:^: 


-?2- 


Conce7-to  di  A'lt/ieri'a  (strings) 
^*3  J: 


1  J-     i^i  I  I    ^   J-  -i  i  I 


\ 


H— ^: 


^ 


"^" 


r- 


Orchestra  (strings). 


:^ 


=F 


Y 


158 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Corni. 


Oubuoe. 


Concerto 

di 
Minerna. 


W-- 


--r- 


tJ 


^^j_J 


J    -^  Sj  -J-  J     I    I 

\ , 1 1 1 — - — M. 


^-■^ 


W^ 


li=-| h 


is:^: 


i^: 


^ ^: 


-J- 


r- 


-I 

I 


m 


fc^= 


=^ 


:^: 


r^^^^^%g^^g#gi^ 


i-J2_ 


e=F 


-J- 


i^: 


£ 


EgE3^ 


:z1: 


^ 


A 


P 


^^ 


J 


^ 


^f21 


J-    J- 


m^ 


m 


^ 


T' 


Note. — The  horn  parts  are  given  in  Scarlatti's  notation  an  octave  above 
the  notes  actually  sounded. 


ROME,   NAPLES 

I     f^V   J      I     J — ^  J     J 


A 


?^^ 


fJ-fJSfJ-fJyf^ 


^  -~d       d    d    d       -d-  —1^ 


r- 


=?2- 


^^^^ 


159 


This  use  of  the  horns  seems  to  have  been  a  happy- 
inspiration,  for  they  appear  in  every  subsequent  opera, 
generally  associated  with  a  harbour-scene,  in  which  some 
characters  arrive  in  a  ship  and  disembark  followed  by  their 
suite.  On  such  occasions  there  is  always  a  '' sinfonia 
per  lo  sbarco "  in  the  manner  of  a  march,  in  which 
the  horns  take  a  prominent  part,  the  players  being 
placed  on  board  the  ship,  like  the  trumpeters  in  "  Mitri- 
date."  No  doubt  the  impresario  considered  that  the  ship 
also  was  a  happy  inspiration,  as  it  could  be  used  again 
every  year. 

"Marco  Attilio  Regolo"  is  an  advance  upon  "  Tele- 
maco  "  as  a  whole,  though  it  contains  nothing  as  great  as 
the  duet  mentioned  above.  Its  airs  are  generally  broad 
and  dignified  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  find  four  airs  broken 
off  abrupdy  in  the  middle  by  the  interruption  of  another 
character.  This  must  have  been  rather  a  risky  proceeding 
with  an  audience  that  came  mainly  to  hear  the  singers, 
though  it  required  an  audience  trained  to  the  Da  Capo 
form  to  realize  its  full  dramatic  value.  The  opera  also 
contains  many  pieces  of  recitativo  stromentato,  one  of 
which  is  remarkably  fine.      Attilio  has  escaped  from  the 


i6o 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Carthaginians  by  a  feigned  death,  which  even  his  wife 
Fausta  beHeves  to  be  genuine.  She  comes  by  night  to 
weep  over  his  tombstone,  Attilio  himself  watching  her  in 
concealment,  undecided  whether  to  endure  her  grief  in 
silence  or  to  risk  recapture  by  making  himself  known  to 
her.  The  recitative,  which  is  unfortunately  much  too  long 
for  quotation  entire,  and  to  which  extracts  would  hardly 
do  justice,  well  illustrates  the  importance  that  was  given 
to  declamation  in  Scarlatti's  day.  Over  fifty  bars  in 
length,  and  followed  by  an  aria  of  which  the  middle 
section  is  also  recitativo  stromentato,  it  illustrates  every 
variety  of  passion.  The  accompaniment  is  very  vigorous 
and  full  for  its  period,  but  the  simplicity  of  the  means 
employed  would  demand  a  first-rate  actress  to  make  the 
most  of  it. 

Another  interesting  feature  of  the  opera  is  the  intro- 
ductory ballet  of  Carthaginians  accompanied  "with  the 
noise  of  bagpipes  and  castanets  and  rattles  in  the  manner 
of  barbarous  nations,"  in  which  it  is  evident  that  Scarlatti 
has  done  his  best  to  get  something  like  local  colour. 
He  made  a  similar  attempt  in  "  Tigrane "  with  a 
ballet  of  Scythians,  but  it  is  not  so  characteristic  as  this 
example. 


Ex.  76.  Strada  di  Cartas^ine  ornata  di  varij  trionfi.  Ballo  di  Gtovani 
Cartaginest.  Conmicia  pi'ima  il  ballo  con  strepito  di  Zampogne  e  Gnaccare 
e  Stslri  all'uso  di  barbare  Nazioni, 


Oubuol. 


Fagotto. 


Viol 

I  (Sr^  2. 


Viola. 
Basso. 


^ 


f 


-^- 


^^=^^ 


;3=i 


Ifery 


^ 


^=^-5 

B 


:3=: 


rt 


:^z±z± 


=^zi-?- 


m^ 


ROME,   NAPLES 


i6i 


-r-r-rx 


^ 


r=^ 


'^ — t 


s 


^1: 


-^  ^r,f 


-^-m- 


^^^^^^^ 


:h=9 


J'  J" 

3^= 


^i^^=5z=  E^z^izS 


-^-^- 


5^ 


-^— ^ 


5= 


^p^^^ — |-^-^^^=j-E-^^i-^-f-"J^— "i-fg-"^ — '^~~- 


s^ 


-^=F 


^= 


■I ! i»S| I       U^- 


r=f^~ 


^m 


tj 


^=r^- 


-^1-^- 


-^-^- 


-^— ^- 


=^-^-^3: 


9^p^~^ — ^ — ->-^-^ 


5-g-g- 


V-^— =>>- 


-^=3: 


^^^^#-fe^ 


^E^Et^ 


-^— ^ 


±=f= 


-^—^--± 


^^^ 


:3=fi 


^3— =1- 


-■-tp*- 


^g^l 


:k— ^— ^ 


-^ — ^- 


^^-=3^ 


Of  "Tito  Sempronio  Gracco "  and  "  Turno  Aricino" 
only  fragments  remain,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  judge  of 
either  opera  as  a  whole.  But  the  airs  that  have  survived 
are  often  singularly  beautiful.     They  have  all  the  masterly 

L 


l62 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


technique  of  Scarlatti's  fourth  period,  all  its  brilliance  of 
dramatic  effect,  together  with  an  increased  sense  of  dignity 
and  spaciousness,  as  well  as  a  sincerity  of  expression 
that  is  often  extremely  touching.  A  very  characteristic 
mannerism  at  this  time  is  the  use  of  an  introductory  vocal 
phrase  sung  ad  libitum;  not,  as  in  the  earlier  operas,  a 
fragment  of  the  initial  phrase  of  the  air,  but  designed 
rather  as  a  contrast  to  what  follows,  like  the  beautiful 
opening  of  Beethoven's  pianoforte  sonata  in  F  sharp 
major.  Employed  in  every  air,  it  would  have  been 
wearisome  in  the  extreme  ;  but  Scarlatti  has  exercised 
a  wise  restraint,  and  reserves  it  as  a  rule  for  airs  of  a 
pathetic  character. 


Ex.  ■]■]. 


i 


^ 


Adcii^io. 


lEEEE 


*'  Tito  Sempionio  Gracco." 

A/Ieoro. 


S 


-w)—^ 


^^^ 


i 


Pria      di        las    -    ciar    -    ti, 
Ex,  78.    ^„^^jjf^ 


pria  di  las-ciar  -  ti, 
"  Turno  Aricino." 


t) 


ttB3r==3= 


^ ^   n ^ ^  w^zrrJzJ 


Lento. 


So  -lo,  so  -  lo,      so 
3 


lo, 


--^- 


^^- 


So 


lo,       ra 


go 


That  he  was  able  to  count  upon  singers  of  high  dra- 
matic ability  is  shown  by  the  frequent  opportunities  that 
he  gives  for  free  declamation  or  for  extemporary  cadenzas. 
The  beautiful  air  "  Queste  son  pene''  in  "Turno  Aricino" 
supplies  several  examples  of  this. 

Here  it  is  evident  that  the  word  ''  lascV'  (Scarlatti  also 
writes  '' lasciata')  m^^rvs  that  the  music  was  to  be  left 
as  it  was  written;  where  the  voice  is  marked  ''solo''  the 
singer  was  no  doubt  free  to  do  what  she  pleased.  The 
final  cadence  in  this  air,  as  in  many  others,  imperatively 
demands  an  extemporized  cadenza  of  some  distinction. 
The    short    extract    given   will   also   serve    to    show    the 


ROME,    NAPLES 


163 


chang-e  in  Scarlatti's  general  style  ;  his  chamber-music 
seems  to  have  reacted  upon  his  music  for  the  stage,  and 
his  later  operas  contain  many  airs  of  great  pathos,  besides 
some  in  which  more  energetic  passions  find  an  intensity 
of  expression  never  attained  in  the  Neapolitan  operas  of 
the  preceding  ten  years. 

Ex.  79.  ±\Iodiyaio. 

:^^^-H— ^r^ --^— ' 


Viol. 

I  iS^  2 


Viola. 
Uasso. 


s 


mE^EEi 


^ 


:^- 


=^-^: 


i^- 


Dil  -  lo  al  mio  be 


dil 


dil 


lo, 


d-^-' 


bti^ztz: 


-t-l_e_^=t- 


B?^ 


:3.-it? 


^a: 


_^!3-^- 


par 


( Violoncello  &^  Viola.) 


-^-^-P— ^- 


r.^=::_5::^ 


ifei 


-     -     la, 


f 


par    -    la     per  me. 


^^r 


\ 


)F-^^i^ 


/ 


-^\y' 


-^-^-P— ^- 


:t--: 


J. 


m^ 


-^v 


{tutti  bassi. 
solo 


s 


:^=^:=J: 


^=; 


:5— iz: 


Son  pe 


ne    ques  -  te, 


dil  -  lo, 


-»-^r~=^r— fajg: 


?^-^ 


S=^ 


-^-=1— - 


l3^ 


6         6  t76      ,  U*     t7 

4     23 


It: 


5e^ 


{Violoncello  S^  Viola.) 


164. 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


solo 


dil   -  lo,       quest'  (^      do  -  lo 

1     ^  J     ^    1 

d     -•-  -^    -^-      ^ 


re,  par  -  la,  par  -  la,       ques- 


^\ 


^f 


"^    f:-J^    f:  ^>. 


££^ 


-T] — ^. 


>— ^ 


te        son     pe 


ha*— h'*-'^ b^—- * — ■ 


fe=t: 


^ 


5=&^^ 


Scarlatti's  last  opera  "  Griselda  "  (1721)  shows  him  at 
his  fullest  maturity.  The  libretto  was  by  Apostolo  Zeno, 
and  is  fairly  good,  though  there  is  not  sufficient  material 
for  three  acts.  The  story  of  "  Patient  Grizzel  "  is  in  some 
ways  effective  for  operatic  treatment,  as  it  affords  well- 
defined  and  strongly  coloured  characters  ;  but  this  very 
reason  is  also  a  drawback.  Gualtiei'O  is  so  incredibly 
tyrannical  and  Griselda  so  incredibly  patient  that  we  can 
get  up  little  sympathy  for  such  obviously  stagey  figures. 
Ottone  is  the  blackest  possible  of  villains;  Roberto  and 
Costanza  are  merely  picturesque  puppets,  and  Corrado 
hardly  even  that.  Scarlatti  has  made  the  most  of  the 
characters,  such  as  they  are,  Griselda  and  Costanza  being 
the  most  successful.  The  finest  example  of  dramatic 
expression  is  Griselda  s  air  in  the  second  act,  "  Figlio  I 
tiranno  !  oh  Dio  I "  when  Ottone  has  threatened  to  kill  her 
child  before  her  eyes  unless  she  yields  to  his  desires.  Here 
the  composer  has  shown  a  truly  wonderful  ingenuity  in 
makingf  the  conventional  aria  form  serve  as  a  vehicle  for 


ROME,    NAPLES 


165 


the  most  passionate  appeals  of  Griselda  to  her  son,  to 
Ottone  and  to  heaven,  the  short  declamatory  phrases  being 
so  arranged  as  to  make  up  together  a  perfectly  logical  and 
formal  movement. 


Griselda. 


Viol. 
I  <&^  2. 


Viola. 
Basso. 


\ 


Ex.  80. 
Andante  moderato. 


al  Jiglio 


he: 


Fi-elio! 


^^^-S-^^ -\S-m-m-m^m  m  -^—m — *— 1^1 


fe^ 


^1 T— L-^ 


( F/c?/(^  ^  Violoncello^ 
ad  Ottone 


^^ 


:3: 


^^- 


i^ft^ 


^^ 


Ti-ran-no  !  oh         Dio  ! 


^^^^^^mM^s. 


^ 


m$E£, 


siS: 


r — r 


^*T*»" 


^ 


^^ 


alfiglio 


P^ 


EE^^^^ 


<*=F 


a^  Ottone 


Ditechefarposs'io,che? 


dite  che  far  poss'  io,  die  '. 


{tutti  senza  cembalo.) 


i66 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


=3=k 


r±i=^: 


-?•- 


=^=s=1 


=_Ei: 


^rf  Otfone 


.:^^ 


oh   Dio!      fi-glio,  fi  -  glio  1  che  far  poss' io  ?  che  far  poss" 


:^zpZ==^S-^- 


:i^i?=^ 


:^^S^^:^W=^====d-?^B|=zz=zr.g:^^i: 


/ 


/Ji 


^ 


:3^V??=^^ 


m 


^r 


_t^ 


-^^^ 


{tuiti  senza  cembalo.) 


m 


tei 


a  I  fi  glio 


ad  Ottone 


-1-^^ 


=f^ 


^=r^ 


:|=g=^: 


fi    -  glio  ! 


Ti-ran     -     no,  ti  -  ran    -  no, 


«J 


^^:5^5EES^^§ag==^^-^^^ 


"^      s:f 


:fe: 


:^ti=tt:^^=^ 


:^S: 


^^ 


=^: 


{Violojicello.) 


\ 


qui  gttarda  ilfiglio  :  poi  dice  iraia  ad  Oliofic 
da  se.  ^  ~^-^-     {t^) 


ti-ran-no  I     (che  far  poss' io  ? )       Ti-ran 


^fe=j3: 


Si* 


no,  ti-ran  - 


£?S 


/ 


^SP^ 


t^--:rti=t:- 


^ 


iese 


t 


{iiitli  con  cembalo.)  6 
5 


ROME,    NAPLES  167 


Especially  good  is  the  contrast  in  the  last  few  bars  be- 
tween her  despairing  aside,  her  silent  glance  at  her  child,  and 
the  rush  of  splendid  indignation  that  concludes  the  section. 
The  second  part  of  the  air  is  more  conventionally  melodious, 
yet  even  here  there  is  a  great  variety  of  expression. 

A  characteristic  feature  of  these  last  operas  is  the 
concerted  movement  which  finds  a  place  in  each  of  them. 
The  septet  in  "  Eraclea,"  quoted  in  an  earlier  chapter,  finds 
its  development  at  last,  after  being  forgotten  for  nearly 
twenty  years.  Yet  even  now  Scarlatti  does  not  seize  the 
opportunities  that  were  offered  for  a  developed  finale.  The 
second  act  of"  II  Trionfo  dell'  Onore  "  ends  with  a  quartet, 
but  it  is  ineffective,  and  does  not  even  serve  to  conceal  the 
want  of  a  strong  dramatic  situation  at  the  fall  of  the  cur- 
tain. The  duets  in  the  same  opera  are  far  superior  to  it 
in  dramatic  vitality.  The  second  act  of  "Griselda"  ends 
with  a  trio  which  is  more  interesting  musically  ;  but  the 
characters  are  not  well  defined.  There  is  much  more  charac- 
terization in  the  quartets  in  "Telemaco"  {^'Sdegno — amor — 
destind')  and  in  the  third  act  of  "Griselda"  [''Nonfti  maicolpa 
amor').  But  even  these  are  hardly  conceived  dramatically, 
any  more  than  the  septet  in  "  Eraclea."  "  Turno  Aricino  " 
and  "  Marco  Attilio  Regolo  "  both  contain  quartets  that  are 
merely  double  duets,  with  no  particular  conflict  of  interests  ; 
and  the  type  is  most  beautifully  exemplified  in  the  melodious 
''  Idolo  mio  ti  chiamo'^  in  "  Tito  Sempronio  Gracco."  It  is 
significant  that  the  contemporary  manuscript  calls  it  an 
''  AiHa  a  quatiro"  ;  the  voices  enter  at  first  singly,  one 
carrying  on  the  phrase  as  another  drops  it,^ 

^  The  unimportant  parts  for  strings  and  oboes  in  this  and  the  following 
example  are  omitted  to  save  space. 


i68 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Ex.  8i. 

Soprano  2do. 


W8^^     T     ^ 


Soprano  \7)io. 


^ 


±z=g(fc3:a 


I  -  do-lo  mio     ti  chia-  mo, 


Sov' 


i^ 


m — a — =^ , 


:^-i=±:±3z^ 


^ 


Mio    be-ne,  mio  te  -  so      -       ro  ! 


^^-^ 


m^ 


->>l     I      hi — f-^^^ F^ 


;-f=p^p5^-i^=*: 


-     ven-ga-ti  ch'ic-t'a 


mo, 
Soprano  320. 


Ram-men -ta-ti  ch'io    mo 


--im=^f^=--r^ 


:t==t2=± 


-^-^-^-%— '£=ppT^*- 


m 


9 


ro 


all  four  uniting  voluptuously  on  a  diminished  seventh  just 
before  the  close. 


Ex.  82.       (a)-mo, 


10     t  a  -  mo. 


Soprani 
I  (S~=3. 


Soprano  2 
<2r^  Tenor 


iz^zrizg^-i 


S^ 


-F— ^^ 


f 


(mo)-ro, 
I 


10     mo  -   ro,  10 

do  lo    mi    -    o  ti    chiamo, 


WW^^ 


mio    ...     te    -    so    -     ro, 


f-5-g-g 


'Si 


^ 


mio  be  -   ne, 


vi=Pii3: 


ROME,   NAPLES 


169 


t'a  -   mo,  t'a 


mm 


0,  t  a     -      mo, 

i— 1-^ — ft*— I — ^- 


t'a 


^\—^- 


^^m 


--^ 


mo,  10 

S  S 


^!^^^: 


t3=^ 


mo  -    ro,    mo 


ro, 
i  -  do  -  lo    mi 


mo  -   ro,  10 

ti     chia 


^^^^^ 


s 


E^ 


te  -  SO     - 


-^— i 


^g^ 


ro, 


It: 


mio  Idc 


:^=t: 


mo 
mo. 


ne. 


-^-^- 


s 


With  these  operas  may  be  classed  the  oratorio  "  La 
Vergine  Addolorata"  (17 17)  and  two  serenatas,  one  for  the 
peace  of  Passarowitz^  {^7^^)  ^^^  the  other  (apparently  un- 
finished) for  the  marriage  of  the  Prince  of  Stigliano  (1723). 
The  oratorio  deals  with  the  Passion,  as  witnessed  by  the 
four  inter loctttori,  the  Virgin,  St.  John,  Nicodemus,  and  a 

1  The  lines 

"  //  Trace  agricoltor 

Ben  presto  piangera 

Che  i  campi  siioi  vedra 

Preda  del fuoco^'' 
and 

"  Si^  s/,  sperar  ci  giovi 

Veder  V  A  quite  alt  ere 

Di  Bizanzio  rubella  suite  roviiie 

Un  di fermarsi  it  nido" 

evidently  refer  to  the  expedition  to  Thessalonica,  projected  by  Prince  Eugene 
and  his  allies  the  Venetians  to  satisfy  the  "zealous  Christians"  who  wished  to 
see  Turkey  more  permanently  crippled  now  that  there  was  so  good  an  op- 
portunity (Muratori,  Atmali  d'' Italia). 


I70  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

Jewish  priest.  The  treatment  is  interesting  for  comparison 
with  other  oratorios  on  the  same  subject.  Scarlatti's 
youthful  Latin  "  Passion  according  to  St.  John  "  told  the 
story  simply  through  the  mouth  of  the  Evangelist  ;  here 
we  deduce  the  story  from  the  meditative  utterances  of 
some  of  the  principal  characters  concerned  in  it.  The  two 
schemes  are  seen  in  combination  in  the  "  Passions "  of 
J.  S.  Bach,  with  the  addition  of  the  chorales,  which  are  of 
course  peculiar  to  the  Lutheran  Church.  Indeed  in  this 
later  oratorio  of  Scarlatti  there  are  many  places  where  one 
is  conscious  of  a  similarity  of  feeling  with  the  "  Matthaus- 
Passion,"  especially  in  the  final  trio  representing  the  Pieta, 
which  corresponds  closely  in  spirit  with  the  chorus  "  Wir 
setzeii  tins  rnit  T/u'linen  nieder.'" 

The  serenatas  are  generally  good,  but  their  principal 
interest  lies  in  their  treatment  of  the  orchestra,  which  at 
this  period  of  Scarlatti's  career  begins  to  show  something 
of  that  importance  which  has  been  assigned  to  it  in  more 
modern  times.  As  early  as  "  L'Amor  Generoso  "  we  can 
see  here  and  there  a  vague  tendency  towards  modern 
orchestral  writing.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out 
(Chapter  II.)  that  the  Venetian  composers  before  Scarlatti 
had  made  some  advance  towards  treating  the  orchestra  on 
harmonic  rather  than  contrapuntal  principles.  Scarlatti's 
early  opera  overtures  show  that  he  realized  the  effect  of 
broken  chords  played  by  the  strings,  as  in  the  extract  from 
"  La  Rosaura"  quoted  in  the  "Oxford  History  of  Music," 
vol.  iii.  ;  but  after  his  return  from  Rome,  where  he  had 
had  the  opportunity  of  studying  Corelli's  methods,  he 
begins  to  carry  this  effect  still  further,  by  employing 
genuine  violin-figures,  instead  of  arpeggios  of  a  type  almost 
equally  well  suited  to  any  instrument.  As  the  violin  style 
gets  more  and  more  differentiated,  so  it  becomes  more  and 
more  impossible  for  the  trumpets  and  oboes  to  play  in 
unison  with  the  strings,  and  in  this  way  Scarlatti  begins  to 
realise  that  the  contrast  of  the  style  between  phrases 
suitable  for  wind  instruments  and  phrases  suitable  for 
strings  enhances  the  contrast  of  colour. 

The  overture  to  "  Griselda "  will  illustrate  some  of 
Scarlatti's  methods. 


Ex.  83. 

Presto. 


.m\ 


Trombe. 


Oubuoe. 


Viol. 
I  St'  : 


Viola. 
Basso. 


Ftf^F^ 


— P- 


-F- 


1 


r:^s^' 


-p- 


^^^- 


±:: 


4t fe 


"SB 


BJ— ^: 


.^* 


•ii 

-a»-  ^-  -^- 


1^ 


-P 


^g: 


ii  M^^ 


mm. 


ta^ 


:ff=£ 


f=f=^-^=^ 


1^ 


%5 


f-P ^:=i-: 


J=^-J: 


? 


— i-^t ^KJ 


.-J- 


m. 


^r^ 


itz" 


:p=z=«: 


:& 


^gi^ 


£3^ 


^^^iliiii 


^i-i^[iJ] 


^c 


172 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

I         r  I 


The  balance  of  instruments  is  of  course  still  old- 
fashioned,  and  we  must  not  forget  that  there  would  be 
some  five  or  six  oboes  playing.  The  frequent  crossing  of 
the  parts  is  a  relic  of  still  older  times  ;  it  was  a  habit  that 
Scarlatti  scarcely  ever  shook  off,  greatly  to  the  disadvantage 
of  his  instrumental  style.  Such  gaps  as  there  are  in  the 
harmony  would  be  well  filled  up  by  the  two  cembali,  and 
though  the  movement  is  not  undeserving  of  Marcello's 
satire — "the  overture  shall  consist  of  a  Tempo  fi'-ancese,  or 
prestissimo  of  semiquavers  in  the  major  key,  which  of  course 
must  be  followed  by  2i  piano  in  the  same  key,  with  the  minor 
third,  ending  with  a  minuet,  gavotte,  or  gigue  in  the  major 
key  again,  avoiding  in  these  forms  fugues,  suspensions, 
subjects  \i.e.  for  imitation],  &c.,  as  being  old-fashioned 
things  quite  out  of  modern  use,"  ^  — it  shows  a  keen  sense 
of  orchestral  eff^ect,  and  certainly  would  get  as  much  noise 
out  of  the  instruments  as  they  could  make.  If  we  cannot 
admire  it  much  as  serious  music,  it  is  at  any  rate  of  great 
importance    in    the   development  of  the   symphonic  style. 

1  //  Teatro  alia  Moda,  p.  23.  "  La  Sinfonia  consistera  in  un  Tempo 
Francese,  o  prestissimo  di  semicrome  iit  Tuono  coti  terza  maggiore,  al  quale 
dovra  succedere  al  solito  un  Piano  del  medesimo  Tuono  in  Terza  minore, 
chiudendo  finalmente  con  Minuetlo^  Gavoita  o  GigJia,  nuovamente  in  Terza 
maggiore,  e  sfuggendo  in  tal  forme  Fughe,  Legatiire,  Soggetti,  &r^c.,  come  cose 
antiche  fuori  affatto  del  moderno  costume." 


ROME,    NAPLES  173 

Scarlatti  himself  must  certainly  have  felt  that  this  sort  of 
writing  was  only  suitable  for  theatre-music  that  had  to 
make  itself  heard  somehow  above  the  noise  of  greneral 
conversation,  for  in  his  instrumental  chamber-music  he 
holds  rigidly  to  the  contrapuntal  style.  His  Sonate  a 
qiLattro,  i.e.  string  quartets,  composed  some  time  during 
the  last  ten  years  of  his  life,  are  if  anything  less  modern 
than  Corelli's,  at  least  in  form.  The  fugues  which  form 
their  principal  movement  are  more  developed  than  Corelli's 
— sometimes  indeed  to  a  very  tedious  extent — and  there  is 
a  certain  modernity  in  the  brisk  little  minuets  that  have 
something  of  the  spirit  of  Beethoven's  scherzos}  but  in 
general  structure  they  look  backward  to  the  old  Sonata  da 
c/iicsa,  not  forward  to  the  chamber-music  of  the  classical 
period. 

The  same  attitude  is  to  be  observed  in  Scarlatti's  twelve 
symphonies  ^  or  concertos  for  orchestra.  These  interesting 
works  were  begun  on  June  i,  17 15;  over  how  long  a 
period  their  composition  extends  cannot  be  definitely 
decided,  but  it  is  not  likely  that  they  cover  a  period  of 
more  than  twelve  months  at  the  outside.  The  instruments 
employed  are  strings,  with  a  few  wind  instruments  ;  the 
first  has  two  flutes,  the  second  a  trumpet  and  a  flute,  the 
third  one  flute,  the  fourth  a  flute  and  an  oboe,  the  rest  one 
flute  only.  In  form  they  come  between  the  quartets  and 
the  opera-overtures  ;  the  first  movement  is  an  allegro  like 
those  of  the  later  overtures,  spirited  and  energetic,  but 
short  and  rather  formless  ;  it  generally  ends  suddenly  on 

1  A  more  detailed  account  of  these  quartets  will  be  found  in  the  Motithly 
Musical  Record  iox  November  1903.  They  are  not  of  sufficient  importance  to 
the  general  history  of  music  to  require  a  full  analysis  here. 

-  The  autograph  manuscript  of  these  interesting  compositions  was  recently 
discovered  by  Mr.  W.  Barclay  Squire  in  the  Music  Library  at  Buckingham 
Palace.     They  are  headed  thus  : 

Co7ninctate  al  P°  Giugjio  1715  D''  Alessandro  Scarlatti 

Sinfonia  Prijna,  di  concerto  Grosso  coft  due  Flauti. 

No  other  date  is  given  throughout  the  volume.  Each  symphony  is  numbered 
in  the  handwriting  of  the  composer,  who  signs  his  name  with  the  title  Cavaliere 
at  the  head  of  No.  5  and  of  Nos.  7-12.  I  describe  them  here  by  kind  permis- 
sion of  Sir  Walter  Parratt. 


174  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

the  dominant.  It  is  followed  by  the  usual  transitional 
adagio,  generally  in  f  time,  sometimes  starting  with  the 
character  of  a  slow  movement,  but  sooner  or  later  re- 
lapsing into  the  conventional  series  of  modulations  serving 
as  a  framework  for  thematic  treatment  of  some  unim- 
portant figure.  The  third  movement  is  a  fugue,  some- 
times on  two  subjects,  always  developed  at  great  length, 
and  showing  traces  of  a  feeling  that  is  symphonic  rather 
than  contrapuntal  in  its  episodes,  though  it  never  falls  into 
what  might  be  truly  classed  as  sonata  form.  It  is  followed 
by  a  second  adagio,  transitional  like  the  first  and  serving 
merely  as  an  introduction  to  the  march  or  dance  move- 
ment which  concludes  the  composition.  Compared  with 
the  quartets,  the  symphonies  show  less  solidity  and  severity 
of  workmanship  ;  the  style  is  often  hollow,  though  efTective. 
The  slow  movements,  instead  of  being  definitely  contra- 
puntal, are  more  melodious  and  modern  in  spirit  ;  the  final 
movements  are  more  elaborate  in  form,  but  sometimes 
almost  rowdy.  Indeed,  the  material  is  hardly  ever  either 
beautiful  or  original,  and  the  interest  of  the  work  lies 
entirely  in  the  skilful  development  of  themes  which  are 
themselves  of  slight  intrinsic  merit. 

Scarlatti's  feeling  for  orchestral  colouring  in  a  modern 
sense  is  best  seen  in  some  of  the  arias,  more  particularly  in 
the  ritornelli.  In  his  middle  period  he  did  not  get  much 
beyond  dividing  his  strings  into  concertino  and  concerto 
grosso,  with  sometimes  nightingales  and  other  birds  ad 
libit2tni  in  the  manner  of  a  toy-symphony,  and  these  extra- 
vagances are  confined  to  the  serenatas  and  oratorios.  It 
may  also  be  pointed  out  that  even  where  he  divides  his 
strings  in  this  way,  he  shows  little  or  no  feeling  for  the 
true  spirit  of  the  concerto.  His  object  seems  merely  to 
get  a  contrast  of  piano  and  forte  in  a  rough  way  from 
players  who  were  not  much  accustomed  to  such  refine- 
ments ;  there  is  hardly  ever  any  attempt  to  counterbalance 
the  superior  weight  of  the  orchestra  by  the  superior 
agility    of    the    individual    soloist.^       In    the    operas,     at 

1  Compare  Mr.  D.  F.  Tovey's  interesting  essay,  The  Classical  Concerto. 


ROME,    NAPLES 


175 


any  rate  until  his  last  ten  years,  he  pays  less  atten- 
tion to  instrumental  detail.  Later  in  life  he  was  very 
likely  influenced  by  such  singers  as  Vittoria  Tesi-Tra- 
montini,  who  was  not  at  her  best  in  coloratura,  but  had  a 
great  dramatic  personality  and  a  great  voice,  since  his  arias 
are  not  only  less  florid  and  more  expressive,  but  also  more 
elaborately  scored.  Thus  in  the  serenata  ("Filli,  Clori, 
Tirsi ")  for  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz  we  find  an  air 
charmingly  accompanied  by  two  flutes,  violins  all  in  unison, 
violas,  two  violoncellos,  and  continuo,  the  score  being  most 
carefully  managed  so  as  never  to  let  the  mass  of  violins 
overpower  the  other  instruments  except  where  they  have  to 
play  a  broad  cantabile  melody,  in  which  they  are  supported 
by  the  ce^nbalo,  thus  contrasting  well  with  the  lighter  tones 
of  the  answering  pairs  of  flutes  and  violoncellos. 

The  trumpet  is  the  first  wind  instrument  to  appear  in 
Scarlatti's  scores,  and  naturally  so,  as  its  technique  was  the 
most  advanced  of  all.  Scarlatti's  treatment  of  it  differs 
very  little  from  that  adopted  by  J.  S.  Bach  and  Handel, 
except  that  he  is  less  lavish  in  the  use  of  scale-passages. 
Airs  with  trumpet  obbligato  were  an  almost  invariable  feature 
of  all  operas  and  oratorios,  and  Scarlatti's  are  often  re- 
markable for  their  keen  dramatic  sense  ;  they  seldom  give 
the  impression  of  being  a  show  piece  for  the  player,  the 
instrument  generally  playing  either  a  broad  sustained 
melody  or  a  series  of  reiterated  notes  which  suggest  its 
military  character  much  more  forcibly  than  the  florid  runs 
of  Handel's  trumpet-arias.  The  oratorio  "  La  Vergine 
Addolorata "  makes  a  very  striking  use  of  the  trumpet 
in  one  of  the  airs,  and  also  in  a  recitative  given  by  the 
Virgin,  which  is  suddenly  interrupted  by  a  single  D  on  the 
trumpet — the  signal  for  the  procession  to  Calvary — blown 
loud  and  growing  gradually  softer,  while  St.  John  takes  up 
the  recitative  on  a  different  chord. 

The  horns  were  a  new  ingredient  of  the  orchestra 
when  Scarlatti  first  introduced  them  into  "Tiofrane"  in 
17 15,  and  after  this  first  experiment  had  been  successful 
it    was    natural    that  they    should    be   given    considerable 


176  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

prominence.  In  the  later  operas  they  nearly  always  have 
passages  of  some  length  to  play  by  themselves  un- 
accompanied, so  that  their  characteristic  tone  might  be 
heard  to  the  fullest  advantage.  Probably  they  were  played 
by  the  trumpeters,  just  as  now  the  cor  anglais  is  often 
played  by  one  of  the  oboe-players,  since  the  horns  and 
trumpets  are  never  used  together. 

The  oboes  and  bassoons  seldom  have  parts  of  much 
individuality.  We  occasionally  find  an  oboe  solo  some- 
times effectively  contrasted  with  a  solo  flute,  as  in  the 
charming  duet,  "  Vaga  ninfa  seviplicetta,'' y^hich.  ends  the  first 
part  of  the  serenata  for  the  Peace  of  Passarowitz  ;  and  in 
the  serenata  for  the  Prince  of  Stigliano  there  is  a  very 
amusing  air  in  which  the  bassoons  imitate  the  bellowing 
of  an  angry  bull.  But  for  the  most  part  the  ''  concerto  di 
oiibiioc  "  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  single  mass  of 
sound  valued  more  for  its  sonority  than  for  its  peculiar 
quality  of  tone.  Indeed,  setting  aside  the  advantages 
resulting  from  later  improvements  in  the  mechanism  of  the 
instrument,  the  characteristic  personality  of  the  oboe  could 
scarcely  be  realized  until  the  advent  of  its  rival,  the 
clarinet.  It  is  in  the  serenata  for  the  Prince  of  Stigliano 
that  Scarlatti  approaches  nearest  to  a  modern  treatment  of 
wind  instruments. 

The  overture,  scored  for  trumpets,  oboes,  and  strings, 
is  of  little  interest,  but  there  is  an  effective  pastoral 
symphony  played  in  the  distance  by  wind  instruments 
only — two  flutes,  two  oboes,  two  horns,  and  two  bassoons, 
the  last  being  supported  by  the  double-basses  as  in  many 
of  Mozart's  compositions  for  wind-bands.  This  is  followed 
by  two  pretty  little  choruses  of  shepherds,  two  sopranos, 
alto,  and  tenor,  accompanied  by  the  same  instruments. 
One  of  the  most  interesting  pieces  of  scoring  is  the  old 
shepherd's  first  air,  ''  Mentre  quel  soke  ara  il  bifolco,'' 
attractive  also  from  the  cheerful  rusticity  of  its  melody, 
which  quite  suggests  the  "impatient  husbandman"  of 
Haydn's  "  Seasons."  Only  flutes  and  oboes  are  used  in 
addition  to  the  strings,  though  perhaps  the  bassoons  would 


ROME,    NAPLES 


177 


play  with  the  contimio ;  but  even  with  these  small  means  a 
very  picturesque  variety  of  colour  is  achieved. 


Ex.  85. 


Flaiiti. 

Oubuo}. 

Pastore. 

Viol. 
I  Sr'  2. 

Viola. 
Basso. 


\ 


fc^C 


^^ 


:?EE 


^ — %: 


-^ 


a 


^^ 


-^— ^ 


g^ 


^^jj^f^^^fc^ 


i^Z^ 


Purcantae  go  -  de sua  li-ber-ta. 


s 


^T^1'=p^ 


3^ 


^^fe^ 


.w — 


^ 


tj- 


'^ 


6       J-      6        tf 


"^-S- 


-I— *ii — I — 


f 


-^_ 


±=^^ 


i_ 


J_ 


^=Si 


^P^ 


^ 


i 


S'    1  ^ 


^^ 


^Eg 


can  -  ta 


e         go  -  de        sua     li  -  ber 


■^^ 


tk, 


.^ 


-^-     J. 


^  ^-«^ 


s 


^^ 


6       tf 
5 


M 


178 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Ex.  86. 


.cmr 


r=F 


t=¥-- 


^fe^=^^ 


^^ 


Per        le  cam      -       pa    -   gne     pas  -    cen      -     do 


li 


3± 


^fe^SS 


P^^^^- 


>J^^- 


-* »!- 


:&p: 


^^g=j^g#=EEig 


fci: 


I'a 


i 


^^=^ 


^^=ftF=, 


gne,  dan 


TH  r 


^^^^^fi^^^^P^ 


.j^_i 


!*- 


—       n— I — F=! — ^ 


1  .J'l  -^ 


-if^- 


ROME,    NAPLES 


179 


^ffiC. 


=1 


^^ 


S 


-%=?^ 


m 


p^g 


'-^^ 


-^— t^— b^— ^— ^^izH 


:^Lz3: 


^ 


zan,        dan 


Sd: 


zan    tal 

r 


ra     le   nin-fe  an  -  co 


w 


-rt 


^^r^ 


si; 


K  S     I  I 


^- 


eg 


-sf- 


?^ 


— p- 


I 


=fc: 


w 


^-:^ 


^^ 


^ 


i 


:3=^=bi^i 


:^c=^ 


;^ 


spet   -   to     tur  -  bar    -     le 


i^ 


ra,  ne  al  -  cun  so 


^^^gjgl^ 


7     6 


?^ 


i«o 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


i^ 


r       1 


-^  ^  :2:  1^  J.  -^-^  J.    J    A  -^ 


-^ 


w 


^ 


^=^=±^ 


^ 


3=^=^ 


:f^=S^: 


V   r  p   r  fl]»— 


sa,         sempre  in    di  -  let 


to,  sempre  in  pia 


^ 


£23' 


-r 


:n 


r 


i!^^tfc=a 


6j6         q6     5 


r^r^ 


^jB^-^JD 


^^g 


f 


^S^ 


^ 


-K-^g^ 


cer,  le   nin  -  fe  dan 


zan  sempre  in  di- 

3 


N^P^^N=^^ 


E?± 


^^^F^^ 


6        61:6 


7 


6    b6 


ROME,   NAPLES  i8i 

One  of  the  most  interesting  works  of  Scarlatti's  latest 
period,  though  contributing  little  that  is  remarkable  from 
an  orchestral  point  of  view,  is  the  second  Mass  in  A  for 
soli,  chorus,  and  orchestra.  The  most  authoritative  extant 
manuscript,  a  score  in  the  Biblioteca  Casanatense  at  Rome, 
written  out  by  a  copyist  but  with  a  heading  in  Scarlatti's 
handwriting,  has  parts  for  five  voices  only,  with  vague 
directions  as  to  when  the  music  is  to  be  sung  by  the  chorus 
and  when  by  solo  voices,  Santini,  however,  appears  to  have 
been  in  possession  of  an  incomplete  set  of  parts  from 
which  he  prepared  a  score,  filling  up  the  missing  portions 
from  the  score  in  the  Biblioteca  Casanatense,  and  in  this 
he  indicates  what  was  probably  the  correct  distribution  of 
the  voices.  The  mass  was  composed  at  Rome  in  1720 
for  Cardinal  Acquaviva  for  performance  on  St.  Cecilia's 
Day,  being  coupled  with  a  setting  of  the  Gradual  "  Audi 
Jilia  et  inclma  aurem  "  for  five  voices,  oboes  and  strings. 
The  complete  autograph  of  this  motet  is  bound  up  with 
the  score  at  Rome.  Santini's  score  of  the  mass  inserts  it 
between  the  Gloria  and  the  Credo. 

The  mass  cannot  be  considered  a  great  work  ;  taken 
as  a  whole  it  wants  breadth  and  dignity,  and  for  success  of 
effect  is  far  surpassed  by  Leo's  compositions  in  the  same 
style.  But  it  is  of  importance  as  a  forerunner  not  only  of 
Leo's  masses,  but  of  J.  S,  Bach's  Mass  in  B  minor.  It 
shows  a  much  greater  mastery  o^rer  the  new  style  than 
Scarlatti's  first  mass  with  orchestra,  and  certain  movements 
show  clearly  that  the  composer  must  have  had  a  fairly 
definite  idea  of  the  kind  of  effects  that  would  be  most 
suitable  to  this  material.  Moreover  it  exhibits  in  certain 
movements  a  poetical  seriousness  of  a  type  which  is  not 
characteristic  of  Leo,  in  spite  of  all  his  severity  and  gran- 
deur ;  indeed  it  is  this  quality  almost  as  much  as  any  other 
that  gives  the  work  its  marked  affinity  to  that  of  Bach. 

The  first  movement  does  not  look  very  dignified  on 
paper,  but  with  the  support  of  the  organ  it  would  be  very 
much  more  solid  ;  and  the  soli  and  ripieni  are  at  any  rate 
laid  out  so  as  to  make  an  effective  contrast. 


I82 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Ex.  87. 


Viol, 
tints. 
Viola. 


Basso. 


-1-3^ 


# 


M===ti: 


^-=-Wf^ 


A \ 


^^^ 


iSjl^Jtl 


1 1 1 ^ * — ts- 


t^ 


-^-i^ 


:iJ^ 


"^"=F 


i^S=3^^ 


-^:^ 


^  ^^ 


::^=z(^=ti^ 


^ 


#-f^ 


:t: 


L_*' ^^^ 


^=3 


t-J 


:3=t2=:t; 


E^^iE^sT^^^-^^^ 


^^^= 

:|^^= 


Ky  -  ri  -  e 


^==g:^: 


ifczz^t: 


I       I       I       I       I   J   J       I  J 


-^-P-- 


^ 


:t: 


i    J     i 


Ky-ri  -e 


^     ^ 


)fS=S= 


^_i 


^^ 


:1^=6SL 


I 


\^t 


zz^l■ 


ei^f=^is 


. !, — ^1^ 


^s=ef 


ROME,    NAPLES 


J± 


=|e 


{Soli.) 


m^ 


¥ 


Ky  -  ri-e 


--f^f^ 


g 


5E^ 


^ 


[^-•-^-  ggg-  ^-^^-•[■ 


ez^gz;jd:j=Ej"'r7^3g 


i 


3^ 


^e^ 


^ 


1 


5^: 


^F^ 


3.-=k 


le 


ison.e      -      le 


e-le 


P^ 


i    -    son 


^ 


ar^ 


£ 


I 


rf 


^^ 


^fe^ 


ssa  I 


e     -     le 


1    -    son 


*==^ 


f^ 


^^P 


ff^^p^ 


^::^ 


It 


^ 


The  Cum  Sancto  Spiritu  Is  set  to  a  well-developed 
fugue  of  some  length  in  quite  a  modern  style  ;  the  subject 
and  its  counter-subject  are  well  contrasted,  and  the  strings 
have  a  definite  figure  of  accompaniment  which  is  kept  up 
the  whole  time. 


i84 

Ex. 

Viol.    I. 


Vzol.   2. 


Soprano 
&-  Alto. 


rf 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

Allegro.  ^-  ^  ^  -^ . 


:^EE± 


^.^^^^^^^ 


^ 


^fce: 


^^^ 


^ 


:3=t^: 


^ 


^ 


tu 


in  glo-ri -a  De -i       Pa-tris   A 


i^ 


^=^ 


T^t 


-^-i^-^-i^ 


^±^::^z^z 


T2-- 


Cum 


to 


Towards  the  end,  when  we  should  expect  a  coda,  a 
new  subject  is  brought  in  on  the  word  Amen ;  but  the  two 
subjects  are  never  worked  together.  Whether  Bach  ever 
knew  this  mass  it  is  impossible  to  say  ;  but  there  is  a 
decided  resemblance  to  Bach's  style  in  the  tranquilly 
melodious  Crucijixus,  though  not  to  his  setting  of  those 
particular  words  : — 


Ex. 


Soli.  ^ 


Or, 


Cru-ci-fix-us    e  -  ti-am  pro    no 


S 


lE^gg^^aE^^ 


bis,  pro 


Cru-ci-fix-us     e   -    ti-am  pro  no 


«=i 


It: 


1 


^^m 


ROME,    NAPLES 


185 


bis,  pro  no 


^^^^ 


W 


bis,  pro     no      -         -         -         -         - 


1 


^S 


i 


^ 


bis. 


ffi 


i^^ 


-•--L-^ 


"=^5=^5? 


bis, 


Cru-ci  -  fix    us       e    -    ti-am  pro       no 


i^^^ 


^^^ 


^        ^  pr-|^ 


Cru-ci  -  fix  -  us    e    -    ti-am  pro     no 


^^. 


'-^. 


:=^= 


and  still  more  so  in  the  ^?/z  tollis,  as  regards  both  the 
melodic  outline  of  the  bass  solo  and  the  carefully  worked 
suspensions  of  the  accompaniment. 


Basso 
Solo. 

Viol. 
I  6-2. 


Viola. 
Basso. 


Ex.  90. 


P 


S 


*=^ 


^^ 


i86 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


^^i^^^^^ 


-s=p= 


Qui  tol 


lis  pec- 


^^^^^^^¥^. 


$ 


ir-i — \—w- 


"^^^ 


-3—dz 


W 


'vrj — r  u 


w^ 


m — •■ — 0 ' ,— ■ -• ^ 


q^=e 


i=^f=££^P=^S^^^ 


:^^ 


^0  ^     >*- 


:^tr^^t^=± 


^^- 


FS^- 


=t. 


^ 


^=^ 


^^3EEE3E5 


ta,        pec  -  ca 


ta,        pec 


) 


i^= 


^^^33H3 


^     ^ 


^ 


S^^ 


.Zl   .^ 


.J_i 


-^  ^ 


.^_:!_ 


-?-  %^ 


1 


1^^ 


^1 


:^t 


e^t^£^^^££^ 


^=F=F=^=-^ 


( Tz^///. 


^^ 


^ 


f 


se      -    re 


:+: — ^ 


^ 


-     ca  -  ta  mun    -     di 


*?J?_3_: 


"p    ^-  -*-        -^ 


Besides  the  Gradual  ''Audi Jilia,''  which  contains  some 
brilliant  and  effective  writing,  several  other  works  for  Saint 
Cecilia's  Day  seem  to  have  been  composed  at  this  date  : 
there  is  a  rather  florid  setting  of  the  Psalm  ''  Laetatus  stmz,'" 
for  five  voices  and  orchestra,  with  a  fine  dignified  Glo7^ia 
followed  by  a  most  Bacchanalian  Amen,  and  also  a  simple 
and  attractive  setting  of  the  hymn  ^'  Jestt  corona  virgi7tum" 
for  five  voices  and  strings,  as  well  as  a  Magnificat  and  minor 
pieces  unfortunately  incomplete.  A  more  interesting  com- 
position is  the  Stabat  Mater  for  soprano  and  alto,  two  violins 
and  continuo.  Pergolesi's  more  celebrated  setting  of  the  same 
words  is  said  to  have  been  composed  as  a  substitute  for  it, 
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  Scarlatti's  was  forgotten,  since 
it  has  little  of  the  grace  and  charm  of  the  younger  com- 
poser's. But  it  probably  served  as  a  model  to  Pergolesi, 
and  though  it  can  seldom  be  called  attractive,  it  is  sincere 
in  expression,  as  well  as  interesting  from  a  technical  point 
of  view.  It  is  evidently  one  of  Scarlatti's  very  latest 
works,  as  it  employs  turns  of  phrase  more  characteristic  of 
the  next  generation  than  of  his  own,  and  the  appoggiatura, 
rare  even  in  his  latest  operas,  frequently  appears  here. 
But  the  general  spirit  of  the  work  is  essentially  severe,  and 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


seems  to  aim  almost  painfully  at  the  expression  of  the  words, 
never  descending  to  the  superficial  prettiness  of  Pergolesi. 
The  first  stanza  is  a  duet  full  of  strange  modulations  in 
long-drawn  phrases  ;  the  Cujtts  aniinam  is  a  soprano  solo, 
the   style  of  which  is  characteristic  of  the  whole  hymn. 

Ex.  91.  Moderato  e  doke. 


Soprano. 


Viol. 
I  iS~=  2. 


Continiio. 


*=S=r#t^ 


^ 


"^ 


Cu-jus       a  -  ni-mam     ge-men-  tem, 

0 


^3 


contris    -   tan-tem 


The  movements  for  two  voices  are  generally  more  or 
less  contrapuntal ;  the  airs,  which  are  always  in  binary 
form,  often  have  curious  experiments  in  expression  in  the 
accompaniment.     We  see  this  in  the  "  Sancta  Mater'' : — 

Ex.  92. 


Contralto. 


Viol. 
I  <S^  2. 


( 


Contijiuo. 


±^ 


-P 


M 


:& 


ROME,    NAPLES 


189 


S 


^-- 


\ 


is       -        tud         a         -         - 


gas, 


g 


is:^: 


:^ 


:^: 


:^: 


and  the  beautiful   "  J^^ac  me  vere "  is  very  remarkable  for 
the  persistence  with  which  the  syncopations  are  carried  on. 

Ex.  93. 


Contralto, 


Violtni 
tints. 


Coitimio. 


i^^^S3 


^^A 


Fac  me        ve  -  re      te    -   cum       fle-re,  Cru  -  ci  - 


5 


^ 


=^==(^ 


3>: 


=^==^ 


3>=3z^z3: 


^ 


:^:U 


?^f- 


-^ — ^=^^=^-^ 


-Jtziz^ 


^--^ 


'       a^ ha n 1*> ha 1 


-^—-\^- 


-^ ]^ 


i 


:|^ 


1=^ 


31 


9 


H^5tS=: 


fix 


( 


con     do      -     le 


^^^^^±^ 


i 


^ 


-^- 


3=51;2=3=t2: 


-^-t 


^^i^s=^^i^ 


^ 


ei-jsti 


"/^^-^  ?/^f  portent''  and  "/^<2;(;  /i^^  cruce''  are  set  as 
recitatives  which  make  a  very  effective  contrast,  and  the 
work  concludes  with  a  well-developed  fugue  on  Amen. 

On  the  whole  the  style  of  the  Stabat  Mater  has  more 
affinity  with  the  chamber-cantatas  than  with  either  the 
oratorios  or  the  motets.  Few  chamber-cantatas  can  be 
ascribed  with  certainty  to  Scarlatti's  closing  years ;  in- 
ternal evidence  is  not  always  a  safe  guide  where  the 
chamber-music  is  concerned,  particularly  in  the  last  fifteen 


190 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


years  of  Scarlatti's  life,  after  he  had  pushed  harmonic 
audacity  as  far  as  ^^  Andate  0  ntiei  sospiriy  But  we  can 
see  that  in  the  work  of  his  old  age  he  had  more  fully 
mastered  the  science  of  modulation.  His  harmony  moves 
more  easily  and  sounds  more  genuinely  modern,  especially 
when  helped  by  the  use  of  more  modern  instrumental 
figures  in  his  basses.  On  the  other  hand,  his  melody 
sometimes  suffers ;  it  even  comes  perilously  near  being 
unvocal  in  the  Bach-like  tortuousness  of  its  coloratura,  as 
may  be  seen  in  the  cantata  "  La  dove  a  Mergellina  "  (1725). 


Ex.  94. 


^^^^^^ 


lf=^P^ 


5=^ 


ff6  S6 


^^^^f^^P^^S 


S^^: 


:gE^EE3E^£^^^£=g 


6   b 


if6 


fi6 


^ES^ 


m 


U==£: 


ROME,    NAPLES  191 

Here  we  can  see  that  for  the  moment  Scarlatti's  interest 
has  been  entirely  absorbed  in  the  sequential  development 
of  a  figure,  complicated  by  a  cross-rhythm  quite  worthy  of 
Brahms.  In  another  late  cantata,  "  Net  centra  oscttro," 
there  is  an  air  which  is  obviously  nothing  but  a  labyrinthine 
study  in  modulations,  the  composer  quite  frankly  trying  to 
see  how  many  he  can  get  into  the  short  space  of  a  single 
aria.  The  result  strikes  the  hearer  at  first  as  more  curious 
than  beautiful ;  yet  it  is  not  without  a  certain  poetic  feel- 
ing, like  the  two  well-known  preludes  of  Beethoven, 
modulating  through  all  keys. 

Short  extracts  cannot  do  justice  to  these  later  cantatas. 
Many  of  them  are  written  round  some  interesting  problem 
of  form  or  harmony,  and  all  require  an  alert  and  sympathetic 
listener  to  fully  appreciate  their  severely  intellectual  beauty. 
Scarlatti  seems,  indeed,  to  have  desired  less  to  make  a 
thing  perfectly  beautiful  of  its  kind  than  to  use  the  most 
intellectual  form  at  his  disposal  to  sketch  the  shadowy  out- 
lines of  ideas  more  profound  than  his  contemporaries  were 
capable  of  penetrating.  Even  a  German  theorist  like 
Heinichen  considerered  his  harmony  as  extravagant,  and 
from  the  account  given  by  Quantz  ^  it  seems  that  he  was 
regarded  at  Naples  rather  as  a  celebrity  to  be  admired  at  a 
respectful  distance  than  as  an  actual  creative  force  in  the 
artistic  life  of  his  time. 

He  probably  remained  in  Rome  until  after  November 
1 72 1,  since  in  that  month  he  composed  a  Pastorale  at  the 
request  of  the  Portuguese  Ambassador  to  celebrate  the 
entrance  of  the  new  Pope  Innocent  XIII.  into  the  Vatican. 
In  1722  he  appears  to  have  paid  a  visit  to  Loreto, 
where  he  is  supposed  to  have  written  an  Ave  Maria  and 
the  psalm  "■Memento  Domine  Davids  But  he  must  have 
been  at  Naples  in  1723  for  the  wedding  of  the  Prince  of 
Stigliano,  and  probably  he  remained  there  until  his  death. 
Hasse  became  his  pupil  in  1724,  although  he  does  not 
appear   to   have  been    teaching    regularly  at  any    of  the 

^  In  Marparg's  {iistonsch-Krltische  Bdtrdge  zurAufnahme  der  Musik, 
Berlin,  1 744-1 762. 


192  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

Conservatorii  at  this  time.  Hasse's  amiable  disposition 
seems  to  have  won  the  old  man's  friendship,  as  it  did  that 
of  many  other  musicians  in  later  years,  Porpora  always 
excepted.  It  was  only  after  some  persuasion  on  his  part 
that  Scarlatti  could  be  induced  to  receive  Quantz,  then  on 
a  visit  to  Naples.  "My  son,"  he  said  to  Hasse,  "you 
know  that  I  cannot  endure  players  of  wind-instruments ; 
for  they  all  blow  out  of  tune."  But  he  yielded  eventually, 
and  Quantz  gives  an  account  of  the  interview,  telling  us, 
however,  less  about  Scarlatti  than  about  himself.  "  Scar- 
latti let  me  hear  him  on  the  harpsichord,^  which  he  played 
in  a  learned  manner,  although  he  did  not  possess  as  much 
agility  of  execution  as  his  son.  After  this  he  accompanied 
a  solo  for  me.  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  gain  his  favour, 
and  he  composed  a  couple  of  flute  solos  for  me." 

It  is  significant  that  although  Quantz  makes  some 
rather  extraordinary  assertions  about  Scarlatti  (it  must  be 
admitted  that  he  offers  them  with  a  touch  of  incredulity), 
he  never  mentions  any  single  one  of  his  compositions  by 
name.  When  we  read  not  only  that  Scarlatti  has  written 
a  vast  quantity  of  operas  {^' eine  grosse  Menge  Opern''), 
but  that  "they  say  he  has  set  the  Mass  two  hundred 
times  in  addition  to  Vesper  Psalms  and  other  church 
music  ;  and  indeed  a  certain  Neapolitan  gentleman  boasted 
of  possessing  four  thousand  ^  pieces  of  his  composition, 
mostly  solo  cantatas,  to  many  of  which  he  had  written  the 
words  himself,"  it  seems  fairly  clear  that  the  musical 
gossips  of  Naples  were  not  averse  to  trying  how  much  the 
^' gremilthlicher  Sachse''  could  be  made  to  swallow. 

It  must  have  been  in  the  early  part  of  1725  that 
Scarlatti  received  Quantz.  On  October  24  of  the  same 
year  he  died,  from  what  immediate  cause  is  not  known.  The 
Gazzetta  di  Napoli  ^  recorded  his  death  a  few  days  later. 

"In  the  course  of  last  week  there  died  ^  the  celebrated 

^  This  has  been  curiously  perverted  by  later  historians  into  a  statement 
that  Scarlatti  was  a  performer  on  the  harp.  Quantz's  word  "  Clavicymbel " 
leaves  no  room  for  misunderstanding. 

-  Not  four  hundred,  as  quoted  in  Grove's  Dictionary. 

2  No.  45,  October  30,  1725. 

*  "  Rese  Faninia  al  Sis:no7-eP 


ROME,    NAPLES  193 

Cavaliere  Alessandro  Scarlatti,  to  whom  music  owes  much 
for  the  numerous  works  with  which  he  enriched  it." 

It  is  the  laconic  and  conventional  eulogy  that  is  paid  at 
his  death  to  a  great  man  who  has  been  forgotten  by  his 
own  generation. 

He  was  buried  in  the  church  of  Montesanto,  in  the 
musicians'  chapel  dedicated  to  St.  Cecilia ;  his  epitaph, 
said  to  have  been  written  by  Cardinal  Ottoboni,  is  on  the 
marble  slab  just  under  the  gate,  and  runs  as  follows  : — 

HEIC  -SITUS  -EST 

EQVES  •  ALEXANDER  •  SCARLACTVS 

VIR  •  MODERATIONE  •  BENEFICENTIA 

PIETATE-INSIGNIS 

MVSICES  •  INSTAVRATOR  ■  MAXIMVS 

QVI  •  SOLIDIS  •  VETERVM  •  NVMERIS 

NOVA  •  AC  •  MIRA  •  SVAVITATE 

MOLLITIS 

ANTIQVITATI  •  GLORIAM  •  POSTERITATI 

IMITANDI  •  SPEM  •  ADEMIT 

OPTIMATIBVS  •  REGIBVSQ 

APPRIME-CARVS 

TANDEM  -ANNGS  -NATVM  •  LXVI  •  EXTINXIT 

SVMMO  ■  CU M  •  ITALIAE  •  DOLORE 

IX  •  KALAS  .  NOVEMBEis  CIOIOCCXXV 

MORS  •  MODIS  ■  FLECTI  •  NESCIA 

Of  Scarlatti's  personal  character  it  is  practically  im- 
possible to  form  an  estimate.  Contemporary  records  are 
singularly  deficient  in  anything  that  can  give  us  an  idea  of 
him  as  a  man.  His  correspondence  with  Ferdinand  de' 
Medici  is  voluminous,  but  its  elaborately  complimentary 
style  effectually  disguises  the  individuality  of  the  writer. 
Such  personal  recollections  of  him  as  were  handed  down 
by  Quantz  and  Geminiani  have  been  seized  upon  by 
historians  with  avidity,  but  they  really  amount  to  hardly 
anything,  and  their  scantiness  has  given  them  a  fictitious 
value.  Even  his  attitude  towards  his  art  is  difficult  to 
determine.  Not  until  a  century  later  did  music  begin  to 
be  regarded  as  the  intimate  expression  of  the  composer's 
personal  feelings  ;  it  was  only  the  romantic  period  of  the 

N 


194  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

nineteenth  century  that  required  an  autobiographical  expla- 
nation of  every  bar.  Roughly  speaking,  the  intellectual 
side  of  music  was  all  that  a  composer  was  expected  to 
provide  in  Scarlatti's  day  ;  the  appeal  to  the  emotions 
was  the  legitimate  province  of  the  singer. 

To  us  Scarlatti's  music  often  seems  conspicuously  de- 
void of  emotional  qualities,  compared  with  that  of  his  con- 
temporaries, such  as  Purcell,  Handel,  and  J.  S.  Bach.  But 
he  certainly  was  very  susceptible  to  emotion  through  the 
medium  of  poetry,  for  he  writes  to  Ferdinand  de'  Medici 
full  of  enthusiasm  for  Stampiglia's  libretto  of  "  II  Gran 
Tamerlano  "  : — 

"  It  is  almost  impossible,  even  merely  reading  the 
drama,  not  to  feel  stirred  by  the  various  passions  which 
it  exhibits.  I  confess  my  weakness  ;  at  some  passages, 
while  I  was  composing  the  music  for  them,  I  wept."^ 

And  in  judging  of  his  emotional  qualities,  it  must  not 
be  forgotten  that  Scarlatti  speaks  a  musical  language  to 
which  we  are  little  accustomed.  To  most  lovers  of  music 
at  the  present  day  Schumann,  Wagner,  and  Brahms  repre- 
sent the  normal  style  of  musical  expression.  Italian  music 
is  out  of  fashion,  and  since  Beethoven's  day  the  only  non- 
German  composers  who  have  taken  a  permanent  hold  upon 
the  musical  public  in  England  are  those  who  have  been 
largely  influenced  by  Teutonic  methods.  In  the  eighteenth 
century  the  converse  was  the  case.  The  Italian  influence  is 
the  strongest  bond  of  unity  even  between  non-Italian  com- 
posers such  as  Purcell,  J.  S.  Bach,  Haydn,  and  Mozart,  and 
we  cannot  enter  into  their  music  at  all  deeply  without  some 
sympathy  with  Italian  methods  of  expression.  Scarlatti  is 
of  course  wholly  and  entirely  Italian,  and  those  to  whom 
Italian  music  is  an  unfamiliar  language  will  naturally  fail  to 
understand  the  poetic  beauty  of  his  work. 

Yet  it  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  it  is  difficult  to 
form  a  right  judgment  of  his  intrinsic  merits  as  a  composer. 
Though  more  than  half  his  operas  are  lost,  the  amount 
that    remains    is    still    enormous,    and    bewildering   in    its 

^  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filza  5903,  No.  204. 


ROME,    NAPLES  195 

variety.  Are  we  to  judge  him  by  the  pedantic  eccentrici- 
ties of  his  later  chamber-music,  or  by  the  be-wigged  and 
powdered  tunes  of  his  NeapoHtan  operas?  Here  again 
we  must  forofet  modern  conditions  and  take  into  considera- 
tion  the  circumstances  of  his  life.  Bach,  a  church  organist 
in  Central  Germany,  scarcely  known  outside  his  own 
immediate  circle,  might  write  what  he  pleased  as  long  as 
he  was  content  to  perform  his  works  as  best  he  could  with 
limited  means,  and  leave  the  rest  to  posterity  ;  Handel, 
tyrannizing  in  musical  matters  over  a  land  that  was  ready 
meekly  to  accept  his  word  as  law,  had  even  greater 
advantages,  provided  that  he  did  not  push  his  learning 
too  far.  Scarlatti's  case  was  in  some  ways  less  fortunate. 
He  had  to  write  to  make  a  living,  and  to  write  in  com- 
petition against  other  musicians  for  audiences  that  had  been 
trained  to  musical  drama  for  nearly  a  hundred  years.  More 
genuinely  and  more  lavishly  enthusiastic  over  opera  than 
any  other  nation,  then  as  now,  provided  that  it  conforms 
to  their  particular  standard,  the  Italians  are  the  least 
patient  of  audiences  towards  opera  that  does  not.  Court 
patronage,  though  encouraging  in  some  respects,  had  its 
drawbacks.  It  is  clear  that  Scarlatti  was  glad  enough 
to  escape  from  the  Spanish  Court  at  Naples  ;  but  whether 
Pratolino  was  really  more  of  "a  safe  harbour"  to  him  may 
be  doubted.  Ferdinand  was  an  amateur  musician  of  some 
ability,  but  though  this  may  have  been  an  advantage  to 
Scarlatti,  it  must  also  have  been  irksome  to  him  to  have  to 
write  and  rewrite  his  operas  in  accordance  with  the  prince's 
taste.  Ferdinand  ^  complained  of  the  melancholy  nature 
of  Scarlatti's  music,  as  well  as  of  its  difficulty,  and  Scarlatti 
protests  vigorously  in  his  letters  that  "  Lucio  Manlio  "  and 
"Tamerlano"  contain  nothing  melancholy,  "even  in  the 
places  where  it  seems  that  such  a  character  is  indispens- 
able." On  the  whole  Scarlatti  seems  to  have  done  his 
best  for  his  art  under  difficult  conditions.  His  work 
certainly  shows  a  steady  improvement  from  beginning  to 
end  in  technique  at  least,  if  the  development  of  its  poetical 

^  Archivio  Mediceo,  Filza  5903,  No.  497. 


196  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

side  is  irregular ;  and  we  can  surely  find  a  good  proof  of 
the  loftiness  of  his  aspiration  and  attainment  in  the  great 
gulf  that  separates  him  from  his  immediate  followers. 

Alessandro  Scarlatti  is  always  regarded  as  the  founder 
of  the  school  of  Naples  ;  but  it  seems  that  Neapolitan 
chauvinism  has  somewhat  exaggerated  his  connection  with 
it.  Roughly  speaking,  he  certainly  is  the  founder  of  the 
style  which  was  developed  by  Leo,  Vinci,  and  the  rest ;  and 
certainly  Naples  would  have  had  little  chance  of  becoming 
a  great  musical  centre  if  Scarlatti  had  not  been  induced  to 
settle  there,  practically  to  monopolize  the  stage  of  S. 
Bartolomeo  from  1684  to  1702  and  from  1709  to  1719. 
But  however  considerable  his  indirect  influence  must  have 
been,  he  was  never  very  much  in  demand  as  an  actual 
teacher.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  men  who  have  had  the 
greatest  reputation  as  teachers  were  seldom  thought  much 
of  as  composers.  Gaetano  Greco  and  Nicola  Fago  il 
Tarentino,  especially  the  latter,  did  far  more  than  Scarlatti 
for  the  actual  training  of  the  next  generation. 

It  is  conceivable  that  Scarlatti  may  have  been  too  exact- 
ing a  teacher  for  clever  boys  who  would  soon  realize  that 
mechanical  accuracy  in  counterpoint  was  sufficient  for  the 
church  and  natural  facility  of  melody  for  the  theatre.  He 
is  said  to  have  insisted  on  not  cramping  his  pupils  with 
rules,  wishing  that  they  should  develop  their  own  ideas 
freely.  As  we  have  already  seen  in  his  "  Regole  per  prin- 
cipianti"  his  ultimate  reason  for  every  exceptional  pro- 
gression is  always  ''' perche  fa  buon  sentire'' — "because  it 
sounds  well ;  "  and  such  a  passage  as  that  on  page  180  of 
this  book  shows  that  he  was  supremely  indifferent  to  con- 
ventional prohibitions.  A  man  of  this  temperament  is  not 
suited  to  be  a  teacher  of  beginners,  and  it  is  only  a  few 
enthusiasts  who  will  be  content  to  listen  to  his  advice  after 
they  think  that  they  have  reached  maturity.  The  early  part 
of  the  eighteenth  century  was  not  conducive  to  the  produc- 
tion of  such  types,  least  of  all  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 

The  difference  between  the  later  operas  of  Scarlatti 
and  those   of  Leo,  Vinci,  and   Pergolesi   is  very  striking. 


ROME,    NAPLES 


197 


Scarlatti  always  seems  to  struggle  more  or  less  against 
the  formalization  of  the  opera,  although  to  the  modern 
reader  this  is  not  very  apparent  at  first  sight  ;  the  next 
generation  not  only  accepted  its  formalities  but  exaggerated 
them,  until  that  intolerable  state  of  affairs  was  reached 
when  every  air  had  its  first  part  in  a  developed  binary 
form,  often  full  of  a  coloraUtra  interesting  at  most  for  its 
difficulty,  and  still  further  extended  by  the  lengthiest  of 
ritornelli  both  at  the  beginning  and  in  the  middle. 
We  see  a  faint  tendency  towards  the  type  in  Roberto  s  airs 
in  "  Griselda "  ;  but  the  style  had  already  been  pushed 
further  by  the  younger  composers,  especially  by  Vinci, 
when  Scarlatti's  opera  came  out,  and  it  is  probable  that 
he  wrote  the  airs  only  as  a  concession  to  popular  taste. 
Everything  seems  to  point  to  the  fact  that  Scarlatti's 
influence  in  Naples  was  practically  exhausted  by  about 
17 1 8.  "  Cambise "  (1719)  was  the  last  opera  which  he 
produced  there,  and  his  works  do  not  appear  to  have 
been  revived  there  later,  as  they  were  at  Rome  and 
Bologna.  The  Neapolitan  school  of  composers  which 
professed  to  regard  Alessandro  Scarlatti  as  their  head 
imitated  him  only  during  his  second  Neapolitan  period, 
of  which  "  Tigrane "  may  be  taken  as  the  representa- 
tive opera.  Even  then  his  direct  influence  was  slighter 
than  might  have  been  expected.  His  music  evidently 
did  not  altogether  suit  popular  taste,  and  it  was  through 
inferior  composers  like  Mancini  and  Sarro,  much  less 
melodious,  but  more  obviously  commonplace  in  their 
rhythms,  that  the  new  style  was  developed  to  the  stage  at 
which  we  find  it  in  Leo  and  Vinci.  Leo's  serious  operas 
are  his  least  interesting  work  ;  like  Vinci  and  Logroscino, 
he  is  at  his  best  in  opera  htffa,  in  which  all  three  in- 
herited a  good  portion  of  Scarlatti's  sense  of  humour. 
Vinci  is  on  the  whole  the  best  of  Scarlatti's  immediate 
followers  in  the  field  of  serious  opera.  His  distinguishing- 
quality  is  a  swift,  incisive  vigour,  enhanced  by  colorahira  of 
real  brilliancy  ;  but  he  very  often  becomes  dry  and  stagey. 
Durante   stands  rather  apart  from  the  rest,  as  he  confined 


198  ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

himself  to  music  for  the  church  and  chamber.  He  exhibits 
a  larger  share  than  any  of  the  others  of  Scarlatti's  poetry 
and  tenderness  of  style  ;  and  we  may  trace  Scarlatti's 
influence  through  him  at  second-hand  in  Pergolesi  and 
Jommelli.  Pergolesi's  nature  was  not  masculine  enough 
for  him  ever  to  reach  anything  approaching  the  grandeur 
of  Scarlatti,  or  even  his  humour  ;  the  best  features  of  his 
comic  operas  are  the  sentimental  airs.  But  the  famous  air 
in  "  L'Olimpiade  " — '' Se  ceixa,  se  dice'' — has  a  touch  of 
Scarlatti  in  the  pathetic  expression  of  its  broken  phrases 
skilfully  woven  into  the  texture  of  a  formal  design. 

It  is  a  significant  fact  that  Scarlatti  was  the  last  great 
writer  of  chamber-cantatas.  Those  of  the  next  generation 
are  comparatively  few,  and  seldom  interesting.  Pergolesi's 
are  on  the  whole  the  best,  and  these  are  hardly  to  be 
classed  as  chamber-music,  all  having  accompaniments  for 
strings,  on  a  much  larger  scale  than  Scarlatti's.  Durante 
arranged  a  series  of  twelve  duets  from  Scarlatti's  later 
cantatas,  taking  recitatives  and  ariosi  and  expanding 
them  in  a  more  or  less  contrapuntal  style.  But  these 
were  intended,  as  Burney  tells  us,  only  as  advanced  ''  stiidij 
for  singers,  in  which  the  passages  being  echoed  in  fugue 
excited  emulation  in  performance,  and  furnished  an  oppor- 
tunity of  comparing  the  rapidity  and  neatness  of  the 
execution,  as  the  comparative  speed  of  two  coursers  is  best 
known  by  their  running  a  trials 

As  the  ideal  form  of  chamber-music  the  cantata  died 
with  Alessandro  Scarlatti.  Probably  the  rise  of  instru- 
mental music  threw  it  out  of  fashion,  as  well  as  the  increase 
in  the  number  of  amateur  players  and  singers,  which  was  a 
prominent  factor  in  the  development  of  music  for  the 
cembalo.  Villarosa's  judgment  on  Scarlatti's  cantatas, 
though  dating  from  a  hundred  years  later,  nevertheless 
probably  represents  with  fair  accuracy  the  opinion  of  the 
previous  century  : — 

"  But  what  music  has  he  left  that  could  be  listened  to 
to-day?  His  style  was  great,  it  is  well  understood;  but 
his  taste  was  always  dry,  nerveless  and  scholastic.      If  it 


ROME,    NAPLES  199 

had  not  occurred  to  Francesco  Durante  to  arrange  some  of 
his  pieces  for  two  voices,  soprano  and  alto,  combining  them 
in  a  masterly  manner,  the  name  of  Scarlatti  would  be  no 
more  heard  among  us."  To  the  modern  reader  it  is 
Durante's  arrangements  that  appear  "dry,  nerveless  and 
scholastic,"  while  the  original  movements,  restored  to  their 
proper  places,  are  full  of  life  and  poetry. 

On  Handel  Scarlatti's  influence  was  strong  at  the 
beginning,  but  not  very  lasting  or  profound.  Certainly 
the  change  of  style  that  took  place  in  his  music  after  his 
visit  to  Italy  is  very  noticeable  ;  "  Rinaldo  "  is  as  definitely 
Italian  as  "  Almira  "  was  definitely  German  in  its  manner. 
But  although  he  began  by  modelling  his  phrases  on  Scar- 
latti after  his  visit  to  Italy,  he  very  seldom  enters  thoroughly 
Into  Scarlatti's  style.  There  are  several  reasons  for  this. 
His  acquaintance  with  Scarlatti  lasted  a  very  short  time, 
and  his  age  made  him  more  suited  to  the  companionship 
of  Domenico,  whose  influence  can  also  be  traced  in  much  of 
his  work.  Moreover,  Handel,  though  only  twenty-three 
when  he  came  to  Italy,  was  a  fully  fledged  composer.  He 
was  not  very  familiar  with  the  Italian  style,  but  his  Italian 
Dixit  Domimts  is  in  some  ways  stronger  than  anything 
of  Scarlatti's  in  that  line:  Handel  had  had  a  Protestant 
organist's  training,  which  taught  him  to  build  up  his  music 
on  a  strong  harmonic  framework.  But  in  spite  of  the 
advantages  of  that  wonderful  German  faculty  for  translating 
and  assimilating  the  work  of  other  countries  which  accounts 
for  much  of  the  greatness  of  Handel,  Bach,  Gluck,  and 
Mozart,  Handel  had  also  the  drawbacks  of  his  nationality. 
He  set  Italian  as  he  set  English,  like  a  foreigner,  never 
approaching  that  delicate  intimacy  of  declamation  which  is 
as  characteristic  a  quality  of  Scarlatti  as  it  is  of  Purcell. 
And  it  must  be  remembered  that  a  literary  appreciation  of 
this  kind  may  take  effect  not  only  in  impassioned  recita- 
tive, but  also  in  the  most  melodious  and  florid  of  arias. 
Handel's  coloratttra  is  fairly  effective  in  many  cases,  but 
it  is  commonplace  in  detail ;  a  florid  passage  by  Handel 
is  as  different  from  one  by  Scarlatti  as  a  cadenza  of  Liszt 


200  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

is  from  a  cadenza  of  Chopin.  Handel  seems  to  nail  his 
coiorahira  to  his  framework ;  Scarlatti's  often  gains  a 
priceless  charm  by  its  wayward  independence.  Handel 
often  reminds  us  of  some  prudish  nymph  of  Rubens, 
clutching  her  drapery  tightly  about  her,  anxious  and  un- 
graceful ;  Scarlatti  recalls  Tintoretto's  Venus,  her  loose 
transparent  girdle  fluttering  crisply  to  the  breeze,  serving 
its  whole  purpose  in  the  delicate  contrast  that  it  makes 
with  the  pure  firm  line  of  her  perfectly  poised  and  rounded 
form.  Besides  Scarlatti,  two  other  Italian  composers  exer- 
cised an  equally  strong  influence  on  Handel  :  the  eclectic 
Steffani,  from  whom  Handel  learned  to  write  overtures 
and  dances  in  what  we  may  call  an  Italian  version  of  the 
style  of  Lulli,  and  Bononcini,  who  in  spite  of  his  bad  repu- 
tation among  Handel's  admirers  seems  to  have  been  the 
real  originator  of  what  is  commonly  described  as  the 
"  Handelian  style."  Bononcini  even  influenced  Scarlatti 
himself,  as  we  have  seen,  and  it  is  therefore  not  sur- 
prising that  a  man  of  Handel's  temperament  should  have 
seized  more  readily  on  the  salient  mannerisms  of  Bononcini 
and  Steffani  than  on  the  more  intricate  subtleties  of  Scar- 
latti's music. 

Domenico  Scarlatti  was  to  some  extent  a  pupil  of  his 
father,  though  he  also  studied  with  Bernardo  Pasquini  and 
Francesco  Gasparini.  At  a  first  glance  there  seems  the 
strongest  possible  contrast  between  father  and  son. 
Domenico's  operas  and  cantatas  are  as  devoid  of  char- 
acter and  interest  as  Alessandro's  tiresome  toccatas  for  the 
cembalo.  But  if  we  compare  Alessandro's  arias  with 
Domenico's  sonatas,  we  shall  find  that  they  have  much 
in  common,  after  eliminating  such  qualities  as  are  purely 
accidental  to  the  two  personalities,  depending  merely  on 
the  form  in  which  their  music  is  cast.  We  must  not  expect 
cantabile  melodies  in  the  Esercizi  i)er  Gravice7?ibalo  any 
more  than  wild  leaps  and  rattling  arpeggios  in  the  Cantate 
a  voce  sola.  But  it  certainly  could  not  have  been  from 
Gasparini  or  Pasquini  that  Domenico  got  his  genius  for 
neatly  organized  forms,  his  extraordinary  modulations,  his 


ROME,    NAPLES  201 

skill  in  thematic  development,  his  quaint  mannerism  of 
reiterating  a  characteristic  figure,  and  above  all  his 
astonishing  Beethovenish  sense  of  humour. 

Among  Scarlatti's  pupils  Hasse  has  a  peculiar  interest 
and  importance.  His  later  work  bears  little  resemblance 
to  his  master's,  for  like  all  his  contemporaries  he  too  was 
obliged  to  conform  to  the  taste  of  his  generation.  But  he 
doubtless  derived  from  Scarlatti  his  careful  workmanship, 
especially  with  regard  to  accompaniments,  and  the  beauti- 
ful declamation  and  dramatic  feeling  of  his  recitativo 
stromentato.  He  is  moreover  the  principal  connecting 
link  between  the  school  of  Naples  and  the  school  of 
Vienna,  and  if  he  did  no  more  than  his  fellow-pupils  to 
carry  on  the  letter  of  the  Scarlatti  tradition,  probably  none 
did  so  much  for  the  propagation  of  its  spirit  as  the  devoted 
disciple  who  told  Burney  "  that  the  first  time  Scarlatti  saw 
him,  he  hastily  conceived  such  an  affection  for  him,  that  he 
ever  after  treated  him  with  the  kindness  of  a  father."  ^ 

Indeed  the  real  importance  of  Scarlatti  lies  not  in  his 
direct  influence  on  his  immediate  followers,  but  in  his  rela- 
tion to  the  whole  development  of  classical  music.  "  Eraclea" 
may  be  said  to  divide  his  work  at  the  meeting  of  the  centu- 
ries. Before  1700,  he  had  gathered  up  all  that  was  best  of 
the  tangled  materials  produced  by  that  age  of  transition  and 
experiment,  the  seventeenth  century,  to  form  out  of  them  a 
musical  language,  vigorous  and  flexible  as  Italian  itself, 
which  has  been  the  foundation  of  all  music  of  the  classical 
period.  Lesser  composers  contributed  their  part  to  this 
great  work,  but  Scarlatti  is  so  much  the  most  fertile,  and 
maintains  even  at  his  lowest  so  high  a  standard,  that  the 
main  glory  of  the  achievement  is  certainly  due  to  him. 
His  best  pupil,  we  may  safely  say,  is  Mozart.  Almost 
all  those  characteristics  of  style  that  we  are  accustomed 
loosely  to  consider  as  essentially  Mozartian,  were  learned 
by  Mozart  from  the  Italians  of  the  preceding  half-century. 
Indeed,  Mozart  to  some  extent  repeated  the  work  of 
Scarlatti,  uniting  in  himself  the  massive   strength  of  Leo, 

^  The  Present  State  of  Music  in  Germany,  Gt'c,  vol.  i.  p.  348. 


202  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

the  sweetness  of  Durante  and  Pergolesi,  the  swift  energy 
of  Vinci  and  the  racy  humour  of  Logroscino,  together  with 
that  divine  beauty  of  melody  which  belonged  to  Scarlatti 
alone.  Nor  was  this  Italian  influence  confined  to  his  early 
years  ;  "  Die  Zauberflote,"  in  some  ways  the  most  German 
of  his  operas,  is  also  the  opera  in  which  he  shows  the  most 
marked  affinity  to  Scarlatti.  The  Q^teen  of  Night,  Taniino, 
and  Pamina  are  all  characteristic  figures  of  the  Italian 
stage,  treated  quite  in  Scarlatti's  manner  ;  and  Papageno 
and  Papagena,  however  typically  Viennese  they  may  be 
from  a  psychological  point  of  view,  are  certainly  nothing 
but  Italian  parti  buffe  as  far  as  their  place  in  the  opera 
is  concerned. 

The  history  of  the  classical  period  is  the  history  of 
musical  form  from  the  aggressive  symmetry  of  Haydn  to 
the  masterly  freedom  of  Beethoven.  For  this  development 
Scarlatti  prepared  the  ground.  Large  symphonic  forms 
he  never  used  ;  the  airs  and  duets  of  his  later  operas  and 
cantatas  represent  the  widest  schemes  of  design  that  he 
could  conceive  for  single  movements.  It  is  natural  to 
think  that  this  was  mainly  due  to  his  innate  sympathy  with 
the  voice  and  his  comparative  indifference  to  instrumental 
music.  This,  however,  is  probably  not  the  sole  reason.  Scar- 
latti, as  we  have  seen,  always  cherished  the  contrapuntal 
tradition  in  serious  music,  both  vocal  and  instrumental, 
although  his  counterpoint  is  seldom  in  more  than  two 
parts  ;  hence  in  his  instrumental  music  the  tendency 
towards  modern  symphonic  forms  is  apparent  only  in  his 
dances,  marches,  and  similar  movements.  Even  in  these 
he  becomes  contrapuntal  whenever  the  occasion  demands 
a  serious  style  :  the  last  movement  of  the  overture  to 
"La  Vergine  Addolorata,"  composed  as  late  as  17 17,  is 
thoroughly  polyphonic,  and  not  in  the  least  orchestral 
in  a  modern  sense,  although  its  dance  form  is  as  clearly 
defined  as  that  of  the  march  in  "  II  Prigioniero  Fortunate." 
In  the  chamber-cantatas,  however.  It  was  easier  to  extend 
his  forms  on  modern  lines  ;  and  we  see  clearly  from  such 
examples  as  are  quoted  in  Chapter  III.  how  much  he  was 


KOME,    NAPLES  203 

influenced  in  this  direction  by  tiie  words  which  he  set. 
Long  before  Scarlatti,  composers  had  found  it  necessary 
to  repeat  the  words  of  a  song  in  order  to  bring  the  music 
to  a  sufficient  length.  Once  repeat  the  words  in  their  en- 
tirety, and  common  sense  demands  a  more  or  less  well- 
defined  binary  form.  The  further  the  words  are  extended 
by  the  repetition  of  single  words  or  phrases  within  a 
section,  the  more  complicated  must  the  musical  organiza- 
tion become  ;  and  such  complication  is  peculiarly  charac- 
teristic of  Italian  music,  because  the  genius  of  the  Italian 
language  has  always  delighted  in  the  symmetrical  group- 
ing of  words  and  the  antithetical  inversion  of  phrase. 
The  breaking  up  of  the  words  into  small  groups  would 
naturally  tend  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  music  into  con- 
trasting subjects,  and  this  would  be  still  further  assisted  by 
the  necessity  of  bringing  out  to  the  full  the  opposition  and 
interaction  of  the  voice  and  the  violoncello.  For  it  is 
noticeable  that  in  all  Scarlatti's  cantatas  the  violoncello  has 
a  strongly  individualized  part,  the  menial  duty  of  accom- 
paniment being  left  to  the  cembalo.  Practical  considerations 
of  course  restrained  music  for  solo  voices  within  shorter 
limits  than  were  possible  for  purely  instrumental  move- 
ments ;  but  within  these  limits  there  is  not  only  a  perfect 
proportion  of  main  divisions,  but  every  bar  displays  the 
most  subtly  ingenious  organization  of  figure,  and  this  too 
carried  out  with  a  richness  of  detail  that  is  noticeably 
deficient  in  the  instrumental  music  of  his  time.  We  must 
admit  that  consciously  or  unconsciously  Scarlatti  did  as 
much  as  any  composer  to  bring  about  that  degradation 
of  the  musical  drama  that  preceded  the  reforms  of 
Gluck  ;  but  when  we  view  the  history  of  European  music 
as  a  whole,  it  must  appear  that  his  sins  with  regard  to 
musical  drama  were  far  outweighed  by  his  priceless  con- 
tribution to  the  development  of  pure  music.  For  we  may 
call  him  not  only  a  great  architect,  but  a  great  poet  as  well ; 
formal  and  rhetorical  as  his  music  may  seem  to  us,  he 
nevertheless  speaks  the  language  of  passion  as  sincerely  as 
any    later    composer.     He    may    almost   be  said    to    have 


204  ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 

invented  it,  for  none  of  his  predecessors  or  contemporaries 
can  show  the  same  absolute  mastery  over  it.  Monteverdi, 
Cavalh,  Heinrich  Schlitz  and  Purcell  may  give  us  single 
phrases,  even  single  movements  which  are  often  astonish- 
ingly modern  in  their  effect ;  Scarlatti  never.  His  music 
is  either  frankly  the  music  of  his  own  time,  or  else, 
like  Mozart's,  it  is  music  for  all  time.  Whenever  he  does 
anything  new  he  does  it  with  the  perfect  ease  of  an 
accomplished  master  ;  even  in  the  chamber-music,  where  he 
is  openly  attacking  a  problem,  he  is  fully  conscious  of  his 
power  to  solve  it.  He  is  entirely  devoid  of  the  hysterical 
romanticism  which  makes  wild  experiments  in  the  vague 
hope  of  expressing  the  inexpressible  ;  musical  composition 
is  for  him  a  science,  "the  daughter  of  Mathematics."^ 
Well  did  Cardinal  Ottoboni  describe  him  for  his  own  age 
when  he  wrote  upon  his  tombstone  "  fuusices  instatirator 
maximtisr  We,  some  two  centuries  later,  tracing  the 
development  of  his  art  through  Haydn,  Mozart,  Beethoven, 
and  Brahms  along  those  lines  which  he  was  the  first  clearly 
to  lay  down,  may  legitimately  interpret  the  words — Father 
of  Classical  Music. 

1  Letter  to  Ferdinand  de'  Medici,  May  i,  1706.     (Archivio  Mediceo, /'//^'(^ 
5903,  No.  196.) 


APPENDIX 


THE    SCARLATTI    FAMILY 


Scarlatti 

Scarlati 

Scarlata 

or 
Sgarlata 

1 

1 

Anna  Maria 

1 
Alessandro 
;;/.  Antonia  Anzalone 
(1659-1725) 

1 

Francesco 
Giuseppe 

Giuseppe 

Domenico 

b.  1685 

1                                  1 

Catarina                     Carlo 

Eleonora                 Francesco 

Emilia                    Giacomo 

b.  1690                     b.  \(3()2. 

Flaminia 

? 

Giuseppe  ? 

The  Biograjia  degli  Uomini  Illustri  del  Regno  di 
Napoli  is  our  only  authority  for  the  existence  of  Flaminia 
Scarlatti,  who  is  said  to  have  been  a  remarkably  good 
singer.  Giuseppe  is  described  by  the  same  writer  as 
grandson  of  Alessandro,  but  not  son  of  Domenico.  As  he 
worked  principally  at  Venice  and  Vienna  it  has  been 
suggested  that  he  was  son  of  Alessandro's  brother 
Francesco,  thus  being  nephew  of  Alessandro.  This  is 
not  incompatible  with  the  statement  in  the  Biograjia, 
if  we  suppose  the  writer  to  have  heard  of  Giuseppe  as 
nepote  di  Alessandro  {i.e.  nephew  of  Alessandro)  and  to 
have  misinterpreted  the  phrase,  the  word  nepote  bearing 
both  meanings.  Burney,  however,  makes  him  nephew  of 
Domenico,  when  mentioning  him  as  one  of  the  distin- 
guished musicians  of  Vienna.^  There  was  a  Pietro 
Scarlatti  organist  of  the  royal  chapel  at  Naples  in  Ales- 
sandro's time,  and  a  Tommaso  Scarlatti  who,  besides 
being  a  tenor  singer  in  the  royal  chapel,  also  took  part 
in  Alessandro's  comic  opera  "  II  Tronfo  dell'  Onore." 
Whether  either  of  these  two  were  related  to  Alessandro 
it  is  impossible  to  say. 

1  The  Presettt  State  of  Music  in  Germany,  ^c,  vol.  i.  p.  369. 


CATALOGUE    OF   THE    EXTANT    WORKS 
OF    ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 

JVith  the  Libraries  where  the  MSS.  are  to  he  found} 


B.  Berlin,  Royal  Library. 

BA.  Bologna,  Accademia  Filarmonica. 

BC.  Brussels,  Conservatoire  Royal  de 
Musique. 

BF.  Brussels,  Royal  Library  (Fetis'  col- 
lection). 

BL.  Bologna,  Liceo  Musicale. 

BM.  London,  British  Museum. 

Bod.  Oxford,  Bodleian  Library. 

C.  Cambridge,  Fitzwilliam  Museum. 
Cas.  Rome,  Biblioteca  Casanatense. 
Cec.  Rome,  Biblioteca  S.  Cecilia. 
Chr.  Oxford,  Christchurch. 

Cor.  Rome,  Biblioteca  Corsiniana. 

D.  Dresden,  Royal  Library. 

Dar.  Darmstadt,  Grand-Ducal  Library. 
F.  Florence,  R.  Istituto  Musicale. 
FN.  Florence,  National  Library. 
LA.  London,  Royal  Academy  of  Music. 
LB.  London,  Buckingham  Palace. 


LC.  London,  Royal  College  of  Music. 
M.  Munich,  National  Library. 
]\IC.  Montecassino. 

Mil.  Milan,  R.  Conservatorio  di  Musica. 
Mod.  Modena,  Biblioteca  Estense. 
N.  Naples,  R.  Conservatorio  di  Musica. 
Pad.  Padua,  Biblioteca  del  Santo. 
Pal.  Palermo,  R.  Conservatorio  di  Musica. 
PC.  Paris,  Conservatoire  de  Musique. 
PN.  Paris,  Bibliotheque  Nationale. 
RB.  Rome,  Biblioteca  Barberini. 
S.  Miinster  in  Westphalia,  Santini's    col- 
lection. 
Sch.  Schwerin,  Grand-Ducal  Library. 

V.  Venice,  Biblioteca  Marciana. 

Vat.  Rome,  Vatican  Library. 

W.  Vienna,  Imperial  Library. 

WM.    Vienna,    Gesellschaft    der    Musik- 
freunde. 


L  Operas. 
IL  Oratorios. 

III.  Serenatas  and  Cantatas  for  Festivals. 

IV.  Madrigals. 

V.  Chamber-Cantatas  for  Two  Voices. 
VI.  Chamber-Cantatas  for  One  Voice. 
VII.  Masses. 
VIII.  Motets. 
IX.  Instrumental  Music. 
X.  Theoretical  Works,  &c. 

^  This  catalogue  does  not  include  modern  printed  editions,  or  MS.  arias  from  un- 
identified operas. 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS 


207 


I.  OPERAS 


L'Aldimiro  ovvero  Favore  per 
Favore. 
Libretto:  BL.  (Gubbio,  1687), 
BC.  (Rome,  1688).  Fragments  : 
BM.  Produced  previously  at 
Naples. 

L'Amazone  Corsara  (in  the  scores, 
Guerriera). 
Score  :  MC.  M.  Cec.    Libretto  : 
N.  (Naples,  Royal  Palace,  1689). 

L'Amor  Generoso. 

Score :  BM.  Libretto :  A^. 
(Naples,  Royal  Palace  and 
Teatro  S.  Bartolomeo,  i 
October  1714)- 

Amor  non  vuol  Inganni.     See  Gli 
Equivoci  nel  Sembiante. 

L'Amor  Volubile  e  Tiranno. 

Score:  BC.  D.  Libretto:  BL. 
N. (Naples,  S. Bartolomeo,  1 709.) 

L'Anacreonte  Tiranno. 

Score:  S.  Libretto:  N'. (Naples, 
1689),  BC.  (Pratolino  1698). 

L'Analinda.      See    Le    Nozze    con 
r  Inimico. 

L'Ariovisto. 

Fragments:  5.  (about  1700?) 

Arminio. 

Libretto:  N.  BL.  (Naples,  S. 
Bartolomeo,  1 9  November  17 14). 
BC.  BL.  (Rome,  Sala  Capra- 
nica,  1722). 

La  Caduta  dei  Decemviri. 

Score  :  BF.  BM.  N.  Libretto  : 
BC.  N.  (Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo, 
1697).     Fragments:  D. 

Cambise. 

Score:  N.  ("Opera  11 1"). 
Libretto  :  N.  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 
lomeo, 4  February  17 19). 

Carlo  Re  d'Allemagna. 

Libretto',:  BL.  N.  (Naples,  S. 
Bartolomeo,  Carnival  17 18). 
Fragments :  BC.  D. 


II  Ciro. 

Score  :  BC.  (autograph,  October 
171 1).  Libretto:  BL.  (Rome, 
17 12).     Fragments:  5.  N. 

Clearco  in  Negroponte. 

Score  :  Mod.  Libretto :  BC. 
Mod.  N.  (Naples,  Royal  Palace, 
21  December  1686). 

11  Consiglio  dell'  Ombra.  See 
L'  Emireno. 

Dafni  e  Galatea. 

Fragments :  D.  PC.  (Naples, 
1700). 

Dal  Male  il  Bene. 

Score :  B.  MC.  (partly  auto- 
graph). Libretto:  BC.  (Naples, 
Royal  Palace,  1687).  Frag- 
ments :  BM. 

La  Dama  Spagnuola  ed  il  Cavalier 
Romano.  See  Scipione  nelle 
Spagne. 

La  Didone  Delirante. 

Fragments:  N.  (Naples,  1695 
or  1696  ?). 

La  Donna  ancora  e  fedele. 

Libretto  :  BC.  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 
lomeo, 1698).  Fragments:  D. 
Sch. 

L'  Emireno     ovvero     II    Consiglio 
dell'  Ombra. 
Libretto  :    BC.  (Naples,  S.  Bar- 
tolomeo,    1697).       Fragments  : 
D. 

L'  Equal  Impegno  d'Amore.  See  II 
Tigrane. 

Gli  Equivoci  in  Amore  ovvero  La 
Rosaura. 
Score  :  BM.  (two  copies,  repre- 
senting two  different  perform- 
ances). Libretto  :  BC.  (Rome, 
at  the  French  Embassy,  1690), 
A^^.  (Naples,  Royal  Palace, 
1690).  Fragments:  F.  N.  PC. 
RB.  S. 


2o8 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Gli  Equivoci  nel  Sembiante  ovvero 
L'  Errore  Innocente. 
Score:  BC.  BL.  Mod.  V. 
Libretto:  BL.  (Rome,  1679; 
Bologna,  1679  ;  Ravenna,  1635), 
BC.  (Monte  Filottramo,  1680), 
Mod.  (Rome,  1679).  Frag- 
ments :  TI'. 

L'  Eraclea. 

Libretto:  A^.  (Naples,  1700), 
BC.  BL.  (Parma  1700).  Frag- 
ments :  BF.  D.  LB.  N.  PC. 

L'  Errore  Innocente.    See  Gli  Equi- 
voci nel  Sembiante. 

II  Figlio  delle  Selve. 

Score  :  PC  Libretto :  BC. 
(Rome,  1687). 

Flavio. 

Libretto:  BL.  N.  (Naples,  S. 
Bartolomeo,  6  November  1688). 

II  Flavio  Cuniberto. 

Score :  Chr.  Libretto :  BC. 
(Rome,  Teatro  Capranica, 
1698),  N.  (Rome,  n.d.),  FN. 
(Pratolino  1702).  Fragments: 
S.  (Pratolino,  1702.  These  16 
airs  are  not  in  the  Chr.  MS.) 
AdemoUo  mentions  a  perform- 
ance at  Rome  (Teatro  Tordi- 
nona)  in  1695. 

Gerone  Tiranno  di  Siracusa. 

Score  :  Chr.  (composed  1692). 
Fragments :  A''.  It  was  per- 
formed at  Rome  in  1694,  and 
probably  produced  at  Naples 
earlier. 

II  Gran  Tamerlano. 

Libretto  :  FN.  (Pratolino,  1706). 

La  Griselda. 

Score:  B.  BC.  M.  S.  ("Opera 
114").  Libretto:  BL.  (Rome, 
T.  Capranica,  Carnival  1721). 
Fragments  :  BM.  (Acts  I.  and 
III.  autograph),  PC. 

L'  Honesta  negli  Amori. 

Score:    Mod.      Libretto:    BL. 


BC.  (Rome,  6  February  1680). 
Fragments :   Cas.  PC. 

L'  Humanitk  nelle  Fere  ovvero  II 
Lucullo. 
Libretto  :  BL.  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 
lomeo, 1708).  Probably  pro- 
duced before  elsewhere,  since 
the  libretto  mentions  additions 
by  Vignola. 

L'  Infedelta  Fedele.     See  La  Ros- 
mene. 

Gli  Inganni  Felici. 

Libretto  :  BC.  N.  (Naples,  Royal 
Palace  and  S.  Bartolomeo,  1699). 
Fragments :  D. 

Laodicea  e  Berenice. 

Score  :  PN.  Libretto  :  Mod. 
N.  (Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo, 
1 701).  Fragments:  BM.  BF. 
N.  PC. 

Lucio  Manlio  1'  Imperioso. 

Libretto  :  FN.  (Pratolino,  1705). 

Marco  Attilio  Regolo. 

Score  :  BM.  (autograph).  Lib- 
retto :  BL.  BC.  N.  (Rome, 
T.  Capranica,  Carnival  17 19). 
Fragments:  BC.  BM.  (with 
title  "  Annibale  ")  PC. 

Massimo  Puppieno. 

Score:  MC.  Libretto:  A^. 
(Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,  26 
December  1695). 

II  Mitridate  Eupatore. 

Score:  B.  PC.  Libretto:  BL. 
V.  (Venice,  Teatro  S.  Giovanni 
Crisostomo,  1707). 

Le    Nozze    con    1'  Inimico    ovvero 
I'Analinda. 
Score:     PN.       Libretto:     BC. 
(Naples,  S.   Bartolomeo,   1695). 
Fragments  :  BM.  D. 

Odoardo. 

Libretto  :  BC.  (Naples,  S.  Bar- 
tolomeo, 1700).  Fragments:  D. 
N.PC. 


CATALOGUE   OF   EXTANT  WORKS 


209 


L'  Olimpia  Vendicata. 

Score :  London,  in  possession 
of  F.  G.  Edwards,  Esq.  Lib- 
retto :  BC.  N.  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 
lomeo,  1686).  Fragments  :  BM. 
N.  PC. 

II  Pastor  di  Corinto. 

Score :  BF.  Libretto :  BC. 
(Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,  1701). 
Fragments  :  D.  PC. 

II  Pirro  e  Demetrio. 

Score:  BF.  N.  Libretto:  A^. 
(Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,  1694), 
5C.  (Rome,  1696).  Fragments: 
BM.  Performed  in  London  14 
December  1700  in  an  English 
adaptation  by  Swiny  and  Haym. 

II  Pompeo. 

Score:  BF.  Libretto:  BC. 
(Rome,  Teatro  Colonna,  1683; 
Naples,  Royal  Palace  and  S. 
Bartolomeo,  1684),  A^.  BL. 
(Leghorn,  1688).  Fragments: 
Bod.  PC.  S.  V. 

II  Prigioniero  Fortunate. 

Score  :  BM.  N.  Libretto  :  BL. 
BC.  (Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,  14 
December  1698).  Fragments  : 
D.  PC.  S.  PN. 

La  Principessa  Fedele. 

Score  :  BF.  Libretto  :  BL.  N. 
(Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,  Carni- 
val 1 710).  Fragments  :  S. 
(partly  autograph). 

La  Rosaura.     See  Gli  Equivoci  in 
Amore. 

La    Rosmene    ovvero    L'  Infedelta 
Fedele. 
Score  :     S.         Libretto  :     BC. 
(Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,   1688). 
Fragments  :  BM.  F. 

Scipione  nelle  Spagne. 

Score:  BM.  BF.  Libretto: 
A''.  (Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo,  21 
January  17 14).  Fragments  : 
MC.     The  comic   scenes  were 


revived  at  Bologna  in  1730  with 
the  title  "  La  Dama  Spagnuola 
ed  il  Cavalier  Romano." 

La  Statira. 

Score:  BM.  BC.  D.  M.  Lib- 
retto :  BC.  (Rome,  Teatro  Tor- 
dinona,  1690).  Fragments:  A^. 
5. 

Telemaco. 

Score  :  PC.  S.  W.  (autograph). 
Libretto:  BL.  BC.  (Rome,  T. 
Capranica,  17 18;  "Opera  109"). 
Fragments  :  F. 

La  Teodora  Augusta. 

Score  :  Chr.  F.  Libretto  :  BC. 
(Rome,  T.  Capranica,  1693). 

Teodosio. 

Libretto  :  N.  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 
lomeo, 1709).  The  libretto  does 
not  mention  Scarlatti,  but  the 
GazzeUa  di  Napoli  names  him 
as  the  composer. 

II  Tigrane  ovvero  L'  Equal  Impegno 
d'Amore. 
Score  :  F.  N.  LB.  Libretto  : 
BL.  N.  (Naples,  S.  Bartolomeo, 
Carnival  1715;  "Opera  106"). 
Fragments  :  S. 

Tiberio  Imperatore  d'  Oriente. 

Fragments :  N.  PC.  (Naples, 
Royal  Palace,  8  May  1702). 

Tito  Sempronio  Gracco. 

Libretto  :  A^'.  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 
lomeo, 1702,  and  Rome,  T. 
Capranica,  1720),  BL.  BC. 
(Rome,  1720).  Fragments:  D. 
N.  (Naples,  1702),  PC.  S. 
(Rome,  1720). 

II  Trionfo  dell'  Onore. 

Score:  BM.  ("Opera  no"). 
Libretto :  N.  (Naples,  T.  dei 
Fiorentini,  17 18). 

II  Trionfo  della  Liberta. 

Libretto:  BL.  N.  V.  (Venice, 
S.  Giovanni  Crisostomo,  1707). 
Fragments  :  BF. 

O 


2IO 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Turno  Aricino. 

Libretto:  FiV.  (Pratolino,  1704), 
BC.  BL.  (Rome,  T.  Capranica, 
1720).  Fragments  :  PC.  S.  B. 
(Rome,  172c).  It  is  possible 
that  the  setting  produced  at 
PratoUno  in  1704  was  not  Scar- 
latti's. 


La  Virtu  negli  Amori. 

Libretto:    BL.  [Rome,   18   No- 
vember 1 721). 

La   Virtii  Trionfante  dell'  Odio   e 
deir  Amore. 
Libretto:  BC.  N.  (Naples,  Royal 
Palace,  3  May,  1716). 


Operas  Written  in  Collaboration 


La  Santa  Genuinda. 

Score  :  BM.  M.  PC.  Libretto  : 
BC.  M.  (Rome,  1694).  Act  L 
by  Giovanni  del  Violone,  Act 
IL  by  A.  Scarlatti,  Act  IIL  by 
C.  F.  Pollarolo. 


Giunio  Bruto  ovvero  la  Caduta  dei 
Tarquinij. 
Score :  W.  Act  L  by  Carlo 
Cesar ini.  Act  IL  by  Antonio 
Caldara,  Act  III.  by  A.  Scar- 
latti. 


Additions  to  Operas  by  Other  Composers 


Odoacre  (Legrenzi). 

Libretto  :  A^  (Naples,  S.  Barto- 

lomeo,  1694). 
La  Pastorella  (Act  I.  by  Cesarini, 
Act  II.  by  Giannino,  Act  III. 
by  Bononcini). 

Fragments  :  BM.     Represented 

by  marionettes  in  the  palace  of 

the    Venetian    ambassador    at 

Rome  in  1705. 
II  Porsenna  (Lotti). 

Fragments  :  MC.     Performed  at 

Naples  in  17 13. 

Aiace,  Cornodo  Antonino,  Etio, 


MttzioScevola, and  Penelope  la  Casta 
were  ascribed  by  Florimo  and  others 
to  A.  Scarlatti  without  any  apparent 
documentary  evidence.  The  libretti 
are  without  any  composer's  name, 
and  no  scores  or  fragments  by  Scar- 
latti are  known. 

II  Medo  and  Rodrigo  (scores  in 
PC.)  have  been  ascribed  to  A.  Scar- 
latti by  modern  hands.  //  Medo 
is  certainly  by  a  much  later  com- 
poser, and  Rodrigo  is  identical  with 
an  opera  by  Stradella  {Mod.\ 
called  by  Catelani  //  Florid oro. 


II.  ORATORIOS 


Agar  et  Ismaele  Esiliati.  Rome, 
1683.     W. 

La  SS"""  Annuntiata  (about  17 10?). 
BF. 

L'Assunzione  della  Beatissima  Ver- 
gine  (about  1705  ?).  S.  W.  See 
La  Sposa  dei  Sacri  Cantici. 

S.  Casimiro  Re  di  Polonia  (Vienna, 
1 7 13,  probably  not  first  per- 
formance).    W. 


La  Concettione  della  B.V.    (Rome, 
1703,    according    to    Florimo). 


PN. 


See 


La  Conversione  di  Maddalena. 
II  Trionfo  della  Gratia. 

Davidis  Pugna  et  Victoria  (Rome, 
1700).     Libretto  :  BL. 

San  Filippo  Neri  (FoUgno,  14  May, 
1 7 13,  probably  not  first  perfor- 
mance).   BF.  S.    Libretto  :  BL. 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS 


21  I 


La  Giuditta  (about  1690?).     A''. 

II  Martirio  di  S.  Teodosia  (Modena, 
1685).  PN.BF.Mod.W.  Lib- 
retto :  BL.  Mod.  Fragments : 
Cor. 

Cantata  per  la  Notte  di  Natale 
(Rome,  Palazzo  Apostolico, 
1705).     S. 

Pastorale  per  la  Nativita  del  Bam- 
bino Giesu  (Rome,  1705?).     S. 

Passio  secundum  Johannem  (about 
1680?).    A^. 

La  Passione  di  N.  S.  G.  C.  (Rome, 
1708).     Cas.'^     Libretto:  BL. 

II  Sedecia  Re  di  Gerusalemme 
(1706).  BC.  Cas.  D.  M.  W. 
Fragments  :  S. 

La  Sposa  dei  Sacri  Cantici  (Naples, 
1 7 10,    according    to    Florimo). 


PC.  A  slightly  different  version 
of  L'Assunzione. 

La  SS'"^Trinitk  (17 15).  A^.  (auto- 
graph). 

II  Trionfo  della  Gratia  ovvero  la 
Conversione  di  Maddalena. 
(Rome,  1685;  Modena,  1686; 
Mantua,  1695;  Bologna,  1696, 
1699,  1704;  Vienna,  1701, 
1707).  D.  Mod.  (partly  auto- 
graph). Libretto:  BC.  Mod. 
Fragments  :  Cor. 

[La  Vergine  Addolorata]  (1717). 
BC.  Fragments :  Westminster^ 
Chapter  Library.  So  called  by 
M.  Gevaert :  neither  score  has 
a  title. 

La  SS""'  Vergine  del  Rosario 
(about  T  705  ?)     5. 


Of  /  Dolori  di  Maria  Sempre  Vergine  (Rome,  1693),  //  Martirio  di 
S.  Cecilia  (Rome,  1709),  and  //  Sagrificio  d'Abramo  (Rome,  1703), 
ascribed  to  A.  Scarlatti  by  Fetis,  Florimo,  and  others,  I  have  found 
no  trace. 

AdemoUo  mentions  an  Oratorio  per  la  Notte  di  Natale  (Rome,  1695), 
and  Croce  an  Oratorio  for  St.  Joseph's  Day,  II  Trionfo  del  Valore 
(Naples,  1709),  but  I  have  found  neither  libretto  nor  music. 


III.  SERENATAS  AND  CANTATAS  FOR  FESTIVALS,  &C.2 


Achille  e  Deidamia  (very  early,  and 

probably  not  Scarlatti).     A'^. 
Diana  ed  Endimione  (about  1680- 

1685?).     MC. 
II  Genio  di  Partenope,  la  Gloria  del 

Sebeto,  il  Piacere  di  Mergellina 

(Naples,  1696).     MC. 
Venere,   Adone   ed    Amore — "Per 

Vapertura  di  Posilipo  "  (Naples, 

1696).     MC.  Chr. 


Venere   ed    Amore  (Naples,  about 

1695-1700?).     BF. 
Clori,    Lidia,    Filli   (about    1700?). 

BC. 
Clori,    Dorino,    Amore    ("  Cantata 

a  Napoli  alia  presenza  diFilippo 

V.  Re  delle  Spagne"  probably 

1702).     B.  S. 
II  Giardino  di  Amore  (about  1700- 

1705?).     B.S. 


1  According  to  the  catalogue  ;  but  the  MS.  is  not  to  be  found.  The  Royal  Library 
at  Dresden  possesses  the  score  of  an  oratorio  attributed  to  Scarlatti,  which  corresponds 
partly  with  the  libretto,  but  it  is  probably  a  rearrangement  of  Scarlatti's  original  by  a 
later  composer,  probably  Hasse. 

2  These  compositions  scarcely  ever  have  definite  titles  ;  I  have  therefore  given  them 
the  names  of  their  characters,  and  arranged  them  (as  far  as  was  possible)  in  chronological 
order. 


212 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Endimione  e  Cintia  (Rome,  1705). 
B.S. 

Amore  e  Virtu  ossia  il  Trionfo 
della  A^irtu  ("  scritta  per  il  Prin- 
cipe Ruspoli,"  Rome,  1706). 
B.S. 

Clori  e  Zeffiro  (1706).     B.  S. 

Fileno,  Niso,  Doralbo  (Rome, 
1706).     S. 

Le  Muse  Urania  e  Clio  lodano  le 
bellezze  di  Filli  (1706).     S. 

Venere,  Adone  e  Amore  (Rome, 
1706).     S. 

Venere  avendo  perduto  Amore  lo 
ritrova    fra    le    Ninfe    e    Pastori 


dei  Sette  Colli  (Rome,  1706). 
B.  S. 

Pace,  Amor,  Providenza  (Naples, 
probably  17 14).     B. 

Primavera,  Estate,  Autunno,  Inverno 
e  Giove  (Naples,  17 16,  for  the 
birth  of  the  Archduke  Leopold). 
BM.  M.  N. 

Filli,  Clori,  e  Tirsi  (Naples,  17 18?). 
B.  S. 

Erminia,  Tancredi,  Polidoro,  e 
Pastore  {^'■Per  I'  ecc'""  Sig''  Prin- 
cipe di  Stigliano  in  occasione  de^ 
suoi  Spojisali,"  Naples,  1723). 
MC.  N.  LC. 


IV.  MADRIGALS 


Arsi  un  tempoe  rardore(SS.A.T.B.). 

WM. 
Cor  mio  deh  non  languire  (SSSS.  A.). 

B.  BL.    BM.     (Add.    141 66) 

C.  M.  N.  S.  Also  printed  in  Mar- 
tini's Saggio  di  Contrappunto. 

Intenerite        voi        lacrime       mie 
(S.A.TT.B).  BM.(Add.  31412). 


Mori  midici  (SS.A.T.B.).     N. 

O  morte  agli  altri  fosca,  a  me  serena 

(SS.A.T.B.).    WM. 
O  selce  o  tigre  o  ninfa  (SS.A.T.B.). 

BM.  (Add.  31412). 
Orchedatemiobene(S.A.T.B.).  N. 
Sdegno        la        fiamma        estinse 

(SS.A.T.B.).  SM.(Add.  31412). 


V.  CHAMBER-CANTATAS  FOR  TWO  VOICES 

{^Accompanied  by  Continuo  alone  unless  additional  instruments  are 

mentioned^ 

The  asterisk  (")  denotes  a  work  of  which  the  authorship  is  doubtful. 


A^^^battaglia,   pensieri,   a   battaglia 

(S.A.,  trumpet,  2  violins,  1699). 

WM. 
Ahi  che  sark  di  me  (Floro  e  Tirsi) 

(SS.,  2  Sept.,  1707).     C.iV.  5. 
Amica,  hor  che  Aprile  (Filli  e  Clori) 

(SS.,    2    violins).      Bod.    BM. 

(Add.  31488,  31506)  5.  WM. 
Bel  Dorino — amata  Clori  (Clori  e 

Dorino)  (S.B.,  2  violins).    Sch. 
Che  pill  farai  arciero  amor  (Clori  e 

Dorino  (S.B.).     Sch. 
Cleopatra  mia  Reina(Marc'antonio 

e  Cleopatra  (S.A.).     S. 


Clori  mia — Dorino   caro  (Clori  e 

Dorino)  (S.B.).     Sch. 
Crudel  perche  privarmi  (SS.).     F. 
(  Di  quel  seno  al  bel  candore  ) 

\  Di  quegli  occhi  al  dolce  foco       ) 
(S.A.).     WM. 
*Dimmi    crudel    e    quando    (S.A.). 
BL. 
Disperate  pupille  hor  si    piangete 

(S.B.).     Sch. 
Dove  fuggi  o  bella  Clori  (Clori  e 

Lidio)  (S.A.).     iV. 
Another  setting  (S.A.,  2   violins). 
S. 


CATALOGUE    OF   EXTANT    WORKS 


213 


*Due  cori   a  me  fan   guerra    (SS.; 

perhaps  by  Lotti).  A'^.  Pal. 
E  pur  vuole  il  cielo  (S.A.,  1706?). 

BL.  BM.  (Add.  31491).   C.  S. 
II  ciel  seren,  le  fresche  aurette  (La 

Primavera,  Clori  e  Lisa)  (SS.). 

5. 
Lasciami  sospirar,  io  voglio  piangere 

(Dorindo  e  Fileno)  (S.B.).   PC. 
Lisa,   del  foco   mio  (Clori  e   Lisa 

(SS.,  28  Feb.  1706). C.A\ PCS. 
Mentre  sul  carro  aurato   (Clori  e 

Mirtillo).     PC.  S. 
*No  che  lungi  da  quel  volto  (SA.; 

perhaps  by  Lotti).  A^.  Pal. 
No,  non  ti  vogho  no  (S.A.).  S. 
O  come   bello    con   onde    chiare 

(Tirsi  e  Clori)  (SS.).     5. 


Openosa  lontananza — o  felice  lon- 
tananza  (S.B.).     S.  Sch.  W. 

Ombre  romite  e  solitarie  piante 
(S.A.).     M. 

Or  per  pieta  del  mio  crudel 
destino  (S.A.).  B.  (incom- 
plete ?). 

Perche    sospiri  o  Niso  (Doralba   e 
Niso)  (S.A.).     D. 
*Quando  un  Eroe  che  s'ama  (S.A.). 
BL. 

Questo  silenzio  ombroso  (S.A.,  17 
Sept.     1707).      BM.       (Add. 
14166,  31412).  C.  N.  PC.  S. 
*Son  pur  care  le  catene  (S.A.).    BL. 
*Tirsi  che  fa  il  tuo  core  (SS.;  per- 
haps by  Lotti).     A^.  Pal. 

Viva,  viva  mia  liberta  (SS.).     PC. 


VL  CHAMBER  CANTATAS  FOR  ONE  VOICE 

(i)  Accompanied  by  Continuo  with  other    Instruments 


Air  hor  che  stanco  il  sole  (S.,    2 

violins).     PC. 
Alma   tu    che    dal    Cielo    (S.,    2 

violins,   12  Sept.  1709,  sacred). 

BM.  (Add.  34056). 
Amanti   anch'    io   son    preso  (S., 

violin  solo).     S. 
Appena    chiudo    gli     occhi     (S., 

violin).     A^.  PC. 
Appena    giunse    al   forte    campo. 

(Oloferne)  (B.,  2  violins).  BM. 

(Add.  14166,  incomplete). 
Ardo,  e  ver,  per  te  d'amore  (S., 

flute).     N.  (incomplete). 
^Augellin  sospendi  i  vanni     (S.,  2 

violins).     B.  (autograph). 
Augellin    vago    e    canoro    (S.,   2 

flutes,  26  June  1699).     S- 
Ben  mio,  quel  verme  alato  (S.,  2 

violins).     BM.  (Add.  31506). 
Clori  mia,  Clori  bella  (S.,  flute,  18 

June  1699).     5. 

^  See  under  Cantatas 


Correa  nel    seno    amato    (S.,     2 

violins).    BM.    (Add.    31506) 

A^.  Pal. 
Da  dupplicati  oggetti  (S.,  2  violins, 

viola).     A^. 
Dair  oscura  magion  dell'  arsa  Dite 

(L'  Orfeo)  (S.,  2  violins).  PC.  S. 
Dove fuggo, ache penso?  (S., violin 

solo.^)     A^.  PC.  S. 
E   con  qual  core,   oh   Dio  (S.,    2 

violins).     5. 
Ebra   d'amor   fuggia   (L'Arianna) 

(S.,  2  violins).     A^.  PC. 
Era  r  oscura  notte  (S.,  2  violins). 

5. 
Ferma  omai  fugace  e  bella  (A.,  2 

violins  and  viola,  Dec.  1724). 

Rome,     Comm.     Carlo     Lozzi 

(autograph). 
Fida     compagna     del    tuo     alato 

amante    (S.,  2  violins).    B.  N , 

PC. 

with  continuo  alone. 


214 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Fileno,  oh  Dio  !  Fileno,  di  quest' 

anima  amante  (S.,    2   violins). 

BF. 
Fileno,  quel  Fileno,  tutto  fe  (S.,  2 

violins).     5. 
Filli  che  fra  gl'orrori  (S.,  2  violins, 

1706).     5. 
Filli,  tu  sai  s'io  t'amo  (S.,  2  flutes, 

April  1 701).     S. 
Hor   che   di    Febo   ascosi    (S.,    2 

violins,  1704).     N.  Dar.  S. 
Imagini  d' orrore  (B.,  2  violins,  16 

July  1 7 10).     PC.  (autograph). 
Lagrime  dolorose  dagli  occhi  miei. 

(T.,  2  violins).     PC. 
*Mentre    Clori   la   bella  presso   un 

ruscel  sedea  (S.,  2  violins).  5. 
Mentre  Clori  la  bella  sotto  1'  ombra 

d'un  mirto  (S.,    2   flutes).     5. 

WM. 
Mentre  un   Zeffiro  arguto    (S.,    2 

violins).     5.    The  same  for  B. 

with  a  different  Sinfonia.  Sch. 
Mi  contento  cosi(T.,  2  violins).  PC. 
Mia  Dorinda,  mia  vita    (S.,  violin, 

1706).     S. 
Mirtillo  anima  mia,  gia  che  parti. 

(S.,  2  violins).     5. 
Nel     silentio     commune     (S.,     2 

violins,     viola).     BM.     (Add. 

14163). 
Nella     stagione    appunto     (S.,    2 

violins).     5. 
Nella    tomba   di     Gnido     (S.,    2 

violins).     S. 
Notte  ch'  in  carro  d'  ombre  (S.,  2 

violins).     5.  W. 
Oh    di    Betlemme    altera     (S.,  2 

violins,    viola,    sacred).      BM. 

(Add.  14165). 
Per     I'ondoso     sentiero     (S.,      2 

violins).     PC. 
Perche,     perche     tacete     regolati 

concenti  (A.,  2  violins).     5. 
Perde  al  vostro  confronto     (S.,  2 

violins).     5. 


Piangete    o    mie    pupille     (S.,    2 

violins).     PC. 
Piango,    sospiro   e   peno     (A.,     2 

violins).    BM.  (Add.  31506). 
Prima    d'esservi    infedele    (S.,    2 

violins).     MC. 
Qual'  ora  io  veggo  la  vezzosa  Irene 

(S.,  2  violins).     N.  PC. 
Quella    pace    gradita     (S.,    flute, 

violin,  violoncello).     5.   (auto- 
graph). 
Siete  uniti  a  tormentarmi  (A.,   2 

violins).     D. 
Silentio,     aure     volanti      (S.,     2 

violins).     Bod.  S. 
Solitudini    amene,    apriche    coUi- 

nette  (S.,  flute).     D. 
Sotto  r  ombra  d'un  faggio  (B.,   2 

vioHns).     N.  PC. 
Sotto  r  ombra  d'un  faggio    (S.,   2 

violins.     MC.    PC.    LA.    (in- 
complete). 
Sovra  carro  stellato    (S.,  2  violins). 

A'^.  (incomplete). 
Sul    margine    d'  un     rivo    (S.,     2 

violins).     PC.  S. 
Sulla  sponda  del  mare  (L'  Olimpia) 

(S.,  2  violins,  viola).     W. 
Sull'ora    appunto    che    col    carro 

d'  oro     (La     Fenice)     (S.,     2 

violins).     Dar.  S. 
Sulle     sponde     del     Tebro     (S., 

trumpet,     2     violins).       BM. 

(Add.  31487)  5.  WM. 
Tiranna    ingrata,    che    far    dovro 

(B.,  2  violins).     A''. 
Tirsi     pastore     amante      (S.,      2 

violins).     PC.  S. 
Tra  speranza  e  timore  (B.,  violin) 

BM.  (Add.  14166). 
Tu  che  una  dea  rassembri  (S.,   2 

violins).     S. 
Tu  resti,  o  mio  bel  nume  (B.,  2 

violins).     A^. 
Tu  sei  quella  che  al  nome  (A.,  flute, 

2  violins).     MC.  (incomplete). 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS    215 


(2)  Accompanied  by  Continuo  alone 
[All for  Soprano  unless  another  voice  is  mentioned. 


*A    chi    t'inganna,    bella    tiranna. 

Mil.  N.  PC. 
A  pie  d'  un  verde  colle.     BF.  LC. 

N.S. 
*A  placar  la  mia  bella.     BF. 
A  privarmi  del  bel.     LC.  Mil.  S. 
A  soffrire  impara  o  core.     S. 
A  te  Lisa  gentile  (alto).     BC. 
A    voi    che    I'accendeste.     D.  N. 

(incomplete)  S. 
Abbandonar  Fileno   dovea,     RB. 

(alto)  S. 
Abbandonato  e  solo  (II  Nerone). 

BC.  M.  S. 
Ad  altro  uso  serbate.     A'^. 
Agitato  mio  core  (1704).     Pal.  S. 
Agitato  sen   cade  (La  Sofonisba). 

Mod.  S. 
x\gli  strali  d'  amore.     BF. 
Ah  ben  1  )  vedi  o  core.     A^.  5. 
Ah  che  pur  troppo  e  vero.     Mil. 
Ah  fuggi,  si,  mio  core.     BF.  S. 
Ah,     Mitilde     vezzosa     (29    July 

1712).     LC.  S. 
Al   fin    m' ucciderete   (1718).     B. 

BM.     (Add.     14165,     31508) 

D.  LA.  M.  Mil.  N.  PC.  S.  W. 
Al  fine  o  Clori  amata.     Pal.  S. 
*A1  mormorio  d'  un  vago  ruscelletto. 

N. 
Al  mormorio  dell'  onda.     C.  S. 
Al    pensiero    miei    sguardi   (July 

1706).     5. 
Al  voler  del   bene   amato.     BM. 

(Add.  14164)  Pal.  PC. 
Alba  che  neghittosa.     BM.  (Add. 

14165)  5. 
All'hor  che  il    Dio  di   Delo    (La 

Gelosia).  BM.  (Add.  14 165)  5. 
Air  hor  che  il  fier  leone.     PC. 
Alle  Trojane  antenne  (La  Didone). 

S. 


Alme    voi    che    provaste.      BM. 

(Add.  14215,  3i5o9)iV.PC.S. 
*Amai  dolce  mia  vita.     S.  W. 
Amanti  sospirate,  Amore  e  morto. 

N. 
Amici,    s'  e    vinto.      BM.    (Add. 

34056)- 
Ammore  brutto  figlio  de  Pottana 

(in  Neapolitan  dialect).     S. 
Amo    e    negar    nol    posso    (Dec. 

1704).     5. 
Amo,  ma  r  idol  mio  (9  June,  1702). 

BM.  (Add.  14227)  PC.  (alto) 

5.  (alto,  autograph). 
Amo,  peno  e  languisco.     RB. 
Amo,  peno,  gioisco.      N.  Pal.  S. 

Sell.  W. 
Amor,  che  fia  di  noi.     PC. 
Amor    con    I'idol    mio    (3    April 

1702).     PCS. 
Amor,    Mitilde    e    morta.       BM. 

(Add.  142 1 2)  A^.  PC.  S. 
Amor,  t'intendo,  si  (170 1).     A'^. 
Amor,    tu    che    si    bella   fiamma 

accendesti.     PC. 
Amore,    o    mi    togli    le    fiamme. 

BM.  (Add.  14228). 
Andate   o  miei  sospiri  (G  minor, 

10  March,  1712).     BM.  (Add. 

i422o)L^.LC.  A^.  S. 
MSS.  without  the  additional  air  in 

V  time.     BM.  (Add.  31509) 

Mil.  PC.    Rome,  Conim.  Carlo 

Lozzi  (autograph  fragment). 
Andate   o    miei   sospiri   (F   sharp 

minor).  BF.    BM.    (Add. 

14220)  LA.  LC.  Mil.  N.  PC. 

Rome,     Comni.     Carlo    Lozzi 

(autograph). 
The  same  cantata  set  by  Gasparini. 

BM.  (Add.    14220)  LA.  LC. 

N.S. 


2l6 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Api  industri  che  volate.    Mil.  PC. 

Sell. 
^  Appena  chiudo  gli  occhi.     N.  PC. 
Ardea  per  Coridone  Clori.     LC. 
Arder  per  due  pupille.     M.  Mil. 

PC.  S. 
Ardo,   ardo   d'amore.     BC.  BM. 

(Add.  141 63)  LA.  Mil.  Sch. 
Ardo  tacito  amante.     PC.  S. 
Arse  felice  un  tempo.     BM.  (Add. 

31512). 
Assiso  in  verde  prato.     S. 
Augelletti  semplicetti.    M.  (incom- 
plete) PC.  (incomplete)  5.  W. 
-  Augellin  sospendi   i   vanni.     BC. 

PCS. 
Augellino   prigioniero,    ferma    oh 

Dio.     5.  W. 
Aure  io  son  di  voi  geloso.     Pal. 
Barbara    e    ingrata    Fille.       Pal. 

Rome,    CoiiDii.     Carlo    Lozzi 

(autograph),  S. 
Bei  prati  freschi  rivi.      BAI.  (Add. 

31512)  LC.  M.  PC.  S. 
Bei  prati  verdi  colli.     5. 
Bella,    dunque    n'andrai.       BM. 

(Add.  31508). 
Bella,    per   te    d'  amore.      A^    N. 

(alto)  Pal.  (alto). 
Bella  quanto  crudel,  spietata  Irene 

(June  17 1 7).     LC.  S. 
Bella  Rosa  adorata  (Sept.    1704). 

5. 
Bella  se  quella  face.     PC. 
*J5elle  pupille  care.     5. 
Ben  che  o  sirena  bella.    BM.  (Add. 

14220)  N.  PC.  S. 
Ben  che  porti  nel  volto.     BF. 
Ben  che  vezzosa  Irene.     N. 
Ben  folle  e  chi  non  parte.     BF. 

Mod. 
Biondi  crini  clie  in  fronte.     5. 
Boschi  amati  che  cingete.     PC. 


Cara  sempre  agli  occhi  miei.     BF. 
BM.  (Add.  141 63). 
*Care  selve  a  voi  ritorno.     LC. 
Care  selve  gradite.     B.  BM.  (Add. 

31509)- 
Caro  Fileno  mio,  quanto  mi  spiace. 

5. 
*Caro  laccio,  dolce  nodo.     B. 
Cerca  nel  cor  di  mille  (10  August 

1706).     BA.  (autograph)  BC 

(alto). 
Cerco,    ne    so   trovar  belta   fedel. 

Pal. 
Ch'  io  da  te  mi  divida.     Pal. 
Che   fai    mio   cor.       BM.    (Add. 

31 5 1 2,  incomplete). 
Che  le  dolcezze  estreme.     LC. 
Che  mai  sara  di  me.     M. 
Che  piu  tardi  o  Ninfa  bella.      PC 
*Che  pretendi  o  tiranna.     5. 
Che  Sisifo  infelice  (25  July  1706). 

S.  (autograph). 
Chi  batte  al  mio  core  ?     PC. 
Chi    m'  insegna    ov'  e   quel   bene. 

5.  W. 
Chi  vedesse  la  ferita.     PN.  S. 
Chi  vidde  mai  o  chi  provo.     S. 
Chiudetevi  per  sempre.     B.  N. 
Chiusa   tra   fosche    bende.     BM. 

(Add.  14164). 
Cinta  dei  pii^i  bei  fiori.     A'^. 
*Cinta  di  rai  splendea.     S. 
Cleopatra     la     bella,     la    ^^enere 

d'  Egitto    (Lamento    di    Cleo- 
patra).    PC. 
Clori  allor  ch'io  ti  vidi  (17  April 

1702).     5.  (autograph). 
Clori,  beir  idol  mio,  Clori  mia  vita. 

PC  S.  W. 
Clori,    Clori   spietata,    mio    crudel 

tesoro.     Mil. 
Clori,  Clori  superba,  e  come  mai. 

A''.  S.      (See  Criida  Lrene  su- 


1  See  under  cantatas  with  contiituo  and  otlier  instruments. 
-  Ibid. 


CATALOGUE    OF    EXTANT    WORKS 


217 


perba,  of  which  this  is  a  differ- 
ent version.) 

Clori,  mi  sento  al  seno.     S. 

Clori,  mia  cara  Clori,  moro.  BM. 
(Add.  31508). 

Clori  vezzosa  e  bella  (alto).  BM. 
(Add.  142 1 2)  F.  LC.  N. 

Clorinda  e  bella.     A'^. 

Colui  che  fisso  mira  (April  1696). 
BM.  (Add.  14163)  5.  (alto). 

Come  il  fuoco  alia  sua  sfera.    Sch. 

Come  potesti  mai.     Chr. 

Come  pub  non  esser  bella  (15  Feb. 
1702).     S.  (autograph). 

Come  vago  augelletto  (1701).     N. 

Come  volubil  gira  la  ruota.  BM. 
(Add.  3 15 12)  PC. 

Con  non  inteso  affanno.     5. 

Con  trasparente  velo  (13  Dec. 
1702).  B.  (autograph)  BM. 
(Add.  14225)  S.  W. 

Cor  di  Bruto  e  che  risolvi.     PC. 

Coronate  il  bel  crine.     PC. 

Cruda  Irene  superba.  Mil.  N. 
PC.  S.  (See  Clori,  Clori  su- 
perba, of  which  this  appears  to 
be  a  corrupt  version.) 

Crudelissimo  amore.  A",  (incom- 
plete). 

Crudo  amor,  che  vuoi  da  me. 
BL. 

D'  un  platano  frondoso.     M. 

Da  che  Tirsi  mirai.     BM.  (Add. 
14220)  Pal. 
*Da  I'arco  d' un    bel  ciglio  (alto). 
Pal. 

Da  qual  parte  celeste  (20  Oct. 
1702).     5.  (autograph). 

Da  quel  di  che  Matilda.     LA. 

Da  quell'hora  fatale  (17 16).  LC. 
N. 

Da  sventura  a  sventura  (1690?). 
BL.  C.  (incomplete)  A^.  PC. 
(incomplete)  W.  (C  has  a 
MS.  of  the  first  air  with  ac- 
companiment for  four  strings.) 


Da  turbini  di  pene.     LC. 
*Da  voi  parto  amati  rai  (bass).     B. 
Dagli    strali   d'  amore   vivea   lieto 

(13  Sept.  1701).     5. 
Dal  bel  volto  d'  Irene.  BM.  (Add. 

14 1 65)  Mil.  N. 
Dal  colle  al  pian  discesa.    BF.  M. 
Dal  crudele  Daliso.     PN. 
Dal  di  che  amor  m'  accese.     A^. 
Dal  di  che  1'  empio  fato.     LC.  N. 
Dal  grato  mormorio.     BM.  (Add. 

31509)- 
Dalla  fida  compagna  abbandonata. 

PC. 
Dalla  speme  deluso.     Mod,  S. 
Dalle    pene    amorose.          Rome, 

Comni.  C.  Lozzi. 
Dalle  Tirrene  sponde  parti  Fille. 

Mil. 
Dammi  amore.     Bod. 
Deh  per  merce.  BM.  (Add.  14164) 

LC.  S. 
Deh  torna  amico  sonno  (22  Sept. 

1 7 16).     A^.  PC.  (autograph?). 
Del  faretrato  nume  Amor  tiranno. 

BF.  Mil.  N.  PC.  (autograph?). 
Del  lacrimoso  lido  (17  June  1699). 

BM.  (Add.  31487)5.  Sch. 
Del  mio  seno  la  costanza.     BM. 

(Add.  14163). 
Del  Tebro  in  su  le  sponde.     Mil. 

N.  PC. 
Del  Tirreno  alle   sponde.      BM. 

(Add.  142 11)  PC.  S.  W. 
Del  Tirreno  sul  lido  (alto).     5. 
Delia   spietata    Irene  fur  1' accese 

pupille.     S. 
Delia  patrie  contrade.     LC. 
Dentro  un  orrido  speco.     W. 
*Di  che  avete  paura  ?     A^. 
Di  cipresso  funesto.     A''.  Pal.  PN. 
Di  colore  de'  cieli.     Pal. 
Di  due  vaghe  pupille  nere.     PC. 
Di  me  che  sara  ?     V. 
Di    pensiero    in    pensier.      BM. 

(Add.  14165). 


2l8 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


Diedi    a    Fileno   il    core   (1705). 

SM.  (Add.  14165)5.  5.  (alto). 
Dimmi  Clori  superba.      M.  Mil. 

PC.  S. 
Dimmi,  mio  ben,  perche.     PN. 
Doppo  lungo  penar  (bass).     BM. 

(Add.  14166). 
Dorisbe  i  miei  lamenti.     PC. 
Dormono  I'aure  estive.  BM.  (Add. 

14165,  31508)  LC.  N.  PC.  S. 

WM. 
Dove  alfin  mi  traeste?  (L'Arianna). 

B.  LC.   N.    Mil.    PC.    (auto- 
graph ?). 
Dov'  e  Filli,  dov'  e  ?     Chr.  Pal. 
Dov'  io    mi   volga   o   vada.      LC. 

Mil. 
Dove    in    grembo.      See    Ove    in 

grembo. 
Dove  r  eneta  Dori  alia  reggia.    A'^. 
Dove  xestu  cor  mio  ?  (in  Venetian 

dialect).     D. 
Due  nemici  tiranni   (1722).     BF. 

N.  PC. 
Dunque    ingrato    spergiuro.       B. 

BM.    (Add.    142 1 2)  Mil.    N. 

PC.  WM. 
Dunque  perche  lontano.     M. 
Dunque  sperar  non  lice.     PC. 
E  come,  oh  Dio,  lontana.     Pal.  S. 
E  come  e  come,  oh  Dio,  tacito.  M. 
E  come  ohime  poss'  io.     N.  PC. 
E'l  gran  pena  1'  amare.     LC. 
E  la  speme  un  desio  tormentoso. 

S. 
E  lungi  dal  mio  bene.     BM.  (Add. 

31512) 
E    penar    deggio    ancora.       BL. 

(alto)  M.  S. 
*E  pur  e  pur  e  vero.     BF.  S. 
E  pur  odo  e  non  moro.     LC.  N. 
E  pur  tenti  il  ritorno.     LC.  MC. 

S.  (versions  vary). 
E  pure  il  gran  tormento.     B.  (alto) 

BM.  (Add.    31508)  LC.  PC. 

(alto)  S.  (alto). 


E  quando  ingrata  Nice.  Mil.  N. 
PC.  W. 

E  quando  io  veggio.  LC.  (incom- 
plete). 

E  quando  mai  cessate.     Pal. 

E  satio  ancor  non  sei.     LC. 

Esia  pur  vero.    BM.  (Add.  14229) 

E  sino  a  quando,  Amor.       LC. 
E  sino  a  quando,  o  stelle.     Pal. 
E  viva  al  diletto   la  mia  rimem- 

branza.     PC. 
Ecco  che  a  voi  ritorno.     B.  BM. 

(Add.     14212,    14225,    14229) 

C.  N.  Mil.  PC. 
Entro  a  piu  foschi  horrori.     PC. 
Entro  romito  speco.     BM.  (Add. 

31509)  LC.     Mil.     N.     PC. 
(partly  autograph). 

Era   gia    I'alba   (Europa    rapita). 

PC. 
Era    giunta    quell'  ora    (29    Nov. 

1704).     5. 
Era  la  notte  e  gia  sorgea  dal  mare. 

N. 
Era     I'oscura     notte.      Florence, 

Comni.  A.  Kraiis.     S. 
Eurilla,  amata  Eurilla.     BC.  BL. 

BM.  (Add.  31518)!).  LC.  PC. 
Eurilla,  io  parto,  addio.     Pal. 
Eurilla,  oh  Dio,  nel  seno  palpita. 

Pal. 
Facile  sembra  a  un  core  I'amar.    5. 
Farfalla  che  s' aggira  (La  Pazzia). 

B.  BC.  BM.  (Add.  3 15 10)  A^. 

Mil.  PC.  S. 
Farfalletta  innocente  se  correndo. 

BM.  (Add.  31510)  5. 
Fatto  d'amor  seguace.    BM.  (Add. 

31510)  PC. 

Fiamma  che  avvampa.    BM.  (Add. 

31509)  Mz7.  iV. 
Fiero  acerbo  destin  dell'  alma  mia. 

N.  PC. 
Fileno,  ove  ten  vai  ?  (1705)     BM. 

(Add.  14165,  31510)  LC.  S. 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS 


219 


1  Filli  adorata,  ah  ben  comprendo. 

BM.  (Add.  3 15 10). 
Filli  adorata  e  cara,  che  fosti  e  sei. 

B.  Silf .  (Add.  14220,  31510) 

LC.  N.  PC.  S. 
Filli  adorata  e  cara,  io  parto.     BM. 

(Add.  31510). 
Filli  altera  e  spietata.    BM.  (Add. 

31510)- 
Fille  che  del  mio  core  (May  1700). 

Filli  crudel,  dunque  tu  parti.    BM. 

(Add.  315 10)  S. 
Filli,  di  questo  cor  parte  piu  cara. 

WM. 
Fille,  dolente  Fille.      BM.  (Add. 

3i5io)iV.  PC. 
Fille,  miacara  Fille (iS  Nov.  1704). 

BM.  (Add.  31510)  LC.  S. 
Filli  mia,  Filli  cara  (15  Jan.  1702). 

BM.  (Add.  31510)5. 
Fille  mia,  perche  piangi.     S. 
*Filli  mia,  tu  mi  consoli.     D. 
Filli,  mio  ben,  mia  vita  (May  1 704). 

BM.  (Add.  31 5 10)  PC. 
Fille,  tu  parti,  oh  Die.     LC.  Mil. 

N.  PC.  S.  W. 
Fiumicel  che  del  mio  pianto.     BM. 

(Add.  315 10). 
Flagellava  nel  Cielo  (II  Narciso). 

PC. 
Fonte  d'  ogni  dolcezza  (12  March 

1709).     BM.  (Add.  3 1 510)  N. 
Fonti   amiche,    erbe   care.      BM. 

(Add.  315 10). 
Forse  di  Sirio  ardente.    BM.  (Add. 

31510)- 

Fra  mille  semplicetti  augei  canori 
(14  August  1 701).  5.  (auto- 
graph). 

Fra  tante  pene  e  tante  (23  June 
1705).  BM.  (Add.  315 10) 
S. 


Frangi  I'arco  e  lo  stral  (27  August 

1706).     BM.  (Add.  31510). 
Fu   d'  oro  il  primo  dardo.     BM. 

(Add.  31510,  31512). 
Gia    di    trionfi    onusto   (II    Ger- 

manico).    BL.  N.  Pal.  PN.  S. 
Gia  per   lunga   stagion   bersaglio. 

BM.  (Add.  31487)5. 
Gia  sorge  I'alba  (Dorisbe  caccia- 

trice).     5.  W. 
Gia  sul  carro  dorato.     M.  PC.  S. 
Gia  vicina  e  quell'  hora  ( 1 5  June 

1699).     BL.  Bod.  Pal.  5.' 
Giacea  d'  un  mirto  all'  ombra.    LC. 
Giacea  presso  alia  sponda,     BM. 

(Add.  14163). 
Giu  di  Vulcan  nella  fucina  eterna 

(1698).     5. 
Giunto  e  il  fatal  moment©  (1705). 

BM.  (Add.  141 65)  5. 
Goderai    sempre    crudele.       BM. 

(Add.  14164)  (incomplete). 
Ha  r  humore  stravagante.     PC. 
Ho   una    pena    intorno   al    core. 

BM.  (Add.  3i5i2)M.  N.  5. 
II  cor  che  vive  oppresso.     Mil.  N. 

PC. 
II   genio   di    Mitilde.      BC.  BM. 

(Add.    14229)    Mil.    N.   PC. 

WM. 
II  mio  sol  non  e  piu  meco.     5. 
II  piu  misero  amante.     N. 
II   rosignuolo    se    scioglie   il   volo 

(alto    in   F   major)    (19    Dec. 

1698).  BL.  (printed  by  Etienne 

Roger,  Amsterdam).    Pal.  (so- 
prano).   5. 
II  rosignuolo    se   scioglie   il   volo 

(alto  in  F  minor)  (26  August 

1700).        BM.    (Add.    141 65) 

5.  W. 
II  timido  mio  core.     B.  Mil.  N. 

PC. 


1  The   name  Phyllis  appears  in  both  forms — Fi//i  and  Fi'/Ze.      I   have  thought  it 
better  to  disregard  the  variation  in  arranging  this  list. 


220 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


In    amorosi    ardori.      BJ\I.    (Add. 

31508). 
In  bel  sonno  profondo.     LC.  N. 
In  che  giammai  t'  offesi.    S.  (auto- 
graph). 
In  due  vaghe  pupille.    BM.  (Add. 

142 1 1). 
In  placida  sembianza.     BF. 
In  solitaria  soglia.     N. 
In  traccia  del  suo  bene.     PC. 
In  vano,  amor  tiranno.     A'^.  S. 
Ingiustissimo    amor.       BF.    BM. 

(Add.  i42i5)LC.  MC. 
lo  ben  so  che  siete  arciere  (1704). 

Mil.  PC.  S. 
lo  che  ad  un  tronco.     BF.  LC. 
PC. 
*Io  che  con  aurea  luce.     BF. 
lo    che   dal  cor   di   Fille.      BM. 
(Add.   14220,   31509;    14213, 
alto).       Mil.    N.    PC.    (also 
alto)  S. 
lo  credei  che  felice.     Mil. 
lo  m'  accendo  a  poco  a  poco.  Pal. 
lo   morirei  contento.     LC.  Mod. 

S.  W. 
lo  non  v'  intendo  o  stelle.     S. 
Id  per  Dori  mi  struggo.     N.  W. 

(both  incomplete). 
lo    son     Neron    1'  imperator    del 

mondo  (1698).     5. 
lo  son  pur  solo.     LC.  Mil.  N. 
*Io  t'  amerb  e  nel  mio  petto.     BF. 
Irene,  idolo  mio.     LC. 
L'  armi  crudeli  e  fiere.    BM.  (Add. 

29249). 
L'  huom  che  segue  una  speranza. 

PC. 
La  belta  ch'  io  sospiro  ( 1 6  August 
1 701).     BM.      (Add.    29249). 
PC.  S.  (autograph). 
La  cagion  delle  mie  pene.     BM. 
(Add.  29249). 
*La  dei  sassi  Latini.     N. 
La   dell'Arno    sull'onda.       BM. 
(Add.  29249). 


La  dove  a  Mergellina  (1725).    BF. 

LC.  Mil.  MC.  N.  S. 
La  dove  al  vivo  argento.     LC. 
La     face     d'  amore      ch'  il      core 

m'arde.     BM.  (Add.  34056). 
La  fortuna  di  Roma  (II  Coriolano). 
BC.BM.  (Add.  29249,  31488) 
PCS. 
La   gran    madre  d'  amore.       PC. 

(autograph  ?) 
La  grazia,  la  sembianza  (22  Feb. 
1702).      BM.      (x\dd.    29249) 
PC.  S. 
La   liberta   perduta    (incomplete). 
BF.  MC.     See  Talor  per  suo 
diletto,  of  which  this  is  a  frag- 
ment. 
La  nel  bel  sen  della  regal  Sirena. 

BF.  BL. 
La  speranza  che  lusinga.     PC. 
La  vezzosa  Celinda.     Mil.  N. 
Langue  Clori  vezzosa.     A^.  5. 
Lascia  di  tormentar  (1709).    BM. 
(Add.      29249,     31507)     LC. 
N. 
Lascia  piu  di  tormentarmi  (1688). 
PC. 
*Lasciami  alquanto  piangere  (May 
1716).     D. 
Lasciate   ch'  io   v'  adori   (October 
1705).       BM.    (Add.    14165, 
29249)  A'^.  S. 
Lasciate  homai  lasciate.     BL.  N. 
Lasciato  havea  1'  adultero  superbo. 

S. 
Le  vaghe  tue  pupille.    BM.  (Add. 

29249,  315 12)  M.  PC.  S. 
Leandro,  anima  mia,  Ero  t'  attende. 
BM.    (Add.    29249)    Pal.   S. 
(alto). 
Liberta  del  mio  cor.     LC. 
Lidia,  in  van  mi  condanni.     BM. 

(Add.  29249). 
Liete     placide     e    belle     (1709). 
BM.   (Add.    29249)    LC.   N. 
S. 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS 


221 


Lieti   boschi,    ombre    amiche  (i8 

x^ugust    1704).      BM.    (Add. 

29249)  5.  (alto). 
Lontan    dalla    sua    Clori.       BM. 

(Add.  31509)  Mil  N. 
Lontan  dall'  idol  mio.    BM.  (Add. 

29249,  Harl.  1273)  Bod.  Chr. 

Pal. 
Lontan  dal  suo  tesor.     Alil. 
Lontan  dal  tuo  bel  viso.     MC. 
Lontananza  che  fai  (27  Nov.  1701). 

BM.      (Add.    29249,    incom- 
plete) 5.  (autograph)  W. 
Lontananza   crudele    deh    perche 

(4  Oct.  1713).     LA. 
Lontananza  crudele  tu  mi  trafiggi. 

A^  Pal. 
Lontananza  non  risana.     Pad. 
Lontananza  tiranna  che  da  te  mi 

divide.     PC. 
Luci  care  al  mondo  sole.     PN.  S. 
Luci  siete  pur  quelle.    BM.  (Add. 

29249). 
Lumi  che  in  fronte  al  mio  bel  sole 

(4   Dec.    1703).      BM.   (Add. 

29249)  M.  MC.   (incomplete) 

Mil.  PC.  S. 
Lumi  dolenti  lumi.    B.  (alto)  BM. 

(Add.  29249)  C.  LC.  Pal. 
Lunga  stagion  dolente  (25  August 

1706).       BM.    (Add.    29249) 

A'^.  5.  (autograph). 
Lungi  dal  ben  ch'adoro.     F. 
Lungi  dair  idol  mio.     B. 
Lungi  dalla  cagion  per  cui  sospiro. 

BM.     (Add.     14165,     29249) 

F.  S. 
M'ha  diviso  il  cor  dal  core.     B. 

BM.  (Add.  34056). 
Mai  fondati  sospetti.     PC. 
Mai   sicuro   e   il    fior   nel    prato. 

BM.  (Add.  34056). 
Mentre  affidan  al  mar  di  Cupido. 

Mod.  S. 
Mentre  al  sonno  chiudea.    S.  W. 
Mentre  da  questo  monte.     S. 


Mentre    Eurillo   fedele    (infelice). 

N.  S. 
*Mentre  in  un  dolce  oblio.     BF. 
Mentre  un  zefifiro  altero.     LC.  N. 

PC. 
Mesto,  lasso  e  ramingo  (June  1 704). 

5. 
Mi  nasce  un  sospetto.     LC.  PC. 
Mi  parto,  Eurilla,  addio  (alto).    B. 

PCS. 
Mi   tormenta    il    pensiero    (alto). 

Pal.  S.  Sch.  (also  for  bass)  W. 
^Another  setting.     S. 
Mia     Chimene     adorata    (1710). 

BM.    (Add.    14225)   LC.   N. 

PC. 
Mie  speranze  fallaci.     S. 
Mira   o    Filli    quella    rosa.       M. 

PCS. 
Mitilde,  alma  mia,  se  udiste  mai 

(3  July  1720).     BF.  LC.  M. 

N.  PC. 
Mitilde,  anima  mia,  dove  sei  ?    M. 
Mitilde,   dove   sei  ?     BC  (incom- 
plete) F. 
Mitilde,  mio  tesoro,  e  dove  sei  ?  5. 
Mitilde,  oh  quanto  dolce  e  lusin- 

ghiero.     5. 
Morirei   disperato.       BM.   (Add. 

14164)  LC.  N.  S. 
*Mostri  deh  non  temete.     S.  W. 
Nei  languidi  respiri.     BM.  (Add. 

14227)  C 
Nei  tuoi  lumi,  o  bella  Clori.    BM. 

(Add.  3 15 1 2)  M.  Mil.  PC.  S. 
Nel  centro  oscuro.     F.  N.  PC 
Nel  dolce  tempo  (27  May  1712  or 

27  Sept.  1 7 16).     LC.  Mil.  N. 

PC. 
Nel  mar  che  bagna  al  bel  Sebeto 

(bass).     N. 
*Nel  profondo  del  mio  core.     5. 
Nel  sen  degli  antri.     A^^. 
Nel  suo  fido  caro  nido.     S.  W. 
Nelle   arene   del    Tago    (24   July 

1698).     S. 


222 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Nice  mia,  un  solo  istante.     BM. 

(Add.  31509)  5. 
Ninfa    crudel,    deh    vieni.       BC. 

BM.  (Add.  14215). 
Ninfe  e  pastori  che  nel  cor  nutrite 

(1712).     N. 
No,    non   deggio,  e   troppo   cara. 

LC.  N.  S. 
No,    non   lasciar   canora   e    bella 

(20  Nov.  1704).     5. 
No,  non  posso  fingere  di  non  amar 

BM.  (Add.  34056). 
No,  non  vorrei  vivere  fra  le  cfitene. 

PC. 
Non  e  come  si   dice   (20  August 

1 701).     5.  (autograph)  W. 
Non  e  facile  ad  un  core.     B.  BM. 

(Add.  14165)  N.  S. 
Non  han  core  is  not  a  cantata,  but 

from    La    Rosaura,    Act    III., 

Scene  7.     BM.   (Add.  31488) 

F.  LC.  N. 
*Non  mi  credi,  deh  perche  ?     5. 
Non   per  pioggia  del  cielo.     BF. 

(incomplete). 
Non  pill  contrasti  (contese)  no  (6 

Oct.  1 721).     B.  BF.  LC.  M. 

N.  PC.  S. 
Non  posso  gia  ne  voglio.     LA. 
Non  temo  disastri.     PC. 
Notte  cara  a  un   cor  che   langue 

(1705).     BM.    (Add.    14165) 

5. 
Notte   cara,    ombre   beate.     BM. 

(Add.   141 64,    incomplete)   N. 

Pal.  W. 
Notte  placida  e  lieta.     LC. 
O  che  mostro,  o  che  furia  (20  July 

1709).     BM.  (Add.  34056).  N. 

(incomplete). 
Oh  che  pena  e  la  mia  (1704).    BM. 

(Add.  31512)  AT.  PC.  S. 
O  Clori,  ahi  bella  Clori.  5. 
O  de'  pastori  diletto  stuolo.     BM. 

(Add.  29963). 
O  de'  regni  di  Dite  Eumenidi.  BC. 


O  di  fere  e  d'  augelli  cheti  ricetti, 

BF.  S. 
O   di  lucida   notte   inclita   imago. 

PC. 
Oh  Dio,  che  viene  amore.     N. 
O  dolce  servitii.    Florence,  Comm. 

A.  Kraiis. 
O  Flora,  anima  mia.    BM.   (Add. 

14190). 
Oh    Mitilde,    fosti    meco    tiranna 

(171 1).     BC.  LC. 
Oh  Mitilde,  oh  del  core  (9   Dec. 

1708).     S. 
O  pace  del  mio  cor.    BF.  LC.  Mil. 

MC.  N.  PC.  S.  WM. 
O  pace  del  mio  cor  (another  set- 
ting).    B.  C. 
O    sol    degli    occhi    miei.     BM. 

(Add.  34056).  LC.  N. 
O  sventurata  Olimpia.  A^. 
O  voi  di  queste   selve   habitatrici 

(1717?)     BM.     (Add.    14220, 

14229,      31509)     LA.     (alto) 

Mil.  N.  PC.  WM. 
Occhi  miei    ch'  al    pianto  avvezzi 

(alto).     B. 
Omai    dal    cielo   al   piu    sublime 

punto.     PC. 
Or  che  a  me  ritornasti.     N. 
Or  che  barbara  sorte.     PC. 
Or   che   di    te    son    privo.     BM. 

(Add.  14215)  PC. 
Or  che  di  Teti  in  seno.     LC.  PC. 
*0r  che  graditi  orrori.     S. 
Or   che  graditi   orrori  (a  different 

cantata).     LC.  S. 
Or   che   in   petto    d'Eurilla.     M. 

PC.  S. 
Or  che  lungi  son  io.    BM.    (Add. 

14220).      M.    Mil.    N.    PC. 

(versions  vary). 
Or  che  su  legno  aurato.     A^. 
Ove  al  Sebeto  in  riva.     LC.  N. 
Ove   fuor    del    mio    seno.     BM. 

(Add.     31512)     M.    PC.    S. 

WM. 


CATALOGUE    OF    EXTANT   WORKS 


223 


Ove  il  fiorito  impero  mostra.     M. 

Mil. 
Ove  in   grembo  alia  pace.     BL. 

LA.  Pal.  S. 
Ove  placido  e  cheto.     PC. 
Park  mia  pena  omai.    BM.  (Add. 

14T65,  31511)  B.  (alto). 
Parte  da  me  Cupido.     PC. 
*Pastor  d'  Arcadia,  e   morta  Clori. 

LC. 
Pastorella        innamorata.        BM. 

(Add.  31508)- 
Pastori  amici,    amiche   pastorelle. 

LC. 
Peno  e  del  mio    penar  (4    Sept. 

1705).      BM.    (Add.     14165, 

31511)  5. 
Pensier  che  in  ogni  parte.    M.  PC. 
Pensier    che   sei    inflessibile    (12 

Feb.       1702).        BM.    (Add. 

3^5]^)  S. 
Pensieri,    pensieri,    oh     Dio    qual 

pena.     5.  T  . 
Penso   che  non    ho    core  (1705). 

BM.   (Add.  31 5 11)  M.  Mil. 

Pal.  PC.  S.  W. 
Per      destin       d'  ingrato       amore 

(tenor).     PC. 
Per  farmi   amar   da    tutte.     BM. 

(Add.  34056). 
*Per  formare  la  bella  che  adoro.  D. 
Per  prova  di  mia  fede  (alto).     B. 
Per  queste  dell'  antica  Alba  famosa. 

BM.  (Add.  3 15 11). 
*Per  saettar  un  seno.     5. 
Per     saettar     un     seno    (another 

setting).     BM.  (Add.  31508). 
Per  te,  florida  bella  (July    1708). 

BM.  (Add.  31511). 
Per  un  momento  solo.     B.  (alto) 

BM.     (Add.     31511,     31512) 

M.  Mil.  N.  PC.  S. 
Per  un  vago  desire.     B.  LC.  Mil. 

N.  PC. 
Perche    mai,   luci  amorose  (April 

1700).     A*. 


Perdono,  amor,  perdono  (6   June 

1702,    alto).     PC.    S.    (auto- 
graph). 
Perdono,  amor,  perdono  (another 

setting).     BM.    (Add.    31509, 

(incomplete),  3151 1).    N.  PC. 
Perfida     Filli     ingrata     (27     July 

1705).      BM.     (Add.     14165, 

315 11)  LC.  (versions  vary). 
Piagge  fiorite,  ameni  prati.  N. 
Piagge    fiorite  e   amene,  io  parto 

(28  August  1 7 16).     N. 
Piangi    la   tua    sventura    (i     July 

1706).  B.  BM.   (Add.  31511). 

LC.  M.  N.  S.  (versions  vary). 
Piango  ogni  ora  del  mio  core.    BM. 

(Add.  31511)- 
Piango  sospiro  e  peno.     LC. 
Piu  che  penso  all'  idol  mio.     BM. 

(Add.  315 II)  Pal.  S. 
Piu    non    si   puote    amar,     BM. 

(Add3i5ii).     PC. 
Piu  vesjgio  Lidia  mia.    BM.  (Add. 

31511)  PC. 
Poi    che    a    Tirsi    infelice.       N. 

Mil. 
Poi    che    cessano    al    fin.      BM. 

{Add.  315^1)  LC. 
Poi  che  r  Ercole  Argivo  (Lisimaco 

Re  di  Traccia).     PC. 
Poi  che  la  bella  Clori  (1699).     N. 
Poi    che     riseppe     Orfeo.      BM. 

(Add.  3>5ii)- 
Porto  il  cor  incatenato.     PC. 
Preparati  o  mio  core  (alto).     BM. 

(Add.  3i5i>)- 
Presso  a  un  Hmpido  fonte.     BM. 

(Add.  315 II)  LC. 
Presso    il    balcon    dell'  incostante 

Nisa(i5  June  1699).     S. 
*Pria  che  desto  ai  nitriti.     BF. 
Primavera  sei  gentile.    BM.  (Add. 

31511)- 
Pur  al  fine  la  vincesti.     BL. 
Qual  bellezza  divina.     BC.  Mod. 

PN. 


224 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


Quale   al    gelo    s'adugge.      BM. 

(Add.  14 1 65)  S. 
Qual'  or  1'  egre  pupille.     M. 
Qual'  or  miro  la  bella.     N.  S. 
Quando  amor  vuol  ferirmi.     BA. 

(incomplete)  N.  S. 
Quando  che  ti  vedrb.     Pal. 
Quando  credeva  il  core  (16  Oct. 

1 701)  Pal.  S.  (autograph) 
*Quando  Lidia  amorosa.     TV. 
Quando  I'umide  ninfe.     LC. 
Quando  satia  sarai.     5. 
Quando  stanche  dal  pianto.     BM. 

(Add.  31512). 
Quando     veggio     un     gelsomino. 

BM.  (Add.  14227). 
Quanta  le  grazie  son  (4  June  1703). 

W. 
Quanti   afifanni   ad    un    core.     B. 

BM.  (Add.  31487,  31518)  N. 

Pal.  RB.  PC.  Sell. 
Quanto  io  v'  ami.  A'^. 
Quanto,  o  Filli,  t' inganni  (10  May 

1702).     S. 
Quanto  piace  agli  occhi  miei.    LC. 

N.  PC.  (versions  vary). 
Quanto   vezzosa  e   quanto.     BM. 

(Add.  14163). 
Quel    cor    che    a    te    gia    diede. 

Sch. 
Quel  piacer  che  nell'  amarti.    LC. 
Quel  ruscelletto  o  Clori.     B.  LC. 
Queir  augello  che  vola  d'  intorno. 

5. 
Questa,  questa  e  la  selva.    N.  PC. 
Queste     torbide     e    meste    onde 

(17 1 7).       BM.   (Add.    142 15) 

LC.  N.  PC. 
Questo  di  bei  giacinti  serto.     BM. 

(Add.  3 15 1 2)  LC. 
Qui   dove   a  pie    d'  un    coUe.    N. 

PC.  S. 
Qui  dove  alfin  m'assido  (II  rossig- 

nuolo).    BC.BM. (Add.  14220) 

LC.  N.  PC.  (versions  vary). 
Qui  dove  aure  ed  augelli.     LC. 


Qui    vieni    ingrata    Fille.       53/ . 

(Add.  14229)  LC.  Mil.N. 
*Reggie  paludi,  addio.     N. 
Reggie  soglie,  alte  moli  (18  Oct. 

1720).     LC.M.N.PC. 
Ritardati    momenti,   egre  dimore. 

PN. 
Rondinella  torna  al  lido   (1701). 

N. 
Rondinella  torna  al  nido.     Sch. 
S'  io    t'  amo,    s'  io    t'  adoro    (June 

1704).     5. 
Sanno,  o  Filli  adorata  (24  August 

1716).     N. 
Sara  pur  vero,  o  stelle?     LC. 
Sarei  troppo  felice(3o  April  1702). 

5.  (autograph). 
Saresti    ben    tiranna    (fragment), 

BF.  MC. 
Sazio  di  piu  soffrire.     5. 
Sciolgo    in    lacrime    am  are.     LC. 

N.  PC. 
Sciolta  da  freddi  amplessi  (Mariio 

vecchio,   sposa  giovane).     M. 

PC.  S. 
Scompagnata  tortorella.     LC.  M. 

PC.  S. 
Scorgo   il    fiume  (La   Primavera). 

BM.  (Add.   14165,  3 15 1 2)  A^. 

PC.  S.  (alto). 
*Sdegno    fiero    ed    amore.      BM. 

(Add.  31518). 
Se  a  goder  torna  il  mio  core.     5. 
Se    a    quel     fiero    dolor.       BM. 

(Add.    31 512)    LA.   Mil.   M. 

PCS. 
Se  amassi  da  dovere.     LC. 
Se  amor  con  un  contento.     BM. 

(.Add.  315 12)  5. 
*Se  credete  all'  amor  mio.     N. 
*Se  dalla  cruda  Irene.     LC. 
Se  d'  Elisa  spietata  il  bel  sembiante. 

N. 
Se  mai  Clori  gentile.     LC.  Mil.  N. 

PC.  S. 
Se  per  amor  quest'  alma.     MC 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS 


225 


Se  tu  parti  io  morirb  (L'Armida). 

PC.  (autograph  ?). 
Se  vagheggio  nel  mattino  (1709). 

LC.  S. 
Sedea    Eurillo    un   giorno.       LC. 

Pal. 
Senti,  bella  crudele.     LC.  PC. 
Senti,  bell' idol  mio  (1705).     BM. 

(Add.  14165)  5. 
Sentite,  o  tronchi,  o  sassi.     Bod. 

Pad. 
Sento  nel  core  certo  dolore.    BM. 

(x\dd.   31512)    M.  Mil.  (alto) 

PC.  S. 
Senz'  alma,  senza  cor.     S. 
Serba  il  mio  cor  costante.     PC. 
S'accinge  Eurillo  al  canto.    BM. 

_    (Add.  31518). 
Si,  conosco,  o  Mitilde.     B.  N. 
Si,    t'  amo,    o    mio    Daliso.      BF. 

(incomplete). 
Si,   t'  intendo,    t'  intendo,  tu  vuoi. 

B.  (alto)  M.  Mil.  PC.  S. 
Siamo  in  contesa  la  bellezza  ed  io 

(4  May  1702).     S.  (autograph). 
Solitudini  amene.     LC.  PC. 
Solitudini  care  in  voi  spera.      BM. 

(Add.  14213,  31509)  Mil.  N. 

PC.  Rome,  Comm.  C.  Lozzi.   S. 
Son  contenta  di  soffrire.     5. 
Son    io,    barbara    donna.       BM. 

(Add.  142 13)  S. 
Son  le  nere  pupillette  (12   March 

1702)  Pad.  PC.  S. 
Son  pur  care  quelle  pene.     LC. 
Son  quest' ultimi  momenti.     BM. 

(Add.  14211)  Bod.  PC.  S. 
Sono  amante  e  m'  arde  il  core.     S. 
Sono  un  alma  tormentata.     A'^. 
Sopra  le  verdi  sponde.     A^.  Pal. 
Sopra  le  verdi    sponde    (11    Feb. 

1 7 12 — a  different  setting).    LC. 
Sorge  r  alba.     MC. 
Sorta  fin  dalle  piume  (8  Jan.  1702) 

S. 
Sovra  il  margine  erboso.     S. 


Spero    che    avrb   la   pace.      BM. 

(Add.  34056). 
Spesso  suol  r  alma  mia.     Pal. 
Spiega  Tali  il  mio  pensiero  (1702 

or  1704).     M.Mil.PC.S. 
Splendeano  in  bel  sembiante  (bass). 

PC. 
Sta  presente  il  mio  tesoro.      BM. 

(Add.  14220). 
Stanco  di  piu  soffrire.     LC. 
Stravagante  e  r  amor.     LC.  PC. 
Stravagante  non  e  1'  amor.    A'^.  PC. 
Strali,  facelle,  Amore.     BM.  (Add. 

14165). 
Su  bel  seggio  di  fiori.     5. 
Sul  margine  d'.un  rio.     Mod. 
Sul  margine   fiorito  d'  un   tumido 

ruscello  (13  Dec.  1704).     BM. 

(Add.  14225)  5. 
Sulla  sponda  fiorita  d'  un  rio  pargo- 

leggiante    (L'Adone).        BM. 

(Add.  14164)  BL.  PC.  (auto- 
graph?). 
*Sulla    sponda   fiorita    di    limpido 

ruscello  (20  August,  17  10).  BM. 

(Add.  i42i5)iV. 
Sulle  fiorite  sponde.     F.  LC. 
SuUe  sponde  d'Abbido  (II  Leandro) 

(1693).     N.  PC. 
Sulle   sponde    del    Reno.       BM. 

(Add.  3i5i8)-_ 
Taccio  e  tacendo  io  moro.     5.  W. 
Taci,  taci,  infedele  (infelice)  amore 

(1720).     LC.N.PC. 
Talor  per  suo  diletto.    BF.  LC.  S. 
Tanti  affanni  e  tante  pene.     S. 
Tanto  strano  e  1'  amor  mio  (April 

1697).     S. 
Temo  d'  amarti  poco.     S. 
Tenebrose  foreste.     N.  PC. 
The    beauteous    Melissa.       BM. 

(printed     in     London     about 

1709). 
Ti  vorrei  credere  speranza.      BM. 

(Add.  31508). 
Tiranna  di  mia  fe.      V. 

P 


226 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


*Tirsi  mentr'  io  dormiva.     M. 
Tormentatemi  pur,  furie  d'  amore. 

BM.  (Add.  31488). 
Torna  al  sen  dolce  mia  pace.     V. 
*Tra  r  ombre  piu  secrete.     BF. 
Tra  le  pompe  fiorite.     5. 
Tra  queste  ombrose  piaggie  (1709). 

LC. 
Tra  solitarie  baize.     F. 
Tra  verdi  piante  ombrose.     Mil. 

PC. 
Troppo  care,  troppo  belle.    M.  PC. 

S.  W. 
Troppo   ingrata   Amaranta.      LC. 

Mil.  N. 
Troppo  oppresso  dal  sonno.     LC. 
Tu  mi  chiedi  s'  io  t'amo.     LC. 
Tu    mi    lasciasti,    o    bella    (April 

1698).     Pal.  PC.  S. 
Tu  parti,  idolo  amato.     N. 
Tu  parti,  idolo  amato  (another  set- 
ting—1702).      Mil.  (alto)  N. 

S.  (alto). 
Tu  resti,  o  mio  bel  nume  (22  April 

1706).     5. 
Tutto     acceso     d' amore.        BM. 

(Add.  1 41 63)  Pal. 
Udite,  o  selve,  o  fiumi.     A^. 
Un    cervello    frenetico    ch'   amb. 

PC. 
Un    giorno    Amor    la    benda    si 

disciolse  (1709).     LC. 
Un'  incredula  speranza.     LC. 
Un  sospiro  d'  un  amante  (La  Luc- 

cioletta).     BM.  (Add.  31507). 
Un    sol   guardo    di    Clori.      BM. 

(Add.  31507)- 
Un  spietato  destino.     Pal. 
Un  Tantalo  assetato.     LC.  N. 


Una  belta  ch'  eguale.     BM.  (Add. 

31507)  PC.  Sch. 
Va  pur  lungi  da  me.     BM.  (Add. 

31507)- 
Vaga    Elisa,  la   tua   rimembranza 
(June     1708).        BM.    (Add. 

31507)- 
Vaghe  selve  beate.     BL. 
Vaghe  tende  adorate.     PN.  S. 
Vaghi  fonti  di  luce.     BM.  (Add. 

31507)  M.  PC.  5. 
Vago  il  ciel  non  saria.     5. 
Vedi,  Fille,  quel  sasso.      B.  BF. 

Mil.  N.  PC.  S. 
Veggio  r  idolo  mio.     BM.  (Add. 

31507,  3'5i2). 
Venite,   amici,    e    con    ghirlande. 

BM.  (Add.  31507). 
Venne  ad  Amor  desio.  BM.  (Add. 

14165,  31507). 
Vi  comanda  un  cenno  solo.     BM. 

(Add.  34056). 
Viddi  un  giorno  un  fiumicello.  PC. 
Vieni,  vieni,  o  caro  Mirtillo  (June 

1708).     BM.  (Add.  31507). 
Voi    ben     sapete.       BM.    (Add. 

31507)- 
Voi  giungeste  o  vaghi  fiori  (I  Fiori). 

BM.  (Add.  31507)  M.  PC.  S. 
Vorrei,   Filli  adorata,  farti  palese 

(21  Nov.  1705).    B.  (alto)  BM. 

(Add.  31507)  PC. 
Vorrei  ma  non  posso  amarti.     A'^, 
Vuoi  ch'io  spiri,  tra  i  sospiri  (20 

Sept.  1699).     PC.  S.  Sch.  W. 
Vuoi  piu  Filli  crudele.      N.  (alto). 
Zeffiretto  che  indrizzi  il  tuo   vole 

( 1 4  Dec.  1702).    B.  (autograph) 

BM.  (Add.  31507)  LC.  S.  W. 


CATALOGUE  OF  EXTANT  WORKS 


227 


VII.  MASSES 

(i)  Unaccompanied,  or  with  Organ  alone 

I.    Missa   Clementina.    I.   (1703),    SS.A.T.B.,   and   SS.AA.TT.B.   in 
Agnus  Dei. 


Ex.  95. 


Ky   -    ri 


:22i 


Ky     -     ri      •      e  e  - 

B.  BF.  BM.  (Add.  MS.  32071),  Dar.  F.  M.  (4  copies,  one  supposed 
to  be  autograph),  S.  Sch.  Vat.  W. 

2.  Mass  (in  Canon),  S.A.T.B. 
Ex.  96. 


Ky 


le 


3£ 


12:21 


z^±. 


Ky 


le 


^B.  N.  (4  copies),  5.  (printed  by  Otto  Braune,  Berlin  and  Potsdam, 
transposed  a  third  higher). 

3.  Mass  for  Cardinal  Ottoboni  (1706),  S.A.T.B. 

Ex.  97.  Ky        -  -  ri     -    e  e    - 


_i^2_ 


35 


122: 


Ky 


:^ 


=?=: 


dEE^ 


le 


B.  (wants  Agnus),  BM.  (Eg.  2464)  (parts  Add.  MS.  315 19),  M.  (wants 
Agnus),  PC.  S.  Vat.  (autograph). 

The  Berlin  MS.  and  British  Museum  Add.  MS.  31519  exhibit  con- 
siderable differences  from  the  other  MSS.  and  have  probably  no  authority. 

Printed  by  Proske  from  the  autograph. 

4.  Mass  in  Canon,  SS.A.T.B.  (Agnus  SS.AA.T.B.). 

Ex.  98.  Ky     -     ri  - 


S 


Ky 


e 


le 


B.  BL.  C.  F.  PC.  (autograph  ?). 


228 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


5.  Missa  Clementina  II.  (1716),  SS.A.T.B. 
Ex  99. 


Ky     -     ri 


e  -    le 


t 


iSai3E*3fe 


— 2^      - 


^ — ^- 


Kv 


r~ 


T 


-t;^- 


le 


B.  M.  (copy  from  A^.),  Mil.  N.  (Kyrie,  Gloria,  Credo  and  fragment 
of  Sanctus),  Vat. 

6.  Mass,  S.A/r.B.,  composed  for  Innocent  XIII.  (1721). 

Ex.  100.  Ky         -         -         -         -         -         li      -      e  e  - 


Ky 


'i        I 


^P"~S^ 


1^ 


PC.  copied  from  a  MS.  in  Cec.  not  to  be  found  there  now.  Frag- 
ments:  BL.  BM.  (Add.  14166— dated  1710)  Mil.  N.  Probably  Scarlatti 
used  up  old  material  for  this. 

7.  Requiem  Mass,  S.A.T.B. 

Ex.  loi. 

Re   -    qui  -  em       pe  -  ter     -     nam,     ae   -   ter         -         -  nam. 


±s^ 


g?~ig:^i:iS 


& 


1?3 iS* — \-iS 


:=!: 


"2^"" 


.  A  -d  -^    A  -J-ij-J-Q- 


'I       I 


r^ 


^^:±EE^ 


SC.  M.  PC.  S. 

Printed  in  Liick's  "Sammlung  Ausgewahlter  Kompositionen  fiir  die 
Kirche,"  and  Choron's  "Choix  de  Musique  Religieuse." 

8.  Mass,  SS.A.T.B.  and  organ  in  E  minor  "m  IV .  tono." 


Ex.  102. 


Ky   -   ri  -  e, 


Ky    -    ri  -  e    e     -     le 


son, 


L:t 


sa 


j^^-^--^,^ 


1 k- 


(^ 


CATALOGUE   OF   EXTANT   WORKS         229 


(2)  With  other  Instruments 

9.  Mass,  SS.A.T.B.,  S.A.T.B.,  two  violins  and  continuo  in  A  (1707— 
for  Christmas).     5. 


Ex.  103. 


r> 


n   i   i   . 


w 


-^:S5^Q 


f=r= 


ifSEt 


E: 


Kv   -    ri  -  e       e        le 


^ — ^-^—H^f Cr     r- 


1-=^^^ 


^5=t 


p:=^^- 


10.  Mass,   SS.A.T.B.  (soli),    SS.A.T.B.    (ripieni),    two    violins,    viola 
and  continuo  in  A.     Cas.  (partly  autograph — 1720).     S. 


Ex.  104. 


Ky  -  ri  -  e        V/. 


^  ^^  J- 


r--==zf^ 


3z-it 


;^3r^:FE3E:^ 


*  Credo,  S.A.T.B.  (soli  and  chorus),   2  oboes,   2  horns,  strings  and 
organ  in  B  flat.     N. 


VIII.  MOTETS 


Adorna  Thalamum  tuum  Sion. 
S.A.T.B.  (January  1 708).  BM. 
(Add.  MS.  34054 — autograph 
parts),  S.  (also  a  copy  to  the 


words  "  Collaudabunt  multi  sa- 
pientiam  eius"). 
Audi  filia  et  inclina  aurem  (Gradual 
for  S.  Cecilia's  day),  SS.A.T.B., 


230 


ALESSANDRO   SCARLATTI 


2  violins,  viola,  oboes,  and 
organ  (October  1720).  Cas. 
(autograph)  S. 

Ave  Maris  Stella,  S.A.T.B.  and 
continuo.     A'^.  B. 

Ave  Regina  Coelorum,  SS.  and 
continuo  (1722).     A^^. 

Beatus  vir  qui  timet  Dominuni, 
SS.A.T.B.  and  organ.     5. 

Benedicta  at  venerabilis  es, 
SS.A.T.B.,  2  violins,  viola, 
and  continuo  (4  July  1720). 
5. 

Cantantibus  organis  Cecilia  (anti- 
phon  for  St.  Cecilia's  Day),  S., 
oboe,  2  violins,  viola  and  con- 
tinuo.    5.  (incomplete). 

Concerti  Sacri,  printed  in  separate 
parts  by  E.  Roger  at  Amster- 
dam : — 
I.  Rorate  coeli.  Canto  solo  con 

V.  V.  per  ognt  Santo. 
II.  Jam  sole  clarior,  Canto  solo 
con  V.  V.  per  Santo  Sacer- 
dote. 

III.  Infirmata    vulnerata.       Alto 

solo  con  V.  V.  per  it  San- 
tissimo  e  per  ogni  tempo. 

IV.  Totus  amore  languens.     Alto 

solo    con   V.    V.    per    ogni 
Santo  e  per  il  Santiss. 
V.  Mortales  non  auditis.     A   2 
Canto  ed  Alto  con  v.  v.  per 
la  Beata  Vergine. 
VI.  Quae  est  ista.    A  ^C.A.T. 
con  V.  V.  e  Organo  per  ogni 
Festivita  delta  Nativitd. 
VII.  Diligam  te.     A   ^  C.  A.  T. 
con  V.  V.  per  il  SS.  e  per 
ogni  tempo. 
VIII.  Properate  fideles.    A4C.A. 
T.  B.  con  V.  V.  per  il  San- 
tissimo. 
IX.  Est  dies.     A  4  C.A.T.  B. 
con  V.  V.  per  ogni  Santo  e 
Santa. 


X.  Salve  Regina.  A^C.A.T.B. 
con  V.  V. 

BF.  Cas.  (wants  2nd  violin  part). 
MS.  parts  of  I.,  II.,  and  frag- 
ments of  others  are  in  LC,  and 
MS.  scores  of  X.  in  BF.  and 
M. 

Confitebor  tibi  Domine,  SS.A.T.B. 
and  organ.     5. 

Constitues  eos  principes,  S.A.B. 
and  organ  (17 16).     S. 

De  tenebroso  lacu,  A.,  2  violins, 
viola,  and  continuo.  BM. 
(Add.  MS.  31508). 

Dextera  Domini  fecit  virtutem, 
S.S.B.  and  organ  (17 15).     S. 

Diffusa  est  gratia,  SS.  and  organ. 
S. 

Dixit    Dominus,     SS.A.T.B.    and 
organ.     D.  S. 
(Another  setting).     5. 

Dixit  Dominus, SS.A.T.B. ,2  violins, 
viola,  oboes,  and  continuo. 
Cas.  (incomplete)  S.  (incom- 
plete). 

Domine  refugium  factus  es  nobis, 
SS.A.T.B.     M.  S.  W. 

Exultate  Deo  adjutori  nostro, 
S.A.T.B.    M.  S.  W. 

Iste  est  panis,  S.A.T.B.  5.  (in- 
complete). 

Jesu  corona  Virginum  {Inno  per 
S.  Cecilia),  S.A.T.B.,  2  violins, 
viola,  and  continuo  (October 
1720).  Pal.  (autograph),  Cec. 
S.  (incomplete). 

Laetatus    sum,    S.A.T.B.      BM. 
(Add.  MS.  14166)  M.  W. 
(Another  setting).     Cas.  (incom- 
plete). 

Laetatus  sum,  SS.A.T.B..  2  violins, 
viola,  and  continuo  (August 
172 1 ).  B.  (autograph)  5.  in- 
complete, partly  autograph). 

Lauda  Jerusalem  Dominum, 
S.A.T.B.  and  organ.     5. 


CATALOGUE   OF   EXTANT   WORKS         231 


Laudate  Dominum  omnes  gentes, 

S.A.TT.B.,  2  violins,  2  violas, 

violoncello  and  continuo.     B. 

S. 
Laudate  Dominum  quia  benignus, 

S.S.B.  and  organ.     S. 
Laudate  pueri  Dominum, SS.  A. T.B. 

and  continuo.     D.  S. 
Another  setting  for  S.solo,S.x'\.T.B., 

2    violins   and   continuo.       S. 

(incomplete). 
Magnificat,  SS.A.T.B.    and   organ 

(ist  tone).     5. 
Magnificat,  SS.A.T.B.  and  orchestra 

in  D  major.     S.  (incomplete). 
Memento  Domine  David,  S.A.T.B. 

B.  BL.  BM.  (Add.  MS.  14166) 

D.   M.    Mil.   N.    (autograph) 


PCS. 

Miserere,      S.A.T.B., 

SS.A.T.B. 

(1680).     Vat. 

Miserere,    SS.A.T.B., 

2    violins. 

viola  and  continuo 

in  E  minor 

(1714?)-     B.S. 

Miserere,     SS.A.T.B., 

2    violins, 

viola  and  continuo  in  C  minor 

_(i7i5?);     BS. 
Nisi    Dominus    aedificaverit,    S.A. 

soli,  S.A.T.B.  rip.,  2  violins  and 

continuo.     B.  BM.  (Add.  MS. 

34ii8)PF. 
Nisi         dominus         aedificaverit, 

S.A.T.B.  and  organ.     5. 
O  magnum  mysterium,  S.A.T.B., 

S.A.T.B.  (1707).     D.  S. 
Sacerdotes    Domini   incensum    et 


panes,  S.A.T.  and  organ  (offer- 
torio  per  il   Corpus    Domini). 
5.  W. 
*Salve  Regina,  S.A.,  2  violins  and 
continuo.     Mil.  N. 

Salve  Regina,  S.A.T.B.  (1703). 
London,  W.  Barclay  Squire, 
Esq. 

Sancti  et  justi  in  Domino  gaudete, 
S.A.T.B.,  S.A.T.B.  S.  (in- 
complete). 

Stabat  Mater,  S.A.,  2  violins  and 
continuo.     F. 

Te  Deum,  SS.A.T.B.,  2  violins, 
viola,  2  oboes  and  continuo. 
Cas. 

Tu  es  Petrus,  S.A.T.B.,  S.A.T.B., 
and  organ.  B.  BC.  (auto- 
graph?) BL.  BM.  (Add.  14166, 
31481;  Eg.  2454,2459)  C.  M. 
Mil.  N.  PC.  S. 

Tui  sunt  caeli  et  terra,  SS.  B.  and 
organ.     5.  W. 

Valerianus  in  cubiculo  Caeciliam, 
A.,  2  violins,  viola,  oboe  and 
continuo  (antiphon  for  St. 
Ceciha's  Day).  5.  (incom- 
plete). 
*Veritas  mea  et  misericordia, 
S.A.T.B.     5. 

Vexilla  regis  prodeunt,  SS., 
2  violins  and  continuo.  Mod. 
(autograph). 

Volo  Pater  ut  ubi  ego  sum, 
S.A.T.B.,  S.A.T.B.,  and  organ. 
S. 


IX.  INSTRUMENTAL   MUSIC 


Toccatas  ^  and  other  pieces  for 
cembalo.  B.  BM.  (Add. 
14244,  32161)  Mil.  MC.  N. 
S.  W.  (some  doubtful). 


Sonate  a  quattro,  2  violins,  viola 
and  violoncello.  5.  D.  (incom- 
plete). Parts  of  these  are  also 
included  in  a  set  of  six  con- 


'  The  MSS.  exhibit  such  confusion  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  a  detailed  list  here. 
The  volume  (in  private  hands)  described  by  Mr.  J.  S.  Shedlock  in  the  Sanunelband  der 
Internationalen  Mtisikgesellschaft,  Jahrgang  vi.  No.  i,  will  probably  throw  some  light 
on  the  correct  arrangement  of  movements  ;  the  article  appeared  too  late  for  me  to  do 
more  than  mention  it  here. 


232 


ALESSANDRO    SCARLATTI 


certos   for   strings.       C.    BM. 

(printed    parts,  and  fragments 

in  Add.  MS.  32587). 
Suite  for  flute  and  cembalo  in  F 

(16  June  1699).     S. 
Suite  for  flute  and  cembalo  in  G 

(June  1699).     S. 
Sonata  for  2  flutes,   2  violins  and 

continuo  in  A.     S. 
Sonata    for    flute,    2    violins   and 

continuo  in  F.     S 


Sonata  for  3  flutes  and  continuo 

in  F.     S. 
Twelve  Symphonies  for  Orchestra 
(begun    I    June    1715).      LB. 
(autograph). 

*Sonata    for   flute,     2    violins    and 
continuo  in  D.     BL. 

*Six  Preludes  and  Fugues  for  cem- 
balo.    MC. 

*Six  Concertos  for  cembalo.      BM. 
(Add.  32431). 


X.    THEORETICAL   WORKS,    &c. 


Fifteen  fugues  in  two  parts.       N. 
Canon  for  two  voices.     BM.  (Add. 

14166). 
Studio  a  quattro  suUa  nota  ferma. 

BM.  (Add.  1 4166). 
Varie    partite    obligate   al    basso. 

MC. 


Regole    per    principianti.       BM. 

(Add.  14244,  31517)  MC. 
Discorso  sopra  un  caso  particolare. 

Printed  in  Kirnberger's  Knnst 

des  reinen  Satzes. 


INDEX 


ACQUAVIVA,  Cardinal,  iSl. 

Adami,  Andrea,  loi  ;/. 

Ademollo,  A.,  23  «. 

'^  Adofita  thalatmim"  1 15. 

"Agar  et  Ismaele  esiliati,"  13,  60,  94. 

Agostini,  Pier  Simone,  9,  36,  59. 

Albani,  G.  F.     See  Clement  XL,  Pope. 

Alexander  VIII.,  Pope,  74. 

"  Amor  Generoso,  L',"  lyo- 

''Amor  Volubile  e  Tiranno,  L',"  n?- 

"  Anacreonte  Tiranno,  L',"  72- 

^''Andate  0  niiei  sosph'i"  140.  190. 

Annunciation  Oratorio,  97. 

Anzalone,  Antonia,  38,  205. 

Arcadian  Academy,  7,  89.     See  also  Cres- 

cimbeni  and  Zappi. 
Architecture,  influence  of  on  opera,  3,  49. 

See  also  Baroque  Art. 
Arioso,  12,  19,  45,  76,  79,  Si,  94,  104,  140. 
Arlecchino,  5. 
"  Arminio,"  72,  102. 
Arteaga,  47. 

Assumption  Oratorio,  98. 
"AtidiJiHa  et  iiicHtta,"  18 r. 
'■''Atigellin  sospendi  i  vanni,"  12,  14,  21. 
Ave  Maria,  191. 
Avvisi  di  Koma,  23. 

Bach,  T-  S.,  13,  80,  iii,  120,  137,  151, 
152,  170,  175,  iSi,  184,  190,  194,  199. 

Baini,  1 16. 

Ballet,  5,  41,  50,  52,  120,  126,  160. 

Balletto,  60. 

Banchieri,  49. 

Bardi,  2. 

Baroque  art,  3,  63,  64,  94. 

Beethoven,  6,  162,  173,  igi,  194,  201,  202, 
204. 

Benedict  XIV.,  Pope,  96. 

Bernini,  3. 

Bibbiena,  5. 

Bologna,  music  at,  4,  9,  127,  197. 

Bononcini,  G.  B.,  65,  69,   106,  200. 

• M.  A.,  65  ;;. 

Botticelli,  2. 

Brahms,  10,  28,  191,  194,  204. 

Bi'ighella,  5. 

Burney,  12,  92,  140  n,  198,  201,  205. 

Buxtehude,  120. 

Cadenza,  162. 

"  Caduta  dei  Decemvii-i,  La,"  48,   50,  62, 

65,  118. 
"Cambise,"  156,  197. 
Canale,  Antonio,  5. 
Cantata,  the  chamber-,  9,  60,  69,   75,  90, 

120,  137,  139,  163,  189,  198,  202. 
Canto  ferino,  136,  138. 
Canzoiiette,  146. 
Capranica  Theatre  (Rome),  75,  156. 


Carissimi,  8,  16,  21. 

Cast  rati,  23,  24,  49,  130. 

Cavaliere,  Scarlatti's  title  of,  7,  132,  173, 

"Cavalleria  Rusticana,"  43. 

Cavalli,  2,  9,   16,  42,  59,  204. 

Cembalo,  11,  118,  153,  172,  19S,  203. 

Cesarini,  Carlo,  106. 

Cesti,  9. 

Chaconne,  13. 

Chamber-m.usic,  instrumental,  173. 

Charles  VI.,  Emperor,  70,  131. 

Chopin,  200. 

Chorus,  Scarlatti's  treatment  of  the,  42,  47, 

94,  134,  137. 
Christina,  Queen  of  Sweden,  22,  25,  34,  37. 
Christmas  Oratorio,  99. 
"  Giro,  II,"  117,  120. 
"  Clearco  in  Negroponte,"  48,  50. 
Clement  X.,  Pope,  22. 

XL,  Pope,  113,  135,  136. 

''Clori,  Dorino,  Amore,"  69. 

Colascione,  51. 

Colonna,  Cardinal,  24. 

Coloratura,    16,   94,    105,    1 18,    124,    130, 

137,   167,  175,  197,  190,  199. 
Comic  characters,  41,  48,  64,  97,  124,  127, 

156,  202. 

opera,  48,  127,  146,  197. 

Composition,   Scarlatti's  methods  of,   105, 

153,  191,  193- 
Concerti  Sacri,  94. 
Concerto  di  Otihuoe,  126,  157,  176- 
Concerto  grosso,  68,  92,  173,  174. 
Conforto,  Domenico,  7;  35;  56,  69,  74- 
Conse^yjatorii  at  Naples,  192. 
Conservatorio  dei Poveri  di  Gesic  Crista,  139. 
Gontarini,  9. 
Contini,  Abbe,  23,  107. 
Gorelli,  lo,  74,  75,  88,  89,  92,  loi,  170, 173. 
Correggio,  98. 

Crescimbeni,  G.  M.,  49,  90,  92,  97. 
Cristofori,  Bartolomeo,  71- 
Cioce,  Benedetto,  36  n. 

D'Alibert,  Count,  22,  75. 

"  Dafne,  La,"  2. 

"Dal  Male  il  Bene,"  61. 

"  Dama  Spagnuola  ed  il  Cavalier  Romano, 

La,"  127. 
Daun.  Count,  70,  117. 
Dia,  Giuseppe,  34. 
Dialect,  Bolognese,  125. 

Neapolitan,  125,  127. 

"  Diana  el  Endimione,"  68. 

Diminished  Seventh,  141,  152,  168. 

"Don  Giovanni,"  3,  122,  128. 

"  Donna  e  ancora  fedele.  La,"  147. 

Dottor  Graziano,  5,  125. 

"  Dove  xestti,  cor  mio  ?  "  113. 

Durante,  Francesco,  197,  198,  202. 


Q 


234 


INDEX 


EiTNER,  Prof.  Robert,  64  n. 

Elizabeth,  Queen  of  Naples,  117. 

"  Endimione  e  Cintia,"  91. 

Ensemble,  48,  59,  167. 

Epitaph,  Scarlatti's,  193. 

"  Equivoci  nel  Sembiante,  Gli,"  9,  23,  31, 

34,  47,  60,  63. 
"Eraclea,"  53,  55,  62,  66,  loS,  117,  118, 

167,  201. 
"  Errore  Innocente,  L'."     See  "Equivoci 

nel  Sembiante,  Gli." 
Eugene,  Prince,  169  n. 
"  Euridice,  L',"  2,  3. 
Euripides,  107. 

Fago,  Nicola,  il  Tarentino,  196. 

Favola  boscareccia,  72,  127. 

Eebi  Arinoiiici,  8. 

"  Ferragosto,  II,"  49,  92,  97. 

Ferrara,  113. 

Ferrari,  Benedetto,  12. 

Fetis,  7. 

"  Fidelio,"  44. 

"Figlio  delle  Selve,  II,"  49,  72,  127. 

"Filli,    Clori,    Tirsi."       See    Passarowitz, 

Serenata  for  the  Peace  of. 
Finale,  47,  53,  107,  167. 
"  Flavio  Cuniberto,''  72. 
Florence,  music  at,  2,  71. 
Florimo,  7. 

Foggia,  Antonio,  72,  1 16. 
Foligno,  117. 

Folk-song,  influence  of,  loi,  147. 
Form  in  music,   6,    12,  21,  26,  31,  41,  59, 

76,  81,  97,  105,  118,  136,  148,  159,  162, 

172,  173,  197,  200,  202. 
Francischiello,  76,  87. 
French  music,  41,  42,  59. 
Frescobaldi,  153. 
Fuller-Maitland,  Mr.  J.  A.,  147. 
Fumiani,  4. 
Fux,  J.  J.,  34. 

Galilei,  Vincenzo,  11. 

Gasparini,  9,  140,  142,  200. 

Gazzetta  di  Napoli,  116,  192. 

Gellius,  Aulus,  39. 

Geminiani,  10,  87,  92,  193. 

"  Genio  di  Partenope,"  61,  68. 

"  Gerone  Tiranno  di  Siracusa,"  75. 

Gesellschaft  fib-  Musikforschuug,  63,  64  n. 

Giannino,  106. 

"  Giardino  d'Amore,  II,''  69,  93. 

Giordano,  Luca,  3. 

Giotto,  2. 

Giovanni  del  Violone,  106. 

Gluck,  42,  124,  199,  203. 

Goethe,  6. 

Golden  Spur,  132. 

Gounod,  59. 

Greco,  Gaetano,  196. 

Gretry,  96  71. 

Grimani,  Cardinal,  70,  116. 

"Griselda,  La,"  60,  156,  164,  170,  197. 

Grossi,  Giovanni  Francesco,  36. 

Grotesque,  the,  4,  49,  122. 

Ground  bass,  12,  26,  32,  83,  94. 


Handel,   13,  65,  74,  80,   loi,   109,  127, 

133,151-  175,  194,  199- 
Harmony,  Scarlatti's  treatment  of,  16,  28, 

79,  95,  134,  135,  140,  151,  154,^  157,  190- 
Haro  y  Guzman,  Don  Gasparo  d',  35. 
Hasse,  I15,  191,  201. 
Haydn,  6,  176,  202,  204. 
Heinichen,  igi. 
Heuss,  Dr.  Alfred,  13  n,  59  n. 
"  Honesta  negli  Amori,  L',"    14,  25,  31, 

"  Ho7-  che  di  Febo  ascosi,"  90. 

Horns,  127,  157,  175. 

"  Humanita  e  Lucifero,"  98. 

"  Humanita  nelle  Fere,  L',"  114. 

Innocent  XL,  Pope,  23,  73. 

Innocent  XII.,  Pope,  75. 

Innocent  XIIL,  Pope,  136,  191. 

hiterinezzo,  127. 

Italian  influence  on  non-Italian  composers, 

194,  199,  201. 
Italian   language,    influence   of,  on   music, 

203. 

James  II. ,  King  of  England,  37. 
Jerome,  Mr.,  39. 
"JesH  corona  virgimtjn,"  187. 
Jommelli,  198. 

"  Z«  dove  a  Mergellina,^'  190. 
Labia,  Palazzo,  49. 
Laetatus  sum  (4  voices),  136. 

(5  voices  and  orchestra),  187. 

"  Lagrijne  dolorosa  "  16,  19. 

Landskron,  Marquis  of,  67. 

"  Laodicea  e  Berenice,"  66,  69,  93. 

Latcdate pueri  Doiiihncm,  137. 

Legrenzi,  9,  13,  31,  64,  146. 

Leo,  48,  53,  120,  136,   137,  146,   iSi,  196, 

201. 
Leopold,  Archduke,  132. 
Libretti,  30,  97,  ic6. 
Liszt,  199. 
Local  colour,  160. 
Logroscino,  48,  53,  197,  202. 
London,  music  in,  35,  64. 
Longhena,  3. 

"  Lontananza  crudele,'"  152. 
"  Lucio  Manlio,"  73,  102,  106,  195. 
Lulli,  59,  74,  200. 
Lute,  127,  153. 

Magnificat,  187. 

Malta,  Scarlatti  a  knight  of?  133. 

Mancini,  Francesco,  116,  156,  197. 

Mantua,  music  at,  2,  36. 

Marazzoli,  Marco,  47  n. 

Marcello,  172. 

"Marco  Attilio  Regolo,"  156,  159,  167. 

Marie  Casimir,  Queen  of  Poland,  75. 

Marpurg,  191  n. 

"  Martirio  di  S.  Teodosia,  II,"  94,  137. 

Masses,  Scarlatti's  : — 

Missa  Clementina  I.,  93. 

Mass  for  Cardinal  Ottoboni,  93. 


INDEX 


'^ZS 


Masses,  Scarlatti's : — 

Mass  in  F,  93. 

Mass  (17 10),  135. 

Missa  Clementina  IT.,  135. 

Mass  for  Innocent  XIII.,  136. 

Mass  in  A  with  orchestra  (1707),  114. 

Mass  in  A  with  orchestra  (1720),  114, 
181. 

Requiem  jNIass,  136. 
"  Massimo  Puppieno,''  43. 
Mazzocchi,  Vergilio,  47  n. 
Medici,   Ferdinand  III.    de',    9,   71,    102, 

113,  114,  154,  193,  194,  195. 
Melani,  Alessandro,  9. 
Melodrama,  39. 
Memento  Douiiiie  David,  191. 
Mendelssohn,  97. 
Mergellina,  68  n. 
Minga,  Papa,  74. 
Minuet,  122,  173. 
Misereres,  113,  136. 
"  Mitridate  Eupatore,"  74  ;z,  107,  118,  151, 

159- 
Modena,  Duke  Francis  II.  of,  33,  37. 
Modena,  Mary  of,  Queen  of  England,  37. 
Modena,  music  at,  4,  9,  33,  36. 
Modes,  influence  of  ecclesiastical,  80,  136, 

139- 
Mongitore,  34. 
Montesanto,  church  of  (Naples),  38  n,  69  n, 

193- 
Monteverdi,  2,  8,  13,  15,  21,  42,  204. 
Morello,  Prof.  E.  P.,  151  n. 
Motets,  94,  136,  139. 
Mozart,  6,  47,  53,  124,  128,   152,  157,  176, 

199,  201,  204. 
Muratori,  36,  169  n. 

Naples,  music  at,  8,  33,  34,  i^. 

the  school  of,  196,  201. 

Neapolitan  Sixth,  146. 
"  Nel  cent7'o  osairo,''''  191. 
Neuburg,  Duke  of,  67. 
Nicolino,  73. 
Northampton,  Marquis  of,  7. 

"  0  viagniun  mysteriutn,"  139. 

"  Odoardo,"  50,  52,  65. 

"  Oh  di  Bellemme  altera"  99. 

"Olimpia  Vendicata,  L',"  39,  43. 

Opera  in  the  seventeenth  century,   3,  22, 

38.  49- 
Operas,  Scarlatti's,  9,  19,  22,  38,  197,  203. 

See  also  wider  separate  titles. 
Oratorio,    60,    94,     96.       See    also    under 

separate  titles. 
Orchestra,  treatment  of  the,  118,  126,  130, 

132,  157,  160,  170,  174. 
Ornamentation,   musical,  10,   41,  105,  162. 

See  also  Coloratura  and  Singers,   influ- 
ence of. 
Ottoboni,   Cardinal  Pietro,  63,  72,  74,  75, 

93.  133.  193'  204. 
Ottoboni  family,  63,  74,  99. 
Oubuoe,  concerto  di,  126,  157. 
Overture,  41,  59,  97,  132,  170,  172,  176. 


Oxford  History  of  Music,  63  n,  80,  147  n, 
170. 

"Pace,  Amor,  Providenza."  131. 
Pachelbel,  80. 
Palermo,  7,  34. 
Palestrina,  93,  135,  137. 
Pamphili,  Don  Benedetto,  23. 
Pantalojte,  Papa,  74. 
Parry,  Sir  C.  H.  H.,  9. 
Pasquini,  Bernardo,  23,  89,  200. 
Passarowitz,  Peace  of,  169. 

Serenata  for  the,  169,  175,  176. 

Passecaille,  13. 

Passio  seciindutn  Johannevi,  170. 

Passion  Oratorio  (1708),  1 1 5. 

Pastoral  music,  95,  99,  loi,  127,  176,  191. 

See  also  Favola  boscareccia. 
"  Pastorella,  La,"  106. 
"  Patro  Calienna  de  la  Costa,"  127. 
Pepe,  Captain  Peppo,  67. 
Peri,  2,  42. 

Pergolesi,  127,  187,  196,  19S,  202. 
Perti,  9,  114. 

Philip  v..  King  of  Spain,  69. 
Piazzola,  9. 

"  Pirro  e  Demetrio,"  64,  74. 
Pisani,  Villa,  at  Stra,  107. 
"  Pompeo,"  7,  30,  34,  36,  60,  72. 
Porpora,  192. 
Posilipo,  68  ;/. 

Pratolino,  71,  72,  102,  106,  1 14,  195. 
"  Prigioniero  P'ortunato,  II,"  62,  65,  202. 
"  Principessa  Fedele,  La,"  117,  119. 
Provenzale,  Francesco,  8. 
Psalms,  136.     See  also  separate  titles. 
Purcell,  42,  194,  199,  204. 

QuADRio,  30. 
Quantz,  191,  192. 

Rameau,  123. 

Rastatt,  Peace  of,  131. 

Recitative,   16,   30,   32,   40,   ']'] ,   105,    109, 

140,  153,  199. 
accompanied,  45,  47,  64,   133,    159, 

201. 
Reformation,  influence  of  the,  80. 
Regole  per  Principianti,  154,  196. 
Renaissance  of  Music,  I. 
Reni,  Guido,  3,  64. 
Reqtciem  Mass,  136. 
Ricci,  Prof.  Corrado,  4. 
Riviera,  Abate  Domenico,  90. 
Roberti,_Count  G.  Frigimelica,  107. 
Roger,  Etienne,  94. 
Rome,  music  at,  2,  9,  22,  36,  73,  197. 
Rosa,  Salvator,  65  ;?. 
Rosary  Oratorio,  98. 
"  Rosaura,  La,"  61,  63,  64,  74,  127,  170. 
"  Rosmene,  La,"  60. 
Rossi,  Luigi,  21. 
Rossini,  128. 
Rousseau,  J.  J.,  122,  150. 
Rubens,  200. 
Ruspoli,  Prince,  90,  156. 


236 


INDEX 


S.  Cecilia's  Day,  music  for,  181,  187. 

"S.  Filippo  Neri,"  117,  133. 

S.  Maria  Maggiore  (Rome),  72,  89,  116. 

S.  Pantaleone  (Venice),  4. 

Saint-Saens,  M.,  122. 

Salvatore,  Giovanni,  8. 

Salvi,  G.  A.,  106. 

Santini,  Fortunate,  113,  181. 

^''  Sard  troppo  felice,'"  76,  81. 

Sarro,  Domenico,  197. 

Scarlatti,  origin  of  the  name,  7. 

Anna  Maria,  24,  35,  108,  205. 

Antonia.     See  Anzalone,  Antonia. 

Carlo  Francesco,  38  ;/,  205. 

Caterina  Eleonora,  38  n,  205. 

Domenico,    35,    38,    71,    73,   74,    75, 

199,  200,  204. 

Flaminia,  205. 

Francesco,  34,  205. 

Giuseppe,  205. 

Pietro,  205. 

• Tommaso,  205. 

Scenery  of  operas,  5,  39,  41,  159. 

Schumann,  79,  194. 

Schiitz,  Heinrich,  204. 

"  Scipione  nelle  Spagne,"'  127,  IS^- 

"Seasons,  The,"  131. 

Sebeto,  68  n. 

"  Sedecia,  II,"  96. 

Selvaggi,  Gaspare,  7. 

Serenatas,  61,  66,  go,  131.     See  aiso  under 

separate  titles. 
Siciliana,  147. 
Siface.     See  Grossi.  G.  F. 
Singers,   influence  of,  on  music,    10,    105, 

162. 
Sonata,  6.     See  also  Foini. 
Sonate  a  quattro,  173. 
Sotibrette  parts,  49,  50. 
Spanish  succession,  war  of  the,  69. 
Stabat  Mater,  187. 
Stampiglia,  Silvio,  102,  194. 
"  Statira,  La,"  63,  74. 
Steffani,  200. 
Stigliano,  Serenata  for  the  Prince  of,  169, 

176,  191. 
Stradella,  9,  16,  21,  31,  64,  146. 
Sullivan,  52. 
Symphony,  6,  41,  97,   172,   173,  202.     See 

also  Form,  Overture. 

"Tamerlano,   11  Gran,"   102,    106,  194, 

195- 
Teacher,  Scarlatti  as  a,  196. 
"Telemaco,"  156,  167. 
7>w/^-marks,  interpretation  of,  104,  122. 
"Teodora  Augusta,  La,"  53,  75. 
"Teodosio,"  1 16. 
Tesi-Tramontini,  Viltoria,  175. 
Thematic  development,  16,  32,  53,  83,  174, 

201. 


"Tiberio  Imperatore  d'Oriente,"  52,  65. 

Tiepolo,  G.  B.,  49. 

"  Tigrane,  II,"  124,  157,  175,  197. 

Tilla,  Signora,  106. 

Tintoretto,  200. 

"  llto  Setnpronio  Gracco"  (1702),  52,  65. 

(1720),  156,  161,  167. 

Toccatas  for  ce77ibalo,  153,  200. 

Tordinona  theatre  (Rome),  75. 

Tovey,  Mr.  D.  F.,  174  w. 

Toy-Symphony  style,  98,  174. 

Trapani,  6. 

Trinity  Oratorio,  133. 

"  Tiionfo  del  Valore,  II,"  117. 

"Trionfo  dell'  Onore,   II,"  127,  156,   167, 

205. 
"Trionfo  della  Liberta,  II,"  107,  112. 
Tro7/iba  niar-ina,   109. 
Trumpet,  11,  32,  43,  62,  109,  1 18,  159,  170, 

175- 
"  Til  es  Petriis"  139. 
"  Turno  Aricino,"  102,  156,  161,  167. 

Udine,  50. 

"  Una  belta  cJi'  egiiale"  147. 

Urbino,  113. 

Variations,  105. 
Vecchi,  Orazio,  49. 
"Venere,  Adone,  Amore,"  61. 
Veneziano,  Gaetano,  116. 
Venice,  architecture  at,  3,  4. 

music  at,  2,  4,  35,  36,  107. 

Verdi,  136. 

Vergil,  Polydore,  39. 

"  Vergine  Addolorata,  La,"  169,  175,  202. 

Veronese,  Paolo,  49. 

"  Vextlla  Regis  "  iS,  21,  33. 

Vienna,  music  at,  34. 

school  of,  201. 

Vignola,  127. 

Villarosa,  198. 

Vinci,  48,  127,  146.  196,  202. 

Violin,  II,  32,  69,  93,  118,  170. 

Violoncello,  87,  203. 

"  Virtii  Trionfanle  dell'  Odio  e  dell'  Amore, 

La,"  132. 
"  Volo,  Pater"  139. 

Wagner,  10,  41,  194. 

Weber,  41. 

Wotquenne,  M.  Alfred,  65  ;z,  74. 

Zampognari,  loi. 

Zappi.G.  B.  F.,  49,  90,  92,  97. 

"  Zauberflote,  Die,"  202. 

Zedler,  133. 

Zeno,  Apostolo,  164. 

Ziani,  Pietro  Andrea,  34. 


Printed  by  Ballantvne,  Hanson  b'  Co. 
Edinburgh  iSr"  London 


^ 


UJ 


92181  Sta]24 


5002  00170  3847 


^ar^a;;at{;%.s.Hean.wor.s 


ML    410    .S22    D2 


j     1957. 

lAlessandro    Scarlatti 


LIWQS  HAUL 


:IIP 


