I 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/1872letterswritt00murd_0 


i8 


7 


COLUMBIA  LAYS  ASIDE  HER  LAURELS  TO  MOURN  AT  THE 
BURNING  OF   HER  BIRTHPLACE 


8 


7 


LETTERS   WRITTEN   BY  A  GENTLEMAN 

IN   BOSTON   TO   HIS    FRIEND    IN   PARIS 

DESCRIBING   THE   GREAT  FIRE 

WITH  INTRODUCTORY  CHAPTERS  AND  NOTES  BY 
HAROLD  MURDOCK 


BOSTON  AND  NEW  YORK 

HOUGHTON  MIFFLIN   COMPANY 

MDCCCCIX 


COPYRIGHT,    1909,    BY    HAROLD    MURDOCH 
ALL    RIGHTS    RESERVED 


FIVE    HUNDRED    AND    FORTY-FIVE    COPIES    PRINTED    AT 
THE    RIVERSIDE    PRESS 
CAMBRIDGE,    MASSACHUSETTS,    U.S.A. 
NUMBER  W-7(j, 


PREFACE 

The  fact  is  painfully  familiar,  that  on  the  9th 
of  November  last,  on  a  calm  and  mild  evening,  a 
fire  broke  out  in  the  building  numbered  83  and 
85  Summer  Street,  and  raged  without  control  till 
the  afternoon  of  the  following  day,  spreading 
through  the  best  business  portions  of  Boston, 
covering  sixty-five  acres  with  ruins,  destroying 
776  buildings,  assessed  at  the  value  of  $13,500,000, 
and  consuming  merchandise  and  other  personal 
property  estimated  at  more  than  sixty  millions  of 
dollars. — Report  of  the  Commissioners  appointed 
to  investigate  the  Cause  and  Management  of  the 
Great  Fire  in  Boston. 


CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTORY 

THE  BOSTON   OF   1872  3 

THE   OUTBREAK   OF  THE   GREAT   FIRE  31 

THE    LETTERS  57 

APPENDIX 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   NOTE  139 
THE  CITY  GOVERNMENT   OF   BOSTON 

IN    1872  141 

THE   BOSTON   FIRE   DEPARTMENT  143 

ORIGIN   OF  THE  FIRE  147 

THE  USE  OF  POWDER  153 

THE  BURNING   OF  TRINITY   CHURCH  155 

THE  UNION  SAFE  DEPOSIT   VAULTS  157 

THE  FREEMAN'S  BANK  158 

OUTSIDE  HELP  159 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

COLUMBIA  MOURNS  Frontispiece 
From  the  drawing  by  Thomas  Nast  in  Harper's  Weekly 
Nov.  30,  1872. 

GRANARY  BURYING-GROUND  5 

WASHINGTON  STREET,   FROM  DOCK  SQUARE  6 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Boston  Athenoeum 

FRANKLIN  STREET  BEFORE  THE  FIRE  7 

MACULLAR,  WILLIAMS  AND  PARKER'S  9 

FIRST  BAPTIST  CHURCH  11 

CAUSEWAY  STREET  DEPOTS  13 

OLD  BOSTON  AND  MAINE  STATION  14 

BOSTON  AND  PROVIDENCE  R.  R.  STATION  16 

THE  TREMONT  HOUSE  17 

THE  PARKER  HOUSE  IN   1872  18 
BOSTON  LATIN  AND  ENGLISH  HIGH  SCHOOL       20 

THE  BOSTON  MUSEUM  22 

THE  GREAT  ORGAN  IN  MUSIC  HALL  24 

BOSTON  PEACE-JUBILEE  COLISEUM  27 

From  Harper's  Weekly,  June  22,  1872 

THE  BOSTON   THEATRE  IN   1872  39 

WASHINGTON  STREET,  FROM  WINTER  41 

From  Frank  Leslie's  Weekly,  Nov.  30,  1872 

vii 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

KINGSTON  STREET,  FROM  SUMMER  44 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Bostonian  Society 

INTO  THE  JAWS  OF  DEATH  53 

From  Harper's  Weekly,  Nov.  30,  1872 

BOSTON  IN  FLAMES  60 

From  a  lithograph  in  the  possession  of  the  State  Street  Trust  Co. 

PARK  STREET,  SHOWING  UNION  CLUB  HOUSE      61 

THE  FIRE  COMING  INTO  DEVONSHIRE 

STREET  67 

From  Frank  Leslie's  Weekly,  Nov.  23,  1872 

BEEBE  BLOCK,  WINTHROP  SQUARE  68 

From  Frank  Leslie's  Weekly,  Nov.  30,  1872 

GLOBE  THEATRE,  1872  72 

SUMMER   STREET,   TRINITY  IN   FLAMES  82 

From  Conwell's  History  of  the  Great  Fire 

LOOKING  UP  SUMMER  STREET  90 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Bostonian  Society 

TRANSCRIPT  BUILDING  92 

THE  FIRE  IN   DEVONSHIRE   STREET  94 

From  Carleton's  Story  of  the  Great  Fire 

THE  FIRE  FROM  FORT  HILL  96 

From  Carleton's  Story  of  the  Great  Fire 

"THE  OLD  SOUTH  STANDS"  99 

From  Frank  Leslie's  Weekly,  Nov.  30,  1872 

PART  OF  FIRST  ISSUE  OF  "BOSTON  TRAN- 
SCRIPT" AFTER  THE  FIRE  100 

FIRST  NEWS  OF  FIRE  IN  "BOSTON  SUNDAY 
HERALD,"   NOVEMBER  10,   1872  105 

viii 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

MERCHANTS'  EXCHANGE  BUILDING  108 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Boston  Athenceum 

POST  OFFICE  IN  FANEUIL  HALL  109 

From  Frank  Leslie's  Weekly,  Nov.  30,  1872. 

THE  OLD  SOUTH,   NOVEMBER  10,   1872  110 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Boston  Athenceum 

LOOKING  DOWN   SUMMER  STREET  112 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Boston  Athenxum 

LOOKING  DOWN  WASHINGTON  STREET  117 

From  Harper's  Weekly,  Dec.  7,  1872 

VIEW  AT  THE  HEAD  OF  STATE  STREET  121 

TREMONT  TEMPLE  IN   1872  126 

CATARACT  STEAMER  NO.   10  128 

From  a  photograph  in  the  Boston  Athenaeum 

DIAGRAM  OF   PROPOSED   REVISION   OF 

STREETS  135 

From  newspaper  cutting  in  the  Boston  Athenceum 

The  cuts  in  the  text,  except  where  otherwise  indicated,  are  from  the  little  guide- 
hook,  ''Boston  Illustrated,"  published  by  James  R.  Osgood  &  Co.,  for  Peace 
Jubilee  visitors  in  1872. 


INTRODUCTORY 


7 


THE    BOSTON    OF    1872 

1  HE  member  of  the  Harvard  Class  of  1872  who 
left  Boston  upon  his  graduation  to  return  in  this 
year  of  grace  would  find  much  that  is  strange  and 
unfamiliar  to  his  eyes.  Thirty-seven  years  have 
passed  since  he  threaded  the  well-known  crooked 
streets;  he  has  almost  reached  his  threescore 
years,  and  his  opportunities  and  achievements  are 
all  behind  him.  The  world  has  changed  with  him, 
and  even  in  this  most  leisurely  and  conservative 
of  American  cities,  he  would  pause  bewildered 
upon  many  well-known  spots,  and  look  in  vain  for 
the  old  landmarks  and  accustomed  sights  of  his 
boyhood  days. 

The  Christ  Church  chimes  still  clang  their  old- 
time  melodies   above  the  huddled  roofs   of  the 

[3] 


1872 

North  End.  Faneuil  Hall  still  gazes  blankly 
down  the  crowded  market  streets ;  the  Old  State 
House  yet  defies  the  struggling  traffic  that  curses 
it  with  every  day.  The  Old  South  and  King's 
Chapel  hold  unmolested  their  busy  corners,  the 
Common  spreads  its  grassy  acres  in  the  city's 
throbbing  heart,  and  the  Park  Street  spire  yet 
towers,  a  graceful  landmark,  across  the  broad 
reach  of  ancient  greenery.  But  the  fleeting  years 
have  wrought  changes  in  and  about  these  time- 
honored  sites.  Strange  people  chatter  in  unknown 
tongues  beneath  the  Old  North  steeple,  the  Old 
South  is  buried  in  the  midst  of  towering  structures 
that  play  strange  pranks  with  its  bewildered 
weather-vane,  the  Old  State  House  is  pierced  and 
mined  by  walks  and  tunnels  that  make  for  rapid 
transit.  The  Common  has  resisted  stoutly  all  en- 
croachments, but  some  of  the  outer  walks  are  gone, 
the  fences  and  great  gates  on  the  south  and  east 
have  been  removed,  the  Old  Elm  has  fallen,  and 
the  Paddock  elms  are  now  but  a  pleasant  memory. 
Indeed,  Tremont  Street  from  School  to  Boylston 
contains  unaltered  hardly  a  vestige  of  the  archi- 

[4  1 


1872 

tecture  of  1872.  True,  the  low-pillared  front  of  St. 
Paul's  stands,  a  lonely  reminder  of  the  past,  but 
it  has  lost  its  old-time  character  and  expression, 
engulfed  as  it  is  in  the  shadow  of  its  high-piled 


GRANARY  BURYING-GROUND  AND  PADDOCK  ELMS 

modern  neighbors.  Nothing  is  left  to  suggest  the 
horse  cars  jogging  at  snail's  pace  in  endless  col- 
umn to  and  from  the  crowded  walks  under  the 
Paddock  elms.  It  is  not  easy  to  reconstruct  an 
exact  picture  of  the  famous  street  as  it  was  in  the 
days   before   corporate   consolidations   and   elec- 

[5] 


1872 

tricity,  the  subway  and  the  referendum,  had  revo- 
lutionized the  street  transportation  system  of  the 
city. 

In  1872  the  broad  area  that  divides  Court 
Street  from  Tremont  Row  had  just  been  opened 
by  the  removal  of  the  shapeless  mass  of  Scollay's 
Building,  while,  walking  down  Cornhill,  one  passed 
into  Washington  Street,  which  turned  sharply 
eastward  at  the  Cornhill  corner,  to  terminate  in 
Dock  Square.  Devonshire  Street  in  these  days 
was  continued  from  State  to  Dock  Square  only 
by  a  narrow  footway  lined  by  tiny  shops.  State 
Street  itself,  now  the  centre  of  the  loftiest  and  most 
variegated  architecture  which  the  city  contains, 
was  then  the  abode  of  low  harmonious  blocks  of 
gray  stone  that  gave  an  impression  of  dignity  and 
permanence.  Post  Office  Square  was  undreamed 
of  in  1872,  and  Congress  Street  from  Water  to 
Milk  was  a  mean  and  narrow  thoroughfare.  The 
graceful  curve  of  Franklin  Street,  with  its  long, 
imposing  commercial  blocks  and  its  scattering 
trees  and  flagpole,  ended  in  these  days  at  Federal. 
There  were  dwellings  in  Purchase  Street,  and  in 

[6] 


< 

i-H 

H 

t-H 

CO 

o 

o 


12;  ^ 


H  o 
m  Em 

H 

O 
H 

O 

I— I 

w 

fa 

o 

Q 
1^ 
H 

w 


1872 

Summer  Street  below  Church  Green,  while  a 
handful  of  people  still  lived  in  Bedford  Street  and 
Temple  Place.    Arch  and  Hawley  Streets  were 


FRANKLIN  STREET  BEFORE  THE  FIRE 

hardly  more  than  lanes,  and  the  former  extended 
only  from  Franklin  to  Summer.  It  is  hard  to  re- 
member, now,  how  narrow  and  crooked  the  busy 

[7] 


1872 

streets  used  to  be  within  the  compass  of  that 
famous  sixty  acres  that  was  long  known  as  the 
Burned  District.  The  unpretentious  mass  of 
Hovey's  store,  the  stone  building  on  the  northerly 
corner  of  Summer  and  Washington  streets,  and  the 
white  f a9ade  of  the  MacuUar-Parker  Company,  are 
almost  the  only  survivals  of  Boston's  business  sec- 
tion that  was  swept  by  the  great  fire  of  1872. 

The  Back  Bay  in  those  days  was  not  built  on 
beyond  Dartmouth  Street,  and  ugly  gaps  yawned 
between  there  and  the  Public  Garden.  Standing 
in  the  Garden,  it  was  a  short  look  up  the  Avenue, 
between  lines  of  feeble  saplings,  to  the  dreary 
wastes  that  stretched  away  toward  the  Mill  Dam. 
Copley  Square  was  a  sandy  desert,  where  work  on 
the  Art  Museum  was  just  beginning.  But  three 
spires  broke  the  Mansard  monotony  of  this  sec- 
tion: the  brownstone  shaft  of  the  Arlington  Street 
Church,  and  the  more  modern  steeples  of  the  Cen- 
tral Congregational  and  the  First  Unitarian,  both 
on  Berkeley  Street.  The  South  End  was  still  the 
abode  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  solid  men  of 
Boston,  and  there  was  an  abundance  of  snug  for- 

[8  ] 


1872 

tunes  and  a  plenitude  of  simple  living  in  all  the 
pleasant  streets  that  crossed  Tremont  from  Dover 
southward  to  Northampton  Street.  Columbus  Ave- 


MACULLAR,  WILLIAMS  &  PARKER'S 
BUILDING  IN  1872 


nue  was  completed  only  between  Berkeley  Street 
and  West  Chester  Park,  although  work  was  being 
pushed  on  the  extension  into  Park  Square.  The 
fate  of  the  avenue  was  still  trembling  in  the  bal- 

[  9] 


1872 

ance.  Here  lived  many  a  worthy  citizen,  but 
Beacon  Hill  pronounced  it  shoddy,  while  fashion 
had  declared  for  the  windy  half-built  streets  of  the 
new-made  land.  Business  had  not  invaded  Boyl- 
ston  Street,  and  Beacon  Hill  was  still  the  home  of 
good  old  Boston  families  who  were  only  beginning 
to  be  tempted  away  from  its  calm  and  dignified 
seclusion.  Perhaps  our  graduate  of  1872  would 
find  to-day  more  of  the  Boston  he  remembered  upon 
Beacon  Hill  than  in  any  other  section  of  the  town. 
The  noble  spire  of  the  First  Baptist  Church  has 
gone,  the  Derne  Street  reservoir  has  been  levelled, 
the  State  House  has  been  enlarged  and  despoiled 
of  its  old-time  charm,  but  the  quiet  streets  on  the 
Common  slope  are  as  they  were,  shaded  by  the 
same  trees  and  lined  by  the  same  houses  that  have 
been  the  delight  and  pride  of  generations  of  dis- 
tinguished Bostonians.  Roxbury  was  thinly  peo- 
pled in  its  southern  portion.  Dorchester  was 
more  rural  than  Milton  is  to-day,  a  rolling  open 
country,  village-dotted,  where  stone  walls  still 
climbed  far- viewing  hills,  and  where  old-time  farm- 
houses, with  their  great  barns,  were  gradually  giv- 

[   10  ] 


1872 

ing  way  to  the  fine  park-like   places  of  Boston 
business  men.    The  historic  "corners"  and  "the 


FIRST  BAPTIST  CHURCH,  SOMERSET  STREET 

upper"  and  "the  lower  road"  did  not  belie  their 
names  in  1872. 

Street  transportation  was  furnished  in  these 
days  by  four  distinct  horse-railway  companies, 
the  Metropolitan,  the  Cambridge,  the  Middlesex, 
running  to  Charlestown  and  the  northern  sub- 

[  11  ] 


1872 

urbs,  and  the  Broadway,  which  served  South 
Boston,  portions  of  which  still  formed  attractive 
residential  quarters.  In  addition  to  these,  the 
Highland  Railway,  with  its  brilliant  plaid-painted 
cars,  began  to  operate  in  the  autumn  of  1872.  In 
the  cars  of  these  corporations,  dimly  lighted  by 
kerosene  lamps  in  two  corners,  passengers  shivered 
and  shook,  with  icy  feet  poked  deep  in  dirty  straw, 
while  the  conductor's  punch  rang  merrily  as  he 
collected  his  six-cent  fare.  Perhaps  no  sound  was 
ever  more  suggestive  of  a  great  metropolitan  com- 
munity than  the  jangling  of  the  horse-car  bells 
and  the  clatter  of  the  hoofs  upon  the  well-worn 
cobblestones.  Cars  left  the  Tremont  House  every 
hour,  for  Brookline  Village,  and  for  Dorchester 
l)y  way  of  Warren  Street  on  the  same  sched- 
ule. On  Washington  Street  the  Metropolitan 
encountered  the  competition  of  Mr.  Hathorne's 
Citizens  Line  of  red  coaches,  which  jolted  their 
leisurely  way  from  the  stables  in  Northampton 
Street  across  the  river  to  the  thriving  city  of 
Charlestown. 

The  facilities  for  reaching  and  leaving  the  city 

[   12  ] 


1872 

were  regarded  as  ample  in  1872.  The  Eastern, 
the  Fitchburg,  and  the  Boston  and  Lowell  departed 
from  stations  in  Causeway  Street.  The  splendid 
new  depot  of  the  last-named  corporation  was  in 


THE  CAUSEWAY   STREET  DEPOTS 


process  of  erection,  and  its  massive  proportions 
were  already  indicated  with  sufficient  clearness  to 
emphasize  the  shortcomings  of  its  dingy,  square- 
towered  neighbor,  which  reflected  no  credit  upon 
the  Eastern  management.  The  massive  stone 
castle  of  the  Fitchburg,  with  its  great  hall  up- 

[  13  ] 


1872 

stairs  redolent  with  memories  of  Jenny  Lind,  still 
served  its  purpose  well.  It  stands  to-day,  and, 
though  put  to  menial  uses,  wears  all  the  rugged 
aspect  that  distinguished  it  in  the  time  when  the 
carriages  of  the  wealthy  and  cultured  stood  lined 
up  before  it  waiting  for  the  concert  to  end.    The 


OLD   BOSTON  AND  MAINE   STATION 

Boston  and  Maine  gates  closed  and  opened  in 
Causeway  Street,  blockading  and  releasing  traffic 
as  the  trains  rumbled  in  and  out  of  the  Hay- 
market  Square  station,  then  the  most  commodious 
and  best  situated  of  all  the  city  depots.  At  the 
foot  of  Summer  Street,  the  Boston,  Hartford  and 

[  14  ] 


1872 

Erie  received  its  patrons  in  a  shabby  wooden 
structure  that  reflected  but  too  vividly  its  dis- 
tressed financial  condition.  The  Old  Colony  and 
Newport  was  housed  in  the  building  still  standing 
in  Kneeland  Street,  a  good  station  then,  familiar 
to  South  Shore  suburbanites  and  to  patrons  of  the 
popular  Fall  River  Line.  The  Boston  and  Albany 
ran  in  and  out  beneath  the  twin  sheds  that  fronted 
on  Beach  Street  opposite  the  United  States  Hotel. 
There  were  two  day  expresses  for  New  York, 
via  Springfield,  one  leaving  at  nine  a.  m.,  the 
other  at  three  p.  m.  Both  these  flyers  carried 
drawing-room  cars  and  made  the  run  in  eight 
hours.  The  knell  of  the  Boston  and  Providence 
station  in  Pleasant  Street  had  been  sounded  by 
the  extension  of  Columbus  Avenue  to  Park 
Square.  It  was  on  the  eve  of  being  torn  down, 
and  work  on  the  finest  railway  structure  in  the 
United  States  had  just  been  started  on  the  westerly 
side  of  the  new  street.  The  Boston  and  Provi- 
dence ran  four  trains  each  way  between  these 
cities  in  1872.  Besides  these,  there  was  the  steam- 
boat express  of  the  Providence  line,  and  two  day 

[  15  ] 


1872 

expresses  for  New  York,  which,  hke  those  of  the 
Albany,  ran  on  an  eight-hour  schedule. 

The  Cunard  line  maintained  a  weekly  service 
with  Liverpool,  calling  at  Queenstown.  One  had 
the  choice  of  the  staunch  and  swift  mail-steamers 


BOSTON  AND  PROVIDENCE  R.  R.  STATION,  PLEASANT  STREET 

Malta,  Olympus,  Siberia,  Batavia,  Hecla,  and 
Samaria ;  and,  under  captains  picked  by  Mr. 
Mclver's  judicious  care,  they  were  certain  to  make 
their  destination  in  ten  or  twelve  days'  time. 

The  traveller  arriving  in  Boston  in  these  days 
found  some  of  the  best  hotel  accommodations  in  the 
country.    There  was  Young's,  the  United  States, 

[  16  ] 


1872 

the  Revere,  and  the  Tremont,  all  deservedly  fa- 
mous. Other  well-known  establishments  were  the 
American,  the  largest  of  the  local  hostelries  and  the 
recognized  headquarters  of  the  shoe  and  leather 


THE  TREMONT  HOUSE 


trade,  the  Adams,  the  Marlboro'  and  the  St. 
James  at  the  South  End.  Then,  too,  there  were  the 
"French  Flat"  houses,  among  which  the  Berke- 
ley, the  Boylston,  the  Pelham,  and  the  Conti- 
nental were  preeminent.    But  the   hotel  "par  ex- 

[  17] 


1872 

cellence  was  the  Parker  House,  the  Mecca  of  all 
who  rejoiced  in  good  living.  It  was  Artemus  Ward 
who  declared  that  Harvard  College  was ''  pleasantly 
situated  in  the  bar-room  of  Parker's."  However 
much  we  may  question  the  good  taste  or    the 


THE  PARKER  HOUSE  IN  1872 


geographical  accuracy  of  this  statement,  it  is 
worth  quoting  as  an  evidence  of  the  popularity 
of  the  School  Street  hotel  forty  years  ago.  A  New 
York  journal  in  jocose  mood  declared  at  this 
time  that  in  Boston  "nearly  all  the  hotels  have 

[  18  ] 


1872 

graveyards  attached  to  them.  Whether  these 
burial  places  are  the  natural  result  of  the  too  rich 
cuisine  of  the  various  establishments,  or  whether 
people  who  do  not  pay  their  hotel  bills  are  sum- 
marily disposed  of  in  Boston,  is  a  matter  we  leave 
to  conjecture."  It  must  be  admitted  that  the 
Parker  House  looking  out  upon  the  tombs  of 
King's  Chapel  yard,  the  Tremont  overlooking  the 
old  Granary,  the  Pelham  hard  by  the  burying- 
ground  in  the  Common,  and  the  St.  James  ad- 
joining the  cemetery  near  Blackstone  Square,  gave 
some  color  to  the  genial  suggestion  of  the  New 
York  editor. 

The  schools  of  Boston  were  deservedly  famous, 
and  served  as  models  for  the  rest  of  the  nation. 
The  new  Girls'  High  and  Normal  on  West  New- 
ton Street  was  regarded  then  as  a  splendid  ex- 
ample of  a  modern  school  edifice.  The  Boston 
Latin  and  English  High  occupied  jointly  the 
granite  building  on  Bedford  Street  that  was  re- 
moved years  since  to  allow  the  extension  of  Har- 
rison Avenue.  Dr.  Francis  Gardner  presided  over 
the  Latin,  and  it  is  fitting  that  mention  should  be 

[  19  1 


1872 

made  of  him  as  a  picturesque  figure  in  the  educa- 
tional Hfe  of  the  city,  a  strong  austere  man  who 
pointed  the  way  to  duty  with  his  rod. 

Boston  in  1872  was  still  a  Protestant  commun- 
ity.   The  Catholic    churches  were    thriving,  and 


THE  BOSTON  LATIN  AND  ENGLISH  HIGH  SCHOOL,  BEDFORD  STREET 

gave  undoubted  promise  of  the  vast  growth  which 
was  in  store  for  them ;  but  the  religious  creeds  of 
the  fathers  were  still  the  dominant  factors  in  local 
religious  life.  The  Reverend  W.  H.  H.  Murray 
of  Adirondack  fame  held  the  Park  Street  pulpit; 

[  20  ] 


1872 

Dr.  Fulton  of  bellicose  tendencies  preached  to 
immense  throngs  in  Tremont  Temple.  The  Old 
South  society  still  occupied  their  meeting-house 
at  the  corner  of  Washington  and  Milk,  although 
contemplating  an  early  removal  to  the  Back  Bay. 
Dr.  Blagden  was  the  pastor  here,  assisted  by  Dr. 
Manning.  Phillips  Brooks  was  the  new  rector  of 
Trinity  Church,  and  his  parishioners  gathered 
from  far  and  near  to  worship  in  the  picturesque 
old  pile  on  Summer  Street.  James  Freeman 
Clarke,  Edward  Everett  Hale,  Rufus  Ellis,  Dr. 
Neale,  Dr.  Herrick,  Dr.  Miner,  Dr.  Vinton,  and 
Dr.  Bartol,  were  a  few  of  the  many  notable 
clergymen  prominent  in  Boston  at  this  time.  The 
South  End  churches  were  at  the  height  of  their 
prosperity.  Dr.  Webb  at  the  Shawmut  Congre- 
gational had  perhaps  one  of  the  wealthiest  and 
most  substantial  constituencies  in  the  city. 

In  its  issue  of  June  22,  1872,  Harper  s 
Weekly  remarked,  ''The  visitor,  especially  if  he 
is  a  New  Yorker,  will  be  curious  to  know  how  the 
Thespian  art  flourishes  in  the  ancient  strong- 
hold of  the  Puritans.    The  fact  remains  that  Bos- 

[21   ] 


187^ 

ton,  in  this  year  of  grace  1872,  lias  five  theatres  in 
successful  operation,  with  numerous  halls  devoted 
to  itinerant  entertainments  more  or  less  calcu- 
lated to  corrupt  ye  youth  of  ye  town.   The  Boston, 


THE   BOSTON   MUSEUM 


the  Museum,  and  the  Globe  are  well-managed 
establishments.  The  Museum  and  the  Globe 
have  most  excellent  stock  companies,  and  put  their 
pieces  upon  the  boards  with  an  elegance  and 
fitness  of  appointments  unknown  elsewhere  out- 

[  22  ] 


1872 

side  of  New  York.  The  Boston  has  a  passable 
stock  company,  depending  chiefly  upon  stars,  for- 
eign and  domestic.  It  is  at  this  house  that  Edwin 
Booth  and  Joseph  Jefferson  always  play  on  their 
professional  visits,  no  other  theatre  in  the  city 
being  sufficiently  spacious  to  hold  their  audiences. 
It  was  here  Mr.  Fechter  made  his  debut  in  blonde 
wig  and  broken  English.  If  Bunker  Hill  is  'the 
place  where  Warren  fell,'  the  Boston  Museum  is 
certainly  the  place  where  another  Warren  may  be 
said  to  have  risen  and  culminated.  Mr.  William 
Warren  is,  and  has  been  for  many  years,  the  lead- 
ing card  at  the  Museum.  The  visitor  is  advised  to 
go  and  see  him,  especially  when  he  plays  Triplet 
in  'Masks  and  Faces.'  The  Howard  Athenaeum 
is  the  democratic  house  of  the  ballet  girl  and  the 
gymnast,  and  the  refuge  of  the  forlorn  negro  min- 
strel. The  St.  James  is  somewhat  difficult  to 
characterize.  Ever  since  its  opening  night,  some 
six  or  seven  years  since,  it  has  carried  on  a  sort 
of  feverish  flirtation  with  the  public,  but  has  not 
succeeded  in  winning  any  lasting  favor." 

It  is  always  good  to  see  ourselves  as  others  see 

[  23  ] 


1872 

us,  and  Bostonians  could  hardly  complain  of  this 
characterization  of  their  playhouses  by  the  New 
York  weekly.  Mention  might  well  have  been 
made  of  the  w  ax-works  and  curios  in  the  Museum 


sfe/j 


THE   GREAT  ORGAN   IN  MUSIC  HALL 

lobby,  which  drew  many  a  rigid  Puritan  to  the 
threshold  of  the  pit.  The  great  organ  in  Music 
Hall  was  the  admiration  of  all  those  who  visited 
the  city  in  1872.  It  played  its  part  melodiously 
in  the  concerts  of  the  Handel  and  Haydn  Society, 

[  24  ] 


1872 

and  of  the  newly  formed  Apollo  Club.  It  looked 
down  in  silent  dignity  upon  the  audiences  which 
attended  the  Lyceum  and  Old  Bay  State  lecture 
courses,  and  in  silent  contempt  upon  the  bazaars, 
fairs,  and  shows,  which  invaded  its  classic  domain. 
The  Boston  Almanac  concluded  its  "Chronicle 
of  Events"  for  1872  in  the  following  words  :  "The 
last  days  of  the  year  were  the  coldest  of  the  same 
time  within  the  past  fifty  years.  Great  storms, 
great  fires,  disasters  by  railway,  and  shipwrecks, 
were  unusually  numerous  during  the  year."  It 
might  have  been  added  that  intense  heat  as  well 
as  intense  cold  had  been  experienced,  the  summer 
being  almost  unprecedented  in  the  soaring  flights 
of  the  thermometer  and  in  the  violence  and  de- 
structiveness  of  the  electrical  storms.  On  Novem- 
ber 11,  inspired  by  the  gruesome  Ellis  murder, 
the  Boston  Globe  discussed  editorially  "Epi- 
demics of  Crime,"  asserting  that  ''the  present 
seems  to  be  one  of  the  periods  only  too  familiar  to 
students  of  the  morbid  anatomy  of  human  society 
when  crime  becomes  at  once  more  prevalent  and 
malignant  than   usual."    The  phenomenon   that 

[  25  ] 


1872 

interested  the  Globe  inspired  numerous  psychical 
dissertations  on  the  part  of  the  American  press. 
There  were  scandals,  horrors,  and  disasters  in 
plenty,  as  one  may  realize  by  turning  the  dis- 
reputable files  of  the  Day's  Doings  and  the  Police 
News.  These  sheets  should  have  reaped  a  rich 
harvest  in  1872,  as  they  encountered  little  com- 
petition, the  Yellow  Press  being  then  a  thing  un- 
born. The  enormities  of  the  Tweed  Ring  were 
agitating  the  public  mind  in  1872,  and  the  Credit 
Mobilier  scandals  were  a  universal  topic  of  dis- 
cussion, as  they  were  sure  to  be  in  the  heat  of  the 
presidential  campaign.  People  seemed  conscious 
that  the  time  was  "  out  of  joint ' ' ;  business  men 
were  feverish  and  worried,  although  few  suspected 
how  swiftly  their  affairs  were  drifting  into  panic 
and  disaster. 

But  the  year  1872  will  always  recall  to  the 
Bostonian  the  more  cheerful  recollections  of  the 
World's  Peace  Jubilee,  which  crowded  the  city 
with  guests  from  all  parts  of  the  Union.  Imbedded 
in  the  sandy  wastes  of  the  Back  Bay,  the  hideous 
Coliseum  Building  was  packed  daily  by  enthusias- 

[  26  ] 


H 
W 

H 

O 
O 


o 

H 

H 


w 

CO 
M 

O 


1872 

tic  thousands,  among  whom  were  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  and  Mr.  Greeley,  his  Demo- 
cratic opponent  in  the  approaching  national  cam- 
paign. The  singing  of  Madame  Peschka-Leut- 
ner  will  always  be  an  inspiring  memory,  and  the 
appearance  of  Herr  Johann  Strauss  was  a  notable 
event.  Our  vanity  was  piqued  by  the  fine  play- 
ing of  the  great  band  of  the  British  Grenadier 
Guard,  under  Dan  Godfrey's  direction,  and  by  the 
no  less  masterly  work  of  the  other  foreign  organ- 
izations, the  band  of  the  Kaiser  Franz  Regiment 
of  the  German  Army  and  that  of  the  Garde 
Republicaine  from  Paris.  But  it  was  the  Anvil 
Chorus  that  took  the  public  ear,  and  while  the 
cannon  roared,  the  bands  crashed,  the  huge  chorus 
labored,  and  the  perspiring  firemen  swung  their 
heavy  hammers,  the  windows  of  quiet  dwellings 
beyond  the  Charles  rattled  in  their  casements. 
Who  can  forget  the  daily  soaring  of  the  great  bal- 
loon, and  the  side-shows  rampant  with  freaks  and 
monstrosities  that  girdled  this  vast  ugly  temple 
dedicated  to  Peace  and  Apollo  ? 

Boston  in  1872  covered  a  territory  of  less  than 

[28] 


1872 

thirty  square  miles,  and  embraced  a  population  of 
250,000  souls.  Roxbury  had  been  annexed  in 
1868,  Dorchester  in  1870,  while  Charlestown, 
Brighton,  and  West  Roxbury  still  maintained  their 
separate  existences.  William  Gaston  was  Mayor, 
supported  by  an  Aldermanic  Board  of  twelve 
members  and  a  Common  Council  numbering 
sixty-four. 

It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  the  baneful  influence 
of  politics  was  to  some  extent  discernible  in  the 
administration  of  our  civic  affairs  thirty-seven 
years  ago,  and  the  disastrous  events  of  1872  served 
to  lay  bare  instances  of  inefficiency  that  had  their 
root  in  conditions  that  have  always  existed  under 
democratic  systems  of  government.  But  the  city 
fathers  were  for  the  most  part  men  of  standing 
and  responsibility  in  the  community,  and  Boston 
suffered  more  from  their  narrow  conservatism 
and  conscientious  economies  than  from  anything 
suggestive  of  that  gross  evil  the  modern  name  for 
which  is  "graft." 

Boston  in  1872  took  pride  in  her  civic  adminis- 
tration, and  was  inclined  to  be  thankful  that  she 

[29  ] 


1872 

was  not  as  other  cities.  It  needed  no  argument  to 
convince  her  that  her  schools  and  public  institutions 
were  beyond  compare,  that  the  intelhgence  and  vir- 
tue of  her  people  and  the  honor  of  her  courts  would 
ever  be  a  barrier  to  such  scandals  as  convulsed 
New  York,  and  that  the  solid  structures  that  lined 
her  streets,  and  the  alert  and  well-equipped  fire  de- 
partment that  was  ever  ready  at  her  call,  were 
proof  against  disasters  of  the  sort  which  had  over- 
whelmed Chicago.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  this  com- 
placency of  the  good  old  city  was  after  all  but 
the  pride  that  goes  before  a  fall.  However  strong 
the  bulwark  of  civic  virtue  that  preserved  her 
from  moral  contamination,  the  old  year  was  not  to 
be  rung  out  until  her  vaunted  fire  department 
had  been  weighed  in  the  balance  and  found  want- 
ing. The  dismal  scenes  of  Chicago  were  to  be  in 
a  measure  reenacted  among  the  granite  palaces  of 
her  merchants,  and,  depleted  in  purse,  wounded 
in  pride,  but  with  faith  in  herself  unabated,  she 
was  to  be  the  recipient  of  condolences  and  of  ten- 
ders of  aid  from  a  great-hearted  and  sympathizing 
nation. 


THE    OUTBREAK    OF 
THE    GREAT    FIRE    OF    1872 

AND  HOW  IT  BECAME  A 
CONFLAGRATION 

1  HE  paid  fire  department  at  this  time  consisted 
of  four  hundred  and  seventy-five  men,  supervised 
by  a  committee  of  the  city  government,  and  di- 
rectly commanded  by  a  chief  engineer  and  fifteen 
assistants,  who  were  appointed  by  the  City  Council. 
The  force  comprised  both  call  and  permanent 
members,  the  former  class  largely  predominating, 
and  was  organized  into  twenty-one  steam  fire- 
engine  companies,  seven  hook-and-ladder  com- 
panies, and  eleven  detached  hose  companies. 
East  Boston,  South  Boston,  and  Roxbury  had 
each  three  engines.  Six  were  located  in  the  city 
proper,  and  precisely  the  same  number  in  the 
sparsely  settled  Dorchester  district,  which  had 
made  this  ample  provision  for  itself  on  the  eve  of 
annexation. 

[31  ] 


1872 

The  fire  department  not  only  commanded  the 
pubHc  confidence,  but  was  the  most  popular 
branch  of  the  city's  equipment.  Only  twelve  years 
had  elapsed  since  the  hand-tubs  had  been  suc- 
ceeded by  the  steam-engines,  and  thousands  of 
men  walked  the  streets  who  had  at  one  time  or 
another  borne  an  active  part  in  the  old-time 
establishment.  The  firemen's  parade  was  always 
one  of  the  events  of  the  year,  and  the  long  array 
of  brightly  painted  and  highly  polished  engines, 
with  their  gleaming  stacks  stuffed  with  flowers, 
the  trucks  and  hose-carriages  draped  with  gor- 
geous bunting,  and  the  trim  files  of  red-shirted 
firemen,  preceded  by  foremen  with  silver  trumpets, 
were  always  received  with  boundless  delight  and 
enthusiasm.  The  different  companies  did  not 
rely  alone  upon  their  numbers  for  identification, 
for  every  steamer,  hose-carriage,  and  truck  bore 
some  distinctive  name,  many  of  them  legacies 
from  hand-engine  times.  The  Boston  schoolboy 
of  1872  still  recalls  with  a  flush  of  the  old  enthusi- 
asm Mazeppa  1,  Eagle  S,  Barnicoat  4,  Melville  6, 
Northern    Liberty    8,    Maverick    9,    Warren    12, 

[  32  ] 


1872 

Tremont  13,  and  many  another  good  title  famous 
in  many  a  hard-fought  contest  with  the  flames. 

On  Saturday,  October  26,  1872,  the  rain  was 
driving  in  sheets  before  a  fierce  autumnal  gale.  If 
we  had  looked  into  the  fire  department  office  in 
City  Hall  late  on  the  afternoon  of  this  stormy  day, 
we  should  have  found  a  group  of  fifteen  strong 
weather-beaten  men  in  earnest  consultation.  This 
was  the  Board  of  Engineers  of  the  Boston  Fire 
Department,  which  had  been  convened  by  Chief 
Damrell,  "to  decide  upon  a  course  of  action  in 
case  of  fire  during  the  present  time  in  which  the 
horses  were  stricken  with  the  distemper-  that  was 
so  prevalent."  The  situation  was  indeed  serious, 
and  the  inroads  of  the  epidemic  had  played  havoc 
with  trade  and  with  the  public  convenience  and 
comfort.  Some  of  the  horse-railways  had  discon- 
tinued running,  while  others  maintained  a  lame 
and  infrequent  service.  Teaming  except  by  oxen 
was  almost  at  a  standstill,  and  but  for  the  latent 
sense  of  humor  in  the  American  character  the 
situation  would  have  seemed  blue  enough.  Em- 
ployees and  truckmen  vied  with  one  another  in 

[  '^3  ] 


1872 

manning  heavy  drays  by  hand-power,  and  some 
concerns  added  gayety  to  these  troubled  days  by 
hiring  brass  bands,  which  headed  gangs  of  tugging 
men,  playing  lively  marching  tunes.  So  far  as  the 
fire  department  was  concerned,  the  conditions  af- 
forded no  opportunity  for  the  play  of  humor.  The 
horses  were  nearly  all  down  in  their  stalls,  and  the 
question  was  how  best  to  insure  a  prompt  re- 
sponse of  the  heavy  apparatus  to  alarms  of  fire. 
It  is  not  clear  whether  the  hiring  or  impressment  of 
sound  horses  was  even  considered  in  the  meeting 
to  which  we  refer,  but  the  final  conclusion  of  the 
whole  matter  was  that  all  use  of  horses  should  be 
for  the  time  suspended.  It  was  voted  that  the 
strength  of  each  company  should  be  temporarily 
doubled  by  the  enlistment  of  volunteers,  and  that 
drag-ropes  should  be  furnished  each  engine-house 
for  the  purpose  of  drawing  the  apparatus  by  hand- 
power.  But  while  strengthening  the  personnel  of 
the  department,  the  engineers  voted  to  suspend 
the  running  card  and  to  decrease  the  number 
of  engines  responding  to  alarms.  Under  the 
running   card    then    in    force,    from    four    to   six 

[  34  ] 


1872 

steamers  responded  to  each  box  in  the  downtown 
section,  but  the  new  assignment  adopted  at  this 
meeting  reduced  the  number  to  one.  It  was  pro- 
vided that  the  hose-jumpers  should  alone  be  taken 
out  on  the  first  call,  the  engines  to  follow  in  case 
of  a  second  alarm.  We  cannot  now  determine  the 
motives  that  inspired  the  suspension  of  the  running 
card,  but  its  practical  effect  was  to  decrease  the  effi- 
ciency of  the  department  by  eighty  per  cent  for  the 
first  five  or  ten  minutes  of  every  fire.  To  minimize 
the  delay  in  the  response  of  the  steamers,  it  was 
voted  to  notify  the  police,  in  all  cases  where  the 
fire  was  above  the  third  story,  to  pull  the  second 
alarm,  as  soon  as  the  first  had  ceased  striking, 
without  waiting  for  an  order  from  an  engineer. 
The  meaning  of  this  is  of  course  clear  enough :  a 
fire  in  the  lower  part  of  a  building  might  be  con- 
trolled by  hydrant  streams ;  above  that  level  the 
power  furnished  by  the  engines  would  be  a 
necessity.  After  voting  Steamers  16  and  18  tem- 
porarily out  of  service,  and  providing  for  some 
minor  details,  the  meeting  adjourned.  The  store- 
fronts were  lighted  and  the  gas-lamps  were  flick- 

[35] 


1872 

ering  above  the  flooded  streets  when  the  engineers 
passed  out  of  City  Hall  after  completing  what 
proved  to  be  a  most  serious  blunder,  none  the  less 
deplorable  because  the  work  of  brave  and  con- 
scientious men.  It  must  be  confessed  that  a  week 
after  the  adoption  of  the  new  system  it  appeared 
to  be  working  well  enough.  The  fire-fiend  seemed 
inclined  to  stay  his  hand,  and  when  the  city  bells 
boomed  out  their  call  of  danger  there  was  a  mad  rush 
of  sturdy  citizens  towards  the  engine-houses  to  man 
the  ropes.  The  long  lines  of  panting  men  with  the 
hose-reels  clattering  at  their  heels  were  received 
with  cheers,  gibes,  and  laughter  whenever  they 
appeared  on  the  crowded  streets.  The  city  was 
enlivened  by  the  workings  of  the  new  rules,  and 
many  a  merchant  whose  fortune  was  soon  to  dis- 
appear in  ashes  looked  out  with  delight  upon  these 
vivid  reminders  of  the  good  old  days  when  he 
**ran  with  the  machine." 

It  was  very  evident  during  the  first  week  of 
November  that  the  epidemic  had  spent  its  force 
and    that    matters    were   rapidly    mending.     The 

street  railways  had  reestablished  an  efficient  serv- 

[36] 


1872 

ice,  and  had  eighty  per  cent  of  their  animals  at 
work.  The  streets  of  the  wholesale  district  re- 
sumed their  normal  appearance,  and  truckmen 
and  cabmen  again  began  to  ply  their  trades.  But 
the  fire  department  still  ran  by  hand.  The  horses 
were  adjudged  unfit  for  their  peculiarly  arduous 
work,  and  the  question  of  hiring  was  not  even  then 
considered.  But,  as  we  have  said,  the  fire-fiend 
seemed  inert,  the  weather  held  still  and  mild,  and 
when  the  morning  of  November  9  broke  with 
all  the  golden  promise  of  a  glorious  Indian  Sum- 
mer day,  it  was  remarked  by  the  firemen  on  duty 
in  the  city  proper  that  no  alarm  had  called  them 
out  for  four  long  days  and  nights.  The  soft  land 
breeze  that  prevailed  throughout  the  day  went 
down  with  the  sun,  and  the  leafless  trees  on  the 
Common  displayed  their  still  and  delicate  tracery 
against  a  cloudless  and  glowing  west.  With  the 
gathering  of  dusk  the  rising  moon  diffused  its  silvery 
light  over  town  and  bay,  and,  as  darkness  deep- 
ened, the  gas-lamps  began  to  flare  in  the  shadowy 
streets.    Silence  reigned  in  the  wholesale  district, 

but  Washington  Street,  deserted  for  a  time,  began 

[37  ] 


1872 

to  fill  again  with  the  usual  crowds  of  a  Saturday 
night.  The  retail  stores  were  soon  thronged  with 
week-end  shoppers,  and  as  the  clock  of  the  Park 
Street  Church  tolled  forth  the  hour  of  seven,  the 
malls  of  the  Common  were  dotted  with  strollers 
tempted  thither  by  the  unseasonable  mildness  of 
the  weather.  The  entrances  of  the  theatres  were 
flaming  with  gas-lights,  and  the  enthusiastic  van- 
guard of  the  evening's  audiences  lounged  in  the 
lobbies  or  sauntered  in  to  their  seats.  At  the 
Museum,  the  bill-boards  announced  that  the 
tragedy  of  Othello  would  be  essayed  by  the  full 
strength  of  the  popular  company.  The  crowd  was 
thin  about  the  Boston  Theatre,  where  the  regular 
company  was  advertised  to  appear  in  Nobody's 
Daughter  and  Paddy  Miles's  Boy,  but  the  great 
house  had  been  filled  during  the  afternoon  to 
witness  Charlotte  Cushman  in  her  soul-stirring 
impersonation  of  Meg  Merrilies.  This  tragic 
queen  had  held  the  Boston  stage  throughout  the 
week,  playing  in  Macbeth  and  Henry  VIII  as 
well  as  in  Guy  Mannering,  and  this  evening's 
entertainment  was  regarded  as  a  tame  conclusion 

[SS  ] 


1872 

to  a  notable  six-days'  run.  It  was  about  the  Globe, 
farther  up  Washington  Street,  that  the  public 
interest  seemed  to  centre,  for  Mr.  E.  A.  Sothern 
was  to  be  the  star  of  the  evening  in  David  Gar- 


THE  BOSTON  THEATRE   IN  1872 


rick,  with  the  Boorampooter  as  a  curtain-raiser. 

The   South   End   cars   halted   here   to   discharge 

their  heavy  freights,  while  Mr.  Hathorne's  coaches 

also  made  their  modest  contributions  to  what  was 

clearly  to  be  a  crowded  house. 

[39  ] 


1872 

The  corner  of  Washington  and  Winter  streets 
was  a  busy  centre,  as  it  has  been  for  long  years 
since,  and  here  a  sudden  halt  was  noticed  in  the 
movement  uptown.  What  had  served  to  chain  the 
interest  of  a  half-dozen  listless  strollers  soon  drew 
a  hundred  to  the  spot,  where  all  were  gazing  down 
the  narrow,  dimly-lighted  length  of  Summer  Street, 
at  the  lower  end  of  which  the  fitful  glowing  of  a 
rapidly  increasing  cloud  of  smoke  told  of  the  out- 
break of  fire.  One  by  one,  or  in  small  knots,  the 
beholders  broke  from  the  throng  and  made  their 
way  down  by  Hovey's  and  Trinity  Church  towards 
the  Hartford  and  Erie  Depot.  There  was  no  out- 
cry, or,  if  there  was,  it  was  lost  in  the  rumble  of 
wheels,  the  jangle  of  horse-car  bells,  and  the  usual 
sounds  of  a  city  street.  The  first  arrivals  from 
Washington  Street  saw  at  a  glance  that  the  mod- 
ern five-story  granite  block  on  the  southeasterly  cor- 
ner of  Kingston  and  Summer  streets  was  on  fire. 
Great  masses  of  yellow  smoke  poured  from  every 
crevice  of  the  Mansard  roof.  The  curtains  were 
drawn  behind  the  broad  expanse  of  glass  that  lined 
the  street-floor,  while  midway  between  sidewalk 

[40] 


1872 

and  eaves  a  brass  corner  sign  shone  faintly  in  the 
hght  of  the  street-lamp  below.  Those  who  passed 
close  under  the  threatened  structure  could  see  the 


LOOKING  DOWN  AVASHINGTON  STREET  FROM  WINTER 
BEFORE  THE  FIRE 


reflection  of  angry  flames  upon  the  window-panes 
on  the  other  side  of  Kingston  Street,  and  then  the 
attention  of  those  who  had  been  gazing  up  to  the 
smoking  roof  was  called  to  the  ruddy  glare  that 

[41  ] 


187^ 

was  spreading  through  the  basement.  It  was  clear 
that  the  flames  had  secured  a  lodgment  upon  every 
floor,  and  that  the  building  was  on  fire  from  cellar 
to  attic. 

But  some  time  before  it  had  become  visible  in 
Washington  Street,  the  fire  had  been  detected  by 
the  dwellers  in  Kingston  Street.  In  1872,  with  the 
exception  of  a  business  structure  at  the  corner  of 
Summer  Street  and  another  adjoining,  in  process 
of  erection,  the  whole  westerly  side  of  Kingston, 
between  Summer  and  Bedford  streets,  was  still 
occupied  by  dwellings.  One  or  tw^o  old  residents 
still  clung  to  their  roof-trees,  but  the  march  of 
business  was  accomplishing  its  certain  work,  and 
most  of  these  old-time  homes  had  deteriorated  into 
lodging-houses,  as  the  first  step  in  retreat  before 
the  encroachments  of  trade.  The  granite  block  in 
which  the  fire  originated  extended  along  Kingston 
Street  for  one  hundred  feet  to  an  alley  in  the  rear. 
Across  the  alley  stood  another  five-story  structure 
built  of  brick,  which  formed  at  that  time  the 
southerly  outpost  of  Boston's  wholesale  district. 
Beyond,  along  the  edge  of  the  South  Cove,  lay  a 

[  42  ] 


1872 

faded  reminder  of  what  had  once  been  a  pleasant 
residential  section,  the  old  swell-front  houses  given 
over  to  lodgers  and  undermined  in  their  basements 
by  the  shops  of  petty  traders. 

From  the  windows  of  the  Kingston  Street  lodg- 
ing-houses scores  of  eyes  beheld  the  incipient 
stages  of  a  catastrophe  that  was  to  become  mem- 
orable in  our  civic  annals.  The  fire  first  appeared 
shining  in  the  basement  of  the  granite  block.  It 
was  decreed  by  fate  that  it  should  break  out 
within  a  few  feet  of  the  pine-sheathed  elevator- 
well  that  pierced  the  building  for  its  entire  height, 
from  the  basement  floor  to  the  great  wooden 
Mansard  roof.  It  was  seemingly  but  a  moment 
from  the  first  appearance  of  the  flames  until  a 
sudden  flaring  through  a  small  window  in  the 
elevator-shaft  proclaimed  that  they  had  begun 
their  upward  march.  The  excited  men  who  first 
crossed  Kingston  Street  into  the  alley  declared 
that  it  was  a  matter  of  seconds  rather  than  of 
minutes  before  the  small  windows  in  the  elevator 
shaft  were  blown  out  at  the  third  story  and  the 
glass  sent  rattling  and  clinking  to  the  pavement 

[43  ] 


187^ 

below.  Then  a  brilliant  reflection,  spreading  through 
the  great  rooms,  indicated  that  the  elevator  parti- 
tions on  the  second  and  third  floors  were  burning 
through.  There  was  a  brief  hesitancy  in  the  upward 
movement  at  this  point,  then  a  new  rush  followed, 
and  those  looking  out  from  open  windows  in  the 
Kingston  Street  houses  could  hear  the  fire  roaring 
like  a  blast  as  it  swept  up  the  shaft  to  the  roof.  As 
floor  after  floor  became  brilliant  with  the  threaten- 
ing light,  and  as  the  masses  of  smoke  drifting 
lazily  into  the  air  grew  lurid  and  became  spangled 
with  sparks,  the  good  people  of  Kingston  Street 
bethought  themselves  of  their  danger,  and,  while 
some  prepared  to  pack  their  belongings,  others 
began  to  concoct  private  measures  for  the  pro- 
tection of  their  property.  In  the  street  the  ques- 
tion was  asked  by  one  of  another  why  the  firemen 
did  not  appear.  A  night  clerk  inquired  from  a 
neighboring  window  if  the  alarm  had  been  given, 
and  some  one  shouted  an  affirmative  response. 
Anxious  queries  regarding  the  alarm  were  inter- 
spersed with  harsh  criticism  of  the  sluggishness  of 

the  fire  department.     No  one  knew  the  where- 

[  44  ] 


1872 

abouts  of  the  nearest  signal-box;  every  one  was 
content  with  his  neighbor's  assurance  that  the 
alarm  had  probably  been  given.  Of  such  men  was 
the  gathering  crowd  composed,  and  this  event 
must  go  down  in  history  as  one  crisis  in  which 
Boston's  citizens  woefully  failed  her. 

It  is  clear  that  the  police  were  not  neglectful 
of  their  duty ;  but  the  same  fate  that  fixed  the  spot 
for  the  outbreak  of  the  fire  also  decreed  an  hour 
when  no  policeman  was  near.  When  Officer  Page, 
attracted  first  by  the  shouting  of  boys  and  then  by 
the  light  of  the  fire,  hurried  up  Lincoln  Street  and 
opened  the  alarm-box  at  the  corner  of  Bedford,  he 
was  but  a  few  seconds  ahead  of  two  of  his  col- 
leagues, who  came  running  in  from  other  direc- 
tions. Without  waiting  to  locate  the  fire.  Page 
opened  the  box  and  pulled  down  the  slide.  Acting 
under  the  special  instructions  of  the  Board  of 
Engineers,  he  gave  the  second  alarm  before  closing 
the  box. 

In  all  the  confused,  tumultuous  testimony  offered 
by  excited  men,  it  is  difficult  to  figure  time  as  it 
elapsed  in  the  vicinity  of  Kingston  and  Summer 

[45] 


1872 

streets  between  seven  and  half-past  on  this  fatal 
evening.  Two  conspicuous  and  widely  separated 
events  alone  enable  us  to  estimate  the  delay  that 
ensued  between  the  first  discovery  of  the  fire  and 
the  taking  of  the  first  step  towards  calling  out  the 
fire-extinguishing  machinery  of  the  city. 

It  chanced  that  evening  that  a  schooner  was 
being  warped  through  the  Prison  Point  draw- 
bridge of  the  Eastern  Railroad  in  Charlestown. 
Two  police  officers  interested  themselves  in  the 
affair,  fearing  that  the  7.10  train  from  Boston 
might  be  delayed.  As  the  bridge  was  closed  and 
the  line  reopened,  they  found  that  the  task  had 
been  well  done,  the  depot  clock  reading  eight 
minutes  after  seven.  At  this  moment,  looking 
towards  Boston,  they  saw  the  glowing  of  the 
smoke-cloud,  and  remarked  one  to  the  other  that 
there  was  a  fire  in  the  city. 

The  fire-alarm  operator  in  the  dome  of  the 
City  Hall  was  engrossed  in  his  paper  on  this 
pleasant  evening.  He  was  called  to  his  feet  by  the 
clicking  of  his  instruments  registering  an  alarm, 
and  as  he  put  the  machinery  in  motion  which  sent 

[40  ] 


1872 

the  news  clanging  through  the  fire-houses  of  the 
city,  he  Hfted  his  eyes  and  saw  the  hght  of  the 
flames.  He  then  turned  to  his  clock  and  entered 
in  his  register  an  alarm  from  Box  52  at  7.24  p.  m. 
Astounding  as  is  the  fact,  we  are  compelled  to 
believe  that  the  fire  was  visible  from  a  point  two 
miles  distant  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour  before  its 
existence  was  made  known  to  the  fire  department 
of  Boston. 

Fifty-two  was  known  among  the  city  firemen  as 
"a  bad  box."  Not  only  was  it  located  among  tall 
buildings  capped  with  wooden  Mansard  roofs  and 
crowded  with  costly  and  inflammable  stocks,  but 
the  water-supply  in  this  vicinity  was  notoriously 
inadequate  to  meet  conflagration  conditions.  The 
old  six-inch  pipe  in  Summer  Street  was  large 
enough  for  hand-engine  days,  when  this  was  a 
region  of  dwellings,  many  of  them  detached  and 
standing  within  shady  yards;  but  in  1872  this 
six-inch  pipe  had  been  reduced  to  five  by  rust,  and 
was  wholly  insuflficient  to  feed  any  number  of  the 
powerful  steam-engines  with  which  the  depart- 
ment was  equipped.    With  a  full  knowledge  of 

[47] 


1872 

the  conditions  existing,  the  Board  of  Engineers 
had  arranged  that  Box  52  should  call  out  every 
engine  in  the  city  proper  on  the  first  alarm.  This 
ensured  the  presence  of  six  steamers  on  the  fire- 
ground  within  ten  minutes  of  the  opening  of  the 
signal-box;  and  by  running  long  lines  of  hose 
from  Winthrop  Square  and  Bedford  Street,  and  by 
utilizing  the  reservoir  in  Church  Green,  it  was 
planned  to  minimize  the  draft  on  the  Summer 
Street  main  and  develop  a  powerful  attack  upon 
every  fire  in  its  incipiency.  More  than  once 
threatening  fires  had  been  controlled  in  this  sec- 
tion by  the  prompt  arrival  and  wise  distribution  of 
the  apparatus. 

We  have  noted  that  the  fire  of  November  9, 
1872,  broke  out  under  conditions  that  made  for  its 
rapid  spread.  There  had  been  an  incomprehens- 
ible delay  in  giving  the  alarm,  and  now  as  never 
before  the  city  was  dependent  upon  the  prompt 
rallying  of  its  fire  department.  But  between  the 
desired  end  and  its  accomplishment  stood  the 
fatal  regulations  of  October  26.  Only  two  en- 
gines left   their  quarters   on  the  first  alarm,  and 

[48  ] 


1872 

Number  10  went  out  against  orders,  inspired  by 
the  threatening  glare.  Steamers  4  and  8  left  their 
houses  as  the  second  alarm  began  to  strike,  but 
it  took  the  third,  which  was  sent  out  at  7.34,  to 
start  the  rest  of  the  downtown  force.  All  of  this 
apparatus  was  drawn  by  hand. 

Chief  Engineer  Damrell  counted  the  alarm  from 
his  house  in  Temple  Street,  and  hurried  on  foot  over 
the  hill  and  down  Park  Street,  amazed  at  the  great 
light  that  loomed  before  him,  but  all  unconscious  of 
the  awful  dimensions  of  the  battle  upon  which  he 
was  entering.  The  third  alarm  was  sounding  as 
he  gained  the  corner  of  Kingston  Street,  and  his 
first  act  was  to  order  the  "general,"  summoning 
the  entire  fire-fighting  force  of  the  city  from  the 
Charles  to  Neponset  River.  At  7.45  the  ominous 
"three  twelves"  began  to  boom  forth  from  a 
hundred  belfries.  The  Chief  found  himself,  ten 
minutes  after  receiving  the  alarm,  confronting  a 
great  structure  that  from  sidewalk  to  roof  had  be- 
come a  living  furnace.  Instead  of  the  heavy  force 
that  under  happier  auspices  should  have  been  in 
position  about  the    threatened  corner,  he  found 

[  49  ] 


1872 

Steamer  7  battling  unaided  against  the  rising  con- 
flagration, although  Number  4  was  just  coming 
in,  drawn  at  a  slow  trot  by  an  exhausted  group  of 
men  and  boys.  Steamer  10  turned  into  Summer 
Street  a  moment  later,  and  her  line  was  run  off" 
promptly  from  the  corner  of  Arch  Street.  Two  or 
three  hose  companies  were  also  on  the  ground, 
but  with  the  low  water-pressure  prevailing  they 
were  of  no  more  value  than  an  equal  number  of 
buckets.  It  is  on  record  that  the  men  of  Hose- 
Company  Number  8  did  force  their  way  up  one 
flight  into  the  burning  building,  but  after  playing 
a  weak  hydrant  stream  for  a  few  minutes,  the 
onrush  of  flames  swept  them  down  the  stairs  and 
into  the  street.  Steamer  4  attempted  to  hold  the 
hydrant  at  the  corner  of  Kingston  and  Summer 
streets,  and  did  so  for  a  time  despite  the  bombard- 
ment of  exploding  granite  and  the  awful  heat  that 
threatened  to  melt  the  suctions.  Then  a  huge 
block  of  granite  came  crashing  to  the  sidewalk  and 
broke  their  connections.  As  the  engine  was  drawn 
from  its  dangerous  position  by  brave  men  who 

took  their  lives  in  their  hands,  the  flames  burst 

[50] 


1872 

forth  in  fury  from  the  upper  stories  of  the  brick 
block  south  of  the  alley-way  on  Kingston  Street, 
and  the  firemen  working  within  its  walls  were 
withdrawn  none  too  soon.  At  the  same  time  the 
dormers  of  the  Kingston  Street  dwellings  began  to 
burn,  while  smoke  rose  from  the  Mansard  roofs 
on  the  northerly  side  of  Summer  Street,  and  bright 
jets  of  flame  flickered  from  under  their  wooden 
eaves.  At  ten  minutes  of  eight  all  the  belated 
engines  of  the  city  proper  had  at  length  arrived, 
and  their  hose  was  stretched  in  the  streets. 

When  Chief  Engineer  Damrell  beheld  the 
danger  that  threatened  on  the  corner  of  Summer 
and  Otis  streets,  he  realized  the  full  gravity  of  the 
crisis.  He  saw  in  that  corner  the  key  to  the  situa- 
tion and  that  it  must  be  held  if  a  general  confla- 
gration was  to  be  averted.  Engine  4,  as  we  have 
seen,  had  been  driven  from  its  point  of  vantage,  but 
Engine  9  reported  unexpectedly  in  Church  Green, 
having  crossed  the  ferry  from  East  Boston  on  the 
second  alarm  instead  of  waiting  for  the  general. 
No  infringement  of  department  rules  was  ever 
more  gratefully  pardoned  than  this  forward  zeal 

[51  ] 


1872 

on  the  part  of  the  East  Boston  company.  Attempts 
were  made  to  play  upon  the  smouldering  roofs  from 
the  street,  but  because  of  the  fierce  heat  prevailing 
between  the  buildings,  and  because  of  the  lack  of 
power  in  the  streams,  these  efforts  were  quickly 
abandoned.  Lines  of  hose  were  carried  up  ladders 
from  Otis  Street  and  over  the  stairways  from 
Summer  Street,  but  the  firemen  gasping  in  the 
smoke  of  the  upper  stories  found  almost  no  pres- 
sure at  their  nozzles.  The  rusty  six-inch  pipe  was 
unequal  to  the  draft  upon  it,  and  when  an  engine 
maintaining  with  diflSculty  a  single  stream  was 
seized  upon  by  a  hose  company  for  a  second  line, 
one  fair  stream  was  ruined  and  two  feeble. ones 
took  its  place.  The  Chief  and  his  assistants  shut 
down  engines  at  some  points  in  order  to  get  more 
power  at  others,  but  this  meant  that  men  fighting 
desperately  in  the  heat  and  smoke  high  above  the 
streets  found  themselves  suddenly  deprived  of 
their  only  means  of  preservation.  Appeal  after 
appeal  came  down  to  the  enginemen  for  more 
water,  but  the  flow  in  the  mains  had  almost 
stopped  and  the  steamers  fretted  angrily  at  their 

[52] 


Vol.  XVL— No.  831.] 


NEW  YORK.  SATURDAY,  NOVEMBER  30,  1872 


Piitcrpd  nrcordiiic  to  Act  nf  l^ni^ruab.  h.  itii-  "^  i-a.   i-.j.  i.y  ilnn'-r  ^-  HrorniT.-.  .u  .ht  v.-Xicx-  oX  ilm  Uhrflrian  of  Coiiircw,  at  Wnshlng 


BOSTON.     "INTO  THE  JAWS  OF  DEATH" 


1872 

fruitless  task.  None  but  those  engaged  in  that 
fierce  half-hour's  struggle  at  the  corner  of  Otis 
and  Summer  streets  can  ever  know  what  a  brave, 
hopeless,  and  heart-breaking  stand  it  was.  The 
city  clocks  struck  eight.  The  scene  at  the  Kingston 
Street  corner  had  become  awful  beyond  descrip- 
tion ;  and  as  the  jagged  walls  came  thundering 
down  in  utter  ruin,  great  billows  of  flame  surged 
into  the  air  and  fairly  lapped  the  granite  fronts 
across  the  way.  The  building  on  the  westerly 
corner  of  Kingston  Street  began  to  burn,  while  the 
fire,  working  around  from  the  structure  in  which 
it  originated,  had  ignited  the  block  adjoining 
on  the  east.  Worse  than  all,  the  firemen  on  Otis 
Street  were  losing  ground,  and  the  flames  could 
be  seen  rippling  in  lurid  waves  along  the  ceilings 
of  the  upper  stories.  As  floor  after  floor  lighted  up 
with  the  glare  of  the  descending  fire,  dull  explosions 
blew  out  the  glass  from  superheated  rooms.  The 
Chief,  having  ordered  a  repetition  of  the  general 
alarm  and  summoned  the  spare  engines  of  the 
department  to  be  brought  to  the  scene,  then 
despatched  a  messenger  to  the  Western  Union 

[  54  ] 


1872 

Office  in  State  Street  to  telegraph  for  aid  to  every 
city  and  town  within  a  radius  of  fifty  miles.  And 
now  the  engines  began  to  come  thick  and  fast  in 
response  to  the  repeated  alarms,  forcing  their 
way  with  clanging  gongs  through  the  excited 
crowds.  But  the  last  opportunity  of  the  firemen 
had  passed,  a  conflagration  was  under  way,  and 
could  the  entire  fire  department  have  then  been 
massed  in  Summer  Street  by  the  wave  of  a  magi- 
cian's wand,  it  would  have  been  of  no  avail. 


II 


THE    LETTERS 


II 

THE    LETTERS 

Union  Club 

Boston,  November  10,  1872. 

Dear  Harry,  — 

When  I  wrote  you  last  week  describing 
the  torchlight  procession  of  October  30th,  and  not- 
ing the  satisfaction  we  all  felt  over  the  result  of 
the  election,  I  had  no  idea  that  the  subject  matter 
of  my  next  would  be  of  such  a  distressing  charac- 
ter. I  suppose  that  you  are  still  in  France  and 
you  will  of  course  soon  see  in  the  Paris  papers 
some  account  of  the  great  calamity  that  has  come 
to  us  here.  As  I  sit  writing  in  the  Club,  everything 
is  in  a  turmoil,  we  are  practically  under  martial 
law,  while  a  small  army  of  firemen  from  all  over 
New  England  is  still  engaged  in  fighting  fire  among 
the  smouldering  ruins  which  cover  some  sixty  or 
seventy  acres  of  what  was  Boston's  wholesale  dis- 

[59] 


1872 

trict.  Somewhere  from  75  to  100  millions  have 
disappeared  in  the  conflagration,  and  God  only 
knows  how  general  business,  bad  enough  at  best, 
is  to  be  influenced  by  this  awful  wiping-out  of 
values.  The  fire  broke  out  at  half-past  seven  last 
evening,  in  a  tall  building  at  the  corner  of  Summer 
and  Kingston  streets,  which  was  used  largely  as  a 
hoop-skirt  manufactory.  There  appears  to  have 
been  great  delay  in  giving  the  alarm,  the  engines 
were  delayed  by  lack  of  horses,  and  although  no 
wind  was  stirring,  the  fire  spread  rapidly,  crossed 
Summer  Street,  and  entered  both  Devonshire  and 
Otis  streets.  It  also  burned  eastward  down  Sum- 
mer street  to  Church  Green,  and  from  there  swept 
down  to  Broad  Street  and  along  High  and  Pur- 
chase streets  towards  Fort  Hill.  In  a  word,  it 
has  taken  pretty  much  everything  within  the  ter- 
ritory bounded  by  Washington  Street  on  the  west, 
Summer  Street  on  the  south,  the  water,  Oliver 
Street,  and  Liberty  Square  on  the  east,  and  State 
Street  on  the  north.  The  Old  South  was  saved, 
and  the  fire  was  held  at  Milk  Street  on  the  line 
between  Devonshire  and  Washington.    It  was  fin- 

[  60  ] 


1872 

ally  brought  under  control  in  Congress  and  Kilby 
streets  this  afternoon,  after  burning  through  the 
post  office,  in  the  Merchants'  Exchange  building. 
I  was  up  all  last  night,  and  but  for  the  fact  that 
I  know  how  anxious  you  will  be  to  have  details  of 


VIEW  OF  PARK   STREET,    SHOWING    THE    UNION   CLUB 

HOUSE 


the  matter  at  the  earliest  possible  moment,  I  should 
be  now  in  my  bed.  I  am  going  to  throw  off  this 
scrawl  in  the  hope  that  I  may  catch  the  mail  which 
goes   out   by   the   Malta  Tuesday,    although  be- 

[61  ] 


1872 

cause  of  the  burning  of  the  post  oflBce  I  don't 
know  just  what  will  happen  to  our  mails  for  the 
next  day  or  two. 

You  must  know,  then,  that  I  was  booked  to  go 
last  evening  (Saturday)  to  the  Globe,  with  your 
Cambridge  cousin  and  some  others  from  that 
town,  to  see  Sothern.  I  had  Dundreary  in  mind, 
a  very  amusing  piece  as  you  know,  and  I  only 
learned  in  the  morning  that  David  Garrick  was 
the  bill.  As  I  have  seen  rather  too  much  of  that 
silly  play,  and  as  I  could  n't  imagine  Sothern  as 
adapted  to  the  part,  I  gave  up  my  ticket  and  con- 
cluded to  take  tea  with  Freddie  and  Maria  at  the 
South  End  and  go  out  to  Roxbury  early  in  the 
evening.  We  had  hardly  risen  from  the  table  be- 
fore some  young  people  dropped  in  on  my  nephews 
and  nieces,  and  the  piano  was  soon  going  and  they 
were  singing  college  songs  and  "Champagne 
Charley,"  "Up  in  a  Balloon,  Boys,"  and  all  that 
sort  of  thing.  You  know  my  habit  of  counting  the 
fire-alarm,  and  several  times  I  thought  I  heard 
the  bell  on  the  Methodist  Church  on  Tremont 
Street.     However,  I  could  n't  be  sure,  and  I  let 

[62] 


1872 

things  go  until  there  was  a  break  in  the  uproar  and 
I  heard  the  bell  again.  I  looked  at  the  clock  and 
saw  that  it  was  eight  o'clock,  and  stepped  to  the 
door  to  look  out.  The  sky  was  cloudless,  the  moon 
bright,  but  the  loom  of  a  big  fire  was  unmistak- 
able above  the  houses  on  the  other  side  of  the  street. 
I  thought  it  could  n't  be  farther  away  than  Dover 
Street,  and  so  endeavored  to  arouse  Freddie's 
enthusiasm  for  a  run  down  Shawmut  Avenue. 
But  he  had  one  of  his  confounded  throats,  was  as 
blue  as  a  whetstone,  and  could  n't  be  budged.  So 
I  said  good-night  and  started  out  alone.  I  met  a 
policeman  before  reaching  the  corner,  who  in- 
formed me  that  the  fire  was  at  the  corner  of  Bedford 
and  Lincoln,  that  the  *'  general"  had  been  given 
and  once  repeated,  and  pointing  to  the  sky  with 
his  cane  ventured  the  statement  that  ''  they  had 
got  a  good  one  this  time."  I  then  decided  to  take 
a  car,  but  as  there  was  nothing  in  sight  on  the 
avenue,  I  went  through  to  Washington  Street. 
The  Metropolitan  was  running,  of  course,  on 
**epizootic"  time,  and  I  don't  know  how  long  I 

waited,  but  others  were  waiting  too.  I  let  two  cars 

[63  ] 


1872 

go  by  on  which  there  was  n't  an  inch  of  room,  and 
when  I  finally  squeezed  on  to  a  crowded  platform  I 
heard  the  bells  striking  again.  There  was  a  steamer 
right  behind  us,  but,  although  we  made  wretchedly 
slow  time,  we  gained  on  her,  and  at  Dover  Street 
she  was  not  in  sight.  I  thought  that  if  the  fire 
department  was  n't  travelling  any  faster  than  that, 
there  was  a  big  chance  for  trouble  before  morning. 
I  jumped  off  at  Essex  Street,  made  my  way  into 
Bedford  and  found  it  crowded  and  roped  off  just 
below  Chauncey.  I  met  the  secretary  of  one  of  the 
insurance  companies,  I  can't  think  of  his  name, 
and  he  told  me  of  the  outbreak  of  the  fire,  that  it 
had  crossed  Summer  and  was  going  down  both 
sides  of  the  street  into  Church  Green,  and  that  it 
looked  like  a  bad  night  for  his  business.  There  was 
an  engine  from  Dorchester  just  taking  position  in 
Chauncey  Street  at  this  time,  and  there  was  a  lad- 
der thrown  against  a  block  on  the  easterly  side, 
from  which  I  inferred  that  they  were  afraid  of 
the  fire  coming  through  there.  I  managed  to  get 
through  Chauncey  into  Summer,  and  then  I  could 
see  the  whole  thing,  both  sides  of  Summer  a  roar- 

[  64  ] 


1872 

ing  furnace,  the  flames  rolling  out  and  seeming  to 
meet  in  the  middle  of  the  street.  I  could  n't  see 
that  the  firemen  were  doing  anything  in  the  world, 
but  a  man  who  had  been  there  from  the  start  said 
that  the  fire  was  going  fast  into  Winthrop  Square 
and  that  the  engines  were  fighting  it  on  that  side. 
There  was  a  steamer  at  the  corner  of  Arch  Street, 
but  her  machinery  was  turning  over  very  slowly 
and  her  hose  was  not  filled.  I  asked  the  engineman 
what  the  trouble  was,  and  he  said  the  steamers  were 
all  ''  running  away  from  their  water  "  and  that  he 
was  shut  down  by  orders  to  lessen  the  draft  upon 
the  main.  The  only  comfort  I  gained  from  him 
was  that  there  was  more  water  elsewhere,  the  sup- 
ply in  Summer  Street  being  particularly  bad.  I 
went  through  Hawley  and  Franklin  streets  into 
Winthrop  Square.  I  had  no  idea  how  bad  things 
were  until  I  arrived  there. and  saw  Beebe's  block 
on  fire  from  top  to  bottom.  You  remember  what 
a  splendid  building  that  was,  altogether  the  noblest 
mercantile  block  in  Boston,  and  yet  it  burned  as 
though  built  of  slabs  or  shingles.  It  went  up  like 
tinder,  although   the  fire   departments   of    Cam- 

[65  ] 


1872 

bridge,  Charlestown,  and  Somerville  aided  the  city 
firemen  in  their  desperate  efforts  to  save  it.  Do 
you  know  that  as  I  stood  here  I  became  con- 
scious that  a  gale  was  blowing?  At  the  South 
End  there  was  hardly  a  breath  of  air,  but  now 
the  fierce  gusts,  caused,  I  suppose,  by  the  rising 
heat,  howled  and  whistled  around  the  corners 
and  whirled  the  tops  of  the  strongest  streams  of 
water  into  useless  spray.  The  picture  of  that  flam- 
ing palace  and  the  red  light  of  its  destruction  re- 
flected upon  the  sea  of  upturned  faces  was  a  sight 
I  shall  never  forget.  I  saw  President  Eliot  of  Har- 
vard standing  in  the  square,  and  it  occurred  to 
me  that  with  Harvard's  interest  in  city  real  estate 
he  could  not  be  in  a  happy  frame  of  mind.  He  was 
with  Mr.  Brooks,  the  Rector  of  Trinity,  and  some 
other  gentlemen  whom  I  did  n't  recognize.  Mr. 
Damrell,  in  his  white  hat,  came  fighting  his  way 
through  the  crowd,  and  I  saw  Mr.  Eliot  exchange 
a  few  words  with  him  in  passing,  but  don't  know 
what  comfort  he  got.  I  believed  even  then  that 
the  firemen  fighting  in  the  big  open  square  would 
manage  to  keep  the  fire  out  of  Franklin  Street, 

[06] 


w 
pi 

a 

m 

Pu 
O 
Pi 
W 

H 


O 
fa 

H 

W 

w 
PS 

H 
c« 

W 

w 

''A 
O 

W 
Q 

O 

H 

<<; 
I— I 

!^ 

o 

H 

Pi 


1872 

and  with  this  idea  in  mind  I  worked  my  way 
through  the  crowd  into  Federal  Street  and  so 
around  into  Church  Green.  Here  matters  were 
in  as  bad  a  shape  as  in  Winthrop  Square;  the 


BEEBE  BLOCK,  WINTHROP  SQUARE 

building  where  the  old  church  stood  was  all  alight, 
and  it  looked  to  me  as  though  the  fire  was  already 
in  Milton  Place.  The  wind  was  very  high  here, 
seeming  to  suck  in  through  the  narrow  streets 

[68  ] 


1872 

towards  the  fire,  while  the  upper  currents  were 
from  the  west.  The  brands  were  driving  about  in 
every  direction,  huge  blazing  fragments,  falling 
all  over  the  streets  and  on  the  tops  of  the  build- 
ings. I  stayed  here  until  the  walls  of  the  Free- 
man's Bank  building  fell  down  and  it  became 
necessary  to  withdraw  all  the  engines  that  had  been 
drafting  from  the  reservoir  in  front.  For  a  few 
minutes  there  was  n't  a  sign  of  a  stream  in  any  di- 
rection, and  then  some  one  said  that  the  Hartford 
and  Erie  depot  had  caught  from  the  sparks.  I  left 
things  here  in  as  desperate  shape  as  they  could 
well  be,  and  went  across  into  South  Street  and 
managed  to  push  my  way  into  Essex  Street.  Here 
the  engines  were  in  strong  force,  and  although  the 
brands  and  cinders  were  a  serious  menace  to  all 
the  shingled  shanties  of  the  South  Cove,  it  looked 
to  me  as  though  the  fire  would  be  stopped  in  this 
direction.  The  brick  dwelling-houses  in  Bedford 
and  Columbia  streets  were  burning,  but  on  the 
whole  there  seemed  to  be  as  much  water  as  fire, 
and  among  the  low  buildings  the  streams  hit  the 
flames  with  telling  effect.    I  was  addressed  very 

[69  ] 


1872 

politely  by  one  of  the  firemen  here,  and  found  that 
he  was  our  worthy  painter  from  Roxbury,  the 
same  with  whom  you  had  that  controversy  about 
your  bill  last  year.  He  runs  with  Warren  12,  the 
successor  of  our  old  love,  and  was  engaged  with 
the  rest  of  his  company  in  getting  a  line  of  hose 
up  on  to  a  low  shed  in  the  rear  of  Bedford  Street. 
I  gave  them  a  lift,  and  our  friend  was  much  sur- 
prised to  hear  that  the  fire  had  gone  into  Winthrop 
Square.  He  thought  they  had  it  all  on  this  side 
and  were  '* killing"  it,  as  he  said. 

It  occurred  to  me  at  this  time  that  Ned  and  his 
party  should  know  of  what  was  going  on,  and  I 
determined  to  go  up  to  the  theatre  and  see  if  I 
could  get  word  in  to  them.  I  went  up  Beach  Street 
to  Washington,  but  found  myself  too  late,  as  the 
crowd  was  pouring  out  of  the  theatre  just  as  I  got 
there.  You  should  have  seen  the  bewilderment  on 
tlieir  faces  as  the  hand-engine  from  Brookline  vil- 
lage came  clanking  and  jangling  across  Washing- 
ton Street  with  crowded  ropes.  It  was  useless  to 
try  to  find  Ned  in  such  a  mob,  so  I  made  my 
way  back  through  Beach  Street  and  found  the  fire 

[70] 


1872 

pretty  well  beaten  down  all  along  the  line  from 
Kingston  to  South  Street.  Just  here  who  should 
I  stumble  on  but  Freddie,  bundled  up  like  an 
Esquimau,  although  the  evening  was  warm  and 
I  was  hot  from  walking  and  elbowing  through 
crowds.  He  said  his  bookkeeper  had  sent  him 
a  note  by  one  of  the  Soldier's  Messenger  Corps 
stating  that  the  whole  business  district  was  afire, 
and  he  was  in  a  terrible  state  of  the  dumps.  He 
said  the  night  air  would  play  the  deuce  with  his 
throat,  and  was  sure  that  his  store  was  already 
fjone.  I  told  him  that  the  fire  was  a  aood  half 
mile  from  India  Street,  and  at  any  rate  he  was  in- 
sured. He  did  n't  seem  to  think  half  a  mile  was 
much,  and  said  he  would  n't  give  a  d — n  for  the 
value  of  any  insurance  policy  when  this  fire  had 
burned  itself  out.  We  went  down  into  Federal 
Street,  where  the  Hartford  and  Erie  property  was 
making  a  great  blaze  without  a  drop  of  water 
being  thrown  upon  it.  There  were  two  steamers 
in  Federal  Street,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  the 
firemen  showed  good  judgment  in  playing  upon 

the  low  buildings  on  the  westerly  side  of  the  way. 

[71  ] 


1872 

We  were  here,  I  suppose,  for  an  hour,  until  it  be- 
came clear  that  the  fire  was  not  going  much  farther 
in  this  direction.  Freddie  kept  worrying  about  his 
throat  and  his  store,  and  finally  I  suggested  that 


THE  GLOBE  THEATRE,  1872 

we  go  along  Broad  Street  to  India  and  have  a  look 
at  his  property.  Then  we  found  that  we  could  n't 
get  through,  that  the  fire  had  come  down  to  Broad 
from  Church  Green,  and  that  Tileston's  Wharf 

[72] 


1872 

was  all  afire.  So  back  we  went  through  Beach  into 
Washington  Street  and  down  as  far  as  Cunning- 
ham's furniture  store,  where  we  were  blocked  by 
the  crowds.  Freddie  was  for  going  into  Brown's 
apothecary  store  on  the  corner  of  Bedford  Street, 
to  stock  up  on  Bronchial  Troches,  I  suppose,  but 
the  place  was  full  and  I  finally  got  him  headed 
up  West  Street  towards  the  Common.  It  was  a 
wonderful  sight  from  Tremont  Street  to  see  the 
light  of  the  fire  reflected  on  the  tree-tops,  on  the 
Park  Street  spire,  and  State  House  dome,  and 
on  the  window-fronts  of  Beacon  and  Arlington 
streets.  It  looked  at  times  as  though  both  of 
these  streets  were  all  in  flames.  There  were  en- 
gines in  Winter  and  Bromfield  streets,  and  one 
from  North  Cambridge  stood  in  front  of  the  Park 
Street  Church.  She  was  whistling  for  coal,  and 
the  fireman  was  breaking  up  boxes  with  a  hatchet 
for  fuel.  There  was  a  great  whistling  going  on  in 
all  directions,  and  you  can  imagine  that  it  was  no 
joke  to  get  around  the  w^ide  circle  we  were  making 
with  the  coal-wagons.  I  suppose,  too,  that  the 
horses  were  in  poor  condition. 

[  7'^  ]        ' 


1872 

The  City  Hall  was  all  dark  as  we  passed,  and  I 
finally  got  Freddie  down  through  Water  Street 
and  Liberty  Square  into  India  Street,  and  showed 
him  his  store  safe  and  sound.  I  told  him  he  was 
an  ass  and  that  there  was  trouble  enough  around 
without  his  imaginary  ones.  Then  he  damned  his 
bookkeeper  for  getting  him  out  on  a  fool's  errand 
and  said  this  expedition  might  cost  him  his  life, 
that  it  did  n't  make  any  difference  if  the  store  did 
go,  there  had  n't  been  any  money  made  there  for 
years,  etc.,  etc.  I  was  pretty  mad  by  this  time,  and 
headed  him  for  Tremont  Street,  to  load  him  on  a 
car  and  send  him  home  to  his  wife  who  loves  him. 
Did  you  know  he  voted  for  Greeley  ?  He  says  he 
did,  and  I  dare  say  he  tells  the  truth.  We  got  into 
Broad  Street  and  thence  through  Sturgis  and 
Perkins  streets  into  Congress,  where  we  found 
the  fire  coming  through  from  Federal  Street  and 
down  from  High.  In  some  respects  this  was  the 
most  remarkable  sight  of  the  evening,  and  we 
stood  watching  the  flames,  without  an  engine  or 
a  fireman  in  sight.  In  Winthrop  Square  and 
Summer  Street  the  buildings  all  caught  on  their 

[74] 


187^ 

roofs,  above  the  reach  of  the  water,  and  burned 
down,  but  here  every  floor  flashed  up  simulta- 
neously and  the  flames  shot  out  as  though  by 
explosive  force.  A  building  all  dark  w^ould  be  a 
living  furnace  in  five  minutes.  It  was  the  effect,  I 
suppose,  of  the  tremendous  heat  making  its  way 
through  the  walls,  but  I  never  should  have  be- 
lieved such  a  thing  possible  if  I  had  n't  seen  it. 
It  was  fearful  to  have  this  sort  of  thing  going  on 
without  a  hand  being  raised  to  stop  it.  There  were 
a  lot  of  people  about,  but  the  street  was  not 
crowded.  Lights  were  burning  in  many  of  the 
stores,  and  wagons  with  and  w^ithout  horses  were 
backed  up  to  the  walks,  and  being  hurriedly 
loaded  with  the  most  portable  merchandise.  I 
saw  a  crowed  of  men  dragging  a  small  safe  down 
the  street  by  a  rope.  I  don't  know  where  they  got 
it,  and  they  certainly  did  n't  know  w^here  to  go  with 
it.  We  stayed  here  until  the  flames  burst  out  of 
Spooner's  big  building,  and  as  we  turned  to  leave, 
an  engine,  from  Salem  I  think,  w^as  just  coming 
in.    They  did  n't  know^  much  about  the  geography 

of  Boston,  and  hesitated  as  to  what  they  should  do. 

[75] 


1872 

A  man  came  running  up  in  a  terrible  state  of  ex- 
citement, and  begged  them  to  put  a  stream  upon 
his  store.  It  was  already  afire,  but  he  insisted  that 
they  could  save  it  if  they  would,  and  promised 
them  all  the  good  things  in  this  world  and  the 
next  if  they  would  only  get  to  work.  But  the  fore- 
man, a  picturesque  old  fellow  in  a  long  army  over- 
coat, said  he  could  n't  do  anything  there  with  a 
single  stream  and  did  n't  propose  to  lose  his  en- 
gine at  that  early  stage  of  the  game.  So,  in  spite  of 
bribes  and  threats,  the  machine  rumbled  off  down 
the  street,  and  a  few  minutes  later  I  saw  it  stand- 
ing in  Bath  Street  while  the  men  ran  back  up  Con- 
gress unreeling  the  hose  from  their  "jumper." 

Just  here  a  fellow  came  along  who  lives  over 
Norfolk  House  way  and  who  was  in  the  Roxbury 
Council  with  us.  You  know  how  bad  a  memory 
I  have  for  names,  but  I  shall  think  of  his  before 
I  close  this  letter.  He  had  seen  the  episode  I  have 
just  described,  and  while  he  agreed  with  me  that 
the  foreman  did  the  right  thing,  he  also  thought 
that  no   kind  of   system  was   being  followed  in 

fighting  the  fire,  that  some  one  should  be  about 

[76  ] 


1872 

to  tell  these  countrymen  where  to  go  and  what  to 
do,  and  not  leave  them  to  fly  at  things  haphazard 
on  the  simple  Irish  plan  of  hitting  a  head  when 
they  saw  it.  He  then  suggested  that  we  go  up  to 
City  Hall  and  see  what  they  were  doing  there. 
Freddie  could  n't  be  persuaded,  so  we  left  him 
in  School  Street  bound  for  his  car.  Our  old  col- 
league informed  me  that  the  Chief  Engineer  had 
telegraphed  all  over  the  country  for  help,  and  that 
both  sides  of  Franklin  and  both  sides  of  Devon- 
shire were  now  burning,  and  that  the  fire  was 
half-way  to  Washington  on  one  street  and  half- 
way to  Milk  on  the  other.  The  Hall  was  bril- 
liantly lighted  when  we  got  there.  There  were 
a  few  people  in  the  lobby,  but  we  went  up  to  the 
Mayor's  office,  where  there  were  twenty  or  thirty 
prominent  men,  besides  Chief  Damrell  and  Mr. 
Gaston  and  his  secretary.  Every  one  was  terribly 
excited,  and  you  never  heard  anything  like  the 
crazy  suggestions  that  were  made  by  some  of  these 
people.  As  we  came  in,  Mr.  Burt,  the  postmaster, 
was  telling  the  Mayor  that  if  he  did  n't  assert  his 
authority  and  order  the  destruction  of  buildings 

[  77  ] 


1872 

by  powder,  in  the  morning  he  would  see  the  har- 
bor from  the  windows  of  City  Hall.  The  Mayor 
replied  that  he  did  not  propose  to  have  any  con- 
flict of  authority,  that  the  law  placed  the  responsi- 
bility upon  the  shoulders  of  the  Chief  Engineer 
and  his  assistants,  and  that  was  the  safest  place  to 
leave  it.  Then  they  all  besieged  Mr.  Damrell, 
calling  for  powder.  It  was  evident  that  the  Chief 
was  very  nervous.  He  had  no  confidence  in  ex- 
plosives, and  he  finally  yielded,  it  seemed  to  me, 
entirely  against  his  judgment.  He  sat  down  at  the 
Mayor's  desk  and  wrote  out  some  orders  author- 
izing the  holder  to  blow  up  buildings,  and  then 
called  for  volunteers.  Alderman  Woolley  spoke 
his  mind  and  refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
the  matter;  but  some  dozen  men  came  forward, 
and,  after  a  hurried  jabber  as  to  where  they  should 
go  and  as  to  what  they  should  do,  they  all  went 
out  like  a  regular  mob.  I  made  up  my  mind  that 
if  those  fellows  succeeded  in  putting  their  hands 
upon  any  powder  the  only  safe  place  in  the  city 
for  the  average  man  would  be  in  the  centre  of  the 

Common.    Is  n't  there  something  in  Shakespeare 

[78  ] 


1872 

or  the  Bible  about  some  chaps  who  "labored  not 
wisely  but  too  w^ell"  ?  It  was  some  of  that  sort 
that  went  jumping  down  the  stairs  after  General 
Burt.  There  was  a  lot  of  grumbling  about  the 
Mayor's  lack  of  energy,  but  God  knows  there  was 
energy  enough  in  that  room  without  any  surplus 
in  him.  He  kept  his  wits,  and  that  cannot  be  said 
of  all  the  good  men  I  met  last  night. 

I  heard  the  Mayor  give  instructions  for  calling 
out  the  militia  and  for  sending  to  the  Navy  Yard 
for  the  marines ;  then  the  Chief  said  he  was  going 
up  to  the  dome  of  the  Hall,  and  two  or  three  of 
us  went  with  him.  It  was  a  great  sight  from  there, 
a  perfect  mountain  of  smoke  and  flame,  with  the 
top  of  the  Transcript  building  and  the  high  blocks 
adjoining  drawn  sharp  and  black  against  it,  while 
the  Old  South  steeple  and  all  the  high  spires  and 
roofs  behind  us  stood  out  wonderfully  in  the  glare. 
The  Chief  said  that  the  fire  would  not  cross  Wash- 
ington Street,  but  that  was  all  the  encouragement 
he  had  to  give  us.  Alderman  Woolley  asked  me  to 
go  out  with  him,  and  we  went  downstairs  together. 
An  engine  from  Providence  w  as  just  getting  to  work 

[79] 


1872 

in  front  of  City  Hall,  and  she  was  sending  out  the 
most  ear-splitting  shrieks  for  coal.  The  streets 
were  filling  with  drays,  wagons,  and  teams  of  all 
sorts.  The  business  men  were  gathering  fast,  and 
even  in  School  Street  lights  were  burning  in  the 
offices  and  stores  while  swarms  of  people  with 
books  in  their  arms  or  loaded  on  barrows  and  hand 
carts  were  passing  up  the  hill.  I  saw  one  fine  old 
chap  carrying  what  I  suppose  was  his  office  cat. 
Tabby  *was  snarling  and  clawing,  and  I  could  n't 
tell  whether  the  hair  that  flew  was  from  the 
beast's  back  or  from  the  old  gentleman's  beard. 
What  a  stupid  brute  a  cat  is !  Our  old  black 
Mephistopheles  was  the  only  sensible  feline  I  ever 
knew,  and  it  is  a  pity  he  could  n't  have  lived  for- 
ever as  an  example  to  his  kind.  Passing  up  Tre- 
mont  Street,  we  now  found  three  steamers  at  the 
Park  Street  reservoir.  The  two  new  comers  were 
from  Worcester,  and  the  enginemen  told  us  that 
their  suctions  would  n't  connect  with  the  city 
hydrants,  that  they  had  been  chasing  about  for  a 
reservoir  and  this  was  the  best  that  they  could  do. 
A  fire-department  wagon  was  standing  by,  dump- 

[  «0  ] 


1872 

ing  out  coal,  and  Woolley  took  occasion  to  notify  the 
driver  of  the  needs  of  the  Providence  engine  we  had 
left  in  School  Street.  The  Common  gates  were  open 
and  teams  were  already  driving  in,  heavily  loaded 
with  all  sorts  of  stuff.  Woolley  said  that  on  Wash- 
ington Street  business  men  had  invited  the  crowd 
in  to  help  themselves  to  anything  they  wanted, 
and  this  gave  roughs  an  excuse  for  helping  them- 
selves at  other  points  without  permission.  As  the 
police  arrested  every  one  found  with  goods  in  their 
hands,  the  innocent  and  the  guilty  were  suffering 
alike.  We  went  down  Winter  Street,  managed  to 
force  our  way  up  to  the  ropes,  and  the  police  let  us 
through.  The  long,  low  building  of  the  Mercan- 
tile Library  was  burning  sullenly  on  one  side  of 
Summer  Street,  while  on  the  other  the  old  post 
office  at  the  corner  of  Chauncey  was  almost  con- 
sumed, and  the  fire  had  reached  one  or  two  doors 
farther  up  towards  Washington  Street.  I  don't 
know  what  time  it  was,  but  I  suppose  it  must  have 
been  two  or  three  o'clock,  so  you  can  see  what  slow 
progress  the  fire  had  been  making  on  Summer 
Street.    It  had  been  at  least  six  or  seven  hours  in 

[  81  ] 


1872 

covering  the  block  between  Kingston  and  Chaun- 
cey.  It  seems  that  the  Mercantile  Library  building 
caught  in  the  rear  from  the  burning  blocks  in 
Franklin  Street,  and  the  fire  from  this  ignited  the 
stores  on  the  southerly  side  of  Summer  Street. 


NIGHT   SCENE,  SUMMER  STREET,  SHOWING  TRINITY  IN 

FLAMES 


There  was  a  good  force  of  steamers  working  about 
here,  but  the  buildings  all  took  fire  in  their  cor- 
nices or  roofs,  and  the  streams  would  n't  reach 
the  threatened  points,  while  the  w^asted  water 
rushed  a  foot  deep  along  the  gutters. 

I  stood  against  the  fence  in  front  of  Trinity 
Church,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  fire  would  be 

[82] 


1872 

held  in  the  Mercantile  Library  building.  You  re- 
member how  low  it  was  and  that  the  roof  was  flat. 
It  did  throw^  out  an  awful  heat,  though,  and  played 
the  mischief  with  the  buildings  across  the  way. 
The  water  poured  upon  it  didn't  seem  to  be  able 
to  cool  it  down  in  the  least.  The  eaves  and 
dormers  of  Hovey's  building  were  draped  with 
blankets,  which  men  from  inside  kept  wetting,  and 
that  struck  me  as  one  of  the  brainiest  thine^s  I  had 
seen.  I  don't  know  how  long  I  had  been  standing 
here,  when  the  front  doors  of  Trinity  opened  and 
I  saw  a  man  fastening  them  back.  Then  Mr. 
Brooks,  unmistakable  from  his  tall  figure,  passed 
out  and  moved  off  into  the  crowd.  In  a  moment  I 
noticed  the  red  glow  of  fire  through  one  of  the  front 
windows  and  concluded  that  the  church  had  caught 
in  the  rear  and  the  door  had  been  opened  to  admit 
the  firemen.  But  no  one  paid  any  attention  to  it, 
and  in  a  few  moments  it  was  all  of  an  angry  glow- 
inside  and  the  smoke  poured  in  clouds  from  the 
roof.  I  stepped  across  the  street  and  found  sev- 
eral of  Hovey's  people,  some  of  whom  I  knew, 

standing  in  their  doorway.  I  asked  if  I  could  be  of 

[83  ] 


1872 

any  assistance  and  they  told  me  to  step  inside,  said 
they  were  having  a  close  rub  of  it,  and  did  n't 
know  how  they  would  come  out,  now  Trinity  had 
caught.  The  employes  I  found  there  had  been  at 
work  since  midnight  under  the  direction  of  mem- 
bers of  the  firm,  and  the  newspapers  cite  what 
was  done  here  as  an  example  of  what  might  have 
been  accomplished  had  other  merchants  been  as 
energetic  and  far-seeing.  The  whole  theory  of  the 
defence  here  was  to  keep  every  vulnerable  part  of 
the  building  damp,  —  not  wet  but  damp,  —  and 
you  would  be  amazed  to  know  what  was  accom- 
plished by  the  use  of  buckets  and  even  tin  cups. 
The  fellows  out  on  the  roof  were  real  heroes,  and 
they  got  an  awful  roasting  up  on  that  dizzy  height. 
I  am  no  topmast  man,  but  I  worked  like  a  day- 
laborer  in  the  basement,  if  I  do  say  it.  My  job  was 
to  help  load  the  buckets  and  ash-cans  full  of  water 
on  the  elevator,  which  had  just  begun  to  run  when 
I  got  there.  Before  that,  the  poor  devils  had  been 
tugging  all  that  water  up  five  flights  by  hand.  It 
was  a  maddening  thing  to  try  and  fill  the  cans,  be- 
cause the  water  only  trickled  at  the  faucets,  while 

[84  ] 


1872 

above  the  basement  they  could  n't  draw  any  water 
at  all.  I  don't  know  how  long  I  worked  at  this, 
but  I  believe  I  lived  hours  with  every  minute.  At 
last,  finding  enough  help  at  hand,  I  went  up  to 
the  street  floor  just  as  the  wall  of  the  building  next 
door  came  crashing  down,  broke  our  skylight  to 
atoms,  and  let  through  a  lot  of  flaming  cinders  right 
into  the  room.  But  they  were  ready  for  this,  too, 
and  with  pails  and  cups  they  put  out  every  fire  as 
quick  as  it  flamed  up.  Just  at  this  minute  a  crowd 
of  firemen  came  across  the  floor  from  Avon  Street 
with  a  hose,  and  I  took  hold  and  gave  them  a  lift 
up  the  stairs.  Up  we  went  the  whole  four  flights, 
and  when  the  men  in  the  attic  saw  the  hose,  they 
fairly  yelled  with  delight.  The  great  danger  now 
was  from  the  windows  that  looked  out  into  the 
well,  they  being  separated  by  only  six  or  seven  feet 
from  the  building  which  was  blazing  next  door. 
The  firemen  went  straight  to  the  window,  then  I 
heard  the  word  "Play  away,  2,"  passed  down  the 
stairs.  The  suspense  was  awful  while  we  waited; 
it  seemed  as  though  the  water  was  never  coming ; 
but  when  at  last  I  felt  the  hose  swell  under  my  foot, 

[85] 


1872 

the  firemen  tore  away  the  wet  blankets  at  the 
window  and  pushed  out  the  nozzle.  Then  we 
heard  the  stream  tearing  away  the  broken  masonry 
across  the  well,  a  burst  of  steam  blew  back  into  the 
room,  and  we  all  knew  that  the  fight  was  won.  It 
was  the  most  desperately  exciting  thing  that  I  ever 
figured  in,  and  the  thought  even  occurred  to  me 
that  perhaps  I  was  a  hero.  At  all  events  I  had 
been  working  in  the  same  building  with  some 
who  deserved  the  title.  I  stepped  out  on  the  roof 
a  minute  and  looked  down  into  Summer  Street, 
a  veritable  inferno,  with  old  Trinity  flaming  like  a 
torch  just  across  the  way.  Going  downstairs,  I 
met  one  of  our  Roxbury  engineers,  and  he  said  the 
store  was  safe. 

I  ran  across  Alderman  Woolley  right  off  in 
Washington  Street,  and  he  was  arguing  in  a  crowd 
of  citizens  and  firemen,  some  of  whom  were  cursing 
like  demons.  It  seems  the  powder-blowers  from 
City  Hall  had  arrived,  and  they  insisted  upon  de- 
molishing the  stone  building  on  the  corner  of  Sum- 
mer Street  where  the  Waltham  Watch  people  are. 
Woolley  maintained  that  it  was  a  strong  building, 

[86] 


1872 

and  would  prove  a  buffer  to  the  fire  raging  in 
Love  joy's  store.  The  crowd  was  shouting  to  blow 
it  up,  and  the  powder  men  were  evidently  the  sort 
who  believe  in  heeding  the  voice  of  the  people. 
At  all  events  blow  they  would,  the  streams  play- 
ing about  there  were  all  withdrawn,  and  every  one 
ran  for  safety.  I  took  position  opposite  Jordan  and 
Marsh's  building,  and  soon  the  explosion  came, 
merely  shattering  the  windows  and  filling  the  street 
with  nasty  smoke.  Then  there  was  another  wrangle, 
followed  by  re-mining  the  building,  and  some  one 
lighted  the  fuse.  We  took  to  our  heels  again  and 
waited,  but  no  explosion  came  and  I  suppose  the 
fuse  went  out.  An  old  fireman  standing  near  me 
remarked  that  if  this  sort  of  thing  was  going  to 
be  allowed  the  fire  would  be  in  the  North  End  by 
sunrise,  and  intimated  that  it  was  getting  about 
time  to  hang  somebody.  Then  I  saw  Woolley 
trying  to  get  the  firemen  back  to  work.  The  build- 
ings on  the  westerly  side  of  Washington  Street 
were  getting  very  hot,  and  some  of  the  roofs  were 
smoking.  Then  a  group  of  hosemen  made  a  rush 
and  put  a  stream  up  on  to  the  Winter  Street  cor- 

[87] 


1872 

ner;  others  followed,  and  soon  there  was  a 
powerful  battery  of  streams  at  work  again.  The 
blowers  went  off,  followed  by  all  sorts  of  lurid 
imprecations  from  the  firemen.  The  figuring  of 
time  for  last  night  is  out  of  the  question,  but  I 
believe  a  good  half-hour  was  lost  by  this  well-nigh 
criminal  foolishness.  I  said  to  Woolley  then,  that 
as  between  water,  and  powder  as  it  was  being 
used  by  our  zealous  citizens,  the  former  was  our 
best  reliance.  And  now,  old  man,  I  have  written 
my  hand  into  a  paralysis.  It  is  striking  ten  and 
I  must  stop.  I  will  mail  this  in  two  envelopes  and 
only  hope  that  you  will  receive  them  together,  or 
at  all  events  that  the  last  half  won't  reach  you  first. 
I  will  finish  up  my  story  as  soon  as  I  can,  perhaps 
to-morrow.  Your  brother  Frank  looked  in  here 
a  minute  ago  in  full  regimentals,  being  on  duty 
with  the  Cadets.  I  told  him  I  was  writing  you,  and 
he  said  to  tell  you  that  he  was  very  well  and  busy. 
I  hear  taps  on  the  Common,  and  so  good-night. 

Always  yours. 


1872 

Mt.  Vernon  Street^  November  11,  1872. 

Dear  Harry,  — 

General  Burt  has  done  wonders  with  the  Post 
Office,  which  is  now  in  Faneuil  Hall,  and  we  had 
our  regular  delivery  this  morning.  I  have  yours 
dated  Rouen,  and  gave  your  message  to  Kidder, 
Peabody  and  Co.  this  afternoon.  There  is  nothing 
to  be  done  on  the  Hartford  and  Erie's  at  present. 
Yes,  work  has  been  started  on  your  house,  I  saw 
them  driving  the  piles  last  week.  A  charming 
location  you  have,  and  your  children's  children 
(if  the  race  survives  the  wind  and  dust)  may  find 
amusement  in  watching  the  city  grow  out  to  where 
they  live.  To  think  of  your  abandoning  your 
green  acres  and  your  great  trees  for  this  !  But  you 
are  married,  and  vanity  and  love  of  fashion  were' 
ever  the  curse  of  womankind. 

We  have  had  another  night  of  fire  and 
added  another  million  or  more  to  our  losses.  A 
gas  explosion  at  midnight  wrecked  Shreve,  Crump 
and  Low's  building  on  the  corner  of  Summer  and 

[  89  ] 


1872 

Washington  Streets,  and  the  shell  burst  into 
flames.  Hovey's  was  saved  again,  and  their  build- 
ing, with  the  store  of  R.  H.  Stearns  and  Co.  ad- 
joining, is  all  that  now  remains  intact  on  the 
southerly  side  of  Summer  Street.  It  was  fortunate 
that  we  had  so  many  out-of-town  fire  companies 
here,  for  the  city  firemen  were  beaten  out  to  a  point 
of  absolute  exhaustion.  All  of  these  people  ar- 
rived Sunday,  some  of  them  not  till  late,  so  they 
were  in  reasonably  good  condition  to  meet  this 
last  ordeal.  I  went  to  bed  last  night  about  four 
o'clock,  for  the  second  time,  and  was  up  at  half- 
past  seven  this  morning,  breakfasted  at  the  Club, 
and  then  went  down  into  the  burned  district  to  see 
what  small  part  I  could  play  in  bringing  order 
out  of  chaos.  But  before  saying  more  about  last 
night's  fire,  or  about  this  strange  and  confused 
day,  I  am  going  to  complete  my  narrative  of 
nocturnal  wanderings  during  the  raging  of  the 
conflagration. 

When  I  left  Alderman  Woolley  on  Sunday  morn- 
ing, I  passed  along  Washington  Street  and  saw  the 

really  good  and  successful  fight  that  was  made 

[00  ] 


LOOKING  UP  SUMMER  STREET,   SHOWING  HOVEY'S  AND  RUINS  OF  SHREVE, 

CRUMP  &  LOW'S 


1872 

there  to  protect  the  buildings  on  the  westerly  side. 
I  don't  know  whether  it  was  because  Hovey's  ex- 
ample was  contagious,  but  wet  blankets  were  much 
in  evidence  on  the  roofs  all  along  between  Milk 
and  Winter  streets.  The  water-supply  seemed 
good,  and  the  streams  not  only  washed  the  roofs 
on  the  westerly  side,  but  they  played  into  the 
burning  buildings  opposite  with  enough  effect  to 
take  some  of  the  wickedness  out  of  the  fire.  It  was 
a  long,  hard  fight  for  the  Marlboro'  Hotel,  and 
the  big  marble  building  of  Macullar,  Williams 
and  Parker  threw  out  a  heat  that  made  the  contest 
doubtful  for  hours.  As  I  walked  down  Washing- 
ton Street,  I  came  upon  the  marines  from  the  Navy 
Yard  marching  silently,  their  gun-barrels  flashing 
red  as  they  came  into  the  light  of  the  fire  at  the 
head  of  Milk  Street.  Looking  down  Milk,  I  saw 
that  the  flames  had  control  on  the  Devonshire 
Street  corner,  and  it  looked  too  as  though  the  fire 
had  got  into  Morton  Place  in  the  rear  of  the  Tran- 
script building  and  the  high  blocks  adjoining.  I 
heard  the  Old  South  clock  strike,  I  don't  know 
what  hour,  and  I  know  the  thought  came  to  my 

[91  ] 


1872 

mind  that  perhaps  it  would  never  strike  again. 
There  was  great  confusion  about  the  church,  and 
one  of  the  out-of-town  engineers  told  me  that  they 
were  mining  that  little  building  of   Currier  and 


TRANSCRirX  BUILDING,  WITH  CURKIER  &  TROTT'S  STORE 

Trott  that  is  wedged  in  between  the  Transcript 
and  the  Milk  Street  corner.  What  possible  good 
could  come  from  that  was  not  clear  to  me  nor  to 
the  engineer,  but  they  were  getting  the  hose  away 

[92  ] 


1872 

and  preparing  for  a  smash.  Wagons  were  backed 
up  to  the  Transcript,  for  removing  stock,  I  sup- 
pose, but  the  drivers  whipped  up  and  got  out  of 
the  way,  too.  I  went  down  through  Spring  Lane 
into  Devonshire  Street,  and  was  not  there  long 
before  I  made  up  my  mind  that  the  granite  walls 
of  the  unfinished  post  office  building  were  worth 
a  dozen  steamers.  Devonshire  Street  beyond  Milk 
was  all  ablaze  (I  understand  they  blew  it  all  to 
bits  before  the  fire  came  in),  and  the  short  block 
on  Milk  between  Devonshire  Street  and  Congress 
was  also  afire.  But  the  conflagration  was  turned 
by  the  post  office  building,  and  being  held  on  the 
northwesterly  corner  of  Devonshire,  it  went  down 
through  Congress  toward  State  Street  on  a  narrow 
front:  You  will  readily  see  from  your  familiarity 
with  the  locality  how  this  was  and  how  great  the 
advantage  gained.  The  staging  around  the  post 
office  took  fire  again  and  again,  but  through  it  all 
there  were  crowds  of  spectators  inside  the  stone 
shell  of  the  building  who  were  not  worrying  a  bit 
about  their  safety.  So  much  for  a  really  fire-proof 
building. 

[93] 


1872 

But  with  all  the  advantage  achieved  by  this 
structure,  when  I  stood  at  the  corner  of  Water  and 
Congress,  things  did  not  look  well,  first,  because 
there  were  too  few  engines  in  the  vicinity,  and  sec- 
ond, because  there  were  too  many  of  the  powder- 
blowing  brigade  in  evidence.    When  I  saw  the 


THE  FIRE  IN   DEVONSHIRE  STREET,  LOOKING  SOUTH 

sailors  from  the  Navy  Yard  desert  their  steamer 
and  run  away  at  the  report  that  the  fuse  was 
lighted  in  a  building  a  few  doors  from  where  they 
stood,  I  made  up  my  mind  that  matters  were 
getting  serious.  I  stumbled  on  one  of  the  Boston 
engineers,  and  asked  if  he  did  n't  realize  that  all 

that  sort  of  thing  was  simply  paving  a  way  for 

[94  ] 


1872 

the  fire  into  State  Street.  He  remarked  that  if  he 
had  his  way  all  those  helpful  citizens  with  their 
d — d  bags  and  kegs  would  find  themselves  in  a 
hotter  place  than  any  he  had  seen  that  night.  I 
think  that  this  suggestion  was  my  sole  contribu- 
tion to  the  fire-fighting  generalship,  and  beyond 
drawing  out  the  honest  sentiment  of  an  over- 
worked man  I  don't  believe  it  had  any  effect.  From 
here  I  wandered  by  Broad  Street  into  open  land 
about  Fort  Hill;  and  though  the  fire  had  not 
reached  there,  it  was  coming  down  without  oppo- 
sition to  where  it  would  have  to  stop  for  lack  of 
fuel.  Furniture  and  household  goods  were  tumbled 
around  in  the  open  area,  but  there  were  compara- 
tively few  people  here,  and  they  sauntered  about 
in  little  groups,  seemingly  as  calm  as  though  they 
had  walked  out  to  witness  a  display  of  the  North- 
ern Lights.  I  sat  down  in  somebody's  rocking- 
chair  and  gained  a  most  comprehensive  idea  of  the 
extent  of  the  calamity,  on  the  south  and  west  there 
being  an  unbroken  bow  of  flame  and  glowing 
smoke.  I  came  up  through  State  Street,  and 
people  were  getting  anxious  there.    Wagons  were 

[95] 


1872 

carting  away  the  mail  and  valuables  from  the 
post  office  and  treasury  in  the  Merchants'  Ex- 
change. Two  or  three  engines  were  at  work  in 
the  side  streets,  and  from  the  corner  of  Kilby  I 
could  see  the  sparks  from  the  fire  in  Milk  Street 
falling  like  rain  in  Liberty  Square.     There  was 


VIEW  OF  THE  FIRE  FROM  FORT  HILL 


quite  a  crowd  about  the  Union  Safe  Deposit 
Vaults,  —  people  who  wanted  to  get  their  valu- 
ables out,  I  suppose,  —  but  all  admission  was 
denied.  The  gas  was  going  in  the  office  of  Lee, 
Higginsonand  Company  and  in  some  of  the  banks, 
and  it  was  a  good,  stiff  question  to  decide  whether 

[96] 


1872 

it  was  safer  to  leave  securities  in  safes  or  vaults,  or 
to  cart  theni  around  through  crowded,  disordered 
streets  and  tuck  them  away  in  cellars  and  between 
mattresses  on  Beacon  Hill.  I  never  appreciated 
before  the  real  blessings  of  poverty.  I  decided  for 
myself  and  for  those  I  was  interested  in,  that  it 
was  best  to  trust  the  firemen  and  the  vaults  of  the 
Union  Safe  Deposit.  What  they  could  n't  do  I 
was  pretty  sure  I  could  n't. 

It  was  not  until  I  passed  up  by  School  Street  on 
Washington  that  I  realized  daylight  had  come. 
The  Transcript  building  was  all  burned  out,  but 
the  walls  were  standing  and  the  flames  still  flick- 
ered in  the  windows.  Where  I  had  left  the  pow- 
der-blowers, a  single  steamer  was  sending  up  a 
black  smoke  column  that  was  silhouetted  against 
the  glow  beyond.  They  were  driving  her  hard, 
and  as  she  quivered  and  roared  she  seemed  pit- 
ted alone  against  a  world  aflame.  The  Old  South 
had  evidently  been  through  a  drenching,  and  as  I 
stepped  across  to  ask  the  engineman  where  he 
hailed  from,  I  read,  ''Kearsarge,  Portsmouth, 
N.  H.,"  on  the  boiler-plate.   Do  you  know  it  gave 

[97] 


1872 

me  the  sort  of  a  thrill  that  I  have  n't  felt  since  the 
first  year  of  the  war.  At  that  minute  Portsmouth 
seemed  more  remote  to  me  than  Timbuctoo,  and 
if  the  engine  had  come  from  the  moon  it  would 
hardly  have  produced  a  stronger  impression.  A 
tall  fellow  standing  near  me,  who  claimed  to  have 
been  "  raised  down  Portsmouth  way,"  said  that 
the  steamer  had  come  from  New  Hampshire  an 
hour  before  in  the  very  nick  of  time.  Two  or  three 
streams  were  playing  from  the  street,  when  a  brand 
from  the  Transcript  building  blew  across  and 
lodged  in  the  belfry.  The  slats  were  soon  smoking, 
the  streams  fell  short,  and  there  were  no  ladders 
at  hand.  As  the  Kearsarge  came  up  Washington 
Street  her  fires  were  lit,  steam  was  up,  and  the  men 
reeled  off  their  hose  with  a  will.  There  was  great 
excitement  in  the  crowd  when  the  first  water  came 
at  the  nozzle,  and  as  the  stream  soared  higher  and 
higher  men  fairly  stood  on  tiptoe.  Then  the  water 
broke  in  through  the  slats  and  out  went  the  fire. 
I  wish  I  had  seen  it. 

You  can  imagine  that  by  this  time  I  was  dead 
tired.     My  eyes  smarted,  my  face  burned,  and  I 

[98] 


"  THE  OLD  SOUTH  STANDS " 
Frank  Leslie's  Conception  of  the  Saving  of  the  Church 


NSCRIPT 

,R  11.  1872. 

DAY 

f  ruins.  Where, 
txi  area  full  of  no- 

rowded  business 
led  and  tottering  <, 
Idering  flames — a 
ess.  The  scene  is 
m  almost  unprec- 
oarely  escaped  a 
■ut  the  city,  thank 
with  the  terrible 
jnificence  and  mil- 
Ik  of  the  causes  of 
C  to  quickly  learn 

it  has  to  teach  for 
ind  only  seasona- 
he  responsibilities 
ce;  calmly,  reso- 
ld persistent  en- 
despondent  repin- 
dness,  or   the  in- 

selfishness.  As  a 
red,  and  as  a  cora- 
ly  and  fraternally 
of  reconstruction, 
auperabound.  Let 
iendship  in  trade," 

and  labor  go  hand 
waste  places  and 
mded  agencies  of 
irit  be  no  drones 
ersifiod  industries. 
We  have  still  a 
arge  resources;  the 

our  feet  again  and 
r  as  ever.  Already 
I,  and  the  people 
3t  the  emergency, 
jarty  common  con- 
co-operation  to  so- 
if   the   interrupted 

orrow  for  individ- 
0  community  as  a 
y,  brave,  vigilant 
earnest  to  make 
few  months  alive 
ast  opulence,  solid- 


tho  postmaster  of 

»  and  energetic  in 

the   Government 

charge.  \  It    was, 

leasures  in  a  groat 

at  his  suggestion 

>st  Office  and  Sub- 

.ved  with  so  little 

*rt  of   the  present 

the  last  mentioned 

;onsumed,  and  the 

«'y  into  State  street, 

would  have  ended 


THE  TRANSCRIPT  BUILDING, 

one  of  tlie  most  northerly  structures  de- 
stroyed by  the  great  conflagration,  took  fire 
in  the  i*ar  part  of  the  upper  story  at  about 
six  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning.  At  eleven 
o'clock  on  Saturday  night  it  was  deemed  pru- 
dent to  remove  the  books  and  papers  from  the 
counting  room  to  a  place  of  safety.  By  the 
kindness  of  J.  E.  Mayuard  &  Co.  of  the 
Kevere  Stables  they  were  taken  in  car- 
riages to  the  residence  of 'Mr.  Button,  the 
senior  proprietor.  No.  GG6  Washington  street. 
The  complete  files  since  1830  were  thus  saved. 

The  standing  matter  in  the  composing  room 
was  put  into  the  turtles  and  lowered  into  the 
basement.  ;The  cases  of  type  were  disposed  of 
in  a  similar  manner.  The  men  connected  with 
the  establishment  worked  with  rare  energy 
and  devotion.  The  most  valuable  portion  of 
the  editorial  library  was  saved. 

From  midnight  until  dawn  those  connected 
with  the  different  departments  of  the  paper, 
watched  the  approach  of  the  flames  with  in- 
tense flolicitude.  At  times  during  the  anxious 
hours  it  was  hoped  the  building  might  escape. 

At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  all  hope  dis- 
appeared, as  the  buildings  in  immediate  prox- 
imity on  the  south  and  east  sides  were  envel- 
oped in  fire.  The  flames  made  rapid  head- 
way when  they  began  and  in  three  hours  this 
elegant  and  costly  structure  was  destroyed 
all  but  its  exterior  walls. 

Investigation  this  morning  shows  that  the 
printing  machinery  is  damaged  fully  fifty  per 
cent.  The  heavy  timbers  from  the  upper 
story  fell  through  the  brick  and  iron  arches 
over  the  presses,  and  the  large  safe  in  the 
counting  room  fell  upon  the  Hoe  four-cylinder 
press.  The  double  six  cylinder  is  injured  to 
the  extent  of  $15,000  to  .1^18,000.  The  steam 
engine  is  nearly  ruined,  the  woodwork  upon 
and  near  it  being  destroyed.  Experts  esti- 
mate that  perhaps  ten  of  the  seventeen  full 
turtles  may  be  saved.  The  type  in  cases  is 
ruined.  .The  folding  machine  is  also  totally 
destroyed. 

As  one  instance  of  the  alacrity  with  which 
assistance  came  even  from  great  distances, 
we  would  hero  mention  the  appearance,  at 
seven  o'clock  Sunday  morning,  of  Steamer 
Kearsarge  from  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  fully 
manned,  accompanied  by  the  mayor  of  that 
city.  It  was  btationed  at  once  near  the  Tran- 
script Building,  where  for  several  hours  it  was 
worked  with  unwearied  efficiency. 

Already  there  has  been  some  compensation 
for  the  serious  disaster  and  loss  to  the  Tran- 
script in  the  cordial  expressions  of  sympathy 
and  generous  offers  of  aid  so  promptly  ex- 
tended to  it.  To  the  proprietors  of  other 
journals  and  its  numerous  patrons  and  friends 
the  Transcript  desires  to  return  its  sincere 
thanks  for  their  manifestations  of  good  will, 
in  this  hour  of  its  misfortune.  These  will 
never  be  forgotton. 

Every  effort  will  be  made  to  restore  the  pa- 
per at  the  earlist  moment  to  its  former  pros- 
perous condition,  and  make  its  publication 
in  all  respects' what  it  was  before  the  iutor- 
ruption  of  its  business. 


BRIEF 

. . .  .One  topic  and  thai 

....The  clmrches  ne» 
yesterday.  At  some  oth 
sbippers. 

. . .  .Multitudes  of  cler' 
trlct  cannot  find  oven  t) 
they  had  eituations. 

....Rev.  Mr.  Chaney 
ganized  his  Sunday  soho 
morning  into  an  active  ( 
food  to  the  exhaustet 
Christian. 

—  Wiseacres  have 
worse  to  come  after 
have  it. 

....The  Christian  Ur-: 
day  in  feeding  the  exha^ 

. . .  .Our  "pi"  Is  balced 

....Tlie  Old  South  is  i 
the  second  time  in  its  h. 

The  first  official  i. 

from  distant  Chicago, 
ber  the  gotierosity  of. 
own.  great  calamity. 

. . .  .Benjamin  Frank!" 
lose  his  birth-place.  H 
towards  Milk  street  tl 
right  and  the  old  accusl 
to  every  passer  by:    "U 

. . .  .Every  precaution 
by  housekeepers,  mer 
everybody  in  charge  of ) 
buildings.  Oiled  rags,  • 
dangerous  things  shoul 

.  ...The  firemen  foug 
vent  the  fire  from  cross: 
success  saved  the  area  I 
School  streets.  The  hai 
bore'  Hotel  and  the  nor 

.  ...The  absence  of  a 
thy  of  a  syllable's  raent 
of  Saturday  night  and  . 
of  Boston.  Hundreds » 
03  orderly  ns  if  the  city 
entire  destruction. 

No  undue  advai 

and  other  laboring  mei. 
of  those  in  sore  peril ;  a 
instances  of  extortion  ' 
orous  action. 

It  is  a  singular  ci 

only  one  church  was  de 
tion. 

Now  is  the  time  f 

owing  debt«  in  Boston 
cheerfully. 

Engines  from  fiv« 

dred  and  fifteen  miles 
fire,  at  the  corner  t 
strcctH,  this  (Monday) 

The  Transcrint 

1630,  and  it  don't  meai 

The  weather  has 

the  great  calamity.  ' 
favoring  the  conflagrai 

Adversity  tries 

friends  have  stood  tria 
to  express  its  thanks. 

Styles  says  bis 

"heavy  loes"  lists  with 
his  account — blepsed  b 

....The  Post  of  todi 
baste. 

....To  the  United  S 
credit  is  due  for  their 
ncFs;  and  our  citizen 
faithful  as  veterans. 

The  gunpowder  i 


FART  OF  EDITOKIAL  TAUE  OF  FIRST  ISSUE  OF  BOSTON  TRANSCRU'T 

AFTER  THE  FlliE 


1872 

was  wet  through  below  the  knees.  I  determined 
to  go  up  to  Mt.  Vernon  Street,  have  a  bath,  get  a 
bite  at  the  Club,  and  then  come  down  to  the  fire 
again.  But  Alderman  Power  came  along  with 
some  men  that  I  knew  in  the  Council,  and  wanted 
my  help  in  making  some  arrangements  ,by  which 
the  firemen  could  be  properly  fed.  This  struck  me 
as  very  good  work,  so  along  I  Went.  The  poor 
fellows  were  very  much  in  evidence  in  Tremont 
Street,  and  I  saw  some  in  State  Street  dragging 
their  weary  way  along,  drenched  to  the  skin  and  as 
black  as  salamanders,  in  search  of  breakfast.  We 
beat  up  a  few  restaurants,  and  finally  fixed  mat- 
ters up  very  well  with  the  United  States  Hotel. 
I  went  up  to  the  Hollis  Street  church,  where  they 
had  opened  the  chapel  and  were  soliciting  con- 
tributions of  food  and  coffee  for  the  firemen. 
After  the  stifling  atmosphere  of  the  burning  streets, 
it  was  good  to  stand  again  in  the  warm  sunlight 
and  to  breathe  the  good  air  that  drew  across  the 
Common.  I  had  no  idea  what  time  it  was  until 
I  heard  the  Sunday  morning  bells  of  the  Back 
Bay  and  South  End.    There  was  an  engine  work- 

[  101  ] 


1872 

ing  in  Tremont  Street,  and  the  engineer  was  sitting 
on  a  box  and  drinking  coffee  from  a  tin  can  as 
an  evidence  that  my  recent  labors  had  not  been 
wasted.  The  drums  were  beating  and  the  mihtia- 
men  in  their  long  coats  were  coming  on  duty.  A 
troop  of  cavalry  clattered  along  Boylston  Street, 
so  you  see  the  soldiers  can  find  horses  if  the  firemen 
can't.  The  Common  was  a  sight,  with  huge  masses 
of  merchandise  heaped  about  in  confusion,  under 
guard  of  the  owners  and  their  clerks.  The  great 
crowds  that  had  poured  in  from  the  suburbs  gave 
things  a  holiday  appearance.  Thousands  stood 
watching  the  smoke  that  rose  from  the  burned 
district,  and  jostled  about  the  telescope  for  a  nearer 
glimpse  of  the  great  tumbled  masses  that  looked 
like  huge  thundercaps  all  stained  with  gray  and 
brown.  Winter  and  Bromfield  Streets  were  packed 
with  people  who  peered  down  their  narrow  vistas 
into  the  smoky  waste.  I  marked  all  this  as  I  was 
dragging  myself  across  the  Common  to  the  Club, 
and  on  Park  Street  I  ran  plump  into  Frank  in  a 
state  of  dumb  astonishment.     He  had  passed  a 

quiet  night,  had  started  out  to  attend  service  at 

[  102  ] 


1872 

Trinity,  and  I  found  him  trying  to  adjust  his  mind 
to  the  change  that  had  come  over  the  world.  I 
assure  you  that  there  were  hundreds  of  good 
sleepers  with  clear  consciences  in  the  same  pre- 
dicament. I  had  no  sooner  stepped  inside  the 
Club  than  they  handed  me  a  note,  which  I  found 
to  be  from  Maria,  saying  that  she  was  at  my  rooms 
on  the  hill  and  must  see  me  at  once.  I  found  it  had 
been  left  an  hour  before,  but  the  cravings  of  my 
inner  man  seemed  stronger  than  the  claims  of  con- 
sanguinity, and  no  chair  ever  felt  as  good  to  me  as 
the  one  into  which  I  dropped  in  the  dining-room. 
There  were  a  dozen  fellows  breakfasting  there  — 
some  who  were  burned  out  and  some  who  expected 
to  be.  Do  you  remember  that  red-headed  chap 
wh6  made  such  a  row  at  Point  Shirley  last  sum- 
mer, the  day  you  had  your  dinner  at  Taft's  ? 
Well,  I  found  him  groaning  about  having  a  worse 
time  than  anybody.  He  reported  that  a  big  gang  of 
roughs  had  got  off  at  the  "Know-Nothing"  on 
the  arrival  of  the  night  express  from  New  York. 
No  one  had  any  hope  for  State  Street,  and  one 
man  assured   us    that   the   Chief    Engineer  had 

[  103  ] 


1872 

gone  crazy  and  been  taken  to  an  insane  asylum.  All 
this  was  pleasant  to  hear.  Shorty  was  the  only 
cheerful  man  I  met.  His  store  has  gone,  of  course, 
and  he  does  n't  know  how  he  stands  on  insurance, 
but  he  said  every  one  was  in  the  same  box,  and 
at  any  rate  the  coffee  and  fish-balls  were  good. 
He  lost  a  good  cigar  among  his  other  trials,  some 
one  knocking  it  out  of  his  mouth  as  he  was  help- 
ing to  unload  powder  in  Devonshire  Street.  He 
is  with  me  on  the  explosive  question,  and  says  it 
would  have  been  better  for  the  town  if  powder 
had  never  been  thought  of.  He  says  you  can't 
make  a  mining  engineer  out  of  a  haberdasher  or 
a  barber  by  handing  him  a  piece  of  paper. 

I  finished  breakfast,  and  leaving  Shorty  asleep 
in  a  chair,  with  his  six  feet  four  spread  out  all  over 
the  room,  started  for  the  hill.  I  found  Maria  wait- 
ing patiently,  and  she  was  in  a  really  alarmed  and 
tearful  state.  I  thought  she  was  simply  mourning 
for  the  city,  but  my  guess  was  wild.  She  had  seen 
in  the  Herald  that  the  militia  was  to  be  called  out, 
and  she  was   dreading   that   Freddie,   with   that 

throat  of  his,  would  have  to  buckle  on  his  armor 

[  104  ] 


THE  FIBE  FIEI 


Terrible   Coiifllaj>ra- 
tioo  ill  Boston  I 


fEAEFUL  im  TO  THE  BUSD^ESS  \l 

mim  OF  TniciTYi 


The  Most  Costly  and  Valuable 
Warehouses  and  Mercan- 
tile Establishments 
liaid  in  Asbos ! 


THE  LOSS  ESTIfVi  ATED  BY 
MILLIONS  ! 


The  Calamity  Attended  by 
Lf03S  of  Liife! 


TEE  STARTING  POINT  ON 
SUMMER  STREET. 


iJncontrollable  Progress  of  tlie 
Flames ! 


THE  mimn   POWERLESS  TO 
SAVE. 


A    Tornado    Created    by    the 
Intense  Heat. 


FLAMES  AND  SPAP.KS  BLOWN 
IN  ALL  DIRECTIONS. 


Bflildiiigs  Lapped  Up  by  ihe  Flames 

and  E educed  to  Ashes  in 

a  Moment. 


"''^ING   SCENES  IN   THE 
'rUEETS. 


Died  by  Lelanrt  &  Whealock.  gpnts'  furmsh- 
in,"- goods  and  8awy,r,  Mansfield  &  Co.,  tm- 
l-or  ers  of  dry  goods.  • 

Tbe  next  are  Easer,  Banlett  &  Co.,  woollen 
poods;  O.  B.  Ntrih  &   bon,    liats,  caps   and 
furs;  n-^.xt,  Farley,  Amsden.  &  Co.,  diy  eoods 
iobbM-s;  hhodes&Ripl  y,  wrtolesale  clotiiiujr. 
The  latter   firm  owned  the  buudin?.      Tha 
buildiuff  (,p  ositeihj  joint  of    starancr   was 
pranite,    fuur   stories   and  a   half,  "occu  ied 
largely  by  Mallyn,  Mullen   &  Lima,  aealcrs 
in  tnrujain^s,  who  need  ihe  entire  low.r  flour, 
liai-n,Dg  Bros.  &  Co.  and  G.  L.  Ide,   Carter  & 
Co.,  o,  ccupied  tne  upD  r  floors.     Fron>   tins 
ba  Idin-.;  '  ac  oss     the    &quare,    diaircmaily, 
was       i       stone       block      occupied        bv 
Smith,        Ivich      <fc      Co?  son      and      George 
M.  tiUzier,  dcrk-rs  in  cor«jfs.   skirts  at,d  knlf. 
po  ds.    Ihfl  bulldincrs  thui  Kt  n.iir.ed  wevi^, 
before  9  o  clock,  pLicerl  bevond  any  possible, 
chnuce  of  s.'uctv,  and  the  tirenie.i  ett  them  to 
burn  whi^e    lliey  en   eavoie  i    to  ohicK   t!ie 
jrosro^s    of    ti:e    mod,    devonnnp:    clement 
will  h  was  mak'.iTT    aiariniuijl.'   rai>id  a  rides 
in  :ill  d  roctions.    On   the  corner  ot  (  tis  and 
Bummer  s  ree  s  Ptood   the  Kverctt  block,  an 
iwio/iinc:    granite   s  rac  ure,  owned    by  the 
Eveie  testa  c.    Ji  inclu  !ed  Noa.  5-i.  54,  .56,  5i, 
(0,  i>->  and  04  '^uaiiuer  slrcet,  ;md  occupied  by 
b,  D.  LytiDs   >i   Co..  WeW   £ros.  &,   Dreylua, 
Philips   &  Shum.Tn,  y.   E.  Kinp:  &  Co.,  and 
Warr   Bros.,  dea'e  s  In   clotiiin>?,  furnslunir 
coods,   lancy    goo::s,   trimmmss,   Ac.      The 
Ui-uer  floors  were  used  moelly  as  oH.ces  and 
occup  ed  by  various  parties.    It  was  ai  out  9 
o'clo  k  w  hen  ihe  flames  caucrht  on  the  top  of 
this  buili'iuff  and  upon    it  the  eilorts  of   tha 
euijines  located    in    that  vicinity  were  bent. 
Th  :   oflbrts    we:c    Tin:iv;idin<r,    however,    as 
hardly  a  drop   of  water  could   be  got  to  the 
top  of  the   biiilujncr.    A   hue   of    hose   was 
soon  nm  np  on   the  m^iile  and  the  ho.-emeu 
reniaiuo  1  asoncrab  they  possibly  could,  s'nv- 
ing  to  check  Ihe  llames.  Oneiiivmen  was  seen 
cliupins  on  to  a  C(<v  t\g  at    the  very  top  of 
the  bni)d'n»'  directing  a  stream  on   the  fire 
whicli  was  abore  )nm  and  on  onosidefiasb- 
Ini^  almost  in  Ins  tace.    His  peiilous  position 
excited  .'.ome  alarm,  but  ht  a  uok  till  the  last 
chauco  and  theu   retired  in  sa  ety.    Kow  t  e 
fire     bey.'tn   to     creep     steadily     up     both 
Bides    of   Summer    street,   crawlin?     alor 
.+rom     root     to      roof     ts     though     the 
w  »       a      rivalry       between       the      t 
SKics  as  to  which  shonld  outstrip  the  other 
speed.      Opposite    the    Everett     block,   t 
bnilajogs  as  they  were   e.igulted    in    ra, 
success  on,  were  as    Ibllows:     Ericlc   s\\ 
front,  occupied  by  A.  Fo  som   &  Sons,  fl( 
cloths  and  oilcloths;  George  II,  Butler,  h 
poods;  and  Eu^  ue  Chapin   commisSiOin' 
chant;     Granite    block:     Moiife,   llamn- 
<te   Co.,    boisery  a:  d  ploves;  Stiles,  lie: 
Homer,  wholesale  clothina-;  S.  Klous  & 
hats,  capa,  and  furs;  Siroci  r  Bros.,  hat 
cap     niamiiactureri;     \Vvman     & 
imported       goods       and       linens: 
Wise      &      Fuller,       hueng       and 
goo'Js;     Eothwell.      LuUier,    Totter 
clothing;  JMiii.heil,  Green  &  Stevens,  cK 
While  the  fire  on  the  noithsriy  side  oj 
mer  sir  ct  w;.s  niarchin <  a  onjj  on   the  i 
the  Everett    bipk,   which  had    not   « 
time     I  ecome     largely    coveiel,     the 
sm.denl/  burst  out  in  anew  and  uncx 
qi:arter,  leaping:  across  and  lisintinsr  do 
tne  too  of  a  buiidiutr  on  Arch  street,  e 
doors  removed  Irom  bummer  areet. 
be;ore    tlie  ex'stence  ot   the  flam 
Quarter  was  known  they  had  sp 
tinougli  the  Luildmfir  and  were  bi 
ver.ect  torrent  from  all  the  \mk 
front  of  the   fancy  pood*  stor  ^ 
Folsom   &  JMartin.     Several   st 
(luicklysent  toither,  but  with 
tnau  a  sinele  hue.  el-iull  of  wa' 
pro;ue(d.    The  hie  spread  • 
velopme  tha  stores  of  i  ho'- 
I  J.    JM.     Hcdijdon,    cV 
riercj  &  Co.;  Miner 
of  which  weie  qui*** 
tb.!   whole  ror*" 
sheet  of  iiam 
:  coh'ian  o<"  ' 


Ark 
Ew 


A 


ownert 
niinea^ 
not,  bu 
adjoint 
moved. 

Men 
every  y. 
V^ashm: 
poa  t  ti 
recorU  < 
sa!e  se^.' 

Carri. 
loaded 
owner 
as  ar 

Thf 
stacko 
dise. 

Tne  b 
with  n. 
trun  8 
while  a 
the  stiv 
the  prov 
the  adj. 

Whet 
street  :u 
reqnisiti 
ly.  A  n 
cars  wh 
tcdie  o 

Befo 
hoars. 
dourn; 
their  t 
ratior 
niovf 
to  t 
a  n 

I 

jot 

an 

rei 

wa 

6v 

al' 

to 

P 

f 


FIRST  NEWS  OF  FIRE  IN  BOSTON  SUNDAY  HERALD,  SHOWING  HEADLINES  OF 
ISSUE  THAT  CIRCULATED  THROUGH  CITY  AND  SUBURBS  ON  NOV.  10,  1872 


1872 

and  plunge  into  danger  with  the  Ancients.  As  a 
lawyer  who  knew  his  frail  physical  condition,  she 
thought  I  could  do  something  towards  getting 
him  excused  from  martial  exercises.  Do  you  know 
that  girl  troubles  me.^  She  used  to  have  a  clear 
understanding  and  a  sense  of  humor,  but  this  was 
the  errand  that  brought  her  down-town  before 
breakfast!  I  told  her  that  there  was  no  occasion 
for  me  to  employ  the  adroitness  of  my  legal  mind, 
that  the  policy  of  the  authorities  was  always  to  hold 
the  Ancients  in  reserve  for  great  emergencies,  and 
that  they  would  surely  not  be  let  loose  in  the  streets 
until  the  police  had  been  overpowered,  the  militia 
routed,  and  the  marines  and  regulars  all  slain  at 
their  posts.  Moreover,  I  told  her  that  I  regarded 
the  present  situation  as  quite  peaceful  on  the 
whole.  I  waited  for  her  to  laugh,  to  smile,  and, 
by  Jove !  she  did  n't,  —  she  was  only  relieved  and 
grateful.  I  believe  she  honestly  thinks  that  Freddie 
joined  the  Ancients  because  of  his  yearning  to 
bleed  for  his  country.  I  told  her  some  of  the  things 
I  have  described  to  you,  and  enlarged  upon  the 
Kearsarge  episode.    She  thought  it  was  fine  and 

[  106  ] 


1872 

splendid  to  think  of  that  company  coming  so  far 
and  doing  so  much.  She  thought  it  was  inspiring 
to  think  of  all  these  brave  fellows  coming  in 
from  great  distances  to  save  the  city,  and  wished 
she  were  a  man  and  could  do  her  part  in  the  good 
fight.  Her  color  came  back,  her  eyes  flashed,  and 
yet  if  I  had  told  her  that  Freddie  was  needed  on 
guard  she  would  have  fainted  on  the  floor.  Well, 
I  told  her  no  such  thing,  and  she  insisted  on  my 
taking  her  where  she  could  see  all  that  was  going 
on.  I  was  getting  restless  myself,  so  we  went  out 
to  Beacon  Street  and  over  the  hill.  It  was  one 
o'clock,  and  in  front  of  the  State  House  we  met 
one  of  the  young  men  from  Kidder,  Peabody 
and  Co.'s  oflSce.  He  said  that  the  fire  was  burning 
*in  the  Merchants'  Exchange  Building,  and  that, 
while  all  the  mail  had  been  removed  to  Faneuil 
Hall,  they  had  word  from  Chief  Damrell  (who  had 
not  gone  crazy  after  all)  that  the  danger  for  State 
Street  had  passed.  He  said  that  Lee,  Higginson 
and  Co.  had  a  squad  of  regulars  from  the  forts 
in  their  office,  that  the  men  in  the  vaults  were  all 
armed,  and  that  there  had  been  a  good  deal  of 

[  107  ] 


1872 

excitement  among  the  people  who  were  denied 
admission  to  their  boxes.  We  hurried  down  into 
Tremont  Street  and  down  Court  Street,  and 
finally  through  the  crowd  to  a  point  almost  oppo- 
site the  Merchants'  Bank.  There  was  a  great 
crowd  here,  and  State  Street  was  full  of  pufiing 
engines,  and  it  was  almost  as  dark  as  night  under 
the  great  pall  of  smoke  they  made.  There  were 
glimmers  of  red  fire  in  Congress  Street,  but  for 
the  most  part  it  was  all  smoke  and  noise,  with  oc- 
casional glimpses  of  the  firemen  swarming  up  and 
down  the  steps  of  the  Merchants'  Exchange.  We 
came  upon  your  neighbors,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Morse, 
and  they  said  they  had  just  spoken  with  the  Mayor 
and  he  said  the  danger  was  over.  The  fire  had  been 
burning  in  the  post  office  all  the  morning,  and  the 
firemen  had  their  hose  inside  and  were  driving  it 
back.  I  never  saw  such  a  massing  of  fire  engines 
as  there  was  here,  and  when  I  told  Maria  that 
they  represented  a  dozen  cities  and  towns,  she 
said  it  was  splendid,  that  it  was  like  1775  when 
the  New  England  minute  men  thronged  to  Boston 
in  her  need.  We  decided  to  go  to  the  Parker  House 

[  108] 


1872 

for  a  bite  of  lunch,  and  turning  from  Washington 
into  School,  found  the  Kearsarge  steamer  still 
humming  away  in  front  of  the  Old  South,  a  sight 
that  delighted  Maria's  heart.  Arrived  at  the  hotel, 
we  found  it  crowded  and  found  also  that  their 


POST  OFFICE  IN  FANEUIL  HALL 


kitchen  had  gone  absolutely  out  of  business. 
Everything  eatable  had  been  devoured  by  hordes 
of  famished  strangers.  So  we  went  up  to  the 
Tremont  House  for  a  car,  and  hitched  and 
crawled  along  to  Boylston  Street,  where  we  found 
ourselves  blocked  by  a  crowd  that  was  making 

[  109  ] 


1872 

quite  a  noisy  demonstration.  I  was  hanging  to  a 
strap  and  could  n't  see  anything ;  but  when  the 
conductor  came  through  he  said  that  the  cheering 
was  for  some  more  Providence  engines  that  had 
just  come  in  and  passed  down  Boylston  Street. 
Maria  was  for  getting  off  again,  and  it  took  some 
quiet  firmness  on  my  part  to  calm  her  enthusiasm. 
At  the  house  Maria  and  I  picked  away  at  the  cold 
turkey,  while  Freddie,  arrayed  in  his  long  dress- 
ing-gown and  smoking  his  pipe,  condescended  to 
come  in  and  sit  with  us.  He  had  the  hiccoughs, 
but  they  did  n't  prevent  him  from  dispensing  words 
of  wisdom  and  explaining  how  easily  the  fire  might 
have  been  stopped  if  they  had  only  gone  at  it  in 
the  right  way.  What  an  ass  he  is!  It  was  after 
four  o'clock  when  I  got  to  Mt.  Vernon  Street 
again.  You  know  how  I  spent  the  evening  in 
writing  you.  After  I  mailed  your  letter  I  again 
headed  for  the  hill,  and  had  been  in  bed  but  half  an 
hour  when  I  heard  the  bell  of  the  Charles  Street 
church  ringing  alarm  after  alarm  from  the  box 
at  the  corner  of  Winter  Street  and  Central  Place. 
So  I  tumbled  into  my  clothes,  more  asleep  than 

[   110  ] 


THE    OLD    SOUTH,   Nov.   10,   1872,  SHOWING    FIRE    ENGINE    AT    CORNER  HELD  BY   THE 

KEARSARGE   OF  PORTSMOUTH,  N    H. 


1872 

awake,  stumbled  across  the  Common,  and  for 
one  good  hour  was  as  anxious  as  I  had  been  at 
any  time  Saturday  night. 

I  have  told  you  how  fortunate  it  was  that  the 
Mayor  requested  the  firemen  who  had  come  from 
a  distance  to  stay  over  until  Monday.  The  bur- 
den of  this  fight  fell  upon  the  companies  from 
Providence,  Fall  River,  Manchester,  New  Hamp- 
shire, New  Haven  and  Norwich,  Connecticut. 
Chief  Damrell  had  command,  and,  jaded  as  he 
must  have  been,  he  handled  it  splendidly.  It 
looked  for  a  long  time  as  though  Jordan,  Marsh 
and  Co.'s  must  go,  and  only  good  work  saved  it. 
There  was  an  engine  from  Norwich  located  right 
on  the  Winter  Street  corner,  and  she  played  the 
best  stream  I  have  seen  since  I  got  into  Summer 
Street  Saturday  night.  They  kept  it  pouring  into 
the  high  Luthern  windows  on  the  corner  for 
hours,  without  once  shutting  down,  and  that 
was  a  big  factor  in  keeping  the  flames  from  cross- 
ing Washington  Street.  The  company  only  ar- 
rived about  half  an  hour  before  the  fire  broke 
out,  and  they  left  for  home  this  morning   early, 

[  111  ] 


1872 

after   paying    their    bills    at    the    United    States 
Hotel. 

As  I  said,  I  got  to  bed  at  four  o'clock  and  was 
down  on  State  Street  at  ten.  I  went  to  Brewster, 
Sweet  and  Co.'s,  where  I  found  that  our  Stock 
Exchange  had  opened,  but  had  adjourned  at  once 
because  of  the  threatening  array  of  sellers.  As  you 
may  imagine,  the  New  York  opening  was  a  wild  one. 
Prices  tumbled  all  around  at  first,  but  recovered 
considerably  before  the  close  at  four  o'clock.  The 
principal  stocks  showed  a  loss  of  from  2  to  3  points 
over  the  Saturday  night  closing.  Pacific  Mail 
declined  from  90f  to  84.  Every  one  is  anxious,  of 
course,  to  know  what  the  Government  will  do  if 
the  financial  stringency  becomes  more  acute.  I  saw 
a  telegram  from  Washington  to-day,  stating  that 
Secretary  Boutwell  is  alive  to  the  situation  and  is 
ready  at  a  moment's  notice  to  counteract  a  decline 
in  bonds  or  a  rise  in  gold  by  a  purchase  of  the 
former  or  l)y  selling  large  amounts  of  the  latter.  It 
looks  black  for  our  local  insurance  companies,  but 
the  foreign  companies  have,  of  course,  no  interest 
here  comparable  to  what  they  had  in  Chicago. 

[  112] 


LOOKING  DOWN   SUMMER  STREET,  SHOWING   RUINS  OF  SHREVE,  CRUMP    &  LOW'S 

HOVEY'S   IN  DISTANCE 


187^ 

To  conclude,  the  Union  Club  house  was  scorched 
this  afternoon.  The  fire  caught  in  the  wooden  ele- 
vator over  the  range  in  the  kitchen,  about  four 
o'clock,  followed  up  the  elevator  to  the  third  floor, 
and  was  stopped  there.  But  smoke  and  water 
have  made  the  house  uninhabitable,  and  so  on 
to  the  sidewalk  we  go.  By  Jove,  I  wonder  if  I 
shall  ever  get  the  smell  of  smoke  out  of  my  nostrils 
or  the  throb  of  the  steam-engines  out  of  my  ears. 
When  I  close  my  eyes  I  see  miles  of  red  flame,  and 
in  my  dreams  I  hear  walls  falling,  the  wind  shriek- 
ing, and  that  infernal  never-ceasing  hum  of  the 
engines.  I  must  go  up  and  see  Maria's  children  and 
let  them  pound  it  all  out  of  my  system  on  that 
overworked  piano. 

I  have  a  lot  more  to  tell  you,  but  not  to-night. 
A  package  of  papers  goes  forward  to-day,  and  you 
can  figure  out  just  who  of  your  friends  has  suf- 
fered. Tell  Eleanor  for  all  our  sakes  not  to  de- 
spair of  Maria,  but  to  insist  on  her  coming  out  in 
the  spring.  You  can  write  over  that  Eleanor  has 
the  small -pox  or  something  rather  disturbing  of 
that   sort,   and   we'll   manage   to  get  Maria  off. 

[  113  ] 


1872 

You  know  the  life  she  leads,  and  how  much  she 
needs  a  change.  If  she  will  only  leave  him,  we 
can  take  hold  here  and  perhaps  make  a  man  of 
Freddie  yet. 

Always  yours. 


1872 

MU  Vernon  St.,  November  15,  1872. 

Dear  Harry,  — 

I  received  your  cable  on  Wednesday 
and  replied  to  it  the  same  day.  There  is  no  pos- 
sible use  in  your  coming  home,  and,  indeed,  you 
are  one  of  the  few  men  I  know  whose  interests  are 
not  seriously  affected  by  this  fire.  Your  presence 
here  will  not  help  the  securities  market,  your  prop- 
erty is  unharmed,  and  you  would  only  make  one 
more  in  the  worrying  crowd  that  is  trying  to 
straighten  out  the  confusion  and  making  more  in 
the  process. 

The  principal  streets  north  and  south  are  of 
course  blocked  by  the  wreckage  of  the  fire,  and 
the  result  is  that  Tremont  Street  is  jammed  with 
traffic  from  walk  to  walk.  It  forms  to-day  the 
only  practicable  line  of  communication  between 
the  North  and  South  ends,  although  the  route  via 
Cambridge  and  Charles  Streets  is  now  helping  us 
out  somewhat.  We  hope  to  have  Washington 
Street  reopened  by  to-morrow  night,  but  there  is 

[  115  ] 


1872 

still  much  to  be  done  there  in  cleaning  up  and 
taking  down  dangerous  walls. 

We  have  word  this  morning  that  the  Malta  has 
put  into  Halifax  with  a  broken  shaft,  so  my 
struggles  to  get  off  my  letters  by  her  were  all  labor 
wasted.  I  suppose  this  will  go  out  by  the  Olympus 
to-morrow,  and  if  it  is  the  first  word  you  have  of 
the  fire  from  me,  I  would  have  you  know  that 
there  are  solid  ounces  of  descriptive  matter  from 
my  pen  which  started  earlier  and  will  arrive  later. 

The  fire  which  destroyed  the  Summer  Street 
corner  shortly  after  midnight  on  Sunday  was  the 
result  of  a  gas-explosion.  It  seems  that  the  gas 
leaking  all  over  the  burned  district  had  become 
confined  under  fallen  masonry  and  in  some  way 
found  its  way  into  the  sewers.  When  Shreve, 
Crump  and  Low's  blew  up,  the  iron  covers  of  the 
man-holes  all  about  that  district  went  sailing 
through  the  air  like  so  many  autumn  leaves.  It  is 
a  wonder  that  many  were  not  killed  in  the  early 
stages  of  that  fire,  and  I  hear  that  at  first  the  coun- 
try firemen  did  n't  like  their  job  a  bit.  But  they 
buckled  down  to  their  work  later,  and  held  the  fire, 

[  IIG  ] 


LOOKING  DOWN  WASHINGTON   STREET,  FROM  WINTER,  NOV.  11,  1872 


1872 

as  I  stated  in  my  last.  The  gas  people  shut  off  the 
supply  at  once,  and  do  you  know  that  Monday 
and  Tuesday  nights  our  streets  and  houses  were 
absolutely  without  light?  I  had  tickets  for  Ar- 
ticle Jf7  at  the  Museum  for  Monday  night,  but 
they  had  to  close  their  doors,  with  all  the  other 
theatres  in  town.  There  was  a  great  rush  for  lamps, 
oil,  and  candles,  and  people  in  those  lines  of  busi- 
ness made  a  good  thing  out  of  the  public  misfor- 
tune. I  bought  a  couple  of  brass  lamps  and  a  lot 
of  candles  for  mother's  house,  but  found  after- 
wards that  my  precautions  were  unnecessary,  as 
Roxbury  had  light.  I  had  to  go  down  to  the 
Parker  House  Tuesday  evening,  and  it  was  a  queer 
sight  to  see  the  dining-room  lit  by  candles  on  the 
tables,  and  every  one  spoiling  their  eyes  in  trying 
to  read  the  evening  papers.  The  night  was  rainy 
with  a  high  wind,  the  moon  of  course  hidden, 
and,  with  the  streets  as  dark  as  a  pocket  and  with 
rumors  flying  about  of  new  importations  of  roughs, 
you  can  imagine  that  we  did  not  feel  very  secure. 
I  understand  that  my  good  neighbors  in  the  West 
End  organized  themselves  into  armed  committees 

[  118] 


1872 

and  patrolled  the  streets  ;  but  as  I  spent  Monday 
and  Tuesday  nights  at  mother's,  I  know  nothing 
of  it  except  by  hearsay.  I  got  out  father's  old  re- 
volver which  I  think  had  been  loaded  ever  since 
1863,  and  if  I  had  been  called  upon  to  fire  it,  I  sup- 
pose it  would  have  destroyed  the  house  and  every 
one  in  it.  The  police  have  done  well,  but  the  sol- 
diers were,  of  course,  our  principal  reliance.  The 
Cadets  went  off  duty  Monday  night,  when  the  Fifth 
Regiment  was  called  out.  Some  of  the  First  Regi- 
ment, quartered  in  the  Old  South,  struck  the  bell 
the  other  night  and  created  a  panic  all  about  there 
by  giving  the  impression  that  there  was  another  fire. 
They  have  n't  found  the  culprits,  but  it  was  a  dirty 
thing  to  do  when  every  one  is  so  nervous  that  they 
jump  a  mile  at  the  sound  of  a  fire-alarm.  I  looked 
into  the  Old  South  one  evening,  and  saw  the  sol- 
diers curled  up  asleep  in  the  pews  and  all  over  the 
floor.  It  w^as  rainy  and  cold,  the  windows  were  all 
broken  in,  and  it  was  a  picture  of  discomfort.  The 
papers  point  out  that  this  is  the  first  military  occu- 
pation of  the  church  since  the  British  used  it  as  a 
riding-school    way   back   in   Revolutionary  days. 

[  119  ] 


1872 

There  were  complaints  of  drunkenness  among  the 
out-of-town  firemen  on  Saturday  and  Sunday.  The 
truth  seems  to  be  that  the  country  firemen  brought 
in  a  lot  of  hangers-on  from  their  towns,  some  of 
whom  donned  firemen's  uniforms  without  hanker- 
ing for  hard  work,  and  it  was  among  these  idlers 
that  the  trouble  occurred.  The  rum-shops  have 
been  closed  this  week,  so  the  poor  man  goes  dry. 
Shorty  says  that  he  was  accosted  yesterday  in  front 
of  the  St.  Joachim  Bazar  by  a  chap  who  probably 
had  n't  been  sober  for  years,  and  who  said, 
'*  What 's  the  use  of  having  such  a  h — 1  of  a  fire 
in  Boston  if  a  feller  can't  get  a  drink  .^"  I  thought 
the  gentleman's  point  of  view  very  interesting. 
Some  of  the  clergymen  tell  us  that  the  fire  was 
sent  as  a  warning  to  us  to  mend  our  ways,  but  here 
is  a  man  who  holds  other  views  and  who  asserts 
that  the  fire  has  utterly  failed  of  its  object. 

The  fire  at  the  Club  was  not  so  bad  as  I  thought, 
and,  now  that  we  have  gas  again,  you  can  be  very 
comfortable  there  if  you  don't  object  to  the  com- 
bined odor  of  smoke  and  fresh  paint.  There  was 
great  excitement  in  the  house  while  the  fire  lasted. 

[  120  ] 


1872 

The  soldiers  came  with  a  rush,  and  Park  Street 
was  jammed  with  engines  all  drawn  by  hand,  ex- 
cept one  from  Manchester,  N.  H.,  which  was  pro- 
pelled by  its  own  steam.  I  never  heard  of  such 
a  machine,  but  if  one  has  been  built  I  prophesy  that 
in  five  years  all  of  our  engines  will  run  that  way. 
If  they  can  only  apply  the  same  principle  to  street 
cars,  drays,  and  wagons,  horse  epidemics  will  lose 
their  terrors  for  the  future. 

They  had  a  grand  row  on  Kilby  Street  Sunday 
morning  over  the  use  of  powder.  I  hear  two  or 
three  versions  of  the  story,  but  it  appears  to  have 
come  down  to  a  direct  conflict  between  the  fire- 
men and  the  powder  brigade.  It  seems  that  Gen- 
eral Benham,  who  is  in  command  of  the  harbor 
forts,  volunteered  his  services  at  City  Hall,  and 
left  there  early  Sunday  morning  wdth  the  idea  that 
he  was  in  charge  of  the  powder  operations.  In 
the  mean  time  the  Fire  Chief,  alarmed  by  the  re- 
ports of  his  officers,  had  rescinded  his  permits  and 
ordered  his  men  to  have  the  explosions  stopped, 
to  arrest  and  if  necessary  to  kill  any  one  attempt- 
ing to  use  powder.  The  rumor  got  into  State  Street 

[  122  ] 


1872 

about  daylight  that  the  Chief  had  turned  against 
powder  and  that  Benham  had  threatened  to  blow 
up  the  buildings  on  the  southerly  side  between 
Kilby  and  Congress,  ''Damrell  or  no  Damrell." 
At  all  events  Alderman  Woolley  interfered  with 
some  men  who  were  carrying  powder  into  a  build- 
ing on  Kilby  Street,  and,  the  police  supporting 
him,  he  had  it  all  brought  out.  Then  Benham 
came  along  and  ordered  them  to  take  it  in  again. 
Woolley  objected,  and  Benham  came  up  and 
asked  if  he  knew  who  he  was.  Woolley  said  he 
did  n't.  Then  says  the  other,  "  I  am  General 
Benham."  Woolley  announced  that  he  did  n't 
care  if  he  was  "General  Damnation,"  the  powder 
should  n't  go  in.  I  understand  that  Benham  then 
showed  some  authority  from  the  Mayor  or  the 
Chief,  and  that  the  powder  did  go  in.  I  also  under- 
stand that  it  came  out  again  by  order  of  the  Chief 
or  one  of  his  assistants,  and  that  was  the  last  of  pow- 
der for  this  fire.  While  the  rumpus  was  going  on, 
the  firemen  w^ere  mixing  in  it,  and  of  course  doing 
everything  except  throwing  water.  It  is  only  fair 
to  say  that  the  general  denies  that  he  ever  said 

[  123  ] 


1872 

he  would  blow  up  State  Street  or  in  any  way  op- 
pose the  Chief.  They  also  deny  from  the  Mayor's 
office  that  they  gave  Benham  any  authority,  merely 
recommending  that  he  place  his  professional  ex- 
perience at  the  disposal  of  the  Chief  Engineer. 
So  I  give  you  the  story  as  I  get  it,  and  you  can 
make  up  your  own  mind  as  to  facts. 

Shorty  tells  me  that  he  saw  your  former  comrade 
in  arms,  Henry  Higginson,  driving  a  wagon-load  of 
powder  along  State  Street  on  Sunday  morning,  right 
among  the  engines  that  were  throwing  sparks  in  all 
directions .  It  seems  that  he  had  been  ordered  by 
General  Benham  to  go  down  to  Central  Wharf,  get 
the  powder,  which  the  government  tug-boat  had 
brought  up  from  the  forts,  and  deliver  it  at  the  cor- 
ner of  State  and  Kilby.  When  Shorty  suggested 
that  he  was  on  dangerous  business,  Higginson 
replied  that  it  seemed  to  him  a  wicked  thing  to  do, 
but  orders  were  orders  and  that  was  all  there  was 
to  it.  I  suppose  that 's  what  army  training  does  for 
a  man.  Shorty  says  even  army  training  would  n't 
do  it  for  him,  and  when  they  commenced  to  unload 
the  powder  right  there  in  the  street  he  got  around 

[  124  ] 


1872 

the  corner  with  all  the  agility  of  the  young  man 
on  the  flying  trapeze. 

There  was  a  great  time  at  the  Union  Safe  De- 
posit Vaults  ;  they  had  regulars  on  guard,  as  I  think 
I  wrote  you,  and  armed  employes  on  duty  day  and 
night.  I  had  a  talk  yesterday  with  young  Lyman 
in  Lee,  Higginson  and  Co.'s  office,  and  he  gave 
a  very  laughable  account  of  their  troubles,  and 
mimicked  a  lot  of  our  solid  people  who  came 
down  there  in  a  panic  on  Sunday  to  remove  their 
valuables.  He  gave,  too,  a  funny  description  of 
the  employes  who  had  abandoned  their  pens  for 
firearms.  Of  course,  things  at  the  Vaults  were 
terribly  serious,  but  it  is  pleasant  to  find  any  one 
who  can  be  jocose  in  discussing  our  calamity. 

Last  night  I  took  Maria  to  Mr.  Froude's  lecture 
in  Tremont  Temple.  There  was  a  beggarly  audi- 
ence, and  I  thought  Mr.  F.  was  not  pleased.  He 
said  that  he  should  have  preferred  to  cancel  the 
engagement  in  view  of  existing  conditions,  but  it 
had  been  represented  to  him  that  the  public  de- 
sired the  course  to  go  on  without  interruption.  He 
talked  about  the  English  in  Ireland,  but  I  was  n't 

[  125  ] 


1872 

much  interested.     Maria  took  notes,  and  I  sup- 
pose got  something  out  of  it. 

No  one  knows  just  where  they  stand  at  present. 
The  safes  are  being  recovered  from  the  ruins  with 


TREMONT  TEMPLE  IN  1872 


all  kinds  of  results.  It  would  seem  that  all  our 
local  insurance  companies,  with  the  possible  ex- 
ception of  one  or  two,  are  gone,  and  it  is  problemat- 
ical as  to  just  what  they  will  pay.  Shorty  finds  he  is 
covered  by  policies  in  English  companies,  so  he 

[  126  ] 


1872 

comes  out  well,  as  he  deserves  to.  He  got  his  safe 
out  yesterday,  and  found  the  contents  all  right. 
The  firemen  of  the  Mount  Vernon  Street  engine 
were  good  to  him,  and  played  a  stream  into  his 
cellar  to  cool  things  off.  I  have  an  idea  that  they 
may  get  cigars  or  a  piano  out  of  it,  for  there  is 
nothing  mean  about  Shorty.  Did  I  write  you  of 
how  he  worked  on  the  brakes  of  a  Wakefield  hand- 
engine  Saturday  night?  As  he  was  wandering 
about  lending  a  hand  here  and  there,  he  fell  in 
with  the  Wakefield  tub  down  on  Broad  Street.  He 
made  up  his  mind  to  work  off  his  despair  by  hard 
labor,  and  he  says  they  ''  shook  it  out  of  her  "  in 
great  shape  and  that  he  has  n't  had  such  a  time  in 
years.  He  says  Wakefield  had  no  call  for  help  from 
Boston,  but  seeing  the  light  of  the  fire  they  started 
off  to  find  it.  After  running  thirteen  miles,  they 
found  it  sure  enough,  and  found  Shorty,  too, 
anxious  to  lend  a  hand  on  the  brakes. 

I  had  a  call  Tuesday  from  Bob  Palmer,  and 
he  gave  me  an  account  of  how  Shorty  met  the 
first  shock  of  disaster.  Bob  left  Chicago  ten  days 
ago,  and  came  over  from  New  York  to  spend  a 

[  127  ] 


1872 

quiet  Sunday  with  his  old  chum.  He  says  they 
came  downtown  late  in  the  evening,  and  when  they 
got  where  they  could  look  into  Franklin  Street  the 
whole  five  stories  of  Shorty's  building  were  in  the 
cellar.  Bob  says  that  Shorty  made  but  two  remarks 
in  his  presence,  and  lit  a  cigar  between  them.  The 
first  was,  "Well,  I'll  be  d— d!"  The  other, 
*'  Come,  let  her  rip,  it's  too  hot  to  stay  here."  The 
next  moment  he  was  helping  load  a  wagon  from 
a  store  farther  up  the  street,  and  then  went  around 
to  lend  a  hand  at  Palmer  and  Bachelder's,  after 
sending  Bob  home  to  keep  the  family  from  worry- 
ing. 

People  have  taken  their  losses  in  all  kinds  of 

ways.     Billy  H cried,  and  so  did  others  for 

that  matter.  Poor  Sawney  got  drunk,  but  that 
might  have  happened  had  there  been  no  fire. 
Ned  carried  on  like  a  madman  when  he  found 
after  the  play  that  Otis  Street  had  gone,  and  they 
took  him  home  in  a  hack  before  midnight.  Most 
of  our  friends  have  shown  real  pluck.  Bob,  by  the 
way,  has  become  a  thorough  Westerner,  and  main- 
tains that  we  have  n't  had  much  of  a  fire  and  that 

[  128  ] 


w 

H 

o 

o 

< 


o 
» 

o 

OS 

;> 


H 

QO 

I— I 

Q 

O 

Em 
Em 
O 

H 

oo 
O 

Ph 

^ 

E^ 
JZi 


O 

w 

CO 

H 
Q 

PS 
< 


1872 

altogether  it  was  a  pretty  tame  show  as  compared 
with  Chicago's  effort  of  a  year  ago. 

By  the  way,  Freddie  honored  me  with  a  call 
this  morning  at  my  office.  He  dropped  in  to  say 
that  I  had  been  gulling  Maria  with  my  Kearsarge 
story,  and  that  he  had  it  on  indisputable  author- 
ity that  brands  on  the  Old  South  steeple  were 
few  and  far  between,  and  that  engines  from  New- 
ton, Watertown,  or  somewhere  near  home,  put 
them  out.  I  do  hear  that  every  one  is  claiming  the 
credit  of  having  "saved"  the  church,  but  I  shall 
stand  by  the  story  of  my  tall  friend  and  the  Kear- 
sarge of  Portsmouth.  I  know  you  will  be  glad  to 
hear  of  my  call  and  what  caused  it.  It's  so  like 
Freddie. 

I  heard  a  good  story  to-day  about  Mr.  Endicott 
of  Hovey's  firm.  He  was  at  his  home  in  Beverly, 
and  did  n't  hear  of  the  fire  until  Sunday  morn- 
ing. He  went  over  to  Salem,  and,  finding  no  train, 
rode  up  with  an  expressman  over  the  road.  On 
reaching  Boston  he  tried  to  pay  his  driver  for  his 
pains,  but  the  man  refused  any  compensation. 
Mr.  E.  insisting,  the  fellow  said  that  he  could  n't 

[  129  ] 


1872 

take  anything  from  him,  because  Hovey's  had 
been  burned  early  the  previous  night,  and  he 
had  n't  the  heart  to  tell  him  before.  In  view  of  the 
circumstances,  this  story  has  both  a  humorous  and 
humanitarian  interest,  and  serves  to  show  some- 
thing of  the  spirit  of  the  times. 

The  open  lands  on  the  Back  Bay  and  down  Fort 
Hill  way  are  to  be  used  for  temporary  business  struc- 
tures, and  the  city  government  is  considering  giv- 
ing over  the  Common  for  the  same  purpose.  But 
this  will  never  do,  and  will  raise  a  public  howl. 
Moreover,  I  don't  believe  that  it  is  at  all  necessary. 
The  Coliseum  is  garrisoned  by  troops  and  used 
for  the  storage  of  goods.  This  enormous  fire-trap 
has  been  a  terrible  bugbear  of  late,  people  fearing 
it  might  be  set  afire  and  start  another  conflagra- 
tion. I  heard  to-night  that  it  is  to  be  sold  at  auc- 
tion within  a  week,  on  the  understanding  that  it 
shall  be  taken  down  at  once.  The  financial  situa- 
tion continues  strained,  and  the  banks  are  very 
timid.  The  Freeman's,  Everett,  Shawmut,  Mount 
Vernon,  North  America,  and  Revere,  were  burned 
out,  but  all  but  the  Freeman's  found  the  contents 

[  130] 


1872 

of  their  safes  in  good  order.  There  is  a  remarkable 
situation  at  the  Freeman's.  I  have  the  story  from 
Henry  Rogers,  whose  father,  as  you  know,  is  Pre- 
sident of  the  Bank.  When  their  safe  fell,  it  was 
broken  by  striking  on  a  stone  pillar,  and  when 
opened  all  the  money,  notes  and  papers  were 
found  blackened  and  charred.  There  was  a  list 
of  the  depositors  in  the  hands  of  the  printer,  and 
one  cash  book  had  been  taken  home  by  the 
Cashier  to  trace  some  trifling  error.  These  com- 
prised the  sum  total  of  the  bank's  books  and 
records  when  it  opened  for  business  on  Monday. 
The  officers  commenced  operations  by  calling  in 
the  pass  books  and  requesting  their  customers  to 
bring  in  a  record  of  their  indebtedness  to  the  bank. 
Do  you  know,  they  have  had  a  crowd  of  people  at 
the  counter  all  this  week  signing  new  notes  to  take 
the  place  of  those  destroyed.  Henry  says  it  has 
been  a  most  wonderful  exhibition  of  mercantile 
honor  and  he  does  n't  believe  they  had  one  skulker 
on  their  books.  The  majority  of  these  people  have 
lost  heavily,  but  they  don't  propose  that  the  bank 
shall  lose  if  they  can  rake  enough  out  of  the  ruins 

[  131  ] 


1872 

to  pay  their  notes.  It  is  a  hard  time  for  thousands 
of  employes  of  homeless  concerns,  but  few  dwell- 
inf^s  were  burned,  so  there  is  little  distress  from 
that  cause.  There  are  some  ugly  rumors  about 
the  origin  of  the  fire,  and  there  is  a  dispute  as  to 
whether  it  took  in  the  roof  or  basement  of  the 
building  first  consumed.  There  will  be  an  inves- 
tigation, of  course,  and  I  have  an  idea  that  they 
will  find  that  it  caught  in  some  way  from  the 
boiler-fire  in  the  basement,  which  was  located 
close  to  the  elevator-shaft.  Of  course  one  hears 
criticism  of  everybody  who  took  a  hand  in  trying 
to  stay  the  fire.  Men  who  snored  in  their  beds 
while  the  flames  were  raging  now  tell  us  of  how 
easily  the  destruction  might  have  been  stopped.  I 
have  said  some  things  myself  about  the  powder 
men,  and  yet  I  must  admit  that  they  acted  bravely 
and  risked  their  lives  for  the  public  good.  The 
Chief  Engineer  is  the  principal  target  for  the  critics, 
and  they  claim  that  he  fought  the  fire  piecemeal  and 
not  according  to  a  good  set  plan.  I  imagine  that  the 
criticism  is  fair  enough,  but  after  the  water  gave  out 

in  Summer  Street,  as  it  did,  and  the  fire  went  gal- 

[  132  ] 


1872. 

loping  in  all  directions  through  wooden  roofs  piled 
way  up  out  of  reach,  plans  were  at  a  discount,  and 
the  best  scheme  in  the  world  would  have  miscar- 
ried because  of  lack  of  means  to  carry  it  out.  The 
truth  is,  no  one  believed  that  such  a  thing  could 
happen,  and  so  no  one  was  prepared  to  meet  it. 
I  confess  that  I  don't  see  now  how  the  fire  ever  got 
so  utterly  beyond  control  in  the  first  building. 
Had  it  been  a  night  like  the  one  on  which  the 
Adelphi  Theatre  burned,  I  could  have  understood 
it,  but  weather  conditions  were  all  favorable  and 
the  air  still  and  mild.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  talk 
about  the  horse  disease  having  demoralized  the 
fire  department,  but  I  don't  know  what  the  truth 
is.  I  suppose  the  devil  had  a  hand  in  things,  and 
that  is  reason  enough.  A  dozen  firemen  lost 
their  lives,  and  most  of  these  were  from  out  of 
town.  Both  officers  of  the  Roxbury  Ladder  Truck 
were  killed  in  one  of  the  Washington  Street 
stores. 

The  question  of  changes  in  the  old  street  lines 
is  already  being  discussed.  Some  radicals  argue 
for  the  obliteration  of  all  the  old  lines  and  planting 

[  133  ] 


1872 

a  bit  of  Philadelphia's  gridiron  design  in  our 
midst. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  Washington  and  Sum- 
mer streets  will  be  widened,  and  I  think  that  Haw- 
ley  and  Arch  will  also  be  broadened  into  real 
streets.  There  is  a  scheme  for  connecting  Frank- 
lin and  Sturgis  streets,  making  a  wide  thorough- 
fare from  Washington  to  Broad.  We  have  a  great 
chance  to  make  things  better,  and  I  don't  think 
we  shall  altogether  miss  it. 

We  have  had  tenders  of  financial  aid  from  all 
over  the  United  States,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that 
some  of  these  offers  have  been  accepted.  The 
generosity  displayed  throughout  the  country  is 
really  magnificent ;  but  we  are  quite  able  to  care 
for  our  own,  and  I  see  no  reason  why  Philadelphia, 
Chicago,  and  other  cities  should  be  bled  when 
there  is  no  occasion  for  it.  If  the  matter  can  be 
arranged  decently,  all  outside  funds  accepted  in  a 
moment  of  panic  should  be  politely  and  gratefully 
returned.  I  think  it  may  come  to  this,  as  our  home 
contributions  are  pouring  in  fast.  Even  Freddie 
has  risen  to  the  occasion.    Shorty  is  down  for  a 

[  134  ] 


The  following  is  a  diagram  of  the  proposed  remsion  of  streets  in  the 
burnt  district,  prepai-ed  at  the  City  Hall  under  the  general  direction  of 
the  committee  on  streets. 


On  this  plan  the  black  lines  stand  for  the 
existing  streets;  the  irregular  dotted  line, 
from  near  Liverpool  Wharf  to  Congress 
Square  and  thence,  through  Washington  and 
Summer,  to  Federal  Street,  marks  the  bound- 
ary of  the  fire.  The  light  lines  in  the  draw- 
ing indicate  the  proposed  widenings  and 
extensions.  The  principal  changes  are  these : 
Federal  Street  is  made  a  main  avenue,  eighty 
feet  wide,  to  the  foot  of  Summer  Street,  and 
so  on  to  South  Boston ;  widened  on  the  right 
coming  toward  State  Street,  and  swinging  to 
the  right  from  the  foot  of  Franklin  Street,  so 
as  to  pass  the  new  post  office  on  the  east 
side  into  Congress  Street,  which  is  widened 
on  the  left  to  State. 

Summer  Street  is  widened  on  the  left,  going 
from  Washington  in  several  places,  and  on 
the  right  between  Lincoln  and  South  streets. 

Washington  Street  is  widened  to  sixty  feet 
on  the  right  coming  toward  Cornhill. 

Bedford  Street  is  widened  on  the  right 
going  from  Kingston  to  (Church  Green,  and 
the  Church  (ireen  lot  is  rounded  otf . 

Franklin  Street  is  extended  across  Devon- 
shire, Federal,  and  Congress  streets  to  Stur- 


gis,  and  is  widened  on  the  south  side  between 
Devonshire  and  Federal . 

Hawley  Street  is  widened  to  forty  feet, 
mainly  on  the  right  from  Summer,  and  is  cut 
through  to  Milk  Street. 

Chauncy  Street  is  widened  and  cut  through 
to  the  junction  of  Devonshire  and  Milk 
streets ;  and  Arch  Street  is  discontinued. 

Otis  Street  is  widened  on  the  right  from 
Summer  to  Winthrop  Square,  and  on  the  left 
to  Franklin  Street. 

Devonshire  Street  is  widened  on  the  left 
from  Summer  to  Winthrop  Square,  and 
straightened  and  widened  on  the  right  to 
Milk. 

Congress  Street  is  widened  on  the  right 
from  Broad  to  the  junction  with  Federal 
Street,  and  thence  discontinued. 

Pearl  Street  is  carried  to  the  junction  of 
Water  and  Federal  streets. 

Milk  Street  is  widened  on  the  right  from 
Washington  to  Broad  Street ;  and  Water 
Street  on  the  left  to  Batterymarch. 

Broad  Street  is  widened  on  the  water  side 
from  Summer  to  Oliver;  and  Purchase  is 
widened  on  the  right  from  Summer  Street. 


135 


1872 

good  round  sum,  and  now  he  talks  of  buying  the 
Norwich  engine  I  wrote  about,  and  presenting  it 
to  the  city  as  a  thank  offering. 

I  suppose  that  you  are  well  on  your  way  to 
Rome  by  this  time.  I  hope  at  least  that  you  are 
not  hanging  about  Paris  for  more  bad  news.  Go 
ahead  and  enjoy  yourself,  and  be  sure  that  you 
are  doing  all  that  any  good  Bostonian  in  your 
place  can  do.  Of  course  if  you  were  here,  you 
would  be  on  relief  committees  and  all  that  sort  of 
thing,  but  there  are  lots  of  good  men  for  that  work, 
every  one  is  willing,  and  we  shall  recover  from  this 
smash-up  with  a  rush  when  we  once  get  the  step 
again.  You  say  that  Paris  has  done  wonders  in 
repairing  the  devastation  of  the  Commune.  I 
prophesy  that  we  shall  outdo  Paris  in  wiping  out 
all  traces  of  our  calamity,  for  there  is  a  lot  of 
pluck  and  life  left  yet  in  this  good  old  town. 

Always  yours. 


APPENDIX 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    NOTE 

The  newspapers  of  the  day  contain  all  the  interesting  cur- 
rent gossip  concerning  the  fire  of  1872.  "  Carleton's  "  Story 
of  the  Great  Fire,  and  Col.  Russell  H.  Conwell's  History 
of  the  Great  Fire,  were  written  at  the  time,  to  supply  the  gen- 
eral demand  for  some  connected  narrative  of  the  event.  The 
Boston  Fire,  by  F.  E.  Frothingham,  published  in  1873,  con- 
tains "  the  losses  in  detail  of  both  real  and  personal  estate. 
Also,  a  complete  list  of  insurance  losses."  A  full  list  of  all 
firms  burned  out  may  be  found  in  the  annual  report  of 
the  Fire  Department  for  1872.  This  document  also  con- 
tains a  complete  roster  of  the  Fire  Department,  the  assign- 
ment for  duty  of  each  company,  and  some  interesting  com- 
ments of  the  Chief  Engineer  upon  the  conflagration.  But 
the  principal  authority  is  the  Report  of  the  Commission  ap- 
pointed to  investigate  the  cause  and  management  of  the  Great 
Fire  in  Boston.  In  this  volume  of  656  pages  is  to  be  found 
all  the  evidence  taken  before  the  Commission.  Here  we  look 
upon  the  conflagration  through  the  eyes  of  cool-headed  fire- 
men, of  anxious  merchants,  of  frightened  city  fathers,  and 
of  citizens  of  all  sorts.  Here  is  everything,  from  the  laconic 
statements  of  fire  engineers  to  the  amazing  recitations  of 
persons  who  dreamed  dreams  and  saw  visions.  The  testi- 
mony of  the  enginemen  and  drivers  of  the  various  companies 

[  139] 


APPENDIX 

is  especially  valuable  as  determining  the  manner  in  which 
they  responded  to  the  various  alarms,  and  the  delays  that 
ensued  as  the  result  of  the  prevalence  of  the  horse  distemper. 
In  the  Boston  Public  Library  is  a  compilation  prepared 
by  H.  H.  Estabrook  for  the  Firemen's  Standard  in  1901, 
giving  voluminous  data  concerning  the  work  of  the  firemen 
on  November  9  and  10.  Augustus  Thorndike  Perkins's 
"  Losses  to  Literature  and  the  Fine  Arts  by  the  Great  Fire 
in  Boston  "  was  prepared  for  the  New  England  Historic 
Genealogical  Society,  and  published  in  1873. 


[  140  ] 


II 

THE    CITY    GOVERNMENT    OF 
BOSTON    IN     1872 

MA  YOR 
WILLIAM  GASTON 

ALDERMEN 

Ward  Ward 

1.  William  Woolley  7.  S.  A.  Stackpole 

2.  George  D.  Ricker  8.  Sydney  Squires 

3.  Moses  Fairbanks  IL  William  C.  Poland 
3.  Thomas  L.  Jenks  12.  James  Power 

6.  John  T.  Clark  14.  Samuel  Little 

6.  Leonard  R.  Cutter  16.  William  Sayward 

COMMON   COUNCIL 

Ward 

1.  James  Smith,  Frederick  Pease,  William  F.  Brooks, 

Joshua  Weston. 

2.  William    Cunningham,    Neil    Doherty,    Patrick 

Collins,  T.  J.  Dacey. 

3.  Stephen    D.    Salmon,    Jr.,    Horace    E.    Walker, 

George  P.  Kingsley,  Thomas  J.  Anderson. 

4.  A.  A.  Clatur,  John  Robertson,  Edward  O.  Shep- 

ARD,  William  E.  Bicknell. 

5.  Amos  L.  No  yes,  William  H.  Flanders,  Francis  H. 

Hughes,  Horace  Loring. 
[  141  ] 


APPENDIX 

6.  David  L.  Webster,  William  E.  Perkins,  Henry  W. 

Pickering,  Edward  J.  Holmes. 

7.  James  J.  Flynn,  J.  T.  Casey,  J.  B.  Martin,  A    J. 

Lamb. 

8.  Isaac  H.  Robbins,  Benjamin  Heath,  David  Whis- 

TON,  Charles  Darrow. 

9.  Washington  L.  Prescott,  C.  A.  Page,  E.  P.  Wilbur, 

John  S.  Moulton. 

10.  Stephen  L.  Emery,  J.  F.  Marston,  Frederick  S. 

RiSTEEN,    J.    J.    McNuTT. 

11.  M.  F.  Dickinson,  Jr.,  W.  F.  Robinson,  A.  H.  Caton, 

W.  W.  Blackmar. 

12.  Charles  H.  Hersey,  Freeborn  Adams,  Jr.,  W.  H. 

Hart,  J.  H.  Locke. 

13.  Thomas    Brennan,    Bartholomew    Dolan,    J.    M. 

Mullane,  Daniel  Dowd. 

14.  William  H.  Jones,  Isaac  P.  Gragg,  T.  C.  Faxon, 

H.  D.  Bradt. 

15.  James    Devine,    Charles    D.    Bickford,    William 

G.  Thacher,  H.  a.  Wright. 

16.  William  H.  West,  Charles  A.  Burditt,  G.  L.  Burt, 

Hartford  Davenport. 


Ill 

THE  BOSTON  FIRE  DEPARTMENT 

The  ordinance  in  force  in  1872  provided  that  a  Chief 
Engineer  of  the  Fire  Department  and  fourteen  Assistant 
Engineers  should  be  elected  annually  by  a  concurrent  vote 
of  the  two  branches  of  the  City  Council,  and  they  were  sub- 
ject to  removal  at  pleasure  by  the  same  body.  Members  of 
the  department  were  appointed  by  the  Mayor  with  the  con- 
sent of  the  Aldermen;  but  any  member  below  the  rank  of 
assistant  engineer  could  be  dismissed  by  the  Mayor  without 
reference  to  either  chamber  of  the  Council.  The  steam  fire 
engine  companies  consisted  of  eleven  men,  —  an  engineer, 
fireman,  and  driver,  who  served  permanently,  and  eight  call 
hosemen,  who  did  duty  only  at  fires.  One  of  these  call  men 
was  nominated  annually  by  each  company  as  foreman,  his 
election  being  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Board  of  En- 
gineers and  of  the  Board  of  Aldermen.  This  officer,  while 
in  command  at  fires,  had  no  authority  in  the  company  quar- 
ters, the  engineer  being  supreme  when  the  apparatus  was 
not  in  service.  Each  hose  and  ladder  company  consisted 
of  a  permanent  driver,  with  a  corresponding  complement 
of  call  men  who  nominated  their  foreman  annually  in  the 
same  way  as  the  engine  companies.  Only  the  permanent 
men  rode  to  fires,  the  hose  being  carried  on  a  two-wheeled 
reel,  or  jumper,  which  was  attached  to  the  rear  of  the  en- 

[  143  ] 


APPENDIX 

gine.  Steamer  companies  6, 12, 13, 14, 16,  and  17  were  sup- 
plied with  horse  hose-carriages,  and  carried  an  extra  driver 
on  their  permanent  rolls.  The  detached  hose  companies 
were  maintained  in  Boston  for  economical  reasons  only,  the 
low  water-pressure  in  the  city  never  justifying  their  exist- 
ence. It  was  the  practice  of  these  companies  to  attach  their 
hose  to  any  steamer  playing  a  single  stream,  and  this  cus- 
tom never  produced  more  unfortunate  results  than  in  the 
early  stages  of  the  Great  Fire.  The  organization  of  the  Fire 
Department  was  as  follows  :  — 

BOSTON   FIRE   DEPARTMENT,   1872 

Committee  on  Fire  Department 
Alderman      William  Woolley 
"  Leonard  R.  Cutter 

John  T.  Clark 
Councilman  William  M.  Flanders 
John  S.  Moulton 
"  George  L.  Burt 

"  James  F.  Marston 

"  W^illiam  H.  Jones 

Engineers 
Chief  Engineer,  John  S.  Damrell 

Assistant  Engineers 

Joseph  Dunbar  Rufus  B.  Farrar 

Zenas  E.  Smith  James  Munroe 

William  A.  Green  John  Colligan 
George  Brown  Joseph  Barnes 

John  W.  Regan  Sylvester  H.  Hebard 

[  144  ] 


APPENDIX 

John  S.  Jacobs  Levi  W.  Shaw 

Phineas  D.  Allen  George  W.  Clark 

Steam  Fire  Engine  Companies 

MazeppaNo.  1.  —  Dorchester,  near  Fourth  Street,  South  Boston. 

S.  R.  Spinney  No.  2.  —  Fourth  Street,  between  L  and  K,  South 
Boston. 

Eagle  No.  3.  —  Washington  Street,  near  Dover. 

Barnicoat  No.   4.  —  Brattle  Square   (temporary  quarters). 

Elisha  Smith  No.  5.  —  Marion  Street,  East  Boston. 

Melville  No.  6.  —  Wall  Street. 

T.  C.  Amory  No.  7.  —  East  Street. 

Northern  Liberty  No.  8.  —  Salem  Street, 

Maverick  No.  9.  —  Paris  Street,  East  Boston. 

Cataract  No.  10.  —  Mt.  Vernon,  corner  River  Street. 

John  S.  Damrell  No.  IL  —  Sumner  Street,  East  Boston, 

Warren  No.  12.  —  Corner  Warren  and  Dudley  streets,  Roxbury 
District. 

Tremont  No.  13.  —  Cabot  Street,  Roxbury  District. 

Dearborn  No.  14.  —  Centre  Street,  Roxbury  District. 

Walter  E.  Hawes  No.  15,  —  Corner  Dorchester  Avenue  and 
Broadway  Extension. 

S.  H.  Hebard  No.  16.  —Temple  Street,  Ward  16. 

Protector  No.  17.  —  Meeting  House  Hill,  Ward  16. 

Torrent  No.  18.  —  Harvard  Street,  Ward  16. 

Alert  No.  19.  —  Norfolk  Street,  Dorchester  District. 

Independence  No.  20.  —  Walnut  Street,  Ward  16. 

J.  H.  Upham  No.  21.  —  Boston  Street,  Ward  16. 

Horse  Hose -Companies 
Washington  No.  1.  —  Salem  Street. 
Union  No.  2.  —  Hudson,  between  Harvard  and  Oak  streets. 

[  i«  ] 


APPENDIX 

Franklin  No.  3.  —  North  Grove  Street. 

Chester  No.  4.  —  Northampton  Street. 

Suffolk  No.  5.  —  Shawmut  Avenue,  near  Canton  Street. 

William  Woolley  No.  6.  —  391  Chelsea  Street,  East  Boston. 

Eliot  No.  7.  —  Tremont  Street,  Roxbury  District. 

Tremont  No.  8.  —  Church  Street,  between  Fayette  and  Mel- 
rose streets. 

Lawrence  No.  9.  —  B  Street,  South  Boston. 

Bradlee  No.  10.  —  Dorchester  Street,  Washington  Village, 
South  Boston. 

Webster  No.  11.  —  Engine  House  No.  9,  East  Boston. 

Hook  and  Ladder  Companies 

Warren  No.  1.  —  Warren  Square. 

Washington  No.  2.  —  Sumner,  corner  Orleans  Street,  East 
Boston. 

Franklin  No.  3.  —  Harrison  Avenue,  corner  Wareham  Street. 

Washington  No.  4.  —  Eustis  Street,  Roxbury  District. 

Hancock  No.  5.  —  Fourth  Street,  near  Dorchester  Street, 
South  Boston. 

Gen.  Grant  No.  6.  —Temple  Street,  Ward  16. 

Everett  No.  7.  —  Meeting  House  Hill,  Ward  IG. 

Extinguisher  Corps  No.  1.  —  Bulfinch  Street. 
Extinguisher  Corps  No.  2.  —  Hook  and  Ladder  House  No.  3. 
Extinguisher  Corps  No.  3.  —  Engine  House  No.  9,  East  Bos- 
ton. 


[  14G  ] 


IV 

ORIGIN    OF    THE    FIRE 

The  building  in  which  the  fire  originated  was  owned  by 
Seman  Klous.  The  basement  and  first  floor  were  occupied 
by  Tebbetts,  Baldwin  &  Davis,  wholesale  dry-goods  mer- 
chants, the  second  floor  by  Damon,  Temple  &  Co.,  dealers 
in  men's  furnishing  goods,  while  A.  K.  Young  leased  the 
rest  of  the  building  for  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  hoop- 
skirts  and  bustles,  and  for  the  sale  of  corsets.  After  an 
exhaustive  inquiry  the  special  commission  appointed  by  the 
Mayor  to  investigate  the  cause  and  management  of  the  fire 
reported  as  follows  :  "  It  is  conclusively  proved  that  the  fire 
began  near  the  elevator  in  the  rear  of  the  basement  of  the 
building,  and  passed  with  great  rapidity  up  the  elevator  to 
the  upper  stories.  .  .  .  The  condition  of  the  floor,  after 
the  ruin,  shows  that  it  probably  began  near  the  ceiling.  To 
the  more  important  question  how  the  fire  began,  no  answer 
can  be  given.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  criminating 
any  of  the  occupants  of  the  building,  nor  is  there  anything 
to  show  that  it  caught  from  the  furnace  or  the  boiler,  ex- 
cept the  fact  that  it  began  in  that  portion  of  the  building. 
And  the  condition  of  the  boiler  and  its  surroundings,  after 
the  fire  and  the  excavations,  as  described  by  witnesses,  and 
as  observed  by  members  of  the  Commission,  seem  to  show 

[  147] 


APPENDIX 

that  it  did  not  take  from  the  heating  apparatus,  unless  it 
took  from  some  flue.    Of  this  there  is  no  evidence." 

Delays  resulting  from  the  Horse  Disease 

The  investigating  commission  appointed  by  the  Mayor 
v^^ent  very  conscientiously  into  the  question  of  the  response 
of  the  engines  to  the  alarms  given  for  the  great  fire,  and  one 
of  the  longest  sections  in  their  report  is  devoted  to  the  "  De- 
lay from  want  of  horses."  Their  conclusions  were  that "  time 
was  invaluable  and  time  was  lost,"  and  that  all  but  two  of 
the  engines  were  "delayed  from  three  to  five  minutes  for 
the  nearest,  to  forty  minutes  for  the  most  distant."  They 
declared  that  the  horses  of  the  fire  department  were  un- 
doubtedly unfit  for  use,  but  that  "  the  fatal  error  lay  in  not 
having  supplied  their  places  with  others  able  to  do  the  work. 
.  .  .  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  occurred  to  any  one, 
but  it  ought  to  have  occurred  to  those  whose  especial  duty 
it  was  to  guard  the  community  from  the  perils  of  fire." 

This  censure  is  severe  enough,  and  yet  the  fact  remains 
that  the  failure  to  hire  horses  was  responsible  for  only  a 
portion  of  the  delay.  The  trouble,  so  far  as  the  downtown 
companies  were  concerned,  arose  less  from  the  slow  pro- 
gress of  the  steamers  through  the  streets,  than  from  the 
simple  fact  that  the  steamers  did  not  start.  It  was  the  order 
emanating  from  the  meeting  of  October  26,  suspending  the 
taking  out  of  steamers  on  first  alarms,  that  played  havoc 
with  a  critical  situation.  Under  the  running  card  we  have 
seen  that,  in  response  to  a  call  from  Box  52,  six  steamers 

[  148  ] 


APPENDIX 

should  have  been  at  work  within  ten  minutes.  According 
to  the  testimony  of  the  firemen  themselves,  it  took  twenty 
minutes  to  gather  this  force  on  the  night  of  November  9. 
As  it  was  imperative  that  fires  in  the  vicinity  of  Box  52 
should  be  met  in  their  incipiency,  that  they  should  not  be 
allowed  to  develop  great  heat,  because  of  the  lack  of  water 
to  control  a  large  body  of  flame  or  to  protect  surrounding 
property  from  its  menace,  it  was  dangerous,  of  course,  to 
decrease  the  speed  with  which  the  engines  travelled  in  the 
streets.  But  it  was  far  more  dangerous  to  hold  them  in  re- 
serve in  quarters  until  repeated  alarms  had  announced  a 
conflagration. 

The  following  tables  have  been  compiled  with  a  view  to 
showing  what  the  response  of  the  department  was  on  Novem- 
ber 9  as  compared  with  what  it  would  have  been  a  month 
earlier  with  the  regular  running  card  in  force.  The  running 
time  of  each  company  is  based  largely  upon  the  testimony 
given  before  the  Commission,  testimony  that  certainly 
would  not  tend  to  magnify  the  discrepancy  in  speed  be- 
tween hand  and  horse-power.  The  first  table  shows  the 
various  alarms  given  for  the  great  fire,  how  engines  should 
have  responded  under  the  running  card,  and  how  they  act- 
ually did  respond  on  November  9,  the  running  card  being 
suspended. 

The  second  table  shows  the  approximate  time  at  which 
engines  were  due  to  arrive  at  Box  52,  operating  under  the 
running  card,  and  the  approximate  time  that  they  did 
arrive,  moving  under  the  special  regulations  of  October  26. 

[  149  ] 


APPENDIX 


Table  I 


Response  of  En- 

Alarms given  for  the  Great  Fire  as  set  forth  in 
the  Annual  Report  of  the  Fire  Department 

gines  to  Box  52, 
as    provided    in 
the  Department 

Response  of  En- 
gines to  Box  52 
on  Nov.  9,  1872 

running  card 

Box  52 

1st  alarm 

7.24  p.  M. 

Engines    3 

Engine    7 

Corner 

4 

10 

Bedford  and 

6 

Lincoln 

streets 

7 

8 

10 

Box  52 

2d  alarm 

7.29  p.  M. 

Engine      1 

Engine    4 
8 
9 

Box  52 

3d  alarm 

7.34  p.  M. 

Engine    12 
13 

Engine    3 
6 
11 

Box  52 

4th  alarm 

7.45  p.  M. 

Engine      2 

Engine    1 

(3  Twelves) 

5 
9 
11 
14 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 

2 

5 

"       12 

"        13 

"        14 

17 

"        18 

21 

Box  52 

5th  alarm 

8  p.  M. 

The  4th  or  gen- 
eral alarm  was 

Engine  15 
"       16 
"        19 

supposed   to 
summon     the 

entire  depart- 

ment with  the 

exception  of 

8.17  p.  M. 

engine  15 

Box  123 

6th  alarm 

Engine  20 

Broadway 

and 

Dorchester 

Ave. 

Box  123 

7th  alarm 

(3  Twelves) 

8.24  p.    M. 

No  response 

Box  48 

10.09  p.  M. 

No  response 

Boston, 

Hartford  and 

ErieR.R. 

station 

[   150  ] 


APPENDIX 


Table  II 


itpproximate   time 
at    which    engines 
should  have  arrived 
at    fire    by    horse- 
power, following 
the    regular     run- 
ning card 

Approximate  time 
engines  did  arrive 
at  fire,  mider  the 
special  regulations 
of  Oct.  26,  1872 

Minutes  late 

Engine  No. 

1 

7.39 

7.57 

18 

"■ 

2*t 

7.57 

8.15 

18 

a 

3 

7.32 

7.45 

13 

<( 

4 

7.30 

7.36 

6 

(< 

5 

8.05 

8.12 

7 

ii 

6 

7.32 

7.44 

12 

(( 

7 

7.26 

7.26 

On  Time 

(( 

8 

7.32 

7.38 

6 

<< 

9 

8.05 

7.50 

15  t 

(( 

10 

7.34 

7.39 

5 

a 

11 

8.05 

7.55 

10$ 

(< 

12 

7.55 

8.05 

10 

<< 

13 

7.55 

8.— 

5 

it 

14* 

8.05 

8.10 

5 

<( 

15 

** 

8.05 

** 

(< 

16* 

8.30 

8.55 

25 

it 

17 

8.10 

8.15 

5 

<< 

18 

8.25 

8.40 

15 

i< 

19 

8.35 

9.30 

55 

i< 

20* 

8.20 

8.55 

35 

i< 

21 

8.— 

8.05 

5 

Discretion  was  used  by  some  company  officers,  fortunately 

in  the  cases  of  Engines  9,  10,  and   11,  less  fortunately  in 

the  case  of  Engines  1,  12,  19,  and  20.   The  case  of  Engine 

15  is  worthy  of  mention.    This  company  was  nearer  to  the 

fire  than  any  other,  with  the  exception  of  No.  7,  but  they 

*  Used  horses. 

t  Detained  by  Broadway  drawbridge  being  open. 

X  Arrived  ahead  of  time. 

**  Engine  15  not  to  leave  South  Boston  except  by  order  of  engineer. 

[  151  ] 


APPENDIX 

had  instructions  not  to  leave  South  Boston  except  by  or- 
der of  an  engineer.  A  messenger  could  have  reached  their 
house  from  Summer  Street  in  five  minutes,  but  they  did 
not  start  until  eight  o'clock,  thirty-six  minutes  after  the 
sounding  of  the  first  alarm,  and  not  until  at  least  three 
more  distant  engines  had  passed  their  quarters  on  their  way 
downtown.  The  rules  governing  Engine  15  had  nothing  to 
do  with  the  special  regulations  of  October  26,  being  a  part 
of  the  regular  running  card. 


THE    USE    OF    POWDER 

The  evidence  bearing  upon  the  use  of  powder  in  fighting 
the  conflagration  will  be  found  in  the  well-indexed  report 
of  the  investigating  commission.  In  its  summing  up,  the 
Commission  expressed  itself  as  follows :  "  There  is  a  conflict 
of  testimony  as  to  the  balance  of  good  or  evil  arising  from 
the  use  of  gunpowder  on  November  9  and  10.  It  is  less 
necessary  to  strike  the  balance  accurately,  because  all  wit- 
nesses agree,  and  all  sane  people  will  agree,  that  explosives 
never  should  be  used  again,  as  they  were  at  that  time,  and 
that,  if  used  at  all,  we  should  be  prepared  to  employ  them, 
skilfully,  carefully,  and  by  a  fixed  plan."  The  City  Ordi- 
nance provided  that  a  building  could  be  demolished  only 
by  consent  of  three  Engineers,  and  two  or  three  hours  before 
he  gave  out  his  permits  at  City  Hall  the  Chief  summoned 
his  assistants  to  confer  with  him  in  Federal  Street  as  to  the 
wisdom  of  using  powder.  As  a  result  there  was  a  long  pe- 
riod when  nearly  all  of  the  Engineers  were  withdrawn  from 
the  direction  of  their  men  and  were  engaged  in  fighting 
their  way  through  crowds  in  efforts  to  find  their  com- 
mander. At  this  time  the  out-of-town  companies  were  fast 
arriving  and  there  was  no  one  in  authority  to  locate  them 
or  to  superintend   their  getting   to  work.     Several   of  the 

[  153  ] 


APPENDIX 

Engineers  left  their  posts  only  after  repeated  summons,  and 
their  withdrawal  from  fire  fighting  at  a  critical  time  was 
doubtless  attended  by  bad  results. 


[  154  ] 


VI 

THE    BURNING    OF    TRINITY 
CHURCH 

Old  Trinity  seemed  safe  all  night,  but  towards  morning 
the  fire  swept  into  her  rear,  and  there  was  no  chance.  She 
went  at  four  in  the  morning.  I  saw  her  well  afire  inside  and 
out,  carried  off  some  books  and  robes,  and  left  her.  She 
burnt  majestically,  and  her  great  tower  stands  now  solid 
as  ever,  a  most  picturesque  and  stately  ruin.  She  died  in 
dignity.  I  did  not  know  how  much  I  liked  the  great  gloomy 
old  thing  till  I  saw  her  windows  bursting  and  the  flame 
running  along  the  old  high  pews. —  Phillips  Brooks  to 
Miss  Mitchell,  Nov.  12,  1872.  (Allen's  Life  and  Letters 
of  Phillips  Brooks,  vol.  ii,  p.  67.) 

Mr.  Brooks  was  sitting  in  one  of  the  pews  of  Trinity 
Church,  with  Mr.  Dillon  the  sexton,  resting  after  the  fa- 
tigues of  the  awful  night,  when  the  flames  were  seen  steal- 
ing in  at  the  roof  of  the  northeast  corner.  They  waited  there 
together,  watching  the  progress  of  the  flames,  until  it  be- 
came unsafe  to  remain.  As  they  were  hurriedly  leaving  the 
building,  Mr.  Dillon,  in  his  excitement,  threw  open  the 
great  doors  of  the  tower  and  fastened  them  back,  as  had 
been  his  habit  for  many  years  when  the  congregation  was  to 
disperse  after  service  was  over,  —  this  last  time,  as  it  were, 

[   155] 


APPENDIX 

for  the  invisible  crowd  of  witnesses  to  take  their  final  de- 
parture. —  Allen's  Life  and  Letters  of  Phillips  Brooks, 
vol.  ii,  p.  68. 


[  156  ] 


VII 

THE   UNION    SAFE    DEPOSIT   VAULTS 

I  HOVERED  r6und  the  Safety  Vaults  in  State  Street,  where 
I  had  a  good  deal  of  destructible  property  of  my  own  and 
others,  but  no  one  was  allowed  to  enter  them.  So  I  saw  (on 
Sunday  morning)  the  fire  eating  its  way  straight  toward 
my  deposits,  and  millions  of  others  with  them,  and  thought 
how  I  should  like  it  to  have  them  wiped  out  with  that  red 
flame  that  was  coming  along  clearing  everything  before  it. 
But  I  knew  all  was  doing  that  could  be  done,  and  so  I  took 
it  quietly  enough,  and  managed  to  sleep  both  Saturday  and 
Sunday  night  tolerably  well,  though  I  got  up  every  now 
and  then  to  see  how  far  and  how  fast  the  flames  were  spread- 
ing northward.  —  Dr.  Holmes  to  John  Lothrop  Motley, 
Nov.  16,  1872.  {Life  and  Letters  of  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes, 
by  John  T.  Morse,  Jr.,  vol.  ii,  p.  197.) 


[  157  ] 


VIII 

THE   FREEMAN'S  BANK 

The  Freeman's  Bank  sent  their  charred  bills  and  papers  to 
the  Treasury  Department  in  Washington  where,  by  the  deli- 
cate processes  employed  there,  many  items  were  restored  or 
deciphered.  Through  the  honesty  of  its  depositors  the  bank 
received  vouchers  for  its  entire  loan,  and  the  only  suit  grow- 
ing out  of  the  destruction  of  the  safe  concerned  a  firm  that 
was  mistaken,  but  not  dishonorable.  This  suit  was  amicably 
settled  by  the  deciphering  of  the  disputed  item  at  the 
Treasury  Department. 


[  158  ] 


IX 

OUTSIDE    HELP 

The  following  cities  and  towns  sent  steam  fire  engines  to 
Boston  on  November  9  and  10:  Cambridge  (3),  Charles- 
town  (2),  Chelsea,  Somerville,  Medford,  West  Roxbury  (2), 
Maiden,  Hyde  Park,  Newton  (2),  Watertown,  Lawrence, 
Lynn  (2),  Salem  (2),  Worcester  (2),  Melrose,  Waltham, 
Stoneham,  Fall  River  (2),  New  Bedford,  Providence,  R.  I. 
(3),  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  Manchester,  N.  H.  (2),  Norwich, 
Conn.  (2),  New  Haven,  Conn.  All  of  these  engines  did  duty 
at  the  fire  with  the  exception  of  Metacomet  No.  3  of  Fall 
River,  which  was  returned  without  being  unloaded  from 
the  cars.  The  first  outside  assistance  to  arrive  was  Niagara 
Steamer  No.  3  of  Cambridge,  at  8.15  Saturday  evening;  the 
last  to  report  was  H.  M.  Welch  Steamer  No.  2  of  New 
Haven,  which  ended  its  long  run  in  the  Boston  railroad 
yards  shortly  before  midnight  on  Sunday. 

In  addition  to  the  above,  two  steamers  were  present  from 
the  Navy  Yard  in  Charlestown  and  one  from  the  Water- 
town  Arsenal.  Wakefield  sent  two  hand  engines,  and  Brook- 
line  and  Reading  one  each.  A  number  of  out-of-town  hose 
companies  also  reported  in  Boston,  one  of  these  from  Bid- 
deford,  Maine. 

The  closing  of  the  telegraph  offices  throughout  New 
England  in  the  early  evening  was  a  serious  handicap  to  the 

[  159] 


APPENDIX 

Boston  authorities.  The  fire  was  visible  from  Nashua, 
and  an  engine  was  housed  in  the  freight  sheds  there  in  ex- 
pectation of  a  call  which  never  came.  A  Taunton  engine 
was  in  readiness  for  the  special  train  bringing  help  from 
Fall  River;  but  through  some  misunderstanding  this  train 
went  through  the  city  without  stopping.  Lowell  and  New- 
buryport  received  no  call  for  aid.  Portland  forwarded  an 
engine  as  far  as  Portsmouth,  where  word  was  received  that 
its  services  were  not  needed. 

Mr.  Grenville  H.  Norcross,  whose  father  was  the  first 
treasurer  of  the  Summer  Street  Fire  Fund,  has  kindly  fur- 
nished the  following  memorandum  upon  the  disposition  of 
outside  financial  aid  :  — 

The  fire  was  hardly  under  control  when  the  Relief  Com- 
mittee was  formed  and  a  large  sum  was  soon  contributed  to 
help  those  who  had  suffered  by  the  fire  as  well  as  the  families 
of  firemen  injured  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty.  Large 
amounts  were  sent  or  promised  by  Detroit,  Chicago,  Phila- 
delphia, and  other  cities.  By  February,  1873,  it  became  evi- 
dent that  sufficient  money  was  in  the  Treasurer's  hands  to 
meet  all  proper  claims  without  calling  for  aid  from  other 
cities,  and  accordingly  the  sums  already  sent  were  gratefully 
returned,  with  the  interest  received  on  them  while  on  deposit, 
and  the  promised  aid  was  thankfully  declined. 

The  fund  in  aid  of  the  families  of  injured  firemen  is  still 
being  used  for  that  purpose ;  a  balance  of  some  twenty  thou- 

[  i«o  ] 


APPENDIX 

sand  dollars  of  the  general  relief  fund  was  used  for  many 
years  by  the  Committee  to  supply  Boston  working  men  who 
had  lost  them  by  fire,  with  sufficient  tools  to  obtain  work 
again.  In  1907,  under  authority  of  the  Legislature  and  the 
Supreme  Court,  the  balance  was  turned  over  to  the  Massa- 
chusetts Charitable  Fire  Society,  which  now  carries  on  the 
same  good  work,  and  the  Summer  Street  Fire  Committee 
ceased  to  exist. 


8 


7 


THE 

GREAT 

BOSTON 

FIRE 

M  U  R  D  O  C  K 


-0 

r 

IE 

EAT 
TON 
BE 


