% 


"*$? 


4!*'*  • 


^ 


H> 


.      ^ 


r 


S.  G.  &  E.  L.  ELBERT 


V 


IWtebu 


.   .  vrxxxi 

*5 


^" 


M 


fktmxdtb  In)       &Lk  smith  elbeet    «88 
Jhx  itWimtriaut. 

NV  KATHAHI10LE,  CQMAU 


THE 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


A  5ft) 


O0I0FIAL  JOT7H1TAI. 


wmws*  ww< 


Published  by  order  of  the  Managers  of 

THE   AMERICAN    COLONIZATION    SOCIETY. 


THE  PROFITS    ARISING    FROM   THIS  WORK,    ARE  DEVOTED  TO  THE 
CAUSE  OF  THE   SOCIETY. 


1829. 

JAMES  C.  DUNN,  PRINTER  AND  PUBLISHER;  QKORGKTOWN,  D.  f. 


/ 
/ 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

TO    THE   FOURTH    VOLUME. 


Page. 
Abdnhl  Rahhahman,  the  Moorish  Prince,       -  -    77 1  243,  379,  380 

Anthony  Benezet,  ..----  61 

Africa,  -  -  -  -  -  -  289,  321,  354 

Voice  from  "1   -  -  -  -  -  25 

Missions  to-  -  -  -  -  -  -27 

by  VV.B.  Tappan,  ...  189 

Expedition  to  ....--    253 

African  Mission  School,       -----     186,  193,  375 

Teak  and  Ind'go,  ------    239 

Africans,  Park's  testimony  in  favour  of  civilizing  them,  76 

Address  by  Wm.  M   Blackford,  -  -  -  -  -     73 

of  the  Managers  of  the  Con.  Society,         -  116 

of  Executive  Committee  of  the  African  Mission  School,         -  193 
by  Wm.  B  Peabody,  -  ....         225 

by  Mr.  Key,     -  -  -  -  .  -  -  298 

of  Uockbridge  Society,      -----         273 

Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Col.  Society,  285,  317,  348,  360 

Contributions,    -  -  32,  64,  96,  128,   159,   190,  253,  '^7 

Communications,     -  305,  734,  319,  552,  383 

Crisis,     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -38 

Candid  acknowledgment  of  Error,  -  376 

Death  of  Dr.  William  Thornton,  -  -  -  -  -    31 

of  Rev.  Jacob  Oson,  -----  283 

of  Mr   Ashmnn,  ------       214,  287 

Dahomy,  account  of  -  »  -  145 

Extracts  from  Correspondence,  -  90,  236 

Emancipation  and  Colonization,       -----         251 

Gerrit  Smith,  Esq.  (his  plan  promoted)  -  30,  95,  185,  252,  270,  379 

Good  devised,  -------         S7B 

July,  Fourth  of  -  -  -  -  -  -  93,  159,  317 

Kentucky  State  Society,       ------         $51 

Laing  (Major),  Fernando  Po,  &c.  -  -  -  -  -158 

Ladies'  Association,  ------  285 

Colonization  Society,      ------  350 

Liberia,  latest  from  -  -  -  -  14,  40,  82,  87,  209,  380 

Lt  tters  from    -------  234 

Expedition  to  -----  318,  349 

Coffee  from       -------  318 

Letter  from  a  Gentleman  in  South  Carolina,  60 

Matthew  Carey,  Esq.  -  270 

Rev.  Dr  Blumhardt,      -----        296 

Gen.  Lafayette,       --.-._  349 
Legacies,  Mr    Burr's  ------  93 

Liberality,  Masonic         -  -  -  -  -  .  -62 

remarkable  ----..        185 

Missions  to  Africa,  -  -  -  -  -  -  -27 

Missionaries,  Swiss    -------        „4X 

Nicolson's  (Captain)  Testimony,  -  -  -  -  -    95 


Pup. 

Note,  Notice,  -  •  -  -  -  -  -187 

Niger,  Theories  respecting  the  -  106 

Remarks  on  the  course  and  termination  of  the  .  -         151 

Omens  of  success,  --.„...  138 

Park's  Testimony,    -------  76 

Plan  for  the  establishment  of  State  Col.  Societies,        -  372 

Pecuniary  wants  of  the  Society,        -----         224 

Postcript,  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -63 

Report  of  the  select  Committee  to  Congress,  51 

of  Manage™  of  the  Lynchburg  Society,  ...  Ipl 

of  Vermont  Society,  ------        312 

Religion,  the  power  of-  -  -  -  -  -  -231 

Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Ashan tee,  1,  S3,  65,  97,  129 
of  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  relations  in  the  Senate, 
to  whom  were  referred  sundry  petitions  and  memorials  in 
relation  to  the  Col.  Society,      -  -  -  161, 

of  Dr.  Wainwright's  Discourse  on  the  occasion  of  forming  the 
African  Mission  School — and  of  Address  of  the  Executive 
Committee  of  that  School,  - 

of  an  Address  by  Wm.  B.  Peabody,  - 

of  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report,         - 
Resolutions  of  Gen.  f Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
Ship  for  the  Society,  Plan  for  purchasing  a      - 
Society,  Connecticut  Colonization  -  -  -      »      - 

African  Mission  School  -  -  -  186,  193, 

Rockbridge  Col-     ---#-- 

Virginia,  Col.  -•••--- 
Vermont  Col.  ------ 

Kentucky  Col.  ------ 

Societies,  To  Auxiliary        -----  94, 

Auxiliary       -  -  -  -  -  •     - 

Plan  for  the  establishment  of  State  Colonization 
Serious  Considerations,  .----*- 

Transportation  Plan,  or  Good  devised,        -  -  -  - 

To  our  Friends,        ------- 

Auxiliaries  and  Friends,  -  -  * 

and  Agents,       -  -  •  * 


257 


193 
225 
330 
126 
377 
116 
375 
273 
307 
S12 
351 
159 
185 
372 
381 
378 
29 
94 
159 


TH£ 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 


COLONIAL  JOTTRITAL. 


Vol.  IV.  MARCH,  1828.  No.  1. 

Of  Mission  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee,  with  a  Statis- 
tical account  of  that  Kingdom^  and  Geographical  Notices  of 
other  parts  of  the  Interior  of  Africa*     By  Edward  Bowdich, 
Esq.,  Conductor.     London,  1819. 

While  Christian  nations  have  explored  almost  every  region 
of  the  globe,  Africa  still  offers  to  their  enterprise  an  immense 
and  interesting  field  for  discovery.  The  efforts  already  made 
to  ascertain  the  features  and  resources  of  this  country,  and  the 
character  of  its  population,  have  but  very  partially  dispelled 
the  mystery  which  has  so  long  enveloped  them.  Sufficient  in- 
formation, however,  has  been  obtained  to  excite  an  eager  desire 
for  more,  and  to  create  the  belief,  that  people  and  objects  of  ex- 
treme curiosity  and  interest,  are  to  be  disclosed  to  the  eyes  of 
future  adventurers  into  the  interior. 

We  w^ould  not  be  understood  as  estimating  lightly,  the  contri- 
butions which  have  been  made  to  our  knowledge  of  Africa,  by 
those  fearless  and  persevering  travellers,  who  have  during  the 
last  century  crossed  its  deserts,  penetrated  its  wildernesses,  and 
sought  to  ascertain  the  sources,  and  trace  out  the  windings  of 
its  noble  rivers.     They  have  accomplished  much,  and  no  one 


2  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [March, 

can  peruse  their  journals  without  thrilling  emotion.  Still  a  sin- 
gle glance  at  the  map  of  this  immense  continent,  will  convince 
us,  that  only  small  portions  of  its  territory  have  opened  upon 
the  view  of  these  enterprising  individuals;  and  that  vast  fields, 
of  which  we  are  in  utter  ignorance,  remain  to  tempt  the  daring 
and  inquiring  spirit  of  this  age. 

The  discoveries  already  made  in  Africa,  are  of  a  nature  cal- 
culated to  attract  universal  attention,  and  to  excite  an  intense 
desire  for  the  further  prosecution  of  researches  into  its  Geogra- 
phy, Natural  History,  the  products  of  its  soil,  and  the  condition 
and  habits  of  its  population.  It  is  in  Africa,  that  we  see  nature, 
rude,  eccentric,  magnificent,  romantic  and  sublime.  In  one 
place  we  behold  the  earliest  and  grandest  monuments  of  civili- 
zation, in  others  her  footstep  is  scarcely  visible  to  the  most  ac- 
curate observer.  Here,  are  deserts,  which  the  swift-footed  and 
long-enduring  dromedary  sometimes  attempts  to  pass  at  his  pe- 
ril; there  vales,  rich  in  loveliness  and  beauty,  as  any  whichever 
greeted  the  imagination  of  the  child  of  genius  and  romance.  In 
some  parts,  are  to  be  found  tribes  gentle  and  amiable  in  their 
dispositions,  with  manners  of  artless  simplicity,  while  in  others 
the  darkest  and  most  odious  features  of  barbarism  frown  away 
from  their  presence  all  the  kindness  and  tenderness  of  humanity. 

The  establishment  of  civilized  colonies  on  the  African  coast, 
will  doubtless  bring  speedily  to  light,  much  very  interesting  in- 
formation concerning  Africa,  with  which  we  have  hitherto  been 
entirely  unacquainted.  What  glorious  effects  may  be  antici- 
pated from  the  growth  and  influence  of  these  colonies !  Prompt- 
ed by  the  spirit  of  commercial  enterprise,  if  by  no  better  motive, 
the  citizens  of  these  colonies  will  maintain  a  friendly  intercourse 
with  the  neighbouring  tribes,  through  them  become  acquainted 
with  those  more  remote,  and  finally  open  the  way  to  the  won- 
derful and  well-nigh  unexplored  regions  of  Central  Africa. — 
But  benefits  of  higher  interest  to  the  philanthropic  mind,  than 
the  mere  acquisition  of  knowledge,  may  be  expected  from  the 
plantation  of  these  colonies — the  introduction  of  a  civilizing  and 
Christian  influence  among  the  vast  and  uncounted  population 
of  the  interior.  "It  has  been,  indeed,  by  the  visits  and  exer- 
tions of  'intelligent  strangers,'  that  many  rude  tribes  have  been 
rescued  from  barbarism,  and  elevated  to  importance  and  dignify 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee.  3 

among  the  nations  of  the  world."*  "In  the  early  traditions  of 
Greece  and  Italy,  some  traces  of  such  sources  of  civilization 
may  be  found,  and  a  similar  origin  has  been  ascribed  to  the  civi- 
lization which  prevailed  in  some  kingdoms  of  South  America  on 
their  first  discovery  by  the  Spaniards. 

If  the  natives  of  the  old  world  had  their  Cadmus  and  Saturn, 
Peru  had  her  Manco  Capac,  who  instructed  her  once  barbarous 
people  in  agriculture  and  the  liberal  arts,  and  whose  accidental 
arrival  from  some  unknown  region  probably  gave  rise  to  the  fa- 
ble of  his  descent  from  the  Sun."t 

We  formerly  (Vol.  i.  p.  321.)  expressed  the  opinion  that 
Christianity  once  established  in  Africa,  would  make  rapid  pro- 
gress, and  gain  signal  triumphs  over  the  vice  and  superstitions 
of  the  natives.  The  faith  of  the  Africans  generally,  (if  it  can  be 
properly  termed  faith,)  is  superficial  and  undefined,  and  cherish- 
ed, rather  because  favourable  to  the  indulgence  of  unhallowed 
passions,  than  from  any  conviction  of  its  truth.  The  most  pow- 
erful opposition  is  to  be  apprehended  from  the  disciples  of  Ma= 
hornet;  but  among  the  negro  tribes,  their  authority  is  partial, 
and  exerted  rather  from  motives  of  avarice  than  from  sincere  at- 
tachment to  the  honor  of  their  prophet. 

And  did  poetic  imagination  ever  represent  in  its  fairest  visions, 
abrighter,  a  sublimer  scene,  than  Africa  must  exhibit  if  regenerated 
by  Christianity — Christianity  introduced  and  propagated  by  her 
children  once  torn  from  her  in  chains,  but  now  restored  as  freemen 
to  give  her  the  charter  of  all  civil  liberty,  and  to  invest  her  sons 
with  the  priceless  immunities  of  the  heirs  of  God?  Then  will  the 
fierce  and  intractable  Arab  of  the  desert,  throw  his  Koran  on  the 
sand;  and  while  with  softened  heart  and  features,  he  reads  the 
messages  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  feel  his  spirit  glow  with  the 
hope  of  a  pure  Heaven,  where  the  warrior's  shout  is  unheard,  and 
no  garments  are  seen  rolled  in  blood.  The  African  despot, 
who  like  the  King  of  Dahomey,  now  walks  to  his  throne  in  blood 
and  enters  his  palace  on  a  pavement  of  human  skulls,  will  lose 
his  ferocity;  nor  will  death  !  death  !  death  !  (ominous  of  human 
sacrifices)  as  echoed  at  midnight  from  the  silver  horns  of  the 


*  Sixth  Report  of  the  Society,  page  15. 
f  First  Keport  of  the  African  Institution, 


4  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [March, 

slaves  of  Ashantee*s  monarch,  strike  terrible  as  a  demon's  voice 
through  every  heart  in  the  capital  of  a  populous  and  powerful 
empire.  The  Abyssinnian,  the  natives  of  Tombuctoo,  of  Bor- 
nou,  and  Darfour,  those  who  inhabit  the  mountains  of  Kong,  and 
the  poor  Hottentot  near  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  shall  cherish 
the  sentiments  of  brotherly  affection,  and  taste  the  rich  but  quiet 
pleasures  of  a  virtuous  and  benevolent  life. 

If  it  were  lawful  to  express  a  wish  which  cannot  be  realized, 
that  of  the  writer  would  be,  that  he  might  be  permitted  to  wit- 
ness the  change  which  Christianity  will  produce  in  Africa,  to 
look  over  this  land  after  Truth  shall  have  achieved  its  conquests, 
to  see  Agriculture  in  its  vales,  and  Art  and  Commerce  in  its 
cities,  to  hear  Science  instructing  her  votaries,  and  Religion 
proclaiming  her  sanctions,  and  to  perceive  all  the  bland  and  so- 
cial virtues  cherished  by  a  population  rejoicing  under  the  do- 
minion of  righteous  law.  "Eheu!  fugaces  Labuntur  anni,"  nor 
will  a  few  years  be  adequate  to  the  accomplishment  of  so  great 
a  work;  yet,  might  we  hazard  a  prediction,  we  would  say  the 
year  1928  will  exhibit  proofs  that  our  hope  for  Africa  is  not  the 
effect  of  enthusiasm. 

The  volume  before  us,  it  is  seen,  was  published  in  London,  in 
1819.  It  may  be  well,  perhaps,  to  state,  concisely,  the  origin  and 
objects  of  the  mission  which  it  describes.  According  to  Mr.  Bow- 
dich,  several  writers  mention  that  reports  of  Ashantee  had  reached 
Europe  as  early  as  the  year  1700,  and  that  it  was  then  regarded 
as  preeminent  in  wealth  and  power.  An  Ashantee  army  reach- 
ed the  coast  for  the  first  time  in  1807,  conducting  a  very  de- 
structive war  against  the  Fantees;  and  again  in  1811,  and  a 
third  time  in  1816,  invaded  the  country  of  these  people,  and  in- 
flicted upon  them  the  severest  sufferings.  Cape  Coast  Castle  was 
placed  in  imminent  hazard,  and  the  Gov.  felt  compelled  to  advance 
large  sums  of  gold  on  account  of  the  Fantees.  In  consequence 
of  these  calamities,  "the  Government  desired  from  the  African 
Committee,  to  authorize  and  enable  them  to  venture  an  embassy 
to  conciliate  the  powerful  monarch  of  Ashantee,  and  to  propitiate 
an  extension  of  commerce."  In  1817  a  store  ship  arrived  from 
England  with  suitable  presents  for  such  an  expedition,  and  in- 
structions from  the  British  Government  in  reference  to  its  cha- 
racter and  the  objects  to  be  effected.     The  Governor  at  Cape 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee.  5 

Coast  Castle,  (John  Hope  Smith,)  immediately  selected  four 
gentlemen  for  the  embassy,  represented  to  them  in  a  letter  the 
importance  of  the  mission,  and  the  various  and  numerous  subjects 
for  inquiry  and  observation  during  their  visit;  and  these  individ- 
uals, under  the  guidance  of  natives  of  Ashantee,  selected  by  an 
Ashantee  captain,  commenced  their  journey  on  the  morning  of 
the  22d  of  April,  1817.  The  names  of  the  individuals  upon 
whom  devolved  the  duties  of  this  interesting  mission  were, 
Frederick  James,  Esq.  principal,  Edward  Bowdich,  Esq.  Mr. 
Hutchison  and  Surgeon  Tedlie;  but  owing  to  an  important  dif- 
ference of  opinion  in  reference  to  measures  to  be  adopted  soon 
after  their  arrival  at  Coomassie,  the  capital  of  Ashantee,  Mr. 
James  was  recalled,  and  Mr.  Bowdich  became  the  conductor  of 
the  embassy. 

Coomassie,  the  Capital  of  Ashantee,  lies  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  in  the  interior,  north  of  Cape  Coast  Castle.-^ 
The  expedition  found  the  paths  through  the  Fantce  territory  in 
many  places  excessively  bad,  but  the  slowness  and  difficulty  of 
their  progress  was  in  some  measure  compensated  by  the  novel 
and  striking  aspect  of  the  country,  and  the  occasional  surpassing 
beauty  of  the  region  through  which  they  passed.  The  second 
day  they  entered  "a  valley  profusely  covered  with  pines,  aloes, 
and  lilies;  and  richly  varied  with  palm,  banana,  plantain,  and 
guava  trees;  the  view  was  refreshed  by  gentle  risings,  crowned 
with  cotton  trees  of  a  stupendous  size."  "I  never  saw,"  says 
Mr.  Bowdich,  usoil  so  rich,  or  vegetation  so  luxuriant."  The 
following  is  the  account  given  of  one  of  the  Fantee  Crooms,  (vil- 
lages) situated  about  twenty  miles  from  the  coast. 

"I  made  Payntree's  Croom.  We  received  the  compliments  of  Payn- 
tree  and  several  Caboceers  (chiefs)  under  a  large  tree,  and  were  then  con- 
ducted to  a  neat  and  comfortable  dwelling',  which  had  been  prepared  for 
us;  a  small  square  area  afforded  a  shed  for  cooking  in,  on  one  side,  and  a 
sleeping  room  in  each  of  the  others,  open  in  front,  but  well  thatched,  and 
very  clean;  from  this  we  passed  to  our  sitting  room,  the  floor  of  which  was 
elevated  about  two  feet  from  the  ground.  The  Croom  was  prettily  situat- 
ed on  a  level,  encircled  by  very  fine  trees,  and  consisted  of  a  very  broad 
and  well  cleaned  street  of  small  huts,  framed  of  bamboo,  and  neatly  thatch- 
ed. "We  observed  a  great  number  of  small  birds,  which  were  even  more 
beautiful  from  their  delicate  symmetry,  than  their  brilliant  plumage.     They 


6  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [March, 

were  generally  green,  with  black  wings,  and  their  nests  hanging  from  the 
trees. 

"I  walked  with  Mr.  Tedlie  along  a  veiy  neat  path,  well  fenced  and  di- 
vided by  stiles,  to  a  corn  plantation  of  at  least  twenty  acres,  and  well  culti- 
vated. Payntree's  farm  house  was  situated  here,  and  afforded  superior 
conveniences;  a  fowl  house,  a  pigeon  house,  and  a  large  granary,  raised  on 
a  strong  stage.  As  we  returned  we  paid  him  a  visit,  and  were  refreshed 
with  some  excellent  palm  wine;  his  dwelling  was  a  square  of  four  apart- 
ments, which  were  entered  from  an  outer  one,  where  a  number  of  drums 
were  kept;  the  angles  were  occupied  by  the  slaves,  and  his  own  room, 
which  had  a  small  inner  chamber,  was  decked  with  muskets,  blunderbusses, 
cartouch  belts  fantastically  ornamented,  and  various  insignia.  The  order, 
cleanliness,  and  comfort  surprised  us;  the  sun  had  just  set,  and  a  cheerful 
fire  on  a  clean  hearth  supported  the  evening  meal.  The  old  man  was  seat- 
ed in  his  state  chair,  diverting  himself  with  his  children  and  younger  wives; 
the  elder  one  was  looking  on  from  the  opposite  apartment  with  happy  in- 
difference :  it  was  the  first  scene  of  domestic  comfort  I  had  witnessed  among 
the  natives.  There  was  a  small  plantation  or  garden  neatly  fenced  in,  near 
the  house,  for  the  supply  of  the  family." 

The  following  will  give  our  readers  an  idea  of  the  obstacles 
which  sometimes  obstructed  their  path: 

"The  doom  and  iron  trees  were  frequent:  the  path  was  a  labyrinth  of 
the  most  capricious  windings,  the  roots  of  the  cotton  tree  obstructing  it 
continually,  and  our  progress  was  generally  by  stepping  and  jumping  up 
and  down,  rather  than  walking;  the  stems  or  caudices  of  these  trees  pro- 
jected from  the  trunks  like  flying  buttresses,  their  height  sometimes  2© 
feet.  Immense  trunks  of  fallen  trees  presented  constant  barriers  to  our 
progress,  and  increased  our  fatigues,  from  the  labour  of  scaling  them;  we 
were  also  frequently  obliged  to  wait  the  cutting  away  of  the  underwood  be- 
fore we  could  proceed,  even  on  foot.  The  large  trees  were  covered  with 
parasites  and  convolvuli,  and  the  climbing  plants,  like  small  cables,  ascend- 
ing the  trunks  to  some  height,  abruptly  shot  downwards,  crossed  to  the 
opposite  trees,  and  threaded  each  other,  in  such  a  perplexity  of  twists  and 
turnings,  that  it  soon  became  impossible  to  trace  them  in  the  general  en- 
tanglement." 

After  a  toilsome  march  of  several  days,  they  beheld  a  scene  of 
singular  beauty,  which  is  thus  described: 

"At  the  end  of  five  miles  and  a  quarter,  the  herbage  to  the  right  disclos- 
ed the  cheerful  reflections  of  the  sun  from  the  water;  and  we  descended 
through  a  small  vista  of  the  forest,  to  the  banks  of  Boosempra,  or  Chamah 
river.     Nothing  could  be  more  beautiful  than  its  scenery.     The  bank  on 


18£8.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  7 

the  south  side  was  steep,  and  admitted  but  a  narrow  path;  that  on  the  north 
sloping";  on  which  a  small  Fetish  house,  under  the  shade  of  a  cachou  tree, 
fixed  the  eye;  whence  it  wandered  over  a  rich  variety  of  tint  and  foliage, 
in  which  light  and  shade  were  most  happily  blended;  the  small  rocks  stole 
through  the  herbage  of  the  banks  and  now  and  then  ruffled  the  water;  the 
doom  trees  towering"  in  the  shrubbery,  waved  to  the  most  gentle  air  a  rich 
foliage  of  dark  green,  mocking  the  finest  touch  of  the  pencil;  the  tamarind 
and  smaller  mimosas,  heightening  its  effect  by  their  livelier  tint  and  the  more 
piquant  delicacy  of  their  leaf;  the  cotton  trees  overtopped  the  whole  en  wreath- 
ed in  convolvuli,  and  several  elegant  little  trees,  unknown  to  me,  rose  in 
the  back  ground,  intermixed  with  palms,  and  made  the  coup  d'oeil  en- 
chanting.    The  bright  rays  of  the  sun  were  sobered  by  the  rich  reflections 
of  the  water,  and  there  was  a  mild  beauty  in  the  landscape,  uncongenial  to 
barbarism,   which  imposed  the  expectation  of  elegance  and  refinement.     I 
attempted  a  sketch,  but  it  was  far  beyond  my  rude  pencil;  the  expression 
of  the  scene  could  only  have  been  traced  in  the  profile  of  every  tree,   and 
it  seemed  to  defy  any  touches,  but  those  of  a  Claude  or  a  Wilson,  to  depict 
the  life  of  its  beauty." 

In  a  few  days  they  entered  the  kingdom  of  Ashantee.  At  the 
second  village  within  its  limits,  they  stopped  awhile  at  the  re- 
quest of  a  "venerable  old  man,  whose  manners  were  very  pleas- 
ing," and  who  refreshed  them  with  wine  and  fruit.  They  were 
pained  to  learn  that  the  "life  of  this  old  man  was  forfeited  to 
some  superstitious  observances,  and  that  he  only  waited  the  re- 
sult of  a  petition  to  the  King,  that  in  consideration  of  his  infir- 
mities, he  might  be  executed  at  his  own  Croom.  He  conversed 
cheerfully  and  congratulated  himself  on  seeing  white  men  be- 
fore he  died."  His  head  was  brought  to  Coomassie  the  day  after 
their  arrival. 

On  the  19th  of  May  they  arrived  at  Coomassie.  Their  ap- 
proach was  announced  to  the  King,  who  desired  them  to  rest  at 
a  little  Croom  until  he  had  finished  washing,  when  Captains 
would  be  deputed  to  conduct  them  to  his  presence.  The  pomp 
and  ceremony  displayed  on  this  occasion  were  of  a  very  striking 
and  imposing  character. 

"We  entered  Coomassie  at  two  o'clock,  passing  under  a  fetish  or  sacrifice 
of  a  dead  sheep,  wrapped  up  in  red  silk,  and  suspended  between  two  lofty 
poles.  Upwards  of  5,000  people,  the  greater  part  warriors,  met  us  with 
awful  bursts  of  martial  music,  discordant  only  in  its  mixture ;  for  horns, 
drums,  rattles,  and  gong  gongs,  were  all  exerted  with  a  zeal  bordering  on 


8  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [March, 

frenzy,  to  subdue  us  by  the  first  impression.  The  smoke  which  encircled 
us  from  thev  incessant  discharges  of  musketry,  confined  our  glimpses  to  the 
foreground;  and  we  were  halted  whilst  the  captains  performed  their  Pyrr- 
hic dance,  in  the  centre  of  a  circle  of  warriors;  where  a  confusion  of  flags, 
English,  Dutch,  and  Danish,  were  waved  and  flourished  in  all  directions; 
the  bearers  plunging  and  springing  from  side  to  side,  with  a  passion  of  en- 
thusiasm only  equalled  by  the  captains,  who  followed  them,  discharging 
their  shining  blunderbusses  so  close,  that  the  flags  now  and  then  were  in  a 
blaze,  and  emerging  from  the  smoke,  with  all  the  gesture  and  distortion  of 
maniacs.  Their  followers  kept  up  the  firing  around  us  in  the  rear.  The 
dress  of  the  captains  was  a  war  cap,  with  gilded  rams  horns  projecting  in 
front,  the  sides  extended  beyond  all  proportion  by  immense  plumes  of 
eagles  feathers,  and  fastened  under  the  chin  with  a  band  of  cowries.  Their 
vest  was  of  red  cloth,  covered  with  fetishes  and  saphies*  in  gold  and  silver; 
and  embroidered  cases  of  almost  eveiy  colour,  which  flapped  against  their 
bodies  as  they  moved,  intermixed  with  small  brass  bells,  the  horns  and  tails 
of  animals,  shells  and  knives;  long  leopards  tails  hung  down  their  backs, 
over  a  small  bow  covered  with  fetishes.  They  wore  loose  cotton  trowsers, 
with  immense  boots  of  a  dull  red  leather,  coming  half  way  up  the  thigh, 
and  fastened  by  small  chains  to  their  cartouch  or  waist  belt;  these  were  also 
ornamented  with  bells,  horses  tails,  strings  of  amulets,  and  innumerable 
shreds  of  leather;  a  small  quiver  of  poisoned  arrows  hung  from  their  right 
wrist,  and  they  held  a  long  iron  chain  between  their  teeth,  with  a  scrap  of 
Moorish  writing  affixed  to  the  end  of  it.  A  small  spear  was  in  their  left 
hands,  covered  with  red  cloth  and  silk  tassels.  Their  black  countenances 
heightened  the  effect  of  this  attire,  and  completed  a  figure  scarcely  human. 
This  exhibition  continued  about  half  an  hour,  when  we  were  allowed  to 
proceed,  encircled  by  the  warriors,  whose  numbers,  with  the  crowds  of 
people,  made  our  movement  as  gradual  as  if  it  had  taken  place  in  Cheapside; 
the  several  streets  branching  off  to  the  right,  presented  long  vistas  crammed 
with  people:  and  those  on  the  left  hand,  being  on  a  declivity,  innumerable 
rows  of  heads  rose  one  above  mother;  the  large  open  porches  of  the  houses, 
like  the  fronts  of  stages  in  small  theatres,  were  filled  with  the  better  sort 
of  females  and  children,  all  impatient  to  behold  white  men  for  the  first  time; 
their  exclamations  were  drowned  in  the  firing  and  music,  but  their  gestures 
were  in  character  with  the  scene.  When  we  reached  the  palace,  about 
half  a  mile  from  the  place  where  we  entered,  we  were  again  halted,  and  an 
open  file  was  made,  through  which  the  bearers  were  passed,  to  deposite  the 
presents  and  baggage  in  the  house  assigned  to  us.  Here  we  were  gratified 
by  observing  several  of  the  Caboceers  pass  by  with  their  trains,  the  novel 
splendour  of  which  astonished  us.  The  bands  principally  composed  of 
horns  and  flutes,  trained  to  play  in  concert,  seemed  to  soothe  our  hearing 

*  Scraps  of  Moorish  writing,  as  charms  against  evil. 


1828.]  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantte.  § 

into  its  natural  tone  again  by  their  wild  melodies;  whilst  the  immense  um- 
brellas, made  to  sink  and  rise  from  the  jerkings  of  the  bearers,  and  the 
large  fans  waving  mound,  refreshed  us  with  small  currents  of  air,  under  a 
burning  sun,  clouds  of  dust,  and  a  density  of  atmosphere  almost  suffocating. 
We  were  then  squeezed  at  the  same  funeral  pace,  up  a  long  street  to  an 
open-fronted  house,  where  we  were  desired  by  a  royal  messenger  to  wait  a 
further  invitation  from  the  King.  Here  our  attention  was  forced  from  the 
astonishment  of  the  crowd  to  a  most  inhuman  spectacle,  which  was  paraded 
before  us  for  some  minutes;  it  was  a  man  whom  they  were  tormenting  pre- 
vious to  sacrifice;  his  hands  were  pinioned  behind  him,  a  knife  was  passed 
through  his  cheeks,  to  which  his  lips  were  noosed  like  the  figure  of  eightj 
one  ear  was  cut  off  and  carried  before  him,  the  other  hung  to  his  head  by 
a  small  bit  of  skin;  there  were  several  gashes  in  his  back,  and  a  knife  was 
thrust  under  each  shoulder  blade;  he  was  led  with  a  cord  passed  through 
his  nose,  by  men  disfigured  with  immense  caps  of  shaggy  black  skins,  and 
drums  beat  before  him;  the  feeling  this  horrid  barbarity  excited  must  be 
imagined.  We  were  s90n  released  by  permission  to  proceed  to  the  King, 
and  passed  through  a  very  broad  street,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  long,  to 
the  market  place.  Our  observations  en-passant  had  taught  us  to  conceive 
a  spectacle  far  exceeding  our  original  expectations;  but  they  had  not  pre- 
pared us  for  the  extent  and  display  of  the  scene  which  here  burst  upon  us; 
an  area  of  nearly  a  mile  in  circumference  was  here  crowded  with  magnifi- 
cence and  novelty.  The  King,  his  tributaries  and  captains,  were  resplen- 
dent in  the  distance,  surrounded  by  attendants  of  every  description,  fronted 
by  a  mass  of  warriors  which  seemed  to  make  our  approach  impervious.— 
The  sun  was  reflected  with  a  glare  scarcely  more  supportable  than  the  heat 
from  the  massy  gold  ornaments,  which  glistened  in  every  direction.  More 
than  a  hundred  bands  burst  at  once  on  our  arrival  with  the  peculiar  airs  of 
their  several  chiefs;  the  horns  flourished  their  defiances  with  the  beating  of 
innumerable  drums  and  metal  instruments,  and  then  yielded  for  a  while  to 
the  soft  breathings  of  their  long  flutes,  which  were  truly  harmonious;  and  a 
pleasing  instrument  like  the  bagpipe  without  the  drone  was  happily  blend- 
ed. At  least  a  hundred  large  umbrellas  or  canopies,  which  could  shelter 
thirty  persons,  were  sprung  up  and  down  by  the  bearers  with  brilliant  ef- 
fect, being  made  of  scarlet,  yellow,  and  the  most  showy  cloths  and  silks, 
and  crowned  on  the  top  with  crescents,  pelicans,  elephants,  barrels,  and 
arms  and  swords  of  gold;  they  were  of  various  shapes  but  mostly  dome,  and 
the  valances  (in  some  of  which  small  looking-glasses  were  inserted)  fantas- 
tically scalloped  and  fringed;  from  the  fronts  of  some,  the  probosces  and 
small  teeth  of  elephants  projected,  and  a  few  were  roofed  with  leopard 
skins,  and  crowned  with  various  animals  naturally  stuffed.  The  state  ham- 
mocks, like  long  cradles,  were  raised  in  the  rear,  the  poles  on  the  heads  of 
the  bearers;  the  cushions  and  pillows  were  covered  with  crimson  taffeta, 

and  the  richest  cloths  hung  over  the  sides.     Innumerable  small  umbrella?, 

9 


10  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [March, 

of  various  coloured  stripes,  were  crowded  in  the  intervals,  whilst  several 
large  trees  heightened  the  scene,  by  contrasting  the  sober  colouring  of  na- 
ture 

"Discolor  unde  auri  perramos  aurarefulsit." 
The  King's  messengers,  with  gold  breast-plates,  made  way  for  us,  and  we 
commenced  our  round,  preceded  by  the  canes  and  the  English  flag.  We 
stopped  to  take  the  hand  of  every  Caboceer,  which  as  their  household  suites 
occupied  several  spaces  in  advance,  delayed  us  long  enough  to  distinguish 
some  of  the  ornaments  in  the  general  blaze  of  splendour  and  ostentation. 

"The  Caboceers,  as  did  their  superior  captains  and   attendants,  wore 
Ashantee  cloths,   of  extravagant  price,  from  the  costly  foreign  silks  which 
had  been  unravelled  to  weave  them  in  all  the  varieties  of  colour  as  well  as 
pattern;  they  were  of  an  incredible  size  and  weight,  and  thrown  over  the 
shoulder  exactly  like  the  Roman  toga.      A  small  silk  fillet  generally  encir- 
cled their  temples,  and  massy  gold  necklaces  intricately  wrought,  suspend- 
ed Moorish  charms,  dearly  purchased,  and  enclosed  in  small  square  cases  of 
gold,  silver,  and  curious  embroidery.      Some  wore  necklaces  reaching  to 
the  navel  entirely  of  aggry  beads;  a  band  of  gold  and  beads  encircled  the 
knee,  from  which  several  strings  of  the  same  depended;  small  circles  of 
gold  like  guineas,  rings,  and  casts  of  animals,   were  strung  round  their  an- 
cles; their  sandals  were  of  green,  red,  and  delicate  white  leather;  manillas, 
and  rude  lumps  of  rock  gold,  hung  from  their  left  wrists,    which  were  so 
heavily  laden  as  to  be  supported  on  the  head  of  one  of  the  handsomest  boys. 
Gold  and  silver  pipes  and  canes  dazzled  the  eye  in  every  direction. — 
"Wolves'  and  rams'  heads  as  large  as  life,  cast  in  gold,  were  suspended  from 
their  gold-handled  swords,  which  were  held  around  them  in  great  numbers; 
the  blades  were  shaped  like  round  bills  and  rusted  in  blood;  the  sheaths 
were  of  leopard  skin,  or  the  shell  of  a  fish  like  shagreen.     The  large  drums 
supported  on  the  head  of  one  man,  and  beaten  by  two  others,  were  braced 
around  with  the  thigh  bones  of  their  enemies,  and  ornamented  with  their 
skulls.     The  kettle  drums,  resting  on  the  ground,  were  scraped  with  wet 
fingers,  and  covered  with  leopard  skin.     The  wrists  of  the  drummers  were 
hung  with  bells  and  curiously  shaped  pieces  of  iron,   which  gingled  loudly 
as  they  were  beating.     The  smaller  drums  were  suspended  from  the  neck 
by  scarfs  of  red  cloth;  the  horns  (the  teeth  of  young  elephants)  were  orna- 
mented at  the  mouth  piece  with  gold  and  the  jaw  bones  of  human  victims. 
The  war  caps  of  eagles'  feathers  nodded  in  the  rear,  and  large  fans,  of  the 
wing  feathers  of  the  ostrich,  played  around  the  dignitaries;  immediately  be- 
hind their  chairs,  (which  were  of  a  black  wood,  almost  covered  by  inlays  of 
ivory  and  gold  embossment)  stood  their  handsomest  youths  with  corslets  of 
leopard  skin,  covered  with  gold  cockle  shells,  and  stuck  full  of  small  knives 
sheathed  in  gold  and  silver,  and  the  handles  of  blue  agate,  cartouch  boxes 
of  elephant's  hide  hung  below,  ornamented  in  the  same  manner — a  large 
gold-handled  sword  was  fixed  behind  the  left  shoulder,  and  silk  scarfs  and 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  11 

horses'  tails  (generally  white)  streamed  from  the  arms  and  waist  cloth. — 
Their  long  Danish  muskets,  had  broad  rims  of  gold,  at  small  distances,  and 
the  stocks  were  ornamented  with  shells.  Finely  grown  girls  stood  behind 
the  chairs  of  some,  with  silver  basins.  Their  stools  (of  the  most  laborious 
carved  work,  and  generally  with  two  large  bells  attached  to  them)  were 
conspicuously  placed  on  the  heads  of  favourites;  and  crowds  of  small  boys 
were  seated  around,  flourishing  elephants'  tails  curiously  mounted.  The 
Warriors  sat  on  the  ground  close  to  these,  and  so  thickly  as  not  to  admit  of 
our  passing  without  treading  on  their  feet,  to  which  they  were  perfectly  in- 
different; their  caps  were  of  the  skins  of  the  pangolin  and  leopard, 
the  tails  hanging  down  behind;  their  cartouch  belts  (composed  of 
small  gourds,  which  hold  the  charges,  and  covered  with  leopard  or  pigs' 
skin, )  were  embossed  with  red  shells,  and  small  brass  bells  thickly  hung  to 
them;  on  their  hips  and  shoulders  was  a  cluster  of  knives:  iron  chains  and 
collars  dignified  the  most  daring,  who  were  prouder  of  them  thanof  goldj 
their  muskets  had  rests  of  leopard's  skin,  and  the  locks  a  covering  of  the 
same;  the  sides  of  their  faces  were  curiously  painted  in  long  white  streaks, 
and  their  arms  also  striped,  having  the  appearance  of  armour. 

"We  were  suddenly  surprised  by  the  sight  of  Moors,  who  afforded  the 
first  general  diversity  of  dress;  there  were  17  superiors,  arrayed  in  large  cloaks 
of  white  satin,  richly  trimmed  with  spangled  embroidery,  their  shirts  and 
trowsers  were  of  silk,  and  a  very  large  turban  of  white  muslin  was  studded 
with  a  border  of  different  coloured  stones;  their  attendants  wore  red  caps 
and  turbans,  and  long  white  shirts,  which  hung  over  their  trowsers;  those 
of  the  inferiors  were  of  a  dark  blue  cloth;  they  slowly  raised  their  eyes  from 
the  ground  as  we  passed,  and  with  a  must  iualigaa.ui  scowl.  The  prolong- 
ed flourishes  of  the  horns,  a  deafening  tumult  of  drums,  and  the  fuller  con- 
cert of  the  intervals,  announced  that  we  were  approaching  the  King:  we  were 
already  passing  the  principal  officers  of  his  household;  the  chamberlain,  the 
gold  horn  blower,  the  captain  of  the  messengers,  the  captain  for  royal  exe- 
cutions, the  captain  of  the  market,  the  keeper  of  the  royal  burial  ground, 
and  the  master  of  the  bands,  sat  surrounded  by  a  retinue  and  splendour, 
which  bespoke  the  dignity  and  importance  of  their  offices.  The  cook  had 
a  number  of  small  services  covered  with  leopard's  skin  held  behind  him,  and 
a  large  quantity  of  massy  silver  plate  was  displayed  before  him,  punch 
bowls,  waiters,  coffee  pots,  tankards,  and  a  very  large  vessel  with  heavy 
handles  and  cloved  feet,  which  seemed  to  have  been  made  to  hold  incense; 
I  observed  a  Portugese  inscription  on  one  piece,  and  they  seemed  generally 
of  that  manufacture. 

"The  executioner,  a  man  of  immense  size,  wore  a  massy  gold  hatchet  on 
his  breast;  and  the  execution  stool  was  held  before  him  clotted  in  blood, 
and  partly  covered  with  a  cawl  of  fat.  The  king's  four  linguists  were  en- 
circled with  a  splendour  inferior  to  none,  and  their  peculiar  insignia,  gold 
canes,  were  elevated  in  all  directions,  tied  in  bundles  like  fasces.     The 


12  Review  of  JEssion  from  Cape  [Marclt? 

keeper  of  the  treasury,  added  to  his  own  magnificence,  by  the  ostentatious 
display  of  his  service;  the  blow  pan,  boxes,  scales  and  weights  were  of  solid 
gold. 

"A  delay  of  some  minutes  whilst  we  severally  approached  to  receive  the 
King's  hand,  afforded  us  a  thorough  view  of  him;  his  deportment  first  excit- 
ed my  attention;  native  dignity  in  prince9  we  are  pleased  to  call  barbarous, 
was  a  curious  spectacle:  His  manners  were  majestic,  yet  courteous;  and  he 
did  not  allow  his  surprise  to  beguile  him  for  a  moment  of  the  composure  of 
the  monarch;  he  appeared  to  be  about  thirty-eight  years  of  age,  inclined  to 
corpulence,  and  of  a  benevolent  countenance;  a  fille"  of  aggry  beads  round 
his  temples,  a  necklace  of  gold  cockspur  shells  strung  by  the  largest  ends, 
and  over  his  right  shoulder  a  red  silk  cord,  suspending  three  saphies  cased 
in  gold;  his  bracelets  were  the  richest  mixtures  of  beads  and  gold,  and  his 
fingers  covered  with  rings;  his  cloth  was  of  a  dark  green  silk;  a  pointed  di- 
adem was  elegantly  painted  in  white  on  his  forehead;  also  a  pattern  resem- 
bling an  epaulette  on  each  shoulder,  and  an  ornament  like  a  full  blown  rose., 
one  leaf  rising  above  another  until  it  covered  his  whole  breast;  his  knee 
bands  were  of  aggry  beads,  and  his  ankle  strings  of  gold  ornaments  of  the 
most  delicate  workmanship,  small  drums,  sankos,  stools,  swords,  guns,  and 
birds  clustered  together;  his  sandals  of  a  soft  white  leather,  were  embossed 
across  the  instep  band,  with  small  gold  and  silver  cases  of  saphies;  he  was 
seated  in  a  low  chair,  richly  ornamented  with  gold;  he  wore  a  pair  of  gold 
castanets  on  his  finger  and  thumb,  which  he  clapt  to  enforce  silence.  The 
belts  of  the  guards  behind  his  chair  were  cased  in  gold  and  covered  with 
small  jaw  bones  of  the  same  metal;  the  elephants'  tails  waving  like  a  small 
cloud  before  him  were  spanglal  with  gold,  and  lujge  plumes  of  feathers 
were  flourished  amid  them.  His  eunuch  presided  over  these  attendants, 
wearing  only  one  piece  of  gold  about  his  neck;  the  royal  stool,  entirely  cas- 
ed in  gold  was  displayed  under  a  splendid  umbrella,  with  drums,  sankos, 
horns  and  various  musical  instruments,  cased  in  gold  about  the  thickness  of 
cartridge  paper:  large  circles  of  gold  hung  by  scarlet  cloth  from  the  swords 
of  state,  the  sheaths  as  well  as  the  handles  of  which  were  also  cased;  hatch- 
ets of  the  same  were  intermixed  with  them:  the  breast  of  the  Ocrahs,  and 
various  attendants  were  adorned  with  large  stars,  stools,  crescents  and  gossa- 
mer wings  of  solid  gold. 

"We  pursued  our  course  through  this  blazing  circle,  which  afforded  to  the 
last  a  variety  exceeding  description  and  memory,  so  many  splendid  novelties 
diverting  the  fatigue,  heat,  and  pressure  we  were  labouring  under;  we  were 
almost  exhausted,  however,  by  the  time  wre  reached  the  end;  when  instead 
of  being  conducted  to  our  residence,  we  were  desired  to  seat  ourselves  under 
a  tree  at  some  distance  to  receive  the  compliments  of  the  whole  in  our  turn. 

"The  swell  of  their  bands  gradually  strengthened  on  our  ears,  the  peals  of 
the  warlike  instruments  bursting  upon  the  short,  but  sweet  responses  of  the 
flutes:  the  gaudy  canopies  seemed  to  dance  in  the  distant  view,  and  floated 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  IS 

broadly  as  they  were  springing  up  and  down  in  the  foreground;  flags  and 
banners  waved  in  the  interval,  and  the  chiefs  were  eminent  in  their'erimson 
hammocks,  amidst  crowds  of  musketry.     They  dismounted  as  they  arrived 
within  thirty  yards  of  us;  their  principal  captains  preceded  them  with  the 
gold-handled  swords,  a  body  of  soldiers  followed  with  their  arms  reversed, 
then  their  bands  and  gold  canes,  pipes,  and  elephants'  tails.  The  chief,  with 
a  small  body  guard,  under  his  umbrella,  was  generally  supported  around  the 
waist  by  the  hands  of  his  favourite  slave,  whilst  captains  holla'd  close  in  his 
ear,  his  warlike  deeds  and  (strong)  names,  which  were  reiterated  with  the 
voices  of  Stentors  by  those  before  and  behind;  the  larger  party  of  warriors 
brought  up  the  rear.     Old  captains  of  secondary  rank  were  carried  on  the 
shoulders  of  a  strong  slave;  but  a  more  interesting  sight  was  presented  in 
the  minors,  or  young  Caboceers,  many  not  more  than  five  or  six  years  of 
age,  who  overweighed  by  ornaments,  were  carried  in  the  same  manner,  (un- 
der their  canopies,)  encircled  by  all  the  pomp  and  parade  of  the  predeces- 
sors.    Amongst  others,  the  grandson  of  Cheboo  was  pointed  out,  whom  the 
king  had  generously  placed  on  the  stool  of  his  perfidious  enemy.      A  band 
of  Fetish  men,   or  priests,   wheeled  round  and  round  as  they  passed,  with 
surprising  velocity.      Manner  was  as  various  as  ornament;  some  danced  by 
with  irresistible  buffoonery,  some  with  a  gesture  and  carriage  of  defiance; 
one  distinguished  Caboceer  performed  the  war  dance  before  us  for  some 
minutes,  with  a  large  spear,  which  grazed  us  at  every  bound  he  made;  but 
the  greater  number  passed  us  with  order  and  dignity,  some  slipping  one 
sandal,  some  both,  some  turning  after  taking  each  of  us  by  the  hand;  the 
attendants  of  others  knelt  before  them,  throwing  dust  upon  their  heads;  and 
the  Moors  apparently,  vouchsafed  us  a  blessing. 

"The  King's  messengers,  who  were  posted  near  us,  with  their  long  hair 
hanging  in  twists  like  a  thrum  mop,  used  little  ceremony  in  hurrying  by 
this  transient  procession;  yet  it  was  nearly  eight  o'clock  before  the  King 
approached. 

"It  was  a  beautiful  star-light  night,  and  the  torches  which  preceded  him 
displayed  the  splendour  of  his  regalia  with  a  chastened  lustre,  and  made 
the  human  trophies  of  the  soldiers  more  awfully  imposing.  The  skulls  of 
three  Banda  Caboceers,  who  had  been  his  most  obstinate  enemies,  adorned 
the  largest  drum;  the  vessels  in  which  the  boys  dipped  their  torches  were 
of  gold.  He  stopped  to  inquire  our  names  a  second  time,  and  to  wish  us 
good  night;  his  address  was  mild  and  deliberate;  he  was  followed  by  his 
aunts,  sisters,  and  others  of  his  family,  with  rows  of  fine  gold  chains  around 
their  necks.  Numerous  chiefs  succeeded,  and  it  was  long  before  we  were 
at  liberty  to  retire.  We  agreed  in  estimating  the  number  of  warriors  at 
thirty  thousand." 

fTo  be  continued.  J 


14  Latest  from  Liberia.  [March, 


Xi&iest  from  lAbraia. 

We  now  offer  to  our  readers,  Mr.  Ashmun's  communication  by  the  On- 
tario, to  which  we  alluded  in  the  last  number  of  our  work. 

Caldwell,  November  28,  1827. 
Gentlemen: 

My  last  advices  from  your  Board  are  those  re- 
ceived by  the  Norfolk — and  my  last  despatches  those  sent  by  the 
same  ship.  She  sailed  from  Montserado  on  the  26th  of  Septem- 
ber— and  except  Dr.  Todsen,  then  nearly  recovered  from  a 
strong  touch  of  the  fever,  all  in  good  health. — The  strength  of 
the  rains  having  abated,  we,  about  that  time,  renewed  the  ac- 
tive operations  of  the  present  dry  season,  which  are  still  carry- 
ing on,  under  the  favour  of  Divine  Providence,  in  a  more  satis- 
factory and  effectual  way  than  in  any  former  year.  The  estab- 
lished state  of  the  Colony — a  treasure  of  past  experience — the 
confirmed  health  of  the  settlers — our  better  knowledge  of  mate- 
rials for  every  useful  work — and  a  path  trodden  smooth  by  use, 
begin,  now,  as  the  fruit  of  perseverance  in  the  unfavourable  cir- 
cumstances of  former  years,  to  requite  in  a  fuller  measure,  the 
labour,  and  expense  bestowed  on  the  improvements  of  the  Colo- 
ny. Every  month  adds  to  it  some  new  acquisitions,  discloses 
some  new  resources — or  produces  some  new  valuable  improve- 
ments. 

The  dry  season  is  but  just  settled.  Four  new  decked  schoo- 
ners have,  however,  been  already  built,  fitted  for  sea,  and  actu- 
ally gone  abroad  under  the  flag  of  the  Colony.  Three  more  of 
the  same  description,  all  new,  will  follow  in  a  very  few  weeks 
and  these  exclusive  of  three  more  decked  vessels,  and  a  varie- 
ty of  open  coasting  craft  before  in  use.  Most  of  these  vessels 
have  been  wholly  built  at  Monrovia,  of  country  materials,  ex- 
cept iron,  copper,  pitch  and  cordage. 

We  have  the  present  year  succeeded  in  introducing  cows  into 
the  Colony  from  the  interior.  Formerly  they  were  prohibited, 
and  male  cattle  only  suffered  to  be  sent  to  market.  It  is  but  a 
few  months  ago,  that  the  Colony  had  no  others,  except  the  pro- 
duce of  a  cow  brought  from  Sierra  Leone  in  1822.     We  have 


X828.J  Latest  from  Liberia.  15 

now,  in  all,  14,  and  begin  to  get  milk  in  considerable  plenty.— 
Monrovia  has  a  butchering  establishment,  which  slaughters  never 
less  than  two  bullocks  weekly — sometimes  four,  and  even  more, 
when  beef  is  in  demand.  We  have  a  path  open,  about  120  miles 
towards  the  Northeast;  by  which  we  receive  as  many  bullocks- 
as  we  choose  to  order. 

There  is  one  team  of  small  but  good  oxen  in  use;  and  several 
others  are  now  breaking  in — and  will  shortly  be  serviceable. — 
And  we  have  at  length  succeeded  in  possessing  ourselves  of  that 
invaluable  animal,  the  horse.  Francis  Devany  deserves  the  cre- 
dit of  introducing  the  first,  a  vigorous  steed,  a  few  weeks  since. 
Several  others,  are  now  ordered.  The  path  from  the  interior 
direct  to  the  Colony,  by  which  horses  will  hereafter  be  brought 
into  it,  is  at  present  too  difficult  to  allow  them  to  pass.  While 
on  this  subject,  permit  me  to  enumerate  the  different  species 
of  domestic  animals  and  products,  rearing,  and  which,  we  have 
reason  to  expect,  will  ever  hereafter  be  had  in  the  Colony,  in 
the  greatest  plenty.  If  not — it  is  certainly  not  the  fault  either 
of  climate,  seasons,  or  soil — but  must  be  wholly  chargeable  on 
the  indolence  of  the  settlers. 

Of  Animals,  8,-c.  We  have  (now)  Horses,  Cattle  in  abun- 
dance, Sheep,  Goats  in  abundance,  fowls,  ducks,  geese,  Guinea 
fowls,  swine  in  plenty. — Fish,  are  no  where  found  in  greater 
quantities.  Asses,  are  lately  introduced.  Fruits,  are,  Plan- 
tains, Bananas  (reges  frugum)  in  endless  abundance — Limes, 
Lemons,  Tamarinds,  Oranges,  Soursop,  Cashew,  Mangoe — 20 
varieties  of  the  Prune — Guava,  Papaw,  Pine-apple,  Grape,  tro- 
pical Peach  and  Cherry. 

Vegetables,  are,  Sweet  Potatoe,  easily  made,  and  the  crop 
abundant — Cassada — the  chief  edible  root  of  the  country,  grows 
almost  without  culture — Yams — not  so  easily  made,  but  a  better 
vegetable,  beginning  to  be  plenty — Cocoa — a  root  easily  grown, 
and  nearly  equal  to  the  Yam.  Ground-nuts — sowed  often  in 
Rice-fields,  very  prolific — Arrow  Boot— easily  made,  nutritious, 
but  best  for  sale — Egg-plant — grows,  once  planted,  without  cul- 
ture, very  prolific — Ocra — every  variety  of  Beans,  and  most 
sorts  of  Pease — Cucumbers — indigenious — Pumpkins — the  sever- 
al varieties  succeed  well. 

Grains,  are:  Bice — the  staple;  several  crops  by  way  of  expe- 


16  Latest  from  Liberia.  [March, 

riment  the  past  season.  It  is  a  sure  crop,  but  requires  assidu- 
ous care.  Indian  Corn — does  not  succeed  well — there  is  some- 
thing unfriendly  in  either  soil,  or  climate;  supposed  to  be  the 
too  great  heat  of  the  latter.  Coffee — of  an  excellent  quality, 
and  abundantly  sufficient  for  the  wants  of  the  Colony.  Pepper; 
of  three  varieties,  of  which  either  is  equal  to  the  Cayenne.-— 
Millet  and  Guinea  Corn — easily  raised,  but  little  cultivated. — 
Their  place  is  supplied  by  the  rice  of  the  country. 

Cotton  is  not  yet  cultivated,  except  on  a  small  scale — staple 
good. 

The  food  of  labouring  people  in  the  Colony  consists  chiefly  of 
the  various  preparations  of  Rice,  Palm  Oil,  Beef,  Coffee,  Fowls, 
Goat's  meat;  Cassadas,  Plantains,  and  Sweet  Potatoes.  Of  all 
these  articles,  there  are,  and  we  trust  will  ever  hereafter  be 
had,  the  greatest  abundance.  But  hitherto,  yielding  to  the  force 
of  habit,  formed  in  America,  most  of  the  colonists  have,  perhaps 
too  liberally  for  their  own  interest,  indulged  themselves  with 
flour,  corn  meal,  butter,  lard,  pickled  beef,  fish  and  pork,  and 
bacon, — a  very  large  amount  of  all  which  is  consumed  every 
month — and  I  fear  monthly  becoming  larger. 

With  the  pardon  of  the  Board,  while  on  these  minutiae,  I  will 
here  add  a  sketch  of  the  inside  economy  of  this  little  community. 

The  older  classes  of  settlers,  fixed  in  comfortable  dwellings, 
and  surrounded  with  their  little  cultured  premises,  are  variously 
and  in  general,  successfully  and  actively  employed  in  the  coast- 
ing commerce,  and  the  country  trade;  either  through  the  facto- 
ries, or  at  home.  To  this  they  add,  as  a  source  of  profit,  their 
transactions  with  trading  vessels — and  several  of  them,  the  ex- 
ercise of  their  mechanical  trades.  Most  of  the  mechanics  of 
long  standing,  have  from  four  to  ten  or  twelve  apprentices  and 
journeymen  working  under  them.  To  the  same  class  is  restrict- 
ed, in  the  first  instance,  the  benefit  of  nearly  all  the  public  mo- 
ney expended  in  the  Colony — whether  in  the  payment  of  sala- 
ries, job  work,  or  building  materials. — They  are  now  beginning 
to  add  both  to  their  comfort  and  their  independence,  by  agricul- 
ture. Belonging  to  this. class  of  settlers,  is  to  be  found,  nearly 
all  the  trading  capital,  and  much  the  greatest  proportion  of  the 
whole  wealth  of  the  Colony.  And  it  comprehends  a  large  hall 
of  its  entire  population. 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia,  17 

A  second  class  (estimated  at  one-third  of  the  population)  have? 
after  an  exhausting  effort,  just  placed  themselves  in  thoir  new — 
some,  even  not  yet  quite  finished — houses;  and  are  completing 
with  great  zeal  and  solicitude,  the  improvements  on  which  the 
titles  of  their  lands  depend.  Many,  having  large  families  to 
support  while  thus  burdened  with  the  severe  labour  of  subduing 
a  piece  of  forest  land,  and  erecting  houses,  and  very  few  bring- 
ing with  them  a  spare  dollar,  feel  the  pressure  of  their  circum- 
stances, at  this  period,  more  sensibly  than  at  any  other  perhaps 
in  their  lives.  Earlier,  they  received  a  little  weekly  aid — (and 
a  little,  in  an  industrious  and  thrifty  family,  goes  a  long  way,) 
from  the  public  store.  Later,  they  will  have  emerged  into  a 
state  of  comparative  independence  and  ease — having  houses  over 
their  heads,  a  title  to  their  lands  in  their  pocket,  cleared  and  cul- 
tivated enclosures  about  them,  and  generally  a  healthier  habit  of 
body,  from  a  longer  residence  in  the  climate.  But  at  the  stage 
I  speak  of,  settlers  are  in  want  of  all  these  comforts  and  helps— 
and  obliged  by  their  own  incessant  exertions,  to  create  them  all. 
Many  of  this  class  live,  slenderly  fed,  slenderly  clad,  and  not 
seldom,  while  the  pressure  lasts,  indulge  despondency; — and 
some  of  them  even  complain,  that  for  ideal  privileges,  they  have 
abandoned  many  substantial  comforts,  in  America. — If  mechan- 
ics, they  spend  nearly  all  their  earnings  in  purchasing  building 
materials — and  in  carpenters',  masons',  and  labourers'  hire, 
about  their  own  houses.  If  simple  farmers,  or  common  labour- 
ers, it  costs  them  two  days'  labour  in  every  week  for  their  more 
opulent  neighbours,  or  the  public,  to  get  provisions  for  them- 
selves and  families — two  days  more,  to  pay  for  such  building 
materials  and  clothing  as  they  cannot  make  for  themselves;  and 
the  remaining  two  days  they  spend  on  their  buildings  and  lands. 
This  is  nearly  the  proportionate  distribution  of  their  industry, 
taking  a  month  or  season  together.  Some  who  have  credit,  go 
in  debt  at  this  stage  of  their  residence  in  the  Colony,  and  thus 
protract  their  embarrassments  a  couple  of  years  longer.  I  do 
what  I  can  to  sustain  their  resolution  in  this  emergency — en- 
courage special  industry,  or  merit  struggling  with  too  many  diffi- 
culties at  once,  by  a  little  seasonable  relief — give  them  the  refu- 
sal of  certain  little  jobs,  and  contracts  which  promise  to  pay 

them  best — and,  to  their  credit  be  it  said,  few  are  iound  ungrate- 
3 


18  Latest  from  Liberia.  [March, 

ful;  and  few  but  acquit  themselves  in  this  season,  with  much 
credit;  and,  as  the  reward  of  their  perseverance,  look  forward, 
in  a  few  months,  to  an  easy  and  respectable  establishment  in  the 
Colony. 

The  third  class  consists  of  settlers  not  a  twelvemonth  in  the 
Colony.  Most  of  these  are  yet  in  the  Public  Receptacles,  and 
in  rented  houses.  Imperfectly  inured  to  the  climate,  they  are 
incapable  of  severe  labour — receive  (for  the  early  part  of  the 
period  under  consideration,)  a  little  rice,  tobacco,  &c.  from  the 
public  store,  weekly — labour  moderately,  either  on  their  own 
lots,  and  in  preparing  shingles  &c.  for  their  future  houses — hire 
themselves,  as  journeymen,  or  labourers,  to  the  older  settlers — 
or  employ  themselves  in  preparing  lumber,  lime,  stones,  &c. 
&c.  for  sale. 

To  these  may  be  joined  a  fourth  class,  not  quite  useless  to  the 
Colony — but  altogether  so  to  themselves.  Men  and  women  of 
too  little  forecast  to  see  a  month  into  the  future,  or  care  for  any 
other  part  of  their  lives  except  the  present  hour.  They  lose 
their  lands,  because  they  never  feel  the  necessity  of  taking  mea- 
sures to  secure  them,  till  it  is  too  late.  They  never  build  hou- 
ses, because  a  house  can,  for  the  present  month,  be  hired  much 
cheaper  than  they  can  build  one.  All  the  incurably  lazy  of  the 
Colony,  of  course,  muster  in  this  class — but  not  a  few,  from  a 
blind  and  constitutional  improvidence,  are  referred  to  it,  who 
labour  hard  the  year  round — but  know  not  how  to  use  their  in- 
dustry for  their  own  benefit. 

From  this  view  of  our  interior  economy,  it  results:  (and  the 
statement  is  made  for  the  sake  of  the  result) — 

Firstly,  That  the  Colony  is  sustained,  and  derives  its  growth, 
almost  wholly  from  its  own  industry.  True,  there  is  a  conside- 
rable amount  of  public  money  laid  out,  and  which  eventually 
stays  in  the  Colony.  But  very  few  indeed  receive  even  a  part 
of  their  support^  by  a  direct  application  of  the  public  funds  to 
their  subsistence.  And  of  these  few,  none,  except  too  small  a 
number  of  the  sick  to  affect  the  account,  receive,  in  that  way, 
more  than  a  small  part  of  their  subsistence.  It  is  the  labour  of 
the  colonists  which  sustains  them — and  which  consequently  sus- 
tains the  Colony  itself. — For  the  public  supplies,  instead  of  go- 
ing to  feed  the  people,  after  accomplishing  this  object,  interme 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia*  19 

diately  and  as  regards  only  a  certain  number,  for  a  limited  time, 
are  made  to  end  in  permanent  buildings  and  other  public  and 
durable  improvements  of  the  Colony. — So  that  it  has  the  princi- 
ple of  its  own  growth  within  itself. 

Secondly,  The  productive  part  of  this  industry,  and  that 
which  directly  administers  to  its  growth,  more  than  all  others, 
is  its  trade  and  commerce.  The  expenditure  of  American  funds 
here  is  subsidiary — and  so  is  our  gardening  and  agriculture. — 
But,  these  are  only  subsidiary  to  the  trade  of  the  Colony,  as  re- 
gards the  share  they  contribute  towards  its  prosperity.  True, 
our  rivers  produce  lime-shells — our  hills  building  stones — our 
forests  all  the  varieties  of  lumber,  and  other  materials  for  build- 
ing; for  domestic  furniture,  and  for  naval  uses: — and  a  very 
large  proportion  of  the  industry  of  the  people  is  employed  in 
preparing,  transporting,  and  working  up  these  materials.  But 
what  feeds  and  clothes  them  while  thus  employed? — What  pays 
for  these  materials  when  brought  into  market? — or  settles  the 
joiners',  cabinet  makers',  masons',  plasterers'  bills,  when  they 
are  finally  worked  up?  To  all  these  inquiries,  I  answer,  the 
trade  and  commerce  of  the  Colony:  and  not,  as  I  gladly  would 
say,  its  agriculture.     But, 

Thirdly,  So  long  as  all  the  profits  of  trade  remain  in,  and  are 
laid  out  in  permanently  improving  the  Colony,  the  effect  is  near- 
ly the  same,  on  its  general  prosperity,  as  if  the  same  improve- 
ments were  effected  by  the  surplus  produce  of  agriculture.  As 
many  houses  are  built,  as  many  roads  opened,  as  many  forts  con- 
structed, as  many  schools  supported,  on  the  one  supposition  as 
the  other.  But  there  is  this  difference.  Every  surplus  bushel 
of  rice,  &c.  made  in  the  Colony,  not  only  feeds  as  many  people 
as  the  same  quantity  introduced  by  trade;  but  that  bushel  of  rice 
proves  the  Colony  capable,  of  itself,  to  produce  another,  and 
another  bushel  in  its  place,  annually,  so  long  as  the  world  stands 
— which  the  bushel  introduced  by  trade  does  not. — Found  the 
Colony's  independence,  on  its  agriculture,  and  it  stands  on  the 
surest  of  all  grounds — on  commerce,  and  it  is  precarious;  liable 
to  be  affected  by  a  thousand  circumstances  over  which  the  Colo- 
ny itself  can  exercise  no  control. 

The  truth  compels  me  to  say,  that  the  sources  of  trade  and 
commerce  naturally  belonging  to  the  Colony,   placed  as  it  is  oh 


20  Latest  from  Liberia.  [March, 

the  central  part  of  a  coast  of  vast  extent — and  bordering  on  po- 
pulous and  industrious  nations  in  the  interior  of  the  continent, 
are  not  a  tenth  part  explored: — and  until  they  shall  be  both  ex- 
plored and  occupied, — and  so  long  as  this  vast  field  of  commer- 
cial enterprise  holds  out  new  inducements  to  the  settlers,  to  en- 
ter upon  and  cultivate  it;  is  agriculture  destined  to  follow  in  the 
train  of  trade — and  not  to  lead  it.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  is 
it  likely  that  the  tide  of  industry  will  shift  its  direction,  and  be 
made  to  set  very  strongly  towards  any  other  object.  In  the 
meantime  it  has  been  my  invariable  practice  to  hold  out  all  pos- 
sible encouragements,  to  the  enterprise  and  perseverance  of  the 
farmers.  The  premiums  authorized  to  be  proposed  for  this  end, 
by  the  Board  of  Managers,  the  last  year,  have  to  a  certain  Ex- 
tent, been  beneficial.  The  survey  on  which  the  first  annual 
award  of  these  premiums  is  to  be  made,  is  now  accomplishing. — 
But,  as  it  was  made  a  condition  of  carrying  the  several  premi- 
ums, that  the  competitors  should  not  only  excel  others,  in  the 
several  crops,  &c.  but  should  deserve  them,  for  the  absolute  val- 
ue of  those  crops,  and  by  the  style  of  their  work,  as  well  as  its 
relative  quantity,  I  am  apprehensive  that  not  more  than  $50, 
out  of  the  8200,  will  be,  this  year,  awarded  at  all.  But  the  com- 
petition has  proved  useful,  and  promises  much  better  effects  the 
ensuing  year.  All  the  practical  farmers  of  Caldwell,  (and  most 
of  the  inhabitants  are  of  this  number,)  are  associated  into  an 
Agricultural  Society.  They  meet  weekly  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
porting, individually,  the  progress  they  have  made  in  the  week, 
on  their  plantations.  These  reports  are  recorded.  Two,  three 
or  more  questions,  of  the  most  practical  nature,  are  then  brought 
forward,  every  one  is  permitted  to  deliver  his  opinion;  and  state 
the  reasons  on  which  his  opinion  is  founded.  The  question  is 
then  decided  by  a  vote  of  the  meeting;  and  if  unanimously  de- 
termined, is  recorded  as  a  maxim  in  the  practical  agriculture  of 
the  settlement,  established  for  the  present  and  future  direction 
of  all.  The  members  are  pledged  to  reduce  to  practice  the  ax- 
ioms established  in  these  meetings.  I  attend  them  myself — and 
can  so  far,  bear  a  very  decided  testimony  in  favour  of  their  great 
utility.  The  expedient  will  be  attempted  at  the  Cape:  but  pro- 
mises less  there  than  in  Caldwell.  Many,  however,  of  that  set- 
tlement are  actively  employed  on  their  farms,  this  season:  and 


i828.]  Latest  from  Liberia*  21 

there  remains  not  a  doubt,  that  the  products  of  the  Colony,  the 
ensuing  year,  will  equal  its  consumption,  in  every  article  except 
rice.  I  have  led  the  way  in  a  farm  of  eight  acres — which,  con- 
sidering the  richness  of  the  soil — the  perennial  growth  of  every 
plant  and  crop — and  the  most  prolific  nature  of  vegetation,  in 
this  country,  is  no  contemptible  piece  of  tillage.  The  articles 
cultivated  on  this  land,  are  Cassada,  Potatoes,  Plantains,  Bana- 
nas, Yams,  several  species  of  Pulse,  a  little  Rice  and  Sugar- 
cane by  way  of  experiment,  Eggplants,  Pepper,  Coffee  plants, 
Cotton,  and  a  variety  of  fruit  trees. 

A  concurrence  of  circumstances  has  given  us,  this  season,  the 
entire  trade  of  Cape  Mount  Two  English  vessels  attempting 
to  trade  there,  were  not  long  since,  totally  lost.  The  difficult 
nature  of  the  trade  to  strangers,  deters  some  others.  The  con- 
tiguity of  the  Gallinas,  which  is  still  the  occasional  resort  of  pi- 
ratical slavers,  excludes  a  few  more.  And,  to  close  the  door 
still  more  effectually,  the  commercial  regulations  of  the  Colony 
prohibit  the  trade  of  Cape  Mount  to  all  foreign  vessels  trading 
to  Cape  Montserado.  The  same  prohibition  is  extended  to  the 
whole  line  of  coast  between  Cape  Mount  and  Young  Sesters, 
both  inclusive— all  of  which  is,  constructively,  within  the  occu- 
pation of  the  Colony. 

The  direct  intercourse  of  the  Colony  with  the  interior  is  great- 
ly improved  and  extended  this  season.  Three  individuals, 
Frederick  James,  Reuben  Dongey,  and  David  Logan,  have,  at 
great  labour,  and  some  personal  hazard,  been  chiefly  instrumen- 
tal in  procuring  the  advantages  of  this  extension  of  our  trade  in 
that  direction.  We  are  now  in  treaty  with  King  Boatswain  to 
open  an  easy  trade  route  to  the  distance  of  150  miles.  Beyond, 
the  roads  are  good,  and  the  communication  free  for  traders,  for 
aught  we  know,  to  Tombuctoo.  This  path  already  brings  us 
.  nearly  all  our  bullocks,  and  no  inconsiderable  amount  of  Ivory. 
And  nearly  all  the  Ivory  received  by  this  channel,  is  large  and 
very  valuable.  James  and  Dongey  are  now  in  the  interior — the 
former  engaged  in  exploring  the  St.  Paul's  river  from  this  place 
upwards  of  200  miles,  towards  its  source.  There  is  reason  to 
hope  that  its  channel  is  not  obstructed,  in  that  whole  distance, 
by  more  than  two  rapids.  And  only  one  of  these  is  believed  to 
amount  to  a  complete  obstruction  of  the  boat  navigation. 


22  Latest  from  Liberia,  [March, 

No  change  has  occurred  in  the  state  of  our  establishments  on 
the  Junk  and  on  Factory  Island,  since  my  last  letters.  We 
have  derived  from  them,  a  large  quantity  of  rice  and  oil.  Of 
the  former  article,  there  is  now  on  hand  20  tons,  or  about  800 
bushels;  and  we  may  safely  depend  on  collecting  a  much  greater 
amount  of  country  produce  this  season,  than  in  any  former  year. 
The  many  advantages  even  of  a  simple  factory  at  Grand  Bassa, 
(Factory  Island)  sufficiently  indicate  the  usefulness  of  a  snug 
little  colony  established  at  the  same  place.  The  chiefs  of  that 
country  continue  as  solicitous  as  ever  for  such  a  settlement. — 
The  want  of  settlers  is  the  only  obstacle — which  we  are  eagerly 
expecting  to  see  removed  by  the  next  arrival  of  colonist  from  the 
United  States. 

The  Colony  remains,  still,  on  bad  terms  with  Little  Bassa. 
That  place  continues  to  be  a  depot  for  slaving — two  vessels 
having  carried  off  slaves  since  September.  It,  indeed,  furnishes 
our  traders  with  large  quantities  of  our  best  camwood — but  re- 
fuses to  punish  the  banditti  who  have  perpetrated  various  acts  of 
violence  and  pillage,  on  persons  and  property  claiming  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Colony.  We  have  repeatedly  proved  the  use  of  a 
forbearing  policy — one  effect  of  which  is,  to  secure  the  suffrage 
of  the  judgment  and  moral  sense  of  all  the  neighbouring  tribes, 
in  our  favour.  But,  forbearance  has  its  limits,  beyond  which  it 
cannot  be  carried  without  pusillanimity,  and  an  abandonment  of 
the  persons  and  property  confided  to,  and  confiding  in,  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Colony,  to  lawless  violence  and  savage  rapacity. 
And  our  forbearance,  as  regards  this  unprincipled  tribe,  certain- 
ly approximates  very  closely  to  those  limits.  May  Heaven  avert 
the  necessity  of  bloodshed!  But  our  little  armed  force  is  fitting 
for  sea — and  if  the  Board  of  Managers  intend  that  arms  shall  not 
be  used — and  the  calamity  of  war  be  forever  and  entirely  avoid- 
ed by  their  Colony;  I  see  not  but  their  present  agent  must  be  re- 
called, and  a  much  wiser  (I  will  not  say  more  pacific)  substitu- 
ted in  his  place.  Tom  Bassa  not  only  harbours,  but  protects, 
and  shares  the  pillage  of  some  sixty  or  eighty  bandits,  natives  of 
Grand  Battou  and  the  other  leeward  parts  of  the  coast,  known 
b}r  the  name  of  Fishmen.  These  have,  with  arms,  assaulted  in 
three  or  four  several  instances,  our  own  citizens,  and  country 
carriers,  charged  with  the  public  property,   and  passing  to  and 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  25 

from  the  leeward  factories.  They  have  wounded  and  maimed 
several  men  with  fire-arms  and  cutlasses,  and  robbed  them  of 
81200  worth  of  property,  belonging  either  to  individual  colo- 
nists, or  to  the  public  store.  Tom  has  permitted  the  leader  to 
withdraw  with  his  booty — refuses  to  punish  the  rest — and  neg- 
lects to  restore  more  than  a  trifling  part  of  the  property:  and  all 
this  in  violation  of  solemn  written  engagements.  Three  differ- 
ent delegations  have  been  sent  from  Montserado — without  ob- 
taining the  least  satisfaction.  And  what,  I  would  respectfully 
inquire,  now  remains,  except  the  "ultima  ratio  regum"? 

We  have  been  in  the  possession  of  Young  Sesters  since  my 
last: — the  war  still  prevailing,  has  rendered  the  situation  of  the 
factor  and  other  occupants,  resident  in  that  country,  less  secure 
than  could  be  wished.     The  site  of  the  factory,  on  one  occasion, 
having  become  the  theatre  of  hostilities,  they  were  obliged  to  re- 
move the  property  to  a  place  of  greater  safety.     An  old  and 
slight  building,  the  property  of  the  Colony,  was  soon  after  de- 
stroyed, with  about  860  worth  of  private  property.     The  King 
Has  engaged  to  make  good  this  small  loss,  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  owners.     And  a  substantial  frame  house  has  since  been  erect- 
ed.    King  Freeman  is  importunate  for  a  small  colony  from  Mont- 
serado to  be  established  in  his  territories.     All  the  chiefs  of  the 
neighbourhood,  Tradetown  excepted,  concur  with  him  in  his  so- 
licitations for  the  same  object.     Such  special  grants  of  lands  are 
now  executing  with  those  chiefs,  as  shall  authorize  the  making 
of  subordinate  grants  to  colonists,  on  sure  grounds;  and  a  com- 
pany of'  six  or  eight  settlers  is  now  raising,  for  the  purpose  of 
permanently  and  effectually  settling  that  country.     These,  toge- 
ther with  about  fourteen  labourers  under  them,  and  accompanied 
at  first  with  a  force  of  10  or  12  recaptured  Africans,  may  be  ex- 
pected to  remove  to  that  territory  early  in  January;  and  com- 
mence the  building  of  a  small  town  and  fortification,   and  the 
making  of  farms.     The  lands  along  the  banks  of  Poor  river,  are 
of  the  very  best  quality — and  having  been  in  the  cultivation  of 
the  natives,  are  easily  cleared  and  subdued. 

Our  inducements  for  colonizing  this  territory,  are, 
1st.  To  establish  and  extend  in  the  most  effectual  method,  the 
influence  of  the  Colony  over  not  only  the  Sesters,   but  all  the 
leeward  tribes — especially  such  as  will  be  thus  placed  between 
that  settlement  and  Montserado. 


24  Latest  from  Liberia.  [March; 

2d.  To  assure  the  safety  of  all  the  intermediate  establishments 
of  the  Colony — as  well  as  of  the  Sesters  itself.  Some  method 
of  protection  must  be  adopted  for  the  security  of  our  two  estab- 
lishments at  Grand  Bassa,  and  our  third  at  the  Junk.  But* 
shall  we  fortify,  and  support  a  guard  at  each  of  these  factories, 
as  well  as  at  the  Sesters?  If  such  an  expense  were  possible,  it 
would  be  most  absurd  and  unnecessary.  Fortify  the  out-post — 
strengthen  the  frontier;  and  there  will  be  little  use  of  fortifica- 
tions at  each  of  the  several  posts  within  those  limits.  But  the 
absolute  expense  to  the  Colony,  of  guarding  a  factory,  and  main- 
taining a  military  post  at  Sesters,  is  not  less  than  that  which 
would  be  sufficient  to  colonize  it.  For  the  colonists,  while  they 
support  themselves,  and  carry  on  their  farms  and  buildings,  are, 
for  all  general  purposes,  the  best  possible  defence.  A  whole 
territory  in  our  occupation  there,  will  extend  our  influence  much 
more  effectually  than  a  simple  fort — a  town  will  form  a  much 
more  formidable  barrier,  than  a  factory — and  a  little  community 
of  inhabitants,  than  a  very  numerous  guard.  Settle  the  Sesters, 
and  we  may  securely  settle  any  part  of  the  territory  within.— 
For  example,  What  insecurity  can  colonists  on  Factory  Island 
feel,  so  long  as  they  have  a  protecting  settlement  25  miles  be- 
yond them?  Among  the  candidates  for  this  little  sub-colony, 
not  a  man  is  enrolled,  who  has  not  been,  at  least,  three  or  four 
years  in  Africa,  and  who  is  not  personally  acquainted  with  hun^ 
dreds  of  the  people  among  whom  they  are  going — and  entirely 
devoid  of  that  suspicious  timidity,  which  invites  the  aggressions 
of  the  country  people,  by  seeming  to  fear  and  distrust' them. — 
But,  as  their  enterprise  is  one  of  great  self-denial,  and  not  a  lit- 
tle arduous,  I  have  thought  it  but  just  to  hold  out  to  adventurers 
extraordinary  inducements.  The  first  12  families  are,  there- 
fore, to  be  permitted  to  hold  lands  in  the  Sesters,  without  regard 
to  lands  previously  held  by  them  in  any  of  the  other  settlements 
of  the  Colony.  They  arc,  further,  to  have  the  selection  of  these 
lands  in  an  order  to  be  fixed  by  lot.  And  their  charter  secures 
to  the  settlement  a  monopoly  of  its  own  trade  for  five  years — ■ 
(the  public  purchasers  of  rice  and  oil  always  excepted.)  It  is 
proposed  to  build  a  town  on  a  height  at  no  great  distance  from 
the  sea  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the  river, 
on  the  other.     A  considerable  chief  of  Tobocanee  has  just  offered 


1828.]  A  Voice  from  Africa,  25 

the  Colony,  all  the  beach  from  G.  Bassa  to  the  village  of  Tapo- 
canee.  The  remaining  portion  between  that  village  and  Poor 
river,  it  is  thought,  may  be  had  for  a  reasonable  consideration. 
This  territory  abounds  in  Coffee — but  the  lands,  near  the  Sea, 
are  generally  poor  and  lean,  and  the  beach  affords  no  commodi- 
ous landing  place — so,  that,  I  have  not  definitively  replied  to 
the  offer  made  us  by  its  owners.  The  matter  will  be,  however, 
kept  alive  till  I  make  a  visit  to  that  part  of  the  coast,  which  I 
propose  to  do  about  Christmas. 

(To  be  continued.) 

u  A  Yoiee,  trom  Africa." 

A  duodecimo  pamphlet  of  thirty-four  pages,  with  this  title* 
has  been  transmitted  to  us,  by  a  highly  esteemed  friend  in  Bal- 
timore, who  has  likewise  favoured  us  with  the  following  account 
of  its  origin  and  object. 

"The  idea  occurred  to  some  benevolent  friends  of  African  Colonization 
in  this  place,  that  great  benefit  to  the  cause  would  ultimately  proceed  from 
instructing  children  in  the  principles  of  the  great  scheme  in  which  we  are 
all  engaged.  Many  years  must  elapse  before  the  emigration  from  this  coun- 
try can  be  as  great  as  we  wish  it,  both  on  account  of  the  paucity  of  our 
means  to  send  emigrants,  and  the  want  of  accommodations  in  Africa  for 
more  than  a  very  limited  number.  This  time  it  was  thought  could  not  be 
better  employed  than  in  spreading  among  the  coloured  people  an  earnest 
desire  to  emigrate,  whenever  circumstances  would  permit:  and  this  could 
not  be  better  effected  than  by  commencing  with  children,  teaching  these 
to  consider  Africa  as  their  natural  home,  making  them  acquainted  with  its 
history  and  productions,  and  convincing  them  that  it  is  there  alone  they  can 
ever  hope  to  attain  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  rights  of  free  and  independent 
men.  With  this  view,  I  undertook,  at  the  request  of  Moris  Sheppard,  a 
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  to  compose  an  easy  history  of  your 
Colony  and  of  the  Society — which  the  youngest  child  might  spell, — 
as  an  introduction  to  the  Address  of  the  Citizens  of  Liberia.  To 
this  I  added  a  hymn  and  prayer,  written  with  the  best  of  my  skill, 
for  children  to  commit  to  memory.  A  Glossary  of  the  hard  words  clo- 
ses the  book — the  titlepage  tells  the  rest-  Mr.  Sheppard  has  caused  3000 
of  these  primers,  if  they  can  be  so  called,  to  be  printed  at  his  own  expense, 
in  the  style  of  that  which  I  send  you;  and  he  has  placed  them  with  me  for 
4 


2b  Ji  Voice  from  Africa.  [March, 

distribution.  He  intends  that  this  shall  be  the  first  of  a  series  of  "minor 
publications"  for  the  use  of  African  schools;  and  he  has  ordered  an  engra- 
ving of  General  Harper's  head  for  the  next.  1  feel  satisfied  that  the  Board 
will  acknowledge  this  distinguished  liberality  on  the  part  of  a  private  indi- 
vidual. The  "Voice  from  Africa''  will  exert  an  influence  beyond  the  pre- 
cincts of  the  school  room. — Parents  will  derive  information  from  their  chil- 
dren; and  the  views  of  the  Society,  and  the  history  and  productions  of  Afri- 
ca, will  be  widely  and  advantageously  disseminated.  It  is  proposed  to  offer 
a  premium  in  each  African  school  to  the  youth  who  shall  'commit  the  Ad- 
dress to  memory.  All  will  no  doubt  attempt,  and  very  many  will  succeed. 
Depend  upon  it,  my  dear  Sir,  African  emigration  will  yet  become  so  popu- 
lar among  the  blacks,  that  they  will  themselves  in  many  cases  furnish  their 
own  passage  money  to  Liberia." 

"We  wish  all  possible  success  to  this  very  judicious  method  of 
instructing  the  Free  People  of  colour  in  the  design  of  our  Insti- 
tution, and  the  benefits  to  be  realized  from  its  execution.  When 
well-informed  on  these  subjects,  it  will  be  impossible  for  them  to 
remain  indifferent  spectators  of  our  proceedings;  they  will  be 
excited  to  action,  and  thousands  will  lay  aside  the  gains  of  their 
more  productive  industry,  that  they  may  be  able  to  remove  to 
Liberia.  The  expense  of  transportation,  will  probably  be  re- 
duced by  the  increase  of  commercial  intercourse  with  the  Colo- 
ny, although  it  is  not  now  beyond  the  means  of  any  healthy,  sin- 
gle young  man  of  colour,  who  can  command  the  profits  of  his 
labours.  We  hope  that  all  such  will  consider  the  prize  which  a 
kind  Providence  now  holds  out  to  their  enterprise,  and  resolve 
that  neither  idleness,  inconsideration,  nor  improvidence,  shall 
prevent  their  obtaining  it. 

As  pleasing  specimens  of  the  little  work  before  us,  and  to  show 
how  well  it  is  adapted  to  the  use  of  the  African  schools  in  the 
United  States,  we  here  insert  the  Hymn  and  Prayer,  which  suc- 
ceed the  Address  of  the  Colonists  to  their  brethren  in  America. 

Land  of  our  fathers,  Af-ri-ca, 

We  turn  our  thoughts  to  thee — 
To  gain  thy  shores  we'll  gladly  bear 

The  storm  upon  the  sea. 

For  He,  who  on  the  firm-set  land 

Can  wield  His  power  to  save, 
Will  watch  above  the  pilgrim  ban<* 

And  guard  it  on  the  wave. 


1828.]  Missions  to  Africa.  xt 

Land  of  our  sires,  thy  spreading  palm 

Above  us  yet  shall  wave, 
And  on  thy  shore  the  sacred  psalm 

Shall  tell  Who  came  to  save. 

We  left  thee  drowned  in  Pagan  night, 

A  Saviour's  name  unknown; 
We'll  bring  thee  back  the  heav-en-ly  light, 

Which  is  the  Christian's  own. 

We'll  live,  where  flow  the  rivers  by, 

Which  were  our  fathers'  pride,— 
And  die  beneath  the  same  blue  sky, 

'Neath  which  our  fathers  died. 

Then  welcome  day,  and  welcome  hour, 

When  on  the  sea  we  roam, — 
Our  guide,  the  God  whose  word  is  power, 

To  gain  our  fathers'  home. 

PRAYER. 

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  whose  all-seeing  eye  is  over  the  plains  of 
Africa,  as  well  as  over  the  cities  of  America,  we  give  thee  our  humble  and 
hearty  thanks,  that  thou  hast  protected,  on  the  great  sea,  and  at  last  estab- 
lished in  the  land  of  their  forefathers,  the  free  citizens  of  Liberia.  We  bless 
thee,  that  thou  hast  preserved  them  in  health  and  safety  through  all  the  toils 
and  perils  of  strangers  in  a  strange  land,  until  "the  wilderness  around  them 
has  blossomed  as  the  rose."  And  most  especially,  Oh,  most  merciful  Fa- 
ther, do  we  bless  and  magnify  thy  holy  name,  that  thou  hast  vouchsafed  thy 
spirit  to  the  people  of  Liberia,  and  that  thy  Everlasting  Gospel  is  made -their 
animating  spring  of  action,  their  daily  rule  of  life,  and  their  source  of  im- 
mortal hope  and  ineffable  enjoyment.  We  humbly  beseech  thee  so  to  cpnr 
tinue  thy  gracious  protection,  that  the  Colony  now  established,  may  in- 
crease in  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  happiness,  until  a  mighty  nation,  peo- 
pled by  pilgrims  returning  to  their  fathers'  homes,  shall  arise,  from  which 
the  light  of  thy  truth  shall  beam  upon  Pagan  Africa;  and  Ethiopia,  lifting 
up  her  hands  unto  God,  shall  embrace  the  hope  of  everlasting  life  held 
forth  to  all  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    Amen, 


Missions  to  Mxica. 

"We  have  received,  through  the  kindness  of  its  Secretary,  the 
first  of  a  series  of  Quarterly  Papers,  to  be  published  by  the  Do- 
mestic and  Foreign  Missionary  Society,  of  the  Protestant  Epis- 


28  Jlissions  to  Africa,  [March, 

copal  Church  in  the  United  States.  The  number  before  us  re- 
lates  almost  entirely  to  the  subject  of  missions  in  Africa;  for 
which,  we  have  already  stated,  a  missionary  has  been  selected 
by  this  Society  (the  Rev.  Jacob  Oson),  who  will  shortly  embark 
for  Liberia.  This  paper  contains  part  of  a  speech  by  the  Rev. 
J.  Raban,  one  of  the  English  Missionaries  at  Sierra  Leone,  de- 
livered at  the  Anniversary  Meeting  of  the  Church  Missionary 
Society  in  1827,  from  which  we  make  the  following  extracts: 

"It  is  well  known,  that  our  efforts  in  Sierra  Leone,  have  been  particu- 
larly, though  not  exclusively,  directed  to  the  instruction  and  improvement 
of  the  liberated  Africans.  Our  congregations  during"  the  past  year,  in  the 
di;:crent  vdlages  connected  with  the  Society,  have  amounted  on  the  aver- 
age, to  3,000  persons  on  Sundays,  and  about  half  as  many  on  the  week 
days.  The  attention  and  seriousness  manifested  by  all  were  truly  gratify- 
ing-. I  heard  many  of  them  join  in  the  forms  of  our  excellent  liturgy,  and 
sing-  the  praises  of  God;  and  I  saw  many  attend  to  the  word  of  life,  with  an 
anxiety,  which  proved  that  they  were  desirous  of  profiting  by  what  they 
heard. 

**  The  number  of  our  scholars,  in  the  last  year,  was  about  1900;  the 
greater  part  of  whom,  were  children  liberated  from  slave  vessels.  Of  their 
behaviour,  I  am  justified  in  saying,  that  on  the  whole,  I  consider  it  equally 
good  with  children  of  the  lower  class  in  this  country.  Respecting  their 
progress,  it  cannot  be  expected  to  be  rapid,  when  it  is  considered  that  all 
that  is  imparted  to  most  of  them,  is  by  the  medium  of  a  foreign  language; 
and  that  those  who  were  born  in  the  Colony,  can  have  scarcely  any  assist- 
ance from  their  parents,  they  themselves  being  almost  equally  strangers  to 
English. 

*'  Of  our  native  teachers  and  assistants,  several  give  us  very  great  plea- 
sure; and  we  ardently  hope  that  it  may  please  God,  to  raise  up  many  more, 
both  children  and  adults,  who  shall  take  a  part  in  assisting  to  convey  to 
their  own  countrymen  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation. 

"  With  respect  to  our  communicants,  we  have,  including  Free  Town, 
four  hundred  and  thirty.  A  greater  number  occasionally  attend,  but  I 
speak  now  of  the  average  attendance. 

*'I  have  had  much  pleasure  in  baptizing  the  children  of  the  liberated 
Africans;  the  attention  which  the  parents  have  shown  on  these  occasions 
has  been  very  gratifying,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  they  have  beep, 
desirous  to  bring  them  up  in  the  fear  and  knowledge  of  God." 

While  on  this  subject,  we  are  happy  to  mention  the  very 
successful  efforts  of  the  Rev.  Lott  Carey  to  preach  the  Gospel 
to  the  natives  in  the  vicinity  of  our  Colony,  and  to  instruct  then 
clnldren  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.      We  observe  by" 


1828.]  To  our  Friends.  29 

his  letter  to  a  Christian  Brother  in  Richmond,  dated  Monrovia, 
Dec.  20,  1827,  that  a  school  has  been  established,  through 
his  agency,  near  Grand  Cape  Mount,  and  that  the  chiefs  of  the 
country  have  unanimously  resolved  to  encourage  and  protect  it. 
The  following  extract  will  show,  wrhat  a  desire  for  knowledge 
exists  among  the  natives. 

"  The  heathen  in  our  vicinity  are  so  very  anxious  for  the  means  of  light 
that  they  will  buy  it — beg"  it — and,  sooner  than  miss  of  it,  they  will  steal  it. 
To  establish  this,  I  will  mention  a  circumstance  which  actually  took  place 
in  removing"  our  school  establishment  up  to  C.  M.  I  had  upwards  of  forty 
natives  to  carry  our  baggage,  and  they  carried  something  like  250  bars,  a 
part  of  them  went  on  four  days  before  hand,  and  had  every  opportunity  to 
commit  depredations;  but  of  all  the  g-oods  that  were  sent  and  carried  there, 
nothing  was  lost  except  fifteen  Spelling-  Books,  five  of  them  we  recovered 
again.  I  must  say  that  I  was  almost  pleased  to  find  them  stealing  books, 
as  they  know  that  you  have  such  a  number  of  them  in  America,  and  that 
they  can,  and  no  doubt  will,  be  supplied  upon  better  terms." 

To  owy  TTiemAs. 

It  will  be  recollected,  we  trust,  that  the  operations  of  the 
Board  of  Managers  the  present  year  must  depend,  as  to  their  ex- 
tent and  importance,  almost  entirely  upon  the  funds  which  may 
be  contributed  within  three  or  four  months  from  the  present  time. 
The  expeditions  which  may  be  fitted  out  should  leave  our  shores 
early  in  the  autumnal  months — certainly,  the  departure  of  none 
of  them  should  be  deferred  until  winter.  Much  time  must  ne- 
cessarily be  consumed  in  the  outfits;  hence  the  importance  of  en- 
abling the  Managers  speedily  to  decide  upon  the  amount  of 
funds  with  which  they  are  probably  to  be  favoured  for  the  prose- 
cution of  their  enterprise  the  ensuing  year.  May  we  be  pardon- 
ed, for  expressing  the  hope,  that  the  Managers  of  Auxiliary  Soci- 
eties will  seriously  consider  this  subject,  and  inform  us  as  ear- 
ly as  convenient  of  the  sums  which  the  several  associations  they 
represent,  may  probably  be  enabled  to  contribute,  and  of  the 
time  when  their  remittances  may  be  expected.  Another  subject 
which  we  regard  as  immensely  important,  and  to  which  we 
earnestly  solicit  the  attention  of  all  who  wish  success  to  our  In- 
stitution, rs  that  of  securing  the  consent  of  tho  Churches  of  atl 


3©  The  Gentrous  Scheme  promoted.  [March, 

denominations  throughout  the  Union,  to  take  up  Collections  for 
the  Society,  on  or  about  the  Fourth  of  July  next.  The  very  lim- 
ited adoption  of  this  measure,  produced,  the  last  year,  a  valuable 
income  to  the  Society,  and  its  general  adoption  could  not  fail  to 
Secure  a.  revenue  greatly  exceeding  the  amount  which  has  been 
received  by  our  Treasurer  during  any  single  year.  Let  every 
Friend  to  our  scheme  feel  it  a  solemn  duty  to  promote  this  object, 
and  it  may  be  accomplished.  Let  every  Minister  of  Christ  re- 
flect upon  it,  and  it  will  be  effected  in  a  manner  honourable  to 
our  country,  and  cheering  to  Africa. 

It  may  be  well  to  state,  (as  some  of  our  readers  may  not  have  perused  our 
last  volume)  that  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq.  of  Peterboro,  N.  Y.  has  offered  to  give 
one  thousand  dollars  to  our  Society,  payable,  one  hundred  annually,  for  ten. 
years,  provided  that  ninety-nine  others  can  be  found  who  will  subscribe  in 
the  same  manner.  We  published  in  our  last  number,  a  letter  from  a  gen- 
tleman in  Charleston,  S.  C.  expressing  his  wish  to  be  considered  one  of  the 
number.  Two  other  individuals,  whose  names  we  are  not  now  at  liberty  to 
mention,  have  resolved  to  join  in  this  great  work  of  charity.  We  cannot, 
however,  withhold  the  following  letter,  the  spirit  of  which  we  pray  may 
pervade  many  minds. 

Newark,  March  15,  1828. 
Rev.  and  dear  Sir: 

I  duly  received  your  communication  on  the  subject  of 

Mr.  Gerrit  Smith's  proposition  of  raising  funds  for  the  Colonic 

zation  Society.     I  ardently  hope,  that  it  may  be  cherished  by  at 

least  a  hundred  friends. 

With  our  disappointed  expectations  in  New  Jersey,  in  the 
cause  of  African  Education,  you  are  acquainted — these  and 
other  difficulties  have  led  me  fully  into  Mr.  Smith's  conclusion, 
"that  the  only  present  channel  for  our  labours  in  behalf  of  Af- 
rica and  her  unhappy  children  on  our  shores,  is  that  which  the 
American  Colonization  Society  opens  up." 

You  will  please,  therefore,  receive  this  as  my  stipulation  to 
become  one  of  the  hundred  subscribers  to  pay  one  hundred  dol- 
lars each  for  ten  years,  payments  to  be  made  on  the  1st  of  July 
of  each  year.      And  may  He,  who  has  the  hearts  of  all  men  in 


182  8.  J.  Death  of  Dr.  William  Thornton.,  3i 

his  hands,  bring  to  this  blessed  enterprise  the  patronage,   it  so 
much  needs  and  deserves. 

With  great  regard,  Yours  truly, 

THEO.  FRELINGHUYSEN. 
Rev.  R.  R.  Gurley. 

Deatl\  of  "Dr.  William  Thornton. 

"With  heartfelt  sorrow  we  record  the  death  of  Dr.  William 
Thornton  of  this  city,  a  devoted  friend  of  our  Society,  and 
from  its  origin  a  highly  valued  member  of  the  Board  of  Mana- 
gers. Gifted  with  rare  genius  and  endowed  with  most  amiable 
and  philanthropic  dispositions,  he  engaged  with  deep  interest 
and  untiring  zeal  in  the  cause  of  African  improvement,  and 
indeed,  in  every  scheme  which  he  considered  favourable  to 
human  liberty  and  happiness.  The  project  of  African  Colo- 
nization, first  suggested  by  Doctor  Fothergill,  (who  is  styl- 
ed by  Biissot  "the  great  Apostle  of  Philanthropy,")  and 
partially  executed  by  Granville  Sharp,  excited  the  benevo- 
lent enthusiasm  of  Doctor  Thornton  while  quite  a  young  man, 
and  he  generously  proposed  himself  to  become  the  conduc- 
tor of  American  Negroes  to  the  country  of  their  ancestors.-— 
Though  unable  to  secure  funds  adequate  to  the  execution  of  this 
purpose,  he  still  cherished  the  hope  that  a  plan  so  patriotic  and 
beneficent  would  ultimately  be  adopted  by  the  American  people, 
and  rejoiced  in  the  establishment  of  the  American  Colonization 
Society,  as  an  evidence  that  this  hope  was  not  to  be  disappointed. 

Punctual  and  faithful  in  his  attendance  on  the  deliberations  of 
the  Board,  liberal  towards  the  sentiments  of  others,  while  ex- 
pressing with  candour  and  firmness  his  own  opinions,  with  a  spi- 
rit that  would  quickly  glow  with  indignation  at  deeds  of  inhu- 
manity or  baseness,  or  yield  prompt  and  joyous  praise  to  gene- 
rous and  noble  actions,  his  occasional  peculiarities  of  thought 
sprung  from  ardent  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of  man,  an  enthusi- 
asm not  easily  satisfied  with  the  present  progress  of  improve- 
ment, but  high-wrought  with  the  anticipations  of  a  better  age. — 
The  grief  of  the  Board  on  the  occasion  of  the  decease  of  this  la- 
mented individual,  is  expressed  in  the  following  Resolutions: — ■ 


32  Contributions.  [ftlarch, 

Office  of  the  Colonization  Society,  Washington,  March  29,  1828. 

At  a  meeting-  of  the  Board  of  Managers  of  the  American  Colonization  So- 
ciety, called  for  the  purpose  of  paying-  an  honourable  and  merited  tribute  of 
respect  to  the  memory  of  Dr.  William  Thobnton,  late  one  of  its  zealous 
and  much  esteemed  members,  the  following-  preamble  and  resolution^  were 
unanimously  adopted : 

This  Board  having  heard  with  very  deep  regret  of  the  death  of  Dr.  Wil- 
liam Thornton,  one  of  its  earliest  and  most  highly  valued  members,  and 
whose  loss  must  be  severely  felt  by  the  friends  of  Africa  and  mankind; 

There  fore.  Revoked,  That,  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory  of  the  de- 
ceased, the  members  of  this  Board  will  attend  his  funeral,  and  that  they  will 
wear  crape  on  the  left  arm  for  thirty  days. 

Ecxolvcd,  That  the  above  preamble  and  resolution  be  transmitted  to  the 
family  of  the  deceased,  and  published  in  the  National  Intelligencer  of  this 
City. 

C  owtYibwtioiis 

To  the  American  Colonizatian  Society,  from  1st  March  to  1st 

April,  1828. 

An  association  of  Ladies  of  the  two  Presbyterian  Churches,  Rich- 
mond, Va.,  to  constitute  Rev.  Jonas  King  a  life  member,   $30 

Literary  Society,  Romney,  Va.,  per  Wm   C.  Woodrow,  Esq.  Sec.       26 

Collections  per  Mr.  Tappan  of  Boston,  as  follows: 

From  North  Yarmouth  and  Cumberland — 4th  July  last,     18  36 
Harvey  Sessions,  Newport,  for  Repository  for  1827,  ...       2 

From  Westhampton,  Mass. — 4th  July, 13  08 

From  Southampton,  Mass 4th  July,    8  58 

From  South  Hadley,  Mass.,  1st  Parish,    12 

From  East  Hampton,   7  58 

From  a  Lady  in  Greensborough,  Vermont,    1 

From  Hendley,  Mass.— 4th  July, 17  03 

From  individuals  in  Ashfield,  Mass 2  68 

From  Executors  of  the  late  Aaron  Woodman,  of  Boston,  250 
"Female  Society  in  Dedham,  for  educating  children  in 
Africa,"  to  constitute  Rev.  Mr.  Searle  a  life  member,     30 

362  31 

Jasper  Corning,  Esq.,   of  Charleston,  S.  C. — his  first  payment  un- 
der the  proposition  to  contribute  the  same  sum  annually  for  ten 

vears,  on  condition  that  100  persons  can  be  found  to  do  the  same,     100 

Tlios.  P.  Wilson,  Esq.,  of  Bockville,   Md 10 

Collections  by  Rev.  B.  O.  Peirs,  as  follows: 

In  Doct.  Herron's  Church,  Pittsburg,  22  55 

Auxiliary  Society,  Pittsburg, 42 

Do.  Maysville,   60 

Rev.  Mr.  Todd's  Church,  Flemingsburg, 15 

Mr.  Smith's  Church,  Frankfort,   4 

Mr.  Coxe,  of  Maysville,  5 

Repository,    4 

152  55 

$680  86 


TIIE 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AxVD 


COLONIAL  JOTJRNAL. 


Vol.  IV.  APRIL,  18Z8.  No.  2. 


Of  Mission  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee,  with  a  Statis- 
tical account  of  that  Kingdom,  and  Geographical  Notices  of 
other  parts  of  the  Interior  of  Africa.  By  Edward  Bowdich, 
Esq.,  Conductor.     London,  1819. 

(Continued  from  p.  13.) 

Our  last  number  contained  a  minute  account  of  the  very  im- 
posing circumstances  which  attended  the  entrance  of  Mr.  Bow- 
dich  and  his  companions  into  Coomassie,  the  capital  of  Ashan- 
tee.  "A  range  of  spacious  but  ruinous  buildings"  were  allotted 
to  them  for  a  residence,  and  several  days  elapsed  before  they 
were  permitted  to  make  known,  publicly,  the  objects  of  their 
mission. 

They  were  invited  to  "speak  their  first  palaver"  in  the  mar- 
ket, that  all  the  people  might  understand  it.  Here  they  foun4 
the  King,  "encircled  by  the  most  splendid  insignia  and  sur- 
rounded by  his  caboceers,"  Mr.  James,  "through  his  linguist, 
declared  to  the  King's,  (who  are  alone  allowed  to  speak  to  him 
in  public)  that  the  objects  of  the  mission  were  friendship  and 

commerce"— that  the  English  desired  that  §ome  ©ne  of  their  na* 
5 


34  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [April? 

tion  might  be  permitted  to  reside  at  Coomassie,  and  that  a  direct 
path  should  be  opened  to  Cape  Coast  Castle.  He  assured  the 
King  that  the  valuable  presents  which  they  had  brought,  would 
convince  him  that  they  were  acting  with  perfect  sincerity  and 
good  faith. 

Shortly  after  this  interview,  the  King  requested  that  the  pre- 
sents should  be  sent  to  his  own  house.  This  it  wras  supposed 
was  from  policy,  to  prevent  any  favourable  bias  on  the  part  of 
the  caboceers  and  people  towards  the  mission,  which  a  publiG 
exhibition  of  them  might  produce. 

When  the  packages  were  opened,  nothing  could  exceed  the 
pleasure  and  surprise  of  the  King. — "Englishmen",  said  he,  ad- 
miring the  workmanship  of  the  different  articles,  "know  how  to 
do  every  thing  proper."  "This  showed  him  that  the  English 
were  a  great  people,  that  they  wished  to  be  friends  with  him,  to 
be  as  one  with  the  Ashantees;  this  made  him  much  pleasure  to 
see,  and  he  thanked  the  King  of  England,  the  Governor  of  Cape 
Coast  Castle,  and  the  officers  who  brought  the  presents,  much, 
Very  much." 

Thus  far  every  thing  seemed  prosperous.  The  King  sent  his 
messenger  to  repeat  his  expressions  of  gratitude  for  the  gifts 
which  had  been  bestowed  on  him.  The  mathematical  and  astro- 
nomical instruments  were  greatly  admired,  particularly  the  tele- 
scope and  camera  obscura,  and  called  forth  the  exclamation,  that 
"Englishmen  knew  more  than  Dutchmen  or  Danes — that  black 
men  knew  nothing."  Suddenly,  however,  a  difficulty  occurred 
of  a  very  alarming  nature,  and  which  came  near  to  defeating  all 
the  purposes  of  the  mission.  The  following  is  the  account  given 
of  it  by  Mr.  Bowdich,  which  we  insert  for"  the  purpose  of  strik- 
ingly illustrating  the  disposition  of  the  King,  and  showing  the 
necessity  of  promptness  and  resolution  in  dealing  with  such  rude 
and  undisciplined  minds. 

"The  King-  then  ordered  our  people  to  be  dismissed,  said  he  would  look 
at  the  telescope  in  a  larger  place,  that  now  he  wished  to  talk  with  us.  He 
again  acknowledged  the  gratification  of  Tuesday,  and  desired  Mr.  James 
to  explain  to  him  two  notes  which  he  produced,  written  by  the  Governor 
in  chief,  at  the  request  of  Amooney,  King  of  Annamaboe,  and  Adokoo, 
Chief  of  the  Braflbes,  making  over  to  Sai,  King  of  Ashantee,  four  ackies 
p'er  month  of  their  Company's  pay,  as  a  pledge  of  their  allegiance,  and  the 


1828.]  Coast  Gastle  to  Jshantee*.  3.5 

termination  of  hostilities.  The  impression  seemed  instantly  to  have  rooted 
itself  in  the  King's  mind,  that  this  was  the  Governor's  individual  act,  or  that 
he  had  instanced  it?  his  countenance  changed,  his  counsellors  became  en^ 
raged — they  were  all  impatience,  wc  all  anxiety.  'Tell  the  white  men,' 
said  the  King",  'what  they  said  yesterday  made  me  much  pleasure;  I  was 
glad  we  were  to  he  friends;  but  to-day  I  see  they  come  to  put  shame  upon 
my  face;  this  breaks  my  h<  art  too  much.  The  English  know,  with  my 
powder,  with  my  own  shot,  I  drove  the  Fantees  under  their  forts;  I  spread 
my  sword  over,  they  were  all  killed,  and  their  books  from  the  fort  are  mine 
I  can  do  as  much  for  the  English,  as  the  Fantees:  they  know  this  well;  they 
know  that  I  have  only  to  send  a  captain,  to  get  all  the  heads  of  the  Fantees. 
These  white  men  cheat  me;  they  think  to  make  'Shantee  fool;  they  pretend 
to  make  friends  with  me,  and  they  join  with  the  Fantees  to  cheat  me,  to 
put  shame  upon  my  face:  this  makes  the  blood  come  from  my  heart.'  This 
was  reported  by  his  linguist  with  a  passion  of  gesture  and  utterance  scarcer 
ly  inferior  to  the  King's;  the  irritation  spread  throughout  the  circle,  and 
swelled  even  to  uproar. 

"Thus  much  was  inevitable  (says  Mr.  Bowdich  in  his  communication  to 
the  Governor);  it  was  one  of  our  anticipated  difficulties;  it  was  not  a  defeat, 
but  a  check;  and  here  originates  our  charge  against  Mr.  James,  whom  we 
declare  to  have  been  deficient  in  presence  of  mind,  and  not  to  have  exert- 
ed those  assurances  and  arguments,  which,  with  a  considerate  zeal,  might 
at  least  have  tended  to  ameliorate  the  unjust  impression  of  the  King,  if  no.t 
to  have  eradicated  it.  Mr.  James  said,  'the  Governor  of  Cape  Coast  Castle 
had  done  it,  that  he  knew  nothing  about  it,  that  he  was  sent  only  to  make 
the  compliments  to  the  King,  that  if  the  King  liked  to  send  a  messenger 
with  him,  he  was  going  back,  and  would  tell  the  Governor  all  that  the  King 
said.'  This  was  all  that  was  advanced.  Was  this  enough  for  such  a  mis- 
sion to  effect*  The  King  repeated,  'That  he  had  expected  we  had  come 
to  settle  all  palavers,  and  to  stay  and  make  friends  with  him;  but  we  came 
to  make  a  fool  of  him.'  The  King  asked  him  to  tell  him  how  much  had 
been  paid  on  these  notes  since  his  demand — that  he  knew  white  men  had 
large  books  which  told  this.  Mr.  James  said  he  had  seen,  but  he  could 
not  recollect.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  King's  indignation — 'White  men', 
he  exclaimed,  'know  how  many  months  pass,  how  many  years  they  live, 
and  they  know  this,  but  they  wont  tell  me;  could  not  the  other  white  men 
tell  me?'     Mr.  James  said  'we  never  looked  in  the  books.' 

"Mr.  James's  embarrassment  had  not  only  hurried  him  to  extricate  him- 
self, as  an  individual,  at  the  expense  of  his  own  dignity  and  intellect,  but, 
which  was  worse,  he  had  thrown  the  whole  onus  of  this  invidious  transac- 
tion on  the  shoulders  of  the  Governor  in  Chief;  against  whom  the  King's 
prejudice  would  be  fatal  to  all,  and  whose  interest  in  his  honour  was  most 
flattering  to  the  King,  most  auspicious  to  us  and  the  hopes  of  the  mission; 
not  only  the  future  prosperity,  but  the  present  security  of  the  settlements 


36  Review  of  Mission  frdm  Cape  [April, 

hung  upon  this,  and  the  dagger  was  at  this  moment  suspended  by  a  cob- 
web. Mr.  Bowdich  urged  this  in  the  ear  of  Mr.  James,  urged  the  danger 
of  leaving  the  King  thus  provoked,  the  fatal  sacrifice  of  every  object  of  the 
mission,  the  discredit  of  the  service,  the  disgrace  of  ourselves.  Mr.  James 
replied,  'he  knew  the  Governor's  private  sentiments  best.' 

"The  Moors  of  authority  seized  the  moment,  and  zealously  fanned  the 
flame  which  encircled  us;  for  the  King  looking  in  vain  for  those  testimonies 
of  British  feeling  which  presence  of  mind  would  have  imposed,   exclaimed 
as  he  turned  his  ears  from  the  Moors,  1  know  the  English  come  to  spy  out 
the  country;  they  come  to  cheat  me;  they  want  war,  they  want  war.'     Mr. 
James  said,  'No!  we  want  trade.'     The  King  impatiently  continued,  'They 
join  the  Fantees  to  put  shame  upon  my  face;  T  will  send  a  captain  to-mor- 
row to  take  these  books,  and  bring  me  the  heads  of  all  the  Fantees  under 
the  forts;  the  white  men  know  I  can  do  this,   I  have  only  to  speak  to  my 
captains.     The  Dutch  Governor  does  not  cheat  me,   he  does  not  shame  me 
before  the  Fantees;  he  sends  me  the  whole  four  ozs.  a  month.     The  Danes 
do  not  shame  me,  and  the  English  four  achies  a  month  is  nothing  to  me;  I 
can  send  a  captain  for  all;  they  wish  war.'     He  drew  his  beard  into  his 
mouth,  bit  it,  and  rushing  abruptly  from  his  seat,  exclaimed,  'Shantee  foo! 
Shantee  foo!     Ah!  ah!'     Then  shaking  his  finger  at  us,   with  an  angry  as- 
pect, would  have  burst  from  us  with  the  exclamation,   'If  a  black  man  had 
brought  me  this  message,  I  would  have  had  his  head  cut  off  before  me.' — 
Mr.  James  was  silent.     Not  a  moment  was  to  be  lost.     Mr  Bowdich  stood 
before  the  King,   and  begged  to  be  heard;  his  attention  was  arrested,  the 
clamours  of  the  council  gradually  abated;  there  was  no  interpreter  but  the 
one  Mr.  James  brought  from  his  own  fort,  and  no  alternative  but  to  charge 
him  promptly  in  the  Governor's  name,  before  reflection  could  associate  the 
wishes  of  his  master,  to  speak  truly.     Mr.  Bowdich  continued  standing  be- 
fore the  King,  and  declared  "that  the  Governor  wished  to  gain  his  friend- 
ship more  than  he  could  think;'  that  we  were  sent  not  only  to  compliment 
him,  but  to  write  what  he  had  to  say  to  the  Governor,  and  to  wait  to  tell  his 
answer  to  the  King,  and  to  do  all  he  ordered;  to  settle  all  palavers,  and  to 
make  Ashantees  and  English  as  one  before  we  went  back.     That  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Accra  (Mr.  James)  was  sick  and  in  pain,    and  naturally  wished  to 
go  back  soon,  but  that  himself  and  the  other  two  officers  would  stay  with 
the  King  until  they  made  him  sure  that  the  Governor  was  a  good  friend  to 
him      That  we  would  rather  get  anger  and  lose  every  thing  ourselves,  than 
let  the  King  think  the  Governor  sent  us  to  put  shame  on  him;  that  we  would 
trust  our  lives  to  the  King,   until  we  had  received  the  Governor's  letter  to 
make^  him  think  so,   and  to  tell  us  to  do  all  that  was  right,  to  make  the 
Ashantees  and  English  as  one;  and  this  would  show  the  King  we  did  not 
come  to  spy  the  country,  but  to  do  good.'     Conviction  flashed  across  the 
countenance  of  the  interpreter,    and  he  must  have  done  Mr.  Bo\vdich*B 
speech  justice;  for  the  cheerful  aspect  of  the  morning  was  resumed  in  every 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee.  S7 

countenance.  The  applause  was  general;  the  King  (who  had  again  resum- 
ed his  seat)  held  out  his  hand  to  Mr.  Bowdich,  and  said,  'He  spoke  well; 
what  he  spoke  was  good;  he  liked  his  palaver  much/  " 


I  >> 


By  this  energy  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Bowdich,  the  great  difficul- 
ty which  threatened  defeat  to  the  purposes  of  the  mission,  seem- 
ed to  be  removed.  The  preceding  extract  is  from  the  joint  let- 
ter of  Messrs.  Bowdich,  Hutchison,  and  Tedlie,  to  the  Governor 
of  Cape  Coast  Castle,  in  consequence  of  which  Mr.  James  was 
recalled,  and  Mr.  Bowdich  appointed  Principal  in  his  place. — 
The  Moors  exerted  themselves  continually,  to  prevent  the  suc- 
cess of  the  English.  Two  days  after  the  interview  of  which  we 
have  just  given  some  account,  Mr.  Bowdich  and  his  associates, 
were  conducted  a  short  distance  out  of  town,  to  an  assembly  of 
Moorish  Caboceers  and  dignitaries,  and  required  to  swear  upon 
the  Koran  that  they  had  put  no  poison  in  the  King's  liquor.—* 
This  they  refused  to  do,  but  offered  to  take  oath  upon  their  own 
prayer  books.  The  King's  linguist  requested  them  to  strike  the 
Koran  thrice,  and  make  the  desired  declaration,  because  the 
Moors  said,  that  the  book  would  kill  them  if  they  spoke  false- 
hood. Having  done  this,  they  received  about  two  hours  after- 
wards, the  following  present  from  the  King: — 

"One  Bullock,  two  Pigs,  eight  ounces  of  Gold,  for  Mr.  James. 

"One  Sheep,   two  ounces  four  ackies  of  Gold,  for  each  of  us. 

"To  each  of  the  numerous  Fantee  Messengers,  ten  ackies  of 
Gold. 

"To  our  Cooks,  a  large  assortment  of  pots  and  country  ves- 
sels, 100  large  billets  of  wood,  100  Yams,  100  bunches  of  Plan- 
tains, four  of  Sugar  Cane,  four  (24  gallon)  pots  of  Palm  Oil, 
three  jars  of  Palm  Wine. 

"To  the  Soldiers,  ten  ackies  of  Gold. 

"To  the  Accra  Linguist,  ten  ackies  of  Gold." 

This  was  not  the  only  instance  of  the  King's  liberality;  it  was 
repeatedly  manifested  in  an  equal  degree,  whenever  he  was  gra 
lifted  with  the  conduct  of  the  mission.  Mr.  Bowdich  declares 
the  sentiments  of  the  King  on  one  occasion,  to  have  been  "in- 
credibly  liberal,  and  such  as  would  have  ennobled  the  most  civi- 
lized Monarchs."     The  palace  is  thus  described: 

"On  Saturday  we  were  summoned  to  the  King,  and  waited  as  usual,  b 


3&  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [April, 

considerable  time  in  one  of  the  outer  courts  of  the  Palace,  which  is  an  im- 
mense building  of  a  variety  of  oblong  courts  and  regular  squares;  the  for- 
mer with  arcades  along  the  one  side,  some  of  round  arches  symmetrically 
turned,  having  a  skeleton  of  bamboo;  the  entablatures  exuberantly  adorned 
with  bold,  fan,  and  trellis  work  of  Egyptian  character.  They  have  a  suit 
of  rooms  over  them  with  small  windows  of  wooden  lattice,  of  intricate  but 
regular  carved  work,  and  some  have  frames  cased  with  thin  gold.  The  squares 
have  a  large  apartment  on  each  side,  open  in  front,  with  two  supporting 
pillars,  which  break  the  view,  and  give  it  all  the  appearance  of  the  prosce- 
nium of  front  of  the  stage  of  the  older  Italian  Theatres.  They  are  lofty 
and  regular,  and  the  cornices  of  a  very  bold  cane  work  in  alto  relievo.  A 
drop  curtain  of  curiously  plaited  cane  is  suspended  in  front,  and  in  each 
we  observed  chairs  and  stools  embossed  with  gold,  and  beds  of  silk  with 
scattered  regalia.  The  most  ornamented  part  of  the  palace  is  the  residence 
of  the  women.  We  have  passed  through  it  once:  the  fronts  of  the  apart- 
ments were  closed  (except  two  open  door  ways)  by  pannels  of  curious 
open  carving,  conveying  a  striking  resemblance  at  first  sight  to  an  early  Go- 
thic screen:  one  was  entirely  closed  and  had  two  curious  doors  of  a  low 
arch,  and  strengthened  or  battened  with  wood  work,  carved  in  high  relief 
and  painted  red.  Doors  chancing  to  open  as  we  passed,  surprised  us  with 
a  glimpse  of  large  apartments  in  corners  we  could  not  have  thought  of;  the 
most  secret  appeared  the  most  adorned.  In  our  daily  course  through  the 
palace  there  is  always  a  delay  of  some  minutes,  before  the  door  of  each  of 
the  several  distinct  squares  is  unlocked;  within  the  innermost  square  is  the 
Council  Chamber." 

The  appearance  of  the  King  on  one  occasion,  is  thus  de- 
scribed:— 

"He  was  encircled  by  a  varied  profusion  of  insignia,  even  more  sumptu- 
ous than  that  we  had  seen  before,  and  sat  at  the  end  of  two  long  files  of  coun- 
sellors, caboceers,  and  captains;  they  were  seated  under  their  umbrellas, 
composed  of  scarlet  and  yellow  cloth,  silks,  shawls,  cottons  and  every  glar- 
ing variety,  with  carved  and  golden  pelicans,  panthers,  baboons,  barrels, 
crescents,  &c.  on  the  top;  the  shape  generally  a  dome.  Distinct  and  pom- 
pous retinues  were  placed  around,  with  gold  canes,  spangled  elephants' 
tails  to  brush  off  the  flies,  gold  headed  swords,  and  embossed  muskets,  and 
many  splendid  novelties  too  numerous  but  for  a  particular  report.  Each 
had  the  dignitaries  of  his  own  province  or  establishment  to  his  right  and 
?eft;  and  it  was  truly  a  "Concilium  in  concilio."  This  magnificence  seem- 
ed the  effect  of  enchantment. " 

On  one  occasion  the  embassy  proceeded  to  Sallagha,  a  town 
situated  at  a  considerable  distance  to  the  North  East  of  Coomas- 
sie.  Here  the  King  received  them  with  every  mark  of  attention 
and  respect.      He  anxiously  inquired  if  they  had  breakfasted, 


1&2&.]  Coast  Castle  to  Askantte.  S9 

and  ordered  refreshments.  In  a  house  prepared  for  their  recep- 
tion, they  found  soups,  stews,  plantains,  yams,  rice,  &c.  (suffi- 
cient for  an  army,  all  excellently  cooked)  wine,  spirits,  oranges, 
and  every  fruit.     About  two  o'clock  dinner  was  announced. 

"We  had  been  taught  to  prepare  for  a  surprise,  but  it  was  exceeded. — 
We  were  conducted  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  croom,  to  a  door  of  green 
reeds,  which  excluded  the  crowd,  and  admitted  us  through  a  short  avenue 
to  the  King's  garden,  an  area  equal  to  one  of  the  large  squares  in  London. 
The  breezes  were  strong  and  constant.  In  the  centre  four  large  umbrellas 
of  new  scarlet  cloth  were  fixed,  under  which  was  the  King's  dining  table, 
(heightened  for  the  occasion)  and  covered  in  the  most  imposing  manner; 
his  massy  plate  was  well  disposed,  and  silver  forks,  knives,  and  spoons, 
(Col  Torrane's)  were  plentifully  laid.  The  large  silver  waiter  supported  a 
roasting  pig  in  the  centre;  the  other  dishes  on  the  table  were  roasted 
ducks,  fowls,  stews,  pease,  puddings,  &c  &c.  On  the  ground  on  one  side 
of  the  table  were  various  soups,  and  every  sort  of  vegetable;  and  elevated 
parallel  with  the  other  side,  were  oranges,  pines,  and  other  fruits;  sugar 
candy,  Port  and  Madeira  wine,  spirits  and  Dutch  cordials,  with  glasses. 
Before  we  sat  down  the  King  met  us,  and  said:  that  as  we  had  come  out  to 
see  him,  we  must  receive  the  following  present  from  his  hand:  two  ounces, 
four  ackies  of  gold — one  sheep  and  one  large  hog  for  the  officers — ten 
ackies  to  the  linguists,  and  five  ackies  to  the  servants. 

"We  never  saw  a  dinner  more  handsomely  served,  and  neve?  ate  a 
better.  On  our  expressing  our  relish,  the  King  sent  for  his  cooks  and 
g-ave  them  ten  ackies.  The  King  and  a  few  of  his  captains  sat  at  a  distance, 
but  he  visited  us  constantly,  and  seemed  quite  proud  of  the  scene;  he  con- 
versed freely,  and  expressed  much  satisfaction  at  our  toasts: — "The  King 
<of  Ashantee,  the  King  of  England,  the  Governor,  the  King's  Captains,  a 
perpetual  union  (with  a  speech  which  is  the  sine  qua  non,)  and  the  hand- 
some women  of  England  and  Ashantee."  After  dinner  the  King  made  ma- 
ny inquiries  about  England,  and  retired  as  we  did,  that  our  servants  might 
clear  the  table,  which  he  insisted  on.  When  he  returned,  some  of  the 
wine  and  Dutch  cordials  remaining,  he  gave  them  to  our  servants  to  take 
with  them,  and  ordered  the  table  cloth,  to  be  thrown  to  them  and  all  the 
napkins.  A  cold  pig,  cold  fowls,  (with  six  that  had  not  been  dressed) 
were  despatched  to  Coomassie  for  our  supper.  We  took  leave  about  five 
•'clock,  the  King  accompanying  us  to  the  end  of  the  croom,  where  he  took 
our  hands  and  wished  us  good  night." 

One  great  object  of  the  mission,  the  ratification  of  a  treaty  of 
peace,   friendship  and  commerce,    could  not  be  effected  without 
repeated  explanations  from  the  Governor  of  Cape  Coast  Castle. 
Four  months  therefore  elapsed,  before  Mr.  Bowdich's  return  be- 


40  Latest  from  Liberia.  [April, 

came  possible,  without  leaving  unaccomplished,  a  principal  de- 
sign of  the  expedition.  During  this  period  no  pains  were  spared 
to  acquire  information  in  reference  to  the  character,  government 
and  customs  of  Ashantee*  the  geography  and  natural  history  of 
the  neighbouring  tribes,  and  of  the  interior,*  and  on  all  these 
subjects  the  work  before  us  is  full  of  interest.  We  must  post- 
pone further  notice  of  it  however,  until  our  next  number. 

(7b  be  continued.) 


liatcst  from  TAberia. 

(Concluded  from  p,  25-) 

The  Schools  of  the  Colony  continue  to  receive  the  attention 
which  their  importance  demands.  But  the  want  of  erudition  in 
our  instructors,  is  sorely  felt. 

The  want  of  school  books  is  likewise  a  great  impediment  to 
the  progress  of  elementary  education  in  the  Colony;  and  I  beg 
pardon  for  reminding  the  Board  of  the  plan  I  took  the  liberty  to 
propose  to  them  a  few  months  since,  for  supplying  the  Colony 
with  school  books,  by  engaging  some  respectable  Bookseller, 
whose  capital  should  bear  him  out  in  the  design,  to  make  ample 
consignments  to  some  commission  merchant  of  the  Colony,  on 
such  terms  as  shall  pay  him  for  the  risk  incurred. 

In  the  chain  of  great  moral  causes  and  effects,  it  may  be  no 
trivial  event,  that  a  school  has  been  opened  by  the  Baptist  Mis- 
sionaries of  the  Colony,  35  miles  in  the  interior  from  Cape  Mount, 
and  65  or  70,  from  Montserado,  under  very  flattering  auspices, 
for  the  instruction  of  the  children  of  the  Vey  nation.  Its  direct 
management  is  confided  to  a  pious  and  prudent  young  man,  six 
years  in  Africa — and  superintended  generally,  by  the  Missiona- 
ries, Carey  and  Lewis.  It  commenced  with  35  scholars — and 
is  decidedly  patronized  by  the  Prince,  and  first  Chiefs  (King 
there  is  none  at  this  time)  of  the  nation — who  declare  it  to  be 
their  intention  to  clothe,  and  train  in  all  respects  to  the  habits  of 
civilized  life,  all  the  youth  who  receive  instruction  at  this  school. 

The  experiment  of  the  Infirmary  of  Invalids,  established  on 
the  15th  of  August  last,  perhaps,  answers  its  design  fully.     Its 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  41 

average  number  of  members,  including  invalids  and  poor,  is  20. 
Three-fourths  of  this  number  are  sufferers  from  ulcerated  feet, 
ancles,  and  legs.  It  is  found  that  patients,  some  of  whom  were 
thought  to  be  incurably  afflicted,  most  certainly  recover  under 
the  treatment  followed  in  this  Institution — and  in  less  than  half 
the  time  which  they  formerly  suffered  in  arriving  at  a  cure. — 
The  expense  attending  the  establishment  is  less  than  the  original 
estimate.  But  the  patients  earn  less — as  most  of  the  cases  are 
judged  by  the  physician  of  a  nature  not  to  admit  of  the  exercise 
of  the  limbs,  by  any  sort  of  labour  which  we  have  yet  been  able 
to  introduce. 

Present  state  of  the  Infirmary  of  Invalids,   Nov.  28. 

Patients,  Confined  of  ulcerated  limbs,   13 

"         not  recovered  from  sickness  caused  by  climate,     2 

"  Decays  of  age,   1 

African  Women  (Norfolk's  company)  having  no  other 
places — and  put  in  the  Infirmary  to  be  employed,  in- 
cluding their  children,    9 

Poor,  Orphan,  and  other  friendless  Children,   5 

Superintendent, • ••••     1 

31* 
Of  this  number,  it  is  seen,  that  fifteen  out  of  thirty-one,  are 
in  perfect  health — and  one  afflicted  with  a  disorder,  which  would 
certainly  have  overtaken  her  in  America.  Of  the  2  reported  there 
from  the  effects  of  fever,  one  has  obtained  his  discharge  and  this 
moment  left  me;  the  other  is  nearly  well.  Of  the  thirteen  cases 
of  ulcers,  one  half  will  be  discharged  in  four  weeks.  Without 
the  Infirmary  there  is  no  sickness,  and  very  few  cases  of  diseas- 
ed limbs,  or  even  of  slight  indisposition,  within  my  knowledge 
(none  therefore  that  has  attracted  the  notice  of  the  Commission- 
ers of  Health).  Three  deaths,  of  which  two  were  of  aged  peo- 
ple, have  occurred  since  my  last.  , 

*Note. — December  22, — last  report  for  December: 

Ulcers, 8 

Age, 1 

Africans,  assisting",  and  supported  at  the  Infirmary,  9 

Poor  children, 3 

Superintendent,  ...,,,.,,.,..».*..... i • * ••  l-*-225  of 
whom  13  are  in  good  health, 
6 


42  Latest  from  Liberia.  [April, 

It  is  important  to  be  reported  to  the  Board,  as  a  fact  in 
the  history  of  the  health  of  the  Colony,  well  attested  by  ex- 
perience, that  persons  advanced  in  age,  are  almost  sure  to  \ 
abridge  by  several  years,  the  length  of  their  lives,  by  removing 
to  this  country.  They  are  not  particularly  liable  to  be  cut  oft* 
by  the  first  impression  of  the  fever — but  generally  sure  to  be 
worn  out  by  slow  degrees,  within  a  very  few  years  afterwards. 
The  mind  sympathises  with  the  body,  and  both  gradually  sink 
together.  But  it  is  otherwise  with  the  vigorous  and  the  young. 
They  readily  adapt  their  habits  to  the  peculiarities  of  the  African 
life — and  enjoy  the  most  perfect  health.  It  is  but  little,  indeed, 
that  the  aged  can  gain  on  the  most  favourable  supposition,  by  re- 
moving to  this  Colony.  Eight  in  ten  shorten  their  days  by  it. 
And  it  is  my  decided  opinion,  that  they  ought  to  end  their  lives 
where  they  have  worn. them  out;  and  not  be  sent  out  to  Africa, 
merely  to  save  America  a  grave  to  rest  their  bones  in.  Thej 
cannot  contribute  to  multiply  their  race — which  is  itself  an  apo- 
logy for  their  remaining  in  America,  and  an  objection  to  their 
transportation  to  the  Colony. — And,  on  this  point,  indulge  me 
in  remarking,  further,  that  we,  on  this  side  the  water  think  we 
sometimes  discover  reasons  why  certain  individuals  do,  and  cer- 
tain others  do  not,  leave  America,  which  may  have  escaped  the 
agents  in  that  country. 

Admitting  the  popularity  of  the  scheme  at  home,  to  require 
the  indiscriminate  acceptance  of  every  man  that  may  be  offered 
as  a  candidate  for  transportation — yet,  at  this  stage  of  our  set- 
tlements, it  is  altogether  unquestionable,  that  the  welfare  of 
the  Colony  requires  no  little  discrimination  in  the  selection  of 
emigrants. — In  1824,  the  Colony  was  saved  by  the  seasonable 
arrival  of  three  or  four  scores  of  select  emigrants  from  Virginia. 
It  is  not  impossible  even  now,  for  as  many  thousands,  sent  out 
without  selection,  to  overthrow  it.  A  man  of  sound  principle 
and  sterling  worth,  and  much  more,  a  well  trained,  industrious 
and  virtuous  family,  is  beginning  to  be  appreciated  as  an  impor- 
tant accession  to  our  community.  Not  that  such  individuals 
or  families  are  not  already  numerous — but  the  sphere  of  every 
man's  influence,  placed  on  so  raised  an  eminence,  as  he  must 
here  occupy,  is  so  wide,  as  to  make  it  desirable,  were  the  thing 
possible,  that  we  should  have  few,  or  none  of  opposite  character. 


j  8.]  Latest  Jrom  Liberia.  43 

Caldwell,  December  7,  1827. 
The  militia  of  the  Colony  has  undergone  an  important  change, 
in  its  organization  this  season.  As  intimated  in  my  last,  the 
compulsory  system,  which  has  so  often  left  the  militia  of  the  U. 
States  to  disgrace  their  country,  in  the  face  of  an  enemy,  by 
their  want  of  science,  discipline,  and  (in  consequence)  of  firm- 
ness, has  been  exploded.  It  is  not  possible  to  introduce  into 
any  militia  system,  the  severity  of  military  law — consequently 
the  efficiency  of  militia,  must  depend  on  such  qualifications  as 
are  the  growth  of  the  voluntary  principles  of  human  nature.—- 
But  where  the  military  spirit  is  not  sufficiently  active  to  engage 
the  soldier,  under  reasonable  encouragements,  to  improve,  and 
perfect  himself,  without  compulsion,  in  the  military  art — it  is 
not  sufficient  to  make  him  a  soldier  under  any  circumstances  ap- 
plicable to  the  people  of  the  Colony. 

Certain  fatigue  services,  and  much  drudgery  connected  with 
the  defence  of  the  Colony,  there  is  to  be  done — and  as  this  duty 
Requires  nothing  but  a  pair  of  able  hands,  it  is  divided  in  the 
shape  of  a  labour-tax  amongst  all  the  settlers.  But  the  duty  of 
bearing  arms,  and  of  enrolment  in  the  serviceable  militia  of 
the  Colony,  is  left  to  the  public  spirit  of  the  people.  And  I  am 
pleased  to  be  able  to  state,  that  there  are  but  about  half  a  dozen 
able-bodied  men,  not  specially  exempted,  who  are  not,  by  volun- 
tary enrolment,  members  of  an  uniformed  corps. 

The  oldest  of  these  companies,  is  Captain  Barbour's  Light  In« 
fantry — composed  of  select  young  men,  completely  armed  and 
equipt,  highly  disciplined  (relatively) — and  consisting  of  about 
forty  men.     Uniform,  light  blue,  faced  with  white. 

The  next,  in  age,  is  Captain  Davis's,  (Caldwell,)  heavy  In- 
fantry. Uniform,  white  with  blue  bars — well  armed  and  ac- 
coutred, and  indifferently  well  disciplined.  It  has,  at  the  pre- 
sent moment,  fewer  men  than  the  Light  Infantry,  but  will  dur- 
ing the  ensuing  season  become  the  larger  company. 

The  third  is  a  company  of  Light  Artillery,  Monrovia,  compos- 
ed of  select  young  men — completely  uniformed  and  equipt,  and 
having  been  lately  organized  on  the  new  principle,  consists  of 
only  about  thirty  men.  But,  as  this  corps  is  exceedingly  popu- 
lar, it  must  very  rapidly  increase  for  some  time  to  come.  Capt. 
Devany  is  the  present  commander  of  the  corps.  Its  uniform, 
deep  blue  with  red  facings. 


44  Latest  from  Liberia.  [April, 

The  fourth  corps  is  also  a  newly  organized  Artillery  compa- 
ny, commanded  by  Captain  Prout — and  belongs  to  Caldwell. 
Its  number  is  nearly  equal  to  Captain  Devany's. 

No.  5.  is  properly  a  detachment  of  twenty  Guards,  under 
Lt.  Johnson;  enlisted,  or  drafted  for  one  year  from  the  body  of 
the  citizens,  for  the  exclusive  purpose  of  manning  Fort  Norris 
battery.  These  guards  being  liable  at  any  moment,  to  be  called 
to  their  posts  by  a  signal  gun  from  the  battery,  ought  to  be  in 
high  discipline.  We  endeavour  to  make  them  perfect  in  all 
that  relates  to  the  management  of  garrison  ordnance.  When 
stationed  for  the  protection  of  foreign  vessels,  or  for  the  deten- 
tion of  vessels  attempting  to  violate  the  port,  or  commercial  re- 
gulations of  the  Colony,  they  are  entitled  to  be  paid  each  man, 
five  cents  per  the  hour. 

Besides  this  guard,  a  subaltern  officer,  at  a  compensation  of 
18  dollars  per  month,  is  stationed  constantly  at  Fort  Norris 
battery,  where  he  resides  with  his  family.  His  duty  is  to  keep 
the  guns,  armament,  and  ammunition  of  the  battery,  in  a  state 
of  complete  readiness  for  service.  He  is  charged  with  the  sig- 
nals of  the  Colony;  by  means  of  which  every  vessel  that  ap- 
pears, with  all  its  movements,  and  every  circumstance  relating 
to  it,  is  instantly  announced  to  the  Agent,  or  officer  of  the 
guard,  in  town. 

Two-thirds  of  this  officer's  pay  is  from  the  store  house;  one 
third  from  the  colonial  treasury. 

The  Tower  on  Crown  Hill  has  not  been  resumed  this  season. 
Central  Fort  is  slowly  advancing  towards  completion,  on  the 
plan  sent  home,  last  winter.  The  three  pentagonal,  two-story 
Towers  at  the  angles,  were  erected,  and  roofed,  and  used  even 
before  the  last  rains,  as  green  houses.  But  they  want  plaster- 
ing, and  some  additional  work  about  the  port -holes.  The  three 
walls  connecting  these  angular  works  into  one,  and  covering  the 
principal  battery  of  the  Fort,  are  now  laving — and  without  un- 
known interruptions,  will  be  completed  during  the  present  dry 
season. 

The  Market  House,  of  which  a  plan  was  sent  home  nearly  18 
months  ago,  and  a  part  of  the  materials  at  that  time  collected, 
after  having  been  suspended  from  time  to  time  since,  is  now  pro- 
ceeding with  fresh  spirit.     The  work  was  dropped  in   1 826,  in 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  45 

consequence  of  a  part  of  the  settlers  withholding  their  quota  of 
the  money  required  for  its  erection,  from  a  disagreement  as  to 
its  situation.  And  I  did  not  feel  authorized  to  make  so  large 
an  appropriation  of  the  public  funds,  for  such  a  building,  as  a 
partial  and  limited  contribution  on  the  part  of  the  people  to  the 
work,  would  require. — Its  site  is  Central  Avenue,  a  little  to  the 
Eastward  of  the  centre  of  the  present  settled  part  of  the  town. 

A  neat,  but  small  building  of  two  stories  has  been  erected 
since  my  last,  for  a  Colonial  Dispensary.  Hitherto,  not  only 
great  inconvenience  has  been  the  consequence  of  having  no 
building:  in  which  our  medicines  and  hospital  stores  might  be 
disposed  in  an  orderly  manner,  but  much  loss  by  damage  and 
waste,  has  been  suffered  from  the  want  of  one.  The  basement 
story  is  of  mason-work — the  upper,  frame — well  plastered  in- 
side, and  painted  without.  The  building  will  cost  about  $270, 
and  be  completed  in  the  month  of  January. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  erect  many  new  buildings  this  sea- 
son— but  direct  my  attention  to  the  completion  of  such  as  are 
already  erected,  but  not  entirely  finished. — Of  these,  are  the 
new  Agency  house,  into  which  I  have  determined,  in  case  of 
the  continuance  of  my  life,  to  remove  on  the  first  day  of  March. 
The  Piazza — much  more  expensive  than  the  body  of  the  house, 
is  now  nearly  completed.  But  little  remains  to  be  done  to  the 
house,  except  the  Venitian  work — plastering  and  painting. 
Some  out-houses  and  additions  must  be  constructed — but  these 
I  shall  defer  to  another  season — as  they  are  not  at  present  abso- 
lutely required. — I  am  now  employed  in  walling  in  the  public 
premises,  both  at  the  Cape,  and  at  Caldwell — a  work  very  ne- 
cessary; but  as  the  Cape  lot  embraces  an  acre  of  ground — and 
the  Caldwell  buildings  occupy  more  than  two  acres,  it  will  be 
attended  with  great  labour,  and  considerable  expense. 

The  United  States'  Buildings  at  Stockton  have  also  to  be 
painted — some  of  them  plastered — and  all  underpinned  this  sea- 
son; as  also  the  Public  Receptacle  on  the  St.  Paul's.  The  last 
named  item  of  building,  except  at  Monrovia,  is  very  expensive, 
as  we  must  either  use  bricks,  or  transport  every  stone  the  dis- 
tance of  4  to  7  miles  from  the  Cape,  not  a  stone  being  to  be 
found  in  either  of  the  other  settlements. 

The  recaptured  Africans,  introduced  per  the  Norfolk,  gener- 


46  Latest  from  Liberia.  [April, 

ally  retained  their  health  through  the  first  months — but  there 
were  in  all,  from  40  to  50  exceptions.  All  are  now  in  perfect 
health — and  in  a  condition  vastly  improved.  They  have  more 
than  equalled  our  highest  anticipations;  proving  to  be  generally 
orderly,  easily  governed,  and  willing  to  labour.  They  have, 
indeed,  proved  an  acquisition  to  the  Colony;  as  they  supply  the 
places  of  vagrant  country  labourers,  whose  object  in  hiring;  to 
the  settlers,  in  short  terms  of  one  or  two  months  at  a  time,  have 
commonly  been,  less  their  wages,  than  the  means  of  committing 
depredations  on  their  employers. — I  have  retained  in  the  public 
service  for  the  year,  at  Monrovia,  seven  men  and  three  wives — 
at  the  Infirmary,  three  women,  and  three  children — and  at 
Caldwell,  four  men,  two  women,  and  a  child,  total  21. — The 
residue  have  places  among  the  settlers. — At  the  end  of  the  year, 
(or  in  August  1828,)  I  am  pledged  to  grant  to  all  such  as  de- 
serve them,  lands  on  the  Stockton  and  elsewhere. — I  have  judg~ 
ed  it  sufficient,  at  first,  to  allow  to  single  men  two  acres;  and  to 
married,  three.  This  will  suffice  for  several  years  to  come-— 
and  better  even  make  to  the  industrious  and  deserving  a  second 
grant  subsequently,  than  grant  them  the  choice  of  the  public 
lands  in  unnecessary  quantities,  before  it  can  be  known  whether 
they  possess  sufficient  industry  and  enterprise  to  reduce  them  to 
cultivation. 

After  the  first  of  January  it  is  intended  that  a  Packet  Boat, 
large  enough  to  accommodate  20  passengers  with  their  baggage, 
will  ply  every  second  day  between  Monrovia  and  Caldwell,  and 
return  on  the  intermediate  days;  touching  at  Stockton  Town,  and 
the  halfway  farms,  going  and  returning. — Such  an  accommoda- 
tion has  become  almost  indispensable,  the  intercourse  between 
the  settlements,  particularly  from  Caldwell  to  Monrovia,  and 
from  Monrovia  to  the  halfway  farms,  having  grown  too  frequent 
and  large  for  individuals  to  provide  themselves  with  the  means 
of  conveyance.  It  is  not  improbable,  that  two  or  three  years 
will  produce  a  demand  for  Steam-boat  Engines  in  the  Colony. 
A  single  Boat  of  about  forty  tons  could,  at  this  moment,  be 
employed  with  advantage  and  economy,  to  ply,  one  half  the  year, 
between  Monrovia,  and  all  our  factories.  The  climate  is 
destructive  to  all  machinery  intended  to  work  with  exactness, 
unless  kept  in  constant  use;  and  it  is  only  the  circumstance  of 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  4? 

being  obliged  to  lay  up  a  Steam-boat  for  half  of  the  year,  that 
prevents  an  immediate  application  for  one. 

It  was  stated  in  former  communications,  that  I  had  entered 
on  a  negotiation  with  "Mama,"  the  proprietress  of  the  North 
half  of  Bushrod  Island,  the  object  of  which  was,  in  the  Ameri- 
can phraseology,  "to  extinguish  her  title"  to  all  the  lands  form- 
ing the  right,  or  Western  bank  of  the  Stockton.  Since  I  began 
this  letter,  I  have  effected  the  ceremony  of  executing  the  deed 
ceding  to  the  Colony  this  tract  of  land.  The  cession  was  agreed 
upon  several  months  ago.  Enclosed  (See  Paper  A)  is  the  deed. 
A  settlement  had  already  been  commenced  on  this  tract,  oppo- 
site to  Caldwell,  of  which  it  is  designed  for  the  present,  to  form 
a  part.  We  have  thus  occupied  Bushrod  Island;  which,  contain- 
ing a  tract  of  20,000  acres  of  fine,  level  land,  is  destined  at  some 
future  period,  and  that  not  very  remote,  to  become  the  orchard 
and  granary  of  the  Montserado  district  of  Liberia. 

Monrovia,  Dec.  18,  1827. 

To-day  arrived  in  our  Roads  the  schooner  Susan,  Edwards, 
of  and  from  Baltimore,  after  the  very  uncommon  passage  of  70 
days.  Passenger,  John  Henson,  a  colonist,  who  brings  advice 
of  the  outfit  of  a  transport  with  100  emigrants — whose  arrival 
may  be  expected  in  January. 

Capt.  Edwards  brings  an  assorted  cargo,  which  will  readily 
sell  for  wood;  but  the  articles  are  not  in  sufficient  demand  to 
sell  readily  for  Ivory  or  dollars. 

The  sooner  the  emigrants  now  arrive  the  better.  We  have 
shelters  ready  for  their  reception — and  have  so  systematized  the 
provisioning  department,  as  to  be  put  a  very  little  out  of  our 
ordinary  course,  by  the  addition  of  1  to  2  hundred  settlers — an 
event,  which,  two  years  ago,  would  have  reduced  the  whole 
Colony,  for  a  month  or  more,  to  a  "make-shift." 

It  must  have  occurred  to  the  Board  of  Managers,  that  their 
colonists  have  put  them  hitherto,  to  very  great  expense,  for 
their  support  after  they  reach  this  country.  It  has  occupied  a 
large  share  of  my  attention  the  year  past — and  I  believe  the  plan 
hitherto  acted  upon,  is  susceptible  of  considerable  improvement 
in  point  of  economy.  Six  months'  support  has  been  afforded  to 
all  without  distinction,  or  other  exceptions,  than  of  such  indi- 
viduals as  proved  able  to  take  care  of  themselves. 


48  Latest  from  Liberia*  [April, 

The  improvement  proposed,  is,  to  provide  all  with  comforta- 
ble houses  for  a  reasonable  term,  gratuitously;  and,  as  far  as 
prac  i cable,  with  tools  and  implements  of  husbandry.  Thus  far, 
all  are  to  be  assisted,  unconditionally,  and  equally — but  no  far- 
ther. Every  man  is  immediately  to  have  his  building  lot,  and 
other  lands,  laid  off  and  assigned  to  him — and  encouraged  with- 
out delay,  to  proceed  to  occupy  and  improve  them;  and  to  such 
as  actually  do  so,  such  farther  aid,  in  the  way  of  provisions, 
coarse  clothing,  &c.  will  be  afforded,  as  the  supplies  on  hand 
will  allow,  and  the  diligence  of  the  settlers  individually,  entitle 
them  to.  All  others^  if  mechanics,  are  expected  to  exercise 
their  trades;  if  farmers,  will  be  put  to  work  on  the  public  farm, 
and  paid  according  to  their  earnings — chiefly  in  provisions,  and 
common  materials  for  clothing,  with  a  few  building  materials. 

Few.  under  these  circumstances,  will  long  delay  to  fix  them- 
selves on  their  own  premises,  and  spend  their  labour  on  their 
own  improvements. 

The  sick,  for  the  time  being,  must  receive  their  subsistence, 
as  well  as  medical  treatment,  at  the  public  expense.  But  so 
soon  as  they  are  struck  from  the  sick  list,  let  them  be  replaced 
on  the  common  footing  of  the  other  new  emigrants  in  health. 

The  aged — some  single  women — and  particularly  single  wo- 
men with  large  families,  are  obliged  to  be  a  greater  burden  on 
the  public  funds — and  must  have  a  large  part  of  their  support 
at  the  public  expense,  for  6,  9,  and  even  12  months.  With 
the  approbation  of  the  Board,  I  will  make  a  thorough  experiment 
of  this  method — which  I  must  beg  leave  to  observe,  cannot  be 
well  attested  in  any  other  way.  Of  one  point,  I  have  not  a 
doubt — and  that  is,  that  a  very  great  reduction  can  be  effected 
in  the  expenses  incurred  on  account  of  settlers  after  their  arrival 
in  the  Colony:  and  it  is  a  subject  too  deeply  affecting  the  whole 
scheme  of  colonization,  not  to  receive  immediate  and  constant 
attention.  I  am  sensible,  that  much  depends  on  the  Agent  in 
this  country.  But  he  requires  the  advice  and  instructions  of 
the  Board;  and  much  may  certainly  be  done  towards  lightening 
future  expenses,  by  not  only  suffering,  but  encouraging  all  emi- 
grants to  bring  all  their  tools,  implements,  cooking  and  domes- 
tic utensils,  except  such  bulky  articles  alone,  as  it  would  be 
manifestly  absurd  to  lumber  a  ship  with*      When  tools,  &c.  are 


i828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  49 

bought  for,  or  by  emigrants,  they  ought,  if  for  mechanics,  to 
be  of  course,  those  of  their  trades — otherwise,  to  consist  almost 
wholly  of  Axes,  broad  and  narrow,  a  large  supply; — Hbes9 
hilling  and  grubbing; — Picks;  Spades;  Bill-hooks;  Saws,  whip, 
cross-cut,  and  hand;  Files;  Froivs;  Drawingknives;  and  Jack  and 
Fore  Planes. 

To  these  tools,  add  nails;  and  your  emigrants  are  equipt  for 
their  first  two  years'  work. 

Friday,  December  21,  1827. 

Arrived,  the  U.  States'  ship,  "Ontario,"  returning  home  from 
the  Mediterranean — from  Gibraltar,  the  11th  of  Nov.  Captain 
Nicolson  has  kindly  offered  to  take  charge  of  letters.  This  gen- 
tleman has,  since  his  arrival,  taken  unwearied  pains  to  ascertain 
from  personal  inspection,  the  true  state,  and  I  think  has  quali- 
fied himself  to  judge  correctly  of  the  prospects  of  the  settlers.—* 
His  ship  will  probably  remain  five  days  at  the  Cape. 

Same  day,  arrived  from  Basle,  by  way  of  England  and  Sierra 
Leone,  a  pioneer  of  the  Swiss  Mission,  to  be  established  in  Li- 
beria. In  May  last,  three  Missionaries,  Handt,  Hegele,  and 
Sessing,  all  single,  were  deputed  by  the  Evangelical  Society  of 
Bashi  for  Liberia.  They  arrived  in  England  in  June — where, 
pursuant  to  instructions,  they  remained  till  the  11th  of  Novem.- 
ber — when  they  went  on  board,  at  London,  of  an  English  ship, 
bound  to  Sierra  Leone;  but  were  obliged,  by  stress  of  weather, 
to  put  back  into  Portsmouth.  On  the  point  of  sailing  from  that 
port,  Hegele  received  a  wound  on  the  head,  by  the  falling  of  a 
block,  which,  it  was  feared,  would  prove  mortal.  He  was  con* 
veyed  on  shore,  and  necessarily  left  to  the  providence  of  God, 
and  the  care  of  Christian  friends;  while  the  two  others,  Messrs. 
Handt  and  Sessing,  proceeded  on  their  voyage,  and  arrived  at 
Sierra  Leone  about  the  10th  of  the  present  month.  On  the 
12th,  the  U.  S.  ship  Ontario,  leaving  Sierra  Leone  for  Liberia, 
Capt.  Nicolson  generously  offered  the  Missionaries  a  passage  to 
this  place.  It  was  not  possible,  however,  for  a  public  vessel  to 
bring  more  than  a  very  small  part  of  the  very  ample  stores  with 
which  the  munificence  of  European  Christians  had  furnished  these 
devoted  servants  of  God  and  man,  on  their  final  departure  from 
their  native  country.      Only  one  could,  therefore,  accept  of 


50  Latest  from  Liberia,  [April, 

Capt.  N's.  overture,  and  Mr.  Sessing  has  accordingly  arrived 
here  by  that  ship,  on  the  21st.  Mr.  Handt  awaits  at  Sierra 
Leone,  a  passage  for  himself  and  the  missionary  property,  to 
this  Colony. 

But  these  two  gentlemen  are  only  the  pioneers  of  a  much 
larger  force,  nearly  ready  to  follow.  Two  more  were  on 
the  point  of  leaving  Switzerland,  when  these  left  England,  and 
may  be  expected  in  two  months'  time.  Dr.  Blumhardt  has 
written  me,  in  the  name  of  the  Directing  Committee  of  the  Basle 
Evangelical  Institution,  a  letter  full  of  the  most  excellent  senti- 
ments— and  of  paternal  and  affectionate  concern  for  the  young 
men  of  the  Mission.  It  is  needless  to  say,  that  they  possess  the 
entire  confidence  of  that  judicious  and  excellent  man,  and  his 
very  respectable  associates — and  that  all  temporal  views,  in  the 
formation  of  this  Christian  establishment,  are  utterly  discarded. 
Too  much  is,  perhaps,  left  to  my  discretion,  in  regard  to  the  se- 
lection of  a  site  for  the  mission,  and  in  recommending  the  mode 
of  carrying  it  on,  and  the  arrangement  of  its  temporal  concerns. 
While  the  civil  and  religious  departments  of  the  Colony  arc 
preserved  as  distinct,  as  interests  so  infinitely  dissimilar  in  their 
nature  and  importance  should  be,  nothing  can  have  a  more  salu- 
tary influence,  both  on  the  Colony  and  surrounding  tribes,  than 
a  well  conducted  Christian  Mission  in  the  hands  of  pious  and 
enlightened  men. 

For  what  is  civilization, — regard  either  its  real  value  to  ra- 
tional and  immortal  beings,  or  its  intrinsic  nature  and  character, 
without  the  Christian  religion?  Two  hundred  years'  constant 
intercourse  with  Europeans,  has  left  the  people  of  the  coast  less 
intelligent,  less  industrious,  lower  in  the  scale  of  human  nature, 
and  more  debased  in  moral  principle,  than  the  heathen  tribes  of 
the  interior  which  never  saw  a  white  man. 

The  gentlemen  of  the  Mission  are  all  liberally  educated — and 
all  either  possess  mechanical  trades,  or  have  been  accustomed 
to  agriculture.  I  expect  them  to  remain  a  few  months  in  our 
settlements,  to  learn  to  stand  the  climate — and  then  proceed  to 
some  station  not  upon  the  sea  coast,  nor  yet,  at  too  great  a  dis- 
tance in  the  interior,  and  to  sit  down  under  the  protection  of 
the  Colony.  At  present,  it  appears  likely  they  will  fix  their 
first  station  some  where  among  the  leeward  tribes,  who  speak 


1828.]  Report  made  to  Congress*  51 

the  Bassa  language — perhaps,  on  one  of  the  smaller  islands  in 
the  St.  John's  River,  about  8  or  9  miles  from  its  mouth.  But 
nothing  has  yet  been  certainly  determined.  Their  whole  lives 
are  devoted  to  the  work  of  evangelizing  and  civilizing  these 
tribes;  and  may  they  receive  a  great  reward  in  that  world  to 
which  they  look  for  it. 

Eight  coloured  people,  natives  of  the  United  States,  and  all 
capable  of  great  usefulness,  and  recommended  in  strong  terms 
by  Capt.  Nicolson,  have  buen  discharged  from  the  "Ontario," 
and  received  at  the  Colony,  as  probationers  for  citizenship. — 
They  have  received  in  drafts  on  the  United  States,  and  other- 
wise, nearly  three  years'  wages — which,  well  managed,  will  set 
ihcm  all  up  in  business  at  once. 

Capt.  N.  also  deserves,  in  behalf  of  the  Colony,  my  very  par- 
ticular acknowledgments.  Having,  at  Gibraltar,  notice  of  the 
destination  of  his  ship,  he  was  at  the  pains  to  procure  for  the 
Colony,  from  Tunis,  a  collection  of  most  of  the  useful  garden 
and  other  seeds,  of  African  production.  These,  with  other 
seeds  collected  in  the  Archipelago  and  Asia  Minor,  he  has  left 
in  my  hands.  Our  hope  is,  that  they  may  so  far  succeed  as  to 
seed  the  Colony  permanently  with  such  species  of  the  different 
vegetables  as  shall  be  natural  to  the  climate,  which  we  have  in 
vain  attempted  to  do  with  the  American  species. 

Capt.  N.  has,  greatly  to  his  own  credit,  and  my  gratification, 
evinced  not  only  a  favourable  disposition,  but  anxious  solicitude 
for  the  advancement  of  your  Colony — of  which  he  has  given 
more  substantial  proofs  than  by  mere  professions. 
Respectfully,  Gentlemen, 
I  have  the  honour  to  remain 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  ASHMUN. 

IWgort  o£  t\ve  Select  Com.  to  Cotvgxess. 

Many  of  our  friends  will  doubtless  read  the  following  Report 
with  deep  interest.  We  have  ever  believed  that  the  great  work 
so  auspiciously  commenced  by  the  Society,  must  be  completed 


52  Report  made  to  Congress.  ^  April, 

by  the  pow^r  of  the  States  and  the  Nation.  We  hail  with  de- 
light,  therefore,  every  indication  of  a  friendly  disposition,  either 
on  the  part  of  the  State  Legislatures  or  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment. 

Mr.  Mercer,  from  the  Select  Committee  appointed  on  the  subject,  made 
the  following-  Report:  March  3,  1827. 

■The  Committee  to  whom  were  referred  sundry  memorials  of  the  American  Colo- 
nization Society,  of  citizens  of  various  portions  of  the  United  States,  together 
with  the  resolutions  of  the  Legislatures  of  the  States  nf  Delaware  and  Ken- 
tucky, inviting  the  aid  of  the  Federal  Government  to  colonize  in  Jlfrica,  with 
their  own  consent,  the  free  people  of  colour  of  the  United  States,  report: 

That  the  memorials  and  resolutions  present  to  the  consideration  of  Con 
gTess  an  object  which  must  be  regarded  as  of  the  highest  importance  to  the 
future  peace,  prosperity,  and  happiness  of  the  United  States. 

Surrounded  with  difficulties,  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  inten- 
ests  that  it  involves,  has  been  the  circumspection  with  which  the  committee 
have  approached  it.  Could  they  hope  that  the  evil,  to  which  the  memorl^ 
als  and  resolutions  point,  would  find  a  remedy  in  silent  neglect,  or  could  be 
mitigated  by  concealment,  they  would  ask  to  be  discharged  from  its  further 
investigation.  The  peculiar  delicacy  of  another  topic,  almost  insepara- 
ble, in  imagination  at  least,  however  distinguishable  in  truth,  from  the  pur- 
pose of  the  several  memorials  and  resolutions  referred  to  them,  would  in- 
duce the  committee  to  avoid  its  consideration,  if  a  sense  of  duty,  prompted 
by  the  hope  that  their  labour  may  not  be  in  vain,  did  not  urge  them  to  pro- 
ceed in  the  delicate  task  imposed  upon  them  by  the  order  of  the  House. 

Its  object,  the  committee  are  well  aware,  is  not  novel,  nor  even  now  for 
the  first  time,  presented  to  the  notice  of  Congress. 

It  involves  an  inquiry  into  the  expediency  of  promoting,  by  the  authority 
and  resources  of  the  General  Government,  the  colonization  of  the  free  peo- 
ple of  colour,  beyond  the  territorial  limits  of  the  United  States. 

The  existence  of  a  distinct  race  of  people,  in  the  bosom  of  the  United 
States,  who,  both  by  their  moral  and  political  condition  and  their  natural 
complexion,  are  excluded  from  a  social  equality  with  the  great  body  of  the 
community,  invited  the  serious  attention  and  awakened  the  anxious  solici- 
tude of  many  American  statesmen,  as  soon  as  the  unhappy  traffic  which  had 
annually  multiplied  them,  ceased  to  be  regarded  as  innocent.  A  part  of 
them,  once  held  by  the  same  tenure  which  originally  introduced  them  all 
into  America,  were,  in  some  of  the  United  States,  liberated  before,  and  in 
others,  by,  the  revolution.  In  many  States,  however,  their  total  number 
was,  as  it  still  continues  to  be,  so  great,  that  universal  or  general  emancipa- 
tion could  not  be  hazarded,  without  endangering  a  convulsion  fatal  to  the 
peace  of  society.    No  truth  has  been  more  awfulty  demonstrated  by  th« 


IB28.T  Report  made  to  Congress*  53 

experience  of  the  present  age,  than  that  to  render  freedom  a  blessing,  man 
must  be  qualified  for  its  enjoyment;  that  a  total  revolution  in  his  character 
cannot  be  instantaneously  wrought  by  the  agency  of  ordinaiy  moral  and 
physical  causes,  or  by  the  sudden  force  of  unprepared  revolution. 

Still,  in  many  States  of  the  American  Union,  all  the  coloured  population 
are  now  free;  and,  in  others,  so  circumstanced  as  still  to  render  universal 
emancipation  dangerous  to  the  public  happiness;  large  bodies  of  free 
coloured  people  have  arisen,  from  the  influence  of  humanity  in  the  master, 
under  a  system  of  laws  which,  if  they  did  not  promote,  did  not  till  recently 
prohibit,  voluntary  enfranchisement.  The  enlargement  of  the  rights  of  the 
coloured  race  extend,  however,  to  very  various  limits  in  the  different  States. 
In  no  two,  perhaps,  has  it  precisely  the  same  extent.  In  none  does  it  ef- 
face all  civil  and  political  distinctions  between  the  coloured  man  and  the 
white  inhabitant  or  citizen.  Over  moral  influences  mere  laws  have  every 
where  less  power  than  manners.  No  where  in  America,  therefore,  has 
emancipation  elevated  the  coloured  race  to  perfect  equality  with  the  white; 
and,  in  many  States,  the  disparity  is  so  great  that  it  may  be  questioned 
whether  the  condition  of  the  slave,  while  protected  by  his  master,  however 
degraded  in  itself,  is  not  preferable  to  that  of  the  free  negro.  Nor  is  this 
any  where  so  questionable  as  in  those  States  which  have  both  the  greatest 
number  of  slaves  and  of  free  people  of  colour.  It  is,  at  the  same  time, 
worthy  of  remark,  that,  among  theset  the  principle  of  voluntary  emancipa- 
tion has  operated  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  the  laws  themselves,  or  the 
principle  of  coercion  upon  the  master  has  ever  done  even  among  those 
States  who  had  no  danger,  whatever,  to  apprehend  from  the  speedy  and 
universal  extension  of  human  liberty.  So  little  ground  is  there,  in  fact,  to 
be  found  among  the  different  sections  of  the  Union  for  those  uncandid  re- 
proaches which,  where  not  reproved,  as  alike  impolitic  and  unjust,  are  cal- 
culated to  sow  the  seeds  of  lasting  jealousies  and  animosities  among  socie* 
ties  of  men  whose  best  interests  are  indissolubly  connected,  and  who  have 
only  to  know  each  other,  intimately,  to  be  as  cordially  united  by  mutual  es- 
teem as  they  are  by  a  common  government. 

All  must  concur,  however,  in  regarding  the  present  condition  of  the  free 
^coloured  race  in  America  as  inconsistent  with  its  future  social  and  political 
advancement,  and,  where  slavery  exists  at  all,  as  calculated  to  aggravate 
its  evils  without  any  atoning  good.  Among  those  evils,  the  most  obvious 
is  the  restraint  imposed  upon  emancipation  by  the  laws  of  so  many  of  the 
slave  holding  States:  laws,  deriving  their  recent  origin  from  the  obvious 
manifestation  which  the  increase  of  the  free  coloured  population  has  furnish- 
ed, of  the  inconvenience  and  danger  of  multiplying  their  number  where 
slavery  exists  at  all. 

Their  own  consciousness  of  their  degraded  condition  in  the  United  States, 
has  appeared  to  the  North  as  well  as  the  South,  in  their  repeated  efforts  to 
find  a  territory  beyond   the  limits  of  the  Union  to  which  they  may  retire, 


,4  Jieport  made  to  Congress*  [April? 

and  on  which,  secure  from  external  danger,  they  may  hope  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  political  as  well  as  civil  liberty. 

The  belief  that  such  would  and  should  be  their  desire,  and  a  conviction 
that  the  voluntary  removal  of  this  part  of  the  population  of  the  U.  States 
would  greatly  conduce  to  the  future  happiness  of  the  residue,  have  turned 
the  anxious  attention  of  many  private  citizens,  and  the  Legislatures  of 
several  States,  to  the  expediency  of  affording  to  them  the  means  of  colo- 
nizing a  territory  in  Africa. 

Anterior  to  the  year  1806  three  several  attempts  to  procure  a  country 
suited  to  this  object,  had  been  secretly  made  by  the  General  Assembly  of 
Virginia,  through  a  correspondence  between  the  Executive  of  that  State 
and  the  President  of  the  United  States. 

The  last,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  earliest  public  effort  to  attain  this 
object,  was  made  by  the  Legislature  of  the  seme  State,  in  December,  1816, 
some  time  before  the  formation,  in  the  City  of  Washington,  of  the  Ameri- 
can Society  for  colonizing  the  free  people  of  colour.  The  design  of  this 
institution,  the  committee  are  apprized,  originated  in  the  disclosure  of  the 
secret  resolutions  of  prior  Legislatures  of  that  State,  to  which  may  also  be 
ascribed,  it  is  understood,  the  renewal  of  their  obvious  purpose  in  the  reso- 
lution subjoined  to  this  report:  a  resolution  which  was  first  adopted  by 
the  House  of  Delegates  of  Virginia,  on  the  14th  of  December,  1816,  with 
an  unanimity  which  denoted  the  deep  interest  that  it  inspired,  and  which 
openly  manifested  to  the  world  a  steady  adherence  to  the  humane  policy 
which  had  secretly  animated  the  same  councils  at  a  much  earlier  period.— 
This  brief  and  correct  history  of  the  origin  of  the  American  Colonization 
Society  evinces,  that  it  sprung  from  a  deep  solicitude  for  Southern  inter- 
ests, and  among  those  most  competent  to  discern  and  to  promote  them. 

Founded  by  the  co-operation  of  several  distinguished  statesmen,  co-op- 
erating with  many  patriotic  and  pious  citizens,  the  American  Colonization 
Society,  for  colonizing  the  free  people  of  colour,  soon  received  the  counte- 
nance of  the  Legislature  of  Maryland,  and,  succeeding  it,  at  shorter  or  lon- 
ger intervals,  the  unequivocal  approbation  of  the  States  of  Georgia  and 
Tennessee,  as  it  has  very  recently  done  of  Delaware  and  Kentucky. 

To  these  have  been  added,  during  the  prosecution  of  its  benevolent  de- 
sign, the  favourable  opinions  and  pious  aspirations  for  its  success,  of  almost 
every  religious  society  in  the  United  States. 

To  these  influences,  and  to  the  success  of  its  measures,  it  may  be  ascrib- 
ed, that  private  subscriptions  to  the  extent  of  near  sixty  thousand  dollars, 
have  co-operated  with  the  collateral  aid  of  the  American  Government  in 
founding  the  present  flourishing  Colony  of  Liberia.  On  two  several  occa- 
sions, in  the  years  1825  and  1826,  the  General  Assembly  of  Virginia  have 
voted,  at  the  request  of  the  Society,  a  small  pecuniary  aid  to  its  resources  \ 
and  that  of  Maryland  has,  by  a  fixed  annuity,  very  lately  concurred  in  a 
similar  benefaction.    These  acts  may  be  regarded  as  an  earnest  of  the  con- 


1 828.]  Report  made  to  Congress.  53 

tinued  adherence  of  both  States  to  the  opinions  which  they  have  repeated- 
\y  expressed  in  behalf  of  the  object  of  the  American  Colonization  Society. 
The  success  of  the  Society,  however,  so  far  as  it  has  advanced,  is  attribu- 
table, under  Heaven,  mainly  to  the  persevering-  zeal  and  prudence  of  its 
members,  and  to  the  countenance  and  aid  which  it  has  both  merited  and 
received  from  the  Federal  Government. 

The  last  annual  report  of  the  Society,  which  is  hereto  annexed,  and  the 
following-  extracts  from  the  various  reports  and  resolutions  of  former  com- 
mittees of  the  House  of  Representatives,  charged,  from  time  to  time,  with 
an  inquiry  into  the  most  effectual  means  of  suppressing  the  African  Slave 
Trade,  will  show  the  present  condition  of  the  Colony  which  the  Society 
have  planted  on  the  coast  of  Africa;  its  present  relation  to  the  Federal  Go 
vernment;  and  the  character  and  extent  of  the  aid  which  it  has  derived  from 
the  national  resources.  The  prosperity  of  the  Colony,  your  committee  are 
assured  by  the  report  and  memorial  of  the  Society,  surpasses  the  most  san- 
guine hopes  of  its  early  founders,  and  furnishes  conclusive  evidence  of  the 
capacity  of  such  communities,  spread  along  the  coast  of  Africa,  not  only  to 
abolish,  effectually,  that  inhuman  traffic  which  has  hitherto  baffled  the  com- 
bined efforts  of  the  Christian  world,  but  to  afford,  on  this  oppressed  conti- 
nent, the  long-sought  asylum  to  such  of  its  free  descendants  in  America,  as 
may  choose  to  return  to  the  land  of  their  progenitors. 

The  aid  hitherto  derived  by  the  Society  from  the  co-operation  of  the  Fe- 
deral Government,  has  been  limited  to  the  execution  of  the  act  of  1819,  un- 
der "the  just  and  liberal  construction"  given  to  it,  by  the  late  President  of 
the  United  States,  in  honour  of  whom,  the  chief  town  of  the  Colony  has  re- 
ceived a  name  which  it  will  hand  down,  it  may  be  hoped,  to  remote  poste- 
rity, as  a  perpetual  memorial  of  the  wisdom  and  benevolence  of  the  nation, 
over  which  he  presided. 

This  construction  harmonized  the  benevolent  spirit  of  the  act  of  Congress 
of  1807,  which  sought  to  abolish  the  American  branch  of  the  African  slave 
trade,  with  the  constitutional  obligations  of  the  General  Government,  to 
the  several  States,  and  to  the  Union. 

The  memorialists  found,  on  views  yet  more  enlarged,  an  application  to 
the  General  Government  for  more  extended  aid;  and,  sustained  as  they  are, 
by  their  own  weight  of  character,  and  the  approving  voices  of  so  many 
States;  by  the  wishes  of  so  large  a  portion,  indeed,  of  the  American  people; 
these  views  are  entitled  to  the  most  respectful  consideration. 

They  request  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  to  assume  the  govern- 
ment and  protection  of  the  Colony  of  Liberia,  and  to  furnish  to  the  free 
people  of  colour,  in  America,  the  means  of  defraying  the  expense  of  their 
voluntary  removal  to  the  continent  of  their  ancestors. 

Objects  of  greater  interest,  though  not  now  pressed,  for  the  first  time,  on 
the  consideration  of  Congress,  have  rarely  been  brought  to  the  notir 
this  Government. 


56  Meport  made  to  Congress-  [April, 

The  first  inquiry  which  they  suggest,  refers  the  Committee  to  the  power 
of  the  Federal  Government  to  gTant  the  prayer  of  the  memorialists;  the  next, 
to  the  exprdiency  of  doing  so. 

Th  f.ommittee  entertain  no  doubt,  whatever,  but  that  the  Government 
of  the  United  States  has  the  constitutional  power  to  acquire  territory;  and 
that  the  people  of  every  inhabited  country,  so  acquired,  must  be  regarded 
as  standing,  towards  the  Federal  Government,  in  the  relation  of  colonial  de- 
pendence, till  admitted  as  co-ordinate  States  with  the  common  Union. 

The  inhabitants  of  every  portion  of  the  former  Northwestern  Territory, 
deriving  their  birth  from  the  thirteen  original  States,  and  possessing  the 
right  of  emigration,  were,  strictly  speaking,  recognized  colonies  of  their 
common  mother  country,  as  are,  at  present,  the  territories  of  Arkansas, 
Michigan,  and  Florida.  They  had  not  the  right  of  self-government,  nor 
have  these;  but  they  were,  or  are,  dependent,  for  their  laws,  upon  the 
Congress  of  the  United  States.  Such  territories,  with  their  inhabitants, 
can,  in  no  sense,  be  regarded  as  the  colonies  of  any  particular  State,  being 
made  up  of  emigrants  from  all  the  States  to  the  common  territory  of  all,  and 
the  power  to  govern  them  has  been  exercised,  at  all  times,  under  the  un- 
questioned and  indisputable  authority  of  the  Union. 

No  State  having  the  power  to  enter  into  any  negotiation  for  the  acquisi- 
tion of  foreign  territory,  the  authority  to  make  a  treaty  for  that  object  must 
and  does,  vest  in  the  United  States,  or  it  exists  no  where.     This  reasoning 
is  in  accordance  with  the  past  history  of  the  United  States,  and  the  tenor  of 
the  earliest  report  upon  this  subject  from  a  Committee  of  this  House.     But, 
while  this  Committee  recognize,  in  the  Federal  Government,  the  power  to 
negotiate  for  the  acquisition  of  territory,  and  to  govern  it  and  its  inhabitants 
when  acquired,   as  a  Colony,   they  are  not  prepared,    at  present,   to  admit 
the  expediency  of  doing  so,    in  relation  to  the  people  and  territory  of  Afri- 
ca.    Were  the  exercise  of  such  a  power  deemed,  by  the  Committee,  indis- 
pensably necessary  to  the  benevolent  and  useful  purposes  of  the  memorial- 
ists, a  decision  on  the  expediency  of  the  measure  proposed,  would  be  in- 
volved in  greater  difficulty,   and  inspire  the  deepest  solicitude.     But,  the 
Committee  entertain  a  different  opinion.     The  Colonial  Agent  of  the  Ame- 
rican Society  has  experienced,   especially  of  late,  very  little  difficulty  in 
procuring  accessions  of  territory.     No  such  difficulty  need  hereafter  be  ap- 
prehended, or  none  that  mere  pecuniary  aid  would  not  promptly  obviate. 
Nor,  for  the  protection  of  the  Colony  against  a  civilized  enemy,  does  it  ap- 
pear to  your  Committee  to  be  required,  that  the  United  States  should  as- 
sume over  it  any  jurisdiction  or  power  of  political  and  civil  government— 
The  fatality  of  the  climate  of  tropical  Africa  to  the  constitution  of  the  white 
man,   forms  one  source  of  the  security  of  any  Colony  of  persons  capable  df 
withstanding  its  influence.     Against  the  predatory  incursions  of  the  feeble 
tribes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  American  Colony,  its  own  strength  man- 
ifestly suffices  for  its  defence;  and,  from  the  power  of  the  maritime  States 


18£8.]  Report  made  to  Congress.  57 

of  Europe  and  America,  and  the  agitations  and  dangers  of  their  frequent 
wars,  the  humanity  of  the  world  would  afford  a  better  protection  than  the 
flag-  of  any  single  State,  however  powerful. 

While  the  Colony  of  Sierra  Leone  was  subject,  as  is  that  of  Liberia  at 
present,  to  the  moral  control  of  a  society  of  private  gentlemen,  it  was 
once,  during  the  disorders  of  the  French  Revolution,  attacked  by  a 
French  squadron;  but,  such  was  the  indignation  awakened  by  this  act  of 
wanton  barbarity,  that  it  was  promptly  disavowed  by  the  Revolutionary 
Government  of  France:  and,  in  all  the  subsequent  wars  of  Great  Britain, 
such  an  act  has  never  been  repeated,  or  even  apprehended.  * 

To  render  this  moral  protection  more  authoritative,  your  Committee  beg 
leave  to  recommend  to  the  House,  in  conformity  with  the  report  of  a  for- 
mer Committee  acting  in  relation  to  the  same  subject,  the  adoption  of  a 
resolution,  requesting  the  President  of  the  United  States  to  "enter  upon 
"such  negotiations  as  he  may  deem  expedient,  with  all  the  maritime  Pow- 
"  crs  of  the  Christian  world,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  to  the  Colony  of 
"  Liberia,"  and  such  other  colonies  as  may  be  planted  on  the  African  coast, 
for  like  purposes,  so  long  as  they  may  merit  it,  "the  advantages  of  a  per- 
petual neutrality." 

Against  the  hazard,  which  must,  however,  shortly  cease,  if  it  has  not  al- 
ready done  so,  arising  from  the  desperate  enterprises  of  those  piratical  ad- 
venturers who  frequent  the  African  coast,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  a 
trade  now  prohibited,  North  of  the  Equator,  by  all  nations,  and  continued 
to  the  South  by  Brazil  and  Portugal  alone,  the  growing  strength  of  the  Col- 
ony, aided  by  the  frequent  presence  of  the  American  flag  in  its  vicinity, 
will  furnish  adequate  security.  To  provide  for  its  internal  tranquillity,  an 
assumption  of  its  government,  by  the  United  States,  would  seem  at  first  to 
be  of  greater  moment.  To  the  future  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  Colony, 
it  may  appear  to  be  an  indispensable  guarantee.  Some  of  the  memorialists 
have  so  regarded  it. 

But  as  a  responsibility,  involving  political  considerations  of  no  small  mag- 
nitude, would,  of  necessity,  attach  to  the  exercise,  by  the  United  States,  of 
a  sovereign  jurisdiction  over  a  remote  territory  and  people,  the  committee 
have  been  led,  in  conformity  with  the  principles  which  they  have  already 
laid  down,  to  consider  it  more  prudent  to  trust  the  internal  government  of 
the  Colony  to  the  administration  b)'  which  it  has  been,  hitherto,  so  success- 
fully conducted. 

A  mixture  of  the  control  of  other  magistrates  than  those  of  the  same  co- 
lour with  the  colonists,  to  be  drawn,  for  that  purpose,  from  the  white  popu- 
lation of  the  United  States,  might  possibly  arouse  in  other  States,  as  well  as 
in  the  colonists  themselves,  jealousies  which  do  not  at  present  exist,  while 
no  small  sacrifice  of  human  life  would  be  the  obvious  consequence  of  at» 
tempting  to  sustain  an  authority  over  the  Colony  by  the  force  of  any  other 
power  than  that  moral  control  which  repeated  benefactions,  a  sense  of  gratis 
8 


58  The  Crisis:  [April, 

tude,  and  the  dictates  of  interest,  may  long  preserve  to  its  American  found- 
ers, and  their  successors. 

When  its  population  and  power  shall  entitle  Liberia  to  rank,  as  it  may, 
and  in  all  human  probability  will,  hereafter  do,  among  the  civilized  States  of 
the  Earth,  negotiation  will  keep  open  and  improve  the  avenue  which,  in  its 
feeble,  though  yet  flourishing  condition,  it  now  ofFers  to  the  admission  of 
the  coloured  race  from  America.  Thus  it  may  continue  to  subserve  all  the 
benevolent  and  useful  purposes  which  its  early  patrons  and  friends  had  in 
view,  without  subjecting  it  to  entangling  alliances  with,  or  a  degrading  de- 
pendence upon,  any  other  political  community. 

The  power  and  the  expediency  of  affording  pecuniaiy  aid  to  the  volun- 
tary removal  of  the  free  people  of  colour,  from  America  to  Africa,  are  ques- 
tions presenting  to  the  committee  fewer  difficulties. 

It  is  not  easy  to  discern  any  object  to  which  the  pecuniary  resources  of 
the  Union  can  be  applied,  of  greater  importance  to  the  national  security 
and  welfare,  than  to  provide  for  the  removal,  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the 
rights  and  interests  of  the  several  States,  of  the  free  coloured  population 
within  their  limits.  And  your  committee  would  not  hesitate  to  accompany 
this  report  with  a  resolution  recommending,  with  suitable  conditions,  such 
an  appropriation,  did  not  the  public  business  remaining  to  be  disposed  of,  by 
the  present  Congress,  preclude  the  hope,  if  not  the  possibility,  of  obtaining 
for  such  a  resolution  the  sanction  of  this  House. 

They  close  their  report,  therefore,  with  an  earnest  recommendation  of 
the  prayer  of  the  memorialists,  and  the  accompanying  resolutions  of  the 
States  of  Kentucky  and  Delaware,  to  the  early  attention  of  the  next  Con- 
gress. 

"T\\e  Crisis, 

Or  Essays  on  the  Usurpations  of  the  Federal  Government." 

A  pamphlet,  with  the  above  title,  of  166  pages,  has  recently 
been  published  in  Charleston,  South  Carolina.  It  is  an  extraor- 
dinary production.  The  adoption  of  any  measures  by  the  Fede 
ral  Government  in  aid  of  the  Colonization  Society,  (and  the  Ta- 
riff and  Internal  Improvements  are  regarded  with  a  like  spirit,) 
is  denounced  as  a  most  wicked  usurpation,  justifying  on  the  part 
of  South  Carolina,  not  only  remonstrance  but  rebellion.  Rather 
than  submit  to  such  usurpation,  the  author  declares  himself  rea- 
-dy  for  war,    or  even  disunion.      He    compares   himself   to 


1 828.  J  The  Crisis.  §& 

Cassandra,  and  in  this  respect  we  doubt  not  the  resemblance  will 
hold  good — that  his  ravings  will  be  disregarded.  To  examine 
these  essays  generally,  is  not  our  present  purpose.  When  not 
better  employed,  we  may  give  them  some  attention.  Our  ob- 
ject now,  is  to  show  by  one  or  two  short  extracts,  how  little  re- 
liance is  to  be  placed  upon  the  statements  of  this  writer;  and 
leave  our  readers  to  conjecture,  if  such  are  his  assertions,  what 
must  be  his  arguments.  The  following  is  the  account  given  of 
our  Journal. 

"It  (the  Colonization  Society)  causes  to  be  published,  at  the  seat  of 
Government,  under  its  immediate  auspices,  a  monthly  Journal,  which  it 
styles  the  "African  Repository,"  published  by  order  of  the  Managers  of  the 
Society.  It  is  in  this  periodical  that  are  constantly  disseminated,  the  senti- 
ments which  are  to  make  the  slave  dissatisfied  with  his  condition,  and  the 
master  doubtful  whether  he  ought  to  hold  in  subjection  his  slave.  It  is  here 
that  we  have  essays,  in  which  the  system  of  servitude  is  pourtrayed  in  colours 
the  most  frightful  and  disgusting-.  It  is  this  Journal  in  which  the  tales  are  to 
be  told,  and  the  anecdotes  related,  of  the  cruelty  of  owners  to  their  slaves.  And 
it  is  here  again,  that  are  recorded  the  examples  of  those  silly  mortals  who  sa- 
crificed their  wealth  upon  the  altars  of  a  moral  enthusiasm;  who  think  they 
aggrandize  their  country  by  manumitting  their  slaves,  and  thus  letting  loose 
beings,  neither  fitted,  by  education  or  by  habit,  for  freedom;  and  who  must 
be  a  walking  pestilence  wherever  they  go.  It  is  in  this  Journal,  that  are 
constantly  expressed,  those  mischievous  forebodings,  'that  the  time  must 
come,  when  the  oppressed  must  rise  against  the  oppressor  with  a  desolating 
vengeance.' " 

Now  we  appeal  to  the  candour  of  our  countrymen,  and  ask, 
is  the  above  a  fair  representation  of  our  work  ?  Have  we  aimed 
to  excite  discontent  among  slaves  ?  Have  we  sought  to  render 
the  owners  of  slaves  odious,  by  retailing  anecdotes  of  their  cru- 
elty ?     Every  honorable  man  will  do  us  the  justice  to  answer  no. 

Again,  the  Essayist  remarks  that, 

"The  negro  Colony  has  been  established  ten  years,  and  now  consists  of 
about  600  poor  wretches,  who  would  be  very  glad,  no  doubt,  to  return  if 
they  could." 

Compare  this  with  the  account  of  Capt.  Nicolson,  who  visited 
the  Colony  in  the  Ontario,  and  who  cannot  possibly  be  supposed 
guilty  of  misrepresentation.     His  words  are, 

'•The  population  is  now  1,200,  and  is  healthy  and  thriving.     The  appear 


60  Letter  from  a  Gentleman  in  S.  Carolina.       [April, 

ance  of  all  the  Colonists,  those  of  Monrovia  as  well  as  those  of  Caldwell, 
indicated  more  than  contentment.  Their  manners  were  those  of  freemen, 
who  experienced  the  blessing-s  of  liberty,  and  appreciated  the  boon.  Ma- 
ny of  them  had,  by  trade,  accumulated  a  competency,  if  the  possession  of 
from  three  to  five  thousand  dollars  can  be  called  so." 

Who  but  one  under  the  influence  of  a  disordered  imagination, 
could  have  penned  such  a  sentence  as  the  following? 

"The  abolitionists  of  Philadelphia,  by  a  gTeat  effort,  have  just  returned 
as  a  member  to  Congress,  Mr.  Sergeant;  and  that  the  labours  of  this  Wilber- 
force  of  the  western  world,  in  the  next  CongTess  may  not  be  in  vain,  the 
seat  of  the  operations  of  the  Abolition  Society,  is  to  be  transferred  from 
Philadelphia  to  Washington,  that  in  conjunction  with  the  Colonization  So- 
ciety, and  the  labours  of  Judg-e  Washington,  of  the  Supreme  Court,  that 
great  National  object  may  be  accomplished: — The  Rdik  of  the  South- 
ern States ! ! ! 

The  parts  of  the  preceding  sentence  in  capitals,  were  so  print- 
ed by  its  author.  We  leave  him  for  the  present,  wishing  to  him 
4 "mens  sana,"  when  he  may  again  attempt  to  instruct  the  public. 

liettfcY  fYom  a  Gentleman  in  S.  Carolina. 

We  have  reason  to  believe  that  many  of  the  most  respectable 
citizens  of  South  Carolina,  entirely  approve  of  the  design  of  our 
Institution.  All  the  virtuous  and  religious  will,  we  doubt  not, 
be  with  us,  when  they  correctly  understand  our  objects.  The 
misrepresentations  and  abuse  of  our  enemies  will  finally  place 
the  true  character  of  our  Society  in  a  stronger  light,  and  give  to 
our  cause  a  nobler  triumph.  The  "crisis"  is  indeed  near,  when 
the  people  of  the  South  will  feel  that  our  Institution  has  special 
claims  to  their  efforts,  since  its  success  would  confer  on  them 
peculiar  benefits.  We  publish  the  following  from  a  Gentleman 
in  South  Carolina  with  great  pleasure. 

"I  have  just  read  the  Eleventh  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Coloniza- 
tion Society,  together  with  the  36th  number  of  the  African  Repository,  with 
great  satisfaction.  I  am  extremely  glad  to  hear  of  the  generar\nterprising 
spirit  which  is  now  in  exercise,  among  many  of  the  free-born  sons  of  Ame- 
rica, in  behalf  of  that  unfortunate  race  of  the  human  family,  whom  we  have 
among-  us.     While  our  philanthropy,  generosity,  and  goodwill  have  abound- 


i828.]  Anthony  Benezet.,  64 

ed  towards  heathen  nations,  sympathies  have  at  length  been  aroused  in  fa- 
vour of  that  oppressed  part  of  our  species,  the  commonness  of  whose  de- 
plorable case,  and  the  selfish  interest  that  many  had  in  them,  made  it  a  mat- 
ter of  no  concern,  with  even  the  Christian  and  the  professedly  humane  for 
many  past  years. 

"But  I  thank  the  Lord,  that  at  length  the  thunders  of  conscience  and 
justice  have  awakened  to  action  many,  who,  till  lately,  cared  but  little 
about  the  miserable  slave,  or  the  degraded  free  black  man;  and  that  they 
are  now  active  in  the  great  work  of  colonizing-  the  free  people  of  colour  in 
the  land  of  their  forefathers.  Though  a  slave  country  has  been  the  place 
of  my  nativity,  yet  I  hope  ever  to  cherish  that  principle  of  right,  which, 
unvitiated  by  interest  or  prejudice,  rejoices  at  the  welfare  of  the  poor  Afri- 
cans, and  at  every  effort  which  is  made  to  better  their  condition," 

Anthony  lienezet. 

In  1786,  four  years  before  Mr.  Wilberforce  made  his  eel ebraU 
ed  motion  in  the  British  Parliament  for  the  Abolition  of  the 
Slave  Trade,  Dr.  Rush  delivered  a  discourse  before  the 
American  Philosophical  Society,  from  which  we  make  the  fol- 
lowing quotation.  The  sentiment  it  contains,  affords  striking 
evidence  of  the  sagacity  of  its  author,  and  proves  that  amid  hi3 
investigations  and  discoveries  in  medical  science,  he  found  time 
to  reflect  profoundly  upon  the  influence  of  moral  causes  on  the 
character  and  conduct  of  nations.  Dr.  Rush  could  discern  in 
"the  labours,  the  publications,  the  private  letters,  and  prayera 
of  Anthony  Benezet,"  a  power  which,  in  its  progress,  though 
it  might  be  silent  and  slow,  would  be  resistless  and  sure ;  which 
accumulating  and  expanding  among  future  generations,  would 
accomplish  the  most  glorious  revolution  in  favour  of  human  hap- 
piness— sweep  from  the  face  of  the  earth  the  most  intolerable 
evils,  and  cover  the  wide  territories  of  the  unenlightened  and 
oppressed,  with  the  habitations  of  civilized  life  and  with  the 
churches  of  God. 

"The  State  of  Pennsylvania  still  deplores  the  loss  of  a  man,  in  whom  not 
only  reason  and  revelation,  but  many  of  the  physical  causes  that  have  been 
enumerated,  concurred  to  produce  such  attainments  in  moral  excellency, 
as  have  seldom  appeared  in  a  human  being1.  This  amiable  citizen  consider- 
ed his  fellow-creature  man  as  God's  extract,  from  hi*  own  works;  and 


62  Masonic  Liberality.  fApril, 

whether  this  image  of  himself  was  cut  out  from  ebony  or  copper:  whether 
he  spoke  his  own  or  a  foreign  language;  or  whether  he  worshipped  with 
ceremonies  or  without  them,  he  still  considered  him  as  a  brother,  and 
equally  the  object  of  his  benevolence.  Poets  and  historians,  who  are  to 
live  hereafter,  to  you  I  commit  his  panegyric;  and  when  you  hear  of  a  law 
for  abolishing  slavery  in  each  of  the  American  States,  such  as  was  passed  in 
Pennsylvania  in  the  year  1780/  when  you  hear  of  the  Kings  and  Qtieens  of 
Europe,  publishing  edicts  for  abolishing  the  trade  in  human  souls,-  and  lastly, 
when  you  hear  of  schools  and  churches,  with  all  the  arts  of  civilized  life,  being 
established  among  the  nations  of  Africa;  then  remember  and  record,  that  this 
revolution  in  favour  of  human  happiness,  was  the  effect  of  the  labours,  the 
publications,  the  private  letters,  and  the  prayers  of  Anthony  Benezet." — [Dn 
Bush's  Inquiry,  Uc. 

We  find  in  the  Montpelier  Patriot,  an  Address  of  Hon.  Phi- 
nehas  White,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  this  state, 
made  to  that  Lodge  on  declining  a  re-election.  It  breathes  a 
most  excellent  spirit — urging  the  duty  of  active  beneficence, 
with  an  earnestness  that  well  becomes  a  Grand  Master,  who 
would  have  Masonry  benevolent,  not  in  name  only,  but  "in  deed 
and  in  truth."  In  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  his  office,  he 
last  summer  laid  before  the  several  Lodges  in  the  state,  the 
claims  of  the  Colonization  Society,  which  he  again  stated  at 
some  length  in  his  Address.  The  result  has  been  that  the 
Grand  Lodge  at  its  late  meeting,  adopted  the  following  resolu- 
tion. 

Resolved,  That  this  Grand  Lodge,  highly  approving  of  the  objects  of  the 
American  Colonization  Society,  present  the  sum  of  $100  as  a  donation  in 
aid  of  the  funds  of  that  Society. 

Another  resolution  adopted  at  the  same  time,  appointing  a 
committee  on  the  establishment  of  a  Grand  Lodge  at  Liberia,  may 
be  considered  as  evidence  that  so  much  interest  is  felt  on  this 
subject,  that  this  donation  will  be  followed  by  others. 

The  following  sums  were  received  of  subordinate  Lodges,  by  the  Grand 
Secretary,  as  donations  to  the  Colonization  Society.     Of  Federal  Lodge 
No.    15,  at  Randolph,  $10, — of  Warren  Lodge    No.  23,    at  Woodstock, 
$10, — of  Social  Masters  No.   19,  at  Williamstown,  $20,-— of  Rural  Lodge 
No.  52,  Stockbridge,  $10. — [Vermont  Chronicle". 


J.828.J  Postscript.  6: 


"Postscript. 

Despatches  up  to  March  the  third,  were  received  from  the 
Colony  by  the  Schooner  Randolph,  just  as  this  sheet  was  going 
to  press,  and  we  have  opportunity  only  to  say,  that  the  affairs  of 
the  Colony  appear  to  be  generally  prosperous.  The  Doris,  Ran- 
dolph and  Nautilus  had  all  arrived  in  safety.  It  is  with  pain 
that  we  add,  that  the  emigrants  by  the  Doris,  have  since  their 
arrival  suffered  severely  by  sickness,  and  among  those  from  the 
of  Virginia,  a  more  than  usual  number  of  deaths  (24)  has 
o  urred.  The  Doris  had  along  passage  of  sixty -one  days.  This 
d  Libtless  (having  produced,  as  was  ascertained,  a  scorbutic  taint 
in  the  system)  had  some  effect  upon  the  subsequent  health  of  those 
who  embarked  in  her.  Mr.  Ashmun  had  been  very  ill,  but  was 
thought  to  be  convalescent.  Further  information  must  be  post- 
poned until  next  number.     We  publish  the  following  from  the 


Colonial  Agent. 


A  CARD. 


J.  Ashmun,  Agent  A.  C.  S.  for  the  Colony  of  Liberia,  takes  this  method 
of  acknowledging-,  generally,  the  receipt  of  numerous  valuable  and  esteem- 
ed communications,  and  a  variety  of  donations,  from  the  friends  of  the  Col- 
ony in  the  United  States,  by  the  Brigs  Doris  and  Nautilus,  and  the  Schoo- 
ner Randolph,  all  of  which  vessels  arrived  in  Liberia  between  the  ,15th  of 
Jan.  and  the  19th  of  Feb.  inclusive;  and  adds  with  regret,  that  a  severe 
illness,  which  has  laid  him  aside  from  the  5th  of  Feb.  to  this  date,  renders  it 
utterly  impossible  to  reply  to  those  favours  in  the  manner  they  deserve. — 
Should  a  merciful  Providence  restore  to  him  sufficient  health,  one  of  the  first 
duties  to  which  it  shall  be  devoted,  will  be  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  these  es- 
teemed correspondents  and  benefactors  of  the  Colony. 

Monrovia,  February  29,  1828, 

The  last  London  Missionary  Register  says,  "The  American 
Colony  at  Liberia  possesses,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  very 
great  advantages  over  every  other  on  the  Coast,  for  all  the  pur- 
poses of  benevolence  and  piety." — [Vermont  Chronicle* 


64  Contributions.  [April, 

Contributions 

To  the  American  Colonizatian  Society,  in  April,  1828. 
Auxy.  Society,  Washington  co.,  Maryland,  per  S.  Steele,  Esq.  Tr.  $29 

Rev.  Otis  Thompson,  Rohoboth,  Mass 2 

Thomas  White,  Esq.,  Cambridge,  Md 4 

Repository, 58 

Collections  in  North  Carolina,  by  the  Rev.  James  Nourse,  viz: 

J.  Orkney,  Washington,  Beaufort  county, $2 

J.  Fowle,  do.  do.  2 

P.  Brown,  Murfreesborough, 2 

Miss  Ann  E.  Winns, 2  75 

J.  C .  Stanley,  Newbern, 5 

Dr.  E.  Hawes,      do 25 

Rev.  J.  Crowdcr, 1  10 

Rev.  L.  D.  Hatch,  10 

Miss  Bendict,  Raleigh, 2 

Cash  from  three  persons,  Cumberland,  50  cts.  each,  ...     1  50 
Cumberland  County  Auxiliary  Colonization  Society,  ...  30 

James  Webb  and  Wife,  Orange  county,  4» 

Elizabeth  Waters,  do. 

Eliza  G.  Hascll,  do.  

Dennis  Heart,  do.  ....... 

W.  Kirkland,  do.  

James  Child,  do.  

Professor  Hooper,  Chapel  Hill, 5 

J.  W.  Norwood,  a  balance  collected, 55 

Collection  in  Church,  Murfreesborough,  15  50 

Do.  do.       Newbern, 5  50 

Do.  do.       Chapel  Hill,  July  1827,    10  75 

Repository  subscriptions  paid  him,  6 

135  65 

Collections  by  C  Frye,  Jefferson  county,  per  Bcnj.  Waters,  .....       7  5C 

Rev.  Rob.  Logan,  Fincastle,  Va — collected  in  1825,  10 

Rev.  Mr.  Davis,  of  Methodist  Church,  Washington,  D.  C,  for  col- 
lections by  Ministers  of  his  Church,  as  follows,  viz: 

Rev.  Robt.  Barnes, $3 

John  Rhodes, 6 

John  Munroe,    1  62 £ 

John  White, 7  37} 

Wm.  Pretty  man, 4  06| 

Th.  Magee,    10 

52  06 

Mr.  &  Mrs-  Maynadier,  Annapolis,  Md 2 

Rev.  Jos.  Caldwell,  Chapel  Hill,  N.  C 10 

»  King  Solomon  Lodge  No.  6,  Gallatin,  Tenn.,  per  S.  D.  Ring,  Esq.     20 

$310  21 


THE 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 


GOLOHIAL  JOTOSTAXi. 


TTff 


Tol.  IV.  IVIAY,  1S2S.  No.  3. 


TWvtow 

Of  Mission  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee,  with  a  Statis- 
tical account  of  that  Kingdom,  and  Geographical  Notices  of 
ether  parts  of  the  Interior  of  Africa,     By  Edward  Bowdich, 
Esq.,  Conductor.     London,  1819. 

(Continued  from  p.  40.) 

The  well-directed  and  persevering  efforts  of  Mr.  Bowdicli 
finally  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  a  treaty  of  peace  and 
friendly  intercourse,  between  the  kingdom  of  Ashantee  and 
Cape  Coast  Castle,  and  it  was  agreed  that  a  British  Officer 
should  be  constantly  permitted  to  reside  in  Coomassie.  Having 
therefore  instructed  Mr.  Hutchison  to  remain,  Mr.  Bowdich,  af- 
ter encountering  numerous  difficulties,  both  in  taking  his  depar- 
ture, and  in  prosecuting  his  journey,  returned  to  Cape  Coast. 

The  remainder  of  this  volume  is  occupied  with  a  very  minute 
and  valuable  account  of  the  History,  Population,  Government 
and  Laws;  Superstitions,  Customs,  Language,  Trade,  Arts  and 
Commerce  of  Ashantee;  with  a  Diary,  kept  by  Mr.  Hutchison, 
during  his  residence  in  its  Capital.  It  also  contains  a  sketch 
of  Gaboon,  and  a  few  remarks  in  reference  to  future  missions 
into  the  interior. 
9 


bo  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [M&yV 

To  illustrate  successfully,  the  important  information  obtained 
by  Mr.  Bowdich,  of  the  Geography  of  Africa,  would  require  a 
Map,  which  circumstances  do  not  permit  us  at  this  time  to  pre- 
sent to  our  readers.  We  pass  over,  therefore,  this  portion  of 
the  work,  with  the  single  remark,  that  the  countries  bordering 
upon  Ashantee  contain  a  population  far  more  numerous,  wealthy 
and  powerful,  than  we  had  imagined;  and  open  a  vast  and  entire- 
ly unexplored  field,  for  the  inquiries  of  future  adventurers. 

Of  the  History  of  Ashantee,  founded  principally  upon  vague 
traditionary  testimony,  we  will  give  but  a  few  of  the  more  pro- 
minent particulars.  In  his  investigations  on  this  subject,  Mr. 
Bowdich  was  obliged  to  encounter  the  absurd  superstition  of  the 
natives,  "that  to  speak  of  the  death  of  a  former  King,  affects 
the  life  of  the  present  equally  with  inquiring  who  would  be  his 
successor;  and  to  converse  of  either  is  made  a  capital  crime  by 
the  law."  Hence  information  was  to  be  derived  principally  from 
the  Moors,  whose  recent  establishment  in  the  country  could 
not  justify  entire  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  their  statements. 

"According  to  a  common  tradition,  which  I  never  heard  contradicted 
but  once,  the  Ashantees  emigrated  from  a  country  nearer  the  water  side, 
and  subjecting  the  western  Intas,  and  two  lesser  powers,  founded  the  pre- 
sent kingdom.  These  people  being  comparatively  advanced  in  several 
arts,  the  Ashantees  necessarily  adopted  a  portion  of  their  language  with 
the  various  novelties;  which  probably  created  the  limited  radical  difference 
between  their  language  and  that  of  the  Fantees;  for  I  could  not  find,  after 
taking  the  greatest  pains,  more  than  two  hundred  words  unknown  to  the 
latter.  The  weights  of  the  Inta  country,  in  particular,  were  adopted  with 
their  names,  by  the  conquerors,  without  the  least  alteration. 

"The  Ashantee,  Fantee,  Warsaw,  Akim,  Assin,  and  Aquapim  languages 
are  indisputably  dialects  of  the  same  root;  their  identity  is  even  more  strik- 
ing than  that  of  the  dialects  of  the  ancient  Greek:  now  the  Fantees  and 
Warsaws  both  cherish  a  tradition,  which  exists  also  in  many  Ahanta  fami- 
lies, that  they  were  pressed  from  the  interior  to  the  water  side  by  the  suc- 
cessful ambition  of  a  remote  power;  whence  it  may  be  concluded,  that  the 
Ashantee  emigration  we  are  now  considering,  was  posterior  to  a  more  im- 
portant movement  of  the  whole  people,  corresponding  with  that  of  their 
neighbours.  I  will  not  dilate  upon  this  secondary  subject  by  referring  to 
internal  evidence,  there  is  nothing  to  recompense  either  the  investigation 
or  the  perusal. 

"One  curious  evidence  however  may  be  added  of  the  former  identity  of 
the  Ashantee,  Warsaw,  Fantee,  Akim,  Assin,  Aquamboe,  and  part  of  the 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  6? 

Ahanta  rations;  which  is  a  tradition  that  the  whole  of  these  people  were 
originally  comprehended  in  twelve  tribes  or  families;  the  Aquonna,  Abroo- 
too,  Abbradi,  Essonna,  Annona,  Yoko,  Intchwa,  Abadie,  Appiadie,  Teh- 
weedam,  Agoona,  and  Doomina;  in  which  they  class  themselves  still,  with- 
out any  regard  to  national  distinction.  For  instance,  Ashantees,  Warsaws,, 
Akims,  Ahantas,  or  men  of  any  of  the  nations  before  mentioned  will  sever- 
ally declare,  that  they  belong  to  the  Annona  family;  other  individuals  of 
the  different  countries,  that  they  are  of  the  Tchweedam  family;  and  when 
this  is  announced  on  meeting,  they  salute  each  other  as  brothers.  The 
King  of  Ashantee  is  of  the  Annona  family,  so  was  our  Accra  and  one  of  the 
Fantee  linguists;  Amanquatea  is  of  the  Essonna  family.  The  Aquonna, 
Essonna,  Intchwa,  and  Tchweedam,  are  the  four  patriarchal  families,  and 
preside  over  the  intermediate  ones,  which  are  considered  as  the  younger 
branches.  I  have  taken  some  pains  to  acquire  the  etymology  of  thes* 
words,  but  with  imperfect  success;  it  requires  much  labour  and  patience, 
both  to  make  a  native  comprehend,  and  to  be  comprehended  by  him.— 
Quonna  is  a  buffalo,  an  animal  forbade  to  be  eaten  by  that  family.  Abroo- 
too  signifies  a  corn  stalk,  and  Abbradi  a  plantain.  Annona  is  a  parrot,  but 
it  is  also  said  to  be  a  characteristic  of  forbearance  and  patience.  Esso  is  a 
bush  cat,  forbidden  food  to  that  family.  Yoko  is  the  red  earth  used  to 
paint  the  lower  parts  of  the  houses  in  the  interior.  Intchwa  is  a  dog,  much 
relished  by  native  epicures,  and  therefore  a  serious  privation.  Appiadie 
signifies  a  servant  race.  Etchwee  is  a  panther,  frequently  eaten  in  the  in- 
terior, and  therefore  not  unnecessarily  forbidden.  Agoona  signifies  a  place 
where  palm  oil  is  collected.  These  are  all  the  etymologies  in  which  the 
natives  agree.  Regarding  these  families  as  primaeval  institutions,  I  leave 
the  subject  to  the  conjectures  of  others,  merely  submitting,  that  the  four 
patriarchal  families,  the  Buffalo,  the  Bush  Cat,  the  Panther,  and  the  Dog, 
appear  to  record  the  first  race  of  men  living  on  hunting;  the  Dog  family, 
probably,  first  training  that  animal  to  assist  in  the  chase.  The  introduction 
of  planting  and  agriculture,  seems  marked  in  the  age  of  their  immediate 
descendants,  the  Corn  stalk  and  Plantain  branches.  The  origin  and  im- 
provement of  architecture  in  the  Red  earth;  and  of  commerce,  probably, 
in  the  Palm  oil:  indeed,  the  natives  have  included  the  Portuguese,  the  first 
foreign  traders  they  knew,  in  that  family,  alleging,  that  their  long  and 
more  intimate  intercourse  with  the  blacks,  has  made  the  present  race  a 
mixture  of  the  African  and  Portuguese  The  Servant  race  reminds  us  of 
the  curse  of  Canaan.  This  resembles  a  Jewish  institution,  but  the  people 
of  Accra  alone  practise  circumcision,  and  they  speak  a  language,  as  will 
be  shown,  radically  distinct,  yet  not  to  be  assimilated  to  the  Inta,  to  which 
nation  they  are  referred  by  the  Fantees,  merely  because  it  is  the  nearest 
which  practises  circumcision.  Accra  is  a  European  corruption  of  the  word 
Inkran,  which  means  an  ant,  and  they  say  the  name  was  either  given  or 
assumed  on  account  of  their  numbers:  this  must  have  been  before  their 
wars  with  the  Aquamboes. 


68  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [May, 

"The  conduct  of  the  later  emigration  of  the  Ashantees  is  ascribed  to  Sai 
Tootoo,  who,  assisted  by  other  leading  men  of  the  party,  and  encouraged 
by  superstitious  omens,  founded  Coomassie,  and  was  presented  with  the 
stool,  or  made  King,  from  his  superior  qualifications.  This  account  is  sup- 
ported by  the  mixed  nature  of  the  government,  founded  on  equality  and 
obligation,  and  the  existence  of  a  law,  exempting  the  direct  descendants 
of  any  of  SaY  Tootoo's  peers  and  assistants  (in  whom  the  Aristocracy  origi- 
nated) from  capital  punishment. 

"The  Dwabin  monarchy  is  said  to  have  been  founded  at  the  same  time 
by  Boitinne,  who  was  of  the  same  family  as  Sai  Tootoo,  being  the  sons  of 
sisters. 

"The  Ashantee  government  concentred  the  mass  of  its  original  force* 
and  making  the  chiefs  resident  in  Coomassie  and  the  few  large  towns  they 
built  in  its  neighbourhood,  with  titular  dignities,  conciliated  those  whom 
they  subdued  by  continuing  them  in  their  governments,  and  checked  them 
by  exacting  their  frequent  attendance  at  festivals,  politically  instituted.— 
Military  command  seems  to  have  been  the  sole  prerogative  of  Sai  Tootoo; 
his  judicial  and  legislative  power  being  controlled  by  the  chiefs  or  aristoc- 
racy much  more  than  at  present,  who,  as  in  the  Teutonic  governments,  di- 
rected the  common  business  of  the  state,  only  consulting  a  general  assem- 
bly on  extraordinary  occasions. 

"Sai"  Tootoo  did  not  live  to  see  all  the  streets  of  Coomassie  completed, 
for  war  being  declared  against  Atoa,  a  district  between  Akim  and  Assin* 
he  invaded  that  country.  The  chief  of  the  Atoas,  unable  to  face  such  a 
power,  dexterously  insinuated  his  small  force  through  the  forest,  until  he 
reached  the  rear  of  the  Ashantee  army,  which  the  King  was  following 
leisurely  with  a  guard  of  a  few  hundred  men,  all  of  whom  were  destroyed 
by  the  Atoas,  who  shot  the  King  in  his  hammock.  This  happening  near  a 
place  called  Cormantee,  (razed  to  the  ground  in  vengeance,)  and  on  a  Sa- 
turday, the  most  solemn  oath  of  the  Ashantees,  is  'by  Saturday  and  Cor- 
mantee;* ('Miminda  Cormantee;')  and  no  enterprise  has  since  been  under- 
taken on  that  day  of  the  week. 

The  report  of  the  Moors  is,  that  the  kingdom  of  Ashantee  has 
been  founded  about  110  years.  The  present  King,  Sai  Tootoo 
Quamina,  is  the  sixth  that  has  occupied  the  royal  seat,  and  was 
elevated  to  the  throne  in  1799.  He  is  represented  as  intelli- 
gent, brave,  generous,  amiable  in  private  life,  but  ambitious, 
and  anxious  to  extend  his  kingly  power.  The  following  anec- 
dotes are  illustrative  of  his  character. 

"The  King  had  sent  to  demand  the  royal  stool  of  Buntooko  or  Gaman, 
which  was  thickly  plated  and  embossed  with  gold;  it  was  given  up  by 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  69 

Adinkara,  the  King,  from  fear;  his  sister,  a  woman  of  masculine  spirit  and 
talent,  and  the  soul  of  the  government,  being  absent.  On  her  return,  she 
reproached  her  brother  severely,  and  ordered  a  solid  gold  stool  to  be  made 
to  replace  it.  That  being  also  demanded,  as  the  right  of  the  superior,  with 
a  large  gold  ornament  in  the  shape  of  an  elephant,  dug  out  from  some  ru- 
ins, the  sister,  receiving  the  ambassadors,  replied,  that  the  King  should  not 
have  either,  and  added,  impressing  it  with  more  force  than  delicacy,  that 
her  brother  and  she  must  change  sexes,  for  she  was  most  proper  for  a  King, 
and  would  fight  to  the  last  rather  than  be  so  constantly  despoiled.  The 
King  of  Ashantee  sent  word  that  she  was  fit  to  be  a  king's  sister,  and  a 
strong  woman,  and  he  would  give  her  twelve  months  to  prepare  for  war. — 
Several  embassies  have  been  sent,  however,  to  negotiate;  two  during  our 
stay,  the  latter,  it  was  said,  with  an  offer  of  400  Bendas,  (£3,200)  but  the 
aristocracy  were  obstinate,  and  urged  to  the  King,  that  his  other  tributa- 
ries would  laugh  at  him,  if  he  did  not  get  the  King  of  Gaman's  head. 

*'His  admiration  of  ingenious  rather  than  splendid  novelty,  has  frequent- 
ly imposed  the  appearance  of  a  covetousness,  scarcely  culpable  from  his 
reverence  for  invention,  and  the  amazement  its  extent  excited.  To  pre- 
sent him  with  the  trifles  which  attracted  his  notice  when  he  visited  us,  of- 
fended him:  he  told  us  we  must  only  answer  his  questions,  and  let  him  ex- 
amine them ;  to  make  dashes  on  the  occasion  of  a  private  visit,  was  to  viti- 
ate the  motive  of  the  condescension,  which  could  not  be  repeated  unless 
we  paid  more  respect  to  his  dignity  and  friendship.  His  humanity  is  fre- 
quently superior  to  his  superstition  and  policy;  he  offended  Quatchi  Quofie, 
one  of  the  four,  by  limiting  the  human  sacrifices  at  his  mother's  funeral, 
and  resisted  all  the  importunities,  founded  on  precedent,  for  the  allowance 
of  a  greater  number.  He  dismissed  us  twice  with  apologies  for  not  pro- 
ceeding  to  business;  confessing,  the  first  time,  that  he  had  been  unusually 
irritated  just  after  he  sent  for  us,  and  had  not  recovered  his  calmness;  the 
latter,  that  some  agreeable  news  had  induced  him  to  drink  more  than  fitted 
him  to  hear  great  palavers  like  ours.  In  his  judicial  administration,  a  lie 
always  aggravated  the  punishment,  and  truth  generally  extenuated,  and 
sometimes  atoned  of  itself  for  the  offence:  he  invariably  anticipated  the  te- 
merity of  perjury,  where  convicting  evidence  was  to  be  opposed  to  the  ac- 
cused. The  King's  manners  are  a  happy  mixture  of  dignity  and  affability, 
they  engage  rather  than  encourage,  and  his  general  deportment  is  concili- 
ating though  repressive.  He  speaks  well,  and  more  logically  than  most 
of  his  council,  who  are  diffusive,  but  his  superior  talent  is  marked  in  the 
shrewd  questions  by  which  he  fathoms  a  design  or  a  narrative.  He  excels 
in  courtesy,  is  wisely  inquisitive,  and  candid  in  his  comparisons:  war,  legis- 
lation, and  mechanism,  were  his  favouril  e  topics  in  our  private  conversa- 
tions. The  great,  but  natural  fault  of  the  King  is  his  ambition;  1  do  not 
think  it  has  ever  proved  superior  to  the  pledge  of  his  honour,  but  it  cer- 
tainly has,  and  that  frequently,  to  his  sense  of  justice,  which  is  repressed 


70  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [May, 

rather  than  impaired  by  it.  This  sketch  of  his  character  being"  narrowed  to 
my  own  knowledge,  will  be  assisted  by  the  following-  history  of  Agay,-  the 
second  linguist. 

"Agay,  when  a  boy,  carried  salt  from  Aquoomo  to  Coomassie  for  sale; 
he  was  afterwards  taken  into  the  service  of  Aquootoo,  caboceer  of  that 
p!ace,  against  whom  the  government  had  instituted  a  palaver;  but  wrong- 
fully. Agay  accompanied  the  caboceer  when  he  was  sent  for  to  Coomassie 
for  judgment.  After  the  King's  messengers  had  spoken,  misrepresenting 
the  case  in  preference  to  confessing  the  King  to  be  in  the  wrong,  and  the 
caboceer  was  confused,  this  boy  suddenly  rose,  and  said,  to  use  the  words 
of  the  narrators,  'King,  you  have  people  to  wash  you,  to  feed  you,  to  serve 
you,  but  you  have  no  people  to  speak  the  truth  to  you,  and  tell  you  when 
God  does  not  like  your  palaver.'  The  assembly  cried  out  unanimously, 
that  the  boy  might  be  hurried  away  and  his  head  taken  off;  but  the  King 
said,  *No!  let  him  finish;*  and  Agay  is  said  to  have  spoken  three  hours,  and 
to  have  disclosed  and  argued  the  palaver  to  the  King's  conviction,  and  his 
master's  acquittal.  He  was  retained  to  attend  the  King,  but  treated  with 
no  particular  distinction.  A  serious  palaver  occurring  between  two  princi- 
pal men,  it  was  debated  before  the  council,  who  were  at  a  loss  to  decide, 
but  inclined  to  the  man  whom  the  King  doubted;  judgment  was  suspend*- 
ed.  In  the  interim  the  King  sent  Agay,  privately,  to  the  house  of  each,  to 
hear  their  palavers  in  turn,  tete-a-tete;  he  did  so,  and  when  the  King  asked 
him  who  he  thought  was  right,  he  confirmed  his  impression.  'Now,'  said 
the  King,  *I  know  you  have  a  good  head.'  Agay  was  then  made  a  Lin- 
guist, and  presented  with  a  house,  wives,  slaves,  and  gold.  Sometime  after- 
wards, the  King  confessing  a  prejudice  against  a  wealthy  captain,  his  lin- 
guists, always  inclined  to  support  him,  said,  *If  you  wish  to  take  his  stool 
from  him,  we  will  make  the  palaver;'  but  Agay  sprung  up,  exclaiming, 
*No,  King!  that  is  not  good;  that  man  never  did  you  any  wrong;  you  know 
all  the  gold  of  your  subjects  is  yours  at  their  death,  but  if  you  get  all  now, 
Strangers  will  go  away  and  say,  only  the  King  has  gold,  and  that  will  not 
be  good;  but  let  them  say  the  King  has  gold,  all  his  captains  have  gold, 
and  all  his  people  have  gold,  then  your  country  will  look  handsome,  and 
the  bush  people  fear  you.'  For  this  the  King  made  him  second  linguist, 
and  much  increased  his  property.  When  Amanqua  had  the  command  of 
the  army  against  Cudjo  Cooma,  the  King  asked  him  which  linguist  he 
would  take,  he  replied,  Adoosee  or  Otee;  the  King  said,  No!  I  will  give 
you  this  boy,  he  has  the  best  head  for  hard  palavers.  Amanqua  urged 
that  he  was  too  young,  the  King  told  him  he  was  a  fool  to  say  so.  He 
then  made  Amanqua  take  fetish  with  him  to  report  the  merits  of  Agay 
faithfully,  who  distinguished  himself  so  much,  that  he  is  always  employed 
in  difficult  foreign  palavers." 

The  higher  order  of  Captains  are  represented  as  "dignified 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  71 

courteous,  and  hospitable  in  private;  but  haughty  and  abrupt  in 
public.  In  their  opinion,  war  affords  the  most  desirable  field 
for  glory,  and  the  ambition  of  their  King  is  his  greatest  virtue. 
The  common  people  are  ungrateful,  insolent  and  licentious. 

The  King,  the  Aristocracy,  now  reduced  to  four,  and  the  As- 
sembly of  Captains,  are  the  three  estates  of  the  Ashantee  Gov- 
ernment. The  Aristocracy  exert  their  influence  without  hesita- 
tion in  reference  to  foreign  politics,  but  seldom  express  an  opin- 
ion concerning:  the  domestic  administration  of  affairs.  The 
Ashantees  believe  that  this  form  of  government  renders  them 
more  formidable  to  their  enemies,  "who  feel  that  they  cannot 
provoke  with  impunity,  where  there  are  so  many  guardians  of 
the  military  glory,"  and  also  that  the  decrees  of  a  monarch  have 
naturally  more  force  with  a  people,  (over  whom  his  power  is 
unlimited)  when  issued  without  regard  to  any  inferior  authority. 
The  following  are  among  the  laws  enumerated  by  Mr.  Bowdich, 

"The  most  original  feature  of  their  law,  that  of  succession,  has  been, 
mentioned  in  the  History,  with  the  argument  on  which  it  is  founded:  it  is 
universally  binding;  the  course  is,  the  brother,  the  sister's  son,  the  son,  the 
chief  vassal  or  slave  to  the  stool.  In  the  Fantee  country,  the  principal 
slave  succeeds  to  the  exclusion  of  the  son,  who  only  inherits  his  mother's 
property,  frequently  considerable,  and  inherited  from  her  family  indepen- 
dently of  her  husband:  the  daughters  share  a  small  part  of  the  fetish  or  or 
namental  gold,  which  is  much  alloyed  with  silver. 

"The  King  is  heir  to  the  gold  of  every  subject,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest;  the  fetish  gold  and  the  cloths  are  generally  presented  by  him  to  the 
successor  to  the  stool,  from  which  the  slaves  and  other  property  of  the  de- 
ceased are  inseparable. 

"The  gold  buried  with  members  of  the  royal  family,  and  afterwards  de* 
posited  with  their  bones  in  the  fetish  house  at  Bantama,  is  sacred;  and  can? 
not  be  used,  but  to  redeem  the  capital  from  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  or  i$ 
extreme  national  distress;  and  even  then,  the  King  must  avoid  the  sight  of 
it,  if  he  wotdd  avoid  the  fatal  vengeance  of  the  fetish  or  deity. 

"If  a  slave  seeks  refuge  from  an  ally  or  tributary,  he  is  restored;  if  from 
an  unconnected  power,  he  is  received  as  a  free  subject. 

"The  blood  of  the  son  of  a  King,  or  of  any  of  the  royal  family,  cannot  be 
shed;  but  when  guilty  of  a  crime  of  magnitude,  they  are  drowned  in  the 
river  Dah,  by  a  particular  captain,  named  Cudjo  Samfani. 

"If  a  man  swears  on  the  King's  head,  that  another  must  kill  him,  which 
is  understood  to  be  invoking  the  King's  death  if  he  does  not,  the  other  man 
must  do  so;  or  forfeit  the  whole  of  his  property,  and  generally  his  life,—- 


7t  Review  of  Mission,  4*c.  [May, 

This  very  frequently  occurs,  for  the  blacks  in  their  ardor  for  revenge,  do 
not  regard  sacrificing  their  own  lives  to  bring  a  palaver  on  their  murderer, 
which  their  families  are  sure  to  do. 

"To  be  convicted  of  cowardice  is  death. 

"If  any  subject  picks  up  gold  dropped  in  the  market  place,  it  is  death, 
being  collected  only  by  order  of  the  government  on  emergencies. 

"Interest  of  money  is  33  5  per  cent,  for  every  forty  days,  which  is  accom- 
panied after  the  first  period  by  a  dash  of  liquor.  When  the  patience  of  the 
creditor  is  exhausted,  he  seizes  the  debtor,  or  even  any  of  his  family,  as 
slaves,  and  they  can  only  be  redeemed  by  the  payment.  This  barbarous 
law  was  nearly  the  same  in  Athens.* 

"The  accuser  is  never  discovered  or  confronted  to  the  accused,  nor  the 
evidence  revealed,  until  the  latter  has  fully  replied  to  the  charge,  as  out- 
lined by  the  king's  linguists. 

"If  a  great  man  kills  his  equal  in  rank,  he  is  generally  allowed  to  die  by 
his  own  hands:  the  death  of  an  inferior  is  generally  compensated  by  a  fine 
to  the  family,  equal  to  seven  slaves,  f 

*1f  an  aggry  bead  is  broken  in  a  scuffle,  seven  slaves  are  to  be  paid  to 
the  owner. 

"It  is  forbidden,  as  it  was  by  Lycurgus,  to  praise  the  beauty  of  another 
man's  wife,  being  intrigue  by  implication. 

"Those  accused  of  witchcraft,  or  having  a  devil,  are  tortured  to  death. 

"The  good  treatment  of  slaves  is  in  some  degree  provided  for,  by  the  li- 
berty they  have  of  dashing  or  transferring  themselves  to  any  freeman  \ 
wrhom  they  enjoin  to  make  them  his  property  by  invoking  his  death  if  he 
does  not;  an  imperative  appeal." 

fTobe  continued.  J 

*  "  In  Ahanta,  all  old  debts  must  be  paid  within  six  weeks  from  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Contoom  or  Harvest  Custom.  The  creditor  can  panyar 
or  seize  not  only  the  family,  but  the  townsmen  of  the  debtor. 

f  "A  person  accidentally  killing  another  in  Ahanta,  pays  5  oz.  of  gold  to 
the  family,  and  defrays  the  burial  customs.  In  the  case  of  murder,  it  is 
20  oz.  of  ,<old  and  a  slave;  or,  he  and  his  family  become  the  slaves  of  the 
family  of  the  deceased.  If  a  man  dashes  himself  to  the  fetish  on  the  head 
of  another,  the  other  must  redeem  him.  If  a  man  kills  himself  on  the  head 
of  an  -  *r,  the  other  must  kill  himself  also,  or  pay  20  oz.  to  the  family:  in 
Fantee  the  sum  is  indefinitely  great:  this  is  frequently  resorted  to,  when 
there  is  no  other  prospect  of  revenge. 

"Adumissa,  an  extraordinarily  beautiful  red  skinned  woman  of  Cape 
Coast,  possessed  numerous  admirers,  but  rejected  them  all.  One  of  them, 
in  despair,  shot  himself  on  her  head  close  to  her  house.  The  family  de- 
manding satisfaction;  to  save  her  relations  from  a  ruinous  palaver,  she  re- 
solved to  shoot  herself  in  expiation.  She  accordingly  assembled  her 
friends  and  relatives  from  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  sitting,  richly 
dressed,  killed  herself  in  their  presence  with  golden  bullets.  After  the 
body  bad  been  exposed  in  state,  it  was  buried  with  a  profusion  of  cloths 
and  gold.  The  beautiful  Adumissa  is  still  eulogised,  and  her  favourite 
patterned  cloth  bears  her  name  amongst  the  natives." 


ii628.]  M-.  Blackford's  Address.  ?$ 


AAAxess 

Before  the  Auxiliary  Colonization  Society  of  Fredericksburgi 
Virginia.     By  William  M.  Blackford,  Esq. 

The  considerations  presented  in  this  very  valuable  address, 
must  lend,  we  think,  especially  at  the  South,  a  very  important 
influence  in  favour  of  our  cause.  The  honour  of  having  first 
proposed  the  scheme  of  the  Society,  is  claimed  by  Mr.  Black- 
ford, for  the  State  of  Virginia.  Nor  can  it  be  denied,  that  the 
Legislature  of  that  State  is  entitled  to  vast  credit,  for  the  reso- 
lution adopted  by  her  on  this  subject,  in  December  1816.  This 
resolution,  doubtless,  encouraged  the  founders  of  our  Society 
in  their  earliest  efforts,  and  excited  a  hope,  which  we  trust,  will 
not  be  disappointed,  that  the  object  of  our  Institution  would 
finally  receive  the  patronage  of  the-  States  and  the  Nation. — 
Public  sentiment  will,  we  believe,  at  no  very  remote  period,  re- 
quire that  our  enterprise  should  be  promoted  by  the  Legislatures 
of  the  Country.  The  following  extract  from  this  address,  we 
earnestly  recommend  to  the  perusal  of  all  our  readers. 

"Not  more  injustice  has  been  done  the  Society  in  misrepresenting  its 
views,  than  in  misapprehending-  the  means  by  which  it  seeks  their  accom- 
plishment. It  has  been  sneeringly  asked  if  we  hoped  to  effect  a  work  so 
mighty  as  the  removal  of  the  free  people  of  colour,  by  the  precarious  means 
which  public  charity  from  time  to  time  places  at  our  disposal.  We  answer, 
no. — As  well  might  we  undertake  by  throwing  pebbles  at  the  pyramids  to 
Jay  them  prostrate  on  the  ground.  No  one  who  is  conversant  with  the 
proceedings  of  the  Society — no  one  who  has  read  its  annual  exposes,  could 
rest  under  such  a  delusion.  Repeatedly  has  the  Society  unequivocally 
avowed  that  it  depended  on  the  state  and  national  governments  to  complete 
the  fabric  of  which  it  could  only  hope  to  lay  the  foundation.  The  employ- 
ment of  the  energies  of  the  nation  entered  into  the  views  of  the  original 
friends  of  the  scheme.  The  object  was  national,  and  justly  they  thought, 
that  national  should  be  the  means  used  in  its  accomplishment.  But  before 
the  assistance  of  the  nation  could  be  asked  with  any  prospect  of  success, 
much  was  to  be  done.  The  practicability  of  the  plan,  was  to  be  in  some 
measure  ascertained— information  collected — territory  purchased — the  wil- 
lingness of  the  people  to  emigrate  tested — and  the  problem  of  the  possibil- 
ity of  a  Colony  existing  in  Africa  solved.  The  public  mind  moreover  was 
to  be  acted  upon,  and  conflicting  interests  enlisted  in  the  cause.  Here 
10 


T4  Mr.  Blackford's  Mdrtss.  [May, 

was  a  sphere  for  the  operation  of  a  private  society,  unconnected  with  gov- 
ernment anil  supported  by  voluntary  contribution,  and  in  this  sphere  has 
the  Society  laboured  faithfully  and  successfully. 

"Deeply  conscious  of  their  inability,  without  national  aid,  to  remove  from 
this  and  to  establish  in  Africa  a  number  sufficient  to  produce  a  sensible  di- 
minution of  the  free  coloured  population,  they  did  indulge  the  hope, 
which  has  been  fully  realized,  that  zeal  and  perseverance  would  enable 
them  to  transport  as  many  as  would  illustrate  the  feasibility  of  the  scheme. 
They  well  knew  that  the  existence  of  a  settlement,  however  small,  whilst 
it  served  as  a  rallying*  point  for  the  hopes  of  friends,  would  address  itself 
with  more  force  to  the  lukewarm,  than  arguments  the  most  convincing  or 
appeals  the  most  animated.  Such  a  settlement  there  is  now  on  the  coast 
of  Africa,  enjoying,  in  the  seventh  year  of  its  existence,  happiness  and 
prosperity  without  a  parellel  in  the  a  nnals  of  colonization;  and  the  Society 
is  now  prepared  to  solicit  and  expect  the  harmonious  co-operation  of  the 
federal  and  state  governments.  It  is  asked,  not  in  behalf  of  some  Utopian 
scheme  of  impracticable  philanthropy,  or  adventurous  folly:  the  request  is 
founded  on  considerations  of  justice,  interest,  and  humanity;  and  although 
national  aid  may  be  for  a  season  postponed,  it  will  ultimately  be  granted. — 
Constitutional  scruples  and  sectional  jealousies  will  be  merged  in  the  patri- 
otic considerations  of  enlightened  policy — and  with  the  aid  of  the  national 
government,  who  will  say  the  scheme  is  impracticable  ?  Bear  with  me, 
whilst  I  show  at  what  a  comparatively  trifling  expense  the  whole  number 
of  free  blacks  might  be  removed  from  our  shores, — we  will  take  250,000  as 
the  present  number.  The  expense  incurred  by  the  Society  in  the  expe- 
ditions recently  fitted  out,  did  not  exceed  $20  per  head,  including  provisions 
for  a  six  weeks'  voyage.  Now,  it  is  apparent  that  competition  and  the  fa- 
cilities afforded  by  a  growing  commerce  between  the  colony  and  the  pa- 
rent country  would  diminish  this  price  perhaps  one-half — certainly  one- 
fourth.  Let  §15,  then,  be  the  charge.  The  removal  of  the  whole  num- 
ber would  cost  but  §3,750,000.  The  removal  of  course  would  be  gradual, 
and  this  amount  not  called  for  in  any  one  year.  The  number  which  might 
annually  be  removed  would  depend  on  the  capacity  of  the  Colony  to  re- 
ceive, and  this  capacity  would  increase  in  an  accelerated  ratio.  Take  then 
a  period — say  20  years,  and  let  the  average  annual  exportation  be  12,500 — 
within  that  time,  at  an  average  annual  expenditure  of  less  than  §190,- 
000,  the  whole  of  this  anomalous  population  would  be  drained  off. — 
Is  this  a  chimerical  project }  Is  the  scheme  of  colonization  so  absurd,  that 
the  bare  mention  of  it  should  curl  with  contempt  the  lip  of  the  pragmatic 
politician?  are  the  resources. of  the  country  unable  to  sustain  such  a  draft 
on  the  Treasury?  Shall  it  be  said  that  the  energies  of  a  great  nation  are 
incompetent  to  the  restoration  of  some  10  or  15,000  souls  to  a  land,  from 
which  the  cupidity  of  individuals  annually  purloins  ten  times  the  number, 
in  defiance  of  all  the  legislative  denunciations  which  British  or  American 
humanity  has  prompted. 


1828.]  Mr.  Blackford9 s  Address.  75 

"To  many  ardent  friends  of  the  scheme,  and  to  all  its  opponents,  the  idea 
of  federal  agency  in  its  accomplishment  is,  I  am  aware,  sincerely  deprecat- 
ed. To  the  first  of  these,  with  all  possible  respect  for  their  scruples,  I 
would  remark,  that  if  colonization  ever  is  to  be  effected,  the  interposition 
of  the  General  Government  is  indispensable,  from  the  disabilities  which 
the  states  labour  under,  by  the  constitution.  No  state  is  permitted  to  enter 
into  any  treaty  or  to  support  a  naval  force — now  it  is  apparent  the  exercise 
•f  both  these  powers  would  be  necessary  in  the  establishment  of  colonies; 
or  granting"  the  states  to  possess  all  requisite  powers,  were  they  to  attempt 
coloniiation,  each  would,  perhaps,  have  its  own  settlement;  and,  instead 
of  one  flourishing  and  profitable  colony,  we  should  see  a  number  of  feeble 
ones,  burthensome  to  the  parent  state  and  conflicting  in  interests  with 
each  other.  The  states,  most  interested,  might  and  would,  no  doubt,  con- 
tribute to  the  society,  when  the  patronage  of  the  National  Government  had 
given  to  it  that  stability  which,  as  a  private  institution,  however  respecta- 
ble, it  could  not  possess.  Maryland,  indeed,  in  the  spirit  of  a  liberal  and 
enlightened  policy,  already  makes  an  annual  appropriation;  and  Virginia 
has  shown  her  sense  of  its  importance  by  repeated  and  generous  dona* 
taons." 

Mr.  Bradford  expatiates  upon  the  inestimable  benefits,  which 
will  result  from  the  execution  of  the  Society's  plan.  The  sup- 
pression of  the  slave  trade,  the  civilization  of  Africa,  and  the 
deliverance  of  our  country  from  its  most  threatening  evil,  may 
all  be  consequences  of  its  vigorous  prosecution.  But  we  must 
conclude  our  too  brief  notice  of  this  address,  by  inviting  the 
public  attention  to  a  few  of  the  closing  sentences. 

*1  have  now  recapitulated,  and  answered  I  hope,  objections  whieh  have 
been  coeval  with  the  Society.  One  word  more  in  relation  to  others  of  re- 
cent date,  so  equivocal  in  character  as  to  seem  like  compliments  in  disguise. 
It  has  been  gravely  alleged  that  ours  is  a  'gigantic*  Society.  Granted;  and 
is  not  the  object  to  be  attained  gigantic?  It  has  been  said  that  it  is  'self- 
created  .'  We  ask  when  was  there  a  benevolent  society  that  was  not  self- 
created?  We  are  charged  with  possessing  a  'great  moral  influence  '  We 
are  happy  to  hear  it,  and  hope  it  may  increase,  until  it  pervades  every  sec- 
tion of  the  Union.  Again,  the  clergy,  and  Christians  of  every  denomina- 
tion, support  it.  This  is  a  charge  which  we  can  neither  palliate  nor  deny; 
we  confess  its  truth,  but  see  in  it  no  turpitude. 

"Such,  fellow-citizens,  is  the  American  Colonization  Society — such  its 
origin — such  its  progress — and  such  the  results  which,  in  a  sober  spirit,  we 
may  anticipate  from  the  success  of  its  plans.  And  should  the  mighty 
scheme  be  not  realized  in  all  its  parts  and  to  its  full  extent,  blessings  will 
nevertheless  be  attained  proportionate  to  the  degree  to  which  it  will  bare 


76  Vark  on  the  Civilizing  of  Jlfrica.  [May? 

been  carried.  This  is  not  a  charity  which  accomplishes  nothing",  if  it  ac- 
complishes not  all.  On  the  contrary,  a  great  good  has  already  been  done. 
The  germ  of  an  Americo-African  empire  has  been  planted;  and  though  our 
Society  should  be  dissolved  to-morrow,  it  will  flourish  and  expand  until  it 
overshadows  a  continent.  Already  has  the  miniature  Commonwealth  of 
Liberia  impressed  the  natives  with  respect  for  the  strength,  and  admiration 
for  the  beauty  of  the  institutions  of  civilized  life.  By  the  justice  which  has 
marked  its  intercourse  with  them,  the  Colony  has  already  attained  an  al- 
most boundless  influence  over  the  neighbouring  tribes.  The  ascendency 
will  be  maintained,  and  must  increase,  until  tribe  after  tribe,  subdued  by 
the  bland  influence  of  civilization  and  the  simple  power  of  the  gospel,  shall 
melt  into  and  become  incorporated  with  the  community.  No  cruel  process 
•f  extermination,  such  as  marked  with  blood  the  settlement  of  this  country, 
will  there  be  necessary.  The  settlers  and  natives  are  of  the  same  race,  and 
amalgamation,  so  far  from  being  there  impracticable,  will  be  natural,  and 
indeed  unavoidable.  Let  no  one,  then,  refuse  his  aid,  because  years,  ge- 
nerations, perhaps,  must  pass  away,  before  the  vast  outline  can  be  filled 
up.  We  may  not  live  to  enjoy  the  blessings  which  must  result  from  the 
accomplishment  of  the  plan;  but  with  a  firm  faith  in  its  ultimate  success,  it 
is  our  duty  to  bring  heart,  hand,  and  purse,  to  secure  to  our  children  and 
ft>  our  children's  children  the  rich  inheritance.  The  plan  will  succeed. — 
It  is,  I  verily  believe,  from  Heaven — and  Heaven's  blessing  will  attend  it 
in  every  stage  of  its  progress .  A  glorious  era  is  yet  in  store  for  Africa, 
when  we  shall  have  rendered  unto  her  the  things  which  are  her's — an  era, 
more  glorious  than  any  she  has  known,  awaits  America,  when,  from  the  At- 
lantic to  the  Pacific,  there  shall  be  none  other  than  one  happy,  united,  ho- 
mogeneous race  of  freemen.  Then  in  the  fulness  of  time  shall  two  mighty 
renovated  continents  rise  up  to  call  him  blessed,  who  gave  the  first  impulse 
to  the  cause  of  African  Colonization  !  !  " 

Pack's 

Testimony  in  favour  of  the  possibility  of  Civilizing  the  Africans, 

"It  appears"  (observes  Mr.  Park  in  summing  up  his  account 
of  the  trade  of  Africa),  "that  slaves,  gold,  and  ivory,  together 
with  the  few  articles  enumerated  in  the  beginning  of  my  work, 
viz.  bees- wax  and  honey,  hides,  gums,  and  dye-woods,  consti- 
tute the  whole  catalogue  of  exportable  commodities.  Other  pro- 
ductions, however,  have  been  incidentally  noticed  as  the  growth 
of  Africa;  such  as  grain  of  different  kinds,  tobacco,  indigo,  cot- 


1828.]  Jlbduhl  Rahahman.  77 

ton-wool,  and  perhaps  a  few  others;  but  of  all  these  (which  can 
only  be  obtained  by  cultivation  and  labour)  the  natives  raise  suf- 
ficient only  for  their  own  immediate  use;  nor,  under  the  present 
system  of  their  laws,  manners,  trade,  and  government,  can  any 
thing  farther  be  expected  from  them.  It  cannot,  however,  ad- 
mit of  a  doubt,  that  all  the  rich  and  valuable  productions,  botb 
of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  might  easily  be  naturalized  and 
brought  to  the  utmost  perfection  in  the  tropical  parts  of  this  im- 
mense continent.  Nothing  is  wanting  to  this  end  but  example 
to  enlighten  the  minds  of  the  natives,  and  instruction  to  enable 
them  to  direct  their  industry  to  proper  objects.  It  was  not  pos- 
sible for  me  to  behold  the  wonderful  fertility  of  the  soil;  the  vast 
herds  of  cattle,  proper  both  for  labour  and  food;  and  a  variety 
of  other  circumstances  favourable  to  colonization  and  agricul- 
ture; and  reflect,  withal,  on  the  means  which  presented  them- 
selves of  a  vast  inland  navigation;  without  lamenting  that  a 
country,  so  abundantly  gifted  and  favoured  by  nature,  should 
remain  in  its  present  savage  and  neglected  state.  Much  more 
did  I  lament,  that  a  people,  of  manners  and  dispositions  so  gen- 
tle and  benevolent,  should  either  be  left,  as  they  now  are,  im- 
mersed in  the  gross  and  uncomfortable  blindness  of  pagan  super- 
stition, or  permitted  to  become  converts  to  a  system  of  bigotry 
and  fanaticism,  which,  without  enlightening  the  mind,  often  de- 
bases the  heart." — [Park's  Travels,  chap,  xxiii. 


AbOxRil  T^alialmvaii, 

THE    UNFORTUNATE   MOORISH    PRINCE. 

Our  number  for  February  contained  some  account  of  this  very 
interesting  individual,  in  a  letter  from  a  Gentleman  of  NatcheZo 
A  few  days  since  we  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a  communi- 
cation from  the  same  Gentleman,  by  the  hand  of  Prince.  The 
following  is  an  extract: — 

"It  affords  me  the  highest  gratification  to  say,  that  the  bearer 
of  this  letter  is  Prince,  the  Captive  Moor,  in  whose  behalf  I  ad- 


78  Abduhl  Rahahmaiu  [May, 

dressed  you  in  February  last.  Since  the  date  of  my  letter,  he 
has  been  manumitted,  and  now\  proceeds  to  Washington. 

"Prince,  ascertaining  that  he  was  about  to  proceed  to  his  na- 
tive country,  became  deeply  solicitous  that  his  aged  wife  might 
accompany  him.  I  immediately  issued  a  paper  for  subscriptions; 
and  so  great  was  the  respect  for  this  unfortunate  man,  that  the 
sum  of  two  hundred  dollars,  the  price  at  which  his  wife  was 
valued  by  her  master,  was  raised  I  believe  in  twenty -four  hours. 
We  are  able,  of  course,  to  forward  her  and  Prince  by  the  same 
conveyance.  They  have  children,  and  most  devoutly  wish  they 
might  go  with  them,  &c. 

"Prince  is  extremely  anxious  to  obtain  an  Arabic  Testament. 
This,  I  presume,  you  can  provide  for  him.  He  leaves  this  place, 
Sir,  with  many  benedictions.  May  the  kindness  of  an  overru- 
ling Providence  protect  him  from  the  dangers  of  the  mighty 
deep — return  him  in  safety  to  the  land  of  his  nativity — make 
him  an  instrument  of  much  good — may  he  be  gathered  to  his 
fathers  in  peace." 

We  have  repeatedly  conversed  with  Prince,  since  his  arrival 
in  our  City;  nor  have  our  expectations  concerning  him,  in  any 
respect  been  disappointed.  He  is  intelligent,  modest,  and 
obliging.  Though  he  has  been  in  slavery  forty  years,  his  man- 
ners are  not  merely  prepossessing,  but  dignified.  He  is  now 
anxiously  engaged  in  seeking  to  obtain  the  means  of  purchasing 
his  children.  A  liberal  subscription  has  been  commenced  in  this 
District,  and  it  is  the  purpose  of  Prince  to  visit  our  more  north- 
ern cities  for  the  same  object.  When  we  recollect  the  kindness 
of  Prince's  family  in  his  own  country  to  an  American  Citizen, 
(unintentionally  left  by  a  vessel  on  the  coast,)  how  this  individu- 
al during  a  period  of  sickness  was  hospitably  entertained  by  his 
Father  for  six  months,  and  in  all  probability  by  this  means,  his 
life  preserved;  we  cannot  but  regard  this  unfortunate  man,  as 
having  peculiar  claims  upon  the  assistance  of  our  countrymen. 
At  our  request,  Prince  has  written  a  concise  history  of  himself, 
and  we  have  penned  a  translation  of  it  from  his  own  lips.  The 
only  liberty  we  have  taken,  is  to  correct  those  grammatical  in- 
accuracies, which  resulted  from  his  imperfect  knowledge  of  our 
language. 


1828.]  dbduhl  Rahahman.  79 

ABDUHL  RAHAHMAN'S  HISTORY. 

"I  was  born  in  the  City  of  Tombuctoo.  My  Father  had  been 
living  in  Tombuctoo,  but  removed  to  be  King  in  Teembo,  in 
Foota  Jallo.  His  name  was  Almam  Abrahim.  I  was  five 
years  old  when  my  father  carried  me  from  Tombuctoo.  I  lived 
in  Teembo,  mostly,  until  I  was  twenty-one,  and  followed  the 
horsemen.  I  was  made  Captain  when  I  was  twenty-one — after 
they  put  me  to  that,  and  found  that  I  had  a  very  good  head,  at 
twenty-four  they  made  me  Colonel.  At  the  age  of  twenty-six, 
they  sent  me  to  fight  the  Hebohs,  because  they  destroyed  the 
vessels  that  came  to  the  coast,  and  prevented  our  trade.  When 
we  fought,  I  defeated  them.  But  they  went  back  one  hundred 
miles  into  the  country,  and  hid  themselves  in  the  mountain.—- 
We  could  not  see  them,  and  did  not  expect  there  was  any  ene- 
my. When  we  got  there,  we  dismounted  and  led  our  horses, 
until  we  were  half  way  up  the  mountain.  Then  they  fired  upon 
us.  We  saw  the  smoke,  we  heard  the  guns,  we  saw  the  people 
drop  down.  I  told  every  one  to  run  until  we  reached  the  top 
of  the  hill,  then  to  wait  for  each  other  until  all  came  there,  and 
we  would  fight  them.  After  I  had  arrived  at  the  summit,  I 
could  see  no  one  except  my  guard.  They  followed  us,  and  we 
ran  and  fought.  I  saw  this  would  not  do.  I  told  every  one  to 
run  who  wished  to  do  so.  Every  one  who  wished  to  run,  fled. 
I  said  I  will  not  run  for  an  African.  I  got  down  from  my  horse 
and  sat  down.  One  came  behind  and  shot  me  in  the  shoulder. 
One  came  before  and  pointed  his  gun  to  shoot  me,  but  seeing 
my  clothes,  (ornamented  with  gold,)  he  cried  out,  that!  the 
King.  Then  every  one  turned  down  their  guns,  and  came  and 
took  me.  When  they  came  to  take  me,  I  had  a  sword  under 
me,  but  they  did  not  see  it.  The  first  one  that  came,  I  sprang 
forward  and  killed.  Then  one  came  behind  and  knocked  me 
down  with  a  gun,  and  I  fainted.  They  carried  me  to  a  pond  of 
water,  and  dipped  me  in;  after  I  came  to  myself  they  bound  me. 
They  pulled  off  my  shoes,  and  made  me  go  barefoot  one  hundred 
miles,  and  led  my  horse  before  me.  After  they  took  me  to  their 
own  country,  they  kept  me  one  week.  As  soon  as  my  people 
got  home,  my  father  missed  me.  He  raised  a  troop,  and  came 
after  me;  and  as  soon  as  the  Hebohs  knew  he  was  coming,  thry 


&0  Jbbduhl  Rahahman,  [May, 

carried  me  into  the  wilderness.  After  my  father  came  and 
burnt  the  country,  they  carried  me  to  the  Mandingo  country,  on 
the  Gambia.  They  sold  me  directly,  with  fifty  others,  to  an 
English  ship.  They  took  me  to  the  Island  of  Dominica.  After 
that  I  was  taken  to  New  Orleans.  Then  they  took  me  to  Nat- 
chez, and  Colonel  F.  bought  me.  I  have  lived  with  Colonel  F. 
40  years.  Thirty  years  I  laboured  hard.  The  last  ten  years  I 
have  been  indulged  a  good  deal.  I  have  left  five  children  be- 
hind, and  eight  grand  children.  I  feel  sad,  to  think  of  leaving 
my  children  behind  me.  I  desire  to  go  back  to  my  own 
country  again;  but  when  I  think  of  my  children,  it  hurts  my 
feelings.  If  I  go  to  my  own  country,  I  cannot  feel  happy,  if 
my  children  are  left.  I  hope,  by  God's  assistance,  to  recover 
them.  Since  I  have  been  in  Washington,  I  have  found  a  good 
many  friends.  I  hope  they  will  treat  me  in  other  cities  as  they 
have  treated  me  in  the  city  of  Washington,  and  then  I  shall  get 
my  children.  I  want  to  go  to  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and  N. 
York,  and  then  I  shall  return  hither  again." 

HIS  INTERVIEW  WITH  DR.  COX. 

"Dr.  Cox  was  a  surgeon  on  board  a  ship.  He  went  ashore  in 
Africa,  and  got  lost.  When  he  returned,  he  found  the  vessel 
gone.  He  set  out  to  travel,  and  came  into  my  country,  Foota 
Jallo — our  people  saw  him,  and  ran  and  told  my  father,  that 
they  saw  a  white  man.  My  father  told  them  to  bring  the  white 
man  here,  that  he  might  see  him.  They  brought  Dr.  Cox,  and 
my  father  asked  him  whither  he  was  going.  He  said  he  knew 
not  where  to  go,  that  the  ship  had  left  him,  and  that  he  had  a 
bad  sore  leg.  My  father  inquired  what  was  the  matter  with  his 
leg.  He  said  he  had  wounded  it  in  travelling.  My  father  told 
him,  he  had  better  go  no  farther,  but  stay  with  him,  and  he 
would  get  a  woman  to  cure  his  leg.  He  was  soon  cured.  My 
father  told  him  to  stay  as  long  as  he  chose.  He  remained  six 
months.  One  day  my  father  asked  him,  if  he  wished  to  go  to 
his  own  country.  He  said  yes.  My  father  said,  what  makes 
you  desire  to  go  back — you  are  treated  well  here?  He  answer- 
ed, that  his  father  and  mother  would  be  anxious,  when  the  ves- 
sel returned  without  him,  thinking  he  might  be  dead.  My 
father  told  him,  whenever  you  wish  to  go,  I  will  send  a  guard  to 


1528.]  Abduhl  Rahahmau.  &! 

accompany  you  to  the  ship.     Then  fifteen  men  were  sent  with 
him  by  my  father  for  a  guard,   and  he  gave  him  gold  to  pay  his 
passage  home.     My  father  told  the  guard,   that  if  a  vessel  was 
there,  to  leave  the  Doctor,  but  not  to  go  on  board  the  ship;  and 
if  there  was  no  vessel,   to  bring  the  Doctor  back.     They  waited 
some  time,   and  then  found  the  same  vessel  in  which  he  came, 
and  in  that  he  took  his  passage.     After  that  I  was  taken  prison- 
er, and  sent  to  Natchez*     When  I  had  been  there  sixteen  years, 
Dr.  Cox  removed  to  Natchez,  and  one  day  I  met  him  in  the 
street.     I  said  to  a  man  who  came  with  me  from  Africa,  Sambo, 
that  man  rides  like  a  white  man  I  saw  in  my  country.     Sec 
when  he  comes  by;  if  he  opens  but  one  eye,  that  is  the  same  man. 
When  he  came  up,   hating  to  stop  him  without  reason,   I  said 
master,  you  want  to  buy  some  potatoes?     He  asked,  what  pota- 
toes have  you?     While  he  looked  at  the  potatoes,  I  observed 
him  carefully,   and  knew  him,   but  he  did  not  know  me.     He 
said  boy,  where  did  you  come  from?     I  said  from  Col.  F's.     He 
said,  he  did  not  raise  you.     Then  he  said,  you  came  from  Teem- 
bo?     I  answered,  yes,  sir.     He  said,  your  name  Abduhl  Rahah- 
man?     I  said,  yes,  sir.     Then  springing  from  his  horse,  he  em- 
braced me,  and  inquired  how  I  came  to  this  country?    Then  he 
said,  dash  down  your  potatoes  and  come  to  my  house.     I  said  I 
could  not,  but  must  take  the  potatoes  home.     He  rode  quickly, 
and  called  a  negro  woman  to  take  the  potatoes  from  my  head. 
Then  he  sent  for  Gov.  W.,   to  come  and  see  me.     When  Gov. 
W.  came,  Dr.  Cox  said,  I  have  been  to  this  boy's  father's  house, 
and  they  treated  me  as  kindly  as  my  own  parents.     He  told  the 
Gov.,  if  any  money  would  purchase  me,  he  would  buy  me,  and 
send  me  home.     The  next  morning  he  inquired  how  much  would 
purchase  me,  but  my  master  was  unwilling  to  sell  me.     He  of- 
fered large  sums  for  me,  but  they  were  refused.     Then  he  said 
to  master,  if  you  cannot  part  with  him,  use  him  well.     After 
Dr.  Cox  died,  his  son  offered  a  great  price  for  me," 


a 


Su  Late  from  Liberia-  [May. 


"Late  from  lAbfcYia. 

We  had  room  in  our  last  number,  merely  to  announce  to  our 
readers,  the  arrival  of  despatches  (bearing  date  March  3d)  by 
the  Randolph  from  Liberia,  and  to  state  a  few  of  the  leading 
items  of  intelligence.  The  Randolph  with  26  passengers  from 
Georgetown,  South  Carolina;  the  Doris  with  107,  principally 
from  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  and  Maryland;  and  the  Nautilus 
with  160,  most  of  them  from  the  three  last  mentioned  states, 
had  arrived  in  safety.  The  Emigrants  from  South  Carolina  first 
arrived,  and  had  enjoyed  almost  universal  and  perfect  health. — 
"We  confidently  expect  them  (says  Mr.  Ashmun)  to  escape  the 
fever  altogether."  The  passengers  by  the  Doris  had  suffered 
severely,  and  a  very  unusual  number  of  deaths  (24)  had  occur- 
red among  those  who  had  resided  in  states  north  of  Virginia. 

"Draw  a  line,"  says  Mr.  Ashmun,  "due  east  and  west,  across 
Elk  Ridge,  in  Maryland,  and  not  a  death  has  invaded  the  peo- 
ple from  the  south  of  it."  It  deserves  likewise  to  be  mention- 
ed, that  the  last  dry  season  upon  the  African  Coast,  was  a  pe- 
culiarly unhealthy  one;  that  the  passage  of  the  Doris  was  pro- 
tracted to  the  period  of  sixty-one  days;  and  that  in  consequence, 
symptoms  of  the  scurvy  had  appeared  among  the  emigrants. — 
The  combined  influence  of  these  causes,  doubtless,  increased 
the  violence  of  the  disease;  and  of  course,  the  extent  of  the 
mortality.  One  other  fact  should  be  mentioned,  which  is,  "that 
all  the  deaths  occurred  in  Monrovia,  not  one  in  Caldwell;  where 
somewhat  less  than  one-half  of  the  company,  had  from  the  first 
been  quartered.  Most  sent  up  the  river  were,  however,  Virgi- 
nians— but  not  all."  On  this  fact,  we  quote  the  remarks  oi 
Mr.  Ashmun. 

"There  is,  as  I  have  before  stated,  an  average  difference  of  temperature 
in  favour  of  Caldwell,  of  3£  to  4°,  taking1  the  heat  of  the  24  hours,  at  the 
two  places,  for  months  together.  No  doubt,  a  corresponding  difference  in 
other  properties  of  the  atmosphere,  affecting  the  healthiness  of  the  two 
situations,  exists.  What  we  have  experienced  in  this  instance,  is  the  coun- 
terpart of  all  our  past  experience,  of  the  relative  healthiness  of  the  two 
places.  Except  two  children,  I  know  not  that  ever  an  individual  has  yet 
died  of  fever  in  Caldwell.     It  may  be  inquired,  why  were  not  all  the  pen 


1828.]  Late  from  Liberia.  83 

pie  sent  to  Caldwell  ?  A  large  proportion  of  the  whole  company  had 
friends  in  Monrovia,  who  insisted  with  great  earnestness,  on  retaining  them 
in  their  families;  or,  in  such  spare  buildings  as  they  could  fit  up  for  their 
accommodation.  I  advised  all  except  one  family,  whom  I  wished  to  settle 
in  Monrovia,  to  go.  Perhaps  I  ought  to  have  compelled.  But  300  people 
was  more  than  the  Caldwell  Receptacle  could  contain.  I  was  obliged  to 
acquiesce  in  some  arrangement  which  would  furnish  more  room,  and  there- 
fore the  more  readily  consented  to  the  stay  of  too  great  a  number  in  town.'* 

At  the  date  of  these  communications,  the  emigrants  by  the 
Nautilus  were  in  good  health,  though  they  had  been  in  Africa 
far  too  short  a  time  to  feel  the  influences  of  the  climate.  As 
they  are  mostly  from  the  South,  we  may  reasonably  hope,  that 
they  will  escape  any  severe  sufferings  from  sickness. 

All  who  have  observed  the  progress  of  our  infant  Colony, 
must  be  aware,  that  its  high  character  of  prosperity  and  promise, 
results  in  great  measure,  at  least,  from  the  distinguished  energy 
and  wisdom  of  the  Colonial  Agent.  That  his  life  and  useful- 
ness should  have  been  so  long  continued,  considering  the  dan- 
gers and  toils  of  his  station,  will  be  viewed  by  the  devout,  as  a 
cause  for  special  gratitude  to  the  Supreme  Disposer  of  events. 
From  the  season  (more  than  six  years  ago)  when  the  earliest 
emigrants  began  to  erect  their  dwellings  on  Cape  Montserado, 
the  present  Agent  has  superintended  with  dauntless  courage, 
unyielding  fortitude,  and  an  energy  and  discretion  perhaps 
never  exceeded,  the  affairs  of  the  Colony,  and  conducted  it  for- 
ward to  its  present  interesting  and  imposing  position;  nor  in  all 
this  time  has  he  once  permitted  any  personal  affliction,  however 
severe,  or  public  calamity,  however  discouraging,  to  subdue  his 
confidence  or  quench  his  hopes.  All  will  regret  to  learn,  that 
the  strength  of  his  constitution  has  proved  inadequate  to  sustain 
uninjured  his  recent  efforts;  and  read  with  more  than  ordinary 
emotion,  the  concluding  sentences  of  the  following  extract. — ■ 
May  the  Father  of  Mercies  long  defer  the  event,  the  probable 
speedy  occurrence  of  which  is  alluded  to  by  the  writer  in  terms 
expressive  of  piety  and  benevolence,  so  deeply  affecting! 

"Early  in  January,  I  made  a  most  fatiguing  visit  of  inspection,  &c,  to 
some  of  our  leeward  settlements.  Returning  on  the  17th,  I  found  in  our 
harbour,  the  Brig  Hope  of  Boston,  awaiting  my  return,  according  to  the 
*enor  of  instructions  given  by  the  owners  to  their  Captain.     1  also  found  the 


84  Late  from  Liberia.  [May. 

Romp,  and  Aretas  from  Portland,  awaiting"  my  return,  under  somewhat  simi  - 
lar  circumstances.  The  Schooner  Susan  was  also  there — and  the  Ran- 
dolph had  arrived  with  emigrants  the  evening  before.  The  same  evening 
came  to  anchor  the  Doris,  with  her  107  people.  Such  an  accumulation  of 
labour  I  never  felt  pressing  on  me  before.  Days  and  nights  were  too  short. 
But  I  despatched  previous  to  the  25th,  three  of  the  vessels — when  another 
arrived  from  Sierra  Leone,  with  special  claims  on  niv  attention.  A  pirati- 
cal Spaniard  now  came  into  our  waters  strongly  armed,  and  being  refused 
in  his  saucy  application  to  trade  ashore,  he  uttered  certain  threats  of  re- 
taliation in  the  course  of  the  night,'  which  made  it  necessary  to  chase  him 
out  of  our  roads,  and  keep  him  off  by  force.  In  this  business,  I  had  my 
3hare  of  the  fatigue  and  exposure  till  a  late  hour.  Immediately  after,  I  re- 
ceived a  proposal  from  the  interior,  for  opening  a  new  trade  path,  on  con- 
dition of  our  forming  a  settlement  and  factory  at  the  head  of  navigation  on 
the  St.  Paul's  river,  which  admitted  of  no  option — but  required  me  imme- 
diately to  explore  that  situation — and  visit,  for  tedious  negotiation,  all  the 
intermediate  kings  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  This  business  I  accomplish- 
ed in  three  days  and  nights — spending  one  night  in  the  bush,  beyond  the 
habitations  of  the  coast  tribes.  Returning,  one  of  the  most  tedious  inquests 
(of  which  such  particulars  as  the  Board  are  interested  in,  shall  be  given)  I 
ever  assisted  in,  employed  me,  and  our  magistrates,  for  four  successive  days. 
This  ended — after  assigning  the  emigrants  their  land,  on  the  2nd  of  Febru- 
ary; I  was  confined  by  a  laborious  session  of  our  Court,  to  the  Court-House, 
two  successive  days  longer.  This  was  the  5th  of  February.  I  had  felt  my 
strength  giving  way — but  there  seemed  no  alternative.  But  Providence 
now  taught  me,  He  could  do  without  my  officious  services.  February  5th 
at  night,  a  raging  fever  seized  me.  Several  of  the  people  sickened  about 
the  same  time.  Up  to  the  21st,  I  was  tossing  on  the  brink  of  eternity — 
And  that  I  am  recovered  so  far  as,  for  the  two  days  past,  moderately  to  re- 
sume my  labours,  is  to  me  matter  of  great  astonishment.  My  delirium  com- 
monly abated  with  the  return  of  day-light,  and  left  my  shattered  mind  suf- 
ficiently clear  to  gve  a  few  plain  general  instructions  to  those,  on  whose 
immediate  activity  the  welfare  of  the  people,  and  the  progress  of  the  Colo- 
ny depends.  These  were  very  faithfully  followed  out — and  little  detri- 
ment, I  trust,  has  resulted  to  any  of  its  affairs  from  my  being  laid  aside. — 
One  death  has,  in  the  time,  occurred,  within  my  own  family — Mr.  S.  E. 
Burnham,  Supercargo  of  several  of  Mr.  Cox's  vessels  on  the  coast,  who  died 
of  consumption;  in  the  last  stage  of  which,  I  had  received  him  into  the 
house  only  ten  days  before.  For  the  last  four  days  my  strength  has  return- 
ed, almost  as  rapidly  as  it  went.  But  I  hope  the  event  will  advertise  the 
Board,  that  the  constitution  of  their  Agent,  here,  is  not  to  be  depended  on 
— and  that  a  most  probable  item  of  intelligence  may  very  shortly  be,  that 
he  too,  is  numbered  with  the  departed.  May  provision  be  made  according- 
ly.   For  myself,  alone,  the  event  has  no  appalling  features — but,  to  leave 


1828.]  Late  from  Liberia*  85 

the  Colony — to  quit  a  field  of  labour  forever,  in  which  so  Utile  is  yet  done 
and  so  much  ought  to  be  done — here,  I  fear,  will  be  the  distressing  pang"  of 
dying".  But  the  Colony  depends,  I  am  persuaded,  on  the  life  of  no  one  or 
ten  individuals;  and  it  is  a  vanity  I  do  not  indulge,  that  it  has  any  such  de- 
pendence on  my  own.  But  it  is  a  field  of  labour,  in  which,  if  better  work- 
men are  not  employed,  I  wish  to  be  myself,  so  long  as,  with  the  divine  bles- 
sing",  I  can  do  any  good." 

The  feeble  health  of  the  Colonial  Agent,  prevented  any  full 
communications  in  regard  to  the  general  concerns  of  the  Colony; 
The  Board  have  been  favoured,  however,  with  the  following  in- 
teresting facts,  relating  to  New  Settlements. 

"Having  just  before  my  illness  chartered  to  a  small  company  of  our  old- 
est settlers,  certain  exclusive  privileges  for  the  term  of  two  years,  on  con- 
dition they  immediately  removed  to  the  head  of  Navigation  on  the  St. 
Paul's,  and  there  formed  an  agricultural  settlement  in  connexion  with  a 
public  factor}',  to  receive  all  the  interior  trade  from  that  direction,  I  have 
the  satisfaction  to  state,  that  they  proceeded  to  occupy  it  on  the  12th  of 
February. — I  had  previously,  perfectly  reconciled  the  minds  of  the  Dey,  or 
St.  Paul's  Chiefs,  to  the  idea  of  such  a  settlement  at  that  place,  at  an  ex- 
pense of  about  100  bars.  The  country — the  finest,  I  must  say,  I  have  yet 
seen  in  Africa  for  a  settlement — had  long  been  vacated — and  left  as  a  sort 
of  barrier  between  the  coast  and  interior  tribes — without  being  particularly 
claimed  by  any.  Hence  the  easy  terms  on  which  we  have  obtained  the  oc- 
cupancy of  it.  A  large  log  factory  is  now  nearly  completed,  and  with  a 
range  of  houses  sufficient  to  accommodate  thirty  or  forty  people, — built 
chiefly  in  the  country  style.  One  of  the  conditions  of  the  charter  is,  that 
the  settlers  cultivate  the  present  season  (ending  15th  of  May)  32  acres.—- 
The  country  is  easily  cleared — and  abounds  in  small  streams  of  fresh  water; 
the  St.  Paul's  itself,  at  the  Falls,  is  always  sweet.  To  this  settlement  king 
Boatswain,  with  whom  we  are  at  present  on  very  free  and  friendly  terms, 
has  engaged,  and  is  believed  to  be  now  employing  a  large  force  in  opening 
a  trade  road  from  his  own  residence .  The  distance  is  about  one  hundred 
miles;  but  from  the  nearest  part  of  the  old  route,  not  more  than  fifty.  It  is 
hoped  the  great  thoroughfare  into  the  heart  of  Africa,  will  therefore,  as  re- 
gards the  native  traders,  lie  directly  to,  and  terminate  at  this  settlement. — 
Its  agricultural  advantages  will  of  course  attract  to  it,  a  large  body  of  far- 
mers in  a  short  time;  and  its  growth  may  be  reasonably  expected  to  be  ra- 
pid. Agreeably  to  the  order  of  the  Board,  we  call  it  'Mills  &  Burgess;'  or, 
by  way  of  contraction,  to  avoid  some  worse  abbreviation,  the  charter  has  it 
'alias,  Millsburg.'  The  Young  Sesters  settlement,  contemplated  in  my  last, 
has  been  deferred  in  consequence  of  the  obstinate  and  wretched  war  be- 
tween Sesters  and  Trade  Town,  continuing  to  rage  with  a  blind  fury;  which 


86  Late  from  Liberia,  L^ay> 

forbids  the  hope  of  its  speedy  termination — and  would  place  a  few  settlers 
in  a  state  of  perpetual  alarm  and  insecurity. 

"Most  of  the  candidates  for  that  settlement,  are  now  at  St.  John's — - 
We  are  beginning1  this  long  contemplated  Sub-Colony,  but  in  a  very  mode- 
rate and  silent  way — as  nothing  seems  likely  to  be  gained  by  forcing  its 
growth,  beyond  its  own  natural  speed.  Mr.  Benson  is  our  steward  for  that 
station — but  has  not  yet  repaired  to  his  charge.  The  factor  at  present  has 
charge  of  the  public  property — and  the  direction  of  the  operations  of  the 
settlers.  Mr.  Warner,  so  long  and  deeply  interested  in  the  Sesters — has 
associated  five  or  six  individuals  with  himself,  and  petitioned  us  for  liberty 
to  proceed  and  settle  there,  notwithstanding  the  great  unseasonableness  of 
such  an  enterprise.  We  refused  to  sanction  so  wild  a  project — by  afford- 
ing it  the  public  aid  and  protection.  He  persisted  in  his  petition  for  liber- 
ty to  go  without  either;  and  having  obtained  it,  has  actually  gone  with  his 
followers.  The  enterprise,  as  a  private  one,  is  however  not  perfectly  ap- 
proved— but  the  individuals  can  only  injure  themselves — and  if  they  should 
happen  to  keep  a  footing  there,  may  benefit  the  Colony.  This  company 
consists  wholly,  (except  Woods  of  Baltimore,  per  the  Doris)  of  old  set- 
tlers, who  in  such  an  undertaking,  ought  to  know  what  they  are  about." 

It  is  the  decided  opinion  of  Mr.  Ashmun,  ''•That  for  at  least 
two  years  to  come,  a  much  more  discriminating  selection  of  set- 
tiers  must  be  made  than  ever  has  been — even  in  the  first  and  se- 
cond expeditions  by  the  Elizabeth  and  Nautilus,  in  1820,  and 
"21 — or  that  the  prosperity  of  the  Colony  will  inevitably  and  ra- 
pidly decline."  *  At  the  end  of  that  time,  he  remarks,  a  "healthy 
proportion  of  working  and  idle  people  will  be  found  here,  and 
the  free  coloured  population  of  the  United  States,  may  then  be 
taken  up  just  as  they  are  found  there,  the  working  and  the  idle, 
as  they  are  now  naturally  distributed  throughout  the  American 
States — and  sent  to  this  Colony — and  my  character  for  the 
stake,  under  good  management,  they  will  not  be  felt  by  it  as  a 
burden." 

Again  he  observes,  "If  rice  grew  spontaneously,  and  covered 
the  country,  yet  it  is  possible  by  sending  few  or  none  able  to 
reap  and  clean  it,  to  starve  ten  thousand  helpless  children  and 
infirm  old  people  in  the  midst  of  so  much  plenty.     Rice  does 

*  Mr.  Ashmun  advises  that  no  person  be  received  for  emigration,  wlio  if 
he  is  not  an  abh  bodied  man,  is  not  a  member  ofsutha  man's  family — or,  any 
able  bodied  man  who  has  more  than  3  or  4  at  most,  dependent  on  him  for  a 
support. 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  87 

not  grow  spontaneously  however,  nor  can  any  thing  necessary 
for  the  subsistence  of  the  human  species,  be  procured  here  with- 
out the  sweat  of  the  brow.  Clothing,  tools,  and  building  mate- 
rials are  much  dearer  here  than  in  America.  But  send  out  your 
emigrants  laborious  men  and  their  families  only — or  laborious 
men  and  their  families,  accompanied  with  only  their  natural  pro- 
portion of  ineflicients;  and  with  the  ordinary  blessing  of  God,  you 
may  depend  on  their  causing  you  a  light  expense  in  Liberia,  and 
fixing  themselves  speedily  and  easily  in  comfortable  and  inde- 
pendent circumstances.  I  further  think  I  may  safely  say,  that 
in  no  new  country  in  the  world,  would  they  be  likely  to  meet 
with  so  many  advantages,  and  find  it  so  easy  to  get  in  a  way  of 
comfortable  living,  by  their  own  moderate  industry." 

To  send  out  "inopcratives"  at  the  present,  is  deemed  by  the 
Colonial  Agent  highly  inexpedient.  His  views  are  concisely 
stated  in  few  words.  "If  such  persons  are  to  be  supported  by 
American  funds,  why  not  keep  them  in  America,  where  they 
can  do  something  by  picking  cotton  and  stemming  tobacco,  to- 
wards supporting  themselves?  I  know  that  nothing  is  effectual- 
ly done,  in  colonizing  this  country,  till  the  Colony's  own  re- 
sources can  sustain  its  own  and  a  considerable  annual  increase 
of  population.  To  this  point  it  has  been  my  great  anxiety  to 
bring  it;  and  adopting  and  persisting  in  the  course  I  have  recom- 
mended, I  am  certain  the  Board  will  see  it  soon  reach  this  point." 


"Latest  from  TAberia. 

We  have  received  information  (just  as  the  last  sheet  of  our 
number  is  going  to  the  press,)  of  the  arrival  of  the  Doris,  Capt. 
Matthews,  in  New  York,  by  way  of  the  West  Indies.  The  Co- 
lonial Agent,  Mr.  Ashmun,  was  compelled  as  the  last  hope  of 
recovering  his  health,  to  take  passage  in  the  Doris  for  the  Unit- 
ed States.  His  sufferings  during  the  voyage  to  the  West  In- 
dies, were  extreme;  and  on  his  arrival  at  St.  Bartholomews,  he 
was  obliged  to  place  himself  under  the  care  of  a  Physician,  and 
to  see  the  Doris  sail  witho.it  him.  .    The  following  letter,  it  will 


88  Latest  from  Liberia.  [May, 

be  seen,  was  written  before  he  had  fully  determined  to  make 
any  stay  at  that  Island. 

Island  of  St.  Bartholomews,  West  Indies,  May  10,  1828. 

"Dear  Sir.  By  a  small  Baltimore  vessel  bound  hence  to-morrow,  I  have 
just  time  and  strength  to  inform  you,  of  my  arrival  here  yesterday  evening 
in  the  Doris,  47  days  from  Liberia.  The  enclosed  certificate  and  accom- 
panying letters  will  show,  in  what  a  low  state  of  health  I  left — and  am  sor- 
ry to  be  unable  to  state,  that  the  passage  has  been  attended  with  all  the 
advantages  anticipated  from  it.  The  form  of  my  disorder  has,  however, 
taken  on  a  new  appearance,  and  at  present  consists  chiefly  in  swelled  feet 
and  legs,  attended  with  topical  inflammation,  and  a  severe,  seated,  and  con- 
stant pain — which  nearly  takes  from  me  the  power  of  sleeping,  and  is  at 
times  nearly  intolerable.  I  am  now  in  the  hands  of  a  physician  of  the  Is- 
land, who  has  the  reputation  of  being  skilfull — and  with  whom  it  will  be 
necessary  for  me  to  remain — 1  hope  not  many  days — but  God  knows — and 
I  am  submissive.  The  Doris  remains  here  only  four  or  five  days — I  shall 
certainly  continue  my  passage  home  in  her,  if  it  can  be  done  without  rash- 
ness— and  if  not,  by  the  next  conveyance  after  my  health  is  sufficiently 
amended  to  endure  the  voyage . 

"I  left  the  Colony  the  25th  March.  The  severe  sickness  had  extended 
no  further  than  to  the  Doris's  company — all  the  other  late  emigrants  had 
passed  their  seasoning  without  much  danger  or  suffering.  The  health  of 
the  people  generally,  was  good;  and  the  usual  internal  prosperity,  and  ex- 
ternal tranquillity  happily  prevailed. 

"I  was  enabled  to  arrange  the  concerns  of  the  Colony  with  Mr.  Cary, 
even  to  the  minutest  particulars — and  I  have  the  greatest  confidence  that 
his  administration  will  prove  satisfactory,  In  a  high  degree,  to  the  Board, 
and  advantageous  to  the  Colony. 

"Excuse  the  unavoidable  brevity  of  this  note — and  expect,  Dear  Sir, 
very  shortly,  either  to  hear  from,  or  see  me,  per  the  Doris. 

Meantime,  Respectfully 

Your  Obedient  Servant, 

J.  ASHMUN" 
The  Rev.  R.  R.  Gurlet,  S.  A.  C.  S.t  Washington. 

Under  date  of  May  13th,  he  writes,  "after  a  severe  struggle 
with  myself,  I  am  obliged  to  yield  to  necessity,  and  see  the  Do- 
ris sail  hence  for  the  United  States  without  me,  uncertain  when 
I  am  to  follow,  if  at  all.  The  nature  of  my  first  attack,  I  have 
already  stated  by  the  Randolph  Mr.  Cary's  certificate  will 
show  the  nature  of  my  symptoms,  on  leaving  Liberia.  During 
the  passage  of  47  days,  my  sufferings  were  nearly  indescribable. 


1828.]  Latest  from  Liberia.  89 

I  spent  two  weeks  in  the  anticipation  of  an  almost  certain  death, 
before  I  should  see  land  again,  and  was  at  length  wholly  con- 
fined to  my  cot.  On  my  arrival  here,  a  thorough  examination 
of  my  case  discovered,  that  the  form  of  the  disorder  had  chang- 
ed since  leaving  the  African  Coast;  and  that  the  evils  of  it  could 
only  be  removed  by  slow  degrees,  and  my  exhausted  strength, 
and  skeleton  frame,  could  bear  none  but  the  mildest  medical 
treatment.  To  pursue  my  voyage  home  by  the  Doris,  has  been 
pronounced  by  my  physician,  as  a  certain  means,  either  of  bring- 
ing all  my  complaints  to  a  speedy  and  fatal  termination,  or  of 
giving  them  an  inveteracy,  which  would  render  them  incurable. 

fciSuch  are  the  circumstances  under  which  I  am  obliged  to 
submit  to  the  heavy  expense,  and  other  still  more  painful  conse- 
quences attendant  on  a  stay  (perhaps  a  final  one)  in  this  Island. 
I  entered  three  days  ago,  on  an  active  course  of  medicines,  and, 
while  my  strength  remains  much  as  it  was,  my  disordered  legs 
and  chest  are  already  very  sensibly  relieved." 

From  the  concluding  sentence,  we  are  led  to  indulge  strong 
hope,  that  a  merciful  God  will  yet  spare  to  a  cause,  which  he 
has  served  with  such  pure  and  heroic  devotedness — with  such 
remarkable  energy  and  success — this  invaluable  man;  and  that 
we  shall  be  permitted  to  see  his  face  once  more — be  allowed  to 
express  to  him,  personally,  the  respect,  more,  the  admiration 
which  we  feel  for  him,  and  which  his  conduct  in  laying  the  foun- 
dation of  the  African  Colony,  and  conducting  it  forward  to  its 
present  high  place  of  promise,  has  excited  in  the  breasts  of 
thousands.  The  reward  which  he  seeks,  is  not  this  world's 
honour;  but  cold  would  be  the  heart  that  at  a  moment  like  this, 
could  hesitate  to  offer  with  its  expressions  of  sympathy,  a  sin- 
cere tribute  of  praise. 

Mr.  Ashmun  mentions  the  kind  attentions  of  Mr.  Matthews, 
in  terms  of  great  respect  and  gratitude;  and  observes,  that 
nothing  could  have  given  him  greater  satisfaction,  than  to  have 
completed  the  voyage  in  the  Doris. 

We  have  received  several  letters  from  the  Rev.  Lott  Cary, 
Vice-Agent  of  the  Colony,  and  others;  all  of  whom  mention  with 
grief,  the  departure  of  Mr.  Ashmun;  yet  appear  to  be  in  the  en- 
joyment of  great  prosperity. 

12 


!W)  Extracts  from  Correspondence-  [-May, 

"Extracts  from  CoiTes^owAewce. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Virginia. 

I  congratulate  you  on  the  handsome  legacy  which  He,  who,  as  I 
believe,  first  put  it  into  the  hearts  of  some  of  his  faithful  servants  to 
establish  our  Society,  and  whose  kind  providence  fostered  and 
protected  it,  has  lately  caused  Mr.  Burr,  of  Vermont,  to  leave 
to  this  Institution.  I  would  fain  hope  that  it  may  be  the  means 
of  inspiring  its  friends  with  new  ardour.  A  pious  and  exempla- 
ry Christian  of  this  town,  lately  deceased,  has,  by  her  last  will, 
directed  her  slaves,  six  in  number,  to  be  sent  to  the  Colony,  at 
the  expense  of  her  estate,  if  they  shall  think  proper  to  accept 
the  boon. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Maine. 

Your  affairs  have  an  unusually  bright  aspect.  Though  I  was 
once  utterly  an  unbeliever  in  the  success  of  your  scheme,  I  am 
brought  wholly  over  to  the  faith.  I  should  now  as  soon  calcu- 
late upon  the  failure  of  any  one  of  the  benevolent  projects  of  the 
day,  as  upon  that  of  your  Institution. 

Fi'om  a  -Gentleman  in  Vermont. 

At  my  request,  the  Editor  of  a  Newspaper  in  this  village,  has 
republished  your  letter  to  Joel  Early,  Esq.;  also  the  Address  of 
the  Colonists  to  the  Free  People  of  Colour  in  the  United  States. 
Those  publications  have  produced  among  the  Christians  and 
philanthropists,  an  extensive  inquiry,  relative  to  the  Society. — 
If  every  Editor  would  admit  in  the  columns  of  their  papers, 
suitable  extracts  from  the  Repository,  it  would  diffuse  much  in- 
formation, of  which  the  great  body  of  the  people  are  ignorant. — 
The  Society  is  gaining  ground  rapidly  in  this  state.  I  calculate 
that  there  will  be  greater  exertions  made  for  its  benefit,  the 
coming  fourth  of  July,  than  at  any  former  period.  There  is  no- 
thing wanting  but  information.  I  am  well  persuaded,  that  the 
Society  will  rank  first  after  the  Bible  Society. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Massachusetts. 

The  Colonization  Society  appears  to  be  gaining  in  the  affec- 
tions and  solicitude  of  many  in  our  beloved  country,  especially 


18£8.]  Extracts  from  Correspondence*  91 

in  this  section  of  it.  I  view  it  as  the  instrument  in  the  hand  of 
a  kind  Providence,  of  restoring  lost  liberty  to  the  African,  and 
honour  and  glory  to  this  land  of  freedom.  With  these  views,  I 
send  you  my  mite,  (S5)  for  this  benevolent  and  highly  praise- 
worthy object.  It  is  near  my  heart;  and  had  I  the  ability^  I 
would  freely  give  one  hundred  times  the  amount. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Maine. 

On  the  Fourth  of  July  last,  in  this  town,  or  rather  township, 
we  celebrated  the  Anniversary  of  American  Independence,"  by 
forming  a  Bible  Society,  and  a  Peace  Society,  auxiliary  to  the 
American  Colonization  Society.  It  was  my  intention  to  com- 
municate this  information  sooner,  but  a  press  of  other  concerns 
has  prevented  me.  Nor  did  I  wish  to  send  an  empty  letter,  but 
meant  that  my  first  letter  to  you,  should  contain  the  first  fruits 
•f  our  offerings.  I,  therefore,  postponed  writing,  hoping  to  see 
you,  on  my  visit  to  the  South  last  winter.  In  this  I  was  disap- 
pointed, as  I  went  no  further  than  Philadelphia;  and  I  embrace 
the  first  leisure  moment,  after  my  return  here,  to  write  to  you, 
not  knowing  when  I  shall  have  another  opportunity. 

I  do  not  expect  great  pecuniary  contributions  from  my  towns- 
men, who,  generally  speaking,  are  not  able  to  do  much  in  this 
way,  and  who  have  been  taxed  by  their  liberality,  to  the  utmost 
of  their  ability — for  I  was  happy  to  hear  on  my  return,  that  the 
Bible  Society  had  actually  supplied  every  destitute  family  in 
town  with  a  Bible.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  travelling  shall 
be  good,  I  will  endeavour  to  see  what  can  be  done  for  your  So- 
ciety, so  that  by  the  next  Anniversary,  I  hope  to  be  able  to  make 
a  remittance.  But  we  have  done  something.  In  a  scheme,  the 
success  of  which,  depends  upon  public  opinion,  as  in  fact,  all 
benevolent  schemes  of  a  public  nature  do,  the  gaining  of  one 
convert  is  doing  something.  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  the 
African  Repository  a  wide  circulation,  by  placing  it  among  the 
tracts  of  our  Peace  Society. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  all  the  benevolent  exertions  of  the  day, 
like  strands  in  a  rope,  mutually  strengthen  each  other.  They 
all  tend  to  the  same  great  cause — peace  on  earth,  and  good  will 
to  man.  The  greatest  obstacles  which  lie  in  the  way  of  benevo- 
lent enterprises,  is  a  spirit  of  selfishness.      In  condemning  as 


92  Extracts  from  Correspondence.  [May, 

mischievous  or  impracticable,  any  benevolent  scheme,  a  man 
finds  a  plausible  excuse  for  his  own  covetousness.  Yet  man- 
kind are  willing  to  sacrifice  immense  sums,  on  their  own  per- 
sonal gratification.  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot  endure  this 
Selfish,  fearful,  distrustful  spirit.  I  am  convinced,  that  there  is 
no  moral  difficulty  which  will  not  yield  to  zeal  and  persever- 
ance— and  that  every  thing  which  ought  to  be  done  can  be  done. 

In  order  to  secure  the  peace  and  liberty  of  all  mankind,  the 
two  leading  passions  of  the  human  heart,  pride  and  avarice,  must 
be  subdued.  This  would  be  a  hopeless  task,  were  not  the  two 
passions,  in  many  cases,  opposed  to  each  other,  and  we  are  wil- 
ling sometimes,  to  sacrifice  one  to  the  other. 

The  time  must  assuredly  come,  when  the  people  of  this  coun- 
try will  be  willing  to  be  taxed  to  rid  ourselves  of  the  opprobri- 
um under  which  we  now  suffer;  which  it  is  as  much  the  interest 
as  it  is  the  duty  of  the  country  at  large  to  accelerate.  But  I 
would  by  no  means,  have  a  hair  of  the  constitution  touched  for 
this  purpose.  Nothing  should  be  done  by  law,  without  the  full 
consent  of  the  slave-holding  states,  which  it  is  as  much  their  inter- 
est as  it  is  their  duty  to  give.  And  we  have  reason  to  be  thankful 
that  God  has  so  kindly  united  our  interest  with  our  duty,  that 
they  are  in  the  long  run  inseparably  connected.  The  command 
to  do  to  others,  as  we  would  that  others  should  do  to  us,  increases 
the  happiness  of  all  who  make  it  the  rule  of  their  conduct. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  the  State  of  New  York. 

I  have  read  the  March  number  of  the  Repository,  with  much 
interest.  The  steady,  unwearied,  and  dignified  devotion,  and 
the  judicious,  intelligent,  firm  administration  of  Mr.  Ashmun, 
command  my  admiration,  my  warm  interest  in  his  prosperity, 
and  my  prayers  for  the  preservation  of  his  valuable  life.  Should 
he  come  to  this  country,  and  to  this  place,  1  hope  you  will 
not  fail  to  give  me  an  opportunity  of  knowing  him  face  to  face. 
I  rejoice  in  all  your  prosperity  and  encouragement,  particularly 
in  the  late  Vermont  donation,  and  the  enlarged  liberality  of  G. 
Smith,  Esq.  I  trust  the  co-partners  in  the  liberal  plan,  will  in- 
crease, and  that  rapidly. 


1828.]        Mr.  Burr9 s  Legacies. — Fourth  of  July 


My.  Ii\\TY'S  legacies. 

It  appears  from  a  statement  of  the  legacies  of  this  gentleman 
in  the  last  Vermont  Chronicle,  made  by  two  of  his  executors, 
that  the  account  which  has  gone  the  rounds  of  the  papers  is  not 
entirely  accurate.     The  following  is  official: 

To  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions,   .  .$17,000 

American  Bible  Society,   15,000 

American  Home  Missionary  Society,  10,000 

American  Tract  Society,   5,000 

*  American  Colonization  Society,   5f000 

Vermont  Domestic  Missionary  Society,   5,000 

North  West  Branch  of  American  Education  Society, 3,000 

Middlebury  College,   12,200 

Dartmouth  College, 1,000 

Williams  College, 1,000 

Congregational  Society  in  Manchester, 5,000 

Also,  a  lot  of  land  worth 400 

To  Trustees,  to  support  a  public  Seminary  of  Learning  in  Manches- 
ter, (a  permanent  fund,)   10,000 

To  constitute  Rev.  William  Jackson  and  Rev.  Abraham  Bronson, 

life  directors  of  the  American  Bible  Society, 300 

To  Baptist  Clergymen  in  Manchester,  300 

To  purchase  a  farm  for  the  support  of  the  poor  in  Manchester,  ....     1,200 

Making  a  total  of,  $91,400 

Besides  several  smaller  legacies.     A  large  amount  of  property  was  also 

given  to  the  relatives  and  other  friends  of  the  deceased. — [N.  Y.  Observe?', 

T\ve  Tourth  of  July . 

Whether  a  single  expedition  shall  sail  for  Liberia  the  present 
season,  must  depend  upon  the  amount,  which  shall  within  three 
or  four  months  be  contributed  to  the  funds  of  our  Society.  We 
make  our  appeal,  then,  to  every  Minister  and  to  every  Church  in 
the  United  States,  and  entreat  them,  on  the  approaching  Anni- 
versary of  our  National  Independence,  or  on  some  Sabbath  near 

*  There  is  little  hope  that  this  generous  bequest  can  be  realized  until 
after  several  months. 


94  To  Auxiliary  Societies  and  our  Friends.        [May, 

to  that  day,  to  consider  the  claims  of  that  cause  which  it  has 
been  our  endeavour  to  promote,  and  to  aid  it  by  their  prayers 
and  their  charities.  What  could  be  more  appropriate;  more 
honourable;  more  religious;  than,  for  all  the  congregations  in 
our  land  to  unite  at  such  a  season,  in  testifying  their  gratitude 
to  Heaven  for  our  political  independence,  and  the  benefits  of 
our  free  institutions,  by  offering  their  aid  to  those  who  are  leav- 
ing us  to  seek  similar  blessings  on  a  distant  shore — who  are 
leaving  us  to  instruct  the  wretched  tribes  of  Africa  in  the  arts 
of  civilization,  the  knowledge  of  human  rights,  and  the  blessed 
doctrines  of  Christ  We  hope  that  every  editor  who  wishes 
success  to  that  cause,  which  it  is  our  duty  and  privilege  to  re- 
commend, will  bring  this  subject  distinctly  before  the  eyes  of 
the  public. 

To  Auxiliary  Societies  and  ora  Txiew&s. 

It  is  now  the  season  when  every  possible  effort  is  required 
from  those  who  regard  our  cause  with  affection,  to  augment  the 
funds  of  the  Society.  The  outfit  of  expeditions  late  in  the  year, 
has  in  times  past,  we  think,  proved  unfortunate;  and  we  trust 
that  in  future,  all  will  leave  our  shores  before  the  end  of  Novem- 
ber. Permit  us  then  to  hope,  that  every  Auxiliary  Society  will 
shortly  send  in  its  annual  contribution,  and  that  whatever  individ- 
ual friends  can  do  for  us,  will  be  done  with  their  might.  To  ani- 
mate us,  there  is  every  thing;  to  discourage  us,  nothing.  No 
Colony,  we  believe,  has  ever  in  the  same  period,  attained  to  au 
equal  degree  of  importance.  A  light  kindled  by  humanity  and 
religion  within  the  precincts  of  cruelty  and  darkness,  many 
hearts  have  already  felt  its  softening  influence;  it  has  excited  the 
admiration  of  barbarians,  while  it  has  shown  itself  a  warning 
beacon  to  the  enemies  of  mankind.  Let  us  then  prosecute  with 
increased  ardour  and  energy,  the  great  work  in  which  we  are 
engaged.  Forget  not,  that  influence  as  well  as  knowledge,  is  pow- 
er; that  for  the  use  we  may  make  of  both,  we  are  responsible  to 
heaven;  and  that  the  ability  to  do  good,  which  results  from  both, 
can  only  be  measured  by  experience. 


1812 8.]     €apt.  Nicholson. — The  Great  Object  Promoted.     95 

Contain  Xicholson's  Testimony. 

Capt.  Nicholson,  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  very  lately  from  Liberia, 
makes  the  most  favourable  representations  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Clay. 
The  state  of  society  is  so  inviting  that  eight  of  his  crew,  free 
coloured  mechanics,  obtained  permission  to  remain. — The  fol- 
lowing is  an  extract  from  Capt.  N's.  letter.  "The  importance 
of  this  Colony,  as  regards  the  native  tribes  of  the  coast,  is,  in 
my  estimation,  great.  They  already  begin  to  perceive  that  it  is 
civilization  and  the  blessings  of  religion,  which  give  superiority 
to  man  over  his  fellow  man.  They  had  supposed  it  was  the 
white  skin;  but  now  they  see  in  their  neighbourhood,  men  of  their 
own  colour,  enjoying  all  those  advantages  hitherto  deemed  pe- 
culiar to  the  former.  This  has  elicited  a  spirit  of  inquiry,  which 
must  tend  to  their  benefit.  The  philanthropist  may  anticipate 
the  day  when  our  language  and  religion  will  spread  over  this  now 
benighted  land.  The  slave  trade  will  cease  as  the  Colony  pro- 
gresses, and  extends  its  settlements.  The  very  spot  where  now 
exists  a  free  people,  was  a  depot  for  the  reception  of  manacled 
slaves.  This  fact  alone  is  entitled  to  consideration,  and  ought 
to  arouse  the  zeal  of  the  friends  of  humanity  every  where." 

[Boston  Recorder. 

T\ve  Great  Object  "Promoted. 

Yet,  great  as  it  is,  we  will  not  despair  of  its  accomplishment.  So  impor- 
tant is  this  object,  and  so  easily  might  it  be  effected,  if  our  friends  who  are 
blessed  with  wealth  could  be  induced  seriously  to  reflect  upon  it,  and  act  as 
we  have  no  doubt  they  would  be  inclined  to  do,  after  serious  consideration; 
that  we  cannot  but  hope  shortly  to  receive  other  subscriptions,  as  gratify- 
ing and  liberal  as  that  which  we  now  record. 

Dear  Sir:  Please  add  my  name  to  the  list  of  subscribers  un- 
der the  proposition  of  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq.;  as,  in  conformity 
thereto,  I  hereby  agree  to  pay  one  hundred  dollars  a  year,  for 
ten  years,  to  the  American  Colonization  Society;  provided,  one 
hundred  persons  agree  to  do  the  same. 

Very  respectfully,  Your  Obedient  Servant, 

JOHN  T.  NORTON. 
Rev.  R.  R.  Gurley,  City  of  Washington. 


9£)  (contributions.  [May, 


C  Qiitoibutiorvs 

To  the  A.  C.  Society,  from  1st  to  50th  May,   1828. 

From  Rev.  Samuel  Ellis,  for  collections  by  him  in  Virginia,  as 
follows,  viz: 
Colonel  Jacob  Vanmeter,  of  Fort  Pleasant,  Oldfield,  Hardy 

County, $5 

Isaac  Vanmeter,  Esq.  of         do.                         do.  5 

Sundry  persons, 6  10 


16  10 

Auxiliary  Society,  New  Jersey,  per  R.  Voorhees,  Esq.  Tr.  100 

Do.  Charleston,  Va.  per  W.  Brown,  Esq.  Tr.  32  70 

Thos.  Hastings,  Esq.  Utica,  New  York,  collections  by  him,  154  70 

Simon  Cronise,  Esq.  Frederick  County,  Md.  for  collections 
us  follows,  viz: 

By  Rev.  Mr.  Greer,  in  Pine  Creek  Church,    15  50 

By  Do.  in  Thomas  Creek  Church,   12  13 

By  Rev.  David  Bossier,  in  German  Reformed  Church, 

Emmetsburg,  Pa 3  45 

31  08 

Auxiliary  Society,  Alexandria,  per  C.  Page,  Esq.  Tr 100 

Collection  in  Presbyterian   Congregation,  Lewistown,  and 

Paymborough,  Mifflin  County,  Pcnn.  Rev.  J.  S.  Poods, 

through  Hon.  Bushrod  Washington,   5 

Collections  by  Grove  Wright,  agent  of  the  Society  in  New 

York,  per  Rev.  Mr.  Gurley,  22  76 

From  I.  J.  Roberts,  Esq.  Edgefield,  S.  C 1  00 

Luther  Bailey,  Esq.  Medway,  Ms 5  00 

Rev.  A.  Hemphill,  York,  Pa 3  00 

A  Friend  to  the  cause,  per  Hon.  Mr.  Whipple,  . .  8  00 
Manumission  and  Emigration  Society,  Loudon  Co. 

Va.  per  B.  F.  Taylor,  Esq 21  25 

Peace  Society,  of  Minot,  Me.  per  W.  Ladd,  Esq.  10  00 
Rev.  John  Schermerhorn,  Utica,  New  York,  ...  15  00 
Collection  at  Canaan,  Columbia  Co.  New  York,       6  124 

J.B.Lawrence,    Esq.  Salem,  Ms 6  00 

Collection  Presbyterian  Congregation,  Wooster, 

Ohio,  per  Hon.  John  Sloane,  5  00 

Repository,  26  00 

106  37i 

$568  70 \ 


Tiih. 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 


COLONIAL  JOTTHNAL. 


Vol.  IV.  JUNE,  1823.  No.  4. 


O/*  Mission  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee,  with  a  Statis- 
tical account  of  that  Kingdom,  and  Geographical  Notices  of 
other  parts  of  the  Interior  of  Africa.     By  Edward  Bowdich, 
Esq.,  Conductor.     London,  1819. 

(COXTINUED    FIIOM    p.  72.) 

Among  all  the  great  and  beneficial  consequences,  which  may 
be  anticipated  from  the  establishment  of  Christian  Colonies  on 
the  African  Coast,  perhaps  none  is  more  cheering  than  the  intro- 
duction of  our  holy  religion,  to  supersede  the  absurd  and  relent- 
less superstitions,  to  which  the  population  of  Africa  has  been  so 
long  subjected.  For  the  honour  of  humanity,  we  should  hope, 
that  in  no  part  of  Africa  were  the  superstitions  more  odious  and 
cruel,  than  in  Ashantee;  but  of  the  tribes  far  in  the  interior,  we 
know  comparatively  little,  and  the  information  which  has  reach- 
ed us,  is  certainly  of  no  favourable  character.  We  except  in  this 
remark  the  followers  of  Mahomet,  who  are  known  to  occupy  large 
territories,  and  who  from  the  extent  of  their  trade,  and  their  in- 
tercourse with  other  nations,  and  perhaps,  from  the  doctrines  of 
their  Prophet,   have  attained  to  a  degree  of  elevation  above  the 

great  mass  of  the  negro  tribes.       But  Mahomedanism  though  in 
13  o 


U#  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  '    [Junfy 

some  respects  less  appalling  in  its  effects,,  will,  we  believe,  be  dis- 
placed with  more  difficulty  by  the  Gospel,  than  the  revolting  su- 
perstitions which  inflict  their  curses  upon  the  immense  popula- 
tion, who  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  Koran.  The  former  is 
a  written  system,  sustained  by  the  power  of  a  disciplined  and 
crafty  priesthood,  teaching  doctrines  adapted  to  enlist  in  its  be- 
half many  of  the  deepest  and  strongest  passions  of  the  heart:  the 
latter  are  vague  and  traditionary,  poorly  compensating  for  their 
terrors  in  this  life,  by  any  hopes  of  another;  shadowy  and  unsub- 
stantial, filling  the  imagination  with  horrors,  but  leaving  the  un- 
derstanding in  midnight  darkness.  How  gratifying  to  think, 
that  the  disciples  of  our  own  pure  faith  have  fixed  their  habita- 
tions upon  the  shores  o£  Africa,  that  the  influence  of  their  prin- 
ciples and  their  example  must  rapidly  extend  itself  into  the  in- 
terior; that  from  them  shall  go  forth  light  and  truth  to  make  thi« 
moral  wilderness  like  Eden,  this  desert  like  the  garden  of  God. 

The  Ashantees  may  emphatically  be  said  to  be  led  captive  by 
Satan  at  his  will.  Their  worship  (if  such  it  can  be  called)  is 
demoniacal,  and  their  rites  are  celebrated  with  the  blood  of  hu- 
man victims.  Indeed,  when  perusing  the  account  of  their  relig- 
ious ceremonies,  no  one,  it  would  seem,  could  doubt  the  reality 
of  satanic  influence. 

The  Negro  tradition  of  the  Book  and  the  Calabash  cited  by 
St.  Pierre,  (says  Mr.  Bowdich)  is  familiar  to  every  native  of 
these  parts,  and  seems  the  source  of  their  religious  opinions. — 
The  following  is  the  Ashantee  manner  of  relating  it. 

"In  the  beginning  of  the  world,  God  created  three  white  and  three  black 
Bien,  with  the  same  manner  of  women;  he  resolved,  that  they  might  not  af- 
terwards complain,  to  give  them  their  choice  of  good  and  evil.  A  large 
box  or  calabash  was  set  on  the  ground,  with  a  piece  of  paper  sealed  up,  on 
one  side  of  it.  God  gave  the  black  men  the  first  choice,  who  took  the  box, 
expecting  it  contained  every  thing;  but  on  opening  it,  there  appeared  only 
a.  piece  of  gold,  a  piece  of  iron,  and  several  other  metals,  of  which  they  did 
not  know  the  use.  The  white  men  opening  the  paper,  it  told  them  every 
thing.  God  left  the  blacks  in  the  bush,  but  conducted  the  whites  to  the 
water  side,  (for  this  happened  in  Africa)  communicated  with  them  every 
night,  and  taught  them  to  build  a  small  ship,  which  carried  them  to  another 
country,  whence  they  returned  after  a  long  period,  with  various  merchan- 
dise to  barter  with  the  blacks,  who  might  have  been  the  superior  people. 

'•WitX  this  imaginary  alienation  from  the  God  of  the  Universe,  not  a  shade 


U528.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee*  $V 

of  despondency  is  associated;  they  consider  that  it  diminishes  their  comforts 
and  endowments  on  earth,  but  that  futurity  is  a  dull  and  torpid  state  to  the 
majority  of  mankind." 

The  Ashantees  believe  in  Fetishes  or  subordinate  Deities,  in- 
habiting particular  rivers  or  mountains,  and  these  are  venerated 
in  proportion  to  the  actual  fulfilment  of  their  equivocal  predic- 
tions. The  favourite  Fetish  is  at  present  the  river  Tando.  The 
kings  and  higher  classes  are  believed  to  dwell  with  the  superior 
Deity  after  death,  in  a  state  resembling  their  condition  on  earth; 
hence,  at  the  death  of  such,  many  of  both  sexes  are  sacrificed, 
that  they  may  accompany  the  deceased  and  minister  to  their 
pleasures.  The  inferior  classes  are  supposed  to  inhabit  after 
death  the  houses  of  the  Fetish,  in  a  state  of  torpor  and  inactivity. 
Those  who  neglect  the  funeral  rites  of  their  family,  are  believed 
to  be  accursed  by  their  spirits. 

There  are  two  orders  of  Fetishmen;  the  higher,  who  attend 
upon  the  Fetish  and  receive  his  oracles — the  lower,  who  mingle 
in  society,  and  are  often  consulted  as  fortunetellers  and  conju- 
rors. There  are  domestic  Fetishes  in  every  family,  answering 
to  the  Penates  of  the  Romans.  These  receive  offerings  at  the 
Yam  Custom,  but  are  not  brought  out  of  the  house. 

"The  Ashantees  have  their  Fasti  and  Nefasti;  or  lucky  and 
unlucky  days,  as  the  Romans  had."*  When  they  drink,  they 
spill  a  little  of  the  liquor  on  the  ground  as  an  offering  to  the  Fe«- 
tish.  But  the  influence  which  the  Moors  exert  over  these 
people  and  other  tribes,  is  perhaps,  the  most  surprising. 

"The  confidence  of  the  Ashantees  in  the  fetishes  or  saphies  they  purchase 
so  extravagantly  from  the  Moors,  is  such,  that  they  believe  firmly  that  they 
make  them  invulnerable  and  invincible  in  war,  paralyse  the  hand  of  the 
enemy,  shiver  their  weapons,  divert  the  course  of  balls,  and  avert  all  evils 
but  sickness,  (which  they  can  only  assuage,)  and  natural  death.  The  King 
gave  to  the  King  of  Dagwumba,  for  the  fetish  or  war-coat  of  Apokoo,  the 
value  of  thirty  slaves;  for  Odumata's,  twenty;  forAdoo  Quamina's,  thirteen,; 
for  Akimpon's,  twelve;  for  Akimpontea's  nine;  and  for  those  of  greater  cap? 
tains  in  proportion.  The  generals  being  always  in  the  rear  of  the  army  are 
pretty  sure  to  escape,  a  circumstance  much  in  favour  of  the  Moors.  A 
sheet  of  paper  would  support  an  inferior  Moor  in  Coomassie  for  a  month. f 


*  Ule  et  nefasto  te  posuit  die.     Hor.  12,  13. 

f  The  saphies  consist  of  pieces  of  paper  upon  which  the  Moors  have  writ- 
ten,  and  which  they  incase  in  leather,  gold,  or  silver. 


ttJO  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [June, 

Several  of  the  Ashantee  captains  offered  seriously  to  let  us  fire  at  them. — 
The  Ashantees  believe  that  the  constant  prayers  of  the  Moors,  who  have 
persuaded  them  that  they  converse  with  the  Deity,  invigorate  themselves 
and  waste  the  spirit  and  strength  of  their  enemies." 

The  Yam  Custom  (says  Mr.  Bovvdich)  is  annual,  just  at  the 
maturity  of  that  vegetable,  in  the  early  part  of  September.  "It 
is  like  the  Saturnalia;  neither  theft,  intrigue,  nor  assault  are  pun- 
ishable during  the  continuance;  but  the  grossest  liberty  prevails, 
and  each  sex  abandons  itself  to  its  passions.  All  the  Caboceers 
are  commanded  to  attend,  and  if  any  one  has  given  offence,  it  is 
at  this  time  that  his  accusation  is  generally  made  known.  The 
show,  riot,  and  confusion  of  this  occasion,  are  thus  described  by 
Mr.  Bowdich. 

"On  Friday  the  5th  of  September,  the  number,  splendour,  and  variety  of 
arrivals,  thronging  from  the  different  paths,  was  as  astonishing  as  entertain- 
ing; but  there  was  an  alloy  in  the  gratification,  for  the  principal  caboceers 
sacrificed  a  slave  at  each  quarter  of  the  town,  on  their  entre. 

"In  the  afternoon  of  Saturday,  the  King  received  all  the  caboceers  and 
captains  in  the  large  area,  where  the  Dankara  canons  are  placed.  The 
scene  was  marked  with  all  the  splendour  of  our  own  entre,  and  many  addi- 
tional novelties.  The  crush  in  the  distance  was  awful  and  distressing.  AH 
the  heads  of  the  kings  and  caboceers  whose  kingdoms  had  been  conquered, 
from  Sai  Tootoo  to  the  present  reign,  with  those  of  the  chiefs  who  had  been 
executed  for  subsequent  revolts,  were  displayed  by  two  parties  of  execu- 
tioners, each  upwards  of  a  hundred,  who  passed  in  an  impassioned  dance, 
'some  with  the  most  irresistible  grimace,  some  with  the  most  frightful  ges- 
ture: they  clashed  their  knives  on  the  skulls,  in  which  sprigs  of  thyme  were 
inserted,  to  keep  the  spirits  from  troubling  the  King.  I  never  felt  so  grate- 
ful for  being  born  in  a  civilized  country.  Firing  and  drinking  palm  wine 
were  the  only  divertissemens  to  the  ceremony  of  the  caboceers  presenting 
themselves  to  the  King;  they  were  announced,  and  passed  all  round  the  cir- 
cle, saluting  every  umbrella:  their  bands  preceded;  we  reckoned  above  for- 
ty drums  in  that  of  the  King  of  Dwabin.  The  effect  of  the  splendour,  the 
tumult,  and  the  musketry,  was  afterwards  heightened  by  torch  light. — 
We  left  the  ground  at  10  o'clock;  the  umbrellas  were  crowded  even  in  the 
distant  streets,  the  town  was  covered  like  a  large  fair,  the  broken  sounds  of 
distant  horns  and  drums  fdled  up  the  momentary  pauses  of  the  firing  which 
encircled  us:  the  uproar  continued  until  four  in  the  morning,  just  before 
which  the  King  retired. 

"The  next  morning  the  King  ordered  a  large  quantity  of  rum  to  be  pour- 
ed into  brass  pans,  in  various  parts  of  the  town;  the  crowd  pressing  around, 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee.  101 

and  drinking  like  hogs;  freemen  and  slaves,  women  and  children,  striking, 
kicking,  and  trampling  each  other  under  foot,  pushed  head  foremost  into  the 
pans,  and  spilling  much  more  than  they  drank.  In  less  than  an  hour,  except- 
ing the  principal  men,  not  a  sober  person  was  to  be  seen,  parties  of  four  reel- 
ing and  rolling  under  the  weight  of  another,  whom  they  affected  to  be  carry- 
ing home;  strings  of  women  covered  with  red  paint,  hand  in  hand,  falling 
down  like  rows  of  cards;  the  commonest  mechanics  and  slaves  furiously  de- 
claiming on  state  palavers;  the  most  discordant  music,  the  most  obscene 
songs,  children  of  both  sexes  prostrate  in  insensibility.  All  wore  their 
handsomest  clothes,  which  they  trailed  after  them  to  a  great  length,  in  a 
drunken  emulation  of  extravagance  and  dirtiness. 

"About  a  hundred  persons,  mostly  culprits  reserved,  are  generally  sacri- 
ficed, in  different  quarters  of  the  town,  at  this  custom.  Several  slaves  were 
also  sacrificed  at  Bantama,  over  the  large  brass  pan,  their  blood  mingling- 
with  the  various  vegetable  and  animal  matter  within,  (fresh  and  putrefied,) 
to  complete  the  charm,  and  produce  invincible  fetish.  All  the  chiefs  kill 
several  slaves,  that  their  blood  may  flow  into  the  hole  from  whence  the  new 
yam  is  taken.  Those  who  cannot  afford  to  kill  slaves,  take  the  head  of  one 
already  sacrificed  and  place  it  on  the  hole."* 

There  is  another  national  custom  called  the  Adai,  which  com- 
mences on  the  first  of  October.  "This  is  supposed  by  the  com- 
mon people  to  be  marked  by  the  falling  of  a  fruit  like  a  gourd* 
from  a  tree  called  Brebretim.  They  further  pretend,  that  from 
the  fruit  of  this  tree  spring  various  kinds  of  vegetables.  The 
customs  ar.e  alternately  called  the  great  and  little  Adai,  the  for- 
mer taking  place  always  on  Sunday,  the  latter  on  Wednesday; 
and  it  appeared,  that  there  were  six  weeks  between  each  great 
Adai,  and  six  between  each  little  one;  so  that  the  custom  was 
generally  held  every  twenty -one  days."  The  proceedings  at 
these,  appear  to  resemble  in  many  respects,  those  of  the  Yam 
Custom. 

*  In  Ahanta,  at  the  Contoom  or  Harvest  custom,  each  family  erects  its 
Hide  altar,  composed  of  four  sticks  driven  in  the  ground,  and  twigs  laid 
across  the  top;  the  whole  is  then  covered  with  fresh  pulled  leaves.  A  hog, 
a  sheep,  a  goat,  or  a  fowl  is  killed,  according  to  the  means  of  the  family, 
and  the  most  delicate  parts  laid  on  the  altar;  a  mixture  is  made  of  eggs, 
palm  oil,  palm  wine,  the  blood  of  the  animal  slain,  and  other  ingredients, 
and  also  dedicated  to  the  Fetish,  in  small  pots  placed  on  the  altar.  In  a  few 
days  these  altars  become  so  offensive  as  to  render  it  disagreeable  to  pass, 
them,  but  fhey  are  never  removed," 


iOii  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [June, 

Mention  has  been  made  already  of  human  sacrifices.  These 
Are  frequent,  but  most  numerous  on  the  decease,  and  at  the  fu- 
nerals of  distinguished  individuals.  On  the  death  of  a  person 
of  wealth  or  rank,  a  discharge  of  musketry  announces  the  fact, 
and  "in  an  instant  you  see  a  crowd  of  slaves  burst  from  the 
house  and  run  towards  the  bush,  flattering  themselves  that  the 
hindmost,  or  those  surprised  in  the  house,  will  furnish  the  hu- 
man victims  for  sacrifice,  if  they  can  but  secrete  themselves  un- 
til the  custom  is  over."  As  soon  as  the  bodv  is  dressed  out  in 
silk  and  gold,  one  or  two  slaves  are  then  sacrificed  at  the  door 
of  the  house.  Mr.  Bowdich  describes  particularly  what  he  wit- 
nessed at  the  decease  of  Quatchie  QuofiVs  mother,  whose  fune- 
ral ceremonies  he  concludes,  were  less  splendid  and  barbarous 
than  common. 

"The  King,  Quatchie  Quofie,  and  Odumata,  each  sacrificed  a  young-  girl 
directly  the  deceased  had  breathed  her  last,  that  she  might  not  want  for  at- 
tendants until  the  greater  sacrifice  was  made.  The  retainers,  adherents, 
and  friends  of  the  family  then  sent  contributions  of  gold,  powder,  rum,  and 
cloth,  to  be  expended  at  the  custom  ;  the  King,  as  heir,  exceeding  every 
quota  but  that  of  the  nearest  relative,  who  succeeded  to  the  stool  and  slaves. 
The  King  also  sent  a  sum  of  gold,  and  some  rich  cloths  to  be  buried  witb 
the  deceased,  in  the  basket  or  coffin.  I  could  not  learn  the  various  sums 
of  gold  dust  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  note  them,  but  the  following  were 
the  quantities  of  powder  presented  on  the  occasion." 

Here  follows  a  statement  of  forty -four  ounces  of  gold,  or  near- 
ly twelve  barrels;  which  were  presented  to  different  persons. 

"We  walked  to  Assafoo  about  twelve  o'clock;  the  vultures  were  hover- 
ing around  two  headless  trunks,  scarcely  cold.  Several  troops  of  women, 
from  fifty  to  a  hundred  in  each,  were  dancing  by  in  movements  resembling 
skaiting,  lauding  and  bewailing  the  deceased  in  the  most  dismal,  yet  not 
discordant  strains;  audible,  from  the  vast  number,  at  a  considerable  distance. 
Other  troops  carried  the  rich  cloths  and  silks  of  the  deceased  on  their  heads, 
in  shining  brass  pans,  twisted  and  stuffed  into  crosses,  cones,  globes,  and  a 
fanciful  variety  of  shapes  only  to  be  imagined,  and  imposing  at  a  small  dis- 
tance the  appearance  of  rude  deities.  The  faces,  arms,  and  breasts  of  these 
women  were  profusely  daubed  with  red  earth,  in  horrid  emulation  of  those 
who  had  succeeded  in  besmearing  themselves  with  the  blood  of  the  victims. 
The  crowd  was  overbearing;  horns,  drums,  and  muskets,  yells,  groans,  and 
screeches  invaded  our  hearing  with  as  many  horrors  as  were  crowded  on 
our  sight.      Now  and  then  a  victim  was  hurried  by,  generally  dragged  or 


4828/]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  las 

run  along-  at  full  speed;  the  uncouth  dress,  and  the  exulting  countenances 
of  those  who  surrounded  him,  likening"  them  to  as  many  fiends.  I  observ- 
ed apathy,  more  frequently  than  despair  or  emotion,  in  the  looks  of  the  vic- 
tims. The  chiefs  and  captains  were  arriving  in  all  directions,  announced 
by  the  firing  of  muskets,  and  the  peculiar  flourishes  of  their  horns,  many  of 
which  were  by  this  time  familiar  to  us;  they  were  then  habited  plainly  as 
warriors,  and  were  soon  lost  to  our  sight  in  the  crowd.  As  old  Odumata 
passed  in  his  hammock,  he  bade  us  observe  him  well  when  he  passed 
again :  this  prepared  us  in  a  small  degree.  Presently  the  King's  arrival  in 
the  market  place  was  announced,  the  crowd  rolled  towards  it  impetuously, 
but  the  soldiery  hacked  on  all  sides  indiscriminately,  and  formed  a  passage 
for  the  procession.  Quatchie  Quofie  hurried  by,  plunging  from  side  to  side 
like  a  Bacchanal,  drunk  with  the  adulation  of  his  bellowing  supporters;  his 
attitudes  were  responsive  to  the  horror  and  barbarism  of  the  exultations 
which  inspired  them.  The  victims,  with  large  knives  driven  through  their 
cheeks,  eyed  him  with  indifference;  he  them  with  a  savage  joy,  bordering 
on  phrenzy :  insults  were  aggravated  on  the  one,  flattery  lavished  on  the 
other.  Our  disgust  was  beguiled  for  an  instant  by  surprise.  The  chiefs 
who  had  just  before  passed  us  in  their  swarthy  cloths,  and  the  dark  gloomy 
habits  of  war,  now  followed  Quatchie  Quofie,  glistening  in  all  the  splendor 
©f  their  fetish  dresses;  the  sprightly  variety  of  their  movements  ill  accorded 
with  the  ceremony.  Old  Odumata's  vest  was  covered  with  fetish,  cased 
invariably  in  gold  or  silver.  A  variety  of  extraordinary  ornament  and  novel 
insignia,  courted  and  reflected  the  sun  in  every  direction.  It  was  like  a 
splendid  pantomime  after  a  Gothic  tragedy. 

"We  followed  to  the  market  place.  The  King,  and  the  chiefs  not  im- 
mediately connected  with  Quatchie  Quofie,  were  seated  under  their  cano- 
pies, with  the  usual  insignia  and  retinue,  and  lined  about  the  half  of  a  cir- 
cle, apparently  half  a  mile  in  circumference;  the  soldiery  completed  it, 
their  respective  chiefs  situated  amongst  them.  Thirteen  victims,  surround- 
ed by  their  executioners,  whose  black  shaggy  caps  and  vests  gave  them  the 
appearance  of  bears  rather  than  men,  were  pressed  together  by  the  crowd 
to  the  left  of  the  King.  The  troops  of  women,  before  described,  paraded 
without  the  circle,  vociferating  the  dirge.  Rum  and  palm  wine  were  flow- 
ing copiously,  horns  and  drums  were  exerted  even  to  frenzy.  In  an  instant 
there  was  a  burst  of  musketry  near  the  King,  and  it  spread  and  continued 
incessantly,  around  the  circle,  for  upwards  of  an  hour.  The  soldiers  kept 
their  stations;  but  the  chiefs,  after  firing,  bounded  once  round  the  area  with 
the  gesture  and  extravagance  of  madmen;  their  panting  followers  envelop- 
ing them  in  flags,  occasionally  firing  in  all  the  attitudes  of  a  scaramouch, 
and  incessantly  bellowing  the  strong  names  of  their  exulting  chief,  whose 
musket  they  snatched  from  his  hands  directly  he  had  fired.  An  old  hag, 
described  as  the  head  fetish  woman  of  the  family,  screamed  and  plunged 
about  in  the  midst  of  the  fire  as  if  in  the  greatest  agonies.     The  greater  the 


1Q4  lievkw  of  Mission  from  Cape  [June, 

chief  the  heavier  the  charge  of  powder  he  is  allowed  to  fire;  the  heaviest 
charge  recollected,  was  that  fired  by  the  King-  on  the  death  of  his  sister,  18 
ackies,  or  an  ounce  avoirdupoise.  Their  blunderbusses  and  long  guns 
were  almost  all  braced  closely  with  the  cordage  of  the  country;  they  were 
generally  supported  by  their  attendants  whilst  they  fired,  several  did  not 
appear  to  recover  it  for  nearly  a  minute;  Odumata's  old  frame  9eemed  shak- 
en almost  to  dissolution.  Many  made  a  point  Of  collecting  near  us,  just 
within  the  circle,  and  firing  as  close  as  possible  to  startle  us;  the  frequent 
bursting  of  their  muskets  made  this  rather  alarming  as  well  as  disagreeable. 
The  firing  abated,  they  drank  freely  from  the  bowls  of  palm  wine,  religious- 
ly pouring  a  small  quantity  on  the  ground  before  they  raised  them  to  their 
lips. 

"The  principal  females  of  the  family,  many  of  them  very  handsome,  and 
•f  elegant  figures,  came  forward  to  dance;  dressed,  generally,  in  yellow 
silk,  with  a  silver  knife  hung  by  a  chain  round  their  necks;  one  with  a  gold, 
another  with  a  silver  horn;  a  few  were  dressed  as  fetish  women;  an  umbrel- 
la was  held  over  the  grand  daughter  as  she  danced.  The  Ashantees  dance 
incomparably  better  than  the  people  of  the  water  side,  indeed  elegantly; 
the  sexes  do  not  dance  separately,  as  in  Fantee,  but  the  man  encircles  the 
woman  with  a  piece  of  silk  which  he  generally  flirts  in  his  right  hand,  sup- 
ports her  round  the  waist,  receives  her  elbows  in  the  palms  of  his  hands, 
and  a  variety  of  figures  approximating,  with  the  time  and  movement,  very 
closely  to  the  waltz. 

"A  dash  of  sheep  and  rum  was  exchanged  between  the  King  aud  Quat- 
chie  Quofie,  and  the  drums  announced  the  sacrifice  of  the  victims.  All  the 
chiefs  first  visited  them  in  turn;  I  was  not  near  enough  to  distinguish  where- 
fore. The  executioners  wrangled  and  struggled  for  the  office,  and  the  in- 
difference with  which  the  first  poor  creature  looked  on,  in  the  torture  he 
was  from  the  knife  passed  through  his  cheeks,  was  remarkable:  the  nearest 
executioner  snatched  the  sword  from  the  others,  the  right  hand  of  the  vic- 
tim was  then  lopped  off,  he  was  thrown  down,  and  his  head  was  sawed 
rather  than  cut  off;  it  was  cruelly  prolonged,  I  will  not  say  wilfully. — 
Twelve  more  were  dragged  forward,  but  we  forced  our  way  through  the 
crowd,  and  retired  to  our  quarters.  Other  sacrifices,  principally  female, 
were  made  in  the  bush  where  the  body  was  buried.  It  is  usual  to  'wet  the 
grave'  with  the  blood  of  a  freeman  of  respectability.  All  the  retainers  of 
the  family  being  present,  and  the  heads  of  all  the  victims  deposited  in  the 
bottom  of  the  grave,  several  are  unsuspectingly  called  on  in  a  hurry  to  as- 
sist in  placing  the  coffin  or  basket,  and  just  as  it  rests  on  the  heads  or  skulls, 
a  slave  from  behind  stuns  one  of  these  freemen  by  a  violent  blow,  followed 
by  a  deep  gash  in  the  back  part  of  the  neck,  and  he  is  rolled  in  on  the  top 
of  the  body,  and  the  grave  instantly  filled  up.  A  sort  of  carnival,  varied 
by  firing,  drinking,  singing,  and  dancing,  was  kept  up  in  Assafoo  for  sever- 
al days;  the  ehiefs  generally  visiting  it  every  evening,  or  sending  their  Hh< 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee.  X05 

guists  with  a  dash  of  palm  wine  or  rum  to  Quatchie  Quofie;  and  I  was  given, 
to  understand,  that,  but  for  the  approaching"  war  and  the  necessary  econo- 
my of  powder,  there  would  have  been  eight  great  customs,  instead  of  one, 
for  this  woman;  one  weekly,  the  King  himself  firing  at  the  last.  The  last 
day,  all  the  females  in  any  way  connected  with  the  family  (who  are  not  al- 
lowed to  eat  for  three  days  after  the  death,  though  they  may  drink  as  much 
palm  wine  as  they  please,)  paraded  round  the  town,  singing  a  compliment 
and  thanks  to  all  those  who  had  assisted  in  making  the  custom. 

"On  the  death  of  a  King,  all  the  Customs  which  have  been  made  for  the 
subjects  who  have  died  during  his  reign,  must  be  simultaneously  repeated 
by  the  families,   (the  human  sacrifices  as  well  as  the  carousals  and  pagean- 
try) to  amplify  that  for  the  monarch,  which  is  also  solemnised,  independent- 
ly, but  at  the  same  time,  in  every  excess  of  extravagance  and  barbarity.— 
The  brothers,  sons,  and  nephews  of  the  King,  affecting  temporary  insanity, 
burst  forth  with  their  muskets,  and  fire  promiscuously  amongst  the  crowd; 
even  a  man  of  rank,   if  they  meet  him,  is  their  victim;  nor  is  their  murder 
of  him  or  any  other,  on  such  an  occasion,  visited  or  prevented;  the  scene 
can  scarcely  be  imagined.      Few  persons  of  rank  dare  to  stir  from  their  hou- 
ses for  the  first  two  or  three  days,  but  religiously  drive  forth  all  their  vassals 
and  slaves,  as  the  most  acceptable  composition  of  their  own  absence.     The 
King's  Ocras,  who  will  be  mentioned  presently,  are  all  murdered  on  his 
tomb,   to  the  number  of  a  hundred  or  more,  and  women  in  abundance.    I 
was  assured  by  several,  that  the  custom  for  Sai'  Quamina,  was  repeated 
weekly  for  three  months,  and  that  two  hundred  slaves  were  sacrificed,  and 
twenty  five  barrels  of  powder  fired  each  time.    But  the  custom  for  the 
King's  mother,  the  regent  of  the  kingdom  during  the  invasion  of  Fantee,  is 
most  celebrated.     The  King  of  himself  devoted  3000  victims,  (upwards  of 
2000  of  whom  were  Fantee  prisoners)  and  twenty-five  barrels  of  powder* 
Dwabin,  Kokoofoo,  Becqua,  Soota,  and  Marmpong,  furnished  one  hundred 
victims,  and  twenty  barrels  of  powder,  each,  and  most  of  the  smaller  towns 
ten  victims,  and  two  barrels  of  powder,  each.     The  Kings,  and  Kings  only, 
are  buried  in  the  cemetery  at  Bantama,  and  the  sacred  gold  buried  with 
them;  (see  Laws;)  their  bones  are  afterwards  deposited  in  a  building  there, 
opposite  to  which  is  the  largest  brass  pan  I  ever  saw,  (for  sacrifices,)  being 
about  five  feet  in  diameter,   with  four  small  lions  on  the  edge.     Here  hu- 
man sacrifices  are  frequent  and  ordinary,  to  water  the  graves  of  the  Kings. 
The  bodies  of  chiefs  are  frequently  carried  about  with  the  army,  to  keep 
them  for  interment  at  home,  and  eminent  revolters  or  enemies  also,  to  be 
exposed  in  the  capital.    Boiteam,  (the  father  of  Otee  the  fourth  linguist,) 
who  accompanied  the  army  of  Abiniowa  in  his  political  capacity,  dying  at 

*  "Suetonius  tells  us  that  Augustus  sacrificed  300  of  the  principal  citizens 
•f  Perusia,  to  the  manes  of  liis  uncle  Julius.     We  read  in  Prevost,  that 
$4080  persons  were  sacrificed,  with  aggravated  barbarity,  in  the  dedication 
of  a  temple  in  Mexieo." 
14 


106  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  [June, 

Akrofroom  in  Aquapim,  during  the  campaign,  his  body  was  kept  with  the 
army  two  months  before  it  arrived  at  Coomassie.  I  could  not  get  any  in- 
formation on  their  treatment  of  the  corpse,  beyond  their  invariable  reply 
that  they  smoked  it  well  over  a  slow  fire." 

(To  be  continued.  J 

TlveoYi^s  Ye&\>ect\ng  fhfc  Couvse,  anft.  Ter- 
mination ot  t\\e  XigCT. 

We  have  thought  it  might  be  interesting  to  our  readers,  to  see  9ome  ac- 
count of  the  various  opinions  which  have  been  adopted,  in  reference  to  the 
course  and  termination  of  this  mysterious  river,  and  the  statements  upon 
which  these  theories  have  been  founded.  The  following  article  is  made 
up  of  extracts  from  the  most  valuable  works  on  Africa. 

The  course  and  termination  of  this  celebrated  stream  is  now 
the  most  interesting  problem  which  remains  to  be  solved,  not 
only  in  Africa,  but  in  any  other  portion  of  the  globe. 

Herodotus,*  more  than  twenty -two  centuries  ago,  describes, 
from  the  information  of  the  Africans,  a  great  river  of  Africa,  far 
removed  to  the  south  of  the  Great  Desert,  and  abounding  with 
crocodiles.  That  it  flowed  from  west  to  east,  dividing  Africa. 
in  like  manner  as  the  Danube  does  Europe. 

Pliny  also  believed  that  the  Nile  came  from  the  west;  but  he 
is  far  from  identifying  it  with  the  Niger,  which  he  describes  as 
a  distinct  river.  But  we  have  at  least  his  negative  opinion  res- 
pecting its  western  course;  for  he  speaks  of  the  Bambotus  river 
as  running  into  the  western  ocean;  meaning  to  express  by  it 
cither  the  Gambia  or  Senegal  river,  and  not  the  Niger.! 

Ptolemy  is  positive  in  describing  the  Niger  as  a  separate 
stream  from  the  Senegal  and  Gambia,  which  two  rivers  are  de- 
signed by  him  under  the  names  of  Daradus  and  Stachir;  and 
they  are  by  no  means  ill  expressed;  falling  into  the  sea  on  differ- 
ent sides  of  the  Jlrsinarium  promontory,  or  Cape  Verd.;j;  The 
Niger  of  Ptolemy  is  made  to  extend  from  west  to  east,  over 
half  the  breadth  of  Africa,  between  the  Atlantic  ocean,  and  the 
course  of  the  Nile. 

*  Euterpe,  c.  32.  |  Lib.  v.  c.  9. 


1828.]  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  107 

These  may  suffice  for  the  ancient  authorities,  which  in  very 
early  times  fixed  the  course  of  the  Niger  in  the  systems  of  geo- 
graphy, to  be,  from  west  to  east.     [Major  Rennell.~\ 

Pliny,  however,  enters  into  much  greater  detail  in  that  extra- 
ordinary passage,  where  he  traces  the  origin  of  the  Nile,  and  its 
various  transformations.*  First,  he  informs  us,  that  it  springs 
from  a  mountain  in  Lower  Mauritania,  and  issues  out  of  a  stag- 
nant Lake,  called  Nilis.  Indignant,  however,  at  flowing  through 
rugged  and  sandy  tracts,  it  hides  itself  under  ground  for  several 
days,  after  which  it  issues  anew  from  another  lake  in  Mauritania 
Caesariensis.  Finding  itself  again  among  sands,  it  plunges  a 
second  time  beneath  them,  and  continues  hid  during  the  whole 
extent  of  a  desert  space  of  twenty  days'  journey.  On  reaching 
ihe  country  of  the  Ethiopians,  it  again  emerges,  and,  as  Ptolemy 
supposes,  from  the  fountain  Nigris;  when,  continuing  to  flow,  it 
divides  the  Africans  from  the  Ethiopians.  In  a  subsequent  part 
of  its  course,  it  assumes  the  name  of  Astapus,  evidently  the 
river  of  Nubia.  In  this  succession  of  rivers,  so  fancifully  united 
to  form  one  Nile,  it  seems  clear  that  the  two  first  are  streams  of 
the  Bled-el-Jereede;  but  in  respect  to  the  other,  situated  on  the 
other  side  of  an  immense  desert,  and  in  the  country  of  the 
Ethiopians,  whom  it  separates  from  the  Africans,  there  seem 
fair  grounds  for  believing  it  to  be  the  Niger  itself.  We  then 
find  Pliny  to  be  the  strenuous  advocate  for  the  ancient  system, 
by  which  the  Nile  and  the  Niger  were  viewed  merely  as  succes- 
sive portions  of  the  same  great  river. 

Mela  leans  to  the  same  opinion.!  He  describes  very  distinct- 
ly, to  the  south  of  Mauritania,  the  great  desert,  and  beyond  it 
the  country  of  the  Ethiopians.  There  rises  the  river  Nuchul, 
on  which  he  makes  the  striking  remark,  that,  "while  all  others 
direct  their  course  towards  the  ocean,  this  one  flows  towards  the 
east,  and  the  centre  of  the  continent^  and  whither  it  goes  is 
quite  uncertain." 

The  next  geographical  system  was  that  of  the  Arabians,  in 
whose  opinion,  with  regard  to  the  course  of  this  river,  there  is 
nothing  dubious  or  equivocal.     They  all  identify  it  with  the 

*  Hist.  Nat,  f  Lib.  iii.  9, 


10S  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  [June, 

Nile,  but  only  in  its  source  and  earliest,  course,  borrowed  appa- 
rently from  Ptolemy.  But  they  conceive  that,  at  a  particular 
point,  this  primary  Nile  separates  into  two  branches,  or  Niles; 
of  which  one,  the  Nile  of  Egypt,  flows  northward  through  Nubia, 
and  falls  into  the  Mediterranean;  the  other,  the  Nile  of  the  Ne- 
groes, takes  its  course  westward,  and  traverses  the  vast  range 
of  central  Africa.  According  to  Abulfeda  and  Edrisi,  the  most 
eminent  Arabian  geographers,  it  continues  to  flow  till  it  is  re- 
ceived into  the  Atlantic,  or  "Sea  of  Darkness,"  as  they  term 
their  supposed  circumambient  ocean. 

Leo  agrees  with  the  Arabians  in  assigning  a  western  course 
to  the  Niger,  but  he  does  not,  like  them,  derive  it  from  the  Nile. 
It  takes  its  rise,  according  to  him,  from  a  lake  situated  to  the 
south  of  Bornou,  probably  the  lake  of  Cauga,  and  thence  flows 
westward,  till  it  reaches  the  ocean.  Leo,  indeed,  had  heard  it 
asserted,  at  Tombuctoo,  that  it  rose  in  a  mountain,  flowed  east- 
ward, and  fell  into  a  lake;  but  this  he  asserts  to  be  contradicted 
by  his  own  actual  observation  of  the  navigation  from  Tombuc- 
too to  Ginea  (Jinnie). 

The  above  observations  of  Leo  entirely  concurred  with  those 
which  the  Portuguese  themselves  had  an  opportunity  of  making. 

The  illustrious  traveller,  Park,  finally  ascertained,  that  the 
Niger  was  entirely  distinct  from  any  of  the  rivers  which  fell  into 
the  Atlantic;  that  it  flowed  eastward  into  the  centre  of  the  con- 
tinent; and  that  to  it  belonged  several  hundred  miles  of  the 
course  which  the  best  modern  geographers  had  assigned  to  the 
Senegal.  Upon  these  data,  Major  Rennell  founded  his  theory 
of  its  course.  It  had  been  traced,  indeed,  by  Park,  only  about 
300  miles  from  its  source;  but  concurrent  testimonies,  ancient 
and  modern,  established  the  existence  of  a  continued  stream, 
upwards  of  a  thousand  miles  farther,  to  the  extremity  of  Wan- 
gara.  That  country  is  described  by  the  Arabian  geographers  as 
entirely  surrounded  and  intersected  by  branches  of  the  Niger, 
(Nile  of  the  Negroes);  as  containing,  at  least,  two  lakes,  and  as 
entirely  overflowed  during  the  rainy  season.  Major  Rennell, 
therefore,  very  plausibly  inferred,  that  Wangara  was  the  Delta 
of  the  Niger;  that  its  waters,  spread  out  by  the  separation  of  its 
branches,  by  inundation,  and  by  the  formation  of  lakes,  might, 
under  the  burning  rays  of  a  tropical  sun,  be  completely  evapor- 
ated. 


1828.]  Theories  respecting  the  Mger.  109 

This  view  of  the  subject,  supported  by  the  learning  and  inge- 
nuity of  Major  Rennel,  became,  for  a  long  time,  the  orthodox 
creed  with  regard  to  Africa.  M.  Reichard,  of  Weimar,  ad- 
vanced another  hypothesis;  according  to  which,  the  stream  pass- 
ed through  Wangara,  and  directing  its  course  to  the  south-west, 
poured  itself  into  the  Gulf  of  Benin,  by  a  succession  of  large 
estuaries,  of  which  the  mouths  only  are  known  to  us. 

The  next  hypothesis  is  that  famous  one  by  which  the  Niger  is 
identified  with  the  great  stream  which  passes  through  the  king- 
dom of  Congo.  The  extraordinary  magnitude  of  this  last  river, 
— the  prodigious  mass  of  waters  which  it  pours  into  the  ocean, 
whose  waves  it  freshens  to  the  distance  of  many  leagues — its 
perpetual  state  of  fullness,  or  rather  flood,  to  which  other  tropi- 
cal rivers  are  incident  only  during  a  few  months  of  the  year — 
the  occurrence,  at  two  seasons,  instead  of  one,  of  a  perceptible 
swelling  of  its  waters — these  circumstances  are  supposed  to  indi- 
cate a  river,  which  not  only  drains  a  vast  extent  of  country,  but 
is  fed  by  the  rains  of  both  the  tropics.  Both  these  conditions 
are  fulfilled,  by  supposing  it  to  be  the  hitherto  unknown  termi- 
nation of  the  Niger. — [Murray.  ~] 

Mr.  Murray,  in  the  following  extract,  gives  his  own  hypothesis. 

The  writer  of  this  was  led  some  time  ago  to  form  an  hypothe- 
sis somewhat  different  from  any  of  those  above  stated;  and 
though  his  original  confidence  in  it  be  somewhat  abated,  yet,  as 
it  may  at  least  serve  as  a  link  to  combine  some  curious  notices 
relative  to  central  Afriea,  he  will  venture  on  a  short  exposition 
of  it. 

Although  the  Niger,  in  Bambarra,  carries  with  it  to  the  east 
all  the  waters  of  central  Africa,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  there 
is  a  tract  on  the  other  side  of  the  continent,  where  these  waters 
flow  in  an  opposite  direction.  Without  having  recourse  to  an- 
cient, or  more  doubtful  authorities,  we  find  Browne  expressly 
stating,  that  all  the  rivers  about  and  beyond  Darfur,  were  re- 
ported to  him  as  flowing  to  the  west  and  north-west.  Some,  the 
Kulla  for  instance,  are  so  delineated,  that  they  could  scarcely 
continue  to  flow  in  that  direction  without  meeting  the  Niger. — 
That  a  junction  therefore  takes  place,  at  some  point,  of  rivers 
from  opposite  sides  of  the  continent,  can  scarcely  be  doubted. 


110  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  [June, 

Whether  these  rivers  terminate  there,  or  direct  their  united 
streams  into  the  ocean,  is  a  separate  question.  According  to 
the  general  opinion,  this  union  takes  place  in  Wangara.  There 
is,  however,  a  considerable  weight  of  testimony  which  goes  to 
prove,  that  much  farther  west,  and  in  passing  through  the  king- 
dom of  Cassina,  the  direction  of  the  stream  is  still  westward. — 
Abulfeda,  Edrisi,  and  all  the  Arabian  writers,  without  a  single 
exception,  are  well  known  to  have  described  their  Nile  of  the 
Negroes  as  flowing  from  cast  to  west.  Now,  as  Gana  was  the 
centre  of  their  settlements,  and  the  main  channel  of  communica- 
tion with  Northern  Africa,  it  appears  very  improbable  that  they 
should  be  misinformed  as  to  how  the  matter  stood  there.  Nor 
is  it  improbable  that  their  knowledge  might  terminate  with  this 
westward-flowing  river,  and  might  never  reach  the  stream  visit- 
oil  by  Park. 

From  these  testimonies,  it  appeared  a  probable  supposition, 
that  the  long  line  of  river  course  to  which  Europeans  have  ap- 
plied the  Roman  name  of  Niger,  (a  name  not  known  in  modern 
Africa,)  consists,  in  fact,  of  two  rivers,  flowing,  one  from  the 
east,  and  the  ether  from  the  west,  and  falling  into  some  common 
receptacle.  It  is  objected,  indeed,  that  no  such  receptacle  has 
ever  been  reported  to  exist.  But  the  tract  between  Cassina  and 
Tombuctoo  is  so  entirely  unknown,  that  it  might  very  well  con- 
tain the  feature  in  question,  without  such  a  report  having  reach- 
ed Europeans.  Moreover,  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  most 
recent  travellers  actually  report  the  existence  of  a  great  lake,  or 
inland  sea,  in  this  quarter.  Jackson  particularly  describes  an 
immense  lake  called  the  Sea  of  Soudan,  situated  about  fifteen 
days'  journey  to  the  east  of  Tombuctoo.  Park  also  heard  at  San- 
sanding  of  a  lake,  called  the  Ba  Sea  Feena,  incomparably  larger 
than  the  Dibbie.,  at  about  a  month's  distance  from  that  place; 
which  would  nearly  agree  with  the  measure  of  Jackson.* 

[From  BowdicWs  Mission  to  •fishantee.'] 
Having  reached  the  Niger,  it  is  time  to  observe,  that  it  is  only 

*  His  expressions  are,  "One  month's  journey  south  of  Baedoo,  through 
**  the  kingdom  of  Gotto,  will  bring  the  traveller  to  the  country  of  the  Chris- 
"  tians  v/ho  have  their  houses  on  the  banks  of  the  Ba  Sea  Feena;  this  wate: 


IS28.]  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  Ill 

known  to  the  Moors  by  the  name  of  Quolla,  pronounced  Quorra 
by  the  negroes,  who,  from  whatever  countries  they  came,  all 
-poke  of  this  as  the  largest  river  they  knew;  and  it  was  the 
grand  feature  in  all  routes  whether  from  Haoussa,  Bornou,  or 
the  intermediate  countries,)  to  Ashantee.  The  Niger,  after 
leaving  the  lake  Dibbir,  was*  invariably  described  as  dividing  in 
two  large  streams;  the  Quolla,  the  greater  pursuing  its  course 
south-eastward,  until  it  joined  the  Baher  Abiad,  and  the  other 
branch  running  northward  of  east,  near  Tombuctoo,  and  divid- 
ing again  soon  afterwards;  the  smaller  stream  running  north- 
wards by  Yahoodee,*  a  place  of  great  trade,  and  the  larger  turn- 
ing directly  eastward,  and  increasing  considerably,  running  to 
the  lake  Caudi  or  Cadi,  under  the  name  of  Gambaroo.  The 
Moors  call  the  branch  running  by  Tombuctoo  the  Jolliba,  I  pre- 
sume figuratively,  as  a  great  water;  for  I  was  assured  by  a  na- 
tive of  Jennie,  who  had  frequently  visited  Tombuctoo,  that  this 
branch  was  called  Zahmer  by  the  negroes.  De  Lisle,  in  his 
map  of  Africa,  for  the  use  of  Louis  XV,  makes  a  branch  from 
the  Niger,  running  near  Tombuctoo,  and,  what  is  even  more  to 
the  point,  writes  "Gambarou  ou  Niger."  Mr.  Park,  in  his  me- 
moir to  Lord  Camden,  writes,  "the  river  of  Dar  Kulla,  men- 


"  they  describe  as  incomparably  larger  than  the  Dibbie,  and  that  it  flows 
'*  sometimes  one  way,  and  sometimes  another." 

To  conceal  nothing,  [  cannot  help  entertaining  some  suspicion  that  this 
report  may  have  referred  to  the  sea  in  the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  though  it  certain- 
ly was  not  so  understood  by  Park.  The  southern  direction,  the  coast  of 
the  Christians,  the  decked  vessels,  and  the  motion  one  way  and  another 
(tides),  all  tend  to  suggest  this  idea.  To  this  may  be  added  the  etymology 
of  the  word  Ba  Sea  Feena,  which  was  obligingly  furnished  to  me  by  Mr. 
Jackson,  who  states  it  to  signify  the  "Sea  of  Ships."  I  even  used  the  free- 
dom to  ask  Mr.  Jackson,  if  he  considered  it  certain,  that  his  Bahar  Soudan 
might  not  also  be  the  Gulf  of  Guinea?  Mr.  Jackson  observed  in  reply,  that 
the  Gulf  of  Guinea  was  universally  called  by  the  Arabs,  El  Bahar  Ginawa; 
that  neither  the  distance  nor  direction  agreed;  and  that  the  Arabs,  who 
pray  daily  with  their  faces  turned  towards  the  east,  can  scarcely  blunder  as 
to  this  last  point.  He  is  also  of  opinion;  that  Park's  Ba  Sea  Feena  must  be 
the  same  with  the  Sea  of  Soudan. 

The  Moors  particularly  mentioned  buying  their  writing  paper  there, 


112  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  [June, 

tioned  by  Mr.  Brown,  is  generally  supposed  to  be  the  Niger,  or, 
at  least,  to  have  a  communication  with  that  river."  The  name 
and  course  of  the  Quolla  suggested  this  to  me,  before  I  observed 
the  above  remark,  which  I  did  not  until  my  return. 

The  Gambaroo  seems  to  me  to  identify  the  Gir  of  Ptolemy,* 
carried  by  him  into  the  centre  of  Xfrica,  and  which  would  ap- 
pear as  large  as  the  Niger,  by  the  expression  "Maximi  suet  Gir 
et  Nigir. " 

It  was  an  inconsiderate  observation  of  Mr.  Maxwell's,  "If 
the  Niger  has  a  sensible  outlet,  I  have  no  doubt  of  its  proving 
the  Congo,  knowing  all  the  rivers  between  Cape  Pa) mas  and  Cape 
Lopez,  to  be  inadequate  to  the  purpose."  The  Volta  may  be 
thought  so,  but  the  Lagos  certainly  cannot,  nor  the  Danger  or 
Gaboon;  and  surely  the  rivers  del  Rey.and  Formoso  are  not, 
which  are  thus  noticed  within  a  few  pages  of  Mr.  Maxwell's 
observation,  by  the  judicious  editor  of  Mr.  Park's  last  mission. 
"The  Rio  del  Rey  and  the  Formoso  are  stated  to  be  of  consid- 
erable size,  being  each  of  them  seven  or  eight  miles  at  the 
mouth;  and  the  supposed  Delta,  estimated  by  thp  line  of  coast, 
is  much  larger  than  that  of  the  Ganges;  consequently,  the  two 
streams,  if  united,  must  form  a  river  of  prodigious  magnitude." 

[A/em.] 

In  his  sketch  of  Gaboon,  Mr.  Bowdich  has  many  very  inter- 
esting remarks  on  the  Congo  hypothesis.  He  submits  the  com- 
pilation of  seven  weeks'  investigation  and  inquiry,  under  very 
advantageous  circumstances.  The  result  was,  that  he  heard  of 
a  kingdom  far  in  the  interior,  through  which,  the  river  Wola 
or  Wole,  flows  and  runs  eastward.  "My  friend,  the  Governor," 
he  observes,  "impressed  on  me,  that  this  was  the  largest  river 
in  the  world,  and  ran,  to  use  his  own  words,  for  aught  he  knew, 
farther  than  Indie;  all  the  great  rivers  in  this  country  come 
from  Wole." 

"The  name,  situation,  magnitude,  and  course  of  the  Wola, 

*  Illorum  vero  qui  per  interiorem  iEthiopiam  fluant,  quique  fontes  et 
•stia  in  continente  habent  maximi  sunt  Gir  et  Nigir.  (Lib.  xxiii.  1.  De 
mzximisJIuminibus.J 


1828.]  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  113 

leave  little  doubt  of  its  being  the  KullaorQuolla.  "With  this, 
the  Ojj:ooawai,  which  enters  the  sea  near  Cape  Lopez,  forms  a 
junction,  or  rather  flows  from  it.  At  Adjoomla,  no  great  dis- 
tance from  the  coast,  the  Ogooawai  is  represented  as  dividing  it- 
self, and  one  arm  running  south  to  fall  into  the  Congo,  which, 
without  it,  would  be  an  inconsiderable  stream." — [Idem.] 

[Extract from  Capt.  Riley. ] 

Sidi  Hamet,  whose  report  is  given  by  Capt.  Riley,  travelled 
from  Tombuctoo,  a  little  south  of  east,  when  he  came  to  a  small 
town,  called  Bimbina,  walled  in  with  canes  and  thorn  bushes; 
here  the  river  turned  more  to  the  south-eastward,  because  there 
was  a  very  high  mountain  in  sight  to  the  eastward.  "We  then 
went  from  the  river  side,  and  pursued  our  journey  more  south- 
wardly, fifteen  days,  when  we  came  to  the  same  river  again. 
Then  we  went  onward  again  in  about  a  south-east  direction, 
winding  as  the  river  ran  for  three  days,  and  then  had  to  climb 
over  a  very  high  ridge  of  mountains,  which  took  up  six  days, 
and  when  we  were  on  the  top  of  them,  we  could  see  a  large 
chain  of  high  mountains  to  the  westward.  Those  were  thickly 
covered  with  very  large  trees,  and  it  was  extremely  difficult 
to  get  up  and  down  them,  but  we  could  not  go  any  other  way, 
for  the  river  ran  against  the  steep  side  of  the  mountain;  so 
having  gotten  over  them,  we  came  to  the  river's  bank  again, 
where  it  was  very  narrow  and  full  of  rocks,  that  dashed  the 
water  dreadfully,  then  finding  a  good  path,  we  travelled  the 
same  way  for  12  days,  afterwards  again  15  days,  when  we  came  to 
the  walls  of  the  city  Wassanah,"  &c. — [Riley's  Narrative."] 

In  Mandara,  (latitude  ten  degrees  north)  Major  Denham  saw  a  man  who 
said  he  had  been  twenty  days  south  of  Mandara,  to  a  country  called  Ada- 
mowa;  which  he  described  as  being"  situated  in  the  centre  of  a  plain,  sur- 
rounded by  mountains  ten  times  higher  than  any  we  could  see. — "This  man 
spoke  of  several  extensive  lakes,  which  he  had  seen  in  his  journey,  and  al- 
so described  with  great  clearness  a  river  running  between  two  very  high 
ridges  of  the  mountains,  which  he  crossed  previous  to  arriving  at  Adamowa." 

This  river  he  declared  to  run  from  the  west,  and  to  be  the 

same  as  the  Quolla  or  Quana  at  Nyffe,  Kora,  and  at  Raka,   but 

not  the  same  as  the  river  at  Kano,  which  had  nothing  to  do  with 

the  Shary,  and  which  ran  into  the  Tchad;  but  the  main  body  of 
15 


114  Theories  respecting  the  Niger.  [June* 

the  water  ran  on  to  the  south  of  Begharmi,  was  then  called 
the  D'Ago,  and  went  eastward  to  the  Nile.  Kaid-Moussa  was 
a  very  intelligent  fellow,  had  visited  Nyffe,  Raka,  Waday,  and 
Darfur;  by  which  latter  place  also,  he  said  this  river  passed. — 
He  was  most  particularly  clear  in  all  his  accounts,  and  his  state- 
ment agreed  in  some  points  with  the  information  a  Shouaa  named 
Dreess-boo-Raas-ben-aboo-Deleel  had  given  me;  therefore  I  was 
the  more  inclined  to  pay  attention  to  it.  To  the  south  of  this 
river,  the  population  is  entirely  Kerdy,  until  (he  Great  Desert. 
This  desert  is  passed  several  times  in  the  year  by  kafilas  with 
white  people,  not  Christians,  who  bring  goods  from  the  great 
sea:  some  of  these  reach  Adamowa. 

From  Mahomad  Gomsoo,  Chief  of  the  Arabs,  at  Sackatoo,  (lat.  13°  4'  52" 
N.,  and  long"  6°  12'  E.)  Captain  Clapperton  received  the  following- account. 
This  man,  if  we  are  to  credit  his  own  statement,  was  at  Tombuctoo  when 
Park  was  murdered. 

I  learned,  besides,  from  Gomsoo,  that  he  had  been  detained  a 
prisoner  three  years,  in  a  country  called  Yoriba,  on  the  west  side 
of  the  Quarra;  which,  he  said,  entered  the  sea  at  Fundah,  a  lit- 
tle below  the  town  of  Rakah.  The  latter  is  opposite  to  Nyffee; 
is  a  place  of  great  trade  between  the  interior  and  the  coast,  and 
all  kinds  of  European  goods,  such  as  beads,  woollen  and  cotton 
cloth,  pewter  and  copper  dishes,  gunpowder,  rum,  &c,  are  to 
be  had  there  in  exchange  for  slaves.  The  inhabitants  of  Yoriba 
he  represented  to  be  extremely  ill  disposed.  I  may  here  men- 
tion, that  during  my  stay  in  Sackatoo,  provisions  were  regularly 
sent  me  from  the  sultan's  table  on  pewter  dishes,  with  the  Lon- 
don stamp;  and  one  day  I  even  had  a  piece  of  meat  served  up  in 
a  white  wash-hand  basin,  of  English  manufacture. 

Bello,  also  sultan  of  Sackatoo,  drew  on  the  sand  the  course  of 
the  river  Quarra,  which  he  also  informed  me  entered  the  sea  at 
Fundah.  By  his  account  the  river  ran  parallel  to  the  sea  coast 
for  several  days'  journey,  being  in  some  places  only  a  few  hours', 
in  others  a  day's  journey,  distant  from  it.  Two  or  three  years 
ago  the  sea,  he  said,  closed  up  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  its 
mouth  was  at  present  a  day  or  two  farther  south;  but,  during  the 
rains,  when  the  river  was  high,  it  still  ran  into  the  sea  by  the  old 
channel.     He  asked  me  if  the  King  of  England  would  send  him 


1828.]  Theories  respecting  the  Mger.  115* 

a  consul  and  a  physician,  to  reside  in  Soudan,  and  merchants 
to  trade  with  his  people;  and  what  I  had  seen  among  them, 
which  I  thought  the  English  would  buy?  Here  again  I  enforced 
the  discontinuance  of  the  slave  trade  on  the  coast,  as  the  only 
effectual  method  of  inducing  the  King  of  England  to  establish  a 
consul  and  a  physician  at  Sackatoo;  and  that,  as  the  sultan  could 
easily  prevent  all  slaves  from  the  eastward  passing  through 
Haussa  and  Nyflfee,  it  would  be  the  consul's  duty  to  see  that 
engagement  faithfully  fulfilled.  With  respect  to  what  English 
merchants  were  disposed  to  buy,  I  particularized  senna,  gum 
arabic,  bees'  wax,  untanned  hides,  indigo,  and  ivory.  I  also 
endeavoured  to  impress  on  his  mind  that  Soudan  was  the  coun- 
try best  situate  in  all  Central  Africa  for  such  a  trade,  which 
would  not  only  be  the  means  of  enriching  himself,  but,  likewise, 
all  his  subjects;  and  that  all  the  merchandise  from  the  east  and 
from  the  west  would  be  conveyed  through  his  territories  to  the 
sea.  "I  will  give  the  King  of  England,"  says  he,  "a  place  on 
the  coast  to  build  a  town:  only  I  wish  a  road  to  be  cut  to  Rakah,* 
if  vessels  should  not  be  able  to  navigate  the  river."  I  asked 
him  if  the  country  he  promised  to  give  belonged  to  him?  'Yes:' 
said  he,  "God  has  given  me  all  the  land  of  the  infidels."  This 
was  an  answer  that  admitted  of  no  contradiction. 

The  author  of  a  Review  of  Denham  and  Clapperton,  for  our 
work,  (vol.  2d,  page  519,)  observes,  "From  what  we  have  been 
able  to  collect,  we  should  conjecture,  that  the  Niger  must  either 
discharge  into  the  Ocean  at  the  Bight  of  Benin,  or  through  the 
wide  mouth  of  the  Congo,  or  into  the  Tchad,  from  the  south, 
under  the  name  of  the  Shary.  That  immense  inland  sea,  has, 
probably,  no  outlet,  unless  it  be  during  the  rainy  season,  when 
it  overflows;  and  if  it  have  one,  it  must  be  at  its  western  end, 
where,  as  Denham,  who  had  examined  its  other  shores,  was  told, 
there  is  the  dry  but  elevated  bed  of  a  river.  In  those  countries., 
where  evaporation  is  so  great,  the  sands  so  arid  and  thirsty,  and 
the  season  so  long  in  which  there  falls  no  rain,  many  of  the 
rivers  which  are  impetuous  and  full  in  winter,  are  perfectly  dry 

*  On  the  map  of  Denham  and  Clapperton,  Rakah  is  represented  as  m  lat, 
N.  about  9°,  and  long.  E.  5°, 


116  Connecticut  Col.  Soc  Address*  [June, 

at  other  times.  Clapperton  looked  from  an  eminence  for  several 
miles  along  the  dry  bed  of  one,  which  was  two  hundred  yards 
Vvide,  and  whose  banks  were  thirty  or  forty  feet  high.  This 
waste  of  waters  will  account  for  the  small ness  of  the  Shary,  if 
\ve  suppose  that  river  to  be  the  Niger.  At  its  mouth  it  is  about 
half  a  mile  wide,  deep,  and  flowing  with  a  rapid  current,  even 
in  the  dry  season;  and  discharges  as  great  a  body  of  water,  per- 
haps, as  the  Niger  could  have  preserved,  during  its  long  course 
of  2000  miles,  from  the  absorption  and  evaporation  to  which  it 
would  be  subjected." 

An  AAAress  to  t\ie  PutoYic, 

By  the  Managers  of  the  Colonization  Society  of  Connecticut. 

The  Managers  of  this  Society,  at  their  recent  Anniversary, 
submitted  in  place  of  their  first  Annual  Report,  this  able  Ad- 
dress, which  we  understand  has  been  widely  circulated  in  that 
state,  and  which,  we  sincerely  wish,  may  be  republished  in  every 
state  of  the  Union.  The  spirit  of  liberality  and  candour,  and 
the  convincing  argument  and  eloquence  which  pervade  it  through- 
out, must  recommend  it  to  the  notice  of  all  those  whose  good 
opinion  merits  regard.  But  we  proceed,  without  further  pre- 
face, to  offer  to  our  readers,  liberal  extracts  from  this  Address. 

Friexds  and  fellow  Citizens, 

In  behalf  of  the  Colonization  Society  of  the  State  of  Connecticut,  we 
beg  leave  to  address  you  on  a  subject  intimately  connected  with  the  honour 
and  the  dearest  interests  of  our  common  country,  and  identified  with  the 
great  cause  of  human  happiness. 

You  are  often  called  upon  to  lend  your  influence  to  schemes  of  patriotic 
enterprise  and  Christian  benevolence.  The  elastic  spirit  of  our  age  has 
long-  been  busy  here,  and  has  been  moving"  you  to  effort.  You  have  found- 
ed and  are  sustaining"  noble  institutions  of  education.  You  have  engaged 
in  the  work  of  sending  the  Scriptures  into  every  family.  You  have  long 
been  contributing  to  impart  the  means  of  instruction  to  the  ignorant  and 
destitute.  You  have  not  held  back  from  the  enterprise  of  giving  to  Pagan 
tribes  the  blessed  influences  of  the  Gospel.  The  spirit  which  has  prompt- 
ed you  to  effort  aims  at  doing  good  to  all  within  its  reach; — it  finds  none 


1828.]  Connecticut  Col.  Soe.  Jlddress*  ll? 

too  degraded  for  its  beneficence,  none  too  distant  for  its  sympathy.  It 
seeks  to  perpetuate  and  to  brighten  that  bright  legacy  of  character  and  of 
privileg'  s  which  has  come  down  to  us  from  sainted  ancestors.  It  seeks  to 
scatter  every  where  the  seeds  of  social  improvement  and  of  spiritual  life.  It 
seems  to  forget  none  of  the  children  of  degradation,  or  of  intellectual  and 
moral  want.  To  the  Pagan  and  the  Mahommedan — to  the  degraded  and 
abject  in  our  cities — to  the  inmates  of  the  manufactories  rising  along  the 
streams  of  our  New  England — to  the  settler  on  the  prairies  of  the  far  South- 
west— to  the  boatmen  of  our  mighty  rivers — to  the  sailor  on  the  ocean— 
and  even  to  the  pauper,  and  the  convict,  and  the  drunkard — it  is  directing 
its  efforts. 

But  there  is  one  large  class  among  the  inhabitants  of  this  country — de- 
graded and  miserable — whom  none  of  the  efforts  in  which  you  are  accus- 
tomed to  engage,  can  materially  benefit.  Among  the  twelve  millions  who 
make  up  our  census,  two  millions  are  Africans — separated  from  the  posses- 
sors of  the  soil  by  birth,  by  the  brand  of  indelible  ignominy,  by  prejudices 
mutual,  deep,  incurable,  by  an  irreconcileable  diversity  of  interests.  They 
are  aliens  and  outcasts; — tiiey  are,  as  a  body,  degraded  beneath  the  influ- 
ence of  nearh  all  the  motives  which  prompt  other  men  to  enterprise,  and 
almost  below  the  sphere  of  virtuous  affections.  Whatever  may  be  attempt- 
ed for  the  general  improvement  of  society,  their  wants  are  untouched.— 
Whatever  may  be  effected  for  elevating  the  mass  of  the  nation  in  the  scale 
of  happiness  or  of  intellectual  and  moral  character,  their  degradation  is  the 
same — dark,  and  deep,  and  hopeless.  Benevolence  seems  to  overlook 
them,  or  struggles  fop  their  benefit  in  vain.  Patriotism  forgets  them,  or 
remembers  them  only  with  shame  for  what  has  been,  and  with  dire  fore- 
bodings, of  what  is  yet  to  come. 

And  of  these  two  millions,  the  great  majority  are  slaves.  In  a  country 
proud  of  its  freedom,  and  whose  institutions  breathe  the  spirit  of  universal 
liberty,  one-sixth  of  the  entire  population  are  the  subjects  of  a  hereditary 
and  hopeless  bondage.  If  the  political  institutions  of  our  country  were 
based  on  the  principle  of  arbitrary  power  and  hereditary  distinctions,  if  the 
privileges  of  freemen  were  less  widely  bestowed  or  less  valued,  the  exist- 
ence of  personal  slavery  to  this  extent  would  hardly  be  out  of  place, — it 
would  be  in  harmony  with  the  national  institutions  and  with  the  national 
spirit,  and  would  be  attended  with  little  danger.  But  as(  it  is,  the  slavery 
which  exists  in  these  States,  is  a  deadly  and  cancerous  sore  upon  the  vitals 
of  the  commonwealth; — it  must  be  eradicated  or  the  nation  dies. 

The  Society  then  proceeds  to  state  some  of  the  principles  in 
which  the  "patriotic,  prudent,  and  Christian,"  of  almost  every 
religious  denomination,  and  from  every  quarter  of  the  country, 
united  at  the  origin  of  the  Society. 


1  is  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Address.  [June. 

1.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  in  present  circumstances,  any  effort  to  pro- 
duce a  general  and  thorough  amelioration  in  the  character  and  condition  of  the 
free  peopU  of  colour  must  be  to  a  great  extent  fruitless.     In  every  part  of  the 
United  States  there  is  a  broad  and  impassible  line  of  demarcation  between 
every  man  who  has  one  drop    of  African  blood  in  his  veins  and  every 
other  class  in  the  community.     The  habits,  the  feelings,  all   the  preju- 
dices of  society — prejudices  which  neither  refinement,  nor  argument,  nor 
education,  nor  religion  itself  can  subdue — mark  the  people  of  colour,  whe- 
ther bond  or  free,  as  the  subjects  of  a  degradation  inevitable  and  incurable. 
The  African  in  this  country  belongs  by  birth  to  the  very  lowest  station  in 
society;  and  from  that  station  he  can  never  rise,    be  his  talents,  his  enter- 
prise, his  virtues,  what  they  may.     In  consequence  of  this,  it  is  that  they 
are  and  what  they  are.     The  wonder  is  that  in  such  circumstances,  they  are 
not  far  worse.      And  so  long  as  they  continue  in  these  circumstances,  they 
must  be  deeply  and  incurably  degraded.      We  have   only  to  compute  the 
extent,  the  variety,  the  power  of  the  motives   which   are   brought  to  bear 
upon  the  mind  of  every  man  who  is  truely  a  freeman,  and  at  the  same  time 
recollect  how  few  of  these  motives  speak  to  the  mind  of  the  black  man, 
bond  or  free;  and  we  see  that  the  coloured  population  of  this  country  thus 
degraded  by  circumstances  and  degraded  in  public  estimation,  must  be,  as 
a  mass,  degraded  in  spirit,  degraded  in  all  their  habits,  degraded  by  igno- 
rance, and  indolence,  and  want  of  thrift,  and  degraded  by  vice.      What 
motive  has  the  black  man  to  cultivate  his  mind.      Educate  him,  and  you 
have  added  little  or  nothing  to  his  happiness — you  have    unfitted  him  for 
the  society  and  sympathies  of  his  degraded  kindred,  and  yet  you  have  not 
procured  for  him,  and  cannot  procure  for  him,  any  admission  into  the  so- 
ciety and  sympathy  of  white  men.     What  motive  has  the  black  man  to  be 
industrious }      He  can  supply  all   his  physical  wants  without  industry;  and 
beyond  the  supply  of  his  immediate  physical  wants,   he  has  little  induce- 
ment to  look.     Would  you  set  before  him  the  prospect  of  wealth  as  a  mo- 
tive to  industrious  enterprise ?    But  of  what  value  is  wealth  to  him*    Wealth 
can  secure  a  sort  of  respectability  for  the  ignorant  and  rude,  and  even  for 
the  vicious;  it  can  half  atone  for  crimes  against  the  happiness  of  society;  but 
it  can  do  nothing  for  the  black  man.      Would  you  urge  him  to  frugality 
and  diligence  by  the  prospect  of  making  provision  for  his  children?     But 
if  neither  education  nor  property  can  do  any  thing  for  him,  education  and 
property  can  do  as  little  for  his  children  after  him.      Would  you  set  before 
him  the  importance  of  a  good  character?     But  of  how  much  value  is  cha- 
racter to  him  who  stands  now,   and  must  always  stand  in  the  lowest  order 
of  society  ?  It  is  this  degradation  of  the  condition  of  our  free  coloured  popu- 
lation which  ensures  their  degradation  of  character,  and  their  degradation 
of  character  reacts  to  make  their  condition  still  more  degraded.     They  con- 
stitute a  class  by  themselves — a  class  out  of  which  no  individual  can  be  ele- 
vated, and  below  which,  none  can  be  depressed,    And  this  is  the  diffici'1 


1828.]  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Mdress.  119 

ty,  the  Invariable  and  insuperable  difficulty  in  the  way  of  every  scheme  for 
their  benefit.  Much  can  be  done  for  them — much  has  been  done;  but  still 
they  are,  and,  in  this  country,  always  must  be  a  depressed  and  abject  race. 
2.  Another  principle,  in  which  the  friends  of  the  Colonization  Society 
have  been  united  from  the  beginning-  is,  that  the  improvement  and  ultimate 
abolition  of  slavery  must  be  brought  about  by  a  moral  influence  only,  and  must 
be  done  by  the  people  of  the  slave-holding  states  themselves,  of  their  own  mill. 
There  is  indeed  another  way  in  which  slavery  may,  at  some  time  or  other, 
be  abolished — a  mode  of  abolition,  at  the  thought  of  which,  the  heart  sick- 
ens, and  the  imagination  revolts  in  horror;  but  that  is  the  very  catastrophe 
which  the  promoters  of  this  undertaking  were  anxiously  aiming  to  avert.-— 
But  how,  in  this  country,  can  slavery  be  abolished,  if  not  by  violence  and 
insurrection ?  By  Legislation?  The  strong  hand  of  an  Imperial  Parliament 
is  indeed  introducing  the  reform  of  slavery  and  preparing  its  gradual  sup- 
pression in  the  British  Colonies;  but  the  circumstances  of  the  slave-holding* 
States  in  this  confederacy,  preclude  the  thought  of  any  such  interference 
here.  The  Legislatures  of  the  States  where  slavery  does  not  exist,  have 
no  more  to  do  with  the  laws  and  social  institutions  of  the  States  where  it 
does  exist,  than  they  have  to  do  with  the  military  and  ecclesiastical  estab- 
lishments of  the  European  kingdoms.  The  National  Government  has  no 
control  over  the  subject,  for  the  right  of  the  slave-holder  to  his  property  is 
guaranteed  by  the  very  compact  on  which  the  National  Government  rests 
for  its  existence.  The  Legislature  of  each  slave-holding  State  can  Legis- 
late only  for  its  own  constituents.  Those  Legislatures  are  only  the  ser- 
vants of  the  people;  and  when  the  people  of  those  States  demand  the  aboli- 
tion of  slavery,  then  slavery  will  be  abolished,  and  not  till  then. 

3.  A  third  point  in  which  the  first  promoters  of  this  object  were  united, 
is,  that  yen;  individual  slave-holders  can,  in  the  present  state  of  things,  emanci- 
pate their  slaves  if  they  would.  There  is  a  certain  relation  between  the  pro- 
prietor of  slaves  and  the  beings  thus  thrown  upon  him,  which  is  far  more 
complicated,  and  far  less  easily  dissolved  than  a  mind  unacquainted  with 
the  subject  is  ready  to  imagine.  The  relation  is  one  which,  where  it  ex- 
ists, grows  out  of  the  very  structure  of  society,  and  for  the  existence  of 
which,  the  master  is  ordinarily  as  little  accountable  as  the  slave.  It  is  a  re- 
lation, like  the  relation  of  parent  and  child,  or  master  and  apprentice,  in- 
volving reciprocal  duties — on  the  one  hand  protection  and  support,  and  on 
•Hie  other  hand  obedience.  It  is  an  arbitrary  relation  in  that  it  does  not  re- 
sult from  the  necessary  condition  of  human  nature,  but  rather  from  an  arti- 
ficial and  unnatural  organization  of  society;  and  yet  it  is  not  arbitrary  in  any 
sense  which  implies  that  it .  depends  for  its  existence,  or  its  continuance, 
on  the  consent  of  the  parties.  You  may  go  to  a  slave-holder,  and  propose 
to  him  to  emancipate  his  slaves.  You  may  set  before  him  all  the  evils  of 
slavery  in  the  most  vivid  colours.  You  may  make  him  feel  those  evils  as 
strongly  as  you  feel  them.      But  what  shall  he  do  ?    Perhaps  the  law*  of 


120  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Address.  [June, 

the  State  forbid  emancipation  as  an  act  which  goes  only  to  swell  the  amount 
of  pauperism,  and  wretchedness,  and  crime.  But  supposing  there  is  n«* 
legal  obstacle  in  the  way,  what  shall  he  do?  Here  are  a  hundred  human 
being's  dependent  on  him  for  protection,  and  support,  and  government, 
and  he,  on  the  other  hand,  is  dependent  on  their  services  for  the 
meant  of  supporting  himself  and  them.  This  relation  he  did  not  volunta- 
rily assume;  he  was  born  the  proprietor  of  these  slaves,  just  as  really  as  he 
was  born  the  subject  of  civil  government.  It  is  his  duty,  a  duty  which  he 
cannot  avoid,  to  make  the  best  provision  in  his  power  for  their  sustenance 
and  comfort.  It  is  proposed  to  him  to  emancipate  them.  He  looks  ground 
him  and  sees  that  the  condition  of  the  great  mass  of  emancipated  Africans 
is  one  in  comparison  with  which  the  condition  of  his  slaves  is  enviable;— 
and  he  is  convinced  that  if  he  withdraws  from  his  slaves,  his  authority,  his 
support,  his  protection,  and  leaves  them  to  shift  for  themselves,  he  turns 
them  out  to  be  vagabonds,  and  paupers,  and  felons,  and  to  find  in  the  work- 
house and  the  penitentiary,  the  home  which  they  ought  to  have  retained  on 
his  paternal  acres.  This  is  no  unreal  case.  There  may  be  slaves — there  are 
slaves  by  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands — whose  condition  is  that  of  the 
most  abject  distress;  but  these  are  the  slaves  of  masters  whose  whole  con- 
duct is  a  constant  violation  of  duty,  and  with  whom  the  suggestion  of  giv- 
ing freedom  to  their  slaves  would  not  be  harboured  for  a  moment.  The 
case  which  we  have  supposed,  is  the  case  of  a  master  really  desirous  to 
benefit  his  slaves.  Hundreds  of  humane  and  Christian  slave-holders  re- 
tain their  fellow-men  in  bondage,  because  they  are  convinced  that  they 
can  do  no  better 

The  simple  object  of  the  American  Colonization  Society  is  to  plant  Colo- 
nies of  free  blacks  from  the  United  States  upon  the  coast  of  Africa.  This 
object  they  have  been  pursuing  for  eleven  years,  and  they  are  now  more 
fully  convinced  than  ever  that  the  accomplishment  of  this  object  will  be 
attended  with  the  best  results,  both  as  it  respects  the  improvement  of  the 
character  and  condition  of  the  free  blacks,  and  as  respects  the  gradual  and 
safe  abolition  of  slavery. 

What  such  Colonies  are  to  do  for  the  free  blacks,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
understand.  Here  the  black  man  is  degraded.  You  may  call  him  free, 
you  may  protect  his  rights  by  legislation,  you  may  invoke  the  spirit  of  hu- 
manity and  of  Christian  benevolence  to  bless  him,  but  still  he  is  degraded. 
A  thousand  malignant  influences  around  him  are  conspiring  to  wither  all 
that  is  manly  and  noble  in  his  nature.  But  in  Africa  he  becomes  a  member 
of  a  community  in  which  he  is  not  only  free  but  equal.  There  he  stands 
up  to  be  a  man.  There  he  has  a  home  for  himself,  and  for  his  children  after 
him.  There,  as  he  looks  about  him  on  a  soil  of  unrivalled  and  almost  in- 
credible fertility,  on  the  dark  forest  already  beginning  to  fall  at  the  ap- 
proach of  civilization,  on  the  varieties  of  mountain,  and  valley,  and  stream, 
already  known  by  names  dear  to  freedom  and  benevolence,  on  all  the  mag- 


1828.]  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Address*  121 

nificence  and  luxuriance  of  that  tropical  land,  he  can  feel  that  there  is  his 
home,  the  land  of  tiis  fathers,  the  refuge  of  the  exile,  and  that  there  his 
children  through  succeeding  ages  shall  enjoy  a  rich  and  noble  inheritance. 
There  he  finds  himself  moved  to  industrious  and  honourable,  and  virtuous 
enterprise,  by  all  the  motives  that  inspire  and  quicken  the  freemen  of  our 
own  New  England.  Every  man  of  colour  who  removes  from  the  United 
States  to  our  African  Colonies,  removes  from  a  land  of  degradation,  from  a. 
land  where  his  soul  is  crushed  and  withered  by  the  constant  sense  of  inferi- 
ority, to  a  land  where  he  may  enjoy  all  the  attributes  of  manhood  and  all 
the  happiness  of  freedom. 

The  successful  establishment  of  these  colonies  will  not  only  bless  the  colo- 
nists themselves,  but  will  react  to  elevate  the  standing  of  those  who  remain 
behind.  From  beyond  the  Atlantic  there  will  come  a  light  to  beam  upon 
the  degradation  of  the  negro.  Let  it  be  known  among  the  coloured  popu- 
lation of  this  country  what  Africa  is,  and  what  advantages  it  offers  to  the 
emig'  ant;  and  soon  the  selfsame  spirit  which  now  lands  thousands  of  suf- 
fering Irishmen  every  year  upon  our  shores,  will  be  yearly  landing  thour 
sands  of  our  free  blacks  upon  the  shores  of  Africa. 

What  effect  the  execution  of  this  scheme  is  to  have  on  the  progressive 
abolition  of  slavery  in  our  country,  may  be  easily  shown. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  it  will  give  to  many  benevolent  masters  an  opportuni- 
ty for  the  safe  and  happy  emancipation  of  their  slaves.  This  scheme  solves 
the  dilemma  in  which  many  a  humane  and  Christian  slave-holder  has  found 
himself.  It  shows  him  how  he  can  free  his  slaves,  and  at  the  same  time 
free  himself  from  the  responsibility  of  holding  them  in  bondage,  and  at  the 
same  time  secure  the  permanent  improvement  of  their  condition.  Already 
has  many  a  benevolent  holder  of  slaves  availed  himself  of  the  opening  which, 
is  thus  presented.  In  the  State  of  North  Carolina  the  entire  community  of 
Quakers  have  emancipated  their  slaves,  and  by  their  own  contributions  have 
provided  for  their  emigration  to  more  favourable  climes. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  prosecution  of  this  scheme  will  excite  discus- 
sion and  will  fix  public  attention  on  this  great  national  interest.  Attention, 
discussion  is  what  this  subject  needs.  We  need  attention  and  discussion — 
not  declamation  aiming  at  no  good  result — not  the  invectives  of  heated  po- 
liticians— but  calm,  serious,  kind  investigation,  leading  the  nation  to  esti- 
mate the  extent  and  nature  of  the  evil  more  exactly,  and  seeking  out  the 
remedies  by  which  it  may  b  e  alleviated  and  subdued.  To  this  result  the 
scheme  is  even  now  most  obviously  tending.  What  has  already  been  done 
in  the  way  of  fre"eing  and  transporting  slaves,  has  sent  a  thrill  through  the 
hearts  of  thousands.  And  every  new  example  of  this  kind,  as  it  awakens 
new  applause  will  act  on  public  opinion  .with  a  wider  and  more  powerful 
influence.  Good  men  and  patriotic  men  in  the  slave-holding  States  will  be 
led  to  examine  the  subject  anew;  they  will  see  it  in  new  relations,  they  will 

16 


i2£  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Address*  •    [June, 

i-egard  it  with  new  emotions.     Thus  the  public  mind  will  be  gradually  en- 
lightened, and  public  opinion  will  be  renovated. 

But  let  this  enterprise  be  successfully  pursued,  and  a  few  years  hence,  the 
fertile  soil  of  Africa  will  be  cultivated  by  the  hands  of  freemen.  Then  there 
will  be  no  monopoly  on  which  slavery  can  be  sustained;  and  the  universal 
abolition  of  slavery  will  be  not  far  distant.  Then  it  will  fall,  not  by  violence, 
not  by  sudden  commotion,  but  by  the  power  of  public  opinion,  convinced 
that  it  is  a  burthen  too  heavy  to  be  sustained,  and  calling"  on  the  wisdom  and 
the  power  of  legislation  to  effect  the  gradual  and  safe,  but  sure  removal  of 
the  curse- 

But  here  we  wouid  remark,  that  such  a  result  would,  instead 
af  proving  injurious,  be  the  greatest  of  all  possible  benefits  t« 
our  southern  country.  A  state  of  things  like  the  present,  can- 
not, permanently,  be  consistent  with  the  most  important  inter- 
ests of  any  class  of  society.  The  removal  then  of  the  evil  allud- 
ed to,  every  patriot  must  desire,  if  such  removal  can  be  provi- 
dentially effected  without  any  violation  of  private  right,  or  pub- 
lic law. 

To  what  remains  of  this  admirable  address,  we  particularly 
invite  the  attention  of  our  friends. 

There  are  other  results  connected  with  the  success  of  our  enterprise  to 
which  we  might  call  your  attention.  We  might  tell  of  the  slave  trade  still 
raging  with  unabated  horror,  save  where  its  suppression  has  been  effected 
by  the  Colonies  of  Liberia  and  Sierra  Leone.  We  might  tell  you  of  a  con- 
tinent covered  with  barbarism,  and  on  which  no  light  of  civilization  or  of 
Christianity  has  ever  shined.  But  it  is  enough  to  name  such  considerations 
as  these.  We  need  not  surpass  the  limits  of  this  appeal  to  show  in  detail 
how  the  prosecution  of  our  enterprise  will  put  a  speedy  and  perpetual  end 
to  all  those  horrors  which  have  so  long  roused  the  indignation  of  the  world 
in  vain.  Nor  need  we  tell  how  from  our  Colonies  the  light  will  spread, 
like  the  morning  on  the  mountain,  when  summit  after  summit,  and  valley 
after  valley  catches  the  sunbeam.  Your  thoughts  glance  forward  to  the 
time  when  Africa,  so  long  darkened,  and  defiled,  and  wretched,  shall  be 
redeemed  from  its  miseries  and  washed  from  its  pollutions,  and  shall  be 
filled  with  the  light  and  blessing  of  the  gospel. 

Jn  this  enterprise,  friends  and  fellow-citizens,  you  are  invited  to  co-ope» 
pate.  And  it  is  urged  upon  your  notice,  not  as  a  newly  projected  scheme 
of  gigantic  yet  uncertain  results,  but  as  a  scheme  already  tried,  and  at  this 
flour  in  successful  operation.  It 'is  now  eleven  years  since  the  experiment 
was  undertaken.  Then  every  thing  was  uncertain.  It  was  uncertain  how 
many  weuld  be  found  to  favour  the  undertaking  in  its  infancy.     It  was  uv 


1828.]  Gotinccticut  Col.  Soc.  Address.  12S 

certain  whether  a  suitable  territory  could  be  purchased.  It  was  uncertain 
whether  a  sufficient  number  of  Colonists  could  be  found  willing  and  quali- 
fied to  make  a  beginning.  It  was  uncertain  whether  savage  tribes,  or  the 
combined  power  of  the  slave  traders  ever  hovering  over  that  devoted  coast9 
*r  the  diseases  of  that  burning  climate,  might  not  sweep  away  the  settlers 
at  the  outset  and  utterly  defeat  the  enterprise.  Then  there  were  few  who 
had  that  prophetic  scope  of  judgment,  or  that  deep  and  inspiring  enthusi- 
asm of  benevolence,  which  could  endure  such  disheartening  anticipations 
as  seemed  inseparable  from  the  project.  Then  it  was  no  wonder  that  the 
people  of  New  England,  knowing  little  of  the  nature,  and  feeling  nothing  of 
the  direct  pressure  of  that  flood  of  evils  fbr  which  an  outlet  was  to  be  pro- 
vided, looked  on  the  scheme  with  comparative  apathy  and  incredulity.— 
Hut  the  time  for  apathy  or  incredulity,  the  time  for  doubt  and  backward- 
ness,  is  past. 

During  the  first  five  years  there  was  little  to  encourage  the  promoters  of 
this  object,  and  much  to  create  despondency.  From  the  inexperience  of 
their  Agents  in  Africa,  from  the  treachery  of  native  proprietors  with  whom 
they  were  compelled  to  negotiate  for  territory,  from  the  diseases  of  the 
country,  and  from  the  assaults  of  savage  enemies,  they  suffered  multiplied 
calamities.  And  at  home  there  were  obstacles  hardly  less  discouraging. — - 
By  some  whose  favour  they  had  anticipated  with  confidence,  the  entire 
project  was  scouted  as  chimerical.  By  others  every  appeal  of  theirs  was 
received  with  indifference.  By  others  their  motives  were  misunderstood, 
and  their  expectations  misconstrued.  The  friends  of  abolition  opposed 
them  because  they  did  not  go  far  enough,  and  charged  them  with  a  design 
to  perpetuate  the  evils  which  they  hoped  to  remedy.  The  friends  of  sla- 
very hated  them  because  they  went  too  far,  and  charged  them  with  a  rash- 
ness  of  philanthropy  that  was  to  be  the  ruin  of  their  country.  But  for  the 
past  six  years  a  kind  Providence  has  been  pleased  to  smile  on  the  under- 
taking. The  Society  is  now  in  possession  of  a  Territory  extending  one 
kundred  and  fifty  miles  on  the  sea  coast.  The  Colony  consists  of  more  than 
twelve  hundred  souls.  It  is  defended  by  fortifications  sufficient  to  repel  any 
probable  attack.  It  is  under  the  immediate  direction  of  a  man,*  who,  by 
six  years  of  arduous  and  successful  effort,  has  given  the  most  abundant 
proof  of  his  competency  for  the  work,  and  of  his  devotion  to  the  noble  en- 
terprise. It  is  enjoying  all  the  blessings  of  a  government  republican  in 
spirit,  well  regulated,  and  wisely  administered.  It  has  under  its  jurisdic- 
tion eight  several  stations^  by  means  of  which,  it  maintains  an  extensive 
commerce  with  the  natives.  Its  principal  town,  which  bears  the  venerated 
name  of  the  late  Chief  Magistrate  of  this  nation,  is  a  thriving  commercial 
village,  whose  port  is  "rarely  clear  of  European  and  American  shipping. ,a 
The  institutions  of  religion  are  planted  there;  houses  are  erected  for  the 

*J.  Ashmun,  Esq. 


124  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Address*  [June, 

worship  of  the  Living"  God;  and  on  the  bold  promontory  of  Monrovia,  the 
•white  spire,  pointing  to  the  heavens,  stands  a  beautiful  monument  of  the 
triumph  of  the  gospel  in  that  land  of  blood  and  darkness.  Every  child  in 
the  Colony  enjoys  the  advantages  of  schools,  for  the  support  of  which  the 
settlers  in  addition  to  what  the  Society  has  done,  contribute  by  voluntary 
subscription  eleven  hundred  dollars  annually.  Not  only  are  the  institutions 
of  religion  and  education  enjoyed,  but  their  influence  is  seen  in  the  order, 
peace,  industry,  contentment  and  happiness  of  the  community.  The  light 
of  civilization  and  religion  is  gradually  spreading  among  the  savage  tribes 
of  the  vicinity.  Missionaries  from  the  Baptist  churches  of  this  country, 
have  for  years  been  stationed  at  the  Colony.  Others  from  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Society,  and  from  the  American  Board  of  Foreign  Missions,  have 
been  appointed  to  that  work  and  are  soon  to  embark.  And  even  the  Lu- 
theran church  of  Germany  and  Switzerland  has  directed  its  evangelical  ef- 
forts to  Liberia,  as  affording  the  best  means  of  access  to  heathen  Africa; 
and  intelligence  has  just  been  received  that  two  missionaries  well  qualified 
and  amply  furnished  for  their  work,  have  already  arrived,  as  pioneers  of  a 
much  larger  force  expected  ?oon  to  follow.  In  a  word,  a  civilized  Chris- 
tian Colony — the  germ  of  a  nation — has  been  planted  on  the  coast  of  Afri- 
ca, and  is  already  diffusing  light  through  its  benighted  regions. 

Such  success  gives  palpable  demonstration  that  the  scheme  is  something 
more  than  a  chimera.  The  consequence  is  that  the  undertaking  is  daily 
exciting  more  and  more  attention,  is  becoming  better  understood,  and  is 
enlisting  in  greater  numbers  warm  and  devoted  friends.  It  is  awaking  a 
deep  and  earnest  interest  throughout  our  land;  and,  especially  in  the  slave- 
holding  States  it  is  fixing  public  attention  and  eliciting  inquiry  and  dis- 
cussion on  that  great  national  interest,  the  remedy  and  ultimate  removal  of 
the  evils  connected  with  the  condition  of  our  coloured  population.  Alrea- 
dy has  it  been  agitated,  and  soon  will  it  be  thoroughly  discussed  in  the 
halls  of  our  national  legislature. 

The  Colonization  Society  of  the  State  of  Connecticut,  in  behalf  of  which 
we  now  address  you,  was  organized  in  the  hope  of  concentrating  and 
heightening  that  interest  in  this  noble  undertaking  which  is  known  to  exist 
among  the  people  of  this  State.  A  year  has  just  elapsed  since  the  forma- 
tion of  the  Society  was  announced  to  the  public.  The  managers  had  hop- 
ed by  the  employment  of  some  competent  agent,  to  bring  the  subject  in  de- 
tail before  the  minds  of  their  fellow-citizens.  That  hop-,  has  been  hither- 
to disappointed,  but  is  not  yet  finally  relinquished.  Meanwhile  we  bring 
before  you,  for  your  candid  consideration,  the  summary  statements  contain- 
ed in  this  address.  And  as  our  Treasurer's  account  for  the  last  year  shows 
that  without  a  word  of  solicitation,  and  without  any  direct  effort  on  our 
part,  two  hundred  dollars  have  been  thrown  into  the  treasury,  we  are  the 
more  encouraged  to  hope  that  this  appeal  to  your  patriotism  and  your 
Christian  feeling  will  not  be  made  in  vain. 


1828.]  Connecticut  Col.  Soc.  Mdress.  12$ 

We  ask  you  to  bestow  on  this  subject  a  fair  and  thorough  investigation. 
And  that  you  may  know  fully  what  has  been  accomplished,  and  what  is 
now  going  on,  we  beg  leave  to  commend  to  your  special  notice  the  publi- 
cations of  the  National  Society.  We  are  bold  to  say  that  no  man  whose 
mind  is  open  to  conviction,  can  read  the  Annual  Ileports  and  the  Monthly 
Magazine  of  that  Society — so  full  of  the  most  striking  and  unanswerable 
facts — without  becoming  interested  even  to  enthusiasm. 

We  ask  you  to  use  your  influence  towards  forming  in  this  community  a 
correct  and  vigorous  and  active  public  opinion  respecting  the  claims  of  Af- 
rica. We  ask  you  to  use  your  influence  in  your  several  spheres,  towards 
rousing  inquiry  and  diffusing  information  on  this  great  subject.  Who  that 
understands  the  merits  of  this  enterprise  may  not  in  this  way  lend  it  an  effi- 
cient patronage?  Who  may  not  in  this  way  contribute  something  towards 
forming  that  strong  current  of  public  opinion  which  will  by  and  by  direct 
the  application  of  the  national  resources  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  national 
design > 

We  ask  your  contributions.  A  subscriber  of  thirty  dollars  at  one  time 
becomes  a  member  for  life  of  the  National  Society.  The  payment  of  ten 
dollars  at  one  time,  or  of  one  dollar  annually,  is  the  condition  of  member- 
ship in  this  auxiliary.  How  many  men  are  there  in  Connecticut  who  might, 
without  material  inconvenience  to  themselves,  and  without  substracting  any 
thing  from  their  ordinary  charities,  constitute  themselves  life  members  of 
the  parent  institution!  How  many  more  who  might  with  equal  ease  be- 
come either  annual  or  life  subscribers  to  the  Connecticut  Society!  How 
many  ministers  of  every  denomination  might  be  constituted  members  of  the 
National  or  State  Society,  by  the  benefactions  of  their  people!  In  which 
of  our  towns  or  villages  might  not  the  exertions  of  a  few  spirited  individu- 
als secure  a  public  contribution  to  this  great  national  object,  on  the  anni- 
versary of  our  independence  ?  There  are  in  this  State  one  hundred  and 
twenty-nine  incorporated  towns.  If  the  average  amount  of  only  thirty  dol- 
lars could  be  raised  annually  among  the  citizens  of  each  of  these  towns,  it 
would  send  nearly  four  thousand  dollars  every  year  to  diminish  the  yearly 
increasing  pressure  of  the  greatest  curse  which  rests  upon  this  nation,  and 
to  build  up  the  institutions  of  freedom,  and  intelligence,  and  piety,  on  a 
continent  over  which  darkness  and  misery  have  brooded  for  uncounted  ge- 
nerations. 

We  trust  that  this  appeal,  brief  and  imperfect  as  it  is,  will  not  be  in  vain. 
For  we  address  a  community  famed  for  its  intelligence,  and  controlled  by 
feelings  of  unquestionable  benevolence.  We  bring  before  you  one  of  the 
most  momentous  interests  of  the  country  which  we  all  love.  We  bring  be- 
fore you  the  wants  of  two  millions  of  fellow-men,  existing  on  our  native  soil, 
and  yet  not  fellow-citizens — two  millions  of  the  human  population  of  this 
country  degraded  to  the  dust,  notwithstanding  the  boasted  institutions  of  our 
freedom.  We  bring  before  you  the  horrors  of  the  yet  unabolished  slave-trade, 


126     Resolutions  of  the  Methodist  Gen.  Conference.      [June, 

and  the  misery  of  50  millions  of  the  pagan  inhabitants  of  Africa.  We  bring 
before  you  the  claims  of  a  little  Christian  settlement  just  planted  on  a  bar- 
barous shore,  at  the  expense  of  toil  and  suffering  almost  incredible,  and  by 
a  patient  and  persevering  fortitude  which  honours  human  nature.  Such  in- 
terests, such  wants  and  claims  as  these,  you  are  not  wont  to  treat  with  apa- 
thy. We  pray  yon  to  remember  these  things.  As  you  look  round  on  your 
hills  resounding  with  the  song  of  the  husbandman,  your  cities  filled  with 
the  fruits  of  enterprise  and  industry,  your  homes  of  peace  and  purity,  youi 
churches,  your  schools,  your  thousand  noble  institutions;  forget  not,  we 
pray  you,  the  poor  African  in  the  midst  of  us,  the  slave  or  the  freeman 
scarcely  happier  than  the  slave,  surrounded  by  all  these  blessings,  yet  hav- 
ing no  inheritance  in  them;  and  forget  not  the  misery  of  that  land  whose 
coast  has  been  half  depopulated  by  the  cruelties  of  Christian  and  American 
slave-traders,  and  whose  tribes  are  sunk  under  the  complicated  wretched- 
ness of  barbarism  and  superstition  and  endless  savage  warfare.  And  espe- 
cially on  the  return  of  our  national  festival,  when  i1s  thousand  notes  of 
gratulation  are  pealing  on  your  ears,  and  you  think  how  many  millions  of 
your  fellow-citizens  are  shouting  their  joy,  or  bowing  with  grateful  devo- 
tion at  the  altars  of  their  God, — then,  as  you  look  backward  to  the  insigni- 
ficant beginnings  of  this  empire  and  forward  to  the  great  results  which  time 
is  now  so  rapidly  revealing,  we  pray  you  to  remember  that  three  thousand 
miles  away,  upon  the  coast  of  Africa,  that  day  is  celebrated  by  a  colony  of 
freemen  with  a  joy  as  deep  and  rational  as  yours;  and  then  under  the  influ- 
ence of  such  associations  determine  what  you  will  do  to  alleviate  the  evils 
which  a  degraded  coloured  population  of  two  millions  is  inflicting  on  our 
country,  and  to  spread  our  language,  our  institutions,  our  freedom,  out  re- 
ligion, over  another  continent. 

Tkesoluiions  of  \\xe  General  Conference 

Of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. — May,  1828. 

1st.   That  this  Conference  highly  approve  of  the  objects  pro 
posed,   and  the  measures  taken  by  the  American  Colonization 
Society,  in  reference  to  the  colonization  of  the  free  people  of 
colour  on  the  coast  of  Africa. 

2nd.  That  this  Conference  look  to  the  settlement  at  Liberia, 
as  opening  a  door  for  the  diffusion  of  all  the  benign  influences 
of  the  Gospel  over  the  continent  of  Africa;  and  therefore  recom- 
mend it  to  our  Ministers  and  membership,  to  aid  by  their  exer- 
tions and  influence  in  the  formation  and  support  of  Auxiliary 


1828.]  From  Liberia.  127 

Societies,  and  the  making  annual  collections  to  aid  in  carrying 
into  effect  the  benevolent  designs  of  the  Parent  Institution. 

3d.  That  the  Secretary  be,  and  he  is  hereby  instructed,  to 
communicate  the  foregoing  resolutions  to  the  Board  of  Managers 
«f  the  American  Colonization  Society. 

We  rejoice  in  the  adoption  of  the  preceding  Resolutions.  No  body  of 
Christians  probably  do  more  for  our  cause  than  the  Methodists;  and  from 
the  energy  with  which  they  are  wont  to  execute  their  purposes,  we  may 
expect  much  from  their  exertions  in  aid  of  our  enterprise. 

T\»om  lAbeiria. 

By  the  Brig  Hope,  Capt.  Woodbury,  of  Boston,  despatches 
Lave  reached  us  from  the  Vice-Agent  of  the  Colony,  the  Rev. 
Lott  Cary,  bearing  date  the  7th  of  May.  The  following  items 
are  extracted  from  this  communication. 

There  have  been  no  very  important  changes  either  in  the  state  or  face  of 
the  Colony  since  Mr.  Ashmun  left,  except  by  the  rapid  progress  of  the  far- 
ming- establishments  at  the  "Half-way  Farms,"  Caldwell  and  Millsburg.  • 
As  I  visited  all  those  establishments  during  Friday  and  Saturday,  the  2nd 
and  3d  of  May,  I  am  happy  to  say,  that  the  prospect  for  crops  the  present 
season  is  tenfold,  and  that  I  think  these  settlements  will  be  beyond  the 
reach  of  suffering,  before  the  close  of  the  present  season. 

About  six  of  the  families  that  commenced  at  Millsburg  very  late  in  March 
are  nearly  housed,  and  some  of  them  have  two  acres  at  least  of  land  in  or- 
der for  planting. 

I  have  judged  it  best  to  help  them  a  little  in  getting  their  houses  erected, 
and  in  planting,  and  to  furnish  them  with  seeds  and  tools  which  they  had 
not;  and  as  soon  as  their  farms  are  planted,  it  is  my  intention  to  stop  alto- 
gether issuing  rations  to  all  who  are  able  to  earn  wages  or  subsist  them- 
selves, and  only  feed  the  poor  women  and  children,  in  a  way,  if  possible,  to 
get  them  safe  through  the  rainy  season,  before  which  time,  I  trust  his  hon- 
our, Mr.  Ashmun,  will  return.  As  to  the  new  settlers  in  Caldwell,  I  have 
found  it  necessary  to  do  rather  more  than  for  those  at  Millsburg,  as  the  latter 
have  lands  more  easy  to  clear,  and  the  timber  for  erecting  their  houses  is  more 
convenient.  There  are  several  families,  which  have  made  astonishing  pro- 
gress. Those  sent  out  by  Col.  B.  in  particular  have  cleared  land  sufficient, 
if  they  can  possibly  succeed  in  getting  it  planted,  to  render  their  families  en- 
tirely comfortable  by  the  close  of  the  ensuing  season;  and  I  trust,  with  the 


128  Contributions.  [June, 

little  help  that  I  am  now  giving-  them,  that  they  will  be  comfortably  housed 
on  their  own  lands  in  two  or  three  weeks. 

I  must  just  beg-  leave  to  mention  to  the  Board,  that  from  information 
which  has  been  received  from  Jacob  Warner,  who  has  very  recently  leturn- 
ed  from  the  Sesters,  a  very  important  section  of  the  country  is  offered  to 
the  authorities  of  the  Colony,  which  from  Mr.  Warner's  account,  would 
connect  our  Sesters  and  Bassa  Lands  together,  and  in  time  g-ive  the  whole 
command  of  that  line  of  coast,  which  is  at  present  one  of  the  principal  ren- 
dezvous of  slave  vessels,  which  so  enormously  intercept  and  interrupt 
the  progress  of  our  factories,  that  the  establishment  of  the  Sesters  isoblig-ed 
to  be  given  over  at  present.  From  the  many  deserters  which  have  attend- 
ed that  enterprise,  Mr.  Warner  has  relinquished  the  idea  of  prosecuting  it 
&rther  at  present. 

The  slave  trade  in  that  neighbourhood  prevails  to  an  alarming  extent, 
and  I  think  from  frequent  information,  tliat  it  is  increasing  very  considera- 
bly in  our  neighbouring  ports. 

I  am  happy  to  inform  the  Board,  that  the  whole  settlement  of  Monrovia 
b  resolved  into  a  Sunday  School  Society,  therefore  our  Sabbaths  are  strict- 
ly observed;  also  at  Caldwell,  they  liave  made  a  beginning  to  the  same 
amount. 

C  ontYibutiQUs 

To  the  A.  Colonization  Society,  from  1st  to  30th  June,  1828. 

By  a  few  young  friends  in  Fredericksburg,  Va. $  16  36 

By  Seth  Terry,  Esq.,  Treasurer  Colonization  Society  Connecticut, 
(including  $30,  paid  by  Mrs.  Parmelie,  a  donation  from  sundry 
individuals  in  Bolton,  to  make  Rev.  L.  Hyde,  their  Pastor,   a 

life  member  of  the  American  Colonization  Society,)  200 

By  B.  Brand,  Esq.,   Tr.  Richmond  and  Manchester  Col.  Soc'y.,  55  25 

By  Richard  Potts,  Esq.,  Fredericktown,  Md., 41  50 

By  John  Pilson,  Albermarle,  Va.,  2 

Annual  donation  from  a  Member, 1 

Repository,    25  33 

Rev.  R.  Henry,  Agent  Pennsylvania 20 

Collection  in  St.  John's  Church,  Washington,  Rev.  William  Haw- 

ly,  29th  June,  13  32 

Collection  in  Christ  Ch.,  Washington,  Rev.  Mr.  Allen,  29th  June,  8  97 

$383  73 


THE 

AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 


O0L0UIAL  JOTTIUTAL. 


Vol.  IV.  JULY,  1S28.  No.  5. 


"Review 

t)f  Mission  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee,  with  a  Statis- 
tical account  of  that  Kingdom,  and  Geographical  Notices  of 
other  parts  of  the  Interior  of  Africa.  By  Edward  Bowdich, 
Esq.,  Conductor.     London,  1819. 

(Concluded  from  p.  106.) 

Though  in  many  respects  a  truly  savage,   the  Ashantees  are 
a  very  discerning  and  shrewd  people.      It  is  their  custom  inva- 
riably in  war,   to  place  the  "revolters  recently  quelled,   or  the 
allies  last  accepted,  in  the  van  of  the  army,"  and  occasionally 
these  constitute  almost  the  entire  army;  the  Ashantee  part  being 
held  in  reserve,  led  on  to  an  engagement  by  the  youngest  captain 
first,  succeeded  in  order  by  those  of  higher  rank  until  you  reach 
the  King,  who  occupies  the  rear.     To  retreat  is  considered  despe* 
rate,  because  those  in  the  rear,   with  heavy  swords  cut  any  man 
down  who  attempts  to  escape  from  the  contest.      "It  is  one  of 
the  sentences  of  the  most  popular  song  in  Coomassie,  'If  I  fight 
I  die,  if  I  run  away  I  die,  better  that  I  go  on  and  die.'"     They 
are  as  the  ancient  Spaniards  have  been  described,  "Prodiga  gens 
animae  et  properare  facillima  mortem."     Their  treatment  of  an 
enemy  is  barbarous  in  the  extreme. 


K 


<? 


130  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [July, 

"Several  of  the  hearts  of  the  enemy  are  cut  out  by  the  fetish  men  who 
follow  the  army,  and  the  blood  and  small  pieces  being  mixed,  (with  much 
ceremony  and  incantation,)  with  various  consecrated  herbs,  all  those  who 
have  never  killed  an  enemy  before,  eat  a  portion;  for  it  is  believed  that  if 
they  did  not,  their  vigour  and  courage  would  be  secretly  wasted  by  the 
haunting  spirit  of  the  deceased.  It  was  said  that  the  King  and  all  the  dig- 
nitaries partook  of  the  heart  of  any  celebrated  enemy;  this  was  only  whis- 
pered; that  they  wore  the  smaller  joints,  bones,  and  the  teeth  of  the  slain 
monarchs,  was  evident  as  well  as  boasted.  One  man  was  pointed  out  to 
me,  as  always  eating  the  heart  of  the  enemy  he  killed  with  his  own  hand. 
The  number  of  an  army  is  ascertained  or  preserved  in  cowries  or  coin  by 
Apokoo.  When  a  successful  general  returns,  he  waits  about  two  days,  at  a 
short  distance  from  the  capital,  to  receive  the  King's  compliments,  and  to 
collect  all  the  splendour  possible  for  his  entre,  to  encourage  the  army  and 
infatuate  the  people.  The  most  famous  generals  are  distinguished  by  the 
addition  of  warlike  names,  mnrp  terrific  than  glorious,  as  they  designate 
their  manner  of  destroying  their  prisoners.  Apokoo  was  called  Aboawassa, 
because  he  was  in  the  habit  of  cutting  off  their  arms.  Appia,  Sheaboo, 
as  he  beats  their  heads  in  pieces  with  a  stone.  Amanqua,  Abiniowa,  as 
he  cuts  off  their  legs." 

Architecture  and  various  other  arts,  appear  to  have  received 
in  Ashantee  considerable  attention.  The  walls  of  the  houses 
consist  of  gravelly  clay,  which  is  received  into  a  mould  formed 
by  two  rows  of  stakes  and  wattle  work  placed  at  a  distance 
equalling  the  intended  thickness  of  the  wall,  and  thickly  plaster- 
ed, so  as  to  present  the  appearance  of  an  entire  thick  mud  wall. 
All  the  houses  had  gable  ends,  and  the  roofs  consisted  of  a  frame 
work  of  Bamboo,  covered  with  an  interwoven  thatch  of  pal  in 
leaves,  the  frame  work  being  painted  black  and  polished  so  as  to 
look  better  than  any  rude  ceiling,  with  which  it  appears  they 
are  unacquainted.  Arcades  and  piazzas  were  common.  Great 
neatness  was  manifest  in  their  houses  as  well  as  in  their  persons. 
One  of  the  favourite  projects  of  the  King  was  to  build  a  house 
for  himself,  to  be  roofed  with  "brass  pans,  beaten  into  flat  sur- 
faces, and  laid  over  an  ivory  frame  work  appearing  within. — 
The  windows  and  the  doors  to  be  cased  in  gold,  and  the  door- 
posts and  pillars  of  ivory."  The  principle  of  the  Ashantee  loom 
is  precisely  the  same  with  the  English;  it  is  worked  by  strings 
held  between  the  toes,  and  the  web  never  exceeds  four  inches  in 
width.     They  use  a  spindle  not  a  distaff,  holding  it  in  one  hand 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashanttt.  131 

and  twisting  the  thread  with  the  finger  and  thumb  of  the  other. 
The  cloths  are  represented  as  remarkable  for  fineness,  variety 
and  brilliancy.  They  unravel  the  richest  silks  to  weave  into 
them.  We  here  remark,  that  cloths  (probably  of  an  inferior 
kind)  are  manufactured  in  the  same  way  among  all  the  African 
tribes.  They  have  two  dye  woods,  a  red  and  a  yellow,  and 
make  green  by  mixing  the  latter  with  a  blue  dye  in  which  they 
excel.  This  is  made  from  a  plant  called  Acassie,  which  is  abun- 
dant in  the  woods.  "They  gather  a  quantity  of  the  leaves, 
bruise  them  in  a  wooden  mortar,  and  spread  them  out  on  a  mat 
to  dry;  this  mass  is  kept  for  use,  a  proportion  of  it  is  put  into  a 
pot  of  water  and  remains  six  days,  drying  it  once  every  day  in 
the  sun,  it  is  then  a  deep  lasting  blue  colour." 

They  excel  in  pottery,  having  very  fine  clay  which  is  polish- 
ed by  friction,  and  the  grooves  of  the  patterns  filled  up  with 
chalk.  They  dress  leather  and  work  in  iron  with  considerable 
ability.  The  following  extract  gives  the  process  adopted  in 
making  articles  of  gold. 

"The  people  of  Dagwumba  surpass  the  Ashantees  in  goldsmith's  work, 
though  the  latter  may  be  esteemed  proficients  in  the  art.  The  small  arti- 
cles for  the  Museum,  a  gold  stool,  sanko,  bell,  jaw  bone,  and  drum,  are 
not  such  neat  specimens  as  I  could  wish;  the  man  who  made  them  having 
too  much  costly  work  on  hand  for  the  King,  to  pay  our  trifles  his  wonted 
attention;  unfortunately  too,  he  was  committed  to  prison  before  they  were 
quite  finished;  however,  they  will  give  an  idea.  I  weighed  out  nineteen 
ackies  and  a  half  of  gold  dust  for  making  these  articles,  one  third  of  an 
ackie  was  lost  in  melting,  and  five  was  the  charge  of  the  goldsmith.  We 
lost  a  beautiful  silver  pipe  in  the  bustle.  Bees  wax  for  making  the  model 
of  the  article  wanted,  is  spun  out  on  a  smooth  block  of  wood,  by  the  side 
of  a  fire,  on  which  stands  a  pot  of  water;  a  flat  stick  is  dipped  into  this, 
with  which  the  wax  is  made  of  a  proper  softness;  it  takes  about  a  quarter 
.  of  an  hour  to  make  enough  for  a  ring.  When  the  model  is  finished,  it  is 
enclosed  in  a  composition  of  wet  clay  and  charcoal,  (which  being  closely 
pressed  around  it,  forms  a  mould, )  dried  in  the  sun,  and  having  a  small  cup 
of  the  same  materials  attached  to  it,  (to  contain  the  gold  for  fusion, )  com- 
municating with  the  model  by  a  small  perforation.  When  the  whole  model 
is  finished,  and  the  gold  carefully  enclosed  in  the  cup,  it  is  put  in  a  char- 
coal fire,  with  the  cup  undermost  When  the  gold  is  supposed  to  be  fused, 
the  cup  is  turned  uppermost,  that  it  may  run  into  the  place  of  the  melted 
wax;  when  cool,  the  clay  is  broken,  and  if  the  article  is  not  perfect,  it  goes 
through  the  whole  process  again.      To  give  the  gold  its  proper  colour, 


132  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [July^ 

they  put  a  layer  of  finely  ground  red  ochre,  (which  they  call  Inchuma,)  all 
over  it,  and  immerge  it  in  boiling'  water  mixed  with  the  same  substance, 
and  a  little  salt;  after  it  has  boiled  half  an  hour,  it  is  taken  out  and  tho- 
roughly cleansed  from  any  clay  that  may  adhere  to  it.  Their  bellows  are 
imitations  of  ours,  but  the  sheep  skin  they  use  being  tied  to  the  wood  with 
leather  thongs,  the  wind  escapes  through  the  crevices;  therefore,  when 
much  gold  is  on  the  fire  they  are  obliged  to  use  two  or  three  pair  at  the  same 
time.  Their  anvils  are  generally  a  large  stone,  or  a  piece  of  iron  placed 
on  the  ground.  Their  stoves  are  built  of  Swish,  (about  three  or  four  feet 
high,)  in  a  circular  form,  and  are  open  about  one-fifth  of  the  circum- 
ference; a  hole  is  made  through  the  closed  part,  level  with  the  ground,  for 
the  nozzle  of  the  bellows.  Their  weights  are  very  neat  brass  casts  of  almost 
every  animal,  fruit,  or  vegetable  known  in  the  country.  The  King's  scales* 
blow  pan,  boxes,  and  weights,  and  even  the  tongs  which  hold  the  cinder 
to  light  his  pipe,  were  neatly  made  of  the  purest  gold  that  could  be  manu- 
factured." 

Mr.  Bowdich  estimates  the  population  of  Ashantee  at  one 
million,  of  which  he  supposes  204,000  are  men  able  to  bear- 
arms.  Though  polygamy  is  tolerated  to  great  excess,  yet  the 
number  of  females  is  not  thought  to  be  two  to  one.  The  men 
are  well  made,  and  among  the  women  Mr.  Bowdich  saw  not  on- 
ly very  beautiful  forms,  but  in  some  instances,  regular  Grecian 
features,  and  brilliant  eyes.  The  higher  classes  are  remarkable 
for  their  neatness.  The  government  derives  a  very  considera- 
ble revenue  from  the  taxation  of  its  subjects  and  tributary  states. 
The  soil  of  the  market  place,  which  is  only  washed  in  cases  of 
emergency,  has  yielded  800  oz.  of  gold  at  one  time. — (Vide  Re- 
pository, p.  72.) 

The  Ashantees  estimate  the  population  of  Coomassie  at  one 
hundred  thousand,  and  Mr.  Bowdich  is  of  opinion  that  it  is 
much  larger  than  Sego,  which  Mr.  Park  thought  contained  thir- 
ty thousand.  Fruits  are  abundant,  and  grow  spontaneously; 
the  oranges  were  large  and  of  an  exquisite  flavour.  The  castor 
pil  (ricinus  communis)  rises  to  a  large  tree.  The  sugar-cane  and 
cotton  plant  are  common. 

To  most  of  our  readers,  we  presume,  the  chapter  on  the  Ashan- 
tee language  would  be  uninteresting,  though  it  contains  many 
acute  and  very  ingenious  remarks.  We  give  but  a  single  ex- 
tract. 

"The  Ashantees  generally  use  much  and  vehement  gesture,  and  speak  in 


i828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee.  133 

recitative:  their  action  is  exuberant,  but  graceful;  and  from  the  infancy  of 
the  language,  nouns  and  verbs  are  constantly  repeated,  for  force  and  dis- 
tinction, as  one  one,  for  one  by  one,  or  each;  one  tokoo  one  tokoo,  for  one  tokoo 
a-piece.  They  frequently  are  obliged  to  vary  the  tone,  in  pronouncing  a 
word  which  has  more  than  one  meaning,  as  the  Chinese  do.  They  have 
no  expression  short  of,  you  are  a  liar;  and  the  King  was  surprised,  when  I 
told  him  we  made  a  great  difference  between  a  mistake  and  a  lie:  he  said, 
the  truth  was  not  spoken  in  either  case,  and  therefore  it  was  the  same 
thing;  they  did  not  consider  the  motive,  but  only  the  fact. 

"Like  the  American  Languages,  those  of  this  part  of  Africa  are  full  of 
figures,  hyperbolical  and  picturesque.*  One  of  the  Kings  of  the  interior, 
whose  territories  the  Ashantees  had  long  talked  of  invading,  sent  forty  pots 
of  palm  oil  to  Coomassie,  with  the  message,  that  "he  feared  they  could  not 
find  their  way,  so  he  sent  the  oil  to  light  them."  The  Accras,  instead  of 
good  night,  say,  wooa'u  d'tcherrimong,  sleep  till  the  lighting  of  the  world: 
one  of  their  imprecations  against  their  enemies  is,  "may  their  hiding  place 
be  our  flute,"  that  is,  "our  plaything:"  when  they  speak  of  a  man  impos- 
ing on  them,  they  say,  "he  turned  the  backs  of  our  heads  into  our  mouths." 
Having  occasion,  whilst  at  Coomassie,  to  protest  against  the  conduct  of  an 
individual,  the  King  replied,  through  Adoosee,  "The  horse  comes  from  the 
bush,  and  is  a  fool,  but  the  man  who  rides  him  knows  sense,  and  by  and 
by  makes  him  do  what  he  wishes;  you,  by  yourself,  made  the  horse,  who 
was  a  fool,  do  better  the  other  day,  therefore,  three  of  you  ought  to  teach 
a  man,  who  is  not  born  a  fool,  and  does  not  come  from  the  bush,  to  do  what 
you  know  to  be  right  by  and  by,  though  I  see  he  does  wrong  now." 

The  wild  music  of  these  people,  (says  Mr.  Bowdich)  is  scarce- 
ly to  be  brought  within  the  regular  rules  of  harmony;  yet  their 
airs  have  a  sweetness  and  animation,  beyond  any  barbarous  com- 
positions I  ever  heard.  Few  of  their  instruments  possess  much 
power,  yet  the  effect  of  their  combination  is  surprising.  A  long 
hollow  reed  with  three  holes,  is  their  flute;  but  it  is  on  the  San- 
ko  that  they  best  display  their  musical  talents. 

"It  consists  of  a  narrow  box,  the  open  top  of  which  is  covered  with  Alie- 
nator or  Antelope  skin;  a  bridge  is  raised  on  this,  over  which  eight  strings 
are  conducted  to  the  end  of  a  long  stick,  fastened  to  the  forepart  of  the  box 
and  thickly  notched,  and  the  strings  are  raised  or  depressed  into  these 
notches  as  occasion  requires. 

*  "The  messenger  concluded  this  insulting  notification,  by    presenting 
the  King  with  a  pair  of  iron  sandals,  at  the  same  time  adding,  that  until 
such  time  as  Daisy  had  worn  out  these  sandals  in  his  flight,   he  should  ne- 
ver be  secure  from  the  arrows  of  Bambarra." — Park's  1st  Mission. 


1S4  Review  of  Mission  from  Cape  [July? 

"The  Horns  are  made  of  elephants*  tusks,  they  are  generally  large, 
and  their  flourishes  have  a  grand  and  martial  effect.  These  flourishes  are 
various  as  the  chiefs  to  whose  bands  they  belong,  and  the  peculiar  senten- 
ces they  express  are  immediately  recognized  by  the  soldiers." 

Here  it  may,  perhaps,  be  well  to  introduce  from  Mr.  Bow- 
dich's  sketch  of  Gaboon,  (or  as  the  natives  call  it  Empoongvva, 
lat.  N.  30°,  E.  long.  8°  42\)  an  account  of  a  most  extraordina- 
ry performer.  The  inspirations  of  genius  were  perhaps  never 
more  wonderful. 

"My  patience  during  a  series  of  dull  Empobngwa  songs,  was  recom- 
pensed by  the  introduction  of  a  performer,  as  loathsome  as  his  music  was 
astonishing.  It  was  a  white  negro  from  the  interior  country  of  Imbeekee; 
his  features  betrayed  his  race,  his  hair  was  woolly,  and  of  a  sandy  colour, 
with  thick  eye-brows  of  the  same;  his  eyes  small,  bright,  and  of  a  dark 
grey;  the  light  seemed  to  hurt  them,  and  their  constant  quivering  and  roll- 
ing gave  his  countenance  an  air  of  insanity,  which  was  confirmed  by  the 
actions  of  his  head  and  limbs,  and  the  distortions  of  his  mouth.  His  stature 
was  middling,  and  his  limbs  very  small;  his  skin  was  dreadfully  diseased, 
and  where  it  was  free  from  sores,  bore  the  appearance  of  being  thrown  on, 
it  hung  about  him  so  loose  and  so  shrivelled;  his  voice  was  hollow,  and  his 
laugh  loud,  interspersed  with  African  howls.  His  harp  was  formed  of  wood, 
except  that  part  emitting  the  sound,  which  was  covered  with  goat  skin, 
perforated  at  the  bottom.  The  bow  to  which  the  eight  strings  were  fixed, 
was  considerably  curved,  and  there  was  no  upright;  the  figure  head,  which 
was  well  curved,  was  placed  at  the  top  of  the  body,  the  strings  were  twist- 
ed round  long  pegs,  which  easily  turned  when  they  wanted  tuning,  and 
being  made  of  the  fibrous  roots  of  palm  wine  tree,  were  very  tough  and  not 
apt  to  slip.  The  tone  was  full,  harmonious,  and  deep.  He  sat  on  a  low 
stool,  and  supporting  his  harp  on  his  knee  and  shoulder,  proceeded  to  tune 
it  with  great  nicety;  his  hands  seemed  to  wander  amongst  the  strings  until 
he  gradually  formed  a  running  accompaniment  (but  with  little  variety)  to 
his  extraordinary  vociferations.  At  times,  one  deep  and  hollow  note  burst 
forth  and  died  away;  the  sounds  of  the  harp  became  broken;  presently  he 
looked  up,  pursuing  all  the  actions  of  a  maniac,  taking  one  hand  from  the 
strings,  to  wave  it  up  and  down,  stretching  forth  one  leg,  and  drawing  it 
up  again  as  if  convulsed,  lowering  the  harp  on  to  the  other  foot,  and  tossing 
it  up  and  down.  Whilst  the  one  hand  continued  playing,  he  rung  forth  a 
peal  which  vibrated  on  the  ear  long  after  it  had  ceased;  he  was  silent;  the 
running  accompaniment  served  again  as  a  prelude  to  a  loud  recitative,  ut- 
tered with  the  greatest  volubility,  and  ending  with  one  word,  with  which 
he  ascendtd  and  descended,  far  beyond  the  extent  of  his  harp,  with  the 


1828.]  Coast  Castle  to  Ashaniee.  135 

most  beautiful  precision.  Sometimes  he  became  more  collected,  and 
mournful  air  succeeded  the  recitative,  though  without  the  least  connection, 
and  he  would  again  burst  out  with  the  whole  force  of  his  powerful  voice  in 
the  notes  of  tfte  Hallelujah  of  Handel.  To  meet  with  this  chorus  in  the 
wilds  of  Africa,  and  from  such  a  being1,  had  an  effect  I  can  scarcely  de- 
scribe, and  I  was  lost  in  astonishment  at  the  coincidence.  There  could 
not  be  a  stronger  proof  of  the  nature  of  Handel,  or  the  powers  of  the  ne- 
gro. 

"I  naturally  inquired  if  this  man  was  in  his  senses,  and  the  reply  was, 
that  he  was  always  rational  but  when  he  played,  when  he  invariably  used 
the  same  gestures,  and  evinced  the  same  incoherency.  The  accompanying 
notes  were  caught  whilst  he  was  singing;  to  do  more  than  set  them  down 
in  their  respective  lengths,  was  impossible,  and  every  notation  must  be 
far  inadequate. 

"As  regards  the  words,  there  was  such  a  rhapsody  of  recitative,  of  mourn- 
ful, impetuous,  and  exhilarated  air,  wandering  through  the  life  of  man, 
throughout  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom  for  its  subjects,  without 
period,  without  connection,  so  transient,  abrupt,  and  allegorical,  that  the 
Governor  of  the  town  could  translate  a  line  but  occasionally,  and  I  was  too 
much  possessed  by  the  music,  and  the  alternate  rapture  and  phrenzy  of  the 
performer,  to  minute  the  half  which  he  communicated.  I  can  only  submit 
the  fragments  of  a  melancholy  and  a  descriptive  part. 
Burst  of  a  man  led  to  execution, 

Yawa  yawa  wo  wo  oh 

Yawa  waif  yawa 

What  have  I  done  ?  what  have  I  done  ? 
Bewailing  the  loss  of  his  mother, 

Yawa  gooba  shangawelladi  yaisa 

Wo  na  boo,  &c. 

My  mother  dies;  who'll  cry  for  me  now 

When  I  die  }  &c. 

Pahmbolee  gwoongee  yayoo,  &c. 

Which  path  shall  I  seek  my  love  } 

Hark  !  I  know  now, 

I  hear  her  snap  the  dry  sticks, 

To  speak,  to  call  to  me. 
"Jiggledy,  jiggledy,  jiggledy,  too  too  tee  too,  often  invaded  or  broke 
off  a  mournful  strain;  it  was  said  to  be  an  imitation  of  the  note  of  a  bird,  de- 
scribed as  the  wood-pecker." 

In  our  last  number  we  published  some  account  of  the  horrible 
rites,  with  which  the  decease  of  a  distinguished  person  is  cele- 
brated. It  was  stated  that  upon  the  death  of  his  mother,  the 
King  devoted  3,000  human  victims  for  sacrifice.      Mr.  Hutchi. 


136  Review  of  Mission  from  tape  [July, 

son.  it  will  be  recollected,  remained  in  Coomassie  after  the  re- 
turn of  Mr.  Bowdich,  and  had  therefore  opportunity  to  become 
more  intimately  acquainted,  than  his  associates  in  the  embassy, 
with  the  customs  and  superstitions  of  the  country.  In  describ- 
ing the  circumstances  which  attend  the  human  sacrifices,  he  re- 
lates only  those  things  of  which  he  was  an  eye,  or  an  ear  wit- 
ness; and  consequently,  his  statement  deserves  full  credit.  Of 
the  following  account,  we  may  say,  as  has  been  said  of  the  slave- 
trade,  "there  is  a  horror  in  it  enough  to  turn  the  streams  of  life 
backward." 

"When  any  public  execution,  or  sacrifice,  is  to  take  place,  the  ivory 
horns  of  the  King"  proclaim  at  the  palace  door,  "wow !  wow !  wow  !" 
"death  !  "death,  death,  death  !"  and,  as  they  cut  off  their  heads,  the 
bands  play  a  peculiar  strain,  till  the  operation  is  finished. 

"The  greatest  human  sacrifice  that  has  been  made  in  Coomassie  during 
my  residence,  took  place  on  the  eve  of  the  Adai'  custom,  early  in  January. 
I  had  a  mysterious  intimation  of  it  two  days  before,  from  a  quarter  not  t<f 
be  named.  My  servants  being  ordered  out  of  the  way,  I  was  thus  address- 
ed:— "Christian,  take  care  and  watch  over  your  family;  the  angel  of  death 
has  drawn  his  sword,  and  will  strike  on  the  neck  of  many  Ashantees;  when 
the  drum  is  struck,  on  Adai'  eve,  it  will  be  the  death  signal  of  many.  Shun 
the  King  if  you  can,  but  fear  not."  When  the  time  came  to  strike  the 
drum,  I  was  sitting  thinking  on  the  horrors  of  the  approaching  night,  and 
was  rather  startled  at  a  summons  to  attend  the  King.  This  is  the  manner 
he  always  takes  to  cut  off  any  captain  or  person  of  rank ;  they  are  sent  for 
to  talk  a  palaver,  and  the  moment  they  enter,  the  slaves  lay  hold  of  them, 
and  pinion  them,  and  throw  them  down;  if  they  are  thought  desperate 
characters,  a  knife  is  thrust  through  their  mouth,  to  keep  them  from  swear- 
ing the  death  of  any  other,  when  they  are  charged  with  their  crime,  real 
or  supposed,  and  put  to  death  or  torture. 

"Whilst  I  was  with  the  King,  the  officers,  whose  duty  it  is  to  attend  at 
sacrifices,  and  are  in  the  confidence  of  the  King,  came  in  with  their  knives, 
&c  and  a  message  was  sent  to  one  chief  to  say,  that  the  King  was  going"  to 
his  mother's  house  to  talk  a  palaver,  and  shortly  after  his  Majesty  rose,  and 
proceeded  thither,  ordering  the  attendants  to  conduct  me  out  by  another 
door. 

"This  sacrifice  was  in  consequence  of  the  King  imagining,  that  if  he 
washed  the  bones  of  his  mother  and  sisters,  who  died  while  he  was  on  the 
throne,  it  would  propitiate  the  fetish,  and  make  the  war  successful.  Their 
bones  were,  therefore,  taken  from  their  coffins,  and  bathed  In  rum  and  wa- 
ter with  great  ceremony;  after  being  wiped  with  silks,  they  were  rolled  in 
gold  dust,  and  wrapped  in  strings  of  rock  gold,  aggry  beads,  and  other 


iSQS.]  Coast  Castle  to  Jlshantee*  137 

things  of  the  most  costly  nature.  Those  who  had  done  any  thing  to  dis- 
please the  King,  were  then  sent  for  in  succession,  and  immolated  as  they 
entered,  "that  their  blood  might  water  the  graves."  The  whole  of  the 
night,  the  King's  executioners  traversed  the  streets,  and  dragged  every 
one  they  found  to  the  palace,  where  they  were  put  in  irons:  but  (which 
is  often  the  case)  some  one  had  disclosed  the  secret,  and  almost  every  one 
had  fled,  and  the  King  was  disappointed  of  most  of  his  distinguished  victims. 
Fext  morning  being  Adai'  custom,  which  generally  brought  an  immense 
crowd  to  the  city,  every  place  was  silent  and  forlorn;  nothing  could  be 
found  in  the  market,  and  his  Majesty  proceeded  to  the  morning  sacrifice 
of  sheep,  &c.  attended  only  by  his  confidents,  and  the  members  of  his  own 
family.  When  I  appeared  at  the  usual  time,  he  seemed  pleased  at  my  con- 
fidence, and  remarked  that  I  observed  how  few  captains  were  present.-*- 
He  appeared  agitated  and  fatigued,  and  sat  a  very  short  time- 

"As  soon  as  it  was  dark,  the  hitman  sacrifices  were  renewed,  and  during 
the  night,  the  bones  of  the  royal  deceased  were  removed  to  the  tomb  at 
Bantama,  to  be  deposited  along  with  the  remains  of  those  who  had  sat  on 
the  throne.     The  procession  was  splendid,  but  not  numerous;  the  chiefs 
and  attendants  being  dressed  in  the  war  costume,  with  a  musket,  and  pre- 
ceded by  torches;  the  sacred  stools,  and  all  the  ornaments  used  on  great 
occasions,  were  carried  with  them;  the  victims,  with  their  hands  tied  behind 
them,  and  in  chains,  preceded  the  bones,  whilst,  at  intervals,  the  songs  of 
death  and  victory  proved  their  wish  to  begin  the  war.     The  procession  re- 
turned about  three  P.  M.  on  Monday,  when  the  King  took  his  seat  in  the 
market-place  with  his  small  band,  and  "death  !  death  !  death  !"  was  echoed 
by  his  horns.     He  sat  with  a  silver  goblet  of  palm  wine  in  his  hand,  and 
when  they  cut  off  any  head,  imitated  a  dancing  motion  in  his  chair;  a  little 
before  dark,  he  finished  his  terrors  for  that  day,  by  retiring  to  the  palace, 
and  soon  after,  the  chiefs  came  from  their  concealment,  and  paraded  the 
streets,  rejoicing  that  they  had  escaped  death,  although  a  few  days  might 
put  them  in  the  same  fear.     I  had  been  attacked  by  a  violent  fit  of  ague  in 
the  morning,  from  having  stood  so  long  in  the  sun  the  day  before,  while 
with  the  King,  it  being  unusually  hot.      I  dared  not  send  out  my  people  to 
procure  any  thing,  least  they  should  be  murdered,  and  in  fact,   there  was 
nothing  in  the  market  to  be  had:  there  was  not  even  a  drop  of  water  in  the 
house.     The  sacrifice  was  continued  till  the  next  Adai'  custom,  seventeen 
days.'* 

We  must  here  take  leave  of  this  very  interesting  and  excel- 
lent work.  Some  surprise,  we  confess,  we  have  felt  that  a  book 
so  much  superior,  as  is  this,  to  any  other  relating  to  Africa, 
with  which  we  are  acquainted,  should  be  still  unpublished  in 
«mr  country.     Mr.  Bowdich  is  evidently  a  man  of  learning  and 


138  Omens  of  Success,  [July, 

science,  and  every  one  who  peruses  his  journal  will  see  evidence 
that  in  regard  to  the  great  objects  of  his  mission,  his  talents 
Were  neither  neglected  nor  misapplied.  He  has  spared  no  la- 
bour to  present,  in  well  arranged  order,  the  facts  which  he  has 
collected;  and  the  remarks  which  accompany  them  are  those  of 
a  judicious  mind,  adding  greatly  to  the  value  of  his  information. 
And  who  that  has  followed  us  even  in  our  concise  review  of  this 
work,  is  not  convinced  that  to  plant  civilization  and  Christiani- 
ty in  Africa,  is  an  object  having  immediate  claims  upon  us — 
claims  of  vast  and  affecting  importance.  Who  that  has  the 
feelings  of  a  Christian,  or  even  of  a  man,  would  not  promote  aa 
enterprise  which  should  afford  the  least  hope  of  disenthralling 
from  satan's  bondage  the  wretched  Africans,  of  overthrowing 
the  tremendous  system  of  Ashantee  superstition,  and  of  publish- 
ing the  gospel  of  peace  and  salvation  wherever  human  beings 
are  to  be  found  throughout  the  continent  of  Africa. 

Omens  oi  Success. 

It  is  delightful  to  observe  how  rapidly  the  design  which  we 
are  permitted  to  advocate,  is  advancing  in  the  good  opinion  of 
our  countrymen.  Every  mail  brings  evidence  of  this,  in  the 
Well  written  essays  coming  forth  from  a  hundred  presses  through- 
out the  Union  to  defend  and  promote  it.  To  notice  them  all  is 
impossible,  much  more  so  to  copy  them  entire  on  our  pages. — 
Their  publication,  however,  is  not  on  this  account  the  less  grati- 
fying or  useful;  and,  indeed,  sad  would  be  our  reflections,  did 
we  find  that  our  own  work  stood  the  sole  representative  of  popu- 
lar sentiment  on  this  subject.  So  far  as  our  limits  will  permit, 
we  shall  certainly  gather  into  it  the  arguments  of  others, 
and  strengthen  ourselves  by  all  those  resources  which  a  good 
Providence  is  bringing  forward  for  the  triumph  of  our  cause. 

We  have  been  favoured  with  copies  of  several  essays  which 
lately  appeared  in  the  Snow  Hill  Messenger,  Md.  and  which,  we 
understand,  have  been  read  with  avidity,  and  much  commended 
in  that  section  of  the  state.  The  style  is  attractive  from  its 
simplicity,  and  touches  of  wit  and  humour  occasionally  give 


1828.]  Omens  of  Success.  139 

brightness  to  the  current  of  the  argument.      In  his  first  essay, 
the  author  observes, 

"As  to  the  manner  of  discussion,  we  shall  avoid  every  thing-  disputatious. 
It  is  true,  we  should  not  decline  opposition  were  it  proffered;  but  we  can- 
not anticipate  opposition  to  one  of  the  most  benignant  schemes  ever  set  on 
foot,  to  meliorate  the  condition  of  our  fellow-men.  Our  style  shall  be  plain. 
The  running-  style  of  the  reviewers  would  suit  neither  myself  nor  my  rea- 
ders We  shall  not  affect,  as  these  learned  gentlemen,  to  take  a  range.— 
Some  of  them  remind  us  of  a  sportsman,  who  starts  in  pursuit  of  game,  but 
consumes  the  day  in  beating"  about  every  bush.  Nor  is  there  necessity  for 
being  ambitious  of  the  boasted  style  of  Junius.  A  style  of  such  severe  and 
uncompromising  statcliness  would  ill  become  one  who  is  aiming  mildly  to 
persuade  his  fellow-citizens  to  turn  their  attention  to  this  benevolent  enter- 
prise. But,  above  all,  brevity  will  be  sought  after.  Were  my  papers  long, 
they  would  not  be  read;  a  man  whose  heart  is  in  his  subject,  will  gene- 
rally be  sparing  of  words.  When  attending  Congress  hall  some  fifteen 
years  ago,  in  the  capacity  of  a  looker  on,  I  always  thought  that  the  long 
and  frequent  speakers  could  not  be  patriots.  Tt  has  become  a  fact  well 
known  in  history,  that  when  the  Declaration  of  Independence  was  under 
consideration,  that  far  more  was  said  by  the  alternation  of  august,  intrepid, 
and  pensive  looks,  than  by  oral  debate. 

"Lastly. — If  asked  for  my  motives  for  stirring  this  business,  I  reply, 
though  we  live  in  a  retired  part  of  the  country,  we  send  Legislators  every 
year  to  the  Capitol  of  the  State — we  delegate  successively  our  Representa- 
tives to  Congress,  we  are  not  behind  every  other  portion  of  the  communi- 
ty in  intelligence.  We  have  an  equal  interest  in  this  scheme  at  stake  with 
other  sections  of  the  country,  and  if  the  American  Colonization  Society 
cannot  have  its  advocates  in  the  retired  nooks,  as  well  as  in  the  public 
places  of  the  land,  the  scheme  will  be  successless,  for  the  King  himself  is 
served  of  the  field.  As  a  ballad  has  sometimes  waked  up  a  nation,  per- 
haps these  little  papers  may  wake  up  a  few  to  the  importance  of  this  enter- 
prise. By  stating  simple  facts,  information  may  possibly  be  given  to  some, 
and  interest  awakened  with  others.  If  Sir  William  Jones  wished  all  great 
intellectual  works  to  be  reduced  to  their  quintescence,  it  is  not  improper 
to  wish  that  all  great  works  of  philanthropy  should  be  laid  before  the  peo- 
ple in  their  elements. 

"It  is  clear  that  the  writer  might  now  choose  any  signature  he  pleased 
out  of  the  long  roll  of  philanthropists,  and  though  I  dislike  his  luscious 
style  and  inconclusive  reasoning,  I  will,  notwithstanding,  take  upon  myself 
the  illustrious  name  of  WM.  PENN." 

At  present,  we  can  only  avail  ourselves  of  the  benefit  of  No- 


140  Omens  of  Success*  [Juty> 

VII.  in  this  series,  which  exhibits  briefly  the  principal  character- 
istics of  our  great  design. 

"If  the  Colonization  scheme  were  destitute  of  the  following'  properties, 
We  should,  for  one,  be  willing"  to  relinquish  it. 

"1st.  It  is  practicable.  It  can  be  accomplished.  The  world  has  been 
peopled  by  colonization.  Greece,  Italy,  and  our  own  country,  are  exam- 
ples. The  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis  is  a  very  illustrative  document  on  thw 
subject.  But  could  the  h  story  of  the  world  be  spread  out,  at  one  view, 
what  light  would  it  cast  on  the  disclosure  of  the  Bible,  that  all  men  were 
descended  from  one  pair.  Yet,  notwithstanding  our  descent  from  a  single 
pair,  the  population  of  our  globe  is  spread  incalculably  wide.  The  curio- 
sity and  avarice  of  men  have  become  acquainted  with  nearly  all  the  eme- 
rald isles  of  the  ocean.  When  Columbus  discovered  America,  he  found  mil- 
lions of  men,  probably  of  the  Asiatic  origin.  Possibly  within  the  interior  of 
our  globe,  there  may  be  millions  of  rational  beings.  If  so,  the  reader  may 
rely  upon  it,  that  they  are  all  sprung  from  Adam  and  Eve.  Why  human 
enterprise  then  should  be  palsied  in  its  efforts  to  roll  the  tide  of  emigration 
over  Africa,  we  are  at  a  loss  to  imagine.  Human  enterprise  has  here  dis- 
played itself  in  another  shape.  It  has  been  fearfully  at  work.  On  the  day 
that  the  subject  was  agitated  in  the  Presbyterian  Church,  after  an  eloquent 
address  by  E.  K.  Wilson,  our  Representative  elect  to  the  next  Congress, 
Irving  Spence,  Esq.  showed  conclusively  that  if  lawless  villains  succeed  in 
removing  so  many  thousands  every  year  from  Africa,  that  influence,  intel- 
ligence, and  philanthropy,  could  doubtless  remove  a  vastly  greater  num- 
ber from  our  country.  The  Portuguese,  Spanish,  French,  and  English, 
have  long  had  settlements  in  Africa,  and  such  settlements  may  be  multi- 
plied a  thousand  fold.  But  private  beneficence  is  quickly  exhausted,  and 
the  scheme  will  thus  be  rendered  abortive.  This  is  an  erroneous  view  of 
private  benevolence,  though  we  do  not  rely  upon  it  entirely  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  this  scheme.  Should  Congress  never  deliberate  on  this  mat- 
ter, we  do  not  despair  of  great  success.  From  private  munificence  alone,  a 
thousand  streams  will  keep  always  flowing  into  the  channels  of  African 
Colonization. 

"2d.  This  scheme  is  expedient.  All  things  are  lawful,  said  an  inspired 
Apostle,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient.  It  is  perfectly  lawful  to  remove 
this  foul  stain  from  our  country,  but  the  question  is,  whether  it  be  expedi- 
ent. Is  it  fit  and  becoming  in  us  to  attempt  it  ?  Is  it  a  suitable  time  to 
beg-in  this  great  work  ?  Do  circumstances  and  events  appear  to  favour 
the  design  ?  Men  might  as  well  not  act,  as  to  act  without  judgment  and 
foresight.  But  for  twenty  years,  events  have  appeared  to  favour  the  cause 
of  Africa.  There  has  been  an  artless  and  undesigned  co-operation  among 
philanthropists  in  different  sections  of  the  United  States.  They  were  aim- 
ing at  the  same  general  objects,  but  it  is  now  becoming    a  fixed  opinion 


1828.]  Omens  of  Success.  141 

among-  the  judicious  friends  of  Africa,  that  the  Colonization  Society  have 
best  adapted  their  means  and  their  measures  to  the  accomplishment  of  their 
•nd. 

"3d.  Necessary.  There  is  necessity  for  this  scheme.  We  ought  to  say  to 
the  evil  that  surrounds  us,  come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face.  But 
the  truth  is,  we  are  afraid  to  look  at  it.  Yet,  it  will  one  day  push  itself 
upon  our  notice.  We  must  open  our  eyes  We  may  shut  them  and  keep 
them  so,  but  this  will  lead  us  on  to  a  destructive  precipice.  By  the  agen- 
cy of  this  evil,  unless  we  open  our  eyes,  this  country  must  one  day  be  lost 
in  a  whirlwind.  We  are  now  the  happiest  people  on  earth,  save  for  this 
fretting*  leprosy,  which  is  creeping  over  our  land.  This  enormous  empire  of 
blacks  rising  up  and  putting  on  daily  strength,  having  the  shadow  of  liber- 
ty without  the  substance,  is  enough  to  make  our  children's  children  turn 
pale. 

"4th.  Lucrative.  By  the  success  of  this  scheme  our  country  will  be  en- 
riched. The  free  blacks  constitute  a  mater/al  spoke  in  that  wheel  which  is 
crushing  down  the  wealth  of  our  land.  The  moment  we  carry  this  plan  into 
vigorous  prosecution,  we  shall  call  many  of  our  countrymen  to  a  state  of 
comparative  wealth.  The  removal  of  the  annual  increase  of  our  coloured 
population,  would  give  to  our  mariners  a  considerable  scope  of  employ- 
ment, whilst  the  trade  of  the  Colony  would  be  a  source  of  profit.  It  would 
remove  the  evil  which  is  daily  impoverishing  our  land,  and  bring  tens  of 
thousands  to  the  enjoyment  of  comforts  which  they  never  before  possessed. 

"5th.  This  scheme  is  philanthropic.  Its  most  implacable  enemies  have 
done  full  justice  to  the  pure  motives  of  its  upholders.  None  dare  impeach 
a  philanthropy  which  is  seeking  to  become  acquainted  with  the  profound 
degradation  and  wretchedness  of  our  coloured  population.  We  freely  ac- 
knowledge that  Howard  was  a  philanthropist;  but  what  was  the  philanthro- 
py of  Howard,  compared  with  that  which  is  seeking  to  re-establish  the 
liberties  of  a  continent — to  fix  watchmen  round  its  coast,  and  send  over  it 
the  pure  light  of  Christianity! 

"6th.  It  is  a  patriotic  scheme.  Patriotism  does  not  consist  in  delivering 
a  fine  speech  on  the  fourth  day  of  July.  Nor  does  it  consist  in  loud  profes- 
sions of  equality  to  voters  who  are  reeling  towards  the  polls.  Popularity 
should  result  from  a  conscientious  performance  of  all  our  duties,  moral,  civil, 
political,  and  religious,  and  not  from  familiarity  with  the  vicious  and  intem- 
perate. He  is  the  best  patriot  who  feels  most  deeply  the  evils  which  afflict 
his  country,  who  wrestles  against  such  evils,  and  breasts  the  overwhelming 
tide  of  immorality  and  corruption. 

"7th.  It  is  an  expeditious  scheme.  Its  opposers  have  charged  it  with 
slowness  and  a  want  of  despatch.  But  do  they  expect  to  remove  the  world, 
without  getting  ready  for  the  operation''  How  much  quicker  are  their  de- 
vices for  our  relief  ?  It  has  been  but  a  short  time  since  the  Editor  of  the 
Genius  of  Universal  Emancipation  published  Mrs.  Hemans's  song  of  Emigra- 


14£  Omens  of  Success.  [J"ty> 

tion.  Let  him  compare  that  beautiful  effusion  with  the  present  state  of  our 
Colony,  and  answer  whether  all  its  imaginative  pictures  have  not  been  real- 
ized. 

"8th.  This  is  a  national  scheme.  We  are  preparing-  to  take  it  up  in  x 
national  way.  It  has  about  it  those  lofty  attributes  which  render  it  worthy 
the  attention  of  enlarged  and  expanded  minds.  Upon  no  other  has  the  na- 
tion ever  bestowed  a  thought.  New  England  has  manifested  a  willingness 
to  aid  in  a  plan,  which  will  not  only  remove  an  evil,  but  diffuse  Christiani- 
ty over  a  continent.  One  of  her  distinguished  Legislators  has  pledged 
himself  to  sustain  any  measure  before  Congress,  which  shall  be  brought 
forward  by  any  prudent  friend  of  Colonization. 

"Lastly.  This  scheme  is  pleasing  to  God.  He  has  not  broken  the  si- 
lence of  the  heavens,  to  speak  in  its  favour,  nor  commanded  his  angels  to 
chant  over  the  song  of  good  will  to  men,  but  his  approbation  has  not  been 
withheld.  The  plan  has  been  conducted  with  a  reference  to  his  authority. 
The  moral  and  religious  good,  as  well  as  the  civil  and  political  elevation  of 
the  Colonists,  has  been  interwoven  with  all  the  movements  of  the  managers. 
God  has  predicted  that  Ethiopia  shall  stretch  out  her  hands  to  him.  She 
is  now  stretching  out  her  hand  to  implore  blessings  from  heaven,  and  to 
beckon  away  her  children  from  the  house  of  bondage  to  her  maternal  bo- 
som." 


The  Editor  of  the  Vermont  Chronicle,  in  a  very  able  article 
designed  to  impress  upon  the  public  the  importance  of  taking  up 
collections  for  the  Society  on  the  fourth  instant,  or  on  some 
Sabbath  near  to  it,  has  the  following  remarks.  We  ought,  here, 
perhaps  to  state,  that  Mr.  Burr's  legacy  to  the  Society,  is  one 
thousand  dollars  a  year  for  Jive  years,  and  that  two  years  at  least 
must  elapse,  before  the  first  payment  can  be  realized. 

"There  is  not,  we  believe,  another  benevolent  enterprise  on  earth,  so 
well  calculated  to  secure  the  favourable  opinion  and  enlist  the  hearty  good 
will  of  all  mejj,  as  this  is,  when  its  objects  and  bearings  are  fully  under- 
stood. In  relation  to  this  Society  it  is  eminently  the  fact,  that  opposition 
and  indifference  have  their  origin  in  prejudice  or  want  of  information.  Ig- 
norance may  raise  an  objection  which  it  requires  knowledge  to  remove; 
and  to  rest  one's  refusal  to  co-operate  in  what  he  is  told  is  a  good  work,  on 
his  own  ignorance,  is  both  weak  and  wicked.  Especially  in  relation  to  a 
benevolent  enterprise  of  such  magnitude  as  this,  and  which  has  been  some 
ten  or  fifteen  years  before  the  public,  the  plea  of  ignorance  is  made  with 
very  ill  grace. 

"The  Society  very  much  needs  the  avails  of  the  proposed  contributions. 
The  expense  of  sending  out  the  large  number  of  emigrants  who  left  this 


1828.]  Omens  of  Success.  143 

country  last  year,  was  of  course  great;  and  the  ability  of  the  Society  to  send 
ant  emigrants  during  the  coming  autumn,  depends  very  much  on  what 
shall  be  done  on  the  Fourth  of  July  — We  have  heard  it  hinted  that  the 
Legacies  of  the  late  Mr.  Burr  will  diminish  the  receipts  of  this  and  some 
•ther  societies,  from  the  usual  sources.  We  cannot  believe  it — we  cannot 
think  the  Christian  public  so  ungrateful.  The  intention  of  Mr  Burr  was 
to  augment  the  resources  of  these  Societies — to  increase  them  to  the  full 
amount  of  his  bequests?  and  any  man  who  withholds  a  dollar  on  account  of 
these  bequests,  docs  just  so  much  towards  defeating  the  object  of  them;  it 
is  in  fact  neither  more  nor  less  than  putting  so  much  of  the  legacy  in  his 
own  pocket.  Whether  that  can  be  done  righteously  or  not,  may  be  safely 
left  to  each  one's  conscience. — Besides,  these  legacies,  it  is  said,  and  we 
presume  truly,  will  not  be  available  immediately — perhaps  not,  to  their 
full  amount,  for  several  years.  But,  be  that  as  it  may,  duties  are  not  to  be 
discharged  by  proxy;  Mr.  Burr  attended  to  his  own;  he  was  not  so  much  of 
a  Papist  as  to  think  of  purchasing  Indulgences  for  a  whole  community." 


We  have  just  perused  a  Review  of  our  last  two  Reports,  in 
the  Christian  Spectator,  made  up,  in  great  part,  of  a  concise 
history  of  the  origin  and  proceedings  of  the  Society.  The  con- 
cluding remarks  of  this  article  are  very  impressive,  and  we  hope 
they  will  be  read  and  remembered.  Surely  it  is  time  that  the 
great  work  of  benevolence  which  commands  our  humble  efforts, 
should  receive  the  support  of  every  friend  to  our  country,  reli- 
gion, or  mankind.     We  give  a  single  extract  from  this  review.* 

"In  reference  to  this  great  cause,  we  think  that  the  Christian  public  have 
a  most  solemn  duty  to  perform.  With  all  the  civil  talent  and  philanthropic 
enterprise,  enlisted  in  it,  we  believe  that  it  will  no  more  than  partially  se- 
cure its  objects,  unless  the  devoted  friends  of  the  Redeemer,  throughout 
the  land,  give  it  their  earnest  and  persevering  support.  Let  the  Christians 
of  the  North  be  fully  enlightened  in  regard  to  their  duty,  and  their  hearts 
will  be  touched  with  compassion,  and  the  mists  of  prejudice  will  vanish, 
and  the  rancor  of  sectional  feeling  will  die  away.  The  interests  of  this 
whole  country  will  be  embraced  within  the  ample  range  of  vision.      The 


*  We  would  correct  an  error  in  this  review.  "The  Montserado  river  is 
three  hundred  miles  in  length,  being  the  largest  African  river  from  the  Rio 
Grande  to  the  Congo."  This  is  a  mistake.  The  Montserado  is  a  very 
small  river,  but  about  forty  miles  long,  probably  much  less  than  even  the 
St.  Paul's  or  the  St.  John's,  and  certainly  less  than  several  others  between 
the  above  named  river-?. 


144  Omens  of  Success.  [July, 

tlaims  of  the  children  of  Africa  are  somewhat  peculiar.      The  unevangel- 
ized  heathen  nations  implore  our  pity  as  members  of  the  human  fannly, 
and  a?  partakers  of  gospel  light,  but  their  misery  is   an  effect  of  their  own 
sin.     We  are  in  duty  bound  to  enlighten  and  save  them,  but  this  duty  re- 
sults from  an  obligation  of  gratitude  to  God,  rather  than  from  an  uncancel- 
led debt  to  them.   But  Africa — the  sin  is  not  at  her  door.  Her  cup  of  misery 
is  not  of  her  own  mingling.      This  country  has  helped  to  do  it.       With  the 
light  of  nature  on  her  path,  she  has  outraged  nature.      With  the  New  Tes- 
tament in  her  hand,  she  has  broken  its  plainest  rules.       When  the  wail  of 
the  dying  African  comes  to  her  ear,  conscience  within  her  bosom  ought  to 
disturb  and  arouse  her.      Would  every  Christian  in  this  country  enlighten 
his  conscience,  he   would  feel   that  himself  and  his  fellow  Christians  are? 
debtors  to  Africa  to  a  tremendous  amount — tremendous,  for  no  repentance 
can  now  cancel  it;  in  the  archives  of  eternity  the  full  records  are  sealed. 

"To  achieve  the  redemption  of  Africa,  there  is  required  Christianity — 
the  zeal  of  Christianity  in  its  highest  and  holiest  exercise.  There  has  been, 
and  there  will  be,  it  is  not  denied,  a  great  deal  of  feeling.  But  how  can 
it  be  otherwise.  Man  was  made  to  feel,  and  on  all  proper  occasions  he 
must  manifest  his  feelings.  And  here  it  will  be  recollected,  that  there 
have  been,  and  that  there  are  strong  temptations  to  feel.  When  the  slave 
trade  is  first  unfolded  to  a  person's  mind  there  is  a  horror  in  it,  enough  to 
turn  the  streams  of  life  backward.  It  is  too  incomprehensible  to  shudder 
at.  It  is  like  opening  the  eyes  of  a  blind  man  on  an  immense  hospital,  or 
like  taking  off  four  feet  from  the  surface  of  a  burying  ground.  But  terri- 
ble as  this  exhibition  of  depravity  has  been,  laying  open,  as  it  does,  all  the 
fountains  of  feeling,  still  the  pure  and  exalted  motives  of  Christianity  have 
actuated,  and  ought  to  actuate  the  labourers  in  this  benevolence.  Thomas 
Clarkson  said  he  devoted  his  life  to  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade,  "be- 
cause he  thought  it  was  God's  will  "  The  same  noble  motive  urged  on  in 
their  glorious  career,  Wilberforce,  Macauley,  and  a  thousand  subordinate 
agents  in  Great  Britain.  And  in  our  own  country,  Mills,  and  Caldwell, 
and  Sessions,  who,  for  the  good  of  Africa,  loved  not  their  own  lives,  bore 
ample  witness  to  the  disinterested  spirit  of  the  gospel.  This  gospel  will 
put  a  final  end  to  the  slave  trade  and  slavery  Its  provisions  are  broad  as 
the  wants  of  the  human  family,  and  mightier  than  the  whole  array  of  man's 
pi  judice  and  sin. 

"We  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  a  close  without  saying  to  the  particular 
friends  of  this  cause,  that  their  services  were  never  more  needed  than  at 
the  present  time  There  are  a  few  individuals,  scattered  through  the  coun- 
try, who  have  g-'tven  to  this  subj  -ct  a  ihorough  investigation,  who  have  sur- 
veyed the  whole  ground,  and  who,  like  the  prophet  in  the  visions  of  God, 
as  thev  have  seen  one  abomination  after  another,  have  had  their  inmost 
souls  moved  within  them  at  the  wretchedness  and  guilt  of  man.  f'pon 
Such  persons  rests  a  fearful  weight  of  responsibility.      They  can  spread 


1828-5  Account  of  Dahotny.  145 

through  the  respective  communities  in  which  they  are  situated,  valuable 
and  correct  information  in  regard  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  evils 
which  the  Colonization  Society  will  remedy.  They  can  shape  and  mould 
public  opinion.  They  can  act  as  telegraphic  signals  from  one  end  of  this 
land  to  the  other.  They  can  impress  upon  the  southern  slave-holder,  by 
the  strength  of  facts,  and  by  the  recorded  declarations  of  honest  men,  that 
the  objects  of  the  Colonization  Society  are  altogether  pure  and  praisewor- 
thy, and  that  it  has  no  intention  to  open  the  door  to  universal  liberty,  but 
only  to  cut  out  a  channel,  where  the  merciful  providence  of  God  may  cause 
those  dark  waters  to  flow  off.  The  Colonization  Society  needs  fast  and 
efficient  friends — men  whose  minds  are  stored  full  of  well  arranged  infor- 
mation, who  are  inspired  by  a  feeling  of  personal  responsibility  abiding  on 
them  and  becoming  a  part  of  their  identity,  to  do  all  in  their  power  for  the 
redemption  of  our  country  from  the  heaviest  curse  with  which  it  is  afflicted. 
"And  what  is  done  ought  to  be  done  quickly.  The  slave  population  is 
swelling  its  numbers  in  a  tremendously  increasing  ratio.  Since  the  morn- 
ing of  our  last  happy  national  jubilee  broke  over  our  land,  more  than  thirty 
thousand  have  been  born  within  our  borders,  to  be  slaves  till  they  die.  In 
the  domestic  trade,  more  than  eighty  thousand  have  been  bought  and  sold, 
The  two  millions  of  minds,  which  have  been  kept  in  ignorance  and  debase" 
inent,  will  soon  be  four  millions — and  eight  millions." 

Account  oi  Dahom^f. 

Dahomy  is  a  fertile  and  cultivated  country;  the  soil  is  a  deep? 
*ich,  reddish  clay,  intermixed  with  sand,  scarcely  containing  a 
stone  of  the  size  of  an  egg  in  the  whole  country.  It  is  extreme- 
ly productive  of  maize,  millet,  beans,  yams,  potatoes,  cassada, 
plantain,  and  the  banana;  indigo,  cotton,  tobacco,  palm-oil,  and 
sugar  are  raised,  as  well  as  a  species  of  black  pepper.  Bread, 
and  a  species  of  liquor,  or  rather  diluted  gruel,  are  formed  of 
the  lotus  berry.  Animals,  both  wild  and  tame,  are  numerous, 
and  the  lakes  abound  in  fish.  The  maritime  districts  of  Whi- 
dah  and  Ardra,  before  they  were  ruined  by  the  Dahomans,  were 
highly  cultivated  and  beautiful.  "The  vast  number  and  variety 
©f  tall  and  spreading  trees,"  says  Smith,  "seeming  as  if  they 
had  been  planted  for  decoration,  fields  of  the  most  lively  ver- 
dure, almost  wholly  devoted  to  culture;  plains  embellished  with 
a  multitude  of  towns  and  villages,  placed  in  full  view  of  the  sur- 
rounding district;  a  gradual  and  almost  imperceptible  ascent  t» 
19 


146  Account  of  Dahomy.  [July/ 

the  distance  of  forty  or  fifty  miles  from  the  sea,  which  termi- 
nates the  prospect; — formed  the  most  picturesque  scene  imagi- 
nable, unobstructed  by  hill  or  mountain."  The  Ardranese  had 
attained  such  a  degree  of  civilization,  that  they  were  able  to  cor- 
respond with  each  other  by  a  species  of  guippos,  similar  to  the 
Peruvian,  and  formed  by  the  combination  of  knots  upon  a  cord, 
to  which  particular  significations  were  attached. 

The  character  of  the  Daumanese,  or  Dahomans,  is  original 
and  strongly  marked;  they  have  retained  peculiar  manners,  and 
have  had  little  intercourse  with  either  Europeans  or  Moors. — m 
They  exhibit  the  germ  of  peculiar  institutions  and  modifications 
of  manners,  that  have  appeared  incredible  to  modern  nations 
when  they  perused  the  ancient  records  of  the  Egyptians,  Hin- 
dus, and  Lacedemonians.  Like  the  Lacedemonians,  they  dis- 
play a  singular  mixture  of  ferocity  and  politeness,  of  generosity 
and  cruelty.  Their  conduct  towards  strangers  is  hospitable, 
without  any  mixture  of  rudeness  or  insult.  Their  appearance 
is  manly,  and  their  persons  strong  and  active;  and  though  they 
are  less  addicted  to  the  practice  of  tattowing  than  their  neigh- 
bours, their  countenance  rather  displays  ferocity  than  courage. 
Their  government  is  the  purest  despotism:  every  subject  is  a 
slave;  and  every  slave  implicitly  admits  the  right  of  the  sovereign 
to  dispose  of  his  property  and  of  his  person.  "I  think  of  my 
king,"  said  a  Dahoman  to  Mr.  Norris,  "and  then  I  dare  engage 
five  of  the  enemy  myself.  My  head  belongs  to  the  king,  not  to 
myself:  if  he  please  to  send  for  it,  I  am  ready  to  resign  it;  or  if 
it  be  shot  through  in  battle,  I  am  satisfied — if  it  be  in  his  ser- 
vice." This  attachment  continues  unshaken,  even  when  their 
nearest  relations  become  the  victims  of  the  avarice  or  caprice  of 
the  king,  and  his  enormities  are  always  attributed  to  their  own 
indiscretions.  With  this  devoted  spirit,  the  Dahoman  rushes 
fearless  into  battle,  and  fights  as  long  as  he  can  wield  his  sabre. 
In  1775,  when  the  viceroy  of  Whidah  was  disgraced,  one  of  the 
military  officers  declared,  "that  it  was  his  duty  to  accompany 
the  general  to  the  field;  and  if  ever  he  betrayed  the  least  symp- 
torn  of  cowardice,  or  showed  the  soles  of  his  feet  to  the  enemy, 
he  hoped  the  king  would  have  his  cutlass  ready  to  behead  him, 
at  the  moment  of  his  return.  But  this,"  said  he,  "will  never 
happen;  for,  should  1  ever  suspect  that  I  am  accused  of  treache' 


1828.]  Account  of  Dahomy,  147 

ry,  of  turning  my  back  on  the  foe,  or  giving  cause  of  complaint, 
I  shall  never  afford  the  prime  minister  an  opportunity  of  asking 
impertinent  questions,  or  of  interfering  between  me  and  my  sove- 
reign; I  prefer  death  at  any  time."  Soon  afterwards,  this  of- 
ficer found  himself  left  almost  alone  in  his  post,  after  detaching 
the  flower  of  his  troops  to  the  assistance  of  his  companions. — 
Perceiving  that  it  was  impossible  to  retrieve  affairs,  at  the  ap- 
proach of  the  enemy  he  called  for  his  large  stool,  or  chair,  dis- 
missed his  attendants,  sat  down,  and  singly  awaited  the  attack. 
When  the  enemy  advanced,  he  stood  up  and  fired  his  musket 
till  he  was  surrounded,  when  he  drew  his  sabre,  and  rushed  in- 
to the  thickest  ranks,  where,  after  killing  numbers,  he  was  over- 
powered and  taken  prisoner.  The  king  of  Dahomy,  who  highly 
approved  of  his  conduct,  paid  his  ransom,  but  he  refused  to  re- 
turn, and  observing  to  the  messenger,  that,  "though  he  might 
perhaps  be  the  most  ugly  of  his  majesty's  subjects,  yet  there 
were  none  more  loyal," — stabbed  himself  with  his  sword. — 
Another  Dahoman  general,  being  about  to  engage  the  Popoes, 
with  a  very  inferior  force,  drank  success  to  the  arms  of  his  king, 
and,  dashing  the  glass  to  pieces,  wished,  "that  if  he  was  unsuc- 
cessful, he  might  not  survive  the  disgrace,  but  perish  like  the 
glass  which  he  broke."  The  metaphors  and  idiomatical  expres- 
sions of  this  nation  have  generally  a  reference  to  their  bodily 
strength  and  the  sharpness  of  their  swords.  The  significant  ti- 
tles which  the  king  assumes,  are  termed  his  strong  names. — 
When  the  king  prohibits  the  minstrels  from  entering  upon  a  dis- 
agreeable subject,  he  announces  that  the  topic  is  too  strong  for 
him.  The  modern  history  of  the  Dahomans  realizes  all  that 
history  has  recorded  of  ancient  Lacedemon,  and  of  those  Lace- 
demonians of  the  north,  the  inhabitants  of  Jomsburgh,  who  were 
forbidden  to  mention  the  name  of  Fear,  even  in  the  most  immi- 
nent dangers,  and  who  proudly  declared  that  they  would  fight 
their  enemies,  though  they  were  stronger  than  the  Gods.  Saxo 
relates,  that  when  Frotho,  king  of  Denmark,  was  taken  prisoner 
in  battle,  he  obstinately  refused  to  accept  of  life,  declaring,  that 
the  restoration  of  his  kingdom  and  treasures  could  never  restore 
his  honour,  but  that  future  ages  would  always  say,  Frotho  has 
been  taken  by  his  enemy.  The  palace  of  the  king  of  Dahomy  is 
an  extensive  building  of  bamboo  and  mud-walled  huts,  surround- 


148  Account  of  Dahomij.  [Jutyr 

ed  by  a  mud-wall  about  twenty  feet  high,   enclosing  a  qua- 
drangular space  of  about  a  mile  square.      The  entrance  to  the 
king's   apartment   is    paved  with   human    skulls,    the    lateral 
walls    adorned   with   human  jaw-bones,    with   a    few    bloody 
heads    intermixed    at    intervals.        The    whole    building    re- 
sembles a  number  of  farm-yards,   with  long  thatched  barns  and 
sheds   for   cattle,    intersected    with   low   mud-walls.     On   the 
thatched  roofs,   numerous  human  skulls  are  ranged  at  intervals, 
on  small  wooden  stakes.     In  allusion  to  these,   when  the  king 
issues  orders  for  war,  he  only  announces  to  his  general,  that  his 
house  wants  thatch.     In   this  palace,    or  large  house,  as  it  is 
termed  by  the  Dahomans,  above  3000  females  are  commonly  im- 
mured,  and  about  500  are  appropriated  by  each  of  the  principal 
officers.     From  this  injurious  and  detestable  practice,    originate 
many  flagrant  abuses;  the  population  is  diminished,   the  sources 
of  private  happiness  destroyed,   and  the  best  feelings  of  human 
nature  being  outraged,  the  energies  of  passion  are  converted  in- 
to bitterness  and  ferocity.     The  first  of  these  evils  is  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  legal  system  of  prostitution,  as  a  considerable  pro- 
portion of  the  inferior  classes  are  unable  to  procure  wives.     As 
children,  whether  male  or  female,   are  considered  the  exclusive 
property  of  the  king,  they  are  separated  from  their  parents  at  an 
early  period,  and  receive  a  species  of  public  education,  by  which 
means  family  connexions  are  annihilated,  and  the  insulated  in- 
dividual becomes  a  passive  instrument  of  tyrannical  power. — 
When  an  individual  is  able  to  procure  20,000  cowries,   he  pros- 
trates himself  at  the  gate  of  the  king,  or  his  vicegerent,  presents 
the  money,  and  begs  to  be  favoured  with  a  wife;   when,  instead 
of  having  the  opportunity  of  selecting  a  natural  friend,  suited  to 
his  taste,   and  adapted  to  gratify  the  affections  of  his  heart,   he 
must  take  the  female  assigned  him,  whether  she  be  old  or  young, 
handsome  or  deformed.     Sometimes,  out  of  malicious  sport,   a 
man's  own  mother  is  handed  out  to  him,   so  that  he  both  misses 
a  wife  and  loses  his  money.     In   1775  the  viceroy  of  Whidah 
was  disgraced  and  punished  with  death,  for  the  following  speech, 
extorted  by  indignation  at  a  procession  of  the  king's  women- — 
"Ah!  see  what  a  number  of  charming  women  are  devoted  to  the 
embraces  of  one  man!   while  we  who  bore  the  dangers  of  the 
siege  of  Whidah,  and  defeated  Abavou  and  his  army,  have  been 


1328.]  Account  of  Dahomy.  149 

presented  with  such  as  are  hardly  good  enough  for  house-sweep- 
ers. It  is  ungenerous,  but  we  are  Dahoman  men,  and  must  sub- 
mit."  The  king's  female  guard  seems  in  some  measure  to  ex- 
plain the  origin  of  the  ancient  opinion  concerning  the  Amazons. 
Some  hundreds  of  the  king's  women  are  regularly  trained  to  the 
use  of  arms,  under  a  female  general,  and  subordinate  officers 
appointed  by  his  majesty.  They  are  regularly  exercised,  per- 
form their  military  evolutions  with  as  great  dexterity  as  any  of 
the  Dahoman  troops,  and  parade  in  public  with  their  standards, 
drums,  trumpets,  flutes,  and  martial  music.  It  is  criminal  for 
any  Dahoman  to  assert,  that  the  king  is  so  similar  to  other  mor- 
tals, as  either  to  eat  or  sleep.  At  his  accession,  he  proclaims 
that  he  knows  nobody,  and  is  not  inclined  to  make  any  new  ac- 
quaintance; that  he  will  administer  justice  with  a  rigorous  and 
impartial  hand,  but  will  listen  to  no  representations,  nor  receive 
any  presents,  except  from  his  officers,  who  approach  him  grovel- 
ling in  the  dust.  The  Dahomans  maintain  the  true  doctrine  of 
passive  obedience,  and  the  divine  right  of  kings,  in  the  utmost 
purity;  and  their  history  exhibits  no  example  of  a  deposition. — 
At  his  accession,  the  king  ivalks  in  blood  from  the  palace  to  the 
grave  of  his  predecessor,  and  annually  waters  the  graves  of  his 
ancestors  with  the  blood  of  human  victims.  The  death  of  the 
king  is  only  announced  by  fearful  shrieks,  which  spread  like 
lightning  from  the  palace  to  the  extremities  of  Dahomy,  and  be- 
come the  signal  for  anarchy,  rapine,  and  murder,  which  continue 
till  the  new  king  ascends  the  throne.  The  religion  of  Dahomy 
is  vague  and  uncertain  in  its  principles,  and  rather  consists  in 
the  performance  of  some  traditionary  ceremonies,  than  in  any 
fixed  system  of  belief,  or  of  moral  conduct.  They  believe  more 
firmly  in  their  amulets  and  fetiches,  than  in  the  Deity;  their 
national  fetiche  is  the  Tiger;  and  their  habitations  are  decorated 
with  ugly  images,  tinged  with  blood,  stuck  with  feathers,  be- 
smeared with  palm-oil,  and  bedaubed  with  eggs.  As  their  ideas 
of  Deity  do  not  coincide  with  those  of  Europeans,  they  imagine 
that  their  tutelary  gods  are  different.  "Perhaps,"  said  a  Daho- 
man chief  to  Snelgrave,  "that  God  may  be  yours,  who  has  com- 
municated so  many  extraordinary  things  to  white  men;  but  as 
that  God  has  not  been  pleased  to  make  himself  known  to  us,  we 
must  be  satisfied  with  this  we  worship. "    The  Dahomans  manu- 


150  Account  of  Datwmy.  [July, 

facture  and  dye  cotton  cloth,  and  form  a  species  of  cloth  of  palm 
leaves.  They  are  tolerably  skilful  in  working  in  metals.  The 
bards,  who  celebrate  the  exploits  of  the  king  and  his  generals, 
are  likewise  the  historians  of  the  country.  Their  historical  po- 
ems, which  are  rehearsed  on  solemn  occasions,  occupy  several 
clays  in  the  recital.  These  may  probably  compare  with  the  le- 
gends of  Ossian:  and  of  the  Irish,  Gaelic,  and  Welsh  bards.  It 
is  probable  that  the  legends  of  Dahomy  are  equally  authentic 
with  these;  for,  in  every  rude  age,  it  is  the  interest  of  the  bards 
not  to  touch  upon  subjects  too  strong  for  their  respective  chiefs. 
The  Persian  Hafez  would  have  been  put  to  death  by  Tamerlane, 
merely  for  preferring,  like  a  true  inamorato,  the  charms  of  his 
mistress  to  the  gold  of  Bokhara,  and  the  gems  of  Samarcand,  had 
he  not  saved  himself  by  an  ingenious  quibble,  to  prove  a  various 
reading.  How  much  authentic  history  may  we  then  derive  from 
oral  and  poetical  legends!  The  Dahomans,  though  they  do  not 
use  human  flesh  as  an  article  of  food,  yet  devour  the  flesh  of  hu- 
man victims  as  a  religious  ceremony,  at  their  solemn  feasts;  and 
their  ancient  practice  seems  to  be  marked  by  their  ordinary 
phrase  of  eating  their  enemies,  by  which  they  denote  taking 
them  alive.  Though  the  martial  genius  of  the  Dahomans  remains 
unaltered,  their  military  exploits  have  not  been  remarkable  since 
the  reign  of  Guadja  Trudo,  the  conqueror  of  Whida  AnJra, 
Torree,  Didouma,  Ajirah,  and  Jacquin,  who  died  in  1731. — 
Guadja  Trudo  was  almost  as  good  a  conqueror  as  any  barbarian 
that  was  ever  dignified  with  that  appellation.  He  waded  to 
glory  through  seas  of  blood,  I  am  not  sure  if  we  may  call  it  in- 
nocent; if  lie  did  not  exhibit  true  magnanimity,  he  always  dis- 
played what  is  equally  good  for  a  conqueror,  a  true  belligerent 
insensibility  to  the  miseries  of  his  own,  and  of  every  other  na- 
tion; and,  when  he  could  not  lead  the  Dahomans,  he  drove  them 
to  victory.  His  policy  was  that  of  an  ambitious  savage,  who 
sought  to  retain  the  territory  he  had  conquered,  by  burning  the 
towns,  and  massacreing  the  inhabitants;  but  his  views  were  more 
extensive  than  those  of  his  countrymen,  and  the  character  given 
of  him  by  Snelgrave  appears  to  be  just;  who  declares,  that  he 
found  him  the  most  extraordinary  man  of  his  colour  with  whom 
he  had  ever  conversed.  His  fame  still  remains  in  Dahomy, 
where  his  memory  is  revered,  and  where,  in  the  most  solemn 


1828.]  Remarks  on  the  Niger.  151 

oaths,  they  swear  by  his  name.  Bossa  Ahadee,  and  Adahoon- 
zou,  the  son  and  grandson  of  Trudo,  possessed  the  same  restless 
ambitious  spirit,  without  his  martial  talents. — [Dr.  Ley  den. 

"Remarks  on  the  Course  aiul  Termination 

of  t\\e  Xiger. 

In  our  last  number  we  stated  various  theories  which  have 
been  adopted  in  reference  to  the  course  and  termination  of  this 
remarkable  stream.  No  one  of  these  has  been  supported  with 
so  much  learning  and  ingenuity,  as  that  of  Major  Rennel,  who 
believed  that  the  Niger  terminates  in  lakes,  situated  in  a  coun- 
try called  Wangara,  in  the  eastern  quarter  of  Africa.  The  re- 
cent discoveries  of  Denham  and  Clapperton,  have  however, 
shown  this  theory  to  be  entirely  unfounded.  Indeed,  it  ap- 
pears from  Major  Denham,  that  there  is  no  such  country  as 
Wangara.  His  words  are,  "I  met  with  two  Moors  only,  besides 
Khalifa,  who  were  able  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  word;  they 
all  agreed  that  there  was  no  such  place;  and-I  am  inclined  to  be- 
lieve the  following  account  will  be  found  to  be  truth.  All  gold 
countries,  as  well  as  any  people  coming  from  the  gold  country,  or 
bringing  Gooroo  nuts,  are  called  Wangara.  Bambarra  is  called 
Wangara;  also  all  merchants  from  Gonga,  Gombeeron,  Ashantee, 
&c."  Besides,  the  great  lake  Tchad,  was  found  by  Denham 
and  Clapperton,  in  the  very  region  where  Major  Rennel  had 
laid  down  Wangara.  This  is  from  12  to  15°  N.  lat.,  and  from 
14  to  17°  E.  Ion.,  or  thereabouts.  Captain  Clapperton  visited 
Sackatoo,  more  than  five  hundred  miles  west  of  lake  Tchad, 
(lat.  13°  4X  52u  N.,  E.  long.  6°  12\)  and  there  learnt  that  the 
Quarra  or  Niger,  was  but  four  days'  journey  to  the  west,  or  judg- 
ing from  the  longitude,  somewhat  less  than  one  hundred  miles. 
The  theory  of  Major  Rennel  then  must  be  rejected.  But  of  the 
several  others  which  have  been  adopted,  is  any,  and  if  so,  which 
is  probably  the  true  one?  If  none  of  them  can  be  maintained, 
can  any  one  be  proposed,  for  which  better  arguments  may  be 
adduced? 


153  Remarks  on  the  Niger.  [July; 

Although  we  have  carefully  and  anxiously  examined,  all  the 
books  and  maps,   which  seemed  to  promise  any  information  con- 
cerning the  course  and  termination  of  the  Niger,  and  compared 
their  different  testimonies  and  representations,  we  have  found  it 
no  easy  matter,   to  satisfy  our  own  minds  on  the  subject.     It  is 
plain  however,  that  the  Niger  after  passing  Tombuctoo,   which 
most  have  agreed  in  placing  between  15  and  17°  N.  latitude, 
and  between   1  and   2°  East  longitude,   takes  a  southwestern 
course,   until  it  nearly  reaches  the  5°  degree  of  E.  long.,   that 
bending  still  more  to  the  south,   it  reaches   Yaory  or  Yeouri, 
(where  Park  lost  his  life,)  and  that  passing  nearly  in  the  same 
direction  it  soon  enters  a  country  called  Noofee  or  Nyffe,   near 
the  Kong  mountains.     By  the  journal  of  Denham  and  Clapper- 
ton  too,  it  is  proved  that  the  place  assigned  to  Nyffe,  on  the 
maps  preceding  theirs,  is  incorrect,   as  they  visited  this  place 
and  found  it  not,  but  heard  of  it  to  the  southwest,   and  as  they 
had  good  means  of  information,  and  could  not  have  been  many 
hundred  miles  from  it,  the  latitude  and  longitude  which  they 
have  given,  may  be  regarded  we  think,  as  not  far  from  the  truth. 

Nothing,  perhaps,  can  aid  us  more  in  forming  a  judgment  in 
relation  to  the  course  and  termination  of  the  Niger,  than  a  compa- 
rison of  the  accounts  received  by  Mr.  Bowdich,  while  in  Ashan- 
tee,  and  Gaboon  (below  the  Bight  of  Benin),  with  those  of 
Messrs.  Denham  and  Clapperton,  while  in  rfaussa  or  Howssa. 
As  all  these  gentlemen  sought  information  from  every  possible 
source;  as  they  examined  the  Moorish  travellers  with  the  utmost 
strictness  and  perseverance;  as  it  was  a  leading  object  with  them 
to  ascertain  the  truth  on  this  subject;  we  think  the  statements  of 
either  of  them,  without  the  other,  would  be  entitled  to  considera- 
ble credit;  but  if  we  find  their  statements  in  the  main,  to  agree, 
we  can  only  account  for  it  by  supposing  them  founded  on  facts. 
Of  course  it  is  but  in  their  great  outlines,  that  these  accounts  if 
true,  can  be  expected  to  agree,  nor  can  any  incongruity  between 
them  in  smaller  matters,  invalidate  their  testimony  in  reference 
to  those  more  important. 

If,  as  Mr.  Bowdich  was  informed,  the  river  known  to  Mr. 
Park  at  Sego  and  D'jinnie  or  Jenne,  as  the  Niger,  divides  itself 
into  three  branches  at  or  near  Tombuctoo,  (which  we  think 
improbable,)  it  must  evidently  be  the  largest  branch  to  which 


1828.]  Remarks  on  the  Niger.  153 

the   name   of  Niger   has   been   given,    both   by   the   ancient* 
and   moderns;  and  this  must  be  the  stream,  from  all  accounts, 
•which  enters  Nyft'e.     It  is   remarkable  that  the  Niger  should 
have  been  invariably  described  by  the  Moors  at  Ashantee,  as 
"dividing  itself  near  Tombuctoo  into  2  large  streams;  the  Quolla, 
th^  greater,  pursuing  its  course  south-eastward  until  it  joined  the 
Bahr  Miad,    (the  principal  branch  of  the  Nile,)   and  the  other 
branch  running  northward  of  east,  near  Tombuctoo,  and  dividing 
itself  soon  afterwards,   the  smaller  stream  running  northwards 
by  Yahoodee,  a  place  of  great  trade,   and  the  latter  running  to 
the  lake  Caude  or  Cadi,   under  the  name  Gambaroo?  and  that 
Captain  Clapperton  should  have  found  a  river  called  Gambaroo9 
(at  some  distance  from  the  lake,  nearly  as  wide  as  the  Thames  at 
Richmond)    flowing   from   a  little  south  of  west  into  the  lake 
Tchad,      It  is  evident  from  this  that  the  Ashantee  Moors  had 
some  knowledge  of  the  remote  interior,  and  if  the  Gainbaroo  is 
not  a  branch  of  the  Niger,  is  it  strange,  considering  its  size  and 
direction,    that  it  should  be  thought  so?     Let  us  then  compare 
the  accounts  given  to  Messrs.  Denham  and  Clapperton  in  the 
interior,  east  of  the  Niger,  with  those  received  by  Mr.  Bowdich 
at  Ashantee,  on  the  west. 

Maj  Denham  saw  a  young  teacher  (Abdel  Gassam)  from  D'jin- 
nie  and  Tombuctoo,  who  remembered  Mr.  Park's  expedition, 
and  who  said  the  river  which  passes  Tombuctoo  is  large,  called 
Quolla,   and  he  always  understood  that  it  had  many  names  and 
branches,  and  that  it  went  from  Nyffe  south  through  high  moun- 
tains.    This  testimony  Major  Denham  thinks  may  be  relied  on. 
On  his  expedition  to  Mandara,   latitude  N.  12°,  longitude  E. 
15°,   a  man  called  Kaid  Moussa  Ben  Yusuf,   told  Major  Den- 
ham that  he  had  been  twenty  days  south  of  Mandara,  to  a  coun- 
try called  Adamowa.     He  described  with  great  clearness  a  river 
running  from  the  west  between  two  high  ridges  of  mountains, 
which  he  declared  to  be  the  same  as  the   Quolla  or  Quorra,   at 
Nyffe  and  Rakah,  and  that  the  main  body  of  the  water  ran  on 
to  the  south  of  Begharmi,  (latitude  N.  12°,  E.  longitude  18°,) 
that  it  was'  there  called  D'Ago  and  went  eastward  to  the  Nile.—* 
This  man  was  intelligent,  and  had  visited  Nyffe,   Rakah,  Wa- 
day,  and  Darfur,  by  the  latter  of  which  he  said  this  river  passed* 
The  above  statements  agree  well  with  the  map  laid  down  for 


154  Remarks  on  the  Niger.  [Juty> 

Captain  Clapperton  by  Bello,  Sultan  of  Sackatoo,  who  after 
giving  to  a  large  river  a  southern  direction  from  Tombuctoo  to 
below  Nyffe,  and  then  conducting  it  eastward,  writes:  "7%is  i> 
the  Kowara,  which  reaches  Egypt,  and  is  called  the  Nile."  'Tis 
true  Captain  Clapperton  informs  us,  that  on  his  expedition  to 
Sackatoo,  he  saw  a  lad  who  stated  that  he  had  travelled  south 
from  Laborge  in  Nyffe,  having  crossed  the  Quorra,  fourteen 
days,  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  until  they  were  within  four 
days  of  the  sea,  but  where  the  river  entered  he  knew  not;  and 
Sultan  Bello  also  drew  on  the  sand  the  course  of  the  Quarra, 
which  by  his  account,  ran  parallel  to  the  sea  coast  for  several 
days,  being  in  some  places  a  few  hours,  in  others  a  day's  journey 
distant  from  it.  He  wished  a  road  cut  to  Rakah  if  vessels 
should  not  be  able  to  navigate  the  river.  Query,  what  river? 
Certainly  some  other  than  Kowara*  which  is  by  the  Sultan  him- 
self identified  with  the  Quolla  or  Niger  until  it  passes  Nyjfef 
but  then  runs  eastward  until  its  junction  with  the  Nile,  and  of 
course  cannqt  below  Rakah  enter  the  ocean. 

Let  us  now  attend  to  some  of  the  statements  of  Mr.  Bowdich. 
The  junction  of  the  Quolla,  he  observes,  with  the  Bahr  Abiad 
or  Nile,  cannot  be  more  descriptively  expressed,  according  to 
every  account  I  received,  than  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Horneman: 
"Some  days  past,  I  spoke  to  a  man  who  had  seen  Mr.  Brown 
in  Darfoor;  he  told  me  that  the  communication  of  the  Niger  with 
the  Nile  was  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  this  communication  be- 
fore the  rainy  season  was  very  little.*' 

The  following  is  the  course  of  the  Quolla,  as  reported  to  Mr. 
Bowdich:  "From  Yaoora  or  Youri  (where  I  should  judge  it  was 
three  miles  wide)  one  journey  eastward  of  Yaoora  it  passes 
Nooffie  or  Nyffe,  three  journies  thence  Boussa,  (mentioned  by 
Amadi  Fatouma,  as  it  was  to  me,  as  the  place  of  Mr.  Park's 
death,)  twelve  journies  thence  it  passes  Atagara,  but  previously 
Hoome  and  Rakah.  Farther  thirty  journies  it  flows  through 
the  kingdom  of  Quolloraba,*  which  falls  precisely  where  Major 
Rennel  has  laid  down  the  kingdom  of  Kulla,  thirty-one  journies 

*  The  Jenne  Moor,  who  reported  to  Mr.  Hutchison,  traces  the  course 
from  Yaoora  thus:  Boussa,  Gange,  Wawa,  Noofa,  Quollaliffa,  Atagara:  the 
only  difference  being-  the  position  of  the  latter  place,  possibly  an  error  of 
mine,  as  the  name  Atagara  was  not  noticed  in  the  charts  I  made  the  Moor 
draw,  but  only  in  the  more  particular  enumerations  of  the  countries  t{r* 


Remarks  on  the  Mger.  15 6 

ihence  the  Quolla  received  the  river  Sharee,  from  the  north.-* 
The  Quolla  was  said  to  pass  to  the  southward  of  Bagarrime9 
(the  Bagherme  of  Mr.  Brown,)  (doubtless  the  Begharmi  of  Ma- 
jor Denham,)  Poor  or  Darfur  or  Darfoor,  and  lastly  to  form  a 
junction  with  the  Nile,  It  then  went  through  a  large  country, 
Soonar,  (doubtless  Sennaar)  and  thence  to  Egypt.* 

On  the  subject  of  the  Niger,  Mr.  Bowdich  pursued  his  inquip 
wes  with  great  zeal  and  perseverance  in  the  country  of  Gaboon* 
(or  as  the  natives  term  it  Empoongwa,)  latitude  3°  N.,  E.  long* 
9°  23s,  and  here  he  was  told  of  the  river  Wola,  at  some  distance 
in  the  interior,  which  the  Governor  pronounced  the  largest  river 
in  the  world,  and  added,  all  the  great  rivers  in  this  country  comt 
from  Wola.  The  Moohnda  or  Danger,  (about  2°  N.  latitude,) 
he  had  always  understood  in  the  long  course  of  his  inquiries  to 
flow  from  it;  but  he  could  not  speak  so  positively  of  that,  as  of 
the  junction  of  the  Ogoowai  (about  1°  E.  longitude)  and  Wola* 
vAll  the  nations  on  this  route  were  said  to  be  cannibals. 

Of  this  Mr.  Bowdich  remarks;  the  name,  situation,  magnitude? 
md  course  of  the  Wola*  leave  little  doubt  of  its  being  the  Kulla 
•r  Quolla.  A  strong  argument,  in  addition  to  the  above,  tor 
the  Wola  and  the  Quolla  being  the  same  river,  (recollecting  the 
description  that  all  the  nations  on  the  line  of  the  Moohnda  are 
cannibals,)  is  suggested  by  the  reperusal  of  the  following  re- 
marks of  Mr.  Horneman  and  Mr.  Hutchison.  "The  Yem 
Vems,  cannibals,  are  south  of  Kano  ten  days,  which  agrees  very 
well  with  the  leeward  course  of  the  Niger,  which  I  have  been 
compelled  to  lay  down." 

If  we  place  reliance  upon  the  reports  collected  by  Mr.  Bow* 

dich  during  his  visit  at  Gaboon,  we  shall  be  compelled  wellnigh. 

to  abandon  the  Congo  hypothesis.     The  Ogoowai  was  invariably 

represented  as  proceeding  from  the  Wola,  and  as  subsequently 

dividing  itself,   the  smaller  branch  running  to  cape  Lopez,   the 

_ — , —  i  .  „*■> 

Quolla  passed,  the  names  of  which  I  minuted  from  their  utterance,  and  af= 
terwards  attached  their  remarks  as  interpreted  to  me. 

The  Jenne  Moor  calls  this  Quollaliffa — Mr.  Hutchison  had  a  servant  a 
native  of  it.  "It  is  to  the  king  of  Quollalifla  that  the  country  in  which 
Canna  Dall  and  Yum  Yum,  where  cannibals  are,  is  subject.  Mr.  Horneman 
mentions  Yem  Yems  Cannibals,  south  of  Cano  ten  days." 

*  It  is  remarkable  that  Mr.  Hutchison  writes  the  course  according  to  the 
Jenne  Moor  from  Atagarathus:  "MafTagoodoo,  Sharee,  lake  Chadee,  (Shary 
©r  lake  Tchad, )  Phorr,  (beginning  of  Arabs)  WadeyS*  This  agrees  €n<> 
tSrely  with  accounts  received  by  Major  Denham/* 


156*  Remarks  on  the  Niger.  fJuly> 

larger  flowing  south-eastward,  through  the  country  of  Tanyan^ 
and  falling  into  the  Congo,  which  is  comparatively  small  before 
the  confluence*  This  account  of  the  slaves  and  traders  was  con- 
finned  by  the  statement  of  a  very  intelligent  man,  who  spoke 
English  fluently,  and  acted  as  interpreter  to  vessels  that  visit 
the  Gaboon.  He  had  been  up  the  Congo,  and  to  the  last  mo- 
ment persisted  that  just  beyond  a  fall,  which  he  described,  is  the 
confluence  of  the.  Ogoowai  and  Congo.* 

Rakah  is  placed  on  the  map  of  Denham  and  Clapperton  ii\ 
lat.  about  9°  N.,  and  E.  long.  5°,  and  whatever  may  be  the 
course  of  the  Niger,  we  cannot  doubt  that  there  is  communication 
by  one  or  more  rivers,  between  this  place  and  the  Bightof  Benin. 

This  seems  evident  from  the  passage  above  quoted,  in  which 
the  Sultan  Bello  offers  to  give  the  King  of  England  a  place  on 
the  coast,  on  condition  that  a  road  be  cut  to  Rakah,  provided 
the  vessels  are  unable  to  navigate  the  river.  Besides  wTe  are  in- 
formed that  <he  imports  into  Sackatoo  are  Gooroo  nuts,  brought 
from  the  borders  of  Ashantee;  and  coarse  calico  and  woollen 
cloth  in  small  quantities,  with  brass  and  pewter  dishes,  and  some 
few  spices  from  ffiyffe.  Captain  Clapperton  writes  Rakah  is  a 
place  of  great  trade  between  the  interior  and  the  coast,  and  all 
kinds  of  European  goods,  such  as  beads,  woollen  and  cot  ten  cloth  t 
pewter  and  copper  dishes,  gunpowder,  rum,  fyc.  are  to  be  had 
there  in  exchange  for  slaves.  During  my  stay  in  Sackatoo", 
provisions  were  regularly  sent  me  from  the  Sultan's  table  on 
pewter  dishes  with  the  London  stamp,  and  one  day  I  had  a  piece 
of  meat  served  up  in  a  while  wash  -hand-basin  of  English  manu- 
facture. The  distance  from  Rakah  to  the  Bight  of  Benin,  is 
according  to  Clapperton,  but  about  200  miles,  and  from  this  as 
well  as  the  statements  concerning  its  trade,  we  should  judge  it 
almost  certain  that  these  articles  must  have  been  carried  from 
the  latter  through  the  former  place. 

To  our  minds  then,  the  probability  is,  that  the  Niger  under 
the  several  names  of  the  Joliba,    Quolla  or  Quarra,    Wola  and 


*  The  information  received  here  (at  Mawoonda,)  of  the  upward  course  of 
the  river  (Congo,)  was  more  distinct  than  any  We  have  yet  had;  all  the  per- 
sons whom  we  spoke  to  agreeing,  that  after  ten  days  in  a  canoe,  we  should 
Come  to  a  large  sandy  island  which  makes  two  channels,  one  to  the  north- 
mesti  and  the  other  to  the  north -east,-  that  in  the  loiter  there  is  a  fall,  but  that 
canoes  are  easily  got  above  it;  that  twenty  days  above  the  island,  the  river 
issues  by  many  small  streams  from  a  great  marsh  or  lake  of  mud. 

[Captain  Tuckey's  narrative  of  a  voyage  ty  the  Congo 


1828.J  Death  of  Captain  Clapperton.  157 

Kowara,  in  its  main  stream  reaches  the  Bahr  Abiad  or  Nile,  but 
that  from  it  one  or  more  branches  descend  to  the  Bight  of  Benin 
and  the  Gaboon;  perhaps  entering  the  former  through  the  Volta, 
the  Bonny,  the  Rio  Del  Rey  or  Formoso,  and  the  latter  by  the 
Danger  and  the  Ogoowai;  possibly  through  some  one  or  two  of 
these;  possibly  through  all.  What  it  loses  in  this  way,  may  be 
partially  at  least,  made  up  by  the  accession  of  other  rivers  from 
the  north,  some  of  which  are  mentioned  by  Denham  &  Clapperton. 

Captain  CLArrr.nTox. — The  following-  particulars  of  the  death  of  Captaia 
Clapperton,  R.  N.,  we  have  just  received  from  the  mouth  of  Richard  Lan- 
der, his  servant,  who  attended  him  in  his  last  moments. 

It  was  on  the  13th  of  April,  1827,  at  6  o'clock  in  the  morning-,  that  this 
intrepid  traveller  breathed  his  last  at  the  city  of  Sackatoo,  about  fifteen  days 
journey  from  Tombuctoo.  His  illness  lasted  32  days.  As  we  stated  yesterday, 
the  complaint  by  which  he  was  lost  to  the  world,  was  dysentery.  He  appears 
to  have  been  perfectly  aware  of  his  approaching  fate,  was  quite  resigned  to 
it,  and  died  in  the  arms  of  his  servant,  without  a  struggle.  The  Captain 
was  thirty-eight  years  of  age. 

It  is  consoling  to  know,  that  in  the  trying-  circumstances  in  which  he  was 
placed,  oppressed  by  consuming-  illness,  in  a  foreig-n  land,  he  did  not  lose 
sight  of  the  value  of  the  consolations  of  Religion.  Every  Sunday  morning1 
he  caused  Lander  to  read  to  him  the  prayers  used  in  the  Service  of  the 
Church  of  England,  andfrequently  occupied  himself  in  other  acts  of  devotion. 

When  the  Captain  was  no  more,  our  informant  washed  the  remains  of  his 
master,  and  wrapped  a  clean  sheet  round  his  body,  which  he  subsequently 
enclosed  in  a  blanket,  and  the  whole  in  a  piece  of  matting-,  coffins  not  being" 
known  in  that  country. 

The  body  was  then  carried  on  the  back  of  a  camel,  and  conveyed  to  a 
grave,  which  had  been  prepared  for  its  reception  by  Lander,  and  some  of 
the  Captain's  black  slaves,  in  a  small  garden  in  the  village  of  Jaungany,  5 
miles  to  the  southeast  of  Sackatoo.  The  camel  wras  led  by  one  of  the 
slaves.  The  remains  were  followed  to  their  resting  place  by  four  others, 
and  by  the  faithful  domestic  from  whom  we  have  obtained  this  account. — 
On  lowering  the  body  into  the  grave,  the  Union  Jack  was  waved  over  it  by 
Lander,  and  the  Burial  Service  was  then  read  by  the  same  individual. 

While  he  remained  at  Sackatoo  the  natives  treated  him  with  the  greatest 
respect.  During  his  last  illness  his  wants  were  imperfectly  provided  for, 
•wing  to  the  barbarous  state  of  that  society,  in  which  he  was  destined  to 
close  his  career  Chicken  broth  and  boiled  milk  and  rice,  were  the  arti- 
cles of  sustenance  which  were  supplied.  Bee?  or  wine  was  notto  be  obtained. 


15a  Intelligence  from  Mr.  Ashmun.  [July? 

"Major  Laing  was  reported  to  have  perished  in  December,  1825.  This  is 
fully  refuted,  as  a  letter  was  received  by  his  wife  at  Tripoli,  dated  Feb. 
1826,  from  a  village  but  a  short  distance  from  Tombuctoo.  In  that  letter 
the  Major  apologised  for  its  brevity,  which,  lie  added,  was  caused  by  a  se- 
vere sabre  wound  on  the  back  of  the  right  hand. — [London  Courier. 

More  recent  accounts,  it  seems,-  have  been  received  by  Baron  Roger, 
dated  at  St.  Louis,  in  Senegal,  the  8th  of  March,  of  the  death  of  Maj.  Laing, 
near  Tombuctoo — a  Moor  who  had  arrived  there  related  the  circumstances, 
which  receive  a  melancholy  corroboration  from  the  fact,  that  he  is  in  possession 
of  the  papers  which  belonged  to  this  new  victim  of  African  research. — [Albion. 

Fernando  Po. — On  this  Island,  which  is  near  the  coast  of  Benin,  Africa, 
and  about  60  miles  in  circumference,  a  mssion  has  just  been  established  by 
the  Church  Missionary  Society  y  with  encouraging  prospects. — [Vt.  Chron* 

Intelligence  from  Mx.  Aslvmun. 

Since  our  last  number,  two  letters  have  been  received  from 
the  Colonial  Agent,  Mr.  Ashmun,  dated  on  the  8th  and  18th -of 
June,  at  Basse  Terre,  in  the  Island  of  St.  Christophers.  The 
first  written  by  the  hand  of  a  friend  represents  him  as  extremely 
low,  and  indulging  but  little  hope  of  a  recovery.  The  last,  it 
will  be  seen,  however,  is  of  a  much  more  favourable  character. 
Basse  Terref  St  Christophers,  June  18,  1828. — Monday. 

Dear  Sir:  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  Divine  Mercy,  which,  contrary  t« 
ill  my  apprehensions,  and  the  expectations  of  friends,  has  again  restored 
me  to  a  state  of  very  hopeful  convalescence.  My  lingering  and  complicat- 
ed disorders,  seem  to  have  arrived  at  a  crisis  about  the  10th  instant.  I  did 
but  survive.  But,  since  that  date,  have  been  by  degrees  recovering.— 
Should  I  escape  those  relapses,  to  which  persons  in  my  reduced  state  are 
extremely  liable,  I  think  I  shall  be  strong  enough  in  ten  days  to  re-embark 
for  the  United  States.  It  is  my  intention  (Deo  volente),  to  return  to  St. 
Barts  the  last  of  the  present  week,  where  I  shall  look  out  for  the  earliest 
conveyance.  My  last  was  written  by  the  hand  of  a  friend,  and  my  strength 
is  only  equal  to  the  effort  which  has  produced  this  note.  But  every  day — 
every  hour,  indeed,  I  feel  an  accession  of  fresh  vigour.  I  want  little  ex- 
cept gratitude  properly  to  acknowledge  so  great  and  unexpected  a  favour. 

With  entire  respect  and  esteem,  Dear  Sir,  Yours, 
Rev.  R.  R.  Gurlet,  S.  A.  C    S.  J.  ASHMUN. 

P.  S.  Since  this  form  has  been  composed,  intelligence  has 
reached  us  from  Mr.  Ashmun,  under  date  the  9th  of  July. — > 
Though  very  low,  he  was  somewhat  better,  and  was  to  sail  for 
New  Haven,  Connecticut,  on  the  Kith  instant. 


1228.]      Auxiliaries. -Fourth  of  Juhj.  -Contributions.      159 

To  Auxiliaries  and  Agents • 

It  is  important,  that  whenever  new  Auxiliaries  are  established 
the  fact  should  be  immediately  communicated  to  the  Parent  In- 
stitution, with  a  full  and  correct  list  of  the  officers  of  such  soci- 
eties. We  shall  be  much  gratified,  likewise,  to  receive  account? 
of  the  Annual  Meetings  of  Auxiliary  Institutions,  and  copies  of 
the  Reports  which  may  be  made  on  such  occasions.  Should 
changes  take  place  in  regard  to  the  Officers  of  Auxiliary  Socie- 
ties, lists  of  which  have  already  been  transmitted  to  us,  we  hope 
to  receive  due  notice  of  such  changes,  that  the  account  of  such 
societies  may  be  correctly  published  in  our  Annual  Reports* 


ToxiYtU  ol  3uY$  Collections. 

The  list  of  Contributions  in  the  present  number,  will  show 
that  we  have  already  begun  to  receive  the  collections  which  were 
taken  up  in  behalf  of  our  cause  in  several  churches  on  or  about 
the  Fourth  of  July.  We  fear,  however,  that  but  few  congrega- 
tions comparatively,  have  thus  lent  their  aid  to  our  cause;  and 
those  who  have  not,  may  be  reminded  that  it  is  not  yet  too  late 
for  them  to  unite  in  this  holy  work  of  charity.  The  pecuniary 
wants  of  our  Institution  were  never  more  pressing  than  at  this 
moment,  and  we  must  say  to  all  who  feel  an  interest  in  our 
scheme,  that  without  their  prompt  and  energetic  exertions^  no 
expeditions  can  befitted  out  for  Liberia  the  present  year. 

C  ontxibutions 

To  the  American  Col.  Soc.  from  the  1st  to  the  20th  July,  1828. 

By  an  "Alexandrian,"  $10  00 

"  Th.  P.  Wilson,  Esq.  Rockville,  Md 10  00 

"  Richard  Harrison,  Esq.  Washington,  D.  C 10  00 

'•  Robt.  Ware,  Esq,  of  Tappahannock,  Va.  per  Mr.  J.  C.  Dunn,         5  00 

*'  Gerard  Morgan,  Esq.  of  Harrisonburg-,  Va.  per  ditto 5  00 

I3y  Rev.  Mr.  M'Kenney,  per  collections  by  him,  as  follows,  viz: 

In  Methodist  Church,  Smithfield,  Va 7  91 

In  do  called  Ben's  meeting  house,   ....     7  64 

In  Millswamp,  Baptist  Church,  6  50 

22  C5 

Carried  forward,-        $62  05' 


160  Contributions  to  the  Jl.  C.  Society.  [July-, 

Brought  forward,  $62  05 

*/  Mr.  Grove   Wright,  Agent  in  New  York,  for  the  following 
collections,  viz: — 

In  Rev.  Mr.  Sandford's  Church,  Brooklyn,    70 

In  Rev,  Mr.  Cox's  Church,  city  of  New  York, 56 

In  Presbyterian  Church,  Elizabethtown,  New  Jersey,       25 

In  Presbyterian  Church,  Pittsfield,  Mass 29  33 

In  Presbyterian  Church,  Chenango  Point,  N.  Y 6  67 — 187  OB 

By  Morning  Star  Lodge,  No.    196,  Mercersburg,  Pa.  per 

Rev.  David  Elliot,  . 10 

Collection  in  Presbyterian  Church,  Upper  West,  Conoco- 

cheague,  Mercersburg,  Pa.  per  ditto, 13 23 

Collections  in  1st  Presbyterian  Church,  Washington,  D.  C.  per. 

Rev.  Mr.  Post,    . ". .' 17  Ifc 

Do.         in  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,    Leesburg,    Va.  per. 

Rev.  Ch.  B.  Tippet,   40  13 

Do.         in  Presbyterian  and  German  Keformed  Churches,  Har- 

risburg,  Pa.  after  a  sermon  by  Rev.  Wm.  R.  l)c  wit,   24  16 

Do.         in  Elmira,  Troy  County,  N.  Y.   in  Methodist  Church, 

Rev.  E.  O.  Flvng,   11 

Do.         in  1st  Presbyterian  Church,  Erie,  Pa.  per  George  Sei- 
dell, Esq   Tr 17 

Do.         by    Auxiliary  Society,  Zanesville  and  Putnam, 
Ohio,   after  Addresses   by   Rev.   James   Culbertson, 

and  M.  T.  Ewnig,  Esq 30 

Contributed  by  said  Society, 1 

31 

Do.         in  Congregational  Church,  Great  Barrington,  Mass.  . .        15 
Do.         from  Cross  Roads  Congregation,  Washington,  Pa.  per 

Rev.  Elisha  Macurd\ , 20 

Do.  in  Baptist  and   Presbyterian  congregation,   King\s\  ille, 

Ohio,   after  a  sermon  by    Rev.  Jacob  Baily,  and  an  Address 

by  Rev.    Wm.  Palmer,    7 

Do.  in  Rev.  J.  D.  Knowles'  Church,  Boston, 52 

Do.         in  Methodist  Church,  Louisville,  Ky.  per  Rev.  W.  A. 

Morris, 15 

Do.         in  2d  Presbyterian  Church,    Washington,  per  George 

Gilliss,  Esq * 9  37 

Do.         additional  in  same  Church 1  50 

Do.         in  Baptist  and  Presbyterian  Churches,  Montrose,  Pa. 

per  Wm.  Jesup, 7 

Do.         in  Methodist  Church,  Hillsborough,  Ohio,  per  Rev.  J. 

M.  Matthews,   5 

Do.         in  Presbyterian  Church,  Suckasunny,   N.  J.   by  Rev. 

Peter  Kanonse,   7 

Do.         from  Bedford  Congregation,  Pa.  perJno.  Coyle,  Esq.       18 
From  the  Auxiliary  Society  Powhatan  County,  Va.   per  Wm.  H. 

Henning,  M.  D 50 

From  Do.   Ashtabula  County,  Ohio,    per  Jacob  Austin,  Esq.  Tr.       33 
From  Do.  Mount  Zion,  Buckingham  County,  Va.  per  James  Sta- 
ples,  Esq 20 

From  Do.  Elkton,  Ky 150 

|822  31 


Error.— Pa^e  134,  7th  line  from  the  top,  for  "North  £0°,"  read  North  30', 


THJF. 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


ANfc 


GOLOITIAL  JQTXILITAL. 


Vol.  IV.  AUGUST,  1823.  No.  6. 


Communication. 

Report  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations,  in  the  Senate  of 
the  United  States,  to  whom  were  referred  sundry  petitions  and 
memorials,  and  the  resolutions  of  several  Legislatures  of  differ- 
mit  States,  in  relation  to  the  Colonization  of  Persons  of 
Colour, 

This  Report  is  the  avowed  production  of  Mr.  Tazewell,  of 
Virginia;  and  from  the  unquestionable  talents,  and  the  known 
hostility  of  that  gentleman  to  the  Colonization  Society,  it  would 
be  fair  to  infer,  that  in  this  laboured  and  (we  believe)  favourite 
production  of  his  pen,  might  be  found  embodied,  all  that  genius 
and  intolerance  could  suggest,  against  a  cause  in  which  a  large 
proportion  of  the  best  feelings  and  the  best  talents  of  our  coun- 
try have  so  generously  embarked.  The  Report  has  accordingly 
been  referred  to,  and,  in  some  instances,  republished  with  feel- 
ings of  unmeasured  exultation,  in  those  sections  of  the  country, 
where  hostility  to  the  Colonization  Society  would  seem  to  be 
the  only  recognized  test  of  patriotism. 

"With  due  deference,  however,  to  our  fellow-citizens  of  the 
South,  and  without  meaning  to  detract,  in  the  smallest  degree, 


162  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  [August? 

from  the  reputation  of  their  senatorial  champion,  we  must  be 
pardoned  for  saying,  that,  in  our  humble  opinion,  this  is  fai 
from  being  the  most  formidable  attack  to  which  the  Colonization 
Society  has  been  exposed.  Much  more  powerful  batteries  have, 
at  different  times,  been  directed  against  it,  and  directed,  we 
humbly  conceive,  by  more  skilful  hands* 

Had  this  Report,  then,  come  to  us  on  the  individual  responsi- 
bility of  Mr.  Tazewell,  high  as  is  his  reputation,  and  great  as  are 
his  talents,  we  should  probably  have  passed  it  without  notice. — 
But  it  carries  with  it  the  sanction  of  a  Committee  of  the  Senate; 
and  the  appeal  it  contains,  is  officially  addressed  to  the  most 
august  legislative  body  in  the  Union.  We  feel  impelled,  there- 
fore, by  the  strongest  sense  of  duty,  by  our  high  respect  for  the 
legislative  department  of  our  country,  and  by  an  earnest  desire 
to  clear  away  the  mist  that  prejudice  is  continually  attempting 
to  throw  around  this  interesting  subject,  to  invite  the  attention 
of  our  readers  to  Mr.  Tazewell's  argument.  And  we  shall  be 
\ery  much  mistaken,  if  a  large  proportion  of  them  do  not  con- 
cur with  us  in  the  opinion,  that  an  opposition  to  the  Colonization 
Society,  resting  on  the  grounds  we  are  about  to  expose,  is  very 
little  to  be  dreaded. 

The  distinguished  individuals  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for 
the  first  matured  and  practical  conception  of  colonizing  Africa, 
by  ridding  America  of  an  injurious  population,  gave  unequivocal 
evidence  of  their  own  views  in  relation  to  the  powers  and  re- 
sources necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  magnificent 
scheme.  At  the  very  moment  of  their  organization,  they  ap- 
pointed a  Committee  to  solicit  the  aid  of  Congress:  and  similar 
Committees  were  appointed,  and  similar  petitions  presented, 
from  time  to  time,  with  little  other  hope,  (it  would  seem,)  thaii 
to  keep  the  public  attention  alive  to  the  subject,  and  to  show 
that  their  ultimate  reliance  was  on  national  and  not  on  individu- 
al resources. 

At  the  eighth  and  ninth  Annual  Meetings  of  the  Society,  how- 
ever, the  subject  was  at  length  taken  up,  with  different  and  more 
serious  views;  and  after  a  long  and  animated  discussion,  it  was 
resolved,  that  memorials  should  be  presented  to  both  Houses  of 
Congress,  "praying  such  aid  and  assistance  to  the  Society,  as 
they  should  think  proper  to  afford." 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  165 

In  pursuance  of  this  resolution,  memorials  were  accordingly 
prepared  and  presented,  and  were  met  by  others  of  similar  cha- 
racter, both  from  state  legislatures,  and  numberless  individuals, 
throughout  the  country.  In  the  House  of  Representatives,  these 
memorials  were  received  with  the  kindest  feelings,  and  were 
answered  by  the  Committee  to  whom  they  were  referred,  in  a 
report  of  the  most  favourable  character.  Their  fate,  however,  in 
the  Senate,  was  entirely  different;  and  they  were  met,  as  will 
be  seen  in  the  Report  before  us,  by  the  declaration,  that  Con- 
gress had  no  power  to  grant  the  assistance  asked,  and  that  if 
they  had,  it  would  be  inexpedient  to  grant  it. 

This  declaration  contains  \n  both  its  branches,  matter  of  most 
serious  import;  and  if  it  can  be  sustained  in  either,  must,  of  course, 
throw  a  cloud  over  the  sanguine  anticipations  that  have  been 
formed  in  relation  to  Africa  and  America.  We  hope,  therefore, 
to  be  pardoned  for  inviting  the  earnest  attention  of  our  readers 
©f  every  description,  to  the  views  we  are  about  to  present  on 
this  interesting  subject. 

As  far  as  we  can  gather  from  the  Report  of  the  Committee, 
even  those  of  the  memorialists  who  specified  the  precise  sort  of 
aid  they  desired  at  the  hands  of  Congress,  asked  nothing  more 
than  the  provision  of  a  territory  on  the  Coast  of  Africa,  for  the 
reception  of  the  coloured  people  of  our  country,  and  the  appro- 
priation of  the  necessary  funds  for  aiding  them  in  their  removal 
to  it.  And  yet  on  both  these  points,  their  application  is  resist- 
ed on  constitutional  grounds. 

Of  the  general  right  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
to  acquire  territory,  we  do  not  know  that  we  can  present  our 
own  impression,  more  strongly,  than  in  the  following  extracts 
from  the  Report  of  the  Committee. 

"The  acquisition  of  new  territory,  no  matter  where  such  territory  may 
be  situated,  or  in  what  mode,  or  for  what  purpose,  such  acquisition  may  be 
made,  is  an  exercise  of  one  of  the  highest  powers  which  any  government 
can  ever  exert."  "All  the  examples  which  history  furnishes  of  new  terri- 
tory acquired  by  any  nation,  in  past  time,  exhibit  but  three  modes  in  which 
such  acquisition  hath  ever  been  made.  These  are  by  discovery,  con- 
quest, or  negotiation."  "Every  government  charged  with  the  exclusive 
direction  of  the  exterior  relations  of  the  nation  for  which  it  was  de- 
signed, and  specially  endowed  with  the   general  powers  of    regulating 


16*  Review  of  the  Report  of  Ike  [August 

commerce,  of  waging  war,  and  of  conducting  negotiations,  must  enjoy, 
as  incident  to  these  powers,  the  right  of  prosecuting  discoveries,  of  achiev- 
ing conquests,  and  of  concluding  treaties;  and,  consequently,  must  enjoy 
the  right  of  acquiring  new  territory  by  any  of  these  means,  unless  this  na- 
tural incident  of  the  powers  granted  is  expressly  denied  to  such  govern 
ment,  by  those  who  created  and  so  endowed  it.  The  Federal  Constitution 
specially  grants  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  all  these  general 
powers,  and  contains  no  direct  inhibition  of  the  right  of  acquiring  new- 
territory,  which,  as  has  been  said,  necessarily  and  naturally  flows  from  each 
of  them.  The  Committee,  therefore,  cannot  doubt,  that  the  Government 
of  the  United  States  does  possess  the  right  of  acquiring  new  territory,  by 
some  of  the  modes  before  referred  to,  whenever  the  case  may  occur,  to 
which  any  of  these  modes  of  acquiring  new  territory  is  properly  applica- 
ble. They  see,  moreover,  that  the  past  practice  of  this  government  has 
conformed  to  this  opinion,  in  the  memorable  examples  of  the  acquisition  of 
the  territory  of  Louisiana  from  France,  and  of  Florida  from  Spain." 

We  present  the  above  quotations  as  the  most  conclusive  and 
unanswerable  train  of  reasoning,  on  the  subject  to  which  they 
relate;  and  when  wc  first  read  them,  we  felt  satisfied,  that  what- 
ever the  Committee  might  decide,  as  to  the  right  of  appropria- 
tion, they  entertained  no  doubt  whatsoever,  of  the  right  of  the 
Government  to  acquire  the  proposed  territory.  What,  then, 
was  our  surprise,  when  at  the  commencement  of  the  very  ne.vJ 
paragraph,  we  encountered  the  following  sentence. 

"But  while  the  Committee  can  readily  discern  the  source  of  the  right 
asserted  by  the  United  States  in  the  cases  referred  to,  and  can  as  distinctly 
perceive  that  such  a  right  may,  at  any  time  hereafter,  be  legitimately  as 
serted  as  an  incident  and  consequence  of  some  of  the  high  powers  to  which 
they  have  referred  it,  whenever  the  case  may  arise  to  which  these  powers 
properly  apply,  they  cannot  discover  what  support  this  opinion  can  afford 
to  the  legitimate  acquisition  of  the  new  territory,  which  is  proposed  upon 
the  present  occasion." 

Now  we  beg  the  most  ingenious  and  talented  of  our  readers, 
to  peruse  for  a  single  moment,  and  to  try  whether,  by  the  exer- 
cise of  all  the  powers  of  their  minds,  they  can  (admitting  the 
correctness  of  the  previous  reasoning  of  the  Committee,)  assign 
a  single  reason,  satisfactory  to  themselves,  why  the  acquisition 
of  the  particular  territory  proposed,  is  to  constitute  an  excep- 
tion to  the  acknowledged  general  right  of  acquiring  territory. 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations*  165 

Having  searched  the  Constitution  in  vain,  for  "an  express  deni- 
al" of  this  "natural  and  necessary  incident"  to  the  enumerated 
powers  of  regulating  commerce,  of  making  war,  and  of  negoti- 
ating treaties;  and  finding  in  its  whole  extent,  no  "direct  inhi- 
bition" of  the  right  in  question,  must  they  not  be  led  to  the  irre- 
sistible conclusion,  that  this  "natural  and  necessary  right"  of 
course  exists  ? 

But  how  fallacious  are  the  deductions  of  the  acutest  intel- 
lect! How  many  wonderful  things  are  to  be  met  with  "in  heaven 
and  earth,  that  are  not  even  dreamt  of  in  the  philosophy"  of  the 
uninitiated!  Who  but  the  ingenious  gentleman  at  the  head  of 
the  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations  in  the  Senate,  could  ever 
have  discovered  that  the  case  in  question  was  precisely  that  case,, 
to  which  alone,  the  various  modes  of  acquiring  territory,  acknow- 
ledged to  appertain  to  the  General  Government,  "were  not  pro- 
perly applicable!"  To  discover  why  they  are  not,  would  per- 
haps puzzle  our  readers  quite  as  much,  as  the  stumbling  block 
already  thrown  in  their  way — and  that  their  patience  may  n» 
longer  be  trifled  with,  we  accordingly  present  them  with  the 
following  summary  of  the  reasoning  of  the  Committee,  in  sup- 
port of  the  exception  they  have  been  pleased  to  make. 

"The  United  States,"  say  they,  "cannot  acquire  territory  on  the  Coast 
of  Africa  by  the  right  of  discovery,  because  its  whole  coast  has  already  been 
explored  by  other  civilized  nations,  who  have  not  thought  proper  to  occu- 
py it.  The  reasons  which  restrained  them,  merit  at  least  as  much  consid- 
eration from  the  United  States,  as  they  have  received  from  the  elder  mem- 
bers of  the  family  of  civilized  man;  and  must  of  course  preclude  them  from 
advancing  any  claim  to  African  territory,  on  the  ground  of  first  discovery 
and  prime  occupancy. 

"Nor  does  the  right  of  declaring  war  apply  to  the  case  in  question.  The 
power  to  declare  war,  like  all  the  other  discretionary  powers,  conferred  by 
the  Constitution,  is  necessarily  limited  by  the  ends  and  objects  for  which 
alone  it  may  be  rightfully  exerted.  Now  as  war  is  never  to  be  justified  ex- 
cept as  a  means  necessary  to  the  preservation  of  permanent  peace  and 
greater  security;  and  as  the  peculiar  situation  of  the  savage  hordes,  occupy- 
ing the  coast  of  Africa,  renders  it  impossible  that  they  should  ever  threaten 
the  peace  or  disturb  the  security  of  the  United  States,  the  power  to  declare 
war  can  hardly  be  considered  as  embracing  them  within  its  scope,  and  of 
course  no  territory  can  be  acquired  amongst  ihent,  ftoivever  it  may  be  eke- 
ivhere,  by  the  right  of  conquest. 


166  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  [August, 

"Equally  inapplicable  is  the  treaty-making  power  to  the  case  now  under 
consideration.  This  too  is  a  discretionary  power  granted  to  the  United 
States  by  the  Constitution;  but  like  all  other  powers  of  the  same  kind,  it 
has  its  limits.  These  limits  the  Committee  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  define; 
but  satisfy  themselves  with  the  remark,  that  from  the  very  nature  of  the 
power,  as  well  as  from  its  effect  on  the  parties  concerned,  and  indeed  on 
the  whole  civilized  world,  it  can  be  exercised  only  by  two  or  more  sove- 
reigns, acting  together  for  the  attainment  of  the  same  object,  by  means  of  a 
compact,  which,  when  concluded,  is  to  be  obligatory  on  the  whole  people 
governed  by  suGh  sovereigns.  Civilized  nations  have  accordingly  seldom 
believed  themselves  at  liberty  to  conclude  treaties  with  absolute  savages — 
no  instance  can  be  adduced,  in  modern  times,  of  the  conclusion  of  such 
treaties  with  the  savage  tribes  wandering  over  the  deserts,  or  dwelling  on 
the  coast  of  Africa — and  hence  the  Committee  infer,  that  the  right  of  ac- 
quiring new  territory,  which  it  is  proposed  the  United  States  should  exert, 
in  order  to  make  such  acquisition  in  Africa,  can  derive  as  little  support 
from  the  treaty -making,  as  from  the  other  great  powers  of  the  Government. 

"But  even  if  this  difficulty  did  not  exist,  an  insuperable  one  would  be 
found  in  the  remote  situation  of  the  territory  proposed  to  be  acquired.  The 
treaty-making  power  of  the  United  States  is  admitted  to  be  equal  to  the 
legitimate  acquisition  of  new  territory,  either  within  or  contiguous  to 
their  original  dominions;  but  it  does  not  extend  to  the  acquisition 
of  a  distant  territory  in  another  quarter  of  the  globe,  separated  from 
the  United  States  by  a  wide  ocean.  A  country  so  situated,  being,  in 
the  nature  of  things,  unable  to  contribute  its  just  proportion  of  the 
blessings,  or  to  bear  its  proper  share  of  the  responsibilities  of  our  re- 
presentative system,  could,  of  course,  never  be  admitted  into  the  Union  as 
an  integral  part  of  the  confederation.  It  must,  therefore,  either  be  retain- 
ed in  a  state  of  colonial  dependence,  or  it  must  be  endowed  with  the  cha- 
racter and  attributes  of  a  sovereign  state,  entirely  independent  of  the  pa- 
rent country.  Neither  of  those  are  the  United  States  authorized  to  do;  and 
hence  it  is  inferred,  that  the  treaty-making  power  does  not  extend  to  the 
acquisition  of  a  territory,  creating  an  absolute  obligation  to  do  one  or  the 
other.  And  this  impression  is  strengthened  by  the  fact,  that  all  the  trea- 
ties hitherto  made  for  the  acquisition  of  territory,  have  contained  stipula- 
tions for  its  future  admission  into  the  Union,  as  apart  and  equal  member  of 
the  confederation." 

Such  we  believe  to  be  a  fair  exposition  of  the  reasoning  of  the 
Committee,  and  we  are  perfectly  satisfied  that  with  the  gene- 
rality of  our  readers,  it  might  be  safely  left,  without  any  other 
answer,  than  could  be  drawn  from  the  extracts  already  made 
from  their  own  Report,  But  it  has  been  so  much  the  fashion  of 
late,  to  cavil  «t  the  exercise  of  the  simplest  and  most  obvious 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  167 

powers  of  the  General  Government — prejudice  and  interest  have 
so  often  combined  to  reduce  those  powers  to  a  scale  wholly  dis- 
proportioned  to  the  demands  of  the  country,  and  wholly  incom- 
patible with  the  intentions  of  the  framers  of  our  Constitution, 
that  it  has  become  the  solemn  duty  of  every  lover  of  law  and 
order,  and  of  every  friend  to  the  permanency  of  our  republican 
system,  to  array  himself  on  the  side  of  the  Constitution,  and  to 
shield  it,  if  possible,  against  attacks,  from  whatever  quarter 
they  may  come,  that  are  calculated  to  diminish  its  value,  if  not 
to  destroy  its  very  existence.  Under  these  impressions,  we 
must  beg  leave  to  pass  the  arguments  of  the  honorable  Commit- 
tee a  little  farther  in  review,  before  we  take  our  final  leave  of 
them. 

The  enumerated  powers  of  the  General  Government,  (and 
amongst  the  rest,  the  three  specified  by  the  Committee,)  are  all 
given  alike,  for  the  purposes  of  "forming  a  more  perfect  union, 
establishing  justice,  ensuring  domestic  tranquillity,  providing  for 
the  common  defence,  promoting  the  general  welfare,"  &c.  &c. 
Whenever,  in  the  opinion  of  Congress,  any  one  or  all  of  these 
ends  can  be  attained  by  the  exercise  of  any  one  or  all  of  their 
enumerated  powers,  the  authority  to  exercise  them  is  absolute, 
and  the  laws  they  may  pass  in  pursuance  thereof,  become  "the 
supreme  law  of  the  land,  any  thing  in  the  Constitution  and  laws 
of  any  state  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding."  It  is  of  no  con- 
sequence, that  the  exercise  of  the  power  in  question  may  fall 
short  of  or  exceed  the  end  proposed — that  it  may  disappoint  the 
expectations  formed  as  to  its  result — that  it  may  violate  estab- 
lished principles  of  policy — that  it  may  fall  with  severity  on 
some  portions  of  our  own  country — or  may  even  operate  unjust- 
ly towards  foreign  nations.  If  it  only  avoid  forbidden  ground — 
if  it  involve  no  incident  "expressly  denied" — if  it  violate  no 
"direct  inhibition"  of  the  Constitution — the  power  is  constitu- 
tionally exercised.  It  may  be  injudiciously  exercised — it  may 
be  exercised  in  a  bad  spirit,  but  it  is  constitutionally  exercised, 
and  its  effects  can  be  got  rid  of,  in  no  other  way,  than  by  an  act 
of  formal  repeal. 

Let  us  apply  these  principles  to  the  reasoning  of  the  Commit- 
tee. The  Congress  of  the  United  States,  thinking  it  important 
to  the  interests  of  the  country?   that  we  should  possess  some 


168  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  [August, 

point  of  territory  beyond  the  Atlantic,  authorize  an  expedition 
for  the  purpose  of  discovering  and  designating  a  convenient  spot. 
A  large  and  commodious  territory,  in  every  respect  suitable  and 
calculated  in  the  highest  degree  to  facilitate  our  commercial 
operations,  or  to  promote  the  "general  welfare"  of  the  country 
in  some  other  way,  is  found  on  the  Coast  of  Africa.  It  is  in- 
habited by  no  one — not  even  savages — and  no  claim  is  set  up  to 
it  by  any  civilized  nation.  We  take  it  for  granted,  that  here  is 
a  case,  to  which,  the  Committee  themselves  would,  according 
to  their  own  showing,  pronounce  the  commercial  powers  of  Con- 
gress "properly  applicable."  And,  as  the  constitution  contains 
no  "express  denial,"  no  "direct  inhibition"  of  the  power  exer- 
cised, the  territory  would  of  course  become  the  property  of  the 
United  States,  on  the  ground  of  "first  discovery  and  prime  oc- 
cupancy." In  process  of  time,  however,  it  is  ascertained,  that 
the  vessels  of  some  other  nation  had,  many  centuries  back, 
touched  at  the  same  point;  but  seeing  that  no  great  advantage 
could  result  to  their  country  from  so  remote  and  inhospitable  a 
possession,  had  abandoned  as  soon  as  they  had  discovered  it. — 
From  that  moment,  the  whole  proceeding  of  the  government  be- 
comes unconstitutional  and  void,  and  the  power  exercised,  though 
constitutional  in  itself,  and  opposed  by  no  "express  denial,"  no 
"direct  inhibition  of  the  constitution,"  is  nevertheless,  uncon 
stitutionally  exercised,  simply  because  the  territory  in  question 
had  been  previously  visited  by  the  vessels  of  another  nation. — 
Are  the  honourable  Committee  prepared  for  this  extraordinary 
result,  to  which  by  the  process  of  their  own  reasoning,  they  are 
inevitably  brought? 

Again,  the  power  of  declaring  war  is  expressly  given  to  the 
Government  of  the  United  States.  It  is  given,  like  its  commer- 
cial powers,  for  the  purposes  exhibited  in  the  preamble  to  the 
constitution.  The  time  and  the  mode  of  exercising  it,  are  left 
without  limitation  to  the  discretion  of  Congress.  On  that  dis- 
cretion, however,  the  Committee  would  impose  a  limitation 
of  their  own  creation — a  limitation  founded  on  motives  of  action, 
and  an  arbitary  selection  of  one  in  preference  to  all  the  other 
ends,  for  which  the  power  in  question  is  given.  "War,"  say 
thev,  "is  never  to  be  justified  except  as  a  means  necessary  to 
the  preservation  of  permanent  peace  and  greater  security."— 


1828.-5  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  16j). 

And  as  the  condition  of  the  people  of  Africa  "places  it  beyond 
credulity  that  any  or  all  of  them  can  now  threaten  the  peace  or 
disturb  the  security  of  any,  the  most  exposed  spot  in  this 
hemisphere,"  tne  right  of  making  war  on  them  is  denied,  how- 
ever the  "general  welfare,"  (an  end  as  important  and  as  defined 
as  the  "common  defence,")  might  be  otherwise  promoted  by  it. 
Had  the  Committee  been  satisfied  with  representing  wars,  ex- 
cept for  the  "preservation  of  permanent  peace  and  greater  secu- 
rity," as  in  the  main  unjust  and  impolitic,  we  might  have  argued 
with  them.  But  when  they  deny  the  constitutional  right  of 
Congress  to  declare  war  for  any  other  purposes,  than  such  as 
they  have  specified,  we  must  be  pardoned  for  appealing  from 
their  judgment,  to  the  express  letter  of  the  constitution  itself. 

We  think  it  proper,  however,  here  to  observe,  that  in  notic- 
ing these  arguments  of  the  Committee,  we  have  no  view  to  the 
immediate  interests  of  the  Colonization  Society.  We  have  ne- 
ver looked  to  the  commercial  or  military  powers  of  the  govern- 
ment as  the  means  of  accomplishing  the  purposes  of  that  Socie^ 
ty;  and  so  far  as  the  acquisition  of  territory  is  desirable,  we  are 
satisfied  that  the  treaty-making  power  is  amply  sufficient  to  ac- 
complish every  thing  that  will  be  asked. 

If  the  acquisition  of  territory  be  not  a  legitimate  object  for  the 
exercise  of  this  power,  it  will  be  a  difficult  matter  to  find  one 
that  is.  And  if  it  be — as  common  sense  would  indicate,  as  the 
Committee  themselves  acknowledge,  and  as  the  uniform  prac- 
tice of  the  government  demonstrates  it  to  be — we  know  of  no 
constitutional  limitation  on  the  exercise  of  the  power,  or  on  its 
application  to  any  particular  case,  but  that  its  aim  should  be  the 
general  good,  that  it  should  disregard  no  "express  denial,"  and. 

should  infringe  no  "direct  inhibition"  of  the  Constitution 

These  considerations  being  regarded,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
the  acquisition  of  desirable  territory  from  one  people  more  than 
from  another,  or  in  one  situation  more  than  in  another.  If  we 
can  purchase  territory  from  the  Indians,  we  can  purchase  it  as 
well  from  the  Africans — the  latter  are,  to  say  the  least,  as  civi- 
lized as  the  former.  And  if  we  can  extend  our  dominions  in 
our  own  neighbourhood,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  ex- 
tending them  in  a  distant  land.  In  every  case,  the  power  is 
equally  complete 5  and  the  only  question  in  relation  to  any  pur- 


170  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  [August, 

chase,  is  the  question  of  expediency — a  question  left  exclusivelv 
to  the  discretion  of  Congress. 

As  to  the  subsequent  use  of  the  territory,  the  Constitution  hae 
left  no  room  for  doubt  Or  difficulty.  In  authorizing  "the  admis- 
sion of  new  states"  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  giving  to  Congress 
on  the  other,  express  power  "to  dispose  of  and  to  make  all 
needful  rules  and  regulations  respecting  the  territory  of  the 
United  States,"  it  has  provided  for  every  emergency.  It  has 
wisely  left  it  to  the  representatives  of  the  people  to  dispose  of 
the  acquired  territory,  to  retain  it  in  its  territorial  condition,  or 
to  admit  it  into  the  Union,  as  the  general  interests  of  the  coun- 
try may  seem  to  require;  and  the  fact,  that  the  acquisition  of 
Louisiana  and  Florida  was  accompanied  by  express  stipulations, 
as  to  the  future  disposition  of  them,  is  no  evidence  that  territo- 
ries differently  situated,  may  not  be  acquired  without  any  such 
stipulations. 

The  Committee  have  done  the  Colonization  Society  injustice*, 
in  charging  them  with  having  referred  in  their  petition,  to  the 
power  of  Congress  "to  provide  for  the  common  defence,  and  to 
promote  the  general  welfare,"  as  to  "a  general  authority  bestow- 
ed upon  that  body  by  the  Constitution,  in  virtue  of  which,  the 
U.  S.  may  lawfully  acquire  distant  territory,  or  do  any  other  of 
the  acts  which  the  Society  wishes  to  be  performed."  An  exami- 
nation of  their  memorial  will  show  that  this  is  a  mistake.  The 
only  use  it  makes  of  the  expressions  referred  to,  will  be  found  in 
the  following  sentence,  near  its  close.  "The  resolutions  which 
have  been  adopted  by  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  Legisla- 
tures of  the  States,  in  favour  of  the  plan  of  colonizing  the  free 
people  of  colour,  indicate  it  as  an  object  entitled,  in  every  res- 
pect, to  the  aid  and  patronage  of  a  government,  whose  peculiar 
province  it  is,  in  the  exercise  of  its  legitimate  powers,  4to  pro- 
vide for  the  common  defence,  and  to  promote  the  general  wel- 
fare' of  the  country  over  which  it  presides."  And  will  the  hon- 
ourable Committee  deny  that  it  is  the  peculiar  province  of  Con- 
gress, in  the  exercise  of  its  legitimate  powers*  to  provide  for  the 
common  defence,  and  to  promote  the  general  welfare  of  the  na- 
tion? Are  these  important  ends  of  legislation  to  be  wholly  dis- 
regarded, even  when  they  can  be  attained  by  means  acknow 
ledged  to  be  legitimate? 


1828.  J  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  171 

In  one  respect,  we  are  aware,  that  we  shall  differ  from  the 
Committee.  We  consider  all  the  powers  conferred  on  Con- 
gress, in  the  8th  section  of  the  Constitution,  as  standing  in  the 
same  relation  to  the  preamble,  as  well  as  to  each  other.  Each 
mav  be  used  in  giving  efficacy  to  the  rest,  but  each  may  also  be 
us  1  in  accomplishing  directly  the  ends  for  which  all  are  given. . 
The  Committee,  on  the  contrary,  have  selected  the  first  and 
must  important  of  these  powers — the  power  to  raise  and  expend 
revenue — have  taken  from  it,  its  distinct  and  substantive  cha- 
racter, and  would  make  it  entirely  and  exclusively  subsidiary 
to  the  powers  that  follow  it.  Commerce  may  be  regulated,  mo- 
ley  coined,  post  offices  established,  and  war  declared,  for  any 
purpose  calculated  "'to  promote  the  common  defence  and  gene- 
ral welfare,"  while  the  power  most  especially  given  for  this  ve- 
ry purpose,  is  alone  withheld  from  a  direct  application  to  it. — 
The  treaty -making  power,  and  the  power  to  regulate  commerce, 
may,  according  to  the  Committee,  be  employed  for  the  acquisi- 
tion of  a  desirable  territory,  because  they  are  thus  accomplish- 
ing "the  general  welfare,"  for  which  they  are  given.  But  the 
money-raising  power  cannot  be  applied  directly  to  the  acquisi- 
tion of  the  very  same  territory,  although  the  fact  of  its  being 
given  for  "promoting  the  general  welfare,"  is  embodied  in  the 
very  clause  that  conveys  the  power.  If  the  reasoning  of  the 
Committee  on  this  subject,  be  correct,  it  would  follow,  that  the 
revenue  of  the  government,  although  given  'Ho  pay  the  debts," 
as  well  as  "to  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  wel- 
fare of  the  United  States,"  cannot  be  applied  to  the  discharge 
of  the  revolutionary  debt,  because,  in  this  case,  it  must  act  di- 
rectly on  its  object,  and  not  indirectly  through  the  medium  of 
any  of  the  subsequently  enumerated  powers.  But  from  a  result 
so  extravagant,  we  imagine  even  Governor  Giles  and  Professor 
Cooper  could  not  hesitate  to  revolt. 

If,  then,  we  are  correct  in  our  views  of  the  general  power  of 
the  government  over  its  revenue — and  we  are  sustained  in  them 
by  the  practice  of  every  administration,  by  decided  majorities  in 
both  branches  of  Congress,  and  by  the  voice  of  at  least  three- 
fourths  of  the  nation — there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  United 
States  may  both  provide  a  territory  for  the  reception  of  our  co- 
loured population,  and  appropriate  the  necessary  funds  for  aid- 


V7Z  Report  of  the  Lynchburg  Jinx.  Society.     [August,. 

ing  in  its  removal.  Beyond  this,  neither  we,  nor  (we  believe) 
any  others  of  the  friends  of  the  Colonization  Society  desire 
them  to  go — we  ask  the  exercise  of  no  power  calculated  to  in- 
terfere, in  the  smallest  degree,  with  either  individual  rights  or 
state  authorities — we  seek  the  removal  of  no  free  person  of  co- 
lour without  his  own  consent,  and  of  no  slave  without  the  con- 
sent of  his  master,  and  of  neither,  without  the  consent  and  co- 
operation of  the  state  in  which  he  lives.  Thus  guarded  and  thufr 
limited,  we  know  no  possible  evil  that  can  result  from  the  pro- 
posed interference  of  the  government,  but  the  expenditure  of  its 
money — and  how  far  that  will  be  an  evil,  must  depend  on  the 
value  of  the  object  to  be  accomplished,  on  its  connection  with 
the  general  interests  of  the  nation,  and  on  the  amount  of  expen- 
diture it  will  actually  involve.  But  we  have  already  trespassed 
so  far  on  the  attention  of  our  readers,  that  we  must  postpone, 
to  some  other  occasion,  the  interesting  and  extensive  inquiry 
opened  to  us  by  the  remarks  of  the  Committee  on  this  branch  of 
the  subject. 

"Report  of  tl\e  TioaYtY  of  Managexs  of  t\\e 
"L^\\e\vb\wg  Ayix..  Co\.  Society. 

The  following  Report  was  presented  by  J.  B.  Harrison,  Esq., 
of  the  Board  of  Managers,  a  few  days  since,  to  the  Lynchburg 
Society.  Expressing  as  it  does,  the  sentiments  of  a  highly  re- 
spected association  in  the  central  part  of  Virginia,  we  may  hope 
that  the  Southern  People  generally,  will  candidly  reflect  upon 
the  clear  and  cogent  arguments  so  admirably  expressed,  with 
which,  here,  the  claims  of  our  Institution  are  defended.  While 
we  must  acknowledge  ourselves  disposed  to  apply  for  aid  to  the 
National  Government,  yet  whether  such  application  is  or  is 
riot  to  be  successful,  we  look  with  the  very  able  author  of  the 
following  Report,  confidently,  for  support  to  individual  charity, 
and  the  patronage  of  the  States.  Who  can  say  what  these  may 
accomplish,  when  given  with  the  full  consent  of  all?  We  hope, 
however,  that  the  preceding  Review  of  Mr.  Tazewell's- Report 


i828.]        Report  of  the  Lijnchburg  Aux.  Society.  173 

Will  not  be  lightly  considered;  coming,  as  it  does,  from  one,  dis- 
tinguished alike  for  candid  examination  and  intellectual  vigour. 

Mr.  Harrisox,  from  the  Board,  presented  the  following-  Report: 
The  Board  would  esteem  itself  happy,  did  the  state  of  public  sentiment 
throughout  the  Union,  justify  it,  in  this  its  annual  exhibit,  in  representing 
the  prospects  of  the  Society  in  the  United  States  as  obscured  by  no  im- 
pending- cloud,  or  menaced  by  no  distant  portent.  But  we  should  be  un- 
candid  if  we  dwelt  in  vague  terms  on  the  high  motives  of  humanity  and 
patriotism  which  impel  us,  and  passed  silently  over  certain  circumstances 
materially  affecting  the  chances  of  our  success,  which  have  occurred  with- 
in the  last  year.  It  is  manifest,  too,  that  this  Auxiliary  Society,  in  the  cen- 
tre of  the  largest  of  the  slave-holding  States,  and  composed  chiefly  of  slave- 
holders, bears  a  relation  to  the  Parent  Society,  and  to  those  of  our  fellow- 
citizens  whom  we  desire  to  persuade  to  accede  to  our  plan,  essentially  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  any  Northern  branch;  for  the  operative  motives  with 
these  last  will  be  a  patriotism  more  vague,  and  a  benevolence  less  informed 
by  experience  than  our  own.  It  is  due  to  ourselves,  then,  that  we  speak 
to  justify  the  existence  of  our  own  Auxiliary  in  the  midst  of  a  community 
of  slave-holders,  and  let  us  take  it  for  our  province  to  address  persuasions, 
not  to  the  general  philanthropy  of  Americans,  but  to  the  good  sense  of  the 
SLAVE-HOLDING  STATES.  It  is  certainly  true,  that  the  aid  which  is 
to  be  most  efficient  to  our  plan,  must  come  from  the  slave-holding  states 
themselves,  and  it  will  be  vain  to  expect  success  for  a  scheme  which  is  to 
operate  chiefly  on  the  South,  if  the  South  should  be  found  decidedly  hos- 
tile to  its  endeavours.  Fully  impressed  with  this  idea,  claiming  too  to 
speak  not  unadvisedly  of  evils  of  which  we  ourselves  feel  our  individual  full 
share,  we  too  speak  as  SOUTHERN  MEN;  not  as  advocates  but  as  parties; 
not  as  uninterested  propagandists,  but  as  the  very  subjects  of  the  advice 
we  give.  It  may  be  well  to  avow  that  a  doubt  has  not  entered  the  mind  of 
the  Board,  that  if  any  people  in  the  world  have  a  right  to  speak  out  on  this 
subject,  it  is, we.    - 

The  first  matter  proper  to  allude  to,  is  the  hostility  to  the  whole  ground 
of  the  American  Colonization  Society,  exhibited  by  certain  writers  and 
speakers  in  our  sister  state  of  South  Carolina.  The  Board  cannot  but  re- 
gret that  all  these  opponents  have  presumed  to  attribute  to  the  Society  ob- 
jects which  are  not  enumerated  in  its  constitution,  and  which  have,  more- 
over, been  repeatedly  disavowed  by  formal  resolutions.  It  is  thought  not 
unfair  to  charge  oh  a  great  number  of  honourable  men,  united  in  a  body 
which  neither  desires  mystery,  nor  by  possibility  admits  of  secret  purposes 
from  the  mode  of  its  existence,  the  harboring  of  designs,  of  which  no  man 
who  proposes  to  live  in  the  country  on  which  such  experiments  are  to  be 
practised,  could  with  common  sense  desire  to  witness  the  progress.  It  is 
thought  not  unfair  to  charge  a  body  composed  in  one-half  certainly  of  slave- 
holders, with  a  deliberate  policy,  which,  to  that  half  would  be  suicidal. 


1T4  Report  of  the  Lynchburg  Aux.  Society.     [Augus% 

and  baneful  to  all  the  country;  or  else  the  malice  is  laid  on  the  non-slave- 
holding  part,  and  the  rest  are  looked  on  as  deluded  by  an  ill  disguised 
scheme,  of  fatal  tendency  Having",  before  this  time,  declared  the  true  ob- 
jects of  the  Society,  we  may  well  demand  the  grounds  on  which  any  man 
may  attribute  to  it  a  secret  purpose  to  emancipate  the  slave  property  of 
the  United  States.  Is  it  permitted  to  harbour  itself  in  the  Northern  and 
Eastern  branches  as  yet,  to  be  shortly  brought  thence  into  light  and  action? 
Those  who  think  so,  are  not  aware,  that,  of  all  parts  of  the  country,  New 
England  is  most  indifferent  to  our  plan.  Perhaps  South  Carolina  itself  has 
contributed  as  much  to  its  aid  as  Massachusetts,  the  head  of  the  Eastern 
states.  Indeed,  except  Vermont,  which  has  honourably  distinguished  it- 
self by  the  charities  of  its  citizens  to  the  Society,  there  is  no  part  of  New 
England  that  has  yet  paid  even  the  fair  tribute  of  patriotism  to  it.  In  the 
middle  and  Western  non-slave-holding  states,  where,  if  at  all,  there  exists 
any  anxiety  to  rid  us  of  our  slaves,  this  feeling  has  in  no  great  degree  asso- 
ciated itself  with  the  Society;  above  all,  it  derives  no  warrant,  but  rather 
meets  rebuke  from  that  body.  Again:  does  this  secret  purpose  exist  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Managers  at  Washington,  citizens,  let  us  not  forget,  like  our- 
selves of  a  slave-holding  district?  Or,  is  it  a  subject  of  consultation  among 
certain  persons  who  assemble  at  the  Annual  meetings?  On  this  head,  the 
Board  feels  itself  able  to  report, to  the  Society — that  a  satisfactory  answer 
may  be  given  this  day  to  our  opponents.  For  several  reasons,  the  Board 
thought  proper  to  have  a  representative  at  the  last  annual  meeting  at  Wash- 
ington, J.  B.  Harrison,  Esq.,  at  which,  also,  he  was  instructed  to  assure  the 
Society  of  resolute  co-operation,  and  cause  of  increasing  hope  in  this  part 
of  Virginia.  We  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  his  zeal  in  the  cause 
gave  him  free  admission  into  the  plans  of  the  managers,  and  attending  mem- 
bers; and  from  him  we  derive  authority  to  say,  neither  the  Managers  nor 
the  invaluable  Secretary,  Mr.  Gurley,  on  whom,  happily  for  us,  devolve 
more  immediate^  the  general  interests  of  the  Society,  nor  any  single  mem- 
ber who  spoke  more  than  his  own  isolated  opinion,  entertains  a  thought  of 
operating  through  this  Society  either  the  seduction  of  slaves,  or  the  libera- 
tion of  a  single  slave  without  the  entire  consent  of  the  master.  This  is  their 
leading  sentiment;  and,  when,  in  the  course  of  some  rhetorical  aberrations, 
a  speaker  happened  to  characterize  the  plan  as  one  of  different  intent  from 
this,  it  was  gratifying  to  the  Virginia  feelings  of  our  delegate,  that  every 
member  with  whom  he  conversed  protested  against  the  ascribing  such  a 
character  to  it.  By  this  general  expression  of  opinion  he  is  convinced  that 
he  spoke  not  unauthorizedly,  when  he  there  declared  that  the  American 
Colonization  Society  had  no  connection  in  fact  or  by  resemblance,  with 
any  Abolition  Society  in  America  or  elsewhere,  and  that  the  Society  were 
ready  then,  if  necessary,  to  pass  a  censure  on  such  Societies  in  America. 

Certainly  the  Society  cannot  justly  be  held  to  account  for  the  overheat- 
ed zeal  of  all  persons  scattered  through  the  country,  who  have  connection 


18*8.]        Report  of  the  Lynchburg  Jluoc.  Society.  175 

in  scarce  any  instance  with  it,  nor  should  very  heavy  wrath  fall  on  it  for 
permitting"  to  pass  within  its  own  halls  the  indiscretion  of  those  rhetoricians 
to  whom  a  simile  is  a  hard  temptation,  and  to  resist  an  inviting-  trope  is  a 
fortitude  for  which  the  flesh  is  quite  too  weak.     We  rely  then  with  confi- 
dence that  the  authorized  officers,   and  its  influential  members  do  with 
honesty  pursue  the  ostensible  objects  set  forth  in  the   constitutions  of  the 
Parent  and  the  Auxiliaries,  and  have  none  other  ulterior  in  view.     Were  not 
this  our  unanimous  opinion,  on  full  examination,  no  consideration,  would  in- 
duce a  single  member  of  the  Board,  and  we  venture  to  say,  of  this  Auxiliary 
itself,  to  give  it  his  co-operation.     Satisfied,  as  we  are,  that  we  are  uniting" 
with  honest  men  in  the  pursuit  of  a  great  object  of  patriotism  and  humanity, 
the  brave  and  true  men  of  Carolina   must  not  expect  us,   in  Virginia,  to 
abandon  principles  dear  to  our  hearts,  at  the  unexpected  hostility  which 
they  who  presume  to  speak  for  the  whole  South,   are  pleased  to  proclaim 
against  them.     The  elders  among-  us,  who  have  lent  their  mature  approba- 
tion to  our  plan,  are  content  to  abide  the  clamour;  and  the  young-  men  who 
have  adventured  into  this  field,   and  made  perhaps  their  first  offering-  to 
the  public  service  by  the  advocacy  of  this  cause  in  the  midst  of  slave-hold- 
ers, as  yet  see  no  reason  to  recede  from  their  ground;  nor  will  they  be  dis- 
mayed while  they  reflect  that  of  all  the  objects  of  animated  zeal  which  can 
be  pictured  to  them,  none  can  so  well  reconcile  ambition  with  a  pure  love 
of  public   utility.     As  for  such  young  men,   they  are  content  to  begin  the 
lace  of  life  in  a  community  where  they  are  aware  that  popularity  is  indeed 
a  precious  treasure,   besides  that  it  is  almost  essential  to  the  usefulness  of 
any  one,    nothing  doubting  that  they  will  finally  be  blessed  with  the  grati- 
tude of  the  Republic,  and,  by  deserving  it,  acquire  the  only  fame  which  is 
worth  having,  the  fame  that  follows.     But  the  Board  will  by  no  means  ad- 
mit that  these,  our  opponents,  speak  the  voice  of  the  whole  South.     They 
even  flatter  themselves  that  an  adversary  is  to  rise  up  to  these  champions, 
not  out  of  the  defied  and  insulted  North,  but  that  the  sensibility,  the  lofty 
spirit,  the  distrust  of  all  philanthropy,  and  the  boasted  talent  of  slave-hold- 
ing Carolina,   are  to  be  outpeered  by  the  calmer  dignity,  the  better  tem- 
pered patriotism  and  the  self-persuaded  zeal  of  slave-holding  Virginia.     In- 
deed, it  strikes  us  forcibly  that  there  is  now  and  always  has  been,  an  essen- 
tial difference  between  the  sentiment  of  Virginia  and  South  Carolina  on, 
the  whole  subject  of  slavery.     If  we  may  consider  the  author  of  an  able 
pamphlet,  by  Brutus,  as  speaking  the  voice  of  our  opponents  in  Carolina, 
we  shall  find,  by  a  close  analysis,  that  the  true  grounds  of  their  hostility 
are  1st,  an  apprehension  that  there  does  exist  in  all  the  non-slave-holaing 
states  a  rooted  design  to  abolish  slavery  among  us,  an  apprehension  which 
we  will  briefly  declare,  in  our  opinion  to  be,  to  any  great  extent,  manifest- 
ly unfounded.    In  proof  of  this,  let  them  reflect  either  on  the  declaration 
of  Mr.  Everett,  that,  in  case  of  an  insurrection  of  our  slaves,   he  and  his 
fellow  citizens  ef  Massachusetts  would  be  the  first  to  take  the  knapsack 


176  Report  of  the  Lynchburg  Aux.  Society,     [August, 

»nd  the  musket,  to  fight  for  us,  the  holy  war  of  our  deliverance:  Or,  let 
them  believe  Mr.  McDuffie,  who  declared  that  he  could  most  sincerely  tell 
them  that  there  were  not  twenty  men  in  Congress  who  would  not  vote  as 
South  Carolina  would  wish,  on  a  proposal  to  interfere,  in  any  manner,  with 
her  slaves.  Let,  then,  this  unworthy  suspicion  be  forever  dismissed. — 
2nd.  However,  they  think  it  a  full  justification  for  all  their  hostility,  that 
a  Society  dares  to  exist  which  speaks  of  slavery  at  all;  and  which,  by 
the  most  remote  implication,  can  be  shown  to  desire  the  amelioration  of 
slavery.  We,  of  Virginia,  have  never  so  much  dreaded  the  bare  hinting  at 
slavery  as  an  evil  as  to  attempt  to  suppress  the  natural  workings  of  human 
mature.  Before  the  Revolution,  we  passed  23  Acts  to  suppress  the  evil; 
all  negatived  by  the  King.  As  early  as  '76,  feeling  that  it  was  an  evil,  we 
did  not  go  into  a  corner  to  whisper  out  a  craven  humanity,  but  we  boldly 
closed  up  and  locked  forever  the  great  gate  through  which  the  pestilence 
was  to  be  perpetually  reinforced;  we  abolished  the  slave  trade.  South 
Carolina  laughed  then  at  our  fanaticism,  and  pretended  to  tremble  at  our 
pernicious  example.  Her  nerves  proved  tough  for  thirty-two  years  after 
this;  and,  up  to  the  very  last  limit  of  the  patience  of  the  other  states,  the 
slave-ship  showed  its  ill-fated  flag  in  her  harbours. 

From  a  period  as  early  as  '82,  we  permitted  any  master,  by  deed  or  will, 
to  emancipate  his  slaves;  and,  in  1806,  for  the  best  reasons,  entirely  accor- 
dant with  the  principles  of  this  Society  too,  we  added  a  clause  requiring 
such  emancipated  persons  to  depart  out  of  the  State.  Yet,  we  learn,  from 
Brutus,  that  no  slave  can  by  law  be  emancipated  in  South  Carolina  without 
a  special  act  of  the  Legislature,  and  that  the  Legislature  has,  particularly  of 
late  years,  set  its  face  against  all  emancipation.  Will  any  one,  after  this, 
seek  to  ally  the  feeling  of  Virginia  on  this  head  with  that  of  Carolina? — 
We  can  give  but  cold  applause  to  that  patriotism  which  declares  war 
against  the  most  distant  tendency — we  use  the  words  of  Brutus — "to  weak- 
en the  attachment  of  our  citizens  to  the  policy  which  is  the  life-blood  of 
Carolina,"  and  proclaims  that  domestic  servitude  is  so  essentially  interwo- 
ven with  her  prosperity,  that  for  her  own  citizens  to  speak  of  its  abolition, 
now  or  in  any  future  time,  is  to  talk  of  striking  her  out  of  political  and  civil 
existence. — ("Brutus,  page  124.  J  As  for  us,  we  mean  to  allow  no  dicta- 
tion of  the  non-slave-holders;  but,  in  bidding  them  hold  off",  we  cannot  use 
such  arguments  as  these.  God  forbid,  that  we  should  be  driven  to  incor- 
porate with  our  every -day  sentiments  of  liberty,  the  detestable  paradox 
which  those  arguments  imply.  There  are  not,  we  believe,  a  hundred  men 
in  Virginia  who  do  not  hope  their  posterity  may  one  day  find  it  fit  to  re- 
lieve themselves  of  this  curse.  We  should  be  unworthy  of  the  beautiful 
system  which  it  mars,  did  we  not  lament  its  existence,  "as  a  stain  upon  a 
vestal's  robe,  the  worse  for  what  it  soils."  With  this  sentiment  we  can  see 
in  a  Society,  which,  neither  by  remote  operation,  promotes  disaffection 
among  our  slaves,  nor  offers  to  dictate  to  us,  nothing  which  cries  aloud  fa 


1828.]        lleport  of  the  Lynchburg  Jlurt.  Society.  IT? 

the  indignation  of  virtue,  or  the  armed  defiance  of  patriotism.  Is  therfe 
danger  of  disaffection,  from  removing-  the  freed  negroes  and  offering  an 
asylum  to  such  slaves  as  their  masters  may  voluntarily  manumit?  Virginia 
will  think  not  more  than  from  her  law  permitting  emancipation  and  requir- 
ing them  to  leave  the  State  at  the  moment.  Carolina,  of  course,  thinks 
otherwise.  The  plan  is  in  principle,  as  it  was  in  fact,  Virginian;  and  ac- 
cords w  ith  every  healthy  throb  of  Virginia  feeling.  If  it  be  indeed  true, 
that  the  richest  cotton  lands  of  Carolina  can  never  be  cultivated  except  by 
slave  labour,  we  sincerely  pity  our  brethren  for  their  embarrassing  condi- 
tion; but  this,  of  itself,  puts  up  a  perpetual  barrier  between  the  interests  of 
"Virginia  and  Carolina,  which  no  attachment  for  them  can  make  us  throw 
down.  Virginia,  at  least,  has  no  physical  obstacle  which  will  decree  her 
never  to  become  a  flourishing  commonwealth  of  homogeneous  freemen  -—• 
To  return,  then,  from  these  general  Considerations,  and  taking  up  the  gen- 
oral  character  of  the  Society,  we  note  with  regret  another  turn  of  thought^ 
Which  Brutus  adopts  as  his  own.  The  Society,  says  he,  is  the  nucleus 
around  which  will  be  gathered  the  worst  elements  of  discord.  But,  for  the 
Society,  we  will  assert,  that,  neither  intending  to  excite  nor  to  encourage 
discord  itself,  if  there  arise  discord  we  shall  know  from  what  quarter  it  ari- 
ses. Proud  that  we  have  discovered  the  richest  scheme  of  patriotism  and 
kumanity  that  the  age  has  seen,  we  offer  it  to  the  world,  not  as  a  nucleus 
for  warring  elements  to  gather  around,  but  as  one  "entire  and  perfect 
chrysolite,"  which  we  have  vowed  to  keep  pure  from  the  taint  of  fanaticism, 
of  sectional  jealousy,  and  of  party  hatred.  If  there  be  faith  in  man,  or  fea- 
sibility in  any  generous  purpose,  it  shall  be  kept  to  this;  and  through  this 
will  prevail. 

The  next  matter  which  requires  mention  is  the  passage  of  resolutions  by 
the  Legislature  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  not  so  much  affecting  the 
general  merits  of  the  Society  as  the  right  of  Congress  to  afford  it  aid,  under 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States;  and  also  a  report  of  a  committee  of 
the  Senate,  takiig  the  same  scope,  never  acted  upon.  This  Auxiliary  does 
not  consider  it  a  vital  part  of  the  scheme  of  the  Society,  to  demand  aid  from 
Congress;  and  our  friends  in  other  parts  of  the  United  States  must  excuse 
Us  for  reminding  them  of  this  Doubtful,  ourselves  whether  Congress  has 
a  right  to  appropriate  money  for  this  end,  we  need  not  meet  our  opponents 
on  these  points.  We  look  for  ample  aid  from  the  treasury  of  the  States, 
and  individual  bounty;  and  would  exhort  all  of  the  Auxiliaries  to  toil  for 
kelp  through  these  channels.  Above  all,  we  entreat  Virginia  not  to  con- 
clude from  the  want  of  power  in  Congress  to  grant  money,  that  therefore 
the  Society  does  not  deserve  individual  and  even  state  patronage.  The 
perfect  logic  of  the  author  of  the  Keport  to  the  Senate  had  taught  him  that 
many  of  the  noblest  subjects  ;or  individual  enterprise,  the  advancement  of 
learning,  of  piety,  of  philanthropy  in  general,  are  wholly  beyond  the  au« 
tkority  of  Congress.      But  this  very  circumstance  lays  a  heavier  responsible 


178  Report  of  the  Lynchburg  Jiux.  Society.     [August 

litv  on  our  private  efforts.  There  is  however,  a  single  passage  at  the  close 
of  Mr  Tazewell's  report,  which  does  indeed  strike  with  no  unskilfully 
guided  weapon  at  the  very  vitals  of  the  Society.  After  cutting1  us  off  from 
any  aid  from  Congress,  he  proceeded  to  speak  of  the  Society,  thus  turned 
adrift,  and  to  show  it  unworthy  of  any  other  aid.  It  is  charged  on  us  that 
this  is  a  self-created  Society,  whose  plans  are  connected  with  the  action  of 
the  government,  and  therefore  to  be  looked  at  with  suspicion  and  distrust. 
Is  it,  then,  true  that  a  government  of  limited  powers,  stretching  its  authori- 
ty over  scarcely  any  of  the  vital  influences  of  the  community,  has  a  just 
right  by  inuendo,  to  discourage  the  formation  of  associations  intended  to 
take  charge  of  those  vital  influences  >  Is  it  not  unreasonable  that  that 
which  the  government  will  not  do,  and  individuals  cannot,  should  be  dis- 
couraged when  attempted  by  a  union  of  many  individuals?  But,  further, 
shoull  such  an  association  even  petition  Congress  for  aid,  can  patriotic 
statesmen  impose  other  conditions  on  them,  than  that  they  should  be  re- 
spectful, peaceable  and  temperate?  Nay,  would  it  not  follow,  from  this, 
that  no  self-created  Society  should  be  allowed  to  petition  any  State  Legis- 
lature? That  which  is  wise,  humane  and  patriotic,  the  people  begin  at 
their  firesides;  and,  if  they  desire  it  much,  they  will  unite  their  scattered 
strength  into  one  body.  This  is  the  inevitable  succession  of  popular  anxie- 
ty, and  he  who  asks  that  the  government  should  look  with  distrust  on  that 
which  does  not  begin  with  itself,  asks  for  stagnation  in  the  fountains  of  the 
public  reservoir.  Self-created  societies  would,  therefore,  be  dangerous  not 
only  to  Congress,  but  to  the  States,  and,  by  deduction,  to  the  people  them- 
selves, where  they  solicit  individual  aid  from  the  people.  But  it  is  mani- 
fest that  government  in  America  is  not  such  a  machine  of  all  work  as  to 
have  a  monopoly  of  public  feeling  and  interest.  There  are  some  subjects 
wholly  within  the  cognizance  of  Congress  which  it  would  be  mischievous 
for  bodies  of  men  to  presume  to  control,  though  even  this  would  not  ap- 
ply to  all  cases  so  within  that  cognizance.  But  it  is  indolent  logic,  and 
worse  humanity,  to  indict  all  self-created  Societies  having  any  reference  to 
the  action  of  the  government,  because  certain  kinds  of  them  have  been 
justly  condemned  by  Washington,  and  others  by  Jefferson.  Just  judg- 
ments of  conviction  or  acquittal  lie  in  particulars  only.  Now,  could  the  ob- 
jects of  this  Society  be  put  in  progress  by  insulated  individuals,  without 
the  fostering  care  of  a  permanent  Board  of  Control >  After  doing  much 
for  themselves,  they  ask  Congress  to  help;  thinking  it  not  foreign  to  their 
jurisdiction,  though  not  belonging  to  Congress  as  a  subject  of  necessary 
legislation.  They  do  this  peaceably  and  respectfully.  Other  cases  prove 
only  themselves.  Let  the  world  judge  of  this  case  by  itself,  if  the  bare 
fact  of  its  being  a  self-created  Society  is  enough  to  condemn  it. 

Is  not  the  Board,  then,  justifiable,  at  the  close  of  the  third  year  of  you* 
existence,  in  urging  you  to  go  on  in  your  great  work,  and  in  saying  to  you, 
that  thus  far,  all  is  well.     "We  shall  succeed;  the  South  will  not  all  refuse  tt 


1828.]  Slave  Trade.  17$ 

bear  its  part  in  the  cause?  We  warn  you  to  beware  of  fulfilling'  the  pre- 
diction of  a  sage  Senator  of  South  Carolina,  that,  "some  how,  benevolence 
seemed  to  be  an  unsuccessful  business  "  It  has  been  indeed  true  in  the 
Southern  States.  Other  things  succeed  better;  ambition  and  avarice  come 
©fa  healthy  stock,  and  they  last  their  generation.  Unmixed  benevolence 
no  one  would  expect  to  exist  long  in  these  States;  but  we  trust,  that  by  ad- 
ding to  our  benevolence  no  small  quantity  of  self-interest,  and  some  poli- 
tics, this  scheme  gives  vital  heat  enough  to  the  philanthropy  of  the  Virgi- 
nia friends  of  Colonization,  to  prolong  it  beyond  the  ordinary  duration  of 
public  schemes  among  us 

All  which  is  respectfully  submitted, 

Slave,  T^aAc, 

We  regret  to  say,  that  this  trade  appears  to  be  carried  on  to 
a  great  extent  and  with  circumstances  of  the  most  revolting  cru- 
elty.    Many  details  on  this  subject  are  given  in  the  last  Report 
of  the  African  Institution.     The  La  Perle,  Gibbin,  master,  hav- 
ing landed  part  of  a  cargo  of  250  slaves  at  Guadaloupe,  was  pur- 
sued by  an  armed  French  Cutter,    and  to  avoid  detection  threw 
the  remainder  [65)  overboard,   and  they  all  perished.     Several 
of  the  bodies  of  the  murdered  negroes  being  washed  ashore,  some 
slight  inquiries  were  made,  but  the  authors  of  this  inhuman  mur- 
der,  were  not  apprehended,  and  they  have  not  yet  been  brought 
to  any  account  for  it.     The  French  slave-trade,  notwithstanding 
the  efforts  of  the  government,   appears  to  be  undiminished.     The 
number  of  Spanish  vessels  employed  in  the  trade  is  immense, 
and  as  the  treaty  between  England  and  Spain  only  permits  the 
seizure  of  vessels  having  slaves  actually  onboard,  many  of  these 
watch  their  opportunity  on  the  coast,  run  in,  and  receive  all 
their  slaves  on  board  in  a  single  day.      The  ravages  of  disease, 
in  consequence  of  the  crowded  state  of  these  vessels,  and  the 
scarcity  and  wretched  quality  of  the  provisions  served  to  the 
victims,  are  considered  so  inseparable  from  the  trade,  that  they 
excite  little  notice.     One  instance  is  mentioned  of  a  Spanish 
Schooner,  of  60  tons  burthen,  into  which,  221  slaves  were  crowd- 
ed,  their  only  provision  being  bad  Yams  and  putrid  water.— 
Thirty  died  on  the  passage,  and  the  rest  were  landed  in  a  mise- 


18a  Slave  Trade'.  [August 

Table  state  of  weakness  and  emaciation.  The  Spanish  slavers 
act  frequently  as  pirates,  sometimes  even  preying  upon  their 
brethren  in  iniquity.  When  they  seize  a  slaver  of  inferior  force* 
they  generally  murder  the  whites,  and  take  possession  of  the 
living  cargo.  The  slave  trade  is  carried  on  unblushingly  at  Ha- 
vana- In  one  instance  when  a  British  cruiser  had  chased  a 
slave  vessel,  the  Minerva,  into  port,  the  slaves  were  landed, 
while  the  government  were  pretending  to  inquire  into  the  com* 
plaint  of  the  British  Officer  who  was  sent  on  shore,  and  at  this 
the  authorities  connived  and  screened  the  delinquents.  On 
searching  a  steam  vessel  bound  to  Matanzas,  however,  this  offi- 
cer found  14  of  the  negroes  stowed  away  between  the  bulk-head- 
ing, which  separated  the  boilers  from  the  vessel's  side,  and  ex- 
posed to  the  intense  heat  produced  by  the  lighted  stoves!  Six 
females  were  found  concealed  under  a  coil  of  ropes  and  a  haw- 
ser. These  wretched  beings  thought  at  first  that  they  were 
doomed  to  death,  but  on  being  undeceived  their  joy  was  exces- 
sive. To  the  Brazils  the  slave  trade  is  carried  on  to  a  great 
extent,  and  with  circumstances  of  the  most  odious  barbarity. — 
The  Intrepida,  of  100  tons  burden,  when  captured,  was  found 
to  contain  310  slaves,  in  a  state  of  great  wretchedness  and  ema- 
ciation; seventy  of  them  had  died  in  a  passage  of  46  days.— 
Another,  the  Invincible,  contained  446  slaves,  so  crowded  to- 
gether, that  it  was  impossible  to  separate  the  sick  from  the 
healthy,  or  the  dying  from  the  dead;  their  provisions  and  water 
were  of  the  worst  kind;  the  filth  and  stench  was  beyond  descrip- 
tion; and  the  dysentery,  opthalmia,  and  scurvy,  carried  off  186 
of  these  poor  wretches  in  less  than  GO.days. 

It  is  consoling  to  think,  that  according  to  a  treaty  signed  with 
Great  Britain,  in  March  1827,  the  Brazilian  slave-trade  is  to 
cease  within  three  years,  from  that  period.  These  facts  are 
stated  in  an  abstract  of  the  African  Institution's  Report,  in  the 
Liverpool  Mercury,  which  is  concluded  by  the  following  dread- 
ful picture  of  cruelty  and  suffering. 

In  a  Spanish  slave  Schooner,  boarded  by  H.  M.  S.  Aurora, 
after  a  diligent  search,  240  slaves  were  found  concealed.  They 
were  in  the  most  dreadful  state  imaginable.  Having  in  their 
confined  situation  disease  and  starvation  to  contend  with  at  once, 
The  vessel  had  been  at  sea  forty-seven  days,  from  the  coast  oJ 


1828.]  Slave  Trade.  1»X 

Guinea;  and,  when  captured,  had  only  one  day's  provision  on 
board.  A  Yam  being  thrown  among  the  wretched  negroes,  they 
fought  for  it  like  hungry  dogs. 

We  will  here  add  a  few  facts  which  show  (if  any  thing  can 
show,)  more  strongly  the  atrocities  and  horrors  of  this  trade. — 
In  1818,  22,231  slaves,  were  embarked  on  the  coast  of  Africa 
for  Rio  de  Janiero;  of  which  number  19,802  only  arrived  at  that 
place,  2,429  having  died  on  the  passage.  One  vessel  lost  161 
out  of  421;  another,  229  out  of  659;  a  third,  238  out  of  464.-— 
By  an  official  document  from  Rio  de  Janiero,  it  appears  that  the 
following  importations  of  slaves  were  made  into  that  port  in 
1826  and  1827. 

1826,  landed  alive,  35,966 died  on  the  passage  1,905 

1827,  landed  alive,  41,384 died  on  the  passage  1,643 

Thus  it  would  seem,   (says  the  Boston  Gazette,)  that  to  only 

one  port  in  the  Brazils,  and  in  the  course  of  two  years,  seventy- 
seven  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  human  beings  were  trans- 
ported from  their  own  country,  and  placed  in  a  state  of  slavery. 
At  Bahia,  Pernambuco,  and  other  ports  in  that  kingdom,  there 
is  also  an  active  commerce  carried  on  with  the  coast  of  Africa 
for  slaves,  as  well  as  in  some  of  the  French  and  other  West  In- 
dia Islands;  and  we  apprehend  there  never  will  bean  extinction 
of  this  detestable  traffic,  until  more  efficient  means  are  adopted 
by  this  country  and  Great  Britain  for  its  suppression. 

During  a  voyage  to  Africa  in  a  vessel  belonging  to  the  United 
States,  a  few  years  ago,  the  writer  conversed  with  several  of  the 
older  seamen,  who  had  at  some  period  of  their  lives  been  em- 
ployed on  board  of  slave  ships.  The  following  is  an  extract 
from  the  writer's  note  book  at  that  time. 

"Our  steward  says,  he  has  been  to  Africa  five  times 
to  obtain  slaves.  On  one  occasion,  when  an  insurrection 
was  apprehended,  two  hundred  of  the  wretched  beings  were  shot 
dead.  Forty  was  about  the  number  of  deaths,  which  took  place 
each  voyage,  except  the  last,  when  the  loss  was  but  ten;  the 
number  purchased  each  time  being  about  four  hundred.  Another 
sailor,  who  has  twice  visited  the  African  coast  for  slaves,  states 
that  from  about  800,  the  cargo  each  time,  113  died  during  one 
voyage,  and  eighty-seven  during  another.  The  Boatswain  in- 
forms me,  that  when  he  went  to  the  Congo  for  slaves,  out  of 


182  Valuable  Thoughts. — Extracts,  Sfc.       [August, 

400,  the  number  taken  on  board,  80  died  on  the  passage."—- 
These  extracts  will,  we  presume,  give  a  correct  idea  of  the 
ordinary  mortality  among  the  slaves  during  what  is  termed  the 
middle  passage,  that  is,  while  crossing  the  Atlantic.  And  shall 
Christian  nations  bear  the  reproach  of  this  traffic  longer?  Can 
nothing  more  be  done  to  save  the  thousands,  men  like  ourselves^ 
who  are  thus  perishing  in  agony? 

YaVuable  T\\o\\g\\ts. 

We  take  the  liberty  to  recommend  the  following  extract  to 
those  who  are  doubtful  and  hesitating,  in  regard  to  our  great  de- 
sign. 

One  thing  is  certain,  that  the  greatest  of  all  obstacles  to  the  improvement  of 
the  world,  is  that  prevailing1  belief  of  its  improbability,  which  damps  the 
exertions  of  so  many  individuals;  and  that,  in  proportion  as  the  contrary 
opinion  becomes  general,  it  realizes  the  event  which  it  leads  us  to  antici- 
pate. Surely  if  any  thing  can  have  a  tendency  to  call  forth  in  the  public 
service  the  exertions  of  individuals,  it  must  be  an  idea  of  the  magnitude  of 
that  work  in  which  they  are  conspiring,  and  a  belief  of  the  permanence  of 
those  benefits  which  they  confer  on  mankind,  by  every  attempt  to  inform 
and  enlighten  them.  As  in  ancient  Rome,  therefore,  it  was  regarded  as 
the  mark  of  a  good  citizen,  never  to  despair  of  the  fortunes  of  the  republic: 
so  the  good  citizen  of  the  world,  whatever  may"  be  the  political  aspect  of 
his  own  times,  will  never  despair  of  the  fortunes  of  the  human  race;  but 
w W  act  upon  the  conviction,  that  prejudice,  slavery,  and  corruption,  must 
gradually  give  way  to  truth,  liberty,  and  virtue;  and  that  in  the  moral  world, 
as  well  as  in  the  material,  the  farther  our  observations  extend,  and  the 
longer  they  are  continued,  the  more  we  shall  perceive  of  order  and  of  be- 
nevolent design  in  the  universe. — [Dugald  Stewart. 

From  the  Colonial  Journal,  transmitted  by  Rev,  Lott  Cary. 

The  Colonial  Agent,  J.  Ashmun,  Esq.,  went  on  board  the 
brig  Doris,  March  26th,  1828,  escorted  by  three  companies  of  the 


1828.]        Extracts  from  Rev.  Lott  Cary's  Journal         183 

military,  and  when  taking  leave  he  delivered  a  short  address, 
which  was  truly  affecting;  never,  I  suppose,  were  greater  tokens 
of  respect  shown  by  any  community  on  taking  leave  of  their 
kead.  Nearly  the  whole  (at  least  two-thirds)  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Monrovia,  men,  women  and  children  were  out  on  this  occa- 
sion, and  nearly  all  parted  from  him  with  tears,  and  in  my 
opinion,  the  hope  of  his  return  in  a  few  months,  alone  enabled 
them  to  give  him  up.  He  is  indeed  dear  to  this  people,  and  it 
will  be  a  joyful  day  when  we  are  permitted  again  to  see  him. — 
He  has  left  a  written  address,  which  contains  valuable  admoni- 
tions to  Officers,  Civil,  Military,  and  Religious.  The  Brig 
-sailed  on  the  27th.     May  she  have  a  prosperous  voyage. 

Thursday,  March  27th. 

Feeling  very  sensibly  my  incompetency  to  enter  upon  the  duties 
of  my  office,  without  first  making  all  the  Officers  of  the  Colony 
well  acquainted  with  the  principal  objects  which  should  engage 
our  attention,  I  invited  them  to  meet  at  the  Agency  House  on  the 
27th,  at  9  o'clock,  which  was  punctually  attended  to;  and  I 
then  read  all  the  instructions  left  by  Mr.  Ashmun  without  re- 
serve, and  requested  their  co-operation.  I  stated  that  it  would 
be  our  first  object  to  put  the  Jail  in  complete  order,  secondly  to 
have  our  guns  and  armaments  in  a  proper  state,  and  thirdly  to 
get  the  new  settlers  located  on  their  lands,  as  this  was  a  very 
important  item  in  my  instructions.  This  explanation  will,  I 
think,  have  a  good  effect;  as  by  it  the  effective  part  of  the  Colo- 
ny is  put  in  possession  of  the  most  important  objects  of  our  pre- 
sent pursuit;  and  I  trust  through  the  blessing  of  the  great  Ruler 
of  events,  we  shall  be  able  to  realize  all  the  expectations  of  Mr. 
Ashmun,  and  render  entire  satisfaction  to  the  Board  of  Mana- 
gers, if  they  can  reconcile  themselves  to  the  necessary  expenses. 

March  29th. 
From  a  note  received  from  Mr.  James,  dated  Millsburg,  I 
learn  that  he  has  visited  King  Boatswain,  and  that  the  new  road 
from  Boatswain's  to  Millsburg  will  shortly  be  commenced. — 
The  Headmen  expect,  however,  to  be  paid  for  opening  the  road. 
Messrs.  James  and  Cook,  who  came  down  this  evening,  state, 
that  the  Millsburg  Factory  will  be  ready  in  a  few  days  for  the 


l-84        Extracts  from  Rev.  Lolt  Cartas  Journal     [August 

reception  of  goods,  and  wished  consignments  might  be  made 
early.  But  as  I  had  been  on  the  27th  paying  off*  the  kings  to- 
wards the  Millsburg  lands,  and  found  that  120  bars  came  so  far 
/fhort  of  satisfying  them,  I  thought  best  to  see  them  together  be- 
fore I  should  attempt  to  make  any  consignments  to  that  place. 

[The  following  is  a  copy  of  a  deed  between  Lott  Cary,  acting 
in  behalf  of  the  American  Colonization  Society,  on  the  one  part; 
and  the  after  mentioned  Kings,  of  the  other  part.] 

Know  all  men  by  these  presents:  That  we,  Old  King  Peter, 
and  King  Governor,  King  James,  and  King  Long  Peter,  do  on 
this  fourth  day  of  April,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  twenty-eight,  grant  unto  Lott  Cary,  acting 
Agent  of  the  Colony  of  Liberia  in  behalf  of  the  American  Colo- 
nization Society,  to  wit: 

All  that  tract  of  Land  on  the  north  side  of  St.  Paul's  river,  be- 
ginning at  King  James'  line  below  the  establishment  called 
Millsburg  Settlement,  and  we  the  Kings  as  aforesaid  do  bargain, 
sell,  and  grant,  unto  the  said  Lott  Cary,  acting  in  behalf  of  the 
American  Colonization  Society,  all  the  aforesaid  tract  of  Land* 
situated  and  bounded  as  follows:  by  the  St.  Paul's  river  on  the 
south,  and  thence  running  an  east  northeast  direction  up  the  St* 
Paul's  river,  as  far  as  he,  the  said  Lott  Cary,  or  his  successor 
in  the  Agency,  or  civil  Authority  of  the  Colony  of  Liberia, 
shall  think  proper  to  take  up  and  occupy;  and  bounded  on  the 
west  by  King  Jimmey's,  and  running  thence  a  north  direction 
as  far  as  our  power  or  influence  extends.  We  do  on  this  day 
ano  date,  grant  as  aforesaid  for  the  consideration  (here  follow 
the  articles  to  be  given  in  payment);  and  will  forever  defend 
the  same  against  all  claims  whatsoever. 

In  witness  whereof  we  set  our  hands  and  names: 

OLD  x  KING  PETER, 
LONG  *  KING  PETER. 
KING  *  GOVERNOR, 
KING  *  JAMES. 
Signed  in  the  presence  of, 

Elijah  Johnson, 
Frederick  James, 
Daniel  George. 


1823.^     Auxilianj  Societies. — Remarkable  Liberality,     185 
AuxWiaY^  Societies. 

We  have  recently  heard  of  the  formation  of  several  Auxiliary 
Societies  in  the  western  part  of  the  State  of  Pennsylvania  and 
in  New  York,  but  unfortunately  have  not  yet  received  lists  of 
their  Officers.  We  hope  the  Secretaries  of  these  Societies  will 
soon  give  us  some  account  of  them.  The  following  is  the  only 
one  which  has  come  to  hand. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  citizens  of  the  village  of  Fredonia,  pufsuant  to  pub- 
lic notice,   the  Rev.  Robert  Henry,   the  American  Colonization  Society's 
Agent,  presented  the  form  of  a  Constitution  for  an  Aux  Society,  which  was 
adopted,  and  the  following-  gentlemen  were  chosen  Officers  of  the  Society. 
John  Crane,  Esq.,  President. 
Vice-Presidents. 

Gen.  Leveret  Barker,  James  Mullett,  Esq. 

Managers. 
Col.  James  McMahan,  Abijah  Young, 

Edward  H.  Mulford. 
Austin  Smith,  Treasurer.  Philip  Wells,  Secretary. 

"We  announce  with  great  pleasure  the  fact,  that  a  gentleman 
in  Georgia,  has  recently  sought  aid  from  the  Society,  to  remove 
the  whole  number  of  his  slaves  (43),  that  they  may  share  the 
blessings  of  freedom  in  Liberia.  The  act  of  giving  liberty  to 
so  large  a  number,  will,  we  are  informed,  deprive  this  individual 
•f  the  greater  part  of  his  fortune,  and  leave  him  utterly  unable 
to  do  much  towards  their  transportation.  The  Society,  there- 
fore, in  assuming  the  responsibility  of  transferring  these  people 
of  colour  to  the  Colony,  look  confidently  for  the  means  to  those 
generous  Friends,  (and  we  doubt  not  that  there  are  many  such) 
who  can  feel  the  full  force  of  the  appeal  which  this  simple  state- 
ment must  make  to  every  humane  and  Christian  mind. 

S\\^scYiY*tion  cm  the  ^\an  of  G.  Smith,  Tisq. 

The  object  of  this  gentleman,  it  will  be  recollected,  is  to  secure 

100,000  dollars  to  the  Society  in  ten  years,  by  subscriptions  of 

24 


186  Mission  School. — Mr.  Ashmun.  [August, 

1000  dollars,  each  subscriber  to  pay  100  annually  for  the  tern, 
we  have  stated.  To  the  number  of  those  who  have  been  men- 
tioned in  our  previous  numbers,  as  associates  in  this  admirable 
purpose,  must  now  be  added  the  name  of  E.  F.  Backus,  Esq. 
of  New  Haven,  Connecticut,  whose  first  payment  will  be  found 
acknowledged  in  our  list  of  donations.  The  liberality  in  which 
this  plan  originated,  and  with  which  it  has  thus  far  been  sup- 
ported, is  worthy  of  all  praise;  and  we  may  at  least  hope,  that 
a  sufficient  number  will  be  found  to  complete  its  execution* 

African  ^Mission  Sc\\oo\  Society, 

We  observe  with  great  pleasure  that  an  Institution  with  thi? 
name  was  established  at  Hartford,  Connecticut,  on  the  7th  inst. 
We  regret  that  the  very  interesting  account  of  the  proceedings 
on  this  occasion,  must  be  deferred  until  our  next  number.  We 
can  only  say,  that  it  appears  to  have  arisen  under  the  fairest 
auspices,  and  that  among  its  officers,  we  notice  many  of  the 
most  distinguished  members  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  in  our 
countrr. 


— ">»©@  9<t»-  ■ 


&r$TOftfi  of  Mr.  &s\\m\m. 

The  Colonial  Agent  arrived  at  New  Haven,  Connecticut,   al 
ter  a  protracted  passage  from  St.  Bartholomews,  on  the  10th  in- 
stant.    We  are  distressed  to  state,  that  our  hopes  of  his  speedy 
convalescence  are  much  darkened;   and  indeed,  that  he  has  suf- 
fered a  very  considerable  diminution  of  strength  since  he  disem- 
barked.    Wonderfully  has  he  been  defended  in  times  past;  the 
shield  of  a  good  Providence  has  covered  him  amidst  a  thousand 
dangers:  and  we  still  would  hope  for  the  Divine  interposition  in 
his  behalf,  and  that  many  years  will  be  yet  added  to  his  invalua- 
ble life.     Let  then  all  who  rejoice  in  the  great  and  benevolent 
work,  to  which  this  life  has  been  so  ably  and  faithfully  devoted,  x 
earnestly  implore  of  Almighty  God,   that  it  may  be  prolonged, 
and  that  the  success  of  his  past  exertions,   may  prove  but  the 
first  fruits  of  good  to  be  realized  from  his  future  labours. 


1228.]  Note. — Notice.  1.87 


It  having  been  suggested,  that  possibly  the  remarks  in  our  May 
number  of  the  Repository,  page  82,  in  which  we  mention  as  one 
of  the  causes  of  the  mortality  among  the  Emigrants  by  the  Do- 
ris, "that  symptoms  of  the  scurvy  had  during  the  voyage  ap- 
peared among  the  emigrants,"  may  be  misinterpreted  as  casting 
censure  upon  the  officers  of  that  vessel ;  we  beg  leave  to  state 
that  the  Managers  never  doubted  for  a  moment,  that  every  thing 
possible  was  done  both  by  Captain  Matthews  and  the  other  offir 
cers,  to  secure  the  comfort  and  health  of  the  emigrants. 


Notice. 

The  Board  of  Managers  of  the  A.  Colonization  Society,  pror 
pose  to  send  a  vessel,  with  a  select  company  of  emigrants  to  Li- 
beria, in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  autumn;  (provided  their  ex- 
pectations in  regard  to  funds  shall  not  be  disappointed,)  and  free 
persons  of  colour  disposed  to  emigrate,  are  hereby  invited  to 
send  in  their  names,  with  testimonials  of  a  fair  character  and  in- 
dustrious habits.  The  Colony  is  now  believed  to  be  established 
on  sure  foundations,  and  the  advantages  which  it  offers  to.  every 
intelligent  and  enterprising  man  of  colour,  constitute  motives 
for  emigration  too  numerous  and  too  great  to  be  easily  resisted. 

Each  settler  soon  after  his  arrival,  receives  a  small  plantation, 
(to  which  some  addition  is  made,  in  case  he  has  a  wife  and  chil- 
dren) and  to  this  tract,  if  cleared  and  cultivated  within  two 
years,  he  obtains  a  title  in  fee  simple.  This  plantation  admits 
of  enlargement,  at  a  very  small  expense.  The  frugal  and  in- 
dustrious are  assisted  for  some  months  after  their  arrival  if  their 
necessities  require  it. 

Considering  theu,  the  many  inducements  for  emigration;  the 
large  number  of  applicants;  the  reduced  price  for  a  passage;  and 
the  very  limited  resources  of  the  Society;  the  Board  of  Managers 
deem  it  reasonable  to  expect,  that,  in  all  cases  where  it  is  pos- 
sible, those  who  wish  to  remove  will  defray  in  whole  or  in  part, 


1*88  Notice.  [August, 

the  cost  of  their  transportation,  (the  whole  amount  not  to  exceed 
g25  for  an  adult,  and  half  price  for  each  child  under  12)  and  to 
such  as  will  do  this,  other  things  being  equal,  the  Managers  feel 
bound  to  say,  the  preference  will  be  given. 

Convinced  as  are  the  Managers,  that  in  ordinary  circumstan- 
ces, every  respectable  free  man  of  colour  might  easily  obtain 
the  means  of  removal  to  the  Colony,  they  deem  it  right  to  urge 
them  to  look  to  their  unassisted  efforts,  for  securing  to  them- 
selves a  share  in  the  privileges  of  the  settlement  in  Liberia. — 
What  these  privileges  are,  the  Colonists  themselves  shall  state, 
in  the  language  of  their  late  address.  "Our  constitution  secures 
to  us,  so  far  as  our  condition  allows,  all  the  rights  and  privileges 
enjoyed  by  the  citizens  of  the  United  States;  and  these  rights 
and  these  privileges  are  ours.  We  are  proprietors  of  the  soil 
we  live  on;  and  possess  the  rights  of  freeholders.  Our  suffra- 
ges, and  what  is  of  more  importance,  our  sentiments  and  opin- 
ions have  their  due  weight  in  the  government  we  live  under — 
our  laws  are  altogether  our  own;  they  grew  out  of  our  circum- 
stances; are  framed  for  our  exclusive  benefit,  and  administered 
by  officers  of  our  own  appointment,  or  such  as  possess  our  confi- 
dence. We  have  a  judiciary  from  among  ourselves;  we  serve 
as  jurors  in  the  trial  of  others;  and  are  liable  to  be  tried  only  by 
juries  of  our  fellow-citizens,  ourselves.  We  have  all  which  is 
meant  by  liberty  of  conscience.  The  time  and  mode  of  worship- 
ping God,  as  prescribed  us  in  his  word,  and  dictated  by  our 
conscience,  we  are  not  only  free  to  follow,  but  are  protected  in 
following.  Forming  a  community  of  our  own,  in  the  land  of  our 
forefathers;  having  the  commerce  and  soil  and  resources  of  the 
country  at  our  disposal;  we  know  nothing  of  that  debasing  infe- 
riority, with  which  our  very  colour  stamped  us  in  America; 
there  is  nothing  here  to  create  the  feeling  on  our  part — nothing 
to  cherish  the  feeling  of  superiority  in  the  minds  of  foreigners 
who  visit  us.  It  is  this  moral  emancipation,  this  liberation  of 
the  mind  from  worse  than  iron  fetters,  that  repays  us,  ten 
thousand  times  over,  for  all  that  it  has  cost  us.  We  do  not  ex- 
pect to  remain  stationary.  We  feel  ourselves,  for  the  first 
time,  in  a  state  to  improve  both  our  minds  and  our  circumstan- 
ces." 

Jkit  whije  we  trust  that  many  free  men  of  colour  may  rely  up 


1828.]  Africa.  189 

on  their  own  exertions  for  the  means  of  emigration,  we  must  say 
to  our  friends,  that  our  pecuniary  necessities  are  at  present, 
great;  and  that  without  their  prompt  and  liberal  contributions, 
much  which  is  urgently  demanded  must  be  left  undone  for  our 
cause.  Auxiliary  Societies  and  Agents  are  respectfully  request- 
ed to  remit  such  sums  as  they  may  have,  or  may  obtain,  without 
delay,  as  this  will  greatly  facilitate  the  operations  of  the  Mana- 
gers in  regard  to  their  intended  expedition. 

By  TVilliam  B.  Tappan. 

While  on  the  distant  Hindoo  shore 

Messiah's  cross  is  reared, 
While  Pagan  votaries  bow  no  more 

With  idol  blood  besmeared — 

While  Palestine  again  doth  hear 

The  Gospel's  joyful  sound, 
While  Islam's  crescents  disappear 

Prom  Calvary's  holy  ground — 

Say  shall  not  Afric's  fated  land 

With  news  of  gTace  be  blest } 
Say  shall  not  Ethiopia's  band, 

Enjoy  the  promised  rest? 

Ye  herald's  of  a  Saviour's  love 

To  Afric's  regions  fly; 
O  haste,  and  let  compassion  move 

For  million's  doomed  to  die. 

Blessed  Jesus,  who  for  these  hast  bled^ 

Wilt  thou  the  captives  free; 
And  Ethiopia,  too,  shall  spread 

Her  ransomed  hands  to  thee. 


190  Contributions,  |  August, 

C  otvtvibwtio  \\s 

To  the  Jl.  C.    Society,  from  23 d  July  to  19th  August,  1828. 

[It  has  been  suggested  that  it  might  be  well  to  publish  the  Fourth  of  Ju- 
ly Collections  separately,  so  that  their*mount  can  be  readily  ascertained; 
which  we  do  in  the  present  number.  We  ought  here  to  say,  that  the 
amount  from  this  source,  acknowledged  in  our  last  Number,  was  §619  31] 

Collections  in  Rev.  Dr.  Laurie's  Church,  Washington,   $20  68 

Do.         in  Patucket,  R.  I.,  per  Rev.  Otis  Thompson,  3 

Do.        by  Rev.  D.  Denny,  Chambersburg,  Pa., 15 

Do.         in  College  Chapel,   Amherst,   Mass.  per  Rev.  Doctor 

Humphreys,   31 

Do.         in  Presbyterian  Church,  Hillsborough,  N.  C 13 

Do.         at  Cedar  Spring,  Centre  co.  Pa.   13 

Do.         in  Presbyterian  Church,  Bellefonte,  Pa.  per  Rev.  Js. 

Linn, $ 

Do.         in  Rev.  Dr.  Fisk's  Church,  Goshen,  New  York,  13 

Do.         in  Olive  Street  Baptist  Church,  N.  Y.  to  constitute  Rev. 

S.  II.  Cone  a  life  member,    30 

Do.         in  Nelson,  Portage  county,  Ohio,  4th  July  1827,  ....         1  12 

Do.  ditto  ditto     1828,   3  38 

Do.         in  South  Dutch  Church,  Albany,  N.  Y 51  92 

Do.  from  Baptist  Society,  Charleston,  Montg'y.  co.  N.  Y.  3 
Do.         of  Congregational  Church,   and  Society  in  Ellsworth 

and  Surry,  Maine,  per  Rev.  Peter  Nourse, 10 

Do.         in  Presbyterian  Church,   Prattsborough,   Steuben  co. 

N.  Y.  per  James  Hotchkin,  14 

Do.  in  Rev.  D.  Field's  Congregation,  Stockbridge,  Mass.  20 
Do.  in  Rev.  R.  Steel's  Congre'n.,  Abington,  near  Phila.  .  6 
Do.  by  Rev  Luke  Humphrey,  Burton,  Granger  co.  N.  Y.  5 
Do.         in  Baptist  and  Presbyterian  Churches,   and  Hamilton 

and  vicinity,  N.  Y.  per  Rev.  Pinder Field,  thro'  C.  Porter,       13 
Do.        in  Foundery  Methodist  Church,  Washington,  per  Rev. 

Mr.  Davis,  23  60 

Do.         in  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  Alexandria,  per  Rev. 

J.  Guest,  7  30 

From  Joseph  Nourse,  Esq.,  for  the  following  collections  by  Rev. 
Dr.  McCleland,  near  Harrodsburg,  Pa.  viz. 

From  New  Providence  Congregation,   $14  54- 

From  Harrodsburg  do 16  75 

31  29 

Carried  forward,    $336  29 


1828.]  Contributions.  191 

Brought  forward,      $336  19 
Through  Gerard  Ralston,  Esq.  Treasurer  of  Pen.  Col.  Society,  viz. 
Collection  in  the  6th  Presbyterian  Church  in  Phila.  $23  30 

Do.  3d  do 21  70 

Do.        Christ  Church,  Episcopal,  do 36  56 

Do.         St.  Peter's,        do.  do 28  77 

Do.         St.  Andrew's,     do.  do 30  08 

Do.         St.  James',         do.  do 44  1Q 

Do.        2d  Presbyterian  Church  in  do 20  50 

Do.         1st  Northern  Liberties,  28  34 

Do.         5th  in  Philadelphia,   20  78 

Do.         at  Milton,   Penn.,  per  Rev.  G.  Jenkin,       5 
Do.         at  Charlestown,  Lancaster  co.  (E   Ch.)     10 

Do.         at  Morgantown,  Berks  county, 6  50 

Sash  (R.  C)  thro'  the  Ed.  of  the  Chris.  Advocate,       5 
Collection  in  a  Society  near  Hamiltonville,  Philadel- 
phia county,  per  Mr.  J.  Buckman, 11  4£ 

Do.        in  1st  Presbyterian  Church,  Kensington,  Philad.    3  60 

295  82 

Collection  in  Presbyterian  Congregation,  Steubenville,  Ohio,   ...       11 
The  offering  of  the  little  flock  of  Rev.  James  Arbuthnot,  of  Put- 
nam, Ohio,  per  A.  Stafford,  5 

From  J.  G.  Birney,  Esq.,  of  Huntsville,  Alabama,  contributed  by 

several  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  that  place, 20 

Prom  Presbyterian  Congregation,  Mercer,  Pa.  per  T.  Templeton,       10 
"     E.  Bateman,  Esq.,  of  Cedarsville,  N.  J.  as  follows,  viz. 

Collection  in  Presbyterian  Church, -. $14  50 

Do.         Methodist        do 3  50 

18 

Collection  in  Rev.  Dr.  Balch's  Church,  Georgetown,  per  John  S. 

Nevins,  Esq 25 

Do.         in  Tabernacle  Church,  Salem,  per  Mich'l.  Shepard,  .       51 
Do.         in  Presbyterian  Church,   Cincinnati,  Ohio,   per  Rev. 

D.Root 1 1@ 

Do.        in  Greenville,  Tennessee,  Presbyterian  Church,   per 

Rev.  O.  S.  Hinckly,   11 

Do.         in  2d  Congregation  near  Ravenna,  Ohio,  per  Rev.  Mr. 

Doolittle,    8  58 

Do.         in  Presbyterian  Church,  Brownsville,  Pa 8  50 

Do.         in   Presbyterian  Congregation,  Uniontown,    Pa.    per 

Rev.  J.  H.  Agnew,   7 

Do.         in  Congregation,  Granville,  Washington  county,  N.  Y. 

per  Rev.  John  Whiton, 13 

Carried  forward,      $830  19 


J9&  "Contributions,  [August, 

Brought  forward,    $830  19 

Collection  in  Methodist  Church,  Suffolk,  Va.  per  A.  Smith,  Esq.  9 
Do.         at  a  Religious  Celebration,  Newburyport,  Mass.,  per 

Rev.  Dr.  Dana,  20  60 

Fourth  of  July  Collections,  $859  79 

Prom  the  charity  box  of  Miss  M.  F.  Turner,  Va. , 2  11 

"      Rev.  James  Boyd  of  Lovington,  Va.  for  Repository,   50 

"      Col.  Benjamin  Higley  of  Windham,  Ohio, 50 

"      Rev.  J.  Treat,  of  ditto, 2 

♦•      George  Petitt,  Esq 22  90 

rt      E.  F.  Backus,  Esq.  of  New  Haven,  Con.,  his  first  payment 

on  the  plan  of  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq., 100 

'*      Fluvanna  Aux.  Society,  Va.  by  John  B.  Magruder,  Sec,  . .  78 
■*      Robert  W.  James,  Esq   of  Charleston,  S.  C.  his  annual  sub- 
scription, per  Mr.  J .  C .  Dunn, 25 

rt      Rev.  B.  O.  Peirs,   to  make  him  a  life  member  of  the  Lex- 
ington Society, 20 

**      Aux.  Society,  Pasquotank,  N.  C.  per  J.  C.  Eringhaus,  ....  60 

"      W.  C.  Pearson  of  Edgefield,  N.  C,  per  J.  J.  Roberts, 2 

"      Adonijah  Bidwell  of  Hillsdale,  Mass.,   10 

rt      Aux.  Society  Meadville,  Pa.  per  John  P.  Davis,  Tr 12 

"      James  Kenear,  Franklin  county,  Pa 1 

"      C.  Foot,  Chatagua  county,  N.  Y. I 

"      J.  Pendergast,  ditto,   1 

«      Dr.  Bristol,  Buffalo,   1 

*'      Rev.  J.  W    Douglass,  Charlotte  county,  Va 2 

"      Repository, 23 

"      Benjamin  Brand,  Esq.,  Treasurer  Richmond  and  Manches- 
ter Colonization  Society,   106 

"      Rev.  Joseph  Checkering,  Phillipston,  Mass.,   3 

"      C.  A.  M  ,  Georgia, 5 

"      Mr.  Potter,   near  Kavenna,  Ohio,   I 

"     A  Friend,   1 

l<     Aux.  Society,  Steubenville,  Ohio,  per  D.  Moody,  Esq.,  Tr.  27 


$1416  3(4 


May  Number,  page  95,  date  the  letter  of  John  Y.  Norton,  Esq.,  Albany. 
May  1828;  page  134,  7th  line  from  top,  for  N  30°,  read  N.  30';  ditto,  page 
134,  8th  line  from  top,  for  Southwestern,  read  Southeastern. 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AS.D 


COLONIAL  JOtrRFAL. 


ac 


Vol.  IV.       SEPTEMBER,  1828.      No.  7. 


•^  Discourse  on  the  occasion  of  forming  the  African  Mission 
School  Society,  delivered  in  Christ  Church,  Hartford,  (Con.) 
Aug.  10,  1828.  By  5.  M.  Wainwright,  D.  D.,  Rector  of 
Grace  Church,  New  York. 

Address  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  African  Mission 
School  Society,  together  with  the  Record  of  the  Proceedings  at 
the  formation  of  said  Society.     Hartford:     1828. 

This  recently  organized  Institution,  the  plan  and  objects  of 
which  are  fully  developed  in  the  pamphlets  before  us,  we  regard 
as  of  special  promise  to  the  cause  of  African  improvement.  We 
have  long  been  of  the  opinion,  that  the  Colony  of  Liberia  has  no 
want  more  pressing,  than  that  of  pious  and  well  educated  men 
of  colour,  to  manage  its  schools;  call  forth  its  energies;  and  to 
elevate  the  intellectual  and  moral  character  of  the  general  mass 
of  the  community.  Individuals,  there  are,  in  our  Colony,  of 
•sterling  good  sense  and  much  practical  wisdom;  but  perhaps  not 
one  who  has  been  thoroughly  educated,  and  is  therefore  capable 
of  conducting  forward  the  youth  to  much  eminence  in  literary 
or  scientific  attain mL-nU  Schools  there  are,  to  which  all  the 
children  have  access;  and  the  fidelity  of  the  teachers  and  the 
ft 


194  African  Mission  School  Society,  [Sept. 

Utility  of  their  instructions,  are  manifest;  though  nothing  more 
is,  or  can  be  attempted,   than  to  impart  the  rudiments  of  know 
ledge. 

Nor  are  there  generally  throughout  the  Colony,  any  adequate 
means  of  religious  instruction.     In  Monrovia,    it  is  true,    there 
are  several  sensible  and  pious  preachers,   by  whose  labours  and 
example  much  good   has   been  effected,  and  under  the  Divine 
blessing,    the  moral  and   religious  character  of  the  settlement 
been  remarkably  preserved  and  improved;  yet,    the  other  villa- 
ges,   we  fear,   enjoy  but  few  advantages  for  the  acquisition  of 
Christian  knowledge.     Such  we  know   was  the  opinion  of  our 
late  lamented  Agent.  Mr.  Ashmun,    who  never  lost  an  opportu- 
nity of  urging  home  upon  his  countrymen  the  necessity  of  send- 
ing to  the  Colony  able  teachers,  and  especially  enlightened,    de- 
voted Missionaries  without  the    l"?nora!  effects"   (we  adopt  his 
own  language,)  '-of  whose  exertions,  all  that  has  been — all  that 
can  be  accomplished,    even  with  the  national  patronage — must 
still  leave  the  work  incomplete,  and  short  of  our  early  hopes. " 
But  our  departed  friend  expressed  his  feelings  on  this  subject 
in  still  stronger  language;  language,    which  we  trust  will  be  re- 
garded by  all  that  love  the  cause  for  which  he  died.     And  sure- 
ly the  testimony  of  an  individual  so  candid  and  intelligent,  (who 
had  resided  for  more  than  six  years  in  a  small  community,    far 
distant  from  civilized  -and  christian  nations,   and  exposed  daily 
to  the  contagious  influence  of  vice  among  the  native  tribes,  a 
community,  the  very  existence  of  which  has  depended  upon  the 
order,  sobriety,  industry  and  union  of  its  members,)   to  the  in- 
separable connexion  of  Christianity  with  the  best  interests  of  so- 
ciety, must  have  no  little  weight  with  every  well  informed  and 
thoughtful  mind.     The  paper  from  which  we  make  the  follow- 
ing extracts  was  written  but  a  few  months  ago;  and  could  our 
friend  speak  to  us  from  his  tomb,  we  believe  he  would  but  reiterate 
the  sentiments  which  he  has  here  expressed. 

"Considered  in  their  own  nature,  and  separately  from  their 
sanctifying  efficacy,  and  the  promised  co-operation  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  if  the  doctrines  of  the  Saviour,  and  the  ministry  of  Chris- 
tian teachers  can  be  so  considered,  these  are,  of  all  the  means 
of  arousing  human  nature,  and  setting  the  heart  and  understand* 


1,828.]  African  Mission  School  Society*  185 

ing — body  and  soul  in  action,   beyond  comparison  the  most  cet> 
tain,  and  the  most  effectual. 

"How  it  is  in  other  parts  of  the  world  I  have  only  heard  and 
read.  But  in  this  Colony  I  have  seen  the  direct  and  insepara- 
ble connection  of  Christianity,  taking  in  its  doctrines,  its  wor- 
ship, and  its  practical  fruits — with  all  that  is  stable,  all  that  is 
patriotic,  all  that  is  mentally  and  morally  improving,  all  that  is 
exalting  to  human  nature — in  a  word,  all  that  is  good  and  ex- 
cellent among  us. 

"There  is  no  room  for  speculation  on  this  point — no  room  for 
reasoning.  Premises  and  conclusion  are  both  embodied  in  one 
and  the  same  obvious  fact.  There  is  a  pious  family — and  there 
stands  a  inn  pillar  of  the  Colony.  Industry,  intelligence,  or- 
der, competency  and  peace,  are  its  characteristics.  There  is  a 
family  without  religion;  I  have  only  to  reverse  the  characteris- 
tic»»  of  the  first,  and  that  family  is  described. 

"We  have  tried  the  effects  of  schools.  These  are  by  no 
means  so  well  conducted  as  they  should  be;  still  their  influence 

-  ilutary.  But  these  effects  are  partial  and  inadequate,  ope- 
rating only  on  the  child,  while  the  parents  are  left  unprofited. 
But  such  as  worthily  sustain  the  office  of  the  ministry,  come 
"with  an  authority  which  none  dare  wholly  to  despise.  They  come 
with  motives  which  all  who  must  die,  all  who  know  what  a  guil- 
ty conscience  is,  all  who  believe  they  have  a  God  to  account  to, 
and  a  soul  to  save,  are  obliged  to  feel. 

"Let  then  the  Colony  be  a  parish.  Let  the  minister  visit  and 
instruct  and  labour  from  house  to  house.  Let  him  have  no  other 
engagements  in  the  Colony — no  other  work  to  divert  his  atten- 
tion from  his  spiritual  charge.  Above  sectarian  prejudices  and 
feelings,  let  him  be  equally  at  home  among  Christians  of  every 
name.  A  man  of  discrimination,  education,  and  humility;  let 
him  employ  the  whole  various  compass  of  means  submitted  to 
his  selection  in  the  Book  whence  he  derives  his  commission;  to 
obviate  the  prejudices,  obtain  the  confidence,  conciliate  the  af- 
fections, instruct  the  ignorance,  correct  the  errors,  amend  the 
morals,  and  save  the  souls  of  all.  Such  a  man  might  indeed 
meet  with  trials  and  discouragements,  might  realize  a  success  at 
first,  by  no  means  commensurate  with  his  wishes  and  his  la- 
bours.    But  he  would  sow  seed  which  must  grow.'* 


196  African  Mission  School  Society.  fSept 

So  intent  indeed  was  Mr.  Ashmun  upon  securing  missionary 
efforts  to  the  Colony,  that  he  did  not  hesitate  even  to  recom- 
mend that  some  able  and  devoted  minister  should  be  sent  out 
tinder  the  patronage  of  the  Board  of  Managers. 

"I  beg  respectfully  but  most  pressingly  (he  observes)  to  re- 
commend, as  in  my  opinion  the  only  means  of  rendering  the 
Colony  what  it  was  intended  to  be  made,  a  truly  christian  and 
civilized  asylum  of  an  outcast  race  of  men,  the  immediate  en- 
gagement of  at  least  one  laborious  Christian  Minister,  of  the 
most  respectable  qualifications:  but  above  all,  of  the  most  ardent 
piety  and  untiring  zeal. 

•*If  it  be  doubted  for  a  moment,  whether  such  an  appointment 
be  consistent  with  the  simple  and  declared  object  of  the  Coloni- 
zation Society,  the  only  question  to  be  determined  is,  whether 
it  be  not  absolutely  necessary  as  a  means  of  accomplishing  that 
object?  Is  the  simple  and  unique  object  of  the  Society  accom- 
plished by  only  landing  emigrants  on  the  African  Coast,  without 
regarding  their  future  situation?  I  have  trespassed  farther  than 
I  fear  I  should  have  done  in  the  length  of  these  remarks,  but  I 
have  done  it  under  a  feeling  of  most  sacred  obligation  to  report 
what  I  sincerely  believed  to  be  the  most  urgent  of  all  the  actual 
necessities  of  the  Colony,  where  they  ought  to  be  known,  and 
where,  if  from  any  quarter,  those  necessities  are  to  be  supplied. 
None  of  us  who  are  now  active  in  the  work,  can  act  or  labour 
long.  And  to  do  seasonably  and  effectually  what  little  Divine 
Providence  permits  Dl  to  attempt,  is  no  doubt  the  way  to  ac- 
complish the  most  in  the  end.  It  is  in  these  views  that  this  pa- 
per is  submitted:  and  I  cannot  more  appropriately  brinj:  it  to  a 
close,  than  by  humbly  supplicating  the  Almighty  in  his  infinite 
wisdom  and  goodness,  to  supply  the  means  of  accomplishing  a 
work  so  agreeable  to  the  great  ends  of  his  moral  government, 
which  his  word  assures  us  is  to  build  up  on  earth  an  universal 
empire  of  holiness,  of  which  the  foundations  are  to  be  laid  in 
the  hearts  of  all  mankind." 

This  it  must  be  remembered,  was  penned  before  the  excellent 
writer  had  been  made  acquainted  with  the  determination  of  va- 
rious missionary  associations,  both  in  this  country  and  Europe, 
to  occupy  and  improve  the  wide  field  for  Christian  labour  open- 
ed to  them  in  Liberia. 


1323.]  African  Mission  School  Society.  197 

Such  determinations,  and  the  energy  with  which  they  have 
been,  or  are  about  to  be  executed,  has  been  deemed  by  the 
Board  of  Managers  a  sufficient  reason  for  abstaining  from  any 
measures  to  effect  the  purpose  so  earnestly  and  impressively  en- 
forced by  Mr.  Ashmun,  even  had  their  opinions  been  altogether 
concurrent  with  his,  and  their  funds  sufficient  to  justify  an  ap- 
propriation for  the  object.  The  preceding  extract,  however,  can 
hardly  fail,  we  think,  to  produce  a  general  conviction  that  the 
introduction  of  enlightened  Christian  Teachers  is  an  object  of 
essential  importance,  viewed  simply  in  its  bearings  upon  the  tem- 
poral interests  of  the  settlements  of  Liberia.  But  our  Colony 
has  been  planted  for  purposes  of  more  elevated  import  than  any 
the  effects  of  which  are  limited  to  time.  Many  who  have  la- 
boured and  died  to  establish  it  on  deep  and  sure  foundations, 
have  brought  to  their  work  the  strength  of  faith  and  the  ardour 
of  intense  devotion.  The  Colonists  have  seen  in  their  example 
the  value  of  religious  principle,  and  been  urged  by  their  precepts 
to  hold  all  other  considerations  in  subordination  to  its  authority. 
They  have  been  taught,  truly,  to  regard  Religion  as  their  principle 
concern,  and  that  to  extend  its  influence  is  a  chief  duty  of  life. 

But  if  efforts  are  demanded  to  supply  Liberia  with  pious  men 
of  education,  the  condition  of  the  native  tribes  in  its  vicinity  of- 
fers a  motive  for  such  efforts  not  less  imperative.  To  these 
tribes  a  door  of  access  is  fully  opened  through  the  Colony. — 
They  are  prepared  to  give  a  kind  reception  to  missionaries,  and 
to  place  their  children  under  instruction.  Among  these  are  n© 
well  constructed  systems  of  superstition,  ancient  and  powerful, 
to  oppose  the  progress  of  the  Gospel;  and  the  only  obstacles  to 
remove,  are  such  as  are  inseparable  from  the  habits  of  unciviliz- 
ed men.  Nor  is  the  field  for  Christian  exertion  wanting  either 
in  pppulousness  or  extent.  We  see  no  reason  why  the  doctrines 
of  our  holy  faith  may  not  (if  faithful  able  teachers  can  be  found 
to  inculcate  them)  be  propagated  rapidly  from  tribe  to  tribe,  un- 
til a  large  portion  of  the  population  of  Africa  shall  experience 
their  efficacy  and  practically  illustrate  the  purity  and  excellence 
of  their  influence. 

And  while  we  are  far  from  having  decided  that  many  white 
men  will  not  be  required  to  accomplish  the  illumination  and  regen- 
eration of  Africa,  we  candidly  say,  that  the  imminent  dangers  t© 


19ff  African  Mission  School  Society,  { Sept, 

which  such  persons  are  exposed  by  a  residence  in  that  country, 
seems  to  indicate  it  as  the  will  of  Heaven,  that  men  of  colour 
should  be  educated  and  sent  forth  without  delay  to  this  glorious, 
work.  These  are,  doubtless,  destined  to  be  the  principal  agents 
in  communicating  the  arts  of  civilization  and  the  ever-blessed 
Gospel,  to  the  long  neglected  and  degraded  tribes  of  Africa. 

What  friend  then  of  humanity  or  religion,  will  not  hail  witlj 
delight,  the  formation  of  the  African  Mission  School  Society? — 
It  comes  before  the  public  sustained  by  many  of  the  most  respecr 
table  names  in  our  country.  We  rejoice  to  see  that  it  is  under* 
the  special  patronage  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  that  the  venera- 
ble Bishops  are  its  Patrons,  and  that  its  Board  of  Directors  » 
made  up  of  distinguished  gentlemen  from  many  different  states,, 
and  who  would  do  honour  to  any  institution.  We  are  informed 
that  the  Rev.  Dr.  Wainwright,  (from  whose  excellent  Dis- 
course we  propose  to  make  some  extracts,)  has  been  mainly  in- 
strumental in  exciting  that  interest  which  has  resulted  in  the 
establishment  of  this  Society.  Should  its  operations  be  well 
conducted,  and  its  success  equal  our  hopes,  reflections  far  more 
valuable  than  human  applause,  must  be  the  treasure  of  him  who 
has  given  an  impulse  to  public  charity  in  favour  of  African  Educa- 
tion, and  moved  that  a  Seminary  should  be  founded  for  this  ob- 
ject; to  the  support  of  which,  the  public  liberality  may  be  ju- 
diciously directed. 

We  regret  that  we  cannot  give  to  the  Discourse  of  Dr.  Wain- 
wright,  that  extended  notice  which  it  so  well  merits.  The  text 
is  that  beautiful  prediction  of  the  Prophet,  (Isaih  xi.  9.)  They 

SHALL  NOT  HURT  NOR  DESTROY  IN  ALL  MY  HOLY  MOUNTAIN:  FOR 
THE  EARTH  SHALL  BE  FULL  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  LORD, 
AS  THE  WATERS  COVER  THE  SEA. 

Dr.  Wain wright  commences  with  some  remarks  to  showithat 
if  the  "Doctrine  of  human  perfectibility"  as  maintained  by  the 
"visionary  and  extravagant,"  is  to  be  discarded,  so  likewise  are 
the  "cold  and  heartless  views"  of  those  who  would  persuade  us 
that  men  must  always  remain  what  they  now  are,  and  that  we  are 
to  expect  no  improvement  in  the  moral  condition  of  the  world. — 
Abandoning  the  "dreams  and  speculations  of  philosophers,"  he 
goes  directly  to  the  word  of  God,  and  finds  there  "frequent  in- 
timations ©f  a  happier  and  better  condition  of  the  world,  at  some 


&828. j  African  Mission  School  Society.  199 

fliture  period,  when  peace  and  virtue  shall  universally  prevail." 
It  is  not  deemed  necessary,  nor  indeed  possible  to  say,  precise- 
ly, to  what  degree  of  knowledge  and  virtue  individuals  or  socir 
%iy  may  be  advanced — to  decide  whether  or  not,  there  may  be 
some  exceptions  to  the  general  improvement;  or  how  soon  this 
glorious  revolution  in  the  character  of  men  is  to  be  effected—- 
the  doctrine  that  a  great  change  for  the  better  is  to  take  place; 
that  it  has  already  commenced;  accords  entirely  with  our  expe- 
rience as  well  as  the  testimony  of  God. 

And  here  we  cannot  but  observe,  how,  that  while  Dr.  Wain- 
Wright  has  expressed  opinions  agreeing  on  many  subjects  with 
those  adopted  by  the  distinguished  Author  of  an  admirable 
address  (lately  published  in  South  Carolina,)  "On  the  Charac- 
ter and  Objects  of  Science;"  on  one,  that  of  the  compara- 
tive merits  of  ancient  and  modern  literature,  his  views  widely 
differ.     He  remarks: 

"Now  we  must  acknowledge,  that  in  some  respects  the  world  has  not 
improved.  It  is  hazardous  enough,  to  claim  for  the  literature  of  modern 
days  an  equality  even  with  that  of  ancient  times;  but  to  say  that  our  poet- 
ry or  eloquence  surpasses  that  of  Grecian  or  Roman  fame,  is  madness.— 
And  when  we  look  at  the  works  of  art,  and  human  ingenuity  and  labour, 
the  ruins  of  Persepohs,  the  pyramids  of  Egypt,  the  simple  majestv  and 
beauty  of  the  Parthenon,  or  the  sublime  grandeur  of  some  great  Cathedral, 
raised,  in  Gothic  times,  as  a  temple  to  the  Most  High;  we  must  acknow' 
ledge,  that  the  labours  of  modern  days  sink  into  comparative  nothingness.53 

Mr.  Grimke,  on  the  contrary,  is  of  opinion,  that 

"Rossuet,  Bourdaloue  and  Massillon;  Pitt,  Sheridan,  Fox,  Erskine  and 
Canning,  fear  no  comparison  if  liberal  and  candid,  with  Demosthenes,  Pe. 
incles,  Socrates  and  Cicero.  Sehlegel  has  ranked  Shakspeare  above  all 
the  dramafsts  of  antiquity;  while  the  critical  judgment  and  accomplished 
taste  of  the  Edmburgh  Ueview,  has  styled  Milton  the  first  of  Poets  When- 
ever  the  world  shall  judge  boldly  and  independently,  candidly,  liberally,  the 
dec'sum  mutt  be  in  favour  of  the  matters  in  literature  and  science,  who  have 
onsen  Slnce  the  Fifteenth  Century.  Whether  in  abstruse  and  comprehen. 
sive,  or  m  refined  and  elegant  speculation;  in  profound,  energetic,  lok 
•a  reasons    in  powerfu|j  commanding>  ^^ ,  el  ^  m  ^  ? 

tellectua  and  imaginative  poetry;  in  the  descriptive  and  pathetic;  in  prac 
fccal  w1Sdom;  mcmtI,  international,  or  political;  civil  social,  o,  domestic;  in 
these  arts  whpfc  employ,  while,  they  improve  w*  Mess  the  people;  in  a 


&QU  African  Mission  Schoot  /Society,  [Sept* 

• 

word,  in  all  that  makes  man  industrious  and  useful,  virtuous  and  haopy9 
and  prepares  him  for  thf  service  of  God,  his  fellow  men,  and  of  posterity — 
if  with  a  view  to  these  thing's  we  contemplate  the  great  men,  who  have 
arisen  since  the  year  1500,  we  must  acknowledge  them  unrivalled  by  the 
ancients." 

We  have  marked  a  part  of  the  last  quotation,  because  in  the 
Sentiments  there  expressed,  the  author  of  the  Discourse  entire- 
ly concurs. 

"When  were  the  rights  of  man  so  well  understood;  when  were  the  prin- 
ciples of  a  sound  philosophy  so  universally  disseminated;  when  was  there 
such  a  vast  proportion  of  intelligent  and  thinking  beings;  when  was  there 
ever  such  active  exertion  to  remove  moral  evil,  and  to  accomplish,  as  far 
as  possible,  the  happiness  of  every  individual  of  the  human  family?  Never, 
We  have  fallen,  my  brethren,  upon  happy  times, — unspeakably  happy, 
compared  with  any  that  have  before  existed.  The  idea  of  a  former  age  of 
peace,  and  happiness,  and  wisdom,  called  the  golden,  is  all  a  foolish  imagi- 
nation. There  never  has  been  an  age,  (great  as  present  evils  are)  yet 
there  never  has  been  an  age  as  wise,  as  peaceful,  or  as  happy  as  the  pre- 
sent. And  why  may  not  future  ages  have  successively  the  same  advantage 
over  those  which  preceded  them?  There  cannot  be  a  retrograde  motion 
now,  because  we  are  improving"  upon  right  principles,  and  we  have  only 
just  begun  to  improve. 

"Let  me  here  introduce  a  few  observations  from  the  pen  of  an  able 
christian  philosopher  of  the  present  day.  *There  are  three  agents  which 
will  soon  be  entwined  with  the  issues  of  all  human  affairs,  and  are  the  very 
hinges  upon  which  the  moral  world  will  speedily  turn.  The  three  things, 
in  which  the  present  age  excels  the  ancients,  are  the  Inductive  Philosophy, 
Printing  and  Universal  Education.  Education  and  the  press  have  only- 
been  employed  to  purpose,  of  very  late  years.  Every  year  they  have  been 
making  some  improvements  upon  their  former  efforts;  and  as  these  are  in- 
struments capable  of  an  indefinite  perfectability,  and  as  the  art  of  using 
will  enlarge  with  the  use  itself,  it  only  requires  to  increase  the  number  of 
printing  presses,  schools,  and  teachers,  to  accelerate  to  any  pitch  the  rate 
of  improvement.  These  two  latter  discoveries  fit  in  together,  and  mutual- 
ly render  each  other  available.  Printing,  by  its  unlimited  multiplication 
of  copies,  supplying  materials  for  universal  education;  and  universal  edu- 
cation creating  a  demand  for  copies  that  proceeds  without  any  assignable 
term.  Thest  are  the  two  great  means  to  bring  about  the  moral  revolution 
of  the  world;  and  these  two  powers  are  gradually  moulding  governments, 
and  stamping  them  with  the  form  and  pressure  of  the  age."'* 


James  Douglas  on  Missions. 


1828.]  African  Mission  School  Society.  £01* 

Dr.  Wainwright  proceeds  to  show,  that  if  the  physician,  the 
civilian,  the  merchant,  the  agriculturist  reasonably  expect  im- 
provements in  their  several  professions  or  occupations,  the  Chris- 
tian may  with  no  less  propriety  look  for  greater  and  wider  re- 
sults than  have  been  realized  from  the  gospel.  Observe  the 
operation  of  Christian  faith  upon  some  individual,  and  you  may 
•onclude,  with  entire  confidence,  that  its  general  prevalence 
would  prove  of  the  utmost  benefit  to  mankind.  "Suppose  that 
several  Christian  nations  were  to  act  consistently  with  their  pro- 
fession, should  we  be  so  disturbed  by  wars,  and  so  often  behold 
garments  rolled  in  blood?"  And  why  should  not  all  this  come 
to  pass?  Consider  what  has  been  effected  by  the  art  of  printing 
and  the  power  of  steam.  And  shall  we,  Christians,  expect  less 
wonders  to  be  accomplished  by  the  Gospel  ?  Let  us  hear  what 
has  been  done,  within  a  very  short  period,  in  the  Islands  of  the 
South  Pacific. 

*'  'The  intelligence  of  the  past  year  enables  us  to  say,  definitively  and 
positively,  that  the  influence  of  christian  missions  has  driven  idolatry  entire- 
ly fr»m  twenty-one  islands.  Their  inhabitants  are  no  more  alarmed  by  the 
no.se  of  war,  nor  by  the  shriek  of  victims  immolated  on  the  altars  of  de- 
mons; and  they  have  been  taught  to  read  and  write,  and  to  make  provision 
for  the  necessities,  the  decencies,  and  the  comforts  of  life.  Some  thousands 
have  been  introduced  into  the  christian  church  upon  a  credible  profession 
©f  piety.  When  one  island  had  received  the  gospel,  its  inhabitants  exerted 
themselves  to  send  it  to  another.  The  intelligence  of  the  past  year  states, 
that  a  missionary  society  of  one  group,  and  that  not  the  largest,  contributed 
in  a  single  year,  of  the  productions  of  the  country,  to  the  value  of  more 
than  a  thousand  dollars;  that  thirty  pious  natives  had  gone  as  missionary 
teachers  to  islands  and  a  people,  which  to  them  were  strange  and  foreign; 
and  that  thirteen  missionary  stations  are  occupied  by  native  missionaries 
alone.' 

"Now,  my  brethren,  in  the  contemplation  of  this,  and  multitudes  of  simi- 
lar descriptions  from  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  may  we  not  feel  encouraged 
to  place  a  full  trust  in  the  words  of  prophecy?  But  what  do  I  say?  Trust 
in  the  words  of  prophecy  !  Dare  we  distrust  them  !  Whose  words  are 
they?  Whose  spirit  pronounced  them?  Whose  veracity  is  staked  upon 
them?  Whose  power  is  put  forth  to  accomplish  their  execution  ?  No,  my 
brethren,  we  dare  not  distrust  the  words  of  prophecy.  As  surely  as  the 
waters  of  the  ocean  reach  from  pole  to  pole,  and  from  continent  to  conti- 


*  Missionary  Herald. 


£Dj2  African  Mission  School  Society.  [Sept." 

*ient,  so  surely  will  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  make  its  way  to  all  kindreds 
and  nations  and  people;  and  wheresoever  it  makes  its  way,  so  surely  will  it 
promote  peace  on  earth,  and  good  will  towards  men." 

Inspired  with  such  sentiments,  the  respected  author  of  thi& 
Discourse,  urjres  all  "joyfully  and  energetically  to  put  their 
hands  to  evprv  work  which  can  help  forward  the  civilizing;  and 
christianizing  of  the  world."  The  objects  of  the  African  Mis- 
sion- School  Society  he  regards  as  eminently  recommended, 
both  on  the  ground  of  their  practicableness  and  utility.  The 
following  observations  are  equally  candid,    liberal,  and  just. 

"Africa  I  regard  as  a  region  of  peculiar  interest  to  us,  and  one  which, 
presents  to  us  peculiar  obligations  to  care  for  its  moral  and  religious  im- 
provement. We  are  indeed  separated  from  it  by  an  immense  ocean,  but 
we  have  taken  its  children  from  their  homes,  we  have  held  them  in  bon- 
dage, we  have  obtained  large  portions  of  our  temporal  comforts  and  luxu- 
ries from  the  labour  of  their  hands.  We  are  all,  to  a  certain  degree,  involv- 
ed in  the  guilt  of  injustice  towards  this  much  suffering  people*  J  say  we, 
for  I  cannot  on  this  point  make  a  line  of  distinction.  I  would  indeed  on 
every  point  forever  forget  the  terms  north  and  south,  as  terms  of  national 
distinction,  but  most  assuredly  upon  this.  For  here  we  are  under  a  like 
condemnation.  Slavery  once  polluted  the  now  free  and  untrammeled  states 
of  New  England.  And  why  has  it  not  remained  the  curse  of  our  land } — 
because  we  were  wiser,  or  loved  freedom  better,  than  our  southern  breth- 
ren?  No,  but  because  the  climate  of  New  England  was  healthful,  and  the 
white  man  could  labour  beneath  its  sun,  and  no  pestilence  drove  him  from 
its  marshes. 

"Let  us  not  then  boast  of  our  exemption  from  responsibility,  and  from 
whatever  may  be  the  criminality  of  possessing  a  slave  population.  Let  us 
rather  look  upon  the  cause  as  one  of  common  interest,  and  the  question 
how  we  are  to  alleviate  the  evil,  as  one  of  common  obligation.  Let  us 
have  no  criminations  and  recriminations.  We  are  brethren  of  one  family, 
and  the  faith  of  Christ  commands  us  to  bear  one  another's  burdens.  Let 
all  animosity  subside,  and  let  us  address  ourselves  to  that  question,  as  it 
presents  itself  to  me,  of  awful  importance,  how  we  are  to  be  preserved 
from  the  effects  of  the  gradual  increase  of  our  coloured  and  slave  popula- 
tion." 

But  what  is  to  be  done?  Immediate  and  universal  emancipa- 
tion will  find  few,  if  any  advocates,  among  judicious  and  reflect- 
ing men. 

"The  colonizing  of  Africa  is  our  only  hope.    It  is  the  only  means  by 


1,828.]  African  Mission  School  Society.  &03 

which  a  drain  is  to  be  made  to  carry  ofFour  surplus  coloured  population.-*- 
This  measure  has  received  the  sanction  of  the  wise  and  good  throughout 
our  country.  It  matters  not  that  some  have  entered  into  it  with  selfish 
yiews,  and  that  they  would  prosecute  the  colonizing"  of  free  people  of  co- 
lour from  the  southern  states,  in  order  to  secure  a  more  effectual  power 
over  the  slaves.  This  has  been  urged  as  an  argument  against  the  Coloni- 
zation Society  by  many  in  our  part  of  the  country.  Rut  very  inconclusive- 
ly, as  appears  to  me.  I  doubt  not  that  there  are  selfish  and  ignoble  beings, 
who  are  actuated  by  such  motives,  and  who  have  no  true  love  of  liberty-* 
and  no  regard  to  the  condition  of  the  poor  African.  But  what  matters  this, 
so  as  the  project  itself  be  a  good  one,  and  be  calculated  to  effect  the  ob- 
ject we  desire.  It  should  not  suffer,  because  others  enter  into  it  with  ba? 
ser  motives  than  our  own." 

And  can  any  thing  be  more  evident  than  the  truth  and  im- 
portance of  the  following  remarks  of  our  author,  in  behalf  of  the 
^Mission  School  Society?  If  there  is  one  which  we  would 
wish  qualified,  it  is  that  in  which  allusion  is  made  to  the  destruc- 
tive influence  of  the  African  climate  upon  the  constitutions  of 
Avhite  men,  and  their  unfitness  (in  consequence  of  their  colour) 
for  useful  exertions  among  the  native  tribes.  That  the  danger 
to  the  life  of  the  white  man  who  fixes  his  residence  in  Africa  is 
great,  we  admit;  and  that  among  the  remote  tribes  of  the  inte- 
rior, his  complexion  might  render  him  an  object  of  disgust  or 
suspicion,  is  possible;  yet,  we  have  seen  white  men  in  health  af- 
ter having  lived  for  many  years  at  Sierra  Leone,  and  "we  are 
confident  that  superior  intelligence  and  influence  is  generally 
attributed  to  such,  among  the  natives  of  the  coast.  Whether, 
therefore,  the  propagation  of  Christianity  in  Africa  without  de- 
lay, is  not  an  object,  for  which  some  white  missionaries,  able  and 
devoted,  might  commendably  expose  themselves  to  the  dangers  of 
the  climate,  is  a  question  which  seems  to  us  to  merit,  at  least, 
consideration.  Still  we  would  lose  no  time  in  preparing  young 
men  of  colour  for  this  work,  which  we  doubt  not,  is  to  be  effect- 
ed principally  by  their  exertions.  Sincerely  do  we  hope  and 
pray,  that  our  concluding  extract  from  this  eloquent  Discourse, 
so  honourable  to  the  head  and  heart  of  its  highly  esteemed 
author,  may  excite  new  interest  in  the  cause  of  African  Educa- 
tion, and  secure  to  the  African  Mission  School  that  liberal  sup- 
port which  it  requires  and  deserves. 


204  African  Mission  School  Society.  [Sept. 

"But  to  make  colonization  effectual,   it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  arts  of 
civilized  society  be  carried  to  a  new  country:  the  Gospel  is  also  needed. — 
1  will  not  insult  your  understandings  and  your  religious  principles  by  argu- 
ing this  point.     You  know,   better  than  I  can  declare  to  you,  that  civiliza- 
tion without  Christianity  is  valueless — nay,  you  know  that  the  former  can- 
not subsist  without  the  latter.     To  be  civilized,   a  country   must  have  reli- 
gion, and  tins  rclig  on  must  be  Christianity.  Now  where  is  Africa,  dark,  de- 
graded, ignorant  Africa;  where  is  it  to  obtain  this  blessed  gift?     How  shall 
they  hear  without  a  preacher,   and  how  shall  they  preach  except  they  be 
sent,   and  how  shall  they  be  sent  except  by  our  exertions >      All  this  has 
been  felt — the  appeal  has  been  made — funds  have  been  raised  and  appro- 
priated— and  still  greater  sums  could  be  collected  for  this  noble  purpose. 
But,  alas,  we  cannot  use  what  we  now  have — we  cannot  obtain  missionaries. 
The  want  is  universal.     It  is  felt  sensibly  in  Great  Britain  as  well  as  in  our 
own  country.      But  a  short  time  since,   letters  were  addressed  to  different 
persons  from  the  Church  Missionary  Society,   stating  that  they  had  looked 
anxiously  to  this  country  for  missionaries,    catechists,   and  schoolmasters— 
they  wished  for  pious,  intelligent,  and  active  men  of  colour  for  this  purpose, 
and  stood  prepared  to  give  them  an  ample  support.     The  white  man,   as 
We  are  convinced  from  melancholy  proof,  cannot  endure  that  climate;  and 
besides,  his  colour,  which  is  associated  with  the  idea  of  disease,  unfits  him 
for  usefulness  among  most  of  the  tribes.      The  call  then  is  loud  for  African 
Missionaries  throughout  the  christian  world.     Now,  to  supply  this  deficien- 
cy so  universally  and  so  deeply  felt,  the  African  Mission  School  Society  has 
been  projected.     It  is  not  intended  to  interfere   with  any  Society  already 
established;  nor  to  take  upon  itself,  in  any  degree,  the  direction  of  mission- 
ary enterprises.     Its  sole  object  is  to  select  and  prepare  instruments  for 
them.       Its  hope  is,    in  the  present  year,   to  obtain  a  few  pious  and  intelli- 
gent young  men  of  colour,  and  to  educate  them  with  reference  to  the  pro- 
pagation of  the  Gospel  in  Africa.     The  leading  object  in  such  a  plan  of  ed- 
ucation should  be,   to  fit  them  to  become  teachers  of  the  Word  of  God  in 
simplicity  and  purity.      Learned  and  accomplished  theologians  are  not 
needed  for  this  work;  but  pious,  humble,  devoted  men,  deeply  instructed 
in  the  Gospel  scheme  of  salvation,  and  familiar  with  the  oracles  of  truth  in 
our  English  version — such  will  make  useful  and  effective  missionaries.     In 
addition  to  this,  we  would  give  them  a  knowledge  of  the  first  principles  of 
the  useful  sciences  and  arts;  viz.  botany,  mineralogy,  surveying,   civil  and 
municipal  law,  and  political  economy.     Nor  should  the  attainment  of  an 
adequate  manual  dexterity,  in  the  performance  of  agricultural  and  mechan- 
ical labour,  be  neglected.  These  qualifications  may  be  of  great  importance 
in  aiding  the  native  tribes  in  their  approaches  to  civilization,   and  in  gain- 
ing a  desirable  influence  over  them. 

"If,  by  the  present  undertaking,  we  can  prepare  a  few  individuals  each 
year,  who  can  be  rendered  useful  in  the  great  work  of  renovating  Africa, 


1828.]  African  Mission  School  Society*  £()£ 

we  should  think  that  our  society  has  occupied  ground,  at  present  vacant, 
with  a  structure,  which,  however  humble,  promises  to  be  eminently  set* 
viceable  tothe  cause  of  civilization  and  Christianity 

a  citizen  of  this  country,  I  can  look  at  Liberia,  and  rejoice  at  the- 
bem  final  influence  which  the  prosperity  of  that  colony  is  destined  to  exer- 
cise upon  our  coloured  population.  As  a  citizen  of  the  world,  I  can  rer 
joice  that  -mother  continent  will  soon  be  added  to  the  domain  of  civilization, 
lint  as  a  disciple  of  Christ,  I  can  infinitely  more  rejoice  that  the  gospel  is 
there  advancing-.  I  see  it  earned  swiftly  along-  the  coast  of  Africa;  1  see  it 
penetrating'  the  remotest  deserts  and  forests  of  that  benighted  continent.— 
1  see  it  demolishing  cruel  and  degrading  superstitions,  overthrowing  the? 
lllan  of  Moloch,  and  carrying  in  its  progress,  peace  and  virtue  and  happi- 
ness, to  regions,  where  brutal  ignorance  and  vice  now  bear  sway.  In  this 
view,  !  can  almost  forget  my  abhorrence  of  slavery.  I  can  almost  feel  re- 
conciled to  the  thought,  that  our  forefathers  unjustly  and  cruelly  tore  these 
liapless  people  from  their  homes,  and  brought  them  to  our  shores.  If  we 
can  send  them  back  with  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  thus  give  them,  as  are- 
ward  for  their  extorted  labours  and  long  continued  suffering",  the  pearl  of 
great  price,  our  guilt  will  be  lessened,  and  our  condemnation  will  be  take& 
iway." 


From  the  address  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Airican 
Mission  School  Society,  it  appears  that  measures  have  been 
taken  to  put  this  school  into  immediate  operation.  A  suitable  build- 
ing has  been  engaged — the  Rector  and  Teacher  have  been  appoint- 
ed; and  the  Committee  are  prepared  to  receive  applications  for 
pupils.  The  school  will  be  opened  about  the  20th  of  the  pre- 
sent month. 

There  may,  perhaps,  be  some  objection  to  the  place  (Hart- 
ford, Connecticut,)  selected  for  this  school,  on  account  of  its 
distance  to  the  north,  though  in  every  other  respect  it  has  pecu- 
liar advantages.  We  understand,  however,  that  it  may,  should 
it  on  the  whole  be  deemed  expedient,  be  ultimately  removed  to 
one  of  the  middle  states.  We  insert  the  Constitution,  Officers^ 
;uid  By-Laws  of  the  Society,  that  our  readers  may  have  a  full 
view  of  this  very  interesting  Institution. 

Constitution  of  the  African  Mission  School  Society. 

Article  I.  This  Association  shall  be  called  the  Jfrkan  Mission  School 
Society, 


20 6  African  Mission  School  Society.  [Sept, 

Art.  IT.  Its  objects  shall  be,  to  establish  and  maintain  a  School  for  the  iiv 
struction  of  suitable  persons  of  African  extraction,  with  reference  to  their 
becoming  Missionaries,  Catechists  and  Schoolmasters  in  Africa,  under  the 
direction  of  the  Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary  Society  of  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church. 

.  Art.  III.  The  Society  shall  consist  of  persons  paying  annually  the  sum 
of  two  dollars;  or  the  sum  of  twenty  dollars  at  one  time,  which  shall  consti- 
tute them  members  for  life. 

Art.  IV.  The  President  of  the  Society  shall  be  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocess 
in  which  the  School  is  established;  and  in  his  absence,  the  chair  may  be 
taken  by  any  other  Bishop  who  may  be  present. 

Art.  V  There  shall  be  three  Vice-Presidents,  whose  duty  it  shall  be 
to  preside,  when  neither  of  the  Bishops  shall  be  present,  and  who  cx-ojji- 
cio  shall  be  directors. 

Art.  VI.  Twenty-four  Directors,  half  clergymen  and  half  laymen,  shall 
be  elected  at  the  annual  meeting".  Any  person,  paying  the  sum  of  fifty 
dollars,   at  any  one  time,    shall  have  the  privileges  of  a  Director. 

Art.  VII.  The  Bishops  of  the  Church  shall  be  ex-officin  Patrons;  and  all 
other  persons  who  shall  pay  §100  at  one  time.  They  shall  have  a  right  to  be 
present,  and  to  vote  at  all  meetings  of  the  Society,  or  of  the  Board  of 
Directors. 

Art.  VIII.  A  Treasurer  and  Secretary  shall  be  chosen  at  the  annual  meet- 
ing, and  shall  be  resident  in  the  place  where  the  school  is  situated. 

Art.  IX.  There  shall  be  annually  chosen  by  the  Board  of  Directors,  ten 
persons,  six  of  whom  shall  be  resident  in  the  place  where  the  school  is  es- 
tablished; and  these,  together  with  the  President,  the  Secretary  and  Trea- 
surer, shall  constitute  the  Executive  Committee.  Of  this  Committee,  five 
shall  be  a  quorum  for  the  transaction  of  business. 

Aiit.  X.  The  Board  of  Directors  shall  meet  annually  on  the  day  before 
the  first  Thursday  in  August,  at  such  time  and  place  as  the  President  may 
designate;  and  shall  make  report  of  their  proceedings  to  the  annual  meeting 
of  the  Society,  which  shall  be  held  on  the  evening  of  the  following  day. — 
The  Board  of  Directors  shall  also  meet  during  the  session  of  the  General 
Convention  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Clu  rch,  at  such  time  and  place  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  President;  to  which  body,  an  account  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Society  shall  be  rendered  triennially.  At  all  meetings  of 
the  Board,  nine  shall  constitute  a  quorum. 

Art.  XI.  The  Executive  Committee  shall  carry  into  execution  the  ordi- 
nances of  the  Board  of  Directors,  and  shall  have  power,  during  the  recess 
of  the  Board,  to  perform  acts  and  make  regulations,  to  which  the  Board  is 
competent.  It  shall  meet  at  the  call  of  the  President,  and  in  his  absence, 
at  the  call  of  three  of  its  members.  Its  proceedings  shall  be  submitted  to 
the  Board  at  every  meeting  of  the  same. 

Art.  XII.   The  Board  of  Directors  bhall  enact  By-Laws  for  their  own 


1828.] 


\9fricau  Mission  School  Society. 


20! 


regulation  and  that  of  the  Executive  Committee.  They  shall  also  appoint 
the  Rector  anct  Teachers  of  the  School,  and  prescribe  the  course  of  study. 

Resolved,  On  motion,  that  the  meeting  proceed  to  appoint  the  officers 
named  in  the  above  Constitution: 

Whereupon,  the  following"  gentlemen  were  appointed: 

Patrons,  ex-officio. 
The  Bishops  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States. 

President,  ex-officio. 
Right  Reverend  T.   C.  Browneu,  Bishop  of  the  Diocess  of  Connecticut 


xwright,  U.  D.,  of  N..Y.  -) 

L.  Winthrop,  of  Boston.     C  Vice-Presidents. 

x,  Eso..  of  Troy,  N.  Y.       J 


Eev.  J.   M.   Wainwright,  D.   D.,  of  N..Y. 

His  Honour  T.  L. 

Stephen  Warren,  Esq,,  of  Troy, 


Directors. 


Kev.  N.  S.  Wheaton, 

Harry   Crosweli, 

G.  W.  Do  we, 

Alonzo   Potter, 

■  Dr.  Mn.N'oit, 

George  Upfold, 

Dr.  Turner, 

L.  S    Ives, 

Dr.  Montgomery, 

Dr    Wyatt, 

Dr.  Mead, 

Dr.  Gadsden, 


George  Brtnley,  Esq. 
Dr.  J.   C.  Wahren, 
EnwAun  A.  Newton,  Esq. 
Peter  A.  Jay,  Esq. 
Peter  Khan,  Esq. 
Horace  Binney,  Fsq. 
J.  B.  Eccleston,  Esq. 
Francis  S    Kky,  Esq. 
Simon  Greenleaf,  Esq. 
James  Bowdoyn,  Esq. 
Henry  Rogers,  Esq. 
Samuel  Slater,  Esq. 

Cyprian  Nichols,  Esq.,  Treasurer. 


S.  H.  Huntington,  Esq.,  Secretary 
The  meeting  then  adjourned. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  African  Mission  School  So- 
ciety, held  in  Christ  Church,  Hartford,  on  the  evening- of  the  7th  day  of  Aug. 
1828,  the  following  gentlemen  were  appointed  the  Executive  Committee: 

Executive  Committee  of  the  African  Mission  School  Society. 


Rev.  N.  S.   Wheaton, 
Dr.  .Wain  wright, 

Horatio  Potter, 

G.  W.Doane, 

H.  Humphreys, 


Dr.  J.  Smith  Rogers, 
C.  Sigourney,  Esq. 
S    Tudor,  Esq 
W.  H.  Imlay,  Esq. 
E.  A.  Newton,  Esq. 


9.  H.  Huntington,  Esq.,  was  appointed  Secretary  to  the  Committee. 

On  motion,  Resolved,  that  the  Executive  Committee  be  empowered  to  pre- 
pare a  code  of  By-laws,  to  be  presented  to  the  B'd.  at  its  next  annual  meeting. 

Resolved,  That  the  Executive  Committee  be  governed  by  said  code  of 
By-laws  until  the  next  annual  meeting  of  the  Board. 

Resolved,  That  the  Rev.  N.  S.  Wheaton  be,  and  hereby  is,  appointed, 
Rector  of  the  African,  Mi&tan  School,  for  the  year  ensuing. 


£bS  -African  Mission  School  SocitUf.  [Sept, 

Resolved,  That  the  Executive  Committee  appoint  a  Teacher,  and  take 
ftieasures  to  collect  funds,  and  to  carry  said  School  into  operation. 
Adjourned. 

Pursuant  to  the  above  resolutions,  the  Executive  Committee  held  a  meet- 
ing on  the  11th  of  August,  when  they  appointed  Mr.  H.  Spencer,  Teacher 
of  the  School — adopted  a  code  of  By-laws,  and  an  Address,  which,  with 
extracts  from  the  By-laws,  was  ordered  to  be  printed,  together  with  the 
proceedings  of  the  meeting,  and  of  the  Board  of  Directors. 

By-Laws  for  the  government  of  the  Executive  Committee. 

It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  Rector  to  visit  the  School  once  a  week,  and 
of  the  Executive  Committee  as  often  as  once  a  month — to  inquire  into  the 
literary  progress,  and  the  religious  character  and  conversation  of  the  pupils. 

The  Instructor  shall  reside  and  lodge  in  the  same  house  with  the  pupils, 
with  the  privilege  of  taking  his  meals  elsewhere.  He  shall  also  superin- 
tend their  education,  and  direct  and  assist  them  in  their  studies  according 
to  the  plan  which  shall  be  prescribed  by  the  Executive  Committee. 

No  pupil  shall  be  admitted  into  this  School  except  he  have  attained  the 
age  of  18,  and  can  read  the  English  language  with  facility,  and  can  write, 
and  has  acquired  some  knowledge  of  the  rules  of  common  arithmetic— 
He  shall  also  produce  to  the  Executive  Committee  satisfactory  testimo- 
nials of  his  exemplary  religious  character,  and  of  his  possessing  such  intel- 
lectual endowments  as  will,  in  all  probability,  render  him  useful  in  the 
capacity  of  Missionary,  Catechist,  or  School-master. 

The  pupils  shall  be  required  to  board  in  the  house  provided  for  them  by 
the  Committee,  and  to  pursue  their  studies  with  diligence.  They  shall  be 
under  the  immediate  care  of  the  Instructor,  to  whose  directions  and  admoni- 
tions they  shall  pay  a  due  obedience.  It  is  expected  that  their  conduct 
will  not  only  be  orderly  and  decent  on  all  occasions,  but  in  an  eminent  de- 
gree exemplary,  as  becomes  Christian  disciples. 

The  stated  religious  exercises  of  the  School  shall  be  daily  morning  and 
evening  prayer,  with  reading  of  the  Scriptifres,  by  the  Teacher,  in  the 
presence  of  the  pupils;  all  of  whom  shall  be  required  to  attend.  They  shall 
also  be  constant  in  their  attendance  on  the  public  services  of  the  Church. 

The  pupils  shall  be  required  to  labour  at  some  mechanical  or  agricultural 
employment,  at  least  two  hours  in  the  day,  as  the  Committee  shall  direct. 

Should  it  appear  to  the  Executive  Committee,  after  a  reasonable  trial,  that 
a  pupil  is  disqualified  for  usefulness  in  Africa,  by  a  want  of  piety  or  of  intellec- 
tual endowments,  they  shall  have  power  to  dismiss  him  from  the  Institution. 

"VVhenever  the  Committee  shall  judge  any  of  the  pupils  qualified  for  use- 
fulness in  Africa,  as  a  Missionary,  Catechist,  or  School-master,  they  shall 
g-ive  notice  thereof  to  the  Executive  Committee  of.the  Domestic  and  Foreign 
Missionary  Society  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Cnurch  in  the  United  States 


1828.^  From  Liberia*  209 


Tyoiw  lAberia, 

Despatches  have  arrived  from  the  Colony,  by  the  "All  Chance,"  Canf> 
*Russel,and  the  Brig-  Liberia,  Captain  Sharp,  bearing-  dates  up  to  the  22nd 
of  July,  which  give  very  favourable  views  of  the  health  and  prospects  of 
the  settlement.  In  a  letter  of  the  18th  of  June,  the  Vice-Ag-ent,  Rev.  Lott 
Gary,  writes — 

"I  found  it  necessary,  in  order  to  preserve  the  frame  of  the 
second  floors  of  the  Government  House,  to  have  the  frame  and 
eeiling  painted,  which  is  now  doing.  I  have  also  been  obliged 
to  employ  another  workman  to  make  the  blinds,  or  else  leave 

the  house  exposed  the  present  season,  as refused  to  do  it  under 

the  former  contract.  On  the  13th  I  visited  Millsburgy*  to  ascer- 
tain the  prospects  of  that  settlement*  and  can  say  with  propriety, 
that  according  to  the  quantity  of  land  which  the  settlers  have 
put  under  cultivation,  they  will  reap  a  good  and  plentiful  crop. 
The  Company's  crop  of  rice  and  cassada  is  especially  promising* 
The  new  settlers  at  that  place  have  done  well;  having  all,  with 
two  or  three  exceptions,  built  houses,  so  as  to  render  their  fami* 
lies  comfortable  through  the  season.  They  have  also  each  of 
them  a  small  farm,  which  I  think  after  a  few  months  will  be 
sufficient  to  subsist  them.  But  I  find  from  a  very  particular 
examination,  that  we  shall  be  obliged  to  allow  them  to  draw  ra- 
tions longer  than  I  expected,  owing  to  the  great  scarcity  of 
country  produce,  the  cassada  being  so  nearly  exhausted,  that  it 
is,  and  will  be,  impossible  to  obtain,  until  new  crops  come  in, 
much  to  aid  bur  provisions,  unless  by  going  some  distance  into 
the  country.  Therefore  I  think  it  indispensably  necessary,  in 
order  to  keep  the  settlers  to  their  farming  improvements,  to  con- 
tinue their  rations  longer  than  I  at  first  intended;  as  I  consider 
the  present  too  important  a  crisis  to  leave  them  to  neglect  their 
improvements,  although  it  may  add  something  to  our  present  ex- 
penses. 

"The  people  at  Caldwell  are  getting  on  better  with  their 
farms  than  with  their  houses.  I  think  some  of  them  are  very 
slow,  notwithstanding  I  have  assisted  them  in  building.  The 
Gun  House  at  Caldwell  is  done,  and  at  present  preparations  are 

*  Mills  &  Burg-ess. 

27 


210  From  Liberia.  [Sept 

making  for  the  Fourth  of  July.  I  think  that  settlement  gene- 
rally, is  rapidly  advancing  in  farming,  building,  and  I  hope,  in 
industry.  Our  gun  carriages  are  done;  the  completion  of  the 
iron  work  alone  prevents  us  from  mounting  them  all  immediate- 
ly. We  have  four  mounted,  and  I  think  we  shall  put  them  all 
in  complete  order  by  the  end  of  the  present  week. 

"Captain  Russel  will  be  able  to  give  something  like  a  fair  ac- 
count of  the  state  of  our  improvements,  as  he  went  with  me  to 
visit  the  settlements  on  the  13th  and  14th,  and  seemed  pleased 
with  the 'prospect  at  Millsburg,  Caldwell  and  the  Halfwajr 
Farms. 

Mr.  Warner,  who  has  been  engaged  nearly  the  whole  of  the  * 
last  twelve  months  on  business  of  negotiating  with  the  native* 
tribes  to  the  I e ward,  is  at  present  down  at  Tippicanoe,  the  place 
which  I  mentioned  in  my  former  communications,  as  being  a 
very  important  section  of  country,  since  it  would  connect  our- 
Sesters  and  Bassa  districts  together.  He  is  not,  however,  now 
engaged  in  business  of  negotiation,  but  only  in  business  ojf 
trade." 

In  his  letter  to  the  lamented  Mr.  Ashmun,  Mr.  Cary  states — 

"Things  are  nearly  as  you  left  them;  most  of  the  work  that 
you  directed  to  be  done,  is  nearly  accomplished.  The  plasterers 
are  now  at  work  on  the  Government  House,  and  with  what  lime 
I  am  having  brought  down  the  river,  and  what  shells  I  am  get- 
ting, I  think  we  shall  succeed. 

"The  Gun  House  in  Monrovia  and  the  Jail  have  been  done 
for  some  weeks;  the  mounting  of  the  guns  will  be  done  this 
week,  if  the  weather  permits. 

"The  Houses  at  the  Halfway  Farms  are  done;  the  Gun  House 
at  Caldwell  would  have  been  done  at  this  time,  had  not  the  rain 
prevented,  but  I  think  it  will  be  finished  in  three  or  four  days. 
The  public  farm  is  doing  pretty  well.  The  Millsburg  farms  are 
doing  very  well.  I  think  it  would  do  you  good  to  see  that  place 
at  this  time. 

"The  Missionaries,  although  they  have  been  sick,  are  now,  I 
am  happy  to  inform  you,  recovered;  and  at  present  are  able  to 
attend  to  their  business,  and  I  regard  them  as  entirely  out  of 
danger. 


1828.]  From  Liberia,  &U 

"I  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  remove  all  the  furniture  into  the* 
new  house  in  two  or  three  weeks. " 

.June  25th,  Mr.  Cary  writes — 

"About  three  o'clock  to  day,  there  appeared  three  vessels-*- 
two  brigs  and  a  schooner.  The  schooner  stood  into  the  Roads, 
and  one  of  the  brigs  near  in,  but  showed  no  colours  until  a  shot 
was  fired  by  Captain  Thompson;  when  she  hoisted  Spanish  co> 
lours,  and  the  schooner  the  same.  All  their  movements  appear- 
ed so  suspicious,  that  we  turned  out  all  our  forces  to-night.-— 
About  eight  this  evening  it  was  reported  that  they  were  stand- 
ing out  of  our  Roads,  and  at  sunset  that  the  schooner  had  come 
to  anchor  very  near  the  "All  Chance,"  from  Boston,  and  that 
the  brig  which  had  passed  the  Cape,  had  put  about  and  was 
standing  up,  trying  to  double  the  Cape,  and  that  the  third  vessel 
(a  brig)  was  standing  down  for  the  Roads.  The  first  mentioned 
brig  showed  nine  ports  a  side.  From  all  these  circumstances  I 
thought  best  to  have  Fort  Norris  Battery  manned,  which  was 
immediately  done  by  Captain  Johnson.  I  also  ordered  out  the 
two  volunteer  companies,  to  make  discoveries  around  the  town, 
and  the  Artillery  to  support  the  guns  and  protect  the  beach; 
which  orders  were  promptly  executed,  and  we  stood  in  readi- 
ness during  the  night.  At  daylight  the  schooner  lay  at  anchor 
and  appeared  to  be  making  no  preparations  to  communicate  with 
■us;  I  then  ordered  a  shot  to  be  fired  at  a  little  distance  from 
her,  when  she  sent  a  boat  ashore  with  her  Captain,  Supercargo, 
and  Interpreter.  She  reported  herself  the  Joseph,  from  Havan- 
na,  had  been  three  months  on  the  coast  trading,  but  not  for 
slaves,  had  one  gun  and  twenty-three  men.  Also,  that  the 
brig  was  a  patriotic  brig  in  chase  of  her,  and  that  through  fear 
she  had  taken  shelter  under  our  guns.  The  Captain  wished  a 
supply  of  wood  and  water;  but  I  told  him  I  knew  him  to  be  en- 
gaged in  the  slave  trade,  and  that  though  we  did  not  pretend  to 
attempt  suppressing  this  trade,  we  would  not  aid  it,  and  that  I 
allowed  him  one  hour,  and  one  only,  to  get  out  of  the  reach  of 
our  guns.  He  was  very  punctual,  and  I  believe  before  his 
hour." 

Speaking  of  the  celebration  of  the  Fourth  of  July  in  the  Colony,  under 
date  of  the  15th  July,  Mr.  Cary  remarks — 


£12  From  Liberia.  [Sept.. 

"The  companies  observed  strictly  the  orders  of  the  day, 
which  I  think  were  so  arranged  as  to  entitle  the  officers  whe 
drew  them  up  to  credit.  Upon  the  whole,  I  am  obliged  to  say, 
that  I  have  never  seen  the  American  Independence  celebrated 
with  so  much  spirit  and  propriety  since  the  existence  oi  the  Co- 
lony; the  guns  being  all  mounted  and  painted,  and  previously 
arranged  for  the  purpose,  added  very  much  to  the  grand  salute. 
Two  dinners  were  given,  one  by  the  Independent  Volunteer 
Company,  and  one  by  Captain  Devany." 

To  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  July  19th,  Mr.  Cary  writes — 

"I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter, 
forwarded  by  Captain  Chase  of  Providence,  also  your  Report 
and  the  Repository,  directed  to  Mr.  Ashmun,  but  owing  to  his 
absence,  they  have  fallen  into  my  hands;  and  permit  me  to  say, 
that  these  communications  are  read  with  pleasure,  aud  that 
nothing  affords  more  joy  to  the  Colony,  than  to  hear  of  the  pros- 
perity of  the  Colonization  Society,  and  that  you  have  some 
hopes  of  aid  from  the  General  Government,  which  makes  us 
more  desirous  to  enlarge  our  habitation  and  extend  the  borders 
of  the  Colony. 

"I  must  say,  from  the  flattering  prospects  of  your  Society,  I 
feel  myself  very  much  at  a  loss  how  to  proceed,  in  the  absence 
of  Mr.  Ashmun,  with  regard  to  making  provisions  for  the  recep- 
tion of  a  large  number  of  Emigrants,  which  appears  to  be  indis- 
pensably necessary.  Therefore,  after  receiving  your  communi- 
cation, we  conceived  the  following  to  be  the  most  safe  and  pru- 
dent course.  First,  to  make  arrangements  to  have  erected  at 
Millsburg,  houses  to  answer  as  receptacles  sufficient  to  shelter 
from  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  persons.  I  have 
therefore  extended  the  duties  of  Mr.  Benson  so  as  to  embrace 
that  object.  I  was  led  to  this  course  from  the  following  conside- 
rations. IHrst,  from  the  productiveness  of  the  Millsburg  lands 
and  the  fewness  of  their  inhabitants.  I  know  if  Mr.  Ashmun 
were  present,  it  would  be  a  principal  object  with  him  to  push 
that  settlement  forward  with  all  possible  speed,  and  that  for 
this  purpose,  he  would  send  the  emigrants  by  the  first  two  or 
three  expeditions  to  that  place.  I  think  that  those  from  the 
fresh  water  rivers,,  if  carried  directly  after  their  arrival  here,  up 


1S28.J  From  Liberia*  Ql$ 

to  Millsburg,  would  suffer  very  little  from  change  of  climate.— < 
Second,  the  fertility  of  the  land  is  such  a  temptation  to  the  far- 
mer, that  unless  he  possesses  laziness  in  its  extreme  degree,  he 
cannot  resist  it;  he  must  and  will  go  to  work.  Thirdly,  it  is 
important  to  strengthen  that  settlement  against  any  possible  at- 
tack; and  though  we  apprehend  no  hostilities  from  the  natives, 
yet  we  would  have  each  settlement  strong  enough  to  repel  them. 
"I  am  happy  to  say,  that  the  health,  peace  and  prosperity  of 
the  Colony,  I  think,  is  still  advancing,  and  I  hope  that  the 
Board  of  Managers  may  have  their  wishes  and  expectations  rea- 
lized to  their  fullest  extent,  with  regard  to  the  present  and  fu- 
ture prosperity  of  the  Colony." 

July  17. — "If  I  could  be  allowed  one  suggestion  to  the  Board 
of  Managers,  I  would  mention  the  importance  of  having  here  for 
the  use  of  the  Colony,  a  vessel  large  enough  to  run  down  as  low 
as  Cape  Pal  mas.  It  would,  I  think,  be  found  to  save  a  very 
great  expense  to  the  Society.  She  might  occasionally  run  up 
also  to  Sierra  Leone. 

"  Until  we  can  raise  crops  sufficient  to  supply  a  considerable 
number  of  new  comers  every  year,  such  an  arrangement  as  will 
enable  us  to  proceed  farther  to  the  leward  than  we  have  ever 
done,  in  order  to  procure  supplies,  will  be  indispensably  neces- 
sary; as  there  we  can  procure  Indian  Corn,  Palm  Oil,  and  live 
stock.  For  these,  neither  the  slave  traders  nor  others,  give  them- 
selves much  trouble.  Corn  can  be  bought  there  for  from  fifteen 
to  twenty  cents  per  bushel.  Fifteen  or  twenty  bushels  which  I 
bought  of  Captain  Woodbury,  I  have  been  using  instead  of  rice 
for  the  last  two  months.  Besides,  it  can  be  ground  into  meal, 
and  would  be  better  than  any  that  can  be  sent.  Upon  the  sup- 
posed inquiry,  will  not  the  lands  of  the  Colony  produce  Corn? — 
they  will  produce  it  in  abundance;  but  with  the  quantity  of 
lands  appropriated  at  present,  and  the  means  to  cultivate  them, 
each  land-holder  will,  I  think,  be  able  to  raise  but  little  more 
than  may  be  required  by  his  own  family,  and  consequently  will 
have  little  to  dispose  of  to  new  comers.* 

"Permit  me  to  inform  the  Board,   that  proposals  have  been 

*  It  has  been  resolved  by  the  Board  of  Managers  to  increase  the  quantity 
of  land  allotted  to  each  settler. 


214  JDeath  of  Mr.  Jishmum  [Sept 

made  by  a  number  of  very  respectable  citizens  in  Monrovia,  to 
commence  a  settlement  near  the  head  of  the  Montserado  River, 
which  would  be  a  kind  of  farming  establishment;  which,  should 
it  be  the  pleasure  of  the  Board  to  approve,  would  be  followed 
up  with  great  spirit,  and  found  to  contribute  largely  towards  ir^ 
creasing  our  crops,  for  the  soil  is  very  promising." 


Deat\\  of  Mx.  Aslimvm. 


We  weep,  for  a  burning  and  a  shining  light  is  extinguished. 
The  Colonial  Agent,  Mr.  Ashmun,  expired  at  New  Haven^ 
(Con.)  on  the  25th  of  August. 

Having  announced  this  mournful  event,  we  feel  inclined  to  si- 
lence; for  we  can  say  nothing  which  will  adequately  represent 
the  worth  of  our  Friend's  character,  the  moral  sublimity  of  his 
death,  or  the  loss  which  it  has  occasioned  to  that  holy  cause 
which  owed  so  much  to  his  exertions.  A  very  brief  and  imper- 
fect sketch  of  his  life  however,  may  perhaps  show  the  necessity, 
and  excite  the  desire  for  a  more  particular  and  extended  biogra- 
phy; and  thus  contribute,  in  humble  measure  at  least,  to  pre- 
pare the  way  for  those  powerful  effects  which  may  be  confident- 
ly expected  from  a  full  and  a  fair  exhibition  of  his  example. 

Jehudi  Ashmun,  Esq.,  was  born  of  respectable  and  pious 
parents  in  Champiain,  New  York,  in  1794.  In  childhood  he 
was  thoughtful  and  reserved,  remarkably  fond  of  books  and  ex- 
tremely ambitious  of  literary  fame.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he 
commenced  study,  in  preparation  for  college,  under  the  instruc- 
tion of  the  Rev.  Amos  Pettingill,  the  worthy  minister  of  his  na- 
tive place,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  some  interesting  facts 
in  his  early  history.  He  made  rapid  progress,  and  gave  promise 
of  distinction.  At  this  time  he  appears  to  have  indulged  doubts 
concerning  the  truth  of  Christianity,  and  intent  upon  the  accom- 
plishment of  selfish  purposes,  was  regardless  alike  of  the  service 
and  the  honour  of  God. 

But  it  pleased  God  to  show  him  the  glory  of  his  perfections. 


1828.]  Death  of  M\  JshiUiim  215 

and  to  make  him  tremble  before  the  power,  the  justice,  and  the 
goodness,  which  he  had  offended.  In  view  of  hi9  sins,  he 
felt  the  worth  of  Christ's  Atonement,  and  was  astonished  that 
be  had  so  long  been  insensible  to  his  criminality  and  his  danger, 
and  utterly  neglected  the  only  means  of  salvation.  When  sub- 
tlued  by  the  truth  and  the  grace  of  God,  the  vividness  of  his  own 
impressions  led  him  to  believe  that  it  would  be  easy  to  produce 
leligious  conviction  in  the  minds  of  others,  but  having  attempted 
to  do  this,  he  returned,  like  Melanchthon,  from  the  effort,  griev- 
ed and  disappointed.  He  no  longer  trusted  in  his  abilities,  and 
well  nigh  despaired  of  salvation.  He  was  humbled;  but  the  evi- 
dences of  his  faith  soon  became  clearer  to  himself  and  toothers, 
and  he  publicly  professed  his  hope  in  the  Saviour  of  the  World. 
Henceforth,  until  his  death,  his  belief  in  the  great  doctrines  of 
Christianity  appears  to  have  been  unwavering;  and  to  exemplify 
their  spirit  and  extend  their  influence,  was  deemed  by  him  the 
noblest  object  of  life. 

Having  pursued  his  studies  with  high  reputation,  both  at  Bur- 
lington and  Middlebury  Colleges,  he  graduated  at  the  former  in 
1816,  and  without  delay  prepared  himself  for  the  ministry,  and 
was  soon  elected  a  Professor  in  the  Theological  Seminary  at  Ban- 
gor, Maine.  Owing  to  peculiar  circumstances,  his  connection  with 
this  Institution  was  of  short  duration,  though  he  ever  remember- 
ed with  devout  gratitude,  the  deep  religious  interest  which  was 
excited  by  his  preaching  and  his  labours.  After  leaving  the 
Bangor  Seminary,  he  resided  for  some  time  in  the  District  of 
Columbia,  where  he  became  a  member  of  the  Protestant  Episco- 
pal Church;  conducted  the  editorial  department  of  the  Theolo- 
gical Repertory,  and  published  his  Memoirs  of  th;j  Rev.  Samuel 
Bacon,  the  earliest  martyr  in  the  cause  of  the  Colonization  So- 
ciety; a  work  which  exhibited  unequivocal  evidences  both  of  ta- 
lent and  piety,  and  which  thousands  would  have  read  with  in- 
terest and  advantage  had  they  been  informed  of  its  merits.— 
Among  the  various  subjects  which  at  this  time  occupied  his 
thoughts,  was  that  of  establishing  a  monthly  journal  for  the 
American  Colonization  Society,  the  plan  of  which  was  matured, 
and  the  first  number  published.  Sufficient  patronage,  however, 
was  wanting  to  sustain  it,  and  the  work  failed. 

Thus  did  the  Almighty  conduct  our  Friend  by  unexpected 


&161-  Death  of  Mr.  Ashmuui  [Sept 

events  to  a  situation,  from  which  Africa  presented  claims  to  his 
services  in  a  light  and  with  a  force  which  were  well  nigh  irre- 
sistible. By  writing  the  life  of  Bacon,  and  becoming  familiar 
with  the  object  and  proceedings  of  the  Colonization  Society, 
the  miseries  of  Africa  were  disclosed  before  him,  and  his  spirit 
was  stirred  within  him  at  the  sight.  He  embarked  for  the  Co- 
lony in  the  Brig  Strong,  June  19th,  1822,  and  arrived  at  Cape 
Montserado  on  the  8th  of  August.  He  assumed  the  Agency  at 
the  most  critical  period  in  the  history  of  the  Colony,  shortly 
after  the  little  band  of  settlers  had  resolved  at  all  hazards  to  re- 
tain possession  of  Montserado,  and  when  both  the  previous 
Agents  were  on  their  passage  to  the  United  States.  The  diffi- 
culties of  the  Colony,  and  the  extraordinary  talent  and  ener- 
gy evinced  by  the  departed,  under  circumstances  most  trying  t<\ 
humanity,  are  justly  and  impressively  described  in  the  follow- 
ing passage  from  the  very  able  Sermon  delivered  at  his  Funeral, 
by  the  Rev.  Leonard  Bacon. 

"He  found  them  almost  without  houses  to  protect  themselves 
from  the  rains  of  their  inclement  season,  which  was  then  at  its 
height,  much  less  able  to  afford  shelter  for  the  new  emigrants 
who  had  accompanied  him.  He  found  the  establishment  just 
ready  to  sink  in  disorder  and  dismay.  The  settlers  were  almost 
defenceless.  The  native  princes,  who  had  sold  them  the  terri- 
tory with  the  treacherous  intention  that  they  should  not  settle 
there,  were  threatening  to  destroy  them,  and  were  forming  com- 
binations for  that  purpose.  In  such  an  emergency  it  was,  thai 
he  came  to  a  work  entirely  new.  He  had  been  educated  for  the 
work  of  preaching  the  gospel.  He  had  been  a  teacher  in  a  lite 
rary  institution.  He  was  still  a  young  man.  And  now  he  had 
come  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  an  unorganized,  feeble, 
heterogeneous  community.  He  was  to  act  the  Legislator; — he 
was  to  form  and  put  in  operation,  a  system  of  government;  he 
was  to  sway  the  minds  of  this  unformed  mass  of  human  beings, 
and  mould  them  into  unity;  he  was  to  make  them  freemen,  and 
habituate  them  to  the  business  of  governing  themselves.  At  the 
same  time  he  must  act  the  Soldier; — he  must  rouse  in  his  little 
Hock  of  once  degraded  men,  the  spirit  of  manhood  and  the  en- 
thusiasm of  self-defence,  and  he  must  head  them  in  the  conflict. 
He  must  act  the  Engineer;-— he  must  lay  out  the  fortification** 


t828.]  Death  of  Mr.  Ashmum  217 

^f  his  little  city,  and  superintend  their  hasty  construction;  he 
must  take  care  that  the  very  dwellings — even  the  temporary 
huts  and  shelters  of  the  people — are  constructed  with  reference 
to  security  from  the  enemy,  and  facility  of  defence  in  an  assault* 
All  this  must  be  commenced  at  once,  for  delay  was  ruin.     And 
just  as  all  this  was  commencing,  the  fever  which  attacks  almost 
every  man  on  his  first  arrival  from  a  temperate  to  a  tropical  cli- 
mate, attacked  him  and  the  fifty  emigrants  who  had  come  with, 
him,  with  uncommon  violence.     They  were  all  sick — sick  with- 
out a  physician — sick  without  any  proper  shelter  from  the  rains 
— sick  almost  without  medicines.     His  own  wife,  among  others, 
was  soon  carried  to  the  grave.     But  for  him,  and  for  all,   there 
was  no  time  to  relax  their  efforts.     Even  in  sickness  and  dis- 
tress, there  could  be  no  respite.     Their  works  must  go  on;  for, 
daily  and  nightly,  they  were  expecting  that  an  army  of  savages 
would  be  upon  them.     While  prostrated  by  disease,  in  the  lucid 
intervals  between  the  returns  of  delirium,  our  friend  was  com- 
pelled to  rise  from  his  sick  bed,   to  inspect  the  condition  and 
progress  of  these  operations,    to  receive  reports,   to  give  out  or- 
ders, to  reanimate  the  weary  and  desponding,  and  to  superintend 
all  the  affairs  of  this  dismayed  and  distressed  community.     All 
this  he  did;  and  when  at  last  the  fever  had  left  him  in  extreme 
debility,  and  he  was  just  beginning  to  recover  strength,  the  dan- 
ger which  they  had  been  so  long  apprehending,    came.     About 
three  months  after  his  arrival,  when  their  defences  had  been  on- 
ly partially  completed,  and  when  their  entire  effective  force  was 
thirty-five  men  and  boys,  they  were  attacked  at  the  dawn  of  day 
by  a  force  of  at  least  eight  hundred  armed  savages.     They  were 
taken  by  surprise,   and  the  enemy  were  almost  in  the  midst  of 
them  before  the  alarm  was  given.     By  an  effort  of  desperate  va- 
lor, directed  by  the  extraordinary  self-possession  and  energy  of 
our  departed  friend,  the  enemy  were  driven  off,    and  the  settle- 
ment on  which  were  suspended  so  many  hopes  of  humanity  and 
religion   was   delivered.       A  few  days  afterwards,    while  the 
wounded  were  still  helpless,  and  the  well  were  exhausted  with 
constant  fatigue  and  watching  and  alarm,   the  enemy  returned 
with  redoubled  numbers  and  redoubled  rage  for  their  destruc- 
tion;  and  again,  by  a  valour  and  energy  which  would  do  honour 


2i8  Death  of  Mr,  Jlshmuu*  [Sept 

to  the  history  of  any  man  or  any  people,  they  were  repulsed, 
and  utterly  defeated. 

**I  have  thus  described  the  commencement  of  his  labours  and 
sufferings  in  Africa,  because  there  is  no  other  way  in  which  I 
could  so  well  describe  his  character:  inasmuch  as  it  is  only  by 
what  a  man  has  done,  that  we  can  ever  distinctly  understand 
what  he  has  been.  And  what  sort  of  character  it  was  that  could 
act  thus  in  circumstances  such  as  these,  it  is  not  difficult  to  di- 
vine. Let  me  say  then,  that  the  same  energy,  the  same  self- 
possession  and  promptitude,  the  same  exhaustless  diligence,  th& 
same  vigor  and  quickness  of  intellectual  power,  the  same1 
courage  amid  difficulties  and  dangers,  have  been  exhibited  in 
all  his  labours  there.  The  establishment  which  he  found  on  the 
brink  of  extinction,  he  left  in  prosperity  and  peace.  The  little, 
colony  which  he  found  defenceless,  weak  and  trembling  witk 
dismay,  he  left  so  strengthened,  as  to  be  safe  against  any  proba- 
ble attack  by  land  or  sea.  The  people  whom  he  began  to  rule 
when  they  were  few,  unorganized,  and  disunited,  he  has  suc- 
cessfully trained  to  habits  of  discipline,  and  taught  to  enjoy  the 
blessings  of  rational  liberty  and  real  independence.  And  hovr 
well  he  has  governed  that  people,  how  happy  he  has  made  them, 
how  he  has  drawn  their  affections  round  him,  their  grief  at  his 
departure  can  testify.  One  of  their  own  number,  in  whose  hands 
our  friend,  on  leaving  the  colony,  placed  the  administration  of 
affairs,  thus  speaks  of  the  occasion  of  his  embarkation  for  his  na- 
tive country.  'The  Colonial  Agent,  went  on  board  the  brig 
Doris,  March  26,  1828,  escorted  by  three  companies  of  the  mili- 
tary, and  when  taking  leave  he  delivered  a  short  address  which 
was  truly  affecting.  Never,  I  suppose  were  greater  tokens  of 
respect  shown  by  any  community  on  taking  leave  of  their  head. 
At  least  two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants  of  Monrovia,  men,  women 
and  children,  were  out  on  this  occasion;  and  nearly  all  parted 
from  him  with  tears.  In  my  opinion;  the  hope  of  his  return  in 
a  few  months,  alone  enabled  them  to  give  him  up.  He  is  indeed 
dear  to  this  people,  and  it  will  be  a  joyful  day  when  we  are  per- 
mitted again  to  see  him.'  Ah  that  day!  What  grief  will  be 
theirs,  when  they  learn  that  they  shall  see  his  face  no  more." 

When  we  consider  the  small  number  and  undisciplined  cha- 


X828.]  Death  of  Mr.  Ashmmip  Q1Q 

racter  of  the  colonists,  the  actual  sickness  of  many  of  them,  their 
almost  defenceless  condition,   the  strength  of  the  combination 
against  them,  and  the  resolution  with  which  it  was  brought  to  act 
for  their  destruction;  when  we  recollect,  that  during  all  the  pre- 
parations for  an  attack,   Mr.  Ashmun  was  scarcely  able  to  rise 
from  his  bed,  yet  that  every  arrangement  must  be  made  by  him, 
and  indeed  most  measures  executed  under  his  own  eye,  we  can- 
not indeed  fail  to  admire  the  directing  skill  and  energy  by  which 
the  settlers  were  enabled  to  repel  successfully  and  even  trium- 
phantly the  repeated  assaults  of  the  barbarians.     It  is  our  candid 
opinion,  that  the  courage  and  ability  exhibited  by  the  late  Colo- 
nial  Agent  in  the  contest  described  in  the  preceding  extract, 
have  very  seldom,  if  ever,  been  surpassed.    The  result  establish- 
ed his  character  among  all  the  neighbouring  tribes,   and  made 
his  name  a  terror  to  the  chiefs  who  would  gladly  have  violated 
their  solemn  engagements  could  they  have  been  sustained  by 
any  reasonable  hope  of  plunder.     But  in  the  'single  white  man' 
on  the  Cape,  they  saw  a  power  with  which  they  dared  not  trifle; 
which  controlled  by  justice,   held  conscience  as  an  ally  even  in 
treacherous  bosoms;  and  thus  weakened  its  enemies  while  they 
knew  it  not,  and  frustrated  their  schemes  as  by  spiritual  agency. 
It  was  a  power  which  they  not  only  feared,   but  respected.     In 
the  presence  of  that  white  man,  who  at  the  head  of  a  little  band, 
untrained  to  war,   had  withstood  their  furious  onset,  and  filled 
the  hearts  of  several  hundreds  of  them  with  dismay,   they  felt 
the  influences  of  christian  kindness;  saw  manifested  principles 
of  moral  power,  to  which  they  were  before  strangers;  which  must 
prove  firm  ground  for  confidence  and  the  safeguard  of  the  good, 
but  which  indignantly  rebuked  every  species  of  falsehood  and 
crime.     They  observed  that  these  principles  had  an  unchangea- 
bleness  of  character,   which  mere  regard  to  expediency  could 
not  produce;  and  were  told  of  that  Omnipotent  Father,  in  whose 
revelation  they  are  inculcated,  and  who  requires  his  creatures 
to  discern  and  to  imitate  (at  least  to  aim  at  imitating)  the  recti- 
tude and  beneficence  of  his  own  perfect  character. 

It  is  indeed  our  conviction,  that  among  the  various  means 
^hich  Providence  has  been  pleased  to  select  and  employ  for  the 
security  and  improvement  of  our  infant  Colony,  whether  we 
look  at  its  internal  arrangements  or  external  relations,  none* 


&20  Death  of  Mr.  Jlshmuu.*  [Stents 

perhaps,   has  been  more  efficacious  than  the  elevated  Christian 
principle  of  the  Colonial  Agent. 

To  exhibit  distinctly,  fairly,  and  completely,  the  character  of 
our  lamented  friend,  and  to  present  an  adequate  view  of  his 
proceedings,  with  their  results,  during  his  residence  of  more 
than  six  years  in  Africa,  would  require  not  a  few  pages,  but  a 
volume.  From  the  hour  when  he  landed  in  Africa  to  that  of  his 
re-embarkation  for  his  native  country,  he  evinced  a  sacred  de- 
votedness  to  the  cause  for  which  he  died.  He  appeared  from 
the  first,  to  form  a  clear  conception  of  the  greatness  of  the  ob- 
ject to  be  accomplished  by  his  labours.  Hence,  his  plans  were 
comprehensive  and  perfectly  developed  to  his  own  mind,  the 
means  of  accomplishing  them  well  ascertained  and  arranged  be- 
forehand, so  that  in  executing  them  he  could  readily  exemplify 
his  own  maxim,  that  the  "»;reat  kev  to  success  in  business  was 
to  aim  only  at  effects."  Placed  at  the  head  of  a  small  commu- 
nity formed  principally  of  unlettered  men,  some  of  them  sadly 
degraded  by  their  past  condition,  widely  separated  from  the 
Christian  World,  exposed  to  the  deleterious  influences  of  heath- 
en tribes,  just  ushered  into  circumstances  designed  to  prepare 
them  for  an  independent  political  existence;  it  was  his  to  create 
(we  had  almost  said)  their  social  character;  to  kindle  in  their 
souls  public  spirit  and  the  sentiments  of  honourable  action;  to 
excite  industry,  enterprise  and  courage;  to  shape  and  polish  the 
rough  materials  before  him,  and  give  to  them  order,  strength, 
and  union.  He  must  provide  for  the  permanent  defence  of  the 
Colony.  He  must  survey  its  territory,  and  allot  to  each  settler 
the  farm  which  he  is  to  cultivate.  By  every  method  of  economy 
must  he  direct  the  scanty  means  which  the  Society  has  entrust- 
ed to  him,  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  Colony,  yet  incapable  of 
furnishing  provisions  for  its  own  subsistence.  Emigrants  are 
expected,  and  buildings  must  be  erected  for  their  temporary  ac- 
commodation. Public  labour  is  required,  and  the  expense  of  it 
can  be  defrayed  only  by  the  most  skilful  management  and  a 
scrupulous  regard  to  the  credit  of  the  Agency.  A  system  of 
government  is  to  be  set  in  operation;  officers  to  be  appointed 
and  instructed  in  their  duties;  courts  of  justice  established  in 
which  the  Agent  must  preside;  ordinances  to  be  enacted  in  rela- 
tion to  subjects  various  and  often  new;  schools  to  be  founded;; 


JS28.]  'Death  of  Mr.  Mhmm'.  ttt 

negotiations  conducted  with  the  natives,  for  the  purposes  of 
trade  and  the  extension  of  territory;  and  full  and  accurately  de- 
tailed statements  of  the  wants,  the  improvements,  and  the  pros- 
pects of  the  Colony,  to  be  frequently  prepared  and  transmitted 
to  the  Society.  But  to  all  this  complex  machinery,  principally 
depending  for  its  movements  upon  the  mind  of  the  Colonial 
Agent,  and  which  could  not  be  regulated  without  familiar  ac- 
quaintance with  all  its  parts,  must  be  added  the  entire  concern 
for  the  Recaptured  Africans;  involving  high  responsibilities,  and 
not  to  be  conducted  without  a  serious  amount  of  care  and  labour. 
But  to  our  lamented  friend  belonged  a  mind  prepared  for  every 
•ffbrt  of  which  humanity  is  capable;  which  could  adapt  itself  to 
every  variety  of  circumstances,  and  which,  governed  by  motives 
from  beyond  the  world,  was  not  to  be  overwhelmed  or  broken  in 
its  powers,  by  the  mere  shocks  of  temporal  calamity.  On  all  oc- 
casions did  he  exhibit  a  lofty  spirit  of  self-control,  which  no 
influences  of  earth  could  reach;  which  preserved  his  faculties 
undisturbed,  unclouded,  and  prompt  to  engage  with  their  entire 
energy  in  every  work  of  duty; — a  versatility  of  talent  which 
enabled  him  to  turn  from  one  subject  to  another,  from  the  sever- 
er and  more  perplexing  to  the  lighter  and  humbler  parts  of  busi- 
ness, with  graceful  eas";  decision*  seldom  unfortunate,  because 
resting  upon  clear  and  accurate  judgments;  industry,  which 
reckoned  moments  invaluable,  and  was,  perhaps,  never  exceed- 
ed; a  perseverance  which  adhered  with  unyielding  tenacity  to  its 
object;  and  an  activity  and  laboriousness  which  permitted  no 
one  mental  power  to  remain  unemployed,  but  which  gave  con- 
stantly to  each  and  every  such  power  its  full  effect.  A  burning 
and  unquenchable  ardor  to  make  the  most  of  life,  glowed  within 
his  bosom;  and  even  the  stranger  could  not  fail  to  discern  in  the 
light  of  his  features,  and  the  deep-toned  expressiveness  of  his 
language,  the  enthusiasm  which  pervaded  and  moved  his  soul. 
And  this  enthusiasm  was  kindled  by  devotion.  It  was  Piety*  in 
its  genuine  and  sublime  influences,  elevating  the  affections  to  the 
"Eternal  Spirit,  and  deriving  from  holy  meditation  upon  the  Di- 
vine Mind,  some  resemblance  of  its  perfection;  which  gave  to  our 
friend's  character  such  dignity,  worth,  and  power.  We  must 
leave  it  to  another  age  to  estimate  the  value  of  his  efforts. — 
"Some thing  of  their  importance  is  indeed  manifest  to  us:  a  pros- 


2£2  Death  of  Mr.  Ashman,  [SepJ, 

perous  Colony  established  upon  sure  foundations;  twelve  hun- 
dred individuals,  once  excluded  from  the  higher  blessings  of  ex- 
istence,  now  freemen  indeed,  and  blessed  with  all  the  motives 
which  rouse  the  soul  to  useful  and  virtuous  action;  wondering 
heathens  assembling  to  learn  the  lessons  of  our  Faith,  and  catch 
the  spirit  of  the  Gospel;  a  great  and  enlightened  nation  waking 
its  dormant  energies  to  consummate  a  most  holy  work  of  charity; 
these  are  effects  already  visible,  and  obviously  in  great  measure, 
perhaps,  mainly,  resulting  from  his  exertions.  But  it  is  only 
by  looking  to  the  future,  by  indulging  reflections  on  what  with 
the  favour  of  Providence  our  infant  Colony  is  destined  to  be- 
come, by  contemplating  our  own  country  as  relieved  from  a 
most  oppressive  evil,  and  Africa  made  an  empire  of  truth,  liber- 
ty and  virtue,  fruitful  in  works  of  righteousness  and  joyful  in 
christian  hope,  that  we  form  even  a  faint  conception  of  the  im- 
portance of  what  the  deceased  has  done,  or  the  loss  which  both 
Humanity  and  Religion  have  sustained  by  his  death. 

But  however  dark,  in  this  event,  may  appear  the  ways  of 
Providence,  their  wisdom  and  benevolence  is  not  to  be  question- 
ed. And  we  trust  as  our  friend  did  not  live,  so  he  has  not  died 
in  vain.  Those  who  stood  by  his  death-bed  can  never  forget 
the  moral  sublimity  of  the  scene.  He  survived  but  fifteen  days 
after  his  arrival  at  New  Haven,  and  these  were  days  of  great 
bodily  weakness  and  occasionally  of  distress;  but  his  soul  pre- 
served a  majestic  tranquillity  and  clearness,  gathering  brightness 
and  purity  as  he  approached  the  grave,  from  the  light  of  that 
"world  which  he  was  so  soon  to  enter.  His  sufferings  appeared 
to  be  well  nigh  forgotten,  while  his  duties  were  constantly  re>- 
membered.  To  expressions  of  human  applause  or  even  of  ap- 
probation, he  would  not  willingly  listen,  and  with  profound  hu- 
mility he  remarked,  "I  do  not  know  of  any  such  thing  as  self- 
righteousness;  I  can  rely  only  on  the  righteousness  of  Christ." 
Soon  after  his  arrival,  he  expressed  a  strong  desire,  if  it  might 
be  the  will  of  God.  to  return  to  Africa;  but  subsequently,  seemed 
only  anxious  to  finish  his  work  and  have  his  spirit  prepared  for 
the  great  transition.  Indeed,  for  several  days,  his  remarkable 
patience,  his  entire  resignation,  his  deep  self-abasement,  his  af- 
fecting devotion,  and  his  holy  magnanimity,  astonished  the 
beholders  and  they  felt  themselves  in  the  presence  of  one  who 


1828.]  Death  of  Mr.  Ashat&to  22$ 

could  adopt  the  language  of  Paul,  "none  of  these  things  move 
me;  for  I  am  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure 
is  at  hand."  On  the  last  day  of  his  life,  while  the  writer 
of  this  sustained  him  as  he  sat  up,  the  perspiration  flow- 
ing from  his  pallid  brow  and  every  feature  expressing  death,  he* 
offered  up  his  last  supplication  in  terms  most  solemn  and  affect- 
ing. A  few  words  uttered  with  perfect  distinctness  have  been 
preserved. 

Prayer. — "O  my  Heavenly  Father,  look  mercifully  upon  thy 
afflicted  servant,  and  do  not  lay  upon  him  that  which  through, 
weakness  he  is  unable  to  bear,  but  let  thy  grace  be  sufficient  for 
Bim.  May  he  desire  communion  with  thee  above  all  other  bles- 
sings. Bless  my  friend  here  present;  keep  him  in  thy  service, 
and  graciously  reward  him  for  all  his  kindness.  O  bless  all 
those  who  have  shown  a  tender  concern  for  me  in  this  place,  and 
all  my  relatives  and  friends,  and  let  them  never  come  into  con- 
demnation. O  bless  the  Colony  and  that  poor  people  among 
whom  I  have  laboured.  Grant  to  me,  O  merciful  Father,  saving 
faith,  sanctifying  faith,  and  glorify  thy  great  name  in  my  eter- 
nal salvation.  Grant  these  blessings,  O  God  of  Grace,  for  the 
Redeemer's  sake,  who  suffered  for  us,  and  to  thee  shall  praise 
»e  given,  through  all  eternity,  through  all  eternity.  Amen! 
Amen!" 

During  the  evening  of  his  departure  he  conversed  with  several 
gentlemen  who  visited  him,  gave  instructions  concerning  an  Af- 
rican lad  rescued  by  him  from  pirates,  and  who  had  accompanied 
him  on  his  voyage,  and  neglected  nothing  which  seemed  to  de- 
mand his  attention.  Just  before  twelve  he  sat  up,  made  one  or 
two  requests  and  when  reclined  again  upon  his  pillow,  almost 
instantly  slept  in  his  Saviour.  Not  more  gently  does  childhood 
sink  to  rest,  or  daylight  fade  from  heaven.  Not  more  simply 
and  majestically  does  the  sun  finish  his  course,  when  he  goes 
down  amid  the  brightness  of  a  cloudless  sky. 

Blessed  be  God;  the  example  of  our  friend  survives  him,  and 
shall  survive  him,  until  the  end  of  time.  Thousands  shall  be 
excited  by  it  to  apply  themselves  to  the  holy  work  of  Africa's 
regeneration;  and  when  this  shall  be  accomplished,  when  a  free, 


-224-  Pecuniary  Wants  of  the  Society,  8[C.  [Sept. 

an  enlightened,  and  christian  people,  shall  cover  that  continent, 
now  buried  in  darkness  and  in  crime,  the  name  of  ASHMUN, 
shall  be  a  word  everywhere  familiar,  even  to  infant  lips;  a  name, 
loved,  admired,  and  venerated,  while  the  coloured  race  exists^ 
©r  a  human  voice  is  heard  in  the  dwellings  of  Africa* 


TecwwiaYy  *Wants  of  the  Society. 

It  will  be  absolutely  impossible  for  the  Board  of  Managers  \% 
effect  the  important  purpose  of  despatching  a  vessel  with  emi- 
grants to  the  Colony  this  Autumn,  unless  they  shall  soon  be  fa- 
voured with  more  liberal  contributions.  Applications  for  a  pas- 
sage are  almost  daily  received  from  respectable  coloured  persons, 
which  cannot,  without  increased  means,  be  satisfactorily  answer- 
ed. Every  Auxiliary  Society,  and  all  our  friends,  are  then,  at 
this  time,  earnestly  appealed  to  for  that  aid.  without  which, 
many  now  waiting  to  embark,  our  own  hopes,  and  public  expec- 
tation, must  be  greatly  disappointed. 

Colonial  Agent. 

We  have  the  pleasure  to  announce  the  fact,  that  Dr.  Richard 
Randall  of  this  City,  a  highly  respected  member  of  the  Board 
of  Managers,  has  been  elected  to  succeed  the  late  Mr.  Ashmun 
in  the  Colonial  Agency  at  Liberia.  He  is  expected  very  short- 
ly to  embark  for  the  Colony,  and  enter  without  delay  upon  the 
arduous  duty  of  his  station,  and  we  fervently  pray  that  a  good 
Providence  may  be  his  safeguard,  and  preserve  him  for  eminent 
usefulness  among  those  over  whom  he  has  been  called  to  preside/ 

A*ote. 

We  are  compelled  for  want  of  room,  to  postpone  several  arti- 
cles^  with  the  usual  list  of  Donations,  to  our  next  number. 


THE 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 


COLONIAL  JOTJRNAL. 


Vol.  IV.  OCTOBER,  1828.  No.  8. 


Jin  Address  delivered  at  Springfield,  before  the  Hampden  Colonic 
zation  Society,  July  4th,  1828.  By  Wm.  B.  0.  Peabody, 
Esq.     Published  by  request  of  the  Society. 

The  practice  of  men  is  generally  no  better  than  their  prin- 
ciples. The  character  of  the  latter,  then,  is  regarded  with  rea- 
son as  of  supreme  interest  to  human  society,  and  worthy  of  the 
anxious  and  undivided  attention  of  every  individual.  And 
though  correctness  of  sentiment  is  not  always  and  universally 
connected  with  virtuous  conduct,  yet  the  last  is  not  to  be  ex- 
pected, where  the  first  does  not  exist. 

Christianity  is  a  perfect  religion.  The  whole  field  of  human 
duty  is  marked  out  by  its  laws;  and  he  cannot  err  who  will  in 
all  things,  and  with  an  unbiassed  mind,  follow  the  clear  light  of 
its  precepts.  Still  we  cannot  deny  that  the  professed  advocates 
of  this  Religion  seldom  do  it  justice  by  a  full  exemplification  of 
its  worth. 

The  subject  of  Mr.   Peabody's  address  is  "the  reason  of  the 

imperfect  influence  of  Christianity  on  the  public   relations  of 

men."      This  leads  him  to  speak  of  slavery  and   war,  which  he 

remarks,    "have  grown  up  together;    which  still  outlive  many 

29 


226  Review  of  an  Address  delivered  before  [Oct. 

of  the  abuses  that  Christianity  has  overthrown;  and  which  will 
not  be  divided  in  their  fall,  when  our  religion  governs  the 
world." 

f*  1  may  as  well  say  in  the  beginning1,  that  I  am  speaking"  simply  of  the 
relation  of  slavery,  and  the  practice  of  war.  I  am  not  complaining  of  the 
owners  of  slaves;  *hey  cannot  get  rid  of  them;  it  would  be  as  humane  to 
throw  them  from  ihe  decks  in  the  middle  passage,  as  to  set  them  free  in 
our  country.  Neither  do  I  condemn  defensive  war;  it  rests  upon  the  right 
of  self-defence,  which  individuals  possess,  and  may  delegate  to  govern- 
ments if  they  will.  I  have  no  taste  for  sweeping  condemnation.  I  can 
sympathise  with  the  owners  of  slaves,  and  admire  the  patriotic  defenders  of 
their  country,  while  I  detest  war  and  slavery  with  all  my  heart." 

That  these  evils  exist  even  among  those  who  enjoy  the  bene- 
fits of  Christianity,  occasions  no  surprise  to  the  Author  of  this 
address.  And  the  reason  is  "that  Christianity  has  no  more  au- 
thority among  men,  than  they  choose  to  allow  it,"  and  that  this 
is  by  no  means  equal  to  what  it  claims;  that  it  enjoins  on  us  all 
some  duties  which  we  leave  undone,  and  demands  sacrifices  and 
efforts  which  we  have  neglected  to  make. 

"The  first  reason  that  Christianity  has  had  so  little  effect  upon  war  and 
slavery  is,  that  men  regard  the  letter  more  than  the  spirit  of  the  religion. 
They  are  apt  to  measure  and  weig-h  their  duties,  that  they  may  learn  how 
far  they  must  go;  and  how  much  can  be  left  undone.  Many  have  tried  to 
show  that  these  things  are  not  directly  prohibited  in  scripture,  taking  for 
granted  that  every  thing  not  forbidden  in  so  many  words,  is  allowed.  This 
reasoning  has  had  and  still  has  great  effect;  and  yet  it  would  be  easy  t» 
show  that  a  man  might  be  thoroughly  abandoned,  without  seeming  to  vio- 
late the  letter  of  the  Christian  law.  Christianity  does  not  attempt  to  push 
back  the  rushing  torrents  of  passion;  it  g"oes  to  the  fountain  head,  and 
checks  them  when  they  are  just  beginning  to  flow.  —  Whence  come  wars  and 
Jightings  among  you?  If  they  come  from  your  lusts  and  passions,  Christi- 
anity forbids  your  indulging  these  passions,  and  thus  prohibits  war.  It  for- 
bids slavery,  when  it  commands  men  to  be  just  and  kind  to  each  other; 
and  this  is  enough  for  one  who  desires  to  know  and  to  do  his  duty." 

But  the  man  who  has  properly  studied  Christianity,  and  tho- 
roughly imbibed  its  spirit,  will  not  be  inclined  to  evade  the 
strictness  of  its  requirements.  He  will  as  Mr.  Peabody  remarks, 
trace  the  broadest  possible  outline  of  his  duty,  and  fulfil  it  to  the 


1828.]  The  Hampden  Colonization  Society.  SSv 

utmost  of  his  power."  Such  a  man  cannot  fail  to  perceive,  that 
we  are  bound  by  Christianity  to  do  good  unto  all  men  as  we 
have  opportunity,  and  to  aim  at  placing  all  in  circumstances, 
favourable  to  their  temporal  happiness  and  spiritual  improve- 
ment. 

"Another  reason  of  the  limited  influence  of  Christianity  is,  that  it  re- 
quires great  Christian  principle  to  make  men  abandon  vices,  and  very  little 
to  make  men  disapprove  them.  They  content  themselves  with  simply  dis- 
approving- their  own  sins.  Uut  do  you  consider  it  much,  for  a  man  to  con- 
demn liis  own  vices?  No  such  thing"!  You  know  that  even  the  guilty  will 
go  as  far  as  this,  without  the  least  idea  of  reforming1  their  lives.  Yet  we 
fall  into  precisely  this  error  in  regard  to  public  opinion?  we  consider  it  a 
matter  of  triumph  when  the  general  sentiment  sets  strongly  against  any 
prevailing  sin.  A  triumph  perhaps  it  is;  but  not  half  so  great  as  we  ima- 
gine; for  long  after  men  have  learned  to  condemn  the  public  reproach,  you 
find  it  nevertheless  impossible  to  make  them  cast  it  away." 

"It  is  mere  romance  to  suppose  that  the  influence  of  Christianity  is  felt, 
when  men  only  cease  to  condemn  their  crimes.  But  if  we  can  see  this 
point  gained,  it  is  something;  it  may  encourage  us  to  redouble  our  efforts 
to  bring  about  the  desired  reform.  Still  we  must  not  regard  the  nations  as 
fully  persuaded  to  be  Christian,  because  they  tremble  for  a  moment  like 
Felix  before  the  eloquence  of  Paul;  for  though  Christianity  simply  con- 
demns the  practice;  men,  influenced  by  Christianity,  must  go  so  far  as  to 
put  down  the  practice;  for  right  judg.nent  is  not  the  same  with  right  con- 
duct; and  men  must  act  upon  their  principles,  before  they  can  deserve  the 
name  of  Christians. 

"A  third  reason  of  the  limited  influence  of  Christianity  is,  that  we  con- 
sider this  point  as  gained  already. — We  think  that  the  public  feeling  is 
sufficiently  alive  to  the  criminality  of  slavery  and  war,  and  that  no  exertions 
are  necessary  to  add  to  the  prevailing  conviction  of  their  guilt  I  must  say 
that  we  take  praise  to  ourselves  too  soon.  Christianity  can  do  but  Utile  to 
reform  the  world,  if  men  are  so  easily  satisfied  with  their  success.  I  look 
in  vain  for  the  proofs  of  this  general  condemnation  of  these  gigantic  sins  I 
see  on  the  contrary  a  lofty  and  enthusiastic  interest  every  where  excited  by 
deeds  of  battle  and  blood.  I  see  the  guilty  paths  of  great  destroyers, 
traced  upon  the  map  with  breathless  emotion;  I  see  the  finest  productions  of 
earthly  inspiration  growing  out  of  this  corruption,  like  wild  flowers  from 
the  heaps  where  the  bodies  of  the  slain  decay,  and  the  warmest  reverence 
the  world  can  give,  lavished  on  those,  who  trample  most  widely  and  care- 
lessly on  the  rights  and  feelings  of  men.  We  may  say  that  we  admire  not 
the  destruction  nor  the  guilt;  not  the  field  shaken  with  artillery  and  slippery 
with  blood,  but  the  great  intellectual  energy  displayed  in  guiding  the  vast 
masses  of  human  power;  this  will  not  do;  for  great  energy  should  be  detest- 


£28  Review  of  an  Address  delivered  before  [Oct. 

cd  for  its  alliance  with  crime,  rather  than  crime  be  forgiven  because  united 
with  energy.  The  public  religious  feeling  must  be  pronounced  unsound, 
so  long  as  men  can  admire  these  splendid  sins;  and  it  is  absolutely  impossi- 
ble for  one  who  worships  these  destroyers,  to  have  any  real  reverence  for 
the  gentle  greatness  of  the  Son  of  God.  Still  I  see  this  delusion  every- 
where spread.  I  see  these  magnificent  outlaws  gazed  on  by  Christians  with 
overpowering  admiration,  while  the  fair  fame  of  mere  defenders  of  their 
country  seems  dull  and  tame  beside  them.  Even  that  man  to  whom  this 
land  is  more  indebted  than  to  any  other;  whose  name  might  be  pronounced 
here,  without  taking  the  place  in  vain;  I  see  that  his  greatness,  beside  that 
of  heroes  as  the  world  calls  them,  seems  cold  and  lifeless  as  the  marble  from 
which  they  have  hewn  his  form. 

"Neither  is  public  opinion  more  decided  on  the  subject  of  slavery.  There 
are  not  many  who  will  say  that  the  relation  of  master  and  of  slave  is  defensible 
in  itself,  but  there  is  no  general  sense  of  the  importance  of  using  every  en- 
deavour to  remove  the  necessity  which  is  its  only  justification. 

"I  do  not  doubt  that  masters  treat  their  slaves  with  kindness,  nor  that  the 
slaves  are  happier  than  they  could  be  if  set  free  in  this  country;  I  believe 
that  many  a  slave-holder  would  rejoice  to  throw  off  the  burden;  but  they 
should  never  forget,  that  when  the  necessity  which  now  weighs  upon  them 
exists  no  longer,  no  humanity  on  their  part  will  atone  for  their  holding  man 
in  bondage." 

But  another  reason  is  specified  by  our  author,  why  Christian- 
ity so  imperfectly  regulates  human  conduct,  which  is  perhaps 
the  most  formidable,  particularly  as  it  regards  any  attempts  to 
remove  the  great  evils,  principally  considered  in  the  Address. — 
We  are  well  convinced  that  an  able  and  judicious  work  on  the 
influence  which  Christianity  should  exert  on  Governments 
and  all  the  relations  of  political  society,  would  prove  a  noble 
contribution  to  the  best  interests  of  mankind.  Many  things  there 
are,  which  go  to  makeup  what  is  called  National  Honour,  which 
deserve  (as  is  observed  by  the  Author,)  "the  curse  which  David 
breathed  upon  the  mountains  where  the  mighty  had  fallen. "  The 
obstacle  to  which  we  have  alluded,  is  mentioned  in  the  following 
extracts,  which  merit  the  most  serious  consideration. 

"Another  obstacle  to  Christian  influences  has  beeu,  that  men  have  ap- 
plied a  different  morality  to  public  and  private  affairs.  In  private  concerns 
they  profess  to  follow  Christianity;  but  in  public  relations  they  have  made 
up  a  different  standard  of  right  and  wrong;  a  standard  of  interest  and  con- 
venience, founded  on  the  right  of  power.     Thus  we  hear  measures  defend- 


1828.]  The  Hampden  Colonization  Society,  &£9 

ed  on  the  ground  of  necessity,  in  which  there  is  no  necessity,  except  what 
oppression  creates  for  itself;  thus,  belligerents  claim  a  right  to  plunder 
neutral  vessels  trading  with  their  enemy;  thus  private  property  is  free  spoil 
on  the  seas,  while  all  civilized  nations  profess  to  respect  it  on  shore.  In 
more  peaceful  relations  there  have  been  equally  unsocial  and  unnatural 
opinions;  thus  it  was  formerly,  perhaps  is  still  believed,  that  one  nation 
could  not  increase  in  wealth  except  in  proportion  as  others  lost. 

"What  influence  can  Christianity  have  on  public  relations,  where  such 
maxims  are  tolerated  or  forgiven }  The  law  of  nations  is  only  an  enlarge- 
ment of  the  rules  of  justice  and  kindness  that  are  binding  on  individuals. 
Is  a  man  who  has  a  quarrel  with  a  neighbour,  justified  in  preventing  all 
others  from  trading  with  that  neighbour?  Does  any  man  feel  as  if  he  had 
personally  a  better  right  to  rob  and  steal  on  the  water  than  on  shore?  Yet 
such  is  the  claim  of  belligerents,  and  such  the  piracy  which  is  called  priva- 
teering and  reprisal.  Does  any  one  think  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  fair 
exchange  between  individuals;  that  no  man  can  prosper  in  business  except 
by  injuring  others''  Does  any  one  think  it  right  to  involve  all  his  friends  in 
misery,  because  some  trifling  insult  has  been  offered  to  himself?  Such  is 
the  duellist's  principle.  More  profound  absurdities  than  these  cannot  be 
imagined;  still  they  rise  up  in  the  world,  and  set  bounds  to  the  influence  of 
Christianity.  But  Christianity  requires  the  same  of  nations  as  of  individuals; 
and  if  any  nation  under  pretence  of  barbarous  precedent  or  selfish  interest 
refuses  to  submit  to  it,  that  nation's  God  is  not  the  Lord. 

"But  one  reason  of  the  limited  influence  of  Christianity  on  public  rela- 
tions perhaps  includes  all  the  rest  that  can  be  given.  Where  is  there  a 
Christian  nation?  where  is  there  a  community  to  exert  this  happy  influence? 
I  know  that  many  individuals  every  where  are  faithful,  and  there  are  many 
regions  where  religion  is  honoured  and  regarded;  but  I  know  of  none  on 
the  face  of  the  earth,  where  Christian  principles  govern,  nor  where  the 
spirit  of  Christianity  prevails  against  the  spirit  of  selfishness  and  the  world. 
Where  is  the  fear  of  God  foremost  among  those  thoughts  which  every  day 
pass  over  the  hearts  of  men  by  millions?  where  do  men  even  think  of  doing 
to  others  as  they  would  have  others  do  to  them?  What  community  main- 
tains on  the  whole  such  a  character  as  our  religion  is  designed  to  form?  In 
a  Christian  country,  the  law  of  God  should  be  at  least  as  well  obeyed  as 
the  law  of  the  land;  but  if  the  laws  of  the  land  were  as  often  and  fearfully 
broken  as  those  of  Christianity,  society  could  not  hold  together.  Christian 
communities  then  must  not  be  expected  to  remove  these  evils  from  the 
world." 

But  how  are  we  to  reform  society  and  bring  our  holy  religion 
to  act  in  and  throughout  all  its  departments?  How  are  the  great 
evils  which  all  seem  to  regret,  but  which  are  so  deeply  founded, 
and  so  powerfully  sustained,  to  be  overthrown  and  destroyed? 


230  Review  of  an  Mdress,  $c.  [Oct. 

"Some  may  suppose  that  these  vicious  institutions  are  too  firmly  establish- 
ed for  Christianity  to  attack  them,  with  any  hope  of  success;  that  they  have 
a  grasp  which  can  never  be  unclenched  from  the  habits  and  affections  of 
men.  A  strong  grasp  they  certainly  have  even  now;  but  what  was  it  a 
century  ago>  The  world  has  outgrown  them,  and  begins  to  see  their  folly, 
if  not  their  guilt.  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  they  derive  their  principal 
strength  at  present,  from  the  strange  reverence  with  which  men  regard 
them,  as  institutions  founded  in  the  nature  of  man.  There  has  been  nei- 
ther heart  nor  hope  in  the  exertions  made  to  put  them  down  " 

The  true  method  of  bringing  these  institutions  to  an  end,  i»by 
candid  and  sober  argument;  by  showing  their  inconsistency  vith 
jhe  holy  precepts  of  Revelation,  and  how  injurious  is  their  influ- 
ence upon  the  interests  of  mankind.  And  surely  if  any  people 
were  ever  bound  to  exhibit  a  lofty  and  spotless  example  of  pub- 
lic justice,  and  public  charity,  to  stand  forth  as  the  firm  advo- 
cates and  supporters  of  all  that  is  right,  honourable,  and  chris- 
tian in  the  institutions  and  operations  of  society,  it  is  the  people 
of  this  favoured  land. 

"When  I  reflect  on  the  prosperity  of  the  people  of  this  country,  such 
prosperity  as  the  world  never  saw  before,  there  seems  to  rest  upon  us  a 
momentous  weight  of  obligation  to  God.  When  I  see  the  vast  tracts  sub- 
dued by  man  from  barrenness  unto  verdure  and  beauty,  and  liberally  re- 
warding his  care;  when  I  see  the  villages  gathering  their  abodes  of  plenty 
and  peace,  round  the  spires  that  rise  like  banners  of  love  above  them;  when 
I  see  the  wild  streams  tamed  and  led  to  turn  the  sparkling  wheels  of  labour; 
when  I  see  the  sails  on  every  wave  of  ocean,  bringing  home  through  their 
beaten  paths,  the  learning  and  luxuries  which  our  own  land  fails  to  supply, 
when  I  see  the  mighty  cities  that  throng  our  shores,  filled  with  the  refine- 
ments of  the  old  world,  and  far  too  much  of  its  corruption;  when  I  think  of 
the  vast  reach  of  our  country's  boundaries,  the  magnificence  of  its  military 
preparation,  and  the  navies  bearing  its  thunder  to  the  utmost  limit  of  the 
deep;  I  leave  it  to  others  to  boast  of  this  growing  power;  these  things  re- 
mind me  of  a  responsibility,  such  as  never  rested  upon  any  people.  I  look 
for  the  gratitude  which  this  unmeasurable  blessing  should  inspire,  for 
mighty  efforts  in  the  cause  of  humanity  and  religion,  at  least  for  an  attempt 
to  efface  the  wide  and  deep  stain  that  now  covers  half  our  country,  such  as 
no  other  Christian  nation  now  tolerates  within  its  bounds." 

We  need  hardly  say  that  Mr.  Peabody's  Address  is  an  excel- 
lent one.  May  its  spirit  universally  pervade  and  animate  the 
minds  of  our  countrymen. 


1828.]  The  Power  of  Religion.  231 


TA\e  Tcwer  of  Religion. 

The  following-  sketch  will  be  read  with  interest,  not  merely  on  aecount 
»f  the  remarkable  facts  related,  but  as  coming-  from  the  pen  of  the  late  la- 
mented Colonial  Agent,  Mr.  Ashmun. 

Magnolia  Dei  evangelii  sempiterni. 

L.  C.  a  black  man,  has  been  a  member  of  this  Colony  since 
the  beginning  of  the  year  1820.  He  had  made  a  profession 
of  religion  in  America,  but  never,  since  I  knew  him,  either  dis- 
charged its  duties,  or  evinced  much  of  its  spirit,  till  within  the 
last  ten  months.  He  was  a  man  of  good  natural  sense,  but 
wretched  in  the  extreme,  and  the  cause  of  equal  wretchedness 
to  his  young  family.  His  wife,  naturally  of  a  mild  and  placid 
temper,  failed  in  almost  every  thing  to  please  him,  or  prevent 
the  constant  outbreakings  of  his  morose  and  peevish  humour. — 
He  was  her  tyrant — and  so  instigated  with  malevolence,  the  vain 
conceit  of  superiority,  jealousy,  and  obstinate  pride,  as  to  resem- 
ble more  an  Arab  of  the  desert,  or  a  person  destitute  of  natural 
affection,  than  a  person  by  education  and  in  name  a  Christian. — 
As  a  neighbour,  his  feelings  were  so  soured  and  narrow,  as  to 
render  him  disobliging,  suspicious,  and  equally  an  object  of  gen- 
eral dislike  and  neglect.  His  heart  was  a  moral  desert — no 
kind  affection  seemed  to  stir  within  it — and  the  bitter  streams 
which  it  discharged,  had  spread  a  moral  desolation  around  him, 
and  left  him  the  solitary  victim  of  his  own  corroding  tempers. 

Such  an  ascendant  had  these  evil  qualities  over  the  other  fac- 
ulties of  his  mind,  as  in  a  great  measure  to  dim  the  light  of  rea- 
son, and  render  him  as  a  subject  of  the  colonial  government,  no 
less  perverse  and  untractable,  than  he  was  debased  and  wretch- 
ed as  a  man.  Several  times  have  the  laws  which  guard  the 
peace  of  our  little  community,  been  called  in  to  check  the  exer- 
cise of  his  turbulent  passions,  by  supplying  the  weakness  of  more 
ingenuous  motives.  Still  this  person  discovered,  in  the  midst  of 
this  wreck  of  moral  excellence,  a  few  remaining  qualities,  on 
which  charity  might  fix  the  hope  of  his  recovery  to  virtue,  use- 
fulness and  happiness.  But  these  were  few,  and  mostly  of  a 
negative  kind.     He  was  not  addicted  to  profane  discourse.     He 


23$  The  Power  of  Iteligion.  [Oct 

allowed  himself  in  no  intemperate  indulgences.  Me  observed 
towards  sacred  institutions,  a  cold,  but  still  an  habitual  respect; 
and  strange  as  the  fact  may  seem,  he  was  laborious  in  his  avoca- 
tions, even  to  severe  drudgery,  and  equally  a  stranger  to  avarice 
and  a  passion  for  vain  ostentation.  Whether  these  relieving 
traits  of  his  character  were  the  effects  of  habits  produced  by  the 
influence  of  former  religious  impressions,  or  whether  they  were 
the  result  of  constitutional  temperament,  or  of  education,  is  not  for 
me  to  decide.  But  such  was  L.  C.  until  the  autumn  of  1824,  when 
not  only  a  reform,  but  an  absolute  reversal,  of  every  perverse  dis- 
position and  habit  in  the  revolting  catalogue  of  his  character  took 
place.  A  more  obliging  and  affectionate  husband  I  am  convinced, 
is  not  to  be  found  on  this  Cape;  few,  indeed,  in  the  world  !  And 
there  is  no  appearance  of  constraint  or  affectation  in  this  display  of 
tenderness.  It  is  uniform,  untiring,  cordial,  and  increasing,  as 
far  as  it  is  permitted  to  any  one  except  the  Searcher  of  hearts  to 
judge.  In  all  his  intercourse  with  his  family  and  neighbours,  he 
carries  with  him  an  inimitable  air  of  sweet  and  profound  humili- 
ty. You  would  pronounce  it  to  be  the  meekness  of  the  heart 
springing  from  some  deep-felt  sentiment  of  the  interior  of  the 
mind.  But  so  far  from  abasing  the  possessor  in  the  estimation 
of  others,  this  very  trait  commands  their  respect  and  their  love. 
It  gives  to  him  a  value  which  he  never  appeared  to  possess  be- 
fore. Ten  months  have  I  now  had  daily  opportunities  to  ob- 
serve this  altered  man  in  a  great  variety  <  f  circumstances,  and 
some  of  them,  it  must  be  confessed,  sufficiently  trying.  In  one 
instance  I  have  had  to  regret  and  censure  the  appearance  of  that 
perversity  which  made  an  important  part  of  his  former  character. 
But  happily  this  fit  of  turbulence  was  of  short  duration;  and 
some  months  have  passed  since,  without  witnessing  a  repetition 
of  the  infirmity.  Were  I  this  evening  asked  to  name  the  man 
in  the  Colony,  who  would  most  carefully  gunrd  against  offending, 
or  causing  even  a  momentary  pain  to  any  of  his  fellow  men,  I 
should  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  in  my  judgment,  the  man  is 
L.  C.  On  this  point  I  insist,  because  it  was  precisely 
in  his  revolting  and  unfeeling  churlishness,  that  his  greatest 
and  most  incurable  infirmity  seemed  to  consist.  I  hardly  need 
add,  were  silence  not  liable  to  misconstruction,  that  the  duties 
and  ordinances  of  religion  are  matters  of  his  most  devout  and 


1828.  J  The  Power  of  Religwu  233 

diligent  observance.  How  often  have  I  been  awaked  at  the 
dawn  of  Sabbath,  by  his  devout  strains  of  prayer  and  praise  sent 
up  from  the  midst  of  a  little  company  of  praying  people,  who  at 
that  hour  assemble  for  religious  exercises  in  a  vacant  building 
near  my  residence.  How  sure  am  I  to  find  him  reverently  seat- 
ed in  his  place  among  the  earliest  who  assemble  in  the  house  of 
God.  What  an  active  promoter  of  every  commendable  and  pi- 
ous design,  is  sure  to  be  found  in  him.  Every  laudable  habit, 
which  had  survived  the  general  extinction  of  all  practical  virtue, 
seems  to  have  acquired  additional  confirmation:  and  from  the 
operation  of  higher  principles,  seems  to  follow  of  course,  and 
derive  the  best  guaranty  of  its  continuance.  I  might  go  on  to 
particularise — but  it  would  only  be  to  fill  up  the  outline  already 
sketched;  and  which,  whether  relating  to  his  former  or  his  pre- 
sent character,  however  imperfect,  is  strictly  true.  Ask  of  him 
the  causes  of  so  obvious  and  surprising  a  change;  and  he  humbly, 
but  unhesitatingly  ascribes  it  wholly  to  the  power  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  operating,  he  cannot  tell  how,  but  evidently  by  means  of 
the  word  and  ordinances  of  God,  upon  his  whole  mind.  Such 
was  the  origin  of  this  great  moral  renovation — and  such  are  the 
agency  and  means  by  which  its  effects  are  sustained,  and  under 
the  operation  of  which  they  are  beginning  to  combine  into  a  habit 
of  holiness.  He  rejoices  in  the  hope  of  its  duration  to  the  end 
of  life,  solely,  he  would  say,  from  the  confidence  he  has  in  the 
immutable  love  and  faithfulness  of  the  Holy  Being  who  has 
wrought  so  great  a  work  in  him.  And  let  philosophers  cavil 
and  doubt  if  they  must:  but  this  man's  example  is  a  refutation 
in  fact,  of  a  thousand  of  their  sceptical  theories.  He  is  a  new 
man — and  the  change  was  effected  chiefly  before  discipline,  or 
example,  had  time  to  work  it.  He  is  an  honest  man;  and  sober- 
ly asserts,  that  to  his  certain  knowledge,  he  did  not  perform  the 
work  himself.  But  where  is  the  example  to  be  found,  of  such 
and  so  great  a  change  wrought  by  mortal  means  ?  The  history 
of  the  human  race  is  challenged  to  produce  it.  To  God  then, 
who  created  man;  to  Christ,  who  redeemed  him;  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  sanctifies  him,  be  ascribed  without  abatement,  or 
reserve,  the  power  and  the  grace  displayed  in  this  and  every 
similar  instance  of  the  conversion  of  a  blind,  and  hardened,  and 
wretched  sinner.  Monrovia,  July  3d,  1825, 

_30 


234  Letteims  from  Liberia.  [Oct 


lietteYs  from  lAbeYia. 

We  published  in  our  last,  several  extracts  from  the  commu- 
nications of  the  Vice- Agent,  the  Rev.  Lott  Carey,  received  by 
the  4AU  Chance'  and  the  'Liberia.'  The  same  vessels  brought 
letters  from  several  of  the  Colonists;  some  of  the  more  interest- 
ing portions  of  which,  we  now  offer  to  our  readers. 

Those  who  have  perused  our  numbers  will  recollect,  that  a 
new  settlement  has  recently  been  founded,  about  twenty  miles 
from  the  coast,  on  the  river  St.  Pauls,  called  Mills  &  Burgess, 
or  by  contraction,  Millsburg.  The  condition  and  prospects  of 
this  settlement  are  thus  represented  in  a  joint  letter  from  seve- 
ral individuals  who  have  taken  the  lead  in  its  establishment. 

"We  have  to  inform  you,  that  we  have  in  good  cultivation 
twenty-four  acres  of  rice,  cassada,  cotton,  corn,  and  other  vege- 
tables, and  our  crops  promise  better  than  any  which  have  been 
raised  since  we  have  been  in  Africa;  but  had  we  come  up  to  this 
place  one  month  sooner,  possessed  of  tools  enough,  we  should 
have  been  much  farther  advanced  in  cultivation  than  we  now 
are;  but  we  now  see  that  here  is  land  that  will  produce  good 
crops  of  corn,  rice,  and  many  other  things  that  are  of  great  use 
to  us.  We  have  seen  enough  to  convince  us  that  we  are  doing 
well  for  the  time.  We  must,  however,  inform  you  that  ten 
acres  of  land  is  not  sufficient  for  a  farm.  Here  are  large  tracks 
of  land  which  no  persons  inhabit.  We  have  travelled  about  fif- 
teen miles  northeast,  and  found  no  person  whatever;  nothing 
but  old  country  farms,  and  good  brooks  of  water,  and  good  land 
for  cultivation.  As  we  have  made  more  discoveries  for  the  good 
of  the  Colony  than  any  other  set  of  men,  we  take  the  liberty  to 
request  that  you  would  give  us  more  land,  as  we  intend  to  pur- 
sue cultivation;  for  without  cultivation  we  cannot  prosper. — 
Although  times  are  hard  with  us  just  now,  yet  we  must  do  the 
best  we  can;  as  we  came  out  to  Africa  to  plant  a  nation  in  the 
deserts  of  Africa,  and  as  there  are  many  waiting  in  America  for 
us  to  clear  the  forest,  we  wish  our  rights  for  our  children  in  law, 
which  we  hope  you  will  grant  us.  As  there  are  mill  seats  here, 
we  wish  you  would  send  to  us  saw  mills,  running  gear  for  the 
same;  also  ox  chains,  reaping  hooks,  grass  scythes,   and  stone 


1828.]  Letters  from  Liberia*  235 

hammers  from  9  to  10  lbs.  weight,  with  seeds  and  grains  of  all 
kinds.  Our  rice  is  now  shooting,  and  in  six  weeks  we  hope  to  be 
eating  it." 

Another  very  respectable  settler  at  Millsburg,  after  specify- 
ing several  kinds  of  vegetables,  (among  which,  are  cucumbers, 
water  mellons,  beans,  potatoes,  radishes,  and  squashes,)  which 
were  growing,  and  most  of  which  had  been  sent,  in  considerable 
quantities,  for  sale  to  Monrovia,  writes  to  Mr.  Ashmun — 

"The  improvements  made,  by  the  favour  of  Providence,  at 
this  place,  are  the  admiration  and  astonishment  of  the  whole  Co- 
lony, at  present.  You  are  too  well  acquainted  with  new  settle- 
ments to  be  at  all  surprised  when  I  say  to  you,  that  the  expense 
of  the  Company  has  not  been  less  than  100  bars  per  month  to 
each  individual;  but  we  are  determined  to  risk  all  that  we  have 
or  can  accumulate,  for  the  accomplishment  of  our  object.  As 
it  respects  Millsburg,  there  are  now  about  24  acres  of  land  un- 
der cultivation  in  rice,  cassada  and  plantains,  peas,  cucumbers, 
mellons  and  other  vegetables,  also  cotton. 

"Sir,  the  creek,  on  the  bank  of  which  we  landed  at  your  dis- 
covery of  this  place,  I  have  found  to  be  a  powerful  stream  of 
great  extent  in  the  Pessa  country.  There  are  many  tine  mill 
seats  in  our  new  territory,  and  also  on  the  other  side  of  the  Ri- 
ver. It  would  be  almost  incredible  if  I  were  to  state  the  many 
advantages  which  are  here  visible  to  men  of  research.  Noth- 
ing appears  to  be  wanting  but  means  and  men  of  industry,  and 
in  a  short  time  the  whole  of  the  present  Colony  might  be  support- 
ed by  its  own  inhabitants  along  the  banks  of  the  noble  Dey,  and 
in  the  adjacent  country." 

Another  Colonist  at  Monrovia  writes: 

"The  farms,  particularly  at  Millsburg,  are  in  the  most  pro- 
mising way  that  any  have  been,  since  I  have  been  in  Liberia.  I 
wish  you  and  the  Hon.  Board  of  Managers  would  make  some  in- 
quiries, whether  it  would  be  prudent  and  safe  for  me  to  trust  a 
vessel  across  the  Atlantic  with  our  stripes  and  cross,  and  whe- 
ther we  would  be  subject  to  foreign  duties  on  tonnage;  as  Mr. 

and  myself  are  about  contracting  for  a  schooner,  and  we 

wish  to  be  very  particular,  and  not  to  move  until  we  shall  hear 
from  the  Board,  as  the  subject  is  important,  particularly  in  re- 
gard to  the  duties.     The  commercial  interest  of  the  Colony  is 


£36  Extracts  from  Correspondence.  [Oct. 

increasing  hourly,  and  we  would  like  to  hear  from  you  by  the 
first  opportunity." 

Another,  at  the  same  place,  writes — 

"Our  business  is  going  on  in  a  prosperous  way,  especially  our 
agriculture.  The  crops,  both  at  Caldwell  and  Millsburg,  ap- 
pear very  promising.  I  have  at  Stockton  and  at  Millsburg  about 
seven  or  eight  acres  of  rice  and  cassada;  the  rice,  on  an  average, 
is  about  as  high  as  my  shoulders,  and  heading  beautifully." 

Another,  to  the  lamented  Mr.  Ashmun  writes — 

"It  is  with  the  utmost  pleasure,  that  I  seize  the  present  op- 
portunity to  forward  to  you  a  few  lines,  to  inform  you  that  my 
health  has  been  unusually  good  ever  since  the  solemn  hour  you 
left  our  Roads,  and  also  of  my  sincere  desire  to  learn  that  your 
health  is  restored,  and  that  you  meet  with  the  greatest  prosperi- 
ty in  all  your  undertakings.  The  Colony  is  much  in  the  same 
state  as  when  you  left  it.  Provisions  of  all  kinds  are  very  scarce 
in  the  Colony;  but  the  Farmers  at  Millsburg  are  making  rapid 
progress,  and  at  every  return  of  a  canoe  send  more  vegetables 
than  can  be  bought  up  by  the  people  of  the  Cape  under  three  or 
four  days." 

From  numerous  letters,  making  application  to  the  Society  for  a  passage 
to  Liberia,  in  behalf  of  many  free  people  of  colour  in  the  south  and  west, 
we  publish  the  following  extracts,  in  the  hope  that  they  may  produce  a 
deeper  and  far  more  general  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  augmenting  the 
resources  of  our  Institution.  Hundreds  of  persons,  well  recommended  for 
their  moral  and  industrious  habits,  are  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  emi- 
grate, while  the  Society  is  left  without  the  means  of  affording  them  a  pas- 
sage.    Shall  this  continue  to  be  so? 

From  a  Gentleman  in  South  Carolina. 

In  this  town  and  its  neighbourhood,  are  large  numbers  of  free 
people  of  colour.  Favourable  reports  of  your  Colony  having 
reached  them,  a  spirit  favourable  to  emigration  has  been  evinc- 
ed. By  desire,  and  in  behalf  of  some  of  them,  I  take  the  liber- 
ty to  address  you. 


1828.]  Extracts  from  Correspondence.  237 

I  have  received  the  names  of  thirty-five,  including  parents 
and  children,  that  are  desirous,  apparently,  to  emigrate.  There 
are  fourteen  grown  persons,  and  the  rest  from  fifteen  years  down 
to  infancy.  One  is  an  able-bodied  young  man,  just  out  of  his 
apprenticeship  to  a  carpenter.  Some  are  ordinary  labourers, 
and  some  accustomed  to  boating.  Of  their  moral  habits  I  can- 
not speak  particularly;  but  have  informed  them  that  none  will 
be  received  except  such  as  can  produce  certificates  of  honesty 
and  sobriety.  If  they  can  be  taken  by  you,  efforts  shall  be 
made  to  have  them  as  well  provided  for  as  their  circumstances 
will  allow. 

From  another  in  the  same  State. 

There  are  thirteen  free  negroes  in  this  district,  who  wish  to 
obtain  a  passage  to  your  Colony  in  Africa,  of  whom  I  am  guar- 
dian. They  are  well  able  to  maintain  themselves,  and  they  may 
be  of  some  service  to  the  Colony,  as  one  of  them  is  a  good  shoe- 
maker, and  three  others  handy  with  carpenters'  tools.  They 
will  carry  out  tools  with  them,  if  permitted,  and  also  household 
and  kitchen  furniture. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Virginia. 

A  family  of  coloured  people  in  this  county,  who  have  been  re- 
cently emancipated  by  will,  are  desirous  of  emigrating  to  Libe- 
ria, and  of  knowing  whether  the  arrangements  of  the  Society 
will  allow  of  a  passage  this  fall.  This  family  amounts  to  16  in 
number. 

Perhaps  no  persons  could  afford  better  materials  for  a  new 
settlement  than  those  who  are  now  asking  your  aid.  They  were 
born  and  have  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  which  they  are  pro- 
posing  to  quit,  without  a  reproach  upon  their  good  name;  but, 
trusted  by  their  owners  and  neighbours  for  their  industry  and 
honesty,  they  have  long  formed,  in  their  habits  and  characters, 
a  prominent  and  creditable  exception  from  the  degraded  class 
to  which  they  belong.  Occupying  poor  land,  remote  from  any 
vicious  examples,  the  subsistence  which  they  have  supplied  for 
themselves  and  owners,  has  been  the  product  of  a  labour,  the 
steadiness  and  economy  of  which  bespeak  the  success  of  their 
exertions  in  the  new  and  improved  theatre  to  which  they  are 
asking  to  go. 


238  Extracts  from  Correspondence.  [Oct. 

From  a  Gentleman  in  the  same  State. 

I  write  at  the  request  of  a  large  family  of  free  people  of  c© 
lour,  who  reside  in  this  county  and  the  adjoining  one.  The  fa- 
mily consists  of  three  brothers  and  their  families.  Two  of  the 
ol.d  men  are  yet  married,  and  have  between  them  thirty-three 
children.  From  a  long  conversation  I  had  with  one  of  them,  I 
judge  him  to  be  uncommonly  intelligent.  Though  he  is  not  a 
mechanic  by  trade,  yet  he  is  a  tolerable  blacksmith.  Some  of 
the  rest  are  carpenters  and  some  masons.  The  old  man  told 
me,  he  had  no  idea  of  being  benefited  himself  by  any  change, 
and  was  only  anxious  to  go  to  the  Colony  on  his  children's  ac- 
count. I  have  been  informed  by  a  gentleman  living  near  them, 
that  thev  are,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  steady  and  industri- 
ous, and  that  the  old  man  stands  high  in  the  opinion  of  all  wh© 
know  him. 


From  another  in  the  same  State. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Managers  of  the  Auxiliary  Col- 
onization Society  of  this  place,  I  was  instructed  to  open  a  cor- 
respondence with  you,  in  relation  to  a  letter  recently  received 
by  the  Board  from  a  free  man  of  colour,  in  an  adjacent  county, 
expressing  a  desire  to  go  to  Liberia.  In  his  letter,  he  remarks, 
"I  am  now  in  my  49th  year,  and  infirm.  I  have  ten  children, 
and  two  grand  children;  all  of  which,  I  wish  to  have  conveyed^ 
with  myself,  to  the  new  African  Coloi^;  but  am  not  able,  nor 
do  I  know  how  to  proceed.  There  are  twelve  families  of  free 
people  of  colour  in  my  neighbourhood,  consisting  of  thirty  or 
forty  persons,  who  say,  that  if  I  will  break  the  ice,  and  start, 
they  will  bear  me  company;  and  they  are  all  young  people  but 
two." 

In  addition  to  the  internal  evidence  afforded  by  the  letter  it- 
self, we  have  the  verbal  assurances  of  those  who  know  him,  to 
the  same  effect,  and,  what  is  of  more  consequence,  of  his  strict- 
ly upright  character  and  industrious  habits. 

I  think,  Sir,  that  it  is  all -important  for  the  advancement  of 
this  great  scheme  of  humanity,  that  as  many  as  can  be  induced 
to  emigrate  from  this  section  of  country,  should  be  accommo- 
dated. 


1828.]  African  Teak  and  Indigo.  259 

From  another  Gentleman  in  the  same  State, 

I  am  very  sorry  that  your  funds  are  so  low;  the  more  so,  as 
there  are  so  many  valuable  free  people  of  colour,  who  are  pre- 
pared to  emigrate,  both  here  and  at  Richmond  and  Petersburg. 
Several  families  of  them  have  sold  their  property,  and  some  of 
them  have  purchased  house  frames  and  goods  to  carry  out  with 
them.  Amongst  these  people  is  a  number  of  valuable  mechan- 
ics and  intelligent  and  industrious  men.  They  are  daily  inqui- 
ring of  me,  if  I  know  when  a  vessel  will  be  despatched.  Some 
of  them  have  lately  come  down  from  both  Richmond  and  Peters- 
burg, to  make  inquiries;  but  I  have  been  unable  to  give  them 
any  information. 

From  a  coloured  Minister  in  the  State  of  Tennessee, 

Having  been  highly  favoured  by  Divine  Providence,  we  may 
be  said  to  be  ready  to  set  out  for  Western  Africa.  I  believe 
my  family  are  all  quite  willing  to  go.  We  are  waiting  with 
great  anxiety  to  hear  the  words,  Go  on!  to  the  place  of  embar- 
kation. Having  made  preparations  for  removing,  it  would  be 
better  for  us  to  9et  out  now,  than  to  remain  here.  Dear  Sir,  if 
you  know  whether  a  vessel  will  sail  for  Monrovia  this  autumn 
or  not,  you  will  greatly  relieve  my  mind  by  giving  me  immedi- 
ate information. 

African,  Teak,  and  In&Ago. 

The  following-  notices  of  those  valuable  productions  of  Africa,  we  have 
discovered  in  the  Sierra  Leone  Gazette  of  1825. 

Anxiously  desirous  for  the  promotion  of  the  timber-trade  of 
this  colony,  which  we  are  happy  to  see  is  rapidly  rising  into  im- 
portance, we  have  much  pleasure  in  inserting  the  annexed  ex- 
tract of  a  letter  relative  to  the  comparative  qualities  of  Oak 
Wood  and  the  Teak  of  this  country.  We  apprehend,  however, 
that  A  Subscriber  is  in  error  as  to  the  two  squares  being  of  the 
same  weight.  We  have  always  understood,  that  oak  is  much 
lighter  than  our  teak:  and,  as  a  proof  of  it,  that  the  former  will 
float  of  itself,  which  is  not  the  case  with  the  latter. 


240  African  Teak  and  Indigo.  [.Oct. 

To  the  Editor  of  the  Royal  Gazette. 

Mr.  Editor:  I  send  you  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  a  house 
of  the  first  respectability  in  London,  to  a  timber  merchant  of 
this  colony,  which  discloses  a  fact  that  seems  not  to  be  generally 
known,  and  which,  if  it  were,  must  considerably  advance  the 
character  of  African  Teak. 

"We  think  it  interesting  to  you  to  communicate  the  following 
particulars  of  an  experiment  made  by  a  most  respectable  and 
clever  shipwright  of  this  city,  to  try  the  effect  of  the  loss  of 
weight  and  size  by  the  action  of  the  atmosphere  upon  two  equal 
squares  of  Oak  and  Teak  Wood.  The  squares  were  each  six 
inch* is,  and  each  weighed  8lb.  3|oz.  They  were  placed  in  a 
situation  free  from  the  rays  of  the  sun,  under  a  covering,  and 
not  subject  to  wet  from  rain.  At  the  end  of  three  months,  the 
teak  square  weighed  7lb.  8oz. ;  the  oak,  61b.  6oz.  At  the  end 
of  two  years,  when  they  were  re-weighed  to  satisfy  our  friend, 
the  teak  weighed  7lb.  2oz. ;  the  oak,  5lb.  7oz.  The  teak  shrunk 
1-I6th  part  of  an  inch,  the  oak  3-l6th,  during  the  space  of  two 
years." 

This  is  an  important  practical  result,  and  speaks  volumes  in 
favour  of  Teak.  A  Subscriber. 


To  the  Editor  of  the  Royal  Gazette. 

Mr.  Editor:  I  beg  leave  to  enclose  for  your  information,  and 
for  that  of  the  public,  the  copy  of  a  memorandum  given  me  by  a 
gentleman  on  this  coast,  who  had  made  repeated  experiments  on 
the  indigenous  Indigo  of  Africa,  with  the  greatest  success. — 
Some  specimens  which  he  sent  home  were  declared  to  be  equal 
to  the  Guatimala,  and  his  process  was  precisely  the  same  as  that 
described  in  the  enclosure. 

I  intend  to  make  some  experiments  as  soon  as  the  Indigo  is 
ripe,  and  think  it  would  be  well  if  some  other  farmers  would  do 
the  same.  Civis. 

(enclosure.) 
"Take  the  leaf  and  stalk  of  the  indigo,  and  press  it  in  a  case 
tight  enough  to  hold  water.     When  well  pressed,  pour  some  wa- 
ter on  it,  just  enough  to  cover  it,  or  about  half  an  inch  to  an  inch 
over.     When  it  ferments,  draw  the  spile  or  cock  out  of  the 


1828.]  Swiss  Missionaries.  241 

bottom,  and  let  the  water  run  into  another  case;  when  done  beat 
it  about  till  it  forms  little  balls,  then  pour  some  lime-water  in, 
which  will  cause  them  to  descend.  There  ought  to  be,  in  this 
latter  case  three  or  four  spiles.  After  it  gets  settled,  take  out 
the  top  one,  and  the  liquor  coming  from  it  will  be  coloured,  but 
clear;  if  thick,  let  it  stop  a  little  longer.  Continue  so  to  do  till 
all  the  water  is  drawn  off,  you  will  then  find  the  indigo  at  the 
bottom;  which  must  be  squeezed  till  the  water  is  all  out  of  it, 
then  put  it  in  forms  fit  for  use;  drying  it  in  the  shade,  by  no 
means  to  let  it  dry  in  the  sun." 

Srwiss  Missionaries. 

By  the  Brig  Liberia,  a  letter  addressed  to  the  lamented  Mr.  Ashmun, 
was  received  from  the  Rev.  T.  F.  Sessing,  one  of  the  five  Swiss  Missiona- 
ries in  our  Colony,  an  extract  from  which,  we  are  sure  will  be  read  with 
interest  and  pleasure. 

Monrovia,  July  22,  1828. 

iiDear  Sir: — I  embrace  this  opportunity,  the  Liberia,  Capt. 
Russel,  in  order  to  give  you  a  short  account  of  my  and  my  breth- 
ren's welfare.  Indeed,  we  do  not  know  how  to  thank  God  for 
our  health  and  life,  which  latter  he  has  been  gracious  to  preserve  to 
this  moment.  And  though  my  brethren  all  had  an  attack  of  the 
fever,  and  myself  was  several  times  indisposed,  yet,  at  present, 
we  are  all  in  good  health.  This  is  indeed  a  privilege,  which 
few  white  people  enjoy  on  this  coast.  We  do,  however, 
rejoice  with  trembling,  for  the  rainy  and  the  dry  season  have  a 
quite  different  effect  on  our  constitutions;  and  I  am  afraid,  my 
dear  brethren  will  have  another  attack  of  the  fever  in  the  next 
dry  season.  But  we  are  in  the  hand  and  under  the  care  of  our 
Lord  and  God;  without  his  will,  neither  they  nor  I  shall  die. — 
The  same  hope,  dear  Sir,  I  have  for  you;  namely,  that  you  are 
not  only  amongst  the  living,  but  that  your  health  is  restored 
again,  and  that  we  shall  soon  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you 
here  in  Liberia  in  full  health  and  vigour!  You  may  believe, 
there  are  many  here,  who  long  for  your  return;  this  I  have  heard 
from  all,  with  whom  I  conversed.      I  myself,  do  not  long  less 


&42  tfwiss  Missionaries,  [Oct. 

for  you,  when  I  view  the  approach  of  our  setting  out  in  the  ene- 
my's country.  With  our  present  situation,  though  not  very 
pi  .isant,  we  are  satisfied.  You  will  have  received  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Devany  some  time  ago,  in  which  he,  as  I  suppose,  has  stat- 
ed the  affairs  of  the  building  of  the  Missionary  House. 

uWe  five  brethren  live  at  present  in  two  houses:  brother 
Wulf  and  mvself  in  Mr.  Lewis's,  and  the  brethren  Hands,  He- 
gele  and  Kissling,  in  the  new  house  you  have  built  for  a  Mr. 
Lewis  in  America.  Those  people,  for  whom  you  had  the  kind- 
ness to  send  a  boat,  proved  almost  all  lazy,  unfaithful,  treacher^ 
ous  people,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  send  them  away.  They 
were  not  sent  from  Sierra  Leone,  neither  by  Mr.  Hands,  nor 
by  any  other  missiona.y,  but  they  only  heard  of  my  being  here, 
and  thought  to  live  on  the  expense  of  a  missionary's  kindness* 
but  such  a  kindness  would  be  sin  and  unwarrantable.  We  have 
at  present  two  Bassa  boys. 

"On  two  points  yet,  I  would  direct  your  attention.  The 
first  concerns  our  settling  in  the  Bassa  country,  whither  I  myself 
with  one  or  two  of  my  brethren  think  to  proceed  after  the  rains. 
Should  you  be  able  and  willing  to  answer  this  letter,  would  you 
be  so  kind  a  id  propose  the  best  way,  by  what  opportunity  we 
may  get  down.  Whether  it  is  necessary  that  an  authorized 
settler  should  accompany  me  to  have  a  conversation  with  the 
King,  about  our  sta/.ng  ii:  his  country?  What  articles  we  are 
to  take  down  with  us  at  the  first  outset?  It  is  very  likely  we 
shall  want  an  oar  boat — and  so  on.  O!  that  your  health  and 
other  affairs  would  permit  you  to  return  hither  before  that  time; 
it  would  be  my  greatest  joy  to  take  the  first  step  in  your  com- 
pany and  under  your  direction,  in  founding  a  mission  settle- 
ment amongst  the  Bnssas,  and  I  know  it  would  not  be  less  yours. 

"The  second  point  concerns  some  provisions.  I  recollect, 
that  \l,m  said,  you  would  have  the  kindness  to  send  us  by  the  first 
vessel  any  kind  of  provisions  we  want.  I,  with  my  brethren, 
accept  of  your  kind  offer. 

"But  I  hope  very  soon  to  see  and  to  speak  with  you  here  per- 
sonally. The  Lord  our  only  Saviour,  supporter  and  preserver, 
be,  and  r  rnain  -villi  you,  dear  brother  in  our  Lord,  and  with 
your  humble  bervant. 

"T.  F.  SESSING." 


1828.]  Abduhl  Rahahman.  24 S 

AbiluMi  M\a\\man,  the  unfortunate  Mootn 

Some  account  has  already  been  given  of  this  individual,  in 
our  numbers  for  February  and  May,  of  the  present  volume. — 
We  have  mentioned  his  desire  to  obtain  the  redemption  of  his 
entire  Family,  and  that  he  was  on  a  visit  to  the  Northern  cities 
to  solicit  aid  for  this  interesting  object.  We  rejoice  to  perceive 
that  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gallaudet,  Principal  of  the  Asylum  of  the 
Deaf  and  Dumb  at  Hartford,  and  so  well  known  to  the  public 
for  his  truly  Christian  and  charitable  enterprise,  has  generously 
devoted  himself  for  two  or  three  weeks  past  to  this  unfortunate 
stranger;  examined  and  made  himself  familiar  with  his  history; 
brought  the  facts  in  it  before  the  public  in  New  England;  and 
finally  visited  New  York,  and  at  a  large  and  most  respectable 
meeting  in  the  Masonic  Hall,  appealed  powerfully  in  his  behalf 
to  the  generous  and  the  wealthy  of  that  city. 

The  amount  of  82500  has  already  been  collected,  and  at  the 
conclusion  of  Mr.  Gallaudet's  Address,  a  committee  of  five  was 
appointed  to  obtain  from  the  citizens  whatever  additional  sum 
might  be  required  for  the  purchase  of  his  family.  We  rely  con- 
fidently upon  the  efforts  of  this  Committee;  and  should  the 
amount  necessary,  exceed  in  some  degree  that  specified  as  pro- 
bably to  be  demanded,  we  trust  that  it  will  be  supplied,  and  that 
Prince  will  yet  be  restored  with  all  his  family,  to  his  country 
and  friends.  Since  the  perusal  of  Mr.  Gallaudet's  Address, 
we  have  been  gratified  to  find  in  several  works  on  Africa,  and 
particularly  in  the  Sierra  Leone  Gazette,  some  statements  which 
evidently  corroborate  the  narration  of  Prince,  though  his  repu- 
tation for  veracity  might,  perhaps,  be  regarded  as  a  sufficient 
guaranty  to  its  truth.  But  before  offering  these  to  our  readers, 
we  invite  their  attention  to  the  following  extracts  from  Mr. 
Gallaudet's  Address. 

"While  at  Hartford  the  other  day,  Priri&fi||had  an  interview  with  Sterling", 
a  well  known  aged  African,  who  had  been  a  soldier  in  the  army  of  his 
father,  and  who  corroborated  many  things,  before  mentioned. 

"The  account  which  I  have  received  from  Prince,  is  that  he  is  a  native 
of  Tombuctoo,  that  interesting  city  in  the  very  heart  of  Africa,  and  of  which 
"we  know  so  little,  a  city  respecting  which  the  African  Society  has  expended 
so  much  money,  and  to  find  which  the  unfortunate  Mungo  Park  lost  his  life 


244  dbduhl  Hahahmaiu  [Oct. 

"Prince  was  at  Tombuctoo  at  the  age  of  17,  and  describes  that  city  as  being 
surrounded  by  a  wall;  that  it  was  as  large  as  New  York ;  that  it  contained  five 
mosques,  numerous  schools,  several  manufactories  of  steel  and  of  gold ;  and 
that  caravans  were  continually  arriving.  His  grandfather,  Almam  (or  Ali- 
mamy)  Ibrahim,  was  king  of  Tombuctoo,  which  is  the  name  of  the  territory 
as  well  as  of  the  city.  His  father,  Almam  Ibrahim  Jalloh,  at  the  age  of  22# 
was  sent  by  his  grandfather  to  make  war  upon  the  city  of  Susos,  1200  miles 
S.  W.  from  Tombuctoo,  on  account  of  some  affront  offered  by  the  chief. 
Wars  are  carried  on  there  by  stratagem.  The  chief  or  king,  seeing  Almam 
by  the  side  of  a  lake,  fired  at  him  with  an  arrow.  The  fire  was  returned; 
and  as  Almam,  to  use  his  own  words,  found  it  close  shooting,  he  fell  down 
as  if  dead.  The  king  came  and  danced  around  him,  according  to  the  cus- 
tom of  the  country.  Almam  having  only  feigned  death,  watched  for  an  op- 
portunity, drew  his  knife,  slew  the  king,  put  his  head  on  a  pole,  and  car- 
ried it  to  the  city.  This  appalling  spectacle  put  the  natives  to  flight,  and 
the  city  was  left  in  possession  of  Almam.  On  his  return,  he  was  appointed 
governor  of  that  city.  He  went  and  took  possession  of  it  with  a  considera- 
ble force.  He  went  back  and  forth  several  times  The  third  time  he  went 
back,  Prince  was  born.  His  father  had,  according  to  the  customs  of  the 
country,  two  wives  at  Tombuctoo,  where  Abduhl  was  born.  He  had  a 
brother  three  years  older,  whose  mother  was  a  native  of  an  inferior  race. — 
As  Abduhl  was  a  full  blooded  Moor  he  took  precedence  and  was  consider- 
ed the  rightful  heir  to  the  throne.  He  was  therefore  sent  back  to  Tombuc- 
too to  be  educated;  and  he  represents  the  school  to  have  contained  upwards 
of  two  hundred  pupils  under  four  masters.  They  read  the  Alcoran,  wrote 
on  boards,  attended  to  what  they  called  Geography,  to  Astronomy,  to  cal- 
culations, to  the  Mahomedan  Religion,  and  to  the  laws  of  the  country. 

"His  grandfather  lived  to  the  age  of  110,  and  had  resigned  the  throne  of 
Tombuctoo  to  his  own  brother,  Almam  Ibrahim  Danajoh,  so  called  from  his 
white  face.  Abduhl  had  another  uncle,  Moorde  Armadu,  wrho  was  gover- 
nor of  the  province  of  Massina,  which  is  as  large  a  territory  as  N.  England. 
The  first  cousin  of  his  father,  Alpha  Boomaree,  was  governor  of  Jenna, 
and  his  second  cousin,  Moorde  Sulimana,  was  governor  of  Bambougo. — 
(Almam  means  king,  and  Moorde  means  governor.)  This  territory  is  fa- 
mous for  gold  mines,  and  the  governor  was  tributary  to  Prince's  father, 
paying  a  peck  of  gold  annually  as  tribute. 

"I  mention  these  circumstances,  to  show  that  Prince's  family  connections 
were  persons  of  power  and  influence  in  Africa;  and  their  territories  stretch- 
ed from  Tombuctoo  to  Teembo^  a  distance  of  1200  miles.  At  the  age  of 
17  he  was  removed  from  Tombuctoo  to  Teembo;  and  at  19  he  began  to  go 
to  war.  The  king  possessed  a  numerous  troop  This  statement  is  confirm- 
ed by  the  best  geographer  of  the  age,  Malte  Brun,  who  says  that  this  na- 
tion, Footah  Jalloh,  of  which  Teembo  is  the  capital,  possesses  sixteen 
thousand  cavalry." 


1828.]  Mduhl  Kahahman.  245 

Mr.  Gallaudet  then  relates  the  circumstances  attending  the 
first  acquaintance  with  Dr.  Cox  in  Africa;  the  return  of  this  gen- 
tleman to  the  United  States,  the  subsequent  capture  and  slave- 
ry of  Prince;  the  remarkable  incident  of  his  meeting  Dr.  Cox, 
more  than  16  years  afterwards  near  Natches;  the  interest  which 
was  thus  excited  among  the  charitable  in  his  behalf,  and  his 
final  emancipation  through  the  liberality  of  his  master. 

He  then  observes, 

"I  would  now  ask  if  this  is  not  one  of  the  strongest  cases  that  can  be  pre- 
sented to  our  feeling's.  After  an  absence  of  forty  years  from  his  native 
country,  during-  which  long  period  he  has  been  a  slave  in  this  land,  Prince 
has  a  desire  to  see  once  more  the  land  of  his  fathers,  and  to  lay  his  bones 
among  those  of  his  kindred.  It  may  be  asked  what  are  his  intentions  for 
wishing  to  go  back.  I  will  tell  you.  When  he  was  lately  at  Boston  he 
met  a  coloured  free  man  from  Liberia,  who  gave  him  intelligence  from 
the  territory  of  his  early  years.  He  told  him  his  father  was  dead;  that  his 
brother  Almam  Abduhl-Gardre,  who  succeeded,  died  about  20  years  ago; 
and  that  at  the  death  of  the  latter  the  people  wanted  to  make  the  son  of 
Prince,  whom  he  left  a  boy  two  years  old  in  Africa,  king.  But  he  would 
not  be  king,  he  said:  king  no  happy;  drink  nothing  until  the  man  who 
brings  it  drink  first;  eat  nothing  before  the  other  eat  first;  never  sleep  twice 
in  same  room;  have  his  bed  made  in  one  room,  and  when  it  is  dark  he  get 
up  and  make  his  own  bed  in  another  room;  trust  nobody;  no  trust  his  wife, 
nor  his  son,  nor  his  daughter:  he  no  want  to  be  king.  He  went  away  ta 
Tombuctoo.  They  then  took  Prince's  nephew,  Almam  Boorbarkar,  and 
made  him  king.  He  is  now  the  reigning  prince;  is  42  years  of  age;  and  is 
said  to  be  a  peaceable  man,  having  had  only  one  war  during  his  reign.— 
This  person  told  Prince  that  a  ship  which  trades  to  England  was  named  af- 
ter his  brother.  This  son  of  Prince  is  now  a  general  hi  the  army  of  his 
cousin  the  King.  A  road  has  lately  been  opened  from  Sierra  Leone  to  the 
territory  of  Tombuctoo,  (Teemboo1')  100  miles,  and  a  brisk  trade  is  carried 
on.  In  consequence  of  opening  this  road  the  slave  trade  has  ceased  in  this 
part  of  the  country,  because  the  British  preferred  to  take  the  productions 
of  the  country  to  slaves. 

"The  object  of  Prince  in  returning,  is  not  to  assert  his  right  to  the  throne: 
he  has  seen  too  much  of  the  dangers  of  the  situation  to  attempt  it  at  the  ad- 
vanced age  of  sixty -six.  He  has  found  too,  what  indeed  might  be  found  by 
any  one,  that  happiness  does  not  depend  on  one's  rank.  He  proposes 
to  have  no  other  desire  than  to  fix  himself  as  a  colonist  at  Liberia;  to  live 
and  die  under  American  protection;  and  to  render  this  country  what  aid  he 
can  in  promoting  an  intercourse  between  our  colony  and  the  interior.  The 
late  Mr.  Ashmun  learned  that  a  road  of  150  miles  length  had  been  made 
into  the  interior,  just  touching  Footah  Jalloh;  the  capital  of  which  is  200 


24(5  Jlbduhl  RaJiahman.  [Oct. 

miles  north  of  Liberia.     When  Prince  arrives  there  it  will  soon  be  know* 
that  old  Abduhl  Kahabman  is  alive,  and  is  come  back,  with  his  family.     His 
relations  at  Tombuctoo  will  hear  of  it.     Think  you  his  son  will  not  go  to 
see  his  aged  father,  whom  he  supposes  to  be  dead?     He  doubtless  will;  and 
when  the  peaceful  intentions  of  the  old  man  are  ascertained,  no  apprehen- 
sions will  be  excited  among1  his  relations.     They  will  invite  him  to  visit  the 
land  of  his  youth;  an  intercourse  may  be  opened  between  Liberia  and  a  ter- 
ritory as  large  as  New  England,  the  capital  of  which,  Teemboo,  is  as  large 
as  Baltimore;  and  probably  this  intercourse  may  be  extended  through  a 
line  of  posts,  where  the  relations  of  Prince  are  the  chiefs,  even  to  the  city 
of  Tombuctoo.     It  ma)r  be  the  means  of  securing  advantages  to  our  trade, 
to  Scientific  curiosity,  and  to  benevolence.     I  ask  then  if  humanity  and  pa- 
triotism do  not  urge  us  to  render  assistance  to  Prince  for  the  hospitality  af- 
forded one  of  our  own  countrymen.     There  is  a  higher  motive:  a  commer- 
cial intercourse,   that  may  be  opened,   will  strike   at  the  root  of  the  slave 
trade.     It  has  already,  as  has  been  stated.     Let  us  make  it  for  the  interest 
of  Africans  to  pay  for  their  purchases  in  the  productions  of  their  country. 
"We  may  be  able  to  dispose  of  our  own  manufactures  and  products  in  ex- 
change for  hides,   ivory,   beeswax,    indigo,  and  dye  stuffs,   which  abound 
there.     We  may  be  able  to  extend  our  commercial  relations  to  the  very 
heart  of  Africa,  and  the  influence  of  our  institutions  also.     As  christians  we 
must  especially  rejoice  that  an  opportunity  will  be  afforded  for  diffusing 
the  blessings  of  Christianity  to  that  dark  and  benighted  region.     Prince  re- 
collects that  at  Tombuctoo  no  one  is  disturbed  for  religious  opinions,   and 
that  the  Alcoran  had  given  the  people  a  curiosity  to  see  the  Bible.     It  is 
already  printed  in  Arabic,   the  language  of  that  district.      During  all  his 
trials,  Prince  has  not  forgot  his  Arabic,  but  reads  it  fluently,  and  writes  it 
with  neatness.     The  finger  of  God  seems  to  point  to  great  results  arising 
from  the  return  of  Prince.     His  life  appears  like  a  romance,  and  the  inci- 
dents would  be  incredible  if  the  evidence  was  not  so  undeniable.     We  see 
in  these  events  that  God's  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,   nor  His  thoughts  as 
our  thoughts.     We  see  why   Prince  was  not  permitted  to  return  with  his 
Moorish  disposition  and  his  Moorish  sword;  that  Providence  continued  him 
here  so  long  until  grace  had  softened  his  heart.     He  will  now  return  a  mes- 
senger of  peace.     Blessed  be  God  that  we  are  permitted  the  honour  of  co- 
operating with  Him.     Methinks  I  see  him  like  a  Patriarch  crossing  the  At- 
lantic, over  which  he  was  taken  a  slave  40  years  since,  with  his  flock  around 
him,  and  happy  in  the  luxury  of  doing  good.     I  think  I  see  benighted  Af- 
rica taking  her  stand  among  the   nations  of  the    earth        1    think  I    see 
Egypt,  as  heretofore,  pouring  a  flood  of  light  into  Greece,  and   Carthage 
arising  in  former  glory.     I  think  I  see  Africa,  one  hand  pointing  to  the  tab- 
let of  eternal  Justice,  making  even  us  Americans  tremble,  while  the  words 
are  pronounced,    'Vengeance  is  mine;   I  will  repay  saith  the  Lord;*  and 
with  the  other  hand  pointing  to  the  golden  rule  of  the  gospel,  which  if  all 


1828.]  Abduhl  Rahahmatt'  247 

practised,  happiness  would  result  to  individuals  as  well  as  to  nations,  and 
the  efficacy  would  be  felt  throughout  the  world:  'Whatsoever  ye  would 
that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them.  " 

Mr.  Gallaudet  states  that  Prince  saw  a  man  in  Boston,  re- 
cently from  Liberia,  [Sierra  Leone  r]  who  informed  him  that 
his  brother,  Alimamy  Abduhl-Gadre,  who  had  been  King  of 
Foota  Jallo,  died  about  twenty  years  ago,  and  that  the  nephew 
of  Prince  succeeded  him,  and  is  now  on  the  throne.  By  refer- 
ence, however,  to  the  Sierra  Leone  Gazette  of  1825,  we  find 
the  following  notice. 

"Intelligence,  which  we  are  assured  may  be  depended  on, 
has  arrived  from  the  Foulah  country,  stating  that  Alimamt  Ab- 
duhl-Kadre,  King  of  that  country,  is  again  in  Teembo.  Bo- 
cary,  the  usurper,  it  appears,  evacuated  the  capital  on  the  ap- 
proach of  the  superior  army  of  the  King,  without  risking  the 
chance  of  a  battle,  and  has  retired  into  the  northern  provinces, 
where  his  adherents  principally  reside.  The  peaceable,  unwar- 
like  disposition  of  Abduhl-Kadre  renders  him  very  unpopular 
among  his  subjects,  and  might  prove  fatal  to  him,  were  it  not 
counterbalanced  by  the  youth  of  his  rival,  who,  in  their  estima- 
tion generally,  is  much  too  young  for  a  King,  not  being  above 
forty  years  of  age." 

In  another  Gazette  of  the  same  year,  it  is  stated  that 

"A  nephew  of  Alimamy  Abduhl-Kadre  arrived  in  the  Colo- 
ny last  week  from  Teembo;  he  was  accompanied  by  a  numerous, 
train  of  traders,  who  sought  the  protection  of  his  name  and 
influence  for  the  safe  conduct  of  their  caravans."  Speaking  of 
the  object  of  the  visit,  the  Editor  observes,  "It  is  not  to  be  im- 
agined that  two  great  Powers  like  that  of  the  Alimamy  of 
Foota  Jallo  and  this  Colony,  can  any  longer  suffer  themselves 
to  be  bearded  and  insulted  by  such  petty  chiefs  as  inhabit  the 
tract  of  country  lying  between  them." 

It  is  probable  then  that  the  Brother  of  Prince  is  now  tivino- 
and  on  the  throne  of  Foota  Jallo.  This  country  (according  to 
Watt  and  Winterbottom,  who  visited  its  capital,  Teembo,  in 
1794)  is  "about  350  miles  from  east  to  west,  and  200  from 
north  to  south.  The  climate  is  good,  the  soil  is  stony  and  dry; 
about  one-third  is  extremely  fertile,  and  produces  rice  and 
maize,  which  the  women  cultivate  and  the  men  carry  to  market 


248  Abduhl  Rahahman.  [Oct. 

in  loads  of  licwt.  which  rise  four  feet  above  their  heads.  Their 
cattle,  horses,  mules,  asses,  sheep  and  goats,  pasture  on  the  hil- 
ly grounds,  which  contain  considerable  quantities  of  iron  stone. 
They  dig  and  manufacture  a  species  of  iron,  which  is  extremely 
malleable.  At  Laby  and  Teembo,  which  is  about  160  miles 
distant  from  Sierra  Leone,  they  manufacture  narrow  cloths,  of 
which  their  dress  is  composed,  and  work  in  iron,  silver,  wood, 
and  leather.  Their  houses  are  well  built,  neat  and  convenient; 
placed  at  a  distance  from  each  other,  to  guard  against  fire;  a 
precaution  which  never  occurs  to  the  Mandingoes.  Among  their 
amusements,  horse  racing  may  be  enumerated.  The  markets 
and  channels  of  trade  are  under  the  regulation  of  the  king.  As 
there  are  schools  in  every  town,  the  majority  of  the  people  are 
able  to  read,  and  many  possess  books  of  law  and  divinity. — 
They  profess  the  Mahometan  Religion,  have  numerous  mosques, 
and  are  not  bigots  though  they  pray  five  times  in  the  day. 

On  a  sudden  emergency,  the  Foulahs  can  bring  into  the  field 
16,000  cavalry.  As  they  are  surrounded  with  twenty-four  na- 
tions, many  of  whom  are  Pagans,  their  religion  affords  them  a 
pretext  for  the  acquisition  of  slaves  in  war.  The  King's  Vice- 
gerent, in  a  conversation  with  the  travellers,  openly  avowed  that 
the  sole  object  of  the  wars  of  Teembo  was  to  procure  slaves,  as 
they  could  not  obtain  European  goods  without  slaves,  nor  slaves 
without  making  war.  He  farther  stated,  that  the  European  fac- 
tories would  not  trade  with  guns,  powder  and  cloth,  for  any  ar- 
ticles except  slaves.  The  King  declared,  that  he  would  renounce 
the  slave  trade,  if  a  trade  in  native  produce  could  he  established. 
One  of  the  chiefs  who  defended  the  religious  wars,  admitted, 
that  if  the  Foulahs  could  procure  European  goods  without  mak- 
ing war,  he  would  believe  that  God  would  be  offended;  but  as 
this  was  impossible,  God  could  not  be  angry,  especially  when 
the  Book  desired  them  to  make  war  on  nations  that  would  not 
serve  him.  The  travellers,  recommended  the  use  of  the  plough, 
which  had  never  been  heard  of  in  the  Foulah  country;  and  the 
King  offered  to  furnish  any  European  with  land,  cattle,  and 
men,  who  should  settle  among  them." 

Such  and  so  interesting  is  the  country,  over  which,  probably 
at  this  moment,  reigns  Alimamy  Abduhl-Kadre,  the  brother  of 
Prince.     How  important  then,  that  this  powerful  (and  as  he  is 


1828.]  Abdahl  Rahahmay.  249 

represented)  peaceful  Chieftain,  should  be  immediately  inform- 
ed by  special  messengers  from  Liberia,  of  the  benevolent  pur- 
poses for  which  that  Colony  has  been  founded;  that  his  brother 
is  living,  and  that  by  the  charity  of  this  Christian  Nation  he  is 
about  to  be  restored  with  a  numerous  family  to  the  land  from 
which,  forty  years  ago,  he  was  taken  by  violence  to  be  carried  in- 
to distant,  and  as  it  seemed,  hopeless  captivity.  How  must  an 
account  like  this,  if  rendered  credible,  excite  the  admiration  of 
a  heathen  King,  and  awaken  even  in  selfish  bosoms  the  kindly 
sentiments  of  gratitude  and  affection.  And  let  us  gain  the 
friendship  of  Abduhl-Kadre;  we  have  easy  access  not  only  to 
Teembo,  but  may  readily  penetrate  to  Tombuctoo  and  the  other 
great  cities  of  Central  Africa. 

Mr.  Park,  in  his  first  journey,  penetrated  to  within  200  miles 
of  Tombuctoo,  and  was  informed  by  the  Moors  that  the  king  of 
that  place  was  named  Abu  Abrahima,  (the  Grandfather  of 
Prince)  that  his  court  was  splendid  and  magnificent,  that  he 
possessed  immense  riches,  and  that  the  expenses  of  government 
were  defrayed  by  a  tax  on  merchandise.  This  city  is  repre- 
sented by  Mr.  Park,  as  the  principal  emporium  of  the  Moorish 
commerce  in  Africa.  Tombuctoo,  as  described  by  Adams,  the 
only  white  man,  we  believe,  who  professes  to  make  report  con- 
cerning it  from  his  own  observation,  stands  nearly  upon  the 
same  extent  of  ground  with  Lisbon;  but  as  the  houses  are  built 
in  a  scattered  manner,  the  population  is  probably  not  so  great. 
The  Arab,  Sidi  Hamet,  who  assures  Captain  Riley  that  he  had 
visited  Tombuctoo,  describes  it  as  in  appearance  six  times  more 
populous  than  Mogadore.  As  the  latter  place  contains  36,000, 
this  would  give  to  Tombuctoo  216.000. 

In  1 804,  Mr.  Grey  Jackson,  who  had  resided  many  years  at 
Mogadore,  made  a  communication  to  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  relative 
to  Tombuctoo,  derived  from  the  information  of  persons  who  had 
visited  or  resided  in  that  city.  He  speaks  of  it  as  twelve  miles 
in  circumference,  that^it  is  subject  to  Bambarra,  but  that  the  in- 
ternal police  of  the  city  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Moors.  All  re- 
ligions are  tolerated,  except  the  Jewish.  The  profits  on  the 
trade  to  Tombuctoo,  is  said  to  be  so  great,  that  5,000  dollars  in- 
vested in  European  produce  at  Mogadore  or  Fez,  would,  in  a 
year  or  two,  produce  a  return  of  20,000. 

How  much  reliance  may  be  placed  upon  these  statements,  we 

32 


250  Abduhl  Hahahman.  [Oct. 

pretend  not  to  decide;  but  they  appear  to  be  generally  confirm- 
ed by  the  testimony  of  Prince,*  and  we  hope  that  to  our  country- 
men will  belong  the  honour  of  having  fully  ascertained  the  size, 
condition  and  importance  of  this  famous  but  wellnigh  myste- 
rious city.  What  glorious  results  to  the  cause  of  humanity,  of 
science.,  of  religion,  might  be  expected  were  there  an  open  path 
from  Liberia  to  Tombuctoo!  Mr.  Park  believed,  "that  a  short 
introduction  to  Christianity,  elegantly  printed  in  Arabic,  and 
distributed  among  the  negroes,  who  read  that  language,  would 
have  a  wonderful  effect  in  disseminating  the  mild  doctrines  of 
Christianity,  and  from  its  superior  elegance  and  cheapness, 
might  soon  be  classed  among  the  school-books  of  Africa." 

We  perfectly  agree  with  the  Editor  of  the  Journal  of  Com- 
merce, on  this  subject,  who  remarks: 

•'Heretofore  no  power  has  been  able  to  gain  the  confidence  of 
the  African  Tribes  in  the  interior — it  now  requires  but  a  little 
management  on  our  part,  and  the  work  is  done.  Some  may  con- 
sider our  notions  on  this  point  as  wild  and  chimerical,  but  we 
are  soberly  convinced,  that  if  Great  Britain  hail  possession  of 
Abduhl  Rahahman,  and  he  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  her  that 
he  does  to  us,  she  would  prize  her  good  fortune  beyond  almost 
any  sum.  Philanthropy,  curiosity  and  self-interest,  would  all 
seize  upon  the  opportunity  and  push  it  to  the  extremity.  It  is 
more  than  probable,  that  within  two  years,  we  should  hear  of  a 
thriving  commerce  with  the  whole  of  that  vast  interior;  we  should 
have  an  accurate  description  of  the  habits,  origin,  and  resources 
of  the  people;  an  accurate  geography  of  the  country,  containing 
the  whole  unexplored  course  of  tiie  Niger;  and  what  is  of  more 
weight  still  with  the  Christian  and  Philanthropist,  a  way  would 
be  opened  for  the  entrance  of  Charity  and  the  Christian  Religion. 
We  really  hope  that  an  expedition  will  be  fitted  out,  if  not  by 
government,  at  least  by  the  enterprise  of  individuals  to  accom- 
pany the  Prince  to  his  native  country.  It  is  impossible  not  to 
expect  of  such  an  expedition  results  favourable  to  the  interests 
and  honourable  to  the  character  of  the  American  people." 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Gallaudet  is  preparing-  for  the  press  a  detailed  statement 
of  the  history  of  the  Moorish  Prince,  which  will  be  published  in  pamphlet 
form.  A  striking-  and  finished  likeness  of  the  Prince  has  been  executed  by 
Mr.  Inman.  It  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  engraver,  and,  as  we  understand, 
will  form  one  of  the  illustrations  of  the  Tallisman,  te  be  published  by  E 
Bliss  before  the  holy  day  3. — [JV.  Y.  Com.  Adv. 


1828.]  Emancipation  and  Colonization.  251 

Emancipation  and  Colonization. 

We  have,  from  the  origin  of  our  Institution,  entertained  and  expressed 
the  opinion,  that  of  all  methods  which  could  be  devised  to  promote  volun- 
tary emancipation,  none  would  be  so  efficient  as  the  establishment  of  a  Col- 
ony for  the  free  people  of  colour,  on  the  African  coast.  We  have  known 
that  thousands  were  connected  with  the  system  of  slavery,  from  necessity, 
and  not  from  choice;  and  that  their  own  liberal  sentiments  would  prompt 
them  to  avail  themselves  of  the  earliest  opportunity  which  should  offer,  of 
conferring"  freedom  on  their  slaves,  when  this  would  evidently  be  benefi- 
cial to  the  slaves,  and  without  injury  to  the  public  welfare  That  our  opinions 
on  this  subject  have  been  well  founded,  will  be  clearly  proved,  by  the  fol- 
lowing- extracts  from  letters  now  before  us.  In  our  August  number  we 
mentioned  that  forty-three  slaves  hail  been  offered  to  the  Society  by  a  sin- 
gle individual  in  Georgia. 

From  a  Clergyman  in  Virginia. 

After  speaking-  of  the  ages  and  character  of  seventeen  servants  whom  he 
proposes  to  liberate,  that  they  may  be  transferred  to  Liberia,  he  observes 

0  "They  are  as  desirable  a  parcel  of  slaves,  for  their  integrity  and  indus- 
try ,  as  any  man  owns.  But  1  cannot  do  my  duty  to  them  in  their  present 
situation.  1  have  been  trying  to  teach  them  to  read,  but  the  circumstances 
•f  their  condition  render  this  an  almost  hopeless  task.  The  young-er  part 
are  as  fine  looking  little  fellows  as  you  have  seen,  anil  in  a  land  of  freedom 
they  would  avoid  many  habits  incidental  to  a  state  of  slavery,  and  in  due 
time  under  God's  blessing,  become  useful  to  the  Colony.  In  giving  up  my 
negroes  I  shall  become  poor.  I  can  at  present  do  nothing  more  for  them 
than  give  them  their  liberty.  Will  you  take  them  on  these  terms,  deliver- 
ed to  you  in  Norfolk  or  Richmond?  " 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Virginia* 

"  I  am  now  writing  from  the  residence  of  an  old  friend  in  this  county. — 

1  introduced  to  his  consideration  the  present  condition  of  the  Colonization 
Society.  He  is  so  struck  with  it,  that  he  has  made  up  his  mind  to  liberate 
a  coloured  woman  and  six  children;  and  to  purchase  and  liberate  her  hus- 
band, and  provide  them  with  the  means  of  paying-  their  passage  to  Liberia. 
Both  the  man  and  woman,  are  to  my  knowledge,  persons  of  good  moral  and 
industrious  habits.     They  are  very  suitable  persons  for  the  Colony.  " 

From  another  in  the  same  State. 

"A  gentleman  who  has  recently  gone  from  this  county,  with  an  inten- 
tion of  residing  for  a  time  in  Kentucky  or  Ohio,  has  left  under  the  care  and 
direction  of  the  Colonization  Society  here,  a  family  of  negroes,  consisting 
of  a  man,  his  wife,  and  their  3  children;  with  the  wish  that  they  should  be 
sent  to  Liberia  by  the  first  vessel  sailing  for  that  Colony.  He  has  provided 
funds  for  paying  the  expenses  of  their  outfit,  and  to  the  place  of  embarka- 
tion; and  it  only  remains  to  be  ascertained  when  and  from  what  point,  it 
will  be  convenient  for  the  parent  Society  to  send  them,  that  the  necessary 
arrangements  may  be  made  for  their  departure,  by  their  friends  here." 

From  a  Lady  in , 

"I  had  some  time  since  the  pleasure  of  conversing  with  you  upon  a  sub- 
ject of  deep  interest  to  myself,  and  which  has  not  since,  for  one  moment, 


252  The  great  Object  advanced.  [Oct. 

been  absent  from  my  mind.  I  then  understood,  that  in  case  I  could  so 
arrange  my  affairs  as  to  be  able  to  offer  my  slaves  to  the  Colonization  Socie- 
ty, yon  thought  they  would  undertake  to  send  them  to  Liberia.  1  have 
deferred  making  any  direct  application  to  the  Society,  until  I  had  obtained 
a  full  and  legal  title  to  them,  which  I  might  be  able  to  transfer.  I 
have  laboured  incessantly  to  effect  this  end,  and  am  now  in  full  possession, 
as  a  lawful  purchaser,  of  24  negroes,  now  25,  so  that  I  have  a  full  and  un- 
disputed power  to  dispose  of  them,  and  am  prepared  to  do  so,  in  the  way 
which  may  appear  most  advisable  for  their  benefit.  They  are  young  and 
promising:  a  number  of  young  boys,  some  young  girls,  and  a  few  old  per- 
sons: but  out  of  the  number,  are  several  who  are  decidedly  opposed  to 
going  to  Liberia,  and  prefer  slavery  here,  to  freedom  in  Africa.  These  I 
should  not  think  of  using  force  with. 

"Two  or  three  very  old  persons,  superannuated,  or  nearly  so,  refuse  posi- 
tively to  quit  the  home  to  which  the)  have  been  so  long  attached  But  my 
wish  is  to  transfer,  as  far  as  I  can  in  justice,  all  my  title  to  the  whole  num- 
ber contained  in  the  list  It  has  been  at  a  heavy  expense,  and  with  a  total 
disregard  of  my  worldly  interests,  that  I  obtained  the  right  to  dispose  of 
these  negroes.  My  situation  is  such  as  precludes  the  possibility  of  iny 
doing  more  than  give  them  their  freedom.  I  therefore  hope  that  the  So- 
ciety may  be  in  a  situation  to  take  them  as  a  gift  from  me,  and  assume  the 
entire  charge  of  providing  for  their  passage  and  settlement  in  the  Colony. 
Will  yeu  be  so  kimd  as  to  communicate  to  the  Board  in  the  form  you  think 
best,  a  direct  proposal  to  commit  to  their  care  for  the  purpose  of  colonizing 
them,  a  family  of  20  or  more  negroes,  good  subjects  for  colonization:  and 
will  you  favour  me  with  as  early  an  answer  to  my  proposal  as  }o>.i  can  con- 
veniently obtain.  The  negroes  are  awarded  to  me  at  a  valuation  of 
$4,100." 

From  a  Gentleman  in  Kentucky* 

"I  will,  willingly,  give  up  12  or  fifteen  of  my  coloured  people  at  this 
time,  and  so  on,  gradually,  till  the  whole  are  given  up,  (about  60)  if  means 
for  their  passage  to  Liberia  can  be  afforded.  I  accord  with  your  ideas,  in 
your  letter,  as  to  the  policy  and  morality  of  the  design  of  the  Society,  and 
wish  it  success." 

The  question  then,  now  submitted  to  this  enlightened  and  liberal  nation, 
is,  shall  the  funds  be  raised  to  effect  the  great  objects  of  our  Society,  and 
to  fulfil  the  wishes  of  these  truly  noble-minded  individuals' 

T\\e  gYeat  Object  advanced. 

A  Clergyman  in  Mississippi  writes,  "J  have  much  pleasure  in  announcing 
one  of  the  Hi  tnrnsn,  who,  for  ten  years,  will  give  to  your  Society  annually 
$100.  For  reasons  not  necessary  to  be  mentioned,  he  wishes  his  nan.t  to 
be  concealed.  He  will  commence  his  payment  of  $100  next  spring,  whether 
ninetv-nine  others  will  make  the  like  contributions  or  not;  and  this  sum  he 
will  hold  himself  bound  to  pay  annually  for  ten  years,  should  he  live  so 
long.  There  is  one  man  more,  who  will,  I  think,  become  a  subscriber  on 
this  liberal  scale.  I  have  moved  him  on  the  subject,  and  he  has  it  under 
consideration.    1  have  little  fear  of  the  result  of  his  deliberation.  " 


1828.]         Expedition  to  Africa — Contributions.  253 

Expedition  to  Mirica. 

The  following  Resolution  was  adopted  by  the  Board  of  Managers  on  the 
31st  instant 

"Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  forthwith  to  despatch  an  expedition,  with 
emigrants  and  supplies  to  Liberia,  provided  $2000  can  be  raised  for  this 
•bject" 

Wm.*M  Atkinson,  Esq.  of  the  Petersburg  Society,  David  T.  Burr,  Esq. 
of  the-  Richmond  Society;  John  M'Phail,  Esq.  of  the  Norfolk  Society;  and 
J.  B.  Harrison,  Esq.  of  the  Lynchburg  Society;  have  kindly  consented  to 
act  as  a  Committee  to  promote  this  object,  and  donations  either  in  money 
or  provisions,  mav  be  entrusted  to  their  care,  or  to  that  of  Charles  Tappan, 
Esq.  Boston;  Grove  Wright,  Esq.  New  York;  Gerard  Ralston,  Esq.  Phila- 
delphia; Messrs   Harper  and  Latrobe,  Baltimore. 

We  state  with  pleasure,  that  the  Rev.  Isaac  Orr,  late  of  the  Hartford 
Asvlum  for  the  Deaf  and  Dumb,  has  been  appointed  "General  Agent  and 
Assistant  Secretary"  o<  our  Society.  We  trust  this  arrangement  may  give 
greater  extent  and  energy  to  our  operations. 

C  onVcibwtions 

To  the  A.  C.    Society,  from  20th  Aug.  to  51st  October,  1828. 

Collection  in  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  at  Marietta,  Ohio,  per 

Rev.  James  Whitney, $11  23 

w  Presbyterian  Church,  Romney,  Virginia,  per  Rev. 

Mr.  Foote, 25 

"  two  congregations  at  New  Albany,  Indiana,  per  H. 

Schribner,  Esq 25 

'*  Methodist  Church,  Petersburg,  Va.  per  William  M. 

Atkinson,  Esq   17  50 

"         at  Natural  Bridge,  Va.  per  M.  Houston,   .. .       6  67 

"         at  Gettysburg,  Pa.  per  Rev    D.  M'Conaughley, 10 

Receive'd  from  John  M'Phail,  Esq.  at  Norfolk,  viz. 
"         in  Methodist  Church,  Portsmouth,  per  Rev   Mr. 

Blake, $17  64 

•»  Methodist  Ch.  Norfolk,  per  Rev.  Mr.    Holk-y,     20 

*'  Presbyterian  ditto  do.  per  Rev.  Mr   Kollock,     23 

M  ditto.     Portsmouth,  per  Rev    Mr.  Nimmo,       5  00 — 65  64 

Mangohiek  Aux.  Society,  Virginia,  per  Robert  B.  Semple.  Esq.  ..     32 

Rev.  J.  D .  Paxton,  Rockbridge  county,  Virginia, 5 

A  friend  in  Petersburg,  Virginia, 2 

Dr.  Magaw,  of  Meadville,  Pa.  per  John  P.  Davis,  Esq 5 

An  Orphan  in   New  Haven,    1 

A  Lady  in  Hanover  county,  Va.  per  Rev.  Mr.  Meade,  50 

A  friend  in  Hagerstown,  Maryland,   5 

J.  T    Vorton,    Esq.  Albanv,  N.  Y.  his  first  payment  on  the  plan  of 

Genii  Smith,   Esq    . . . .' ." 100 

Theo.  Frelinghuysen,  Esq.  Newark,  N.  J.  his  first  payment  on  the 

same  plan,   , 100 

Hezekiah  Beecher,    Esq.  Livonia,  New  York,   5 

Two  ladies  at  Fredericksburg,  Va.  per  W.  F.  Gray,  Esq.   .......     10 


Carried  forward,     #476  04 


254  Contributions.  [Oct. 

J  mount  brought  forward,  $476  04 
The  mites  of  a  few  individuals  in  Cabarras  county,  North  Carolina, 

per  John  Robinson,  Esq 5 

Greencastle  Aux.  Society,  per  J.  B.  M'Lanahan,  Esq.  Secretary,  .     41 

Maryland         ditto 30  80 

7th  annual  payment  from  Sunday  School  Teachers  Frcderict'n  Md.     10 

Collections  by  D.  T.  Baird,  Pittsburg-, 5 

Collection  in  Northumberland,  Pa.  by  J.  B .  Boyd, 10 

"  Lutheran   Church,   Williamsport,   Md.    by  A.  M.  C. 

Hamer,  per  James  C.  Dunn,   12 

M         at  monthly  concert  of  prayer,  Oxford,  Granville  co.  N.  C.       5 

"        in  1st  Presbyterian  Church,   Pittsburg',  Pa 40 

"  Presbyter'n  Ch.  Morristown,  N.J.  by  P.  A.  Johnson,     42  25 

"         by  Rev.  Win.  Monroe,   20 

'*         in  Ptesbyterian  Church,  Princess  Ann,  Somerset  county, 

Md.  by  Rev.  John  Moore,   10 

"         in  Market  street  Church,   New  York,   by  Rev.  William 

M 'Murray,   per  Peter  Neefur,    Esq.  Treasurer,   ....     31  58 
at  Cannonsburg,  Pa.  of  the  citizens,  and  students  of  Jef- 
"  ferson  College,   after  an  address  by  Rev.  Dr.  Brown,     10 

"        in  Congregation   of  church  at  Hudson,  Portage  co.  O.     20 

"         at  Leesburg,  Virginia, 11   27 

*         at  Middleburg,  do 5  39 

"         at  Aldie,  do     3  86 

By  Rev.  James  Nourse,  as  follows: 
Prom  Mr.  Ripley,  forwarded  by  Joseph  Jackson,  collections 

at  Rockaway  and  Dover,  New  Jersey,  July  4,  1827,  ....  $15  00 
Received  from  Rev.  Dr.  Ludlow,   Albany,   collected  from 
the  citizens  of  Albanv  at  the  celebration  of  Independence, 

in  the  new  Dutch  Church,  July  4,  1828,   70  28 

Received  from  Ashley  Samson,  Esq.  Rochester,    N.  York, 

a  collection  from  the  citizens  ot  Rochester,  July  4,  1828,     41  27 
Received  from  Seth  Seelye,    Esq.    collection  in  Presbvt'n. 

Church,  Lansing-burg-,  N.  Y.  4th  July,  1827, 8  50 

Ditto  from  ditto,  collected  4th  July  1828, 16  31 

Received  from  J.  House,  East  Waterford,  N.  Y.  collection 

in  Presbyterian  Church,  4th  July  1'  28, 12 

Received  of  Mr.    Riplrv.    collection  in  Rockaway,  N-    J. 

Sabbath  after  4th  July  1828, 9 

Ditto  collected   in  Presbyterian   Church,  Jamaica,   L.  I. 

per  Rev.  E.  W.  Crane,    29 

Collection  by  Rev.  Mr.  Clarke,  of  Canaan,  N.  Y 9 

From  David  Williams,    \\  est  ford,  N.  Y 3 

Collection  4th  July,  Catskill,  N.  Y.  per  Rev.  J.  W.  WycorF,       9 
"  Congregation  of  New  Windsor,  $4  50  and  con- 

gregation of  Canterbury,  Orange  county,  N.  Y.  per  Rev. 

James  H.  Thomas,  $5  *10, .* 9  60 

Collection,  Bioomfield,  N.  J.  Sabbath  next  succeeding  4th 

July,  1828,  per  Rev.  G.  N.  Judd,    15 

Received  of  Mr.   Job  Squier,    Railway,  N.  J.    his  annual 

contribution,    10 253  96 

Collection  in  Christ  Ch.  Georgetown,  1).  C.  per  J.  Marbury,  Esq.    .      25  31 

Auxiliary  Society,  Nelson  county,  V  irginia, 20 

Collection  in  the  South  Congregational  Church,  Hartford,  Connecti- 
cut, per  Rev.  Joel  H    Linsley, 10 

P.  A.  Johnson,  Esq.  of  Morristown,  N.  J.  his  annual  subscription,       5 

Carried  forward,  $1103  46 


1828.T  Contributions.  255 

Amount  brought  forward,  $1103  46 
Collection  in  Pencader  and  St.  George  congregation,   Delaware, 

per  Rev.  Mr.  Post, 11 

"         in  Rev   George  W.  Janvier's  Church,  Pittsgrove,  N.  J.       5 

"         in  Reformed  Lutheran  Church,  Newtown,  Pa 1  50 

"        in  St.  Joseph's  Church,  Frederick  county,  3  50 

"         at  Greensborough,  North  Carolina,   ...• 8 

From  C.  Tappan,  Esq    Boston,  as  follows,  viz: 

From  Rev.  Joseph  (.off,   of  Millbury,  Massachusetts,   $2 

Collected  in  Marblehead,  4th  July,  1827.        do 11 

Collected  in  Congregational  Soc.  Dalton,         do 7  34 

Of  William  Rock  wood,  of  Hollisl  on,  for  Repository,   Ms.    ..     4 

Of  John  Fairbanks,  Holliston,  for  Repository, 2 

From  an  unknown  friend  in  Roxbury,  N.  II. 1 

Of  George  Lord,  for  Repository, 4  50 

Collection  at  New  Bedford*  4th  July,  1827,  Massachusetts,     4 

From  a  lady  in  Adington,  do 1 

From  North  Brookfield,  Massachusetts,  do 11  37 

From  the  Baptist  Church  in  Randolph,  do 10 

Collected  in  Park  Street  Chuivh,  Boston, 4th  of  July,  Ms.    .    81  50 
A  donation  from  Azael,  Am  :S  M-rshfield,    Massachusetts,    .    10 
Collected  in  S.  Parish,  Reading  and  Sioiubam,  do.  July  4,  17 
Collected  in  the  first  Con.  Society    Ilallouel!,  Me.  July  4,   .    13 
Collected  in  the  Calvinistic  Society,  Ashby,  Ms.  July  4,    . .     7  85 

Collected  in  Portland,  Maine,  July  4, 54 

Collected  in  the  South  Parish  of  Weymquth,  Ms.  Julv  4,  . .  28  37 
Collected  in  Rev.  Mr.  Holmes'  So.  N  Bedford,  Ms.  July  4,  12  75 
Collected  in  Rev.  Mr    Woodbury's  Society,  Falmouth,  Ms.    10  56 

Collected  in  Thomaston,  Maine,  4th  of  July,   12 

Contributed  by  the  children  of  the  Central  District  School, 

Hopkinton,  Massachusetts,   2 

Collected  in  the  West  Parish  of  Brookfield,  Ms.  4th  of  Jul}-,  22  50 
Collected  in  Rev.  Mr.  Huntington's  Society,  North  Ifridge- 

water,  Massachusetts,  4th  of  J  uly,   32  57 

Collected  in  Castine,    Maine,   26   55 

F'rom  Mrs.  Almera  Ellis  of  Medway,    Massachusetts,    ....       5 

Contributed  in  Southampton,  Massachusetts,  July  4, 10  37 

*'  by  inhabitants  of  Boothbay,  Ms.  July  4, 4  30 

"  by  inhabitants  of  Swaiizev,  N    H.  July  4. 2  60 

"  by  Con.  Society,  Rluehill,  Maine,  ..." 11   15 

in  Chapel  of  the  Theo.  Sem.  Ando.  Ms.  July  4,  15 

"  in  Andover,  Maine,  4th  of  July,   5 

Received  of  the  Rev.  Jonathan  Ward,  of  Plymouth,  N.  H. 
contributed  by  his  Soc.  to  constitute  him  a  life  member,  30 

Contributed  in  Dalton,  Massachusetts,  4th  of  July,   18 

Given  by  Miss  Hannah  Goodell,  of  Millbury,  Ms     20 

From  an  unknown  person,   51 

Deduct  postage,  &c.  $1  60,  nett  amount,   559  68 

Collection  at  the  Chapel',  Frederick,  Va.  by  Rev.  W.  Meade,    52  52 

Wm.  Brown,  Esq.  of  Charlestown,  Va.  the  donation  of  a  lady,  ...     10 
Geo.  Cotton,  Esq.  Treasurer  Hamp.  co  Mass.    for  collections  4th. 
July,  and  the  annual  subscription  of  members  of  the  society,  . . .  112 

Walter  Bayne,  Esq  Accomac  county,  Virginia, 5 

Joseph  Cowan,  Augusta  county,  Virginia,    30 

Miss  Landonia  Randolph  Fauquier  co.  Virginia, 10 

Rev.  I.  J.  Roberts,  Edgefield,  S.  C.  to  make  him  a  life  member,    .     30 

Carried  forward,  $1941  66 


256 


Contributions. 


[Oct. 


Amount  brought  forward,  $1941  66 
Collections  in  Mississippi,  per  Rev.  William  Winans,  viz: 

At  Laurel  Hill,  M.  H.by  Rev.  R.  L   Walker,  July  4 $13  50 

At  Washington,  by  Mr.  A.  Covington,  in  Class-meeting-,  . .        4 

Repository,    $9  60  Amount  brought  up,  $64  85 

Rev.  Thomas  Clinton,   . .     5         William  Diamond, 5 


Edward  M'Gehee,  Esq.  .  5 

Col.  John  S.  Lewis,   ....  5 

Jeremiah  D.  Brown,   ....  5 

Robert  Smith,   5 

Cornelius  Van  Houton,  . .  2 

Dav  id  W  illiams,   2 

Ann  J .    (  imton,   1 

Col.  David   Davis,   1 

Robert  Germany,   1 

George  Damon, 1 

Rev.  Bevil  Taber,   1 

James  Reames, 1 

Malachi  Bradford,   1 

Isaac  Taylor, 1 

James  Bowman, I 

Job   Poster,  

Joseph  Dunbar,   1 

Thomas  Freeland,  Esq.  .  2 

John  Nugent,    1 

„Ann  Nugent, « . .  1 

Buckner  Darden,   I 

John  Snodgrass,    5 

1 
1 
1 
1 


50 


Rev    Benjamin  M  Drake,  1 

Rev.  John  O.  T.  Hawkins,  1 

John  Fulks, 5 

John  M.  Gamble,   5 

Moore  F.  Hooe,   1 

William    Foster, 5 

William  Tigner,   

Frances  H-  Calvit,    3 

Eliza  Little, 

Simeon   Gibson,   2 

Jarret   Hendricks,   

James  Hendricks, 

Beverly  R.  Grayson,   ....  3 

John   M.    Whitney,    1 

Col.  John  G.  Richardson,  1 

Augustine    Freeland,   ...  5 

Thomas    Miller, 

Col.  James  Smith, 2 

Levin   Covington,    3 


50 

75 

50 
12 


50 

50 
50 


George  W.  Kellogg,   . 

Alvarez   Fisk, 

William  M.  Lindsey, 

Dr.  John  W.  Monett, 

Rev.  William  Winans, 

Martha  Winans,    


1 

10 

1 


28 


50 

25 


143  55 


Rev   John  C    Burruss,    .. 

Caroline  M.    Thayer,    . . . 

Gen.  Samuel  L    Winston, 

Leonard  Bradford, 

Jesse  Trahern,    ....«/... 

Captain  Samuel  King,    . . 
Collections   by    the 

C.  H.  Shipman,  Newark, 

John  Ta}  lor,  do.  ..     25  Luther  Goble,         do         ..     10  110 

Collection  in  Hartford,  Trumbull  co.  O.  per  Rev.  W.  Anderson,  .        5 

"  by   ttev.  Mr.  Bennet,     2 

"         by  Samuel  Stocking,    Fsq.  Agent  at  Utica,   New  York,  211  3% 
"         by  Rev.  A.  Proudfit  and  Rev.  J.  H  Seymour,  Salem,  N.  Y.     25 

•*         in  Downes  Chapel,  Accomac  county,  Virginia,   6 

"         in  Methodist  Epis.  Church,  Bait,  per  Kev .  W.  Hamilton,     20 

Subscription  to  Repository,  .... 

A  friend  in  Connecticut 

Miami  University   Society,   Ohio, 
R.  I.  Alexander,  Esq.  of  Alex.   . 

Auxiliary  Society,  Connecticut,  per  Seth  Terry,  Fsq.  Treasurer, 


$145  00 

Draft,     $     1  45 

Hon.  Theo.   Frelinghuysen,    N.  J.   \iz: 

.   $50  Isaac  Baldwin,   Newark,    . .   $25 

. .     25  Luther  Goble,         do         ..     10 

O.  per  Rev.  W.  Anderson,  . 


87 
IS 


5 
3 

10 

63 


Greensboroug!),  North  Carolina, 31 

Cuyahoga  county,  Cleaveland,   Ohio 20 

"  "  Vermont,  per  J.  Loomis,  Esq    Treasurer, 120 

"  "  Albemarle,   Virginia,  ptrJ.B    Carr,   Fsq  Tr.      10 

'*  "  Rock  bridge,  Va    per  J.  F.  Campbell,  Fsq.  Tr.     47 

"  "  K  Tit  co.  Maryland,  per  P.  Worth,  Fsq.  Tr.  ..     50 

Ladies*  Missionary  Society  Frederick  county,  Virginia, 113  87 

$2,940  46 


THE 


I 


VF11ICAN  REP0SIT011Y, 


AND 


COLONIAL  JOTJRHAL. 

Yol.  IY.     NOVEMBER,  1828.  No.  9. 


C  ouuwunicaiio  i\ . 

Report  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations,  in  the  Senate  of 
llif  United  States,  to  ivhom  were  referred  sundry  petitions  and 
memorials,  and  the  resolutions  of  several  Legislatures  of  differ- 
ait  States,  in  relation  to  the  Colonization  of  Persons  of 
Colour.  * 

[Concluded  from  p.  172.  ] 

In  pursuance  of  an  intimation  given  in  a  former  number,  we 
proceed  to  inquire  how  far  it  may  be  expedient  for  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  to  comply  with  the  earnest  solicita- 
tions of  the  Colonization  Society  and  its  friends,  and  with  the 
recommendations  of  the  numerous  and  highly  respectable  States 
that  have  volunteered  an  expression  of  their  opinions  on  this  in- 
teresting subject. 

The  object  proposed  to  be  accomplished,  is  (in  the  language 
of  the  memorial  of  the  Colonization  Society,)  "the  removal  to 
the  Coast  of  Africa,  with  their  own  consent,  of  such  people  of 
colour,  within  the  United  States,  as  are  already  free,  and  of 
such  others,  as  the  humanity  of  individuals,  and  the  laws  of  the 
different  States  may  hereafter  liberate." 

It  is  not  our  intention,  at  this  time,  to  enter  into  the  various 
views,  religious,  philanthropic,  and  patriotic,  in  which  origina- 


258  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  ■  [Nov. 

ted  the  scheme  for  colonizing  Africa  with  the  coloured  popula- 
tion of  America.  Such  an  exposition  would  very  properly  enter 
into  an  appeal  to  popular  sentinwnt.  But  our  only  object  now, 
is  to  meet  the  committee  of  the  Senate,  on  the  ground  tbay  have 
themselves  chosen,  and  to  show  that  the  object  in  contemplation, 
is  not  only  national  in  its  character,  but  fully  within  the  com- 
pass of  the  means  at  the  disposal  of  the  Government  of  the 
United  States. 

We  were  aware  that  some  difference  of  opinion  had  at  all 
times,  existed  as  to  the  actual  value  of  the  slave  population  of 
the  United  States,  and  that  although  a  very  large  proportion  of 
our  fellow-citizens  concurred  in  reprobating  its  existence,  there 
were  to  be  found  here  and  there,  highly  respectable  individuals, 
and  indeed  in  some  cases,  communities  of  individuals,  who  con- 
sidered its  benefits,  as  more  than  counterbalancing  its  acknow- 
ledged evils.  But  until  the  extraordinary  protest  of  Mr.  Taze- 
well, against  any  effort  on  the  pait  of  the  United  States,  "to  in- 
trude itself  within  the  limits  of  the  States,  for  the  purpose  of  with- 
drawing from  them,  an  important  portion  of  their  population;" 
we  had  not  supposed  that  a  single  dissentient  could  be  found, 
from  the  general  sentiment  entertained  in  relation  to  that  por- 
tion of  our  coloured  population,  which  had  been  admitted  to  a 
state  of  partial  freedom. 

The  feelings  of  the  slave-holding  States,  in  relation  to  this 
"important  portion  of  their  population,"  may  be  inferred  from 
the  legislative  restraints,  almost  all  of  them  have  sought  to  im- 
pose on  its  increase,  within  their  respective  limits.  And  even 
the  non-slave-holding  States,  where  there  must,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  be  a  greater  degree  of  toleration,  for  the  free  people  of 
colour,  than  in  the  South,  are  beginning  to  exhibit  evident  symp- 
toms of  uneasiness  at  their  rapid  increase. 

These  feelings,  pervading,  as  they  do,  every  portion  of  our 
country;  extending  from  the  North  to  the  South,  and  from  the 
East  to  the  West,  have  originated  in  no  unnatural  and  unreasonable 
prejudices,  but  rest  for  their  support,  on  the  most  obvious  prin- 
ciples of  political  wisdom  and  foresight.  It  is  impossible,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  that  a  population,  just  emerged  from  slavery, 
distinguished  by  the  peculiarity  of  its  colour,  and  cut  oft*  by  un- 
avoidable necessity,  from  the  most  powerful  inoentives  to  indi- 


1828]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations*  259 

vidual  exertion,  and  to  moral  elevation,  should  constitute  a  val- 
uable portion  of  any  community,  on  which  it  may  be  cast.  It 
can  add  neither  to  its  wealth,  its  character,  nor  its  strength. 

44 Whoever,"  says  a  late  essayist,  "is  at  all  conversant  with 
the  character  of  the  free  coloured  population  of  our  country, 
must  be  satisfied,  that  it  is  a  source  of  evil,  rather  than  of  good 
to  us.  The  very  limited  addition  which  it  makes  to  the  labour 
of  the  country,  is  more  than  counterbalanced  by  its  extraordinary 
deductions  from  the  gross  amount  of  that  labour,  by  the  indo- 
lence and  the  immorality  inseparable  from  its  condition,  by  the 
distinctions  which  it  creates  in  our  society,  as  well  as  in  our 
laws,  and  above  all,  by  the  paralyzing  influence  it  must  neces- 
sarily exercise  over  the  physical  energies  of  the  nation.  In  the 
slave-holding  portions  of  our  country,  this  balance  of  evil  is  in- 
finitely increased,  by  the  effect  of  an  intermediate  class  of  po- 
pulation, such  as  that  we  are  considering,  in  the  relations  sub- 
sisting between  the  master  and  the  slave.  Made  up,  for  the 
most  part,  either  of  emancipated  slaves,  or  of  their  immediate 
descendants,  elevated  above  the  class  from  which  it  has  sprung, 
only  by  its  exemption  from  domestic  restraint,  and  effectually 
debarred  by  the  law,  from  every  prospeot  of  equality  with  the 
actual  freemen  of  the  country,  it  is  a  source  of  perpetual  uneasi- 
ness to  the  master,  and  of  envy  and  corruption  to  the  slave.  Its 
effect  is  to  diminish  the  comforts  of  the  one,  while  it  increases 
the  burthens  of  the  other,  and  to  leave  to  the  society,  in  which 
it  exists,  no  other  security,  than  can  be  derived  from  an  arbi- 
trary system  of  laws,  not  less  revolting  to  humanity,  than  in- 
consistent with  the  general  character  of  our  institutions." 

Such,  we  believe,  to  be  a  fair  and  faithful  exhibition  of  the 
real  character  and  influence  of  the  population,  whose  removal  is 
the  object  of  the  Colonization  Society;  and  entertaining  this 
opinion,  we  cannot  help  considering  the  object  itself,  as  one  of 
infinite  importance  to  the  nation,  and  calling  loudly  for  the  ap- 
plication of  the  necessary  means,  that  have  been  wisely  committed 
to  the  government  of  the  union,  "for  securing  the  domestic  tran- 
quillity, providing  for  the  common  defence,  and  promoting  the 
general  welfare."  Will  not  this  Government  indeed  be  guilty 
of  a  gross  and  unpardonable  neglect,  of  the  high  and  important 
duties  devolved  upon  it,  if  it  shall  continue  to  regard  with  cold 


260  Review  of  bhe  Report  of  the  •  [Nov. 

indifference,  an  evil,  so  extensive,  so  various,  and  so  powerful 
in  its  operation;  an  evil  pervading  in  a  greater  or  less  degree, 
every  section  of  our  country — and  affecting  by  its  baleful  influ- 
ence, not  only  our  morals  and  our  politics,  but  our  individual 
wealth,  and  with  it,  our  national  strength? 

Even  had  the  fearful  exhibition  of  expenditure,  conjured  up 
by  the  fervid  fancy  of  Mr.  Tazewell,  been  justified  by  the  actual 
data  in  his  possession,  we  are  very  much  inclined  to  doubt, 
whether  the  expenditure  would  not  have  been  more  than  coun- 
terbalanced by  its  resulting  benefits.  Indeed  we  hardly  know 
how  to  estimate  in  dollars  and  cents,  the  value  of  a  measure, 
that  by  withdrawing  from  us,  our  free  coloured  population, 
should  open  the  way  for  the  ultimate  extinction  of  slavery, 
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  our  territory.  Could  such  an 
event  be  instantaneously  brought  about — could  the  whole  colour- 
ed population  of  our  country  be  suddenly  converted,  by  the 
magic  touch  of  some  enchanter's  wand,  into  a  free  and  industri- 
ous white  population,  what  price  should  we  not  be  willing  pay, 
what  terms  should  we  not  readily  grant  for  so  signal  a  bless- 
ing? 

But  these  are  not  tl^  days  of  miracles;  and  we  are  not  dis- 
posed to  attempt,  with  human  means,  what  omnipotence  alone 
could  accomplish.  Mr.  Tazewell  need  not  be  alarmed  there- 
fore, at  the  idea  of  being  called  on  to  vote,  either  one  hundred 
and  ninety  millions  of  dollars  for  the  immediate  extinction  of 
slavery,  nor  twenty -eight  millions  for  the  immediate  removal  of 
our  whole  free  coloured  population;  and  we  can  assure  him,  on 
the  most  unquestionable  authority,  that  even  if  the  Coloniza- 
tion Society  were  to  ask  of  Congress,  means  for  the  transporta- 
tion of  the  annual  increase  of  the  whole  coloured  population  of 
the  country,  both  free  and  slave,  their  demand,  instead  of 
swelling  to  six  or  seven  millions,  would  be  satisfied  by  an  ap- 
propriation falling  short  even  of  a  single  million.* 

But  in  truth,  the  chief  object  of  the  Colonization  Society  in 
applying  to  Congress,  is  to  procure,  in  the  first  instance,  the 
national  countenance  to  their  undertaking,  and  in  the  next  place, 

*  See  the  Note  after  this  Article. 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  261 

to  obtain  from  the  Government,  such  moderate  pecuniary  aid,  as 
will  enable  them  to  make  their  settlement  on  the  coast  of  Africa 
a  safe  and  desirable  asylum  for  the  coloured  population  of  Ame- 
rica, whenever  this  shall  have  been  so  far  accomplished  as  to  sat- 
isfy that  portion  of  them  already  free,  that  they  may,  by  their 
removal  to  it,  improve  their  condition,  moral,  political  and  pe- 
cuniary; individual  enterprise,  aided  by  a  very  moderate  share 
of  individual  philanthropy,  will  readily  overcome  all  the  antici- 
pated difficulties  of  transportation.  The  fact  is,  that  at  this  very 
moment,  a  large  proportion  of  the  free  coloured  population  of 
America,  could  furnish  abundant  means  for  their  own  transpor- 
tation, if  the  situation  of  the  Colony  held  out  sufficient  induce- 
ments for  their  removal  to  it.  And  we  venture  to  predict,  that 
if  ever  the  time  shall  arrive,  when  the  most  industrious  and 
thrifty  amongst  them  shall  have  been  tempted  to  emigrate,  there 
is  not  a  village,  a  town,  a  county,  nor  a  state  in  the  Union,  that 
will  not  be  prepared,  from  motives  of  interest  alone,  to  furnish 
the  necessary  means  of  migration  to  the  remainder. 

That  a  settlement  in  Africa,  thus  constituted,  and  thus  pro- 
tected, would  also  draw  from  us,  if  not  the  whole  of  our  slave 
population,  such  portions  of  it,  at  least,  as  would  relieve  us  from 
the  greatest  and  most  appalling  of  the  apprehensions  connected 
with  its  existence  among  us,  cannot  admit  of  a  doubt.  Even 
under  all  the  discouragements  which  the  laws  of  the  South  are 
compelled  to  throw  in  the  way  of  emancipation,  individual  hu- 
manity is  nevertheless  continually  at  work;  and  under  its  influ- 
ence, hundreds  and  thousands  of  slaves  are  annually  liberated, 
with  very  little  hope  that  their  situation  will  be  improved,  and 
with  the  strongest  reasons  to  apprehend  that  they  may  become-  a 
more  serious  evil  to  the  community  on  which  they  are  thrown,, 
than  in  their  primitive  condition.  Their  removal  to  Africa  un- 
der the  auspices  and  protection  of  the  Government  of  the  United 
States,  would  obviate  every  difficulty.  Philanthropy  and  patri- 
otism might  then  go  hand  in  hand.  Individual  felling  would  do 
much,  and  state  legislation  yet  more,  towards  relieving  the  coun- 
try of  its  greatest  curse  and  its  greatest  opprobrium. 

It  is  not  for  us  to  point  out  the  extent  to  which  the  Government 
(should  it  see  proper  to  embark  in  this  business)  must  go,  to  ren- 
der its  co-operation  most  efficacious/    If  ever  it  does  move,  its 


26£  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  •  [Nov. 

first  movements  must,  of  course,  be  experimental;  leaving  it  te 
time  and  observation  to  mature  its  ultimate  plans.  We  venture, 
however,  to  predict,  that  under  no  possible  circumstances,  can 
the  numerous  expenditures  anticipated  by  Mr.  Tazewell,  ever  be 
required;  and  we  repeat  our  conviction,  that  one  million  of  dol- 
lars, judiciously  expended,  would  be  more  than  sufficient  to  de- 
fray every  necessary  expense,  connected  with  the  removal  of  the 
annual  increase  of  the  whole  coloured  population  of  the  coun- 
try. 

But  even  this  amount  would  very  far  exceed  either  the  expec- 
tations or  the  wishes  of  the  Society.  The  protection  of  the 
government,  and  an  annual  appropriation  of  one  hundred  thou- 
sand dollars  for  some  years  to  come,  would,  most  probably,  ac- 
complish every  thing  that  ought  to  be  attempted,  would  meet 
the  demands  for  immediate  emigration;  give  stability  and  pros- 
perity to  the  settlement  at  Liberia;  and  ultimately  open  an  effi- 
cient drain,  for  a  population  as  injurious  to  the  national  inter- 
ests, as  it  is  dangerous  to  the  national  peace.  Who,  that  is 
conversant  with  the  resources,  can  doubt  the  ability  of  the  Gov- 
ernment to  make  such  an  appropriation?  And  what  appropria- 
tion, that  could  be  made,  would  contribute  more  "to  secure  the 
domestic  tranquillity,  and  promote  the  general  welfare"  of  the 
Union? 


JS'ote. 


The  average  price  paid  by  the  Colonization  Society,  for  the 
conveyance  of  emigrants  to  Africa,  and  for  supporting  them  dur- 
ing the  voyage,  has  been  about  thirty  dollars  for  each  individual. 
The  lowest  price  was  twenty-eight  dollars.  There  cannot  be  a 
doubt,  however,  that  as  emigration  increases,  and  trade  to  the 
Colony  is  proportionally  augmented,  or  rather  as  it  is  augment- 
ed in  proportion  to  the  size  and  resources  of  the  Colony,  the 
price  of  conveying  emigrants  will  be  much  diminished,  so  that 
twenty  dollars  or  twenty-five  dollars  will  be  the  highest  at  which 
it  can  be  estimated.  Besides,  the  general  rule  is  obviously  ap- 
plicable in  this  case,  that  business  done  on  a  small  scale,  is  the 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations,  263 

most  expensive.     It  has  been  the  usual   custom  of  the  Society, 
to  receive  the  emigrants  at  the  place  of  embarkation. 

From  these  premises,    the  glaring  unfairness  of  Mr.    Taze- 
well's statements,   cannot  but  appear  obvious  to  every  unpreju- 
diced and  discerning  eye.      Indeed  it  seems  remarkable  that  he 
should  venture  to  present  such  a  report  before  so  enlightened  a 
body  as  the  American  Congress.     And  it  seems  no  less  unfortu- 
nate, that  a  subject  so  momentous,  should  be  entrusted  to  hands 
apparently  so  ready  to  stifle  it,   without  giving  a  fair  exhibition 
of  its  claims  and  its  character.     Judging  solely  from  the  guesses 
of  others,  and  from  past  expenses,  he  made  a  rough  estimate  of 
the  cost  of  planting  each  emigrant  in  Africa,  at  $100.     Proceed- 
ing from  this  goal  so  ingeniously,  but  so  loosely  set  up,  he  esti- 
mates the  expense  of  transporting  all  the  free   coloured  popula- 
tion of  the  country,  at  $28,000,000,  and  of  the  annual  increase, 
at  $700,000:  of  the  whole  of  the  slave  population,  at  $195,000,- 
000,  and  of  their  annual  increase,  at  $7,500,000.     What  would 
we  think  of  the  farmer  who  should  count  the  cost  of  clearing  and 
planting  a  piece  of  wild  land,  and  should   calculate  that  the  an- 
nual expense  of  doing  it  in  succeeding  years  would  be  the  same. 
And   more  especially,   what  would   be  thought  of  him,   if  he 
should  even  attempt  to  make  converts  to  such  an  opinion.     And 
yet  it  is  exactly  on  this  principle  that  Mr.  Tazewell  has  pro- 
ceeded.    However  great  the  expenses  of  the  emigrants  may  have 
been  in  the  infancy  of  the  Colony,  it  is  certain,   that  when  the 
facilities  of  support  to  the  coloured  people  are  as  great  in  Afri- 
ca, as  in  this  country,  (and  we  confidently  expect  them  soon  to  be 
much  greater,)   nothing  will  then  remain  but  the  cost  of  remo- 
val.    For  this,  $20  a  head  would  doubtless  be  an  estimate  suffi- 
ciently high.     Even  admitting,    then,   the  rest  of  Mr.   Taze- 
well's premises,  the  cost  of  transporting  the  whole  of  the  free 
coloured  population   would  be,  $5,600,000,   and  of  the  annual 
increase,  $140,000:  the  whole  of  the  slaves,    $38,000,000,  and 
their  annual  increase,    $1,140,000.     From  this  it  will  be  seen, 
that  the  undoubted  loss  sustained  by  the  people  of  the  United 
States  in  a  single  year  by  the  use  of  ardent  spirits,  would  more 
than  remove  the  whole  African  race  from  our  country  to  their 
native  shores.     How  fortunate,  if  intemperate  men,  before  pro- 
ceeding to  ruin,  would  appropriate  one  year's  waste  to  this 
cause  of  philanthropy. 


264  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  '    [Nov. 

But  further.  Mr.  Tazewell  is  alarmed  at  the  idea,  that  if  Gov- 
ernment interpose,  it  must  pay  something  like  an  equivalent  foi 
the  slaves,  iri  order  to  obtain  their  manumission.  Was  he  in- 
deed unacquainted  with  the  fact,  that  the  disposition,  from 
whatever  motive,  to  liberate  them,  is  already  so  great,  that  al- 
most every  where,  the  strong  arm  of  the  law  is  found  necessary 
to  arrest  the  progress  of  manumission?  and  that  it  is  the  avowed 
determination  of  a  great  portion  of  masters,  to  liberate  their 
slaves,  as  soon  as  it  can  be  done  to  the  benefit  of  the  slaves, 
without  danger  to  themselves?  And  docs  he  know  the  rapid 
progress  of  this  change  of  sentiment?  He  ought  at  least  to  have 
contrived  some  method,  by  which  the  chain  might  have  been 
separated  that  binds  the  master  to  his  servants,  and  might  leave 
them  free  to  liberate  them,  according  to  their  desire,  before  he  pro- 
posed to  pay  them  for  doing  it.  The  colonization  scheme  in 
fact,  opens  the  only  way  in  which  even  the  white  man  is  at  lib- 
erty to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own.  Even  a  child  can  under- 
stand, that  though  no  human  arm  can,  at  a  single  lift,  cast 
Mount  /Etna into  the  sea,  its  removal  thither  is,  notwithstanding, 
entirely  practicable.  Only  let  the  work  go  on,  and  it  will,  in 
due  time,  be  accomplished.  Only  remove  entirely  the  barriers 
to  the  progress  of  moral  sentiment,  and  that  alone  would  per- 
form most  of  the  wonders  that  make  such  a  figure  in  Mr.  Taze- 
well's arithmetic.  And  further,  let  such  an  experiment  be  fairly 
made,  as  will  show  clearly  on  which  side  lie  individual  and  na- 
tional interest,  and  the  work  is  done.  The  nation  and  the  man 
will  hardly  be  found  so  selfish  as  not  to  gratify  their  selfishness, 
even  if  in  doing  it,  they  should  also  obey  the  dictates  of  humanity. 

The  subject,  however  plausibly  numbers  may  be  set  down  and 
exhibited,  is  obviously  not  within  the  comprehension  of  pure  nu- 
merical arithmetic.  It  enters  mostly  into  a  moral  arithmetic, 
of  which  many  of  the  digits  are  yet  to  be  found.  For  instance, 
only  suppose  for  a  moment,  that  the  African  Colony  held  forth 
strong  inducements  to  emigration,  as  it  doubtless  will,  if  well 
managed  and  properly  supported;  and  that  the  coloured  people 
might  be  liberated  with  safety  a  while  before  their  departure 
thither;  how  long  would  it  be,  before  each  person,  that  was  fit  to 
emigrate  would  lay  up  $20;  and  how  soon  would  they  forever 
abandon  the  shores  of  our  country?     It  is  a  pity  that  Mr.  Tazc 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  265 

well,  while  he  was  wandering  in  the  field  of  conjectures,  had 
not  touched  upon  these  and  similar  grounds  of  more  light  and 
greater  probability.  Before  such  a  state  of  things,  his  imposing 
estimates  would  vanish  like  the  meadow  mist  before  the  sun  of 
a  summer  morning.  The  better  part  of  the  sons  of  Africa, 
would  proceed  by  their  own  resources  and  their  own  energies, 
to  civilize  and  renovate  their  native  home;  and  the  remnant 
would  very  prob;ibly  end  their  days  and  their  lineage  in  the 
alms-houses  and  hospitals  of  our  own  country.  All  this  may  be 
called  fancy;  but  when  shadows  are  made  warriors,  truly  better 
shadows  may  be  set  up  to  oppose  them. 

On  the  supposition,  however,  that  the  aid  of  Government  will 
not  be  obtained  immediately,  even  at  the  most  important  crisis 
of  our  great  and  very  promising  experiment,  the  subject  of  this 
note  presents  a  fit  opportunity  to  make  an  urgent  and  powerful 
appeal  to  the  people  of  the  North.  Almost  to  a  man,  they  are 
anxious  that  our  common  country  should  be  delivered  from  what 
they  deem  a  great  and  threatening  evil.  And  moreover,  it  can- 
not be  said,  that  they  are  backward  to  do  what  they  see  to  be 
their  duty  in  the  cause  of  their  country.  If  their  feelings  are 
in  any  case  too  violent  on  this  interesting  subject,  it  is  because 
they  are  mistaken  respecting  it.  It  is  because  they  do  not  see 
clearly  the  difficulties  and  impediments  with  which  it  is  encum- 
bered. But  they  understand  arithmetic.  They  know  too,  that 
the  owners  of  slaves  have  paid  for  them  the  market  price,  the 
very  price  for  which  they  are  now  ready  to  sell  them,  or  set 
them  at  liberty.  Their  profit  has  been  wholly  that  of  use, 
which  can  be  considered  only  as  equal  to  the  interest  of  the  mo- 
ney which  they  have  actually  expended.  The  clear  profit,  if 
there  has  been  any,  has  mostly  fallen  to  the  lot  of  those  who  have 
perpetrated  the  atrocities,  and  partaken  in  the  horrors  of  the  slave- 
trade.  Of  these  guilty  persons,  with  shame  be  it  spoken,  many, 
perhaps  the  most,  belong  to  the  North.  Those  who  give  up  their 
slaves  without  an  equivalent,  must  make  an  actual  sacrifice, 
nearly  or  quite  equal  to  the  full  amount  of  their  value.  We 
may  with  safety  set  this  value  at  g200  a  head.  What  then  is 
the  readiness  of  the  South  compared  with  the  North  to  get  rid 
of  this  evil?     We  may  compute  it  in  decimal  arithmetic.     If  the 

South  liberate  their  slaves,  they  virtually  pay  $200  a  head  to- 

34 


t6$  Meview  of  the  Report  of  the  [Noy. 

wards  their  emigration  to  Africa.  If  the  North  bear  the  whole 
expense  of  removal,  they  pay,  excepting  extraordinary  expen- 
ses, 825  a  head,  or  one-eighth  of  what  is  paid  by  the  South.— 
But  in  fact,  the  South  bear  a  very  considerable  part  of  the  ex- 
pense of  removal.  And  yet  there  are  more  than  200  slaves 
whose  masters  wish  to  liberate  them,  and  have  already  offered 
them  to  the  Society;  and  they  must  still  remain  in  slavery  simply 
because  the  means  cannot  be  provided  of  conveying  them  to  Afri- 
ca. By  actual  computation,  then,  the  South  are  about  eight  times 
as  ready  as  the  North  to  get  rid  of  this  evil.  Surely  if  emulation 
does  not  turn  the  scales,  censure  must  be  silent.  Those  who  - 
are  now  implicated,  cannot  be  blamed  for  what  has  fallen  to 
them  by  paternal  inheritance.  Their  fathers  expended  their 
money  for  what  was  then  deemed  legitimate  property.  It  is 
still  so  represented  by  the  laws  of  our  country.  The  evil  is  uni- 
versally allowed  to  be  national,  and  it  requires  for  its  removal, 
a  nation's  resources  and  a  nation's  energies. 

And  what  are  our  free  coloured  population?  They  are  slaves, 
or  the  children  of  slaves,  manumitted  by  the  hand  of  their  mas- 
ters. They  can,  in  reality,  be  considered  in  no  other  light  than 
that  of  slaves  just  set  at  liberty.  The  South,  as  it  respects  the 
emancipation  of  their  own  coloured  people,  have  stolen  a  march 
on  the  North,  and  have  left  them  in  the  rear  in  the  progress  of 
moral  sentiment.  The  actions  of  the  North,  then,  should  de- 
monstrate how  much  their  declarations  on  this  subject  are  based 
on  sincerity.  In  this  respect,  the  language  of  the  South  is  more 
unequivocal  and  more  decisive.  This  is  not  declamation;  it  is 
not  hyperbole;  but  truth  unvarnished:  and  to  a  candid  ear, 
a  simple  statement  of  facts  is  the  most  acceptable  and  the  most 
commanding  eloquence.  Ed:  pro  tern. 

Since  writing  the  above,  we  have,  for  the  first  time,  noticed 
the  following  from  the  New- York  Observer. 

"African  Colonization. — We  mentioned  in  our  last,  that  more  than  400 
free  blacks  had  applied  to  the  Managers  of  the  American  Colonization  So- 
ciety to  be  transported  to  the  African  Colony,  and  that  the  owners  of  more 
than  200  slaves  had  declared  their  readiness  to  liberate  them  as  soon  as 
means  are  provided  for  their  removal. 

"We  with  our  benevolent  readers  to  dwell  for  a  moment  upon  these 


1S28.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  &67 

facts — particularly  the  latter.  The  good  people  of  the  North  profess  to 
regard  slavery  with  utter  abhorrence,  and  often  reproach  their  Southern 
neighbours,  in  no  measured  terms,  for  continuing  a  practice  so  opposed  to 
every  principle  of  justice  and  humanity.  "  But  is  not  the  reply  just?-— 
"We  feel  the  force  of  what  you  say:  but  we  cannot  first  relinquish  our 
slaves,  which  are  half  the  property  we  possess,  and  then  transport  them  to 
another  clime:  neither  can  we,  nor  will  we,  turn  them  loose  upon  our  fel- 
low citizens,  to  become  paupers,  thieves  and  robbers.  If  you  are  as  hon- 
est in  favour  of  emancipation  as  you  are  importunate,  hand  oerto  the 
Colonization  Society  $20,  as  often  as  we  relinquish  $300  or  $400.  We 
will  free  our  slaves,    if  you  will  transport  them  to  the  land  of  their  fathers. 

"\nd  what  can  the  Northerner  say?  Nothing.  And  he  ought  to  say  no- 
thing. If  with  all  his  boasted  patriotism  and  compassion  for  suffering  hu- 
manity, he  cannot  do  little  where  he  requires  others  to  do  so  much,  let 
him  hide  his  head,  and  close  his  lips  with  conscious  shame. 

"Hut  is  it  so?  Will  the  friends  of  African  emancipation  in  the  Northern 
States  suffer  200  of*  their  fellow  men  to  wear  the  chains  of  slavery  yet  lon- 
ger and  longer,  for  lack  of  the  necessary  funds  to  transport  them  to  Libe- 
ria }  We  do  not— we  cannot  believe  it.  Exempt  from  slavery  ourselves, 
with  all  its  attendant  evils, — the  very  love  of  country,  the  common  sympa- 
thies of  our  nature,  much  more  the  dictates  of  humble  piety,  would  lead  us  to 
pity  and  relieve  these  children  of  misfortune  and  sorrow.  But  let  it  be  remem- 
bered, kind  wishes  avail  nothing-  in  a  matter  like  this;  kind  words  avail  no- 
thing. The  necessities  of  the  case  can  only  be  relieved  by  prompt  and 
liberal  generosity.  The  season  for  safe  emigration  is  rapidly  passing  away; 
and  whatever  is  clone,  must  be  done  quickly.  Two  months  longer,  and  it 
will  be  too  late." 

There  is  such  a  resemblance  between  the  note  and  the  quota- 
tion, that  it  would  seem  as  if  one  must  have  been  a  transcript  of 
the  other.  They  are  both,  however,  the  transcript  of  truth,  and 
are  therefore  from  the  same  original.  We  rejoice  to  see  such 
sentiments  from  a  source  at  the  North  so  highly  respectable. 
We  cannot  but  hope  that  they  will  be  found  already  written 
in  the  hearts  of  all  who  are  the  friends  of  freedom,  of  our  coun- 
try, and  of  humanity.  And  we  trust,  that  wherever  they  are 
found,  they  will  be  like  the  breath  of  life,  and  will  arouse  each 
and  every  individual  to  ardent  feeling,  and  to  efficient  activity. 
The  people  of  the  South  are  now  saying,  and  what  is  more,  they 
are  saying  practically  to  the  people  of  the  North,  "We  are  moved 
by  your  remonstrances;  we  are  convinced  by  your  arguments; 
and  moreover,  we  are  willing  to  set  you  an  example  on  your  own 
lessons  of  freedom  and  humanity.     We  are  ready  to  lead  the 


268  Review  of  the  Report  of  the  [Nor. 

way,  and  even  to  leave  you  far  in  the  rear,  in  the  attainment  of 
that  object  for  which  you  have  so  earnestly  plead,  and  which 
you  have  so  loudly  demanded.  We  hold  our  coloured  popula- 
tion on  principles  which  were  approved  and  practised  by  you 
and  your  fathers.  We  paid  for  them  the  market  price,  at  a  time 
when  no  doubt  was  expressed  that  they  were  just  and  legal 
property.  We  have  ever  held  them,  and  we  still  hold  them  as 
such  by  the  laws  of  our  country.  We  obtained  them  when 
Government  was  pledged  to  defend  them  as  our  own.  This 
pledge  stands  on  the  firm  basis  of  a  contract.  No  retrospective 
law  can  reach  and  destroy  it,  without  doing  inexcusable  violence 
to  the  free  principles,  and  free  institutions  of  our  country. 
Such  a  law  would  at  least  operate  like  the  hidden  spring  of  a 
trap,  set  to  catch  citizens  whom  the  Government  is  bound  to 
protect.  Violence  of  this  kind,  though  it  may  assume  the  name 
of  legal,  we  will  repel  with  all  our  strength.  The  free  spirit  ot 
our  fathers,  and  of  our  common  country,  commands  us  to  do  so. 
Yet  we  are  ready,  we  show  you  that  we  are  ready  to  give  up 
what  you  have  no  right  to  wrest  from  our  possession. — 
Hundreds  of  thousands  have  already  been  so  given  up. — 
More  still  would  have  been  given  up;  but  policy,  and  even 
the  voice  of  humanity  forbid  the  progress  of  manumission; 
and  the  salutary  hand  of  law  came  forward  to  co-operate  with 
our  convictions,  and  to  arrest  the  flow  of  our  feelings,  and  the 
ardour  of  our  desires.  But  they  are  only  arrested;  not  over- 
powered or  extinguished.  We  offer  you  now  more  than  two 
hundred  Africans,  and  we  entreat  you  to  convey  them  to  their 
native  shores,  whence  they  were  torn  by  other  hands  than  ours. 
We  would  call  upon  those  guilty  persons  to  undo  what  they 
have  done;  but,  Alas!  if  the  curse  of  Providence  has  not  swept 
them  and  theirs  from  the  world,  their  hearts  would  probably  be 
callous  far  beyond  the  influence  of  our  entreaties.  Accept,  we 
beseech  you,  the  offering,  and  assist  in  a  small  degree  to  accom- 
plish your  own  desires.  We  give  it  freely:  we  give  ten  dollars 
to  your  one.  Many  of  us  are  embarrassed,  and  some  made  poor 
by  the  sacrifice.  But  we  trust  in  that  God  whom  we  desire  to 
obey,  and  we  beseech  him  to  touch  your  hearts,  and  impress 
your  minds  with  our  own  feelings,  and  our  own  sentiments." 
Friends  of  freedom  and  humanity,  shall  this  language,  so  much 


1828.]  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations.  269 

like  your  own,  be  permitted  to  pass  by  unheard  and  unheeded? 
Shall  this  soft  flame  of  hope,  that  beams  so  delightful,  and  so 
full  of  promise,  be  suffered  to  sink  for  the  want  of  so  small  an 
encouragement  Ah!  who  can  tell,  if  it  should  once  expire, 
what  hand,  or  what  power  can  rekindle  it? 

Before  closing,  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  if  the  principal 

sround  on  which  Mr.  Tazewell  rests  his  estimates,  can  be  made 

s 

good,  to  us  it  will  inevitably  be  fatal.  About  three  quarters  of 
his  supposed  expense,  must  be  incurred  in  supporting  the  colo- 
nists after  their  arrival.  If  the  facilities  of  support  to  the  colour- 
ed people  cannot  be  rendered  as  great  at  the  Colony  as  in 
America,  or  even  greater,  all  our  efforts  are  idle  and  vain.  If 
they  can,  the  Colonists  will  in  the  main,  support  themselves  im- 
mediately upon  their  arrival.  If  they  cannot,  then  the  argu- 
ment not  only  properly  precludes  the  patronage  of  Government, 
but  it  withers  entirely  the  hopes  of  the  Society.  Never,  in  that 
case,  can  the  coloured  population  be  removed,  but  by  the  strong 
hand  of  violence,  that  dragged  them  from  their  native  shores. 
But  we  ought  to  be  thankful  that  Mr.  Tazewell  is  neither  the 
dispenser  nor  the  prophet  of  futurity.  In  addition  to  the  known 
fertility  of  Africa,  here  the  coloured  people  have  to  contend  with 
the  strong  and  skilful  hand  of  enlightened  freemen;  there 
with  a  sparse  population  of  untaught  and  indolent  savages. 

We  cannot  do  better  than  to  close  this  article  with  an  extract 
of  a  letter  from  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq.  one  of  our  warmest  friends 
and  ablest  contributors.  "Will  another  attempt  be  made,  at 
the  next  session  of  Congress,  to  enlist  the  means  of  the  nation  in 
behalf  of  the  objects  of  our  Societj'?  Those  means  are  indispen- 
sable to  the  speedy  accomplishment  of  our  work;  but  let  us  not 
have  them,  unless  they  can  be  constitutionally  afforded  to  us. — 
I  cannot  agree  with  the  great  majority  of  our  friends,  that  our 
work  cannot  be  done  without  these  means.  There  is  patriotism 
enough  in  the  people  of  this  republic  to  do  it — and  in  the  face 
of  all  obstacles,  they  will  do  it.  Do  I  count  too  largely  on  that 
patriotism?  We  betake  ourselves,  then,  to  a  better — ran  un- 
failing reliance.  If  the  subject  cannot  kindle  sufficient  alarm 
in  the  bosom  of  the  patriot,  yet  it  has  power  to  move  the  sym- 
pathies of  the  Christian;  and  on  the  benevolent  workings  of  his 
holy  religion,  and  the  blessing  of  God,  which  ever  accompanies 


270  Letter  from  Matthew  Carey,  Esq.  [Nov. 

them,  do  we  ground  our  last  and  safest  confidence,  that  the  next 
generation,  if  not,  indeed,  ourown,  will  witness  countless  vessels 
employed  in  carrying  back  our  poor  Africans  to  their  mother 
land,  and  in  recompensing  all  the  wrongs  we  have  done  her, 
with  the  blessings  of  civilization  and  the  gospel." 

OF  PHILADELPHIA. 

We  are  happy  to  announce  by  the  following  letter,  the  attain- 
ment of  another  distinguished  friend  to  our  cause;  and  the  more 
so,  because  he  has  seen  fit  at  the  outset,  to  place  himself  in  the 
first  rank  of  our  friends  and  advocates.  Indeed  we  are  perfect- 
ly confident,  that  just  so  far  as  we  can  make  fully  known  the 
true  state  of  things,  and  the  designs  and  prospects  of  our  Society, 
we  shall  attain,  to  a  man,  every  friend,  that  in  the  promotion  of 
a  good  cause  is  worth  the  attainment. 

Dear  Sir: 

When  the  idea  of  the  Colonization  Society  was  first  present- 
ed to  the  public,  I  was  one  of  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands, 
who  regarded  it  as  one  of  the  wildest  projects  ever  patronized 
by  a  body  of  enlightened  men.  Thus  viewing  it,  you  will  not 
be  surprised  to  learn,  that  I  was,  as  Sterne  says,  "predeter- 
mined not  to  bestow  on  it  a  single  sous." — This  view  I  enter- 
tained until  lately,  when  a  careful  perusal  of  the  tenth  and 
eleventh  reports  of  the  Society,  which  you  were  so  kind  as  to 
send  me,  convinced  me  that  I  had  been  egregiously  in  error;  I 
had  greatly  overrated  the  expense  of  the  transportation  of  the 
Colonists,  and  of  their  support  for  some  time  in  Liberia,  sup- 
posing it  would  be  from  one  hundred,  to  one  hundred  and  fifty 
dollars  each.  Under  this  impression  I  considered  the  scheme  al- 
most as  Utopian,  as  it  would  be  to  attempt  to  drain  Lake  Erie 
with  a  ladle. 

It  appears  by  the  report,  that  the  conveyance  of  Colonists  to 
Liberia,  and  their  support  there  for  one  year,  can  be  accomplish- 
ed for  twenty  dollars,  perhaps  less.    This  wholly  changes  the  face 


1828.]  Letter  from  Matthew  Carey,  Esq.  271 

of  affairs,  and  places  the  attainment  of  the  grand  object  in  view, 
(that  is,  to  withdraw  from  the  United  States  annually,  so  many 
of  the  coloured  population,  and  provide  them  a  comfortable  home 
and  all  the  advantages  of  civilization  in  Africa,  as  will  make  the 
number  here  remain  stationary,)  within  the  grasp  of  the  nation; 
provided  sound  views  and  a  spirit  of  liberality  commensurate 
with  the  magnitude  of  the  object,  can  be  spread  abroad  on  the 
subject. 

The  mortality  that  has  occurred,  and  the  various  difficulties 
and  disadvantages  that  have  been  experienced  in  the  settlement 
of  Liberia  have  been  considerable,  but  they  have  been  greatly 
exaggerated;  they  however  sink  into  insignificance,  when  com- 
pared with  what  took  place  in  the  early  settlement  of  Virginia^ 
famine,  pestilence,  internal  dissensions,  idleness,  profligacy, 
and  the  tomahawk  of  the  savages,  swept  off  repeated  settlements 
of  the  colonists,  and  cleared  the  country  of  them;*  and  it  was 
not  until  about  thirty  years  from  the  date  of  the  first  attempt  at 
a  settlement,  that  a  permanent  establishment  was  effected. 
This  ought  to  silence  forever  those  who  plead  the  difficulties  that 
Liberia  has  experienced,  as  a  proof  of  the  impracticability  of  the 
undertaking. 

I  firmly  believe,  that  numerous  as  are  the  objects  which  claim 
the  beneficence  of  the  wealthy,  there  is  none  that  promises  so 
copious  a  harvest  of  blessings  to  the  United  States — none  which 
involves  so  many  of  those  considerations  that  oup;ht  to  influence 
citizens  who  look  beyond  their  own  selfish  interests.  There  is 
one  point  of  view  in  which  it  soars  in  magnitude  and  import- 
ance, beyond  every  other  object  of  public  utility,  and  which  can- 
not be  regarded  without  the  deepest  solicitude  and  terror.  By 
a  rational  calculation  in  Mr.  Darby's  valuable  work,  just  pub- 
lished, it  appears,  that  according  to  the  past  ratio  of  the  increase 
of  the  coloured  population  of  the  United  States,  they  will  in  the 
year  1868,  amount  to  above  10,000,000;  in  1882,  to  15,000,000,  * 
unless  some  efficient  measures  of  prevention  be  adopted!  Who 
can  regard  this  enormous  increase  without  affright?  Who  can 
consider  any  expense  too  great  to  avert  the  horrible  consequen- 
ces, with  which  it  is  pregnant?     Could  a  portion  of  the  national 

*See  Note  at  the  end. 


272  Letter  from  Matthew  Carey,  Esq.  [No> , 

wealth — could  individual  or  State  munificence  be  in  any  other 
mode  better  employed?     "Can  any  man  who  loves  his  country, 
regard  the  present  prospect  on  this  subject  without  terror?     Can 
we  view  this  state  of  things  and  let  it  pass  on,  without  once  cal 
dilating   what  will  be  its   consequences  to  posterity." — [-#«# 
mond. 

I  shall  conclude  this  long  letter  with  stating,  that  in  confor- 
mity with  the  views  of  Mr.  Gerrit  Smith, *  of  New  York,  I  send 
you  one  hundred  dollars,  and  intend  to  remit  to  the  Society,  the 
same  sum,  for  nine  successive  years,  should  I  live  so  long.  But 
I  wish  it  distinctly  understood,  that  although  this  is  my  present 
intention,  I  am  not  to  be  considered  as  irrevocably  bound  by  it. 
I  hold  myself  at  liberty,  should  I  judge  proper,  (which  however 
is  unlikely,)  to  change  my  purpose. 

Yours  with  esteem, 
Matthew  Carey. 
Philadelphia,  Nov.  Sth,  1828. 

NOTE. 

Smith  left  the  Colony  furnished  with  three  ships,  good  fortifi- 
cations, twenty-five  pieces  of  cannon,  arms,  ammunition,  ap- 
parel, commodities  for  trading,  and  tools  for  all  kinds  of  labour. 
At  James'  Town,  there  were  nearly  sixty  houses.  The  set- 
tlers had  begun  to  plant  and  to  fortify  at  five  or  six  other 
places.  The  number  of  inhabitants  was  nearly  five  hundred. — 
They  had  just  gathered  in  their  Indian  harvest,  and  besides, 
had  considerable  provision  in  their  stores.      They  had  between 

♦Rev.  R.  R.  Gurlet.  Peterboro,  N.  Y.  Dec.  26,  1827. 

Dear  Sir.-  Above  is  my  draught  for  $100,  which,  I  trust,  you  will  be 
able  to  realize  without  much  delay  or  trouble.  I  am  fully  persuaded,  that 
the  only  present  channel  for  our  labours  in  behalf  of  Africa  and  her  un- 
kappy  children  on  our  shores,  is  that  which  the  Amer.  Colonization  Socie- 
ty opens  up  to  our  patriotic  and  christian  liberality.  Can  there  not  be  one 
hundred  persons  found,  who  will  subscribe  $1000  each  to  the  funds  of 
your  Society? — $100  to  be  paid  in  hand,  and  the  residue  in  nine  equal  pay- 
ments. If  there  can  be,  you  are  then  at  liberty  to  consider  me  as  one  of 
the  one  hundred  persons,  and  the  enclosed  draught  as  the  first  payment  of 
my  $1000. 

Your  friend.  Gerbit  Smith. 


1823.]         Address  of  the  Rockbridge  Col.  Society.  £7Q 

five  and  six  hundred  hogs,  an  equal  number  of  fowls,  some 
goats  and  some  sheep.  They  had  also  boats,  nets  and  good  ac- 
commodations for  fishing.  But  such  was  the  sedition,  idle- 
ness and  dissipation  of  this  mad  people,  that  they  were  soon  re- 
duced to  the  must  miserable  circumstances.  No  sooner  was 
Capt.  Smith  gone,  than  the  savages,  provoked  by  their  dissolute 
practices  and  encouraged  by  their  want  of  government,  revolt- 
ed, hunted  and  slew  them  from  place  to  place.  Nansemond, 
the  plantation  at  the  falls,  and  all  the  out-settlements,  were 
abandoned.  In  a  short  time,  nearly  forty  of  the  company  were 
eut  off  by  the  enemy.  Their  time  and  provisions  were  consum- 
ed in  riot;  their  utensils  were  stolen  or  destroyed;  their  hogs, 
sheep  and  fowls  killed  and  carried  off  by  the  Indians.  The 
sword  without,  famine  and  sickness  within,  soon  made  among 
them  surprising  destruction.  Within  the  term  of  six  months, 
of  their  whole  number,  sixty  only  survived.  These*  were  the 
most  poor,  famishing  wretches,  subsisting  chiefly  on  herbs, 
acorns  and  berries.  Such  was  the  famine,  that  they  fed  on  the 
skins  of  their  dead  horses:  nay,  they  boiled  and  ate  the  flesh  of 
the  dead.  Indeed  they  were  reduced  to  such  extremity,  that 
had  they  not  been  relieved,  the  whole  Colony  in  eight  or  ten 
days  would  have  been  extinct.  Such  are  the  dire  effects  of 
idleness,  faction  and  want  of  proper  subordination. — [Holmes' 
American  Annals,  Vol.    I,    p.    60. 

This  hideous  state  of  things  took  place  in  1610;  and  the 
first  attempt  at  settlement  was  in  1585.  Thus  we  see  there 
were  twenty-five  years  of  famine,  disorder,  slaughter  and  de- 
struction. 

AAftxess  oi  i\\e  T^ockVritlge  Col.  Society. 

We  introduce  the  following"  extracts  from  this  well-written  and  very  able 
Address,  with  an  entire  conviction,  that  if  an  apology  for  their  appearance 
in  our  work  should  be  deemed  needful,  they  will  abundantly  speak  their 
own  apology.  Coming,  as  they  do,  from  the  central  part  of  Virginia,  they 
will  fully  evince,  that  we  have  in  that  quarter,  at  least  one  distinguished 
friend,  in  addition  to  those  whom  we  knew  before.  But  further*  they 
35 


274  Address  of  the  Rockbridge  Col.  Society.  •       [Nov. 

doubtless  contain  the  sentiments  of  many;  and  viewed  in  this  light  they  are 
peculiarly  interesting1,  especially  as  those  sentiments  are  expressed  in  a 
clear,  concise  and  forcible  manner.  We  confidently  trust,  that  so  much 
zeal  and  intelligence  will  ever  hereafter  be  alive  and  active  in  promoting 
this  great  cause  of  Africa  and  our  country. 

"The  scheme  of  colonizing  our  coloured  people,  is  not  a  new 
and  untried  theory,  nor  can  it  be  traced  to  any  impure  or  sus- 
picious origin.  Long  ago,  when  the  sages  of  the  revolution  still 
directed  our  public  affairs,  the  Legislature  of  Virginia  first  adopt- 
ed the  scheme,  took  measures  to  carry  it  into  effect,  and  would 
have  proceeded  with  it,  as  the  proper  business  of  government, 
had  they  been  able  at  that  time,  to  obtain  a  foreign  territory 
adapted  to  the  purpose. 

"About  twelve  years  ago,  some  of  the  wisest  men  of  the  na- 
tion, (mostly  slave-holders,)  formed,  in  the  city  of  Washington, 
the  present  American  Colonization  Society.  Among  them  were 
men  high  in  office,  who  had  spent  many  years  in  studying  the 
interests  of  their  country,  and  who  could  not,  therefore,  be  sus- 
pected of  short-sighted  enthusiasm,  or  any  secret  design  of  dis- 
turbing the  rights  or  the  safety  of  our  Southern  citizens. 

"Experience  has  so  far  proved  the  wisdom  of  their  plan. — 
They  have  sent  about  1400  coloured  people  to  Africa;  settled 
them  in  a  good  country,  where  they  flourish  beyond  all  previ- 
ous expectation:  and  thus  have  the  Society  demonstrated,  that 
nothing  is  wanting  to  complete  success,  but  an  adherence  to  the 
same  wise  principles,  and  a  general  movement  of  our  citizens 
in  favour  of  the  scheme. 

"The  scheme  itself  is  a  simple  one.  It  is,  to  remove,  with 
their  consent,  the  free  people  of  colour  from  the  United  States; 
and  to  colonize  or  settle  them  in  Africa,  the  country  of  their  fore- 
fathers 

•'You  will  observe,  first,  that  there  is  to  be  no  intermeddling 
with  property  in  slaves.  The  rights  of  masters  are  to  remain 
sacred  in  the  eyes  of  the  Society.  The  tendency  of  the  scheme, 
and  one  of  its  objects,  is  to  secure  slave-holders,  and  the  whole 
Southern  country,  against  certain  evil  consequences,  growing 
out  of  the  present  three-fold  mixture  of  our  population.  If 
slave-holders  shall  choose  to  liberate  their  slaves,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  having  them  removed  to  Africa,  there  is  nothing  to  pre- 


1828.  J         Address  of  the  Rockbridge  Col.  Socieiij.  2,75 

vent  them;  and  this  effect  of  the  scheme,  instead  of  tending  to 
evil,  is  not  more  gratifying  to  humanity,  than  it  is  favourable  to 
the  general  interest  of  our  citizens. 

1 'Observe,  secondly,  that  every  thing  is  to  be  voluntary:  those 
only  are  to  be  sent  away,  who  willingly  offer  themselves.  The 
rights  of  all  parties  are  to  be  respected.  Those  who  go,  will  go 
freely,  with  the  hope  of  bettering  their  condition.  Those  who 
are  released  from  slavery,  for  the  purpose  of  being  sent  to  the 
Colony,    will  be  released  by  the  voluntary  act  of  their  masters. 

"The  free  coloured  people  are  generally  too  poor  to  bear  the 
expense  of  a  long  voyage,  and  of  a  new  settlement  in  a  distant 
country.  They  depend  on  our  citizens  for  charitable  aid;  and 
this  is  what  we  solicit  you  to  join  in  affording  to  them.  Some  of 
them  are  able  to  pay  all  their  expenses;  others,  particularly  such 
as  are  newly  emancipated,  are  so  miserably  destitute,  as  to  need 
donations  of  food,  clothing  and  utensils. 

"These  are  the  principles  of  the  Colonization  Society.  We 
oan  perceive  nothing  in  them  to  alarm  the  most  timid,  or  to  of- 
fend the  most  conscientious  man  in  the  country.  " 

"It  will  appear  too  on  the  least  reflection,  that  our  interest 
will  be  promoted  by  this  scheme  of  Colonization.  At  a  mode- 
rate expense  we  shall  relieve  our  country  of  a  growing  pest;  we 
shall  make  room  for  a  better  population,  and  secure  the  contin- 
uance of  domestic  peace  and  prosperity. 

"The  scheme  of  Colonization  will  not  only  extend  to  the  peo- 
ple of  colour  who  are  now  free,  but  it  will  occasion  an  increased 
dispositon  in  masters  to  liberate  their  slaves,  for  the  purpose  of 
sending  them  to  Africa.  It  has  already  produced  that  effect. — 
There  are  thousands  of  humane,  slave-holders  in  the  Southern 
States,  who  have  been  restrained  from  liberating  their  slaves,  by 
considerations  of  humanity  and  policy.  The  wretched  condi- 
tion of  free  negroes  in  our  country,  makes  it  doubtful  to  many 
good  men,  whether  slaves  would  be  benefited  by  manumission; 
unless  they  could  be  removed  to  a  better  situation  than  they  can 
find  in  this  country.  It  is  certainly  inexpedient  also  to  multiply 
the  number  of  our  free  coloured  population,  for  reasons  which  we 
have  already  suggested. 

"Now  the  scheme  of  colonizing  them  in  Africa,  where  they 
will  have  a  fine  soil  to  cultivate,  a  large  commerce  to   excite 


£~6  Address  of  the  Rockbridge  Col.  Society.  ■      [Nov. 

their  enterprise:  and  every  privilege  and  institution  calculated 
to  promote  their  improvement — this  will  not  only  remove  objec- 
tions to  manumission,  but  will  offer  every  inducement  to  it» 
which  humanity  and  policy  can  afford." 

"We  have  said  enough  to  prove  the  expediency — or  rather 
the  absolute  necessity  of  colonization.  But  the  vast  amount, 
of  the  coloured  people,  seems  to  afford  a  disheartening  prospect^ 
and  makes  numbers  of  our  citizens  give  up  the  cause  in  des- 
pair. But  the  difficulties  arc  not  so  great,  as  at  first  sight  we 
may  apprehend. 

"Let  us  recur  to  the  principle  abovementioned — that  every 
black  family  occupies  the  room  of  a  white  family.  On  this  principle 
we  are  lost,  if  we  suffer  the  coloured  population  to  multiply,  un- 
checked, upon  our  hands;  because  they  will  increase  faster  than, 
the  whites,  and  will  crowd  them  out  of  all  the  Southern  country. 
But  on  the  same  principle  we  are  saved,  if  by  means  of  coloniza- 
tion, we  can  retard  the  increase  of  the  blacks,  and  gain  ground 
on  them  in  the  South.  That  we  can  do  with  ease,  if  our  people 
will  unite  in  prosecuting  the  scheme.  Every  family  taken  from 
the  blacks,  will  add  also  a  family  to  the  whites,  and  make  an 
actual  difference  of  two  families  in  our  favour.  This  exchange 
will  leave  fewer  blacks  to  remove,  while  it  will  increase  our 
ability  to  remove  them.  Thus,  at  eveiy  step  in  the  work  of 
colonization,  our  labour  will  become  less,  and  our  ability  greater. 
If  we  colonize  1000  a  year,  we  shall  every  year  gain  a  relative 
strength  of  2000.  Let  us  remove  10,000  a  year,  and  we  gain, 
relatively,  20,000  each  year,  and  200,000  in  tan  years. 

<kWe  affirm  therefore,  that  a  vigorous  commencement  alone 
is  wanting,  to  ensure  success.  Set  the  work  fairly  in  motion; 
and  like  a  stone  which  rolls  down  hill,  it  will  gather  force  and  ve- 
locity as  it  proceeds.  A  small  but  happy  commencement  has 
been  made.  The  fertile  country  of  Liberia  has  been  purchased, 
containing  vacant  land  enough  for  many  thousand  additional  fam- 
ilies; the  business  has  been  put  in  train,  and  wants  but  united 
exertion,  on  our  part,  to  give  it  the  decisive  push.  Now  is  the 
time  for  every  friend  of  the  measure,  to  put  forth  all  his  exer- 
tions in  its  behalf.  Every  year's  delay  now,  adds  80,000  to 
those  whom  it  is  our  duty  and  our  policy  to  diminish.  But  eve- 
ry year's  exertion  will  deduct  more  and  more  from  that  fearful 


1828.]         Mdress  of  the  Rockbridge  CoL  Society.  9,77 

increase,  and  give  a  constantly  accelerated  gain  to  the  increase 
of  our  citizens.'' 

"Self-interest  and  self-preservation  furnish  motives  enough  to 
excite  our  exertions;  benevolence,  of  the  most  pure  and  diffusive 
kind,  unites  her  voice  in  the  same  cause.  We  have  before  de- 
scribed the  wretched  condition  of  our  free  coloured  people. — 
Let  us  consider  whether  a  removal  to  Africa,  would  not  place 
them  in  far  happier  circumstances. 

^Africa  is  a  continent  of  vast  extent,  stretching  4,800  miles 
from  North  to  South;  and  at  the  broadest  part,  4000  miles  from 
East  to  AVest.  Though  much  of  it  consists  of  sandy  deserts; 
one  half,  probably,  is  a  fertile  country,  and,  in  many  parts,  it  is 
exceedingly  rich.  The  climate  is  every  where  warm,  and  being 
the  native  climate  of  the  negro  race,  it  is  agreeable  to  their  con- 
stitution. Along  the  Western  side,  opposite  to  America,  there 
is  a  line  of  coast  3000  miles  in  extent,  backed  by  a  fertile  coun- 
try, and  rich  in  valuable  products,  such  as  rice,  cotton,  coffee, 
sugar,  drugs,  dye-stuffs,  ivory  and  gold-dust.  The  coast  of  Gui- 
nea, about  1J00  miles  in  length,  has  been  for  centuries  infested 
by  the  slave-trade;  and  the  greater  part  of  it  has  been  reduced 
to  a  wilderness.  Our  negroes  came  chiefly  from  that  naturally 
rich  country:  and  back  to  that  land  of  their  forefathers  we  de- 
sire to  send  them.  Probably  one  hundred  millions  of  fertile 
acres,  are  lying  uncultivated  there,  which  might  be  purchased  of 
the  feeble  and  barbarous  natives  for  a  small  compensation.  The 
Colony  of  Liberia  lies  near  the  centre  of  that  coast.  Never  did 
a  people  in  similar  circumstances  prosper  more  than  the  people 
of  that  Colony,  who  were  so  lately  a  portion  of  our  degraded 
and  wretched  free  negroes;  they  are  in  their  own  country;  they 
live  on  their  own  soil;  they  are  the  people  of  thejand,  who  will 
have  the  making  of  the  laws,  and  the  sole  management  of  their 
own  affairs,  as  soon  as  they  are  prepared  for  that  event. 

'•It  has  been  doubted,  whether  our  coloured  people  be  capable 
of  becoming  a  free  and  civilized  nation.  Those  who  entertain 
this  doubt,  have  not  made  sufficient  allowance  for  the  unfortu- 
nate condition  of  the  coloured  race,  both  in  America  and  in  Af- 
rica. What  can  be  expected  of  men  who  have  been  untaught, 
enslaved,  despised,  and  thrust  out  from  every  society  and  every 
institution,  by  which  they  might  be  improved?     How  could  they 


2f8  Mdress  of  the  Rockbridge  Col.  Society.         {Now 

be  otherwise  than  ignorant,  rude,  and  unqualified  to  act  a  part 
in  life,  for  which  they  were  not  educated,  and  to  which  they 
durst  not  aspire?  In  Hayti,  where  they  rose  suddenly  to  liberty 
and  independence;  they  have  managed  their  affairs  as  well  as 
the  new  nations  of  Spanish  America.  In  the  colony  of  Liberia, 
to  which  about  1400  of  them  have  removed,  from  this  country; 
they  give  promise  of  becoming  as  wise  and  orderly  a  community 
as  ever  was  formed  under  like  circumstances. 

"We  are  told,  what  is  in  itself  agreeable  to  the  nature  of 
things, — that  when  our  coloured  people  reach  the  African  shore, 
and  find  themselves  to  be  the  people,  lords  of  the  soil,  fathers  of 
a  free  nation,  ami  heralds  of  civilization  to  a  vast  continent; — 
th<  v  feel  a  new  spirit  within  them — their  souls  rise  to  the  dignity 
of  their  station,  and  expand  to  the  breadth  of  their  prospects. 

"It  would  be  imprudent,  we  admit,  to  crowd  the  unprepared 
multitude  of  our  coloured  people,  too  rapidly  into  Africa.  The 
evil  consequences  of  such  a  measure  may  be  avoided,  by  the  es- 
tablishment of  schools  in  some  suitable  part  of  the  United  States, 
and  also  in  Africa,  in  order  to  give  some  of  them  a  preparatory 
education, — and  by  taking  care  to  send  over  the  necessary  pro- 
portions of  the  more  intelligent  and  virtuous  among  them, — 
Schools  are  established  for  the  whole  population  of  Liberia;  in 
process  of  time,  the  rising  generation  will  come  forth  in  that 
country,  with  the  ideas  and  habits  of  intelligent  citizens;  and 
will  keep  up  a  healthy  action  in  the  body  politic,  though  many 
of  our  rude  emigrants  should  continue  to  arrive  among  them. 

"The  African  tribes  are  mostly  in  a  state  of  wretched  barba- 
rism, which  is  not  owing  to  natural  incapacity,  but  to  their  un- 
fortunate condition.  During  250  years,  they  have  been  the 
prey  of  avarice  and  cruelty.  The  slave-trade  has  infested  their 
coasts,  and  kept  their  people  at  continual  war,  to  supply  the 
traders  with  captives  for  the  American  market.  In  vain  have 
Britain  and  the  United  States  endeavoured,  lately,  to  stop  this 
inhuman  traffic.  Nothing  will  stop  it,  while  the  diabolical  tra- 
ders can  obtain  slaves  in  Africa.  Let  us  line  the  coast  with 
colonies;  and  shut  up  all  the  avenues  of  the  trade.  Already  has 
the  little  Colony  of  Liberia  excluded  the  dealers  in  human 
flesh  from  200  miles  of  coast.  A  dozen  such  colonies  at  proper 
distances,    would  leave  the   miscreants   scarce  a  door  out  of 


1828.]        Address  of  the  Rockbridge  Col  Society.  279 

which  to  drag  their  prey.  It  is  time  to  stop  their  work,  which 
has  kept  Africa  in  tears  and  barbarism — filled  America  with 
slaves,  and  whitened  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  between  them,  with 
the  bones  of  those  who  perished  on  the  way.  Last  year,  proba- 
bly 80,000  miserable  creatures  were  torn  from  Africa,  crammed 
into  filthy  ships,  and  conveyed  into  hopeless  bondage  in  the 
Southern  part  of  our  continent;  except  eight  or  ten  thousand, 
who  were  killed  by  ill  usage  on  the  way,  and  thrown  to  the 
sharks.  This  horrible  business  has  been  going  on  in  the  same 
way  for  centuries. 

"Our  colonies  will  deliver  Africa  and  America  from  this  deso- 
lating curse.  They  will  make  some  compensation  for  the  incal- 
culable miseries  which  it  has  produced,  by  diffusing  civilization 
and  Christianity  among  all  the  tribes  in  their  neighbourhood.  Al- 
ready is  the  colony  of  Liberia  exercising  a  salutary  influence  on 
the  tribes  of  the  vicinity.  Some  of  them  have  actually  petition- 
ed for  instruction  in  the  arts  and  religion,  which  elevate  their 
new  neighbors  so  far  above  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  coun- 
try. Missionaries  are  proceeding  to  the  work  with  every  pros- 
pect of  success.  Hitherto  the  tribes  of  Africa  have  been  almost 
unapproachable  to  the  Christian  Missionary.  The  colour  of 
white  men,  the  unliealthiness  of  the  climate  to  their  constitutions, 
and  the  want  of  a  refuge  among  warring  barbarians,  have  prov- 
ed insuperable  obstacles.  But  these  obstacles  exist  no  longer 
in  Liberia.  Black  missionaries  can  be  employed,  the  tribes  are 
at  peace,  and  they  see  with  admiration,  the  example  set  before 
them,  of  what  real  Christians  (not  slave-traders)  are.  The  colo- 
ny is  a  hive  from  which  the  labourers  can  issue,  and  into  which, 
in  case  of  necessity,  they  may  retire.  It  is  a  radiating  point 
from  which  light  will  emanate  and  diffuse  itself,  far  into  the  sur- 
rounding darkness.  Such  will  be  every  successive  colony  plant- 
ed by  the  Christian  charity  of  our  nation. 

"Does  not  Divine  Providence  point  oul  this  as  the  one  and  on- 
ly way,  in  which  poor  Ethiopia  shall  at  last  'stretch  out  her 
hands  unto  God?' 

"Difficulty  has  been  apprehended  in  obtaining  a  sufficient 
number  of  emigrants,  if  we  attempt  to  colonize  on  a  large  scale. 
Many  of  the  free  people  are  either  ignorant  of  the  scheme,  or 
prejudiced  against  it.     They  are  suspicious  of  white  men;  and 


280  Address  of  the  Rockbridge  Col.  Society.        [Nov. 

judging  from  past  experience,  they  are  fearful  of  a  deep-laid 
plot  to  enslave  them  again.  Their  prejudices  will  be  removed 
in  the  progress  of  the  work.  Information  will  be  diffused — 
they  who  emigrate  will  send  back  word  of  their  situation  and 
prospects.  The  subject  will  excite  increasing  attention  among 
them,  and  every  successive  year  will  find  them  better  informed, 
and  present  them  with  additional  motives  to  join  their  brethren 
in  Africa.  Benevolent  masters  will  furnish  increasing  numbers 
to  swell  the  tide  of  emigrants.  Tlius  far,  at  least,  the  Society 
has  been  unable  to  transport  them  as  fast  as  they  have  offered 
themselves.  Fifteen  who  belong  to  our  county  have  applied  for 
a  passage.  A  gentleman  of  Georgia  has  lately  proposed  to  send 
his  slaves,  to  the  number  of  45,  if  he  could  obtain  aid  from  the 
Society.  But  the  funds  are  wanting.  If  our  citizens  be  wise, 
they  will  hereafter  provide  means  for  all  who  are  ready  and 
qualified  to  go.  None  should  be  under  the  necessity  of  waiting 
a  single  year,  before  they  leave  our  country,  and  make  room  for 
white  citizens. 

"The  expense  of  the  colonization  scheme  is  made  a  serious  ob- 
jection by  many  of  our  citizens.  We  acknowledge  the  expense 
to  be  great.  But  what  human  evil  is  removed  or  blessing  obtained 
without  cost?  We  put  it  to  the  judgment  and  conscience  of  any 
man  to  say,  whether  the  ends  which  the  Colonization  Society  has 
in  view,  would  not  justify  almost  any  expenditure  within  the 
compass  of  our  ability?  Add  the  evils  which  will  be  removed,  to 
the  positive  benefits  that  will  accrue — look  to  the  future,  and 
calculate  the  amount,  and  then  say  how  many  millions  of  dol- 
lars it  is  worth;  and  how  much  everv  citizen  of  the  United 
States,  and  especially,  in  the  Southern  States,  can  afford  to  pay 
for  the  whole. — We  shall  then  be  prepared  to  demonstrate  to  you, 
that  the  actual  cost  will  fall  infinitely  below  the  value  of  the  mea- 
sure. Were  it  possible,  or  desirable,  to  remove  all  our  colour- 
ed population  at  once,  Ihe  expense  would  hardly  exceed  the  sum 
which  was  expended  by  the  government,  in  one  year  of  the  late 
war  with  Great  Britain.  But  we  may  take  20  or  30  years  to  pay 
that  sum  in  the  present  undertaking,  and  thereby  accomplish  the 
main  ends  of  the  scheme;  the  safety  of  our  country,  the  relief 
of  a  large  portion  of  our  coloured  people,  the  civilization  of  a 
continent,   and  the  eternal  destruction  of  the  slave-trade. 


1828.]  Naval  Intelligence.  38  J 

1 'The  cost  is  now  at  the  rate  of  perhaps  830  for  each  person 
sent  to  Africa.  If  the  work  be  carried  on  vigorously,  the  rate 
per  head  will  continue  to  diminish.  This  will  appear  evident 
from  the  following  considerations. 

ML  It  is  always  cheaper  to  carry  on  such  undertakings  on  a 
large,  than  on  a  small  scale,  and  to  proceed  with  it  after  a  good 
beginning  has  been  made,  and  experience  has  been  gained. 

"2.  When  the  colonies  have  grown  and  gotten  into  a  regular, 
train  of  business,  a  large  commerce  will  arise  between  us  and. 
them.  Ships  will  carry  out  fine  and  valuable  goods  to  bring  raw 
produce  in  return.  The  outward  cargo  being  generally  lighter, 
emigrants  may  be  taken  at  a  low  rate. 

"3.  When  the  colonists  acquire  property,  and  get  into  regu- 
lar business,  they  will  want  hands  in  their  fields,  shops  and  com- 
mercial operations.  They  can  then  afford  immediate  employ- 
ment to  new  emigrants,  and  pay  their  passage  in  order  to  obtain 
their  services.  Thus  many  poor  emigrants  may  be  sent  at  little 
or  no  expense  to  this  country. 

•*4.  The  Colonies  will  after  a  while  defray  all  the  expenses 
of  their  own  government — purchase  lands  for  new  settlers,  and 
contribute,  in  various  ways  to  reduce  the  expense  of  adding  to 
their  own  population. 

"It  is  not  unreasonable  to  calculate,  that  in  the  course  of  time, 
the  work  of  colonization  may  proceed  rapidly  with  but  little  aid 
from  our  citizens.  To  bring  that  to  pass,  however,  in  any  rea- 
sonable time,  we  must  soon  lay  a  broad  foundation,  by  hasten- 
ing the  growth  of  the  present  Colony,  and  establishing  others." 

'^"»9ft9**i'.- 

XayaV  Intelligence,. 

Portsmouth,  July  12. — The  Diadem  transport  arrived  on 
Thursday  from  Sierra  Leone;  which  place  she  left  on  the  17th 
May. — She  brings  home  returned  stores  and  invalids.  The  Col- 
ony and  Squadron  were  very  healthy.  Com.  Collier  was  there, 
in  the  Sybille  frigate,  refitting,  but  intended  to  proceed  to  As- 
cension in  about  ten  days. — The  Commodore  had  been  fortu- 
nate in  the  capture  of  slave  vessels,  having  carried  into  Sierra 

Leone  a  Dutch  schooner,  with  272  slaves,  and  a  Spanish  schoo- 
36 


28£  Naval  Intelligence.  [Nov. 

ner,  with  282  slaves;  also  a  schooner  called  the  Hope,  of  180 
tons  burden  (which  vessel  had  recently  been  employed  as  a  ten- 
der to  the  Maidstone),  with  a  cargo  on  board  for  the  purchase  of 
slaves.  The  Sybille  has  not  been  on  the  station  more  than  ten 
months,  and  in  that  period  she  has  captured  nearly  1200  slaves. 
The  Primrose  and  Plumper  were  also  there.— About  the  1st  of 
May,  the  Black  Joke,  Lt.  \V.  Turner,  tender  to  the  Sybille, 
fell  in  with  a  Spanish  privateer,  and  had  a  severe  action.  The 
Black  Joke  had  on  board  43  men,  with  one  long  gun  on  a  swiv- 
el: the  Spaniard  mounted  14  carriage  guns,  of  twelve  and  twen- 
ty-four-pounders, on  Gover's  principle,  with  a  crew  of  87  men,  of 
all  nations.  Two  days  previously,  she  had  been  boarded  by  the 
Sybille,  and  had  exhibited  a  regular  commission,  from  the  King 
of  Spain,  to  cruise  as  a  privateer  against  the  vessels  of  the  South 
American  States.  Those  two  vessels  fell  in  together  in  the 
night,  and  at  day-light  the  Spaniard  was  observed  with  a  red  en- 
sign (English);  on  approaching  within  hail,  he  promised  to  send 
a  boat  on  board  the  Black  Joke,  but,  immediately  afterwards, 
said  he  had  no  boat  that  could  swim,  and  requested  one  to  be 
sent  to  him.  Lieutenant  Turner  consequently  sent  a  boat  with 
two  men  and  a  Master's  Mate,  who  were  compelled  to  go  on 
board  the  pirate,  and  who  immediately  sent  an  officer  and  five 
men  in  the  same  boat,  to  the  Black  Joke,  with  a  demand  to  look 
at  her  papers.  Lieutenant  Turner,  not  wishing  to  compromise 
the  safety  of  his  three  men  on  board  the  Spaniard,  showed  his 
commission,  and  Commodore  Collier's  orders  to  cruise;  which, 
after  a  parley,  were  desired  to  be  sent  to  the  privateer,  to  com- 
pare with  the  signature  of  the  Commodore,  who  had  previously- 
put  his  name  to  the  back  of  the  Spanish  commission.  Lieuten- 
ant Turner,  however,  prudently  detained  the  officer  and  two 
men,  as  hostages  for  his  own  people.  A  demand  was  then  made 
that  the  Black  Joke  should  send  15  of  her  crew  on  board  the 
privateer,  who  would  send  the  like  number  of  men  to  the  for- 
mer, and  that  both  vessels  should  go  to  Princess  Island.  This 
having  been,  of  course  refused,  the  privateer  immediately  fired 
into  the  tender  a  broadside,  when  the  Black  Joke,  immediately 
taking  a  position  on  the  Spaniard's  bow,  engaged  him  for  two 
hours,  principally  with  grape  shot,  and  nearly  unrigged  him. — 
The  Spaniard  then  hoisted  out  a  flag  of  truce,  and  sent  our  peo- 


1828.]  The  late  Rev.  Jacob  Oson.  2a3 

pie  on  board,  whose  lives  had  been  several  times  attempted  du- 
ring the  action,  but  who  were  saved  solely  by  the  intervention 
of  the  Captain.  The  Spaniards  would  not  confess  what  their 
loss  had  been;  several  wounded  men,  however,  were  seen.  For- 
tunately, the  Black  Joke  had  none  of  her  people  hurt,  though  her 
sails  and  rigging  were  much  cut  up.  Too  much  encomium  can- 
not be  given  to  Lieut.  Turner,  for  his  intrepidity  and  judgment 
on  the  occasion.  Fernando  Po  is  losing  ground  in  the  estima- 
tion of  all;  its  insalubrity  rendering  it  a  spot  totally  unfit  for  a 
settlement.  Since  the  establishment,  we  have  buried  a  man 
weekly,  and  sent  home  a  great  number  of  invalids;  the  natives 
also  have  shown  a  desire  to  avoid  us,  and  never  come  near  the 
settlement.  No  fresh  beef  is  to  be  had,  and  very  few  fowls;  and 
yams,  which  were  so  plentiful,  are  not  now  to  be  obtained;  the 
North  Star  could  not  get  one.  Palm  wine,  for  which  only  six- 
pence a  gallon  is  paid,  is  drank  in  abundance  by  our  seamen, 
and  a  more  deleterious  liquor  cannot  be  taken;  it  invariably  pro- 
duces illness.  The  annual  estimated  cost  of  this  establishment 
is  £29,000.  The  North  Star  was  on  the  Gold  Coast,  and  the 
Clinker  had  sailed  to  the  Gambia. 


T\\e  late  TWv .  Jacob  Oson. 

Messrs,  Editors: — Perhaps  it  may  be  gratifying  to  your  read- 
ers, to  know  something  more  of  the  African  Missionary  (the 
Rev.  Jacob  Oson)  whose  death  was  announced  in  your  last  pa- 
per. In  his  case,  we  are  furnished  with  a  striking  instance  of 
the  triumph  of  integrity,  industry,  application,  and  a  patient  and 
humble  reliance  on  divine  assistance,  over  all  the  disadvantages 
of  colour  and  humble  birth,  and  of  the  early  associations  arising 
from  these  circumstances.  His  early  piety,  his  natural  strength 
of  mind,  and  his  prudence  and  sound  judgment,  seemed  to  qual- 
ify him  for  usefulness;  and  he  expressed  a  strong  desire,  nearly 
twenty  years  ago,  to  enter  the  gospel  ministry.  But  his  educa- 
tion was  insufficient,  at  that  time,  to  enable  him  advantageously 
to  commence  the  study  of  divinity;  and  the  state  of  the  coloured 
population  throughout  the  countrv  was  such,  as  to  hold  out  but 
little  prospect  of  gathering  a  congregation  to  receive  his  minis- 


284  The  late  liev.  Jacob  Oson.  fNov. 

trations.  Such,  however,  was  his  desire  to  qualify  himself  for 
the  sacred  office,  that  he  found  time,  amid  the  care  and  labour 
of  rearing  a  large  family,  to  make  very  considerable  progress  in 
an  English  education;  and,  eventually,  by  keeping  a  school  for 
coloured  children,  he  not  only  added  to  his  stock  of  knowledge, 
but  became  an  experienced  and  successful  teacher.  From  the 
moment  that  an  American  colony  was  established  on  the  coast  of 
Africa,  he  began  to  look  forward  to  that  oppressed  and  degraded 
country,  as  the  scene  of  his  future  labours;  and  having  produced 
satisfactory  testimonials  of  character  and  qualifieatious,  to  the  ec- 
clesiastical authority  of  Connecticut,  he  was  admitted  as  a  can- 
didate for  holy  orders.  He  now  applied  himself  diligently  te 
his  studies;  and  when  the  Domestic  and  Foreign  Missionary  So- 
ciety were  prepared  to  send  a  Missionary  to  Liberia,  he  receiv- 
ed and  accepted  the  appointment.  He  was  soon  after  admitted 
to  holy  orders,  by  the  Right  Rev.  Bishop  Brownell,  and  was  ta- 
ken into  the  emnlov  of  the  Societv.  The  necessarv  outfits  were 
prepared,  every  thing  was  in  readiness  for  his  departure,  and  he 
anxiously  waited  for  a  passage  to  the  station  which  he  fondly 
hoped  he  was  destined  to  occupy.  But  it  pleased  Providence  to 
disappoint  his  expectations,  and  to  frustrate,  for  the  present, 
the  plans  of  the  Society.  Though  he  had  hitherto  enjoyed  an 
unusual  share  of  good  health,  he  now  fell  into  a  rapid  decline, 
which  terminated  his  earthly  existence,  on  the  very  day  that 
he  was  directed  to  repair  to  Philadelphia,  to  take  his  passage 
for  the  Colony.  In  the  view  of  approaching  death,  but  one  con- 
sideration appeared  to  distress  him — and  this  was,  that  he  was 
never  to  be  permitted  to  see  Africa.  He  frequently  remarked, 
that  he  could  realize  no  terror  in  death;  and  sometimes  express- 
ed a  fear,  that  this  circumstance  might  be  considered  as  an  evi- 
dence of  stupidity  or  hardness.  He  bore  a  long  and  distressing 
illness  with  fortitude  and  composure,  and  enjoyed  the  unobscur- 
ed  use  of  his  reason,  until  the  close  of  his  life.  He  received 
the  holy  eucharist,  for  the  last  time,  a  few  days  before  his  death; 
and  being  asked,  on  the  day  of  his  departure,  whether  his  faith 
and  hope  in  the  Redeemer  remained  steadfast,  he  replied,  with 
great  emphasis — "stronger  and  stronger!  "  He  finally  sunk 
into  the  sleep  of  death,  without  a  struggle. — [E.  Watchman. 


1828.]      Ladies9  Association. — Annual  Meeting,  fyc.        285 

Ija&icsv  Associations, 

Auxiliary  to  the  American  Colonization  Society. 

It  affords  us  great  pleasure  to  announce  the  fact,  that  many 
Ladies  in  Richmond  have  formed  themselves  into  a  Society  to 
aid  the  objects  of  our  Institution,  and  that  efforts  for  a  similar 
purpose  have  been  engaged  in  by  the  Ladies  of  Petersburg. — 
We  feel  grateful  for  the  interest  which  has  thus  been  manifested 
in  our  cause;  and  we  expect  much  from  these  proceedings;  es- 
pecially, we  cannot  but  hope  that  they  will  serve  as  a  bright  ex- 
ample to  other  ladies  to  exercise  their  feelings,  their  talents, 
and  their  influence  in  our  favour,  in  a  similar  way,  and  thus  to 
bring  forward  their  efforts  and  their  sympathies  in  the  cause  of 
patriotism  and  humanity.  The  state  of  Africa  and  of  our  coun- 
try in  relation  to  that  continent,  makes  its  strongest  appeal  to 
the  more  mild  and  tender  emotions  of  the  heart;  and  we  trust 
that  the  fair  portion  of  our  community,  in  whom  those  emotions 
are  peculiarly  vivid,  will  be  awake  to  a  subject  which  calls  so 
loudly  for  their  attention,  which  has  not  been  sufficiently  urged 
upon  them,  and  to  which  in  fact,  they  have,  as  yet,  too  little  at- 
tended. 

Annual  fleeting  of  five  Society. 

The  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Society  will  be  held  in  this  City, 
on  the  17th  of  January.  It  will  add  greatly  to  the  interest  of 
the  occasion,  should  the  several  Auxiliary  Institutions  represent 
themselves  by  Delegates.  We  misinterpret  the  signs  of  the 
times,  or  the  year  upon  which  we  are  shortly  to  enter,  is  to  be 
one  of  vast  importance  to. our  work,  and  of  far  more  rapid  ad- 
vancement to  measures  for  its  execution.  Let,  then,  all  who 
implore  Heaven's  blessing  upon  it,  stir  each  other  up  to  liberali- 
ty and  nobler  deeds  in  its  behalf. 

EiX^cAition  to  lAbciria. 

We  are  happy  to  say,  that  the  Society  is  very  soon  (probably 
within  four  or  five  weeks)  to  despatch  an  expedition  with  about 
one  hundred  and  fifty  emigrants  to  Liberia.  As  the  effort  to  do 
this  will  bring  into  requisition  all  the  resources  whioh  can  be 


286  Death  of  Ashmuiu  [Nov. 

obtained,  it  is  hoped  that  our  friends  will  not  relax,  but  rather 
give  new  vigour  to  their  exertions.  The  number  which  can  now 
be  transported  is  only  about  one-fifth  of  the  whole  number  now 
seeking  a  passage.  The  disposition  to  remove  is  daily  increas- 
ing among  the  free  people  of  colour,  and  hence  all  who  desire  the 
improvement  of  their  condition,  or  Africa's  redemption,  should 
go  forward  with  more  burning  zeal  and  mightier  resolution. 

We  have  just  received  the  following  lines  on  the  Death  of 
Ashmun  from  a  distinguished  lady  and  poetess,  already  well 
known  to  the  public  for  the  excellence  of  her  composition  and 
sentiments.  We  give  it  a  place  in  the  Repository,  with  the 
hope  of  something  more  from  her  pen,  confident  that  it  will  af- 
ford high  gratification  to  all  who  may  honour  our  work  with  a 
perusal. 

FOR  THE  "REPOSITORY." 

Whose  is  yon  sable  bier? — 

Why  move  the  throng  so  slow? — 
Why  doth  that  lonely  mother's  tear 

In  sudden  anguish  flow? — 
Why  is  that  sleeper  laid 

To  rest  in  manhood's  pride ? — 
How  g-ain'd  his  cheek  such  pallid  shade  ?-*■ 

I  spake, — but  none  replied. 

The  hoarse  wave  murmur'd  low, 

The  distant  surges  roar'd. — 
And  o'er  the  sea  in  tones  of  woe 

A  deep  response  was  pour'd: 
I  heard  sad  Africk  mourn    • 

Upon  her  billowy  strand, — 
A  shield  was  from  her  bosom  torn, 

An  anchor  from  her  hand. — 

Ah!  well  I  know  thee  now, 

Though  foreign  suns  would  trace 
Deep  lines  of  death  upon  thy  brow, 

Thou  friend  of  misery's  race. — 
Their  leader  wben  the  blast 

Of  ruthless  war  swept  by, — 
Their  teacher  when  the  storm  was  pasty 

Their  guide  to  worlds  on  high. — 


1828.]  Contributions.  287 

Bent  o'er  the  lowly  tomb 

Where  thy  soul's  idol  lay, 
I  saw  thee  rise  above  the  gloom^ 

And  hold  thy  changeless  way- 
Stern  sickness  woke  a  flame 

That  on  thy  vigour  fed, — 
But  deathless  courage  nerv'd  the  frame 

When  health  and  strength  had  fled.— 

Spirit  of  Power, — pass  on! — 

Thy  homeward  wing  is  free, — 
Earth  may  not  claim  thee  for  her  son,— 

She  hath  no  chain  for  thee: — 
Toil  might  not  bow  thee  down, — 

Nor  Sorrow  check  thy  race, — 
Nor  Pleasure  win  thy  birthright  crown,— 

Go  to  thy  own  blest  place! — 
Hartfoud,  Cox.  1828.  L.  H.  5. 

C  ontYibutions 

To  the  Jim.  C.  Society  during  the  month  of  November ',   1828. 

Collections  by  Rev.  George  Duffield,  Esq.  as  follows,  viz: 

in  Presbyterian  Church,  Carlisle,  Pa $6  41 

in  Associate  Reformed  Church,  at  ditto,   ....     6  25 
in  Dickinson  Church,  in  Cumberland  county,     2  50 

$13  16 

Collections  by  Grove  Wright,  Esq.  in  New  York,  as  follows,  viz : 

From  the  Church  at  Ovid,  New  York,    §10 

From  the  Church  at  Percy,  New  York,    7 

Siles  Pepoon,   Esq.  Ohio,    7 

From  the  Church  at  Danvill,  New  York,    15  17 

From  the  Church  at  Williamstown,  Massachusetts,  .     32  97 

From  the  Church  at  Plattsburgh,  New  York,   10 

82  14 

Collection  by  Ladies  at  Shepherdstown,  Virginia,  to  make  John 

Matthews,  D.  D.  a  life  member,    10 

Collection  by  Ladies  at  Oak  Hill,   Fauquier  county,  Virginia,  in 
the  parish  of  Leeds,   to  make  Rev.  George  Lemmon  a  life 

member,  per  Thomas  Marshall,  Esq SO 

Collection  from  small  country  Congregations  about  Union  Town, 

Maryland,  per  Rev.  G.  Duris,   8 


Carried  forward,        $145  39 


288  Contributions,  [Nov. 

Amount  brought  forward j        $145  30 
Collections  in  Alexandria  by  the  Agent,   for  the  expedition  this 
fell  to  Africa,  as  follow*: 

Thomas  Smith,    $10 

Rev.W.  C.  Walton,  .       5 

Mr.  Riddle, .       I 

George  Johnson,  ....       1 

Mr.   Myers,  1 

H.   Smith,   1 

Thomas  Sanford,  ....       1 

Mr.  Blacklock,  1 

Mr.  Wood,   1 

Thomas  W.  Smith,  .  1 
Rev.  Mr.  Harrison,  ..  1 
Rev.  S.  Cornelius,  . .  1 
Various  individuals,  .       5  18 


$30  18 
Deduct  expenses,    . .       1  25 


28  9S 


Rev.  Charles  Dresser,  of  Halifax  county,  Virginia,   3 

James  C.  Dunn,  for  the  following  sums  transmitted  him,  viz: 
By  D.  A.  Sherman,  Esq.  of  Chittenango,  New  York,   ...   $3 

By  N.  M.  Wilson,  Esq-  of  Morgantown,   Virginia,   2 

—  5 

Vermont  Auxiliary  Society,   per  D.  Baldwin,  Esq.  Tr.  $234  43 

Deduct  discount  on  draft,  78 


233  65 


Matthew  Carey,   Esq.  of  Philadelphia,  his  first  payment  on  the 

plan  of  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq 100 

A  Lady  in  Northumberland,  Pennsylvania, 10 

A  friend*  in  Alexandria,   10 

Liberia  Society,  Essex  county,  Va.  per  J.  M.  Garnett,  Esq.    ...  20 
The  same  good  "Lady"  who  transmitted  $10  in   October,   per 

William  Brown,  Esq.  Charlestown,  Virginia,   . ... 10 

Auxiliary  Society,  Fredericksburg,  Va   per  W.  F.Gray,  Esq.  ..  100 

Do.           do.       Cincinnati,  per  George  Graham,  Jr 125 

Do.           do.       of  the  Ohio  State,  per  L.  Reynolds,  Esq.  Tr.  150 


$940  88 


*  This  friend  is  under  the  impression  that  he  made  a  similar  remittance 
in  September — none  such  was  received;  but  in  July  last,  he  will  find  by 
'he  Repository,  that  such  a  sum  is  credited. 


THB 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 


C0L01TIAL  J0TJH1TAL. 


Vol.   IV.     SE^EMBE^  1328.  No.  10. 

* 

As  it  has  become  one  of  the  grand  ultimate  designs  of  our  So* 
•iety  to  enlighten  and  civilize  a  very  large  portion  of  our*vorld's 
population;  to  deliver  them  from  the  miseries  of  moral  and  poli* 
tical  bondage;  and  as  the  field  of  its  substantial  hopes  and  pros* 
pects,  if  not  of  its  present  operations  and  influence,  is  already 
extended  over  the  whole  of  Africa,  it  is  a  desideratum  of  much 
importance,  that  a  concise  and  comprehensive  account  should  be 
given  of  that  continent,  derived  from  authentic  documents,  and 
divested  of  the  fiction  and  idle  conjecture,  with  which  most  ac» 
•ounts  of  that  dark  quarter  of  our  earth  have  abounded. 

HISTORY. 

The  whole  of  the  History  of  Africa,  ever  recorded  or  made 
known  to  the  civilized  world,  has  reached  in  the  main  no  further 
than  its  outskirts  and  its  shores;  while  the  principal  part  of  that 
vast  country  has  from  time  immemorial  been  covered  with  Egyp- 
tian darkness,  except  that  at  distant  intervals,  a  brief  glance,  as 
if  aided  by  a  single  flash  of  lightning,  has  penetrated  into  the  in- 
terior, and  has  produced  no  accurate  and  well  defined  impres- 
sion; but  still  it  has  produced  a  decided  though  confused  im- 
pression, of  depravity  and  cruelty  in  the  extreme;  of  vice  and. 
disorder;  of  mental  and  moral  imbecility  $  of  ignorance  and  bar- 
$7 


•90  Africa.  [Dec 

barism;  of  degradation  and  wretchedness;  a  picture,  around 
which  the  horrors  and  atrocities  of  the  slave-trade  scarcely  threw 
a  gloomier  or  more  distressing  aspect;  a  picture,  from  which 
all  the  better  principles  of  our  nature  revolted,  and  endeavoured 
to  contemplate  them  as  a  dream,  and  not  as  a  reality. 

Africa  was  doubtless  originally  peopled  by  the  descendants  of 
Ham.  The  testimony  of  Scripture  on  this  point  is  clear  and 
decisive.  In  addition  to  the  evidence,  that  in  the  general  divi- 
sion of  the  earth  after  the  flood,  the  south  was  assigned  to  Ham; 
Mizraim,  the  name  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Ham,  is  generally  given 
to  Egypt  in  the  Hebrew  Bible;  and  Cush,  the  name  of  another 
of  the  sons  of  Ham,  is  generally  applied  to  Ethiopia,  or  Africa 
in  general,  and  in  the  English  translation  it  is  rendered  Ethio- 
pia. Egypt  is  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  sometimes  called  the 
land  of  Ham,  as  it  was  also  by  its  ancient  inhabitants,  though 
its  proper  name  is  Mizraim.  The  Septuagint  uniformly  renders 
Phut,  another  name  of  the  sons  of  Ham,  by  Lybians,  the  name 
of  a  race  of  people  to  the  west  of  Egypt.  A  colony  of  Phenici- 
ans,  or  Canaanites,  descendants  of  another  of  Ham's  sons,  it  is 
well  known,  settled  at  Carthage,  and  spread  themselves  over 
the  most  of  the  country  that  is  at  present  comprised  in  the. 
states  of  Barbary. 

Africa,  notwithstanding,  is  pronounced  by  common  consent, 
the  birthplace  and  cradle  of  civilization,  as  well  as  of  the  arts 
and  sciences.  In  one  corner  of  that  dark  continent  was  kin- 
dled the  light,  which  was  destined  to  blaze  so  conspicuously  in 
Greece  and  Rome,  and  which  was  to  attain,  under  the  auspices 
of  Christianity,  in  Europe  and  America,  the  full  splendor  of  its 
meridian  brightness.  And  delightful  indeed  is  the  prospect,  the 
certainty,  that  it  is  soon  to  return,  matured  and  baptised,  un- 
blemished and  unclouded,  to  the  place  of  its  nativity.  Joyful, 
indescribably  joyful  to  Africa,  will  be  the  return  of  her  sons  re- 
deemed and  renovated,  conveying  with  them  the  primitive  but 
departed  production  of  her  own  intellect,  improved  and  perfect- 
ed. The  impress  of  her  misery  will  be  obliterated,  the  cloud  of 
her  grief  will  vanish,  and  even  the  love  for  her  children  will  be 
almost  forgotten,  while  she  exults  in  the  influence  and  light  of 
civilization  and  of  heaven. 

Moses,  we  are  told,  was  skilled  in  all  the  learning  of  the  Egyp- 


1828.]  Africa.  £9i 

"Hans:  and  we  find  in  him,  aside  from  his  functions  as  an  inspir- 
ed prophet,  at  that  early  period  when  written  language  was 
scarcely  known  at  all,  an  eminent  example  of  learning  and  ac- 
quired abilities:  a  striking  and  decisive  proof  of  the  greatness  afc 
that  time  of  African  attainments. 

Both  in  ancient  and  modern  times  Africa  has  been,  perhaps 
equally,  an  object  of  intense  curiosity,  frequently  heightened  by* 
false  or  exaggerated  accounts.  There,  imagination  delineated 
the  hitherto  inaccessible  abodes  of  the  blest;  Edens  guarded,  if 
not  by  a  flaming  sword,  at  least  by  burning  deserts.  There  al- 
so, in  less  favoured  spots,  she  figured  to  herself  the  diminutive 
and  the  monstrous.  Permitted  to  wander  alone,  she  drew  her 
delineations,  and  indulged  her  phrensy,  without  fear  of  restraint 
or  danger  of  contradiction.  She  even  at  times  exerted  a  con- 
trolling power  over  the  senses  of  voyagers  and  travellers.  Prior 
to  the  date  of  authentic  history,  many  efforts  appear  to  have  been 
made  to  circumnavigate  Africa.  The  first  attempt  on  record,  is 
mentioned  by  Herodotus  as  having  been  made  by  a  number  of 
Phenicians,  in  pursuance  of  the  order  of  Necho,  king  of  Egypt. 
The  voyage,  commencing  from  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea,  lasted 
nearly  three  years.  When  their  provisions  were  exhausted, 
they  procured  a  fresh  supply  by  landing,  sowing  their  seed,  and 
waiting  till  the  crop  was  ready  to  be  gathered.  On  their  return 
they  related,  that  when  they  were  south  of  Africa,  the  sun  was 
north  of  them;  a  fact  which  Herodotus,  from  his  ignorance  of  astro- 
nomy, discredited,  but  which  really  goes  to  prove,  that  the  voyage 
around  the  continent  was  at  that  time  accomplished.  Several 
other  strenuous  attempts  were  made,  but  it  is  not  known  that 
any  were  successful,  though  a  considerable  extent  of  coast  was 
in  this  way  explored.  Some  found  supernatural  wonders,  and 
all  of  them  obstacles,  which  to  them  seemed  insuperable.  It 
was  reserved  for  modern  times,  to  reduce  to  nothing  the  impos- 
sibilities of  antiquity. 

To  penetrate  the  interior  has  as  yet  been  found  a  still  more 
difficult  and  arduous  performance.  Herodotus  relates,  that  a 
few  young  men,  from  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  traversed 
the  habitable  parts  of  Lybia,  and  the  great  desert  beyond,  till 
they  arrived  at  a  plain  diversified  with  a  few  trees,  where  they 
were  seized  by  a  company  of  blacks,  and  Gonveyed  through  ex- 


g9t  Africa.  £Bec. 

tensive  marshes,  to  a  city  situated  on  a  great  river  which  flowed 
from  west  to  east,  frequented  by  crocodiles.  This  river  was 
doubtless  the  Niger.  The  only  character  given  of  the  inhabitants 
was  that  they  were  impostors  or  sorcerers;  a  sufficient  indication 
that  the  present  superstitious  practices  of  the  Africans  at  that  time 
existed.  There  is  evidence  that  other  attempts  at  discovery  in 
the  interior  were  made  in  ancient  times;  but  there  is  nothing  re- 
corded respecting  them,  that  is  worthy  of  being;  related. 

The  arm  of  conquest  appears  to  have  been  little  more  success- 
ful in  these  inhospitable  regions.     Nebuchadnezzar,    Cimbyses 
and  Alexander,  successively  subdued  Egypt:  but  they  found  the 
torrid  atmosphere  and  sands  of  the  desert,  more  powerful  oppo- 
nents than  the  vegetable  and  animal  gods  of  the  Egyptians.— 
Cambyses  divided  his  army  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  he  him- 
self led  toward  Abyssinia.   Soon,  however,  their  provisions  were 
exhausted.      They  supported  themselves  first  by  killing  all  the 
cattle  belonging  to  the  expedition;  then  on  the  scanty  herbage 
which  came  in  their  way;  and  at  last  by  devouring  each  other, 
Cambyses  returned  with  only  a  remnant  of  the  division  of  his 
army  with  which  he  had  started.     The  other  division  took  the 
direction  of  Ammon,  the  modem  oasis  of  Siwah,  and  were  never 
beard  of  again.     They  were  never  known  to  have  arrived  at  Am- 
mon, or  to  have  returned  to  Egypt,   and  the  sands  of  the  desert 
probablv  furnished  them  with  a  home  and  a  grave.      Alexander, 
instigated  at  the  time  more  by  vanity  than  a  desire  or  an  expec- 
tation of  conquest,  traversed  the  desert   with  his  army,  through 
immense  sufferings,  from  Memphis  to  tin  temple  of  Jupiter  Am- 
mon, ami  obtained  from  the  priests  the  empty  title  of  the  son  of 
Jupit  r.      The  Romans*    Saracens  and   Turks,  extended  their 
conquests  over  Egypt  and  the  States  of  Barbary.     The  numer- 
ous fugitives  from  their  victorious  arms  fled  far  into  the  interior, 
if thev   fortunately  survived  the  hardships  of  their  flight,  not  to 
return  to  the  homes  which  they  had  abandoned,  but  to  exercise 
a  predominating  influence  among  the  more  barbarous  tribes  of  the 
country;  to  impose  on  ignorance  and  superstition  their  religion 
end  learning  as  miraculous;  to  plant  new  colonies  in  unknown 
regions;    to  sustain  the    interests    of   a  perilous  but   lucrative 
commerce,    while  from  jealousy  their  discoveries  were  kept  a 
secret;  or  to  perish  by  the    climate  and  diseases  oi   the  less 


1828.]  Afric*.  208 

salubrious  parts  of  Africa.  These  new  comers,  and  their  de- 
scendants generally,  so  far  as  they  were  distinguishable  from 
the  original  inhabitants,  have  been  designated  by  the  name  of 
M  >ors,  probably  because  the  most  of  them  came  originally  from 
ancient  Mauritania.  The  Moorish  character,  and  an  excess  of 
the  Moorish  influence,  is  almost  every  where  mingled  with  those? 
©f  the  aboriginals  of  Africa. 

It  ought  to  be  remarked,  that  besides  those  who  fled  from  in- 
vasion, a  considerable  number,  influenced  by  the  love  of  gain, 
subjected  themselves  voluntarily  to  the  same  perils  and  hard- 
ships that  were  incurred  by  the  fugitives.  Of  these  the  Arabs 
were  the  most  numerous  and  the  most  conspicuous.  They  even 
wrote  accounts  of  the  interior  of  Africa.  They  described  some 
of  the  kingdoms  situated  on  a  great  river,  at  that  time  called  the 
Nde  ol  the  Negroes.  It  flowed,  as  they  supposed,  from  east  to 
west,  and  the  part  described  by  them  lies  far  to  the  east  of  Tom- 
buctoo  and  Houssa.  Situated  on  the  eastern  part  of  this  river,. 
was  the  kingdom  of  Ghana,  the  most  splendid  and  powerful  at 
that  time  known  in  the  interior  of  Africa.  The  palace  of  the 
king  was  adorned  with  painting  and  sculpture,  and  lighted  with 
glass  windows:  and  the  chief  ornament  of  his  throne  was  a  mass 
of  native  gold  weighing  thirty  pounds.  The  dress  of  the  com- 
mon people,  however,  was  rude  and  simple,  composed  merely 
©f  a  belt,  which  was  frequently  made  of  the  skins  of  wild  ani- 
mals. Subject  to  the  king  of  Ghana  was  Wangara,  or  the  land 
of  gold.  This  was  overflowed  in  the  rainy  season  by  the  waters 
of  the  river,  and  it  was  immediately  after  they  had  subsided, 
that  the  gold  was  sought  for,  and  that  merchants  arrived  from 
all  parts  of  Africa  to  procure  it.  West  of  Ghana,  was  the  king- 
dom of  Tocrur.  South  of  these  kingdoms  lay  Lamlam,  an  ex- 
tensive, and  comparatively  barren  and  savage  country,  where 
was  carried  on  to  a  considerable  extent  the  business  of  slave 
hunting,  by  those  who  dwelt  near  the  river.  The  victims  when 
taken  became  an  article  of  traffic  with  northern  Africa.  Other 
countries  in  that  region  were  described  by  the  Arabs,  of  which 
the  lower  orders  were  rudely  and  scantly  clad;  the  merchants 
Wore  vests,  tunics,  caps  and  ornaments  of  gold;  and  the  nobility 
were  clothed  in  satin.  All  this  does  not  indicate,  that  they 
were  other wiie  than  savage:  the  rough  product*  oi  their  country. 


&94  Africa.  [Dec. 

slaves,  gold  and  ivory,  procured  from  abroad  those  convenience! 
and  luxuries  of  civilized  life,  which  could  not  be  produced 
among  them. 

About  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  Leo  Africanus,  a  native 
of  Grenada  in  Spain,  fled  from  the  arms  of  Ferdinand,  took  re- 
fuge in  Fez,  and  both  as  a  traveller  and  ambassador,  traversed 
a  great  part  of  Africa.  He  found  that  the  kingdom  of  Tombuc- 
too  had  then  recently  risen  by  its  commercial  advantages,  and 
the  enterprise  of  its  sovereigns,  and  that  Ghana  itself,  under  the 
name  of  Cano,  and  many  other  kingdoms,  had  become  subject 
to  its  power.  The  houses  of  the  city,  however,  were  built  in 
the  form  of  bells,  the  walls  of  stakes  or  hurdles,  plastered  with 
clay,  and  the  roofs  of  reeds  interwoven  together.  One  mosque 
and  the  royal  palace  were  built  of  stone;  but  the  artist  had  been 
brought  from  Grenada.  Cotten  cloth  was  woven  in  great  quan- 
tity, and  the  merchants  were  extremely  rich;  two  of  whom  had 
married  the  king's  daughters.  The  country  abounded  with  corn, 
cattle  and  the  other  necessaries  of  life.  Salt  was  brought  five 
hundred  miles,  and  a  camel's  load  sold  for  eighty  ducats.  Hor- 
ses were  not  bred,  but  imported  from  Barbary.  Manuscripts 
were  in  great  demand,  probably  because  they  were  then,  as  at 
the  present  day,  represented  by  the  Moors,  and  considered  by 
the  superstitious  Africans,  as  a  charm  to  keep  off  evil.  The  in- 
habitants were  mild,  and  spent  a  great  part  of  the  night  in  sing- 
ing and  dancing.  The  city  was  much  exposed  to  fire,  and  in 
five  hours  one  half  of  it  had  been  consumed.  The  religion  was 
Mahometan,  but  apparently  more  tolerant  then,  than  in  modern 
times.  The  merchants  of  Tombuctoo,  on  the  rise  of  the  river, 
conveyed  their  goods  in  a  small  canoe  made  of  a  single  tree. — 
Hardly  any  characteristics  were  then  to  be  found,  but  those  of 
barbarism  and  rudeness. 

In  the  fifteenth  century,  the  commencement  of  the  era  of  great 
discoveries  in  religion  and  nature,  a  new  impulse  was  given  to 
inquiry  respecting  the  unknown  regions  of  Africa.  The  Portu- 
guese led  the  way.  But  as  if  fiction  itself  was  doomed  to  ex- 
tend the  boundaries  of  science,  the  great  object  of  their  search, 
was  a  reputed  christian  monarch,  whose  fame  they  had  heard, 
and  whom  they  called  Prester  John;  but  they  were  uncertain 
whether  he  resided  in  Asia  or  Africa.     Thus  they  must  wander 


1828.]  Africa.  395 

through  the  world  to  find  him,  like  Ceres  in  search  of  her  daugh- 
ter. Compared  with  this  fictitious  catholic  prince,  gold  itself 
had  lost  its  inducements.  The  mariners  in  the  various  expedi- 
tious sent  to  Africa,  were  directed  to  inquire  diligently,  if  the 
inhabitants  knew  any  thing  of  Prester  John;  to  penetrate  fre- 
quently into  the  interior,  and  on  hearing  of  any  sovereign,  to 
send  an  embassy  and  inquire  if  he  was  Prester  John,  or  if  he 
know  where  Prester  John  could  be  found.  The  result  was  as 
might  be  expected:  Prester  John  evaded  them;  but  their  search 
in  other  respects  was  far  from  fruitless.  They  coasted  along 
the  shores  of  the  Sahara,  passed  Cape  Blanco,  discovered  the 
rich  and  productive  regions  of  the  Senegal  and  Gambia,  and  the 
falsi-  idea  of  their  catholic  hero,  gave  way  to  ambition  and  the 
love  of  gain.  They  formed  an  establishment  on  Arguin,  an  is- 
land not  far  from  the  shore.  A  native  prince  having  called  up- 
on them  to  aid  him  in  regaining  his  crown,  he  was  taken  to  Lis- 
bon, and  there  gave  a  splendid  account  of  the  interior  of  Africa. 
At  least  the  dominions  of  Prester  John  seemed  now  to  have  been 
discovered.  A  formidable  fleet  was" equipped,  and  although  the 
deposed  prince  was  assassinated  on  account  of  some  misunder- 
standing between  him  and  the  Portuguese,  the  appearance  of 
such  an  armament  in  Africa,  produced  a  sensation  all  along  the 
banks  of  the  Senegal  and  Niger,  very  far  into  the  interior.  Al- 
liances were  formed  by  the  Portuguese  with  nations  even  as  far 
off  as  Tombuctoo.  Still  the  Portuguese  monarch  was  in  quest 
of  Prester  John;  but  he  took  care  as  much  as  possible  to  estab- 
lish his  power,  wherever  he  extended  his  inquiries.  He  obtain- 
ed, when  he  could,  a  promise  from  all,  that  they  would  aid  him 
in  the  discovery  of  this  mysterious  personage.  He  pushed  his 
adventures  and  discoveries  around  the  continent,  and  far  into 
the  interior,  established  the  Catholic  religion  in  Congo,  and 
other  countries;  gave  birth  to  the  slave-trade;  set  up  every  where 
in  pillars  of  stone,  the  dumb  ensigns  of  his  dominion;  and  had 
his  power  and  success  equalled  his  desires,  he  himself  would 
have  become  the  Prester  John,  the  emperor  of  Africa. 

This  was  the  birth  time  of  the  hopes,  as  well  as  the  deepest 
miseries  of  Africa:  and  when  a  new  world  was  discovered  in  the 
west,  one  in  the  east  was  destined  to  struggle  into  a  new  exist- 
ence, through  pangs  untold  and  unequalled.     The  slave-trade 


fl96  Letter  from  T)r.  Blumhardt.  [Dec# 

without,  acting  on  the  desire  of  the  native  Africans  for  fomgii 
luxuries,  kindled  ill  the  fk-rce^st  fires  of  internal  war,  and  spread, 
in  an  unprecedented  and  dreadful  manner,  dissension  and  hatred 
and  rapine  throughout  the  continent.  The  horrid  accompani- 
ments of  the  slave-trade,  and  the  violence  and  kidnapping  on  the 
coast,  were  but  faint  indications,  although  thev  were  the  moving 
causes,  of  the  awful  convulsions  that  rent  and  distracted  the 
heart  of  Africa.  If  guilt  is  answerable  for  all  its  consequences, 
dreadful  indeed  will  be  the  account,  hereafter  to  be  rendered  bj 
the  authors  and  supporters  of  the  slave-trade. 

From  the  period  of  the  first  brilliant  successes  of  the  Portu- 
guese, up  to  the  present  time,  adventurers  into  the  interior  of 
Africa,  too  numerous  even  to  mention  in  this  article,  have  fol- 
lowed each  other  in  succession,  and  have  added  much  to  our 
knowledge  of  that  continent.  Among  them,  perhaps  the  most 
distinguished  are  Bruce,  Ledyard,  Lucas,  Park,  Riley,  Brown, 
Bowdich,  Denham  and  Clapperton.  Still,  however,  much  remains 
to  be  done;  and  perhaps,  as  in  our  own  country,  we  must  look  to 
tile  force  of  steam,  acting  on  the  great  rivers  of  Africa,  to  accom- 
plish what  as  jet  for  mere  human  power,  has  been  found  to* 
great  an  achievement. 

"Letter  from  Dr.  TYlvimhardt. 

Our  readers  have  been  already  informed  that  this  excellent  man  is  at  the 
head  of  the  Missionary  College  at  Basle,  Switzerland,  and  that  no  less  than 
five  devoted  missionaries  have  gone  forth  from  the  Institution  over  which 
he  presides,  to  instruct  in  the  arts  and  Christianity  the  poor  Africans  in  the 
vicinity  of  our  Colony.  Extracts  from  a  letter  of  Mr  Sessing,  one  of  these 
missionaries,  were  published  in  our  Number  for  October. 

Basle,  Oct.  21,  1828. 

Dear  Sir:  By  a  copy  of  your  kind  letter  of  September  10,  to 
Messrs.  DeRham,  Iselin  &  Moore,  at  New  York,  I  was  yester- 
day informed  of  the  death  of  your  worthy  Agent,  Mr.  Ashmun; 
and  I  cannot  forbear  to  express  to  you  our  heartfelt  sympathy 
and  grief,  on  that  mysterious  dispensation  of  God.  We  deplore 
in  this  late  lamented  friend,   a  very  excellent  and  zealoufc  sej> 


1828.]  Letter  from  Dr.  Blumhardt.  297 

vant  of  Christ,  and  cannot  but  regard  his  departure  to  eternal 
blessedness,  as  a  severe  loss  to  your  Colony  as  well  as  to  the  mis- 
sionary work  amongst  the  surrounding  negro  tribes.  May  out 
heavenly  Father  guide  and  help  you  to  find  another  man  after 
his  own  heart;  who,  urged  by  the  love  of  Christ,  will  be  willing 
to  take  the  important  office  of  your  Colonial  Agent,  and  who 
will  continue  to  lend  his  friendly  assistance  to  the  work  of  God, 
for  the  enlightening  and  salvation  of  the  poor  negroes. 

We  take  very  much  interest  in  your  important  choice  of  an 
Agent,  as  it  must  exercise  a  great  influence  upon  our  humble 
work  on  your  coast,  and  beg  you  to  be  so  kind  as  to  give  us  no- 
tice whom  you  have  appointed  in  our  late  lamented  friend's 
place,  and  whether  he  is  also  moved  by  the  same  christian  spi- 
rit and  principles. 

Messrs.  DeRham,  Iselin  &  Moore,  have  sent  the  provisions 
asked  for  by  Rev.  Mr.  Sessing,  and  we  are  very  much  obliged 
to  you  for  your  having  kindly  communicated  their  wants  to  the 
above  gentlemen.  Continue,  dear  Sir,  to  cherish  the  Missiona- 
ry work  in  your  Colony  and  its  labourers,  our  dear  Brethren; 
have  particularly  the  kindness  to  recommend  them  with  concern 
to  the  benevolence  and  friendly  assistance  of  your  new  Agent. 

As  I  am  wanting  many  numbers  of  Vol.  I.  and  II.  of  your  in- 
teresting African  Repository,  I  have  ordered  the  above  mention- 
ed gentlemen  at  New  York,  to  procure  these  two  volumes  com- 
plete for  me.  Of  Vol.  IV.  the  numbers  till  June  have  reached 
me,  and  I  should  feel  particularly  obliged  to  you,  if  you  would 
kindly  order  the  editor  to  send  the  following  numbers  directly 
to  Messrs.  DeRham,  Iselin  &  Moore,  in  New  York,  forme,  and 
likewise  your  Annual  Reports,  and  whatever  you  may  publish, 
as  we  are  now  still  more  longing  for  every  account  of  the  state 
of  your  Colony.  May  the  Lord,  our  God,  bless  you  and  your 
work  with  his  best  blessing.  With  Christian  respect  and  es- 
teem, Yours  affectionately,  J.  BLUMHARDT. 

Permit  me,  dear  Sir,  to  beg  you  to  inform  us,  what  would  be 
the  amount  of  the  passage  money  from  one  of  your  ports  to  your 
Colony  of  Liberia,  and  how  often  and  in  what  season  your  ships 
are  generally  sailing  there.  Do  you  think  that  our  correspon- 
dence with  Liberia  would  go  directly,  safely  and  quickly,  by 
way  of  North  America? 

To  R.  R.  Gurley,  Esq.  Sec.  A.  C.  Society,  Washington. 
38 


298  Mr.  Keifs  Address.  [Dec. 

It  is  well  known  to  our  readers,  that  a  very  respectable  Auxiliary  State 
Colonization  Society  has  for  some  years  existed  in  Pennsylvania,  the  Board 
of  Managers  of  which  reside  in  Philadelphia.  In  this  Citjr,  however,  so  dis- 
tinguished for  its  contributions  to  other  charitable  objects,  our 'own,  has 
heretofore  been  regarded  with  little  favour,  owing  to  misconceptions  con- 
cerning its  nature  and  the  motives  of  those  who  seek  its  accomplishments 
Hence  the  Managers  of  the  Pennsylvania  Society,  have,  very  judiciously, 
availed  themselves  of  various  opportunities,  to  bring  the  design  which  they 
would  promote,  in  its  true  character  before  their  fellow  citizens,  and  to  re- 
move the  erroneous  impressions  in  regard  to  it,  which  have  existed  in  too 
many  minds.  And  we  rejoice  to  state,  that  the  candid  exhibition  of  our 
plan,  and  avowal  of  the  reasons  which  demand  its  execution,  have  not  prov- 
ed inefficient,  but  that  a  great  and  auspicious  change,  has  taken  and  is  tak- 
ing place  towards  our  cause,  in  the  opinions  and  feelings  of  the  people  of 
Philadelphia.  Nor  can  we  doubt,  that  the  able  address  of  Mr.  Key,  deliver- 
ed before  a  large  and  respectable  assemblage  of  the  citizens  on  the  25th  of 
last  month,  will  powerfully  aid  this  change,  since  the  facts  and  arguments 
which  it  contains,  show  conclusively  that  it  is  impossible  to  reconcile  a  so- 
ber and  commendable  concern,  either  for  the  interests  of  the  south  or  our 
coloured  population,  with  hostility  to  the  scheme  of  African  Colonization. 
We  here  offer  to  our  readers  a  few  extracts  from  this  Address. 

"I  feel  gratified  at  the  prospect  which  this  meeting  presents, 
that  the  sympathies  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  great  city  will,  at 
last,  be  excited,  in  favour  of  the  cause,  which  I  now  appear  be- 
fore you  to  advocate. 

"The  American  Colonization  Society,  always  entertained  an 
expectation,  from  the  commencement  of  their  labours,  that  a  time 
would  come,  when  the  scheme  of  patriotism  and  christian  char- 
ity, which  they  offer  to  the  consideration  of  their  countrymen, 
would  find  friends  and  patrons  in  the  northern  cities.  They 
looked  with  confidence  to  Philadelphia,  in  particular,  knowing 
that  many  of  her  citizens  were  zealous  in  the  cause  of  the  aboli- 
tion of  slavery.  When,  several  years  ago,  the  subject  was  intro- 
duced to  the  attention  of  the  citizens  of  this  place,  the  Society 
were  disappointed  on  finding  that  they  met  with  no  encourage- 
ment. They  were  disappointed  and  surprised;  but  they  did  not 
despond,  for  they  felt  satisfied  that  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the 
plan  was  such,  as  must  ultimately  recommend  it  to  the  approba- 
tion of  all  the  benevolent  and  reflecting;  and  they  were  persuad- 
ed that  although  repeated  efforts  to  attract  favourable  regard 


1828.]  Mr.  Keifs  Address.  209 

might  fail,  they  must  at  length  succeed.  The  managers  confi- 
dently trust  that  the  time  is  come,  when  their  claims  will  be 
heard.  I  shall  proceed,  then,  to  lay  before  you  a  plain  state- 
ment of  the  situation  and  prospects  of  the  Society;  of  what  we 
have  done  and  what  we  intend  to  do:  and  to  explain  the  grounds 
of  that  confidence,  witli  which  we  now  look  to  you  for  encourage- 
ment and  co-operation. 

"I  presume  you  all  know  that  the  object  of  the  Society  is  to 
establish  upon  the  coast  of  Africa,  a  colony  composed  of  free 
coloured  persons  from  the  United  States,  including  such  as  have 
been  manumitted  by  their  masters  for  the  purpose  of  their  becom- 
ing colonists.  This  design  has  been  so  far  executed,  that  an  ex- 
tensive, fertile  and  healthy  territory  has  been  obtained;  and  a 
colony,  as  flourishing,  perhaps,  for  its  age,  as  was  ever  settled 
any  where,  subsists  upon  it.  All  the  difficulties  that  were  ap- 
prehended and  which  many  persons  thought  insuperable,  have 
been  overcome;  and  there  is  now  no  rational  cause  of  fear  that 
any  thing  will  occur  to  impede  its  growth  and  prosperity." 

Mr.  Key  proceeds  to  remark,  that  one  of  the  consequences  expect- 
ed  from  the  success  of  the  Society,  was,  that  manumission  would  be  pro- 
moted: that  this  consequence  has  actually  followed,  even  to  so  great  an  ex- 
tent, that  the  Society  is  wholly  unable  to  curry  to  Africa  all  the  slaves  that 
are  offered  them:  that  a  way  is  thus  gradually  and  safely  to  be  opened  for 
the  peaceful  termination  of  slavery  throughout  the  country:  that  even  to 
those  who  most  ardently  desire  its  termination,  the  colonizing-  scheme,  lead- 
ing-, as  it  does,  to  voluntary  manumission,  is  the  only  one  which  true  wis- 
dom can  dictate:  that  it  is  admitted  by  all,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of 
one  in  a  million,  to  be  a  great  evil:  that  it  is  a  proper  maxim  to  be 
adopted  by  a  free  people,  that  no  political  evil  is  irremediable,  and  especi- 
ally as  Providence  will  prosper  wise  and  faithful  attempts  to  remove  it:  that 
the  use  of  force  would  be  disastrous:  that  inflammatory  publications  tending 
to  this,  are  no  less  to  be  deprecated:  that  legal  compulsion  in  the  case 
would  be  a  direct  violation  of  a  solemn  compact,  and  would  almost  certain- 
ty meet  with  resistance.     He  then  presents  the  only  alternative. 

"May  it  not,  then,  be  laid  down  as  a  plain  truth,  which  we 
ought  never  to  lose  sight  of;  that,  whatever  plan  may  be  adopted 
to  effect  this  great  object,  it  must  be  carried  on  with  the  consent 
of  the  slave  owners?  Success  without  this,  I  insist  is  hopeless: 
but  even  were  there  other  schemes  by  which  it  was  possible  to 
effect  the  work;  still,  if  there  be  one  which  can  be  conducted 
with  the  consent  of  those  most  interested  in  the  subject,   every 


300  Mr.  Key's  Mdress.  [Dec; 

man  guided  by  sound  discretion  and  prudence  will  give  it  the 
preference. 

"The  Colonization  Society,  I  undertake  to  show,  presents  such 
a  scheme.  Slave  holders  have  given  it  their  approbation;  they 
will  approve  it,  and  they  can  approve  of  no  other.  Any  scheme 
of  emancipation  without  colonization,  they  know  and  see  and 
feel  to  be  productive  of  nothing  but  evil;  evil  to  all  whom  it  af- 
fects: to  the  white  population,  to  the  slaves,  to  the  manumitted 
themselves.  It  is  needless  to  offer  facts  and  arguments  in  proof 
of  this,  to  any  man  who  will  seriously  reflect  upon  the  unavoida- 
ble consequences  of  the  mingling  of  three  so  discordant  classes 
in  the  same  community.  Even  among  you,  where  every  thing 
that  benevolence  could  do,  has  been  done,  to  make  the  freedom 
(as  it  is  miscalled)  of  the  coloured  population  beneficial  to  them; 
is  it  not  acknowledged  that  they  cannot  be  adequately  protected 
in  their  personal,  much  less  in  the  exercise  of  the  civil  rights 
allowed  them  by  your  laws,  and  which  are  essential  to  perfect 
freedom?     Even  here,  they  have  but  the  name  of  liberty. 

"If  you  can  remove  the  great  difficulty,  that  of  the  emanci- 
pated persons  remaining  in  the  country;  if  you  can  open  a  way 
by  which  they  will  be  willing  to  remove;  you  take  from  thousands 
of  slave-holders  all  their  objections  to  emancipation,  and  they 
will  freely,  of  their  own  accord,  furnish  more  colonists  from 
among  their  slaves,  than  the  means  to  be  obtained  will  enable 
you  to  transport,  and  more  than  it  would  be  prudent  to  add  at 
present  to  the  population  of  the  colony. 

"It  remains  only  to  show  (continued  Mr.  Key)  that  the  exe- 
cution of  the  Society's  plan  will  be  followed  by  the  consequence 
predicted;  the  promotion  of  emancipation.  It  is  reasonable  to 
expect  such  a  consequence.  Can  any  one  believe  that  the  states 
in  which  slavery  exists,  desire  its  perpetuation;  that  they  will 
not  make  an  effort  to  relieve  themselves  from  this  evil,  if  a  prac- 
ticable and  safe  plan  be  presented  to  them?  Slave-holders  are 
like  other  men,  governed  by  the  same  feelings,  influenced  by 
the  same  motives.  Can  it  be  supposed  that  they  are  insensible 
to  their  own  interests?  They  see  the  injurious  effects  of  the 
slave  system:  that  the  value  of  their  lands  is  lessened  by  it,  the 
progress  of  improvements  retarded,  the  increase  of  population 
checked.     If  the  people  of  Maryland  and  Virginia,  for  example, 


1828.]  Mr.  Key's  Address.  301 

have  common  sense  and  observation,  they  must  see,  thej  have 
seen,  and  do  see,  that  their  neighbours  of  Pennsylvania  increase 
in  wealth  and  population  in  a  ratio  far  greater  than  theirs.  At 
the  first  census,  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  Pennsylvania,  was 
little  more  than  one-half  that  of  Virginia:  at  the  last  it  was  near- 
ly equal.  The  increased  value  of  lands  and  houses  in  Pennsyl- 
vania, in  fifteen  years,  from  1799  to  1814,  exceeded  that  of  Vir- 
ginia, though  her  territory  is  much  larger,  upwards  of  $90,000,- 
000.  The  lands  in  the  latter  state  are  as  fertile  as  those  of  the 
former.  No  other  cause  can  be  assigned  for  this  difference,  than 
the  existence  in  the  one  of  an  evil  which  has  been  removed  from 
the  other.  There  is,  moreover,  in  each  of  the  slave-holding 
states  just  mentioned,  nearer  and  plainer  proof  of  the  bad  effects 
of  this  evil  in  their  institutions.  There  are  counties  wherein 
the  slave  population  nearly  equals  the  white,  and  others  where 
the  number  of  slaves  is  inconsiderable.  In  one  county  of  Mary- 
land, having  but  few  slaves,  the  increase  of  population  between 
1810  and  1820,  amounted  to  many  thousands:  while  in  another, 
where  the  numbers  of  slaves  and  of  whites  are  nearly  the  same, 
there  was  a  decrease  of  almost  a  fifth  of  its  whole  population. — 
Lands  of  similar  quality,  bear  very  different  prices  in  the  two 
districts:  for  farmers  will  not  migrate  to  a  slave  country:  and 
there  is  the  same  difference  in  many  other  particulars  of  this  na- 
ture. 

"Nor  is  it  only  in  reference  to  the  value  of  property  and  im- 
provement of  their  outward  circumstances  that  the  inconveni- 
ence of  the  present  condition  of  things  is  felt  and  acknowledged. 
In  respect  of  moral  advantages,  they  have  impediments  peculiar 
to  this  unfortunate  state  of  society.  They  cannot  with  the  same 
facility  and  benefit,  have  churches,  schools,  or  other  institutions 
for  religious  and  intellectual  improvement,  such  as  are  found  in 
every  neighbourhood  amidst  the  denser  population  of  the  northern 
states.  Not  only  have  they  no  accessions  to  their  numbers  by 
emigration  from  foreign  countries  or  other  states,  but,  where  the 
slaves  are  numerous,  the  young  people  of  the  labouring  classes, 
who  grow  up  among  them,  are  unwilling  to  work  in  the  company 
of  blacks,  and  feel  their  own  station  in  society  to  be  degraded. 
For  this  reason,  such  of  them  as  are  industrious  and  enterprising 
remove  to  the  new  settlements  of  free  states,  while  the  idle  and 


3D2  Mr.  Key's  Address.  [Dec. 

dissolute  remain.     So  that  such  districts  lose  their  best,  and  re- 
tain their  worst  population." 

Mr.  Key  proceeds  to  show,  and  he  shows  very  clearly,  that  the  morbid 
sensibility  which  has  existed  on  this  subject,  is  rapidly  diminishing1,  and 
that  the  subject  may  now  be  agitated  with  much  greater  safety  to  the  one 
who  does  so,  than  formerly :  that  in  fact  a  great  and  radical  change  is  going 
on  in  public  sentiment:  that  of  late  years,  both  Virginia  and  Maryland  hare 
passed  resolutions  approving  of  the  plan  of  the  Colonization  Society,  and 
Maryland  has  rendered  it  pecuniary  assistance:  that  the  books  of  the  Socie- 
ty present  absolute  practical  proof  that  their  scheme  leads  to  voluntary  man- 
umission, and  in  this  way  tends  to  the  peaceful  termination  of  an  evil,  which 
doubtless  all  measures  of  force  would  only  aggravate.     He  adds, 

"And  will  not  this  continue  to  be  the  case?  Will  the  causes, 
which  produced  these  effects,  suddenly  and  without  any  reason 
cease  to  operate!  If  so  much  has  been  done,  when  the  objects 
of  the  society  and  the  condition  of  the  colony  were  but  partially 
known;  when  the  difficulties  incident  to  a  new  enterprise  were 
yet  to  be  overcome:  what  may  not  be  expected,  when  this  great 
cause  shall  be  fairly  presented  with  its  success  apparent,  to  the 
patriots,  philanthropists  and  christians  of  our  land?  So  convin- 
ced am  I,  that  this  favourable  feeling  of  the  masters  will  con- 
tinue to  be  commensurate  with  any  efforts  the  Society  may  be 
enabled  to  make;  that  if  I  were  invited  by  the  Legislators  of 
either  of  the  States  I  have  mentioned,  to  draw  a  law  in  favour 
of  emancipation,  with  the  assurance  that  it  would  be  passed,  I 
would  say  to  them  pass  no  law;  we  have  already,  by  the  volun- 
tary consent  of  their  owners,  more  slaves  offered  to  us  than  we 
can  provide  for,  and  a  law  is  wholly  unnecessary. 

"I  know  (continued  the  speaker)  that  very  different  impres- 
sions, as  to  the  disposition  of  the  people  of  the  South  to  abolish 
slavery,  have  prevailed  here.  I  know  it  has  been  confidently 
asserted  and  honestly  believed,  that  all  the  apparently  favoura- 
ble movements  in  the  South,  and  particularly  that  which  gave 
rise  to  the  Colonization  Society,  originated  in  a  mercenary  and 
selfish  spirit;  that  these  who  formed  this  association,  desired  to 
remove  the  free  people  of  colour,  in  order  that  their  slave  pro- 
perty might  be  held  more  safely  and  beneficially.  There  is  not 
the  slightest  ground  for  such  imputations.  The  Society  and  their 
*Yiends  have  always  declared  their  hope;  that  emancipation  would 


1828.]  Mr.  Key's  Address.  803 

be  a  result  of  the  success  of  their  scheme.  It  is  true,  their  ope* 
rations  have  been  confined  to  the  single  object,  colonization. — 
They  do  nothing  directly  to  effect  the  manumission  of  slaves. — 
They  think  nothing  can  be  advantageously  done  in  favour  of 
emancipation,  but  by  means  of  colonization,  of  which  emancipa- 
tion will  be  a  certain  consequence  that  may  be  safely  and  quiet- 
ly awaited.  So  little  reason  is  there  for  such  a  suspicion,  that 
th"  Society,  while  suffering  under  this  reproach  in  the  North, 
have  been  continually  assailed  by  some  of  the  most  sensitive  of 
their  brethren  in  the  South,  with  accusations  of  a  directly  con- 
trary character,  with  charges  of  being  krash  and  dangerous  abo- 
litionists.' Tli"  middle  course  of  sound  and  prudent  policy, 
steadily  pursued  by  the  Society,  can  alone  account  for  these  er- 
roneous and  inconsistent  opinions  respecting  their  purpose.  Im- 
pressions so  different  cannot  long  subsist.  The  Society  is  daily 
gaining  friends  from  both  classes  of  these  conflicting  opponents. 
In  the  North,  those  who  believe  that  emancipation,  without  re- 
moval of  the  manumitted  slaves,  never  can  take  place  but  with 
danger,  begin  to  acknowledge  that  colonization  may  be  carried 
on  safely;  and  that  it  is  better,  as  something  bearing  either  di- 
rectly or  indirectly  on  the  question  of  slavery  will  be  done,  that 
the  work  should  be  conducted  discreetly,  the  execution  of  it  be- 
ing entrusted  to  those  who  have  a  common  interest  with  them, 
and  who,  from  their  situation,  are  enabled  to  understand  the 
subject,  and  to  judge  how  it  may  be  safely  dealt  with. 

"There  is  a  portion  of  our  brethren,  who  have  been  labouring 
for  many  years,  with  the  most  benevolent  intentions,  but,  as  I 
conceive,  with  erroneous  views,  in  the  cause  of  abolition.  I  ask 
them,  why  it  is  that  they  have  exerted  themselves  to  so  little 
purpose?  Is  it  not  because  there  has  been  an  obstacle  in  their 
way,  which  they  have  disregarded,  but  the  removal  of  which  was 
necessary  to  their  success?  Do  not  the  proofs  that  have  been 
laid  before  you  make  this  apparent?  The  Colonization  Society 
removes  this  impediment.  It  provides  on  the  shores  of  Africa, 
a  refuge  for  her  outcast  children.  It  opens  an  outlet  for  our 
greatest  evil.  Does  not  wisdom  then  dictate  the  propriety  of,  at 
least,  suspending  labours  that  have  availed  little,  in  order  to 
unite  our  efforts  to  remove  the  obstruction,  which  stands  in  the' 
way  of  the  accomplishment  of  our  wishes? 


304  Mr.  Key's  Address.  [Dec. 

"In  addition  to  what  I  have  already  urged  in  favour  of  Colo- 
nization, I  beg  leave  to  offer  one  or  two  further  considerations. 
Let  me  call  your  attention  to  the  influence  of  the  Colony  in  sup- 
pressing the  slave- trade;  that  horrid  traffic,  of  which  you  have 
heard  frequent  descriptions,  but  can  scarcely  imagine  the  enor- 
mity. All  the  efforts  of  Europe  and  of  this  country  to  suppress 
it,  have  been  unavailing.  Officers  of  European  nations,  and  of 
our  own*  who  have  had  experience  in  the  naval  service  on  the 
African  coast,  have  expressed  an  unanimous  opinion  that  all  the 
navies  of  the  world  would  be  insufficient  to  destroy  this  trade. 
In  fact  it  is  impossible  to  suppress  it  but  by  such  means  as 
the  American  Colony  employs:  by  introducing  among  the  wretch- 
ed inhabitants  of  that  oppressed  continent,  the  arts  of  civiliza- 
tion and  the  principles  of  Christian  benevolence;  and  by  showing 
them  that  the  rich  productions  their  naturally  fine  country  is  ca- 
pable of  yielding,  are  much  better  articles  of  commerce  than  the 
bodies  of  their  brethren.  The  American  Colony  has  already 
done  much  in  this  work.  The  spot  where  it  is  planted  was  once 
a  slave  station,  from  which  every  year  multitudes  of  wretched 
beings  were  carried  to  be  sold  into  bondage.  Sierra  Leone  was 
another  such  station.  A  great  change  has  been  effected,  in  a  few 
years.  The  slave-traders  dare  not  now  attempt  their  abomina- 
ble traffic  within  many  miles  of  these  settlements.  No  more 
from  this  part  of  the  coast,  the  slave  ship,  freighted  with  human 
misery,  launches  forth  and  pursues  her  course,  with  all  the  mon- 
sters of  the  deep  following  in  her  wake  to  claim  their  share  of 
prey.  Instead  of  this,  we  see  approaching,  the  American  vessel, 
laden  with  cheerful  emigrants,  returning  to  the  land  of  their 
forefathers,  bringing  with  them  the  blessings  of  civilization  to 
improve  that  unhappy  continent,  and  bringing  the  gospel  of  peace 
to  dispel  the  darkness  of  gross  superstition.  What  American 
would  not  feel  more  pleasure  to  see  the  flag  of  his  country  giv- 
ing protection  to  these  messengers  of  peace  and  joy,  than  to  be- 
hold it  waving  in  triumph  over  the  field  of  blood?  It  is  thus,  we 
may  recompense  the  wrongs  of  this  injured  people;  thus,  we 
may  atone  for  the  part  we  have  been  forced  to  take  in  these 
wrongs. 

"To  conclude: — Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  views  which 
I  have  on  this  occasion  endeavoured  to  present,  the  immediate 


>» 


18*8.]  Emancipation,  305 

manumission  of  two  hundred  slaves,  and  their  settlement  in  a 
country  where  they  may  enjoy  the  rights  and  the  improvement 
of  freemen,  cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  you.  These 
are  objects  according  with  the  desires  often  expressed  by  this 
community.  In  assisting  the  society  to  provide  for  the  colonists 
now  offered  to  them,  you  would  in  part,  accomplish  the  work  to 
which  your  labours  have  so  long  been  applied.  The  society  are 
anxious  to  despatch  an  expedition  to  Africa  this  season,  and  are 
making  great  efforts  to  obtain  the  means.  Without  further  aid 
from  their  friends  it  will  be  impossible  to  do  it.  We  ask  you 
to  assist  us  in  an  enterprise,  which  we  believe  to  be  worthy  the 
regard  of  every  philanthropist,  patriot  and  christian/ 


C  ommunication. 

u Almost  all  masters  in  Virginia  assent  to  the  proposition, 
that  when  the  slaves  can  be  liberated  without  danger  to  our- 
selves, and  to  their  own  advantage,  it  ought  to  be  done." — [Mr. 
Harrison  of  Lynchburg,  before  the  American  Colonization  So- 
ciety. 

And  is  it  possible  that  this  can  be  true?  It  must  be  so. — 
Coming  as  it  does,  from  a  distinguished  man  in  the  heart  of  that 
great  state,  the  assertion  cannot  be  doubted.  The  most  emi- 
nent leader  of  our  political  career,  here  presents  a  very  remark- 
able indication,  "That  she  may  yet  be  no  less  distinguished  in 
the  promotion  of  humane  and  truly  liberal  sentiments."  Alrea- 
dy the  wish  had  almost  risen  in  my  heart,  and  nothing  but  the 
attachment  which  I  feel  for  the  institutions  of  my  own  State 
could  have  hindered  it,  that,  Providence  willing,  I  had  been  a  na- 
tive of  Virginia. 

"When  the  slaves  can  be  liberated  without  danger  to  our- 
selves, and  to  their  own  advantage,  it  ought  to  be  done."  By  this 
conquer.  And  when  a  precipitate  or  prejudiced  enthusiast,  con- 
siders it  too  moderate,  and  would  rashly  go  beyond  it,  let  him 
know,  that  he  will  be  pronounced  a  traitor  to  his  country.  Per- 
haps the  people  of  the  north  have  judged  those  of  the  south  too 

severely.     But  let  the  south  adopt  and  vindicate  this  and  its 
39 


306  Emancipation.  [Dec. 

kindred  sentiments,  and  they  will  find  a  vast  majority  of  the 
north  ever  ready,  to  engage  with  them  as  brethren,  and  to  hon- 
our tHem,  as  fellow  citizens,  and  fellow  workers  in  the  great 
cause  of  freedom  and  humanity.  Let  such  sentiments  become 
permanent  and  universal,  and  they  will  do  more  to  perfect  and 
perpetuate  the  union  of  the  States,  than  the  immense  influences 
of  roads  and  canals  and  commerce  put  together.  The  union  of 
souls  no  outward  force  can  abolish. 

Never  may  this  sacred  maxim  remain  a  mere  epitaph  on  the 
grave  of  philanthropy.  It  is  a  part  of  the  very  essence  of  inspi- 
ration. Let  it  be  a  living  and  an  acting  principle.  Though  at 
times  it  may  issue  from  the  lips  of  the  dead  who  feel  not  its  pow- 
er, while  they  see  and  confess  its  correctness;  yet  let  the  lan- 
guage which  the  very  stones  cannot  but  utter  and  approve,  never 
perish  in  air,  nor  fall  to  the  ground  ineffectual:  but  let  it  be  in- 
Ivaled  by  everv  active  friend  of  freedom  and  humanity;  let  it  fas- 
ten on  their  memories,  animate  their  hearts,  rouse  their  whole 
souls  to  effort,  and  even  descend  to  their  posterity  as  one  of  the 
richest  bequests  that  can  be  made;  till  it  bears  its  triumphs  into 
every  corner  of  our  free  country.  Thus,  and  thus  only,  will  it 
accomplish  the  salvation  of  this  great  and  flourishing  community. 

The  Colonization  Society,  as  such,  have  renounced  wholly 
the  name  and  the  characteristics  of  abolitionists.  On  this  point 
they  have  been  unjustly  and  injuriously  slandered.  They  need 
no  such  barrier  to  restrict  them,  as  the  sentiment  of  Mr.  Harri- 
son, for  their  operations  are  entirely  in  a  different  department. 
Into  their  accounts  the  subject  of  emancipation  does  not  enter 
at  all.  To  the  religious  people  of  the  north,  from  whom  in  that 
region  they  mainly  derive  their  support,  they  present  the  almost 
certain  and  glorious  prospect  of  redeeming  and  renovating  Afri- 
ca. On  this  account,  if  on  no  other,  they  feel  themselves  bound 
at  least  by  every  consideration  of  expediency,  to  render  their  in- 
stitution decidedly  religious  m  its  aspect  and  in  its  character. — 
The  moment  that  it  ceases  to  be  so,  its  support  in  the  north  must 
fall,  and  the  splendour  of  its  present  glory  there  must  vanish. — 
To  the  south  they  present  the  immediate  prospect  of  delivering 
them  from  the  dangers  and  the  trouble  of  their  free  coloured  po- 
pulation.    To  all  they  make  a  direct  and  powerful  appeal,  that 


1898.]  Colonization  Society  of  Virginia,  307 

rouses  the  most  dormant  feelings  of  humanity  in  every  breast 
not  rendered  callous  by  wrong  practice  or  evil  principles,  in  the 
prospect  of  giving  the  death-blow  to  the  miseries  and  horrors  of 
the  slave-trade,  and  of  raising  all  Africa  to  civilization  and  peace 
and  prosperity.  It  is  by  keeping  these  great  and  glorious  objects 
in  view,  that  they  will  render  their  whole  cause  the  cause  of 
God  and  humanity,  and  will  find  no  enemies  to  encounter,  but 
the  enemies  of  God,  and  the  destroyers  of  human  happiness. 

N.  E. 

Colonization  Society  oi  YiYginia. 

We  have  perused  with  peculiar  gratification  an  account  of  the  proceed- 
ings of  the  Auxiliary  Colonization  Society  of  Richmond  and  Manchester  at 
its  Annual  Meeting"  on  the  15th  instant,  and  the  very  encouraging  Report 
presented  on  that  occasion  by  its  Board  of  Managers.  We  particularly  re- 
joice in  the  fact,  that  this  Society  has  changed  its  name  and  character,  and 
is  now  the  Colonization  Society  of  the  State  of  Virginia. 

The  following  is  its  list  of  Officers  for  the  ensuing  year: 

John  Marshall,  President. 
Vice-Presiden  ts. 


James  Madison, 
James  Monroe, 
James  Pleasants, 
John  Tyler, 
Win.  H.  Fitzhugh, 
John  F.  May, 


Gen.  B.  G.  Baldwin, 
Philip  Doddridge, 
Hugh  Nelson, 
Gen.  W    H.  Broadnax, 
William  Maxwell, 
Dr.  Thomas  Massie. 


Benjamin  Brand,  Treasurer. 
William  Barret,  Secretary. 
John  Rutherford,  Cor.  Secretary, 

Managers. 


W.  H.  Fitzwhylsonn, 
Robert  G.  Scott, 
Hall  Neilson, 
John  H.  Eustace, 
James  Blair, 
William  Crane, 


David  I.  Burr, 
James  E.  Heath, 
Nicholas  Mills, 
James  Caskie, 
Th's.  C.  Howard, 
Fleming  James. 


The  Hall  of  the  House  of  Delegates  was  on  this  occasion  crowded,  and 
many  ladies  who  have  recently  made  liberal  efforts  and  contributions  to  aid 
the  objects  of  the  Society,  evinced  by  their  presence  their  deep  interest  in 
its  proceedings.    Very  able  and  impressive  addresses  were  made  by  Flem- 


308  Colonisation  Society  of  Virginia.  [Dec. 

big"  James  and  J.  Forbes,  Esqs.  of  Richmond,  and  Wm.  H.  Fitzhugh,  Esq. 
of  Fairfax,  a  member  of  the  House  of  Delegates.  The  Managers  state  in  their 
interesting  Report,  "that  the  sum  of  $818  10,  has  been  contributed  by  their 
Association  during  the  year,  to  the  funds  of  the  Parent  Society,  and  that  the 
diffusion  of  correct  information  has  removed  in  great  measure  the  prejudices 
which  have  existed  against  its  design.  "The  clouds  of  suspicion  and  distrast 
are  rapidly  disappearing  before  the  irresistible  power  of  truth  and  inquiry: 
never  probably  since  the  first  organization  of  the  Society,  have  its  prospects 
been  brighter  or  its  labours  more  successful. " 

After  a  brief  statement  of  the  plan,   principles  and  success  of  our  Institu- 
tion, the  Managers  remark: 

"In  many  parts  of  the  country  owners  of  slaves  are  ready  to 
emancipate  them  on  their  being  removed  hence  to  Liberia,  and 
several  are  now  preparing  in  the  best  manner  they  can  their 
slaves  for  this  purpose.  So  that  the  Society  will  find  no  diffi- 
culty in  procuring  emigrants  of  approved  character  and  to  any 
number.  Already  about  five  hundred  free  blacks  and  two  hun- 
dred emancipated  slaves  are  soliciting  to  be  removed.  Had  the 
Society  ample  means  to  indulge  the  wishes  of  these  applicants, 
it  would  be  unwise,  in  the  present  condition  of  the  Colony,  to 
send  thither  more  than  five  hundred  in  any  one  year,  until  the 
population  of  the  Colony  shall  exceed  two  .thousand;  for,  a  sud-. 
den  and  too  great  addition  to  the  present  number  would  be  of 
serious  injury  to  the  good  government  of  the  Colony,  and  would 
probably  produce  disastrous,  consequences  to  the  emigrants 
themselves,  arising  from  the  want  of  accommodation  and  the  ne- 
cessary supplies. 

"Thus  at  home  we  have  ample  materials  and  demands  to  en- 
gage our  resources,  and  to  excite  our  utmost  and  constant  exer- 
tions. Nor  is  the  condition  of  the  Colony  less  cheering.  Its 
agriculture  and  commerce  is  respectable,  nay  considerable  and 
very  profitable.  In  an  infant  country,  the  former  is  always  and 
naturally  the  most  necessary  avocation.— At  first  the  colonists 
did  not  gucceed  so  well  in  their  attempts  at  agriculture,  the 
country  and  sands  on  the  coast  not  proving  so  productive,  as 
their  appearance  had  led  the  first  settlers  to  expect.  By  a  ces- 
sion, however,  made  by  the  natives  to  the  Colony,  of  an  exten- 
sive tract  of  country  on  the  St.  Pauls  river,  a  territory  has  been 
acquired,  and  on  which  settlements  have  been  formed,  where 
agriculturists  have  succeeded  in  the  most  remarkable  manner. 


1828.]  Colonization  Society  of  Virginia.  609 

"The  soil  and  climate  has  been  found  well  adapted  to  the  pro- 
duction of  Indian  corn,  millet,  rice,  cotton,  sugar  and  coffee, 
and  of  sustaining  a  population  of  many  thousands. 

"The  commerce  of  the  Colony  is  considerable  and  rapidly  in- 
creasing, as  well  with  the  interior  as  with  the  United  States  and 
foreign  countries.  The  exports  are  not  less  than  fifty  thousand 
dollars  per  annum;  and  those  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits, 
are  enterprising,  judicious  and  successful  in  their  adventures.— 
Some  of  the  colonists  have  acquired  considerable  fortunes,  by 
their  care  and  industry — Most  of  them  are  independent — Ml 
can  do  well,  who  devote  their  labour  and  skill  steadily  to  any 
regular  avocation;  while  common  laborers  receive  on  an  average 
ninety  cents  per  day,  and  tradesmen  two  dollars. 

*k Whatever  doubts  might  have  been  entertained  formerly  as 
to  the  health  of  the  colonists,  recent  events  have  entirely  remov- 
ed. All  who  have  emigrated  from  Virginia  and  South  of  it,  have 
enjoyed  good  health,  and  but  few  deaths  have  occurred  among 
them.  Where  the  colonists  have  been  removed  from  higher  la- 
titudes, they  have  been  subject  to  the  same  diseases,  as  if  their 
removal  had  been  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  latitude  on  this  conti- 
nent— and  when  the  total  number  of  deaths  among  the  colonists, 
shall  be  compared  with  those  that  usually  occur  among  the  set- 
tlers of  any  new  country,  it  will  be  demonstrated  that  Liberia 
has  been  founded  with  a  less  loss  of  human  life,  than  probably 
any  colony  in  the  old  or  new  world.  But  we  cannot  stop  here 
with  our  view  of  the  situation  of  the  Colony. — It  is  not  alone  in 
their  commerce — their  health  or  their  agriculture,  that  the  emi- 
grants have  been  peculiarly  fortunate — the  picture  of  their  politi- 
cal, intellectual  and  moral  condition  is  still  brighter — they  have 
formed  a  government,  at  the  head  of  which  has  been  placed  one 
of  their  own  number,  Lott  Carey,  late  of  the  city  of  Richmond, 
and  well  known  for  his  good  sense,  moral  character  and  inflexible 
integrity — they  have  ordained  laws,  which  punish  offenders  and 
protect  each  in  his  rights  of  person  and  of  property-r-they  have 
created  a  judiciary  for  expounding  these  laws  and  deciding  con- 
troversies— they  have  instituted  a  Legislature  for  the  enactment 
of  new  laws,  and  the  repeal  or  modification  of  the  existing  ones, 
where  experience  shall  show  it  proper  to  do  so.  In  short,  they 
have  instituted  for  themselves  a  civil  government,  the  principles 


3X0  Colonization  Society  of  Virginia.  [Dec. 

of  which  recognize  the  equal  rights  of  all,  which  protects  each  in 
his  person  and  in  his  property;  which  separates  the  Legislative, 
Executive  and  Judicial  departments,  and  assigns  to  each  its 
appropriate  functions;  which  guarantees  to  all  civil,  political 
and  religious  freedom,  encourages  virtue  and  discourages  vice. 
Such  measures  have  had  with  the  colonists,  the  same  influence, 
which  in  all  time  they  have  had  with  other  men;  to  improve  and 
elevate  their  moral  condition,  to  promote  harmony  and  to  ad- 
vance their  prosperity. 

"In  this  work  the  name  of  the  lamented  Ashmun  stands  pre- 
eminent, and  will  be  regarded  with  admiration  while  this 
flourishing  Colony  shall  remain  a  proud  monument  of  his  la- 
bours. 

"The  Society  has  then  demonstrated  the  practicability  of  co- 
lonizing the  free  black  population  of  the  United  States,  and  the 
happy  influence  this  change  will  have  upon  the  emigrants.     In 
doing  this,  it  has  expended  more  than  sixty  thousand  dollars, 
and  is  prepared  to  prosecute  the  undertaking.     But  has  not  the 
Society  now  a  fair  claim  on  Government  for  that  aid,  which  was 
originally  denied  only  because  the  plan  was  considered  chimeri- 
cal?    It  has  already  been  asserted,  and  the  assertion  is  suscepti- 
ble of  clear  proof,  that  the  cost  of  transporting  each  emigrant  is 
twenty  dollars.     The  annual  increase  of  the  free  coloured  popu- 
lation of  the  United  States,  has  been  variously  estimated  at  from 
five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty  to  seven  thousand.     Sup- 
pose the  latter  be  the  true  increase;  to  remove  these  will  require 
an  annual  appropriation  of  one  hundred  and  forty  thousand  dol- 
lars.     But  for  several  years  to  come,  one-third  of  that  amount 
will  be  more  than  could  be  judiciously  used,  and  by  its  applica- 
tion in  thirty  years,   the  total  free  black  population  will  be  re- 
moved.    Ought  such  a  people  as  this  to  hesitate  in  bestowing 
this  sum,  on  a  work  of  such  a  magnitude? — not  more  than  one- 
fifth  of  the  amount  now  actually  employed  by  individuals  im- 
pelled by  the  most  avaricious  purposes  in  transporting  into  per- 
petual slavery  the  inhabitants  of  ill-fated  Africa.  " 

The  example  exhibited  by  the  Ladies  of  Richmond,  and  to  which  allusion 
is  made  in  the  subsequent  extract,  is  indeed  a  cheering1  one,  and  we  trust 
will  excite  benevolent  females  throughout  our  whole  country  to  unite  their 
hands  and  hearts  in  aid  of  a  work  which  lays  most  urgent  claim  to  support 


1828.]  Colonization  Society  of  Virginia,  31 J 

from  those   in  whose  bosoms  dwell  the  kindest  and   the  best  of  senti- 
ments. 

"The  Managers  cannot  pass  unnoticed  an  event  of  the  past 
year,  and  which  they  deem  a  most  propitious  omen  to  the  future 
hopes  and  prospects  of  the  Society.  They  allude  to  the  forma- 
tion of  Female  Societies  for  contributing  to  this  object.  From 
the  efforts  of  our  fair  countrywomen  we  anticipate  the  happiest 
effects.  In  the  works  of  kindness  and  of  charity,  their  appeals 
are  never  made  in  vain.  More  earnest  and  more  constant  than 
men;  the  influence  of  their  sincerity  and  solicitation,  of  their 
opinions  and  their  advice,  will  be  felt  and  seen  in  every  circle. 
Of  the  contribution  of  this  to  the  Parent  Society  in  this  year, 
one  hundred  and  seventy  dollars  has  been  received  from  the 
Richmond  and  Manchester  Female  Society." 

After  mentioning  some  reasons  for  reorganizing-  the  Society  on  the  plan 
of  a  State  Society,  the  Managers  conclude: 

"The  deep  interest  which  Virginia  has  in  the  success  of  this 
Society,  and  the  favourable  expression  of  her  opinions  hereto- 
fore on  the  subject;  induce  the  Managers  to  recommend  that  an 
application  should  be  made  to  the  present  General  Assembly  for 
further  aid.  Nor  can  the  Managers  doubt  of  the  success  of  this 
application,  when  the  objects  and  views  of  the  Society  are  pro- 
perly understood;  and  when  it  is  recollected,  that  the  laws  of 
Virginia  forbid  emancipation,  but  upon  condition  that  the  eman- 
cipated slave  shall  remove,  except  in  rare  cases.  Is  it  not  just 
then,  that  the  means  of  removal  should  be  facilitated  and  afforded? 
To  Virginia  an  appeal  of  justice  has  never  been  made  in  vain;  and 
when  sustained  by  philanthropy,  humanity  and  policy,  we  are 
not  permitted  to  doubt  of  success." 

Nothing  can  be  more  auspicious,  than  the  establishment  of  such  a  Socie 
ty,  in  a  state  which  is  so  deeply  interested  in  our  enterprise;  which  has  the 
honour  of  being  the  first  to  give  to  it  the  sanction  of  its  influence;  and  which 
has  at  all  times  been  most  prompt  to  suggest,  and  firm  to  maintain  plans, 
founded  upon  the  true  principles  of  national  utility,  honour  and  duty. 


312        Report  of  the  Vermont  Colonization  Society,      [Dec. 
OF  THE  VERMONT  COLONIZATION  SOCIETY. 

The  proceedings  of  this  important  and  energetic  Society,  continue  to  be 
quite  characteristic  of  the  active  and  enterprising  people  of  Vermont. — 
They  give  us  a  few  words,  quite  to  the  purpose,  and  a  good  deal 
of  money.  They  were  among  the  earliest  friends  of  our  cause,  and 
through  evil  report  and  good  report,  they  have  manifested  toward  it  the 
same  increasing,  unwearied,  unwavering  attachment.  While  they,  in  so 
substantial  a  manner,  honour  the  purity  of  our  motives,  and  the  rectitude  of 
our  views  and  proceedings,  it  is  only  the  payment  of  an  honest  debt,  that 
we  should  honour  their  zeal  and  fidelity.  In  the  beginning  of  their  Ninth 
Report,  they  pay  a  fervent  and  merited  tribute  to  the  memory  of  Mr.  Ash- 
mun;  a  tribute  which  not  only  manifests  their  readiness  to  sympathize  with 
the  bereaved,  and  to  render  to  all  the  meed  of  their  merits;  but  adds  to  the 
proof  of  their  zeal  in  our  cause,  if  indeed  any  further  proof  were  needed; 
and  evinces  an  enlightened  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  events  and  pro- 
ceedings relative  to  our  Society  and  Colony,  and  an  inquisitive  scrutiny  in- 
to our  concerns  which  we  are  highly  gratified  to  witness.  This  is  just 
what  we  ask,  and  what  we  desire :  while  we  consider  neglect  and  apathy 
as  our  deadliest  enemies.  Just  so  far  as  keen  and  candid  inquiry  can  be 
excited,  the  friends  of  man,  to  an  individual,  will  be  found  the  friends  and 
advocates  and  supporters  of  our  cause  and  Society.  On  this  point  our  con- 
fidence amounts  very  nearly  to  certainty. 

The  Report  proceeds  to  give  a  brief  and  accurate  view  of  the  Colony, 
and  of  the  very  promising  prospects  of  the  General  Society  It  mentions 
the  formation  of  two  new  Societies,  one  at  Manchester,  and  the  other  at 
Bennington,  of  which  Chief  Justice  Skinner  and  Hon.  Jonas  Galusha  are 
the  Presidents,  both  of  whom  were  Governors  of  the  State.  It  alludes  to 
the  noble  bequest,  and  the  efficient  testimony  in  our  favour,  of  the  late  Mr. 
Burr;  and  when  speaking  of  the  conditional  subscription  of  Gerrit  Smith, 
Esq.  it  asks,  with  an  obvious  and  well  grounded  confidence  in  the  genero- 
sity of  their  fellow  citizens,  "if  Vermont  cannot  furnish  a  few  instances  of 
like  liberality."  We  trust  the  appeal  will  not  be  fruitless:  and  that  those 
who  have  been'  found  so  faithful  in  little,  in  the  contribution  of  smaller 
sums,  will,  agreeably  to  Scripture,  be  found  faithful  in  much. 

We  cannot  dismiss  this  brief,  but  interesting  report,  without  letting  it 
speak  for  itself. 

"It  is  peculiarly  gratifying  to  be  able  to  state,  that  the  Socie- 
ty's application  to  Congress  was  favorably  received  in  the  House 
of  Representatives,  and  was,  by  a  committee  of  that  honorable 
body,  recommended  to  the  early  attention  of  Congress  at  the  ap- 


1828.]    Report  of  the  Vermont  Colonization  Society.         3  IS 

proaching  session.  We  regret  to  say*  that  in  the  Senate  it  was 
otherwise.  But  at  this  we  are  neither  surprised  nor  discourag- 
ed. Opposition  provokes  discussion;  and  by  the  collision  of  such 
minds  as  that  of  Mr.  Tazewell,  and  such  others  as  will  meet 
him  in  the  field  of  argument,  truth  will  be  elicited,  and  will  ul- 
timately triumph.  Should  the  desired  aid  be  long  withheld, 
which  we  do  not  believe  will  be  the  case,  the  state  legislatures  are 
able,  and  we  trust  many  of  them  will  be  found  willing,  to  Sup- 
ply the  deficiency.  As  yet,  however,  the  Society  must  chiefly 
depend  for  ability  to  proceed  in  the  great  work  it  has  undertaken, 
on  the  liberality  of  its  auxiliaries,  and  the  individual  donations 
of  the  benevolent.  And  we  are  concerned  to  state,  that  the 
wants  of  the  Society  were  never  greater  than  now.  The  expe- 
ditions of  last  year  made  great  drafts  on  the  treasury,  and  the 
calls  of  the  agent  at  Washington  for  pecuniary  aid,  are  earnest 
and  importunate.  Lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  the  legacy  of 
Mr.  Burr  will  supply  the  immediate  wants  of  the  Society,  it 
should  be  understood  that  this  legacy  will  not  be  placed  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Society  for  one  or  two  years,  and  perhaps  a  lon- 
ger term.  And  we  will  not  for  a  moment  suppose,  that  the  li- 
berality of  our  lamented  friend  will  be  so  misimproved,  as  to  in- 
duce one  friend  of  the  cause  to  withhold  or  diminish  his  aid.— 
We  will  rather  believe  it  will  stimulate  all  to  persevere  in  this 
work  of  love,  and  induce  many  to  come  forward  with  enlarged 
benefactions. 

"An  expedition  should  without  fail  be  sent  out  the  present 
autumn.  But  the  means,  we  fear,  are  yet  to  be  provided. — 
Many  emancipated  slaves  and  free  coloured  people,  are  anxious- 
ly waiting  to  be  gone.  The  Colony,  no  doubt,  is  waiting  to  re- 
ceive them.  The  friends  of  humanity  are  waiting  to  see,  in  the 
rapid  increase  of  the  population,  the  improvement,  and  the  re- 
sources of  the  Colony,  the  rising  dawn  of  African  glory,  the  abo- 
lition of  the  slave-trade,  and  the  extension  of  freedom  and  re- 
ligion over  vast  regions  of  darkness  and  death. 

"Africa,  meanwhile,  bleeding,  and  writhing  in  agony,  stretch- 
es forth  her  hands,  and  implores  our  immediate  and  vigorous  ef- 
forts to  drive  from  her  coasts  those  infamous  wretches,  who  are 
annually  dragging  hundreds  of  thousands  of  her  children  to  en* 

counter  the  horrors  of  the  middle  passage,  in  which,  a!  large 
40 


314  To  Christian  Ladies*  [Dec. 

share  of  them  are  barbarously  murdered,   while  those  who  sur- 
vive are  doomed  to  perpetual  bondage. 

"Who,  that  has  humanity  in  his  bosom,  will  not  be  impatient 
to  engage  with  all  the  means  he  can  command  in  an  enterprise,  de- 
sighed  to  shut  out  the  pirate  from  the  land  where  cruelty  has  so 
long  revelled  and  rioted  on  the  blood  of  its  slaughtered  victims, 
and  to  proclaim  freedom,  and  peace,  and  social  joy,  and  the 
opened  gate  of  eternal  glory,  to  the  sons  and  daughters  of  abused 
Africa. 

"The  report  of  the  Treasurer,  annexed  to  this,  will  show 
what  has  been  received  in  the  course  of  the  past  year.* 

•"■To  the  generous  sympathies  of  our  countrymen,  especially 
those  of  our  beloved  commonwealth,  and  to  the  patronage  of 
Heaven,  we  commend  the  sacred  cause  in  which  we  have  unit- 
edly embarked.  May  its  friends  increase,  and  multiply  in  num- 
bers, and  resources,  and  benevolence,  till  slavery  and  all  its  at- 
tendant evils,  shall  be  banished,  not  from  this  nation  only,  but 
from  every  nation  under  heaven. " 

To  C\wistia\\  li&&ifcs. 

In  presenting  to  the  Ladies  of  our  country,  a  few  thoughts 
"which  may  serve  to  excite  and  bring  more  generally  into  active 
operation  in  behalf  of  our  Institution,  those  benevolent  senti- 
ments, which  in  their  bosoms  are  ever  so  ready  to  answer  to  the 
calls  of  charity,  we  rejoice  in  the  evidences  already  manifest 
that  our  attempt  is  not  hopeless — in  the  knowledge  that  not  a 
few  females  eminent  for  whatever  adorns  their  sex,  are  now 
practically  evincing  their  conviction,  that  this  Institution  is 
based  upon  the  purest  principles  and  effecting  the  noblest  ob- 
jects. 

Some  of  these,  alas!  with  whom  it  has  been  our  privilege  to  be 
acquainted,  have  finished  their  earthly  service,  and  while  many 
are  tasting  the  fruits  of  their  beneficence,  are  themselves  enjoy- 
ing its  rewards  amid  the  brighter  light  and  more  exalted  minis* 

*  The  amount  is  #916"  31, 


1828.  j  To  Christian  Ladies.  31.5 

trations  of  the  heavenly  world.  Others,  their  sisters,  in  the  spi* 
rit  of  Him,  who  came  to  redeem  the  world  and  preach  a  better 
liberty  than  poets  ever  sung,  we  could  name;  but  must  not  of- 
fend the  modesty  which  prefers  the  approbation  of  conscience 
and  of  God  to  the  loudest  acclamations  of  human  applause.  But 
we  may  be  allowed  to  mention  the  encouragement  which  we  de- 
rive from  the  honourable  example  exhibited  by  the  Ladies  of 
Richmond,  and  which  (if  we  mistake  not)  has  already  kindled 
a  generous  spirit  of  emulation  elsewhere;  an  example  which  we 
venture  to  predict  will  exert  an  influence  until  our  nation  is  de- 
livered from  its  most  degraded  and  unfortunate  population,  and 
Africa  intellectually  and  morally  regenerated. 

Few  of  our  enlightened  countrywomen,  we  fear,  are  aware  to 
what  extent,  and  with  what  moral  power  their  influence  may  be 
exerted.  Our  own  confidence  in  it  is  well  nigh  unbounded. — 
This,  we  are  convinced,  when  generally  active,  and  judiciously 
directed,  will  effect  more  for  the  interests  of  humanity,  and  the 
pious  charities  of  the  age,  than  the  ablest  arguments  and  the 
most  commanding  eloquence.  It  is  an  influence  which  like  the 
light  of  Heaven  is  silent,  all -pervading,  and  irresistible.  It 
changes  public  sentiment  as  by  miracle,  and  opposition,  if  it  can 
live,  finds  its  energies  paralyzed  in  its  presence.  And  who 
that  loves  either  God  orman,  will  not  rejoice  that  the  Females 
of  our  own  land,  are  bringing  their  united  influence  to  advance 
those  objects  which  unless  virtue  and  religion  are  shadows,  de- 
mand the  best  thoughts  and  the  highest  efforts  of  our  nature. 

We  have  no  apprehension  that  Ladies  will  attempt  too  much 
for  the  various  enterprises  of  Christian  benevolence.  In  asso- 
ciating themselves  to  promote  these  enterprises,  they  but  hon- 
ourably fulfil  their  appropriate  duties,  and  do  not  in  the  least 
transcend  the  limits  which  reason  and  scripture  have  prescribed 
for  their  efforts.  If  it  is  recorded  in  the  sacred  volume  of  one 
female  disciple,  that  she  was  ufull  of  good  works  and  alms-deeds 
which  she  did,"  and  of  others,  that  they  were  "succourers  of 
many,"  and  "helpers"  of  the  Apostles'  labours,  their  sisters  of 
the  present  age  surely  need  not  be  ashamed  to  evince  a  spirit  of 
kindred  charity,  to  feel  their  hearts  engaged,  and  have  their 
hands  employed  in  similar  holy  ministrations. 

And  can  any  female  heart,  especially  any  one  which  has  been 


316  To  Christian  Ladies,  [Dec. 

warmed  by  the  heavenly  spirit  of  the  gospel,  remain  indifferent 
to  the  claims  which  our  infant  Colony,  and  the  people  whom  it 
would  bless,  present  for  immediate,  united,  and  persevering  ex- 
ertions? Consider  the  magnitude  of  the  object.  We  would 
transfer  thousands,  within  our  own  borders,  from  a  state  of  poli- 
tical, intellectual,  and  moral  degradation,  to  a  country  which 
they  may  call  their  own;  where  they  must  feel  the  excitements 
of  the  noblest  motives,  occupy  stations,  and  discharge  duties  to 
which  there  are  none  superior.  We  would  instruct  the  count- 
less tribes  of  a  long  barbarous  and  wretched  continent,  in  the 
arts  which  civilize  and  the  religion  which  saves  our  race.  We 
would  suppress  the  slave-trade;  that  evil  which  the  combined 
powers  of  Christendom,  after  years  of  effort,  have  scarce  been 
able  to  check,  and  which  taken  in  the  whole  length  and  breadth 
of  it,  is  generally  admitted  to  have  no  parallel  in  the  annals  of 
human  suffering  or  crime.  And  in  doing  this  we  bless  our  own 
country.  Patriotism  demands  the  work,  no  less  than  Religion. 
So  true  is  it  that  our  scheme  "is  a  circle  of  Philanthropy,  every 
segment  of  which  tells  and  testifies  to  the  beneficence  of  the 
whole." 

But  we  mistake,  or  there  have  been  peculiarities  in  the  mise- 
ries of  the  African  race,  for  two  centuries,  which  appeal  irresis- 
tibly to  the  sympathies  of  the  female  mind.  How  have  the  sa- 
cred ties  of  nature  been  ruthlessly  sundered,  the  peaceful  village 
and  the  quiet  home  violated  by  those  who  would  tear  children 
from  their  parents,  and  bind  even  a  mother's  limbs  in  fetters  of 
iron!  The  mere  recital,  of  what  is  now  almost  daily  occurring 
on  the  shores  of  Africa,  would  be  sufficient  to  pierce  every  fe- 
male heart  with  sorrow,  and  unite  in  a  holy  sisterhood  of  chari- 
ty all  the  Ladies  of  our  country.  Of  such  a  union,  we  see,  we 
think,  the  commencement,  and  may  predict  that  the  time  so 
much  desired  by  a  distinguished  female  correspondent  will  soon 
arrive,  "when  the  sufferings  and  hopes  of  Africa,  shall  mingle 
with  the  morning  and  evening  sacrifices  in  every  household." 

And  let  none  of  our  female  friends  forget,  "that  to  do  good 
and  communicate"  is  an  injunction  of  Scripture,  and  that  "with 
such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  Vain  are  all  professions 
of  piety,  if  Charity  to  mankind  is  a  stranger  to  our  souls.  "He 
that  loveth  not  his  Brother,   whose  wants  and  sufferings  are  ob- 


1828.]  The  great  Object  advanced,  $c.  SIT 

jects  of  his  daily  perception,  how  can  he  love  the  invisible  God?" 
0  that  we  may  all  partake  more  of  his  spirit  "who  went  about 
doing  good,"  and  whose  aphorism  should  be  engraven  upon  eve- 
ry heart,  uIt  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  She  who 
feels  and  does  most  for  others,  is  best  preparing  herself  for  the 
society  of  Angels,  who  themselves  deem  it  no  dishonour,  but 
their  glory,  to  go  forth  and  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation. 

The  gxeat  Object  Advanced,. 

We  have  already  announced  the  following  individuals  as  sub- 
scribers on  the  plan  of  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq. — that  is,  as  agreeing 
to  give,  each,  $100  a  year  to  the  Society  for  ten  years. 

Gerrit  Smith,  Peterboro,  New  York, 

Jasper  Corning,  Charleston.,  South  Carolina. 

Theodore  Frelinghuysen,  Newark,  New  Jersey. 

John  T.  Norton,  Albany,  New  York. 

E.  F.  Backus,  New  Haven,  Connecticut. 

A  Gentleman  in  Mississippi. 
We  have  now  the  pleasure  to  add  to  this  list 

Matthew  Carey,   Philadelphia.       (See  Mr.  Carey's  letter 
in  our  last.) 

Josiah  Bissel,  Rochester,  New  York. 

William  Crane,  Richmond,  Virginia. 

Fleming  James,  ditto. 

Robert  Ralston,  Philadelphia. 

Elliot  Cresson,        ditto. 

Animal  fleeting  of  the  Society, 

This  will  be  held  on  the  17th  of  January.     Auxiliaries  are  in 
vited  to  send  Delegates  to  this  meeting. 

In  an  acknowledgment  of  receipts  for  the  American  Coloni- 
zation Society  in  the  Utica  Recorder,  is  the  following — 

"From  the  estate  of  Cyrene  Isaacs,  late  of  Genoa,  Cayuga 


318  African  Golonization.  [Dec. 

co.  deceased,  'who  was  born  a  slave,  purchased  her  freedom, 
and  sustained  a  christian  character;'  by  William  Bradley,  one 
of  the  executors,  50  dollars. 


I^^e&iiion  for  liiberia. 

Arrangements  have  been  made  by  the  Board  of  Managers  to 
send  a  vessel  from  Norfolk  to  Liberia,  with  from  150  to  200 
emigrants,  during  the  course  of  next  month. 

lAbfcYia  Coffee. 

We  have  observed  with  great  pleasure  the  following  advertise 
ment  in  a  Richmond  Paper. 

"LIBERIA  COFFEE.— 6000  lbs.  Liberia  Coffee,  shipped  by 
Lott  Carey,  for  sale  by  OTIS,  DUNLOP  &  CO." 

•Mxican  Colonization, 

BY  J.  G.  C.  BRAINARD. 

All  sights  are  fair  to  the  recover'd  blind — 

All  sounds  are  music  to  the  deaf  restor'd — 
The  lame,  made  whole,  leaps  like  the  sporting  hind; 

And  the  sad,  bow'ddown  sinner,  with  his  load 
Of  shame  and  sorrow,  when  he  cuts  the  cord, 

And  drops  the  pack  it  bound,  is  free  again 
In  the  light  yoke  and  burden  of  his  Lord. 

Thus,  with  the  birthright  of  his  fellow  man, 

Sees,  hears  and  feels  at  once  the  righted  African. 

'Tis  somewhat  like  the  burst  from  death  to  life; 

from  the  grave's  cerements  to  the  robes  of  Heaven; 
From  sin's  dominion,  and  from  passion's  strife, 

To  the  pure  freedom  of  a  soul  forgiven ! 

When  all  the  bonds  of  death  and  hell  are  riven, 
Vnd  mortals  put  on  immortality: 

When  fear,  and  care,  and  grief  away  are  driven, 
And  Mercy's  hand  has  turn'd  the  golden  key, 
And  Mercy's  voice  has  said,  ^Rejoice — thy  soul  is  free!" 


1828.]  Sonnet. — Contributions.  819 

FnOM  THE  EPISCOPAL  WATCHMAN. 

Sonnet. — TSuYial  of  AsYvmun. 

"What  desolate  mourner  rushes  to  the  bier, 

And  stays  the  solemn  rites  of  that  sad  hour"* 
©  God,  sustain  her  as  she  draweth  near, 

Support  her  in  the  struggles  that  o'erpower! 

It  is  an  aged  mother  that  bows  down 
Beside  the  coffined  corpse,  amid  the  crowd, — 

It  is  the  ashes  of  her  noble  son,— 
His  living-  face  unseen  for  many  a  year,— - 
Well  may  she  lift  her  voice  and  weep  aloud! 

The  world  cannot  console  her.     God  alone 
Hath  power  to  speak  to  such  a  sorrowing'  one, 

And  take  her  dreadful  load  of  grief  away. 

To  man  it  is  not  given,  for  who  can  say, 
In  his  own  single  strength,  "Thy  will  be  done!" 


C  ontYibutious . 

To  the  Am.  Col.  Society,  from  1st  to  ZSd  of  December,    1828. 

Miss  Blackburn,  of  Charlestown,  Va.  who  has  often  contributed  to  this  fund/ 

per  William  Brown,  Esq $10 

Gerrit  Smith,   Esq.  of  Peterboro,   N.  Y.  his  second  annual  sub- 
scription,     • 100 

Jasper  Corning,  Esq.  of  Charleston,  S .  C .  his  first  payment  on  the 

plan  of  Gerrit  Smith,  Esq 100 

Hon.  Bushrod  Washington,  of  Mount  Vernon,  his  annual  sub'n.  .  100 

Arthur  Shaaff,  Esq ,  of  Millidgeville,  Georgia, 10 

James  D  wight,  Esq.  of  Petersburg",   Virginia,   5 

Colonization  Society  of  Virginia,  perBenj.  Brand,  Esq.  Tr.  ...  *600 
Collection  in  Presbyterian  Church,  Cortland  Village,  after  a  ser- 
mon by  Rev.  Lube  Lym, 15  37 

Wilmington  (D.)  Union  Col.  Society,  per  Allan  Thompson,  Tr.  90  3S 
Collection  in  the  Associate  Reformed  Church,  Newburgh,  New 

York,  per  D.  Farrington, 15  75 

Amount  carried  forward,  $1046  45 

*  Of  this  sum,  the  Female  Colonization  Society  of  Richmond  and  Man- 
chester, contributed  by  Miss  J.  R.  Shedden,  to  make  Rev.  R.  C.  Moore, 
Bishop  of  Virginia,  a  life  member,  $30;  and  by  Miss  Amelia  Coleman, 
Treasurer  of  said  Society,  to  assist  in  defraying  expenses  of  emigrants  froffe 
Richmond  to  Liberia,  $139  75. 


320  Contributions,  fBec. 

Amount  brought  forward,         $1046  45 
Chambersburg  Colonization   Society,   Pa.  its  first  annual  contri- 
bution, per  B.  A.  Fahnestock,  Esq.  Treasurer,   37 

New  Jersey  Col.  Soc.  per  R.  Voorhecs,  Esq.  Treasurer,   150 

Hon.   Theo.  Frelinghuysen,  N.  J.  from  following-  sources,  viz: 

Mr.  F.  Thomas,  of  Newark,   $10 

Female  Juvenile  Sewing-  Society,  of  ditto,   16  40 

Miss  Jane  A.  Philips,  of  Philadelphia, 5 

Ladies  of  2nd  Church,  Newark,  20 

51  40 

Collection  4th  July  last  at  Salem,  Indiana,  paid  by  Dr.  B.  Brad- 

ly ,  by  the  hands  of  Hon.  Mr.  Hendricks,  6  50 

Collections  by  Auxiliary  Society  of  Alexandria,  to  aid  an  expedi- 
tion this  fall,  per  Charles  Page,  Esq.  Treasurer, 

Collection  in  St.  Paul's  Church,   $12  57 

Mrs.  Sarah  Ladd,   1 

Collection  in  1st  Presbyterian  Church,       9  72 
Do.  2nd         do.  do.  .       6  09 

Hugh  Charles  Smith,   1 

John   Emerson,   1 

Frederick  Jacob  Hirters,   2 

William  Gregory,   5 

H.  C.  Smith,  through  others, 5 

H.  C.  Smith,   2 

Jane  Muir,   1 

N.  R.  Fitzhugh, 5 

Robert  Jameison,   15 

Mr  Walton, 5 

Mr.  Harmon, 1 

Mr.  Cheres, 2 

74  38 

Rev.  Mr.  Blodget,  of  Dawfuskie  Island,   South  Carolina,  50 

Auxiliary  Society,  Berkely  Co.  Va.  per  P.  O  Pendleton,  Esq     .         30 
Washington  Auxiliary  Society,  Penn.  per  Hon.  J.  Lawrence,   . .         50 

Jacob  Wagener,  Esq.  of  Easton,  Maryland, 10 

Collection  at  Richmond,  Massachusetts,  per  Rev.  E.  W  Dwight,  8 

Collection  at  Talmadge,  Portage  co.  (O.)  per  Hon.  E.  Whittlesey         16 
Collection  at  Franklin,         do-  per  ditto,   ....  5 

Collection  in  Congregation  of  Ludlowvilly,  New  Jersey, 10 

Collected  on  the  4th  of  July,  in  the  Pres.  Ch.  Charlottesville,  per 

O.  B.  Carr,  20 

Auxiliary  Col.  Society  of  New  Hampshire,   40 

Right  Rev.  Bishop  Croes,  of  New  Jersey,  3 

$1609  73 


THft 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY 


AND 


COLONIAL  J0TO1TAL. 


Vol.  IT.       JANUARY,  1829.  No.  11. 


PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 

The  same  causes  which  have  hindered  the  civilization,  and 
darkened  the  history  of  Africa,  continue  also  to  render  very  im- 
perfect its  civil  and  physical  geography.  In  view  of  this  imper^ 
fection,  however,  it  is  peculiarly  gratifying  to  know,  that  it  will 
soon  be  removed;  not  by  the  theories  of  ingenious  or  presuming 
projectors,  but  by  the  eyes  and  energies  of  enterprising  and  re- 
solute observers.  With  regard  to  our  knowledge  of  the  present 
state  of  Africa,  and  what  is  more,  with  regard  to  extending 
a  saving  and  a  civilizing  influence  over  it,  nil  est  desperandum9 
may  now  be  placed  high  on  our  standard.  The  laws  and  pow*> 
ers  of  the  moral  world  are  assuming  an  aspect  and  an  energy, 
that  will  throw  far  in  the  shade  the  discoveries  of  Watt  and  of 
Newton;  and  human  skill  and  enterprise  are  fast  hastening  to 
the  extreme  limits  of  possibility. 

Africa  is  a  vast  peninsula,  about  5,000  miles  in  length,  and 
4,500  in  breadth;  and  its  area  is  computed  at  13,430,000  square 
miles.  Its  shores  are  remarkable  throughout  for  their  uniformi- 
ty of  outline,  for  the  want  of  gulfs,  bays,  harbours  and  naviga- 
ble rivers,  and  for  the  smallness  and  fewness  of  the  islands  in 

its  vicinity .      The  gulf  of  Guinea  on  the  south,  and  that  of  Si 
41 


SSfi  Africa.  £Jaii< 

dra  in  the  north,  the  two  principal  indentures  made  by  the  sea, 
a*e  both  of  them  dangerous  to  navigators,  and  besides  are  sepa- 
rated by  a  distance  of  1,800  miles.  All  this,  while  it  renders 
access  difficult,  is  also  indicative  of  a  level  country.  In  gener- 
al the  indication  proves  to  be  correct.  The  rays  of  a  vertical 
sun  are  not  often  scattered  by  the  sloping  sides  of  hill  or  moun- 
tain, or  tempered  by  cool  and  springy  valleys  beneath;  and  the 
winds,  burning  with  heat,  or  bearing  and  scattering  vast  vo- 
lumes of  sand  or  rain,  drive  over  the  continent  almost  without 
obstruction. 

In  its  geofogical  character,  Africa  is  chiefly  of  secondary  and 
alluvial  formation,  and  thus  presents  a  correspondence  in  this 
respect  with  the  general  evenness  of  its  surface:  there  being  no 
reservoirs  sufficiently  capacious  for  the  ruins  of  these  later  for- 
mations, unless  they  had  been  swept  from  the  continent  into  the 
ocean.  The  comparatively  flat  body  of  primitive  rock  remained 
clad  with  the  newer  coats  of  our  globe,  except  where  at  distant 
intervals  its  protuberant  parts  were  exposed  to  the  rush  of  the 
mighty  waters,  which  before  they  were  confined  to  their  present 
boundaries,  and  shut  up  in  the  dark  caverns  of  the  earthy  mo- 
delled and  polished  its  surface,  and  prepared  it  to  be  inhabited. 
It  is  certainly  determined,  however,  that  there  is  at  least  one 
basin  in  the  centre  of  Africa,  from  which  there  is  no  outlet  to 
the  ocean.  But  even  this  is  so  remarkable  for  its  shallowness, 
that  the  waters  on  its  shores  advance  and  retire  to  great  distan- 
ces  with  the  change  of  seasons,  and  nothing  apparently  but  the 
influx  of  great  rivers  prevents  it  from  being  dried  up  entirely. 
It  is  perhaps  not  improbable  that  there  are  other  inland  seas  of 
a  similar  character.  The  accounts  of  the  natives,  though  they 
are  in  the  main  exceedingly  contradictory,  and  little  to  be  trustr 
ed,  agree  in  representing  various  and  extensive  marshes  in  the 
interior  of  Africa. 

The  isthmus  of  Suez  is  marked  by  several  singularities.  The 
breadth  of  the  isthmus  in  a  strait  line  is  seventy  miles.  Its  sur- 
face generally  declines  from  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea  to  those 
of  the  Mediterranean.  The  level  of  the  Mediterranean  is  thir- 
ty feet  lower  than  that  of  the  gulf  of  Suez,  Besides  this  lead- 
ing inclination  of  the  surface  there  is  a  particular  one  in  the 
middle  of  the  isthmus.     The  deep  basin  called  the  Bitter  Lakes, 


1829.]  Africa*  &U 

is  more  than  fifty  feet  lower  than  the  level  of  the  Red  Sea,  the 
waters  of  which  would  enter  and  fill  it,  if  they  were  not  pre- 
vented by  a  little  sandy  isthmus  about  three  feet  higher  than 
the  level  of  the  sea.  The  ancient  Egyptians,  being  ignorant  of 
the  principles  of  hydraulics,  it  is  stated,  were  not  without  ap- 
prehension, that  the  Arabian  gulf  would  burst  its  low  and  feeble 
boundaries,  and  by  some  unknown,  but  dreadful  power,  would 
overwhelm  that  part  of  their  country  which  lies  below  the  level 
of  its  surface.  But  as  the  descent  to  the  Mediterranean  is  iu 
the  main  \ery  gradual,  being  only  about  six  inches  in  a  mile,  it 
is  evident  that  the  action  of  the  water  could  not  be  very  violent, 
even  if  it  proceeded  in  a  body;  and  it  seems  by  no  means  a  vi- 
sionary opinion,  that  an  ample  communication,  proceeding  by  a 
very  gentle  current,  will  yet  be  made  between  the  two  seas, 
and  thus  a  direct  passage  will  be  obtained  for  ships,  from  the 
Mediterranean  to  the  Indian  Ocean.  All  that  appears  to  be 
wanting  to  accomplish  this  grand  result,  is  a  Clinton  at  the 
head  of  a  free,  enlightened  and  enterprising  community. 

There  is  a  more  general  characteristic  of  Africa,  that  is  well 
Worthy  of  our  attention.  It  is  found,  that  in  some  parts  where 
both  the  soil  and  the  water  at  the  surface  are  impregnated  with 
salt,  fresh  water  springs  up  from  beneath.  A  late  English  tra- 
veller remarks,  "As  far  as  I  can  learn,  no  salt  formations  exist 
within  the  boundaries  of  the  rains."  In  places  where  they  do 
exist,  "there  are  many  fine  fresh  springs  issuing  from  the  soil, 
and  none  of  the  wells  are  brakish;  when  the  water,  however, 
remains  sometime  stagnant,  it  gets  impregnated  with  saline  mat- 
ter." He  suggests,  that  in  producing  this  salt  on  the  surface, 
"the  air  has  a  powerful  effect,  and  is  a  principal  agent:"  as  if 
the  air  itself  might  be  impregnated  with  salt,  or  had  the  power 
of  manufacturing  it!  The  true  explanation  of  this  extraordina- 
ry phenomenon,  is  notwithstanding  exceedingly  obvious  and 
simple.  It  is  found,  as  has  been  remarked,  only  where  rains, 
seldom  or  never  occur.  The  water  then  which  rises  from 
iprings,  and  which  is  evaporated  from  the  surface  of  the  ground, 
must  come  from  a  distance,  from  a  rainy  country;  and  its  course 
in  the  salt  districts  must  be  always  upward,  toward  the  surface 
of  the  earth.  Of  course,  even  if  there  were  salt  beneath  the  sur- 
face, it  would  gradually  be  brought  upward  to  the  surface,  by 


324  Africa.  [Ja». 

the  continual  rising  of  the  water;  and  from  the  surface  evapora- 
tion alone  could  never  remove  it.  We  see  then  in  the  actual 
state  of  things,  a  constant  tendency  to  the  remarkable  result  in 
question. 

The  extensive  deserts  of  Africa  present  all  the  indications  of 
having  once  been  the  level  bed  of  the  ocean.  Not  only  do  salt 
plains,  and  the  reliques  of  sea  animals  frequently  occur,  but  trees 
are  often  found  in  a  petrified  state.  It  is  altogether  unphiloso- 
phical  to  suppose  for  a  moment,  that  such  results  could  be  pro- 
duced, except  by  miraculous  power,  or  the  waters  of  the  sea.— 
To  believe  this,  however,  requires  no  degree  of  credulity,  since 
it  is  a  well  ascertained  geological  fact,  that  the  highest  seconda- 
ry mountains  present  the  same  indisputable  proof,  that  the  wa- 
ters of  our  globe  formerly  enveloped  them.  Scripture  itself 
adds  its  testimony;  that  such  was  the  fact,  before  "the  waters 
were  gathered  together." 

The  most  noted  mountain  range  in  Africa,  is  the  Jibbel  Ku- 
mri,  or  Mountains  of  the  Moon.      It  lies  on  the  south  of  Abys- 
sinia,  and  stretches  oft*  westward  through  the  centre  of  Africa. 
Its  extent  and  magnitude  arc  known  very  imperfectly;  though 
it  seems  at  least  altogether  probable,  from  its  central  position, 
that  it  surpasses  in  both  these  respects  all  the  other  ranges  oi 
the  continent.      The  actual  view  which  Major  Denham  had,  of 
stupendous  mountains  to  the  south  of  Mandara,  in  the  heart  of 
Africa,   as  well  as  the  coldness  of  the  climate  in  that  region, 
goes  very  far  to  confirm  this  opinion.     From  Mandara  also  a 
range  is  represented  by  the  same  traveller,  as  extending  ver\ 
far  to  the  southward.     He  was  told  by  a  i 'very  intelligent"  Af- 
rican, who  had  travelled  south  of  Mandara,  that  the  inhabitants 
there   "were  unanimous  in  declaring  these  mountains  tp  extend 
southward  for  two  months'  journey;  and  in  describing  them  he 
called  them  mountains  large,  large,  moon  mountains."     To  the 
west  of  Mandara  are  the  Kong  mountains,  which  range  east  and 
west,  and  are  probably  a  mere  continuation  of  the  Abyssinian 
Mountains  of  the  Moon.     Mount  Atlls,  which  lines  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  north  coast,   is  a  series  of  five  or  six  small  chains, 
rising  one  behind  another,  and  including  many  table  lands.     It 
is  stated,  however,  that  toward  the  desert  they  increase  in  ele- 
vation and  terminate  in  steep  and  inaccessible  peaks.     It  is  eer- 


1849.]  Africa.  $25 

tain  that  such  is  the  character  of  others  of  the  African  moun- 
tains. But  in  general,  agreeably  to  preceding  remarks,  thej 
appear  to  be  of  calcareous  formation,  built  in  terraces ;  and  their 
rivers,  instead  of  traversing  long  and  deep  valleys,  descend  in 
a  series  of  cataracts.  It  is  supposed,  and  the  supposition  is  cer- 
tainly a  very  plausible  one,  that  the  Atlas  of  Homer  and  Virgil, 
was  the  Peak  of  Teneriffe. 

Of  African  rivers,  the  most  of  the  Nile,  the  Senegal,  the 
Gambia,  and  a  part  of  the  Niger,  are  too  well  known  to  require 
a  description.  It  is  chiefly  the  rivers  of  Central  Africa,  that 
are  not  only  known  very  imperfectly,  but  in  the  various  accounts 
respecting  them,  present  such  a  labyrinth  of  mysteries,  such  a 
series  of  contradictions,  and  such  a  medley  of  absurdities,  that 
it  would  seem  as  if  they  were  possessed  of  no  permanent  charac- 
ter, but  were  changeable  like  the  colours  of  the  cameleon,  and 
unlike  the  cameleon  indicating  no  cause  of  the  diversity.  A 
good  many /acta,  however,  respecting  them,  are  already  estab- 
lished by  competent  observers.  It  is  certain  that  a  fresh  water 
sea  or  lake,  six  or  eight  hundred  miles  in  circuit,  called  Tchad, 
or  otherwise  Chad,  Shad,  Chadee,  Shadee,  Cauga,  Cadee  or 
Caudee,  lies  about  13°  north,  by  15°  east.  Into  this  lake  the  river 
Yeou  or  Yow,  empties  from  the  west,  which  near  its  mouth  is  150 
yards  across,  and  its  probable  source  and  continued  eastern  direc- 
tion, have  been  ascertained  entirely.  From  the  south,  by  seve^ 
ral  channels,  empties  the  Shary,  Shar  or  Sharee,  running  two 
or  three  miles  an  hour,  measuring  only  five  or  six  feet  in  depth, 
and  more  than  six  hundred  yards  across.  Its  general  course, 
though  not  far  ascertained,  continues  to  be  from  the  south. — 
Kano,  which  is  doubtless  the  Ghana  of  the  Arabs,  and  the  Cano 
of  Leo  Africanus,  and  which  is  near  the  centre  of  Houssa,  in- 
stead of  being  situated  on  a  great  river  running  east  or  west, 
lies  between  the  sources  of  the  Yeou,  running  eastward  into  the 
Tchad,  and  the  Quorrama,  which  runs  to  the  westward.  Kano 
is  about  12°  north,  by  2°  east  from  London. 

We  now  pass  from  these  known  premises  to  the  wretched  na- 
tive accounts;  and  of  some  of  them  we  shall  be  able  at  least  to 
discover  the  falsity.  Though  Major  Denham  did  not  go  quite 
round  the  Tchad,  it  was  the  unanimous  testimony  of  those  who 
had  often  done  so,  that  it  has  no  outlet-.     They  agreed,  howev- 


326  Afric*.  fJai. 

er,  that  its  waters  formerly  passed  off  to  the  east,  and  that  the 
dry  bed  of  its  stream  still  remained,  though  'covered  with  large 
trees  and  full  of  pasture.  On  this  account  doubtless  it  is  pro- 
per to  place  no  dependence,  though  the  freshness  of  the  lake 
argues  in  favour  of  an  outlet.  Major  Denham  himself  viewed 
from  the  distant  southern  hills  the  great  basin,  of  which  the  lake 
occupies  the  centre,  and  a  northern  outlet,  if  any  ever  existed, 
appeared  te  him  the  most  probable.  A  venerable  patriarch 
shepherd  on  the  east  shore  of  the  Tchad,  informed  him,  that 
from  Tchad  to  Fittre  was  four  days;  there  was  no  water,  and 
but  two  wells  on  the  road.  ' 'Fittre,  he  said,  was  large,  but 
not  like  the  Tchad.  His  infancy  had  been  passed  on  its  bor- 
ders. He  had  often  heard  the  Fittre  called  the  Darfoor  water, 
and  Shilluk.  A  river  also  came  from  the  south-west  which 
formed  lake  Fittre;  and  this  and  the  Nile  were  one;  he  believed 
this  was  also  the  Shary;  but  he  knew  nothing  to  the  westward  " 
Major  Denham  says,  "There  is  a  prevailing  report  among  the 
Shouaas,  that  from  a  mountain,  south-east  of  Waday,  called 
Tama,  issues  a  stream,  which  flows  near  Darpoor,  (Darfoor,) 
and  forms  the  river  Bahr  el  Abiad;  and  that  this  water  is  the 
lake  Tchad,  which  is  driven  by  the  eddies  and  whirlpools  of  the 
centre  of  the  lake  into  subterranean  passages;  and  after  a  course 
of  many  miles  under  ground,  its  progress  being  arrested  by 
rocks  of  granite,  it  rises  between  two  hills,  and  pursues  its  way 
eastward."  Here  we  have  a  very  intelligible,  and  very  satis- 
factory specimen  of  African  fanciful  philosophy.  But  this  is 
not  all.  Native  accounts  have  agreed,  that  the  river  Gambaroo, 
separated  from  the  Niger  near  Tombuctoo,  and  flowed  eastward 
into  the  lake  Tchad;  whereas  it  has  been  ascertained  with  cer- 
tainty, that  the  Gambaroo  is  merely  a  branch  or  portion  of  the 
Yeou,  which  rises  at  Kano  and  flows  eastward  to  the  Tchad. — 
Here  then  we  have  ample  proof  even  if  we  had  no  other,  that 
the  African  testimony,  with  regard  to  the  identity  of  rivers,  is 
not  at  all  to  be  trusted.  By  a  single  freak  of  the  imagination, 
they  can  make  a  single  river  run  all  over  and  under  the  earth. 
And  they  do  not  hesitate  to  make  them  even  run  up  stream,  as 
the  Niger  was  represented  by  them  to  run  up  the  Quorrama, 
and  down  the  Yeou,  into  the  Tchad,  by  Kano.  Major  Denham 
makes  evident  another  source  of  error.     "An  intelligent  MooY 


1825.]  Africa.  3Q7 

©f  Mesu rata  again  told  me,  this  water,  (the  Yeou,)  was  the  same 
as  the  Nile;  and  when  I  asked  him  how  that  could  be,  when  he 
knew  that  we  had  traced  it  into  the  Tchad,  which  was  allowed 
to  have  no  outlet,  he  replied,  'Yes,  but  it  is  nevertheless  Nile 
water-sweet.'  I  had  before  been  asked  if  the  Nile  was  not  in 
England;  and  subsequently  when  my  knowledge  of  Arabic  was 
somewhat  improved,  I  became  satisfied  that  these  question?  >had 
no  reference  at  all  to  the  Nile  of  Egypt,  but  merely  meant  run- 
ning water,  sweet  waster,  from  its  rarity  highly  esteemed  by  all 
desert  travellers." 

We  will  now  proceed  with  the  native  testimony,  carefully  re- 
jecting it,  however,  when  it  is  plainly  rendered  worthless;  and 
will  pursue  a  course  of  analogical  reasoning,  which  has  hereto- 
fore been  too  little  regarded.  They  unanimously  agree,  that  a 
little  to  the  west  of  Sackatoo,  the  capital  of  the  vast  and  power- 
ful kingdom  of  the  Felatahs,  which  was  visited  by  Captain  Clap- 
perton,  and  which  lies  about  6£°  east,  by  15°  north,  flows  the 
river  Quolla,  Quorra,  Kowara,  Kulla  or  Wola,  which  is  three 
or  four  miles  wide,  and  is  universally  allowed  to  be  the  Niger. 
It  is  certain  that  the  Niger  does  not  pass  north  of  Sackatoo.—- 
The  natives  also  unanimously  agree,  that  the  Quolla  flows  east- 
ward toward  the  Nile;  which  latter  testimony  as  has  been  seen, 
amounts  to  nothing,  but  that  there  is  a  great  river  connected 
with  the  Quolla,  and  having  the  same  name,  in  that  direction^ 
flowing  either  eastward  or  westward.  They  also  agree,  that  a 
branch  flows  from  the  Quolla,  southward  to  the  sea.  Bello, 
sultan  of  the  Felatahs,  a  man  obviously  possessed  of  extensive 
information,  and  of  a  quick  and  powerful  intellect,  informed 
Captain  Clapperton,  in  a  desultory  conversation,  that  the 
Quolla  "entered  the  Sea  at  Fundah.  Two  or  three  years  be- 
fore, the  sea  closed  up  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  its  mouth 
was  then  a  day  or  two  farther  south.  I  will  give  the  king  of 
England,  said  he,  a  place  on  the  coast,  to  build  a  town:  only  I 
wish  a  road  to  be  cut  to  Rakah^  if  vessels  should  not  be  able  to 
navigate  the  river."  He  said  nothing  at  the  time  of  an  arm 
flowing  eastward  from  the  Quolla.  Afterward,  when  it  was 
known,  that  he  had  become  jealous  of  the  designs  of  England  on 
kis  empire,  he  drew  a  map  of  the  river,  which  represented  it  as 
flowing  eastward  to  tha  Nile,  and  having  no  outlet  to  the  aea.— 


328  Africa.  Jan. 

The  mere  fact  of  his  jealousy  throws  distrust  on  his  map,  and 
fixes  our  confidence  on  the  unbiassed  testimony  which  he  had 
given  before.  By  a  mere  glance  at  the  gulf  of  Guinea,  compar- 
ed with  similar  gulfs,  on  the  map  of  the  world,  we  are  irresisti- 
bly led  to  the  probable  conclusion,  that  it  is  the  estuary  of  one 
or  more  great  rivers.  ^confirmation  of  this  analogical  conclu- 
sion, Mr.  Bowdich  entered  the  Gaboon,  near  the  equator,  as- 
cended it  forty -five  miles,  and  there  found  two  branches,  one  of 
which  was  four,  and  the  other  two  miles  wide.  Several  other 
rivers  at  the  gulf  were  of  a  similar  magnitude.  We  have  seen 
that  the  native  testimony  does  nothing  to  show,  whether  the 
great  eastern  branch  of  the  Quolla  flows  eastward  or  westward; 
though  its  existence  cannot  at  all  be  doubted.  It  is  then  at 
least  a  very  probable  analogical  conclusion,  that  it  rises  in  the 
country  of  Dar  Koolah  or  Kulla,  a  place  plainly  of  the  same 
name  with  the  river,  and  flowing  westward,  enters  the  great 
river,  the  Niger,  flowing  from  the  north,  or  runs  directly  into 
the  gulf  of  Guinea.  Indeed  in  the  map  of  Malte  Brun,  the 
source  of  a  river  running  westward,  is  laid  down  in  Dar  Koolah, 
on  the  authority  of  Browne,  who  visited  that  region  of  country. 
"At  a  distance  of  three  days'  journey  to  the  south  of  Cabbeh,  (in 
Darfoor,)  there  are  copper  mines;  and  seven  days'  journey  and 
a  half  beyond  these,  is  the  Bahr  el  Abiad.  To  the  west  of  this 
is  the  river  Koolah,  (Kulla  or  Quolla,)  the  banks  of  which,  ac 
cording  to  the  information  of  Mr.  Browne,  abound  with  pimen- 
to trees."  As  a  proof  of  the  great  height  of  this  country  com- 
pared with  Central  Africa,  it  is  stated,  that  the  mountains  "are 
frequently  covered  with  snow."  A  glance  at  the  rivers  of  the 
gulfs  of  Persia,  Bengal  and  Birmah;  will  give  at  least  a  proba- 
ble general  idea  of  the  rivers  of  the  gulf  of  Guinea.  The  native 
testimony  that  the  rivers  of  Africa  in  the  interior,  separate,  in 
their  downward  course,  into  two  or  more  branches,  has  been 
shown  to  be  false  in  some  instances,  and  in  all  good  for  nothing. 
At  the  utmost,  there  are  not  more  than  two  examples  of  this 
kind  known  In  the  world;  and  the  obvious  reason  is,  that  rivers 
in  the  interior  are  constantly  lowering  their  beds,  and  thus  di- 
minishing the  chance  of  a  division;  and  even  if  a  division  actu- 
ally existed,  there  would  be  a  constant  and  unavoidable  tenden- 
cy to  flow  in  a  single  direction;  whereas  near  their  mouths^ 


1829.]  Africa.  329 

rivers  are  continually  raising  their  beds,  and  thus  preparing  to 
burst  their  boundaries,  and  to  pour  their  waters  in  any  direction, 

Mr.  Bowdich  concluded  from  native  testimony,  that  an  arm 
of  the  Quolla  passes  into  the  Zaire  or  Congo:  but  this,  as  ha* 
been  seen,  may  amount  to  nothing  more,  than  that  a  branch  of 
the  Quolla  and  one  of  th<>  Zaire,  have  th:  \r  sources  nearly  to- 
gether, and  flow  in  different  directions;  and  analogy  shows  al- 
most irresistibly,  that  such  is  the  fact.* 

Africa  is  distinguished  for  the  richness  and  fertility  of  its  soil, 
as  well  as  for  the  number  and  magnitude  of  sterile  spots  which 
are  found  on  its  surface.  The  fame  of  Egypt's  productiveness 
tas  already  filled  the  world,  and  accounts  fully  agree,  that  other 
parts  of  the  continent  will  even  vie  with  Egypt  in  point  of  fer- 
tility. Indeed  it  would  seem  as  if  nothing  had  contributed 
more  to  lower  the  character  of  the  African  race,  than  the  com- 
parative ease  with  which  life  and  even  luxury  may  be  supported. 
The  abundant  resources  of  Egypt,  under  a  wise  and  rigid  go- 
vernment, were  once  brought  to  operate  in  elevating  the  charac- 
ter of  its  inhabitants.  But  where  such  a  government  is  want- 
ing, and  where  there  is  no  sufficient  moral  influence,  and  no 
pressure  of  necessity,  to  operate  in  its  stead,  resources,  in  al- 
most exact  proportion  to  their  abundance,  are  wasted  in  dissi- 
pation, and  consumed  in  comparative  idleness.  The  same  pro- 
fuseness  of  nature,  which  under  judicious  management  would 
improve  and  elevate  its  possessors,  serves  only  to  degrade  them, 
when  no  controlling  influence  is  exerted  over  it. 

The  climate  of  Africa  has  generally  had  the  reputation  of  be- 
ing unhealthy.  But  when  the  number  and  extent  of  its  marsh- 
es, and  the  habits  of  the  natives  are  known,  this  circumstance 
will  appear  to  be  no  cause  of  wonder.  When  those  marshes 
shall  be  cleared  and  cultivated,  and  the  inhabitants  shall  become 
civilized  and  cleanly,  it  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  expect,  that 
the  world  will  not  furnish  a  region  more  salubrious  or  healthful 
than  Africa. 


*  Some  of  the  views  in  this  article,  it  will  be  seen,  differ  from  those  ex- 
pressed in  our  last  July  number.  On  a  subject  embarrassed  with  so  much 
uncertainty,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  different  writers  will  not  altogether 
agree;  and  indeed  that  the  developement  of  unknown  facts,  may  at  any 
time  turn  the  scale  of  probability.  At  all  events,  the  exhibition  of  differ- 
ent opinions,  may  aid  in  arriving  at  the  truth. 
49 


350  Mr*  Tazewell's  Report  [Jan. 


COMMUNICATION. 

•Vhr.  Taze^eWa  ^e^OYt. 

T\  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations  to  the  Senate^ 
April  28,  1828,  on  African  Colonization,  Mr.  Tazewell  seems  to  have  en- 
tirely and  most  unaccountably  misapprehended  the  petitions  of  the  Ameri- 
can Colonization  Society  and  oftlu -ir  frier,  ir  behalf.  For  instance, 
nothing"  can  be  more  erroneous  than  his  assertion,  that  the  "applicants  wish 
generally,  that  the  United  States  should  exei  I  their  power  and  their  means 
to  acquire  a  territory  somewhere  on  the  Coast  of  Africa,  which  when  ac- 
quired, should  be  opened  as  an  asylum  for  the  reception  of  free  people  of 
colour  and  liberated  slaves."  If  any  advocates  of  our  cause  in  any  part  of 
the  United  States  have  recently  made  such  a  request,  it  is  more  than  we 
are  aware  of,  and  must  have  been  done  most  inadvertently.  But  as  to  the 
Society  themselves,  it  is  very  certain  that  by  them  no  such  application  has, 
at  least  for  several  years,  been  urgedj  for  a  territory  on  the  African  Coast 
has  already  been  obtamed  and  occupied,  and  a  Colony  of  twelve  hundred 
souls  has  been  successfully  established.  So  far,  then,  from  being  under 
the  necessity  of  soliciting"  the  aid  of  Congress  for  the  acquisition  of  territo- 
ry, the  Society  have  found  by  experience  that  that  is  the  least  difficult  part 
of  our  undertaking;  and  we  are  at  this  moment  in  possession  of  more  land 
than  we  can,  with  our  means  alone,  people  for  many  years  to  come. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  this  simple  but  highly  important  fact  should 
have  escaped  Mr.  Tazewell's  observation;  for,  if  he  had  been  acquainted 
with  it,  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  for  him  to  waste  so  much  keen 
argument  and  so  much  of  his  precious  time  in  the  discussion  of  the  territo- 
rial question;  and  the  whole  subject  would  have  escaped  from  many  pages 
of  metaphysical  torture. 

If,  at  the  very  origin  of  the  scheme  of  Colonization,  when  those  who 
were  wise  and  virtuous  enough  to  discern  its  merits,  had  not  yet  the  means  of 
forming  definitive  plans  for  its  accomplishment,  but  were  either  awaiting 
the  result  of  experience,  and  the  gradual  and  natural  progress  of  the  sug- 
gestion, or  were  deliberating  among  themselves  how  it  might  be  best  pro- 
moted; if,  at  that  period,  there  did  exist  among  the  friends  of  our  cause  a 
great  diversity  of  opinions,  as  each  may  have  happend  to  spring  up  sponta- 
neously in  remote  situations;  and  if,  for  some  time,  the  public  mind  did 
fluctuate  among  the  various  courses  that  were  proposed;  all  uncertainty 
has  long  sinee  disappeared  from  the  councils  of  our  well  organized  Socie- 
ty, and  its  more  distinguished  and  influential  members  have  ceased  to  en- 
tertain either  indefinite  or  conflicting  views.  It  is  thus  that  every  project 
is  by  degrees  perfected.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  propositions  or 
wishes  of  many  of  ourselves  in  the  infancy  of  our  design,  as  to  the  proper 
scite  for  an  establishment,  the  proper  measures  for  acquiring  territory,  and 


1829.]  Mr.  Tazewell* s  Report  S31 

the  proper  way  to  found,  maintain  and  govern  the  Colony,  there  may  be 
said  to  be,  at  present,  but  one  persuasion,  on  those  topics,  among"  the 
fathers  and  leaders  of  the  cause.  Mr.  Jefferson,  the  enlightened  and  ear- 
liest advocate  of  colonization,  at  first  suggested  that  some  part  of  our  con- 
tinent might  be  selected  for  a  Colony:  but  that  idea  was  soon  abandoned 
and  is  now  almost  forgotten;  and  Mr.  Jefferson  became  one  of  the  zealous 
supporters  of  the  settlement  in  Africa.  So,  when  the  idea  of  colonizing 
our  free  coloured  population  had  been  only  recently  conceived,  and  no 
place  had  been  chosen  for  their  new  abode,  it  was  proposed  that  the  re- 
quisite territory  should  be  procured  by  the  United  States,  as  this  was  a 
matter  of  national  concern:  but  the  Society,  when  afterwards  formed,  de- 
termined to  purchase  the  territory  themselves,  and  did  purchase  it  without 
the  assistance  or  privity  of  Government.  Thus,  another  of  the  early  and 
perhaps  crude,  or  at  least  impracticable,  designs  of  those  who  had  embrac- 
ed the  scheme,  was  abandoned.  The  position  being  fixed  upon,  a  settle- 
ment effected,  and  the  Colony  prosperous,  the  question  very  naturally  and 
indeed  unavoidably  arose,  how  this  new  nation  should  be  governed  and 
protected.  No  one,  we  believe,  was  ever  so  extravagant  as  to  suppose 
that  it  might  be  or  ought  to  be  incorporated  into  this  confederacy.  Mr. 
Tazewell's  remarks  upon  that  subject  are  entirely  gratuitous.  But  some 
persons  did  imagine  that,  although  it  could  not  be  adopted  as  a  co-equal 
state,  it  would  be  necessary  for  its  defence  that  it  should  be  held  as  a  terri- 
tory or  Colony,  until,  having  learnt  from  our  institutions  to  be  free  and 
happy,  and  being  old  and  strong  enough  for  self-preservation,  it  might  be 
endowed  with  independence;  an  imperishable  monument  to  the  American 
name,  on  the  shores  of  injured  Africa.  This  was  no  wild  nor  ordinary 
thought,  and,  if  carried  into  execution,  would  be  both  honourable  and  use- 
ful to  our  country.  We  cannot  agree  with  Mr.  Tazewell  that  the  acquisi- 
tion, permanent  occupation  and  government  of  such  a  territory,  for  pur- 
poses so  national,  nay  so  necessary,  would  be  repugnant  to  the  constitu- 
tion, any  more  than  would  an  establishment  in  the  Rocky  Mountains  or  a 
garrison  at  Oregon.  No  man  will,  after  a  moment's  reflection,  suppose 
that  the  countries  beyond  the  sandy  prairies  in  the  west  and  north,  and  at 
the  mouth  of  Columbia  river,  can  ever  become  members  of  this  Union;  for 
they  are  scarcely  less  distant  than  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  are  separated 
from  us  by  a  breadth  of  continent,  which  it  requires  more  time  and  ex- 
pense to  traverse  than  to  cross  the  ocean.  Yet  what  American  statesman 
of  any  eminence  has  denied  the  right  of  the  United  States  to  claim,  possess 
and  occupy  those  regions?  If  any  have  denied  it,  the  objection  has  been 
over-ruled  by  a  contrary  practice. 

The  power  of  acquiring  territory  is  an  incident  to  that  of  negociating 
treaties,  regulating  commerce  and  declaring  war,  and  is  limited  only  to 
those  occasions  when  it  may  be  necessary  for  "the  common  defence,"  or 
conducive  to  "the  general  welfare."  Indeed,  any  measure  that  should  not 
have  those  great  objects  in  view,  would  be  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  our  in- 


332  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  [Jaft, 

StttutiOfts;  and  every  proposition,  no  matter  how  consistent  with  the  letter 
of  1  lie  Constitution,  is  and  must  be  advocated  also  on  those  broad  grounds. 
The  words  'common  defence  and  general  welfare"  thus  become  an  im- 
portant ingredient  in  our  national  policy,  and,  although  conferring,  of 
themselves,  no  powers,  encompass  and  sanation  all  that  are  conceded  di- 
rectly or  incidentally.  It  is  in  this  sense,  as  we  understand  their  arguments, 
that  those  who  h;i\e  reasoned  in  favour  of  African  Colonization,  have  ap- 
pealed to  that  phrase:  not,  as  Mr.  Tazewell  imagines,  to  deduce  from  it 
the  power  of  acquiring  and  maintaining  distant  territories;  but  to  justify, 
by  the  innumerable  adv:<   I  to   our  country  of  that  scheme,  the  exer- 

cise bv   Congress  of  powers  inferred   from   other  clauses.     In  order  that 
Congress  should  wield,  for  the   acquisition  and  support  of  colonies  or  ter- 
ritories, the  authority  justly  implied  in  the  power  of  declaring  war,  making 
treaties  or  regulating  commerce,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  such  authority  ap- 
pear to  be  manifestly  and  indubitably  contained  in  the  grant  of  those  pow- 
ers; but  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  particular  act  in  question  be  for  the 
"common  defence"  or  '"general  welfare."       For  those  great  primary  pur- 
poses all  authority  is  granted  and  the  Constitution  itself  exists.      They  vin- 
dicate and  limit  all  the  powers  entrusted  by   the  people  to  their  rulers. — 
They  constitute  the  only  limitation  to  the  power  of  declaring  war,  and 
making  treaties.*     In  a  maratime  war  it  might  become  necessary  for  the 
United  States  to  seize,  upon  and  hold  an  island  in  the  Mediterranean;  and 
in  doing  so  they  would  be  obeying  the  Constitution.     It  might  be  necessa- 
ry to  land  and  possess  themselves  of  a  part  of  the  coast  of  Africa,  or  of  this 
continent  in  the  southern  hemisphere  or  in  the  Pacific  Ocean;  and  doing  so 
would  be  to  obey  the  Constitution        How  long  these  places  should  be  re- 
tained would  depend  upon  the  circumstances  of  the  case,   interpreted  by 
Congress;  for  the  Constitution  is  silent  on  that  subject.     Whether  they 
should  be  occupied  for  only  a  few  weeks,  or  for  many  years,  or  permanent- 
ly, would  be  for  Congress  to  determine,  with  a  view  to  the  "common  de- 
fence and  general  welfare. ,v     The  same  or  similar  places  might  become, 
from  peculiar  circumstances,   necessar)    to  us  in  time  of  peace,  and  might 
therefore  be  acquired  bv  the  treaty-making  power,  provided  the  President 
and  Senate  should  deem  it  for  the  "common  defence  and  general  welfare." 
We  cannot  conceive  how  these  plain  inferences  can  be  denied.     There 
is  no  clause,  no  word  of  the  Constitution,   that  specifies  any  particular  or 
exclusive  purposes  for  winch   territory  may  be  acquired,  or  that  prohibits 
the  acquisition  of  distant  and  foreign  territory  any  more  than  of  domestic 


*  That  of  regulating  commerce  is  restricted  by  various  additional  provi- 
sions. 

"But  all  duties,  imposts  and  excises,  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the 
United  States." — [Sec  8,  Art.  I.  Con. 

"Mo  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  articles  exported  from  any   state." 

[Art.  I.  Sec.  9. 


1829.]  Mr>  TaxewelVs  Report  33S 

•r  contiguous.  Tor  the  great  purposes  for  which  the  power  was  created, 
a  foreign  and  distant  territory  might,  in  a  particular  posture  of  affairs,  be 
essential  to  our  security  or  peace,  and  a  tract  of  country  adjacent  to  us  be 
utterly  useless.  In  such  a  case  the  distinction  would  be  worse,  than  ab- 
surd. The  Constitution  has  wisely  left  it  to  the  discretion  of  Congress, 
and  to  the  course  of  things.  We  shall  not  undertake  to  explain  how  and 
when  it  may  become  necessary  to  exercise  that  power  for  the  acquisition 
of  foreign  and  very  distant  regions,  nor  where  those  regions  will  be  situa- 
ted; for,  although  we  think  we  understand  the  nature  of  our  institutions, 
we  do  not  pretend  to  prophesy;  but  to  show  that  this,  as  we  have  given  it, 
is  the  true  theory  of  the  Constitution,  it  is  only  necessary  to  recite  it.— 
None  of  us  may  foretell  how  soon  we  shall  be  called  upon  to  put  it  into 
practice. 

The  President  and  Senate  having  the  power  of  making  treaties  for  the 
acquisition  of  territory,  whether  contiguous  or  remote,  whether  on  this 
continent  or  on  another,  and  whether  separated  from  us  by  oceans  of  water 
or  oceans  of  sand,  we  may  suppose  that  a  juncture  might  arise  in  which  the 
"common  defence  and  general  welfare"  would  require  them  to  make  a 
treaty,  stipulating  the  payment  of  a  sum  of  money  for  the  territory  to  be 
acquired.  This  gentle  mode  of  acquisition  would  be  as  much  within  their 
constitutional  powers,  as  a  more  forcible  one;  and,  indeed,  more  congenial 
to  our  peaceful  institutions.  If  a  treaty  may  be  made  with  the  Winneba- 
goes,  it  may  be  made  with  the  Foulahs  or  Mandingoes.  There  is  no  re- 
striction, whatsoever,  (we  repeat  it,)  but  that  \mposed  upon  the  discretion 
and  honesty  of  the  Executive  and  Senate,  that  they  enter  into  such  trans- 
actions, not  for  any  sinister  or  private  or  frivolous  purpose,  but  for  the 
"common  defence  and  general  welfare"  of  their  constituents. 

The  appropriation  of  monies  under  the  treaty-making  power,  however, 
is  rather  indirect  than  immediate;  and  though  it  would  sufficiently  answer 
our  present  object,  of  demonstrating  that  a  territory  in  Africa  might  have 
been  constitutionally   procured  and  held  by  the  General   Government,  we 
will  proceed  to  consider  those  direct  and  more  common  appropriations, 
which  have   no  treaty-stipulations  in  view.     In   Article  I.  Sec.  8,  of  the 
Constitution,  we  find  this  comprehensive  clause:  "The  Congress  shall  have 
power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises."     This  at  once 
places  at  their  discretion  all  the  power  of  the  purse,  and,  if  it  were  the  on- 
ly clause  in  the  Constitution,    would  enable  them  to  dispose  of  the  public 
monies  in  any  manner  their  caprice  might  prompt,  even  for  their  own  in- 
dividual emolument.      But  they  are  strictly  limited  by  clauses  that  follow. 
There  are  certain  duties  which  they  must  fulfil,   and  there  are  other  acts 
which  they  are  directly  or  indirectly  forbidden  to  perform.     Among  the 
former,  to  which  they  must  appropriate  the  funds  entrusted  to  them,  are 
"regulating  commerce,"  "establishing  post-offices  and  post-roads,"  "pro- 
moting the  progress  of  the  arts  and  sciences,"  &c.  "constituting  and  sup- 
porting the  judiciary,"  "providing  aad  maintaining  armies  and  navies  and 


334  Mr.  TazexveWs  Report.  [Jan. 

all  the  materials  of  war,"  "organizing*  and  arming  the  militia,"  "giving*  a 
compensation  to  the  President  and  other  public  officers,"  &c.  &c.  &c. — 
These  acts,  being*  enjoined  by  the  Constitution,  they  must  perform;  to 
neglect  any  of  them,  when  requisite  and  practicable,  would  be  an  infrac- 
tion of  that  instrument.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  things  which  they 
mud  not  do.  For  instance,  Congress  were  not  allowed  to  prohibit  the  in- 
troduction of  negroes  into  the  United  States  before  1808,  but  mig-ht  lay  a 
tax  of  $10  a  head  upon  such  as  should  be  imported.  Not  only  to  have  pro- 
hibited their  introduction,  before  that  per'.od,  or  to  have  imposed  a  higher 
duty  on  them,  but  also  to  have  mtv.le  any  appropriation  of  the  public  mo- 
nies, by  which,  directly  or  indirectly,  their  introduction  might  have  been 
stopt  or  interrupted,  would  have  been  unconstitutional;  for  the  public 
funds,  entrusted  to  Congress  by  the  Constitution,  are  not  to  be  used  in  vio- 
lation or  embarrassment  of  the  Constitution. 

There  is  a  third  class  of  acts,  which  Congress  are  neither  expressly  nor 
by  implication  commanded  to  do  nor  prohibited  from  doing;  which  seem« 
to  be  left  to  their  discretion,  with  the  multitude  of  things  which  may  be- 
come necessary  but  cannot  be  foreseen  nor  indicated,  and  which  time 
alone,  in  its  incessant  flight,  reveals.  Such  was  the  present  to  General 
Lafayette.  Such  are  appropriations  for  internal  improvements.  Neither 
of  those  expenditures  can  be  justified  but  on  the  ground,  that  the  public 
revenue  is  entrusted  to  Congress,  to  be  applied  to  certain  enumerated  pur- 
poses, and  to  such  others,  not  repugnant  to  the  Constitution  nor  inconsis- 
tent with  the  rights  of  states,  as  they  may  deem  for  the  "common  defence" 
or  "general  welfare."  Upon  the  same  grounds  and  with  equal  reason, 
may  a  portion  of  that  revenue  be  devoted,  by  those  to  whose  honesty  and 
judgment  it  is  committed,  to  the  purchase  of  a  territory  in  Africa  and  the 
establishment  there  of  a  Colony. 

It  would  have  been  most  unwise  and  unavailing*  in  the  founders  of  our 
government,  to  have  pretended  to  enumerate  and  define  all  the  supposa- 
bla  objects  to  which  our  redundant  means  should  in  future  years  be  direct- 
ed. Such  an  attempt  could  only  have  crippled  our  resources,  and  led  us 
back  into  the  same  embarrassments,  confusion  and  ultimate  dissolution, 
with  which  we  were  afflicted  or  threatened  by  the  old  articles  of  confedera- 
tion. The  framers  of  that  immortal  monument  of  wisdom,  our  present 
Constitution,  contented  themselves  with  indicating  certain  primary  purpo- 
ses for  which  it  was  intended,  and  with  laying  down  a  few  leading  princi- 
ples, sufficient,  when  properly  examined  and  faithfully  obeyed,  to  give  it 
full  developement  and  impose  due  limitation;  and,  fortunately,  left  the  rest 
to  time  and  Providence.  It  appears  to  us  that  nothing  can  be  more  evi- 
dent, than  that,  in  confiding  the  national  revenue  to  Congress,  the  Consti- 
tution designs  to  make  them  the  judges,  within  certain  bounds,  to  what 
objects  it  shall  be  applied.  It  can,  with  propriety,  be  applied  only  to  those 
purposes  that  are  consistent  with  the  Constitution,  not  repugnant  to  state 
rights,  and  conducive  to  the   "general  welfare,"  or  "common  defence;" 


18C9.]  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  335 

and  for  a  judicious  exercise  of  this  discretion,  members  of  Congress  are 
answerable  to  their  constituents.  Even  the  most  jealous  form  of  govern- 
ment must  repose  confidence  at  last  in  some  one;  and  if  that  person  be  re- 
sponsible to  an  enlightened  people,  as  are  those  of  the  United  States, 
government  has  attained  its  utmost  security.  The  abuse  of  such  a  trust  can 
be  provided  against,  only  by  the  original  selection  of  proper  representa- 
tives, or  by  the  expulsion  of  those  that  fail  in  their  duty.  Both  of  these 
privileges  have  been  reserved  to  the  people  by  the  Constitution;  and  upon 
their  own  good  sense  and  patriotism  must  the  people  rely,  to  guard  against 
violations  of  that  Constitution  by  its  legitimate  expounders  or  those  who 
are  its  necessary  instruments. 

If  therefore  it  can  be  shown,  to  the  r-iitisfaction  of  the  people  and  their 
representatives,  that  the  scheme  of  African  Colonization  would  be  emi- 
nently conducive  to  the  prosperity,  peace,  safety,  and  general  welfare  of 
our  country;  and  that  no  state  rights  would  be  interfered  with,  nor  any  ex- 
press or  implied  provision  of  the  Constitution  violated,  by  an  application 
of  some  of  the  public  funds  to  that  purpose,  Congress  will  be  entirely  at 
liberty  to  appropriate  any  sum  which  they  may  deem  reasonable  or^suffi- 
cient. 

It  was  not  necessary  for  us  to  discuss  the  questions  of  territorial  acquisi- 
tion and  colonial  establishments  by  the  United  States;  for,  notwithstanding 
Mr.  Tazewell's  long  argument,   they  have  no  relation  to  the  views  of  our 
Society.     That  this  is  true  with  reference  to  the  acquisition  of  territory 
has  been  already  shown,  by  the  fact  of  a  suitable  and  sufficiently  extensive 
territory  having  been  long  ago  procured  at  the  expense  of  the   Society.-— 
Nor,  with  regard  to  the  colonial  government,  is  it  by  any  means  necessary 
that  it  should  be  assumed  and  its  continuance  guaranteed  by  the  United 
States.     On  the  contrary,   the  prevailing  sentiment  among  the  leading 
friends  of  the  undertaking,  is,  we  are  inclined  to  think,  that  the  Colony  re- 
main under  the  direction  of  the  Society  and  of  its  own  laws,  until  it  arrive 
at  the  proper  crisis  for  entire  independence;  and  that  it  have  no  connection 
with  the  friendship  or  enmities,  war  or  peace,  treaties  or  alliances,  of  this 
country.     It  will  thus  more  certainly  escape  the  vicissitudes  to  which  such 
a  connection  would  expose  it.     A  place  of  free  resort  for  the  vessels  of  all 
nations,  and  an  institution  of  a  purely  benevolent  character,  it  may  reason- 
ably hope  to  be  exempt,  for  many  a  year,  from  the  troubles  of  general 
politics  and  the  disasters  of  European  or  American  wars.  The  only  conflict 
which  it  may  expect,  will  be  with  the  piratical  slave-vessels  on  the  coast, 
and  now  and  then  with  some  petty  tribe  of  the  interior;  against  both  of 
whom  it  is  able  already  to  protect  itself.     Thus  it  will  be,   in  a  political 
point  of  view,   totally  distinct  from  us;  but  in  language,  in  customs,   in  in- 
stitutions, in  religion,  it  will  be  similar;  and,  though  independent,  bound 
to  us  by  all  the  ties  of  interest  and  gratitude. 

Such  is  the  consummation  at  which  we  devoutly  aim.     The  only  assist- 
ance which  we  desire  from  the  United  States  is  pecuniary;  with  such  ad- 


336  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report  [Jan; 

ditional  good  offices  as  their  cruizers  may  properly  afford,  in  their  endea- 
vours to  suppress  the  slave  trade.  All  that  we  ask  is  an  appropriation  of 
money;  and  we  confidently  claim  it  for  a  purpose  in  every  way  conducive 
to  the  "common  defence  and  general  welfare." 

In  making-  such  an  application,  it  may  he  justly  demanded  of  us  to  ex- 
plain the  particular  objects  for  which  the  money  will  be  used,  and  give 
some  estimate»of  the  amount  that  will  be  required.  To  tha-t  duty  we  now 
proceed.  And  we  will,  at  the  outset,  remark,  with  due  respect  for  his 
high  character  and  deference  to  his  talents,  that  in  no  part  of  his  subject 
has  Mr.  Tazewell  more  egregiously  shot  beyond  his  mark,  than  this.  We 
humbly  venture  to  think,  that  on  a  question  of  such  influence  and  impor- 
tance, recommended  to  the  attention  of  the  Legislature  by  many  of  our 
most  distinguished  citizens,  it  would  have  been  more  candid  and  statesman- 
like, to  have  contemplated  its  bearings  and  pretensions,  if  not  in  afavoura- 
ble  light,  at.  least  in  that  in  which  alone  they  are  rational,  than  to  have  ta- 
ken sides,  like  a  pleader  in  the  forum,  not  a  Senator  in  the  (  apitol,  and 
laboured  to  ruin  the  project,  by  pushing  it  to  extremes  with  which  it  has 
no  affin'ty.  If  it  have  defects,  let  them  be  fearlessly  exposed:  but  if  it  have 
merits  also,  let  them  too  be  acknowledged.  We  will  presume  to  oppose 
our  calculations  to  Mr.  Tazewell*Sj 

The  objects  to  which  any  monies  derived  from  government  would  be 
appropriated,  are  the  extension  and  improvement  of  the  Colon)  of  Liberia, 
and  the  transportation  thither  of  such  free  coloured  persons  as  might  be 
willing  to  go,  and  of  such  slaves  as  their  masters  might  liberate  for  that 
purpose.  The  attention  of  the  Society  has  been  chiefly  directed  to  the 
free  people  of  colour,  because  they  furnish  more  numerous  applicants  for  re- 
moval, and  afford  the  best  subjects  for  a  wholesome  establishment;  being 
generally  better  educated  and  more  enlightened  than  the  slaves.  At  every 
expedition  to  the  coast,  more  of  that  class  of  persons  have  been  eager  to 
embark,  than  the  Society  had  the  means  of  gratifj  l.g,  although  in  nearly 
every  instance  a  most  rigid  and  judicious  selection  has  been  made. 

From  free  coloured  people,  in  various  parts  of  the  union,  but  principally 
south  of  the  Susquehanna  and  Potomac,  there  are,  at  this  moment,  500 
applications  for  a  passage  to  the  Colony.  Last  year  upwards  of  four  hun- 
dred were  conveyed  thither,  generally  excellent  subjects,  its  population 
Ls  now  more  than  twelve  hundred. 

In  the  present  state  of  the  Society's  funds,  exhausted  by  previous  efforts, 
and  not  yet  sufficiently  restored,  it  will  be  impossible  for  us,  we  fear,  to 
afford  the  means  of  emigration  to  more  than  half  the  actual  applicants.  The 
number  of  applications  has  gone  on  mcre^sing  from  year  to  year;  and  we 
feel  justified  in  the  belief,  that  it  will  continue  to  augment  most  rapidly,  if 
it  be  encouraged.  It  has  been  ascertained  that  in  one  year  about  six 
thousand  free  coloured  persons  emigrated  to  Hayti,  a  large  part  of  them  at 
their  own  expense.  This  reveals  an  inclination  in  that  class  of  people  to 
emigrate.     In  another  year  the  number  would  have  been  greater:  but  ur< 


1839.]  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  337 

fortunately,  they  found  that  their  condition  wa9  not  improved  by  settling 
among*  an  ignorant  and  semi-barbarous  people,  speaking*  a  different  lan- 
guage, of  a  different  religion,  intolerant,  and  having  very  limited  notions 
indeed  of  the  "rights  of  man;"  and  as  many  of  them  as  could  escape,  re- 
turned. There  are  political  reasons  of  great  weight,  why  we  should  not 
desire  to  see  the  power  of  a  nation  of  blacks  in  our  neighbourhood  increas- 
ed, nor  much  intercourse  established  between  us.  It  was  not  from  any 
partiality  for  Hayti  in  particular,  that  the  free  blacks  emigrated;  but  from 
a  disposition  to  leave  this  country,  provided  they  could  go  to  some  other 
where  they  might  enjoy  all  the  privileges  and  advantages  of  freemen. — 
Such  is  Liberia. 

We  will  now  proceed  to  show,  that  the  object  which  the  Society  pro- 
pose to  accomplish,  can  be  readily  attained  without  burthening  the  resour- 
ces of  the  Union.  The  probable  number  of  free  coloured  persons  in  the 
United  States,  is  280,000;  and  their  annual  increase,  about  7,000.  The 
cost  of  transporting  such  persons  to  Liberia  has  been  ascertained  to  be 
about  $28  for  every  adult,  and  $14  for  children  under  twelve.  We  will 
put  it,  respectively,  at  $30  and  $15,  that  we  may  not  underrate  it.  Mr. 
Tazewell  estimates  it  at  $100,  for  persons  of  every  age:  but  he  has  not 
told  us  where  he  obtained  his  information.  According  to  our  calculation, 
which  we  assert  to  be  correct,  (and  for  which  we  refer  to  the  statement  of 
expenditures  in  the  Navy  Department,  recently  laid  before  Congress,)  to 
transport  280,000  persons,  at  $30  each,  would  cost  $7,400,000;  and  to 
transport  the  annual  increase,  7,000  persons,  at  the  same  rate,  would  cost 
$210,000.  But  who,  except  Mr.  Tazewell,  has  been  ingenious  enough  to 
suggest  the  transportation,  at  once,  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  free  coloured 
population  of  this  country?  Such  a  design  would  be  even  much  less  ex- 
pensive, than  it  would  be  absurd  and  impracticable.  No  such  scheme  was 
ever  proposed,  and  therefore  it  need  not  have  been  combated.  Although 
the  idea  has  been,  not  only  plausibly  but  reasonably,  entertained  of  trans- 
porting in  every  year  the  whole  annual  increase,  yet  it  is  very  certain  that, 
even  under  favourable  circumstances,  the  Colony  will  not  be  capable,  for 
several  years,  of  receiving  and  providing  for  even  such  an  addition  to  its 
population.  Gentlemen  spoke  of  what  might  or  ought  (and  no  doubt  will) 
be,  at  some  future  day;  not  of  what  should  or  could  be  done  immediately. 
Thus  there  is  no  danger,  for  the  present,  that  even  the  $210,000  annually 
will  be  called  for;  much  less  the  $7,000,000.  And  yet  where  is  the  man 
of  sense  or  liberality,  that  would  refuse  those  $7,000,000,  if  they  cquld  in. 
one  year  remove  that  dreadful  nuisance,  our  free  coloured  population? 

The  progress  of  emigration  must,  as  we  have  said  before,  be  gradual. — 
It  is  in  its  nature  to  be  slow,  and  it  cannot  be  driven  beyond  a  certain  volun- 
tary and  accelerating  motion.  No  doubt,  it  will  acquire  an  increased  mo- 
mentum at  every  revolution.  For  this  slowness  there  are  various  reasons. 
One  of  them  is,  that  by  being  surcharged  with  crude  emigrants,  the  Colo- 
ny would  be  destroyed:  another,  that  the  free  coloured  people,  being  un- 
43 


33S  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  ^an- 

der  no  compulsion,  could  not  be  persuaded,  all  of  them,  to  set  out  at  once 
and  without  delay  These  are  the  retarding  causes.  The  accelerating 
causes  will  be,  that  as  the  Colony  shall  each  year  expand,  it  will  become, 
like  all  newly  peopled  countries,  in  a  geometrical  ratio,  more  and  more  ca- 
pable of  receiving  greater  numbers;  and  that  when  many  shall  have  emigrat- 
ed hence,  more  will  be  prepared  and  willing  to  follow  them.  If,  therefore, 
the  emigration  must  unavoidably  be  gradual,  the  appropriation  may  also 
be  gradual. 

Thus,  several  years  must  elapse  before  the  Society  can  desire  to  trans- 
port even  the  annual  increase  of  our  iree  coloured  population.  Perhaps 
the  Colony  may  not,  the  first  year,  receive  more  than  1,000  emigrants;  the 
second  year,  not  more  than  2,000;  the  third,  not  more  than  3,000;  and  so 
on,  until  the  whole  number  be  embraced.  If  this  anticipation  be  correct, 
(and  we  believe  it  to  be  so,)  not  more  than  *30,o00  would  be  required, 
the  first  year,  for  the  mere  transportation  of  free  coloured  persons  to  Afri. 
ca;  not  more  than  60,000,  the  second  year;  and  not  more  than  90,000,  the 
third.  Indeed,  it  is  probable  that  not  even  the  number  of  persons  we  have 
named  would  emigrate  in  those  three  or  four  years.  But,  nevertheless, 
the  appropriation  ought  not  to  be  diminished;  for  a  large  portion  of  it 
should  be  annually  applied  to  the  local  improvement  of  the  Colony,  and  to 
the  adaptation  of  it  to  those  purposes  for  which  it  is  intended. 

Although  the  sum  necessary  to  transport  7,000  persons  be  $210,000,  yet 
we  believe  that  to  effect  that  object,  no  greater  appropriation  will  ever  be 
required,  in  any  one  year,  than  $100,000.  For,  we  must  recollect  that  of 
those  7,000,  one  fourth  at  least  are  children,  who  can  be  conveyed  at  half 
price;  and  that  there  are  also  many  persons,  incapable  from  age  or  ill 
health,  of  adding  to  our  species,  and  many  oihers,  totally  unfit,  from  cha- 
racter or  bodily  infirmities,  to  become  members  of  a  young  and  vigorous 
establishment,  who  would  be  either  excluded,  if  bad,  or,  if  unfortunate,  ad- 
mitted only  at  their  own  expense.  From  Dr.  Halley's  tables  of  births  and 
mortality  at  the  various  stages  of  life,  it  may  be  ascertained  that,  if  the  an- 
nual increase  of  the  free  coloured  population  be  7,000>  the  number  of  per- 
sons in  those  7,000  between  the  ages  of  20  and  30,  will  be  about  1100  or 
1200.  These  would  be  the  persons  most  desirable  to  remove,  as  they  con- 
stitute the  principal  source  of  multiplication.  To  remove  them  at  $30 
each,  would  cost  about  $36,000.  It  would  be  impossible,  however,  in 
practice,  to  confine  gratuitous  emigration  to  them  alone,  for  many  reasons; 
and  therefore  this  sum  is  too  small:  but  to  some  extent  it  might  be  effect- 
ed; and  we  mention  it  merely  as  one  of  the  ingredients  of  a  system  of  great 
economy. 

We  must  also  make  large  allowances  for  the  operation  of  moral  causes, 
so  much  more  powerful  than  the  physical,  upon  those  who  are  to  be  re- 
moved. There  is  implanted  in  the  human  breast,  whether  black  or  white, 
an  active  desire  of  "life,  liberty  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness;"  and,  if  the 
free  coloured  people  conceive  that  their  condition  will  be  improved  by 


1829.]  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  339 

emigration,  it  is  unnatural  to  suppose  that  they  will  not  emigrate.  The 
Society  will  assume  the  task  of  enlightening"  them  on  that  subject.  We 
see  that  many  have  emigrated,  and  that  many  others  would  follow,  if  it 
were  in  their  power;  persons,  too,  distinguished  above  most  of  their  class 
for  information  and  acuteness.  The  conviction  that  it  is  for  their  own 
greater  good  and  for  the  happiness  of  their  posterity,  is  rapidly  stealing 
over  the  whole  free  coloured  population.  Let  any  of  them  be  once  ani- 
mated by  an  irresistible  inclination  to  emigrate,  founded  on  the  experience 
of  those  who  have  gone  before,  and  on  the  assurance  that  they  are  to  be 
immensely  benefited,  and  they  will  soon  create  resources  for  their  own 
transportation.  Many  of  them  already  possess  the  means  of  defraying  their 
expenses;  others  would  know  how  to  derive  them  from  private  benevo- 
lence; and  others  would,  no  doubt,  receive  assistance  from  individual 
states. 

To  produce  the  entire  benefit  which  we  anticipate  to  this  country  and  to 
themselves,  it  will  be  necessary  to  remove  not  only  the  wholesome  part  of 
the  annual  increase,  but  also,  at  the  same  time,  a  portion  of  the  general  mass 
itself.  This  would  be  effected  by  the  aid  of  Congress  and  by  the  causes  to 
which  we  have  alluded;  and  would  only  require  that  a  somewhat  greater 
number  should  be  transported,  than  might  be  absolutely  necessary  to  keep 
down  the  permanent  annual  increase.  In  the  first  year,  not  more,  as  we 
have  already  said,  than  1,000  may  be  removed;  and  in  the  second  year,  not 
more  than  2,000;  but  in  the  third,  there  may  be  5,000;  in  the  fourth, 
10,000;  in  the  fifth,  20,000.  If  the  experiment  succeed,  such  will  be  the  re- 
sult, or  such  at  least,  the  tendency.  We  must  not  and  shall  not  be  discourag- 
ed at  the  slow  developement  of  the  plan.  Precipitation  would  produce 
the  most  ruinous  effects:  and  we  are  convinced  that  one  of  the  most  admi- 
rable features  of  our  scheme,  in  relation  to  its  practicability  as  well  as  its 
expediency,  consists  in  its  dependance  upon  a  gradual,  voluntary,  natural, 
and  almost  imperceptible  fulfilment.  When  we  contemplate  the  stream 
of  emigrants  that  has  poured,  and  is  still  pouring,  into  our  country,  from 
the  nations  of  Europe,  bearing  upon  its  surface  men  of  every  condition, 
but  chiefly,  of  the  poorest  and,  as  one  should  imagine,  least  able  to  remove, 
we  cannot  but  be  deeply  impressed  with  the  belief,  that,  when  the  channel 
shall  be  properly  opened  to  Liberia,  and  the  motives  to  which  we  have  re- 
ferred shall  have  begun  to  have  their  natural  and  unavoidable  consequence, 
the  torrent  of  emigration  will  be  more  powerful  than  that  from  Europe; 
in  proportion  as  the  pressure  of  circumstances  is  heavier  here,  and  the  in- 
ducements and  facilities  of  departure  greater. 

The  calculations  of  expense  made  with  reference  to  the  free  blacks,  are 
equally  applicable  to  slaves.  We  shall  proceed  to  apply  them.  We  do  so 
the  more  particularly,  as  Mr.  Tazewell's  calculation  seems  to  have  been 
meant  for  a  caricature  of  our  project.  If  not  designed  to  ridicule  us,  it  is 
certainly  a  much  less  skilful  and  correct  delineation  of  our  views,  than  we 
had  a  right  to  expect  from  so  able  a  hand.    As  we  have  been  so  greatly 


340  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  [Jan. 

misunderstood  even  by  a  gentleman  of  his  sagacity,  it  will  be  the  more  in- 
cumbent on  us  to  be  explicit. 

With  slave*  the  Society  have  no  concern,  but  to  transport  to  Africa,  as 
far  as  our  funds  will  permit,  such  as  their  owners  may  liberate  for  that  pur- 
pose. We  know  of  them  only  through  the  intervention  of  their  masters. — 
In  the  last  and  former  years,  about  one  hundred  slaves  were  manumitted, 
and  were  conveyed  by  us  to  Liberia.  At  this  moment  the  masters  of  more 
than  two  hundred  have  notified  the  Society,  that  they  are  ready  to  liberate 
them  as  soon  as  they  can  be  sent  to  Africa.  Of  these  two  hundred  slaves, 
twenty  five  are  offered  from  Maryland;  sixty  from  Kentucky;  eighteen  or  twen- 
ty from  Virginia;  and  j arty -three  from  Georgia.  Of  those  that  emigrated  last 
year,  thirty  were  manumitted  in  Maryland,  and  twenty-Jive  in  South 
Carolina. 

These  details  are  important,  as  they  prove  the  truth  of  what  the  Society 
have  asserted,  that  many  masters,  opposed  to  unconditional  emancipation, 
will  be  happy  of  this  opportunity  of  gi .  ing  their  slaves  freedom  on  condition 
of  removal.     Throughout  the  slave-holding  States  there  is  a  strong  objec- 
tion, even  among  the  warmest  friends  of  the  African  race,  to  slaves  being  li- 
berated and  allowed  to  remain  among  us;  and  some  States  have  enacted  laws 
against  it.     The  objection  is,  in  our  individual  opinion,  well  founded.     But 
whether  sound  or  futile,  it  operates  powerfully  to  repress  the  benevolent  de- 
signs of  masters,  and  to  hold  the  slave  in  a  situation  from  which  he  would 
otherwise  be  delivered.  The  authorized  organs  of  the  Society  have  often  pro- 
claimed their  belief,  that  a  very  large  number  of  owners  would  instantly  man- 
umit their  slaves  or  would  provide  for  their  manumission  at  some  future  day, 
if  there  were  an  asyl  im,  remote  from  this  country  and  exempt  from  the  demo- 
ralizing effects  ot  only  partial  freedom,  to  which  they  might  be  sent.     If  we 
may  judge  from  such  facts  as  have  occurred,  (and  we  can  perceive  no  other 
more  legitimate  foundation  for  an  opinion,)  that  anticipation  is  beginning  to 
be  realized.   This  is  the  only  mode,  under  any  general  plan,  by  which  the  ulti- 
mate expulsion  of  negro  slavery  may  be  promoted;  and  it  is  also,  the  only 
mode  which  the  Society  have  adopted.     Nothing  can  or  ought  to  be  done 
without  the  consent  of  the  individual  master.     Each  State  is  competent,  no 
doubt,  to  provide  for  the  gradual  emancipation  and  removal,  or  the  eman- 
cipation only,  of  the  slaves  within  its  boundaries:  but  that  question  the  So- 
ciety leave,  without  discussion,  to  those  whom  it  concerns.  We  do  not,  there- 
fore, "intrude  within  the  confines  of  any  of  the  States,  for  the  purpose  of 
withdrawing  from  thence  any  portion  of  its  inhabitants;"*  nor  do  we  solicit 
the  United  States  to  do  so.     It  is  our  opinion,  'tis  true,  that  the  existence 
among  us  of  a  free  coloured  population  is  a  great  evil,  both  to  us  and  to  that 
population  itself;  and  that  negro  slavery  is  an  evil  of  no  less  virulence  and 
of  a  much  more  dangerous  extent.     This  was  also  the  sentiment  of  Mr.  Jef- 
ferson.    It  is  the  sentiment,  we  venture  to  affirm,  of  a  large  majority  of 

*See  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report,  page  9. 


1829.)  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  341 

slave-holders,  especially  in  Virginia  and  Maryland.  If  then  these  be  evils 
of  an  alarming  character,  we  deem  it  our  duty,  or  at  least  our  privilege, 
as  citizens,  to  do  all  in  our  power  for  their  cure  or  mitigation.  In  the  means 
by  which  we  propose  to  accomplish  that  end,  there  is  suggested  no  compul- 
sion, either  of  the  free  or  of  the  bond,  either  of  the  master  or  of  the  slave. 
The  entire  process  is  to  be  voluntary,  and  so  gradual  as  to  be  almost  imper- 
ceptible. All  our  exertions  rest  upon  these  incontrovertible  grounds;  that 
individuals  have  a  right  to  dispose  of  their  slaves  as  they  think  proper;  and 
that  we  have  a  right  with  the  permission  of  those  individuals,  to  transport 
such  slaves  to  Africa.  Our  own  resources  are  not  sufficient  for  the  purpose, 
to  the  full  extent  to  which  the  object  can  be  effected;  and  we  have,  there- 
fore, being  engaged,  as  we  believe,  in  an  undertaking  of  great  private  phi- 
lanthropy and  public  and  national  advantage,  solicited  the  pecuniary  aid 
of  the  nation. 

Such  only  being  our  views  and  actions,  we  are  the  more  surprised  at  the 
violent  opposition  to  our  Society,  that  has  manifested  itself  in  some  places: 
an  opposition  which  tends  immediately  to  abridge  the  liberty  of  speech 
and  to  restrict  the  master's  rightful  dominion  over  the  slave.  Have  we  ad- 
dressed ourselves  to  the  slaves?  Never.  We  speak  to  the  master  only. — 
But  even  him  we  have  not  endeavoured  to  prevail  upon,  by  reason  or  per- 
suasion, to  part  with  his  slave.  Being,  chiefly,  slave-holders  ourselves,  we 
Well  know  how  it  becomes  us  to  approach  such  a  subject  as  this  in  a  slave- 
holding  state,  and  in  every  other.  If  there  were  room  for  a  reasonable 
jealousy,  we  among  the  first  should  feel  it;  being  as  much  interested  in  the 
welfare  of  the  community,  and  having  as  much  at  heart,  as  any  men  can 
have,  the  security  of  ourselves,  our  property  and  our  families.  One  or  two 
Legislatures,  with  indignation  and  terror,  "felt  or  feigned,"  have  interfer- 
ed, to  create  perhaps  the  very  danger  which  they  apprehend;  and  have 
done  us  the  honour  of  denouncing  us  most  violently,  in  their  general  ana- 
themas. Do  they  fear  lest  the  citizen  be  persuaded  or  convinced  of  the 
propriety  of  transporting  his  slaves,  or  approving  of  our  project?  Surely, 
the  citizen  has  a  right  to  be  persuaded  or  convinced:  and  if  he  ever  should 
be  so,  the  Legislature  themselves  will  become  our  warmest  advocates.  Our 
object  is,  not  to  prevail  upon  the  master  to  part  with  his  slave,  for  that  we 
leave  to  his  own  reflection  and  convenience;  but  to  afford  to  those  masters 
who  have  determined,  or  may  determine,  to  manumit  their  slaves;  provided 
they  can  be  removed  from  this  country,  the  means  of  removing  them  to  a 
place  where  they  may  be  really  free,  virtuous,  respectable  and  happy. — 
Nothing  can  be  more  innocent  and  less  alarming.  We  advise  those  hasty 
Solons  to  confide  in  the  good  sense  of  their  constituents;  among  whom  are 
many  members  of  our  Society.  Did  we  suppose  that  such  denunciations 
could  have  any  effect  upon  the  national  councils,  we  should  proudly  op- 
pose  to  them  the  recommendations,  in  our  favour,  of  nine  members  of  the 
Union. 

If  these  remarks  be  correct,  (and  tkeir  correctness  cannot  be  disputed,) 


342  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  [Jan. 

no  other  answer  need  be  given  to  Mr.  Tazewell's  fears:* — That  the  United 
States  should,  under  the  pretext  of  colonization,  assume  over  the  coloured 
population  of  the  Union,  a  power  reserved  to  the  respective  states  alone; 
intrude  within  the  boundaries  of  those  states,  to  withdraw  from  thence  the 
coloured  population,  whether  slave  or  free:  and  finally  arrogate  to  them- 
selves the  rig-lit  of  determining,  not  only  who  are  free  and  bond,  but  even 
who  are  coloured,  to  the  manifest  danger,  we  might  add,  to  the  whites 
themselves,  of  being  ultimately  involved  in  compulsory  emigration:  these, 
we  candidly  confess,  are  usurpations  too  monstrous  to  find  a  place  in  our 
narrow  imagination. 

As  we  intended,  therefore,  to  appropriate  a  part  of  any  monies  which  we 
may  receive  from  the  United  States,  to  the  transportation,  not  only  of  such 
free  people  of  colour  as  are  willing  to  emigrate,  but  also  of  such  slaves  as 
their  masters  may  liberate  for  that  purpose,  it  will  be  proper  for  us  to  give 
some  estimate  of  the  sum  that  will  probably  be  required  Mr.  Tazewell 
sets  it  down  (page  13)  at  $195,000,000  for  the  transportation  of  the  whole 
slave  population,  and  $5,700,000  for  that  of  their  annual  increase;  without 
counting  some  $500,000,000  more  that  will  be  required  for  their  purchase: 
and  he  gives  the  Senate  to  understand  (at  the  top  of  page  14,)  that  these 
*urns  are  to  be  collected  and  paid  immediately,  and  the  ent.re  coloured 
population  to  be  removed  at  once  without  further  delay.  Such  a  demand 
on  the  part  of  the  Society;  although  urged  by  Chief  Justice  Marshall  and 
many  other  wise  and  learned  men,  would  be  little  less  than  insane,  under 
actual  circumstances;  and  might  well  astonish  and  intimidate  even  a  more 
prodigal  and  richer  government  than  our  own.  Rut  fortunately  it  is  entire- 
ly a  false  alarm  of  Mr.  Tazewell's,  who  has  again  misunderstood  us. 

None  of  us  have  ever  imagined  that  the  whole  slave  population  of  the 
Union,  any  more  than  the  free  coloured,  might  be  or  ought  to  be  suddenly 
removed;  nor  even  that  the  annual  increase  of  either  could,  for  several, 
perhaps  many,  years  to  come,  be  drained  from  our  soil.  There  are  various 
obstacles  to  such  an  achievement,  almost  as  great  as  the  want  of  money, 
and  which  amount  to  physical  impossibilities.  They  consist  in  the  unpre- 
pared condition  of  the  Colony,  and  the  danger  of  crowding  such  inhabitants 
into  it  too  rapidly.  The  operation  must  be  gradual,  and  at  first  very  slow: 
afterwards  it  will  regulate  itself.  Perhaps  not  more  than  five  hundred 
slaves  will  be  offered  in  this  or  in  the  ensuing  year?  and,  if  more  were  of- 
fered, the  Society  might  perhaps  not  choose  to  convey  them  to  the  Colony: 
what  then  should  we  want  with  $195,000,000? 

The  same  considerations  might  prevail  in  the  selection  of  slave  emigrants, 
as  of  free  emigrants.  Of  the  45,000,  the  annual  increase  of  the  slaves,  on- 
ly about  8,000  are  between  the  ages  of  20  and  30;  and  although  the  bene- 
fits of  emigration  could  not  be  confined  to  that  class,  yet  they  might  be  ex- 
tended more  to  them  than  to  the   rest.     This  would  essentially  diminish  the 


*  See  page  11  of  the  Report. 


1829.]  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  343 

mass  itself,  and  remove  in  a  great  measure,  or  at  least  retard  and  weaken, 
the  means  of  further  increase.  Also,  a  larger  proportion  of  young  females 
than  of  young  men,  might  be  selected.  Various  other  expedients  might 
be  devised  for  diminishing  the  number  necessary  to  be  transported,  and 
thereby  diminishing  the  expense.  The  old  and  infirm  might  as  well  die  in 
this  country  as  in  Africa;  and  the  very  young  might  as  well  remain  here  to 
take  their  chance,  until  a  certain  age,  of  living  or  dying.  We  mention 
these  suggestions,  not  as  the  plan  of  the  Society,  but  as  thoughts  occurring 
to  ourselves.  In  offering  a  master  the  means  of  removing  his  slaves  to  Af- 
rica, the  Society  would  undoubtedly  have  a  right  to  refuse  to  remove,  at 
their  expense,  such  as  he  might  be  supposed  to  liberate,  in  order  to  rid 
himself  of  the  burthen  of  maintaining  them;  and  also  in  purchasing  slaves, 
for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  their  freedom  in  Liberia,  the  Society  would 
have  an  undeniable  right  to  purchase  only  such  as  they  should  prefer. — 
This  will  illustrate  our  meaning. 

Mr.  Tazewell  calculates  the  expense  of  transportation  at  $100  for  each 
person;  we  have  shown  that  it  is  only  $30,  at  the  utmost.  This  reduces 
his  $5,700,000  for  the  conveyance  of  the  57,000  to  1,710,000.  Then  we 
must  make  allowance  for  the  humanity  of  individuals,  themselves,  providing 
for  the  transportation  of  their  slaves;  for  the  omission  of  such  as  are  unsuita- 
ble; and  for  the  continually  augmenting  ability  of  the  Society,  derived  from 
state  and  private  charity,  to  furnish  the  means  of  emigration  to  a  great  num- 
ber. There  yet  remains,  besides,  a  most  important  consideration.  It  is, 
that  when  intercourse  with  the  colony  shall  become  more  frequent,  it  will 
be  proportionably  cheaper.  The  first  emigrants  cost  $100;  those  of  the 
present  day,  $28;  in  a  few  years  the  price  would  be  reduced  to  $10.  We  see 
at  how  slight  an  expense  people  find  their  way  from  Europe  to  this  country. 

Of  the  purchase  of  slaves  it  will  be  time  to  speak  when  there  shall  be  no 
masters  willing  to  manumit  them  gratuitously. 

But  suppose  that  we  do  require  $1,710,000  annually  for  the  transportation 
of  the  increase  of  slaves:  what  are  $1,710,000  a  year  to  such  a  nation  as  this, 
when  public  security  and  the  happiness  of  our  descendants  are  to  be  pur- 
chased by  them?  There  is  no  probability  that  that  sum,  nor  that  half  of  it, 
will  be  required,  for  many  years  yet,  if  at  all:  but  even  if  it  should  be  re- 
quired, every  year,  for  an  hundred  successive  years,  the  object  to  be  effect- 
ed by  it  would  amply   justify  the  expenditure. 

The  slave  population  increases,  in  most  of  the  States,  much  faster  than 
the  white.  In  Georgia,  between  1810  and  1820,  the  increase  of  the  latter 
was  less  than  thirty  per  cent;  that  of  the  former,  more  than  forty -two.  In  the 
same  period,  in  South  Carolina,  the  blacks  increased  above  twenty-eight  per 
cent,  the  whites  only  nine;  and  in  North  Carolina,  the  blacks  twenty-six, 
and  the  whites  twelve.  The  whole  number  of  slaves  in  the  United  States 
is  now  about  1,852,126,  and  their  annual  increase  about  45,174.*     In  the 

*Mr.  Tazewell  estimates  them  erroneously  at  1,900,000,  and  57,000, 


344  Mr.  Tazewell* s  Report.  [Jan. 

year  1840,  they  will  be  respectively  2,430,149  and  59,272;  in  1867,  4,860,- 
298;  in  1894,  9,720,596;  in  1921,  19,441,192;  thus  rolling  on,  doubling 
every  twenty -seven  years,  until  it  vastly  exceed  the  entire  present  popula- 
tion, black  and  white,  of  our  country.  If  the  world  continue  to  exist,  and 
the  human  race  to  be  multiplied  on  the  same  principles  as  now,  no  one  can 
foresee  to  what  a  fearful  height  this  inundation  may  not  rise,  what  frightful 
ravages  it  may  not  commit,  and  what  permanent  changes  it  may  not  leave, 
like  convulsions  in  the  natural  world,  upon  the  face  of  American  society, — 
Every  man  who  has  the  welfare  of  his  race  at  heart,  must  confess  that  this 
prospect  is  appalling,  and  that  it  will  be  wise  to  do  something  to  avert  the 
danger.  If  his  efforts  should  have  no  other  object  or  result  but  to  keep 
down  the  increase,  or  abate  its  alarming  speed,  he  will  be  entitled  to  the 
gratitude  and  admiration  of  all  posterity.  Compared  with  such  a  design, 
$1,700,000  are  as  a  cent.  If  the  United  States  do  not  provide  the  means, 
it  will  be  the  interest  and  policy  of  each  State  to  do  so  for  herself,  and  to 
make  such  regulations  (which  States  alone  can  make)  as  will  deliver  her 
citizens,  and  their  children's  children  from  the  awful  consequences.  We 
entertain  no  doubt  that  many  States  will  resort  to  such  measures.  All  that 
we  can  do,  is  to  remove  such  slaves  as  may  be  gratuitously  manumitted  by 
their  masters,  or  bought  by  us,  for  that  purpose;  and  it  is  to  effect  those  ob- 
jects, that  we  call  upon  our  government  to  aid  us. 

If,  by  any  appropriation  of  money  whatsoever,  the  annual  increase  of  slaves 
can  be  arrested  or  at  least  retarded,  it  will  be  wise  to  make  that  appropria- 
tion, be  it  ever  so  great.  It  should  be  applied  to  the  purchase  and  transpor- 
tation of  such  as  might  be  voluntarily  sold  by  their  masters;  and  to  the 
transportation  of  such  as  might  become  free  under  the  laws  of  any  State. 
In  this  there  could,  surely,  be  no  infringement  of  state  rights.  By  thus  re- 
pressing the  too  rapid  increase  of  blacks,  the  white  population  would  be 
enabled  to  reach  and  soon  overtop  them.  The  consequence  would  be  se- 
curity; and  if  any  state  should  then  desire  it,  she  might  the  more  readily  ac- 
complish the  entire  extirpation  of  the  evil.  If  she  should  not  choose  to  do 
so,  she  might  refuse:  it  is  idle  to  suggest  or  apprehend  compulsion.  But  if 
the  blacks  be  suffered  to  accumulate  as  they  have  done  and  are  doing,  the 
time  must  arrive  when  the  slave-holding  States  will  present  the  appearance 
of  a  handful  of  whites  in  the  midst  of  a  multitude  of  slaves,  who  will  have 
become  indomitable  from  their  numbers,  and  from  the  same  cause  worthless. 

Mr.  Tazewell  has  estimated  the  sum  which  we  shall  require,  at  $195,000- 
000.  He  cannot  seriously  pretend  to  think  that  we  shall  want  the  whole 
sum  in  any  one  year.  Then  it  will  be  distributed  among  many  years.  Ap- 
portioned among  an  hundred  years,  it  will  be  about  $2,000,000  every 
year:  among  one  hundred  and  ninety-five,  $1,000,000.  We  have  never 
supposed  that  the  Society's  plan  could  be  accomplished  in  a  few  years; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  have  boasted  that  it  will  demand  a  century  for  its  ful- 
filment. What  is  a  century,  what  are  three  centuries,  in  the  existence  of 
a  nation  ?     They  are  like  years  in  the  life  of  man.     We  are  not  labouring- 


18i0.]  Mr.  Tazexvell's  Report.  345 

and  living  for  ourselves  alone:  our  ancestors  lived  and  laboured  for  us,  and 
we  must  live  and  labour  for  our  posterity.     When  our  fathers  plunged  into 
the  war  of  the  [{evolution,  where  would  have  been  their  triumphs,   where 
©ur  freedom,  strength  and  happiness,  if  they  had  stopt  to  calculate  the  cost? 
What  they  expended,  for  us  as  well  as  for  themselves,  we  have  done  our 
part  in  paying:  and  when  we  undertake  this  great  system  of  amelioration  or 
defence,  let  our  posterity,  who  will  derive  the  chief  benefits,  assume  a  due 
proportion  of  the  burthen.     If  it  had  been  adopted  at  the  Independence,  it 
would  now  be  in  the  fruit-bearing  season  and  drawing  to  maturity.     If  it  had 
been  commenced  a  century  and  an  half  ago,  it  would  now  be  complete;  per- 
haps mere  matter  of  history.     But  if  it  never  be  begun,  it  can  never  be  con- 
cluded.    Let  us  therefore  lead  the  way,  and  earn  the  applause  of  centuries 
to  come.     Our    resources  are   in   the  vigour  of  manhood.     Our  treasury  is 
full.     In  a  few  years  the  national  debt  will  have  been  paid  off,  and  ten  mil- 
lions of  dollars  disengaged  to  be  appropriated  to  other  purposes.     Can  we 
not  spare  a  small  portion  of  that  sum  for  such  an  experiment  as  this! 

Besides  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  this  scheme  to  ourselves  at  home, 
it  has  numerous  incidental  and  accompanying  advantages,  upon  which  we 
have  not  now  room  to  dwell.  Experience  has  demonstrated  that  the  slaver 
trade,  which  all  concur  in  wishing  to  suppress,  cannot  be  destroyed  with- 
out making  establishments  on  land,  along  the  coast.  From  such  establish- 
ments, the  slavers  would  be  overawed,  and  their  marts  commanded,  and  the 
deluded  natives  be  taught  a  better  traffic,  or  compelled  to  refrain  from  the 
worse.  By  such  establishments  they  might  be  gradually  reclaimed  from  all 
barbarity,  and  the  blessings  of  Christian  civilization  be  substituted  for  their 
senseless  idolatry.  As  these  establishments  should  grow  into  nations,  they 
would  afford  an  immense  and  ever  extending  market  for  the  products  of  our 
soil  and  industry,  and  furnish  incessant  occupation  for  our  commerce;  more 
than  compensating  us,  perhaps,  for  all  expenditures. 

Tike  experiment  is  not  difficult,  nor  will  it  be  onerously  expensive.  All 
that  remains  .to  be  tested  is,  whether  the  free  blacks  will  emigrate  in  suffici- 
ent numbers,  and  whether  many  masters  will  liberate  their  slaves  for  the 
purpose  of  sending  them  to  Africa.  A  home  is  already  provided  for  them 
there,  where  they  will  be  as  free  as  we  are  here,  and  where  they  will  be 
among  people  of  their  own  religion,  language,  customs,  and  colour.  Twen- 
ty years  will  suffice  for  the  experiment.  If  it  succeed,  how  much  is  gained! 
If  it  fail,  nothing  is  lost  but  a  pittance  from  our  coffers. 

The  expense  can  be  ascertained  by  a  very  simple  computation.  Let  Go- 
vernment grant  the  Society,  each  year,  a  sum  sufficient  for  the  transporta- 
tion of  as  many  applicants  as  may  offer  during  the  year.  This  year,  for  in- 
stance, as  there  are  six  hundred,  the  appropriation,  at  $30  for  each  person, 
would  amount  to  §15,000:  to  which  add  £10,000  or  $15,000  for  incidental 
expenses,  and  the  progressive  improvement  of  the  place  intended  for  their 
reception.  It  must  be  remarked  that,  as  the  Colony  shall  expand  and  be- 
come more  populous,  this  additional  appropriation,  small  as  it  now  is,  will 
44 


346  Jir.  Tazewell's  Report.  [/an. 

diminish,  and  the  necessity  for  it  gradually  disappear.  Of  the  disbursement 
of  the  whole  sum  the  society  might  be  required  to  render  a  strict  annual  ac- 
count. Next  year,  if  there  should  be  1000  applicants,  $30,000,  with  a  pro- 
per  addition,  for  purposes  alluded  to  above,  might  be  appropriated.  So  the 
appropriations  might  continue  to  be  made,  from  year  to  year,  as  long  as  Go- 
vernment should  deem  them  for  the  general  good.  Augmenting  and  con- 
tracting with  the  object  to  which  they  were  applied,  they  would  themselves 
constitute  the  most  unerring  measure  by  which  to  judge  of  their  utility. — 
Thus,  if  they  should  increase,  it  would  indicate  that  they  were  producing 
an  equivalent  advantage:  and,  if  emigration  should  proceed  more  slowly, 
so  much  of  the  public  monies  would  be  saved.  Therefore,  the  appropri- 
ation can  never  outstrip  or  surpass  its  benefits.  Indeed,  it  would  not  in- 
crease in  the  same  rapid  proportion;  for,  should  the  scheme  grow  popular, 
and  the  tide  of  emigration  swell,  the  expense,  as  we  have  shown,  would  di- 
minish; and  thus,  although  double  the  effect  that  now  favours  our  project, 
might  be  produced  ten  years  hence,  it  would  be  produced  by  an  equal,  per- 
haps a  smaller  amount  of  money.  The  apprehensions,  then,  that,  as  the 
plan  goes  on,  larger  and  larger  sums  must  be  drawn  from  the  treasury,  un- 
til at  length  they  leave  it  empty,  appear  to  be  groundless;  and  Mr.  Taze- 
well's millions  shrink  into  a  few  thousands.  There  is  not  a  more  intimate 
association  between  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  fluctuations 
of  the  thermometer,  than  between  these  principles  and  our  cause- 

If,  for  a  paltry  saving,  the  rulers  of  our  country  allow  this  design  to  die 
or  languish  without  a  trial,  they  will  deserve  to  be  quoted,  in  all  aftertimes, 
a*  the  most  short-sighted  men  to  whom  the  destinies  of  a  nation  ever  had 
the  misfortune  to  be  entrusted. 


We  publish  in  our  present  number  another  very  interesting  and 
able  article,  on  the  subject  of  Mr.  Tazewell's  Report.  For  this 
we  have  reasons  to  render,  in  addition  to  the  extent  and  impor- 
tance of  the  subject,  which  not  only  warrant,  but  demand  its  inser- 
tion. We  wish  the  public  generally  to  understand,  that  we  are  not 
so  alarmed  at  Mr.  Tazewell's  statements  and  estimates,  as  to  let 
them  pass  in  silence,  lest  peradventure  they  should  be  found  t® 
be  correct.  We  have  no  such  fear.  It  is  true,  that  for  the 
time,  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  grant  from  Congress  was  defeated, 
yet  we  see,  and  we  rejoice  to  see,  that  in  the  main  scope  of  his 
arguments,  aiming,  as  they  do,  at  the  general  ruin  of  our  cause, 
he  is  blowing  against  the  wind.  In  the  busy  Senate  chamber, 
the  more  immediate  sphere  of  his  influence,  where  there  was  time 
to  commit  the  subject,  but  not  to  consider  it,  he  might  be  able 
to  check  or  change  the  current,  at  least  for  the  timej  but  abroad 


1829.]  •Afr.  TaxeweWs  Report.  347 

it  still  movei  onward,  the  disturbance  from  this  source  amount- 
ing scarcely  to  a  ripple;  and  so,  we  trust,  it  will  move  onward 
forever.  We  speak  not  merely  of  the  known  and  certain  merits 
of  our  undertaking;  of  its  entire  and  easy  practicability,  in  itself 
considered;  of  its  unlimited  fund  of  beneficence;  of  the  sound 
principles  of  wisdom  by  which  it  is  supported;  but  we  say  that 
our  country,  even  though  Mr.  Tazewell  does  not  stand  quite 
alone,  our  country  is  prepared  to  receive  and  to  accomplish  it. 
In  proof  of  this  we  can  say,  that  in  the  other  and  more  numerous 
branch  of  our  National  Legislature,  a  report  was  made  and  ac- 
cepted, which  was  directly  the  reverse  of  Mr.  Tazewell's. — 
In  Congress,  then,  there  is  an  equipoise  relative  to  the 
interests  of  our  cause,  and  weights  are  constantly  accumulating 
to  turn  the  scales  in  our  favour.  But  the  constituents  of  Con- 
gress, it  may  be  said  without  the  least  shadow  of  doubt  or  of  ar- 
rogance, even  a  vast  majority  of  the  great  arid  good  of  our  coun- 
try are  for  us;  and  are  so  fixed  in  their  sentiments,  that  nothing 
but  the  most  inexcusable  supineness,  or  criminal  apathy,  can 
prevent  our  cause  from  becoming  triumphant.  In  the  mean- 
while there  is  nothing  that  can  justly  excite  enmity;  and  we  are 
not  without  the  hope,  that  even  the  captious  and  the  selfish, 
merely  from  motives  of  personal  interest,  will  ere  long  become 
our  well  wishers,  though  we  can  expect  little  benefit  from  their 
activity. 

But  not  only  do  we  wish  to  manifest  our  entire  fearlessness, 
and  even  our  desire,  of  thorough,  minute,  and  candid  inquiry, 
but  we  are  anxious  to  do  what  we  can  in  promoting  such  an  in- 
quiry, especially  with  regard  to  those  topics,  around  which  an 
attempt  has  been  made  to  throw  distrust,  by  an  authorized 
committee  of  Congress.  We  have  not  the  least  apprehension, 
that  this  attempt  will  alienate  the  minds  of  any  of  jour  friends 
who  have  taken  clear  and  candid  views  of  the  subject.  Our  on- 
ly fear  is,  that  it  may  hinder  inquiry,  where  it  has  not  yet  been 
made;  and  that  the  unfounded  opinions  of  an  individual  may  be 
adopted  without  examination  as  the  true  description  of  reality. 
We  desire  then,  we  entreat,  that  all  would  duly  examine  the 
subject  for  themselves;  and  inasmuch  as  we  have  by  far  the 
greatest  weight  of  talent  and  influence  in  our  favour,  that  they 
would  not  rest  their  faith  on  this  hostile  and  exparte  authority. 


"48  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Col.  Society.  [Jaa. 


Aim.  Meeting  ofttve  Colonization  Society. 

The  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Society  for 
Colonizing  the  Free  People  of  Colour  in  the  United  States,  was 
held  at  the  City  Hall,  in  Washington,  on  Saturday  the  17th  of 
January.  Though  the  evening  was  rainy  and  unpleasant,  the 
meeting  was  quite  respectable,  and  was  honoured  with  the  pre- 
sence of  many  of  the  most  distinguished  men  of' our  country; 
among  whom  were  Chief  Justice  Marshall,  the  Secretary  of 
State,  and  many  eminent  Members  from  both  Houses'  of  Con- 
gress. 

At  seven  o'clock  Judge  Washington  took  the  Chair,  and  the 
Secretary,  Mr.  Gurley,  read  the  names  of  the  Delegates  from 
various  Auxiliary  Societies.  He  then  read  the  Report:  ami  tho9 
from  the  numerous  interesting  events  of  the  past  year  it  was  ne- 
cessarily rather  longer  than  usual,  it  was  heard  with  profound 
attention,  and  deep  interest,  which  were  more  manifest  toward 
the  close  than  near  the  commencement.  The  Report  developed 
very  clearly  the  state,  progress  and  prospects  of  the  Colony  and 
Society.  It  appears,  that  though  the  hand  of  Providence  has 
inflicted  great  bereavements,  yet  no  year  has  transpired  that  has 
been  on  the  whole  so  auspicious  to  the  interests  and  prospects 
of  our  cause.  The  Colony  has  been  greatly  blessed,  and  in  its 
very  aspect  it  stands  a  conspicuous  and  unanswerable  argument 
to  prove  the  wisdom  as  well  as  the  benevolence  of  the  scheme 
on  which  it  has  been  sustained  and  established.  When  its  op- 
posers  require  an  absolute  demonstration  of  its  beneficial  ten- 
dency, expediency  and  practicability,  we  point  in  silence  to 
Africa. 

In  this  country  too,  events  have  been  no  less  animating  and 
auspicious.  The  sound  of  opposition  has  been  sinking  to  a 
whisper:  the  spontaneous  and  persuasive  tones  of  the  female 
voice,  are  beginning  to  be  heard  in  our  behalf:  an  increased  in- 
terest, and  a  decisive  conviction,  in  favour  of  Colonization,  has 
jone  forth  throughout  the  Union:  the  hand  of  beneficence  is  ob- 
viously opening  to  supply  the  means  which  have  heretofore  been 
so  scanty,  although  productive  of  almost  miraculous  results:  and 
Virginia  and  Kentucky  have  risen  in  their  might,  and  have  at 


1829.]         Gen.  Lafayette. — Expedition  to  Liberia.         34* 

once  taken  their  stand  among  the  very  foremost  of  our  advocates 
and  supporters.  These  states  possessing  as  great  an  influence 
as  any  in  the  country,  and  having  a  common  interest  with  all 
the  people  of  the  south,  the  most  glorious  results  maybe  expect- 
ed from  the  bright  example  which  they  have  so  freely  and  so 
nobly  exhibited.  At  least  the  shadows  of  mere  suspicion  must 
rapidly  flee  before  it. 

The  meeting  was  closed  by  a  series  of  suitable  resolutionsf 
and  by  interesting  and  able  addresses  from  some  of  those  who 
moved  them,  and  from  other  gentlemen  who  attended  the  meet- 
ing. There  was  obviously  a  very  great  unanimity  of  sentiment 
and  feeling,  and  the  proceedings  of  the  evening  were  not  dis- 
turbed by  a  single  dissenting  voice. 

Reserving  a  further  account  of  the  meeting  for  a  future  num- 
ber, we  close  with  the  animating  remark,  that  the  cause  of  colo- 
nization is  triumphant  over  every  thing  but  neglect  and  apathy. 


Gen.  liaia^ette. 

In  a  letter  now  before  us,  dated  "Lagrange,  November  29th, 
1828,"  this  venerable  and  beloved  man  observes,  "I  am  delight- 
ed to  hear  that  the  accounts  from  our  so  very  interesting  Libe- 
ria, are  so  satisfactory.  The  honour  I  have  received  in  being 
elected  an  Officer  of  the  Society,  no  one  could  more  highly 
value.  Be  pleased  to  present  my  respects  and  sympathies  to 
our  fellow  members  when  you  meet  them.  I  have  received  the 
greater  part  of  the  Journals,  but  would  like  to  have  a  complete 
collection  from  the  origin  of  the  Institution,  to  the  end  of  the 
year. " 


T&xpediiioii  to  lobelia. 

We  mentioned  in  our  last  number,  that  the  ship  Harriet,  ly- 
ing  at  Norfolk,  was  chartered  by  the  Society  to  convey  emi- 
grants to  the  Colony.  About  two  hundred  are  expected  to  em- 
bark in  her,  and  she  will  probably  sail  next  week. 


:*50  Coloni%ation  Society  and  the  Ladies.  [Jaw. 

Colonization  Society  awiVthe  lia&ifcs. 

We  rejoice  that  our  fair  countrywomen,  who  have  ever  evin- 
ced the  most  laudable  spirit  whenever  appealed  to  in  behalf  of 
humane,  benevolent,  or  pious  institutions,  begin  to  express  a 
deep  and  active  interest  in  the  great  and  promising  enterprise  of 
the  American  Colonization  Society.  We  have  long  believed 
that  it  was  only  necessary  to  bring  this  scheme,  attractive  and 
imposing  as  it  is,  distinctly  before  them,  to  excite  their  best 
feelings,  and  secure  their  noblest  exertions  to  advance  it — to 
kindle  within  their  bosoms  a  holy  and  resolute  enthusiasm  not  to 
be  extinguished — not  to  die  away,  which  should  soften  down  op- 
position, and  outlive  censure,  prove  admirable  in  its  influences, 
and  illustrious  in  its  deeds.  They  have  not  waited  for  our  ex- 
planations, our  arguments,  and  our  appeal,  but  have  already 
commenced  (unostentatiously,  to  besure,  but  efficiently  we 
know,)  their  kind  and  generous  operations.  Urged  by  the  spon- 
taneous sentiments  of  their  hearts,  they  have  established  several 
Auxiliary  Associations,  which  have  contributed  with  no  ordinary 
liberality  to  the  funds  of  the  Parent  Institution.  Other  Female 
Societies  are  to  be  organized,  and  various  expedients  (which  the 
charity  of  Christians  is  eyer  so  prompt  to  suggest)  are  to  be  de- 
vised to  augment  the  funds  which  are  so  imperiously  required 
for  our  object.  We  bid  them  God  speed  in  all  their  gentle  and 
blessed  charities,  but  especially  would  we  cheer  them  onward  in 
this  heavenly  work.  Ours  is  not  the  gift  of  prophecy;  yet,  we 
venture  to  predict,  that  the  voice  of  future  ages  will  speak  their 
praise,  and  the  people  of  two  Continents  render  to  them  the 
homage  of  thankful  hearts.  Regarding  the"  approbation  and  ef- 
forts of  the  ladies  for  the  Colonization  Society  as  meriting  all 
possible  encouragement,  the  Board  of  Managers  of  the  Parent 
Institution,  on  the  12th  instant,  unanimously  adopted  the  fol- 
lowing resolution, 

''Resolved,  That  this  Board  view  with  special  interest  the  disposition  evin- 
ced by  the  Ladies,  in  several  cities  to  promote  the  interests  of  this  Society, 
and  that  they  earnestly  recommend  to  their  female  friends,  throughout  the 
Union,  to  establish  Auxiliary  Societies,  and  to  aid  in  the  collection  of  funds 
by  such  other  methods  as  their  wisdom  and  charity  may  suggest." 


1829.]  State  Society  of  Kentucky.  551 


State  Society  of  Kentucky. 

Frankfort,  Tuesday  Evening,  Dec.  20th*  1828. — A  num- 
ber of -gentlemen  met  at  the  Senate  chamber,  for  the  purpose  of 
taking  into  consideration  the  propriety  and  expediency  of  form- 
ing a  State  Society,  auxiliary  to  the  American  Colonization  So- 
ciety at  Washington  City. 

Mr.  Tunstall  Quarles,  was  appointed  Chairman,  and  Mr. 
James  Stonestreet,  Secretary. 

Mr.  John  Pope,  the  Rev.  Benjamin  0.  Peers,  agent  of  the 
American  Colonization  Society,  and  Doctor  Louis  Marshall 
addressed  the  meeting,  showing  the  origin,  objects  and  prospects 
of  the  Society,  and  the  propriety  of  forming  an  auxiliary  Society. 

Mr.  Pope  moved  the  following  resolution:  which  was  adopted. 

Resolved,  That  in  the  opinion  of  this  meeting",  the  objects  of  the  America* 
Colonization  Society  are  such,  as  must  be  approved  by  humanity  and  en- 
lightened patriotism,  that  its  scheme  is  one  calculated  to  relieve  the  citi- 
zens of  this  Commonwealth,  from  the  serious  inconveniences  resulting- from 
the  existence  among-  them,  of  a  rapidly  increasing  number  of  free  persons 
of  colour,  who  are  not  subject  to  the  restraints  of  slavery;  and  that  for  these 
reasons  it  is  desirable  that  an  auxiliary  State  Society  be  formed  in  Kentucky, 
to  co-operate  with  the  Parent  Society  at  Washington;  and  that  a  committee 
of  five  be  now  appointed  to  draft  a  constitution,  which  shall  be  submitted  to 
a  general  meeting  to  be  held  at  the  Methodist  meeting  house,  in  this  town, 
on  Friday  the  ninth  day  of  January  next,  at  3  o'clock,  P.  M. 

Messrs.  John  Pofe,  Daniel  Mayes  Adam  Beatty,  James 
W.  Denny  and  Samuel  Daviess,  *wcr<3  appointed  a  committee 
pursuant  to  said  resolution. 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Beatty, 

Resolved,  That  the  Secretary  of  this  meeting  be  requested  to  cause  to  be 
published  in  the  several  newspapers,  printed  in  Lj  e  town  of  Frankfort,  a 
copy  of  the  proceedings  of  this  itieeting. 

T.  Quarles,  Chairman- 
Att.  J.  Stonestreet,  Secretary. 


In  the  list  of  contributions,  page  320,  instead  of  "Jacob  Wagener,  Ksq. 
«f  Easton,  Maryland,"  read  Jfaw6  Waggoner,  Esq.  ofEaston,  Penmylmmn, 


35&  Contributions.  [Jaw. 


C  out  r  Ybutions 

To  the  A.  C.  Society,  from  29th  Dec.   182«,   to  Jan.  21,  1829. 

By  Rev.  Samuel  Gutelius,  Hanover,  Pa.  per  Hon.  A.  King",  ....     $10 

By  Rev.  Nicholas  Patterson,  per  the  General  Agent,   3 

Mrs   Lucy  Minor,  of  Fredericksburg1,  Va.  as  follows,  viz. 
Contributed  by  a  Juvenile  Society  at  Edgewood,  Hanover  Co'ty. 

Virginia,  $10 

Ditto  by  a  similar  So'y   at  St,  Martins'  Parish,  Han'r.  Co.  Va.     10—  20 
A  Christmas  offering,  from  a  warm  friend  in  Hagestown,  Md.  ...       10 

Asa  Hammond,   Esq  of  Claiborne,  Alabama, 1 

W.  Frye,  Esq.  of  ditto 5 

G.  W.Dillingham,  of  Clinton,  Jones  County,    Georgia,  to  consti- 
tute himself  a  member  for  18  years,    18 

Miss  Francina  Cheston,  of  West  River,    Md.  per  F.  S-  Key,  Esq.     60i 
A  few  friends  in  Lynchburg,  Va.  being  the  sum  required  by  the 
Rev.  Jos.  Turner  and  family,  for  a  passage  to  the  Colony 

at  Liberia, 9Q 

From  a  gentleman  of  Washington,  a  loan  from  him,  800 

Rev.  William  Hawley,  collected  by  him  in  the  Episcopal  Church, 

at  Troy,  New  York,   50 

Mrs.  Brewster  of  Pa.  per  C.  C.  Harper,  Esq 5 

Rev.  J.  J.  Robertson,  formerly  of  Baltimore, 4 

Dr.  Alex.  Somerville,  of  Essex  Co.  Va.  per  Hon.  C.  F.  Mercer,       14 

Wm.  E .  Beckwith,  Esq.  of  Fairfax  County,  Va.  per  ditto, 15* 

Auxiliary  Society,  Berkely  County,  Va.  per  Mr.  Pendleton,  ....       30 

Ditto,  Ann  Arundell  Co.  Md.  per  A.  Randall,  Esq.   .       48  52 

Ditto,  Liberty  Town,  Fred.  Co.  Md.  per  R.  Potts,  Esq.       88 

Ladies'  Auxiliary  Society,  Georgetown,  D.  C .  their  first  donation, 

per  Mrs.  Southern,  Treasurer,    37  75 

Collections  at  sundry  times,  by  Rev   Messrs.  Emory  and  Waugh, 

by  the  hands  of  Mr.  James  Connell,  5123 

Collections  by  Rev.  William  Jackson,  of  Alex,  as  follows: 

Mr.  Entwistle, $3      Mr.  Cowing, $1 

Mrs.  Magruder,    1      A  friend?  3 

Mrs.  Henderson, 2      William  Jackson,   2 12 

Collection  by  Presbyterian  Congregation,  at  New  Lisbon,  Colum- 
bus, Ohio,  per  Hon.  Mr.  Sloane,  4  10 

Collection  by  ditto  at  Middlebury,  Va.  per  Rev.  Dr.  Williamson,         3  81 
Some  person  unknown,  deposited  in  Bank  to  credit  of  the  Treas- 
urer, on  the  2d  August,  1828, 18  52 

$1,932  93 

*  $6  of  this  for  the  Repository. 


THE 


AFRICAN  REPOSITORY, 


AND 

COLONIAL  JO'JJtlTAL. 

« 

Vol.  IV.  MARCH,  1829.  No.  12. 

Africa. 

CIVIL  GEOGRAPHY. 

It  is  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  useful  achievements  of  hu- 
man intellect,  to  seize  upon  those  complex  and  extensive  sub- 
jects, which  to  a  common  or  uneducated  mind,  present  nothing 
but  confusion  and  incomprehensible  diversity;  and  by  means  of 
analysis,  comparison,  and  deduction,  to  reduce  them  to  simpli- 
city, order,  and  uniformity,  so  that  the  weakest  may  say,  all 
this  is  plain  and  easy;  so  that  the  great  ingenuity  of  the  man, 
may  even  deprive  himself  of  the  credit  of  any  ingenuity.  It 
would,  however,  be  a  visionary  hope,  that  such  a  result  could  be 
attained  with  regard  to  African  Civil  Geography.  So  numer- 
ous, so  diversified,  and  so  buried  in  oblivion,  are  the  causes 
which  have  led  to  the  present  civil  state  of  Africa,  and  so  blend- 
ed together  and  confounded,  are  the  innumerable  civil  charac- 
teristics of  that  continent,  that  scarcely  any  thing  satisfactory 
can  be  expected,  except  minute  and  particular  details,  which 
would  not  be  at  all  consistent  with  the  brevity  of  this  article. 
The  subject,  in  its  very  aspect,  is  about  as  comprehensible  by 
the  savage  African,  as  by  the  consummate  philosopher. 

Africa,  as  it  respects  its  civil  character,  may  be  divided  into 

two  great  portions,  of  which  the  separating  boundary,  though 

iomewhat  fluctuating,  lies  at  present,  near  the  line  of  the  Sene- 
45 


3o4  Africa.  Feb. 

gal,  Niger,  and  Mountains  of  the  Moon.  The  Northern  por- 
tion, by  the  incursions  of  the  Turks,  Moors,  and  Saracens,  has 
been  visited  and  overspread  by  a  species  of  civilization,  obscured, 
disgraced,  and  deformed,  by  numerous  traits  of  more  than  sav- 
age barbarity.  The  Southern  portion,  though  cursed  with  much 
of  the  influence  of  these  marauders,  is  still  in  the  possession  and 
power  of  the  Aborigines  of  the  country;  and  the  name  of  Ker- 
dies  is  applied  to  them  by  their  Northern  persecutors:  a  name 
which  is  at  once  outlawed,  hated,  and  despised.  The  hard 
hearted  Mussulman,  drawing  from  heaven  the  sanction  of  his 
horrible  cruelties,  piously  hunts  them  in  their  villages  and  na- 
tive wilds,  and  without  mercy  or  distinction,  destroys  them,  or 
drags  them  into  the  miseries  of  oppression,  and  perpetual  servi- 
tude. Fortunately,  the  profession  of  Islamism,  saves  them  from 
the  disgrace  of  slavery,  though  not  from  the  hand  of  the  destroy- 
er. As  followers  of  Mahomet,  they  may  not  be  enslaved,  but 
they  may  still  be  oppressed  and  subdued,  and  like  domestic 
dogs,  be  compelled  to  hunt  and  destroy  their  kindred  and  their 
countrymen. 

Many  of  the  Southern  nations  have  improved  deplorably  om 
these  examples  of  their  oppressors.  Where  they  have  embraced 
the  Mahometan  faith,  the  same  tenets  justify  them,  and  urge 
them  forward  in  the  same  ferocious  and  merciless  treatment  of 
their  countrymen.  Frequently  uniting  these  tenets  in  a  horrid 
alliance  with  ambition,  avarice  and  revenge,  and  instigated  by 
the  more  enlightened  and  cunning  Northern  traders,  for  the  spe- 
cial purpose  of  maintaining  the  commerce  in  slaves,  they  wage 
war  on  the  slightest  pretences;  betray  their  peaceful  and  unsus- 
pecting neighbours  into  servitude;  visit  their  defenceless  huts 
with  rapine  and  violence;  doom  their  subjects  and  fellow-citi- 
zens, for  the  slightest  offences,  and  often  on  suspicion,  to  per- 
petual exile,  and  foreign  bondage;  and  a  great  portion  of  these 
numberless  victims,  ensnared  by  every  device  of  savage  ingenui- 
ty, after  having  endured  the  indignities  of  their  situation,  and 
the  bitter  parting  from  the  endearments  of  home,  are  destined 
to  perish,  famished  and  exhausted,  on  the  sands  of  the  desert; 
to  end  an  existence,  protracted  in  misery,  in  the  crowded  and 
pestilential  prisons  of  the  slave  ship,  or  in  saving  a  rapacious 
crew  from  starvation,  to  be  buried  alive  in  a  watery  grave. 


1829.3  Africa.  .355 

Their  bones,  when  not  covered  by  the  winds,  are  formed  into 
pavements  for  caravans,  around  the  watering  places,  and  along 
the  way,*  or  strewed  unseen,  on  the  bed  of  the  Ocean. 

The  name  of  Moors,  which  is  used  in  Europe,  but  not  in  Afri- 
«a,  is  applied  chiefly  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  States  of  Barbary: 
These  are  not  a  single  race,  but  derive  their  origin  from  various 
sources.  They  are  a  mixture  of  the  ancient  Mauritanians,  and 
Numidians;  the  Vandals  from  the  North,  the  Saracens  and 
Turks  from  the  East,  and  the  Brebers,  the  oldest  inhabitants, 
who  were  driven  back,  like  the  ancient  Britons,  and  now  occu- 
py the  interior  and  mountainous  parts  of  the  country.  These 
races,  however,  art>.so  assimilated,  by  the  mouldings  of  despotic 
power,  and  religious  intolerance,  that  they  can  now  be  hardly 
distinguished. 

In  Barbary,  Jews  also  are  found  in  great  numbers,  a  distinct 
Face,  and  indeed,  the  farthest  possible  from  an  amalgamation 
with  the  other  inhabitants.  They  are  an  outcast  class,  hated, 
despised,  and  derided,  and  subject  to  insult  and  persecution, 
with  impunity.  But  the  immense  profits  of  trade,  induce  them 
to  submit  with  patience  to  these  indignities. 

The  inhabitable,  or  rather  the  almost  uninhabitable  portions  of 
the  vast  space  between  the  States  of  Barbary,  and  the  produc- 
tive regions  of  Central  Africa,  are  occupied  by  the  Arabs. 
This  name  is  doubtless  applied,  not  only  to  the  descendants  of 
those  who  originally  came  from  Arabia,  but  to  all  who  lead  the 
same  rude  and  migratory  life.  They  dwell  in  moveable  villages, 
consisting  of  tents,  arranged  in  circles,  like  the  huts  of  the  Hot- 
tentots, and  in  the  intermediate  space,  supplying  their  cattle 
with  a  place  of  security.  When  the  means  of  support  are  ex- 
hausted, they  depart  for  a  spot  where  their  wants  can  be  sup- 
plied. They  are  governed  by  Sheiks  and  Emirs,  pay  homage 
and  tribute  to  the  Moorish  sovereigns  when  they  must,  but  seize 
upon  every  opportunity  to  act  for  themselves,  and  to  in- 
dulge to  the  full,  their  predatory  propensities.  They  consist  of 
several  races,  of  different  names,  as  the  Errifi,  the  Shelluhs,  the 
Shouaas,  the  Tibboos,  the  Tuaricsj  but  they  doubtless  have  a 

*  A  single  watering  place,  says  Major  Denham,  was  in  some  cases,  sur- 
rounded by  more  than  a  hundred  kuman  skeletons 


J5fc  Africa*  [Feb. 

common  origin,  and  they  use  different  dialects  of  the  same  lan- 
guage. They  are  all  bigoted  Mussulmans.  They  are  much  ad- 
dicted to  pilfering,  and  in  the  use  of  fire-arms,  excel  all  the  other 
inhabitants  of  Africa. 

-  The  inhabitants  of  Egypt  are  chiefly  foreigners.  The  Copts 
are  the  only  people  that  derive  their  origin  from  the  Egyptians, 
of  remote  antiquity,  and  even  they,  are  the  descendants  of  a 
confused  mixture  with  the  Persian,  Grecian,  Roman,  and  Ara- 
bian races.  They  dwell  chiefly  in  upper  Egypt;  their  numbers 
are  small,  and  they  are  very  far  inferior  to  their  ancestors. 
Abyssinia  appears  to  have  been  peopled  from  Arabia,  having 
many  characteristics  corresponding  to  thog*  of  the  Jews  and 
Arabians.  Its  remote  parts,  however,  are  inhabited  by  the  pri- 
mitive African  race,  some  of  whom,  are  still  of  the  lowest  order 
of savages. 

In  the  middle  countries  of  Africa,  as  might  be  expected,  there 
is  a  mixture  of  the  Southern  Aborigines,  with  the  various  races 
from  the  North.  They  are  ruled  chiefly  by  Moorish  Mahometan 
chiefs;  but  in  some  cases,  the  negro  race  appear  occasionally  to 
resume  the  ascendancy.  Of  this,  Tombuctoo  is  said  to  present 
an  instance. 

Further  South,  Africa  is  filled  with  a  population  almost  en- 
tirely native.  Among  the  tribes  of  that  part  of  the  continent,  a 
few  profess  the  Mahometan  faith,  rendered  worse,  if  possible,  by 
a  mixture  of  their  own  superstitions.  The  austere  habits  of  a 
Mussulman  is,  however,  mostly  avoided.  The  native  races  are 
generally  much  devoted  to  pleasure,  and  their  character  is 
marked  by  carelessness  and  levity.  '"From  sunset,  all  Africa 
dances."  Polygamy  is  practised  in  the  extreme,  the  number  of 
women  appropriated  to  an  individual,  being  sometimes  three  or 
four  thousand.  But  it  is  not  attended  with  the  same  jealous  se- 
clusion which  exists  in  most  Mahometan  countries.  The  idle- 
ness of  the  Turkish  harems  is  unknown;  and  on  the  women  are 
devolved  in  general,  the  most  laborious  employments.  On  the 
Southern  extremity  of  the  continent,  the  complexion  of  the  popu- 
lation is  brown,  or  copper-coloured;  but  they  are  no  less,  on  that 
account,  in  a  state  of  extreme  barbarity. 

The  religion  of  the  Northern  half  of  Africa,  as  has  been  already 
developed,  is  almost  entirely  Mahometan.     The  general  charac- 


1829.]  Africa.  S5f 

ter  of  this  religion,  is  too  well  known  to  require  a  description. 
In  Africa,  it  assumes  its  wor*t  aspect,  and  fully  exhibits  the  ex- 
treme of  its  cruelties.  One  that  is  not  a  Mussulman,  usually 
finds  himself  an  outlaw  without  a  remedy;  and  death  or  bondage 
is  continually  before  him.  P;tradise  being  the  reward  offered 
for  deeds  of  cruelty,  there  are  multitudes  who  are  eager,  in  this 
way,  to  procure  it.  A  kind  of  corrupt  Christianity  prevails  in 
Aon r^sinia;  and  relics  of  the  Catholic  faith  and  practice,  exist  in 
Congo,  ;m<\  a  few  other  places  visited  by  the  Portuguese.  The 
8  ithem  natives  generally  are  distinguished  for  their  supersti- 
tions, above  all  other  people  in  the  world.  Respecting  the  crea- 
tion of  man.  they  hold  to  different  opinions.  Some  believe  that 
h"  was  formed  by  an  enormous  spider;  others  that  he  emerged 
from  caves  and  holes  in  the  earth.  Some  believe  in  the  transmi- 
gration of  souls;  others  in  future  rewards  and  punishments, 
graduated  according  to  their  own  absurd  notions  of  religious 
duty,  received  either  in  a  hell  of  oblivion,  or  a  heaven  of  sensu- 
ality. Death  is  regarded  with  horror.  The  existence  of  ghosts 
is  generally  credited,  and  the  spirits  of  those  whose  crimes  are 
unexpiated,  are  supposed,  after  death,  to  wander  on  earth. 

A  species  of  superstition  called  fetishism,  is  almost  universal. 
Any  thing  that  strikes  the  imagination  of  the  negro,  as  possessed 
of  some  occult,  supernatural  influence,  becomes  his  fetish,  or  the 
idol  of  his  worship.  Thus  the  anchor  of  a  wrecked  ship  was  cast 
on  shore.  An  African  broke  a  piece  from  it,  and  happened  to 
die  the  same  evening.  It  was  supposed  that  he  was  the  victim 
of  its  vengeance,  for  committing;  violence  upon  it;  and  the  anchor 
was  of  course,  afterwards  worshipped  as  a  god.  The  ignorant 
and  superstitious  African,  adores,  and  consults  in  his  difficul- 
ties, a  tree,  a  rock,  a  stick  of  wood,  a  fish  bone,  a  bit  of  paper, 
or  a  blade  of  grass,  just  as  his  fancy  happens  to  ascribe,  to  either 
of  these  or  other  objects,  a  secret  power  over  his  destinies.  Ser- 
pents, and  lizards,  and  leopards,  and  crocodiles,  are  the  objects 
of  solemn  public  worship;  and  the  various  rites  connected  with 
this  stupid  devotion,  are  usually  a  mixture  of  folly,  lewdness, 
and  cruelty.  Africans  usually  carry  their  fetishes  about  them, 
and  expect  assistance  and  protection  from  them,  on  all  occa- 
sions. The  virtue  of  a  fetish  is  always  determined  by  the  suc- 
cess of  its  possessor.     If  one  fetish  proves  insufficient  to  effect 


358  Jfrica.  [Feb. 

the  object  proposed,  another  is  selected,  and  another,  until  the 
right  one  is  procured.  Thus  in  consequence  of  a  combined 
series  of  experiments,  the  delusion  is  never  detected.  When- 
ever the  owner  of  a  fetish  performs  an  improper  action,  he  care- 
fully conceals  his  fetish,  so  that  its  knowledge  of  his  guilt  may 
not  lead  to  punishment.  The  people  of  Benin  consider  the  shad- 
ow of  a  man  to  be  a  fetish,  that  has  a  real  existence,  and  will 
give  an  account  of  all  his  actions.  Fetishes  whose  influence  are 
supposed  to  extend  over  particular  districts,  are  remarkable 
mountains,  rocks,  trees,  lakes,  and  rivers.  The  fetishes  most 
valued,  are  scraps  of  paper  or  parchment,  with  something  writ- 
ten upon  them  by  the  Moors  or  Arabs,  and  sold  by  them  to  the 
poor  and  deluded  negroes,  at  an  extravagant  price.  These  in 
general  can  be  procured  only  bv  the  chiefs  of  the  people,  who 
are  often  literally  loaded  with  these  talismans  of  security;  and 
as  in  war  they  usually  follow  in  the  rear,  an  efficiency  is  ascribed 
to  their  paper  gods,  which  is  owing  wholly  to  their  customs  or 
their  cowardice. 

"These  superstitions,"  says  Malte  Brun,  "were  merely  ridi- 
culous. Vengeance  and  brutality,  however,  gave  birth  toothers 
of  a  horrible  and  atrocious  nature.  The  prisoners  of  war  from 
an  adjoining  tribe,  were  sacrificed  on  the  tombs  of  those  against 
whom  they  had  fought.  Believing  in  the  necessary  connexion 
between  moral  powers  and  visible  objects,  these  barbarians  were 
persuaded,  that  by  devouring  the  bodies  of  their  enemies,  they 
became  imbued  with  the  courage  of  the  deceased.  Cannibalism 
arising  from  the  rites  of  the  hideous  altar,  and  at  first  limited  to 
these  rites,  was  soon  converted  into  a  capricious  taste — a  demand 
of  luxurious  appetite."  They  in  many  places  suppose  that 
death  is  always  the  effect  of  poison  or  enchantment;  and  the  sup- 
posed author  of  the  mischief,  is  immediately  sold  as  a  slave. 
In  Ashantee,  three  or  four  thousand  victims  are  often  sacrificed 
at  the  death  of  one  of  the  principal  people,  in  order  that  in  the 
other  world,  he  may  have  a  respectable  suit  of  attendants. 

While  describing  the  disgusting  and  the  horrible,  which  pre- 
vail so  very  extensively  in  Africa,  it  will  not  be  considered  amiss 
to  notice  the  tribe  of  Giagas,  which  is  supposed  by  some,  still  to 
exist  somewhere  in  the  interior.  They  were  a  horde  of  wander- 
ing marauders,  and  were  properly  considered,   entirely  as  out^ 


1829.]  Africa.  359 

laws,  even  in  Africa.  They  kept  up  their  numbers  by  volun- 
teers, and  by  children  stolen  at  the  proper  age,  to  be  educated 
in  all  their  atrocities.  Their  own  children,  to  avoid  necessary 
trouble,  were  destroyed.  They  lived  entirely  by  robbery,  and 
devoured  the  still  palpitating  hearts  of  their  victims,  in  order  to 
increase  their  courage  and  ferocity.  Many  tribes,  however,  par- 
ticularly on  the  Western  coast,  are  represented  by  Golberry  and 
others,  as  docile,  "amiable  and  happy.  Though  superstitious, 
they  are  not  strongly  attached  to  their  superstitions,  and  would 
readily  be  converted  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith. — 
The  ascendency  which  has  been  obtained  over  them  by  the  disci- 
ples of  Mahomet,  proves  the  facility  with  which  Christianity 
might  be  promulgated  among  their  tribes. 

Their  judicial  trials  consist  chiefly  of  some  species  of  ordeal, 
among  which,  may  be  numbered,  the  use  of  fire  and  hot  water, 
and  the  drinking  of  a  decoction  of  various  kinds  of  barks  and 
herbs,  by  which,  at  least,  the  fate,  if  not  the  guilt  of  the  indivi- 
dual is  decided.  It  is  supposed  that  those  who  prepare  and  ad- 
minister the  mixture,  are  well  acquainted  beforehand,  with  the 
ensuing  result.  Those  convicted  in  this  or  any  other  way,  even 
of  the  smallest  theft,  are  doomed  at  least,  to  hopeless  slavery. 

The  arts  are  still  in  their  infancy.  In  the  vicinity  of  the 
Colony  of  Liberia,  however,  the  natives  manufacture  cotton 
cloths,  leather  and  iron,  and  in  other  regions,  the  art  of  casting 
gold  ornaments  and  vessels,  is  practised  with  much  skill  and  in- 
genuity. In  others,  a  rude  blacksmith  is  regarded  as  a  superior 
being;  the  plough  is  generally  unknown;  the  palaces  of  kings  are 
the  huts  of  savages,  often  adorned  with  human  skulls,  and  even 
with  human  heads,  fresh  and  bloody,  which  constitute  also  the 
pavements  in  and  about  them;  and  the  productions  of  foreign 
skill  are  viewed  with  all  the  feelings  of  admiration  and  astonish- 
ment. 

The  governments  of  Africa,  both  in  their  form  and  mode  of 
administration,  are  exceedingly  diverse,  and  greatly  changeable. 
Military  despotism,  however,  in  its  various  forms,  spreads  its 
dark  and  bloody  wings,  over  almost  the  whole  of  Africa.  In  the 
Mahometan  states,  a  long  reign  and  peaceful  death,  rarely  oc- 
curs. In  other  places,  also,  the  tenure  of  power  i$  exceedingly 
precarious. 


360  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  S.     ■  [Feb. 

Commerce  is  carried  on  to  a  very  considerable  extent,  though 
there  is  very  little  facility  in  the  means  of  conveyance.     The 
camel  is  very  properly  called,  the  ship  of  the  African  deserts. 
Commerce  is  almost  wholly  internal.     The  traders  are  usually 
formed  into  large  companies,  called  caravans,  varying  in  num- 
ber, from  two  or  three  hundred,  to  two  thousand.     From  Cairo, 
three  caravans  go  into  the  interior  of  Africa,   one  to  Sennaar, 
the  other  to  Darfur.     These  two  travel  only  once  in  two  or  three 
years.     The  other  to  Mourzouk,  is  the  largest,   and  generally 
performs  an  annual  journey.     It  is  the  medium  of  communica- 
tion between  Cairo  and  all  the  countries  of  interior  and  western 
Africa,     From  Fezzan,  two  great  caravans  go  to  the  South,  one 
to  Bornou,  and  the  other  to  Cashna.     The  last  and  greatest  cara- 
yan,  is  that  from  Morocco,  by  the  way  of  Acca  or  Tatta,   to 
Tombuctoo. 

The  exports  from  Africa,  are  mostly  the  unwrought  produc- 
tions of  nature.  Slaves  are,  and  ever  have  been,  the  principal 
articles,  and  do  more  than  any  thing  else,  to  keep  in  existence, 
the  commerce  of  Africa. 

Twelfth  Annual  fleeting  of  the  Amexican 
Colonization  Society. 

The  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Society  for 
Colonizing  the  Free  People  of  Colour  on  the  Coast  of  Africa, 
was  held  on  Saturday  evening  the  17th  Jan.  at  the  City  Hall  in 
Washington.  Though  the  weather  was  quite  unpleasant,  the  as- 
sembly was  numerous  and  respectable,  and  was  honoured  with 
the  presence  of  many  of  the  most  distinguished  men  of  our  coun- 
try, among  whom  were  Chief  Justice  Marshall,  the  Secretary 
of  State,  and  many  Members  from  both  Houses  of  Congress. 

At  seven  o'clock,  the  President  of  the  Society,  Judge  Wash- 
ington, took  the  Chair,  and  the  names  of  the  following  Dele- 
gates from  Auxiliary  Societies  were  read  by  the  Secretary: 

Prom  the  State  Society  of  Virginia, 
Chief  Justice  Marshall, 
The  Hon.  John  Tyler, 
The  Hon.  C.  F.  Mercer. 


1829.]        Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  S.  361 

From  the  State  Society  of  Vermont 

The  Hon.  H.  Seymour, 

The  Hon.  Benjamin  Swift. 

From  the  State  Society  of  New  Hampshire. 

The  Hon.  Samuel  Bell. 

From  the  Society  of  Lexington,  Ky. 

The  Hon.  Judge  Clarke. 

From  the  Society  of  Jinn  Arundel  County,  Md_. 

Alexander  Randall,  Esq. 

Thos.  S.  Alexander,  Esq. 

From  the  Society  of  Fredericksburg,  Va. 

Iohn  L.  Marys,  Esq. 

From  the  Society  df  Petersburg,  Va. 

The  Hon.  Mr.  Archer. 

From  the  Society  at  Preston,  Trumbull  County,  Ohio* 

The  Hon.  Mr.  Whittlesey,  President. 

From  the  Society  at  Snowhill,  Md. 

The  Hon.  Mr.  Wilson. 

From  the  Society  of  Crawford  County,  Pennsylvania. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Barlow. 

From  the  Society  at  Pittsburg,  Penn. 

The  Hon.   William  Marks, 

The  Hon.  John  L.  Kerr. 

From  the  Society  of  Albemarle  County,  Va. 

The  Hon.  Mr.  Rives. 

From  the  Society  in  Alexandria,  D.  C. 

George  Johnson,  Esq. 

Wm.  Gregory,  Esq. 

From  the  Society  in  Georgetown,  D.  C. 

Joel  Cruttenden,  Esq.  President, 

R.  Dunl"op,  Esq. 

Gideon  Davis,  Esq. 

From  the  Society  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio, 

The  Hon.  Jacob  Burnet. 

From  the  Society  in  Wilmington,  Delaware* 

The  Hon.  Kensey  Johns. 

The  Secretary  then  read  the  Report  of  the  Board  of  Managers 

©n  the  affairs  of  the  Society  for  the  past  year,  the  progress  of  the 

Colony,  its  condition  and  prospects. 
46 


362  Twe[fth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  J.  C.  8.         [Fel» 

The  Hon.  C.  F.  Mercer  offered  the  following  resolution: 
Resolved^   Thai  the  thanks  of  this  Society  be  prrsenl  he 

President  and  Board  of  Managers,  for  their  able  and  • 
exertions  during  the   \ear,   ind   for  the   report  laid  before  this 
meeting,  and  that  they  b»j  requested  to  print  the  same. 

Mr.  Msbceb  addressed  the  meeting",  and  after  congratulating  the  Presi- 
dent and  Board  on  the  return  of  the  present  anmv  so 
cheering",  adverted,  bv  way  of  contrast,  to  tli  e- 
ty,  and  especially,  to  that,  -  plan  was  first  submitted,  b\  a  resol'  on, 
ask'ng*  the  co-operation  of  the  general  government,  to  the 

stature  of  Virginia.     He  remembered,  he  said,  the   v  .-  '■»  i 
which  it  encountered  in  that  body,   and   particularly  from  i      a 

gentleman,  now  distinguished  in  tht  councils  of  I  th- 

standing  that  he  voted  for  the  resolution,  cont< 
sand  barren:  that  the  climate  was  pestilential;  and 
there,  an  asylum  for  emancipat 

who  was  transported  thither,  would  cost,  for  h>  .'JO: 

and  lhat.1  required  to  plant  a  colon;. ,  u 

greatest  empire  in  the  world.     The  scheme,   at  iy,  met  with  but 

lukev  arm  friends  or  open  enemies,  in  almo-  U  hat  a  differ- 

ent spectacle  nov.  a  the  view  of  the  patriot  and  I  lanthropist — 

The  Society  had  already,  a  Colony  in  Africa,  which,  in  the  short  space 
of  fi\e  j  ear^  from  its  actual  commencement,  had  attained  a  strength  and  ex- 
tent such  as  the  first  settlements  of  Virginia  did  not  reach  in  the  fourth  of  a 
cent  |  it  had  heen  planted  by  the  efforts  of  a  r  ty,  with- 

out the  direel  aid  of  any  Go>  i  ,  and  had  succeeded  in  despite  of  per- 

secution, (if  the   c  p:  i  sentiments  could  he  so  dt  nominated.) 

I  support,  mainly  on  the  exertions  of  individual  zeal  and 

b-  i  e:  underthc  blessing,  indeed,  of  that  superintending*  Pro\  idence 

I  all   good  councils  anil  all  just   thoughts  proceed.      From  this 

poii  rj ,  the  fr  ends  of  the  Society  migl  t  look  ba<  k  with  an  hon- 

est pride,  and  forward  with  the  h  ghest  anticipations  of  complete  success  — 
Their  errors  had  already  received  the  sanction  of  in  e  of  the  states  of  this 
Union,  and  the  da\  v  approaching  when  its  advocate  would  have  no 

n  to  subdue — when  but  one  opinion  would  prevail,  as  to  the 
nd  tin-  objects  of  the  enterprise:   when  the   slave-holder  and  the 
*    would   consider  this    Society  as  a  middle  ground,  where  the) 
I  lent  and  action — when  our  southern  brethren   would 

beco  i,   s        Mr.     1   that  the  Society  sought  nothing"  more  anx- 

iously than  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  slave-holding  states.  Tile  time 
is  ^qi,  we  ma)  trust,  very  remote,  when  there  will  exist  not  a  district,  a  city 
or  a  village  in  our  country,  \\  here  the  success  of  the  American  Colony  of 
Liberia  will  m  1  '  hailed  with  j  >y.  A  place  was  long  sought  for  in  \ain, 
ta  which  the  free  coloured  population  of  the  United  States  might  be  trans 


1829.]         Twelfth  Animal  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  S.  36$ 

ported  with  safety  f'>  others,  and  advantage  to  themselves:  at  length,  sack 

a  spot  has  been  found,  where  every  advantage  seemed  to  be  concentrated, 

which  the  most  enlightened  friend  of  the  African  race  could  have  desired. 

Ht  re,  that  race  ;s  in  every  form  a  curse,  and  if  the  system,  so  long  contend. 

>r  b\  the  uneo  noromising  abolitionist  could  prevail,  its  effect  would  be 

avad   discord  and  devastation  from  one  end  of  the  Union  to  the  other. 

J        evil  though  begun  in  the  South,  wo  dd  be  staid  by  the  North.     But  if 

the  interests  of  the  North  and  of  the  South,  the  feelings  and  views  of  the 

\  and   of  the    Wes1    can  be  united  in  a  well-matured  s\  stem  of  colo- 

.    not     o-..!»    may    the   threatening  prospect  of   future  danger  be 

as  >■  led,  but  tin-  i<  and  complained  of,  be  greatly  mitigated,  if 

not  wholly  removed.      H   re  Mr  .to  the  situation  of  his  native 

state,  an  k  population  existing  there,  whom 

he  d  jerable  people — the  objects  of  universal  sus- 

p  ;.and  then  took  occasion  to  refer  to  the  con- 

:    population  in  the  City  of  Philadelphia.     After 
lean  I  ornament  of  our  country,  and  re- 
l  r*aine,  as  well  for  the  excellence  of  her  police,  as  for 
th     >   n  arly  founders,  which  still  continued,  he  said,  to  dia- 

ling idants;    he  addc  L,  thai  he  had  so  ne  time  ago  availed 

J  opportunity  of  devoting  two  days  in  that  city  to  the  investiga- 

indition  of  its  coloured  population.     One  of  them  was  a  Sab- 
-  other,  a  day  of  labour — and  he  had  seen  on  both,  scenes  ofsqua- 
iniser) — such  as  be  had  never  witnessed  in  any  part  of  the 
nong  the  wretched  paupers  of  England,  nor  the  wooden- 
shod  tn  of  France.      He  had  conversed  with  a  very  intelligent  phy- 

sic ■an  there,  who  had  supplied  him  with  facts,  which,  if  it  were  proper  to 
deia.l  on  the  present  occasion,  would  add  a  deep  and  mournful  colour- 
ing to  Miis  picture.  Experience  had  there  confirmed  the  deductions  of 
■n,  that  if  we  would  render  freedom,  to  the  slave,  a  blessing;  if  we 
would  confer  r*.al  benefits,  on  the  children  of  Africa,  Colonization  must  go, 
hand  in  hand,  with  Emancipation.  In  endeavouring  to  accomplish  this  ob- 
ject, the  Society  would  find  ample  employment.  The  pernicious  influence 
which  had  been  charged  upon  its  designs,  was  not  only  foreign  to  them, 
but  deprecated,  by  no  part  of  the  American  people,  more  sincerely,  than  by 
the  friends  of  the  colonization  of  Africa  by  her  free  coloured  descendants  of 
the  United  States.  He  was  happy  to  believe,  said  Mr.  M,  that  the  fears  of 
his  Southern  friends  were,  every  day,  becoming  more  and  more  quieted, 
while  a  conviction  was  hourly  strengthening  at  the  North,  that  their  South- 
ern countrymen  were  actuated  by  the  same  spirit  of  benevolence  with 
themselves.  All  that  was  needed,  for  a  just  estimate  of  the  views  of  both, 
was  to  enable  them  to  understand  each  other.  The  result  would  be  to  unite 
their  efforts  by  common  council.  Could  both  parts  of  the  Union  be  repre- 
sented in  one  common  assemblv  here,  it  would  soon  be  found  that  the  dele- 


364  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  JS.       '  [Feb. 

gates  from  every  quarter  of  America  had  brought  with  them  the  same  feel- 
ings. Justice  would  be  done,  at  once,  to  the  policy  of  the  South,  and  t« 
the  humanity  of  the  North. 

In  conclusion,  Mr.  M.  renewed  his  congratulations  to  the  President,  on 
the  prosperous  advances  of  the  African  colony,  which  might  be  ascribed  in 
part  to  his  early  and  steady  patronage,  and  the  moral  influence  of  a  name 
deservedly  dear  to  both  continents.  In  offering  a  resolution  of  thanks  to  the 
Board  of  Managers,  which  he  knew  to  be  merited  by  their  persevering  zeal 
and  ability,  he  desired  to  be  regarded  not  as  an  officer  of  the  Parent  Institu- 
tion, from  whose  councils  other  duties  had  withdrawn  him,  during  die  past 
year,  but  as  a  delegate  of  the  Colonization  Society  of  his  native  common- 
wealth, which  he  had  the  honour,  on  the  present  occasion,  to  represent,  in 
common  with  his  much  revered  friend,  on  his  left,  (Chief  Justice  Marshall,) 
and  an  absent  friend,  recently  the  Governor  of  that  Commonwealth,  (Mr.  Ty- 
ler of  the  Senate,)  whose  attendance  was  withheld  from  the  present  meet* 
ing  by  ill  health,  and  the  inclemency  of  the  season, 
F.  S.  Key,  Esq.  then  rose  and  said, 

That  he  felt  grateful,  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Managers,  for  the  ap- 
probation expressed  in  the  resolution  just  passed. — He  begged  leave  to 
present  to  the  meeting,  by  the  resolution  he  was  about  to  offer,  a  far  more 
worthy  subject  of  thanks  than  the  Board  of  Managers.  It  becomes  this  Socie- 
ty, while  it  expresses  its  regret  for  the  loss  of  one  to  whom  it  is  more  indebt- 
ed than  to  all  the  labours  of  all  its  friends,  to  express  also  its  thankfulness, 
that  he  was  ever  g'ven  to  us.  The  lamented  Ashmun  was  a  man  raised  up 
by  Providence,  fitted  for,  and  called  to  the  post  which  he  had  so  honoura- 
bly filled,  and  to  which  he  gave  himself  as  a  martyr. 

He  did  not  fear  to  be  thought  an  enthusiast,  in  saying,  that  clearer  indi- 
cations were  never  given  that  the  Almighty  interposes  in  the  schemes  of 
his  creatures,  than  by  the  incidents  which  removed  Mr.  Ashmun  from  his 
humble  labours  here,  to  a  continent  where  his  name  will  be  remembered  for- 
ever. It  ought  to  be  known,  that  it  was  not  the  wisdom  of  the  Board  of 
Managers  that  selected  for  the  deliverance  and  government  of  their  infant 
Colony  in  Africa,  the  man  who  so  faithfully  and  eminently  performed  this 
service.  With  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  he  had  moved  among  us,  in  his 
sphere  of  humble  duties,  as  if  unconscious  himself  of  the  energies  he  was 
afterwards  to  dev elope. 

While  fitting  out  a  vessel  about  to  sail  from  Baltimore,  with  settlers  for 
the  Colony,  some  apparent  accident  suggested  the  necessity  of  his  accom- 
panying them  to  Liberia,  and  without  any  appointment  from  the  Board,  or 
any  farther  design  than  that  of  seeing  them  restored  to  the  land  of  their 
forefathers,  and  returning  in  the  vessel,  he  embarked  with  them.  His  re- 
turn, the  slate  of  the  Colony  upon  his  arrival,  rendered  impossible.  It  was 
on  the  brink  of  destruction.  The  former  Agent  had  been  compelled,  by 
ill  health,  to  leave  it.     The  people  were  eut  off  from  all  communication 


1829«]       Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  rf.  C.  S.  16* 

with  the  natives,  who  were  then  collecting1  forces  to  assail  them,  without  a 
leader,  and  dispirited  at  the  prospect  of  the  unequal  contest  approaching 
them  He  resolved  to  share  their  fate,  and  encouraged  and  prepared 
them  for  the  defence  they  so  nobly  sustained  From  that  moment  till  his 
death,  it  is  well  known  how  he  devoted  all  the  powers  of  his  mind  and 
bo  ly,  till  he  sacrificed  health  and  life  to  the  people  he  had  saved.  It  is 
well  k  town,  how,  in  the  varying  circumstances  of  danger  and  difficulty,  in 
which  they  were  placed,  every  variety  of  quality  and  talent  that  could  be 
called  for,  military  skill  and  courage,  political  sagacity  and  address,  were 
most  conspicuously  exhibited  in  this  remarkable  man. 

Deeplv  did  the  Board  and  all  the  friends  of  the  Society  lament  that  he 
was  not  spared  to  meet  them,  and  receive  the  warm  tribute  of  thankfulness 
and  admiration  they  were  prepared  to  offer  him.  But  his  parting  moments 
WePe  cheered  and  sustained  by far  higher  cons61ations.  He  could  look 
back  upon  a  life  given  to  a  great  cause,  to  incalculable  blessings  which  he 
had  been  made  the  instrument  of  conferring  upon  two  Continents  of  people. 

He  has  lefl  a  name  to  be  remembered  by  generations  to  come,  when 
those  that  may  be  more  illustrious  now  on  the  pages  of  history,  will  be 
forgotten.  To  express  our  gratitude  for  the  gift  of  such  a  man,  and  our 
reverence  for  his  memory,  he  would  offer  a  resolution  to  which  all  hearts 
would  respond. 

Resolved,  That  this  Society  is  penetrated  with  the  deepest  re- 
givt  for  the  loss  of  their  invaluable  Colonial  Agent,  J.  Ashmun, 
Esq.  and  that  as  a  tribute  of  respect  for  his  worth,  the  Board  of 
Managers  be  instructed  to  cause  a  suitable  monument,  with  an  ap- 
propriate inscription,  to  be  erected  over  his  grave. 

Mr.  Mercer  proposed  an  addition  to  this  resolution,  which  was  adopted* 
viz. 

That  another  monument  be  erected  to. his  memory  in  Liberia. 
Walter  Jones,  Es-q.  moved  the  following: 

The  time  having  arrived  when  the  diffusive  beneficence  of  the  plan,  and 
the  great  political  and  moral  results  from  the  labours  of  this  Society,  are 
so  well  and  so  generally  understood,  as  to  dispense  its  founders  and  advo- 
cates from  the  necessity  of  dedicating  their  principal  efforts  to  explain  or  to 
justify  its  principles  or  its  tendencies  to  the  great  body  of  patriots  and  phi- 
lanthropists in  the  country;  it  has  become  the  more  essential  duty  of  them, 
who  are  duly  impressed  with  the  important  truths  unfolded  by  the  doc- 
trines and  the  experiments  of  this  Society,  to  press  on  with  untiring  activity, 
and  unquenchable  ardour,  to  the  practical  accomplishment  of  their  own 
theory,  by  all  the  means  that  sagacity  and  determined  perseverance  can 
render  available,  and  not  to  disparage  the  very  cause  of  humanity,  of  pub- 
lic good,  of  social  and  individual  improvement,  by  making  all  public  spirit 
and  active  virtue  appear  but  as  a  dream  of  speculative  benevolence. — 


366  Tweljth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  S.      '  [Fob. 

Among  the  most  available  and  practicable  means  of  establishing  an 
^uate  fund,  to  supply  the  indispensable  wants  of  the  Society,  the  nu  ruori- 
©us  plan  suggested  by  Gen-it  Smith,  Ksq.  of  Petersboro',  New  York:,  de- 
serves the  highest  commendation.  Whilst  it  would  ensure  a  permanent 
fund  for  the  operations  of  the  Society,  it  brings  the  contribution  of  that 
fund  within  the  compass  of  the  great  mass  of  men  possessing1  moderate,  but 
independent  fortunes,  without  a  sacrifice  of  any  of  the  comforts  or  enjoy- 
ments that  a  well-regulated  mind  ought  to  wish  or  expect  from  the  pos- 
session of  worldly  wealth,  therefore, 

Resolved,  That  the  pi  in  proposed  by  Gerrit  Smith,  to  rV>se 
100,000  dollars,  by  subscriptions  of  1000  dollars,  payable  by 
instalments,  in  ten  years,  be  recommended  to  all  the  real  well 
wishers  and  active  supporters  of  the  Society. 

In  commenting  upon  the  resolution,  Mr  J.  contended  that  enough. had 
been  done  to  meet  and  to  remove  the   various  objection*   with  which  the 
design  of  the  Society  had  had  to  contend.     It  was  now  time  thar  its  friends 
rested  from  their  speculative  labours,  and  turned  their  attention  to  the  pre-.- 
tical  means  of  advancing  and  securing  the  great  interests  of  the    Colony, 
the  happy  victory  of  benevolence  over  force.      By  peacefully   restoring  to 
Afrca  that  of  which  we  had  forcibly  robbed  her,  the  Society  would  accom- 
plish a  double  benefit.     It   would   no*  only  remove  f"o  n  the   trunk  of  the 
great   national  tree,  a  morbid  excrescence,  whose  growth  must  only  termi- 
nate in  the  ultimate   destruction  of  both,   but  by  separating  it  and  placing 
it  in  a  kindred  soil,    would  plant  a  germ  whose  branches  might  overspread 
another  continent,  and  bear  abundant  fruit  in  all  the  blessings  of  education, 
morals,  freedom,  and  the  arts.     He  deprecated  the  idea  of  remitting  exer- 
tions which  had  been  so  successful,  pressed  the  obligation  which  rested  up- 
on those  who  had  thus  given  being  to  an  infant  State  never  to  abandon  its 
interests,  or  yield  to  any  difficulties  which  might  present  themselves  in  con- 
summating so  noble   a  design.      They  were  now  called  to  exercise  the  sa- 
gacity and  energy  which  ought  to  distinguish  the  founders  of  Republics. — 
Mr    J.  referred  with  commendation  to  a  scheme  first  proposed  by  Gerrit 
Smith,  Esq.  of  New  York,  for  the  securing  of  pecuniary  aid,  and  which  con- 
sists in  the  pledging  of  a  definite  sum  ultimately  to  be  paid,   but  vhich  is 
to  be  advanced  by  easy  but  certain  instalments.     This  would  show   the 
Board  on  what  they  might  calculate,  and  enable  it  to  graduate  ita   mea- 
sures by  its  means. 

A.  Randall,  Esq.  presented  the  following  resolution: 

Resolved,  That  the  thanks  of  this  Society  be  given  to  the  Cler- 
gy of  all  denominations,  who  have  taken  up  collections  for  its 
benefit  on  the  Fourth  of  July,  and  that  they  be  earnestly  request- 
ed to.continue  their  efforts  in  aid  of  this  Institution. 

Mr.  H.  made  a  short  address  on  the  subject  of  the  resolution, 


1829]  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Ji.  C.  S.  36? 

off  >rin«;  a  merited  tribute  to  those  who  had  availed  themselves 
of  th>  enthusiasm  produced  by  the  recurrence  of  our  national 
birth-day,  and  poured  into  the  treasury  of  the  Society  a  multi- 
tu  leof  kfc  lr<>p  like"  contributions,  which,  though  individually  of 
small  amount,  when  united,  formed  a  great  and  valuable  stream. 
The  Hod.  Mr.  Marks  offered  the  following  resolution: 
Resolved*    Tut  the  thanks  of  this  Institution  be  presented  to 
the  several  Auxiliary  Societies  throughout  the  Union,  for  their 
efficient  efforts,  and  liberal  contributions  to  the  Society  during 
the  last  year. 

Mr  Ctjiy  rose  to  perform  a  duty  which  he  had  hoped  would  have  devolv- 
ed on  some  Other  member  "f  the  Institution.  But  before  he  presented  the 
i .  it  ion,  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  he  could  not  deny  himself  the  grati- 
fteat  on  of  offering  to  the  presiding-  officer,  to  the  Board  of  Managers  and 
Others  here  assembled,  the  congratulations  which  belong  to  the  occasion. 
How  different  is  the  present  triumphant  position  of  the  Society  from  what 
it  was  a  tew  yean  ago!  He  recollected  about  twelve  years  ago,  when 
sou:-  fifteen  or  twenty  gentlemen  assembled  in  a  room,  not  eighteen  feet 
square,  of  a  tavern  in  this  place,  to  consult  together  about  this  great 
scheme  They  formed  a  constitution,  and  organized  the  Society.  We 
all  p  member  what  scoffs  and  taunts  it  subsequently  experienced,  how  the 
timid  were  alarmed,  how  the  ignorant  misconceived  or  misrepresented  its 
object,  and  how  both  extremes — the  partisan  of  perpetual  slavery,  and  the 
friend  of  unqualified,  immediate  and  universal  emancipation,  united  against 
us  \\\  have  triumphed  o\er  all  these  obstacles.  Prejudice  has  yielded, 
tlu  ignorant  have  acquired  infoimation,  and  converts  are  daily  made.  The 
Report  pead  this  evening  shows  the  flourishing  condition  of  the  Colony. 

Among  the  circumstances  of  the  pa>*  year,  which  are  worthy  of  particu- 
lar felicitation,  are  tin  formation  of  State  Societies,  in  two  neighbouring 
Commonwealths.  One  of  these  has  been  organized,  in  a  manner  calcula- 
ted to  make  a  deep  impression,  in  a  State  which  has  always  exercised,  and 
must  ever  continue  to  exert  great  influence  on  the  affairs  of  this  Confede- 
racy. The  other  has  been  formed  in  a  State,  her  daughter,  to  which  I  be- 
long as  a  citizen.  In  the  constitution  of  each,  some  of  the  most  eminent 
citizens  of  the  respective  States  concurred.  We  may  anticipate,  with 
much  confidence,  the  best  effects  from  both  The  past  year  had  brought 
forth  another  most  gratifying  incident.  Our  fair  countrywomen,  always 
ready  to  sanction  schemes  of  religion,  humanity  and  benevolence,  have 
manifested  a  warm  approbation  of  that  of  the  Colonizing  Society.  They 
have,  in  several  instances,  formed  themselves  into  auxiliary  associations, 
and  have  otherwise  contributed  to  the  promotion  of  the  great  object  of  this 
Society.  Their  co-operation  was  wanted  to  complete  the  circle  of  moral  ex- 
ertion. They  are  entitled  to  our  grateful  thanks.  It  is  to  propose  the  e** 
pression  of  them,  in  the  shape  of  a  resolution,  that  I  have  now  risen. 


368  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  S-.         [Feb. 

Mr.  President,  said  Mr.  C.  we  have  a  cause  inherently  good.  It  is  support- 
ed by  some  of  the  best,  the  most  virtuous,  and  eminent  men  of  our  country. 
The  Clergy,  of  all  denominations,  almost  unanimously  support  it,  and  daily 
offer  up  their  prayers  for  its  success.  Our  fair  countrywomen  give  us  their 
cheering  countenance  and  encouragement.  The  God  of  Heaven,  (he  be- 
lieved from  his  very  soul)  is  with  us.  Under  such  auspices,  we  cannot  fail. 
With  zeal,  energy,  and  perseverance  we  shall  subdue  all  difficulties  and  ul- 
timately realize  every  hope. 

He  offered  the  following  resolution: 

Resolved,  That  the  cordial  thanks  of  this  Society  be  presented 
to  our  fair  countrywomen,  who  contribute  by  their  countenance, 
association,  and  their  donations,  to  the  success  of  the  Society. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Society,  Mr.  Gurley,  rose  and  said, 

All  the  members  of  this  Society,  I  doubt  not,  have  heard  with  peculiar 
gratification,  of  the  establishment  during  the  year,  of  State  Societies  in  Vir- 
ginia and  Kentucky.  The  influence  of  these  states,  on  the  great  question 
presented  to  this  Union,  by  the  Society,  cannot  tail  to  be  felt  to  the  ex- 
tremities of  our  land,  and  must  conduce  most  powerfully  to  the  success  of 
the  cause  which  we  have  assembled  to  advance.  The  resolution  which  I 
intend  to  submit,  recommends  that  the  system  of  organization  already  par- 
tially adopted,  should  be  extended  throughout  the  United  States,  nor  can 
it  fail,  if  thus  extended,  to  affect  the  State  Legislatures  and  the  nation  at 
large;  it  proposes  the  formation  of  a  State  Society  auxiliary  to  the  Parent 
Institution,  with  subordinate  associations  in  the  counties  or  towns  of  the  se- 
veral states,  in  every  state  of  the  Union.  Such  a  system,  I  can  say  with 
confidence,  has  long  been  regarded  by  the  whole  Board  of  Managers,  as  of 
vast  importance,  well  suited  to  produce  those  triumphant  results  which  are 
cherished,  as  objects  of  hope,  at  least,  by  all  the  friends  of  this  Institution. 
A  resolution  similar  to  that  which  I  hold  in  my  hand,  was  adopted  at  the  last 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Society,  and  I  trust  we  shall  continue  to  recommend 
the  plan  until  it  shall  be  universally  adopted.  I  trust  we  shall  repeat  our 
expressions  of  opinion  on  this  subject,  until  a  moral  and  christian  influence 
in  favour  of  this  Society,  has  reached  every  heart  in  our  country;  until  we 
have  not  one,  but  many  flourishing  Colonies  on  the  African  coast,  from 
which  shall  emanate  the  pure  and  benign  lights  of  Science  and  Religion  to 
cheer  and  to  regenerate  a  land  long  injured,  and  long  involved  in  darkness 
and  crime.  Providence  has  favoured  us,  nor  does  the  history  of  Coloniza* 
tion  furnish  a  parallel  to  our  success.  Our  friends  are  able  and  numerous, 
and  from  the  most  remote  parts  of  this  Union,  do  they  look  with  interest  to 
our  proceedings  to-night.  But  we  see  only  the  dawning  of  the  day.  Let 
this  animate  us:  for  the  light  now  faint,  gives  promise  of  noonday  brightness. 
I  hope  this  resolution  will  be  adopted,  and  that  from  the  efforts  of  this  Soci- 
ety the  present  year,  we  shall  witness  the  happiest  and  the  best  results. 

Mr.  CuatEY  then  presented  the  following  resolution: 


1829- ]         Txv elf th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  8.         Z6\) 

Resolved,  That  this  Institution  has  heard  with  great  gratifica- 
tion, of  the  establishment  of  State  Colonization  Societies  in 
Virginia  and  Kentucky,  and  that  the  experience  of  another  year 
has  confirmed' it  in  the  opinion,  that  the  formation  of  similar  So- 
cieties, throughout  the  Union,  with  subordinate  associations  in 
the  several  counties  or  towns  of  each  State,  is  highly  important, 
and  deserves  the  serious  attention  of  all  the  friends  of  the  So- 
ciety. 

Rev.  Mr.  Hawley  moved  the. following  resolution: 

Resolved,  That  this  Society  will  cherish  a  sincere  and  respect- 
ful regard  for  the  memory  of  Dr.  William  Thornton, .  late  a 
valuable  member  of  the  Board  of  Managers. 

Rev.  Dr.  Laurie  offered  the  following  resolution: 

Resolved,  That  this  Society  are  deeply  sensible  of  its  obliga- 
tions to  Richard  Smith,  Esq.  their  Treasurer,  for  his  able  and 
gratuitous  services  during  the  year. 

It  is  with  great  pleasure,  said  Dr.  Laurie,  the  Rev.  mover,  that  T  rise  to 
offer  a  resolution  embracing  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  Treasurer  of  this  Soci- 
ety. The  benefits  resulting-  from  the  judicious  and  efficient  labours  of  the 
Treasurer,  he  remarked,  had  been  peculiarly, felt,  and  were  highly  prized  by 
the  Board  of  Managers,  and  by  those  more  immediately  connected  with  him 
in  his  official  character.  Often  in  cases  of  depression  and  perplexity  have 
they  been  relieved  by  his  counsel,  and  by  his  energy.  Nor  ought  it  to  be 
unnoticed  that  his  invaluable  services  have  been  rendered  without  fee  or  re- 
ward, other  than  that  which  springs  from  the  consciousness  of  being  instru- 
mental in  planting  on  the  shores  of  Africa,  a  Colony,  where  the  blessings  Of 
civil  and  religious  liberty  are  already  enjoyed,  and  from  whence  it  is  confi- 
dently hoped  light  and  life  and  gladness  shall  be  diffused  through  all  the 
regions  of  tliat  vast  continent. 

The  Hon.  Mr.  Storrs  then  said, 

That  he  was  gratefvd  to  be  able  to  assure  the  meeting  that  the  objects 
of  the  Society  had  begun  to  excite  much  interest  in  parts  of  the  Union 
which  were  exempt  from  the  evils  incident  to  that  personal  relation 
which  was  yet  recognized  in  many  of  the  States.  The  Society  would  find 
sure  evidence  of  this  feeling,  in  the  generous  offer  made  by  Mr.  Getrit 
Smith,'  alluded  to  in  the  Report  of  the  Board  of  Managers.  Mr.  S.  said 
that  he  resided  near  Mr  Smith,  and  spoke  in  high  terms  of  his  public  spirit, 
his  purity  of  life,  exemplary  piety  and  benevolence. 

Mr.  S.  said  that  when  the  Society  was  first  instituted,  he  was  one  of  those 

who  doubted  its  success,   and  believed  its  objects  to  be  unattainable.     So 

great  did  the  undertaking  then  appear  to  be,  and  so  chimerical  had  it  been 

generally  considered,  that  few  thought  it  worth  the  trouble  of  very  close 

47 


sr&  Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  5.         [Feb. 

examination.  He  was  one  of  that  great  mass  who  had  reflected  very  lit- 
tle on  the  subject,  and  it  was  perhaps,  not  too  much  to  say,  that  the 
pbj  cts  of  the  Society  were  not,  tor  some  time  after  its  formation,  fully  and 
fairly  understood.  He  was  satisfied  from  the  success  which  had  thus  far 
followed  its  exertions,  that  the  colonization  of  the  free  black  population  of 
the  Union  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  was  practicable.  So  far  as  what  had  been 
done  already,  was  to  be  considered  in  the  light  of  an  experiment;  it  had  been 
eminently  successful,  and  promised  to  realize  all  which  its  sanguine 
supporters  had  hoped  for.  The  Keport  which  had  been  read,  showed 
thai  the  Colony  had  prospered  as  highly  during  the  time  since  it  was 
founded,  as  the  first  settlement  of  New  England,  so  far  as  any  physical 
obstacles  to  its  progress  were,  to  be  overcome.  It  may  have,  perhaps, 
superior  natural  advantages.  The  state  of  the  world,  too,  was  more  fa- 
vorabli  now  to  such  an  enterprise.  It  was,  he.  continued,  due  to  candor 
to  say,  that  he  was  com. need  that  it  was  deserving  of  more  general  sup- 
port than  it  had  received,  and  hoped  that  the  efforts  of  its  patrons  wovdd 
meet  with  general  encouragement  to  perseverance. 

Mr.  S.  expressed  the  belief*  that  there  had  been  some  misunderstanding 
between  different  parts  of  the  Union,  in  respect  to  the  views  of  each  otheron 
the  subject  of  the  condition  and  emancipation  of  the  coloured  population  in 
the  States.  He  was  quite  sure  that  in  the  Northern  States,  there  was  no 
opinion  generally  prevailing,  that  immediate,  absolute,  and  universal  eman- 
cipation was  desirable.  There  might  be,  said  Mr.  S.  some  who  are  actuat- 
ed by  pure  motives  and  benevolent  views,  who  considered  it  practicable; 
but  he  might  say  with  confidence,  that  very  few,  if  any,  believed  that 
it  would  be  truly  humane  or  expedient  to  turn  loose  upon  *the  com- 
munity more  than  a  million  of  persons,  totally  destitute  of  the  means  of 
subsistence,  and  altogether  unprepared  in  every  moral  point  of  view,  to  en- 
jov  or  estimate  their  new  privileges.  Such  a  cotemporaneous  emancipa- 
tion of  the  coloured  population  of  the  Southern  States  could  only  bring  a 
common  calamity  on  all  the  states,  and  the  most  severe  misery  on  those  who 
were  to  be  thus  thrown  upon  society,  under  the  most  abject,  helpless  and 
deplorable  circumstances  He  might  say,  however,  and  he  trusted  that 
there  was  no  part  of  the  Union  where  such  a  sentiment  was  not  favorably 
entertained,  that  every  truly  philanthropic  man  and  every  friend  of  our  com- 
mon country,  looked  forward  in  the  confident  hope  that  the  period  would 
arnv.-,  when,  at  some  future  day,  that  great  work  should  be  ultimately  ac- 
complished. It  was  to  be  treated,  however,  by  all,  as  a  work  of  time  and 
prudence,  and  not  of  mere  feeling.  He  believed  that  causes  were  in  opera- 
tion, and  daily  developing  their  influence,  that  were  calculated  to  convince 
those  most  directly  and  most  deeply  concerned  in  that  subject,  that  it  was 
a  question  which  invited  their  careful  and  early  examination.  Desirable  as 
such  an  event  might  be  to  any,  it  was  false  humanity  to  disperse  such  a 
number  of  our  fellow  beings,  of  all  ages  and  both  sexes,  through  the  cotm- 


1829.]         Twelfth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  A.  C.  S.         371 

try,  to  perish  for  want,  to  fill  up  the  jails  and  penitentiaries,  or  to  sink  to 
the  lowest  and  basest  degrees  of  vice  and  crime.      The  success  of  such  a 
policy  could  only  end  in  their  final  extirpation.  Still  the  question  of  eman- 
cipation could  not  in  the  nature  of  thing's  be  long*  avoided,  and  must  be   met 
at  last.     He  thought  that  two  points  might    be  affirmed  in  reference  to  it, 
which  none  could  deny — that  it  was  impracticable  to  collect  this  people  to- 
gether  at  any  future  time,  on  this  continent,  at  any  place  or  under  circum- 
stances that   would  ensure  their  happiness,   and  that   even  under  any  plan, 
which  had  in  view  the  only  practicable  result — gradual  emancipation — the 
first  steps  to  be  taken  were   those  preparative  measures    which   onl)  could 
render  their  emancipation   a  blessing  at  all       No  stronger  motive  could  be 
addressed  to  the  human  heart,  than  that  which  the  measures  of  the  Society 
held    out,    to    enable    them    to  estimate  the   value    of  freedom.     Instead 
of  being  turned  out  upon  the  world,  without  the  means  of  support,  and 
without  hope,  the  emancipated  are  offered  an  asylum,  where  with  the  first 
enjoyment  of  liberty,  they  may  rationally  know  its  value  and  realize  its  bless- 
ings.    Under  the  patronage  and  protection  afforded  to  them  in  the  Colony, 
every  inducement  is  presented  to   persuade   them  to  feel  that  their  happi- 
ness is  in  their  own  power      They  cannot   fail  to  find  in   the  equality    of 
their  condition,  and  the  sure  rewards  of  industry,  the  greatest  encourage- 
ments to  perseverance  in  their  exertions.     The  acquisition  and  enjoyment 
of  separate  property  for  themselves  and  their  families,  and  the  rules  of  de- 
scent must  there  set  in  motion  those  principles  of  action  in  the  human  heart, 
which  lay  at  the  foundations  of  social  happiness,    and  all  well-regulated 
human  government.     To  this  are  added  the  blessings  of  education  and  reli- 
gious instruction.     Why,  Mr.  President,   said  Mr   S.  should  we  doubt  that 
the  African  is  susceptible  of  the  highest  degrees  of  moral  and  sociarim- 
provement?     We  do  wrong  to  human  nature  in  every   situation  of  life,  to 
judge  of  its  capacity  unfavorably,  merely  because  we  find  that  despotism 
and  paganism  degrade  and  debase  the  human  character.     This  Colony,  too, 
planted  by  you  on  the  shores  of  Africa,  is  a  Christian  Colony,  and  its  growth 
is  strengthened  under  flie  moral   influences  of  our  religion.     If  liberty  is 
power  in  the  social  state — and  if  knowledge  is  power — so  too,  above  both, 
is   Christianity  power.     Mr.   S.  then  referred  to    facts  stated  in  the  An- 
nual Report,  from  which  he  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  state  of  the  Colo- 
ny was  prosperous  beyond  what  could  have"  been  expected  at  so  early  a  pe- 
riod, and  that  the  operation  of  its  moral  as  well  as  political  institutions  pro- 
mised to  realize  the-  hopes  of  its  founders  and  patrons.     He  thought  that 
the  benevolent  and  patriotic  would  find  in  the  actual  experience  of  its  suc- 
cess hitherto,   a  pledge  on  which  they  could  rely,  that  their  final  hopes 
should  be  realized,  in  respect  to  our  own  country.     The  plan  of  the 
Board  of  Managers  had  thus  far  proceeded  under  most  discouraging  cir- 
cumstances from  its  commencement.     In  spite  of  public  opinion,  and  with. 
extremely  limited  and  precarious  resources,  it  seemed  to  have  been  sustained 


372  Flan  for  the  establishment  of  .[Feb. 

by  the  influence  of  super-human  power.  It  has  certainly,  said  Mr  S.  at- 
tained  a  point  of  success,  which  it  was  not  expected  to  have  reached  so 
soon,  and  there  was  no  reason  to  think  that  its  prusperity  was  to  be  check- 
ed. Its  final  success  must  depend  on  the  perseverance  of  its  patrons,  and 
surely  all  will  admit  that  to  abandon  the  experiment  at  the  present  favora- 
ble point  of  its  progress,  would  be  to  trifle  with  the  demonstrations  of  the 
safest  and  most  instructive  of  all  teachers — experience. 

If,  said  Mr.  S  its  prosperity  shall  be  continued,  the  debt  which,  not 
only  our  own  country,  but  the  civilized  world  owes  to  Africa,  may  be  paid. 
Who  can  foresee  in  what  results  your  efforts  may  end>  They  are  not  for 
us  to  know,  and  it  is  not  for  man  to  set  the  limits  of  those  blessing's  which 
flow  in  upon  that  benighted  and  afflicted  country,  from  the  establish- 
ment there  of  an  educated  and  Christian  State.  We  may  hope,  however, 
without  presumption,  that  these  blessings  may  not  only  be  perpetuated  to 
l  may  colonize  there,  but  shall  extend  and  expand  their  be- 

neficent and  r  isistless  influence,  till  whole  nations  of  the  human  family  shall 
be  gathered  within  the  pale  of  civilization  and  Christianity. 

A'.i  the  preceding  resolutions  were  adopted  with  great  una- 
nimity. 

It  wus  then 

Resolved^  That  the  fourth  article  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
Society,  be  so  altered,  that  the  time  fixed  for  the  annual  meet- 
ing of  the  Society,  shall  he  the  third  Monday  of  January. 

After  the  President  had  retired,  -on  motion  by  Gen.  C.  F. 
Mercer,  it  was 

Jiesolved,  That  the  thanks  of  this  Society  be  presented  to  the 
Hon.  Bushrod  Washington,  the  President  of  the  Society,  for 
the  dignified  and  able  manner  in  which  he  has  presided  over  the 
proceedings  of  this  meeting. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Ryland,  of  this  city,  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Board  of  .Managers,  in  the  place  of  Or.  Randall.  The  other 
officers  remain  the  same  as  in  the  last  year. 

We  have  long  desired  to  see  State  Colonization  Societies,  auxiliary  to 
the  Parent  Institution,  established  throughout  the  Union,  and  organized 
on  such  a  plan,  as  to  secure  the  greatest  possible  results.  We  have  re- 
garded the  object  of  our  Society  as  truly  national,  and  demanding  for  its 
full  accomplishment,  the  energies  and  resources  of  the  nation.  Eleven 
State  Societies  have  been  already  established.  The  following  plan  for  a 
general  organized  sisTE.M,  was  recently  submitted  to  the  Board  of  Mana- 


1829.]  Slate  Colonization  Societies.  373 

gers,  by  the  Rev.  Isaac  Orr,  General  Agent  of  the  Society,  and  after  due 
consideration,  was  unanimously  adopted;  and  is  now  earnestly  recommend- 
ed to  the  attention  of  all  tlie  friends  of  our  cause.  Why  may  not  this  sys- 
tem be  put  info  actual  and  vigorous  operation  in  the  course  of  the  present 
year?  Is  there  any  thing'  which  more  imperiously  claims  the  thoughts  and 
efforts  of  every  humane,  patriotic,  or  religious  mind? 

Plan  for  the  establishment  of  State  Colonization  Societies,  with 
Subordinate  Associations  throughout  the  Union. 

1.  That  t!t  Societies  be  direct  Auxiliaries  to  the  Gene- 
ral Society,  and  that  it  be  recommended  that  each  State  Society 
should,  by  its  constitution,  determine  to  see  that  a  Society, 
auxiliary  to  itself  shall  be  formed,  and  kept  in  efficient  activity, 
in  each  county  in  the  state,  from  each  of  which  a  delegate  shall 
be  a  manager  of  the  State  Society.  The  reasons  for  this  latter 
provision,  are,  that  the  members  of  the  State  Society,  being  on 
the  ground,  and  coming  indeed  from  all  parts  of  the  State,  can 
best  discern,  and  seize  iipon  the  various  facilities,  which  will 
enable  them  to  form  County  Societies  most  readily;  that  they 
can,  on  the  same  account,  do  much  without  incurring  the  ex- 
pense of  employing  an  agent;  and  that  if  an  agent  must  be  em- 
ployed, they  have  the  best  means  of  selecting  one  that  is  suita- 
ble, who  being  on  the  ground  can  perform  the  duties  of  his  office 
without  incurring  the  travelling  expenses  necessary  to  be  incur- 
red by  an  agent  of  the  General  Society. 

2.  That  it  be  recommended  to  each  County  Society,  to  see 
that  Societies  auxiliary  to  itself  be  formed  and  kept  active  in  ev- 
ery town  of  district  in  the  County,  from  each  of  which  a  dele- 
gate shall  be  a  manager  of  the  County  Society.  The  reasons  for 
this  are  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  article. 

5.  That  the  annual  meetings  of  the  Town  and  District  Socie- 
ties, be  in  regular  order,  with  regard  to  places,  and  in  immedi- 
ate succession;  that  as  far  as  practicable,  the  same  order  and 
succession  be  observed  with  regard  to  the  meetings  of  the  vari- 
ous State  Societies,  to  the  end,  that  an  agent  of  the  General  So- 
ciety may  attend  them  all  in  succession,  as  far  as  practicable: 
and  that  the  meetings  of  the  State  Societies  immediately  precede 
the  annual  meeting  of  the  General  Society. 

4.  That  the  monies  of  the  Town  and  District  Societies,  be 


374  Plan  for  State  Colonization  Societies.        .  Feb. 

generally  collected  directly  before  their  annual  meetings;  that 
they  be  transferred  to  the  County  Societies,  by  their  Delegates 
to  the  meeting  of  tha.t  Society;  that  the  monies  of  the  County 
Societies,  be  collected  and  transferred  in  the  same  manner,  to  the 
State  Society;  and  that  the  monies  of  the  various  State  Societies, 
be  collected  and  transferred  in  the  same  manner,  as  far  as  prac- 
ticable, to  the  General  Society. 

The  object  of  this  article,  is  to  save  expense  and  embarrass- 
ment, in  the  collection  of  monies  for  the  General  Society. 

5.  That  the  various  Societies  make  it  the  obj?ct  of  their  most 
strenuous  efforts,  to  collect  funds  sufficient  to  convey  immedi- 
ately to  the  Colony  of  Liberia,  every  coloured  person  of  suitable 
age,  and  suitable  qualifications,  that  is  willing  to  go;  that,  with 
the  attainment  of  this  object,  they  will  be  satisfied;  and  that  they 
combine  and  increase  their  efforts,  until  this  object  is  fully  ac- 
complished. 

6.  That  inasmuch  as  it  must  be  deemed  a  leading  object  of 
this  Society,  to  diffuse  information,  and  ex"rt  an  influence,  by 
means  of  the  press,  it  be  earnestly  recommended  to  the  various 
Societies,  to  circulate  as  much  as  possible,  the  different  publica- 
tions of  the  Society,  to  obtain  subscriptions  for  the  Repository; 
to  collect  and  transmit  the  payments  for  that  work,  with  the  con- 
tributions to  the  funds  of  the  Society;  and  for  compensation  and 
encouragement  in  this  undertaking,  which  may  be  performed  al- 
most without  trouble  by  the  collectors  of  the  Town  and  District 
Societies,  they  are  authorized  by  the  Agent  and  Publisher 
(Mr.  James  C.  Dunn,  Georgetown,  D.  C.)  of  the  Repository, 
to  retain  twelve  and  a  half  per  cent,  on  all  payments  for  that 
work  collected. 

The  reasons,  in  brief,  in  favour  of  the  whole  system  now  re- 
commended, are,  that  it  contains  in  itself,  the  principles  of  its 
own  life,  and  its  own  activity;  that  on  this  account,  it  avoids  the 
expense  and  trouble  of  an  extraneous  influence;  that  it  will  be 
relieved  of  the  various  irregularities  and  embarrassments  una- 
voidable by  any  other  system  less  general  in  its  character;  and 
that  as  a  ground  of  safe  dependence  for  the  Society,  it  will 
procure  an  income  of  much  greater  amount,  and  greater  unifor- 
mity. 


1829.]  Afr  can  Mission  School.  575 

African  Mission  Sc\\oo\. 

[FOR  THE  AFRICA*     REPOSITORT.] 

On  the  establishment  of  an  African  Mission  School  in  the  city 
of  Efartfi  I,  it  w^  hoped  that  a  lively  interest  would  be  taken 
in  it,  by  the  patrons  and  friends  of  the  American  Colonization 
,  in  the  more  Southern  Slates;  where  we  were  led  to  be- 
lieve, there  were  many  young  men  of  colour,  who  would  gladly 
avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity,  to  become  qualified  for 
usefulness  to  Colony,  It  was  hoped,  that  pains  would  be 
taken,  to  look  out  suitable  pupils  for  the  school,  and  put  them 
in  the  wav  of  joining  it.  The  Executive  Committee  confess, 
that  thev  have  hitherto  been  disappointed  in  their  expectations 
fron  j     ••  I  notwithstanding  their  exertions  to  spread 

int  •,  it  is  feared  that  very  few  of  the  children  of  Africa, 

are  vet  acquainted  with    I  stence  of  a  free  school  for  their 

be  IK  fit.      You  will 'do  tli     [hstituiion  a  favour,   by  inserting  in 
the  itorv,    th  ng  notice  ot   the  African   Mission 

School,    stable  <his  place. 

Us  obj  'Ct  is,  i  re  young  men  of  religious  character  and 

hah:  .  td  serve  in  the  Colony  in   Africa,  in  the  capacity  of  Mis- 
sion tries,  Catechists  or  Schoolmasters.     On  leaving  the  school, 
th  -v  are  to  be  placed  under  the  direction  of  the  Executive  Com- 
of  the  Domestic  and  Foreign  Church  Missionary  Society, 
to  ;>.'  employed  by  them  in  the  sphere,   in   which  they  may  be 
judged  best  fitted  to  labour. — They  must  be  at  least  18  years  of 
a.    — be  able  to  read  and  write;  and  have  acquired  some  know- 
ledge of  the  rules  of  common  arithmetic.     They  must  also  pro- 
duce to  the  Executive  Committee,   satisfactory  testimonials  of 
their  exemplary  moral  and  religious  character,  and  of  their  pos- 
sessing such  intellectual  endowments,  as  will,  in  all  probability, 
render  them  useful  in  some  one  of  the  above-mentioned   capaci- 
ties.— Such  pupils  will  be  received  into  the  School,  and  be  sup- 
ported and  educated,  free  of  expense,  until  they  are  judged  quali- 
fied to  proceed  to  their  destination  in  the   Colony.     A  compe- 
tent instructor  has  been  appointed,  and  the  school   is  in  actual 
operation  with  a  few  pupils. 
The  clergy,  and  others  interested  in  the  welfare  of  our  infant 


376  Candid  acknowledgment  of  error.  [Feb. 

eolony,  are  earnestly  desired,  to  give  all  possible  publicity 
to  the  intelligence  relative  to  the  school,  among  the  people  of 
colour.  It  is  particularly  requested,  that  they  will  see  and  con- 
verse with  promising  young  men  of  African  descent,  and  induce 
them  to  apply  for  admission,  if  they  appear  to  be  qualified  for 
the  situation:  and  especially,  if  they  sustain  a  character  for  de- 
voted piety,  missionary  zeal,  and  competent  talents. — Letters 
of  application,  testimonials,  &c.  may  be  addressed  to  the  Cor- 
responding Secretary,  the  Rev.  N.  S.  Wheaton,  Hartford, 
Conn. — Donations  to  the  Society,  maybe  remitted  to  the  Trea- 
surer, Cyprian  Nichols.  Esq.  of  the  same  place. 
Bar/ford,  Feb.  25th,  'l 829. 

CantYid  Ackno'wle&giviexit  of  T&yyot. 

The  Editor  of  Freedom's  Journal,  Mr.  Ruswurm,  (a  very  respectable, 
and  \vell  educated  coloured  man  in  New  York,)  who  has  for  several  years, 
been  decidedly  and  actively  opposed  to  the  Colonization  Society,  in  his 
paper  of  the  14th  February,  candidly  and  honourably  confesses  that  his 
opinions  in  regard  to  our  Institution,  have  become  entirely  changed.  The 
following  is  his  statement. 

"As  our  former  sentiments  have  always  been  in  direct  opposi- 
tion to  the  plan  of  colonizing  us  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  perhaps 
so  favourable  an  opportunity  may  not  occur,  for  us  to  inform 
our  readers,  in  an  open  and  candid  manner,  that  our  views  are 
materially  altered.  We  have  always  said,  tliac  when  convinced 
of  our  error,  we  should  hasten  to  acknowledge  it.  That  period 
has  now  arrived.  The  change  which  has  taken  place,  has  not 
been  the  hasty  conclusion  of  a  moment:  we  have  pondered  much 
on  this  interesting  subject,  and  read  every  article  within  our 
reach,  both  for  and  against  the  Society,  and  we  come  on,  from 
the  examination,  a  decided  supporter  of  the  American  Coloniza- 
tion Society. 

We  know,  that  in  making  this  avowal,  we  advance  doctrines 
in  opposition  to  the  majority  of  our  readers,  to  many  of  whom 
we  are  personally  known,  and  for  whose  opinions  we  still  enter- 
tain great  respect;  but  how  unpopular  soever  they  may  be,  we 


1829.]       Plan  for  purchasing  a  Ship  for  the  Society.       377 

know  they  are  conscientious  ones — formed  from  no  sordid  mo- 
tives: but  having  for  their  basis,   the  good  of  our  brethren. 

We  have  carefully  examined  the  different  plans  now  in  ope- 
ration for  our  benefit,  and  none,  we  believe,  can  reach  half  so 
efficiently,  the  mass,  as  the  plan  of  colonization  on  the  coast  of 
Africa;  for,  if  we  take  a  second  look  into  any  or  all  of  them,  we 
find  them  limited  to  a  single  city  or  state.  We  consider  it 
mere  waste  of  words  to  talk  of  ever  enjoying  citizenship  in  this 
country;  it  is  utterly  impossible  in  the  nature  of  things;  all, 
therefore,  who  pant  for  this,    must  cast  their  eyes  elsewhere. 

The  interesting  query  now  arises,  wKere  shall  we  find  this  de- 
sirable spot?  If  we  look  to  Europe,  we  find  that  quarter  alrea- 
dy overburdened  with  a  starving  population:  if  to  Asia,  its  dis- 
tance is  an  insuperable  barrier,  were  all  other  circumstances 
favourable.  Where,  then,  shall  we  look  so  naturallv,  as  to  Af- 
rica?  In  preferring  Liberia,  we  wish  not  to  deprive  any  of  the 
right  of  choice  between  it  and  Hayti;  as  it  is  not  our  design  to 
say  ought  against  Hayti  or  the  able  ruler  at  its  head;  but  it  is  a 
fact  well  known  to  all,  that  our  people  have  strong  objections 
against  emigrating  to  that  country,  arising,  in  many  cases,  from 
the  unfavourable  reports  of  those  who  have  returned.  Sensible 
of  the  fact,  then,  of  the  unwillingness  of  our  people  to  emigrate 
to  Hayti,  we  feel  it  our  duty,  to  offer  to  their  consideration,  our 
present  sentiments  concerning  African  Colonization,  and  per- 
haps, what  we  may  be  able  to  offer  hereafter,  may  be  the  means 
of  enlightening  some,  whom  it  was  our  misfortune  to  have  mis- 
led by  our  former  opinions." 

T?\an  to  xaise  T\m&s  foY  ^ucchasing   a 
Shi$  tor  the  Society. 

The  Board  of  Managers  have  received  a  communication  from  a  very  ac- 
tive and  judicious  friend,  to  which  they  earnestly  invite  public  attention. 
This  friend  writes,  "a  few  days  ago,  when  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  I  left  a  sub- 
scription paper,  of  which  the  following  is  a  copy." 

"Proposals  to  raise  the  sum  of  twenty  thousand  dollars  with- 
in 12  months,  from  Jan.  1st,  1829,  to  be  given  to  the  American 
Colonization  Society,  for  the  purchase  of  a  vessel  to  belong  to 

the  Society. 
48 


378  Lioo d  Devised.  '    [Feb. 

"Whereas  the  benevolent  designs  of  the  American  Coloniza- 
tion Society,  have  required  appropriations  of  their  funds  to  a 
larg«  amount,  for  the  charter  of  vessels  to  transport  emigrants 
to  Liberia,  and  whereas  their  limited  resources  have  not  enabled 
the  Society  to  afford  the  means  of  transportation  to  numbers, 
who  are  anxious  to  settle  in  Liberia;  we,  the  undersigned,  do 
agree  to  pay  to  the  Society,  or  assume  ttje  responsibility  of  col- 
lecting, for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  Society  to  procure  a 
vessel,  worth  §20,000,  the  amount  of  §50  each,  upon  condition 
that  400  subscribers  shall  pledge  themselves  to  raise  each,  the 
like  sum;  the  money  to  be  paid  to  the  Treasurer  of  the  near- 
est auxiliary,  or  to  the  Parent  Society,  upon  their  annunciation 
that' the  subscription  of  §20,000  has  been  completed." 

The  following  gentlemen  have  given  in  their  names  as  sub- 
scribers on  this  scheme. 

Herbert  C.  Thomson,  New  York. 

John  M.  Nelson,  New  York. 

Andrew  Barry,  Hillsborough*  Highland  Co.  Ohio. 

Dr.  Isaac  Telfair,         do.  do.  do. 

Benjamin  Harris,  do.  do.  do. 

Col.  Edward  Colston,  Berkely  Co.   Virginia. 

Henry  Miller,  Cincinnati*  Ohio, 
The  Managers  have  heretofore  expressed  their  opinion,  that  the  posses- 
sion of  a  ship,  by  the  Society,  would  greatly  facilitate  its  operations,  and  in- 
crease their  beneficial  results.  They  earnestly  invited  the  attention  of  l 
their  friends  to  this  subject,  in  their  Eleventh  Report,  and  the  experi- 
ence of  another  year,  has  still  more  deeply  impressed  their  minds  with 
the  importance  of  the  object.  They  solicit  the  aid  of  all  who  wish  suc- 
cess to  their  enterprise,  to  the  plan  which  is  now  submitted.  They  feel 
under  special  obligations  to  the  gentleman  who  has  suggested  it,  and  who 
has  placed  his  own  name  at  the  head  of  the  subscription.  Shall  not  this 
plan  as  well  as  that  of  Mr.  Smith,  be  carried  into  complete  effect  during- 
the  present  year > 

Good  DerviseiY. 

The  Rev.  G.  W.  Campbell,  an  Agent  of  the  Society,  in  the 
State  of  New  York,  has  submitted  the  following  plan  to  the  con- 
sideration of  the  Board  of  Managers,  and  expressed  the  opinion, 
that  it  may  be  attended  with  great  advantages.  The  Managers 
approve  it,  and  wish  it  success.  Every  plan,  indeed,  which 
may  serve  to  augment  the  resources  of  the  Society,  should  i* 


1829.]  The  great  Object  advanced.  57$ 

their  view,  be  immediately  adopted.  The  annual  income  of  our 
Institution,  must  be  increased  tenfold,  if  we  would  realise  the 
benefits  which  have  been  cherished  as  objects  of  hope  at  least, 
by  its  earliest  and  most  constant  advocates.  The  plan  now 
offered  to  public  attention,  is  the  following: 

"1st.  A  transportation  shall  be  $30,  payable  down,  at  the 
end  of  5  or  10  years;  the  time  to  be  designated  on  subscribing. 

2nd.  One  engaging  a  transportation,  may,  when  the  sum  is 
paid,  designee  the  beneficiary  of  his  charity,  or  name  a  friend 
who  shall  designate  for  him. 

3rd.  An  individual  engaging  a  transportation,  as  soon  as  he 
has  paid  a  tenth  of  his  subscription,  shall  receive  gratuitously, 
the  African  Repository  for  one  year,  and  when  the  whole  sum 
is  paid,  shall  be  a  life  member  of  the  Society. 

4th.  The  payments  on  the  transportation,  shall  be  a  sum 
not  less  than  three  dollars." 

About  twenty  subscriptions  have,  we  are  informed,  been  ob- 
tained on  the  plan  here  proposed. 

TYie  great  Object  a&Y&nceA. 

We  have  the  pleasure  to  announce  six  subscriptions  on  the 

the  plan  of  Gerrit  Smith,   Esq.  since  the  publication  of  our  last 

number. 

Mrs.  M.  H.  CarhingtonO 

Mrs.  Ann  Fontaine,  I   $100  annually  by  equal  contri- 

P.  S.  Carrington,  J    .  butions. 

Wm.  A.  Carrington,        J 

Gen.  Edward  Carrington, 

A  few  Gentlemen  near  Oak  Hill,  Fauquier  County,  Va. 

Rev.  Ebenezer  Burgess,  Dedhain,  Mass. 

A  friend  in  Virginia. 

Arthur  Tappan,  New  York, 

"EiTYor  Corrected. 

We  learn  that  a  statement  is  circulating"  through  the  papers,  that  the 
whole  amount  of  funds  required  for  the  ransom  of  the  Family  of  Abduhl 
Rahhahman,  the  Moorish  Prince,  has  been  obtained.  This  is  a  mistake} 
somewhat  less  than  half  the  sum  only  has  been  raised.  The  whole  amount 
demanded,  is  little  if  any,  short  of  $10,000,  for  the  entire  Family;  whereas, 
only  about  $4,000  have  been  contributed  for  their  redemption.  We  have 
seen  other  evidences  than  this,  that  many  persons,  in  regard  to  our  Society 
at  least,  have  been  indebted  to  their  "imaginations  for  their  facts!" 


J 80  Departure  of  the  Ship  Harriet,  E^k- 

"Departure,  ot  \\\e  S\\vp  HsiYTiet. 

The  Ship  Harriet,  Capt.  Johnson,  left  Hampton  Roads  on  the 
9th  instant,  with  1 60  emigrants,  for  the  Colony  of  Liberia.  We 
arc  happy  to  say,  that  a  more  select  and  respectable  companj 
has  not  at  any  time  embarked  for  the  African  Colony.  Of  this 
number,  18  were  from  Norfolk,  67  from  Richmond,  and  19  from 
Petersburg,   Virginia* 

Between  40  and  50  of  this  number,  were  slaves  liberated  by 
less  tlun  half  a  dozen  individuals,  for  the  special  purpose  ofbeing 
transferred  to  the  privileges  of  the  Liberian  Colony.  Fifteen  of 
these,  very  promising  subjects  for  colonization,  were  emancipated 
by  iss  Margaret  Mercer,  near  Annapolis,  Maryland,  and  18  by 
thf  Rev.  Thomas  P.  Hunt,  of  Brunswick  County,  Virginia. 
Six  were  lately  the  property  of  Edward  Colston,  Esq.  of  Vir- 
ginia. Sever. »l  others  had  just  received  freedom  from  their  bene- 
volent  proprietors.  Many  of  those  who  had  long  been  free,  had 
acquired  considerable  property,  and  all  who  embarked,  took 
with  them  a  very  liberal  supply  of  provisions,  household  furni- 
ture, tools,  and  agricultural  implements,  and  articles  for  trade. 
Most  of  these  emigrants  were  in  the  vigour  of  life,  highly  recom- 
mended for  their  correct  morals,  and  industrious  habits;  and  a 
large  proportion  distinguished  among  their  class  for  intelligence, 
influence,  and  piety.  Abduhl  Rahhahman,  the  unfortunate 
Moorish  Prince,   with  his   wife,   took    passage  in    the   Harriet. 

Before  the  departure  of  the  Harriet,  the  Rev.  Joseph  Turner 
was  ordained  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  by  a  Presbytery  of 
the  Church,  of  which  he  had  long  been  an  exemplary  member, 
and  a  useful   preacher. 

The  Rev.  David  Payne,  a  highly  respected  preacher  in  the 
Methodist  Church,  also  embarked  in  this  vessel. 

IwteWiger.ce  ftom  t\\e>  -Colony. 

News  has  arrived  from  the  Colony,  by  the  way  of  Bristol,  England,  whick 
is   of  a   melancholy  character.     It  is  stated  in  a  British  paper,  that  on  the 
18th  of  November,  the  Colonial  Magazine  was  exploded,  and  that  the  Rev. 
Lent  Cary  and  nun.  other  persons  were  killed.     We  have  no  confirmation  of 
this  account,  yet  we  much  fear  that  something  of  the  kind  has  occurred. 


1829.]  Serious  Considerations-  381 

Serious  Considerations. 

We  would  off-r  to  Heaven  our  most  devout  thanksgivings, 
that  we  are  permitted  to  bring  to  a  close,  the  fourth  volume  of 
our  Journal.  Though  in  a  review  of  the  year  which  has  just 
elapsed,  we  find  occasion  for  sad  and  mournful  thoughts,  we  al- 
so discern  much  to  encourage  and  urge  us  onward  with  increas- 
ed industry  and  pffort,  towards  the  completion  of  the  arduous 
work  iq  mspiciously  commenced,  and  which  so  well  merits,  not 
only  the  richest  contributions  of  individual  enterprise,  but  of 
state  and  national  means.  On  this  occasion,  we  beg  leave,  ear- 
ly to  invite  the  attention  of  all  our  friends  to  some  subjects 
which  appear  to  us  to  claim  their  immediate  and  most  serious 
reflections. 

It  is  unquestionable,  that  the  great  experiment  of  founding  a 
Colony  on  the  African  Coast  has  been  fairly  tried,  and  found 
iful.  The  entire  practicableness  of  the  scheme  of  the 
cty  being  then  ascertained,  the  object  now  is,  to  reduce  to  a 
reality*  the  immense  benefits  which  are  promised  by  this  scheme, 
both  to  this  couutry  and  Africa.  The  earliest  friends  of  our 
Institution  have  indulged  the  expectation,  that  nothing  more 
was  requisite  to  secure  general  and  liberal  patronage  to  their 
plan,  than  a  demonstration  of  its  feasibility:  and  the  question  is, 
shall  this  expectation  be  disappointed?  Will  those  who  con- 
stantly professed  themselves  ready  to  lend  their  aid  to  this  plan, 
the  moment  they  might  be  convinced  that  it  could  be  effected, 
prove  their  professions  to  have  been  insincere,  when  they  can  no 
longer  plead  incredulity  as  an  excuse  for  inaction?  Or  will  those 
who  have  evinced  zeal  and  energy  during  the  progress  of  this 
experiment,  at  first  doubtful,  prove  cold  and  heartless,  when  it 
is  no  longer  possible  to  deny  that  the  work  can  be  done,  and 
that  its  utility  would  be  great  beyond  conception?  Shall  efforts 
to  secure  our  object  become  less,  because  we  perceive  that  this 
object  may  certainly  be  obtained,  and  that  it  will  amply  reward 
exertion? 

But  the  results  at  which  we  aim,  can  only  be  realized,  by  far 
more  liberal  contributions  to  the  Society  than  have  ever  yet  been 
received,  and  its  consequent,  more  vigorous  and  extensive  ope- 
rations.    And  for  these  enlarged  exertions,  the  African  Colony 


382  Serious  Considerations.  [Feb. 

is  now  prepared.  Every  successive  year  hereafter,  will  it  be 
ready  for  the  reception  of  a  larger  number  of  emigrants  than  in 
the  preceding  one,  and  of  course,  the  Society  should  advance 
with  accumulating  resources  and  energy.  Let  it  never  be  for- 
gotten, however,  that  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged,  de- 
mands the  powers  of  the  nation,  and  that  without  them,  its 
completion  is  not  to  be  expected.  Our  endeavour,  then,  should 
be  to  send  abroad  an  influence  in  its  favour  throughout  the 
Union,  and  secure  to  it  the  approbation  and  support  of  the 
whole  country. 

For  this  end,  no  plan  suggests  itself  as  likely  to  be  more 
effective  than  that  (submitted  in  the  present  number)  for  the 
organization  of  a  State  Colonization  Society,  with  subordinate 
associations,  in  each  of  the  United  States.  We  hope  that  it 
will  be  adopted,  and  that  our  friends  in  those  States  where  such 
Societies  do  not  exist,  will  without  delay,  combine  their  efforts 
to  establish  them.  Such  a  system  as  we  have  ventured  to 
recommend,  cannot  fail  to  bring  the  great  objects  of  the  Soci- 
ety, constantly  and  universally  before  the  American  people, 
and  render  them  generally,  matters  of  conversation  and  re- 
flection. A  disposition  to  promote  these  objects,  will  be  thus 
produced,  and  the  streams  of  public  charity  will,  through  the 
several  county  societies  as  their  appropriate  channels,  flow  into 
the  State  Societies,  and  thence  to  the  Parent  Institution. 

May  we  not  confidently  rely  upon  collections  in  the  numerous 
churches  in  our  land,  on  the  4th  of  July,  for  more  liberal 
aid  than  has  yet  been  granted?  For  such  aid  we  must  look 
principally  to  the  influence  of  the  clergy;  and  surely  this  in- 
fluence cannot  on  such  an  occasion,  be  better  exerted,  than  in 
turning  the  gratitude  and  joy,  which  warm  all  hearts,  to  the  ac- 
count of  charity — charity  towards  those,  who  on  the  chosen  soil 
of  freedom,  are,  and  must  be,  strangers  to  its  blessings. 

All,  we  hope,  will  feel,  that  without  vastly  increased  funds, 
the  cause  of  the  American  Colonization  Society,  if  it  can  advance 
at  all,  cannot  prosper.  To  give  it  the  triumph  which  it  merits, 
this  nation  must  be  aroused  to  exertions*  compared  to  which, 
what  has  yet  been  done,  is  not  worthy  to  be  mentioned.  And 
these  exertions  must  soon  be  made,  or  they  will  be  forever  too 
fate.     Solemnly  and  urgently,  as  by  a  voice  from  Heaven,  are 


1829.]  Contributions.  383 

all  the  people  of  this  Union  called  upon,  to  come  forward  in- 
stantly, and  with  their  might  to  the  great  but  glorious  work,  in 
which  the  Colonization  Society,  with  entire  devotion,  but  in- 
adequate resources,  has  been  permitted  to  engage. 

C  ontYibutiows 

To  the  Am.  Col.  Society,  from  the  21st  Jan.  to  the  5th  March, 

1 829 — inclusive. 

A  Lady  in  Exeter  Parish,  Lebanon,  Con.   ... $  5 

The  Associate  Presbyterian  Congregation  of  Cambridge,  N.  Y.  5 
The  Wells'  Valley  (Cherokee  Nation,)  African  Benevolent  Soci- 
ety, bv  Ucv.  William  Chamberlain,   10 

Collections  by  Obed  Waite,  Esq.  of  Winchester,  Va.  as  follows: 

James  Little,   on  his  subscription,   $10 

Coll'n    in  Pres.  Ch   Winchester,  6th  July  last,   ....       5 

Obed  Waite,  himself, 10 25 

Collections  by  Grove  Wright,  Esq.  of  New  York,  as  follows: 
"From  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bradford's  Church,  at  Sheffield, 

Massachusetts,   ., $  7  81 

From  the  Ladies'  Freewill  Society,  at  Pittsfield, 

Massachusetts,   6 

From  the    Reformed    Association  in  Orange  Coun- 
ty, New  York,  . .' , S  75 

From  the  Presbyterian  Church  at  Catskill,    N.  York,     14 
From  the  Church  at  Meredith,  Delaware  Co.,  N.  Y.       3  50 
From  the  Rev.  Mr.  Shaw,  South  Hartford,  Conn.   .       3  20 

From  a  Lady  in  this  city, 20 

From  the  Church  at  Malborough,  Ulster  Co.  N.  Y.       6 
From  the  Rev.  Doctor  Lewis,  Greenwich,  Conn,  by 

the  hand  of  Zach.  Lewis,  Esq 20 

From  Mr.  Griffith  Rogan  of  Kingsport,  Tenn 2  50 

From  Mr.  W.  C.  Redfield,   10 96  7£ 

Collection  by  the  Congregation  at  the  Chapel,  Frederick  County, 

Va.  per  Rev  William  Meade,   10 

Collections  in  Granville,   New  York,  per  Rev.  J.  Whiton,  ....         30 

Collections  by  A.  R.  Plumley,  Esq 113  It: 

Collection  by  Governor  Coles,  of  Illinois: 

Edward  <  oles  and  J.  M    Robinson,  each  $20 $40 

N.  Edwards,  J.  Tillson,  and  W.  Kitchell,  each  $10  .    30 
J.  Conwav,  W.  B.  Archer,  T.  Mather,  J.  Black,  J. 
Reynolds,  T.  Guard,  W.  L.  D.  Ewing,   J,  Harlin, 

S.  Wiggins,  and  J.  Douglass,  each  $5 50 

H.  M.  Gilhaai,  S.  H.  Kimmel,  J.  Turney  and  A.'  W. 

Cavarley,  each  $3  12 

C.  Ives,  S,  B.  Shelledy,  P .  Cartwright,  E,  C.  Berry, 
J.  B.  Campbell,  T.  Ford,  J.  T.  Lusk,  J.  Atwater, 
W.  P.  McKee,  J.  Mason  &  B.  F.  Edwards,  each  $2  28 
J.  Allen,  M.  Lemen,  C.  Mundy,  R.  J.  Hamilton,  A. 
Miller,  G.  Flagg,  R.  Matheny,  J.  Adams,  K.  Till- 
son, E.  Baker,  R.  H.  Peebles,  J.T.  B.  Stapp,  C. 

B.  Berry,  J.  D.  Gorin,  each  $1  14 —  168 

Collections  by  Rev.  J.  Rea,  at  Cadiz,  Ohio,  per  Hon.  J.  C.  Wright,        14 


384  Erratum*  [Feb. 

Amount  brought  forward,  $476  8$ 

Joint  Contribution  of  a  few  Gentlemen,  living  near   Oak  Hill, 
Fauquier  county,  Va.  (a  subscription  on  the  plan  of   Gerrit 

Smith,   Esq.) *. 100 

A  Friend  to  the  cause  in  Amherst,  Mass.   ...   ...  3 

Rev.  S-  M.  VY  orcester,  of        do.  5 

Collections  by  Kev.  J.  J.  Roberts: 

Rev.  Mr.  Daniel  Raker,  Savannah,  Ga.    . .     $5 

Mr.  H.  Campbell,    20 

Mr  Josi  ph  Cumming,   8 

MrS    H.  Fay 3 

Mr.  Geo.  W.  Coe,   % 5 

Mr.  Moses  Cleland,   5 

Mr.  G.  B.  dimming,   10 

Mr.  Homes  Tupper,   5 

Rev.  Mr.  W.  O.  Wver, 2 

Mr-  0.  Mclntire,  Charleston,  S.  C 20 

Mr.  Thomas  Flemming, 10 

A    Fr  end 5 

Two  Friends,  2 

Mr.    W.  Riley,   1 

For  the  Repository,   34 133  76 

Auxiliary  Society  at  Zanesville  and  Putnam,  Ohio,  per  Hon.  Mr. 

Beecher 35 

Auxiliary  Society  of  Georgetown,  D.  C.  per  F  T  Sewall,  Esq.  52 
Auxiliary  Society  of  Green  Castle,  Pa.  per  M  L  Fullerton,  Esq.  30 
Auxiliary  Society  of  Wheeling,  Va.  per  Isaac  I.  effler,  Esq     ....  84 

Auxiliary  Society  of  Lewisburg,  Greenbriar  County,  Va.   from 

John  S potts,  Esq.  Treasurer,  per  Hon.  S.  Maxwell,    5 

Auxiliary  Society  of  Chester  County,  Pa.  per  David  Townsend, 

Esq.    Treasurer,   .' 202  25 

Auxiliary  Society  of  Amherst  Court  House,  per  Samuel   R    Da- 
vis, Esq.  Treasurer,  10 

Auxiliary  Society  of  Lexington  and  Fayette,  Ky.  per  J.  Harper, 

Esq  Treasurer,  100 

Auxiliary  Society  of  Versailles,  Kentucky,   61 

Auxiliary  Society  of  the  Ladies  in  Georgetown,  per  Mrs.  South- 
ern, Treasurer,   29  17 

Repository  from  sundries,  14 

From  Auxiliary  Society  of  Petersburg,  Va    443  38 

Rev.  Howard  Malcom,  of  Boston 5 

Peter  Force,  refunded  by  him,  for  overpayment  for  printing,    . .       100 
A   Friend  in  Fredericksburg:   (a  Lady  and  a  distinguished  pa- 
troness of  the  Society,  who  declines,  from  motives  of  delica- 
cy, from  having  her  name  made  known  to  the  public,)   ....       200 
Dr.  T.  B.  Anderson,  per  Mrs.  L.  L.  Minor,   of  Fredericksburg,  5 

Rev.  W.  Hooper,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina, ! 3 

Francis  Durlavy,  Esq.  Warren  Co.  Ohio,  per  Hon.  John  Woods,  5 

Hon.  John  Locke,  of  Mass.  his  annual  subscription,    1 

Rev.N.  Patterson,  30 


$2,133  43 

T&rratum. 

The  first  page  of  this  No.  should  have  been  dated  February  1829,  in- 
stf  ad  of  "March  1829." 


