F 

^^^^H^H|> 

, 

bd  .lewel 

J 

k 

j 

^^!^^H 

\ 

\<L/VJ>7 

g  ^ 

THE 


ALFEED 

— ♦ — 


JEWEL. 


tAv£S 


TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  TIMES. 

oir -Where  so  many  angels  have  been  treading  it  is 
perhaps  rmwise  for  a  hnmble  student  to  ventnre  in.  &tm, 
\"^^he  worth  whUe  to  make  another  guess  at  the 
truth  about  the  Alfred  jewel. 

Since  1698,  when  Dr.  Musgrave,  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal 

Society,  published  the  first    notice  of  the  jewel  m  the 

f<  Sophi-l  Tnmsactions"(No     247)    It  has  been 

en^.ested   that   the   jewel  may  have  been   (1)    an  amulet 

mT  Musgrave's  suggestion)  ;  (2)  a  pendant  to  a  chaan  or 

collar  •  (3)  an  umbilicus,  or  head  of  a  roller  for  a  M.S.  ; 

U)  the'  top  of  a  stilus  ;  (5)  the   head  of  a  book-pomter  ; 

6    the   top   of  a   standard;  (7)    the  head  of  a  sceptre  ; 

8    S  ornament  for  .Alfred's   helmet.     This   last   xs   tbe 

ecent    svxggestion    of    Professor    Earle,    ^d    is     rn^t 

engagingly    presented   in  his    interesUng    book,        The 

Alfred  Jewel."  .  .  , 

Without  criticizing  in  detafl  these  various   views^^d 
before  offering  a  new  suggestion  or   two,  I  should  like  to 
point   out  apropos   of   the  book-pomter  view-the   one 
Loured  by  Sir  John  Evans  in  his  address  at  Winchester 
-that  tbe  jewel  is  by  no   means   uncomfortable   m  the 
wd      A  little  experimenting  with   one   of  the  excellent 
Scsimiles  which  we   owe  to   the   Millenary  proves  this. 
Also,  the  view  that  the  jewel  may   have   been  the   head 
of  a  sceptre  scarcely   seems   to   have   received   sufScient 
consideration.    The     illumination     from     the   Book   of 
Kells   which  Professor  Earle  refers   to  for  his  own  view, 
at  leak  suggests  a  sceptre  with  a  flat  head. 

In  considering  any  suggestion  as  t<)  its  probable  use 
it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Alfred  jewel  is  not 
unique.     A    jewel,    smaller    it    is    true     and    circular. 


•59 


'H: 


f  '.oddn.  pu.  .^eup,  ^^^^JSI^  iSf 

Us^a  J«  ^r'^^r  ^'T:^'  'IS  old  moLmmoo  s,t  uo 
i:paiiu9 -^somtr:  spuadep  ^^^^^^^^-^^^-^^  ^^slaoau  qons 
,nowv^neq..dmon.  o,  .iepi|V-  l^^:}^^;il 

emn  eomJOTis -jon  op    ^I^^'^''  P'   "^  qsamsuq  ttsiiSu^ 
ano  o^^pimi^s  ppoqs    ^^^aco    icioiemmoo  ^  ^^^^ 

Smio^Sunn^^  ^oj   ^^J   «",f  ^^^^f J^oi,OT5Bd  pe^urds 
.^q  mouooiv  puB  Ti^mjap   P  ^°g'J,o  '^o^^  ommaoi^p 

lq,^6;-po,nq«.uoo  ^^^^'jg'l'^^^^.^l  ,uesaad  o^^ 
■'■"''fj^^iZV^  ssSn5^?oup.oo  o,  ^3uoa.  pe^-y- 
-out!  ireoDu^  ./sannrcmnH  ,.  ©^  ?»  amq^suios  m     i 


THJ!;  ALFIiED   JEWEL. 


3JD-6/. 


TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  TIMES. 

Sir, — Mr.  Elworthy  would  appear  to  be  incapable  of 
apprehending  my  particular  predicament  in  this  "  Five 
o'clock  tea"  controversy  over  the  "  Al  frcd  Jewel  " — 
which  simply  is  that  the  traces  of  Oriental  influence  to  be 
observed  in  its  form  and  decoration  support  Professor 
Earle's  contention  that  it  was  meant  to  be  worn  on  a 
helmet.  Surely  this  very  humble  suggestion  is  deserving 
of  some  consideration,  especially  as  the  "  Alfred  Jewel  " 
was  fastened  to  whatever  it  was  attached  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  two  parts — the  "  knop"  and  the  "  flower  " 
— of  the  Mo(n)gol  torn  were,  and  are,  fastened  together. 

After  Professor  Earle's  suggestion  of  the  purpose  of 
the  "  jewel,"  I  should  be  inclined  to  accept  that  of  Lady 
Huggins.  Mr.  Elworthy  sneers  at  it,  but  he,  trans- 
parently, Icnows  nothing  of  th©  attiring  of  womeid^ind 
or  he  would  know  that  pins  for  female  wear  are  still 
made  in  the  East  of  all  sizes,  up  to  fiin.  and  Sin.  in 
length,  and  of  the  most  beautiful  forms,  ^vith  eveiy 
elaboration  of  art ;  and  that,  in  the  way  cheap  trinkctry, 
similar  pins  are  often  to  be  seen  for  sale  in  the  shop  -win- 
dows of  Regent-street  and  the  Burlington-arcade.  The 
very  etymology  of  the  word  "pin"  goes  to  prove  that  the 
article  signified  by  it  is  intended  not  only  for  the  mere 
mechanical  use  but  the  artistic  adorning  of  women — 
it  being  the  same  word  as  "  pink,"  to  embroider  ; 
"  finch,"  the  painted  bird  ;  "  pica,"  originally  the 
illuminated  initial  in  black  letter  manuscript  ;  "  picca- 
dilly,"  an  embroidered  collar  ;  "  pickles,"  mixed 
acetified  vegetables  ;  "  picture,"  &c.,  and  in  Latin 
"  pingere,"  to  paint,  and  in  Greek  "  Poecile  "  (compare 
Piccadilly),  the  Painted  Porch,  and  in  Sanscrit  pecas, 
a  "  jewel,"  and  pecalas,  "  adorned." 

I  have  the   honour  to  be.     Sir,    your   most   obediei^; 
servant, 

St.  Pihtas  Day,  1101. 


GEORGE  BIRnWOr<J,% 


-rr 


^Tolv^^-    TEE  ALFRED   JEV/EL.  ffOO). 

• ^ 

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  TIMES. 
Sir^_Somo  weeks  ago  you  were  good  enough  to  print 
two  letters  from  myself,  and  now  that  the  millenary  is 
over  and  you  have  again  opened  your  columns  on  this 
subject  I  trust  you  will  permit  me  to  refer  to  it  onco 
more.  Lady  Huggins's  suggestion  in  your  issue  of  to- 
day, that  the  so-caUed  "  jewel  "  may  have  been  the  head 
of  a  pin  for  female  wear,  is  new,  but  will  hardly  bear  ex- 
amination, inasmuch  as  the  socket  is  nearly  large  enough 
to  hold  an  ordinary  lead  pencil,  and  a  pin  of  that  size  for 
fastening  any  garment  would  be  monstrous. 

My  contention  that  the  "  jewel  "  was  the  handle  of  a 
pointer  was  met  by  Sir  George  Birdwood  with  much 
learning.  Oriental  and  classical,  as  to  the  etymology  of  the 
word  jewel,  while  I  was  allowed  to  bo  castigated  for  pre- 
suming to  offer  an  opinion  differing  from  that  of  Pro- 
fessor Earle,  and  there  it  was  left.  In  your  report  of  the 
proceedings  at  Winchester  I  read  that  Professor  Skeat 
spoke  "  of  the  thing  called  an  cestel,  which  Alfred  was 
said  to  have  presented  to  certain  Bishops  witli  his 
i  books,"  and  he  went  on  to  say  that  one  solution  of  the 
'  "  jewel  "  mystery  was  that  the  cestel  was  an  indicator, 
and  this  seemed  to  be  his  opinion.  Sir  John  Evans  more 
distinctly  supported  my  contention  that  it  "was  the 
head  (I  said  handle)  of  a  pointer  for  pointing  out  to  the 
reader  the  Une  which  ha  had  reached." 

After  being  sat  upon   and  demolished  without   oppor- 
tunity of  reply,  it  is  satisfactory  to  an  obscure,  nobody 
to  find  two  such   authorities   maintaining   that  after  all 
I  his  view  was  the  right  one  and  that  it  is  now  generally 


The    Alfred   Jewel 


J.    EARLE 


Henry  Frowde,  M.A. 

Publisher  to  the  University  of  Oxford 
London,  Edinburgh,  and  New  York 


■f^^S. 


^- 


J3MAHa 


I  ^ 


I  nom 


BACK 
FRONT 


ENAMEL 


RIGHT  LEFT 

THE    JEWEL    IN     FOUR    ASPECTS 

WITH     SEPARATE      FIGURE     OF     ENAMEL 
FRONTISPIECEJ 


The  Alfred  Jewel: 

An  Historical  Essay 


By 


John    Earle,   M.A.,   LL.D. 

Rector  of  Swanswick,  Prebendary  of  Wells 
Rawlinsonian  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of  Oxford 


With  Illustrations  and  Map 


Oxford 

At  the  Clarendon  Press 

mdcccci 


Oxford 

Printed  at  the  Clarendon  Press 

By    Horace    Hart,    M.A. 

Princer  to  the  University 

\1  ^34 1 


(V/< 
730? 

11o( 


PREFACE 

IT  is  full  fifty  years  since  I  began  to  contem- 
plate the  Alfred  Jewel  with  a  wonder  and 
curiosity  which  became  a  habit.  At  length,  in 
the  latter  half  of  that  period,  the  vague  attitude 
of  enquiry  began  to  point  in  a  definite  direc- 
tion, and  to  exhibit  susceptibility  of  develop- 
ment suggesting  promise  of  possible  discovery. 
Prompted  by  such  anticipations,  I  one  day 
ventured  to  express  a  wish  to  the  Principal  of 
Hertford  College  that  he  would  exercise  his 
well-known  graphic  talent  upon  the  Alfred 
Jewel,  and  make  some  enlarged  drawings  of 
it  suitable  for  a  Public  Lecture.  The  result 
was  that  he  gave  me  a  beautiful  set  of  coloured 
drawings  of  the  Jewel  in  various  aspects  admir- 
ably calculated   for  exhibition  in  the  Lecture 


vi  Treface 

Room.  Thus  equipped,  I  was  able  to  make  the 
subject  more  intelligible  and  more  attractive, 
and  I  lectured  upon  it  the  oftener.  As  it  has 
not  been  my  wont  to  write  my  lectures  out  in 
full,  it  was  all  the  more  necessary  for  me  on  every 
new  occasion  to  make  a  fresh  study  of  the  Jewel. 
In  this  recurring  process  new  lights  rose  at  wide 
intervals  of  time,  and  drew  me  on  to  devote 
more  thought  to  the  object  and  to  the  times 
associated  with  it  j  and  I  found  more  than 
I  had  looked  for  in  the  design,  and  more 
(I  think)  than  I  should  have  found,  but  for  the 
generous  aid  so  readily  extended  to  me  by 
Dr.  Boyd. 

It  was  after  such  a  lecture  delivered  in  May, 
1899,  that  I  had  the  great  and  unexpected 
pleasure  of  a  proposal  from  the  Delegates  of 
the  Press  to  make  a  book  of  it.  I  was  able 
to  accept  this  proposal  without  misgiving, 
because  I  was  satisfied  that  I  had  a  solid 
interpretation  to  offer — one  which  had  been 
slowly   matured    and    scrupulously    tested    by 


Treface  vii 

every  means  in  my  power.  All  the  old  theories 
had  come  to  nothing :  there  was  not  one  of 
them  that  could  be  seriously  advocated  as 
resting  upon  evidence  either  in  history  or  in 
common  sense  and  the  natural  reason  of  things. 
In  saying  so  much  as  this,  I  am  only  accounting 
for  my  readiness  to  accept  the  task,  and  not  by 
any  means  prejudging  the  general  verdict  upon 
the  validity  of  my  argument.  In  this  argu- 
ment I  seek  to  establish  the  intimate  relation  of 
the  Jewel  with  the  history  and  the  mind  and 
the  person  of  Alfred  of  Wessex,  not  indeed 
as  a  scientifically  demonstrated  fact,  but  as  a 
well-founded  and  abundantly  supported  proba- 
bility. I  have  no  desire  that  this  conclusion 
should  be  admitted  without  a  complete  and 
rigid  scrutiny. 

In  the  carrymg  out  of  this  undertaking 
I  have  received  welcome  and  much-needed  help 
from  many  quarters.  The  subject  is  one  that 
calls  for  illustration  by  maps  and  drawings  j 
and  I  desire  to  express  my  sincere  acknowledge- 


viii  Treface 

ments  to  Mr.  Alfred  A.  Clarke  of  Wells  for 
his  four  drawings,  among  which  I  will  particu- 
larly mention  his  characteristic  landscape  of 
the  Isle  of  Athelney. 

The  map  of  Athelney  and  the  lands  adjacent 
is  very  ingeniously  devised  for  exhibiting  the 
contrast  between  the  low  level  of  the  moorland 
and  the  contours  of  the  rising  country  around ; 
it  is  expressive  and  intelligible  at  a  glance  :  and 
for  this  excellent  illustration  my  acknowledge- 
ments are  due  to  Mr.  Bernhard  V.  Darbishire. 

My  hearty  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Charles  H. 
Read  of  the  British  Museum  for  the  ample  in- 
formation he  kindly  afforded  me  concerning  the 
gold  rings  of  the  Saxon  period  which  are  in  his 
department.  Also  for  the  permission  which  he 
gave  (as  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries) 
to  transfer  to  these  pages  their  engraving  from 
the  Book  of  Kells,  and  also  their  three  figures 
of  the  gold  ring  of  queen  iEthelswith. 

To  those  gentlemen  of  Somerset  who  have 
aided  me  with  local  information  and  hospitality 


"Preface  ix 

and  personal  guidance,  I  have  good  cause  to 
be  always  grateful.  Major  Barrett,  junior,  of 
Moredon,  the  owner  of  the  Isle  of  Athelney, 
took  me  over  the  ground  in  a  manner  that  is 
very  agreeable  to  remember,  and  caused  me  to 
see  the  historical  sites  of  his  country  with  every 
advantage.  It  was  under  his  auspices  that  I  first 
realized  the  full  import  of  Alfred's  fort  at 
Borough  Bridge,  and  what  a  speaking  object- 
lesson  it  certainly  is.  I  had  seen  it  in  i8y(^, 
but  I  had  not  adequately  appreciated  it. 

From  Mr.  Cely  Trevelian  of  Midelney  Place 
I  learnt  much  that  was  useful  to  me  concern- 
ing the  history  and  present  conditions  of  the 
moorlands  of  Somerset.  He  was  my  hospit- 
able friend  and  companion  over  the  country  on 
either  side  of  the  Parrett  in  the  circle  of  I.ang- 
port,  and  from  that  to  Borough  Bridge.  Under 
his  guidance  I  revisited  Aller  (pronounced 
Oiler),  and  renewed  acquaintance  with  its  sacred 
associations,  after  an  interval  of  forty-four  years. 
In  1 8  yd  I  was  conducted  by  an  old  Oriel  friend 


X  Treface     ■ 

who  was  my  host,  the  Rev.  James  Coleman, 
then  Curate  of  the  parish  in  which  Athelney 
is  situated  ;  he  subsequently  became  Vicar  of 
Cheddar  and  Prebendary  of  Wells.  When 
I  entered  upon  the  present  work,  after  so 
long  an  interval,  it  was  with  Mr.  Coleman 
that  I  began  to  make  enquiries  for  local  in- 
formation. 

To  Sir  Alexander  Acland  Hood  I  am  indebted 
for  genealogical  and  topographical  information^ 
and  particularly  for  some  new  light  on  the 
history  of  the  Jewel,  now  for  the  first  time  made 
public.  The  statement  in  the  manuscript  of 
Mr.  Thomas  Palmer,  which  is  preserved  at  Fair- 
field, that  the  Jewel  was  '  dug  up,'  is  a  new  item 
in  the  circumstances  of  the  discovery,  to  which 
I  attach  important  evidential  weight. 

I  have  also  to  thank  Sir  Cuthbert  Slade  of 
Maunsel,  for  his  courtesy  in  answering  my 
enquiries,  genealogical  and  territorial,  con- 
cerning the  Slade  family. 

On  Mr.  C.  F.  Bell,  the  Assistant  Keeper  of  the 


Trefac(^  xi 

Ashmolean  Museum^  I  chiefly  depended  for  help 
in  that  part  of  my  subject  where  I  was  most 
wanting,  namely  in  the  technicalities  of  ancient 
art,  and  especially  concerning  enamels. 

To  my  friend  Dr.  Shadwell  my  obligations 
are  not  the  less  but  the  greater  for  that  they 
are  somewhat  indefinable.  He  has  redd  through 
the  proofs,  and  has  given  me  valuable  sugges- 
tions, and  he  has  always  been  ready  to  help  when 
I  needed  advice. 

For  me  this  trinket  has  assumed  the  propor- 
tions of  a  serious  historical  problem,  and  its 
investigation  has  been  rewarded  with  new  light 
in  many  directions,  and  I  do  not  think  I  shall 
regret  the  time  spent  upon  it,  even  though  my 
conclusions  should  hereafter  be  modified  or 
even  refuted.  I  hold  that,  apart  from  the  con- 
clusions, the  investigation  itself  was  worth  the 
while,  but  when  I  say  this  I  am  not  to  be 
understood  as  admitting  that  I  have  little 
confidence  in  my  conclusions. 

In   putting    forth    this    Essay,   I    desire    to 


xii  Treface 

convince  the  reader  only  as  fully  as  I  am 
convinced  myself,  that  is  to  say,  with  a  con- 
viction which  makes  no  claim  to  finality,  but 
lies  open  to  correction  in  case  of  new  light  or 
better  use  of  old  data  •  yet  which  nevertheless, 
in  the  mean  time  and  for  the  main  issues  of 
the  enquiry,  reaches  a  degree  of  probability 
whereby  all  doubt  and  uncertainty  is  practically 

excluded. 

J.E. 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    I 

Description  of  the  Alfred  Jewel 

The  place  of  its  deposit 
Structural  details  of  the  Jewel 
The  name  of  Alfred  upon  it  . 
Question  what  this  name  imports 
Other  persons  bearing  this  name 
The  perfection  of  the  Jewel  suggested  doubt 
The  firm  judgement  of  Dr.  George  Hickes 
Nevertheless,  the   question  must  be  kept  in  view 
throughout  this  Essay  .         .         .         .         . 


PAGE 

1-9 
I 

4- 
id, 

T 

7 
8 


CHAPTER    II 
The  Epigraph  or  Legend  . 

The  forms  of  the  lettering 
The  Syntax  of  the  Sentence  : 

(i)  as  to  collocation    . 

( z)  usage  of  words 


lO— 2  1 

.     lo 

.        IZ 

.     id. 


xiv 


Contents 


(3)  riexional  construction    .... 

(4)  active  and  passive  structure  , 
Other  time-indications  in  the  Epigraph  . 
Quotation  from  Alfred's  Prologue  to  his  Fastoralh 
Similarity  between  the  Prologue  and  the  Epigraph 


PAGE 

IT 
16 

17 

^9 

21 


CHAPTER    III 

Early  Speculations  about  its  Design  and 
Manner  of  Use 22-30 


The  Epoch  of  the  Discovery — The  Royal  Society 
The  persons  who  first  were  conversant  with  the  new 

found  object — Colonel  Nathaniel  Palmer    . 
Dr.  Hans  Sloane — The  British  Museum 
Robert  Harley,  first  Earl  of  Oxford 
First  published  notice  of  the  Jewel — Dr.  William 

Musgrave  ..... 
Hickes's  Thesaurus 
Variety  of  opinions  about  the  Jewel 
Francis  Wise — Samuel  Pegge 
Mr.  Philip  Duncan 
St.  Neot  and  St.  Cuthbert 
Abortiveness  of  these  attempts 


i+ 
id. 

id. 

id. 

17 
z8 

30 


Contents 


XV 


CHAPTER    IV 

Bishop  Clifford's  Theory 

Bishop  Clifford      .... 
The  handle  of  a  choir-master's  wand 
Identical  with  the  '  aestel '  ?     . 
Given  by  Alfred  to  Athelney  Abbey  and 

to  Henry  VIII's  time 
This  theory  inapplicable  to  the  Jewel 
But  perhaps  applicable  to  the  '  asstel ' 
Theory  of  sceptre -tip 


PAGE 

3T-43 

•  Bi 

•  34 


there  kept 


35 
37 
41 
4^ 


CHAPTER    V 


A  Jewel  in  the  Crown 


Form  convenient  for  erection  in  the  helmet 
Transforms  the  helmet  into  a  Coronet 
The  minor  jewel  from  Minster  Lovel 
Dr.  Wilson  and  Dr.  Griffiths 
Quotations  from  Beowulf  and  La3amon 
The  Crown  of  Queen  Victoria 


44-5-0 

44 
45 

48 

4y 

50 


XVI 


Contents 


CHAPTER    VI 

pagl: 
The  Boar's  Head yi-do 

Diversity  of  opinion  about  the  animal's  head  .         -51 
Testimony  undesigned    ......     5-^ 

The  wild  boar  in  the  helmet  .         .         .         .         .id. 

Quotations  from  the  Beovjulf  .  .         .  5"3  ff- 

The  Boar's  Head  at  Queen's  College,  Oxford  .         •     5"? 
Religious  origin  of  the  Boar's  Head  as  a  Crest        .     55) 


CHAPTER    VII 


The  Figure  in  Enamel  and  the  Engraved 
Plate  at  the  back  of  it     .       .       .     di-91 

Our  Chief  Problem  is  '  A  figure  hard  to  characterize  '     6\ 
Division  of  this  Chapter         .         .         .         .         .     6'x 

Enamelling  as  an  artistic  industry  ....     id. 

Enamel  clo'tsonvee  .         .         .         .         .         .  •     <^3 

Chief  extant  specimens  according  to  M.  Labarte  6^  fF. 
The  Enamelled  Ouche  of  Mr.  Roach  Smith  .  .  6% 
Enamel  champlevee  .  .  .  .  .  .id. 


Contents 


XVll 


Obscurity  of  the  history  of  enamelling    . 
Philostratus  ...... 

Enamelled  horse-gear     .... 

The  Symbolism  of  the  icmicula  and  its  Source 
The  Book  of  Kells  ..... 

Relations  of  Alfred  with  Irish  travellers 
The  Tufa       ...... 

Evidence  for  the  Enamel's  being  an  insular  pr 
Allegorical  engraving  on  the  back-plate 
Dualistic  theory  of  Sir  Francis  Palgrave 
The  brothers  John  and  Philip  Duncan   . 
Unity  of  thought  in  the  Jewel 
Alfred's  Epilogue  to  his  Past  oralis  . 
Summary  of  this  Chapter 


oduct 


PAGE 

69 

70 
71 

74 
7df. 

78 

19 
80 

81 

83 
8+ 
U 

87  ff. 
po 


CHAPTER    VIII 


Alfred  in  Somerset  beyond  Pedrida  .  92-132 


The  central  episode  of  Alfred's  career    . 
Suddenness  of  the  surprize  at  Chippenham     . 
Apprehension  of  attack  on  north  coast  of  Wealcyn 
Alhstan,  bishop  of  Sherborne  .         .         .         . 

Meditations  of  king  Alfred     .         .         .         .         . 

b 


id. 


xvm 


Contents 


Danish  invasion  of  Wessex  . 

Placable  temper  of  the  West  Welsh 

Hostility  of  the  '  North  Welsh  ' 

Alfred's  disguise    . 

The  Jewel  must  be  buried 

Selwood         .... 

Story  of  Denewulf 

Hingston  Down    , 

The  Danes  in  Exeter     . 

The  Danes  at  Cynwit    . 

The  political  import  of  Pedrida 

Selwoodshire 

The  Transpedridan  dialect     . 

The  Devonian  '  u  ' 

The  Pixies    .... 

Somerset  in  Alfred's  day 

Subsidence  of  the  land  . 

Elm-trees      .... 

Red  Deer      .... 

Leland's  Itinerary  . 

Etymology  of  '  Pedrida  ' 

British  policy  of  Wessex 

Aldhelm's  letter  to  Gerontius 

His  little  church  at  Bradford-on-Avon 

Associations  of  Glastonbury  . 

Asserts  Life  of  Alfred    . 

The  Fort  at  Athelney    . 

Brixton  Deveril     . 


PAGE 

97 
5,8 

id. 

99^' 

ICO 
lOI 

id. 

lOZ 

id. 

103 
i04f. 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
iiof. 

IIX 

117 

id.  f. 

up 

IZO 

id.  if. 
1x4. 

ia8 


Contents 


XIX 


The  buried  Jewel  not  recovered 

The  Peivvar  Kotal  (1878) 

'  What  follows  is  like  a  dream ' 


PAGE 

130 


CHAPTER    IX 


VTON   TARK    AND    T AIRFIELD   HOUSE       I33- 

.145- 

'  Newton  Park  ' 

133 

iElfric,  archbishop  of  Canterbury  . 

.  13+ 

The  Forest  of  North  Petherton      . 

.    id. 

Three  co-heiresses 

•  I3T 

The  Perambulation  of  the  Forests  . 

.    Id. 

Gefferey  Chaucer 

13^ 

The  improvements  of  Sir  Thomas  Wrothe 

•  137 

A  surmise  about  the  Manor  of  Newton  . 

.  138 

Petherton  Park 

139 

The  parish  of  Stogursey 

id. 

Fairfield  House •     . 

140 

*  Always  a  Vernal  at  Fairfield '        .         .         .         . 

14a 

The  Palmer  family         ..... 

id. 

Nathaniel  Palmer 

144 

Thomas  Palmer 

id. 

Two  co-heiresses 

i4ir 

b    2 


XX 


Contents 


CHAPTER    X 

Gold  Rings  contemporaneous 

The  Enamelled  Ouche  of  Mr.  Roach  Smith 

The  Ring  of  Alhstan    . 

The  place  of  its  discovery 

The  Ring  of  Alfred's  father   . 

The  place  and  manner  of  its  discovery 

The  Ring  of  Alfred's  sister    . 

The  manner  of  its  discovery  . 

The  Ring  of  ^^thred     . 

Runes  intermixed  with  Roman  lettering 

The  artist  bears  a  Saxon  name 


PAGE 

14.6" 

148 
14.9 

150 

15:4. 

IT)" 
i'^6 


CHAPTER    XI 
Some  Closing  Reflections 


15-7-174 


Fine  workmanship  no  longer  an  objection 

Early  cumulation  of  evidence 

Evidence  added  since    .... 

Rejected  theories   ..... 

The  Cynehelm  theoiy    .... 

The  unity  of  the  work  makes  for  Alfred  of  Wessex 

Outline  of  the  Symbolism 


157 
id. 

id, 

id. 


Contents 


XXI 


My  surprize  at  the  latent  meanings 
The  fondness  of  king  Alfred  for  imagery 
The  Simile  of  the  Waggon    . 


*D&^ 


The  Jewel  illustrated  by  the  Writings  of  king  Alfred  16% 


The  Jewel  probably  records  a  Crisis 
At  what  Epoch  designed  ? 
Double  process  of  investigation 
Date  of  Alfred's  return  from  Rome 
The  nature  of  Probable  Evidence    . 
Conclusions  from  the  above  data    . 


PAGE 

Id.  ff. 
1^3 


.   166 
.     id. 

.  i6j 
lyof. 
lyxff: 

•  17+ 


APPENDICES 


Appendix  A.     The  First  published  Notice  of  the  Alfred 

Jewel  (to  pp.  a<r  and  144)  .         ,         ,         .         •   175" 

Appendix  B.    St.  Neot  and  St.  Cuthbert  (to  pp.  19  and  74.)  177 

Appendix  C.     The  Two-sceptred  Figure  in  the  Book  of 

Ke//s  (to  ip.  78) 181 

Appendix  D.     The   British  Origin  of  the   Enamelled 

Figure  (to  p.  91) 184 

Appendix  E.     Athelney  Abbey  (to  p.  115)     .         .         .1851 

Appendix  F,     North  Newton  Church  (to  p.  i^y)  •        .   ipi 

Appendix   G.     The  Presentation  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  to 

the  University  of  Oxford  (to  pp.  140  and  145-)     .  15)4 


XXll 


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


PAGE 


Frontispiece 
to  face 


J) 


jj 


The  Alfred  Jewel  in  four  aspects,  with  separate  Figure  of 

Enamel     .... 
The  Inscription  on  the  Jewel 
The  Minster  Lovel  Jewel 
Illumination  from  tiie  Book  of  Kelts 
The  Isle  of  Athelney    . 
Fairfield  House    .... 
Inscription  on  the  Ring  of  iEthelwuif 
The  Ring  of  i^thelwulf 
The  Ring  of  Queen  ^thelswith,  the  bczil 
Inscription  within  the  Ring  of  Queen  iEthclswith 
The  Ring  of  Queen  ^Ethelswith  showing  niello 
Inscription  on  yE^red's  Ring 
The  Jewel,  Front  and  Back  . 
Sculptured  Bosses  found  at  Athelney  Abbey 
Tower  of  North  Newton  Church  . 
Map  of  the  Isle  of  Athelney  . 


to  face 
to  face 


M 

11 
9Z 

141 

149 

17+ 
191 

At  end 


THE    ALFRED   JEWEL 


CHAPTER    I 

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  ALFRED  JEWEL 

THE  subject  of  this  Essay  is  preserved  in 
the  Ashmolean  Museum,  which  has  been 
its  home  for  a  period  of  time  now  approaching 
two  hundred  years.     It  is  there  installed  under 


glass  in  such  a  manner  that  every  side  of  it  is 
plainly  exhibited  to  the  eye  of  the  visitor.  It 
bears  an  inscription  in  conspicuous  lettering 
which  sets  forth  that  by  Alfred's  order  it  was 


%  The  Alfred  Jewel 

made,  and  this  is  the  ground  upon  which  it  is 
known  as  The  Alfred  Jewel. 

The  Alfred  Jewel  has  been  compared  to  a 
battledore,  not  untruly  for  the  matter  of 
shape  j  but  the  wide  diversity  of  size  makes 
the  comparison  seem  incongruous.  The  extreme 
length  of  the  Jewel  is  a  very  small  fraction 
under  two  inches  and  a  half;  its  greatest  width 
is  just  one  inch  and  a  fifth ;  its  thickness  barely 
half  an  inch. 

It  contains  a  sitting  Figure  enamelled  on  a 
plate  of  gold  which  is  protected  in  front  by 
a  slab  of  rock  crystal,  and  at  the  back  by  a 
gold  plate  engraved  j  the  whole  enshrined  in 
a  golden  frame  of  delicately  executed  filigree 
work.  The  picture  is  visible  through  the 
rock  crystal,  making  the  obverse  of  the  Jewel  j 
while  the  reverse  is  formed  by  the  gold 
plate  which  is  at  the  back  of  the  enamelled 
plate.  Upon  this  gold  plate  is  engraved  an  alle- 
gorical design.  Both  these  surfaces  (obverse 
and  reverse)  are  flat,  but  in  every  other  part  of 
the  Jewel  the  surface  is  rounded. 

The  rounded  contours  may  be  likened  to 
those  of  a  pigeon's  Qgg,     If  we  imagine  a  longi- 


Description  of  the  Alfred  Jewel    g 

tudinal  section  of  a  pigeon's  Q^g^  the  engraved 
plate  at  the  back  of  the  picture  will  correspond 
to  the  plane  of  the  egg's  diameter.  From  this 
plane,  if  we  measure  three-quarters  of  an  inch 
in  the  girth  of  the  Qg^^  and  then  take  another 
section  parallel  to  the  gold  plate  at  the  back,  we 
obtain  the  front  surface  of  the  crystal,  through 
which  the  Enamel  is  visible. 

The  effect  of  this  arrangement  is,  that  the 
sides  all  round  the  Jewel  are  curved  and  sloping, 
and  that  the  obverse  is  of  more  contracted  area 
than  the  reverse,  and  also  that  the  measurement 
of  the  sloping  side  exceeds  that  of  the  thickness. 
The  head  of  the  sitting  Figure  occupies  the  broad 
end  of  the  oval  section  j  the  smaller  end  is  pro- 
longed, and  is  fashioned  like  the  head  of  a  wild 
boar  on  the  obverse,  but  the  reverse  of  this 
head  is  flat  and  covered  with  fish-like  scales. 

The  snout  is  projected  in  the  form  of  a  socket 
adapted  to  receive  a  peg  or  stem ;  athwart  this 
socket  is  a  cross-pin,  having  a  head  at  one  of 
its  ends,  while  the  other  end  is  riveted.  This 
indicates  that  the  Jewel  was  furnished  with 
a  stem  which  has  perished,  and  which,  therefore, 
was  not  metallic,  but  of  some  organic  material. 


B    1 


4  The  Alfred  Jewel 

perhaps  walrus  ivory.  Around  the  sloping  sides 
runs  a  legend  : 

^  AELFRED  MEn  HEHT  DEWYRCAN 
Alfred  me      ordered  make 

and  this  legend  starts  from  the  narrowest  point 
of  the  oval,  beginning  on  the  right-hand  side 
and  running  round  to  the  corresponding  point 
on  the  left,  so  that  it  encircles  the  oval  com- 
pletely, running  in  the  contrary  direction  to 
that  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  our  coins, 
which  are  redd  from  left  to  right,  as  indeed 
were  also  the  coins  of  the  ninth  century. 

Some  have  doubted  whether  the  owner  of 
the  Jewel  was  the  famous  Alfred  of  Wessex.  It 
has  been  urged  that  the  name  of  iELFRED  in 
the  Epigraph  is  not  of  itself  adequate  proof 
of  the  fact,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  this 
is  literally  true.  And  it  is  not  superfluous  to 
point  out  the  inconsequence  of  such  reasoning, 
for  it  has  actually  been  advanced  in  serious 
argument.  Samuel  Pegge,  an  antiquary  of  re- 
pute, wrote  in  Arch(zologia  ii  as  if  there  had  been 
but  one  eminent  person  of  the  name  of  Alfred  : — 
'There    is    no    doubt    but    this    Keiix-qXiov    was 


Description  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  5- 

once  the  property  of  the  great  King  iElfred, 
notwithstanding  the  goodness  of  the  work  which 
has  been  an  objection  to  its  authenticity  j  for 
the  king's  name  is  expressly  mentioned  in  the 
inscription.'  There  were  many  persons  of  that 
name  in  the  course  of  the  Saxon  period,  and 
the  name  was  not  confined  to  men  born  after  his 
time,  for  there  were  persons  of  this  name  who 
were  men  of  mark  among  his  contemporaries, 
one  of  whom  (to  say  the  least)  was  certainly 
his  senior. 

When  Swithun  died,  in  %6z  (m  Alfred's 
fourteenth  year),  his  successor  in  the  See  of 
Winchester  was  named  Alfred. 

A  contemporary  of  position  and  intelligence 
and  of  great  wealth  was  that  ^Elfred  who  re- 
deemed from  heathen  hands  a  noble  volume 
of  the  Gospels,  and  conveyed  it  by  a  solemn 
deed  of  gift  in  his  own  name  and  that  of  his 
wife  to  the  brotherhood  of  Christ  Church,  Can- 
terbury 1.  That  volume  is  the  Codex  Aureus^  which 

^  This  remarkable  document  begins  thus  : — ^  In  nomine 
domini  nostri  Ihesu  Christi.  Ic  ^Elfred  aldormon  and 
Werburg  min  gcfera  begetan  ^as  bee  aet  h^-gnum  herge  mid 
uncre  clasne  feo  -gset  -boune  w£es  mid  clxne  golde,  and  -gset 
wit  deodan  for  Godes  lufan  and  for  uncre  saule  tiearf  ond 


6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

is  now  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Stockholm.  The 
Will  of  this  Alfred,  who  in  the  course  of  that 
document  styles  himself '  Elfred  dux,'  is  one  of 
the  most  precious  relics  of  Saxon  antiquity  ^ 

A  few  years  after  the  king's  death,  the 
Chronicle  records,  in  90(5,  the  death  of  an 
Alfred,  who  was  Reeve  of  Bath. 

It  has  been  argued  that  with  such  facts  before 
us  the  ownership  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  must  be  a 
matter  of  uncertainty,  for  we  only  know  that  it 
was  ordered  by  a  person  of  the  name  of  Alfred. 
Such  arguments  may  sometimes  be  heard  from 
persons  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to  respect, 
but  I  am  not  aware  that  any  one  has  under- 
taken to  reason  out  and  maintain  this  view  in 
a  published  writing.  And  perhaps  if  we  attend 
well  to  the  whole  of  the  evidence,  we  shall  see 


foriSon  -Se  wit  noldan  -gaet  'Sas  halgan  beoc  lencg  in  ^sere 
hse^enesse  wunaden.  '  ^  In  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ.  I  Alfred  alderman  and  Werburg  my  consort  pur- 
chased these  books  at  a  heathen  host  with  our  clean  money, 
that  is  to  say  with  clean  gold ;  and  that  we  two  did  for  God's 
love  and  for  the  benefit  of  our  souls,  and  for  that  we  would 
not  that  these  holy  books  should  longer  lie  in  hethenesse.' 
Birch,  Cartul avium  Saxonkum^  No.  (j^-f. 

1  Yjtv^Xt^  Codex  'Diplornatkus^'^o.  317;   Birch,  Cartularium 
Saxonicum^  No.  558  j   Earlc,  lja?id  Charters,  p.  15a. 


Description  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  7 

no  cause  to  marvel  at  the  unanimity  of  authors 
in  accepting  this  Jewel  as  a  personal  possession 
of  king  Alfred's,  and  (in  some  measure,  diversely 
estimated)  as  a  product  of  his  own  artistic 
design. 

It  is  not  the  name  by  itself,  but  this  name 
taken  in  connexion  with  the  richness  and  costli- 
ness of  the  work,  with  the  thoughtful  ingenuity 
of  its  device  and  composition,  and  with  the 
symbolic  meanings  which  must  be  assigned  to 
certain  parts  of  the  structure  ^ — such  evidences 
as  these,  again  combined  with  certain  external 
evidences,  namely,  the  locality  in  which  the 
Jewel  was  found,  and  any  affinities  apparent  in 
the  above  data  with  the  career  or  exploits 
of  the  king,  or  with  his  character  and  tastes, — 
when  the  ownership  is  questioned,  we  find  our- 
selves face  to  face  with  an  accumulation  of  evi- 
dence varying  in  quality  and  requiring  to  be 
judged  by  the  delicate  and  sensitive  standard 
of  probability.  In  presence  of  such  a  problem 
we  should  not  neglect  the  impressions  and  ex- 
pressed opinions  of  persons  whose  instincts  have 
been  cultivated  in  the  sphere  of  such  proba- 
bilities. 


8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

George  HickeSjin  170^,  mentions  some  doubt- 
ing critics,  whose  difficulty  lay  in  the  beauty 
and  perfection  of  the  work.  They  could  not 
understand  how  such  artistic  work  could  proceed 
from  Anglo-Saxon  artists  in  the  ninth  century. 
But  for  himself,  he  added,  the  mere  sight  of  the 
Jewel  had  been  enough,  and  that  from  his  first 
view  of  it  he  had  never  doubted  that  it  was  a 
personal  possession  of  the  great  king  Alfred  ^ 

When  an  elaborate  piece  of  workmanship  like 
the  Alfred  Jewel  is  presented  to  the  experienced 
mind  and  practised  eye  of  a  man  like  Hickes, 
the  evidence  is  rapidly,  almost  unconsciously, 
sifted,  and  the  probabilities  converge  to  a  focus, 
so  as  to  produce  a  conviction  which  seems  like 
a  simple  apprehension  of  the  senses.  I  welcome 
Hickes's  expression  of  confidence  as  a  confirma- 
tion of  that  which  I  have  experienced  myself 
But  while  I  am  entirely  free  from  uncertainty 
I  quite  recognize  the  reasonableness  of  the 
doubt,  and  I  know  that  (logically  speaking)  the 

^  'Quoad  opiiicium  autem,  tarn  elegans  quidem  id  est  et 
perfectum,  iit  eius  antiquitatem  in  dubium  vocandi  doctis 
nonnullis  occasionem  dederit,  etsi  JElfredt  regis  hoc  olim 
fuisse  peculium,  ex  quo  primum  vidi,  nunquam  dubitavi.' 
Liinguarmn  Veterum  Septentrional'ium  Thesaurus^  vol.  i,  p.  144. 


'Description  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  9 

uncertainty  is  there.  And  I  know  also  that 
many  of  my  readers  will  entertain  it  and  will 
look  more  or  less  dubiously  upon  the  assumption 
of  certainty  in  this  matter.  And,  indeed,  there 
is  a  certain  advantage  in  having  to  reckon  with 
this  sceptical  attitude  of  mind,  insomuch  as  the 
presence  of  doubt  has  a  stimulating  effect  in 
iurnishing  the  discourse  with  a  determinate  aim 
and  direction.  It  will  set  me  on  the  alert,  that  I 
may  not  miss  any  incidental  chance  of  a  reflection 
tending  to  assure  those  who  would  be  gratified 
to  think  that  we  do  indeed  possess  a  relic 
intimately  associated  with  the  person,  and  with 
the  mind,  of  Alfred,  king  of  Wessex. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE  EPIGRAPH  OR  LEGEND 

We  must  now  consider  and  see  what  we  can 
learn  from  the  Epigraph.  This  was  the  cue 
whereby  Hickes  introduced  the  Jewel  into  the 
argument  of  his  Dissertatio  Epistolar'is^  and  there 
gave  us  the  cream  of  the  discussions  which  had 
been  developed  in  the  space  of  twelve  years 
from  the  discovery.  Observing  that  in  a  Saxon 
inscription  which  Dr.  Hans  Sloane  had  commu- 
nicated to  t\iQ  PhilosophicalTransactions (No.  247) 
only  two  letters  of  Anglo-Saxon  form  occurred, 
the  C  and  the  G,  he  proceeded  to  describe  and 
discuss  the  Jewel  in  all  the  points  of  view 
which  up  to  that  time  had  occupied  the  attention 
of  the  curious.  The  forms  to  which  he  adverted 
were  the  angular  C  and  G,  which  however  are 
rather  Epigraphic  than  Saxonic  forms.     These 


The  Epigraph  or  Legend        ii 

square  letters  occur  (as  Mr.  Falconer  Madan 
informs  me)  in  the  inscriptions  of  the  sixth 
and  sev^enth  centuries  in  Gaul,  Spain,  and 
Britain.  Hickes  added  that  all  the  other 
letters  of  the  Epigraph  were  in  ordinary  Roman 
characters  ^  : 

AELFRED  MEE  HEHT  DEWYREAN 

In  fact  there  was  only  one  place  where  a  dis- 
tinctly Saxon  character  might  have  come  in, 
namely  in  the  place  of  the  W,  which  instead 
of  the  Runic  Wen  (p)  is  composed  of  two 
Roman  Vs.  There  is  no  place  for  the  Runic 
Thorn  ]?). 

He  had  been  pursuing  an  argument,  of  which 
the  aim  was  to  show  that  from  the  time  of 
Alfred  the  characteristic  features  of  Anglo- 
Saxon  writing  were  less  used,  being  superseded 
by  Gallic  or  Italic  forms.  He  attributes  the 
change  to  the  teachers  which  the  king  had  drawn 
from  Gaul.  That  such  a  change  was  taking 
place  in  Alfred's  time  is  quite  manifest,  but  its 

*  'Saxonici  ductus   duas  taiitum  literas  habet,  E  et  C 
Thesaurus^  vol.  i,  p.  i\i. 


IX  The  Alfred  Jewel 

beginnings  were  further  back;  the  taste  for 
Prankish  fashions  having  been  introduced  by 
his  grandfather  Ecgberht,  who  had  passed  years 
of  exile  at  the  Court  of  Charlemagne.  Doubt- 
less the  movement  grew  under  the  influence  of 
Alfred,  who  not  only  had  visited  Rome,  but 
in  all  probability  had  resided  there  for  some 
years. 

If  now  passing  from  the  alphabetic  characters 
we  consider  the  syntax  of  this  sentence,  we  shall 
find  that  it  varies  so  widely  from  our  habits 
of  speech  at  the  present  time  as  to  furnish  some- 
thing like  a  measure  of  the  intervening  period, 
and  as  it  were  to  render  some  account  of  the 
lapse  of  a  thousand  years.  Let  us  begin  by 
translating  the  sentence  verbally  with  the 
minimum  of  change,  retaining  the  selfsame 
words  in  their  modern  guise.  Ovi  this  plan  the 
sentence  will  run  thus:  'Alfred  me  hight  work;' 
where  the  baldness  of  the  diction  exhibits 
roughly  the  gulf  there  is  between  this  Epigraph 
and  our  present  usage.  Each  word  is  English, 
but  the  sentence  is  far  from  being  so.  This 
great  contrast  is  the  result  of  a  combination 
of  causes,  and  it  may  be  resolved  into  four  chief 


The  Epigraph  or  Legend        13 

movements  which  have  slowly  operated  during 
the  long  interval. 

(i)  A  change  has  taken  place  in  the  collocation 
of  words  in  forming  a  sentence.  The  governed 
pronoun  stands  in  a  place  where  it  is  now 
inadmissible :  the  present  habit  of  the  language 
requires  that  the  pronoun  'me'  should  come 
in  after  its  governing  verb.  If  we  make  this 
change,  we  shall  see  that  the  sentence  will 
become  a  trifle  more  like  English,  thus :  'Alfred 
hight  work  me.' 

(2)  Another  movement  is  that  which  in  process 
of  time  takes  place  in  the  usage  of  words. 
There  is  a  fashion  in  the  choice  of  words  for 
the  clothing  of  our  ideas,  and  that  fashion 
changes  sometimes  capriciously  and  fitfully,  but 
for  the  most  part  so  slowly  and  gradually  that 
it  takes  an  era  of  time  to  make  the  change 
conspicuous.  Words  are  liable  to  this  kind  of 
alteration  in  various  degrees,  and  this  inequality 
of  change  is  observable  even  in  a  sentence  of 
four  words.  The  verb  heht,  hight^  has  under- 
gone so  great  a  change  of  sense  that  to  the 
general  reader   it   is  apt  to  be   unintelligible  ^ 

1  This  is  briefly  explained  in  my  English  Philology,  §  ajo. 


14  The  Alfred  Jewel 

But  while  this  verb  has  altered  greatly,  the 
verb  'work'  has  altered  little.  Still,  it  has 
altered,  and  it  is  no  longer  the  right  word  for 
its  place. 

The  remaining  two  words  have  in  usage  un- 
dergone no  change  at  all.  The  pronoun  mec 
has  suffered  alteration  in  form  by  dropping  a 
consonant,  but  it  is  absolutely  unchanged  in 
its  application.  Indeed,  it  may  be  stated  as 
a  general  law,  that  pronouns  as  a  class  are 
among  the  slowest  of  words  to  admit  semantic 
change. 

Nevertheless  there  is  a  group  of  words  which 
are  still  more  unchangeable  in  signification,  and 
these  are  the  Proper  Nouns.  External  changes 
of  form  they  do  admit,  but  not  the  internal 
change  of  sense.  The  name  ^xfred  is  the 
form  prevalent  on  the  coinage  of  his  reign,  but 
there  are  variations,  thus :  Alfred,  ^lbred, 
ELFRED,  ELFERED  \  and  there  is  the  form  Alfred, 
which  has  become  established  in  modern 
English  in  consequence  of  the  fact  that  our 
earliest  popular  histories  of  the  king  were 
derived  from  Latin  books,  in  which  language 
his  name  was  commonly  spelt  alfredus.     But 


The  Epigraph  or  Legend        15- 

whatever  changes  may  pass  over  the  visible 
representation  of  the  word,  there  is  no  alteration 
possible  in  the  relation  between  this  word  and 
the  memory  of  that  royal  person  whose  proper 
name  it  was. 

If  now  we  remove  the  words  that  have 
suffered  a  semantic  change,  and  substitute  those 
which  at  the  present  time  seem  most  natural, 
the  sentence  will  take  this  form :  '  Alfred 
ordered  make  me ; '  and  thus  it  approaches 
another  step  towards  the  present  manner  of  our 
speech. 

(3)  The  third  movement  to  be  noticed  is  that 
from  the  flexional  to  the  phrasal  method  of 
syntax.  The  word  gewyrcan  is  a  flexional 
verb,  the  last  syllable,  -an,  being  the  sign  of  the 
infinitive  mood,  and  indicating  the  syntactical 
function  of  that  word  in  the  sentence.  By  slow 
degrees  this  method  of  syntax  fell  out  of  use, 
and  another  way  came  up  of  expressing  the 
same  function.  Instead  of  the  syllable  -an  at 
the  end  of  the  verb,  a  little  word, '  to,'  was  set 
before  the  verb,  with  the  same  effect  of  ex- 
pressing the  infinitive  mood.  If  now  we  add 
this  change  to  the  other  modifications  of  our 


1(5  The  Alfred  Jewel 

sentence,  we  shall  bring  it  considerably  nearer 
to  current  speech,  thus :  '  Alfred  ordered  to 
make  me.'  But  still  it  wants  something  to  reduce 
it  into  the  shape  which  we  can  recognize  as 
modern  English. 

(4)  The  fourth  and  last  change  which  we  must 
note  in  the  habits  of  our  speech  is  the  great 
extension  of  the  passive  verb,  and  particularly 
in  the  infinitive  mood.  Many  infinitive  phrases 
which  were  once  cast  in  the  Active  have  been 
changed  to  the  Passive,  and  a  lingering  survival 
of  the  active  formula  may  be  observed  to  have 
a  peculiar  and  exceptional  air.  We  feel  this  in 
the  phrase,  'The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.' 
A  more  familiar  example  may  be  seen  on  the 
boards  of  the  house  agents.  Some  of  these 
boards  say  '  House  to  let,'  while  others  prefer 
<  House  to  be  let,' — the  one  is  homely  and 
native  English,  the  other  is  modish  and  reminds 
us  of  the  schoolmaster.  The  same  authority  will 
guide  us  to  bring  our  Legend  up  to  date,  and 
stamp  our  version  with  the  mint  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  thus :  '  Alfred  ordered  me  to 
be  made.' 

In  the  above  analysis  it  has  been  necessary 


77:?^'  Epigraph  or  Legend        17 

to  depart  in  some  measure  from  the  course  of 
nature  by  exhibiting  in  succession  a  group 
of  changes  which  are  due  to  processes  more  or 
less  simultaneous.  This  accumulation  of  gradual 
changes  furnishes  a  measure,  partly  scientific, 
partly  sentimental,  of  the  wide  interval  that 
separates  us  from  the  time  when  this  Epigraph 
was  curiously  woven  in  golden  filigree  by  the 
lucky  artist  who  executed  the  design  of  the 
ingenious  prince. 

But  the  Epigraph  has  time-indications  which 
are  closer  and  more  definite.  There  are  features 
which,  besides  telling  of  the  lapse  of  time,  do 
also  in  some  sense  indicate  the  point  of  time  j 
features  in  virtue  of  which  this  Legend  may  be 
said  to  suggest  proximately  its  own  date.  The 
two  words  '  MEC  HEHT '  are  archaic  forms,  the 
one  of  which  is  never,  and  the  other  rarely, 
found  in  the  prose  of  the  tenth  century  j  indeed 
they  were  both  archaic  in  the  ninth.  Mec  had 
given  place  to  me,  and  (though  less  absolutely) 
HEHT  to  HET  J  but  the  oldcr  forms  were  still  at 
the  service  of  the  poet,  and  Epigraphy  has  some 
share  in  poetic  privilege.  Indeed  it  would  seem 
that  in  the  time  of  Alfred  mec  was  consciously 


i8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

used  as  an  archaic  curiosity.  There  is  a  gold  ring 
which  I  take  to  be  contemporaneous  with  our 
Jewel,  and  it  bears  an  English  inscription  in 
which  MEC  occurs  twice.  It  will  be  described 
below  ^ 

It  would  be  too  much  to  say  that  the  forms 
MEC  HEHT  convey  a  definite  date,  but  they  cer- 
tainly fit  well  with  the  time  of  Alfred,  and  (but 
for  that  vague  licence  of  Epigraphy)  they  might 
even  be  said  to  suggest  the  ninth  century  as  the 
latest  probable  date  of  a  work  with  which  they 
are  identified. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  heht  occurs  in 
another  piece  of  Alfred's  inditing,  which  I 
will  introduce  here  not  only  for  the  sake  of 
the  old  reduplicative  verb,  but  also  because 
the  passage  is  germane  to  the  argument,  and 
imports  an  illustration  of  a  comprehensive  kind. 
The  king  prefixed  to  his  version  of  Gregory's 
Pastoral  Care  a  preface  m  prose  and  a  prologue 
in  verse.  The  prose  preface  was  about  the 
main  purpose  of  his  work;  the  poetical  pro- 
logue dealt  with  literary  matters,  the  authority 
of    his    text,   the     history    of    his    copy,    the 

1  Chapter  x. 


Th(^  Epigraph  or  Legend        n^ 

manner  of  his  own  literary  operation.  It  is 
this  poetical  and  literary  Prologue  which  I  here 
quote  : 


pis  aerendgewrit 

Agustinus 
ofer  sealtne  sae 

suan  brohte 
ieg-buendum, 

swa  hit  aer  fore 
adihtode 

drihtnes  cempa 
Rome  papa. 

Ryhtspell  monig 
Gregorius  gleawmod 

gind  w6d 
•Surh  sefan  snyttro, 

searoSonca  hord. 


This  Epistle 

Augustine 
over  salt  sea 

brought  from  the    south 
to  us  island-dwellers, 

just  as  it  erst 
indited  had  been 

by  Christ's  doughty  champion 
the  pontiff  of  Rome. 

Much  rightful  discourse 
did  Gregory's  glowing  wit 

give  forth  apace 
with  skilful  soul, 

a  hoard  of  studious  thought. 


ForSaem  he  monncynnes  Wherefore  he  of  mankind 
maest  gestriende  converted  the  most 

rodra  wearde  :  to  the  Ruler  of  heaven  : 

Romwara  betest,  he  of  Romans  the  best. 


C    2 


xo 


TJoe  Alfred  Jewel 


monna  modwelegost, 
maer^um  gefraegost. 

Si^an  min  on  Englisc 

Alfred  kyning 
awende  worda  gehwelc, 

and  me  his  writerum 
sende  suS  and  nor^ ; 

heht  him  swelcra  ma 
brengan  bi  "Saere  bisene, 

■Saet  he  his  biscepum 
sendan  meahte: 

for^aem  hi  his  sume  ^orften, 
Sa  ^e  Lsedenspraece 

laeste  cfi'Son. 


of  men  the  most  mind-rich, 
and  widest  admired. 

At  length  into  English 

Alfred  the  king 
every  word  of  me  wended, 

and  me  to  his  writers 
south  and  north  he  did  send ; 

more  ordered  of  such 
by  the  copy  to  bring, 

that  he  to  his  bishops 
might  be  able  to  send  : 

for  some  of  them  needed  it, 
such  as  of  Latin 

very  little  did  know. 


In  the  last  six  lines  of  this  little  poem  a  new 
attitude  is  taken  up  j  the  book  itself  becomes  the 
speaker,  and  sets  forth  how  Alfred  was  the  trans- 
lator, how  he  ordered  (heht)  more  copies  of  his 
translation  to  be  made,  and  for  what  purpose.  In 
mentioning  purpose,  the  prologue  communicates 


The  Epigraph  or  Legend        xi 

something  beyond  the  Legend,  which  leaves  the 
purpose  and  signification  of  the  design  shrouded 
in  symbolism.  But  for  the  rest,  if  we  analyze 
these  six  lines,  we  shall  find  the  heart  and  core 
of  them  to  be  essentially  identical  with  the 
Legend  on  the  Jewel — 

AELFRED  MEE  HEHT  DEWYRCAN 


CHAPTER    III 

EARLY  SPECULATIONS  ABOUT 
ITS  DESIGN  AND  MANNER  OF  USE 

The  finding  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  chanced 
upon  a  remarkable  time  in  the  intellectual  life  of 
the  English  nation.  It  was  the  time  of  Dryden, 
Defoe,  Swift,  Christopher  Wren,  Bentley,  Lord 
Somers,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Addison.  In  litera- 
ture the  coming  man  was  Alexander  Pope. 

The  cardinal  event  of  that  period  was  the 
institution  of  the  Royal  Society  in  16  6  o,  the 
year  of  the  Restoration.  The  most  conspicuous 
bent  of  the  intellectual  world  was  in  the  direc- 
tion of  physical  science,  and  'the  great  work  of 
interpreting  nature  was  performed  by  the  English 
of  that  age  as  it  had  never  before  been  performed 
in   any   age    by   any  nation  ^'      This  was   the 

'  Macaulay,  History^  c.  iii. 


^Design  and  Manner  of  Use      xg 

period  in  which  a  national  Observatory  was 
established  at  Greenwich  (\6j6).  To  this  period 
belong  the  chemical  discoveries  of  Boyle,  the 
botanical  researches  of  Sloane,  and  the  classi- 
fications of  Ray.  In  every  department  of 
knowledge  enquiry  was  roused,  and  with  it  the 
genius  of  theory,  whose  movements  were  some- 
times hasty  and  erratic.  But  this  tendency  was 
gradually  counteracted  by  the  deepening  con- 
viction that  sound  knowledge  must  be  based 
on  careful  observation,  and  the  need  of  museums 
began  to  be  recognized.  The  Ashmolean  Museum 
was  built  by  the  University  of  Oxford,  in  1*^83, 
to  receive  Elias  Ashmole's  collection  of  curiosi- 
ties, the  formation  of  which  had  originated  with 
the  Tradescants.  The  architect  was  Sir  Christo- 
pher Wren.  Altogether  it  was  a  time  of  new 
ideas  and  new  institutions. 

When  the  Jewel  was  found,  in  1(^93,  it  fell 
into  the  hands  of  persons  who  belonged  both 
socially  and  intellectually  to  the  foremost  ranks. 
The  first  recorded  owner  was  Colonel  Nathaniel 
Palmer,  of  Fairfield  House,  in  the  region  of  the 
Quantocks.  Of  this  house  and  this  family  some 
particulars  will  be  related  in  the  ninth  chapter. 


14  The  Alfred  Jewel 

The  first  notice  of  the  Jewel  was  published 
by  Dr.  Hans  Sloane,  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal 
Society,  eminent  as  physician,  natural  philoso- 
pher, and  antiquarian.  He  was  elected  Secretary 
of  that  Society  in  1(^93,  the  year  in  which  the 
Jewel  was  found.  Whether  by  reason  of  the 
new  cloud  of  political  and  religious  trouble 
which  brooded  over  the  land  in  the  latter  years 
of  James  II,  or  from  whatever  cause,  so  it  was 
that  the  Philosophical  Transactions  had  been 
suspended  for  the  past  six  years,  and  they  were 
resuscitated  by  the  new  Secretary,  who  was 
himself  an  active  contributor.  This  remark- 
able man  lived  to  a  great  age,  and  when  he  died, 
in  175-2,  in  his  ninety-second  year,  his  museum 
was  bought  by  the  Government,  and  this  pur- 
chase was  the  origin  of  the  British  Museum ; 
for  until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century 
the  idea  of  a  national  library  and  museum  had 
never  been  entertained  in  England. 

The  same  Act  of  Parliament  {^6  Geo.  II) 
which  directed  the  purchase  of  the  Sloane  museum 
also  directed  the  purchase  of  the  Harleian 
collection  of  manuscripts  which  had  been  made 
by  Robert  Harley,  first  Earl  of  Oxford,  whose 


Design  and  Manner  of  Use     15- 

name  is  also  memorable  in  the  study  of  the  Alfred 
Jewel ;  for  it  was  from  an  engraving  furnished 
by  Robert  Harley,  and  made  from  a  drawing 
of  his  own,  that  the  first  of  the  three  figures  in 
Hickes's  Dissertatio  Epistolaris  was  printed. 

The  first  published  notice  of  the  Jewel  ap- 
peared in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  (No.  247 
in  i<^9  8),  and  it  was  contributed  by  Dr.  William 
Musgrave,  Fellow  of  New  College,  physician  in 
London,  and  an  acti\'e  member  of  the  Royal 
Society,  and  author  (1709)  oi  Jiitiquitates  Bri- 
tanno-Belgicie.  He  also  contributed  to  Hickes's 
Thesaurus  the  second  and  third  figures  of  the 
Jewel  which  are  there  engraved  ^ 

These  were  the  eminent  persons  who  prepared 
the  material  for  the  elaborate  account  which 
Hickes  (17 of)  gave  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  in  the 
first  volume  of  his  Thesaurus.  For  the  minutiae 
of  the  description  he  was  particularly  indebted 
to  Harley  and  Musgrave,  who  appear  to  have 
been  occasional  visitors  at  Fairfield  House. 

The  first  impression  which  prevailed  as  to  its 
design  and  use  was  that  it  might  be  an  amulet. 
This    was    Dr.   Musgrave's    first    opinion.     But 

^  Appendix  A. 


x6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

afterwards  he  followed  Hickes  in  supposing  it 
was  a  pendant  to  a  chain  or  collar  of  state,  and 
Hickes  even  says  (but  here  he  must  be  simply 
repeating  the  expressions  of  his  informants)  that 
the  cross-pin  in  the  socket  seems  adapted  to 
such  a  use. 

The  boar's  snout  is  developed  into  a  tubular 
ending  which  furnishes  a  socket  with  a  cross-pin, 
manifestly  asking  a  peg  or  (as  artisans  speak) 
a  stert  \  and  when  this  observation  was  maturely 
appreciated,  it  generated  two  inferences :  (i)  that 
there  was  no  provision  for  attachment  answering 
to  the  above  theory ;  and  (2)  that  in  the  position 
imagined,  the  picture  would  hang  upside  down. 

These  criticisms  opened  the  way  for  new  obser- 
vations and  new  conjectures.  The  antiquary 
Hearne  interpreted  the  Jewel  as  if  it  were 
designed  to  be  fixed  at  the  extremity  of  a 
roller  on  which  a  manuscript  was  rolled,  as 
a  suitable  ornament  for  some  ceremonious  pre- 
sentation. But  this  hypothesis  neglected  the  fact 
that  the  Jewel  is  made  with  an  obverse  and 
a  reverse,  a  front  and  a  back,  which  renders  it 
quite  unfit  for  such  a  position  as  Hearne  had 
assigned  to  it. 


Design  and  Manner  of  Use     x7 

By  Francis  Wise  and  Samuel  Pegge,  chief 
antiquarians  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  was 
imagined  that  our  Jewel  might  have  adorned  the 
top  of  a  stilus  or  ancient  pen  for  writing  upon 
a  waxen  tablet.  In  refutation  of  this  theory  it 
sufficed  to  observe  how  awkward  and  unwieldy 
an  ornament  it  would  prove  to  the  pemnan. 

Nevertheless,  this  idea  had  a  career,  winning 
a  momentary  plausibility  from  the  assumption 
that  Alfred's  <^stel'  was  a  stylus.  In  Jrchcto- 
logta  ii  there  is  a  letter  signed  <  S.  Pegge,'  from 
which  I  extract  the  following : 

'It  is  not  certainly  known  to  what  use  this 
valuable  curiosity  .  .  .  might  be  put :  but  among 
other  conjectures  Mr.  Wise  imagines,  and  very 
probably,  it  might  have  been  the  handle  of  a 
stylus.  And  if  one  should  say  it  was  one  of 
those  styli  which  the  king  sent  along  with  his 
translation  of  Gregory's  Pastoral^  it  would  be 
no  great  absurdity.  ...  It  may  here  be  alleged 
that  the  king  sent  his  present  to  the  cathedral 
churches:  but,  with  submission,  this  does  not 
imply  that  he  might  not  also  send  the  like  to 
the  two  monasteries  of  his  own  foundation,  this 
of  Athelney  and  the  other  at  Shaftesbury;  it  is 


x8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

most  probable  he  would  send  a  book  and  a 
stylus  to  both  those  places,  and  if  he  did,  this 
jewel  in  my  opinion  bids  fair  to  be  the  handle 
or  upper  part  of  the  stylus  which  was  presented 
by  him  to  the  House  of  Athelney  where  it  was 
found.' 

Collinson,  the  historian  of  Somersetshire 
(i 791),  in  a  passage  to  be  quoted  below  (chapter 
ix),  designates  it  an  amulet,  and  this  was  probably 
the  way  in  which  it  was  usually  regarded  in  the 
eighteenth  century.  To  this  Pegge  (in  the  article 
cited  above)  objected  as  follows :  '  Dr.  Musgrave 
once  thought  it  might  be  an  Amulet,  but 
Alfred  never  ran  (that  we  know  of)  into  such 
vanities.' 

Passing  now  to  the  nineteenth  century, 
Mr.  Philip  Duncan,  in  his  Catalogue  of  the 
Ashmolean  Museum,  advanced  the  theory  that 
it  might  have  been  mounted  on  the  top  of  a 
staff  (after  the  manner  of  a  Roman  eagle),  and 
that  it  was  carried  into  battle  as  a  standard 
to  animate  the  courage  of  warriors.  This 
exquisite  bijou,  of  materials  so  brittle  as  enamel 
and  crystal,  cased  in  a  delicate  web  of  golden 
filigree,  looks  strangely   inappropriate   for    the 


Design  and  Manner  of  Use     19 

fury   of  battle  and   the   interchange   of  hard 
knocks. 

And  indeed  this  theory  was  never  suggested 
to  its  author  by  the  reason  or  probability  of 
the  thing,  but  by  certain  texts  which  at  that 
time  were  in  better  esteem  than  they  are  now, 
especially  the  hagiography  of  St.  Neot,  wherein 
it  was  said  of  this  saint  that  he  went  before  the 
king  in  war,  carrying  a  palm  and  guiding  him 
to  victory,  to  all  which  the  palm-bearing  figure 
in  the  Enamel  seemed  to  correspond.  And  this 
also  explains  why  that  figure  was  supposed  to 
represent  St.  Neot. 

In  like  manner,  Hickes  was  carried  away  by 
a  passage  in  pseudo-Ingulph  to  abandon  his 
first  and  best  interpretation  of  the  enamelled 
Figure,  and  to  adopt  the  idea  that  it  may  have 
been  intended  to  represent  St.  Cuthbert  ^ 

All  these  speculations  on  the  design  and 
use  of  the  Jewel  are  unsatisfactory  and,  con- 
sidering the  eminence  and  ability  of  the  pro- 
pounders,  strangely  poor  in  the  craft  of  inter- 
pretation. If  this  surprizes  us  in  an  age  when  the 
minds  of  men  were  so  much  awakened,  we  should 

Appendix  B. 


30  77^6'  Alfred  Jewel 

remember  that  the  new  movement  was  chiefly  in 
the  direction  of  physical  science,  and  that  little 
progress  had  as  yet  been  made  in  the  analysis 
of  human  history  and  the  science  of  historical 
criticism. 

From  these  abortive  attempts  at  interpreta- 
tion, we  gather  that  this  singularly  elaborate 
phenomenon  of  a  Jewel  had  the  effect  of  setting 
curiosity  and  imagination  awork  in  the  minds 
of  those  who  contemplated  it,  and  that  some 
theory,  however  precipitate,  became  a  sort  of 
necessity.  To  this  category  must  be  added  a 
more  recent  conjecture,  which,  as  it  proceeded 
from  a  highly  honoured  source,  as  it  was  persist- 
ently and  circumstantially  argued  out,  and  as  it 
has  been  widely  accepted,  demands  a  chapter 
by  itself 


CHAPTER    IV 

BISHOP   CLIFFORD'S   THEORY' 

The  theories  about  the  Alfred  Jewel  which 
have  been  noticed  hitherto,  belong  to  the  crude 
attempts  at  interpretation  which  were  evoked 
by  the  surprize  of  the  strange  discovery  in  the 
last  decade  of  the  seventeenth  century.  We 
come  now  to  a  new  theory  which  was  broached 
in  our  own  time  by  Bishop  Clifford,  in  his  In- 
augural Address  as  President  of  the  Somersetshire 
Archaeological  Society  in  1877,  when  the  Annual 
Meeting  of  that  Society  was  held  at  Bridgwater. 

This  theory  demands  a  fuller  attention  than  any 

^  William  Joseph  Hugh  Clifford,  second  son  of  the  seventh 
Baron  Clifford  of  Chudleigh,  was  the  Roman  Catholic  bishop 
of  Clifton  from  185-7  ^o  1888.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Somerset  Archseological  and  Natural  History  Society,  and 
for  many  years  a  constant  attendant  at  the  yearly  meetings. 
In  1877  he  was  President  of  the  Society.  His  obituary,  by 
Canon  Holmes,  is  in  vol.  xxxix  of  the  Society's  Proceedings. 


gx  The  Alfred  Jewel 

of  the  foregoing,  first,  because  it  bears  manifest 
tokens  of  maturer  thought,  but  further,  because 
there  is  much  curious  material  woven  into  its 
fabric,  which  gives  it  independent  value.  If 
only  for  the  single  fact  that  it  introduces  a  new 
explanation  of  the  problematic  '  sstel,'  it  ought 
to  quicken  the  interest  of  every  reader.  It 
will  be  better  on  all  accounts  that  the  ideas  of 
the  author  be  presented  in  his  own  words : 

Amongst  the  articles  of  church  furniture  used  in  the  middle 
ages,  frequent  mention  is  made  of  '  Baculi  Cantorum,'  or 
choir  staves.  In  the  year  iiir  there  were  eight  such  staves 
in  the  treasury  of  Salisbury  Cathedral.  'The  staves  at 
Canterbury  Cathedral  (writes  Dr.  Rock,  Church  of  our 
Fathers^  vol.  ii)  were  as  rich  as  they  were  curious,  in  the 
year  13 15.'  He  gives  a  list  of  them,  and  among  them  are 
'  IV  baculi  de  cornu,  cum  capitibus  eburneis  '—four  staves  of 
horn  with  ivory  handles  •  others  were  adorned  with  gold  and 
silver  and  precious  stones.  The  use  of  these  staves  was  to 
enable  the  Cantor  or  master  of  the  choir  to  point  out  to  the 
singers  and  to  the  readers  their  places  in  the  book,  and  so 
prevent  the  manuscripts  and  their  illuminations  being  soiled 
by  the  touch  of  fingers.  When  the  lessons  were  read,  the 
choirmaster  not  only  pointed  out  the  spot  where  the  lesson 
commenced,  but  handed,  if  necessary,  the  staff  to  the  lector, 
that  he  might  use  it  to  guide  his  eye  along  the  Unes  in  reading. 
This  precaution  was  not  only  observed  with  regard  to  those 
beautifully  illuminated  volumes  used  for  the  church  services. 


Bishop  Clifford's  Theory         33 

but  was  equally,  if  not  more  so,  required  in  the  case  of  books 
which  were  intended  for  the  use  of  the  general  public.  Most 
readers  required  to  use  their  fingers  to  assist  their  eyes  in 
following  the  lines,  a  practice  which,  if  allowed,  would  not 
only  soil  the  manuscripts,  but  in  course  of  time  obliterate 
them.  Therefore  when  books  were  intended  for  public  use 
it  was  customary  to  place  by  them  a  small  staff  or  pointer 
for  the  use  of  the  reader,  even  as  in  modern  days  a  paper- 
knife  forms  one  of  the  ordinary  articles  of  furniture  on  a 
library  table.  In  many  instances  these  little  staves  or 
pointers  were  inserted  in  the  binding  of  the  books  themselves, 
something  after  the  fashion  in  which  pencils  are  inserted 
in  modern  pocket-books. 

I  may  seem  to  be  widely  departing  from  Alfred  and  from 
Athelney,  but  you  will  soon  perceive  the  pertinency  of  these 
remarks.  Alfred,  as  you  know,  did  much  to  encourage  learning 
amongst  his  subjects,  and  he  was  especially  anxious  that  useful 
works  should  be  translated  into  English,  and  copies  of  them 
be  arranged  in  public  places,  where  all  might  gain  access  to 
them  and  read  them. 

To  encourage  this  good  and  noble  work  by  his  example 
he  became  himself  an  author.  And  he  thus  describes,  in 
the  preface  which  he  wrote  to  the  book  he  translated,  the 
steps  he  took  to  start  what  I  may  call  the  first  public  reading 
in  England  : — '  When  I  reflected,'  he  says,  '  how  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Latin  tongue  had  fallen  away  throughout  England, 
though  many  still  knew  how  to  read  English  writing,  I  began 
in  the  midst  of  divers  and  manifold  affairs  of  this  kingdom 
to  turn  into  English  this  book  (of  St.  Gregory  the  Great) 
which  in  Latin  is  named  Fastoralis^  and  in  English,  The 
Herdsma?i's  Book ;  sometimes  word  for  word,  and  sometimes 

t  P 


34  The  Alfred  Jewel 

sense  for  sense,  even  as  I  had  been  taught  by  Plegmund  my 
Archbishop,  and  Asser  my  Bishop,  and  Grimbald  my  Mass- 
Priest,  and  John  my  Mass-Priest.  After  I  had  learned  of 
them  how  I  might  best  understand  it,  I  turned  it  into  English. 
And  I  will  send  a  copy  to  every  bishop's  see  in  my  kingdom, 
and  in  each  book  there  is  an  aestel  (i.e.  a  staff)  of  (the 
value  of)  50  mancusses;  and  I  command,  in  Code's  name, 
that  no  man  take  the  staff  from  the  book,  nor  the  book  from 
the  minster,  seeing  that  we  know  not  how  long  there  shall 
be  such  learned  bishops,  as  now,  thank  God,  there  be. 
Therefore  I  command  that  these  remain  always  in  their 
places,  unless  the  bishop  have  them  with  him  either  to  lend 
somewhere,  or  to  have  other  copies  made  from  them.' 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  explanation  of  Alfred's  gem.  It 
is  the  handle  of  a  book-stafl^'  or  pointer  which,  like  those  at 
Canterbury,  and  elsewhere,  was  made  of  horn  (which  has 
perished),  the  handle  itself  being  of  precious  and  durable 
materials.  The  inscription  on  it  bears  witness  that  it  was 
made  by  Alfred's  order,  '  Aelfred  had  me  worked ; '  and  this 
circumstance,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  costliness  of  its 
material  and  the  beauty  of  its  execution,  makes  it  in  the 
highest  degree  probable  that  it  is  one  of  those  aestels  which 
Alfred  says  were  worked  by  his  order,  and  inserted  in  the 
presentation  copies  of  his  translation  of  The  Herdsmafi's 
Book,  and  which  were  valued  at  5^0  mancusses,  or  (taking  the 
value  of  the  mancus  at  -js.  6d.)  £1%  15-^.,  a  large  sum  for 
those  days. 

But  if  so,  how  came  this  gem  to  be  found  in  this  neighbour- 
hood? Alfred  presented  one  to  each  bishop's  see  in  his 
kingdom,  and  there  was  no  bishop's  see  in  those  days  in 
these  parts  nearer  than  Sherborne,  in  Dorsetshire.     You  will 


Bishop  Clifford's   Theory         ^5- 

have  remarked   that    Alfred   in  his   preface   mentions   four 
persons  who  assisted  him  in  translating  the  book  :  Plegmund, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  •   Asser,  Bishop  of  Sherborne  •  the 
Priest  Grimbald,  who  presided  over  the  school  which  Alfred 
had   founded   for   the  training    of  the    English  youth-    and 
the  Priest  John,  who  was  placed  by  Alfred  as  abbot  over  the 
monastery  which  he  founded   at  Athelney.     Copies  of  the 
book,  each  having  a  book-staff,  were  sent  to  Plegmund  and 
Asser,   for    they    both   were    bishops.      Can    there    be    any 
reasonable  doubt  that  this  mark   of  attention   was   equally 
observed  in  the  case  of  the  other  two  collaborators  ?     More 
especially  as  Grimbald  was  at  the  head  of  Alfred's  school, 
and  it  was  in  order  to  promote  English  reading  that  Alfred 
had  undertaken  the  translation  of  the  book,  and  John,  though 
not  a   bishop,  was  abbot  over  th?   monastery  which  Alfred 
himself  had  built  in  gratitude  to  God  for  the  victory  he  had 
gained.     A  copy  of  the  book,  with  the  costly  aestel  in  it,  was 
no  doubt  sent  by  Alfred  to  his  friend  John,  at  Athelney,  as 
well  as  to  the  other  three  collaborators.     The  book  and  the 
staff  were,   agreeably   to    Alfred's   order,   preserved   in   the 
minster,  till,  in  the  days  of  trouble,  (probably  at  the  dissolution 
of  the  monastery,)  both  were  hidden  out  of  sight,  and  for 
that  purpose  buried  in  the  grounds   of  some  neighbouring 
friend  at  Newton  Park,  in  the  hopes  of  recovering  them 
in  better  days.     As  time  passed  on,  the  secret  of  the  place 
where  they  were  hidden  died  with  the  man  who  had  hidden 
them ;  and  when  after  many  years  chance  revealed  the  place 
of  the  deposit,  the  book  itself  and  the  perishable  portion  of 
the  staff  had  rotted  away,  leaving  only  the  gold  and  crystal 
handle,  with  the  words,  '  Aelfred  had  me  worked,'  to  tell  the 
tale.     This  1  believe  to  be  the  true  history  of  Alfred's  gem. 

D  z 


^6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

When  I  visited  the  Ashmolean  Museum  at  Oxford,  in  the 
month  of  July,  I  was  shown  by  the  courteous  Curator,  by 
the  side  of  Alfred's  jewel,  a  smaller  specimen  of  ancient  gold- 
smith's work  which  was  dug  up  a  few  years  ago  at  Minster 
Love],  in  Oxfordshire,  on  the  site  of  an  ancient  abbey.  It 
is  smaller  than  Alfred's  gem,  but,  like  the  latter,  it  is 
evidently  the  handle  of  a  reading-staff.  The  handle  of  Alfred's 
staff  was  made  of  a  size  that  might  be  conveniently  grasped 
in  the  hand  j  the  one  from  Minster  Lovel  was  intended  to 
be  held  between  the  finger  and  thumb.  It  is  smaller  and 
less  costly,  but  the  workmanship  of  the  gold  is  so  lilce  the 
larger  one  of  Alfred  as  almost  to  suggest  its  being  the  work 
of  the  same  man. 

Thus  Bp.  Clifford  would  fain  persuade  us  to 
see  in  our  Jewel  the  costly  handle  of  a  pointing 
stave.  This  satisfies  the  requirement  of  the 
socket  and  rivet,  which  is  a  fit  provision  for 
the  insertion  of  a  fine  stave.  The  only  question 
at  this  point  that  could  be  raised  in  opposition 
is,  whether  the  socket  is  not  too  small  to  admit 
a  stave  of  useful  thickness  for  the  purpose 
contemplated.  And  as  the  author  of  this 
theory  has  applied  it  equally  to  the  Minster 
Lovel  jewel,  this  objection  gains  in  force,  as 
the  rod  that  could  be  inserted  in  that  little 
jewel  would  be  of  very  doubtful  service  as  a 
pointer. 


Bishop  Clifford's   Theory         ^ 

But  when  we  consider  the  common  elements 
in  the  design  and  workmanship  of  these  two 
jewels,  we  are  compelled  to  reject  the  theory 
that  they  were  intended  as  handles  to  pointers. 
And  first  of  the  design.  Both  of  these  jewels 
have  an  obverse  and  a  reverse,  which  in  such 
an  instrument  would  not  only  be  unnecessary 
and  unmeaning,  but  absolutely  inconvenient 
and  detrimental.  Both  of  them  are  obviously 
designed  to  gratify  the  eye ;  as  objects  to  be 
displayed  in  positions  which  they  are  to  adorn 
and  beautify.  The  Alfred  Jewel  contains  the 
picture  of  a  man  in  enamel,  framed  in  golden 
filigree,  glazed  with  crystal,  and  backed  with 
a  plate  of  gold  curiously  engraved  ;  the  whole 
composition  plainly  dictates  which  side  is  to  be 
foremost  and  which  end  is  to  be  uppermost 
when  it  is  fixed  in  the  position  for  which  it 
is  intended.  Bp.  Clifford's  theory  cannot  be 
accommodated  to  these  conditions. 

So  much  for  the  design :  now  as  to  the 
materials  and  workmanship.  In  both  of  these 
jewels  the  outer  surface  is  filigree  work  of 
very  fine  texture  ;  can  it  be  imagined  that  this 
agrees  with  the  suggested  use  of  a  handle  to 


5  8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

a  choirmaster's  wand,  whether  we  consider  the 
implied  defacement  of  the  finest  goldsmith's 
work,  or  the  galling  friction  to  the  musician's 
hand } 

But  besides  appropriateness  of  design  and 
workmanship,  there  is  yet  another  condition 
to  be  satisfied,  and  one  which  this  theory  can 
only  meet  by  means  of  a  roundabout  and 
arbitrary  hypothesis.  Any  interpretation  of 
the  Jewel,  to  be  satisfactory,  must  harmonize 
naturally  and  spontaneously  with  the  Alfredian 
associations  of  the  spot  on  which  it  was  found. 
Bp.  Clifford  has  felt  this,  and  he  has  employed 
an  elaborate  machinery  to  meet  it.  The  place 
of  the  find  is  one  that  naturally  suggests  direct 
and  immediate  connexion  with  the  goings  and 
comings  of  the  king  himself,  for  it  lies  near 
the  centre  of  that  region  in  which  he  spent 
some  months  of  acute  effort  in  the  most  critical 
juncture  of  his  diversified  and  adventurous  life. 
If  our  interpretation  harmonize  with  the  associa- 
tions which  are  linked  to  the  spot,  and  through 
the  spot  to  the  Jewel,  probability  is  strength- 
ened while  the  interest  is  heightened  j  but 
what    possibility    is    there    of   bringing    these 


Bishop  Clifford's   Theory         39 

associations  to  bear  upon  a  costly  book-pointer  > 
If  anything  so  extravagant  existed,  it  might 
be  preserved  in  the  treasury  of  the  minster  or 
in  the  book-room  of  the  cloister  j  but  it 
could  have  no  place  about  the  person  of  a 
fugitive  king  and  a  struggling  warrior.  Accord- 
ingly the  author  of  this  theory  is  compelled 
to  detach  the  interpretation  from  the  personal 
history  of  the  king,  and  to  rest  his  solu- 
tion of  the  problem  upon  a  highly  speculative 
assumption  combined  with  the  chances  and 
vicissitudes  of  a  later  age. 

The  author  of  this  theory  has  to  face  the 
inevitable  question — On  the  supposition  that 
the  Alfred  Jewel  is  the  handle  of  a  book-pointer, 
how  do  you  account  for  its  being  found  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Athelney?  In  preparing  to 
answer  this  question,  he  fetches  a  wide  compass, 
enclosing  in  his  sweep  the  literary  achievements 
of  the  king,  and  seven  centuries  of  the  after- 
time.  He  begins  by  recalling  Alfred's  acknow- 
ledgements to  Plegmund,  Asser,  Grimbald, 
and  John,  for  their  help  in  his  translation  of 
Gregory's  Pastoral  Care^  and  he  recites  the 
king's  statement  that  he  would  send  a  copy  of 


40  The  Alfred  Jewel 

the  translation  to  each  bishop's  see,  and  with 
each  book  an  'ccstel'  worth  fo  mancusses.  It  is 
an  essential  part  of  his  theory  that  the  'sestel' 
was  a  book-pointer  with  a  costly  handle,  and 
moreover  that  the  Alfred  Jewel  was  one  of  these 
handles.  But  there  was  no  bishop's  see  at  or 
near  Athelney,  the  nearest  being  at  Sherborne : 
how  then  did  this  relic  find  its  way  to  Newton 
Park  by  Athelney?  The  answer  is  that  John 
the  Priest  became  abbot  of  Alfred's  foundation 
at  Athelney,  and  that  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  Alfred  gave  the  book  and  '•  ^stel ' 
not  only  to  Plegmund  and  Asser,  but  that  he  also 
extended  his  bounty  to  Grimbald  and  John,  his 
two  other  collaborators  ^  So  the  Alfred  Jewel 
having  thus  arrived  at  Athelney  as  the  handle 
of  a  book-pointer,  was  religiously  preserved  there 
until  the  time  of  Henry  VIII,  when  it  was  buried 
to  await  better  times,  and  in  the  course  of  nature 
forgotten.  My  objection  to  this  is  not  that  it 
is  imaginative,  but  that  it  is  ill  suited  to  its 
purpose,  because  it  is  needlessly  cumbrous,  and 

^  This  machinery  for  bringing  the  baculus  cantoris  to 
Athelney  v/as  first  employed  in  the  interest  of  the  stylus 
theory.  See  S.  Pegge  in  Archteologia  ii,  quoted  above  in 
chapter  iii. 


Bishop  Cliffoy^d's   Theory        4.1 

because  the  Jewel  can  be  traced  to  Athelney  by 
a  much  simpler  and  more  obvious  process. 

But  while  I  find  it  impossible  to  admit 
Bp.  Clifford's  theory  as  an  interpretation  of  the 
Alfred  Jewel,  seeing  that  this  relic  absolutely 
refuses  to  be  classed  with  the  decorated  handles 
of  the  baculi  cantorum^  I  must  add  that  the 
question  of  the  '^esteP  stands  apart.  I  am  by 
no  means  prepared  to  maintain  that  the  ex- 
planation of  that  problem  which  I  have  recently 
offered  in  Alfred  the  Great  is  preferable  to 
Bp.  Clifford's.  There  is  a  close  affinity  be- 
tween the  two  explanations  \  they  both  rest 
upon  a  common  basis  in  the  ancient  gloss : 
'  Indicatorium^  cCSteL'  I  interpreted  the  indica- 
toriiim  to  be  a  light  slab,  much  like  a  flat 
ruler,  which  was  to  be  brought  to  bear  across 
the  page  so  as  to  guide  the  reader's  eye,  and 
perhaps  furnish  a  rest  for  his  fingers.  The 
Latin  term  would  fit  a  pointer  as  well  as 
a  flat  ruler,  and  perhaps  better.  It  may 
therefore  well  be  that  in  the  endeavour  to 
interpret  the  Jewel,  Bp.  Clitford  has  inci- 
dentally explained  that  problematical  object 
which   king    Alfred   sent   as    a   fitting   accom- 


4^  The  Alfred  Jewel 

paniment  with  each  of  the  presentation  copies 
of  his  version  of  Gregory's  Pastoral  Care.  The 
remark  that  the  pointer  might  be  fitted  to  the 
volume  by  an  arrangement  like  that  now  in 
common  use  for  attaching  a  pencil  to  a  note- 
book must,  I  think,  be  felt  to  add  a  certain 
persuasive  concreteness  to  his  suggestion.  Only 
then,  if  the  '  ^stel '  was  a  book-pointer  with 
a  costly  handle,  that  handle  was  certainly  not 
fashioned  after  the  manner  of  the  Alfred  Jewel, 
or  of  its  natural  associate  the  minor  jewel  of 
Minster  Lovel — it  was  not  fashioned  with 
obverse  and  reverse. 

A  subsequent  interpretation  by  Llewellynn 
Jewitt,  F.S.A.,  appeared  in  the  'Reliquary  for 
October,  1879,  ^'^l.  xx,  p.  66  : — '  Many,  and  very 
curious  as  well  as  various,  have  been  the  con- 
jectures as  to  the  use  or  origin  of  this  remark- 
able jewel,  and  of  the  figure  intended  to  be 
represented  upon  it,  but  it  is  not  worth  while 
to  here  repeat  them.  The  probability,  to  my 
mind,  is  that  it  simply  formed  the  head  of 
a  sceptre,  and  that  just  possibly  it  might  have 
been  ultimately  given  by  Alfred  to  the  head  of 
the  monastery  founded  by  himself,  to  be  used 


Bishop  Cl'iffoy^d's   Theory       43 

as  a  pastoral  stafF  or  staff  of  office,  as  was  the 
crosier  in  later  days.  The  design  and  the  work- 
manship are  of  exquisite  beauty,  and  in  all 
respects  the  jewel  is  unsurpassed,  by  any  other 
existing  example  of  Anglo-Saxon  art.'  Again, 
this  interpretation,  like  that  of  Hearne  and 
others,  appears  to  be  excluded  by  the  formation 
of  the  Jewel  with  a  front  and  a  back. 

By  the  rejection  of  so  many  hypotheses  the 
field  of  choice  is  narrowed,  and  our  path 
should  be  so  much  the  clearer  to  find  the 
true  design  and  use  of  the  Alfred  Jewel. 


CHAPTER    V 

A   JEWEL   IN    THE   CROWN 

The  Alfred  Jewel  is  so  made  as  to  require 
a  small  stem  or  'stert'  for  its  fixture  when  in 
use.  It  tapers  off  to  a  socket,  which  is  adapted 
to  receive  a  small  stem,  and  it  is  only  when 
erected  on  such  a  stem  that  the  Figure  in  enamel 
will  appear  in  a  natural  position.  How  can  we 
accommodate  it  with  such  a  function  as  will  cor- 
respond to  these  indications  of  design?  Evidently 
not  on  the  top  of  a  standard-bearer's  pole,  nor 
on  the  top  of  a  stilus,  nor  at  the  butt-end  of 
a  music-master's  wand.  It  is  moreover  evident 
that  the  stem  was  a  permanent  fixture  in  the 
socket,  for  although  the  socket  is  now  empty, 
this  is  due  to  the  perishing  of  the  stem,  as 
appears  from  the  fact  that  the  cross-pin  is 
riveted.     The  stem  was  therefore  not  metallic. 


A  Jewel  in  the  Crown        45* 

but  of  some  hard  organic  substance,  perhaps 
walrus  ivory.  Our  problem  then  is  to  discover 
a  place  in  which  this  Jewel,  permanently  fur- 
nished with  such  a  stem,  could  be  so  erected 
as  to  discharge  some  appropriate  function. 
That  function  can  hardly  be  other  than  personal 
decoration,  and  the  place  in  which  it  might  be 
erected  is  the  helmet  of  the  warrior. 

I  imagine  then  that  a  hollow  bead  ran  round 
the  king's  helmet,  along  the  rim  next  the  fore- 
head, and  that  over  the  very  centre  of  the  brow 
there  was  a  round  orifice  in  the  upper  slope 
of  the  bead,  fitted  to  receive  the  ivory  stem  of 
the  Jewel,  and  that  when  fixed  in  this  position 
it  would  have  minor  jewels  similarly  fixed  on 
either  side,  but  that  this  one  would  be  the 
central  piece  and  the  richest  jewel  in  the  crown 
or  coronet.  For  this  magnificent  Jewel  would 
have  the  effect  of  converting  the  helmet  into 
a  crown,  transforming  the  most  vital  piece  of 
defensive  armour  into  the  chief  of  royal  insignia 
for  public  occasions  of  state. 

That  the  rudiment  of  the  crown  was  derived 
from  the  helmet,  at  least  among  our  people, 
seems    to    be    indicated    by    the    Anglo-Saxon 


4^6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

word    that    preceded    'crown,'    namely,    cyne- 
HELM,  which  means  Regal  Helmet.     This  word 
is  the  only  English   representative  of  the  idea 
before    the    Romanic    word    was    domesticated 
among  us.    The  term  <  crown '  made  its  entrance 
after  the  Norman  Conquest,  at  first  in  its  original 
Latin    form    corona,  as   may   be    seen   in    the 
contemporary  Chronicle  of  Peterborough.     Thus  we 
read   under  the  date    i  o  8  y :    Her  se  cyng  b^r 
his  CORONA  and  heold  his  hired  on  Winceastre 
to  J?am  Eastran,  <-  This  year   the  king  wore  his 
Crown  and  held  his  Court  at  Winchester  for  the 
Eastertide.'   But  the  native  word  was  not  quickly 
superseded.     In  the  next    annal,   io8^,  we  are 
informed  that  the  king  wore  his  Crown  three 
times  every  year  : — <  j^riwa  he  b«r  his  cyne-helm 
«lce  geare.' 

The  explanation  now  offered  of  the  use 
and  function  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  is  confirmed 
by  comparison  with  a  minor  jewel  in  the 
same  glass  case,  which  for  its  illustrative  value 
has  been  placed  by  the  Keeper  of  the  Ashmolean 
Museum  near  the  Alfred  Jewel.  In  workman- 
ship it  is  so  similar  that  it  might  well  be  (as 
Bp.  Clifford  said)  from   the   hand  of  the  same 


,  and 
which  they  were  intended 
w.is  of  the  same  nature.     This,  minor  jewel  has 
like  the  Alfred  Jewel,  a"  .^hverse  p^^f^  ^  »•' 
the  -^- '—  -  '-r:    —  '■ 


ot    a.  1 

St    a   vertical 

in  tlie   other,  the 

.irea  of  the  obverse  is  more  contracted  than  the 

reverse,  ■^■'^'^  ^^"-  ^loping  sides  a''*^   .  .-.i.-^-  ri  ytnth 

a  (ielicaic  '"    ■  ^  '       ^  ■  ^u  has 

•  a  a  V  m  lis  place 

all  A   to   be 

eitiier  the  tront  and  central  jewel  ot  a  ni' 

J3W3L  J3Y0J   aarei^iM   3HT 


Ul   O  W  ul    tiiw 


■.:M 


THE     MINSTER     LOVEL    JEWEL 


A  Jewel  in   the  Crown         47 

maker.  In  design  it  is  as  much  alike  as  it  is 
possible  for  a  simple  and  rudimentary  pattern 
to  resemble  one  that  is  highly  elaborate  and 
developed.  No  one  can  doubt  that  these  two 
objects  are  fully  analogous  to  each  other,  and 
that  the  service  for  which  they  were  intended 
was  of  the  same  nature.  This  minor  jewel  has, 
like  the  Alfred  Jewel,  an  obverse  and  a  reverse  j 
the  obverse  presents  a  Cross  in  opaque  enamel 
cloisonnee\  the  reverse  has  a  gold  plate,  not 
engraved — as  in  the  greater  work — but  equally 
with  it  suggestive  of  the  back  of  a  framed 
picture  which  is  to  lean  against  a  vertical 
surface  of  some  kind.  As  in  the  other,  the 
area  of  the  obverse  is  more  contracted  than  the 
reverse,  and  the  sloping  sides  are  covered  with 
a  delicate  filigree  of  gold.  Lastly,  this  also  has 
its  projecting  socket,  with  a  cross-pin  in  its  place 
riveted.  It  is  in  all  respects  adapted  to  be 
either  the  front  and  central  jewel  of  a  minor 
coronet,  or  else  a  lateral  and  subordinate  jewel 
in  the  circlet  whose  front  place  was  filled  by 
a  superior  piece  such  as  the  Alfred  Jewel. 

This  minor  jewel  was  found  at  Minster  Lovel 
in  Oxfordshire  about  the  middle  of  the  present 


48  77^6*  Alfred  Jewel 

century.  The  finder  brought  it  to  a  jeweller  in 
Oxford,  who,  apprehending  that  the  object  was 
one  of  more  than  ordinary  curiosity,  carried  it 
to  Dr.  Wilson,  then  President  of  Trinity  College, 
an  eminent  archaeologist,  and  the  man  who 
of  all  men  in  Oxford  at  that  time  was  the  most 
capable  of  estimating  a  find  of  this  nature  \  The 
interest  which  he  took  in  it  was  shared  with 
Dr.  Griffiths^  who  was  afterwards  Warden  of 
Wadham  College,  and  (whether  by  one  or  both) 
it  was  presented  to  the  Ashmolean  Museum.  The 
date  of  this  event  does  not  appear  to  be  recorded, 
but  I  suppose  it  must  have  happened  in  the  fifties. 
That  gold  ornaments  were  proper  for  the 
helmet,  we  gather  from  a  passage  in  the  Beowulf^ 
a  poem  which  is  now^  I  think,  among  critics  of 
proved  competency,  allowed  to  belong  to  the 
eighth  century.  When  Beowulf,  after  slaying 
the  Dragon,  lies  fatally  wounded,  he  puts  off 
the  chief  pieces  of  his  armour  with  the  insignia 

^  Speaking  of  the  archseologists  in  Oxford  fifty  years 
ago,  I  am  not  forgetting,  indeed  I  could  not  forget,  John 
Henry  Parker,  C.B.,  the  guide  and  teacher  of  his  time  in 
much  antiquarian  knowledge  of  great  value  to  the  historian  ; 
more  especially  in  whatever  concerned  ecclesiastical  or 
domestic  architecture.  He  was  for  many  years  Keeper  of 
the  Ashmolean  Museum. 


A  Jewel  in  the  Crown       491 

of  royalty,  and  bestows  them  upon  Wiglaf,  his 
faithful  Thane  and  the  natural  heir  to  his  throne. 
In  the  poetic  description  we  perceive  that  the 
insignia  are  largely  blended  with  the  body- 
armour,  and  that  the  helmet  is  characterized 
by  its  golden  decoration: 

•1810  i8io 

Dyde  him  of  healse  Ungearing  his  neck 

hring  gyldenne  of  the  golden  ring 

}7i6den  J^rist-hydig  the  courageous  Captain 

Jjegne  gesealde,  on  his  Thane  conferred  it, 

geongum  gar-wigan-  on  the  gallant  youth; 

gold-fahne  helm,  the  gold-prankt  helm  also, 

beah  ond  byrnan  ;  the  collar  and  the  byrnie ; 

het  hine  brucan  well.  saying:  '  Brookthem  well !' 

It  would  be  easy  to  collect  examples  from 
later  romances,  but  I  will  add  only  one,  taken 
from  La3amon's  description  (a.  d.  1200)  of 
king  Arthur  putting  his  armour  on : 

Helm  he  set  on  hafde  Helm  he  set  on  head, 

hash  of  stele  :  high  of  steel : 

J>£er  on  wes  moni  jimston,         thereon  was  many  a  gem-stone 
al  mid  golde  bigon.  all  encircled  with  gold  ^ 

^  La^amon's  Brut^  ed.  Madden,  vol.  ii,  p.  4.6'4. 

E 


.5'o  77^6*  Alfred  Jewel 

The  position  which  I  have  imagined  for  the 
Alfred  Jewel  would  represent  the  cumulative 
effect  of  the  two  chief  and  central  gems  in  the 
Crown  of  Queen  Victoria,  namely,  the  great 
Sapphire  of  Charles  II  and  the  great  Ruby  of 
Edward  the  Black  Prince  ^ 

1   The  English  Kegaliaj  by  Cyril  Davenport,  p.  51. 


CHAPTER    VI 

THE    BOAR'S    HEAD 

There  is  a  feature  in  the  Alfred  Jewel  which 
appears  to  support  the  theory  propounded  in 
the  last  chapter.  I  mean  the  Boar's  Head, 
which  is  so  wrought  into  the  composition  of 
the  piece  as  to  represent  a  subordinate,  or  even 
a  servile,  relation  to  the  saintly  Figure  which 
is  seen  through  the  window  of  crystal. 

About  the  creature  indicated  by  this  head 
there  has  been  some  diversity  of  opinion.  It  has 
been  spoken  of  as  the  head  of  a  serpent,  of 
a  fish,  of  a  dolphin,  and  strangest  of  all,  it  has 
been  called  the  head  of  a  griffin.  Of  these 
notions  the  last  is  the  one  that  has  been  oftenest 
repeated,  and  yet  it  is  the  most  absurd.  No 
doubt  the  griffin  has  been  variously  described, 
nevertheless  it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  head 

E    Z 


5-x  The  yilfred  Jewel 

of  this  fabulous  animal  is  either  that  of  an 
eagle  or  that  of  a  lion. 

Many  years  ago,  as  I  happened,  in  company 
with  Dr.  Liddon,  to  be  passing  the  entrance 
of  the  Ashmolean  Museum — the  old  original 
building  by  the  Sheldonian  Theatre — I  asked 
him  whether  he  had  ever  seen  the  Alfred  Jewel. 
He  had  not,  and  he  manifested  some  alacrity 
and  we  went  in.  It  was  naturally  my  part  to 
act  the  showman,  and  I  did  it  with  a  will,  which 
was  quickened  by  an  interested  motive.  I  set 
forth  all  my  best  exegesis  of  every  part,  except 
one — I  left  the  animal's  head  unnoticed.  The 
old  doubt  about  the  nature  of  this  head  had 
been  recently  revived,  and  I  lay  in  wait  for 
testimony  undesigned.  I  had  the  satisfaction  of 
hearing  my  companion  remark  interrogatively, 
'  That  appears  to  be  a  boar's  head } ' 

Between  the  wild  boar  and  the  helmet  there 
existed  a  close  and  recognized  association,  as  is 
well  attested  by  the  Beowulf^  which  is  our  chief 
voice  from  the  heroic  age  of  Teutonic  antiquity. 
In  the  course  of  that  poem  there  are  no  less 
than  five  passages  in  which  this  habitual  associa- 
tion of  ideas  stands  out  prominently.     The  first 


The  Boar''s  Head 


SI 


passage  is  where  Beowulf  and  his  companions 
have  reached  the  Danish  coast  and  stepped 
ashore  and  parleyed  with  the  coast-warden,  and 
obtained  his  approval  of  their  visit  and  his 
offer  of  guidance  to  Hrothgar's  Court.  As 
they  set  forth  on  their  march  inland,  the  poet 
notices  the  play  of  the  sunlight  glancing  from 
the  boar-figures  on  their  helmets : 


501 

Gewiton  him  J)a  feran 

— flota  stille  bad, 
seomode  on  ssele, 

sid-fe-Smed  scip, 
on  ancre  fest. 

Eoferlic  scionon 
ofer  hleor-bergan  ; 

gehroden  golde 
fah  and  fyr-heard 

ferh  wearde  heold. 


301 

Forth  on  the  march  they  fared 

— the  floater  reposing, 
wearing  on  her  cable, 

the  wide-bosomed  ship, 
at  anchor  fast. 

Boar-figures  shone 
over  the  cheek-plates ; 

as  chequered  with  gold 
defiant  and  fire-hard 

the  farrow  kept  ward. 


The  second  passage  occurs  in  the  course  of 
the  Lay  of  Hnsef,  which  is  inserted  among  the 
festivities  that  follow  Beowulf's  success  against 


5*4  The  Alfred  Jewel 

Grendel,  as  being  sung  by  the  minstrel  in 
Hrothgar's  hall.  In  the  story  of  the  Lay  there 
is  a  fight,  and  that  is  followed  by  the  burning 
of  the  dead,  and  here  the  poet  notices  the 
arms  which  are  consumed  with  their  owners. 
In  the  short  quotation  which  follows,  the  coat 
of  mail  is  called  a  sark,  and  the  helmet  is 
indicated  by  its  crest,  which  was  a  boar  of  hard 
iron  plated  with  gold  : 


nil  nil 

aet  J7xm  ade  wass  At  the  place  of  the  pile 
e'S-gesyne  was  plain  to  behold 

swat-fah  syrce,  the  sark  blood-stained, 

swin  eal-gylden,  the  gilded  swine-crest, 

eofer  iren-heard.  the  boar  of  hard  iron. 

The  third  passage  presents  us  with  an  inci- 
dental description  of  the  terrors  of  a  hand-to- 
hand  fight  between  armed  champions,  and  it 
pictures  a  trial  of  strength  between  the  tough 
steel  of  the  flashing  sword  and  the  hard  iron 
of  the  boar  on  the  helmet: 


The  Boar's  Head 


SS 


|7onne  heoru  bunden 
hamere  ge]7uren, 

sweord  swate  fah, 
swin  ofer  helme 

ecgum  dyhtig 

andweard  scire'S. 


When  the  hafted  halberd 
hammer-toughened, 

the  sword  battle-spotted, 

at  the  swine  on  the  helmet 

with  urgent  edge 

smites  importunate. 


The  first  success  of  Beowulf  having  left  an 
avenger  alive,  it  becomes  necessary  for  the  hero, 
in  pursuance  of  his  pledged  war  against  the 
monster  brood,  to  dive  all-armed  to  the  bottom 
of  an  awful  mere.  In  our  fourth  quotation  he 
is  seen  arming  himself  and  preparing  to  plunge 
into  the  abyss ;  the  main  pieces  of  his  armour 
are  described,  and  of  his  helmet  it  is  said  as 
follows : — 


I44P 

ac  se  hwita  helm 

hafelan  werede, 

se  ]7e  mere-grundas 
mengan  scolde, 

secan  sund-gebland 


H49 
But  the  burnished  helmet 

his  head  to  protect, 
in  the  murky  mere 

was  now  to  be  merged, 
in  the  swirl  of  the  swimmer 


S6 


The  Alfred  Jewel 


since  geweorSad, 
befangen  frea-wrasnum 

swa  hine  fyrn-dagum 
worhte  w«pna-smi5, 

wundrum  teode 
besette  swin-licum 

]?st  hine  si^^an  no 
brond  ne  beado-mecas 

bitan  ne  meahton. 


all  its  sumptuous  array, 
fringed  with  lordly  filigree 

as  in  far-away  days 
by  weapon-smith 'twas  wrought, 

and  wondrously  dight, 
beset  with  figures  swine-like 

that  on  it  ever  since 
no  brand  or  blade  of  war 

had  any  power  to  bite. 


These  closing  lines  recall  the  remarkable 
passage  of  Tacitus,  where  he  says  that  the  instil 
(Esthonians)  venerate  the  mother  of  the  gods, 
and  that  they  wear  figures  of  the  wild  boar  as 
the  emblem  of  her  cult,  and  that  this  obser- 
vance alone  suffices  without  arms  offensive  or 
defensive  to  make  her  votary  feel  secure  even 
in  the  midst  of  enemies  i. 

The  mother  of  the  gods  may  be  identified, 
or  at  least  proximately  equated,  with  Frige,  the 
consort    of  Woden,    whose    name    survives    in 

1  'Matremdeumvenerantur.  Insigne  superstitionis  formas 
aprorum  gcstant :  id  pro  armis  omnique  tutela  securum  dese 
cultorem  etiam  inter  hostes  prxstat.'     Germania,  45-. 


The  Boar's  Head  5-7 

the  sixth  day  of  the  week,  Friday,  Frige-d.eg. 
A  survival  of  her  cult  is  seen  in  the  festive 
ceremony  of  the  Boar's  Head,  which  is  kept  up 
in  Queen's  College,  Oxford,  adding  a  mystic 
incident  to  the  mirth  of  Christmas. 

Caput  apri  defero. 

Reddens  laudes  Domino. 

The  boar's  head  in  hand  bring  I, 

With  garlands  gay  and  rosemary. 

Our  fifth  example  occurs  in  a  passage  emi- 
nently characteristic  of  the  heroic  age,  when 
the  institutions  of  monarchy  rested  upon  the 
personal  devotion  of  the  thane  to  the  king. 
This  relation  is  one  of  great  historical  conse- 
quence ;  it  was  to  grow  into  the  later  institution 
of  knighthood ;  it  had  been  matured  by  that 
immemorial  tradition  of  sacred  confidence  and 
fidelity  between  the  war-chief  and  his  companion 
in  arms,  which  is  signalized  by  Tacitus  in  words 
familiar  to  the  modern  historian.  The  passage 
which  I  am  about  to  quote  exhibits  this  devotion 
in  concrete  act.  Beowulf,  the  hero  of  the  poem, 
has  returned  successful  from  his  adventure,  and 
he  is   fulfilling  his   first  duty  by  rendering  a 


5-8 


Tha  Alfred  Jewel 


report  to  Hygelac  his  king.  His  speech  is 
closing  with  mention  of  rich  guerdon  he  had 
received  from  the  king  whom  he  had  delivered, 
namely,  Hrothgar,  son  of  Halfdan  j  and  then  he 
produces  the  noblest  of  these  prizes  as  a  dutiful 
offering  to  his  lord.  This  scene  constitutes 
a  frame  to  our  last  instance  of  the  boar-figure 
as  the  most  signal  feature  in  a  warrior's  head- 
gear : 


ZI45 

"  Swa  se  Jjeod  kyning 

|7eawum  lyfde ; 
nealles  ic  Jjam  leanum 

forloren  haefde, 
mxgnes  mede — 

ac  he  me  madmas  geaf, 
sunu  Healfdenes, 

on  minne  sylfes  dom  • 
yi  ic  ]7e,  beorn-cyning, 

bringan  wylle, 
estum  geywan. 

Gen  is  eall  set  J^e 
lissa  gelong  : 


ai4^ 

"  So  in  fair  customs  lived 

the  imperial  king ; 
nor  of  fitting  guerdon  I 

was  aught  forlorn, 
of  meed  for  service — 

yea,mighty  things  he  gave, 
did  Halfdan's  son, 

myself  withal  to  please ; 
which  I  to  thee,  brave  prince, 

by  choice  do  bring, 
in  willing  homage. 

All  my  wealth  proceeds 
of  thy  good  lordsliip  ; 


The  Boar's  Head 


S9 


ic  lyt  hafo 
heafod-maga, 

nefne  Hygelac  j?ec !  " 

Het  ]7a  in  beran 

eafor  heafod-segn, 
hea^o-steapne  helm, 

hare  byrnan, 
gu'S-sweord  geatolic — 

gyd  xfter  wrasc : 


nor  is  my  lot  to  have 
kinsman  of  chief  account, 
king  Hygelac,  but  thee ! " 

Then  bade  he  in  to  bear 
the  wild-boar  crest, 

the  helm  in  fight  so  high, 
the  hoary  mail-coat  gray, 

the  sword  seigneurial — 
and  he  said  withal : 


"  Me  ]>is  hilde-sceorp 
Hro^gar  sealde, 
snotra  fengel  ..." 


"  To  me  this  battle-harness 

Hrothgar  gave, 
the  sapient  monarch  "  &:c. 


In  the  evidence  above  given  we  see  indica- 
tions that  this  traditional  choice  of  the  wild 
boar  for  a  crest  was  of  high  antiquity,  and  had 
its  origin  in  a  religious  sentiment,  and  our 
fourth  passage  (1449  ff.)  certainly  conveys  the 
idea  that  the  armourer  who  wrought  at  the  fur- 
niture of  the  helmet  did  so  with  a  mind  still 
under  the  spell  of  the  old  persuasion  that  a 
mystic  sanction  clung  to  the  figure  of  the  wild 


6o  The  Alfred  Jewel 

boar,   and    qualified    it    for   its    time-honoured 
post  as  guardian  of  the  warrior's  head. 

In  the  Alfred  Jewel  the  Boar's  Head  appears  to 
discharge  a  double  function  :  one  subservient,  as 
affording  a  base  or  pedestal  to  the  frame  of  the 
sacred  effigy  j  the  other  servile,  as  a  socket  for 
the  shaft  whereby  the  elaborate  and  composite 
design  is  to  be  fixed  in  its  destined  place. 


CHAPTER    VII 

THE  FIGURE  IN  ENAMEL  AND  THE 
ENGRAVED  PLATE  AT  THE  BACK 
OF  IT 

But  the  vital  problem  of  the  Alfred  Jewel 
is  in  the  enamelled  Figure.  Of  its  meaning 
there  have  been  guesses  and  suggestions,  some 
reasonable,  some  wild  ;  M.  Labarte  could  only 
say,  '  it  represents  a  figure  hard  to  characterize.' 
This  Figure  is  manifestly  of  a  religious  character, 
and  it  is  the  centre  and  focus  of  the  whole. 
All  the  other  parts  are  relative  and  subordinate 
to  this,  and  the  entire  Jewel  is  in  fact  a  setting 
and  a  shrine  for  this  sacred  object.  We  must 
endeavour  to  ascertain  its  intention  and  signi- 
ficance, but  before  attempting  this  interpretation 
we  must  consider  the  Enamel  as  a  work  of  art. 

For  this  venerable  relic,  even  if  regarded 
only    in    its    material    aspect    as    an    ingenious 


6z  The  Alfred  Jewel 

mechanical  product,  and  as  a  specimen  of  a  once 
flourishing  art,  is  rare  and  curious  to  so  high 
a  degree  as  to  confer  rank  upon  any  Museum 
(however  otherwise  rich)  that  is  so  fortunate 
as  to  possess  it. 

Behind  the  Enamel,  in  the  position  of  a  back- 
board to  a  picture-frame,  is  a  separate  gold 
plate  bearing  a  significant  device  which  is  cer- 
tainly intended  as  a  counterpart  to  the  Figure 
of  the  obverse.  From  the  relation  observable 
between  these  two  representations  we  may  gather 
a  constructive  inference.  Thus  we  have  three 
subjects  for  our  consideration  in  the  present 
chapter,  and  it  will  be  convenient  to  give  to 
each  of  them  a  separate  section  by  itself. 
Accordingly,  the  plan  of  this  chapter  will  be  as 
follows: — I. The  Enamel  as  an  artistic  product j 

II.  The  inward  signification  of  the  enamelled 
Figure,  and  of  the  Engraving  at  the  back  of  itj 

III.  A  Constructive  Inference. 

I 

The  Enamel  as  an  Artistic  Product 

Oi  enamels  we  may  say  that  they  are  a  sort 
of  paintings  or  embroideries ; — only  not  made 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlatt     6g 

with  liquid  pigments  nor  with  variegated  threads, 
but  with  molten  glass  diversely  tinted  by  means 
of  metallic  oxides  i.  On  the  one  hand  they  are 
the  precursors  of  our  painted  windows,  and  on 
the  other  they  are  the  parents  of  the  famous 
works  of  the  artists  of  Limoges.  Of  this  artistic 
industry  the  Alfred  Jewel  preserves  a  specimen 
of  the  rarest  kind.  It  belongs  to  the  type 
which  is  designated  cloiso?mSe^  because  the  out- 
lines of  the  design  have  first  been  made  by 
little  slender  barriers  of  gold  which  serve 
as  fences  between  the  colours.  Into  the  com- 
partments so  enclosed  the  material  of  the  enamel 
is  deposited  in  the  form  of  a  vitreous  paste,  that 
is,  glass  ground  to  a  fine  powder,  and  mixed 
with  the  colouring  material  and  moistened.  So 
prepared,  the  work  is  passed  into  an  oven,  with 
a  heat  to  melt  the  glass,  but  not  the  metal  plate 
upon  which  the  design  has  been  laid.      If  the 

1  For  the  etymology  :  enamel  is  a  compound  of  the  simple 
amel^  which  is  now  obsolete.  This  was  an  anglicized  form 
of  French  ematl^  which  in  Old  French  was  esmal^  whose 
cognates  were  Provencal  esrualt,  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
esmalte^  Italian  smalto  (used  by  Dante),  which,  in  medieval 
Latin,  was  smaltum.  The  source  is  Old  High  German 
^smaltjaJij  our  verb  to  smelt ^  i.  e.  to  fuse  by  heat  (New  English 
Dictionary,  v.  Amel). 


64  The  yilfred  Jewel 

process  is  successful,  the  work  is  substantially 
achieved  when  it  comes  out  of  the  oven,  and 
nothing  remains  to  be  done  but  the  dressing  and 
finishing  of  the  surface.  Of  this  doisonjiee  type 
M.  Labarte,  in  enumerating  nine  examples,  as 
being  the  chief  works  of  this  kind  now  extant, 
gives  to  all  of  them  the  title  '  Byzantine.' 

T^he  chief  extant  Monuments  in  Byx^antine  Enamel 
Cloisonnee,  according  to  Labarte. 

1.  The  celebrated  crown  of  gold,  which  goes 
by  the  name  of  the  Iron  Crown,  is  the  oldest 
extant  jewel  that  is  enriched  with  enamel.  It 
was  given  to  the  cathedral  at  Monza  by  Theo- 
delinda,  the  Lombard  queen,  who  died  in  6i^  ^ 

2.  The  enamels  in  the  altar  of  St.  Ambrose 
of  Milan,  executed  in  835-,  must  have  been 
executed  by  Greek  artists,  who  were  numerous 
in  Italy  at  that  time.  It  is  to  be  noted  that 
the  flesh  tints  are  rendered  by  opaque  white. 

3.  The  enamels  in  the  cross  called  the  Cross  of 
Lothaire  in  the  treasury  of  the  cathedral  at  Aix- 
la-Chapelle,  which  we  hold  to  be  Byzantme  work. 

^   It   is   figured   in    the   Dictiojiary  of  Christian   Antiquities^ 
V-  Crown. 


Figure  and  Engraved  'Plate     65- 

4.  "A  jewel  preserved  in  the  Ashmolean 
Museum  at  Oxford.  It  was  discovered  in  idpd 
{sic\  near  the  Abbey  of  Athelney,  in  which 
Alfred  the  Great  took  refuge  when  he  was 
defeated  by  the  Danes  in  878.  Mr.  Albert  Way 
has  given  a  description  of  it,  with  engravings 
of  front  and  back,  and  in  section  (T/;^  Archcto- 
logical  Journal^  vol.  ii,  p.  1(^4).  The  inscrip- 
tion AELFRED  MEC  HEHT  GEVYRCAN 
[Alfred  ordonna  que  je  fusse  fait)  which  stands  in 
the  thickness  of  the  piece,  is  thought  to  leave 
small  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  origin  which  is 
attributed  to  it.  The  enamel  of  the  obverse 
is  executed  by  the  process  of  cloisonnage  j  it 
represents  a  figure  hard  to  characterize  {il  repro- 
duit  une  figure  dont  il  est  difficile  de  determiner  le 
caractere).  The  flesh  portions  are  in  whitish 
enamel  ^  the  colours  employed  in  the  drapery 
are  pale  green  and  ruddy  brown  semi-transparent  j 
the  ground  is  blue.  The  jewel  terminates  in  the 
head  of  an  animal,  in  golden  filigree,  with  all 
the  characteristics  of  the  oriental  style. 

"  Admitting  that  the  inscription  may  apply  to 
Alfred  the  Great,  this  jewel  would  not  by  itself 
be  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  art  of  enamel- 


66  The  yilfred  Jewel 

ling  was  practised  in  England  in  the  ninth 
century.  The  inscription  might  have  been 
engraved  after  the  king  had  purchased  it  (pos- 
sibly) of  a  merchant  from  the  East." 

5".  The  enamels  which  environ  the  gold  crown 
preserved  in  the  treasury  of  St.  Mark's,  at  Venice. 
We  see  there  a  bust  of  the  Emperor  Leo  the 
Philosopher  (88^-911),  who  was  probably  the 
donor  of  this  votive  crown,  which  was  made 
to  be  suspended  over  an  altar. 

6.  The  enamels  on  a  chalice  in  the  same 
treasury  j  it  appears  by  the  inscription  to  have 
been  executed  for  an  emperor  who  died  in  944. 

7.  The  enamels  on  the  reliquary  of  Limburg. 
This  magnificent  piece  was  executed  before  <)j6. 

8.  The  enamels  upon  eight  gold  plates  which 
were  found  at  Nyitra,  in  Hungary.  Seven  of 
them  are  in  the  Museum  at  Pesth.  These  eight 
plates  unite  to  form  a  crown,  one  in  front  and 
one  at  back,  and  three  on  either  side.  Each 
has  its  enamelled  picture.  The  front  piece  has 
a  portrait  of  Constantinus  Monomachus  (1042). 
The  pieces  to  right  and  left  of  this  represent 
the  Empresses  Theodora  and  Zoe ;  the  next  two 
on  either  side  represent  actresses;  the  third  on 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     67 

either  side  contains  an  allegorical  figure  of  a 
woman,  the  one  being  Humility,  with  hands 
crossed  in  front,  the  other  Truth,  bearing  a  cross. 
The  eighth,  which  is  the  hindmost,  is  circular, 
and  represents  St.  Andrew'. 

9.  The  enamels  which  decorate  the  royal 
crown  of  Hungary,  which  was  sent  as  a  present 
to  Geysa  I,  king  of  Hungary,  who  died  in  1077- 

In  this  list  the  famous '  iron '  crown  of  Monza 
holds  the  first  place,  being,  in  fact,  an  ample 
golden  fillet  richly  decorated  with  enamels,  and 
containing  within  it  a  narrow  hoop  of  iron, 
which  is  reputed  to  have  been  made  of  a  nail 
from  the  Cross. 

The  fourth  place  in  this  catalogue  is  assigned 
by  M.  Labarte  to  the  Alfred  Jewel,  and  by  this 
classification  it  is  referred  to  a  Byzantine  source. 
But  as  it  is  plain  from  the  matter  as  well  as  the 
manner  of  his  description  that  his  acquaintance 
with  the  Jewel  is  second-hand,  we  pass  over  this 
local  element,  while  we  accept  his  classification 
so  far  as  it  refers  to  structural  affinities. 

In  the  spring  of  1 8  3  9,  during  some  excavations 

^  These  eight  plates  have  been  reproduced  by  M.  de  Linas 
in  his  Histoire  du  Travail  a  I'Expositioji  uni'verselle  de  1 8(^7,  p.  1 2.5". 

F    1 


68  The  Alfred  Jewel 

in  Thames  Street,  was  discovered  a  fibula  which 
happily  passed  straightway  into  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Roach  Smith,  and  he  wrote  a  memoir  upon 
it  which  may  be  seen  in  the  Ardmologia  for  1 840, 
accompanied  with  a  splendid  illustration  in 
colour  and  gold.  It  contains  a  bust  in  cloison- 
work  enamel,  and  invites  comparison  with  our 
Jewel  more  than  any  of  those  in  the  above  list, 
probably  more  than  any  other  extant  specimen. 
It  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  Both  the 
figure  and  the  filigree  are  of  superior  workman- 
ship to  the  Alfred  Jewel,  as  if  it  were  a  later 
and  more  refined  product  of  the  same  school. 
A  French  critic  calls  it  Byzantine,  and  assigns  it 
to  the  eleventh  century  ^ 

So  far  about  other  extant  specimens  of  enamel 
cloisonnee.  This  species  of  enamel  rises  like  an 
island  out  of  the  broad  level  of  the  enamel 
champlevee^  in  which  the  plate  was  prepared  for 
the  vitreous  deposit  by  scooping  the  pattern 
upon  it.  To  this  common  method  belong  the 
older  and  more  rudimentary  enamels  of  the 
British  horse-gear,  correctly  described  by  Phi- 

^  Notice  des  Emaux,  ©"r.,  du  Musee  du  Louvre^  par    M.  de 
Labordc,  18 5 7,  p.  ^(). 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     6^ 

lostratus,  who  will  be  quoted  below.  To  this 
belong  also  the  late  enamels,  for  which  during 
the  thirteenth  century  Limoges  was  famous. 

The  history  of  the  art  of  enamelling  is  very 
imperfectly  known,  and  the  paucity  of  extant 
specimens  makes  the  investigation  the  more 
difficult.  The  canvas  upon  which  these  pictures 
were  laid  consisted  of  plates  of  the  precious 
metals,  the  smaller  works  being  laid  upon  gold 
or  silver,  the  larger  on  copper.  As  a  natural 
consequence  it  happened  that  as  soon  as  they 
were  antiquated  or  had  served  their  turn,  they 
were  lightly  cast  into  the  melting-pot,  save 
where  they  were  protected  by  some  peculiar 
veneration. 

Hence  it  has  come  to  pass  that  a  favourite 
art  of  the  Dark  and  Middle  Ages,  which  we 
have  reason  to  believe  was  for  centuries  very 
prolific  (until  it  was  superseded  by  the  increased 
vigour  of  painting  and  sculpture  in  the  four- 
teenth century),  is  now  represented  by  a  ^^-w 
specimens  only,  and  its  history  is  hard  to 
retrace.  I  shall  make  no  attempt  to  supply  this 
want,  and  shall  only  rehearse  a  ^^ysf  interesting 
facts  which  the  present  investigation  has  brought 


70  The  Alfred  Jewel 

to  my  knowledge.  Origins  I  leave  to  specialists: 
but  this  I  may  say,  that  such  evidence  as  the 
present  enquiry  has  brought  within  the  circle 
of  my  observation  seems  to  suggest  a  Keltic 
source  for  the  Enamel  in  our  Jewel. 

The  earliest  mention  of  enamel  to  which  we 
can  confidently  point  is  found  \\\  the  book  of 
Philostratus  entitled  'Pictures  (Icones,  Elaovsf). 
This  author  was  a  Greek  rhetorician  and  connois- 
seur in  Art,  who  came  to  Rome  (a.d,  200)  in  the 
reigii  of  Severus,  attracted  by  the  Court  of  Julia 
Domna,  who  (in  the  words  of  Gibbon)  was  the 
patroness  of  every  art  and  the  friend  of  every 
man  of  genius.  In  his  Icones  he  makes  pictures 
the  text  of  his  elegant  and  fashionable  discourse. 
Whether  his  pictures  were  real  or  imaginary  is 
a  matter  of  no  consequence  to  our  present 
purpose.  The  picture  in  which  we  are  interested 
is  one  that  represents  a  Meet  for  a  Boar-hunt. 
The  writer  comments  upon  the  well-equipped 
company,  the  horses  and  their  riders,  in  the 
splendour  of  their  get-up  for  the  sport,  drawing 
special  attention  to  the  curiosity  and  costliness 
of  their  horse-trappmgs.  Their  bits  are  silvern, 
and  their   head-stalls  are  decorated  with  gold 


Figure  and  Engraved  'Plate     71 

and  enamelled  colours.  For  the  production  of 
these  colours  it  is  said  that '  the  barbarians  who 
dwell  in  the  ocean  do  smelt  them  upon  heated 
copper,  and  that  in  cooling  they  do  set  and 
harden  and  keep  the  design  ^' 

It  has  been  questioned  who  are  meant  by  the 
barbarians  in  the  ocean.  Modern  French  writers 
have  generally  applied  it  to  the  Gauls ;  but 
Olearius,  the  editor  of  Philostratus  (1709),  under- 
stood the  Keltic  peoples ;  and  certainly  the 
expression  appears  more  applicable  to  the  British 
Isles  than  to  Gaul.  Moreover,  it  is  in  Britain, 
and  not  in  Gaul,  that  enamelled  horse-trappings 
have  been  found.  Some  of  these  may  be  seen 
in  the  Ashmolean,  and  more  in  the  British 
Museum. 

'The  antiquities  discovered  at  Stanwick  in 
Yorkshire,  Polden  Hill  in  Somersetshire,  Saham 
Toney  in  Norfolk,  Westhall  in  Suffolk,  and  at 
Middleby  in  Annandale,  Scotland,  which  are  all 
of  Celtic  workmanship,  consist  principally  of 
bits  and  portions  of  horse-furniture  of  various 

1  Philostratus,  Icones^  i.  a8  : — the  horsemen  are  described 
as — apyvpo\akLVOi  koI  avLKTol  koI  XP^'^'OI  to.  (f)dXapa.  TavTo. 
(pacn  TO.  xpuifxaTa  tovs  fv  b)K€av<^  ^ap^dpovs  ^yx^^^  ''''?  xuXkc^ 
StttTTvpci),  TO.  8e  crvvCcTTacrdai.  Koi  XidovaOai,  koI  aui^dv  h  €ypd(pr]. 


7x  The  Alfred  Jewel 

kinds  which  have  preserved,  in  many  cases,  the 
enamel  with  which  they  were  decorated  ^.' 

The  Romans  or  Romanized  populations  con- 
tinued the  practice  of  this  art,  and  from  the 
evidence  of  the  finds  that  occur  from  time  to 
time  it  appears  probable  that  some  of  the  finest 
specimens  were  made  in  Britain.  A  large  flat 
plate,  representing  an  altar,  which  was  found  in 
London  and  is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  has 
all  the  appearance  of  being  unfinished.  A  curious 
cup,  which  was  found  at  Rudge  in  Wiltshire, 
has  round  it  the  names  of  five  of  the  towns  on 
the  Roman  Wall.  And  this  specimen  appears, 
by  peculiarities  of  workmanship,  to  be  nearly 
related  to  the  beautiful  vase  which  was  found 
in  a  tumulus  on  the  Bartlow  Hills,  in  Essex, 
where  it  seems  to  have  been  deposited  after  the 
time  of  Hadrian.  And  if  the  Saxon  invasions 
of  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  did,  as  it  is 
thought,  obliterate  all  traces  of  this  art  in  the 
other  parts  of  the  west,  this  could  only  have  had 
the  effect  of  making  the  practice  of  it  peculiar 

1  Augustus  W.  Franks,  'Vitreous  Art,'  p.  14  in  Art 
Treasures  of  the  Vn'tted  Kingdom^  a  book  which  was  brought  out 
in  connexion  with  the  Manchester  Exhibition  of  iS^y. 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     7g 

to  Ireland;  and  the  Irish  were  not  a  stay-at-home 
race,  neither  did  they  hide  their  gifts  from 
other  people. 

There  is  a  Keltic  aspect  in  the  enamelled 
designs  which  was  remarked  by  Franks,  and 
which  may  have  accompanied  the  tradition  of 
this  art  even  when  it  passed  out  of  Keltic 
hands  ^ 

In  short,  all  the  indications  which  this  en- 
quiry has  brought  to  my  notice  concerning  the 
technical  history  of  our  Enamel  do  seem  to 
localize  it  in  the  British  Isles.  At  a  later  stage 
of  this  chapter  we  shall  be  met  by  evidence  of 
a  different  kind,  tending  in  the  same  direction. 


II 

The  Inward  Signification  of  the  Figure, 

AND  OF  THE  EnGRAVING  AT  THE  BACK  OF  IT 

About   the  sigTiification   of  this   Figure    the 
conjectures    have    been  diverse,  but   they  have 

1  Mr.  Arthur  Evans  recognizes  a  Keltic  physiognomy  in 
the  eyes  of  the  icuncula ;  but  for  me  the  eyes  are  as  if  they 
were  not,  being  so  much  sunk  out  of  their  place,  that  through 
infirmity  of  sight  I  am  unable  to  verify  them. 


74  The  Alfred  Jewel 

all  agreed  in  recognizing  the  two  sceptres  as 
the  characterizing  attribute.  Hickes,  in  his 
first  interpretation,  thought  that  the  kuncula 
represented  the  glorified  Saviour  with  a  lily 
sceptre  in  either  hand,  denoting  his  twofold 
realm  of  heaven  and  earth  :  or  else  the  pontiff 
of  Rome  as  his  vicegerent  wielding  both  the 
temporal  and  the  spiritual  power.  Afterwards, 
however,  when  he  had  redd  in  pseudo-Ingulph 
the  story  of  St.  Cuthbert's  appearance  to  Alfred, 
and  had  contemplated  in  the  Lichfield  Book 
the  figure  of  St.  Luke  (seemingly,  but  not  really 
two-sceptered),  he  was  moved  to  think  that  the 
icuncula  represented  a  saint,  and  was,  perhaps, 
meant  for  St.  Cuthbert  ^ 

I  think  Hickes  was  right  in  his  first  inter- 
pretation, and  especially  in  the  second  member 
of  his  alternative,  wherein  he  referred  it  to 
the  pope.  In  the  ninth  century  the  thought 
of  Christ  was  easily  blended  with  that  of  his 
vicegerent  upon  earth :  and  it  is  plain  that  the 
Figure  is  arrayed  in  precisely  those  insignia 
which  best  represent  the  dominant  thought 
of  the  papacy  at  that  epoch.     The  two  sceptres 

1   Appendix  B. 


Figure  and  Engraved  'Plate     75- 

aptly  symbolize  the  claim  and  aspiration  of  the 
Western  hierarchy  during  those  very  years  which 
Alfred  spent  in  Rome. 

Leo  IV,  the  pontiff  who  welcomed  the  princely 
boy  to  Rome,  had  already,  as  the  organizer  of 
victory  over  the  Saracens,  done  much  to  prepare 
the  exaltation  of  the  Roman  See.  Many  causes 
conspired  to  the  same  result.  This  was  just  the 
moment  when  the  famous  Decretals  were  ready 
to  start  upon  their  triumphant  career.  A  first 
display  of  their  working  was  seen  in  85-8,  when 
the  novel  solemnity  of  coronation  was  added 
to  the  consecration  of  Nicholas  I.  And,  as 
I  apprehend  the  course  of  events,  this  falls 
within  the  period  of  Alfred's  sojourn  at  Rome. 

Not  long  after  this  the  surprizing  spectacle 
was  seen  of  the  pope  on  horseback,  and  the 
emperor  on  foot  walking  by  his  side  and  hold- 
ing his  bridle  as  he  rode.  This  pontiff  gave 
commands  to  kings  and  ruled  over  them  as  lord 
of  the  whole  world ;  and  he  actually  realized 
his  ambition  of  making  all  secular  power  subject 
to  the  papacy. 

He  claimed  the  subjection  of  all  national 
churches  to  the  bishop  of  Rome.     He  decreed, 


7<5  The  Alfred  Jewel 

in  %66^  that  no  archbishop  might  be  enthroned 
or  might  consecrate  the  eucharist,  mitil  he  had 
received  the  pallium,  from  the  Roman  pontiff. 

There  was  much  in  the  conditions  of  the  time 
and  in  his  own  experience  to  cause  Alfred  to 
view  these  things  wholly  on  their  favourable 
side.  The  enamelled  head  is  probably  not  meant 
for  a  portrait  of  Leo  IV  or  any  particular  pope, 
but  we  can  hardly  be  mistaken  if  we  interpret 
it  as  a  symbolical  figure  to  represent  the  papal 
authority  as  the  vicar  and  vicegerent  of  Christ. 

And  if  this  be  a  true  solution  of  the  pro- 
blematical icuncula^  there  is  yet  something  more 
which  we  naturally  desire  to  know.  We  naturally 
inquire  about  the  composition  of  the  symbol, 
of  what  elements  is  it  made  up,  and  from  what 
source  did  the  suggestion  come } 

In  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  is 
preserved  a  very  famous  book,  known  as  the 
Booh^  of  ]\clls^  a  monument  of  Irish  learning 
and  art  in  that  period  when  Ireland  most  justly 
earned  the  glorious  title  of 'Insula  Sanctorum.' 
One  of  the  full-page  illuminations  which  adorn 
that  book  represents  a  scene  of  the  Temptation, 
in  which  Jesus  is  on  the  pinnacle  and  Satan  is 


III-  'in~     iiii   lliY   viss^&Vt-l  Sgjfc^' J 


liB 


ILLUMINATION    FROM    THE    *  BOOK    OF    KELLS.' 


To/ace/.  77.] 


Figure  and  E/igraved  Tlate     77 

near.      Such    is    the   action    represented:     but 
besides  the  action  the  same  picture  conveys  also 
a  reflection  or  comment  upon  the  action.    Lower 
down,  and  more  in  the  body  of  the  building, 
there  is  a  window  at  which  is  seen  a  majestic 
personage    holding   a    sceptre    in    either    hand, 
which  leans  and  rests  on  either  shoulder.     At 
first    sight    the    etFect    is    quaint,    bizarre,   and 
puzzling  j  but  a  little  attention  makes  all  plain. 
It    becomes   clear  that   a    contrast    is   intended 
between   the  humiliation  and   the   triumph  of 
the  Christ  j  and  perhaps  also,  by  the  association 
of  ideas  which  the  last  two  verses  of  St.  Mat- 
thew's Gospel   have  made  familiar,  to  suggest 
the    duty   (zealously    discharged    by    the    early 
Irish  Church)  of  missionary  devotion.     No  one 
who  has  given  time  and  thought  to  this  picture 
can  doubt  that  the  two-sceptered  figaire  is  Christ. 
Here  is  no  question  of  the   pontiff  of  Rome. 
In   the  seventh   century,  to  which  the  Bouk^  of 
Knells   is    assigned,  the   papal    claims    were   not 
admitted,  much  less  glorified,  by  those  of  the 
Scotian   rite.     Therefore   the   interpretation   of 
that  Irish  picture  is  quite  simple,  and  it  repre- 
sents the  glorified  Christ  inhabiting  his  temple 


78  The  Alfred  Jewel 

and  looking  out  over  his  Church  as  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth  ^ 

Though  we  know  only  of  a  single  extant  copy 
of  this  picture,  we  may  confidently  assume  that 
among  the  manifold  activities  of  the  monks  and 
hermits  and  missionaries  and  pilgrims  from 
Ireland  it  was  multiplied  and  disseminated.  It 
is  (I  think)  impossible  to  compare  our  Figure 
of  the  ninth  century  with  that  of  the  seventh, 
without  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  one  is 
a  descendant  of  the  other.  We  need  not  be  incre- 
dulous about  the  chance  of  Alfred's  being  ac- 
quainted with  Irish  iconography.  The  narrative 
in  the  Chronicle  (K.  891)  of  three  Irish  exiles 
who  found  their  way  to  king  Alfred,  reflects  a 
valuable  light  on  his  kindly  relations  with  the 
learned  and  pious  from  the  sister  island.  This 
connexion  was  neither  new  nor  immature.  When 
they  found  themselves  ashore  on  the  coast  of 
Cornwall  they  set  out  'at  once'— such  is  the 
effect  of  soNA — for  king  Alfred  2. 

Moreover,  the  Irish  picture  furnishes  a  wel- 

1  Appendix  C 

2  And  ]7a  comon  hi  ymb  vii  niht  to  londe  on  Cornwalum, 
and  foron  J^a  sona  to  ^Ifredc  cyninge. 


Figuy^e  and  Engraved  Tlate     79 

come  light  upon  an  obscure  detail  of  our 
enamelled  Figure.  How  are  the  heads  of  the 
sceptres  to  be  explained?  Some  have  taken 
them  for  palms,  and  others  for  lilies,  but  the 
Irish  drawing  shows  them  rather  as  plumes.  And 
this  finds  support  in  a  singular  passage  of  Bede's 
Ecclesiastical  History.  Speaking  of  Oswald  the 
Bretwalda,  Bede  describes  him  as  a  prince  who 
carefully  upheld  his  imperial  dignity,  insomuch 
that,  not  only  when  he  rode  through  his  provinces 
did  his  standard  go  before  him,  but  even  when 
he  walked  forth  in  the  streets  he  was  always  pre- 
ceded by  an  apparitor  bearing  the  Tufa,  which 
(he  adds)  was  in  the  vernacular  called  Tuuf.  We 
learn  from  Du  Cange  that  the  Tufa  was  a  wand 
with  a  head  of  plumes,  and  this  is  what  we  see 
in  the  sceptres  of  the  Irish  drawing.  Sir  Francis 
Palgrave  divined  that  the  Saxon  Bretwaldadom 
had  inherited  this  emblem  of  authority  from 
the  provincial  dignitaries  of  the  empire. 

From  these  data  the  natural  conclusion  is 
that  the  Figure  in  this  Jewel  was  derived  from 
an  Irish,  and  not  from  an  Oriental,  nor  from  any 
continental  source.  It  was  taken  from  an  Irish 
symbolical   drawing  of  Christ   triumphant  and 


8o  The  Alfred  Jewel 

reigning  over  his  Church,  and  it  was  adapted 
by  the  king  in  a  sense  which  his  experience 
had  made  real  and  concrete  and  practical.  As 
Chaucer  was  called  'grand  translateur,'  so  we  may 
call  Alfred  a  grand  adapter.  Whoever  has  been 
drawn  in  to  study  both  Alfred  and  Dante  may 
have  observed  this  in  common  to  the  two,  that 
what  they  borrow  they  transfigure,  their  touch 
imparts  to  it  the  colour  of  their  mind.  King 
Alfred  in  early  youth  was  tied  by  every  thread 
of  religious  conviction  and  political  interest  and 
personal  sentiment  to  the  See  of  Rome,  and  he 
meant  this  Jewel  to  enshrine  the  frontispiece 
of  his  profession  and  the  ensign  of  his  creed 
ecclesiastical,  political,  and  personal. 

At  the  close  of  the  former  section  I  said 
that  the  conclusion  there  arrived  at  would  be 
confirmed  by  another  kind  of  evidence  in  the 
sequel.  Up  to  that  point  the  argument  had 
run  upon  the  technical  aspects  of  our  enamelled 
Figure,  and  these  had  seemed  to  indicate  the 
British  Isles  as  its  native  region.  Since  that  stage 
our  argument  has  turned  upon  the  conception 
and  pedigree  of  the  device  j  and  here  again  we 
find    that    an    insular    rather    than    a    foreign 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     8i 

source  is  indicated.  Further  evidence,  pointing 
in  the  same  direction,  will  be  advanced  before 
the  close  of  the  present  chapter  \ 

At  the  back  of  this  Enamel  there  is  a  gold 
plate  which  serves  the  same  purpose  as  a  back- 
board to  a  picture,  and  it  is  secured  by  an 
overlapping  undulating  border  of  gold.  In  the 
Minster  Lovel  jewel  this  member  consists  of 
a  blank  gold  plate,  but  in  the  Alfred  Jewel 
this  surface  is  occupied  with  an  engraving  which 
is  certainly  allegorical.  At  first  sight  it  seems 
to  be  no  more  than  a  decorated  pattern  made 
upon  the  idea  of  a  tree  with  branches  and 
blossoms  and  fruit  -.  But  upon  closer  inspection 
this  tree  appears  to  be  a  sword  with  its  point 
buried  in  a  human  heart,  and  when  this  is  dis- 
covered it  becomes  plain  that  the  branches  and 
blossoms  must  be  allegorical. 

^  For  the  Irish  illumination  above  referred  to  I  have  relied 
upon  Facsimiles  of  Mi?iiatures  and  Ornaments  of  Anglo-Saxon  and 
Irish  Manuscripts.  By  J.  O.  Wcstwood.  London,  iSdS. 
Plate  XI. 

2  'The  back,  or  reverse,  is  a  plate  of  gold  lying  immediately 
upon  the  back  of  the  miniature,  and  this  is  beautifully  worked 
in  foliage.'  Llewellynn  Jewitt,  F.S.A.,  in  the  Reliquary  for 
October,  1878  :  vol.  xx,  p,  66. 

G 


8x  The  Alfred  Jewel 

A  sword  with  its  point  planted  in  a  human 
heart  may  mean  compunction  for  sin  and 
mortification  of  the  natural  man ;  it  may  also 
mean  resignation  in  adversity  to  the  overruling 
providence  of  God.  Such  a  disposition  of  mind 
is  productive  of  flowers  and  fruit,  that  is,  of 
conduct  which  is  beautiful  and  profitable,  and 
(on  great  occasions)  of  action  which  is  heroic. 
This  mode  of  symbolical  expression  may  be 
seen  in  the  figiire  of  St.  Luke  in  St.  Chad's 
Book  at  Lichfield.  The  Evangelist  holds  in  his 
right  hand  a  pen,  the  feathery  part  of  which 
branches  out  into  flowers  and  fruit,  to  signify 
the  fruitful  nature  of  the  writings  of  St.  Luke  ^ 

These  are  the  obvious  meanings  of  such  a 
symbolical  device,  and  this  being  so,  it  plainly 
results  that  the  Figure  and  its  back-plate  are 
united  by  correlation  of  thought.  The  en- 
amelled Figure  is  the  symbol  of  religion  in  its 
ecclesiastical  and  political  aspect  5  the  engraved 
plate  represents  the  inward  disposition  of  the 
heart,  the  root  and  fount  of  personal  religion. 
The    former    is    of   the    nature    of   a    public 

1  Here  I  follow  the  old  copy  of  this  drawing  in  Hickes's 
Thesaurus  (ijoy)  facing  p.  viij. 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     83 

profession,  and  as  such  is  openly  displayed  to 
view  •  the  latter  is  reserved,  out  of  sight,  facing 
the  wall. 


Ill 

A  Constructive  Inference 

And  this  raises  a  consideration  to  which 
I  invite  careful  attention.  These  two  pictures, 
the  one  enamelled,  the  other  engraved,  are 
complementary  the  one  to  the  other  j  they  are 
two  parts  of  one  design,  and  as  such  they  com- 
bine to  declare  the  unity  of  thought  which 
locks  together  the  composition  and  fabric  of 
this  Jewel  into  one  constructive  whole.  And 
this  observation,  once  verified  and  clearly  appre- 
hended, must  henceforth  exclude  the  theory  of 
Sir  Francis  Palgrave  which  explained  this  Jewel 
as  being  derived  from  two  diverse  sources  in 
the  following  manner : — 

'  Alfred's  Jewel,  in  the  mechanical  workman- 
ship of  the  metallic  portion,  offers  a  close 
resemblance  to  the  Icelandic  ornaments,  now 
made  in  the  island,  where  the  mode  has  probably 
continued    by   usage    from    the    most    remote 


G   X 


84-  The  Alfred  Jenvel 

periods.  The  enamel  within,  on  the  other  hand, 
resembles  some  ornaments  of  the  Carlovingian 
era  now  existing  on  the  continent,  which  have 
been  generally  considered  as  Oriental.  The 
head  at  the  extremity  of  the  ornament  is  ex- 
tremely like  what  is  found  in  those  architectural 
ornaments  usually  called  Saxon,  e.  g.  the  porch 
of  St.  Margaret's  at  York.  Whether  St.  Neot 
be  the  personage  represented  in  the  enamel 
I  rather  doubt ;  and  1  think  it  possible  that  the 
enamel  itself  was  brought  from  the  continent, 
and  that  the  setting  only  was  made  in  England. 
This  would  reconcile  the  two  styles  of  work- 
manship •  the  metallic  portion  is  unquestionably 
Anglo-Saxon,  the  enamel  may  be  supposed  to  be 
from  another  country.  But  altogether  it  is  one 
of  the  most  curious  relics  of  the  kind;  and  no 
one,  taking  all  the  points  of  evidence  tog-ether, 
can  reasonably  doubt  but  that  it  did  belong 
to  king  Alfred.' 

This  is  copied  from  the  Ashmolean  Catalogue, 
\%l6  (p.  138),  the  work  of  Mr.  Philip  Duncan, 
or  rather  perhaps  of  the  two  brothers,  John  and 
Philip  Duncan,  both  Fellows  of  New  College, 
and    successively    Keepers    of    the    Ashmolean 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     85* 

Museum,  men  famous  in  their  generation  for 
their  zeal  in  promoting  all  that  was  good  and 
generous  and  beautiful ;  and  graced,  both  of 
them,  with  a  strong  and  manly  beauty  worthy 
to  support  the  nobility  of  their  character  and 
set  it  forth  to  the  best  advantage. 

I  take  the  above  to  be  an  extract  from  a  letter 
to  one  of  the  brothers  in  answer  to  enquiries 
addressed  to  Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  asking  his 
opinion  about  the  Jewel,  and  especially  whether 
he  thought  the  evidence  warranted  the  con- 
clusion that  it  had  really  belonged  to  the  great 
king  of  Wessex.  The  answer  has  a  peculiar 
value,  because  of  the  firm  judgement  it  supplies 
upon  the  main  problem.  The  deliberate  opinion 
of  the  most  competent  authority  of  the  time 
upon  this  point  is  of  permanent  value.  Oi  a 
different  nature  is  the  other  part  of  his  answer, 
in  which  he  embarked  upon  a  bold  antiquarian 
diagnosis,  and  broached  his  dualistic  theory. 
This  solution  was  accepted  at  the  time  as 
furnishing  a  solid  basis  for  the  interpretation  of 
the  Jewel,  and  it  has  held  its  ground  ever  since. 

This  new  hypothesis  gave  satisfaction  on  three 
grounds :    first,   in   that    it   accounted    for    the 


86  The  Alfred  Jewel 

quaintness  of  the  Tigure  as  being  probably 
Byzantine  or  Oriental ;  secondly,  in  that  it 
lightened  the  burden  of  credit  demanded  for 
our  insular  jewellers  of  the  ninth  century ;  and 
thirdly,  because  it  squared  so  well  with  the 
accredited  fact  that  Alfred  did  receive  presents 
from  foreign  potentates.  On  all  these  grounds 
the  dual  hypothesis  of  Sir  Francis  Palgrave 
gave  general  satisfaction  and  seemed  to  be 
absolutely  final. 

For  myself,  I  adopted  it  as  the  pivot  of  my 
interpretation,  and  as  such  I  used  it  in  the  last 
lecture  I  gave  on  the  subject,  which  was  in 
May,  1899.  But  now  at  length,  by  the  wider 
and  more  searching  investigation  which  has  been 
required  in  the  preparation  of  this  Essay,  I  have 
satisfied  myself  that  all  the  parts  of  this  composite 
work  are  bound  together  by  a  unity  of  thought 
which  manifests  the  effort  of  a  single  mind. 

All  available  testimony  indicates  that  this 
was  none  other  than  the  mind  of  king  Alfred. 
In  support  of  this  broad  assertion  I  will  here 
bring  forward  a  new  illustration  from  the 
original  writings  of  the  king.  When  he  had 
translated  the  Pastoral  Care  he  furnished  it  with 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate      87 

a  prologue  and  an  epilogue,  both  in  verse  : 
the  prologue  is  given  above,  in  the  second  of 
these  chapters ;  the  epilogue  is  quoted  here.  It 
illustrates  his  love  of  figure  and  symbol,  and 
his  aptness  for  the  development  of  a  train  of 
allegorical  thought : 


Bis  is  nu  se  waeterscipe 

*Se  us  wereda  God 
to  frofre  gehet 

fold  buendum. 
He  cwae'S  'Saet  he  wolde 

■Saet  on  worulde  for^ 
of  'Saem  inno'Sum 

a  libbendu  waetru  fleo"wen 
'8'e  wel  6n  hine  gelifden  under 

lyfte. 

Is  hit  lytel  tweo 
Sset  "Saes  "waeterscipes 

welsprynge  is 
on  hefonrice ; 

■Saet  is  Halig  Gast. 
Bonan  hine  hlodan 

halge  and  gecorene, 


This  is  now  the  watering 

which  the  world's  Creator 
for  refreshment  promised 

us  who  till  the  field. 
He  said  it  was  his  will 

that  in  the  world  thenceforth 
out  of  the  inward  soul 

waters  aye  enduring  flow 
of  loyal  believers  under  heaven. 

There  is  little  doubt 
that  of  this  watering 

the  well-spring  is 
in  the  heavenly  kingdom  • 

for  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost. 
From  that  fountain  fetched  it 

faithful  men  elect. 


88 


The  Alfred  Jewel 


si^an  hine  gierdon 
•Sa  ^e  Gode  herdon 

^urh  halgan  bee 
hider  on  eor'San 

geond  manna  m6d 
missenlice. 


and  at  length  'twas  guided 
by  hearers  of  God 

through  holy  books 
hither  on  earth 

men's  minds  to  pervade 
in  manners  diverse. 


Sume  hine  weria^  on  gewit- 

locan 

wisdomes  stream  welerum 

gehaefta'S 
■Saet  he  on  unnyt 

{it  ne  to  fleowe^ : 
ac  se  wael  wuna'S 

on  weres  breostum 
Surh  Dryhtnes  giefe 

diop  and  stille. 
Sume  hine  laeta^ 

ofer  landscare 
ri^um  torinnan. 

Nis  "Saet  raedlic  «ing, 
gif  swa  hlutor  waster 

hlud  and  undiop 


Some    warily    keep    in    memory's 
ward 

wisdom's  stream  with  closed 
lips 
so  that  it  fruitlessly 

flows  not  away  : 
but  the  brooklet  bideth 

in  the  man's  breast 
through  divine  grace 

deep  and  still. 
Some  let  it  at  large 

over  the  land 
in  rillets  wide-running. 

Good  rede  is  it  not 
if  water  so  lucid 

run  shallow  and  loud 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     89 


toflowe'S  sefter  foldum 
o'S  hit  to  fenne  werS. 

Ac  hlada^  iow  nu  drincan 

nu  iow  Dryhten 
geaf  Saet  iow  Gregorius 

gegiered  hafa^ 
to  durum  iow^rum 

Dryhtnes  w^elle. 
Fylle  nu  his  faetels, 

se  Se  faestne  heder 
kylle  brohte : 

cume  eft  hraeSe. 
Gif  her  "Segna  hwelc 

■Syrelne  kylle 
brohte  to  "Sys  human, 

bete  hine  georne, 
■Sylaes  he  forsceade 

scirost  waetra, 
o^e  him  lifes  drync 

forloren  weorSe. 


flowino;  free  over  fields 


^& 


and  turning  to  fen. 


But  draw  now  for  your  drinking 

now  that  your  Lord 
Gregorius  to  you  gave, 

and  he  hath  guided 
to  your  doors 

the  spring  divine. 
Fill  each  man  now  his  vessel, 

if  sound  it  be, 
the  pail  he  brought : 

come  back  for  more  anon. 
If  any  lording  here 

a  leaky  pail 
brought  to  this  burn, 

make  boot  with  zealous  fear, 
lest  he  should  spill 

the  sparkling  water, 
or  of  life's  drink 

depart  forlorn. 


The  diction  of  alliterative  poetry  has  fallen 
out  of  use,  and  consequently  this   illustration 


90  The  Alfred  Jewel 

must  labour  under  the  disadvantage  of  being  in 
a  form  unfamiliar  to  the  general  reader.   Never- 
theless, with  a  little  attention,  the  essential  point 
will   become  plain.     The   royal  translator  had 
been  refreshed  and  invigorated  with  the  lucid 
stream  of  Gregory's  discourse,  and  at  the  moment 
of  parting  with   a  beloved  task  he   sought  to 
relieve   his    full-fraught    soul  with   a    grateful 
burst  of  eulogy.     Out   of  all   the   topics   that 
were  appropriate  to  the  occasion  he  chose  the 
perennial   water   of  life   promised  at  the  well 
of  Samaria,   and    upon    this    noble    theme    he 
expatiated  with  a  fertility  of  invention  which 
makes  it  the  easier  for  us  to  attribute  to  him 
the  rich  symbolism  of  the  Alfred  Jewel. 

And  now  to  gather  up  the  results  of  this 
chapter.  We  have  found  more  than  one  reason 
to  think  that  our  Enamel  was  an  insular,  and 
not  a  continental  product.  This  conclusion  was 
reached  by  two  diiferent  paths,  first  when  we 
were  tracing  the  technical  history  of  the  fabri- 
cation, and  again  when  we  were  seeking  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  the  design ;  by  these  two 
widely  different  lines  of  evidence  we  were  led 


Figure  and  Engraved  Tlate     91 

severally  and  independently  to  infer  a  British 
rather  than  a  foreign  origin  for  the  Figure  \ 

This  inference  was  further  confirmed  by  a 
third  evidential  process,  arising  out  of  the 
sympathy  of  meaning  which  appears  to  unite 
the  enamelled  Figure  with  the  engraved  device 
upon  its  back-plate.  This  led  us  to  question 
the  long-established  doctrine  of  duality  of  origin 
which  rested  upon  the  authority  of  Sir  Francis 
Palgrave,  and  to  infer  that  the  whole  compo- 
sition of  the  Jewel  had  been  projected  and 
devised  by  a  single  mind. 

Finally,  we  found  reason  to  think  that  all 
these  features  harmonized  well  with  the  mind 
and  character  of  a  person  with  whose  name  the 
Jewel  is  already  connected  by  the  Epigraph; 
and  if  anything  was  yet  wanting  to  complete 
the  identification  of  that  person,  it  seems  to 
be  supplied  by  certain  traces  of  inward  affinity 
between  the  symbolism  of  the  Jewel  and  that 
of  the  epilogue  to  the  translation  of  the 
Pastoral  Care^  one  of  the  surest  monuments  of 
the  mind  of  king  Alfred. 

^  Appendix  D. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

ALFRED  IN  SOMERSET  BEYOND 
PEDRIDA 

When  we  have  described  the  form  and  sym- 
bolism of  the  Alfred  Jewel,  and  reviewed  the 
various  interpretations  which  it  has  evoked,  and 
when  we  have  moreover  analyzed  its  design 
and  considered  each  several  feature,  we  have 
not  as  yet  exhausted  the  matter  of  our  theme. 
An  important  part  of  the  problem  remains  to 
be  discussed,  and  that  is  the  place  of  its  dis- 
covery, the  how  and  the  why  of  its  deposit 
there,  and  the  possibility  of  light  to  be  derived 
from  the  historical  associations  of  the  locality. 
It  was  found  near  the  Isle  of  Athelney.  This 
looks  like  a  piece  of  circumstantial  evidence 
tending  to  identify   the  Alfred  named  in   the 


w 


CO 

h 


■< 


Alfred  in  Somerset  95 

Epigraph,  and  to  associate  the  Jewel  with  the 
chief  and  central  episode  in  the  career  of  our 
national  hero.  The  momentous  crisis  which  is 
thus  reflected  in  the  Jewel  seems  to  open  a  wider 
view,  and  to  demand  some  enlargement  of  this 
Essay,  so  as  to  embrace  a  glimpse  of  tliat 
eventful  story. 

Of  all  this  we  now,  after  the  lapse  of  a 
thousand  years,  speak  as  men  who  know  the 
sequel,  and  (because  we  do  know  the  sequel)  it 
is  the  harder  for  us  to  appreciate  the  intensity 
of  that  crisis.  We  are  helped  by  the  occurrence 
of  an  opportune  discovery.  Just  when  our 
nation  was  begmning  to  be  ripe  for  historical 
reflection  and  capable  of  entering  into  the 
struggles  of  our  remote  forefathers,  there  was 
'dug  up'  in  the  locality  where  Alfred  took 
refuge  in  the  year  878,  a  personal  ornament 
bearing  his  name  in  impressive  characters.  It 
is  to  us  now  as  if  the  king  himself  had  but 
recently  passed  that  way  under  such  stress  of 
circumstances  as  constrained  him  to  hide  his 
royal  insignia,  and  as  if  we  somehow  by  this 
chance  were  brought  nearer  to  the  burden  of 
his  lot,  and  were  made  sharers  not  only  in  the 


94-  The  Alfred  Jewel 

fruits  of  his  triumph,  but  also  in  the  toil  and 
the  joy  of  his  achievement. 

*  *  * 

By  the  sudden  surprize  with  which  the  Danes 
had  broken  the  peace  and  come  upon  him  at 
Chippenham  in  the  dead  of  winter,  they  had 
almost  fulfilled  their  design  and  taken  him 
captive.  But  he  had  fled,  and  they  had  Wessex 
at  will,  and  were  proceeding  to  divide  and 
occupy  the  land.  The  king,  with  a  ^qw  com- 
panions, had  escaped  into  Selwood,  and  thence 
by  wood  and  by  fen,  like  hunted  creatures, 
they  eluded  pursuit,  but  were  never  secure  until 
they  had  passed  beyond  Pedrida. 

What  were  his  reflections  on  finding  himself 
suddenly  an  outcast  in  the  winter,  a  fugitive  in 
the  wild?  He  had  experienced  hair-breadth 
escapes,  but  none  like  this !  He  had  trusted 
Guthrum's  oath,  had  thought  him  in  earnest 
this  time !  And  even  now  he  was  loth  to  charge 
this  last  perfidy  upon  him.  No !  this  trick  was 
not  his,  it  came  from  those  buccaneers  in  the 
Severn  Sea.  Mad  at  the  defeat  of  last  summer's 
combined  scheme,  which  they  had  come  from 
far  north  to  support,  they  had  forced  Guthrum's 


Alfred  in  Somerset  95- 

hand,  and  compelled  him  to  join  them  in  this 
winter  raid.  And  they  would  not  stop  there! 
Finding  that  he  had  given  them  the  slip,  they  . 
would  certainly  be  down  upon  some  part  of  the 
coast  of  Somerset  or  of  Devon,  and  preparations 
must  be  made  to  receive  them.  Odda  will 
surely  be  stirring :  he  is  safe  to  be  on  the  alert ! 
I  must  find  out  v/hat  he  is  doing,  and  we  must 
work  on  a  plan ;  he  in  Devon,  and  I  in 
Somerset ! 

It  was  now  twelve  years  since  he  had  come  to 
the  front,  and  had  taken  his  stand  by  the  side 
of  his  brother  iEthered.  The  moment  when  he 
had  begun  to  share  in  public  affairs  had  coincided 
with  a  great  change  in  the  situation.  That  was 
the  time  when  the  invaders  acquired  a  footing 
in  East  Anglia  :  they  made  there  a  centre  of 
operations  from  which  they  went  out  and  to 
which  they  came  in — it  had  become  the  head 
quarters  of  an  invading  host  which  manifested 
a  settled  design  of  conquest.  Previously  the 
incursions  of  the  Northmen  had  been  desultory, 
but  from  that  time  they  had  become  methodical. 
This  change  had  comcided  with  the  death  of 
^thelbriht  m  8<5d,and  the  accession  of  iEthered. 


96  The  Alfred  Jewel 

In  the  following  year  had  died  Alhstan,  that 
vigilant  patriot,  the  old  warlike  bishop  of 
Sherborne. 

iEthered  and  I  were  the  two  youngest  of  the 
family,  and  our  relations  had  been  peculiarly 
close.  Before  we  were  united  by  public  cares, 
we  had  been  partners  in  our  private  concerns. 
Our  several  estates  had  been  kept  in  one  and 
worked  in  common,  under  agreed  conditions, 
so  that  they  had  remained  undivided.  Our 
names  had  been  coupled  together  by  the  common 
voice  of  the  nation.    The  style  was  ever  thus: — 

iEJ3ERED    CYNING    AND    iELFRED    HIS    BRO]5UR. 

Oh  what  a  fearful  time  it  was  for  Angel- 
CYNN,  that  five  years  of  iEthered's  reigii ! 
Northumbria,  that  old  imperial  kingdom,  was 
crushed ;  Mercia  reduced  to  make  a  peace  with 
the  heathen,  which  was  the  best  we  could  effect 
by  marching  in  force  to  Nottingham  to  support 
Burgred  and  iEthelswith  !  And,  worst  of  all, 
the  East  Angles  defeated  in  battle,  the  good 
king  Edmund  slain  (he  fought  like  a  hero,  and 
died  like  a  martyr) ;  the  land  conquered,  pos- 
sessed, and  turned  from  an  Anglian  into  a  Danish 
kingdom ! 


Alfred  in  Somerset  97 

It  was  our  turn  next.  All  was  at  length  ripe 
for  the  subjugation  of  Wessex,  and  on  this  aim 
they  brought  all  their  strength  to  bear.  We 
made  a  gallant  stand  at  Ashdown  against  over- 
whelming odds  j  we  slew  their  kings  and  jarls, 
and  made  their  practised  braves  fly  before  the 
rustic  militia  of  Ecgberht.  Eight  pitched 
battles  in  that  year,  besides  smaller  fights  without 
number.  But  iEthered  died  at  Easter.  Rightly 
the  people  revere  him  as  a  saint.  So  I  was  left 
to  continue  the  struggle  single-handed. 

Since  then  they  have  established  themselves 
in  the  possession  of  London,  and  they  have 
banished  Burgred  and  set  up  for  king  in  Mercia 
a  tool  of  their  own ;  also  Halfdan  has  abolished 
the  kingdom  of  Northumbria  and  partitioned 
the  land.  And  amidst  all  this,  what  a  destruction 
of  religious  houses,  seats  of  piety  and  learning 
and  education — Lindisfarne,Wearmouth,Jarrow, 
York,  Ripon,  Bardney,  Ely,  Crowland,  Medes- 
hamstead,  and  many  others. 

They  have  destroyed  the  powers  of  North- 
umbria and  Mercia  ;  but  there  they  had  a  point 
in  their  favour  which  is  against  them  here. 
The  Welsh  at  the  back  of  those  nations  were 

H 


98  The  Alfred  Jewel 

always  ready  to  co-operate  with  the  invader,  but 
that  is  not  so  here  in  the  west.  The  Cornish  have 
never  made  common  cause  with  the  heathen 
since  the  battle  of  Kingston  Down,  in  which 
that  coalition  was  quashed  by  Ecgberht.  And 
we  have  a  still  better  guarantee  in  the  constant 
policy  of  Wessex  ever  since  the  days  of  Ina 
and  Aldhelm.  The  territorial  quarrel  was  then 
appeased,  and  the  religious  difference  too.  The 
West  Welsh  were  conquered,  but  they  were  never 
wantonly  humiliated,  no  man  was  ejected  from 
his  own.  They  appreciated  the  respect  and 
even  honour  that  was  shown  to  their  favourite 
church  of  Glastonbury.  Therefore  I  have  good 
hope  of  the  support  of  the  men  of  Somerset. 

True,  we  have  to  count  upon  the  hostility 
of  the  Welsh  on  the  opposite  shore  of  the 
Severn  Sea,  where  the  Danish  fleets  find  harbour 
and  all  friendly  countenance.  Still,  that  is  not 
quite  the  same  thing  as  having  an  active  enemy 
behind  your  back  upon  the  same  stretch  of 
territory.  Here  in  this  west  country  the  people 
differ  only  in  degrees  of  allegiance,  none  are 
actively  hostile.  This  is  the  weak  point  in  the 
position  of  the  invaders.     This  is  the  one  little 


Alfred  ni  Somerset  99 

bit  of  advantage  that  still  remains  to  us.  I  must 
improve  it  to  the  utmost ! 

But  first  of  all  we  must  provide  against  a 
sudden  descent  on  the  coast.  For  the  last  two 
years  events  have  succeeded  one  another  at  a 
quickened  pace :  surprize  on  surprize  !  There, 
under  the  opposite  coast,  lies  a  heathen  fleet, 
ready  to  be  down  upon  us  without  notice !  The 
coast-wardens  must  be  kept  up  to  the  mark,  and 
I  not  to  be  seen  in  it ! 

The  mobility  of  these  troopers  defies  calcu- 
lation !  How  unexpected  and  startling  was  that 
occupation  of  Wareham  last  autumn !  How 
daringly  defiant  of  gods  and  men  that  breach 
of  their  most  sacred  oath !  When  by  that 
perjury  they  had  lulled  our  mistrust,  they  made 
a  sudden  rush  for  Exeter !  Perfidy  is  part  of 
their  tactics.  How  wonderful,  how  divinely 
providential,  that  storm  off  Swanage,  which 
wrecked  the  perfidious  plan !  And  now,  not 
to  be  baulked,  they  pounce  upon  Chippenham 
in  time  of  truce  and  in  mid-winter,  thinking 
to  capture  me !  How  great  in  war  is  the  un- 
expected !  Without  perfidy,  I  too  must  learn 
to  meditate  surprize;  I  must  contrive  how  to 


H    Z 


loo  The  Alfred  Jewel 

distract  their  calculations,  and  strike  where  least 
expected. 

With  some  such  a  strain  of  thought  as  this 
(if  I  have  followed  him  aright)  now  ruminated 
the  undaunted  king,  in  whom  thought  was  the 
spring  of  action.     Moreover,  he  reasoned  thus 
with    himself:    'So   long  as  winter   lasts,  they 
cannot  follow  me  with  the  host  by  the  way  that 
I  have  come,  but  if  they  learn  my  whereabouts, 
they   may  easily    find    adventurers   who  would 
undertake  to  kill  me.     Wherefore  I  must  not 
make   myself  too    freely  known,   but   proceed 
cautiously,  and   make  proof  of  men   before   I 
trust  myself  to  them.     To  most  I  must  appear 
like  some  mounted  yeoman  hunter  who  follows 
the  high  deer  that  abound  in  the  forests  about 
these  hills.     And   as   for   this   sacred  toy,  this 
personal  enigma,  this  Jewel  of  ceremony,  which 
many  eyes  have  beheld,  I  must  no  longer  carry 
it  about  me,  lest  peradventure  it  make  me  known 
unawares.     I  will   bury  it  in   some   convenient 

spot ! ' 

*  *  * 

The    western    boundary   of  Wessex  had    for 
centuries   been  the  Great  Wood  of  which  the 


Alfred  in  Somerset  loi 

ancient  name  still  survives  as  a  specific  ele- 
ment in  the  historic  designation  of  Frome 
Selwood. 

This  great  wood  was  also  called  Wealwudu, 
a  very  natural  and  appropriate  name,  because  it 
had  long  been  the  barrier  between  the  Saxon 
and  the  Welsh  populations.  Here  lies  the  most 
fitting  scene  for  the  story  of  Denewulf.  In  the 
time  when  the  king  was  a  fugitive,  he  found 
this  man  keeping  swine  in  the  forest,  and  he 
discovered  in  him  a  great  natural  capacity  and 
aptness  for  good,  and  after  his  return  to  power 
he  educated  Denewulf,  and  made  him  bishop  of 
Winchester.  This  story  does  not  run  on  all 
fours,  because  according  to  the  best  authorities 
Denewulf  became  bishop  of  Winchester  in  879, 
and  if  he  was  keeping  swine  in  878,  being 
already  of  mature  age,  it  smacks  rather  of 
hagiology  than  of  history.  But  it  may  be 
that  the  marvel  has  been  enhanced  in  trans- 
mission j  or  if  we  choose  the  lowest  estimate 
and  call  it  mere  fiction,  still  it  is  worth  while 
observing  what  manner  of  stories  were  invented 
about  king  Alfred. 

Behind  this  barrier  the  Danes  had  never  been 


lox         The  Alfred  Jeivel 

able  to  get  a  footing.  As  if  aware  how  greatly 
this  was  needed  for  the  success  of  their  designs 
upon  Wessex,  they  had  made  several  attempts. 
Two  great  efforts  which  imply  this  aim  were 
made  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Ecgberht. 
The  force  of  thirty-five  ships  which  that  king 
repelled  at  Charmouth,  on  the  coast  of  Dorset, 
seems  to  indicate  something  more  than  merely 
a  plundering  incursion. 

In  835-,  a  great  naval  armament  [micel 
sciphere)  came  to  the  Cornish  coast  and  were 
joined  by  the  West  Welsh,  and  they  gathered 
in  force  at  Kingston  Down,  where  they  prob- 
ably intended  to  fortify  themselves  ;  when 
Ecgberht  appeared  with  an  army,  and  dispersed 

them. 

The  next  recorded  attempt  of  the  kind  was  in 
the  year  845-,  in  the  reign  of  iEthelwulf,  when 
the  Wicengas  entered  the  mouth  of  the  Parret, 
and  were  met  by  the  posse  comitatus  of  the  two 
shires,  Somerset  and  Dorset,  under  their  two 
ealdormen,  and  Alhstan  the  warlike  bishop  of 
Sherborne. 

Only  in  the  very  last  year  (877)  their  land- 
force  had,  by  a  perfidious  surprize,  seized  Exeter, 


Alfnd  in  Somerset  103 

acting  in  concert  with  a  fleet  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  ships,  which  were  to  sail  up  the  Exe 
and  co-operate  with  them  —  but  they  were 
wrecked  in  a  storm  off  Swanage  ^  This  disaster, 
combined  with  the  promptitude  of  the  king  in 
assault,  had  compelled  them  to  capitulate,  and 
had  dislodged  them  from  Exeter. 

O^  the  same  nature  and  motive  was  the 
attempt  of  this  spring  on  the  coast  of  Devon 
at  a  place  which  Asser  calls  Cynwit,  with  a  force 
of  twenty-three  ships,  which  were  wintering 
on  the  opposite  coast  of  the  Severn  Sea.  The 
repulse  was  complete  and  the  blow  decisive,  but 
the  name  of  the  English  leader  is  not  given 
by  the  contemporary  annalist.  A  hundred  and 
twenty  years  later,  Ethelwerd  calls  him  Odda 
the  ealdorman  of  Devonshire.  The  reticence 
of  the  Chronicle  suggests  that  this  achievement 
was  conducted  by  Alfred  while  he  was  keeping 


1  Among  promising  fields  of  exercise  in  exploring  the  bed 
of  the  sea,  there  is  the  coast  from  Swanage  Bay  round  to 
St.  Aldhelm's  Head,  which  might  yield  some  durable  relics 
from  the  loot  of  ancient  monasteries.  And  if  Alfred  really 
did  purchase  the  evacuation  of  Wareham  in  877,  <^pccuniam 
dando,'  as  Ethelwerd  has  it,  the  very  coins  may  still  be  there, 
and  in  a  good  state  of  preservation. 


I04  The  Alfred  Jewel 

in  the  background^  lest  the  place  of  his  retreat 
should  become  known. 

*  *  * 

Gradually  and  by  the  spontaneous  action  of 
natural  causes,  the  western  barrier  of  the  Saxon 
was  moved  from  the  line  of  Selwood  to  the  fen- 
land  of  Pedrida.  This  barrier  was  deeper  bedded 
in  the  soil,  was  harder  to  pass,  and  has  left 
behind  it  memories  more  indelible.  The  first 
explicit  notice  of  this  virtual  transfer  of  the 
western  boundary  meets  us  seventeen  years  later 
than  the  epoch  with  which  we  are  now  engaged, 
and  it  may  be  worth  while  to  ^o  so  far  out  of 
our  way  in  order  the  better  to  realize  the  import 
of  Pedrida. 

In  the  last  decade  of  Alfred's  reign,  when  he 
was  in  the  agony  of  that  supreme  crisis  which 
tested  the  value  of  his  institutions,  a  great 
muster  of  force  was  called  for,  and  the  extent 
of  the  contributing  area  is  sketched  by  the 
annalist  as  matter  of  amazement.  '  There 
gathered  iEthered  aldorman  and  ^thelm  aldor- 
man  and  iEthelnoth  aldorman,  and  the  king's 
Thanes  who  were  then  at  home  in  the  fortifica- 
tions,   from    every    garrison    east    of   Pedrida 


Alfred  in  Somerset  \o<^ 

(whether  west  of  Selwood  or  east),  likewise  also 
north  of  Thames  and  west  of  Severn  : — moreover 
some  part  of  the  Welsh  nation  ^? 

Here  we  mark  the  startling  novelty  that  the 
Welsh  in  894  are  seen  aiding  the  Saxon  against 
the  Danej  and  we  can  hardly  forgo  a  passing 
cry  of  wonder  and  pleasure  at  this  signal  token 
of  the  imperial  success  of  Alfred's  policy.  But 
our  present  concern  is  with  the  recognition  of 
Pedrida  as  the  westernmost  limit  of  Wessex 
proper  instead  of  Selwood,  and  the  implication 
that  the  change  was  recent.  We  see  that 
Selwoodshire  (as  the  intervening  district  was 
popularly  called)  was  by  894  quite  assimilated 
and  included  in  the  military  administration  of 
Wessex,  but  that  beyond  Pedrida  some  other  rule 
was  operative  at  that  time.  Such  a  fact  reflects 
back  an  illustrative  light  upon  the  year  878, 
and  helps  us  to  estimate  the  situation  of  Alfred 
when  he  was  in  Somerset  beyond  Pedrida. 

^  J)a  gegaderode  iEj^ered  ealdormon  and  vEj^elm  ealdorman 
and  ^]7elno]7  ealdorman,  and  )>a  cinges  J^egnas  \z  \z  set  ham 
get  l^aem  geweorcum  wseron,  of  alcre  byrig  be  eastan  Pedredan, 
ge  be  westan  Sealwuda  ge  be  eastan ;  ge  eac  be  norj^an 
Temese,  and  be  westan  S-xfern,  ge  eac  sum  dael  \-xs  Nor-S 
Weal  cynnes.     Sax.  Chroji.^  7^.  894. 


io6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

The  political  division  here  indicated  has  left 
traces  which  may  still  be  recognized,  particularly 
in  the  dialect  and  in  folk-lore.  Oi  the  dialect 
we  have  a  remarkable  monument  in  Mr.  El- 
worthy's  works,  T^he  Dialect  of  West  Somerset, 
and  his  West  Somerset  Word-Book^  Especially  to 
be  noted  is  the  '  u '  of  the  West  Country,  which 
is  radically  one  with  the  Welsh  '  u '  and  with 
the  Erench  'u,'  while  at  the  same  time  it  has 
a  very  distinct  local  character  of  its  own.  Every 
Englishman  who  is  conversant  with  the  Erench 
language  knows  how  hard  it  is  to  acquire  the 
utterance  of  the  Erench  ^u'  after  the  age  of 
infancy.  A  like  strangeness  is  experienced  by 
English  people  born  east  of  Pedrida,  when  they 
attempt  to  reproduce  the  western  '  u.'  In  fact, 
this  vowel-sound  is  Keltic  j  it  is  a  legacy  from 
our  British  predecessors. 

Not  that  this  British  'u'  is  absolutely  con- 
fined to  the  western  promontory:  it  may  be 
occasionally  heard  in  other  parts  of  the  country 
by  a  cultivated  and  observant  ear.  Mr.  Mayhew 
once  told  me  that  he  had  heard  it  in  the  Corn 
Market  at  Oxford.  But  though  not  confined  to 
the  lands  west  of  Pedrida,  it  is  in  a  peculiar 


yilfred  in  Somerset  107 

manner  concentrated  there.  It  is  chiefly  in 
Devonshire  that  this  peculiar  vowel  has  wakened 
wider  attention,  but  this  is  simply  because  that 
county  has  been  the  most  frequented  as  a  place 
of  holiday  resort. 

The  so-called  Devonian  ^u'  and  its  contiguous 
sounds  have  been  described  many  times  from  first 
to  last,  but  it  has  been  mostly  in  that  perfunctory 
vein  which  contents  the  summer  tourist.  It  is 
rare  to  catch  such  a  plain  and  solid  illustration  as 
the  following,  which  is  quoted  from  the  preface 
to  Mr.  El  worthy's  West  Somerset  Word-Booh^. — 
'I  was  a  passive  listener  at  Brandon's  while 
a  bonnet  was  being  discussed,  and  when  making 
the  payment  ventured  to  remark  to  the  young 
lady,  "  You  must  have  been  a  long  time  in 
London."  "  Oh  yes,  ten  years ;  but  why  do 
you  ask  ? "  "  Only  for  information,"  said 
I.  "  And  did  you  come  straight  from  TeigTi- 
mouth  ? "  With  much  surprise  at  my  supposing 
she  came  from  Devonshire,  she  said  at  length 
that  she  was  a  native  of  Newton  Abbott. 
I  could  not  pretend  to  define  the  precise  quality 
of  her  trvo^  but  it  was  only  in  that  one  word  that 
I  recognized  her  locality.' 


io8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

If  the  vocabulary  of  this  dialect  were  minutely 
examined  by  a  competent  Welsh  scholar,  some 
British  words  might  be  detected.  Among  those 
which  would  deserve  early  attention  are  pliim 
(soft,  as  a  bed),  pilm  or  pillum  (dust),  rveb  (to  beat, 
thrash). 

Another  local  characteristic  of  the  West  Welsh 
promontory  is  this,  that  it  is  the  peculiar  haunt 
of  a  race  of  whimsical  or  mischievous  sprites 
called  Piskies  or  Pixies.  In  South  Devon  and 
Cornwall  any  one  whose  conduct  is  strange  and 
unaccountable  is  said  to  be  pisky-led.  This  is 
a  branch  of  the  numerous  kindred  of  that  ver- 
satile Puck,  whose  memory  is  kept  fresh  by  the 
Midsummer  Night's  Dream.  In  an  Anglo-Saxon 
perambulation  of  land  at  Weston  by  Bath,  we 
meet  with  a  Pucan  Wyl,  Puck's  Well  ^.  The 
English  Dialect  Dictionary  preserves  the  name 
of  Aw-Puck  for  Will-o'-the-Wisp  or  ignis  fa- 
tuus^  a  compound  which  imports  that  he  is 
the  most  dangerous  of  the  species.  This  name 
was  current  in  Worcestershire,  but  is  now 
obsolete  ^ 

^  Kembic,    Codex    Dip  lorn  aticus^  vol.    iii,    p.    423 ;     Birch, 
Cartular'ium  Saxo7ticum^  No.  %\\. 

2  The    Evglish     Dialect     Dictionary.        Edited    by    Joseph 


Alfred  In  Somerset  109 

These  are  the  more  obvious  extant  traces 
of  the  long  isolation  of  the  trans-Pedridan 
world  :  others  there  are  which  have  attracted 
inquiry,  such  as  peculiar  customs,  implements, 
songs  and  song-tunes,  which  latter  have  been 
investigated  by  Dr.  Bussell  and  the  Rev.  S. 
Baring-Gould. 

*  *  4«- 

The  Somerset  to  which  Alfred  retired  was 
widely  unlike  the  Somerset  of  to-day.  In  this 
respect  three  points  may  be  taken  :  (i)  Differences 
in  the  distribution  of  land  and  water;  (2) 
differences  in  the  trees  and  woods  and  game ; 
(3)  differences  in  the  political  aspect  of  the 
population. 

I.  West  Somerset  was  separated  from  East 
Somerset  by  wide  inland  waters :  the  beds  of 
the  Brue  and  Parret  were  lakes  in  the  winter, 
and  only  passable  in  summer  to  those  who  knew 
the  ground.  Pedrida  was  regarded  as  a  natural 
limit,  like  the  sea  itself,  dividing  nations ;  it 
was  spoken  of  in  like  phraseology.  Thus  we 
read  in  65-8  how  Cenwalh  warred  against  the 

Wright,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,   Deputy   Professor    of  Comparative 
Philology  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 


no  The  Alfred  Jewel 

Welsh  and  drave  them  even  unto  Pedrida  ^ ;  and, 
in  (58  2,  how  Centwine  drave  the  Bret- Welsh  even 
unto  the  sea  2. 

The  cause  of  that  expanse  of  water  and  large 
area  of  fenland  happened  far  back  beyond 
historical  chronology,  and  we  can  only  date 
it  by  using  the  geological  method  of  reckoning 
time.  Far  back  in  the  sub-glacial  era  a  sub- 
sidence of  the  land  took  place  which  affected 
the  coast  of  Somerset  and  North  Devon.  Proof 
of  this  is  found  in  a  submarine  forest  extending 
along  the  south  coast  of  the  Severn  Sea,  which 
has  long  been  known.  'That  portion  of  it 
visible  at  Porlock  was  described  in  1839  by 
Sir  Henry  de  la  Beche,  and  more  recently 
by  Mr.  Godwin  Austen  in  an  essay  read  before 
the  Geological  Society  in  1 865-  ^.' 

Subsequently  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Winwood  and 
Professor  Boyd  Dawkins  verified  the  discovery 
by  a  thorough   examination  of  the   forest-bed. 

^  6<)%.  Her  CenwaJh  gefeaht  set  Peonnum  wi]^  Walas  and 
hie  gefliemde  oj?  Pedridan. 

2  d8x.  On  ^issum  geare  Centwine  gefliemde  Bret  Wealas 
o]?  ss. 

^  Proceedings  of  the  Somersetshire  Archaeological  and 
Natural  History  Society,  vol.  xviii. 


^Ify^ed  In  Somerset  iii 

Near  Minehead  the  forest  consists  of  oak,  ash, 
alder,  and  hazel,  which  grew  on  a  blue  clay. 
An  ancient  growth  of  oak,  ash,  and  yew  is 
found  everywhere  underneath  the  peat  or  allu- 
vium in  the  Somersetshire  levels.  Throughout 
this  wide  area  the  trees  were  destroyed  by  the 
growth  of  peat,  or  by  the  deposits  of  the  floods, 
except  at  a  i^vj  isolated  spots,  which  stand  at  a 
higher  level  than  usual,  in  the  great  flat  extend- 
ing between  the  Polden  Hills  and  the  Quantocks. 
One  of  these  oases,  a  little  distance  to  the  west 
of  Middlezoy,  is  termed  the  Oaks,  because  those 
trees  form  a  marked  contrast  to  the  prevailing- 
elms  and  willows  of  the  district.  In  the  neigh- 
bouring ditches,  that  gradually  cut  into  peat,  and 
then  into  silt,  prostrate  oaks  are  very  abundant  ^. 
Subsidence  of  the  land  at  a  remote  geological 
period  was  the  cause  of  the  impassable  state 
of  these  levels  in  the  time  of  king  Alfred,  and 
the  modern  system  of  drainage  which  was  carried 
out  at  a  later  date  has  been  the  cause  of  the 
improved    condition    which    we    see    now,   and 

^  From  an  Address  by  Professor  Boyd  Dawkins  ia  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Somersetshire  ArchiEological  and  Natural 
History  Society  for  the  year  1872. 


I IX  The  Alfred  Jewel 

which    has   made    the   Vale    of  Taunton  Dean 
proverbial  as  the  Garden  of  England. 

2.  In  Alfred's  time  the  eye  was  greeted  by 
a  variety  of  trees  which  are  not  observable  now. 
The  elm  predominates  all  over  the  plain. 
I  asked  the  occupier  of  Athelney  Farm  about 
the  trees  on  his  land,  and  he  said  there  was 
hardly  anything  but  elm.  O^  other  kinds  he 
had  only  two  ash-trees  and  one  beech  \  '  but  (he 
added)  we  find  bog-oak  in  the  moors,  and  it 
makes  good  gate-posts.'  The  elms  have  driven 
out  both  oak  and  ash,  and  whatever  other  sorts 
they  touched  in  their  ^  wrastling '  progress.  These 
sombre  grenadiers  dress  up  their  lines  so  close 
as  to  leave  little  room  for  other  trees.  They  suck 
the  fruitful  soil  more  than  any  other  tree,  and 
they  repay  their  costly  nurture  with  thiiber 
of  inferior  value.  Introduced  by  the  Romans 
to  serve  as  stakes  and  props  in  the  culture  of 
the  vine,  they  have  overrun  the  land  like  the 
imported  rabbits  in  some  of  our  colonies.  In 
Alfred's  day  these  hungry  aliens  had  not  yet 
usurped  the  field,  and  there  was  still  room  for 
the  display  of  the  rich  variety  of  nature — oak, 
ash,  beech,  fir,  maple,  yew,  sycamore,  hornbeam, 


Alfred  in  So??ierset  113 

holly,  poplar,  aspen,  alder,  hazel,  wych-elm, 
apple,  cherry,  juniper,  elder,  willow,  mountain 
ash,  spindle-tree,  buckthorn,  hawthorn^  wild 
plum,  wild  pear,  servdce-tree,  &c.  But  now,  the 
fair  places  of  the  field  are  encumbered  by  the 
tall  cousins  of  the  nettle,  and  the  most  diversified 
of  English  counties  is  muffled  with  a  monotonous 
shroud  of  outlandish  and  weedy  growth. 

In  the  animal  world,  likewise,  the  lapse  of 
a  thousand  years  has  brought  change.  In  the 
pastures  the  most  frequent  animal  is  the  cow, 
and  only  on  rare  occasions,  as  we  view  the  moors 
from  some  elevated  '  tump,'  have  we  the  chance 
to  see  a  little  company  of  antlered  deer  careering 
over  the  open  plain,  clearing  the  rhines  with  an 
airy  bound.  In  Alfred's  time  too,  cow-keeping 
was  a  stock  industry,  and  we  read  of  the  king 
as  entertained  incognito  by  one  of  his  own  cow- 
herds (apiid  quendam  suum  vaccariuni). 

But  the  proportion  of  wild  to  domesticated 
animals  was  far  greater  then  than  it  is  now. 
The  whole  stretch  of  country  from  Pedrida 
to  the  end  of  Exmoor,  fifty  miles  long  and 
twenty  miles  wide,  was  then  almost  a  continuous 
forest,  abounding  with  game  of  all  kinds,  but 


114-  ^^^^  Alfred  Jewel 

especially  with  red  deer,  which  still  continues, 
though  in  diminished  numbers.  This  noble 
creature  is  thus  described  by  Bewick: — 

<  The  Stag  or  Red  Deer.  This  is  the  most 
beautiful  animal  of  the  deer  kind.  The  elegance 
of  his  form,  the  lightness  of  his  motions,  the 
flexibility  of  his  limbs,  his  bold,  branching 
horns,  which  are  annually  renewed,  his  grandeur, 
strength,  and  swiftness,  give  him  a  decided  pre- 
eminence over  every  other  inhabitant  of  the 
forest  ^' 

The  red  deer  still  lives  and  breeds  along  the 
southern  coast  of  the  Severn  Sea,  and  this  is 
I  believe  the  only  part  of  Great  Britain  in 
which  this  right  royal  animal  still  ranges  at 
large  in  all  the  freedom  of  nature.  I  am  informed 
by  my  friend  Mr.  Townshend  that  in  Ireland 
they  are  kept  as  an  ornament  in  some  gentle- 
men's parks,  but  that  in  a  free  state  of  nature 
they  survive  only  in  the  mountains  of  Killarney. 

1  A  General  History  of  S^uadrupeds.  The  Figures  en- 
graved on  Wood  by  Thomas  Bewick ^  i8io,  p.  135'.  In 
Taunton  Castle,  which  is  the  home  and  museum  of  the 
Somersetshire  Archseological  and  Natural  History  Society, 
the  form  and  beauty  of  the  red  deer  may  be  contemplated  in  a 
fine  specimen  which  is  set  up  in  the  great  hall,  the  very  hall 
of  the  Bloody  Assize. 


yiljred  in  Somerset  115- 

Here  it  will  be  useful  to  read  Leland's  notes  of 
travel  across  the  lowlands  of  Somerset,  especially 
as  they  touch  some  places  with  which  we  are 
concerned.  (I  quote  from  the  Proceedings  of 
the  Somersetshire  Arch^ological  and  Natural 
History  Society,  No.  xxxiii/Leland  in  Somerset- 
shire, 15-40-1742.') 

'  Thens  to  Cury-Malet  a  3.  Miles,  wher  is  a  Parke  longging 
to  Ch amber jwufi  of  Devonshire. 

I  left  this  Parke  a  litle  on  the  lift  Hand,  and  sone  after 
cam  over  a  great  Brook,  that  resith  West  South  West,  and 
rennith  East  North  East  into  Ivel  a  2.  Miles  above  Michel- 
boroin  by  Estimation. 

(Here  I  cam  from  the  Hilly  Ground  to  the  Low  and 
Marschy  Ground  oi  Somerseteshir.) 

Thens  to  North  Cury  stille  by  low  Ground  aboute  a  2.  Miles 
or  more.     The  Chirch  of  Welles  hath  fair  Landes  here. 

And  hereabout  is  Stoke  Gregory^  wher  the  Chirch  of  Welles 
hath  Possessions. 

Thens  about  a  Mile  to  the  Ripe  of  Thone  Ryver,  by  the 
which  I  passed  by  the  space  of  half  a  Mile,  and  then  I  went 
over  Thone  by  a  Wood  Bridge. 

Athehiey  lyith  half  a  Mile  lower  on  Thon^  and  ther  is 
a  Bridge  of  Wood  to  entre  thabbay  ^,  and  beneth  that  almost 
at  the  very  Confluence  of  Thone  and  Ivel  is  another  Wood 
Bridge  over  Thone. 

Thonetoun  alias  Tawntoun  is  a  5.  Miles  by  South  West  from 
Athelney. 

1   Appendix  E. 


il6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

Ther  is  a  great  Bridge  on  Thorn  at  Basford  a  Mile  lower 
then  Thonetoun. 

From  this  Brdge  by  AtheJney  I  rode  by  a  low  Marsch 
Ground  a  a.  Miles  to  Federtun  VarTc. 

Here  at  Federton  the  soyle  Westward  and  South  West 
rysith  agayn  and  ys  not  fenny. 

There  ys  a  great  Numbre  of  Dere  longging  to  this  Park, 
yet  hath  it  almost  no  other  Enclosure  but  Dikes  to  let  the 
Catelle  o'^  the  Commune  to  cum  yn. 

The  Dere  trippe  over  these  Dikes  and  feede  al  a'x)ut  the 
Fennes,  and  resort  to  the  Park  agayn.  There  is  a  praty 
Lodge  moted  yn  the  Parke. 

There  cummith  a  praty  Broke  thorough  the  Park,  and 
half  a  Mile  beneth  the  Park  it  goith  ynto  Ivel. 

This  Brooke  is  caullid  Peder^  and  risith  West  South  West 
yn  the  Hylles  aboute  a  2.  Myles  of.  First  it  cummith  by 
Noth  Fedretofiy^  praty  uplandisch  Toun,  wher  is  a  fair  Chirch, 
the  Personage  whereof  was  impropriate  to  Mynch'-n  bocland. 

Then  it  touchith  on  South  Federton^  in  the  which  Paroch 
the  Parke  standith,  and  so  to  the  Ryver  of  Ivel. 

From  the  Lodge  in  Federton  Parke  to  Northpedertun  a 
Mile. 

From  Northpedertim  to  Bridgeivater  z.  Miles.  The  way  or 
I  cam  ynto  Bridgwater  was  caused  with  Stone  more  then  half 
a  Myle. 

Here  we  may  observe  that  Leland  appears  to 
know  of  no  river  Parret ;  to  him  it  was  '  Ivel.' 
It  would  be  curious  to  learn  when  and  how  a 
minor  tributary  gave  its  name  of  Parret  to  the 


Alfred  tn  Somerset  117 

lower  waters  of  the  Ivel.  It  may  be  surmised 
that  Pedrida  was  never  the  name  of  a  river,  but 
of  a  belt  of  country,  and  that  it  may  have  meant 
'the  passage  or  ford  of  the  Peder,'  Leland's 
'  praty  broke.'  The  name  seems  to  contain  the 
Welsh  rhyd^  a  ford.  At  first  it  may  have  denoted 
the  ford  of  the  Peder,  and  then  by  natural  exten- 
sion it  may  have  come  to  designate  the  whole 
fenland  of  the  lower  Ivel. 

3.  Racial  differences  were  still  seen  and  felt. 
The  West  Welsh  had  been  conquered,  and  were 
now  living  in  peaceful  subjection,  and  forming 
an  outlying  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Wessex ; 
but  still  they  were  imperfectly  assimilated. 

The  old  internecine  quarrel  between  the  races 
had  in  this  western  land  been  hushed  and  calmed  j 
and  on  no  other  border  were  the  British  living 
and  mingling  with  their  conquerors  on  such 
amicable  terms.  There  was  a  very  great  differ- 
ence between  the  disposition  of  the  West  Welsh 
towards  the  Saxon  and  that  of  the  'North  Welsh ' 
on  the  opposite  coast  of  the  Severn  Sea. 

These  pacific  relations  were  not  of  recent 
date ;  they  appear  as  a  deliberate  policy  in  the 
reign  of  Ina    before   the   end  of  the   seventh 


ii8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

century,  and  even  earlier  indications  of  this 
tendency  may  be  gleaned  which  carry  us  back 
two  hundred  years  behind  the  reign  of  Alfred. 

When  in  66 s-,  Wina  i,  bishop  of  Winchester, 

consecrated  Ceadda  (St.  Chad),  he  had  with  him 

two  British  bishops  as  his  assistants.     These  two 

bishops  must  have  belonged  to  the  West  Welsh. 

Further,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  Cead- 

walla,  though  descended  from  Cerdic,  and  king 

of  Wessex,   was    half  a   Briton.      Again:    the 

legendary  tales  about  Ina's  legislation  which  are 

embodied  in  the  so-called  Laws  of  Edward  the 

Confessor,  however  unhistorical,  have  possibly 

a  traditional  value  as  characterizing  the  attitude 

of  Wessex  towards  her  British   subjects  in  the 

seventh  and  eighth  centuries.    In  this  apocryphal 

text  it   is    said    that   by  Ina's  enactment  'the 

British  were  declared  politically  equal  with  the 

English,    and     that    as    he     himself   had     set 

the  example  of  a  Welsh  marriage,  so  he  would 

that  connubium  between  the  two  races  should 

1  The  West  Saxon  form  of  this  name  was  Wine,  but  I 
write  it  Wina,  as  also  I  adopt  the  Latin  form  Ina,  in  place 
of  the  genuine  Ine,  lest  the  English  reader  should  allow  it  to 
pass  through  his  mind  in  the  shape  of  a  monosyllable.  The 
Anglian  forms  of  these  names  (in  Bede)  are  Ini  and  Wini. 


Alfred  in  Somerset  119 

be    legally   recognized.'      These    are   distorted 
reminiscences   of  the    historical    fact   that   Ina 
maintained   a    conciliatory  policy  towards    the 
conquered   British,  and   in  this   course   he  was 
well  supported  or  perhaps  guided  by  Aldhelm, 
abbot  of  Malmesbury,  who  in  704  was  requested 
by   a   synod    to    write    a    letter    to    Gerontius 
(Geraint),  king  of  Damnonia,  and  exhort  him 
and   his   people  to   conformity  with    Catholic 
usage  in  the  time  of  keeping  the  Easter  festival. 
The  letter  was  sent,  and  it  is  still  extant.    It  is  ad- 
dressed, in  respectful  and  courteous  language — 
'  To  the  most  glorious  prince,  swaying  the  sceptre 
of  the  Western  realm,  whom  I,  the  searcher  of  the 
heart  is  my  witness,  do  embrace  with  brotherly 
charity — to  king  Geraint  and  to  all  God's  priests 
dwelling  in  Damnonia,  Aldhelm,  &c.i ' 

And  when,  shortly  afterwards,  H^dde,  bishop 
of  Winchester,  died,  and  the  moment  had  arrived 
for  the  long-contemplated  division  of  the  vast 

1  '  Domino  gloriosissimo  occidentalis  regni  sceptra  guber- 
nanti,  quern  ego,  ut  mihi  scrutator  cordis  et  rerum  testis  est, 
fraterna  caritate  amplector,  Gerontio  Regi  simulque  cunctis 
Dei  sacerdotibus  per  Domnoniam  conversantibus,  Alt- 
helmus,  &c.'  Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Councils  and  Ecclesiastical 
Documents  relating  to  Great  Britain  and  Ireland^  vol.  iii, 
p.  r6%. 


no  The  Alfred  Jewel 

diocese  of  Wessex,  Aldhelm  became  bishop  '  to 
the  west  of  the  wood,'  over  a  province  which 
(as  Ethelwerd  tells  us)  was  commonly  called 
Selwoodshire.  Aldhelm  died  in  709  upon  one 
of  his  episcopal  journeys,  at  the  village  of 
Doulting  on  the  western  brow  of  Mendip,  be- 
tween Wells  and  Frome.  His  memory  has  been 
locally  revived  in  the  present  century  by  the  dis- 
covery of  a  small  Saxon  church  in  Bradford-on- 
Avon,  which  has  been  identified  by  competent 
judges  with  the  ecchsiola  which  William  of 
Malmesbury  says  that  Aldhelm  built  in  that 
place.  To  him  was  probably  due  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  British  monastery  at  Glastonbury  and 
its  endowment  by  king  Ina. 

That  spot  was  dear  to  the  British  patriot  as 
the  mysterious  sojourn  of  their  hero,  who  in 
due  time  was  to  return  and  revive  the  ancient 
glory  of  the  British  name.  The  extant  books 
in  which  this  legend  is  recorded  are  later  than 
the  time  of  Alfred,  but  the  romance  itself  is 
of  the  sixth  century.  Our  oldest  English  form 
of  it  is  of  about  a.d.  1200. 


yilfred  In  Somerset 


III 


THE  PASSING  OF  ARTHUR 
(From  La^amon's  Brut^  line  x8,^8a.) 


Arthur  wes  forwunded 
wunderliche  swithe. 
Ther  to  him  com  a  cnaue, 
the  wes  of  his  cunne  ; 
he  wes  Cadores  sune, 
the  eorles  of  Cornwaile. 
Constantin  hehte  the  cnaue  • 
he  wes  than  kinge  deore. 
Arthur  him  lokede  on, 
ther  he  lai  on  folden, 
and  thas  word  scide, 
mid  sorhfulle  heorte  : 
Constantin  thu  art  wilcume, 
thu  weore  Cadores  sune; 
ich  the  bitache  here, 
mine  kineriche : 
*         *         * 


Arthur  was  wounded 
very  dangerously. 
There  to  him  came  a  youth 
who  was  of  his  kin ; 
he  was  son  of  Cador, 
the  earl  of  Cornwall. 
Constantine  hight  the  youth  ^ 
to  the  king  he  was  dear. 
Arthur  looked  upon  him, 
where  he  lay  on  the  ground, 
and  these  words  said, 
with  sorrowful  heart : 
Constantine  thou  art  welcome, 
thou  wert  Cador's  son  ; 
I  here  commit  to  thee, 
my  kingdom  : 
*         ^         * 


And  ichwulleuarento Aualun,      And  I  will  fare  to  Avalon, 
to  uairest  aire  maidene  j  to  the  fairest  of  all  maidens ; 

to  Argante  there  quene,  to  Argante  the  queen, 


IXX 


The  Alfred  Jewel 


aluen  swithe  sccone  : 
and  heo  seal  mine  wunden 
makien  alle  isunde  j 
al  hal  me  makien, 
mid  haleweije  drenchen. 
And  seothe  ich  cumen  wuUe 
to  mine  kineriche  : 
and  wunien  mid  Brutten, 
mid  muchelere  wunne. 
^fne  than  worden, 
ther  com  of"  se  wenden, 
that  wes  an  sceort  bat  lithen, 
sceouen  mid  vthen  : 
and  twa  wimmen  therinne, 
wunderliche  idihte  : 
and  heo  nomen  Arthur  anan, 
and  aneouste  hine  uereden, 
and  softe  hine  adun  leiden, 
and  forth  gunnen  hine  lithen. 

Tha  wes  hit  iwurthen, 
that  Merlin  seide  whilen  : 
that  weore  unimete  care, 


elf  exceeding  sheen  • 
and  she  shall  my  wounds 
make  all  sound ; 
all  whole  me  make, 
with  healing  drinks. 
And  sith  return  I  will 
to  my  kingdom : 
and  dwell  with  Britons, 
with  much  delight. 

Even  with  these  words, 
lo  came  from  sea  wending, 
that  was  a  short  boat  sailing, 
driving  with  the  waves  : 
and  two  women  therein, 
of  wondrous  aspect : 
and  they  took  Arthur  anon, 
and  straight  him  bore  away, 
and  softly  down  him  laid, 
and  forth  with  him  to  sea 
they  gan  to  move  away. 

Then  was  it  come  to  pass, 
what  Merlin  said  whilome  : 
that   there   should   be    much 
curious  care 


Alfred  in  Somerset  ixg 

of  Arthures  forth  fare.  when  Arthur  out  of  life  should 

fare. 
Bruttes  ileueth  3ete,  Britons  believe  yet, 

that  he  beo  on  liue,  that  he  be  alive, 

and  wunnie  in  Aualun,  and  dwelling  in  Avalon, 

mid  fairest  aire  aluen  :  with  the  fairest  of  all  elves  • 

and  lokietheuere  Bruttes  5ete,  still  look  the  Britons  for  the  day 

whan  Arthur  cume  lithen.  ofArthur's coming  o'er  the  sea. 

All  this  history  was  known  to  Alfred  and 
went  to  swell  the  stream  of  his  meditations, 
which  tended  to  assure  him  that  he  had  a  fresh 
and  promising  field  before  him,  and  to  mature 
in  him  the  purpose  of  exerting  himself  to  win 
the  hearty  attachment  of  this  well-affected  but 
still  half  alien  population. 

■5f  *  * 

Between  Twelfth  Day  and  Easter  Day  of  the 
year  878  there  were  barely  eleven  weeks,  for 
Easter  fell  early  that  year,  namely  on  March  2  3 . 
Of  Alfred's  doings  in  that  interval  we  have  no 
information,  except  in  so  far  as  it  seems  to  be 
indicated  that  the  affair  of  Cynwit  was  not 
conducted  without  his  intervention.  And  we 
may  add    the    traditional  story  of  the   cakes, 


ii-|w  The  Alfred  Jewel 

a  story  which  probably  dates  from  Alfred's 
day,  as  we  have  reasonably  good  evidence  that 
it  was  current  in  the  tenth  century.  Nor  may 
we  omit  his  espial  of  the  Danish  camp  in 
minstrel  guise,  a  legend  which,  though  not 
found  in  early  authorities,  yet  does  claim  some 
credit  from  the  book  in  which  it  is  narrated, 
namely  the  Booh^  of  Hyde — a  book  in  which 
we  might  expect  to  find  some  early  tradi- 
tions of  New  Minster,  one  of  king  Alfred's 
foundations. 

But  while  we  desire  to  make  the  most  of  these 
items,  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  constitute 
an  inadequate  furniture  for  eleven  weeks  of 
Alfred's  time  in  the  most  intense  crisis  of  his 
life.  At  any  other  point  in  Alfred's  career,  the 
silence  of  so  many  weeks  might  not  provoke 
remark,  but  at  this  moment  it  makes  a  sensible 
void.  If,  however,  we  rightly  apprehend  the 
situation  of  the  fugitive  king,  his  hopes  and 
his  fears,  his  aims  and  his  resources,  we  may 
(in  the  light  of  the  great  result)  indulge  a  sober 
imagination  without  fear  of  considerable  error. 

Among  the  pieces  of  genuine  tradition  which 
seem  to  greet  the  explorer  in  Asser's  Life^  there 


Alfred  in  Soinerset  iiy 

is  perliaps  none  on  which  we  may  more  con- 
fidently lean  than  a  certain  fragment  in  the 
paragraph  beginning  '  Interea  tamen  rex  \' 

The  drift  of  this  context  is  that  with  all  his 
wars  and  frequent  interruptions,  Alfred  ruled 
his  kingdom^  and  'practised  every  branch  of 
the  craft  of  venery  j  directed  his  goldsmiths  and 
all  his  artificers  j  did  moreover  instruct  the 
falconers  and  hawk-catchers  and  dog-trainers  j 
and  by  his  own  novel  engineering  constructed 
buildings  beyond  all  former  wont,  statelier  and 
more  costly ;  had  Saxon  books  redd  to  him, 
and  commanded  others  to  learn  Saxon  poems  by 
heart,  &c.' 

In  this  passage  I  seem  to  recognize  a  true 
historic  notej  and  I  think  that  in  this  picture 
of  the  range  of  his  powers,  and  the  roll  of  his 
accomplishments,  his  vast  activity  and  versatility, 
we  have  some  genuine  reminiscences  of  the 
personality  of  Alfred.  In  the  emphasis  here 
laid  on  hunting,  we  may  recognize  the  king 
who,  some  years  later,  sent  a  present  of  wolf- 
hounds to  the  archbishop  of  Rheims,  and  such 

^  la  the   edition   by  F.   Wise  (1712.)  it  is  on  p.  48;   in 
Monmnenta  Wstcrica  Britannica^  p.  4.8^'. 


1x6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

dogs,  too,  that  their  quality  and  breed  was 
accentuated  by  the  receiver  in  his  grateful 
acknowledgement  ^  And  when  to  this  we  add 
that  he  could  make  and  sing  a  song,  could  tell 
a  good  tale,  could  make  choice  of  men  and 
win  their  confidence,  we  need  little  aid  from 
imagination  to  perceive  how  this  mysterious 
visitor  might  captivate  the  British  hearts  of 
all  Somerset  like  one  man,  and  perhaps  set 
them  wonderino"  whether  it  could  be  their  own 
ideal  king  Arthur  come  back  to  them  again. 

During  nearly  three  months  of  that  eventful 
year  his  aim  was  to  cultivate  closer  relations 
with  the  people  of  that  outlying  territory, 
desiring  that  they  might  become  attached  to 
him  with  sentiments  of  loyalty  and  friendship. 
To  devote  himself  to  this  undertaking  was  at 
once  his  duty,  his  interest,  and  his  delight. 
For  such  an  achievement  as  this  he  had  advan- 
tages both  natural  and  acquired.  Apart  from 
war,  there  is  nothing  like  hunting  for  making- 
comrades,  if  a  man  have  a  genial  soul  and  be 

1  This  letter  is  printed  in  the  edition  of  Asser  by  F.  Wise, 
p.  iT-i  ^  and  the  most  important  parts  are  given  in  English 
by  Mr.  Conybeare,  Alfred  in  the  Chroniclers^  p.  zi8. 


Alfred  m  Somerset  1x7 

himself  a  mighty  hunter.  Alfred  voas  a  mighty 
hunter  and  a  genial  soul,  and  close  at  hand 
there  was  one  of  the  finest  hunting-grounds  in 
the  world. 

Immediately  from  the  Pedridan  swamp  the 
ground  began  to  rise  to  north  and  north-west 
towards  a  run  of  hilly  and  woodland  country 
forty  miles  long,  and  from  ten  to  twenty  miles 
broad ;  a  country  which  remains  singular  to 
this  day  for  its  natural  breed  of  red  deer  and 
its  chase  of  the  great  game.  This  royal  sport 
survives  on  Exmoor  and  in  the  Quantocks,  and 
there  are  Minehead  people  who  can  tell  you 
that  they  have  seen  the  stag-hunt  scamper 
through  their  main  street  in  full  cry. 

At  the  entrance  of  this  country,  at  a  point 
which  is  conveniently  situated  for  unitmg 
activity  inland  with  a  constant  observation 
of  the  line  of  Pedrida,  is  a  village  which  is 
now  called  North  Newton,  with  which  Petherton 
Park  had  been  so  long  and  closely  linked  that  it 
went  by  the  popular  name  of  Newton  Park. 
I  am  led  by  a  number  of  small  indications  to 
infer  that  this  is  the  place  where  Alfred  had 
his  chief  residence  during  those  early  months  of 
the  year  878. 


1x8  The  u4lfrcd  Jewel 

When  Easter  came,  his  action   began   to   be 

overt  j  he  dropped  personal  disguise,  and  stood 

forth  as  TElfred  cyning.     'When  Easter  came, 

king  Alfred,  with    a    small   force,   constructed 

a  fort  at  Athelney,  and  out  of  that   fort  was 

warring  against  the  invading  host,  he  and  the 

men  of  Somerset,  that  portion  of  them  which  was 

nighest  \'     This  is  the  action  of  a  commander 

who  has  made  sure  of  his  following,  and  is  now 

beginning  his  operations  against  the  enemy.    He 

fortifies  himself  on  the  east  side  of  the  bridge, 

where  a  conical  hill  offers  an  opportune  position  j 

and  from  that  basis  he  opens  a  guerilla  warfare 

with  the  invaders.     He  does  not  show  his  hand : 

he   rather    wants    to    be    thought   weak.     This 

naturally  draws  away  from  head  quarters  more 

and  more  of  the  hostile  force,  who  think  that 

they   shall  presently  deal   a    last   blow  to   the 

Saxon   resistance.     And    so   with    a    petty    and 

apparently  futile  display  of  military  force,  he 

continues  to  amuse  and  distract  the  enemy  for 

the  next  six  weeks. 

^  And  |?£es  on  Eastron  worhtc  Alfred  cyning,  litle  werede, 
gewcorc  iet  Myd'mgz  eigge,  and  of  J^am  geweorce  was 
winnende  wi)?  jjonc  here,  and  Sumurssetna  se  dsel  se  ])xr  niehst 
WiES.      S:7X.  Chro7/.y  "K.  878. 


Alfred  in  Somerset  1x9 

The  impression  made  on  the  mind  of  the 
people  by  these  events  is  traceable  in  two 
names :  Athelney,  which  now  represents  ^thel- 
inga  Eig,  the  island  of  princes  \  and  Borough 
Bridge,  which  means  the  bridge  at  the  fortifica- 
tion. The  fort  which  Alfred  made  in  878  is 
well  preserved,  the  entrenchments  occupying 
the  summit  of  a  conical  hill  near  the  east  end 
of  the  bridge  which  spans  the  Parret,  after  its 
junction  with  the  Tone. 

How  the  king  had  employed  the  unrecorded 
months  is  manifest  in  the  result.  His  muster- 
roll  at  Brixton  Deveril,  in  the  words  of  a  con- 
temporary, is  brief  yet  eloquent :  *  Then  in  the 
seventh  week  after  Easter  he  rode  to  Ecgbrihtes 
Stan,  on  the  eastern  side  of  Selwood,  and  to 
meet  him  at  that  place  came  the  men  of  Somer- 
set, all  of  them,  and  the  Wiltshire  men,  and  of 
Hampshire  the  part  that  was  on  the  hither  side 
of  the  sea ;  iand  of  him  fain  they  were.'  This 
passage  of  the  Saxon  Chronicle  seems  to  render 
a  satisfactory  account  of  the  manner  in  which 
the  king  had  employed  his  time  from  Epiphany 
to  Easter  in  the  year  878. 

Absorbed  in  this  supreme  effort,  where  his  all 

K 


igo  The  Alfred  Jewel 

was  at  stake,  he  may  well  have  found  no  time 
for  recovering  his  buried  Jewel,  and  he  may 
never  have  revisited  the  spot  until  his  marks 
were  all  obliterated. 

From  the  land  beyond  Pedrida,  which  had 
hitherto  counted  to  the  crown  of  Wessex  only  as 
a  recent  territorial  acquisition,  now  started  up 
around  the  fugitive  king  an  army  of  devoted 
warriors,  who  resolutely  threw  their  weight 
into  the  scale,  and  rescued  the  dynasty  of  their 
conquerors. 

Such  was  the  nature  of  the  force  which  Alfred 
now  with  a  swelling  heart  perceived  to  be 
entirely  at  his  disposal,  and  he  buckled  to  the 
task  of  employing  them  to  the  best  advantage. 
From  the  entrenched  hill  by  Borough  Bridge 
he  prosecuted  the  war  against  the  Danes,  whose 
basis  was  at  Chippenham,  and  this  he  continued 
for  six  weeks.  This  he  could  do  with  a  small 
force,  as  he  had  great  advantages  of  position. 
Between  him  and  the  foe  lay  the  fenny  channel 
of  the  Brue,  which  he  and  his  people  were 
expert  in  crossing.  So  it  was  comparatively  easy 
for  him  to  harass  them  and  retire  to  his  fort. 

This  kind  of  warfare,  continued  for  six  weeks, 


Alfred  in  Somerset  131 

must  have  had  the  designed  effect  of  drawing 
off  from  the  strength  of  the  foe  in  Wiltshire, 
and  causing  them  to  concentrate  their  attention 
upon  this  feigned  line  of  attack.  For  all  this 
was  only  to  amuse  and  distract  the  enemy,  and 
so  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  a  very  different 
project,  which  the  king  was  preparing.  What 
was  passing  in  Alfred's  mind  may  (in  all  essen- 
tials) be  redd  in  Lord  Roberts's  narrative  of 
his  preparations  for  attacking  the  Afghans,  when 
they  were  entrenched  on  the  Peiwar  Kotal  in 
December,  1 8  7  8  ^  By  making  display  of  re- 
connoitring parties  and  other  preparations  as 
for  a  front  attack,  carrying  this  on  to  the 
extent  of  raising  batteries  and  mounting  guns, 
till  he  had  caused  the  enemy  to  make  counter 
dispositions  accordingly,  he  with  the  utmost 
secrecy  by  a  circuitous  night  march  made 
a  flank  attack,  taking  them  unprepared,  and 
promptly  dislodged  them  from  an  apparently 
impregnable  position.  So  Alfred,  while  waging 
the  six  weeks'  war,  had  his  trusty  messengers 
abroad  all  through  Wiltshire  and  Hampshire, 
preparing  for  the  tryst  at  Ecgbrihtes  Stan. 

1  Forty-cne  Tears  in  India^  chap.  xlvi. 
K  % 


15  X  The  Alfred  Jewel 

Well  may  we  exclaim  with  Sir  Walter  Besant 
— '  What  follows  is  like  a  dream  ! '  Yea,  verily, 
like  a  dream  in  its  sudden  transformation  of 
the  whole  face  and  prospect  of  things,  and 
equally  unaccountable  tooj  for  no  attempt  to 
explain  it  by  natural  causes  will  ever  match  the 
stupendous  result.  It  is  not  in  order  to  dispel 
an  illusion  that  we  seek  to  trace  the  plan  and 
the  process — the  illusion  cannot  be  dispelled. 
No,  rather  it  is  in  order  to  penetrate  further 
into  the  action  of  a  life  that  has  kindled  our 
admiration.  Of  that  life  we  have  a  mirror  in 
the  enthusiasm  with  which  his  presence  had 
fired  the  Welsh  of  Somerset  beyond  Pedrida. 
It  is  surely  no  mere  accident  that  in  the  memo- 
randum of  that  resolute  force  which  mustered 
for  his  restoration,  the  first  item  should  be — 

SUMORS^TE  ALLE. 


CHAPTER    IX 

NEWTON   PARK   AND   FAIRFIELD 

HOUSE 

From  the  date  of  its  discovery  in  1(^93  down 
to  the  present  time,  the  name  of '  Newton  Park ' 
has  been  associated  with  the  Alfred  Jewel 
as  designating  the  property  on  which  it  was 
found.  In  our  day,  however,  this  name  is  no 
longer  recognized  in  the  neighbourhood,  and 
indeed  it  is  apt  to  be  misleading.  For  this 
title  is  now  current  in  Somerset  in  another 
sense,  namely,  as  denoting  the  seat  of  Earl 
Temple  at  Newton  St.  Loe,  near  Bath.  Still 
the  honorific  appellation  of 'Newton  Park,'  for 
the  estate  on  which  the  Jewel  was  discovered, 
will  be  found  to  rest  upon  historic  antecedents, 
which  are  full  of  interest,  and  not  devoid  of 
suggestiveness  for  the  purpose  of  our  present 
investigation. 


134  The  Alfred  Jewel 

The  extant  mention  of  this  Newton  carries 
us  back  a  good  space  behind  the  Norman 
Conquest.  The  Will  of  iElfric,  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  who  died  in  1006,  affords  evidence 
that  he  was  a  landowner  in  Newton.  It  is 
not  generally  possible  to  identify  a  place  by  a 
name  which  became  so  common,  but  the  coupling 
of  it  in  Abp.  iElfric's  Will  with  the  name  of 
Fiddington,  removes  all  uncertainty.  The 
passage  in  the  Will  (which  is  cast  in  the  third 
person)  runs  thus :  'And  the  land  in  the  West 
Country  at  Fiddington  and  at  Newton  he  be- 
queathed to  his  sisters  and  their  children  ^' 

In  the  forest  laws,  which  grew  up  after  the 
Conquest,  we  find  that  the  custody  of  the  royal 
forest  of  North  Petherton  was  a  serjeanty,  which 
was  attached  to  the  Manor  of  Newton  and  caused 
it  to  be  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Newton 
Forester.  When  this  Manor  was  granted  by 
King  John  to  William  de  Wrotham,  it  was 
declared  that  he  held  it  by  the  service  of  being 

1  And  •Se  land  be  westan  at  Fittingtune  and  at  Niwantune 
he  becwse'S  hisswcostrum  and  heora  bearnum.  Kemble,  Codex 
Diplomat!cuSj  p.  yip;  Thorpe,  Dip  lorn  at  ar  mm  ^  p.  545)  i  Earle, 
Land  Charters ^  p.  123. 


Newton  Turk  and  Fairfield     135- 

the  king's  forester  in  the  counties  of  Somerset, 
Dorset,  Devon,  and  Cornwall.  As  he  does  not 
appear  to  have  exercised  his  office  beyond  the 
county  of  Somerset,  this  territorial  definition 
suggests  that  some  vague  prerogative  had 
attached  to  Newton  Manor  at  an  earlier  time. 

In  the  third  generation  from  the  above  grant 
this  Manor  passed  with  an  heiress  into  the  hands 
of  William  de  Placetis.  A  generation  later  it 
was  divided  between  three  co-heiresses,  Sabina, 
Evelina,  and  Emma.  Then  arose  a  question 
about  the  office  of  Forester,  and  it  was  found 
that  it  appertained  to  a  particular  messuage  and 
meadow,  and  that  these  were  included  within  the 
portion  of  Sabina,  so  she  was  declared  Forester  in 
fee  of  the  forests  of  Exmoor,  Neroche,  Selwood, 
and  Mendip,  likewise  custodian  of  the  warren 
of  Somerton ;  and  these  offices  she  discharged  by 
deputy.  In  her  time  (2d  Edw.  I)  occurred  the 
Perambulation  of  the  forests  of  the  county,  in 
pursuance  of  the  Charter  of  the  Forests  which 
had  been  granted  by  Henry  III.  The  forests 
were  to  be  reduced  to  their  ancient  and  lawful 
bounds,  according  to  their  limits  at  the  accession 
of  Henry  I.     The  annual  value  of  the  lands 


ig6  The  Alfred  Jewel 

then  disafforested  was  more  than  a  hundred  times 
as  great  as  that  of  the  legal  forest  of  North 
Petherton. 

In  the  time  of  Edward  III  the  Manor  of 
Newton  with  its  rights  and  appurtenances  be- 
longed to  Roger,  earl  of  Mortimer,  in  whose 
descendants  and  in  the  dukes  of  York  it  con- 
tinued to  the  time  of  Edward  IV,  when  it  came 
to  the  Crown,  and  then  the  Manor  was  quoted 
as  Newton  Regis.  During  this  period  the 
powers  of  Forester  were  delegated,  and  some 
interesting  names  occur  in  the  list  of  deputies : 

14  Ric.  II.  Richard  Biettle  and  GefFerey  Chaucer,  esqrs., 
by  the  appointment  of  the  earl  of  March. 

21  Ric.  II.  GefFerey  Chaucer,  by  Alienor,  countess  of 
March. 

4  Hen.  V.     Thomas  Chaucer,  by  Edward,  earl  of  March. 

8  Hen.  VI.     William  Wrothe  and  Thomas  Attemore. 

iz  Hen.  VI.     William  Wrothe. 

i<)  Hen.  VI.  Sir  William  Bonville  and  Richard  Luttrell, 
by  the  duke  of  York. 

14  Edw.  IV.     Sir  Giles  D'Aubeny,  for  life. 

23  Hen.  VII.     Robert  Wrothe,  for  thirty  years. 

Soon  after  the  expiration  of  which  term 
Sir  Thomas  Wrothe,  son  and  heir  of  the  last- 
named  Robert,  purchased  of  Edward  VI  the  fee 


Newton  Tark  and  Fairfield     137 

of  Petherton  Park  and  the  Manor  of  Newton 
Regis.  The  office  of  Forester  had  now  fallen 
into  decay  and  the  ancient  glory  had  departed, 
and  the  transfer  of  this  property  appears  to 
have  been  governed  by  the  ordinary  considera- 
tions. In  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth  the 
descendants  of  Sir  Thomas  pulled  down  the  park 
house,  and  carried  the  materials  to  a  lodge  called 
the  Broad  Lodge,  which  (said  CoUinson  in  1 7  9 1 ) 
'the  late  Sir  Thomas  Wrothe  improved  to  a 
handsome  dwelling.  The  whole  park  ^  is  now 
converted  into  farms.'  The  improvements  of 
Sir  Thomas  Wrothe,  here  mentioned,  have  a 
probable  connexion  with  our  subject. 

Such  is  the  remarkable  history  of  the  Manor 
which  has  been  at  different  times  known  as 
Newton  Forester,  Newton  Placey,  Newton  Regis, 
and  Newton  Wrothe  j  and  this  history  ministers 
occasion  for  a  surmise  that  the  distinction  which 
attended  this  Manor  may  have  had  its  roots  con- 
siderably further  back,  inasmuch  as  the  extant 
records  do  not  offer  an  adequate  account  of  that 

1  '  In  this  park  was  found  the  curious  amulet  of  king 
Alfred,  mentioned  in  vol.  i,  p.  87.'  CoUinson,  History  of 
Somerset y  vol.  iii,  p.  6x. 


158  The  Alfred  Jewel 

peculiar  prerogative  which  made  it  so  famous 
and  so  dignified. 

I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  beginnings  of 
this  place,  which  has  been  so  eminent,  and  which 
is  now  known  by  the  comparatively  obscure  name 
of  North  Newton,  may  have  been  connected 
with  the  retreat  of  the  king  to  Athelney,  that 
this  may  have  been  a  spot  of  his  own  selec- 
tion. It  is  reached  from  Athelney  by  simply 
following  the  rise  of  the  ground,  it  is  well 
placed  for  keeping  an  eye  on  the  Parret,  the 
side  from  which  a  surprize  was  most  to  be 
apprehended,  and  it  was  the  approach  to  the 
fine  hunting-fields  of  Quantock  and  Exmoor. 
What  more  natural  than  that  he  should 
take  a  liking  to  the  place  and  judge  it  con- 
venient for  a  hunting-lodge?  And  I  venture 
to  throw  out  a  surmise  for  consideration.  May 
it  not  be  that  the  prefix  '  New '  was  set  by  the 
king  himself,  who  gave  the  name  of  New 
Minster  to  his  foundation  at  Winchester  ^ } 


^  In  Kemble's  Codex  DiplomatkuSj  No.  310,  there  is  a  late 
and  meagre  abstract  of  a  grant  of  land  by  king  Alfred  '  in  loco 
qui  dicitur  Nor'Sniwtune.'  Kemble  puts  this  place  in  Wilt- 
shire, but  why  may  it  not  be  the  North  Newton  by  Athelney  ? 


Newton  Turk  and  Fairfield     139 

The  name  of  Newton  properly  belonged  only 
to  the  Manor,  but  as  the  lordship  of  this 
Manor  was  long  coupled  with  the  custody  of 
Petherton  Park,  and  as  the  two  were  habitually 
associated  in  men's  minds^  the  latter  came  to  be 
spoken  of  as  ^Newton  Park^'  and  this  title  is 
simply  a  colloquial  variation  and  equivalent  for 
Petherton  Park.  The  correct  name  of  Pether- 
ton Park  is  constantly  used  by  Leland  in  the 
extract  from  his  Itinerary  which  is  given  in  the 
previous  chapter.  So  that  when  the  Alfred  Jewel 
is  said  to  have  been  found  in  Newton  Park,  this 
is  only  a  popular  way  of  saying  that  it  was 
found  in  Petherton  Park.  The  discovery  oc- 
curred in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Wrothe,  who 
was  also  the  enlarger  of  the  mansion,  and  it  is 
a  probable  inference  that  it  was  found  in  the 
excavations  which  were  required  for  this  work  ^ 

The  scene  now  shifts  from  Newton  to 
the  neighbouring  parish  of  Stogursey  or,  as 
modern    research   has    taught   us    to   write   it, 

The  orthography  of  the  name  would  be  not  that  of  the  original 
grant,  but  of  the  abridger's  time.     Appendix  F. 

1  1   am  indebted   for  this  suggestion  to   Sir   Alexander 
Acland  Hood. 


I4-0  The  Alfred  Jewel 

Stoke  Courcy.  In  this  parish  is  Fairfield  House, 
a  handsome  Elizabethan  mansion  in  which  the 
Alfred  Jewel  was  preserved  for  a  quarter  of 
a  century,  from  the  time  of  its  discovery  in 
1^9  3,  until  it  was  given  to  the  University  of 
Oxford  in  1 7 1 8  \ 

About  the  time  of  Henry  II  the  lands  of 
'  Ferfelle '  were  severed  from  those  o^  Honibere, 
and  erected  into  a  separate  estate. 

By-and-by  the  name  slid  into  a  new  form^ 
conveying  a  new  idea.  The  new  name  into 
which  it  merged  is  one  that  has  been  freely 
propagated  both  at  home  and  in  the  colonies, 
with  pleasing  associations  of  soft  and  gently 
undulating  landscape  suggestive  of  homely 
scenery  and    a  sheltered   situation.     Very  dif- 

^  To  be  quite  exact,  its  lodging  for  the  first  five  years  is 
matter  of  inference  from  the  fact  that  in  16^98  it  is  described 
as  being  at  Fairfield,  without  any  indication  of  a  change  of 
ownership.  One  transfer  however  there  must  have  been. 
The  place  of  discovery  made  it  the  property  of  Sir  Thomas 
Wrothe;  and  as  Nathaniel  Palmer  was  his  mother's  brother,  it 
is  easy  to  understand  the  gift  of  the  nephew  to  his  uncle,  who 
may  have  been  a  man  of  antiquarian  tastes.  We  can  also 
understand  the  desire  of  Nathaniel  Palmer  that  this  precious 
relic  should  go  to  Oxford,  as  he,  with  many  others  of  his 
family,  had  been  educated  at  the  University,  of  which  Alfred 
was  the  reputed  founder.     Appendix  G. 


Newton  Tark  and  Fairfield     141 

ferent  is  the  connotation  of  the  name  in  its 
documentary  form.  In  '  Ferfelle '  we  can  see 
only  some  outlying  '  remoter  fell,'  such  as  would 
be  little  visited  save  for  uses  of  summer  pasture. 
In  CoUinson's  picture  of  the  mansion,  which  is 


FAIRFIELD    HOUSE, 


here  reproduced,  while  the  foreground  seems  to 
justify  the  modern  name,  the  hills  and  hanging- 
woods  at  the  back  of  the  house  seem  to  bear  out 
the  more  primitive  signification  of  an  outlying 
mountain  fell.     And  probably  this  was  also  the 


14^  The  Alfred  Jewel 

idea  which  originally  gave  name  to  the  well- 
known  mountain  in  Westmoreland  over  Gras- 
mere. 

After  a  succession  of  owners  of  various  names 
this  new  estate  came  (14  Edw.l)  into  the  possession 
of  William  de  Vernai,  who  had  married  the  sole 
daughter  and  heiress  of  the  previous  proprietor. 
For  nearly  three  hundred  years  there  was  always 
a  Vernai  at  Fairfield.  In  12  Edw.  IV  the 
Vernai  of  that  day  (the  fourth  of  the  name  of 
William)  had  a  licence  to  build  a  wall  and 
seven  round  towers  about  his  mansion-house 
at  Fairfield,  and  to  enclose  two  hundred  acres 
of  ground  for  a  park.  'The  tomb  in  the 
Vernais  isle  in  the  fine  old  Priory  church  of 
Stoke  Courcy,  with  an  image  of  an  armed  man 
lying  thereon,  belongs  to  this  William  Vernai ' 
(Collinson). 

Fairfield  had  come  into  the  family  of  Vernai 
by  an  heiress,  and  at  length  it  passed  in  the 
same  manner  to  the  family  of  Palmer.  Hugh 
de  Vernai  left  one  only  daughter,  and  she  was 
called  Elizabeth,  after  the  great  queen,  who  was 
her  godmother.  On  the  death  of  her  father  her 
wardship  was   granted   to   Sir  Thomas  Palmer, 


Newton  Tark  and  Fairfield    143 

of  Parham,  in  the  county  of  Sussex,  Knt. ;  to 
whose  only  son,  William,  she  was  afterwards 
married.  Soon  after  this  marriage,  Sir  Thomas 
Palmer  pulled  down  the  old  house,  and  began 
the  present  mansion,  which  was  completed  by 
his  grandson  (also  Sir  Thomas  Palmer,  Knt.), 
who  inherited  Fairfield  in  15-87.  This  pro- 
prietor was  not  a  keeper  at  home.  In  15-95-  he 
was  with  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  Sir  John 
Hawkins  in  the  expedition  to  Porto  Rico,  and 
afterwards  commanded  a  ship  at  the  taking  of 
Cadiz,  where  he  was  knighted.  He  was  one 
of  the  most  considerable  persons  in  the  Court 
of  Queen  Elizabeth;  but  on  the  accession  of 
King  James  he  resolved  to  spend  the  remainder 
of  his  days  beyond  the  seas,  and  accordingly,  in 
the  year  1(^05-,  he  went  with  the  earl  of  Not- 
tingham into  Spain,  where,  as  he  was  providing 
a  settlement  for  his  family  at  Valladolid,  he  died 
of  the  small-pox,  and  was  there  buried. 

William  Palmer,  his  son  and  heir,  was  a  man 
of  learning,  and  chose  to  live  in  London,  and 
he  was,  in  the  time  of  Charles  I,  fined  a  thousand 
pounds  by  the  Star  Chamber  for  disobedience 
to  the  king's  proclamation,  which  required  all 


144         ^^-^^  Alfred  Jewel 

persons  of  estate  to  reside  and  keep  hospitality 
at  their  country  houses. 

His  brother  Peregrine,  who  succeeded  him, 
went  as  a  volunteer  to  the  Palatinate  wars,  and 
was  afterwards  an  officer  in  the  Swedish  army. 
As  soon  as  the  royal  standard  was  set  up  he 
repaired  to  Nottingham,  and  faithfully  served 
King  Charles  in  the  commissions  of  major, 
lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  of  horse,  being 
present  at  the  battles  of  Edgehill,  Marston  Moor, 
Cropredy  Bridge,  and  Naseby.  He  died  in  1(584, 
having  married  Anne,  the  daughter  of  Nathaniel 
Stevens,  in  the  county  of  Gloucester,  Esq.,  and 
he  was  succeeded  in  the  estate  by  his  eldest 
surviving  son,  Nathaniel,  who  is  reported  m 
the  Philosophical  Transactions  as  the  possessor 
of  the  Alfred  Jewel  in  the  year  1(^98  ^  He 
served  in  several  parliaments  for  the  boroughs 
of  Minehead  and  Bridgwater,  and  for  the 
county  of  Somerset.  The  first  recorded  possessor 
of  the  Alfred  Jewel  died  in  17 17.  He  was 
succeeded  by  his  son  Thomas,  who  resided  at 
Fairfield,  where  he  lived  a  studious  life,  investi- 
gating   the    antiquities   of    his    country.     His 

^  Appendix  A. 


Newton  Turk  and  Fairfield  145- 

manuscript  is  preserved  at  Fairfield,  and  it  was 
a  valuable  source  of  information  to  Collinson, 
the  historian  of  Somerset.  It  is  from  this 
source  we  learn  that  the  Jewel  was  ^  dug  up,'  an 
expression  which  seems  to  justify  the  inference 
that  it  was  not  accidentally  lost,  but  purposely 
buried  \  It  was  he  who,  in  1 7 1 8,  gave  the  Alfred 
Jewel  to  the  University  of  Oxford. 

He  married  a  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Wrothe 
of  Petherton  Park,  who  died  in  1721,  leaving 
two  daughters  co-heiresses.  The  elder  of  these 
was  married  to  Sir  Hugh  Acland,  of  Columb- 
John  in  the  county  of  Devon,  Bart,  and  the 
younger  to  Mr.  Thomas  Palmer,  who  died  with- 
out issue.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  brother 
Peregrine,  who  represented  the  University  of 
Oxford  in  several  parliaments,  and  died  in 
17(^2,  the  last  survivor  of  his  name  and  family. 
He  left  his  estate  to  Arthur  Acland,  Esq.,  his 
next  of  kin,  from  whom  it  has  descended  to  Sir 
Alexander  Acland  Hood,  Baronet,  the  present 
owner  of  the  Fairfield  estate. 

^  Appendix  G. 


CHAPTER     X 

GOLD   RINGS   CONTEMPORANEOUS 

The  earliest  recorded  doubt  as  to  the  identity 
of  the  Alfred  of  the  Jewel  with  Alfred  of 
Wessex  was  grounded  upon  the  high  artistic 
quality  of  the  work  ^  It  may  therefore  be 
illustrative  if  we  advert  to  some  other  specimens 
of  English  jewellery  belonging  to  those  early 
times.  One  such  has  already  been  quoted  above 
(p.  d  8 ),  namely,  the  ^  enamelled  ouche '  of 
Mr.  Roach  Smith,  which  is  now  in  the  British 
Museum.  This  is  a  piece  of  great  beauty  and 
high  technical  skill  ^  and  it  has  every  appear- 
ance of  belonging  to  these  times,  but  there  is 
nothing  to  fix  its  date  more  definitely.  Happily, 
there  are  specimens  of  English  jewellery  of  the 
ninth  century  which   exclude  this  doubt.     We 

*  See  above,  p.  7. 


Gold  Rings  contemporaneous  147 

have  no  less  than  three  inscribed  gold  rings 
which  certainly  belonged  to  eminent  contem- 
poraries of  Alfred,  and  two  of  them  to  members 
of  his  family  circle  j  insomuch  that  we  may  say, 
with  some  confidence,  that  these  two  must  have 
been  familiar  objects  to  his  eye. 

The  Ring  of  Alhstan,  who  was  Bishop 
OF  Sherborne  from  824  to  8(^7. 

In  chronological  order  the  first  of  these  three 
rings  is  one  that  bears  the  name  of  Alhstan. 
It  was  found  in  the  year  17^3  at  Llysfaen,  in 
the  county  of  Carnarvon.  It  was  figured  and 
described  in  the  Ardmologta^  iv.  47,  by  Mr.  Pegge, 
whose  letter  is  dated  July  d,  1771.  He  identified 
the  name  with  Ealhstan  or  Ealchstan,  the  warlike 
bishop  of  Sherborne.  It  may  seem  strange  that 
the  bishop  of  Sherborne's  ring  should  be  found 
in  Carnarvonshire;  but  the  Saxon  Chronicle 
suggests  a  simple  and  natural  explanation.  In 
the  year  85-3  iEthelwulf,  king  of  Wessex,  was 
petitioned  by  the  king  and  Witan  of  Mercia  to 
aid  them  in  the  subjugation  of  the  Welsh,  who 
were   in   rebellion.      Consequently,   iEthelwulf 


148  The  Alfred  Jewel 

marched  with  an  army  into  Wales,  and  restored 
the  imperial  authority  of  Mercia. 

This  operation  (which  was  part  of  the  defence 
of  the  country  against  the  Danes,  whom  the 
Welsh  of  Cambria  were  prone  to  support)  would 
naturally  have  been  conducted  with  the  advice 
and  under  the  management  of  Alhstan  \  The 
name  Llysfaen  ('Stone  Court')  fitly  describes  the 
rocky  enclosure  in  which  the  ring  was  found, 
and  in  which  we  may  suppose  that  the  final 
negotiations  were  conducted.  Preoccupation  of 
mind  in  momentous  business  makes  it  easy  to 
imagine  how  the  old  war-chief  of  ^thelwulf 
might  have  lost  his  ring.  Among  the  selfsame 
rocks  of  Llysfaen,  and  near  the  spot  where  the 
Alhstan  ring  was  discovered,  another  ring  was 
shortly  afterwards  found,  containing  a  greater 
weight  of  gold,  but  of  comparatively  rude  work- 
manship, and  not  inscribed. 

The  Alhstan  ring  now  belongs  to  the  Waterton 
Collection,    which    is   preserved    in    the   South 

^  Alhstan  had  accompanied  Ecgberht  on  his  famous  ex- 
pedition into  Cornwall  in  825,  and  we  find  him  with  the 
forces  of  Somerset  and  Dorset  in  84.5'  to  oppose  the  Danes  at 
the  mouth  of  Pedrida.  Sec  Mr.  Plummer's  note  to  Sax. 
^hron.j  'K.  8x5. 


Gold  Rings  contemporaneous   149 

Kensington  Museum.  It  is  of  that  type  (not 
uncommon  in  Roman  rings)  which  suggests 
derival  from  a  string  of  beads.  The  lettering 
occupies  four  circular  compartments,  which 
alternating  with  four  lozenge-shaped  compart- 
ments, constitute  the  hoop  of  the  ring.  Pegge 
saw  the  dragon  of  Wessex  in  the  grotesque 
animals  which  occupy  the  lozenge-shaped  com- 
partments. The  characters  are  beautiful  Roman 
capitals  of  Anglo-Saxon  type,  except  the  N, 
which  is  represented  by  the  Rune  t .  Besides  the 
Arch(2ologia^  the  ring  is  figured  in  Art  Treasures 
of  the  ^United  Kjngdorriy  a  monumental  book  which 
was  published  in  connexion  with  the  Manchester 
Exhibition  of  1 8  f  7. 

Inscribed  Gold  Ring  of  iExHELWULF, 
King  of  Wessex  (%7,6-%^y). 


3.»OCOC»X»30000&OOOQOOOQOOQJOCX30CXXO 

>{<  EXEELVVLF    ^ 

The  second  of  the  three  rings  is  inscribed  m 
the  above  form  with  the  name  of  Alfred's  father, 


15*0  The  Alfred  Jewel 

king  EthelwLilf,  for  whom  it  was  evidently 
made.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  bishop^s  mitre, 
with  only  one  peak. 

In  178 1,  March  22,  Lord  Radnor  brought 
this  find  before  the  Society  of  Antiquaries.  It 
had  been  found  in  the  summer  of  1 7  8  o  in  a  field 
in  the  parish  of  Laverstoke,  near  Salisbury. 
According  to  the  finder's  story,  it  was  brought 


to  the  surface  by  the  pressure  of  a  cart-wheel, 
and  it  lay  exposed  on  the  edge  of  the  rut. 
Mr.  Howell,  a  silversmith  in  Salisbury,  gave  the 
man  thirty-four  shillings  for  the  value  of  the 
gold,  and  Lord  Radnor  bought  it  of  Mr.  Howell. 
It  still  shows  the  effect  of  hard  pressure,  being 
almost  flattened.  It  was  figured  in  the  Archceologia^ 
vii.  421,  and  repeatedly  since.  It  is  preserved 
in  the  British  Museum. 


Gold  Rings  contemporaneous   15-1 

A    Gold    Ring    upon    which    the    Name    of 

^THELSWITH,    QuEEN   OF    MERCIA,    HAS    BEEN 
INCISED. 


In  the  two  rings  already  described,  the  names 
of  Alhstan  and  iEthelwulJf  belong  to  the  fabric 
of  the  rings,  as  the  name  of  iElfred  belongs  to 
the  fabric  of  the  Jewel.  But  it  is  different  in 
the  ring  of  queen  ^thelswith. 

This  ring  swells  out  into  a  dilated  bezil,  on 
the  cop  of  which  is  an  Jgnus  Dei,  beautifully 
engraved  in  relief,  with  a  background  of  niello. 
The  interior  of  this  bezil  (which  would  be  in 
contact  with  the  wearer's  finger)  was  a  fair  gold 
surface  when  the  ring  was  finished  and  put  out  of 
hand  by  the  goldsmith.  Subsequently,  the  name 
of  ^thelswith  has  been  incised  upon  that  surface 
with  the  fine  point  of  a  graving  tool,  somewhat 
in  this  form :  >J<  EADELXVI©  REGNJA,  where 
the  N  is  a  monogram  for  IN,  so  that  the  in- 
scription reads  >J<  ^thelswith  Regina. 

The  incision  is  so  slight  and  so  fresh  that  it 


ifz  The  Alfred  Jewel 

is  manifest  the  ring  had  no  considerable  wear 
after  it  was  done  \ 


IM 


mEM 


iEthelswith  was  the  daughter  of  ^thelwulf 
and  sister  of  Alfred,  and  consort  of  Burgred, 
king  of  Mercia,  who  was  driven  out  by  the  Danes 
in  874,  and  retired  to  Rome,  where  he  died. 
iEthelswith  died  in  8  8  8  at  Pavia,  apparently  on 
pilgrimage.  The  annal  recording  it  runs  thus  : 
'8  88.  This  year  the  alms  of  the  West  Saxons 
and  of  king  Alfred  were  conducted  to  Rome 
by  "Beocca  ealdorman."  And  queen  iEthelswith, 
who  was  king  Alfred's  sister,  died,  and  was 
buried  at  Pavia  2.' 

1  But  the  edges  of  the  ring  show  (as  Franks  pointed  out) 
traces  of  long  wear.  He  goes  on  to  say  :  '  The  engraving, 
moreover,  scarcely  looks  like  the  work  of  a  goldsmith.  I  would 
therefore  suggest,  that  the  Queen  had  probably  offered  this 
ring  at  some  shrine,  and  the  priests  connected  with  the  shrine 
had  engraved  her  name  within  the  ring,  to  record  the  royal 
giver.'     Troc.  Soc.  A7ittq.^  and  Series,  vol.  vi,  p.  307. 

2  888.  Her  Isedde  Beocca  ealdorman  West  Sea  na  aelmessan 
and  iElfredes  cyninges  to  Rome.  3  iEj^elswij?  cuen,  sio  waes 
iElfredes  sweostor  cyninges,  for|?ferde,  •]  hire  lie  li]?  «t  Pafian. 


Gold  Rings  contemporaneous   15-3 

This  fine  nielloed  ring  was  found  near  Aber- 
ford  in  Yorkshire,  in  or  about  the  year  1870. 
It  was  first  observed  by  a  ploughman  at  the  point 
of  his  ploughshare.  He  brought  it  to  his  master, 
who,  thinking  it  brass,  attached  it  to  his  dog's 
collar,  where  it  hung  until  some  one  assured  him 
it  was  gold,  whereupon  he  carried  it  to  a  silver- 
smith at  York,  and  exchanged  it  for  spoons. 
From  this  dealer  it  was  purchased  by  Canon 
Green  well  of  Durham,  from  whom  it  passed  into 
the  possession  of  Sir  Wollaston  Franks,  and  ulti- 
mately by  his  bequest  came  to  the  British 
Museum. 


When  we  consider  how  very  small  is  the  whole 
number  of  extant  gold  rings  (whether  inscribed 
or  not)  that  date  from  the  Saxon  period,  it  must 
strike  us  as  a  very  remarkable  circumstance  that 
we  are  able  to  produce  three  such  examples,  all 
within  the  period  of  Alfred's  life,  and  two  of 


i5'4  The  Alfred  Jewel 

them  belonging  to  such  near  relations  that  we 
may  naturally  suppose  they  were  familiar  objects 
to  his  eye. 

And  there  is  a  fourth  ring,  of  which  we  cannot 
assert  that  it  belongs  to  this  very  select  group, 
but  which  certainly  must  be  assigned  to  the 
same  general  period,  and  claims  association  with 
the  three.  It  is  a  simple  hoop  of  gold,  a  good 
quarter  of  an  inch  wide,  having  its  outer  surface 
covered  with  the  following  engraved  inscription 
nielloed  ^ : 


^)^F:1yI^EI)mECPCH;E7^.^IED9REC:f^;>lMa 


>i<  I^SREDCOELSHES+REDCDELI^'XROK 

^^RED  MEC  AH  Eanred  mec  agrof  :    that  is, 
JESred  me  orons^  Eanred  me  engraved. 

Hickes  described   this  ring  in  his  'Thesaurus 
(Preface,  pp.  viij  and  xiij)  with  a  good  figure : 

^  Professor  Stephens  of  Copenhagen,  Rumc  MonumetitSy 
Part  II,  p.  ^d^,  dated  it  'about  a.d.  700-800':  but  in  this 
estimate  he  has  been  guided  (I  think)  not  by  anything  in  the 
artistic  design  or  execution,  but  simply  by  the  large  proportion 
of  Runes  in  the  mixed  lettering,  a  criterion  of  very  doubtful 
value. 


Gold  Rings  contemporaneous    iss 

but  in  the  interpretation  he  redd  the  last  word 
as  AGROFT,  taking  an  idle  mark  like  an  inverted 
T  as  part  of  the  word  j  whereas  it  is  there  only 
to  fill  out  the  space.  In  the  lettering  there  are 
five  Runes :  namely,  the  M  in  ^'Sred,  the  N  in 
Eanred,  and  the  A,  G,  and  F  in  agrof.  This 
is  the  ring  which  was  alluded  to  above  (p.  1 7), 
in  comiexion  with  the  archaic  pronoun  mec, 
which  occurs  twice  on  it. 

In  i70f,  when  this  ring  was  described  by 
Hickes,  it  was  in  the  possession  of  Dr.  Hans 
Sloane:  it  is  now  in  the  British  Museum. 

The  forms  '  ^thred  ^  and  '  i^thered '  are  col- 
loquial abbreviations  of  ^  ^thelred,'  which  was 
the  name  of  that  one  among  the  brothers  of 
Alfred,  with  whom  his  relations  were  closest.  But 
the  frequency  of  the  name  forbids  us  to  assert 
that  this  ring  was  made  for  king  iEthelred.  The 
names  '^thelwulf '  and  'iEthelswith'  are  in  them- 
selves exceptional,  and  when  combined  with  the 
royal  title  are  absolutely  identifying:  the  name 
'Alhstan,'  combined  with  the  peculiar  aspect  of 
the  ring  and  the  circumstances  of  its  discovery, 
not  much  less  so  j  but  the  name  '^thred,'  though 
forcibly  aided  by  the  noble  aspect  of  the  ring. 


is6  The  Alfred  Jeii/el 

only  enables  us  to  assert  a  degree  of  probability 
which  every  one  must  determine  for  himself. 

Everything  in  the  appearance  of  these  rings 
declares  them  to  be  the  work  of  Saxon  artists, 
and  on  the  iE^RED  ring  the  artist  bears  a  good 
Saxon  name.  Such  specimens  must  finally  dissipate 
any  lingering  relics  of  the  old  prejudice,  that 
the  work  of  the  Alfred  Jewel  is  too  good  to 
have  been  produced  in  the  England  of  the 
ninth  century.  We  may  rest  assured  that  the 
excellence  of  the  workmanship  carries  with  it 
no  presumption  against  its  being  English  work 
of  the  time  of  king  Alfred. 


CHAPTER   XI 

SOME  CLOSING  REFLECTIONS 

Among  the  various  criticisms  which  have 
been  elicited  by  the  Alfred  Jewel  during  the 
two  hundred  and  seven  years  which  have  elapsed 
since  its  discovery  in  the  year  1^93,  the  opinion 
that  the  name  it  bears  is  that  of  the  king  has 
not  met  with  more  than  one  definite  and  for- 
mulated objection.  This  objection,  if  it  had 
prevailed,  would  have  excluded  the  production 
of  such  a  work  in  king  Alfred's  time,  as  a  thing 
impossible.  But  the  question  thus  raised  has 
evoked  evidence  of  so  overpowering  a  nature 
as  not  only  to  neutralize  the  objection,  but  also 
to  increase  the  balance  of  probability  in  favour 
of  the  opinion  that  the  person  named  on  the 
Jewel  is  Alfred  of  Wessex. 

The  name,  combined  with  the  costliness  and 


15-8  The  Alfred  Jewel 

the  strongly  marked  individuality  of  the  work, 
draws  the  mind  naturally  to  think  of  the  most 
remarkable  person  who  bore  that  name ;  but, 
in  addition,  we  have  to  consider  that  it  was 
found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  very  spot 
which  is  most  closely  associated  with  the  career 
of  the  selfsame  person.  In  these  obvious  prima 
facie  elements  of  the  case,  there  is  an  accumula- 
tion of  probability,  which  fully  justified  Hickes 
in  saying  that  from  his  first  sight  of  the  Jewel  he 
had  never  doubted  its  having  been  a  personal 
possession  of  king  Alfred's  \ 

To  this  central  and  primary  body  of  evidence 
other  instances  of  probability  have  been  added 
in  the  course  of  the  present  Essay.  The  investi- 
gation of  the  Epigraph  led  us  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  diction  answered  well  to  the  time  of 
king  Alfred's  life,  and  also  that  it  bore  some 
resemblance  to  an  analogous  piece  of  his  admitted 
writing. 

Our  examination  of  theories  concerning  the 
design  and  use  of  the  Jewel  resulted  in  the  con- 
clusion that  the  suggestions  hitherto  advanced 
were  inadmissible,  and  of  no  other  value  than 

^  See  above,  p.  8. 


Some   Closing   Reflections      i5'9 

as  narrowing  the  field  of  conjecture.  We  at 
least  know  a  number  of  things  that  have  appeared 
plausible  in  their  time,  and  are  now  no  more  to 
be  thought  of  j  namely,  an  amulet,  a  pendant  to 
a  collar  of  state,  a  decorated  umbilicus,  the 
head  of  a  stilus,  a  military  standard,  the  handle 
of  a  book-pointer,  the  tip  of  a  sceptre. 

Our  review  of  the  abortiveness  of  early 
speculations  concerning  the  design  and  use  of 
the  Jewel  drove  us  by  a  process  of  elimination 
to  seek  a  place  for  it  in  the  helmet.  In  favour 
of  this  new  theory  historical  evidence  has  been 
adduced,  such  as  has  not  been  offered  in  support 
of  any  other  explanation.  Unless  this  theory  is 
approved,  both  the  Alfred  Jewel  and  the  minor 
jewel  from  Minster  Lovel  remain  without  ex- 
planation. There  is  not  so  much  as  a  theory 
in  the  field.  On  the  other  hand,  if  this  xiqw 
theory  is  judged  to  be  right,  or  to  have  high 
probability,  then  this  circumstance  makes  strongly 
in  favour  of  the  identification  of  the  Jewel  with 
king  Alfred.  For  it  points  to  a  warrior,  a  helmet- 
wearer,  and  to  a  person  of  commanding  position. 

One  of  the  effects  of  the  present  investigation 
upon  myself  has  been  to  convince  me  (in  the 


i6o  The  Alfred  Jewel 

face  of  what  I  counted  a  settled  opinion)  that  the 
enamelled  Figure  is  a  product  of  these  islands ; 
and  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  look  abroad 
towards  Byzantium,  or  further  east,  for  a  satis- 
factory account  of  it.  This  unity  again  is  in 
favour  of  identification  with  Alfred  of  Wessex, 
whose  conspicuous  interest  in  jewellers'  work  is 
asserted  by  a  well-sustained  tradition. 

The  symbolism  of  the  Jewel  appears  to  con- 
tain an  allegorical  representation  of  the  de- 
signer's position,  both  inherited  and  chosen,  both 
national  and  personal.  His  religious  standing 
is  pictured  in  the  Figure  and  its  back-plate; 
and  the  ancient  religion  of  his  nation  in  the 
boar's  head,  once  dominant,  now  under  foot, 
forming  a  pedestal  for  the  Head  of  the  Church. 
And  to  this  I  will  add  the  surmise,  that  perhaps 
the  scales  or  waves  on  the  small  triangular  space 
in  the  reverse  signify  that  his  country  is  an 
island  in  the  ocean. 

I  am  not  without  apprehension  that  these 
explanations  may  strike  some  readers  as  too 
minute  and  too  far-fetched,  and  that  I  may  be 
charged  with  bringing  out  of  the  Jewel  more 


Some  Closing  Reflections       i6\ 

than  is  in  it.  I  will  therefore  endeavour  to 
anticipate  this  charge  with  a  few  apologetic 
words.  And  first  of  all,  I  think  it  well  to  state 
that  I  did  not  set  out  with  any  idea  of  dis- 
covering latent  meanings  in  the  Jewel.  When 
first  I  discoursed  upon  it,  I  contented  myself 
with  exhibiting  drawings  of  the  object,  narrating 
the  story  of  the  discovery,  explaining  the  in- 
scription, and  rehearsing  the  opinions  which  had 
been  put  forward  concerning  such  a  remark- 
able find.  This  furnished  material  to  fill  an 
hour,  and  to  satisfy  an  audience.  Whatever 
I  have  added  to  the  traditional  exegesis  has 
broken  in  upon  me  from  time  to  time  at  wide 
intervals,  causing  me  on  such  occasions  more 
surprize  and  pleasure  than  I  can  hope  to  impart 
to  my  readers. 

For  those  who  would  test  the  symbolism  of  the 
Jewel,  there  is  an  obvious  preliminary  question. 
Is  there  any  reason  to  think  that  Alfred  had 
an  aptitude  and  a  fondness  for  allegory?  This 
question  has  been  to  me  a  valuable  guide  in 
observations  en  the  extant  writings  of  the  king. 
It  would  be  easy  to  show,  by  examples  drawn 
from  his  writings,  that  he  had  a  marked  fondness 


M 


i6x  The  Alfred  Jewel 

for  imagery  and  parable,  that  his  habit  of  mind 
inclined  to  all  figures  of  analogy  and  similitude. 
It  was  not  a  previous  knowledge  of  these  in  the 
writings  that  led  me  to  look  for  them  in  the 
Jewel,  but  reversely.  I  am  not  aware  that  any 
one  had  called  attention  to  this  characteristic 
in  the  writings :  I  do  not  think  I  apprehended 
it  from  any  other  source  than  the  Jewel  itself. 
In  regard  to  this  particular  feature,  the  Jewel 
has  (for  me)  thrown  light  on  the  writings,  and 
these  again  have  reflected  illustration  back  upon 
the  Jewel.  I  hope  this  explanation  may  make 
it  easier  for  some  to  think  that  the  imagery  of 
the  Jewel  is  a  strong  indication  that  Alfred  of 
Wessex  was  the  designer. 

It  was  with  this  aim  that, in  chapter  vii,I  quoted 
the  poetical  Epilogue  to  Alfred's  Pastoralis^  and 
with  the  same  aim  I  now  proceed  to  quote  a  long- 
drawn  simile  in  prose,  which  the  king  inserted 
into  his  translation  of  Boethius'  De  Consolatione 
Philosophies.  It  is  in  the  fourth  book,  where  the 
discussion  is  about  Providence  and  Fate  ^ 

^  The  Anglo-Saxon  text  may  be  found  in  Cardale's  edition 
(18x51),  P'  33^j  "^"^^  ^^  ^^^  recent  edition  by  Mr.  Sedgeficld, 
p.  lie,. 


Some  Closing  Reflections      16 1 

In  the  abstract  and  implicit  manner  natural 
to  the  sage  of  a  mature  and  over-blown  culture, 
Boethius  had  illustrated  the  relation  between 
Providence  and  Fate  by  the  relation  between 
the  centre  of  the  circle  and  its  circumference. 
This  analogy  is  stated  in  mathematical  fashion. 
A  series  of  concentric  circles  offer  points  of 
external  contact  more  numerous  in  some  and 
less  numerous  in  others,  according  as  their  cir- 
cumference is  nearer  or  fiirther  from  the  common 
centre,  but  the  centre  itself  is  unaffected  by  such 
chances  j  it  remains  always  the  same,  one  and 
indivisible.  The  stable  centre  is  Divine  Provi- 
dence ;  by  the  various  contact  of  the  circum- 
ferences with  external  things  is  represented  the 
vicissitude  of  Fate  or  Fortune. 

This  refined  similitude  was  translated  by  king 
Alfred,  out  of  the  diamond-cut  succinct  Latin 
of  Boethius,  into  the  homely  speech  of  his  own 
people,  by  means  of  a  concrete  figure  that  was 
familiar  to  every  son  of  the  soil. 

Accordingly  some  things  in  this  world  are  subject  to  Fate, 
some  are  no  whit  subject  thereto  :  but  Fate,  and  all  the  things 
subject  to  it,  are  in  subjection  to  Divine  Providence.  Con- 
cerning this  I  can  rehearse  unto  thee  a  similitude,  whereby  thou 
mayest  the  better  understand,  which  men  be  subject  to  Fate, 

M  z 


164  The  Alfred  Jewel 

and  which  be  not.  All  this  moving  and  revolving  creation 
revolves  upon  God,  who  is  immovable,  unchangeable,  and 
one :  and  he  wieldeth  all  creatures  just  as  he  at  the  first  had 
ordained,  and  still  doth  ordain. 

As  on  a  waeg-on's  axle  the  wheels  revolve  and  the  axle 
standeth  still  and  beareth  the  whole  waggon  and  governs  all 
the  motion  j  while  the  wheel  turns  about,  and  the  nave  next 
to  the  axle  moves  more  steadily  and  more  securely  than  the 
fellies  do  :  in  such  a  manner  that  the  axle  is  the  highest  good, 
which  we  call  God,  and  the  happiest  men  move  nighest  to 
God,  even  as  the  nave  moveth  nighest  to  the  axle,  and  the 
middling  sort  are  just  like  the  spokes ;  forasmuch  as  every 
spoke  hath  one  end  fast  in  the  nave  and  the  other  end  in  the 
felly.     So  it  is  with  men  of  the  middUng  sort ;  at  one  time 
he  thinks  in  his  mind  about  this  earthly  Hfe,  at  another  time 
about  the  heavenly;    like  a  man   looking  with  one  eye  to 
heaven  and  with  the  other  to  earth.     Just  as  the  spokes  have 
one  end  sticking  in  the  felly  and  the  other  in  the  nave,  while 
the  middle  of  the  spoke  is  equally  near  to  both,  even  so  are 
the  middling  men  in  the  middle  of  the  spoke,  and  the  better 
men  nearer  to  the  nave,  and  the  meaner  men  nearer  to  the 
fellies  :  they  are,  however,  in  connexion  with  the  nave,  and 
the  nave  with  the  axle.     So  now,  the  fellies  though  they  are 
attached  to  the  spokes,  yet  are  they  altogether  rolling  upon 
the  earth  ^  so  are  the  meanest  connected  with  the  middling 
and  the   middling   with  the    best  and   the    best   with    God. 
Though  the  meanest  men  all  direct  their  love  to  this  world, 
yet  can  they  not  rest  thereon,  nor  be  of  any  account,  unless 
they  be  in  some  measure  associated  with  God,  any  more 
than  the  wheel's  fellies  can  be  in  progress,  unless  they  be 
attached    to    the  spokes  and  the  spokes  to  the  axle.     The 


Some  Closing  Reflections      i<55' 

fellies  are  the  farthest  from  the  axle ;  therefore  they  move 
the  most  unevenly.  The  nave  moves  next  to  the  axle  ;  and 
that  is  why  it  has  the  surest  motion.  So  do  the  happiest 
men  :  as  they  set  their  love  nearer  to  God,  and  more  reso- 
lutely contemn  these  earthly  things,  so  are  they  more  free 
from  care,  and  less  they  reck  how  Fate  may  chance  to  turn, 
or  what  it  may  bring.  In  like  manner  the  nave  is  continually 
so  sure,  jolt  the  fellies  on  whatso  they  may  jolt;  and  this 
even  though  the  nave  is  somewhat  apart  from  the  axle.  By 
this  figure  thou  mayest  understand  that  as  the  waggon  is  much 
more  durably  sound,  the  less  it  is  parted  from  the  axle  ;  so 
are  those  men  the  freest  of  all  from  care  (whether  about 
anxieties  of  this  life  or  of  the  next)  who  are  fast  in  God  :  but 
in  whatever  degree  they  are  asunder  from  God,  in  the  same 
degree  are  they  worried  and  harassed,  both  in  mind  and  in  body. 

This  prose  simile  is  unquestioned  as  an 
original  piece  of  king  Alfred's  authorship,  and 
so  is  also  the  poetical  epilogue  to  his  Pastoralis^ 
which  was  quoted  above  in  the  seventh  chapter. 
Can  any  one  doubt  that  his  mind  was  exuber- 
antly fertile  in  allegorical  thought,  and  shall 
it  be  judged  a  thing  improbable  that  in  his 
imaginative  youth,  having  recently  passed 
through  a  very  grand  and  rude  transition  of 
experience,  he  should  have  strained  the  plas- 
ticity of  a  favourite  craft  to  body  forth  the 
symbolic  expression  of  thoughts  too  deep  for 
common  speech? 


i66  The  Alfred  Jewel 

As  the  course  of  investigation  into  the  variety 
and  unity  of  this  composite  Jewel  brings  it  more 
and  more  home  to  the  creative  mind  of  Alfred, 
the  conviction  rises  that  this  work  represents 
no  passing  freak  of  artistic  fancy,  nor  the  fond 
elaboration  of  some  fascinating  idea  (as  in  a 
sonnet)  j  but  rather  that  we  have  before  us  the 
thoughtful  record  of  a  period  of  life  and  a 
phase  of  some  duration,  containing  serious  re- 
flections by  one  who  had  reached  a  higher  stage 
of  observation,  a  stage  commanding  a  wider 
outlook.  Of  some  such  a  crisis  as  this  the 
Alfred  Jewel  appears  to  be  the  pictorial  and 
symbolic  monument. 

And  if  this  impression  is  sound,  it  ought  to 
help  us  to  some  further  conclusions.  We  ought 
with  this  help  to  be  able  to  form  some  estimate 
of  the  period  in  which  this  Jewel  was  designed. 
However  we  may  lament  the  poverty  of  detailed 
incident  in  the  life  of  Alfred,  we  are  not  ignorant 
of  its  main  divisions.  And  we  are  now  in  a 
position  to  ask — To  which  of  these  divisions 
does  this  carefully  elaborated  design  most 
naturally  belong? 

In  seeking  materials  for  the  answer  to  this 


Some  Closing  Reflections       167 

question,  I  will  first  consider  the  probabilities 
of  the  case,  which  are  suggested  by  the  course 
of  public  events :  and  then,  secondly,  I  will  come 
to  the  indications  which  are  personal  to  Alfred 
himself  This  plan  may  tend  to  clearness,  though 
it  be  not  feasible  to  keep  the  two  aspects  quite 
apart. 

For  a  basis  to  this  enquiry,  we  must  take  the 
year  878,  as  being  that  in  which  the  Jewel  dis- 
appeared. This  is  now  an  established  point  in 
our  argument.  To  this  we  were  led  both  by 
history  and  by  tradition :  and  it  is  only  by 
keeping  as  close  as  possible  to  these  that  we  can 
shun  the  proclivities  of  arbitrary  hypothesis. 

I.  Taking  then  the  year  878  as  that  in  which 
Alfred  saw  the  Jewel  for  the  last  time,  how  far 
back  must  we  recede  to  come  to  the  most 
probable  time  for  his  inventing  it?  Our  first 
step  must  be  to  skip  the  seven  years  since  his 
accession  in  871.  A  glimpse  at  the  events  of 
that  period  may  suffice  to  assure  us  that  the 
constant  pressure  of  sterner  duties  would  have 
left  him  in  no  mood  to  amuse  himself  with 
enamel  and  filigree.  And  even  if  for  the  sake 
of  winter   relaxation   he  had  done  so,  I  think 


1 68  The  Alfred  Jewel 

he  would  not  have  designated  himself  as  plain 
iElfred,  when  he  was  king.  During  his  reign 
his  constant  style  was  Alfred  cyning,  and  it 
would  have  been  quite  easy  to  have  added  the 
letter  R  to  his  name,  as  his  father  did  when  he 
ordered  the  fashion  of  his  ring.  For  these 
reasons  (among  others),  I  think  the  Jewel  was 
made  before  871. 

We  may  still  recede  another  long  step,  and 
say  that  the  date  we  seek  was  probably  before 
%66.  That  is  the  year  in  which  Alfred  began 
to  share  the  burden  of  reigning  without  the 
title,  the  year  in  which  the  common  danger 
entered  upon  a  new  and  more  menacing  phase, 
as  the  heathen  invasion  began  to  be  more 
systematically  conducted.  Wessex  was  not 
indeed  attacked  until  the  last  of  these  five  years, 
but  the  whole  period  must  have  been  passed  in 
apprehension  and  intense  preparation.  Accord- 
ingly, this  process  of  reasoning  back  from  the 
year  878  by  the  light  of  public  events  brings 
us  to  the  result  that  the  design  and  execution 
of  the  Jewel  is  probably  to  be  dated  before 
A.D.  86d,  that  is  to  say,  it  must  belong  to  the 
reign  of  king  iEthelberht. 


Soyne  Closing  Reflections      169 

2,  Coming  now  to  the  second  process,  we 
have  to  consider  at  what  time  it  appears  likely 
that  Alfred  might  have  been  in  the  mood  for 
such  a  work  as  this,  and  also  in  circumstances 
(as  to  his  immediate  surroundings)  favourable 
for  artistic  and  allegorical  meditation.  When 
dees  it  appear  likely  that  he  had  leisure  for 
thinking  out  these  details,  while  at  the  same 
time  his  mind  was  exercised  with  the  themes 
represented  in  the  Jewel?  It  was  certainly 
subsequent  to  his  return  from  Rome ;  not  imme- 
diately, but  after  an  interval,  when  the  first 
agitation  of  his  mind  had  subsided,  and  he  had 
become  reconciled  to  his  lot. 

For  we  cannot  doubt  that  when  he  returned 
from  Rome  to  England,  and  witnessed  the  state 
of  his  country — the  danger  and  the  depression — 
he  must  have  experienced  a  great  revulsion  of 
feeling,  a  strong  outburst  of  regret  for  the  long 
and  happy  time  that  he  had  been  enjoying 
abroad.  His  passionate  yearning  for  Rome  and 
his  friends  there  must  have  amounted  to  some- 
thing like  a  violent  fit  of  home-sickness.  All 
this  it  was  his  duty  to  live  down;  and  to  do 
so  he  had  to  look  the   facts  in  the   face,  and 


I70  77^6'  Alfred  Jewel 

take  their  measure  and  their  bearing,  and  ascer- 
tain their  relation  to  his  path  of  duty,  and 
interpret  his  position  by  the  light  of  a  religious 
conscience.  Some  earnest  and  ardent  minds 
would  find  solace  and  strength  in  writing  poetry, 
and  perhaps  Alfred  did  so.  If  this  Jewel  is  not 
the  equivalent  of  such  a  poem  it  is  nearly  akin 
to  it.  In  constructive  art  there  certainly  is  a 
solace  of  a  healing  kind,  and  the  Jewel  before 
us  answers  remarkably  to  the  situation.  It  is  in 
many  particulars  like  the  outcome  of  such  a 
mood.  And  if  such  a  mood  is  likely  to  have 
followed  the  return  of  the  young  prince  to 
England,  it  concerns  us  to  form  some  opinion 
about  the  probable  date  of  that  event. 

It  is  asserted  in  the  bilingual  Chronicle  (F) 
that  Alfred  returned  to  England  on  the  occasion 
of  his  father's  death,  which  took  place  in 
January,  85-8;  but  the  statement  is  discredited 
by  considerations  which  Mr.  Plummer  has  given 
in  his  notes  to  the  Saxon  Chronicle  (vol.  ii,  p.  8  o). 
Two  years  later,  in  8  do,  his  eldest  brother, 
iEthelbald,  king  of  Wessex,  died  \  and  this  event 
occasioned  a  definite  call  for  his  return.  The 
three  brothers,  ^thelbald,  TEthered,  and  iElfred, 


Some  Closing  Reflections       171 

held  lands  in  common  which  were  given  by 
their  father  to  these  three  sons,  in  such  a  way 
that  the  whole  was  to  come  to  the  latest  survivor. 
This  property  would  now  pass  to  the  two 
brothers,  iEthered  and  iElfred ;  and  for  the 
sanction  of  this  transfer  it  was  necessary  that 
the  parties  should  appear  before  the  Witan. 
This  transaction  is  related  in  Alfred's  Will. 
The  tv/o  brothers  agreed  that  their  joint  property 
should  be  held  in  trust  by  iEthelbriht,  the  new 
king,  and  that  he  should  farm  it  for  the  benefit 
of  his  younger  brothers,  a  trust  which  he  fully 
discharged. 

At  the  death  of  iE.thelbriht  and  the  accession 
of  iEthered  in  8dd,  the  heathen  invasion  began 
to  assume  a  more  alarming  form ;  but  the  reign 
of  iEthelbriht  had  been  a  quiet  time,  at  least 
for  Wessex.  This  period  (8 do  to  %66\  from 
Alfred's  thirteenth  to  his  eighteenth  year,  would 
be  a  time  of  leisure,  and  he  would  be  at  the  age 
of  youthful  reverie,  and  his  mind  would  be 
stimulated  by  reports  that  would  reach  his  ear 
of  the  savagery  of  the  heathen  raids  in  neigh- 
bour and  kindred  nations  contrasted  with  the 
humanities  of  Christianity,  while   his   memory 


I7X  The  Alfred  Jewel 

would  contrast  the  learned  culture  of  Rome 
with  the  ignorance  of  his  own  people.  These 
appear  to  be  apt  conditions  for  exercising  the 
mind  of  a  serious  prince  with  such  thoughts  as 
we  find  symbolized  in  the  Alfred  Jewel. 

In  collecting  evidence  for  the  argument  of 
this  Essay,  I  have  been  solicitous  to  omit  nothing 
that  seemed  to  make  for  the  credit  of  a  Jewel, 
concerning  which  I  am  persuaded  in  my  own 
mind  that  it  bears  the  authentic  signature  of 
Alfred  of  Wessex.  I  hope  that  this  aim  has 
not  betrayed  me  into  the  use  of  any  arguments 
which  are  of  no  validity.  And  if  any  reader's 
opinion  should  be  against  me  on  this  point, 
I  would  ask  him  to  consider  that  in  the  region 
of  probability  all  men  do  not  judge  exactly 
alike:  one  may  think  a  particular  fact  or 
tradition  of  no  argumentative  value,  while 
another  may  hesitate  to  exclude  it.  And  even 
if  any  such  instance  were  disallowed  and  ruled 
to  be  of  no  weight,  still  it  cannot  invalidate 
the  rest. 

Morally,  it  may  damage  the  effect  of  the 
whole,  because   it   may  prejudice   the  mind  of 


Some  Closing  Reflections       173 

the  reader ;  but  logically,  it  leaves  the  argumen- 
tative effect  of  the  rest  where  it  was  before. 
Such  being  the  case,  I  have  leaned  toward  com- 
prehension as  being  the  more  useful  course  j  and 
if  I  have  erred  I  hope  I  may  claim  the  reader's 
indulgence,  on  the  ground  of  being  faithful  to 
the  view  which  I  had  of  the  task  before  me. 

In  this  scientific  age,  there  are  more  persons 
who  can  appreciate  a  train  of  exact  serial  reason- 
ing than  of  those  who  can  do  justice  to  a  com- 
bination of  probabilities.  It  is  not  very  rare  to 
find  disputants  capable  of  testing  a  mathematical 
demonstration,  who  if  they  had  to  examine  a 
probable  argument  might  dismiss  it  with  the 
proverbial  maxim,  which  says  that  no  chain  is 
stronger  than  its  weakest  link. 

There  are  arguments  which  are  like  a  chain, 
and  to  them  the  maxim  applies :  one  weak  link 
vitiates  the  conclusion.  Such  are  the  demon- 
strations in  Euclid.  But  the  argument  which 
runs  through  this  book  is  not  of  that  kind, 
rather  it  resembles  a  bundle,  and  to  such  the 
maxim  does  not  apply.  It  cannot  be  said,  for 
example,  that  no  faggot  is  stronger  than  its 
weakest    stick.     And    this   is   the   simile  which 


174  ^^-^^  Alfred  Jewel 

applies  to  the  evidence  in  probable  reasoning. 
It  is  not  linked,  but  massed. 

When  Gulliver  awoke  on  the  shore  of  Lili- 
put  and  found  that  he  was  fastened  to  the 
ground,  the  threads  which  bound  him  were 
severally  slight,  but  the  total  effect  was  irre- 
sistible. Analogous  thereto  was  the  combined 
effect  of  many  partial  and  inconclusive  argu- 
ments on  the  mind  of  Sir  Francis  Palgrave, 
when  he  testified  that  'no  one,  taking  all  the 
points  of  evidence  together,  can  reasonably 
doubt  but  that  it  did  belong  to  king  Alfred  ^' 

This  conclusion  may  now  be  somewhat  am- 
plified. I  trust  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  say 
with  reasonable  confidence,  that  not  only  did 
this  Jewel  belong  to  Alfred  of  Wessex^  having 
been  made  by  his  order  \  but  further,  that  it  was 
his  work,  having  been  made  after  his  design ; 
and  further  again,  that  the  design  referred  to, 
and  was  based  upon,  his  own  position ;  and, 
moreover,  that  the  Jewel  was  a  production  of 
his  youth,  of  the  period  after  his  return  from 
Rome,  and  before  he  assumed  a  share  in  public 
affairs  by  the  side  of  his  brother  iEthelred. 

1  See  above,  p.  84.. 


THE    JEWEL,    PROMT    AKD    BACK. 


To  face  f-  174-] 


APPENDIX    A 

THE  FIRST  PUBLISHED  NOTICE  OF 
THE  ALFRED  JEWEL 

(pp.  2;  and  144) 

The  following  is  an  Article  in  the  Philo- 
sophical transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of 
London,  vol.  xx,  No.  247,  page  441: — 

Tart  of  a  Letter  from  Dr.  Musgrave^  Fellow  of  the 
College  of  Physicians  and  J^  S.^  to  Dr.  Sloane  j 
concerning  a  Piece  of  Antiquity  lately  found  in 
Somersetshire, 

I  enclose,  to  you,  the  Figure  (see  Fig.  4)  of  a  curious  piece 
of  Antiquity,  lately  found  near  Ashelney  in  Somersetshire; 
the  Place  where  King  Alfred  built,  as  Milton  affirms,  a 
Fortress  :  But  according  to  William  of  Malmsbury,  a  Monas- 
tery ;  in  Memory  (as  some  have  thought)  of  his  Deliverance, 
obscure  Retreat  to  that  Place,  and  Concealment  in  it,  from 
the  Danes. 


i7<5  u^ppendix  A 

The  Substance  is  in  the  Possession  of  Col.  P.  of  Fairfeild 
in  the  same  County  •  by  whose  Permission,  I  had  the  Sight 
of  it.  'Tis  of  the  same  Length  and  Breadth  with  the  Figure  : 
the  Work  very  fine  ^  so  as  to  make  some  Men  question  its 
true  Age :  But  in  all  probability,  it  did  belong  to  that  great 
King,  it  is  so  well  represented  in  the  Figure,  that  a  short 
Description  will  suflBce. 

The  Edge  is  thin,  as  far  as  the  Letters.  The  Letters  are 
on  a  Plane  rising  obliquely.  All  within  the  inner  Pyramidal 
Line  is  on  a  Plane  equi-distant  from  the  Reverse.  The 
Representation  (in  that  upper  Plane)  seems  to  be  of  some 
Person  in  a  Chair.  It  is  in  Enamel,  covered  over  with 
a  Crystal ;  which  is  secured  in  its  place  by  the  little  Leaves 
coming  over  its  Edges.  In  the  Reverse  are  Flowers  engraved. 
The  whole  piece  may  be  of  the  Weight  of  Three  Guineas. 
The  Chrystal  and  Enamel  excepted,  it  is  all  of  pure  Gold. 

This,  perhaps,  was  an  Amulet  of  King  Alfred's. 

ExoN,  "Dec.  lo,  16 ^%. 


APPENDIX    B 

ST.  NEOT  AND  ST.  CUTHBERT 

(pp.  29  and  74) 

Among  the  tentative  interpretations  of  the 
enamelled  Figure  both  of  these  saints  have  at 
different  times  been  put  forward,  as  was  only 
natural,  since  they  both  hold  a  place  in  the  cur- 
rent narratives  of  king  Alfred's  life.  But  it  is 
well  to  observe  that  their  several  relations  to  the 
stream  of  tradition  are  neither  equal  nor  alike. 
The  first  is  found  united  with  that  stream  in 
the  tenth  century,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  highest 
point  which  has  been  reached  in  the  investiga- 
tion of  these  episodes.  As  to  what  is  told 
of  St.  Neot,  however  unlikely,  it  cannot  be 
pronounced  impossible  that  it  may  have  had 
some  original  right  to  the  place  which  it  holds. 
The  second  is  a  transparent  fraud,  introduced 

N 


178  appendix   B 

in  the  twelfth  century  by  wrong-headed  zeal. 
A  few  details  will  make  this  clear. 

The  oldest  source  for  the  life  of  St.  Neot 
is  an  Anglo-Saxon  homily  of  that  well-known 
type  which  sprang  out  of  the  monastic  revival 
associated  with  the  names  of  Odo  and  ^thel- 
wold  and  Dunstan.  Conspicuous  examples  of 
this  type  are  the  Lives  of  St.  Edmund,  Ring 
and  Martyr,  and  of  St.  Swithun. 

At  this  epoch  the  relics  of  St.  Neot  (by  a 
traffic  too  intricate  for  us  to  unravel)  were 
removed  from  their  natural  resting-place  at 
St.  Neots  in  Cornwall,  where  the  man  had  lived 
and  died,  to  enrich  a  new  foundation  in  Hunt- 
ingdonshire, where  influential  persons  were 
planting  a  new  monastery,  which  became  a 
second  St.  Neots.  We  may  pretty  safely  assume 
that  this  event,  which  happened  about  984,  gave 
rise  to  the  biography,  in  which  the  relations 
of  St.  Neot  to  Alfred  form  the  distinguishing 
feature.  Of  this  writing  only  a  late  and  some- 
what interpolated  copy  has  reached  our  times. 

The  modern  historian  will  not  hesitate  to  say 
of  St.  Cuthbert  that  his  relations  to  Alfred  are 
wholly  fictitious ;   but  he  cannot  undertake  to 


Appendix   B  179 

say  the  same  of  St.  Neot.  Nevertheless,  they 
are  equally  out  of  the  question  so  far  as  regards 
the  icuncula.  The  idea  that  the  Figure  might 
be  St.  Neot  is  excluded  by  the  homily,  which 
places  the  death  of  St.  Neot  shortly  before  the 
troubles  of  Alfred,  and  the  accepted  date  is  877. 
According  to  the  most  probable  chronology  we 
have  been  able  to  make  out  for  the  Jewel,  it 
was  fabricated  before  %66. 

The  legendary  connexion  of  St.  Cuthbert 
with  Alfred  dates  from  the  twelfth  century, 
and  is  apparently  due  to  Simeon  the  historian, 
who  was  a  monk  of  the  monastery  of  Durham, 
and  who,  when  about  thirty-five  years  old,  wit- 
nessed the  impressive  ceremonial  of  the  trans- 
lation of  the  great  saint  of  the  North  Country, 
which  took  place  in  11 04. 

When  he  compiled  his  narrative  of  the  reign 
of  king  Alfred,  he  sacrificed  facts  of  history  to 
the  fame  of  the  saint.  Omitting  genuine  details 
which  he  had  at  hand,  he  subjected  the  capital 
events  of  Alfred's  life  to  the  patronage  of 
St.  Cuthbert.  Thus  he  begins  :  '  In  the  year  877 
the  nefarious  host  quitted  Exeter  and  came  to 


N  1 


i8o  appendix   B 

Chippenham  and  wintered  there.  King  Alfred 
in  those  days  endured  great  tribulations  and 
lived  an  unsettled  life.  Being  encouraged  with 
an  explicit  oracle  by  St.  Cuthbert,  king  Alfred 
fought  against  the  Danes,  at  the  time  and  in 
the  place  which  the  saint  had  directed,  and 
gained  the  victory,  and  from  that  time  forward 
he  was  terrible  and  invincible  to  his  enemies. 
The  manner  in  which  he  vanquished  his  foes 
is  related  as  folio weth.' 

In  such  a  manner  was  this  figment  introduced 
into  the  page  of  history,  where  it  long  con- 
tinued in  good  repute.  Hickes  was  so  much 
swayed  by  it,  that  he  relinquished  his  first 
interpretation  of  the  icuncula  in  favour  of 
St.  Cuthbert. 

If  the  connexion  of  Alfred  with  St.  Neot  is 
(as  it  may  well  be)  of  a  mythical  nature^  or  even 
an  invention  of  the  biographer,  he  did  but  use 
the  licence  which  was  then  accorded  to  the 
panegyrist  j  and  it  is  very  different  from  that 
abuse  of  the  authority  of  the  historian  which 
introduced  St.  Cuthbert  into  the  narrative  of 
the  deeds  of  Alfred, 


APPENDIX    C 

THE    TWO-SCEPTRED    FIGURE    IN 
THE   BOOK   OF    KELLS 

(p.  78) 

I  AM  indebted  to  Miss  Swann  for  the  following 
extract  from  Professor  Westwood's  Miniatures 
and  Ornaments  of  Anglo-Saxon  and  Irish  Art  (p.  29) : 

The  drawing  representing  (as  I  apprehend)  the  Temptation 
of  the  Saviour  occurs  on  fol.  loi  v.,  and  is  copied  in  my 
Plate  XI. 

Here  the  bust  of  the  Saviour  is  represented  at  the  summit 
of  an  elaborately  ornamented  conical  design,  which  I  sup- 
pose represents  a  '  pinnacle  of  the  temple '  rather  than  the 
<  exceeding  high  mountain.' 

The  head  of  the  Saviour  is  surrounded  by  a  cruciferous 
nimbus,  like  that  of  the  Virgin  in  the  above-described  drawing, 
and  He  appears  to  hold  a  roll  in  His  left  hand. 

Two  very  rudely  designed  angels  hover  above  His  head, 
and  two  others  occupy  the  upper  angles  of  the  picture,  the 
interstices  of  the  latter  being  filled  in  with  foliage  and  branches 


i8x  Appendix  C 

springing  from  vases ;  that  on  the  right  hand  being  in  an 
unusual  position. 

The  strangely  emaciated  black  figure  of  the  Tempter 
(destitute  of  tail,  but  with  hoof-like  feet),  and  the  crowd  of 
heads  at  the  side  and  bottom  of  the  design,  as  also  the  bust 
within  a  frame  holding  two  rosette-bearing  rods,  merit 
particular  notice. 


My  interpretation  of  the  Irish  Figure  was 
made  solely  from  a  study  of  the  picture  itself, 
without  suggestion  from  any  quarter.  I  had 
great  difficulty  in  making  up  my  mind  whether 
the  meaning  were  a  personage  at  a  window  in  the 
building,  or  whether  it  were  simply  a  framed 
picture  exhibited  in  front  of  the  building. 
I  was  not  then  aware  of  Professor  Westwood's 
description,  which  takes  the  latter  view.  It  is 
obvious  that  this  view  gives  to  the  representation 
the  nature  of  a  reflection  or  comment  more 
pointedly  than  the  view  which  I  have  taken 
in  the  text. 

I  will  here  add  another  quotation  from  Pro- 
fessor Westwood,  in  which  he  describes  and 
characterizes  the  Book^  of  Knells :  '  It  is  the  most 
astonishing  book  of  the  Four  Gospels  which 
exists  in  the  world,  and  it  is  in  Trinity  College, 


appendix  C  i8? 

Dublin,  where  it  was  placed  along  with  the 
books  of  Archbishop  Usher,  after  his  death 
in  16^6^  where  it  has  since  remained,  and  where 
I  trust  it  will  ever  remain,  as  the  glory  of 
Ireland '  (The  Book^  of  Kjlls :  a  Lecture^  &c.,  p.  6). 

For  a  partial  illustration  of  the  contents  of 
this  Appendix,  see  the  illustration  facing  p.  77. 


APPENDIX  D 

THE   BRITISH   ORIGIN   OF   THE 
ENAMELLED   FIGURE 

(P-  91) 

I  AM  greatly  indebted  to  my  friend  Mr.  C.  F. 
Bell,  the  Assistant  Keeper  of  the  Ashmolean 
Museum,  for  the  following  observations  upon 
the  technical  characteristics  of  early  cloisonnee 
enamels.  These  observations  are  very  germane 
to,  and  indeed  were  partly  occasioned  by,  the 
questions  which  surround  the  Enamel  in  the 
Alfred  Jewel. 

Setting  aside  the  reliquary  at  Poitiers,  which,  if  it  could 
really  justify  its  claim  to  having  been  a  gift  of  Justinian  II  to 
St.  Radigund,  would  be  by  far  the  oldest  piece  of  Byzantine 
enamel  work  in  existence,  as  well  as  all  such  specimens  as 
have  no  inscriptions  or  documentary  evidence  to  indicate 
their  age,  there  exist,  apparently,  only  two  enamelled  objects 


Appendix   T)  185- 

of  supposed  Byzantine  workmanship  that  can  be  maintained 
to  be  older  than  the  Alfred  Jewel.  These  are  the  iron  crown 
of  Monza  and  the  golden  altar  of  Saint  Ambrose  at  Milan. 

With  regard  to  the  first,  apart  from  the  controversy  as  to 
whether  it  truly  was  amongst  the  jewels  given  to  the  cathedral 
by  Theodolinda,  there  seems  to  be  some  uncertainty  as  to 
whether  there  is  any  cloisonnee  enamel  about  the  crown  at 
all.  Du  Sommerard,  who  was  allowed  to  make  a  drawing  of 
it  which  is  reproduced  in  his  Arts  au  Moyen  Age  (Album, 
serie  x,  pi.  14),  speaks  of  incrustations  of  jewels,  but  makes 
no  mention  of  enamel.  His  carefully  coloured  illustration 
shows  the  plaques  described  by  Labarte  {Arts  Industr'tels^  i. 
312),  but  the  emerald-green  ground  that  figures  in  the  descrip- 
tion is  not  indicated.  Du  Sommerard's  plate  fails  in  one  or 
two  other  particulars  to  tally  with  Labarte's  description  j  and 
as  the  latter  speaks  of  his  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  sight  of 
the  crown,  it  is  possible  that  he  mistook  in  this  instance,  as 
he  appears  to  have  done  in  the  case  of  the  Limburg  reliquary, 
what  M.  Molinier  (Tresor  de  Saint  Marc  de  Venise^  p.  4.8) 
calls  la  verroterie  cloisonnee — that  is,  presumably,  glass  mosaic 
inlaid  in  golden  cells — for  cloisonnee  enamel.  At  any  rate, 
some  fresh  opinion  is  surely  needed  to  establish  the  iron 
crown  as  a  monument  of  this  class  of  enamel  work. 

To  turn  to  the  altar  of  Saint  Ambrose.  .  It  was  made  in 
838 ;  and  Labarte  admits  that  the  Latin  inscriptions  upon  it, 
and  the  Latin  name  of  its  artist,  proclaim  the  Italian  origin 
of  the  greater  part  of  the  work.  But  the  enamels  which  form 
a  comparatively  unimportant  part  of  the  decoration  '  doivent,' 
he  says,  'avoir  ete  executes  par  un  des  artistes  grecs  qui 
travaillaient  en  grand  nombre  en  Italic  a  cette  epoque.  On 
remarquera  que  les   carnations  des  figures  sont  rendues  en 


1 8  (5  Appendix    2) 

email  blanc  opaque'  {Hlsto'ire  des  Arts  hidustriels^  iii.  lo). 
Of  these  enamels  the  most  striking  appear  to  be  eight  small, 
circular  medallions  upon  the  doors  at  the  back  of  the 
altar.  These  medallions  do  not  form  an  integral  portion 
of  the  work,  but  are  affixed,  in  the  manner  of  jewels,  to 
the  framework  of  the  silver-gilt  bas-reliefs,  and  may  in 
fact  be  amongst  those  very  English  enamels  whose  discovery 
upon  the  early  shrines  in  continental  churches  and  museums 
Mr.  Starkie  Gardner  predicts  [Catalogue  of  Europeatt  Enamels 
exhibited  at  the  Burlington  Fine  Arts  Club^  ^^5)7?  P-  i^).  Each 
represents  a  diademed  head  seen  in  full  face,  a  palm  branch, 
or  perhaps  a  wing,  appearing  above  each  shoulder  against 
a  translucent  green  background.  In  motive  they  thus  present 
an  extraordinarily  close  parallel  to  the  Alfred  Jewel  (Du 
Sommerard,  Arts  an  Moyen  Age^  Album,  serie  ix,  planches 
1 8  and  19). 

The  earliest  enamels  of  incontestably  Byzantine  origin, 
which  can  be  dated  with  accuracy  by  documentary  evidence, 
seem  to  go  no  flirther  back  than  the  beginning  of  the  tenth 
century.  It  cannot,  however,  be  said  that  these  works, 
with  those  of  closely  subsequent  periods,  have  the  appear- 
ance of  being  the  productions  of  the  school  in  its  infancy 
and  early  development.  Very  considerable  technical  accom- 
plishment is  shown  in  the  manipulation  of  the  extremely 
narrow  gold  cloisons,  disposed  for  the  most  part  in  straight 
or  slightly  curved  lines,  and  filling  even  the  spaces  of  the 
drapery  with  closely  laid  chevrons  or  parallel  stripes ;  while 
the  innumerable  minute  cells  thus  formed  are  filled  with 
homogeneous,  brilliant,  many-hued  enamels.  A  warm  tone 
of  pink  is  invariably  used  to  represent  flesh. 

An  impressive  object,  possessing  certain  characteristics  in 


appendix  T>  187 

common  with  the  Jewel  and  other  supposed  Celtic-Saxon 
enamels,  is  the  eagle  fibula  found  at  Mainz,  and  now  in  the 
museum  there.  The  present  setting  of  the  enamelled  eagle 
has  been  supposed  to  be  Prankish,  of  the  latter  part  of  the  tenth 
or  earlier  years  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  the  eight  small 
enamelled  jewels  inserted  in  the  border  confirm  this  view, 
as  they  closely  resemble  the  jewels  incrusted  upon  the  frame 
of  the  Crucifixion  plaque  in  the  Reiche-Capelle  at  Munich, 
which  has  usually  been  attributed  to  that  age  (Von  Hefner- 
Alteneck,  Trachten  des  chr'istUchen  Mhtelalters ;  Schlumberger, 
Nkephorus  Fhocasy  The  figure  of  the  eagle,  presumably,  con- 
sisted originally  of  five  plaques,  one  representing  the  head, 
another  the  tail,  two  others  the  outspread  wings,  and  a  fifth 
the  body  of  the  bird.  This  last  is  missing,  its  place  having 
been  supplied,  apparently  at  the  time  the  setting  was  made, 
by  a  plaque  of  engraved  gold.  This  circumstance;  seems  in 
favour  of  the  idea  that  the  enamels  are  of  foreign  workman- 
ship, and  earlier  than  the  setting. 

The  cloisons  of  neither  the  eagle  nor  the  Roach  Smith 
ouche  are  as  narrow  as  those  employed  by  the  Byzantine 
enamellers,  although  they  are  at  most  only  half  the  width 
of  those  made  use  of  in  the  Alfred  Jewel.  The  doubling  of 
the  cloisons  into  loops,  not  commonly  seen  in  Byzantine 
work  but  remarkable  in  the  Jewel,  is  also  noticeable  in  the 
eagle.  Amongst  the  five  colours  employed  in  the  eagle  are 
the  dark,  translucent  green,  and  the  yellow,  considered  by 
Mr.  Gardner  as  characteristic  of  Celtic-Saxon  enamels,  and 
also  the  opaque  white  such  as  is  used  for  the  flesh  tint  in  the 
Jewel  and  the  ouche,  and,  as  Labarte  particularly  remarks, 
in  the  closely  analogous  heads  upon  the  altar  of  Saint 
Ambrose. 


i88  appendix   T> 

Of  all  these  monuments  the  enamel  of  the  Alfred  Jewel 
is  at  once  the  coarsest  and  most  primitive  in  execution. 
Having  been  protected  by  the  rock-crystal  pane,  its  surface 
is  presumably  in  much  the  same  state  as  when  it  left  the 
maker's  hands.  It  was,  evidently,  when  it  came  out  of  the 
furnace,  extremely  uneven  and  rough,  and  had  to  be  subjected 
to  a  grinding  process,  traces  of  which  are  still  apparent. 
The  gold  cloisons  are  dull  with  minute  scratches,  and  where 
two  ran  close  together  they  have  become  one  confused, 
ragged  line.  Both  the  eagle  and  the  ouche,  although  exposed 
for  long  periods  to  the  direct  action  of  the  soil,  preserve  a  far 
higher  degree  of  polish. 

Yet  the  rough  workmanship  by  itself  cannot,  it  must 
be  remembered,  be  held  to  preclude  the  Byzantine  origin 
of  this  enamel,  since,  as  there  is  not  known  to  exist 
a  single  indisputably  dated  work  of  the  Byzantine  school  in 
its  primitive  stages,  it  is  impossible  to  assert  that  this  school 
was  not,  during  the  lifetime  of  king  Alfred,  producing  work 
as  rude  in  execution  as  the  Jewel.  It  may  be  that  such  a 
specimen  will  some  day  make  its  appearance,  and  determine 
the  Eastern  origin  of  this  enamel  and  all  cognate  works. 
It  is  also  possible  that  the  discovery  of  an  undoubtedly  Irish 
example  may  place  above  all  dispute  the  contention  that  it  is 
of  Celtic-Saxon  origin,  and  finally  justify  the  absorption  into 
the  same  class  of  the  ouche,  the  eagle,  the  eight  medallions 
upon  the  altar  of  Saint  Ambrose,  nay,  even  of  the  crown 
of  Theodolinda  itself. 


APPENDIX    E 


ATHELNEY  ABBEY 


(P-  1^0 

The  Abbey  of  Athelney  was  founded  by  king 
Alfred^  in  pious  gratitude  for  mercies  received. 


There  are  no  remains  now  visible  on  its  site.   The 
materials  have  doubtless  passed  into  the  neigh. 


190  ^fpendtx  E 

bouring  farm  buildings.  The  spot  is  marked 
by  a  monumental  pillar,  which  was  erected 
in  1 801  by  the  then  proprietor  of  the  land, 
with  an  historical  inscription,  which  is  not  too 
inaccurate  for  the  time  in  which  it  was  com- 
posed.    It  runs  thus : 

King  Alfred  the  Great,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  875), 
having  been  defeated  by  the  Danes,  fled  for  refuge  to  the 
forest  of  Athelney,  where  he  lay  concealed  from  his  enemies 
for  the  space  of  a  whole  year.  He  soon  after  regained 
possession  of  the  throne ;  and  in  grateful  remembrance  of 
the  protection  he  had  received,  under  the  favour  of  Heaven, 
he  erected  a  monastery  on  this  spot,  and  endowed  it  with 
all  the  lands  contained  in  the  Isle  of  Athelney.  To  per- 
petuate the  memory  of  so  remarkable  an  incident  in  the  life 
of  that  illustrious  prince,  this  edifice  was  founded  by  John 
Slade,  Esq.,  of  Maunsel,  the  proprietor  of  Athelney,  and 
lord  of  the  manor  of  North  Petherton,  a.d.  1801. 

The  present  representative  of  this  gentleman 
is  his  great-great-grandson,  Sir  Cuthbert  Slade 
of  Maunsel,  Bart.,  lord  of  the  Manor  of  North 
Petherton. 

The  Abbey  of  Athelney  never  attained  to 
any  considerable  wealth  or  importance  ^  but  a 
sculptured   boss,  which  was  found  on  the  site. 


appendix  E 


191 


and  which  is  here  figured  in  two  aspects,  after 
drawings  by  Mr.  Alfred  A.  Clarke  of  Wells, 
seems  to  indicate  some  costly  architecture  among 
the  abbey  buildings  in  the  fourteenth  century. 


APPENDIX    F 

NORTH  NEWTON  CHURCH 

(P-  139) 

The  church  of  North  Newton  has  features 
suggestive  of  ancient  celebrity,  but  the  dates 
which  are  historically  known,  do  not  mount  so 
high  as  might  have  been  expected.  The  tower, 
which  is  the  oldest  part,  and  to  which  the  high 
antiquity  of  a  thousand  years  has  been  popularly 
attributed,  speaks  by  its  architecture,  which  is 
here  represented.  The  earliest  known  date 
connected  with  the  fabric  is  1292,  in  which  year 
the  foundation  stone  of  the  elder  chapel  was 
laid  by  Richard  de  Barfleur,  called  also  Richard 
de  Plesseto.  This  being  a  chantry  chapel,  the 
endowment  was  taken  away  in  if 48,  and  the 
fabric  decayed.  In  the  time  of  Charles  I,  Sir 
Thomas  Wrothe  built  a  new  chapel  and  provided 


,  M„|i><K/'llll    l^ 


THE   TOWER    OF    NORTH    NEWTON    CHURCH. 
To  face  p.  192] 


appendix   F  193 

a  stipend  for  the  minister :,  which  still  continues. 
The  Parable  Door,  the  Oak  Screen,  and  the 
Pulpit  are  evidently  of"  the  same  period,  and 
were  probably  given  by  the  same  benefactor. 

The  village  of  North  Newton,  originally  a 
chapelry,  was  separated  from  the  mother  parish 
of  North  Petherton,  and  formed  into  an  ecclesi- 
astical parish  on  the  twenty-third  day  of  March, 
1880.  It  is  situated  two  miles  north  of  Durston 
Station  (Great  Western  Railway),  four  and  a  half 
south-west  of  Bridge  water,  and  seven  north-east 
of  Taunton.  These  particulars  are  taken  from 
a  little  book  entitled  The  Church  and  Parish  of 
St.  Peter'^s^  North  Newton^  by  the  Rev.  L.  H.  King, 
M.A.,  Vicar  j  to  whom  I  am  also  personally 
indebted  for  some  interesting  local  information. 


APPENDIX   G 

THE    PRESENTATION    OF   THE 
ALFRED  JEWEL  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF   OXFORD 

(pp.  140  and  I4-S-) 

I  HAVE  been  favoured  by  Sir  Alexander  Acland 
Hood  with  the  following  extract  from  the 
Manuscript  of  Mr.  Thomas  Palmer,  which  is 
preserved  in  Fairfield  House : — 

'NEWENTON,   NEWTON,   OR 
PETHERTON   PARK. 

'  The  Park  and  Manor  of  Newentdn  belonged 
« to  the  King  at  the  time  of  the  general  survey, 
'  and  probably  this  is  the  Petherton  where  king 
'  John  held  his  court.  The  House  was  on  the 
'  north  side  of  the  Park,  where  there  is  now  a 
'  tenement  called  Parker's  Field.     At  this  place 


Appendix    G  195- 

a  remarkable  piece  of  antiquity  was  dug  up  in 
the  year  1^93,  which  is,  by  Dr.  Hickes  and 
other  antiquaries,  adjudged  to  have  been  of 
the  age  of  King  Alfred,  the  letters  being  such 
as  were  introduced  by  this  King  in  imitation 
of  the  Roman  Alphabet,  and  never  used  before 
or  since. 

'  Doctor  Hickes  interprets  this  inscription  to  be 
"  Alfred  ordered  me  to  be  made  "  ;  and  supposes 
the  enamelled  figure  to  be  the  picture  of 
St.  Cuthbert,  the  tutelar  saint  of  that  King. 
The  whole  is  of  gold,  over  the  enamel  is  a  piece 
of  rock  crystal,  half  an  inch  thick :  the  gold 
rim  is  cut  through  to  form  the  letters  of  the 
inscription.  This  is  now  among  the  antiquities 
of  the  University  of  Oxford.' 

The  Keeper  of  the  Archives  (Mr.  Bayne  of 
Christ  Church)  has  kindly  made  search  at  my 
request,  and  he  writes :  '  I  have  gone  carefully 
through  the  Convocation  Register  for  171 8, 
and  can  find  no  reference  to  the  Jewel,  nor  to 
Mr.  Palmer  who  died  6  March,  17  3  f.' 

The  Register  of  Benefactions  of  the  Ash- 
molean  Museum  has  a  paragraph  in  Latin,  which 
however  gives  no  information  on  this  point. 


I9<5  appendix   G 

The  most  interesting  piece  I  have  found  on 
this  point  is  in  CoUinson's  History  of  Somerset 
(1791),  vol.  i,  p.  87,  where  he  is  speaking  of 
Athelney  Abbey  :  it  is  as  follows : — 

Some  allusion  to  the  vision  of  St.Cuthbert  above-mentioned 
is  supposed  to  have  been  intended  by  a  little  curious  amulet 
of  enamel  and  gold,  richly  ornamented,  that  was  found  in 
i6'93  in  Newton  Park,  at  some  distance  northward  from  the 
abbey.  On  one  side  of  it  is  a  rude  figure  of  a  person  sitting 
crowned,  and  holding  in  each  hand  a  sceptre  surmounted  by 
a  lily,  which  Dr.  Hickes  and  other  antiquaries  have  imagined 
to  be  designed  for  St.  Cuthbert.  The  other  side  is  filled  by 
a  large  flower,  and  round  the  edge  is  the  following  legend  : 
AELFRED  MEC  HEIT  GEWRCAN ;  that  is,  Alfred 
ordered  me  to  be  made.  This  piece  of  antiquity  is  now  in  the 
museum  at  Oxford,  accompanied  with  the  accounts  of  doctors 
Hickes  and  Musgrave,  and  the  following  memorandum : 
"  Nov.  i(),  1 71 8,  Tho.  Palmer,  esq  ;  of  Fairfield  in  Somerset- 
"  shire,  put  this  ancient  picture  of  St.  Cuthbert,  made  by  order 
"of  king  Alfred,  into  my  hands  to  bee  conveyed  to  y'  Bodlean 
"Library  in  Oxford,  where  his  father  Nat.  Palmer,  esq;  lately 
"  dead,  desired  it  might  be  placed  and  preserved. 

"  Geo.  Clark." 


,E2  tt«r 


3  5002  00172  2854 

Earle.  John 
I      The  Alfred  jewel:  an  historical  essay. 


PRESENTED   BY 


IX^ML 


Art    NK    7308    . E2    1901 
Earle,     John,     1824-1903. 
The    Alfred    jewel 


