MYSTICS 

1.  jAtAlirCMSiN  R^Ml 


ijMmijjij 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


BEQUEST  OF 


BAMETTE  MILLER 


Kegan  Paul, Trench, 

Trubner  &  Co.,  Ltd., 

Oriental  Booksellers 

38 Great  Russell  St., 
I  London,  W.l. 


XTbe  TlClta^om  of  tbe  Ba6t  Series 


Edited  by 

L.    CRANMER-BYNG 

Dr.    S.   A.   KAPADIA 


THE    PERSIAN    MYSTICS 


WISDOM   OF  THE  EAST 

THE   PERSIAN   MYSTICS 

JALALU'D-DfN    ROmI 


By  F.  HADLAND   DAVIS 

AUTHOR    OF    "  IN     THB    VALLEY    OF    STARS 
THBRB  IS   A   TOWER  OP  SILENCE  " 


LONDON 

JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET,  W. 

1920 


.-^L-^; 


2 


First  Edition  «...  May  1907 
Reprinted  ....  January  1912 
R^printtd     •        •        •        .    November  1920 


All  RiQHTi  Rkcervsd. 


TO 

A.  T.   K. 

THIS  LITTLE  BOOK  OF   EASTERN   WISDOM 
IS  LOVINGLY  INSCRIBED 


•'  Our  Journey  is  to  the  Rose-Garden  of  Union  " 

JAlAlU'D-DIn   R<!Mi. 


PEEEACE 


I  DESIRE  to  thank  IVIr.  R.  A.  Nicholson  for 
his  kind  and  generous  permission  to  use 
selections  from  his  Divani  Shamsi  Tabriz,  and 
also  his  publishers,  the  Cambridge  Press.  I  am 
deeply  indebted  to  Mr.  E.  H.  Whinfield  for 
allowing  me  to  use  quotations  from  his  rendering 
of  the  Masnavi  (Triibner's  Oriental  Series).  I 
also  cordially  thank  Mr.  John  Hastie  for  giving 
me  permission  to  quote  a  few  passages  from  the 
late  Rev.  Professor  Hastie's  "  Festival  of  Spring  " 
(James  Maclehose  and  Sons,  Glasgow).  The 
poems  quoted  from  this  volume  are  entitled  : 
"  Thy  Rose,"  "  I  saw  the  Winter  weaving," 
"  Love  sounds  the  Music  of  the  Spheres,"  "  The 
Souls  Love-moved,"  and  "  The  Beloved  All  in 
All."  All  the  other  translations  from  the  lyrical 
poetry  of  Jalalu'd-Din  Riimi  are  by  Mr.  R.  A. 
Nicholson.     To  these  gentlemen,   and  to  those 

7 


8  PREFACE 

I  have  left  unnamed,  I  tender  my  warmest  thanks 
for  their  help,  sympathy,  and  interest  in  my 
attempt  to  "  popularise  the  wisest  of  the  Persian 
Sufis." 


F.   Hadland   Davis. 


London, 

January  22,  190T. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 

I.   Origin  of  Si^fiism. 
II.  The  Early  Sufis  . 

III.  The  Nature  of  Si^^fIism  . 

IV.  The  Influence  of  Sufiism 
V.  Analysis  op  the  Religion  of  Love 


11 
11 

14 
20 
27 
31 


The  Life  and  Work  of  JalIlu'd-DIn  Rt^mI    34 

I.  Life -34 

II.  Shamsi  Tabriz       .         .         .         .         .36 

III.  The  Stories  op  Al-AplakI  and  the  Death 

op  JALALU'D-DiN  RtTMI.  .  •  •      38 

IV.  The  Nature  and  Significance  of  Jalalu'd- 

DIn  RAMI'S  Poetry        .  .  .  .40 

Selections  from  the  '^  Divani  Shamsi  Tabriz  "  44 
Selections  from  the  "Masnavi"  .  ,  68 
Appendix  :   A  Note  on  Persian  Poetry     .  101 

9 


EDITOEIAL   NOTE 

The  object  of  tlie  Editors  of  this  series  is  a  very 
definite  one.  They  desire  above  all  things  that, 
in  their  humble  way,  these  books  shall  be  the 
ambassadors  of  good- will  and  understanding 
between  East  and  "West — the  old  world  of 
Thought  and  the  new  of  Action.  In  this  en- 
deavour, and  in  their  own  sphere,  they  are  but 
followers  of  the  highest  example  in  the  land. 
They  are  confident  that  a  deeper  knowledge  of 
the  great  ideals  and  lofty  philosophy  of  Oriental 
thought  may  help  to  a  revival  of  that  true  spirit 
of  Charity  which  neither  despises  nor  fears  the 
nation  of  another  creed  and  colour. 

L.  CRANMER-BYNG. 
S.   A.   KAPADIA. 

nobthbrook  society, 
21,  Cromwell  Road, 
Kensington,  S.W, 


mTRODUCTION 


I.    The  Origin  of  Sufiism 

AMONG  the  Mohammedans  Sufiism,  or  Persian 
mysticism,  is  known  as  tasaivwuf.  The 
word  Sufi  is  derived  from  suf,  meaning  "  wool." 
When  a  little  Persian  sect  at  the  end  of  the 
eighth  century  a.d.  broke  away  from  the 
orthodox  Muslim  religion,  and  struck  out  on 
an  independent  path,  they  ignored  costly  robes 
and  worldly  ostentation,  and  clad  themselves  in 
a  white  wool  garment.  Hence  they  were  known 
as  "  wool  wearers,"  or  Sufis. 

Prof.  Edward  G.  Browne  *  gives  four  theories 
in  regard  to  the  origin  of  Sufiism,  viz.  :  (1)  Eso- 
teric Doctrine  of  the  Prophet.  (2)  Reaction  of 
the  Aryan  mind  against  a  Semitic  religion.  (3) 
Neo-Platonist  influence.  (4)  Independent  origin. 
Neither  of  the  four  theories  altogether  satisfies 
the   learned   professor,    and   very   certain   it   is 

*  A  Literary  History  of  Persia^  vol.  i, 

U 


12  NEO-PLATONISM 

that  the  last-mentioned  theory  is  of  very  little 
account.  Prof.  Browne  seems  in  favour  of  a 
"  spontaneous  growth  "  existing  in  various  forms, 
under  various  names  throughout  the  civilised 
world  ;  but  after  all  this  is  not  very  tangible 
evidence.  Moreover,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that 
the  Neo-Platonist  philosophers  paid  a  visit  to 
the  Persian  court  in  the  sixth  century  a.d., 
and  founded  a  school  there  in  the  reign  of  Nushir- 
wan.  It  is  highly  probable,  therefore,  that  these 
seven  philosophers,  forced  to  leave  their  homes 
through  the  tyranny  of  Justinian,  who  forbade 
the  teaching  of  philosophy  at  Athens,  should 
have  had  considerable  influence  upon  a  few  of 
the  more  thoughtful  Persians.  We  shall  now 
find  that  this  theory  is  borne  out  by  internal 
evidence. 

Let  us  briefly  study  the  tenets  of  Neo-Platon- 
ism.  The  Neo-Platonists  believed  in  the  Supreme 
Good  as  the  Source  of  all  things.  Self -existent, 
it  generated  from  itself.  Creation  was  the 
reflection  of  its  own  Being.  Nature,  therefore, 
was  permeated  with  God.  Matter  was  essenti- 
ally non-existent,  a  temporary  and  ever-moving 
shadow  for  the  embodiment  of  the  Divine.  The 
Neo-Platonists  believed  that  by  ecstasy  and 
contemplation  of  the  All-Good,  man  would  rise 
to  that  Source  from  whence  he  came.  These 
points  bear  directly  upon  the  Sufi  teaching. 
They  form   a  broad   outline   of   the   tenets   of 


NEO-PLATONISM   AND   SUFIISM        13 

Sufiism.  The  Sufis,  from  temperamental  and 
other  causes,  elaborated  these  ideas,  gave  them 
a  rich  and  beautiful  setting,  and,  what  is  all- 
important,  built  about  them  one  of  the  most 
interesting  phases  of  mystical  poetry  the  world 
has  ever  known,  and  this  particular  phase  may 
be  said  to  date  from  the  twelfth  century  a.d. 

Thus,  I  think,  it  will  be  readily  admitted  that 
the  Sufis  certainly  owed  something  to  the  Neo- 
Platonists.  The  cry  for  the  Beloved  was  in  their 
hearts  before  the  Greek  philosophers  came  ;  but 
Neo-Platonism  appealed  to  their  Oriental  minds. 
It  was  a  stepping-stone  across  the  river  of  their 
particular  spuitual  tendencies,  and  they  trod 
thereon,  and  proceeded  to  lay  down  other 
stones  across  the  stream.  I  have  pointed  out 
the  similarities  between  this  particular  Greek 
and  Persian  beHef.  There  was,  however,  one 
very  important  difference.  The  Neo-Platonist's 
conception  of  God  was  purely  abstract,  the  Sufi's 
essentially  personal,  as  far  as  the  early  Sufis 
were  concerned.  We  shall  consider  other  in- 
fluences which  were  brought  to  bear  upon  Sufiism 
a  little  later  on.  There  is  a  very  great  difference 
between  the  early  Sufiism  and  the  elaborate 
additions  that  followed  as  an  evolutionary 
matter  of  course. 

In  brief,  then,  Neo-Platonism  was  the  doctrine 
of  Ecstasy.  A  quotation  fro^m  the  letter  of 
PlotinuB  to  Flaccus  on  Ecstasy  will  still  further 


14  THE   EARLY   SUFIS 

show   the   similarities  between  this   Greek   and 
Persian  teaching  : 

"  The  wise  man  recognises  the  idea  of  the 
Good  within  him.  This  he  develops  by  with- 
drawal into  the  Holy  Place  of  his  own  soul.  He 
who  does  not  understand  how  the  soul  contains 
the  Beautiful  within  itself,  seeks  to  realise 
beauty  without,  by  laborious  production.  His 
aim  should  rather  be  to  concentrate  and  simplify, 
and  so  to  expand  his  being  ;  instead  of  going  out 
into  the  Manifold,  to  forsake  it  for  the  One, 
and  so  to  float  upwards  towards  the  Divine 
Fount    of    Being    whose    stream    flows    within 


mm." 


This  is  Stifiism  in  prose.     The  Sufis  turned  the 
same  conception  into  poetry. 


II.    The  Early  Sufis. 

Abu  Hashim  (ob.  150  a.h.)  was  the  first  to  bear 
the  name  of  Sufi,  while  Dhu'1-Nun-al-Misri 
(245  A.H.)  may  be  said  to  have  given  Sufiism  its 
permanent  shape.  Rabi'a,  of  Basra,  was  the 
first  woman  to  join  the  sect,  and  her  saintliness 
and  wise  sayings  have  been  preserved  by  Faridu'd- 
Din  'Attar.  One  day  a  great  sickness  fell  upon 
Rabi'a,  and  on  being  asked  the  reason  for  it 
she  replied  :  "I  dwelt  upon  the  joys  of  Paradise 
and  therefore  my  Beloved  has  chastened  me." 


RABI'A  16 

Rabi'a  did  not  believe  in  earthly  marriage.  Her 
remark  on  the  subject  is  given  as  follows  :  "  The 
bonds  of  wedlock  have  descended  upon  me.  I 
am  not  my  own,  but  my  Lord's,  and  must  not  be 
unfaithful  to  Him."  'Attar  also  informs  us 
that  when  Rikbi'a  was  asked  if  she  hated  the 
devil,  she  replied :  *'  My  love  to  God  leaves 
me  no  time  to  hate  him."  Rabi'a  was  a  woman 
of  much  independence  of  thought,  ethical  rather 
than  metaphysical  in  her  remarks,  and  strongly 
opposed  to  outward  ceremonials.  She  is  said 
to  have  died  at  Jerusalem,  753  a.d.  It  was  at 
Ramla,  in  Palestine,  that  a  Christian  nobleman 
built  a  convent  (Khdngdh)  for  the  Sufis.  Thus 
in  the  early  days  the  sect  defied  their  Prophet's 
condemnation  of  monkery  by  building  an  abode 
for  members  of  the  order.  The  Sufis  were 
strongly  opposed  to  the  idea  of  free-will  or 
distinct  and  self-existent  personality  apart  from 
the  Beloved.  The  orthodox  Muslim's  idea  was 
precisely  the  reverse.  The  Sufis  have  always 
made  the  Koran  their  text-book.  With  infinite 
licence  they  ingeniously  quote  therefrom,  and 
still  more  ingeniously  add  their  own  explanations 
when  necessary.  No  doubt  there  were  political 
reasons  for  adopting  this  method  of  concealing 
heterodox  ideas  under  the  cloak  of  orthodoxy. 
We  shall  see,  however,  as  the  sect  grew  and 
still  further  broadened  its  views,  that  these 
clever  compromises  did  not  prevent  the  appear- 


16  BAYAZID 

ance  of  martjo's  among  their  number  in  the 
future. 

By  the  end  of  the  second  century  of  the  Hijira 
the  Sufis  were  a  much-respected  religious  order. 
In  the  following  century  Quietism  had  not  only 
changed  to  Pantheism,  but  Pantheism  had 
kindled  a  belief  that  Beloved  and  lover  were 
identical.  The  step  was  inevitable  and  at  this 
juncture  it  was  that  Sufiism  became  essentially 
mystical,  and  it  became  more  mystical  as  years 
advanced.  About  this  time,  viz.,  the  beginning 
of  the  third  century  a.h.,  we  come  across  two 
interesting  Sufis  who  seem  to  have  been  the 
prime  movers  in  this  new  development,  by  name 
Bayazid  and  Mansur  al-Hallaj. 

Concerning  the  saint  Bayazid  an  interesting 
story  is  told  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Masnavi. 
The  saint  surprised  his  disciples  one  day  by 
saying :  "  Lo,  I  myself  am  God  Almighty. 
There  is  no  God  beside  me ;  worship  me  !  '* 
The  disciples,  thinking  their  Master  was  beside 
himself,  told  him,  when  the  strange  ecstasy  had 
passed,  what  he  had  said.  Bayazid  promptly 
replied :  "  If  I  do  so  again  straightway  slay 
me  !  "  His  disciples  accordingly  sharpened  their 
knives.  Once  more  Bayazid  cried  out  :  "  Within 
my  vesture  is  naught  but  God,  whether  you  seek 
Him  on  earth  or  heaven."  The  disciples,  horror- 
struck  at  his  remarks,  straightway  plunged  their 
knives  into  Bayazid's  body.    But  their  blades 


MANSUR   AL-HALLAJ  17 

were  turned  back  against  their  own  throats, 
so  that  they  died.  He  explained  to  the  few 
disciples,  who  had  not  struck  him,  that  the 
ecstasy  he  had  been  experiencing  annihilated 
self,  "  His  form  is  vanished,  he  is  a  mere  mirror." 
The  disciples  who  had  struck  him  saw  their  own 
faces  in  that  mirror  and  so  wounded  themselves, 
and  not  Bayazid,  whose  soul  had  left  the  mirror 
of  his  body  and  was  one  with  the  Beloved. 

Perhaps  the  life  of  Mansur  al-Hallaj  is  even 
more  interesting.  Whether  he  was  a  mere 
adventurer  or  genuine  exponent  of  Sufiism  is 
still  open  to  controversy  among  modern  Sufis. 
It  will  be  perfectly  safe  to  describe  him  as  either 
a  saint  or  a  vagabond.  He  was  possibly  both 
extremes  to  suit  the  necessities  of  a  very  exciting 
and  eventful  career.  He  was  born  in  the  close 
of  the  ninth  century  a.d.,  and  was  said  to 
perform  many  miracles,  such  as  raising  the  dead 
to  life,  and  drawing  gold  and  flowers  from  the 
air.  According  to  his  own  belief  he  could  write 
verses  equal  to  those  of  the  Koran.  He  went 
one  better  than  the  "  superman  "  theory,  how- 
ever, and  called  himself  God,  and  his  disciples 
after  the  various  prophets.  Akbar  was  called 
God,  but  deification  in  this  case  did  not  sound 
from  his  own  trumpet ;  it  sounded  from  the 
trumpet  of  an  enthusiastic  poet :  "  See  Akbar 
and  you  see  God."  Al-Hallaj  visited  India 
for  the  purpose  of  studying  magic,  and  there 

2 


18  MANSUR   AL-HALLAJ 

saw  the  celebrated  Rope  Trick,  on  that  occasion 
performed  by  a  woman,  a  point  of  considerable 
interest.*  This  mystic-adventurer  wrote  forty- 
six  books,  and  certainly  gained  considerable 
influence  over  the  lower  classes  by  his  many 
signs  and  wonders.  He  is  said  to  have  disputed 
the  necessity  of  making  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca 
by  stating  that  by  occult  practices  it  could  be 
performed  equally  well  in  any  room.  On  a 
certain  occasion,  however,  we  cannot  help  but 
admire  Al-Hallaj's  wit  and  aptitude.  One  day 
he  stretched  forth  an  empty  hand  and  produced 
from  the  air  an  apple,  which  he  asserted  he  had 
plucked  from  Paradise.  One  of  his  witnesses 
disputed  his  assertion,  because  this  particular 
apple  was  maggot-eaten,  and  therefore  not  of 
Divine  origin.  Al-Hallaj  at  once  replied  :  "  It 
is  because  it  hath  come  forth  from  the  Mansion 
of  Eternity  to  the  Abode  of  Decay :  there- 
fore to  its  heart  hath  corruption  found  its 
way  !  " 

Al-Hallaj,  on  account  of  his  various  heretical 
teachings,  was  imprisoned  and  subjected  to  all 
manner  of  cruelties.  Bravely  he  went  forth 
to  the  place  of  crucifixion.  For  four  days  he 
was  nailed  on  a  cross  on  both  sides  of  the  Tigris. 
From  these  tortures  he  was  finally  released.  Ten 
years  later  he  was  executed,  telling  his  disciples 

*  '*  Among  the  Adepts  and  Mystics  of  Hindostaa."  The 
Occult  Review,  December,  1905. 


TWO    EARLY   MYSTICS  19 

he  would  return  to  them  in  thirty  days,  and 
exultantly  reciting  poetry,  he  cried :  "  From 
His  own  cup  He  bade  me  sup,  for  such  is  hospi- 
tality !  "  A  comment  of  his  on  Sufiism — a  very 
ironical  one — was  :  "  That  which  is  mine,  for 
by  God  I  never  distinguished  for  a  moment 
between  pleasure  and  pain !  "  Yet  another 
characteristic  saying  of  his  was  :  "  The  way 
to  God  is  two  steps  :  one  step  out  of  this  world 
and  one  step  out  of  the  next  world,  and  lo  ! 
you  are  there  with  the  Lord  !  "  Whatever  were 
the  faults  of  Al-Hallaj,  and  they  were  many, 
at  least  it  may  be  said  of  him  that  he  was  a  brave 
man.  With  all  his  fanaticism,  his  absurd  indis- 
cretion and  love  of  conjuring,  he  left  much 
behind  of  permanent  value  to  the  Sufis.  The 
Government,  in  those  days,  did  all  in  its  power 
to  restrain  the  publicity  of  his  books  ;  but  a 
Ught  that  was  never  for  a  moment  set  under 
a  bushel  cannot  be  hid  ;  the  very  attempt  to 
obliterate  it  is  in  itself  the  cause  for  a  keener 
and  more  persistent  search. 

In  the  fifth  century  of  the  Hijira  we  may  note 
Abu-1-Khair  as  the  first  to  give  Sufiism  pohtic 
significance,  and  Iman  Ghazali  as  the  first  to 
give  it  a  metaphysical  basis.  At  this  time  we 
find  in  Sufi  books  many  terms  borrowed  from 
the  Neo-Platonists.  Books  on  ethics,  as  weU 
as  poetry,  now  became  impregnated  with  Sufi 
ideas. 


20  THE   NATURE    OF   SUFIISM 


III.    The  Nature  of  Sufiism 

The  Sufis  are  folk  who  have  preferred  God  to  everything, 
80  that  God  has  preferred  them  to  everything. — Dhu'  l-Nun.* 

In  the  Islam  faith  there  are  eight  Paradises 
arranged  one  within  the  other  in  ascending 
stages.  The  highest  is  called  "  The  Garden  of 
Eden."  All  are  lovely  gardens  full  of  luxuriant 
flowers  and  trees,  amid  which  gleam  the  domes 
and  minarets  of  gorgeous  palaces,  rich  with 
precious  stones,  where  the  departed  are  feasted 
and  entertained  by  beautiful  houris.  All  the 
Paradises  are  watered  by  rivers,  such  as  the 
Kevser,  the  Tesnim,  and  the  Selsebil.  The  great 
Tuba  tree  grows  in  the  highest  Paradise  ;  its 
branches  fall  into  the  seven  other  gardens,  f 
This  brief  description  will  be  sufficient  to  show 
the  nature  of  the  Muslim  heaven.  That  it  was  a 
glorified  creation  of  the  earth  in  eight  degrees  is 
evident.  It  was  sensuous  rather  than  meta- 
physical.    The  five  worlds  of  the  Sufis  are  : 

1.  The  "  Plane  of  the  Absolute  Invisible." 

2.  The  "  Relatively  Invisible." 

3.  The  "  World  of  SimHitudes." 

*  For  further  extracts  from  Sufi  writers  see  A  Historical 
Enquiry  concerning  the  Origin  and  Development  of  Sufiism, 
By  R.  A.  Nicholson.  The  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  March,   1906. 

•f  Set)  History  of  Ottoman  Poetry t  by  E.  G.  W.  Gibb,  vol.  i. 


THE   FIVE   PLANES  21 

4.  The  "  Visible  World "  (or  the  plane  of 
"  Form,  Generation  and  Corruption"). 

5.  The  "  World  of  Man." 

These  Five  Planes  are  often  regarded  as  Three  : 
the  "  Invisible,"  the  "  Intermediate,"  and  the 
"  Visible,"  or  yet  again  as  simply  the  "  Visible  " 
and  "  Invisible."  Above  the  "  Plane  of  the 
Absolute  Invisible "  is  an  infinity  which  we 
might,  perhaps,  compare  with  Dante's  "  Spaceless 
Empyrean."  The  Sufis  regarded  the  existence 
of  the  soul  as  pre-natal.  Moreover  that  the  full 
perception  of  Earthly  Beauty  was  the  remem- 
brance of  that  Supreme  Beauty  in  the  Spiritual 
world.  The  body  was  the  veil ;  but  by  ecstasy 
{Hal)  the  soul  could  behold  the  Divine  Mysteries. 
As  Avicenna,  in  his  poem  on  the  soul,  has  written : 

Lo,  it  was  hurled 
Midst  tlie  sign-posts  and  ruined  abodes  of  this  desolate  world. 
It  weeps,  when  it  thinks  of  its  home  and  the  peace  it  possessed, 
With  tears  welling  forth  from  its  eyes  without  pausing  or  rest, 
And  with  plaintive  mourning  it  broodeth  hke  one  bereft 
O'er  such  trace  of  its  home  as  the  fourfold  winds  have  left. 

Creation  was  regarded  as  the  output  of  the 
All-Beautiful.  The  visible  world  and  all  therein 
was  a  reflection  of  the  Divine,  an  ever-changing 
scene  full  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  following 
beautiful  poem  of  Jami,  from  YMSuf-u-Zulaykhd, 
will  illustrate  the  Sufi's  conception  of  the  Beloved 


22  JAMI 

and   His   significance   and   relationship   to   His 
world  of  lovers  : 

No  mirror  to  reflect  Its  loveliness. 
Nor  comb  to  touch  Its  locks ;    the  morning  breeze 
Ne'er  stirred  Its  tresses  ;    no  colljrrium 
Lent  lustre  to  Its  eyes  ;    no  rosy  cheeks 
O'ershadowed  by  dark  curls  like  hyacinth. 
Nor  peach-like  down  were  there.  .  .  . 
To  Itself  it  sang  of  love 
In  wordless  measure.     By  Itself  it  cast 
The  die  of  love.  .  .  . 

One  gleam  fell  from  It  on  the  Universe  ( 

And  on  the  angels,  and  this  single  ray 
Dazzled  the  angels,  till  their  senses  whirled 
Like  the  revolving  sky.     In  diverse  forms 
Each  mirror  showed  it  forth,  and  everywhere 
Its  praise  was  chanted  in  new  harmonies. 
•  •  •  • 

The  spirits  who  explore  the  depths 

Of  boundless  seas,  wherein  the  heavens  swim 

Like  some  small  boat,  cried  with  one  mighty  voice, 

*'  Praise  to  the  Lord  of  all  the  \mi verse  !  " 

His  beauty  everywhere  doth  show  itself, 

And  through  the  forms  of  earthly  beauties  shines 

Obscured  as  through  a  veil.  ... 

Where'er  thou  seest  a  veil, 

Beneath  that  veil  He  hides.     Whatever  hearfc 

Doth  yield  to  love,  He  charms  it.     In  His  love 

The  heart  hath  life.     Longing  for  Him,  the  soul 

Hath  victory.  * 

Man  was,  therefore,  a  part  of  God,  because  he 
was  a  fragment  of  the  Whole ;  or,  better  still,  he 

♦  Translation  by  Professor  E.  G.  Browne. 


HAFIZ  23 

was  a  divine  emanation.*  The  Sufi  recognised 
this  fact,  and  his  supreme  desire  was  to  be 
reunited  with  the  Beloved.  His  difficulty,  how- 
ever, was  to  bear  in  mind  that  his  worship  should 
ever  be  of  God,  and  not  of  God's  many  beautiful 
forms.  Love  came  into  his  heart,  and  he  en- 
deavoured to  recognise  that  earthly  objects, 
however  dear  and  beautiful  they  might  be, 
were  but  lanterns  where  God's  Light  shone 
through.  Here  it  must  be  readily  admitted 
that  Sufiism  often  fails.  The  Sufi  poets  were 
much  given  to  excessive  laudations  of  physical 
beauty,  and  we  often  find,  with  all  the  toleration 
and  ingenuity  we  can  bring  to  bear,  that  some  of 
Hafiz's  lines  are  no  more  spiritual  than  Anacreon's, 
to  whom  he  has  been  compared.  We  have  a 
number  of  Sufi  words  with  a  strictly  Sufi  mean- 
ing ;  but  it  would  not  be  wise  to  strain  the 
analogy  of  earthly  love  too  far  and  say  that 
everything  that  Hafiz  wrote  was  spiritual.  The 
Sufi  poets,  for  the  most  part,  wrote  about  the 
Love  of  God  in  the  terms  applied  to  their  beautiful 
women,  for  the  simple  reason  that  no  one  can 
write  the  celestial  language  and  be  understood 
at  the  same  time.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that 
the  Sufis,  still  remembering  their  old  love-songs, 
their  old  earthly  delights  in  women  dear  to  them, 

♦  Compare  the  Alexandrian  doc|;rine  of  Emanations. 
Also  Jami's  LawaHh.  Translated  by  E.  H.  Whinfield  and 
Murza  Muhammad  Kazvlni. 


24    THE   MEANING   OF   SUFI   WOKDS      ' 

should  find  it  difficult  not  to  apply  such  names, 
such  ideas  even  in  their  love  of  the  One  Beloved  ? 
Take  those  expressions  literally  and  many  of 
them  are  sensuous,  but  consider  them  as  brave, 
strong  strivings,  fraught  with  much  spiritual 
fervour,  after  God,  and  you  at  once  annihilate 
prejudice  and  come  very  near  understanding  the 
meaning  of  Sufiism.  We  need  not  fly  to  Mrs. 
Grundy  and  seek  shelter  under  her  hypocritical 
wing  when  some  really  devout  and  sincere  Sufi 
calls  God  "  the  Eternal  Darling  "  or  sings  about 
the  Beloved's  curls.  In  studying  Sufiism  from 
Sufi  poetry  we  must  always  remember  that 
Eastern  poetry  is  essentially  erotic  in  expression, 
but  just  as  essentially  symbolic  in  meaning. 
We  must  also  bear  in  mind — and  this  point  must 
have  had  its  influence  upon  Sufiism — that  the 
Muslim's  reward  for  having  lived  a  good  life, 
according  to  the  teaching  of  Mohammed,  was 
that  he  should  enjoy  an  eternal  liason  with 
lovely  hour  is. 

It  may  be  questioned  that  if  the  earthly  object 
of  Love  was  a  mere  passing  shadow  of  God, 
the  man  who  loved  that  object  was  equally 
insignificant.  And  again,  how  can  God  be  the 
All-One  when,  according  to  the  Sufi  thesis. 
He  divided  Himself  into  creation  ?  The  part 
is  not  equal  to  the  whole.  These  questions 
are  easily  answered.  The  stars  shine  in  the  sky, 
and  on  the  bosom  of  the  sea  without  diminution, 


THE    VOICE    OF    LOVE  25 

Let  the  sea  pass  away,  and  the  star-shadows 
pass  away  too  ;  but  the  stars  are  still  there. 
So  when  the  world  shall  pass  away  it  will  only  be 
the  fading  of  innumerable  shadows  we  call 
Humanity.  God  will  still  be  there,  and  we 
shall  still  be  there  because  we  came  alone  from 
Him.  There  was  a  Voice  that  sounded  in  men 
and  women,  in  mountains  and  in  seas,  in  the 
beasts  of  the  jungle  and  the  swinging  of  the 
stars.  It  was  the  Voice  of  Love,  the  great 
beckoning  in  the  Hereafter  to  which  all  things 
must  go.  That  Voice  to  the  Sufi  was  God  calling 
His  lovers  into  one  chamber,  one  mighty  love- 
feast.  Jami  has  expressed  the  finality  of  Love 
in  the  following  lines  ; 

Gaze,  till  Gazing  out  of  Gazing 
Grew  to  being  Her  I  gaze  on, 
She  and  I  no  more,  but  in  One 
Undivided  Being  blended. 
All  that  is  not  One  must  ever 
Suffer  with  the  Wound  of  Absence; 
And  whoever  in  Love's  City 
Enters,  finds  but  Room  for  One, 
And  but  in  oneness  Union. 

The  Rev.  Professor  W.  R.  Inge,  in  Christian 
Mysticism,  has  brought  a  good  deal  of  adverse 
criticism  to  bear  upon  Sufiism.  He  remarks;  "  The 
Sufis,  or  Mohammedan  Mystics,  use  erotic  language 
very  freely,  and  appear,  like  true  Asiastics,  to 
have  attempted  to  give  a  sacramental  or  symbolic 


26  ADVERSE   CRITICISM 

character  to  the  indulgence  of  their  passions.'* 
The  same  writer  accuses  Emerson  of  "  playing 
with  pantheistic  Mysticism  of  the  Oriental  type," 
and  goes  on  to  compare  him  with  the  Persian 
Sufis  on  account  of  his  self-deification.  This 
critic,  in  his  desire  to  defame  the  Sufis,  states 
that  they  are  among  the  most  shocking  and 
blasphemous  of  the  mystics,  because  they  believe 
that  state  is  present  with  them  even  in  their 
earthly  life.  This,  however,  is  no  teacliing  of 
the  Sufis,  and,  rightly  considered,  we  cannot  even 
except  the  sayings  of  Bayazid  already  referred 
to,  because  here  he  undoubtedly  denies  all  claim 
to  human  personality,  admitting  God  only. 
/SeZ/'deification  is  no  teaching  of  the  Sufis.  As 
the  Buddhist's  belief  in  Nirvana  was  a  state  only 
to  be  reached  by  degrees,  after  much  striving 
and  severe  discipline,  so  was  the  fusion  of  the 
Beloved  and  His  lover  a  behef  and  a  beautiful 
hope  far  out  on  the  spiritual  horizon.  Hadj 
Khan,  in  his  interesting  book  With  the  Pilgrims 
to  Mecca,  briefly  touches  upon  this  sect  and 
mentions  *'  seven  stages  "  in  the  spiritual  growth 
of  the  Sufi,  and  not  an  arrogant  proclamation 
of  Deity  and  man  being  coequal  in  the  earthly 
existence.  The  gradually  ascending  scale  of  the 
Sufi's  heaven  is  another  point  in  favour  of  this 
argument.  "  For  the  love  that  thou  would'st 
find  demands  the  sacrifice  of  self  to  the  end  that 
the  heart  may  be  filled  with  the  passion  to  stand 


THE   INFLUENCE    OF   SUFIISM       27 

within  the  Holy  of  Holies,  in  which  alone  the 
mysteries  of  the  True  Beloved  can  be  revealed 
unto  thee."  The  average  Sufi  was  a  poet.  All 
that  was  beautiful  was  God  to  him.  He  tried 
to  be  nearer  the  Beautiful  every  day,  and  thus 
his  soul  swept  on  from  flower  to  flower,  higher 
and  higher,  until  he  was  absorbed  into  the 
Divine. 

We  have  now  seen  that  Stifiism  is  essentially 
a  religion  of  Love  without  a  creed  or  dogma. 
No  merciless  hells  leap  up  in  the  Sufi's  beliefs. 
He  has  no  one  ivay  theory  for  the  Life  beyond  : 
*'  The  ways  of  God  are  as  the  number  of  the  souls 
of  men."  There  is  splendid,  magnificent  broad- 
mindedness  in  this  Sufi  remark.  This  un- 
sectarian  teaching  should  be  appHed  to  every 
religion.  It  would  tend  to  sweeten  and  deepen 
the  thoughts  of  men,  who  would  forget  the  petty 
non-essentials  of  creeds  and  dogmas,  lost  in  the 
perception  of  the  All-Beautiful. 


IV.    The  Influence  of  Sufhsm 

This  love  here   forms   the   centre  which  expands  on   all 
sides  and  into  all  regions. — Hegel. 

Although  Jalalu'd-Din  Rumi  lived  for  fifty 
years  in  a  Turkish  city  he  scarcely  ever  used  any 
Turkish  words  ;  but  nevertheless  his  influence 
on  Turkish  poetry  was  very  considerable.     The 


28  INFLUENCE  IN  TURKEY  AND  INDIA 

Turkish  poets  of  that  day  poured  forth  innumer- 
able "  spiritual  couplets  "  of  a  mystical  nature. 
Indeed  nearly  all  the  Ottoman  poets  were  either 
Sufis  or  men  who  wrote  after  the  manner  of  the 
Persian  Sufis.  Jalal's  son,  Sultan  Valad,  wrote 
in  Turkish  the  following  concerning  his  father  : 

Wot  ye  -well  Mevland  is  of  saints  the  Pole  ; 
Whatsoever  thing  he  sayeth,  do  in  whole. 
All  his  words  are  mercies  from  the  Heavenly  King ; 
Such  that  blind  folks'  eyes  were  opened,  did  they  sing. 

The  Sufi  influence  on  Turkish  poetry,  many  years 
after  Jalal's  death,  gradually  weakened  as  time 
went  on,  and  their  poetry  became  less  mystical. 
The  French  were  probably  responsible  for  this 
change  to  a  certain  extent. 

Then,  again,  Sufiism  influenced  the  poetry 
of  India  ;  but  in  this  case  there  was  influence  on 
both  sides,  and  the  Sufis  probably  borrowed 
some  of  the  Buddhistic  ideas,  especially  in  regard 
to  their  later  conception  of  Divine  absorption. 
The  following  remark  of  Abu  Bahu  al-Shibli 
certainly  points  to  the  belief  that  the  Sufis 
inculcated  certain  ideas  from  the  Vedanta  Philo- 
sophy : — "  Tasawwuf  is  control  of  the  faculties 
and  observance  of  the  breaths. ^^ 

Sufi  poetry  has  greatly  influenced  Western 
thought.  Many  of  the  German  mystics  wrote 
as  the  Sufi  poets  had  written  before  them.  Par- 
ticularly  might  be  mentioned  Eckhart,  Tauler 


THE    GERMAN   MYSTICS  29 

and  Suso.  Concerning  the  last  mentioned  I  may 
quote  the  following  passage  to  demonstrate  my 
meaning  :  "  Earthly  friends  must  needs  endure 
to  be  distinct  and  separate  from  those  whom 
they  love  ;  but  Thou,  0  fathomless  sweetness 
of  all  true  love,  meltest  into  the  heart  of  Thy 
beloved,  and  pourest  Thyself  fully  into  the 
essence  of  his  soul,  that  nothing  of  Thee  remains 
outside,  but  Thou  art  joined  and  united  most 
lovingly  with  Thy  beloved."  There  was  rap- 
turous language  both  with  the  Persian  and 
German  mystics.  The  great  difference  between 
them  w^as  that  the  German  mystics,  for  the  most 
part,  were  ascetics,  the  Persians  were  not.  Then 
again  in  the  nineteenth  century  Hegel  was  loud 
in  his  praise  of  Jalalu'd-Din  Rumi,  calling  him 
a  great  thinker  as  well  as  a  great  poet,  but  some- 
how he  seems  to  put  Jalal's  Pantheism  first, 
his  Mysticism  second.  Surely  this  was  putting 
the  cart  before  the  horse  ? 

To  trace  the  scope  of  the  influence  of  Sufi 
thought  in  England  w^ould  be  extremely  inte- 
resting, but  the  Hmits  of  this  little  book  will  not 
admit  of  our  doing  so.  The  influence  was  at  first 
among  the  few  ;  but  optimistic  lovers  of  the 
East  believe  that  Oriental  thought  is  daily 
becoming  of  more  interest  to  Western  minds. 
The  student  knows  that  Edward  FitzGerald's 
rendering  of  Omar  Khayyam,  was  anything  but 
a  faithful    translation ;    that   FitzGerald  shook 


30  OMAR   KHAYYAM 

up  Omar's  words  like  so  many  dice  and  set  them 
to  the  music  of  wine,  roses,  and  pessimism.  The 
Omar  Khayyam  Club  read  FitzGerald,  but  not 
Omar  Khayyam,  and  in  consequence  they  have 
fallen  into  the  error  of  associating  Omar  with 
Bacchus.  But,  nevertheless,  we  must  be  grate- 
ful to  FitzGerald.  He  has  given  us  a  great  poem, 
and  stirred,  let  us  hope,  many  of  his  countless 
readers  to  a  more  faithful  study  of  Persian 
poetry.  The  indefatigable  Dr.  Johnson  has 
written  the  following  on  the  Persian  poet, 
who  is  the  subject  of  our  present  volume  ; 
*'  He  makes  plain  to  the  Pilgrim  the  secrets  of 
the  Way  of  Unity,  and  unveils  the  Mysteries 
of  the  Path  of  Eternal  Truth."  Concerning 
our  modern  poets  I  have  quoted  elsewhere  a 
few  lines  of  Mr.  Arthur  Symons  on  a  dancing 
dervish.  Many  of  the  late  Thomas  Lake 
Harris's  poems  are  of  a  Sufi  nature.  In  Mr. 
Stephen  Phillip's  beautiful  poem  "  Marpessa,'* 
the  following  lines  are  full  of  Sufi  mysticism  : 

For  they, 
Seeking  that  perfect  face  beyond  the  world. 
Approach  in  vision  earthly  semblances, 
And  touch,  and  at  the  shadows  flee  away. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  at  least  one  cele- 
brated Englishman  adopted  the  Sufi  teaching.  I 
refer  to  Sir  Richard  Burton.*     The  Sufis  beUeved 

♦  Life  of  Sir  Richard  Burton.    2  vols.    By  Thomas  Wright. 


THE    RELIGION   OF   LOVE  31 

heart  and  soul  in  the  beautiful  lines  of  Cameons, 
the  poet  for  whom  Burton  had  so  great  an  affec- 
tion : 

Do  what  thy  manhood  bids  thee  do,  from  none  but  self 
expect  applause. 

He  noblest  lives  and  noblest  dies  who  makes  and  keeps  his 
self-made  laws. 

All  other  Hfe  is  living  death,  a  world  where  none  but 
phantoms  dwell ; 

A  breath,  a  wind,  a  sound,  a  voice,  a  tinkling  of  the  camel- 
bell. 


V.    Analysis  or  the  Religion  of  Love 

Put  away  the  tale  of  love  that  travellers  tell ; 
Do  thou  serve  God  with  all  thy  might. 

Jaxalu'd-DIn  RuMf. 

Stjfiism,  then,  is  the  religion  of  Love.  Lafcadio 
Hearn  tells  us,  in  his  inimitable  way,  that  earthly 
love  is  brought  about  by  the  memories  of  in- 
numerable loves  in  the  past,  a  host  of  the 
phantoms  of  you  seeking  in  your  momentary 
ego  the  joy  of  Love  over  again.  Schopenhauer, 
with  much  pride,  quotes  Rochefoucauld  as  having 
said  that  "love  may  be  compared  to  a  ghost 
since  it  is  something  we  talk  about  but  have 
never  seen."  Precisely  ;  but  this  is  no  antago- 
nistic statement,  as  Schopenhauer  supposed. 
Rather  than  belittling  the  beauty  of  Love,  it  is 
an  unconscious  defence  of  a  very  great  truth. 


32  THE   NATURE    OF   LOVE 

Love  can  only  be  compared  with  Love.  There 
is  nothing  else  to  compare  it  with.  No  one  has 
seen  Love,  because  no  one  has  seen  God.  A 
little  child  plays  at  funerals  and  tenderly  buries 
a  dead  butterfly,  not  because  it  understands 
the  mystery  of  Death,  but  because  Love  prompted 
the  action.  And  so  we  love  without  knowing 
the  why  and  the  wherefore.  Scientists  have 
already  proved  that  first  love  is  not  controlled 
by  either  of  the  individuals  loving  ;  that  it  is 
but  the  expression  of  thousands  of  tendencies 
in  past  lives.  That  Love  can  be  ever  personal, 
ever  Umited  to  the  individual,  is  unthinkable. 
We  must  recognise  some  day  that  those  countless 
tendencies,  those  strivings  after  men  and  women 
seeming  to  hold  our  souls'  affinities,  were  but  the 
momentary  finding  of  God  in  His  creatures.  We 
do  not  love  a  woman  merely  because  she  is  pretty, 
possesses  a  pleasing  mannerism.  W^e  love  her 
because,  in  an  indescribable  way,  she  sings  a  song 
we  alone  can  fully  understand,  a  voice  that  lifts 
up  our  soul  and  makes  it  strong.  We  follow 
that  Invisible  Figure  from  land  to  land,  from 
heart  to  heart,  from  Death  into  Life,  on  and  on. 
When  Love  loves  Love  for  its  own  sake,  when 
the  self  is  dead,  we  shall  meet  Him.  We  shall 
find  the  Beloved  to  be  the  Perfection,  the  realisa- 
tion of  that  strong  desire  that  mxade  us  lose  our- 
selves in  others.  The  more  we  lose  ourselves 
in  God  the  more  we  find  Him.     Men  and  women 


THE    DIVINE    ESSENCE  33 

love  and  die.  But  Love  is  a  Divine  Essence 
working  through  and  through  innumerable  lives 
for  its  own  eternal  glory.  Personality  is  Hmited 
only  to  the  finite  world — perhaps  a  phase  or 
two  beyond  the  grave.  Even  that  is  the  sum- 
total  of  countless  so-called  personalities  in  the 
past.  We  love  instinctively.  If  it  was  wholly 
physical  then  it  dies  with  the  death  of  the  object. 
If  it  was  infinitely  more  than  that,  if  it  was  the 
love  of  Goodness  and  Purity  and  the  Beautiful 
it  lives  on  for  ever.  But  these  things  live  not 
eternally  in  humanity.  They  are  parts  of  that 
all-pervading  Essence — the  Love  Divine.  Love 
God's  light  in  men  and  women,  and  not  the 
lantel'i^s  through  which  It  shines,  for  human 
bodies  nnist  turn  to  dust ;  human  memories, 
human  desjres,  fade  away.  But  the  love  of  the 
All-Good,  All-Beautiful  remains,  and  when  such 
is  found  in  'Earthly  love  it  is  God  finding  Himself 
in  you,  and' you  in  Him.  That  is  the  supreme 
teaching  of  Sufiism,  the  religion  of  Love. 


THE    LIFE   AND  WORK    OP 
JALALU'D-DIN    RTOII 

I.    Life 

JALALU'D-DIN  RUMI  was  born  at  Balkh 
on  September  30th,  1207,  a.d.,  or  accord- 
ing to  Mohammedan  reckoning,  in  604  a.h.  His 
father,  Bahau-'d-Din,  was  a  man  of  much  learning, 
but  gave  offence  to  the  reigning  king  by  an 
attack  on  that  monarch's  innovations.  Another 
account  disputes  this  in  the  place  of  jealousy 
on  the  part  of  the  king.  Whatever  the  cause, 
however,  Bahau-'d-Din  left  Balkh,  together  with 
his  family,  and  settled  at  Nishapur.  It  was 
here  that  the  celebrated  Sufi,  Faridu-d  Din 
'Attar,  presented  young  Jalalu'd-Din-Rumi  with 
his  Asrarnama*  and  informed  his  father  that 
the  child  would  some  day  become  famous  through- 
out the  world.  After  the  destruction  of  Balkh 
the  family  went  to  Qonia,f  an  old  Roman  province, 
where    the   poet   acquired  his    name   Rumi,   or 

*  Book  of  Mysteries.  f  Iconium. 

34 


JALAL   ON   IMUSIC   AND    DANCE      35 

"  the  Roman."  Young  Jalal  must  have  been 
a  child  prodigy  if  we  are  to  beheve  the  many 
wonderful  stories  of  his  early  days.  At  six 
years  of  age  he  is  said  to  have  seen  visions, 
taught  his  playmates  philosophy,  and  performed 
many  marvellous  feats,  such  as  flying  into  the 
celestial  regions.  On  the  death  of  his  father 
Jalal  took  the  professorial  chair.  He  also 
founded  an  order  of  Dervishes  known  as  Maulavis, 
where  he  authorised  music  and  religious  dance. 
When  asked  why  he  introduced  singing  and  dance 
at  a  funeral,  such  practice  being  contrary  to 
custom,  Jalal  replied :  "  When  the  human 
spirit,  after  years  of  imprisonment  in  the  cage 
and  dungeon  of  the  body,  is  at  length  set  free, 
and  wings  its  flight  to  the  Source  whence  it 
came,  is  not  this  an  occasion  for  rejoicings, 
thanks,  and  dancing  ?  "  Jalal  was  an  indomit- 
able or;t:mist.  In  his  sayings,  and  still  more 
in  his  poetry,  we  find  an  almost  untrammelled 
ecstasy.  The  religious  dances,  known  as  R-iza 
Kuli,  may  in  some  way  account  for  JalaFs 
occasional  lack  of  care  displayed  in  his  poetry, 
and  also  for  the  outbursts  not  far  removed  from 
insanity.  We  are  informed  by  Daulat  Shah  that 
"  There  was  a  pillar  in  the  Maulavi's  house,  and 
when  he  was  drowned  in  the  ocean  of  Love  he 
used  to  take  hold  of  that  pillar  and  set  himself 
turning  round  it."  It  was  while  turning  round 
the  pillar  that  he  not  infrequently  dictated  much 


36  THE    POET'S    MARRIAGE 

of    his    poetry.     As    Mr.    Arthur    Symons    has 
sung  : 

I  turn  until  my  sense. 

Dizzied  with  waves  of  air, 
Spins  to  a  point  intense, 

And  spires  and  centres  there.* 

We  can  well  imagine  Jalal  writing  the  following 
under  the  conditions  just  mentioned  : 

Come !      Come !      Thou  art  the  Soul,   the  Soul  so  dear, 

revolving  ! 
Come  !     Come  !     Thou  art  the  Cedar,  the  Cedar's  Spear, 

revolving  ! 
Oh,  come !     The  well  of  Light  up-bubbling  springs  ; 
And  Morning  Stars  exult,  in  Gladness  sheer,  revolving  !  "  f 

In  1226  A.D.  Jalal  was  married  at  Lerenda 
to  Gevher  (Pearl).  She  bore  two  sons  and  died 
early  in  life.  Jalal  married  again  and  his  second 
wife  survived  him. 


II.    Shamsi  Tabriz 

A  WORD  must  now  be  said  about  Shamsi  Tabriz, 
an  intimate  friend  of  Jalal.  We  have  sufficient 
evidence  to  prove  that  Shamsi  Tabriz,  Jalal's 

*  The  Fool  of  the  World. 

t  The  Festival  of  Spring,     Translated  by  the  Rev.  Prof. 
William  Hastie. 


SHAMSI    TABRIZ  37 

nom  de  guerre,  was  an  actual  person,  and  not  a 
mythical  creation  on  the  part  of  the  poet.  This 
mysterious  being,  who  flitted  across  Jalal's  life 
so  tragically,  seems  to  have  had  great  personal 
influence  over  the  poet,  who  went  with  him  into 
solitary  places  and  there  discussed  profound 
mysteries.  The  scholars  of  Jalal  looked  upon 
the  whole  affair  as  an  unworthy  infatuation  on 
the  part  of  their  Master,  and  on  the  part  of 
Shams  a  shameful  seduction.  Their  protests 
brought  about  the  flight  of  Shams,  who  fled 
to  Tabriz.  But  it  was  only  a  momentary  separa- 
tion. Jalal  followed  this  strange  figure  and 
brought  him  back  again.  Most  of  his  lighter 
poetry  was  composed  during  this  separation. 
Another  disturbance,  however,  caused  the  de- 
parture of  Shams  to  Damascus.  We  then  have 
no  clear  record  of  him.  Various  legends  exist 
in  regard  to  the  death  of  this  mysterious  person. 
It  may  be  safely  stated,  however,  that  Shams 
met  with  a  violent  death,  the  exact  nature  of 
which  it  is  impossible  to  say  definitely. 

This  strange  union  is  by  no  means  unique  in 
the  history  of  the  world's  literature.  The  union, 
however,  in  this  particular  case,  is  extremely 
difficult  to  rightly  fathom.  We  may  reasonably 
infer  that  Jalal's  intense  poetic  temperament 
became  fascinated  by  the  dogmatic  and  powerful 
Shams.  The  very  treatment  of  this  friendship, 
both  in  the  Lyrical  Poems,  and  in  the  Masnavi, 


38       THE   STORIES    OF   AL-AFLAKI 

is  Sufi.  The  two  following  quotations,  from 
many  that  might  be  cited,  will  prove  sufficient 
to  illustrate  this  point : 

The  face  of  Shamsi  Din,  Tabriz's  glory,  is  the  sun 
In  whose  track  the  cioud-hke  hearts  are  moving. 

0  Shamsi  Tabriz,  beauty  and  glory  of  the  horizons. 
What  king  but  is  a  beggar  of  thee  with  heart  and  soul  ? 


III.     The    Stories    of    Al-Aflaki    and    the 
Death  of  Jalalu'd-DIn  Rumi.* 

The  historian  al-Aflaki,  in  his  collection  of  anec- 
dotes called  Menaqibu  'L  'Arifin,t  gives  a  number 
of  stories  relating  to  the  miracles  and  wise  sayings 
of  Jalal.  Many  of  these  miraculous  performances 
were  followed  by  the  conversion  of  those  who 
witnessed  them.  A  marvel  or  a  wise  saying  of 
Jalal  was  generally  accompanied  by  mpsic  and 
dance,  which  reminds  us  of  the  jubilations  of  the 
Indian  gods  after  Rama's  victories  over  his 
enemies.  These  stories,  interesting  enough  in 
themselves,  can  scarcely  be  credited  to  such  a 
learned  man  as  Jalal  undoubtedly  was.  Accord- 
ing to  tradition  he  spoke  to  frogs  and  fishers, 
raised  the  dead  to  Hfe,  and  at  the  same  time 


*  See  The  Masnavi.     Translated  by  Sir  James  W.  R©d 
house. 

t  "The  Acts  of  the  Adepts." 


JALAL'S   LOVE    OF   CHILDREN       39 

very  ignominiously  lost  his  temper  when  a 
disciple  who  said,  after  having  received  Jalal's 
.instructions  :  "  God  willing."  After  all,  the 
significance  of  Jalal  hes  not  in  these  rather 
lamentable  fairy  tales,  but  in  the  fruit  of  his 
work.  Jalal,  Hke  the  Lord  Buddha,  suffered 
considerably  from  the  addition  of  fabulous  tales 
and  fancies  of  no  real  moment  to  his  teachings. 

Al-Aflaki  tells  a  pretty  story  concerning  the 
tenderness  of  Jalal  for  little  children.  As  the 
poet  passed  by  some  children,  they  left  their 
play  and  ran  to  him  and  bowed.  Jalal  bowed  in 
response.  One  little  boy,  some  distance  off, 
seeing  the  honour  bestowed  upon  his  playmates, 
cried  to  Jalal  :  "  Wait  for  me  until  I  come  !  " 
And  Jalal  waited  and  bowed  to  the  little  child. 
This  story  is  worth  far  more  than  juggler's 
tricks. 

Jalalu'd-Din  Rumi  died  at  Qonia  in  1273  a.d., 
praising  God  and  leaving  to  the  world  a  vast 
store  of  spiritual  knowledge  and  many  wise 
instructions  to  his  son,  Bahau-'d-Din  Valad. 
It  is  very  gratifying  to  note  that  at  the  death 
of  Jalal  his  mourners  were  of  all  creeds.  A 
Christian  was  asked  why  he  wept  over  a  Muslim 
grave,  and  he  replied  :  "  We  esteem  him  as  the 
Moses,  the  David,  the  Jesus  of  our  time  ;  and 
we  are  his  disciples,  his  adherents."  This  was 
indeed  a  splendid  and  worthy  tribute  to  the 
memory  of  so  great  a  man. 


40      JALALU'D-DIN   RUMI'S   POETRY 

I  hope  I  have  already  demonstrated  that  the 
very  nature  of  Sufi  poetry  is  entirely  lacking  in 
creed  or  dogma,  and  certainly  the  great  singer 
of  the  Masnavi  has  left  in  his  songs  a  wealth  of 
the  wonder  of  Divine  Love. 


IV.  The  Nature  and  Significance  of  Jalaltj'd- 

DiN  RuMi's  Poetry 

The  Lyrical. — ^We  have  already  noted  the 
acceptance  of  the  Asrarnama.  Among  the  other 
literary  influences,  according  to  Mr.  Nicholson, 
we  may  note  the  poems  of  Sana'i,  Sa'di,  and 
Nizami.  The  fact  that  Jalal's  poetry  some- 
times faintly  resembles  Omar  Khayyam's  is  too 
slight  to  be  of  any  value.  Mr.  Nicholson  very 
ably  sums  up  the  nature  of  the  Masnavi  and 
Divan  respectively :  "  The  one  is  a  majestic 
river,  calm  and  deep,  meandering  through  many 
a  rich  and  varied  landscape  to  the  immeasurable 
ocean  ;  the  other  a  foaming  torrent  that  leaps 
and  plunges  in  the  ethereal  soHtude  of  the  hills." 
The  poetry  of  Jalal  is  not  of  equal  merit.  His 
work  seldom  if  ever  has  the  technical  polish  of 
Jami.  There  is  too  much  of  it ;  too  much  pro- 
duced in  the  belief  that  all  his  poetry  was  inspired. 
He  is  fond  of  harping  on  certain  words,  and  as 
far  as  the  translations  are  concerned  he  has  little 


FIERCENESS    AND   TENDERNESS     41 

sense  of  humour.*  There  was  certainly  room 
for  a  touch  of  humour  in  the  poet's  description 
of  Iblis  receiving  from  God  a  gift  of  beautiful 
women  whereby  to  tempt  mankind  ;  but  Jalal 
entirely  ignores  it.  These  weaknesses  are  almost 
lost  in  the  strength  and  purity  and  lyrical  grandeur 
of  many  of  Jalal's  poems.  He  carries  us  along 
on  a  torrent  of  heavenly  music.  The  rhythmic 
swing  of  his  wonderful  dance  is  soul-stirring. 
We  seem  to  move  exultantly,  ecstatically,  to 
the  sound  of  the  poet's  singing,  far  behind  the 
silver  stars  into  the  Presence  of  the  Beloved. 
With  what  reverence,  with  what  a  glow  of 
simile  and  subtle  suggestion  he  describes  the 
Beauty  of  the  Beloved !  With  what  exquisite 
passion  he  foretells  the  Eternal  Union !  Then 
there  is  a  lull  in  this  fierce  spiritual  song,  and 
Jalal  sings,  ever  so  gently  and  with  an  infinite 
tenderness,  about  human  tears  being  turned 
into  "  rain-clouds."  He  sings  about  the  meeting 
of  two  friends  in  Paradise,  with  the  oft-repeated 
refrain,  "  Thou  and  I."  There  seems  in  this 
poem  an  indescribable  and  almost  pathetic 
play  on  the  idea  of  human  friendship  and  the 
Divine  Friendship,  a  yearning  tenderness  for 
that  human  shadow,  passing  shadow  though 
it    be.     Jalal    appears    to    have    the    power    of 

♦  Prof.  C.  E.  Wilson  informs  me  that  Jal41  certainly 
had  a  very  fair  sense  of  humour,  and  that  in  the  original 
there  is  often  a  clever  and  wittj'  play  on  words. 


42  THE    "MASNAVl" 

producing  almost  orchestral  effects  in  his  music 
of  the  Spheres.  There  is  that  terrific  touch  of 
Wagner  about  his  poetry,  and  in  those  suggestive 
Wagner-pauses  there  is  a  tenderness  of  expression 
more  touching,  more  truly  great  than  the  loud 
triumphant  notes.  Jalal  has  truly  said  :  "  Our 
journey  is  to  the  Rose-Garden  of  Union."  He 
sang  about  the  Divine  Rose-Garden  ;  but  he  did 
not  forget  to  sing  about  the  roses  that  fade  and 
the  human  hearts  that  ache.  We  seem  to  see 
Jalal  ever  bowing  to  the  little  child  in  all  his 
wonderful  singing. 

The  Masnavi. — Jalal  is  said  to  have  been 
forty-three  years  engaged  in  writing  the  Masnavi. 
Often  whole  nights  were  spent  in  its  composition, 
Jalal  reciting  and  his  friend  Hasam  copying  it 
down  and  sometimes  singing  portions  of  the 
verse  in  his  beautiful  voice.  At  the  completion 
of  the  first  book  Hasam 's  wife  died,  and  two 
years  elapsed  before  the  work  was  continued. 
The  Masnavi  is  full  of  profound  mysteries,  and 
is  a  most  important  book  in  the  study  of  Sufiism — 
mysteries  which  must,  for  the  most  part,  be  left 
to  the  discernment  of  the  reader.  Jalal  him- 
self has  said  that  great  Love  is  silent.  It  is 
in  Silence  that  we  shall  come  to  understand 
the  supreme  Mystery  of  Love  that  has  no  com- 
parison. The  key-note  to  the  Masnavi  may  be 
found  in  the  Prologue  to  the  first  book.  The 
poet  here  sings  of  the  soul's  longing  to  be  united 


THE  KEY-NOTE  TO  THE  "MASNAVI"    43 

with  the  Beloved.  The  fact  that  he,  and  all 
other  Sufi  poets,  use  as  an  analogy  the  love 
between  man  and  woman  renders  the  spiritual 
meaning  extremely  vague.  We  have,  however, 
already  considered  this  point  in  the  introduction, 
and  it  needs  no  further  explanation.  The  Masnavi 
has  all  the  pantheistic  beauty  of  the  Psalms, 
the  music  of  the  hills,  the  colour  and  scent  of 
roses,  the  swaying  of  forests  ;  but  it  has  con- 
siderably more  than  that.  These  things  of  scent 
and  form  and  colour  are  the  Mirror  of  the  Be- 
loved ;  these  earthy  loves  the  journey  down 
the  valley  into  the  Rose-Garden  where  the  roses 
never  fade,  and  where  Love  is. 


SELECTIONS   FROM   THE    "DIVANI 
SHAMSI   TABRIZ" 


"  I   AM   SILENT  " 


I  am  silent.     Speak  Thou,  0  Soul  of  Soul  of  Soul, 
From   desire  of  whose  Face  every  atom  grew 
articulate. 


A  CRY  TO   THE   BELOVED 

Yestereve  I  dehvered  to  a  star  tidings  for  thee  : 
"  Present,"  I  said,  "  my  service  to  that  moon- 
like form." 
I  bowed,  I  said  :  "  Bear  that  service  to  the  sun 
Who  maketh  hard  rocks  gold  by  his  burning." 
I  bared  my  breast,  I  showed  it  the  wounds  : 
"  Give  news  of  me,"  I  said,  "  to  the  Beloved 

whose  drink  is  blood." 
I  rocked  to  and  fro  that  the  child,  my  heart, 

might  become  still ; 
A  child  sleeps  when  one  sways  the  cradle. 

44 


REMEMBER  GOD  AND  FORGET  SELF  45 

Give  my  heart-babe  milk,  relieve  us  from  its 

weeping, 
0  Thou  that  helpest  every  moment  a  hundred 

helpless  like  me. 
The  heart's  home,  first  to  last,  is  Thy  City  of 

Union  : 
How  long  wilt  Thou  keep  in  exile  this  heart 

forlorn  ? 


REMEMBER  GOD   AND   FORGET   SELF 

0  spirit,  make  thy  head  in  search  and  seeking 
like  the  water  of  a  stream. 

And  0  reason,  to  gain  Eternal  Life  tread  ever- 
lastingly the  way  of  Death. 

Keep  God  in  remembrance  till  self  is  forgotten. 

That  thou  may  be  lost  in  the  Called,  without 
distraction  of  caller  and  call. 


"  THE  PRINCE   OF  THE   FAIR  " 

A  garden — may  its  rose  be  in  flower  to  Resurrec- 
tion ! 

An  idol — may  the  two  worlds  be  scattered  o'er 
his  beauty  ! 

The  Prince  of  the  Fair  goes  proudly  forth  to  the 
chase  at  morning  ; 

May  our  hearts  fall  a  prey  to  the  arrow  of  His 
glance  ! 


46     "MY   BODY   IS   LIKE   THE   MOON" 

From  His  eye  what  messages  are  passing  con- 
tinually to  mine  ! 

May  my  eyes  be  gladdened  and  filled  with 
intoxication  by  His  Message  ! 

"  MY   BODY   IS   LIKE   THE    MOON  '* 

My  body  is  like  the  moon  which  is  melting  for 

Love, 
My  heart  like  Zuhra's  *  lute — may  its  strings 

be  broken  ! 
Look  not  on  the  moon's  waning  nor  on  Zuhra's 

broken  state  : 
Behold  the  sweetness  of  his  affection — may  it 

wax  a  thousandfold  ! 


MORTALITY  AND   IMMORTALITY 

What  a  Bride  is  in  the  soul !     By  the  reflection 

of  Her  face 
May  the  world  be  freshened  and  coloured  like 

the  hands  of  the  newly  married  !  f 
Look  not  on  the  fleshy  cheek  which  corrupts 

and  decays, 
Look  on  the  spiritual  cheek — may  it  be  sweet 

and  agreeable  ! 

*  The  celestial  Venus,  and  leader  of  the  starry  choirs 
to  raiisic.  See  R.  A.  Nicholson's  note  in  Selected  Poems  from 
the  Dlvani  Shamsi  Tabriz. 

t  A  design  traced  in  henna. 


THE   DIVINE    CONSOLER  47 

The  dark  body  resembles  a  raven,  and  the  body's 

world  winter  ; 
0  in  spite  of  these  two  unpleasants  may  there 

be  Eternal  Spring  ! 


THE  BELOVED  THE  DIVINE  CONSOLER 

0  Thou  who  art  my  soul's  comfort  in  the  season 
of  sorrow, 

0  Thou   who   art   my   spirit's   treasure   in   the 

bitterness  of  dearth  ! 
That  which  the  imagination  has  not  conceived, 

that  which  the  understanding  has  not  seen, 
Visited  my  soul  from  Thee  ;    hence  in  worship 

I  turn  toward  Thee. 
By  Thy  grace  I  keep  fixed  on  Eternity  my  amorous 

gaze, 
Except,  0  King,  the  pomps  that  perish  lead  me 

astray. 
The  favour  of  that  one,  who  brings  glad  tidings 

of  Thee, 
Even  without  Thy  summons,  is  sweeter  in  mine 

ear  than  songs. 

•  •  •  •  • 

If  a  never-ceasing  bounty  should  offer  kingdoms. 
If   a  hidden  treasure  should  set  before  me  all 
that  is, 

1  would  bend  down  my  soul,  I  would  lay  my  face 

in  the  dust, 


48  THE    SOUL    OF   THE   WORLD 

I  would  say,  "  Of  all  these  the  love  of  such  an 
One  for  me  !  " 


"  THOU  ART   THE   SOTJL  OF  THE  WORLD  " 

Eternal  Life,  methinks,  is  the  time  of  Union, 
Because  Time,  for  me,  hath  no  place  There. 
Life  is  the  vessels.  Union  the  clear  draught  in 

them  ; 
Without  Thee  what  does  the  pain  of  the  vessels 

avail  me  ? 
I  had  twenty  thousand  desires  ere  this  ; 
In  passion  for  Him  not  even  (care  of)  my  safety 

remained. 
By  the  help   of  His  grace  I  am  become  safe, 

because 
The  unseen  King  saith  to  me,  "  Thou  art  the 

soul  of  the  world." 


"  THE   VOICE   OF  LOVE  " 

Every  moment  the  voice  of  Love  is  coming  from 

left  and  right. 
We  are  bound  for  heaven  :    who  has  a  mind  to 

sight-seeing  ? 
We  have  been  in  heaven,  we  have  been  friends 

of  the  angels  ; 
Thither,  Sire,  let  us  return,  for  that  is  our  country. 


THE    SEA   OF   LOVE  49 

THE   SEA   OF  LOVE 

Mankind,   like  waterfowl,   are  sprung  from  the 

sea — the  Sea  of  Soul ; 
Risen  from  that  Sea,  why  should  the  bird  make 

here  his  home  ? 
Nay,  we  are  pearls  in  that  Sea,  therein  we  all 

abide  ; 
Else,  why  does  wave  follow  wave  from  the  Sea 

of  Soul  ? 
'Tis  the  time  of  Union's  attainment,  'tis  the  time 

of  Eternity's  beauty, 
'Tis   the   time   of  favour  and  largesse,   'tis   the 

Ocean  of  perfect  purity. 
The  billow  of  largesse  hath  appeared,  the  thunder 

of  the  Sea  hath  arrived, 
The  morn  of  blessedness  hath  dawned.     Morn  ? 

No,  'tis  the  Light  of  God. 

THE  BEAUTY  OF  THE  BELOVED 

0   Beloved,   spiritual   beauty   is   very   fair   and 

glorious. 
But  Thine  own  beauty  and  loveliness  is  another 

thing. 
0  Thou  who  art  years  describing  Spirit, 
Show  one  quahty  that  is  equal  to  His  Essence. 
Light  waxes  in  the  eye  at  the  imagination  of 

Him, 
But  in  presence  of  His  Union  it  is  dimmed. 

i 


60  ETERNAL   LIFE 

I   stand   open-mouthed   in   veneration   of   that 

beauty  : 
"  God  is  most  great  "  is  on  my  heart's  lips  every 

moment. 
The  heart  hath  gotten  an  eye  constant  in  desire 

of  Thee. 
0  how  that  desire  feeds  heart  and  eye  ! 
'Tis  slave-caressing  Thy  Love  has  practised  ; 
Else,  where  is  the  heart  worthy  of  that  Love  ? 
Every  heart  that  has  slept  one  night  in  Thy  air 
Is  like  radiant  day. 


THE   WATER  OF  ETERNAL  LIFE 

Every  form  you  see  has  its  archet3rpe  in  the  place- 
less  world  ; 

If  the  form  perished,  no  matter,  since  its  Original 
is  everlasting. 

Every  fair  shape  you  have  seen,  every  deep 
saying  you  have  heard, 

Be  not  cast  down  that  it  perished ;  for  that  is 
not  so. 

Whereas  the  Spring-head  is  undying,  its  branch 
gives   water   continually  ; 

Since  neither  can  cease,  why  are  you  lamenting  ? 

Conceive  the  Soul  as  a  fountain,  and  these 
created  things  as  rivers  : 

While  the  Fountain  flows,  the  rivers  run  from  it. 


DIVINE    AND   HUMAN   LOVE         61 

Put  grief  out  of  your  head  and  keep  quaffing 

this  River-water  ; 
Do  not  think  of  the  Water  failing,  for  this  Water 

is  without  end. 


EARTHLY  LOVE   AND   THE   LOVE   DIVINE 

'Twere  better  that  the  spirit  which  wears  not 

true  Love  as  a  garment 
Had  not  been  :  its  being  is  but  shame. 

•  .  •  •  • 

Without  the  dealing  of  Love  there  is  no  entrance 
to  the  Beloved. 


'Tis  Love  and  the  Lover  that  live  to  all  Eternity  ; 

Set  not  thy  heart  on  aught  else  ;  'tis  only  bor- 
rowed, 

How  long  wilt  thou  embrace  a  dead  beloved  ? 

Embrace  the  Soul  which  is  embraced  by  nothing. 

What  was  born  of  spring  dies  in  autumn, 

Love's  rose-plot  hath  no  aiding  from  the  early 
spring. 


"  THE   HOUSE   OF  LOVE  " 

This    is    the    Lord   of   Heaven,    who   resembles 

Venus  and  the  moon, 
This  is  the  House  of  Love,  which  has  no  bound 

or  end. 


62  LOVE'S   DESIRE 

Like  a  mirror,  the  soul  has  received  Thy  image 

in  its  heart ; 
The  tip  of  Thy  curl  has  sunk  into  my  heart  like 

a  comb. 
Forasmuch   as   the  women  cut  their  hands  in 

Joseph's  presence, 
Come  to  me,  0  soul,  for  the  Beloved  is  in  the 

midst. 


love's  desire 

Show  Thy  face,  for  I  desire  the  orchard  and  the 

rose-garden  ; 
Ope  Thy  lips,  for  I  desire  sugar  in  plenty. 
0  sun,  show  forth  Thy  face  from  the  veil  of 

cloud, 
For  I  desire  that  radiant  glowing  countenance. 


THE   FINDINa  OF  THE  BELOVED 

I  was  on  that  day  when  the  Names  were  not. 
Nor  any  sign  of  existence  endowed  with  name, 
By  me  Names  and  Named  were  brought  to  view 
On  the  day  when  there  was  not  "  I  "  and  "  We," 
For  a  sign,  the  tip  of  the  Beloved's  curl  became 

a  centre  of  revelation  ; 
As  yet  the  tip  of  that  curl  was  not. 
Cross  and  Christians,  from  end  to  end, 
I  surveyed  ;  He  was  not  on  the  Croag, 


THE    MOON-SOUL   AND   THE    SEA      53 

I  went  to  the  idol- temple,  to  the  ancient  pagoda  ; 
No  trace  was  visible  there. 

I  went  to  the  mountains  of  Herat  and  Candahar  ; 
I  looked  ;  He  was  not  in  that  hill-and-dale, 

•  •  •  •  • 

I  gazed  into  my  own  heart ; 

There  I  saw  Him  ;  He  was  nowhere  else. 


GOD   ONLY 

"  None  but  God  has  contemplated  the  beauty  of 

God/' 
This  eye  and  that  lamp  are  two  lights,   each 

individual, 
When  they  came  together,  no  one  distinguished 

them. 


THE   MOON-SOUL  AND   THE   SEA   . 

At  morning-tide  a  moon  appeared  in  the  sky, 
And  descended  from  the  sky  and  gazed  on  me. 
Like  a  falcon  which  snatches  a  bird  at  the  time 

of  hunting. 
That  moon  snatched  me  up  and  coursed  over 

the  sky. 
When  I  looked  at  myself,  I  saw  myself  no  more, 
Because  in  that  moon  my  body  became  by  grace 

even  as  soul. 


54  LIFE    IN   DEATH 

When  I  travelled  in  soul,  I  saw  naught  save  the 

moon, 
Till  the  secret  of  the  Eternal  Theophany  was 

revealed. 
The  nine  spheres  of  heaven  were  all  merged  in 

that  moon, 
The  vessel  of  my  being  was  completely  hidden  in 

the  sea. 
The  sea  broke  into  waves,  and  again  Wisdom  rose 
And  cast  abroad  a  voice ;    so  it  happened  and 

thus  it  befell. 
Foamed  the  sea,  and  at  every  foam-fleck 
Something  took  figure  and  something  was  bodied 

forth. 
Every  foam-fleck  of  body,  which  received  a  sign 

from  that  sea, 
Melted  straightway  and  turned  to  spirit  in  this 

Ocean. 


LIFE   IN   DEATH 

When  my  bier  moveth  on  the  day  of  Death, 

Think  not  my  heart  is  in  this  world. 

Do  not  weep  in  the  devil's  snare  :   that  is  woe. 

When  thou  seest  my  hearse,  cry  not  "  Parted, 
parted  !  " 

Union  and  meeting  are  mine  in  that  hour. 

If  thou  commit  me  to  the  grave,  say  not  "  Fare- 
well, farewell !  " 


THE   DIVINE   FRIEND  55 

For  the  grave  is  a  curtain  hiding  the  communion 

of  Paradise, 
After  beholding  descent,  consider  resurrection  ; 
Why  should  setting  be  injurious  to  the  sun  and 

moon  ? 
To  thee  it  seems  a  setting,  but  'tis  a  rising  ; 
Tho'  the  vault  seems  a  prison,  'tis  the  release 

of  the  soul. 

•  •  •  •  • 

Shut  thy  mouth  on  this  side  and  open  it  beyond, 
For  in  placeless  air  will  be  thy  triumphal  song. 


THE   WHOLE   AND    THE   PART 

Beware  !   do  not  keep,  in  a  circle  of  reprobates, 
Thine  eye  shut  like  a  bud,  thy  mouth  open  like 

the  rose. 
The  world  resembles  a  mirror  :    thy  Love  is  the 

perfect  image  : 
0  people,  who  has  ever  seen  a  part  greater  than 

the  whole  ? 


THE   DIVINE   FRIEND 

Look  on  me,   for  thou   art   my  companion  in 

the  grave 
On  the  night  when  thou  shalt  pass  from  shop 

and  dwelling. 


66  ASPIRATION 

Thou  shalt  hear  my  hail  in  the  hollow  of  the 

tomb  :    it  shall  become  known  to  thee 
That  thou  wast  never  concealed  from  mine  eye. 
I  am  as  reason  and  intellect  within  thy  bosom 
At  the  time  of  joy  and  gladness,  at  the  time  of 
sorrow  and  distress. 

•  •  •  •  • 

In  the  hour  when  the  intellectual  lamp  is  lighted, 
What  a  pean  goes  up  from  the  dead  men  in  the 
tombs  ! 

ASPIRATION 

Haste,  haste  !    for  we  too,  0  soul,  are  coming 
From  this  world  of  severance  to  that  world  of 

Union. 
0  how  long  shall  we,  like  children,  in  the  earthly 

sphere 
Fill  our  lap  with  dust  and  stones  and  sherds  ? 
Let  us  give  up  the  earth  and  fly  heavenwards, 
Let  us  flee  from  childhood  to  the  banquet  of 

men. 
Behold  how  the  earthly  frame  has   entrapped 

thee  I 
Rend  the  sack  and  raise  thy  head  clear. 

"  I  WILL  CHERISH  THE   SOUL  " 

"  I  am  a  painter,  a  maker  of  pictures ;    every 

moment  I  shape  a  beauteous  form. 
And  then  in  Thy  presence  I  melt  them  aU  away. 


LOVE  57 

I  call  up  a  hundred  phantoms  and  indue  them 

with  a  spirit ; 
When  I  behold  Thy  phantom,  I  cast  them  in  the 

fire." 

•  •  •  •  • 

Lo  !    I  will  cherish  the  soul,  because  it  has  a 

perfume  of  Thee. 
Every  drop  of  blood  which  proceeds  from  me 

is  saying  to  Thy  dust  : 
"  I  am  one  colour  with  Thy  love,  I  am  a  partner 

of  Thy  affection.'* 
In  the  house  of  water  and  clay  this  heart  is 

desolate  without  Thee  ; 
0  Beloved,  enter  the  house,  or  I  will  leave  it. 


"  THIS   IS  LOVE  " 


This  is  Love  :   to  fly  heavenward, 

To  rend,  every  instant,  a  hundred  veils. 

The  first  moment,  to  renounce  Life  : 

The  last  step,  to  feel  without  feet. 

To  regard  this  world  as  invisible. 

Not  to  see  what  appears  to  one's  self. 

**  0  heart,"  I  said,  "  may  it  bless  thee 

To  have  entered  the  circle  of  lovers. 

To  look  beyond  the  range  of  the  eye. 

To  penetrate  the  windings  of  the  bosom  ! 

Whence  did  this  breath  come  to  thee,  0  my  soul, 

Whence  this  throbbing,  0  my  heart  ?  " 


58  THE    DIVINE    JOURNEY 

THE  JOURNEY  TO  THE  BELOVED 

0  lovers,  0  lovers,  it  is  time  to  abandon  the 

world  : 
The  drum  of  departure  reaches  my  spiritual  ear 

from  heaven. 
Behold,  the  driver  has  risen  and  made  ready  his 

files  of  camels. 
And  begged  us  to  acquit  him  of  blame  :    why, 

0  travellers,  are  you  asleep  ? 
These  sounds  before  and  behind  are  the  din  of 

departure  and  of  the  camel-bells  ; 
With  each  moment  a  soul  and  spirit  is  setting 

off  into  the  Void. 
From  these  inverted  candles,   from  these  blue 

awnings 
There  has  come  forth  a  wondrous  people,  that 

the  mysteries  may  be  revealed. 
A  heavy  slumber  fell  upon  thee  from  the  circling 

spheres  : 
Alas,  for  this  life  so  light,  beware  of  this  slumber 

so  heavy  ! 
0  soul,   seek  the  Beloved,   0  friend,   seek  the 

Friend, 
0   watchman,    be   wakeful :    it   behoves   not   a 

watchman  to  sleep. 

THE   DAY   OF  RESURRECTION 

On  every  side  is  clamour  and  tumult,  in  every 
street  are  candles  and  torches, 


THE  RETURN  OP  THE  BELOVED  59 

For  to-night  the  teeming  world  gives  birth  to  the 

World  Everlasting. 
Thou  wert  dust  and  art  spirit,  thou  wert  ignorant 

and  art  wise. 
He  who  has  led  thee   thus  far  will  lead  thee 

further  also. 
How  pleasant  are  the  pains  He  makes  thee  suffer 

while  He  gently  draws  thee  to  Himself  ! 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  BELOVED 

Always  at  night  returns  the  Beloved  :  do  not 
eat  opium  to-night ; 

Close  your  mouth  against  food,  that  you  may 
taste  the  sweetness  of  the  mouth. 

Lo,  the  cup-bearer  is  no  tyrant,  and  in  his  as- 
sembly there  is  a  circle  : 

Come  into  the  circle,  be  seated  ;  how  long  will 
you  regard  the  revolution  (of  Time)  ? 

•  •  •  •  • 

Why,  when  God's  earth  is  so  wide,  have  you 

fallen  asleep  in  a  prison  ? 
Avoid   entangled   thoughts,    that   you   may   see 

the  explanation  of  Paradise. 
Refrain  from  speaking,  that  you  may  win  speech 

hereafter. 
Abandon  life  and  the  world,  that  you  may  behold 

the  Life  of  the  world. 


60  THE   DIVINE    UNION 

THE   CALL   OF  THE   BELOVED 

Every   morning    a   voice   comes    to    thee    from 

heaven  : 
"  When  thou  lay'st  the  dust  of  the  way,  thou 

win'st  thy  way  to  the  goal." 
On  the  road  to  the  Ka'ba  of  Union,  lo,  in  every 

thorn-bush 
Are    thousands    slain    of    desire    who    manfully 

yielded  up  their  lives. 
Thousands  sank  wounded  on  this  path,  to  whom 

there  came  not 
A  breath  of  the  fragrance  of  Union,  a  token  from 

the  neighbourhood  of  the  Friend. 

"  THE   BANQUET   OF  UNION  " 

In  memory  of  the  banquet  of  Union,  in  yearning 

for  His  beauty 
They  are  fallen  bewildered  by  the  wine  Thou 

knowest. 
How  sweet,  in  the  hope  of  Him,  on  the  threshold 

of  His  Abode, 
For  the  sake  of  seeing  His  face,  to  bring  night 

round  to  day  ! 
Illumine  thy  bodily  senses  by  the  Light  of  the 

soul : 

•  •  •  •  • 

Look  not  in  the  world  for  bliss  and  fortune, 
»inc©  thou  wilt  not  find  them  ; 


SILENCE  61 

Seek  bliss  in  both  worlds  by  serving  Him, 
Put  away  the  tale  of  Love  that  travellers  tell ; 
Do  thou  serve  God  with  all  thy  might. 


"  BE    SILENT  " 

Be  silent  that  the  Lord  who  gave  thee  language 

may  speak. 
For  as  He  fashioned  a  door  and  lock,  He  has 

also  made  a  key. 


"  THOU  DIDST  GO   TO   THE   ROSE-GARDEN  " 

At   last   thou   hast   departed   and  gone   to   the 

Unseen  ; 
'Tis  marvellous  by  what  way  thou  wentest  from 

the  world. 
Thou  didst  strongly  shake  thy  wings  and  feathers, 

and  having  broken  thy  cage 
Didst  take  to  the  air  and  journey  towards  the 

world  of  Soul. 
Thou  wert  a  favourite  falcon,  kept  in  captivity 

by  an  old  woman  : 
When  thou  heard'st  the  falcon-drum  thou  didst 

fly  away  into  the  Void. 
Thou  wert  a  love-lorn  nightingale  among  owls  : 
The  scent  of  the  Rose-Garden  reached  thee,  and 

thou  didst  go  to  the  Rose-Garden, 


62      THE  SOUL  OF  SOUL 


"  THE  WORLD  GAVE  THEE  FALSE  CLUES  " 


The  world  gave  thee  false  clues,  like  a  ghoul : 
Thou  took'st  no  heed  of  the  clue,  but  wentest  to 

that  which  is  without  a  clue. 
Since  thou  art  now  the  sun,  why  dost  thou  wear 

a  tiara  ? 
Why  seek  a  girdle,  since  thou  art  gone  from  the 

middle  ? 
I  have  heard  that  thou  art  gazing  with  distorted 

eyes  upon  thy  soul : 
Why  dost  thou  gaze  on  thy  soul,  since  thou  art 

gone  to  the  Soul  of  soul  ? 
0  heart,  what  a  wondrous  bird  art  thou,  that 

in  chase  of  divine  rewards 
Thou  didst  fly  with  two  wings  to  the  spear-point, 

like  a  shield  ! 
The  rose  flees  from  autumn — 0  what  a  fearless 

rose  art  thou, 
Who  didst  go  loitering  along  in    the   presence 

of  the  autumn  wind  ! 
Falling  like  rain  from  heaven  upon  the  roof  of 

the  terrestrial  world 
Thou  didst  run  in  every  direction  till  thou  didst 

escape  by  conduit. 
Be  silent  and  free  from  the  pain  of  speech  :    do 

not  slumber. 
Since  thou  hast  taken  refuge  with  so  loving  a 

Friend. 


LOVE'S   MIGHTY   ARM  63 


"  HE   COMES  " 


He  comes,  a  moon  whose  like  the  sky  ne'er  saw, 
awake  or  dreaming, 
Crowned  with  Eternal  Flame  no  flood  can  lay. 
Lo,  from  the  flagon  of  Thy  Love,  0  Lord,  my  soul 
is  swimming. 
And  ruined  all  my  body's  house  of  clay  ! 
When  first  the  Giver  of  the  grape  my  lonely 
heart  befriended, 
Wine  fired  my  bosom  and  my  veins  filled  up. 
But  when  His  image  all  mine  eye  possessed,  a 
voice  descended  : 
"  W^ell  done,  0   sovereign   Wine  and  peerless 
Cup  !  " 
Love's  mighty  arm  from  roof  to  base  each  dark 
abode  is  hewing 
Where  chinks  reluctant  catch  a  golden  ray. 
My  heart,  when  Love's  sea  of  a  sudden  burst 
into  its  viewing. 
Leaped  headlong  in,  with  "  Find  me  now  who 
may 


I  '» 


"  THE  ROAD  BE  THINE  TOWARDS  THE  SHRINE  " 

0  honoured  guest  in  Love's  high  feast,  0  bird  of 
the  angel-sphere, 

'Tis  cause  to  weep,  if  thou  wilt  keep  thy  habita- 
tion here. 


64  TOWARD    THE    SHRINE 

A  voice  at  morn  to  thee  is  borne — God  whispers 

to  the  soul — 
"If  on  the  way  the  dust  thou  lay,  thou  soon 

wilt  gain  the  goal." 
The  road  be  thine  toward  the  Shrine  !    and  lo, 

in  bush  and  briar, 
The  many  slain  of  Love  and  pain  in  flower  of 

young  desire, 
Who  on  the  track  fell  wounded  back  and  saw  not, 

ere  the  end, 
A  ray  of  bliss,  a  touch,  a  kiss,  a  token  of  the 

Friend  ! 

THY   ROSE 

Our  Sweetnesses  all  blent  in  Thee, 

Give  infant  Hps  their  smiles  benign. 
Thou  crushest  me  to  drops  of  Rose 

Nor  'neath  the  press  do  I  repine. 
In  Thy  sweet  Pain  is  pain  forgot ; 

For  I,  Thy  Rose,  had  this  design. 
Thou  bad'st  me  blossom  on  Thy  Robe, 

And  mad'st  me  for  all  eyes  Thy  sign. 
And  when  Thou  pour'st  me  on  the  world, 

It  blows  in  beauty,  all  Divine. 


"  I   SAW  THE   WINTER  WEAVING  '* 

I  saw  the  winter  weaving  from  flakes  a  robe  of 
Death ; 


GOD'S   LIKENESS  65 

And   the   spring   found   earth   in   mourning,   all 

naked,  lone,  and  bare. 
I  heard  Time's  loom  a- whirring  that  wove  the 

Sun's  dim  Veil ; 
I  saw  a  worm  a-weaving  in  Life-threads  its  own 

lair. 
I   saw   the   Great   was   Smallest,    and   saw   the 

Smallest  Great ; 
For  God  had  set  His  likeness  on  all  the  things 

that  were. 


"  LOVE   SOUNDS   THE   MUSIC   OF  THE   SPHERES  " 

0,  soul,  if  thou,  too,  wouldst  be  free. 
Then  love  the  Love  that  shuts  thee  in. 

'Tis  Love  that  twisteth  every  snare  ; 
'Tis  Love  that  snaps  the  bond  of  sin  ; 

Love  sounds  the  Music  of  the  Spheres ; 
Love  echoes  through  Earth's  harshest  din. 

•  •  •  •  • 

The  world  is  God's  pure  mirror  clear, 
To  eyes  when  free  from  clouds  within. 

With  Love's  own  eyes  the  Mirror  view, 
And  there  see  God  to  self  akin. 


*'  THE   SOULS  LOVE-MOVED  '* 

The  souls  love-moved  are  circling  on, 
Like  streams  to  their  great  Ocean  King. 

6 


66        THE    BELOVED    ALL   IN   ALL 

Thou  art  the  Sun  of  all  men's  thoughts  ; 

Thy  kisses  are  the  flowers  of  spring. 
The  dawn  is  pale  from  yearning  Love  ; 

The  moon  in  tears  is  sorrowing. 
Thou  art  the  Rose,  and  deep  for  Thee, 

In  sighs,  the  nightingales  still  sing. 

THE   BELOVED   ALL  IN   ALL 

My  Soul  sends  up  to  Heaven  each  night  the  cry 
of  Love  I 

God's  starry  Beauty  draws  with  might  the  cry 
of  Love  ! 

Bright  sun  and  moon  each  morn  dance  in  my 
Heart  at  Dawn  : 

And  waking  me  at  daylight,  excite  the  cry  of 
Love  ! 

On  every  meadow  glancing,  I  see  God's  sun- 
beams play  ; 

And  all  Creation's  wonders  excite  the  cry  of 
Love  ! 

•  •  •  •  • 

I,  All  in  All  becoming,  now  clear  see  God  in  All ; 
And  up  from  Union  yearning,  takes  flight  the 
cry  of  Love  ! 


"  THOU  AND  I  " 

Happy  the  moment  when  we  are  seated  in  the 
Palace,  thou  and  I, 


"THOU   AND    I"  67 

With  two  forms  and  with  two  figures  but  with 

one  soul,  thou  and  I. 
The  colours  of  the  grove  and  the  voice  of  the 

birds  will  bestow  immortality 
At  the  time  when  we  come  into  the  garden,  thou 

and  I. 
The  stars  of  heaven  will  come  to  gaze  upon  us  ; 
We  shall  show  them  the  moon  itself,  thou  and  I. 
Thou  and  I,  individuals  no  more,  shall  be  mingled 

in  ecstasy. 
Joyful,  and  secure  from  foolish  babble,  thou  and  I. 
All  the  bright-plumed  birds  of  heaven  will  devour 

their  hearts  with  envy 
In  the  place  where  we  shall  laugh  in  such  a  fashion, 

thou  and  I. 
This  is  the  greatest  wonder,  that  thou  and  I, 

sitting  here  in  the  same  nook, 
Are  at  this  moment  both  in  *  Iraq  and  Khorasan, 

thou  and  I. 


SELECTIONS   FROM   THE    '^MASNAVI" 


SORROW  QUENCHED   IN  THE   BELOVED 

Through  grief  my  days  are  as  labour  and  sorrow. 
My  days  move  on,  hand  in  hand  with  anguish. 
Yet,  though  my  days  vanish  thus,  'tis  no  matter, 
Do  Thou  abide,  0  Incomparable  Pure  One. 


THE   MUSIC   OF  LOVE 

Hail  to  thee,  then,  0  love,  sweet  madness  ! 
Thou  who  healest  all  our  infirmities  ! 
Who  art  the  Physician  of  our  pride  and  self- 
conceit  ! 
Who  art  our  Plato  and  our  Galen  ! 
Love  exalts  our  earthly  bodies  to  heaven, 
And  makes  the  very  hills  to  dance  with  joy  ! 

0  lover,  'twas  Love  that  gave  life  to  Mount  Sinai, 
When  "  it  quaked,  and  Moses  fell  down  in  a 

swoon." 
Did  my  Beloved  only  touch  me  with  His  lips, 

1  too,  like  a  flute,  would  burst  out  into  melody. 

68 


THE    SILENCE    OF   LOVE  69 


WHEN   THE   ROSE   HAS   FADED 

When    the   rose   has  faded   and  the    garden  is 

withered, 
The  song  of  the  nightingale  is  no  longer  to  be 

heard. 
The  BELOVED  is  all  in  all,  the  lover  only  veils 

Him  ; 
The  BELOVED  is  all  that  lives,  the  lover  a  dead 

thing. 
When  the  lover  feels  no  longer  love's  quickening, 
He  becomes  Uke  a  bird  who  has  lost  its  wings. 

Alas  ! 
How  can  I  retain  my  senses  about  me, 
When  the  beloved  shows  not  the  Light  of  His 

countenance  ? 


THE   SILENCE   OF  LOVE 

Love  is  the  astrolabe  of  God's  mysteries. 
A  lover  may  hanker  after  this  love  or  that  love, 
But  at  the  last  he  is  drawn  to  the  king  of  Love. 
However  much  we  describe  and  explain  Love, 
When  we  fall  in  love  we  are  ashamed  of  our 

words. 
Explanation  by  the  tongue  makes  most  things 

clear, 
But  Love  unexplained  is  better. 


70  WOMAN 

EARTHLY   LOVE    ESSENTIAL   TO    THE    LOVE    DIVINE 

In  one  'twas  said,  *'  Leave  power  and  weakness 

alone  ; 
Whatever  withdraws  thine  eyes  from  God  is  an 

idol." 
In   one    'twas  said,     "  Quench  not  thy  earthy 

torch, 
That  it  may  be  a  light  to  lighten  mankind. 
If  thou  neglectest  regard  and  care  for  it, 
Thou  wilt  quench  at  midnight  the  lamp  of  Union.' 

THE  ETERNAL  SPLENDOUR  OF  THE  BELOVED 

Why  dost  Thou  flee  from  the  cries  of  us  on  earth  ? 
Why  pourest  Thou  sorrow  on  the  heart  of  the 

sorrowful  ? 
0  Thou  who,  as  each  new  morn  dawns  from  the 

east. 
Art  seen  uprising  anew,  like  a  bright  fountain  ! 
What  excuse  makest  Thou  for  Thy  witcheries  ? 
0  Thou  whose  hps  are  sweeter  than  sugar. 
Thou  that  ever  renewest  the  life  of  this  old  world, 
Hear  the  cry  of  this  lifeless  body  and  heart ! 

WOMAN 

Woman  is  a  ray  of  God,  not  a  mere  mistress, 
Th©  Creator's  Self,  as  it  were,  not  a  mere  creature  ! 


THE    BRIDE       '  71 

THE   DIVINE   UNION 

Mustafa  became  beside  himseK  at  that  sweet  call, 
His  prayer  failed  on   "  the  night  of  the  early 

morning  halt." 
He  lifted  not  head  from  that  blissful  sleep,* 
So  that  his  morning  prayer  was  put  off  till  noon. 
On  that,  his  wedding  night,  in  the  presence  of 

his  bride, 
His  pure  soul  attained  to  kiss  her  hands. 
Love  and  mistress  are  both  veiled  and  hidden. 
Impute  it  not  a  fault  if  I  call  Him  "  Bride." 

"  HE  KNOWS  ABOUT   IT  ALL  "f 

He  who  is  from  head  to  foot  a  perfect  rose  or 

lily, 
To  him  spring  brings  rejoicing. 
The  useless  thorn  desires  the  autumn, 
That    autumn    may    associate    itself    with    the 

garden  ; 
And  hide  the  rose's  beauty  and  the  thorn's  shame, 
That  men  may  not  see  the  bloom  of  the  one  and 

the  other's  shame ; 
That  common  stone  and  pure  ruby  may  appear 

all  as  one. 


*  The  night  of  his  marriage  with  Safiyya. 
t  See  Rubaiydt  of  Omar  Khayyam,  translated  by  Edward 
Fitz-Gerald,  second  edition,  quatrain  Ixx. 


72  RESIGNATION 

True,  the  Gardener  knows  the  difference  in  the 

autumn, 
But  the  sight  of  One  is  better  than  the  world's 

sight. 

RESIGNATION  THE   WAY  TO   PERFECTION 

Whoso  recognises  and  confesses  his  own  defects 
Is  hastening  in  the  way  that  leads  to  Perfection  ! 
But  he  advances  not  towards  the  Almighty 
Who  fancies  himself  to  be  perfect. 


LOVE    THE    SOURCE    OF    LIGHT    RATHER    THAN 
VANISHING  FORM 

Whatsoever  is  perceived  by  sense  He  annuls. 
But  He  stablishes  that  which  is  hidden  from  the 

senses. 
The  lover's  love  is  visible,  his  Beloved  hidden. 
The  Friend  is  absent,  the  distraction  He  causes 

present. 
Renounce  these  affections  for  outward  forms, 
Love  depends  not  on  outward  form  or  face. 
Whatever  is  beloved  is  not  a  mere  empty  form, 
Whether  your  beloved  be  of  the  earth  or  heaven. 
Whatever  is  the  form  you  have  fallen  in  love 

with — 
Why  do  you  forsake  it  the  moment  life  leaves 

it? 


THE    RELIGION   OP   LOVE  73 

The  form  *  is  stiU  there  ;  whence  then  this  disgust 

at  it? 
Ah  !     lover,   consider  well   what   is   really  your 

beloved. 
If  a  thing  perceived  by  outward  senses  is  the 

beloved, 
Then  all  who  retain  their  senses  must  still  love 

it ; 
And  since  Love  increases  constancy, 
How  can  constancy  fail  while  form  abides  ? 
But   the   truth  is,   the   sun's   beams   strike   the 

wall. 
And  the  wall  only  reflects  that  borrowed  light. 
Why  give  your  heart  to  mere  stones,  O  simpleton  ? 
Go  !     Seek  the  Source  of  Light  which  shineth 

alway ! 

THE   RELIGION   OF  LOVE 

The  sect  of  lovers  is  distinct  from  all  others. 
Lovers  have  a  religion  and  a  faith  of  their  own. 
Though  the  ruby  has  no  stamp,  what  matters  it  ? 
Love  is  fearless  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  of  fear. 


"  PAIN   IS   A   TREASURE  * 

Pain  is  a  treasure,  for  it  contains  mercies  ; 
The  kernel  is  soft  when  the  rind  is  scraped  off. 

*  "  Form  "  here  is  used  rather  as  ^oul,  the  love  behind 
the  decaying  body. 


74  A   SWEET   GARDEN 

O  brother,  the  place  of  darkness  and  cold 

Is  the  fountain  of  Life  and  the  cup  of  ecstasy. 

So  also  is  endurance  of  pain  and  sickness  and 

disease. 
For  from  abasement  proceeds  exaltation. 
The  spring  seasons  are  hidden  in  the  autumns, 
And  the  autumns  are  charged  with  springs. 


SPIRIT  GREATER  THAN   FORM 

If  spiritual  manifestations  had  been  sufficient, 
The  creation  of  the  world  had  been  needless  and 

vain.  " 

If  spiritual  thought  were  equivalent  to  love  of 

God, 
Outward  forms  of  temples  and  prayers  would  not 

exist. 


THE  BELOVED  COMPARED  TO  "  A  SWEET  GARDEN  " 

"  We   bow   down   our    heads    before    His    edict 

and  ordinance, 
We  stake  precious  life  to  gain  His  favour. 
While  the  thought  of  the  Beloved  fills  our  hearts, 
AU  our  work  is  to  do  Him  service  and  spend  life 

for  Him. 
Wherever  He  kindles  His  destructive  torch, 
Myriads  of  lovers*  souls  are  burnt  therewith. 


THE   WATER   OF   WATERS  76 

The  lovers  who  dwell  within  the  sanctuary 
Are  moths  burnt  with  the  torch  of  the  Beloved's 

face." 
0  heart,  haste  thither,  for  God  will  shine  upon 

you, 
And  seem  to  you  a  sweet  garden  instead  of  a 

terror. 
He  will  infuse  into  your  soul  a  new  Soul, 
So  as  to  fill  you,  like  a  goblet,  with  wine. 
Take  up  your  abode  in  His  Soul ! 
Take  up  your  abode  in  heaven,  0  bright  full 

moon  ! 
Like  the  heavenly  Scribe,   He  will   open  your 

heart's  book 
That  He  may  reveal  mysteries  unto  you. 


(( 


BEHOLD  THE  WATER  OF  WATERS  I  " 


The  sea  itself  is  one  thing,  the  foam  another  ; 
Neglect  the  foam,  and  regard  the  sea  with  your 

eyes. 
Waves  of  foam  rise  from  the  sea  night  and  day. 
You  look  at  the  foam  ripples  and  not  at  the 

mighty  sea. 
We,  like  boats,  are  tossed  hither  and  thither. 
We  are  blind  though  we  are  on  the  bright  ocean. 
Ah  !    you   who  are   asleep  in  the  boat  of   the 

body. 
You  see  the  water  ;  behold  the  Water  of  waters  ! 


76  WHERE   LOVE    IS 

Under  the  water  you  see  there  is  another  Water 

moving  it. 
Within  the  spirit  is  a  Spirit  that  calls  it. 

•  •  •  • 

When  you  have  accepted  the  Light,  0  beloved, 
When  you  behold  what  is  veiled  without  a  veil, 
Like  a  star  you  will  walk  upon  the  heavens. 


WHERE   LOVE   IS 

A  damsel  said  to  her  lover,  "  0  fond  youth, 
You  have  visited  many  cities  in  your  travels  ; 
Which  of  those  cities  seems  most  delightful  to 

you  ?  " 
He  made  answer,   "  The  city  wherein  my  love 

dwells. 
In  whatever  noolc  my  queen  alights ; 
Though  it  be  as  the  eye  of  a  needle,  'tis  a  wide 

plain  ; 
Wherever  her  Yusuf-like  *  face  shines  as  a  moon, 
Though  it  be  the  bottom  of  a  well,  'tis  Paradise. 
With  thee,  my  love,  hell  itself  were  heaven. 
With  thee  a  prison  would  be  a  rose-garden. 
With  thee  hell  would  be  a  mansion  of  delight, 
Without  thee  liUes  and  roses  would  be  as  flames 

of  fire  !  " 


*  Joseph,  a  name  frequently  used  by  Persian  poeta, 
irrespective  of  gender,  to  symbolise  the  ideal  type  of  human 
beauty. 


THE  LOVE  OF  SOUL  AND  BODY  77 

THE  LOVE   OF  THE   BELOVED 

No  lover  ever  seeks  union  with  his  beloved, 
But  his  beloved  is  also  seeking  union  with  him. 
But  the  lover's  love  *  makes  his  body  lean, 
While   the   Beloved's   love  makes  her  fair  and 

lusty. 
When  in  this  heart  the  Hghtning  spark  of  love 

arises, 
Be  sure  this  Love  is  reciprocated  in  that  heart. 
When  the  Love  of  God  arises  in  thy  heart, 
Without  doubt  God  also  feels  love  for  thee. 


THE  LOVE  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  THE  LOVE  OF  THE 

BODY 

The  Love  of  the  soul  is  for  Life  and  the  Living 
One, 

Because  its  origin  is  the  Soul  not  bound  to 
place. 

The  Love  of  the  soul  is  for  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge, 

That  of  the  body  for  houses,  gardens,  and  vine- 
yards ; 

The  love  of  the  soul  is  for  things  exalted  on  high, 

That  of  the  body  for  acquisition  of  goods  and 
food. 

•  Earthly  love. 


78  HEART'S   DESIRE 

The  Love,  too,  of  Him  on  high  is  directed  to  the 

soul : 
Know  this,  for  "  He  loves  them  that  love  Him.'*  * 
The  sum  is  this  :  that  whoso  seeks  another, 
The  soul  of  that  other  who  is  sought  inclines  to 

him. 


"  O  LOVE,  LOVE,  AND  HEART's  DESIRE  OF  LOVE  !  " 

0  Israfil  of  the  resurrection-day  of  Love  ! 
O  Love,  Love,  and  heart's  desire  of  Love  ! 
Let  thy  first  boon  to  me  be  this  : 
To  lend  thine  ear  to  my  orisons, 
Though  thou  knowest  my  condition  clearly, 
0  protector  of  slaves,  listen  to  my  speech. 
A  thousand  times,   0  prince  incomparable. 
Has  my  reason  taken  flight  in  desire  to  see  thee, 
And  to  hear  thee  and  to  listen  to  thy  words, 
And  to  behold  thy  life-giving  smiles. 
Thy  inclining  thine  ear  to  my  supplications 
Is  as  a  caress  to  my  misguided  soul. 


DESTROY  NOT  EARTHLY  BEAUTY  :     IT  BEAUTIFIES 

THE   SOUL 

Tear  not  thy  plumage  off,  it  cannot  be  replaced  ; 
Disfigure  not  thy  face  in  wantonness,  0  fair  one  i 

*  Koran. 


THE    DEVIL  79 

That  face  which  is  bright  as  the  forenoon  sun — 
To  disfigure  it  were  a  grievous  sin. 
'Twere  paganism  to  mar  such  a  face  as  thine  ! 
The  moon  itself  would  weep  to  lose  sight  of  it ! 
Knowest  thou  not  the  beauty  of  thine  own  face  ? 
Quit  this  temper  that  leads  thee  to  war  with 

thyself  ! 
It  is  the  claws  of  thine  own  foolish  thoughts 
That  in  spite  wound  the  face  of  thy  quiet  soul. 
Know  such  thoughts  to  be  claws  fraught  with 

poison. 
Which  score  deep  wounds  on  the  face  of  thy  soul. 


THE  DEVIL  MAKES  USE  OF  THE  BEAUTY  OF  WOMEN 

Thus  spake  cursed  Iblis  to  the  Almighty, 

"  I  want  a  mighty  trap  to  catch  human  game 

withal  !  " 
God  gave  him  gold  and  silver  and  troops  and 

horses, 
Saying,    "  You    can    catch    my    creatures    with 

these." 
Iblis  said,  "  Bravo  !  "  but  at  the  same  time  hung 

his  lip. 
And  frowned  sourly  like  a  bitter  orange. 
Then  God  offered  gold  a«id  jewels  from  precious 

mines 
To  that  laggard  in  the  faith. 
Saying,  "  Take  these  other  traps,  0  cursed  one." 


80  THE    BEAUTY    OF   WOMEN 

But  Iblis  said,  "  Give  me  more,  0  blessed  De- 
fender." 

God  gave  him  succulent  and  sweet  and  costly 
wines, 

And  also  store  of  silken  garments. 

But  Iblis  said,  "  0  Lord,  I  want  more  aids  than 
these. 

In  order  to  bind  men  in  my  twisted  rope 

So  firmly  that  Thy  adorers,  who  are  valiant  men, 

May  not,  man-Hke,  break  my  bonds  asunder." 

•  •  •  •  • 

When   at  last   God  showed  him  the  beauty  of 

women. 
Which  bereaves  men  of  reason  and  self-control, 
Then  Iblis  clapped  his  hands  and  began  to  dance, 
Saying,  "  Give  me  these  ;   I  shall  quickly  prevail 

with  these  !  "  * 


**  LOVERS  AND  BELOVED  HAVE  BOTH  PERISHED  " 

Lovers  and  beloved  have  both  perished ; 
And  not  themselves  only,  but  their  love  as  well. 
'Tis  God  alone  who  agitates  these  nonentities, 
Making  one  nonentity  fall  in  love  with  another. 

*  The  meaning  of  this  poem  is  strictly  allegorical.  Wo 
must  not  infer  that  the  All-Good  would  be  a  party  to  the 
evil  designs  of  the  Devil.  No  material  gifts,  however  seduc- 
tive, could  succeed  in  stamping  out  the  Divine  Presence 
in  His  creatures. 


SELF-AGGRANDISEMENT  81 

In  the  heart  that  is  no  heart  envy  comes  to  a 

head, 
Thus  Being  troubles  nonentity.* 


"  O   ANGELS,    BRING   HIM   BACK   TO   ME  " 

"  0  angels,  bring  him  back  to  me. 
Since  the  eyes  of  his  heart  were  set  on  Hope, 
Without  care  for  consequence  I  set  him  free, 
And  draw  the  pen  through   the  record  of  his 
sms  ! 


SELF-AGGRANDISEMENT  AND  VAINGLORY 
NO   PART   OF   LOVE 

A  lover  was  once  admitted  to  the  presence 
of  his  mistress,  but,  instead  of  embracing  her, 
he  pulled  out  a  paper  of  sonnets  and  read  them 
to  her,  describing  her  perfections  and  charms 
and  his  own  love  towards  her  at  length.  His 
mistress  said  to  him,  "  You  are  now  in  my 
presence,  and  these  lovers'  sighs  and  invocations 
are  a  waste  of  time.  It  is  not  the  part  of  a  true 
lover  to  waste  his  time  in  this  way.  It  shows  that 
I  am  not  the  real  object  of  your  affection,  but 

♦  At  first  sight  there  seems  to  be  Omarian  pessimiam 
in  this  poem.  In  reaUty  it  signifies  that  all  Love  is  One, 
which  shines  through  the  ever- vanishing  lanterns  of  the 
worl4. 

« 


82        LOVE    NEEDS   NO    MEDIATOR 

that  what  you  really  love  is  your  own  effusions 
and  ecstatic  raptures.  I  see,  as  it  were,  the  water 
which  I  have  longed  for  before  me,  and  yet  you 
withhold  it.  I  am,  as  it  were,  in  Bulgaria,  and 
the  object  of  your  love  is  in  Cathay.  One  who 
is  really  loved  is  the  single  object  of  her  lover, 
the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  his  desires.  As  for 
you,  you  are  wrapped  up  in  your  own  amorous 
raptures,  depending  on  the  varying  states  of 
your  own  feelings,  instead  of  being  wrapped 
up  in  me." 

"  I  AM  THINE,   AND   THOU   ART  MINE  !  " 

Eternal  Life  is  gained  by  utter  abandonment 
of  one's  own  life.  When  God  appears  to  His 
ardent  lover  the  lover  is  absorbed  in  Him,  and 
not  so  much  as  a  hair  of  the  lover  remains. 
True  lovers  are  as  shadows,  and  when  the  sun 
shines  in  glory  the  shadows  vanish  away.  He 
is  a  true  lover  to  God  to  whom  God  says,  "  I  am 
thine,  and  thou  art  Mine  !  " 

LOVE  NEEDS  NO    MEDIATOR 

When  one  has  attained  Union  with  God  he 
has  no  need  of  intermediaries.  Prophets  and 
apostles  are  needed  as  links  to  connect  ordinary 
man  with  God,  but  he  who  hears  the  "  inner 
voice  "  within  him  has  no  need  to  listen  to  out- 


EARTHLY   FORMS  83 

ward  words,  even  of  apostles.  Although  that 
intercession  is  himself  dwelling  in  God,  yet  my 
state  is  higher  and  more  lovely  than  his.  Though 
he  is  God's  agent,  yet  I  desire  not  his  intercession 
to  save  me  from  evil  sent  me  by  God,  for  evil 
at  God's  hand  seems  to  me  good.  What  seems 
mercy  and  kindness  to  the  vulgar  seems  wrath 
and  vengeance  to  God-intoxicated  saints. 

HUMANITY   THE    REFLECTION    OF  THE    BELOVED 

Parrots  are  taught  to  speak  without  understand- 
ing the  words.  The  method  is  to  place  a  mirror 
between  the  parrot  and  the  trainer.  The  trainer, 
hidden  by  the  mirror,  utters  the  words,  and  the 
parrot,  seeing  his  own  reflection  in  the  mirror, 
fancies  another  parrot  is  speaking,  and  imitates 
all  that  is  said  by  the  trainer  behind  the  mirror. 
So  God  uses  prophets  and  saints  as  mirrors 
whereby  to  instruct  men,  viz.,  the  bodies  of 
these  saints  and  prophets  ;  and  men,  when  they 
hear  the  words  proceeding  from  these  mirror^v. 
are  utterly  ignorant  that  they  are  really  behig 
spoken  by  "  Universal  Reason  "  or  the  "  Word 
of  God  "  behind  the  mirror  of  the  saints 

"  EARTHLY  FORMS  " 

Earthly  forms  are  only  shadows  of  the  Sun  of 
Truth — a  cradle  for  babes,  but  too  small  to  hold 
those  who  have  grown  to  spiritual  manhood. 


84  THE   BEATIFIC   VISION 

"  THE   BEATIFIC  VISION   OF   ETERNAL  TRUTH  " 

The  end  and  object  of  all  negation  is  to  attain 
to  subsequent  affirmation,  as  the  negation  in 
the  creed,  "  There  is  no  God,"  finds  its  comple- 
ment and  purpose  in  the  affirmation  "  but 
God."  Just  so  the  purpose  of  negation  of  self 
is  to  clear  the  way  for  the  apprehension  of  the 
fact  that  there  is  no  existence  but  the  One. 
The  intoxication  of  Life  and  its  pleasures  and 
occupations  veils  the  Truth  from  men's  eyes, 
and  they  ought  to  pass  on  to  the  spiritual  in- 
toxication which  makes  men  beside  themselves 
and  lifts  them  to  the  beatific  vision  of  eternal 
Truth. 

THE   WENE   EVERLASTING 

0  babbler,  while  thy  soul  is  drunk  with  mere 

date  wine, 
Thy  spirit  hath  not  tasted  the  genuine  grapes. 
For  the  token  of  thy  having  seen  that  divine 

Light 
Is  this,  to  withdraw  thyself  from  the  house  of 

pride. 

BE  LOST  IN  THE  BEAUTY  OF  THE  BELOVED 

When    those    Egyptian   women   sacrificed   their 

reason. 
They  penetrated  the  mansion  of  Joseph's  love ; 


THE  KINGDOM  THAT  ENDURES  NOT    85 

The  Cup-bearer  of  Life  bore  away  their  reason, 

They  were  filled  with  wisdom  of  the  world  with- 
out end. 

Joseph's  beauty  was  only  an  offshoot  of  God's 
beauty  : 

Be  lost,  then,  in  God's  beauty  more  than  those 
women. 

*'  WHAT   EAR  HAS   TOLD   YOU  FALSELY  " 

What  ear  has  told  you  falsely  eye  will  tell  truly. 
Then  ear,  too,  will  acquire  the  properties  of  an 

eye; 
Your  ears,  now  worthless  as  wool,  will  become 

gems  ; 
Yea,  your  whole  body  will  become  a  mirror, 
It  will  be  as  an  eye  of  a  bright  gem  in  your 

bosom. 
First  the  hearing  of  the  ear  enables  you  to  form 

ideas. 
Then  these  ideas  guide  you  to  the  Beloved. 
Strive,   then,  to  increase  the  number  of  these 

ideas, 
That  they  may  guide  you,  like  Ma j nun,  to  the 

Beloved. 

"  THERE  IS  A  PLACE   OF  REFUGE  " 

Yea,  0  sleeping  heart,  know  the  kingdom  that 

endures  not 
For  ever  and  ever  is  only  a  mere  dream. 


86  THE    UNBELIEVER 

I  marvel  how  long  you  will  indulge  in  vain 
illusion, 

Which  has  seized  you  by  the  throat  like  a  heads- 
man. 

Know  that  even  in  this  world  there  is  a  place  of 
refuge  ; 

Hearken  not  to  the  unbeliever  who  denies  it. 

His  argument  is  this  :    he  says  again  and  again, 

"  If  there  were  aught  beyond  this  life  we  should 
see  it." 

But  if  the  child  see  not  the  state  of  reason. 

Does  the  man  of  reason  therefore  forsake 
reason  ? 

And  if  the  man  of  reason  sees  not  the  state  of 
Love, 

Is  the  blessed  moon  of  Love  thereby  eclipsed  ? 


THE  lover's  cry  TO  THE  BELOVED 

"  My  back  is  broken  by  the  conflict  of  my 
thoughts ; 

0  Beloved  One,  come  and  stroke  my  head  in 

mercy  ! 

The  palm  of  Thy  hand  on  my  head  gives  me 
rest. 

Thy  hand  is  a  sign  of  Thy  bounteous  provi- 
dence. 

Remove  not  Thy  shadow  from  my  head, 

1  am  afflicted,  afflicted,  afflicted  ! 


THE   DIVINE   FOUNT  87 

Sleep  has  deserted  my  eyes 

Through  my  longing  for  Thee,  0  Envy  of  cy- 
presses ! 

•  •  •  •  • 

0  take  my  life,  Thou  art  the  Source  of  Life  ! 
For  apart  from  Thee  I  am  wearied  of  my  life. 

1  am  a  lover  well  versed  in  lovers'  madness, 
I  am  weary  of  learning  and  sense." 

SORROW  TURNED   TO   JOY 

"  He  who  extracts  the  rose  from  the  thorn 
Can  also  turn  this  winter  into  spring. 
He  who  exalts  the  heads  of  the  cypresses 
Is  able  also  out  of  sadness  to  bring  joy.** 

THE   GIFTS   OF  THE   BELOVED 

Where  will  you  find  one  more  liberal  than  God  ? 
He  buys   the  worthless  rubbish  which  is  your 

wealth, 
He  pays  you  the  Light  that  illumines  your  heart. 
He  accepts  these  frozen  and  lifeless  bodies  of 

yours, 
And  gives  you  a  Kingdom  beyond  what  you 

dream  of. 
He  takes  a  few  drops  of  your  tears, 
And  gives  you  the  Divine  Fount  sweeter  than 

sugar. 


88  **THOU   ART   HIDDEN" 

He  takes  your  sighs  fraught  with  grief  and 
sadness, 

And  for  each  sigh  gives  rank  in  heaven  aa 
interest. 

In  return  for  the  sigh-wind  that  raised  tear- 
clouds, 

God  gave  Abraham  the  title  of  "  Father  of  the 
Faithful." 

*'  THOU  ART  HIDDEN  FROM  US  " 

Thou  art  hidden  from  us,   though  the  heavens 

are  filled 
With   Thy   Light,   which   is   brighter   than   sun 

and  moon  ! 
Thou    art    hidden,    yet    revealest    our    hidden 

secrets  ! 
Thou  art  the  Source  that  causes  our  rivers  to 

flow. 
Thou  art  hidden  in  Thy  essence,  but  seen  by  Thy 

bounties. 
Thou  art  like  the  water,  and  we  like  the  mill- 
stone. 
Thou  art  like  the  wind,  and  we  like  the  dust ; 
The  wind  is  unseen,  but  the  dust  is  seen  by  all. 
Thou  art  the  Spring,  and  we  the  sweet  green 

garden  ; 
Spring  is  not  seen,  though  its  gifts  are  seen. 
Thou  art  as  the  Soul,  we  as  hand  and  foot ; 
Soul  instructs  hand  and  foot  to  hold  and  take. 


"EXERT    YOURSELVES*'  89 

Thou  art  as  Reason,  we  like  the  tongue  ; 
'Tis  reason  that  teaches  the  tongue  to  speak. 
Thou  art  as  Joy,  and  we  are  laughing  ; 
The  laughter  is  the  consequence  of  the  joy. 
Our  every  motion  every  moment  testifies. 
For  it  proves  the  presence  of  the  Everlasting 
God. 


"  EXERT  YOURSELVES  " 


i(  i 


Trust  in  God,  yet  tie  the  camel's  leg.' 
Hear  the  adage,   '  The  worker  is  the  friend  of 

God;' 
Through  trust  in  Providence  neglect  not  to  use 

means. 
Go,  0  Fatalists,  practise  trust  with  self -exertion, 
Exert  yourself  to  attain  your  objects,  bit  by  bit. 
In  order  to  succeed,  strive  and  exert  yourselves  ; 
If  you  strive  not  for  your  objects,  ye  are  fools." 


THE   WISDOM   OF  THE   WEAK 

"  0  friends,  God  has  given  me  inspiration. 
Oftentimes   strong   counsel  is  suggested   to   the 

weak. 
The  wit  taught  by  God  to  the  bee 
Is  withheld  from  the  lion  and  the  wild  ass. 
It  fills  its  cells  with  liquid  sweets. 
For  God  opens  the  door  of  this  knowledge  to  it. 


90  WHITE   NIGHTS 

The  skill  taught  by  God  to  the  silkworm 
Is  a  learning  beyond  the  reach  of  the  elephant. 
The  earthly  Adam  was  taught  of  God  names, 
So  that  his  glory  reached  the  seventh  heaven. 
He  laid  low  the  name  and  fame  of  the  angels, 
Yet  blind  indeed  are  they  whom  God  dooms 
to   doubt !  " 


WHITE   NIGHTS 

Every  night  Thou  freest  our  spirits  from  the  body 
And  its  snare,  making  them  pure  as  rased  tablets. 
Every  night  spirits  are  released  from  this  cage. 
And  set  free,  neither  lording  it  nor  lorded  over. 
At  night  prisoners  are  unaware  of  their  prison, 
At  night  kings  are  unaware  of  their  majesty. 

*'  THE   KINGLY   SOUL  " 

The  kingly  soul  lays  waste  the  body, 

And  after  its  destruction  he  builds  it  anew. 

Happy  the  soul  who  for  love  of  God 

Has  lavished  family,  wealth,  and  goods  ! — 

Has   destroyed   its    house    to   find   the    Hidden 

Treasure, 
And  with  that  Treasure  has  rebuilt  it  in  fairer 

sort ; 
Has  dammed  up  the  stream  and  cleansed  the 

channel, 
And  then  turned  a  fresh  stream  into  the  channel. 


SAINT   AND   HYPOCRITE  91 


SAINT   AND   HYPOCRITE 

Watch  the  face  of  each  one,  regard  it  well, 

It  may  be  by  serving  thou  wilt  recognise  Truth's 

face. 
As  there  are  many  demons  with  men's  faces, 
It  is  wrong  to  join  hand  with  every  one. 
When  the  fowler  sounds  his  decoy  whistle. 
That  the  birds  may  be  beguiled  by  that  snare, 
The  birds  hear  that  call  simulating  a  bird's  call. 
And,  descending  from  the  air,  find  net  and  knife. 
So  vile  hjnpocrites  steal  the  language  of  Dervishes, 
In  order  to  beguile  the  simple  with  their  trickery. 
The  works  of  the  righteous  are  light  and  heat. 
The  works  of  the  evil  treachery  and  shamelessness. 
They  make  stuffed  lions  to  scare  the  simple, 
They  give  the  title  of  Muhammad  to  false  Musai- 

lima. 
But  Musailima  retained  the  name  of  "  Liar," 
And  Muhammad  that  of  "  SubHmest  of  beings.'* 
That  wine  of  God  (the  righteous)  yields  a  perfume 

of  musk  ; 
Other  wine   (the  evil)  is  reserved  for  penalties 

and  pains. 

HARSHNESS   AND   ADORATION 

Let  me  then,  I  say,  make  complaint 
Of  the  severity  of  that  Fickle  Fair  Ona 


92  THE    GLORY    OF   THE    JUST 

I  cry,  and  my  cries  sound  sweet  in  His  ear  ; 

He  requires  from  the  two  worlds  cries  and  groans. 

How  shall  I  not  wail  under  His  chastening 
hand  ? 

How  shall  I  not  be  in  the  number  of  those  be- 
witched by  Him  ? 

How  shall  I  be  other  than  night  without  His 
day? 

Without  the  vision  of  His  face  that  illumes  the 
day  ? 

His  bitters  are  very  sweets  to  my  soul, 

I  am  enamoured  of  my  own  grief  and  pain, 

For  it  makes  me  well-pleasing  to  my  peerless 
King. 

I  use  the  dust  of  my  grief  as  salve  for  my  eyes, 

That  my  eyes,  like  seas,  may  team  with  pearls. 


THE   DIVINE  ABSOEPTION 

Do  me  justice,  0  Thou  who  art  the  glory  of  the 
just, 

Who  art  the  throne,  and  I  the  lintel  of  Thy 
door  ! 

But,  in  sober  truth,  where  are  throne  and  door- 
way ? 

Where  are  "  We  '*  and  "  I  "  ?  There  where  our 
Beloved  is  ! 

0  Thou,  who  art  exempt  from  *'  Us  "  and  "  Me," 

Who  pervadest  the  spirits  of  all  men  and  women  ; 


THE    DIVINE    ABSORPTION  93 

When  man  and  woman  become  one,  Thou  art 

that  One  ! 
When  their  union  is  dissolved,  lo  !     Thou  abidest ! 
Thou  hast  made  these  "  Us  "  and  "  Me  "  for  this 

purpose, 
To  wit,  to  play  chess  with  them  by  Thyself. 
When  Thou  shalt  become  one  entity  with  "  Us  " 

and  "  You," 
Then  wilt  Thou  show  true  affection  for  these 

lovers. 
When  these  "  We  "  and  "  Ye  "  shall  all  become 

One  Soul, 
Then   they   will   be   lost   and   absorbed   in   the 

"  Beloved." 


LOVE   MORE   THAN   SORROW  AND   JOY 

Come  then,  0  Lord  ! 

Who  art  exalted  above  description  and  explana- 
tion ! 

Is  it  possible  for  the  bodily  eye  to  behold  Thee  ? 

Can  mind  of  man  conceive  Thy  frowns  and  Thy 
smiles  ? 

Are  hearts,  when  bewitched  by  Thy  smiles  and 
frowns. 

In  a  fit  state  to  see  the  vision  of  Thyself  ? 

When  our  hearts  are  bewitched  by  Thy  smiles 
and  frowns. 

Can  we  gain  Life  from  these^  two  alternating 
states  ? 


94  THE    GARDEN    OF   LOVE 

The  fertile  garden  of  Love,  as  it  is  boundless, 
Contains  other  fruits  besides  joy  and  sorrow. 
The  true  lover  is  exalted  above  these  two  states, 
He  is  fresh  and  green  independently  of  autumn 
or  spring  ! 
Pay  tithe  on  Thy  beauty,  0  Beauteous  One  ! 
Tell  forth  the  tale  of  the  Beloved,  every  whit ! 


**  THE   HEART   OF  THE   HARPER  " 

The  heart  of  the  harper  was  emancipated. 
Like   a   soul   he   was   freed   from   weeping   and 

rejoicing, 
His  old  life  died,  and  he  was  regenerated. 
Amazement  fell  upon  him  at  that  moment, 
For  he  was  exalted  above  earth  and  heaven, 
An  uplifting  of  the  heart  surpassing  all  uplifting. 
I  cannot  describe  it ;   if  you  can,  say  on  ! 
Ecstasy  and  words  beyond  all  ecstatic  words  ; — 
Immersion  in  the  glory  of  the  Lord  of  glory  ! 
Immersion  wherefrom  was  no  extrication, — 
As  it  were  identification  with  the  Very  Ocean  ! 

**  WHEN  NIGHT  RETURNS  '* 

When  night  returns  and  'tis  the  time  of  the  sky's 

levee, 
The  stars  that  were  hidden  come  forth  to  their 

work. 


SEPARATION  95 

The  people  of  the  world  lie  unconscious, 

With  veils  drawn  over  their  faces,  and  asleep  ; 

But  when  the  morn  shall  burst  forth  and  the  sun 

arise 
Every  creature  will  raise  its  head  from  its  couch  ; 
To  the  unconscious  God  will  restore  consciousness  ; 
They  will  stand  in  rings  as  slaves  with  rings  in 

ears  ; 
Dancing    and    clapping     hands    with     songs    of 

praise, 
Singing  with  joy,  "  Our  Lord  hath  restored  us 

to  life  !  ' 

SEPARATION 

Nothing  is  bitterer  than  severance  from  Thee, 
Without  Thy  shelter  there  is  naught  but  per- 
plexity. 
Our  worldly  goods  rob  us  of  our  heavenly  goods, 
Our  body  rends  the  garment  of  our  soul. 
Our  hands,  as  it  were,  prey  on  our  feet ; 
Without  reliance  on  Thee  how  can  we  live  ? 


*'  god's  light  *' 

'Tis  God's  Light  that  illumines  the  senses'  light, 
That  is  the  meaning  of  "  Light  upon  light." 
The  senses'  light  draws  us  earthwards. 
God's  Light  calls  us  heavenwards. 


96  LOVE'S    LIGHT 

"  LOVE   CASTS  ITS   OWN  LIGHT  " 

When  love  of  God  kindles  a  flame  in  the  inward 

man, 
He  burns,  and  is  freed  from  effects. 
He  has  no  need  of  signs  to  assure  him  of  Love, 
For  Love  casts  its  own  Light  up  to  heaven. 


"  THE   believer's   HEART  " 

The  Prophet  said  that  God  has  declared, 

*'  I  am  not  contained  in  aught  above  or  below, 

I  am  not  contained  in  earth  or  sky,  or  even 

In  highest  heaven.     Know  this  for  a  surety,  0 

beloved  ! 
Yet  am  I  contained  in  the  believer's  heart ! 
If  ye  seek  Me,  search  in  such  hearts  !  " 


"  SELF-SATISFACTION  " 

No  sickness  worse  than  fancying  thyself  perfect 
Can  infect  thy  soul,  0  arrogant  misguided  one  ! 
Shed  many  tears  of  blood  from  eyes  and  heart,  ^ 
That  this  self-satisfaction  may  be  driven  out. 
The  fate  of  Iblis  lay  in  saying,  "  I  am  better  than 

He," 
And  this  same  weakness  lurks  in  the  souls  of  all 

creatures, 


**TRUE    KNOWLEDGE''  97 

"  TRUE   KNOWLEDGE  " 

The  knowledge  which  is  not  of  Him  is  a  burden  ; 

Knowledge  which  comes  not  immediately  from 
Him 

Endures  no  longer  than  the  rouge  of  the  tu'e- 
woman. 

Nevertheless,  if  you  bear  this  burden  in  a  right 
spirit 

'Twill  be  removed,  and  you  will  obtain  joy. 

See  you  bear  not  that  burden  out  of  vainglory, 

Then  you  will  behold  a  store  of  True  Knowledge 
within. 

When  you  mount  the  steed  of  this  True  Know- 
ledge, 

Straightway  the  burden  will  fall  from  your 
back. 

"  THE    FLAME    OF   LOVE  " 

How  long  wilt  thou  dwell  on  words  and  super- 
ficialities ? 
A  burning  heart  is  what  I  want ;    consort  with 

burning  ! 
Kindle  in  thy  heart  the  flame  of  Love, 
And    burn    up    utterly    thoughts    and    fine    ex- 
pressions. 
0  Moses  !   the  lovers  of  fair  rites  are  one  class, 
They  whose  hearts  and  souls  burn  with  Love 
another. 

7 


98  A   MOTHER'S    CHILDREN 

A   MOTHER   WHOSE    CHILDREN   WERE   IN   THE 
beloved's  KEEPLNG 

A  woman  bore  many  children  in  succession, 
but  none  of  them  lived  beyond  the  age  of  three 
or  four  months.  In  great  distress  she  cried  to 
God,  and  then  beheld  in  a  vision  the  beautiful 
gardens  of  Paradise,  and  many  fair  mansions 
therein,  and  upon  one  of  these  mansions  she  read 
her  own  name  inscribed.  And  a  voice  from 
heaven  informed  her  that  God  would  accept 
the  sorrows  she  had  endured  in  lieu  of  her  blood 
shed  in  holy  war,  as,  owing  to  her  sex,  she  was 
unable  to  go  out  to  battle  like  the  men.  On 
looking  again,  the  woman  beheld  in  Paradise 
all  the  children  she  had  lost,  and  she  cried,  "  O 
Lord  !  they  were  lost  to  me,  but  safe  with  Thee  1  " 


THE   OPTIMISTIC   ROSE 

In  this  tale  there  is  a  warning  for  thee,  0  Soul, 
That  thou  mayest  acquiesce  in  God's  ordinances. 
And  be  wary  and  not  doubt  God's  benevolence. 
When  sudden  misfortune  befalls  thee. 
Let  others  grow  pale  from  fear  of  ill  fortune. 
Do  thou  smile  like  the  rose  at  loss  and  gain  ; 
For  the  rose,  though  its  petals  be  torn  asunder, 
Still  smiles  on,  and  it  is  never  cast  down. 


THE    TRUE    MOSQUE  99 

THE  TRUE   MOSQUE 

Fools  laud  and  magnify  the  mosque, 

While  they  strive  to  oppress  holy  men  of  heart. 

But  the  former  is  mere  form,  the  latter  spirit 

and  truth. 
The  only  true  mosque  is  that  in  the  hearts  of 

saints. 
The  mosque  that  is  built  in  the  hearts  of  the 

saints 
Is  the  place  of  worship  of  all,  for  God  dwells 

there. 
So  long  as  the  hearts  of  the  saints  are  not  afflicted. 
God  never  destroys  the  nation. 


"  IGNORANCE  " 


Blood  is  impure,  yet  its  stain  is  removed  by 

water  ; 
But  that  impurity  of  ignorance  is  more  lasting, 
Seeing  that  without  the  blessed  water  of  God 
It  is  not  banished  from  the  man  who  is  subject 

to  it. 
O  that  thou  wouldst  turn  thy  face  to  thy  own 

prayers, 
And  say,    "  Ah  !    my  prayers   are   as   defective 

as  my  being  ; 
0  requite  me  good  for  evil !  '* 


100        ALL    RELIGIONS    ARE    ONE 


A  PRAYER 


"  Pray  in  this  wise  and  allay  your  difficulties  : 
*  Give  us  good  in  the  house  of  our  present  world, 
And  give  us  good  in  the  house  of  our  next  world. 
Make  our  path  pleasant  as  a  garden, 
And  be  Thou,  0  Holy  One,  our  goal ! 


>  J) 


ALL  RELIGIONS   ARE   ONE 

In  the  adorations  and  benedictions  of  righteous 
men 

The  praises  of  all  the  prophets  are  kneaded  to- 
gether. 

All  their  praises  are  mingled  into  one  stream, 

All  the  vessels  are  emptied  into  one  ewer. 

Because  He  that  is  praised  is,  in  fact,  only  One. 

In  this  respect  all  religions  are  only  one  religion. 

Because  all  praises  are  directed  towards  God's 
Light, 

These  various  forms  and  figures  are  borrowed 
from  it. 


A   NOTE    ON    PERSIAN    POETRY 

NizAMl's  Discourse  on  Poetry 

In  Nizaml's  The  Chahdr  Magdla  ("  Four  Dis- 
courses "),  translated  by  Professor  Edward  G. 
Browne,  we  find  the  Second  Discourse  devoted 
to  "  The  Nature  of  Poetry,  and  the  Utility  of  the 
Skilful  Poet."  In  this  interesting  Discourse 
Nizami  very  amiably  discusses  the  training 
required  to  become  a  poet  of  enduring  fame,  and 
intersperses  these  remarks  with  a  number  of 
anecdotes,  which  in  the  main  are  examples  of  the 
advantages  derived  from  poetic  improvisations 
given  at  opi3ortune  moments  before  kings  when 
wine  has  gone  round  two  or  three  times.  Nizami 
sums  up  the  nature  of  poetry  in  the  following 
words  :  "  Poetry  is  that  art  whereby  the  poet 
arranges  imaginary  propositions  and  adapts  the 
deductions,  with  the  result  that  he  can  make  a 
little  thing  appear  great  and  a  great  thing  small, 
or  cause  good  to  appear  in  the  garb  of  evil  and 
evil  in  the  garb  of  good."  Nizami  denounces 
the  habit  of  giving  money  to  old  poets.  He 
remarks :   *'  For  one  so  ignoble   as  not  to  have 

101 


102  APPENDIX 

discovered  in  fifty  years  that  what  he  writes  is 
bad,  when  will  he  discover  it  ?  "  On  the  other 
hand  Nizami  favours  the  young  poet  with  hopeful 
talent,  and  generously  remarks  that  "  it  is  proper 
to  patronise  him,  a  duty  to  take  care  of  him,  and 
an  obHgation  to  maintain  him."  The  minor 
poets  of  to-day  have  not  these  glowing  advan- 
tages ! 

The  most  ingenious  example  of  a  poetic  im- 
provisation in  this  Discourse  is,  perhaps,  one 
given  by  Rudagi  in  connection  with  the  pro- 
tracted stay  of  Amir  Nasr  b.  Ahmad  in  Herat. 
Four  years  the  Amir  camped  with  his  army  in 
this  town,  with  its  twenty  different  varieties  of 
grape  and  beautiful  narcissus.  "  He  preferred 
Herat  to  the  Garden  of  Eden."  But  at  length 
the  Amir's  captains  and  courtiers  grew  weary  of 
being  absent  so  long  from  Bukhara,  where  they 
longed  to  see  their  wives  and  children  again. 
They  offered  Rudagi,  the  poet,  five  thousand 
dinars  if  he  could  persuade  the  Amir  to  quit 
Herat  and  return  to  Bukhara.  Rudagi,  at  an 
opportune  moment,  took  up  his  harp  and  sang 
the  following  song  to  the  Amir : 

The  sands  of  Oxus,  toilsome  though  they  be, 
Beneath  my  feet  were  soft  as  silk  to  me. 
Glad  at  the  friend's  return,  the  Oxus  deep 
Up  to  our  girths  in  laughing  waves  shall  leap, 
Long  live  Bukhara !     Be  thou  of  good  cheer  ! 
Joyous  towards  thee  hasteth  our  Amfr  ! 


APPENDIX  103 

The  Moon's  the  Prince,  Bukhara  is  the  sky  ; 
0  sky,  the  Moon  shall  hght  thee  by  and  bye  1 
Bukhara  is  the  mead,  the  Cypress  he  ; 
Receive  at  last,  0  Mead,  thy  Cypress-tree  1 

This  particular  Amir  seems  to  have  been  fond  of 
flattery,  and  he  found  the  daintily  turned  song 
of  Rudagi  more  acceptable  to  his  vanity  than 
even  the  beauty  of  Herat.  He  accordingly  took 
his  departure  immediately  the  song  had  con- 
cluded, and,  in  his  absent-mindedness,  forgot  to 
put  on  his  boots,  which  were  carried  by  an 
attendant  who  rode  in  hot  pursuit. 

Poetry  in  those  days  was  evidently  a  remunera- 
tive pursuit.  Nizami  tells  us  that  Khidr  Khan 
always  had  in  readiness  four  trays  of  gold. 
"  These  he  used  to  dispense  by  the  handful  "  to 
the  successful  poets.  Though  the  royal  favour 
towards  the  poets  was  extremely  bountiful, 
Persian  poets  were  not  always  particularly 
courteous  the  one  to  the  other.  Nizami  teUs 
an  amusing  story  of  a  minor  poet  named  Rashidi. 
At  the  king's  command  the  Poet-Laureate  was 
asked  to  express  his  opinion  of  Rashidi's  poetry. 
The  Poet-Laureate  accordingly  remarked  :  "  His 
verse  is  extremely  good  and  chaste  and  correct, 
but  it  wants  spice."  The  king  afterwards  re- 
peated these  words  to  Rashidi  and  bade  him 
compose  a  fitting  rejoinder.  Rashidi  composed 
the  following  verse : 


104  APPENDIX 

You  stigmatise  my  verse  as  "wanting  spice," 
And  possibly,  my  friend,  you  may  be  right. 
My  verse  is  honey- flavoured,  sugar-sweet, 
And  spice  with  such  could  scarcely  cause  delight. 
Spice  is  for  you,  you  blackguard,  not  for  me. 
For  beans  and  turnips  is  the  stuff  you  write  ! 

This  was  not  kind  ;  but  Rashidi  received  all 
four  baskets  of  gold  that  day  ! 

The  technical  study  of  prosody  was  instituted 
by  Khalil  ibn  i  Ahmad  i  Bicri.  He  is  said  to 
have  discovered  this  science  by  listening  to  the 
rythmic  beats  of  the  fuller's  mallets  upon  his 
clothes.  This  story  is  mentioned  in  Saifi's 
Treatise  on  Prosody.  ^ 

Much  of  Persian  poetry  is  conventional,  and 
the  demarcation  in  style,  due  to  the  various 
phases  of  Persian  history,  is  not  as  pronounced 
as  might  be  expected.  The  Persian  poets  not 
only  conservatively  followed  old  metres,  but  old 
similes,  old  subjects  as  well.  It  was  with  words 
they  were  most  concerned,  and  not  with  ideas. 
The  Lover's  Companion  of  Sharafu'd-Din 
Rami  is  sufficient  to  prove  this.  The  book 
contains  a  very  large  number  of  similes  on  the 
various  parts  of  the  body.  This  was  intended  to 
be  a  vade  mecum  to  the  writer  of  erotic  poetry. 
Professor  Brown  defends  this  conservatism  and 
remarks    that    it    has    "  guarded     the    Persian 

'  See  The  Prosody  of  iht  Persians.  By  H.  Blockmann, 
Calcutta,  1872. 


APPENDIX  105 

language  from  the  vulgarisation  which  the 
triumph  of  an  untrained,  untrammelled,  and 
unconventional  genius  of  the  barbaric-degenerate 
type  tends  to  produce  in  our  own  and  other 
European  tongues." 


Printed  by  Haaell,  Watson  &  Viney,  Ld.,  London  and  Ayltsbury,  England. 


X. 


THE  WISDOM  OF  THE  EAST 

SERIES 

Edited  by  L.  CRANMER-BYNG  and  Dr.  S.  A.  KAPADIA 


THE   SERIES  AND   ITS   PURPOSE 

THIS  Series  has  a  definite  object.     It  is,  by  means  of  the  best 
-Oriental  literature — its  wisdom,  philosophy,  poetry,  and  ideals 
— to  bring  together  West  and  East  in  a  spirit  of  mutual  sym- 
pathy,   goodwill,   and   understanding.      From    India,    China,    Japan, 
Persia,   Arabia,    Palestine,  and    Egypt  these  words   of  wisdom  have 
been  gathered. 

NEW  VOLUMES. 
LOTUSES    OF    THE    MAHAYANA.      Edited   by   Kenneth 

Saunders,  Translator  and  Editor  of  "  The  Heart  of  Bhuddisni,"  etc.     2/6  net 

ANCIENT  INDIAN  FABLES  AND  STORIES.  By 
Stanley  Rice.    3/6  net. 

VEDIC  HYMNS.  Translated  from  the  Rigveda.  By  Edward 
J.  Thomas,  M.A.,  Litt.D.    3/6  net. 

INDIAN 

HINDU  GODS  AND  HEROES.  Studies  in  the  History  of  the 
Religion  of  India.     By  Lionel  D.  Barnett.     3/6  net. 

THE  RELIGION   OF  THE  SIKHS.      By   Dorothy  Field. 

3/6  net. 

BUDDHIST  SCRIPTURES.  A  Selection  Translated  from  the 
Pali  with  Introduction  by  E.  J.  Thomas,  M.A.    3/6  net. 

THE  HEART  OF  INDIA.  Sketches  in  the  History  of  Hindu 
Religion  and  Morals.    By  L.  D.  Barnett,  M.A.,  Litt.D.     3/6  net. 

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE:  An  Outline  of  the  Philosophy  of 
the  Vedanta.     As  set  forth  by  the  Upanishads  and  by  Sankara. 

By  L.  D.  Barnett,  M.A.,  Litt.D.    3/6  net. 

Continued  over 


THE  BUDDHA'S  "WAY  OF  VIRTUE."     A  Translation  of 
the   Dhammapada.      By  W.  C   D.  Wagiswara  and   K.   J,   Saunders 
Members  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Ceylon  branch.     3/6  net. 

THE  PATH  OF  LIGHT.  Rendered  for  the  first  time  into 
Eng:lish  from  the  Bodhi-charyavatara  of  Santi-Deva.  A  Manual  of 
Maha-Yana  Buddhism.     By  L.  D.  Barnett,  M.A.,  Litt.D.     3/6  net. 

LEGENDS  OF  INDIAN  BUDDHISM.  Translated  from 
"  L'Introduction  a  I'Histoire  du  Buddhisme  Indian  "  of  Eugene  Burnouf, 
with  an  Introduction  by  Winifred  Stephens.    3/6  net. 

THE  WAY  OF  THE  BUDDHA.  Selections  from  the  Buddhist 
texts,  together  with  the  original  Pali,  with  Introduction  by  Herbert 
Baynes,    M.R.A.S.     3/6  net. 

IRANIAN  (Persian,  Pehlvi,  Zend,  etc.) 
THE    SECRET    ROSE    GARDEN    OF    SA'D    UD    DIN 

MAHMUD   SHABISTARI.     Rendered    from    the    Persian, 
with  an  Introduction,  by  Florence  Lederer.     3/6  net. 
THE  DIWAN  OF  ZEB-UN-NISSA.     The  First  Fifty  Ghazals. 
Rendered  from  the  Persian  by  Magan  Lal  and  Jessie  Duncan  West- 
brook.     With  an  Introduction  and  Notes.    3/6  net. 

THE  RUBA'IYAT  OF  HAFIZ.  Translated  with  Introduction 
by  Syed  Abdul  Majid,  LL.D.  Rendered  into  English  Verse  by 
L.  Cranmkr-Byng.     2/6  net. 

THE  SPLENDOUR  OF  GOD.  Being  Extracts  from  the  Sacred 
Writingsof  the  Bahais.     With  Introduction  by  Eric  Hammond.     3/6  net. 

THE  TEACHINGS  OF  ZOROASTER,  and  the  Philosophy 
of  the  Parsi  Religion.     Translated  with  Introduction   by  Dr. 
S.  A.  Kapadia,  Lecturer,    University   College,    London,      and  Edition 
3/6  net. 

THE    PERSIAN    MYSTICS. 

I.  Jalalu'd-din   Rlimi.      By  F.  Hadland  Davis.    3/6  net. 

II.  Jami.     By  F,  Hadlamd  Davis.    3/6  net. 

THE    BUSTAN    OF    SA'Dl.      From   the    Persian.      Translated 

with  Introduction  by  A.  Hart  Edwards.     3/6  net. 
SA'DI'S  SCROLL    OF  WISDOM.     By  Shaikh  Sa'dl     With 

Introduction  by  Sir  Arthur  N.   Wollaston,  K.C.I.E.     2/6  net. 
With  Persian  Script  added.     3/6  net. 
THE    ROSE    GARDEN    OF    SA'DI.      Selected  and    Rendered 

from  the  Persian  with  Introduction  by  L.  Cranmer-Byng.     2/6  net. 

ARABIC 

THE    POEMS    OF    MU'TAMID,    KING    OF    SEVILLE. 

Rendered  into  English  Verse  by  Dulcie  Lawrence  Smith.    With  an 
Introduction.     2/6  net. 

ABU'L  ALA,  THE  SYRIAN.     By  Henry  Baerlein.     3/6  net. 


THE    ALCHEMY    OF    HAPPINESS.      By    Al    Ghazzali. 

Rendered  into  English  by  Claud  Field.     3/6  net. 

THE  AWAKENING  OF  THE  SOUL.  From  the  Arabic  of 
Ibn  Tufail.  Translated  with  Introduction  by  Paul  Bronnle,  Ph.D. 
2/6  net. 

THE   RELIGION   OF   THE    KORAN.     With  Introduction  by 

Sir  Arthur  N.   Wollaston,  K.C.I.E.     2/6  net. 

ARABIAN  WISDOM.  Selections  and  Translations  from  the 
Arabic  by  John  Wortabet,  M.D.     2/6  net. 

THE  SINGING  CARAVAN.  Some  Echoes  of  Arabian  Poetry. 
By  Henry  Baerlein.     3/6  net. 

THE    DIWAN    OF     ABU'L-ALA.       By    Hknry    Baerlein. 

2/6  net. 

HEBRE}^ 

ANCIENT  JEWISH  PROVERBS.  Compiled  and  Classified 
by  A.  Cohen,  late  Scholar  of  Eminaniiel  College,  Cambridge.     3/6  net. 

THE  WISDOM  OF  THE  APOCRYPHA.  With  an  Intro- 
duction by  C.  E,  Lawrence,  Author  of  "  Pilgrimage,"  etc,    3/6  net. 

CHINESE 

THE  RHYTHM  OF  LIFE.  Based  on  the  Philosophy  of 
Lao-Tse.     By  Henri   Borel.     Translated  by  M.  E.  Reynolds.    3/6  net. 

A  FEAST  OF  LANTERNS.  Rendered  with  an  Introduction  by 
L.  Cranmer-Byng,  Author  of  "A  Lute  of  Jade,"  "The  Odes  of  Con- 
fucius," etc.     3/6  net. 

YANG  CHU'S  GARDEN  OF  PLEASURE.  Translated 
from  the  Chinese  by  Professor  Anton  Forke.  With  an  Introduction  bj* 
H.  Cranm£r-Byng.     2/6  net. 

TAOIST  TEACHINGS.  From  the  My.stical  Philosophy  of  Lieh 
Tzu.     Translated  by  Lionel  Giles,  M.A.    3/6  net. 

A  LUTE  OF  JADE.  Being  Selections  from  the  Classical  Poets  of 
China.     Rendered   with   an   Introduction   by   L.    Cranmer-Byng.     2nd 

Edition.     3/6  net. 

THE  CLASSICS  OF  CONFUCIUS. 
The  Book  of  History  (Shu-King). 
By  W.  GoRN  Old.     2/6  net. 

The  Book  of  Odes  (Shi-King). 
By  L.  Cranmer-Byng.     2/6  net. 

THE  SAYINGS  OF  CONFUCIUS.  A  new  Translation  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  Confucian  Analects,  with  Introduction  and  Notes  by 
Lionel  Giles,  M.A.  (Oxon.),  Assistant  in  the  Department  of  OrientaJ 
Books  and  Manuscripts  of  the  British  Museum.    3/6  net. 


THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE;  or,  The  Universal  Order  of 
Confucius.  A  translation  of  one  of  the  four  Confucian  Books, 
hitherto  known  as  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean.  By  Ku  Hung  Ming,  M.A. 
(Edin.).     2/6  net. 

THE  BOOK  OF  FILIAL  DUTY.  Translated  from  the  Chinese 
of  the  Hsiao  Ching  by  Ivan  Chen,  First  Secretary  to  the  Chinese 
Legation.     2/6  net. 

THE  SAYINGS  OF  LAO  TZU.  From  the  Chinese.  Trans- 
lated with  Introduction  by  Lionel  Giles,  British  Museum.     2/6  net. 

MUSINGS  OF  A  CHINESE  MYSTIC.  Selections  from  the 
Philosophy  of  Chuanp:  Tzu.  With  Introduction  by  Lionel  Giles,  M.A. 
(Oxon.),  Assistant  at  the  British  Museum.     3/6  net. 

THE  FLIGHT  OF  THE  DRAGON.  An  Essay  on  the  Theory 
and  Practice  of  Art  in  China  and  Japan,  based  on  Original  Sources.  By 
Laurence  Binyon.    3/6  net. 

JAPANESE 

BUDDHIST  PSALMS.     Translated  from  the  Japanese  of  Shinran 

Shonin  by  S.  Yamabe  and  L.  Adam  Beck,     3/6  net. 
SPIRIT  OF  JAPANESE  ART.     By  Yone  Noguchi.    3/6  net. 
SPIRIT  OF  JAPANESE  POETRY.  By  YoneNoguchi.  3/6net. 

THE  WAY  OF  CONTENTMENT.  Translated  from  the 
Japanese  of  Kaibara  Ekken  by  Ken  Hoshino.     3/6  net. 

THE  MASTER-SINGERS  OF  JAPAN.  Being  Verse  Trans- 
lations from  the  Japanese  Poets.     By  Clara  A.  Walsh.     3/6  net. 

WOMEN  AND  WISDOM  OF  JAPAN.  With  Introduction 
by  S.  Takaishi.     2/6  net. 

EGYPTIAN 

ANCIENT  EGYPTIAN  LEGENDS.  By  M.  A.  Murray.  3/6net. 

THE  BURDEN  OF  ISIS.  Being  the  Laments  of  Isis  and 
Nephthj^s.  Translated  from  the  Egyptian  with  an  Introduction  by  James 
Teackle  Dennis.     2/6  net. 

THE  INSTRUCTION  OF  PTAH-HOTEP  AND  THE 
INSTRUCTION  OF  KE'GEMNI.  The  Oldest  Books  in 
the  World.  Translated  from  the  Egyptian  with  Introduction  and 
Appendix  by  Battiscombe  Gunn      2/6  net. 

A^sody  L.  CRANMER-BYNG 

SALMA.  A  play  in  three  acts,  of  which  the  scene  is  laid  in  Cintra 
a  thousand  years  ago.     3/6  net. 


Editorial  Communications  should  be  addressed  to 

The  Editors  of  the  Wisdom  of  the  East  Series, 

50A,  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.  i. 


LONDON:    JOHN    MURRAY,    ALBEMARLE    STREET,   W. 


/ 


Date  Due 

1 

AFh  ■.       5S 

DEC  1  8  '5^ 

iKt^i  2  9  '^ 

3 

MAY2U 

^/^' 

a 

V 

DEC 

OEC  2  1  ^^ 

i-; 
"v" 

MAY  8  ,?  !S7< 

t 

^^ 

u— -- 

f 

©K— 01!39a 

? 

-eear^.^i.^j-^ 

►  .. 

iw^-U^ 

^brary  Bureau  Cat.  No.  1137 

BP175,M9J3 


CLAPP 


3  5002  00242  2066 


Jalal  al-Din  Rumi 

The  Persian  mystics.  Jalalu'd-Din  Rum 


309238 


:i!iii||||i||i!ii! 


