S.  G.  and  E.  L.  ELBERT 


^@i^tU^^^^S^     ELLA  SMITH  ELBERT  '88 

X?    KATEAEIIJE^E  ^  COMAN  


i 


D.  APPLETON  &  C0MPANT8  PUBLICATIONS. 


The  Great  Work  on  Russia. 

Fifth  Edition  now  readf. 


RUSSIA   AS    IT  IS. 

By  Count  A.  de  Gurowski. 

One  neat  volume  12mo.,  pp.  32S,  well  printed.    Price  $1,  cloth. 

COXTEXTS. — Preface. — Introduction. — Czaristn :  its  historical  origin — Tho 
Czar  Nicholas.— The  Organization  of  the  Government.— The  Army  and 
i;ravy.— The  Nobility.— The  Clergy.— The  Bourgeoisie— The  Cossacks.- 
The  Real  People,  the  Peasantry.— The  Rights  of  Aliens  and  Strangers. 
— ^The  Commoner. — ^Emancipation. — ^Manifest  Destiny. — Appendix. — 
The  Amazons. — ^The  Fourteen  Classes  of  the  Russian  Public  Service  ;  or, 
the  Tsehins.— The  Political  Testament  of  Peter  the  Great.— Extract 
from  an  Old  Chronicle. 


Notices  of  the  Press. 

"  The  author  takes  no  superficial,  empirical  view  of  his  subject,  but  collecting  a  rich 
variety  of  facts,  brings  the  lights  of  a  profound  philosophy  to  their  explanation.  His  work, 
indeed,  neglects  no  essential  detail — it  is  minute  and  accurate  in  its  statistics — it  abounds 
in  lively  pictures  of  society,  manners  and  character.  *  *  Whoever  wishes  to  obtain  an 
accurate  notion  of  the  internal  condition  of  Eussia,  the  natnre  and  extent  of  her  resources, 
and  the  practical  indiieuce  of  her  institutions,  will  here  find  better  materials  for  his  pur- 
jKise  thanin.'iny  single  volume  now  extant."' — X.  Y.  Tribune. 

"This  is  a  powerfully-written  book,  and  will  prove  of  vast  service  to  every  one  who 
desires  to  comprehend  the  real  nature  and  bearings  of  the  great  contest  in  which  liussia  is 
now  engaged."" — X.  Y.  Courier. 

"It  is  original  in  its  conclusions:  it  is  striking  in  its  revelations.  Numerous  as  are  the 
volumes  tha-  have  been  written  about  Kussia,  wo  really  hitherto  have  known  little  of  that 
immense  territory — of  that  numerous  people.  Count  Gurowski"s  work  sheds  a  light  which 
at  this  time  is  most  welcome  and  satisfactory.'' — X.  Y.  Times. 

"The  book  is  well  written,  and  as  might  be  expected  in  a  work  by  a  writer  so  unu- 
sually con%  ersant  with  all  sides  of  Russian  affairs,  it  contains  so  much  important  information 
respecting  the  Russian  people,  their  government  and  religion."' — Com.  Advertiser. 

"This  is  a  valuable  work,  explaining  in  a  very  satisfactory  manner  the  internal  conditions 
of  the  Russian  people,  and  the  construction  of  their  political  society.  The  institutions  of 
Russia  are  f)reseuted  as  they  exist  in  reality,  and  as  they  are  determined  by  existing  and 
obligatory  laws." — X.  Y.  Herald. 

"  A  hasty  glance  over  this  handsome  volume  has  satisfied  us  that  it  is  one  worthy  of 
general  perusal.  *  *  *  It  is  full  of  valuable  historical  information,  with  very  interest- 
ins  accounts  of  the  various  classes  among  the  Russian  people,  their  condition  and  aspi- 
rations."—xV.  Y.  Sun. 

"  This  is  a  volume  that  can  hardly  fail  to  attract  very  general  attention,  and  command  a 
wide  sale  in  view  of  the  present  juncture  of  European  afi'airs,  and  the  prominent  part 
therein  which  Russia  is  to  play." — Utica  Gazette. 

"  A  timely  book.  It  will  be  found  all  that  it  professes  to  be,  though  some  may  be  star; 
led  at  some  of  its  conclusions." — Boston  Atlas. 

"  This  is  one  of  the  best  of  all  the  books  caused  by  the  present  excitement  in  relation  to 
Russia.  It  is  a  very  able  publication — one  that  will  do  much  to  destroy  the  general  belief 
in  the  infallibility  of  liussia.  The  writer  shows  himself  master  of  his  subiect,''and  treats  of 
the  internal  condition  of  Russia,  her  institutions  aud  customs,  society,  laws,  &o..  in  an  en- 
Uglitened  and  sohii!nrly  Tii:i;Hior."  -  It-'"'. 


New  Copyright  Works,  Adapted  for  Popular  Heading. 


JUriT  PUBLISHED. 
BY  J).  APPLETON  6c  CO. 

L 

PERSONAL  NARRATIVE  OF  EXPLORA- 
TIONS AND  IXriDENTS  IN  TEXAS,  NEW  MEXICO,  CALIFOR. 
NIA,  SONOUA.  AND  CHIIinAUr  \.  CONNECTED  WITH  THB 
MEXICAN  BOI  NDART  COMMISSION,  DUKING  THE  yF\!:s  1850 
'ftl,  "62,  and  '53. 

i;  .'  JOnX  RUSSELL  BARTLETT, 

United  Stat's  C'njnmusioner  during  that  y  riud. 
In  2  vols.  8vo,  of  nearly  600  pages  each,  printed  with  lartfe 
type  and  on  extra  fine  paper,  to  be  illustrated  with  nearly  1(><> 
wood-cuts,  sixteen   tinted   lithographs   and   a   beautiful  map, 
engraved  on  steel,  of  the  extensive  regions  traversed.  Price,  $5. 

AFRICA  AND  THE^AMERICAN  FLAG. 

BY  ANDREW  H.  FOOTE, 

Lieutenant  Commanding  the  U.  S.  Brig  Porpoise,  on  the  Coast  of 
Africa,  1851-53. 
"With  tinted  lithographic  illustrations.    One  volume  12mo. 

IlL 

CAPT.  CANOT;  or,  TWENTY  YEARS  OF  A 

SLAVER'S  LIFE. 

EDITED  BY  BRAXTZ  MAYER. 

With  numerous  illustrations.    One  vol.  12mo,  cloth. 

RUSSIA  AS  IT  IS. 

BY  THE  COUNT  D  E  G  U  R  O  W  3  K  I . 

One  voL  l*2mo,  cloth. 

TElVfPEST  AND  SUNSHINE;  ok.  LIFE  IN 

KENTUCKY. 

BY  MRS.  MARY  J.  HOLMES. 

One  vol.  r2mo,  paper  cover  or  clotli. 

FARMINGDALE. 

A   TALE    R  Y    C  A  R  O  L  I  .N  E  THOMAS. 

One  vol.  12rao,  paper  cover  or  cloth. 
•»*    Excels  in  Interest,  and  is  quite  equal  in  its  delineation  of  character  ta 
The  Wide,  Wide  World." 

VH. 

THE  HIYE  OF  THE  BEE  HUNTER. 

BY  T.  B.  TUORPE. 

With  several  illustrations.    One  vol.  Vlmo,  cloth. 


AFRICA 


AND 


THE  AMERICAI  FLAG. 


BY 

COMMANDER  ANDREW  H.  FOOTE. 

U.  S.  NAYY, 

LTELT.  CX)MMANDING  U.  9.  BRIG  PERRY  ON  THE  COAST  OF  AFRICA, 
A,  D.  ISoO— 1S51. 


NEW  YORK: 
D.  APPLETOX  &  CO.,  346  &  348  BROADWAY, 

AND  16  LITTLE  BRITAIN.  LONDON. 

M  nrcr  uv. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Conpress,  in  the  year  1S54, 

By  D.  APPLETON  &  COMPANY, 

In.  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  SUtes  for  the  Sonthern 
District  of  New  York, 


COMMODORE  JOSEPH  SMITH,  U.  S.  N., 

CHIEF    OF    THE    NATAL    BlIIJEAU    OF    YARDS    AND  DOCKS, 
AS  A  SLIGHT  TRIBL'TE 


OF  EESPECT   FOE   HIS   OFFICIAL  CHARACTEK, 
AND  AS  AX  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


OF    HIS    UNIFORM  ATTACHMENT 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  L 

Subject  and  Arrangement — Area  of  Cruising-Ground — Distribu- 
tion of  Subjects  

CHAPTER  II. 

Discoveries  by  French  and  Portuguese  along  the  Coast — Cape  of 
Good  Hope — Results  

CHAPTER  III. 

Pirates — Davis,  Roberts,  and  others — British  Cruisers — Slave- 
Trade  systematized — Guineamen — "  Horrors  of  the  Middle 
Passage"  

CHAPTER  IV. 

Physical  Geography — Climate — Geology — Zoology — Botany  

CHAPTER  V. 

African  Nations — Distribution  of  Races — Arts — Manners  and  Char- 
acter— Superstitions — Treatment  of  the  Dead — Regard  for  the 
Spirits  of  the  Departed — Witchcraft — Ordeal — Military  Force — 
Amazons — Cannibalism  

CHAPTER  VI. 

Trade — Metals — Mines — Vegetable  Productions — Gums — Oils — 
Cotton— Dye-Stuffs  


8 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

European  Colonies — Portuguese — Remaining  Itifluence  of  the  Por- 
tuguese— Slave  Factories — English  Coloni*  •> — Treaties  with  the 
Native  Chiefs — Influence  of  Sierra  I>eone — D.  ^t  ruction  of  Barra- 
coons — Influence  of  f^ngland — Chiefs  on  the  Coast — Aehantee — 
King  of  Dahomey  

CHAPTER  VIIL 

Dahomey — Slavish  Subjection  of  the  People — Dependence  of  the 
King  on  the  Slave-Trade — Exhibition  of  Human  Skulls — Annual 
Human  Sacrifices — Lagos — The  Changes  of  Three  Centuries,. . . 

CHAPTER  IX. 

State  of  the  Coast  prior  to  the  Foundation  of  Liberia — Native 
Tribes — Customs  and  Policy — Power  of  the  Folgias — Kroomen, 
<fcc. — Conflicts  

CHAPTER  X. 

General  Views  on  the  Establishment  of  Colonies — Penal  Colonies — 
Views  of  the  People  of  the  L^nited  States  in  reference  to 
African  Colonies — State  of  Slavery  at  the  Revolutionary  War — 
Negroes  who  joined  the  English — Disposal  of  them  by  Great 
Britain — Early  Movements  with  respect  to  African  Colonies — 
Plan  matured  by  Dr.  Finley — Formation  of  the  American  Colo- 
nization Society  

CHAPTER  XL 

Foundation  of  the  American  Colony — Early  Agents — Mills,  Bur- 
gess, Bacon  and  others — U.  S.  Sloop-of-War  "  Cyane" — Arrival 
at  the  Island  of  Sherboro — Disposal  of  Recaptured  Slaves  by 
the  U.  S.  Government — Fever — Slavers  Captured — U.  S.  Schoon- 
er "  Shark" — Sherboro  partially  abandoned — U.  S.  Schooner 
"Alligator" — Selection  and  Settlement  of  Cape  Mesurado — Capt. 
Stockton — Dr.  Ayres — King  Peter — Arguments  with  the  Na- 
tives— Conflicts — Dr.  Ayres  made  Prisoner — King  Boatswain — 
Completion  of  the  Purchase   1 

CHAPTER  XIL 

Ashmun — Necessity  of  Defence — Fortifications — Assaults — Arrival 
of  Major  Laing — Condition  of  the  Colonies — Sloops-of-War 
"  Cyane"  and  "  John  Adams" — King  Boatswain  as  a  Slaver — 


CONTENTS. 


9 


Misconduct  of  the  Emigrants — Disinterestedness  of  Ashmun — U. 
S.  Schooner  "  Porpoise" — Captain  Skinner — Rev.  R.  R.  Gurley — 
Purchase  of  Territory  on  the  St.  Paul's  River — Attack  on  Trade- 
town — Piracies — U.  S.  Schooner  "Shark" — Sloop-of-War  "On- 
tario"— Death  of  Ashmun — His  Character  by  Rev.  Dr.  Bacon....  123 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Lot  Carey — Dr.  Randall — Establishment  of  the  Liberia  Herald — 
Wars  with  the  Deys — Sloop-of-War  "  John  Adams" — Diflficultiea 
of  the  Government — Condition  of  the  Settlers   141 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  Commonwealth  of  Liberia — Thomas  H.  Buchanan — Views  of 
different  Parties — Detached  Condition  of  the  Colony — Xecessity 
of  L^nion — Establishment  of  a  Commonwealth — Use  of  the 
American  Flag  in  the  Slave-Trade — "Euphrates" — Sloop  Camp- 
bell"— Slavers  at  Bassa — Expedition  against  them — Conflict — 
Gallinas   148 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Buchanan's  Administration  continued — Death  of  King  Boatswain — 
War  with  Gaytumba — Attack  on  Heddington — Expedition  of 
Buchanan  against  Gaytumba — Death  of  Buchanan — His  Char- 
acter  159 

CHAPTER  XVL 

Roberts  governor — Difl5culties  with  English  Traders — Position  of 
Liberia  in  respect  to  England — Case  of  the  "  John  Seyes" — Offi- 
cial Correspondence  of  Everett  and  Upshur — Trouble  on  the 
Coast — Reflections   166 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

Roberts'  Administration — Eff'ortsin  Reference  to  English  Traders — 
Internal  Condition  of  Liberia — Insubordination — Treaties  with 
the  native  Bangs — Expedition  to  the  Interior — Causes  leading 
to  a  Declaration  of  Independence   173 


CHAPTER  XVITL 

Independence  of  Liberia  proclaimed  and  acknowledged  by  Great 
Britain,  France,  Belgium,  Prussia,  and  Brazil — Treaties  with  Eng- 
land and  France — Expedition  against  New  Cesters — U.  S.  Sloop- 

1* 


10 


CONTENTS. 


of-War  "  Yorktown" — Engliah  and  French  Cruisers — Disturb- 
ances among  the  native  Chiefs — Financial  Troubles — Recurring 
Difficulty  with  English  Traders — Boombo,  Will  Buckle,  Grando, 
King  Buyer   IRQ 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Condition  of  Liberia  as  a  Nation — Aspect  of  Liberia  to  a  Visitor — 
Character  of  Monrovia — 8oil»  Productions  and  Labor — Uiirbor — 
Condition  of  the  People  compared  with  that  of  their  Race  in  the 
United  States— Schools   192 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Maryland  in  Liberia — Cape  Palmas — Hall  and  Russwurm — Chas- 
tisement of  the  Natives  at  Berebee  by  the  U.  S.  Squadron — 
Line  of  Packets — Proposal  of  Independence — Illustrations  of 
the  Colonization  Scheme — Christian  Missions   200 

CHAPTER  XXL 

Renewal  of  Piracy  and  the  Slave-Trade  at  the  close  of  the  Euro- 
pean War — British  Squadron — Treaties  with  the  Natives — Origin 
of  Barracoons — L^se  of  the  American  Flag  in  the  Slave-Trade — 
Official  Correspondence  on  the  Subject — Condition  of  Slaves  on 
board  of  the  Slave- Vessels — Case  of  the  "  Veloz  Pcusageira' — 


French  Squadroa   218 

CHAPTER  XXn. 
United  States  Squadron — Treaty  of  Washington   232 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Case  of  the  "  Mary  Carver,"  seized  by  the  Natives — Measures  of 
the  Squadron  in  consequence — Destruction  of  Towns — Letter 
from  U.  S.  Brig  "  Truxtou"  in  relation  to  a  captured  Slaver   235 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Capture  of  the  Slave-Barque  "Pons" — Slaves  landed  at  Mon- 
rovia— Capture  of  the  Slave-equipped  Vessels  "  Panther," 
"Robert  Wilson,"  "Chancellor,"  itc— Letter  from  the  "James- 
town" in  reference  to  Liberia — Affair  with  the  Natives  near  Cape 
Palmas — Seizure  and  Condonination  of  the  Slaver  "H.  N.  Gam- 
briU"   243 


CONTENTS. 


11 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

Cruise  of  the  "Perry" — Instructions— Dispatched  to  the  South 
Coast — Benguela — Case  of  a  Slaver  which  had  changed  her  Nation- 
ahty  captured  by  an  English  Cruiser — St.  Paul  de  Loanda — 
Abuse  of  the  American  Flag — Want  of  a  Consul  on  the  South 
jCoast — Correspondence  with  British  Officers  in  relation  to  Sla- 
vers under  the  American  Flag — The  Barque  "  Navarre" — Treaty 
with  Portugal — Abatement  of  Custom-House  Duties — Cruis- 
ing off  Ambriz — An  Arrangement  made  with  the  British  Com- 
modore for  the  Joint  Cruising  of  the  "Perry"  and  Steamer 
"Cyclops" — Co-operation  with  the  British  Squadron  for  the 
Suppression  of  the  Slave-Trade — Fitting  out  of  American  Slavers 
in  Brazil   254 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

American  Brigantine  "  Louisa  Beaton"  suspected — Correspondence 
with  the  Commander  of  the  Southern  Division  of  the  British 
Squadron — Boat  Cruising — Currents — Rollei's  on  the  Coast — 
Trade- Winds — Climate — Prince's  Island — Madame  Fereira   272 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Return  to  the  Southern  Coast — Capture  of  the  American  Slave- 
Ship  "  Martha" — Claim  to  Brazilian  Nationality — Letters  found 
on  board  illustrative  of  the  Slave-Trade — Loanda — French,  Eng- 
lish, and  Portuguese  Cruisers — Congo  River — Boarding  Foreign 
Merchant  Vessels — Capture  of  the  "  Volusia"  by  a  British 
Cruiser — She  claims  American  Nationality — The  Meeting  of  the 
Commodores  at  Loanda — Discussions  in  relation  to  Interference 
with  Vessels  ostensibly  American — Seizure  of  the  American 
Brigantine  "  Chatsworth," — Claims  by  the  Master  of  the 
"  Volusia"   285 

CHAPTER  XXVIIL 

Another  Cruise — Chatsworth  again — Visit  to  the  Queen  near 
Ambrizette — Seizure  of  the  American  Brigantine  "  Louisa  Bea- 
ton" by  a  British  Cruiser — Correspondence — Proposal  of  Remu- 
neration from  the  Captors — Seizure  of  the  "  Chatsworth"  as  a 
Slaver — Italian  Supercargo — Master  of  the  "  Louisa  Beaton"  306 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 
Prohibition  of  Visits  to  Vessels  at  Loanda — Correspondence — 
Restrictions  removed — St.  Helena — Appearance  of  the  Island — 
Reception — Correspondence  with  the  Chief-Justice — Departure.  324 


12 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXX- 

Return  to  Loanda — "  Cyclopa"  leaves  the  Coast — Hon.  Captain 
Hasting!*— Discussion  with  the  British  Commodore  in  reference 
to  the  Visit  at  St.  Helena— Commodore  Fanshawe — Arrival  at 
Monrovia — British  Cruiser  n«}i' r- — \r  ;i\  .i1  at  !*f  rt  .  Pnva — 
Wreck  of  a  Hamburgh  Shi;  36 


CHAPTER  XXXr. 

Return  to  the  South  Coast — Comparative  Courses  and  Length  of 
Pa*sagt — Country  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Congo— Correspondence 
with  the  British  Commodore — Slate  of  the  Slave- Tra.le — Com- 
munication to  the  Hydrograpliicnl  D- 1  rir»  n.  nt — EU-j  hants' 
Bay — Crew  on  Shore — Zebras.     344 


CHAPTER  XXXIL 

The  Condition  of  the  Slave-Trade — "Want  of  suitable  Cruisers — 
Health  of  the  Vessel — Xavy  Spirit-ration — Portuguese  Commo- 
dore— French  Commodore — Loanda — Letter  from  Sir  George 
Jackson,  British  Commissioner,  on  the  State  of  the  Slave-Trade — 
Return  to  Porto  Pray  a   857 


CHAPTER  XXXIIL 

Island  of  Madeira — Porto  Grande,  Cape  Verde  Islands — Inter- 
ference of  the  Briti>h  Consul  with  the  "  Louisa  Beaton" — Porto 
Praya — Brazilian  Brigantiue  seized  by  the  Authorities — Arrival 
at  New  York  369 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

Conclusion — Necessity  of  Squadrons  for  Protection  of  Commerce 
and  Citizens  abroad — Fever  in  Brazil,  West  Indies,  and  United 
States — Influence  of  Recaptured  Slaves  returning  to  the  diflFerent 
regions  of  their  own  Country — Commercial  Relations  with  Africa.  379 


■  V- 


AFRICA 

AND 

THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


CHAPTEK  I. 

SUBJECT    AND    ARRANGEMENT  AREA    OF  CRUISING-GROUND  

DISTRIBUTION  OF  SUBJECTS. 

On  the  28tli  of  I^'ovember,  1849,  the  U.  S.  brig 
"  Perry"  sailed  for  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  to  join  the 
American  squadron  there  stationed. 

A  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  signed  at  "Washington 
in  the  year  1842,  stipulates  that  each  nation  shall  main- 
tain on  the  coast  of  Africa,  a  force  of  naval  vessels  "  of 
suitable  numbers  and  description,  to  carry  in  all  not 
less  than  eighty  guns,  to  enforce  separately  and  respec- 
tively, the  laws,  rights,  and  obligations  of  each  of  the 
two  countries,  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade." 

Although  this  stipulation  was  limited  to  the  term  of 
five  years  from  the  date  of  the  exchange  of  the  ratifi- 
cations of  the  treaty,  "  and  afterwards  until  one  or  the 


14 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


Other  imvty  shall  signify  a  wish  to  terminate  it the 
United  States  have  continued  to  maintain  a  squadron 
on  that  coast  for  the  protection  of  its  commerce,  and 
for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade,  so  far  as  it  might 
be  carried  on  in  American  vessels,  or  by  American 
citizens. 

To  illustrate  the  importance  of  this  squadron,  the  re- 
lations which  its  operations  bear  to  American  interests, 
and  to  the  rights  of  the  American  flag ;  its  effects  upon 
the  condition  of  Africa  in  checking  crime,  and  pre- 
paring the  way  for  the  introduction  of  peace,  prosperity, 
and  civilization,  is  the  primary  object  of  this  work. 

A  general  view  of  the  continent  of  Africa,  compris- 
ing the  past  and  present  condition  of  its  inhabitants ; 
slavery  in  Africa  and  its  foreign  slave-trade ;  the  pira- 
cies upon  the  coast  before  it  was  guarded  and  protected 
by  naval  squadrons ;  the  geological  structure  of  the 
country ;  its  natural  history,  languages,  and  people ; 
and  the  progress  of  colonization  by  the  negro  race  re- 
turning to  their  own  land  with  the  light  of  religion,  of 
sound  policy,  and  of  modern  arts,  will  also  be  intro- 
duced as  subjects  appropriate  to  the  general  design. 

K  a  chart  of  the  Atlantic  is  spread  out,  and  a  line 
drawn  from  the  Cape  Yerde  Islands  towards  the  south- 
eastern coast  of  Brazil ;  if  we  then  pass  to  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope  and  draw  another  from  that  point  by  the 
island  of  St.  Helena,  crossing  the  former  north  of  the 


CRUISING-GROUND. 


15 


equator,  the  great  tracks  of  commerce  will  be  traced. 
Yessels  outward  bound  follow  the  track  towards  the 
South  American  shore,  and  the  homeward  bound  are 
found  on  the  other.  Thus  vessels  often  meet  in  the 
centre  of  the  Atlantic ;  and  the  crossing  of  these  lines 
off  the  projecting  shores  of  central  Africa  renders  the 
coasts  of  that  region  of  great  naval  importance. 

The  wide  triangular  space  of  sea  between  the  home- 
ward bound  line  and  the  retiring  African  seaboard 
around  the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  constituted  the  area  on 
which  the  vigilance  of  the  squadron  was  to  be  exer- 
cised. Here  is  the  region  of  crime,  suffering,  cruelty 
and  death,  fi*om  the  slave-trade ;  and  here  has  been  at 
different  ages,  when  the  police  of  the  sea  happened  to 
be  little  cared  for,  the  scene  of  the  worst  piracies  which 
have  ever  disgraced  human  natui*e. 

Yessels  mnning  out  from  the  Afi-ican  coast  fall  here 
and  there  into  these  lines  traced  on  the  chart,  or  some- 
times cross  them.  No  one  can  tell  what  they  contain 
from  the  graceful  hull,  well-proportioned  masts,  neatly 
trimmed  yards,  and  gallant  bearing  of  the  vessel.  This 
deceitfid  beauty  may  conceal  wrong,  violence,  and 
crime — the  theft  of  living  men,  the  foulness  and  cor- 
mption  of  the  steaming  slave-deck,  and  the  charnel- 
house  of  wretchedness  and  despair. 

It  is  difficult  in  looking  over  the  ship's  side  to  con- 
ceive the  transparency  of  the  sea.    Tlie  reflection  of  the 


16 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


blue  sky  in  these  tropic  regions  colors  it  like  an  opaque 
sapphire,  till  some  fish  startles  one  by  suddenly  appear- 
ing far  beneath,  seeming  to  carry  daylight  down  with 
him  into  the  deptlis  below.  One  is  then  reminded  that 
the  vessel  is  suspended  over  a  transparent  abyss.  There 
for  ages  has  sunk  the  dark-skinned  sufferer  from  the 
horrors  of  the  middle  passage,"  carrying  that  ghastly 
daylight  down  with  him,  to  rest  until  "  the  sea  shall 
give  up  its  dead,"  and  the  slaver  and  his  merchant 
come  from  their  j^laces  to  be  confronted  with  their 
victim. 

The  relation  of  the  western  nations  to  these  shores 
present  themselves  under  three  phases,  which  claim 
more  or  less  attention  in  order  to  a  full  understanding 
of  the  subject.    These  are, 

I.  Period  of  Discovery,  Piracy  and  Sla\4ng. 

n.  Period  of  Colonizing. 

lU.  Period  of  Naval  Cruising. 


CHAPTER  II. 


DISCOVERIES  BY  FRENCH  AND  PORTUGUESE  ALONG  THE  COAST 
 CAPE  OF  GOOD  HOPE  RESULTS. 

The  French  of  E"onnandy  contested  with  the  Portu- 
guese the  honor  of  firet  venturing  into  the  Gulf  of 
Guinea.  It  was,  however,  nearly  a  hundi-ed  years 
from  the  time  when  the  latter  first  embarked  in  these 
discoveries,  imtil,  in  1487,  they  reached  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope.  For  about  eight  centuries  the  Moham- 
medan in  the  interior  had  been  shaping  out  an  influence 
for  himself  by  proselyting  and  commerce.  The  Portu- 
guese discoverer  met  this  influence  on  the  African 
shores.  The  Yenetians  held  a  sort  of  partnership  with 
the  Mohammedans  in  the  trade  of  the  East :  Portugal 
had  then  taken  scarcely  any  share  in  the  brilliant  and 
exciting  politics  of  the  Levant ;  her  vocation  was  to  the 
seas  of  the  West,  but  in  that  direction  she  was  advanc- 
ing to  an  overwhelming  triumph  over  her  Eastern 
competitor. 

On  the  3d  of  May,  1487,  a  boat  left  one  of  two  small 
high-stemed  vessels,  of  less  tonnage  than  an  ordinary 
river  sloop  of  the  present  day,  and  landed  a  few  weath- 
er-beaten men  on  a  low  island  of  rocks,  on  which 


18 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


they  proceeded  to  erect  a  cross.  Tlie  sjiiiid  which 
rustled  across  their  footsteps,  the  sigh  of  the  west  wind 
among  the  waxberry  bushes,  and  the  croakings  of  the 
penguins  as  they  waddled  ofiP, — these  were  the  voices 
^  which  hailed  the  opening  of  a  new  era  for  the  world ; 
for  Bartholomew  Diaz  had  then  passed  the  southern 
point  of  Africa,  and  was  listening  to  the  surf  of  the 
Antarctic  Sea. 

This  enterprising  navigator  had  sailed  from  Lisbon 
in  August,  1486,  and  seems  to  have  reached  Sierra 
Parda,  north  of  the  Orange  River,  in  time  to  catch  the 
last  of  the  strong  southeasterly  winds,  prevailing  during 
the  summer  months  on  the  southern  coast  of  Africa,  in 
the  region  of  the  Cape.  He  stood  to  the  southwest,  in 
vessels  little  calculated  for  holding  a  wind,  and  at 
length  reached  the  region  of  the  prevailing  southwest 
winds.  Then  standing  to  the  eastward  he  passed  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  of  which  he  was  in  search,  and 
bearing  away  to  the  northward,  after  nmning  a  distance 
of  four  himdred  miles,  brought  up  at  the  island  of  St. 
Croix  above  referred  to.  Coasting  along  on  his  return, 
the  Cape  was  doubled,  and  named  Cdbo  Tormentoso^  or 
the  Cape  of  Storms.  The  King  of  Portugal,  on  the 
discoverer's  return,  gave  it  the  more  promising  name  of 
Caho  de  huen  Speranza^  or  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

Africa  thus  fell  into  the  grasp  of  Europe.  Trade 
flowed  with  a  full  stream  into  this  new  channel.  Por- 


DISCOVERIES  ALONG  THE  COAST. 


19 


tugal  conquered  and  settled  its  shores.  Missionaries 
accompanied  the  Portuguese  discoverers  and  conquerors 
to  various  parts  of  Africa,  Tvhere  the  Portuguese  do- 
minion had  been  established,  and  for  long  periods  in- 
fluenced the  condition  of  the  country. 


CHAPTEK  111. 


PIRATES  DAVIS,    ROHEKTS,   AND    OTHERS  BRITISH  CRUISERS  

SLAVE-TRADE     SYSTEMATIZED  GUINEAMEX  HORRORS  OF 

THE  MIDDLE  PASSAGE." 

The  i?econd  period  is  that  of  villany.  More  Africans 
seem  to  have  been  bought  and  sold,  at  all  times  of  the 
world's  history,  than  of  any  other  race  of  mankind. 
The  early  na^ngators  were  offered  slaves  as  merchan- 
dise. It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  that  the  few  which 
they  then  carried  away,  could  serve  any  other  pm^ose 
than  to  gratify  curiosity,  or  add  to  the  ostentatious 
gi-eatness  of  kings  and  noblemen.  It  was  the  demands 
of  the  west  which  rendered  this  iniquity  a  trade.  Every 
thing  which  could  debase  a  man  was  thrust  upon  Africa 
from  every  shore.  The  old  military  skill  of  Europe 
raised  on  almost  every  accessible  point  embattled  for- 
tresses, which  now  picturesquely  line  the  Gulf  of 
Guinea.  In  the  space  between  Cape  Palmas  and  the 
Calabar  River,  there  are  to  be  counted,  in  the  old  charts, 
forts  and  factories  by  hundreds. 

Tlie  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  were  espe- 
cially the  era  of  woe  to  the  African  people.  Crime 
against  them  on  the  part  of  European  nations,  had  be- 


^         PIKATES  A^'D  SLAVES.  21 

come  gi'oss  in  cruelty  and  universal  in  extent.  From 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Mediterranean,  in  respect 
to  their  lands  or  their  persons,  the  European  was  seiz- 
ing, slaying  and  enslaving.  The  mischief  perpetrated 
by  the  white  man,  was  the  som-ce  of  mischief  to  it> 
author.  The  west  coast  became  the  haunt  and  nursery 
of  pirates.  In  fact,  the  same  class  of  men  were  the 
navigatoi's  of  the  pirate  and  the  slaver ;  and  sailors  had 
little  hesitation  in  betraying  their  own  vessels  occa- 
sionally into  the  hands  of  the  buccaneer.  Slave-trad- 
ing aflorded  a  pretext  which  covered  all  the  prepara- 
tions for  robbery.  The  whole  civilized  world  had  begun 
to  share  in  this  guilt  and  in  this  retribution. 

In  1692,  a  solitary  Scotchman  was  found  at  Cape 
Mesurado,  living  among  the  negroes.  He  had  reached 
the  coast  in  a  vessel,  of  which  a  man  named  Herbert  had 
gotten  possession  in  one  of  the  American  colonies,  and 
had  run  off  with  on  a  buccaneering  cruise ;  a  mutiny 
and  fight  resulted  in  the  death  of  most  of  the  officers 
and  crew.  The  vessel  drifted  on  shore,  and  bilged  in 
the  heavy  sm-f  at  Cape  Mesurado. 

The  higher  ranks  of  society  in  Christendom  were . 
then  most  grossly  corrupt,  and  had  a  leading  share  in 
these  crimes.  There  arrived  at  Barbadoes  in  1694,  a 
vessel  from  'New  England,  which  might  then  have  been 
called  a  clipper,  mounting  twenty  small  guns.  A  com- 
pany of  merchants  of  the  island  bought  her,  and  fitted  her 


22  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

out  ostensibly  as  a  slaver,  bound  to  the  island  of  Mada- 
gascar ;  but  in  reality  for  the  purpose  of  pirating  on 
the  India  merchantmen  trading  to  the  Red  Sea.  They 
induced  Russell,  the  governor  of  the  island,  to  join  them 
in  the  adventure,  and  to  give  the  sliip  an  official  char- 
acter, 60  far  as  he  was  authorized  to  do  so  by  his  colo- 
nial commission. 

A  "sea  solicitor"  of  this  order,  named  CJonklyn, 
aiTived  in  1719  at  Sierra  Leone  in  a  state  of  great  des- 
titution, bringing  with  him  twenty-five  of  the  greatest 
villains  that  could  be  culled  from  the  crews  of  two  or 
three  piratical  vessels  on  the  coast.  A  mutiny  had 
taken  place  in  one  of  these,  on  account  of  the  chiefs 
assuming  something  of  the  character  and  habits  of  a 
gentleman,  and  Conklyn,  after  a  severe  contention,  had 
left  with  his  desperate  associates.  Had  he  remained, 
he  might  have  become  chief  in  command,  as  a  second 
mutiny  broke  out  soon  after  his  departure,  in  which 
the  chief  was  overpowered,  placed  on  board  one  of  the 
prize  vessels,  and  never  heard  of  afterwards.  The 
pirates  under  a  new  commander  followed  Conklyn  to 
Sien-a  Leone.  They  found  there  this  worthy  gentle- 
man, rich,  and  in  command  of  a  fine  ship  with  eighty 
men. 

Davis,  the  notorious  pirate,  soon  joined  him  with  a 
well-armed  ship  manned  with  one  hundred  and  fifty 
men.    Here  was  collected  as  fruitftd  a  nest  of  villany 


DAVIS,  ROBERTS,  AND  PLUNKET. 


23 


as  the  world  ever  saw.  They  plundered  and  captui-ed 
whatever  came  in  theii-  com-se.  Tliese  vessels,  with 
other  pirates,  soon  destroyed  more  than  one  hundi-ed 
trading  vessels  on  the  African  coast.  England  entered 
into  a  kind  of  compromise,  previously  to  sending  a 
squadi-on  against  them,  by  offering  pardon  to  all  who 
should  present  themselves  to  the  governor  of  any  of  her 
colonies  before  the  first  of  July,  1719.  This  was  equiv- 
alent to  offering  themselves  to  serve  in  the  war  which 
had  commenced  against  Spain,  or  exchanging  one  kind 
of  brigandage  for  another,  by  privateering  against  the 
Spanish  commerce.  But  from  the  accoimts  of  their 
prisoners  very  few  of  them  could  read,  and  thus  the 
proclamation  was  almost  a  dead  letter. 

In  1720,  Roberts,  a  hero  of  the  same  class,  anchored 
in  Sien'a  Leone,  and  sent  a  message  to  Plunket,  the 
commander  of  the  English  fort,  with  a  request  for  some 
gold  dust  and  ammunition.  The  commander  of  the 
fort  replied  that  he  had  no  gold  dust  for  them,  but  that 
he  would  serve  them  with  a  good  allowance  of  shot  if 
they  ventured  within  the  range  of  his  guns  ;  whereupon 
Roberts  opened  his  fire  upon  the  fort.  Plunket  soon 
expended  all  his  ammunition,  and  abandoned  his  posi- 
tion. Being  made  prisoner  he  was  taken  before  Rob- 
erts :  the  pirate  assailed  the  poor  commander  with  the 
most  outrageous  execrations  for  his  audacity  in  resisting 
him.    To  his  astonishment  Plunket  retorted  upon  him 


24  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

with  oatlis  and  execrations  yet  more  tremendous.  This 
was  quite  to  the  taste  of  the  scoundrels  around  them, 
who,  with  shouts  of  laughter,  told  their  captain  that  he 
was  only  second  best  at  that  biLsiness,  and  Plunket,  in 
consideration  of  his  victory,  was  allowed  to  escape  with 
life. 

In  1721,  England  dispatched  two  men-of-war  to  the 
Gulf  of  Guinea  for  the  purpose  of  exterminating  the 
pirates  who  had  there  reached  a  formidable  degree  of 
power,  and  sometimes,  as  in  the  instance  noted  above, 
assailed  the  establishments  on  shore.  They  found  that 
Roberts  was  in  command  of  a  squadron  of  three  vessels, 
with  about  four  hundred  men  under  his  command,  and 
had  been  particularly  active  and  successful  in  outrage. 
After  cruising  about  the  northern  coast,  and  learning 
that  Roberts  had  plundered  many  vessels,  and  that 
sailors  were  flocking  to  him  from  all  quarters,  they 
found  him  on  the  evening  of  the  third  of  February, 
anchored  with  his  three  vessels  in  the  bay  north  of 
Cape  Lopez. 

When  entering  the  bay,  light  enough  remained  to  let 
them  see  that  thev  had  cauorht  the  miscreants  in  their 
lair.  Closing  in  with  the  land  the  cruisers  quietly  ran 
in  and  anchored  close  aboard  the  outer  vessel  belonging 
to  the  pirates.  Having  ascertained  the  character  of  the 
visitors,  the  pirate  slipped  his  cables,  and  proceeded  to 
make  sail,  but  was  boarded  and  secured  just  as  the 


CAPTURE  OF  PIRATES. 


25 


rapid  blackness  of  a  tropical  niglit  buried  every  thing 
in  obscurity.  Every  sound  was  watched  during  the 
darkness  of  the  night,  with  scarcely  the  hope  that  the 
other  two  pirates  would  not  take  advantage  of  it  to 
make  their  escape ;  but  the  short  gray  dawn  showed 
them  still  at  their  anchors.  The  cruisers  getting  under 
way  and  closing  in  with  the  pirates  produced  no  move- 
ment on  their  part,  and  some  scheme  of  cunning  or 
desperate  resistance  was  prepared  for.  They  had  in 
fact  made  a  draft  from  one  vessel  to  man  the  other 
fiilly  for  defence.  Into  this  vessel  the  smaller  of  the 
cruisers,  the  Swallow^  threw  her  broadside,  which  was 
feebly  returned.  A  grape-shot  in  the  head  had  killed 
Koberts.  This  and  the  slaughter  of  the  cruiser's  fire 
prepared  the  way  for  the  boarders,  vsdthout  much  far- 
ther resistance,  to  take  possession  of  the  pirate.  The 
third  vessel  was  easily  captured. 

The  cruisers  suffered  no  loss  in  the  fight,  but  had 
been  fatally  reduced  by  sickness.  The  larger  vessel, 
the  Weymouth^  which  left  England  with  a  crew  of  two 
hundi-ed  and  forty  men,  had  previously  been  reduced 
so  greatly  as  scarcely  to  be  able  to  weigh  her  anchors; 
and,  although  recruited  often  from  merchant  vessels, 
landed  but  one  hundred  and  eighty  men  in  England. 
This  rendered  the  charge  of  their  prisoners  somewhat 
hazardous,  and  taking  them  as  far  as  Cape  Coast  Castle^ 
they  there  executed  such  justice  as  the  place  could 

2 


26 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


afford,  or  the  demerits  of  their  prey  deserved.  A  great 
number  of  them  oi-namented  the  shore  on  gibbets — the 
well-known  signs  of  civilization  in  that  era — as  long  as 
the  climate  and  the  vultiire-<  would  permit  them  to 
hang. 

Consequent  on  these  events  such  order  was  established 
as  circumstances  would  admit,  or  rather  the  progress  of 
maritime  intercourse  and  naval  power  put  an  end  to 
the  system  of  daring  and  regulated  piracy  by  which  the 
tropical  shores  of  Africa  and  the  West  Indies  had  been 
laid  waste.  This,  however,  was  slight  relief  for  Africa. 
It  was  to  secure  and  systematize  trade  that  piracy  had 
been  suppressed,  and  the  slave-trade  became  accord- 
ingly cruelly  and  murderously  systematic. 

The  question  what  nation  should  be  most  enriched 
by  the  guilty  traffic  was  a  subject  of  diplomacy.  Eng- 
land secm*ed  the  gi*eater  share  of  the  criminality  and  of 
the  profit,  by  gaining  from  her  other  competitors  the 
right  by  contract  to  supply  the  colonies  of  Spain  with 
negroes. 

Men  forget  what  they  ought  not  to  forget ;  and  how- 
ever startling,  disgusting,  and  oppressive  to  the  mind  of 
man  the  horroi-s  are  which  characterized  that  trade,  it 
is  well  that  since  they  did  exist  the  memory  of  them 
should  not  perish.  It  is  a  fearfully  dark  chapter  in  the 
history  of  the  world,  but  although  terrific  it  has  its 
value.    It  is  more  worthy  of  being  remembered  than 


GUINEAMEN  AND  PRESENT  SLAVERS.  27 

the  historical  routine  of  wars,  defeats,  or  victories ;  for 
it  is  more  illustrative  of  man's  proper  history,  and  of  a 
strange  era  in  that  history.  The  evidence  taken  by  the 
Committee  of  the  English  House  of  Lords  in  1850,  has 
again  thrust  the  subject  into  daylight. 

The  slave-trade  is  now  carried  on  by  comparatively 
small  and  ill-found  vessels,  watched  by  the  cruisers  in- 
cessantly. They  are  therefore  induced,  at  any  risk  of 
loss  by  death,  to  crowd  and  pack  their  cargoes,  so  that 
a  successful  voyage  may  compensate  for  many  captures. 
In  olden  times,  there  were  vessels  fitted  expressly  for 
the  purpose — large  Indiamen  or  whalers.  It  has  been 
objected,  to  the  employment  of  squadrons  to  exterminate 
that  trade,  that  their  interference  has  increased  its  enor- 
mity. This,  however,  is  doing  honor  to  the  old  Guinea- 
men,  such  as  they  by  no  means  deserve.  It  is,  in  fact, 
an  inference  in  favor  of  human  nature,  implying  that  a 
man  who  has  impunity  and  leisure  to  do  evil,  cannot, 
in  the  nature  of  things,  be  so  dreadfully  heartless  in 
doing  it,  as  those  in  whose  track  the  avenger  follows 
to  seize  and  punish.  The  fact,  however,  does  not  jus- 
tify this  surmise  in  favor  of  impunity  and  leism-e.  If 
ever  there  was  any  thing  on  earth  which,  for  revolting, 
filthy,  heartless  atrocity,  might  make  the  devil  wonder 
and  hell  recognize  its  own  likeness,  then  it  was  on  any 
one  of  the  decks  of  an  old  slaver.  The  sordid  cupidity 
of  the  older,  as  it  is  meaner,  was  also  more  callous 


28  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

than  the  hurried  ruffianism  of  the  present  age.  In  fact, 
a  slaver  now  has  but  one  deck ;  in  the  last  century 
they  had  two  or  three.  Any  one  of  the  decks  of  the 
larger  vessels  was  rather  worse,  if  this  could  be,  than 
the  single  deck  of  the  brigs  and  schooners  now  em- 
ployed in  the  trade.  Then,  the  number  of  decks  ren- 
dered the  suffocating  and  pestilential  hold  a  scene  of 
unparalleled  -svretchedness.  Here  are  some  instances 
of  this,  collected  from  evidence  taken  by  the  British 
House  of  Commons  in  1792. 

James  Morley,  gunner  of  the  Medway^  states  :  "He 
has  seen  them  under  great  difficulty  of  breathing ;  the 
women,  particularly,  often  got  upon  the  beams,  where 
the  gratings  are  often  raised  with  banisters,  about  four 
feet  above  the  combings,  to  give  air,  but  they  are  gener- 
ally driven  down,  because  they  take  the  air  from  the  rest. 
He  has  known  rice  held  in  the  mouths  of  sea-sick  slaves 
imtil  they  were  almost  strangled ;  he  has  seen  the  sur- 
geon's mate  force  the  panniken  between  their  teeth, 
and  throw  the  medicine  over  them,  so  that  not  half  of 
it  went  into  their  mouths — the  poor  wi^etches  wallowing 
in  their  blood,  hardly  having  life,  and  this  with  blows 
of  the  cat." 

Dr.  Tliomas  Trotter,  surgeon  of  the  Brookes^  says : 
"  He  has  seen  the  slaves  drawing  their  breath  with  all 
those  laborious  and  anxious  efforts  for  life  which  are 
observed  in  expiring  animals,  subjected,  by  experiment. 


imUl^      "  HORRORS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  PASSAGE."  29 

to  foiil  air,  or  in  the  exhausted  receiver  of  an  air-pump ; 
has  also  seen  them  when  the  tarpaulins  have  inadver- 
tently been  thrown  over  the  gratings,  attempting  to 
heave  them  up,  crying  out  '  kickeraboo !  kickeraboo  I' 
i.  e.,  We  are  dying.  On  removing  the  tai-paulin  and 
gratings,  they  would  fly  to  the  hatchways  with  all  the 
signs  of  teiTor  and  di-ead  of  suffocation ;  many  whom 
he  has  seen  in  a  dying  state,  have  recovered  by  being 
brought  on  the  deck ;  others,  were  irrevocably  lost  by 
suffocation,  having  had  no  previous  signs  of  indisposi- 
tion." 

In  regard  to  the  Garland'' s  voyage,  17SS,  the  testi- 
mony is :  "  Some  of  the  diseased  were  obhged  to  be 
kept  on  deck.  The  slaves,  both  when  ill  and  well,  were 
frequently  forced  to  eat  against  their  inclination ;  were 
whipped  with  a  cat  if  they  refused.  The  parts  on  which 
their  shackles  are  fastened,  are  often  excoriated  by  the 
violent  exercise  they  are  forced  to  take,  and  of  this  they 
made  many  grievous  complaints  to  him.  Fell  in  with 
the  Hero^  Wilson,  which  had  lost,  he  thinks,  thi-ee  hun- 
dred and  sixty  slaves  by  death ;  he  is  certain  more  than 
half  of  her  cargo ;  learnt  this  from  the  sm-geon  ;  they 
had  died  mostly  of  the  smallpox ;  surgeon  also  told  him, 
that  when  removed  from  one  place  to  another,  they  left 
marks  of  their  skin  and  blood  upon  the  deck,  and  that 
it  was  the  most  horrid  sight  he  had  ever  seen." 

The  annexed  sketch  represents  the  lower  deck  of  a 


80  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Guineaman,  when  the  trade  was  under  systematic  reg- 
ulations. The  slaves  were  obliged  to  lie  on  their  backs, 
and  were  shackled  by  their  ankles,  the  left  of  one 
being  fettered  close  to  the  right  of  the  next ;  so  that  the 
whole  number  in  one  line  formed  a  single  li\'ing  chain. 
When  one  died,  the  body  remained  during  the  night, 
or  during  bad  weather,  secured  to  the  two  between 
whom  he  was.  The  height  between  decks  was  so  little, 
that  a  man  of  ordinary  size  could  hardly  sit  upright. 
During  good  weatlier,  a  gang  of  slaves  was  taken  on 
the  spar-deck,  and  there  remained  for  a  short  time.  In 
bad  weather,  when  the  hatches  were  closed,  death  from 
suffocation  would  necessarily  occur.  It  can,  therefore, 
easily  be  understood,  that  the  athletic  strangled  the 
weaker  intentionally,  in  order  to  procure  more  space, 
and  that,  when  striving  to  get  near  some  aperture 
affording  air  to  breathe,  many  would  be  injm-ed  or 
killed  in  the  struggle. 
Such  were  "  the  horrors  of  the  middle  passage." 


CHAPTEK lY* 


PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY  CLIMATE  GEOLOGY  ZOOLOGY-— 

BOTANY. 

Before  proceeding  to  the  colonizmg  era,  it  will  be 
requisite  to  present  an  estimate  of  tlie  value  and  impor- 
tance of  the  African  continent  in  relation  to  the  rest  of 
the  world.  This  requires  some  preliminary  notice  of 
the  physical  condition  of  its  territories,  and  the  charac- 
ter and  distribution  of  the  tribes  possessing  them. 
Africa  has  not  yet  yielded  to  science  the  results  which 
may  be  expected  from  it.  Courage  and  hardihood, 
rather  than  knowledge  and  skill,  have,  from  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case,  been  the  characteristics  of  its 
successful  explorei-s.  Wq  have,  therefore,  wonderful 
incidents  and  loose  descriptions,  without  the  accm-ate 
observation  and  statement  of  circumstances  which  can 
render  them  useful. 


*  The  author  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  for  liberal  and  valuable 
contributions  on  the  subject  of  Physical  Geography,  Geology,  <fcc.,  to 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Adamson,  for  twenty  years  a  resident  at  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  and  government  director  and  professor  in  the  South 
African  college.  He  wishes  also  to  express  his  obligations  for  frequent 
suggestions  from  the  same  source  on  scientific  subjects,  during  the  prep- 
aration of  this  work. 


82  AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

The  vast  radiator  formed  bj  the  sun  beating  verti- 
cally on  the  plains  of  tropical  Africa,  heats  and  ex- 
pands the  air,  and  thus  constitutes  a  sort  of  central 
trough  into  which  gravitation  brings  compensating  cur- 
rents, by  producing  a  lateral  sliding  inwards  of  the 
great  trade- wind  streams.  Thus,  as  a  general  rule, 
winds  which  would  normally  diverge  Jfrom  the  shores 
are  drawn  in  towards  them.  They  have  been  gather- 
ing moistm-e  in  then*  progress,  and  when  pressed  up- 
wards, as  they  expand  under  the  vertical  sun,  lose  their 
heat  in  the  upper  regions,  let  go  their  moisture,  and 
spread  over  the  interior  terraces  and  mountains  a  sheet 
of  heavily  depositing  cloud.  This  constitutes  the  rainy 
season,  which  necessarily,  from  the  causes  producing  it, 
accompanies  the  sim  in  its  apparent  oscillations  across 
the  equator. 

The  Gulf  of  Guinea  has  in  its  own  bosom  a  system  of 
hurricanes  and  squalls,  of  which  little  is  known  but 
their  existence  and  their  danger.  A  description  of 
them,  of  rather  an  old  date,  specifies  as  a  fact  that  they 
begin  by  the  appearance  of  a  small  mass  of  clouds  in 
the  zenith,  which  widens  and  extends  till  the  canopy 
covers  the  horizon.  Now  if  this  were  true  of  any  given 
spot,  it  would  indicate  that  the  hurricane  always  began 
there.  The  appearance  of  a  patch  of  cloud  in  the 
zenith  could  be  true  of  only  one  place  out  of  all  those 
which  the  hun-icane  influenced.    If  it  is  meant  that 


PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


33 


wherever  the  phenomenon  originated,  there  a  mass  of 
cloud  gradually  formed  in  the  zenith,  this  would  be  a 
most  important  particular  in  regard  to  the  proximate 
cause  of  the  phenomenon,  for  it  would  mark  a  rapid 
direction  upwards  of  the  atmosphere  at  that  spot  as  the 
first  observable  incident  of  the  series.  That  the  move- 
ments produced  would  subsequently  become  whirling 
or  circumvolant,  is  a  mechanical  necessity.  But  the 
force  of  the  movement  ought  not  to  be  strongest  at  the 
place  where  the  miscliief  had  its  origin. 

The  squalls,  with  high  towering  clouds,  which  rise 
like  a  wall  on  the  horizon,  involve  the  same  principles 
as  to  the  formation  of  the  vapor,  and  are  easily  expli- 
cable. They  are  not  necessarily  connected  with  circular 
hm-ricanes ;  but  the  principles  of  their  formation  may 
modify  the  intensity  of  the  blasts  in  a  circumvolant 
tornado.  Since  in  the  Gulf  of  Guinea  they  come  from 
the  eastward,  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  they  are  ripples 
or  undulations  in  an  au-  cm-rent.  In  regard  to  all  of 
this,  it  is  necessary  to  speak  doubtfully,  for  there  is  a 
great  lack  of  accurate  and  detailed  observation  on  these 
points. 

Its  position  and  physical  characteristics  give  to  this 
continent  great  influence  over  the  rest  of  the  earth. 
Africa,  America,  and  Austi-alia  have  nearly  similar 
relations  to  the  great  oceans  intei-posed  respectively  be- 
tween them.    Against  the  eastern  sides  of  these  regions 

2* 


34  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

aro  carried  from  the  ocean  those  strange,  fiirions  whirl- 
ings in  the  shallow  film  of  the  earth's  atmoephere, 
which  constitute  hurricanes.  It  is  evident  that  these 
oceans  are  mainly  the  channels  in  which  the  surface 
winds  move,  which  are  drawn  from  colder  regions  to- 
wards the  equator.  Tlie  shores  are  the  banks  of  these 
air  streams.  The  return  currents  above  flow  over  every 
thing.  They  are  thus  prevalent  in  the  interior,  so  that 
the  climatic  conditions  there  are  different  from  those 
on  the  seaboard.  Tliese  circumstances  in  the  southern 
extra-tropical  regions  are  accompanied  by  correspond- 
ing differences  in  the  character  of  the  vegetable  world. 

These  winds  are  sometimes  drawn  aside  across  the 
coast  line — constituting  the  Mediterranean  sirocco, 
and  the  African  hannattan.  Vessels  far  off  at  sea,  sail- 
ing to  the  northward,  are  covered  or  stained  on  the 
weather  side  of  their  rigging  (that  next  to  the  African 
coast),  with  a  fine  light-yellow  powder.  A  reddish- 
brown  dust  sometimes  tinges  the  sails  and  rigging.  An 
instance  of  this  occmTcd  on  board  the  "  Perry"  on  her 
outward  bound  passage,  when  five  himdred  miles  from 
the  African  coast. 

The  science  of  Ehrenberg  has  been  searching  amid 
the  microscopic  organisms  contained  in  these  substan- 
ces, for  tokens  of  their  origin.  In  the  red  material  he 
finds  forms  betraying  not  an  African,  but  an  American 
source,  presumed  to  be  in  the  great  plains  of  the  Ama- 


PHISICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


35 


zon  and  Orinoco.  This  suggests  new  views  of  the  me- 
teorology of  the  world ;  but  the  theories  founded  on  it, 
are  not  clear  of  mechanical  difficulties. 

K  we  stand  on  almost  any  shore  of  the  world  as  it 
exists  at  present,  and  consider  the  character  of  the  land 
surface  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  ocean  bottom  on  the 
other,  we  shall  see  that  a  very  great  difference  in  the 
nature  of  the  beach  line  would  be  produced  by  a  de- 
pression of  the  land  towards  the  ocean,  or  by  an  eleva- 
tion of  it  from  the  deep.  The  sea  in  its  action  on  the 
bottom  fills  up  hollows  and  obhterates  precipices  ;  but 
a  land  surface  is  worn  into  ravines  and  valleys.  Hence 
a  depression,  so  that  the  waters  overflowed  the  land, 
would  admit  them  into  its  recesses,  and  river  courses, 
and  winding  gulleys — forming  bays,  islands,  and  secure 
harbors.  Whereas  elevation  would  bring  up  from  the 
bottom  its  sand-banks  and  plains,  forming  an  extent  of 
slightly  winding  and  unsheltered  shore.  The  character 
of  a  coast  will  therefore  depend  very  greatly  upon  its 
former  history,  before  it  became  fixed.  "We  have  this 
contrast  in  the  eastern  and  western  sides  of  the  Adriatic, 
or  in  the  western  and  eastern  sides  of  the  British 
islands.  These  circumstances  are  to  some  degree  con- 
trolled by  the  effects  of  partial  volcanoes,  or  of  power- 
ful winds  and  currents.  But  on  the  whole,  it  may 
generally  be  inferred  that  a  long  unbroken  shore  indi- 
cates that  the  last  change  on  the  land  level  was  one  of 


30  AFRICA  AND  THE  A31ERICAN  FLAG. 

elevation;  while  a  coast  penetrated,  broken,  and  de- 
fended by  islands  has  receiyed  its  conformation  from 
being  stopped  in  the  process  of  subsiding. 

llie  coast  of  Africa  has  over  almost  its  whole  circuit, 
that  unbroken  or  slightly  indented  outline  which  would 
arise  from  upheaval.  The  only  conspicuous  exception 
to  this,  is  in  the  eastern  region,  neighboring  on  the 
Mozambique  Channel,  where  the  Portuguese  and  the 
Arab  possess  the  advantage,  so  rare  in  Africa,  of  hav- 
ing at  their  command  convenient  and  sheltered  harbors. 
Tliere  are  centres  of  partial  volcanic  agency  in  the 
islands  of  the  Atlantic,  north  of  the  equator,  and  in 
the  distant  spots  settled  by  Europeans  outside  of  Mad- 
agascar ;  but  this  action  has  not,  as  in  the  Mediterra- 
nean or  Archipelago,  modified  the  character  of  the 
continental  shore.  It  is  not  known  that  there  exists 
any  active  volcano  on  the  continent. 

Africa,  therefore,  if  it  could  be  seen  on  a  great  model 
of  the  world,  would  offer  little,  comparatively,  that  was 
varied  in  outline  or  in  aspect.  There  would  be  great 
tawny  deserts,  with  scanty  specks  of  dusky  green,  or 
threads  of  sombre  verdure  tracing  out  its  scant  and 
temporary  streams.  There  would  be  forests  concealing 
or  embracing  the  mouths  of  rivers,  with  brown  moun- 
tains here  and  there  penetrating  through  them,  but 
rarely  presenting  a  lofty  wall  to  the  sea.  Interior 
plains  would  show  some  glittering  lakes,  begirt  by  the 


PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  3Y 

jungle  which  they  create.  But  it  is  a  land  nearly  de- 
void of  winter,  either  temporary  or  permanent.  Only 
one  or  two  specks,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea,  and 
a  short  beaded  line  of  the  chain  of  Atlas,  would  throw 
abroad  the  silver  splendor  of  perpetual  snow.  It  is  the 
great  want  of  Africa,  that  so  few  mountains  have  on 
their  heads  these  supplies  for  summer  streams. 

The  sea-shore  is  generally  low,  except  as  influenced 
by  Atlas,  or  the  Abyssinian  ranges,  or  the  mountains  of 
the  southern  extremity.  There  is,  not  uncommonly,  a 
flat  swampy  plain,  bordering  on  the  sea,  where  the 
rivers  push  out  their  deltas,  or  form  lagoons  by  their 
conflict  with  the  fierce  surge  upon  the  shore.  Gene- 
rally at  varying  distances,  there  occur  falls  or  rapids  in 
the  great  rivers,  showing  that  they  are  descending  from 
interior  plains  of  considerable  elevation.  The  central 
regions  seem,  in  fact,  to  foiTU  two,  or  perhaps  three 
great  elevated  plateaux  or  ten-aced  plains,  having 
waters  collected  in  their  depressions,  and  joined  by 
necks ;  such  as  are  the  prairies  of  Illinois,  between  the 
St.  Lawrence  and  the  Mississippi,  or  the  llanos  of 
South  America  between  its  great  rivers.  The  southern 
one  of  these  African  plains  approaches  close  to  the 
Atlantic  near  the  Orange  River.  Starting  there  at  the 
height  of  three  thousand  feet,  it  proceeds  round  the 
sources  of  the  river,  and  spreads  centrally  along  by 
the  lately  visited,  but  long  known  lakes  north  of  the 


38 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


tropic.  Tlie  equinoctial  portion  of  it  is  probably 
drained  by  the  Zambeze  and  the  Zaire,  flowing  in  op- 
posite directions.  It  appears  to  be  continuous  as  a 
neck  westward  of  Kihnandjaro,  the  probable  source 
of  the  Nile  ;  till  it  spreads  out  into  the  vast  space  ex- 
tending from  Cape  Verde  to  Suez,  including  in  it  the 
Kiger  and  the  Nile,  the  great  desert,  and  the  collections 
of  waters  forming  Lake  Tzad,  and  such  others  as  there 
may  be  towards  Fitre. 

The  moimtains  inclosing  these  spaces  form  a  nearly 
continuous  wall  along  the  eastern  side  of  Africa.  The 
snows  of  Atlas  form  small  streams,  trickling  down  north 
and  south ;  and,  in  the  latter  case,  struggling  almost  in 
vain  with  the  tropical  heats,  in  short  courses,  towards 
the  Desert  of  Sahara. 

There  are  found  separate  groups  of  mountains,  form- 
ing for  the  continent  a  broken  margin  on  the  west. 
There  may  also  be  an  important  one  situated  centrally 
between  Lake  Tzad  and  the  Congo ;  but  there  appears 
no  probability  of  a  transverse  chain,  stretching  contin- 
uously across  this  region,  as  has  hitherto  had  a  place  on 
maps,  under  the  title  of  the    Mountains  of  the  Moon." 

No  geological  changes,  except  those  due  to  the  eleva- 
tion of  the  oldest  formations,  appear  to  have  taken 
place  extensively  in  this  continent.  The  shores  of  the 
Gulf  of  Guinea,  and  of  the  eastern  regions,  abound  with 
gold,  suggesting  that  their  interior  is  not  covered  by 


PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY 


39 


modem  rocks.  The  two  .extremities  at  Egypt  and  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  have  been  depressed  to  receive  secondary 
and  tertiary  deposits.  There  may  be  other  such  instan- 
ces ;  but  the  continent  seems,  dm-ing  a  time,  even  geo- 
logically long,  to  have  foi-med  a  great  compact  mass  of 
land,  bearing  the  same  relations  as  now  to  the  rest  of 
the  world. 

The  valleys  and  precipices  of  Sonth  Africa  have  been 
shaped  by  the  mighty  cm-rents  which  circulate  round 
the  promontory  of  the  Cape;  and  the  flat  summit  of 
Table  Mountain,  at  the  height  of  thi-ee  thousand  six 
hundred  feet,  is  a  rocky  reef,  worn  and  fretted  into 
strange  projections  by  the  surge,  which  the  southeasters 
brought  against  it,  when  it  was  at  the  level  of  the 
sea. 

The  present  state  of  organized  life  in  Africa  tells  the 
same  tale.  It  indicates  a  land  never  connected  with 
polar  regions,  nor  subjected  to  great  variations  of  tem- 
peratm-e.  Our  continent,  America,  is  a  land  of  ex- 
tremes of  temperatm-e.  Corresponding  to  that  condition, 
it  is  a  land  characterized  by  plants,  the  leaves  of  which 
ripen  and  fall,  so  that  vegetation  has  a  pause,  waiting 
for  the  breath  of  spring.  All  the  plants  of  southern 
Africa  are  evergreens.  The  large  browsing  animals, 
such  as  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros,  which  cannot  stoop 
to  gather  grass,  find  continuous  subsistence  in  the  con- 
tinuous foliage  of  shrubs.    America  abounds  with  stags 


40 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


or  deer — animals  ha\'ing  deciduous  horns  or  antlers. 
Southern  Africa  has  none,  but  is  rich  in  species  of 
antelopes,  which  have  true  or  permanent  horns,  and 
which  nowhere  sustain  great  variations  of  heat  and  cold. 
Its  fossil  plants  correspond  apparently  in  character  to 
those  which  the  country  now  bears. 

Its  fossil  zoology  offers  very  peculiar  and  interesting 
provinces  of  ancient  life.  These  have  been  in  positions 
not  greatly  unconformable  to  those  of  similar  phenom- 
ena even  now.  Great  inland  fresh-water  seas  have 
abounded  with  new  and  strange  types  of  organization, 
in  character  and  office  analogous  to  the  amphibious 
forms  occurring  with  profusion  in  similar  localities  of 
the  present  interior.  These,  and  representatives  of  the 
secondary  formations,  rest  chiefly  on  the  old  Silurian 
and  Devonian  series,  the  upheaving  of  which  seems  to 
have  given  ^e  continent  its  place  and  outline.  Coal  is 
found  at  !N'atal,  near  the  Mozambique  Channel,  but  not 
hitherto  known  to  be  of  value. 

Africa  still  offers,  and  will  long  continue  to  offer, 
the  most  promising  field  of  botanical  discovery.  Much 
novelty  certainly  remains  to  be  elicited  there,  but  it  is 
very  dilatory  in  finding  its  way  abroad.  Katal  is  the 
region  most  likely  to  be  sedulously  explored  for  some 
time.  Vegetable  ivory  has  been  brought  thence,  and 
elastic,  hard,  useful  timber  abounds.  Much  lumber  ot 
good  and  varied  character  is  taken  to  Europe  from  the 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


41 


western  regions  of  the  continent;  but  so  greatly  has 
scientific  inquiry  been  repelled  by  the  deadly  climate, 
that  even  the  species  affording  it  are  unknown,  or  doubt- 
fully guessed  at. 

The  vegetation  of  the  south  is  brilliant,  but  not  greatly 
useful.  It  affords  the  type  of  that  which  covers  the 
mountains,  receding  towards  the  northeast,  until  they 
reach  perpetual  snow  near  the  equator.  That  which  is 
of  a  more  tropical  character,  stretches  round  their  bases 
and  through  their  valleys,  with  its  profusion  of  palms, 
creepers,  and  dye-woods.  These  hereafter  will  form 
the  commercial  wealth  of  the  country,  affording  oil, 
india-rubber,  dye-stuffs,  and  other  useful  produc- 
tions. 

The  wild  animals  of  Africa  belong  to  plains  and  to 
loose  thickets,  rather  than  to  timbered  forests.  There 
is  a  gradation  in  the  height  of  the  head,  among  the  lar- 
ger quadrupeds,  which  indicates  the  sort  of  country  and 
of  vegetation  suitable  to  them. 

The  musket,  with  its  "villanous  saltpetre,"  in  the 
hands  of  barbarians  is  everywhere  expelling  from  the 
earth  its  bulkier  creatures,  so  that  the  elephant  is  dis- 
appearing, and  ivory  will  become  scarce.  Fear  tames 
the  wildest  nature ;  even  the  lion  is  timid  when  he  has 
to  face  the  musket.  The  dull  ox  has  learned  a  lesson 
with  regard  to  him ;  for  when  the  kingly  brute  prowls 
round  an  unyoked  wagon  resting  at  night,  and  his  growl 


42  AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMKRICAX  FLAG. 

or  smell  makes  the  oxen  shake  and  struggle  with  terror, 
they  are  quieted  bv  the  discharge  of  firearms. 

When  Europeans  first  visited  the  shores  of  Africa, 
they  were  astonished  at  the  tameness  and  abundance  of 
michecked  animal  life.  The  shallow  bays  and  river 
lagoons  were  full  of  gigantic  creatures;  seals  were 
found  in  great  numbers,  but  of  all  animals  these  seem 
the  most  readily  extirpated.  The  multitudes  which 
covered  the  reefe  of  South  Africa  are  nearly  gone,  and 
they  seem  to  be  no  longer  met  with  on  the  northern 
shores  of  the  continent.  The  manatee,  or  sea-cow,  and 
the  hippopotamus,  frequented  the  mouths  of  rivers,  and 
were  killed  and  eaten  by  the  natives.  They  had  never 
tamed  and  nsed  the  elephant:  that  this  might  have 
been  done  is  inferred  from  the  use  of  these  animftk  by 
the  Carthaginians.  But  as  the  Carthaginian  territory 
was  not  African  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  it  may  be 
doubted  whether  their  species  was  that  of  Central  Af- 
rica. This  latter  species  is  a  larger,  less  intelligent 
looking,  and  probably  a  more  stubborn  creatiire  than 
the  Asiatic.  The  roundness  of  their  foreheads  and  the 
size  of  their  ears  give  them  a  duller  and  more  brutal 
look;  the  magnitude  of  their  tusks,  and  the  occur- 
rence of  these  formidable  weapons  in  the  female  as 
well  as  in  the  male,  are  accommodated  to  the  neces- 
sity of  conflict  with  the  lion,  and  indicate  a  wilder 
nature. 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


43 


Lions  of  several  species,  abundance  of  panthers,  cats, 
genets,  and  hyenas  of  many  forms,  mainly  constitute 
the  carnivorous  province,  having,  as  is  suitable  to  the 
climate,  a  high  proportion  of  the  hyena  form,  or  devour- 
ers  of  the  dead.  A  foot  of  a  pongo,  or  large  ape,  "  as 
large  as  that  of  a  man,  and  covered  with  hair  an  inch 
long,"  astonished  one  of  the  earliest  navigators.  This 
animal,  which  indicates  a  zoological  relationship  to  the 
Malayan  islands,  is  known  to  afford  the  nearest  ap- 
proach to  the  human  form.  The  monkey  structure  on 
the  east  coast  of  Africa  tends  to  pass  into  the  nocturnal 
or  Lemurine  forms  of  Madagascar,  where  the  occurrence 
of  an  insulated  Malayan  language  confirms  the  relation- 
ship indicated  above. 

The  plains  with  bushy  verdure  nourish  the  ostrich 
and  many  species  of  bustards  over  the  whole  continent. 
Among  the  creatures  which  range  far  are  the  lammer- 
geyer,  or  bearded  eagle  of  the  Alps,  and  the  brown  owl 
of  Europe,  extending  to  the  extremity  of  the  south. 
Among  the  parrots  and  the  smaller  birds,  congregating 
species  abound,  forming  a  sort  of  arboreal  villages,  or 
joint-stock  lodging-houses.  Sometimes  hundreds  of 
such  dwellings  are  under  one  thatch,  the  entrances 
being  below.  The  weaving  birds  suspend  their  bottle- 
shaped  habitations  at  the  extremities  of  limber  branches, 
where  they  wave  in  the  wind.  This  affords  secm-ity 
from  monkeys  and  snakes ;  but  they  retain  the  instinct 


44 


AFRICA  A>T)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


of  forming  them  60  when  there  is  no  danger  fix)m  either 
the  one  or  the  other. 

Reptiles  abound  in  Africa.  The  Pythons  (or  Boas) 
are  formidable.  Of  the  species  of  serpents  probably 
between  one-fourth  and  one-fifth  are  poisonous;  but 
every  thing  relating  to  them  in  the  central  regions  re- 
quires to  be  ascertained.  The  Natal  crocodile  is  smaller 
than  the  Egyptian,  but  is  greatly  dreaded. 

The  following  instance  of  its  ferocity  occurred  to  the 
Rev.  J.  A.  Butler,  missionary,  in  crossing  the  Umko- 
mazi  River,  in  February,  1S53.  When  about  two-thirds 
of  the  way  across,  his  horse  suddenly  kicked  and  plunged 
as  if  to  disengage  himself  from  the  rider,  and  the  next 
moment  a  crocodile  seized  Mr.  Butler's  thigh  with  his 
horrible  jaws.  The  river  at  this  place  is  about  one 
hundred  and  fitVr  yards  wide,  if  measured  at  right  an- 
gles to  the  current ;  but  from  the  place  we  entered  to 
the  place  we  go  out,  the  distance  is  three  times  as 
great.  The  water  at  high  tide,  and  when  the  river  is 
not  swollen,  is  from  four  to  eight  or  ten  feet  deep.  On 
each  side  the  banks  are  skirted  with  high  grass  and 
reeds.  Mr.  Butler,  when  he  felt  the  sharp  teeth  of  the 
crocodile,  clung  to  the  mane  of  his  horse  with  a  death 
hold.  Instantly  he  was  dragged  from  the  saddle,  and 
both  he  and  the  horse  were  floundering  in  the  water, 
often  dragged  entirely  under,  and  rapidly  going  down 
the  stream.    At  first  the  crocodile  drew  them  again  to 


NATURAL  HISTORY. 


45 


the  middle  of  the  river,  but  at  last  the  horse  gained 
shallow  water,  and  approached  the  shore.  As  soon  as 
he  was  within  reach  natives  ran  to  his  assistance,  and 
beat  off  the  crocodile  with  spears  and  clubs.  Mr.  But- 
ler was  pierced  with  five  deep  gashes,  and  had  lost 
much  blood." 


• 


46  AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


CHAPTEE  Y. 

AFRICAN  NATIONS  DISTRIBUTION  OF  RACES  ARTS  MANNERS 

AND  CHARACTER  SUPERSTITIONS  TREATMENT  OF  THE  DEAD 

 REGARD  FOR  THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  DEPARTED— WITCH- 
CRAFT ORDEAL  MILITARY  FORCE  AMAZONS  CANNIBAL- 
ISM. 

\Yhence  came  the  African  races,  and  how  did  they 
get  where  they  are  ?  These  are  questions  not  easily 
answered,  and  are  such  as  might  have  been  put  witli 
the  same  hesitation,  and  in  view  of  the  same  puzzling 
circumstances,  three  thousand  years  ago.  On  the  mon- 
uments of  Thebes,  in  Upper  Egypt,  of  the  times  of 
Thothmes  III.,  three  varieties  of  the  African  form  of 
man  are  distinctly  portrayed.  There  is  the  ruling  race 
of  Egypt,  red-skinned  and  massy-browed.  There  are 
captives  not  unlike  them,  but  of  a  paler  color,  with 
their  hair  tinged  blue  ;  and  there  is  the  negro,  bearing 
his  tribute  of  skins,  living  animals,  and  ivory ;  with  the 
white  eyeball,  reclining  forehead,  woolly  hair,  and 
other  normal  characteristics  of  his  type. 

Provided  that  these  representations  are  correct,  and 
that  the  colors  have  not  changed,  the  Egyptian  has 


AFRICAN  NATIONS. 


47 


been  greatly  modified  as  to  Lis  tint  of  skin ;  whether  we 
consider  them  as  represented  by  the  Copts,  or  the  Fellahs 
of  that  conntry  at  present,  the  former  bearing  clearer 
traces  of  the  more  ancient  form.  The  population  of 
Africa,  as  it  is  at  present,  seems  to  be  chiefly  derivable 
from  the  other  two  races.  There  are,  however,  circum- 
stances difficult  to  reconcile,  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge,  with  any  hypothesis  as  to  the  dispersion 
of  man. 

Southern  and  equatorial  Africa  includes  tiibes  speak- 
ing dialects  of  two  widely-spread  tongues.  One  of 
them,  the  Zingian,  or  the  Zambezan,  is  properly  dis- 
tinguished by  the  excess  to  which  it  carries  repetition 
of  certain  signs  of  thought,  giving  to  inflections  a  char- 
acter different  from  what  they  exhibit  in  any  other  lan- 
guage. This  tongue,  however,  bears,  in  other  respects, 
a  strong  relationship  to  the  many,  but,  perhaps,  not  mu- 
tually dissimilar  dialects,  of  northern  Africa.  It  may 
be  considered  as  the  form  of  speech  belonging  to  the 
true  or  most  normally  developed  African  race. 

The  other  of  these  two  tongues  offers  also  circum- 
stances of  peculiar  interest.  "We  may  consider  it,  first, 
as  it  is  found  in  use  by  the  Hottentot  or  Bushman  race, 
of  South  Africa.  It  has  even  among  them  regular  and 
well-constructed  forms  of  inflection,  and  as  distinguishing 
it  from  the  negro  dialects,  it  has  the  sexual  form  of  gen- 
der, or  that  which  arises  from  the  poetical  or  personify- 


iB  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

ing  view  of  all  objects — considering  them  as  endowed 
with  life,  and  dividing  them  into  males  and  females. 
In  this  respect  it  is  analogous  to  the  Galla,  the  Abys- 
sinian, and  the  Coptic.  Nay,  at  this  distant  extremity 
of  Africa,  not  only  is  the  fonn  of  gender  thus  the  same 
with  that  of  the  people  who  raised  the  wonderful  mon- 
uments of  Egypt,  but  that  monumental  tongue  has  its 
signs  of  gender,  or  the  tenninations  indicating  that 
relation,  identical  with  those  of  the  Hottentot  race. 

'We  have,  therefore,  the  eWdence  of  a  race  of  men, 
sticking  through  the  other  darker  ones,  on  perhaps 
nearly  a  central  line,  from  one  end  of  the  continent  to 
tlie  other.  Tlie  poor  despised  Bushman,  forming  for 
himself,  with  sticks  and  grass,  a  lair  among  the  low- 
spreading  branches  of  a  protea,  or  nestling  at  sunset  in 
a  shallow  hole,  amid  the  warm  sand  of  the  desert,  with 
wife  and  little  ones  like  a  covey  of  birds,  sheltered  by 
some  ragged  sheepskins  from  the  dew  of  the  clear  sky, 
has  an  ancestral  and  mental  relationship  to  the  builder 
of  the  pyramids  and  the  colossal  temples  of  Egypt,  and 
to  the  artists  who  adorned  them.  He  looks  on  nature 
with  a  like  eye,  and  stereotypes  in  his  language  the 
same  conclusions  derived  from  it.  He  has  in  his  words 
vivified  external  things,  as  they  did,  according  to  that 
foim  which,  in  our  more  logical  tongues,  we  name  po- 
etical metaphor.  Tlie  su7i — "Soorees" — is  to  him  a 
female,  the  productive  mother  of  all  organic  life ;  and 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  RACES. 


49 


rivers,  as  Kuis-eep,  Gar-eep,  are  endowed  with  mas- 
culine activity  and  strength. 

To  this  scattered  family  of  man,  which  ought  prop- 
erly to  be  called  the  Ethiopic  race,  as  distinguished 
from  the  negro,  may  probably  be  ascribed  the  fierce 
invasions  from  the  centi-e,  eastward  and  westward,  un- 
der the  names  of  Galla  Giagas,  and  other  appellations, 
which  occasionally  convulsed  both  sides  of  Africa ;  and, 
perhaps,  by  intermixture  of  races,  gave  occasion  to 
much  of  the  diversity  found  among  native  tribes,  in  dis- 
position, manners,  and  language.  The  localities  occu- 
pied by  it  have  become  insulated  through  the  intrusion 
of  the  negro.  Its  southern  division,  or  the  Hottentot 
tribes,  were  being  pressed  off  into  an  angle,  and  ap- 
parently in  the  process  of  extinction  or  absorption  by 
the  Zambezan  Kafinrs  from  the  north  and  east,  when 
Europeans  met  and  rolled  them  away  into  a  small  cor- 
ner of  desert. 

Egypt  was  evidently  the  artery  through  which  popu- 
lation poured  into  the  broad  expanse  of  Africa.  That 
the  progenitors  of  the  negro  race  first  entered  there, 
and  that  another  race  followed  subsequently,  is  one 
mode  of  disposing  of  the  question,  which,  however,  only 
removes  its  difficulties  a  little  farther  back. 

This  supposition  is  unnecessary.  Any  number  of 
human  families  living  together,  comprises  varieties  of 
constitution,  affording  a  source  from  which,  by  the  force 

3 


60 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


of  external  circumstances,  the  extreme  variations  may 
be  educed.  If  we  examine  critically  the  representa- 
tions of  the  olde-t  inhabitants  of  Egypt,  we  shall  see  in 
the  form  of  man  which  they  exhibit,  a  combination  of 
characteristics,  or  a  provision  for  breaking  into  vari- 
eties corresponding  to  the  conditions  of  external  nature 
in  the  interior  regions. 

The  dissatisfied,  the  tm-bulent,  the  defeated  and  the 
criminal  would  in  these  earliest  times  be  thrown  off 
from  a  settled  community  in  Egypt,  to  penetrate  into 
the  southern  and  western  regions.  They  would  gene- 
rally die  there.  Many  ages  of  such  attempts  might 
pass  before  those  individuals  reached  the  marshes  of 
the  great  central  plateau,  whose  constitutions  suited 
that  position.  Many  of  them,  moreover,  would  die 
childless.  Early  death  to  the  adult,  and  certain  death 
to  the  immature,  would  sweep  families  off,  as  the 
streams  bounding  from  southern  Atlas  intnide  on  the 
desert,  and  perish  there.  The  many  immigrants  to 
whom  all  external  things  were  adveree  would  be  con- 
stantly weeded  out ;  so  it  would  be  for  generation  after 
generation,  until  the  few  remained,  whom  heat,  expo- 
sure, toil,  mai-sh  vapor,  and  fever  left  as  an  assorted 
and  acclimated  root  of  new  nations. 

Such  seems  to  have  been  the  process  in  Africa  by 
which  a  declension  of  our  nature  took  place  from  Egypt 
in  two  directions;  one  through  the  central  plains  down 


ARTS  AND  MANNERS. 


51 


to  the  marshes  of  the  Gaboon  or  the  Congo  river,  where 
the  aberrant  peculiarities  of  the  negro  seem  most  de- 
veloped ;  and  the  other  along  the  momitains,  by  the  Nile 
and  the  Zambeze,  until  the  Ethiopian  sank  into  the 
Hottentot. 

The  sea  does  not  deal  kindly  with  Africa,  for  it 
wastes  or  guards  the  shores  with  an  almost  unconcpaer- 
able  surf.  Tides  are  small,  and  rivers  not  safely  pene- 
trable. The  ocean  offered  to  the  negro  nothing  but  a 
little  food,"procm'ed  with  some  ti'ouble  and  much  dan- 
ger. Hence  ocean  commerce  was  unknown  to  them. 
Only  in  the  smallest  and  most  wretched  canoes  did 
they  venture  forth  to  catch  a  few  fish.  If  strangers 
sought  for  regions  of  prosperity,  riches,  or  powerful 
government,  their  views  were  directed  to  the  interior. 
Benin,  in  1484,  confessed  its  subordination  to  a  great 
internal  sovereign,  who  only  gave  responses  from  be- 
hind a  curtain,  or  peiTaitted  one  of  his  feet  to  be  visi- 
ble to  his  dependents,  as  a  mark  of  gracious  favor.  It 
was  European  commerce  in  gold  and  slaves,  received 
for  the  coveted  goods  and  amis  they  bought,  which  ul- 
timately gave  these  monarchs  an  interest  in  the  sea- 
shore. 

Cruelty  and  oppression  were  everywhere,  as  they 
still  are.  It  is  not  easy  for  us  to  conceive  how  a  living 
man  can  be  moulded  to  the  unhesitating  submission  in 
which  a  negro  subject  lives,  so  that  it  should  be  to  him 


52 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


a  satisfaction  to  live  and  die,  or  suffer  or  rejoice,  just 
SB  his  sovereign  wills.  It  can  be  accounted  for  only 
from  the  prevalence  and  the  desolating  fury  of  wars, 
which  rendered  perfect  uniformity'  of  will  and  move- 
ment indispensable  for  existence.  It  is  not  so  easy  to 
oflfer  any  probable  reason  for  the  eagerness  to  share  in 
cruelty  which  glows  in  a  negro's  bosom.  Its  appalling 
character  consisted  rather  in  the  amount  of  bloodshed 
which  gratified  the  negro,  than  in  the  studious  prolon- 
gation of  pain.  He  offers  in  this  respect  a  contrast  to 
the  cold,  demoniac  vengeance  of  the  Xorth  Ameri- 
can Indian.  Superstition  probably  excused  or  justi- 
fied to  him  some  of  his  worst  practices.  Human  sac- 
rifices have  been  common  everywhere.  There  was  no 
scruple  at  cruelty  when  it  was  convenient.  The  mouths 
of  the  victims  were  gagged  by  knives  run  through  their 
cheeks ;  and  captives  among  the  southern  tribes  were 
beaten  with  clubs  in  order  to  prevent  resistance,  or  "  to 
take  away  their  strength,"  as  the  natives  expressed  it, 
that  they  might  be  more  easily  hurried  to  the  "  hiU  of 
death,"  or  authorized  place  of  execution. 

The  negro  arts  are  respectable,  and  would  have  been 
more  so  had  not  disturbance  and  waste  come  with  the 
slave-trade.  They  weave  coarse  narrow  cloths,  and  dye 
them.  They  work  in  wood  and  metals.  The  gold 
chains  obtained  at  Wydah,  of  native  manufacture,  are 
well  wrought.    Nothing  can  be  more  correctly  formed 


ARTS  AND  CUSTOMS. 


53 


for  its  puq)03e  than  the  small  barbed  lancet-looking 
point  of  a  Bushman's  arrow.  Those  who  shave  their 
heads  or  beards  have  a  neat,  small  razor,  double-edged, 
or  shaped  like  a  shovel.  Arts  improve  from  the  coast 
towards  the  northeast. 

Tlieir  noi-mal  form  of  a  house  is  round,  with  a  coni- 
cal roof.  The  pastoral  people  of  the  south  have  it  of 
a  beehive  form,  covered  with  mats ;  the  material  is 
rods  and  flags.  If  the  whole  negro  nations,  however, 
were  swept  away,  there  would  not  remain  a  monument 
on  the  face  of  their  continent  to  tell  that  such  a  race  of 
men  had  occupied  it. 

One  curious  relation  to  external  nature  seems  to  have 
prevailed  throughout  all  Africa,  consisting  in  a  special 
reverence,  among  different  tribes,  for  certain  selected 
objects.  From  one  of  these  objects  the  tribe  frequently 
derives  its  national  appellation  :  if  it  is  a  living  thing, 
they  avoid  killing  it  or  using  it  as  food.  Sei-pents, 
particularly  the  gigantic  pythons  or  boas,  are  every- 
where reverenced.  Some  traces  of  adoration  offered 
to  the  sun  have  been  met  with  on  the  west  coast ;  but, 
generally  speaking,  the  supei-stitions  of  Africa  are  far 
less  intellectual.  These  and  many  of  their  other  prac- 
tices have  a  common  characteristic  in  the  disappear- 
ance of  all  trace  of  their  origin  among  the  tribes  ob- 
seiwing  them.  To  all  inquiries  they  have  the  answer 
ready,  that  their  fathers  did  so.    There  is  in  this,  how- 


54 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


ever,  no  great  assurance  of  real  antiquity,  for  tradition 
extends  but  a  short  way  back. 

A  reliance  on  grisgris,  or  amulets,  worn  about  the 
person,  belongs  to  Africa,  perhaps  from  very  ancient 
ages.  Egypt  was  probably  its  soiu*ce  :  a  kind  of  litera- 
ry character  has  been  given  to  it  by  the  Mohammedans. 
Throughout  inland  central  Africa,  sentences  written  on 
scraps  of  paper  or  parchment  have  a  marketable  value. 
An  impostor  or  devotee  may  gain  authority  and  profit 
in  this  way.  As  we  pass  southward  we  find  this  super- 
stition sinking  lower  and  lower  in  debasement :  men 
there  really  cover  or  load  themselves  with  all  kinds  of 
trumpery,  and  have  a  real  and  hearty  confidence  in 
bones,  buttons,  scraps,  or  almost  any  conceivable  thing, 
as  a  security  against  any  conceivable  evil.  The  Kroo- 
men,  even,  with  their  purser's  names,  of  Jack  Crowbar^ 
Head  Man^  and  Flying-Jib^  Bottle  of  Beei\  Pea  Soujp^ 
Poor  Fellow^  Prince  Will^  and  others,  taken  on  board 
the  "  PeriT,"  in  Monrovia,  were  found  now  and  then 
with  their  sharks',  tigers'  and  panthers'  teeth,  and  small 
shells,  on  their  ankles  and  wrists;  although  most  of 
these  people,  from  contact  with  the  Liberians,  have 
seen  the  folly  of  this  j^ractice,  and  dispensed  M  itli  tlieir 
charms. 

The  Africans  also  have  stationary  fetishes^  consisting 
in  sacred  places  and  sacred  things.  They  have  prac- 
tices to  inspire  terror,  or  gain  reverence  in  respect  to 


SUPERSTITIONS  AND  FETISH. 


55 


wliich  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  decide  whether  the 
actors  in  them  are  impostors  or  sincere.  Idols  in  the 
forms  of  men,  mde  and  frightful  enough,  are  among 
these  fetishes,  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  idolatry  of  this 
kind  prevails  extensively  in  the  countiy. 

In  two  respects  they  look  towards  the  invisible :  they 
dread  a  superhuman  power,  and  they  fear  and  worship 
it  as  being  a  measureless  som*ce  of  evil.  It  is  scarcely 
correct  to  call  this  Devil-worship,  for  this  is  a  title  of 
contrast,  presuming  that  there  has  been  a  choice  of  the 
evil  in  preference  to  the  good.  The  fact  in  their  case 
seems  to  be,  that  good  in  will,  or  good  in  action,  are 
ideas  foreign  to  their  minds.  Selfishness  cannot  be 
more  intense,  nor  more  exclusive  of  all  kindness  and 
generosity  or  charitable  affection,  than  it  is  generally 
found  among  these  barbarians.  The  inconceivableness 
of  such  motives  to  action  has  often  been  found  a  strong 
obstacle  to  the  influence  of  the  Christian  missionary. 
They  can  worship  nothing  good,  because  they  have  no 
expectation  of  good  from  any  thing  powerful.  They 
have  mysterious  words  or  mutterings,  equivalent  to 
what  we  term  incantations,  which  is  the  meaning  of 
the  Portuguese  word  from  which  originated  the  term 
fetish. 

The  other  reference  of  their  intellect  to  invisible 
things  consists  in  acknowledging  the  continued  exist- 
ence of  the  dead,  and  paying  reverence  to  the  spirits  of 


66  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

their  forefathers.  This  leads  to  great  cruelty.  Men  of 
rank  at  their  death  are  presumed  to  require  attendance, 
and  be  gratified  with  companionship.  This  event,  there- 
fore, produces  tlie  murder  of  wives  and  slaves,  to  afibrd 
them  suitable  escort  and  service  in  the  other  world. 
From  the  strange  mixture  of  the  material  and  spiritual 
common  to  men  in  that  barbarian  condition,  the  bodies 
or  the  blood  of  the  slain  appear  to  be  the  essentials  of 
these  requirements.  Thus,  also,  the  utmost  horror  is 
felt  at  decapitation,  or  at  the  severing  of  limbs  from  the 
body  after  death.  It  is  revenge,  as  much  as  desire  to 
perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  victory,  which  makes 
them  eager  for  the  skulls  and  jaw-bones  of  their  ene- 
mies, so  that  in  a  roval  metropolis,  walls,  and  floors, 
and  thrones,  and  walking-sticks,  are  everywhere  lower- 
ing with  the  hollow  eyes  of  the  dead.  These  sad,  bare 
and  whitened  emblems  of  mortality  and  revenge  pre- 
sent a  curious  and  startling  spectacle,  creating  and  fes- 
tooning the  red  clay  walls  of  Kumassi,  the  Ashantee 
capital. 

Such  belief  leads  to  strange  vagaries  in  practice. 
Tliey  sympathize  with  the  departed,  as  subject  still  to 
common  wants  and  niled  by  common  affections.  A 
negro  man  of  Taliou  would  show  his  regard  for  the  de- 
sires of  the  dead  by  sitting  patiently  to  hold  a  spread 
umbrella  over  the  head  of  a  corpse.  The  dead  man's 
mouth,  too,  was  stuffed  with  rice  and  fowl,  and  in  cold 


TREATMENT  OF  THE  DEAD. 


57 


weather  a  fire  was  kept  burning  in  the  hut  for  the  bene- 
fit of  their  deceased  friend.  They  consulted  his  love  of 
ornament,  also,  for  the  top  of  his  head  and  his  brow 
were  stained  red,  his  nose  and  cheeks  yellow,  and 
the  lower  jaw  white ;  and  fantastic  figures  of  different 
colors  were  daubed  over  his  black  body. 

Dingaan,  the  Zulu  chief,  was  exceedingly  fond  of 
ornament.  He  used  to  boast  that  the  Zulus  were  the 
only  people  who  understood  dress.  Sometimes  he  came 
forward  painted  with  all  kinds  of  stripes  and  crosses,  in 
a  very  bizarre  style.  The  people  took  all  this  gravely, 
saying  that  "he  was  king  and  could  do  what  he 
pleased,"  and  they  were  content  with  his  taste.  It  is 
this  unreflecting  character  which  astounds  us  in  sav- 
ages. They  never  made  it  a  question  whether  the 
garniture  of  the  king  or  of  the  coi-pse  had  any  thing 
unsuitable. 

All  along  the  coasts,  from  the  equator  to  the  north  of 
the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  they  did  not  eat  without  throwing 
a  portion  on  the  ground  for  those  who  had  died.  Some- 
times they  dug  a  small  hole  for  these  purposes,  or  they 
had  one  in  the  hut,  and  into  it  they  poured  what  they 
thought  would  be  acceptable.  They  conceived  that 
they  had  sensible  evidence  of  the  inclinations  of  the 
dead.  In  lifting  up  or  carrying  a  coipse  on  their 
shoulders,  men  may  not  attend  to  the  exact  direction 
of  their  own  muscular  movements  or  those  of  their  as- 

3* 


58 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


sociates.  There  are  necessarily  shocks,  jolts  and  strug- 
gles, from  the  movements  of  their  associates.  People 
will,  in  some  cases,  pull  different  ways  when  hustled 
together.  All  these  uncoiii>cious  movements,  not  unlike 
the  "  table  turnings"  of  the  present  era,  were  taken  as 
expressive  of  the  will  of  the  dead  man,  as  to  how  and 
whither  he  was  to  be  carried. 

Their  belief,  as  we  have  seen,  influenced  their  life  : 
it  was  earnest  and  heartfelt.  When  the  king  of  Wydah, 
in  169^,  heard  that  Smith,  the  chief  of  the  English 
factory,  was  dangerously  ill  with  fever,  he  sent  his 
fetishman  to  aid  in  the  recovery.  The  priest  went  to 
the  sick  man,  and  solenmly  announced  that  he  came  to 
save  him.  He  then  marched  to  the  white  man's  burial- 
ground  with  a  provision  of  brandy,  oil,  and  rice,  and 
made  a  loud  oration  to  those  that  slept  there.  "  O  you 
dead  white  people,  you  wish  to  have  Smith  among  you  ; 
but  our  king  likes  him,  and  it  is  not  his  will  to  let  him 
go  to  be  among  you."  Passing  on  to  the  grave  of 
Wybum,  the  founder  of  the  factory,  he  addressed  him, 
"  You,  captain  of  all  the  whites  who  are  here !  Smith's 
sickness  is  a  piece  of  your  work.  You  want  his  com- 
pany, for  he  is  a  good  man ;  but  our  king  does  not 
want  to  lose  him,  and  you  can't  have  him  yet."  Then 
digging  a  hole  over  the  grave,  he  poured  into  it  the 
articles  which  he  had  brought,  and  told  him  that  if  he 
needed  these  things,  he  gave  them  with  good- will,  but 


WITCHCRAFT  AND  ORDEAL. 


59 


he  must  not  expect  to  get  Smith.  The  factor  died,  not- 
withstanding. The  ideas  here  are  not  very  dissimilar 
to  those  of  the  old  Greeks. 

It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  in  tracing  this  negro 
race  along  the  continent  towards  the  south,  we  find 
these  notions  and  practices  to  fade  away,  and  at  last 
disappear.  Southeast  of  the  desert,  along  the  Orange 
River,  there  is  scarcely  a  trace  of  them. 

The  dread  of  witchcraft  prevails  universally.  In 
general,  the  occurrence  of  disease  is  ascribed  to  this 
som'ce.  In  the  north  they  fear  a  supernatural  in- 
fluence ;  in  the  south  this  is  traced  to  no  super- 
human origin,  but  is  conceived  to  be  a  power  which 
any  one  may  possess  and  exercise.  Among  these  tribes, 
the  man  presumed  to  be  guilty  of  this  crime  is  a  public 
enemy  (as  were  the  witches  occasionally  found  among 
our  own  venerated  pious,  and  public-spirited  puritan 
forefathers — a  blemish  in  their  character  due  to  the  gene- 
ral ignorance  of  the  age),  to  be  removed  if  possible,  as 
a  lion,  tiger,  or  pestilence  would  be  annihilated.  Even 
the  force  of  civilized  law,  when  introduced  among 
them,  has  not  saved  a  man  under  this  stigma  from  be- 
ing secretly  murdered  by  the  terrified  people.  It  has 
yielded  only  to  the  enlightening  influence  of  Chi'istian 
missionaries. 

These  delusions  are  often  rendered  the  support  of 
tyi-amiy  by  the  chiefs,  for  the  property  of  the  accused 


60  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

is  confiscated.  Scenes  sad  and  horrible  are  exhibited 
as  the  consequence  of  a  chief's  LQness.  In  order  to 
force  a  discovery  of  the  means  employed,  and  to  get 
the  witchcraft  counteracted,  some  native,  who  is  gene- 
rally rich  enough  to  be  worth  plundering,  is  seized  and 
tortured,  until,  as  an  old  author  expresses  it,  he  dies, 
or  the  chief  recovers."  They  extend  the  horror  of  the 
infliction,  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  vermin  life,  destined  in 
nature  to  devour  corruption,  by  scattering  handfnls  of  ants 
over  the  scorched  skin  and  quivering  flesh  of  their  victim. 

Generally  among  the  Guinea  negroes,  the  ordeal  em- 
ployed to  detect  this  crime,  is  to  compel  the  accused  to 
drink  a  decoction  of  sassy-wood.  This  may  be  rendered 
haiTnless  or  destructive,  according  to  the  object  of  the 
fetishman.  It  is  oftener  his  purpose  to  destroy  than  to 
save,  and  great  cruelty  has  in  almost  all  cases  been 
found  to  accompany  the  trial. 

Plunder  is  the  reward  of  the  soldier.  In  the  central 
regions  this  was  increased  by  the  sale  of  captives. 
Captives  of  both  sexes  were  the  chief's  property.  Thus 
the  warriors  looked  to  the  acquisition  of  wives  from  the 
chief,  as  the  recompense  of  successful  wars.  They  an- 
noimced  this  as  their  aim  in  their  preparatory  songs. 
The  chief  was,  therefore,  to  them  the  source  of  every 
thing.  Theirwwhole  thought  responded  to  his  move- 
ments, and  sympathized  with  his  greatness  and  success. 

Women  in  Africa  are  everywhere  slaves,  or  the 


POSITION  OF  THE  WOMEN. 


61 


slaves  of  slaves.  The  burdens  of  agricultural  labor  fall 
on  them.  When  a  chief  is  announced  as  having  hun- 
dreds or  thousands  of  wives,  it  signifies  really  that  he 
has  so  many  female  slaves.  There  does  not  appear  to 
be  any  tribe  in  Africa,  in  which  it  is  not  the  rule  of 
society,  that  a  man  may  have  as  many  such  wives  as  he 
can  procure.  The  number  is  of  course,  except  in  the 
case  of  the  supreme  chief,  but  few.  The  female  retinue 
of  a  sovereign  partakes  everywhere  of  the  reverence 
due  to  its  head.  The  chief  and  his  household  are  a 
kind  of  divinity  to  the  people.  His  name  is  the  seal 
of  their  oath.  The  possibility  of  his  dying  must  never 
be  expressed,  nor  the  name  of  death  uttered  in  his 
presence.  Names  of  things  appearing  to  interfere  with 
the  sacredness  of  his,  must  be  changed.  His  women 
must  not  be  met  or  looked  at. 

In  war,  as  long  as  success  depends  alone  on  in- 
dividual prowess,  the  sti'ong  and  athletic  only  can  be 
successful  soldiers.  Where  the  weapons,  rather  than 
the  person  are  the  source  of  power,  docility  and  en- 
durance are  qualities  more  valuable  than  sti-ength.  In 
these  the  weaker  sex,  in  savage  life,  surpasses  the  other ; 
hence  women  have  appeared  in  the  world  as  soldiei-s. 
It  was  probably  the  introduction  of  the  arrow,  killing 
at  a  distance,  as  superior  in  effect  and  safety  to  the  rude 
clubs  and  spears  of  earlier  conflict,  which  originated 
the  Amazons  of  old  history.    The  same  fact  is  resulting 


62  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

in  Africa  from  the  introduction  of  the  musket.  Females 
thus  anned  were  found,  commonly  as  royal  guards,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  last  century-.  The  practice  still 
continues  in  the  central  regions. 

In  Dahomey  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  na- 
tional troops  consists  of  armed  and  disciplined  females. 
They  are  kno\NTi  as  being  royal  women,  strictly  and 
watchfully  kept  from  any  communication  with  men, 
and  seem  to  have  been  trained,  through  discipline  and 
the  force  of  co-operation,  to  the  accomplishment  of  en- 
tei'prises,  from  which  the  tumultuous  warriors  of  a 
native  army  would  shrink.  A  late  English  author 
(Duncan)  says,  "  I  have  seen  them,  all  well  armed,  and 
generally  fine,  strong,  healthy  women,  and  doubtless 
capable  of  endul-ing  great  fatigue.  They  seem  to  use 
the  long  Danish  musket  with  as  much  ease  as  one  of  our 
grenadiers  does  his  firelock,  but  not  of  coiu^e  with  the 
same  quickness,  as  they  are  not  trained  to  any  particu- 
lar exercise ;  but  on  receiving  the  word,  make  an  attack 
like  a  pack  of  hounds,  with  great  swiftness.  Of  course 
they  would  be  useless  against  disciplined  troops,  if  at 
all  approaching  to  the  same  numbers.  StiU  their  ap- 
pearance is  more  martial  than  the  generality  of  the 
men,  and  if  undertaking  a  campaign,  I  should  prefer 
the  female  to  the  male  soldiers  of  this  country." 

Tlie  same  author  thus  describes  a  field  review  of 
these  Amazons,  which  he  witnessed  :  "  I  was  conducted 


AMAZON  REVIEW. 


63 


to  a  large  space  of  broken  ground,  where  fourteen  days 
had  been  occupied  in  erecting  three  immense  prickly 
piles  of  green  bush.  These  three  clumps  or  piles,  of  a 
sort  of  strong  brier  or  thorn,  armed  with  the  most  dan- 
gerous prickles,  were  placed  in  line,  occupying  about 
four  hundred  yards,  leaving  only  a  narrow  passage  be- 
tween them,  sufficient  merely  to  distinguish  each  clump 
appointed  to  each  regiment.  These  piles  were  about 
seventy  feet  wide  and  eight  feet  high.  Upon  examin- 
ing them,  I  could  not  persuade  myself  that  any  human 
being  without  boots  or  shoes  would,  under  any  circum- 
stances, attempt  to  pass  over  so  dangerous  a  collection 
of  the  most  efficiently  ai-med  plants  I  had  ever  seen." 

The  Amazons  wear  a  blue  striped  cotton  sm-tout, 
manufactured  by  the  natives,  and  a  pair  of  trowsers  fall- 
ing just  below  the  knee.  The  cartridge-box  is  girded 
around  the  loins. 

The  drums  and  trumpets  soon  announced  the  ap- 
proach of  three  or  four  thousand  Amazons.  "  The  Apa- 
domey  soldiers  (female)  made  their  appearance  at  about 
two  hundred  yards  from,  or  in  fi*ont  of,  the  first  pile, 
where  they  halted  with  shouldered  arms.  In  a  few 
seconds  the  word  for  attack  was  given,  and  a  rush  was 
made  towards  the  pile  with  a  speed  beyond  conception, 
and  in  less  than  one  minute  the  whole  body  had  passed 
over  this  immense  pile,  and  had  taken  the  supposed 
town.    Each  of  the  other  piles  was  passed  with  the 


64 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


same  rapidity,  at  intervals  of  twenty  minutes."  When 
a  person  is  killed  in  battle,  the  skin  is  taken  from  the 
head,  and  kept  as  a  trophy  of  valor.  I  counted  seven 
hundred  scalps  pass  in  this  manner.  The  captains  of 
each  corps  (female),  in  passing,  again  presented  them- 
selves before  his  majesty,  and  received  the  king's  ap- 
proval of  their  conduct."  These  heroines,  however, 
say  that  they  are  no  longer  women,  but  men. 

The  people  of  Ashantee  and  Dahomey  are  consider- 
ably in  advance  of  those  on  the  coast.  They  cultivate 
the  soil  extensively,  manufacture  cotton  cloth,  and 
build  comparatively  good  houses.  They  have  musical 
instruments,  which,  if  rude,  are  loud  enough.  Their 
drums  and  horns  add  to  the  stateliness  of  their  cere- 
monies. Of  such  exhibitions  they  are  very  fond,  and 
consider  it  a  national  honor  if  they  can  render  them 
impressive  to  strangers.  The  Dahomeans  are  about 
one  hundred  miles  in  the  interior,  west  of  the  Niger. 

Necessity  has  occasionally  driven  some  of  the  south- 
em  tribes  to  adopt  the  practice  of  cannibalism.  There 
it  has  ever  excited  horror  and  disgust.  Those  who 
have  practised  it  are  distinguished  by  an  appellation 
setting  them  apart  from  other  men.  Among  some  of 
the  central  tribes  it  has  prevailed  rather,  however,  in 
all  appearance,  from  superstitious  motives,  or  as  an 
exhibition  of  triumphant  revenge,  than  in  the  revolting 
form  which  it  assumes  among  some  of  the  Polynesian 
islandei*s. 


CHAPTEK  YI. 


TRADE  METALS  MINES  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTIONS  GUMS  

OIL  COTTON  DYE-STUFFS. 

The  trade  of  Africa  for  an  almost  indefinite  time 
must  consist  of  the  materials  for  mannfactm*es. 

The  fact  that  old  formations  reposing  on  granite,  or 
distorted  by  it,  form  a  large  proportion  of  its  geological 
surface,  indicates  that  useful  metals  ^vill  probably  be 
found  in  abundance.  In  comparing  it  with  California 
and  Australia  as  to  the  probability  of  finding  deposits 
of  the  more  valuable  metals,  two  circumstances  of  great 
importance  must  be  kept  in  \dew.  These  countries 
were  possessed  by  natives  who  had  no  domesticated 
animals,  and  therefore  were  not  called  upon  to  exercise 
over  the  soil  the  same  inquisitive  inspection  for  her- 
bage and  water  as  were  required  from  the  races  among 
the  mountains  and  deserts  of  Africa,  so  that  the  chances 
of  finding  any  thing  were  not  the  same. 

Tlie  other  circumstance  is,  that  metals  were  compar- 
atively little  known  to  the  aborigines  of  California,  and 
not  at  all  to  those  of  New  Holland,  so  that  discoveries 
of  the  kind  would  neither  be  sought  for,  nor  reckoned 
of  much  value  when  they  occurred.    On  the  other 


66 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG 


hand,  metals  of  all  kinds  have  during  indefinite  eras 
been  regarded  as  of  high  importance,  and  have  been 
used  in  various  ways  by  the  African  nations.  Copper, 
and  some  alloys  of  it,  seem  to  be  used  for  ornaments 
throughout  the  whole  south.  These  are  smelted  from 
the  ores  by  the  natives.  Tliey  also  manufacture  their 
own  iron.  Their  desires,  therefore,  and  their  necessi- 
ties, and  their  aiis,  render  it  probable  that  no  deposits 
of  metals  exist,  except  such  as  require  scientific  skill  to 
discover,  and  mechanical  resom*ces  to  procure. 

Gold  is  not  in  this  predicament.  Wherever  it  oc- 
cm-s  in  abundance,  it  has  been  collected  by  elemental 
waste  from  disintegrated  rocks,  and  is  mixed  with 
gravel  and  alluvial  matters  in  those  portions  where 
men  of  nomadic  habits,  and  familiar  with  metal  orna- 
ments, would  most  readily  meet  and  appropriate  it. 
Some,  probably  a  great  proportion,  of  the  gold  of  an- 
cient Egypt,  was  got  by  a  laborious  process  of  grinding, 
on  which  their  wi-etched  captives  were  employed. 
This  would  not  have  been  the  case  if  the  metal  had 
been  found  plentifully  tliroughout  the  extensive  regions 
with  which  they  were  acquainted. 

An  addition  to  the  metallic  riches  of  the  world  from 
Africa,  is  therefore  to  be  looked  for  in  the  discovery 
of  deep-seated  mines,  if  there  are  any,  and  in  better 
modes  of  working  those  which  exist,  particularly  the 
alluvial  deposits  of  gold  along  the  northern  shores  of 


ARTICLES  OF  EXPORT. 


67 


the  Gulf  of  Guinea  and  the  shores  of  the  Mozambique 
Channel.  The  present  export  of  gold  from  all  Africa, 
probably  amounts  to  about  two  millions  of  dollars  per 
annum. 

The  vegetable  articles  of  export  are  of  great  value. 
Cotton  may  be  produced  in  unlimited  abundance.  The 
African  dye-stuffs  are  abeady  recognized  as  extensive 
and  valuable  articles  of  commerce.  Indigo  is  used  ex- 
tensively by  the  natives.  When  we  recollect  that  the 
vast  trade  of  Bengal  in  this  article  has  been  created 
within  the  memory  of  men  still  living,  and  that  India 
possesses  no  natural  advantages  beyond  those  of  Africa, 
we  may  infer  what  a  profusion  of  wealth  might  be 
poured  rapidly  over  Africa  by  peace  and  good  govern- 
ment. 

Gums,  of  various  kinds,  constitute  a  branch  of  trade 
which  may  be  considered  as  only  commencing.  The 
extensive  employment  of  india-rubber,  and  the  knowl- 
edge of  gutta-percha,  are  only  a  few  years  old.  Africa 
gives  promise  of  a  large  supply  of  such  articles.  Its 
caoutchouc  has  already  been  introduced  into  the  arts."^" 

*  The  Rev.  J.  Leighton  Wilson,  who  was  a  missionary  of  the  Ameri- 
can Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions,  at  Cape  Palmas  and 
at  the  Gaboon  River  for  more  than  twenty  years,  first  called  attention 
to  a  vine,  or  creeper,  as  affording  india-rubber.  It  is  now  collected  from 
this  plant  in  the  Gaboon  district ;  and  two  or  three  cargoes  have  al- 
readjj  been  shipped  to  this  country,  with  a  prospect  of  its  becoming  a 
lucrative  article  of  trade.  We  may  look  to  intelligent  missionaries, 
like  Mr.  Wilson,  for  secm'ing  such  benefits  to  traffic  and  art,  as  well 


68  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

It  may  be  long  before  tlie  natural  sources  of  supply 
found  in  its  marshy  forests  can  be  exhausted.  Be  that 
as  it  may;  when  men  are  induced,  as  perhaps  they 
soon  will  be,  to  substitute  regular  cultivation  for  the 
wild  and  more  irregular  modes  of  procuring  articles 
which  are  becoming  every  day  of  more  essential  im- 
portance, Africa  may  take  a  great  share  in  the  means 
adopted  to  supply  them. 

Palm-oil  has  become  pre-eminently  an  object  of  at- 
tention. Tlie  modes  of  procuring  it  are  very  rude  and 
wasteful.  The  palm-nuts  are  generally  left  for  a  day  or 
two,  heaped  together  in  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground.  They 
are  then  ti'odden  by  the  women,  till  they  form  a  greasy 
pulp ;  out  of  this  the  oil  is  rudely  strained  through  their 
fingers,  or  water  is  run  into  the  hole  to  float  the  oil, 
and  it  is  skimmed  off  with  their  hands  into  a  calabash. 
In  Benin  they  employ  the  better  mode  of  boiling  it  off. 
The  oil  occm-s  in  a  kind  of  pulp  surrounding  the  seed, 
as  is  the  case  with  the  eatable  part  of  the  common  date ; 
it  is  evident,  therefore,  that  more  suitable  modes  of  pro- 
ducing it  may  be  put  in  practice. 

What  may  be  done  in  the  production  of  sugar  and 
coffee,  no  man  can  tell.  James  Macqueen,  who  has, 
during  great  part  of  his  life,  devoted  his  attention  to 


as  to  science  and  literature.  We  are  glad  to  loarn  that  he  conteaplatos 
an  extended  work  on  Africa,  which  will  no  doubt  be  highly  acceptable 
to  the  public 


DYE-STUFFS  AND  COTTON. 


69 


the  condition  and  interests  of  Africa,  gave  evidence  be- 
fore a  committee  of  the  British  House  of  Peers,  in  1850, 
to  the  following  effect:  "Tliere  is  scarcely  any  tropical 
production  known  in  the  world,  which  does  not  come  to 
perfection  in  Africa.  There  are  many  productions 
which  are  peculiarly  her  own.  The  dye-stuffs  and  dye- 
woods  are  superior  to  any  which  are  known  in  any  other 
quarter  of  the  world,  inasmuch  as  they  resist  both  acids 
and  light,  things  which  w^e  know  no  other  dye-stuffs, 
from  any  other  parts  of  the  w^orld,  can  resist.  Then 
there  is  the  article  of  sugar,  that  can  be  produced  in 
every  pai-t  of  Africa  to  an  unlimited  extent.  There  is 
cotton  also,  above  all  things — cotton  of  a  quality  so 
fine ;  it  is  finer  cotton  than  any  description  of  cotton 
we  know  of  in  the  world.  Common  cotton  in  Af- 
rica I  have  seen,  and  had  in  my  possession,  which  was 
equal  to  the  finest  quality  of  American  cotton. 

"  Egyptian  cotton  is  not  so  good  as  the  cotton  away 
to^  the  south ;  but  the  cotton  produced  in  the  southern 
parts  of  Africa  is  peculiarly  fine.  Africa  is  a  most  ex- 
traordinary country.  In  the  eastern  horn  of  Africa, 
which  you  think  to  be  a  desolate  wilderness,  tliere  is  the 
finest  country,  and  the  finest  climate  I  know.  I  know 
of  none  in  South  America  equal  to  the  climate  of  the 
country  in  tlie  northeastern  horn  of  Africa.  It  is  a  very 
elevated  country ;  and  on  the  upper  regions  you  have  all 
the  fruits,  and  flowers,  and  grain  of  Europe  growing ;  and 


70 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


in  the  valleys  you  have  the  finest  fruits  of  the  torrid 
zone.  The  whole  country  is  covered  with  myrrh  and 
frankincense ;  it  is  covered  with  flocks  and  herds ;  it 
produces  abundance  of  the  finest  grain.  Near  Brasa, 
for  instance,  on  the  river  Webbc,  you  can  pui'chase  as 
much  fine  wheat  for  a  dollar  as  will  serve  a  man  for  a 
year.  All  kinds  of  European  grain  flourish  there.  In 
Enarea  and  KafFa,  the  whole  country  is  covered  with 
coffee ;  it  is  the  original  country  of  the  coffee.  You  can 
purchase  an  ass's  load  (200  lbs.)  of  coffee  in  the  berry 
for  about  a  dollar.  The  greater  portion  of  the  coffee 
that  we  receive  from  Mocha,  is  actually  African  coffee, 
produced  in  that  part." 


CHAPTEE  YIL 


EUROPEAN     COLONIES  PORTUGUESE  REMAINING  INFLUENCE 

OF  THE  PORTUGUESE  SLAVE  FACTORIES  ENGLISH  COL- 
ONIES TREATIES  WITH  THE   NATIVE  CHIEFS  INFLUENCE  OF 

SIERRA  LEONE  DESTRUCTION    OF  BARRACOONS  INFLUENCE 

OF  ENGLAND  CHIEFS  ON  THE  COAST  ASHANTEE  KING  OF 

DAHOMEY. 

The  Portuguese  commercial  discoverers  having  suc- 
ceeded those  of  France,  and  founded  trading  establish- 
ments on  the  coast  of  Africa,  were  driven  from  the  sea- 
shore by  the  rivalry  and  power  of  the  Dutch  and  the 
English,  about  the  year  1604.  They  retired  into  the 
interior,  and  commingled  vrith  the  negroes.  From  their 
intermaiTiages  arose  a  race  of  mulattoes,  who  have  long 
exercised  considerable  influence.  As  early  as  1667, 
this  influence  had  become  detrimental  to  commerce  and 
discovery.  They  closed  against  others  the  entrances  to 
the  great  region  of  more  elevated  lands,  and  carried  on 
trade,  without  rivals,  from  Benin  to  Senegambia,  over 
two  thousand  miles.  They  had  generally  little  chapels 
near  their  houses,  and  spared  no  pains  to  make  prose- 
lytes. 

How  much  might  these  men  have  done  for  the  good 


72 


Af'RICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


of  Africa  and  the  progress  of  the  world !  Following 
their  lines  of  commerce,  and  cresting  the  high  lands, 
which  feed,  witli  rains  and  rivulets,  the  Gambia  and 
the  Niger,  as  well  as  the  streams  hy  which  they  dwell, 
they  might  have  saved  two  centuries  of  doubt  and  haz- 
ardous attempts,  and  much  sacrifice  of  good  and  tal- 
ented men.  They  might  earlier  have  let  in  Christian 
civilization  to  repel  tlie  Moslem  and  redeem  the  negro. 
Portuguese  influence  is  gone,  and  has  left  the  world  lit- 
tle reason  to  regret  its  extinction.  On  the  rising  and 
almost  impen'ious  forest-lands  which  are  at  the  distance 
of  from  twenty  to  fifty  miles  back  from  the  coast,  these 
Portuguese  mulattoes  are  still  found,  watching  for  their 
monopoly,  with  the  same  jealous  exclusiveness  as  of 
old.  These  forests  thus  inhabited,  form,  at  present,  a 
serious  obstacle  to  the  extension  of  the  influence  of  Li- 
beria. An  entei-prising  people,  however,  occupying  the 
great  tracts  of  cleared  lands  along  tlie  coast,  which  con- 
stitute the  actual  territories  of  the  republic,  will,  with 
the  progress  of  the  settlements,  and  the  increase  of 
their  power,  soon  be  enabled,  notwithstanding  the  short 
navigable  distance  of  the  rivers,  to  open  communication 
with  the  far  interior. 

The  Portuguese  founded  cities  and  missions.  A 
more  extensive  authority  was  gained  by  them  over 
great  and  populous  regions,  both  on  the  eastern  and 
western  shores,  than  has  been  attained  by  any  other 


PORTUGUESE  INFLUENCE. 


73 


people.  The  title  of  "  Lord  of  Guinea"  was  fairly  claimed 
for  the  King  of  Portugal,  by  the  establishment  of  this 
sovereign's  supremacy  over  various  native  kingdoms. 
But  Portugal  wanted  the  light  and  sti^ength  of  a  nation 
— a  righteous  and  intelligent  policy. 

The  establishments  on  the  east  coast  now  scarcely 
keep  their  ground,  ever  shrinking  before  the  barbarian 
and  the  Arab.  St.  Paul  de  Loando,  on  the  southwest 
coast,  is  shrivelled  down  from  its  former  greatness. 
Both  regions  have  rich  capabilities ;  both  might  have 
extended  a  useful  influence,  until  they  met  and  em- 
braced in  the  centre,  uniting  these  vast  regions  with  the 
great  movements  of  human  progress  ;  but  they  clung  to 
the  slave-ti'ade,  and  its  curse  has  clung  to  them. 

They  misunderstood  human  natoi-e,  and  overlooked 
its  high  destiny.  Of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese 
concerned  in  slaving,  Captain  Dimlop,  of  the  British 
N^avy,  long  attached  to  the  English  squadi'on  on  the 
African  coast,  says :  "  They  speak  of  the  African  as  a 
brute,  who  is  only  fit  to  be  made  a  slave  of,  and  say 
that  it  is  quite  chimerical  and  absurd  in  us  to  attempt 
to  put  down  the  ti-ade,  or  to  defend  men  who  were  only 
bom  to  be  slaves." 

Other  nations  only  founded  slave  factories.  Every 
thing  peculiar  to  this  influence  was  bad.  Compared 
with  the  ounces  of  gold  and  tusks  of  ivory  which  drew 
the  cupidity  of  early  navigators,  there  arose  everywhere 

4 


74 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


a  traflfic,  far  more  rapid,  but  it  was  that  of  cruelt}^, 
bringing  with  it  vice.  Brandy  and  arms,  drunkenness 
and  war,  followed  as  the  remuneration  of  rapine  and 
slaving.  The  gro.-fs  vices  of  Europe  added  to  the  mis- 
chief. Legitimate  trade,  which  might  have  flourished 
for  centuries,  withered ;  and  the  rank  which  the  white 
man  held  among  the  natives,  made  him  a  source  of 
wide  corruption.  Little  good  could  come  out  of  the 
state  of  society  in  Europe  during  the  last  century,  for 
little  good  was  in  it.    This  state  of  things  has  improved. 

The  three  nations  whose  interference  seems  likely  to 
have  a  conspicuous  effect  upon  the  interests  of  Africa  in 
the  future,  are  France^  England^  and  the  United  States. 

France  will  have  all  the  Mediterranean  shore,  and 
the  caravan  trade  across  the  deserts.  But  this  will 
diminish  in  activity  and  value,  as  the  ti*ade  of  the  other 
shores  extends,  and  as  the  way  across  from  them  to  the 
interior  becomes  easier.  Ko  great  influence  can,  there- 
fore, be  in  this  way  exercised  over  the  prosperity  of  the 
African  people. 

England  holds  the  south  ;  but  the  natives  aromid  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  are  greatly  isQlated  from  the  interior 
by  deserts  and  climates  hostile  to  European  life.  De- 
mocracy has  a  footing  there,  inasmuch  as  Dutch  colo- 
nists have  retired  from  imder  English  jurisdiction,  and 
formed  a  government  for  themselves,  which  has  been 
acknowledged  by  England.    Afrer  suffering,  and  trial, 


FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH  INFLUENCE.  75 


and  privation  shall  have  taught  independence  of  thought 
and  patriotism,  a  respectable  confederacy  of  states  may 
be  formed  in  these  regions. 

Every  effort  that  is  just  and  suitable,  is  made  to  ex- 
tend English  influence  along  the  shores  of  negro  lands. 
The  expenditui'e  in  endeavoring  to  extirpate  the  slave- 
trade  is  very  great ;  and  great  devotedness  and  heroism 
have  been  seen  in  attempts  to  explore  the  interior. 
Both  objects  are  di-awing  towards  completion  ;  but  the 
permanently  beneficial  influence  of  England  rests  on  the 
establishment  of  Sierra  Leone  and  the  extended  coasting 
trade,  arising  from  the  semi-monthly  line  of  English 
steamers  which  touch  there. 

England  has  established  twenty-four  treaties  with 
native  kings,  chiefs,  or  powers,  for  the  suppression  of  the 
slave-trade ;  seventeen  of  these  are  with  chiefs  whose 
territories  have  fallen  under  the  influence  of  the  Repub- 
lic of  Liberia  and  Cape  Palmas.  The  influence  of  these 
governments  has  now  replaced  that  of  England,  by 
sweeping  the  slave-trade  from  their  territory  of  about 
six  hundred  miles.  The  great  proportion  of  recaptui-ed 
slaves,  chiefly  men  and  boys,  who  have  been  throTO 
into  the  population  of  Sierra  Leone,  has  loaded  it  heav- 
ily. Of  these,  altogether  not  less  than  sixty  thousand 
have,  at  different  times,  been  introduced ;  yet,  with  the 
original  colonists — ^the  Kovascotians,  Canadians  and 
the  Maroons  from  Jamaica — the  whole  do  not  now  ex 


76 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


tend  beyond  forty-five  thousand ;  still,  Sieira  Leone 
has  long  been  a  focus  of  good  emanations.  It  embraces 
a  territory  small  compared  with  Liberia.  The  govern- 
ment is  repressive  of  native  energy,  on  accoimt  of  the 
coiLstant  superintendence  of  white  men,  and  the  subor- 
dination of  the  colony  to  a  distant  and  negligent  gov- 
ernment. 

One  momentous  effect  of  its  influence,  however,  has 
come  permanently  foi-ward,  tending  to  carry  rapid  im- 
provement widely  over  the  western  regions  of  Africa. 
These  recaptured  slaves,  and  their  descendants,  many 
of  them,  are  returning  to  their  native  lands,  elevated 
in  character  by  the  instruction  they  have  received. 
Three  thousand  of  them  are  now  settled  among  their 
brethren  of  the  Yoruba  ti'ibe,  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Niger,  and  there,  superintended  by  two  or  three  mission- 
aries, are  sending  abroad,  by  their  influence  and  ex- 
ample, the  light  of  Divine  tinith. 

Sierra  Leone  and  the  naval  squadi'ons  have  rendered 
great  service  to  Liberia.  It  is  perfectly  obvious  that 
the  colony  could  not  have  existed  if  left  to  itself  imder 
the  old  system  of  pirating  and  slave-ti*ading.  Those 
who  did  not  spare  European  forts,  would  have  had  no 
scruple  at  plundering  and  extinguishing  such  opponents 
of  their  ti-affic.  It  must  in  justice  be  admitted,  that  a 
fair  siurender  of  what  might,  in  reality,  be  considered 
as  conquered  territory,  has  been  made  by  England  to 


COLONY  OF  SIERRA  LEOISTI 


77 


Liberia.  The  instances  of  sucli  transactions  show  a 
greatly  advanced  state  of  morality  in  the  public  deal- 
ings of  nations,  and  in  this,  even,  tlie  Afi-ican  has  begun 
to  partake. 

SieiTa  Leone  was  foimded  on  the  9th  of  May,  1787, 
by  a  party  of  fom-  hundi-ed  negroes,  discharged  from 
the  army  and  navy.  They  were  joined  by  twelve  hun- 
dred from  Xova  Scotia  in  1792. 

In  1849,  the  country  around,  the  river  Sherboro,  in- 
tervening between  Sien-a  Leone  and  Mom-ovia,  had 
been  carrying  on  a  war  for  about  seven  yeai-s,  and  at 
length  commenced  plundering  the  canoes  of  the  Sierra 
Leone  people.  The  acting  governor  soon  brought  them 
to  tei-ms.  This  vexed  the  slavers  at  the  Gallinas, 
who  had  long  been  an  annoyance  to  the  Liberian  au- 
thorities. It  was  the  slavei*s'  policy  to  keep  up  the  ex- 
citement and  sti'ife,  that  they  might  in  the  mean  time 
drive  a  brisk  trade  unmolested. 

The  English  cruisei-s  at  length  blockaded  the  Gallinas. 
They  ascertained  that,  notwithstanding  the  blockade, 
abundance  of  goods  were  received  by  the  enemy. 
The  mysteiy  was  at  length  solved  by  discovering  that 
the  slave-ti-adei-s,  through  small  creeks  and  lagoons, 
had  received  what  they  wanted  from  Sierra  Leone. 
The  case  was  referred  to  the  governor  to  have  this  pre- 
vented, and  by  the  governor  it  was  referred  to  the  law- 
yers.   They  shook  their  wigs  solemnly  over  the  com- 


78 


AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


plaint,  and  decided  that  nothing  within  the  compass  of 
the  law  suited  the  case,  and  therefore  nobody  could 
interfere. 

Captain  Dunlop,  in  command  of  the  cruisers,  a 
good  naval  diplomatist,  ready  in  the  cause  of  justice 
and  hiunanity  to  make  precedents  where  none  could 
be  found,  informed  the  Sherboro  chiefe,  that  a  treaty- 
existed  between  them  and  his  government  for  the  sup- 
pression of  the  slave-trade ;  and  suggested  to  them  the 
virtue  and  the  profit  of  seizing  the  goods  brought  from 
Sierra  Leone.  The  chiefe  had  the  smallest  possible 
objections  which  honest  men  could  have,  to  appro- 
priate the  slavers'  goods  to  themselves.  On  the  princi- 
ple of  employing  a  thief  in  oflSce  for  the  moral  benefit 
of  his  companions,  this  matter  was  easily  settled. 
The  goods  were  seized  in  their  transit.  It  was  also 
stipulated  with  these  chiefs,  that  they  should  stop  all 
trade  and  intercourse  between  their  own  people  and  the 
slave  barracoons.  Having  now  no  chance  of  sending  off 
slaves,  and  no  means  of  getting  any  thing  from  Sierra 
Leone  or  elsewhere,  the  slavers,  established  at  the 
Gallinas — regarded  for  the  present  as  no  man's  land — 
were  obliged  to  come  to  terms. 

Captain  Dunlop  landed  to  receive  their  surrender. 
But  to  spare  his  own  men  in  the  sickliest  season  of  the 
year,  he  applied  to  a  chief  for  one  hundred  and  fifty 
hands  ;  these  he  obtained,  and  soon  after  three  hundred 


DESTRUCTION  OF  BARRACOONS. 


79 


more  joined  him,  and  remained  for  the  five  or  six 
weeks,  while  the  affair  was  being  settled.  These  men 
behaved  as  well  as  disciplined  troops,  or  rather  better, 
for  although  among  an  enemy's  property,  there  was  no 
drunkenness  or  plunder. 

An  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  slave-establishment  may 
be  had  from  the  fact  that  sixty  foreignei'S  were  made 
prisoners.  They  hailed  from  everywhere,  and  were  sent 
to  Sierra  Leone  to  find  passage  to  Brazil,  Cuba  and 
other  places. 

The  chiefs  who  had  been  in  partnership  with  them, 
found  themselves  none  the  worse  for  this  summary 
breaking  up  of  the  firm.  They  cleared  off  their  national 
debt.  In  the  way  of  ti*ade  they  had  come  under  obli- 
gations to  this  establishment  to  the  extent  of  seven 
thousand  slaves,  and  they  found  themselves  at  liberty 
honestly  to  "  repudiate,"  or  rather  their  obligation  was 
discharged,  as  slaves  were  no  longer  a  lawful  tender. 
The  chiefs,  however,  were  required  to  set  at  liberty  all 
slaves  collected  but  not  delivered.  These  amounted  to 
abont  a  thousand.  A  preparation  was  here  made  for 
the  extension  of  Liberia,  and  afterwards,  as  will  be 
seen,  that  government  came  into  possession  of  this  ter- 
ritory, and  thus  secured  a  still  greater  extent  of  coast 
from  the  intrusion  of  the  slaver. 

English  influence  is  extending  by  means  of  factories 
and  agents  all  along  the  coast,  from  Cape  Palmas  to 


80  ATRICA  AM)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

the  Gaboon  (about  twelve  hundred  miles),  for  commer- 
cial purposes  and  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade. 
These  establishments  are  supported  by  the  government. 
Commissioners  proceed  from  them  to  enter  into  negotia- 
tions on  the  subject  of  the  slave-trade  with  the  powerful 
chiefs  of  the  interior,  and  cm*ious  results  sometimes  oc- 
cur from  the  prestige  thus  gained. 

One  of  the  great  Ashantee  chiefs  came  over  to  the 
English,  dm-ing  the  war  in  which  Sir  Charles  McCarthy- 
was  killed,  and  retained  his  independence  on  the  bor- 
ders of  the  two  powers.  Governor  McLean,  at  Cape 
Coast  Castle,  learnt  that  this  chief  had  offered  human 
sacrifices  as  one  of  his  "  customs."  A  summons,  in  a 
legal  foiTQ,  was  dispatched  to  him  by  a  native  soldier, 
citing  him  to  appear  for  trial  for  this  offence.  Agreea- 
bly to  the  summons,  he  marched  to  the  court  in  great 
state,  surrounded  by  his  chiefs  and  attendants.  He  was 
tried,  convicted,  and  heavily  fined.  He  was  then  dis- 
missed, with  an  order  to  remit  the  money.  This  he  im- 
mediately did,  although  there  was  no  force,  except  moral 
supremacy,  to  constrain  him  to  obey.  There  has  been 
no  slaving  at  Cape  Coast  Castle  since  the  trade  was 
abolished  forty  years  ago. 

There  are  only  forty  British  officei-s  and  soldiers  in 
all  the  line  of  forts,  with  one  hundred  of  the  West  India 
regiment,  and  about  fifty  native  militia-men.  The  an- 
nual expense  of  the  establishments  is  about  twenty 


VISITS  TO  CHIEP^  IN  THE  mTERIOR. 


81 


thoasand  dollars ;  altliough,  as  tlie  goYemment  has 
latelj  pui'cliased,  for  fifty  thousand  dollars,  the  Danish 
forts,  the  expense  will  be  materially  increased. 

The  interior  is  improving.  Captain  "Winniet  visited 
Ashantee  in  October,  1849.  Ke  found  on  the  route  large 
thriving  additional  villages,  as  far  as  English  protection 
extended.  He  vras  received  at  Kumassi  with  the 
usual  display  of  A£i*ican  music,  musketiy,  and  marching. 
He  was  led  for  a  mile  and  a  half  through  a  lane  at 
heads  and  shouldei-s,  clustered  thick  on  both  sides. 
There  were  here  and  there  diverging  branches  of  a  like 
character,  as  thick  with  heads  and  shoulders ;  and  at 
the  end  of  each,  a  chief  sitting  in  his  chair  of  state.  To 
and  by  each  chief,  a  hand  was  waved  as  a  salutation, 
until  the  monarch  himself  was  reached.  He  rose,  came 
forward,  and,  with  heavy  lumps  of  gold  dangling  at  his 
wrists,  exhibited  his  agility  in  dancing.  When  this  act 
of  state  ceremony  had  been  properly  done  ujy^  he  of- 
fered his  hand  to  shake,  and  thus  completed  the  eti- 
quette of  a  reception  at  com-t.  The  houses,  with  piazzas 
projecting  to  shelter  them  from  the  sun — ^public-rooms 
in  front,  and  dwelling-rooms  behind,  nicely  plastered 
and  colored — were  greatly  admii-ed. 

The  pleading  about  the  slave-ti-ade  was  the  main 
business  and  the  main  difficult}^ ;  but  the  nature  of  such 
negotiations  appears,  in  its  most  impressive  aspect,  in 
the  case  of  Dahomey. 

4* 


82 


AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


This  chief  professes  great  devotedness  to  England. 
In  consequence  of  some  difficulty,  he  gave  notice  to  Eu- 
ropean foreigners,  "  that  he  was  not  much  accustomed 
to  cut  off  white  heads,  but  if  any  interfered  with  an 
agent  of  the  English  govermnent,  he  would  cut  off  their 
heads  as  readily  as  those  of  his  black  people."  Bj- mur- 
derous incursions  against  his  neighbors,  he  seized  about 
nine  thousand  victims  annually.  He  sold  about  three 
thousand  of  these  directly  on  his  own  account,  gave  the 
rest  chiefly  away  to  his  troops,  who  sold  them :  a  duty 
of  five  dollai-s  being  paid  on  each  slave  exported,  af- 
foixied  him  altogether  a  revenue  of  about  three  hundred 
thousand  dollars. 

This  was  a  serious  matter  to  argue  against.  He  stated 
the  case  strongly  :  "  The  form  of  my  government  cannot 
be  suddenly  changed,  without  causing  such  a  revolution 
as  would  deprive  me  of  my  throne,  and  precipitate  the 
kingdom  into  anarchy. ...  I  am  very  desirous  to  acquire 
the  friendship  of  England.  I  and  my  army  are  ready, 
at  all  times,  to  fight  the  queen's  enemies,  and  do  any 
thing  the  English  government  may  ask  of  me,  except  to 
give  up  the  slave-trade.  No  other  trade  is  known  to 
my  people.  Palm-oil,  it  is  true,  is  engaging  the  atten- 
tion of  some  of  them,  but  it  is  a  slow  method  of  making 
money,  and  brings  only  a  very  small  amount  of  duties 
into  my  coffers.  The  planting  of  cotton  and  coffee  has 
been  suggested,  but  that  is  slower  still.    The  trees  have 


KING  OF  DAHOMEY'S  ARGUMENT. 


83 


to  grow,  and  I  shall  probably  be  in  my  grave  before  I 
reap  any  benefit  from  them ;  and  what  am  I  to  do  in  the 
mean  time  ?  Who  will  pay  my  troops  in  the  mean 
time  ?  Who  will  buy  arms  and  clothes  for  them  ?  Who 
will  buy  dresses  for  my  wives?  Who  will  give  me 
supplies  of  cowries,  rum,  gunpowder  and  cloth,  for  my 
annual  '  customs  V  I  hold  my  power  by  the  observance 
of  the  time-honored  customs  of  my  forefathers.  I 
should  forfeit  it,  and  entail  on  myself  a  life  fall  of 
shame,  and  a  death  full  of  misery,  by  neglecting  them. 
The  slave-trade  has  been  the  ruling  principle  of  my 
people.  It  is  the  source  of  their  glory  and  wealth. 
Their  songs  celebrate  their  victories,  and  the  mother 
lulls  the  child  to  sleep  with  notes  of  triumph  over  an 
enemy  reduced  to  slavery.  Can  I,  by  signing  such  a 
treaty,  change  the  sentiments  of  a  whole  people  ?  It 
cannot  be !" 

The  case  was  a  puzzling  one  for  this  intelligent,  open- 
hearted,  and  ambitious  barbarian.  He  had  trained  an 
army  of  savage  heroes,  and  as  savage  heroines,  thirsting 
for  distinction  and  for  plunder.  This  army  cowers  at 
his  feet  as  long  as  he  satiates  its  appetite  for  excite- 
ment, rapine  and  blood.  But  woe  to  him  if  it  turn  in 
disappointed  fury  upon  him  !  Such  is  military  despo- 
tism ;  perilous  to  restrain,  and  perilous  to  let  loose. 
Blessed  is  that  people  which  is  clear  of  it ! 

There  is  this  strange  incident  in  the  afiair.  that  the 


84 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


English  power,  which  sent  an  ambassador  to  plead  the 
case  with  him  in  this  peaceful  mode,  was  at  the  same 
time  covering  the  sea  with  cmiserB,  and  lining  tlie  shore 
with  factories,  and  combining  every  native  influence  to 
extinguish  the  sole  source  from  which  flowed  the  secu- 
rity and  si)lendor  of  his  rule.  He  knew  this,  and  could 
ofier  no  moral  objection  to  it,  although  complaining  of 
the  extent  to  which  it  reduced  his  authority,  and  crip- 
pled his  resources. 

The  urgency  to  which  the  King  of  Dahomey  was 
subjected,  ended,  in  1852,  in  his  yielding.  England 
had  proposed  to  pay  him  some  annual  sum  for  a  time, 
as  a  partial  compensation  for  the  loss  of  his  revenue  :  it 
may  therefore  be  presumed  that  he  is  a  stipendiary  of 
the  British  government ;  and  as  the  practices  given  up 
by  him  can  scarcely,  in  any  circumstances,  be  suddenly 
revived,  his  interest  will  retain  him  faithful  to  the  en- 
gagement. It  is  a  strange,  bold,  and  perilous  under- 
taking, that  he  should  direct  his  disciplined  army,  his 
hero  and  his  heroine  battalions,  to  the  arts  of  peace ! 
But  to  these  he  and  they  must  henceforward  look  as 
the  source  of  theii'  wealth,  security,  and  greatness. 

Queen  Victoria,  it  is  said,  has  lately  sent  the  King  of 
Dahomey  two  thousand  oniamental  caps  for  the  Ama- 
zon soldiers. 


CHAPTEK  YIIL 


DAHOMEY  SLAVISH  SUBJECTIOX  OF  THE  PEOPLE— DEPENDENCE 

OF  THE  KING  ON  THE  SLAVE-TRADE  EXHIBITION  OF  HU- 
MAN   SKULLS  ANNUAL     HUMAN     SACRIFICES  LAGOS  THE 

CHANGES  OF  THREE  CENTURIES. 

Dalziel,  in  slave-trading  times,  shocked  the  vrorld 
with  details  in  reference  to  Dahomey.  Duncan  and 
Forbes  have  again  presented  the  pictm-e  in  the  same 
hues  of  darkness  and  of  blood.  Ghezo  is  a  good  king  as 
things  go,  and  rather  particularly  good  for  an  African, 
for  whom  the  world  has  done  nothing,  and  who,  there- 
fore, cannot  be  expected  to  do  much  for  the  world.  He 
has  a  threatening  example  before  him.  His  elder 
brother  is  a  prisoner,  with  as  much  to  eat  and  more  to 
drink  than  is  good  for  him — caged  up  by  a  crowd  of 
guards,  who  prevent  him  from  doing  any  thing  else. 
He  was  deposed,  and  reduced  to  this  state,  because  his 
rule  did  not  suit  his  subjects. 

Ghezo,  therefore,  has  the  office  of  seeing  men  roll  on 
the  earth  before  him,  and  scrape  up  dust  over  them- 
selves ;  of  being  deafened  by  vociferations  of  his  dignity 
and  virtue  and  glory  and  honor,  by  court  poets  and  par- 


86 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


asites,  on  state  occasions  ;  the  oflRce  of  keeping  satisfied, 
with  pay  and  phmder,  the  ferocious  spirit  of  a  blood- 
thirsty people  ;  the  oflice  of  looking  out  for  some  vic- 
tim tribe,  whom,  by  craft  and  violence,  they  may  ruin  ; 
and  the  oflSce  of  procuring,  catching  and  buying  some 
scores  of  human  victims,  whom  he  and  his  savages 
murder,  at  different  set  seasons,  in  public. 

A  good  share  of  this  used  to  be  effected  by  means  of 
the  slave-trade.  But  that  is  gone,  or  nearly  so,  and 
with  it  may  go  much  of  the  atrocity  of  Dahomean  pub- 
lic life.  Things  are  yet,  however,  and  may  long  remain, 
in  a  transition  state.  He  and  his  people  will  not  sud- 
denly lose  their  taste  for  the  excitement  of  human  suf- 
fering; and  it  would  be  a  danger  for  which,  it  is 
probable,  he  has  not  the  moral  courage,  or  a  result 
for  which  he  has  no  real  wish,  to  biing  old  national 
ceremonies  to  a  sudden  pause.  But  there  are  cir- 
cumstances likely  to  act  with  effect  in  producing  the 
change,  which  is  a  matter  destined  to  occur  at  some 
time  or  other,  and  to  be  obtained  when  it  occurs  only 
in  one  mode  ;  and  the  sooner  the  process  is  begun,  the 
sooner  it  will  end. 

As  to  what  it  is  that  higher  principles  must  banish 
from  the  world,  Commander  Forbes,  of  the  British 
Navy,  in  1850,  the  latest  visitor  of  that  country  who 
has  given  an  account  of  it,  tells  us  what  he  saw.  He 
says :  "  There  is  something  fearfiil  in  the  state  of  sub- 


HUMAN  SACRIFICES. 


87 


jection  in  which,  in  outward  show,  the  kings  of  Da- 
homey hold  their  highest  officers ;  yet,  when  the  sys- 
tem is  examined,  these  prostrations  are  merely  keeping 
up  of  ancient  customs.  Although  no  man's  head  in 
Dahomey  can  be  considered  warranted  for  twenty-four 
hours,  still  the  great  chief  himself  w.ould  find  his 
tottering  if  one  of  these  customs  was  omitted." 

They  were  preparing  for  the  ceremony  of  watering 
the  graves  of  the  royal  ancestors  with  blood ;  during 
which  the  king  also  presents  some  victims  as  a  royal 
gift  to  his  people.  This  merely  means  that  they  are 
knocked  down  in  public,  and  their  heads  cut  off,  amidst 
trumpeting,  and  clamor,  and  jesting. 

"  With  much  ceremony,"  we  read,  "  two  large  cala- 
bashes, containing  the  skulls  of  kings,"  conquered  by 
the  Dahomeans,  "  ornamented  with  copper,  brass,  coral, 
&c.,  were  brought  in  and  placed  on  the  ground.  Some 
formed  the  heads  of  walking-sticks,  distaffs^  while 
those  of  chiefs  and  war-men  ornamented  drums,  um- 
brellas, surmounted  standards,  and  decorated  doorways. 
They  were  on  all  sides  in  thousands." 

"  There  was  much  to  disgust  the  white  man  in  the 
number  of  human  skulls  and  jaw-bones  displayed ;  but 
can  the  reader  imagine  twelve  unfortunate  human  be- 
ings lashed  hands  and  feet,  and  tied  in  small  canoes 
and  baskets,  dressed  in  clean  white  dresses,  with  a  high 
red  cap,  carried  on  the  heads  of  fellow-men  ?  These, 


88 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


and  an  alligator  and  a  cat,  were  the  gift  of  the  monarch 

to  the  people — prisoners  of  war."  When  carried 

round  the  court,  they  bore  the  gaze  of  their  enemies 
without  shrinking.  At  the  foot  of  the  throne  they 
halted,  while  the  Mayo  presented  each  with  a  head 
(bunch)  of  cowries,  extolling  the  munihcence  of  the 
monarch,  who  had  sent  it  to  them  to  piu*chase  a  last 
meal,  for  to-morrow  they  must  die." 

Again :  "  But  of  the  fom-teen  now  brought  on  the 
platfonn,  we  the  unworthy  instruments  of  the  Divine 
will,  succeeded  in  saving  the  lives  of  three.  Lashed  as 
we  have  described  before,  these  sturdy  men  met  the 
gaze  of  their  persecutors,  with  a  firmness  perfectly  as- 
tonishing.   Not  a  sigh  was  breafhed.    In  all  my  life 

I  never  saw  such  coolness  before,  so  near  death  The 

victims  were  held  high  above  the  heads  of  their  bearers, 
and  the  naked  ruffians  thus  acknowledged  the  munifi- 
cence o^  their  prince  Having  called  their  names, 

the  nearest  one  was  divested  of  his  clothes ;  the  foot  of 
the  basket  placed  on  the  parapet,  when  the  king  gave 
its  upper  pai-t  an  impetus,  and  the  victim  fell  at  once 
into  the  pit  beneath.  A  fall  upwards  of  twelve  feet 
may  have  stuimed  him,  and  before  sense  could  return, 
his  head  was  cut  oft',  and  the  body  thrown  to  the  mob ; 
wlio,  now  aimed  with  clubs  and  branches,  brutally  muti- 
lated it  and  dragged  it  to  a  distant  pit."  Forbes  and 
liis  companion  had  retired  to  their  seats  away  from  the 


HUMAN  SACRIFICES. 


89 


sight.  Two  sons  of  Da  Souza,  the  notorious  slaver,  re- 
mained to  look  on. 

Tlie  circumstance  most  likely  to  have  effect  in  restrain- 
ing these  barbarities,  is  the  value  which  slaves  will  now 
bear  as  the  means  of  cultivating  the  ground,  and  rais- 
ing exportable  produce,  to  which  alone  the  monarch 
and  people  must  look,  in  the  diminished  state  of  the 
slave-trade,  to  furnish  means  for  their  expenses.  Vic- 
tims and  slaves  will  also  be  more  diJBScult  to  be  pro- 
cured by  warfare,  inasmuch  as  civilized  people  have 
more  general  access  to  the  countiy,  and  will  introduce 
a  better  policy,  and  more  powerful  defensiye  means 
among  the  people.  Christianity  also  is  adventuring 
there,  and  caiTying  its  peaceful  influence  and  nobler 
motives  with  it. 

Lagos  plundered  recaptured  slaves  retmiiing  to  their 
homes.  The  authorities  deserved  no  favor.  A  better 
man — perhaps  a  more  legitimate  claimant  for  the  royal 
dignity — was  found,  and  after  a  severe  fight,  in  which 
the  British  cruisers  warmly  participated,  he  was  seated 
on  the  throne.  A  severe  blow  was  given  to  the  slave- 
trade.  Affairs  seemed  to  be  going  on  smoothly  until 
early  in  the  autumn  of  1853,  when  a  revolution  broke 
out,  amidst  which  the  king  died,  and  the  country,  as  far 
as  is  known,  remains  in  confusion. 

The  present  is  an  interesting  period  in  the  history  of 
the  world.    Changes  are  rapid  and  irrevocable.  Cir- 


90 


AFRICA  AST)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


cumstances  illusta-ative  of  the  condition  of  our  race  as 
it  has  been,  are  disappearing  rapidly.  The  future 
must  trust  to  our  philosophic  observation,  and  faithful 
testimony,  for  its  knowledge  of  savage  life.  The  help- 
lessness, and  artlessness,  and  miserable  shifts  of  barba- 
rism are  becoming  things  of  the  past.  There  is  per- 
haps no  region  of  the  earth  which  is  now  altogether 
beyond  the  reach  of  civilized  arts.  Shells,  and  flints, 
and  bows,  and  clubs,  and  bone-headed  spears  are  every- 
where giving  way  to  more  useful  or  more  formidable 
implements.  Improvements  in  di-ess  and  tools  and 
fm-niture  will  soon  be  universal.  The  history  of  man 
as  he  has  been,  requires  therefore  to  be  written  now, 
while  the  evidence  illustrative  of  it  has  not  altogether 
vanished. 

The  changes  of  the  last  three  centuries  have,  to  only 
a  slight  degree,  influenced  the  African  races.  An 
inaccessible  interior,  and  a  coast  bristling  with  slave- 
factories,  and  bloody  with  slaving  cruelties,  probably 
account  for  this.  The  slight  progress  made  shows  the 
obduracy  of  the  degradation  to  be  removed,  and  the 
difficulty  of  the  first  steps  needed  for  its  removal. 
Wherever  the  slave-trade  or  its  effects  penetrated,  there 
of  course  peace  vanished,  and  prosperity  became  im- 
possible. This  evil  affected  not  only  the  coast,  but 
spread  warfare  to  rob  the  country  of  its  inhabitants,  far 
into  the  interior  regions.    There  were  ti-ibes,  however, 


SLOWNESS  OF  IMPROVEME]NT. 


91 


uninfluenced  by  it,  and  some  of  these  have  gained  ex- 
tensive, although  but  temporary  authority.  Yet  no- 
where has  there  been  any  real  civilization.  It  is  sin- 
gular that  these  people  should  have  rested  in  this 
unalloyed  barbarism  for  thousands  of  yeai-s,  and  that 
there  should  have  been  no  native-bom  advancement, 
as  in  Mexico,  or  Peru,  or  China ;  and  no  flowing  in 
upon  its  darkness  of  any  glimmering  of  light  from  the 
brilliant  progress  and  high  illumination  of  the  outside 
world.  It  has  been  considered  woi-thy  of  note,  that  a 
few  yeai-s  ago  one  of  the  Yeys  had  contrived  a  cum- 
brous alphabet  to  express  the  sounds  of  his  language  ; 
but  it  is  surely,  to  aii  incomparable  degree,  more  a 
matter  of  sm-prise,  that  centuries  passed  away  in  com- 
munication with  Europeans,  without  such  an  attempt 
having  been  made  by  any  individual,  of  so  many  mil- 
lions, diu'ing  so  many  generations  of  men. 

The  older  state  of  negro  society,  therefore,  still 
continues.  "With  the  exception  of  civilized  vices,  civ- 
ilized arms,  and  some  amount  of  civilized  luxuries, 
life  on  the  African  coast,  or  at  no  great  distance  from 
it,  remains  now  much  the  same  as  the  fii-st  discoverei*s 
foimd  it. 

As  it  was  two  himdred  years  ago,  the  food  of  the 
people  consists  of  rice,  maize  and  millet ;  or  the  Asi- 
atic, the  American  and  the  African  native  grains.  A 
few  others,  of  comparatively  little  importance,  might  be 


93 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


added  to  tlicse.  Many  fniits,  as  bananas,  figs  and 
pumpkins,  compose  part  of  their  subsistence. 

Flesh  of  all  kinds  was  used  abundantly  before  Eu- 
ropean arms  began  to  render  game  scarce.  Fish  along 
the  coa.st,  and  beside  the  rivere  and  interior  lakes,  are 
used,  except  by  some  tribes,  who  regard  them  as  un- 
clean. Tlie  Bushmen  south  of  Elephants'  Bay,  reject 
no  kind  of  ]-eptile.  The  snake's  poison  arms  tlieir 
weapon,  and  its  body  is  eaten.  As  the  poisons  used 
act  rapidly,  and  do  not  affect  the  flesh  of  the  animal,  it 
is  devoured  without  scruple  and  without  danger. 
Throughout  all  the  deserts,  as  in  ancient  times,  the 
locust,  or  large  winged  grasshopper,  is  used  as  an  ai1i- 
cle  of  food,  not  nutritive  certainly,  but  capable  of  sus- 
taining life.  The  wings  and  legs  are  pulled  off,  and 
the  bodies  are  scorched,  in  holes  heated  as  ovens,  and 
having  the  hot  sand  hauled  over  them.  •• 

In  Dahomey,  according  to  Duncan,  there  is  some  im- 
provement in  agricultm-e,  traced  to  the  retiu-n  from  the 
Brazils  of  a  few  who  had  been  trained  as  slaves  in  that 
empire.  This  influence,  and  that  of  ideas  imported 
from  civilized  society,  seem  to  be  more  prevalent  in 
Dahomey  than  elsewhere.  Tlie  present  sovereign  has 
mitigated  llie  laws,  diminished  the  transit  duties,  and 
acted  with  such  judicious  kindness  towards  tribes  who 
submitted  without  resistance,  that  his  neighbors,  tired 


PROSPECTS  OF  THE  FUTURE. 


93 


of  war  and  confiision,  have  willingly,  in  some  instances, 
preferred  to  come  under  his  jm'isdiction. 

These  circumstances,  together  with  the  treaty  formed 
by  England  with  the  King  of  Dahomey,  in  1852,  for 
the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade,  indicate  that  a 
new  destiny  is  opening  for  the  African  races.  It  may 
be  but  rarely  that  a  man  of  so  much  intelligence  gains 
power ;  and  the  successor  of  the  present  king  may  suffer 
matters  to  decline ;  but  still  great  sources  of  evil  are 
removed,  and  the  people  are  acquiring  a  taste  for  better 
practices.  Human  sacrifices  have,  to  a  great  extent, 
been  abolished ;  and  the  wants  of  cultivation  will  of 
themselves  render  human  life  of  higher  value.  The  two 
great  states  of  Ashantee  and  Dahomey,  now  both  open 
to  missionary  influence,  are  likely  to  run  an  emulative 
race  in  the  career  of  improvement. 


CHAPTEK  IX. 


STATE  OF  THE  COAST  PRIOR  TO   THE   FOUNDATION  OF  LIBERIA  

NATIVE  TRIBES  CUSTOMS  AND  POLICY  POWER  OF  THE  FOL- 

GIAS  KROOMEN,  ETC.  CONFLICTS. 

The  lands  chosen  as  the  site  of  the  American  colony 
excited  attention  in  olden  times.  "Africa  would  be 
preferable  to  Europe,"  said  the  French  navigator 
Villault  in  1667,  "if  it  were  all  like  Cape  Mount" 
He  launches  out  with  delight  on  the  beauty  of  the  pros- 
pects, and  the  richness  of  the  country.  He  says,  "  There 
you  find  oranges,  almonds,  melons,  pumpkins,  cherries 
and  plums,"  and  the  abundance  of  animals  was  so  great 
that  the  flesh  was  sold  "  for  almost  nothing."  Of  the 
Rio  Junco  he  remarks,  "  The  banks  are  adorned  with 
trees  and  flowers ;  and  the  plains  with  oranges,  citrons 
and  palms  in  beautiful  clumps.  At  Rio  Cesters  he 
found  a  people  rigidly  honest,  who  had  carefiilly  pre- 
served the  eflects  of  a  deceased  ti*ader,  mitil  a  vc>>ol 
an-ived  to  receive  them. 

Another  Frenchman,  Desmarchais,  in  the  succeeding 
century  was  invited  by  "  King  Peter"  to  form  an  es- 
tablishment on  the  large  island  at  Cape  Mesurado,  but 


RELATIONS  OF  THE  COAST  TRIBES. 


95 


he  preferred  the  Cape  itself,  on  account  of  the  advanta- 
ges of  its  position. 

The  country  adjoining  Mesui'ado,  although  subse- 
quently harassed  and  wasted  by  the  slave-trade,  had  in 
early  times  a  national  history  and  policy,  containing 
incidents  which  illustrate  the  character  of  savage  man 
as  displayed  in  such  social  arrangements  as  his  dull 
apprehension  can  conti-ive.  This  will  be  apparent  fi-om 
circumstances  in  its  history  dui*ing  the  sixteenth 
centmy. 

The  comitry  was  held  chiefly  by  divisions  of  a  great 
community,  known  by  the  common  name  of  Monoo. 
Tlie  Gallas  and  the  Yeys  were  intruders,  but  nearly  re- 
lated. Tlie  Mandi,  or  head  of  the  Monoo,  retained 
reverence  and  dignity,  but  had  lost  dominion. 

The  subordinate  ti'ibes  ranged  themselves  in  rank, 
according  to  the  power  they  possessed,  which  varied 
with  temporary  circumstances.  Thus  the  Monoo  lorded 
it  over  the  Folgias ;  the  Folgias  over  the  Quojas,  and 
the  Quojas  over  the  Bulams  and  Kondos. 

Their  forti-esses  were  square  inclosures,  smTOunded 
by  stout  palisades,  driven  close  together,  having  fom* 
structures  somewhat  in  the  fonn  of  bastions,  through 
which,  and  under  their  defence,  were  the  entrances  to 
the  place.  Two  streets  in  the  interior,  crossing  each 
other  in  the  centre,  connected  these  entrances.  They 
had  a  kind  of  embrasures  or  port-holes  in  these  wooden 


96 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


walls,  out  of  which  thej  threw  assagays  or  spears  and 
arrows. 

Along  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Junco,  stretched  the 
lands  of  the  Kharoo  Monoos,  the  Kroornen  so  well 
known  to  our  cruisers  of  the  present  day.  The  Folgias 
weakened  in  warfare  had  recourse  to  the  sorceries  of  a 
celebrated  performer  in  that  line,  whose  policy  in  the 
case  savored  very  greatly  of  earthly  wisdom.  He  rec- 
ommended religious  strife  as  the  best  mode  of  weaken- 
ing the  enemy.  They  tlierefore  contrived  to  excite 
some  "  old  school  and  new  school"  controversy  with 
regard  to  the  sacredness  of  a  pond  held  in  reverence  by 
tlie  Kroos. 

It  was  a  matter  of  Kroo  oi-thodoxy,  that  into  this 
pond  the  great  ancestor  and  author  of  their  race 
had  descended  from  heaven,  and  there  first  made  his 
appearance  as  a  man.  Hence  it  was  the  faith  of  their 
established  chm*ch  to  make  offerings  to  the  pond  in 
favor  of  the  fish  that  dwelt  there. 

iN'ow  it  was  also  an  old  and  ever-to-be-respected  law 
among  them,  that  no  fish  should  be  boiled  with  tlie  scales 
on.  Amid  their  career  of  \Hctory,  the  audacious  and 
criminal  fact  was  one  day  discovered,  that  into  the 
sacred  pond,  the  just  object  of  reverence  to  an  en- 
lightened and  religious  people,  there  had  been  thrown 
a  quantity  of  fish  boiled  in  a  mode  which  indicated 
contempt  for  every  thing  praiseworthy  and  national,  in- 


RELIGIOUS  DISSENSIONS. 


97 


asmuch  as  not  a  scale  liad  been  scraped  off  previously 
to  their  being  boiled. 

The  nation  got  into  a  ferment  about  the  fish-scales. 
From  arguments  they  went  to  clubs  and  spears.  Parties 
accusing  and  parties  accused  defended  their  lives,  in 
"just  and  necessary  wars,"  while  the  Folgias  looked  on 
until  both  were  weak  enough  to  be  conquered.  The 
victors,  however,  were  generous.  Theii*  chief  mamed 
the  sister  of  Flonikerri,  the  leader  of  the  Kroos,  and 
left  him  in  sovereignty  over  his  people.  Floniken-i 
showed  his  loyalty  by  resisting  an  attack  on  the  Fol- 
gias  by  the  Quabo  of  the  southeast. 

In  the  mean  time  the  great  sovereign  Mendino,  king 
of  the  Monoos,  had  died ;  and  as  negro  chiefs  are  or 
ought  to  be  immortal,  and  as  no  king  can  die  except 
by  sorcery,  his  brother  Manomassa  was  accused  as 
having  contrived  his  death.  lie  drank  the  sassy-wood, 
and  survived,  without  satisfying  the  people.  As  the 
sorcerers  proposed  to  hold  a  kind  of  com-t  of  inquiry 
upon  the  case,  Manomassa,  indignant  at  the  charge, 
surrendered  himself  to  the  care  of  the  "  spirits  of  the 
dead,"  and  went  away  among  the  Gala. 

There  his  character  gained  him  the  office  of  chief. 
But  annoyed  at  their  subsequent  caprice,  he  threw  him- 
self upon  the  generosity  of  the  Folgias,  who  employed 
Flonikerri  to  reinstate  him  in  his  dominion  over  the 
Gala.    Flonikerri  had  in  fact  become  a  kind  of  gene- 


98 


AI'RICA  AND  THK  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


ralissimo  of  the  unitoil  tribes.  He  was  afterwards  em- 
ployed in  subduing  the  Vejs  of  Cape  Mount;  and 
after  various  battles,  reduced  them  to  oflPer  proof  of 
their  submission.  T\m  consisted  in  each  swallowing 
some  drops  of  blood  Ironi  a  great  number  of  chickens, 
which  were  afterwards  l^oiled ;  they  ate  the  flesh,  re- 
serving the  legs,  which  were  delivered  to  the  con- 
queror, to  be  preserved  as  a  memorial  of  their  fealty. 

Flonikerri  fell  in  battle,  resisting  a  revolt  of  the 
Galas.  Being  hard  pressed,  he  drew  a  circle  round 
him  on  the  ground,  vowing  that  within  it  he  would 
resist  or  die.  Kneeling  there  he  expired  under  showers 
of  arrows. 

His  brother  and  successor,  Killimanzo,  extended  the 
authority  of  the  tribe  by  subduing  the  Quilligas  along 
the  Galliuas  river.  The  son  of  the  latter,  Flanseer,  ex- 
tended their  conquests  to  Sierra  Leone,  crushed  some 
rebellions,  and  left  a  respectable  domain  under  the 
sway  of  his  son  Flamburi.  Then  it  was  that  the  energy, 
skill  and  vices  of  Europeans  came  powerfully  into  ac- 
tion among  the  contentions  of  the  natives,  until  they 
rendered  war  a  means  of  revenue,  by  making  men  an 
article  of  merchandise  for  exportation. 

The  same  language  prevailed  among  all  their  tribes. 
The  most  cultivated  dialect  was  that  of  the  Folgias, 
who  prided  themselves  greatly  on  the  propriety  and  the 
elegance  of  their  speech,  and  on  the  figurative  illustra- 


COURT  CEREMOIOES. 


99 


tions  which  they  threw  into  it.  They  retained  their  su- 
premacy over  the  Quoj  as,  notwithstanding  the  extended 
dominion  of  the  latter.  This  was  indicated  by  the  in- 
vestitm-e  of  the  chief  of  the  Quojas  with  the  title  of 
Donda,  by  the  king,  or  Donda,  of  the  Folgias.  The 
ceremony  bore  the  character  of  abasement  almost  uni- 
versal among  the  negro  race.  The  Quoja  aspirant,  hav- 
ing approached  the  Folgia  chief  in  solemn  state,  threw 
himself  on  the  gi-ound,  remaining  prosti'ate  until  the 
Folgian  had  tlirown  some  dust  over  him.  He  was  then 
asked  the  name  he  chose  to  bear.  His  attendants  re- 
peated it  aloud.  The  king  of  the  Folgians  pronounced 
it,  adding  the  title  of  Donda ;  and  the  whole  multi- 
tude seized  and  shouted  it  with  loud  acclamations.  He 
was  invested  with  a  bow  and  quiver.  Mutual  presents 
concluded  the  ceremony. 

State  and  dignity,  of  such  a  character  as  could  be 
found  among  savages,  were  sti-ictly  enforced  in  these 
old  times.  Ambassadors  did  not  enter  a  territory  until 
they  had  received  pel-mission,  and  until  an  officer  had 
been  sent  to  conduct  them.  There  were  receptions, 
and  reviews,  and  stately  marchings,  trumpetings,  di-um- 
mings,  and  singing  of  songs,  and  acclamations,  and 
flatteries. 

The  attendants  of  the  ambassador  prostrated  them- 
selves. He  was  only  required  to  kneel,  but,  having 
bent  his  head  in  reverence,  he  wheeled  round  to  the 


100 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


people,  and  drew  the  string  of  his  bow  to  its  full  bent, 
indicating  that  he  became  the  king's  soldier  and  defen- 
der. Then  came  his  oration,  which  was  repeated,  sen- 
tence by  sentence,  in  the  mouth  of  the  king's  interpre- 
ter. Tlie  Quojas  claimed  the  credit  of  best  understand- 
ing the  proper  ceremonies  of  civil  life.  How  great  is 
the  difference  between  this  population,  and  the  few 
miserable  slave-hunters,  who  subsequently  ravaged, 
rather  than  possessed,  these  shores ! 


CHAPTER  X. 


GENERAL  VIEWS   IN  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF   COLONIES  PENAL 

COLONIES  VIEWS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  IN 

REFERENCE  TO   AFRICAN    COLONIES  STATE    OF  SLAVERY  AT 

THE     REVOLUTIONARY     WAR  NEGROES     WHO     JOINED  THE 

ENGLISH  DISPOSAL    OF    THEM  BY    GREAT    BRITAIN  EARLY 

MOVEMENTS    WITH    RESPECT    TO    AFRICAN    COLONIES  PLAN 

MATURED    BY    DR.  FINLEY  FORMATION    OF    THE  AMERICAN 

COLONIZATION  SOCIETY. 

The  views  of  men  in  founding  colonies,  liave  varied 
in  diflerent  ages  of  the  world.  Although,  however, 
some  special  inducement  may  have  been  pre-eminent  at 
different  times,  yet  a  multiplicity  of  motives  have  gen- 
erally combined  in  leading  to  such  undertakings.  Han- 
nibal found  the  municipal  cities,  or  Roman  colonies  of 
Italy,  the  obstacles  to  his  conquest  of  the  republic.  It 
was  with  provident  anticipation  of  such  an  effect  that 
they  were  founded.  Lima  in  Peru,  and  other  places 
in  Brazil  and  elsewhere,  had  their  origin  in  similar 
aims.  Differences  in  political  views  have  led  to  the 
foundation  of  many  colonies ;  and,  superadded  to  these, 
religious  considerations  have  had  their  influence  in  the 
settlement  of  some  of  the  early  North  American  col- 
onies. 


102  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

In  the  small  republics  of  Greece,  the  seditious,  or  the 
criminal — sometimes  whole  classes  of  men,  whose  resi- 
dence was  unsuitable  to  the  general  interests — were 
cast  adrift  to  go  where  they  chose,  probably  making  a 
general  jail  deliver}^  for  the  time  being. 

Modem  efforts  of  the  kind  are,  upon  the  whole,  more 
systematic.  A  colony  sent  for  settlement  or  for  subsists 
ence,  is  piu-ely  so.  A  military  colony  is  purely  mili- 
tary, or,  more  generally,  is  nothing  else  than  a  garrison. 
A  colony  of  criminals  is  restricted  to  the  criminals. 
In  this  case  a  new  element  characterizes  the  modem 
system,  for  the  object  is  not  merely  to  remove  the  crim- 
inal, but  to  refomi  him.  England  has  done  much  in 
this  way.  It  is  a  great  result,  that  in  Australia  there 
are  now  powerful  communities,  rich  with  the  highest 
elements  of  civilization ;  constituted  to  a  great  extent 
of  those  who  otherwise,  as  the  children  of  criminals, 
would  have  been  bom  to  wretchedness  and  depravity, 
to  cells  and  stripes  and  brandings  and  gibbets,  as  their 
inheritance. 

But  such  experiments  are  not  capable  of  indefinite 
repetition ;  space  is  wanting  for  them  in  the  world. 
Nations  are  now  called  by  the  imperious  force  of  cir- 
cumstances, or  more  properly  speaking,  by  the  decree 
of  Providence,  to  the  nobler  task  of  preventing  rather 
than  pimishing;  of  raising  society  from  the  pollution 
of  vice  rather  than  curing  or  expelling  it.    This  higher 


COLONIAL  ESTABLISHMENTS.  103 

effort,  wliicli  is  natm-al  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity, 
should  have  accompanied  it  everywhere.  A  nation  is 
responsible  for  its  inhabitants,  and  ought  to  master 
whatever  tends  to  crime  among  them.  Those  whom  it 
sends  abroad  should  be  its  citizens,  not  its  reprobates. 
It  owes  to  the  world,  that  the  average  amount  of  virtue 
in  it  accompany  its  transferred  communities,  so  that  the 
world  does  not  suffer  by  the  transferrence.  This  must 
be  the  case  when  a  race  unsuitably  placed  is,  on  account 
of  that  unsuitableness  only,  transported  to  a  location 
more  suitable. 

A  case  which  is  exceptional  in  regard  to  common 
instances,  will  be  when  the  higher  and  better  motives 
to  colonization  take  precedence  of  all  others.  Such  an 
instance  is  that  of  retiu-ning  the  negro  race  to  their  own 
land.  It  is  exceptional  in  this  respect,  that  the  transfer 
of  that  race  to  its  more  suitable  locality  is  mainly  an 
effort  of  philanthi'opic  benevolence.  Its  motives,  how- 
ever, excel  in  degree,  not  in  kind.  The  same  induce- 
ments which  at  all  times  influenced  colonizing  measm-es, 
have  had  theii*  place,  with  more  or  less  force,  in  these 
schemes.  In  deriving  support  for  them  it  has  been 
necessary  to  appeal  to  every  motive,  and  seek  assistance 
by  every  inducement. 

The  increase  of  national  prosperity,  the  promotion  of 
national  commerce,  the  relief  of  national  difficulties, 
the  ]3reservation  of  national  quiet,  have  all  been  urged 


104 


AFRICA  A^^)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG 


on  the  different  orders  of  men  appealed  to.  It  han 
been  shown  how  all  these  circumstances  would  influence 
individual  interests,  while  the  higher  Christian  and 
philanthropic  aims  to  be  fulfilled  by  these  efforts  have 
not  been  overlooked.  All  this  is  perfectly  right ;  and 
if  right  in  us,  it  is  also  right  in  others.  It  would  have 
been  satisfactory  if  in  the  two  parties,  America  and 
England,  in  respect  to  their  measures  towards  African 
establishments,  there  had  been  more  nobleness  in  their 
discussions,  less  national  jealousies  in  all  parties,  less  of 
sneering  censure  of  national  ambition,  selfishness  or 
grasping  policy,  while  both  parties  were  in  fact  making 
appeals  to  the  very  same  principles  in  human  nature, 
which  foster  national  ambition,  or  selfishness,  or  grasp- 
ing policy. 

Although  African  colonization  originated  with,  and 
has  been  sustained  wholly  by  individuals,  in  the  United 
States,  England  has  regarded  it  in  the  same  light  with 
which  this  country  has  looked  upon  her  acquisition  of 
foreign  territory. 

There  is,  however,  a  high  superiority  in  these  schemes 
of  African  colonization,  although  it  be  but  in  degree. 
The  best  and  holiest  principles  were  put  prominently 
forward,  and  men  of  corresponding  character  called 
forth  to  direct  them.  They  sought  sympathy  and  aid 
from  the  English  African  Association,  and  from  the 
Bible  and  Missionary  Societies  of  this  land.  They 


ORIGIN  OF  SIERRA  LEONE. 


105 


were  truly  eflforts  of  Christianitj,  thi'owing  its  solid  intel- 
ligence and  earnest  affections  into  action  for  the  conquest 
of  a  continent,  by  returning  the  Africans  to  their  home, 
and  making  this  conquest  a  work  of  faith  and  labor  of  love. 

The  slavery  imported  and  grafted  on  this  country  by 
foreign  political  supremacy,  when  the  country  was  help- 
less, has  been  subjected  to  a  trial  never  undergone  by 
such  an  institution  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  An 
enemy  held  dominion  where  slavery  existed,  and  while 
the  masters  were  called  upon  to  fight  for  their  own  po- 
litical independence,  there  was  opportunity  for  the 
slave  to  revolt  or  escaj)e  if  such  had  been  his  wish. 
Those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the  ties  uniting  the 
slave  to  his  master's  household,  and  the  interest  he  feels 
in  his  master's  welfare,  would  expect  that  when  a  hos- 
tile army  was  present  to  rescue  and  to  defend  them, 
the  whole  slave  population  would  rise  with  eager  fiiry 
to  avenge  their  subjection,  or  with  eager  hope  to  escape 
from  it.  But  the  historical  truth  is,  that  very  few  in- 
deed of  the  colored  men  of  the  United  States,  whether 
slaves  or  free,  joined  the  English  or  Toiy  party  in  the 
Kevolutionary  War.  Thus  the  character  impressed  on 
the  institution  frustrated  the  recorded  expectation  of 
those  who  forced  this  evil  upon  a  reluctant  people — that 
the  position  and  the  influence  of  the  negro  in  society 
would  forever*check  republican  spirit  and  keep  the 
country  in  dependence. 

5^ 


106  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

The  small  number  of  colored  persons  who  did  join 
the  English  produced  no  slight  difficulty.  That  small 
number  ought  perhapi  to  have  been  easily  amalga- 
mated somehow  or  other  with  the  vast  amount  of  the 
English  population.  That  this  did  not  happen,  and  did 
not  seem  possible,  is  perfectly  evident.  Either  color,  or 
character,  or  position,  or  something  else,  which  it  is  for 
the  English  people  to  explain,  prevented  this.  Many 
of  them  were  found  in  the  lanes  and  dens  of  vice  in 
London,  without  the  prospect  of  their  ever  amalgamat- 
ing with  the  Londoners,  and  therefore  only  combining 
incumbrance,  nuisance,  and  danger  by  their  presence 
there. 

This  condition  of  tilings,  as  is  well  known,  excited 
the  attention  and  sympathy  of  Granville  Sharpe,  and 
led  to  the  foundation  of  the  colony  of  Sierra  Leone,  as 
a  refuge  for  them. 

Great  Britain  found  herself  hampered  on  a  subsequent 
occasion  with  the  charge  of  a  few  hundreds  of  the  Ma- 
roons, or  independent  fi*ee  negroes  of  Jamaica.  It  was 
known  that  it  would  not  answer  to  intermingle  them 
with  the  slave  population  of  that  island.  Tlie  public 
good  was  found  imperiously  to  require  that  they  should 
be  removed  elsewhere.  They  afterwards  constituted 
the  most  trustworthy  portion  of  the  population  of 
Sierra  Leone.  • 

Similar  difficulties  have  pressed  with  a  manifold 


EARLY  COLONIZATION  MOVEMENTS.  107 


weight  on  society  in  tliis  country.  Jefferson,  with  other 
distinguished  statesmen,  endeavored  to  remedy  them. 
Marshall,  Clay,  Randolph,  and  others  shared  in  his 
anxieties.  A  suitable  location  was  sought  after  for  the 
settlement  of  the  free  negi'oes  in  the  lands  of  the  West. 
The  Portuguese  government  was  afterwards  sounded 
for  the  acquisition  of  some  place  in  South  America. 
But  these  schemes  were  comparatively  valueless,  for 
they  wanted  the  main  requisite, — that  Africa  itself 
should  share  in  the  undertaking. 

"When  Chiistian  benevolence  looked  abroad  upon  the 
face  of  the  world  to  examine  its  condition  and  its  wants, 
Africa  was  seen,  dark,  gloomy,  and  vast  and  hopeless, 
with  Egyptian  darkness  upon  it, — "  darkness  that 
might  be  felt," — while  Europe  guarded  and  fought  for 
it  as  a  human  cattle-fold,  to  be  plundered  with  an  ex- 
tent and  ati'ocity  of  rapine  such  as  the  world  elsewhere 
had  never  beheld.  Afi-ica,  therefore,  became  the  object 
of  deep  interest  to  the  ChTistian  philanthi'opy  of  this 
country,  and  all  things  concurred  to  bring  out  some 
great  enterprise  for  its  benefit  and  that  of  the  Afr-ican 
race  in  America. 

In  1773  slavery  was  not  only  common  in  New  Eng- 
land, but  the  slave-trade  was  extensively  carried  on  in 
Rhode  Island  and  other  northern  states.  Dr.  Hopkins 
became  convinced  of  the  injustice  of  the  traffic,  and  in 
conjunction  with  Dr.  Stiles,  afterwards  President  of 


108 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


Yale  College,  made  an  appeal  to  the  public  in  behalf 
of  some  colored  men  whom  he  was  preparing  for  an 
African  mission.  These  men  were  nearly  qualified  for 
proceeding  to  Africa  when  the  Hevolutionarj  War  frus- 
trated the  scheme,  which,  in  its  character,  was  rather 
missionaiy  than  colonial. 

Paul  Cuffy,  SL  colored  man  bom  in  Kew  Bedford, 
Massachusetts,  who  had  risen  to  the  possession  of  con- 
siderable wealth,  and  commanded  a  vessel  of  his  own, 
induced  about  forty  colored  people  to  embark  in  his 
vessel  for  Sierra  Leone,  where  they  had  every  facility 
for  a  settlement  afforded  them. 

Dr.  Thornton,  of  "Washington,  in  1783,  suggested  the 
practical  course  of  establishing  a  colony  in  Africa,  and 
obtained  in  some  of  the  New  England  States  the  con- 
sent of  a  number  of  colored  persons  to  accompany  him 
to  that  coast.  This  project  failed  for  want  of  funds. 
No  better  success  attended  an  application  of  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son, as  secretary  of  state,  directed  to  the  Sierra  Leone 
company. 

The  State  of  Yirginia,  in  legislative  session,  1800-1805, 
and  1816,  discussed  the  subject  of  colonization,  and 
contributed  greatly  to  prepare  the  public  mind  for  sub- 
sequent action  on  the  subject. 

The  Rev.  Dr.  Finley,  of  New  Jersey,  matured  a  plan 
for  the  purpose,  and  proceeded  to  Washington,  where, 
after  consultation  with  a  few  friends,  a  meeting  was 


OBJECTS  OF  COLONIZATION. 


109 


called  on  the  25th  of  December,  1816.  Henry  Clay- 
presided  ;  Andrew  Jackson,  William  H.  Crawford,  Dr. 
Finley,  and  othei's,  were  elected  vice-presidents.  The 
American  Colonization  Society  was  formed  with  the 
resolution  to  be  free,  and  christian,  and  national. 

There  was  peace  in  the  world.  Society  was  awaken- 
ing to  a  remorseful  consideration  of  the  iniquities  which 
had  been  practised  x)il  the  African  race  in  their  own 
land,  and  of  the  condition  of  its  population  in  this. 
The  gradual  emancipation  of  slaves,  as  favored  by  Jef- 
ferson and  others  in  the  early  days  of  the  republic,  was 
discussed.  But  the  objects  sought  in  the  formation  of 
the  Colonization  Society,  were  the  removal  and  benefit 
of  the  free  colored  population,  together  with  such  slaves 
as  might  have  freedom  extended  to  them  with  the  view 
of  settlement  in  Africa.  And  thus  the  work  of  form- 
ing an  African  nation  in  Africa,  with  republican  feel- 
ings, impressions  and  privileges,  and  with  Christian 
truth  and  Christian  civilization,  was  commenced. 


CHAPTER  XL 


FOUNDATION    OF    THE    AMERICAN    COLONY  EARLY  AGENTS  

MILLS,  BURGESS,  BACON,  AND  OTHERS — U.  8.  6LOOP-OF-WAR 
"  CYANE"  ARRIVAL  AT  THE  ISLAND  OF  8HERB0R0  DISPO- 
SAL OF  RECAPTURED    SLAVES   BY    THE  U.  8.  GOVERNMENT  

FEVER  SLAVES    CAPTURED  U.    8.    SCHOONER    "  SHARk"  

8HERB0R0  PARTIALLY    ABANDONED  U.  8.  SCHOONER  "  ALU- 

GATOr"  SELECTION    AND    SETTLEMENT    OF  CAPE  MESURADO 

 CAPTAIN  STOCKTON  DR.  AYRES  KINO  PETER  ARGU- 
MENTS   WITH    THE    NATIVES  CONFLICTS  DR.  AYRES  MADE 

PRISONER  KING  BOATSWAIN  COMPLETION  OF  THE  PUR- 
CHASE. 

In  November,  1819,  the  Colonization  Society  ap- 
pointed the  Rev.  Messrs.  Samuel  J.  Mills  and  Ebenezer 
Burgess  as  its  agents ;  with  directions  to  proceed,  by 
the  way  of  England,  to  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  inquiries  and  explorations  as  to  a 
suitable  location  for  a  settlement.  They  arrived  in 
Sierra  Leone  in  the  month  of  March  following,  and  vis- 
ited all  the  ports  from  thence  to  the  island  of  Sherboro. 

At  Sherboro,  about  sixty  miles  S.  S.  E.  from  Sierra 
Leone,  the  agents  foimd  a  small  colony  of  colored  peo- 
ple, settled  by  John  Kizel,  a  South  Carolina  slave,  who 
had  joined  the  English  in  the  Revolutionary  War,  and 


PIONEERS  OF  THE  COLONY. 


Ill 


at  its  close  was  taken  to  JSfova  Scotia,  from  whence  he 
sailed,  with  a  number  of  his  countrymen,  to  the  coast  of 
Africa.  Here  he  became  prosperous  in  trade,  built  a 
church,  and  was  preaching  to  his  counti-ymen.  By 
Kizel  and  his  people  the  agents  were  kindly  received. 
He  expressed  the  opinion,  that  the  gi-eater  part  of  the 
people  of  color  in  the  United  States  would  ultimately 
return  to  Africa.  "  Africa,"  said  Kizel,  "  is  the  land 
of  black  men,  and  to  Africa  they  must  and  will 
come." 

After  the  agents  had  fulfilled  theii*  duties,  they  sailed 
for  the  United  States.  Mr.  Mills  died  on  the  passage. 
In  a  public  discourse,  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Leonard  Bacon, 
of  New  Haven,  Mi*.  Mills  is  thus  alluded  to  :  "  He 
wandered  on  his  eiTands  of  mercy  from  city  to  city ; 
pleading  now  with  the  patriot,  for  a  countiy  growing  up 
to  an  immensity  of  power  ;  and  now  with  the  Christian, 
for  a  world  lying  in  wickedness.  He  explored  in  per- 
son the  devastations  of  the  West,  and  in  person  he  stirred 
up  to  enterprise  and  to  efibrt  the  churches  of  the  East. 
He  lived  for  India  and  Hawaii,  and  died  in  the  sei-vice 
of  Africa."  Mr.  Bm-gess  gave  so  satisfactory  a  report 
of  his  mission,  that  the  society  was  encom*aged  to  pro- 
ceed in  its  enterprise. 

The  political  friends  of  colonization,  being  desirous 
of  affording  aid  to  the  incipient  efforts  of  the  society, 
accomplished  their  object  through  Wm.  H.  Crawford, 


112  AFRICA  ANT)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


one  of  the  vice-presidents,  who  proposed  to  the  govern- 
ment, that  recaptured  slaves  should  be  sent  in  charge  of 
an  agent  to  the  colonies  in  Africa.  He  called  the  at- 
tention of  the  government  to  a  number  of  slaves  who 
had  been  received  in  the  state  of  Georgia,  subsequently 
to  the  law  of  Congress,  in  1807,  prohibiting  the  slave- 
trade.  These  slaves  were  to  have  been  sold  in  payment 
of  expenses  incurred  in  consequence  of  their  seizure 
and  detention  by  the  state  authorities.  The  Coloniza- 
tion Society  proposed  to  take  them  in  charge,  and  re- 
store them  to  Africa,  provided  the  government  would 
furnish  an  agent  for  the  purpose. 

Agreeably  to  the  views  of  the  Colonization  Society, 
and  to  guard  against  an  occurrence  of  a  character  sim- 
ilar to  that  in  Georgia,  Congress  passed  an  act,  on  the 
3d  of  March,  1S19,  by  which  the  President  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  was  authorized  to  restore  to  their  own  coun- 
try, any  Africans  captured  from  American  or  foreign 
vessels  attempting  to  introduce  them  into  the  United 
States  in  violation  of  law  ;  and  to  provide,  by  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  suitable  agency  on  the  African  coast,  for 
their  reception,  subsistence  and  comfort,  until  they 
could  return  to  their  relatives,  or  derive  support  from 
their  own  exertions.  Thus  the  government  became  in- 
directly connected  with  the  society. 

It  was  detei-mined  to  make  the  site  of  the  govern- 
ment agency  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  that  of  the  colonial 


SAILING  OF  EMIGRANTS. 


113 


agency  also ;  and  to  incoi-porate  into  the  settlement  all 
the  blacks  delivered  by  onr  men-of-war  to  the  govern- 
ment agent,  as  soon  as  the  requisite  aiTangements 
should  be  completed. 

The  Rev.  Samuel  Bacon  received  the  appointment  of 
both  government  and  colonial  agent,  having  associated 
with  him  John  P.  Bankson  and  Dr.  Samuel  A..  Crozer, 
the  society's  agents ;  and  with  eighty  emigrants,  sailed 
on  the  6th  of  February,  1820,  for  the  coast  of  Africa. 
The  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  Cyane,  also  bound  to  the  coast, 
under  orders  from  the  government,  accompanied  the 
emigrant  vessel,  but  parted  company  after  being  a  few 
days  at  sea.  The  vessels  met  at  Sierra  Leone,  whence 
they  proceeded  to  the  island  of  Sherboro. 

The  confidence  of  the  new  agents  in  Kizel  was 
greatly  impaired  by  finding  that  he  had  given  impres- 
sions of  the  place  where  he  resided,  which  were  much 
too  favorable.  The  fever  made  its  appearance  among 
the  people,  who  were  loud  in  their  complaints  of  every 
thing,  and  their  conduct  was  any  thing  but  commend- 
able. Many  were  detected  in  petty  thefts,  falsehoods 
and  mischiefs  of  a  disgraceful  nature.  About  twenty 
or  twenty-five  of  the  emigrants  died.  The  remainder 
survived  the  acclimating  fever,  and  in  a  few  weeks  re- 
gained their  health.  Mr.  Bacon  himself  fell  a  victim  to 
it ;  but  to  the  last  his  confidence  in  the  ultimate  success 
of  African  colonization  was  unabated.    He  remarked 


114 


AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


tliat  he  had  seen  ninety-five  native  Africans  landed 
together  in  America,  who,  the  first  year,  were  as  sickly 
as  these.  And  regarding  himself,  he  said :  "  I  came 
here  to  die  ;  and  any  tiling  better  than  death,  is  better 
than  I  expected."  Lieutenant  Townsend,  one  of  the 
officers  of  the  Cyane,  also  died  of  the  fever.  After  this 
disastrous  attempt  at  forming  a  settlement,  Sherboro 
was  partially  abandoned,  and  several  of  the  emigrants 
were  removed  to  Sierra  Leone. 

Had  timid  counsels  prevailed,  the  cause  of  coloniza- 
tion would  have  been  no  longer  prosecuted.  But 
the  societ^^  detemiined  to  persevere,  trusting  that 
experience  and  the  choice  of  a  more  salubrious 
situation  would  guard  against  a  repetition  of  these 
disasters. 

The  L^.  S.  sloops-of-war  Cyane  and  John  Adams  in 
cruising  off  the  coast  captured  five  &lavei*s,  which  were 
sent  to  the  United  States  for  adjudication. 

In  the  year  following  Messrs.  Winn  and  Bacon 
(brother  of  the  deceased  agent)  on  the  part  of  the  gov- 
ernment, and  Messrs.  Andrews  and  Wiltberger  by  the 
society,  were  appointed  agents,  and  proceeded  to  Sierra 
Leone,  with  foi-ty  effective  emigrants  to  recruit  the 
party  sent  out  the  preceding  year.  Li  a  personal  inter- 
viQW  with  Mr.  Wiltberger,  and  from  some  notes  com- 
mimicated  by  him,  the  author  has  derived  much  inter- 
esting and  reliable  information  relating  to  the  colony 


SELECTION  OF  CAPE  MESURADO. 


115 


during  his  agency,  extending  to  the  purchase  and  set- 
tlement of  Liberia. 

The  island  of  Sherboro  was  wholly  abandoned,  and 
the  remaining  emigrants  removed  to  Sierra  Leone. 

Li  1822,  Dr.  Ayres  was  a^^pointed  colonial  physician 
and  agent,  and  proceeded  in  the  U.  S.  schooner  Shark 
to  Sierra  Leone.  Soon  afterwards  the  U.  S.  schooner 
Alligator  arrived  with  orders  from  the  government  to 
co-operate  with  the  agents  of  the  society  at  Sierra  Le- 
one. Captain  Stockton,  her  commander,  with  Dr. 
Ayres  and  seven  of  the  emigrants,  proceeded  on  a 
cruise  of  exploration  down  the  coast,  and  on  the  12th 
of  December  anchored  off  Cape  Mesm-ado,  in  lat.  6*^  19' 
N.,  and  long.  lO'^  48'  W. 

"  That  is  the  spot  we  ought  to  have,"  said  Captain 
Stockton,  pointing  to  the  high  bluff  of  the  cape  ;  "  that 
should  be  the  site  of  our  colony.  'No  finer  spot  on  the 
coast."    "  And  we  must  have  it,"  added  Dr.  Ayi-es. 

They  landed  without  arms,  to  prove  their  peaceful 
intentions,  and  sent  an  express  to  King  Peter  for  negoti- 
ations. The  natives  collected  in  large  bodies,  until  the 
captain  and  agent  were  surrounded  without  the  means 
of  defence,  except  a  demijohn  of  whiskey  and  some 
tobacco,  which  convinced  the  natives  that  no  hostility 
was  then  intended. 

King  Peter  at  length  appeared,  and  a  long  palaver 
took  place,  when  the  agent  informed  him  that  their 


116  AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

object  was  to  purchase  the  cape  and  islands  at  the 
mouth  of  tlie  river.  He  strongly  objected  to  paiting 
with  the  cape,  saying,  "  If  any  white  man  settle  there, 
King  Peter  would  die,  and  his  woman  cry  a  plenty." 
The  agents  represented  to  him  the  great  advantages  in 
trade,  which  the  proposed  settlement  would  afford  to 
his  people.  After  receiving  a  vague  promise  from  the 
king  that  he  would  let  them  have  the  land,  the  palaver 
broke  up. 

On  the  14th  instant  the  palaver  was  renewed  at  the 
residence  of  the  king,  whither,  as  a  measure  of  the  last 
resort.  Captain  Stockton  and  the  agent  had  determined 
to  proceed.  The  first  word  the  king  said  was,  "  What 
you  want  that  land  for  ?"  This  was  again  explained  to 
him.  One  of  the  men  present  accused  them  of  taking 
away  the  King  of  Bassa's  son  and  killing  him ;  another 
of  being  those  who  had  quan-elled  with  the  Sherboro 
people.  A  mulatto  fellow  also  presented  himself  to 
Captain  Stockton,  and  charged  him  with  the  capture  of 
a  slave-vessel  in  which  he  had  served  as  a  seaman. 
Tlie  prospects  now  looked  very  gloomy,  as  here  were 
two  men  in  the  midst  of  a  nation  exasperated  against 
them.  But  by  mixing  a  little  flatteiy  with  threatening. 
Captain  Stockton  regained  his  advantage  in  the  discus- 
sion, lie  explained  his  connection  with  the  circum- 
stances, and  complained  of  their  constant  vacillation  of 
purpose  in  reference  to  the  lands.    The  old  king  was  at 


CESSION  OF  TERRITORY. 


117 


length  pacified,  and  promised  to  call  some  more  kings, 
and  have  a  meeting  the  following  day  for  the  pui-pose 
of  ceding  the  lands. 

Several  palavers  of  a  more  amicable  nature  were  af- 
terwards held,  and  the  kings  at  last  consented  to  cede 
a  ti-act  of  land,  receiving  as  a  compensation  goods  to 
the  value  of  about  three  hundred  dollars.  The  deed 
bears  on  it  the  marks  for  signatures  of  King  Peter,  King 
George,  King  Zoda,  King  Long  Peter,  King  Governor, 
King  Jimmy,  and  the  signatures  of  Captain  Robert  F. 
Stockton  and  Eli  Ayres,  M.  D. 

The  tract  ceded  included  Cape  Mesurado  and  the 
lands  foraiing  nearly  a  peninsula  between  the  Mesm-a- 
do  and  Junk  rivei'S — about  thirty-six  miles  along  the 
sea-shore,  with  an  average  breadth  of  about  two  miles. 

Captain  Stockton  then  left  the  coast  with  the  Alliga- 
tor, placing  Lieutenant  Hunter  in  command  of  a 
schooner,  who,  with  Dr.  Ayres  and  the  men,  proceeded 
to  Sierra  Leone,  and  brought  from  thence  all  the  work- 
ing men  to  Cape  Mesurado.  They  disembarked  on  the 
smaller  of  the  two  islands  amidst  the  menaces  of  the 
natives. 

It-  was  ascertained  on  their  arrival  that  King  Peter 
had  been  denounced  by  many  of  the  kings  for  having 
sold  the  land  to  a  people  who  would  interfere  with  the 
slave-trade,  and  were  hostile  to  their  old  customs.  The 
king  was  threatened  with  the  loss  of  his  head  ;  and  it 


118  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

was  decreed  that  the  new  people  should  be  expelled 
from  the  country.  Dr.  Ayres  at  length  succeeded  in 
checking  the  opposition  of  the  kings,  and  restored  ap- 
parent tranquillity. 

The  island  on  which  the  colonists  first  established 
themselves,  was  named  Perseverance.  It  was  destitute 
of  wood  and  water,  affording  no  shelter  except  the  de- 
cayed thatch  of  a  few  small  huts.  Thus  exposed  in  an 
insalubrious  situation,  several  of  the  people  were  at- 
tacked with  intermittent  fever.  By  an  arrangement 
with  King  George,  who  claimed  authority  over  a  part 
of  the  northern  district  of  the  peninsula  of  Mesurado, 
the  colonists,  on  their  recovery,  were  permitted  to  cross 
the  river,  where  they  cleared  the  land,  and  erected  a 
number  of  comparatively  comfortable  buildings  ;  when, 
m  the  temporary  absence  of  Dr.  Ayres,  a  circumstance 
occurred  which  threatened  the  extinction  of  the  colony. 

A  small  slaver,  prize  to  an  English  cruiser,  bound  to 
Sierra  Leone,  ran  into  the  port  for  water.  During  the 
night  she  parted  her  cable,  and  drifted  on  shore,  near 
King  George's  Town,  not  far  from  Perseverance  Island. 
Under  a  prescriptive  right,  when  a  vessel  was  wrecked, 
the  natives  claimed  her,  and  accordingly  proceeded  to 
take  possession.  Tlie  English  prize-oflScer  resisted,  and 
after  one  or  two  shots  the  assailants  hastily  reti'eated. 
The  officer  learning  that  another  attack  was  meditated, 
sent  to  the  colony  for  aid.    One  of  the  colonists — tern 


"  ENTANGLING  ALLIANCES.' 


119 


porarilj  in  charge  during  the  absence  of  the  agents  to 
bring  the  women  and  children  from  Sierra  Leone — re- 
j  ardless  of  the  admonition  to  avoid  "  entangling  alli- 
iinces,"  and  approving  "  the  docti'ine  of  intervention," 
promptly  afforded  assistance.  The  second  attack  vras 
made,  bnt  the  colonists  and  prize-crew,  with  the  help  of 
one  or  two  ronnds  of  grape  and  cannister  from  a  brass 
field-piece  on  the  island,  which  was  brought  to  bear  on 
the  assailants,  soon  scattered  them,  with  the  loss  of  two 
kiUed  and  several  wounded.  On  the  following  day, 
they  renewed  theii-  assualt  with  a  gi-eater  force,  and 
were  again  repulsed,  but  an  English  sailor  and  one  col- 
onist were  killed. 

This  interference  on  the  part  of  the  colonists,  in  be- 
half of  the  slave-prize,  gi-eatly  exasperated  the  natives ; 
not  merely  from  the  loss  of  their  men  and  the  vessel, 
but  from  the  apprehension  that  their  most  valued  priv- 
ileges were  about  being  invaded ;  and  especially  that 
the  slave-trade,  on  which  they  depended  for  their  gains 
and  supplies,  would  be  desti-oyed.  The  natives,  there- 
fore, detennined  forthwith  to  extirpate  the  colony  while 
in  its  feeble  and  defenceless  state. 

In  the  mean  time.  Dr.  Ayi-es,  having  retm-ned,  found 
the  colonists  confined  to  the  island ;  and  as  the  stores 
had  become  nearly  exhausted,  and  the  rainy  season  was 
about  setting  in — superadded  to  the  vindictive  feelings 
of  the  natives  towards  the  people — the  agents  proposed 


120 


AFRICA  A2sD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


to  re-embark  for  Sierra  Leone,  and  abandon  the  new 
settlement.  Mr.  "Wiltberger  strenuougly  opposed  the 
agents'  proposal,  and,  after  ascertaining  that  the  colo- 
nists were  disposed  to  remain  at  Mesurado,  Dr.  Avres 
cheerfully  assented. 

The  kings  then  adopted  the  deceitful  policy  of  pre- 
tending to  be  conciliated,  and  inveigled  Dr.  Ayres  into 
their  power.  He  became  their  prisoner,  and  in  that 
condition  appeared  to  consent  to  take  back  the  portion 
of  goods  which  had  been  received  towards  the  payment 
of  the  land,  but  evaded  their  peremptory  order  for  the 
immediate  removal  of  the  people,  by  showing  its  im- 
possibility, on  account  of  the  want  of  a  vessel  for  the 
purpose.  They  finally  gave  permission  that  they  might 
remain,  until  he  should  have  made  arrangements  to 
leave  the  country.  In  this  dilemma,  Ba  Caia,  a  friendly 
king,  at  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Ayres,  appealed  to  King 
Boatswain,*  whose  power  the  maritime  tribes  well  un- 


*  Boatswain  was  a  native  of  Shebar.  In  his  youth,  he  served  in  8<xno 
menial  capacity  on  board  of  an  English  merchant  vessel,  where  he  ac- 
quired the  name  which  he  still  retains.  His  personal  qualifications 
were  of  the  most  commanding  description.  To  a  stature  approaching 
seven  feet  in  height,  perfectly  erect,  muscular  and  finely  proportioned  ; 
a  countenance  noble,  intelligent  and  full  of  animation,  he  united  great 
comprehension  and  activity  of  mind ;  and,  what  was  still  more  impos- 
ing, a  savage  loftiness,  and  even  grandeur  of  sentiment — forming  alto- 
gether an  assemblage  of  qualities  obviously  disproportioned  to  the  no 
tual  sphere  of  his  ambition.  He  was  prodigal  of  every  thing  eicej  • 
the  means  of  increasing  the  terror  of  hb  name.    "  I  give  you  a  bul- 


KINK  BOATSWAIN'S  ARBITRATION. 


121 


derstood,  and  with  whom  he  was  in  alliance.  King 
Boatswain  came  down  to  the  coast,  and  by  a  direct  ex- 
ertion of  his  authority,  convoked  the  hostile  kings.  He 
also  sent  for  the  agents  and  principal  settlers  to  appear 
before  him,  and  explain  the  nature  of  their  claims,  and 
present  their  grievances.  The  respective  allegations  of 
the  parties  were  heard.  King  Boatswain  decided  in 
favor  of  the  colonists.  He  said  that  the  bargain  had 
been  fair  on  both  sides,  and  that  he  saw  no  grounds  for 
rescinding  the  contract.  Turning  then  to  King  Peter, 
he  laconically  remarked  :  "  Having  sold  your  country^ 
and  accepted  payment,  you  must  take  the  consequen- 
ces. .  .  .  Let  the  Americans  have  their  lands  imme- 
diately. Whoever  is  not  satisfied  with  my  decision,  let 
him  tell  me  so."  Then  turning  to  the  agents :  "  I 
promise  you  protection.  If  these  people  give  you  fur- 
ther disturbance,  send  for  me ;  and  I  swear,  if  they 
oblige  me  to  come  again  to  quiet  them,  I  will  do  it  by 
taking  their  heads  from  their  shoulders,  as  I  did  old 
King  George's,  on  my  last  visit  to  the  coast  to  settle 
disputes." 

In  this  decision  both  parties  acquiesced,  whatever 

lock,"  said  he  to  an  agent  of  the  society,  "not  to  be  considered  as 
Boatswain's  present,  but  for  your  breakfast."  To  his  friend  Ba  Caia,  he 
once  sent :  "  King  Boatswain  is  your  friend ;  he  therefore  advises  you 
to  lose  not  a  moment  in  providing  yourself  plenty  of  powder  and  ball ; 
or,  in  three  days  (the  least  possible  time  to  make  the  journey),  let  me 
see  my  fugitive  woman  again." 


122 


AFRICA  AXD  THK  AMERICAN'  FLAG. 


their  opinion  iniglit  have  been  as  to  its  equity.  The 
settlers  immediately  resumed  their  labors  on  the  grounds 
near  the  Cape. 

The  Dey  tribe  i,K^"o  i^etci't?)  saw  that  a  dangerous 
enemy  had  been  intrutlnccJ  among  them.  King  Peter, 
with  whom  we  must  have  sympathy,  was  impeached, 
and  brought  to  trial  on  a  charge  of  having  betrayed  the 
interests  of  his  people,  and  sold  part  of  the  country  to 
strangers.  The  accusation  was  proven ;  and,  for  a  time, 
there  was  reason  to  believe  that  lie  would  be  executed 
for  treason. 

Soon  after  King  Boatswain  had  retimied  to  his  coun- 
try, the  colony  was  again  threatened.  The  agent  called 
another  council  of  kings ;  and  after  some  opposition  to 
his  claim  for  the  disputed  territory,  the  whole  assembly 
— amounting  to  seventeen  kings,  and  thirty-four  half- 
kings — assented  to  the  settlement ;  and  on  the  2Sth  of 
April,  1822,  formal  possession  was  taken  of  Cape  Mes- 
urado. 

Dr.  Ayres  and  Mr.  "Wiltberger  now  returned  to  the 
United  States,  the  former  to  iu*ge  the  wants  of  the 
colony,  and  the  latter  from  ill  health.  Before  they  left, 
Elijah  Johnson,  of  Kew  York,  one  of  the  colonists,  who 
had  on  various  occasions  distinguished  himself,  was 
appointed  to  superintend  the  colony  during  their 
absence. 


CHAPTEK  XII. 


ASHMUN  NECESSITY  OF  DEFENCE  FORTIFICATIONS  ASSAULTS 

 ARRIVAL  OF  MAJOR  LAING  CONDITION  OF  THE  COLONISTS 

 SLOOPS-OF-WAR    "  CYANe"    AND    "  JOHN    ADAMs" — KING 

BOATSWAIN  AS  A   SLAVER  MISCONDUCT  OF  THE  EMIGRANTS 

 DISINTERESTEDNESS   OF    ASHMUN  U.   S.   SCHOONER  "POR- 

POISe"  CAPTAIN  SKINNER  REV.  R.  R.  GURLEY  PURCHASE 

OF  TERRITORY  ON  THE  ST.  PAUL's  RIVER  ATTACK  ON  TRADE- 
town  piracies  u.  s.  schooner  "  shark*'  sloop-of-war 

"  Ontario" — death  of  ashmun — character  by  rev.  dr. 

BACON. 

The  acting  agent  of  the  colony  judiciously  managed 
its  affairs  until  the  amval  of  Mr.  Ashmun  and  his  wife, 
with  thirty-seven  emigrants,  part  of  whom  were  re- 
captured slaves,  who  had  been  delivered  over  to  the 
Colonization  Society  by  the  Marshal  of  Georgia,  under 
the  Act  of  Congress  already  noticed.  Mr.  Ashmun 
held  the  appointments  of  government  and  society's 
agent.  He  took  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  colony. 
The  entire  population  did  not  exceed  one  hundred  and 
thirty,  of  whom  thirty  only  were  capable  of  bearing 
arms.  The  settlement  had  no  adequate  means  of  de- 
fence. He  found  no  documents  defining  the  limits  of 
the  purchased  territor}^ — explaining  the  state  of  the 


124  AFRICA  AND  TUE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

negotiations  with  the  natives,  or  throwing  light  on  tlie 
duties  of  the  agency. 

It  was  now  perceived  that  means,  as  well  as  an 
organized  system  of  defence  were  to  be  originated, 
while  the  materials  and  artificers  for  such  purposes 
were  wanting.  One  brass  field-piece,  five  indifierent 
iron  guns  and  a  nmnber  of  muskets,  ill-supplied  with 
ammmiition,  comprised  all  the  means  for  defence.  These 
were  brought  from  the  island  and  mounted,  and  such 
fortifications  as  the  ability  and  resources  of  the  agent 
could  construct  were  erected.  Public  stores  and  more 
comfortable  houses  were  also  raised.  The  settlement, 
except  on  the  side  towards  the  river,  was  closely  envi- 
roned with  the  heavy  forest.  This  gave  an  enemy  an 
important  advantage.  The  land  around  was,  conse- 
quently, cleared  up  with  all  possible  dispatch. 

Mr.  Ashmun  experienced  an  attack  of  fever.  On 
the  following  day  his  wife  was  seized,  and  soon  after- 
wards died :  she  thus  closed  a  life  of  exemplary  faith 
and  devotedness. 

It  has  been  observed,  that  the  dread  of  provoking 
King  Boatswain's  resentment,  led  the  hostile  kings  to 
assume  a  show  of  friendship ;  but  the  disguise  could 
not  conceal  their  intentions.  The  chiefs  attributed  the 
departure  of  the  agents  to  a  want  of  spirit,  and  dread 
of  their  power.  Tlie  arrival  of  Mr.  Ashmun  had  de- 
layed the  execution  of  their  pm*pose,  of  a  general 


FIRST  CONFLICT  WITH  THE  NATIVES.  125 

attack  on  the  colony ;  but  when  the  vessel  sailed,  early 
in  October,  which  had  brought  out  the  agent  and 
emigrants,  a  council  of  kings  determined  upon  instant 
hostilities.  King  George  had  abandoned  his  town 
early  in  September,  leaving  the  Cape  in  possession  of 
the  colonists.  This  had  been  regarded  by  the  natives 
as  the  first  step  of  colonial  encroachments ;  if  left  alone 
for  a  few  years,  they  would  master  the  whole  country. 
The  natives  refused,  throughout  the  consultation,  to 
receive  any  pacific  proposals  from  the  colony. 

On  the  7tli  of  E"ovember,  Mr.  Ashmun,  although 
still  suffering  from  the  eflfects  of  fever,  examined  and 
strengthened  the  defences.  Picket  guards  were  posted 
during  the  night,  and  every  preparation  made  for  a 
vigorous  defence.  On  the  11th  the  attack  was  com- 
menced by  a  force  of  eight  hundred  warriors.  The 
picket,  contrary  to  orders,  had  left  their  station  in 
advance  of  the  weakest  point  of  defence;  the  native 
force,  already  in  motion,  followed  close  in  the  rear  of 
the  picket,  and  as  soon  as  the  latter  had  joined  the 
detachment  of  ten  men  stationed  at  the  gun,  the 
enemy,  presenting  a  front,  opened  their  fire,  and  nished 
forward  to  seize  the  post ;  several  fell,  and  off  went  the 
others,  leaving  the  gun  undischarged.  This  threw  the 
small  reserve  in  the  centre  into  confusion,  and  had  the 
enemy  followed  up  their  advantage,  victory  was  cer- 
tain ;  but  such  was  their  avidity  for  plunder,  that  they 


126  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

fell  upon  the  booty  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  This 
disordered  the  main  body.  Mr.  Ashmun,  who  was  too 
ill  to  move  at  any  distance,  was  thus  enabled,  by  the 
assistance  of  one  of  the  colonists,  Rev.  Lot  Carey,  to 
rally  the  broken  forces  of  the  settlers.  The  brass  field- 
piece  was  now  brought  to  bear,  and  being  well  served, 
did  good  execution.  A  few  men,  commanded  by  Elijah 
Johnson,  passed  round  on  the  enemy's  flank,  which 
increased  their  consternation,  and  soon  after  the  front 
of  the  enemy  began  to  recoil.  The  colonists  now  re- 
gained the  post  which  had  at  first  been  seized,  and 
instantly  brought  the  long-nine  to  bear  upon  the  mass 
of  the  enemy;  eight  hundred  men  were  in  a  solid  body, 
and  every  shot  literally  spent  itself  iamong  them.  A 
savage  yell  was  raised  by  the  enemy,  and  the  colonists 
were  victors. 

In  this  assault  the  colonists  (who  nmnbered  thirt}'- 
five)  had  fifteen  killed  and  wounded.  It  is  impossible 
to  estimate  the  loss  of  the  natives,  which  must  have 
been  very  great.  An  earnest  but  ineffectual  effort  was 
made  by  the  agent  to  fonn  with  the  kings  a  treaty  of 
peace. 

Notwithstanding  this  disastrous  result,  the  natives  deter- 
mined upon  another  attack.  Tliey  collected  auxiliaries 
from  all  the  neighboring  ti-ibes  who  could  be  induced 
to  join  them.  The  colonists,  on  the  other  hand,  under 
Ashmun,  the  agent,  were  busily  engaged  in  foi'tifj'ing 


DEFEAT  OF  THE  NATIVES. 


127 


themselves  for  tlie  decisive  battle,  upon  which  the  fate 
of  the  settlement  was  suspended.  On  the  2d  of  Decem- 
ber the  enemy  attacked  simidtaneously  the  three  sides 
of  the  fortifications.  The  colonists  received  them  with 
that  bravery  and  deteimination  which  the  danger  of 
total  destruction  in  case  of  defeat  was  calculated  to  in- 
spire. The  main  body  of  the  enemy  being  exposed  to 
a  galling  fire  from  the  battery,  both  in  front  and  flank, 
and  the  assault  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  town  having 
been  repulsed,  a  general  reti-eat  immediately  followed, 
and  the  colonists  were  again  victorious. 

Mr.  Ashmun  received  three  musket-balls  through  his 
clothes ;  thi-ee  of  the  men  stationed  at  one  of  the 
guns  were  dangerously  wounded ;  and  not  three  roimds 
of  armnunition  remained  after  the  action.  Had  a  third 
attack  been  made,  the  colony  must  have  been  conquered ; 
or  had  the  first  attack  occm-red  before  the  arrival  of 
Mr.  Ashmun,  it  would  have  been  extii-pated.  But  its 
foundations  were  now  secured  by  a  firm  and  lasting 
peace. 

The  British  colonial  schooner  Prince  Regent,  with  a 
prize  crew  in  charge  of  Midshipman  Gordon,  R.N"., 
opportunely  arrived,  with  Major  Laing,  the  African 
traveller,  on  board,  by  whose  influence  the  kings,  being 
tired  of  the  war,  signed  a  truce,  agreeing  to  submit  all 
their  differences  with  the  colony  to  the  Governor  of 
Sierra  Leone.    Midshipman  Gordon  and  his  crew  vol- 


128  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

unteered  to  assist  the  colonists,  and  see  that  the  truce 
was  preserved  inviolate.  The  Prince  Regent  furnished 
a  liberal  supply  of  ammunition.  Four  weeks  after  sail- 
ing, Midshipman  Gordon  and  eight  of  his  men  had 
fallen  victims  to  the  malaria  of  this  climate,  so  inimi- 
cal to  the  constitution  of  white  men. 

At  tkis  period,  1823,  the  colonists  were  in  a  sad  con- 
dition :  their  provisions  were  nearly  consumed,  trade 
exhausted,  lands  untilled,  houses  but  partially  covered ; 
the  rainy  season  was  approaching,  and  the  people,  in 
many  instances,  had  become  indolent  and  improvident. 
Captain  Spence,  of  the  Cyane,  arrived  at  the  Cape,  and 
proceeded  to  adopt  efficient  measures  for  the  benefit  of 
the  colony.  He  fitted  out  the  schooner  Augusta,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant  Dashiell,  with  orders  to 
cruise  near  the  settlement  and  render  it  aid.  Dr.  Dix, 
the  surgeon  of  the  Cyane,  died  of  the  fever.  Upon  her 
leaving  the  coast,  Eichard  Seaton,  the  captain's  clerk, 
volunteered  to  remain  as  an  assistant  to  Mr.  Ashmun. 
In  the  course  of  two  or  three  months  he  fell  a  victim  to 
the  fever,  and  his  death  was  soon  followed  by  that  of 
Lieutenant  Dashiell,  of  the  Augusta.  On  the  home- 
ward-boimd  passage  of  the  Cyane  forty  of  the  crew 
died  from  the  eftects  of  the  African  climate,  superadded 
to  those  of  the  climate  of  the  "West  Lidies,  where  she 
had  been  cruising  previously  to  proceeding  to  the  Afri- 
can coast. 


ATROCITIES  OF  KING  BOATSWAIN.  129 


The  slave-trade  had  received  no  effectual  check. 
King  Boatswain,  although  one  of  the  best  friends  of  the 
colony,  partook  in  no  degree  of  the  views  for  which  it 
had  been  established,  and  at  this  time  committed  an 
act  of  great  atrocity,  in  making  an  attack  at  m'ght  upon 
an  inoffensive  tribe,  murdering  all  the  adults  and  in- 
fants, and  seizing  upon  the  boys  and  girls,  in  order  to 
fulfil  his  engagements  with  a  French  slaver. 

In  the  month  of  May,  Dr.  Ayres  brought  a  reinforce- 
ment of  sixty  emigrants.  He  announced  his  appoint- 
ment as  the  government  and  colonial  agent.  Mr.  Ash- 
mun  was  at  the  same  time  informed  that  a  bill  drawn 
by  him  to  defray  expenses  for  the  necessities  of  the 
colony  had  been  dishonored,  and  that  the  board  of  di- 
rectors of  the  society  had  withdrawn  from  him  all  au- 
thority except  as  sub-agent.  Yery  soon  after  this.  Dr. 
Ayi-es  was  obliged  on  account  of  ill  health  again  to 
leave  for  the  United  States.  Had  Mr.  Ashmun  acted 
under  the  impressions  of  indignation  naturally  flowing 
from  such  treatment,  the  colony  would  have  been  ut- 
terly extinguished.  But  he  was  of  nobler  spirit  than  to 
yield  to  any  such  motive,  and  therefore  resolved  to  re- 
main in  this  helpless  and  disorganized  community, 
sending  home  at  the  same  time  to  the  board  a  proposal 
that  he  should  receive  from  them  less  than  one-third 
the  sum  which  a  man  of  ordinary  diligence  might  in 
his  position  gain  by  traffic.    This  proposal  he  had 

6* 


130  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


made  from  the  most  honorable  sense  of  duty,  in  order 
in  fact  that  the  people  for  whom  he  had  done  and  suf- 
fered so  much  should  not  utterly  perish.  And  yet  he 
had  the  mortification  to  learn  afterwards  that  the  di- 
rectors, influenced  by  slanderous  reports  to  the  detri- 
ment of  his  character,  had  refused  to  sanction  this  pro- 
posal. 

At  this  period  a  number  even  of  the  principal  colo- 
nists became  disaffected,  in  consequence  of  the  regula- 
tions of  the  board,  requiring  that  any  emigrant  who  re- 
ceived rations  from  the  public  store,  should  contribute 
two  days'  labor  in  a  week  on  the  public  works.  About 
twelve  of  the  colonists  not  only  refused  work  and  threw 
off  all  restraint,  but  exerted  their  influence  to  induce 
others  to  follow  their  example.  Soon  after  this  occur- 
rence Mr.  Ashmun  published  the  following  notice  : 

"  Tliere  are  in  the  colony  more  than  a  dozen  healthy 
persons  who  will  receive  no  more  provisions  out  of  the 
public  store  until  they  eani  them."  On  the  19th  of 
December  he  directed  the  rations  of  the  offending  party 
to  be  stopped.  This  led  to  a  riotous  assembly  at  the 
agent's  house,  which  endeavored  by  denunciations  to 
drive  him  from  his  purpose  ;  but  finding  him  inflexible, 
they  then  proceeded  to  the  public  store,  where  the  com- 
missary was  issuing  rations  to  the  colonists,  and  each 
one  seized  a  portion  of  the  provisions  and  hastened  to 
their  homes. 


ACCUSATIONS  AGAIXST  ASHMUN.  131 


The  same  clay  Mr.  Aslimim  directed  a  circular  to 
the  people,  in  which  he  strongly  appealed  to  their  pa- 
triotism and  conscience.  This  measure  induced  the 
disaffected  to  return  to  their  duty.  The  leader  of  the 
sedition  acknowledged  his  eiTor,  and  by  his  subsequent 
good  conduct  fully  redeemed  his  character. 

A  faithful  history  of  the  colony  would  furnish,  at  in- 
tervals, a  dark  shady  as  well  as  a  sunny  side.  The 
friends  of  the  cause  are  prone  to  exaggerate  its  success, 
while  its  enemies  regard  the  colored  race,  judging  them 
in  their  condition  when  in  contact  with  the  whites,  to 
be  incapable  of  developing  the  mind  and  character, 
which,  under  their  own  independent  government,  is 
now  manifested. 

Early  in  Februaiy,  1824,  a  vessel  arrived,  after  a 
short  passage,  with  one  hundred  and  five  emigi-ants  in 
good  condition. 

Mr.  Ashmun  had  heard  nothing  from  the  board  for 
some  time  after  the  departm-e  of  Dr.  Ayi*es ;  and  find- 
ing his  health  beginning  to  fail,  and  that  his  services 
had  been  received  with  calumny  instead  of  approba- 
tion, he  appKed  to  be  relieved  from  the  service  of  the 
board.  After  making  this  application,  he  appointed 
Elijah  Johnson  to  act  as  agent  dm-ing  his  absence,  and 
proceeded  to  the  Cape  Yerde  Islands  in  the  hope  of 
recruiting  his  health,  and  finding  some  government  ves- 
sel at  that  place. 


132  AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

The  n&yj  department,  on  application  by  the  society, 
ordered  the  U.  S.  schooner  Porpoise,  Lieutenant  Com- 
mandant Skinner,  with  the  Kev.  R.  E.  Gurley,  to  pro- 
ceed to  the  coast  of  Africa.  These  gentlemen  were 
appointed  by  the  govemmeut  and  society  to  examine 
into  the  affairs  of  the  colony,  and  into  the  reports  in 
circulation  prejudicial  to  the  agent.  The  Porpoise 
reached  the  Cape  Yerde  Islands  soon  after  Mr.  Ash- 
mun's  arrival  there ;  and  he  returned  with  the  com- 
missionei"S  to  the  colony.  As  the  result  of  communi- 
cations received  by  the  board  from  the  commissioners, 
Messrs.  Skinner  and  Gurley,  a  resolution  was  passed, 
completely  exonerating  Mr.  Ashmun  from  the  calum- 
nious charges  which  had  been  made  against  him,  and 
expressing  their  cordial  approbation  of  his  conduct. 

The  commissioners,  on  the  conclusion  of  their  inves- 
tigation, deeply  impressed  with  the  zeal  and  ability  of 
Mr.  Ashmim,  left  him  in  charge  of  the  colony  as  for- 
merly. But  previously  to  the  reception  of  the  report  of 
the  commissioners,  and  of  the  resolution  above  noticed, 
that  body  had  appointed  Dr.  John  W.  Peaco,  already 
selected  as  the  agent  of  the  government,  to  be  their 
agent  also.  On  the  25th  of  April,  after  their  acquittal 
of  Mr.  Ashmim,  they  modified  this  resolution  by  reap- 
pointing him  colonial  agent,  requesting  and  authorizing 
Dr.  Peaco  to  give  assistance  and  support  to  Mi*.  Ash- 
mun in  the  fulfilment  of  his  duties,  and  to  assume  the 


ANNEXATION. 


133 


charge  of  those  duties,  in  case  of  "the  absence,  ina- 
bility, or  death  of  Mr.  Ashmnn." 

At  the  suggestion  of  the  commissioners,  a  greater 
share  in  the  government  of  the  colony  was  conferred  on 
the  people.  The  general  consequence  of  these  proceed- 
ings was,  that  comparative  tranquillity  and  energy  pre- 
vailed. 

Mr.  Ashmun  had  made  the  important  acquisition  of 
the  rich  tract  of  land,  afterwards  the  location  of  the  set- 
tlement on  the  St.  Paul's  River,  extending  twenty  miles 
into  the  interior,  and  of  unequalled  fertility.  The  col- 
ony now  seemed  to  be  emerging  from  the  difficulties 
which  often  had  threatened  its  very  existence.  Four 
day-schools,  in  addition  to  the  Sunday-schools,  were  in 
operation  ;  two  churches  had  been  erected  ;  a  religious 
influence  more  generally  pervaded  the  community  ;  the 
acclimating  fever  was  becoming  less  fatal ;  many  of  the 
colonists  preferred  the  climate  to  that  of  the  United 
States ;  they  were  living  in  comparative  comfort.  In 
addition  to  the  rich  tract  of  country  lying  on  St.  Paul's 
Eiver,  the  right  of  occupancy  was  obtained  at  Young 
Cesters  and  Grand  Bassa.  The  adjoining  tribes  re- 
garded the  colonists  so  favorably  as  to  desire  to  come 
partially  under  their  jurisdiction;  and  sixty  of  their 
children  were  adopted  as  children  of  the  colony.  A 
Spanish  slave-factory,  near  Monrovia,  was  destroyed, 
and  the  slaves  recaptured  and  freed  by  the  colonists. 


134  AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

At  Tradeto"wii,  there  were  three  slave-factories, 
guarded  by  two  amied  vessels,  with  crews  of  thirty 
men  each,  besides  twenty  men,  mostly  Spaniards,  well 
armed,  on  shore.  On  the  9th  of  April,  the  Colmnbian 
man-of-war  schooner  "  San  Jacinto,"  Captain  Chase, 
aiTived  at  Monrovia,  and  oflered  to  co-operate  with  Mr. 
Ashmun  and  Dr.  Peaco  for  the  purpose  of  breaking  up 
this  slave  establishment.  The  offer  was  accepted ;  and 
Mr.  Ashmun,  accompanied  by  Captain  Cochran,  of  the 
"  Indian  Chief,"  who  gallantly  volunteered  his  services, 
with  two  companies  of  the  colonial  militia,  embarked 
in  the  San  Jacinto  for  Tradetown.  There  they  fortu- 
nately found  the  Columbian  man-of-war-brig  "El  Yin- 
cendor,"  Captain  Cottrell,  mounting  twelve  guns ; 
which  vessel  had,  the  same  afternoon,  captured  one  of 
the  slave-vessels,  the  brigantine  Teresa.  Captain  Cot- 
trell united  his  forces  with  the  others. 

On  the  following  morning,  while  the  vessels  covered 
the  landing,  they  pulled  for  the  shore,  through  a  pas- 
sage of  not  more  than  five  or  six  fathoms  wide,  lined  on 
both  sides  with  rocks,  and  across  which,  at  times,  the 
surf  broke  furiously,  endangering  the  boats  and  the 
lives  of  the  assailants.  Tlie  boat  in  which  were  Mr. 
Ashmun  and  Captain  Cottrell  was  capsized  in  the  surf, 
and  a  number  of  men  were  thrown  upon  the  rocks. 
Nothing  daimted,  although  Mr.  Ashmun  was  badly  in- 
jui*ed,  they  made  a  dash  upon  the  enemy,  which  was 


EXPEDITION  AGAINST  SLAVERS. 


135 


met  by  a  galling  lire  from  the  Spanish  slavers.  The 
colonists  and  their  allies  rapidly  advanced  upon  the 
town,  demolished  their  slight  palisades,  and  before  the 
enemy  had  time  to  rally  behind  their  defences,  forced 
them  to  retreat,  in  great  confusion,  into  the  jungle. 

As  soon  as  the  colonists  found  themselves  in  quiet 
possession  of  the  toTvn,  Mr.  Ashmun  demanded  fi'om 
King  West  the  delivery  of  all  the  slaves  belonging  to 
the  factories.  The  king  was  told  that  if  this  was  not 
complied  with,  not  a  vestige  of  Ti-adetown  should  be 
left.  On  the  same  day  the  Kroomen  of  King  West 
brought  in  thirty  or  foi-ty  slaves,  evidently  the  refuse 
of  those  which  they  held. 

The  natives,  notwithstanding,  collected,  and,  in  con- 
junction with  the  Spaniards,  continued  to  rush  out  occa- 
sionally from  the  jungle  and  direct  their  fire  upon  the 
invaders.  The  surgeon  of  the  San  Jacinto  was  badly 
wounded,  and  several  of  the  colonists  slightly.  A 
peaceable  settlement  was  now  impossible.  On  the 
12th,  after  the  recaptured  slaves  had  been  sent  on 
board,  the  town  was  fired,  and  at  three  o'clock  all  were 
embarked.  The  explosion  of  two  hundred  kegs  of  pow- 
der consummated  the  destniction  of  Tradetown. 

The  annihilation  of  Ti*adetown  and  of  the  slave-fac- 
tories was  a  severe  blow  to  the  traflSc,  which  was  felt 
as  far  south  as  the  Bight  of  Benin.  It  convinced  the 
slave-traders  that  their  commerce  was  insecure,  inas- 


136  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

much  as  a  powerful  enemy  to  their  crimes  had  gaiued 
a  pennanent  establishment  on  the  coast. 

Here  is  developed  an  influence  for  the  suppression  of 
the  most  atrocious  commerce  which  has  ever  existed. 
The  writer,  however,  by  no  means  concurs  in  opinion 
with  the  zealous  friends  of  colonization,  that  the  slave- 
trade  can  be  suppressed  on  the  entire  coast  of  Africa 
by  Liberia  alone.  Yet  it  is  an  established  fact  that 
within  her  jurisdiction  of  six  hundred  miles  of  sea-coast 
and  thirty  miles  inland,  it  has  been  effectually  extir- 
pated. 

At  this  period  many  piratical  vessels,  well  armed, 
were  hovering  about  the  coast.  A  brig  from  Portland, 
and  a  schooner  from  Baltimore,  were  robbed  of  a  large 
amount  of  specie,  by  a  vessel  mounting  twelve  guns, 
manned  principally  by  Spaniards.  Scarcely  an  Ameri- 
can merchant  vessel  had,  for  a  year  or  more,  been  on 
the  coast  as  low  down  as  6**  IN'orth,  without  suffering 
either  insult  or  plunder  from  these  vessels.  Mr.  Ash- 
mun  then  erected  a  battery  for  the  protection  of  vessels 
at  anchor,  while  he  represented  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy  the  necessity  of  the  constant  presence  of  a  man-of- 
war  on  the  African  coast  for  the  protection  of  legal 
commerce. 

Five  of  the  most  important  stations  from  Cape  Mount 
to  Trade  town,  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  now  be- 
longed to  the  colony  by  purchase  or  perpetual  lease. 


INCIDENTS  IN  THE  COLONIAL  HISTORY.  137 

and  all  Europeans  were  excluded,  or  attempted  to  be, 
from  possessions  within  their  limits.  On  the  18th  of 
August,  Dr.  Peaco  was  compelled  from  ill  health  to  re- 
tm-n  to  the  United  States. 

The  native  chiefs  not  imfrequently  proposed  to  the 
colonists  to  aid  them  in  their  wai*s,  promising  as  an 
inducement  the  whole  of  the  enemy's  country.  This 
was  of  coui-se  declined,  on  the  gromid  that  the  colony 
was  established  for  the  benefit,  and  not  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  their  neighbors ;  and  that  their  military  means 
were  sacred  to  the  pm-pose  of  self-defence.  The  kings 
were  now  favorable  to  the  colony,  and  began  to  appre- 
ciate the  benefits  of  legal  ti-ade. 

The  U.  S.  schooner  Sharlc^  and  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war 
Ontario^  arrived  on  the  coast  during  the  year  1827, 
and  besides  aftbrding  aid  to  the  colony,  rendered  good 
service  towards  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade. 

A  reinforcement  of  emigrants  was  received;  the 
school  system  reorganized  and  put  in  comparatively  ef- 
ficient condition,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Eev. 
G.  M'Gill,  a  colored  teacher.  The  schools  were  all 
taught  by  colored  people:  the  number  of  scholars 
amounted  to  two  hundi-ed  and  twenty-seven,  of  whom 
forty-five  were  natives.  The  native  children  belonged 
to  the  principal  men  in  the  adjoining  countiy. 

The  Chief  of  Cape  Mount,  fifty-two  miles  IT.  E.  fi-om 
Cape  Mesurado,  entered  into  stipulations  with  the  colo- 


138  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

nial  government  tor  establish  a  large  factory  for  legal 
trade  between  it  and  the  interior.  The  land  north  of 
the  St.  John's  Iliver,  about  sixty  miles  southeast  of  Cape 
Mesurado,  was  ceded  to  the  colonists.  In  this  extent  of 
ten-itory  there  were  eight  eligible  sites,  upon  which 
comfortable  settlements  have  been  founded.  Four 
schooners  were  built.  The  colony  was  mainly  support- 
ed by  its  own  industry.  The  life  of  this  industry  was, 
however,  rather  in  trade  and  commerce  than  in  agri- 
cultiu-e,  the  fact  being  overlooked  that  men  ought  to 
seek  in  the  latter  the  som-ces  of  their  prosperit^\  Libe- 
ria has  suflered  from  the  want  of  steady  agricultural 
effort.  ludustiy  like  that  of  our  Puritan  fathers  in 
Kew  England,  would,  with  the  Liberian  soil  and  cli- 
mate, have  prevented  the  recurrence  of  difficulty,  and 
produced  uninterrupted  abundance. 

On  leaving  Liberia,  the  commander  of  the  "  Ontario" 
permitted  eight  of  his  crew,  colored  men,  to  remain, 
furnishing  them  with  a  valuable  collection  of  seeds,  ob- 
tained in  the  Mediterranean  and  up  the  Archipelago. 
On  his  arrival  in  the  United  States,  the  captain  bore 
testimony  to  the  encouraging  prospects  of  the  colony, 
and  its  salutary  influence  over  the  native  tribes. 

Mr.  Ashmun's  health  failing  from  excessive  labors  in 
the  administration  of  the  government,  he  was  seized 
in  July,  1828,  with  a  violent  fever,  and  having  been 


DEATH  AND  CHARACTER  OF  ASHMUN.  139 


advised  by  his  surgeon  that  a  return  to  the  United 
States  afforded  the  only  hope  of  his  recovery,  he  letl 
Africa  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  March,  1828,  and  reached 
Xew  Haven,  where  he  died  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  Au- 
gust. Of  Ashmun  it  may  be  said,  that  he  united  the 
qualities  of  a  hero  and  statesman.  He  found  the  colo- 
ny on  the  brink  of  extinction :  he  left  it  in  peace  and 
prosperity.  He  ti-ained  a  people  who  were  unorgan- 
ized and  disunited,  to  habits  of  discipline  and  self-reli- 
ance ;  and  to  crown  his  character,  when  death  ap- 
proached, he  met  it  with  that  imshaken  hope  of  a 
blissful  immortality,  which  the  tme  Christian  alone  can 
experience. 

The  remains  of  this  honored  martjT  to  the  cause  of 
African  colonization  repose  in  the  cemeteiy  at  'New 
Haven.  At  his  funeral  the  Eev.  Dr.  Bacon,  preaching 
a  sei-mon  from  the  text,  "To  what  purpose  is  this 
waste,"  said : 

"  Who  asks  to  what  pm-pose  is  this  waste  ?  He  is 
not  dead  to  usefulness.  His  works  still  live.  The 
light  which  he  has  kindled  shall  yet  cheer  nations  un- 
born. His  influence  shall  never  die.  What  parent 
would  exchange  the  memory  of  such  a  departed  son, 
for  the  embrace  of  any  living  one !  I  would  that  we 
could  stand  together  on  the  promontory  of  Cape  Mesu- 
rado,  and  see  what  has  been  accomplished  by  those 


140  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

toils  and  exposures,  which  have  cost  this  man  his  life. 
Years  and  ages  hence,  when  the  African  mother  shall 
be  able  to  sit  with  her  children  under  the  shade  of  her 
native  palm,  without  trembling  in  fear  of  the  man- 
Btealer  and  murderer,  she  will  speak  his  name  with 
thankfulness  to  God." 


CHAPTEK  XIII. 


LOT  CAREY  DR.   RANDALL  ESTABLISHMENT    OF    THE  LIBERIA 

HERALD  WARS    WITH     THE     DEYS  SLOOP-OF-WAR     "  JOHN 

ADAMs"  DIFFICULTIES    OF    THE    GOVERNMENT  CONDITION 

OF  THE  SETTLERS. 

From  tlie  hands  of  Mr.  Ashinun,  the  government  of 
the  colony  devolved  upon  the  Rev.  Lot  Carey,  whom 
necessity  and  the  claims  of  Immanity  made  a  physician 
and  a  governor.  Such  education  as  he  could  obtain 
when  a  slave,  terminated  in  his  becoming  a  Baptist 
preacher.  The  colony  was  more  indebted  to  him  than 
to  any  other  man,  except  Ashmun,  for  its  memorable  de- 
fence in  1822.  During  the  few  months  of  Dr.  Carey's 
administration,  the  affairs  of  the  colony  were  prosper- 
ous. His  death  was  caused,  with  that  of  eight  others, 
by  an  explosion,  while  tilling  cartridges  in  the  old 
agency-house.  Mr.  Waring  was  elected  to  supply  the 
vacancy  occasioned  by  Carey's  decease. 

The  society  appointed  Dr.  Richard  Randall  as  suc- 
cessor to  Ashmim,  who,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Mechlin, 
the  colored  surgeon,  arrived  in  December,  1828,  and  as- 
sumed the  supervision  of  the  colony.  Dr.  Randall 
possessed  great  firmness  of  pui*pose,  and  benevolence  of 


142 


AFRICA  AND  TUE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


disi)osition,  Buperadded  to  extensive  scientific  knowl- 
edge, lie  had  been  a  surgeon  in  the  army,  and  after- 
wards filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Colimabia  Col- 
lege. But  his  death,  in  four  months  after  his  arrival  on 
the  coast,  deprived  the  colonists  of  his  invaluable  ser- 
vices.   The  agency  tlien  devolved  upon  Dr.  Mechlin. 

In  the  following  year,  Dr.  Anderson,  appointed 
colonial  physician  and  assistant  agent,  arrived  "v^nth 
sixty  emigrants.  An  emigrant  vessel  brought  ninety 
recaptured  slaves.  She  had  sailed,  the  year  previous, 
in  charge  of  a  captain  who  made  a  direct  course  for 
Monrovia,  instead  of  keeping  his  northing  until  striking 
the  northeast  ti-ades ;  and,  after  being  at  sea  ninety 
days,  was  compelled  to  put  back.  Dr.  Mechlin  wa^ 
induced,  from  ill  health,  to  return  to  the  United  States, 
when  the  government  devolved  upon  Dr.  Anderson, 
who  soon  aftei-wards  died,  and  A.  D.  Williams,  the  vice- 
agent,  temporarily  filled  the  vacancy.  The  schools,  at 
this  period,  were  sadly  in  want  of  competent  teachers, 
which  were  partially  supplied  on  the  arrival  of  five 
Christian  missionaries  from  Switzerland.  The  arrival 
of  two  more  emigrant  vessels  and  two  missionaries  from 
the  United  States,  had  a  favorable  influence  on  the 
colony. 

The  Liberia  Herald^  established  the  year  previous, 
announced  eighteen  arrivals  and  the  sailing  of  fourteen 
vessels  in  one  month.    In  December,  it  says:  "The 


COMMERCE  AND  PIRACY. 


143 


beach  is  lined  with  Liberians  of  all  ages,  from  twelve  to 
fifty  years,  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  traffic,  and  in  the 
acquisition  of  camwood ;  and  it  is  astonishing  what  lit- 
tle time  is  necessary  to  qualify,  even  the  youngest,  to 
drive  as  hard  a  bargain  as  any  roving  merchant  from 
the  land  of  steady  habits,  with  his  assortment  of  tin- 
ware, nutmegs,  books,  or  dry-goods.  Here  the  simile 
ends ;  for  it  is  to  be  w^ished  that  our  Liberians  would 
follow  their  prototype  in  the  mother  country  through- 
out, and  be  as  careful  in  keeping  as  acquiring.  The 
Liberian  is  certainly  a  great  man ;  and,  w^hat  is  more, 
by  the  natives  he  is  considered  a  white  man,  though 
many  degrees  from  that  stand ;  for  to  be  thought  ac- 
quainted with  the  white  man's  fashions,  and  to  be 
treated  as  one,  are  considered  as  marks  of  great  distinc- 
tion among  the  Bassa  and  other  nations."  The  amount 
of  exports  had  reached  the  sum  of  eighty-nine  thou- 
sand dollars. 

Piracy  still  continued  rife.  There  was  no  American 
squadron  then  on  the  coast.  The  schooner  Mesurado 
was  captured  off  Cape  Mount,  and  all  hands  put  to 
death.  But  while  the  native  commerce  was  thus  ex- 
posed and  almost  destroyed,  the  colony  was  extending 
its  limits.  The  petty  kings  offered  to  come  under  its 
jurisdiction,  on  condition  that  settlers  should  be  placed 
upon  their  lands,  and  schools  established  for  the  benefit 
of  the  native  children. 


144  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


The  arrivals  of  emigrants  became  more  frequent ;  six 
hundred  being  added  to  the  colony  during  one  year. 
These  suffered  comparatively  little  in  the  acclimating 
process. 

In  the  year  1832,  the  colonists  were  again  called  to 
take  the  field  against  the  Deys  and  a  combination  of 
other  tribes.  Several  slaves  had  escaped,  and  sought 
protection  in  the  colony ;  upon  which  the  settlements 
at  Caldwell  and  Mills  were  threatened  with  destruction. 
A  brisk  action,  of  half  an  hour,  resulted  in  favor  of  the 
Liberians.  This  victory  made  an  impression  on  the 
minds  of  the  natives  favorable  to  the  future  peace  of 
the  settlers.  The  chiefs  who  had  been  conquered  ap- 
peared in  Monrovia,  and  signed  a  treaty  of  peace, 
guaranteeing  that  traders  from  the  interior  should  be 
allowed  a  free  passage  through  their  territories.  The 
agent  received  a  significant  message  from  his  old  friend. 
King  Boatswain,  stating,  that  had  he  known  of  the  hos- 
tility of  the  chiefe,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary  for 
the  colonists  to  have  marched  against  them. 

Captain  Yoorhees,  of  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  John 
Adams^  on  his  homeward-bound  passage  from  the 
MediteiTanean,  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretaiy  of  the 
Kavy,  reported  favorably  of  the  condition  in  which  he 
found  the  colony. 

In  January,  1834,  the  Kev.  J.  B.  Pinney,  as  colonial 
agent,  and  Dr.  G.  P.  Todsen,  as  physician,  with  nine 


CORRECTION  OF  ABUSES. 


146 


missionaries,  arrived  at  Monrovia,  and  were  formally 
received  by  the  civil  and  military  officers,  and  uniform 
companies.  Mr.  Pinney,  in  entering  upon  the  duties 
of  his  office,  found  many  abuses,  which  he  promptly 
corrected.  He  resurveyed  the  lands;  repaired  the 
public  buildings;  satisfied  the  public  creditors;  and 
extinguished  the  jealousy  between  two  tribes  of  recap- 
tured Africans,  by  allowing  each  to  elect  its  own  offi- 
cers. After  a  short  and  efficient  administration,  he  was 
compelled,  from  ill  health,  to  retire,  when  the  agency 
devolved  on  Dr.  Skinner. 

The  Liberia  Herald,  in  1835,  was  edited  by  Hilary 
Teage,  a  colored  man,  who  was  one  of  the  small  party 
first  settled  at  Cape  Mesurado.  Mr.  Teage  filled  various 
public  offices  of  trust  and  emolument.  He  made  an 
argument  before  the  General  Assembly  in  a  divorce 
case,  in  1851  (when  the  Perry  was  at  Monrovia),  for 
beauty  of  diction  and  sound  logic  seldom  surpassed. 
The  August  number  of  the  Herald  states :  "  On  the 
9th  instant,  the  brig  Louisa  arrived  from  N^orfolk,  Vir- 
ginia, with  foi-ty-six  emigrants,  thirty-eight  of  whom 
are  recaptured  Africans,  principally,  we  believe,  from 
the  Nunez  and  Pargos.  They  are  a  strolling  people. 
A  number  of  their  countrymen,  and  among  them  some 
acquaintances,  have  found  their  way  to  this  settlement : 
they  were  hailed  by  their  redeemed  brethren  with  the 
most  extravagant  expressions  of  joy." 

7 


146  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


From  January  to  September  there  were  nine  arrivals 
of  emigrants,  which  produced  a  great  sensation  among 
the  native  tribes :  they  gravely  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  rice  had  given  out  in  America,  and  suggested  to 
the  colonists  to  send  word  ior  the  people  to  plant  more, 
"  or  black  man  will  Iiave  no  place  for  set  down." 
Dr.  Skinner,  suffering  from  ill  health,  returned  to  the 
United  States,  and  the  government  devolved  on  A.  D. 
AVilliams,  tlie  vice  agent. 

The  revenue  from  imports  had  disappeared  to  an 
extent  which  the  vouchers  of  the  disbui-sing  officers 
did  not  explain.  Tlie  editor  of  the  Herald,  after  noti- 
cing the  excitement  at  that  period  in  the  United  States, 
on  the  passage  of  tlie  "  Sub-Treasmy  Law,"  quaintly 
remarked  that  "  their  ti-easmy  was  all  sub." 

In  the  year  1837,  the  Mississippi  Society  established 
its  new  settlement,  Greenville,  on  the  Sinoe  River. 
There  were,  therefore,  at  this  period  in  Liberia :  Mon- 
rovia, under  the  American  Colonization  Society ;  Bassa 
Cove,  of  the  Kew  York  and  Pennsylvania  Societies; 
Greenville,  of  the  Mississippi  Society ;  and  Cape  Pal- 
mas,  of  the  Maryland  Society.  These  contained  ten  or 
twelve  towns,  and  between  four  and  five  thousand 
emigrants. 

Here  was  a  mass  of  conflicting  or  disconnected 
organizations,  with  separate  som*ces  of  authority,  and 
separate  syf^tems  of  management ;  without  common 


EVIL  TENDENCIES. 


147 


head  or  common  spirit.  Each  colony  was  isolated 
amid  encompassing  barbarism,  and  far  more  likely,  if 
left  to  itself,  to  fall  back  under  the  power  of  that  which 
sun-ounded  it,  than  to  establish  good  policy  or  civiliza- 
tion among  any  portion  of  the  savage  African  commu- 
nities with  which  they  were  brought  in  contact.  It 
was  anticipated  that  intercourse  and  example,  and  the 
temptation  of  profit,  would  make  them  slavers ;  and  it 
was  said  that  they  were  so.  This,  although  untrue,  was 
perhaps  only  prevented  by  a  change  ;  for  it  now  became 
evident,  that  the  existing  state  of  things  was  unsuitable 
and  dangerous  to  the  objects  contemplated. 


CHAPTEE  XIY. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH    OF    LIBERIA  THOMAS    H.  BUCHANAN  

VIEWS  OF  DIFFERENT  PARTIES  DETACHED  CONDITION  OF  THE 

COLONY  NECESSITY  OF  UNION  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  COM- 
MONWEALTH USE  OF  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG  IN  THE  SLAVE- 
TRADE  "  EUPHRATES"  SLOOP    "  CAMPBELL*'  SLAVERS  AT 

BASSA  EXPEDITION  AGAINST  THEM  CONFLICT  GALLINAS. 

Thomas  II.  BucnANAN,  afterwards  governor  of  Liberia 
when  it  became  a  commonwealth,  had  reached  Africa, 
in  1836,  as  agent  of  the  New  York  and  Pennsylvania 
Societies,  and  had  acquii-ed  great  experience,  in  estab- 
lishing and  superintending,  during  two  years,  the  settle- 
ment at  the  Bassa  country. 

He  had  thus  time  to  appreciate  the  condition  of  things 
around  him,  before  he  was  called  to  the  prominent 
station  which  he  adorned  as  the  first  governor  of  the 
commonwealth.  It  needed  a  keen  eye  to  see  light,  if 
any  was  to  be  got  at  all,  through  the  wretched  entangle- 
ment of  interests,  vices,  associations,  colonies,  jurisdic- 
tions of  natives  and  foreigners,  which  then  existed.  It 
needed  great  tact,  and  a  strong  hand,  to  bring  any  thing 
like  order  out  of  such  confusion. 

The  United  States  had  at  least  three  associations  at 
work,  besides  that  of  Maryland,  each  with  its  own  little 


WANT  OF  UNION  IN  THE  COLONY.  149 

colony,  established  in  such  spots  as  chance  seems  to 
have  directed.  These  occupied  three  districts  of  a 
tolerably  definite  character.  There  was  the  original 
settlement  at  Cape  Mesm-ado,  with  a  wing  stretching 
to  the  north,  so  as  to  rest  on  the  expanded  lagoon  at 
Cape  Mount,  and  another  wing  dipping  into  the  Junk 
Kiver  at  the  south.  This  was  in  a  measure  "  the 
empire  state,"  containing  Monrovia,  the  capital,  and 
several  agi-icultural  villages  around  it;  but  the  Mon- 
rovians  and  then*  fellow-colonists  were  not,  on  the 
whole,  much  given  to  agricultural  pm*suits.  They  were 
shrewd  at  driving  a  ti*ade,  and  liked  better  to  compete 
for  some  gallons  of  palm  oil,  or  sticks  of  camwood, 
than  to  be  doing  their  duty  to  their  fields  and  gardens. 
They  had,  besides,  the  politics  and  the  military  con- 
cerns of  the  nation  to  supervise,  and  were  called  upon 
to  adjust  claims  with  the  neighboring  settlements.  The 
Bassa  Cove  villages,  constituting  the  second  district, 
were  settling  down  and  strengthening,  after  their  visi- 
tation of  violence  and  rapacity  from  the  natives.  Sinoe, 
the  third  district,  with  its  fine  river  and  rich  lands,  had 
received  the  settlement  at  Greenville,  then  flourishing. 
These  two  latter  bore  a  very  ill- defined  relation  to  the 
older  station  at  Monrovia,  and  to  each  other.  There 
were  in  the  ten-itories  claimed  by  all  of  them  as  hav- 
ing passed  justly  and  by  amicable  means  under  their 
jurisdiction,  various  native  tribes,  with  their  kings  and 


150  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

half  kings ;  sometimes  wise  enough  to  see  the  advan- 
tages offered  to  them ;  sometimes  pre-eminently  wise  in 
having  stipulated,  that  in  return  for  the  territory  they 
gave  u]),  schools  should  be  provided  to  teach  them 
"  sense,"  "  book sometimes  sorely  perplexed  by  the 
new  state  of  things,  and  always  sorely  tempted  by 
strong  habits,  and  by  people  at  hand  to  take  advantage 
of  them. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  tliat  between  these  three  settle- 
ments there  were  two  intervals  of  sea-coast,  each  about 
one  hundred  miles,  which  were  foreign  in  regard 
to  the  colonies.  There  were  also  battle-fields,  where 
slavers  afloat  and  slavers  ashore,  with  the  occasional 
help  of  a  pirate,  and  the  countenance  of  Spain  and  Por- 
tugal, were  ready  to  resist  colonial  authority,  and  even 
to  withstand  the  opposition  which  they  might  encoun- 
ter from  ciniisers  and  other  sources.  There  were  honest 
traders,  also ;  that  is,  those  who  were  honest  as  things 
went  there,  dropping  their  anchor  everywhere  as  they 
could  get  pm-chasers  for  their  rum  and  gunpowder. 
Nor  had  European  powers  yet  made  up  their  minds 
how  the  colonies  and  their  claims  were  to  be  treated. 

The  necessity  of  union  was  a  clear  case  to  every  man, 
and  Buchanan  prepared  himself  to  accomplish  it.  The 
Bassa  Cove  people  entertained  sentiments  not  very  con- 
ciliatory towards  tlie  Monrovians.  Tlie  Mississippi 
people  of  Sinoe  might  come  under  suspicion  next. 


A  CONSTITUTION  FORMED. 


151 


and  no  one  could  imagine  how  far  the  evil  would 
extend. 

This  state  of  things  was  clearly  undei-stood  among  the 
friends  of  the  American  Colonization  Society  and  of 
the  State  societies,  and  the  corrective  was  applied.  A 
committee,  comprising  the  names  of  Charles  F.  Mercer, 
Samuel  L.  Southard,  Matthew  St.  Claii*  Clark,  and 
Elisha  Whittlesey,  met  at  Washington,  and  drew  up  a 
common  constitution  for  the  colonies.  Mi*.  Whittlesey 
moved,  and  the  motion  was  adopted,  "  That  no  white 
man  should  become  a  landholder  in  Liberia,"  and  that 
full  rights  of  citizenship  should  be  enjoyed  by  colored 
men  alone.  Political  suffrage  was  extended  to  all  adult 
males,  and  slavery  was  absolutely  prohibited. 

This  constitution  divided  the  territory  into  two  prov- 
inces or  counties,  and  having  been  acceded  to  and 
acted  on  by  the  different  colonies,  supei-seded  and 
abolished  the  political  relations  of  the  separate  estab- 
lishments to  the  associations  which  had  preceded  it. 

The  American  Colonization  Society  retained  the 
right  to  disapprove,  or  veto,  the  acts  of  the  local  legis- 
lature. This  last  particular,  as  an  indication  of  national 
dependence,  was  the  characteristic  distinguishing  the 
commonwealth  from  the  republic  subsequently  estab- 
lished. 

The  emancipation  of  the  negroes  under  the  English 
government  was  now  taking  effect.    The  United  States 


162 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


government  were  beginning  to  realize  the  expediency 
of  keeping  permanently  a  naval  force  on  the  west  coast 
of  Africa ;  and  notwitlistanding  ditiiculties  and  appre- 
hensions resting  gloomily  on  the  future,  Governor  Bu- 
chanan, on  landing  with  the  new  constitution,  at  Mon- 
rovia, on  the  fii*st  of  April,  1S39,  seems  to  have  inaugu- 
rated a  new  era  for  the  African  race. 

He  arrived  with  a  full  supply  of  guns  and  ammuni- 
tion, furnished  mostly  from  the  navj  department, 
besides  a  large  quantity  of  agricultural  implements, 
and  a  sugar-mill.  The  constitution  was  at  once 
approved  by  the  Monrovians,  and  in  course  of  time  it 
was  accepted  by  the  entire  three  colonies. 

A  firm  stand  was  taken  against  the  slave-trade,  and 
the  governor  succeeded  in  getting  the  legislature  at 
Monrovia  and  the  people  to  back  him  in  efforts  to  sup- 
press it.  His  indignant  appeals  and  strong-handed 
measures  had  their  effect  in  turning  the  attention  of  our 
government  to  the  use  of  the  American  flag  in  the 
slave-trade  as  a  protection  from  British  cruisers.  Hear 
him  :  "  Tlio  chief  obstacle  to  the  success  of  the  very 
active  measures  pm*sued  by  the  British  government  for 
the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade  on  the  coast,  is  the 
Americaji  flag.  Never  was  the  proud  banner  of  free- 
dom so  extensively  used  by  those  pirates  upon  liberty 
and  humanity  as  at  this  season."  He  did  not  stop  at 
words.    An  American  schooner  named  the  EwphrateSy 


IMMUNITY  OF  AMERICAN  SLAVERS.  153 


which  had  been  boarded  fifteen  times,  and  three  times 
sent  to  Sierra  Leone,  and  escaped  condemnation  on  ac- 
count of  her  nationality,  was  brought  into  Monrovia 
by  a  British  cruiser,  and  instantly  seized  by  Governor 
Buchanan,  for  the  purpose  of  sending  her  to  the  United 
States  for  trial,  on  suspicion  of  being  engaged  in  the 
slave-trade. 

It  may  here  be  remarked  that  not  only  this  vessel, 
but  the  American  sloop  "  CamjpbeW^  was  also  de- 
tained, and  taken  to  Governor  Buchanan,  under  simi- 
lar circumstances.  These  proceedings  were  in  direct 
violation  of  our  doctrine  as  to  the  inviolability  of  Amer- 
ican vessels  by  foreign  interference ;  and  he  had  no  right 
to  authorize  or  connive  at  English  cruisei*s  interfering 
in  any  degree  with  such  vessels.  These  circumstances, 
together  with  the  report  of  Governor  Buchanan,  that 
"  The  Euphrates  is  one  of  a  number  of  vessels,  whose 
names  I  have  forwarded  as  engaged  in  the  slave-trade, 
under  American  colors,"  will  show  the  extent  to  which 
the  American  flag  has  been  used  in  the  traffic  ;  and  to 
those  who  have  patriotism  and  humanity  enough  to 
vindicate  the  rights  of  that  flag  against  foreign  authority, 
and  resist  its  prostitution  to  the  slave-ti-ade,  it  will  con- 
clusively prove  the  necessity  of  a  well-appointed  Amer- 
ican squadron  being  permanently  stationed  on  the 
west  coast  of  Africa. 

The  Euphrates  being  placed  in  the  hands  of  Governor 


154  AFRICA  AM)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Buchanan,  who  had  resolved  on  sending  her  to  the 
United  States  for  trial,  was  made  available  in  a  crisis 
when  she  proved  of  singular  service  as  a  reformed 
criminal  against  her  old  trade. 

A  Spanish  slaver  had  established  himself  at  Little 
Bassa,  within  fifh-  miles  of  the  capital.  The  governor 
prohibited  the  purchase  of  slaves,  and  ordered  the 
Spaniard  off.  This  he  disregarded.  An  Englishman, 
in  the  character  of  a  legal  trader,  sided  with  the  Span- 
iard. The  governor,  on  Monday,  the  22d  of  July,  dis- 
patched a  force  of  one  hundred  men  by  land  to  dislodge 
the  slavers  and  destroy  the  barracoons.  The  respecta- 
bility, or  the  safety  of  the  colony,  which  is  the  same 
thing,  in  its  dealings  with  the  mass  of  corrupted  barba- 
rians with  which  it  was  begirt,  required  summary 
measures.  Three  small  schooners  were  sent  down  the 
coast  vrith  ammunition  to  assist  the  land  force  at  Little 
Bassa.  A  fi^sh  southerly  wind,  however,  prevented 
these  vessels  from  reaching  their  destination,  leaving 
the  land  forces  in  a  perilous  predicament.  Affairs 
looked  gloomy  at  Monrovia  as  the  schooners  returned, 
after  beating  in  vain  for  sixtA'  hours. 

At  this  jimcture  the  schooner  Euphrates,  which  had 
been  seized  as  a  slaver,  was  put  in  requisition.  Being 
supplied  with  arms  and  ammunition,  the  governor  him- 
self, in  three  hours  after  the  return  of  the  vessels,  was 
aboard,  and  the  schooner  sailed  for  the  scene  of  action. 


ATTACK  UPON  BARRACOONa 


155 


Being  a  clipper^  she  soon  beat  down  the  coast,  and  an- 
chored before  daylight  off  Little  Bassa.  On  the  morn- 
ing of  the  fifth  day  after  the  colonial  force  had  marched, 
a  canoe  was  sent  ashore  to  ascertain  the  state  of  things. 
The  rapid  daybreak  showed  that  there  was  work  to  be 
done ;  for  as  the  barracoon,  standing  in  its  little  patch 
of  clearance  in  the  forest,  became  distinguishable,  the 
discharge  of  mnsketiy  from  without,  replied  to  from 
within,  showed  plainly  that  beleaguering  and  beleaguer- 
ed parties,  whoever  they  might  be,  had  watched 
through  the  night,  to  renew  their  interrupted  strife  in 
the  morning. 

It  was  a  sm'prise  to  both  parties,  to  find  a  well-known 
slaver  at  hand,  and  ready  to  take  a  part  in  the  fray. 
The  governor  learned  by  the  canoe  on  its  return,  that 
the  colonists  had  seized  and  were  holding  the  barracoon 
against  the  slavers  and  the  chiefs,  with  the  whole  hue 
and  cry  of  the  country  in  arms  to  help  them.  These 
natm-ally  hailed  the  Euphrates  as  an  ally;  and  Bu- 
chanan foresaw  the  certainty  of  a  fatal  mistake  on  the 
part  of  his  people,  in  case  he  should  land  and  attempt 
to  march  up  the  beach,  with  the  men  he  had,  under 
the  fire  which,  jsvithout  some  explanation,  would  be 
drawn  upon  him  from  the  palisades  of  the  ban-acoon. 

In  this  emergency,  an  American  sailor  volunteered 
to  convey  the  necessary  intelligence  to  the  besieged. 
In  pulling  off  in  the  Kroomen's  canoe,  he  necessarily 


156  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

became  the  object  of  attention  and  mistake  to  both  par- 
ties. The  besiegers  rushed  down  to  meet  him  with  a 
friendly  greeting,  while  Elijah  Johnson  sent  a  party  to 
intercept  him  as  an  enemy.  Tlie  sailor's  bearing  showed 
both  parties,  almost  simultaneously,  that  they  were 
wrong.  The  enemy,  who  had  seized  him,  were  charged 
by  the  colonists.  A  fellow,  grasping  a  knife  to  stab 
him,  was  knocked  down  by  a  shot ;  the  sailor  was  res- 
cued, and  taken  into  the  barracoon. 

Buchanan,  aware  how  this  would  engage  the  atten- 
tion of  the  combatants,  had  taken  the  men  with  him  in 
the  two  small  boats,  and  was  pulling  for  the  shore. 
The  governor's  boat  capsized  in  the  surf,  but  with  no 
other  harm  than  a  ducking,  he  made  his  way  safely  to 
the  barracoon.  A  brisk  fight  continued  for  some  time ; 
but,  at  meridian  the  day  following,  the  indefatigable 
governor  had  embarked  with  the  goods  seized ;  and  he 
returned  to  Monrovia  for  a  fresh  supply  of  ammunition. 
On  his  reaching  again  the  scene  of  action,  the  refractory 
chiefe  were  persuaded  to  submit.  With  three  of  the 
slavers  as  prisoner,  and  about  a  dozen  liberated  slaves, 
he  then  returned  to  the  capital. 

At  this  period,  the  Gallinas,  at  the  north  of  which 
the  Sherboro  Island  shuts  in  the  wide  mouth  of  the 
river  of  the  same  name,  was  a  den  of  thieves.  Cesters, 
at  the  south,  was  not  much  better.  Governor  Buchanan 
was  compelled  to  lean  on  the  support  of  the  British 


SLAVERS;  "WORKING  A  TRAVERSE."  157 

cruisers.  In  fact,  it  is  obvious  that  Liberia  could  not 
have  been  founded  earlier  than  it  was,  except  it  had 
been  sustained  by  some  such  authority,  or  directly  by 
that  of  the  United  States.  An  older  and  firmer  condi- 
tion of  the  slave-trade  influence  would  have  crushed  it 
in  its  birth.  A  few  of  the  lawless  ruflSans,  with  their 
well-armed  vessels,  who  once  frequented  this  coast, 
could  easily  have  done  this.  For  want  of  an  American 
squadron,  the  governor  assumed  an  authority  to  which 
he  was  not  entitled. 

Every  thing  was  reduced  to  a  regular  mercantile 
system  in  carrying  on  the  slave-trade.  We  have  the 
schooner  "  Hugh  Boyle,"  fi-om  XewYork,  with  a  crew  of 
nine  American  citizens,  coming  to  the  coast,  and  having 
as  passengers  a  crew  of  ten  "  citizens  of  the  world," 
or  from  somew^here  else.  She  is  American,  with  an 
American  crew  and  papers,  until  she  gets  her  slaves 
on  board ;  then  her  American  citizens  become  passen- 
gers, and  the  "  citizens  of  the  world"  take  their  place 
as  the  crew,  till  she  gets  her  slaves  into  Cuba. 

Governor  Buchanan,  in  one  of  his  dispatches,  dated 
November  6th,  1839,  writes :  "  When  at  Sierra  Leone, 
I  visited  a  small  schooner  of  one  hundred  and  twenty 
tons,  which  was  just  brought  in,  ^\\hfoiir  hundred  and 
twenty-seven  slaves  on  board  ;  and  of  all  scenes  of  mis- 
ery I  ever  saw,  this  was  most  overpowering.  My  cheek 
tingled  with  shame  and  indignation,  when  I  was  told 


158  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

that  the  same  vessel,  the  Mary  Cushing^  had  come 
on  the  coast,  and  was  sailed  for  some  time  under  Amer- 
can  colors.  When  taken,  the  American  captain  was  on 
board.  He  had  not  arrived  when  I  left  Sierra  Leone, 
but  the  governor,  at  my  instance,  promised  to  send 
him  down  here,  and  deliver  him  up  to  me,  to  be  sent 
to  the  United  States.  Is  there  any  hope  that  our  gov- 
ernment will  hang  him  ?" 

It  is  a  question  whether  Buchanan  had,  as  the  agent 
of  a  private  association,  or  the  agent  of  the  govern- 
ment for  recaptured  Africans,  any  right  to  seize  the 
goods  of  British  traders,  or  hold  in  custody  the  persons 
of  Americans.  But  the  governor  was  a  man  for  the 
time  and  circumstances,  as,  taking  "  the  responsibility," 
he  detei-mined  to  do  right,  and  let  the  law  of  nations 
look  out  for  itself. 


CHAPTER  XY. 


Buchanan's  administration   continued — death  of  kino 

boatswain  war  with  gaytumba  attack  on  hedding- 

ton  expedition   of  buchanan  against  gaytumba  

death  of  buchanan  his  character. 

When  a  frontier  rests  on  a  savage  territory,  a  "  good 
look  out"  must  be  kept  there,  and  npon  every  thing 
beyond  it,  as  the  Hollander  watches  his  dykes  and  the 
sea.  Liberia  had  to  watch  an  early  ally  and  friend  ot 
very  equivocal  character,  abeady  known  as  King  Boat- 
swain. He  had  founded  a  new  Home,  like  Romulus, 
of  ragamuffins.  He  had  made  a  kind  of  pet  of  Li- 
beria, and  perhaps  intended  to  give  up  slaving,  and 
take  to  better  courses.  Nothing  better,  however,  came 
in  his  way,  till  all  his  courses  ended. 

The  death  of  Boatswain,  whose  tribe  w^as  of  his  own 
creation,  was  followed  by  confusion  among  them- 
Gaytumba,  an  unscrupulous  and  ready  man,  with  the 
assistance  of  Gotera,  succeeded  to  the  chief  share  ot 
influence  in  the  tribe.  The  Deys,  from  whom  the  co- 
lonial territory  had  been  purchased,  were  near  neigh- 
bors, and  most  convenient  subjects  for  the  slave-trade. 
An  assault  was  accordingly  made,  and  many  secured. 


160 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


A  small  remnant  of  the  tribe  took  refuge  in  the  colony  ; 
and  Gaytumba,  not  seeing  any  reason  why  they  should 
not  be  caught  and  sold  under  colonial  protection,  as 
well  as  elsewhere,  many  were  seized  within  the  juris- 
diction of  the  commonwealth. 

The  northern  region  was  thus  black  with  danger, 
and  the  vast  woods  which  surrounded  the  settlement- 
on  the  St.  Paul's,  became  suspicious  as  a  wild,  imknown 
source  of  difficulty.  There  was  uneasy  watchfulness 
for  months;  and  such  preparations  as  circumstance^ 
would  admit,  were  made  for  resistance.  The  storm  fell 
on  Heddington,  a  village  at  the  extreme  north  of  the 
settlements. 

A  messenger  sent  to  negotiate  had  been  seized  and 
put  to  death,  and  no  mercy  was  to  be  expected.  AU 
hands  were  on  the  alert.  Twenty  muskets,  which  had 
been  provided  for  the  settlement,  were  prudently  kept 
by  the  missionary,  Mr.  Brown,  ready  loaded  in  the 
upper  story  of  his  house,  which  had  around  it  a  fence  oi 
pickets.  Two  carpenters  were  at  the  time  inmates  of 
the  dwelling:  their  names  deserve  record,  for  they, 
Zion  Harris  and  Demery,  constituted,  with  the  mission- 
ary, the  entire  force  at  the  point  of  approach.  Sudden- 
ly, in  the  morning  before  the  men  began  their  work, 
they  heard  the  yelling  and  crashing  of  three  or  four 
hundred  savages  through  the  bushes. 

This  was  Gaytiunba's  tribe :  Gotera  was  at  their  head, 


DESPERATE  DEFENCE  OF  HEDDINGTON.  161 

bringing  with  him  a  pot  to  cook  the  missionary  for  his 
next  repast.  Harris  and  Demery  placed  themselves 
quietly  at  the  fence,  confronting  the  negroes  as  they 
came  sh-aggling  in  a  mass,  expecting  no  resistance,  and 
exposing  themselves  amid  the  low  green  leaves  of  a 
cassada  patch.  The  two  men  fired  into  the  thickest  of 
them,  and  Mr.  Brown  commenced  a  destructive 
slaughter  with  his  muskets  overhead.  As  the  mass 
heaved  backwards  and  forwards,  a  fiu*ious  return  of 
musketry,  arrows,  and  speai-s  was  made.  Gotera,  with 
some  skill,  disentangled  himself  with  a  band  of  resolute 
men,  broke  through  the  pickets  at  one  end,  and  came 
upon  Harris,  standing  defenceless,  witli  his  musket  just 
discharged.  He  "turned  to  grasp  a  hatchet,  as  a  last 
resom-ce,  but  fortunately  caught  a  musket,  which  a 
wounded  colonist,  in  running  for  shelter,  had  placed 
against  the  pickets,  and  lodged  its  contents  in  Gotera's 
breast.  The  death  of  their  chief  was  the  signal  for  a 
general  reti-eat.  But  ashamed  and  indignant  at  not 
having  secured  the  dead  body,  they  attempted  by  a 
rush  to  recover  it,  and  were  again  and  again  driven 
back,  till  they  utterly  despaired,  and  disappeared.  This 
strange  episode  of  war  lasted  an  hour  and  twenty  min- 
utes. 

The  forest  recovered  its  suspicious  character  from  the 
prowling  and  threatening  of  the  enemy  spread  thi-ough 
it ;  and  there  were  reports  of  the  gathering  of  more  dis- 


1C2 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


tant  tribes  to  join  Gaytumba,  to  make  the  work  of 
destruction  sure  by  an  overwhelming  rush  upon  the 
settlement-. 

The  governor,  lull  of  warlike  foresight,  saw  the  rem- 
edy for  this  state  of  things  ;  and,  after  screwing  up  the 
courage  of  his  people,  he  planned  an  expedition  against 
Gaytumba  in  his  own  den.  For  this  purpose,  a  force 
of  two  hundred  effective  men,  with  a  field-piece  and  a 
body  of  followers,  aasembled  at  MilLsburg,  on  the  St 
Paul's  River.  About  thirty  miles  from  this,  by  the  air 
line,  in  the  swampy  depths  of  the  forest,  was  the  point 
aimed  at  Many  careful  arrangements  were  necessary 
to  baffle  spies,  and  keep  the  disaffected  at  bay  during 
this  desperate  incursion,  which  the  governor  was  about 
to  make  into  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  country.  The 
fine  conception  had  this  redeeming  characteristic,  that 
it  was  quite  beyond  the  enemy's  understanding. 

Tlie  force  left  Millsburg  on  Friday,  27th  of  March. 
Swamps  and  thickets  soon  obliged  him  to  leave  the  gun 
behind.  Through  heavy  rains,  drenched  and  weary, 
they  made  their  way,  without  any  other  resistance,  to  a 
bivouac  in  an  old  deserted  town.  Starting  at  daylight 
next  morning,  they  forced  their  way  through  flooded 
streams  and  ponds,  "  in  mud  up  to  their  knees,  and 
water  up  to  the  waist."  After  a  halt  at  ten  o'clock^ 
and  three  hours'  march  subsequently,  they  learnt  that 
the  enemy  had  become  aware  of  their  movements,  and 


CARRYING  THE  WAR  INTO  AFRICA.  163 


was  watching  them.  About  six  miles  from  their  desti- 
nation, after  floundering  through  the  mud  of  a  deep 
ravine,  followed  by  a  weary  pull  up  a  long  hill,  a  sharp 
turn  brought  them  in  front  of  a  rude  barricade  of  felled 
trees.  A  fire  of  musketry  from  it  brought  to  the  ground 
Captain  Snetter,  of  the  riflemen,  who  was  in  advance 
of  his  men.  Tlie  men  made  a  dash  on  the  enemy  so 
suddenly  that  soon  nobody  was  in  front  of  them.  The 
line  moved  on  without  stopping,  and  met  only  a  strag- 
gling fire  here  and  there,  as  they  threaded  their  narrow 
path  through  the  bushes  in  single  file.  A  few  men  were 
woimded  in  this  disheartening  march.  At  length  those 
in  advance  came  to  a  halt  before  the  forti'ess,  and  the 
rear  closed  up.  There  the  line  was  extended,  and  the 
party  advanced  in  two  divisions.  The  place  was  a  kind 
of  square,  palisaded  inclosm-e,  having  outside  cleared 
patches  here  and  there,  intermingled  with  clumps  of 
brush. 

The  assailants  were  received  with  a  sharp  fire  from 
swivels  and  muskets,  which  was  wai-mly  returned.  Bu- 
chanan ordered  Koberts  (the  present  president)  to  lead 
a  reserved  company  round  from  the  left,  so  as  to  take  in 
reverse  the  face  attacked.  This  so  confounded  Gay- 
tumba's  garrison  that  they  retreated,  leaving  every 
thing  behind.  The  hungry  colonists  became  their  suc- 
cessors at  the  simmering  cooking-pots.  So  rapid  had 
the  onslaught  been,  that  the  second  division  did  not 


164 


iLFBlCA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


reach  in  time  to  take  a  hand  in  it.  The  operation  wa.- 
thus  completely  successful,  with  the  ultimate  loss  of 
only  two  men. 

The  place  was  burnt,  and  a  lesson  given,  which  es- 
tablished beyond  all  future  challenge,  the  power  of  civ- 
ilization on  that  coast.  The  banks  of  the  St.  Paul's 
River,  with  its  graceful  meanderings,  palm-covered 
islands,  and  glorious  basin  spreading  round  into  the 
eastward  expanse  of  the  interior,  were  secured  for  the 
habitations  of  peace  and  prosperity. 

Great  and  corresponding  energy  was  displayed  by 
Buchanan  in  civil  concerns.  The  legislature  passed  an 
act  that  every  district  should  have  a  free  school.  Kules 
and  regulations  were  established  for  the  treatment  of 
apprentices,  or  recaptured  Africans  not  able  to  take 
care  of  themselves.  Provision  was  made  for  paupers  in 
the  erection  of  almshouses,  with  schools  of  manual  labor 
attached.  The  great  point  was,  that  the  people  had 
begmi  to  be  the  government ;  and  there,  among  colored 
men,  it  was  shown  that  human  nature  has  capacity  for 
its  highest  ends  on  earth,  and  that  there  is  no  difficulty 
or  myster}'  in  governing  society,  which  men  of  com- 
mon sense  and  common  honesty  cannot  overcome. 

Buchanan  died  in  harness.  Drenching,  travelling 
and  over-exertion,  brought  on  a  fever  when  far  from 
the  means  of  relief.  He  expired  on  the  3d  of  Septem- 
ber, 1841,  in  the  government  house  at  Bassa.  Then 


BUCHANAN;  HIS  WORK  COMPLETED.  165 

and  there  was  a  remarkable  man  withdrawn  from  the 
work  of  the  world.  Ever  tliroii£?h  his  administration 
he  illustrated  the  motto  of  his  heart:  "The  work  is 
God's  to  which  I  go,  and  is  worthy  of  all  sacrifice." 
The  narrative  already  given  is  his  character  and  his 
eulogium.  His  deeds  need  no  explanatory  words — they 
have  a  voice  to  tell  their  own  tale. 

The  blow  given  to  King  Boatswain's  successor,  Gay- 
tumba,  nearly  obliterated  the  predatory  horde  which 
he  had  collected :  they  were  scarcely  heard  of  after- 
wards. A  small  portion  of  them  seem  to  have  migrated 
northwards,  so  as  to  hang  on  the  skirts  of  more  settled 
ti-ibes,  and  carry  on  still,  to  a  small  extent,  the  practice 
of  slaving  and  mm-der,  to  which  they  had  been  accus- 
tomed. The  Fishmen  tribe  still  continued  to  raise  some 
distiu'bance.  Certain  points  on  the  sea-coast  gave  great 
uneasiness;  these  points  were  the  haunts  of  slavers. 
Merchant  traders,  at  least  some  of  them,  came  peddling 
along,  establishing  temporary  factories  for  the  disposal 
of  their  goods,  and  not  unfrequently  having  an  under- 
standing with  the  slavei*s  for  their  mutual  benefit. 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 


ROBERTS  GOVERNOR  DIFFICULTIES  WITH  EXGLISH  TRADERS  

POSITION  OF  LIBERIA  IN  RESPECT  TO  ENGLAND  CASE  OF  THE 

"JOHN    SEYES"  OFFICIAL    CORRESPONDENCE    OF  EVERETT 

AND  UPSHCR  TROUBLE  ON  THE  COAST  REFLECTIONS. 

Transactions  growing  out  of  the  circumstances  above 
mentioned,  became  of  very  grave  importance.  The 
rights  of  different  nations  to  trade  on  that  coast  had 
been  contested  in  war,  and  settled  in  peace,  for  cen- 
turies. The  long  Napoleonic  wars  had  thrown  posses- 
sions and  commerce,  all  along  the  coast,  into  the  hands 
of  England ;  and  in  restoring  foi-ts  and  factories  to  dif- 
ferent nations,  the  intention  seems  to  have  been,  to  let 
every  thing,  with  the  exception  of  the  slave-trade, 
revert  to  its  old  fashion.  At  existing  factories,  parties 
were  allowed  to  conduct  their  trade  in  their  own  way, 
and  to  exercise  whatever  competing  injluence  they 
could  gain  with  the  native  powers  to  forward  their  pur- 
poses. Comparatively  few  of  the  old  establishments 
were  preserved.  Everywhere  else  the  coast  had  become 
free  to  all  traders ;  it  being  understood  that  no  one  was 
entitled  to  use  measures  of  force  to  tlie  injury  of 
others. 


CLAIMS  OF  THE  COLONY. 


167 


If  a  private  company  of  merchants  in  France,  for 
instance,  had  taken  possession  of  a  part  of  the  coast, 
driven  off  other  traders,  or  seized  and  confiscated  their 
goods,  because  thej  refused  to  pay  such  duties  as  the 
company  chose  to  levy,  the  matter  undoubtedly  would 
have  led  to  national  complaint,  and  to  correspondence 
between  governments.  If  France  disavowed  all  con- 
cern in  these  ti-ansactions,  reparation  would  have  been 
sought  for  by  force.  Governor  Buchanan's  zeal  there- 
fore sometimes  outi'an  his  discretion,  in  the  outcry 
he  made  against  the  English  Government,  for  resisting 
his  interferences  with  their  subjects,  when  these  men 
were  acting  on  practices  of  very  venerable  antiquity, 
or  making  arrangements  with  the  natives  identical  with 
those  which  he,  as,  the  Agent  of  the  American  Coloniza- 
tion Society,  was  making. 

Edina,  in  the  Bassa  country,  for  instance,  had  been 
the  resort  of  vessels  of  all  nations.  Private  factories, 
for  trading  ip  ivory,  palm  oil,  &c.,  were  there  in  1826  : 
such  places  were  assumed  to  be  open  ground,  on  which 
the  same  might  occur  again,  or  were  common  property. 
Such  had  been  the  case  on  almost  every  point  occupied 
by  the  Liberian  Government :  hence  the  lev^ang  of 
duties  and  the  establishment  of  monopolies  were  resisted 
by  English  traders. 

England  was  bound  to  defend  the  property  of  her 
subjects,  or  to  compensate  them  for  the  loss  of  it,  if  this 


168  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


occurred  through  the  neglect  of  the  government.  And 
it  no  doubt  appeared  very  strange  to  Great  Britain, 
that  an  association  of  Americans  should  claim  a  right 
to  profit  by  duties  levied  on  her  vessels,  when  there 
was  no  government  responsible  for  their  acts. 

From  the  feeling  to  which  these  transactions  had 
given  rise,  it  was  inferred  that  something  in  the  shape 
of  reprisals  was  intended  by  the  seizure  of  the  "  John 
Seyes,"  a  colonial  schooner.  But  this  ground  was  aban- 
doned, by  admitting  the  vessel  to  trial  before  the  vice- 
admiralty  court,  at  Sierra  Leone,  on  suspicion  of  being 
engaged  in  the  slave-trade.  Of  this  there  does  not  ap- 
pear to  have  been  evidence  justifying  even  a  shadow  of 
suspicion.  As  the  vessel  and  cargo  were,  by  these  pro- 
ceedings, really  lost  to  their  proprietor,  the  whole  case 
ofFei-s  only  the  most  revolting  features  of  injustice  and 
oppression.  There  was  then  no  American  squadron  on 
the  coast  of  Africa,  to  look  after  such  interests. 

This  case,  and  many  others,  were  in  reality  very  hard 
and  perplexing.  The  Liberian  was  virtually  of  no  coun- 
try. His  government,  in  the  eyes  of  national  law,  was  no 
government.  Tliis  was  an  evil  and  threatening  state  of 
thinjjs.  The  colonial  authorities  could  not  do  riorht 
without  hazard.  For  it  was  right  to  extend  their  juris- 
diction, and  regulate  trade,  and  substitute  fixed  duties 
for  the  old  irregular  systems  of  presents  or  biibes  to  the 
chiefe.    But  they  had  not  political  law  on  their  side. 


FORBEARAJS'CE  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN.  169 

They  had  the  advantage,  however,  of  a  good  era  in  the 
world's  history. 

Mr.  Everett,  the  American  Minister  to  England,  on 
this  subject  had  said,  in  his  note  to  Lord  Aberdeen, 
30th  of  December,  184:3 :  "  The  midersigned  greatly 
fears,  that  if  the  right  of  the  settlement  to  act  as  an  in- 
dependent political  community,  and  as  such  to  enforce 
the  laws  necessary  to  its  existence  and  prosperity,  be 
denied  by  Her  Majesty's  government;  and  if  the  naval 
force  of  Great  Britain  be  employed  in  protecting  indi- 
vidual traders  in  violation  of  these  laws,  the  effort  will 
be  to  aim  a  fatal  blow  at  its  very  existence.'^ 

The  British  government  seemed  to  consider  that  a 
political  community  could  not  act  as  independent, 
which  neither  was  in  fact,  nor  professed  to  be,  inde- 
pendent ;  and  also  supposed  that  it  could  hardly  an- 
swer to  its  people  for  acknowledging  a  right  not 
claimed  on  a  foundation  of  fact.  But  the  Lords  of  the 
Admiralty  gave  orders  to  the  Conmiodore  of  the  squad- 
ron on  the  coast,  for  the  cruisers  off  Liberia  "  to  avoid 
involving  themselves  in  contentions  with  the  local  au- 
thorities of  the  Liberian  settlements  upon  points  of 
uncertain  legality^ and  added,  "  great  caution  is  rec- 
ommended to  be  observed  in  the  degree  of  protection 
granted  to  British  residents,  lest,  in  maintaining  the 
supposed  rights  of  these  residents,  the  equal  or  superior 
rights  of  others  should  be  violated." 


170 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


Mr.  Upshur,  Secretary  of  State,  in  his  correspond- 
ence, announced  that  tlie  American  government  re- 
garded Liberia  as  occupying  a  peculiar  position,  and 
as  possessing  peculiar  claims  to  the  friendly  considera- 
tion of  all  Christian  powci-s."  There  was  found  after- 
wards little  difficulty  in  treating  the  matter,  when  put  in 
this  light. 

In  the  mean  time,  circumstances  looked  very  dis- 
heartening, when  the  government  was  committed  to  the 
hands  of  Joseph  J.  Roberts ;  for  upon  the  decision  of 
this  question  vrith.  England  depended  the  stability  and 
progress  of  the  colonies.  Jf  they  could  not  control  their 
own  shores,  intercept  evil,  repulse  wrong,  and  foster 
good ;  if  they  could  not  expel  the  contrabandist,  secure 
the  native  chiefs  from  being  bribed  to  slaving  and  all 
kinds  of  e\al,  there  was  an  end  to  tlieir  progress. 

Looking  to  the  interior  concerns,  however,  there  was 
much  that  was  promising.  Civilization,  with  its  peace, 
intelligence  and  high  aims,  was  rooted  in  Africa.  The 
living  energy  of  republicanism  was  there.  Christianity, 
in  various  influential  forms,  was  among  the  people. 
Education  was  advancing,  and  institutions  for  public 
good  coming  into  operation.  Governor  Buchanan  had, 
among  his  last  efforts,  addressed  an  audience  in  the 
Lycemn  at  Monrovia. 

Schools  were  supporting  themselves  among  the  colo- 
nists, although,  when  established  for  the  benefit  of  the 


HOPEFUL  INDICATIONS. 


171 


natives,  they  were  maintained  by  missionary  associations 
in  the  United  States.  E"ative  hereditary  enmity  and 
faction  were  yielding  perceptibly,  in  all  directions,  to 
the  gentle  eflScacy  of  Christian  example.  All  this  con- 
stituted a  great  result. 

The  physical,  material  and  political  resources,  or 
agencies,  were  small.  A  few  men,  in  a  distant  land, 
had  taken  up  the  subject  of  African  colonization 
amidst  the  sectional  strifes,  political  controversies  and 
gigantic  enterprises  of  a  mighty  nation,  and  held  fast  to 
it.  A  few,  of  pre-eminent  generosity,  surrendered  their 
slaves,  or  wealth,  or  personal  endeavors,  to  forward  it. 
ITo  one  could  stand  on  Cape  Mesurado,  and  see  the  in- 
termingled churches  and  houses ;  the  broad  expanses  of 
interior  waters,  bordered  by  residences,  and  see  a  peo- 
ple elevated  far,  very  far,  to  say  the  least,  above  those 
of  their  color  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  without  the 
consciousness  that  a  great  work  was  begun.  To  meet 
everywhere  the  dark-browed  men  of  Africa,  solely  the 
governors  of  it  all,  indicated  a  great  fact  in  the  history 
of  the  negro  race. 

Other  movements  among  men  were  falling  into  a 
correspondence  with  these  proceedings;  A  great 
awakening  in  regard  to  Africa  was  pervading  Europe. 
The  Niger  expedition  had  entered  "the  valley  and 
shadow  of  death,"  which  extends  its  fatal  circle  round 
the  white  man  as  he  penetrates  among  the  wide  la- 


172  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

goons,  the  luxuriant  verdure,  and  sunny  slopes  of  Afri- 
ca. The  world  regarded  it  as  a  calamity,  when  the 
fatal  consequence  of  this  attempt  came  to  light  Men 
were  willing  to  continue  the  sacrifice  of  life  and  treas- 
ure, if  any  prospect  of  success  should  be  seen.  All 
entrances,  north,  south,  east  and  west,  were  anxiously 
scrutinized  to  see  if  a  safe  access  could  be  found  leading 
into  the  land  of  mystery. 

The  trade  with  the  west  coast  was  becoming  the  ob- 
ject of  keen  comj^etition.  England  had  for  years  had 
her  full  share,  and  was  grasping  for  more ;  France  was 
straining  every  nerve,  by  purchase  and  otherwise,  as  ol 
old,  to  establish  herself  commercially  there ;  while  the 
United  States  were  sending  their  adventurous  traders  to 
pick  up  what  the  change  in  Africa  would  develop. 
Something  like  an  earnest  cordial  deteiTuination  was 
evinced  to  abolish  the  slave-trade,  and  substitute  for  it 
the  pursuits  of  true  and  beneficial  commerce. 


CHAPTEK  XYII. 


Roberts'  administration — efforts  in  reference  to  English 

TRADERS  internal  CONDITION  OF  LIBERIA  INSUBORDINA- 
TION TREATIES  WITH  THE    NATIVE    KINGS  EXPEDITION  TO 

THE  INTERIOR  CAUSES  LEADING  TO  A  DECLARATION  OF  INDE- 
PENDENCE. 

The  election  of  Roberts,  a  colored  man,  as  governor 
of  the  commonwealth  of  Liberia,  totally  separated  and 
individualized  the  African  race  as  the  managers  of 
local  affairs,  and  made,  as  to  internal  concerns,  all 
things  their  own.  He  attempted  to  root  out  the  inter- 
lopers, with  energy  more  patriotic  than  potent,  and 
stood  up  strongly  for  the  rights  of  his  community.  He 
purchased,  negotiated,  threatened ;  and  in  every  way 
did  his  best  to  accomplish  the  object.  It  was  soon 
seen,  however,  that  the  termination  of  Liberian  pro- 
gress as  a  dependent  commonwealth  had  arrived,  and 
that  a  change  was  indispensable. 

Liberia  was,  after  all,  as  to  its  physical  means,  only 
a  few  thousands  of  enlightened  and  determined  men, 
amidst  an  ocean  of  barbarism.  All  the  emigrants 
were  by  no  means  among  the  enlightened.  Some 
curious  practical  difficulties  occun-ed  in  any  political 


17-i  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

co-operation  with  their  American  bretliren.  A  gang 
of  hard-headed  fellows  seemed  to  think  that  it  was  rather 
a  joke,  a  kind  of  playing  at  government,  meaning  nothing 
serious ;  therefore  their  respect  and  obedience  to  the 
constituted  authorities  were  verv  limited. 

It  should  never  be  forgotten,  that  no  change  could 
be  greater  than  that  to  which  these  men  were  subjected, 
in  coming  from  countries  where  no  power,  authority, 
or  public  respect,  could  ever  rest  on  their  race,  to  a  coun- 
tiy  where  colored  men  might  exercise  dominion,  enact 
laws  and  enforce  them,  and  by  their  personal  qualities 
exact  and  attain  eminence  and  respect.  The  best  pos- 
sible laws  are  only  for  the  best  state  of  society,  and 
men  must  grow  to  them ;  otherwise  they  are  only  like 
a  giant's  helmet  on  a  child's  head — more  a  burden  than 
a  defence. 

The  Liberians  had  no  laws  admitting  of  imprison- 
ment for  debt.  There  is  no  harm  in  this,  where  a  man 
has  to  borrow  before  he  can  become  a  debtor.  But 
the  case  is  not  so  easily  settled,  when  roguery  is  the 
source  of  debt.  A  man  who  is  fined  when  he  has 
nothing  to  pay,  laughs  at  the  judge.  So  it  happened 
in  Liberia,  to  the  embarrassment  of  the  better  class  of 
men. 

Governor  Roberts  had  to  keep  an  eye  on  grog-selling 
and  grog-drinking.  From  the  style  of  his  reflections, 
he  gives  fair  promise  of  becoming  a  strong  advocate  of 


THE  COMMONWEALTH  A  MEDIATOR.  175 

the  "  Maine  law."  There  was  no  small  number  of  cases 
of  idleness,  obstinacy  and  heedlessness  of  the  future ; 
very  natm-al  to  men  whose  independence  of  station 
was  of  very  recent  date,  and  whose  independence  of 
character  was  yet  to  come.  The  more  credit  is  there- 
fore due  to  the  firm,  industrious  and  upright,  stationed 
on  the  threshold  of  this  vast,  dark  continent,  with  its 
fury  and  its  vice  ready  to  bm-st  out  upon  them. 

The  governor's  resom-ces,  never  very  great,  were 
called  for  to  regulate  the  intercoui-se  between  civiliza- 
tion and  barbarism ;  and  he  found  that  the  high  moral 
influence  of  a  few  hundi*ed  men  aroimd  him,  was  a 
tower  of  strength  in  dealing  with  the  savage.  All  the 
kings  of  the  northern  and  western  districts  were  in- 
duced to  assemble  in  convention  in  the  early  part  of 
1843,  at  King  Bromley's  town,  to  settle  their  gi-eat 
disputes  of  long  standing,  and  to  draw  up  a  set  of  rules 
and  regulations  for  their  future  guidance.  This  was  a 
great  step  gained:  a  moral  victory  over  the  furious 
enormities  of  savage  life. 

The  kings  asked  the  countenance  and  advice  of  the 
colony,  acknowledging  fully  its  jm-isdiction  over  them. 
King  Ballasada,  however,  sent  his  respectful  compli- 
ments, with  a  petition  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  cut 
the  throat  of  King  Gogomina,  if  opportunity  offered ;  or 
might  at  least  have  the  pleasure  of  shooting  some  of 
his  people,  because  the  said  Gogomina  had  killed  six 


176  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

of  Ballasada's  "boys."  Information,  however,  was 
given  by  Governor  Roberts  to  King  Ballasada,  that 
the  time  had  passed  for  snch  summary  proceedings, 
but  that  the  matter  of  shooting  the  six  boys  should  be 
inquired  into  by  the  governor  himself.  Gogomina  there- 
upon produced  the  six  "  boys"  alive,  and  sent  them  home. 

Much  interest  now  began  to  be  manifested  to  learn 
something  of  the  interior.  It  was  not  known  whither 
the  wide  valleys  of  the  rivers  might  lead,  or  what  they 
might  contain.  It  was  ascertained  that  there  were  the 
Mandingoes  and  other  noted  people  somewhere  beyond 
the  deep  forests,  with  whom  communication  had  been 
held,  and  with  whom  it  might  be  held  again.  The 
natives  on  a  line  northeast,  as  far  as  the  Niger,  were 
entirely  unknown :  little  was  really  ascertained,  except 
that  the  Niger  was  there.  Tliey  knew  that  there  were 
jealous  tribes  interposing,  who  stopped  all  commercial 
intercourse  that  did  not  pass  thi*ough  their  own  bloody 
and  avaricious  hands. 

The  governor,  relying  on  the  reputation  for  power 
and  good  faith  which  the  colony  had  acquired,  resolved 
to  head  in  person  an  expedition  of  exploration  along 
the  St.  Paul's  River.  Taking  a  small  number  of  men 
with  him,  he  proceeded  up  the  river,  visited  the  cam- 
wood country,  about  seventy  miles  inland,  and  found 
the  forests  greatly  wasted,  and  the  main  source  of  sup- 
ply at  that  time  one  hundred  miles  farther  back.  Kings 


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  INTERIOR.  177 


were  visited  and  relieved  of  their  fears,  although  not 
of  their  wonder,  that  "  the  governor  should  be  at  that 
distance  from  home  without  engaging  in  war."  The 
party  had  left  the  canoe,  and  after  a  circuit  round  to 
the  eastward,  they  reached  "  Captain  Sam's"  town,  one 
hundred  and  twenty  miles  east  of  Monrovia. 

Several  kings  met  with  the  president  in  his  excursion, 
with  whom  a  conversation  was  held,  "  on  the  subject 
of  trade,  the  course  and  extent  of  the  river,  native 
wars,  religion,  &c."  One,  "  who  was  seated  in  state,  on 
a  sofa  of  raised  earth,  gave  us  a  hearty  shake  of  the 
hand,  and  said  he  was  glad  to  see  us adding,  "  this 
country  be  yom*  coimtry,  all  this  people  be  your  coun- 
tryman, you  be  first  king."  This  king  was  informed 
by  the  president,  "  that  he  and  his  people  must  agi-ee 
to  abandon  the  slave-trade,  to  discontinue  the  use  of 
sassywood,  engage  in  no  war  except  by  permission  of 
the  colonial  government."  On  one  occasion,  "  Balla- 
sada,  the  principal  war-man  of  the  Golah  ti-ibe,  made 
his  appearance ;  he  entered  the  gate  of  the  barricade, 
at  the  head  of  some  twenty  or  thirty  anned  warriors, 
with  drums  beating,  horns  blowing,  di-essed  in  a  large 
robe,  and  stepping  with  all  the  majesty  of  a  great 
monarch."  At  Yando's  town,  arrangements  were  made 
for  establishing  a  school.  At  Gelby,  one  of  the  mis- 
sionaries preached  to  a  large  congregation — the  king 
with  most  of  his  people  being  present.    The  audience 

8* 


178  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

was  attentive,  and,  with  the  king,  gave  "  a  nod  of  the 
head  at  almost  every  word  uttered  by  the  inter- 
preter." 

At  "  Captain  Sam's  town,"  a  place  of  great  trade,  they 
met  three  strangers  from  different  tribes,  anxious  to 
have  a  question  settled,  viz. :  "  whether,  if  they  carried 
their  produce  to  the  American  settlement  for  sale,  the 
colonists  would  beat  them,  take  their  property  away, 
and  put  them  in  jail."  Tlieir  intermediate  friends  had 
persuaded  them  that  such  would  be  the  case,  and  con- 
sequently had  themselves,  in  the  mean  time,  become 
their  agents,  and  plundered  them  at  discretion.  They 
had,  at  that  time,  brought  a  considerable  quantity  of 
produce  for  sale,  and  some  of  them  had  been  kept  waiting 
for  many  months.  All  this  was  fully  cleared  up  to  their 
satisfaction,  and  great  extension  of  trade  was  promised. 
The  governor  says :  "  I  have  travelled  considerably  in 
the  United  States,  but  have  never  seen  anywhere  a 
more  beautiful  country  than  the  one  passed  through, 
well  timbered  and  watered,  and  the  soil,  I  venture  to 
assert,  equal  to  any  in  the  world." 

President  Eoberts,  at  Monrovia,  in  1S50,  stated  to 
the  writer,  that  in  the  interior,  ore  was  found  so  pure 
as  to  be  capable  of  being  beaten  into  malleable  iron, 
without  the  process  of  smelting. 

Treaties  were  formed  with  all  the  kings,  and  sundry 
fractions  of  kings ;  introducing  everywhere  peace  and 


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  COLONY.  17d 

facilities  for  commerce.  It  may  be  presumed,  there- 
fore, that  now  the  tidings  are  circulating  through  the 
depths  of  the  interior,  that  peace  has  come  from  the 
west ;  and  that  an  African  people  has  returned  to  bless 
their  old  dark  continent  \vith  light  and  truth. 


CHAPTER  XYIII. 


INDEPENDENCE  OF  LIBERIA  PROCLAIMED  AND  ACKNOWLEDGED  BT 

GREAT  BRITAIN,   FRANCE,  BELGIUM,  PRUSSIA   AND  BRAZIL  

TREATIES  WITH  ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE  EXPEDITION  AGAINST 

NEW   CESTER8  U.  8.  6L00P-0F-WAR  '*  YORKTOWn'*  ENGLISH 

AND  FRENCH   CRUISERS  DISTURBANCES  AMONG  THE  NATIVE 

CHIEFS  FINANCIAL  TROUBLES  RECURRING  DIFFICULTY  WITH 

ENGLISH   TRADERS  BOOMBO,   WILL    BUCKLE,   GRANDO,  KINO 

BOYER. 

Foe  the  main  evils  with  which  Liberia  was  oppressed, 
independence  was  the  only  remedy.  We  have  seen  the 
natm-e  and  extent  of  these  evils,  in  her  equivocal  posi- 
tion in  the  view  of  several  European  powers,  and 
especially  in  that  of  the  English  nation.  The  meas- 
ures necessary  to  carry  out  this  great  purpose  were  re- 
ceived with  universal  sympathy. 

Individuals  from  all  sections  of  our  own  country, 
bearing  on  them  the  imperial  character  of  their 
nation,  had  transmitted  it  by  the  dark-skinned  race,  to 
vivify  with  liberty  and  self-govermnent,  the  great 
slave-land  of  the  world.  This  was  perhaps  an  honor 
higher  than  they  aimed  at.  The  few  judicious  leading 
men  of  Liberia  saw  the  necessity  of  making  the  ex- 
periment.   The  outlines  of  a  constitution,  as  far  as 


LIBERIAN  INDEPEjST)EXCE  ACKNOWLEDGED.  181 

that  already  existing  needed  modification,  were  bor- 
rowed from  that  of  the  United  States.  A  declaration 
of  independence  was  drawn  up  and  proclaimed ;  and 
on  the  24th  day  of  August,  1847,  the  flag  of  the  Ee- 
public  of  Liberia  was  displayed. 

Roberts,  whose  state  of  pupilage  had  been  passed 
under  the  master  mind  of  Buchanan,  was,  as  might  be 
expected,  elected  President  of  the  Republic .  England, 
France,  Prussia,  Belgium  and  Brazil  have  successively 
acknowledged  the  independence  of  Liberia.  A  liberal 
treaty  of  amity  and  commerce,  based  upon  the  equality 
of  rights  of  the  two  nations,  was  entered  into  between 
England  and  Liberia.  The  ministry  were  probably 
led  to  the  conclusion  by  the  president's  visit,  that  trade, 
regulated  by  the  laws  of  a  compact  nation,  was  likely 
to  become  far  more  advantageous  than  the  bribing, 
cheating  and  plundering  that  had  occurred,  with 
kings  and  half  kings,  and  some  Em-opean  subjects; 
and  had  in  view  the  increased  power  of  the  govern- 
ment for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade. 

The  president  arrived  in  Liberia  on  the  1st  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1849,  in  her  majesty's  steam  frigate  Amazon, 
and  was  saluted  by  her  with  21  guns  on  landing. 
Other  appropriate  ceremonies  were  observed ;  soon  after 
this,  England  presented  the  republic  with  a  man-of-war 
schooner,  with  armament  and  stores  complete. 

France  entered  afterwards  into  a  commercial  ti-eaty 


182 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


with  Liberia,  and  furnished  a  large  quantity  of  arms. 
Subsequent  assurances  from  the  European  powers,  in- 
dicate their  interest  in  the  prosperity  of  the  African 
republic. 

On  the  22d  of  Februar}',  1849,  the  French  flag 
steam  frigate  Penelope,  accompanied  by  another 
cruiser,  arrived  at  Monrovia.  On  the  following  day, 
the  commander,  with  the  officers  and  two  hundred  men, 
landed  for  the  purpose  of  saluting  the  flag  of  the  re- 
public. They  were  received  by  three  uniform  compa- 
nies of  Monrovia,  in  front  of  Colonel  Yates's  residence ; 
where  three  field-pieces  from  the  French  frigate  had 
been  placed.  The  procession  was  then  formed  and 
moved  up  Broad-street  to  the  president's  house,  where 
the  flag-staflP,  bearing  the  the  Liberian  colors,  was  stand- 
ing. A  salute  of  twenty-one  guns  was"  fired  from  the 
field-pieces,  which  was  repeated  by  the  French  cmisers, 
and  returned  by  the  Liberian  guns.  Refreshments 
were  provided  for  the  men,  and  the  officers  dined  with 
the  president. 

Li  the  month  of  March  following,  several  English 
and  French  cruisers  placed  themselves  at  the  disposal 
of  President  Roberts,  for  an  expedition  against  the 
slavers  who  had  established  themselves  at  jSTew  Cesters. 
Arrangements  had  previously  been  made  with  some  of 
the  chiefs  in  that  quarter,  for  the  surrender  of  their  lands 
and  for  the  incorporation  of  their  people,  on  the  usual 


A  COMBINED  EXPEDITION. 


183 


terms,  with  the  Liberian  republic.  But  a  portion  of 
the  chiefs  and  people  had  been  allured  to  the  support 
of  the  slavers,  and  force  was  required  to  dislodge 
them. 

Koberts  embarked  four  hundred  men  in  the  cruisers, 
and,  accompanied  hj  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  "  Yorktown," 
proceeded  to  the  scene  of  action.  Here  were  foreign  crui- 
sers, transporting  the  troops  of  an  African  republic  to 
make  a  descent  upon  a  Em-opean  slave  establishment ; 
such  establishments  as  Europe  had  for  centuiies  sus- 
tained on  the  AMcan  coast.  A  novel  sight,  certainly, 
to  the  leader  of  the  enemy,  who  was  a  Spaniard  ! 

The  landing  was  covered  by  the  cruisei-s,  and  a  well- 
du-ected  shell  from  the  French  steamer,  bursting  over 
the  heads  of  the  natives,  cleared  the  way  for  the  troops 
to  form  and  march  upon  the  barracoon,  with  now  and 
then  a  harmless  shot  from  the  jungle.  Foreseeing  the 
result  of  a  conflict,  the  Spaniard  fired  his  buildings, 
mounted  his  horse,  sought  safety  in  flight,  and  his  rab- 
ble dispersed.  The  establishment  was  strengthened  by 
a  thick  clay-wall,  capable  of  oflfering  a  respectable 
resistance.  Thirty  slaves  were  liberated.  The  fort  was 
destroyed.  'New  Cesters  was  annexed^  and  the  troops 
retm-ned  to  Monrovia. 

An  infectious  impulse  to  disturbance,  seems  to  have 
come  from  a  fruitful  source  in  the  northern  interior. 
For  about  thii-ty  years,  a  war  had  been  prevailing  be- 


184  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

twoen  revolted  slaves  and  the  cliiefs,  along  the  Gallinas 
River.  These  lingering  hostilities  aftbrded  facilities  for 
securing  a  good  supply  of  slaves  for  exportation,  which 
was  probably  the  cause  why  the  slave-trade  held  on  so 
pertinaciously  at  the  mouth  of  this  river.  Treacher}', 
for  a  time,  enforced  quiet.  The  chiefs  of  the  oppressors 
inveigled  the  leaders  of  the  insurgents  to  a  conference, 
and  massacred  them.  Manna,  who  seems  to  have 
had  a  long  familiarity  with  crime,  directed  this  ex- 
ploit. 

President  Roberts,  when  in  England  (1S4S),  dining 
on  one  occasion  with  the  Prussian  Ambassador,  the 
subject  of  purchasing  the  Gallinas  territory  was  dis- 
cussed. Lord  Ashley  and  Mr.  Gumey  being  present, 
pledged  one  thousand  pounds,  half  the  amount  required 
to  secure  the  territory.  Benevolent  individuals  in  the 
United  States,  also  contributed  for  the  same  purpose. 
Possession  was  afterwards  obtained  of  the  Gallinas  for 
the  sum  of  nine  thousand  dollars.  The  price  demanded 
was  large,  as  the  chiefs  were  aware  that  annexation  to 
Liberia  would  forever  cut  off  the  lucrative  slave-trade. 
Commissioners  were  appointed  to  settle  the  difficulties 
in  the  interior,  open  the  trade  in  camwood,  palm-oil 
and  ivory,  and  furnish  the  people  with  the  means  of  in- 
struction in  the  art  of  agriculture.  It  is,  however, 
doubtful  whether  the  influence  of  the  republic  is  sufli- 
cient  to  control  the  wai*s  which  have  been  so  long  ra- 


FINANCIAL  TROUBLES. 


185 


ging  in  the  interior.  By  the  annexation  of  this  territory, 
and  in  May,  1852,  of  the  Cassa  territory,  Liberia  • 
practically  extends  its  dominion,  exterminating  the 
slave-trade  from  Cape  Lahou,  eastward  of  Cape"  Pal- 
mas,  to  Sierra  Leone,  a  distance  of  about  six  hundred 
miles  of  sea-coast. 

The  jBnancial  burdens  of  the  government  were  a  mat- 
ter of  no  little  anxiety.  Tlie  money  for  the  purchase  of 
the  Gallinas  had  been  munificently  contributed  by  Mr. 
Gurney  and  other  individuals  from  abroad,  but  still 
there  was  that  "national  blessing — a  national  debt." 
The  expedition  against  New  Cesters  was,  doubtless,  a 
great  event  in  the  history  of  Liberia.  There  was 
glory,  which  is  not  without  its  practical  use  ;  and  there 
was  gratification  in  the  honor  of  having  been  aided,  or 
accompanied  in  such  an  effort,  by  the  naval  forces  of 
great  nations.  But  glory  and  gratification  have  their 
disadvantages  also.  Yery  keenly  did  the  leading  men 
of  Liberia  look  to  the  fact  that  there  were  heavy  bills 
to  be  paid.  The  payment  of  a  few  thousand  dollars 
was  a  serious  affair.  Tliey  wisely  concluded,  however, 
that  they  were  follo^ving  the  ways  of  Providence  in  in- 
corporating ISTew  Cesters  and  the  Gallinas  into  their 
family.  And  the  results  have  justified  their  proceed- 
ings. 

On  the  15th  of  February,  1850,  the  Secretary  of 
State,  in  compliance  wdth  a  resolution  of  the  Senate  of 


186  AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

the  United  States,  transmitted  a  report  of  the  Rev.  R 
E.  Gurley,  who  had  a  short  time  previously  been  sent 
out  by  the  government  to  obtain  information  in  respect 
to  Liberia.  This  report  contains  a  full  account  of  the 
people,  the  government  and  the  territory. 

The  long-standing  difficulty  with  the  British  traders 
was  brought  to  a  crisis,  by  a  prosecution  in  the  Liberian 
courts.  An  appeal  was  made  to  the  British  conmio- 
dore.  Mr.  Hansen,  the  British  consul,  a  native  Afri- 
can, who  had  been  liberally  educated  in  the  United 
States,  warmly  espoused  the  cause  of  the  traders. 
These  circumstances  induced  the  president,  in  May, 
1852,  to  revisit  England,  where  matters  were  satis- 
factorily arranged.  He  extended  his  visit  to  France, 
and  was  there  received  with  attentions  due  to  his 
station. 

The  elements  of  society  in  Liberia  were  not  all  ele- 
ments of  peace.  Native  tribes,  long  hostile,  had  sub- 
mitted to  union.  They  had  promised  to  be  very 
friendly,  and  met  very  lovingly  together,  which  they 
no  doubt  considered  very  strange,  and  perhaps,  for  a 
time,  found  very  pleasant.  We  should  have  been  in- 
clined to  think  this  very  strange,  if  it  had  continued. 
When  old  nature,  old  habits  and  old  enmities  recov- 
ered their  strength,  it  required  a  firm  hand,  and  one 
pretty  well  armed,  too,  to  keep  order  among  them. 
Nor  did  the  means  available  always  attain  this  end. 


DISSENSIONS  AMONG  THE  NATIVES.  187 

Dissension  could  not  be  overcome  without  force  and 
punishment. 

In  1850,  the  Yeys,  Deys,  and  Golahs  had  roused  up 
their  perennial  quarrel  about  their  rights  and  terri- 
tories. A  portion  of  them  were  wise  enough  to  apply 
to  the  government  to  appoint  a  commission  to  settle 
the  difficulties  among  them.  Others  took  the  larger 
liberty  of  attempting  to  settle  matters  in  their  own  way. 
The  excitement  prevailed  dm-ing  the  president's  ab- 
sence. In  March,  1853,  he  proceeded,  with  two 
hundi'ed  troops,  to  the  northward  of  Little  Cape 
Mount,  and,  after  a  suitable  demonstration,  brought 
the  chief  offender,  having  the  appropriate  name  of 
Boombo,  to  await  trial  at  Mom^ovia;  he  was  con- 
victed, fined  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  two 
years. 

In  N'ovember,  1850,  the  people  of  Timbo  brought  in 
a  complaint  against  "  Will  Buckle,"  who  was  at  the 
head  of  a  gang  of  rogues,  murdering  and  robbing 
with  impunity.  They  asked  the  protection  of  the 
government,  and  to  be  received  within  its  jm-isdiction, 
and  that  Will  Buckle  might  feel  the  strong  arm  of 
the  law. 

But  an  outbreak  at  Bassa  Cove,  under  a  chief  named 
Grando,  threatened  to  be  the  grand  affair  of  the  time. 
He  was  a  shrewd,  cunning  subject.  The  president 
gave  him  a  lecture.    To  all  of  it "  he  listened  attentive- 


188  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

ly,  and  with  seeming  penitence  readily  admitted  the 
error  of  his  course  and  the  wrongs  he  had  been  guilty 
of,  and  promised  never  again,"  (fee,  &c.  The  presi- 
dent, liowever,  found,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  that 
Grando  was  much  the  same  after  the  lecture  as  be- 
fore. "I  had  scarcely  left  the  country,"  says  the 
president,  "before  his  evil  genius  got  the  better  of 
him."  And  tlie  fact  turned  out  to  be,  that  his 
"evil  genius"  very  nearly  got  the  better  of  every- 
body else. 

He  Established  himself,  ^vith  his  people,  beside  a  new 
settlement  near  Bassa  Cove.  This  was  exposing  his 
penitence  to  too  strong  a  temptation.  He  cultivated 
the  most  friendly  terms  with  the  settlers ;  and  when  he 
had  sufficiently  disarmed  suspicion,  he  rose  upon  the 
settlement,  on  the  15th  of  November,  1851,  murdered 
nine  of  the  inhabitants,  carried  off  what  he  could  get, 
and  took  to  the  "  bush." 

Grando  had  taken  measures  to  excite  a  considerable 
insurrection  of  confederated  tribes  in  that  region,  and 
returned  to  the  attack  with  rather  a  serious  force,  esti- 
mated at  one  thousand  men.  The  assailants  fought 
with  unreflecting  fierceness,  as  the  negro  does  when 
excited,  paying  no  attention  to  the  artillery  which 
opened  upon  them.  But  they  made  no  impression  on 
the  place.  Koberts  proceeded  to  Bassa  Cove  in  the 
U.  S.  sloop-of-war  "  Dale,"  accompanied  by  a  reinforce- 


THE  GRAND  BASS  A  WAR. 


189 


inent  in  the  Liberian  schooner  "  Lark,"  and  prevented  a 
third  attack. 

In  March,  1852,  Grando  and  his  confederate,  Bojer, 
were  again  arranging  combinations  among  the  tribes 
in  the  "  bush."  The  "  evil  genius"  complained  of  had 
contrived  to  bring  the  tradei*s  again  on  the  stage,  with 
their  perplexing  complaints  about  imposts  and  monopo- 
lies. One  of  these  tradei*s  seems  to  have  been  insti- 
gating the  disturbance. 

These  circumstances  brought  on  the  most  extensive 
and  most  trying  mihtary  campaign  in  which  the  Libe- 
rian forces  have  yet  been  engaged.  It  was  estimated 
that  the  confederates  had  in  the  field  about  five  thou- 
sand men.  They  were  well  supplied  with  ammunition, 
and  had  some  artillery,  and  were  employing  their  time 
in  constructing  formidable  defences.  To  meet  them, 
Koberts  had  about  five  hundi-ed  colonists,  and  the  same 
number  of  natives.  With  these,  on  the  6th  of  January, 
1852,  he  marched  upon  the  enemy.  A  breastwork, 
terminating  the  passage  through  a  swamp,  was  occu- 
pied by  three  times  the  number  of  its  assailants.  After 
an  action  of  an  horn-  and  a  half,  this  position  was  forced, 
and  the  enemy  driven  through  a  piece  of  difiicult  for- 
est ground.  After  some  resistance  here,  they  were  dis- 
lodged and  chased  to  Grando 's  palisaded  town.  This 
they  set  on  fii*e,  and  then  retreated  to  Boyer,  occupying 
the  left  bank  of  the  New  Cess  river,  to  dispute  the  passage. 


190  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

From  this  position  Boyer  was  dislodged  by  the  hos- 
tility of  the  chiefs  around  him,  who  did  not  join  in  the 
revolt.  He  retreated  within  the  barricades  of  his  own 
town.  Here  he  had  some  artillery.  On  the  15th, 
Roberts  came  with  his  whole  force  upon  tliis  place.  A 
fierce  fight  of  nearly  two  hours  took  place,  which  re- 
sulted in  the  capture  of  the  town.  The  loss  of  the  ene- 
my was  considerable.  The  Liberians  had  six  killed 
and  twenty-five  wounded. 

Grando's  allies  soon  discovered  that  they  were  in  the 
wrong.  Boyer  fell  into  the  same  train  of  repentance. 
Grando's  authority  altogether  expired  in  1853.  His 
own  people  held  a  council,  whether  they  should  not 
deliver  him  up  to  the  president.  This  was  opposed  by 
the  old  men  as  contrary  to  custom.  They  made  him 
prisoner,  however.  Boyer  would,  by  no  persuasion,  be 
induced  to  put  himself  within  the  grasp  of  the  presi- 
dent. He  was  also  playing  his  tricks  upon  other  peo- 
ple. Having  in  July,  1853,  induced  a  Spanish  slaver 
to  advance  him  a  considerable  sum  in  doubloons,  and  a 
quantity  of  goods,  he  suddenly  became  strongly  anti- 
slavery  in  his  views,  and  sent  a  request  to  the  presi- 
dent, and  to  the  British  steam  cruiser  "  Pluto,"  to  look 
out  for  the  slaver,  which  vessel  had  cleared  for  the 
Gallinas,  grounded  in  the  river,  and  was  afterwards 
destroyed. 

Boyer  himself  and  another  worthy  by  the  name  of 


THE  SAVAGES  IN  A  DILEMMA. 


191 


Cain,  who  joined  Grando  in  these  disturbances,  keep 
the  Liberians  on  the  alert,  but  seem  gradually  spreading 
a  net  for  themselves,  and  it  is  to  be  anticipated  that  ere 
long  they  may  be  found  as  companions  with  Boombo 
in  his  captivity. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


CONDITION   OF  LIBERIA   AS   A   NATION  ASPECT  OF  LIBERIA  TO 

A   VISITOR  CHARACTER  OF  MONROVIA  SOIL,  PRODUCTIONS 

AND  LABOR  HARBOR  CONDITION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  COM- 
PARED  WITH  THAT   OF  THEIR  RACE   IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  

SCHOOLS. 

Notwithstanding  the  heterogeneous  population  of 
Liberia,  a  commendable  degree  of  order,  quiet  and 
comparative  prosperity  prevails.  With  such  men  as 
President  Roberts,  Chief-Justice  Benedict,  Major- 
General  Lewis,  Vice-President  Williams,  and  many 
other  prominent  persons  in  office  and  in  the  walks  of 
civil  life,  the  government  and  society  present  an  aspect 
altogether  more  favorable  than  a  visitor,  judging  them 
from  the  race  when  in  contact  with  a  white  population, 
is  prepared  to  find.  The  country  is  theirs — they  are 
lords  of  the  soil;  and  in  intercourse  with  them,  it  is 
soon  observed  that  they  are  free  from  that  oppressive 
sense  of  inferiority  which  distinguish  the  colored  people 
of  this  country.  A  visit  to  Monrovia  is  always  agree- 
able to  the  African  cruiser. 

Monrovia,  the  capital,  is  situated  immediately  in  the 


DESCRIPTION  OF  MONROVIA.  193 


1-ear  of  the  bold  promontory  of  Cape  Mesurado,  which 
rises  to  the  altitude  of  250  feet.  The  highest  part  of  the 
town  is  eighty  feet  above  the  lev^el  of  the  sea.  The 
place  is  laid  out  with  as  much  regularity  as  the  loca- 
tion will  admit.  Broadway  is  the  main  or  principal 
street,  running  nearly  at  right  angles  with  the  sea. 
Besides  this,  there  are  twelve  or  fifteen  more.  The 
town  contains  not  far  fi-om  two  thousand  inhabitants. 
Many  of  the  houses  are  substantially  built  of  brick  or 
of  stone,  and  several  of  them  are  handsomely  furnished. 
The  humidity  of  the  climate  has  greatly  impaired  the 
wooden  buildings.  The  State-House,  public  stores, 
and  the  new  academy  are  solid,  substantial  buildings, 
appropriate  to  their  uses.  There  are  five  churches,  and 
these  are  well  attended.  The  schools  will  compare 
favorably  with  the  former  distiict  schools  in  this 
country,  which  is  not  saying  much  in  their  favor. 

The  soil  in  the  vicinity  of  the  rocky  peninsula  of 
Mesm-ado  is  generally  sandy  and  comparatively  un- 
productive, except  where  there  are  alluvial  deposits 
along  the  margin  of  the  sti-eams  or  creeks.  The  lands 
on  the  banks  of  the  rivers — of  the  St.  Paul's,  for  in- 
stance, four  or  five  miles  north  of  Monrovia — are  very 
rich,  of  loamy  clay  soil,  equalling  in  fertility  the  high 
lands  of  Brazil,  or  any  other  part  of  the  world.  Here 
more  care  is  devoted  to  the  culture  of  sugar,  and  in- 
creasing attention  is  given  to  agricultm*e.    These  lands 

9 


194  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


readily  poll  at  from  forty  to  fifty  dollars  per  acre.  A 
fork  r»f  this  river  flows  in  a  soutlieasterly  direction, 
and  unites  with  the  Mesurado  River  at  its  mouth.  This 
fork  is  called  Stockton's  Creek,  in  honor  of  Commodore 
Stockton.  The  largefit  rivers  of  Liberia  are  navigable 
only  about  twelve  or  lifteen  miles  before  coming  to  the 
Rapids. 

As  the  country  becomes  settled,  and  the  character  of 
its  diseases  better  understood,  the  acclimating  fever  is 
less  dreaded.  In  fact,  it  now  rarely  proves  fatal.  Tliis 
having  been  passed  through,  the  colored  emigrants 
enjoy  far  better  health  than  they  did  in  most  parts  of 
the  United  States.  The  statistics,  as  President  Roberts 
stated,  show  some  three  per  cent,  smaller  number  of 
deaths  than  in  the  Is  ew  England  States  and  Canada 
among  the  same  class  of  population.  Tlie  thermometer 
seldom  rises  higher  than  85°,  nor  falls  lower  than  70°. 

The  productions  of  the  soil  are  varied  and  abundant, 
— capable  of  sustaining  an  immense  population.  Tlie 
want  of  agricultural  industry,  rather  than  the  incapa- 
city of  the  country  to  yield  richly  the  fruits  of  the 
earth,  has  been  the  difficulty  with  the  Liberians.  With 
well-directed  labor,  of  one-half  the  amount  required 
among  the  farmers  of  the  United  States,  a  large  sur- 
plus of  the  earth's  productions,  over  the  demands  of 
home  consumption,  might  be  gathered.  The  country 
certainly  possesses  elements  of  great  prosperity. 


THE  HARBOR  A>fD  THE  LANDING.  195 

"  A  bill  for  the  improvement  of  rivers  and  harbors" 
should  be  forthwith  passed  by  the  Liberian  legislature. 
A  country  exporting  articles  annually  amounting  to 
the  sum  of  eight  hundred  thousand  dollars,  and  this  on 
the  increase,  might  make  an  appropriation  to  render 
landing  safe  fi*om  the  ducking  in  the  surf  to  which  one 
is  now  exposed.  Sharks,  in  great  abundance,  are 
playing  about  the  bai*s  of  the  rivei's,  eagerly  watching 
the  boats  and  canoes  for  their  prey.  Dr.  Prout,  a 
Liberian  senator,  and  several  others,  have  been  cap- 
sized in  boats  and  fallen  victims  to  these  sea-tigei*s. 

A  full  and  veiy  interesting  description  of  the  geog- 
raphy, climate,  productions  and  diseases  of  Africa 
has  been  published  by  Dr.  J.  W.  Lugenbeel,  late  colo- 
nial physician,  and  the  last  white  man  who  was  United 
States  agent  in  Africa. 

In  devising  measm*es  for  the  benefit  of  Liberia,  one 
thing  was  pre-eminently  to  be  kept  in  view,  which  was, 
that  the  people  be  prevented  from  sinking  back  to 
become  mere  Africans.  It  is  believed  that  this  danger 
was  wholly  past  under  the  energetic  administration  of 
Buchanan,  to  whom  too  much  praise  cannot  be 
awarded.  He  infused  life  and  spii-it  into  the  nation, 
and  brought  out  such  men  as  Roberts  and  othei*s,  in 
whose  hands  we  believe  the  republic  is  safe.  A  large 
majority  of  the  emigrants  having  been  slaves,  and 
dependent  on  the  will  and  dictation  of  othei-s,  many 


196  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

of  them  are  thereby  rendered  in  a  measure  incapa- 
ble of  that  self-reliance  which  secures  early  success  in 
an  enterprise  of  this  kind. 

Slaves  do  not  work  like  freemen.  Tlie  question, 
then,  arises — Is  this  the  case  because  they  are  slaves, 
or  because  they  are  negroes  ?  Those  who  have  been 
emancipated  in  the  British  territories  have  hitherto  cast 
no  favorable  light  on  this  inquiry.  They  do  not  now 
work  as  they  did  when  compelled  to  work,  although 
they  are  free.  ^Neither  do  tlie  Sicilians,  Neapolitans, 
or  Portuguese  work  as  men  work  elsewhere.  There 
are  no  men  freer  than  the  slavers,  who  steal  children 
and  sell  them,  in  order  that  they  themselves  may  live 
in  vicious  idleness.  It  is  the  freeman's  intelligence 
and  his  higher  motives  of  action,  which  produce  his 
virtues. 

The  slave-trade  being  extirpated  within  the  bounda- 
i-ies  of  Liberia,  and  the  natives  brought  imder  new 
influences,  the  necessity  produced  for  new  kinds  of 
labor  has  become  favorable  to  the  improvement  of  the 
African.  There  is  now  the  will  and  ability  of  the 
native  population  to  work  in  the  fields.  The  low  rate 
of  remuneration  which  they  require,  favors  the  em- 
ployment of  capital,  but  keeps  wages  for  common 
labor  very  low.  It  is  of  no  use  to  urge  upon  colonists 
to  employ  their  own  people  in  preference  to  natives, 
when  the  former  want  eighty  cents  a  day  and  the 


RELIGION  AND  EDUCATION. 


197 


latter  only  twenty-five.  These  things  must  take  their 
natui'al  course.  The  increase  of  capital  must  be  waited 
for  ere  wages  can  rise.  But  it  all  tells  strongly  in  favor 
of  settlers  securing  grants  of  land,  and  becomes  a 
gi-eat  inducement  for  colored  men  emigi-ating  to  Libe- 
ria who  have  some  little  capital  of  their  own. 

It  is  in  Liberia  alone  that  the  colored  man  can  find 
freedom  and  the  incentives  to  higher  motives  of  action, 
which  are  conducive  to  virtue.  There  these  som-ces  of 
good  are  found  in  abundance  for  his  race.  In  this 
country  he  can  gain  the  intelligence  of  the  free  popula- 
tion, but  is  excluded  from  the  vivifying  motives  of  the 
freeman.  In  Liberia  he  has  both.  Means  are  needed 
to  sustain  this  condition  of  things.  The  first  of  these 
is  religion,  which  to  a  great  degree,  pervades  the  com- 
munity there  :  it  is  true  that  some  of  the  lower  forms 
of  a  vivid  conception  of  spiritual  things  characterize 
the  people ;  but  far  preferable  is  this,  to  the  tendency 
of  the  age  elsewhere — towards  attempting  to  bring 
within  the  scope  of  human  reason  the  higher  mysteries 
of  faith.  The  second  is  the  school,  which  keeps  both 
intelligence  and  aspiration  alive,  and  nm-tin-es  both. 
Koberts  is  aware  of  this,  and  keeps  it  before  the  peo- 
ple. They  will  ti*ansfer,  therefore,  what  the  United 
States  alone  exemplifies,  and  what  is  vitally  important 
to  free  governments,  namely,  a  system  of  free  public 
education  in  the  common  schools :  such  a  system  is  that 


198 


AFRICA  Am>  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


of  the  graded  schools  in  many  parts  of  our  country, 
far  siu7)assing  most  of  the  select  schools,  where  a 
thorough  education  may  be  freely  obtained  by  all  the 
children  of  the  community. 

Liberia  contains  a  population  exceeding  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  thousand  inhabitants ;  not  more  than  one- 
twentieth  of  this  number  are  American  colonists.  Its 
growth  has  been  gradual  and  healthy.  The  government, 
from  its  successful  administration  by  blacks  alone,  for 
more  than  six  years,  appears  to  be  firmly  established. 
The  country  is  now  in  a  condition  to  receive  as  many 
emigrants  as  the  United  States  can  send.  To  the 
colored  man  who  regards  the  highest  interest  of  his 
children ;  to  young  men  of  activity  and  enterprise, 
Liberia  afibrds  the  strongest  attractions. 

"We  would  not  join  in  any  attempt  to  crush  the  aspi- 
rations of  any  class  of  men  in  this  coimtiy.  But  it  is 
an  actual  fact,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  it,  that  here 
the  colored  man  has  never  risen  to  that  position,  which 
every  one  should  occupy  among  his  fellows.  For  sup- 
pose the  wishes  of  the  philanthropist  towards  him  to  be 
fully  accomplished, — secure  him  his  political  rights ; 
unfetter  him  in  body  and  intellect ;  cultivate  him  in 
taste  even;  then  while  nominally  free,  he  is  still  in 
bondage ;  for  freedom  must  also  be  the  prerogative  of 
the  white,  as  well  as  of  the  black  man ;  and  the  white 
man  must  likewise  be  left  free  to  fomi  his  most  intimate 


CLAIMS  OF  LIBERIA. 


199 


social  relations ;  and  he  is  not,  and  never  has  been  dis- 
posed, in  this  country,  to  unita  himself  with  a  caste, 
marked  by  so  broad  a  distinction  as  exists  between  the 
two  races.  The  testimony  on  these  two  points  of  those 
who  have  had  abundant  advantages  for  observation,  has 
been  uniform  and  conclusive.  For  the  colored  man 
himself  then,  for  his  children,  Liberia  is  an  open  city 
of  refuge.  He  there  may  become  a  freeman  not  only 
in  name,  but  a  freeman  in  deed  and  in  truth. 

Liberia  has  strong  claims  upon  Christian  aid  and 
sympathy.  Its  present  and  prospective  commercial 
advantages  to  our  country,  will  far  counterbalance  the 
amount  appropriated  by  private  benevolence  in  planting 
and  aiding  the  colony  and  the  republic.  Its  indepen- 
dence ought  to  be  acknowledged  by  the  United  States. 
This,  according  to  the  opinion  of  President  Roberts, 
would  not  imply  the  necessity  of  diplomatic  corre- 
spondence, while  the  moral  and  political  effects,  would 
be  beneficial  to  both  parties.  England,  by  early  ac- 
knowledging the  independence  of  Liberia,  and  culti- 
vating a  good  understanding  with  its  government  and 
people,  has  greatly  subserved  her  own  commercial  in- 
terest, while  responding  to  the  call  of  British  phi- 
lanthropy. 


CHAPTEE  XX. 


MARYLAND  IN  LIBERIA  CAPE  PALMAS  HALL  AND  RUSSWURM  

CHASTISEMENT   OF   THE  NATIVES  AT  BEREBEE   BY  THE  U.  8. 

SQUADRON  LINE  OF  PACKETS  PROPOSAL  OF  INDEPENDENCE 

 ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  COLONIZATION  SCHEME  CHRISTLAN 

MISSIONS. 

The  Maryland  Colonization  Society  resolved  to  estab- 
lish a  colony  at  Cape  Palmas.  Dr.  James  HaU,  their 
agent,  secured  the  consent  of  the  chiefs  to  cede  the 
required  territory,  without  employing  the  wretched 
medium  of  rum.  Tliese  kings,  to  their  credit,  have 
retained  sensible  names  of  their  own,  redolent  of  good 
taste  and  patriotism,  being  Parmah,  Weah  Boleo,  and 
Baphro.  As  has  ever  been  done  by  all  wise  people  on 
that  coast,  a  fort  was  expeditiously  erected,  overlooking 
in  a  peremptory  way  the  native  villages  and  the  anchor- 
age ;  since  it  is  not,  for  a  time  at  least,  safe  to  trust  in 
such  affairs  to  the  conscience  of  the  natives. 

Cape  Palmas  is  well  suited  for  such  an  establish- 
ment ;  the  climate  is  as  good  as  any  in  tropical  Africa. 
The  Cape  itself  is  a  small  elevation  or  insulated  hill, 
sloping  down  towards  the  continent,  into  the  general 
*        expanse  of  wooded  plain  or  forest;  this,  to  the  north 


SETTLEMENT  OF  CAPE  PALMAS. 


201 


and  east  of  the  Cape,  stretches  out  into  a  wide  fertile 
flat,  the  waters  of  which  drain  towards  the  long  line  of 
sea-beach,  receiving  the  heavy  surf  of  the  equatorial 
Atlantic.  Tlie  surf  throws  a  long  bulwark  of  sand 
along  the  mouths  of  the  fresh-water  streams,  and  checks 
them  in  a  lagoon  of  ten  miles  in  length,  by  about  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  in  breadth.  This  water  is  fresh  or 
brackish,  according  as  either  element  gains  the  mastery, 
and  serves  the  natives  as  a  precious  and  fruitful  fish- 
pond. 

Of  this  region,  a  tract  extending  about  twenty  miles 
along  the  sea-shore,  and  as  much  inland,  was,  by  pur- 
chase, brought  imder  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Maryland 
Society.  Provision  was  made  for  retaining  the  resident 
natives  on  the  lands  they  cultivated.  Here,  in  the  month 
of  Febmary,  1834,  the  Maryland  Colonization  Society 
attached  itself  to  Africa,  by  landing  fifty-three  emigrants 
from  that  State. 

Their  temporary  dwellings  were  soon  put  up ;  and 
their  fortifications  erected  near  to  populous  towns 
crowded  with  natives  supplied  with  fire-arms  and  ready 
to  use  them.  Yessels  continued  to  amve,  bringing 
more  settlers  to  their  shores.  In  1SS6^  an  additional 
tract  of  country,  east  of  the  Cape,  was  procm-ed ;  extend- 
ing the  colonial  territories  along  the  broad,  rapid  stream 
of  the  Cavally,  to  the  distance  of  thirty  miles  from  its 
mouth.    In  succeeding  yeai*s  new  settlei*s  arrived  to 

9^ 


202  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


occupy  the  lands  so  acquired ;  yet  all  these  acquisitive 
proceedinj2^3  gave  rise  to  scarcely  any  noticeable  opposi- 
tion. A  little  blustering  occurred  on  the  part  of  one 
chief,  who  attempted  to  monopolize  the  selling  of  rice 
to  the  colonists  when  in  want ;  but  a  kind  and  resolute 
firmness  removed  the  difficulty.  Scarcely,  in  fact,  does 
an  instance  occur  in  history,  of  an  administration  so 
uniformly  successful  in  the  operations  for  which  it  was 
established;  and,  whatever  the  future  may  ofier  to 
equal  it,  nothing  certainly  in  the  past  has  a  higher 
claim  for  sympathy,  than  these  efibrts  of  Maryland  for 
the  benefit  of  her  colored  population. 

"With  the  same  wisdom  which  had  characterized  the 
previous  measures  of  the  society,  in  1837  Mr.  Russ- 
wurm,  a  colored  man,  was  appointed  governor  of  the 
colony.  He  fulfilled  the  expectations  formed  of  him. 
Thus  one  step  was  judiciously  taken,  to  disengage  the 
colored  men  of  Africa  fi-om  dependence  on  foreign 
management. 

Considering,  however,  that  Cape  Palmas  has  been 
colonized  from  a  slave  state  alone,  and  that  the  govern- 
ment has  been  retained  in  the  hands  of  the  state  society, 
it  is  scarcely  to  be  expected  that  the  same  vigor  and 
activity  should  be  found  in  its  internal  operations,  or 
the  same  amount  of  influence  exercised  over  the  sur- 
rounding natives,  as  has  been  manifested  in  Liberia. 
Notwithstanding  this,  the  beneficial  influence  of  this 


EXTENT  OF  CAPE  PALMAS  COLONY.  203 

colony  also,  on  the  sniTounding  natives,  has  been  con- 
siderable. Six  kings,  of  their  own  accord,  applied  to 
Governor  Russwunn,  and  ceded  their  territories,  that 
they  might  be  incorporated  with  the  colony.  Every 
ti-eaty  contained  an  absolute  prohibition  of  the  slave- 
trade. 

Cape  Palmas  colony,  then,  may  be  considered  as 
now  extending  from  the  confines  of  her  elder  sister  at 
the  river  Jarraway,  as  far  to  the  eastward  as  Cape  La- 
hou.  The  iiiland  boundary  may  be  anywhere,  as  the 
future  shall  settle  it.  The  cultivated  or  cleared  land 
extends  parallel  to  the  coast,  over  distances  varying 
from  twenty-five  to  fifty  miles.  Here  comes  on  the 
dark  verdure  of  forest,  undulating  over  the  rising  lands 
which  lead  to  the  mountains,  or  whatever  they  may 
be,  which  feed  the  rivei*s.  These  streams  act  as  lines 
of  communication.  But  here  also  the  old  Portuguese 
influence  has  aimed  at  a  monopoly  of  trade.  Some 
explorations  have  disclosed  the  fact  that  there  are  pow- 
erful tribes  in  these  lands,  who,  in  spite  of  an  obstacle 
of  this  kind,  will  soon  be  brought  within  the  commer- 
cial influence  of  the  colony. 

This  line  of  coast  has  at  many  points  been  a  fi*equent 
haunt  of  slavei-s,  and  the  atrocities  due  to  native  su- 
pei*stition  have  been  shocking,  and  rendered  more  vil- 
lanous  by  European  trade.  Commodore  PeiTy,  in 
184:3,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  notice  of  squadrons,  did 


204  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

justice  on  some  of  their  villages,  convicted  of  murder 
and  robbery  of  an  American  vessel.  The  oflScers  de- 
livered several  of  the  natives  from  torture  under  the 
accusations  of  sorcery.  To  control  such  fierce  materials 
into  quietness,  or  melt  them  to  Christian  brotherhood, 
will  require  much  grace  from  Providence,  and  much 
kind  and  patient  dealing  from  men. 

In  carrying  out  the  objects  of  the  colony,  an  effort 
was  made  by  the  Mars'land  Colonization  Society,  which 
seemed  in  its  nature  singularly  promising.  This  con- 
sisted in  establishing  a  joint-stock  trading  company,  or 
line  of  packets  for  carrying  out  emigrants  and  returning 
with  produce.  It  was  expected  that  the  colored  people 
of  the  state  would,  to  some  considerable  extent,  invest 
capital  in  shares.  TVith  these  expectations  the  "  Libe- 
ria Packet"  was  laimched  in  1S46,  and  made  many 
voyages.  It  was  found  necessary  to  increase  the  size 
of  vessels  thus  employed.  But  these  operations  were 
checked  by  the  wreck  of  the  "  Kalph  Cross."  It  was 
also  found  that  comparatively  little  interest  in  this  un- 
dertaking was  awakened  among  the  colored  population, 
or  that  they  had  not  the  means  for  investment  in  it,  as 
only  about  one-eighth  of  the  whole  amoimt  of  stock 
was  held  by  them.  It  is,  however,  an  incident  of 
value  in  the  history  of  Africa,  that  through  facilities 
thus  afforded,  many  emigrants  revisited  this  countiy 
for  short  periods,  and  thus  established  a  return  line  of 


MOVEMENT  TOWARD  INDEPENDENCK  205 

intercourse,  inquiry,  or  business,  which  binds  Africa 
more  strongly  to  this  land. 

A  movement  for  the  elevation  of  the  colony  into  an 
independent  state,  has  been  made  by  the  people  at 
Cape  Palmas,  and  a  commission  has  visited  this  coun- 
try to  make  arrangements  for  the  purpose.  That  there 
be  full  political  independence  granted  to  this  people,  is 
requisite,  as  an  element  of  the  great  achievement  now 
going  on.  This  contemplates  something  far  higher 
than  creating  merely  a  refuge  for  black  men,  or  stick- 
ing on  a  patch  of  colored  America  on  the  coast  of  Af- 
rica like  an  ill-assorted  graft,  for  which  the  old  stock 
is  none  the  better.  Liberia  is  the  restoration  of  the 
African  in  his  highest  intellectual  condition  to  that 
country  in  which  his  condition  had  become  the  most 
degraded.  The  question  is  to  be  settled  whether  that 
condition  can  be  retained,  or  so  improved  that  he  may 
keep  pace  with  the  rest  of  the  world. 

It  is  a  necessary  element  in  this  proceeding  that  he 
be  self-governing.  It  is  to  the  establishment  of  this 
point  that  all  men  look  to  decide  the  dispute,  whether 
negro  races  are  to  remain  forever  degraded  or  not. 
Time  and  patience,  however,  and  much  kind  watchful- 
ness, may  be  required  before  this  experiment  be  deemed 
conclusive.  Let  many  failm-es  be  anticipated  ere  a 
certain  result  is  secured.  Let  no  higher  claims  be 
made  on  the  negro  than  on  other  races.    Would  a  col- 


206  AFRICA  AUD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

ouy  of  Frenchmen,  Spaniards,  Portuguese,  Sicilians,  if 
left  to  themselves,  offer  a  fairer  prospect  of  success  than 
Liberia  now  offers  ?  Few  persons  would  have  confi- 
dence in  the  stability  of  republican  institutions  among 
these  races,  if  so  placed. 

Let  then  the  black  man  be  judged  fairly,  and  not 
presumed  to  have  become  all  at  once  and  by  miracle,  of 
a  higher  order  than  old  historic  nations,  through  many 
generations  of  whom  the  political  organization  of  the 
world  has  been  slowly  developing  itself.  There  will 
be  among  them  men  who  are  covetous,  or  men  who  are 
tyrannical,  or  men  who  would  sacrifice  the  public  inte- 
rests or  any  others  to  their  own :  men  who  would  now 
go  into  the  slave-trade  if  they  could,  or  rob  hen-roosts, 
or  intrigue  for  office,  or  pick  pockets,  rather  tlian  trou- 
ble their  heads  or  their  hands  witli  more  honorable  oc- 
cupations. It  should  be  remembered  by  visitors  that 
such  things  will  be  found  in  Liberia ;  not  because  men 
are  black,  but  because  men  are  men. 

It  shoujd  not  be  forgotten  that  the  experiment  in  re- 
spect to  this  race  is  essentially  a  new  one.  The  non- 
sense about  Hannibal,  and  Terence,  and  Cyprian,  and 
Augustine,  being  negro  Africans,  should  have  been  out 
of  the  heads  of  people  long  ago.  A  woolly-headed, 
flat-nosed  African,  in  ancient  times,  would  have  created 
as  great  a  sensation  at  the  head  of  an  army,  or  in  the 
chair  of  a  professor,  as  it  would  now  in  the  United 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  AFRICAN. 


207 


States  or  in  England.  These  men  were  Asiatics  or 
Eui'opeans,  rather  than  Africans :  the  Great  Desert 
being  properly  the  northern  boundaiy  of  the  Afiican 
'race.  The  African  has  never  reached  in  fact,  until  the 
settlement  of  Liberia,  a  higher  rank  than  a  king  of  Da- 
homey, or  the  inventor  of  the  last  fashionable  grisgris 
to  prevent  the  devil  from  stealing  sugar-plums.  No 
philosopher  among  them  has  caught  sight  of  the  mys- 
teries of  nature ;  no  poet  has  illustrated  heaven,  or 
earth,  or  the  life  of  man ;  no  statesman  has  done  any 
thing  to  lighten  or  brighten  the  links  of  human  policy. 
In  fact,  if  all  that  negroes  of  all  generations  have  ever 
done,  were  to  be  obliterated  from  recollection  forever, 
the  world  would  lose  no  great  truth,  no  profitable  art, 
no  exemplary  form  of  life,  llie  loss  of  all  that  is  Afri- 
can would  ofier  no  memorable  deduction  from  any 
thing  but  the  eaith's  black  catalogue  of  crimes.  Afri- 
ca is  guilty  of  the  slavery  under  which  she  sufiered ; 
for  her  people  made  it,  as  well  as  sufiered  it. 

The  great  experiment,  therefore,  is  as  to  the  effect 
of  instruction  given  to  such  a  race  from  a  higher  one. 
It  has  had  its  success,  and  promises  more.  But  many 
patient  endeavoi's  must  still  be  used.  The  heroism  of 
the  missionary  is  still  needed.  Such  men  as  MiUs, 
Ashmun,  Wilson,  and  Bishop  Payne,  will  be  required 
to  give  energy  to  this  work  in  various  fonus.  But 
there  will  be  henceforth,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  less  demand 


AFRICA  AJfD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


for  the  exposure  of  American  life.  There  should  be 
found  in  the  colored  people  of  the  United  States,  with 
whom  the  climate  agrees,  the  source  of  supply  for  Af- 
rican missions,  till,  in  a  few  years,  Liberia  itself  send 
them  forth,  with  words  of  life  to  their  brethren  through- 
out the  length  and  breadth  of  the  continent. 

Like  all  sinful  men,  the  African  needs  faith.  But 
you  must  dig  deeper  in  him,  before  you  find  any 
thing  to  plant  it  on.  The  grain  of  mustard-seed  meets 
a  very  hard  soil  there,  and  the  thorns  are  deep.  It  is 
a  conquest  to  get  him  to  believe  that  there  is  any  vir- 
tue in  man.  They  have  never  had  a  Socrates,  to  talk 
wisdom  to  them ;  nor  a  Cyrus,  who  was  not  a  slave- 
merchant  ;  nor  a  Pythagoras,  to  teach  that  kindness 
was  a  virtue.  Hence  the  difficulty  which  the  Christian 
missionary-  has  had  with  them,  has  been  to  satisfy  their 
minds  as  to  the  miraculous  phenomenon  of  there  being 
a  good  man.  It  has  been  always  found  that  there  was 
many  a  consultation  among  their  sages  as  to  the  pecu- 
liar trade  or  purpose  the  missionary  might  have  in 
view,  in  coming  as  he  came ;  and  very  generally  the 
more  good  they  saw,  the  more  evil  they  suspected- 
The  first  thing  which,  in  most  instances,  opened  their 
eyes,  has  been  in  his  inculcating  p)eace  ;  for  they  saw 
no  fees  coming  to  him  for  it,  and  of  course  no  looking 
out  for  plunder. 

The  civilized  world,  as  well  as  the  savage,  need  the 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  MISSIONARIES. 


209 


example  of  the  missionary.  The  trae  corn-age  of  faith 
is  a  hlessing  to  mankind.  Besides  his  devotion  to  the 
highest  interests  of  men,  the  world  also  owes  much  to 
the  educated  and  enlightened  missionaiy,  who  has  not 
only  greatly  contributed  to  the  cause  of  science  and 
literature,  but  has  often  been  the  means  of  developing 
the  commercial  resom*ces  of  the  countries  where  he  has 
been  stationed.  Women,  with  their  own  peculiar  he- 
roism, which  consists  in  fearless  tenderness  and  patience, 
have  also  shared  in  this  work  of  faith.  Mrs.  Judson  is 
seen  wanderino^  throuo^h  a  Bui-man  villasre  teachinor  the 
people,  with  a  sick  child  in  her  arms,  while  her  hus- 
band lies  in  prison.  And  Mrs.  Wilson,  highly  culti- 
vated and  refined,  sacrificing  her  property,  and  surren- 
dering a  position  in  the  best  society  of  the  countiy,  is 
foimd  teaching  negro  childi-en  in  the  dull  and  fetid 
atmosphere  of  African  schools.  This  is  true  heroism, 
such  as  the  gospel  alone  can  inspire. 

Christianity  has,  with  watchful  kindness,  been  seek- 
ing to  penetrate  Afi-ica  fi*om  various  points  of  the 
coast.  Abyssinia  has  long  professed  the  Christian  faith, 
although  in  a  corrupt  form.  Its  church,  and  that  of 
Egypt,  must  soon  fall  imder  the  influence  of  the  line  of 
communication  through  the  Red  Sea.  English  mission- 
aries are  at  Zanzibar,  and  have  brought  to  light,  by 
their  explorations  in  the  interior,  the  group  of  mountains 
which  raise  their  snowy  heads  south  of  the  equator  in 


210  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

that  neighborhood.  Missionaries  from  the  same  coun- 
try are  also  to  be  foimd  at  Sierra  Leone  and  in  the 
Bight  of  Benin.  From  the  extremity  of  the  continent 
they  have,  in  conjunction  with  those  of  five  other  na- 
tions, been  penetrating  all  the  interior  of  the  southern 
angle. 

The  United  States  have  also  missionaries  at  four  or 
five  points.  There  are  those  of  the  Liberian  republic. 
Cape  Palmas,  and  the  Mendi  mission.  In  these  places 
different  denominations  work  kindly  and  earnestly  to- 
gether. The  first  obvious  sign  of  their  presence*  is 
peace.  Nowhere  in  the  world  was  this  more  needed, 
or  more  welcome,  than  in  the  regions  north  and  east  of 
Liberia,  where  men,  for  many  years,  had  had  to  fight 
for  their  own  persons,  that  they  might  remain  their 
own,  and  not  be  sold.  Every  thing,  as  might  be  ex- 
pected, had  fallen  into  utter  confusion.  Tribes  of  his- 
toric character  were  in  fragments  ;  towns  depopulated, 
cultivation  suspended,  and  the  small  knots  of  families 
which  kept  together,  were  perishing.  "The  women 
and  children,"  says  Mr.  Thompson,  "  were  often  obliged 
to  go  out  in  search  of  beiTies  and  fruits  to  keep  them- 
selves from  starving."  To  this  country,  which  lies 
along  the  sources  of  the  Sierra  Leone  and  the  Gallinas 
rivers  on  the  northern  confines  of  Liberia,  the  captives 
on  board  the  Amistad  had  gone  in  1842.  But  such 
was  the  confusion  in  that  quarter,  that  it  was  not  until 


MISSIONARY  INFLUENCE. 


211 


1851,  that  the  missionary  found  it  practicable  to  com- 
mence his  efforts  for  peace.  Tliey  told  Mr.  Thompson, 
"  that  no  one  but  a  white  man  could  have  brought  it 
about and  that  "  they  had  long  been  praying  to  God 
to  send  a  white  man  to  stop  the  war." 

The  Gaboon  mission,  since  its  distui'bance  by  the 
French  in  1844,  has  been  re-established,  and  has  ex- 
perienced courteous  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the 
French  authorities.  This  mission  occupies  the  impor- 
tant position  at  which  the  great  southern  nation  and 
language  come  in  contact  with  the  more  energetic  men 
of  the  equatorial  region,  and  at  which  great  light  is 
likely  to  be  thrown  on  their  relations.  The  French  also 
have  a  mission  at  the  Gaboon. 

The  mission  to  the  Zulus,  in  the  healthy  region  at 
the  southern  end  of  the  Mozambique  Channel,  was  at 
one  time  divided  between  the  two  branches  of  that 
tribe ;  but  in  consequence  of  wars,  was  afterwards 
united  and  established  in  the  colony  of  Natal.  The 
commercial  crisis  in  the  United  States  in  1837,  led  to 
the  proposal  that  this  mission  should  be  abandoned. 
But  its  influence  had  been  so  beneficial,  that  the  Cape 
colonists  and  their  government  proposed  to  take  meas- 
m-es  to  support  it.  Circumstances,  however,  enabled 
the  American  Board  to  decline  this  proposal,  and  they 
continue  their  operations.  An  effort  is  being  made  by 
this  mission  to  unite  all  similarly  engaged,  in  a  com- 


212        \FRiCA  A^^)  the  American  flag. 


mon  and  uniform  mode  of  treating  the  language  of  the 
south. 

The  Portuguese  have  missions,  both  on  the  east  and 
west  side  of  the  continent. 

Commander  Forbes,  R.  X.,  says  :  "  In  all  the  coun- 
tries which  have  given  up  the  traffic  in  their  fellow- 
men,  the  preaching  of  the  Grospel  and  the  spread  of 
education  have  most  materially  assisted  the  effects  of 
the  coercive  measures  of  our  squadron." 


CHAPTEE  XXI. 


RENEWAL  OF  PIRACY   AND    THE    SLAVE-TRADE  AT  THE   CLOSE  OF 

THE  EUROPEAN  WAR  BRITISH  SQUADRON  TREATIES  WITH  THE 

NATIVES  ORIGIN  OF  BARRACOONS  USE    OF    THE  AMERICAN 

FLAG  IN  THE  SLAVE-TRADE  OFFICIAL   CORRESPONDENCE  ON 

THE    SUBJECT  CONDITION    OF   SLAVES    ON    BOARD    OF  THE 

SLAVE-VESSELS  CASE   OF  THE  VELOZ  PASSAGEIRA  FRENCH 

SQUADRON. 

It  was  the  cessation  of  the  last  great  European  war, 
which  assembled  the  matured  villany  of  the  world  on 
the  African  coast  to  re-establish  the  slave-ti-ade.  This 
traffic  had  been  suspended  during  the  latter  years  of 
the  contest,  as  England  and  the  United  States  had 
abolished  it,  and  the  former  was  strong  enough  at  sea 
to  prevent  other  European  powers  from  engaging  in  it. 
In  fact,  she  had  swept  almost  the  whole  European  marine 
from  the  ocean.  The  treaties  formed  at  the  peace,  left 
Europe  to  the  strife  between  anarchy  and  despotism ; 
and  gave  up  the  coast  of  Africa  to  the  slave-trade  and 
piracy. 

Every  evil  and  every  fear  which  have  harassed  the 
world  since  that  time,  seem  to  be  the  retributions  of  an 


814  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

indignant  Providence.  Let  it  not  be  imagined  that 
these  dealings  of  justice  with  men  are  at  an  end. 
What  could  atone  for  giving  up  the  coaste  of  a  whole 
continent  to  be  ravaged  by  the  slave-shipe  of  France, 
Spain,  and  Portugal?  What  compensation  for  this 
vncious  and  deadly  scourge  has  Africa  yet  received  ? 
The  cruising,  suffering,  sickness,  deaths  and  expenses 
of  nearly  half  a  century  have  not  remedied  the  crime 
of  signing  these  treaties.  The  ambassador,  minister, 
or  whoever  he  was,  tliat  signed  them,  bears  a  load  of 
guilt,  such  as  few  mortal  men  have  assumed. 

England  set  about  remedying  this  in  a  more  com- 
mendable spirit,  as  soon  as  the  years  of  free  and  un- 
restricted crime,  which  she  had  really  granted  to  these 
nations,  were  run  out.  During  about  twenty  years 
subsequently,  when  treaties  ^vith  these  powers  had 
granted  mutual  right  of  search  and  capture,  three  him- 
dred  vessels  were  seized,  having  slaves  on  board. 
But  during  the  latter  part  of  this  period,  more  than 
one  hundred  thousand  half-dead  negroes  were  annu- 
ally landed  from  slave-vessels  in  Cuba  and  Brazil. 

In  1S39  the  corrective  was  more  stringently  applied. 
Permission  had  then,  or  soon  after,  been  wrung  from 
different  slave-trading  powers,  to  capture  vessels  out- 
ward-bound for  Africa,  when  fitted  for  the  slave-trade, 
as  well  as  after  they  had  taken  in  their  cargoes.  The 
treaties  provided  that  vessels  equipped  for  the  traffic 


EQUIPMENT  TREATIES. 


215 


I  might  be  captured,  so  as  to  prevent  the  crime.  A 
slaver  was  thus  to  be  taken,  because  she  was  a  slaver ; 
just  as  it  is  better  to  shoot  the  wolf  before  he  has  killed 
the  sheep  than  afterwards.  If  a  vessel,  therefore,  was 
foimd  on  the  African  coast  with  slave-irons,  water  in 
sufficient  quantity  for  a  slave-cargo,  with  a  slave-deck 
laid  for  packing  slaves — somewhat  as  the  carcases  of 
sheep  and  pigs  in  a  railway  train,  with  the  exception 
of  the  fresh  air — she  was  seized  and  condemned  before 
committing  the  overt  a*ct.  Under  this  arrangement, 
with  a  rigorous  squadron,  double  the  nmnber  of  cap- 
tures were  made,  during  the  next  ten  years,  as  com- 
pared with  the  previous  twenty. 

Seeing,  then,  that,  as  before  noticed,  one  thousand 
and  seventy  slave-vessels  were  captured,  and  of  the 
slaves  who  were  not  dead,  a  great  proportion  were 
landed  at  Sierra  Leone,  and  that  the  whole  population 
of  that  colony,  although  established  for  nearly  sixty 
years,  does  not  amount  to  more  than  forty-five  thousand 
souls,  young  and  old,  it  may  be  conceived  what  a  fear- 
ful waste  of  life  has  arisen  even  from  deliverance. 

The  efibrts  of  this  squadron  were  conjoined  with 
those  of  France  and  the  United  States.  The  former 
had  withdrawn  from  the  treaty  stipulating  the  right  of 
search,  and  sent  a  squadi'on  of  her  own  to  prevent 
French  vessels  from  engaging  in  the  slave-ti-ade ;  and 
the  United  States,  which  never  has  surrendered,  and 


216 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAI^  FLAG. 


never  will  surrender,  the  inviolability  of  her  own  flag 
to  a  foreign  power,  guaranteed,  in  1842,  to  keep  a 
squadron  on  the  coast.  Tliese,  together  with  other 
subsidiary  means,  had  reduced  the  export  of  slaves  in 
1849  to  about  thirty-seven  thousand,  from  one  hundred 
and  five  thousand.  And  since  that  period  the  trade 
has  lessened,  until  in  Brazil,  the  greater  slave-mart,  it 
has  become  almost  extinct ;  although  at  times  it  has 
been  earned  on  briskly  with  the  island  of  Cuba. 

The  subsidiary  means  alluded  to  arose  out  of  the 
presence  of  tlie  squadrons,  and  would  have  had  no 
effect  without  them.  They  consist  in  arrangements,  on 
the  part  of  England,  with  some  of  the  native  powers, 
to  join  in  checking  the  evil,  and  substitute  legal  trade, 
and  in  the  conversion  of  the  old  slave-factories  and 
forts  into  positions  defensive  against  their  fonner  pur- 
pose. 

These  measm-es  have  also  prepared  the  way  for  the 
establishment  of  Christian  missions,  as  well  as  per- 
mitted to  legitimate  traffic  its  full  development.  Mis- 
sions and  the  slave-trade  have  an  inverse  ratio  be- 
tween them  as  to  their  progress.  When  the  one 
dwindles,  the  other  grows.  Although  it  was  no  osten- 
sible purpose  of  the  squadron  to  forward  missions,  yet 
the  presence  of  cruisers  has  been  essential  to  their  es- 
tablishment and  success. 

Trade  of  all  kinds  was  originally  an  adjunct  to  the 


ORIGIN  OF  BARRACOONS.       ~  217 

slave-trade.  Cargoes  were  to  be  sold  where  they  could 
find  a  purchaser.  Gold,  ivory,  dye-stuffe  and  pepper 
were  the  articles  procured  on  the  coast.  All  of  these 
are  from  exhaustible  sources.  The  great  vegetable 
productions  of  the  countiy,  constituting  heavy  cargoes, 
have  but  lately  come  into  the  course  of  commerce. 
Hunting  and  roaming  about  suppHed  the  former  ar- 
ticles of  commerce.  The  heavier  ai*ticles  now  in  de- 
mand require  more  industry  with  the  hands,  and  a 
settled  life.  Trade  thus  becomes,  inconsistent  with 
slavery,  and  hostile  to  it;  and  the  more  so  as  it  be- 
comes more  dependent  on  the  collection  of  oil,  ground- 
nuts, and  other  products  of  agriculture.  Covering  the 
coast  now  with  ti-ading  establishments,  excludes  the 
slaver.  The  efforts  of  the  squadrons  were  necessary  to 
carry  out  this  proceeding,  for  commerce  needed  to  be 
protected  against  the"pii'acies  of  the  slaver  afloat  and 
the  ravages  of  the  slaver  on  shore. 

Exposure  to  capture  gave  origin  to  the  barracoons. 
A  slaver  could  no  longer  leisurely  dispose  of  her  cargo, 
at  different  points,  in  return  for  slaves  who  happened 
to  be  there.  The  crime  now  required  concealment  and 
rapidity.  Wholesale  dealers  on  shore  had  to  collect 
victims  sufficient  for  a  cargo  to  be  taken  on  board  at  a 
moment's  notice.  This  requii-ed  that  the  slaver  should 
arrive  at  the  station,  with  arrangements  previously 
made  with  the  slave-factor,  ready  to  "  take  in or  that 

10 


218 


AFRICA  AND  THF  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


she  should  bring  over  a  cargo  of  goods  in  payment  for 
the  slaves. 

In  the  case  c»f  falling  in  with  British  cruisers,  an 
American  slaver  was  inviolate',  on  presenting  her  regis- 
ter, or  sea-letter,  as  a  proof  of  nationality,  and  could 
not  be  searched  or  detained.  But  the  risk  of  falling  in 
with  American  cruisers,  especially  if  co-operating  with 
the  British,  led  to  the  disguise  of  legal  trading;  with 
a  cargo  corresponding  to  the  manifest,  and  all  the  ship's 
papers  in  fonn.  An  instance  of  this  occmred,  as  will 
be  seen,  in  the  capture  of  the  second  slaver  by  the 
"  Perry." 

The  American  flag,  in  these  ways,  became  deeply 
involved  in  the  slave  traffic.  How  far  this  acted  injuri- 
ously to  the  interests  of  Africa,  is  seen  in  the  complaints 
of  Buchanan  and  Roberts,  and  in  the  reports  of  our  min- 
isters and  consuls,  and  of  those  of  the  English,  at  Bra- 
zil. In  1849,  the  British  consul  at  Rio,  in  his  public 
correspondence,  says :  "  One  of  the  mo-t  notorious 
slave-dealers  in  this  capital,  when  speaking  of  the  em- 
plo^nnent  of  American  vessels  in  the  slave-trade,  said, 
a  few  days  ago  :  '  I  am  worried  by  the  Americans,  who 
insist  upon  my  hiring  their  vessels  for  slave-trade.' " 

Of  this  there  is  also  abundant  and  distressing  eW- 
dence  from  our  own  diplomatic  officers.  Besides  a 
lengthy  correspondence  from  a  preceding  minister  near 
the  court  of  Brazil,  the  President  of  the  United  States 


TRANSFER  OF  AMERICAN  SLAVES.  219 


transmitted  a  report  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  in 
December,  1850,  to  the  Senate  of  the  United  States, 
with  documents  relating  to  the  African  slave-trade.  A 
resolution  had  previously  passed  the  Senate,  calling 
upon  the  Executive  for  this  information. 

In  these  documents  it  is  stated  that  "  the  number  of 
American  vessels  which,  since  the  1st  of  July,  1844, 
until  the  1st  of  October  last  (1849),  sailed  for  the 
coast  of  Africa  from  this  city,  is  ninety-three.  ...  Of 
these  vessels,  all,  except  five,  have  been  sold  and  de- 
livered on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  have  been  engaged 
in  bringing  over  slaves,  and  many  of  them  have  been 
captured  with  slaves  on  board.  .  .  .  This  pretended  sale 
takes  place  at  the  moment  when  the  slaves  are  ready  to 
be  shipped ;  the  American  captain  and  his  crew  going 
on  shore,  as  the  slaves  are  coming  off,  while  the  Por- 
tuguese or  Italian  jpassengers^  who  came  out  from  Rio 
in  her,  all  at  once  became  the  master  and  crew  of  the 
vessel.  Those  of  the  American  crew  who  do  not  die  of 
coast-fever,  get  back  as  they  can,  many  of  them  being 
compelled  to  come  over  in  slave-vessels,  in  order  to  get 
back  at  all.  Tliere  is  evidence  in  the  records  of  the 
consulate,  of  slaves  having  started  two  or  three  times 
from  the  shore,  and  the  master  and  crew  from  their 
vessel  in  their  boat,  carrying  with  them  the  flag  and 
ship's  papers ;  when,  the  parties  becoming  frightened, 
both  retroceded  ;  the  slaves  were  returned  to  the  shore, 


220  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

and  the  American  master  and  crew  again  went  on  board 
the  vessel.  The  stars  and  stripes  were  again  hoisted 
over  her,  and  kept  flying  until  the  cause  of  the  alarm 
(an  English  cruiser)  departed  from  the  coast,  and  the 
embarkation  was  safely  effected." 

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  following  notice 
from  Brazil :  "  As  in  former  years,  the  slave-dealers 
have  derived  the  greatest  assistance  and  protection  for 
their  criminal  purposes,  from  the  use  of  the  American 
flag,  I  am  happy  to  add  that  these  lawless  and  unprin- 
cipled tradei-s  are  at  present  deprived  of  this  valuable 
protection,  by  a  late  determination  of  the  American 
naval  commander-in-chief  on  this  station,  who  has  caused 
three  vessels,  illegally  using  the  flag  of  the  United 
States,  and  which  were  destined  for  African  voyages, 
to  be  seized  on  their  leaving  this  harbor.  This  proceed- 
ing has  caused  considerable  alarm  and  embarrassment 
to  the  slave-dealers ;  and,  should  it  be  continued,  will 
be  a  severe  blow  to  all  slave-trading  interests." 

Mr.  Tod,  the  American  Minister  at  the  com*t  of  Bra- 
zil, in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  says :  "  As  my 
predecessors  had  already  done,  I  have,  from  time  to 
time,  called  the  attention  of  our  government  to  the  ne- 
cessity of  enacting  a  stringent  law,  having  in  view  the 
entire  withdrawal  of  om*  vessels  and  citizens  jfrom  this 
illegal  commerce  ;  and  after  so  much  has  been  already 
written  upon  the  subject,  it  may  be  deemed  a  work  of 


TESTIMONY  OF  AMERICAN  DIPLOMATISTS.  221 

supererogation  to  discuss  it  further.  The  interests  at 
stake,  however,  are  of  so  high  a  character,  the  integrity 
of  our  flag  and  the  cause  of  humanity  being  at  once 
involved  in  their  consideration,  I  cannot  refrain  from 
bringing  the  topic  afresh  to  the  notice  of  my  govern- 
ment, in  the  hope  that  the  President  may  esteem  it  of 
such  importance  as  to  be  laid  before  Congress,  and  that 
even  at  this  late  day,  legislative  action  may  be  se- 
cured." 

In  this  communication,  a  quotation  is  made  from 
Mr.  Proffit,  one  of  the  preceding  ministers,  to  the  Sec- 
retary of  State,  February,  1844,  in  which  he  says  :  "  I 
regret  to  say  this,  but  it  is  a  fact  not  to  be  disguised 
or  denied,  that  the  slave-trade  is  almost  entirely  carried 
on  under  our  flag,  in  American-built  vessels,  sold  to 
slave-traders  here,  chartered  for  the  coast  of  Africa,  and 
there  sold,  or  sold  here — delivered  on  the  coast.  And, 
indeed,  the  scandalous  traffic  could  not  be  carried  on  to 
any  great  extent,  were  it  not  for  the  use  made  of  om- 
flag,  and  the  facilities  given  for  the  chartering  of  Amer- 
ican vessels,  to  carry  to  the  coast  of  Africa  the  outfit 
for  the  trade,  and  the  material  for  purchasing  slaves." 

Mr.  Wise,  the  American  Minister,  in  his  dispatch  of 
February  15th,  1845,  said  to  Mr.  Calhoun : 

"  It  is  not  to  be  denied,  and  I  boldly  assert  it,  that 
the  administration  of  the  imperial  government  of  Brae 
zil,  is  forcibly  constrained  by  its  influences,  and  is 


222  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

deeply  inculpated  in  its  guilt.  With  that  it  would,  at 
first  sight,  seem  the  United  States  have  nothing  to  do ; 
but  an  intimate  and  full  knowledge  of  the  subject  in- 
fonns  us,  that  the  only  mode  of  carrying  on  that  trade 
between  Africa  and  Brazil,  at  present,  involves  our  laws 
and  our  moral  responsibilities,  as  directly  and  fully  as 
it  does  those  of  this  country  itself  Our  flag  alone  gives 
requisite  protection  against  the  right  of  visit,  search, 
and  seizure ;  and  our  citizens,  in  all  the  characters  of 
owners,  consignees,  of  agents,  and  of  masters  and  crews 
of  our  vessels,  are  concerned  in  the  business,  and  par- 
take of  the  profits  of  the  African  slave-trade,  to  and 
from  the  ports  of  Brazil,  as  fully  as  the  Brazilians  them- 
selves, and  others  in  conjunction  with  whom  they  carry 
it  on.  In  fact,  without  the  aid  of  our  own  citizens  and 
our  flag,  it  could  not  be  carried  on  with  success 
at  aU." 

To  exhibit  the  state  of  the  slave-trade  prior  to  the 
equipment  treaty  in  1S40,  we  have  the  following  in- 
stances from  parliamentary  papers,  and  other  British 
authority : 

"  La  Jeune  Estelle,  being  chased  by  a  British  vessel, 
inclosed  twelve  negroes  in  casks,  and  threw  them  over- 
board." 

"  M.  Oiseau,  commander  of  Le  Louis^  a  French  ves- 
sel, in  completing  his  cargo  at  Calaba,  thrust  the  slaves 
into  a  narrow  space  three  feet  high^  and  closed  the 


CONDITION  OF  A  SLAVE  CARGO. 


223 


hatches.  l^ext  morning  fifty  were  found  dead. 
Oiseau  coolly  went  ashore  to  pui'chase  others  to  sup- 
ply their  place." 

The  following  extract  is  li\<m  a  report  by  Captain 
Hayes  to  the  Admiralty,  of  a  representation  made  to 
him  respecting  one  of  these  vessels  in  1832 : 

"  The  master  having  a  large  cargo  of  these  human 
beings  chained  together^  with  more  humanity  than  his 
fellows,  pei-mitted  some  of  them  to  come  on  deck,  hut 
still  chained  together^  for  the  benefit  of  the  air,  when 
they  immediately  commenced  jumping  overboard, 
hand  in  hand,  and  drowning  in  couples ;  and  (contin- 
ued the  person  relating  the  circumstance)  without  any 
cause  whatever.  Xow  these  people  were  just  brought 
from  a  situation  between  decks,  and  to  which  they 
knew  they  must  return,  where  the  scalding  perspiration 
was  running  from  one  to  the  other  And  men  dy- 
ing by  their  side,  with  full  in  their  view,  living  and 
dead  bodies  chained  together  ;  and  the  living,  in  addi- 
tion to  all  theii'  other  torments,  laboring  imder  the 
most  famishing  thirst  (being  in  very  few  instances  al- 
lowed more  than  a  pint  of  water  a  day) ;  and  let  it  not 
be  forgotten  that  these  unfortunate  people  had  just 
been  torn  from  their  country,  their  families,  their  all ! 
Men  dragged  from  their  wives,  women  from  their  hus- 
bands and  childi*en,  girls  from  their  mothers,  and  boys 
from  their  fathers  ;  and  yet  in  this  man's  eye  (for  heart 


224  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


and  soul  be  could  have  none),  there  was  no  cause  what- 
ever for  jumping  overboard  and  drowning.  This,  in 
truth,  is  a  rough  picture,  but  it  is  not  highly  colored. 
The  men  are  chained  in  pairs^  and  as  a  proof  they  are 
intended  so  to  remain  to  the  end  of  the  voyage,  their 
fetters  are  not  locked^  hut  rnveted  hy  the  hla^ksmith  / 
and  as  deaths  are  frequently  occurring,  living  men  are 
often  for  a  length  of  time  confined  to  dead  hodies  :  the 
living  man  cannot  be  released  till  the  blacksmith  has 
performed  the  operation  of  cutting  the  clinch  of  the 
rivet  with  his  chisel ;  and  I  have  now  an  officer  on 
board  the  Dryad,  who,  on  examining  one  of  these  slave- 
vessels,  found  not  only  living  men  chained  to  dead 
hodies^  hut  the  latter  in  a  jputrid  state?''* 

In  the  notorious  Spanish  slaver,  the  Yeloz  Passageira^ 
captured  with  five  hundred  and  fifty-six  slaves,  after  a 
severe  action,  the  captain  made  the  slaves  assist  to 
work  the  guns  against  their  own  deliverers.  Five  were 
killed  and  one  desperately  wounded. 

"  This  Yeloz  Passageira  had  acquired  so  atrocious  a 
reputation,  that.it  became  an  object  with  our  command- 
ers to  make  a  special  search  for  her. .  Ca*ptain  Arabiu, 
of  the  North  Star,  having  information  on  his  home- 
ward voyage  that  she  would  cross  his  course  near  the 
equator,  made  preparations  to  attack  her,  though  the 


•  Parliamentary  papers,  presented  1832,  B.,  pp.  170,  171. 


CHASING  A  BRAZILIAN  SLAVER.  225 

North  Star  was  of  much  inferior  strength.  Dr.  Walsh, 
who  was  coming  home  in  the  British  vessel,  relates, 
that  at  breakfast,  while  the  conversation  was  turning 
on  the  chances  of  meeting  with  the  slaver,  a  midship- 
man entered  the  cabin,  and  said,  in  a  hurried  manner, 
that  a  sail  was  visible  to  the  northwest.  All  rushed  on 
deck,  and  setting  their  glasses,  distinctly  saw  a  large 
ship  of  three  masts,  apparently  crossing  their  way.  In 
about  an  horn*  she  tacked,  as  if  not  liking  their  appear- 
ance, and  stood  away  before  the  wind.  The  English 
captain  gave  chase.  Escape  seemed  impracticable. 
The  breeze  freshened,  her  hull  became  distinctly  visi- 
ble, and  she  was  now  ascertained  to  be  a  slaver.  She 
doubled,  however,  in  all  directions,  and  seemed  to 
change  her  course  each  moment  to  avoid  her  pursuers. 
Five  guns  w^ere  successively  fired,  and  the  English 
union-flag  hoisted,  but  without  effect;  and  the  wind 
now  dying  away,  the  North  Star  began  to  drop  astern. 
"We  kept  a  sharp  look-out,  with  intense  interest,  lean- 
ing over  the  netting,  and  silently  handing  the  glass  to 
one  another,  as  if  a  word  spoken  would  impede  our 
way.  Thus  closed  the  night.  When  morning  dawned 
we  saw  her,  like  a  speck  on  the  horizon,  standing  due 
north.  The  breeze  increased,  and  again  the  British 
captain  gained  on  the  slaver.  Again  long  shots  were 
sent  after  her,  but  she  only  crowded  more  sail  to  es- 
cape.   At  twelve  we  were  entirely  within  gunshot,  and 

10-^ 


22G  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


one  of  our  long  bow  guns  was  again  fired  at  her.  It 
struck  the  water  along  side,  and  then  for  the  first  time 
she  showed  a  disposition  to  stop.  While  we  were  pre- 
paring a  second,  she  hove  to,  and  in  a  short  time  we 
were  alongside  of  her,  after  a  most  interesting  chase  of 
thirty  hours;  during  which  we  ran  three  hundred 
miles." 

After  all  she  was  not  the  ship  for  which  Captain 
Arab  in  had  been  looking  out,  but  she  was  full  of  slaves. 
"  Behind  her  foremast  was  an  enormous  gun,  turning 
on  a  broad  circle  of  iron,  and  enabling  her  to  act  as  a 
pirate  if  Tier  slaving  speculation  had  failed.  She 
had  taken  in  on  the  coast  of  Africa  five  himdred  and 
sixty-two  slaves,  and  had  been  out  seventeen  days, 
during  which  she  had  thrown  overboard  fifty -five. 

"The  slaves  were  all  inclosed  under  grated  hatch- 
ways between  decks.  The  space  was  so  low  that  they 
sat  between  each  other's  legs,  and  stowed  so  close  to- 
gether that  there  was  no  possibility  of  their  Ipng  down 
or  at  all  changing  their  position,  by  night  or  day.  As 
they  belonged  to,  or  were  shipped  on  account  of,  dif- 
ferent individuals,  they  were  all  branded  like  sheep, 
with  the  owners'  marks,  of  different  forms.  These 
were  impressed  under  their  hearts,  or  on  their  arms, 
and  as  tlie  mate  informed  me,  with  perfect  indiffer- 
ence, "  burnt  with  the  red-hot  iron."  Over  the  hatch- 
ways stood  a  ferocious-looking  fellow,  with  a  scourge 


HOPE  OF  DELIVERANCK 


227 


of  many-twisted  thongs  in  liis  hand,  who  was  the  slave- 
driver  of  the  ship ;  and  whenever  he  heard  the  slight- 
est noise  below,  he  shook  it  over  them,  and  seemed 
eager  to  exercise  it.  I  was  quite  pleased  to  take  this 
hateful  badge  out  of  his  hand ;  and  I  have  kept  it  ever 
since  as  a  horrid  memorial  of  the  reality,  should  I  ever 
be  disposed  to  forget  the  scene  I  witnessed. 

"  As  soon  as  the  poor  creatures  saw  us  looking  down 
at  them,  their  dark  and  melancholy  visages  brightened 
up.  They  perceived  something  of  sjTnpathy  and  kind- 
ness in  om*  looks,  which  they  had  not  been  accustomed 
to  ;  and  feeling  instinctively  that  we  were  friends,  they 
immediately  began  to  shout  and  clap  their  hands.  One 
or  two  had  picked  up  a  few  Portuguese  words,  and 
cried  out,  Yiva !  viva !  The  women  were  particularly 
excited.  They  all  held  up  their  arms,  and  when  we 
bent  down  and  shook  hands  with  them,  they  could  not 
contain  their  delight :  they  endeavored  to  scramble  up 
on  their  knees,  stretching  up  to  kiss  our  hands,  and  we 
understood  they  knew  we  were  coming  to  liberate  them. 
Some,  however,  hung  their  heads  in  apparently  hope- 
less dejection ;  some  were  greatly  emaciated,  and  some, 
particularly  children,  seemed  dying.  But  the  circum- 
stance which  struck  us  most  forcibly  was,  how  it  was 
possible  for  such  a  number  of  human  beings  to  exist, 
packed  up  and  wedged  together  as  tight  as  they  could 
cram,  in  low  cells,  three  feet  high,  the  greater  part  of 


228  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

which,  except  that  immediately  under  the  grated  hatch- 
ways, were  shut  out  from  light  and  air ;  and  this,  when 
the  thermometer,  exposed  to  open  sky,  was  standing  in 
the  shade  on  our  deck  at  89°.  The  space  between 
decks,  divided  into  two  compartments,  was  three  feet 
three  inches  high  ;  the  size  of  one  was  16  feet  by  18, 
and  of  the  other  40  by  21 ;  into  the  first  were  crammed 
the  women  and  the  girls,  into  the  second  the  men  and 
boys.  Two  hundred  and  twenty-six  fellow-creatures 
were  thus  thrust  into  one  space  of  288  square  feet,  and 
three  hundred  and  thirty  into  another  space  of  800 
square  feet,  giving  the  whole  an  average  of  23  inches  ; 
and  to  each  of  the  icomen  not  more  than  13  incJies. 
We  also  found  manacles  and  fetters  of  difierent  kinds ; 
but  it  appeared  that  they  all  had  been  taken  ofi"  before 
we  boarded.  The  heat  of  these  horrid  places  was  so 
great,  and  the  odor  so  offensive,  that  it  was  quite 
impossible  to  enter  them,  even  had  there  been  room. 
They  were  measured  as  above  when  the  slaves  had  left 
them.  The  officers  insisted  that  the  poor  suffering 
creatures  should  be  admitted  on  deck,  to  get  air  and 

water  On  looking  into  the  places  where  they  had 

been  crammed,  there  were  found  some  children  next 
the  sides  of  the  ship,  in  the  places  most  remote  from 
air  and  light ;  they  were  lying  nearly  in  a  torpid  state, 
after  the  rest  had  turned  out.  The  little  creatures 
seemed  indifferent  as  to  life  or  death  ;  and  when  they 


THE  VICTIMS  ABANDONED. 


229 


were  earned  on  deck,  many  of  them  could  not  stand. 
After  enjoying,  for  a  short  time,  the  unusual  luxury  of 
air,  some  water  was  brought ;  it  was  then  that  the  ex- 
tent of  their  sufferings  was  exposed  in  a  fearful  manner. 
They  all  mshed  like  maniacs  towards  it.  'No  entreaties, 
or  threats,  or  blows  could  restrain  them ;  they  shrieked, 
and  struggled  and  fought  with  one  another,  for  a  drop 
of  this  precious  liquid,  as  if  they  grew  rabid  at  the 
sight  of  it.  There  is  nothing  which  slaves,  in  the  mid- 
passage,  suffer  from  so  much  as  want  of  water.  It  is 
sometimes  usual  to  take  out  casks  filled  with  sea-water 
as  ballast,  and  when  the  slaves  are  received  on  board, 
to  start  the  casks  and  refill  them  with  fresh.  On  one 
occasion,  a  ship  from  Bahia  neglected  to  change  the 
contents  of  the  casks,  and  on  the  mid-passage  found,  to 
their  horror,  that  they  were  filled  with  nothing  but  salt- 
water.   All  the  slaves  on  hoard  perished^ 

At  the  time  of  this  seizure,  Brazil  was  precluded 
from  the  slave-ti-ade  north  of  the  equator ;  but  the  period 
had  not  arrived  when,  by  treaty,  the  southern  trade 
was  to  be  extinguished.  "  The  captain  of  this  slaver 
was  provided  with  papers,  which  exhibited  an  apparent 
confoi-mity  to  the  law,  and  which,  false  as  they  may 
have  been,  yet  could  in  no  way  be  absolutely  disproved. 
The  accounts  of  the  slaves  themselves,  who  stated  they 
had  originally  come  from  parts  of  Afi-ica  nort/i  of  the 
line — the  course  which  the  slaver  was  steering — ^her 


230 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


flight  from  the  English  cruiser — were  circumstances 
raising  suspicion  the  most  violent ;  but  the  reader  will 
be  not  a  little  disappointed  to  learn,  that,  with  all  this, 
the  case  was  deemed  too  doubtful,  in  point  of  legal 
proof,  to  bear  out  a  legal  detention ;  and  the  slaver 
therefore,  after  nine  horn's  of  close  investigation,  was 

finally  set  at  liberty,  and  suffered  to  proceed  It 

was  dark  when  we  separated,  and  the  last  parting 
sounds  we  heard  from  the  unhallowed  ship,  were  the 
cries  and  shrieks  of  slaves,  suffering  under  some  bodily 
infliction." —  Walsh^  vol.  ii.  pp.  474-484. 

The  question  arises,  ought  not  humanity  to  have 
overcome  all  these  considerations,  and  led  to  the  deliv- 
erance of  the  victims?  K  one  death  in  such  circum- 
stances had  occmTed,  ought  not  a  sense  of  justice  to 
have  led  to  the  detention  of  the  slaver,  and  the  convey- 
ance of  the  captain  to  his  own  government,  to  be  tried 
for  murder  ? 

The  traders  of  France  were  nearly  in  the  same  posi- 
tion with  those  of  the  United  States,  and  there  was  the 
same  necessity  for  guarding  against  the  abuse  of  their 
flag.  Before  proceeding  to  the  proper  history  of  the 
American  squadron  in  its  efforts  for  the  great  purposes 
it  had  in  view,  it  may  be  advisable  briefly  to  notice 
that  France,  in  1845,  had  formed  with  England  a  treaty 
under  which  both  parties  engaged  to  keep  a  squadron 
of  not  less  than  twenty-six  cruisers  on  the  coast.  The 


THE  FRENCH  SQUADRON. 


231 


number  was  afterwards,  by  a  separate  agreeraent,  re- 
duced on  the  part  of  France  to  twelve  vessels. 

The  reasons  for  this,  and  the  few  captures  made  by 
French  vessels,  apply  as  well  to  the  American  cruisers, 
and  account  for  the  nature  of  the  stipulation  in  the 
treaty  of  Washington,  that  the  United  States  should 
only  employ  on  the  African  coast  a  squadron  of  eighty 
guns.  These  two  nations  have  not,  as  England  has,  the 
right  by  treaty  with  other  powers,  to  interfere  with  any 
vessels  except  their  own.  Hence  the  captures  made  by 
English  cruisers  necessarily  outnumbered  greatly  the 
captm-es  made  by  both  the  other  powers. 

The  duty  of  the  American  and  French  squadi'on  was 
in  fact  restrictive  in  respect  to  their  own  citizens  alone ; 
and  while  indispensable  for  the  general  success  of  these 
operations,  they  could  not  exhibit  any  thing  like  the 
same  amount  of  result  in  captures,  whatever  might  be 
the  zeal  and  activity  of  the  cruisers.  Several  slavers, 
however,  have  been  captured  by  this  squadron ;  and  its 
presence  has  restrained  the  employment  of  the  French 
flag  in  that  traffic. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


UNITED  STATES  SQUADRON"  TREATl'  OF  WASHINGTON. 

There  has  been  noted  in  the  history  of  Liberia,  prior 
to  the  establishment  of  the  commonwealth,  the  occa- 
sional arrival  of  American  men-of-war  on  the  west 
coast  of  Africa.  But  an  organized  squadron  was  not 
established  until  the  year  1843. 

The  question  as  to  the  effects  arising  from  the  abuse 
of  the  American  flag  was  brought  into  discussion  in 
1842,  between  American  and  British  diplomatists. 
Great  Britain  had  to  acknowledge,  as  the  slave-ti-ade 
by  the  United  States  had  only  been  declared  piracy  in 
a  municipal  sense,  that  although  a  vessel  was  fully 
equipped  for  the  trade,  or  even  had  slaves  on  board,  if 
American,  she  was  in  no  sense  amenable  to  British 
cruisers.  It,  however,  leaves  the  question  unsettled. 
How  is  a  vessel  to  be  ascertained  to  be  American  ?  The 
plea  that  any  vessel,  hoisting  any  flag,  is  thereby 
secured  against  all  interference  in  all  circumstances, 
never  can  be  seriously  offered  as  a  principle  of  national 
law.  Neither  the  United  States  nor  any  other  power 
has  ever  acted  on  a  dogma  of  this  breadth.  The 


NATIONALITY;  IIOW  ASCERTAINED.  233 

United  States  do  not  claim  that  their  flag  shall  give 
immunity  to  those  who  are  not  American ;  for  such  a 
claim  would  render  it  a  cover  to  piracy  and  to  acts  of 
the  greatest  ati'ocity.  But  any  vessel  which  hoists  the 
American  flag,  claims  to  be  American,  and  therefore 
while  she  may  be  boarded  and  examined  by  an  Ameri- 
can cruiser,  this  right  is  not  conceded  to  a  foreign 
cruiser ;  for  the  flag  is  prima  facie  evidence,  although 
not  conclusive  proof  of  nationality ;  and  if  such  vessel 
be  really  American,  the  boarding  oflScer  will  be  re- 
garded in  the  light  of  a  trespasser,  and  the  vessel  will 
have  all  the  protection  which  that  flag  supplies.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  vessel  prove  not  to  be  American, 
the  flag  illegally  worn  will  afford  her  no  protection. 
Therefore  a  foreign  officer  boarding  a  vessel  under  the 
flag  of  the  United  States,  does  it  upon  his  own  respon- 
sibility for  all  consequences. 

These  principles  have  been  carried  out  in  the  co- 
operation and  joint  cruising  with  British  vessels,  as  will 
hereafter  be  seen,  ^vith  occasional  exceptions  of  blus- 
tering and  blundering,  when  American  cruisers  were 
absent.  This  state  of  things,  however,  sometimes  pro- 
duces a  strange  dilemma.  The  brig  "  Lawrence,"  which 
was  really  American,  was  captm-ed  and  condemned  by 
an  English  admiralt}^  court,  as  a  slaver,  all  of  which 
was  contrary  to  national  rights.  But  it  was  made  out 
that  she  was  a  slaver,  and  although  the  master  pro- 


234  AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

tested,  he  found  himself  helpless.  The  vessel  was 
justly  condemned  as  a  slaver,  but  condemned  by  the 
wrong  party,  which  had  no  legal  jurisdiction  over  her. 
The  master  was  a  pirate  if  he  fell  into  the  hands  of 
American  authorities,  and  thus  was  debarred  all  claim 
for  redress. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  many  such  cases  occurred, 
and  would  again  on  the  withdrawal  (  »f  the  squadron. 
This,  therefore,  gave  a  kind  of  impunity  to  the  British 
cruisers,  in  violating  the  rights  of  the  American  flag, 
and  kept  things  in  an  unsound  state.  The  only  remedy 
for  it,  was  in  the  pennanent  establishment  of  an  Ameri- 
can squadron  on  the  coast. 

Dr.  Hall,  the  agent  in  the  Maryland  colony  at  Cape 
Palmas  says,  "  aSo  stronger  incentive  could  be  given  to 
the  commission  of  these  outrageous  acts  on  the  part  of 
the  British  cmisers,  than  the  course  pursued  by  the 
United  States  government,  in  declaring  the  slave-trade 
piracy,  and  then  taking  no  effective  steps  to  prevent  its 
prosecution  under  their  owii  flag !"  Again  :  "  K  our 
force  is  not  increased,  and  we  continue  to  disregard  the 
prostitution  of  our  flag,  annoyances  to  our  merchant- 
men will  more  frequently  occur.  We  shall  no  longer 
receive  the  protection  of  British  cruisei'S,  which  has 
ever  been  rendered  to  American  vessels,  and  without 
which  the  whole  coast  would  be  lined  with  robbers 
and  pirates." 


CHAPTEK  XXIII. 


CASE  OF  THE    "  MARY  CARVER,"  SEIZED  BY  THE  NATIVES  MEAS- 
URES OF  THE  SQUADRON  IN  CONSEQUENCE  DESTRUCTION  OF 

TOWNS  LETTER  FROM  U.  S.  BRIG  "  TRUXTOn"  IN  RELATION  TO 

A  CAPTURED  SLAVER. 

The  ti-eaty  of  Washington  in  1842,  settled  and  de- 
fined matters  clearly  and  honorably,  both  to  the  United 
States  and  Great  Britain ;  and  agreeably  to  the  treaty, 
the  African  squadron  was  established  in  the  year  fol- 
lowing, under  the  command  of  Commodore  Matthew 
C.  Perry,  consisting  of  the  flag-ship  Macedonian,  the 
sloop -of- war  Saratoga,  the  sloop-of-war  Decatur,  and 
the  brig  Porpoise.  The  squadi-on  selected  its  rendez- 
vous at  Porto  Praya,  St.  Jago,  one  of  the  Cape  Yerde 
Islands,  in  lat.  14°  54'  IST.  and  long.  23°  30'  W. 

One  of  the  first  acts  of  this  squadron  was  the  chas- 
tisement of  the  natives  for  an  outrage  on  American 
commerce. 

The  people  of  Little  Berebee,  eastward  of  Cape 
Palmas,  had  some  time  previously  mm-dered  the  cap- 
tain and  crew  of  the  American  brig  Mary  Carver." 
This  occurrence  of  itself  establishes  one  point,  which  is 
the  necessity  of  having  cruisers  on  such  a  coast.  The 


236  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


safety  of  commerce  and  the  general  welfare  of  the 
world  are  promoted  bv  inspiring  wrong-doers  with 
wholesome  terror. 

On  two  occasions,  towns  have  been  capiurc»i,  and  in 
one  instance  a  town  fired,  by  our  squadrons  on  the  coast 
of  Sumatra,  for  similar  atrocities  on  our  merchant 
vessels.  But  the  impression  is  soon  forgotten,  and  the 
necessity  for  punishment  occurs  again.  Xow  it  may  be 
expedient  to  act  thus  at  a  distance,  and  trust  only  to 
occasional  proofs  of  just  severity;  but  when  wrong  is 
ever  ready  to  arise,  it  would  be  better  that  the  means 
of  correction  were  at  hand ;  for  in  this  way  is  the 
wrong-doing  most  readily  prevented.  Such,  therefore, 
is  the  best  arrangement  for  all  parties. 

In  a  country  so  near  as  Africa,  and  with  which  the 
United  States  is  so  closely  connected,  the  dut}^  of  pre- 
venting evil  by  the  presence  of  power,  is  imperative ; 
otherwise  we  at  once  jeopardize  our  citizens,  and  lead 
the  savage  into  crime. 

The  commodore,  with  the  frigate  Macedonian,  the 
Saratoga,  and  Decatiu-,  proceeded  to  Cape  Palmas. 
Such  was  then  the  tendency  to  warfare,  that  the  salu- 
ting was  misinteq)reted  as  the  commencement  of  a 
fight,  and  brought  down  a  hostile  tribe  to  share  in  the 
conflict  or  the  spoils.  Tliese  natives  attacked  the  post 
called  Fort  Tubman,  eastward  of  Cape  Palmas,  and 
suffered  some  loss  in  being  driven  off. 


CHASTISEMENT  OF  THE  NATIVES. 


237 


The  squadron  then  proceeded  to  Berebee.  Hav- 
ing landed  a  force  of  about  two  hundred  men, 
and  called  together  the  chiefs  and  head  men,  some 
palavering,  and  a  great  deal  of  lying  on  the  part  of 
the  natives,  took  place.  They  had  really  prepared  foi' 
a  conflict,  which  on  their  attempting  to  run  off,  took 
place.  In  the  melee,  the  king  was  unintentionally 
killed,  eight  or  ten  more  suffered,  and  the  palisades 
and  houses  were  burnt. 

Landings  took  place  afterwards  at  towns  along  the 
coast,  which  had  shared  in  the  crime  and  in  the  spoils. 
A  few  straggling  shots  were  fired  from  the  shores  and 
from  the  woods,  but  without  causing  any  loss.  The 
stockades  and  dwelling-places  were  committed  to  the 
flames. 

Four  towns  w^ere  burnt,  containing  "  from  fifty  to  one 
hundred  houses  each,  neatly  built  with  wicker-work, 
and  thatched  with  palmetto —  It  was  the  commodore's 
orders  to  destroy  property,  but  spare  life."  This  was 
right ;  but  we  have  the  reflection  that  the  penalties  may 
not  fall  altogether  upon  the  guilty,  and  that  in  every 
point  of  view  the  prevention  of  such  murderous  out- 
rages as  here  met  punishment,  is,  when  it  can  be  done 
by  a  show  of  authority,  better  than  such  retaliation. 

Humanity  gained  in  other  respects  by  this  chastise- 
ment. The  capricious  hostilities  of  the  natives  against 
the  Maryland  colony  were  checked,  and  their  appetite 


%S%  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

for  plunder  brought  under  wholesome  correction,  while 
missionaries  were  secured  against  their  violence.  A 
native  also  who  was  being-  tortured,  under  a  senseless 
accu>ation  of  causing  sickness  in  a  chief,  was  rescued. 
All  treaties  bj  which  the  colonies  consent  to  the  incor- 
poration of  the  natives,  stipulate  that  this  atrocity 
shall  cease.  Tlie  thinking  men  among  the  natives  feel 
no  repugnance  in  giving  it  up.  It  is  well  that  the  colo- 
nial and  native  authorities  be  sustained  in  counteractino: 
the  furious  superstition  of  the  mob,  by  the  power  of 
solemn  obligation. 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Ameri- 
can Colonization  Society,  Febniary  3d,  1844,  from  J. 
N.  Lewis,  acting  Colonial  Secretary  of  Liberia,  it  is  re- 
marked, "  Some  months  ago  the  Porpoise  sent  home 
the  American  brigantine  Uncas,  under  very  suspicious 
circumstances.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  her  in- 
tention was  to  take  from  the  coast  a  cargo  of  slaves. 
Still  I  am  imder  the  impression  that  your  courts  will 
acquit  her.  I  am  informed  that  a  bill  is  before  Con- 
gress making  it  criminal  for  vessels  under  the  Ameri- 
can flag  to  sell  goods  at  slave-factories.  If  such  a  bill 
pass  the  Houses,  the  slave-traders  will  be  much  injured, 
as  they  get  their  principal  supplies  from  vessels  bear- 
ing the  flag  of  your  coimtry  Your  flag  is  used  to  pro- 
tect the  slavers  from  interference  by  British  vessels  of 
war  while  they  are  landing  their  cargoes ;  and  when 


THE  SQUADRON  AND  LIBERIA.  239 


the  slaves  are  put  on  board  they  throw  overboard,  or 
otherwise  destroy,  the  '  stars  and  stripes,'  and  depend 
upon  the  swiftness  of  their  sailing  to  escape  capture  by 
a  British  man-of-war." 

The  squadron  was  actively  employed,  cruising  over 
the  entire  extent  of  the  slave-coast,  rendering  aid  and 
protection  to  legal  commerce,  and  checking  the  slave- 
trade  carried  on  in  American  vessels.  It  was  relieved 
in  1845  by  the  an-ival  of  Commodore  Skinner,  with  the 
sloops-of-war  Jamestown,  Yorktown,  and  Preble,  and 
the  brig  Truxton. 

The  commander  of  the  Decatur,  on  his  return  to  the 
United  States,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Massachusetts  Colonization  Society,  alluding  to  the 
object  of  the  Society,  says  that  he  cannot  but  view  it 
"  as  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  important  that  can 
claim  the  attention  and  sympathy  of  the  Christian  and 
philanthropist  at  the  present  day :  besides,  that  in  a  po- 
litical and  national  point  of  view,  it  is,  I  think,  well 
worthy  the  study  of  our  ablest  statesmen,  and  the  fos- 
tering aid  of  government,  in  consideration  of  the  present 
and  futui-e  prosperity  of  our  agricultural,  manufactur- 
ing and  commercial  interests.  For  were  Africa,  as  she 
is  now,  to  be  stmck  out  of  existence,  all  these  interests 
would  feel  it  a  calamity ;  but  were  a  requisition  now 
made  for  only  a  single  gannent  for  each  individual  of 
the  myriads  of  the  African  race,  it  would  probably  re- 


240  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

quire  the  energies  of  the  whole  world  for  at  least  five 
years  to  come  to  supply  it." 

A  letter  from  an  officer  of  the  Truxton,  off  Sierra 
Leone,  dated  March  29th,  1845,  says:  "Ilerewe  are 
in  tow  of  Iler  Britannic  Majest^^'s  steamer  Ardent,  with 
an  American  schooner,  our  prize,  and  a  Spanish  brig- 
antine,  prize  to  the  steamer,  captured  in  the  Rio  Pon- 
gas,  one  lumdi-ed  miles  to  the  northward.  "We  had 
good  information  when  we  left  Monrovia,  that  there 
was  a  vessel  in  the  Pongas,  waiting  a  cargo ;  and  on 
our  arrival  off  the  river,  finding  an  English  man-of-war 
steamer,  arrangements  were  made  to  send  a  combined 
boat  expedition,  to  make  captures  for  both  vessels." 
The  American  boats  were  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Blunt. 

"  On  coming  in  sight,  our  little  schooner  ran  up 
American  colors,  to  protect  hereelf  from  any  suspicion, 
when  our  boats,  after  i-unning  along  side  of  her,  pro- 
duced the  stripes  and  stars,  much  to  the  astonishment 
of  those  on  board.  She  proved  to  be  the  Spitfire,  of 
New  Orleans,  and  ran  a  cargo  of  slaves  from  the  same 
place  last  year.  Of  only  about  one  hundred  tons  ;  but 
though  of  so  small  a  size  she  stowed  three  hundred  and 
forty  six  negroes,  and  landed  near  Matanzas,  Cuba, 
three  Inindred  and  thirty-nine. 

"  Between  her  decks,  where  the  slaves  are  packed, 
there  is  not  room  enough  for  a  man  to  sit,  unless  in- 
clining his  head  forward  :  their  food,  half  a  pint  of 


THE  HAUNTS  OF  THE  SLAVER. 


241 


rice  per  day,  with  one  pint  of  water.  No  one  can  im- 
agine the  sufferings  of  slaves  on  their  passage  across, 
unless  the  conveyances  in  which  they  are  taken  are 
examined.  Our  friend  had  none  on  board,  but  his 
cargo  of  three  hundred  were  ready  in  a  barracoon, 
waiting  a  good  opportunity  to  start.  A  good  hearty 
negro  costs  but  twenty  dollars,  or  thereabouts,  and  is 
purchased  for  rum,  powder,  tobacco,  cloth,  &c.  They 
bring  from  three  to  four  hundred  dollars  in  Cuba.  The 
English  are  doing  every  thing  in  their  power  to  prevent 
the  slave-trade ;  and  keep  a  force  of  thirty  vessels  on 
this  coast,  all  actively  cruising.  Tlie  British  boats 
also  brought  down  a  prize ;  and  the  steamer  is  at  this 
moment  towing  the  Truxton,  the  Tnixton's  prize,  and 
her  own,  at  the  rate  of  six  miles  an  hour. 

"  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  get  up  these  rivei-s  to  the 
places  where  the  slavers  lie.  The  whole  coast  is  inter- 
sected by  innumerable  rivers,  with  branches  pouring 
into  them  from  every  quarter,  and  communicating  with 
each  other  by  narrow,  circuitous  and  very  numerous 
creeks,  bordered  on  each  side  with  impenetrable  thick- 
ets of  mangroves.  In  these  creeks,  almost  concealed  by 
the  trees,  the  vessels  lie,  and  often  elude  the  strictest 
search.  But  when  they  have  taken  on  board  their  liv- 
ing cargo,  and  are  getting  out  to  sea,  the  British  are 
very  apt  to  seize  them,  except,  alas !  when  they  are 
protected  hy  the  hanner  of  the  United  States?"^ 

11 


242 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


The  Sierra  Leone  "Watchman,  of  February  19th, 
adds,  that  "  the  slave-traders  at  Shebar  and  in  the  river 
Gallinas  had  been  much  emboldened  by  the  prosecu- 
tion of  Captain  Denham,  in  England,  for  his  summary 
destruction  of  sundry  baiTacoons,  and  0]>enly  asserted 
their  determination  to  seek  redress  in  the  English 
courts,  if  they  were  again  molested  in  their  opera- 
tions." 


CHAPTEK  XXIY. 


CAPTURE  OF  THE   SLAVE-BARQUE  "  PONS"  SLAVES  LANDED  AT 

MONROVIA  CAPTURE      OF      THE     SLAVE-EQUIPPED  VESSELS 

"  PANTHER,"  "  ROBERT  WILSON,"  "  CHANCELLOR,"  ETC.  LET- 
TER FROM  THE   "  JAMESTOWN"  IN  REFERENCE   TO  LIBERIA  

AFFAIR  WITH    THE    NATIVES    NEAR  CAPE   PALMAS  SEIZURE 

AND  CONDEMNATION  OF  THE  SLAVER  "  H.  N.  GAMBRILL." 

On  the  30tli  of  I^ovember,  the  Yorktown,  Com- 
mander Bell,  captured  the  American  bark  "  Pons,"  off 
Kabenda,  on  the  south  coast,  with  eight  hundred  and 
ninety-six  slaves  on  board.  This  vessel  had  been  at 
Kabenda  about  twenty  days  before,  during  which 
she  had  been  closely  watched  by  the  British  cruiser 
"  Cygnet."  The  Cygnet,  leaving  one  morning,  the 
master  of  the  Pons,  James  Berry,  immediately  gave 
up  the  ship  to  Gallano,  the  Portuguese  master.  Dur- 
ing the  day,  so  expeditious  had  they  been,  that  water 
and  provisions  were  received  on  board,  and  nine  hun- 
dred and  three  slaves  were  embarked ;  and  at  eight 
o'clock  the  same  evening,  the  Pons  was  under  way. 
Instead  of  standing  out  to  sea,  she  kept  in  with  the 
coast  during  the  night ;  and  in  the  morning  discoveiv 


244  AFRICA  AXD  Tin:  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

ing  the  British  cniisor,  furled  Bails,  and  drifted  so  close 
to  tlie  shore  that  the  negroes  came  down  to  the  beach 
in  hopes  of  her  being  wrecked.  She  thus  eluded  detec- 
tion. When  clear  of  the  Cvgnet,  she  stood  out  to 
sea,  and  two  days  afterwards  was  captured  by  the 
Yorktown. 

Commander  Bell  says  :  "  The  captain  took  us  for  an 
English  man-of-war,  and  hoisted  the  American  colors ; 
and  no  doubt  had  papers  to  correspond."  These  he 
threw  overboard.  "  As  soon  as  the  slaves  were  recap- 
tured, they  gave  a  shout  that  c<-^\\]<\  liave  been  heard  a 
mile." 

During  the  night  eighteen  of  the  slaves  had  died,  and 
one  jumped  overboard.  The  master  accounted  for  the 
number  dving  from  the  necessity"  of  his  sending  below 
all  the  slaves  on  deck,  and  closing  the  hatches,  when 
he  fell  in  with  the  Yorktown,  in  order  to  escape  de- 
tection. Ought  not  every  snch  death  fo  be  regarded  as 
murder  ? 

Commander  Bell  says :  *'  The  vessel  has  no  slave- 
deck,  and  upwards  of  eight  hundred  and  fifty  were 
piled,  almost  in  bulk,  on  water-casks  below.  As  the 
ship  appeared  to  be  less  than  three  hundred  and  fifty 
tons,  it  seemed  impossible  that  one-half  could  have 
lived  to  cross  the  Atlantic.  About  two  hundred  filled 
up  the  spar-deck  alone  when  they  were  permitted  to 
come  np  from  below :  and  yet  the  captain  assured  me 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  SLAVER  PONS.  245 


that  it  was  his  intention  to  have  taken  four  hundred 
more  on  board,  if  he  could  have  spared  the  time. 

"  The  stench  from  below  was  so  great  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  stand  more  than  a  few  minutes  near  the 
hatchways.  Our  men  who  went  below  from  curiosity, 
were  forced  up  sick  in  a  few  minutes :  then  all  the 
hatches  w^ere  off.  What  must  have  been  the  sufferings 
of  those  poor  wretches,  when  the  hatches  were  closed  ! 
I  am  informed  that  very  often  in  these  cases,  the 
stronger  will  strangle  the  weaker ;  and  this  was  proba- 
bly the  reason  why  so  many  died,  or  rather  were  found 
dead  the  morning  after  the  captm-e.  None  but  an  eye- 
witness can  form  a  conception  of  the  horrors  these  poor 
creatures  must  endure  in  their  transit  across  the  ocean. 

"  I  regret  to  say,  that  most  of  this  misery  is  produced 
by  our  own  countrymen.  They  fiu'nish  the  means  of 
conveyance  in  spite  of  existing  enactments;  and  al- 
though there  are  strong  circumstances  against  Berry, 
the  late  master  of  the  Pons,  sufficient  to  induce  me 
to  detain  him,  if  I  should  meet  him,  I  fear  neither 
he  nor  his  employers  can  be  reached  by  our  present 
laws." 

In  this  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Comman- 
der Bell  further  adds  :  "  For  twenty  days  did  Berry  wait 
in  the  roadstead  of  Kabenda,  protected  by  the  flag  of 
his  country,  yet  closely  watched  by  a  foreign  man-of- 
war,  who  was  certain  of  his  intention  :  but  the  instant 


246 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


that  cruiser  is  compelled  to  withdraw  for  a  few  hours, 
he  springs  at  the  opportunity  of  enriching  himself  and 
owners,  and  disgracing  the  flag  which  had  protected  him." 

The  prize  "  Pons"  was  taken  to  Monrovia.  There  the 
slaves  were  landed,  and  gave  the  people  a  practical 
exhibition  of  the  trade  by  which  their  ancestors  had  been 
torn  from  their  homes.  In  the  fourteen  days  interven- 
ing between  the  capture  and  arrival  of  the  vessel  at 
Monrovia,  one  hundred  and  fifty  had  died. 

Tlie  slaves,"  says  the  Monrovia  Herald  of  Decem- 
ber 28tli,  "  were  much  emaciated,  and  so  debilitated 
that  many  of  them  found  difficulty  in  getting  out  of  the 
boats.  Such  a  spectacle  of  misery  and  wretchedness, 
inflicted  by  a  lawless  and  ferocious  cupidity,  so  excited 
our  people,  that  it  became  unsafe  for  the  captai!i  of  the 
slaver,  who  had  come  to  look  on,  to  remain  on  the 
beach.  Eight  slaves  died  in  harbor  before  they  were 
landed,  and  the  bodies  were  thrown  overboard." 

The  slaves,  who  were  from  eight  to  thirty  years  of 
age,  came  starved  and  thirsting  from  on  board.  Cau- 
tion was  required  in  giving  them  food.  "  When  it  was 
supposed  tliat  the  danger  of  depletion  was  over,  water 
was  poTU*ed  into  a  long  canoe,  into  which  they  plunged 
like  hungry  pigs  into  a  trough — the  stronger  faring  the 
best." 

Still,  the  kindness  of  human  nature  had  not  altogether 
been  obliterated  by  length  and  intensity  of  sufiering. 


DISPOSITION  OF  THE  RECAPTURED.  247 

Two  boys,  brothers,  had  found  beside  them  a  younger 
boy  of  the  same  tribe,  who  was  ill.  They  contrived  to 
nestle  together  on  the  deck,  under  such  shelter  as  the 
cover  of  the  long-boat  oflfered  them — a  place  where  the 
pigs,  if  they  are  small  enough,  are  generally  stowed. 
There  they  made  a  bed  of  some  oakum  for  their  dying 
companion,  and  placed  a  piece  of  old  canvas  imder 
his  head.  Is  ight  and  day  one  was  always  awake  to 
watch  him.  Hardship  rendered  their  care  fniitless : 
the  night  after  the  vessel  anchored  he  died,  and  was 
thrown  overboard. 

The  recaptured  were  apprenticed  out,  and  kindly 
cared  for  by  the  Liberians.  Several  of  them  were 
found,  when  the  Perry  visited  Monrovia,  to  have  be- 
come members  of  churches,  and  others  were  attending 
Sunday-schools. 

Several  empty  slavers  were  captured  by  the  squadron 
about  this  period ;  they  are  thus  noticed  by  the  National 
Intelligencer : — "  It  is  remarkable  that  within  the  same 
week,  should  have  arrived  in  our  ports  as  prizes  to  the 
American  squadron,  for  having  been  engaged  in  the 
slave-trade — the  Pons,  above  mentioned,  captured  by 
the  Yorktown ;  the  Panther,  a  prize  of  the  same  ves- 
sel, which  arrived  at  Charleston  on  Monday ;  and  the 
Robert  Wilson,  a  prize  to  the  sloop-of-war  Jamestown, 
which  reached  Charleston  on  Thm-sday." 

In  1846,  the  sloop-of-war  Marion,  brigs  Dolphin  and 


248 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


Boxer,  with  the  flag-ship  United  States,  Commodore 
Read,  constituted  the  squadron. 

Sixty  miles  of  additional  sea-coast  territory  had  been 
purchased  by  Governor  Roberts,  from  the  natives.  The 
influence  of  traders,  of  the  slave-trade,  and  even  of 
England  being  thrown  in  the  way  of  obtaining  posses- 
sion of  the  purchased  territory.  Governor  Roberts  made 
aj^plication  to  the  commodore,  that  one  of  the  vessels 
of  the  squadron  might  cruise  for  several  weeks  within 
the  limited  territory,  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating 
negotiation.  Tlie  Dolphin  was  assigned  this  service; 
her  commander  offered  General  Lewis,  the  agent,  a 
passage  to  such  points  as  he  wished  to  visit,  and  other- 
wise rendered  service  as  circmiistances  required. 

The  Dolphin  was  lying  at  Cape  Mount,  watching  the 
siL<picious  American  bark  "  Chancellor,"  which  was 
trading  with  a  slave-dealer  named  Canot.  Tlie  British 
cruiser  "Favorite"  was  stationed  off  the  Cape,  and  sug- 
gested to  the  chiefs,  that  as  they  were  in  treaty  with 
his  government  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade, 
and  as  Canot  was  on  their  territory  making  prepara- 
tions for  slaving,  they  were  bound  to  destroy  his  estab- 
lishment. The  chiefs  accordingly  burnt  his  premises, 
containing  a  large  amount  of  goods  he  had  shipped  at 
New  York.  Canot  havinoj  been  bv  no  means  secure  in 
conscience,  had  left  with  his  family  and  taken  up  his 
residence  in  Monrovia. 


WEATHERING  THE  CRUISERS. 


249 


The  Dolphin  proceeded  to  Porto  Praya  for  stores,  and 
the  Chancellor  was  watched  in  the  mean  time  by  the 
British  cruisei's  at  the  Cape  and  at  the  Gallinas.  Among 
the  traverses  worked  by  the  slave-traders,  the  practice 
had  been  adopted,  to  fill  canoes  with  slaves  and  send 
them  oflf  the  coast,  to  be  picked  up  by  vessels  in  search 
of  a  cargo,  which,  from  the  blockade,  could  not  reach 
the  shore.  In  one  instance,  fifty  of  these  were  found 
in  a  single  canoe,  and  taken  by  a  British  cruiser.  On 
the  return  of  the  Dolphin,  the  Chancellor  was  seized 
by  Commander  Pope  as  a  prize,  on  the  ground  of  hav- 
ing a  slave-deck  laid,  and  water-casks  with  rice  on 
board  sufficient  for  a  slave  cargo,  and  sent  to  the  United 
States  for  adjudication. 

The  commodore,  after  having  cruised  along  the 
entire  extent  of  the  slave-coast,  rendering  such  service 
as  American  interests  required,  was  relieved,  in  1847, 
by  the  sloop-of-war  Jamesto^vn,  Commodore  Bolton. 
The  frigate  United  States  then  proceeded  to  the  Medi- 
terranean station,  to  complete  her  cruise. 

The  commander  of  the  Jamestown  writes,  in  rela- 
tion to  Monrovia,  "  It  was  indeed  to  me  a  novel  and 
interesting  sight,  although  a  southern  man,  to  look -upon 
these  emancipated  slaves  legislating  for  themselves,  and 
discussing  freely,  if  not  ably,  the  principles  of  human 
rights,  on  the  very  continent,  and  perhaps  the  very 
spot,  where  some  of  their  ancestors  were  sold  into 

11* 


250  AFRICA  AST)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


slaven'  Liberia,  I  think,  is  now  safe,  and  may  be 

left  after  a  while  to  stand  alone.  Would  it  not  be 
advisable,  then,  for  the  Colonization  Society  to  turn  its 
attention  to  some  other  portion  of  the  coast,  and  extend 
the  area  of  Christian  and  philanthroi)ic  effuits  to  bet- 
tering the  condition  of  the  colored  people  of  our  coun- 
try, by  sowing  on  other  parts  of  the  coast  some  of  the 
good  seed  which  has  produced  so  bountifully  on  the 

free  soil  of  Liberia  In  no  part  of  the  world  have 

I  met  with  a  more  orderly,  sober,  religious  and  moral 
community  than  is  to  be  found  at  Monrovia.  On  the 
Sabbath,  it  is  truly  a  joyful  sound  to  hear  hymns  of 
praise. offered  up  to  Him  who  doth  promise,  '  where  two 
or  three  are  gathered  together  in  His  name,  there  He 
is  in  the  midst  of  them and  a  pleasure  to  observe  how 
very  general  the  attendance  upon  divine  worship  is 
among  these  people.  I  believe  every  man  and  woman 
in  Monrovia,  of  any  respectability,  is  a  member  of  the 
church.  If  you  take  a  family  dinner  with  the  Presi- 
dent (and  his  hospitable  door  is  always  open  to 
strangers),  a  blessing  is  asked  upon  the  good  things 
before  you  set  to.  Take  a  dinner  at  Colonel  Hicks's 
(whg,  by  the  way,  keeps  one  of  the  very  nicest  tables), 
and  'mine  host,'  with  his  shiny,  black,  intelligent 
face,  will  ask  a  blessing  on  the  tempting  viands  set 
before  you.'' 

Tliis  may  be  considered  a  lair  tN-pe  of  the  views  of 


CHAIsGES  IN  THE  SQUADRON. 


251 


persons  generally  who  visit  Liberia,  judging  the  peo- 
ple comparatively.  Our  estimate  of  them  ought  not 
to  be  conformed  to  the  standard  of  an  American  popu- 
lation. 

The  squadron  confined  mostly  to  the  north  coast,  ren- 
dered such  services  as  the  commerce  of  the  United 
States  and  the  interest  of  its  citizens  required,  and 
checked  the  perversion  of  the  flag  to  the  continuance 
of  the  slave-ti'ade.  The  year  following,  the  commodore 
was  relieved  by  the  Yorktown,  bearing  the  broad  pen- 
dant of  Commodore  Cooper,  and  with  the  flag-ship 
proceeded  to  the  Mediterranean. 

Commodore  Cooper  soon  after  assuming  the  com- 
mand, sufiering  from  ill-health,  returned  to  the  United 
States,  and  the  African  squadron  was  assigned  to  Com- 
modore Gregory,  who  sailed  in  the  summer  of  1849, 
in  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  Portsmouth.  It  consisted  of 
the  sloops-of-war  John  Adams,  Dale,  Yorktown,  and 
the  brigs  Bainbridge,  Porpoise  and  Perry.  Three  or 
four  slavers  were  captured,  the  entire  slave-coast  closely 
examined,  and  such  services  rendered  to  our  commer- 
cial interests  as  were  required. 

In  1851,  Commodore  Lavallette,  with  the  Germantown, 
relieved  Commodore  Gregory.  He  made  an  active 
cruise,  captm-ing  one  or  two  suspected  slavers,  and 
otherwise  caiTying  out  the  views  of  the  government  in 
the  establishment  of  the  squadron.    At  the  expiration 


t 


252  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

of  two  years,  the  frigate  Constitution  arrived,  bearing 
the  broad  pendant  of  Commodore  Mayo,  who  now  com- 
mands the  squadron,  consisting  of  the  sloops-of-war 
Marion  and  Dale,  with  the  brig  Perry. 

In  visiting  Cape  Palmas  in  the  summer  of  1853,  one 
of  the  unintelligible  quarrels  common  to  the  coast  was 
then  raging  between  the  Barbo  people  and  their  neigh- 
bors along  the  Cavally.  Interfering  to  settle  the  matter 
was  by  no  means  acceptable.  When  the  commodore 
proposed  going  on  shore  for  the  piu^ose,  the  proposal 
was  met  by  an  intimation  to  go  away,  or  they  would 
cut  off  his  head.  The  launch  was  sent  off  well 
manned,  with  a  howitzer.  The  natives  assembled  with 
a  show  of  resistance,  but  a  shot  being  thrown  among 
them,  brought  the  belligerents  to  terms.  They  apolo- 
gized, and  promised  to  reconcile  their  enmities,  and 
took  the  oath  of  friendship. 

Tlie  American  schooner  I^".  H.  Gambrill,  of  Balti- 
more, attempting  to  re-awaken  the  small  remains  of 
slaving  off'  the  river  Congo,  was  seized  by  the  frigate 
Constitution  on  the  3d  of  December,  arrived  in  New 
York  in  charge  of  a  prize- officer,  and  on  the  30th  of 
January,  1854,  was  condemned  in  the  U.  S.  Circuit 
Court,  for  having  been  engaged  in  the  slave-trade. 

Considering  that  we  have  had  no  steamers  on  the 
coast,  and  the  number  of  vessels  being  small,  the 
squadron  has  been  efficient  in  fulfilling  its  duties.  Its 


EFFECTS  OF  SQUADRON  CRUISING. 


253 


appearance  alone  had  great  influence.  It  showed  a 
determination  in  our  government  to  share  in  the  naval 
charge  of  these  vast  seas  and  shores.  Our  country 
thus  became  present,  as  it  were,  in  power  to  repress, 
and  if  need  be,  by  punishment  to  avenge  outrages  on 
our  citizens  or  their  property.  It  checked,  by  impor- 
tant captures,  the  desecration  of  the  American  flag, 
and  has  had  an  essential  agency  towards  removing  the 
guilt  of  the  slave-trade  from  the  world.  Had  we  no 
squadron  on  the  African  coast,  American  vessels  would 
with  impunity  pursue  the  iniquitous  traffic ;  our  com- 
merce w^ould  be  exposed,  and  our  citizens  subject  to 
outrage.  The  natui-e  of  the  proceedings  of  this  squad- 
ron, the  circumstances  of  its  experience,  and  the  effect 
of  its  operations,  will  be  more  clearly  apparent  in  the 
subsequent  detail  of  the  proceedings  of  the  U.  S.  brig 
"Perry,"  during  the  years  1850-1851.  The  following 
chapters  will  comprise  a  synopsis  of  these  proceedings, 
and  a  compilation  from  the  correspondence  in  relation 
to  them. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


CRUISE  OF  THE  "  PERRY"  INSTRCCTIOKS  DISPATCHED  TO  THE 

SOUTH  COAST  BEKGUELA  CASE  OF  A   SLAVER  WHICH  HAD 

CHANGED     HER    NATIONALITY    CAPTURED   BY    AN  ENGLISH 

CRUISER  ST.  PAUL   DE  LOANDA — ABUSE  OF  THE  AMERICAN 

FLAG  WANT  OF  A  CONSUL  ON  THE  SOUTH  COAST — CORRES- 
PONDENCE WITH  BRITISH  OFFICERS   IN  RELATION  TO  SLAVERS 

UNDER    THE   AMERICAN    FLAG  THE  BARQUE  *'  NAVARRe"  

TREATY  WITH  PORTUGAL  ABATEMENT  OF  CUSTOM-HOUSE  DU- 
TIES CRUISING  OFF  AMBRIZ  AN  ARRANGEMENT  MADE  WITH 

THE  BRITISH  COMMODORE  FOR  THE  JOINT  CRUISING   OF  THE 

PERRY  AMD  STEAMER  "  CYCLOPS"  CO-OPERATION  WITH  THE 

BRITISH  SQUADRON  FOR  THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  SLAVE- 
TRADE  FITTING  OUT  OF  AMERICAN  SLAVERS  IN  BRAZIL. 

On  the  2l6t  of  December,  1849,  the  "Peny"  arrived 
at  the  Cape  Yerde  Islands,  and  was  reported  to  the 
commodore  of  the  American  squadron.  On  the  9th 
of  the  succeeding  month  a  communication  was  received 
from  the  commodore  intimating  his  intention  to  dis- 
patch the  vessel  immediately  on  a  cruise  south  of  the 
equator :  stating,  that  he  should  leave  the  commander 
to  the  exercise  of  his  own  judgment  in  general  matters ; 
but  as  an  object  of  the  first  consequence,  called  his 
attention  to  the  observance  of  every  means  calculated 


SANITARY  SUGGESTIONS. 


255 


to  preserve  and  insure  the  health  of  his  crew.  He  had 
been  counselled  by  the  experience  of  the  fleet  sui-geon 
and  others,  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  for  white  per- 
sons to  avoid  exposure  to  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  to  the 
night  air  on  shore,  and  always  when  at  anchor  to  lie  at  a 
sufiicient  distance  from  the  shore  to  avoid  its  deleterious 
effects.  Besides  these  precautions,  cleanliness  of  ship 
and  persons,  constant  ventilation,  proper  food  and 
clothing,  sufiiciency  of  water,  and  good  discipline,  had 
hitherto  produced  the  happiest  results,  and  no  doubt 
would  continue  to  do  so.  A  number  of  Ki'oomen  sufii- 
cient to  man  two  boats,  were  to  be  furnished  at  Monro- 
via, which  would  relieve  the  crew  ordinarily  from  the 
hazards  of  that  duty.  The  officers  and  men  should  not  be 
peiTnitted  to  visit  the  shore  unnecessarily ;  or  at  all,  when 
they  could  not,  with  certainty,  return  at  any  moment. 
Care  was  to  be  observed  in  procuring  good  wholesome 
water,  and  in  such  abundance  as  to  insm-e  at  all  times, 
if  possible,  a  fall  allowance  to  the  crew ;  and  also  to 
furnish  them  with  fresh  provisions  and  vegetables, 
whenever  the  opportimity  offered. 

A  record  of  all  vessels  boarded,  with  a  report  accord- 
ing to  the  form  furnished,  was  required. 

The  commander  was  reniinded  of  the  disposition  of 
the  government  to  cultivate  and  maintain  the  most 
friendly  intercourse  with  all  other  nations  or  people, 
and  was  directed  to  govern  himself  accordingly. 


256 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


The  commodore  also  directed  the  commander  of  the 
Perr}',  when  tliat  vessel  should  be  in  all  respects 
ready  for  sea,  to  proceed  direct  to  Monrovia,  where  he 
would  meet  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  Yorktown ;  the  com- 
mander of  which  had  been  instructed  to  fill  up  the 
Perry  with  provisions,  furnish  sixteen  Kroomen,  and 
to  render  all  needftil  assistance  required  to  expedite  her 
movements.  Making  no  unnecessary  delay  at  Mon- 
rovia, the  commander  of  the  Perry  was  to  proceed 
thence  on  the  cruise,  the  limits  of  which  would  extend 
to  the  lat.  of  Cape  St.  Mar^-'s,  13°  south. 

It  was  recommended,  that  from  Monrovia  he  should 
proceed  off  from  the  coast,  keeping  well  to  the  west- 
ward, until  crossing  the  equator  and  reaching  the 
southern  limits  of  the  cruising-ground,  for  the  purpose 
of  avoiding  the  prevailing  winds  and  currents,  which, 
soutli  of  the  line,  would  be  adverse  to  progress  in-shore, 
but  favorable  to  a  close  examination,  on  the  return 
northward. 

The  object  of  the  cruise  was  to  protect  the  lawful 
commerce  of  the  United  States,  and,  under  the  laws 
of  the  United  States,  to  prevent  the  flag  and  citizens  of 
the  United  States  from  being  engaged  in  the  slave- 
trade  ;  and  to  carry  out,  in  good  faith,  the  treaty  stipu- 
lations between  the  United  States  and  England. 

After  reaching  the  southern  point  of  destination,  or 
nearly  so,  the  vessel  was  to  cmise  along  the  coast,  ex- 


OBJECTS  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  CRUISE.  257 

aminiiig  the  principal  2)oints,  or  slave-stations  ;  such  as 
the  Salinas,  Benguela,  Loanda,  Ambriz,  Kiver  Congo, 
and  intennediate  places,  back  towards  Monrovia  :  the 
commander  acting  in  all  cases  according  to  the  best  of 
his  judgment,  upon  the  information  he  might  obtain, 
and  circumstances  that  might  present  themselves  ;  tak- 
ing care,  in  no  case,  to  exceed  the  instructions  of  the 
Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Xavy,  furnished  for  his  gui- 
dance. 

Should  British  cruisers  be  met,  he  might  act 
in  concert  with  them,  so  far  as  the  instructions  per- 
mitted. 

It  was  further  noticed,  that  a  number  of  suspected 
American  vessels  had  been  hovering  on  the  coast,  be- 
tween Cape  St.  Mary's  and  Cape  Lopez,  and  tliat  some 
of  them  had  left  the  coast  with  slaves.  Vessels  clearly 
liable  to  capture  and  not  provided  with  cargoes,  might 
be  sent  directly  to  the  United  States.  All  captives 
found  on  board  were  to  be  landed  at  Mom-ovia. 

The  PeiTy  left  the  Cape  Yerde  Islands  on  the  day 
in  which  her  ordei-s  were  issued,  and  arrived  at  Mon- 
rovia on  the  20th.  She  there  received  provisions  from 
the  Yorktown,  and  sixteen  Kroomen  from  the  shc^e. 
Having  exchanged  salutes  and  visits  of  ceremony,  she 
sailed  on  her  southern  cruise,  and  arrived  at  St.  Philip 
de  Benguela,  after  a  passage  of  forty-one  days,  having, 
diu-ing  the  interval,  boarded  three  legal  tradei-s.  This 


268  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

passage  was  made  on  the  port  tack  by  standing  to  the 
southward  and  westward,  into  the  southeast  trades. 
But  the  passage  from  the  north  to  the  south  coast 
should,  in  all  cases,  be  made  in-shore  on  the  starboard 
tack  ;  as  will  be  explained  hereafter,  during  the  tliird 
cruise  of  the  Peny. 

At  Benguela,  which  is  a  Portuguese  settlement,  next 
in  importance  to  St.  Paul  de  Loanda,  although  now 
much  dilapidated,  and  where  the  slave-trade  has  been 
carried  on  to  a  great  extent,  the  customary  exchange  of 
a  national  salute  and  ofticial  visits  was  duly  observed. 

The  commander  ascertained,  on  his  an-ival,  that 
the  American  merchant  vessels  were  subject  to  greater 
restrictions  than  probably  would  have  been  the  case 
had  a  man-of  war  occasionally  made  her  appearance  in 
that  quarter.  He  therefore  intimated  to  the  governor 
tliat  our  cruisers,  in  future,  would  visit  that  part  of  the 
coast  more  frequently  than  they  had  done  for  the  last 
few  yeai-s. 

Information  was  received,  that  five  days  previous  to 
the  arrival  of  the  Perry,  an  English  cruiser  had  cap- 
tured, near  this  place,  a  brig,  with  eight  hundred 
slaves  on  board.  In  this  case,  it  appeared  that  the  ves- 
sel came  from  Rio  de  Janeiro,  under  American  colors 
and  papers,  with  an  American  captain  and  crew ;  and 
had  been,  when  on  the  coast,  transfeiTed  to  a  Brazilian 
captain  and  crew,  the  Americans  having  gone  on 


MIXED  CHARACTER  OF  SLAVES. 


259 


shore  with  the  papei*s.  The  captured  slaver  was  sent 
to  the  Island  of  St.  Helena  for  adjudication. 

After  remaining  three  days  at  Benguela,  where 
neither  fresh  water  nor  provisions  could  be  procured, 
the  Perry  weighed  anchor  and  ran  down  the  coast,  ex- 
amining all  intermediate  points,  and  boarding  several 
vessels  during  the  passage  to  Loanda.  Tliis  city  is  the 
capital  of  Loango,  and  the  most  flourishing  of  the  Por- 
tuguese establishments  on  the  African  coast. 

In  a  letter  announcing  the  amval  of  the  vessel,  and 
her  reception  by  the  authorities,  the  Xavy  Department 
was  informed  that  an  English  steamer  had  arrived,  hav- 
ing recently  captm*ed  a  slaver,  the  barque  J^'avarre, 
which  had  sailed  from  Rio  de  Janeiro  to  St.  Catharine's, 
where  she  had  fitted  up  for  a  slave  cargo,  and  received 
a  Brazilian  captain  and  crew.  When  boarded  by  the 
English  steamer,  the  slaver  had  American  colors  flying ; 
and  on  being  told  by  the  commander  that  her  papei's 
were  forged,  and  yet  that  he  could  not  search  the  vessel, 
but  must  send  her  to  an  American  cruiser,  the  captain 
then  ordered  the  American  colors  to  be  hauled  down, 
and  the  Brazilian  to  be  hoisted,  declaring  that  she  was 
Brazilian  property,  sent  the  Brazilian  captain  and 
crew  on  deck,  and  gave  up  the  vessel. 

The  commander  of  the  Perry  also  informed  the  Navy 
Department  that,  soon  after  his  amval  at  Loanda,  he 


260 


Af  RICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


had  received  from  various  sources  information  of  the 
abuse  of  the  American  flag  in  connection  with  the 
slave-trade ;  and  inclosed  copies  of  letters  and  papers 
addressed  to  him  by  the  British  commissioner,  and  thr 
commander  of  an  English  cmiser,  which  gave  authen- 
tic information  on  the  subject. 

He  suggested  that  as  the  legitimate  commerce  of  the 
United  States  exceeded  that  of  Great  Britain  and 
France,  on  the  coast  south  of  the  equator,  and  the 
American  flag  had  been  used  to  cover  the  most  exten- 
sive slave-trade,  it  would  seem  that  the  presence  of 
one  or  two  men-of-war,  and  the  appointment  of  a  con- 
sul, or  some  public  functionary  at  that  place,  were  de- 
sirable. 

He  noticed  that  the  depot  of  stores  at  Porto  Praya 
was  so  far  removed,  that  a  vessel  could  barely  reach 
the  southern  point  of  the  slave-stations  before  she  was 
compelled,  for  want  of  provisions,  to  return  and  replen- 
ish. A  consul  or  storekeeper  there  might,  as  is  the 
case  with  the  English  or  French,  supply  that  division 
of  the  squadron,  and  thus  a  force  might  constantly  be 
kept  on  that  side  of  the  equator,  where,  until  the  arrival 
of  the  PeiTy,  there  had  been  no  American  man-of-war 
for  a  period  of  two  years. 

It  had  been  intimated  to  him,  as  he  further  stated, 
by  Americans,  that  if  tlie  U.  S.  government  were  aware 


STATE  OF  AFFAIRS  AT  THE  SOUTH  COAST. 


261 


of  the  atrocities  committed  under  its  flag,  it  might  be 
induced  to  take  some  measures  for  j^reventing  the  sale 
of  American  vessels  on  the  African  coast,  as  in  nearly 
every  instance  the  vessel  had  been  sold  for  the  purpose 
of  engaging  in  the  slave-trade.  But  if  that  should  be 
regarded  as  too  great  a  check  upon  the  commercial  in- 
terests of  the  United  States,  such  sale,  if  made  on  that 
coast,  might  be  duly  notified  to  the  proposed  consul  or 
agent,  that  the  vessel  should  be  known  as  having 
changed  her  nationality. 

All  information  showing  the  number  of  American 
vessels  and  American  citizens  engaged  in  the  slave- 
trade  being  regarded  as  desirable,  interviews  on  the  sub- 
ject were  held  not  only  mth  the  Americans  engaged  in 
mercantile  pursuits,  but  with  others,  from  whom  relia- 
ble information  could  be  derived.  A  list  of  American 
vessels,  which  had  been  on  the  coast  during  the  pre- 
ceding year,  was  procured.  Many  of  these  vessels 
came  from  Rio  and  adjoining  ports,  with  two  sets  of 
papers^  A  sea-letter  had  been  granted  by  the  consul 
in  good  faith,  according  to  law,  on  the  sale  of  a  vessel 
in  a  foreign  port ;  the  cargo  corresponded  with  the 
manifest ;  the  consular  certificate,  crew  list,  port  clear- 
ance, and  all  papei-s  were  in  form.  Several  of  these 
vessels,  after  discharging  their  cargoes,  changed  their 
flag ;  the  American  captain  and  crew,  with  flag  and 


262 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


papers,  leaving  the  vessfel,  and  she  instantly  becoming 
invested  with  Spanish,  Portuguese,  or  Brazilian  nation- 
ality.* 

By  this  arrangement,  as  the  United  States  never  has 
consented,  and  never  ought  to  consent,  even  on  the  Af- 
rican coast,  to  grant  to  Great  Britain,  or  any  other 
power,  tlie  right  of  search,  a  slaver,  when  falling  in 
with  an  American  cruiser,  would  be  prepared  to  elude 
search  and  capture  by  the  display  of  a  foreign  ensign 
and  papers,  even  had  she  slaves  on  board.  And  on  the 
other  hand,  she  might  the  same  day  fall  in  with  a  Brit- 
ish cruiser,  and  by  displaying  her  flag,  and  pre- 
senting the  register  or  sea-letter,  vindicate  her  Ameri- 
can nationality.  This  illustrates  the  importance  of 
men-of-war,  belonging  to  each  nation,  cruising  in  com- 
pany for  the  detection  of  slavers. 

Great  Britain  being  in  treat}^  with  Spain,  Portugal, 
Brazil,  Sardinia  and  other  powers,  the  proposed  mode 
of  co-operation  would  lead  to  the  detection  of  slavers 
under  almost  any  nationality  except  that  of  France, 
which  government  has  an  efficient  squadron  of  steam- 


*  The  papers  of  the  second  slaver  captured  by  the  Perry  \rere  in 
form,  excepting  the  crew  list,  which  showed  but  one  American  oa 
board,  who  was  master  of  tiie  vessel.  And  in  a  letter  of  instructions 
from  the  reputed  owner,  he* was  required  to  leave  whenever  the  Italian 
supercargo  directed  him  to  do  so.  This  shows  how  readily  the  nation- 
ality of  a  vessel  may  be  changed. 


AMERICAN  VESSEI^  IN  THE  SLAVE-TRADE.  263 


ers  and  sailing  vessels  on  the  coast,  fully  prepared  to 
vindicate  her  own  flag." 

In  reference  to  vessels  ostensibly  American,  which 
had  been  engaged  in  the  slave-trade,  a  British  oflScer, 
on  the  21st  of  March,  1850,  in  a  letter  inclosing  a  list 
of  American  vessels  which  had  been  boarded  by  the 
cruiser  under  his  command,  stated  that  all  these  vessels 
had  afterwards  taken  slaves  from  the  coast ;  and  with 
the  exception  of  the  "Lucy  Ann,")-  captured  with  five 
hundred  slaves  on  board  by  a  British  steamer,  had  es- 
caped. The  registers,  or  sea-letters,  of  these  vessels 
appeared  to  be  genuine ;  and  he  being  unable  to  detect 


*  The  master  of  the  first  slaver  captured  bj  the  Perry,  stated  that 
had  he  not  supposed  she  was  an  English  cruiser,  he  would  have  been 
prepared  with  a  foreign  flag,  and  otherwise,  to  have  eluded  search  and 
capture ;  and  that  on  a  former  occasion  he  had  been  boarded  by  an 
English  cruiser,  when,  to  use  his  own  expression,  he  "  bluffed  off  John 
Bull  with  that  flag ;"  referring  to  the  American  ensign. 

f  The  "Lucy  Ann,"  when  captured,  was  boarded  fifty  or  sixty  miles 
to  leeward,  or  north  of  Loanda.  She  had  an  American  flag  flying,  al- 
though her  papers  had  been  deposited  in  the  consul's  office  at  Rio. 
The  English  boarding-officer,  who  was  not  allowed  to  see  any  papers, 
suspecting  her  character,  prolonged  his  visit  for  some  time.  As  he  was 
about  leaving  the  vessel,  a  cry  or  stifled  groan  was  heard  issuing  from 
the  hold.  The  main  hatches  were  apparently  forced  up  from  below,  al- 
though a  boat  was  placed  over  them,  and  the  heads  of  many  people 
appeared.  Five  hundred  and  forty-seven  slaves  were  found  in  the 
hold,  almost  in  a  state  of  suffocation.  The  master  then  hauled  down 
the  American  flag,  declared  the  vessel  to  be  Brazilian,  and  gave 
her  up. 


264  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

any  inaccuracies  in  their  papers,  his  duty  to  the  Amer- 
ican flag  had  ceased.  Tlie  vessels  in  his  list  had  been 
boarded  by  himself;  but  the  senior  officer  of  the  divis- 
ion was  referred  to,  "  who  could  give  a  list  of  many 
more,  all  of  which  would  have  been  good  prizes  to  an 
officer  having  the  right  of  search for  he  was  well  as- 
sured that  they  went  over  to  that  coast,  fully  fitted  and 
equipped  for  the  slave-trade. 

He  expressed  a  regret  that  the  pleasure  of  making 
acquaintance  with  the  commander  of  the  Perry  had 
only  fallen  to  his  lot  at  a  moment  when  the  term  of  his 
service  on  the  western  coast  of  Africa  had  expired ;  but 
was  satisfied  that  not  only  on  the  part  of  the  senior  offi- 
cer commanding  the  southern  division,  but  also  of  his 
brother  officers  still  remaining  in  service  on  the  coast, 
the  most  cordial  co-operation  would  be  aftbrded  in  the 
sui3pression  of  the  slave-trade. 

The  British  commissioner,  of  the  mixed  commission 
under  the  treaty  between  Great  Britain  and  Portugal 
for  the  suppression  of  the  African  slave-trade,  also  fur- 
nished a  list  of  suspected  slavers  which  had  claimed 
American  nationality. 

On  the  25th  of  March,  the  commander  requested  the 
English  captain  to  give  him  a  detailed  account  of  the 
circumstances  attending  the  capture  of  the  barque  Na- 
varre, by  her  B.  M.  steamer  Fire  Fly. 

He  asked  for  this  information,  as  the  Navarre  was 


TREATMENT  OF  THE  "NAVARRE." 


265 


boarded  when  under  American  coloi-s,  although  dis- 
playing Brazilian  coloi-s  when  captured. 

In  reply,  the  English  captain  informed  him  that  the 
slave  barque  Xavarre,  seized  under  the  Brazilian  flag, 
on  the  19th  instant,  had  the  American  ensign  flying  at 
the  time  she  was  boarded.  The  boarding-officer  hav- 
ing doubts  of  her  nationality,  in  consequence  of  her 
papers  not  appearing  to  be  regular,  he  himself,  al- 
though ill  at  the  time,  considered  it  his  duty  to  go  on 
board,  when,  being  convinced  that  her  papers  were 
false,  he  informed  the  person  calling  himself  master  of 
her,  that  it  was  his  duty  to  send  him  to  the  American 
squadron,  or  in  the  event  of  not  falling  in  with  them,  to 
i^ew  York.  The  master  immediately  went  on  deck 
and  ordered  the  mate  to  haul  do^vn  the  American  en- 
sign— to  throw  it  overboard — and  to  hoist  their  proper 
colors.  The  American  ensign  was  hauled  down  and 
thi'own  overboard  by  the  mate,  who  immediately 
hoisted  the  Brazilian  ensign.  A  man  then  came  on 
deck  from  below,  saying  that  he  was  captain  of  the 
vessel ;  that  she  was  Brazilian  property,  and  fiilly  fitted 
for  the  slave-trade ;  which  the  pei'son  who  first  ap- 
peared acknowledged,  stating  that  he  himself  was  a 
Brazilian  subject.  Having  obtained  this  from  them  in 
wi'iting,  the  person  who  first  called  himself  captain 
having  signed  it,  and  having  had  the  signing  of  the 
document  witnessed  by  two  officers,  he  opened  her 

12 


266  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


hatches,  found  all  the  Brazilian  crew  below,  slave-deck 
laid,  water  filled,  provisions  for  the  slaves,  and  slave- 
shackles. 

At  this  period  the  agent  of  a  large  and  respectable 
commercial  house  in  Salem,  Massachusetts,  established 
at  Loanda,  submitted  to  the  commander  of  the  Perry 
a  copy  of  the  treaty  between  the  United  States  and 
Portugal,  together  with  a  letter  from  the  Secretary  of 
State,  and  a  paper  from  an  officer  of  the  Treasury  De- 
partment, exhibiting  tlie  commercial  rights  of  the 
United  States  under  said  treaty. 

Tlie  agent  claimed  that  agreeably  to  the  treaty,  a 
portion  of  the  duties  were  to  be  remitted  when  a  vessel 
arrived  direct  from  the  United  States;  which  claim 
had  not  been  acknowledged  at  Loanda,  on  the  ground 
that  the  vessels  were  in  the  habit  of  touching  at  the 
native  ports,  while  the  agent  insisted  that  as  these  ports 
were  not  recognized  as  \tithin  the  jm'isdicti<»n  of  a  civ- 
ilized government,  the  Portuguese  provincial  authori- 
ties had  not  faithfully  obsei'ved  the  treaty  stipulations. 

The  subject  was  referred  to  the  Govermnent. 

After  remaining  a  week  in  Loanda,  making  proi>er 
repairs  on  the  vessel,  and  refreshing  the  crew,  the 
PeiTy  ran  down  the  coast  to  the  northward,  for  the 
purpose  of  cruising  off  Ambriz,  a  noted  slave-station, 
under  native  authority,  with  several  factories  for  legal 
trade.    Arriving  at  this  station  the  following  morning, 


NATIONALITY  OF  SLAVERS. 


267 


three  English  steam  cruisers  were  in  sight.  The  sec- 
ond lieutenant  of  the  Perry  was  sent  to  call  on  the  com- 
manding officer  of  the  southern  division  of  the  British 
squadron,  who  soon  afterwards  called  on  board  the 
American  cruiser  in  person. 

In  a  letter,  dated  the  24th  of  March,  the  British  com- 
manding officer  informed  the  commander  of  the  Per- 
ry, that  it  afforded  him.  great  pleasure  to  witness  the 
presence  of  a  United  States  vessel  on  the  southwest 
coast  of  Africa,  to  be  employed  in  co-operation  with 
British  vessels  in  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade. 
And  he  therefore  took  the  liberty  to  transmit,  by 
the  officer  of  the  Perry,  kindly  sent  to  wait  upon 
him,  two  documents  connected  with  Brazilian  slave- 
vessels,  which  had  lately  come  over  to  that  coast,  dis- 
playing the  American  ensign,  and  presenting  to  the 
English  boarding-officer  (as  they  had  proven)  fraudu- 
lent American  papers. 

He  assured  him,  that  in  the  necessary  examination  of 
these  papei-s,  every  respect  had  been  paid  to  the  Amer- 
ican flag,  and  the  visit  made  in  strict  accordance  with. 
the  treaty  between  the  United  States  of  America  and 
Great  Britain ;  and  that  it  was  not  until  the  different 
vessels  had  voluntarily  hauled  down  their  ensigns  and 
destroyed  their  papers,  stating  at  the  same  time  that 
they  were  Brazilians,  that  possession  was  taken  of 
them.    He  intimated  that  a  letter — a  copy  of  which 


268  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

was  inclosed — had  been  addressed  to  him  by  a  lieuten- 
ant of  the  "  Cyclops,"  who  had  conducted  to  the  Island 
of  St.  Helena  one  of  the  prizes,  on  board  of  which  were 
two  American  seamen,  and  that  this  letter  would  give 
some  idea  of  the  plan  pursued  by  parties  in  Brazil,  to 
equip  and  man  Brazilian  slave- vessels. 

The  inclosed  letter,  above  referred  to,  stated  that 
American  seamen  were  often  enticed  on  board  of 
slavers,  without  knowing  their  real  character  until  it 
was  too  late  to  leave  them.  And  that  the  owner  of  a 
Todging-house  in  Rio,  where  two  or  three  sailors  were 
boarding,  offered,  on  one  occasion,  to  get  them  a  ship 
bound  to  the  United  States,  wliich,  at  the  time,  was 
loading  at  Yittoria — a  harbor  to  the  northward  of 
Cape  Frio.  They  agreed  to  ship ;  and,  after  receiving 
their  advance,  proceeded  in  a  small  steamer  outside 
the  harbor  of  Rio,  when  they  were  transferred  to  a 
schooner,  in  company  with  a  number  of  Brazilians; 
and,  in  a  few  days,  reached  Yittoria.  On  joining  the 
slaver,  wliich  was  named  "  Pilot,"  they  discovered  her 
true  character,  but  were  not  allowed  to  go  on  shore ; 
and  were  promised,  on  their  arrival  in  Africa,  a  good 
reward,  with  the  option  of  returning  in  the  vessel,  or 
having  their  passage  found  in  another.  It  was  af- 
firmed that  these  men  had  never  seen  the  American 
consul ;  and  the  crew-list,  register  and  other  papers, 
were  forgeries.    Also  that  the  owner  of  the  Pilot 


AiyiERICAN  AND  BRAZILIAN  SLAVERS.  269 


was  a  Brazilian,  and  esteemed  one  of  the  richest  men 
in  the  empire.  Two  slave-steamers  were  owned  by 
him  ;  and  it  was  said  that  he  had  boasted  that  not  a 
week  passed  that  he  had  not  had  a  full  cargo  of  slaves 
landed  on  the  coast.  He  then  owned  seven  or  eight 
vessels,  sailing  under  the  American  flag,  which  he  had 
bought  in  Eio,  and  whose  papers  were  all  forgeries. 
One  of  the  vessels  belonging  to  the  rich  Brazil  mer- 
chant, and  sailing  alternately  under  the  American  and 
Brazilian  flag,  had  made  nine  clear  voyages ;  and  on 
the  last  voyage,  before  she  was  captured,  the  American 
captain  had  landed  at  Ambriz,  with  part  of  his  crew, 
his  flag  and  papers  ;  and  then  the  vessel  shipped  one 
thousand  slaves. 

An  American  was  the  consignee  of  these  vessels,  bear- 
ing his  country's  flag.  He  obtained  for  them  masters, 
crews,  flag  and  papei*s ;  and  received  -for  his  agency  a 
percentage  on  all  slaves  landed  from  the  vessels. 

During  the  month  when  the  Pilot  was  equipped 
at  Yittoria,  two  other  slavei-s  were  also  fitting  out  for 
the  slave-trade,  under  the  American  flag ;  viz.,  the 
"  Casco"  and  the  ^'  Snow."  The  former  was  afterwards 
captured,  with  fom*  hundred  and  flfty  slaves,  by  the 
.  English  steamer  "  Pluto  .;"  the  other  entered  the  harbor 
of  Kio  under  Brazilian  colors,  having  landed  her  slaves 
outside. 

The  Pilot  made  the  African  coast  near  Benguela ; 


270 


ATRICA  AJsD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


and  aftervs'ards  anchored  at  Bahia  Longa,  where,  there 
being  no  slaves  ready  for  shipment — as  eight  hundred 
had  been,  a  few  days  previously,  shipped  in  a  two-top- 
sail schooner — she  was  ordered,  by  the  slave-agents,  to 
remain  at  sea  for  ten  days.  On  making  the  land  at 
the  expiration  of  that  time,  the  English  steamers  Fire 
Fly,  Star,  and  Pluto,  being  at  Ambriz,  she  was  again 
ordered  to  sea  fur  ten  days ;  when,  on  anchoring 
at  the  latter  place,  she  was  captiu-ed  by  the  English 
steamer  Cyclops.  She  was  to  have  shipped  twelve 
hundred  slaves,  who  had  been  for  some  time  ready  for 
a  slave-steamer — then  so  strictly  blockaded  at  Santos 
by  the  English  steamer  Ilydra,  as  to  prevent  her  leav- 
ing port. 

Such  was  the  information  contained  in  this  letter. 

Dm-ing  this  con-espondence  with  the  British  oflScers, 
the  Perry  was  cruising  off  Ambriz,  in  company  with 
a  part  of  the  British  squadron,  for  the  purpose  of  board- 
ing and  searching  all  American  vessels  suspected  of 
being  engaged  in  the  slave  trade,  on  that  part  of  the 
coast. 

After  cniising  for  several  days,  the  commander-in- 
chief  of  the  British  naval  forces,  bearing  his  pendant 
at  the  main  of  tlie  steam-frigate  Centaur,  appeared  in 
the  offing.  The  PeiTy  hauled  up  her  courses,  and 
saluted  him  with  thirteen  guns,  which  were  duly  re- 
tui-ned.    An  official  call  was  made  on  the  commodore, 


ARRIVAL  OF  ANOTHER  CRUISER. 


271 


and  an  arrangement  settled  for  the  joint  cmising  of  the 
Peny  and  steamer  Cyclops. 

This  cruising  had  continued  for  a  week  or  more,  when 
the  arrival  of  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  John  Adams  con- 
stituted her  commander  the  senior  Ameiican  officer 
south  of  the  equator ;  he,  accordingly,  while  in  com- 
pany, relieved  the  Perry  of  the  con*espondence  with 
the  British  officers. 

A  short  time  after  the  arrival  of  the  Adams,  it  be- 
came necessary  for  her  to  visit  Loanda,  when  the  Perry 
was  again  left  with  the  Cyclops,  cruising  off  Ambriz. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


AMERICAN    BRIGAMINE    lJ)ll>\    UEAIOX    SUSPECTED  CORRES- 
PONDENCE WITH  THE  COMMANDER  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  DIVISION 

OF   THE  BRITISH    SQUADRON  BOAT    CRUISING  CURRENTS  

ROLLERS  ON  THE  COAST  TRADE-WINDS  CLIMATE  PRINCE's 

ISLANDS  MADAME  FEREIRA. 

On  tlie  13tli  of  April,  the  American  brigantine 
Louisa  Beaton,  which  a  few  days  previously  had  been 
boarded,  examined,  and  proven  to  be  a  legal  trader, 
ran  out  of  Ambriz  under  American  colore.  One  or 
tsvo  of  the  officere  who  had  been  on  shore,  on  Iheir  re- 
turn in  the  evening,  reported  that  it  was  rumored  that 
the  Louisa  Beaton  had  shipped  and  escaped  with  a 
cargo  of  slaves. 

That  vessel  had  then  made  a  good  offing,  and  was 
out  of  sight.  Acting  under  the  impression  of  the  re- 
port thus  conveyed,  an  armed  boat,  in  charge  of  the 
second  lieutenant  and  junior  passed  midshipman,  was 
dispatched  on  each  beam,  and  with  the  Perry  stood  out 
to  sea,  in  the  hope  of  overhauling  the  chase.  At  day- 
light, being  out  of  sight  of  the  land,  and  no  sail  visible, 
the  boats  were  picked  up,  and  the  vessel  stood  in 
towards  Ambriz. 


CHASE  OF  A  SUSPECTED  VESSEL. 


273 


During  the  succeeding  day,  on  joining  company  with  ' 
the  Cyclops,  the  second  lieutenant  was  sent  with  a 
message  to  her  commander,  requesting  that  he  might 
remain  on  board,  and  that  the  Cyclops  would  steam  out 
to  sea,  on  a  southwest  course,  with  a  view  of  overhaul- 
ing the  Louisa  Beaton,  and  ascertaining  if  there  was 
any  foundation  for  this  charge  against  her. 

The  proposition  was  readily  complied  with ;  and  after 
running  forty  miles  off  the  land,  and  no  sail  being  seen, 
the  steamer  rejoined  the  Perry. 

A  letter  from  the  commanding  officer  of  the  British 
division  was  received,  dated  April  15th,  containing  in- 
formation to  the  following  eflfect:  that  he  had  the 
pleasure  of  receiving  the  intelligence,  which  the  com- 
mander of  the  Perry  had  kindly  sent  him  by  the  lieu- 
tenant, informing  him  that  a  report  had  been  circulated, 
that  the  American  brigantine  Louisa  Beaton,  which 
vessel  was  lying  at  Ambriz,  in  company  with  the  British 
and  American  cruisers,  on  the  7th  instant,  had  shipped 
a  cargo  of  negroes.  He  had  observed  the  Louisa 
Beaton  weigh  from  Ambriz  on  the  evening  of  the  12th 
instant,  and  pass  close  to  the  stern  of  the  Perry,  with 
her  colors  flying ;  and  at  sunset  she  was  observed  by 
him,  close  in  with  the  land.  He  also  sighted  her  next 
morning,  and  continued  to  see  her  until  the  evening, 
apparently  working  in-shore  to  the  southward. 

As  the  wind  had  been  exceedingly  light  all  night, 
12^ 


274  AFRICA  AM)  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

he  thought  it  possible  that  the  steamer  might  overtake 
her,  and  accordingly  proposed  to  the  lieutenant  of  the 
Perry  to  accompany  him,  and  watch  the  proceedings 
of  the  vessel,  in  case  they  should  discover  her.  The 
lieutenant  having  acceded  to  this  proposal,  he  steamed 
to  the  westward  for  nearly  fort}^  miles,  but  saw  nothing 
of  her;  and  was  of  opinion,  that  the  report  affecting 
the  character  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  was  not  then  correct, 
and  that  when  intelligence  next  arrived  from  Loanda, 
she  would  be  found  to  have  reached  that  place. 

But  he  believed  it  very  probable  that  she  had  been 
disposed  of  by  sale,  in  consequence  of  the  slave-dealers 
not  having  been  successful,  as  they  had  eflfected  the 
embarkation  of  only  two  cargoes  of  negroes  that  year 
(1850),  and  therefore  all  the  vessels  that  could  be  pro- 
cured, no  matter  at  what  expense,  would  be  eagerly 
sought  after.  But,  as  he  had  heard  that  there  was  no 
water  at  Ambriz,  he  had  supposed  it  possible  that 
aiTangements  were  making  for  the  Louisa  Beaton's 
cargo  to  be  discharged  at  Loanda ;  whence,  after  hav- 
ing procured  the  necessary  articles  and  fitments  re- 
quired, she  would  probably  retiun  to  Ambriz  for  the 
negi'oes.  He  remarked  that  this  would  be  no  new 
occurrence,  as  many  American  vessels  had  been  dis- 
posed of  in  a  similar  manner,  and  escaped  with  cargoes 
of  Africans,  since  he  had  been  stationed  on  the  coast. 

Had  no  American  man-of-^\'ar  been  present  on  the 


CORRESPONDENCE  OF  THE  COMMANDERS.  275 

12tli  instant,  when  the  Louisa  Beaton  left  Ambriz,  he 
should  have  considered  it  his  duty  (from  there  having 
been  observed,  whilst  in  company  with  her  on  the  7th 
instant,  a  large  quantity  of  plank,  sufficient  for  a  slave- 
cfeck,  on  her  upper  deck,  together  with  water-casks, 
which  would  have  created  suspicion)  to  have  visited 
her,  and  satisfied  himself  that  her  nationality  had  not 
been  changed,  by  sale^  at  Ambriz;  not  taking  it  for 
granted,  that  the  flag  displayed  by  any  vessel  is  a 
sufficient  evidence  of  her  nationality. 

He  added,  that  as  it  was  probable  that  he  might 
not  meet  the  John  Adams  previous  to  the  Perry's 
leaving  the  coast  for  Porto  Praya,  the  commander  of 
the  Perry  would  oblige  him,  by  forwarding  a  copy 
of  that  letter  to  his  senior  officer,  for  the  information  of 
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  American  squadron,  as 
it  would  be  his  duty  to  lay  it  before  the  British  com- 
mander-in-chief, in  the  sincere  hope  that  some  aiTange- 
ment  would  be  made  by  those  officers  to  put  a  stop 
to  that  nefarious  system  on  the  southwest  coast  of 
Africa. 

A  boat  had  been  dispatched  from  the  Peny  to 
Loanda,  which  found  the  Louisa  Beaton,  still  offer- 
ing no  cause  of  suspicion,  lying  in  that  port. 

On  the  17th  of  April,  the  commander  of  the  Perry 
informed  the  British  commanding  officer  that  he  had 
received  and  forwarded  the  above  letter,  agreeably  to 


276 


AFRICA  AJfD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


his  i*equest ;  intimating  at  the  same  time  that  he  had 
boarded  the  Louisa  Beaton  at  sea,  several  days  be- 
fore her  arrival,  and  found  her  to  be  a  legal  American 
trader — a  character  which  she  sustained  while  at  an- 
chor  with  the  several  men-of-war  at  Ambriz ;  and  that 
he  had  no  reason,  after  an  absence  of  three  days,  to 
suppose  that  she  could,  in  the  mean  time,  have  fitted 
for  a  slave  cargo  ;  and  therefore  did  not  consider  it  to 
be  his  duty  again  to  board  her ;  that  he  was  happy  to 
inform  him  that  the  report  of  the  Louisa  Beaton's 
having  taken  slaves  at  Ambriz,  was  untrue  ;  and  that 
she  was  then  at  St.  Paul  de  Loanda. 

In  relation  to  the  British  commander  "  not  taking  it 
for  granted,  that  the  flag  displayed  by  any  vessel  is  a 
sufficient  evidence  of  her  nationality,"  the  commander 
of  the  Perry  remarked  that  the  flag  which  a  vessel 
wears  \^  pinmd  facie ^  although  it  is  not  conclusive  proof 
of  nationality.  It  is  a  mere  emblem,  which  loses  its 
true  character  when  it  is  worn  by  those  who  have  no 
right  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  lawfully  dis- 
play the  flag  of  the  United  States,  will  have  all  the 
protection  which  it  supplies.  Therefore,  when  a  foreign 
cruiser  boards  a  vessel  under  this  flag,  she  will  do  it 
upon  her  own  responsibility. 

On  the  19th  of  April,  the  British  commander  ac- 
knowledged the  receipt  of  the  communication  of  the 
ITtli  instant,  in  reply  to  his  of  the  15th,  in  which  he 


INCIDENTS  IN  BOAT-CRUlStxa. 


277 


expressed  himself  glad  to  learn  that  the  report  of  the 
Louisa  Beaton's  having  shipped  a  cargo  of  slaves  at 
Ambriz,  was  incoi-rect ;  but  as  vessels  were  disposed  to 
change  their  nationality,  and  escape  with  slaves,  "  in  so 
very  short  a  period  of  time  as  a  few  hours,"  he  would  re- 
spectfully suggest  the  necessity  of  keeping  a  strict  watch 
over  the  movements  of  the  Louisa  Beaton,  should 
she  appear  again  on  that  part  of  the  coast. 

Two  armed  boats  were  at  this  time  frequently  dis- 
patched from  the  Terrj  a  long  distance  in  chase  of 
vessels,  when  the  winds  were  too  light  to  enable  her  to 
overhaul  them. 

On  one  occasion,  these  boats  had  been  in  chase  of  a 
vessel  for  ten  hom-s,  and  encountered,  a  few  minutes  be- 
fore overhauling  her,  a  violent  squall  of  wind  and  rain. 
"When  the  squall  had  passed  over,  after  night-fall,  the 
strange  vessel  was,  for  a  moment,  descried  within  long- 
gun  shot  of  the  Perry.  A  thirty-two  pound  shot  was 
thrown  astern  of  her,  and,  quite  suddenly,  the  fog 
again  enveloped  her,  and  she  became  invisible. 

On  the  return  of  the  boats  which  had  succeeded  in 
boarding  the  chase,  the  commander  regretted  to  learn 
that  the  strange  vessel  was  a  Portuguese  man-of-war. 
Li  the  year  following,  when  falling  in  with  her  at  Ben- 
guela,  he  availed  himself  of  an  early  opportunity  to 
apologize  for  having  fired,  as  this  had  been  done  under 
the  impression  that  the  vessel  was  a  merchantman ;  and 


278  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

for  the  purpose  of  bringing  her  to,  in  order  to  ascertain 
her  character. 

The  John  Adams,  after  a  short  stay  at  Loanda. 
again  appeared  off  Ambriz.  and  resumed  her  cruising. 
The  Peny-s  provisions  had  now  become  nearly  ex- 
hausted ;  and  she  was  ordered  by  the  John  Adams  t'j 
proceed  to  the  north  coast  with  dispatches  to  the  com- 
modore. 

The  land  along  the  southern  African  coast,  from  lat, 
7°  south,  extending  to  Benguela,  and  even  to  the  Capo 
of  Good  Hope,  is  more  elevated  than  the  coast  to  the 
northward  towards  the  equator.  Long  ranges  of  high 
bluff  may  be  seen,  extending,  in  some  cases,  from  twenty 
to  thirty  miles.  A  short  distance  to  leeward,  or  north, 
of  Ambriz,  is  a  remarkable  range  of  hills,  with  heavy 
blocks  of  granite  around  them,  resembling,  at  a  dis- 
tance, a  small  village.  The  '*  granite  pillar,"  which 
shoots  up  in  the  air,  towering  above  the  surrrounding 
blocks  like  a  church-spire,  is  a  good  landmark  to  the 
cruisers  off  Ambriz.  They  often  find  themselves  at  day- 
light, after  beating,  during  the  night,  to  the  southward, 
drifted  down  abreast  of  it  by  the  northerly  current. 

The  natives  along  this  coast,  unlike  those  of  northern 
Guinea,  who  are  bold,  energetic  and  effective,  compara- 
tively, when  muscular  force  is  required,  are  marked 
by  very  opposite  traits ;  softness,  pliancy  and  flexibili- 
ty, distinguish  their  moral  and  mental  character.  They 


METEOROLOGY:  TRADE- WINDS.  279 

are  mostly  below  the  middle  stature,  liv-ing  in  villages, 
in  rude,  rush-thatched  huts ;  subsisting  principally  upon 
fish,  and  the  plantain,  which  is  the  Afiican  bread  fruit 
tree. 

These  people  present  some  of  the  lowest  forms  of 
humanity. 

The  temperature  of  both  the  air  and  water  within 
southern  intertropical  Africa,  averages,  during  the 
months  of  August  and  September,  72°,  and  off  Ben- 
guela,  on  one  occasion,  early  in  July,  the  air  tempera- 
ture was  as  low  as  60^,  while  in  the  month  of  Febru- 
ary, the  thermometer  seldom  reaches  a  higher  point 
than  S2^ 

It  is  known  that  the  southeast  trade-grinds  prevail  in 
the  Atlantic  ocean,  between  the  African  and  American 
continents,  south  of  the  equator  to  tbe  tropic  of 
Capricon,  and  the  northeast  trade  to  the  southward 
of  the  tropic  of  Cancer.  It  is  of  course  generally  un- 
derstood, that  the  sun  heats  the  equatorial  regions  to 
a  higher  temperature  than  is  found  anywhere  else, 
and  that  the  air  over  these  regions  is  consequently  ex- 
panded and  rendered  lighter  than  that  which  envelops 
the  regions  at  a  distance.  This  causes  the  whole  man- 
tle of  air  round  the  earth,  for  a  short  distance  near  the 
equator,  to  be  displaced  and  thrown  upwards  (like  the 
draffc  of  a  chinmey),  by  the  cooler  and  heavier  air  rush- 
ing in,  in  steadfast  and  continuous  streams,  from  the 


280  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

north  and  south.  The  earth's  revolution  carries  every 
thing  on  its  surface  somewhat  against  these  air-currents 
in  their  progress,  so  that  they  appear  to  sweep  aslant 
along  the  earth  and  sea,  coming  from  northeast  and 
southeast.  In  consequence  of  the  greater  amount  of 
heated  land  being  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  its  pecu- 
liar wind,  or  the  northeast  trade,  is  narrower;  while 
the  other,  the  southeast  trade,  blowing  from  the  greater 
expanse  of  the  Southern  Ocean,  is  broader.  The  latter, 
therefore,  sometimes  extends  considerably  beyond,  or 
north  of  the  equinoctial  line.  Tlius  the"  winds  over  all 
the  Gulf  of  Guinea  are  generally  from  the  south. 

The  coast  of  Africa,  both  north  and  south  of  the 
equator,  greatly  modifies  the  force  and  direction  of  the 
winds.  On  the  southern  coast  the  wind  blows  lightly,  in 
a  sea-breeze  from  the  southwest.  But  at  the  distance  of 
one  hundred  miles  from  the  land,  it  begins  gradually 
to  veer  round,  as  it  connects  itself  with  the  S.  E.  trades. 
A  line  drawn  on  the  chart,  from  the  southern  tropic,  in 
5°  east  to  the  lat.  of  5°  south,  may  be  regarded  as  the 
eastern  boundary  of  the  southeast  trade- winds.  Hence 
a  vessel,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Perry,  on  her  first  pas- 
sage to  the  southern  coast,  when  in  10°  south  and  20° 
west,  on  going  about  and  standing  for  the  African 
coast  by  the  wind,  although  she  at  first  will  not  be 
able  to  head  higher  than  N.  E.,  will  gradually  come  np 
to  the  eastward  as  the  wind  veers  to  the  southward ; 


CLIMATE  ASD  SEASONS. 


281 


until  it  gradually  hauls  as  far  as  S.  W.,  and  even  ^Y.  S. 
W. — enablino:  her  to  fetch  BenOTela  in  12°  34'  south 
lat.,  although  on  going  about  she  headed  no  higher 
than  Prince's  Island  in  1°  20'  north  lat. 

On  the  entire  intertropical  coast  of  Afi-ica,  it  may  be 
said  that  there  are  but  two  seasons,  the  rainy  season 
and  the  dry  season. 

On  the  southern  coast,  the  rainy  season  commences 
in  November,  and  continues  until  April,  although  the 
rains  are  neither  as  frequent  nor  as  heavy  as  on  the 
northern  coast,  where  they  commence  in  May  and 
continue  through  the  month  of  November. 

The  months  of  March  and  April  are  the  most  im- 
healthy  seasons  on  the  southern  coast,  arising  proba- 
bly from  the  exhalations  of  the  earth,  which  are  not 
dispelled  by  the  light  sea-breezes  prevailing  at  this 
period. 

The  climate  of  the  south  coast,  esj^ecially  fr*om 
6°  south  towards  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  is  more 
healthy  than  on  the  north  coast.  As  evidence  of  this, 
Europeans  are  found  in  comparatively  gi-eat  numbers 
in  Loanda  and  Benguela,  in  the  enjoyment  of  tolerable 
health. 

There  is  a  northerlv  cmTent  nmnino:  alono'  the  south- 
em  coast  of  Africa,  at  the  average  rate  of  one  mile  per 
hour,  imtil  it  is  met  by  the  Congo  Eiver,  in  6°  south  ; 
where  the  impetuous  stream  of  that  great  river  breaks 


282  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


up  this  northerly  current  and  forms  one,  of  two  miles 
per  hour,  in  the  direction  of  N.  W.,  until  it  meets  with 
the  equatorial  current  in  2°  or  3°  south.  The  Congo 
will  be  more  particularly  noticed  in  speaking  of  the 
third  southem  cruise  of  the  Perry. 

Tlie  rollei-s  on  the  coast  are  veiy  heavy.  And  the 
breaking  of  the  tremendous  surf  along  the  shore  can 
often  be  heard  at  night,  the  distance  of  twenty  miles 
fi'om  the  land,  reminding  one  of  the  sound  of  [Niagara, 
in  the  vicinity  of  that  mighty  cataract. 

But  having  in  this  part  of  the  work  (compilation  of 
the  correspondence)  to  treat  more  of  ships,  sailors  and 
letters,  than  of  the  climate,  the  shore,  and  its  inhabit- 
ants, it  is  time  to  recur  to  the  Perry, — now  squared 
away  before  the  wind,  with  studding-sails  set  below 
and  aloft,  bound  to  Porto  Praya,  via  Prince's  Island 
and  Monrovia,  in  search  of  the  commander-in-chief  of 
the  squadron. 

There  are  so  many  graphic  descriptions  before  the 
public,  in  sea  novels  and  naval  journals,  of  life  in  a 
man-of-war,  that  it  may  well  suffice  here  to  remark — 
that  a  small  vessel,  uncomfortable  quartei-s,  salt  pro- 
visions, m}Tiads  of  cockroaches,  an  occasional  tor- 
nado and  deluge  of  rain,  were  ills  that  naval  life  duly 
encountered  "during  the  five  days'-  passage  to  Prince's 
Island. 

On  the  27th  of  April  the  Perry  an-ived,  and  to  the 


PRINCE'S  ISLAND. 


283 


great  gratification  of  officei*s  and  men,  the  broad  pen- 
dant of  tlie  commodore  was  descried  at  the  main  of 
the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  "  Portsmouth." 

The  U.  S.  brig  "  Bainbridge"  was  also  at  anchor  in 
West  Bay. 

Prince's  Island  is  ten  miles  in  length  from  north  to 
south,  and  five  miles  in  breadth.  In  places,  it  is  con- 
siderably elevated,  presenting,  in  its  grotesque  shafts 
and  projecting  figures  curiously  formed,  an  exceedingly 
picturesque  appearance. 

The  natives  are  mostly  black,  and  slaves ;  although 
a  few  colored  people  are  seen  of  a  mixed  race — Portu- 
guese and  African. 

The  island  is  well  wooded,  and  the  soil  rich ;  and  if 
cultivated  properly,  would  yield  abundantly.  Farina 
is  extensively  manufactured. 

Madame  Fereira,  a  Portuguese  lady,  long  resident 
on  the  island,  has  no  little  repute  for  her  hospitality 
to  African  cruisers.  Her  taste  in  living  here  as  she 
does,  is  no  more  singular  than  that  of  the  late  clever, 
eccenti'ic  and  distinguished  Lady  Hester  Stanhope, 
who  established  herself  near  Sidon.  Madame  Fereira, 
it  is  said,  on  a  late  visit  to  Europe,  with  abundant 
means  for  enjoyment  in  ^  civilized  state  of  society,  was 
ill  at  ease  until  the  time  arrived  for  her  return  to  this 
barbarian  isle.  She  is  ever  ready,  at  a  reasonable 
price,  to  furnish  the  cruisers  with  wood,  fresh  pro  vis- 


284  \FRICA  AisD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


ions  and  vegetables  ;  and  is  never  indisposed  to  take  a 
hand  at  whist,  or  entertain  foreigners  in  any  other  way, 
agreeable  to  their  fancy. 

Vessels  frequently  touch  at  l*ri net's  Island  for  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  fresh  water,  which,  running  down 
from  the  mountains  in  copious  streams,  is  of  a  far  bet- 
ter quality  than  can  be  procured  on  the  coast. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  Perry,  in  a  letter  dated  the 
27th  of  April,  the  commander  announced  to  the  com- 
modore the  fulfilment  of  his  instructions.  The  cruise 
had  been  extended  to  one  hundred  and  seven  days,  of 
which  eighty  had  been  6j)ent  at  sea,  and  the  remainder 
at  anchor,  at  different  points  of  the  coast. 

The  reply  of  the  commodore  contained  his  full  ap- 
probation of  the  course  pursued,  stating  in  addition,  that 
it  was  a  mafter  of  great  importance  to  keep  one  of  the 
squadron  upon  the  southern  coast;  and  not  having 
provisions  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  proceed  thither, 
and  as  the  John  Adams,  having  nearly  exi>ended  her 
stock,  would  soon  be  compelled  to  return  to  Porto 
Praya,  he  therefore  directed  the  commander  of  the 
PeriT  to  make  requisitions  upon  the  flag-ship  for  as 
full  a  supply  of  provisions  as  could  conveniently  be 
stowed,  and  prepare  again  foi'  immediate  service  on  the 
soutliera  coast. 


CHAPTEE  XXYII. 


RETURN  TO  THE   SOUTHERN  COAST  CAPTURE  OF  THE  AMERICAN 

SLAVE-SHIP   "  MARTHa"  CLAIM  TO   BRAZILIAN  NATIONALITY 

 LETTERS  FOUND  ON  BOARD  ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  THE  SLAVE- 
TRADE  LOANDA  FRENCH,     ENGLISH      AND  PORTUGTJESK 

CRUISERS  CONGO     RIVER  BOARDING     FOREIGN  MERCHANT 

VESSELS  CAPTURE  OF  THE  "VOLUSIa"  BY  A  BRITISH  CRUISER 

 SHE  CLAIMS  AMERICAN  NATIONALITY — THE  MEETING  OF  THE 

COMMODORES  AT  LOANDA  DISCUSSIONS  IN  RELATION  TO  IN- 
TERFERENCE WITH  VESSELS   OSTENSIBLY  AMERICAN  SEIZURE 

OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRIGANTINE  "  CHATSWORTh" — CLAIMS  BY 
THE  MASTER  OF  THE  "  VOLUSIA." 

On  the  6tli  of  May,  ordei*s  were  given  to  the  com- 
mander of  the  Peny,  to  proceed  thence,  with  all  prac- 
ticable dispatch,  to  the  southern  coast;  and  to  com- 
municate with  the  commander  of  the  John  Adams  as 
soon  as  possible.  In  case  that  vessel  shonld  have  left 
the  coast  before  the  arrival  of  the  Perry,  her  com- 
m^der  would  proceed  to  cruise  imder  former  orders, 
and  the  instructions  of  the  government. 

It  appeared  to  the  commodore,  in  the  correspondence 
had  with  some  of  the  British  officers,  that  in  certain 
cases  where  they  had  boarded  vessels  under  the  flag  of 


286  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

the  United  States,  not  having  the  right  of  search, 
threats  had  been  used  of  detaining  and  sending  them  to 
the  United  States  squadron.  This  he  remarked  was 
improper,  and  must  not  be  admitted,  or  any  under- 
standing had  with  them  authorizing  such  acts ;  adding, 
in  substance,  that  if  tlicy  chose  to  detain  suspicious 
vessels,  they  must  do  it  upon  their  own  responsibility, 
without  our  assent  or  connivance.  Refusing  to  the 
British  government  the  right  of  search,  our  government 
has  commanded  us  to  prevent  vessels  and  citizens  of 
the  United  States  from  engaging  in  the  slave-ti*ade. 
These  duties  we  must  perfoi-m  to  the  best  of  our  ability, 
and  we  have  no  right  to  ask  or  receive  the  aid  of  a 
foreign  power.  "  It  is  desirable  to  cultivate  and  pre- 
serve the  good  understanding  which  now  exists  be- 
tween the  two  services;  and  should  any  differences 
arise,  care  must  be  taken  that  tlie  discussions  are  tem- 
perate and  respectful.  You  have  full  authority  to  act 
in  concert  with  the  British  forces  within  the  scope  of 
our  ordei-s  and  duty." 

On  the  same  day,  the  Perry  again  sailed  for  the 
south  coast,  and  after  boarding  several  vessels,  which 
proved  to  be  legal  traders,  a  slaver  was  captured,  {y;id 
made  the  subject  of  a  communication,  dated  June  7th, 
1S50. 

In  this  it  was  stated  to  the  commodore,  that  the 
PeiTy,  agreeably  to  his  ordei*s,  had  made  the  best  of 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  SHIP  "MARTHA." 


287 


her  way  for  Ambriz,  and  arrived  oft'  that  place  on  the 
5th  instant.  It  was  there  reported  that  the  John  Adams 
was  probably  at  Loanda;  and  accordingly  a  course 
was  shaped  for  that  port.  But  on  the  6th  instant,  at 
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  a  large  ship  with  two 
tiers  of  painted  ports  was  made  to  windward,  standing 
in  for  the  land  towards  Ambriz.  At  four  o'clock  the 
chase  was  overhauled,  having  the  name  "Martha, 
'New  York,"  registered  on  her  stern.  The  Perry  had 
no  colors  flying.  The  ship,  when  in  range  of  the  guns, 
hoisted  the  American  ensign,  shortened  sail,  and  backed 
her  main-topsail.  The  first  lieutenant,  Mr.  Rush,  was 
sent  to  board  her.  As  he  was  rounding  her  stem,  the 
people  on  board  observed,  by  the  uniform  of  the  board- 
ing-officer, that  the  vessel  was  an  American  cniiser. 
The  ship  then  hauled  down  the  American,  and  hoisted 
Brazilian  colors.  The  officer  went  on  board,  and  asked 
for  papers  and  other  ^^roofs  of  nationality.  The  cap- 
tain denied  having  papers,  log,  or  any  thing  else.  At 
this  time  something  was  thrown  overboard,  when  an- 
other boat  was  sent  from  the  Perry,  and  picked  up  the 
wi'iting-desk  of  the  captain,  containing  sundry  paj^ei-s 
and  letters,  identifying  the  captain  as  an  American 
citizen ;  also  indicating  the  owner  of  three-fifths  of  the 
vessel  to  be  an  American  merchant,  resident  in  Eio  de 
Janeiro.  After  obtaining  satisfactory  proof  that  the 
ship  Martha  was  a  slaver,  she  was  seized  as  a  prize. 


288  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Tlie  captain  at  length  admitted  that  the  ship  was 
fully  equipped  for  the  slave-trade.  There  were  found 
on  board  the  vessel,  one  hundred  and  seventy-six  en  > 
filled  with  water,  containing  from  one  hundred  to  uiic 
hundred  and  fifty  gallons  each  ;  one  hundred  and  fifh»- 
barrels  of  farina  for  slave-food ;  several  sacks  of  beans ; 
slave-deck  laid  ;  four  iron  boilers  for  cooking  slave- 
provisions  ;  iron  bars,  with  the  necessary  wood-work, 
for  securing  slaves  to  the  deck ;  four  hundred  spoons 
for  feeding  them ;  between  thirty  and  forty  muskets, 
and  a  TVTitten  agreement  between  the  owner  and  cap- 
tain, witli  the  receipt  of  the  owner  for  two  thousand 
mih*eis. 

Tliere  being  tlih-t}'-five  pei*sons  on  board  this  prize, 
many  of  whom  were  foreigners,  it  was  deemed  neces- 
sary to  send  a  force  of  twenty-five  men,  witli  the  first 
and  second  lieutenanti>,  that  the  prize  might  be  safely 
conducted  to  New  York,  for  which  place  she  took  her 
departure  that  evening. 

Soon  after  the  Martha  was  discovered,  she  passed 
within  hailing  distance  of  an  American  brig,  several 
miles  ahead  of  the  Perry,  and  asked  the  name  of  the 
cruiser  astern ;  on  being  told,  the  captain,  in  despair, 
threw  his  trumpet  on  deck.  But  on  a  moment's  reflec- 
tion, as  he  afterwards  stated,  he  concluded,  notwith- 
standing, that  she  must  be  an  English  cruiser,  not  only 
fjom  her  appearance,  but  from  the  knowledge  that  the 


CLAIMING  BRAZILIAN  NATIONALITY.  289 

Perry  had  left  for  Porto  Praya,  and  could  not  in  the 
mean  time  have  retm-ned  to  that  part  of  the  coast 
Therefore  finding,  when  within  gun-shot  of  the  vessel, 
that  he  could  not  escape,  and  must  show  his  colors,  ran 
up  the  American  ensign,  intending  imder  his  nation- 
ality to  avoid  search  and  capture.  The  boarding-officer 
was  received  at  the  gangway  by  a  Brazilian  captain, 
who  sti'ongly  insisted  that  the  vessel  was  Brazilian 
property.  But  the  officer,  agreeably  to  an  order  re- 
ceived on  leaving  the  Peny,  to  hold  the  ship  to  the 
nationality  fii-st  indicated  by  her  colors,  proceeded  in 
the  search.  In  the  mean  time,  the  American  captain, 
notwithstanding  his  guise  as  a  sailor,  being  identified 
by  another  officer,  was  sent  on  board  the  Perry.  He 
claimed  that  the  vessel  could  not  lawfully  be  subjected 
to  search  by  an  American*  man-of-war,  while  under 
Brazilian  colors.  But,  on  being  infc)rmed  that  he  would 
be  seized  as  a  pirate  for  sailing  ^vithout  papers,  even 
were  he  not  a  slaver,  he  admitted  that  she  was  on  a 
slaving  voyage  ;  adding,  that,  had  he  not  fallen  in  with 
the  Peny,  he  would,  during  the  night,  have  shipped 
eighteen  hundred  slaves,  and  before  daylight  in  the 
morning,  been  clear  of  the  coast. 

Possession  was  immediately  taken  of  the  Martha, 
her  crew  put  in  irons,  and  both  American  and  Brazilian 
captains,  together  with  three  or  four  cabin  passengers 

(probably  slave-agents\  were  given  to  understand  that 

13 


290  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

they  would  be  similarly  served,  in  case  of  the  slightest 
evidence  of  insubordination.  Tlie  accounts  of  the 
prize  crew  were  transferred,  thci  vessel  provisioned, 
and  in  twenty-four  hours  after  her  capture,  the  vessels 
exchanged  three  cluorp,  and  the  Martha  bore  away 
for  New  York. 

She  was  condemned  in  the  U.  S.  District  Court.  The 
captain  was  admitted  to  bail  for  the  sum  of  five  thou- 
sand dollars,  which  was  afterwards  reduced  to  three 
thousand:  he  then  escaped  justice  by  its  forfeiture. 
The  American  mate  was  sentenced  to  the  Penitentiary 
for  the  teim  of  two  years;  and  the  foreigners,  who 
had  been  sent  to  the  United  States  on  account  of  the 
moral  efi*ect,  being  regarded  as  beyond  our  jurisdiction, 
were  discharged. 

The  \sTiting-desk  thrown  pverboard  fi-om  the  Martha, 
soon  after  she  was  boarded,  contained  sundry  papers, 
making  curious  revelations  of  the  agency  of  some 
American  citizens  engaged  in  the  slave-trade.  These 
papers  implicated  a  number  of  persons,  who  are  little 
suspected  of  ever  having  participated  in  such  a  diaboli- 
cal traflSc.  A  citizen  of  New  York,  then  on  the  Afri- 
can coast,  in  a  letter  to  the  captain  of  the  Martha,  says : 
"  The  French  barque  will  be  here  in  a  few  days,  and,  as 
yet,  the  agent  has  no  instructions  as  to  her  taking 
ebony  [negroes,  slaves].  .  .  .  From  the  Rio  papers  which 
I  have  seen,  T  infer  that  business  is  pretty  brisk  at  that 


LETTERS  FOUND  IX  A  SLAVER. 


291 


place  It  is  thought  here  that  the  brig  Susan  would 

bring  a  good  price,  as  she  had  water  on  board.  .  .  .  C, 
an  American  merchant,  has  sold  the  Flood,  and  she 
was  put  under  Brazilian  colors,  and  gone  around  the 
Cape.  The  name  of  the  brigantine  in  which  B.  came 
passenger  was  the  Sotind ;  she  was,  as  we  are  told, 
formerly  the  United  States  brig  Boxer."  Other  letters 
found  with  this,  stated :  "  The  barque  Ann  Richardson, 
and  brig  Susan,  were  both  sent  home  by  a  United 
States  cruiser.  The  Independence  cleared  for  Paraguay ; 
several  of  the  American  vessels  were  cleared,  and  had 
sailed  for  Montevideo,  &c.,  in  ballast,  and  as  I  suppose 
bound  niggerly ;  but  where  in  hell  they  are  is  the  big 
business  of  the  matter.  The  sailors,  as  yet,  have  not 
been  near  me.  I  shall  give  myself  no  trouble  about 
them.  I  have  seen  them  at  a  distance.  I  am  told  that 
they  are  all  well,  but  they  look  like  death  itself.  Y. 
Z.  tells  me  they  have  wished  a  hundred  times  in  his 
presence,  that  they  had  gone  in  the  ship ;  for  my  part, 
I  wish  they  were  in  hell,  Texas,  or  some  other  nice 
place.  B.  only  came  down  here  to  '  take  in,'  but  was 
driven  off  by  one  of  the  English  cmisei"s ;  he  and  his 
nigger  crew  were  under  deck,  out  of  sight,  when 
visited  by  the  cruiser.''^ 

*  The  following  letter  from  Viscount  Palmerston  to  Sir  H.  L.  Bulwer, 
then  British  Minister  at  Washington,  appears  in  the  Parliamentary 
Papers  of  1851.    LVI.  Part  L 


292 


AFRICA  AND  TIIE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


After  parting  company  with,  the  Martha,  the  Perry 
proceeded  to  Loanda,  and  found  English,  French  and 
Portuguese  men-of-war  in  port.  Tlie  John  Adams, 
having  exhausted  her  provisions,  had  sailed  for  the 
north  coast,  after  having  had  the  good  fortune  to  capture 
a  slaver.  The  British  conmiissioner  called  aboard,  and 
oiBfered  his  congratulations  on  the  capture  of  the  Martha, 
remarking  that  she  was  the  largest  slaver  that  had  been 
on  the  coast  for  many  years  ;  and  the  effect  of  sending 
all  hands  found  in  her  to  the  United  States,  would  prove 
a  severe  blow  to  the  iniquitous  traffic.  The  British 
cruisei*s,  after  the  capture  of  a  vessel,  were  in  the  prac- 
tice of  landing  the  slave-crews,  except  when  they  are 
British  subjects,  at  some  point  on  the  coast.  This  is 
believed  to  be  required  by  the  governments  with  which 
Great  Britain  has  formed  treaties. 

At  the  expiration  of  a  few  days,  the  Perry  pro- 
ceeded on  a  cruise  down  the  coast,  towards  the  Congo 


"Foreign  Office,  November  18,  1850. 

"  Sir, — I  herewith  transmit  to  you,  for  your  information,  a  copy  of  a 
dispatch  from  the  commodore  in  command  of  H.  M.  squadron  on  the 
west  coast  of  Africa,  respecting  the  circumstances  under  which  the  ship 
Martha  was  cai)tured,  on  the  6th  of  June  (1S50)  last,  fully  equipped 
for  the  slave-trade,  by  the  U.  S.  brig-of-war  Perry,  and  sent  to  the 
United  States  for  trial 

"  I  have  to  instruct  you  to  furnish  me  with  a  full  report  of  the  pro- 
ceedings which  may  take  place  in  this  case  before  the  courts  of  law  in 
the  United  States. 

"  Palmerston." 


BOARDING  MERCHANT-VESSELS. 


293 


River,  encoimtering  successively  the  British  steamers 
Cyclops,  Rattler,  and  Pluto.  All  vessels  seen  were 
boarded,  and  proved  to  be  legal  traders.  Several 
days  were  spent  between  Ambriz  and  the  Congo  ;  and, 
learning  from  the  Pluto — stationed  off  the  mouth  of 
the  Congo  River — that  no  vessels  had,  for  a  long  time, 
appeared  in  that  quarter,  an  idea,  previously  enter- 
tained, of  proceeding  up  the  river,  was  abandoned. 
The  Perry  was  then  worked  up  the  coast  towards 
Benguela. 

Among  the  many  incidents  occm'ring : — On  one  oc- 
casion, at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  the  char- 
acter of  the  vessels  could  not  be  discerned,  a  sail 
suddenly  appeared,  when,  as  usual  on  making  a  vessel 
at  night,  the  battery  was  ordered  to  be  cleared  away, 
and  the  men  sent  to  the  guns.  The  stranger  fired  a 
musket,  which  was  instantly  retui*ned.  Subsequent  ex- 
planations between  the  commanders  of  the  cruisers 
were  given,  that  the  first  fire  Avas  made  'svithout  the 
knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  vessel ;  and  the  latter 
was  made  to  repel  the  former,  and  to  sliow  the  charac- 
ter of  the  vessel. 

On  boarding  tradei"S,  the  masters,  in  one  or  two  in- 
stances, when  sailing  under  a  foreign  flag,  had  requested 
the  boarding-officer  to  search,  and,  after  ascertaining 
her  real  character,  to  endorse  the  register.  This  elicited 
the  following  order  to  the  boarding-officer  : 


294  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


"  If  a  vessel  hoists  the  American  flag ;  is  of  American 
build  ;  has  her  name  and  place  of  ownership  in  the  Uni- 
ted States  registered  on  her  stem  ;  or  if  she  has  but  part 
of  these  indications  of  American  nationality,  you  will, 
on  boarding,  ask  for  her  papers,  which  papers  you  will 
examine  and  retain,  if  she  excites  suspicion  of  being  a 
slaver,  until  you  have  searched  sufficiently  to  satisfy 
yourself  of  her  real  character.  Should  the  vessel  be 
American,  and  doubts  exist  of  her  real  character,  you 
will  bring  her  to  this  vessel ;  or,  if  it  can  be  done  more 
expeditiously,  you  will  dispatch  one  of  your  boats; 
communicating  such  information  as  will  enable  the 
commander  to  give  specific  directions,  or  in  person  to 
visit  the  suspected  vessel. 

"  K  the  strange  vessel  be  a  foreigner,  you  will,  on 
ascertaining  the  fact,  leave  her;  declining,  even  at 
the  request  of  the  captain,  to  search  the  vessel,  or  to 
endorse  her  character, — as  it  must  always  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  our  government  does  not  permit  the  deten- 
tion and  search  of  American  vessels  by  foreign  cruis- 
ere;  and,  consequently,  is  scnipulous  in  observing  to- 
wards the  vessels  of  other  nations,  the  same  line  of  con- 
duct which  she  exacts  from  foreign  ciTiisers  towards 
her  own  vessels." 

After  cmising  several  days  off  the  southern  point 
designated  in  her  ordei*s,  the  Perry  ran  into  Ben- 
guela.    Spending  a  day  in  that  place,  she  proceeded 


SEIZURE  OF  THE  "  VOLUSIA." 


295 


down  the  coast  to  the  northward,  occasionally  falling 
in  with  British  cruisers  and  legal  traders.  On  meeting 
the  Cyclops,  the  British  commanding  officer,  in  a  let- 
ter, dated  the  ICth  of  July,  stated  to  the  commander 
of  the  Perry,  that  he  "  hastened  to  transmit,  for  his 
information,  the  following  extract  from  a  report  just 
received  from  the  commander  of  Her  Britannic  Majes- 
ty's steam-sloop  '  Eattler,'  with  copies  of  two  other 
documents,  transmitted  by  the  same  officer ;  and  trusted 
that  the  same  would  be  deemed  satisfactory,  as  far  as 
American  interests  were  concerned." 

The  extract  gave  the  information,  that  on  the  2d 
of  July,  Her  Majesty's  steam-sloop  Rattler  captured 
the  Brazilian  brigantine  "Yolusia,"  of  one  hundred 
and  ninety  tons,  a  crew  of  seven  men,  and  fully  equipped 
for  the  slave-trade,  with  false  papers,  and  sailing  under 
the  American  flag ;  that  the  crew  had  been  landed  at 
Kabenda,  and  that  the  vessel  had  been  sent  to  St.  He- 
lena for  adjudication ;  and  that  he  also  inclosed  cer- 
tified declarations  from  the  master,  supercargo  and 
chief  mate,  stating  the  vessel  to  be  bona  fide  Brazilian 
property ;  that  they  had  no  protest  to  offer,  and  that 
themselves  and  crew  landed  at  Kabenda  of  their  o^vn 
free  will  and  consent. 

On  the  following  day,  the  commander  of  the  Per- 
ry, in  reply  to  the  above  communication,  stated  that, 
as  the  brigantine  in  question  had  first  displayed  Ameri- 


296  AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

can  colors,  he  wished  all  information  which  could  be 
furnished  him  in  relation  to  the  character  of  the  papers 
found  on  board ;  the  reason  for  supposing  them  to  be 
false,  and  the  disposition  made  of  them.  Also,  if  there 
was  a  person  on  board,  apparently  an  American,  rep- 
resenting himself,  in  the  first  instance,  as  the  captain ; 
and  if  the  vessel  was  declared  to  be  Brazilian  on  first 
being  boarded,  or  not  until  after  her  capture  had  been 
decided  upon,  and  announced  to  the  parties  in  charge. 

In  reply  to  this  letter,  on  the  23d  of  July,  the  com- 
manding officer  of  the  British  division  stated  that  he 
would  make  known  its  purport  to  the  commander  who 
had  captured  the  Volusia,  and  call  upon  that  officer 
to  answer  the  questions  contained  in  the  communica- 
tion of  the  ITth  instant,  and  hoped  to  transmit  his 
reply  prior  to  the  Perry's  departure  for  the  north 
coast. 

After  cruising  for  several  days  in  company  with  the 
English  men-of-war,  the  vessel  proceeded  to  Loanda, 
for  the  purpose  of  meeting  the  commodore.  Arriving 
at  that  place,  and  leaving  Ambriz  without  any  guar- 
dianship for  the  morals  of  American  tradei*s,  an  order 
was  ti'ansmitted  to  the  acting  first-lieutenant,  to  pro- 
ceed with  the  launch  on  a  ciiiise  oft'  Ambriz ;  and  in 
boarding,  searching,  and  in  case  of  detaining  suspected 
vessels,  to  be  governed  by  the  instructions  therewith 
furnished  him. 


REPORT  OF  PROCEEDINGS. 


297 


On  the  5th  of  August,  the  British  commissioner 
brought  off  intelligence  that  the  American  commodore 
was  signalled  off  the  harbor.  The  British  commodore 
was  at  this  date,  also,  to  have  rendezvoused  at  Loanda, 
that  the  subject-matter  of  correspondence  between  the 
oflScers  of  the  two  services,  migjit  be  laid  before  their 
respective  commanders-in-chief. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  American  commodore,  the 
PeiTy  was  reported,  in  a  communication  dated  August 
the  5th,  inclosing  letters  and  papers,  giving  detailed  in- 
formation of  occurrences  since  leaving  Prince's  Island, 
under  orders  of  the  6th  of  May  ;  also  sundry  documents 
from  the  commander  of  the  British  southern  division, 
in  relation  to  the  capture  of  the  slave-equipped  brigan- 
tine  Yolusia  ;  adding,  that  this  case  being  similar  to  a 
number  already  the  subjects  of  correspondence,  he  had 
requested  further  information,  wiiich  the  British  com- 
mander of  the  division  would  probably  communicate  in 
a  few  days. 

The  letter  to  the  commodore  also  stated,  that  our 
commercial  intercourse  with  the  provincial  govern- 
ment of  Portugal,  and  the  natives  of  the  coast,  had 
been  uninterrupted.  Tlie  question  arising  in  regard  to 
the  treaty  with  Portugal,  whether  a  vessel  by  touching 
and  discharging  part  of  the  cargo  at  a  native  poi-t,  is 
still  exempt  from  payment  of  one-third  of  the  duties  on 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  cargo,  as  guaranteed  by 

13* 


298 


\PRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


treaty,  when  coming  direct  from  the  United  States,  had 
been  snbmitted  to  our  government. 

On  the  15th  of  Angnst  the  Cyclop  arrived  at  Loanda, 
with  the  commander  of  the  British  southern  division  on 
board,  who,  in  a  letter  dated  the  12th  of  August, 
stated,  that  agreeably  to  the  promise  made  on  the  23d 
ultimo,  of  furnishing  the  details  from  the  commander 
who  had  captured  the  Volusia,  he  now  furnished  the 
particulars  of  that  capture,  which  he  trusted  would 
prove  satisfactory.  He  also  gave  information  that  the 
British  commander-in-chief  was  then  on  the  south 
coast,  to  whom  all  further  reference  must  be  made  for 
additional  information,  in  case  it  should  be  required.  TTie 
reply  from  the  officer  who  had  captiu^d  the  Volusia 
stated,  that  he  had  boarded  her  on  the  2d  of  July  off 
the  Congo  River.  She  had  the  American  ensign  fly- 
ing, and  on  the  production  of  documents,  purporting  to 
be  her  papers,  he  at  once  discovered  the  register  to  be 
false :  it  was  written  on  foolscap  paper,  with  the  original 
signature  erased ;  her  other  papers  were  likewise  forge- 
ries. He  therefore  immediately  detained  her.  They 
had  been  presented  to  him  by  the  ostensible  master, 
apparently  an  American,  but  calling  himself  a  Brazil- 
ian, and  claiming  the  protection  of  that  empire.  The 
register  and  muster-roll  were  destroyed  by  the  master ; 
the  remainder  of  the  records  were  sent  in  her  to  St. 
Helena,  for  adjudication.    The  British  commander 


MEETING  OF  THE  COMMODORES. 


299 


further  stated,  that  on  discovering  the  Volusia's  papers 
to  be  false,  her  master  immediately  hauled  dowai  the 
ensign,  and  called  from  below  the  remainder  of  the 
crew,  twelve  in  number,  all  Brazilians. 

In  a  letter  dated  the  15th  of  August,  the  above  com- 
munications were  acknowledged,  and  the  British  com- 
mander informed  that  the  American  commander-in- 
chief  was  also  on  the  south  coast :  that  all  official 
documents  must  be  submitted  to  him,  and  that  the  re- 
ply of  the  12th  instant,  with  its  inclosure,  had  been 
forwarded  accordingly. 

The  British  commodore  soon  an-ived  at  Loanda,  and 
after  an  exchange  of  salutes,  an  interview  of  three 
hours  between  the  two  commodores  took  place.  The 
captm-es  of  the  Navarre,  Yolusia,  and  other  vessels, 
with  cases  of  interference  with  vessels  claiming  Ameri- 
can nationality,  were  fully  and  freely  discussed.  The 
British  commodore  claimed  that  the  vessels  in  ques- 
tion, were  wholly,  or  in  part  Brazilian ;  adding,  that 
had  they  been  known  clearly  as  American,  no  British 
officer  would  have  presumed  to  capture,  or  interfere 
with  them.  The  American  commodore  argued  from 
documents  and  other  testimony,  that  hondfide  Ameri- 
can vessels  had  been  interfered  with,  and  whether  en- 
gaged in  legal  or  illegal  ti*ade,  they  were  in  no  sense 
amenable  to  British  cruisers ;  the  United  States  had 
made  them  responsible  to  the  American  government 


300  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

alone — subject  to  search  and  capture  by  American  cruia- 
ers,  on  good  grounds  of  suspicion  and  evidence  of  be- 
ing engaged  in  the  slave-trade ;  which  trade  the  United 
States  had  declared  to  be  piracy  in  a  municipal  sense — 
this  offence  not  being  piracy  by  the  laws  of  nations : 
adding,  in  case  of  slavers, "  we  choose  to  punish  our  own 
rascals  in  our  own  way."  Several  discussions,  at  which 
the  commander  of  the  Perry  was  present,  subsequently 
took  place,  without  any  definite  results,  or  at  least  while 
that  vessel  remained  at  Loanda.  These  discussions 
were  afterwards  continued.  In  the  commodores,  both 
nations  were  represented  by  men  of  ability,  capable  of 
appreciating,  expressing  and  enforcing  the  views  of 
their  respective  governments. 

Every  person  interested  in  upholding  the  rights  of 
humanity,  or  concerned  in  the  progress  of  Africa,  will 
sympathize  with  the  capture  and  deliverance  of  a 
wi-etched  cargo  of  African  slaves  from  the  grasp  of  a 
slaver,  irrespective  of  his  nation.ility.  But  it  is  contrary 
to  national  honor  and  national  interests,  that  the  right 
oi  capture  should  be  entnisted  to  the  hands  of  any  for- 
eign authority.  In  a  commercial  point  of  view,  if  this 
were  granted,  legal  traders  would  be  molested,  and 
American  commerce  suffer  materially  from  a  power 
which  keeps  afloat  a  force  of  armed  vessels,  more  than 
four  times  the  number  of  the  commissioned  men-of-war 
of  the  United  States.    The  deck  of  an  American  vessel 


THE  "CHATSWORTH"  SEIZED. 


301 


under  its  flag,  is  the  territory  of  the  United  States,  and 
no  other  authority  but  that  of  the  United  States  must 
ever  be  allowed  to  exercise  jurisdiction  over  it.  Hence 
is  apparent  the  importance  of  a  well-appointed  United 
States  squadron  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa. 

On  the  18th  of  August,  the  captain  of  an  English 
cruiser  entered  the  harbor  with  his  boat,  leaving  the 
vessel  outside,  bringing  the  information  that  a  suspected 
American  trader  was  at  Ambriz.  The  captain  stated 
that  he  had  boarded  her,  supposing  she  might  be  a 
Brazilian,  but  on  ascertaining  her  nationality,  had  left 
her,  and  proceeded  to  Loanda,  for  the  purpose  of  com- 
municating what  had  transpired. 

On  receiving  this  information,  the  commodore 
ordered  the  Perry  to  proceed  to  Ambriz  and  search 
the  vessel,  and  in  case  she  was  suspected  of  being  en- 
gaged in  the  slave-trade,  to  bring  her  to  Loanda.  In 
the  mean  time  a  lieutenant  who  was  about  leaving  the 
squadron  as  bearer  of  dispatches  to  the  Government, 
volunteered  his  services  to  take  the  launch  and  proceed 
immediately  to  Ambriz,  as  the  Perry  had  sails  to  bend, 
and  make  other  preparations  previous  to  leaving.  The 
launch  was  dispatched,  and  in  five  hom's  afterwards  the 
Perry  sailed.  Arriving  on  the  following  morning 
within  twelve  miles  of  Ambriz,  the  commander,  accom- 
panied by  the  purser  and  the  surgeon,  who  volunteered 
their  services,  pulled  for  the  suspected  vessel,  which 


302  AFRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


proved  to  be  the  American  brigaDtine  "  Chatsworth,"  of 
Baltimore.  The  lieutenant,  with  his  launch's  crew, 
was  on  board.  He  had  secured  the  papers  and  com- 
menced the  search.  After  taking  the  dimensions  of 
the  vessel,  which  corresponded  to  those  noted  in  the 
register,  examining  and  comparing  the  cargo  with  the 
manifest,  scrutinizing  the  crew  list,  consular  certificate, 
port  clearance,  and  other  papers  on  board,  possession 
was  taken  of  the  Chatsworth,  and  the  boarding-officer 
directed  to  proceed  with  her,  in  company  with  the 
Peny,  to  Loanda. 

Both  vessels  having  arrived,  a  letter  to  the  following 
purport  was  addressed  to  the  commodore :  "  One 
hundred  bags  of  farina,  a  large  quantity  of  plank,  suffi- 
cient to  lay  a  slave-deck,  casks  and  barrels  of  spirits,  in 
sufficient  quantity  to  contain  water  for  a  large  slave- 
cargo,  jerked  beef,  and  other  articles,  were  found  on 
board  the  Chatsworth.  These  articles,  and  others  on 
board,  corresponded  generally  with  the  manifest,  which 
paper  was  drawn  up  in  the  Portuguese  language.  A 
paper  with  the  consular  seal,  authorizing  the  shipment 
of  the  crew,  all  foreigners,  was  also  made  out  in  the 
Portuguese  language.  In  the  register,  the  vessel  was 
called  a  brig,  instead  of  a  brigantine.  A  letter  of  in- 
structions fi:x)m  the  reputed  owner,  a  citizen  of  Balti- 
more, directed  the  American  captain  to  leave  the  ves- 
sel whenever  he  should  be  directed  to  do  so  by  the 


THE  "CHATSWORTH"  RELEASED. 


303 


Italian  supercargo.  These,  together  with  the  report 
that  the  vessel  on  her  last  voyage  had  shipped  a  cargo 
of  slaves,  and  her  novr  being  at  the  most  notorious 
slave-station  on  the  coast,  impressed  the  commander  of 
the  Perry  so  strongly  with  the  belief  that  the  Chats- 
worth  was  a  slaver,  that  he  considered  it  his  duty  to 
direct  the  boarding-officer  to  take  her  in  charge,  and 
proceed  in  company  with  the  Peny  to  Loanda,  that 
the  case  might  undergo  a  more  critical  examination  by 
the  commander-in-chief." 

The  commodore,  after  visiting  the  Chatsworth  in 
person,  although  morally  certain  she  was  a  slaver,  yet 
as  the  evidence  which  would  be  required  in  the  United 
States  Courts  essential  to  her  condenmation,  was  want- 
ing, conceived  it  to  be  his  duty  to  order  the  commander 
of  the  Perry  to  surrender  the  charge  of  that  vessel,  and 
return  all  the  papers  to  her  master,  and  withdraw  his 
guard  from  her. 

The  captain  of  the  Yolusia  now  suddenly  made  his 
appearance  at  Loanda,  having  in  his  possession  the  sea- 
letter  which  the  British  commander  who  had  captured 
him  called  a  register,  written  on  a  sheet  of  fools- 
cap paper,  which  from  misapprehension  he  eiToneously 
stated  was  destroyed  by  the  master.  This  new  matter 
was  introduced  in  the  discussion  between  the  two  com- 
modores. The  captain  of  the  Yolusia  claimed  that  his 
vessel  was  bond  fide  American,  stating  that  the  sea-let- 


304  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

ter  in  his  possession  was  conclusive  evidence  to  that 
effect.  Xo  other  subject  than  that  of  the  nationality  of 
the  vessel,  while  treating  upon  this  matter  with  an  En- 
glish officer,  could  be  inti-oduced.  The  sea-letter  was 
laid  before  the  commanders.  This  document  bore  all 
the  marks  of  a  genuine  paper,  except  in  having  the 
word  "  signed"  occurring  before  the  consul's  signature, 
and  partially  erased.  This  seemed  to  indicate  that  it 
had  been  made  out  as  a  copy,  and,  if  genuine,  the  con- 
sul had  afterwards  signed  it  as  an  original  paper.  The 
consular  seal  was  impressed,  and  several  other  docu- 
ments, duly  sealed  and  properly  certified,  were  at- 
tached, bearing  strong  evidence  that  the  document  was 
genuine. 

The  British  commodore  argued  that  the  erasure  of 
the  word  "  signed,''  even  if  it  did  not  invalidate  the 
document,  gave  good  ground  for  the  suspicion  that  the 
document  was  a  forgepy;  and  she  being  engaged  in 
the  slave-trade,  the  officer  who  captured  her  regarded 
the  claim  first  set  forth  to  American  nationality  as 
groundless. 

The  American  commodore  could  not  permit  the 
character  of  the  vessel  to  be  assigned  as  a  reason  for 
her  capture,  and  confined  the  discussion  to  the  papers 
constituting  the  nationality  of  the  vessel.  He  re- 
garded the  consular  seal  as  genuine,  and  believed 
that,  if  the  paper  had  been  a  forgery,  care  would  have 


NATIONALITY  OF  THE  •*  VOLUSIA.' 


305 


been  taken  to  have  had  it  drawn  up  without  any  era- 
sui*e,  or  the  word  "  signed." 

The  discussion  in  relation  to  the  Yolusia  and  the  !N'a- 
varre,  was  renewed  with  the  Chief-Justice  and  Judge 
of  the  Admiralty  Coui't,  soon  after  the  arrival  of  the 
Perry  at  the  island  of  St.  Helena. 


CHAPTER  XXYIII. 


ANOTHER   CRUISE  CHATSWORTH    AGAIN  VISIT  TO   THE  QUEEN 

NEAR  AMBRIZETTE  SEIZURE   OF  THE   AMERICAN  BRIGANTINL 

"LOUISA  Beaton"  bv  a  British  cruiser — correspondence 

 proposal  of  remuneration  from  the  captors  SEIZURE 

OF  THE  CHATSWORTH  AS  A  SLAVER  ITALIAN  SUPERCARGO  

MASTER  OF  THE  LOUISA  BEATON. 

The  commodore,  on  the  24th  of  August,  intimated 
tliat  it  had  been  his  intention  to  relieve  the  Perry  from 
the  incessant  duties  which  had  been  imposed  upon  her, 
but  regretted  that  he  could  not  then  accomplish  it  with- 
out leaving  American  interests  in  that  quarter  im- 
protected,  and  that  the  commander  would  therefore 
be  pleased  to  prepare  for  further  service  on  the 
southern  coast,  with  the  assurance  of  being  relieved 
as  soon  as  practicable. 

Orders  were  issued  by  the  commodore  to  resume 
cruising  upon  the  southern  coast,  as  before,  and  to  visit 
such  localities  as  might  best  insure  tlie  successful  ac- 
complishment of  the  purposes  in  view. 

Authority  was  given  to  extend  the  cruise  as  far  as 
the  island  of  St.  Helena,  and  to  remain  there  a  suffi- 


BOARDIXG  THE    CHATSWORTH."  307 

cient  length  of  time  to  refresh  the  crew ;  and,  after 
cruising  until  the  twentieth  of  November,  then  to  pro- 
ceed to  Porto  Praya,  touching  at  Monrovia,  if  it  was 
thought  jDroper. 

The  ordei's  being  largely  discretionaiy,  and  the 
Chatsworth  still  in  port,  and  suspected  of  the  intention 
of  shipping  a  cargo  of  slaves  at  Ambriz,  the  Peny 
sailed,  the  day  on  which  her  orders  were  received,  with- 
out giving  any  intimation  as  to  her  cruising-gi'ound. 
When  outside  of  the  harbor,  the  vessel  was  hauled  on 
a  wind  to  the  southward,  as  if  bound  up  the  coast,  and 
continued  beating  until  out  of  sight  of  the  vessels  in 
the  harbor.  She  was  then  kept  away  to  the  northward, 
making  a  course  for  Ambriz,  in  anticipation  of  the 
Chatsworth's  soon  sailing  for  that  place. 

The  ciTiising  with  the  English  men-of-war  was  re- 
sumed. A  few  days  after  leaving  Loanda,  when  trying 
the  sailing  qualities  of  the  vessel  with  a  Biitish  cniiser, 
a  sail  was  reported,  standing  down  the  land  towards 
Ambriz.  Chase  was  immediately  made,  and,  on  com- 
ing ^vithin  gun-shot,  a  gun  was  fired  to  bring  the  vessel 
to.  She  hoisted  American  colors,  but  continued  on  her 
com*se.  Another  gun,  throwing  a  thirty-two  pound 
shot  across  her  bows,  brought  the  Chatsworth  to.  She 
was  then  boarded,  and  again  searched,  without  finding 
any  additional  proof  against  the  vessel's  character. 

After  remaining  a  day  or  two  off  Ambriz,  the  Perry 


308         afhk  \MEiticA: 


proceeded  to  Ambrizette,  a  short  distance  to  the  nortli- 
ward,  leaving  one  of  the  ship's  boats  in  charge  of  a: 
officer,  with  orders  to  remain  sufficiently  near  the 
Chats wortli,  and,  in  case  she  received  water-casks  f•^ 
board,  or  any  article  required  to  equip  a  slave-vessel, 
to  detain  her  until  the  return  of  tlie  Peny. 

When  the  vessel  had  reached  her  destination,  the 
commander  conceived  it  to  be  a  good  opportunity  to 
forward  the  interests  of  American  commerce,  by  paying 
a  visit  of  conciliation  to  the  queen  of  that  regior 
Tliough  warned  by  the  British  officei-s  that  the  native- 
were  hostile  to  all  persons  engaged  in  suppressing  the 
lucrative  trade  in  slaves,  he  resolved  to  avail  himself 
of  the  invitation  of  the  resident  American  factor,  and 
proceed  to  the  royal  residence.  Two  other  officers  of 
the  vessel,  the  agent,  and  several  of  the  gig's  Kroomen, 
accompanied  him.  On  their  way,  a  great  number  of 
Her  Majesty's  loyal  subjects — dressed  chiefly  in  the 
costume  of  their  own  black  skins — formed  the  escort. 
"  All  hands,"  however,  were  not  in  the  native  sable- 
exclusively,  for  several,  of  more  aristocratic  claim-, 
sported  a  piece  of  calico  print,  of  glaring  colors,  over 
one  shoulder.  The  village,  when  first  seen,  resembled 
a  group  of  brown  haystacks ;  the  largest  of  these,  as  a 
palace,  sheltered  the  royal  presence.  The  court  eti- 
quette brought  the  mob  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  of  the 
escort,  with  and  without  costume,  down  upon  their 


PRESENT ATIOX  AT  COURT. 


309 


knees,  in  expectation  of  Her  Majesty's  appearance.  A 
little  withered  old  woman  then  stepped  out,  having,  in 
addition  to  the  native  costume,  an  old  red  silk  cloak, 
drawn  tight  around  her  throat,  and  so  worn  as  to  make 
her  look  like  a  loose  umbrella,  with  two  handles.  She 
then  squatted  on  the  ground.  Her  prime  minister  as- 
pired to  be  higher  than  African  in  his  costume,  by 
hanging  on  his  long,  thin  pei^son,  an  old  full-dress 
French  navy  uniform-coat,  dispensing  with  other  ma- 
terial articles  of  clothing,  except  a  short  pair  of  white 
trowsers.  The  officers  being  seated  in  front,  the  kneel- 
ing hedge  of  three  or  four  hundred  black  woolly  heads 
closed  behind  them, — impregnating  the  air  with  their 
own  peculiar  aroma — their  greasy  faces  upturned  in 
humble  reverence — hands  joined,  palm  to  palm,  ready 
to  applaud  Her  Majesty's  gracious  wisdom  when  they 
heard  it, — the  conference  began.  The  interpreter  intro- 
duced the  officers,  and  their  business,  and,  in  the  nam.e 
of  the  commander,  expressed  their  friendly  feelings  to- 
wards Her  Majesty  and  her  people ;  advising  her  to 
encourage  ti-ade  with  the* American  merchants  in  gums, 
copper  and  the  products  of  the  country,  instead  of 
selling  her  people  as  slaves,  or  conniving  at  the  sale  in 
other  tribes,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  goods.  Tliis 
speech  having  the  honor  of  being  directed  to  the  royal 
ears,  was  greeted,  according  to  etiquette,  with  clap, 
clap,  clap,  from  all  the  ready  hands  of  all  the  gentle- 


310  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

men  in  waiting,  who  were  using  their  knees  as  supports 
in  Her  Majesty's  royal  presence.  The  prime  minister, 
from  the  inside  of  the  French  coat,  then  responded — 
that  Iler  ]Maje.-ty  had  great  reason  to  complain  of  the 
conduct  of  ciniisei's'  boats  on  the  coast,  for  they  were  in 
the  habit  of  chasing  the  fishermen,  and  firing  to  bring 
them  to,  and  taking  their  fish,  which  were  the  principal 
support  of  the  people,  without  making  an  equivalent 
return.  Whereupon,  clap,  clap,  clap,  went  the  hands 
again.  Iler  Majesty  was  assured,  in  repjly,  that  such 
had  never  been,  and  never  would  be  tlie  case,  in  regard 
to  the  boats  of  American  cruisers,  and  that  her  com- 
plaints would  be  made  known  to  those  officers  who  had 
the  power  and  the  disposition  to  remove  all  such  cause 
of  grievance.  The  chorus  of  clap,  clap,  clap,  again  at 
this  answer  concluded  the  ceremony.  The  prime  min- 
ister followed  the  return  escort  at  some  distance,  and 
took  occasion,  at  parting  on  the  beach,  to  intimate  that 
there  were  certain  other  marks  of  friendly  respect  com- 
mon at  courts,  and  marking  the  usages  of  polished 
nations.  He  gave  no  hints  about  gold  snuff-boxes,  as 
might  be  suitable  in  the  barbarian  courts  of  Europe ; 
but  intimated  that  his  friends  visiting  Her  Majesty,  in 
such  instances,  thought  his  humble  services  worthy  of 
tvvo  bottles  of  rum.  Compliance  with  this  amiable  cus- 
tom was  declared  to  be  wholly  impracticable,  as  the 
spirit-room  casks  of  the  Perry  had  been  filled  only  with 


RETURN  TO  AMBRIZ. 


311 


piire  (or  impui-e)  water,  instead  of  whisky,  during  the 
cruise. 

In  communicating  to  the  government,  in  a  more 
official  form,  the  object  and  incidents  of  the  visit  to  the 
queen  near  Ambrizette,  reference  was  made  to  a  pow- 
erful king,  residing  ten  miles  in  the  interior  of  Ambriz, 
and  the  intention  of  making  him  a  visit  was  announced. 
But  the  seizure  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  by  a  British 
cruiser,  on  her  retm-n  to  the  coast,  and  the  impression 
made  upon  the  natives  by  the  capture  of  the  Chats- 
worth  as  a  slaver,  not  only  occupied  the  intervening 
time  before  leaving  for  St.  Helena,  but  rendered  inland 
excui-sions  by  no  means  desirable. 

On  returning  towards  Ambriz,  soon  after  making  the 
land,  the  steamer  Cyclops,  with  another  British  cruiser, 
was  observed ;  and  also  the  Chatsworth,  with  an  Ameri- 
can brigantine  lying  near  her.  A  boat  from  the  Cyclops, 
with  an  English  officer,  pulled  out  several  miles,  while 
the  PeiTy  was  in  the  offing,  bringing  a  packet  of  let- 
ter and  papers  marked  as  usual,  "  On  Her  Britannic 
Majesty's  Service."  These  papei*s  were  accompanied 
by  a  private  note  from  the  British  commander  of  the 
division,  expressing  great  regret  at  the  occurrence, 
which  was  officially  noticed  in  the  accompanying 
papei*s,  and  the  earnest  desire  to  repair  the  wrong. 

The  official  papers  were  dated  September  the  ninth, 
and  contained  statements  relating  to  the  chasing^  hoard- 


312  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

ituf  and  detention  of  the  American  brigantine  Louisa 
Beaton,  on  the  seventh  and  eighth  instant 

The  particulars  of  the  seizure  of  the  vessel  were 
given  in  a  letter  from  the  commander  of  the  Enfjlish 
cruiser  Dolphin,  directed  to  the  British  commander  of 
the  division,  as  follows:  "I  have  tlie  honor  to  inform 
you,  that  at  daylight  on  the  Tth  instant,  being  about 
seventy  miles  off  the  land,  a  sail  was  observed  on  the 
lee  bow,  whilst  Her  Majesty's  brigantine,  under  my 
command,  was  steering  to  the  eastward.  I  made  all 
possible  sail  in  chase  :  the  chase  was  obsei-ved  making 
more  sail  and  keeping  away.  O^snng  to  light  winds,  I 
was  unable  to  overtake  her  before  Oh.  30m.  a.  m. 
"When  close  to  her  and  no  sail  shortened,  I  directed  a 
signal  gim  to  be  fired  abeam,  and  hailed  the  chase  to 
shorten  sail  and  heave  to.  Chase  asserted  he  could 
not,  and  requested  leave  to  pass  to  leeward ;  sa^-ing,  if 
we  wanted  to  board  him,  we  had  better  make  haste 
about  it,  and  that  ^  we  might  fire  and  be  damned.' 

"  I  directed  another  gun  to  be  fired  across  her  bows, 
when  she  immediately  shortened  sail  and  hove  to :  it 
being  night,  no  coloi-s  were  observed  flying  on  board 
the  chase,  nor  was  I  aware  of  her  character. 

"  I  was  proceeding  myself  to  board  her,  when  she 
bore  up  again,  with  the  apparent  intention  of  escaping. 
I  was  therefore  again  compelled  to  hoist  the  boat  up 
and  to  close  her  under  sail.    I  reached  the  chase  on  the 


IXTERFERENCE  OF  A  BRITISH  CRUISER. 


313 


second  attempt,  and  found  her  to  be  the  American 
brigantine  Louisa  Beaton.  Tlie  master  produced  an 
American  register,  vrith.  a  transfer  of  masters :  this  gave 
rise  to  a  doubt  of  the  authenticity  of  the  paper,  and  on 
requesting  fm*ther  information,  the  master  refused  to 
give  me  any,  and  declined  showing  me  his  port  clear- 
ance, crew  list,  or  log-book. 

**The  lieutenant  who  accompanied  me  identified  the 
mate  as  having  been  in  charge  of  the  slave-brig  Lucy 
Ann,  captin-ed  by  Her  Majesty's  steam-sloop  Kattler. 
Under  these  suspicious  circumstances,  I  considered  it 
my  duty,  as  the  Louisa  Beaton  was  bound  to  Ambriz, 
to  place  an  officer  and  crew  on  board  of  her,  so  as  to 
confer  with  an  American  officer,  or  youi'self,  before 
allowing  her,  if  a  legal  trader,  to  proceed  on  her 
vovasce," 

The  British  commander  of  the  division,  in  his  letter, 
stated,  that  immediately  on  the  arrival  of  the  vessels, 
he  proceeded  with  the  commander  of  the  Dolphin  and 
the  lieutenant  of  the  Kattler  to  the  brigantine  Louisa 
Beaton.  Her  master  then  presented  the  register,  and 
also  the  transfer  of  masters  made  in  Rio,  in  consequence 
of  the  death  of  the  former  master,  but  refused  to  show 
any  other  documents. 

On  examining  the  register,  and  having  met  tlie  ves- 
sel before  on  that  coast,  he  decided  that  the  Louisa 
Beaton's  nationality  was  perfect ;  but  that  the  conduct 

U 


814  AFRICA  AND  THi:  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

pursued  by  her  masU  r,  in  witliholding  documents  that 
should  have  been  produced  on  boarding,  had  led  to  the 
unfortunate  detention  of  the  vessel. 

Tlie  British  commander  further  stated,  that  he  in- 
formed the  master  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  that  he  would 
immediately  order  his  vessel  to  be  released,  and  that 
on  falling  in  with  the  commander  of  the  Perry,  all  due 
inquiry  into  the  matter  for  his  satisfaction  should  be 
made ;  but  that  the  master  positively  refused  to  take 
charge  again,  stating  that  he  would  immediately  aban- 
don the  vessel  on  the  Dolphin's  crew  quitting  her;  and, 
further,  requested  that  the  vessel  might  be  brought 
before  the  American  commander. 

That,  as  much  valuable  property  might  be  sacrificed 
should  the  master  carry  his  threat  into  execution,  he 
proceeded  in  search  of  the  Perry,  that  the  case  might 
be  brought  under  consideration  while  the  Dolphin  was 
present;  and  on  arnving  at  Ambriz,  the  cutter  of  the 
Perry  was  found  in  charge  of  one  of  her  r>flicers. 

On  the  following  morning,  as  he  stated,  accompanied 
by  the  officer  in  charge  of  tlie  Perry's  cutter,  and  the 
commander  of  the  Dolphin,  he  proceeded  to  the  Louisa 
Beaton,  and  informed  her  master  that  the  detention  of 
his  vessel  arose  from  the  refusal,  on  his  part,  to  show 
the  proper  documents  to  the  boarding-officer,  authoriz- 
ing him  to  navigate  the  vessel  in  those  seas  ;  and  from 
his  mate  having  been  identified  by  one  of  the  Dolphin's 


BRITISH  OFFICERS'  LETTERS. 


315 


officei*s,  as  having  been  captured  in  charge  of  a  vessel 
having  on  board  five  hundred  and  forty-seven  slaves, 
which  attempted  to  evade  searcli  and  capture  by  dis- 
playing the  American  ensign ;  as  well  as  from  his  own 
suspicious  maneuvering  in  the  chase.  But  as  he  was 
persuaded  that  the  Louisa  Beaton  was  an  American 
vessel,  and  her  papei's  good,  although  a  most  important 
document  was  wanting,  namely,  the  sea-letter^  usually 
given  by  consular  officei-s  to  legal  traders  after  the 
transfer  of  masters^  he  should  direct  the  commander 
of  the  Dolphin  to  resign  the  charge  of  the  Louisa 
Beaton,  which  was  accordingly  done ;  and,  that  on 
meeting  the  commander  of  the  Peny,  he  would  lay  the 
case  before  him ;  and  was  ready,  if  he  demanded  it,  to 
give  any  remuneration  or  satisfaction,  on  the  part  of 
the  commander  of  the  Dolphin,  for  the  unfortunate 
detention  of  the  Louisa  Beaton,  whether  engaged  in 
legal  or  illegal  trade^  that  the  master  might  in  fairness 
demand,  and  the  commander  of  the  Perry  approve. 

After  expressing  great  regret  at  the  occurrence,  the 
British  commander  stated  that  he  was  requested  by 
the  captain  of  the  Dolphin  to  assm-e  the  commander 
of  the  Perry,  that  no  disrespect  was  intended  to  the 
flag  of  the  United  States,  or  even  interference,  on  his 
part,  with  traders  of  America,  be  they  legal  or  illegal ; 
but  the  stubbornness  of  the  master,  and  the  identifying 
of  one  of  his  mates  as  having  been  captured  in  a 


316  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Brazilian  vessel,  trying  to  evade  detection  by  the  dis- 
play of  tlie  American  flag,  had  led  to  the  mistake. 

A  postscript  to  the  letter  added,  ''I  beg  to  state 
that  the  hatches  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  have  not  been 
opened,  nor  the  vessel  or  crew  in  any  way  exam- 
ined." 

On  the  Perry's  reaching  the  anchorage,  the  Louisa 
Beaton  was  examined.  The  aflSdavit  of  the  master, 
which  diffei-s  not  materially  from  the  statements  of  the 
British  officers,  was  taken.  A  letter  by  the  command- 
er of  the  Perry  was  then  addressed  to  the  British 
officer,  stating,  that  he  had  in  person  visited  the  Louisa 
Beaton,  conferred  with  her  master,  taken  his  affidavit, 
examined  her  papers,  and  found  her  to  be  in  all  re- 
spects a  legal  American  trader.  That  the  sea-letter 
which  had  been  referred  to,  as  being  usually  given  by 
consular  officei*s,  was  only  required  when  the  vessel 
changes  owners,  and  not,  as  in  the  present  case,  on  the 
appointment  of  a  new  master.  The  paper  given  by 
the  consul  authorizing  the  appointment  of  the  present 
master,  was,  with  tlie  remainder  of  the  vessel's  papers, 
strictly  in  form. 

The  commander  also  stated  that  he  respectfully  de- 
clined being  a  party  concerned  in  any  arrangement  of 
a  pecimiaiy  nature,  as  satisfaction  to  the  master  of  the 
Louisa  Beaton,  for  the  detention  and  seizure  of  his 
vessel,  and  if  such  arrangement  was  made  between 


REPLY  TO  THE  BRITISH  OFFICERS. 


317 


the  British  officei*s  and  the  master  of  the  Louisa  Bea- 
ton, it  would  be  his  duty  to  give  the  information  to  his 
government. 

The  commander  added,  that  the  government  of  the 
United  States  did  not  acknowledge  a  right  in  any  other 
nation  to  visit  and  detain  the  vessels  of  American  citi- 
zens engaged  in  commerce  :  that  whenever  a  foreign 
cruiser  should  venture  to  board  a  vessel  under  the  flag 
of  the  United  States,  she  would  do  it  upon  her  own 
responsibility  for  all  consequences  :  that  if  the  vessel 
so  boarded  should  prove  to  be  American,  the  injm'ed 
party  would  be  left  to  such  redress,  either  in  the  tri- 
bunals of  England,  or  by  an  appeal  to  his  own  country, 
as  the  natm-e  of  the  case  might  require. 

He  also  stated  that  he  had  carefully  considered  all 
the  points  in  the  several  communications  which  the 
commander  of  the  British  division  had  sent  him,  in  re- 
lation to  the  seizure  of  the  Louisa  Beaton,  and  he  must 
imqualifiedly  pronounce  the  seizm*e  and  detention  of 
that  vessel  wholly  unauthorized  by  the  circumstances, 
and  contrary  both  to  the  letter  and  tlie  spirit  of  the 
eighth  article  of  the  treaty  of  Washington ;  and  that  it 
became  his  duty  to  make  a  full  report  of  the  case,  ac- 
companied with  the  communications  which  the  British 
commander  had  forwarded,  together  with  the  affidavit 
of  the  master  of  the  Louisa  Beaton,  to  the  government 
of  the  United  States. 


31 S  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Tliis  letter  cl<»se(l  the  correspondence.* 

The  British  commander-in-chief  then  accompanied 
the  commander  of  the  Perry  to  the  Louisa  Beaton,  and 
there  wholly  disavowed  the  act  of  the  commander  of 
the  Dolphin,  stating,  in  the  name  of  that  officer,  that  he 
begged  pardon  of  the  master,  and  that  he  would  do 
any  thing  in  his  }X)wer  to  repair  the  wrong ;  adding, 
"  I  could  say  no  more,  if  I  had  knocked  you  down." 

The  Louisa  Beaton  was  then  delivered  over  to  the 
charge  of  her  own  master,  and  the  officer  of  the  cutter 
took  his  station  alongside  of  the  Chatsworth. 

On  the  11th  of  September  this  brigantine  was  seized 
as  a  slaver.  During  the  correspondence  with  the  British 
officere  in  relation  to  the  Louisa  Beaton,  an  order  was 
given  to  the  officer  of  the  cutter,  to  prevent  the  Chats- 
worth  from  landing  the  remaining  part  of  her  cargo. 
The  master  immediately  called  on  board  the  Perry, 
with  the  complaint,  that  his  vessel  had  been  seized  on 
a  former  occasion,  and  afterwards  released  by  the  com- 
modore, with  the  endoi-sement  of  her  nationality  on 
the  log-book.  Since  then  she  had  been  repeatedly 
searched,  and  now  was  prevented  from  disposing  of 
her  cargo  ;  he  wished,  therefore,  that  a  definite  decision 


*  This  correspondence,  with  much  of  that  which  is  to  be  referred  to 
hereafter,  with  the  British  officers,  has  been  published  more  at  length 
in  the  "Blue  Book,"  or  Parlianaentary  Papers,  of  1851. 


SECOND  SEIZURE  OF  THE  "  CHATSWORTH."  319 

might  be  made.  A  decision  was  made  by  the  instant 
seizure  of  the  vessel. 

Information  from  the  ma  ter  of  the  Louisa  Beaton, 
that  the  owner  of  the  Chatswurth  had  in  Eio  acknowl- 
edged to  him  that  the  vessel  had  shipped  a  cargo  of 
slaves  on  her  last  voyage,  and  was  then  proceeding  to 
the  coast  for  a  similar  purpose — superadded  to  her  sus- 
picious movements,  and  the  importance  of  breaking  up 
this  line  of  ostensible  traders,  but  real  slavei-s,  running 
between  the  coasts  of  Brazil  and  Africa — were  the 
reasons  leading  to  this  decision. 

On  announcing  the  decision  to  the  master  of  the 
Chatsworth,  a  prize  crew  was  immediately  sent  on 
board  and  took  charge  of  the  vessel.  The  master  and 
supercargo  then  drew  up  a  protest,  challenging  the  act 
as  illegal,  and  claiming  the  smn  of  fifteen  thousand 
dollars  for  damages.  The  supercargo,  on  presenting 
this  protest,  remarked  that  the  United  States  Comt 
would  certainly  release  the  vessel ;  and  the  procuro 
of  the  owner,  with  other  j)arties  interested,  would  then 
look  to  the  captor  for  the  amoimt  of  damages  awarded. 
The  commander  replied,  that  he  fully  appreciated  the 
pecuniary  responsibility  attached  to  this  proceeding. 

The  master  of  the  Louisa  Beaton,  soon  after  the  super- 
cargo of  the  Chatsworth  had  presented  the  protest, 
went  on  shore  for  the  purpose  of  having  an  interview 
with  him,  and  not  coming  off  at  the  time  specified, 


320 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


apprehensions  were  entertained  tliat  the  slave-factors 
had  revenged  themselves  for  his  additional  informa- 
tion— leading  to  the  seizure  of  the  Chatsworth.  At 
nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  three  boats  were  manned 
and  armed,  containing  thirty  officers  and  men, — ^leaving 
the  Perry  in  charge  of  one  of  the  lieutenants.  When 
two  of  the  boats  had  left  the  vessel,  and  the  third  was 
in  readiness  to  follow,  the  master  of  the  Louisa  Bea- 
ton made  his  appearance,  stating  that  his  reception  on 
shore  had  been  any  thing  but  pacific.  Had  the  appre- 
hensions entertained  proved  correct,  it  was  the  inten- 
tion to  have  landed  and  taken  possession  of  the  town ; 
and  then  to  ha^  o  marched  out  to  tlie  bamicoons,  liber- 
ated the  slaves,  and  made,  at  least  for  tlie  time  being, 
"  free  soil"  of  that  section  of  country. 

In  a  letter  to  the  commodore,  dated  September  14th, 
infonnation  was  given  to  the  following  purport : 

"  Inclosed  are  affidavits,  with  other  papers  and  letters, 
in  relation  to  the  seizure  of  the  American  brigantine 
Chatsworth.  This  has  been  an  exceedingly  complica- 
ted case,  as  relating  to  a  slaver  with  two  sets  of  papers, 
passing  alternately  under  difterent  nationalities,  eluding 
detection  from  papers  being  in  form,  and  tradmg  with 
an  assorted  cargo. 

"Tlie  Chatsworth  has  been  twice  boarde<l  and 
searched  by  the  commander,  and  on  leaving  for  a  short 
cruise  off  Ambrizette,  a  boat  was  dispatched  with  or- 


INCIDENTS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SEIZURE.  321 

ders  to  watch  her  movements  during  the  absence  of  the 
Perry.  On  returning  from  Ambrizette,  additional  evi- 
dence of  her  being  a  slaver  was  procured.  Since  then 
the  affidavits  of  the  master  of  the  Chats  worth  and  the 
mate  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  have  been  obtained,  leading 
to  fui-ther  developments,  until  the  guilt  of  the  vessel,  as 
will  be  seen  by  the  accompanying  papers,  is  placed  be- 
yond all  question." 

Tlie  Italian  supercargo,  having  landed  most  of  the 
cargo,  and  his  business  being  in  a  state  requiring  his 
presence,  was  permitted  to  go  on  shore,  with  the  assurance 
that  he  would  return  when  a  signal  was  made.  He 
afterwards  came  within  hail  of  the  Chatsworth,  and 
finding  that  such  strong  proofs  against  the  vessel  were 
obtained,  he  declined  going  on  board,  acknowledging 
to  the  master  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  that  he  had  brought 
over  Brazilian  papers. 

The  crew  of  the  Chatsworth  being  foreigners,  and 
not  wishing  to  be  sent  to  the  United  States,  were  land- 
ed at  Ambriz,  where  it  was  reported  that  the  barra- 
coons  contained  four  thousand  slaves,  ready  for  ship- 
ment ;  and  where,  it  was  said,  the  capture  of  the  Chats- 
worth, as  far  as  the  American  flag  was  concerned, 
would  give  a  severe  and  an  unexpected  blow  to  the 
slave-trade. 

After  several  unsuccessful  attempts  to  induce  the 
supercargo  of  the  Chatsworth  to  come  off  to  that  vessel, 

14* 


322 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


a  note  in  French  was  received  firom  him,  stating  that 
he  was  "  an  Italian,  and  as  such  could  not  be  owner  of 
the  American  brig  Chatsworth,  which  had  been  seized, 
it  was  true,  but  unjustly,  and  against  the  laws  of  all 
civilized  nations.  That  the  owner  of  the  said  brig 
would  know  how  to  defend  his  property,  and  in  case 
the  judgment  should  not  prove  favorable,  the  one  who 
had  been  the  cause  of  it  would  always  bear  the  remorse 
of  having  ruined  his  countryman." 

After  making  the  necessary  preliminary  airange- 
ments,  the  master,  'v\'ith  a  midshipman  and  ten  men, 
was  placed  in  charge  of  the  Chatsworth  ;  and  on  the 
14th  of  September,  the  following  order  was  sent  to  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  prize :  "  You  will  proceed 
to  Baltimore,  and  there  report  yourself  to  the  com- 
mander of  the  naval  station,  and  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Xavy.  You  will  be  prepared,  on  your  arrival,  to 
deliver  up  the  vessel  to  the  United  States  marshal,  the 
papers  to  the  judge  of  the  United  States  District  CJourt, 
and  be  ready  to  act  in  the  case  of  the  Chatsworth  as 
your  ordei*s  and  circumstances  may  require. 

"  It  is  ad  viable  that  you  should  stand  as  far  to  the 
westward,  at  least,  as  the  longitude  of  St.  Helena,  and 
when  in  the  calm  latitudes  make  a  direct  north  course, 
shaping  the  course  for  your  destined  port  in  a  higher 
latitude,  where  the  winds  are  more  reliable." 

On  the  following  morning  the  three  vessels  stood  out 


THE  CHATSWORTH  CONDEMNED. 


323 


to  sea — the  Periy  and  Louisa  Beaton  bound  to  Loanda, 
and  the  Chatsworth  beaiing  away  for  the  United  States. 
The  crew  had  now  become  much  reduced  in  numbers, 
and  of  the  two  lieutenants,  master,  and  four  passed 
midshipmen,  originally  ordered  to  the  vessel,  there  re- 
mained but  two  passed  midshipmen,  acting  lieutenants 
on  board. 

After  a  protracted  trial,  the  Chatsworth  was  at 
length  condemned  as  a  slaver,  in  the  U.  S.  District 
Court  of  Maijland. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

PROHIBITION  OF  VISITS  TO  VESSELS  AT  LOAND A— CORRESPOND- 
ENCE RESTRICTIONS  REMOVED — ST.   HELENA  APPEARANCE 

OF  THE    ISLAND  RECEPTION  CORRESPONDENCE  "WITH  THE 

CHIEF-JUSTICE  DEPARTURE. 

Soon  after  arriving  at  Loanda,  it  was  ascertained 
that  the  mastere  of  merchant-traders  were  forbidden  to 
visit  one  another  on  board  their  respective  vessels,  with- 
out express  permission  from  the  authorities.  This  reg- 
ulation was  even  extended  to  men-of-war  officers  in 
their  visit  to  merchant  vessels  of  their  own  nation.  An 
application  was  made  to  the  authorities,  remonstrating 
against  this  regulation  being  applied  to  the  United 
States  officers ;  and  assurances  were  given  which  led  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  regulation  had  been  rescinded. 

Soon  afterwards  a  letter  to  the  collector,  dated  the 
17th  of  September,  stated  that  the  commander  of  the 
Perry,  in  company  with  tlie  purser,  had  that  evening 
pulled  alongside  of  the  Louisa  Beaton,  and  much  to 
his  surprise,  especially  after  the  assm*ance  of  the  col- 
lector that  no  objection  would  in  future  be  raised  against 
the  United  States  naval  officers  visiting  the  merchant 


PORT  REGULATIONS  AT  LOAXDA.  325 

vessels  of  their  own  nation,  the  custom-house  officers  in- 
formed him  that  he  could  not  be  admitted  on  board : 
they  went  on  board,  however,  but  did  not  go  below, 
not  wishing  to  involve  the  vessel  in  difficulty. 

The  report  of  this  circumstance  was  accompanied 
with  the  remark,  that  it  was  the  first  time  that  an  objec- 
tion had  been  raised  to  the  commander's  visiting  a 
merchant  vessel  belonging  to  his  own.  nation  in  a  for- 
eign port ;  and  this  had  been  done  after  the  assurance 
had  been  given,  that  in  future  no  obstacles  should  be 
in  the  way  of  American  officers  visiting  American 
ships  in  Loanda. ' 

In  reply  to  this  letter,  the  collector  stated  that  he  had 
shown,  on  a  foi-mer  occasion,  that  his  department  could 
give  no  right  to  officers  of  men-of-war  to  visit  merchant 
vessels  of  their  own  nation  when  in  port,  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Portuguese  flag  and  nation.  But  in  view 
of  the  friendly  relations  existing  between  Portugal  and 
the  United  States,  and  being  impressed  with  the  belief 
that  these  visits  would  be  made  in  a  social,  friendly 
character,  rather  than  with  indifference  and  disrespect 
to  the  authorities  of  that  province,  he  would  forward, 
and  virtually  had  forwarded  already,  the  orders,  that 
in  all  cases,  when  American  men-of-war  are  at  anchor, 
no  obstacle  should  be  thrown  in  the  way  of  their  officers 
boarding  American  vessels. 

He  further  stated,  that  the  objections  of  the  guards 


326 


AFRICA  ANT)  THE  AMERICA^i  FLAG. 


to  the  commander  boarding  the  Louisa  Beaton,  was  the 
result  of  their  ignorance  of  his  orders,  permitting  visits 
from  American  vessels  of  war;  but  concluded  that  the 
opposition  encountered  could  not  have  been  great,  as 
the  commander  himself  had  confessed  tliat  he  had  really 
boarded  the  said  vessel. 

On  the  19th  of  September,  the  Peny  sailed  for  the 
island  of  St.  Helena.  Soon  after  leaving  port,  a  vessel 
was  seen  dead  to  windward,  hull  and  courses  down. 
After  a  somewhat  exciting  cha.=ie  of  forty-two  hours, 
the  stranger  was  overhauled,  and  proved  to  be  a  Por- 
tuguese regular  trader  between  the  Brazil  and  the 
African  coast. 

Several  days  before  reaching  St.  Helena,  the  trades 
had  so  greatly  freshened,  together  with  thick,  squally 
weather,  that  double-reefed  topsails,  with  single-reefed 
coui-ses,  were  all  the  sail  the  vessel  could  bear. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  of  October,  a  glimpse  of 
the  island  was  caught  for  a  few  minutes.  Two  mistv 
spires  of  rock  seemed  to  rise  up  in  the  horizon — notched 
off  from  a  ridge  extended  between  them — the  centre 
being  Diana's  peak,  twenty-seven  hundred  feet  in 
height.  The  vessel  was  soon  again  enveloped  in  thick 
squalls  of  rain,  but  the  bearings  of  the  island  had  been 
secured,  and  a  course  made  for  the  point  to  be  doubled. 
After  ininning  the  estimated  distance  to  the  land,  the 
fog  again  lifted,  presenting  the  fonnidable  island  of  St 


DESCRIPTION  OF  ST.  HELENA. 


327 


Helena  close  aboard,  and  in  a  moment  all  was  obscured 
again.  But  the  point  had  been  doubled,  and  soon 
afterwards  the  Perry  was  anchored,  unseeing  and 
unseen. 

The  sails  were  fiu-led,  the  decks  cleared  up,  when  the 
whole  scene  started  out  of  obscurity.  St.  Helena  was 
in  full  view.  A  salute  of  twenty-one  guns  was  fired, 
and  promptly  responded  to,  gun  for  gun,  from  the  brist- 
ling batteries  above. 

Under  the  vast,  rugged  buttresses  of  rock — serrated 
with  gaps  between  them,  like  the  surviving  parapets  of 
a  gigantic  fortress,  the  mass  of  which  had  sunk  be- 
neath the  sea — the  vessel  seemed  shrunk  to  a  mere 
speck ;  and  close  imder  these  mural  precipices,  rising  to 
the  height  of  two  thousand  feet,  she  had,  in  worse  than 
darkness,  crept  along  within  hearing  of  the  smf. 

On  either  bow,  when  anchored,  were  the  two  stupen- 
dous, square-faced  blufts,  between  which,  liked  a  ruined 
embrasure,  yawned  the  ravine  containing  Jamestown. 
High  and  distant  against  the  sky,  was  frowning  a  bat- 
tery of  heavy  guns,  looking  down  upon  the  decks ;  and 
beyond  the  valley,  the  road  zigzagged  along  the  nine 
hundred  feet  of  steep-faced,  ladder  hill.  Green  thickets 
were  creeping  up  the  valleys;  and  plains  of  verdant 
tiu'f  here  and  there  overlapped  the  precipices. 

Subsequently,  on  an  inland  excursion,  were  seen  the 
fantastic  foi-ms  of  Lot  and  his  wife,  more  than  fourteen 


828 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


hundred  feet  in  height ;  and  black  pillars,  or  shafts  of 
basaltic  columns,  standing  high  amid  the  snowy  foam 
of  tlie  sui-f.  Patclies  of  luxuriant  vegetation  were  sud- 
denly broken  by  astounding  chasms,  such  as  the  "  Dev- 
il's Punch  Bowl." 

This  striking  and  majestic  scenery,  on  an  island  ten 
miles  in  length  and  six  in  breadth,  arises  from  its  great 
height  and  its  volcanic  configuration.  The  occurrence 
of  small  oceanic  deposits  high  up  on  its  plains,  indi- 
cates fits  of  elevation  ere  it  reached  its  present  altitude. 
The  Yam-flowers  (the  sobriquet  of  the  island  ladies) 
need  not,  however,  fear  that  the  joke  of  travellers  will 
prove  a  reality,  by  tlie  island  again  being  drawn  imder 
water  like  a  turtle's  head. 

Visits  were  received  from  the  chief-justice,  the  com- 
mandant and  officei's  of  the  garrison.  Invitations  were 
sent  to  dine  "  with  the  mess."  The  American  consul, 
and  many  of  the  inhabitants,  joined  in  extending  un- 
bounded hospitality  to  the  officei*s,  which  was  duly 
appreciated  by  African  cniisers.  A  collation  to  their 
hospitable  friends,  on  the  quarterdeck  of  the  Perry, 
was  also  partaken  of  by  the  officers  of  a  British  cruiser, 
which,  on  leaving  the  island,  ran  across  the  stem  of  the 
vessel,  gave  three  cheers,  and  dipped  her  colors.  The 
proprietor  of  Long^vood,  once  the  prison  of  Napoleon, 
received  the  officers  and  their  friends  at  a  pic-nic, 
when  a  visit  was  made  to  that  secluded  spot,  so  sug- 


CORRESPOXDENCE  WITH  THE  CHIEF-JUSTICR  329 


gestive  of  interesting  associations.  Every  means  was 
used  to  leave  a  sense  of  grateful  remembrance  on  the 
minds  of  the  visitoi-s  to  the  island. 

One  watch  of  the  crew  were  constantly  on  shore,  in 
search  of  health  and  enjoyment. 

A  short  time  previously  to  leaving  Loanda,  infonna- 
tion  being  received  from  the  American  consul  at  Rio, 
that  the  barque  N'avarre,  and  brigantine  Yohisia,  al- 
ready noticed,  had  been  furnished  with  sea-letters  as 
American  vessels,  steps  were  taken  to  ascertain  from 
the  vice-admiralty  court,  in  St.  Helena,  the  circum- 
stances attending  their  tibial  and  condemnation.  Calls 
were  made  on  several  officers  of  the  court  for  that 
pm-pose.  Failing  thus  to  obtain  the  information  un- 
officially, a  letter  was  drawn  up  and  sent  to  the  chief- 
justice,  who  was  also  the  judge  of  the  admiralty  court. 
After  the  judge  had  read  the  letter,  he  held,  with  the 
commander  of  the  Perry,  a  conversation  of  more  than 
an  horn-,  in  reference  to  its  contents.  During  this  in- 
terview, the  judge  announced  that  he  could  not  commu- 
nicate, officially,  the  information  solicited.  An  oppor- 
tunity, however,  was  offered  to  look  over  the  record  of 
the  proceedings.  Circmnstances  did  not  seem  to  jus- 
tify the  acceptance  of  this  proposal.  It  was  then 
intimated  to  the  commander  that  the  letter  of  request 
would  be  sent  to  Lord  Palmerston ;  and,  in  retui-n, 
intimation  was  also  given  that  a  copy  of  the  letter 


330  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

would  be  transmitted  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Na\y  at 
Washington. 

Tlie  social  intercourse  between  the  parties,  during  this 
inten  iew,  was  of  tlic  most  agi*eeable  character. 

In  the  same  letter  to  the  judge  of  the  admiralty 
court,  that  contained  the  above-mentioned  request  for 
documents  relating  to  the  case  of  the  Kavarre,  the 
commander  of  the  Perry  stated  that  he  was  informed  by 
the  American  consul  that  the  Navarre  was  sold  in  Rio 
to  a  citizen  of  the  United  States ;  that  a  sea-letter  was 
granted  by  the  consul ;  that  the  papers  were  regular 
and  true;  that  the  owner  was  master,  and  that  the 
American  crew  were  shipped  in  the  consul's  oflSce. 

Tlie  commander  also  stated,  that  information  from 
other  sources  had  been  received,  that  the  Navarre  pro- 
ceeded to  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  when  near  Benguela 
was  boarded  by  H.  B.  Majesty's  brig  Water- Witch,  and 
after  a  close  examination  of  her  papers  was  permitted 
to  pass.  The  captain  of  the  Navarre,  after  having 
intimated  his  intention  to  the  officer  of  the  Water- 
Witch,  of  going  into  Benguela,  declined  doing  so  on 
learning  that  the  Perry  was  there,  assigning  to  his  crew 
as  the  reason,  that  the  Periy^  would  take  him  prisoner ; 
and  at  night  accordingly  bore  up  and  ran  down  towards 
Ambriz.  The  captain  also  stated  to  a  part  of  the  crew, 
that  tTie  officer  of  the  Wakr-  Witch  had  advised  him  to 
give  up  the  vessel  to  hirn^  as  the  Perrv  would  certainly 


A3IERICAN  COMMANDER'S  STATEMENT.  331 


take  his  vessel,  and  send  him  home,  whereas  he  would 
only  take  his  vessel,  and  let  him  land  and  go  free. 

On  reaching  Ambriz,  with  the  American  flag  flying, 
the  Navarre  was  boarded  by  the  commander  of  H.  M. 
steam-sloop  Fire-Fly,  who,  on  examining  the  papei-s 
given  by  the  consul,  and  passed  by  the  commander  of 
the  Water-Witch  as  being  in  form,  pronounced  them 
false.  Tlie  captain  of  the  Navarre  was  threatened 
with  being  taken  to  the  American  squadron,  or  to  New 
York ;  and  fearing  worse  consequences  in  case  he  should 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  American  cruisers,  preferred 
giving  up  his  vessel,  hond  fide  American,  to  a  British 
oflacer.  Under  these  circumstances,  he  signed  a  paper 
that  the  vessel  was  Brazilian  property,  and  he  himself 
a  Brazilian  subject.  The  mate  was  ordered  to  haul 
down  the  American  and  hoist  the  Brazilian  coloi*s ;  in 
doing  which  the  American  crew  attempted  to  stop  him, 
when  the  English  armed  sailors  interfered,  and  stmck 
one  of  the  American  crew  on  the  head. 

The  Fire-Fly  amved  at  Loanda  a  few  days  after  the 
captm-e  of  the  Navarre,  and  the  representations  of  her 
commander  induced  the  commander  of  tlie  Perry  to 
believe  that  the  Navarre  was  Brazilian  propeiiy,  and 
captured  with  false  American  papers;  which  papei*s 
having  been  destroyed,  no  evidence  of  her  nationality 
remained  but  the  statement  of  the  commander  of  the 
Fire-Fly.    This  statement,  being  made  by  a  British 


332 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


officer,  was  deemed  tjufficient,  until  subeeqnent  inturma- 
tion  led  to  the  couclnsion,  that  the  Navarre  was  an 
American  vessel,  and  whether  engaged  in  legal  or 
illegal  trade,  the  course  pursued  towards  her  bv  the 
commanders  of  the  AVater-Witcli  and  the  Fire-Fly, 
was  wholly  unauthorized ;  and  her  subsequent  capture 
by  the  commander  of  the  Fire-Fly,  was  in  direct  viola- 
tion of  tlie  treaty  of  Washington. 

After  this  statement  was  drawn  up,  the  Water- 
Witch  being  in  St.  Helena,  it  was  shown  to  her  com- 
mander. 

A  statement  in  relation  to  the  capture  and  condemna- 
tion of  the  Volusia,  was  also  forwarded  to  the  chiei- 
justice :  stating,  upon  the  authority  of  the  American 
consul  at  Rio,  that  she  had  a  sea-letter,  and  was  strictly 
an  American  vessel,  bought  by  an  American  citizen  in 
Rio  de  Janeiro. 

In  reply  to  this  application  for  a  copy  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Admiralty  Court  in  relation  to  the  Na- 
varre, the  chief-justice,  in  a  letter  to  the  commander  of 
the  Perry,  stated  tliat  he  was  not  aware  of  any  Ameri- 
can vessel  having  been  condenmed  in  the  Vice-Admi- 
ralty Court  of  that  colony. 

It  was  true  that  a  barque  called  tlie  Xavarre  had 
been  condemned  in  the  court,  which  might  or  might 
not  have  been  American ;  but  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  case  was  presented  to  the  court,  were  such  as 


REPLY  OF  THE  CHIEF-JUSTICE. 


333 


to  indrce  the  court  to  conclude  that  the  Navarre  was 
at  the  time  of  seizure  not  entitled  to  the  protection  of 
any  state  or  nation. 

With  respect  to  the  commander's  request  that  he 
should  be  furnished  with  a  copy  of  the  affidavits  in  the 
case,  the  judge  regretted  to  state,  that  with  every  dis- 
position to  comply  with  his  wishes,  so  far  as  regards 
the  proceedings  of  the  court,  yet  as  the  statement  of  the 
commander  not  only  reflected  upon  the  conduct  of  the 
officers  concerned  in  the  seizure,  but  involved  questions 
not  falling  within  the  province  of  the  court,  he  did  not 
feel  justified  in  giving  any  special  directions  in  refer- 
ence to  the  application. 

Similar  reasons  were  assigned  for  not  furnishing  a 
copy  of  the  affidavits  in  the  case  of  the  Yolusia. 

In  a  letter  to  the  commodore,  dated  October  19th, 
information  was  given  substantially  as  follows  : 

"  A  few  days  previously  to  leaving  the  coast  of  Africa, 
a  letter  was  received  from  the  American  consul  at  Rio,  in 
reply  to  a  communication  from  the  commander  of  the 
John  Adams,  and  directed  to  that  office,  or  to  the  com- 
mander of  any  U.  S.  ship-of-war.  This  letter  inclosed  a 
paper  containing  minutes  from  the  records  in  the  con- 
sulate in  relation  to  several  American  vessels,  and  among 
them  the  barque  Navarre  and  brigantine  Yolusia  were 
named,  as  having  been  furnished  with  sea-letters  a^^ 
American  vessels.    Tliese  vessels  ^veve  seized  on  the 


334 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


coast  of  Africa,  and  condemned  in  this  admiralty  court, 
as  vessels  of  unknown  nationality. 

"  Availing  himself  of  tlie  permission  to  extend  the 
cruise  as  far  as  this  island,  and  coming  into  possession 
of  papers  identifying  the  American  nationality  of  the 
Navarre  and  Volusia,  the  commander  regarded  it  to  be 
his  duty  to  obtain  all  information  in  reference  to  the 
course  pursued  by  British  authorities  towards  these 
vessels  for  the  purpose  of  submitting  it  to  the  Govern 
ment. 

"  The  commander  called  on  the  queen's  proctor  of  the 
Vice- Admiralty  Court,  requesting  a  copy  of  the  affida- 
vits  in  the  instances  of  the  Navarre  and  Volusia.  The 
proctor  stated  that  the  registrar  of  the  court  would 
probably  furnish  them.  The  registrar  declined  doing 
it  without  the  sanction  of  the  judge,  and  the  judge  de- 
clined for  reasons  alleged  in  the  inclosed  correspond- 
ence. 

"  The  proctor,  soon  afterwards,  placed  a  packet  of  pa- 
pers in  the  hands  of  the  commander  of  the  Perry,  con- 
taining the  affidavits  in  question,  and  requested  liim  to 
forward  them  to  the  British  commodore.  Tlie  proctor 
suggested  to  the  commander  that  he  might  look  over 
the  papei-s.  This  was  declined,  on  the  groimd  that 
when  the  request  was  made  for  permission  to  examine 
them,  unofficially,  it  was  denied,  and  since  having 
made  the  request  officially  for  a  copy  of  the  papers, 


RECORDS  OF  ADMIRALTY  COURT.  335 

they  could  not  now  be  received  and  examined  at  St. 
Helena,  except  in  an  official  form.  It  was  then  inti- 
mated that  the  intention  was  to  have  the  papers  sent 
unofficially  to  the  British  commodore,  that  he  might 
show  them,  if  requested  to  do  so,  to  the  American 
officers." 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


RETT'RK   TO   LOAXDA  CYCLOPS  LEAVES  THE  COAST  UOS.  CAP- 
TAIN HASTINGS  DISCUSSION  WITH  THE  BRITISH  COMMODORE  IN 

REFERENCE  TO  THE  VISIT  AT  ST.  HELENA  COMMODORE  FAN- 

SIIAWE  ARRIVAL  AT  MONROVIA  BRITISH  CRUISER  ON  SHORE 

 ARRIVAL  AT  PORTO  PRAYA  WRECK  OF  A  HAMBURGH  SHIP. 

The  Pern',  after  ten  days'  acquaintance  and  inter- 
course with  many  exceedingly  kind  and  hospitable 
friends,  reluctantly  sailed  for  the  African  coast,  and  af- 
ter a  passage  of  ten  days,  beat  up  inside  of  the  reef 
forming  the  harbor,  guided  by  the  signal-lights  of  the 
men-of-war,  and  anchored  at  Loanda.  Tlie  following 
morning,  salutes  were  exchanged  with  the  French  com- 
modore, whose  broad  pendant  was  flying  at  the  main 
of  a  fine  steam-frigate.  To  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
it  was  announced  that  no  suspicious  American  vessel 
had  been  on  the  south  coast  since  the  capture  of  the 
Chatsworth. 

After  remaining  two  days  in  Loanda,  cruising  was 
i-enewed,  in  company  with  the  Cyclops,  off  Ambriz. 
Soon  afterwards  the  Cyclops  was  ordered  to  England. 
Tlie  commanding  officer  of  the  southern  division  was 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  HON.  CAPT.  HASTINGS.  337 


now  about  taking  his  leave  of  the  coast.  The  Hon. 
Captain  Hastings  (since  deceased),  brother  to  the  Earl 
of  Huntington,  was  an  officer  of  great  merit,  and  a  man 
of  noble  qualities.  He  was  ever  kind  and  attentive  to 
the  wants  of  his  crew.  He  possessed  great  moral  in- 
tegrity of  character,  *and  sound  religious  principles. 
Notwithstanding  the  protracted  correspondence,  often 
involving  delicate  points  and  perplexing  questions,  the 
social  friendly  intercourse  between  the  two  command- 
ers in  the  difleient  services  had  not  for  a  moment  been 
interrupted.  On  partmg  the  two  vessels  exchanged 
three  hearty  cheers. 

The  Perry  beat  up  to  tne  southward  as  far  as  Ben- 
guela,  and  looking  into  the  harbor,  without  anchoring, 
proceeded  to  run  down  the  coast  to  the  northward. 
On  approaching  a  Portuguese  man-of-war,  that  vessel 
fired  a  blank  cartridge  from  a  small  gun.  It  being 
daylight,  and  the  character  of  both  cruisers  easily  dis- 
cernible, the  object  of  the  fire  could  not  be  conceived. 
A  thirty- two  pound  shot  was  immediately  thrown 
across  the  cruiser's  bows.  She  then  hauled  down  her 
colors,  but  soon  afterwards  hoisted  them.  A  boat  was 
sent  for  an  explanation.  The  officer  was  assured  that 
the  Peny,  in  coming  bows  on,  had  been  mistaken 
for  a  Portuguese  brig,  of  which  the  cruiser  was  in 
search. 

On  reaching  Loanda,  although  no  vessel  had  arrived 
15 


338  AFRICA  A>T)  THF  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

to  relieve  the  Perry,  yet,  as  her  provisions  were  nearly 
exhausted,  preparations  were  made  to  leave  the  north 
coast.  Tlie  day  before  sailing,  November  29th,  a  letter 
addressed  to  the  commander  <  »f  any  U.  S.  vessel-of-war, 
was  left  in  charge  «'f  the  commercial  agent  of  the 
Salem  House.  After  recapitulating  the  occurrences  of 
the  last  cruise,  the  letter  stated  that  the  correspond- 
ence with  the  collector  had  secured  to  our  merchant 
vessels  more  consideration  than  formerly  from  the  cus- 
tom-house ;  and  gave  information  that  cniisei-s  were 
often  met  at  night,  and  that,  tlierefore,  the  Perry  had 
always  fom*  muskets  and  the  two  bow-guns  ready  for 
service  at  a  moment's  warning.  A  list  of  signals,  es- 
tablished between  the  two  commodores,  was  inclosed. 
It  was  stated  that  Ambriz  was  considered  the  best 
ciTiising-ground ;  although  the  Perry  had  three  times 
run  up  to  Benguela,  and  once  as  far  as  Elephant  Bay, 
having  deemed  it  advisable  to  show  the  vessel  on  the 
entire  line  of  coast. 

It  was  also  stated  that  landing  the  Chatsworth's  crew 
at  Ambriz  having  been  regarded  as  prejudicial  to  the 
interests  of  the  American  factory,  the  agent  had  been 
informed  that  no  more  slave-crews  would  be  landed 
at  that  place ;  and  that  it  was  believed  that  there  were 
then  no  American  vessels,  with  the  exception  of  tliree 
or  four  legal  traders,  on  the  soutli  coast.  Although 
it  was  rumored  that  several  vessels,  fitted  for  the  slave- 


INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  BRITISH  COMMODORE.  339 


trade,  had  gone  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  into  the 
Mozambique  Channel. 

On  the  following  day,  the  Peny  sailed  for  the  north 
coast.  Off  Ambriz  a  visit  was  made  to  the  British  flag 
steam-frigate.  The  cases  of  the  ISTavarre  and  Yolusia, 
together  with  other  instances  of  interference  with  the 
American  flag,  were  discussed  with  the  British  com- 
modore. The  copies  of  the  affidavits,  brought  from  St. 
Helena,  were  examined,  fi*om  which,  with  other  infor- 
mation in  the  commander's  possession,  it  clearly  ap- 
peared that,  when  the  Xavarre  was  first  boarded  off 
Benguela  by  the  officer  of  the  Water- Witch,  her  papers 
were  found  to  be  in  form,  and  she  was  passed  accord- 
ingly. When  boarded  by  the  Fire-Fly,  a  few  days 
afterwards,  the  commander  of  that  vessel  declared  her 
papei-s  to  be  forgeries,  and  they  were  destroyed.  The 
prize-officer,  sent  from  the  Fire-Fly  to  St.  Helena  in 
charge  of  the  vessel,  testified  in  the  admiralty  court, 
that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  IS'avarre's  papers. 
The  commodore  acknowledged  that  in  the  case  of  the 
IS'avarre  there  appeared,  at  least,  some  discrepancies 
in  the  different  statements.  Full  reports,  embracing 
these  points,  were  made  to  the  American  commo- 
dore. 

The  social  intercom*se  with  the  commander-in-chief 
had  always  been  of  the  most  agreeable  character. 
Commodore  Fanshawe,  C.  B.,  was  Aid  to  the  Queen, — 


340 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


a  man  of  distinguished  professional  abilities,  and  of 
great  moral  worth.  He  is  now  the  admiral  in  com- 
mand of  the  British  naval  forces  in  the  West  Indies, 
and  on  the  north  coast  of  America. 

The  commodore  expressed  his  determination,  while 
doing  all  in  his  power  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave- 
trade,  not  to  interfere,  in  the  least  degree,  with  Ameri- 
can vessels ;  and  in  cases  of  actual  interference,  attrib- 
uted it,  in  a  measure,  to  the  want  of  judgment  and 
discretion,  now  and  then  to  be  fuund  among  tlie  num- 
ber of  twenty  captains ;  adding,  >nth  your  extensive 
commerce,  you  ought  to  have  more  cruisers  where  we 
are  so  strong."  He  expressed  his  readiness  to  render 
assistance  to  American  vessels  in  distress,  as  exempli- 
fied in  having  sent  a  vessel  to  the  United  States,  which 
had  lost  her  master  and  crew  by  the  African  fever ;  and 
in  the  fact  tliat  an  American  vessel,  aground  in  the 
Congo  Kiver,  had  been  towed  off  by  one  of  his  steam- 
ers. The  master  of  this  vessel  refused  to  state  his  ob- 
ject in  going  up  the  river,  which  was  afterwards 
explained  by  his  shipping,  and  escaping  with  a  cargo  of 
slaves. 

After  parting  with  the  commodore,  the  Perry  filled 
away  for  the  north  coast;  chased  and  boarded  an 
English  barque,  bound  to  St.  Helena ;  also  boarded  an 
American  barque,  which,  a  few  days  previously,  had 
been  struck  by  lightninir.    This  vessel  had  eight  hun- 


RETURN  TO  MONROVIA. 


341 


dred  kegs  of  powder  on  board ;  her  spars  and  rigging 
were  much  damaged. 

The  passage  to  Monrovia  occupied  fourteen  days. 
The  U.  S.  brig  Poq^oise  had  arrived  on  the  coast,  and 
was  lying  in  the  harbor  of  Monrovia.  The  General 
Assembly  was  in  session,  and  the  debates  on  the  subject 
of  resurveying  the  lands  in  one  section  of  the  country, 
were  creditable  to  the  speakers. 

A  few  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  Peny,  it  being 
learned  that  the  British  steam-cruiser  Flamer  was 
ashore  near  Gray's  Point,  a  correspondence  took  place 
with  President  Roberts,  which  will  furnish  some  idea 
of  the  character  of  the  president,  as  well  as  the  means 
which  Monrovia  is  capable  of  afibrding  for  assistance  in 
such  cases. 

In  this  correspondence,  the  commander  informed  the 
president  that  he  was  about  proceeding  with  the  Perry 
to  offer  assistance  to  the  Flamer ;  and  suggested  that 
the  cases  of  fever  among  the  crew  should  be  removed 
to  Monrovia,  rather  than  remain  subject  to  the  discom- 
fort of  their  present  situation.  He  proposed,  in  case 
the  president  concurred  in  opinion,  and  accommodations 
could  be  furnished,  to  offer  the  services  of  the  Perry  in 
transporting  the  sick  to  Monrovia.  The  president,  in 
reply,  fully  concurred,  and  recommended,  by  all  means, 
that  the  sufferers  should  be  immediately  brought  to 
Monrovia,  where  the  best  of  accommodations  would 


342  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

be  supplied.  He  also  sent  his  respects  to  the  com- 
mander of  the  steamer,  assuring  him  that  he  was  ex- 
ceedingly anxious  to  render  all  aid  in  his  power. 

On  arriving  at  Gray's  Point,  the  proffered  assistance 
was  declined,  as  one  British  cruiser  had  just  arrived, 
and  another  was  momentarily  expected,  which  would 
transport  the  sick  and  suffering  to  Sierra  Leone. 

The  Perry  then  proceeded  to  Porto  Praya,  and  on 
the  8th  of  January,  1851,  after  one  years  service  on 
the  south  coast,  reported  to  the  commander-in-chief. 
Soon  afterwards,  the  commodore  was  informed  that  a 
large  Hamburgh  ship,  with  a  cargo  exceeding  in  value 
the  sum  of  three  hundred  thousand  dollars,  had  been 
wrecked  at  night  on  the  island  of  Mayo — forming  one 
of  the  group  of  the  Cape  Yerdes.  The  Peny-  pro- 
ceeded to  Mayo,  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  the 
wrecked  ship  all  assistance  in  her  power.  The  com- 
mander called  on  the  American  vice-consul,  who  was 
an  intelligent,  dignified  black  man,  holding  the  oflSces 
of  mayor  and  military  commandant,  superadded  to  that 
of  vice-consul.  It  was  found  that  the  ship  and  most  of 
her  cargo  had  proved  a  total  loss.  The  passengers  and 
crew  had  escaped  witli  their  lives.  Among  the  passen- 
gers was  a  clever  young  governess,  going  out  to  San- 
tiago, in  Chili :  she  proceeded  to  Porto  Praya,  where 
her  losses  were  fully  compensated  by  the  contributions 
of  the  officei's  of  the  squadron.    After  rendering  all 


ARRIVAL  AT  PORTO  PRAYA. 


343 


possible  assistance  to  the  wrecked  vessel  and  sufferers, 
the  Perry  returned  to  Porto  Praya,  and  made  prepara- 
tions for  a  third  southern  cruise.  A  first  lieutenant  and 
one  midshipman  were  ordered  to  the  vessel,  to  supply, 
in  part,  the  vacancies  occasioned  by  sending  home 
officers  in  charge  of  captured  slavers. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


RETURN   TO    THE    SOUTH    COAST  COMPARATIVE    COURSES  AND 

LENGTH    OF    PASSAGE — COUNTRY    AT    THE    MOUTH    OP  THE 

CONGO  CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  THE  BRITISH  COMMODORE  

STATE  OF  THE  SLAVE-TRADE  COMMUNICATION  TO  THE  HYDRO- 
GRAPHICAL     DEPARTMENT         ELEPIIANl's     BAY  CREW  ON 

SHORE  ZEBRAS. 

On  the  19th  of  February,  the  vessel  having  been 
reported  ready  for  sea,  the  commodore  issued  orders  to 
proceed  on  a  cruise  south  of  the  equator,  imder  former 
orders  and  insti'uctions,  stopping  at  Monrovia  and  at 
the  island  of  St.  Helena ;  and  returning  to  Porto  Praya 
when  provisions  should  be  exhausted. 

The  vessel  sailed  at  daylight  on  the  following  morn- 
ing, and  after  a  passage  of  eight  days,  during  which 
she  had  a  long  chase  after  an  English  brig,  arrived  at 
Monrovia.  Five  days  were  spent  in  wooding  and 
watering  ship.  On  Sunday,  a  colored  Rev.  Dr.  of 
Divinit}'  in  the  Baptist  church,  preached  to  a  large  con- 
gregation, giving  his  own  rendering  of  the  text  from 
the  original  Greek.  Tlie  effort  was  perhaps  unusually 
elaborate,  in  consideration  of  several  officers  forming 
part  of  the  audience. 


THE  IX-SHORE  PASSAGE. 


345 


In  running  down  the  coast,  a  great  number  of  canoes, 
filled  with  natives — sans  culottes  and  sans  chemises — 
pulled  off  to  the  vessel.  By  one  of  these,  a  note  ad- 
dressed to  the  missionaries  was  sent  into  Cape  Palmas, 
expressing  regret  that  orders  to  the  south  coast  pre- 
vented the  vessel  from  touching  either  at  the  Cape  or 
at  the  Gaboon  River. 

The  former  passage  to  the  south  coast  had  been  made 
on  the  port  tack,  by  standing  out  into  the  southeast 
trades,  and  forty-one  days  had  expired  on  reaching 
Benguela.  This  passage  was  made  on  the  starboard 
tack,  in-shore,  and  occupied  but  twent)^-two  days  to 
Ambriz — a  run  of  fom-  days  from  Benguela.  The  great 
advantages  of  the  in-shore  passage  will  be  made  mani- 
fest in  a  letter  hereafter  to  be  referred  to.  Greater 
alternations  of  weather,  pleasant  and  squally,  with  now 
and  then  a  strong  tornado,  occm*  in-shore ;  but  a  good 
look-out  will  enable  a  man-of-war  to  encounter  all  these 
with  safety.  Besides  a  number  of  legal  traders,  on  the 
passage  down,  several  British  cruisers  were  boarded, 
who  reported  the  slkve-trade  as  being  exceedingly  dull. 

Three  days  were  spent  in  Loanda,  and  then  cruising 
for  the  s'ame  length  of  time,  with  the  new  commander 
of  the  British  southern  division,  was  resumed  off  Am- 
briz. Thence  the  vessel  proceeded  down  the  coast 
towards  the  Congo  Eiver,  where  the  new  commander 
of  the  steamer  Fire-Fly  boarded  the  Perry,  when  at  a 

15- 


346 


AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


distance  of  four  miles  from  his  own  vessel.  Passed  the 
Congo,  after  encountering  a  tornado. 

Tliis  nver  is  more  than  two  leagues  broad  at  its 
mouth.  At  the  distance  of  eight  or  ten  miles  seaward, 
in  a  northwesterly  direction,  the  water  preserves  its 
freshness ;  and  at  the  distance  of  fifty  and  even  sixty 
miles,  it  has  a  black  tinge.  Here  are  often  seen  small 
islands  floating  seaward,  formed  of  fibrous  roots,  bam- 
boo, rushes  and  long  grass,  and  covered  with  birds. 
The  banks  of  the  Congo  are  lined  with  low  mangrove 
bushes,  with  clumps  of  a  taller  species  interspersed, 
growing  to  the  height  of  sixty  and  seventy  feet.  Palm- 
trees,  and  others  of  a  smaller  growth,  are  seen  with  a 
rich  and  beautiful  foliage.  In  going  up  the  river,  the 
southern  shore,  where  there  is  plenty  of  water  close  in 
with  the  land,  should  be  kept  aboard.  Tlie  current  is 
so  strong — often  running  six  miles  an  hour  off"  Shark's 
Point — that  an  exceedingly  fresh  sea-breeze  is  ne- 
cessary in  order  to  stem  the  stream.  The  greatest 
strength  of  this  current,  however,  is  superficial,  not 
extending  more  than  six  or  eight  feet  in  depth.  Tlie 
Congo,  like  all  rivers  in  Africa,  except  the  Xile,  is 
navigable  but  a  short  distance  before  reaching  the  ra- 
pids. The  great  central  regions  being  probably  not 
less  than  three  thousand  feet  in  altitude  above  the 
sea,  these  rapids  are  fonned  by  a  sudden  depression 
of  the  surface  of  the  counti-y  towards  the  sea,  or 


CX)UNTRY  ABOUT  THE  CONGO. 


347 


by  a  bed  of  hard  rocks  stretching  across  the  basin 
of  the  river. 

The  slave-trade  has  been  extensively  pursued  in  the 
Congo.  A  British  steam-cniiser,  for  many  years,  has 
been  stationed  off  its  mouth,  making  many  captures. 
Under  American  nationality,  however,  several  vessels 
have  entered,  taken  in  a  cargo  of  slaves  and  escaped. 
The  natives,  near  the  mouth  of  the  river,  have  been 
rendered  treacherous  and  cruel  by  the  slave-trade ;  but 
a  short  distance  in  the  interior,  they  are  represented  as 
being  civil  and  inoffensive,  disposed  to  trade  in  ele- 
phants'-teeth  and  palm-oil. 

After  crossing  the  Congo,  the  Perry  communicated 
with  Kabenda,  and  the  day  following  anchored  at 
Loango,  in  company  with  the  British  cruiser  stationed 
off  that  point.  The  British  commodore  amving  the 
next  day,  a  letter  was  addi-essed  to  him,  dated  April  4th, 
asking  whether  any  suspected  vessels  had  been  seen  on 
the  south  coast,  by  the  cruisers  under  his  command, 
since  the  capture  of  the  Chatswoiih,  on  the  11th  of 
September,  1850;  also  requesting  that  he  would  ex- 
press his  views  of  the  present  state  of  the  slave-trade 
on  the  southern  coast  of  Africa. 

In  reply,  the  British  commodore  made  the  following 
communication : 

"  I  beg  to  acquaint  you  that  the  only  report  I  have 
received  of  a  suspected  vessel,  imder  American  colors. 


348  ATRICA  A>'D  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


having  been  seen  on  the  south  coast  since  the  date  you 
have  named,  was  from  H.  M.  steam-sloop  Rattler,  of  a 
schooner  showing  American  colors  having  approached 
the  coast  near  Old  Benguela  Head ;  which  vessel, 
when  Commander  Cimaming  landed  subsequently,  was 
reported  to  him,  by  the  people  on  shore,  to  have  shipped 
slaves  near  that  place. 

Your  inquiry  applies  only  to  the  south  coast ;  but 
it  will  not  be  irrelevant  to  the  general  subject  and 
object  for  which  we  are  co-operating,  if  I  add  that  the 
schooner  Bridgeton,  of  Philadelphia,  under  the  Ameri- 
can flag,  was  visited  by  Her  Majesty's  steam-sloop 
Prometheus,  off  Lagos,  on  the  22d  of  August,  under 
circumstances  causing  much  suspicion,  but  with  papers 
which  did  not  warrant  her  seizure  by  a  British  oflScer; 
and  that  I  have  since  received  information  from  Her 
Britannic  Majesty's  consul  at  Bahia,  that  the  same 
vessel  landed  three  hundred  slaves  there  in  October. 

"  I  also  take  this  opportunity  of  bringing  under  your 
notice  'another  American  vessel,  which  I  observed  at 
Sierra  Leone  under  the  American  flag ;  and  which  was 
reported  to  me,  by  the  authorities  there,  as  being  to  all 
appearance  a  legal  trader,  with  correct  papers,  but 
whose  real  character  and  ultimate  object  I  have  since 
had  much  reason  to  doubt. 

I  inclose  a  copy  of  the  formal  entry  of  this  vessel, 
'  TTie  Jasper,'  at  the  port  of  Sierra  Leone,  from  which 


BRITISH  COMMODORE'S  LETTER.  349 

you  will  observe  that  her  cargo  was  shipped  at  the 
Havana ;  and  that  in  the  manifest  are  shooks  and  heads 
of  water-casks,  and  that  she  had  on  board  three  pas- 
sengers :  these  passengers  were  Spaniards.  The  Jasper 
staid  a  short  time  at  Sierra  Leone,  disposed  of  some 
ti-ifles  of  her  cargo  for  cash,  and  left  for  Monrovia. 
On  proceeding  a  few  days  afterwards  in  the  Centaur  (the 
flag-ship)  to  that  place,  I  found  that  she  had  disposed 
of  more  of  her  cargo  there,  also  for  cash,  and  was  re- 
ported to  have  proceeded  to  the  leeward  coast ;  and  I 
learned  from  the  best  authority,  that  of  the  passengers, 
one  was  recognized  as  being  a  Spanish  slave-dealer 
who  had  been  expelled  from  Tradetown,  in  1849,  by 
President  Roberts,  and  that  the  others  were  a  Span- 
ish merchant,  captain  and  supercargo ;  and  that  the 
American  captain  had  spoken  of  his  position  as  being 
very  indefinite. 

"  On  the  second  subject,  my  view  of  the  present 
state  of  the  slave-trade  on  the  south  coast :  It  is  formed  on 
my  own  observations  of  the  line  of  coast  from  Cape  St. 
Paul's  to  this  port,  and  from  the  reports  which  I  have 
received  from  the  captains  of  the  divisions,  and  the 
commanders  of  the  cruisei-s  under  my  orders,  as  well 
as  from  other  well-informed  persons  on  whom  I  can 
rely,  that  it  has  never  been  in  a  more  depressed  state, 
a  state  almost  amounting  to  suppression  ;  and  that  this 
arises  from  the  active  exertions  of  Her  Majesty's  squad- 


350  AFRICA  A>D  THE  AMERICAN'  FLAG. 


ron  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  and  the  cordial  co- 
operation which  has  been  established  between  the 
cruisers  of  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  on  this 
coast,  to  caiTy  out  the  intention  of  the  Washington 
treaty  ;  and  latterly  from  the  new  measures  of  the 
Brazilian  government. 

"  Factories  have  been  broken  up  at  Lagos,  in  the 
Congo,  and  at  Ambriz ;  although  of  this  I  need  hardly 
speak,  because  your  own  observation  during  the  past 
year  must  satisfy  you  of  the  present  state  of  depression 
there. 

The  commencement  of  last  year  was  marked  by  an 
unusual  number  of  captures  by  Her  Majesty's  cruisers, 
both  in  the  bights  and  on  the  south  coast,  and  also  by 
those  by  the  cruisers  of  the  United  States.  This  year, 
the  capture  of  only  one  vessel  equipped  in  the  bights, 
and  one  with  slaves  (a  transferred  Sardinian),  on  the 
south  coast,  have  been  reported  to  me — a  striking  proof 
of  my  \'iew. 

"  The  desperate  measures  also  adopted  by  the  slave- 
dealers  in  the  last  few  months  to  get  rid  of  their  slaves 
by  the  employment  of  small  vessels,  formerly  engaged 
in  the  legal  and  coasting  trade,  as  marked  by  the  cap- 
ture of  several  (named)  slavers,  prove  the  difficulty  to 
which  they  have  been  driven. 

"  The  barracoons,  however,  along  the  whole  line  of 
coast,  ai*e  still  reported  to  me  to  contain  a  great  num- 


STATE  OF  THE  SLAVE-TRADE. 


351 


ber  of  slaves,  to  ship  whom,  I  have  little  doubt  further 
attempts  will  be  made. 

"  Most  satisfactory,  on  the  whole,  as  this  state  of  things 
may  be  considered,  still  I  hope  it  will  not  lead  to  any 
immediate  relaxation  either  of  our  efforts  or  of  our  co- 
operation ;  but  that  a  vigilance  will  be  observed  for  a 
time  sufficient  to  enable  a  legal  trade  to  replace  the 
uprooted  slave-traffic,  and  to  disperse  the  machinery  (I 
may  say)  of  the  merchants  connected  with  it,  and  pre- 
vent any  resumption  of  it  by  them." 

Leaving  Loango  with  a  fresh  supply  of  monkeys  and 
parrots,  the  Perry  retraced  her  course  to  the  southward, 
and  on  reaching  the  Congo,  crossed  that  river  in  a  few 
hours,  close  at  its  mouth,  showing  this  to  be  practicable, 
and  altogether  preferable  to  standing  off  to  the  west- 
ward for  that  pm-pose.  After  crossing  the  river,  the  fii-st 
lieutenant,  Mr.  Porter,  who  had  seen  much  service  in 
other  vessels  on  the  coast,  was  requested  to  draw  up  a 
letter  addressed  to  the  commander,  containing  the  fol- 
lowing information,  which,  after  having  been  endorsed 
as  fully  according  with  experience  and  observation  on 
boai'd  the  Perry,  was  forwarded  to  Lieutenant  Mamy, 
in  charge  of  the  is'ational  Observatory,  under  the  im- 
pression that  it  might  be  available  in  the  hydrographi- 
cal  department.  It  has  since  been  published  in  "  Mau- 
ry's Sailing  Directions." 

"  Li  the  season  of  Febniary,  March,  April  and  May, 


352 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


there  is  no  difficulty  in  making  the  passage  from  Porto 
Praya  to  Ambriz  in  thirty  days,  provided  the  run  from 
Porto  Praya  takes  not  more  than  eight  days. 

"The  direct  route,  and  tliat  which  approaches  the 
great  circle,  leads  along  the  coast,  touching  the  outer 
soundings  of  St.  Ann's  Shoals,  thence  to  half  Cape 
Moimt,  to  allow  for  a  current  when  steering  for  Monro- 
via. From  there,  follow  the  coast  along  with  land  and 
sea  breezes,  assisted  by  the  current,  until  you  arrive  at 
Cape  Palmas.  Keep  on  the  starboard  tack,  notwithstand- 
ing the  wind  may  head  you  in-shore  (the  land-br«'eze3 
will  carry  you  off),  and  as  the  ^vind  permits,  haul  up 
for  2°  west  longitude.  Cross  the  equator  here  if  con- 
venient, but  I  would  not  go  to  the  westward  of  it.  You 
will  encounter  westerly  currents  from  thirty  to  fifty 
miles  a  day.  In  the  vicinity  of  Prince's  Island,  the 
southwest  wind  is  always  strong.  In  the  latitude  of 
about  1°  30'  north  there  is  a  current :  should  it  not  be 
practicable  to  weather  the  island  of  St.  Thomas,  stand 
in,  approach  the  coast,  and  you  will  meet  with  north 
Avinds  to  carry  you  directly  down  the  coast. 

"Our  vessels,  afler  arriving  at  Cape  Palmas,  have 
generally  gone  upon  the  port  tack,  because  the  wind 
carried  them  towards  the  coast  or  Gulf  of  Guinea,  and 
seemed  to  favor  them  for  tlie  port  tack  the  most,  which, 
on  the  contrary,  although  slowly  veering  towards  the 
southeast,  was  hauling  more  ahead,  and  leading  them 


ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  IN-SHORE  PASSAGE. 


353 


off  into  a  cuiTent,  which,  under  a  heavy  press  of  sail,  it 
is  impossible  to  work  against.  The  consequences  were, 
that  they  had  to  go  upon  the  starboard  tack,  and  re- 
trace the  ground  gone  over.  On  the  starboard  tack, 
as  you  proceed  easterly,  the  action  of  the  wind  is  the 
reverse,  and  it  allows  you  to  pursue  the  great  circle 
course. 

"  It  employed  one  man-of-war  eight}^  odd  days  to  Ka- 
benda,  a  port  two  hundred  miles  nearer  than  Ambriz, 
to  which  port  (Ambriz)  from  Monrovia,  in  this  vessel 
(the  Perry),  we  went  in  twenty-tkree  days;  making 
thirty-one  from  Porto  Pray  a.  Another  vessel  was  oc- 
cupied ten  to  Monrovia,  and  forty-six  to  Ambriz,  by  the 
way  of  Prince's  Island,  about  ten  of  which  was  lost  in 
working  to  the  south  of  Cape  Palmas.  In  standing  to 
the  eastward,  north  of  the  equator,  the  cm-rent  is  with 
you — south  of  the  equator,  it  is  adverse. 

"  The  practice  along  the  coast  in  this  vessel  (the  Per- 
ry), was  to  keep  near  enough  to  the  land  to  have  the  ad- 
vantage of  a  land  and  sea  breeze,  and  to  drop  a  kedge 
whenever  it  fell  calm,  or  we  were  unable  to  stem  the 
cmrent.  Upon  this  pai*t  of  the  coast,  near  the  Congo, 
the  lead-Hne  does  not  always  show  the  direction  of  the 
cun'ent  which  affects  the  vessel.  On  the  bottom  there 
is  a  current  in  an  opposite  direction  from  that  on  the 
surface ;  therefore,  before  dropping  the  kedge,  the  bet- 
ter way  is  to  lower  a  boat  and  anchor  her,  which  will 


'354  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

show  the  drift  of  the  vessel.  Between  Ambriz  and  the 
Congo  I  have  seen  the  under-current  eo  strong  to  the 
soutlieast  as  to  carry  a  twenty-four  pound  lead  off  the 
bottom,  while  tlie  vessel  was  riding  to  a  strong  south- 
west current ;  but  the  under-current  is  the  stronger. 

"  In  crossing  the  Congo,  I  would  always  suggest  cross- 
ing close  at  its  mouth,  night  or  day.  Going  north,  with 
the  wind  W.  N.  W.,  steer  N.  N.  E.  with  a  five  or  six 
knot  breeze.  When  you  strike  soundings  on  the  other 
side,  you  will  have  made  about  a  N.  J  E.  course  in  the 
distance  of  nine  miles,  by  log  from  11^  fathoms  ofl 
Shark's  Point.  The  cun-ent  out  of  the  river  sets  west 
about  two  knots  the  hour.  "With  the  land-breeze  it  is 
equally  convenient,  and  may  be  crossed  in  two  hours. 
In  coming  from  the  north,  with  Kabenda  bearing  K.  E. 
in  thirteen  fathoms,  or  from  the  latitude  of  5°  48',  wind 
southwest,  a  S.  S.  E.  coui*se  will  caiTy  you  over  in  four 
hours,  outside  of  Point  Padron  ;  and  by  keeping  along 
shore  the  current  will  assist  you  in  going  to  the  north. 
Vessels  which  cross  to  seaward,  from  latitude  of  5°  45' 
south,  and  9°  west  longitude,  are  generally  six  days  or 
more  to  Ambriz :  by  the  fonner  method  it  occupied  us 
(the  Perry)  only  two  days." 

The  vessel  tlien  proceeded  to  Loanda,  and  after  re- 
maining one  day  in  port^  beat  up  the  coast  as  far  as 
Elephants'  Bay,  in  13°  14'  south  latitude,  commimicated 
with  four  British  cruisei-s,  anchored  en  route  in  Ben- 


SCENES  AT  ELEPHANTS'  BAY. 


355 


guela,  and  there  supplied  a  British  cruiser  with  masts, 
plank  and  oars,  for  repairing  a  bilged  launch.  Du- 
ring a  walk  on  shore,  a  Portuguese  merchant  was  met, 
who  spoke  of  the  slave-trade  being  in  a  languishing 
state.  On  calling  at  his  house,  a  yard  in  the  rear  was 
observed,  capable  of  accommodating  some  three  or  four 
hundred  slaves.  On  entering  Elephants'  Bay  in  a 
fresh  breeze,  the  vessel  was  brought  down  to  her  dou- 
ble-reefed topsails. 

Elephants'  Bay  may  be  termed  the  confines  of  the 
Great  Southern  Desert,  and  the  limit  of  the  African 
fever.  A  very  few  wretched  inhabitants,  subsisting  by 
fishing,  are  found  along  the  shores.  None  were  seen 
during  the  Perry's  visit.  The  soil  is  sandy  and  barren, 
and  rains  very  scanty,  seldom  occurring  more  than 
once  or  twice  during  the  year.  The  climate  is  exceed- 
ingly invigorating.  The  crew  were  permitted  to  haul 
the  seine,  and  take  a  ran  on  shore.  A  brackish  spring 
was  found,  and  around  it  were  many  tracks  of  wild  ani- 
mals. Several  of  the  men,  armed  with  muskets,  while 
strolling  a  few  miles  from  the  shore,  started  up  a  drove 
of  zebras,  but  were  unsuccessful  in  their  attempts  to 
capture  even  a  single  prize. 

The  day  after  arriving  in  this  bay,  while  one  watch 
of  the  men  were  exercising  the  big  guns  at  target-firing, 
and  the  other  watch  on  shore  familiarizing  themselves 
with  the  use  of  small-ai-ms,  a  large  barque  was  dis- 


356 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


covered  in  the  offing;  and  not  conceiving  any  other 
object  than  that  of  slaving  to  be  the  busineas  of  a  ves- 
sel on  that  desert  coast,  a  signal-gun  was  fired,  and  the 
comet  hoisted  for  "  all  hands"  to  repair  on  board.  The 
Ferry  was  soon  off  irnder  full  sail  in  chase  of  the  stran- 
ger. As  night  closed  in,  and  the  sea-breeze  became 
light,  two  boats,  in  charge  of  the  first  and  second  lieu- 
tenant^, were  dispatched  in  the  chase ;  the  vessel  and 
boats  occasionally  throwing  up  a  rocket  and  burning  a 
blue  light  to  indicate  their  relative  positions.  The 
strange  vessel  was  at  length  brought  to,  and  boarded. 
She  proved  to  be  a  Portuguese  barque  in  search  ol 
ochil  for  dyeing  purposes. 


CHAPTEE  XXXII. 


THE    CONDITION     OF    THE    SLAVE-TRADE  WANT    OF  SUITABLE 

CRUISERS  HEALTH    OF    THE  VESSEL  NAVY  SPIRIT  RATION 

 PORTUGUESE  COMMODORE  FRENCH  COMMODORE  LOANDA 

 LETTER  FROM  SIR  GEORGE  JACKSON,  BRITISH  COMMIS- 
SIONER,  ON    THE   STATE   OF   THE    SLAVE-TRADE  RETURN  TO 

PORTO  PRAYA. 

After  parting  company  with  the  Portuguese  ves- 
sel, the  Perry  ran  down  to  Loanda,  from  whence  a 
letter,  dated  the  17th  of  April,  was  addi-essed  to  a 
gentleman  in  a  prominent  station  at  Washington,  com- 
municating in  effect  the  following  views  and  infor- 
mation : 

"The  slave-trade  has  received  an  effectual  check 
within  the  past  year.  Only  one  suspected  American 
vessel  has  been  seen  on  the  south  coast,  since  the  cap- 
ture of  the  Chats  worth. 

"  In  a  letter  from  Sir  George  Jackson,  British  com- 
missioner at  Loanda,  addressed  to  Lord  Palmerston, 
which  was  shown  to  the  commander  of  the  Perry,  it  is 
stated  that  the  present  state  of  the  slave  trade  arises 
from  the  activity  of  British  cruisers,  the  co-operation  of 
part  of  tJie  American  squadron  on  the  southern  coast 


358 


AFRICA  A>D  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


within  the  year,  and  its  capture  of  two  or  three  slaTen 
bearing  the  flag  of  that  nation,  together  with  the  meas- 
ures adopted  bv  the  Brazilian  government ;  and  also 
that  it  may  be  said  that  the  trade  on  this  southern 
coast  is  now  confined  to  a  few  vessels  bearing  the  Sar- 
dinian flag. 

"  The  British  commander-in-chief  has  expressed  him- 
self equally  sanguine  as  to  the  state  of  the  trade ;  and 
is  of  the  opinion  that  the  continued  presence  of  our 
Teasels,  in  co-operation  with  the  English,  will  tend  to 
depress,  if  not  effectually  break  up  the  traffic. 

'*  The  impression  was  entertained  previously  to  join- 
ing this  squadron,  that  the  orders  of  our  government — 
giving  such  narrow  latitude  to  the  conmiander^ — super- 
added to  the  difficulty  of  getting  a  slaver  condenmed 
in  the  United  States  courts,  that  had  not  slaves  actually 
•ju  board,  were  almost  insuperable  obstacles  to  the 
American  squadron's  effecting  any  thing  of  conse- 
quence towards  the  suppression  of  this  iniquitous  traffic, 
or  even  preventing  the  use  of  our  flag  in  the  trade.  But 
observation  and  experience  have  entirely  changed  these 
views,  and  led  to  the  conclusion  that  if  even  the  commo- 
dore had  a  small-sized  steamer — which  is  here  wanted 
more  than  on  any  other  station — in  which  he  might 
visit  the  cruisers  at  points  along  the  line  of  the  slave- 
coast,  that  we  should  no  more  hear  of  a  slaver  using 
the  American  flag,  than  we  do  now  of  his  n^ing  the 


WANTS  OF  THE  SQUADRON. 


359 


British  flag.  iJ^otwithstanding  our  legal  commerce 
here  exceeds  that  of  Great  Britain  or  France,  yet  the 
United  States  have  not  had,  for  a  period  of  more 
than  two  years  previous  to  the  arrival  of  this  vessel,  an 
American  man-of-war,  an  American  consul,  or  a  public 
functionary  of  any  kind,  on  the  southern  coast  of  Af- 
rica. In  consequence,  the  slave-trade  has  been  boldly 
carried  on  under  the  American  flag,  while  American 
legal  traders  have  been  annoyed,  both  by  the  inter- 
ferences of  foreign  cruisers  at  sea,  and  custom-house 
restrictions  and  exactions  in  port. 

"  Checked  as  the  slave-trade  is  for  the  time  being,  if 
vigilant  cruising  were  to  be  relaxed,  or  the  coast  left 
without  a  man-of-war,  this  trade  would  soon  revive  ; 
and  even  if  with  Brazil  it  should  be  suppressed,  then 
with  Cuba  it  would  break  out,  with  greater  virulence 
than  ever,  in  the  Bight  of  Benin.  Hence  the  importance 
of  well-appointed  cruisers  for  its  suppression,  to  say 
nothing  of  their  agency  in  the  vindication  of  our  com- 
mercial rights  in  the  protection  of  legal  traders. 

"  Eight  smaller  vessels,  carrying  the  same  number  of 
guns,  two  of  which  should  be  steamei*s,  would  not  add 
materially  to  the  expense,  as  coal  at  Loanda  may  be 
purchased  at  ten  dollars  the  ton,  while  they  would  prove 
much  more  efficient  than  the  vessels  composing  the 
present  squadron.  These  cruisei*s  might  each  be  as- 
signed two  hundred  miles  of  the  slave-coast,  having 


360  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

tlicir  provisions  replenished  by  a  store-ship  and  flag- 
steamer;  and  once  during  the  cruise — which  should 
never  exceed  twenty  months — run  into  the  trades,  or  to 
St.  Helena,  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting  the  health  of 
ofBcei-s  and  men.  Tlie  health  of  the  squadron  under 
the  present  sanitary-  regulations,  is  as  good  as  that  on 
any  other  station.  This  vessel,  although  in  constant 
and  active  service,  with  her  boats,  after  cruising  for  the 
last  sixteen  months,  has  not  had  a  death  on  board.  The 
Perry  has  served  out  no  grog ;  and  if  Congress  would 
only  do  the  naxy  in  general  the  kindness  to  abolish 
tht  whisky  ration,  which  is  '  evil,  and  only  evil,  and 
that  continually,'  all  men-of-war,  in  health,  comfort, 
morals,  discipline  and  efficiency,  would  be  benefited. 
The  climate  has  been  urged  as  an  objection  to  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  squadron.  This,  as  has  been  shown,  is 
a  groundless  objection  ;  and  were  it  not,  it  is  an  immili- 
taiy  objection,  as  the  navy  is  bound  to  perform  all  ser- 
vice, irrespective  of  danger  to  health  and  life,  which 
the  honor  and  interests  of  the  comitiy  require.  It 
would  be  a  reflection  on  the  chivalry  of  the  service,  to 
suppose  that  the  African  squadron  could  not  be  well 
officered.  Withdraw  the  squadrons  on  the  coast  of 
Africa,  and  not  only  would  Liberia  sufier  materially, 
but  the  legal  trade  in  ivory,  gum-copal,  palm-oil,  cop- 
per and  caoutchouc,  now  in  process  of  development 
along  the  line  of  coast,  would  soon  be  broken  up,  and 


INTERCOURSE  -WITH  FOREIGN  OFFICERS.  361 

the  entire  coast  handed  over  to  the  tender  mercies  of 
piratical  slave-traders." 

PortnoTuese,  English  and  French  men-of-war  were 
lying  at  Loanda.  The  Portuguese  commodore  had 
been  imiformlj  attentive  and  com*teous  in  oflScial  and 
social  intercourse.  The  navy-yard  was  freely  offered  for 
the  service  of  the  vessel.  One  evening,  on  falling  in 
with  the  commodore  at  sea,  the  Perry  beat  to  quartei-s ; 
and  the  first  intimation  given  of  the  character  of  the 
vessel  she  met,  was  by  the  flag-ship  running  across  her 
stem,  and  playing  "  Hail  Columbia."  In  the  last  inter- 
view, the  commodore  alluded  to  om*  correspondence 
with  the  British  officers,  and  expressed  his  gratification 
at  the  results.  The  French  commodore  was  an  intelli- 
gent, active  officer,  whose  squadron  had  made  several 
captures.  He  often  expressed  the  wish  that  the  Perry 
would  visit  his  friends,  the  Pev.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson 
and  Mr.  Bushuell,  at  the  G:iboon  Mission,  whom  he  re- 
garded as  being,  in  all  respects,  highly  creditable  rep- 
resentatives of  American  benevolence  and  culture. 
The  character  of  the  intercoui-se  with  the  British  com- 
missioner may  be  inferred  from  a  letter  to  be  intro- 
duced hereafter.  The  attentions  of  the  British  consul, 
and  in  particular  his  politeness  in  famishing  news  and 
information  from  England,  were  highly  appreciated. 
The  agent  of  the  large  and  respectable  house  in  Salem, 
Massachusetts,  extended  a  liberal  hospitality  to  the 

10 


362 


AFRICA  A>D  THK  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


American  officers.  Tug  governor-general  of  the  prov- 
ince of  Angola  was  a  distinguished  general  in  the 
Portuguese  service,  and  supported  great  state.  He 
oflered,  in  the  coinplimentarA-  style  of  his  country',  the 
palace  and  its  contents  to  the  officers  of  the  Perry. 
Salutes  had  been  exchanged  with  the  garrison  and  all 
the  commodores  on  the  station.  The  attentions  extended 
to  a  small  cruiser,  were  the  tribute  paid  to  the  only 
representative  of  a  great  and  highly  respected  nation. 

Loanda,  with  its  seventeen  thousand  inhabitants, 
numerous  fortifications,  palace,  churches  and  cathedral, 
its  houses,  many  being  of  stone,  spacious  and  substan- 
tial, standing  as  it  does  on  an  eminence,  presents  an 
impressive  appearance,  reminding  one  of  a  somewhat 
dilapidated  Italian  city ;  while  the  frequent  passing  of 
a  palanquin,  supported  by  two  stout  negroes,  in  which 
the  movement  is  agreeably  undulating,  recalls  the 
eastern  luxury  of  locomotion.  But  the  wealth  and 
prosperity  of  Loanda  have  been  dependent  <  n\  the  slave- 
trade.  In  the  year  eighteen  hundred  an«l  forty-eight, 
the  amount  of  goods  entered  for  the  legal  trade, 
amounted  to  about  ninety  thousand  dollars ;  and  at  the 
same  time,  there  were  smuggled  goods  for  the  purposes 
of  the  slave-trade,  amounting  to  the  sum  of  eight 
hundred  thousand  dollars.* 


•  Parliamentary  reports,  1850.    H.  L.  evidence. 


TAKING  LEAVE  OF  SOUTH  COAST. 


3G3 


On  the  17th  of  May,  the  Perry  took  final  leave  of 
St.  Paul  de  Loanda,  leaving  a  letter  addressed  to  tlie 
commander  of  any  U.  S.  cruiser  on  the  coast,  and  re- 
ceiving from  the  British  commissioner,  a  letter  express- 
ing his  views  on  the  subject  of  the  slave-h-ade,  and  of 
the  agencies  in  operation  for  its  suj)pression.  After 
cruising  a  day  or  two  off  Ambriz,  she  bid  adieu  to  the 
south  African  coast,  and  made  all  sail  for  the  island  of 
St.  Helena. 

The  letter  addressed  to  the  commander  of  any  U.  S. 
cruiser,  was  to  the  following  purport : 

"  Nothing  has  occurred  to  interrupt  the  cordial  and 
harmonious  co-operation  with  the  British  men-of-'war, 
during  the  present  cruise  on  the  southern  coast. 

"The  agent  of  the  American  House  at  Loanda 
asserts,  that  the  presence  of  om*  cruisers  has  had  a 
salutary  effect  upon  his  interests.  Formerly  there  were 
many  vexatious  detentions  in  the  clearance  of  vessels, 
prohibitions  of  visiting  vessels,  &c.,  which  are  now^ 
removed.  Having  no  consul  on  the  coast,  he  says  that 
the  interests  of  the  House  are  liable  to  be  jeopardized 
on  frivolous  pretexts,  in  case  that  a  man-of-war  is  known 
to  be  withdrawn  for  any  length  of  time." 

The  letter  of  Sir  George  Jackson,  the  commissioner, 
received  on  leaving  Loanda,  says : 

"I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  of  the  Yth  instant,  in  which,  referring  to  my 


364:  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Dfficial  position  and  long  residence  here,  you  request 
my  opinion  on  the  past  and  present  state  of  the  slave- 
trade,  and  of  the  measures  respectively  adopted  for  its 

suppression. 

"  From  tlie  time  I  left  your  magnificent  and  interest- 
ing country,  I  have  been  mostly  engaged  as  H.  M. 
commissioner  in  the  mixed  courts  at  Sierra  Leone,  Kio 
de  Janeiro,  and  for  the  last  five  years  nearly,  at  this 
place ;  but  in  all  that  long  period,  the  present  is  the 
fii-st  occasion  when  I  could  have  answered  your  inquiiy 
with  any  satisfaction.  When  you  did  me  the  honor  ot 
calling  upon  me,  on  your  first  arrival  here,  in  March, 
1850,  I  welcomed  you  with  those  feelings  of  pleasure, 
which  the  recollection  of  kindnesses  received  in  your 
country  will  ever  excite  in  my  breast  at  the  sight  of  an 
American ;  but  I  was  far  from  anticipating  those  bene- 
fits, in  a  public  point  of  view,  in  a  cause  in  which  we 
both  take  so  deep  an  interest,  which,  I  am  happy  to 
say,  have  resulted  fi'om  your  appearance,  and  that  of 
other  vessels  of  the  U.  S.  Xavy,  on  this  coast,  which 
soon  followed  you.  During  the  four  years  preceding 
your  arrival,  I  did  not  see,  and  scarcely  heard  of  one 
single  American  oflScer  on  this  station.  The  Marion 
and  the  Boxer  did,  indeed,  if  I  recollect  right,  anchor 
once  or  twice  in  this  harbor,  but  they  made  no  stay  in 
these  parts.    What  was  the  consequence  ? 

"Tlie  treaty  of  Washington  proved  almost  a  dead 


LETTER  OF  SIR  GEORGE  JACKSON. 


365 


letter,  as  regarded  one  of  the  contracting  parties.  And 
the  abuse  of  the  American  flag  became  too  notorious, 
in  promoting  and  abetting  the  slave-trade,  to  make  it 
necessary  for  me  to  refer  further  to  it — more  particu- 
larly in  addressing  one  who,  himself,  witnessed  that 
abuse  when  at  its  height. 

"Tlie  zeal  and  activity  displayed  by  yom*self  and 
brother  officers,  and  the  seizures  which  were  the  results 
of  them,  at  once  changed  the  face  of  things.  The 
actual  loss  which  the  traffic  has  sustained,  and  still 
more  the  dread  of  those  further  losses  which  they  anti- 
cipated, on  seeing  the  U.  S.  squadron  prepared  to  con- 
front them  at  those  very  haunts  to  which  they  had  been 
accustomed  to  repair  with  impunity,  and  determined 
to  vindicate  the  honor  of  their  insulted  flag,  which  they 
had  too  long  been  allowed  to  prostitute,  struck  terror 
into  those  miscreants  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic. 
And  from  the  date  of  those  very  opportune  captm-es, 
not  a  vessel  illicitly  assuming  American  colors  has  been 
seen  on  the  coast ;  and,  as  it  was  upon  the  abuse  of  that 
flag,  aided  by  the  facility  which  the  system  of  granting 
sea-letters  aflTorded,  that  the  slave-tradei-s  have  mainly 
relied  for  the  prosecution  of  their  nefarious  ti-affic,  the 
suppression  of  that  abuse  by  the  joint  exertions  of  Her 
Majesty's  squadron  with  that  of  the  United  States,  has 
given  a  blow  to  the  slave-trade  which,  combined  with 
the  change  of  policy  on  that  subject  on  the  part  of  the 


366 


AFRICA  AKD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


Bnizilian  government,  will,  I  hope  and  believe,  go  far, 
if  not  to  extinguish  it  altogether,  at  least  very  materially 

to  circumscnbe  its  operations. 

"The  eftect  of  what  1  have  al)Mvc  >!ated  ha-^,  as 
you  know,  for  some  time  past,  shown  itself  very  sensi- 
bly at  this  place  :  money  is  exceedingly  scarce — slaves 
hardly  find  purchasers.  Failures  of  men  who  have 
hitherto  figured  as  among  the  chief  merchants  of  this 
city,  have  already  occurred,  and  others  are  anticipated, 
and  a  general  want  of  confidence  prevails. 

"  We  must  not,  however,  allow  oui-selves  to  be  de- 
ceived either  by  our  otsti  too  sanguine  expectations,  or  the 
interested  representations  of  otliers.  The  enemy  is  only 
defeated,  not  subdued ;  on  the  slightest  relaxation  on 
om*  part,  he  would  rally,  and  the  work  would  have  to 
be  commenced  de  novo.  Xor,  I  should  say,  from  my 
knowledge  of  the  Brazils,  must  we  reckon  too  confi- 
dently on  the  continuance  of  the  measures  which  the 
Lnperial  Government  appears  now  to  be  adopting. 
Giving  the  present  administration  every  credit  for  sin- 
cerity and  good  intentions,  we  must  not  shut  our  eyes 
to  the  proofs,  which  have  hitherto  been  so  frequent  and 
so  overwhelming,  of  the  power  of  the  slave-trade  in- 
terest in  that  country.  We  must  act  as  if  we  still 
wanted  the  advantage  of  her  co-operation ;  and  in  this 
view  it  is,  that  I  cannot  too  forcibly  insist  on  the  abso- 
lute necessity  uf  the  continuation  of  our  naval  exer- 


LETTER  OF  SIR  GEORGE  JACKSON. 


367 


tions,  which,  so  far  from  being  diminished,  ought  as  fax 
as  possible,  I  conceive,  to  be  ill  further  increased,  till 
this  hideous  hydra  shall  be  finally  and  forever  destroyed. 
Then  when  its  last  head  shall  be  cut  off,  colonization, 
which  till  then,  like  other  plans,  can  only  be  regarded 
as  auxiliaiy  to  the  gi*eat  work,  may  step  in  and  prosper, 
and  commerce,  dipping  her  wings  in  the  gall  of  the 
slain  monster,  shall  rise  triumphant. 

"  It  would  not  be  becoming  in  me,  in  addi*essing  an 
American  citizen,  to  do  more  than  to  testify  to  the  mis- 
chiefs occasioned  by  the  system  I  have  abeady  alluded 
to,  of  granting  sea-letters  ;  but  I  should  hope,  upon  due 
investigation  it  would  be  found  very  practicable  to 
deny  such  letters  to  vessels  sailing  to  the  coast  of  Afri- 
ca, without  at  all  interfering  with  the  interest  or  freedom 
of  licit  trade. 

"  I  have  thus,  very  imperfectly,  I  fear,  complied  with 
your  request — pm-posely  abstaining  fi*om  a  detailed 
recapitulation  of  those  occurrences  which,  if  they  took 
place  in  these  pai-ts,  you  have  yourself  been  an  eye- 
witness to ;  or  with  which,  if  they  happened  in  a  more 
remote  quarter,  you  have  had  opportunities  of  being 
made  acquainted,  from  better  sources  tlian  I  can  com- 
mand. 

"  I  cannot,  however,  quit  this  subject  without  indul- 
ging in  a  feeling  of  gratification,  if  not  of  exultation,  at 
the  singular  coincidence,  or  i-ather,  I  should  say,  con- 


368 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


trast,  between  my  present  employment,  and  that  which 
occupied  me  for  four  years  in  the  United  States. 

"I  was  then  associated  with  v<'ur  dbtinguished 
countiyman,  Langdon  Cheeves,  engaged  in  appraising 
the  value  of  humau  beings  like  oui*selves — regarded  as 
mere  goods  and  chattels.  I  have  been  since  that  time 
chiefly  occupied  in  restoring  that  same  unhappy  class 
to  freedom  and  to  their  natural  rights,  and  in  giving 
eflfect  to  that  increasing  and  disinterested  perseverance 
in  this  righteous  cause,  on  the  paii;  of  my  government 
and  country,  which  will  form  one  of  the  brightest 
pages  in  its  histor}\  Glad  am  I  to  think  that  the 
United  States  are  disposed  to  join  heart  and  hand  with 
Great  Britain  in  so  blessed  an  undertaking ;  and  oh, 
that  I  could  hear  my  ci-devant  and  much  respected 
colleague  sympathize  with  me  in  this  feeling,  and  know 
that  his  powerfid  voice  and  energies  were  exerted  in 
the  same  cause !" 

The  run  of  the  Perry  to  St.  Helena  occupied  eight 
days.  On  approaching  the  island  it  was  distinctly  seen 
at  the  distance  of  sixty-four  miles.  After  making  a 
short,  but  an  exceedingly  interesting  visit,  the  vessel 
sailed,  making  a  passage  of  nine  days  to  Monrovia ; 
and  from  thence  proceeded  to  Porto  Praya,  arriving  on 
the  30th  of  June. 


CHAPTEK  XXXIII. 


ISLAND   OF  MADEIRA  PORTO    GRANDE,  CAPE  VERDE  ISLANDS  

INTERFERENCE    OF    THE    BRITISH    CONSUL  WITH    THE  LOUISA 

BEATON  PORTO    PRAYA  BRAZILIAN  BRIGANTINE   SEIZED  BY 

THE  AUTHORITIES  ARRIVAL  AT  NEW  YORK. 

More  than  eighteen  months  had  elapsed  since  the 
arrival  of  the  vessel  on  the  coast ;  and  orders  from  the 
Navy  Department,  to  proceed  to  the  United  States, 
were  believed  to  be  waiting  at  Porto  Praya.  such 
orders,  however,  were  received.  But  instructions  had 
been  issued  hj  the  new  commodore,  w^ho  had  sailed  a 
few  days  previously,  either  to  remain  at  Porto  Praya, 
or  proceed  to  the  island  of  Madeira.  The  latter  alter- 
native was  adopted ;  and  seven  weeks  were  as  agreeably 
spent  in  Madeira,  as  was  consistent  with  our  disappoint- 
ment in  proceeding  to  this  genial  climate,  instead  of  re- 
turning home,  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting  health  and 
strength,  enfeebled  by  long  service  on  the  African 
coast.  A  portion  of  the  crew  were  daily  on  shore  for 
the  sake  of  relaxation  and  enjoyment. 

The  princely  hospitality  of  the  American  consul,  Mr. 
March,  in  opening  his  splendid  mansion  to  the  Ameri- 
can officers,  and  at  all  times  receiving  them  at  his  ta- 
16* 


370 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


ble,  is  worthy  of  grateful  acknowledgment.  Several 
English  and  Portuguese  families  extended  a  generous 
hospitality  to  the  officers;  and  the  intercourse  with 
I^rd  and  Lady  Newborough,  whose  steam  yacht  was 
lying  in  port,  contributed  much  to  the  satisfaction  with 
which  the  time  was  spent  at  Madeu-a.  The  noble 
party  dipped  their  colors  three  times,  on  separating, 
which  was  duly  acknowledged. 

On  returning  to  the  Cape  Verde  Islands,  a  brisk  gale 
from  the  eastward  induced  the  Perry  to  run  into  Porto 
Grande,  St.  Vincent's  Island,  which  is  the  largest  and 
most  commodious  harbor  in  the  group. 

The  master  of  an  American  vessel,  when  calling  on 
board,  in  company  -with,  the  consul,  communicated 
a  report  that  the  American  brigantine  Louisa  Beaton,  a 
few  months  previously,  had  been  denounced  by  the 
British  consul  to  the  governor-general  of  these  islands, 
as  a  vessel  enoraored  in  the  slave-trade.  The  American 
consul  had  heard  the  report,  but  being  informed  that 
the  information  was  communicated  unofficially  to  the 
governor-general,  had  taken  no  action  in  the  case. 
The  commander  of  the  Perry,  with  the  consul,  then 
called  on  the  collector  of  the  port,  and  after  learning 
the  facts,  addressed,  on  the  29th  of  September,  a  letter 
to  tlie  collector,  requesting  official  infonnation  in  refer- 
ence to  the  agency  that  the  British  consul  had  had  in 
inducing  the  governor-general  of  the  Cape  Verde 


INTERFERENCE  OF  A  BRITISH  CONSUL.  371 

Islands  to  direct  a  searcli  to  be  made  of  the  Louisa 
Beaton,  on  suspicion  of  her  being  engaged  in  the  slave- 
trade. 

The  collector,  in  reply,  stated  that  the  governor-gene- 
ral had  not  ordered  any  survey  or  visit  on  board  the 
Louisa  Beaton,  but  had  directed  him  to  state  what  was 
ti-ue  in  regard  to  the  aforesaid  vessel  suspected  of 
being  employed  in  the  slave-trade ;  as  a  representation 
had  been  made  to  his  Excellency,  by  the  consul  for 
her  British  Majesty  for  these  islands,  in  which  the  con- 
sul stated  his  belief  that  the  said  brig  had  on  board 
irons,  pots,  and  all  other  utensils  and  preparations 
necessaiy  for  that  traffic;  and  also  that  he  knew  of 
a  load  of  slaves  being  already  bargained  for,  for  the 
said  vessel. 

A  letter  of  the  same  day's  date  was  then  addressed 
to  her  British  Majesty's  consul,  stating  that  the  com- 
mander was  credibly  informed  that,  during  the  month 
of  May  he  had  denoimced  the  Louisa  Beaton  to  the 
governor-general,  on  suspicion  of  her  being  engaged  in 
the  slave-trade,  and  requested  him  to  state  by  what 
authority  he  made  the  denunciation ;  also,  the  groimds 
upon  which  his  suspicions  of  the  illegal  character  of  the 
vessel  were  founded. 

Li  reply,  on  the  same  day,  the  British  consul  stated 
that  it  was  upon  the  very  best  authority  that  could  be 
given  ;  but  he  regretted  that  it  was  not  in  his  power  to 


372  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

name  his  authority.  But  that  the  character  and  former 
proceedings  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  were  quite  sufficient 
to  be  referred  to,  to  show  that  her  proceedings  were 
even  then  strongly  suspected. 

In  a  letter  to  the  British  consul,  of  the  same  day's 
date,  the  commander  informed  him  that  he  regretted 
that  the  consul  did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  disclose  the 
authority  upon  which  he  had  acted  in  denouncing  the 
American  brigantine  Louisa  Beaton,  for  it  had  been 
with  the  hope  that  he  would  in  a  measure  be  able  to 
relieve  himself  of  an  act  of  interference  in  a  matter  in 
which  he,  the  consul,  had  no  concern,  that  chiefly  in- 
duced the  commander  to  address  him.  As,  however, 
he  had  failed  to  assign  any  reason  for  that  act  of  inter- 
ference with  a  vessel  belonging  to  the  United  States,  it 
had  become  a  duty  to  apprise  him  that  the  government 
of  the  United  States  would  not  permit  an  ofiicer  of  any 
other  government  to  interfere,  officially  or  otherwise, 
with  any  vessel  entitled  to  wear  their  flag ;  and  that  he 
had  to  suggest  to  the  consul,  that  hereafter,  should  he 
have  any  cause  to  suspect  any  such  vessel  sailing  in  vi- 
olation of  a  municipal  law  of  the  L^nited  States,  he 
would  content  himself  by  giving  information  of  the  fact 
to  some  officer  or  agent  of  the  L^nited  States  :  that  such 
officer  or  agent  would  at  all  times  be  found  near  his 
residence. 

Tlie  commander  further  stated  that  he  might  then. 


CORRESPONDENCE  ON  THE  SUBJECT.  373 

with  propriety,  dismiss  the  subject,  but  that  justice  to 
the  ownei*s  of  the  Louisa  Beaton  required  him  further 
to  state,  that  the  consul's  information,  come  from  what 
source  it  might,  of  the  Louisa  Beaton's  being  engaged 
in  the  slave-trade,  was  not  entitled  to  any  credit.  And 
in  reference  to  "  the  character  and  former  proceedings 
of  that  vessel,"  the  commander  would  inform  him,  that 
the  British  officer  commanding  the  southern  division 
of  Her  Majesty's  squadron  had  disavowed  to  him,  in 
September,  eighteen  hundi*ed  and  fifty,  the  act  of 
boarding  and  detaining  the  said  brigantine  Louisa 
Beaton  by  another  British  ci-uiser ;  and  also  had  pro- 
posed a  pecuniary  remuneration  for  the  satisfaction  of 
the  master  of  the  said  vessel ;  in  reference  to  which  the 
commander  declined  any  agency,  deeming  it  rather  to 
be  his  duty  to  report  the  matter,  which  w^as  accordingly 
done,  to  the  government  of  the  L^nited  States.  And 
further,  that  in  the  month  of  June,  eighteen  hundred  and 
fifty-one,  he  had  himself  examined  the  Louisa  Beaton, 
at  the  island  of  St.  Helena,  and  that  at  the  date  of  his 
communication  to  the  governor-general  affecting  her 
character,  she  was  a  legal  trader. 

On  the  day  follow^ing,  as  the  Perry  was  about  leav- 
ing Porto  Grande,  a  letter  was  received  from  the  Brit- 
ish consul,  in  which  he  remarked,  that  he  must  be  per- 
mitted to  say,  that  he  could  not  acknowledge  the  right 
of  the  American  commander  to  question  his  conduct  in 


374 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


the  slightest  degree ;  that  when  he  gave  a  reply  to  the 
commanders  first  letter,  it  was  a  mere  act  of  courtesy 
upon  his  part ;  and  that  the  language  and  bearing 
evinced  in  the  la.*t  letter  which  he  had  received,  com- 
})elled  him  to  inform  the  commander  that  he  declined 
any  fiuther  correspondence,  but  to  remark,  that  he 
tshould  continue  the  course  he  had  hitherto  pursued,  in 
denouncing  all  slave-vessels  that  came  in  his  way,  and 
should  not  fail  to  lay  a  copy  of  the  correspondence  be- 
fore Her  Majesty's  government 

The  Perrj'  anchored  in  Porto  Praya  on  the  foUo'v^dng 
day ;  and  a  letter  was  immediately  addressed  to  the 
conmiodore,  which  furnished  information  of  the  occur- 
rences at  Porto  Grande.  The  conamander  added,  that 
in  his  interview,  in  company  with  the  American  consul, 
with  the  collector  of  the  port,  the  collector  had  read  to 
him  a  letter  from  the  governor-general  of  the  islands, 
from  which  it  was  evident  that  the  Louisa  Beaton  had 
been  denounced  by  the  British  consul.  A  copy  of  the 
governor-general's  letter  having  been  requested,  it  was 
refused ;  but  when  it  was  intimated  that  he  ought  to 
have  informed  our  consul  of  tlie  action  of  the  British 
consul  in  the  case,  and  that  the  relations  between  the 
United  States  and  Portugal  were  of  a  character  which 
should  lead  him  to  communicate,  promptly,  any  action 
or  information  given  by  a  foreign  officer,  bearing  upon 
American  vessels  or  American  interests ;  the  collector 


A  BRAZILIAN  SLAVER. 


375 


replied  to  this  that  he  would,  if  officially  requested, 
communicate  the  requii-ed  inforaiation.  This  was  ac- 
cordingly done. 

It  was  further  stated,  that,  pending  the  coiTespondence, 
the  British  mail  steam-packet  arrived,  with  the  Hon.  Da- 
vid Tod,  late  American  minister  at  the  com-t  of  Brazil,  on 
board,  to  whom  the  matter  of  the  British  consul's  inter- 
ference was  referred  for  counsel ;  and  that  the  minister 
approved  the  course  pursued,  remarking  that  it  was  a 
case  of  unwarrantable  interference  on  the  part  of  a  for- 
eign officer,  which,  on  our  part,  demanded  prompt 
notice. 

"While  lying  in  Porto  Praya,  a  suspicious-looking 
brigantine,  under  Brazilian  colors,  appeared  off  the  har- 
bor. The  hull,  rigging,  maneuvering,  and  the  number 
of  men  on  board,  indicated  her  to  be  a  slaver.  In  a 
letter  to  the  commodore,  the  agency  of  the  PeiTy  in  the 
capture  of  this  vessel  was  explained  in  the  following 
terms. 

"  On  the  13th  instant,  a  brigantine  arrived  in  this 
port,  under  Brazilian  colors.  A  boat  was  dispatched 
from  the  PeiTy  to  ascertain  (without  boarding,  as  the 
custom-house  boat  had  not  visited  her)  where  she  was 
from,  where  bound,  and  what  news  she  had  to  com- 
municate. She  reported  Brazilian  nationality,  last  from 
Trinidad  de  Cuba,  with  sand-ballast.  As  soon  as  the 
vessel  had  anchored    the  custom-house  boat  pulled 


376 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


alongside  to  pay  the  usual  visit,  but,  without  boarding 
her,  proceeded  to  the  Perry,  when  the  officer  stated 
that  the  said  l^rigantine  had  the  small-pox  on  board, 
and  had  been  placed  in  quarantine.  A  request  was 
then  made  from  the  autliorities  on  shore,  not  to  pennit 
her  to  leave  the  ix>rt  previous  to  the  settlement  of  her 
bills  for  the  provisions  which  were  to  be  furnished. 
The  commander  deeming  it  rather  a  duty  to  ascertain 
the  real  character  of  the  vessel,  than  to  act  as  a  jwlice 
for  the  authorities,  communicated  his  doubts  of  her 
having  the  small-pox  on  board,  intimating  that  the  re- 
port was  probably  a  ruse  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding 
an  examination,  as  he  strongly  saspected  her  of  being  a 
slaver,  and  requested  that  the  Perry  might  board  the 
vessel.  This  was  declined,  as  she  was  in  quaran- 
tine. It  was  then  suggested  to  the  officer  to  pull  under 
the  bows  of  the  vessel,  take  her  papers,  and  submit 
them  to  a  critical  examination,  which  might  give  a  clue 
to  her  real  character.  This  was  done  ;  and  the  papere 
were  found  too  informal  to  entitle  her  to  the  protection 
of  any  state  or  nation.  She  was  then  boarded  by  the 
governor  and  collector,  who,  finding  no  small-pox  on 
board,  requested  tlie  commander  of  the  Perry  to  furnish 
an  officer,  with  a  gang  of  men,  to  assist  in  making  a 
thorough  search  of  the  vessel.  Tliis  request  was  com- 
plied with,  in  the  full  understanding  that  she  was  under 
Portuguese  jm-isdiction,  and  that  the  search  was  to  be 


EXPIRATION  OF  THE  CRUISE. 


377 


made  under  the  direction  of  the  collector,  as  a  matter 
of  accommodation,  in  the  light  of  rendering  assistance 
to  a  foreign  service. 

"  After  completing  the  search,  which  confirmed  the 
suspicions  of  the  vessel's  character,  the  first-lieutenant 
of  the  Peny,  at  the  request  of  the  collector,  was  directed 
to  take  the  slaver  to  the  inner  harbor,  and  to  unbend 
her  sails." 

Tlie  commodore  not  arriving  at  Porto  Praya,  the 
Perry  ran  up  to  Porto  Grande,  and,  on  tlie  twent\'-sec- 
ond  day  of  October,  a  copy  of  the  correspondence 
with  the  British  consul,  in  reference  to  the  Louisa 
Beaton,  was  forw^arded  to  the  Xavy  Depai-tment,  at 
Washington. 

After  her  return  to  Porto  Praya,  to  wait  the  an-ival 
of  the  squadron,  on  the  eleventh  of  November,  the  John 
Adams  made  her  appearance,  and  was  followed,  on  the 
succeeding  day,  by  the  flag-ship.  The  commodore 
had  received  triplicate  ordei*s  to  send  the  Perry  to  the 
United  States.  The  proceedings  of  the  vessel,  during 
her  absence  from  the  squadron,  were  approved  by  the 
commodore  ;  and  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  December  she 
stood  out  of  the  harbor,  homeward  bound,  exchanging 
three  cheers  successively  with  tlie  Porpoise,  the  John 
Adams,  and  the  Gennantown. 

On  aiTiving  at  ^N'ew  York,  and  reporting  the  vessel, 
a  letter,  dated  December  26th,  was  received  from  the 


.378  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

Secretar}'  of  tlie  Navy,  of  which  the  follo^ving  is  the 
concluding  paragraph ;  "  Tlie  Depai-tment  tenders  its 
congratulations  upon  your  safe  return  to  your  country 
and  friends,  after  an  active  cruise  on  the  coast  of  Af- 
rica ;  during  which,  your  course  has  met  the  approba- 
tion of  the  Department." 


CHAPTER  XXXIY. 


CONCLUSION  NECESSITY    OF    SQUADRONS    FOR   PROTECTION  OP 

COMMERCE    AND   CITIZENS  ABROAD  FEVER   IN  BRAZIL,  CUBA 

AND    UNITED    STATES  INFLUENCE    OF    RECAPTURED  SLAVES 

RETURNING  TO  THE  DIFFERENT  REGIONS  OF  THEIR  OWN  COUN- 
TRY COMMERCIAL  RELATIONS  WITH  AFRICA. 

Where  a  nation  lias  commerce,  it  lias  a  dwelling- 
place — a  scene  of  action  and  of  ti-affic  on  the  sea.  It 
ought  to  find  its  government  there  also.  The  people 
have  a  right  to  be  protected,  and  the  government  is 
bound  to  enforce  that  right  wherever  they  go.  K  they 
visit  foreign  countiies,  they  have  a  right  to  just  ti-eat- 
ment.  The  traveller — the  merchant — the  missionary — 
the  person  of  whatever  character,  if  an  American 
citizen,  can  demand  justice.  The  sea  is  no  foreign 
territory.  Where  a  merchant  vessel  beai*s  its  countiy's 
flag,  it  covers  its  coimtry's  territoiy.  Government  is 
instituted  to  be  watchful  for  the  interests  and  safety  of 
its  citizens.  A  navy  is  the  organ  through  which  it 
acts.  People  on  shore  see  nothing  of  this  kind  of 
governmental  protection.  There  is  there  no  marching 
and  drumming,  or  clearing  the  streets  with  horsemen 
or  footmen,  or  feathers  and  trumpets.  It  is  the  mer- 
chant who  is  most  directly  benefited  by  naval  protec- 


380  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


tion  ;  and  yet  all  classes  share  in  ite  advantages.  The 
planter  and  the  manufacturer  are  interested  in  safe  and 
free  commerce ;  our  citizens  generally  avow  that  they 
are  also  interested,  by  the  sensitiveness  with  which  the 
rights  of  our  flag  are  regarded.  It  is  more  politic  to 
prevent  wrong  than  to  punish  it;  therefore  we  have 
police  in  our  streets,  and  locks  on  our  doors.  The  shores 
of  civilized  governments  are  the  mutual  boundaries  of 
nations.  Our  government  is  disposed  to  show  itself 
there,  for  there  are  its  people,  and  there  are  their  in- 
terests. The  shores  of  savage  lands  are  our  confines 
with  savages.  Just  as  forts  are  required  on  the  fron- 
tiers of  the  Camanches  or  Utahs,  so  are  they  at  Ambriz 
or  Sumatra.  Cruisers  are  the  nation's  fortresses  abroad, 
employed  for  the  benefit  of  her  citizens,  and  the  security 
of  their  commerce.  It  would  be  discreditable,  as  well 
as  unsafe,  to  trust  to  a  foreign  power  to  keep  down 
piracy  in  the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  or  in  the  West  Indies 
and  in  the  China  seas.  As  commerce  extends,  so  does 
the  necessity  of  its  supervision  and  defence  extend. 
The  navy  therefore  requires  augmentation,  and  for  the 
reasons  assigned  in  the  late  report  of  the  Head  of  that 
Department,  it  may  be  inferred  that  it  will  have  it,  in 
reorganized  and  greatly  improved  efficiency. 

On  this  subject,  the  following  are  extracts,  in  sub- 
stance, from  a  lecture  delivered  on  the  evening  of  Feb- 
ruary 3d,  1854,  before  the  Xew  York  Mercantile 


DEMANDS  OT  THE  XAVY. 


381 


Library  Association,  by  the  Hon.  Mr.  Stanton,  of 
Tennessee,  the  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee 
of  the  U.  S.  House  of  Representatives,  and  for  a  long 
time  chairman  of  the  naval  committee  of  that  body : 

"  A  strong  naval  power  is  the  best  promoter  of  com- 
merce, and  hence  men  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits, 
cannot  but  feel  an  interest  in  the  history  of  the  rise  and 
progress  of  that  navy,  to  which  the  successes  of  their 
business  undertakings  are  principally  due.  At  a  very 
early  period,  navies  became  an  indispensable  power  in 
war.  The  later  invention  of  ordnance,  and  the  still 
more  recent  application  of  steam  as  a  motive  power  to 
ships  of  war,  render  it  at  present  a  question  of  some 
difficulty,  to  predict  the  extent  to  which  naval  military 
power  may  hereafter  arrive. 

"  What  we  have  to  do  in  times  of  peace,  is  to  main- 
tain our  naval  force  in  the  highest  state  of  efficiency  of 
which  it  is  capable,  and  ready  to  enter  upon  action  at 
a  moment's  warning.  \Yith  the  lessons  of  the  British 
war  before  us,  it  cannot  be  possible  that  the  recent 
experiments  of  Lieutenant  Dahlgren  at  Washingtoii, 
and  the  discoveries  which  have  resulted  from  them, 
will  fail  to  prove  of  high  practical  service.  But  with 
all  our  appliances  or  discoveries  in  this  regard,  we  can- 
not conceal  from  ourselves  the  fact,  that  we  are  behind 
other  nations  in  all  that  concerns  the  structure  of  our 
ships. 


382  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

"We  must  have  machinery  and  all  proper  appli- 
ances, as  well  as  the  raw  materials,  for  the  construction 
of  a  naval  power  when  required.  We  must  have  inde- 
pendent establishments  on  both  sides  of  the  continent, 
to  protect  our  Pacific  as  well  as  our  Atlantic  coasts, 
which  should  be  connected  by  a  railroad  stretching 
across  the  breadth  of  the  country.  The  requirements 
of  commerce,  and  the  advances  which  it  has  been  mak- 
ing in  increasing  the  facilities  for  navigation,  will  force 
us  into  improvements  in  our  naval  power,  in  order  to 
uphold  our  commerce. 

"  It  may  be  safely  presumed,  that  at  the  present  state 
of  our  aftaii*s,  a  moderate  and  efficient  navy  would  be 
a  great  civilizing  power ;  it  would  hover  around  the 
path  of  our  ships,  and  by  the  very  exiiibition  of  its 
power  suppress  all  attempts  to  molest  them  in  their 
mission  of  peace  and  brotherhood  across  the  seas.  But 
in  addition  to  this,  our  navy  is  even  now  aiding  stren- 
uously in  the  march  of  geographical  discovery,  and  in 
enlarging  our  stock  of  scientific  knowledge,  and  our 
familiarity  with  the  facts  of  physical  philosophy. 
^Vlien  we  consider  the  character  of  our  institutions — 
when  we  consider  that  our  great  interests  lie  in  the 
paths  of  peace — we  must  be  impressed  with  the  fact, 
that  the  contributions  to  science,  and  the  civilizing  in- 
fluences of  our  navy,  are  one  of  the  most  powerful  means 
by  which  we  can  uphold  our  interests,  and  carry  out 


PROPOSALS  TO  WITHDRAW  THE  SQUADRON.  383 

our  institutions  to  the  fullest  development  of  whicli  they 
are  capable. 

"  Under  all  circumstances  and  all  disadvantages,  the 
navy  has  never,  at  any  period  of  our  history,  failed  to 
do  honor  to  itself,  and  to  shed  lustre  on  the  American 
character.  From  the  Revolutionary  war  down  to  the 
late  conquest  of  Mexico,  in  every  case  in  which  its  co- 
operation was  at  all  possible,  it  has  given  proofs  of 
activity  and  power  equal  to  the  proud  and  commanding 
position  we  are  to  occupy  among  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  We  have  opportunities  to  supply  the  service 
with  the  means  of  moral  and  physical  progress,  to  free 
it  from  the  shackles  of  old  forms,  and  suffer  it  to  clothe 
itself  with  the  panoply  of  modern  science,  and  to  be 
identified  with  the  spread  of  civilization  and  enlighten- 
ment over  the  world.  It  will  continue  to  be  om*  pride 
and  our  boast,  the  worthy  representative  upon  the 
ocean,  of  the  genius,  the  skill,  and  the  enterprise  of  our 
people — of  the  boundless  resources  of  our  growing 
country — of  the  power,  and  grandeur,  and  glory,  as 
well  as  the  justice  and  humanity  of  our  free  insti- 
tutions." 

The  legislatm-es  of  some  states,  the  reports  of  some 
auxiliary  colonization  societies,  the  speeches  of  some 
distinguished  senators  and  representatives  in  congress, 
the  addresses  of  some  colonization  agents,  have  repre- 
sented the  great  sacrifice  of  life  and  treasure  in  "  un- 


9S4  \FRICA  AXD  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

successful  eflbrts,"  by  the  African  squadron,  for  the 
extermination  of  the  slave-trade,  and  proposed  to  witli- 
draw  it.  Whereas,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  African 
squadrons,  instead  of  being  useless,  have  rendered 
e^iiitial  service.  For  much  as  colonizatir»n  has  accom- 
plished, and  eflectiial  as  Liberia  is  in  suppressing  the 
slave-traflSc  within  her  own  jurisdiction,  these  means 
and  these  results  have  been  established  and  secured  by 
the  presence  and  protection  of  the  naval  squadrons  of 
Great  Britain,  France  and  the  United  States.  And 
had  no  such  assistance  been  rendered,  tlie  entire  coast, 
where  we  now  see  legal  trade  and  advancing  civiliza- 
tion, would  have  been  at  this  day,  in  spite  of  any  efforts 
to  colonize,  or  to  establish  legal  commerce,  the  scene  of 
unchecked,  lawless  slave-trade  piracy. 

Strange  and  frightful  maladies  have  been  engen- 
dered by  the  cruelties  perpetrated  within  the  hold  of  a 
slaver.  If  any  disease  affecting  the  human  constitu- 
tion were  brought  there,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  would 
be  nursed  into  mortal  vigor  in  these  receptacles  of  filth, 
corruption  and  despair.  Crews  have  been  known  to 
die  by  the  fniit  of  their  own  crime,  and  leave  ships 
almost  helpless.  They  have  carried  the  scourge  with 
them.  Tlie  coast  fever  of  Africa,  bad  enough  where 
it  has  its  birth,  came  in  these  vessels,  and  has 
assumed  perhaps  a  permanent  abode  in  the  western 
regions  of  the  world.     Xo  fairer  sky  or  healthier 


THE  AFRICO-AMERICAN  FEVER. 


385 


climate  were  there  on  earth,  than  in  the  beautiful  bay, 
and  amid  the  grand  and  picturesque  scenery  of  Eio  de 
Janeiro  in  Brazil.  But  it  became  a  haunt  of  slavers, 
and  the  dead  of  Africa  floated  on  the  glittering  waters, 
and  were  tumbled  upon  the  sands  of  its  harbor.  The 
shipping  found,  in  the  hot  summer  of  1849,  that  death 
had  come  with  the  slavers.  Thirty  or  forty  vessels  were 
lying  idly  at  their  anchors,  for  their  crews  had  mostly 
perished.  The  pestilence  swept  along  the  coast  of  that 
empire  with  fearful  malignity. 

Cuba  for  the  same  crime  met  the  same  retribution. 
Cargoes  of  slaves  were  landed  to  die,  and  brought  the 
source  of  their  mortality  ashore,  vigorous  and  deadly. 
The  fever  settled  there  in  the  beginning  of  1853,  and 
came  to  our  country,  as  summer  approached,  in  mer- 
chant vessels  from  the  "West  Indies.  At  ^Tew  Orleans, 
Mobile,  and  other  places  it  spread  desolation,  over 
which  the  counti§i«iiourned.  Let  it  be  remembered 
that  it  is  never  even  safe  to  disregard  crime. 

Civilized  governments  are  now  very  generally  united 
in  measures  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade.  The 
coast  of  Africa  itself  is  rapidly  closing  against  it.  The 
American  and  English  colonies  secure  a  vast  extent  of 
sea-coast  against  its  revival.  Christian  missions,  at 
many  points,  are  inculcating  the  doctrines  of  divine 
truth,  which,  by  its  power  upon  the  hearts  of  men,  is 
the  antagonist  to  such  cruel  unrighteousness. 

17 


386 


AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


The  increase  of  commerce,  and  the  advance  cf  Chris- 
tian civilization,  v  ill  imdoubtedly,  at  no  distant  date, 
render  a  naval  Ibrce  for  the  suppression  of  the  African 
slave-trade  unnecessary ;  but  no  power  having  exten- 
sive commerce  ought  ever  to  overlook  the  necessity  of 
a  naval  force  on  that  coast.  The  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  it  is  to  be  hoj)ed,  has,  in  his  recent  report,  set- 
tled the  question  as  to  the  continuance  of  the  African 
squadron. 

Tlie  increasing  influence  of  Liberia  and  Cape  Palmas 
will  prove  a  powerful  protection  to  their  colored  breth- 
ren everywhere.  With  them  Sierra  Leone  will  unite 
in  feeling  and  purposes.  Their  policy  will  always  be 
the  same.  It  must  necessarily  happen  that  a  close  po- 
litical relationship  in  interests  and  feelings  will  unite 
them  all  in  one  system  of  action.  Their  policy  ^vill  be 
that  of  uncompromising  hostility  to  the  slave-trade. 

There  are  two  aspects  of  this  queltlbn  well  worthy  of 
consideration : 

The  Liberians  are  freemen,  recognized  as  having 
their  proper  standing  among  the  nations  of  the  world. 
The  people  of  Sierra  Leone  are  Englishmen,  having 
the  legal  rights  of  that  kingdom.  Therefore,  seizing 
the  citizens  of  either  the  one  or  the  other  community  in 
time  of  peace,  and  carrying  them  captive  to  be  sold, 
amounts  to  the  greatest  crime  which  can  be  committed 
on  the  ocean. 


A  NEW  ASPECT  OF  THE  SLAVE-TRADE.  387 

I^ow  as  this  may  be  siii*mised  in  the  case  of  all  sla- 
vers on  that  coast,  the  guilt  of  the  slaver  in  the  eye  of 
national  law  becomes  greater  than  before ;  and  the 
peril  greater.  It  may  be  presumed  that  if  a  case  were 
established  against  any  slave  cargo,  that  it  contained 
one  of  either  of  the  above-mentioned  description  of 
persons,  the  consequences  to  the  slavei-s,  whatever  their 
nation  might  be,  would  be  mnch  more  serious  than  has 
hitherto  been  the  case. 

But  a  principle  of  higher  justice  ought  long  ago  to 
have  been  kept  in  view,  and  acted  upon.  Let  the  cai- 
tiff have  his  "  pound  of  flesh,"  but  "  not  one  drop  of 
blood."  If  a  man  throttles  another,  or  suffocates  him 
for  want  of  air,  or  stows  eight  hundred  people  in  a 
ship's  hold,  where  he  knows  that  one  or  two  hundred 
in  the  "middle  passage"  will  necessarily  die,  every 
such, death  is  a  murder^  and  each  man  aboard  of  such 
vessel  who  has  any  agency  in  procm-ing  or  forwarding 
this  cargo,  is  a  murderer.  It  has  therefore  been  con- 
trary to  justice,  that  the  perpetrators  of  such  crimes 
should  have  been  dismissed  with  impunity  when  cap- 
tured. Such  considerations  ought  to  weigh  with  men 
in  the  future. 

There  has  been  already  a  commencement  of  a  coast- 
ing trade,  conducted  by  colored  men.  There  is  a  Li- 
berian  man-of-war  schooner,  the  "  Lark,"  Lieutenant- 
Commanding  Cooper ;  and  the  English,  after  furnishing 


388  AFRICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG. 

the  schooner,  have  proffered  the  assistance  of  her  navy 
officers  to  instruct  the  young  aspirants  of  the  republic, 
in  the  art  of  sailing  the  cruiser,  and  in  the  science  of 
naval  warfare.  Captain  Cooper  will  not  take  exception 
at  the  remark,  that  it  is  "  the  day  of  small  things"  with 
the  Liberian  navy.  But  his  flag  bears  the  star  of  hope 
to  a  vigorous  young  naval  power. 

A  returning  of  recaptured  slaves,  instructed  and  civ- 
ilized, to  the  lands  which  gave  them  birth,  has  taken 
place.  Some  hundreds  passed  by  Lagos,  and  were  as- 
sailed and  plundered.  Some  hundreds  passed  by  Ba- 
dagry,  and  were  welcomed  with  kind  treatment.  The 
one  occurrence  reminded  them  of  African  darkness, 
obduracy  and  crime ;  the  other  of  the  softening  and 
elevating  effects  which  Christianity  strives  to  introduce. 
They  have  gone  to  establish  Christian  churches,  and 
have  established  them  there.  Such  things  we  are  sure 
have  been  reported  far  in  the  interior,  and  Christianity 
now  stands  contrasted  with  Mohammedanism,  as  being 
the  deliverer,  while  the  latter  is  still  the  enslaver.  The 
report  must  also  have  gone  over  the  whole  broad  inter- 
tropical continent,  that  Christian  nations  have  joined 
together  for  African  deliverance  ;  and  that  for  purposes 
80  high  the  race  of  Africa  has  returned  from  the 
west,  and  by  imitation  of  western  policy  and  religion, 
is  establishing  a  restorative  influence  on  their  own 
shores. 


THE  FUTURE  OF  AFRICA. 


389 


There  has  thus  been  presented  a  view  of  Africa  and 
of  its  progress,  as  far  as  its  condition  and  advancement 
have  had  any  relation  to  our  country  and  its  flag. 
How  far  its  gro-svth  in  civilization  has  been  dependent 
on  the  efforts  of  America  has  been  illustrated ;  and  how 
essentially  the  naval  interference  of  the  United  States 
has  conti-ibuted  to  this  end,  has  been  made  evident.  It 
cannot  escape  notice  that  this  progress  must  in  the  fu- 
ture depend  on  the  same  means  and  the  same  efforts. 
Our  own  national  interests,  being  those  of  a  commer- 
cial people,  require  the  presence  of  a  squadron.  Under 
its  protection  commerce  is  secure,  and  is  daily  increas- 
ing in  extent  and  value. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  how  lucrative  this  commerce 
may  ultimately  become.  That  the  whole  African  coast 
should  assume  the  aspect  of  Liberia,  is  perhaps  not  an 
um-easonable  expectation.  That  Liberia  will  continue 
to  grow  in  wealth  and  influence,  is  not  improbable. 
There  is  intelligence  among  its  people,  and  wisdom  and 
energy  in  its  councils.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe 
that  this  will  not  continue.  Its  position  makes  it  an 
agi'icultural  community.  Other  lands  must  afford  its 
manufactures  and  its  ti*aders.  There  will,  therefore, 
ever  be  on  its  shores  a  fair  field  for  American  enter- 
prise. 

The  reduction,  or  annihilation  of  the  slave-trade,  is 
opening  the  whole  of  these  vast  regions  to  science  and 


390 


AFRICA  A5D  IHK  AMERICAN  FLAG. 


legal  commerce.  Let  America  take  her  right  share  in 
them.  It  is  throwing  wide  the  portals  of  the  continent 
for  the  entrance  of  Christian  civDization.  Let  our 
country  exert  its  full  proportion  of  this  influence ;  and 
thus  recompense  to  Africa  the  wrongs  inflicted  upon 
her  people,  in  which  hitherto  all  nations  have  partici- 
pated. 


THE  END. 


D.  APPLETON  &  CO., 

316  &  348  BROABWAT,  NEW-YORK, 

Have  jus'  published 
THE 

By  JOSEPH  G.  BALDWIN. 

ILLUSTRATED,  12rao.    330  PAGES. 


These  sketches  of  the  "Flush  Times"  of  our  own  day,  personating 
our  own  citizens,  are  written  with  entertaining  spirit,  elegance,  and 
humor,  and  cannot  fail  to  contribute  to  the  enjoyment  and  gratification 
of  all  readers. 

Few  works  have  ever  been  issued  from  the  press  which  has  been  as 
favorably  received  by  the  whole  public  as  this,  upwards  of  Nine  Thou- 
sand having  been  sold  within  a  few  weeks  after  its  appearance. 

Contents  of  "Flush  Times."'— OYID  BOLUS,  Esq.,  Attorney  at  Law,  and 
Solicitor  in  Chancery.— MY  FIRST  APPEARANCE  AT  THE  BAP^  Higgin- 
botham  vs.  Swink,  Slander.— THE  BENCH  AND  THE  BAR.  Introduction-^olly 
Times — Chaos  of  Jurisprudence — The  Era  of  Quashing — Jim.  T.,  a  Character — 
How  to  get  rid  of  Counts  in  a  Declaration— A  Nonsuit — The  Commonwealth  V8. 
Foreman — Yankee  Schoolmaster  in  a  Fix — The  Argument  and  Verdict,  &c. — 
HOW  THE  TIMES  SERVED  THE  VIRGINIANS.— Virginians  in  a  New 
Country— The  Rise,  Decline,  and  Fall  of  the  Rag  Empire.— ASSAULT  AND 
BATTERY.— Burrell  or  Burwell  Shines— His  Testimony  in  Full— Verdict  of  the 
Jury.- SIMON  SUGGS,  Jr.,  Esq. ;  A  LEGAL  BIOGRAPHY.— Correspondence.— 
SQUIRE  A.  AND  THE  FRITTERS.— .JONATHAN  AND  THE  CONSTABLE. 
—SHARP  FINANCIERING.— CAVE  BURTON,  ESQ.,  OF  KENTUCKY.— 
His  Traits  and  Characteristics- The  Earthquake  Story— A  Breach  of  Promise — A 
Fining  Judge — Scene  in  a  Court  House — Miss  Jule  Pritcher — Catastrophe,  <fec.,  &c 
-JUSTIFICATION  AFTER  VERDICT.— AN  AFFAIR  OF  HONOR.— HON. 
S.  S.  PRENTISS.— A  Sketch  of  his  Character,  and  Review  of  his  Public  Career.— 
THE  BAR  OF  THE  SOUTH-WEST.— Jurisprudence  in  a  New  Country— The 
Young  Attorney  and  the  Celebrated  Lawyer- Litigation  Attending  Frontier  Life— 
The  Poetry  of  Swindling,  &c,  &c.— HON.  FRANCIS  STRof HER.— "  Portrait 
of  a  Gentleman'' — The  Genius  of  Labor — Rare  Union  of  the  Suaviter  and  the 
Fortiter— The  Hon.  Francis'  Munificence— His  Services  to  the  State,  «fec.,  &c.- 
MR.  TEE  AND  MR.  GEE.— SCAN.  MAG.— AN  EQUITABLE  SET-OFF.— 
A  COOL  RE.J0INDER.— A  HUNG  COURT.— Smith  vs.  Johnson.— SAMUEL 
HELE,  ESQ.,  A  Yankee  Schoolmistress  and  an  Alabama  Lawyer. — JOHN 
STOUT,  ESQ.,  AND  MARK  SULLIVAN.— MONSLOW— JO.  HEYFRON— OLD 
UNCLE  JOHN  OLIVE.— EXAMINING  A  CANDIDATE  FOR  LICENSE. 


NEW    LIGHT  READIXG  BOOKS, 


PUBLISHED  BY  D.  APPLETOH  &  CO. 


BUSY  MOMENTS  OF  AN  IDLE  WOMAN. 

1  voL  12mo.,  cloth,  75  cent<<;  paper  cov«  i-s,  60  cenU. 
RoinntT— "  Ilereshc  romt-s."   [KnUr  Vlolanf.-  ] 

TtOLANTK— "  I  prttv  yotu  gentlemen,  pa!»  Uiu  ligfaUj  by:  I  aru  too  slight  %  tLlBg  ta 

Iwel  on."— Choice  of  a  Wife. 

OiXTKNTB.— Editb— An  Every  Day  Life— The  Widow— OM  MalfHsm  v.  Mwrlnce. 

■Ai  Ef'lMMle  In  the  Life  (if »  Woman  of  Fashion  -  by  a 

ady  who  Is  eviilently  familiar  with  the  nsaces  of  fa-  .  ni  to 

the  possession  of  very  ronsid'TRidf  literary  altllHy.  i  truth- 
ful, with  a  (lash  of  exiii^^Urif  and  sly  sarcasm,  tliat  tic:ii.y  6- 1",..  n  a  tii.m  ■  r^linary 
amount  of  clevprnes.<4  and  ohMTvalion  on  the  part  of  the  writer.  The  dial<n.iifc  I*  a  faithful 
rf»iiro<lucti(>n  of  tlie  lijrht,  gosiipy  conversation  of  i»cople  of  ton,  is  nalunil  and  free."— 
K Wining  Express,  Nov.  12. 

CnOICE  NEW  SWEDISH  NOVEL. 

"  JOHN;  " 

OR,  IS  A  coiTsiy  ly  the  ha^d,  worth  two  counts  ly  tite  Busni 

By  Emilie  Carlen,  author  of  "The  Ro-»e  of  TUtleton,"   "Woman's  Life," 
"Tlie  Birthright,"  <tc.,  <tc. ;  translated  from  the  original  Swedish. 
Onevolumo,  8vo.,  paper  cover.  25  cents. 
An  exceedingly  Interesting  story,  delineating  the  trinraph  of  a  true  heart  ortr  tb« 
allorementfi  of  rank,  and  the  aspiration  of  an  ambitious  spirit    The  pre\ioas  worka  of  tbto 
•mlnent  Swedish  novelist,  have  been  received  with  great  favor. 

A  VERY  CAPITAL  BOOK. 

AN  ATTIC  PHILOSOPHER  IN  PARIS ; 
or,  a  peep  at  tite  world  from  a  garret. 

Being  the  Journal  of  a  Happy  Man.    From  tlie  French  of  Emilie  Souvisstm. 
One  vobmie,  8vo.,  paper  coN  ^  rs,  price  25  cents. 
This  capital  work,  presenting  a  view  of  Paris  Life  from  a  garret,  has  been  received  with 
high  favor  in  that  brilliant  capiuL    Its  spirit  and  naiveti  are  of  the  true  attic  stamp. 

LINNY  LOCK  WOOD, 
By  Mr.<».  Crowe,  author  of  "  Susan  Hopley,"  <te,  Ac.     One  volume,  8to. 
pape-  "-overs,  50  cents. 
"  A  ver,      Ightful  tale.   The  charm  of  the  story  is  In  its  naturalness.   It  Is  perfectly 
quiet,  domei^rti,  »^Tid  truthful" 

THE  FLU  ^H  TIMES  OF  ALABAMA  d-  MISSISSIPPI. 

A  Series  of  Sketches.    Bv  Josepu  G.  B.xldwin.    1  vol.  12mo.,  illustrated, 
cloth,  $1,25. 

CoN-TKNTB :— Ovid  Bolus.  Esq.— My  First  Appearance  at  the  Bar— T!     ^^  id  the 

Bar— How  the  Times  served  the  Virginians— Assault  and  Battery-  -.  Jr., 

Esq.— Squire  A.  and  the  Fritters— .lonatlian  and  tiie  Con.stablo— t?harp  1  v  ave 

Burton.  Esq..  of  Kentucky— 'Justification  after  Verdict— An  Aflair  of  1!  r-ii  i  S.  t?. 
Prontiss— The  liar  of  the  Southwo.st— Hon.  Francis  Strothi  r— .Mr.  Tee  anrl  Mr.  Gee— Scan. 
Mag.— An  Equitable  5>et-off— A  (.ool  INioinder- A  Hung  Court— Samuel  Hill.  Esq.-rI..hD 
Stout,  ICsq..  and  Mark  Sullivan— Mr.  Onslow— Jo  Heyfroin— Old  Uncle  John  Ulivc— Exam- 
ining a  Candidate  for  License. 

A  dccldedlv  happy  production  for  all  who  love  fun  and  novelty.  The  author  of  a 
work  like  this  need  not  stop  to  make  apologies.  There  Is  a  spice  of  real  wit  throuEhout  the 
book  that  renders  it  greatly  attractive,  while  the  subjects  are  of  interest  to  every  body,  not 
even  excepting  the  worthy  members  of  the  legal  profession.  To  all  we  say,  get  and  read 
tblBboct.  —DaU]/P«nnij/luinian,  Phiuu 


SIXTH  EDITION.    (SEVEN  THOUSAND  COPIES  SOLD 


7).   APFLETON  Sf    CO  MP  ANY 


HAVE  JUST  PCBLISHED 


fl  u  i  t  Ii  - 1. 11  a  r  Ii  s 

FROM   AN    EDITOR'S  TABLE. 
|{y  L.  Gatlorl  Clark,  Editor  of  the  "Knickerbocker  Magazine' 

"WITH  OEIGINAL  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

One  vol.  12mo.,  handsomely  printed  and  bound.    Price  $1  26 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS,  Etc. 

"  I  have  often  thought  it  a  great  pity  that  the  sallies  of  humor,  the  entertaining  of 
amusing  incidents,  and  the  touches  of  tender  pathos,  that  are  so  frequently  to  be  met 
with  in  the  'Gossip'  of  the  Knickerbocker',  siiould  be  comparatively  lost  among  the 
multitudinous  leaves  of  a  magazine." — Washington  Irving. 

"This  will  prove  one  of  the  pleasantest  books  of  the  season,  with  alternations  o( 
healthful  mirth  and  wholesome  sadness.  The  Editor's  Table  of  the  Knickerbocker  has 
things  quite  too  good  to  be  foi^oiten.  and  it  is  well  thought  of  to  gather  them  and  gar- 
ner them  up  in  a  volume." — N.  Y.  Evening  Pofit. 

"A  collection  of  the  very  cream  of  the  good  things  which  during  nineteen  years  the 

Eopular  and  experienced  Editor  of  the  Knickerbocker,  Mr.  L.  Gaylord  Clark,  has  so 
ountifully  and  acceptably  si)read  before  his  readers  " — iV;  F.  Albion. 
"  A  repast  of  which  thousands  have  partaken  with  zest,  and  found  intellectual  re- 
freshment, invigorating  and  delightful,  therefrom.  Mr.  Clark's  humor  is  quiet,  soothing, 
irresistible:  it  diflfuses  itself  through  your  whole  system,  and,  when  you  join  him  in  his 
benignant  smile,  a  glow  passes  all  ov-or  you.  So  with  his  pathos,  it  is  not  mawkish,  nor 
exaggerated,  but  'the  real  tear:'  and  leaves  the  reader— if  our  temperance  friends  will 
not  pervert  our  meaning — with  a  '  drop  in  his  eye'  also." — Boston  Post. 

"  A  very  epicurean  feast  of  the  richest  and  daintiest,  culled  with  the  most  sednloas 
eare  and  nicest  discrimination.  It  is  a  collection  of  luxuries  such  as  was  never  before 
made  on  American  soil ;  and  thousands,  when  they  hear  of  it,  will  be  ready  to  greet 
their  favorite  purveyor  wi-ih  old  Chaucer's  irrepressible,  '•Ah,  benediaite  !  Ah,  bene- 
dicite  r  "— iV.  Y.  DaUy  Tribune. 

"The  work  will  be  hailed  with  satisfaction  by  every  one  who  can  appreciate  tha 
genial  humor,  wit,  and  pathos,  which  have  given  such  a  zest  to  the  Knickerbocker  for 
80  many  ye2ivs,y— Augusta  (J/e.)  Gospel  Banner. 

"The  title  is  a  veiy  taking  and  happy  one.  It  cannot  foil  to  have  a  wide  sale,  and 
become  immensely  popular ;  readable,  quotable,  and  enjoyable,  for  all  ages,  sexes,  and 
conditions."— iV':  Y.  Sunday  Courier. 

"  A  most  various  and  pleasant  companion  for  tho  traveller  abroad,  or  the  stayer  at 
home." — Croydon  (Ind.)  Gazette. 

"  We  have  often  -wished  for  just  this  very  book,  and  we  shall  welcome  it  rejoicingly." 
—Susquehanna  (Pa.)  Register. 

"These  '  Knick-Knacks'  are  bound  to  have  a  run  wherever  Clark  and  the  Knicker 
hooker  are  known,  which  is  everywhere  this  side  of  the  Kaffirs  and  the  New-Zealand 
ers-'^—Ifashua  (iV.  11.)  Journal. 

"That  will  be  a  book  for  the  million — for  all  capable  of  feeling  and  enjoying — whc 
can  neither  n  sist  langliter  nor  forbid  tears  that  will  out,  and  must  have  vent,  when  the 
secret  strings  of  the  heart  are  touched.  '  Old  Knick '  has  many  friends  and  admirers 
wlio  will  thank  him  for  this  excellent  idea.  His  '  Knick-Knacks'  will  go  off  like  hot 
cakes.  They  are  just  the  article  the  people  most  affect,  and  cannot  fail  to  be  popular 
'A'ith  all  classes  of  readers." — Reading  (Pa.)  Journal. 

"To  doubt  the  success  of  the  '  Knick-Knacks'  would  be  about  equal  to  doubting  the 
luccess  of  the  Knickerbocker  itself,  which,  happil}',  is  one  of  the  fixed  literary  facta  of 
American  history."— G^ociey's  Lady's  Book. 

"Tiiose  who  have  enjoyed  the  'feast  of  fat  things'  spread  before  them  monthly,  it 
the  '  Editor's  Table'  of  '  Old  Knick,'  need  no  artificial  stimulus  to  create  an  appetlt* 
for  the  'Knick-Knacks.'" — Adriati  (Mich)  Watchtotoer. 

"  If  Clark  does  not  print  and  seil  50,000  copies,  '  the  fools  are  not  all  dea4l,  / . 
.iiiintain  a  very  decided  majority  among  the  •  i)ooples.' Graham' Ma^gaaine. 


D,  Appleton  dc  Company's  Publicatk  iis. 


UP-COUNTRY  LETTERS. 

EDITED  BT 

Prof.  B  ,  National  Observatory. 

"Time  driveth  on«-ard  fiwt; 
And  In  a  Htile  while,  oar  Hps  dumb." 

Lotot  KaUf. 

One  neat  Volume,  1 2mo.    Cloth,  75  centA. 


KatirrB  of  lf)e  $rrss. 

"Full  of  cental  feellnp,  wa'm  home  toQches,  delicate  huraor,  pore  thonght,  ni 
brilliant  sketching."— J'oMz-HrtZ  of  Commerce. 

"  Wo  like  this  book.  There  Is  such  an  air  of  naturalness  about  the  whole  perform 
ance;  every  page  exhibits  the  marks  of  a  refined  and  caltivated  taste,  and  aiTords  speci- 
mens uf  pure  and  classic  English." — Troy  Budget 

"A  charming  book,  so  full  of  genial,  hopeful  thought— such  quiet  domestic  picture^ 
earnest  longings  and  pure  sentiment,  that  we  would  It  were  in  all  bands.  To  read  It 
does  one  good  as  a  medicine."— X.  Y.  Observer. 

"  An  exquisitely  humorous,  pathetic,  and  entertaining  book."— ylriu  Whig  Review. 

**  Full  of  rare  reading." — State  Regutter. 

"  Pleasant  reading  for  a  light  and  leisure  hour.  We  like  the  style  of  the  letters-  «urt, 
wttllng,  and  epigrammatia"— JVat  Intelligencer. 

Every  page  has  some  passage  which  Is  as  fi-esb  and  sweet  to  the  healthy  mind,  at 
the  breath  of  new-mown  floods  to  healthy  nostrils."— .V.  Y.  Courier  <t  Enquirer. 

"  A  most  unique  and  charming  volume.  Off-bantl,  spirited,  dashing.  It  bewitches  us 
with  its  easy  and  graceful  familiarity — easy  and  graceful  as  the  movement  of  a  cloud,  or 
the  swaying  of  a  tree.''— JZ''a?<y  Knickerhocker. 

"  Written  in  a  genial  and  pleasant  style."— ^os^on  Traveller. 

"Abounding  iu  Interesting  incidents  and  well  drawn  characters." — Hartford  Ea>^el- 
gior. 

"Tliere  is  much  healthf^  philosophy  In  the  writer's  lacubrations,  and  «  tone  d 
cheery  music  keeping  company  with  his  thoughts  We  commend  '  Up-Coontiy  Let- 
ters '  to  the  reader  with  great  satisfaction."— Sow/A^rn  Literary  Messenger. 

"We  are  deceived  in  this  beautifully  published  book.  If  It  do  not  contain  a  treasnre 
«f  very  charming  light  r&&(\\n^:''—Springfifld  Daibj  Republican. 

"  J'ull  of  wit,  happy  allusions,  and  lifelike  delineations  of  character,  manners,  and 
customs.    Far  removed  ft-om  the  commonplace." — Boston  JoumaL 

"A  book  of  quiet  life  and  placid  healthfUl  enjoyment"— Pror.  Journal. 

"A  handsome  volume  of  delightful  rural  sketches  and  rambling  gossip,  varylnir  bi 
tcno  from  delicate  humor  to  t«^.uching  pathos."— /'At^*/,  Evening  Bulletin. 

"  Anybody  that  relishes  Innocent  amu.'^ement  and  a  hearty  laugh  will  like  this  book 
Mfciy  of  the  letters  are.  In  their  way,  perfectly  Inimitable."— .(4  liany  Argus. 

"  The  Letters  Indicate  a  fresh  writer,  and  promise  pleasant  reading." — PMla.  U. 
Gazette. 

•*  We  .Ike  the  style  of  the  author,  etc.  eic^'—BalL  American, 

"FuD  of  pleasant  gossip  and  deligbtftal  reminiscences."— PWto.  Co^iHm 


APPLETON'S  EDITION  OF  THE  BEITISH  POETS. 


PROSPECTUS 

OF  A 

New  and  Splendid  Library  Edition 

OF  THB 

POPULAR  POETS  AND  POETRY  OF  BRITAIN 

EDITED,  WITH  BIOGRAPHICAL  AND  CEITICAL  NOTICES, 
BY  THE  REV.  GEORGE  GILPILLAN, 

AUTHOR  OF  "GALLERY  OF  LITERARY  PORTRAITS,"  "BARDS  OF  TH«  BIBLX,"^  IXa 

In  demj-octavo  size,  printed  from  a  new  pica  type,  on  superfine  paper,  and  neatly  bound. 
Price)  only  $1  a  volume  in  cloth,  or  $2  50  in  calf  extra. 


"  Strangely  enon^h,  -we  have  never  had  as  yet  any  thing  at  all  approachingr  a  satis- 
factory edition  of  tlie  Engllsli  poets.  We  have  had  Johnson's,  and  Bell's,  and  Cooke's, 
and  Sharpe's  small  sized  editions— we  have  had  the  one  hundred  volnme  edition  from 
the  Chiswick  press — we  have  had  the  double-columned  editions  of  Chalmers  and  An- 
derson— and  we  have  the,  as  yet,  imperfect  Aldine  edition  ;  but  no  series  has  hitherto 
given  evidence  that  a  man  of  cultivated  ta-^te  and  research  directed  the  whole." — Athen. 

The  splendid  series  of  books  now  offered  to  the  public  at  such  an  unusually  low 
rate  of  charge,  will  be  got  up  with  all  the  care  and  elegance  which  the  present  advanced 
•tate  of  the  "publishing  art  can  command. 

The  well-known  literary  character  and  ability  of  the  editor  is  sufficient  guaranty  for 
the  accuracy  and  general  elucidation  of  the  text,  while  the  paper,  printing,  and  binding 
of  the  volumes  will  be  of  the  highest  class,  forming,  in  these  respects,  a  striking  contrast 
to  all  existing  cheap  editions,  in  which  so  few  efforts  have  been  made  to  combine 
superiority  in  production  with  low  prices. 

Under  the  impression  that  a  clironological  issue  of  the  Poets  would  not  be  so  ac- 
ceptable as  one  more  diversified,  it  has  been  deemed  advisable  to  intermix  the  earlier 
and  the  later  Poets.  Care,  however,  will  be  tiken  that  either  the  author  or  the  volumes 
are  in  themselves  complete,  as  published  ;  so  that  no  purchaser  discontinuing  the  series 
at  any  time,  will  be  possessed  of  imperfect  books. 

The  absence  in  the  book  market  of  any  handsome  uniform  series  of  the  Popular  Brit- 
ish Poets,  at  a  moderate  price,  has  induced  the  publishers  to  project  the  present  edition, 
under  the  impression  that,  produced  in  superiiT  style,  deserving  a  place  on  the  shelves 
of  the  best  libraries,  and  offered  at  less  than  one  half  the  usual  selling  price,  it  will  meet 
that  amount  of  patronage  which  an  enterprise,  based  on  such  liberal  terms,  requires. 

The  series  will  conclude  with  a  few  volumes  of  fugitive  pieces,  and  a  History  oi 
British  Poetry,  in  which  selections  will  be  given  from  the  writings  of  those  authors 
Those  works  do  not  possess  sufiicient  interest  to  warrant  their  publication  as  a  whole. 

It  is  believed  that  this  will  render  the  present  edition  of  the  British  Poets  the  moe^ 
complete  which  has  ever  been  issued,  and  secure  for  it  extensive  support  The  series  if 
intended  to  include  the  following  authors : — 


ADDISOX. 

COW  PER. 

GRAHAME. 

OPIE. 

6PEXSER. 

AKENSIDK. 

CRABBE. 

GRAY. 

PARXELL. 

SUCKLING. 

AKMSTEONa. 

CRASHAW. 

GREEK. 

PEXROSE. 

SURREY. 

BARBACLD. 

CUNXINGUAM. 

HAMILTOX,  W. 

PERCY. 

SWIFT. 

BEATTIE. 

DAVIES. 

HARRIXGTOX. 

POPE. 

TANXAHILI, 

BLAIR. 

DENHAM. 

HERBERT. 

PRIOR. 

THOMSON. 

BLOOMFIELD. 

DONKE. 

HERRICK. 

QUARLES. 

TICKELL. 

BRCrCE. 

DRAYTOX. 

HOGG. 

RAMSAY. 

TAUOHAN,  H. 

B0RXS. 

DRUMMOND. 

JAMES  I. 

ROGERS. 

WALLER. 

BUTLER. 

DRYDEX. 

J0XE3. 

BOSCOMMOX, 

"WARTOX,  J. 

BYROX. 

DUXBAR. 

JOHXSOX. 

BOSS. 

WARTON,  T. 

CAMPBELU 

DYER. 

JOXSOX. 

8ACKVILLE. 

WATTS. 

CAREW. 

FALCOXEE. 

LEYDEX. 

SCOTT,  J. 

WHITE,  H.  & 

CHATTERTON, 

FERGUSSOX. 

LLOYD. 

SCOTT,  SIR  W. 

WITHER. 

CHAUCER. 

FLETCHER,  G. 

LOGAX. 

SHAKSPEARE. 

WILKIK. 

CHURCHILL. 

GAY. 

MACPHER80X. 

SHELLEY. 

WOLCOTT. 

CLARE. 

GIFFORD. 

MALLETT. 

8BEX8TOXE, 

WOLFE. 

COLERIDGE. 

GLOVER. 

MARVEL. 

SMART. 

WTATT. 

COLLLNS. 

GOLDSMITH. 

MILTOX. 

SMOLLETT. 

Y0UX6. 

COWLEY. 

GOWER. 

MOORE. 

SOMERVXLLE. 

The  following  Authors  are  noio  re-ady : 
fOHN  MILTON,  2  vols. ;  JAMES  THOMSON,  1  vol. ;  GEORGE  HERBERT,  1  vol 
JAMES  TOTTNG,  1  vol. 


THE  SPECTATOR  ENTIRE. 

THE  mOST  BEAlTIFri.  EDITIO:^'  EVER  PVBEIJ^HED. 


D.  APPLETOX  &  COMPACT 

HATS  rCVt  PlTBLaHXO 

THE  ''SPECTATOR:" 

WITH  PREFACES,  HISTOBICAL  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL* 

By  Alexander  Clialmeni,  A.  IL 

A  NetD  and  Carefully  Rctiud  Edition^ 

Ovmplete  in  six  volames,  Svo.,  pica  type.    Price  in  cloih,  $9;  half  cmU 
extra  or  antique,  $15  ;  calf  extra  or  antique,  $20. 


**  It  is  pr*ls«  *nonph  to  8«t  of  a  writer,  that,  in  a  bljrh  detMutment  of  Mteratare.  b 
which  inanv  eminent  writers  have  dlstincnlshed  themM-I-  Vi^l  nf>  eoriil :  nri  i 

this  may,  with  strict  jostle*,  be  Mid  of  Ad<!is«»n. 
not  only  aa  the  ereatest  of  the  En^Hah  essayista,  bot  as  • 
1th  novelists.    Ilis  best  essays  approach  near  to  absol 

cellence  more  wonderful  than  their  variety.  His  invention  \tT  >*t  m-«  to  nor  ia 
he  ever  under  the  necessity  of  repeating  bimself,  or  of  wearing  oat  a  aubject."— Jfa- 
eaulay. 

•*  lie  was  not  onlr  the  ornament  of  his  aee  and  eornitry.  but  be  reflects  dignity  on 
the  nature  of  man.  'He  lias  divested  vice  of  its  meretricious  omam-nt-s  and  r«iiitad 
religion  and  virtue  in  the  modest  and  graccfol  attire  which  cbanu  and  devata  tlM 
heart" — Dr.  Andertoit. 

*  T"  A  " ^  -  ^  '  '  -  ^  ■"  ^  »  rich  and  dustc  Teln  of  humor  and  .«atlre:  letua— 
of  r  '  "Jl  austerity  and  gio»nii ;  criticism  at  onco  plcaring 

-  al  character  and  manners  tliat  must  ever  cbarm, 
from  I.. ;    —  -  Ilurd. 

"Of  Addison's  numerous  and  well-known  writing  It  may  be  affirme<i  that  they 
rest  on  the  solid  basis  of  real  excellence,  in  moral  tendency  as  well  a«  litenur  merit. 
Vice  and  follv  are  satirized,  virtue  and  «!eoorum  are  rendered  attractive:  and  while 
polished  diction  and  Attic  wit  abound,  the  purest  ethics  are  inculcated."— Jfaimd«r. 

"  Hi**  el^^rv  is  that  of  one  of  onr  greatest  writers  in  pmeo.  Here,  with  his  deTloate 
sense  of  pn.prietv.  his  lively  fancv.  anil,  aWe  alL  his  nnoat  original  and  exqui«it« 
humor  he  was  in'bb  proper  wallt.  He  is  the  founder  of  a  new  school  of  popular  writ- 
ing, in  which,  like  m.et  other  four  ;  -  ■  -  's,  he  is  still  nnsarpaased  by  any  who 
have  attempted  to  imitate  liiin.    1!  -"ive  us  the  firs*  examples  of  a  style 

posse^sins  all  the  best  quairies  of  a  ■  ral  amusement  and  instruction;  easy 

imdfkmiliar  without  coarseness,  ani:.  extravagance,  p^.lUhed  witbowt  un- 

natural labor,  and,  from  it?  flexibility,  adapted  to  aU  the  variety  of  the  gay  and  tb« 
serious." — Penny  Cyclopedia. 

"Toconwt  the  vices,  ridicnle  the  follies,  ar  '   "  -        which  too 

generally  prevaiie<l  at  the  commencement  of  th  the  greai 

and  noDle  objects  the  c>p^<:Uit.>r  ever  hoMs  in  v..  -^!itT  wtih 

wit,  and  tenu>erinc  wit  with  nioraMty.  not  only  \*  tro  "  emi- 

nent degree,  but  the  authors  conferred  a  lastine  benefit .  -  ing 

and  renderine  popidar  a  species  of  writing  which  has  n  •  Uie 

nnderstanding,  refine  the  taste,  and  augment  and  purify  w^.^i.^  vi  succcaaive 

fenerations."— CAo/mera. 

"  He  not  onlv  brought  a  rood  philologlca]  taste  into  fcshkm,  bot  gave  a  pMng  ele- 
ration  and  popular  turn  to  relii.'ious  studies,  and  placed  Milton  upon  a  pedestal  frc«n 
which  he  can  never  be  pulled  down."— J  ii:*n. 

» It  stands  at  the  bead  of  all  works  of  the  same  kind  that  have  since  been  prodaoed, 
•nd  as  a  miscellany  of  polite  literature,  is  not  surpassed  by  any  lKK>k  wbatever."- 
Chambtr*. 

-  I  consider  the  spectator  Invaluable,  as  containing  on  the  subject  of  reljgkn  aO 
that  the  world  would  then  bear.  Had  Addison  or  his  ftiends  attempted  n>«A  tt  wooU 
oot  have  been  endured.  The  work  was  a  stepping^one  to  truth  rf  the  biglMit  ofdi« 
Md,  M  such,  our  obliffatlotis  to  it  are  great"— W5»le|r 


CHOICE  NEW  WORKS  OF  FICTION, 
PUBLISHED  BY  D.  APPLETON  &  00. 


KOMANCE 

OF 

ABELARD  AND  HELOISE. 

BY  O.  W.  WIGHT, 

Translator  of    Cousins  Iliidory  of  Modern  Philosophij,'^  Etc,  Etc 

One  Vol.,  12mo.    Goth,  75  Cents. 

Abelard  and  ITeloi?*,  the  p-catest  man  and  the  ?reatest  woman  of  the  TwelfU 
Century:  with  the  one  began  the  enfranchisement  of  tliought,  and  with  the  other  thr 
enfranchis«ment  of  her  sex.  They  were  brought  by  fortune  into  romantic  n-laiion? 
with  each  other,  and  their  history  as  lover\  is  of  most  extraordinary  interosit.  Tlif 
power  of  passion  and  the  disinterestedness  of  true  and  devote<l  love'  in  sucii  heroic 
spirit,  is  portrayed  in  these  masterly  pages  with  fervid  elcKjuence." — Southern  Lit.  (Jaz, 
'*  This  is  a  work  at  once  creditable  to  the  good  tnste  of  its  publishers,  and  to  the 
research,  industry,  and  discriminating  .jndgment  or"  its  author.  Wlu*  is  not  airea<ly 
familiar  with  its  touching,  painful,  yet  ffis<.inating  story  ?  Who  need  be  reminde<i  ol 
the  genius,  the  learning,  and  the  fervor  of  its  hero,  or  of  the  beauty,  devotion  un«l  self- 
sacrificing  love  of  the  ill-starred  Ileloise?  Their  loves  and  their  misfortunes  ha%-' 
fbui.d  a  sympathizing  ann  appreciating  memorial  in  tiiis  volume,  to  which  we  can 
hardly  give  a  higher  tribute  of  our  ai'prov»l,  than  by  saying  that  it  is  in  all  res|H.H-ts 
well  worthy  of  the  theme  to  which  it  is  devoteiL  It  has  evidently  been  a  work  ol 
much  labor,  as  well  as  serious  and  careful  study,  and  will  bo  found  to  have  more  tlian 
the  intere.-^t  of  the  most  fascinating  fiction,  while  it  teaches  some  of  the  sternest  lessons 
of  the  severe  realities  of  actual  Wie.'^— Evening  Potst 


THE  FAWX  OF  THE  PALE  FACES ; 

OR,  TWO  CENTimiES  AGO. 

BY  J.  P.  BRACE. 

One  vol.,  12mo.    Cloth  75  Cents.  Paper  Covers  50  Cents. 

The  story  told  in  this  volume,  is  fall  of  old  revolutionary  reminiscences.  It  if 
ample,  yet  attracts  the  attention  of  the  reader  wonderfully.  The  character  of  tht 
Indian  is  faithfully  drawn,  and  the  intrigues  and  vice  of  the  human  heart  well  exfiosed 
The  narrative  is  charming  throughout— the  tale-  moral — the  scene  laid  at  Ilartlbrd,  i£ 
the  Bevenicenth  century." — Courier. 


CYRILLA  ;  A  Tale, 

BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF  THE  "  IXITIALS." 
8vo.  Paper  Covers,  50  Cents. 

"  There  is  a  naturalness  and  depth  of  feeling  about  the  works  of  this  writer  that 
makes  them  exceedingly  interesting,  and  no  perst>n  M  ho  has  read  one  of  them  wib 
need  any  urtrins  to  try  another.  She  is  not  one  of  those  writers  that  write  many  hooksi, 
but  seems  to  wait  for  the  moment  of  insjiiration,  and  then  sits  down,  with  pen  in  hana, 
and  writes  directly  from  the  heart" — AUmni/  Tranorript. 

"  Whoever  has  read  that  delightful  novel,  '-The  Initials,"  will  not  fail  to  purchase 
this  tale,  by  tlie  same  pen.  There  is  a  freshntvs  and  simi>licity  in  the  style  of  the 
author.  Human  character  and  manners  are  depicted,  by  strokes  as  profound  as  they 
are  apparently  facile.  It  is  a  work  cf  much  thought,  and  of  a  high  d»»£r^ce  of  literary 
merit  It  ^vill  take  its  place  among  V.i  standard  works  of  the  ago." — Southern  JM«rar^ 
Uleisenger. 


D,  Appleton  dc  Company's  Fublicattoru 


THE    DBOOIt    or"    THE  X>-A-Tr. 

JVbi/;  Ready^  the  Tenth  Tfiousand. 

THE  LOFTY  AND  THE  LOWLY; 

OR    GOOD  IN  ALL,  AND  NONE  ALL-GOOD 

%r\  311nria  3.  Bltaiitoslj, 

Author  of  *'  Two  Lives,"  "Channs  and  Counter-Charms,"  "  Ereninga  H 
Donaldson  Manor,"  etc.,  etc. 
2  vols.  12mo,    Paper  covers,  Si ;  cloth,  $1  60. 
%*  l.i/e,  in  it*  varied  relaiiont  at  the  North  and  Vi«  South,  i«  ths  fA#fn«  of  (kU 
work.   In  its  graphic  delineation*  of  character,  trut}ifulne*s  of  representation,  and 
gUrring  realities  of  life,  it  will  tiardly  give  pAace  to  "  Uncle  Turn'*  CabinJ^  77u 
auilioress  is  well  ktwwn  to  the  publio  /y  her  many  cfutrming  works  of  fiction,  and 
her  life  has  been  passed  at  the  North  and  South.    The  nobleness  of  her  setitiments, 
her  elevated  and  candid  views,  her  genuine  feelings  of  humanity,  and  the  elegance 
and  eloquence  of  her  pen,  are  brought  out  in  these  page*  Vfith  their  full  brillUincy 
and  effect   

A  FEW  CRmciSMS  OF  TBK  PROS. 

"  Afl  to  Its  I  terary  merles,  we  can  honestly  commend  it  as  a  charming  story,  and  ibr 
Its  moral  influence,  we  think  the  admirers  of  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  v*111  not  find  their 
dislike  of  slavery  greatly  lessened  by  its  perusal,  while  they  may  be  persuaded  to  cherlab 
a  kindlier  feeling  tf  wrird  those  whose  lot  Is  cast  amid  the  institutions  of  the  South-"- 
tjincinnati  Magazine. 

"  It  is  a  book  of  great  Interest,  written  in  a  candid,  truthful  spirit— the  arrangement 
of  the  plot  and  mcid;nts  is  skilful,  and  the  work  abounds  In  passages  of  great  pathos  and 
of  thrilling  i  tere&t"— Boston  Journal. 

•'•A  good  book,  commendable  in  spirit  and  creditable  in  execntlon— It  will  make  ttj 
vay  in  public  favor,  and  win  for  its  accomplished  author  the  commendation  of  all  dls 
pissionate  readers," — Daily  Times. 

"  Written  in  a  most  admirable  tone,  and  with  manifest  sincerity." — Troy  Whig. 
Miss  Mcintosh  will  certainly  find  a  host  of  very  earnest  admirers  of  the  'Lofty  vai 
the  Lowly."— TVifetin*. 

"  Her  sketches  of  character  and  incidents  show  that  she  Is  perfectlj'  familiar  with  tb« 
ground  upon  which  she  treads." — Journal. 

"  We  assure  our  readers  they  will  arise  from  the  perusal  of  these  pages  impressed 
with  the  important  lesson  they  contain." — Gazette. 

"  The  characters  are  depicted  with  force  and  cXc&mtSi.'"'— Philadelphia  Inquirer. 

"The  most  eager  novel  reader  will  find  himself  satisfied  with  the  novelty  of  tncideLti 
with  which  this  book  is  moa^'—Charle^ton  Gazette. 

"  Written  with  a  great  refliienient  of  UeWn^.'''— Reading  Gazette. 

•*  The  book  throughout  exhibits  great  dramatic  power,  fine  knowledge  of  charaeta 
%nd  nntwual  command  of  language."— 5u/(iio  Com.  Advertiser. 

"It  places  Miss  Mcintosh  in  the  front  rank  of  American  Novelists."— i7Uoci  (hs* 

•  We  cordially  recommend  this  noble  romance." — Ontario  Repotitory. 


D.  Appleton  &,  Company's  PuhlicationB. 


LADY  FULLERTON'S  NOVELS 

LADY-BIRD. 

jne  Volume,  12mo.    Cloth,  75  cents  ;  Paper  Cover,  60  cents. 

"A  boaatiful  and  affecting  story,  told  in  a  sweet  pure  style,  and  swaying  the  heail 
'>y  Ita  natural  and  lifv'Dce  scenes.  It  is  a  story  of  wilfulness,  trial,  misery,  and  of  being 
irvle  'perfect  tL*r>^^  suffering'  on  tiie  part  of  the  heroine  Gertrude,  the  'Lady-Bif'J  ' 
A  the  story.  "^tT^ated  sentiments  and  pure  thoughts  are  the  characteristics  of  th«t 
rtory." — Albany  Xnickerbocker. 

Tue  authoress  of  these  volumes,  if  she  has  not  the>signiflcant  name  of  Currer  Bell, 
deserves  as  highly  the  value  of  her  sex,  for  her  gift  In  portraying  the  finest  natures,  an.i 
giving  to  her  readers  not  only  much  to  charm  and  interest,  but  suggestions  for  earneat 
thought,  which  may  ripen  into  the  beautiful  characters  she  so  skilfully  depicts.  Tlio 
present  volumes  will  a;id  to  her  celebrity.'' — Journal  of  Commerce. 

"  This  book  deserves  more  than  an  ordinary  notice.  "We  do  not  often  read  novels ; 
but  when  we  opened  this  we  found  it  difficult  to  lay  it  down.  The  characteristics  are 
well  drawn,  and  unexaggerated,  so  that  they  seem  like  people  one  meets  every  day,  and 
the  interest  is  sustained  to  the  last,  with  a  great  deal  of  pc~.ver."— j?o«to7i  Pilot. 

ELLEI^^  MIDDLETOJq-. 

One  Volume,  12mo.    Cloth,  75  cents;  Paper  Cover,  60  cents. 

"This  tale  Is  by  the  author  of 'Grantley  Manor,'  which  alone  will  secure  for  it  a 
wide  circle  of  readers.  But  It  has  an  intrinsic  excellence  also.  The  narrative  is  well 
sustained  throughout.  There  is  no  stiffness  or  flagging  in  the  dialogues,  and  the  seuti- 
ments  are  pure." — Courier  and  Enquirer. 

"  Ellen  Middleton  is  a  work  of  much  interest  and  ability.  The  style,  is  admirable, 
and  her  practical  observations  show  a  clearness  and  depth  of  thought  rarely  found 
•mong  the  younger  members  of  the  fair  sex." — Boston  Atlas. 

III. 

GEAIS-TLEY  MAKOE. 

One  Volume,  12mo.    Cloth,  75  cents;  Paper  Cover,  50  cents. 

"  Grantley  Manor  is  the  title  of  an  exceedingly  interesting  volume,  which  we  have 
read  with  more  than  ordinary  pleasure.  The  style  is  elegant,  the  story,  which  involved 
a  succession  of  mysteries  and  cross  purposes,  is  well  developed,  and  the  scene  and  char- 
acter painting  is  full  of  spirit  and  truth.  The  authoress  is  certainly  a  woman  of  gcnios, 
which  she  has  used  to  excellent  purpose." — Southern  Literary  Messenger. 

"Lady  Georgiana  Fullerton's  first  appearance  as  a  novelist  rendered  her  famous  at 
once.  Ellen  Middleton,  her  first  production,  was  a  powerfully  constructed  story,  manl' 
ftisting  great  ability  in  the  author,  which  Grantley  Manor  fully  confirms.  "We  commend 
the  book  most  cordially.'"— ^yeni??.^'  Mirror. 

"  The  book  is  an  excellent  one,  and  the  Lady  Georgiana's  style  is  admirable.  It  ll 
clear,  concise,  glowing,  and  lady-liko.  Her  dialogue  and  narrative  ikewieo  show  great 
»kill  In  perception  and  arrangement."— PAiiarft^pA /a  Enquirer. 


D.  Applcton  dc  Compan'i/s  Publications. 


Choice  Hciu  finglislj  Storks  of  ^fictioR. 


THE  HEIR  OF  REDCLYFFE. 

A  Tale.    2  vols.  12mo.    Paper,  |1  00  ;  cloth,  f  1  AO. 

"  A  novel  of  really  hlph  merit  Th<>  rhamrtor«  nrc  nrxt  «!;l'fMl'v  .Irnwn  nnl  In  lb« 
Miorse  of  thestorv.    The  <leatljof  On  .  .  •  w«  evei 

;c*<L    •    •  •   Yhe  work  i>  oneof  «f  ilift  oiorn! 

Uuelit  in  IL^  pASo.s  Is  eininenlly  bea.:  :>oi^k  niosl 

«)r«llally."—f '/>>/!.  Adv. 

"The  whi»!e  tone  and  feeling;  of  this  book  Is  fcood  and  troe.  The  reader  dr^se  ml 
require  to  be  told  that  the  author  In  relljlou-s;  the  richl  prlnclplcN  the  hleii  s^-nB©  c.i 
duty  and  honor,  softened  by  the  Influence  of  a  reverent  falUu  can  be  explaineil  on  no 
other  hyiMitlioKlv  It  N  eminently  a  book  to  wnd  tlie  rea<leraway  from  the  t»en]aal  bet- 
ter and  wiser  for  the  lcs.sons  hitlden  under  its  deeply  iBtereetlng  narrative.  — London 
Gtuiniian. 

"  A  well  written,  spirited  and  Interestlns:  work.  It  Is  full  of  character,  sparkling 
with  conversation,  and  picturesque  with  paintings  of  nature.  The  plot  Is  well  con- 
oeived  and  handsomely  wrou<rlit  out  There  is  a  ft-eshnesw  of  feeline  and  tone  of  heiiltby 
sentiment  about  such  novel^s  that  recommend  tbem  to  public  (kvur." — Albany  ^>eo 
tator. 

II. 

LIGHT  AND  SHADE; 

OR,    THE    YOUNG  ARTIST 
A  Talk.    By  Anna  Harriet  Drlby,  author  of  "  Friends  and  Forttine," 
"  Ea^^tbury,"  <tc.    12ino.    Paper  cover,  50  cents;  cloth,  76  cents. 

"  It  '.s  a  beaut'ful  and  ably  written  story.'' — Churchman. 

"Tlie  !<t<iry  is  well  written,  and  will  be  read  with  roach  pleasuro  as  well  as  profit 
Lanxiyigliiirgh  (rdzHic. 

"  A  novel  with  a  deep  reli^oos  tone,  bearing  and  aim — a  mos*  attractive  style."— 
Sprino/i'-l'f  R^inildiviin. 

•-  \Ve  commend  her  l>ooks  to  the  young,  as  among  tboee  from  which  they  bav« 
nothing  to  ft-ar.'" — AV/c-Z/i/r/'n  Courier. 

"  A  very  well  told  tale,  mingling  the  grave  and  gay,  the  tender  and  severe.  In  fair 
croporUona.  It  displays  a  genius  and  skill  in  the  writer  of  no  ordinary  measure."— rz-ift 

III. 

THE   DEAN'S  DAUGHTER; 

Or,  THE  DATS  WE  LIVE  IN. 

By  Mrs.  Gore.    1  vol.  12mo.    Paper,  50  cents;  cloth,  76  cents 

"  The  '  Dean's  Daughter '  will  doubtless  be  one  of  the  most  8ncce«?fal  books  of  the 
iMSon.  It  abounds  In  all  those  beauties  which  have  hitherto  distingul«.ie<l  Mr».  Gor«"i 
novels.  The  inanajrement  of  the  inci<lents  of  the  story  is  as  clever,  the  style  is  a.*  bril- 
liant the  satire  as  keen,  and  the  conversation  as  flowing,  as  in  the  best  of  her  works.*"— 

"  It  will  be  read  with  pleasure  by  thousands.''— /TiTrtZd. 

"Mrs.  Gore  is  jierhaps  the  u-ittit-st  of  modt-rn  novelists.  Of  all  .he  ladics  who  li 
'ater  times  liave  taken  In  hand  the  weapon  of  satire,  her  b'a<le  is  certainly  the  moe> 
renrlianL  A  vapid  lord  or  a  purse-proud  citizen,  a  money-hniiting  woman  «>f  fe.«hloi 
•r  a  toad-eati'r,  a  hiitul>ug  in  short  male  or  female,  ami  of  what:ir>ever  cast  or  qnality  lie 
nay  be,  will  find  his  [jretensions  well  cji.stipato<l  in  some  one  or  other  of  tier  brilliant 
pugcn;  while  scattered  about  In  many  pKaces  are  passages  and  st-enes  of  inflnit*.-  tender 
nc«,  showing  that  our  authoress  Is  not  insensible  to  the  gentler  qualitlee  of  ooi  oatnrr 
nnd  la  mlstreee  of  pathos  In  no  common  degree."— J5<r« m»«»«r 


V 


D.  Appltton  &  Coinpany's  PublitcUioM. 


JULIA  KAVANAGirS  WORKS 


DAISY  BUENS. 

12mo.    Two  Parts.    Paper  Cover,  75  cents  ;  or  in  1  Vol  cloth,  $1 

■^Tbc  clear  conception,  tbo  forcible  delineation,  the  style,  at  once  eleg:ant  and  powei 
hi,  of  Misd  Kavanagh's  former  works,  are  exhibited  in  this,  as  well  as  deep  thought  an 
Sc-uud  moral  reflection.  Every  tbin^  presented  to  the  reader,  whether  thought  or  image 
ie  elaborated  with  tL3  finish  of  a  Flemish  painting  without  its  grossncss ;  the  p<irson 
•re  nicely  conccivc-I  and  consistently  sustained,  and  the  principal  narrative  is  relieveia 
by  very  truthful  pictures  of  every  day  life  and  character." — London  Spectator. 

"  A  very  delightful  tale.  *  ♦  *  The  cliarm  of  the  story  is  in  its  naturalness.  It 
Is  perfectly  quiet,  domestic,  and  truthful.  In  the  calm  force  and  homely  realities  of  iti 
•oenes  it  reminds  us  of  Miss  Austen."— T'/wes. 

"  All  her  books  are  written  with  talent  and  a  woman's  true  feeling."—  U.  S.  Gazette, 

"  It  is  full  of  deep  feeling,  tenderness,  pure  feminine  sentiment  and  moral  truth."— 
A  Ibany  Knickerbocker. 

NATHALIE. 

Two  Parts.  12mo.  Paper  Covers,  75  cents  ;  cloth,  $1. 
"A  work  of  extraordinary  merit,  with  a  far  deeper  design  than  merely  to  amuse,  it 
Btt«mpt8  to  solve  some  of  the  subtle  problems  of  human  nature.  Some  of  the  wisest 
lessons  in  life  are  taught  in  the  work,  while  the  artistic  skill  with  which  the  narrative 
is  managed  imparts  a  vivid  interest  The  author  might  be,  with  a  stronger  infusion  oi 
the  poetic  element,  another  Joanna  Baillie;  and  no  cte  will  read  the  work  without  t 
high  estimate  of  her  dramatic  powers  and  her  deep  insighC— Evangelist. 

III. 

MADELEINE. 

One  Volume.    12mo.    Paper  Covers,  50  cents;  cloth,  75  cents. 

"  A  charming  story,  gracefully  told.  Its  intrinsic  interest  as  a  narrative,  and  the 
tenderness  of  its  pathos  will  win  for  it  many  readers." — Boston  Travtller. 

"  The  character  of  Madeleine,  the  heroine,  is  beautifully  drawn  and  powerfully  por- 
trayed. Miss  Kavanagh  is  most  known  by  her  excellent  novel  of  '  Nathalia'  This  book 
poaeesses  no  less  interest,  though  oi  h  very  different  kind." — Courier  and  Eng. 

IV. 

WOMEN  OF  CHEISTIANITY. 

One  Volume.    l'2mo.    Cloth,  75  cents. 

"The  design  and  spirit  of  this  volume  are  alike  admirable.  Miss  Kavanagh  divide 
er  work  intD  four  periods;  the  first  relates  tlr^eeds  of  holy  women  under  the  Goman 
empire ;  the  secon  1  tells  us  of  the  fruits  of  faith  in  the  middle  ages;  the  third  is  devoted 
to  the  women  of  thfi  seventeenth  century;  and  the  fourth  to  those  of  the  eighteenth  and 
present  centuries.  We  have  read  many  of  these  records  of  ot>ier  days,  as  told  by  Mis* 
Kavanagh,  and  we  are  sure  that  the  influence  upon  every  Christian-minded  person 
CMXAot  but  be  for  good,  if  he  will  meditate  upon  what  our  holy  religion  is  every  day  do- 
ts     The  volume  is  well  worthy  a  place  in  every  Christian  family."'— £«n.  o/t^  Cfom 


D.  Appleton  dc  Company's  Fublicutiofts. 


CHOICE  NEW  WORKS  FOR  FAMILY  READING 


IIAKUY  MUIR. 

A  STORY  OF  SCOTTISH  LIFE. 
Bj  the  author  of  "  Mrs.  Margaret  Maitland,"  etc.  One  voL  12ma  Cloth, 
76  centa;  paper  cover,  60  centa. 
"  We  prefer  Harry  Mu!r  to  most  of  the  Scottish  Novels  th»t  h«T«  appeared  tinw 
8«lt*8  Diincstic  Stories  were  publlshe*!.  This  new  tale  by  the  author  of  Margaret  llait- 
land,  U  "over  true''— a  real  itlctare  of  the  weakness  of  man's  nature  and  the  depth  o4 
woman's  teutierncsA."'— Athena um. 

tu 

PASSAGES  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  MES.  MARGARET 
MAITLAND,  OF  SUNNYSIDE. 

Written  by  herself.    12mo.    Paper,  60  cents;  cloth,  75  centa. 

"This  Is  one  of  thoso  charining  works  In  which  the  affections  of  the  female  heart 
are  portrayed  as  they  are  wrought  ui)on  by  the  vicissitudes  an<l  trials  of  life.  The 
scenes  are  lal<l  chiefly  in  the  quiet  plen.-*  of  Scotland,  and  the  actors  are  represented  as 
possessing  all  the  rich  and  genial  elements  of  the  noblest  Scottish  character.  It  is 
written  with  a  siilrlted  asd  powerful  pen,  and  cannot  fail  strongly  to  impres6  th-^ 
reader."— ^ce.  Mirror. 

IIL 

ROSE  DOUGLiVSS ; 

Or,  TIIK  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A  MINISTER'S  DAUGHTER. 
By  S.  R.  M.    1  vol.  Vlmo.    Paper  covers,  50  centa;  cloth,  75  cents. 

"  The  style  of  the  writer  is  pure  and  pleasing,  and  the  moral  tone  of  the  book  not 
merely  unexceptionable,  but  positively  excellent" — Comm^rcinl  Adrerti-atr. 

"This  is  one  of  that  class  of  novels  to  which  the  reader  turns  with  delight  after 
reading  some  of  tlie  trash  timt  is  put  forth  by  the  press.  It  abounds  in  soul-elevating 
thoughts,  and  no  person  can  read  it  without  being  uiaile  wiser  and  better  thereby.  It 
Is  full  of  simple  and  naive  wisdom,  shrewd  delineation  of  cliaracter  in  great  variety, 
and  has  a  Scotch  canray-noss  and  piquancy  that  rivet  the  attention  even  amidst  sample 
Incidents.  Wo  like  it  mucTi,  and  cordially  commend  it  to  our  readers."— ^Vo/trieA 
Evening  Courier. 

IT. 

THE  USE  OF  SU]N^SHIXE. 

By  S.  M.    1  vol.  16mo.    Paper,  50  cents;  cloth,  75  cents. 

**  This  Is  a  moral  talo  of  exceeding  beauty.  It  Is  elegantly  written,  full  of  Just  sentl- 
jnonta,  and  inculcates  moral  lessons.  It  is  a  tJile  for  the  family,  encouraging  social,  do 
mestic  pleasures,  and  leaving  upon  the  mind  religious  impressions.  It  can  never  bs 
ead  without  profit."— .So«<on  Journal. 

T. 

HOME  IS  HOME. 

A  Domestic  Story.    12ma    Paper,  50  cents  ;  clot**,  tS  cents. 
•  We  have  no  objection  to  snoh  '  light  literature '  as  this.    It  fa-.  ...<e  the  dew  oi  .-j* 
gentle  rain,  lightly,  it  is  true,  but  it  falls  to  cheer  and  gladden  the  heart   There  art 
pleasant  and  pro'fluble  lessons  In  the  pages  of  this  book,  and  the  reader  cannot  hdf 
o>ine<tA  heroine,  the  gentle  Kate  Sinclair,  and  all  who  love  her  "—  Lit,  Oaa. 


WORKS  BY  MISS  SEWELL, 

PUBLISHED  BY  D.  APPLETON  &  COMPANY. 


THE  experience'' OF  LIFE:  A  TALE. 

One  vol.  12mo.    Paper  cover,  50  cents  ;  cloth.  75  cents.    {Just  ready.) 

A  JOURNAL  KEPT  DURING  A  SUMMER  TOUR 

FOR  THE  CHILDREN  OF  A  VILLAGE  SCHOOL 
Tiiree  parts  in  one  vol.  12mo.  Cloth,  ^1. 
"A  very  simple  and  sweetly  written  work.  There  is  the  same  natur&I  anil  graofifkii 
detail  that  mark  Miss  Sewell's  novels.  It  will  find  a  great  many  aduiirers  among  the 
young  people,  who  will  be  almost  as  hai>py  as  the  fair  traveller  in  wandering  over  tb« 
ground  on  which  she  has  looked  with  a  discriminating  eye,  and  received,  and  comma- 
Dlcated  suggestions  which,  from  her  enlarged  sphere  o'"  observation,  can  hardly  (kil  to 
enlarge  the  heart  as  well  as  to  enrich  the  intellect." — Commercial  Advertiser 

III. 

THE  EARL'S  DAUGHTER:    A  TALE. 

Edited  bj  the  Eev.  "Wm.  Sewell,  B.  A.    One  vol.  12mo.   Paper  cover,  50 
cents ;  cloth,  75  cents. 

MARGARET  PERCIVAL:   A  TALE. 

Edited  by  the  Rev.  Wm.  Sewell,  B.  A.   Two  vols.  12nio.   Paper  cover,  fl  j 
cloth,  $1  50. 

GERTRUDE:   A  TALE. 

Edited  by  the  Eev.  TVm.  Sewell,  B.  A.   12mo.    Cloth,  75  cents ;  pap« 
cover,  50  cents. 

AMY  HERBERT:   A  TALE. 

Edited  by  the  Eev.  Wm.  Sewell,  B.  A.    One  vol.  12mo.   Cloth,  75  cents 
paper  cover,  50  cents. 

TIL 

LAN  ETON  PARSONAGE:  A  TALE. 

Edited  by  the  Eev.  Wm.  Sewell,  B.  A.   Three  vols.  12mo.    Cloth,  |2  26 
paper  cover,  $1  50. 

VIIL 

WALTER  LO RIMER,  AND  OTHER  TALES. 

12mo.   Cloth,  75  cents. 

THE  CHILD'S  FIRS T^HIS TORY  OF  ROME, 

One  vol.  16mo.    50  cents. 

X. 

THE  CHILD'S  FIRST  HISTORY  OF  GREECK 

One  vol.  16mo. 


D.  Apple  ton  it  Company' t  Puhlieationi. 


MARIA  J.  M^NTOSirS  WORKS, 


I. 

THE  LOPTY  AND  THE  LOWLY , 

0«,   GOOD   IN   ALL   AND   NONE    ALL  GOOD. 
TvDO  volt.  12//ia    C/ofA,  $1  50;  paper  covers,  |1. 
"  Life,  In  iu  varied  relations  at  the  North  and  at  the  Snath,  Is  the  th^me  of  thk 
vsrk.    In  its  jrraj.fii''  .!.-'iP**a'!i.n5  nf  r^t^ncrr.  tnithAiIneai  of  reprreentaiion,  an  1  Btir- 
jinf  roallllee  of  lif.  T'nele  Tom's  Cabin."   The  autU.re* 

la  well  known  t.  -  worts  of  fiction,  ao<l  her  lift  has 

twefi  Mssed  at  Ui<  « of  her  aeottmeota,  Uer  elevated  and 

mndu  vi«ws.  her  ge:.i.u.f  Wv.iu^^  uf  i.  .!i.ar.r.v.  An  J  tbe  eleganee  and  alofiMOM  of  hw 
MA.  are  broo^t  oat  la  tbeae  iMg«s  with  their  fall  brilllaocf  Md  eflbeL** 

IL 

EVENINGS  AT  DONALDSON  MANOR ; 

Oe,   Tilt  CHRISTMAS  GUEST. 
One  vol.  \2mo.     Cloth,  75  cents;  paper  covers,  50  cents;  or,  a  Jiner 
Edition,  Illustrated  with  Ten  Steel  E}igravings,  %vo.,  doth,  f  2 ;  gilt 
edjef,  $2  50;  morocco,  ?3  50. 

It  Is  a  bo«tk  that  parents  may  bay  for  their  ehildren,  brothers  for  their 
b'^sband^  for  their  wives,  with  the  assurance  that  the  book  will  not  only  give  piai 
bat  convey  leasuns  of  love  and  charity  that  can  hardly  fail  to  leave  durable  Iniprei 
of  moral  and  social  duty  upon  the  mind  and  heart  of  tbe  reader."— ^r«nin^  Mirrt 

ni. 

WOMAN  IN  AMERICA; 

HEu  WORK  AND  II  EE  REWARD. 
One  vol.  12mo.  Paper  covers,  50  cents;  cloth,  63  cents. 
•*W(»  like  this  work  exceedingly,  and  onr&lr  coantrywomeu  will  ailmirpft  stfll : 
khan  we  do.  It  is  written  in  the  triie  spirit  and  evinces'extensive  obeerratlon  of  sodetj, 
a  clear  ins1«rht  into  the  evils  surrounding  and  pressing  down  ber  eex,  and  a  florloas  de- 
termination to  exjKwe  and  remove  them.  liea^l  her  work.  She  will  win  a  wiUinf  way 
to  the  heart  and  home  of  wuman,  and  her  mission  wiil  be  found  to  be  one  of  beoefleeoes 
and  love.   Truly,  woman  has  her  work  and  ber  reward-"— ulnMrtcan  SpwAaior. 

IV. 

CHARMS  AND  COUNTER-CHARMS. 

One  Vol.  I'lino.     (Jluth,  jl  ;  or,  iu  Tic-j  P'trt<,  jfJ!"r,  75  centn. 

"This  is  one  of  thoee  liealthftil,  truthful  works  r.f  grtion.  which  improve  the  b«at* 
and  enlighten  the  judgment,  whilst  tliey  furnish  amusement  to  the  passing  hour.  Tb« 
^le  Is  clear,  easy  and  simple,  and  the  construction  of  tbe  story  artistic  la  a  high  dagra* 
We  commend  most  cordially  the  book." — Tribun*^ 

T. 

TWO  LIVES;  OR,  TO  SEEM  AND  TO  BE. 

One  vol.  V2mo.    Paper  covers.  50  cents  ;    cloth,  75  cents, 

"  Tbe  previous  works  of  Miss  Mcintosh,  although  issued  anonymously,  have  b©«» 
prjp'jl:.'  i-  r' '  t-     -  —    '  *'    "-.  r  i.    The  simple  beauty  of  her  narrativea,  cnmbiBing 

tur«  ',1  noble  view?  of  li'"e  und  its  duties,  ought  to  win 

•r  •  our  land.    We  have  rarely  perused  a  tale  mors 

Inter.      -  .  r  .  T>«  before  a\  and  wc  commena  it  most  oonUaUy  ts 

lb«  alleauou  of     our  reaJers.  — iVoX*«fa«<  Churchman 

TL 

AUNT  KITTY'S  TALES. 

A  new  edition,  complete  in  one  vol.  \2mo.     Cloth.  71  cts.;  paper,  50  cU. 
This  Tolume  -wiitalns  the  following  delightfUIv  interesting  stories:  "  Blind  Aha^" 
"  J«sle  Graham,"  "Florence  Amo'-V  "Grace  an^  Clara,"  " Ellen  Leslie:  or.  Tbe  In- 
ward of  Self  Control*' 


CHOICE  NEW  WORKS  OF  FICTION 

PUBLISHED  BY  J).  APPLETON  <fe  00 

BATiL; 

A  STOR\   OF  MODERN  I^IFE. 
By  W.  WILKIE  COLLINS, 
luthor  of  "  Antonina,"  etc.,  etc.    One  voL  12mo    Paper  cover,  50c. ;  Clotii,  78* 

*'  Basil"  is  eminently  an  original  work,  in  plan  and  execution,  and  not  i 
X  »Te  copy  of  the  modern  novel.  It  is  strongly  marked  by  the  geniua 
li»d  author— a  genius  which  is  greatly  indebted  tc  ripe  scholarship  and  to 
m^rit  laborious  painstaking,  in  whatever  it  attempts  to  accomplish  :  and 
thvi-efore,  if  for  nothing  else,  worthy  of  recognition.  Should  tliis  work  foil 
of  jiopularity,  it  will  not  be  for  its  unworthiness,  but  for  its  unusual  excel- 
lence, as  a  work  of  art.  There  is  nothing  meretn'cious  about  iV^— Albany 
Eveuing  Journal. 

"  No  one  who  reads  this  work  but  will  pay  his  tribute  to  its  excellence. 
He  has  given  us  in  prose  fiction  the  poetry  of  every-day  truth,  and  made  a 
brilliant  romance  which  even  in  this  age  of  book-n;aking,  will  Uvo.  No 
reader  will  ever  confound  the  eloquent  writer  with  "  the  mob  of  gentlemen 
who  write  at  ease." — National  Intelligencer. 

*'  The  interest  and  beauty  of  fiction  are  strikingly  blended  with  the  re- 
alities of  modern  life,  in  this  new  work  of  Mr.  Collins :  and  whether  we 
regard  the  happy  manner  in  which  the  author  has  sustained  throughout  th« 
plot  of  his  tale,  or  the  elegant  style  in  which  the  publishers,  Messrs.  Apple- 
ton  &  Co.,  have  presented  the  vdume  to  the  American  reader,  we  equally 
recommend  it." — Boston  Times. 


REUBEN  MEDLICOTT: 

OR,  THE  COMINO  MAN. 
By  M.  W.  SAVAGE,  ESQ. 

AUTHOR  or  "the  nAOHELOR  OF  ALBANY,"    "  MY  UNCLE  THE  CURATE,"  KTO. 

One  vol  12mo.  pp.  443.   Paper,  50c.:  Cloth,  T5c. 

**  A  most  enterlAining  story  by  the  author  of  ihe  Bachelor  of  Albany 
[t  is  full  of  life  and  character,  and  is  written  sensibly,  humorously,  and  often 
•atirically." — N.  T.  Cou7'ier. 

"The  story  is  vail  told,  and  the  moral  a  most  instructive  one." — Dailj/ 
Standard. 

"  The  narrative  is  rsjiarkably  lively  and  amusing,  and  the  varied  char 
oteri  are  depicted  in  a  graphic  and  sparkling  manner." — Clir.  Messenger. 

"The  story  is  very  ssknfully  and  yet  naturally  wrought  out,  and  ho  will 
00  a  fortunate  reader  who  does  not  find  parts  of  it  bearing  closely  upon  pa» 
•ages  in  his  own  life." — Allany  Register. 

"A  satirical  novel,  written  in  a  style  of  high  art  and  careless  carefnlned: 
rarely  excelled.  We  have  M^n.  nothing  more  lively,  polished  and  piquaui 
for  many  a  day." — N.  T.  Post. 

"  It  iR  written  in  a  dazzling  and  joyous  styje,  which  certainly  reoo« 
oaends  it."— 7>rt?/  Whig. 


D.  Appletcn  dt  Company^s  Publicaltons. 


GRACE  AGUILAR'S  WORKS. 


HOME  SCENES  AND  KEAET  STUDIES. 

One  voL  12mo.    Paper  cover,  60  cent* ;  cloth,  75  cent*. 
"Wilk  this  Tolvne,  whtcb  completee  the  •erles  in  which  Uie  dettiMrtlOD  of  (W  ehar 
mhm  «f  WDtnan  hw  been  Ui«  chief  design,  the  pablic  now  hmve  Um  Works  ci  Qnm 

ACidUr,  the  Intrinsic  iniere^  and  vdue  '  f  have  woo  for  t^o;n  sn  unviable  rep«- 

tatlon.   This  last  of  the  aeries  consist-  <,t  talee  and  ^  -  '-alcalated 

lo  aw&kf  n  senlimeota  of  pare  affecti  -e  tlie  heart  ^  .^nd  hoUet 

ensil  i         '  v  i'- Inii^.rc—ivv  illustrat;  .' .ij^ta  of  Uoni>  .  ■ 

~  I  '  -  ress  of  geiiiii-N  conMfcmedtotbe  nobieal  porposea,  They 

Baj  :  claa(«««,  without  the  least  liesltatloo ;  and  bo  better  tm 

▼loe  « <^  .  .  V«>  thi^  ^  inspire  it  with  a  love  for  these  prodnetloiift 

We  recuiiiuicail  tub  5<:ru-:s  of  books  bo  car  readers,  and  espedallj  to  oor  fetnale  \m\\tn 
Let  them  get  and  read  the  writiDgt  of  ttiis  champion  of  their  sex."— 06«erc«r 

THE  MOTHER'S^  RECOMPENSE. 

12mo.    Paper,  50  ccDta ;  cloth,  75  centa. 

**It  Is  a  fragrant  offering  to  tlie  cause  of  domestic  rirtae  and  bappinesa."— .^AdMif 
AUa<. 

"  In  the  domestic  circle,  and  br  all  car  lair  readers,  this  excellent  story  WJl  meal 
with  a  cordial  welcome."— Journal. 

in. 

WOMAN'S  FRIENDSni.\ 

A  Story  of  Domestic  Life.    12nio.    Cloth,  75  cents  ;  paper,  50  centa. 

"This  work  shoa'd  fin(i  a  w<»lor,me  in  every  Cunily  circle,  where  it  is  so  well  ealea* 
lated  to  do  goo<L'' — Coiiti  -  rtiM^r. 

-The  style  of  this  j.r  v  resembles  that  of  Miss  Edgeworth.   It  ts  oiM 

of  thoee  vivid  pictur«  oi  ^  tliai  never  fkils  to  please."— 3''.  O.  71ru«  DeUa. 

THE  YALE  OF  CEDARS ;  OR,  THE  MARTm 

A  Story  of  Spain  in  the  Fi^eenth  Century.   12mo.    Paper.  50  c«nta ; 

cloth,  75  cents. 

•'The  grace  and  vigor  of  the  style,  the  masterly  manner  in  which  the  details  of  tb« 
story  are  managed,  and  its  thrilling  interest,  render  the  book  one  of  the  most  abeorbiag 
that  we  have  read  fur  some  Mm&T—yetcark  JJaily  Advertuer. 

THE  WOMEN  OF  ISRAEL. 

Two  12mo.  Paper,  |1 ;  cloth,  $1  60. 
•*  By  no  writer  have  the  characters  of  the  celebrated  Women  of  Israel  beei  so  eor 
rectly  appreciated,  or  eloquently  delineated-  Those  high  attainments  of  piety,  thoea 
graces  of  spirit,  which  have  placed  them  in  the  rank  of  examples  for  all  sab^aent 
generations,  are  spread  before  us  with  a  geniality  of  spirit  and  a  beauty  of  style  wliieh 
wii  secuce  the  warmest  admiration ;  at  the  same  time  their  weaknesses  and  snon  an 
aot  overlooked  or  excused."- Courier  and  Enquirer 

THE  DAYS^^OF  BRUCE. 

A  Story  from  Scottish  History.    2  vols.  16mo.    Paper,  tl ;  dotli,  f  1  6u 
"  This  traly  delightful  work  takes  a  higher  position  than  that  of  a  novel.    It  Is  fti£ 
-if  sound  Instruction,  doee  and  logical  reasoning,  and  is  fill  with  practical  lessons  of  every 
lay  eaaracter,  which  renders  it  a  deMrable  book  for  the  yonng."-  -Albany  Iteai$ter. 


D.  Appleton  &  Company's  Publications. 


f  0p[iir  Cellos  b]T  ^merirait  ^Btljors, 


TIME  AND  TIDE  ; 

OR,    STRIVE    AND  WIN. 
By  A.  S.  Roe.    Vlmo.    Cloth,  63  cents  ;  paper,  38  cents. 

We  wish  tliat  every  worlc  of  fiction  we  are  called  to  notice  was  as  admirable  lo  iti 
as  this,  for  there  are  few  which  we  can  so  unliesitatingly  put  into  the  hands  of  • 
f 'laifg  person.  AVe  gladly  welcome  any  such  addition  to  our  lighter  literature."-^a>/)r«#4 

TO  LOVE  AND  TO  BE  LOVED; 

A  Story.  By  A.  S.  Roe.  12mo.  Paper  cover,  38  cents  ;  cloth,  63  centat 
"This  is  one  of  those  attractive  romances  in  which  the  purest  passions  of  the  heart 
we  delineated  with  a  simplicity  of  style  and  an  elevation  of  thought,  that  will  charm 
•very  reader.  Love  in  its  fulness  and  its  richness,  its  delicacy  and  its  fervor,  is  here 
portrayed  with  a  masterly  hand."— Cowrier  and  Eaq. 

III. 

JA3IES  MONTJOY  ; 

OR,   I'VE   BEEN  THINKING. 
By  A.  S.  Roe.    12mo.    Cloth,  ^75  cents  ;  paper,  50  cents. 
It  abounds  with  the  purest  and  deepest  moral  and  pious  sentiments  interwoven  with 
scenes  of  every  day  life,  in  a  manner  that  goes  directly  to  the  heart    It  is  a  work  0I 
which  Americans  may  well  be  proud." — Evangelist. 

HEARTS  UNVEILED  ; 

OR,  "I  KNEW  you  WOULD  LIKE  HIM." 
By  Sarah  Emery  Saymore.    12mo.    Paper,  50  cents;  cloth,  75  cents. 
"  This  is  a  pleasant,  unpretending  book,  abounding  with  moral  lessons,  and  written 
with  a  moral  purpose,  exposing  the  many  unthouglit  of  influences  which  operate  upon 
the  character,  and  illustrating  what  it  is  that  insures  real  happiness.   The  book  is  welJ 
calculated  to  benefit  young  minds  and  young  hearts." — Courier. 

SUNBEA3IS  AND  SHADOWS,  AND  BUDS 
AND  BLOSSOMS. 

OR,  LEAVES  FROM  AUNT  MINNIE'S  PORTFOLIO. 
By  Georgie  A.  Hulse,    16mo,    Paper,  50  cents;  cloth,  75  cents. 
"This  is  a  wholesome  and  lefreshing  novel— the  dialogue  is  sprightly  and  sparklina 
the  moral  good,  and  the  interest  of  the  work  is  well  sustained.   It  can  be  recommen* 
wt,  we  think,  to  readers  of  all  descriptions." — Protest.  Ohurchman. 

HELOISE; 

OR,   THE   UNREVEALED  SECRET. 
By  Talvi.    12mo.    Paper  cover,  50  cents ;  cloth,  75  cent& 

VII. 

LIFE'S  DISCIPLINE : 

A  Tale.    By  Talvi.    12mo.    Paper,  38  cents;  cloth.  68  oenta 


19""  Al'l'LKTONS'  POrULAU  LIBllAKY.  "^('i 


Now  Ready. 

1>>AY>  I  i:<>M  THE  LONDON  TIMES;  A  Collection  of 

rerhonnl  nmJ  Historical  SketcbflOi 

THE  YKLI.OWl'IA  SII  PAPERS.    By      M.  Thackerat. 
THE  MAIDEN  AND  MARRIED  LIFE  OF  MARY  POW- 

KLL:  aftorwanls  Mrs.  Milton. 

A   JOL'RNEY    THROUGH  TARTARY,  THIBET,  AND 

CHINA.    By  M.  Uvc 

THE  PARIS  SKETCH  BOOK.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray. 
GAIETIES  AND  GRAVITIES.    By  Horace  S.mith,  one  of 

the  Authors  of  the  *•  Rejected  Ad'lrease^" 

THE  IN(iOLDSBY  LEGENDS.    By  Barham. 

PAPERS  FROM  THE  QUARTERLY  REVIEW. 

LITTLE  PEI)L1N(;T0N  AND  THE  PEDLINGTONIANS. 

By  the  Atithoi  of  "Paul  Pry." 

A  JOURNEY  TO  KATMANDU;  OR,  THE  NEPAULE8E 

AMBASSADOli  AT  HOME.    Bt  Lawrk.nc£  Oltphant. 

THE  HOOK  OF  SNOBS.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray. 

A  BOOK  FOR  SUMMER  TIME  IN  THE  COUNTRY. 

By  the  Rev.  li.  A.  W'illmott. 

STORIES  FROM  ''BLACKWOOD." 

MEN'S  WIVP:S.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray. 

LIVES  OF  WELLIN(;T0N  and  PEEL. 

A  SHABBY  GENTEEL  STORY.    Bv  W.  M.  Thackeray. 

a  second  SERIES  OF  ESSAYS  FROM  THE  LONDON 

TIMES. 

CONFESSIONS  OF  FITZ  BOODLE  AND  MAJOR  GAHA- 

GAN.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray. 

THE  LUCK  OF  15ARRY  LYNDON:  A  Romance  of  the 

Last  Century.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray. 

LIFE  AND  MEMORIALS  OF  DANIEL  WEBSTER.  By 

Gen.  S.  p.  Ltmax.    Two  vols.  16mo. 

MR,  BROWN  S  LETTERS  TO  A  Y'OUNG  MAN.  THE 

PROSEPs  &c.    By  W.  M.  Thackeray.   50  eta. 

PUNCirs  PRIZE  NOVELISTS.  THE  FAT  CONTRIBUTOR. 

TRAVELS  IN  LONDON.   Bv  W.  M.  Thackeray.   60  cts. 

JEAMESS  DIARY;  A  TALE  OF  THE  PANIC  OF  1845. 

A  LEGEND  OF  THE  RHINE;  REBECCA.  AND  EOWKNA.  Bj  W. 
M.  Thackeray.   60  eta. 


I  Nearly  Eeady. 

THE  I NG  OLDS  BY  LEGENDS.  2d  and  3d  Seuies,  with  a  Life 

of  the  Author. 

THEODORE  HOOK'S  LIFE  AND  LITERARY  REMAINS. 
vTHE   MISCELLANEOUS    WORKS  OF  CHRISTOPHER, 
0  NORTH.  0 


« 


V 


