100 

Bkm 

copy  2 


m 


*5* 


Bergf  Albanj 
WOZZECK 
JL  Guide  to  the  Text  and  Musie  of  the 


_..-_-  ■"--  "  ~\       :.   .. 


*      •^6kb 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PURCHASED  FROM 


BUNTING  FUND 


;  'l!l°3  'uoiipois 


ALBAN   BERGS 


WOZZECK 


A  GUIDE 

TO  THE  TEXT  AND  MUSIC 
OF  THE  OPERA 


by  WILLI  REICH 


Price,  75  cents 


Reprinted  from  the  Monograph  originally  published  by 

THE  LEAGUE  OF  COMPOSERS' 

Quarterly  Review 

MODERN  MUSIC 


G.  SCHIRMER,  Inc.,  New  York 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2012  with  funding  from 
Wellesley  College  Library 


http://archive.org/details/albanbergswozzecOOreic 


ALBAN   BERG'S 


WOZZECK 


A  GUIDE 

TO  THE  TEXT  AND  MUSIC 
OF  THE  OPERA 


by  WILLI   REICH 


Reprinted  from  the  Monograph  originally  published  by 

THE  LEAGUE  OF  COMPOSERS* 

Quarterly  Review 

MODERN  MUSIC 


G.  SCHIRMER,  Inc.,  New  York 


Copyright,  1927,  1931,  1952,  by  The  League  of  Composers,  Inc, 

International  Copyright  Secured 

Printed  in  the  U.  S.  A. 

42802c 


MUSIC  LIBRARY 

/  DV 


fry;  a 


A  GUIDE  TO  WOZZECK 


Synopsis  of  the  Opera 
Act  I 

Scene   1.    Early  morning.    Wozzeck  shaves  the  Captain,   who   twits   him   for  his 
stupidity  and  philosophizes  neurotically  about  his  unhappy  look,  his  innate  decency, 
and  his  illegitimate  child.   Wozzeck  replies  humbly  but  bitterly  that  he  is  too  poor 
to  be  able  to  afford  morality  and  that  the  child  will  not  be  forsaken  by  the  Lord 
merely  because  no  Amen  was  said  before  he  was  conceived.   Scene  2.   Late  after- 
noon.   Wozzeck  and  his  friend  Andres  cut  rods  for  their  major  in  a  field  outside 
the  town.   Andres  sings  a  hunting  song.    Wozzeck  is  frightened  by  the  fierce  light 
of  the  setting  sun  and  the  eerie  sounds  in  the  distance.   Andres,  also  disturbed,  tries 
to  calm  him.    Scene  3.    Evening.    Marie  at  the  window  in  her  room,  her  child  in 
her  arms.    The  army  band   marches  by  outside  and   Marie   admires   the   Drum 
Major,  who  waves  a  greeting  to  her.    Her  neighbor,  Margret,  looking  in  at  the 
window,  taunts  her  for  her  unsavory  reputation.    Marie  sings  her  boy  to  sleep. 
Wozzeck  knocks  at  the  window,  says  he  can't  come  in  because  he  has  to  hurry 
to  the  barracks,  tells  her  of  the  strange  vision  he  saw  in  the  sunset,  which  obsesses 
him,  and  wonders  what  it  portends.    Scene  4.    Sunny  afternoon.    Wozzeck  comes 
to  the  Doctor,  who  pays  him  for  the  right  to  experiment  with  him.    The  Doctor 
is  angry  with  him  for  coughing.   "Have  I  not  proved  that  the  diaphragm  is  subject 
to  the  will?"    Wozzeck  attempts  inarticulately  to  speak  about  nature,  but  his  con- 
versation wanders  to  Marie  and  the  vision  he  saw.    The  Doctor  derides  what  he 
calls  Wozzeck's  idee  fixe  but  exclaims  that  his  own  theory  will  make  him  im- 
mortal.   He  exhorts  Wozzeck  to  continue  with  the  prescribed  diet  and  Wozzeck, 
because  of  his  abject  poverty,  promises  to  obey.    Scene  5.    Sunset.    Marie  stands 
in  the  street  in  front  of  her  door,  admiring  the  Drum  Major,  who  makes  love  to 
her.    She  repulses  him  at  first  but  then  yields. 


Act  II 

Scene  1.  Marie,  in  the  morning,  studies  with  approval  her  new  earrings  in  a 
fragment  of  mirror  as  she  tries  to  put  her  boy  to  sleep.  When  Wozzeck  enters, 
she  puts  her  hand  to  her  ears  but  he  catches  the  glint  of  the  earrings  between 
her  fingers  and  questions  her  about  them.  She  claims  she  found  them.  He  does 
not  believe  her  but  doesn't  quarrel.  Noticing  that  the  boy  perspires  as  he  sleeps, 
Wozzeck  remarks  that  for  the  poor  even  sleep  is  work.    He  gives  Marie  his  wages 


2  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

and  leaves.  She  says  "May  God  reward  you,  Franz"  and,  when  he  is  gone, 
"What  an  evil  woman  I  am!"  Scene  2.  The  Captain  meets  the  Doctor  in  the 
street.  The  Doctor  frightens  the  Captain  with  a  malicious  prognosis  of  apoplexy. 
Wozzeck  comes  hurrying  by.  They  stop  him  and  the  Captain  taunts  him  about 
the  Drum  Major.  Wozzeck  runs  off.  Scene  3.  On  the  street  in  front  of  Marie's 
door,  Wozzeck  quarrels  with  her  about  the  Drum  Major  and  is  about  to  strike 
her.  She  forbids  him  to  do  so:  "I'd  rather  be  stabbed  than  have  anyone  lay  a 
hand  on  me!"  Scene  4.  A  tavern  garden  at  night.  Workers,  soldiers,  and  girls, 
some  dancing,  others  watching.  Two  workers  are  drunk.  Marie  dances  with  the 
Drum  Major.  Wozzeck  sees  them  and  is  furious  but  restrains  himself.  The  soldiers 
and  others  sing  a  hunting  song,  with  Andres  chiming  in.  The  first  worker  delivers 
a  drunken  sermon.  Wozzeck  continues  to  brood,  sitting  near  the  door.  "Blood  — 
everything  turns  red  before  my  eyes."  Scene  5.  Night.  Before  the  curtain  rises 
on  a  guard  room  in  the  barracks,  the  breathing  of  sleeping  soldiers  is  heard. 
Andres  and  Wozzeck  share  a  wooden  cot.  Wozzeck  awakens  from  a  troubled 
sleep,  unable  to  forget  the  fiddles  in  the  beer  garden  and  Marie  and  the  Drum 
Major  dancing  together.  The  Drum  Major  comes  in,  drunk,  boasts  about  Marie, 
and  when  Wozzeck,  feigning  indifference,  whistles  derisively,  beats  him.  The 
soldiers,  aroused  by  the  fight,  go  back  to  sleep. 


Act  III 

Scene  1.  Marie,  reading  from  the  Bible  in  candlelight,  pushes  her  child  away 
guiltily,  but  then  draws  him  close.  She  is  worried  about  Wozzeck,  who  did  not 
come  home  last  night  or  tonight.  She  begs  the  Saviour  for  mercy.  Scene  2. 
Dusk.  Marie  and  Wozzeck  on  a  wooded  path  near  a  lake.  She  wishes  to  hurry 
on  but  he  persuades  her  to  sit  down.  As  the  moon  rises  red,  he  plunges  a 
knife  into  her  throat.  Scene  3.  In  a  dimly  lit  tavern  young  people,  including 
Margret,  dance  a  wild  polka.  Wozzeck,  drinking,  tries  to  make  love  to  Margret. 
She  notices  the  blood  on  him  and  her  exclamations  attract  the  whole  company 
around  the  pair.  Wozzeck  threatens  them  and  runs  off.  Scene  4.  Same  as  Scene 
2.  Wozzeck,  half-crazed  with  guilt  and  fear,  looks  for  the  knife  in  the  moonlight, 
finds  it,  throws  it  into  the  lake,  fears  it's  too  close  to  shore,  wades  in  after  it, 
and  drowns.  The  Doctor  and  Captain  enter;  they  have  heard  Wozzeck's  shout 
and  conclude  someone  is  drowning.  It  grows  still  and  they  leave  hurriedly.  Scene 
5.  The  street  in  front  of  Marie's  door.  In  the  morning  sunshine  children  are 
playing,  Marie's  boy  on  a  hobby-horse.  OthvT  children  rush  in  and  report  that 
Marie  has  been  found  dead.  They  run  to  see.  Marie's  boy,  alone,  continues  to 
ride  around,  then,  after  hesitating  a  moment,  rides  after  the  others. 


I.  Berg's  Organization  of  the  Text 

A  performance  in  19 14  of  Wozzeck,  the  dramatic  fragment  by  the 
German  poet  Georg  Buchner  (1813-37),  first  gave  Berg  the  idea  of  his 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck  3 

opera.  Buchner's  sketchy  design  made  an  absolutely  new  dramaturgical 
treatment  necessary.  This  has  best  been  analyzed  in  the  remarks  of  H. 
Jalowetz1  and  R.  Schafke:2 

The  story  of  Buchner's  drama  is  told  in  a  few  words.  From  the  loose  concatena- 
tion of  twenty-five  scenes  Berg  chose  fifteen  which  he  grouped  into  three  acts  of 
five  scenes  each.  Wozzeck,  an  orderly,  is  tormented  by  his  superior,  the  Captain; 
by  a  physician  to  whom  he  surrenders  himself  for  medical  experiments  that  he 
may  be  able  to  support  his  beloved  Marie  and  her  child;  and  by  visions  rising  out 
of  his  fantastic  reveries.  Marie  is  seduced  by  the  Drum-Major.  When  Wozzeck, 
after  torturing  uncertainty,  has  convinced  himself  of  her  infidelity,  he  stabs  his 
beloved  and  drowns  himself. 

More  significant  than  the  external  events  is  what  animates  these  people  and 
their  deeds,  what  reveals  them  as  phantoms  in  spite  of,  or  rather  by  means  of,  the 
daring  realism  of  the  presentation.  Thus  the  Captain  becomes  the  mask  of  fear- 
tormented,  moralizing  philistinism;  the  Physician,  the  demon  of  cold,  materialistic 
science,  hostile  to  man  and  his  soul;  the  Drum-Major,  the  embodiment  of  the  beast 
in  man;  and  Marie,  simply  the  poor  unfortunate.  But  Wozzeck  is  far  more  than  the 
representative  of  the  oppressed  class,  die  arme  Leut\  who  must  not  only  suffer 
extreme  misery  but  assume  all  the  blame.  This  figure  is  akin  to  the  "pure  Fool," 
the  primitive  being,  still  outside  morality;  close  to  the  forces  of  nature,  surrounded 
by  their  hidden  mysteries  and  forced  to  surrender  to  them.  He  loves  tenderly  yet 
is  driven  to  murder  and,  from  the  same  compulsion,  atones  by  committing  suicide 
in  the  very  pond  where  he  had  washed  the  blood  from  his  murderous  knife.  He 
is  one  of  those  "poor  in  spirit"  in  the  sense  of  the  Gospels,  who,  disorientated  in 
a  later  age,  seek  their  lost  origins  with  every  power  and  shatter  their  life-force 
in  this  superhuman  effort.  Words  cannot  convey  the  idea,  which,  though  barely 
expressed,  becomes  embodied  in  this  figure  as  powerfully  as  any  concept  ever 
has  been  on  the  stage. 

Thus  Wozzeck  has  something  of  the  force  of  a  mythological  being  and  for  that 
reason  is  well  cast  as  the  central  figure  of  an  opera.  The  heroes  of  tragic  opera  who 
have  survived  are  either  taken  directly  from  the  material  of  sagas  or  they  are  just 
such  incarnations  of  elemental  feelings,  of  passions;  to  mention  but  a  few,  Orpheus, 
Don  Juan,  Leonore  in  Fidelio,  the  Flying  Dutchman,  as  well  as  Carmen,  Othello, 
Falstaff.  The  uniqueness  and  universality  of  these  "figures  justify  the  elevating  effect 
that  song  gives  to  words.  All  intellectual,  all  episodic,  all  realistic  detail  is  relegated 
to  the  background  so  that  the  music  may  freely  follow  its  own  laws. 

Berg's  dramaturgy  condenses  and  clarifies  the  material.  First  he  divides  it  into 
three  parts:  exposition,  denouement,  catastrophe.  Through  apparently  slight 
changes,  symmetry  and  proportion  are  given  to  the  individual  scenes  and  so  a  well- 
conceived,  balanced  drama  is  evolved  from  a  naturalistic  sketch. 

The  poetic  treatment  by  Berg  is  an  adequate  answer  to  the  question:  How  can 
this  dramatic  fragment,  a  hundred  years  old,  be  made  the  subject  of  a  modern 

1  In  an  address  delivered  in  connection  with  the  premiere  of  Wozzeck  in  Cologne. 

2  In  Meios,  May  1929. 


4  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

opera?  Indeed  the  sociological  undercurrent  of  the  Buchner  play  is  not  untimely 
today.  The  grotesque  element  in  the  delineation  of  the  characters,  especially  that 
of  the  Physician,  finds  its  echo  in  modern  art.  The  interpolated  folk-tunes  and  the 
opportunities  for  the  use  of  tone-color  in  various  episodes  must  have  attracted  the 
musician.  But  there  would  always  have  been  a  contradiction  in  style  between 
Biichner's  amorphous  naturalism  and  the  rigid,  structural  tendency  of  contemporary 
music.  Here  is  where  Berg  the  poet  with  sure  instinct  reconciles  Berg  the  musician. 
The  method  by  which  the  poetic  material  is  developed  contains  the  germ  cell  of 
Berg's  music. 


II.  The  Musical  Structure  as  a  Whole 

In  1 9 14,  when  Berg  decided  to  compose  Wozzeck,  the  situation  in 
music  was  most  peculiar.  The  Viennese  school,  led  by  Arnold  Schoen- 
berg,  had  just  developed  beyond  the  initial  stages  of  the  movement 
incorrectly  known  as  "atonal."  Composition  in  that  style  was  limited 
at  first  to  the  smaller  forms,  such  as  songs  and  piano  and  orchestral 
pieces.  There  were  no  so-called  atonal  works  in  the  traditional  four- 
movement  order,  no  symphonies,  oratorios,  and  operas.  In  renouncing 
tonality  this  school  had  abandoned  one  of  the  strongest  and  most  tested 
mediums  for  the  construction  not  only  of  small  but  of  large  forms. 
When  Berg  decided  to  write  a  full-length  opera  he  faced,  in  regard  to 
harmony,  a  problem  entirely  new.  How,  without  the  proved  resource  of 
tonality  and  the  formal  structural  possibilities  based  upon  it,  was  he 
to  obtain  the  same  completeness,  the  same  convincing  musical  coherence 
not  only  in  the  small  units  of  the  individual  scenes  but  also,  and  this 
was  the  difficulty,  in  the  large  units  of  each  act,  and,  further,  in  the 
complete  architectonics  of  the  whole  work? 

Text  and  plot  alone  could  not  assure  this  unity  of  form ;  certainly  not 
for  a  work  like  Biichner's  Wozzeck,  made  up  as  it  is  of  many  loose  and 
fragmentary  scenes.  Even  when  the  three-part  arrangement,  which 
clearly  divided  fifteen  scenes  into  exposition,  denouement,  and  catas- 
trophe, was  achieved  and,  through  it,  unity  in  the  dramatic  action,  no 
provision  had  yet  been  made  for  musical  coherence. 

How  this  unity  and  coherence  were  planned  and  acquired  will  be- 
come clear  in  the  course  of  our  study.  For  the  time  being  we  must  direct 
our  attention  to  the  harmonic  construction,  especially  to  that  of  the  act 
endings.  The  points  at  which,  in  a  tonal  work,  a  distinct  repetition  and 
fortifying  of  the  main  key  is  made  comprehensible  to  the  eyes  and  ears 
of  the  lay  audience  are  also  the  place  in  an  atonal  work  where  the 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck  5 

harmonic  circle  of  a  long  act  must  be  brought  to  a  conclusion.  Such 
an  emphasis  was  arrived  at,  first  of  all,  by  making  every  act  steer  its 
way  towards  one  and  the  same  final  chord  in  a  sort  of  cadence  to  rest 
there  as  on  a  tonic.  These  final  chords  always  appear  in  a  different  form 
although  they  are  made  up  of  the  same  notes.  The  justification  for  these 
tonal  differentiations  lies  not  only  in  the  occasional  changes  of  dramatic 
situation,  but  also  in  demands  of  a  purely  musical  nature.  The  striving 
for  formal  coherence  and,  to  use  a  phrase  of  Schoenberg's,  for  musical 
"coordination"  is  counterbalanced  by  just  as  strong  a  leaning  towards 
change,  towards  variation  in  form. 

To  show  still  more  clearly  how  this  coherence,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
variety,  on  the  other,  are  worked  out,  let  us  consider  the  beginnings  and 
endings  of  the  acts. 

In  the  first  scene  the  curtain  rises  immediately  after  the  opening  of 
the  orchestra;  it  descends  on  the  last  measure  at  the  end  of  Act  I.  The 
curtain  of  Act  II  rises  after  a  short  orchestral  introduction.  When  the 
music  of  this  act  is  finished  the  curtain  remains  open  on  the  final  scene 
for  a  short  time.  Then  it  falls.  Corresponding  to  this  close,  the  curtain 
rises  on  the  third  act,  preceding  the  music;  there  is  a  pause  before  the 
musicians  begin.  The  curtain  descends  for  the  last  time  before  the  music 
has  ceased;  not,  however,  as  in  the  first  act,  where  the  descent  is  simul- 
taneous with  the  crescendo  of  the  final  chord,  but  before  this  chord 
sounds  in  a  breathless  pianissimo  and  dies  away. 

Finally,  another  point  may  be  made  concerning  the  structure  of 
the  opera  as  a  whole  in  relation  to  the  striving  for  coherent  form.  The 
method  of  constructing  each  of  the  three  acts  makes  it  clear  that  in  the 
main  the  old,  reliable,  three-part  design  A  -  B  -  A  is  used,  inasmuch 
as  the  first  and  third  acts  reveal  definite  structural  parallels.  Shorter  by 
far  than  the  weightier  middle  act,  they  enclose  it  in  what  might  be  called 
a  time-symmetry.  While  the  second  act,  as  we  shall  see,  is  a  completely 
integrated  musical  structure  from  the  first  to  the  last  measure,  the  form 
of  the  first  and  third  is  much  freer.  In  each  of  the  two  latter,  for  the 
five  loosely  connected  scenes  there  are  five  corresponding  musical  episodes 
also  loosely  connected.  The  scenes  of  the  first  act  could  be  called  a  group 
of  related  character  sketches,  which,  although  they  are  consistent  with 
the  dramatic  content,  from  time  to  time  describe  a  new  figure  in 
the  action,  always  of  course  in  relation  to  the  protagonist.  The  scenes  of 
the  third  act  reveal  musical  forms  whose  coherence  is  established  by  the 
use  of  certain  principles  of  unity,  justifying  their  title  of  "inventions." 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

These  two  acts,  rather  loose  in  structure,  like  the  two  "A's"  of  the 
three-part  form  encompass  the  middle  act,  which  is,  musically,  much 
closer  knit.  The  five  scenes  here  are  inseparably  united  like  the  move- 
ments of  a  symphony  (in  this  case  a  dramatic  symphony).  The  middle 
act  corresponds  to  the  "B"  section  of  the  three-part  form  and  is  essentially 
differentiated  from  the  two  "A"  sections,  the  first  and  third  acts,  which 
are  similar  to  each  other  in  structure. 

From  the  need  for  musical  coherence  even  in  small  details,  there 
came  the  much  discussed  utilization  of  certain  "old  forms,"  which  won 
such  notoriety  at  the  beginning  of  the  opera's  history. 

The  composer's  desire  for  musical  variety  and  the  avoidance  of 
"durchkomponieren" — the  common  characteristic  of  music-drama  since 
Wagner's  day — led  him  to  devise  a  different  form  for  every  one  of  the 
many  scenes.  But  the  completeness  of  each  of  these  scenes  demanded  a 
similar  completeness  in  the  music,  from  which  arose  the  necessity  of 
creating  an  artistic  fusion  of  the  varied  parts — in  a  word,  of  giving  them 
musically  complete  forms.  The  application  to  the  drama  then  developed 
just  as  naturally  as  the  choice  of  the  forms  selected  for  this  purpose. 

We  must  not  regard  the  use  here  of  variations,  even  passacaglias  and 
fugues,  as  an  attempt  to  be  "archaic."  It  would  be  even  more  erroneous 
to  conclude  that  this  work  has  any  relation  to  the  "Back-to-Something" 
movements,  which  were  actually  initiated  later.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
Berg  met  his  requirements  not  only  through  these  more  or  less  old 
forms,  but  created  forms  based  upon  new  principles,  such  for  example 
as  those  resting  for  a  foundation  on  one  "tone,"  one  "rhythm,"  one 
"chord,"  etc. 

A  further  example  of  the  inner  necessity  to  be  as  varied  and  many- 
sided  as  possible  is  present  in  the  relatively  numerous  interludes  resulting 
from  so  many  scene  changes.  To  scatter  transitions  or  intermezzos  would 
not  have  been  consistent  with  Berg's  idea  of  the  music-drama,  to  which, 
despite  his  respect  for  absolute  music,  he  strictly  adhered  in  all  matters 
pertaining  to  the  theater.  Even  here  he  was  impelled  to  aim  at  a  variety 
rich  in  contrast,  making  the  connective  music  sometimes  transitional, 
sometimes  giving  it  the  form  of  a  coda  or  at  times  of  an  introduction 
to  that  which  follows,  or  a  combination  of  the  two  latter.  Thus  he 
attempts  either  an  almost  imperceptible  connection  between  the  diverse 
parts  of  the  separate  musical  forms,  or  an  often  abrupt  juxtaposition. 
On  the  next  page  a  complete  dramatic  and  musical  perspective  gives 
the  relation  of  all  formal  events  in  Wozzeck: 


7 
SCHEME 

of  the 

Dramatic  and  Musical 

Forms  in  Wozzeck 

Dramatic 

Musical 

Act  I 

Exposition 

Wozzeck  and  his  relation  to 

Five  Character  Sketches 

his  environment 

Scene 

Scene 

1.  Suite 

i.  The  Captain 

2.  Rhapsody 

2.  Andres 

3.  Military  March  and  Cradle  Song 

3.  Marie 

4.  Passacaglia 

4.  The  Physician 

5.  Andante  Affettuoso 

5.  The  Drum-Major 

(quasi  Rondo) 

Act  II 

Denouement 

Wozzeck  is  gradually  convinced 

Symphony  in  five  movements 

of  Marie's  infidelity 

Scene 

Scene 

-i.  Wozzeck's  first  suspicion 

1.  Sonata  Form 

2.  Wozzeck  is  mocked 

2.  Fantasie  and  Fugue 

3.  Wozzeck  accuses  Marie 

3.  Largo 

4.  Marie  and  Drum-Major  dance 

4.  Scherzo 

5.  The  Drum-Major  trounces 

5.  Rondo  Martiale 

Wozzeck 

Act  III 

Catastrophe 

Wozzeck   murders  Marie  and  atones 

Six  Inventions 

through  suicide 

Scene 

Scene 

I.  Marie's  remorse 

1.  Invention  on  a  Theme 

2.  Death  of  Marie 

2.  Invention  on  a  Tone 

3.  Wozzeck  tries  to  forget 

3.  Invention  on  a  Rhythm 

4.  Wozzeck  drowns  in  the  pond 

4.  Invention  on  a  Six-tone  Chord 

(Instrumental  interlude  with  closed  curtain) 

5.  Marie's  son  plays  unconcerned 

5.  Invention  on  a  Persistent 

Rhythm  (Perpetuum  Mobile) 

8  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

III.  Analysis  of  the  Individual  Scenes 

ACT  I EXPOSITION 

Scene  i 

The  very  first  scene  of  the  opera  is  cast  as  a  suite,  apparently  because 
the  dialogue  here,  where  nothing  really  occurs,  is  made  up  of  diverse, 
loosely  connected  conversations.  It  was  natural  to  find  a  small  form  for 
each  one  of  these,  which  as  a  whole  group  constitute  a  series  of  small 
pieces,  that  is,  a  suite.  This  consists  largely  of  old  (or  at  least  more  or 
less  stylized)  forms,  and,  though  their  selection  might  have  been  deter- 
mined subconsciously,  the  result  is  not  accidental.  For  by  this  choice  the 
first  scene  gains,  even  musically,  the  appropriate  historical  color  which, 
naturally  enough,  the  composer  does  not  employ  elsewhere  in  Wozzeck,  a 
drama  essentially  of  no  particular  period. 

The  following  analysis  will  show  how  the  choice  of  these  small  forms 
accurately  corresponds  to  the  events  on  the  stage  and  how  their  union 
into  a  musico-dramatic  entity  is  thereby  facilitated.  But  even  in  the 
purely  musical  sense  strict  rules  are  generally  applied,  and  not  only  to 
the  most  prominent  melodic  episodes.  Every  new  tempo,  as  can  be  seen 
by  the  metronome  figures  in  the  score,  evolves  from  the  one  preceding  it, 
with  almost  mathematical  accuracy.3  In  the  instrumentation,  the  dif- 
ferent movements  are  distinguished  by  assigning  a  certain  instrumental 
group  to  each  as  an  obbligato,  their  combination  being  brought  into 
relation  with  the  events  on  the  stage.  Three-part  forms  are  used  mostly 
(prelude,  pavane,  gigue,  and  air) ;  the  reprises,  however,  are  not  mere 
repetitions  but  always  far-reaching  variations.  The  gavotte  and  the  two 
"doubles"  are  in  two-part  form;  the  cadences  are  free. 

The  first  movement  of  the  suite  is  a  prelude.  It  is  introduced  by 
two  short  chords  of  the  strings  interconnected  by  a  soft,  crescendo  roll 
of  the  small  drum.4  The  first  three  measures  are  used  later  in  this  scene 
in  the  manner  of  a  refrain.  Measure  four  brings  the  theme  of  the  Captain 
( Ex.    i )    whose  motif  constituents  yield  the  material  for  the  further 

construction  of  the  piece.  *1 

■* 

3  This  is  one  of  Berg's  most  consistently  applied  artistic  devices  and  assures  metric 
uniformity  to  whole  scenes,  indeed,  whole  acts. 

4  Berg  once  said  about  this  beginning:  "The  drum-roll  originally  was  intended 
to  accentuate  the  crescendo  between  the  two  chords.  It  was  to  be  purely  instrumental, 
that  is,  musical.  When  I  heard  the  part  for  the  first  time,  though,  I  was  surprised  to 
find  that  I  could  not  have  suggested  the  military  background  more  precisely  and 
concisely  than  through  this  roll  of  the  drum." 


A  Guide  to   Wozzeck 


Ex.  i 


f^P^U1 


etc. 


The  only  answer  Wozzeck  knows  is  the  stereotyped  "Jawohl,  Herr 
Hauptmann"   (Ex.  2),  which  becomes  especially  significant  as  a  char- 
Ex.  2 


3E 


3 


g^ 


* 


#£c 


Jawohl,  Hprr  Hftuptimftnnj 

acteristic,  rhythmic  motif.  The  succeeding  conversations  are  musically 
portrayed  through  the  forms  of  pavane,  gigue,  and  gavotte,  with  two 
doubles.  The  two  lascivious  meditations  of  the  Captain  are  spun  into 
cadenzas  (viola  and  contra-bassoon ) .  Wozzeck's  great  outburst  comes 
in  the  form  of  an  "air"  and  its  climax  is  the  cry:   "Wir  arme  Leut'  : 

Ex.  3 


SE 


VVir  arme  Leufc'    ' 

(Ex.  3)  which  is  really  the  most  important  motif  of  the  whole 
opera.  The  soothing  words  of  the  Captain  lead  into  the  reprise  of  the 
prelude  which  corresponds  to  a  repetition  in  the  conversation  and  appears 
in  the  form  of  a  crab-like  inversion.  The  transitional  music  uses  the 
principal  themes  of  the  suite  in  the  fashion  of  a  development  and  ends 
abruptly  after  a  stretto-like  climax. 

Scene  2 

The  sudden  interruption  and  quick  blotting  out  of  the  strettos  pre- 
pare us  for  a  different  world  in  the  next  scene.  The  narrow  and  musty 
barrack-room  fades  before  the  elemental  forces  of  the  open  field,  above 
which  arches  the  eerie  sky  of  a  late  afternoon.  The  music  of  this  scene, 
too,  departs  from  the  familiar  forms  of  the  one  preceding  and  seeks 
new  bases.  Its  unifying  principle  is  a  harmonic  one:  three  chords 
(Ex.  4)   make  up  the  skeletal  structure  of  this  scene.   In  tonal  music 

Ex.  4 


g 


EF5g     ^j^ 


*D= 


n 

one 


nr 


f«        ><*    f 


<DT 


10  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

this  principle  is  a  familiar  structural  medium;  in  Berg's  case,  where 
tonality  is  absent,  we  may  liken  the  functions  of  these  three  chords  to 
those  of  tonic,  dominant,  and  subdominant.  Of  course  the  manner  in 
which  the  chords  and  their  successions  are  employed  is  manifold  and 
varied  throughout. 

Since  the  composer  has  designated  the  musical  form  of  the  second 
scene  a  "rhapsody"  we  would  naturally  expect  to  find  a  structure  of 
free  fantasy,  like  a  potpourri,  in  accordance  with  the  well-known  patterns 
of  this  type  of  piece.  But  on  the  contrary,  Berg's  strong  leaning  towards 
orderly  form  has  led  him  even  here  to  create  a  structure  completely 
fulfilling  the  most  exacting  musical  strictures. 

In  addition  to  the  three-chord  motif  there  is  a  "Hunting  Song"5  by 
Andres,  Wozzeck's  friend,  which  forms  the  second  musical  component 
of  this  scene.  Its  color  is  derived  entirely  from  Wozzeck's  uncanny  reac- 
tion to  inanimate  nature  and  his  exulting  superstition.  In  this  scene  the 
"rhythmic  declamation"  introduced  by  Schoenberg  in  the  spoken 
choruses  of  Die  Gluckliche  Hand  appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  opera; 
we  shall  therefore  quote  Berg's  own  words  about  this  important  means 
of  expression: 

It  had  become  plain  that  this  method  (the  Sprechstimme)  of  treating  the  voice 
in  a  music-drama  not  only  strengthened  one  of  the  best  mediums  for  making  such 
a  work  comprehensible — namely  the  words — but  enriched  the  opera  by  the  addi- 
tion of  a  genuine  means  of  artistic  expression,  created  from  the  purest  sources  of 
music,  ranging  from  a  toneless  whisper  to  the  authentic  bel  parlare  of  far-reaching 
speech-melodies.  Thus,  moreover,  all  possibilities  of  form  in  absolute  music  that 
are  lost,  for  instance,  through  recitative,  may  be  preserved. 

This  scene  dies  away  on  a  military  signal  and  slowly  yields  to  the 
approaching  march  of  the  stage-band. 

Scene  3 

With  Ex.  5  we  have  the  opening  motif  of  the  military  march, 
which  is  important  later.  During  its  repetition  it  becomes  suddenly  in- 

5  This  hunting  song  is  an  example  of  the  composer's  ingenuity  in  establishing  a 
relationship  within  his  opera  between  formal  and  folk  music.  While  in  a  tonal  work  it 
is  a  mere  commonplace,  in  so-called  "atonal''  harmony  it  is  not  so  easy  to  make  that 
difference  in  plane  clear.  Here  it  was  accomplished  by  giving  an  obvious  primitiveness 
— practicable  even  in  atonal  harmony — to  all  popular  elements.  Other  means  that 
might  be  noted  are  a  preference  for  symmetrical  construction  of  periods  and  phrases, 
harmonic  construction  by  thirds  and  fourths,  a  melodic  line  in  which  the  whole-tone 
scale  and  the  perfect  fourth  play  an  important  part,  whereas  in  the  atonal  music  of 
the  Viennese  school  diminished  and  augmented  intervals  predominate.  So-called 
"polytonality"   is  also  a  means  of  building  up  primitive  harmonic  effects. 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 


11 


Ex.  5 


hi   =  If 


m 


m 


pBp 


rtc. 


audible  when  the  window  is  shut.  Strings  and  voice  bring  a  new  sig- 
nificant motif   (Ex.  6),  the  "lament"  of  Marie,  which  may  be  con- 
Ex.  6 


sidered  a  sort  of  introduction  to  her  "Cradle  Song."  The  characteristic 
fourths  of  the  latter  are  anticipated  melodically  by  timpani  and  harp; 
harmonically,  by.  the  chords  of  the  second  inversion  which  prevail 
throughout. 

The  song  rigidly  observes  the  two-strophe  form  and  is  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  and  significant  melodic  inspirations  of  the  opera.  A  lively  first 
part  is  followed  by  a  very  much  slower  second  whose  beginning  has 
already  been  foreshadowed  in  the  introduction  to  the  song.  The  second 
verse  repeats  the  two  antecedents  literally,  and  the  consequents  in  great 
variation;  it  closes  with  an  instrumental  coda  which  is  again  based  on 
the  beginning.  From  this  a  cadential  transition   (Ex.  7)    is  developed 


Ex.  7 


as  an  ending,  one  of  the  most  important  motifs  of  the  opera.  The  open 
fifths  represent  the  somewhat  aimless  waiting  of  Marie,  a  waiting  that  is 
terminated  only  by  her  death.6  The  repetition  of  Ex.  7  is  interrupted 
by  the  swiftly  intruding  figure  of  Wozzeck  suddenly  knocking  at  the 
window    (Ex.  8).  From  here  on  the  musical  structure   abandons   all 

6  This  device  (used  as  a  sort  of  leit-motif)  recurs  several  times  later  on.  Similar 
repetitions  are  made  with  other  motifs,  applying  at  times  to  certain  characters  and 
sometimes  to  certain  situations.  The  coordination  and  relation  of  recurrent  motifs 
are  thus  employed  as  another  means  of  establishing  unity  in  the  opera. 


12 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 


Ex.8 

bastig 


3E 


hfr.T.* 


? 


poco  marc. 


formal  schemes  of  unity  and  suggests  the  free,  unconstrained  technique 
of  composition  of  the  post-Wagnerian  style,  which  was  so  prone  to 
develop  long  stretches  of  the  text  in  this  manner,  using  the  leit-motif 
only  as  a  means  of  support.  I  emphasize  this  particular  idiosyncrasy  here, 
because  it  is  the  only  place  in  Wozzeck  where  it  occurs.  The  composer 
deliberately  sought  to  create  an  alternation  through  contrast  of  this 
free  structure  with  the  rigid  forms  encompassing  it.  A  short  thematic 
development  leads  us  into  the  next  scene. 

Scene  4 

The  line  of  the  twelve-tone  passacaglia  theme  is  presented  in  Ex.  9. 
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  note  that  its  development  by  variation  is  not 

Ex.  9 


9B 


^^^^(jo^^^l'o^l 


achieved  mechanically  or  even  by  means  of  pure,  absolute  music.  First 
of  all,  it  bears  the  closest  relation  to  the  dramatic  action.  Even  the 
introduction  of  the  twelve-tone  series  has  a  basis  in  the  drama.  The 
series  appears  for  the  first  time  with  the  opening  words  of  the  scene, 
expressing  the  speech  of  the  physician  though  concealed  in  the  animated 
rubato  of  a  'cello  recitative.  Twenty-one  variations  follow  which  are  true 
variations,  dealing  with  one  and  the  same  theme,  with  the  same  fixed 
ideas  of  the  physician,  which  find  their  echo  even  when  Wozzeck,  their 
victim,  speaks  in  his  torture. 

In  the  parlando,  apparently  entirely  improvised,  with  which  the 
doctor  accompanies  the  recitative-like  introduction  of  the  passacaglia- 
theme,  two  motifs  occur  which  are  important  in  view  of  what  follows. 
First  comes  the  phrase  (Ex.  10)  which  grows  out  of  the  end  of  Ex.  9 


Was  er-lfib'  kh,   Wozzedi? 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck  13 

and  through  its  first  part  ( mostly  presented  in  the  position  F  -  Ab  -  D ) 
gains  a  significant  function  as  the  connecting  link  between  the  variations, 
more  often  entering  into  their  inner  facture.  From  Ex.    1 1    a  motif  is 

Ex.  1 1 

Caxxidbile  ,r  ,--i 

_  _    _ 1  »W— ■  L—  I 


^-tOJ'tffi'ft'T  CP^' 


Gcb'  khihmda-fur  al-k  Ta-ge  drei  Grosch£n?        Wozaeck! 

developed  that  characterizes  the  conceited,  scientific  attitude  of  the  phys- 
ician, and  is  later  also  employed  for  contrapuntal  treatment.  The  whole 
chain  of  variations,  with  its  deliberate  gradation  of  intensity,  represents 
the  growing  scientific  megalomania  of  the  Doctor.  When  finally,  in  the 
last  variation,  he  breaks  out  in  a  cry  of  desire  for  immortality,  the  most 
vaulting  of  his  delusions,  the  theme,  more  or  less  concealed  during  the 
passacaglia,  surges  up  with  greater  clarity,  harmonized  in  chorale  fashion 
in  the  full  orchestra,  only  to  be  quickly  subdued  after  a  repetition  of 
chords  (Ex.  4)  and  to  return  to  the  matter-of-fact  dialogue  of  the 
beginning  of  the  scene.  Over  a  timpani  roll  on  D#  fragments  of  Ex.  10 
bring  on  the  close  of  the  scene. 

Scene  5 

With  its  sixty-two  measures  the  last  scene  of  this  act  is  the  shortest, 
a  characteristic  it  shares  with  the  other  final  scenes.  It  is  the  most  im- 
portant in  the  development  of  the  plot,  for  here  Marie  is  seduced  by  the 
Drum-Major,  an  event  that  is  the  immediate  cause  of  the  conflict  and 
tragic  catastrophe.  Musically  the  scene  characterizes  the  brutality  of  the 
Drum-Major.  Even  Marie  to  a  certain  extent  adopts  the  language  of 
her  abductor,  her  part  containing  many  phrases  that  suggest  his  themes. 

The  important   theme  of  this   scene    (Ex.    12),   fundamentally   an 


"Andante  affettuoso,"  frequently  interrupted  by  short  interpolations, 
recurs  always  with  but  slight  variation.  It  is  therefore  not  inaccurate  to 
regard  its  form  as  a  sort  of  free  rondo.  On  the  other  hand  a  certain  three- 
part  structure  is  also  evident,  which  is  obviously  related  to  the  events 
on   the  stage    (the   preliminaries,   the   seduction,   and   the   aftermath). 


14 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 


Although  the  rondo  theme  is  well  marked  in  the  first  and  third  sections, 
in  the  middle  it  is  considerably  overshadowed  by  the  attack  motif  (Ex. 
13).  When  the  Drum-Major  has  disappeared  into  the  house  with  Marie 

Ex.  13 


1  m  ^  i^lu 


etc. 


the  theme  (Ex.  12)  is  heard  across  the  empty  stage,  in  distorted  rhythm. 
With  a  mighty  crescendo,  the  chord  of  Ex.  14,  sounded  in  an  increasingly 
rapid  tremolando  over  the  organ-point  G-D,  brings  this  important  act 
devoted  to  the  exposition  to  a  close. 

Ex.  14 


&  0  i 


SE 


SB 


ACT  II DENOUEMENT 


Scene  1 


The  first  musical  section  of  the  second  act  is  in  sonata  form.  It  is 
no  mere  coincidence  that  the  three  characters  in  this  scene,  Marie,  her 
child,  and  Wozzeck,  serve  as  the  basis  for  the  three  thematic  groups  of 
a  sonata  exposition:  the  main,  second,  and  closing  themes.  The  wnVle 
dramatic  development  of  this  "Jewel  Scene,"  the  twofold  recurrence  of 
certain  situations,  then  the  collision  of  the  main  characters,  facilitates  a 
strictly  musical  division,  in  which  the  first  reprise  follows  immediately 
after  the  exposition,  clearly  repeating  it  although  in  an  abridged  form 
and  with  variations. 

The  development,  just  that  part  of  the  scene  in  which  the  main 
figures  are  in  conflict,  leads  to  the  climax  of  the  sonata,  the  motif  that 
permeates  the  whole  piece,  the  recurrent  "Wir  arme  Leut'  "  (Ex.  3). 
The  words  of  Wozzeck  "Here,  Marie,  is  money  once  more,  my  wages," 
etc.,  are  sung  to  a  held  C-major  triad  of  the  orchestra.  The  rest  of  the 
music  of  this  scene  and  of  the  intermission  that  follows  (but,  musically, 
really  relates  to  and  completes  it)  shows  how  the  transition  from  the 
chord  to  the  last  reprise  is  effected.  The  transformation  music  is  given 
independent  life,  that  is,  becomes  a  small  unit,  most  palpably  because 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 


15 


at  the  moment  where  the  transformation  sets  in,  a  harp  glissando 
suggests  a  beginning;  the  end  is  indicated  when  the  effect  is  repeated, 
the  first  time  descending  fortissimo,  the  second  ascending  pianissimo, 
whereby  the  connection  with  the  next  scene  is  made. 

Scene  2 

This  scene  also  brings  three  people  on  the  stage,  but  their  relation 
is  not  as  close  as  that  of  the  three  members  of  the  family  group  in  the 
preceding  one.  Whereas  the  first  could  employ  the  sonata,  a  musical 
form  whose  parts  are  organically  connected  like  that  of  a  family,  here 
the  form  is  constructed  of  more  alien,  disparate  elements,  a  fantasy  and 
fugue  with  three  themes.  The  definite  independence  of  the  motifs  of 
these  themes,  in  contrast  to  the  closer  melodic  interrelation  of  those  in 
the  foregoing  sonata,  makes  the  strictly  fugal  form  necessary,  its  rigidity 
somewhat  relieved  by  the  use  of  motifs  that  are  already  familiar.  We 
find  that  of  the  Captain  ( Ex.  i ) ,  which  dominates  the  first  scene  at 
the  very  beginning  of  the  opera,  then  a  motif  of  the  Physician  ( Ex.  1 5 ) 


Ex.  15 


33E 


nielli!  m 


etc. 


recurrent  from  the  fourth  scene  of  Act  I,  and  finally  a  Wozzeck  theme 
(Ex.  16),  which  is  clearly  suggested  in  the  preceding  sonata-form, 
though  not  presented  literally  there. 


Ex.  16 


r— -3 1     f— 5 . 


Scene  3 

The  slow  movement  of  this  symphonic  act  is  a  Largo.  Aside  from 
the  obvious  thematic  coordination  which  makes  it  a  complete  movement, 
we  find  this  idiosyncrasy:  the  instrumentation  is  that  of  a  chamber 
symphony  and  corresponds  exactly  to  that  employed  by  Arnold  Schoen- 
berg  in  his  first  Kammersymphonie.  Thus  Berg  does  homage  here  to 
his  teacher  and  master.  The  introduction  and  close  of  the  Largo  furnish 
another  example  of  how  coherence,  usually  achieved  by  returning  to 
the  main  key,  can  be  gained  by  other  means.  The  clarinet  figures  ap- 


16  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

parently  quickly  departing  from  the  fugal  thematic  material  of  the  pre- 
ceding scene  lead  over  to  the  beginning  of  the  Largo,  and  become  fixed 
as  the  first  harmonic  foundations  of  its  theme. 

The  Largo  closes  with  the  same  harmony,  which  in  retrogressive 
movement  again  forms  the  very  clarinet  figures  from  which  the  chord 
developed.  Moreover,  these  clarinet  figures  also  lead  into  the  transforma- 
tion-music which  introduces  the  next  scene  with  a  slow  country  dance. 

Scene  4. 

In  the  "Landler"  and  in  the  other  dance-music  there  are  passages 
that  seem  to  have  a  dissonance  not  merely  within  a  tonality,  a  dissonance 
rather  like  the  sounding  together  of  several  pieces  of  music  in  different 
keys.  This  effect,  arising  from  primitive  "polytonality,"  is  of  course 
deliberate,  but  not  arbitrary;  it  is  derived  not  only  from  the  dramatic 
situations,  but  also  from  the  rationale  of  the  music.  For  example:  the 
antecedent  of  a  "Landler"  in  G  minor  according  to  the  rules  may  pro- 
gress to  the  dominant  (D  major)  or  return  to  the  tonic.  Since  both  these 
forms  occur  simultaneously  (natural  enough  in  a  drunken,  carefree 
tavern-band!)  the  sense  of  confusion  results.  This  effect  is  sustained 
when  one  part  of  the  band  modulates  to  the  dominant,  and  returns 
properly  to  the  tonic  (G  minor),  while  the  other  part,  also  quite  in 
conformity  to  rule,  modulates  at  the  same  time  to  a  related  major  key 
(Eb  major).  It  is  indeed  a  miracle  that  they  should  find  themselves 
together  again  at  the  end  of  the  Landler! 

The  tavern  scene  introduced  by  the  Landler  corresponds  to  the 
scherzo  in  the  dramatic  symphony  that  this  second  act  represents.  The 
Landler  is  the  first  idea  of  the  scherzo.  The  journeyman's  song  represents 
the  first  trio;  the  waltz  of  the  ale-house  band,  the  second  scherzo;  the 
hunting  chorus  of  young  fellows — the  middle  section  of  the  whole — a 
second  trio.  In  accordance  with  the  usual  construction  of  such  scherzo 
movements  (as  in  for  example  those  of  Schumann's  symphonies)  a 
repetition  of  the  first  three-part  scherzo-group  follows.  To  be  sure  the 
repetition  of  these  three  small  forms  (Landler,  song,  waltz)  is  not  literal 
but  much  varied,  corresponding  to  the  course  of  the  action.  The  Landler, 
for  example,  though  exactly  repeated,  is  placed  in  an  entirely  new 
environment.  The  journeyman's  song  which  represented  the  first  trio 
is  so  changed  in  its  repetition  that  the  fundamental  harmonies  are  split 
up  to  make  a  chorale  melody  in  half  notes,  which,  played  by  the  bom- 
bardon, lays  the  foundation  for  a  "melodrama."  This  melodrama,  the 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck  17 

good-natured  parody  of  a  sermon,  is  on  the  one  hand  the  repeated  first 
trio,  and  on  the  other  a  regular  (but  parodied)  five-part  chorale  tran- 
scription. 

The  repetition  finally  of  the  tavern-band  waltz  occurs  not  only  as  a 
waltz,  but  in  an  extended  form,  a  symbolic  development  for  full  or- 
chestra, serving  at  the  same  time  as  the  transformation-music  to  the 
next  scene. 

Scene  5 

The  transformation  music  comes  to  a  sudden  stop  with  the  "snoring 
chorus"  of  the  soldiers  in  the  guard  room  based  upon  the  chords  of  Ex.  4. 
Intended  as  a  natural  sound,  it  is  heard  at  first  before  the  curtain  rises. 
The  "Rondo-Martiale"  which  brings  this  act  to  a  close  is  then  intro- 
duced. 

The  scene  presents  the  conflict  between  the  Drum-Major  and  the 
jealous  Wozzeck,  who  is  finally  defeated.  (The  tussle  that  takes  place 
is  musically  identical  with  the  struggle  between  the  Drum-Major  and 
Marie  in  the  last  scene  of  the  preceding  act,  which  ended  with  her  sur- 
render. Here  again  is  a  device  for  achieving  coherence. ) 

The  dramatic  similarity  of  the  two  act-endings  would  of  itself  have 
brought  about  a  musical  parallel.  In  the  passionate  Andante  of  the 
earlier  episode  the  rondo  form  is  merely  suggested,  but  here  in  the  scene 
that  unfolds  according  to  military  regulations  and  discipline,  the  strictest 
rules  are  applied  to  the  construction  of  a  rondo  on  the  theme  ( Ex.  17). 

Ex.  17  * 

1 


ji  i^Qjf1'^ 


etc. 

The  act  closes  on  the  chord  of  Ex.  14,  which  is  used  in  all  the  act- 
endings.  It  gradually  resolves  into  its  constituents,  leaving  the  low  B  as 
the  final  sound.  To  anticipate,  it  might  be  mentioned  that  this  low  B 
which  accompanies  the  prophetic  last  words:  "Er  blut',''  "Einer  nach 
dem  Andern,"  is  significant  from  the  dramatic  point  of  view  in  one  of 
the  important  later  scenes  and~  that  it  also  acquires  a  structural  function. 

ACT  III CATASTROPHE 

Scene  1 

As  has  been  said,  the  first  scene  of  the  third  act  contains  an  invention 
on  a  theme.  The  severity  of  the  architecture    (a  phrase  intentionally 


18  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

used  by  Berg  in  this  connection)  leads  to  the  following  construction:  the 
two-part  theme,  consisting  of  antecedent  and  consequent,  has  seven 
measures ;  it  recurs  seven  times  in  varied  forms ;  moreover  the  concluding 
double  fugue,  corresponding  to  this  two-part  form,  has  two  seven-tone 
themes.7  The  principle  of  this  construction  is  taken  from  the  poetic  text, 
which,  throughout  the  scene,  as  well  as  in  the  theme,  contrasts  Marie's 
objective  reading  of  the  Bible  with  her  subjective  reflections.  There  are 
further  musical  allusions  to  the  text  in  details.  For  instance,  the  tonality 
of  the  fifth  variation  set  off  against  the  prevailing  atonality  of  the  work 
lends  it  a  characteristic  and  delicate  symbolism  of  the  transcendental 
world  of  fairy-tales.  The  introduction  of  the  persecution  motif  (Ex.  8) 
in  the  sixth  variation  takes  place  in  the  manner  of  a  leit-motif  supporting 
Marie's  speech  on  the  absence  of  Wozzeck. 

Scene  2 

The  low  B  of  the  contrabasses,  which  was  heard  in  the  final  chord 
of  the  fugue  (also  as  the  last  tone  of  the  important  concluding  cadence 
of  the  second  act),  now  becomes  the  unifying  factor,  the  coordinating 
principle  of  the  murder  scene.  It  appears  here  again  in  the  greatest  variety 
of  ways,  as  an  organ-point,  as  a  stationary  middle  or  upper  voice, 
doubled  in  many  octaves  and  heard  in  all  conceivable  registers  and 
colors.  Finally  when  the  murder  of  Marie  occurs  to  the  fortissimo  roll 
of  the  timpani,  all  her  important  musical  motifs  are  sounded  in  precipi- 
tate succession  over  this  organ  point  of  B — as  in  the  moment  of  death  all 
the  important  occurrences  of  life  are  believed  to  pass  rapidly  and  in  distor- 
tion through  the  mind  of  the  dying  person:  the  cradle-song  of  her  first 
scene,  reminiscences  of  the  jewel  scene  in  the  second  act,  even  of  the 
Drum-Major,  of  the  lament  on  her  misery  which  finally  melts  into  the 
motif  in  fifths,  the  theme  of  her  vain  waiting. 

The  brief  transformation  music  brings  this  underlying  B  forward  once 
more.  This  time  it  is  employed  as  a  unison,  the  only  note  of  the 
scale,  present  in  almost  all  the  instruments  of  the  full  orchestra,  begin- 
ning with  the  softest  imaginable,  the  muted  horn,  and  finally  evolving 
to  its  highest  powers  through  the  entrance,  one  after  the  other,  of  each 
member  of  the  ensemble,  except  the  percussion.  It  is  to  be  observed  that 

7  It  is  of  course  very  easy  to  poke  fun  at  the  mathematics  of  this  form.  Thus  on 
the  occasion  of  Wozzeck's  first  concert  presentation  a  critic  discussed  this  scene,  which, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  was  not  given.  Even  though  no  note  of  that  music  had  yet  been 
heard  the  clairvoyant  critic  could  attest  and  already  communicate  to  his  readers  how 
badly  such  a  mathematical  division  stood  the  test,  how  ridiculous  it  was. 


a 


ON 


V-i 


G 
O 

-t-J 

u 

p 

o 

u 

+-> 
to 

in 

u 

O 

G 


G 
> 

< 

O 
G 

G 

•  T— I 

<U 

Q 


<u 

a 

GO 


u 

< 

<o 

i 


On 


u 

G~ 

O 


o 

a. 

</) 

Ui 

<~G 
<u 

O 

O 
G 

•    T- 1 
+-> 

a 
> 

u 
< 

o 

G 
oS 

G 

GO 

<u 

Q 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck  19 

these  consecutive  entrances  do  not  occur  at  regular  intervals,  but  follow 
a  peculiar  rhythmic  principle.  The  entrances  of  the  winds  as  well  as 
those  of  the  strings  make  distinct  rhythms,  interlocking  in  the  form  of  a 
canon  at  the  distance  of  a  quarter  note.  The  apparent  irregularity  so 
created,  of  which  the  listener  is,  of  course,  as  little  aware  as  of  the 
logical  arrangement  of  the  entrances,  seems  to  breathe  an  exceptionally 
strong  life  into  this  crescendo  tone. 

Scene  3 

The  rhythm  just  mentioned  is  of  course  not  accidental.  Like  the 
chord  ( Ex.  1 8 )  that  first  leads  to  this  crescendo  climax,  it  is  of  important 

Ex.  18 


fe 


fp 


BEE 


o^ 


thematic  significance.  This  rhythm  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  new 
scene,  and,  conspicuous  in  every  measure,  guarantees  a  definite  unity. 
To  be  sure,  it  is  not  applied  in  the  form  of  a  monotonous  ostinato,  but 
in  a  way  that  permits  the  greatest  metrical  differentiation  within  a  quasi 
rhythmical  uniformity.  Thus  melodies  are  based  on  this  rhythm,  as  in 
the  quick  polka  of  the  intoxicated  boys  and  girls  which  opens  the  scene; 
or  the  rhythm  may  appear  in  the  accompaniment.  Furthermore  it  is 
expanded,  contracted,  shifted,  changed  by  different  time  signatures, 
divided  into  triplets,  and  finally  interlocked  in  two  and  more  canonic 
entrances. 

Scene  4 

A  further  example  of  such  exploitation  of  musical  material,  first 
tonal,  now  rhythmical,  may  be  found  in  the  fourth  scene,  which  is  based 
solely  on  a  chord,  or  rather,  a  group  of  six  tones  (Ex.  18).  This  six-tone 
chord,  as  has  been  pointed  out,  has  already  been  announced  in  the 
earlier  brief  transformation  music  with  its  tremendous  dynamic  cres- 
cendo on  B.  It  is  also  the  harmonic  completion  for  the  close  of  the  pre- 
ceding scene,  that  is,  of  the  corresponding  transformation.  In  spite  of 
the  persistence  of  this  six-tone  group,  variety  is  achieved  here  by  sub- 
jecting the  chord,  as  was  done  with  the  single  tone  and  the  rhythm,  to 
all  conceivable  alterations,  such  as  divisions,  inversions,  replacement  of 
groups,  and  changes  in  register  of  all  or  a  part  of  its  tones.  Structural 
unity  in  this  piece,  on  the  other  hand,  is  assured  by  the  old  reliable,  sym- 


20  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

metrical,  three-part  form,  inasmuch  as  in  the  first  and  third  parts  the 
chord  occurs  in  all  its  variations,  naturally,  on  only  one  of  the  steps  of 
the  chromatic  scale,  while  in  the  middle  section  it  works  its  way  to  all 
the  others.  Finally  (in  the  third  part)  when  it  reverts  to  its  original 
position,  to  its  tonal  center,  so  to  speak,  this  chord  at  the  same  time  forms 
the  harmonic  transition  to  the  one  that  follows,  whose  D  minor  indicates 
the  resolution  of  the  former.8 

Interlude 

A  somewhat  longer  orchestra  piece  succeeds  the  fourth  scene.  From 
the  dramatic  point  of  view  it  should  be  considered  the  epilogue  to 
Wozzeck's  suicide,  a  gesture  made  by  the  author  outside  the  circle  of 
events  seen  on  the  stage;  even  as  an  appeal  to  the  audience  in  their 
role  of  humanity's  protagonist.  The  music  of  this  orchestral  interlude  is  a 
thematic  development  of  all  the  important  forms  used  in  relation  to 
Wozzeck. 

The  form  is  three-part;  the  coordinating  principle,  for  a  change,  is 
tonality  (D  minor).  This  D-minor  tonality  (whose- introduction  into  the 
harmony  has  just  been  discussed)  undergoes  such  unlimited  expansion 
as  to  permit  its  every  possibility  to  be  finally  and  exhaustively  developed. 
And  this  because  in  the  middle  section  of  the  piece,  where  the  fantasia- 
like entrances,  in  the  manner  of  anticipatory  strettos,  crowd  upon  one 
another  to  a  climax,  a  harmonic  tonal  combination  results  as  if  of  its 
own  volition.  Though  it  contains  all  the  twelve  tones,  in  the  field  of  this 
tonality  it  operates  only  as  a  dominant  which,  sounding  naturally  and 
harmonically,  leads  back  to  the  D  minor  of  the  reprise. 

Scene  5 

The  scene  with  the  children  which  concludes  this  act,  in  its  eighth- 
note  activity,  persisting  from  the  first  to  the  last  measure   (one  could 

8  It  is  evident  that  such  music,  based  primarily  upon  harmonies  and  chordal 
combinations  whatever  its  melodic  twists,  retains  a  strongly  impressionistic  character. 
This  is  appropriate  for  dramatic  events  concerned  exclusively  with  nature  and  natural 
episodes.  (For  instance,  the  waves  of  the  pond  closing  over  the  drowning  Wozzeck, 
the  croaking  toads,  the  rising  moon,  etc.)  Nevertheless  Berg  made  no  attempt  here 
to  ape  that  style  which  one  attributes  to  Debussy.  Such  tone-painting  of  nature  as 
one  may  seem  to  find  in  these  and  in  other  places  of  the  opera  appears  also  in  the 
music  of  the  Classicists  and  Romanticists,  and  in  the  nature-impressionism  of  Wagner. 
Actually,  what  seems  impressionistic  here  is  far  removed  from  vague,  illogical  sound- 
effects.  Everything  is  constructed  according  to  a  musically  determined  law.  In  this 
case,  the  thematic  six-tone  group  is  the  basis,  and  in  the  second  scene  of  the  first 
act  it  is  an  ostinato  three-chord  succession. 


A  Guide  to  Wozzeck  21 

really  call  this  a  "perpetuum  mobile"),  follows  a  certain  rule,  really 
one  of  those  systems  of  norms  that  Berg  was  so  often  obliged  to  "create 
in  order  that  he  might  follow  them."  The  scene  portrays  the  behavior 
and  play  of  proletarian  children,  one  of  whom  is  the  infant  of  Marie 
and  Wozzeck,  still  unaware  that  it  has  just  been  orphaned.  Though 
here  a  cadence  is  clearly  made  to  the  final  chord  (Ex.  14),  the  music 
seems  still  to  be  going  forward.  It  does  indeed  go  on!  As  a  matter  of 
fact  the  first  measure  of  the  opera  could  be  directly  attached  to  these 
concluding  bars,  whereby  the  circle  would  be  closed. 

# 

Postscript  by  Alban  Berg  (1931) 

It  is  now  ten  years  since  I  started  to  compose  Wozzeck;  already  so 
much  has  been  written  about  it  that  I  can  hardly  say  anything  without 
plagiarizing  my  critics.  I  should  like,  however,  to  correct  an  error  that 
arose  in  1925  soon  after  it  was  produced  and  that  has  spread  widely  since. 

I  have  never  entertained  the  idea  of  reforming  the  structure  of  opera 
through  Wozzeck.  Neither  when  I  started  nor  when  I  completed  the 
work  did  I  consider  it  a  model  for  further  efforts  by  any  other  composer. 
I  never  assumed  or  expected  that  Wozzeck  should  become  the  basis  of  a 
school. 

I  simply  wanted  to  compose  good  music;  to  develop  musically  the 
contents  of  Georg  Buchner's  immortal  drama;  to  translate  his  poetic 
language  into  music.  Other  than  that,  when  I  decided  to  write  an 
opera,  my  only  intention,  as  related  to  the  technique  of  composition,  was 
to  give  the  theater  what  belongs  to  the  theater.  The  music  was  to  be  so 
formed  that  at  each  moment  it  would  fulfill  its  duty  of  serving  the  action. 
Even  more,  the  music  should  be  prepared  to  furnish  whatever  the  action 
needed  for  transformation  into  reality  on  the  stage.  The  function  of  a 
composer  is  to  solve  the  problems  of  an  ideal  stage  director.  On  the  other 
hand  this  objective  should  not  prejudice  the  development  of  the  music 
as  an  entity,  absolute,  and  purely  musical.  No  externals  should  interfere 
with  its  individual  existence. 

That  I  accomplished  these  purposes  by  a  use  of  musical  forms  more 
or  less  ancient  (considered  by  critics  as  one  of  the  most  important  of 
my  ostensible  reforms  of  the  opera)  was  a  natural  consequence  of  my 
method.  It  was  first  necessary  to  make  a  selection  from  Buchner's  twenty- 


22  A  Guide  to  Wozzeck 

five  loosely  constructed,  partly  fragmentary  scenes  for  the  libretto.  Repe- 
titions not  lending  themselves  to  musical  variation  were  avoided.  Finally, 
the  scenes  were  brought  together,  arranged,  and  grouped  in  acts.  The 
problem  therefore  became  more  musical  than  literary,  and  had  to  be 
solved  by  the  laws  of  musical  structure  rather  than  by  the  rules  of 
dramaturgy. 

It  was  impossible  to  shape  the  fifteen  scenes  I  selected  in  different 
manners  so  that  each  would  retain  its  musical  coherence  and  individ- 
uality and  at  the  same  time  follow  the  customary  method  of  development 
appropriate  to  the  literary  content.  No  matter  how  rich  structurally, 
no  matter  how  aptly  it  might  fit  the  dramatic  events,  after  a  number  of 
scenes  so  composed  the  music  would  inevitably  create  monotony.  The 
effect  would  become  boring  with  a  series  of  a  dozen  or  more  formally 
composed  entr'actes  which  offered  nothing  but  this  type  of  illustrative 
music,  and  boredom,  of  course,  is  the  last  thing  one  should  experience 
in  the  theater. 

I  obeyed  the  necessity  of  giving  each  scene  and  each  accompanying 
piece  of  entr'acte  music — prelude,  postlude,  connecting  link  or  interlude 
— an  unmistakable  aspect,  a  rounded  off  and  finished  character.  It  was 
imperative  to  use  everything  essential  for  the  creation  of  individualizing 
characteristics  on  the  one  hand,  and  coherence  on  the  other.  Hence  the 
much  discussed  utilization  of  both  old  and  new  musical  forms  and  their 
application  in  an  absolute  music. 

The  appearance  of  these  forms  in  opera  was  to  some  degree  unusual, 
even  new.  Nevertheless  novelty,  pathbreaking,  was  not  my  conscious 
intention.  I  must  reject  the  claim  of  being  a  reformer  of  the  opera 
through  such  innovations,  although  I  do  not  wish  to  depreciate  my 
work  thereby,  since  others  who  do  not  know  it  so  well  can  do  that  much 
better. 

What  I  do  consider  my  particular  accomplishment  is  this.  No  one 
in  the  audience,  no  matter  how  aware  he  may  be  of  the  musical  forms 
contained  in  the  framework  of  the  opera,  of  the  precision  and  logic  with 
which  it  has  been  worked  out,  no  one,  from  the  moment  the  curtain 
parts  until  it  closes  for  the  last  time,  pays  any  attention  to  the  various 
fugues,  inventions,  suites,  sonata  movements,  variations,  and  passacaglias 
about  which  so  much  has  been  written.  No  one  gives  heed  to  anything 
but  the  vast  social  implications  of  the  work  which  by  far  transcend  the 
personal  destiny  of  Wozzeck.  This,  I  believe,  is  my  achievement. 


Date  Due 


MUSI 


m 

100 


. 


..- 


■VRS 


