CUuaru  itf 

Ella  Smith  Elbert 

JitJltauumum 

Zptherine  Conan 

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2014 


https://archive.org/details/advocateofpeaceuOOburr 


CONTENTS. 

The  Sea  Fight,  by  Rev.  E.  Davis,   

Noah  Worcester,  by  W.  Chanmng,  M.  D.       -   {Jg 

»  In  time  of  Peace  prepare  for  War,"  by  the  Editor,  -  -  "  -  "  "  gH 
On  the  Education  of  Children  for  War,  by  J.  F.  Erving,  M.  D.  -  -  -  -  JW 
The  Inipietv  of  the  Military,  by  Rev.  SamuelJ.  May,  - 

William  Perm,  by  P.  S.  Duponceau,  L.  L.  D.        -  jjj 
Universal  Brotherhood,  -      -      -      -      -      -      "      "  "      "  1ir 

Letter  from  Juniper  Hedgehog,  to  Elihu  Burritt,     -------  110 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Oxford,  Eng.  -  

Friendly  International  Addresses,  -  - 

Peace  Movements  Abroad,      -      --      --      --      -  ~      ~  197 

Peace  Movements  at  Home,    -      -      -  - 

ADVOCATE  OF  PEACE, 

AND  UNIVERSAL  BROTHERHOOD, 

Vol.  L  MAY,  1846.  No.  V. 


THE  SEA  FIGHT. 

BY  REV.  E.  DAVIS. 

Note.  The  naval  battle  between  the  United  States,  Com.  Decatur,  and  the  Mace- 
donian, Capt.  Cardon,  was  fought  on  a  beautiful  Sabbath  morning  in  Oct  1812.  The  bat- 
tle was  obstinate  and  bloody,  but  resulted,  according  to  the  sanctified  language  of  war, 
in  "  a  splendid  victory"  on  the  side  of  the  United  States. 

The  clear  blue  heavens  were  bent  above, 

The  light  waves  danced  below, 
Where  a  war-ship  sternly,  proudly  flung 

Defiance  at  her  foe. 

That  foe  as  proudly,  sternly  hurled 

The  murderous  challenge  back, 
And  swept,  like  lightning,  to  the  charge, 

Upon  her  gleaming  track. 

And  shameless,  on  each  vessel's  deck, 

A  priest  kneels  down  to  pray 
That  God  will  wing  their  bolts  with  death, 

And  speed  them  on  their  way. 

See  !  see  !  war's  vivid  lightnings  flash, 

His  deep,  hoarse  thunders  roll, 
While  curses  loud  are  vollied  forth, 

And  hate  knows  no  control, 

And  mortal  cries  of  agony — 

The  stifled,  dying  prayei-, 
And  bitter  tears,  and  groans,  and  blood, 

Are  all  commingled  there. 

4  Tis  done.    The  storm  of  iron  hail  ^ 

Sweeps  their  broad  decks  no  more ; 
Cleaved,  throbbing  human  hearts  have  ceased, 

Their  fountains  warm  to  pour. 

Those  mighty  ships,  that,  giant-like, 

The  mountain  waves  could  leap, 
Like  thunder-riven  sepulchres, 

Lie  helpless  on  the  deep. 
OLD  SERIES,  VOL.  VII.  8 


106 


NOAH  WORCESTER. 


And  this  is  glory  !    Far  and  wide, 
Fame's  echoing  trump  is  heard ; 

And  lo  !  with  fevered,  frenzied  joy, 
A  nation's  pulse  is  stirred: 

And  e'en  the  very  church  of  Christ 

Takes  up  the  hateful  cry, 
And  shouts  her  praise  for  victory, 

Up  to  the  peaceful  sky. 

Nor  she  alone  ; — through  all  their  deeps, 

The  fiery  hosts  of  hell 
Howl  peans  to  the  God  of  war, 

Whose  work  they  love  so  well. 


NOAH  WORCESTER. 

BY  WALTER  CHANNING,  M.  D. 

The  readers  of  the  Advocate  cannot  but  be  grateful  to  its  Editor,  for 
the  beautiful  print  of  this  early  and  late  friend  of  Peace,  which  stands  at 
the  head  of  the  last  number,  and  those  who  are  not  subscribers  would  at 
once  become  so,  could  they  but  look  upon  that  beautiful  face.    The  spirit 
of  Peace,  the  dove  from  heaven,  has  found  its  home  there,  and  you  see 
that  it  will  never  be  scared  away.    What  so  firm,  what  so  immovable  as 
this  principle  of  Peace  !    It  is  the  victory  over  self,  over  the  brutal,  over 
the  satanic.    It  is  the  conqueror  over  the  world  of  the  human  heart.  It 
says  to  it,  and  to  him  who  has  it,  "  be  of  good  cheer,  )ou  have  overcome 
the  world."    But  not  only  is  the  reign  of  Peace,  when  perfect,  an  estab- 
lished monarchy  ;  it  is  full  of  gentleness  in  its  mighty  rule.   It  is  the  wis- 
dom from  above.    It  is  the  placable,  the  loving  Jesus  !    It  is  the  divine 
manifested  in  the  human.    It  is  the  spiritual  illumining  the  corporeal.  It 
is  noble  because  it  is  just.    It  gives  true  nobility,  true  grandeur  to  the 
countenance,  as  it  invests  the  soul  with  genuine  nobility.    See  it  as  it 
lives,  faintly,  indeed,  but  truly,  in  that  transcript  of  the  face  of  our  friend. 
You  see  that  such  a  man  was  just,  as  well  as  merciful.    You  see  that  his 
great  reason,  his  infinite  con:-eience,  gave  in  subjection  to  him  the  poor, 
the  infirm,  the  uncertain,  and  replaced  them  all  by  that  silent,  loving 
energy,  which  has  place  in  the  agencies,  the  unerring  agencies  of  the  uni- 
verse of  God!    Who  would  not  give  in  his  willing,  his  cheerful  adhesion 
to  a  principle  which  can  transform  a  man  into  an  angel  of  light  ?  Which 
in  its  rapturous  power  can  fill  the  soul  with  love,  and  recognise  in  man 
the  child  of  a  heavenly  Father,  the  disciple  of  his  Son,  the  heir  of  an 
Lea  <  nl)  inheritance  ! 


NOAH  WORCESTER.  107 


The  cause  of  Peace  is  the  cause  of  God.  Those  who  make  or  pre- 
serve it  are  his  children.  "What  an  adoption  !  And  upon  how  noble  a 
principle !  Would  that  men  would  understand  the  whole  meaning  of  that 
scripture  which  teaches  that  doctrine.  For  what  i3  its  converse  ?  What 
is  war?  It  is  separation  from  God.  It  is  the  denial  and  the  destruction 
too  of  the  paternal  relation  with  the  infinite  Father.  It  drives  men,  it 
takes  them,  out  of  their  Father's  house.  Does  it  not  take  from  them  his 
love  ?  Dreadful  is  the  thought  which  thus  lies  in  close  approximation  to, 
if  not  in  the  fact  of,  this  moral  aberration  from  the  Divine.  Do  men 
feel  this  in  its  terrible  force  and  truth  ?  Does  the  temporary  government 
of  this  country  understand  what  is  its  responsibleness  when  it  makes  public 
preparation  for  that  which  separates  the  child  from  his  Father,  the  man 
from  his  God  !  What  infinite  woes  are  denounced  upon  him  who  taketh 
the  sword  ?  How  terrible  that  bereavement  which  war  makes  !  It  is  an 
open  grave  for  him  who  in  the  fullest  health  might  live  for  the  service 
and  love  of  God  and  of  man.  It  is  the  winding  sheet  of  thousands  who 
die  out  of  the  ordinary  appointment  of  God,  and  compared  to  which  the 
j  approaches  of  death  in  all  other  forms  are  merciful.  When  will  be  that 
time  when  the  reign  of  individual  and  of  world-wide  love  shall  take  the 
I  place  of  this  personal  and  universal  hate  ?  When  will  government  and 
|  people  resting  on  Christianity,  as  the  exponent  of  all  humanity,  be  the 
i  acknowledged  element  of  all  that  is  noble  in  enterprise,  grand  in  accom- 
plishment,— worthy  of  the  hearty  honor  of  man,  and  sure  of  the  aproba- 
tion  of  God  !  What  grander,  what  more  noble,  what  more  deserving  in- 
I  finite  reverence  and  love,  than  the  manifestation  of  divine  principles  in 
human  word  and  in  human  act?  Peace  is  the  complement  of  them  all.  It 
is  their  sole  condition;  it  forms  their  very  self. 

Let  us  give  to  this  great  cause  our  hearts,  our  minds,  our  lives.  Let 
us  look  with  love  and  with  holy  awe  upon  the  speaking  memorials  of  those 
who  have  been  its  fast  friends  in  their  lives,  and  in  whose  death  its  power 
had  perfect  place.  See  it  living  in  Wilberforce,  and  in  Clarkson,  abroad, 
— in  Worcester,  in  Ladd, — in  Tuckerman  and  in  Ware  at  home.  Apostles 
of  peace  !  who  does  not  honor  you  in  remembrance  of  your  heroic  lives, 
1 — in  the  conquest  you  made  over  the  evil  in  yourselves,  and  in  the  world  ? 
Visit  us  from  the  mansions  of  Peace  which  are  now  yours,  and  in  smiles, 
and  in  great  speech,  bid  us,  too,  to  be  of  good  cheer.  We  feel  that  we 
are  ever  in  the  presence  of  the  Infinite.  Are  we  not  still  the  companions 
of  his  glorified  children !  we  would  live  here  on  the  earth,  God's  earth, 
as  if  in  heaven.  We  would  pray  for  its  sanctification,  its  redemption,  its 
present,  its  everlasting  Peace  ! 


108  "IN  time  of  peace  prepare  for  war." 


"IN  TIME  OP  PEACE  PREPARE  FOR  WAR." 

BY  THE  EDITOR. 

Few  maxims,  human  or  divine,  have  commanded  such  veneration  of 
Christian  Governments,  as  the  one  that  heads  this  article.  To  such  an 
extent  have  Great  Britain,  France,  and  the  United  States  followed  the 
teachings  of  this  doubtful  proverb,  that  their  preparations  for  war  in  time 
of  peace,  cost  more  than  the  entire  profits  of  their  united  commerce.  As 
the  venerable  name  of  Washington  is  made  to  father  this  maxim,  let  us 
refer  to  him  as  the  true  expounder  of  it,  during  his  administration.  Let 
us  see  how  he  "  prepared  for  war  in  time  of  peace."  When  that  illustri- 
ous man  acceded  to  the  Presidency,  the  country  had  just  emerged  from  a 
long,  wasting  war.  The  age  was  warlike,  and  the  moral  power  of  com- 
merce, and  of  international  intercourse  facilitated  by  steam,  had  hardly 
come  to  be  felt  as  a  ligament  of  brotherhood  between  nations.  The  dem- 
ocratic principle  had  hardly  been  acknowledged  as  a  fixed  fact  in  human 
government ;  and  was  never  more  exposed  to  be  crushed  out  of  existence, 
under  the  heel  of  European  despotism,  than  during  the  first  years  of 
American  independence.  The  people  were  peeled  and  few,  and  scattered 
over  a  vast  territory.  They  numbered  scarcely  four  millions,  young  and 
old,  bond  and  free.  Powerful  tribes  of  disaffected  Indians  surrounded 
the  republic  with  a  cordon  of  dangerous  foes.  If  military  defences  ren- 
der a  nation  secure  from  foreign  invasion :  or  if  a  nation  is  most  exposed 
when  least  able  or  prepared  to  resist  a  foe,  then  at  no  period  of  our  na- 
tional existence  should  there  have  been  greater  preparations  for  war  in 
time  of  peace,  than  during  the  administration  of  Washington.  And  we 
may  assume  that  none  could  have  been  more  deeply  impressed  with  the 
importance  of  such  preparations,  than  he  and  his  compatriots  of  the  Rev- 
olution. Nor  can  we  suppose  they  withheld  a  dollar  in  their  expendi- 
tures for  this  purpose,  from  any  reluctance  of  the  people  to  vote  adequate 
defences  for  their  country.  We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  Gov- 
ernment under  him  would  have  appropriated  a  larger  sum  to  the  Army 
and  Navy,  if  its  revenue  equalled  that  of  the  present  time.  How  did  he 
"  prepare  for  war  in  time  of  peace,"  so  precarious  ?  During  the  eight 
years  of  his  administration,  and  while  surrounded  by  perils  which  have 
long  since  ceased  to  exist,  the  whole  amount  appropriated  to  the  Military 
and  Naval  Establishments,  was  $10,925,470.  This  sum,  in  his  view,  met 
all  thi  necessties  of  preparing  for  war  in  time  of  peace.  He  asked  no 
more  to  put  the  country  in  an  attitude  of  defence,  at  a  time  when  it  was 
most  exposed  to  invasion,  if  the  principle  be  true,  that  a  nation  is  most 
exposed  when  least  able  to  resist. 


ON  THE  EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN  FOR  WAR.  109 

Xow  let  us  turn  to  another  chapter  of  our  national  history,  and  see  how 
this  maxim,  attributed  to  Washington,  has  been  carried  out.  During  the 
eight  years  ending  with  1843,  a  period  of  profound  peace  in  the  civilized 
world,  this  Government  expended  8163,336,717  on  the  Military  and  Na- 
val Establishments  ! ! !  Taking  the  average  population  of  the  country 
during  these  eight  years,  it  must  have  been  nearly  16,000,000 — four 
times  the  number  of  the  people  under  "Washington's  administration.  Can 
his  example,  then,  sustain  the  present  course  of  this  Government  in  pre- 
paring for  war  in  time  of  peace  ?  Is  a  rapidly  increasing  population  an 
element  of  weakness  ;  or  is  a  country  more  exposed  to  invasion  in  pro- 
portion as  the  number  of  its  men  and  means  for  defence  increases  ?  It 
would  seem  so  from  the  course  of  our  Government ;  for  while  the  popu- 
lation of  the  country  has  multiplied  itself  by  four,  the  appropriations  for 
their  defence  have  been  multiplied  by  sixteen  ! — thus  $10,000,000  for  a 
population  of  four  millions,  and  $160,000,000  for  a  population  of  sixteen 
millions,  during  a  period  of  eight  years.  At  this  ratio,  when  the  people 
of  this  country  shall  number  sixty-four  millions,  then  the  appropriations 
for  their  defence,  for  eight  years,  will  amount  to  $2560,000,000  ! ! !  Is 
it  not  time  for  the  people  to  think  of  these  things  ?  E.  B. 


ON  THE  EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN  FOR  WAR. 

BY  J.  F.  ERTING,  M.  D. 

I  apprehend  that  there  is  a  radical  defect  in  the.  education  of  children 
in  respect  to  the  subject  of  Peace  and  War.  I  mean  Common  School 
Education.  "We  as  individuals  may  advocate  the  cause  of  Universal 
peace.  We  may  deprecate  War,  as  the  greatest  calamity  which  can  be- 
fall a  nation,  as  well  as  being  heinously  wicked.  We  may  denounce  the 
policy  of  the  heavy  expenditures,  which  this  nation  annually  makes,  to 
foster  and  support  a  system  which  has  drenched  this  Earth  with  human 
blood,  and  which  has  raged  and  scourged  the  human  family  to  an  extent, 
which  the  most  malignant,  and  indeed  every  pestilence  recorded  on  the  page 
of  history,  can  scarcely  be  considered  as  parallel ;  and  yet  we  permit 
principles  to  be  infused  into  the  minds  of  our  children,  in  their  common 
school  education,  which  go  directly  to  foster  and  nurture  the  spirit  of 
War. 

This  fact  may  seem  incredible,  but  I  shall  endeavor  (though  feebly  it 
may  be,)  to  sustain  the  position  here  assumed.    I  do  it  for  the  purpose 
of  directing  attention  to  this  subject,  in  order  that  a  change  in  the  re- 
10* 


110 


ON  THE  EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN  FOR  WAR. 


spect  to  which  I  shall  presently  allude,  in  the  common  school  education 
of  children  may  be  introduced. 

I  think  that  all  will  agree  with  me,  that  in  the  mental  training  of 
children,  if  we  wish  to  increase  or  develop  a  certain  faculty  of  the  mind, 
we  may  do  so  by  presenting  to  the  mind  ideas  or  sentiments  congenial  to 
that  faculty,  in  as  interesting  and  attractive  a  form  as  we  can ;  while,  at 
the  same  time,  we  withhold  chose  of  an  opposite  character,  or  at  most 
permitting  the  mind  to  receive  them  only  in  their  most  repulsive  aspect ; 
in  other  words  retarding  an  opposite  developement.  The  mind  of  youth 
is  of  such  a  plastic  nature  as  to  be  susceptible  of  a  great  degree  of  cul- 
tivation, of  change,  if  the  discipline  is  applied  early,  before  the  charac- 
ter is  irretrievably  fixed — 

"  Just  as  the  twig  is  bent,  the  tree 's  inclined." 

If  we  wish  to  instil  the  principles  of  Peace  into  the  minds  of  children, 
we  must  present  them  in  their  most  attractive  forms — dwell  upon  the  pleas- 
ure, the  loveliness  of  peace  and  harmony,  not  only  among  kindred  and 
friends,  but  among  nations  and  mankind  at  large, — of  cultivating  a  kind, 
a  conciliatory  and  forgiving  disposition,  for  any  real  or  imaginary  wrongs, 
which  we  may  receive  at  the  hands  of  others, — and  also  by  diverting  their 
attention  from  the  "  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war."  When  the  subject  of 
war  is  presented  to  their  minds,  let  it  be  in  its  true  light  which  of  course 
is  a  most  repulsive  aspect.  Let  them  see  thousands — yea,  millions  of  hu- 
man beings,  like  themselves,  possessed  of  immortal  spirits  which  are  to 
rive  forever,  either  in  bliss  or  woe,  and  who  one  day  are  to  stand  before 
the  bar  of  the  Eternal  Judge,  then  and  there  to  receive  their  final  destiny 
— mown  down  on  the  battle  field,  their  bodies  weltering  in  the  purple 
gore,  which  drenches  with  a  crimson  flood  this  fair  Earth.  Let  them  see 
the  mangled  limbs, — the  ghastly  wounds, — the  bleeding  corpses.  Let 
them  hear  the  groans,  the  wailings  of  anguish  and  woe,  as  they  ascend  to 
Heaven  from  the  lips  of  the  victims  of  the  insatiable  monster  War. 

But  is  this  the  way  that  the  subject  is  presented  to  children  !  I  appre- 
hend not.  Few  if  any  children  attend  lectures  or  addresses  on  the  subject 
of  Peace,  which  are  occasionally  delivered  to  the  public,  and  are  calculat- 
ed more  generally  for  adults  than  children.  Few  have  acess  to,  or  peruse 
the  newspapers  and  journals  devoted  to  this  subject ;  but  almost  all  attend 
common  schools,  especially  the  children  of  New  England,  and  they  are 
furnished  with  the  elementary  books  of  education.  Do  these  inculcate 
the  principles  of  Peace  or  War  ?  In  Mitchell's  School  Geography,  a 
popular  work,  and  one  that  is  extensively  used  in  the  common  schools  of 
New  England,  out  of  forty-six  pictures  illustrative  of  the  Geography  of  the 
United  States,  thirteen  are  battles  scenes  or  pictures  of  a  warlike  charac- 


ON  THE  EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN  FOR  WAR.  Ill 

ter.  What  is  the  ligitimate  effect  of  presenting  so  much  war  to  the  minds 
of  children !  Is  it  not  to  fill  them  with  a  thirst  for  martial  glory  1  At 
least  it  attracts  their  attention  to  the  "  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war." — 
These  are  so  presented  that  instead  of  creating  in  their  minds  a  disgust 
for  war,  they  are  calculated  to  fascinate  and  charm.  I  do  not  directly 
condemn  the  book  alluded  to,  but  wish  to  call  attention  to  the  fact.  I 
suppose  the  author,  like  most  other  authors,  wishing  to  make  their  pro- 
ductions popular,  endeavor  to  render  them  attractive. 

Such  being  the  case  with  Geography,  what  is  the  character  of  History 
— elementary  History,  written  expressly  for  the  young  and  used  in  com- 
mon schools  !  We  all  know  that  they  are  but  accounts  of  battles,  war9, 
and  bloodshed.  These  events  are  singled  out  in  history  to  the  neglect 
and  exclusion  of  almost  every  other  fact,  and  dressed  up  in  the  most  at- 
tractive garb,  and  thus  presented  to  the  susceptible  minds  of  children  in 
a  manner  that  cannot  fail  to  create  in  them  a  thirst  for  martial  glory,  and 
familiarize  them  with  scenes  of  bloodshed,  carnage,  and  rapine,  which 
viewed  in  any  other  light,  would  make  them  recoil  and  shudder  at  the 
bare  suggestion.  Where  such  ideas,  when  presented  to  the  youthful 
mind,  do  not  have  the  effect  alluded  to  at  once,  (for  all  minds  are  not 
alike,  an  idea  or  sentiment  will  be  readily  imbibed  by  one  mind,  which 
another  instinctively  recoils  from,)  yet  by  the  daily  study  of  them  they 
finally  produce  these  effects. 

"  Vice  is  a  monster  of  so  frightful  mien, 
As,  to  be  hated,  needs  hut  to  be  seen ; 
Yet  seen  too  oft,  familiar  with  her  face, 
We  first  endure,  then  pity,  then  embrace." 

Another  grand  influence  which  is  thrown  in  the  way  of  children  and 
youth,  and  which  tends  much  to  the  formation  of  their  characters,  and  is 
in  fact  but  a  branch  of  education,  are  the  popular  tales  and  poetry  con- 
tained in  the  fashionable  magazines  and  periodicals  of  the  day.  How 
large  a  share  of  these  are  battle  scenes — skirmishes,  stratagems,  exploits 
of  danger,  and  "  hair-breadth  'scapes"  from  a  hostile  foe,  all  of  which  are 
done  up  in  the  most  fascinating  and  alluring  style, — all  of  which  are  de- 
voured with  a  greedy  avidity,  which  no  precept  of  morality,  religion  or 
brotherly  love  has  ever  been  able  to  command  and  which  goes  directly 
to  create  in  the  minds  of  youth  a  thirst,  an  ardent  longing  for  martial 
glory  and  for  deeds  of  renown  ! 

If  a  "  Tale  of  the  Revolution"  is  told,  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  it  is  a  tale 
of  blood — of  battle — of  military  glory.  I  am  not  disposed  to  detract  one 
iota  from  the  glory  and  honor  of  the  heroes  of  that  noble  achievement. 
I  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  Revolutionary  blood  runs  in  my  veins,  but  I  do 


112 


THE  IMPIETY  OF  THE  MILITARY. 


not  deem  it  necessary  in  order  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  our  children  the 
cost  of  that  priceless  boon,  inherited  from  our  ancestors,  that  they  should 
be  told  only  of  the  achievements  of  battle.  Nor  am  I  disposed  to  banish 
Geography  and  History  from  our  common  schools,  but  would  that  our 
children  should  be  made  more  familiar  with  both  branches  of  study. 
Let  the  Geography  give  an  exact  description  of  our  country — of  all  coun- 
tries, and  where  it  is  embellished  let  the  embellishments  be  of  a  charac- 
ter that  will  illustrate  the  beauty — the  loveliness  of  peace  and  universal 
brotherhood.  Let  the  Historian  faithfully  record  the  events  of  past  time 
— dwell  upon  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  nations  when  at  peace,  and 
when  war  is  introduced,  as  it  necessarily  must  be,  let  it  be  in  its  true  light, 
— its  true  character,  which  will  not  be  such  as  will  charm  like  the  ser- 
pent with  its  glowing  colors  before  it  strikes  its  deadly  poisonous  blow. 


THE  IMPIETY  OP  THE  MILITARY. 

BY  REV.  SAMUEL  J.  MAY. 

There  is  no  assumption  on  earth,  which  so  boldly  sets  itself  up  above 
God,  as  the  assumption  of  military  commanders.  They  require  of  those 
who  have  submitted  themselves,  or  who  have  been  subjected  by  force  to 
their  authority — they  require  of  them  implicit  obedience.  Safer  is  it  for 
a  soldier  to  disobey  all  the  laws  of  God,  than  to  disregard  the  commands 
of  the  military  chieftain.  No  soldier  is  allowed  to  have  a  will  or  a  con- 
science of  his  own.  He  must  do  what  he  is  ordered  to  do,  whether  he 
thinks  it  right  or  wrong.  No  trait  of  character  would  be  more  trouble- 
some to  a  soldier,  or  more  likely  to  hinder  his  rise  in  the  profession,  than 
a  tender  conscience,  that  impelled  him  to  scrutinize  the  commands  of  his 
superiors.  And  yet  how  many  of  those  commands  contravene  the  com- 
mandments of  God.  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  saith  the  Most  High ;  but 
murder  is  the  specific  work  of  soldiers,  to  which  if  they  go  not  voluntarily, 
they  are  spurred  by  the  bayonet.  "  Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil," 
<(  avenge  not  yourselves."  But  the  very  object  of  an  army  is  to  make 
reprisals  upon  an  offending  party, — to  take  such  vengeance  for  real  or  sup- 
posed injuries,  that  they  shall  not  be  respected.  "  If  thine  enemy  hunger 
feed  him  ;  if  he  thirst  give  him  drink." — But  says  the  military  law  of  our 
country,  if  you  do  so — if  you  comfort  an  enemy — you  shall  be  adjudged 
guilty  of  high  treason,  and  punished  accordingly. 

Such  is  the  training,  by  which  men  are  converted  into  soldiers.  Such 
is  the  machinery  by  which  masses  of  human  beings  are  compacted  into 


WILLIAM  PENN. 


113 


a  great  instrument  of  war,  and  wielded  to  accomplish  its  purpose,  the 
destruction  of  human  life,  and  scattering  of  ruin  and  desolation  over  a 
land  at  the  will  of  those  daring  mortals,  by  whom  the  dread  instrument 
is  directed. 

He  who  voluntarily  enlists  in  an  army,  sells  himself — body  and  soul 
— to  be  clothed  and  fed  and  sheltered  and  transported  and  used  and 
abused  just  as  others  may  see  fit.  He  consents  to  be  a  slave,  during  the 
term  of  his  enlistment — at  the  expiration  of  which,  there  is  danger, 
he  will  be  fit  for  nothing  else.  "  The  slavery  of  the  soldier,"  said  Dr. 
Franklin,  "  is  worse  than  the  slavery  of  the  negro.*'  He  who  is  com- 
pelled by  the  law  of  his  country  to  enter  the  army  or  navy,  is  violently 
reduced  to  this  state  of  bondage. 

Since  I  have  thought  so  much  as  I  have  done  on  war — I  cannot  see  a 
man  rigged  out  in  the  livery  of  our  army,  but  I  say  to  him  in  my  heart 
— you  are  doomed,  my  brother, — a  victim  to  be  crushed,  mentally  and 
morally,  if  not  bodily,  under  the  car  of  our  Juggernaut.  And  the  music 
of  the  military  bands  sounds  in  my  ear  like  the  noises  that  are  made  on 
various  instruments,  at  the  worship  of  the  pagan  idols,  to  drown  the 
shrieks  of  the  human  sacrifices. 

Syracuse,  N.  Y. 


WILLIAM  PENN. 

BY  P.  S.  DUPONCEAU,  L.  L.  D. 

William  Penn  stands  first  among  the  lawgivers  whose  names  and  deeds 
are  recorded  in  history,  Shall  we  compare  with  him  Lycurgus,  Solon, 
Romulus,  those  founders  of  military  commonwealths,  who  organized  their 
citizens  in  dreadful  array  against  the  rest  of  their  species,  taught  them  to 
consider  their  fellow  men  as  barbarians,  and  themse!  ves  as  alone  worthy 
to  rule  over  the  earth  ?  What  benefit  did  mankind  derive  from  their 
boasted  institutions  ?  Interrogate  the  shades  of  those  who  fell  in  the 
mighty  contests  between  Athens  and  Lacedasmon,  between  Carthage  and 
Eome,  and  between  Rome  and  the  rest  of  the  universe.  But  see  our 
William  Penn,  with  weaponless  hands,  sitting  down  peaceably  with  his 
followers  in  the  midst  of  savage  nations,  whose  only  occupation  was  shed- 
ding the  blood  of  their  fellow-men,  disarming  them  by  his  justice,  and 
teaching  them,  for  the  first  time,  to  view  a  stranger  without  distrust. 
See  them  bury  their  tomahawks  in  his  presence,  so  deep  that  man  shall 
Dever  be  able  to  find  them  again.  See  them  under  the  shade  of  the  thick 
groves  of  Coaquannock  extend  the  bright  chain  of  friendship,  and  solemn- 
ly promise  to  preserve  it  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  shall  endure.  See 
him  then  with  his  companions  establishing  his  commonwealth  on  the  sole 


114  UNIVERSAL  BROTHERHOOD. 

basis  of  religion,  morality,  and  universal  love,  and  adopting,  as  the  fun- 
damental maxim  of  his  government,  the  rule  handed  down  to  us  from 
Heaven,  "  Glory  to  God  on  high,  and  on  earth  peace,  and  good  will  to 
men." 

Here  was  a  spectacle  for  the  potentates  of  the  earth  to  look  upon,  an 
example  for  them  to  imitate.  But  the  potentates  of  the  earth  did  not  see, 
or  if  they  saw,  they  turned  away  their  eyes  from  the  sight ;  they  did  not 
hear,  or  if  they  heard,  they  shut  their  ears  against  the  voice  which  called 
out  to  them  from  the  wilderness, 

Discite  justitiam  raoniti,  et  non  temnere  Divos. 

The  character  of  William  Penn  alone  sheds  a  never-fading  lustre  up- 
on our  history.  No  other  state  in  this  union  can  boast  of  such  an  illus- 
trious founder ;  none  began  their  social  career  under  auspices  so  honora- 
ble to  humanity.  Every  trait  of  the  life  of  that  great  man,  every  fact 
and  anecdote  of  those  golden  times,  will  be  sought  for  by  our  descendants 
with  avidity,  and  will  furnish  many  an  interesting  subject  for  the  fancy 
of  the  novelist,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  poet. 


UNIVERSAL  BROTHERHOOD. 

We  propose  to  fill  this  department  of  the  Advocate  with  the  correspondence  of  the  friends 
of  peace  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  The  interchange  of  friendly  communications  is 
one  of  the  strongest  elements  of  peace  and  amity  between  the  two  nations  ;  and  we  hope 
that  every  vessel  that  arrives  from,  or  leaves  for,  an  English  port,  will  bear  to  old  and  new 
made  friends  thousands  of  these  messages  of  good  will.  Every  letter  received  and  answer- 
ed, breathing  this  spirit,  is  worth  more  for  the  security  of  each  country  against  war,  than  a 
"regiment  of  horse,"  as  Corporal  Trim  would  say.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  the  world  that 
the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  however  scattered  over  the  earth,  speak  now  and  will  speak  forever 
one  language.  This  circumstance  in  itself  devolves  upon  them  the  duty  to  lead  the  way 
in  fraternizing  the  whole  family  of  man.  That  the  niggard  idea  of  "natural  enmity" 
might  be  perpetuated  between  the  French  and  English,  is  nothing  surprising,  when  not  one 
in  a  hundred  of  them  can  either  read  or  write  each  other's  language.  But  the  thought  of 
war  between  Englishmen  and  Americans,  is  at  war  itself  with  all  the  social  affinities  that 
nature  can  create  between  two  countries.  So  much  importance  to  the  well-being  of  the 
two  nations  do  we  attach  to  this  friendly  correspondence,  that  scarcely  any  item  of  news, 
connected  with  the  arrival  or  departure  of  the  ocean  steamers,  interests  us  more  than  the 
number  of  letters  carried  out  or  brought  back.  For  whether  they  appertain  to  mercenary 
commerce,  or  the  "  foreign  exchanges  "  of  humanity  and  christian  friendship,  they  are  not 
only  hostages,  but  emissaries  for  peace  and  good  will.  Let  there  be  proclaimed  free  trade 
and  friendship's  rights  in  this  matter  of  international  correspondence,  until  we  shall  have  a 
daily  arrival  from,  and  departure  for,  Old  England,  of  a  mail-packet,  freighted  with  fifty- 
thousand  letters,  filling  the  British  Realm  with  American  mind. 

We  have  been  constrained,  with  some  reluctance,  to  give  in  this  department  communica- 
tions somewhat  personal  to  ourself.  Nothing  but  our  interest  in  the  cause  of  peace  could 
induce  us  to  do  this  thing.  We  have  thought  that  this  cause  might  be  advanced  in  this 
country  by  a  free  correspondence  with  its  friends  abroad.  Consequently  we  send  about 
half  |  Iomd  letters  by  every  steamer  to  friends  of  peace  in  England.  The  communica- 
tions we  receive  in  reply  contain  much  that  is  interesting  to  the  cause  here  ;  but  as  they 


LETTER  FROM  JUNIPER  HEDGEHOG. 


115 


are  addressed  personally  to  ourself,  they  abound  in  personal  allusions  which  we  cannot  en- 
tirely suppress ;  although  we  scarcely  ever  publish  a  letter  entire,  but  extract  the  least 
personal  part.  The  printed  "  Letter  of  Juniper  Hedgehog,"  written  by  Punch  himself, 
a£as,  Douglass  Jerrold,  was  first  published  in  his  Shilling  Magazine.  It  so  completely  an- 
swers the  "  Bible  argument"  for  territorial  aggrandizement  and  conquest  by  Christian 
swords,  that  we  comply  with  the  urgent  request  of  some  of  the  friends  of  peace  in  both 
countries,  and  publish  it  both  in  the  Advocate  and  in  the  Bond  of  Brotherhood. 

From  "  Douglass  Jerrold's  Shilling  Magazine,  April  1846." 
LETTER  FROM  JUNIPER  HEDGEHOG, 

To  Elihu  Burritt,  Blacksmith,  of  Worcester,  United  States  of  America. 

Friend  Burritt, — Whether  it  was  one  of  your  Manchester  friends,  or 
whether,  indeed,  it  was  nothing  less  than  a  dove  from  your  own  Ameri- 
can woods  that  droptone  of  your  Olive  Leaves  in  my  cab, — I  won't  stop 
to  consider.  It's  enough  that  I've  read  the  Leaf  again  and  again,  and 
can't  help  thanking  you  for  it.  Can't  help  admiring  how  that  you,  "a 
poor  man  not  worth  a  dollar  in  the  world,"  as  you  say  of  yourself,  should 
be  scattering  thousands  and  thousands  of  these  healing  Leaves  about 
America — Leaves  in  their  meaning  and  intention  worth  all  the  laurels 
that  ever  grew  out  of  dead  men's  graves,  made  so  foul  and  rank  with  dead 
men's  blood. 

Your  Leaf  fell  into  my  hands  just  after  I'd  read  Mr.  Adams's  speech 
in  Congress,  where  he  stands  upon  the  Bible  for  his  right  to  Oregon,  and 
would  cut  throats  according  to  his  notion  of  Genesis  !  Foolish  old  gentle- 
man !  he  can't  have  many  years'  mortal  breath  in  him,  and  therefore  it  is 
sad  to  see  him  puffing  and  puffing  to  blow  the  embers  of  war  into  a  blaze 
— to  see  him,  as  I  may  say,  ramming  down  murderous  bullets,  and  wad- 
ding muskets  with  leaves  from  the  Bible !  But  there's  a  sort  of  religion 
that  would  sharpen  the  sword  itself  on  the  stone  tables  of  Moses. 

However,  this  is  an  old  trick.  There's  a  good  many  of  these  pious 
lovers  of  gunpowder  who,  somehow  or  the  .other,  will  insist  upon  turning 
up  the  regimental  uniform  with  pages  of  the  Bible  and  Testament.  To 
make  a  man  particularly  the  care  of  Heaven,  they  think  it  only  necessary 
to  dress  him  in  red  clothes,  put  a  feather  in  his  cap.  ball-cartridges  in  his 
cartouche-box,  and  a  musket  in  his  hand.  And  these  folks — they've  been 
doing  it  in  the  House  of  Commons  only  a  week  or  two  ago — always  give 
the  glory  of  slaughter  to  "  His  Arm  that  gives  all  battles  !  "  And  so  ac- 
cording to  these  people,  the  Army  of  Martyrs  should  be  an  army  with 
forty-two  pounders  and  a  rocket  brigade.  Their  Christianity  is  Christian- 
ity humbly  firing  upon  one  knee.  Their  incense  fur  the  altar  is  not 
myrrh  and  frankincense,  but  charcoal  and  saltpetre.  Our  Sir  Robert 
Harry  Inglis,  for  instance — who  in  the  House  of  Commons  speaks  for 
pious  Oxford — he  was  quite  delighted  that  the  Governor-General  of  India 
had  put  so  much  religion  into  the  bulletin  that  published  the  slaughter  of 
nine  thousand  Sikhs,  as  they  call  'em.  They  were  all  killed — according 
to  Sir  Robert — not  by  the  cold  iron  of  the  English  infantry,  but  by  a 
heavenly  host ;  the  bayonet,  in  truth,  did  not  do  the  work  ;  no,  it  was  the 
fiery  swords  of  the  angels,  and  praises  were  sung  to  them  accordingly. — 


HG  LETTER  FROM  JUNIPER  HEDGEHOG. 


And  this  is  the  Christianity  of  the  Gazette  ;  though  I  can't  find  it  in  the 
New  Testament. 

And,  poor  Mr.  Adams  makes  a  very  lame  case  out  of  Genesis  :  some- 
how or  the  other  he  reads  his  Bible  upside  down ;  for  he  declares — 

**  If  our  controversy  respecting  Oregon  had  been  with  any  other  than 
a  Christian  nation,  I  could  not  quote  from  that  book',  if  we  were  in  dis- 
pute with  the  Chinese  about  the  territory  it  would  be  a  different  question. 
So  it  is  a  different  question  between  us  and  the  savages,  who,  if anybody 
have  now  the  rigl  tful  occupation  of  the  country ;  because  they  do  not  be- 
lieve the  BOOK." 

And  because  Mr.  Adams  believes  "  The  Book"  and  the  Red  Man  does 
not,  he  Mr.  A.  has  not  scrupled  to  countenance  the  wholesale  robbery  of 
the  Red  Man's  lands.  Thus,  either  way — it  is  the  custom  with  some 
very  devout  people — Mr.  Adams  makes  profit  of  his  Bible  !  And  thus  a 
war  for  Oregon  would  be  no  other  than  a  Holy  War — a  war  declared 
upon  the  strength  of  sacred  texts.  Christians  would  blaze  away  at  one 
another  on  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures ;  with,  perhaps,  to  tickle  Mr. 
Adams,  "  Peace  on  earth,  and  good-will  to  men"  painted  on  American 
cannon. 

And  Mr.  Adams,  friend  Elihu,  will  go  to  his  Bible  to  settle  this  matter 
of  disputed  land.  Now  the  first  disjute  of  the  sort  mentioned  in  "The 
Book"  was  arranged,  certainly  not  after  the  fashion  of  Mr.  Adams  :  for 
here's  the  original  "  Oregon  question"  disposed  of  in  Genesis  in  a  manner 
quite  forgotten  by  tue  Adams  of  America  : — 

"  And  there  was  a  strife  between  the  herdsmen  of  Abram's  cattle  and 
the  herdsmen  of  Lot's  cattle,  and  the  Canaanite  and  Perezzite  dwelled 
then  in  the  land. 

"  And  Abram  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no  strife,  lpray  thee,  between 
me  and  thee,  and  between  my  herdsmen,  and  thy  herdsmen,  for  we  be 

brethren: 

"  Is  not  the  whole  land  before  thee  ?  separate  thyself  I  pray  thee  from 
me  :  if  thou  wilt  take  the  left  hand  then  I  will  go  to  the  right;  or  if  thou 
depart  to  the  right  hand  then  I  will  go  to  the  left." 

And  so,  Elihu,  Gunpowder  Adams  is  answered  out  of  his  own  Genesis  ! 

But  we  shall  have  no  fighting  for  Oregon.  Mr.  Adams's  speech  is  like 
one  of  the  wooden  cannon  mounted  for  cheapness  by  the  Dutch  ;  it  looks 
warlike  and  dangerous,  but  sound  it,  and  there's  no  true  ring  of  metal  in 
it — it's  only  wood  thickly  painted.  Besides,  your  Olive  Leaves — copied 
as  they  are  in  the  American  papers,  which  as  you  say  "  enables  you  to 
bring  the  principles  of  peace  before  a  million  of  minds  every  week," — 
your  Olive  Leaves  must  go  to  cool  the  glory  fever,  smacking  its  lips  for 
blood. 

You've  been  some  time  known  among  us  Britishers,  Elihu,  as  the 
"learned  blacksmith  ;"  but  your  Olive  Leaves  are  getting  for  you  a  still 
betti  r  name.  It's  a  fine  thing,  no  doubt,  to  get  at  the  heart  of  a  dozen 
languages  and  more — as  they  say  you  have  done — and  so  be  able  to  make, 
I  may  say,  a  speaking  acquaintance  with  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans, 
and  so  on  ;  but  it's  nobler  work  to  have  made  yourself  "  the  head  of  the 


LETTER  FROM  JUNIPER  HEDGEHOG. 


117 


periodical  peace  publications"  of  America,  and  so  to  preach  quiet  and 
goodness  to  tens  of  thousands  of  men,  that  otherwise,  like  bull-dogs, 
might  be  patted  on  to  tear  one  another  to  pieces. 

It's  a  fine  thing  to  think  of  you,  Elihu  Burritt,  Blacksmith.  To  see 
you,  working  all  day — making  your  anvil  ring  again  with  glorious  labor 
(how  I  should  like  just  a  set  of  shoes  for  my  mare  of  your  own  making), 
to  see  you  forging  anything  but  swords  and  bayonets, — and  when  that  work 
is  over,  to  think  of  you  sitting  down,  with  your  iron  pen  in  your  hand, 
working  away,  to  weld  men's  hearts  together — to  make  the  chain  of  peace, 
as  your  own  Red  Men  say,  between  America  and  England, — and  to  keep 
it  bright  for  ever.  When  I  think  of  this  work  of  yours  I'm  pretty  sure 
that  your  true-hearted  countryman  Longfellow  must  have  had  you  in  his 
brain,  when  he  painted  the  picture  of  his  blacksmith. 

Toiling, — rejoicing,— sorrowing, — 

Onward  through  life  he  goes  , 
Each  morning  sees  some  task  begun, 

Each  evening  sees  it  close  : 
Something  attempted,  something  done, 

Has  earned  a  night's  repose. 

Thanks,  Thanks  to  thee,  my  worthy  friend, 

For  the  lesson  thou  hast  taught ! 
Thus  at  the  flaming  forge  of  life 

Our  fortunes  must  be  wrought ; 
Thus  on  its  sounding  anvil  shaped 

Each  burning  deed  and  thought  ! 

I  especially  like  your  fancy  that  English  Plymouth  should  write  to 
American  Plymouth — Rochester  to  Rochester — Norwich  to  Norwich,  and 
so  on.  As  you  prettily  say,  "  it  would  be  more  like  mothers  writing  to 
their  daughters."  You  are  right  too,  that  "  every  letter  thus  interchanged, 
like  a  weaver's  shuttle,  will  i-arry  across  the  ocean  a  silken  ligature  to 
bind  two  kindred  hearts,  and  through  them,  two  kindred  nations."  De- 
pend upon  it,  the  thinking  masses — for  odd  as  it  might  seem  to  some  Solo- 
mons now  in  their  grave,  and  I  may  add,  odd  as  it  does  seem  to  some 
Solomons  fast  going  there, — the  masses  do  begin  to  think — they  are  all 
against  the  cruelty,  the  wicked  tom-foolery  of  war.  I've  just  been  read- 
ing one  of  their  addresses ;  I  think  the  last.  Fine,  rousing  words  are  in 
it,  I  can  tell  you  ;  words  that  strike  upon  the  heart  better  than  fife  and 
beaten  sheep's-skin.  Just  to  show  you  that  we,  too,  have  our  pacific 
blacksmiths — our  iron-worker3  who,  like  Elihu  Burritt,  think  it  far  better 
to  make  hoes  and  spades  than  pikes  and  bayonets,  I  copy  out  this  little 
paragraph,  addressed  as  it  is  to  Americans : 

"  Working  men  of  America,  you  are,  or  should  be,  the  pioneers  of  free- 
dom ;  such  was  the  mission  bequeathed  to  you  by  Washington  and  his 
great  brother  patriots.  That  mission  you  will  best  fulfil  by  perfecting 
your  institutions — by  abolishing  the  slavery  of  white  and  black — [Ding  this 
into  the  ears  of  your  countrymen,  Master  Burritt]  wages  and  the  whip — 
by  driving  from  your  legislatures  the  landlords,  usurers,  lawyers,  soldiers, 
and  other  idlers  and  swindlers ;  by  making  the  veritable  people,  the 
wealth-producers,  really  1  sovereign,'  and  thus  establishing  a  real,  instead 
of  a  nominal,  Republic.  War  will  not  aid,  but  will  prevent  you  accom- 
plishing these  reforms." 

11 


118 


LETTER  FROM  OXFORD,  ENG. 


And  to  crown  all,  you'll  have  to  sow  wheat  for  us,  instead  of  making 
gunpowder.  Already  you  have  sent  maize  into  the  stomachs  of  the  Irish, 
— and  this  is  better,  isn't  it,  more  profitable  too,  than  riddling  them  with 
bullets  ? 

And  this  morning  I  read  in  one  of  the  papers  a  long  account  of  the 
pleasant  dishes  made  out  of  Indian  corn,  and  how  they  were  mightly  rel- 
ished in  Scotland  ;  a  professor — whose  name  I  forget — having  written  and 
lectured  on  the  best  way  of  dressing  the  grain.  More  pleasant  reading 
this,  of  stomachs  comforted  and  bellies  filled  by  American  grain — than 
throats  cut  and  bodies  slashed  by  American  steel.  Such  a  gazette  of  the 
kitchen  is  better  than  twenty  gazettes  of  the  War-office.  If  we  must  have 
war,  let  it  be  the  new  war  of  prices — the  buying  cheap  and  selling  dear; 
and  so  no  more  at  present  from  your  friend  and  admirer, 

Juniper  Hedgehog. 


EXTRACT  OP  A  LETTER  FROM  OXFORD,  ENGLAND. 

Mr.  Elihu  Burritt  : 

Dear  Sir  : — *  *  *  *  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the  cause  of 
peace  has  made  but  little  progress  in  this  city  ;  perhaps  as  little  as  at 
any  place  in  England ;  many  influences  are  here  opposed  to  it,  but  I  re- 
joice that  it  is  making  more  rapid  progress  in  other  places.  Since  God 
has  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  to  dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  it 
is  high  time  peace  principles  did  prevail,  and  that  men  of  divers  nations 
began  to  look  upon  each  other  as  brethren,  instead  of  killing  each  other 
and  making  the  Apocalyptic  Harlot  drunken  with  the  blood  of  their  slain. 
"  By  her  sorceries  are  all  nations  deceived ;  in  her  was  found,  the  Scrip- 
ture saith,  the  blood  of  prophets  and  of  saints  and  of  all  that  were  slain 
upon  the  earth."  (Rev.  18  ch.  23,  24.)  I  have  often  been  struck  with  the 
expressions  contained  in  these  verses,  and  other  portions  of  this  and  the 
preceding  chapter,  and  find  a  difficulty  in  limiting  them  (as  most  com- 
mentators do,)  to  any  particular  system  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  polity. 
They  must,  I  think,  be  applicable  to  something  by  which  all  ever  have 
been,  and  still  continue  to  be  deceived,  (although  they  may  have  cast  off, 
or  never  have  been  subject  to  the  thraldom  of  Home:)  and  which  may 
be  briefly  comprehended  in  the  word  lust,  the  corruption  or  perversion  of, 
and  antipodes  to,  love  ;  for  all  war,  persecution,  slavery,  and  despotism, 
both  h  cular  and  spiritual,  of  which  these  chapters  treat,  may  be  traced 
to  this  source.  It  has,  I  conceive,  been  fed  or  supported  by  the  war  spirit, 
and  all  these  things  follow  in  the  train.  And  have  not  men  uttered  blas- 
phemies when  they  have  professed  to  go  to  war  in  the  name  and  cause  of 


LETTER  FROM  OXFORD,  ENG.  119 

the  true  God,  imputing  their  conquests  to  Him  ;  their  real  motive  having 
been  lust,  in  some  disguise  or  other,  either  of  dominion,  ambition,  envy, 
or  revenge;  all  of  which  are  opposed  to  His  will,  for  "  God  is  love." 

*  Let  warriors  tremble,  when  they  dare 
To  take  thine  awful  name  in  vain, 
And  say  that  thou,  Great  God  !  wast  there, 
Strengthening  their  arms  to  kill  the  slain  I" 
M  That  from  thy  throne  thou  lookedst  down 
With  joy  upon  the  murderer's  blade  ; 
And  cheered  them  on,  to  seek  renown 
By  slaughtering  men  whom  thou  hast  made." 
"  0  !  Blasphemy  !  most  dark— profound, — 
Could  but  an  Angel  from  above 
Descend  to  cast  his  glance  around, 
And  answer  1  No !'  for  1  God  is  love.'  " 

From  what  I  have  already  written,  you  will  at  least  perceive  that  lam 
one  in  heart  with  you  upon  the  subject  of  Peace.  I  rejoice,  therefore, 
in  your  "  Appeal  to  the  Ministers  of  Jesus  Christ  in  Great  Britain  and 
the  United  States."  May  the  Holy  Spirit  send  it  with  power  to  their 
hearts,  that  the  watchman  of  Zion  may  awake  and  give  their  King  no  rest 
until  he  "  establish  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth  ;"  until  "the  wolf  and 
the  lamb  feed  together  and  the  leopard  lie  down  with  the  kid."  I  have 
long  been  of  opinion  that  ministers  of  the  Gospel  have  been  lamentably 
deficient  upon  this  subject ;  many  of  them,  I  fear,  have  shunned  to  de- 
clare the  whole  counsel  of  God ;  have  failed  fully  to  propound  the  glad 
mission  of  eternal  peace,  and  universal  brotherhood,  and  by  such  means 
to  endeavor  to  put  down  all  need  of  armies  in  the  world ;  and  if  they 
have  touched  upon  it  at  all,  in  many  cases,  I  fear,  it  has  not  been  without 
compromise  to  the  prevailing  opinions  in  the  world  with  reference  to  war; 
without  truckling  to  expediency,  or  considering  whether  it  might  not  on 
some  occasions  be  lawful  for  a  christian  man  to  draw  the  sword. 

Where  the  civil  sceptre  is  allowed  to  rule  in  spiritual  things  and 
the  church  of  God  is  placed  under  secular  control,  we  need  no 
wonder  at  the  minister's  keeping  silence,  because  the  decrees  of 
Cesar  with  regard  to  war,  are  opposed  to  the  commands  of  Christ,  and 
they  cannot  serve  two  masters  ;  but  that  those  who  are  out  of  the  tram- 
mels of  an  establishment,  and  who  profess  to  be  Ministers  of  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  should  be  silent,  upon  this  momentous  question,  to  me  appears 
to  be  as  great  an  anomaly  as  for  Americans  to  call  their  country  the  land 
of  liberty,  while  they  break  not  the  fetters  of  the  slave.  Should  the 
Ministers  still  hold  their  peace,  the  savage  sons  of  long  benighted  Africa 
will  rise  up  in  judgment  against  them  upon  this  question.  You  have  heard 
of  Africaner,  once  the  terror  and  the  scourge  of  the  tribes  of  Southern 


120  LETTER  FROM  OXFORD,  ENG. 

Africa,  but  receiving  the  gospel  through  the  instrumentality  of  our  inde- 
fatigable missionary,  Mr.  Moffat,  he  at  once  perceived  that  deeds  of  blood 
were  not  for  christian  men,  and  not  only  forsook  the  same  but  went  and 
taught  men  so.  This  I  heard  from  the  lips  of  Mr.  Moffat  himself,  when 
in  England  ;  and  I  believe  many  hundreds  of  our  Ministers  who  profess 
to  teach  us,  heard  the  same,  for  he  went  from  place  to  place  declaring  it : 
and  yet  of  the  majority  of  them,  it  is  to  be  feared,  it  may  yet  be  said, 
their  opinions  are  undefined  and  they  are  reluctant  boldly  to  declare  that 
all  fighting  is  a  sin.  But  is  it  less  a  sin  for  civilized  nations  than  for 
savages  to  fight  ?  Quite  the  reverse,  and  no  language  is  sufficiently 
strong  in  which  to  denounce  the  sin  of  two  such  nations  as  England  and 
America  going  to  war,  enjoying  as  they  do,  the  light  of  revelation.  What 
scenes  would  have  to  be  described  under  such  a  war  !  What  true  Chris- 
tian is  there  whose  heart  does  not  sicken  at  the  thought  of  our  late  do- 
ings in  India  and  China  ?  Though  for  the  present  we  appear  to  prosper, 
unless  we  as  a  nation  repent,  I  believe  God  will  ultimately  require  the 
blood  we  have  shed  at  our  hands.  We  are  now  flushed  with  victory  and 
drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  slain,  with  the  wages  of  iniquity  in  our 
hands,  which  we  have  wrested  from  a  comparatively  inoffensive  and  de- 
fenceless people,  the  Chinese.  "  Having  driven  whole  masses  of  them  into 
their  narrow  streets,  we  then  brought  cannon  and  mowed  them  down  by 
wholesale."  "  When  we  got  possession  of  Chinhae,  we  found  many  had 
destroyed  themselves  in  various  ways ;  fathers  having  murdered  their 
own  families,  and  then  killed  themselves  lest  they  should  fall  into  our 
hands,"  &c.  &c.  "  Thus  we  conquered  them."  "  Then  we  demanded 
from  them  fifteen  hundred  thousand  pounds,  and  made  them  promise  to 
pay  twice  as  much  more  and  took  part  of  their  country."  And  our  do- 
ings in  India  have  been  of  a  like  nature.  And  yet  the  Ministers  of  our 
Established  Church  have  been  thanking  God  for  such  conquests !  But 
though  like  the  Harlot  we  may  thus  wipe  the  mouth  and  say  we  have 
done  no  wickedness,  in  my  opinion,  we  have  contracted  guilt  of  a  crimson 
dye  and  sin  as  black  as  that  of  the  midnight  assassin,  who  in  his  lust  of 
gold,  slays  his  victim  and  then  returns  to  his  den  and  carouses  over  the 
spoil.  The  sanction  of  human  custom  does  not  lessen  the  crime.  Where 
does  He  whom  we  profess  to  follow,  give  countenance  to  such  extortion, 
such  wholesale  robbery,  such  deeds  of  murder  and  of  blood  ! 

I  hope  your  Appeal  to  Ministers  will  be  responded  to  in  each  nation, 
and  that  they  will  make  their  voices  heard  through  the  length  and  breadth 
of  each  land,  denouncing  war,  and  publishing  peace  ;  and  not  let  the  echo 
of  that  anthem  "  Peace  on  earth,  &c,"  "  go  up  to  heaven  from  the  lips  of 
men  of  commerce"  only.    It  is  a  cry  in  which  all  men  may  well  unite, 


121 


and  if  responded  to  by  all,  would  accomplish  both  the  political  and  reli- 
gious regeneration  of  the  world. — Alas  !  that  mankind  should  have  suf- 
fered eighteen  hundred  years  to  have  rolled  away  since  that  anthem  was 
sung,  and  by  their  mutual  jealousies  and  restrictive  laws,  to  have  retard- 
ed so  great  a  blessing  !  I  hope  our  statesmen  are  now  growing  wiser. 
The  adoption  of  free  trade  principles  will  do  much  to  promote  it. 

I  long  to  see  the  day  when  Old  England's  wooden  walls,  shall  be  waft- 
ed to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  not  to  lay  waste  and  to  destroy,  but  for  a 
nobler  purpose.  When  the  death's  head  and  cross  bones  shall  be  supersed- 
ed by  the  olive  branch,  and  Britian's  gallant  tars,  (instead  of  being  the 
scourges  of  the  human  race)  shall  be  hailed  in  every  land  as  the  messen- 
gers of  'peace. — I  conclude  with  the  earnest  prayer  that  the  most  High 
may  long  spare  your  valuable  life,  to  be  devoted  to  the  promotion  of  so 
good  a  cause  ;  and  with  all  deference, 

Remain,  yours 

Very  faithfully,  J.  I.  EL 

Oxford,  April  2d,  1846. 


FRIENDLY  INTERNATIONAL  ADDRESSES. 

Since  the  last  number  of  the  Advocate,  we  have  received  several  communications  from 
abroad,  adverting,  in  terms  of  earnest  gratulation,  to  the  progress  and  influence  of  this 
interesting  social  movement.  The  following  letter  from  our  three  friends  in  Manchester, 
indicates  the  interest  elicited  in  England  by  these  "  Friendly  International  Addresses." 

Manchester,  2d  of  \th  month,  1846. 

Esteemed  Friend  Elihu  Burritt, 

Rejoice  with  us,  for  we  have  found  that  which  was  lost,  or  if  not  lost,  at 
least  hidden  ;  we  mean  the  energies  of  the  friends  of  Peace  in  the  United 
States.  Our  eyes  have  seen,  our  ears  have  heard,  and  our  hearts  have 
been  gladdened  with  your  noble  responses. 

You  tell  us  that  the  "  vast  aggregate  of  morai  worth  is  beginning  to  be 
called  into  action  ;"  we  are  rejoiced  that  it  is  so  :  we  never  doubted  its 
existence.  It  appeared  to  us  to  be  lying  dormant,  and  our  object  in  the 
promotion  of  Friendly  International  Addresses  was  to  "  elicit  a  proof  that 
it  really  did  exist,"  at  a  time  when,  both  for  your  sakes  and  ours,  the  call 
upon  the  friends  of  Peace  in  your  country  was  so  very  urgent.  We  have 
indeed  had  our  reward.  You  have  declared  to  the  World  that  overtures 
of  peace  are  "  more  powerful  than  brute  force,"  and  that  "  without  the 
most  deplorable  obstinancy  and  blackest  guilt  on  the  part  of  one  or  both, 
a  war  is  imposible." — We  cordially  unite  in  these  sentiments  and  look 
upon  them  as  a  pledge  of  confirmed  peace  and  closer  amity. 

Thy  letter  of  the  26th  of  2d  month  reached  us  on  the  loth  alt  It  re- 
ceived if  possible  a  more  cordial  welcome  than  its  predecessor.  We  has- 
tened to  gladden  other  hearts  as  well  as  our  own  with  its  cheerin^  news 
11* 


v 


122  FRIENDLY  INTERNATIONAL  ADDRESSES. 

and  glowing  sentiments.  We  multiplied  it  a  thousand  fold,  and  scattered 
it  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  The  effects  of  it  will  be 
felt  far  and  wide  ;  as  a  proof  of  which,  we  transmit  thee  a  copy  of  a  letter 
from,  we  suppose,  a  new  correspondent,  but  a  name  well  known  to  fame 
on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Douglass  Jerrold  is  a  zealous  friend  of 
peace.  And  though  the  letter  speaks  of  the  "  Learned  Blacksmith"  in 
terms  which  might  induce  thee  to  hesitate  circulating  such  an  epistle,  yet 
we  trust  that  thou  wilt  not  permit  the  cause  of  peace  to  suffer  loss  by 
allowing  any  feeling  of  this  nature  to  prevent  thee  making  it  into  one  of 
thy  "Olive  Leaves,"  or  in  some  way  "distilling  it  in  dew-drops  over  the 
United  States."  If  thou  canst  not  do  it  thyself,  others  must  do  it  for 
thee. 

The  2d  Edition  of  our  pamphlet  on  Friendly  International  addresses 
will  explain  the  progress  we  have  been  making  in  the  movement.  We 
are  still  keeping  the  subject  before  the  public,  and  the  support  we  con- 
tinue to  receive  from  our  Press  is  very  encouraging.  The  response  from 
the  New  England  Plymouth  appeared  in  the  City  article  of  the  London 
Times  of  the  27th  ult.,  thus  bringing  the  subject  of  Friendly  Internation- 
al Addresses  before  the  whole  commercial  world,  indeed  carrying  it  to 
the  very  ends  of  the  earth. 

We  have  not  yet  received  the  original  of  the  New  York  address,  but 
we  have  circulated  printed  copies  of  it,  and  our  Merchants  and  Manufac- 
turers will  be  prepared  to  give  it  a  hearty  welcome  when  it  arrives. — (See 
Postscript.) 

It  will  indeed  be  a  blessed  thing,  as  thou  hast  so  aptly  observed,  if  the 
small  War-cloud  which  has  been  hovering  over  the  two  countries  shall  be 
the  means  of  bringing  the  friends  of  Peace  into  an  enthusiastic  union 
against  the  common  destroyer.  And  if  in  any  way,  the  hint  of  Friendly  In- 
ternational Addresses  has  served  to  promote  this  glorious  end,  we  desire 
to  be  thankful  to  the  Author  of  all  good. 

We  have  spread  abroad  thy  challenge  to  meet  Uncle  John  Bull  in  the 
field  of  friendship;  we  hope  he  will  accept  it.  For  ourselves  we  can 
only  say,  that  feeble  as  we  are  and  feel  onrselves  to  be,  our  consolation 
is,  that  to  use  thy  own  sentiments,  the  victor  and  the  vanquished  are  alike 
triumphant.  We  should  be  glad  to  see  levelled  to  the  ground  the  ram- 
parts of  prejudice  in  both  countries. 

We  feel  with  thee,  the  difficulty  which  the  restriction  on  international 
postage  impose  on  us,  and  we  have  handed  thy  suggestions  to  one  of  our 
Newspaper  Editors,  who  will  take  up  the  matter  shortly. 

And  now,  dear  friend,  we  must  conclude ;  we  have  not  said  half  of 
what  is  in  our  hearts,  in  truth  we  can  not.  We  could  talk  with  thee  over 
thy  hearth,  or  our  hearth,  but  we  cannot  make  time  to  write  just  now. — 
We  feel  overwhelmed  with  the  kindness  of  our  friends  in  Worcester,  Bos- 
ton, New  York,  and  we  suppose  all  over  America,  and  we  have  more  let- 
ters to  write  than  we  have  fingers  to  write  with.  When  we  first  proposed 
the  Friendly  International  Addresses,  we  knew  little  of  thee,  or  of  the 
flames  of  love  which  have  been  kindled  on  thy  glowing  hearth,  and  we 
little  dreamt  that  our  message  would  so  soon  enter  the  hearts  of  our  Ameri- 
can brethren  from  the  Rocky  Mountains  to  Texas.      In  fact  we  do  not 


FRIENDLY  INTERNATIONAL  ADDRESSES.  123 

feel  competent  to  the  task  we  have  undertaken.  But  in  the  Bonds  of 
Universal  Peace  and  Brotherhood, 

We  cordially  subscribe  ourselves, 

Thy  sincere  friends, 

Joseph  Crosfield, 
George  Bradshaw, 
Wjl  A.  Cunningham. 

P.  S.  Since  writing  the  above,  we  have  received  the  New  York  Re- 
sponsive Address.  We  hope  to  have  it  published  in  our  papers  in  time 
for  the  Steamer  to  Boston,  but  of  this  we  are  not  quite  certain.  The  ad- 
dress has  been  in  our  town  some  days,  but  the  party  to  whom  it  was  for- 
warded has  been  out  of  town.  We  enclose  a  printed  copy  of  a  Friendly 
Address  from  Margate  in  the  County  of  Kent ;  the  original  is  sent  by 
this  packet  to  New  York,  and  one  from  Rochdale,  in  the  county  of  Lan- 
caster, to  the  citizens  of  Boston,  which  also  goes  by  this  Packet. 


The  New  York  Response. 

"  To  the  Friends  of  Peace  throughout  the  British  Realm  :  and  especially 
those  in  Manchester,  Boston,  Huddersfield,  Plymouth,  and  other  places, 
who  have  issued  'Friendly  Addresses'  to  the  People  of  the  United 
States, 

The  undersigned,  merchants  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  city  of  New 
York,  earnestly  desiring  the  preservation  of  peace  between  the  two  coun- 
tries, are  the  more  encouraged  to  expect  it,  when  they  find  the  hearts  of 
so  many  in  the  father-land  beating  in  unison  with  their  own.  No  tri- 
umphs of  brute  force  over  moral  right  ever  did  or  can  command  our  ad- 
miration as  do  these  peaceful  overtures,  coming  from  a  nation  so  power- 
ful as  England,  and  so  well  prepared  for  a  conflict  of  arms  ;  and  none 
we  are  sure  were  ever  so  approved  by  the  Prince  of  Peace.  The  ef- 
fect of  these  "Friendly  Addresses  "  upon  the  public  mind  in  this  coun- 
try will  be  eminently  favorable  ;  and  will  do  much  to  promote  that 
hearty  good  will  which  ought  ever  to  prevail  between  nations  bound  to- 
gether by  so  many  sacred  ties.  Go  on  then,  respected  friends,  in  your 
labor  of  love  and  mercy.  Tell  your  people  that  our  noisiest  men  are  not 
the  best  exponents  of  the  national  sentiment  towards  Great  Britain,  or 
in  regard  to  war.  Tell  them  that  in  the  nation  at  large  there  is  a  vast 
aggregate  of  moral  worth,  which,  when  called  into  action,  as  it  is  begin- 
ning to  be,  by  the  threatened  calamities  of  a  causeless  and  unnecessary 
war,  will  assuredly  repress  ambition,  or  turn  it  into  a  more  peaceful  chan- 
nel. Tell  them  that  this  effect  is  already  visible  to  a  most  gratifying 
extent,  not  only  in  our  maritime  cities,  but  throughout  the  land  ;  and  that 
it  has  been  aided  by  the  relaxation  of  the  restrictive  features  of  your 
commercial  policy. 

A  war  of  concession,  compromise,  mutual  forbearance  and  good  fel- 
lowship, resulting,  a3  it  necessarily  must,  in  increasing  trade,  intellectual 
advancement,  and  progress  in  every  thing  truly  great  and  good,  is  the 
only  war  which  we  wish  to  see  waged  between  the  two  nations. 


124 


FRIENDLY  INTERNATIONAL  ADDRESSES. 


As  to  Oregon, — although  from  comparative  proximity,  we  naturally 
desire  our  proper  share  of  that  extensive  territory,  yet  we  will  gladly 
concur  [and  we  believe  such  is  the  general  voice  of  the  nation]  in  any 
fair  measures  of  compromise  or  reference,  which  the  two  governments 
may  see  fit  to  adopt,  for  the  peaceful  adjustment  of  the  question.  It  is 
clearly  one  which  ought  not,  under  any  circumstances,  to  breed  a  war 
between  the  two  countries  ;  and  we  hold  that  without  the  most  deplora- 
ble obstinacy  and  the  blackest  guilt,  on  the  part  of  one  or  both  of  the 
claimants,  such  an  issue  is  impossible.  As  a  matter  of  profit  and  loss, 
it  would  be  infinitely  better  that  "  the  whole  of  Oregon  "  should  sink  to 
the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  than  that  two  such  nations  as  Great  Britain  and 
the  United  States  should  go  to  war  about  it,  to  the  disgrace  of  civiliza- 
tion, Christianity,  and  rational  freedom. 

With  a  firm  belief  in  the  pacific  disposition  of  both  Governments,  and 
that  they  will  yet  be  enabled  to  settle  the  controversy  in  a  manner  at 
once  just  and  honorable  to  all  concerned,  we  look  forward  with  hope  to 
the  future,  and  in  the  meantime  beg  leave  to  subscribe  ourselves  your 
friends  and  well-wishers." 

[Signed  by  400  most  respectable  and  influential  citizens.] 


The  Response  of  New  England's  Boston 
to  Old  England's  Boston. 

Boston,  April  9, 1846. 

We  are  directed  by  the  City  Council  of  Boston,  in  Massachusetts,  to  ac- 
knowledge, on  behalf  of  its  citizens,  the  receipt  of  the  letter  addressed  to 
them  by  the  citizens  of  Boston,  in  Lincolnshire,  dated  Jan.  27,  1846.  To 
the  friendly  sentiments  which  it  expresses,  we  return  a  cordial  response. 
Feeling  as  we  do  a  strong  interest  in  a  land  whose  language  we  speak, 
whose  books  we  read,  and  whose  laws  and  institutions  have  furnished  the 
models  upon  which  our  own  were  shaped,  we  acknowledge  with  peculiar 
force  the  ties  of  sympathy  which  bind  us  to  your  city  of  Boston,  We 
have  borrowed  from  you  a  name  which  is  inexpressibly  dear  to  our 
hearts ;  and  when  we  hear  it  in  a  foreign  land,  it  invests  the  spot,  which 
bears  it,  with  something  of  the  sacred  character  of  home. 

We  subscribe  to  the  sentiments  expressed  in  your  letter  upon  the  sub- 
ject of  war.  We  believe  it  to  be  an  evil,  the  extent  and  magnitude  of 
which  can  hardly  be  overstated.  It  accumulates  upon  humanity  all  pos- 
sible forms  of  suffering  and  privation.  It  surrenders  large  masses  of  men 
to  the  dominion  of  those  passions  from  which  education  and  Christianity 
are  ever  struggling  to  set  them  free.  It  exposes  the  weak  and  unpro- 
tected to  brutal  violence  and  cruel  wrong.  That  it  is  injurious  to  the 
matei lal  prosperity  of  States,  that  it  puts  back  the  hands  upon  the  dial- 
plate  of  Time,  that  it  undoes  in  weeks  and  days  the  work  of  years  and  gen- 
erations, is  a  great  evil  of  war,  but  not  the  greatest.  A  worse  feature  in  it  is, 
that  it  wounds  the  le.nderest  affections  of  the  human  heart,  that  it  strips  fami- 
lies of  their  stays  and  protectors,  that  it  reverses  the  order  of  Nature, 
forcing  fathers  to  bury  their  sons,  and  the  aged  to  mourn  over  the  un- 
timely graves  of  the  young.    And  worse  even  than  these  are  the  demor- 


FRIENDLY  INTERNATIONAL  ADDRESSES. 


125 


alizing  consequences  of  war.  It  legalizes  piracy,  under  the  form  of  priva- 
teering. It  leads  to  systematic  deceptions  and  deliberate  evasions  of  law 
highly  injurious  to  the  moral  sense  of  all  who  engage  in  them.  It  fills  the 
minds  of  the  young  with  false  notions  of  honor  and  glory.  We  look  upon 
war  as  peculiarly  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  We  believe  that 
it  must  long  ago  have  ceased  among  Christian  nations,  were  it  not  that 
men  so  constantly  dishonor  in  their  lives,  those  truths  to  which  they  as- 
sent with  their  lips. 

We  believe,  too,  that  as  a  general  rule,  war  is  one  of  the  greatest  of 
evils.  We  subscribe  the  well  known  sentiment  of  one  of  your  own 
poets — 

"  War  is  a  game,  which,  -were  their  subjects  wise, 
Kings  would  not  play  at." 

As  a  means  for  the  adjustment  of  controversies,  we  regard  it  as  wholly 
unreasonable,  since  it  submits  to  the  arbitration  of  force  that  which  is 
purely  a  question  of  right,  and  makes  the  stronger  arm  triumph  over  the 
juster  claim.  Of  all  the  many  wars  which  darken  the  pages  of  history, 
how  few  there  are  which  might  not  have  been  averted  by  mutual  forbear- 
ance, patience  and  self-sacrifice  ;  by  those  virtues  which  Christianity  en- 
joins, and  even  self-interest  exacts  from  individuals  in  the  ordinary  rela- 
tions of  life. 

Cherishing,  as  we  do,  these  views,  we  need  not  say  that  our  influence 
will  be  exerted  in  favor  of  a  peaceful  adjustment  of  our  present  contro- 
versy with  Great  Britain.  It  is  alike  our  interest  and  our  duty  to  do 
this.  Indeed,  we  apprehend  none  other  than  a  peaceful  termination  of 
our  present  causes  of  difference.  We  feel  confident  that  there  is  too  much 
of  good  sense  and  correct  feeling  in  both  countries  to  allow  of  any  other 
result.  Should  the  future  prove  us  to  be  mistaken  in  this  anticipation,  it 
can  only  be  on  account  of  the  wickedness  of  the  few  and  the  apathy  of 
the  many. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be, 
With  sincere  respect, 

Your  friends  and  obedient  servants, 
Josiah  Quincy,  Jr. 
Mayor  of  the  City  of  Boston  in  New  England. 
George  S.  Hillard, 

President  of  the  Common  Council. 


The  Caledonia  brought  over  two  more  Addresses — one  from  Rochdale, 
the  other  from  Margate,  England. 

The  Ministers,  Magistrates,  Manufacturers,  Merchants,  and  other  Inhabi- 
tants of  Rochdale,  Lancashire,  to  the  Citizens  of  Boston,  and  through 
them,  to  the  Citizens  of  the  United  States  of  North  America. 
Friends  and  Fellow  Citizens, 

With  deep  solicitude  and  unfeigned  regret,  have  we  contemplated  the 
hostile  sentiments  expressed  by  some,  on  either  side  of  the  Atlantic,  in 
reference  to  the  Oregon  question,  and  the  possible  rupture  of  those  amica- 
ble relations  which  have  so  long  and  advantageously  existed  between  Eng- 


120  FRIENDLY  INTERNATIONAL  ADDRESSES. 

land  and  America.  Fain  would  we  take  a  part,  with  all  the  lovers  of 
peace  and  good  order,  in  endeavoring  to  allay  the  feelings  of  jealous  dis- 
cord, and  to  avert  the  disastrous  issue  to  which  they  tend. 

Regarding  war,  in  any  instance,  as  a  calamity  deeply  to  be  deplored, 
we  especially  deprecate  it  in  the  present  case,  as  tending  to  stay  the  pro- 
gress of  civilization  and  liberty  throughout  the  world,  and  to  darken  the 
prospects  and  blight  the  interests  of  universal  man. 

But  there  are  other  considerations,  more  nearly  affecting  us  in  com- 
mon, and  which  tend  to  strengthen  the  desires  for  continued  and  perma- 
nent peace.  Our  mercantile  interests  are  largely  involved,  and  by  their 
wanton  sacrifice,  at  the  shrine  of  a  sanguinary  and  brutal  violence,  not 
only  will  industry  be  restricted,  and  the  spirit  of  enterprise  checked,  but 
the  comforts  of  our  several  houses  be  embittered  and  abridged.  Besides, 
are  we  not  one  in  national  descent  ?  Are  we  not  united  by  the  ties  of  a 
common  brotherhood  ?  Do  we  not  sympathize  in  the  same  great  objects 
of  scientific,  literary  and  philanthropic  pursuits  ?  Do  we  not  offer  our  de- 
votions to  the  Father  of  spirits  in  one  and  the  same  language  ?  Do  we 
not  alike  recognize  our  obligations  to  imitate  Him  whose  course  through 
this  world  wTas  signalized  by  the  triumphs  of  mercy,  and  who  came,  1  not 
to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them  ?' 

Shall  then  all  these  ties  of  interest  and  pleasurable  union  be  ruthlessly 
broken?  shall  our  pecuniary  resources  be  wasted, — shall  the  ties  of  do- 
mestic life  be  violated, — shall  our  common  humanity  be  outraged, — shall 
the  brave  and  loving  hearts  of  our  countrymen  and  friends  pour  forth 
their  vital  tides, —  and,  above  all,  shall  the  laws  of  our  beneficent  Creator 
be  dishonored,  for  the  sake  of  any  amount  of  territory  ?  Surely  that 
were  to  purchase  it  at  too  high  a  price.  Let  us  rather  cherish  the  spirit 
of  mutual  forbearance  and  concession  ;  and  unite  in  earnest  and  ceaseless 
endeavors  to  frustrate  the  designs  of  ambitious  and  reckless  minds,  and 
to  promote  the  continuance  of  international  harmony  and  good-will. 

May  the  '  Giver  of  concord'  dispose  the  hearts  of  all  governments  and 
nations  to  gentleness  and  goodness,  and  render  our  respective  countries, 
the  home  of  permanent  prosperity  and  peace. 

Signed  by  231  Inhabitants  of  Rochdale. 


Address  from  the  Undersigned  Inhabitants  of  the  Town  of  Margate,  in 
the  County  of  Kent,  Old  England,  to  the  Citizens  of  New  York,  and 
the  Inhabitants  of  the  United  States  of  America: 

Friends, 

It  is  our  earnest  desire  that  nothing  may  be  allowed  to  interrupt  those 
amicable  relations,  which  under  the  divine  blessing,  have  for  so  many 
years  subsisted  between  your  country  and  our  own.  There  being  at 
the  present  moment,  the  rumor  of  a  possible  breach  of  these  friendly 
relations,  we  beg  of  you  to  assist  us  in  endeavoring  to  dispel  even  a  sur- 
mise so  baneful  in  its  present  consequences,  and  calculated  to  lead  to  still 
more  disastrous  results. 

You  and  we  have  a  common  ancestry  ;  our  ties  are  such,  that  should 
wai  },  men  must  on  either  side  be  hired  to  slay  their  own  rela- 
tive-' 


PEACE  MOVEMENTS  ABROAD  AND  AT  HOME.  127 

We  desire  to  acknowledge  our  dependence  for  all  we  enjoy  on  the 
bounty  of  a  kind  Providence,  who  has  beneficently  designed  that  the 
varying  products  of  the  earth  should  be  freely  borne  from  the  shores  of 
one  nation  to  those  of  another.  We  therefore  congratulate  you,  and 
ourselves  on  the  early  prospect  of  a  still  closer  bond  of  commercial  union 
between  these  two  great  nations. 

We  beg  of  you,  to  unite  with  us  in  recording  a  solemn  testimony,  that 
our  differences  ought  to  be  settled  by  reason,  not  by  arms  ;   that  arbitra- 

d0n  h°k  C^rC,0f'-  ShTld  be  the  final  resort  5  that  the  P™>  the  sword, 
should  be  the  arbiter  between  us. 

May  the  great  family  of  man  become  closely  united  in  christian  fel- 
lowship-then will  commerce  hold  on  its  uninterrupted  course,  and  war 
with  all  its  horrors  be  banished  from  the  earth. 

MA^ecHinf846°Ur  h6allh        prosperit^  we  are  y°uv  Fiends. 


PEACE  MOVEMENTS  ABROAD. 

The  readers  of  the  Advocate  will  learn  from  the  correspondence  published  in  the  depart- 
me  t  of  Umversal  Brotherhood,  some  particulars  with  regard  to  the  progress  of  the  cauVe 
of  Peace  m  England.    By  the  recent  arrival  of  a  steamer,  cheering  intelligence  has  been 

enrol  the  M.ht.a  by  ballot.  The  Cambria  brought  over  several  -  Friendly  Addresses^  from 
vanons  towns  m  England,  to  the  people  of  ,„is  eountry ;  from  Southampton  to  Z cbmT 
Bu  y  ,  Lancash.re,  to  P.ttsburgh  ,  Young  Men  of  Bristol  to  the  Young  Men  of  Nevr  York  •' 
Antt-Uar Assoe.at.on  of  Bristol  to  the  citizens  of  Washington  ;  Birmingham  to ^hl People 
of  the  Umted  State,  ,  the  Sunday  School  Teachers  of  Manchester  District,  to  Americ  n  S 
S.  Teachers  ;  the  Fraternal  Democrats,  embracing  natives  of  all  the  Couth  ,1,  p 
to  the  IT-totOta-  of  Great  Britiau  and  theWs^ S^^^ZZ 
were  announced  as  being  prepared  to  forward  to  this  country.  Addiesse, 

PEACE  MOVEMENTS  AT  HOME. 

■JjT^T*"'"0''  FlT0HBD1!G-  The  Worcester  County  Peace  Society  held  it* 
first  Quarterly  meeting  at  Fitchburg  on  Friday,  April  17th,  at  10  o'clock  A  M  The  Jb 
cers  present  were  Amasa  Walker,  Esq.  President-  Eiilm  H„rri»  r ,  ffl" 
«*,  and  Julius  L.  Clarke,  EecordTg  Sw   gt^StZ  ^ 

the  meetmg  was  thinly  attended,  but  was  one  of  deep  interest    AnLaf  d  o 'rf      ■  7 
dresses  were  made  by  Messrs.  Amasa  Walker,  of  North 
ter;  J.  P.  Blanchard,  of  Boston;  Eev.  EInathan  Davis  A-ent  of    1  T 
Messrs.  Bristol  and  Eemington,  of  Fitchburg ;  Rev.  Mr  sTe  o  r    ,         ^  ^ 

tiESr*?1"*  Wh°TOhnitari,y  «*  ™<lersta'udi„g,y  pr„mote  war 


128 


PEACE  MOVEMENTS  AT  HOME. 


Considerable  interest  was  elicited  in  the  cause  of  peace  by  this  Convention,  and  manv  of 
the  citizens  of  Fitchburg  manifested  much  sympathy  with  its  principles. 

Amasa  Walker,  Esq,  addressed  the  people  of  Gardner  three  times  on  Sunday,  April 
19th,  in  Eev.  Mr.  Stone's  church.  Those  who  heard  him,  we  doubt  not,  were  convinced 
that  the  sublimest  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  are  those  which  teach  us  love  to  God  and  man  > 
principles  that  lie  at  the  foundation  of  the  peace  cause,  and  for  whose  utterance  and  exer- 
cise the  sabbath  was  made. 

"  The  Bonds  of  Brotherhood."  We  anticipate  much  from  putting  all  the  railroads 
and  steamboat  lines  under  these  "  Bonds  to  keep  the  peace."  Being  filled  with  a  spicy 
variety  of  facts,  arguments,  and  illustrations  relating  to  Peace  and  War,  they  are  more 
happily  adapted  to  the  gratuitous  distribution  than  mere  Tracts.  We  have  made  arrange- 
ments for  their  distribution  at  Syracuse,  and  Cleveland,  two  important  centres  and 
points  of  travel.  We  have  forwarded  to  each  of  those  places  1000  copies  of  each  of  the 
two  first  numbers,  at  our  own  expense.  An  earnest  friend  of  peace  has  been  raised  up  in 
Cleveland— the  Eev.  J.  W.  Walker — who  in  a  letter  recently  received,  says  he  has  com- 
menced lecturing  on  the  subject  in  the  open  air.  We  have  in  addition  to  the  "  Bonds," 
forwarded  to  him  a  barrel  of  old  Peace  publications  for  gratuitous  distribution  on  board  of 
the  steamboats  that  touch  at  that  place.  Eev.  S.  J.  May,  a  long  and  well  tried  veteran  of 
the  peace  band,  has  in  the  most  cordial  manner,  promised  to  supervise  the  distribution  of 
the  Bonds  in  the  cars  and  canal-boats  that  pass  through  Syracuse  ;  so  that  a  gulf  stream  of 
locomotive  mind  will  receive  and  carry  to  different  parts  of  the  Union,  a  slight  infusion  of 
peace  principles.  We  distribute  in  the  cars  that  pass  through  Worcester,  about  1000  of 
these  missiles  a  week.  At  Fitchburg,  also,  they  are  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  all  the 
passengers  on  the  railroad  between  that  place  and  Boston.  We  hope>  during  the  month  of 
May,  to  extend  this  system  to  railroads  farther  south. 

Eev.  E.  Davis,  Agent  of  the  American  and  Worcester  County  Peace  Societies,  writes  : 
During  the  month  of  April  I  visited  Eoyalston,  South  Eoyalston,  Winchendon  and  Ash- 
burnham,  and  lectured  9  or  10  times  to  audiences  that  seemed  deeply  interested  in  the 
question  of  peace.  Let  the  question  be  fully  presented  to  the  people  of  N.  England,  and 
they  will  take  a  strong  position  against  war  under  any  and  all  circumstances. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Worcester  Central  Association  of  ministers  held  at  Berlin  on  the 
first  Tuesday  in  the  present  month,  I  presented  the  subject  briefly  to  that  influential  body, 
whereupon  the  following  action  was  taken. 

"  The  Committee  on  the  subject  of  peace,  submitted  the  followiug  Eesolution,  which 
was  adopted — 

Resolved — That  as  men  and  as  Ministers  of  the  Gospel,  we  heartily  approve  of  the  great 
object  and  aim  of  the  Am.  Peace  Society,  viz.  the  abolition  of  war  throughout  the  World : 
— that  we  commend  that  Society,  and  its  auxiliaries,  to  the  favorable  regard  and  efficient 
aid  of  the  Churches  and  Societies  within  our  bounds;  that  we  rejoice  at  the  growing  sen- 
timent against  the  crime  and  scourge  of  Avar,  and  especially  at  the  moral  stand  taken  at 
the  present  crisis,  in  this  country  and  in  Europe,  to  preserve  the  threatened  harmony  of 
kindred  nations,  and  that  we  hail  this  emphasis  of  christian  sentiment,  and  the  listening  to 
it  of  so  many,  as  new  and  peaceful  proof  that  right  sentiments  rightly  expressed,  and 
earnestly  urged  in  such  an  age  as  the  present,  may  in  the  good  Providence  of  God  be  ex- 
pected to  meet  with  speedy  encouragement  and  ultimate  success." 

S.  G.  Buckingham, 
Sec.  pro  tem.  of  the  Worcester  Central  Association. 


AMERICAN  PEACE  SOCIETY. 

The  Depository  of  the  American  Peace  Society  is  at  No.  21,  Court  Square,  Boston.  The 
Advocate  of  Peace,  and  a  variety  of  other  peace  publications,  may  always  be  obtained 
there.  J.  P.  Blanciiard, 

Treasurer  and  Stationary  Agent. 


\ 


ELIS  BINDERY  INC. 
ALTHAM,  MASS. 
Ju.tf  1958 


