Purcljascft  from 


AGE  AND  AREA 


CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
C.  F.  CLAY,  Manager 
LONDON  :  FETTER  LANE,  E.C.4 


LONDON  :  H.  K.  LEWIS  AND  CO.,  Ltd., 

136,  Gower  Street,  W.C.  1 
LONDON :  WHELDON  AND  WESLEY,  Ltd., 

28,  Essex  Street,  Strand,  W.C.  2 
NEW  YORK:  THE  MACMILLAN  CO. 
BOMBAY  } 

CALCUTTA  \  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 
MADRAS  J 

TORONTO  :  THE   MACMILLAN  CO.  OF 

CANADA,  Ltd. 
TOKYO  :  MARU  ZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA 


ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED 


AGE  AND  AREA 

A  STUDY  IN  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION 
AND  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


BY 

J.  C.  WILLIS 

M.A.,  Sc.D.,  Hon.  Sc.D.  (Harvard),  F.R.S. 
European  Correspondent,  late  Director,  Botanic  Gardens, 
Rio  de  Janeiro 


WITH  CHAPTERS  BY 

HUGO  DE  VRIES,  F.M.R.S. 

H.  B.  GUPPY,  M.B.,  F.R.S. 

Mrs  E.  M.  REID,  B.Sc,  F.L.S. 

JAMES  SMALL,  D.Sc,  F.L.S. 

[These  authors  are  not  committed,  by  writing  these  chapters, 
to  the  support  of  all  the  doctrines  here  advanced] 


CAMBRIDGE 
AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
1922 


H 

0&322, 

SCIENCE 

QH 


PREFACE 


Some  thirty  years  ago,  a  pupil  of  the  strictest  school  of  natural 
selection,  and  enthusiastic  in  my  belief  in  its  principles,  I  set 
out  upon  a  course  of  independent  observation  of  nature.  Ten 
years  of  such  work  convinced  me  that  a  simpler  explanation  of 
phenomena  was  always  to  be  found,  and  one  that  seemed  more 
in  accordance  with  the  facts;  and  I  endeavoured — with  what 
success  this  book  will  show — to  free  myself  from  the  trammels  of 
the  natural  selection  theory,  and  to  work  as  if  I  had  found  myself 
in  another  planet  where  scientific  investigation  was  just  begin- 
ning. Stationed  in  one  of  the  best  centres  in  the  tropics  (where 
the  phenomena  of  distribution  are  more  impressive  than  in 
Europe),  badly  handicapped  in  laboratory  work  by  a  serious 
accident,  and  finding  my  chief  pleasure  in  travelling  about  the 
world  to  see  its  vegetation — I  took  up  the  study  of  distribution, 
in  which  I  had  always  taken  much  interest. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  was  soon  evident  that  the  current 
theories  provided  an  explanation  that  was  not  only  unnecessarily 
complex,  but  one  that  did  not  explain.  As  one  of  my  critics 
words  it,  "for  some  reason  the  plant  has  advantages  which 
enable  it  to  spread";  and  beyond  that  point  we  cannot  go. 
Gradually  it  became  clear  to  me  that  plants  spread  very  slowly, 
but  at  an  average  rate  determined  by  the  various  causes  acting 
upon  them,  so  that  age  forms  a  measure  of  dispersal  when  one 
is  dealing  with  allied  and  similar  forms. 

Age  as  an  explanation  of  spread  is  enormously  simpler  than 
natural  selection,  and  that  it  is  probably  valid  is  shown  by  the 
way  in  which  it  can  be  used  for  prediction.  An  opponent  re- 
marks that  "it  is  too  simple  to  be  true,"  but  this  very  simplicity 
seems  to  me  a  strong  reason  in  favour  of  its  adoption,  at  any 
rate  as  a  preliminary  hypothesis.  Of  two  explanations  take  the 
simpler,  is  an  old  rule,  and  as  Hooker  has  said,  "no  speculation 
is  idle  or  fruitless,  that  is  not  opposed  to  truth  or  to  probability, 
and  which,  while  it  coordinates  a  body  of  well-established  facts, 
does  so  without  violence  to  nature,  and  with  a  due  regard  to  the 


vi 


PREFACE 


possible  results  of  future  discoveries."  To  find  explanation  of  the 
facts  of  distribution  under  the  current  theories  has  always 
seemed  a  very  hopeless  task,  and  any  hypothesis  that  offers  a 
way  out  should  at  least  receive  attention.  No  hypothesis  can, 
after  all,  alter  the  facts,  though  it  may  show  ways  in  which  to 
accumulate  new  ones. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  book,  I  have  pushed  my  hypothesis 
to  what  seem  to  me  its  logical  conclusions,  conclusions  which 
are  sometimes  subversive  of  received  opinions.  To  be  compelled 
to  re-examine  the  bases  upon  which  those  opinions  are  founded 
will  do  science  no  injury,  however. 

While  the  defects  of  the  book  are  my  own,  I  owe  what  is  good 
in  it  very  largely  to  the  constant  help,  advice,  and  criticism  of 
many  friends,  among  whom  I  would  specially  mention  Dr  Hugo 
de  Vries,  Dr  H.  B.  Guppy,  Mrs  E.  M.  Reid,  and  Prof.  James 
Small,  all  of  whom  have  also  contributed  chapters  to  the  work. 
To  these  four  I  must  add  my  friend  Mr  G.  Udny  Yule,  to  whose 
trained  mathematical  skill  I  owe  much  useful  help  and  criticism. 
Prof.  J.  Stanley  Gardiner  has  helped  me  very  greatly  in  the  work 
upon  animals.  In  particular  he  was  so  kind  as  to  obtain  for  me 
the  help  of  Dr  Hugh  Scott,  who  spent  hours  with  me  in  counting 
beetles,  Mr  E.  Meyrick,  F.R.S.,  who  gave  me  figures  for  dis- 
tribution of  Micro-lepidoptera,  Mr  G.  C.  Robson,  and  Dr  W.  T. 
Caiman,  F.R.S.  To  the  criticism  of  Prof.  E.  S.  Prior,  A.R.A.,  I 
largely  owe  the  present  simplified  form  of  the  book,  and  its 
freedom  from  technical  terms;  he  was  also  so  kind  as  to  obtain 
for  me  the  aid  of  Dr  W.  D.  Lang.  References  to  literature,  and 
other  valuable  help,  I  owe  to  Sir  David  Prain  and  Mr  S.  A.  Skan 
at  Kew,  Mr  G.  Goode,  M.A.,  at  the  University  Library,  Miss 
Taylor  at  the  Balfour  Library,  and  others,  whilst  I  am  also 
deeply  indebted  for  help  and  criticism  to  (the  late)  Dr  E.  A.  N. 
Arber,  Mrs  Agnes  Arber,  Prof.  Margaret  Benson,  Mr  E.  Breakwell, 
Dr  W.  B.  Brierley,  Dr  N.  L.  Britton,  Dr  J.  Brownlee,  Mr  J.  Burtt- 
Davy,  Dr  L.  Cockayne,  (the  late)  Mr  R.  W.  Davie,  Mr  C.  E. 
Foweraker,  Mr  E.  G.  Gallop,  Prof.  R.  Ruggles  Gates,  Dr  B. 
Daydon  Jackson,  (the  late)  Dr  A.  Lofgren,  Dr  D.  T.  MacDougal, 
Dr  J.  H.  Maiden,  Miss  E.  R.  Saunders,  Dr  D.  H.  Scott,  Prof. 
A.  C.  Seward,  Mr  A.  M.  Smith,  Dr  Norman  Taylor,  Dr  R.  J. 


PREFACE 


vii 


Tillyard,  Prof.  A.  Wall,  Dr  J.  E.  B.  Warming,  Prof.  D.  M.  S. 
Watson,  and  many  others.  That  I  have  been  able  to  carry  out 
this  work  at  all  I  owe  to  the  labours  of  generations  of  systematists, 
botanical  and  zoological,  foremost  among  whom,  inasmuch  as 
the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area  was  originally  founded  upon 
their  work,  I  must  place  my  predecessors  in  Ceylon,  G.  H.  K. 
Thwaites  and  Henry  Trimen.  I  must  also  specially  mention 
Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  as  this  work  forms  a  continuation  of  his 
labours  of  the  fifties.  Last,  but  not  least,  I  am  deeply  grateful 
to  my  wife,  and  to  my  relatives,  Mrs  and  Miss  Steel,  for  much 
help  ungrudgingly  given. 

For  illustrations  I  am  much  indebted  for  loan  of  blocks  to  the 
Royal  Society,  and  to  the  Editors  of  the  Annals  of  Botany,  Nature, 
and  New  Phytologist ;  also  to  my  daughter  Margaret,  who  made 
the  drawings  from  which  all,  except  those  on  pp.  125,  153,  173, 
241  and  242,  were  prepared. 

J.  C.  WILLIS. 


Cambridge, 

4  April,  1922. 


CONTENTS 
PART  I.  THE  PRESENT  POSITION 


OF  AGE  AND  AREA 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  Introductory   1 

II.  The  Dispersal  of  Plants  into  New  Areas  .  10 

III.  The  Introduction  and  Spread  of  Foreign 

Species        .    24 

IV.  Acclimatisation   29 

V.  Causes  which  favour  or  hinder  the  Dis- 
persal of  Species   32 

VI.  Age  and  Area   54 

VII.  Age  and  Area  (contd.).    Confirmation  by 

Prediction   66 

VIII.  Age  and  Area  (contd.).  Invasions  ...  76 

IX.  Objections  to  the  Hypothesis      ...  84 


PART  II.  THE  APPLICATION  OF  AGE  AND  AREA 


TO  THE  FLORA  OF  THE  WORLD, 
AND  ITS  IMPLICATIONS 

X.  The  Position  of  the  Age  and  Area  Theory  101 

By  H.  B.  Guppy,  M.B.,  F.R.S. 

XI.  The  Further  Extension  of  the  Application 

of  Age  and  Area  107 

XII.  Size  and  Space  113 

XIII.  Age  and  Area,  and  Size  and  Space,  in  the 

Compositae  119 

By  James  Small,  D.Sc,  F.L.S. 


x  CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

XIV.  Age  and  Area  from  a  Palaeobotanical 

Standpoint   137 

By  Mrs  E.  M.  Reid,  B.Sc,  F.L.S. 

XV.  Endemism  and  Distribution:  Species    .       .  148 

XVI.  Endemism  and  Distribution  :  Genera  .       .  169 

XVII.  The  Monotypic  Genera,  and  Genera  of 

Larger  Size   185 

XVIII.  The  Hollow  Curve  of  Distribution     .       .  195 

XIX.  Applicability  of  Age  and  Area  to  Animals  .  200 

XX.  The  Origin  of  Species   204 

XXI.  Age  and  Area  and  the  Mutation  Theory    .  222 
By  Hugo  de  Vries,  F.M.R.S. 

XXII.  Geographical  Distribution  :  General  .       .  228 

List  of  Literature   247 

Index   253 

The  illustrations  on  pp.  56,  66,  76,  78,  79,  80,  153,  I  owe  to  the  courtesy 
of  the  Editor,  Annals  of  Botany. 


PART  I 


THE  PRESENT  POSITION 
OF  AGE  AND  AREA 

CHAPTER  I 
INTRODUCTORY 

The  existing  distribution  of  a  plant  (or  animal)  upon  the  surface 
of  the  globe,  which  is  often  a  very  complex  phenomenon,  is  due 
to  the  interaction  of  very  many  factors.  Sometimes  they  are 
inherent  to  the  plant  itself,  sometimes  they  are  incidental  to  its 
surroundings,  sometimes  they  partake  of  both  qualities.  At 
times  they  may  be  active,  at  others  very  active,  and  at  some 
periods,  or  in  some  places,  they  may  be  more  or  less  quiescent. 
One  pulls  in  one  direction,  another  in  another.  As  a  plant  spreads 
from  the  place  in  which  it  originally  commenced,  therefore,  it 
comes  under  an  ever- varying  pull,  causing  it  to  spread  more  or 
less  rapidly,  or  at  times  not  at  all,  according  to  the  different  and 
ever-altering  combinations  of  these  factors — different  climates, 
different  soils,  different  groups  of  plants  that  occupy  the  soil, 
presence  or  absence  of  such  barriers  as  are  offered  by  mountains, 
seas,  changes  of  climate,  and  many  other  things.  To  all  this  it  is 
obvious  that  age  must  be  added — the  older  the  species  is,  the 
more  area  will  it  have  had  time  to  cover. 

But  mere  spreading  is  not  all;  a  species  may  at  one  time  be 
common  in  a  certain  region,  and  at  a  subsequent  time  may  be 
very  rare,  or  even  non-existent  there.  This  may  be  due  to  many 
things,  for  example,  the  arrival  of  a  disease-organism  to  which 
the  plant  may  be  very  subject,  and  to  which  it  falls  an  easy  prey, 
or  which  so  reduces  its  vigour  that  it  falls  a  prey  to  something 
else.  Or  some  new  competitor  may  appear,  which  is  so  much 
better  suited  to  the  local  conditions  that  the  first  plant  is  reduced 
to  rarity  or  perhaps  even  to  extinction.  In  this  connection  by 
far  the  most  important  factors  are  those  introduced  by  geological 
and  other  changes.  In  times  which,  geologically  speaking,  were 
but  yesterday,  Britain  was  united  to  the  continent  of  Europe, 
and  the  way  was  open  for  the  passage  of  any  species  that  grew 


W.A. 


l 


2 


INTRODUCTORY 


upon  the  latter;  now  it  is  closed,  or  closed  to  all  but  a  few  whose 
seeds  may  be  carried,  by  wind,  birds,  or  man,  across  the  dividing 
seas.  In  Tertiary  times,  Europe  was  covered  with  forest  in  which 
grew  many  things  not  now  found  there ;  the  onset  of  the  cold  of 
the  glacial  period,  and  the  secular  changes  of  climate,  have  so 
altered  the  conditions  that  the  Tertiary  forest  has  disappeared. 

So  complicated  is  the  interaction  of  all  these  many  factors, 
and  their  continual  changes,  that  in  general  it  has  been  con- 
sidered impossible  to  say  why  a  given  plant  should  be  found  to 
occupy  a  given  area,  while  another  species  of  the  same  genus 
occupies  one  much  larger  or  much  smaller,  though  it  may  look 
almost  exactly  like  the  first,  and  may  differ  from  it  only  in 
characters  to  which  we  cannot,  without  great  stretch  of  the 
imagination,  attach  any  serious  importance  for  life  or  success. 
We  have  been  unable  to  say  why,  for  example,  Coleus  barbatus 
should  be  found  almost  over  tropical  Asia  and  Africa,  while 
C.  elongatus,  which  differs  chiefly  in  the  form  of  the  calyx  and 
of  the  inflorescence,  is  confined  to  the  summit  of  one  mountain. 

For  sixty  years  we  have  been  under  the  wonderful  fascination 
of  the  theory  of  evolution  by  means  of  infinitesimal  variations, 
or  minute  changes  of  character  from  individual  to  individual. 
At  first,  and  for  a  long  period,  this  theory  seemed  to  be  capable 
of  explaining  almost  everything,  and  to  it  we  owe  what  could 
perhaps  have  come  in  no  other  way,  the  establishment  of  the 
doctrine  of  evolution,  now  universally  adopted,  but  which  until 
the  latter  part  of  the  last  century,  though  2000  years  old,  had 
met  with  no  acceptance.  To  quote  Huxley  (22  in  List  of  Litera- 
ture, ii,  pp.  180,  197),  "To  any  one  who  studies  the  signs  of  the 
times,  the  emergence  of  the  philosophy  of  Evolution,  in  the 
attitude  of  claimant  to  the  throne  of  the  world  of  thought,  from 
the  limbo  of  hated  and,  as  many  hoped,  forgotten  things,  is  the 
most  portentous  event  of  the  nineteenth  century."  "...the  pub- 
lication... had  the  effect... of  the  flash  of  light,  which  to  a  man 
who  has  lost  himself  in  a  dark  night,  suddenly  reveals  a  road 
which,  whether  it  takes  him  straight  home  or  not,  certainly  goes 
his  way." 

Under  the  glamour  of  this  theory,  the  tendency  naturally  was 
to  lay  the  greatest  stress  upon  the  vital  factors  in  distribution, 
for  these  were  the  only  ones  which  could  differ  from  individual  to 
individual,  or  from  species  to  species.  The  means  of  dispersal 
open  to  plants,  their  reactions  to  the  climate,  etc.,  and  their 
adaptations  to  various  ends,  were  therefore  studied  with  re- 


ch.  i]  INTRODUCTORY  3 

newed  and  extraordinary  vigour,  whilst  the  mechanical  factors, 
except  perhaps  the  purely  negative  influences  of  barriers,  were 
left  comparatively  neglected.  For  many  years  there  was  re- 
markable progress  in  our  knowledge  of  geographical  distribution, 
but  this  has  now  all  but  ceased,  except  in  regard  to  the  study  of 
the  purely  local  distribution  of  species  in  reference  to  the  purely 
local  changes  of  the  different  factors  of  climate,  water-supply, 
associations  of  plants  covering  the  ground,  and  the  like,  in 
which  direction  much  work  of  extreme  value  is  being  carried  on. 
But  in  regard  to  the  wider  general  distribution  of  plants  about 
the  globe,  we  seem  to  have  arrived  at  a  period  when  the  limiting 
factor,  to  use  Blackman's  words,  has  become  the  lack  of  a  satis- 
factory theoretical  background,  which  will  provide  efficient 
working  hypotheses  for  the  conduct  of  investigations  that  shall 
lead  to  real  advances  in  our  knowledge  of  the  fascinating  sub- 
ject of  geographical  distribution.  I  have  myself  heard  a  leading 
authority  upon  this  subject  say  that  he  thought  that  it  was 
almost  beyond  the  range  of  human  capacity. 

In  this  emphasising  of  the  effects  of  the  vital  factors,  the 
action  of  mere  age,  which  must  evidently  be  of  some  importance, 
has  been  more  and  more  lost  to  view.  And  yet  in  1853  Lyell 
(69,  p.  702)  wrote 

As  a  general  rule,  however,  species  common  to  many  distant 
provinces,  or  those  now  found  to  inhabit  very  distant  parts  of 
the  globe,  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  most  ancient.  Numerically 
speaking,  they  may  not  perhaps  be  largely  represented,  but  their 
wide  diffusion  shows  that  they  have  had  a  long  time  to  spread 
themselves,  and  have  been  able  to  survive  many  important 
revolutions  in  physical  geography. 

Again  he  says 

Nor  do  I  doubt  that  if  very  considerable  periods  of  equal 
duration  could  be  compared  with  one  another,  the  rate  of  change 
in  the  living... world  might  be  nearly  uniform. 

And  yet  again 

Every  local  revolution... tends  to  circumscribe  the  range  of 
some  species,  while  it  enlarges  that  of  others;  and  if  we  are  led 
to  infer  that  new  species  originate  in  one  spot  only,  each  must 
require  time  to  diffuse  itself  over  a  wide  area.  It  will  follow, 
therefore,  from  the  adoption  of  this  hypothesis,  that  the  recent 
origin  of  some  species,  and  the  high  antiquity  of  others,  are 
equally  consistent  with  the  general  fact  of  their  limited  dis- 
tribution; some  being  local,  because  they  have  not  existed  long 
enough  to  admit  of  their  wide  dissemination;  others,  because 


1—2 


4 


INTRODUCTORY 


circumstances  in  the  animate  or  the  inanimate  world  have 
occurred  to  restrict  the  range  which  they  may  once  have 
obtained. 

Hooker  (55  a,  p.  xxv),  in  the  same  year,  1853,  quotes  the  first 
passage  from  Lyell,  and  goes  on 

If  this  be  true,  it  follows  that  consistently  with  the  theory  of 
the  antiquity  of  the  alpine  flora  of  New  Zealand,  we  should  find 
amongst  the  plants  common  to  New  Zealand  and  the  Antarctic 
Islands  some  of  the  most  cosmopolitan,  and  we  do  so  in  Montia 
fontana,  Callitriche  verna,  Cardamine  hirsuta,  Epilobium  tetra- 
gonum  and  many  others.... On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  recol- 
lected that  there  are  other  causes  besides  antiquity  and  facility 
for  migration,  that  determine  the  distribution  of  plants;  these 
are  their  power... of  invading  and  effecting  a  settlement  in  a 
country  preoccupied  with  its  own  species,  and  their  power  of 
adaptability  to  various  climates... though  we  may  safely  pro- 
nounce most  species  of  ubiquitous  plants  to  have  outlived  many 
geological  changes,  we  may  not  reverse  the  position,  and  assume 
local  species  to  be  among  the  most  recently  created,  for  species, 
like  individuals,  die  out  in  the  course  of  time;  whether  following 
some  inscrutable  law  whose  operations  we  have  not  yet  traced, 
or  whether  (as  in  some  instances  we  know  to  be  the  case)  they 
are  destroyed  by  natural  causes  (geological  or  other)  they  must 
in  either  case  become  scarce  and  local  while  they  are  in  process 
of  disappearance. 

It  is  thus  clear  that  the  subject  of  Age  and  Area  is  by  no 
means  new.  Until  comparatively  recently  I  was  not  aware  of 
the  above  very  striking  quotations,  and  it  is  interesting  to  find 
that  my  experience  of  actual  distribution  in  many  lands  has  led 
me,  as  it  has  led  Guppy  and  many  more,  to  much  the  same 
conclusions  as  those  reached  by  two  authorities  so  great  as  Lyell 
and  Hooker.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  appearance  and  rapid  rise 
of  the  great  theory  of  Darwin,  with  its  inevitable  diversion  of 
effort  into  other  and  at  the  time  much  more  profitable  lines,  it 
is  evident  that  Hooker  or  some  other  worker  of  an  earlier  time 
would  have  discovered  not  only  the  principle  which  I  have 
termed  Age  and  Area,  but  also  the  many  and  remarkable  con- 
clusions to  which  it  leads. 

During  the  last  twenty  years,  since  finishing  my  monograph 
of  the  Indian  Podostemaceae  (116),  I  have  devoted  my  spare 
time  to  the  study  of  geographical  distribution.  My  studies  of 
that  family  had  convinced  me  that  the  vital  factors  were  not, 
to  any  great  extent,  responsible  for  the  existing  dispersal  of  the 
species,  and  in  May,  1907,  I  published  the  first  sketch  of  the 


INTRODUCTORY 


5 


theory  that  was  growing  up  in  my  mind  in  respect  to  it.  Almost 
simultaneously  Copeland  (18)  presented  evidence  for  the  same 
view,  practically  enunciating  the  hypothesis  itself,  though  not 
in  definite  arithmetical  terms. 

In  various  subsequent  papers  I  published  further  suggestions 
in  regard  to  Age  and  Area,  and  the  other  hypotheses  that  I  had 
associated  with  it,  but  it  was  not  until  in  1912  I  actually  worked 
over  the  complete  flora  of  Ceylon  with  respect  to  local  distribu- 
tion that  I  discovered  that  the  effects  of  mere  age  upon  dispersal 
were  so  clear  and  unmistakable  that  they  could  be  expressed  in 
figures.  My  paper  embodying  these  results  was  published  in 
1915,  and  has  been  followed  by  many  others  upon  the  same 
subject. 

While  the  distribution  of  any  single  species  is  due,  as  has  been 
said,  to  the  complex  interaction  of  many  factors  and  barriers, 
it  must  be  remembered  that  only  in  the  case  of  a  group  of  allied 
species  will  these  be  likely  to  act  with  some  uniformity.  Age, 
on  the  other  hand,  pulls  all  alike,  so  that  if  one  deal  with  groups 
of  allied  species,  and  call  the  various  factors  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  etc., 
while  some  will  probably  pull  different  ways  on  different  species, 
and  so  cancel  one  another,  others  will  pull  the  same  way  upon 
all,  so  that  the  dispersal  of  one  group  of  ten  may  be  due  to 
(a  +  b  +  e  +  /)  x  age  =  10,  and  of  another  (allied  to  these) 
(a  +  b  +  e  +  g)  x  age  =  20.  The  latter  will  evidently  be  of 
much  greater  age  than  the  former',  as  it  occupies  twice  the 
area,  and  the  factors  other  than  age  are  much  the  same.  But  if 
one  take  two  groups  of  unallied  types,  e.g.  one  of  Leguminosae 
and  one  of  Gramineae,  or  one  of  trees  and  one  of  herbs,  one  may 
have  in  one  case  (a  +  c  +  d  +  e)  x  age  =  10  and  in  the  other 
(b  +  d  +  / +  g)  x  age  =  20,  and  a  comparison  as  regards  age 
alone  will  evidently  be  impossible. 

A  very  excellent  illustration  of  the  principle  here  involved  is 
given  by  the  tables  of  expectation  of  life  published  by  the  in- 
surance companies.  In  no  single  case  does  "age"  alone  deter- 
mine the  period  to  which  a  man  will  live,  yet  by  taking  averages 
of  men  of  the  same  race  it  is  possible  to  say  with  perfect  accuracy 
how  long  an  average  man  of  45  will  have  to  live,  or  a  man  of 
46,  etc. 

If  one  be  dealing  with  one  species  only  (or  one  life  only),  then 
the  interaction  of  many  factors,  including  age,  will  be  so  com- 
plex that  one  cannot  say  to  which  the  distribution  (or  length  of 
life)  is  actually  due.  It  must  always  be  remembered  that  the 


6 


INTRODUCTORY 


[PT.  I 


effects  of  age  only  show  clearly  when  one  deals  with  many 
species,  and  those  allied  (and  therefore  more  or  less  similar,  both 
in  structure  and  reactions). 

I  must  consider  myself  very  fortunate  in  having  finally  dis- 
covered that  the  effects  of  age  were  sufficiently  clear  to  be 
arithmetically  expressed.  It  is  consequently  possible  now  to 
disentangle  them  to  some  extent  from  the  effects  of  the  other 
factors  acting  upon  distribution,  and  this  should  tend  to  make 
the  study  of  these  other  factors  and  their  results  an  easier  matter. 
It  seems  to  me  by  no  means  impossible  that  they  too  may  prove 
amenable  to  statistical  treatment.  Many  biologists  have  a  feeling 
of  dislike  to  the  introduction  into  biology  of  the  more  exact 
methods  of  arithmetic;  as  Hooker  wrote,  many  years  ago,  "all 
seem  to  dread  the  making  botanical  geography  too  exact  a 
science."  But  we  have  become  accustomed  to  their  use  in  the 
study  of  genetics,  and  we  may  hope  that  their  employment  in 
geographical  work  may  not  ultimately  prove  too  repugnant. 

What  has  really  surprised  me  in  my  work  upon  Age  and  Area 
more  than  anything  else,  and  what  seems  at  the  same  time  to 
rouse  some  antagonism,  is  that  the  figures  that  have  been  given 
in  many  papers,  by  myself  and  others,  show  such  clear  and  un- 
mistakable results  that  it  is  evident  that  mere  age  of  species  is 
a  much  more  important  factor  in  geographical  distribution  than 
we  had  been  inclined  to  suppose.  By  the  use  of  my  hypothesis 
that  area  occupied  is  largely  dependent  upon  age,  one  can  make 
so  many  predictions  about  the  geographical  distribution  of 
plants,  especially  within  comparatively  small  areas,  and  find 
them  correct  within  such  small  limits,  that  it  is  evident  that 
mere  age  is  a  very  important  factor  indeed,  and  consequently 
that  distribution,  when  one  works  with  groups  of  species,  and 
over  enormous  periods  of  time,  is  a  much  more  mechanical  pheno- 
menon than  we  had  been  inclined  to  think. 

Of  course  age  in  itself  cannot  effect  anything;  what  is  really 
meant  is  that  the  resultant  effect  of  all  the  active  factors,  like 
dispersal  methods,  etc.,  is  so  uniform,  when  one  considers  long 
periods  of  time  and  takes  an  average  of  several  allied  species, 
that  these  species  spread  indefinitely  at  a  fairly  steady  average 
rate.  This  rate,  as  I  have  pointed  out  in  most  of  my  papers, 
will  probably  not  be  the  same  for  any  two  species,  but  for  allied 
forms  will  not  usually  differ  very  much,  so  that  by  taking  groups 
of  ten  allies,  and  comparing  with  other  groups  allied  to  the  first, 
the  rate  of  expansion  of  area  will  be  a  fair  measure  of  age. 


INTRODUCTORY 


7 


Argument  of  Part  I.  In  the  next  eight  chapters  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  set  forth  the  hypothesis  as  thus  far  developed,  and 
shall  follow  this  in  Chapter  xi  (Part  II)  with  a  general  statement 
of  the  argument  of  the  remainder  of  the  book,  in  which  the 
hypothesis,  which  now  stands  upon  a  good  basis  of  facts,  is 
pushed  to  some  of  the  conclusions  to  which  it  appears  to  me  to 
lead,  and  which  are  so  wide-ranging  that  they  cover  much  of 
the  ground  occupied  by  all  the  biological  sciences. 

In  Chapter  u  the  dispersal  of  plants  is  considered.  Only  by 
such  dispersal,  accepting  the  views  of  the  present  day  about 
origin,  could  they  have  covered  the  large  areas  that  so  many 
now  occupy.  It  is  shown  that  while  the  possession  of  a  good 
mechanism  for  the  purpose  is  of  great  advantage  to  a  plant, 
especially  in  reaching  areas  that  are  a  little  distance  away,  it  is 
by  no  means  necessary  for  world-wide  distribution.  The  examples 
quoted  about  the  actual  dispersal  of  plants  into  new  areas  are 
practically  always  cases  in  which  there  was  virgin  soil  available 
for  their  reception,  and  in  actual  life  one  very  rarely  sees  such 
distribution.  Most  places  are  occupied  by  societies  of  plants, 
into  which  a  newcomer  will  find  it  very  difficult  to  enter,  and  it 
may  have  to  wait  a  very  long  time  until  the  changes  that  are 
always  going  on  allow  it  to  get  a  foothold.  Barriers  to  dispersal, 
even  though  quite  small,  may  produce  very  large  effects,  and 
as  a  rule  dispersal  appears  to  be  extremely  slow. 

The  questions  of  Introduction  and  spread  of  foreign  species 
and  of  Acclimatisation  are  then  dealt  with,  and  it  is  shown  that 
the  popular  interpretation  of  the  rapid  spread  of  introductions 
— that  they  spread,  and  especially  in  islands,  because  they  have 
come  from  continental  areas  or  from  the  north,  where  the 
struggle  for  existence  is  keener,  and  has  made  them  more  effi- 
cient— rests  upon  very  insufficient  evidence,  and  that  the  real 
explanation,  in  all  but  a  very  few  doubtful  cases,  is  that  their 
spread  is  due  to  change  of  conditions.  This  has  usually  been 
effected  by  man,  who  has  often  altered,  or  even  destroyed,  the 
conditions  under  which  many  societies  of  plants  formerly 
flourished,  thus  giving  a  fair  field  to  those  newcomers  that  were 
suited  to  the  new  circumstances.  Acclimatisation  is  very  briefly 
considered,  the  general  conclusion  indicated  being  that  as  a  rule 
it  must  be  very  slow  and  gradual,  as  in  fact  is  the  case  with 
most  of  nature's  work. 

In  Chapter  v  it  is  pointed  out  that  only  in  rare  cases  will  a 
seed  be  carried  more  than  a  few  yards  to  survive  and  grow,  and 


8 


INTRODUCTORY 


also  that  in  view  of  the  time  available  there  is  no  need  for  rapid 
dispersal.  The  various  causes  are  then  considered  that  may  help, 
or  far  more  often  hinder,  dispersal,  e.g.  purely  physical  barriers 
like  seas  or  mountains,  barriers  partly  physical,  partly  dependent 
upon  the  constitution  of  the  plant,  like  changes  of  soil  or  of 
climatic  factors,  or  barriers  (or  aids  to  spread)  dependent  wholly 
upon  the  latter,  like  the  fact  that  herbs  may  spread  much  more 
rapidly  than  trees,  that  parasites  can  only  spread  with  their 
hosts,  that  a  plant  may  or  may  not  spread  quickly  according  to 
the  particular  society  of  plants  with  which  it  meets,  and  so  on. 
The  general  impression  is  that  dispersal  in  nature,  except  in  a 
few  (probably  very  few)  cases,  must  be  an  exceedingly  slow  pro- 
cess. Only  in  cases  where  man  has  interfered  is  there  much 
evidence  of  rapid  spread,  and  the  popular  impression  that  this 
is  general  cannot  be  justified  by  any  of  the  facts  at  our  disposal 
as  to  plants  in  unchanged  natural  conditions. 

Passing  on  to  the  consideration  of  Age  and  Area  itself,  in 
Chapter  vi,  it  is  pointed  out  that  when  I  began  to  investigate 
the  flora  of  Ceylon,  I  soon  noticed  the  extraordinary  differences 
in  area  occupied  that  were  to  be  found  in  species  of  the  same 
genus,  where  there  were  no  characters  of  difference  that  could, 
by  any  stretch  of  imagination,  be  regarded  as  fitting  or  unfitting 
them  for  the  struggle  for  existence.  Endemic  or  purely  local 
species  very  rarely  occupied  the  whole  island,  and  must  evi- 
dently be  adapted,  if  adapted  at  all,  to  local  conditions  within 
its  area.  This  led  to  a  careful  study  of  areas,  and  it  was  found, 
for  Ceylon,  New  Zealand,  and  elsewhere,  that  those  species  were 
the  most  widely  distributed  in  a  country  which  had  the  widest 
distribution  outside,  while  the  local  or  endemic  species  showed 
the  smallest  areas  of  distribution;  in  both  cases  working  always 
with  averages  of  ten  allied  species. 

Dividing  the  species  of  a  country  into  classes  according  to  the 
amount  of  area  occupied,  it  was  found  that  the  endemics  were 
most  numerous  in  the  lowest  class  (smallest  areas),  the  numbers 
decreasing  steadily  upwards,  while  the  widely  distributed  species 
were  arranged  in  the  exact  reverse  direction.  Such  facts  were 
much  opposed  to  the  supposition  that  endemics  were  adapta- 
tions to  local  conditions,  and  equally  so  to  the  other  supposition 
that  they  were  relics.  The  facts  call  for  a  mechanical  explanation, 
and  the  most  reasonable  seems  to  be  that  area  occupied  on  the 
average  increases  with  age,  independently  of  the  origin  of  the 
species.  Endemic  species  are  usually  young  beginners. 


CH.  i] 


INTRODUCTORY 


9 


The  next  chapter  gives  a  few  illustrations  of  the  successful 
manner  in  which  Age  and  Area  has  been  applied  to  the  making 
of  predictions  about  local  distribution.  For  example,  the  floras 
of  the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  being  in  general  derived 
from  the  same  sources  as  that  of  the  main  islands,  must  be  com- 
posed of  species  that  were  among  the  earliest  arrivals,  in  their 
own  affinity  groups,  in  New  Zealand,  and  should  therefore,  by 
hypothesis,  be  very  widespread  there.  This  proved  to  be  the 
case,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  the  species  of  the  islands  ranging 
on  the  average  nearly  300  miles  farther  in  New  Zealand  than  the 
species  that  did  not  reach  the  islands.  Further,  the  endemic 
species  that  reached  the  islands  ranged  much  farther  in  New 
Zealand  than  the  widely  distributed  species  of  New  Zealand  that 
did  not  reach  them.  This  result  seems  explicable  only  by  aid  of 
Age  and  Area.  Other  predictions  that  were  equally  successful 
are  also  instanced,  and  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  as  Age  and 
Area  has  been  applied  in  this  manner  in  over  ninety  cases  with- 
out a  failure,  the  hypothesis  now  stands  upon  a  very  firm  basis. 

A  further  chapter  is  then  given  to  the  consideration  of  the 
way  in  which  it  may  be  applied  to  the  study  of  the  invasions  of 
plants  that  may  have  reached  a  country,  New  Zealand  being- 
taken  as  an  example.  By  a  consideration  of  an  imaginary  case 
in  which  a  single  widely  distributed  species  enters  New  Zealand 
and  gives  rise  to  endemics  in  a  casual  way,  it  is  shown  that  the 
endemics  in  a  country  will  in  general  show  numbers  decreasing 
from  the  centre  where  the  parent  entered  down  to  the  two  ends. 
On  examining  the  facts  it  was  found  that  all  the  genera  of  the 
New  Zealand  flora  gave  such  curves.  A  study  of  the  position  of 
the  maxima  shows  that  they  are  concentrated  in  three  chief 
regions — north,  south,  and  central — and  one  infers  that  these 
must  have  been  the  centres  of  corresponding  invasions.  Careful 
study  of  the  curves  given  by  the  single  invasions  goes  to  show 
that  the  northern  was  much  older  than  the  southern,  and  this 
is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  mainly  composed  of 
the  more  mobile  group  of  herbs,  while  the  former  is  chiefly  trees. 

Lastly,  Chapter  ix  is  devoted  to  a  detailed  consideration  of 
the  many  objections  that  have  been  brought  up  against  Age 
and  Area,  and  many  or  most  of  them  seem  to  be  satisfactorily 
met,  very  many  of  them  depending  simply  on  misunderstanding 
of  the  work  upon  which  it  is  based. 


CHAPTER  II 


THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  INTO 
NEW  AREAS 

A  very  large  number  of  species  are  to  be  found  at  more  or  less 
frequent  intervals  over  enormous  areas  of  territory,  often  in 
regions  separated  by  large  stretches  of  water,  or  sometimes  of 
land.  Never,  since  the  days  of  the  hypothesis  of  special  creation, 
has  it  been  maintained  that  a  species  originally  arose  over  the 
whole  of  the  area  upon  which  it  now  occurs.  This  would  be  a 
difficult  proposition  to  uphold,  as  it  is  usually  found  that  when 
a  species  occupies  a  large  territory,  it  has  different  varieties  in 
different  parts.  Various  views,  however,  have  at  times  held  sway 
as  to  the  probable  extent  of  the  land  surface  upon  which  a 
species  began.  Darwin  (22,  in,  109),  for  example,  had  at  one  time 
the  idea  that  it  might  arise  under  Natural  Selection  from  one  or 
a  few  individuals  varying  in  the  desired  direction,  but  Fleeming 
Jenkin  brought  up  a  criticism  of  this  position  so  incisive  that 
he  was  forced  to  abandon  it,  and  postulate  for  a  much  more 
numerous  original  ancestry,  of  course  occupying  a  much  larger 
amount  of  ground.  It  is  perhaps  from  this  latter  position  taken 
up  by  him  that  the  current  view  has  arisen,  according  to  which 
species  that  now  occupy  very  small  areas  of  country  owe  the 
smallness  of  that  area  to  the  supposed  fact  that  they  are  really 
in  process  of  dying  out,  for  they  could  not  have  arisen  by  aid 
of  the  Darwinian  mechanism  of  Natural  Selection  upon  so  small 
a  space. 

At  the  present  time,  however,  when  this  mechanism  of  in- 
finitesimal variation  with  natural  selection  (or  survival  of  the 
fittest)  is  not  commonly  accepted  as  being  the  principal  factor 
in  the  production  of  new  species,  it  is  probable  that  comparatively 
few  people  would  be  found  to  demand  more  than  a  relatively 
limited  area  for  the  purpose.  Not  many,  perhaps,  have  any 
exact  idea  of  how  much  would  be  needed,  but  possibly  the 
majority  would  require  either  a  little  more  than  just  a  few 
square  yards,  or  the  repeated  origin  of  the  same  species  upon 
the  same  area.  A  good  many  writers,  both  of  former  times  and 
of  the  present,  have  adopted  the  view  that  it  is  not  absolutely 


pt.  i5  ch.  ii]     THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS 


11 


necessary  that  a  species,  genus,  or  tribe  should  arise  upon  one 
spot  only,  or  even  in  one  region  only.  They  consider  that  the 
same  thing  may  arise  independently  in  different  places,  very 
rarely  indeed  the  species,  more  often  the  genus,  tribe,  or  family, 
either  from  the  same  species  by  the  same  road  (as  would  probably 
be  the  case  with  the  origin  of  a  species  in  this  way),  or  from 
different  species,  which  all  made  the  necessary  changes  to  place 
them  in  the  same  genus  or  tribe  (cf.  116,  p.  446).  This  sup- 
position would  unquestionably  get  rid  of  some  of  the  difficulties 
of  explaining  many  cases  of  discontinuous  distribution,  where 
the  same  species,  genus  or  tribe  appears  in  widely  separated 
regions. 

Whatever  view  has  been  held  as  to  origin,  however,  it  seems 
to  have  been  generally  taken  for  granted  that  except  in  so  far 
as  they  have  been  prevented  by  actual  barriers,  such  as  seas, 
ranges  of  mountains,  sudden  changes  of  climate  from  one  dis- 
trict to  the  next,  and  the  like,  species  have  spread  over  the 
whole  area  to  which  they  are  suited,  i.e.  where  they  can  grow 
and  reproduce  in  spite  of  any  adverse  conditions  to  which  they 
may  be  subject.  In  other  words,  it  seems  to  have  been  assumed 
that  the  distribution  about  the  world  of  the  species  now  existing 
therein  is  largely  a  closed  chapter,  except  in  so  far  as  man  by 
his  various  activities  may  alter  it.  Why  this  idea  of  finality 
should  have  sprung  up  is  not  quite  so  easy  to  decide,  unless  it 
has  been  that  people  take  for  granted  that  in  nature  dispersal 
of  plants  is  rapid1,  and  it  is  one  of  the  objects  of  the  present  work 
to  show  that  we  are  still  dealing  here  with  open  questions. 

It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  large  areas  now  occupied  by 
many  species  must  almost  always,  if  not  always,  be  due  to 
spreading  from  others  originally  much  smaller,  and  a  careful 
study  of  the  ways  in  which  this  dispersal  may  be  effected  must 
form  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  study  of  geographical  dis- 
tribution in  general.  It  is  of  course  obvious  that,  as  a  rule,  a 
plant  once  established  will  not  move  again,  but  its  seeds,  or 
detached  portions  of  itself  (or  sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  runners, 
connected  portions),  may  in  various  ways  be  carried  to  a  distance 

1  People  see  a  dandelion  scattering  seed  over  a  large  area,  or  notice  the 
rapid  spread  of  a  new  weed  in  the  garden,  and  are  apt  to  reason  that  this 
sort  of  thing  is  always  going  on  with  all  species,  while  at  the  same  time 
they  forget  that  most,  if  not  almost  all,  seeds  dropped  upon  ground  already 
fully  occupied  by  plants,  fail  to  grow,  even  if  they  germinate.  One  may  see 
the  same  clump  of  traveller's-joy,  for  example,  occupy  the  same  place 
without  spreading,  for  a  whole  lifetime. 


12  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  [pt.  i 

from  the  parent.  This  dispersal  implies  the  concurrence  of  various 
circumstances,  and  when  all  of  these  are  external  to  the  plant 
it  is  spoken  of  as  occasional  or  accidental,  while  when  some  are 
inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  plant  itself,  it  is  said  to  take  place 
by  aid  of  the  regular  "  mechanisms."  As  instances  of  "  irregular  " 
dispersal,  we  have  such  cases  as  the  carriage  of  heavy  seeds  by 
a  hurricane,  or  their  casual  attachment  to  a  log  which  is  acci- 
dentalty  floated  across  the  sea  to  a  new  country;  whilst  it  is 
"regular"  in  the  case  of  seeds  so  light  that  they  will  always  be 
carried  by  wind  to  some  little  distance,  or  fleshy  fruits  which 
are  eaten  by  birds  and  the  seeds  subsequently  dropped.  It  may 
prove  of  more  interest  if  an  account  be  given  of  some  actual 
researches  carried  out  upon  this  subject,  rather  than  a  mere 
enumeration  of  the  various  mechanisms,  etc.  (54,  71). 

My  chief  pleasure  in  life  being  travel,  I  have  always  been 
interested  in  the  movement  of  plants,  and  in  1893,  with  Mr  I.  H. 
Burkill,  published  (137)  a  study  of  the  flora  found  in  the  bowl- 
like tops  of  the  pollard  willows  that  line  the  banks  of  the  Cam, 
especially  from  Cambridge  to  Ely.  We  examined  about  4000  of 
these  trees,  and  counting  each  occurrence  of  one  species  in  one 
tree,  whether  represented  by  few  or  many  individuals,  as  1,  and 
only  as  1,  we  obtained  3951  records.  The  tops  of  the  trees  being 
about  six  feet  above  the  ground,  it  is  clear  that  without  some 
assistance  seeds  would  be  quite  unable  to  reach  them,  though 
when  once  reached,  a  willow  top  presents  a  virgin  area  of  soil, 
with  no  other  species  growing  there.  There  were  some  200  to  240 
species  in  the  neighbourhood  which  if  planted  in  the  willows 
would  probably  have  been  able  to  grow  there,  but  of  these  we 
found  that  only  80,  or  about  a  third,  actually  occurred,  showing 
that  the  presence  of  a  barrier  even  so  trifling  as  the  height  of  a 
willow  was  sufficient  to  exclude  very  many.  Most  of  the  plants 
with  well-marked  "regular"  mechanisms  were  among  the  80, 
though  one  missed  Cornus  (dogwood),  Salix,  the  willow  itself 
(possibly  it  would  not  grow  in  its  own  humus),  Populus,  the 
poplar  (possibly  for  the  same  reason,  it  belonging  to  the  same 
family),  and  a  few  Compositae  and  the  orchids.  The  commonest 
plant  in  the  tops  was  Galium  Aparine,  the  goose-grass,  found  in 
644  trees,  or  over  16  per  cent,  of  the  total  records.  The  fruit  of 
this  plant  has  little  hooks,  so  that  it  may  easily  cling  to  an 
animal  or  a  bird  for  time  enough  to  be  carried  to  a  willow.  But 
it  was  also  found  to  be  largely  used  by  birds  in  nest-making, 
and  probably  the  bulk  of  the  records  are  due  to  this,  for  ripe 


CH.  Il] 


INTO  NEW  AREAS 


13 


fruit  would  often  be  present  upon  the  pieces  carried  to  the  trees 
for  this  purpose.  The  next  most  common  plant  was  Sambucus 
nigra,  the  elder,  with  550  records;  this  has  a  fleshy  fruit  which 
is  eaten  by  birds,  and  the  seeds  subsequently  dropped.  The 
third  plant  was  Rosa  canina,  the  dog-rose  (410  records),  also  with 
a  fleshy  fruit;  the  fourth  Urtica  dioica,  the  nettle  (306  records), 
with  very  light  seeds  that  are  easily  carried  by  wind,  but  also 
largely  used  in  nest-making.  These  mechanisms  were  repeated 
in  the  next  two  or  three  plants  on  the  list,  and  then  followed  the 
ash,  Fraxinus  excelsior,  with  100  records.  This  has  a  winged 
fruit,  which  when  falling  from  a  tree  of  some  height  during  a 
fairly  strong  wind  may  be  carried  to  some  distance ;  and  as  there 
were  many  ash  trees  close  to  the  river,  this  accounts  for  the 
frequency  of  the  occurrence  of  this  species  in  the  willow-tops. 
Next  after  this  came  the  dandelion,  Taraxacum  officinale  (82 
records),  with  a  fruit  which  in  a  breeze  is  easily  carried  upwards 
by  means  of  its  parachute  of  fine  hairs.  By  the  time  that  we 
come  down  the  list  to  plants  with  40  records,  or  1  per  cent,  of 
the  total,  21  species  have  appeared  there.  All  but  one  of  these 
have  well-marked  "regular"  mechanisms,  but  the  remaining  59 
include  a  considerable  number  whose  arrival  in  the  tree-tops 
must  have  been  due  to  some  "irregular"  aid,  for  they  have 
neither  light,  winged,  burred,  nor  fleshy  fruits  or  seeds.  Nineteen 
of  them  showed  only  one  record  each,  and  their  appearance  must 
be  due  to  some  such  accident  as  having  been  carried  in  a  ball  of 
earth  attached  to  a  bird's  foot,  driven  by  an  unusually  strong 
wind,  or  some  other  irregular  transport. 

Classifying  the  records  according  to  mechanism,  we  find : 


Per  cent. 

Species 

Records 

of  records 

Fleshy  fruit  (animals) 

19 

1763 

44-6 

Winged  or  feathered 

fruit  or  seed  (wind) 

33 

995 

251 

Burred  fruit  (animals) 

3 

651 

16-4 

Light  seed  (wind)    . . . 

9 

425 

10-7 

Doubtful  methods  ... 

16 

117 

2-9 

Thus  quite  an  appreciable  number  of  species  are  sometimes 
transported,  though  in  no  great  numbers.  Of  the  117  records, 
Anthriscus  sylvestris,  which  is  used  in  nest-making,  accounts  for 
63. 

Three  important  facts  appear  in  this  result:  (1)  that  even  a 
slight  barrier  may  produce  a  large  effect;  (2)  that  the  bulk  of 
the  individual  plants  (not  species)  travel  by  aid  of  the  "regular" 


14  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  [ft.  i 

mechanisms,  especially  by  help  of  birds;  but  also  that  (3)  a  large 
number  of  species,  even  if  few  plants,  travel  by  aid  of  "irregu- 
lar" or  accidental  methods.  If  one  could  follow  up  the  entire 
history  of  distribution  of  plants  about  the  globe,  one  would  be 
quite  likely  to  find  that  all  species  sometimes  travel  in  this  way, 
even  though  only  very  rarely.  One  would  hardly  expect  to  find 
the  buttercup,  Ranunculus  bulbosus,  or  Lathyrus  pratensis,  in  the 
willow-tops,  yet  both  occur,  though  one  does  not  find  such  com- 
mon plants  as  clover  or  daisy  (44,  p.  277). 

Two  other  important  results  also  appeared:  (4)  that  in  only 
two  instances  did  a  plant  occur  of  which  there  was  not  a  repre- 
sentative actually  growing  on  the  soil  within  200  yards.  Even 
in  these  cases  it  was  quite  possible  that  at  the  time  of  reaching 
the  willows  the  distance  to  be  traversed  did  not  exceed  that 
figure,  for  one  of  the  two,  Lactuca  muralis,  was  recorded  for  the 
same  tree  in  Babington's  Flora  of  thirty-five  years  earlier.  In 
any  case,  it  was  clear  that  as  a  rule  transport  was  only  over 
short  distances;  and  (5),  a  result  which  appeared  on  comparison 
with  similar  work  done  elsewhere  in  Europe,  that  the  proportions 
of  species  distributed  by  the  various  mechanisms  were  much  the 
same  (10,  p.  120),  so  that  one  might  be  able  to  predict  to  some 
extent  the  probable  composition  of  such  a  flora. 

Another  type  of  distribution  was  studied  in  working  out,  with 
Prof.  J.  Stanley  Gardiner,  the  flora  of  the  Maldive  Islands  (138), 
a  group  of  coral  atolls  about  400  miles  south-west  of  Ceylon,  far 
removed  from  other  land.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
any  of  their  flora  survives  from  the  far-distant  period  when  there 
was  probably  a  land  bridge  from  India  to  Africa,  so  that  they 
probably  formed  a  virgin  area  for  the  arrival  of  species  from 
elsewhere.  Of  their  160  species,  66  proved  to  be  suited  to  carriage 
by  sea  currents,  possessing  easily  floated  seeds  or  fruits,  im- 
pervious to  salt  water;  17  were  bird-carried,  with  fleshy  fruit, 
4  were  wind-carried,  and  there  remained  73,  probably  mostly 
due  to  unintentional  carriage  by  man,  but  some  doubtless 
brought  upon  floating  logs  or  in  other  ways.  Again  a  large  per- 
centage of  the  species  had  thus  arrived  "irregularly." 

Another  piece  of  work  of  this  kind  was  done  upon  the  flora  of 
Ritigala  (117),  a  solitary  precipitous  peak,  rising  to  2506  feet  in 
the  low-lying  "dry"  north  country  of  Ceylon,  about  40  miles 
from  the  main  mountain  mass  to  'the  south,  which  forms  part 
of  the  "wet"  zone.  The  dry  zone  receives  practically  no  rain 
during  the  six  months  of  the  south-west  monsoon,  and  has  thus 


CH.  Il] 


INTO  NEW  AREAS 


15 


a  long  period  of  drought,  but  Ritigala  is  high  enough  and  steep 
enough  to  condense  the  moisture  of  this  wind,  and  its  upper  part 
therefore  forms  an  outlier  of  the  wet  zone.  Upon  the  summit  is 
a  wet-zone  flora,  which  must  in  general  have  reached  it  by  over- 
stepping the  whole  40  miles  of  separation,  for  the  configuration 
of  the  country,  and  the  course  of  the  monsoons,  render  it  very 
improbable  that  the  intermediate  country  can  ever  have  been 
"wet,"  i.e.  have  received  rain  in  the  south-west  monsoon  also, 
which  alone  would  render  life  possible  for  these  species.  Of  the 
103  wet-zone  plants  at  the  summit,  24  had  fruits  suited  to  bird 
carriage,  49  had  light  fruits,  seeds,  or  spores  suited  to  wind,  and 
30  may  be  classed  as  doubtful,  being  entirely  unsuited  to  any 
of  these  methods,  and  yet  equally  so  to  growth  in  the  inter- 
mediate "dry"  country.  Here,  therefore,  was  carriage  by  doubt- 
ful methods  over  a  good  40  miles,  most  probably  by  the  aid  of 
birds  in  some  way,  as  the  species  were  largely  mountain  species. 

Of  the  actual  wind-carried  species,  24  were  ferns  and  lycopods 
with  dust-like  spores,  20  were  orchids  with  very  light  seeds,  and 
the  other  5  were  Compositae,  Apocynaceae,  and  Asclepiadaceae, 
with  parachute-like  fruit  or  seed. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  peak  of  Ritigala,  a  mere  small  area 
projecting  out  of  a  sea  of  dry-zone  plants,  was  probably  not  a 
virgin  area,  though  suitable  to  wet-zone  forms.  It  was  probably 
covered  with  plants  of  "dry-zone"  type,  which  have  only  gradu- 
ally been  ousted  by  "wet-zone"  arrivals,  and  in  the  whole  of 
the  enormous  period  since  it  became  suitable  to  the  latter  it  has 
only  received  103  of  them,  and  also  bears  a  great  number  of 
plants  which  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  dry-zone  areas  below. 
The  Maldive  Islands,  which  were  probably  a  virgin  area,  have 
received  160  species,  in  probably  much  less  time,  and  Krakatau, 
which  we  shall  next  consider,  received  137  in  thirty  years. 

Krakatau,  the  classical  instance  of  the  distribution  of  plants 
to  new  ground,  is  an  island  in  the  strait  between  Java  and 
Sumatra,  about  25  miles  from  each,  and  about  11 J  from  the 
nearest  island  with  vegetation.  In  1883  it  was  absolutely 
sterilised  by  the  famous  eruption.  In  1886  Dr  Treub  of  Buiten- 
zorg  visited  it  to  see  to  what  extent  it  had  been  re-colonised  (109) ; 
he  found  many  blue-green  Algae,  11  ferns  (spores  easily  carried 
by  wind),  9  flowering  plants  on  the  beach  (carried  by  currents, 
or  drifted  over  by  wind),  and  8  inland,  two  of  these  the  same  as 
on  the  beach.  These  eight  were  a  Wedelia,  two  Conyzas,  and  a 
Senecio,  all  Compositae,  with  dandelion-like  fruits,  easily  carried 


16  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  [pt.  i 

by  wind,  Phragmites  and  Pennisetum  (grasses,  ditto),  Tourne- 
fortia  and  Scaevola  (fleshy  fruit,  bird-carried).  In  1897  (34)  a 
further  examination  showed  that  there  were  50  flowering  plants, 
of  which  about  30  were  due  to  sea  carriage,  and  16  to  wind.  In 
1905  the  number  had  increased  to  137,  and  the  island  was  be- 
ginning to  show  thick  forest  growth.  But  again  the  effect  of  a 
barrier  should  be  noted,  for  the  flora  of  Java  alone  is  over  5000 
species. 

Thus  at  first  only  the  regular  mechanisms  produced  any  result ; 
but  sooner  or  later  the  irregular  begin  to  show,  for  in  the  137 
are  a  few  species  as  to  whose  method  of  reaching  Krakatau  it  is 
impossible  to  do  more  than  guess.  On  Ritigala,  where  there  are 
30  species  of  doubtful  method  of  transport,  the  time  allowed  has 
been  enormous,  while  on  Krakatau  it  was  less  than  thirty  years. 
Yet  in  those  thirty  it  had,  thanks  to  virgin  soil,  and  somewhat 
greater  nearness  to  the  sources  of  supply,  received  many  more 
species  than  Ritigala. 

Another  case  of  this  kind  was  the  re-vegetation  of  the  Taal 
volcano  (38),  in  the  middle  of  a  lake  in  the  Philippine  Islands. 
Here,  again,  the  wind-carried  plants  arrived  very  early,  and  in 
larger  numbers  of  species,  but  the  bird-carried  tended  to  be 
numerous  in  individuals.  Both  upon  Krakatau  and  upon  Taal 
the  vegetation  began  before  very  long  to  settle  down  into  asso- 
ciations of  plants.  While  at  first  chiefly  herbaceous  plants,  these 
were  soon  followed,  as  happens  in  damp  regions  when  sufficient 
time  is  allowed,  and  no  other  agency,  such  as  man,  interferes,  by 
shrub  and  forest. 

Incidentally,  a  method  of  dispersal  which  has  not  been  men- 
tioned above  must  receive  a  word  of  notice.  This  is  the  explosive 
mechanism,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  where,  owing  to  tensions 
set  up  in  the  fruit  by  turgidity,  as  in  Impatiens,  or  by  drying, 
as  in  Claytonia,  Montia,  Hevea,  Hura,  etc.,  the  seeds  when  ripe 
are  jerked  away  from  the  plant.  The  distance  is  commonly  quite 
small,  but  when,  as  in  Hura  or  Heir  a,  the  fruits  are  at  the  top 
of  a  tall  tree  may  be  slightly  increased. 

In  many  respects,  the  last  regular  mechanism  which  has  to 
be  mentioned,  that  of  vegetative  reproduction  by  portions  of 
the  plant  itself,  like  runners,  suckers,  bulbils,  etc.,  is  the  most 
efficient  of  all,  as  witness  the  profusion  of  daisies  in  most  lawns, 
or  the  difficulty  of  eradicating  Jerusalem  artichokes  once  estab- 
lished; while  anyone  who  has  had  the  misfortune  to  have  his 
garden  infested  with  goatweed,  enchanter's  nightshade,  celan- 


18 


THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  [pt.  i 


distance  from  the  mainland,  but  as  regards  frequency  of  arrival 
of  species  from  elsewhere.  There  are  few  local  island  species 
among  the  beach  plants,  which  are  continually  arriving  with  the 
ocean  currents,  more  among  the  mountain-top  plants,  where 
probably  birds  most  commonly  alight  on  arrival,  and  most 
among  those  of  intermediate  elevation. 

He  regards  as  the  oldest,  on  the  whole,  those  groups  with 
actual  genera  confined  to  the  island  or  group  of  islands,  then 
those  with  genera  all  of  whose  species  are  endemic,  followed  by 
those  having  genera  with  some  species  endemic  and  some  widely 
distributed,  and  as  the  youngest,  on  the  whole,  those  having 
only  genera  with  no  species  endemic.  He  regards  the  develop- 
ment of  endemic  species  as  due  to  what  he  calls  the  principle  of 
differentiation.  They  are  most  often  allied  to  some  common 
widely  ranging  and  polymorphous  species  which  he  regards  as 
the  parent.  To  this  very  important  conclusion  he  returns  in 
other  papers  (45-6),  and  in  his  later  book  upon  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  (47),  where  he  comes  to  much  the  same  general  conclu- 
sions upon  distribution  as  in  the  case  of  the  Pacific. 

In  fact,  as  we  shall  see  in  more  detail  in  the  course  of  this 
book,  Guppy  arrived  at,  and  published  a  year  sooner,  the  same 
general  conclusions  to  which  I  also  have  been  driven  by  a  life- 
time spent,  like  his,  in  travel  and  botanical  investigation,  chiefly 
in  the  tropics. 

Interesting  facts  in  regard  to  the  distribution  of  the  Compositae 
have  been  worked  out  by  Small  (103).  The  fruits  of  these  plants 
are  usually  carried  by  aid  of  a  parachute-like  tuft  of  hairs,  as 
may  be  well  seen  in  the  dandelion.  The  general  evidence  that  he 
marshals  goes  to  show  that  the  fruits  may  frequently  be  dis- 
persed to  a  distance  of  from  four  to  twenty  miles,  and  even  at 
times  over  one  hundred  (cf.  Ritigala  and  Krakatau  above).  His 
experimental  observations  show  that  so  long  as  the  relative 
humidity  of  the  air  remains  at  a  figure  that  keeps  the  pappus 
open,  a  wind  of  two  miles  an  hour  (barely  perceptible)  is  enough 
to  keep  the  fruit  floating  in  the  air  for  an  indefinite  period,  but 
if  the  moistness  increases,  the  pappus  closes,  and  the  fruit  soon 
falls  to  the  ground.  Thus  the  dispersal  of  these  plants  on  land, 
where  the  air  in  general  is  drier,  may  at  times  be  to  great  dis- 
tances, but  over  the  sea  such  conditions  of  dryness  will  com- 
paratively rarely  occur. 

Important  papers  have  also  been  published  by  Ridley  on  the 
actual  facts  of  spreading  observed  by  him  (91-2).  For  example, 


CH.  Il] 


INTO  NEW  AREAS 


19 


he  studied  the  Dipterocarpaceae  in  the  Botanic  Gardens  at 
Singapore.  These  are  tall  trees  with  rather  large  fruit,  upon 
which  two  or  more  of  the  persistent  sepals  grow  out  into  large 
wings.  Falling  as  they  do  from  a  considerable  height,  and  re- 
volving as  they  fall,  these  fruits  may  be  carried  to  some  distance 
before  they  drop,  if  there  be  a  wind  blowing.  A  Shorea,  100  feet 
high,  was  found  to  scatter  its  fruits  freely  up  to  40  yards  dis- 
tance, but  not  beyond  100.  As  it  fruits  at  thirty  years  old,  a 
little  calculation  will  show  that  in  the  most  favourable  circum- 
stances conceivable,  with  the  ground  clear  of  other  vegetation, 
it  would  take  about  60,000  years  to  migrate  100  miles.  Diptero- 
carpus  grandifolius,  another  of  this  family,  ranges  from  the 
Malay  Peninsula  to  the  Philippines,  and  Ridley  estimates  that 
at  least  lj  million  years  would  be  needed  to  traverse  this  dis- 
tance. He  considers  that  light  powder-like  seed  affords  the  most 
rapid  transit,  plumed  fruit  or  seed,  like  the  dandelion  and  other 
Compositae,  next,  and  winged  fruit  or  seed,  like  the  ash  or  the 
Dipterocarps,  the  slowest  (of  the  "regular"  mechanisms  for 
wind-dispersal).  In  another  paper  he  gives  interesting  points 
about  the  dispersal  of  seed  by  mammals,  calling  especial 
attention  to  the  small  distances  usually  travelled  in  such 
cases. 

What  has  been  said  so  far  might  be  read  to  mean  that  dis- 
persal of  plants  was  always  a  comparatively  simple  and  rapid 
process,  only  interfered  with  to  some  extent  by  actual  barriers; 
and  it  is  necessary  now  to  make  clear  that  in  nature  this  is  far 
from  being  the  case.  The  desirability,  under  the  Darwinian 
theory,  of  finding  as  many,  and  as  effectual,  "adaptations"  as 
possible,  has  led  to  those  for  seed-dispersal  receiving  much  greater 
credit  than  is  their  due.  In  all  the  cases  (except  Ritigala)  that 
we  have  so  far  considered,  the  dispersal  of  the  plants  has  been 
into  areas  of  ground  that  could  be  easily  occupied,  on  account 
of  the  lack  of  competition;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  the 
introductions  described  in  the  next  chapter.  But  suppose  that, 
instead  of  the  4000  willow-tops,  one  thought  of  4000  areas  of  a 
square  yard  each  (or  of  a  single  acre)  upon  a  moor  or  in  a  forest, 
it  is  at  once  obvious,  from  ordinary  observation,  that  in  100 
years  they  would  not  receive  80  new  species  of  plants,  even 
though  these  might  be  growing  within  200  yards.  It  is  doubtful 
if  they  would  even  receive  one  or  two.  Nor  would  an  area  equal 
to  that  of  the  island  of  Krakatau,  but  upon  a  tropical  savannah, 

2—2 


20  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  [pt.  i 

receive  137  new  species  in  less  than  40  years.  As  Lyell  stated 
in  1853: 

Every  naturalist  is  familiar  with  the  fact,  that  although  in  a 
particular  country,  such  as  Great  Britain,  there  may  be  more 
than  3000  species  of  plants,  10,000  insects,  and  a  great  variety 
in  each  of  the  other  classes;  yet  there  will  not  be  more  than  a 
hundred,  perhaps  not  half  that  number,  inhabiting  any  given 
locality.  There  may  be  no  want  of  space  in  the  supposed  tract; 
it  may  be  a  large  mountain,  or  an  extensive  moor,  or  a  great 
river  plain,  containing  room  enough  for  individuals  of  every 
species  in  our  island;  yet  the  spot  will  be  occupied  by  few  to 
the  exclusion  of  many,  and  these  few  are  enabled,  throughout 
long  periods,  to  maintain  their  ground  successfully  against  every 
intruder,  notwithstanding  the  facilities  which  species  enjoy,  by 
virtue  of  their  power  of  diffusion,  of  invading  adjacent  terri- 
tories (69,  p.  670). 

This  fixity  of  the  vegetation  in  any  given  neighbourhood, 
though  familiar  enough  to  everyday  observation,  tended  to  be 
ignored  during  the  period  of  the  hunt  for  adaptations ;  but  with 
the  rise  of  the  study  of  ecology  it  has  once  more  come  into 
prominence,  and  the  tendency  at  present  is  perhaps  to  regard 
it  as  too  permanent.  A  given  area  of  ground  is  occupied  by  a 
society  or  association  of  plants,  made  up  in  a  fairly  definite  way. 
This  association  may  be  open,  leaving  room  for  possible  new- 
comers, but  tends  always  to  become  closed,  by  taking  in  the 
maximum  number  which  can  mutually  adjust  themselves  to  the 
conditions  there  prevailing,  and  as  altered  to  some  extent  by 
each  new  arrival.  It  is  a  matter  of  extraordinary  difficulty  for 
a  newcomer  to  obtain  a  foothold  in  a  closed  association,  which 
may  thus  form  an  almost  complete  barrier  to  passage.  But  with 
the  changes  brought  about  in  the  soil,  etc.,  by  the  vegetation 
itself,  and  for  other  reasons,  an  association  sooner  or  later  passes 
its  climax,  and  tends  to  be  succeeded  by  others.  As  Clements 
says  (16),  "the  most  stable  association  is  never  in  complete 
equilibrium";  and  again,  "local  migration  is  primarily  respon- 
sible for  the  population  of  new  areas... most  of  the  evidence 
available  shows  that  effective  invasion  in  quantity  is  always 
local."  It  is  clear  that  to  think  of  plants  in  general  as  travelling 
rapidly  about  the  world  by  aid  of  their  dispersal  mechanisms  is 
to  take  a  completely  incorrect  view  of  the  situation. 

In  fact,  it  is  clear,  and  will  be  made  clearer  in  the  chapter  upon 
barriers,  that  in  nature  dispersal  will  be  an  extremely  slow  pro- 
cess. The  majority  of  plants  have  no  special  "mechanism"  for 


CH.  Il] 


INTO  NEW  AREAS 


21 


the  purpose,  and  depend  on  a  small  transport  due  to  wind  or 
animals,  often  only  of  a  few  inches.  RitigaJa,  which  was  probably 
covered  with  a  "dry-zone"  flora,  but  which  has  apparently 
existed  in  its  present  place  since  the  Tertiary  period,  has  only 
received  103  "wet-zone"  plants  in  all  that  time,  though  the 
conditions  are  favourable  to  them,  while  Krakatau,  with  virgin 
soil,  has  received  137  in  less  than  thirty  years.  All  the  work, 
whether  upon  dispersal  or  upon  plant-associations,  that  has  been 
quoted,  goes  to  show  the  enormous  influence  of  barriers ;  but  as 
the  floras  of  most  countries,  even  of  most  islands,  do  not  show 
any  such  influences  of  the  barriers  that  cut  them  off,  the  natural 
inference  is  that  in  general  they  received  the  bulk  of  their  floras 
when  the  barriers  were  not  there. 

Looking  at  the  dispersal  mechanisms  in  a  general  way,  one 
gathers  a  broad  impression  that  they  are  really  of  much  less 
importance  to  plants  than  one  has  been  inclined  to  imagine.  This 
is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  one  finds  many  genera  with  little 
or  no  mechanism  for  dispersal  just  as  widely  spread  and  cosmo- 
politan as  others  with  the  most  perfect  arrangements.  For 
example,  among  the  former  we  find  Callitriche,  Ceratophyllum, 
Carex,  Cocculus,  Desmodium,  Euphorbia,  Hippuris,  J  uncus, 
Lemna,  Piper,  Pistia,  Polygonum,  Salvia,  Utricularia,  etc.  Al- 
together more  than  half  the  cosmopolitan  genera  have  no  good 
dispersal  mechanism.  (Cf.  Lantana  and  Tithonia  mentioned 
above,  p.  17.) 

Of  genera  occurring  in  both  Old  and  New  Worlds,  the  family 
with  most  (97)  is  Gramineae,  whose  fruits  are  to  some  degree 
suited  to  wind  dispersal,  but  it  is  followed  by  Leguminosae  (79) 
which  are  ill-suited  to  rapid  spread,  except  to  some  extent  by 
currents.  These  families  are  followed  by  Compositae,  Orchida- 
ceae,  Rosaceae,  Rubiaceae,  Scrophulariaceae,  Liliaceae,  Umbel- 
liferae,  Cypera'ceae,  Cruciferae,  Caryophyllaceae,  Ericaceae, 
Euphorbiaceae,  Ranunculaceae,  Acanthaceae,  Convolvulaceae, 
Coniferae,  Labiatae,  and  Malvaceae,  in  the  order  named.  The 
general  impression  is  not  that  of  the  predominance  of  plants 
with  good  dispersal  mechanisms. 

The  first  ten  largest  families  in  the  world  (judged  by  number 
of  genera) — the  Compositae,  Orchidaceae,  Leguminosae,  Rubi- 
aceae, Gramineae,  Asclepiadaceae,  Euphorbiaceae,  Umbelliferae, 
Cruciferae,  and  Acanthaceae — are  not  remarkable  for  the  pos- 
session of  extra  good  methods  of  dispersal,  excepting  the  first 
two.  Yet  not  only  have  they  the  largest  number  of  genera  in 


22  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  PLANTS  [pt.  i 

the  world,  but  they  have  also  the  largest  number  in  most  large 
sections  of  it,  e.g.  the  Tropics,  or  the  islands  of  the  world,  taken 
together.  This  fact  goes  to  show  that  dispersal  has  not  altogether 
depended  upon  the  possession  of  a  good  "adaptation"  for 
the  purpose,  and  also  that  when  one  takes  large  numbers  and 
long  periods,  it  is  to  a  marked  degree  mechanical.  Attention  was 
first  called  to  this  striking  fact  by  Hooker  in  1888  (56,  p.  lxiv)^ 
in  these  words  "the  conditions  which  have  resulted  in  Mono- 
cotyledons retaining  their  numerical  position  of  1  to  4  or  there- 
abouts of  Dicotyledons,  in  the  globe,  and  in  all  large  areas 
thereof,  are,  in  the  present  state  of  science,  inscrutable." 

If  the  methods  of  dispersal  be  compared  throughout  a  family,, 
it  will  be  found  that  they  are  often  attached  only  to  a  genus  or 
group  of  genera,  and  thus  are  probably  comparatively  modern. 
Even  in  Compositae,  which  as  a  whole  have  the  same  mechanism, 
there  are  a  good  many  widely  dispersed  forms  with  no  pappus. 
"  Of  the  Compositae  common  to  Lord  Auckland's  group,  Fuegia, 
and  Kerguelen's  Land,  none  have  any  pappus  at  all !  Of  the 
many  species  with  pappus,  none  are  common  to  two  of  these 
islands"  (55a,  p.  xxi,  note).  " Phyllanthus  shows  by  its  distribu- 
tion in  the  Pacific  that  dry-fruited  Euphorbiaceae  are  as  widely 
distributed  and  as  much  at  home  as  the  fleshy-fruited  ones" 
(44,  p.  325).  And  cf.  7,  p.  573. 

Summary 

It  being  generally  agreed  that  plants  dispersed  over  large 
areas  began  upon  smaller,  a  study  of  the  methods  of  dispersal 
must  form  an  introduction  to  that  of  distribution  in  general, 
and  a  number  of  cases  of  such  investigation,  from  the  flora  found 
in  the  pollard-willow  trees  near  Cambridge  to  the  new  flora  of 
the  island  of  Krakatau,  are  given.  The  general  results  that  seem 
to  come  out  of  all  such  work  are  (1)  that  barriers  to  spreading 
produce  very  important  results;  (2)  that  most  individual  plants 
travel  (to  anything  more  than  the  very  smallest  distance)  by 
aid  of  the  "regular"  mechanisms  for  dispersal  by  wind,  water, 
or  animals  (or  vegetative  reproduction);  but  (3)  that  a  great 
many  species  are  sometimes,  even  if  very  rarely,  carried  by 
various  "irregular"  methods — mud  on  birds'  feet,  hurricanes,, 
floating  logs,  etc. ;  (4)  that  the  distance  covered  is  usually  very 
small;  but  (5)  that  dealing  with  large  numbers  and  long  periods, 
the  general  result  tends  to  be  much  the  same  in  all  cases  under 
somewhat  similar  conditions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fixity  of 


CH.  II] 


INTO  NEW  AREAS 


23 


the  vegetative  covering  of  any  given  area  shows  that  the  pos- 
session of  a  good  dispersal  mechanism  is  only  rarely  of  much 
value.  A  general  comparison  of  the  flora  of  the  world  shows  that 
more  than  half  of  the  most  cosmopolitan  genera  have  little  or 
no  mechanism  for  dispersal,  nor  is  such  well  marked,  on  the 
whole,  in  the  largest  and  most  widely  distributed  families.  It 
also  goes  to  show  that  in  most  cases  where  there  are  now  wide 
separations  by  seas,  etc.,  the  floras  are  too  large  to  have  been 
able  to  arrive  across  such  formidable  barriers. 


CHAPTER  III 


THE  INTRODUCTION  AND  SPREAD  OF 
FOREIGN  SPECIES 

o  ne  of  the  most  commonly  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted 
phenomena  in  connection  with  the  distribution  of  plants  is  that 
exhibited  by  many  species  that  have  been  introduced,  whether 
intentionally  or  not,  into  countries  to  which  they  were  not  really 
native.  Often  they  have  spread  rapidly,  and  are  now  among  the 
most  common  plants.  The  casual  traveller  in  Ceylon,  for  example, 
will  notice  everywhere  by  the  roadside  the  sensitive  plant 
(Mimosa),  the  Mexican  sunflower  (Tithonia),  Lantana,  Mikania, 
various  Cassias,  guavas,  Turner  a,  Vinca  rosea,  etc.,  not  one  of 
which  is  really  native.  Higher  in  the  hills  he  will  see  abundance 
of  clover,  dandelion,  gorse,  shepherd's  purse,  spurrey,  etc.,  also 
introduced  in  recent  times. 

When  Europeans  first  settled  in  tropical  and  other  countries 
to  which  they  were  newcomers,  the  places  in  which  they  located 
themselves  were  not  determined  by  mere  chance,  but  were 
places  to  and  from  which  transport  was  most  easily  and  cheaply 
obtainable  (114,  p.  36).  They  had  not  come  to  these  countries  for 
the  benefit  of  the  inhabitants,  but  to  begin  trade  with  Europe 
in  those  products  that  they  only  could  supply.  Accordingly  the 
white  men  settled  at  the  mouths  of  the  great  rivers  like  the 
Ganges,  Yang-tze-kiang,  Amazon,  de  la  Plata,  etc.,  where  ports 
existed  or  could  be  easily  made,  and  goods  could  be  easily 
brought  down  from  inland.  Even  more  frequently  they  settled 
upon  the  islands,  beginning  with  the  smaller  ones.  Here  there 
was  less  risk  of  invasion  by  the  natives  in  great  force,  and  trans- 
port from  the  interior  was  usually  easy,  by  reason  of  the  com- 
paratively small  size  of  the  country,  though  of  course  river- 
mouths  were  utilised,  for  purposes  of  port  accommodation,  and 
of  transport  from  the  interior,  whenever  possible. 

In  these  places  introduced  plants  were  soon  found  spreading 
about,  especially  when  the  country,  prior  to  occupation — as  was 
very  often  the  case,  especially  on  the  islands — was  in  its  natural 
state  of  forest.  No  notice  was  taken  of  this  spread  until  the  rise 
of  the  theory  of  Natural  Selection,  when  it  was  found  that  these 
introductions  apparently  gave  good  evidence  in  its  support.  This 


pt.  i,  ch.  m]     SPREAD  OF  FOREIGN  SPECIES 


25 


evidence  was  accepted  without  being  always  subjected  to  proper 
sifting,  and  it  was  for  a  long  time  believed  that  these  introduc- 
tions spread  with  this  rapidity  and  success  because  they  came 
from  large  continental  areas  (chiefly  Europe  and  tropical 
America)  where  they  had,  so  to  speak,  become  highly  efficient 
and  "up-to-date"  by  competing  in  the  struggle  for  existence 
amongst  a  large  crowd  of  other  species,  and  were  in  consequence 
exterminating  the  native  productions  because  these  had  not 
had  such  advantages.  In  a  comparatively  short  time  the  fact 
that  introductions  also  occurred  on  continental  areas  was  almost 
lost  sight  of,  and  the  argument  was  applied  almost  entirely  to 
islands.  Darwin,  for  example,  states  (23,  p.  340)  that  "in  many 
islands  the  native  productions  are  nearly  equalled,  or  even  out- 
numbered, by  those  which  have  become  naturalised ;  and  this  is 
the  first  stage  towards  their  extinction."  Wallace  (111,  p.  527) 
makes  very  similar  statements. 

Now  the  fact  of  rapid  spread  in  many  cases  is  undeniable,  and 
also  that  it  has  been  largely,  if  not  mainly,  recorded  from  islands. 
But  no  proper  analysis  of  the  evidence  has  been  made.  One 
soon  finds  that  introductions  are  just  as  common  on  continental 
areas,  especially  where  these  (as  was  nearly  always  the  case  upon 
islands)  were  untouched  forest  at  the  time  of  settlement.  Thus 
141  species  have  been  recorded  as  spontaneous  in  the  Transvaal, 
368  in  South  Australia,  364  in  Victoria;  800  introductions,  of 
which  107  have  become  naturalised,  occur  near  Montpellier,  and 
548  in  the  Tweed  valley  (14,  11,  35,  107,  143).  One  also  finds 
that  the  cases  of  rapid  spread  without  alteration  of  the  conditions 
are  very  few  indeed ;  in  most  cases  man  has  removed  the  forest, 
made  great  clearances,  introduced  grazing  animals,  or  in  other 
ways  completely  altered  the  circumstances,  thus  enabling  those 
introductions  to  survive  and  prosper  which  were  suited  to  the 
new  conditions.  And  one  further  finds  that  when  introductions 
have  spread,  it  has  been  just  as  much,  if  at  all,  at  the  expense 
of  species  in  the  native  flora  that  are  of  wide  distribution  as  of 
species  of  the  most  strictly  local  kind.  The  great  bulk  of  cases 
of  spread  of  introductions  are  due,  not  to  the  fact  of  their  having 
come  from  Europe  or  America,  but  to  the  fact  of  their  suiting 
the  new  conditions  created  by  clearance  of  the  forest,  or  cultiva- 
tion of  the  ground,  to  which  there  were  few  or  no  native  species 
suitable,  and  to  the  fact  that  man  has  thus  broken  up  the  old 
associations  of  plants  that  covered  the  ground,  and  made  it 
possible  for  new  plants  easily  to  gain  a  foothold.  In  Ceylon,  for 


26 


THE  INTRODUCTION  AND  [pt.  i 


example,  which  has  been  much  quoted  in  this  connection,  all 
but  11  of  the  387  naturalised  species  (115)  are  either  weeds  about 
houses,  due  to  cultivation,  or  weeds  of  open  ground,  which  was 
all  but  unknown  in  the  old  days  of  forest.  Seven  of  these  11  are 
only  a  clump  or  two  of  planted  trees,  and  there  are  really  only 
two  cases  of  natural  or  nearly  natural  spread,  and  then  only  to 
a  distance  of  a  few  hundred  yards,  downstream,  in  a  very  steep 
valley. 

The  only  instances  of  rapid  spread  in  Ceylon,  on  land  already 
occupied  by  a  growth  of  plants  suited  to  the  conditions,  have 
been  in  the  case  of  a  few  such  weeds  as  Tithonia  and  Mikania, 
which  have  spread  rapidly  over  the  open  ground  already  occu- 
pied by  weeds  previously  introduced.  One  is  inclined  to  think 
that  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  such  areas  have  not  as  yet 
elaborated  the  best  plant  societies  suited  to  their  conditions, 
and  that  room  is  still  left  for  newcomers.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  no  evidence  for  rapid  spread  in  forest,  where  the  adjust- 
ment of  species  to  environment  has  probably  been  carried  to 
great  lengths. 

In  a  few  cases,  new  species  have  spread  rapidly  over  ground 
already  occupied  by  herbaceous  plants,  like  Elodea  in  the  waters 
of  western  Europe,  or  Spartina  in  the  low  coast  lands  on  the 
south  of  England.  Here,  again,  one  may  suppose  that  there  has 
still  been  room  for  newcomers,  especially  in  the  case  of  the 
Spartina,  which  is  largely  found  on  land  that  was  submerged 
not  so  very  long  ago. 

The  enormous  majority  of  cases  of  rapid  spread  of  introduced 
weeds  are  due  to  cutting  of  forest,  or  other  serious  alterations 
of  conditions ;  in  North  America  and  Argentina  often  to  cultiva- 
tion of  the  soil  (even  if  only  once),  leaving  conditions  different 
from  what  they  were.  In  St  Helena,  which  has  been  much  used 
as  an  argument  for  natural  selection,  man  introduced  goats, 
which  are  most  destructive  to  vegetation,  with  the  result  that 
there  is  left  only  a  flora  practically  " goat-proof."  Even  the 
largest  trees  are  not  safe,  for  the  goats  may  destroy  the  smaller 
trees,  and  expose  them  to  the  action  of  the  sun  and  wind.  [Cf. 
also  the  effects  of  the  exclusion  of  rabbits  from  a  heath  (36, 
1917,  p.  1).] 

Cockayne  has  devoted  much  attention  to  New  Zealand,  an 
island  in  which  over  550  introductions  have  become  more  or 
less  naturalised,  and  which  has  often  been  quoted  as  evidence 
for  the  great  superiority  of  introductions  from  the  crowded  flora 


CH.  Ill] 


SPREAD  OF  FOREIGN  SPECIES 


27 


of  Europe.  In  actual  fact,  however,  man,  by  felling  the  forest, 
introducing  cattle,  and  in  other  ways,  has  completely  altered  the 
local  conditions.  Cockayne  states  (19,  p.  32)  that  introductions 
only  give  the  characteristic  stamp  to  the  vegetation  "where 
draining,  cultivation,  constant  burning  of  forest,  scrub,  and 
tussock,  and  the  grazing  of  a  multitude  of  domestic  animals  have 
made  absolutely  new  edaphic  conditions,  which  approximate  to 
those  of  Europe."  And  farther  on  in  the  same  paper  he  says, 
"the  indigenous  vegetation  is  still  virgin,  and  the  introduced 
plants  altogether  absent,  where  grazing  animals  have  no  access, 
and  where  fires  have  never  been." 

Bolle  regards  the  Canarian  endemic  flora  as  "everlasting"  and 
"indestructible,"  and  writing  of  the  same  flora  Christ  views  the 
local  conditions  as  all  in  favour  of  the  native  plants  and  against 
intruders. 

There  are  very  few  cases  of  rapid  spread  of  introductions  that 
cannot  be  accounted  for  by  changed  conditions,  and  in  many  of 
these*  it  is  probable,  as  in  the  cases  of  Elodea  or  Eichhornia 
(water-hyacinth)  in  the  water,  or  cacti  or  Cynara  (cardoon)  on 
the  land,  that  they  have  proved  suitable  to  joining  a  plant 
society  which  as  yet  was  incomplete  (open)  and  allowed  room 
for  newcomers.  The  few  cases  remaining,  that  are  quite  in- 
capable of  explanation  as  yet,  are  so  very  limited  in  number 
that  to  base  any  argument  upon  them  would  be  in  a  very  high 
degree  dangerous. 

The  spread  of  introductions  is  often  so  rapid  and  striking  that 
one  is  tempted  to  lay  too  much  stress  upon  it,  and  to  think  that 
the  original  rate  of  spread  of  most  species  was  something  of  the 
same  kind.  But  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  this  view,  and 
the  natural  rate  of  spread  is  often  so  slow  that  one  may  even 
think  that  nothing  is  happening  at  all,  and  that  a  species  has 
reached  its  limit  of  distribution,  whereas  if  things  could  be  left 
quite  untouched  for  several  centuries,  one  might  find  an  ap- 
preciable change  at  the  end  of  that  time. 

Summary 

An  endeavour  is  made  to  show  that  in  the  great  majority  of 
cases  the  rapid  spread  of  plants  introduced  into  new  countries 
is  due  to  the  changes  of  conditions  that  have  been  made  by 
man,  and  not  to  the  fact  that  these  plants  have  usually  come 
from  more  complex  and  "efficient"  floras.  Introductions  are 
just  as  common  upon  continental  areas  as  upon  islands  (to 


28 


SPREAD  OF  FOREIGN  SPECIES     [pt.  i,  ch.  hi 


which  they  are  sometimes  supposed  to  be  largely  confined) ;  and 
their  spread  is  practically  always  due  to  some  change  of  con- 
ditions that  has  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  interfered  with  the 
success  of,  or  has  even  destroyed,  the  society  of  plants  formerly 
growing  upon  the  ground  which  they  now  occupy. 


CHAPTER  IV 


ACCLIMATISATION 

Acclimatisation  may  be  described  as  the  accustoming  of 
plants  to  new  conditions  and  climates  till  they  are  not  only 
capable  of  growing  there,  but  also  of  reproducing  themselves 
freely.  Thus,  though  the  cherry  and  apple  will  grow  readily 
enough  in  the  hills  of  Ceylon,  they  are  not  really  acclimatised, 
for  they  do  not  produce  fertile  seed,  and  if  left  to  themselves 
would  inevitably  die  out.  Lantana,  on  the  other  hand,  is  com- 
pletely acclimatised,  and  seeds  freely. 

As  practised  by  man,  acclimatisation  is  chiefly  modern,  but 
in  nature  it  has  been  going  on  for  ages.  Hers  is  much  more 
gradual,  but  there  is  no  nursing  of  a  delicate  plant  till  it  can 
survive  and  reproduce;  if  in  any  way  unsuitable  to  the  altered 
conditions,  it  will  die  out.  Man  used  to  try  to  make  enormous 
changes,  as  from  Europe  to  the  Tropics,  but  has  slowly  learnt 
that  this  is  usually  impracticable,  and  has  even  begun  gradual 
acclimatisation,  as  for  example  in  the  way  in  which  he  has 
treated  Liberian  coffee  in  Java,  taking  the  seed  of  successive 
generations  a  few  score  yards  higher  up  each  time,  till  he  has 
persuaded  the  tree  to  do  well  at  a  much  higher  elevation  than 
that  to  which  it  is  naturally  suited. 

In  the  Ceylon  Botanic  Gardens  we  were  very  anxious  to 
acclimatise  the  beautiful  Cyperus  Papyrus;  so  long  as  we  tried 
seed  from  Europe  we  failed,  but  seed  from  Saharanpur  in  India 
succeeded  at  once.  Sometimes  the  difficulty  is  with  change  of 
climate  in  regard  to  periodicity,  as  when  one  tries  to  acclimatise 
plants  of  the  southern  hemisphere  in  Europe.  Sometimes  the 
plant  requires  a  mycorhiza  (or  fungus  in  association  with  the 
roots)  for  its  successful  growth,  and  it  may  not  be  possible  to 
persuade  this  to  grow,  as  with  heather  in  Ceylon,  which  has 
never  succeeded  there.  But  it  would  lead  too  far  to  discuss  all 
the  many  and  complex  phenomena  of  acclimatisation  as  prac- 
tised by  man,  and  we  must  return  to  that  carried  on  by  nature, 
which  almost  never  attempts  to  make  great  changes  at  once, 
except  when,  for  example,  the  Gulf  Stream  carries  to  Europe 
seeds  which  refuse  to  grow  there  except  in  hothouses. 

As  a  rule,  nature's  acclimatisation  is  simply  to  the  slightly 


30  ACCLIMATISATION  [pt. 

different  conditions  that  may  be  experienced  in  a  transit  of  a 
few  score  of  yards  or  less,  but  small  journeys  like  this,  added 
up  over  many  centuries,  ultimately  result  in  enormous  differences 
of  conditions,  as  when  one  finds  Hydrocotyle  asiatica  growing  in 
the  low  country  of  Ceylon,  with  a  steady  mean  temperature  of 
80°,  and  in  Stewart  Island,  New  Zealand,  with  winter  snow  and 
frost. 

Acclimatisation  may  also  take  place  in  nature  without  the 
plant  changing  its  position,  by  the  secular  changes  of  climate 
which  are  usually  going  on.  New  Zealand  had  probably  at  one 
time  a  more  or  less  tropical  climate,  and  now  has  a  temperate 
one,  yet  the  tropical  species  are  still  to  be  found  there,  and  quite 
probably  may  have  originally  arrived  when  the  climate  was 
warmer,  and  then  become  gradually  acclimatised,  themselves 
and  their  descendants,  to  climates  steadily  becoming  colder. 
The  rise  of  a  mountain  chain  may  gradually  acclimatise  plants 
to  a  colder  climate,  by  carrying  them  upwards. 

This  gradual  acclimatisation  that  is  carried  on  by  nature  has 
often  been  so  successful,  as  illustrated  by  Hydrocotyle  asiatica 
above,  and  by  scores  of  other  "tropical"  species  which  are  found 
far  south  in  cold  but  still  damp  climates  (to  the  northwards  the 
change  to  dry  is  more  sudden)  that  it  makes  it  very  difficult  to 
say  when  a  species  has  really  reached  its  climatic  limit,  beyond 
which  no  amount  of  acclimatisation  would  be  of  any  use.  People 
are  apt  to  say  that  laboratory  experiments  show  that  such  or 
such  a  temperature  is  the  lowest  that  a  plant  will  stand,  for- 
getting nature's  very  gradual  acclimatisation.  Hydrocotyle  from 
Stewart  Island  would  almost  certainly  give  reactions  in  the 
laboratory  different  from  those  of  the  same  plant  from  the 
plains  of  Ceylon. 

It  is  possible,  again,  that  in  nature's  acclimatisation  by 
gradual  change  of  climate,  plants  may  become  slower  in  the 
performance  of  their  functions,  or  in  growth,  so  that  the  genera- 
tions may  be  farther  apart. 

Yet  another  factor  that  has  probably  an  important  influence 
is  the  increasing  number  of  species  upon  any  given  piece  of 
country.  As  the  species  increase  in  number,  they  probably  begin 
to  form  more  or  less  complete  or  "  closed  "  associations  of  plants, 
into  which  intrusion  of  a  newcomer  becomes  increasingly  diffi- 
cult, so  that  probably  both  rate  of  travel  and  acclimatisation 
are  rendered  slower  and  more  troublesome. 


CH.  IV] 


ACCLIMATISATION 


31 


Summary 

Acclimatisation  in  the  hands  of  man,  who  is  impatient  of 
results,  has  been  largely  a  matter  of  trial  and  error,  with  nume- 
rous failures,  but  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  this  is  not  so 
much  the  case  in  the  hands  of  nature,  working  as  she  does  over 
vast  periods  of  time,  with  very  small  steps.  Species  have  thus 
been  acclimatised  to  conditions  wonderfully  different  from  those 
in  which  they  began. 


CHAPTER  V 


CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  HINDER 
THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 

It  being  generally  considered  that  a  species  commences  upon  a 
comparatively  small  area  (or  areas),  it  is  clear  that  it  has  to  do 
much  travelling  to  cover  the  large  territory  which  is  now  occu- 
pied by  so  many  forms.  In  general  it  will  be  dispersed  by  aid 
of  one  of  the  methods  already  described,  whether  regular  or 
not,  and  will  be  aided,  or  far  more  often  hindered,  in  its 
journeyings  by  various  factors  which  we  have  now  to  consider. 

Whatever  one's  views  may  be  as  to  the  efficacy  of  transport 
to  a  distance,  it  is  unquestionable  that  as  a  rule  new  plants  of 
a  given  species  grow  up  fairly  near  to  pre-existing  specimens  of 
the  same  kind.  For  one  thing,  though  it  is  often  overlooked,  it 
is  much  more  difficult  for  a  plant  carried  to  a  distance  to  estab- 
lish itself,  under  the  different  conditions  of  climate,  soil,  and 
especially  of  plant  societies,  etc.,  that  it  will  then  meet  with, 
than  if  it  were  simply  transported  a  few  yards,  just  as  it  would 
be  more  difficult  for  an  emigrant  from  England  to  establish 
himself  in  a  foreign  country,  rather  than  in  a  colony  or  the 
United  States. 

If  near  to  a  solitary  tree  of  a  given  kind  there  exist,  at  dis- 
tances of  ten,  a  hundred,  and  a  thousand  yards,  spaces  where 
its  seeds  if  sown  would  stand  a  reasonable  chance  of  growing 
and  flourishing,  then  it  is  clear  that  to  put  a  seed  on  every 
square  yard1  up  to  a  distance  of  ten  (supposing  the  impossible 
case  of  uniform  distribution),  the  tree  would  have  to  disperse 
314  seeds;  up  to  100  yards  31,400;  and  up  to  1000  yards  it 
would  need  no  less  than  3,140,000  seeds,  a  number  probably 
far  beyond  the  capacity  of  most  trees.  In  actual  fact,  the  seeds 
are  notoriously  carried  in  such  vastly  greater  numbers  to  the 
smaller  distances,  that  this  figure  would  probably  have  to  be 
multiplied  by  100,  or  even  1000  or  more,  to  allow  of  the  plant 
placing  a  seed  on  every  square  yard  up  to  a  radius  of  1000  yards. 
But  even  this  is  not  enough,  for  a  seed  placed  in  one  part  of  a 
square  yard,  while  the  suitable  spot  for  its  growth  is  in  another, 
will  have  no  better  chance  of  success  than  if  a  dozen  yards  away. 
1  Area  of  circle  =  7rr2,  e.g.  3-14  x  10  x  10. 


pt.  i,  ch.  vj       THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


33 


One  must  again  multiply  by  say  150,  to  allow  a  seed  for  every 
three  inches  square,  or  probably  by  even  more  than  this.  Unless, 
therefore,  a  seed  just  happens  to  fall  on  the  exact  spot  where  it 
can  grow,  the  chance  that  the  plant  will  ever  travel  more  than 
a  few  yards  from  its  parent  is  but  a  small  one1;  and  the  majority 
of  plants  cannot  in  any  case  travel  more  than  a  few  yards, 
except  by  irregular  aid,  for  want  of  a  suitable  mechanism. 

Of  course,  in  cases  where  a  wall  of  uniform  vegetation,  like 
the  edge  of  a  pine  forest,  is  advancing,  the  number  of  seed  re- 
quired per  tree  to  reach  to  a  considerable  distance  will  be  much 
reduced,  or  even  where  the  plant,  as  is  more  often  the  case,  is 
thinly  scattered  along  a  given  front,  but  in  any  case,  to  reach 
a  favourable  spot  at  some  distance  away,  a  vast  number  of  seed 
will  be  required.  In  the  temperate  zone,  where  seed  may  survive 
for  a  long  time,  the  chance  of  such  success  is  greater,  but  in  the 
tropics,  where  they  rarely  remain  viable  for  long,  is  but  slight. 
Not  only  so,  but  the  vegetation  of  the  wetter  tropics  is  usually 
forest,  and  so  thick  that  a  seed  dropped  near  the  top  of  the  tree 
canopy  will  be  unlikely  to  reach  the  soil  if  not  very  heavy, 
unless  by  mere  chance. 

There  is  not  the  least  need,  when  one  has  regard  to  the  vast 
periods  of  time  that  are  available  for  the  purpose,  for  rapid 
dispersal.  Few  people,  perhaps,  have  fully  grasped  the  fact  that 
while  some  species  occupy  very  large  areas,  the  bulk  of  them  do 
not,  and  the  average  area  is  but  comparatively  small.  Upon 
50  million  square  miles  of  land  there  are  about  160,000  species 
of  flowering  plants,  so  that  if  each  occupied  its  own  area,  and 
alone,  the  average  would  be  about  300  square  miles.  But  in 
fact,  at  a  rough  and  fairly  liberal  estimate,  there  are  say  3000- 
4000  in  any  given  country,  which  would  make  the  average  about 
a  million  square  miles,  probably  an  overestimate.  But  taking  it 
at  a  million  for  convenience,  this  area  could  be  covered  in  a 
million  years  (a  mere  detail  in  geological  time)  by  an  annual 
plant  which  merely  moved  forward  a  yard  a  year,  and  which 
started  on  an  open  plain  of  the  necessary  size,  with  a  uniform 
climate. 

While  the  radius  of  the  area  occupied  increased  1,  2,  3,  4,  5, 
etc.,  the  area  (irr2)  would  increase  3,  12,  27,  48,  75,  108,  the 
differences  being  9,  15,  21,  27,  33,  or  an  annual  increase  of  6. 

1  The  rapid  spread  of  weeds  does  not  affect  this  argument,  for  they  are 
spreading  upon  cultivated  ground,  and  owe  their  rapid  dispersal  to  changed 
or  unnatural  conditions,  as  do  the  introductions  considered  in  Chapter  m. 

W.A.  3 


34 


CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR 


The  area  would  thus  grow  with  increasing  speed1,  and  though 
for  a  long  time  it  would  be  very  small,  at  the  end  of  a  million 
years  the  radius  would  be  1  million  yards,  or  roughly  600  miles 
(London  to  the  Shetlands,  Dresden,  and  the  Pyrenees),  and  the 
area  over  a  million  square  miles. 

Thus,  in  a  period  of  time  which  is  almost  insignificant  from 
a  geological  point  of  view,  a  species  without  competition  or 
interference  might  cover  an  area  which  is  probably  larger  than 
the  average  area  of  a  species  to-day.  At  the  same  rate  of  travel, 
in  12  million  years  it  would  cover  an  area  of  50  million  square 
miles,  equal  to  the  whole  available  land-surface  of  the  globe, 
and  in  24  million  years  might  cover  the  entire  surface  of  the 
earth,  supposed  land  with  uniform  conditions.  All  these  periods 
are  probably  small  compared  even  to  the  Tertiary  period  of  the 
earth's  history,  for  Lord  Rayleigh  has  estimated  the  time  since 
the  Eocene  alone  at  30  millions. 

These  figures  are  of  course  the  merest  rough  approximations, 
and  are  given  simply  to  show  how  little  actual  forward  move- 
ment is  required  to  do,  in  a  comparatively  short  space  of  time, 
what  has  actually  been  done  by  even  the  most  widely  distributed 
species.  No  special  mechanism  for  dispersal  would  be  imperative 
in  such  a  case.  It  is  clearly  obvious  that  in  nature  what  actually 
happens  must  be  delay  of  spread  rather  than  acceleration. 

Another  important  point  that  one  must  not  allow  to  be  for- 
gotten, and  which  may  perhaps  be  dealt  with  best  in  this  place, 
is  the  simple  arithmetical  ratio  in  which  an  early  species  will 
gain  upon  one  that  appears  at  a  later  period,  both  in  the  area 
occupied,  and  in  the  chance  of  giving  rise  to  new  species.  Let 
us  suppose  that  both  of  these  are  purely  mechanical  processes, 
and  that  the  species  spread  uniformly  in  every  direction,  as 
before,  without  let  or  hindrance.  Then  if  two  species  A  and  B 
start  at  different  periods,  spreading  at  the  same  rate,  B  will 
never  catch  up  to  A,  but  will  always  fall  behind.  The  areas 
occupied  will  be  (cf.  above): 

A  3  12  27  48  75  108  147  192 
B  —      3    12      27      48  75 

Difference...  45    63      81      99  117 


1  The  dispersal  would  of  course  tend  to  become  less  and  less  dense,  but 
as  for  Age  and  Area  purposes  area  is  estimated  by  drawing  a  circle  round 
the  outermost  localities,  this  matters  little. 


1 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES  35 

The  differences  in  area  occupied  will  continually  increase  (by  18 
every  time)  though  in  radius  of  area  B  will  always  be  only  3 
behind  A.  And  in  the  same  way,  if  each  give  rise  to  new  species 
in  proportion  to  the  area  occupied  (i.e.  number  of  individuals), 
A  will  continually  gain  upon  B.  In  actual  practice,  of  course, 
the  result  will  not  be  so  mechanical,  but  on  the  average  the  earlier 
formed  species  will  gain  upon  the  later,  both  in  area  and  in 
number  of  progeny  of  new  species,  unless  the  later  formed  ones 
are  superior  to  the  parents.  This  gain  is  incidentally  shown  to 
be  the  case  by  looking  over  the  geological  record.  The  genera 
that  are  found  in  the  earliest  horizons  are  in  general  large  genera 
of  the  present  day.  Twenty  of  them  from  one  horizon,  though 
one  or  two  are  now  extinct,  include  over  2000  species  now  living, 
so  that  their  average  size  is  at  present  over  eight  times  the 
average  of  twelve  species  per  genus. 

It  is  clear  that  in  nature  the  usual  case  will  be  transport  to  a 
small  distance  only.  But  when  this  has  been  accomplished,  the 
seed  has  still  to  become  a  plant  capable  of  reproducing  itself, 
and  to  do  this  it  has  to  overcome  many  difficulties,  the  chief 
perhaps  being  the  fact  that,  as  a  rule,  the  ground  is  already  all 
but  completely  occupied  by  plants  more  or  less  fully  grown,  so 
that  even  a  vacant  space  left  by  the  death  of  one  of  them  will 
be  full  of  roots,  and  overshadowed  by  the  neighbouring  plants. 
Not  only  so,  but  the  plants  that  grow  upon  any  given  piece  of 
ground  in  its  natural  state  generally  form  what  is  called  an 
association  or  society,  into  which  a  stranger,  i.e.  a  plant  of  a 
species  not  usually  occurring  in  that  association,  will  find  entry 
very  difficult.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  below. 

When  a  species  is  just  commencing  its  life  as  such,  and  con- 
sists possibly  of  a  very  few  individuals,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
its  chance  of  spreading,  by  seizing  upon  spots  more  or  less  vacant, 
will  be  much  less  than  when  it  becomes  more  common,  as  indi- 
cated by  the  very  few  plants  that  make  up  many  endemic 
species  (below,  p.  55).  A  species,  unless  it  start  upon  an  un- 
occupied piece  of  ground,  will  probably  take  a  very  long  time 
to  spread  from  the  condition  of  half-a-dozen  plants  on  a  few 
square  yards  to  reasonable  frequency  on  a  square  mile.  Once 
established  with  commonness  more  or  less  equal  to  that  of  its 
neighbours,  it  will  probably  spread  with  a  rapidity  much  the 
same  as  that  of  other  species  of  the  same  genus  living  in  the 
same  country  and  in  the  same  type  of  vegetation,  inasmuch  as 
all  will  probably  have  much  the  same  type  of  mechanism  for 

3—2 


36  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [ft.  i 

dispersal,  and  will  react  to  their  surroundings  in  much  the  same 
way.  But  as  yet  we  have  no  means  of  comparing  the  rate  of 
spread  of  species  that  are  separated  in  systematic  relationship, 
and  which  may  differ  in  many  ways.  Some  may  have  powder- 
like seed,  easily  carried  by  wind,  others  fleshy  fruits  dispersed 
by  birds;  some  may  be  herbs,  with  a  generation  every  year  or 
two,  and  a  corresponding  chance  of  frequent  dispersal,  others 
may  be  trees  with  as  much  as  twenty  to  thirty  years  between 
generations;  and  so  on. 

If  the  dispersal  of  plants  depended  simply  upon  their 
"mechanism"  to  that  end,  it  is  evident  that  (working  with 
groups  of  species,  and  long  periods)  it  would  be  almost  a  purely 
mechanical  process,  the  area  occupied  enlarging  steadily  with 
the  increasing  age  of  the  species;  and  of  course  each  species 
would  probably  progress  at  a  different  rate,  those  with  good 
mechanisms,  or  in  good  environment,  or  flowering  while  still 
young,  travelling  more  rapidly.  After  a  certain  period  of  time 
the  areas  occupied  by  a  set  of  different  plants,  say  a  Dipterocarp 
tree  (p.  19),  a  Leguminous  tree,  a  Cruciferous  herb,  and  a  Com- 
posite herb,  all  starting  simultaneously  on  area  represented  by 
1,  might  at  a  guess  be,  say,  2,  5,  10,  and  100.  But  in  actual  life 
many  other  causes  come  in  to  facilitate  or  delay  the  spread  of 
species,  and  it  seems  probable  that  delay,  rather  than  accelera- 
tion, is  the  usual  result.  This  is  chiefly  the  case,  for  instance,  with 
the  actual  physical  features  of  the  world,  which  we  shall 
consider  first. 

Open  seas,  for  example,  and  even  comparatively  narrow  arms 
of  the  sea,  like  the  English  Channel,  may  offer  practically  in- 
superable barriers  to  migration,  only  to  be  occasionally  passed 
by  a  few  species,  unless  with  the  assistance  of  man.  An  im- 
portant point  to  remember  is  that  such  seas,  or  arms  of  the  sea, 
may  be  comparatively  recent,  or  of  very  ancient  standing  in 
geological  history,  so  that  their  total  effect  upon  distribution 
may  be  relatively  small,  or  of  very  great  importance  indeed. 
Once  formed,  however  shallow  or  deep,  a  sea  will  offer  much 
the  same  obstacle,  and  the  degree  to  which  it  obstructs  passage 
of  species  will  to  some  extent  depend  upon  the  direction  of  any 
currents  that  may  traverse  it.  Further,  even  when  it  has  become 
wide  enough,  in  the  process  of  formation,  to  stop  some  species 
completely,  others,  by  virtue  of  good  dispersal  mechanisms,  may 
be  able  to  cross. 

Mountains,  again,  are  of  great  importance.  Considered  merely 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


37 


as  elevations  of  the  ground,  they  would  probably  make  com- 
paratively little  difference  to  the  existence  or  to  the  migrations 
of  plants,  unless  very  high  or  very  steep,  but  their  presence 
usually  involves  change  of  climate  from  one  side  to  the  other, 
and  from  bottom  to  top,  so  that  they  may  produce  great  effects 
upon  the  composition  of  the  vegetation,  whether  as  seen  in 
simply  ascending  them,  or  in  crossing  to  the  other  side.  The 
climate  usually  becomes  cooler  and  damper  in  ascending,  until 
the  cloud  belt  is  passed  at  high  elevations;  and  if  the  range  be 
transverse  to  a  damp  air-current,  as  so  often  happens  owing  to 
the  fact  that  ranges  are  frequently  parallel  to  the  sea,  much  rain 
will  be  precipitated  on  the  nearer  side,  and  the  farther  side  will 
have  a  much  drier  climate.  This  effect  can  be  well  seen  in  the 
mountains  of  Scandinavia,  of  Portugal,  of  New  Zealand,  in  the 
Western  Ghats  of  India,  the  northern  Rocky  Mountains,  the 
Cascades,  etc.  If  the  change  is  very  great,  the  flora  may  be 
almost  totally  different  on  the  two  sides  of  a  range. 

Mountains  may  also  serve  as  agencies  facilitating  migration 
of  species,  inasmuch  as  they  may  enable  the  passage  into  or 
through  a  country,  otherwise  unsuitable  in  whole  or  in  part,  of 
the  plants  of  cooler  or  moister  climates,  or  of  herbs  of  open 
ground.  They  are  also  favourable  to  rapid  migration  because 
the  frequently  occurring  landslips  may  open  appreciable  areas 
of  new  soil  not  covered  by  vegetation,  upon  which  plants  may 
at  once  take  hold,  without  having  to  wait  to  secure  a  spot 
temporarily  free,  or  struggling  to  effect  an  entrance  into  a  closed 
association  of  plants.  Such  plants  will  probably  be  mostly  herbs 
or  small  shrubs,  inasmuch  as  landslips  will  be  more  common  at 
the  higher  elevations,  which  are  above  the  tree  line  in  many 
cases.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  changes  of  climate  have  often 
taken  place  in  a  north  and  south  direction,  mountain  chains 
running  east  and  west  have  been  of  especial  importance. 

As  a  general  rule,  a  river  hardly  seems  to  be  of  sufficient 
width  to  offer  a  very  formidable  obstacle  to  migration,  though 
it  will  doubtless  delay  it  considerably.  The  only  river  that  really 
seems  large  enough  to  be,  possibly,  an  actual  boundary  to 
migration  in  some  cases  is  the  Amazon  in  the  lower  half  of  its 
course,  from  Manaos,  where  it  is  joined  by  the  Rio  Negro,  to 
the  sea,  and  where  it  may  be  several  miles  wide.  Owing  to  the 
density  and  enormous  size  of  the  forests,  however,  we  do  not 
yet  know  enough  of  the  local  distribution  of  the  plants  of  that 
region  to  be  able  to  say  whether  or  not  any  species  really  meet 


38  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [ft.  i 

the  river  with  a  long  frontage  to  it,  and  are  not  found  at  all  on 
the  other  side. 

Soil  may  be  considered  as  a  geographical  factor  in  migration, 
inasmuch  as  it  depends  upon  the  geology  of  the  country,  or  may 
be  considered  under  the  next  heading,  of  ecological  factors. 
Nothing  has  been  a  subject  of  greater  controversy  than  the 
effects  of  its  composition  upon  the  vegetation  which  it  carries. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  one  may  observe  quite  different  floras 
upon,  say,  a  chalk  soil  and  a  siliceous  soil  in  England,  and  quite 
another  again  upon  a  soil  impregnated  with  salt.  Exactly  to 
determine,  however,  what  part  of  this  effect  is  due  to  the 
chemical  composition  of  the  soil,  and  what  part  to  its  physical 
constitution,  is  a  very  difficult  problem.  My  own  experience 
with  tropical  agriculture,  extending  over  nearly  twenty  years, 
inclines  me  to  lay  more  stress  upon  the  physical  constitution, 
for  crops  will  succeed  almost  equally  well  upon  soils  of  very 
different  chemical  composition,  if  only  they  be,  for  example,  of 
such  physical  consistency  as  to  retain  water  well.  Chalk  soils  in 
the  natural  condition  are  dry,  and  little  retentive  of  water,  sandy 
soils  even  more  so,  while  clays  may  retain  water  very  well  indeed. 

It  is  comparatively  rare  for  any  plant  to  be  confined  in  its 
growth  to  one  kind  of  soil  only.  Festuca  ovina  is  so  abundant 
and  successful  upon  the  chalk  downs  that  one  is  tempted  to 
think  it  a  chalk  plant  till  one  finds  it  almost  as  common  upon 
a  bilberry  moor  in  Derbyshire,  or  a  grass  moor  in  Scotland, 
with  peaty  soil.  Both  chalk  and  peat  demand  in  the  plants  that 
grow  upon  them  some  capacity  of  resistance  to  insufficiency  of 
water,  and  it  may  be  the  physical  rather  than  the  chemical 
constitution  that  matters  most. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  if  in  the  same  climatic  and  other  general 
conditions  there  exist  two  belts  of  different  soils,  these  will  be 
covered  with  floras  that  will  be  differently  constituted  in  detail, 
but  it  is  comparatively  rarely  that  a  species  will  not  occur  on 
both,  though  it  may  be  common  on  the  one  and  very  rare  on 
the  other.  The  only  chemical  constituents  present  in  the  soil 
that  really  seem  to  have  a  determining  effect  in  allowing  some 
species  and  excluding  others  are  calcium  carbonate  (chalk  or 
limestone)  and  sodium  chloride  (salt).  A  good  case  is  mentioned 
by  Drude  (33)  of  a  line  of  chalk-loving  shrubs  found  running 
through  a  forest  on  siliceous  soil  in  France;  on  investigation  it 
was  found  that  they  occupied  the  track  of  an  old  Roman  road, 
for  which  chalk  had  been  used. 


ch.  v]    HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES  39 

As  a  general  rule,  a  change  of  soil  does  not  cover  a  breadth  of 
country  sufficiently  wide  to  form  an  absolute  barrier  to  the 
passage  of  some  species,  or  a  special  assistance  to  that  of  others. 
If  it  is  broad  one  way,  it  may  be  narrow  in  the  direction  per- 
pendicular to  that.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  and  this 
is  all  that  matters  to  our  present  discussion,  that  it  may  readily 
hinder  or  delay  the  passage  of  some  species,  and  assist  that  of 
others;  and  that  it  may  distort  as  well  as  delay  some  species  in 
their  distribution,  by  compelling  them  to  go  round. 

We  come  now  to  those  hindrances  interposed  by  change  of 
conditions  (to  which  plants  react  in  different  manners)  either 
from  one  place  to  another,  or  from  one  time  to  another,  which 
in  a  general  way  may  be  classed  as  ecological.  The  change  may 
be  very  sudden,  as  from  forest  to  dry  grassland  (seen  very 
strikingly  at  the  edge  of  the  patanas  of  Ceylon;  cf.  81),  or  from 
a  wet  to  a  dry  climate,  as  on  the  two  sides  of  many  mountain 
chains;  and  in  this  case  one  comparatively  seldom  finds  the 
same  individual  species  growing  on  both  sides  of  the  barrier 
thus  formed.  But  if  the  change  be  more  gradual,  as  from  warm 
to  cold  in  ascending  a  mountain,  one  often  finds  this  to  occur. 
To  what  extent  the  barrier  is  effective,  therefore,  will  depend 
largely  upon  its  sharpness  of  definition,  as  well  as  its  width  and 
depth,  and  upon  whether  a  genus  on  reaching  it  is  able  to  form 
new  species  capable  of  living  upon  the  other  side.  This  is  a 
phenomenon  which  is  very  often  seen,  and  it  is  in  fact  by  no 
means  certain  that  an  ecological  barrier  will  interrupt  com- 
pletely the  progress  of  a  genus,  though  it  may  stop  a  species. 
When  a  genus  is  found  confined  to  wet  or  dry,  high  or  low,  it  is 
most  probably,  as  we  shall  see,  because  it  is  still  comparatively 
young  in  that  country,  and  has  not  yet  had  time  to  spread 
widely;  quite  possibly  it  has  not  yet  even  reached  the  actual 
boundary.  Widely  distributed  genera,  if  they  have  many  species 
in  the  country,  more  usually  have  species  on  both  sides  of  the 
boundary.  In  the  first  hundred  genera  of  the  Ceylon  flora,  for 
example,  the  genera  which  have  species  in  both  wet  and  dry 
zones  (which  have  a  very  different  climate,  cf.  p.  14)  are  32 
with  141  species,  or  an  average  of  4-4  per  genus,  while  those 
confined  to  one  zone  are  68  with  135  species,  or  an  average  of 
2  only.  [The  average  for  the  whole  flora  is  2-7.]  Of  genera  in 
the  entire  flora  that  have  over  10  species,  seven  only,  with  21, 
20,  13,  12,  12,  12,  and  11  (average  14),  are  confined  to  one  zone; 
eight,  the  largest  with  27  species,  have  one  or  more  species 


40  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 

occurring  in  both  zones  (average  16),  and  21  genera  with  484 
species  (largest  43,  42,  40,  38,  average  23)  have  separate  species 
in  each  zone. 

There  are  many  ecological  changes  which  may  be  summed  up 
as  climatic,  and  which,  if  they  occur  over  a  sufficient  depth  and 
width  of  country,  may  offer  very  formidable  checks  or  barriers 
to  dispersal.  Such,  for  instance,  are  change  of  rainfall,  of  dis- 
tribution of  rainfall,  of  temperature,  of  dampness  of  air,  of  light, 
of  wind,  etc.  The  combined  effects  of  these  form  what  may  be 
termed  the  climate  of  a  place.  In  the  existing  conditions  of  the 
world  the  climate  is  determined  in  broad  outline  chiefly  by  lati- 
tude, position  with  regard  to  the  sea,  to  prevailing  winds,  and 
to  mountain  chains  which  are  at  no  very  great  distance.  The 
lower  the  latitude,  the  warmer  the  climate;  the  nearer  the  sea, 
and  the  more  wind  blows  from  it,  the  damper;  the  nearer  the 
lee  side  of  a  range  crossing  the  prevailing  wind,  the  drier. 

Further,  during  at  any  rate  the  later  periods  of  the  world's 
history,  great  ranges  of  mountains  have  sprung  up  in  different 
directions,  especially  from  east  to  west  in  the  Old  World,  from 
north  to  south  in  the  New.  These  ranges  are  so  lofty  that  apart 
from  the  changes  of  climate  due  to  them,  they  have  acted  as 
very  formidable  barriers.  And  when  to  this  is  added  the  enor- 
mous difference  of  climate  on  the  two  sides,  it  is  clear  that  they 
must  have  completely  altered  the  distribution  of  species,  and  in 
general  rendered  it  more  difficult  for  the  greater  number,  though 
on  the  other  hand,  species,  chiefly  herbaceous,  which  can  live 
at  high  levels  in  the  mountains,  have  been  enabled  to  travel 
through  and  into  regions  otherwise  impassable  (cf.  p.  37).  It 
is  in  this  way,  probably,  that  many  herbaceous  and  shrubby 
types  of  vegetation,  including  such  genera  as  Caltha,  Ligusticum, 
and  Veronica,  characteristic  of  the  north  temperate  regions,  but 
now  also  found  in  New  Zealand,  South  America,  etc.,  have  been 
enabled  to  reach  those  countries;  and  that  the  comparatively 
young  Compositae  have  spread  so  widely  over  the  world. 

The  effects  of  the  mountain  ranges  on  the  two  chief  continents 
may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  climates  of  North  America  and 
of  Europe,  both  in  the  zone  of  prevailing  westerly  winds  from 
the  ocean.  The  west  coast  of  the  former  is  very  wet,  in  latitudes 
equal  to  those  of  northern  Europe,  and  was  originally  covered 
with  forest;  but  as  one  comes  to  the  east  of  the  Cascades  and 
Rocky  Mountains,  which  lie  across  the  path  of  the  westerly 
winds,  one  reaches  the  land  of  prairie,  which  is  especially  dry 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


41 


in  the  near  neighbourhood  of  the  mountains.  In  north-central 
Europe,  on  the  other  hand,  the  climate  slowly  becomes  drier 
with  fair  regularity  in  passing  from  England  to  the  Urals,  and 
then  becomes  suddenly  much  drier.  In  the  Scandinavian 
peninsula,  the  mountains  lie  more  across  the  wind,  and  Sweden 
is  much  drier  than  Norway. 

Farther  south,  there  is  a  great  belt  of  more  or  less  dry  and 
desert  country,  almost  round  the  world  in  the  northern,  much 
less  marked  in  the  same  latitudes  of  the  southern,  hemisphere, 
and  between  these  two  drier  regions,  which  oppose  all  but  im- 
passable barriers,  lies  the  wet  zone  of  the  equatorial  tropics, 
where  the  climate  is  usually  damp,  and  often  very  rainy  through 
a  great  part  of  the  year,  though  there  are  alternations  of  drier 
and  wetter  periods. 

If  a  country  be  flat,  or  nearly  so,  as,  for  instance,  North  Europe 
from  England  to  the  Urals,  the  rainfall  gradually  falls  off  as 
one  goes  inland  from  the  sea,  but  only  in  averages  over  a  number 
of  years.  If,  for  example,  at  a  series  of  stations,  working  inland 
from  the  sea,  the  rainfall  average  50,  45,  40,  35  inches,  it  is  quite 
possible,  if  not  even  probable,  that  in  some  years  the  fall  at  the 
station  farthest  inland  may  be  50,  or  in  others  that  the  fall  at 
the  station  nearest  the  sea  may  be  only  35.  Unless,  therefore, 
plants  are  suited  to  a  great  range  in  the  amount  of  rainfall,  they 
cannot  hope  to  succeed  in  most  stations,  and  it  also  becomes 
doubtful  when  and  where  the  rainfall  reaches  an  absolute 
maximum  or  minimum  which  causes  it  to  be  an  ecological 
barrier.  It  is  also  highly  unlikely  that  this  point  will  be  the 
same  for  any  two  species.  That  there  is  such  a  barrier  seems  not 
improbable  when  we  consider  the  difference  in  flora  between 
the  steppes  of  Russia  and  the  British  Islands,  but  where  it 
exists  for  any  single  species  we  are  unable  to  state. 

If,  however,  as  very  often  happens,  a  mountain  chain  stand 
athwart  the  prevailing  or  most  frequent  winds,  there  may  be  a 
sudden  change  in  the  rainfall.  The  damp  air  from  the  sea,  striking 
the  mountains,  is  forced  upwards  and  cooled,  parting  with  much 
of  its  moisture;  then  as  it  descends  upon  the  other  side,  it  be- 
comes warmed,  and  thereby  much  drier.  In  Ceylon,  for  example, 
the  south-west  monsoon  blows  for  about  six  months  over  a  vast 
expanse  of  ocean,  and  reaches  the  island  a  saturated  wind. 
Meeting  the  mountains,  it  deposits  an  enormous  rainfall  (over 
100  inches  at  the  foot  of  Adam's  Peak),  and  upon  the  eastern 
side  (they  reach  8000  feet)  becomes  a  dry  scorching  wind,  deposit- 


42  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 

ing  less  than  10  inches  of  rain  at  Batticaloa  on  the  east  coast. 
The  change  at  the  summit-level  is  so  sudden  that  one  may  some- 
times find  a  wet  climate  at  one  end,  and  a  dry  and  sunny  one  at 
the  other  end,  of  the  short  summit  tunnel  on  the  railway.  The 
position  is  largely  reversed  during  the  other  monsoon,  so  that 
very  many  species  can  grow  on  both  sides,  though  usually  with 
different  periodicity,  Para  rubber,  for  example,  ripening  its 
seeds  on  one  side  of  the  mountains  in  February,  on  the  other 
in  August. 

In  South  India  the  chain  of  the  Western  Ghats  causes  a  heavy 
fall  of  rain  in  the  south-west  monsoon  on  the  western  side,  while 
the  north-east  monsoon  is  comparatively  dry,  so  that  there  is 
a  great  difference  in  the  climate  of  the  two  sides,  and  many 
species  are  confined  to  one  or  the  other.  This  contrast  in  climate 
and  vegetation  between  lee  and  weather  sides  is  also  well  shown 
in  the  trade  belts  in  the  tropical  Pacific  islands,  large  and  small, 
and  is  very  marked  in  the  Andes,  in  the  section  from  10°  to  30a 
south  of  the  equator.  The  wind  striking  them  is  usually  the 
easterly  trade  wind,  and  their  western  side  is  almost  completely 
dry.  Farther  south  the  eastern  side  is  comparatively  dry,  be- 
cause of  the  westerly  winds  from  the  Pacific  Ocean.  Chains 
that  run  north  and  south  are  of  greater  importance  in  this  con- 
nection than  chains  that  run  east  and  west,  regarded  simply 
as  mountain  chains  causing  differences  in  rainfall,  for  the  question 
is  less  complicated  with  change  of  temperature  following  lati- 
tude. But  from  the  general  historical  point  of  view  of  geo- 
graphical distribution,  the  east  and  west  chains,  by  forming 
barriers  to  the  plants  spreading  south  or  north  with  the  ad- 
vancing or  retreating  cold  of  a  glacial  period,  have  been,  in  all 
probability,  of  enormously  greater  importance  than  the  chains 
that  run  north  and  south.  An  immense  number  of  species,  and 
even  genera,  have  probably  perished  against  the  chain  of  moun- 
tains that  runs  east  and  west  with  few  gaps  from  Spain  to 
eastern  Asia. 

The  effect  of  the  drier  climate  on  one  side  of  a  chain  of  moun- 
tains will  generally  be  to  encourage  a  more  herbaceous  type  of 
vegetation.  So  long  as  there  is  a  reasonable  amount  of  rainfall, 
not  too  much  concentrated  into  one  period  of  the  year,  the  usual 
type  of  covering  of  the  soil,  in  countries  that  have  not  been  dis- 
turbed by  ice  periods,  or  by  man,  is  forest.  But  below  a  certain 
amount  of  rain,  forest  does  not  seem  readily  to  survive,  nor  to 
occupy  new  ground,  even  if  it  survive  upon  ground  that  was 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


43 


forest  in  days  of  greater  moisture.  The  general  tendency,  there- 
fore, of  the  change  of  climate  brought  about  by  a  chain  of 
mountains  transverse  to  the  prevailing  damp  wind,  is  to  en- 
courage the  growth  upon  the  lee  side  of  herbaceous  and  shrubby 
plants  which  can  stand  greater  extremes  of  drought,  and  to 
make  it  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  the  forest  species, 
whether  trees  or  undergrowth-herbs  and  shrubs,  to  travel  into 
the  drier  country.  A  complete  barrier  may  thus  be  offered  to 
the  passage  of  some  species,  while  others,  that  would  have  been 
quite  unable  to  pass  the  level  forest,  may  be  enabled  to  pass 
easily  by  the  development  of  a  mountain  chain  at  a  later  period, 
like  the  development  of  the  Andes  in  Cretaceous  times. 

Distribution  of  rainfall  and  moisture  of  the  air  is  of  even 
greater  importance  to  a  plant  than  total  rainfall.  The  largest 
rainfall  in  the  world  is  at  Waialeale,  in  the  mountains  of  the 
Hawaiian  Islands;  it  is  also  well  distributed  throughout  the 
year,  so  that  the  place  is  always  wet,  with  no  dry  season  at  all. 
As  the  result,  it  has  a  flora  of  a  very  moisture-loving  kind. 
Cherrapunji,  in  Assam,  which  has  almost  as  great  a  rainfall,  but 
badly  distributed  through  the  year  (April  29  inches,  May  50 
inches,  June  110  inches,  July  120  inches,  August  78  inches, 
September  57  inches,  October  13  inches,  and  the  other  five 
months  only  14  inches  amongst  them),  does  not  show  this,  but 
has  a  vegetation  which  almost  suggests  a  dry  climate. 

Kandy  in  Ceylon  has  a  very  steady  mean  temperature  just 
over  75°  F.,  and  a  rainfall  well  distributed  through  the  year  (the 
twelve  months  have  approximately  5,  2,  3;  7,  6,  9;  7,  6,  6;  11, 
10,  and  9  inches,  total  about  82),  and  though  there  is  a  "dry 
season"  in  February  and  March,  the  flora  is  distinctly  forest  of 
the  ordinary  rain-forest  type.  In  the  dry  zone  of  northern  and 
eastern  Ceylon  lies  Anuradhapura,  with  a  total  rainfall  of 
55  inches,  distributed  mainly  in  the  north-east  monsoon  from 
October  to  April  (3,  1,  2;  7,  3,  1;  1,  2,  3;  8,  10,  9).  In  a  hot 
climate  like  Ceylon,  a  fall  of  less  than  4  inches  in  a  month  is 
practically  negligible,  so  that  there  is  really  a  long  drought  from 
January  to  September,  broken  only  by  the  April  rains,,  and  the 
flora  is  of  the  dry-forest  type,  with  comparatively  few  species 
in  common  with  Kandy,  only  about  90  miles  away.  Calcutta, 
on  the  edge  of  the  tropics,  with  a  hot  sun,  and  a  rainfall  of 
66  inches,  is  equally  a  "dry"  climate  (rain  0-4,  1,  1-3;  2-3,  5-6, 
11-8;  13,  13-9,  10;  5-4,  0-6,  0-3).  Going  to  the  other  and  darnper 
hemisphere,  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  also  on  the  edge  of  the  tropics, 


44  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 

one  finds  a  place  with  only  40  inches  of  rainfall  (5,  4,  5 ;  4,  4,  2 ; 
2,  2,  2;  3,  4,  5)  which  shows  as  much  of  the  character  of  rain- 
forest and  a  wet  climate  as  does  Kandy  with  82  inches.  Evi- 
dently the  distribution  of  the  rainfall,  and  of  the  humidity  of 
the  air,  which  largely  goes  with  it,  is  of  much  greater  importance 
than  the  actual  total.  Rio,  with  40  inches,  is  better  suited  to 
plants  needing  a  moist  climate  than  Cherrapunji  with  470;  its 
sun  is  not  so  hot  as  that  of  tropical  Asia,  and  its  season  of  less 
rainfall  coincides  with  the  weaker  sun  of  June-September. 

Change  of  distribution  of  rainfall,  if  at  all  sudden,  usually 
coincides  with  the  presence  of  a  mountain  chain.  The  presence 
of  the  mountains  may  alter  the  periodicity  of  the  rain,  as  in 
Ceylon  (above),  when  the  only  plants  that  can  cross  the  boundary 
will  be  those  that  can  alter  their  periodicity ;  or  it  may  completely 
alter  the  rainfall,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Andes,  where  the  flora  is 
very  markedly  different  on  the  two  sides.  Gradual  change,  on 
the  other  hand,  will  usually  accompany  gradual  change  of  rain- 
fall. Change  of  dampness  of  air,  again,  if  permanent  between 
one  place  and  another,  will  involve  differences  in  the  plants  in 
their  reactions  to  moisture,  and  some  will  be  more  drought- 
resistant  than  others. 

Change  of  temperature  is  usually  of  a  more  permanent,  or 
regularly  recurring  nature,  especially  in  the  tropics.  At  Colombo 
in  Ceylon,  for  example,  the  maximum  is  usually  about  88°  F., 
the  minimum  about  75°,  all  the  year  round,  except  for  a  small 
increase  from  February  to  May.  At  Rio,  on  the  edge  of  the 
tropics,  there  is  more  range,  from  say  98°  absolute  maximum 
in  summer  to  52°  absolute  minimum  in  winter,  and  at  Nuwara 
Eliya  (elevation  6000  feet)  in  Ceylon  the  absolute  maxima  and 
minima  are  about  81°  and  28°,  with  much  greater  daily  ranges 
in  dry  than  in  wet  weather.  The  farther  one  goes  from  the 
equator,  or  the  higher  in  the  mountains,  the  greater  the  range 
on  the  whole,  whether  annual  or  diurnal,  and  the  range  is 
also  greater  the  farther  one  goes  inland  from  the  sea.  The 
extreme  variation  of  all  is  reached  by  going  both  north  and 
inland,  to  the  centre  of  northern  Siberia,  where  it  may  touch 
80°  in  summer,  and  —  60°  in  winter. 

More  rapid  change  of  temperature  is  experienced  in  ascending 
a  mountain,  the  mean  falling  about  3-4°  F.  for  every  1000  feet 
of  ascent.  Correlated  with  this  is  the  rapid  change  of  the  com- 
position of  the  flora,  as  compared  with  the  change  experienced 
in  going  north  or  south  at  the  same  level  and  under  the  same 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


45 


conditions.  The  plants  in  the  mountain  garden  in  Ceylon  are 
very  different  from  those  in  the  gardens  in  the  "low"  country, 
not  from  any  special  wish  to  keep  the  collections  distinct,  but 
from  the  great  permanent  difference  of  20°  (F.)  in  the  mean 
temperature,  though  the  highest  and  lowest  of  both  stations  may 
easily  be  reached  in  the  same  day  at  the  same  place  in  Europe 
or  North  America. 

Every  function  in  every  plant  has  a  temperature  (the  mini- 
mum) below  which  it  will  not  go  on,  a  temperature  (optimum) 
at  which  it  will  best  go  on,  and  a  third  (maximum)  above  which 
it  ceases.  As  these  differ  for  every  species,  one  kind  of  climate 
will  suit  one,  and  not  another,  though  there  is  no  doubt  that 
species  may  become  acclimatised  (cf.  Chapter  iv).  If  the  ex- 
tremes of  temperature  come  at  a  season  when  the  functions 
concerned  are  not  being  performed,  they  may  be  easily  with- 
stood, as  for  instance  the  great  cold  of  winter  in  North  Siberia, 
which  does  not  kill  the  conifers  there.  Extreme  cold,  when  un- 
seasonable, does  at  times  kill  out  species,  but  the  loss  is  usually 
recoverable,  especially  as  it  is  only  necessary  for  the  plant  to 
regain  a  foothold  in  societies  of  plants  of  which  it  has  already 
been  a  member. 

Light,  again,  changes  too  gradually  from  place  to  place  for  it 
to  be  supposed  that  it  has  any  appreciable  effect  in  opposing 
a  barrier  to  any  species.  Species  from  one  part  of  the  equatorial 
tropics  do  just  as  well  in  another  part  with  much  less  intense 
light,  or  vice  versa.  It  is  in  general  only  in  descending  into  deep 
water  that  there  is  any  great  change  in  light  over  a  large  area, 
and  even  there  some  plants  are  found  below  the  limits  of  darkness. 

Wind  is  chiefly  of  importance  in  an  indirect  manner,  according 
to  whether  it  is  wet  or  dry,  and  according  to  its  direction  in 
reference  to  that  of  the  mountains,  but  if  very  strong,  it  may 
alter  or  prevent  the  growth  of  some  species.  On  the  west  coast 
of  Britain  one  may  often  see  trees  blown  into  a  one-sided  type 
of  growth,  and  a  little  more  wind  would  prevent  their  growth 
altogether.  A  cyclone  may  uproot  so  many  trees  that  it  may 
render  passage  through  a  country  possible  for  herbs  which  can 
quickly  seize  upon  the  vacant  spots  before  the  growth  of  the 
forest  once  more  suppresses  them. 

Though  climatic  differences  are  thus  of  such  enormous  im- 
portance one  must  be  careful  not  to  say  of  any  species  that  it 
has  certainly  reached  its  climatic  limit,  when  one  has  regard  to 
the  very  slow  and  gradual  acclimatisation  that  is  practised  by 


46  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 

nature.  If  one  carried  seeds  of  Hydrocotyle  asiatica  (p.  30)  from 
Ceylon  to  the  south  of  New  Zealand,  and  planted  them  there, 
they  would  probably  refuse  to  grow,  yet  nature  has  gradually 
acclimatised  the  species  to  both  regions.  Many  species  range 
4000-8000  feet  vertically  in  the  Himalaya ;  seeds  from  the  higher 
levels  produce  plants  much  more  at  home  in  Europe  than  seeds 
from  the  lower  levels,  and  might  spread  much  more  rapidly  in 
cooler  climates  than  the  latter.  Travel  may  be  much  slower  in 
a  vertical  direction,  where  conditions  change  comparatively 
rapidly,  than  in  a  horizontal. 

Finally,  we  must  go  on  to  consider  what  are  probably  the 
most  important  positive  causes  favouring  or  hindering  species 
in  their  dispersal;  barriers  are  obviously  negative.  These  causes 
may  also  be  classed  in  general  as  ecological,  depending  on 
some  peculiarity  inherent  in  the  plant  itself,  often  described  as 
being  an  "adaptation"  to  something  or  other.  We  have  already 
considered  in  Chapter  n  one  of  the  most  important  of  these 
— the  method  of  dispersal  of  the  plant — and  must  now  go  on 
to  deal  briefly  with  the  others.  In  my  published  papers  I  have 
perhaps  not  allowed  enough  for  ecological  barriers,  but  I  am 
not  sure  that  they  are  sufficiently  permanent  to  do  more  than 
delay  spread,  rarely  to  completely  stop  it. 

Take,  for  example,  the  wide  differences  seen  between  trees, 
shrubs,  and  herbs.  The  flora  of  the  wetter  tropical  and  southern 
regions  of  the  globe,  and  of  large  portions  of  the  north,  prior  to 
the  great  clearances  made  by  man  in  recent  times,  consisted 
mainly  of  trees.  These  had,  it  is  true,  more  or  less  of  herbaceous 
undergrowth,  but  there  was  comparatively  little  open  country 
covered  with  herbs  suited  to  a  life  exposing  them  to  the  sun  and 
the  wind.  Even  in  much  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America, 
that  is  now  covered  with  herbaceous  or  shrubby  vegetation, 
there  appears  to  have  been  forest  over  a  great  part  of  the  country 
during  Tertiary  times. 

It  used  to  be  generally  supposed  that  the  Angiosperms  com- 
menced as  herbs  and  that  trees  were  a  later  development,  but 
this  view  is  now  usually  reversed,  and  the  herbaceous  form  is 
looked  upon  as  the  younger.  The  change  of  view  dates  largely 
from  a  paper  by  Sinnott  and  Bailey  (99)  in  which  they  marshal 
the  evidence  from  palaeobotany,  anatomy,  phylogeny,  and  geo- 
graphical distribution,  etc.,  showing  that  it  all  points  in  the 
same  direction,  to  the  conclusion  that  herbs  on  the  whole  are 
the  younger  form  of  vegetation. 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


47 


Now  this  conclusion,  taken  just  as  it  stands,  is  open  to  exactly 
the  same  objections  to  which,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  Age  and 
Area  is  subject.  One  must  not  say  that  all  trees  are  older  than 
all  herbs,  or  that  such  or  such  a  tree  is  older  (i.e.  as  a  species) 
than  such  or  such  a  herb.  One  must  work  with  averages  of 
species,  and  keep  to  the  same  circle  of  affinity.  One  may  with 
reasonable  safety  say  that  ten  allied  herbs,  belonging  say  to  the 
family  Leguminosae,  are  on  the  whole  probably  younger  (i.e.  as 
independent  species)  than  ten  allied  trees  belonging  to  the  same 
family,  but  one  cannot  say  with  any  approach  to  certainty,  if 
even  of  probability,  that  ten  herbaceous  species  of  Piperaceae 
are  younger  than  ten  woody  Proteaceae. 

But,  in  general,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  bulk  of  the 
chiefly  herbaceous  families,  like  Compositae  or  Cruciferae,  has 
developed  in  comparatively  recent  times,  while  the  bulk  of  the 
chiefly  woody  families,  like  Euphorbiaceae  or  Rubiaceae,  is 
probably  very  old.  It  must  be  clearly  understood,  however, 
that  this  is  not  saying  that  the  families  Compositae  and  Cru- 
ciferae are  younger  than  the  Euphorbiaceae  or  Rubiaceae,  but 
that  the  great  development  of  the  herbaceous  type  has  probably 
taken  place  since  the  glacial  period,  the  gradual  desiccation  of 
climate,  and  other  causes,  have  rendered  vast  spaces  of  country, 
which  were  formerly  largely  covered  with  forest,  available  for 
the  growth  of  herbs  of  open  ground. 

So  long  as  a  region  is  covered  with  forest,  no  herbaceous  vege- 
tation can  succeed  that  cannot  live  in  the  shade,  or  (in  the  case 
of  deciduous  forest)  vegetate  before  the  leaves  of  the  trees  have 
grown  so  much  as  to  make  the  shade  too  deep.  There  is  little 
evidence  to  show  that  herbaceous  vegetation  can  actually  invade 
and  replace  forest  without  assistance  from  desiccation  of  the 
climate,  or  from  man  or  animals,  but  a  good  deal  to  show  that 
the  reverse  may  happen,  and  that  forest  may  overwhelm  and 
replace  herbaceous  vegetation. 

Another  point  that  must  not  be  forgotten  is  that  "trees"  as 
a  whole  have  not  descended  from  a  single  tree  ancestor.  The 
group  is  extremely  polyphyletic,  i.e.  its  members  have  arisen 
independently  from  many  different  and  often  unrelated  an- 
cestors. Within  the  same  genus  one  often  finds  trees  or  shrubs, 
and  herbs,  e.g.  in  Solanum,  Hypericum,  Euphorbia,  Senecio, 
Phyllanthus,  Ficus,  Urtica,  etc.  It  is  evident  that  for  nature  to 
form  a  tree  from  a  herb  or  shrub,  or  vice  versa,  is  not  a  specially 
difficult  or  unusual  feat. 


48  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 

But  we  must  go  on  to  consider  the  advantages  or  disadvan- 
tages in  the  matter  of  spreading  about  the  world  that  arise  from 
herbaceous  or  woody  nature.  It  is  clear  that  a  herb  will  in  general 
go  through  its  generations  more  rapidly  than  a  shrub,  and  still 
more  quickly  than  a  tree.  A  herb  producing  seed  in  its  first 
year  may  get  three  or  more  generations,  and  as  many  chances 
of  dispersal,  whilst  a  shrub,  starting  at  the  same  time,  is  getting 
one,  and  may  get  from  ten  to  thirty  for  the  single  opportunity 
offered  to  a  tree.  It  is  thus  evident  in  the  first  place  that  the 
chance  of  rapid  dispersal  to  a  distance  is  much  greater  for  the 
herb,  and  in  the  second  that  the  chance  of  forming  a  new  species, 
by  whatever  method  it  may  be  evolved,  is  also  much  greater  in 
a  given  time. 

It  must,  however,  be  clearly  understood  that  dispersal  is 
chiefly  conditioned  by  the  barriers  which  have  already  been  dis- 
cussed. Though  the  Compositae,  for  example,  developed  into  a 
herbaceous  type,  and  though  they  developed  a  firstrate  mechan- 
ism for  dispersal,  they  would  not  be  so  widespread  and  abundant 
to-day  were  it  not  that  the  north  temperate  regions  of  the  world 
were  largely  cleared  of  forest  by  the  ice  in  the  glacial  period,  that 
large  areas  became  more  open  on  account  of  desiccation  of 
climate,  and  that  they  were  enabled  to  spread  widely  by  the 
development,  often  in  comparatively  recent  periods,  of  the  great 
mountain  chains  which  form  an  almost  continuous  track  leading 
over  a  very  great  proportion  of  the  world,  upon  which  they  were 
able  to  move  above  the  limit  of  the  forest,  and  often  aided  by 
the  formation  of  landslips  (p.  37).  One  can  clearly  see  that  had 
the  world  remained  comparatively  flat,  and  covered  by  forest, 
to  the  present  time,  the  Compositae  to-day  might  be  little  more 
widespread  and  abundant  than  say  the  Dipsacaceae. 

One  may  thus  point  to  the  development  of  herbaceous  habit, 
with  the  capability  of  living  in  open  ground  exposed  to  the  sun, 
as  an  ecological  feature  which  has  made  possible  the  compara- 
tively rapid  and  extensive  spread  of  certain  families,  the  spread 
being  accompanied  by  a  correspondingly  rapid  development  of 
new  forms,  whether  species  or  genera.  But  that  rapid  and  wide 
spread  was  only  rendered  possible  by  the  incoming  of  certain 
physical  conditions  to  which  these  plants  proved  suited.  It  is 
quite  possible,  if  not  probable,  that  these  families,  and  even  the 
herbaceous  type  suited  to  open  ground,  are  really  very  ancient, 
but  were  confined  to  small  localities,  and  never  able  to  spread 
widely,  till  the  new  conditions  rendered  it  possible.  There  is 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


49 


reason  to  believe  that  given  sufficient  time,  and  no  interference 
by  man,  forest  would  once  more  replace  the  open  herbaceous 
vegetation  of  the  damper  parts  of  the  globe. 

Other  types  of  habit  may  have  entirely  different  effects  upon 
spread.  Water  plants  can  obviously  only  spread  so  long  and  so 
far  as  there  is  water  available  (leaving  out  of  account  in  this 
place  all  negative  factors  like  barriers  of  temperature,  etc., 
already  considered  above),  parasites  can  only  spread  with  their 
hosts,  saprophytes  only  with  the  presence  of  the  necessary  pro- 
ducts of  decay  in  which  they  live,  epiphytes  with  the  presence 
of  sufficient  moisture,  etc.  Halophytes  can  spread  wherever  the 
ground  is  sufficiently  salt,  mangroves  where  it  is  muddy  and 
covered  by  a  quiet  sea  at  high  water.  Climbers  as  a  rule  can 
only  go  where  there  are  plants  sufficiently  tall  upon  which  to 
climb.  Xerophytes  or  plants  of  dry  climates,  once  formed,  will 
be  able  to  advance  into  dry  country  until  the  drought  becomes 
too  great  for  them  to  survive,  and  so  on. 

So  long  as  a  plant  remains  of  average  (mesophytic)  type, 
suited  to  an  average  damp  climate  and  good  water  supply,  it 
may  have  an  enormous  territory  possible  of  occupation  if  only 
no  barriers  interfere,  while  a  plant  that  becomes  very  specialised 
in  these  respects  may  be  limited  in  its  capacity  for  spreading  to 
little  more  than  the  small  area  upon  which  it  commenced.  As 
Thiselton  Dyer  says  (94,  p.  311),  "The  Nemesis  of  a  high  degree 
of  protected  specialisation  is  the  loss  of  adaptability." 

General  evidence  seems  to  indicate  that  it  is  not  improbable 
that  in  the  Tertiary  period  the  world  as  a  whole  was  better 
suited  to  mesophytic  vegetation  than  at  present,  and  hence  it 
is  not  unlikely  that  the  earlier  species  not  only  gained  in  the 
mechanical  way  described  on  p.  34,  but  also  found  fewer 
barriers  to  their  spread.  Later  formed  species,  on  the  other 
hand,  as  they  could  not  survive  if  not  exactly  suited  to  the  con- 
ditions in  which  they  were  evolved,  would  be  increasingly  likely 
to  find  themselves  with  climatic  or  other  ecological  barriers  to 
further  spread  at  no  great  distance  away.  A  progressive  speciali- 
sation of  climate  and  other  factors  seems  to  have  been  going  on 
in  the  world  since  the  Tertiary  period,  the  comparatively  damp 
and  uniform  climates  of  the  latter  being  replaced  by  every 
variety  from  very  damp  to  very  dry.  Hence  the  more  recent 
species  tend  to  become  more  and  more  specialised  to  match  the 
climates.  To  quote  Guppy,  "when  one  finds  Salsola  Kali  upon 
the  Devonshire  coast,  upon  a  Chile  beach,  and  upon  the  uplands 

W.  A.  4 


50  CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 

of  Tibet,  one  can  hardly  doubt  that  here  a  very  ancient  type  of 
plant  finds  its  still  more  ancient  conditions  of  existence."  On 
the  other  hand,  many  species  of  very  local  range  seem  to  be 
suited  to  very  local  conditions,  and  more  or  less  incapable  of 
further  spread  without  further  modification.  Some  Utricularias 
in  South  Brazil,  for  example,  are  specialised  to  grow  in  Bromeliad 
pitchers,  and  can  only  go  where  those  exist.  Copeland  (18) 
mentions  the  case  of  Stenochlaena  areolaris,  which  is  epiphytic 
on  Pandanus  utilissimus  only,  and  confined  therefore  to  places 
where  that  grows.  It  seems  not  impossible  that  some  Mesembry- 
anthemums  in  South  Africa  are  specialised  to  suit  the  exact 
climate  in  which  they  grow,  and  are  thus  rigidly  localised. 

It  is  thus  highly  probable  that  at  times  very  local  species  may 
in  reality  be  much  older  ^than  from  the  area  occupied  one  would 
be  inclined  to  think.  This,  however,  does  not  affect  the  soundness 
of  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area  to  be  advanced  below,  but 
merely  goes  to  show  that  ecological  barriers  may  often  be  very 
effectual. 

An  ecological  factor  which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to 
a  commencing  species  is  the  type  of  vegetation  into  which 
it  is  born.  In  the  natural  state  of  the  vegetation  of  a  country, 
the  ground  in  any  place  is  covered  with  an  assortment  of  plants 
which  is  found  to  be  fairly  constant  in  its  composition  so  long 
as  the  general  conditions  are  much  the  same.  This  assortment 
is  termed  a  plant  society  or  association,  and  upon  the  chalk 
downs,  for  example,  or  the  moors  of  Yorkshire,  one  finds  much 
the  same  society,  made  up  of  much  the  same  proportions  of  its 
various  members,  in  places  far  removed  from  one  another.  Con- 
sequently, if  a  new  species  is  evolved  at  a  given  place,  and  can- 
not enter  the  society  that  exists  there,  it  will  die  out  again  by 
the  simple  action  of  natural  selection.  The  instant  that  it  is 
produced,  it  will  have  to  undergo  a  strenuous  struggle  for  exist- 
ence, but  if  it  pass  successfully  through  that,  it  may  succeed, 
and  may  spread  with  the  society  which  it  has  entered,  and 
ultimately  also  enter  other  societies. 

As  the  number  of  plants,  and  their  variety,  in  any  society, 
increases,  the  entrance  of  a  newcomer  probably  becomes  in- 
creasingly difficult.  The  society  is  said  to  be  in  progress  from 
an  "open"  condition  to  a  "closed"  one.  But  as  Clements  has 
said,  a  society  is  never  in  a  state  of  stable  equilibrium,  and 
though  one  may  regard  it  as  perfectly  closed,  it  may  yet  be  able 
to  admit  new  members.  The  most  conspicuous  plant  upon  the 


ch.  v]     HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES 


51 


chalk  downs  south  of  Cambridge  is  Festuca  ovina.  Suppose, 
however,  that  this  plant  in  its  dispersal  had  not  yet  reached  the 
downs.  They  would,  none  the  less,  be  covered  by  a  society  of 
plants  which  might  be  very  numerous,  and  which  we  might 
think  closed.  Yet  when  the  fescue  appeared,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  it  would  soon  secure  a  foothold. 

An  association  of  plants  ultimately  passes  its  zenith,  and  be- 
comes gradually  superseded  by  another,  the  process  being  known 
as  succession  (16).  "The  pine... gave  place  at  length  to  the  oak, 
and  the  oak... yielded  in  its  turn  to  the  beech,  the  periods  when 
these  three  forest  trees  predominated  in  succession  tallying 
pretty  nearly  with  the  ages  of  stone,  bronze,  and  iron  in  Den- 
mark" (68,  p.  372). 

The  more  closed  an  association  is,  probably  so  much  the  more 
difficult  will  a  newcomer  find  it  to  obtain  any  foothold,  and  by 
so  much  will  its  dispersal  be  retarded.  One  will  expect  that 
most  newcomers  will  find  it  quite  impossible  to  gain  a  footing 
at  all,  but  that  every  now  and  then  (as  in  the  case  of  Elodea,  the 
famous  "American  water- weed"  of  the  last  generation,  which 
spread  so  rapidly  through  the  waters  of  Western  Europe,  though 
only  the  female  plant  was  introduced)  one  will  do  so,  and  will 
spread,  more  especially  to  those  places  which  the  association 
concerned  already  reaches. 

In  many  instances,  of  course,  a  plant  in  its  travels  will  come 
across  a  type  of  vegetation  into  which  it  cannot  spread  at  all, 
and  which  may  thus,  if  broad  and  wide  enough,  form  a  complete 
barrier.  If  an  ordinary  herb,  accustomed  to  a  good  water  supply, 
and  to  life  in  the  open  sunshine,  comes  across  a  stretch  of 
country  which  is  either  a  forest  or  a  desert,  it  will  be  held  up 
in  this  manner,  and  whether  it  can  cross  will  depend  upon  its 
mechanism  for  dispersal,  upon  the  width  of  the  barrier,  and 
upon  other  factors.  Forest  trees  arriving  at  a  desert  will  un- 
doubtedly be  stopped,  but  when  they  meet  a  herbaceous  asso- 
ciation, in  a  country  where  the  rainfall  is  sufficient,  will  probably 
spread  at  the  expense  of  the  herbs,  and  cover  previously  open 
ground  with  trees.  One  may  see  this  going  on  at  the  edge  of  a 
pine  wood,  or  on  any  small  clearing  made  by  a  peasant  in  a 
tropical  forest.  There  is  little  evidence  for  the  occurrence  of  the 
reverse  process,  without  the  aid  of  desiccation  of  the  climate  or 
something  of  the  kind. 

Changes  of  conditions  will  make  great  differences  to  the  rate, 
or  even  to  the  possibility,  of  spread,  often  by  the  effects  they 

4r— 2 


52 


CAUSES  WHICH  FAVOUR  OR  [pt.  i 


produce  upon  the  composition  of  the  plant  societies  that  occupy 
the  ground.  Farrow's  work  upon  the  changes  in  the  plant 
societies  upon  Cavenham  heath  (36)  made  by  the  exclusion  of 
rabbits  may  be  quoted  as  an  example.  A  new  disease  may  arrive 
in  a  district,  and  a  plant  that  was  previously  very  common  may 
fall  an  easy  prey  to  it ;  the  more  common  it  is  the  more  likely  is 
it  to  suffer  badly. 

From  a  general  distribution  point  of  view,  of  course,  geo- 
logical changes,  with  the  changes  that  they  cause  in  climates,  in 
barriers  of  sea  or  mountain,  and  the  like,  are  by  far  the  most 
important  in  this  connection.  They  have  been  so  fully  discussed 
in  geological  books  that  there  is  no  need  to  enlarge  upon  them 
in  this  place. 

In  this  connection  we  must  briefly  mention  the  action  of  man, 
which  in  recent  times  has  become  by  far  the  greatest  help  or 
hindrance  to  dispersal,  though  in  the  consideration  of  Age  and 
Area  we  have  endeavoured  to  deal  with  the  vegetation  as  much 
as  possible  as  it  was  before  his  interference.  By  clearing  of 
forest,  opening  of  roads,  making  fires,  cultivating  the  ground, 
introducing  grazing  animals,  carrying  seeds,  voluntarily  or  in- 
voluntarily, about  the  world,  and  in  many  other  ways,  man  has 
made,  and  is  making,  the  most  enormous  differences  in  the 
vegetation  of  the  globe,  sometimes  favouring  the  spread  of  a 
species,  sometimes  retarding  it,  sometimes  destroying  a  species 
in  whole  or  in  part. 

Other  features,  again,  must  be  considered,  which  would  hardly 
come  under  any  of  these  heads,  and  yet  which  may  make  a  great 
difference  in  the  actual  spreading  of  species.  Suppose  a  country,, 
comparatively  empty  of  species,  united  to  another  by  a  broad 
belt  of  land,  which  is  gradually  sinking.  Then  the  first  species  to 
arrive  across  it  may  reach  almost  the  whole  country  at  once, 
while  later  ones  may  only  reach  the  centre,  and  require  to  take 
an  immense  period  to  spread  about. 

Summary 

As  a  rule,  a  new  plant  of  a  given  species  springs  up  not  far 
from  its  parent,  so  that  transport  is  at  most  a  few  yards.  Even 
if  a  species  only  travelled  a  yard  a  year,  it  might  in  a  million 
years  (a  mere  detail  in  geological  time)  travel  from  London  to 
the  Shetlands,  Dresden,  and  the  Pyrenees,  or  on  an  open  plain 
might  cover  a  million  square  miles.  The  whole  surface  of  the 
globe  might  be  covered  in  less  time  than  it  is  now  supposed  has 


ch.  v]    HINDER  THE  DISPERSAL  OF  SPECIES  53 


elapsed  since  the  Eocene  period — a  portion  only  of  the  time 
during  which  the  flowering  plants  have  existed.  It  is  clear  that 
delay,  and  not  acceleration,  of  spread  has  been  the  rule. 

The  various  barriers  that  species  may  meet  with  are  then  con  • 
sidered,  first  those  purely  physical,  such  as  seas  or  mountains, 
then  those  due  to  change  of  climatic  factors  from  place  to  place, 
which  are  partly  physical,  partly  depend  upon  the  constitution 
of  the  plant,  and  lastly  barriers  (or  at  times  aids  to  dispersal) 
depending  upon  the  type  of  vegetation  into  which  a  plant  may 
try  to  intrude,  such  as  forest  or  open  grassland,  or  various 
associations  of  plants,  some  of  which  may  suit  it  and  some  not. 
A  herb,  for  example,  may  spread  ten  times  as  rapidly  as  a  tree. 
The  effects  of  specialisation  in  structure  and  function  are  also 
pointed  out;  the  more  specialised  a  plant  becomes,  the  more 
limited  its  possible  range. 

The  general  impression  which  I  have  tried  to  convey  in  this 
and  preceding  chapters  is,  that  until  man  began  to  interfere 
upon  the  large  scale  with  cultivation,  war,  and  clearing,  the 
dispersal  of  plants  from  one  place  to  another  must  have  been  a 
matter  of  the  most  extreme  slowness. 


CHAPTER  VI 


AGE  AND  AREA 

T  he  hypothesis  which  I  have  termed  (123)  Age  and  Area  is  not 
a  sudden  discovery,  but  has  grown  up  in  my  mind  during  a  period 
of  about  twenty  years  of  work,  in  the  study  more  especially  of 
the  flora  of  Ceylon  and  its  neighbouring  countries.  It  will  per- 
haps prove  of  interest,  therefore,  to  sketch  this  gradual  develop- 
ment, enlarging  for  the  purpose  a  short  account  recently  pub- 
lished (135). 

Going  out  to  Ceylon  in  1896,  and  remaining  there  till  1911, 
I  had  constant  occasion  to  refer  to  the  volumes  of  Trimen's 
Flora  (37).  There  I  gradually  found,  somewhat  to  my  surprise, 
that  the  many  species  which  are  confined  to  that  country  (en- 
demic to  the  island)  were  usually  confined  also  to  small  areas 
within  it.  Now  at  that  time  I  held  the  view,  then  very  usual, 
that  these  endemics  were  specially  adapted  to  the  local  con- 
ditions, and  it  seemed  very  remarkable  that  they  should  be  so 
rare  in  those  very  conditions.  If  they  were  specially  adapted 
to  Ceylon,  therefore,  it  could  hardly  be  to  the  general  conditions 
of  the  island  (whatever  those  might  be),  but  must  be  to  strictly 
local  conditions  within  its  area.  Now  this  was  the  explanation 
that  was  usually  applied  to  the  very  numerous  species  that  were 
endemic  in  such  regions  as  West  Australia  or  South  Africa,  and 
it  was  therefore  clear  that  there  were  no  differences  between  the 
endemics  of  an  island  and  those  of  the  mainland,  and  that  any 
explanation  that  fitted  the  one  would  fit  the  other. 

Still  more  remarkable,  therefore,  did  the  facts  appear,  when 
I  gradually  began  to  study  in  greater  detail  the  local  distribu- 
tion of  the  endemics,  and  found  that  they  were  not,  as  a  rule, 
confined  each  to  one  spot  or  small  region  characterised  by  some 
special  local  peculiarity  in  conditions.  Had  this  been  the  case, 
they  might  have  been  supposed  to  have  been  evolved  to  suit 
such  spots,  which  in  actual  fact  might  be  found  without  any 
local  species  upon  them. 

Coleus  elongatus,  for  example,  was  confined  to  the  summit  of 
Ritigala  Peak  (p.  14),  a  minute  area,  and  was  found  nowhere 
else  in  the  world;  but  C.  inflatus,  another  endemic  species,  was 
common  all  over  the  high  mountain  regions  of  the  island.  C. 


PT.  I,  CH.  Vl] 


AGE  AND  AREA 


55 


maldbaricus  also  occurred  there,  but  was  found  in  the  plains 
too,  and  in  the  mountains  of  South  India,  while  C.  barbatus,  the 
remaining  Ceylon  species  of  this  genus,  covered  the  range  of 
C.  malabaricus,  and  also  occurred  almost  throughout  tropical 
Asia  and  Africa.  It  seemed  hard  to  believe,  when  one  could  not 
see  in  plants  like  these  four  Colei  any  characters  whatsoever 
that  one  could  point  to  as  advantageous  or  as  disadvantageous, 
that  there  should  exist  internal  characters  so  distinct  and 
different  as  would  enable  C.  barbatus  to  cover  so  enormous  an 
area,  and  C.  malabaricus  a  smaller  but  still  large  one,  while 
keeping  C.  inflatus  confined  to  the  Ceylon  mountains,  and  C. 
elongatus  to  a  few  square  yards  on  the  peak  of  Ritigala.  No 
differences  in  efficiency  of  the  dispersal  "mechanism"  could 
account  for  the  differences  in  area  covered  by  these  allied  species 
of  the  same  genus. 

This  question  of  areas  occupied  roused  my  interest,  and  a 
little  study  soon  showed  that  species,  endemic  or  not,  occupied 
every  conceivable  area,  from  a  few  square  yards  to  a  large  part 
of  the  surface  of  the  globe  (the  "area"  being  determined  by  the 
outlying  stations,  even  if  the  plant  be  absent  from  the  area,  or 
part  of  the  area,  between  them).  On  the  older  view  that  dis- 
tribution was  chiefly  determined  by  degree  of  adaptation  to 
conditions,  it  had  come  to  be  more  or  less  unconsciously  sup- 
posed that  species  were  divided  into  a  comparatively  few  "suc- 
cessful" species  covering  large  areas,  and  a  great  number  of 
"unsuccessful"  covering  small.  This  view  proved  to  be  a  very 
inadequate  explanation  "of  the  very  striking  facts  of  distribution 
that  have  just  been  outlined  above.  We  shall  return  to  this 
subject  again  under  Endemism. 

Of  the  809  species  of  flowering  plants  endemic  to  Ceylon,  less 
than  200  were  confined  to  what  one  might,  by  a  stretch  of  the 
imagination,  regard  as  single  spots,  and  about  half  of  these 
occurred  upon  the  tops  of  single  mountains  or  small  groups  of 
mountains  (121).  On  the  summit  of  Nillowe-kanda,  for  example, 
which  is  a  mere  precipitous  rock,  there  are  found,  and  there 
only,  Acrotrema  lyratum,  Stemonoporus  reticulatus,  and  Ochna 
rufescens;  on  Ritigala  (p.  14)  three  species,  on  Hinidun-kanda 
(another  somewhat  isolated  mountain)  three,  on  Adam's  Peak 
ten,  one  of  which  extends  into  a  valley  2000  feet  below;  and  so 
on.  Evidently  the  investigation  of  areas  occupied  bid  fair  to 
furnish  interesting  information,  and  I  devoted  much  attention 
to  it.  A  careful  study  of  the  remaining  three-quarters  of  the 


56  AGE  AND  AREA  [pt. 

endemics  showed  that  they  were  found  upon  areas  of  various 
sizes  up  to  the  full  extent  of  the  dry  or  the  wet  zone  of  Ceylon, 
or  more  rarely  of  both,  but  that  the  numbers  grew  smaller  as 
one  went  up  the  scale  toward  the  larger  areas.  Trimen  in  his 
Flora  had  rendered  yeoman  service  to  the  student  of  areas,  by 
attaching  to  every  species  a  note  to  the  effect  that  it  was  Very 
Common  (VC),  Common  (C),  Rather  Common  (RC),  Rather 
Rare  (RR),  Rare  (R),  or  Very  Rare  (VR).  A  study  of  the 
localities  in  which  species  had  been  found  showed  that  as  a  rule, 
though  with  a  good  many  exceptions,  a  VR  species  occurred  in 


>iit 
loonies 


one  place  only,  or  two  close  together,  R  in  an  area  about  10-30 
miles  across,  RR  in  one  30-60  miles  across,  and  RC  and  C  in 
areas  larger  yet,  while  VC  referred  rather  to  unusual  common- 
ness on  areas  represented  by  C. 

The  three  diagrams  here  reproduced  give  the  ranges  of  a 
number  of  the  earlier  endemic  species  in  Trimen 's  Flora  of 
Ceylon,  belonging  to  the  classes  VR,  R,  and  RR.  The  VR  species 
are,  it  will  be  seen,  usually  well  localised,  though  a  few  (5  in  the 
diagram)  have  been  recorded  from  two  widely  separated  localities, 
joined  by  a  wavy  line.  The  R  and  the  RR  species,  however, 
cover  areas  that  overlap  one  another  in  every  possible  way,  and 
look  something  like  the  rings  in  a  shirt  of  chain  mail.  Nowhere 
do  the  areas  occupied  by  two  endemic  species  coincide,  except 


CH.  Vl] 


AGE  AND  AREA 


57 


(approximately)  in  the  case  of  a  few  VR  species,  which  occur 
together  on  the  same  mountain-top.  The  VR  species  that  occur 
in  the  large  forests  have  each  their  own  location.  Now  a  little 
consideration  will  soon  show  that  from  the  point  of  view  of 
evolution  to  suit  local  conditions  this  is  a  very  remarkable  state 
of  affairs.  It  is  of  course  obvious  that  if  a  species  newly  evolved 
upon  a  small  area  does  not  suit  the  conditions  that  obtain  upon 
that  area  at  the  time  in  which  it  was  evolved,  it  will  be  promptly 
killed  out ;  but  while  this  is  so  there  is  no  actual  need  to  imagine 
that  it  was  evolved  specially  "adapted"  to  those  conditions. 

If  two  species  A  and  B  grow  in  overlapping  areas,  both  must 
be  growing  in  the  coincident  portion;  and  what  keeps  A  from 
growing  into  the  rest  of  B's  territory,  and  B  into  ^4's?  It  has 
usually  been  insisted  that  it  was  because  A  was  adapted  to  its 
own  territory,  and  B  to  its  own.  But  when  one  considers  that 
the  conditions  are  never  the  same  from  one  spot  to  the  next, 
nor  from  one  year  to  the  next,  this  would  mean  a  most  wonderful 
adaptation  if  the  species  were  not  to  grow  into  each  other's 
territory,  especially  when  one  remembers  the  many  more  widely 
distributed  species  that  occur  in  both.  In  reality  the  case  is 
more  complex,  for  there  are  at  least  a  dozen  overlapping  at  any 
one  point,  while  in  Ceylon  the  soil  is  essentially  the  same  through- 
out the  greater  part  of  the  island,  the  flora  was  practically  all 
forest  before  the  arrival  of  man,  and  the  rainfall  varies  very 
much  from  year  to  year  in  quantity  and  distribution.  It  was 
evident  that  the  old  ideas  of  particular  adaptation  were  un- 
tenable, and  this  view  was  enormously  strengthened  by  subse- 
quent discovery  of  the  way  in  which  species  were  grouped  in  a 
country. 

This  conclusion  was  confirmed  by  later  work  on  the  Podo- 
stemaceae  (124),  a  family  of  water-plants  of  smooth  rocks  in 
rushing  tropical  and  subtropical  mountain  streams  only.  Here 
there  is  nothing  to  which  the  many  genera  and  species  can  be 
adapted,  for  the  conditions  are  the  same  for  all,  and  could  not 
be  equalled  for  uniformity  in  a  laboratory  of  the  temperate  zone. 
They  grow  only  upon  a  smooth  rigid  substratum,  from  which 
they  take  no  food;  all  grow  in  water,  and  have  no  climatic 
differences,  no  difference  in  circumambient  medium,  in  light,  or 
in  any  other  factor.  And  yet  there  have  evolved  many  genera 
and  species,  with  very  striking  and  bizarre  differences  between 
them.  Evidently  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  local  condi- 
tions to  which  to  be  adapted  in  order  to  ensure  that  evolution 


58 


AGE  AND  AREA 


shall  go  on.  Cordyceps,  with  60  species  on  insects,  is  a  similar 
case  (73). 

Another  popular  theory  about  localised  species  like  these 
Ceylon  endemics  is  still  strongly  held,  though  the  one  just  con- 
sidered (local  adaptation)  has  suffered  somewhat  of  an  eclipse 
with  the  gradual  decay  of  the  hypothesis  of  natural  selection. 
Like  the  first,  though  completely  at  variance  with  it,  this  second 
explanation  is  also  founded  upon  natural  selection,  but  some- 
what less  obviously.  It  is  to  the  effect  that  species  on  very  small 
areas  are  really  in  process  of  dying  out.  It  is  evident  that  they 
could  not  have  arisen  by  aid  of  natural  selection  upon  areas  so 
small,  and  therefore  they  are  assumed  to  be  moribund.  This 
hypothesis  is  supposed  to  be  supported  by  the  facts  of  fossil 
botany,  which  unquestionably  proves  that  many  species  have 
existed  in  the  past  and  no  longer  occur  in  the  world  to-day. 
There  is,  however,  nothing  to  show  that  the  two  cases  are  paral- 
lel, except  in  a  few  instances  where  there  is  good  evidence  that 
the  present  existing  species  once  covered  a  much  larger  area.  It 
was  simply  assumed  that  such  a  species  as  Coleus  elongatus  had 
once  occupied  more  ground. 

Like  the  previous  theory,  however,  this  explanation  breaks 
down  when  applied  to  the  very  striking  facts  of  the  distribution 
of  endemics  in  Ceylon.  How  can  species  be  dying  out  in  a  chain- 
mail  pattern,  like  the  R  and  RR  species  given  in  the  diagrams 
above?  And  why  were  there  so  many  more  with  the  smallest 
areas  (VR).than  with  areas  not  quite  so  small  (R  and  RR)?  Had 
one  arrived  in  Ceylon  just  in  time  to  see  the  disappearance  of 
a  considerable  flora?  Was  the  dying-out  becoming  less  and  less, 
and  if  so,  why?  This  graduation  of  the  areas  of  endemic  species 
from  many  small  to  few  large  was  a  most  difficult  point  indeed 
to  explain  upon  this  supposition  of  dying-out,  just  as  it  had  been 
for  the  theory  of  local  adaptation. 

Again,  why  did  so  many  of  the  "very  rare"  endemics  choose 
mountain-tops  as  a  last  resort?  There  were  many  widely  dis- 
tributed species,  with  very  restricted  areas  in  Ceylon,  but  these 
did  not  choose  such  places,  and  why  did  they  not?  The  "dying- 
out"  explanation  supposes  endemics  to  have  ascended  moun- 
tains as  the  last  refuge  from  the  invading  flora  of  the  plains,  but 
in  such  a  small  and  uniform  country  as  the  wet  zone  of  Ceylon 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  suppose  that  there  was,  for  example,  a 
separate  Eugenia  at  every  few  miles ;  whilst  some  of  the  moun- 
tains with  endemic  Eugenias  did  not  even  rise  directly  from  the 


CH.  Vl] 


AGE  AND  AREA 


59 


plains,  but  from  a  high  plateau.  And  why  did  the  endemics 
climb  right  to  the  summits  of  the  hills?  One  would  have  ex- 
pected to  find  them  at  varying  heights,  pursued,  so  to  speak, 
by  the  widely  distributed  species  before  whose  onslaught  they 
were  dying-out,  instead  of  finding,  as  is  not  infrequently  the 
case,  a  great  gap  in  elevation  between  the  two.  It  suggests  an 
unnecessary  degree  of  alarm  about  the  coming  competition,  and 
further  suggests  that  they  are  not  so  incapable  of  adaptation  to 
new  conditions  of  life  that  they  need  fear  it.  If  they  can  undergo 
the  great  adaptive  changes  necessary  to  reach  a  summit  of  5000 
feet  or  more,  they  must  have  a  very  fair  capacity  for  modifica- 
tion, and  should  be  able  to  hold  their  own  against  the  intruders. 
Queries  like  these  might  be  put  by  the  dozen  (131,  p.  351,  and 
p.  88,  below),  and  the  explanation  now  under  consideration 
could  give  no  answer.  Clearly  the  theory  of  dying-out  was  as 
untenable  as  that  of  local  adaptation,  so  far  as  the  Ceylon 
endemics  were  concerned.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  considerable 
number  of  species  here  and  there,  especially  within  the  range  of 
the  glacial  periods,  may  be  looked  upon  as  dying-out,  or  some- 
times as  locally  adapted,  but  these  are  comparatively  few  and 
far  between,  and  the  mass  of  local  endemics,  particularly  in  the 
tropics,  cannot  be  looked  upon  as  coming  within  these  cate- 
gories. 

Just  before  leaving  Ceylon  I  published  a  Catalogue  of  the 
flora  (115),  which  rendered  the  task  of  enumerating  the  species 
with  their  distribution  a  much  simpler  affair,  and  on  reaching 
Rio  I  began  this  work.  Dividing  the  species  into  three  groups — 
those  endemic  to  Ceylon,  those  found  in  Ceylon  and  Peninsular 
India  (cut  off  by  a  line  from  Calcutta  to  the  north  of  Bombay), 
and  those  with  wider  distribution  abroad  than  this — I  found 
that  the  endemics  were  (VC  19),  C  90,  RC  139,  RR  136,  R  192, 
VR  233,  increasing  fairly  steadily  from  top  to  bottom  of  the  list. 

Examining  the  distribution  in  Ceylon  of  the  species  (which  I 
termed  "wides"  for  short)  that  occurred  outside  the  island  to 
a  greater  distance  than  merely  into  the  peninsula  of  southern 
India,  it  was  found  that  the  areas  they  occupied  in  the  island 
went  in  the  reverse  order,  being  (VC  221),  C  462,  RC  313,  RR 
209,  R  159,  VR  144. 

If  now,  leaving  out  of  account  the  somewhat  uncertain  VC 
class  (its  greater  uncertainty  is  largely  due,  as  already  explained, 
to  the  fact  that  it  is  not  based  on  actual  area  occupied),  we 
number  the  other  classes  1  to  5  (i.e.  by  degree  of  rarity,  not  of 


60 


AGE  AND  AREA 


frequency),  then  the  number  1  attached  to  a  species  will  mean 
that  it  has  the  maximum,  the  number  5  the  minimum,  dispersal 
in  Ceylon.  And  we  can  find  the  average  distribution  of  a  group, 
whether  Ceylon  endemics  or  widely  distributed,  by  multiplying 
the  number  under  each  head  from  1  to  5  by  the  number  of  that 
head,  adding  up  all  the  marks  thus  obtained,  and  dividing  by 
the  total  number  of  species.  Thus  we  obtain: 

Widely  dis- 
tributed species 

No.  of 

species  Marks 

462  x  1  462 

313  x2  626 

209  x  3  627 

159  x  4  636 

144  x  5  720 

1287  3071 
2-3 

Now  the  actual  number  of  species  under  each  of  these  heads 
in  the  whole  flora  is  (VC  285),  C  670,  RC  555,  RR  429,  R  415, 
VR  455.  If  we  take  the  average  rarity  of  the  last  five  classes, 
we  find  it  to  be  just  over  2-7.  The  average  rarity  of  an  endemic 
we  have  seen  to  be  3-4,  and  of  a  wide  2-3,  while  the  remaining 
species,  which  are  endemic  to  Ceylon  and  South  India,  show  a 
rarity  of  2-7,  the  same  as  the  whole  flora.  The  difference  of  1*1 
in  average  rarity  between  wides  and  endemics  represents  over 
a  quarter  of  that  between  the  most  and  the  least  widely  dis- 
tributed species  (1  and  5,  difference  4).  In  other  words,  the 
most  widely  distributed  species  in  Ceylon,  on  the  average,  are 
those  that  show  a  distribution  abroad  to  a  greater  distance  than 
merely  to  Peninsular  India;  then  follow  those  that  reach  the 
peninsula,  and  the  least  widely  distributed  are  those  that  are 
found  in  Ceylon  only.  Taking  the  estimates  of  actual  area  given 
above  for  the  different  classes,  the  differences  actually  found 
indicate  that  an  endemic  has  an  average  area  about  40  miles 
in  diameter,  a  "wide"  one  of  80  miles,  or  four  times  as  large. 

A  cursory  examination  of  other  floras  soon  showed  that  their 
species  behaved  in  the  same  way,  occupying  areas  of  all  sizes, 
overlapping  in  the  same  manner,  and  with  their  endemics 
occupying  areas  from  many  small  up  to  few  large,  and  the  wides 
the  reverse.  At  the  same  time,  the  figures  for  the  Ceylon  flora 
indicated  clearly  that  this  graduation  of  areas,  wides  largest, 


Endemic  species 


No.  of 

Class 

species 

Marks 

1. 

c 

90  x  1 

90 

2. 

RC 

139  x2 

278 

3. 

RR 

136  x3 

408 

4. 

R 

192  x4 

768 

5. 

VR 

233  x5 

1165 

Total  790 

2709 

Average  rarity  represented  by  3-4 


CH.  Vl] 


AGE  AND  AREA 


61 


Ceylon-Peninsular-India  next,  Ceylon  endemics  least,  showed 
not  only  for  the  grand  total,  but  also  for  every  family  of  14  or 
more  species.  It  was  clear  that  any  one  group  of  allied  species 
behaved  like  any  other  group,  and  it  was  therefore  obvious  that 
nothing  but  a  mechanical  explanation  would  serve.  Natural 
selection  could  not  act  on  all  plants  alike  with  even  pressure. 
The  only  possible  mechanical  explanation  seemed  to  me  to  be 
age,  which  would  almost  necessarily  act  alike  upon  all.  If  one 
supposed  the  "wides"  to  be  (on  the  average)  the  oldest,  and  to 
have  been  the  first  arrivals  in  Ceylon,  they  were  thus  allowed 
sufficient  time  to  spread  to  the  largest  extent.  On  the  way,  they 
would  give  rise,  perhaps  somewhere  south  of  the  middle  of  the 
peninsula,  to  the  species  now  found  in  Ceylon  and  Peninsular 
India;  these  would  be  next  oldest,  and  would  spread  in  Ceylon 
to  the  second  degree  of  distribution.  The  Ceylon  endemics  would 
arise  in  Ceylon,  and  on  the  whole  probably  later  still,  from  one, 
or  more  likely  both,  of  these  groups,  and  being  the  youngest, 
would  have  spread  the  least.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  at 
last  provided  with  a  simple  and  feasible  explanation  of  the  dis- 
tribution of  species,  though  it  involved  a  great  break  with  the 
older  ideas,  inasmuch  as  it  indicated  that  the  Ceylon  species 
were  confined  to  Ceylon  simply  because  they  had  been  too  young 
to  have  had  time  to  spread  abroad. 

It  is  clear,  of  course,  that  age  in  itself  can  effect  nothing,  but 
it  allows  time  for  the  various  factors  that  are  active  in  distribu- 
tion to  produce  their  effects.  The  mechanical  regularity  of  the 
figures  given  above  demands  a  mechanical  explanation,  and  the 
only  possible  one  seems  to  be  that  age  is  mainly  responsible  for 
the  distribution,  or  in  other  words,  that  the  various  factors  that 
are  operative  produce  an  average  or  resultant  effect — so  much 
dispersal  in  so  much  time.  Dispersal  therefore  becomes  a  measure 
of  age,  except  in  so  far  as  barriers,  physical  or  ecological,  inter- 
fere. Distribution  is  very  slow,  and  probably  the  vast  majority 
of  species  have  not  yet  reached  the  limits  that  they  might  reach, 
if  sufficient  time  were  allowed. 

The  greatest  change  from  the  older  view  of  matters,  however, 
consists  in  the  fact  that  since  one  can  no  longer  accept  either 
the  view  of  local  adaptation  or  that  of  relic  nature,  for  the  great 
majority  of  local  species,  and  as  these  show  definite  numerical 
relationships  to  those  of  wider  distribution  that  occur  beside 
them,  one  must  regard  the  two  classes  as  related.  But  as  area 
goes  with  age,  the  endemics  must  be  the  younger,  and  must 


62 


AGE  AND  AREA 


therefore  be  looked  upon  as  in  general  descended  from  the  wides, 
and  as  young  species  just  commencing  their  careers. 

I  called  this  hypothesis,  that  on  the  average  the  area  occupied 
by  species  in  a  country  depended  upon  their  age  within  that 
country,  by  the  convenient  jingle  of  "  Age  and  Area  "  (123,  p.  337, 
footnote),  and  from  the  very  first  I  was  careful  to  point  out  that 
this  result  was  only  true  when  averages  of  about  15  allied  species 
were  taken.  People,  however,  have  nearly  always  insisted  upon 
applying  the  rule  to  individual  cases,  and  then  complaining  that 
it  does  not  fit  the  facts.  In  regard  to  the  facts  that  have  just 
been  discussed,  for  example,  they  say  "there  are  many  VC 
endemics,  and  a  lot  of  VR  wides,  so  it  must  be  wrong."  A  simple 
illustration  will  perhaps  make  my  position  more  clear. 

Suppose  that  five  wides  are  approaching  Ceylon  (then  attached 
to  the  mainland),  spreading  at  a  uniform  speed,  and  let  the  dis- 
tance from  the  foremost  of  A  to  the  foremost  of  B  be  represented 
by  2,  that  from  B  to  C  by  2  also,  and  so  on.  Then  A  will  reach 
Ceylon  first,  and  when  B  reaches  the  island  A  will  occupy  there 
a  space  represented  by  2.  When  C  arrives  A  will  occupy  4,  and 
B  2.  Ultimately  they  will  occupy  spaces  represented  by  10,  8, 
6,  4,  and  2.  Now  let  each  give  rise  in  South  India  to  another 
species  a,  /?,  y,  8,  e,  each  always  at  a  distance  behind  its  parent 
represented  by  2.  Then  a  will  arrive  in  Ceylon  simultaneously 
with  B,  p  with  C,  and  so  on,  and  these  Ceylon-Peninsular-Indian 
species  will  ultimately  occupy  areas  represented  by  8,  6,  4,  2, 
and  0.  And  if,  lastly,  each  species,  when  it  has  reached  a  dis- 
tribution in  Ceylon  represented  by  2,  gives  rise  to  a  Ceylon 
endemic,  then  if  we  subtract  2  from  the  figures  of  distribution 
of  all  the  preceding  species,  we  shall  get  the  distribution  of  the 
endemics.  This  will  be,  for  the  endemics  derived  from  the  wides, 
8,  6,  4,  2,  — ,  and  for  those  derived  from  the  Ceylon-Peninsular- 
Indian  species  6,  4,  2,  — ,  — . 

Now  the  most  widely  distributed  endemic,  derived  from  A, 
the  first  wide  to  arrive,  will  have  a  range  of  8,  while  three  out 
of  five  of  the  wides,  and  three  out  of  four  of  the  Ceylon-Penin- 
sular-Indian  species  will  have  ranges  of  6,  4,  or  2,  considerably 
less.  If  one  attempt  to  apply  the  rule  to  individual  cases,  it  is 
at  once  liable  to  break  down.  But  if  we  add  up  the  dispersal  of 
all  the  wides,  and  divide  by  the  total  of  species,  we  get 
(10  +  8  +  6  +  4  +  2=)  30  h-5  =  6  as  the  average  range  of  a 
wide,  20  +  4  =  5  as  the  average  range  of  a  Ceylon-Peninsular- 
Indian  species,  and  32  +  7  =  4-5  as  the  average  range  of  an 


CH.  Vl] 


AGE  AND  AREA 


63 


endemic,  figures  which  obviously  agree  with  the  rule.  If  one 
take  the  figures  in  groups,  one  may  safely  say  that  the  wides 
will  range  the  most,  the  endemics  the  least. 

In  the  same  way,  one  must  work,  not  only  with  groups  of 
species,  but  with  groups  of  allied  species,  which  will  have  more 
or  less  the  same  dispersal-mechanisms  and  the  same  reactions 
to  their  surroundings.  If  A,  B,  C  be  three  species  with  wide 
separation  in  relationship,  and  great  differences  between  them 
in  regard  to  habit,  dispersal-method,  or  other  things,  their  rates 
of  dispersal  may  be  entirely  different,  and  A  may  travel  ten 
times  as  fast  as  C.  But  with  a  group  of  ten  allied  species  one 
will  be  fairly  safe. 

Changes  of  condition,  again,  might  evidently  completely  alter 
the  relative  rates  of  dispersal  of  species,  or  might  even  stop 
some  of  them  altogether.  And  we  must  also  take  account  of  the 
presence  and  action  of  barriers,  already  discussed,  remembering 
that  some  forms  may  cross  a  barrier  when  it  has  become  quite 
impassable  to  others. 

Age  shows  clearly  in  the  distribution  figures  because  it  always 
pulls  the  same  way,  whereas  other  causes  of  dispersal  will  either 
tend  to  cancel  one  another  by  pulling  different  ways,  or  more 
commonly  to  exert  a  practically  uniform  pull  upon  a  group  of 
allied  species,  so  that  when  two  groups  of  allies  are  compared, 
one  will  be  able  to  see  the  relative  effects  of  age  upon  either. 
In  any  single  species  its  effects  are  liable  to  be  completely  hidden 
by  those  of  some  of  the  other  causes,  just  as  the  effect  of  gravity, 
which  is  admittedly  universal,  is  hidden  in  the  case  of  an  aero- 
plane, a  balloon,  or  a  moving  bullet. 

The  most  recent  expression  of  the  rule  of  Age  and  Area  so 
far  published  (133)  is  as  follows: 

The  area  occupied1  at  any  given  time,  in  any  given  country, 
by  any  group  of  allied  species  at  least  ten  in  number,  depends 
chiefly,  so  long  as  conditions  remain  reasonably  constant,  upon 
the  ages  of  the  species  of  that  group  in  that  country,  but  may 
be  enormously  modified  by  the  presence  of  barriers  such  as  seas, 
rivers,  mountains,  changes  of  climate  from  one  region  to  the 
next,  or  other  ecological  boundaries,  and  the  like,  also  by  the 
action  of  man,  and  by  other  causes. 

Extensions,  which  will  be  considered  below,  have  since  been 
given  to  Age  and  Area,  which  appears  to  be  a  general  law  cover- 
ing all  or  nearly  all  the  plants  now  existing  upon  the  globe,  and 
1  Determined  by  the  most  outlying  stations. 


64 


AGE  AND  AREA 


to  have  determined  their  distribution  thereon,  in  broad  outline. 
When  stated  thus,  it  would  appear  to  be  almost  axiomatic,  but 
for  a  very  long  time  the  simple  effects  of  age  upon  dispersal  have 
been  lost  sight  of,  under  the  widely  held  view  that  distribution 
was  rapid,  and  that  local  species  were  either  local  adaptations 
or  were  dying  out. 

The  Ceylon  figures  gave  strong  evidence  in  favour  of  Age  and 
Area,  but  confirmation  of  the  most  satisfactory  kind  was  soon 
obtained  by  working  out  the  distribution  of  the  flora  of  New 
Zealand  (127),  employing  north  and  south  diameters  of  areas 
occupied  (i.e.  in  the  direction  in  which  the  islands  run),  and 
obtaining  these  by  actual  measurement.  This  flora  followed  the 
law  with  great  exactness,  as  a  quotation  of  actual  figures  will 
show. 


Range 

in  N.Z. 

(miles) 

Endemics 

Wides 

1. 

881-1080 

112 

.201 

2. 

641-880 

120 

77 

3. 

401-640 

184 

53 

4. 

161-400 

190 

38 

5. 

1-160 

296 

301 

Further  work  was  then  carried  out  upon  various  other  similar 
phenomena,  the  conclusions  already  made  being  confirmed  by 
the  Orchids  of  Jamaica,  Callitris  (a  Conifer)  in  Australia,  and 
the  flora  of  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  A  study  of  the  ferns  there 
and  in  New  Zealand  also  gave  the  same  result,  showing  that  the 
law  was.  probably  quite  general. 

Breakwell  (13)  studied  the  grasses  of  Australia,  and  found 
that  while  the  species  of  very  wide  distribution  showed  an 
average  rarity  there  of  3,  those  confined  to  Australia  and  New 
Zealand  or  Asia  showed  4-1,  and  those  confined  to  Australia 
only  an  average  rarity  of  4-6,  the  figures  agreeing  exactly  with 
those  already  given.  He  also  found  that  the  genera  showed  the 
same  thing,  and  that  it  showed  in  Panicum  alone,  while  several 
of  the  larger  genera  showed  a  very  close  agreement. 

Taylor  (105-6)  has  studied  the  endemics  of  New  York  and 
of  the  Bahama  islands,  obtaining  results  that  harmonise  quite 
well  with  the  general  theory  of  Age  and  Area.  In  the  latter 
case,  it  was  noticed  that  the  difference  usually  seen  between  the 
distribution  of  the  endemics  and  the  wides  was  not  nearly  so 
large  as  usual.  This  may  be  due  to  one  or  more  causes;  it  may 
1  Largely  undoubted  introductions  of  recent  years. 


CH.  Vl] 


AGE  AND  AREA 


65 


be  that  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  Bahamas,  with  their 
sterile  soil  and  considerable  droughts,  suit  the  endemics — which 
must  have  been  developed  in  them,  and  have  had,  as  just  ex- 
plained, a  strenuous  struggle  to  become  established,  and  which, 
therefore,  should  be  unusually  well  suited  to  the  local  conditions. 
Although  the  parent  species  were  able  to  survive  there,  the 
endemics  were  probably  better  suited,  and  would  therefore  be 
able  to  overtake  the  former  to  some  extent. 

Summary 

Studying  the  flora  of  Ceylon,  it  was  very  soon  noticed  that 
there  were  enormous  differences  between  the  areas  occupied  by 
species  of  the  same  genus,  some  of  which  were  endemic  to  the 
island,  some  not,  and  this  led  on  to  a  study  of  areas  occupied  in 
general,  when  it  was  soon  found  that  the  endemic  species  occu- 
pied, on  the  average,  the  smallesi^reas  in  the  island,  those  found 
also  in  Peninsular  India  (but  not  beyond)  areas  rather  larger, 
and  those  that  ranged  beyond  the  peninsula  the  largest  areas 
of  all  (again  on  the  average).  The  two  current  theories  about 
endemic  species — that  they  were  local  adaptations,  suited  to 
special  local  conditions,  and  that  they  were  relics — proved  to 
be  incapable  of  explaining  the  facts  when  it  was  found,  as  was 
ultimately  done,  that  the  areas  occupied,  both  by  endemics  and 
by  widely  distributed  species,  were  arranged  in  a  graduated 
series,  the  first  from  many  small  to  few  large,  the  second  in  the 
opposite  direction.  It  was  not  possible  to  suppose  that  local 
adaptation  should  exist  in  this  graduated  manner,  nor  that  there 
should  be  many  relics  at  the  final  stage  of  dying  out,  and  suc- 
cessively fewer  at  all  the  stages  leading  up  to  that.  Some 
mechanical  explanation  was  necessary,  and  the  only  simple  and 
reasonable  one  was  that  the  area  occupied  increased  with  age. 
The  actual  quotation  of  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis,  as  so  far 
developed,  is  given  on  p.  63. 


W.  A. 


5 


CHAPTER  VII 


AGE  AND  AREA  (contd.).  CONFIRMATION 
BY  PREDICTION 

Confirmation  of  the  general  idea  advanced  in  the  hypothesis 
can  be  easily  obtained  by  applying  it  to  predict  what  will  be 
found  in  certain  places 
or  under  certain  circum- 
stances. Many  success- 
ful predictions  of  this 
kind  have  been  made  for 
the  area  comprised  by 
New  Zealand  and  its 
surrounding  islands  (the 
Kermadecs,  420  miles 
north;  Chathams,  375 
miles  east;  and  Auck- 
lands,  190  miles  south). 
It  will  be  well  to  instance 
a  few  of  these. 

To  begin  with  simple 
cases  (129) ;  from  the  fact 

that  to  the  east  of  these      New  Zealand  and  outlying  islands  The 
outlying     islands    the         dotted  line  is  the  1000-fathom  limit, 
soundings  are  in  general 

of  enormous  depth,  while  the  water  between  them  and  New 
Zealand  is  comparatively  shallow,  one  may  infer  that  their 
floras  have  in  general  the  same  sources  of  origin  as  that  of  New 
Zealand.  This  is  indicated  also  by  the  very  few  species  in  them, 
other  than  their  own  local  endemic  species,  which  do  not  occur 
in  New  Zealand.  If  they  had  received  their  flora  by  casual 
transport  over  sea,  one  would  expect  that  it  would  be  a  miscel- 
laneous assortment,  and  that  it  would  not  show  any  numerical 
relations  to  the  flora  of  the  larger  island.  But  as  such  relation- 
ships are  shown  very  clearly  one  may,  I  think,  take  it  for  granted 
that  the  connection  was  by  land,  at  least  so  far  as  the  bulk  of 
the  flora  of  these  islands  is  concerned.  Now  in  this  case  it  is 
clear  that  on  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area,  this  flora  should 
in  general  be  very  old  in  New  Zealand,  or  it  could  not  have 


Inew 

Sou^h  l^0y^(^^^J^P 


/    -Snares  <B<yhty  I* 

/  ? 
/       oAixakXarxduI.       ■■:  ^ 

Campbell  -  "^ritwodAS  I 

/        ^ .  !  —  -~ 


pt.  i,  ch.  vn]  CONFIRMATION  BY  PREDICTION 


67 


reached  the  islands  before  they  were  cut  off.  In  the  case  of  the 
Chathams,  more  particularly,  where  except  New  Zealand  there 
is  no  other  source  for  the  flora  than  casual  arrivals  by  sea,  by 
currents  which  also  run  close  to  New  Zealand,  this  should  be 
the  case.  The  Kermadecs  must  have  lain  fairly  near  to  any  in- 
coming northern  current  of  plants,  the  Aucklands  probably  to 
any  southern  invasion,  and  both  these  islands  therefore  may 
contain  plants  that  were  too  late,  or  only  just  in  time,  to  reach 
New  Zealand  at  all,  but  this  does  not  apply  to  the  Chathams. 

One  will  therefore  expect,  upon  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and 
Area,  that  while  on  the  average  all  the  floras  of  these  islands  will 
be  old,  and  therefore  widespread,  in  New  Zealand,  those  plants 
that  reach  the  Chathams  will  be  the  oldest,  and  most  widespread. 
Actual  examination  soon  shows  that  those  plants  that  reach  all 
three  groups,  and  which  are  therefore,  by  hypothesis,  about  the 
oldest  of  all  in  New  Zealand  in  their  own  circles  of  affinity,  show 
the  maximum  possible  range  in  New  Zealand,  ranging  it  from 
end  to  end.  Three  of  the  five  are  Compositae,  including  Lageno- 
phora  Forsteri,  which  is  endemic  to  New  Zealand  and  the  islands, 
and  the  others  are  Samolus  repens  and  Deyeuxia  Forsteri.  In 
my  papers  upon  New  Zealand  I  have  divided  the  plants  into 
ten  classes  by  range,  instead  of  the  six  of  the  Ceylon  flora.  The 
average  rarity  of  a  plant  in  New  Zealand,  including  all  the  flora, 
is  represented  by  5-6,  and  the  rarity  of  these  five  species  is  repre- 
sented by  1.  Those  plants  that  reach  two  groups  of  islands, 
which  must  also,  by  hypothesis,  be  very  old  forms,  have  a  rarity 
represented  by  an  average  of  1-5.  Of  these  plants  there  are  16 
species  in  class  1,  4  in  class  2,  and  a  solitary  species  in  class  8, 
about  whose  identification  there  is  some  doubt,  and  whose  in- 
clusion brings  the  average  from  1-2,  at  which  it  would  otherwise 
stand,  to  1*5. 

There  are  a  great  many  species  that  reach  only  one  group  of 
islands,  and  these  show  on  the  average  less  range  in  New  Zealand, 
but  it  is  very  noticeable,  that  just  as  was  predicted  above,  those 
of  the  Chathams  show  a  much  greater  average  range  than  those 
of  the  Kermadecs  or  Aucklands.  The  average  rarity  for  a  species 
reaching  the  Chathams  is  represented  by  1-7,  and  it  would  be 
1-5  were  it  not  that,  though  there  is  otherwise  no  species  below 
class  4,  there  is  one  conspicuous  exception  in  class  9,  which 
brings  up  the  average  figure.  This  exception  is  the  Tainui  of  the 
Maoris  (Pomaderris  apetala),  which  they  assert  sprang  from  the 
rollers  or  skids  of  their  invading  canoe  the  Tainui,  and  which  is 


68 


AGE  AND  AREA 


only  found  in  a  short  range  on  the  north-west  coast  of  New 
Zealand.  It  is  fairly  clear,  from  the  marked  way  in  which  it 
forms  an  exception  to  the  rule  as  regards  distribution  of  these 
island  species,  that  this  legend  is  probably  the  truth,  and  that 
this  species  therefore  may  be  regarded  as  an  introduction,  and 
omitted  from  the  indigenous  flora.  Even  including  it,  however, 
the  average  figure  for  the  Chatham  plants  is  1-7.  The  species 
that  reach  the  Kermadecs  show  an  average  rarity  in  New  Zea- 
land represented  by  3-6,  and  as  each  0-1  represents  12  miles  in 
range,  this  means  that  they  range  New  Zealand  on  the  average 
228  miles  less  than  the  Chatham  species.  Their  range,  however, 
is  still  much  greater  than  the  average  for  the  species  of  New 
Zealand  as  a  whole,  which  is  represented  by  5-6,  or  240  miles 
less  than  the  Kermadec  species.  The  number  of  species  in  the 
different  classes  ranges  down  to  class  7,  and  in  class  9  there  is 
again  a  species  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  an  exception 
— Ipomoea  palmata,  which  is  possibly  carried  by  sea  currents, 
and  may  have  reached  both  Kermadecs  and  New  Zealand  in 
this  way,  as  they  are  washed,  where  it  occurs,  by  the  same 
current. 

Lastly,  the  species  that  reach  the  Aucklands  (only)  show  an 
average  rarity  in  New  Zealand  represented  by  3-5,  or  practically 
the  same  as  the  range  of  the  Kermadec  species,  with  the  lowest 
species  in  class  4.  The  prediction  as  to  range  in  New  Zealand  of 
the  various  species  reaching  the  islands  is  thus  fully  verified,  and 
this  success  lends  great  support  to  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and 
Area.  There  is  no  conceivable  reason  why  ranging  to  one  or 
more  of  these  little  groups  of  islands,  and  to  any  one  of  them1, 
though  they  differ  widely  in  climate  and  geology,  should  make 
a  species  more  widespread  in  New  Zealand  than  the  average, 
unless  it  be  the  mere  fact  that  to  have  been  able  to  reach  the 
islands  at  all  it  must  have  been  above  the  average  age  in  New 
Zealand,  and  thus  have  had  more  time  in  which  to  spread. 

This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  there  are  in  New  Zealand 
many  species,  both  widely  distributed  (reaching  Australia,  etc.) 
and  endemic,  which  do  not  reach  the  islands  at  all.  These  by 
hypothesis  should  be  younger,  each  of  course,  as  already  ex- 
plained, in  its  own  circle  of  affinity,  than  the  species  which  reach 
the  islands,  and  should  therefore  be  less  widespread  in  New 
Zealand.  There  are  213  such  "wides,"  and  they  show  an  average 

1  Kermadecs  in  latitude  29°-15,  volcanic ;  Chathams  in  44°-20,  schists, 
volcanic  and  tertiary;  Aucklands  in  50°-35,  igneous,  mostly  volcanic. 


ch.  vn]       CONFIRMATION  BY  PREDICTION  69 


rarity  in  New  Zealand  represented  by  the  figure  4-3,  i.e.  0-7 
greater  than  the  largest  figure  for  any  that  reach  the  islands 
(Kermadecs,  3-6),  or  a  range  of  84  miles  less.  This  difference 
between  the  two  groups  comes  out  in  a  very  striking  way  if  we 
place  the  figures  in  columns  by  classes: 

Range  in 

N.Z.  Reaching  Not  reaching 

Class        (miles)  islands  islands 

1  1001-1080  45  x   1  =45  35 

2  881-1000  19  x  2=38  39 

3  761-880  3  x  3=  9  26 

4  641-760  3  x  4  =  12  28 

5  521-640  1  x  5=  5  19 

6  401-520  1  x  6=  6  17 

7  281-400  3  x  7=21  12 

8  161-280  1  x  8=  8  14 

9  41-160  2  x  9  =  18  7 
10              1-40  .  x  10  =  .  16 

78  with  162  marks       2lTwith  919 

Average  rarity  2  0  (  =range  of  940  miles);  4-3  (664  miles). 

Difference  2-3,  representing  276  miles  of  range.  If  one  subtract  from 
class  10  in  the  second  column  about  a  dozen  that  are  probably  introduc- 
tions, one  gets  201  with  799  marks,  an  average  of  3-9,  representing  228 
miles  less  range  than  the  first  column. 

There  are  also  98  species  that  are  endemic  to  New  Zealand 
and  one  or  more  of  these  island  groups,  but  not  found  elsewhere 
in  the  world.  These  have  an  average  rarity  in  New  Zealand 
represented  by  2-9,  or  in  other  words,  they  are  a  good  deal  more 
widely  ranging  in  New  Zealand  than  those  species  which  reach 
Australia,  etc.  (enumerated  above  in  the  second  column),  but 
do  not  reach  these  little  islands.  The  difference  of  1-4  in  average 
range  represents  168  miles.  Now  here,  still  more  than  in  the 
previous  case  (p.  68),  there  is  no  conceivable  reason  why  ranging 
to  these  little  groups  of  islands  (and  to  any  one  of  them,  though 
they  differ  completely  in  climate  and  geology)  should  make  these 
endemic  species  more  widespread  in  New  Zealand  than  many 
others  whose  distribution  touches  Australia,  etc.,  unless  it  be 
simply  that  being  older,  they  have  had  time  to  reach  the  islands, 
and  to  range  more  widely  in  New  Zealand  itself. 

Another  interesting  point  shows  in  the  table  given  above, 
which  also  indicates  the  greater  age  of  these  species,  whether 
wide  or  endemic,  that  reach  the  outlying  islands.  The  wides  that 
reach  them  show  45  in  class  1,  whose  range  covers  Stewart 
Island,  a  separate  island  near  to  the  south  coast  of  New  Zealand, 


70  AGE  AND  AREA  [pt.  i 

and  only  19  in  the  next  class,  which  does  not  in  all  cases  include 
Stewart.  In  other  words,  most  of  these  species  were  so  old  that 
they  were  also  in  time  to  reach  Stewart  before  it  was  cut  off. 
The  endemics  that  reach  the  islands  also  show  41  in  class  1  and 
21  in  class  2,  but  the  wides  that  do  not  reach  these  islands 
(last  column  in  table  above)  show  35  in  class  1  and  39  in  class  2, 
indicating  that  they  were  on  the  whole  a  good  deal  younger,  so 
that  many  of  them  were  not  in  time  to  reach  Stewart.  The 
endemics  that  do  not  reach  the  islands  show  52  and  60  in  these 
classes  respectively,  in  the  same  way. 

That  these  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  are  not  a  special 
case  may  be  seen  by  comparing  with  the  flora  of  Great  Britain 
those  of  some  of  its  outlying  islands.  If  we  take  the  Orkneys 
(north  Scotland),  Colonsay  (south-west  Scotland),  Clare  (west 
Ireland)  and  the  Scillies  (south-west  England),  islands  widely 
separated,  and  differing  very  much  in  climate  and  geology, 
and  if  we  take  in  these,  at  random  (37,  108),  the  families 
Ranunculaceae,Caryophyllaceae,  Leguminosae,  Orchidaceae,  and 
Gramineae,  we  find  that  while  (going  by  the  London  Catalogue, 
8th  ed.)  the  average  distribution  of  a  species  in  Great  Britain 
is  to  47  of  the  vice-counties  out  of  112,  the  175  species  of  these 
families  that  occur  on  the  islands  mentioned  range  on  an  average 
to  71  (or  50  per  cent,  more),  whilst  those  that  reach  three  or  four 
of  the  islands  show  an  average  range  of  99.  The  facts  are  exactly 
parallel  to  those  for  the  islands  off  New  Zealand,  though  of  course 
not  so  striking,  as  the  islands  are  very  much  closer  to  their 
mainland. 

Before  going  further  we  must  once  more  consider  the  reserva- 
tions which  are  laid  down  in  the  statement  of  the  hypothesis 
in  the  preceding  chapter,  and  whose  misunderstanding  seems  the 
chief  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  an  acceptance  of  Age  and 
Area.  It  is  easy  to  pick  out  of  the  list  of  "wides"  reaching  the 
islands  a  few  that  have  less  range  in  New  Zealand  than  other 
wides  that  occur  there  and  do  not  reach  the  islands.  The  hypo- 
thesis is  often  treated  in  this  manner,  and  then  rejected  for  non- 
agreement  with  actuality.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  if  it 
could  be  applied  in  such  minute  detail  we  should  have  at  our 
command  a  theory  that  would  explain  more  facts  in  distribu- 
tion and  phylogeny  than  any  other  that  has  ever  been  suggested. 
Too  much  is  expected  of  an  hypothesis  which  claims  no  more 
than  to  be  a  useful  guide,  and  the  reservation,  that  it  must  not 
be  applied  to  a  group  of  less  than  ten  allied  species,  is  ignored. 


Cii.  vn]       CONFIRMATION  BY  PREDICTION  71 


It  may  be  applied  to  less  if  it  be  simply  desired  to  gain  an  argu- 
ment from  greater  or  less  probability  to  add  to  other  arguments 
in  favour  of  some  point,  but  when  it  is  to  form  a  main  argument 
it  must  be  applied  to  at  least  ten  allied  species  at  once.  By  this 
means  the  exceptional  species,  of  which  there  are  many,  will 
be  lost  in  the  crowd,  and  also  a  group  of  species  will  be  obtained 
which  react  to  their  surroundings  in  much  the  same  way,  have 
more  or  less  the  same  rapidity  of  dispersal,  and  so  on.  On 
averages  there  can  be  no  question  about  the  wider  dispersal  in 
New  Zealand  of  the  Chatham  plants,  though  individuals  can  be 
found  with  little  dispersal  there.  The  herbaceous  Compositae 
may  be  enormously  younger  in  the  islands  than  the  woody 
Leguminosae,  for  example,  and  also  younger  in  New  Zealand,  yet 
by  virtue  of  their  better  dispersal  mechanism,  and  the  fact  that 
they  are  herbs,  may  be  much  more  widely  distributed  in  the 
latter,  and  may  even  have  started  much  later  from  New  Zealand 
than  the  Leguminosae  (which  could  hardly  cross  a  strait)  and 
yet  have  reached  the  islands.  Both  groups,  however,  obey  Age 
and  Area,  though  they  cannot  be  compared  with  one  another 
as  to  relative  age. 

If  there  were,  again,  a  great  change  of  conditions  between 
New  Zealand  and  the  Chathams,  or  any  serious  barriers  like 
mountains,  this  would  completely  alter  the  list  of  plants  that 
might  arrive.  One  must  remember  all  these  provisos  in  dealing 
with  the  distribution  of  plants,  but  none  the  less  one  finds  that 
by  keeping  to  the  Age  and  Area  rule  as  enunciated,  and  dealing 
always  with  groups  of  allied  species,  results  may  be  obtained 
that  are  fairly  reliable. 

To  return  to  predictions,  another  upon  the  following  lines  (132) 
was  equally  successful.  A  family  will  rarely  arrive  in  a  country 
as  a  group  of  genera  simultaneously;  some  will  arrive  sooner 
than  others.  On  the  average,  therefore,  in  any  circle  of  affinity, 
the  families  with  several  genera  will  be  older  in  that  country 
than  those  with  one  or  two,  as  it  is  all  but  impossible  that  their 
first  genus  should  only  arrive  at  the  same  time  as  the  solitary 
one  of  another  family.  This  being  so,  we  shall  therefore  expect 
the  larger  families  of  New  Zealand  to  be  better  represented  upon 
the  outlying  islands  than  the  smaller,  as  being  older.  On  Stewart 
Island,  at  the  south  end  of  New  Zealand,  we  do  in  fact  find  this 
to  be  the  case,  as  the  following  table  shows : 


72 

AGE  AND  AREA 

1  PT  I 

Family 
represented  in 
New  Zealand  by 
(genera) 

±11  rNcW 

Ait  ctitl  H<  I 

Represented  in 
Stewart  by 

Not  represented 
there 

(families) 

(families) 

(per  cent.) 

(families) 

1 

36 

13 

36 

23 

2 

15 

6 

40 

9 

3 

15 

12 

80 

3 

4-5 

10 

9 

90 

1 

6-10 

9 

8 

90 

1 

over  10 

6 

6 

100 

91 

54 

59 

37 

We  may  even  take  the  genera,  and  consider  those  represented 
by  most  species  in  a  country  to  be  the  oldest  in  the  country. 
Testing  this  on  the  flora  of  Stewart  Island,  we  get : 


Genus 

Represented  in 

represented  in 

In  New 

Stewart  by  Not 

represented 

New  Zealand  by 

Zealand 

there 

(species) 

(genera) 

(genera) 

(per  cent.) 

(genera) 

1 

155 

32 

20 

123 

2 

54 

22 

40 

32 

3 

29 

20 

68 

9 

4-5 

29 

23 

79 

6 

6-10 

36 

32 

88 

4 

11-20 

16 

15 

93 

1 

over  20 

10 

10 

100 

329 

154 

46 

175 

Thus,  just  as  with  the  families,  the  proportion  of  genera 
represented  in  Stewart  shows  a  steady  increase  with  the  in- 
creasing number  of  species  in  the  genus  from  20  per  cent,  of 
those  with  one  up  to  100  per  cent,  of  those  with  more  than 
20  species. 

If  we  test  the  same  question  on  the  farther  outlying  islands 
of  New  Zealand,  the  Kermadecs,  Chathams,  and  Aucklands,  we 
find  that  the  average  size  of  a  family  that  reaches  all  three 
groups  is  47  species,  of  a  family  reaching  only  two  is  14,  reaching 
one  5,  and  of  a  family  reaching  none  is  only  2.  A  similar  result 
follows  a  test  of  the  genera.  This  fact  also  shows  in  the  flora  of 
the  islands  off  the  British  coast  mentioned  above. 

Or  again,  as  the  wides  are,  according  to  hypothesis,  the  oldest 
forms,  one  will  expect  to  find  them  the  best  represented  in  the 
floras  of  the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand.  In  New  Zealand 
itself  the  wides  form  about  18  per  cent,  of  the  flora  in  number 
of  species,  but  when  we  pass  over  into  Stewart  Island,  the  plants 
reaching  which  must,  by  hypothesis,  be  older  on  the  average 
than  the  plants  of  New  Zealand  proper,  we  find  that  the  wides 
form  36  per  cent,  of  the  flora.  In  the  plants  that  reach  Stewart, 


ch.  vn]       CONFIRMATION  BY  PREDICTION 


73 


and  also  one  of  the  three  outlying  groups  so  often  mentioned, 
the  wides  form  41  per  cent.,  when  two  groups  are  reached  they 
form  64  per  cent.,  and  of  those  plants  that  reach  Stewart  and 
all  three,  i.e.  Kermadecs,  Chathams,  and  Aucklands,  they  form 
SO  per  cent.  The  result  agrees  exactly  with  the  prediction,  con- 
firming the  hypothesis  in  a  very  striking  manner. 

Or  we  may  predict  that  the  far  outlying  islands  will  have  a 
large  proportion  of  forms  in  common  with  one  another  and  with 
Stewart,  all  being  old  in  New  Zealand,  and  that  the  proportion 
will  be  much  larger  than  that  in  common  with  New  Zealand. 
In  actual  fact,  one  finds  81  per  cent,  of  the  Stewart  families, 
67  per  cent,  of  the  genera,  and  even  40  per  cent,  of  the  species, 
on  the  other  islands,  while  of  the  plants  that  occur  in  New  Zea- 
land, but  not  on  Stewart,  only  32,  17,  and  15  percent,  respec- 
tively occur,  an  enormous  difference.  The  prediction  is  com- 
pletely borne  out  by  the  facts,  and  it  will  suffice  to  quote  one 
or  two  instances.  The  Kermadecs  have  30  percent,  of  the  genera 
that  occur  upon  the  Aucklands,  1200  miles  away,  in  a  totally 
different  climate,  and  only  19  per  cent,  of  those  of  New  Zealand. 
Of  52  species  occurring  outside  the  Kermadecs,  as  well  as  in 
those  islands,  30  occur  in  the  Chathams,  and  even  5  in  the 
Aucklands;  and  so  on. 

One  may  in  the  same  way  predict  a  great  similarity  between 
the  floras  of  the  islands  off  the  British  coast,  above  mentioned. 
On  examination,  one  finds,  in  the  five  families  before  considered, 
that  their  70  genera  have  in  the  British  Islands  an  average  of 
4-7  species,  against  3-4  for  the  whole  flora.  Whilst  about  37  per 
cent,  of  the  whole  175  species  of  these  families  are  confined  to 
one  island,  24  per  cent,  are  found  on  two,  19  per  cent,  on  three, 
and  19  per  cent,  on  all  four,  widely  separated,  and  widely 
different  in  climate,  etc.,  though  they  be.  The  average  occur- 
rence of  each  species  is  upon  2-2  island  groups  of  the  four. 

Or  we  may  predict  that  the  genera  which  are  common  to  the 
islands  and  New  Zealand,  taking  at  least  two  groups  of  the 
three,  will  be  very  old  genera,  and  consequently  in  general  will 
be  large  genera  in  large  families.  This  is  so  obvious  when  one 
comes  to  make  a  list,  and  finds  it  composed  of  Ranunculus, 
Cardamine,  Lepidium,  Stellaria,  Colobanthus,  Geranium,  etc., 
that  it  hardly  needs  any  further  elaboration.  The  32  genera 
upon  the  islands  in  the  first  half  of  the  New  Zealand  flora  show 
an  average  size  of  144  species,  against  an  average  for  the  world 
of  only  12.  Only  five  of  them,  Corynocarpus,  Coriaria,  Panax, 
Samolus,  and  Calystegia,  are  below  the  average  in  size. 


74  AGE  AND  AREA  [pt.  i 

Or,  lastly,  one  may  take  the  endemics  of  New  Zealand  and 
the  outlying  islands,  and  make  predictions  about  them.  We 
have  just  seen  that  on  the  whole,  each  in  its  own  circle,  the 
larger  families  and  genera  of  a  country  will  be  the  older  in  that 
country.  Now  endemic  species,  by  hypothesis,  occupying  small 
areas,  will  be  on  the  whole  younger  than  the  wides,  as  already 
pointed  out,  and  one  will  therefore  expect  the  older  families, 
which  have  had  the  longest  time  in  the  country,  to  produce  the 
most  endemics.  That  is  to  say,  that  the  endemics  should  belong 
to  the  largest  families  in  the  country,  working  in  averages.  The 
same  rule  should  of  course  apply  to  the  genera.  If  now  we  test 
this  on  New  Zealand  and  its  surrounding  islands,  we  find  that 
in  New  Zealand  and  its  outlying  islands  there  are  22  families 
above  the  average  size,  with  1100  species,  of  which  890  are 
endemic  to  New  Zealand  or  the  islands,  or  80  per  cent.;  there 
are  69  families  below  the  average,  with  292  species,  of  which 
only  110  are  endemic,  or  37  per  cent.,  an  enormous  difference. 
In  Stewart  Island,  all  the  19  local  endemics  belong  to  the  15 
largest  families  of  New  Zealand,  and  10  of  them  to  the  three 
largest  families  in  Stewart,  and  the  same  thing  holds  for  the 
local  endemics  of  the  other  outlying  islands. 

In  the  same  way,  one  finds  that  the  (local)  endemics  of  the 
Kermadecs,  Lord  Howe  Island,  and  Norfolk  Island,  all  islands 
which  must  have  lain  more  or  less  in  the  track  of  the  invasions 
of  New  Zealand  by  plants  from  the  north,  belong  chiefly  to 
those  families  and  genera  of  their  floras  which  have  also  reached 
New  Zealand,  i.e.  to  the  oldest  families  and  genera  contained 
in  them. 

On  the  supposition,  which  follows  from  Age  and  Area,  that 
the  wides  have  given  rise  to  the  endemics  (p.  61),  one  will  expect 
most  endemics  to  occur  in  those  regions  where  there  are  most 
wides,  and  not,  as  on  the  theory  of  dying  out  of  endemics  would 
rather  be  the  case,  in  those  regions  where  there  are  fewest 
wides.  In  fact,  this  is  at  once  seen  to  be  the  case,  whether  in 
New  Zealand,  its  outlying  islands,  or  in  Ceylon  or  elsewhere. 

Age  and  Area  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  hypothesis  by  whose  use 
one  may  discover  great  numbers  of  new  facts,  and  as  so  far  all 
the  predictions  made  by  its  aid  have  proved  to  be  correct,  on 
verification,  the  result  is  to  afford  great  support  to  the  hypo- 
thesis itself.  Over  90  such  predictions  as  those  mentioned  above 
have  now  been  made  and  verified,  and  one  may,  one  is  inclined 
to  think,  regard  the  hypothesis,  in  the  absence  of  any  rival 


ch.  vn]       CONFIRMATION  BY  PREDICTION 


75 


explanation,  as  sound.  The  question  now  is  to  bring  it  into 
accord  with  other  views,  theories,  and  facts,  which  often  con- 
flict with  it,  or  apparently  so. 

Summary 

This  chapter  is  devoted  to  a  few  instances  of  the  very  suc- 
cessful way  in  which  Age  and  Area  can  be  used  to  make  pre- 
dictions about  distribution.  For  example,  it  was  predicted — and 
verified — that  the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  would  have 
a  flora  which  was  very  old  in  New  Zealand,  and  therefore  very 
widespread  there.  In  fact  it  was  found  that  on  the  average  its 
species  ranged  nearly  300  miles  more  in  New  Zealand  than  did 
those  that  did  not  reach  the  islands.  Further,  those  endemic 
forms  that  reached  the  islands  were  found  to  be  more  widespread 
in  New  Zealand  than  the  species  of  its  flora  that  reached  Aus- 
tralia, etc.,  but  did  not  reach  the  islands — a  result  only  explicable 
by  aid  of  Age  and  Area.  Parallel  results  were  obtained  by  a 
study  of  the  floras  of  various  islands  off  the  British  coast,  from 
the  Orkneys  to  the  Scillies. 

The  reservations  already  laid  down,  that  Age  and  Area  must 
only  be  applied  to  groups  of  at  least  ten  species,  and  to  groups 
of  allied  species,  are  then  once  more  insisted  upon. 

The  successful  prediction  that  as,  on  the  whole,  the  larger 
families  and  genera  in  a  country  will  be  the  older,  therefore  the 
flora  of  the  outlying  islands  will  be  chiefly  composed  of  these,  is 
then  described.  Other  predictions  indicate  that  the  farther  out 
one  goes  the  greater  will  be  the  proportion  of  wides,  that  the 
outlying  islands  will  have  much  in  common,  especially  of  large 
genera  in  large  families,  that  the  endemics,  both  of  New  Zealand 
and  the  outlying  islands,  will  belong  mainly  to  large  families 
and  genera,  and  that  most  endemics  will  occur  where  there  are 
most  wides.  All  these  predictions  proved  successful,  and  as  this 
method  has  now  been  used  over  ninety  times  with  no  failures,  it 
is  evident  that  Age  and  Area  has  strong  foundations  on  which 
to  rest. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


AGE  AND  AREA  (contd.).  INVASIONS 

The  acceptance  of  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area  involves 
various  changes  in  our  way  of  looking  at  many  problems  of 
geographical  distribution,  and  of  other  branches  of  Botany,  and 
we  must  go  on  to  further  illustrate  its  (published)  implications 
and  possibilities.  The  facts  upon  which  it  is  based,  as  illustrated 
by  the  preceding  two  chapters,  are  so  clear  and  so  definite  that 
they  cannot  go  without  an  explanation ;  either  one  must  accept 
Age  and  Area,  or  one  must  find  some  other  explanation  for  them 
— a  thing  that  no  one  has  yet  attempted. 

If  the  distribution  of  plants  about  the  world  has  been  very 
largely  the  result  of  their  age,  it  is  clear  that  it  should  be  com- 
paratively easy  to  make  predictions  about  it,  as  has  already 
been  shown.  The  very  first  prediction  I  employed  (127)  was  the 
following,  which  will  serve  as  a  text  for  this  chapter : 


O  100  200  5O0  ^OC  5<>0  600  700  800  QOO 


Let  W  be  a  species  arriving  at  the  centre  of  New  Zealand  from 
abroad,  and  following  the  rule  exactly  in  its  dispersal  (there  is 
reason  to  suppose  that  it  would  not  do  so  unless  the  direction  were 
east  and  west,  not  north  and  south  as  in  New  Zealand ;  but  this 
does  not  affect  the  prediction).  Such  exactness  probably  never 


pt.  i,  ch.  viii]  AGE  AND  AREA.  INVASIONS 


77 


occurs  in  real  life,  but  by  taking  groups  of  ten  allied  species  one 
may  cancel  out  many  of  the  effects  of  chance  differences.  This 
dispersal  is  indicated  by  drawing  a  right-angled  triangle,  which 
expands  regularly  till  after  a  certain  time  it  reaches  both  ends 
of  New  Zealand.  As  it  does  so,  and  covers  more  country,  W  is 
supposed  to  give  rise  casually  to  new  species  (shown  at  every 
increase  of  200  miles  of  range,  their  locations  of  origin  obtained 
by  drawing  numbers  at  random).  These  new  species,  El  to  10, 
spread  like  the  parent,  as  is  shown  by  the  similar  triangles,  so 
that  when  W  reaches  0  and  1000,  E  1  reaches  120  and  9?0. 

If  now  we  divide  New  Zealand  into  ten  zones  by  drawing  a 
vertical  line  at  every  100  miles,  and  count  in  every  zone  the 
number  of  endemics  found  there  (derived  directly  or  indirectly 
from  W),  we  find  the  number  small  at  each  end,  and  with  a 
maximum  (or  at  times  two  or  more)  near  the  middle.  In  the 
present  case,  for  instance,  the  numbers  in  each  of  the  zones  from 
left  to  right  are:  0,  3,  5,  8,  9,  8,  7,  3,  2,  2. 

If  we  obliterate  the  left-hand  half  of  the  diagram,  we  get  the 
result  of  entrance  of  W  at  one  end  of  New  Zealand,  and  find  the 
maximum  near  that  end;  it  always  tends  to  be  near  the  point 
of  entry.  If  the  entrance  be  not  at  a  point,  but  at  a  zone,  e.g. 
from  300  to  700  miles,  at  the  level  of  E  2  and  3,  then,  if  one 
omit  E  1,  2,  and  3,  one  finds  that  the  remainder  give  the  figures : 
0,  1,  3,  5,  6,  5,  4,  1,  0,  0,  a  similar  but  shorter  curve. 

Occasionally,  with  a  casual  development  of  new  endemic 
species,  it  so  happens  that  the  curve  may  show  two,  or  even 
more,  maxima  with  a  slight  drop  between  them,  but  to  have  one 
maximum  only  is  the  general  rule. 

One  might  therefore  predict  that  one  would  find  the  endemic 
species  of  any  genus  in  New  Zealand  to  form  such  a  curve,  and 
this  proved  to  be  the  case  for  every  genus  in  the  flora.  A  few 
examples  are  here  given: 

Zone  in  miles 


0 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

900 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

900 

1000 

Ranunculus 

2 

3 

5 

7 

11 

12 

18 

18 

10 

Drimys 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

Pittosporum 

11 

11 

11 

11 

8 

7 

6 

6 

5 

5 

Colobanthus 

2 

3 

3 

4 

2 

Coprosma 

12 

12 

15 

16 

17 

18 

18 

16 

15 

12 

Metrosideros 

8 

8 

8 

8 

5 

6 

6 

2 

1 

1 

Ligusticum 

1 

1 

1 

2 

7 

8 

9 

7 

6 

Veronica 

6 

6 

10 

14 

15 

39 

41 

43 

38 

26 

Utricularia 

3 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Pimelea 

4 

4 

5 

5 

7 

8 

8 

6 

5 

4 

78 


AGE  AND  AREA 


These  curves  show  many  things.  The  first  point  that  appears 
from  their  study  is  that  the  maxima  are  not  casually  scattered 
all  over  New  Zealand,  but  occur  in  masses  at  particular  regions, 
e.g.  chiefly  at  the  far  north,  at  a  little  south  of  the  middle  of  the 


Soundings  in  the  New  Zealand  area.  Numbers  inserted  here  and  there 
give  the  depth  in  fathoms  at  those  points.    (From  the  Annals  of  Botany.) 

 100  fathoms.   1000  fathoms. 


South  Island,  and  at  the  north  end  of  the  same  island.  These 
last  two  groups  are  so  close  to  one  another  that  they  are  some- 
what confused  together.  Of  the  examples  given  above,  Pitto- 
sporum  and  Metrosideros  have  northern,  Ranunculus  and  Vero- 
nica southern,  and  Drimys  and  Coprosma  central  maxima. 


CH.  VIIl] 


INVASIONS 


79 


These  are  bare  and  unvarnished  facts,  and  though  found  by 
aid  of  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area  do  not  depend  upon  it  in 
any  way,  but  may  be  examined  upon  their  own  merits.  It  is 
clear  from  them  that  the  previous  distributional  history  of  these 
groups  of  genera  must  have  been  quite  different,  and  it  would 
seem  to  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  present  flora  of  New 
Zealand  has  been  the  result  of  at  least  three  distinct  invasions 
of  plants  from  elsewhere,  which  probably  had  their  centres  at 
the  points,  north,  south,  and  central,  where  the  masses  of 
maxima  occur. 

This  is  confirmed  by  examination  of  the  actual  genera,  for  the 
northern  group  is  composed  of  families  characteristic  of  Indo- 


Endemics 
Wides 


-100  -  200    -300    -  400    -  500    -  600   -  700     -800    -  900    -1000  -1080 


Malaya,  probably  indicating  an  invasion  thence,  the  southern 
group  belongs  to  Ranunculaceae,  Umbelliferae,  and  other 
families  prominent  in  the  northern  hemisphere  (the  only  ex- 
ceptions being  Stylidiaceae  and  Centrolepidaceae,  both  southern 
families),  and  the  central  group  to  Stackhousiaceae,  Campanu- 
laceae,  Violaceae,  etc.,  which  may  perhaps  have  come  from 
Australia. 

If  now  one  add  together  all  the  species  of  the  genera  of  the 
northern  invasion  that  occur  at  each  zone  of  100  miles  from 
north  to  south  in  New  Zealand  (including  Stewart  Island),  one 
obtains  the  curves  shown  above,  from  which  one  may  perhaps 
infer  that  the  invasion  was  at  about  0-300  miles  from  North 
Cape.  The  two  curves  fall  off  very  steadily  towards  the  south, 


80  AGE  AND  AREA  [pt.  i 

but  that  for  endemics  much  more  rapidly  than  that  for  wides, 
the  maximum  in  each  case  being  at  about  the  same  spot,  and 


10 


-100  -  200   -300    -  400  -  500    -600    -  700   -  800  -  900  -1000  -1080 


CH.  VIIl] 


INVASIONS 


81 


the  minimum  at  the  same.  The  more  rapid  fall  of  the  endemic 
curve  is  to  be  attributed  (on  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area) 
to  the  fact  that  they  are  in  general  younger,  and  so  have  not 
had  time  to  spread  so  far. 

Treating  the  southern  invasion  in  the  same  way,  one  obtains 
the  curves  on  p.  80,  showing  both  endemics  and  wides  falling 
off  towards  the  north.  The  latter  are  shown  with  a  double  curve ; 
the  upper  shows  the  grand  total  of  wides,  but  many  begin  at 
the  north  and  do  not  occur  in  the  far  south,  showing  that  they 
probably  really  belong  to  the  northern  invasion.  Subtracting 
these  gives  the  lower  curve,  and  the  diminishing  distance  be- 
tween these  two  curves  shows  the  way  in  which  these  species 
diminish  southwards.  The  endemics,  being  more  numerous,  are 
split  into  two  curves,  one  endemic  to  New  Zealand  only,  one 
endemic  to  New  Zealand  and  the  outlying  islands  (Kermadecs, 
Chathams,  Aucklands). 

These  curves  provide  a  very  formidable  argument  against  the 
supposition  that  endemics  are  dying  out,  for  if  so,  why  does 
their  number  show  its  maximum  with  that  of  the  wides,  and 
fall  off  to  a  minimum  at  the  same  point  with  the  latter? 

They  also  illustrate  various  other  points.  For  example,  from 
the  much  steeper  curves  of  the  southern  invasion,  one  may 
probably  infer  that  it  was  much  younger  than  the  northern, 
both  wides  and  endemics  having  had  less  time  to  spread  widely 
in  New  Zealand.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  both  northern 
curves,  and  that  for  southern  wides,  show  no  break  of  any  kind 
between  500  and  600,  where  Cook's  Strait  lies,  while  that  for 
southern  endemics  shows  a  marked  drop  there,  indicating  that 
when  this  group  (the  youngest  of  all,  by  hypothesis)  came  along, 
the  strait  was  at  any  rate  beginning  to  be  formed.  The  same 
feature  shows  in  a  much  more  marked  way  at  Foveaux  Strait, 
between  the  last  two  figures  in  the  curves;  even  the  northern 
"wides"  show  a  drop  here,  and  the  southern  endemics  an  enor- 
mous one. 

The  greater  age  of  the  northern  invasion  may  also  be  inferred 
from  the  fact  that  in  it  the  number  of  the  endemics  at  any  zone 
is  always  at  least  twice  as  great  as  that  of  the  wides,  while  in 
the  southern  invasion  the  curve  for  endemics  goes  below  that 
for  wides  at  both  ends,  or  adding  the  endemics  of  islands,  below 
that  for  wides  at  the  northern  end. 

The  greater  youth  of  the  southern  invasion  is  also  emphasised 
by  the  fact  that  it  is  composed  to  the  extent  of  83  per  cent,  of 


w.  A. 


6 


82 


AGE  AND  AREA 


herbs,  while  the  northern  has  84  per  cent,  of  trees  and  shrubs, 
and,  as  we  have  pointed  out  above,  the  latter  will  be  likely  to 
spread  with  vastly  greater  slowness.  The  average  areas  occupied 
by  the  species  of  the  two  invasions  are  much  the  same. 

I  am  informed  by  the  well-known  palaeobotanist,  Mrs  Clement 
Reid,  that  geology  gives  evidence  that  invasions  follow  directions 
which  offer  stability  of  climatic  conditions  to  their  members; 
polewards  wrhen  climates  are  warming,  equatorwards  when 
cooling.  One  feels  inclined  to  infer,  therefore,  that  at  the  time 
of  the  northern  invasion  New  Zealand  was  warm  in  the  south, 
whilst  the  Antarctic  land  was  habitable  to  the  northern  types 
of  plants  that  largely  compose  the  southern  invasion,  and  which 
perhaps  reached  Antarctica  by  way  of  the  Andes,  as  most  of 
them  occur  in  that  chain.  Then  as  the  south  cooled,  the  southern 
invasion  perhaps  entered  New  Zealand,  working  northwards.  It 
is  very  noticeable  in  the  curves  for  this  invasion  that  they  fall 
off  much  more  gradually  to  the  north  than  to  the  south. 

Yet  other  probabilities  may  be  deduced  from  the  figures  and 
curves  given.  The  curve  in  the  southern  invasion  for  endemics 
that  reach  the  outlying  islands  is  flatter  even  than  the  curve 
for  wides,  showing  that  they  are  probably  older  than  the  average 
for  wides,  as  we  have  shown  above  (p.  69).  But  if  we  split  the 
curve  for  wides  in  the  same  way,  into'two,  that  for  the  wides 
that  reach  these  islands  proves  to  be  even  flatter  than  that  for 
the  endemics  which  do  so,  as  we  should  expect  by  hypothesis. 

From  the  diagram  given  at  the  commencement  of  this  chapter, 
one  may  deduce  that  the  average  range  of  endemic  species  that 
occur  in  the  outer  zones  of  New  Zealand  will  be  greater  than 
that  of  those  that  occur  in  the  centre,  for  obviously  those  of 
short  range  will  be  mainly  concentrated  towards  the  middle. 
Examination  of  the  actual  figures  for  the  southern  invasion 
shows  that  this  is  very  strikingly  the  case,  the  average  range  of 
all  the  endemics  occurring  in  the  northern  half  of  the  South 
Island  being  about  a  third  of  that  of  those  occurring  to  the 
south.  Not  only  so,  but  they  belong  in  much  greater  proportion 
to  the  smaller  genera  of  New  Zealand,  i.e.  by  hypothesis  (p.  71) 
the  younger.  The  long-ranging  endemics  of  the  outer  zones  be- 
long mainly  to  large  genera  (of  the  New  Zealand  flora). 

It  is  clear  that  Age  and  Area  can  be  used  with  considerable 
directness  in  the  study  of  the  invasions  by  which  a  country  has 
received  its  present  population  of  plants. 


CH.  VIIl] 


INVASIONS 


83 


Summary 

The  application  of  the  hypothesis  to  a  study  of  the  way  in 
which  a  country  has  been  peopled  by  invasions  of  plants  is 
illustrated  by  the  case  of  New  Zealand.  If  a  species  enter  the 
country  and  give  rise  casually  to  new  (endemic)  species,  then, 
if  the  country  be  divided  into  equal  zones,  it  will  generally  occur 
that  the  endemic  species  occupy  the  zones  in  numbers  increasing 
from  the  outer  margins  to  some  point  near  the  centre  at  which 
the  parent  entered.  Applying  this  prediction  to  New  Zealand 
it  was  found  that  all  the  genera  in  the  flora  showed  figures  of 
this  type.  Further,  it  was  noticed  that  the  points  at  which  the 
maxima  occurred  were  not  scattered  casually  all  over  the  coun- 
try, but  tended  to  mass  together  in  three  places — northern, 
southern,  and  central.  The  most  reasonable  explanation  of  this 
is  that  these  points  represent  the  centres  of  corresponding  inva- 
sions. Curves  are  given  showing  the  way  in  which  both  wides 
and  endemics  fall  off,  from  the  centres  of  the  invasions,  the  latter 
much  the  more  rapidly.  As  the  curves  of  the  southern  invasion 
are  much  more  steep  than  those  of  the  northern,  one  may  perhaps 
infer  that  the  latter  was  much  the  older  (perhaps  even  a  geo- 
logical period  older),  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  it 
consists  mainly  of  trees,  while  the  southern  is  composed  chiefly 
of  herbs,  and  also  by  other  considerations.  It  is  clear  that  Age 
and  Area  can  be  applied  with  effect  in  the  study  of  the  peopling 
of  a  country  with  plants. 


6—2 


CHAPTER  IX 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 

Very  many  objections  and  criticisms  have  already  been  pub- 
lished, and  many  more  are  doubtless  to  follow.  A  consideration 
of  them,  however,  shows  that  in  general  they  are  based  upon  a 
few  general  principles,  and  that  a  proper  understanding  of  Age 
and  Area,  and  of  the  provisos  with  which  it  is  hedged  round, 
will  go  far  to  remove  the  most  of  them. 

The  first  few,  (1)  that  the  numerical  results  are  accidental, 
(2)  that  the  figures  are  not  reliable,  and  will  be  vitiated  by 
further  work,  and  (3)  that  the  figures  can  be  accounted  for  by 
changes  in  climate  and  configuration  of  the  countries  concerned, 
require  no  discussion  at  the  stage  which  Age  and  Area  has  now 
reached.  Far  too  many  facts  have  been  accumulated  from  too 
many  places,  to  leave  room  for  them  to  be  seriously  advanced. 

Another,  (4)  that  the  hypothesis  is  an  assumption,  has  really 
little  bearing  upon  the  matter.  Natural  Selection,  and  many 
other  fruitful  hypotheses,  are  also  assumptions,  and  Age  and 
Area  has  already  led  to  new  discovery. 

Some  writers  show  a  confusion  of  thought  between  (5)  en- 
demism  and  endemic  species.  The  former,  if  it  occur  in  a  country, 
is  a  sign  of  age,  for  time  must  be  allowed  for  it  to  appear;  but 
the  endemic  species  are  in  general  the  youngest  in  the  country, 
in  their  own  groups  of  affinity. 

Some  say  (6)  that  the  wide  dispersal  of  the  wides  is  due  to 
their  wide  dispersal  outside  the  country,  but  give  no  reason  for 
this.  It  utterly  fails,  however,  to  explain  the  graduated  dis- 
tribution of  the  wides,  those  that  occur  farthest  away  showing 
(on  the  average)  the  maximum  local  dispersal  (cf.  the  Ceylon- 
Peninsular-Indian  species  with  the  wides  of  greater  range,  or 
the  species  that  reach  the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  with 
those  that  do  not).  To  explain  such  cases  the  most  improbable 
supplementary  hypotheses  have  to  be  adduced  (126,  p.  16). 

A  number  of  objections  arise  from  the  attempt  to  apply  Age 
and  Area  to  individual  cases;  such  are  (7)  that  there  are  many 
exceptions — species  whose  area  does  not  at  all  represent  their 
age,  and  the  like,  (8)  that  species  may  die  out  or  be  killed  out  in 
part  of  their  area,  (9)  that  one  cannot  properly  compare  a  single 


pt.  i5  ch.  ix]   OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS  85 


species  to  its  nearest  relative,  (10)  that  a  species  may  owe  its 
wide  range  to  being  part  of  a  wide-ranging  association  of  plants, 
(11)  that  a  species  that  occurs  in  a  greater  number  of  associations 
must  have  taken  longer  to  spread  than  one  that  only  occurs  in 
one,  (12)  that  climate  produces  great  effects  upon  the  distribu- 
tion of  a  species,  (13)  that  altitude  does  the  same,  (14)  that 
latitude  also  does  the  same,  (15)  that  of  two  species  with  equal 
latitudinal  range  the  one  with  the  greater  altitudinal  range  will 
be  the  older,  and  so  on. 

It  has,  I  hope,  been  made  clear  above  that  the  distribution  of 
any  one  species  depends  upon  very  many  factors — method  of 
dispersal,  acclimatisation,  suitability  to  the  society  of  plants  in 
which  it  may  find  itself,  local  adaptation,  barriers  of  all  kinds, 
whether  physical,  climatic  or  ecological,  individual  habit  of  the 
species  itself,  and  so  on,  as  well  as  upon  mere  age.  With  so  many 
factors  active,  it  is  clear  that  probably  in  no  single  case  does 
age  alone  determine  the  area  upon  which  a  species  occurs.  In 
exactly  the  same  way,  when  a  baby  is  born,  it  is  very  rarely 
possible  to  say  of  what  complaint  that  baby  will  ultimately  die, 
yet  if  one  take  a  large  number  of  babies,  living  in  the  same  coun- 
try, one  can  say  that  just  so  many  will  be  accidentally  killed,  so 
many  will  die  of  tuberculosis,  and  so  on.  In  India  one  can  say 
that  just  about  so  many  deaths  from  snake-bite  will  occur  in 
a  year;  and  there  are  many  other  similar  cases  of  reasoning  upon 
large  numbers,  where  in  the  large  figure  and  the  long  run  the 
result  is  certain,  yet  cannot  be  predicted  for  the  individual. 
And  the  same  is  the  case  for  Age  and  Area,  and  such  objections 
as  just  quoted  have  really  no  bearing  upon  its  validity  or  other- 
wise. 

When  one  takes  groups  of  ten  allies,  and  compares  them  with 
other  related  groups  of  ten  allies,  for  instance,  ten  Mimosas  with 
ten  Ingas — nearly  related  genera  in  the  same  family,  living  under 
much  the  same  conditions — the  effects  of  age  will  show  clearly, 
because  all  the  other  factors  in  dispersal  will  either  be  pulling 
the  same  way  upon  all,  or  will  cancel  one  another  out  by  pulling 
in  different  directions.  Ten  herbaceous  Compositae  may  occupy 
an  area  X,  and  ten  woody  Dipterocarpaceae  may  occupy  the 
same  area  X,  but  the  two  are  not  comparable.  In  the  former 
case,  the  herbaceous  habit  implies  many  more  generations  in  a 
given  time,  and  therefore  many  more  opportunities  of  dispersal ; 
the  parachute  mechanism  of  the  seed-dispersal  enables  it  to 
travel  better;  the  fact  that  herbs  of  this  kind  grow  in  the  open 


86 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [ft.  r 


also  enables  dispersal  to  be  more  rapid,  and  so  on.  The  two  cases 
are  quite  incomparable.  But  if  the  ten  Compositae  be  compared 
with  ten  other  nearly  allied  Compositae,  then  the  effects  of  the 
"other"  factors  will  be  much  the  same,  and  age,  which  is  always 
pulling  alike  upon  all  species,  will  show  its  effects  clearly.  The 
greater  the  number  of  allied  forms  taken,  and  the  greater  the 
length  of  time  considered,  the  more  clearly  will  the  effects  of 
age  show. 

Other  objections  come  under  the  head  of  comparison  of  un- 
allied  forms.  For  example,  it  has  been  objected  (16)  that  herbs 
must  be  older  than  trees,  because  they  occupy  greater  areas, 
but  that  all  probability  is  against  this,  (17)  that  Age  and  Area 
shows  that  new  species  must  have  been  formed  more  rapidly 
among  trees  (because  there  are  more  of  them  among  the  endemic 
forms),  and  that  this  also  is  against  probability,  (18)  that  local 
endemics  are  usually  unrelated  to  the  wides  that  grow  beside 
them,  and  are  often  very  unlike  them,  and  so  on.  What  has  just 
been  said  about  comparing  groups  of  allied  forms  only  really 
covers  most  of  these,  and  a  reference  to  such  works  as  Hooker's 
Flora  of  Nexv  Zealand,  or  other  systematic  works,  will  show  that 
a  great  deal  too  much  has  been  made  of  the  supposed  differences 
between  the  endemics  and  the  wides  that  accompany  them.  In 
the  great  majority  of  cases  the  two  are  allied,  and  if  they  were 
unrelated,  it  would  be  a  very  remarkable  thing  that  they  should 
show  the  numerical  relationships  that  we  have  seen  to  exist. 
There  are  a  considerable  number  of  endemic  forms,  especially 
within  the  range  of  the  last  glacial  period,  for  example  in 
temperate  North  America,  which  are  not  related  to  the  wides 
beside  them,  but  when  groups  of  tens  are  taken,  these  are  quite 
lost  in  the  crowd,  or  in  some  cases  can  not  find  a  crowd  to  which 
they  can  be  attached.  There  are,  however,  at  most  about  400 
such  cases  in  North  America1,  and  the  endemics  of  most  of  the 
world,  especially  the  countries  south  of  the  Tropic  of  Cancer, 
are  to  be  counted  by  tens  of  thousands.  Only  very  rarely,  again, 
will  one  find  a  group  of  ten  allied  herbs,  with  a  group  of  ten 
allied  trees  closely  related  to  it.  In  such  a  case,  which  will  very 

1  Sinnott  (95)  instances  as  endemics  of  this  class  Carya,  Planera,  Madura, 
Garrya,  Sassafras,  Xanthorhiza,  Baptisia,  Nemopanthus,  Ceanothus,  Dirca, 
Dionaea,  Hudsonia,  Rhexia,  Ptelea,  Decodon,  Houstonia,  Symphoricarpus, 
etc.,  pointing  out  that  many  occur  as  fossils  in  the  Old  World,  and  that  they 
include  most  of  the  woody  endemics  of  north  temperate  America.  In 
dealing  with  such,  one  must,  as  already  pointed  out,  include  the  "fossil" 
area,  and  in  any  case  they  are  lost  in  the  crowd  when  not  considered  singly. 


ch.  ix]     OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


87 


seldom  occur,  comparisons  on  the  basis  of  age  will  be  impossible. 
But  a  group  of  mixed  trees  and  herbs  may  be  compared  with 
another  allied  group  of  the  same  general  composition. 

These  considerations  also  dispose  to  a  large  extent  of  the 
objection  (19)  that  age  is  only  one  factor  of  manj^,  and  (20)  that 
enough  is  not  allowed  for  the  action  of  other  factors.  Age  is,  as 
has  been  pointed  out  above,  only  one  factor,  but  it  is  a  factor 
whose  action  can  be  shown  in  figures  which  no  one  as  yet  has 
been  able — has  even  indeed  attempted — to  explain  upon  any 
other  supposition.  If  one  were  dealing  with  individual  species, 
one  would  have  to  allow  for  each  individual  factor,  and  could 
never,  or  very  rarely,  be  in  a  position  to  say  how  much  was  due 
to  this,  and  how  much  to  that.  No  one  has  yet  been  able  to 
reduce  to  figures  the  effects  of  any  of  these  factors,  and  their 
action  is  still  accepted  upon  a  priori  considerations.  The  effect 
of  my  work  is  to  disentangle  from  among  them  the  effect  of 
age,  and  to  show  that  it  is  very  considerable  indeed;  and  this 
should  of  itself  make  much  easier  the  study  of  the  effects  of  the 
many  other  factors  that  take  part  in  the  dispersal  of  a  species 
about  the  globe. 

The  next  group  of  objections  is  to  the  general  effect  (21)  that 
endemic  forms,  whether  species  or  genera,  are  local  adaptations, 
suited  expressly  to  the  spots  in  which  they  occur.  In  one  sense 
this  objection  is  a  truism,  for  if  a  species  or  genus  were  not  suited 
to  the  spot  where  it  occurred,  it  would  die  out  there,  so  that  if 
it  were  endemic  to  a  very  small  locality,  it  might  easily  dis- 
appear from  the  earth.  But  the  general  explanatory  idea  which 
lies  behind  this  objection  is  very  hardly  pressed  when  it  comes 
to  explaining  such  a  series  of  species,  arranged  in  "wheels 
within  wheels,"  as  those  of  Ranunculus  in  New  Zealand  (p.  156), 
or  Doona  in  Ceylon  (p.  153),  and  breaks  down  altogether  when 
it  is  once  realised  that  endemic  species  and  genera,  as  will  be 
more  fully  shown  below,  represent  only  a  special  case  of  species 
and  genera  in  general.  It  is  not  possible  to  explain  upon  any 
theory  of  adaptability  the  varying  areas  occupied,  and  occupied 
in  a  way  that  can  be  reduced  to  statistics  which  agree  for  each 
family  and  area.  One  cannot  suggest  conditions  that  will  overlap 
like  the  rings  in  a  shirt  of  chain  mail,  as  do  the  genera  and 
species  (p.  56).  Nor  will  this  view  explain  the  increase  of 
endemism  as  one  goes  southwards,  or  outwards  from  the  con- 
tinental areas.  Nor  will  it  enable  us  to  do  any  prediction  about 
geographical  distribution  whatever,  though  Age  and  Area  has 


88 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [pt.  i 


already  been  successfully  used  in  this  way  nearly  a  hundred 
times.  Nor,  again,  can  it  explain  such  cases  as  Castelnavia,  with 
seven  species  in  an  area  where  there  are  no  differences  in  con- 
ditions (126,  p.  15).  Above  all,  it  will  not  explain  the  mechanical 
way  in  which  every  group  of  species  behaves  like  every  other, 
as  has  been  pointed  out  above. 

The  next  group  of  objections  takes  the  general  position  that 
endemics  are  mostly  the  relics  of  pre-existing  floras ;  the  first  is 
(22)  that  endemics  are  usually  relicts  in  the  sense  of  species  that 
are  dying  out;  that  they  are  old  species  driven  into  quiet  nooks 
or  odd  corners;  the  most  recent  statement  to  this  effect  is  that 

Very  many  endemics  owe  their  limited  distribution  to  the  cir- 
cumstance that  they  are  remnants  of  comparatively  unsuccessful 
types  which  have  been  exterminated  elsewhere,  and  which  even 
in  these  isolated  floras  are  waging  a  losing  fight  against  more 
vigorous  and  adaptable  newcomers. 

This  is  undoubtedly  true  of  a  great  number  here  and  there 
especially  in  the  north  temperate  zone  (particularly  North  America 
and  China),  where  the  influence  of  the  last  glacial  period  was 
severely  felt,  and  so  far  as  the  first  part  of  the  sentence  (to 
"elsewhere")  is  concerned.  We  know  from  geological  evidence 
that  in  the  Canaries  and  Madeira  there  are  many  generic  sur- 
vivals of  the  Tertiary  flora  now  extinct  in  Europe  itself,  but  we 
have  no  proof  that  they  are  dying  out  there  without  change  of 
conditions.  Age  and  Area  has  always  insisted  upon  the  reserva- 
tion "so  long  as  conditions  remain  reasonably  constant,"  though 
critics  and  opponents  frequently  ignore  this.  Guppy  has  re- 
cently (50)  shown  that  the  endemics  of  the  Canaries  which  may 
be  looked  upon  as  Tertiary  relics  occupy  more  space  in  the 
Canaries  than  do  the  more  recent  Mediterranean  type  of  en- 
demics, while  they  also  extend  to  the  Azores  or  Madeira,  which 
the  latter  do  not.  As  these  Tertiary  relics  are  mainly  woody,  the 
conditions  are  naturally  against  them  so  soon  as  man  has  settled 
in  the  country  (cf.  p.  27). 

When  a  species  is  really  dying  out,  the  fact  is  usually  due  to 
some  change  of  conditions;  and,  as  we  have  shown  above,  dis- 
persal is  usually  so  slow  and  to  such  small  distances  that  the 
species  may  easily  be  cut  off  by  the  changing  conditions,  and 
then  gradually  exterminated,  through  no  fault  of  its  own. 
Cupressus  macrocarpa  is  probably  the  most  generally  suitable 
Conifer  for  average  sub-tropical  climates,  and  is  planted  in 
millions  all  over  the  warmer  parts  of  the  world;  yet  it  is  dying 


ch.  ix]      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


89 


out  in  its  only  natural  habitat,  the  Monterey  peninsula  of 
California,  probably  on  account  of  the  secular  drying  of  the 
Californian  climate. 

The  comparative  rarity  of  seriously  broken  areas  of  distribu- 
tion among  endemic  forms,  especially  south  of  the  influence  of 
the  last  glacial  period,  is  much  against  any  very  large  amount  of 
dying  out.  One  would  not  expect  a  moribund  species  to  retain 
its  area  intact — though  it  is  true  that  with  the  Cycads,  often 
supposed  moribund,  this  is  largely  the  case. 

It  is  very  hard  to  suppose  that  a  genus  would  choose  certain 
spots  upon  the  globe  where  its  species  should  die  out  in  large 
numbers,  yet  the  facts  of  distribution  require  that  this  should 
be  so  under  this  explanation.  Why  should  the  Senecios  retire 
to  die,  in  large  numbers,  to  Mexico,  California,  Bolivia,  Peru, 
South  Africa,  Australia,  etc.?  The  larger  the  genus  the  greater 
the  number  of  local  species,  and  the  greater  the  number  of 
places  in  which  they  occur. 

As  this  is  the  principal  argument  brought  forward  by  oppo- 
nents of  Age  and  Area,  it  will  be  well  to  bring  up  other  points. 
If  all  or  most  endemics  are  to  be  regarded  as  relics,  then  they 
must  evidently  be,  on  the  whole,  older  than  the  "wides,"  and 
the  reply  to  another  objection  (23)  that  greater  distribution  may 
be  due  to  youth,  rather  than  age,  may  be  given  at  the  same  time. 

The  great  difficulty  is  to  explain  why,  in  most  countries  remote 
from  the  influence  of  the  last  glacial  period,  the  "dying-out"  is 
purely  mechanical.  Every  family  and  genus  behaves  in  the 
same  way,  whether  it  has  or  has  not  wides,  and  whatever  its 
habit  of  growth,  its  origin  (local  or  foreign),  or  its  distribution 
generally.  The  general  type  of  distribution — in  "wheels  within 
wheels" — is  shown  below  (Chapter  xv)  in  several  maps,  and  not 
even  the  most  determined  upholder  of  a  general  dying-out  can 
interpret  these  maps  into  a  support  for  his  position.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  a  large  number  of  species  and  genera  in  the  north 
temperate  zone  may  be  interpreted  as  dying  out  (cf.  footnote, 
p.  86),  but  they  are  insignificant  in  number  beside  the  endemics 
of  more  southern  regions.  North- temperate  America  has  perhaps 
400,  but  Ceylon  alone  has  800  endemics,  and  Brazil  perhaps 
12,000.  The  latter  country  has  240  endemic  Eugenias  alone. 

A  still  greater  difficulty  for  the  supporters  of  general  dying- 
out  is  td  explain  why  there  should  be  many  more  endemics  at 
the  point  of  death  (VR  in  Ceylon,  for  example)  than  there  are 
a  little  further  removed  from  it  (R),  and  more  of  these  than  of 


90 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [pt.  i 


those  still  further  away  (RR,  RC,  and  C,  in  diminishing  numbers 
as  one  goes  up  the  scale).  This  is  a  general  rule  for  all  endemics 
of  the  tropics  and  the  south,  and  is  impossible  to  explain  on  any 
theory  of  dying  out. 

Yet  another  difficulty,  considered  below  in  Chapter  xv,  is  to 
explain  why  the  endemics  should  belong  in  larger  proportion  to 
the  large  and  "successful"  families  and  genera  than  to  the  small 
and  broken  ones  which  we  have  been  accustomed  to  consider 
moribund. 

Or  again,  why  should  those  genera,  like  Gunnera,  in  which 
there  are  no  wides  at  all,  behave  exactly  like  those  in  which 
there  are  such?  And  why  do  not  the  moribund  species  congre- 
gate in  special  regions,  so  to  speak,  reserved  for  derelicts,  instead 
of  choosing  each  its  own  special  location?  Why  should  many 
Eugenias  in  Ceylon  choose  each  its  own  mountain  upon  which 
to  die? 

To  these  one  may  add  the  following  notes  and  queries,  which 
if  not  successfully  answered,  are  very  fatal  to  the  view  that 
endemics  are  chiefly  relicts : 

(a)  How,  on  the  view  that  endemics  are  relicts,  is  it  possible 
to  predict  what  has  already  been  successfully  predicted  by  the 
aid  of  Age  and  Area? 

(b)  How  are  the  facts  of  the  regular  graduation  of  species,  of 
narrowly  localised  endemics  up,  and  of  wides  down,  to  be  ex- 
plained at  all? 

(c)  Why  is  there  no  difference  in  behaviour  between  endemic 
genera  and  species? 

(d)  Why  does  a  genus  behave  in  just  the  same  way  in  New 
Zealand  (for  example),  whether  endemic  with  small  area,  en- 
demic with  large,  endemic  in  New  Zealand,  endemic  in  New 
Zealand  and  islands,  endemic  in  New  Zealand  and  Australia,  or 
endemic  in  New  Zealand  and  the  rest  of  the  world? 

(e)  Why  are  the  endemics  of  the  same  order  of  rarity  whether 
there  are  or  are  not  wides  in  the  same  genera? 

(/)  Why  should  the  islands  round  New  Zealand  have  more 
endemics  the  more  wides  they  have  (129,  p.  332)? 

(g)  Why  are  the  endemics  of  New  Zealand  least  numerous  at 
the  ends  of  the  islands  and  not  in  the  middle,  and  the  wides  the 
same  (128,  p.  201)? 

(h)  Why  do  the  endemics  that  reach  the  ends  of  New  Zealand 
range  on  the  average  so  much  farther  than  those  in  the  middle 
(127,  p.  448)? 


ch.  ix]      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


91 


(k)  Why  are  the  endemics  still  less  numerous  in  proportion 
on  the  islands  surrounding  New  Zealand  than  on  New  Zealand 
itself,  and  the  wides  more  numerous?  (N.Z.  Wides/Endemics 
301/902,  Kermadecs  45/25,  Chathams  69/76,  Aucklands  27/72.) 

(I)  Why  do  the  endemics  of  both  northern  and  southern  inva- 
sions of  New  Zealand  taper  down  in  number  with  the  wides,  but 
much  more  rapidly,  so  that  in  the  case  of  the  southern  forms 
they  are  actually  less  numerous  than  the  wides  in  some  zones? 

(m)  Why,  if  endemics  are  being  driven  in  by  the  wides,  do 
their  areas  almost  invariably  overlap  and  why  are  there  prac- 
tically no  broken  areas  among  them? 

(n)  Why  do  the  Ceylon-Peninsular-Indian  species  show  a 
range  on  the  average  intermediate  between  the  Ceylon  endemics 
and  the  wides? 

(o)  Why  are  the  species  endemic  to  New  Zealand  and  the 
islands  so  common  in  New  Zealand,  more  so  than  the  average  of 
the  wides  in  that  country  (129,  p.  331),  and  why  are  the  wides 
that  also  reach  the  islands  yet  more  common  again? 

(p)  Why  do  endemics  on  the  average  occupy  so  much  larger 
an  area  in  New  Zealand  than  in  Ceylon,  even  proportionately 
to  the  size  of  the  country  (127,  p.  454)? 

(q)  Why  do  fern  endemics,  which  must  on  the  average  be 
older,  show  greater  distribution  areas  than  angiosperm  endemics 
(130,  p.  340)? 

(r)  If  the  wides  are  the  younger,  there  is  no  reason  why  they 
should  be  specially  closely  related  to  the  endemics,  and  why 
should  they  show  the  same  arithmetical  relationships  throughout? 

(s)  Why  do  endemics  and  wides,  in  the  majority  of  cases, 
belong  to  the  same  genera  ? 

(t)  Why  are  the  endemics  so  often  on  mountain-tops  and  why 
do  separate  species  of  endemics  occur  for  different  mountains 
near  together  (121,  p.  132)? 

(u)  Why  do  the  endemics  belong  principally  to  widely  spread 
and  successful  genera,  and  this  even  more  on  very  isolated  islands 
like  the  Chathams?  The  Chatham  endemics  belong  to  Geranium, 
Aciphylla,  Pseudopanax,  Corokia,  Coprosma,  Olearia,  Cotula, 
Senecio,  Sonchus,  Cyathodes,  Myrsine,  Gentiana,  Veronica,  Car  ex, 
Poa,  Festuca.  The  Auckland  -  endemics  belong  to  Ranunculus, 
Stellaria,  Colobanthus,  Geum,  Azorella,  Ligusticum,  Coprosma, 
Olearia,  Celmisia,  Cotula,  Abrotanella,  Gentiana,  Veronica,  Plan- 
tago,  Urtica,  Bulbinella,  Hierochloe,  Deschampsia,  Poa. 

(v)  Why  does  the  maximum  of  the  wides,  in  Ceylon,  New 


92  OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [pt.  i 

Zealand,  etc.,  coincide  with  that  of  the  endemics,  and  both 
decrease  together  from  that  point,  the  endemics  much  the  more 
rapidly? 

Other  formidable  arguments  against  this  view  are  given  below, 
in  Chapters  xv,  xvi  of  Part  II. 

The  hypothesis  of  youth  (within  a  country)  and  area  can  only 
be  accepted  if  one  be  prepared  to  accept  with  it  the  numerous 
absurdities  to  which  it  leads.  In  particular,  it  involves  a  most 
remarkable  amount  of  rising  and  falling  in  the  scale  of  area  of 
distribution,  for  which  we  have  no  warrant.  The  distribution  of 
the  plants  of  the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  (p.  66)  seems 
to  provide  a  very  strong  case  against  it,  for  how  can  youth 
ensure  that  a  species  shall  reach  more  of  these  little  islands? 

"The  families  Tristichaceae  and  Podostemaceae  also  afford  an 
excellent  test  case  for  the  question  of  age  or  youth,  for  owing  to 
their  peculiar  morphology  one  can  say  with  reasonable  approach 
to  certainty  which  are  the  older  forms.  He  would  be  a  bold  man 
who  would  say  that  such  forms  as  Lawia  in  the  one  family,  or 
Castelnavia  in  the  other,  with  their  violently  dorsiventral  struc- 
ture, shown  in  the  lichen-like  vegetative  body  and  the  extra- 
ordinarily modified  flowers,  were  older  than  such  forms  as  Tri- 
sticha  or  Podostemon,  which  are  almost  radially  symmetrical, 
and  come  near  to  the  ordinary  type  of  submerged  water  plant. 
Yet  the  latter  are  widespread  and  almost  universal,  covering 
the  whole  range  of  distribution  of  families,  while  the  violently 
dorsiventral  forms  are  all  endemic  to  comparatively  small  areas, 
Lawia,  for  example,  occurring  from  Ceylon  to  Bombay,  Castel- 
navia in  the  Araguaya  and  one  other  river  in  Brazil.  It  is  im- 
possible to  talk  of  local  adaptation  in  these  plants,  as  I  have 
elsewhere  pointed  out  (124);  there  is  nothing  to  be  adapted  to. 
The  non-dorsi ventral  forms  are  just  as  common  as  the  dorsi- 
ventral, whether  in  slowly  or  in  swiftly  moving  water"  (quota- 
tion from  128). 

Mrs  Arber  (4,  p.  306)  has  brought  up  a  parallel  case  in  the 
genus  Callitriche. 

Some,  while  admitting  that  in  general  endemics  are  not  relicts, 
say  (24)  that  the  endemics  of  mountains,  at  any  rate,  are  usually 
such,  especially  as  the  wides,  not  infrequently,  do  not  ascend  as 
high  as  they  do.  This  latter  fact  is  a  strong  argument  against 
the  explanation  often  given  of  mountain  endemics,  that  they 
have  retreated  upwards  to  escape  the  competition  of  the  wides 
in  the  plains  below,  for  it  would  be  very  remarkable  if  they 


ch.  ix]      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


93 


should  at  once,  so  to  speak,  retreat  as  far  as  possible  beyond 
pursuit. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  species  of  mountain  chains  often 
show  much  less  affinity  to  the  species  of  the  lowlands,  than  do 
the  species  of  islands  to  those  of  their  mainland.  In  some  cases 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  species  of  mountains  are  relics 
of  a  flora  that  once  occupied  the  lowlands,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
many  arctic  species  that  occur  upon  the  mountains  of  the  north 
temperate  zone.  In  other  cases  the  difference  may  be  simply 
due  to  the  fact  that,  as  explained  on  p.  37,  a  mountain  chain 
may  act  as  a  road  for  migration  to  the  plants  of  another  country, 
which  would  not  otherwise  be  able  to  enter  the  country  under 
consideration,  by  reason  of  unfavourable  conditions.  In  the 
mountains  of  Ceylon,  India,  Java,  and  most  tropical  countries, 
one  finds  two  types  of  vegetation  at  least.  There  are  the  more 
northern  types,  such  (in  Ceylon)  as  Thalictrum  or  Heracleum, 
which  may  be  relics  of  a  former  more  northern  type  of  vegetation 
in  the  plains,  though  they  are  more  probably  invaders  by  way 
of  the  mountains;  and  there  are  the  more  numerous  forms  like 
the  Eugenias,  the  Impatiens,  or  the  Memecylons,  which  are  re- 
lated to  those  growing  at  lower  elevations. 

While  it  is  clear  that  many  mountain  endemics  are  relicts,  and 
probably  many  more  are  local  adaptations,  the  former  especially 
within  the  range  of  the  last  glacial  period,  the  evidence  for  relict 
nature  in  the  tropics  and  the  southern  sub-tropics  is  not  suffi- 
ciently clear  to  make  it  safe  to  regard  any  of  them  as  such 
without  some  direct  evidence  in  favour  of  such  a  conclusion. 

Others,  again,  maintain  (25)  that  very  many  endemics  are 
waging  a  losing  fight  against  more  vigorous  and  adaptable  new- 
comers. This  is  no  doubt  the  case  with  many  woody  endemics 
in  North  America,  etc. — genera  which  once  were  widely  spread, 
and  are  now  left  as  representatives  of  a  former  woody  flora  in 
a  land  of  herbaceous  vegetation.  But  to  say  that  this  latter  is 
more  adaptable  seems  rather  stretching  a  point.  Were  its 
members  turned  into  a  forest  they  would  die  out  there  much 
sooner  than  the  woody  endemics  seem  likely  to  do  as  things 
are.  The  dying-out  is  owing  to  change  of  conditions,  which  has 
been  carefully  guarded  against  in  the  statement  of  the  rule  of 
Age  and  Area  given  above. 

Lastly,  it  is  maintained  that  in  general  (26)  endemics  are 
relicts  in  the  more  literal  sense  that  they  are  remains  of  floras 
that  have  disappeared  elsewhere,  in  whole  or  in  part,  but  are 


94 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [pt.  i 


not  necessarily  dying  out.  This  is  a  perfectly  sound  position,  but 
is  not  really  an  objection  to  Age  and  Area,  when  this  is  properly 
understood.  If  a  genus  has  5  species  in  one  region,  and  an 
outlying  species  6  in  another,  and  one  can  produce  geological 
evidence  of  former  connection,  whether  by  living  or  by  extinct 
species,  then  there  is  no  doubt  that  6  is  a  relic  in  the  sense  of 
this  objection.  One  must  simply  take  the  whole  area  covered 
by  1-6  as  the  area  of  the  genus  in  consideration  of  any  matter 
by  Age  and  Area.  This  type  of  relic,  however,  is  really  rather 
uncommon. 

A  more  frequent  type  is  that  so  often  found  in  temperate 
North  America,  where  the  mountain  chains,  running  north  and 
south,  did  not  offer  such  a  barrier  to  the  ice  and  cold  of  the  glacial 
period  as  in  the  Old  World.  -Sinnott  (p.  86,  footnote)  instances 
Carya  and  others,  pointing  out  at  the  same  time  that  many 
occur  as  fossils  in  the  Old  World,  and  that  they  include  most 
of  the  woody  endemics  of  north  temperate  America.  Such  en- 
demics, showing  wide  taxonomic  separation  from  the  rest  of 
their  surrounding  forms,  are,  however,  comparatively  rare,  and 
as  already  pointed  out,  in  dealing  with  them  from  an  Age  and 
Area  point  of  view,  one  must  include  the  "fossil"  area. 

In  the  tropics,  or  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  on  the  other 
hand,  and  even  in  the  north  among  the  herbs,  which  Sinnott 
has  shown  to  be  in  all  probability  very  much  younger  than  the 
trees  and  woody  plants,  and  which  are  probably  mostly  forms 
that  have  spread  there  since  the  glacial  period,  the  endemics 
are  usually  closely  related  to  the  forms  around  them,  whether 
other  endemics  or  "wides."  It  would  be  absurd  to  apply  the 
"relic"  explanation  to  such  a  case  as  Doona  in  Ceylon  (p.  153) 
or  Ranunculus  in  New  Zealand,  and  yet  on  this  supposition 
Ranunculus  in  that  country,  or  at  any  rate  Veronica,  must  be 
considered  as  a  relic,  though  the  vegetation  of  north  temperate 
type  represented  by  Ranunculus,  Veronica,  and  many  other 
genera  is  a  very  marked  feature  in  the  total  vegetation  of  New 
Zealand. 

Another  very  serious  reply  to  this  objection  is  contained  in 
the  fact  that  the  endemics  of  a  country  remote  from  the  effects 
of  the  glacial  period  usually  belong  to  the  large  and  what  have 
usually  been  considered  the  "successful"  genera,  as  has  been 
pointed  out  elsewhere  (Chapter  xv  of  Part  II). 

The  next  objection  (27)  is  based  upon  the  supposed  rapid 
spread  of  introductions,  and  is  urged  to  show  that  dispersal 


ch.  ix]      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


95 


within  a  country,  when  a  species  first  arrives,  is  rapid,  not  slow. 
But  we  have  already  seen  that  the  evidence  of  introductions 
(p.  24)  forms  a  very  broken  reed  upon  which  to  lean.  It  only 
shows  that  the  spread  may  be  rapid  when  the  conditions  have 
been  changed,  and  cannot  be  twisted  into  meaning  that  spread 
is  always  rapid  even  in  such  circumstances.  Even  in  Ceylon  or 
New  Zealand,  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  introductions  have 
spread  rapidly,  although  the  conditions  have  often  been  changed. 
Nowhere  is  there  any  indication  of  a  whole  flora,  or  great  part 
of  it,  spreading  in  this  rapid  way,  whereas  in  the  case  of  an 
island  like  Great  Britain,  near  to  a  continent,  the  local  flora  is 
simply  a  somewhat  reduced  edition  of  that  of  the  continent,  and 
the  flora  of  such  an  island  as  Ireland,  a  little  farther  out  again, 
is  a  reduced  copy  of  that  of  Great  Britain.  One  may  even  go 
further,  and  find  upon  little  islands  off  the  coast  of  Ireland  a 
still  further  reduction  of  the  Irish  flora. 

A  careful  consideration  of  what  has  been  said  in  Chapters  n 
and  v  will  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  in  general  the  dispersal  of 
plants  into  new  areas  must  be  exceedingly  slow,  so  slow  that 
as  a  general  rule  one  will  notice  little  or  no  progress  in  a  lifetime 
of  observation.  One  cannot  regard  this  objection  as  sound. 

An  objection  often  brought  up  is  (28)  that  in  many  places 
characterised  by  the  presence  of  endemic  forms  there  are  many 
genera  composed  of  endemic  species  only.  This  very  striking  fact 
has  been  termed  "swamping"  by  Dr  Sinnott,  who  proposes  a 
hypothesis  to  the  effect  that  "the  longer  a  successfully  invading 
species  remains  in  an  isolated  area... the  less  common  it  tends  to 
become  until  it  is  actually  'swamped'  out  of  existence — quite 
the  reverse  of  the  'age  and  area'  idea."  He  suggests  that  "some 
may  simply  be  exterminated  outright,  and  some  by  continual 
crossing  with  new  forms  may  ultimately  lose  their  specific 
identity."  Cf.  also  Guppy  (44,  Chs.  xxi-xxvn),  who  gives  full 
accounts  of  it. 

On  the  whole,  the  older  and  more  isolated  the  region,  the 
greater  is  the  proportion  of  such  genera.  Ceylon  has  89  of  1027 
(apart  from  actually  endemic  genera);  New  Zealand  has  127  of 
329,  the  Hawaiian  Islands  have  101  out  of  256  genera. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  fact  that  genera  are  common  in 
these  floras  with  endemics  only,  and  no  wides,  is  a  feature  which 
requires  explanation;  but  as  the  genera  with  endemics  only 
behave  exactly  like  those  which  also  contain  wides,  or  like  the 
endemic  genera,  the  fact  that  it  cannot  at  the  moment  be  satis- 


96 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [ft.  r 


factorily  explained1  does  not  in  the  least  militate  against  the 
hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area.  Age  and  Area  may  seem  to  disagree 
with  other  views  as  to  this  or  that,  but  it  is  based  upon  very 
clear  and  definite  figures,  which  must  either  be  controverted  or 
explained  in  some  other  way — they  are  far  too  striking  to  go 
without  any  explanation.  It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  controvert 
figures  which  simply  represent  bald  facts,  and  if  Age  and  Area 
be  not  accepted,  it  is  consequently  necessary  to  have  some  other 
hypothesis,  which  must  be  mechanical,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
the  figures  show  such  mechanical  regularity. 

The  objection  is  based  largely  on  the  undoubted  fact  that  the 
proportion  of  "swamped"  genera  is  larger  in  the  more  outlying 
of  the  big  islands.  But  that  mere  isolation  is  not  sufficient  as  an 
explanation  would  seem  to  show  in  the  fact  that  in  the  very 
isolated  islands  round  New  Zealand  the  proportion  is  not  so 
high  as  in  New  Zealand  itself.  In  New  Zealand  127  genera  out 
of  329  show  it,  in  the  Kermadecs  only  8  out  of  62,  in  the  Chathams 
the  same,  and  in  the  Aucklands  12  out  of  64.  In  none  of  the 
islands  is  the  proportion  anything  like  so  high  as  in  New  Zealand, 
and  it  is  highest  in  the  Aucklands,  which  were  perhaps  nearest 
to  an  incoming  stream  of  plants  (131).  On  the  other  hand,  the 
number  of  genera  which  are  swamped  in  New  Zealand  is  13  in 
the  Kermadecs,  33  in  the  Chathams  (the  most  isolated),  and  26 
in  the  Aucklands,  facts  tending  to  show  that  the  swamped 
genera  were  in  existence  fairly  early  opposite  to  the  Chathams, 
and  therefore  were  rather  old  in  comparison  to  some  of  the  rest, 
though  even  in  the  Chathams  the  unswamped  genera  (29)  are 
almost  as  numerous. 

Another  test  that  we  may  apply  is  to  find  the  proportion  of 

"swamped  "genera  in  the  northern  and  southern  invasions  of  plants 

into  New  Zealand  (p.  79).  The  northern  shows  45  out  of  75  or  60 

per  cent.,  while  the  southern  shows  36  out  of  108  or  33  per  cent. 

We  have  seen  that  probability  is  in  favour  of  the  greater  age  in 

New  Zealand  of  the  northern  invasion,  so  that  to  some  extent 

this  speaks  in  favour  of  the  objection  in  a  general  and  purely 

local  sense.  But  as  only  one  herb  (Elatostema)  is  "swamped"  in 

the  northern  invasion,  and  all  the  shrubs  but  one  {Veronica)  in 

the  southern,  it  is,  it  seems  to  me,  equally  possible  that  swamping 

may  go  with  woody  habit,  and  further  tests  are  necessary. 

1  Small  (103,  pp.  189,  224)  has  suggested  two  explanations,  both  quite 
probable;  but  as  the  phenomenon  (as  shown  above)  does  not  affect  the 
probability  that  Age  and  Area  is  a  correct  hypothesis  upon  which  to  work, 
the  question  may  be  left  out  of  consideration  in  this  place. 


ch.  ix]      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


97 


Of  the  "swamped"  genera,  only  about  half  are  herbs,  while 
of  the  unswamped,  herbs  are  83  per  cent.  Of  the  unswamped 
genera  with  no  endemics,  85  per  cent,  are  herbs,  while  of  those 
with  endemics  80  per  cent,  are  herbs.  From  these  figures  it 
would  seem  that  the  evidence  is  just  as  good  for  the  connection 
of  swamping  and  woody  nature  as  of  swamping  and  age. 

The  Coniferae  are  probably  older  than  the  flowering  plants, 
and  as  they  have  no  wides  at  all  in  New  Zealand,  this  speaks  in 
favour  of  age,  but  they  are  also  all  woody  plants.  The  Ferns,  on 
the  other  hand,  which  are  probably  older  again,  show  very  little 
"  swamping,"  only  5  genera  out  of  31  exhibiting  this  phenomenon. 
Of  these  it  may  be  noted  that  three  are  the  only  tree-ferns  in 
New  Zealand.  The  remaining  two,  and  all  the  unswamped  genera, 
are  herbaceous.  It  is  evident  that  the  question  of  swamping 
must  be  disentangled  from  the  question  of  the  relatively  greater 
age  of  woody  vegetation,  but  inasmuch  as  woody  vegetation  in 
general  is  probably  older  than  herbaceous,  it  seems  probable 
that  swamping  goes  to  some  extent  with  age. 

Actual  measurements  show  that  the  average  range  in  New 
Zealand  of  one  species  of  a  swamped  genus  is  509  miles,  which 
within  a  very  close  approximation  is  the  same  range  as  that  of 
the  whole  flora  of  New  Zealand,  and  considerably  more  than  the 
average  range  of  the  total  of  the  species  endemic  to  New  Zealand, 
or  New  Zealand  and  its  outlying  islands,  which  is  only  446.  On 
the  whole,  therefore,  one  may  probably  say  that  these  "swamped" 
genera  are  older  than  the  unswamped. 

Further  confirmation  of  this  view  may  be  obtained  from  the 
fact  that  45  of  the  swamped  genera  reach  the  outlying  islands 
round  New  Zealand,  while  only  27  of  the  unswamped  do  so, 
though  the  latter  are  much  more  numerous. 

There  is  a  possibility  that  with  mere  passage  of  time  species 
may  undergo  change,  and  it  may  be  that  "swamping"  is  some- 
thing of  this  nature. 

An  important  fact  must  be  noticed  in  considering  this  objec- 
tion, that  the  genera  without  "wides"  behave  just  like  those 
that  include  such.  They  have  (cf.  the  map  of  Gunner  a  in  New 
Zealand,  p.  158)  similar  local  distribution ;  their  centres  of  greatest 
density  are  the  same;  their  proportion  of  species  belonging  to 
the  different  classes  {i.e.  the  classes  in  order  of  area)  is  the  same 
when  several  genera  are  taken.  If  the  endemic  species  of  the 
genera  that  possess  wides  are  dying  out  before  the  competition 

W.  Am  7 


98 


OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS        [pt.  i 


of  the  latter,  then  the  same  thing  is  going  on  in  the  genera  that 
possess  none,  i.e.  they  are  dying  out  without,  competition,  and 
at  the  same  rate,  a  remarkable  fact.  If  endemics  are  local  species 
developed  in  response  to  local  conditions,  then  it  is  very  remark- 
able that  in  the  genera  where  they  have  not  been  able  to  kill  out 
the  wides,  the  latter  should  occupy  the  largest  range  (cf.  map 
of  Ranunculus,  p.  156,  or  almost  any  other  genus  of  Ceylon  or 
New  Zealand  that  possesses  wides). 

What  the  explanation  of  "swamping"  may  be  is  not  as  yet 
clear,  though  it  seems  probable  that  it  goes  to  some  extent  with 
the  mere  age  of  a  genus,  especially  if  of  woody  habit.  But  its 
existence  does  not  in  any  way  prejudice  the  validity  of  Age 
and  Area  as  an  explanation  of  distribution,  for  the  presence 
or  absence  of  wides  makes  no  difference  to  the  behaviour  of 
genera. 

Another  objection  is  (29)  that  much  detailed  work  is  being 
done  in  splitting  up  large  and  wide-ranging  Linnean  species  into 
micro-species,  and  that  this  will  destroy  the  value  of  my  work, 
as  I  have  dealt  only  with  Linnean  species.  This,  translated  into 
terms  of  the  figures  which  have  been  given  in  Chapters  vi-viii, 
means  that  species  are  being  removed  from  the  column  of 
"wides"  into  that  of  endemics,  and  perhaps  usually  to  near  the 
bottom  of  this.  The  result  will  not  be  to  undermine  my  work, 
but  rather  to  strengthen  it.  As  one  of  our  leading  ecologists  says 
in  a  letter  to  me,  and  underlines,  "this  will  be  strongly  in  favour 
of  your  Age  and  Area  hypothesis." 

It  is  also  objected  (30)  that  species  with  wide  distribution  are 
usually  found  in  an  early  stage  of  the  plant  succession.  This  is 
practically  the  same  as  the  old  axiom  of  the  systematists  "sim- 
plicity of  type  goes  with  increase  of  area."  Later  species  in  a 
country  that  is  undergoing  change  of  climate  will  tend  to  be 
adapted  to  more  strictly  local  conditions,  and  their  spread  will 
therefore  be  hindered  by  ecological  boundaries.  But  it  is  to 
some  extent  a  single-species  objection. 

The  general  objection,  never  perhaps  expressed  in  so  many 
words,  but  running  through  a  number  of  those  actually  given, 
(31)  that  Age  and  Area  does  not  agree  with  ecological  results, 
is  largely  answered  in  what  has  been  said  above.  Age  and  Area 
works  over  much  longer  periods  than  does  local  ecology,  and 
must  not  be  applied  to  single  species,  and  it  must  not  be  for- 
gotten that  it  is  not  a  mere  unsupported  hypothesis,  with  no 


ch.  ix]      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS 


99 


facts  to  back  it.  It  rests  upon  a  large  number  of  very  clear  and 
definite  figures,  which  are  so  consonant  with  one  another  that 
they  must  be  explained ;  they  cannot  be  passed  by  as  unimport- 
ant, any  more  than  can  those  upon  which  Mendel's  Law  is  based. 
Further  than  this,  Age  and  Area  has  been  used  as  the  basis  for 
numerous  predictions,  all  of  which  have  proved  to  be  correct. 
Unless,  therefore,  some  other  hypothesis  can  be  found  to  explain 
the  facts,  and  make  the  predictions,  and  that  a  mechanical 
hypothesis,  on  account  of  the  mechanical  regularity  of  the 
figures,  Age  and  Area  must  be  regarded  as  holding  the  field  for  the 
present. 

Ecological  factors  work  at  right  angles  to  the  age  factor,  to  a 
considerable  extent,  and  on  groups  of  allied  species,  taken  over 
a  long  time,  their  influence  will  then  rarely  be  visible,  as  regards 
total  areas.  The  objections  of  the  ecologists  should,  it  seems  to 
me,  largely  disappear  when  they  fully  realise  the  meaning  of 
the  careful  provisos  with  which  Age  and  Area  is  hedged  about. 
Not  only  are  there  those  already  considered  (groups  of  ten  species, 
and  allied  species),  but  it  is  also  pointed  out  that  conditions 
must  remain  reasonably  constant.  A  serious  change  of  con- 
ditions is  bound  to  make  a  great  change  in  the  dispersal  rate  of 
the  plants  subject  to  it.  If  it  only  comes  after  the  plant  has 
already  spread  into  the  neighbourhood  affected  by  it,  it  will 
probably  make  little  difference,  unless  it  reach  the  margin  of 
the  area  to  which  the  plant  has  reached.  Merely  to  exterminate 
a  plant  in  a  portion  of  its  range  does  not  affect  the  total  as 
marked  by  the  outlying  stations. 

Further  than  this,  it  is  expressly  stated  that  great  modifica- 
tions may  be  introduced  by  barriers,  including  ecological  changes, 
changes  of  climate,  and  the  like.  All  these  provisos,  taken  to- 
gether, seem  to  me  to  make  sufficient  allowance  for  any  possible 
ecological  influences,  and  the  fact  remains,  as  just  stated,  that 
the  figures,  which  are  incontrovertible,  go  to  show  the  great, 
and  indeed  overwhelming,  effect  of  mere  age,  when  working 
with  a  group  of  allied  species  over  a  long  period. 

As  has  already  been  pointed  out  several  times,  age  in  itself 
effects  nothing,  but  the  average  result  of  the  operation  of 
ecological  and  jother  factors  is  so  uniform,  when  one  works  with 
long  periods,  that  the  average  rate  of  dispersal  is  also  very 
uniform.  Barriers  may  of  course  completely  stop  it,  but  usually, 
perhaps,  only  when  they  are  physical,  or  due  to  such  a  cause  as 

7—2 


100      OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  HYPOTHESIS  [pt.i,ch.ix 


a  very  marked  alteration  of  ciimate.  Ordinary  ecological  barriers, 
which  most  often,  perhaps,  are  not  very  broad,  will  usually 
only  be  able  to  check  it.  The  check  may  be  long-lasting,  but 
often  the  succession  (pp.  51,  20)  which  usually  occurs  in  plant 
societies  may  give  opportunity  for  passage.  Further,  by  working 
with  groups  of  ten  one  allows  for  chance  differences,  and  by 
working  with  groups  of  allies  one  obtains  groups  upon  which 
all  the  various  factors  will  probably  operate  in  a  more  or  less 
uniform  way,  so  that  their  rate  of  (total)  dispersal  will  be  more 
or  less  uniform. 

Finally,  one  writer  does  not  like  big  changes;  (32)  "if  the 
camel  can  go  through  the  eye  of  the  needle,  the  gnat  can  follow." 
In  other  words,  presumably,  if  age  can  produce  such  effects,  the 
various  later  conclusions  to  which  we  shall  presently  proceed 
will  present  little  difficulty.  But  if  large  changes  were  not 
sometimes  made  in  our  way  of  looking  at  things,  progress 
would  be  remarkably  slow.  Even  if  the  new  point  of  view  is 
not  permanently  adopted,  it  will  do  no  harm  to  spend  a  little 
time  there. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  noted  that  many  of  these  objections 
will  perhaps  cease  to  be  urged  in  view  of  the  interesting  facts 
to  be  brought  up  in  the  next  few  chapters,  facts  which  will 
quite  possibly  educe  an  entirely  fresh  set  of  objections. 


PART  II 


THE  A  PPLICA  TION  OF  AGE  A  ND  A  RE  A 
TO  THE  FLORA  OF  THE  WORLD, 
AND  ITS  I M PLICA  TIONS 

CHAPTER  X 

THE  POSITION  OF  THE  AGE  AND  AREA  THEORY 
By  H.  B.  Guppy,  M.B.,  F.R.S. 

We  would  sometimes  infer  that  there  is  only  one  way  of  regard- 
ing the  central  problem  of  Plant-Distribution.  If  this  were  so, 
distribution  would  stand  alone  among  the  great  studies  of  plant- 
life,  and  it  would  be  particularly  unattractive  and  uninteresting. 
Generally  speaking,  the  more  numerous  the  standpoints,  the 
more  complete  will  be  our  grasp  of  the  problem.  The  surveyor 
who  has  the  most  accurate  conceptions  of  the  extent  and  out- 
lines of  a  great  mountain  range  will  be  the  man  who  has  viewed 
it  from  the  greatest  variety  of  stations,  and  so  it  will  be  with  the 
student  of  distribution. 

The  fewer  limitations  we  impose  upon  ourselves  at  the  start, 
the  better  progress  shall  we  make.  Some  are  inevitable,  but  they 
should  be  light  easy  burdens  that  do  not  gall.  Thus  when  we  find 
ourselves  constrained  to  associate  our  point  of  view  with  the 
story  of  Evolution,  we  are  at  once  confronted  with  the  query  as 
to  the  kind  of  evolution  implied.  What  is  the  genetic  sequence 
in  the  scheme  of  the  ordinal,  tribal,  generic,  specific,  and  varietal 
types?  It  is  possible  to  hold  views  in  this  connection  that  are 
as  far  asunder  as  the  poles.  In  the  case  where  we  begin  with  the 
larger  groups  we  have  evolution  on  a  plane,  or  differentiation 
pure  and  simple.  The  basic  principle  here  involved,  the  change 
from  the  Simple  to  the  Complex,  from  the  General  to  the  Par- 
ticular, from  the  Homogeneous  to  the  Heterogeneous,  is  at  the 
back  of  the  development  of  life  on  the  earth.  It  is  symbolised 
in  all  natural  systems  of  classification  and  in  the  daily  practice 
of  the  systematist,  and  was  a  part  of  the  faith  of  the  old 
philosophers. 


102 


THE  POSITION  OF  THE 


[PT.  II 


On  the  other  hand,  to  lay  down,  as  the  Darwinian  evolutionist 
does,  that  the  order  of  development  begins  with  the  variety, 
varieties  diverging  into  species,  species  into  genera,  and  genera 
into  families,  is  to  reverse  the  method  followed  in  nature,  since 
it  implies  that  the  simpler,  least  mutable,  and  least  adaptive 
characters  that  distinguish  the  great  families  are  the  last  de- 
veloped. This  could  never  have  been.  Nature  has  ever  worked 
from  the  simple  to  the  complex,  from  the  general  to  the  par- 
ticular. Had  she  followed  the  lines  laid  down  by  the  Darwinian 
school  of  evolutionists,  there  would  be  no  systematic  botany. 
All  would  be  confusion.  There  would  be  no  distribution  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  term  is  generally  understood,  and  the  plant 
world  would  be  a  world  of  oddities  and  monstrosities.  This  is 
the  view  expressed  by  the  writer  in  his  volume  of  West  Indian 
Observations  published  in  1917,  p.  320  (47). 

It  is  this  incompatibility  between  theory  and  practice  that  has 
given  Dr  Willis  his  opportunity.  Under  the  glamour  of  Darwin's 
great  theory  Distributionists  lost  touch  with  old  basic  principles, 
and  it  is  as  an  endeavour  to  establish  the  old  connections,  or  as 
an  effort  to  return  to  the  pre-Darwinian  position,  which  we  have 
largely  abandoned  or  forgotten,  that  the  Age  and  Area  hypo- 
thesis will  find  its  place.  The  vain  attempts  to  bring  together 
ends  that  could  never  meet,  and  the  failures  to  reconcile  views 
that  were  hopelessly  apart,  have  all  prepared  the  way  for  a  re- 
consideration of  the  central  problem  of  Plant-Distribution. 

Until  we  are  in  agreement  about  essentials  we  cannot  utilise 
the  evolutionary  standpoint  for  a  general  view  of  the  subject. 
The  possible  standpoints  need  much  further  exploration,  and 
several  of  the  oldest  have  been  forgotten.  At  any  time  a  dis- 
tributionist  is  liable  to  be  held  up  by  a  query  that  in  some  quaint 
old-time  fashion  will  raise  an  issue  that  has  been  floating  in 
men's  minds  through  the  centuries.  Distribution  bristles  with 
the  points  made  by  the  old  philosophers,  and  many  of  our  new 
notions  can  there  be  matched.  We  cannot  turn  up  any  of  the 
old  abandoned  fields  of  research  without  unearthing  some  of 
these  old  notions  as  fresh  and  as  sound  as  in  the  days  of  their 
entombment.  But  the  query  may  belong  more  to  our  own  time. 
Thus  one  might  be  asked  for  the  real  significance  of  the  fact  that 
we  could  found  the  Institutes  of  Botany  on  much  the  same 
principles  whether  we  based  them  on  the  flora  of  China  or  of 
Peru.  One  of  the  implications  of  a  recent  paper  by  Dr  Willis  (135), 
in  which  insular  and  continental  floras  are  compared,  is  con- 


CH.  X] 


AGE  AND  AREA  THEORY 


103 


cerned  with  precisely  the  same  point.  The  question  may  be  un- 
answerable; but  there  are  those  who  might  see  in  a  primeval 
jumble  of  family  types  the  background  of  the  whole  story  of 
Distribution.  They  might  regard  it  as  the  most  significant  indica- 
tion of  the  great  antiquity  of  the  higher  plants,  and  they  would 
see  in  this  world-wide  mixture  of  family  types  the  impress  of  the 
lost  Mesozoic  ages  on  the  history  of  the  flowering  plants,  ages  of 
unceasing  revolutionary  changes  in  the  relations  of  land  and  sea. 
They  would  see  in  this  world-spread  mixture  the  materials  on 
which  the  great  laws  of  development  have  operated  in  the  later 
ages.  Such  would  be  their  standpoint.  But  the  problem  may 
prove  to  be  one  for  the  biometrician ;  and  we  may  perhaps  be 
able  to  learn  from  him  in  the  case  of  other  world-spread  mixtures 
of  organisms  of  different  types  the  significance  of  the  develop- 
ment of  uniform  mixtures  of  types  in  Time. 

There  is  another  way  of  approaching  the  central  problem  of 
Distribution,  and  that  is  best  typified  in  the  case  of  the  gold- 
miner  who,  guided  at  first  by  a  faint  show  of  colour  in  his  pan, 
follows  the  clue  through  until  he  finds  the  reef.  This  is  pretty 
much  what  Dr  Willis  has  been  doing  for  years  in  the  working  out 
of  his  Age  and  Area  theory.  With  a  history  of  small  beginnings  in 
Ceylon  long  ago,  it  is  still  in  the  making,  and  we  can  watch  its 
development.  It  is  assimilating  as  it  grows  numbers  of  ideas  that 
have  been  floating  in  the  minds  of  biologists  for  generations,  and 
linking  together  others  that  have  always  been  difficult  to  place. 
Its  tendency  to  unify  and  co-ordinate  as  it  develops  are  two  of 
its  striking  features.  The  writer's  attitude  towards  it  may  be 
thus  stated.  Recognising  that  we  had  here  a  courageous  and 
persistent  effort  to  utilise  the  statistical  method  in  getting  behind 
the  distribution  of  living  plants,  the  question  whether  it  was 
wrong  in  this  or  wrong  in  that  did  not  seem  to  be  of  primary 
importance.  For  years  the  writer  had  been  approaching  the 
subject  of  Distribution  from  the  opposite  direction,  that  is,  from 
the  a  priori  side.  Like  many  a  general  theory  that  had  not  been 
linked  up  with  the  other  side  the  one  that  he  advocated  (a  theory 
of  differentiation  of  generalised  types)  stood  still  for  lack  of 
verification ;  and  there  were  echoes  in  his  memory  of  the  despair- 
ing counsels  of  those  in  this  and  other  lands  who  regarded  Dis- 
tribution as  beyond  the  pale  of  human  endeavour.  So  that  when 
he  realised  the  possibilities  of  far  greater  extension  that  lay 
behind  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis,  the  question  for  him  was 
not  whether  Dr  Willis  was  right  or  whether  he  was  wrong,  but 


104  THE  POSITION  OF  THE  [pt.  ii 

where  he  was  heading  for.  Here  was  a  daring  attempt  to  get  a 
grip  at  things  from  the  inductive  side,  and  the  question  was — 
Which  among  the  general  theories  will  prove  to  be  its  goal? 

But  the  prospects  of  the  new  theory  at  the  outset  were  not 
promising.  Botanists  had  been  inclined  to  regard  the  statistical 
treatment  of  distribution  as  illusory,  and  the  believers  in  what 
Watson  termed  "Species-arithmetic"  and  Humboldt  named 
"  Arithmeticae  botanices  "  were  few.  Yet  Hooker,  with  the  seer's 
outlook,  took  the  true  meaning  of  things  three-quarters  of  a 
century  ago  when  he  wrote : 

All  seem  to  dread  the  making  Botanical  Geography  too  exact 
a  science ;  they  find  it  far  easier  to  speculate  than  to  employ  the 
inductive  process.  The  first  step  to  tracing  the  progress  of  the 
creation  of  vegetation  is  to  know  the  proportion  in  which  the 
groups  appear  in  different  localities,  a  relation  which  must  be 
expressed  in  numbers  to  be  at  all  tangible  (57,  Vol.  I.  p.  438). 

A  generation  later,  when  Hemsley  at  his  suggestion  took  up  the 
preliminary  statistical  treatment  of  floras  in  the  introduction  to 
his  great  work  on  the  botany  of  Central  America  (51),  Hooker 
characterised  the  subject  as  "that  most  instructive  branch  of 
phytogeography."  The  lode  was  rich  in  promise,  but  he  passed 
it  by.  How  was  this? 

It  is  clear  from  his  lecture  on  Insular  Floras  (142),  and  from 
different  letters  written  in  the  sixties,  that  the  Natural  Selection 
theory  offered  to  him  "the  most  hopeful  future"  for  an  advance 
on  the  problems  of  plant-distribution  from  the  inductive  side. 
In  that  lecture  he  also  shadowed  out  a  general  notion  of  "  Cen- 
trifugal Variation  operating  through  countless  ages."  It  appears 
almost  as  a  suggestion,  but  the  idea  had  been  evidently  floating 
half-formed  in  his  mind  ever  since  he  wrote  his  essay  on  the 
Tasmanian  flora  in  the  late  fifties.  It  was  the  nucleus  of  a  theory 
of  Divergence  or  Differentiation  that  acquired  more  definite  out- 
lines as  time  went  on,  since  it  reappears  in  the  intensely  interest- 
ing account  of  a  talk  with  Darwin  which  is  given  in  a  letter  to 
Huxley  in  1888  (57,  n.  p.  306). 

We  can  perhaps  understand  the  long  intervals  of  time  now. 
For  the  confirmation  that  such  a  theory  would  have  derived 
from  a  line  of  research  instituted  on  Darwin's  lines  was  denied 
to  him.  The  two  proved  to  be  incompatible.  For  no  inductive 
process  based  on  Darwin's  lines  could  have  found  its  goal  in  a 
theory  of  centrifugal  variation.  "I  well  remember,"  Hooker 
describes  in  his  letter  to  Huxley  in  1888,  "the  worry  which  that 


CH.  X] 


AGE  AM)  AREA  THEORY 


1 05 


tendency  to  divergence  caused  him  (Darwin).  I  believe  I  first 
pointed  the  defect  out  to  him,  at  least  I  insisted  from  the  first 
on  his  entertaining  a  crude  idea  which  held  that  variation  was 
a  centrifugal  force,  whether  it  resulted  in  species  or  not."  Huxley 
m  h>  in  the  same  case.  For  he  held  views  of  the  general  differentia- 
tion of  types,  and  his  road  that  would  lead  to  the  discovery  of 
the  causes  of  evolution  started  from  the  Darwinian  position. 
That  road  was  barred  to  him. 

The  secret  of  the  success  of  Dr  \\  ill  is  is  that  he  works  with 
limited  objectives  and  is  always  tree  to  shape  his  course  accord- 
ing to  his  results.  A  distant  objective  with  a  specified  general 
theory  of  distribution  as  his  goal  might  easily  have  brought  him 
to  the  ground.  As  it  is,  he  has  struck  a  wonderful  trail  that 
seems  to  increase  in  promise  as  he  advances.  But  the  logical 
outcome  of  establishing  his  theory  successively  for  the  species, 
the  genus,  the  tribe,  and  the  family,  is  a  general  theory  of 
differentiation.  In  other  words,  it  will  bring  him  to  the  pre- 
Darwinian  position.  Once  there,  he  will  enjoy  greater  freedom 
in  his  choice  of  routes  and  methods,  and  new  and  unexpected 
fields  of  research  will  be  opened  up  all  around  him.  This  note 
may  be  concluded  with  a  brief  reference  to  a  few  of  the  more 
remarkable  features  of  a  theory  that  is  still  in  the  making. 

Though  the  linking  up  of  old  ideas  that  have  been  without  a 
resting  place  for  generations  is  mainly  incidental,  it  is  none  the 
Ibm  significant.  I  gather  from  Dr  Willis  that  his  44  alliterative 
series,"  as  he  terms  it,  which  began  with  "Age  and  Area,"  is 
increasing  in  its  numbers  as  his  work  proceeds.  Thus  we  have 
Antiquity  and  Amplitude,  Rank  and  Range,  Size  and  Space, 
and  several  others,  some  of  them  overlapping,  but  each  with 
its  own  variant,  and  some  again  capable  of  considerable  exten- 
sion and  amplification.  Thus  Rank  and  Range  implies  Simplicity 
of  Type  and  Increase  of  Area,  a  very  old  principle  long  recog- 
nised in  the  theory  and  practice  of  pre-Darwinian  systematists. 
Simplicity  of  Type  goes  with  Variability,  another  old  principle. 
If.  therefore,  the  simplest  organisms  of  a  group  are  the  widest 
distributed  and  the  most  variable  (ideas  old  enough  and  true 
enough)  it  is  among  them  that  we  ought  to  look  for  examples 
of  genera  that  have  arisen  independently  in  different  parts  of 
their  areas,  as  in  the  case  of  Senecio,  the  most  primitive  form  of 
the  Compositae.  Incidental  as  such  results  may  be,  Dr  Willis 
may  well  claim  that  his  materials  are  working  for  him.  Whilst 
he  is  following  a  definite  plan,  much  is  happening  that  was 


106  POSITION  OF  AGE  AND  AREA  THEORY  [pt.  ii,  ch.  x 


neither  premeditated  nor  foreseen.  Just  as  a  river  wearing  its 
way  into  a  mountain-mass  unites  in  a  single  system  widely 
separated  streams  by  capturing  one  water-head  after  another, 
so  the  Age  and  Area  theory  in  its  advance  is  bringing  about  the 
coalescence  of  principles  that  we  have  been  wont  to  consider  as 
things  apart. 

This  may  be  the  luck  of  the  trail.  But  at  all  events  we  have 
to  distinguish  between  the  direct  and  indirect  results,  and  one 
scarcely  knows  which  will  prove  to  be  the  most  important  out- 
come of  this  investigation.  It  is  difficult  to  speak  of  work  still 
on  the  stocks,  but  we  will  expect  to  find  in  the  results  of  the 
tabulation  of  the  genera  of  the  flowering  plants  a  survey  of  the 
distribution  of  some  12,000  genera  over  the  great  regions  of  the 
globe.  Endemism  will  figure  more  as  a  world-affair  than  as  a 
peculiarity  of  localities,  and  some  unexpected  results  are  to  be 
looked  for  in  a  treatment  of  endemism  in  the  mass.  Then  there 
will  be  the  story  of  the  monotypic  genera  that  appropriate 
almost  two-fifths  of  the  total  of  the  genera  of  the  flowering  plants ; 
and  their  part  in  the  forming  of  the  curve  of  all  the  genera 
grouped  by  the  number  of  their  species  will  prove  to  be  a 
triumph  for  the  mutationists.  A  closing  word  may  be  said  of 
the  great  labour  involved  in  the  preparation  of  the  tabulated 
results,  of  the  weeks  of  counting  to  establish  a  single  point,  and 
of  the  wearisome  recovering  of  the  ground  to  make  some  doubtful 
point  assured.  Since  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  writer  to  place 
rather  than  describe  the  Age  and  Area  theory  more  cannot  be 
said  here. 


CHAPTER  XI 


THE  FURTHER  EXTENSION  OF  THE 
APPLICATION  OF  AGE  AND  AREA 

In  most  of  the  work  so  far  published,  and  in  the  first  part  of 
this  book,  Age  and  Area  is  used  only  within  narrow  limits,  as 
applying  to  the  flora  of  a  single  given  country.  But  this  is  a 
purely  arbitrary  limitation,  and  was  adopted  in  order  to  render 
less  complex  its  application  to  the  problems  of  distribution; 
and  in  this  second  part  of  the  book  Age  and  Area  will  be 
applied  to  genera  as  well  as  to  species,  and  to  the  flora  of  the 
world  as  a  whole. 

Like  Age  and  Area  itself,  its  twin  principle,  to  which  I  give 
the  name  Size  and  Space,  has  also  been  used  as  yet  in  a  limited 
way,  e.g.  on  p.  71,  where  it  is  pointed  out  that  genera  that  are 
represented  in  a  country  by  several  species  are  likely  to  be  (on 
the  average)  older  in  that  country  than  genera  that  are  only 
represented  there  by  one.  The  exact  graduation  of  commonness 
with  number  of  species  which  is  there  shown  indicated  that  this 
principle  was  also  capable  of  extension,  and  it  is  expanded  in 
Chapter  xn  into  the  more  general  proposition  that  within  any 
circle  of  affinity,  the  larger  genera  will  be  the  older,  and  when 
taken  in  groups  of  ten  allied  genera  will  be  older  in  rough  pro- 
portion to  their  numbers  of  species. 

This  supposition  is  very  strikingly  confirmed  by  an  examina- 
tion of  the  British  flora,  which  shows  that  the  distribution  in 
Britain  of  the  most  widely  distributed  species  of  each  genus  (on 
the  average  of  the  whole  number)  varies  with  the  number  of 
species  that  the  genus  possesses  in  Britain.  "The  same  is  the  case 
with  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  so  on  to  tenth,  most  widely 
distributed  species  in  each  genus.  Extension  of  the  principle  to 
the  whole  world  is  then  illustrated  by  aid  of  the  Helobieae,  by 
reference  to  Prof.  Small's  work  on  the  Compositae  (in  the  next 
chapter),  and  also  to  many  other  cases  given  below.  The  general 
result,  therefore,  is  to  show  that  Age,  Size,  and  Space  (or 
Area)  go  together. 

In  the  next  chapter  Prof.  Small  shows  how  Age  and  Area  can 
be  applied  with  effect  to  the  distribution  of  a  single  family,  by 
dealing  with  the  Compositae.  The  average  generic  area  is  deter- 


108        THE  FURTHER  EXTENSION  OF  THE       [pt.  11 


mined  for  each  group  of  the  Compositae,  and  it  is  shown  that  on 
the  whole  it  increases  with  the  increasing  age  of  the  group  as 
deduced  from  phyletic,  morphological,  and  geological  con- 
siderations. This  agreement  forms  a  strong  argument  both  for 
the  general  correctness  of  Age  and  Area,  and  for  that  of  the 
previously  deduced  genetic  relationships  of  the  different  groups 
of  Compositae. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  chapter  Prof.  Small  takes  up  the 
application  of  Size  and  Space,  showing  that  it  holds  very  well 
indeed  as  a  general  rule  in  this  family,  so  that  here,  as  in  other 
cases,  "both  the  average  generic  area  and  the  average  number 
of  species  per  genus  are  closely  related  to  absolute  age."  Age, 
Size,  and  Space  go  together. 

Mrs  Reid  then  takes  up  the  application  of  Age  and  Area  to 
the  fossil  botany  of  comparatively  recent  times,  especially  the 
Pliocene  and  Pleistocene.  She  shows  how  great  have  been  the 
migrations  to  and  fro,  north  and  south,  of  the  floras  of  the 
north  temperate  zone,  and  discusses  the  applicability  of  this 
proved  migration  to  the  flora  of  New  Zealand,  leaving  the 
question  finally  open  for  settlement  by  geological  evidence.  Dis- 
cussing then  the  flora  that  at  one  time  occupied  the  complete 
circle  of  the  north  temperate  zone,  and  which  is  now  confined 
to  North  America  or  to  China,  or  to  both,  and  often  a  good  deal 
broken  in  distribution,  she  shows  that  the  existing  dispersal 
may  probably  be  attributed  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  Glacial 
period. 

It  is  then  pointed  out  that  it  is  this  unquestionable  fact  that 
a  good  many  existing  strictly  localised  or  endemic  species  are 
survivors  of  races  that  once  flourished  widely,  that  offers  the 
greatest  stumbling  block  to  the  acceptance  of  Age  and  Area,  but 
that  there  is  no  insuperable  difficulty  in  the  acceptance  both  of 
this  fact  and  of  Age  and  Area,  for  the  latter  is  reasoning  from  the 
mass,  the  former  from  the  individual,  and  while  perhaps  1  per 
cent,  of  the  grand  total  of  endemic  species  are  relics,  the  rest  are 
not,  and  in  reasoning  about  the  mass  the  former  are  quite  lost. 
There  is  good  evidence  to  the  effect  that  many  or  most  of  these 
survivals  are  due  to  the  effect  of  the  Glacial  period,  and  on  the 
whole,  therefore,  the  verdict  is  in  favour  of  Age  and  Area. 

Endemism  and  Distribution  of  Species  are  then  considered  in 
Chapter  xv,  and  it  is  shown  that  the  phenomena  presented  by 
endemic  species  in  their  distribution  are  simply 'a  miniature  of 
those  presented  by  species  in  general,  and  that  the  distribution 


ch.  xi]       APPLICATION  OF  AGE  AND  AREA 


109 


of  both  can  be  graphically  represented  by  "hollow  curves1,"  like 
those  in  the  fig.  on  p.  155  (and  cf.  clearer  figure  on  p.  174),  with 
very  many  species  occurring  upon  very  small  areas,  the  numbers 
rapidly  diminishing  towards  the  areas  of  moderate  size  and  then 
more  slowly  to  those  of  large  size. 

In  view  of  these  and  many  other  facts  brought  up,  and  of 
which  a  summary  is  given  upon  p.  159,  it  is  no  longer  possible, 
except  in  comparatively  rare  cases,  to  regard  endemic  species 
either  as  relics  or  as  special  local  adaptations ;  though  of  course 
if  not  adapted  to  the  local  conditions  as  they  existed  at  the  time 
of  their  birth,  they  would  be  promptly  killed  out  by  natural 
selection.  The  explanation  offered  by  Age  and  Area,  that  species 
of  very  small  area  of  dispersal  are  in  general  young  beginners, 
and  that  area  occupied  increases  with  age,  seems  the  only  pos- 
sible one  for  the  great  majority  of  species.  Not  only  so,  but  age 
proves  to  be  by  far  the  most  important  factor  in  the  dispersal. 

In  Chapter  xvi  Endemism  and  Distribution  of  Genera  are 
dealt  with,  and  it  is  shown  that  the  phenomena  presented  are 
exactly  parallel  to  those  exhibited  by  species,  and  that  the  dis- 
tribution of  endemic  genera  is  similarly  a  miniature  of  that  pre- 
sented by  genera  as  a  whole.  The  areas  occupied  by  the  genera 
of  a  given  family  are  arranged  like  those  occupied  by  the  species 
of  a  given  genus.  There  are  very  many  upon  comparatively 
small  areas,  and  many  on  the  areas  just  a  little  larger,  whilst 
there  are  but  few  upon  areas  that  are  really  large.  As  one  would 
expect  from  a  consideration  of  the  hypothesis  of  Size  and  Space, 
one  finds  that  the  sizes  of  the  genera  themselves  (in  number  of 
their  species)  go  mainly  with  the  area  occupied,  so  long  as  one 
keeps  to  the  allied  forms  of  a  single  family.  The  bulk  of  the 
genera  of  very  small  area  are  monotypic,  or  have  but  one  species 
each,  while  the  bulk  of  those  of  very  large  area  have  very  many 
species  (average  59),  those  with  intermediate  size  of  area  having 
intermediate  numbers  of  species.  Plotting  of  the  genera,  whether 
by  size  or  by  area,  thus  gives  hollow  curves.  While  the  latter 
represents  their  geographical  distribution,  the  former  obviously 
represents  their  evolution. 

The  same  hollow  curve  type  of  distribution  shows  itself  if  one 

1  The  "hollow  curve"  arises  when  numbers  are  plotted  as  a  graphic  curve 
which  are  large  for  the  first  two  or  three  cases  (e.g.  in  the  fig.  on  p.  174  the 
first  three  are  40,  15,  and  8,  or  much  more  than  half  the  total  of  100),  and 
then  taper  away  gradually  in  a  tail  (e.g.  the  remaining  37  are  divided  among 
the  groups  of  families  from  the  4th  to  the  29th).  There  is  a  large  drop  from 
the  first  to  the  second,  and  from  the  second  to  the  third  or  fourth. 


110 


THE  FURTHER  EXTENSION  OF  THE      [pt.  ii 


sort  into  sizes  the  genera  confined  to  any  section  of  the  world, 
whether  it  be  an  individual  island,  or  a  larger  area  of  territory 
like  Africa  or  South  America,  or  whether  it  be  the  entire  world 
itself.  Always  there  are  many  monotypes  with  a  rapid  drop 
through  the  ditypes  and  tritypes,  and  a  longer  or  shorter  tail  of 
larger  genera. 

The  supposition  that  endemic  genera  are  usually  relics,  as  well 
as  the  other  that  they  are  usually  local  adaptations,  must  be 
ruled  out  of  consideration  in  view  of  the  facts  brought  up,  and 
the  only  supposition  that,  at  present  seems  at  all  feasible  is  that 
provided  by  Age  and  Area,  that  in  general  they  are  young 
beginners.  This  is  also  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  proportions 
upon  islands  in  the  different  families  are  not  unlike  the  pro- 
portionate sizes  of  these  families  in  the  world. 

Passing  on  to  Monotypic  Genera  in  Chapter  xvn,  it  is  shown 
that  these,  which  are  usually  much  localised,  display  the  same 
phenomena.  They  are  very  numerous,  over  38  per  cent,  of  the 
genera  of  the  world  containing  only  one  species  each,  while  there 
are  about  13  per  cent,  of  ditypes,  these  two  therefore  containing 
more  than  half  the  genera  in  the  world.  The  proportion  of  mono- 
types falls  off  with  increasing  size  of  area,  and  the  proportions 
of  genera  of  other  sizes  bear  a  definite  relation  to  that  of  mono- 
types, showing  that  to  explain  these  in  general  as  relics  or  as 
special  adaptations  would  be  absurd.  They  must  usually  be 
young  beginners. 

Not  only  do  these  numbers,  when  plotted,  exhibit  a  beautiful 
hollow  curve  for  the  distribution  into  sizes  of  the  genera  of  the 
world,  but  the  same  thing  is  shown  by  every  individual  family. 

Other  arithmetical  relationships  between  the  monotypes  and 
other  genera,  depending  upon  the  size  of  the  area  considered, 
are  also  pointed  out. 

Chapter  xviii  deals  with  the  Hollow  Curve  of  Distribution 
and  shows,  by  summing  up  what  has  already  been  said,  how 
universal  this  type  of  curve  is,  not  only  in  the  distribution  of 
species  and  genera  (endemic  or  not)  by  area — Geographical  Dis- 
tribution or  Distribution  in  Space — but  in  the  distribution  of 
genera  into  groups  according  to  their  number  of  species — Evo- 
lution or  Distribution  in  Time.  It  is  clearly  evident  throughout, 
and  usually  in  a  very  marked  and  unmistakable  way,  and  goes 
to  show  that  Evolution  and  Geographical  Distribution  have  gone 
on  "mechanically."  The  former  appears  to  have  been  organised 
at  the  start  upon  a  definite  plan,  and  its  further  unfolding,  and 


ch.  xi]       APPLICATION  OF  AGE  AND  AREA 


111 


the  distribution  of  species  about  the  globe,  have  been  chiefly 
determined  by  age,  when  one  is  dealing  with  the  mass  of  species, 
the  various  other  causes  that  may  be  operative — climatic,  eco- 
logical, geographical,  geological,  etc. — simply  causing  deviations 
to  one  side  or  the  other,  but  not  permanently  diverting  the 
dominant  plan.  Age  and  Area  obviously,  therefore,  becomes  a 
corollary  of  the  larger  law. 

But  if  this  be  so  universal  a  rule  in  plants,  it  is  obvious  that  it 
must  probably  show  in  animals  also,  and  Chapter  xix  shows 
that  this  is  actually  the  case,  and  that  it  is  exhibited  as  clearly 
in  the  animal  kingdom  as  in  the  vegetable. 

The  question  of  Origin  of  Species  is  then  touched  upon 
(Chapter  xx),  and  it  is  shown  that  probability  is  much  in  favour 
of  mutation  as  against  infinitesimal  variation,  and  that  the 
effect  of  the  recent  work  upon  distribution  and  evolution  de- 
scribed in  this  book  is  to  make  extremely  probable  the  con- 
tention that  I  have  frequently  put  forward,  and  which  is  now 
accepted  by  Prof,  de  Vries,  that  mutations  may  at  times  occur 
of  the  necessary  "size"  to  give  rise  at  once  to  Linnean  species. 
If  one  such  mutation  survived  in  fifty  years,  the  whole  existing 
population  of  flowering  plants  could  be  evolved  in  eight  million 
years,  which  is  perhaps  less  than  25  per  cent,  of  the  time  that 
has  actually  been  available  for,  and  occupied  in,  their  evolution. 
If  evolution  be  a  predetermined  result,  then  it  is  clear  that 
advantage  as  guiding  it  is  ruled  out  of  acceptance,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  see,  upon  this  ground  alone  (though  there  is  strong 
evidence  upon  other  grounds),  how  anything  but  direct  mutation 
giving  Linnean  species  can  be  effective. 

In  the  following  chapter  (xxi)  Prof,  de  Vries  deals  with  the 
relations  of  Age  and  Area  to  the  Mutation  theory,  first  pointing 
out  the  essential  difference  between  this  and  the  theory  of 
infinitesimal  variation.  In  the  latter  there  is  no  change  in  the 
genes,  or  material  bearers  of  characters,  but  merely  a  fluctuation 
or  oscillation  of  the  emphasis  of  the  characters  about  a  mean 
value,  so  that  in  one  member  of  a  group  of  plants  of  common 
descent  a  character  may  be  large,  in  another  small,  and  so  on. 
In  the  theory  of  Mutation,  the  changes  have  involved  the  genes, 
the  alterations  in  these  resulting  in  permanent  and  usually 
hereditary  differences  in  the  organism. 

Prof,  de  Vries  then  points  out  that  while  Darwin  recognised 
that  both  mutation  and  fluctuation  might  result  in  new  species, 
the  material  of  facts  at  hand  was  insufficient  for  any  kind  of 


112 


FURTHER  EXTENSION       [pt.  ii,  ch.  xr 


definite  proof,  and  he  decided  in  favour  of  the  latter.  The  theory 
of  natural  selection  of  infinitesimal  variations  has,  however,  met 
with  great  and  increasing  difficulties  in  explaining  the  general 
occurrence  of  useless  characters,  or  the  manner  in  which  natural 
selection  can  take  hold  of  the  first  beginnings  of  a  change.  It  is 
now  generally  recognised  that  the  bulk  of  the  morphological 
characters  by  which  the  systematic  arrangement  of  plants  into 
related  groups  is  carried  out  have  no  physiological  value  to  the 
plant  at  all. 

At  this  point  Age  and  Area  comes  in,  showing  that  the  dis- 
persal of  species  is  largely  independent  of  their  distinctive 
morphological  characters,  for  even  in  the  youngest  of  them 
(those  most  limited  in  area)  no  relation  can  be  pointed  out  be- 
tween these  things,  and  yet  the  conditions  under  which  these 
very  confined  species  are  living  must  approximate  at  any  rate 
to  those  under  which  they  began.  One  must  therefore  conclude 
that  specific  characters  have  evolved  without  any  relation  to 
their  possible  significance  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  Area 
occupied  depends  mainly  upon  age,  and  not  upon  morphological 
characters  (of  course  there  are  many  exceptions);  species  spread 
where  they  find  suitable  conditions,  and  the  adaptation  is  not 
on  their  side,  but  in  the  long  run  they  choose  the  best  environ- 
ment. Prof,  de  Vries  regards  this  as  being  the  great  proof  which 
the  mutation  theory  still  wanted  for  its  complete  acceptance. 

Finally,  a  brief  chapter  (xxn),  which  does  not  lend  itself  to 
a  summary  in  advance,  is  given  to  show  the  general  bearings  of 
the  subject-matter  of  the  book  upon  the  study  of  distribution. 
Age  and  Area,  and  Size  and  Space,  are  both  so  valid,  and  can 
be  so  successfully  used  to  make  predictions  about  geographical 
distribution,  and  these  predictions  are  so  near  to  accuracy,  that 
it  is  clear  that  in  general  distribution  has  been  mainly  governed, 
positively  by  age,  negatively  by  barriers  (of  course  including 
ecological  barriers).  This  being  so,  it  seems  probable  that  a  very 
promising  line  of  work  for  the  present  may  be  the  study  of 
invasions  of  plants,  of  course  taken  in  connection  with  ecological 
investigation  into  the  formation  (or  disappearance)  of  barriers. 
Age,  and  geographical  proximity,  again,  will  have  to  be  taken 
into  more  serious  account  in  dealing  with  taxonomic  questions, 
and  there  are  other  directions  in  which  the  changes  in  our  methods 
of  viewing  problems  of  distribution  that  seem  necessary  may 
produce  considerable  effects. 


CHAPTER  XII 


SIZE  AND  SPACE 

We  have  already  pointed  out,  on  p.  71,  that  on  the  average 
the  larger  families  and  genera  in  a  country  will  probably  be  the 
older  there,  inasmuch  as  it  is  highly  improbable  that  the  single 
species  of  a  genus  represented  only  by  one  would  always  arrive 
as  soon  as  the  first  species  of  a  genus  represented  by  many.  The 
tendency  will  be  for  the  latter  to  arrive  first,  and  if,  as  Age  and 
Area  indicates,  there  is  but  little  killing  out  of  species  once 
established,  one  will  expect  that  the  first  arrivals  will  have  spread 
the  most.  It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  one  must  work  with 
averages  of  considerable  numbers  to  obtain  reliable  results,  but 
it  seems  to  me  that  this  extension,  for  which  I  propose  the  name 
Size  and  Space,  may  be  given  to  the  original  idea  of  Age  and 
Area.  Under  this  supposition  one  will  say  that  on  the  whole, 
keeping  to  the  same  circle  of  affinity,  the  larger  families  and 
genera  will  be  the  older,  and  will  therefore  occupy  the  most 
space.  This,  however,  involves  a  break  with  the  long  current 
idea,  that  the  larger  families  and  genera  are  the  successful  ones, 
the  smaller  the  (comparative)  failures. 

This  principle  obviously  follows,  once  the  central  principle  of 
Age  and  Area  is  recognised,  and  it  is  further  realised  that  destruc- 
tion of  species  by  natural  selection  takes  place  when  they  are 
newly  born  and  occupy  minute  areas  of  ground,  and  not  when 
they  are  once  established  on  a  reasonable  area.  Destruction 
then,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  will  rarely  happen,  except  in  the  case 
of  some  great  change  of  conditions,  such  as  the  secular  drying 
of  climate,  which  (among  other  things)  is  apparently  responsible 
for  the  fact  that  Cupressus  macrocarpa,  etc.,  are  now  apparently 
dying  out  (or  rather  not  expanding)  in  California. 

One  may  get  very  good  evidence  in  favour  of  this  view  by 
applying  it  to  such  a  flora  as  that  of  Britain,  for  which  there  are 
good  statistics  of  distribution  available.  If  we  take  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  plants  by  the  number  of  Watson's  "vice-counties" 
that  they  reach  (37)  we  get  the  table  on  p.  114. 

The  diminution  of  the  numbers  in  every  line  from  left  to  right 
of  course  means  nothing,  for  the  species  are  taken  in  order  from 
first  to  fifth  most  widely  dispersed.  But  all  the  columns  alsc. 


W.  A. 


8 


114 


SIZE  AND  SPACE 


[PT.  II 


Table  showing  (in  the  horizontal  lines)  the  average  number  of  vice- 
counties  in  Britain  reached  by  the  most  widely  distributed  species 
in  each  genus  of  different  sizes,  and  by  the  second,  third,  fourth, 
and  fifth,  most  widely  distributed  species  in  each  genus. 


Average  number  of  vice-counties 
reached  by  the 


1st 

2nd 

3rd 

4th 

5th 

Genus  of 

species 

species 

species 

species 

species 

Over  10  species 

108 

104 

96 

86 

79 

6  to  10 

103 

84 

64  | 

49 

33 

5  species 

98 

76  1 

39 

22 

16 

4  „ 

89 

61 

35 

13 

3  „ 

89 

1  48 

27 

2 

73 

1  33 

1  „ 

50 

show  a  steady  diminution  from  top  to  bottom,  whether  the  first, 
second,  third,  fourth,  or  fifth  species  be  taken;  and  examination 
of  the  remaining  figures  shows  that  the  rule  holds  equally  well 
for  the  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  most  widely 
distributed  species.  The  most  widely  dispersed  species  of  a  large 
genus  (i.e.  a  genus  with  many  species  in  Britain)  is  (on  the  average) 
more  widely  dispersed  than  that  of  a  genus  with  6-10  species, 
this  than  that  of  a  genus  with  five,  and  so  on  right  down  the 
scale,  and  the  same  thing  shows  with  the  second,  third,  fourth, 
and  fifth  to  tenth  most  widely  distributed  species.  Nothing  but 
a  mechanical  explanation  can  explain  such  mechanical  regu- 
larity. If  the  vital,  climatic,  or  ecological  factors  had  many 
differences,  other  than  purely  local,  in  their  action,  one  would 
expect  some  breaks  in  the  regularity,  but  there  are  none.  The 
genera  occupy  areas  in  Britain  in  proportion  to  their  numbers 
of  species  there,  and  age  has  been  the  overwhelming  factor  in 
their  distribution. 

As  the  species  of  those  genera  with  one  species  each  average 
50  vice-counties,  and  those  with  two  73  and  33,  one  may  imagine 
that  on  the  average  one  species  in  the  latter  genera  arrived  before 
the  solitary  one  of  the  former.  In  the  same  way  (as  indicated  by 
the  vertical  lines  in  the  table)  two  species  in  the  genera  with 
four  or  five,  three  in  those  with  6-10,  and  at  least  five  in  the 
larger  genera,  probably  did  so. 

Such  results  as  this,  which  could  be  easily  multiplied,  go  to 
show  that  in  a  given  country  the  area  occupied  by  a  genus 
increases  (on  the  average  of  considerable  numbers)  with  the 


CH.  XII] 


SIZE  AND  SPACE 


115 


number  of  species  representing  that  genus  in  that  country,  or, 
in  other  words,  that  the  principle  of  Size  and  Space  is  valid. 
Very  little  consideration,  however,  is  required  to  show  that  in 
general  a  genus  of  many  species  occupies  a  larger  area  than  an 
allied  genus  of  few  species.  It  is  not  perhaps  always  realised 
how  close  the  agreement  really  is,  when  one  considers  a  number 
of  allied  genera  (as  with  Age  and  Area)  between  the  size  of  a 
genus  (as  marked  by  the  number  of  its  species)  and  space  occu- 
pied. Everyone  knows  that  Senecio  or  Astragalus,  with  1500  or 
more  species,  occupies  an  enormous  area,  whilst  monotypic 
genera  like  Fatsia  (Japan),  or  Welwitschia  (south-west  Africa), 
or,  again,  like  Ionopsidium  (Portugal)  or  Kitaibelia  (Lower 
Danube)  occupy  small  ones,  and  genera  with  intermediate 
numbers  of  species  often  occupy  areas  between  these  extremes. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  people  point1  to  such  a  genus  as  Hip- 
puris,  with  one  nearly  cosmopolitan  species,  or  Veronica,  with 
about  80  species  in  New  Zealand,  and  maintain  that  there  is  no 
connection  between  size  and  space.  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that 
these  exceptions  to  the  rule  are  very  numerous  and  very  im- 
portant, so  that  it  would  be  in  the  highest  degree  dangerous  to 
draw  a  rule  with  limits  as  narrow  as  those  for  Age  and  Area 
(ten  allied  species);  but  we  are,  nevertheless,  of  the  opinion  that 
such  a  rule  may  be  drawn,  in  such  a  form,  say,  as  "Within  any 
circle  of  plants  of  near  affinity,  living  under  similar  ecological 
conditions,  the  areas  occupied,  taking  the  genera  in  groups  of 
ten,  will  vary  with  the  number  of  species  in  the  genus,  being 
large  when  that  is  large."  It  is  to  be  noted  that  proportionate 
areas  are  not  claimed;  one  would  probably  have  to  deal  with 
the  genera  by  hundreds  rather  than  tens  for  this. 

The  number  of  species  in  a  genus  seems  to  bear  a  distinct 
general  relation  to  the  variety  of  conditions  that  exists  in  its 
range:  for  example,  water  plants  in  general  have  much  fewer 
species  than  land  plants  that  cover  the  same  area.  It  is  clear, 
however,  that  this  is  not  a  complete  explanation,  for  Veronica 
in  the  comparatively  uniform  conditions  of  New  Zealand,  or 
Eugenia  or  Strobilanthes  in  those  of  Ceylon,  is  represented  by 
many  species,  while  some  species  are  able  to  stand  a  variety  of 
conditions,  such,  for  example,  as  Cissampelos  Pareira  or  Senecio 
vulgaris.  On  the  whole,  however,  greater  variety  of  conditions 

1  "There  is  no  necessary  relation  between  the  area  a  genus  covers,  and 
the  number  of  species  it  contains,  though  speaking  generally,  monotypes 
have  a  restricted  area"  (51,  p.  xxx). 


8—2 


116 


SIZE  AND  SPACE 


[PT.  II 


means  greater  variety  of  forms,  and  as  to  obtain  that  greater 
variety  of  conditions  means  in  general  larger  areas,  size  of  a 
genus  and  space  occupied  go  largely  together. 

A  good  proof  for  the  general  correctness  of  Size  and  Space  is 
that,  as  we  shall  see  in  more  detail  below,  the  further  out  we  go 
among  the  islands,  the  larger  on  the  average  do  the  genera 
become  (in  the  number  of  species  they  contain  in  the  world). 
^Yhilst  the  world  average  for  a  genus  is  12-13  species,  the  non- 
endemic  genera  found  in  India  contain  on  the  average  about 
50  species  in  the  world,  in  New  Zealand  about  75,  and  in  the 
Hawaiian  Islands  about  100. 

Prof.  Small  (see  below,  Chapter  xiii)  has  worked  out  the  hypo- 
thesis of  Size  and  Space  with  reference  to  the  Compositae,  and 
his  results  form  a  remarkable  verification  of  its  correctness  in 
broad  outline,  and  consequently  a  further  proof  that  however 
much  the  distribution  of  an  individual  form  may  be  subject  to 
the  many  and  various  factors  already  mentioned,  on  the  average 
of  large  numbers  the  results  go  very  largely  in  accordance  with 
the  laws  of  probability,  so  that  the  distribution,  under  the  steady 
pull  of  age,  is,  on  the  large  scale,  much  more  mechanical  than 
we  had  previously  been  inclined  to  suppose. 

If  one  take  again  such  a  group  as  the  order  Helobieae  (7 
families)  which  are  chiefly  water  or  marsh  plants,  and  closely 
related,  one  finds : 

4  cosmopolitan  genera,  with          ...        ...  138  species;  average  34 

12  genera  occupying  large  areas  in  the  tropics, 

with    83     „              „  7 

2  genera,  temperate  and  subtropical  regions  7     „              „  3-5 

26  genera  of  small  area         ...        ...        ...  55     „              „  2 

showing  very  clearly  how  size  goes  with  space.  And  yet  it  is 
quite  possible  here  as  usual  to  pick  out  genera  that  go  in  the 
reverse  direction;  e.g.  Zannichellia  with  one  species  is  cosmo- 
politan, while  Philotria  with  five  is  confined  to  North  America. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  principle  we  have  laid  down  may 
be  seen  to  be  justified  by  the  facts  when  large  numbers  are  dealt 
with.  But  this  is  a  recognised  necessity  of  all  statistical  work, 
as,  for  instance,  in  working  out  results  under  Mendel's  Law. 

Now,  taking  this  principle  together  with  Age  and  Area,  it 
is  clear  that  Age  and  Size,  or  Antiquity  and  Amplitude,  if  an 
alliterative  title  be  preferred,  go  together,  and  on  the  whole  the 
larger  a  genus,  the  older  will  it  be,  within  its  own  circle  of  affinity. 
No  one  would  suggest  that  a  herbaceous  genus  of  100  species  was 


CB..  XIl] 


SIZE  AND  SPACE 


117 


of  the  same  age  as  a  tree  genus  with  100,  but  both  will  follow 
this  principle  as  far  as  possible.  It  goes  to  show  that  on  the  whole, 
as  the  area  occupied  increases,  a  genus  tends  to  break  up  into 
more  and  more  species:  only  at  times  does  the  original  species 
of  the  genus  cover  the  whole  of  its  range  when  it  has  reached  a 
very  large  area,  and  then  most  often  when  the  conditions  are 
very  uniform,  as  in  the  case  of  Zannichellia  for  example.  In  the 
case  of  the  Podostemaceae,  where  the  conditions  are  perhaps 
even  more  uniform,  and  yet  a  great  many  species  have  arisen, 
it  is  due,  as  I  shall  hope  to  show  in  a  later  publication,  to  the 
fact  that  the  plants  are  always  under  the  influence  of  plagio- 
tropism,  to  the  greatest  extent  possible. 

If  we  take  the  28  largest  genera  in  the  world  (51),  we  find  that 
about  16  are  cosmopolitan  in  their  distribution,  5  are  cosmo- 
tropical,  4  tropical  America,  and  Quercus  Old  World,  leaving 
only  Erica  and  Mesembryanthemum,  whose  large  number  of 
species  is  correlated  in  both  cases  with  the  fact  that  they  grow 
in  South  Africa,  where  the  extreme  conditions  seem  to  tend  to 
produce  large  numbers  of  species,  though,  as  we  shall  hope  to 
show  in  later  publications,  there  are  other  factors  in  the  matter. 

Nearly  half  the  species  in  the  world  (69,000  of  162,000)  belong 
to  1171  genera  that  occur  in  both  worlds  (average  59  species  per 
genus),  while  only  66,750  belong  to  9671  genera  that  are  con- 
fined to  a  single  continent  (average  7),  and  the  2026  genera  of 
the  northern  palaeotemperate  and  the  palaeotropical  regions, 
etc.  (i.e.  widely  distributed  in  the  Old  World)  have  about  26,250 
species  (numbers  from  my  Dictionary),  and  form,  as  one  would 
expect  upon  the  hypothesis  of  Size  and  Space,  an  intermediate 
between  the  other  two  groups  (average  13). 

Of  the  28  large  genera  named  above,  the  British  Isles  contain 
10,  Ceylon  17,  New  Zealand  11,  the  Hawaiian  Islands  14  and 
the  Galapagos  15.  Solarium  (1225  species),  Euphorbia  (750),  and 
Cyperus  (400)  occur  on  all  five,  and  four  others  on  four,  of  these 
groups,  the  only  ones  that  occur  on  none  being  Myrcia  and  Mam- 
millaria.  Of  the  244  genera  that  contain  over  100  species,  no 
fewer  than  166  occur  in  both  Old  and  New  Worlds,  28  in  tropical 
America,  and  19  in  the  Old  World  tropics,  leaving  only  31  for 
the  remaining  smaller  divisions  of  the  world,  like  tropical  Asia, 
which  has  only  7. 

In  the  same  way,  the  smaller  families  usually  occupy  smaller 
areas  than  the  larger,  and  the  question  arises  whether  they 
should  be  considered  of  equal  rank  to  the  latter.  Guppy  has 


118 


SIZE  AND  SPACE 


[PT.  II,  CH.  XII 


suggested  a  grouping  of  families  into  classes  based  upon  these 
principles,  for  which  he  has  suggested  the  title  Rank  and  Range, 
and  it  is  clear  that  in  all  future  systematic  work,  the  question 
of  area  must  occupy  some  attention. 

Excellent  examples  of  the  application  of  the  principle  of  Size 
and  Space  may  be  found  below,  e.g.  on  pp.  132,  164,  165, 
171-2,  174,  178,  187-8,  190,  and  197. 

Summary 

If  species  spread  in  a  country  mainly  in  accordance  with  their 
age,  then  it  is  clear  that  on  the  average  some  of  those  in  the 
genera  represented  by  most  species  will  have  arrived  before  the 
first  of  those  in  the  genera  represented  by  few.  This  principle 
may  be  extended,  and  under  the  name  Size  and  Space  may  be 
thus  expressed;  on  the  whole,  keeping  to  the  same  circle  of 
affinity,  a  group  of  large  genera  will  occupy  more  space  than  a 
group  of  small.  The  space  occupied  will  vary  more  or  less  with 
the  number  of  species. 

Illustrations  of  the  operation  of  this  principle  have  already 
been  given  in  Chapter  vn,  and  further  examples  are  drawn  from 
the  Helobieae,  and  from  the  flora  of  Britain,  while  a  good  instance 
is  also  given  by  Prof.  Small  in  the  next  chapter.  Many  other 
instances  can  be  found,  too,  in  later  chapters. 


CHAPTER  XIII 


AGE  AND  AREA,  AND  SIZE  AND  SPACE, 
IN  THE  COMPOSITAE 
By  James  Small,  D.Sc,  F.L.S. 

Age  and  Area.  In  a  previous  contribution  to  the  study  of  the 
geographical  distribution  of  the  Compositae  (103)  many  of  the 
conclusions  were  based  upon  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis  as 
far  as  the  phenomena  could  be  determined  roughly  by  simple 
inspection  of  a  series  of  maps  which  included  all  the  genera.  It 
was  mentioned  (103,  p.  190)  that  although  this  hypothesis  was 
still  restricted  to  "age  within  a  given  country,  its  proved  exten- 
sion to  absolute  age  and  total  area  seems  to  be  only  a  question 
of  time  and  application."  This  extension  of  the  original  hypo- 
thesis, which  was  suggested  in  1916  by  the  writer  (103,  p.  208), 
has  now  been  adopted  by  Dr  J.  C.  Willis,  and  the  present  con- 
tribution consists  of  a  critical  analysis  of  the  statistics  for  Age 
and  Area  in  the  Compositae  in  the  light  both  of  that  extension 
and  of  previous  phyletic  conclusions.  These  previous  suggestions 
were  summarised  as  "the  basis  of  future  discussions"  (103, 
p.  313)  in  a  family  tree  which  is  reproduced  upon  p.  125.  The 
statistical  data  are  given  in  Table  I,  and  were  obtained  by  the 
following  methods.  (Table  I,  pp.  120-124.) 

In  order  to  avoid  the  unbalanced  effects  of  the  inclusion  of 
new  genera  which  have  been  discovered  or  resuscitated  fre- 
quently as  the  result  of  special  studies  of  only  one  or  a  few 
tribes,  the  data  have  been  prepared  only  for  the  genera  included 
by  Bentham  in  the  Genera  Plantarum.  The  area  covered  by  each 
genus  has  been  determined  approximately  in  millions  of  square 
miles.  For  this  purpose  Mikania  and  Eupatorium  have  again 
(cf.  103,  pp.  133  and  204)  been  taken  as  one  genus,  and  so  have 
Aster  and  Erigeron  as  two  genera  which  are  "so  very  closely 
allied  that  the  transitional  species  are  comparatively  numerous 
and  the  genera  in  these  cases  are  distinguished  only  by  the  so- 
called  indefinable  characters  of  the  taxonomist"  (103,  p.  307). 
All  genera  occupying  less  than  1,000,000  square  miles  have  been 
included  in  Class  1 ;  while  59  other  classes  have  been  taken  for 
the  other  genera,  the  total  area  of  the  land  surface  of  the  world 
being  approximately  60  million  square  miles.  This  method  is, 


pq 


1       ^S^c^S^'  1 

M  (M 


Loo  -tLoo 


no 

_  co-£l  0^  cono 
§  On  J?  S 


I        I        I        I  I 


I        I        I        I        I  I 


pijom  pio  *m  IIV 


ONHONNON^O  '-'N~Tj-,x 


MM  Tf 

M  ^  «  h  n£>  ^  O  ^ 


•M-  I  "m~^"  I  I 
<N    I         <M  Cv)    I  I 


U0I§9£[ 

uuoujy  q^nog 


~o 
o 


O"  ON^O  ~m    3?     I         cV^  ^  I 


U0I§9)J 


Tj-  tj- 

"on  VoW  | 

On  01  ON  <SJ 


"on"^« 
ON  <m 


U0I§9}J 


U0tS9)J 
DI,;'BISY-09'Bd0Jna 


"cotx'oN'Sr  "on  Vo"  £  "^?  ^"5*  S 
MHOn<M  On      m       hi  "4- 


0O(M   O  <M  <N  log.  c^ 


~M~  O  •   -  "    '  M»  I 

U-CN-jONM-ONOSTj-^*. 

^tMm  ion* 


U0T§9^J 

ui39ui2iJ9itp9j\[ 


g-H^H^H^HM     ^  MH 


or 

o  <N 


^1  I 


U0I§9)J  UBTftZ'Bjg 

uoi§9}j  guipuy 

^  H  oo  N         oo  M  N              to  m          m  m  co  ^ 

S9ipUJ  ^S9^ 

uor§9y; 
S9^g  pa^iufl 

U0I§9}£  UB0TX9J\[ 

h  »tn.no      m      ^ .    co      M      H<0        -^lO  COVO  lO 
«0»  h       H      N  "on^O  ><>  ^6               °~>"m"  CO^m 

M  M 

Tribes  and  Sub-tribes 

Senecioneae  

1.  Senecioninae 

3.  Tussilagininae  ... 

1+3 

2.  Liabinae  

4.  Othonninae 
Gnaphalieae  (ltd.)  ... 
Inuleae  (Benth.) 

1.  Eu-gnaphalieae  ... 

2.  Plucheinae 

3.  Filagininae 

4.  Helichryseae 

5.  Tarchonanthinae... 

«U  co?2  ob^co£ 

N       co     ~       <n  VN 


Co  m  ^ 
co~co  H 
o» 


t-»    *>.     t»-     Q  M  ~ 

^  os^Lvo     ^  ^  v-^  nh(n  -~r°P  ^.00  m  o  m  co 

CO        M         in  *0 


I  I  I  I  I  I 


I  I  I 


"n"  h  ~c7  ro^  6v©  co  £  co  ' 
o»      co  m  w 


M  >0 
OO  ^ 


<0  M 


I  I  I 


^    m  i2.io 


i  i  n#?i  1 

~  coO\  1       "-~<M  1 

1         1         1                   1  1 
00  ">5h 

1 

1    1  1 

1        1       £  J^N  ^  1 

cO^°  <M  <M    1         1  1 
N  ^  w 

I     1     1    -SIT*  1  1 

00 

1 

1   1  l^^l  1 

1         1  1 
jo^jo^I       1  1 

1    1  |H    1  1 

1 

1               1  N 

00  rt» 

1 

1             1            1             1             1  I 

If?      ro      co      O  _ 

-k^co^co^-cV,^ 

N  »0 

co  H 

1             1            1            1             1  1 

1 

m  m 
M  H  00       O  H 

1            l            1            I            1  1 

1 

S^^c^1 
N       M  CO 

1    1    1    !    I  1 

1 

no        n-  4.  m  6  ^  h 

CO  H               H  ^O^t^H  nVO 

1    1    1    1    I  1 

in 

W 

VO 

w  ^^.^  woo  n 

H  01 

COS     '          ^^S^'  ^ 

1 

MIN  I 

"o" 

o"o§^^  1 

M  0» 

1 

1    1  ■  1    1    1  1 

O 
»*■ 

vo 
co 

Os-^  OY-p           O  w  CO  I 

^N  m           ^  1 

co       M  rh 

^MS  m  ^j.  m  ^-^00  Ow  H 

1 

I  1 

s  § 

s 


-9  £ 


<J    i3  .2 


-qng 


•h  £?so  J 


*S  vo 


o     co  S 


1      I      I      I  I 


VO 


PIJOM  pio  atfl  TIV 


00  H  JN^5  "O  ^ 


CO  ^  N  ' 


^  ^oo      m  ^ 


i  22.  H 


uox§9)j  ireips.qsny 


.  co  <m  »o 


U0I§9£[ 


!*NN*S  I 


f^fv.  I 


U0I§9}J 


I  I 


oo' 


2^o  I 


O^ 


~cT  fx.  oi  fx  | 


I  I 


CI  ir>Oo  m 
----SO  —  •  — — 


m      moo  moo 

<DY — -  •  • 

OO       N  is,  -tO  i-O 


oi^Bisy-oaBdoing 


-iiio  I 
£^  1 


roso  (N  V)  ■ 


PQ 
< 


UB8UBJJ8^tpaj\[ 


i      rj-  O  0> 


•BDuauiy  fly 


in      in  O 


-Tl  71  -CL  .  -SL  .         -iL°o  -o^o 

01  COSO  N\Q  h^h:    Ol  <k  ^  iV 


. fx  mso 


uoiSa^;  UBijrqQ 


c\_  m      m  cj 

r/-i  SJS,~-.         rr\     J  m  ^ 


I 

so  h 


moo 


U0I§9^  UBT^TZBjg 


-----  •  — .so  — -  ^J"1  w.— -so 


O  1 


U0T§9)J  9uipuy 


S9ipUJ  ^S9^\ 


oq  so 


^*vO 


I        I        I  I 


 V-N— lO 

O  ^  O  m 


I  I 


U0I§9}J 


I  I 


y.  0i  CO     3  ro"°  m  H  1\ 


uoi§9£[  UBoixaj^ 


i0)  M  "Oh 
so  "in"  Or)"^ 


00  -^"9  ro  m  I       22.  «0  (4 


PQ    PQ  O 
o  CO 


5  o 


o 


■*00^  O      fx  „  on 

-£1  Wl  "["V^ -^"9 -£2. ^  I      I        9v^  H f;22. <^->  i        ^2°  h^;^ 

7^  C-jT^  (^O  0|  vo  "O^T  ^1        I      "on  <OvO  VT>~5;  "Sh  £  C")  I       o  ^,^>1?<S 


i  fsfsi  i  i  I  pi  i  i 


1 

-sir*  | 
1  1 

1 

M    H  ' 

1 

1      1  1 

1 

1 

1 

Oh    1         N  H 

OJ        m        M  >0  , 

^  1 

ii  i  i 

oh  1  n 

1 

M  O 

1 

r-s^?  ^oo 

IN  H   M  O 

1 

1 

1  1  1  1 

1 

1 

Cg  OO  >w 
oo  H      <N  <~0 

— ■  <M   1       — M 

o 

— hw  —  •        On — —  • 
iO  <M  (M  H  IN.  \f-0O  k,  r*. 

 (NJ   01 

1 

1  1  1  1 

1 

1 

1 

r0>0  M  CO 
O  — -  •  -~  <M -~- »n  1 
N  O  N  <\j  m  hi 

N 
OO 

1  f5§.| 

^J-O  O^O  [OqL 
ioh  inh  f^^3 

M  1-00  IflfO 

m 

v© 

1 

1  1  §sl 

M  fX 

^     o  ~t 
0\,5"        iO~o^  co^  -if  ^  fO  1 

~       iO      VO  w 

M 

N       N  <0  u->  ^ 

0\^0  Tf  >/-> 
KM  tnh 

1 

1 

1 

00 

-?  1 

*-<    ii-  M    JL.    O  ^ 

^^^^  1 

I 

1 

Rh  ' 

1 

1     "J^"o"h  1 

1  1  1 

1 

1 

2     h  ^.xn 

On 

1 

1     ^o"n  1 

00 

<N  ~  M  M 

1  1  1 

1 

1 

1        1        1  1 

' 

1    i  1 

1 

1 

—  c*  1 

l 

1^*1  1 

1       M   *  1  1 

ro       m  _  N  *0 
^  sO   .  • 

1 

1 

1 

1       n     oo  1 

1 

1 

1 

Job 

I  I  I  I  I 


<a  o 
to 

2  "S 


.5 

s 

'M 

o 


Average  Generic 
Area 

saqu^ 
-qng 

1      ^.HhO  ]               hOo  .£2*o  1?.h  «H  I      2°  (s«  o  i^oo  1 

saqux 

O                       O  k. 

'                1      1      1      1    "5:^1      1  1 

M  0» 

PPOM  PIO  9W  IIV 

UTBoi.ijy  qinog 

<^_<^^.         h         I         i         H         i         i         i                  M  i>0O-!i? 

S^SI           1        1    1    1  ^N^^ 

U0I§9}J 

orjBisy  reordoix 

|3fe?Sfrl    1    1   1    1    1    1    1    1    1  1 

U0T§9^J 

UBOtijy  reo'ydojx 

uoiSay; 
oi^'BiSY-09'Bdojng 

1    III   1    1  . 1    1  J    1    I    I    1  J8 

U0I§9}J 

UBauBuaciipgj;^ 

1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1  M  § 

BDtiauiy  [jy 

M           M           "*          N  '•O 

-it  ir^  lO  1       -^°0                                             ~    1         1         1          I        M  . 
CO     J  CO     J            O        N  ^  H        M       d       fcl  . 

uotSa^j  ireiyiz'B.ig 

-5^-5*  2               ,      ^0  —  ^^.1        1        1        1        1  1 

?°St,«^l                      1     1     1     1  1 

mm"* 

uoiSay;  ainpuy 

«  U-i^Oo^O      QO        h      -^t^M-"                  1         1         1         1  . 

S9ipuj  1S9A\ 

UOT§9'JJ 

S9^g  p^iufi 

f^MT^f^";??!  f&i  i  i  i  i 

uoiSgy;  ueoixaj^ 

1  1111 

Tribes  and  Sub-tribes 

Vernonieae   

1.  Vernoniinae 

2.  Lychnophorinae  ... 
Helenieae   

1'.  Heleniinae 

1".  Tagetinae 

2.  Flaveriinae 

3'.  Jaumeinae 

3".  Baeriinae 
Arctotideae   

1.  Arctotidinae 

2'.  Gundeliinae 

2".  Gorteriinae 
Calenduleae  

EOCENE 


OLIGOCENE 


MIOCENE 


3  9. 


PLIOCENE 


PLEISTOCENE 


EUPATORIEAE 

—  PlOUERMNAE 
AGERATimae 

ADEN05TVLIMAE 

ASTEREAE 

coriyzmAE. 

BACCHARlD/riAE 
HETEROCHROMinAf 

■i — grangeinae 

BELLIDlttAE 
HOMOCMROriin/lE 

IMULEAE 

PLUCHEIftAE 

TARjCHONANTHirMf 
£U-GMAPHAUEA£:\ 
HEUCHRYSEAE  / 
ANGIANTHI/1AE 
RELHAWIMAE 
ATHRlXII/iAE 
NULINAE 
BUPHTH^LMIflAf 

CyHAREAE 

CEHTAUREINAE 
CARDUINAE 
CARLIMIMAE 
ECHINOPSIDirtAE 

VERNOM/EAE 

— VERNONIlMAE 

—  LYCHMOPH0RIMAE 

5EMECI0NE/IE 

—  LfABINAE 
— TU55)LACinmAE 
— 5EMECIONINAE 
— 0THONNIMAE 

CALENDW.EAE 
ARCTOT/DEAE 

ARCTOTID'NAE 
GORTERIIttAE 
GUhDCUitiAE 

UELLtViriAl 
TAGZTIMKE 
JAUMEINAE 
BAERMNAE 
FLAVLRIinAZ 

MUTI5IEAE 

BARMADE5MNAE 
NASSAU  VII NAE 
GOCHftATI  IttAE 
OMOSEftlOlNAE 
"ERBERINAE 

CICHOPIEAE 

SCOLVMINAE 
LACTUCIMAE 
OTHER  SUOTPiSfb 
SCOfiZONERlNAE 

ANTWEMIOOE 

CHRYSANTHEMIDIMAE- 
AMTHEMIDIftAE 

HELIANTfOE 

(i/LLERHMAE 
MELANPODMriAE 

ambroshmae 
lagasceimae 
petrc8/imae 
verbesinimae 
Zkinmhae 
madiinae: 
gaumsogihae 
c0re0psidinae 


126     AGE  AND  AREA,  AND  SIZE  AND  SPACE,    [pt.  it 


of  course,  only  one  of  rough  approximation,  but  the  inequalities 
more  or  less  cancel  out  when  the  genera  are  taken  in  groups  of 
ten  or  more  as  specified  for  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis. 

The  average  generic  area  has  been  determined  by  adding  up 
the  marks  (=  square  miles  in  millions)  for  all  the  genera  in  each 
group  and  dividing  by  the  number  of  genera.  This  "average 
generic  area"  has  been  determined  for  each  tribe  and  sub-tribe 
in  the  Compositae,  firstly,  for  the  whole  world  (using  my  own 
notes);  then  for  the  Old  World,  all  America  and,  in  the  sub- 
tribes,  for  each  of  the  twelve  great  regions  into  which  Bentham 
divided  the  world  in  relation  to  the  Compositae  (7),  using  the 
data  given  by  that  authority.  The  use  of  two  sources  for  the 
data  has  introduced  some  slight  discrepancies  in  the  figures,  but 
the  value  of  the  check  also  introduced  by  this  method  makes 


these  slight  differences  of  no  real  consequence.  All  these  data 
are  presented  in  Table  I,  and  on  the  whole,  taken  in  conjunction 
with  the  relative  ages  and  sources  of  these  groups  as  previously 
determined  (fig.  on  p.  125),  they  form  a  striking  corroboration, 
both  for  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis  and  for  the  previous 
phyletic  conclusions. 

In  accordance  with  the  indications  of  a  diphyletic  origin  of 
the  Inuleae  (103,  p.  301),  that  tribe  has  been  given  in  Table  I 
as  two,  the  Gnaphalieae  (limited)  which  includes  the  first  five 
sub-tribes  (with  the  Gnaphaliinae  divided  into  Eu-gnaphalieae 
and  Helichryseae)  together  with  half  the  Relhaniinae;  and  the 
Inuleae  (limited)  which  includes  the  last  three  sub-tribes  to- 
gether with  the  other  half  of  the  Relhaniinae  (cf.  fig.  on  p.  120). 
The  Inuleae  as  a  complete  tribe  may,  therefore,  be  omitted. 

Taking  the  tribes  in  order  of  origin,  as  given  on  p.  125,  we  find 
(Table  I,  col.  16)  that  the  average  generic  areas  range  from  7-9 
(Senecioneae)  through  6-5,  6-4,  6-2,  5-6,  5-5,  3-9,  5-3,  4-9,  4-5, 
4-8,  3-6  and  3-8  to  3-6  (Calenduleae).  In  this  list  there  are  three 
figures  not  in  series — 3-8  for  the  Arctotideae  follows  3-6  for  the 
Helenieae,  and  4-8  for  the  Vernonieae  follows  4-5  for  the  Eupa- 
torieae,  but  these  two  pairs  of  tribes  are  approximately  of  the 
same  age  (p.  125),  and  the  relative  positions  could  be  reversed 
without  any  argument.  The  third  figure  not  in  series  is  3-9  for 
the  Mutisieae,  a  tribe  in  which  much  geographical  splitting  of 
the  genera  largely  increases  the  number  of  genera  in  proportion 
to  the  area  occupied,  thus  decreasing  the  average  generic  area 
for  the  tribe. 

The  gradual  increase  of  average  generic  area  with  geological 


ch.  xiii]  IN  THE  COMPOSITAE 


127 


age  is  shown  even  more  strikingly  when  the  mean  is  taken  for 
the  tribes  arising  in  each  sub-division  of  the  geological  periods ; 
the  Mutisieae  are  then  the  only  exception  in  the  series  (Table  II, 
col.  4).  When  the  mean  is  taken  for  each  period  an  unbroken 
series,  running  7-2,  5-9,  4-6,  4-3,  3-6,  is  obtained  (Table  II,  col.  5). 


TABLE  II 


Average 

Average 

Average 

Time 

Tribes 

Generic 

for 

for 

Area 

Divisions 

Periods 

Pliocene 





— 

3-6 

Upper 
Middle 

— 

— 

Lower 

Calenduleae 

3-6 

3-6 

Miocene 

4'3 

Upper 

Arctotideae 

3-8) 

3*7 

Helenieae 

3-6/ 

Middle 

Vernonieae 

4'8\ 

4-65 

Eupatorieae 

4-5/ 

Lower 

Cynareae 

4-9 

4-9 

Oligocene 

4-6 

Upper 

Middle 

Inuleae  (ltd.) 

5'3 

5-3 

Lower 

Mutisieae 

3*9 

3-9 

Eocene 

5'9 

Upper 

Cichorieae 

5-51 

5-55 

Anthemideae 

5-6/ 

Middle 

Astereae 

6-2 

6-2 

Lower 

Heliantheae 

6-4 

6-4 

Cretaceous 

7-2 

Upper 

Gnaphalieae  (ltd.) 

6^7| 

7-2 

Senecioneae 

7-9/ 

Arranging  the  sub-tribes  within  each  tribe  in  the  order  of 
origin  as  given  on  p.  125,  we  find  that  even  there  the  series  follow 
the  average  generic  area  series  more  or  less.  The  series  (Table  I, 
col.  17)  for  the  following  six  tribes  are  unbroken  in  each  case: 

Anthemideae:  6-2,  4-3. 
Inuleae  (limited):  8-4,  3-5,  3-3,  1-7. 
Cynareae:  5-9,  51,  4-5,  3-3. 
Eupatorieae:  5-3,  4-1,  3-3. 
Vernonieae:  5-1,  4-0. 
Arctotideae:  4-7,  3-0,  2-8. 

The  Calenduleae  has  no  sub-tribes,  so  that  only  half  of  the 
fourteen  tribes  require  special  consideration. 

As  we  are  in  many  cases  dealing  with  fewer  than  ten  genera, 
and  since  a  number  of  the  sub-tribes  are  more  than  slightly 


128    AGE  AND  AREA,  AND  SIZE  AND  SPACE,    [pt.  11 


artificial,  while  several  contain  genera  which  are  exceptionally 
widespread  because  of  special  dispersal  mechanisms,  we  cannot 
expect  a  complete  correspondence.  On  the  other  hand,  a  family 
tree  is  available  (p.  125)  which  was  worked  out  in  the  first  place 
from  the  morphological  characters  of  the  styles  and  stamens 
(103,  fig.  7)  and  subsequently  modified  only  slightly  as  a  result 
of  the  consideration  of  the  most  extensive  data.  It  is,  therefore, 
interesting  to  examine  the  deviations  from  the  numerical  se- 
quence in  average  generic  area  for  the  other  seven  tribes. 

Senecioneae.  The  Tussilagininae  have  been  shown  to  be  a 
somewhat  mixed  group  of  genera,  separated  from  the  Senecio- 
ninae  in  a  rather  artificial  way  (103,  pp.  39  and  298),  and  these 
two  sub-tribes  are,  in  fact,  fused  by  Hoffman  in  the  Pfianzen- 
familien.  The  proper  statistical  procedure  is,  therefore,  to  take 
them  as  one  group  for  comparison  with  the  other  groups  within 
the  tribe;  then  we  obtain  another  unbroken  sequence — 8-9,  6-8,. 
3-6  (Table  I,  col.  17). 

Gnaphalieae  (limited).  With  the  Eu-gnaphalieae  and  Heli- 
chryseae  as  two  distinct  groups  the  series  for  the  Gnaphalieae 
reads  9-8,  8-8,  9-3,  4-3,  1-6,  1-7,  3-2.  There  are  in  this  case  two 
marked  exceptions  to  the  sequence.  The  first  is  the  Filagininae 
(9-3)  with  only  eleven  genera  including  Micropus  as  a  widely 
spread  weedy  type,  and  Filago  also  of  the  weedy  type  and  a 
distribution  suggesting  either  early  dispersal  by  man  or  a  poly- 
phyletic  origin.  If  this  genus  were  broken  up  into  three,  as  was 
done  by  many  of  the  earlier  synantherologists,  the  average 
generic  area  for  the  sub-tribe  would  be  7-8,  and  the  sequence 
would  be  unbroken  except  for  the  last  sub-tribe.  The  second 
exception  is  the  Angianthinae  (3-2),  chiefly  an  Australian  group 
with  only  ten  genera,  the  distribution  of  which  in  Australia  may 
be  somewhat  less  on  the  whole  than  has  been  estimated.  Such 
a  reduction  in  this  sub-tribe  would  bring  the  average  for  the 
Gnaphalieae  to  about  6-3,  but  a  similarly  careful  revision  in 
detail  of  the  other  sub-tribes  might  result  in  raising  the  average 
one  or  more  decimals,  so  that  such  changes  may  be  considered 
negligible  when  the  broad  outlines  of  the  history  of  the  family 
are  being  considered. 

Heliantheae.  The  series  for  this  tribe  appears  rather  irregular, 
running  thus:  6-9,  9-6,  3-7,  6-5,  2-7,  3-2,  12-8,  3-8,  6-0,  1-3;  but 
most  of  the  sub-tribes  contain  less  than  ten  genera.  It  is,  there- 
fore, advisable  to  group  them ;  the  first  three  groups  are  of  early 
origin  (see  p.  125),  while  those  numbered  6',  6",  6'"  in  Table  I 


ch.  xiii]  IN  THE  COMPOSITAE 


129 


are  so  marked  because  they  are  presumed  to  have  arisen  about 
the  same  time.  Taking  these  six  sub-tribes  as  two  groups  we 
get  the  series  6-7,  6-5,  2-7,  6-6,  6-0,  1-3.  In  this  series  there 
is  only  one  prominent  break,  2-7  for  Madiinae  with  only  seven 
genera.  Considering  the  sub-tribes  showing  exceptional  figures 
for  average  generic  area,  there  is  the  Coreopsidinae  (9-6)  with 
17  genera  of  which  Bidens  is  a  very  widely  spread  weedy  type 
with  a  very  special  dispersal  mechanism,  especially  when  the 
early  migrations  of  man  are  regarded  as  a  means  of  dispersal. 
The  Melampodiinae  shows  a  low  average,  but  it  has  an  average 
generic  area  very  similar  to  several  of  the  other  young  sub- 
tribes.  The  other  exceptional  figure  is  12-8  for  the  Ambrosiinae; 
in  which  there  are  only  nine  genera,  of  which  both  Ambrosia 
and  Xanthium  are  widely  spread  weeds,  the  latter  like  Bidens 
with  a  special  dispersal  mechanism. 

Astereae.  The  series  for  this  tribe  is  very  uniform,  running  5-4, 
6-0,  7-5,  7-7,  7-0,  5-5.  Such  a  sequence,  with  the  most  primitive 
sub-tribe  showing  the  lowest  average  generic  area,  might  well 
seem  to  show  that  the  present  thesis  cannot  be  maintained,  but 
only  two  of  the  six  groups  have  more  than  ten  genera.  Further, 
the  division  into  sub-tribes  is  introduced  by  Bentham  (7, 
p.  402) thus: 

The  vast  tribe  of  Asteroideae  is  neither  so  well  marked  as  a 
whole...,  nor  yet  is  it  well  divisible  into  distinct  groups.  Nearly 
the  whole  of  the  90  genera,  comprising  above  1400  species,  pass 

into  each  other  through  exceptional  or  intermediate  forms  The 

Asteroideae  not  being  divisible  into  distinct  sub-tribes,  we  may 
for  geographical  purposes  consider  a  number  of  types  with  the 
various  divergences  from  them. 

Bentham  also  gives  the  key  to  this  anomalous  distribution  as 
follows:  "Aster,  taken  in  its  most  extended  sense,  ranges  over 
the  whole  area  of  the  tribe;  but  isolation  has  been  ancient 
enough  to  admit  of  its  having  established  special  forms  in 
different  countries,  which  are  now  admitted  as  genera  by  most 
botanists"  (7,  p.  402);  and  in  the  Solidago  type  (7,  p.  410): 

We  have  here  about  320  species  in  24  genera,  all  nearly  allied 
to  each  other  and  only  distinguished  technically  from  Aster  and 
its  immediate  allies  by  the  homochromous  florets,  the  ray  florets, 
when  present,  being  yellow,  like  the  disk — a  character  in  general 
of  so  little  value  that  it  cannot,  in  Senecio  for  instance,  be  ad- 
mitted as  of  more  than  specific  importance. 

Translating  these  quotations  from  Bentham,  who  makes 
several  other  statements  of  a  like  nature  (cf.  op.  cit.,  pp.  405 
w.  a.  9 


130     AGE  AND  AREA,  AND  SIZE  AND  SPACE,    [pt.  ii 


and  412),  into  modern  terms  (46),  one  would  say  that  the  Astereae 
was  predominantly  a  case  in  which  a  primitively  world-ranging 
type  has  been  differentiated  in  situ  with  practically  no  spreading 
of  markedly  new  types  from  definite  centres  of  origin.  Some 
such  explanation  is  almost  necessary  for  the  frequency  of  inter- 
mediate species  and  the  grading  of  the  Aster,  Erigeron  and 
Conyza  types  into  each  other. 

Guppy's  theory  of  "Rank  and  Range,"  which,  although 
similar  to  "Age  and  Area,"  is  slightly  different,  is  therefore 
exemplified  in  this  tribe  of  the  Compositae;  whereas  the  other 
tribes  are  examples  rather  of  "Age  and  Area."  A  detailed 
examination  of  many  of  the  sub-tribes  in  other  tribes  shows 
that  within  the  sub-tribe  there  are  seldom  groups  of  genera 
which  show  markedly  different  average  generic  areas.  The  Eu- 
gnaphalieae  and  Helichryseae  are  exceptions.  This  leads  to  the 
conclusion  that,  in  spite  of  the  large  numbers  of  genera  and  species 
in  the  Astereae,  this  group  is  really  of  the  same  "rank"  (with 
regard  to  differentiation  and  Age  and  Area  statistics)  as  the 
normal  sub-tribes  of  most  of  the  other  tribes. 

Cichorieae.  The  ten  sub-tribes  into  which  this  tribe  is  divided 
are  admittedly  artificial.  Bentham  (op.  cit.,  p.  475)  writes:  "It 
is  very  difficult  to  arrange  these  genera  into  sub-tribes;  and 
those  we  have  adopted  are  in  a  great  degree  artificial,  and  have 
little  or  no  connection  with  geographical  distribution;  we  must, 
therefore,  now  consider  the  principal  genera  separately." 

The  Lactucinae  have  been  indicated  (103,  pp.  271  and  282,  and 
p.  125)  as  the  primitive  group,  while  the  Scorzonerinae  have 
been  indicated  as  a  fairly  definite  and  advanced  group  (103, 
p.  282).  Scolymus  is  quite  a  distinct  genus  and  the  only  one  in 
the  Scolyminae.  Grouping  the  other  seven  sub-tribes  together 
as  one,  we  have  the  series — 6-2,  5-9,  3-7,  4-0.  The  last  figure  is 
of  little  importance  since  it  represents  only  one  genus,  while  the 
other  figures  are  in  the  usual  sequence.  Of  the  seven  sub-tribes 
which  are  grouped  only  one,  Hyoseridinae  (42/10  =  4-2),  has  as 
many  as  ten  genera;  while  the  other  two  sub-tribes  which  are 
taken  singly  show  the  figures  69/11  =  6-2  (Lactucinae)  and 
37/10  =  3-7  (Scorzonerinae).  The  inclusion  of  the  American 
genera  in  Scorzonerinae  is  distinctly  artificial,  and  if  only  the 
Old- World  genera  are  taken  the  average  is  5-8.  Then  the  series 
for  the  Cichorieae  reads  6-2,  5-9,  5-8,  4-0,  and  it  is  in  complete 
sequence  and  in  perfect  accord  with  the  origins  given  on  p.  125. 
With  appropriate  statistical  treatment,  therefore,  this  tribe 


ch.xiii]  IN  THE  COMPOSITAE 


131 


shows  the  action  of  the  Age  and  Area  law,  and  it  is  interesting 
to  note  that  it  is  a  clear  case  of  an  origin  in  and  dispersal  from  a 
definite  centre  (see  103,  PI.  2,  fig.  31),  contrasting  markedly 
with  the  Astereae. 

Mutisieae.  As  stated  above  (p.  126)  the  low  average  generic 
area  for  this  tribe  is  to  be  explained,  at  least  in  part,  by  the 
rather  artificial  splitting  into  geographical  genera.  This  occurs 
chiefly  in  the  Gerberinae  and  Gochnatiinae,  and  an  allowance 
for  this  "error"  would  bring  into  greater  prominence  a  feature 
which  is  marked  in  the  series  as  given.  The  origin  of  the  Barna- 
desiinae  is  still  obscure,  therefore  the  3-5  for  that  sub-tribe  may 
be  neglected  for  a  moment.  The  series  for  the  other  sub-tribes 
reads  3-3,  2-6,  5-6,  4-2.  A  diphyletic  origin  for  the  Mutisieae,  as 
far  as  the  Barnadesiinae  is  concerned,  has  already  been  sug- 
gested (103,  p.  211),  but  the  data  for  Age  and  Area  suggest  very 
strongly  that  the  origin  of  the  rest  of  the  Mutisieae  has  also  been 
diphyletic,  giving  a  triphyletic  origin  for  the  tribe  as  a  whole. 
Some  difficulty  was  experienced  in  tracing  the  interrelationships 
of  these  sub-tribes  (cf.  103,  pp.  211  and  305),  and  it  is  quite 
probable  that  the  purely  American  sub-tribes,  Nassauviinae  and 
Onoseridinae,  are  relatively  recent,  while  the  other  two  sub- 
tribes  are  a  more  ancient  group  evolved  along  similar  lines. 
Then  we  have  two  groups  and  two  series,  3-3,  2-6,  and  5-6,  4-2, 
with  the  Barnadesiinae  (3-5)  intermediate  from  probably  a 
third  origin.  The  structural  affinities  combined  with  the  Age  and 
Area  data  allow  of  no  other  explanation  of  the  origins  of  this 
unique  tribe. 

Helenieae.  This,  the  last  of  the  tribes  showing  exceptional 
figures,  gives  the  series  6-4,  3-8,  5  6,  6-1,  2-1;  but  three  of  the 
five  sub-tribes  have  less  than  ten  genera  so  that  further  grouping 
is  required.  This  can  be  done  by  taking  as  one  group  the  first 
two  sub-tribes,  marked  1'  and  1"  (Table  I,  col.  1)  on  account  of 
suggested  simultaneous  origin,  and  as  another  group  the  last 
two  sub-tribes  3'  and  3"  for  the  same  reason.  The  series  then 
becomes  4-6,  5-6,  2-7.  The  middle  figure  is  not  in  sequence,  but 
it  refers  to  the  Flaveriinae  with  only  three  genera  (17/3  =  5-6), 
and  does  not,  therefore,  vitiate  the  general  argument  which 
applies  quite  well  to  the  first  and  last  groups,  both  with  more 
than  ten  genera. 

With  the  one  exception  of  the  Astereae,  which  has  been 
explained  (p.  129),  the  statistical  data  for  Age  and  Area  in  Com- 

9—2 


132    AGE  AND  AREA,  AND  SIZE  AND  SPACE,    [pt.  ii 


positae  can,  therefore,  be  said  to  demonstrate  in  some  consider- 
able detail  the  action  of  the  Age  and  Area  law  as  far  as  relative 
age  is  concerned  in  a  group,  the  evolutionary  history  of  which 
in  time  can  be  confirmed  by  many  other  lines  of  evidence. 

Size  and  Space.  Dr  Willis  has  also  forwarded  another  pre- 
diction to  the  effect  that,  "on  the  whole  the  area  occupied  by  a 
genus  (taking  a  great  many,  say  ten  allies  at  least)  varies  in  the 
same  sense  as  the  number  of  species  it  contains."  This  also  has 
been  worked  out  for  Compositae,  using  the  number  of  species 
recorded  for  each  genus  by  Bentham  in  the  Genera  Plantarum, 
in  order  to  avoid  the  inequalities  of  modern  species-splitting 
and  specialisation  in  particular  genera.  The  results  which  are 
given  in  Table  III,  when  analysed  properly,  form  a  remarkable 
verification  of  this  prediction.  The  average  number  of  species 
per  genus  does  follow  on  the  whole  the  same  series  as  the  average 
generic  area. 

TABLE  III 

Species/Genera 


Tribes  and  Sub-tribes 

Tribes 

Sub-tribes 

Average 
Generic 
Areas 

Senecioneae   

1266/44  =  28-7 

7.9 

1.  Senecioninae 

1053/26= 

40-51 

8-7 

3.  Tussilagininae 

24/7  = 

3-4i 

32*6 

9-4 

1+3   

1077/33  = 

32-6 

8-9 

2.  Liabinae  

50/5  = 

io-o^ 

6-8 

4.  Othonninae 

139/6  = 

23-1/ 

17-1 

3-6 

Gnaphalieae  (ltd.) 

975/100=9-7 

6-5 

Inuleae  (Benth.) 

6-i 

1.  Eu-gnaphalieae  ... 

214/20  = 

21-4 

9-8 

2.  Plucheinae 

157/16  = 

9-81 

8-8 

3.  Filagininae 

46/11  = 

4-2/ 

7*5 

9-3 

4.  Helichryseae 

393/26  = 

I5'i 

4*3 

5.  Tarchonanthinae. . . 

10/3  = 

3-3 

jio-9 

i-6 

6.  Relhaniinae 

91/14  = 

6-5\ 

i-7 

7.  Angianthinae 

64/10  = 

6-4/ 

3-2 

1.  Inulinae  ... 

131/19  = 

6-9 

8-4 

2.  Buphthalminae  ... 

45/i6  = 

2-8 

3'5 

3.  Athrixiinae 

39/7  = 

5-5 

3-3 

4.  Relhaniinae 

91/14  = 

6-5 

i-7 

Heliantheae   

1101/138  =  7-9 

6-4 

1.  Verbesininae 

604/57  = 

io-6 

6-9 

2.  Coreopsidinae 

i53/i7= 

9-0 

9-6 

1+2   

7'5 

3.  Melampodiinae  ... 

95/20= 

4-7 

3-7 

1+2+3   

852/94  = 

9-1 

6-7 

4.  Galinsoginae 

8i/7  = 

n-5 

6-5 

5.  Madiinae  

52/7  = 

7-4 

2-7 

6'.  Milleriinae 

40/11  = 

3-6) 

3-2) 

6".  Ambrosiinae 

40/8  = 

4-4  > 

4-0 

12-8  }  6-6 

6"'.  Zinniinae 

25/6  = 

4'iJ 

3-8i 

ch.  xiii]  IN  THE  COMPOSITAE  133 


TABLE  III  (Contd.) 

Species/Genera 


Average 

XliUco  allU  OUU  UlUco 

Tribes 

ollD~triD6S 

Generic 
Areas 

7.  Lagasceinae 

— 

7/1  =  7-o 

6-o 

8.  Petrobiinae 

— 

4/3  =  i-3 

i'3 

Astereae1   

(1386/91  =  15-2) 

— 

6-2 

1.  Homochrominae ... 

— 

323/26  =  12-4 

5-4 

2.  Heterochrominae 

— 

601/36  =  16-7 

6-o 

3.  Conyzinae 

109/10  =  10-9 

7-5 

4.  Bellidinae 

80/10=  8-o 

7-7 

5.  Baccharidinae 

256/3  =85-3 

7-o 

6.  Grangeinae 

— 

17/6  =  2-8 

5-5 

Anthemideae  ... 

67i/45  =  i4-9 

— 

5-6 

1.  Chrysanthemidinae 

— 

399/30  =  13-3 

6-2 

2.  Anthemidinae 

272/15  =  18-1 

3-7 

Cichorieae   

824/56  =  14-7 

— 

5-5 

1.  Lactucinae 

— 

148/11  =  13-4 

6-2 

3.  Scorzonerinae 

— 

165/10  =  16-5 

3-7 

4.  Scolyminae 

— 

3/1  =  3-0 

4-0 

2.  All  other  sub-tribes 

— 

508/34=14-9 

5-9 

Hyoseridinae    . . . 

— 

50/10=  5-0 

4-2 

Lapsaninae 

11/3  =  3-6 

7-3 

Crepidinae 

162/6  =27-0 

6-3 

Hieraciinae 

— 

171/3  =57-o 

9-3 

Hypochoeridinae 

— 

95/5  =19-0 

10-4 

Dendroseridinae 

— 

8/2  =  4-0 

i-o 

Rhagadiolinae  ... 

Il/5    =  2-2 

3-2 

Mutisieae 

43o/53  =  8-2 

3-9 

?  Barnadesiinae 

11/2  =  5-5 

3-5 

1.  Nassau viinae 

166/14=  n-8 

3-3 

2.  Onoseridinae 

— 

62/10=  6-2 

2-6 

3.  Gerberinae 

— 

101/10=10-1 

5-6 

4.  Gochnatiinae 

98/17=  5-8 

4-2 

Inuleae  (ltd.)   

(306/56=  5'4) 

— 

5-3 

Cynareae2   

(992/37  =  26-8) 

— 

4-9 

1.  Centaureinae 

— 

402/10=40-2 

5-9 

2.  Carduinae... 

— 

476/17=28-0 

5-1 

3'.  Echinopsidinae  ... 

— 

75/2  =37-5\ 

n-4 

4-5 

3".  Carlininae 

— 

39-8  =  4-8/ 

3"3 

Eupatorieae 

(727/35  =  20-7) 

— 

4-5 

1.  Ageratinae 

— 

595/20  =  29-7 

5'3 

2.  Adenostylinae 

— 

77/8  =  9-6 

4'i 

3.  Piqueriinae 

— 

55/7  =  7-8 

3*3 

Vernonieae 

534/40  =  i3-3 

4-8 

1.  Vernoniinae 

482/29  =  16-6 

5-1 

2.  Lychnophorinae  . . . 

52/11=  4-7 

4-o 

Helenieae 

278/60=  4-6 

3-6 

1'.  Heleniinae 

48/7  =  6-81 

7-3 

1".  Tagetinae 

114/14=  8-iJ 

2.  Flaveriinae 

9/3  =  3-o 

5-6 

3'.  Jaumeinae 

12/6    =  2-0") 
95/30=  3-l/ 

2-9 

6-i\ 

3".  Baeriinae 

2-i)2-7 

Arctotideae 

236/17  =  13-9 

3-8 

1.  Arctotidinae 

115/8  =14-3 

4-7 

2'.  Gundeliinae 

3/2  =  i-5\ 

13-4 

3-o 

2".  Gorteriinae 

118/7  =16-8/ 

2-8 

Calenduleae 

114/8  =14-2 

3-6 

1  Astereae + Eupatorieae =16-7. 


2  Cynareae + Inuleae  (ltd.)  =  13*9. 


134     AGE  AND  AREA,  AND  SIZE  AND  SPACE,    [pt.  ii 


In  this  case  it  is  clear  that  the  larger  the  groups  of  allies  taken 
the  more  reliable  the  results,  therefore  the  Astereae  has  been 
grouped  with  its  derivative  tribe  (Eupatorieae)  and  the  Inuleae 
(limited)  has  been  grouped  with  the  derived  Cynareae.  In  this 
way  the  number  of  larger  groups  has  been  reduced  from  fourteen 
to  twelve,  and  these  give  the  following  series  of  averages  for 
number  of  species  per  genus1: 

28-7,  9-7  ||  7-9,  16-7,  14-9,  14-7  ||  8-2,  13-9  ]  \  13-3,  4-6  13-9  \  \  14-2. 
The  last  two  numbers  are  not  quite  in  series,  but  they  represent 
groups  with  only  seventeen  and  eight  genera  respectively.  All 
the  four  numbers  out  of  sequence  are  practically  in  series  with 
each  other.  The  low  figures  for  the  Gnaphalieae  (9-7)  and  Heli- 
antheae  (7-9)  may  be  traced  to  the  fact  that  many  of  the  genera 
are  plants  of  the  plains,  where  the  average  number  of  species 
per  genus  is  lower,  according  to  Harshberger  (cf.  103,  p.  187), 
than  it  is  along  the  mountain  ranges  with  their  highly  diversified 
topography.  The  low  figure  (8-2)  for  the  Mutisieae  furnishes  a 
curious  pieCe  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the  prediction,  for  it  may 
be  noted  that  the  average  generic  area  is  also  lower  than  it 
should  be  in  the  series;  and  the  geographical  splitting  of  genera 
already  mentioned  would  reduce  not  only  the  area  but  also  the 
number  of  species  per  genus.  The  low  figure  (4-6)  for  the  Helenieae 
also  occurs  in  conjunction  with  a  low  figure  for  average  generic 
area.  Thus,  of  the  twelve  groups  taken  only  two  do  not  fall  into 
the  same  series  as  that  for  average  generic  area. 

The  increase  of  average  number  of  species  per  genus  with  age 
shows  even  more  strikingly  when  the  mean  is  taken  of  the  figures 
for  each  geological  period.  The  figures  for  the  groups  arising  in 
the  five  periods  concerned  are  separated  by  vertical  lines  in  the 
series  as  given  above;  and  the  means  for  the  Upper  Cretaceous, 
Eocene,  Oligocene,  Miocene  and  Pliocene  read  thus:  19-2,  12-8, 
11-0,  10-6,  14-2.  Only  the  last  figure  is  out  of  sequence,  and  it 
represents  a  single  small  tribe,  the  Calenduleae,  with  eight  genera 
and  114  species,  which  are  scarcely  sufficient  for  reliable  data. 

When  we  take  the  subordinate  groups  the  same  correspondence 
between  the  two  series  shows  very  well  on  the  whole.  For  the 
present  purpose  as  much  grouping  of  the  sub-tribes  as  seems 
reasonable  has  been  made  in  order  to  get  groups  with  more  than 
ten  genera.  Taking  the  tribes  seriatim  we  get  the  following  data : 

Senecioneae.  The  Tussilagininae  are  sunk  as  before  giving  32-6; 
the  Liabinae  and  Othonninae  are  grouped  to  get  more  than  ten 
1  Numbers  in  italics  are  in  series  or  nearly  so. 


CH.  XIIl] 


IN  THE  COMPOSITAE 


135 


genera  giving  189/11  =  17*1;  and  the  series  is  complete.  An 
interesting  point  is  the  large  figure  (40-5)  for  the  basal  sub-tribe 
of  the  family,  which  is  exceeded  only  in  the  Baccharidinae  (85-3) 
and  the  Hieraciinae  (57-0),  both  with  only  three  genera. 

Gnaphalieae  (limited).  The  Plucheinae  and  Filagininae  are 
grouped  as  similar  in  age  and  in  area,  giving  203/27  =  7-5;  the 
Helichryseae  is  grouped  with  its  derivatives  Relhaniinae  and 
Angianthinae  giving  548/50  =  10-9.  The  series  for  the  tribe  then 
reads  21-4,  7-5,  10-9,  3-3.  The  larger  figure  for  the  Helichrysum 
group  may  be  explained  as  an  effect  of  the  diversified  topography 
in  South  Africa;  the  other  figures  are  in  series. 

Inuleae  (limited).  Two  out  of  the  four  figures  are  in  series,  but 
the  numbers  of  genera  are  low  in  all  cases. 

Heliantheae.  The  first  three  sub-tribes  and  those  marked  6', 
6",  6"'  are  again  counted  as  two  groups;  and  the  series  reads 
thus:  9-1,  11-5,  7-4,  4-0,  7-0,  1-3.  The  exceptions  are  11-5  for  the 
Galinsoginae  with  only  seven  genera  and  7-0  for  the  Lagasceinae 
with  only  one  genus. 

Astereae.  The  series  (12-4,  16-7,  10-9,  8-0,  85-3,  2-8)  in  this 
tribe  again  shows  the  series  following  age  as  previously  suggested, 
with  two  exceptions.  These  are  85-3  for  the  Baccharidinae  with 
only  three  genera,  and  12-4  for  the  Homochrominae  as  compared 
with  16-7  for  the  Heterochrominae.  The  latter  figures,  when  com- 
pared with  5-4  and  6-0  for  average  generic  area,  are  seen  to 
follow  the  sequence  for  area. 

Anthemideae.  In  this  tribe  the  figures  are  not  in  the  proper 
series. 

Cichorieae.  The  series  in  this  case  runs  practically  in  the  oppo- 
site direction  to  the  average  generic  area  series,  but  the  numbers 
of  genera  are  low  in  three  of  the  four  groups.  These  two  excep- 
tional tribes,  it  should  be  noted,  show  the  proper  sequence  as 
tribes,  so  that  it  would  seem  that,  not  only  the  admittedly  arti- 
ficial subdivision  in  both  tribes  (see  below),  but  also  the  small 
number  of  genera  in  most  of  the  subordinate  groups  has  an 
effect  on  the  correspondence  of  the  series  in  these  cases. 

Mutisieae.  Adopting  the  triphyletic  origin  of  this  tribe,  which 
is  suggested  above,  we  have  three  sets  of  figures  which  corre- 
spond to  the  three  series  for  area  and  show  the  same  sequence 
within  the  sets. 

Cynareae.  Grouping  3'  with  3"  as  being  of  the  same  age,  we 
get  the  series  40-2,  28-0,  11-4,  which  corresponds  completely 
with  the  series  for  area. 


136     AGE  AND  AREA,  SIZE  AND  SPACE    [pt.  ii,  ch.  xiii 

Eupatorieae.  The  series  here  (29-7,  9-6,  7-8)  also  corresponds 
completely  with  the  series  for  area. 

Vernonieae.  The  series  here  (16-6,  4-7)  also  corresponds  com- 
pletely with  the  series  for  area. 

Helenieae.  Grouping  1'  with  1",  and  3'  with  3"  as  being  of  the 
same  age  we  get  the  series  7-3,  3-0,  2-9,  which  agrees  completely 
with  the  order  of  origin  as  given  previously  (p.  125). 

Arctotideae.  Grouping  2'  with  2"  as  being  of  the  same  age  we 
get  the  series  14-3,  13-4,  which  also  corresponds  completely  with 
the  series  for  area. 

The  prediction  that  the  series  for  the  average  number  of 
species  per  genus  will  follow  those  for  the  average  generic  area 
may,  therefore,  be  said  to  be  verified  for  the  tribes  on  the  whole, 
ten  out  of  twelve  showing  a  similarity;  and  also  for  the  sub- 
tribes  on  the  whole,  with  the  exception  of  three  tribes  out  of 
fourteen.  Further,  the  divergences  amount  to  two  out  of  four 
sub-tribes  in  the  Inuleae  (limited);  while  the  subdivision  of  the 
other  two  tribes  (Anthemideae  and  Cichorieae)  is  admitted  by 
Bentham  to  be  artificial.  For  the  Anthemideae  he  records  (7, 
p.  451):  "In  the  Genera  Plantarum  we  have,  for  convenience' 
sake,  classed  the  genera  somewhat  artificially,"  and  (op.  cit., 
p.  450)  "It  is  not  easy,  either,  to  group  them  into  well-marked 
sub-tribes."  On  the  artificial  subdivision  of  the  Cichorieae  he 
has  already  been  quoted  (p.  130). 

The  conclusion  is,  therefore,  quite  justified  that  in  the  Com- 
positae  on  the  whole  both  the  average  generic  area  and  the 
average  number  of  species  per  genus  are  closely  related  to 
absolute  age. 


CHAPTER  XIV 


AGE  AND  AREA  FROM  A 
PALAEOBOTANICAL  STANDPOINT 
By  Mrs  E.  M.  Reid,  B.Sc,  F.L.S. 

Any  student  of  ancient  floras  must  feel  that  in  its  power  to 
meet  the  facts  of  geology  and  palaeobotany  lies  the  supreme 
test  of  Dr  Willis'  theory  of  Age  and  Area.  The  time  has  not  come 
when  such  a  test  can  be  applied  with  any  degree  of  fullness,  for 
the  history  of  Tertiary  floras,  which  are  those  chiefly  concerned, 
is  still  but  imperfectly  known;  and  more  especially  is  this  true 
of  their  migrations.  Nevertheless,  even  if  we  cannot  make  a  full 
comparison,  it  may  be  of  use  to  make  a  beginning,  by  comparing 
such  conclusions  as  have  been  reached  by  the  two  studies;  not 
only  for  the  sake  of  testing  a  new  theory,  but  because,  if  it  holds, 
palaeobotany  has  much  to  learn  from  it  of  the  past  history  of 
plant-life  and  must  therefore  reconsider  its  conclusions  in  the 
light  of  new  knowledge. 

In  what  follows  I  do  not  propose  to  go  much  beyond  the  range 
of  my  own  studies,  but  these  have  been  largely  concerned  with 
the  questions  of  which  Age  and  Area  treats,  the  migration  of 
floras,  the  age  of  species,  and  the  extermination  of  species.  The 
material  of  study  has  been  the  Pleistocene  floras  of  Britain,  and 
some  late  Tertiary  floras  of  West  Europe,  chiefly  the  following 
Pliocene  floras:  Cromerian  (East  Anglia),  Teglian  (Holland), 
Castle  Eden  (Durham),  Reuverian  (Dutch-Prussian  border), 
Pont-de-Gail  (Cantal).  These  have  been  investigated  by  an 
examination  of  seeds  and  fruits. 

Plant  Migration.  If  there  is  one  fact  which  has  emerged 
more  clearly  than  another  from  the  study  of  Pleistocene  and  late 
Tertiary  floras  in  West  Europe,  it  is  that  at  different  geological 
times,  different  floras  have  occupied  the  same  locality.  By 
"different  floras"  is  meant  different  assemblages  of  plants  which 
have  lived  in  the  past,  as  they  do  in  the  present,  in  regional,  or 
in  ecological  association,  more  especially  in  climatic  association. 

Thus,  by  the  quantitative  study  of  pollen-grains  in  the  suc- 
cessive horizons  of  the  peat-bogs  of  Scandinavia,  it  has  become 
possible  for  Scandinavian  workers  to  trace  successive  assemblages 


138 


AGE  AND  AREA  FROM  A 


[PT.  II 


of  plants  at  different  periods,  not  only  so  as  to  gain  a  knowledge 
of  the  species  occupying  the  country  at  successive  times  in  the 
Pleistocene,  but  so  as  to  gain  also  some  knowledge  of  the  pro- 
portion in  which  those  species  flourished  (60). 

Or,  again,  we  may  take  in  our  own  country  the  succession 
seen  in  our  eastern  counties.  In  the  Cromerian  (83)  at  the  close 
of  the  Pliocene  period,  we  find  a  temperate  flora  almost  identical 
with  that  now  inhabiting  East  Anglia.  At  a  later  period  we  find 
a  flora  composed  of  plants  nowT  inhabiting  colder  regions — sub- 
arctic, alpine,  or  cold  temperate  (15,  72,  82).  Yet  again,  in  the 
present  day,  after  a  further  interval,  when  the  climate  has  once 
more  become  temperate,  we  find  the  old  temperate  flora  of  the 
Cromerian  back  in  its  former  locality,  shorn  only  of  a  few  of  its 
elements. 

The  instances  of  such  successions  could  be  multiplied,  but  the 
above  are  sufficient  to  show  that  we  have  definite  evidence  of  a 
continual  swaying  to  and  fro  of  plant-life. 

Evidence  of  this  kind  can  scarcely  be  interpreted  otherwise 
than  as  indicating  the  movement  of  plant  assemblages,  under 
the  influence  of  climatic  change;  in  other  words,  migration. 

But  if  migration  has  occurred,  how  has  it  been  brought  about? 
The  answer  is  suggested  by  Dr  Willis'  theory  of  Age  and  Area, 
though  the  idea  of  plant  movement  embodied  in  it  would  seem 
to  need  some  modification.  Dr  Willis  suggests,  as  a  result  of  his 
wrork,  that  newly  arrived,  or  newly  formed,  species  tend  to 
spread  outwards  in  all  directions  from  their  point  of  arrival,  or 
point  of  origin,  like  rings  formed  by  casting  a  stone  into  a  pool. 
In  such  a  tendency  we  see  a  motive  force;  but  migration  is  a 
directed  movement,  and  the  combined  evidence  of  geology  and 
palaeobotany  indicates  that  the  directing  force  is  change  of 
climate.  Each  species  flourishes  best  under  definite  climatic 
conditions,  within  limits  appropriate  to  itself.  Change  of  climate, 
acting  ecologically,  works  as  a  weeding  process,  so  that  move- 
ment, instead  of  being  general  all  round,  becomes  a  movement  in 
one  definite  direction — migration. 

From  various  considerations  of  geology,  palaeontology,  fossil 
and  recent  botany,  the  conclusion  has  been  reached  that  if 
change  of  climate  has  been  from  cold  to  heat,  in  a  flat  country 
migration  has  been  polewards,  in  a  mountain  country  upwards. 
If  the  change  has  been  from  heat  to  cold,  then  in  a  flat  country 
migration  has  been  equatorwards,  in  a  mountain  country  down- 
wards. 


ch.  xiv]      PALAEOBOTANICAL  STANDPOINT  139 


In  the  paper  on  the  "Sources  and  Distribution  of  the  New 
Zealand  Flora,"  pp„  354-362,  the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  there 
were  two  main  plant-invasions  by  which  New  Zealand  was  popu- 
lated, a  northern  and  a  southern.  In  a  subsequent  paper  (134) 
this  conclusion  is  amplified.  The  northern  invasion  is  split  into 
three,  a  principal  one  from  the  north,  and  two  subsidiary  ones, 
called  the  Kermadec  and  western  invasions  respectively. 

It  will  at  once  be  seen  that  we  have  here  postulated  three 
invasions  (northern,  western,  and  Kermadec),  which  in  their 
general  direction  are  poleward,  and  one  invasion  (southern) 
which  is  equatorward.  Bearing  in  mind  the  conclusions  we  have 
reached  as  to  the  relationship  between  direction  of  migration 
and  change  of  climate,  it  would  appear  that  the  three  poleward 
invasions  must  have  occurred  whilst  the  climate  of  all  the  regions 
involved,  or  possibly  only  that  of  New  Zealand,  was  becoming 
warmer;  the  southern  invasion,  equatorward,  must  have  oc- 
curred whilst  the  climate  of  the  regions  involved  was  becoming 
colder. 

It  will  be  sufficient  for  our  argument  if  we  consider  only  the 
two  main  divisions,  the  northern  and  southern. 

Dr  Willis  brings  forward  strong  evidence  (132,  and  cf.  p.  81) 
to  show  that  of  the  two,  the  northern  was  much  the  older.  We 
have,  therefore,  to  consider  one  very  old  migration  polewards 
whilst  the  climate  was  warming,  and  one  newer,  equatorwards, 
whilst  the  climate  was  cooling. 

For  the  migration  of  floras  (plants  in  ecological  association), 
as  opposed  to  the  casual  transport  of  individuals,  Dr  Willis 
rightly  insists  that  land  connection,  complete  or  all  but  com- 
plete with  the  source  of  dispersal,  at  the  time  of  dispersal,  is 
necessary.  It  is  inconceivable  that  associated  assemblages  could 
travel  in  one  definite  stream  except  by  land.  A  sea-passage 
must  have  sifted  out  species  with  inferior  powers  of  dispersal 
across  water  in  a  way  that  is  not  found  to  have  occurred. 

We  have  now  traced  the  conditions  necessary  for  these  two 
main  invasions  as  postulated.  For  the  northern,  a  very  ancient 
land  connection  between  New  Zealand  and  Indo-Malaya,  with 
a  climate  increasing  in  temperature,  certainly  in  New  Zealand, 
and  probably  over  the  whole  of  these  regions.  For  the  southern, 
a  very  much  later  land  connection  southwards,  at  least  as  far 
as  the  Campbells  and  Aucklands,  with  the  climate  of  these 
regions  becoming  colder.  It  will  readily  be  seen  that  for  the 
western  and  Kermadec  invasions,  conditions  very  similar  to 


140 


AGE  AND  AREA  FROM  A 


[PT.  II 


those  needed  for  the  northern  invasion  must  have  occurred, 
possibly  at  intermediate  periods. 

Such  are  the  problems  which  present  themselves  for  solution 
when  we  attempt  to  apply  the  results  of  the  comparative  study 
of  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  floras  to  the  postulated  migrations 
of  the  New  Zealand  flora.  Whether  the  geology  of  New  Zealand 
and  Indo-Malaya  will  bear  out  the  possibility  of  these  changes 
of  sea-level  associated  with  the  corresponding  changes  of  climate, 
it  is  for  students  of  those  regions  to  say.  The  answer  is  outside 
the  range  of  my  knowledge. 

Extermination.  The  study  of  West  European  Pliocene  floras 
led  to  the  recognition  of  an  extinct  Tertiary  flora  in  West  Europe. 
This  flora,  which  I  have  named  the  Chinese-North-American 
Association  of  Plants,  is  now  represented  by  two  living  plant 
associations;  the  one  the  forest-belt  flora  of  the  East  Asian 
mountains,  the  other  the  allied  flora  of  parts  of  North  America. 
There  is  much  evidence  from  recent  and  fossil  botany,  and 
geology,  to  show  that  all  three  are  migrant  floras,  branches  of  a 
common  polar  or  circumpolar  flora,  which  migrated  southward 
in  later  Tertiary  time  under  the  influence  of  a  cooling  climate  in 
the  Northern  Hemisphere.  The  travel  southward  of  each  branch 
must  have  extended  over  many  hundreds,  more  probably  thou- 
sands, of  miles.  In  the  end  there  resulted  the  complete  exter- 
mination of  the  European  branch,  and  the  isolation  of  the  other 
two,  in  regions  of  the  Old  and  New  World  respectively,  separated 
by  many  thousand  miles  of  sea  and  land. 

In  the  history  of  this  flora  we  see  exemplified  two  kinds  of 
extermination,  both  of  which  are  concerned  with  the  questions 
raised  by  the  study  of  Age  and  Area.  In  the  first  place  we  have 
regional  extermination;  no  trace  being  left,  in  the  region  where 
such  extermination  occurs,  of  the  life  that  has  been.  In  the 
second  place  we  have  specific  extermination;  the  species  being 
killed,  but  an  allied  one  taking  its  place. 

Regional  Extermination.  Regional  extermination,  as 
illustrated  by  the  history  of  the  Chinese-North- American  flora, 
may  be  of  different  degrees. 

(1)  It  may  be  confined  to  one  region  only.  We  have  numerous 
instances  of  this  in  our  flora.  Take,  for  example,  the  genera 
Magnolia,  Liriodendron,  Menispermum,  and  Nyssa.  These  have 
been  exterminated  in  Europe,  but  have  survived  in  East  Asia 
and  North  America ;  though  they  are  now  represented  by  different 


ch.  xiv]      PALAEOBOTANICAL  STANDPOINT  141 


species  in  the  two  regions.  Survivals  of  this  kind  in  Japan  and 
North  America,  which  are  many,  led  to  the  recognition  by  Asa 
Gray  of  the  fact  that  the  floras  of  Japan  and  Atlantic  North 
America  are  allied. 

(2)  It  may  have  occurred  in  two  out  of  the  three  regions.  Thus 
Phellodendron,  Actinidia,  and  Zelkowa  have  been  exterminated 
in  Europe  and  probably  in  North  America,  but  survive  in  the 
East  of  Asia.  Dulichium,  Karwinskia,  Proserpinaca  have  been 
destroyed  in  Europe  and  probably  in  East  Asia,  but  survive  in 
North  America.  When  such  regional  distribution  has  occurred, 
there  is  nothing  to  indicate  in  the  present  how  wide  the  distribu- 
tion may  have  been  in  the  past,  or  to  say  whether  genera  are 
survivals  or  not. 

(3)  Extermination  may  have  extended  to  all  three  regions.  In 
that  case  the  past  is  completely  wiped  out,  and  in  the  present 
there  is  no  sign  of  the  life  that  has  been.  We  have  numerous 
instances  of  such  extermination  in  the  case  of  species — extinct 
species  of  Dulichium,  Euryale,  Liriodendron,  and  so  on,  far  too 
numerous  to  name  here;  but  we  have  also  in  all  probability 
instances  of  genera  exterminated  in  the  many  undetermined 
fossil  forms  which  would  appear  to  belong  to  living  families,  but 
cannot  be  placed  in  living  genera.  These  forms  are  mostly  un- 
named so  cannot  be  referred  to,  but  by  consulting  the  works 
enumerated  they  will  be  recognised. 

It  is  this  fact,  that  endemic  species  can  frequently  be  proved 
to  be  survivors  from  a  wide-ranging  past,  which  offered  to  me 
the  greatest  stumbling-block  to  the  acceptance  of  the  theory  of 
Age  and  Area.  So  formidable  did  the  difficulty  appear  that  I 
felt  it  must  vitiate  the  reasoning  which  pointed  to  endemics  as 
the  newest  elements  in  plant-life;  and  yet  it  was  hard  to  see 
where  the  flaw  could  lie;  and  the  theory  offered  so  simple  and 
reasonable  an  explanation  of  much  that  one  met  with  in  paleo- 
botany. 

A  student  of  Tertiary  floras  must  stand  by  the  fact  that  in 
many  instances  endemics  are  survivors  from  races  that  once  flour- 
ished widely,  though  they  do  so  no  more.  Take  the  genus  Sequoia. 
It  once  inhabited  Europe,  Eastern  Asia,  the  Arctic  regions,  and 
large  areas  of  North  America;  now  it  is  confined  to  the  Pacific 
coast  of  California.  Euryale,  again,  was  once  represented  by 
many  species  scattered  at  different  times  (some  at  the  same 
time)  throughout  Europe;  now  it  survives  as  a  single  species 
only  in  parts  of  China  and  Assam.  Or  again,  with  individual 


142 


AGE  AND  AREA  FROM  A 


[PT.  II 


species;  Liriodendron  tulipifera,  Nyssa  sylvatica,  Pilea  pumila, 
Dulichium  spathaceum  were  once  all  inhabitants  of  Western 
Europe ;  now  they  are  confined  to  the  North  American  continent. 
The  list  could  be  continued  to  great  length  but  this  is  enough  to 
show  that  genera  and  species  formerly  widespread  have  con- 
tracted their  range  and  become  endemic.  Are  we  then  to  throw 
over  the  conclusions  of  Age  and  Area  which  show  that  immensely 
the  greater  proportion  of  endemics  represent  new  life ;  and  take 
the  position  that  the  two  lines  of  research  are  mutually  contra- 
dictory? It  is  not  necessary  if  we  make  due  allowance  for  the 
differences  of  method  and  subject-matter  in  the  two  studies,  and 
their  consequent  limitations. 

Throughout  his  work  Dr  Willis  has  insisted  that  his  conclusions 
are  based  upon  mass-investigation,  averages.  Consequently  he 
warns  us  that,  as  with  all  average  calculations,  though  the  con- 
clusions will  be  true  for  the  mass  they  quite  possibly  may  not 
be  true  for  the  individual.  Now  the  whole  of  palaeobotanical 
research  is  based  upon  the  study  of  the  individual ;  consequently 
we  must  be  prepared  to  find  that  our  results  may  not  conform 
to  the  conclusions  of  mass-investigation,  though  we  ought  to  be 
able  to  explain  the  causes  of  divergence.  The  palaeobotanist 
states  that  some  endemics  are  relicts.  Dr  Willis  replies  that  if  it 
is  so,  they  are  of  no  account  in  comparison  with  the  vastly 
greater  number  of  endemics  which  are  not.  Not  having  counted 
up  the  total  of  endemics  in  the  living  flora  of  the  world,  as  he 
has  done,  I  am  prepared  to  accept  his  estimate  that  relict  en- 
demics form  only  about  1  per  cent,  of  the  total.  Even  if  the 
percentage  were  higher,  it  would  not  vitiate  Dr  Willis'  reasoning. 
And  here  we  come  to  the  explanation  of  our  difference.  Whereas 
Age  and  Area  fixes  its  attention  upon,  and  argues  from,  the 
99  per  cent.,  palaeobotany  has  its  attention  fixed  upon,  and 
seeks  to  argue  from,  the  1  per  cent.  In  the  nature  of  things  the 
99  per  cent,  are  outside  the  scope  of  its  investigations,  for  if 
they  represent  the  newest  forms  of  life,  then  they  cannot  occur 
fossil.  Consequently,  though  palaeobotany  is  right  to  hold  to 
its  1  per  cent.,  it  must  yield  place  in  the  argument  to  the  superior 
force  of  numbers. 

Specific  Extermination;  Extinction  and  Survival  of 
Species ;  Killing  out  and  Dying  out.  Specific  extermination, 
the  replacement  of  old  forms  by  new,  is  continually  met  with  in 
Tertiary  botany;  one  of  the  most  striking  instances  is  seen  in 


CH.  xiv]      PALAEOBOTANICAL  STANDPOINT  143 

the  monotypic  genus  Stratiotes.  Miss  Chandler's  work  on  the 
subject  is  not  yet  published,  but  we  may  state  that  a  succession 
of  species  has  been  found  at  different  geological  horizons  which 
carries  the  history,  with  but  few  interruptions,  from  the  top  of 
the  Eocene  to  the  present  time.  A  whole  series  of  extinct  forms 
lies  behind  the  living  species.  The  same  is  true  of  other  genera 
though  the  succession  may  be  less  completely  known.  To  name 
but  a  few,  Dulichium,  Sparganium,  Potamogeton,  Xajas,  Sam- 
bucus,  Vitis,  Magnolia,  Rubus,  Cotoneaster  and  Phellodendron  are 
all  known  to  have  a  long  fossil  record  of  species  that  are  now 
extinct.  Given  time,  the  fate  of  all  species  is  extinction,  though 
exceptionally  they  survive  for  long  periods.  The  oldest  living- 
species  I  have  myself  come  across  are  Vitis  huiata  and  Poly- 
gonum Convolvulus  in  the  oldest  Pliocene  (Pont-de-Gail),  or 
possibly  Calla  palustris  in  the  Bovey  Oligocene. 

If  now  we  turn  to  Age  and  Area  and  inquire  what  evidence  it 
has  to  offer,  we  find  that  it  points  to  survival  as  the  probability, 
unless  extermination  be  due  to  "killing  out." 

It  is  possible  that  we  have  here  a  real  discrepancy  between  the 
two  studies,  for  the  evidence  of  universal  extinction  of  species 
furnished  by  the  pages  of  paleobotany  is  incontrovertible;  but 
we  should  bear  that  proviso  "unless  killed  out"  in  mind.  For 
further  evidence  on  the  subject  we  may  turn  to  the  history  of 
the  Chinese-North-American  flora. 

We  have  seen  that  all  branches  of  the  flora  have  suffered 
extermination,  either  complete  extermination,  or  partial.  By  a 
comparison  of  its  old  constituents,  as  seen  in  the  Pliocene 
deposits  of  West  Europe,  with  its  present  constituents,  as  seen 
in  the  Far  East  and  in  North  America  at  the  present  day,  we 
may  gain  some  idea  how  the  flora  has  changed. 

In  the  first  place  we  discover  that  not  all  species  have  been 
exterminated,  in  spite  of  the  great  lapse  of  time,  and  the  immense 
distances  travelled  to  their  present  homes.  Even  if  we  consider 
the  older  deposits,  the  Reuverian  belonging  low  down  in  the 
Lower  Pliocene,  and  the  Pont-de-Gail  at  the  base  of  the  Pliocene, 
we  find  some  species  of  those  remote  times  still  living.  As  in- 
stances we  may  cite  Dulichium  spathaceum,  Brasenia  peltata, 
Zelkowa  keaki,  Magnolia  kobus,  Liriodendron  tulipifera,  Stewartia 
pseudo-camellia,  and  Nyssa  sylvatica  from  the  large  Reuverian 
flora,  and  Vitis  lanata  and  Polygonum  Convolvulus,  as  already 
stated,  from  the  Pont-de-Gail  flora. 

But  though  some  species  have  remained  unchanged,  it  is  far 


144 


AGE  AND  AREA  FROM  A 


[PT.  II 


more  common  for  change  to  have  occurred,  and  we  find  that 
the  greater  the  lapse  of  time,  the  greater  proportionately  has 
been  the  change.  That  is  to  say,  more  species  found  in  the  older 
deposits  are  extinct,  than  in  the  newer.  This  may  very  clearly 
be  seen  by  comparing  the  percentages  of  species  and  varieties, 
which  there  is  reason  to  think  are  extinct,  in  the  successive 
Pliocene  floras.  There  is  an  element  of  uncertainty  in  such  a 
comparison  for  this  reason.  It  has  not  always  been  possible,  for 
lack  of  living  material,  to  discover  whether  a  seed  belongs  to  a 
living  species  or  not.  The  following  figures  will,  I  believe,  have 
at  least  some  approximation  to  the  truth.  The  deposits  read 
downwards  in  order  of  age ;  they  are  those  from  which  the  main 
evidence  of  the  facts  discussed  in  this  paper  were  derived. 

Percentages  of  extinct  species  belonging  to  the  Chinese-North- 
American  Association  of  Plants  in  the  West  European  Pliocene 
at  successive  periods. 

Percentage  of 
extinct  species 


Deposit 

Age  of  deposit 

(approximate) 

Cromerian 

Top  of  Pliocene 

0 

Teglian 

Upper  Pliocene 

35 

Castle  Eden 

Middle  Pliocene 

44 

Reuverian 

Lower  Pliocene 

70 

Pont-de-Gail 

Base  of  Pliocene 

90 

The  figures  show  clearly  a  progressive  extermination  of  older 
forms  as  compared  with  newer.  In  some  way  age  has  acted  as 
an  exterminating  agent.  How?  Is  it,  to  use  the  language  of  Age 
and  Area,  by  dying  out,  or  by  killing  out? 

I  take  it  that,  by  the  use  of  these  terms,  Dr  Willis  intends  to 
distinguish  between  extinction  of  species  due  to  exhaustion  of 
vitality,  and  extinction  of  species  due  to  external  agencies.  That 
is,  between  internal  and  external  causes.  It  cannot  always  be 
possible  to  distinguish  between  these  two,  for  frequently,  as  we 
know,  external  causes  are  assisted  in  their  work  of  destruction 
by  pre-disposing  conditions  in  the  individual,  or  it  may  be  in  the 
race.  Such  relationships  are  seen  in  that  of  disease  to  sus- 
ceptibility to  disease,  of  change  of  climate  to  a  weakened  con- 
stitution. It  is  the  external  cause  which  seems  the  cause  of 
death,  though  the  internal  cause  may  have  an  equal  share  in  it. 

Viewing  the  fact  of  the  immense  amount  of  extermination 
that  has  occurred  in  this  flora,  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  think 
that  such  destruction  of  species,  one  might  almost  call  it  uni- 


ch.  xiv]      PALAEOBOTANICAL  STANDPOINT  145 


versal  destruction,  must  be  the  effect  of  dying  out.  It  seemed 
that  some  all-embracing,  inevitable,  cause — " dying  out" — must 
be  at  work,  which  in  time  would  kill  everything;  "killing  out" 
must  be  more  localised  and  more  discriminating.  If  due  to 
climate,  it  might  act  in  one  region,  if  due  to  disease,  upon  one 
species,  but  not  in  regions  far  apart,  or  upon  so  many  species. 

Yet,  with  further  consideration,  the  problem  appeared 
differently.  It  had  to  be  taken  into  account  that  the  mere  fact 
of  age  means  so  many  more  chances  of  destruction.  Therefore 
these  older  forms  must  have  suffered  far  more  vicissitudes,  and 
have  been  subjected  to  far  more  numerous  attacks  from  exter- 
minating agencies  than  the  newer.  The  lapse  of  time  since  the 
deposition  of  the  Eocene  basalt  of  Antrim  has  been  the  subject 
of  investigation  by  Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.  Basing  his  calculation 
on  the  amount  of  helium  as  compared  with  radium  (and  hence 
of  uranium)  present  in  haematite  iron  of  that  age,  he  reached 
the  conclusion  that  the  interval  is  one  of  30  million  years. 

We  must  acknowledge  that  the  vicissitudes  of  30  million  years 
are  quite  beyond  the  powers  of  our  mind  to  grasp,  and  it  seems 
possible  that  they  may  have  furnished  ample  cause,  through 
disease  or  other  adverse  conditions,  to  bring  about  all  the 
destruction  to  which  palaeobotany  bears  witness. 

There  is  very  strong  evidence  to  show  that  the  whole  European 
branch  of  the  Chinese-North-American  flora  was  killed  out,  by 
being  subjected  to  cold  which  it  could  not  withstand,  with  no 
possibility  of  escape;  and  that  it  perished,  trapped  between  the 
cold  of  the  north  behind,  and  an  impassable  trans-continental 
barrier  of  mountains  and  seas  in  front. 

What  of  the  other  two  branches,  the  living  ones?  Has  there 
been  extermination  of  species  there?  And  if  so,  how  has  it 
occurred?  We  have  already  gained  some  knowledge  on  this 
subject,  by  comparing  some  of  their  species  with  those  of  the 
European  Pliocene — which  it  must  be  remembered  are  nearer 
in  time  to  the  ancestral  forms,  even  if  they  be  not  actually  the 
ancestral  forms — and  we  find  that  of  the  few  species  so  com- 
pared somewhere  about  90  per  cent,  have  changed. 

To  discover  something  more  of  the  changes  which  have  taken 
place,  we  may  compare  the  living  members  of  this  flora  with 
what  are,  without  any  doubt,  the  ancestors  of  some  of  them. 
The  description  of  these  is  to  be  found  in  Prof.  Nathorst's 
account  of  the  Post-Miocene  flora  of  Mogi  in  Japan  (78-9).  This 
is  the  largest  of  several  Post-Miocene  floras  (mostly  very  frag- 
w.a.  10 


146 


AGE  AND  AREA  FROM  A 


[PT.  II 


mentary)  examined  by  him.  With  regard  to  the  age  of  the  flora, 
Dr  Kryshtofovich,  who  has  also  worked  much  upon  Japanese 
fossil  plants,  believes  that  it  should  be  assigned  to  the  base  of 
the  Pliocene  (63).  In  that  case  it  is  contemporary  with  the  flora 
of  Pont-de-Gail. 

Nathorst  remarks  of  the  Mogi  flora  that  the  outstanding  fact 
regarding  it  is  its  closeness  to  the  living  flora  of  the  forest-belt 
of  the  Japanese  mountains;  and  we  have  only  to  consult  his 
lists  to  see  how  true  the  statement  is.  But  though  the  living 
flora  be  close  to  that  of  Mogi,  it  has  changed.  If  we  examine 
Nathorst's  list  we  shall  see  that  about  44  species  may  be  con- 
sidered as  belonging  to  what  I  have  termed  the  Chinese-North- 
American  Association ;  and  that  of  these,  39  are  now  represented 
by  different  species  or  varieties.  That  is,  about  89  per  cent,  have 
changed.  The  figure  approximates  closely  to  the  90  per  cent,  of 
changed  species  found,  when  we  compared  the  Pont-de-Gail 
species  with  living  Chinese-North- American  species.  I  do  not 
wish  to  press  the  similarity  of  the  figures.  Whether  it  be  due  to 
chance,  or  really  represents  the  degree  of  extinction  of  older 
forms  since  the  beginning  of  the  Pliocene,  I  do  not  know.  The 
number  of  species  in  the  Pont-de-Gail  flora,  belonging  to  the 
Chinese-North- American  plant  association  was  small;  also  Prof. 
Nathorst's  references  to  living  species  suggest  that  the  Japanese 
Pliocene  forms  may  be  nearer  to  living  forms  than  those  of  Pont- 
de-Gail  would  appear  to  be.  Anyhow,  his  work,  like  mine,  bears 
evidence  that  old  forms  have  very  largely  given  place  to  new. 
We  may  say  at  once  that  the  work  gives  no  evidence  as  to  how 
the  new  forms  arose,  though  the  endemic  Japanese  species  which 
are  related  to  these  old  Mogi  species  would  seem  to  have  arisen 
in  Japan ;  but  though  we  cannot  trace  the  history  of  the  new,  we 
can  find  out  a  little  more  about  the  extinction  of  the  older  forms. 

If  a  list  be  made  from  all  the  five  European  Pliocene  floras 
(those  already  named),  of  all  the  Chinese-North- American  species 
which  are  still  living — 26  in  all — it  will  be  seen  that  by  far  the 
greater  number  are  now  found  living  in  East  Asia.  Twenty 
species,  out  of  the  26,  about  77  per  cent.,  are  there  found; 
5  species,  or  19  per  cent.,  in  North  America;  whilst  one  species 
(Brasenia),  or  4  per  cent.,  occurs  in  both  continents.  Again, 
consider  the  living  genera  represented — 55  in  all — 33  of  these, 
or  60  per  cent.,  are  found  living  on  both  continents;  17,  or  31  per 
cent.,  in  East  Asia  only;  5,  or  9  per  cent.,  in  America  only. 
Therefore,  whether  we  consider  genera  or  species,  there  would 


ch.  xiv]     PALAEOBOTANICAL  STANDPOINT 


147 


appear  to  have  been  greater  destruction  in  America  than  in 
East  Asia.  Such  a  conclusion  is  not  wholly  unexpected,  and  may 
help  to  suggest  in  part  the  fate  of  some  of  the  older  species. 

In  travelling  to  and  fro  in  latitude  in  America,  the  plants 
would  find  themselves  mostly  in  a  country  of  great  plains;  not 
so  in  East  Asia,  where  successions  of  north  and  south  mountain 
chains  existed  in  those  old  times,  as  in  the  present.  It  is  known 
that  many  of  the  climatic  changes  which  occurred  during  the 
Pleistocene  were  fairly  rapid.  When  such  rapid  changes  happen 
in  a  flat  country,  it  may  result  that  a  migrating  flora  may  be 
overtaken  in  its  travel  by  the  change  of  climate,  and  in  that 
case  many  of  its  components  will  be  exterminated,  whereas  in 
a  mountain  country,  by  change  of  altitude,  they  may  escape. 

Such  facts  may  in  part  account  for  the  lesser  survival  of 
Pliocene  species  in  America  than  in  East  Asia.  If  so,  it  would 
seem  that  in  part  extinction  in  America  too  was  due  to  killing 
out. 

Age  and  Area.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  main  theme  of  the 
subject  and  inquire  whether  the  Chinese-North- American  flora 
has  any  evidence  to  offer  as  to  present  distribution  in  connection 
with  age.  Taking  it  as  a  whole,  we  see  an  ancient  flora  associated, 
either  fossil  or  living,  with  the  widest  possible  range  in  longitude. 
Is  there  any  evidence  that  it  shows  wide  distribution  in  latitude 
associated  with  age?  Such  distribution  would  appear  to  me, 
certainly  in  the  case  of  a  flora  with  a  dispersal  originating  in 
polar  regions,  to  be  a  far  more  crucial  test  of  age  than  dispersal 
in  longitude,  for  with  a  circumpolar  flora  as  a  source  of  dispersal, 
with  a  cooling  climate,  spread  would  be  equatorwards  through 
all  possible  regions.  The  distance  of  travel  would  therefore  be 
measured,  not  by  span  in  direction  of  longitude,  but  by  travel 
in  latitude.  In  the  case  of  the  Chinese-North-American  flora 
there  is  some  evidence  that  travel  in  latitude  is  an  accompani- 
ment of  age.  It  is  too  small  to  be  estimated  quantitatively,  but 
is  seen  in  the  presence,  especially  among  the  older  Pliocene 
floras  (Reuverian  and  Pont-de-Gail),  of  such  genera  as  Hakea, 
Symplocos,  Styrax,  Polanisia,  and  Trichosanthes,  which  have  a 
present  distribution  into  the  southern  hemisphere.  The  evidence 
as  to  the  source  and  direction  of  migration  of  the  Chinese-North- 
American  flora  to  which  they  seem  to  belong  indicates  that  these 
genera  too  are  migrants  from  the  north,  and  that  their  present 
distribution  in  latitude  is  partly  due  to  age. 

10—2 


CHAPTER  XV 


ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES 

The  term  endemic  has  long  been  used  to  connote  a  species, 
genus,  or  other  group  confined  to  a  small  area,  such  especially  as 
a  single  island,  a  group  of  islands,  a  mountain  chain,  or  a  com- 
paratively small  country  like  South  Africa  or  West  Australia, 
largely  bounded  by  the  sea  or  by  a  marked  alteration  of  climate. 
In  recent  years  species  of  larger  areas  have  been  spoken  of  as 
endemic,  but  the  term  is  used  in  an  arbitrary  way,  for  one 
speaks  of  species  as  endemic  to  Australia,  though  not  to  Brazil, 
which  really  has  far  more  of  them  (533  endemic  genera,  perhaps 
12,000  endemic  species). 

There  is  almost  never  any  real  and  demonstrable  difference 
between  species  and  genera  of  small  and  of  large  area,  other 
than  in  the  territory  occupied,  but  since  the  rise  of  natural 
selection  it  has  been  generally  assumed  that  such  a  difference 
really  occurs.  On  that  theory  one  will  expect  to  find  many 
species  "going  under"  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  the  fact 
that  so  many  are  actually  localised  to  small  areas  of  territory, 
particularly  in  somewhat  isolated  regions  of  the  globe,  provides 
the  necessary  material  for  this  explanation  to  rest  upon.  Botanists 
have  long  been  accustomed  to  look  upon  endemic  forms  as  the 
oldest,  and  very  often  as  in  some  way  expressly  suited  to  the 
very  local  conditions  in  which  they  occur.  This  latter  must  of 
course  be  true  for  any  species,  anywhere,  or  it  would  be  exter- 
minated in  a  short  time;  but  the  study  of  detail  which  has  re- 
sulted in  the  putting  forward  of  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area 
gives  reason  to  believe  that  in  general  the  supposition  of  greater 
age  of  endemics  is  incorrect. 

As  endemics  usually  occur  in  somewhat  isolated  places  or 
countries,  the  question  at  once  arises  whether  endemism  is  corre- 
lated with  isolation  as  such,  for  if  so,  the  fact  will  have  an  im- 
portant bearing  on  the  question  of  evolution  generally.  There  is 
also  some  ground,  however,  for  supposing  that  the  soil  in  isolated 
regions  may  be  less  completely  taken  up  by  its  associations  of 
plants,  so  that  a  newcomer  would  have  a  better  chance  of  sur- 
vival; and  this  may  be  the  explanation. 

From  about  48°  N.,  to  the  southwards,  all  important  islands 


pt.  ii,  ch.  xv]   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION 


149 


and  mountain  chains  (if  over  4500  feet),  besides  all  more  or  less 
isolated  pieces  of  country,  like  Italy,  possess  endemics.  They  are 
also  frequent  in  such  localities,  even  in  large  areas  of  country 
with  large  populations  of  plants,  as  are  isolated  in  the  sense  that 
they  do  not  lend  themselves  to  free  interchange  of  plants  with 
their  surroundings.  Such  are  stations  in  large  forests,  or  patches 
of  grassland  in  forest  country,  patches  of  country  with  salt  soil, 
and  the  like.  The  numbers  and  proportions  increase  to  the  south- 
wards (and  the  isolation  becomes  less  marked),  till  one  finds  the 
maxima  in  such  places  as  West  Australia,  South  Africa,  Juan 
Fernandez,  the  Mascarene  Islands  and  New  Caledonia.  Beyond 
about  40°  to  48°  S.  they  fall  off  again.  "The  greatest  concen- 
tration of  species  in  small  areas  occurs  in... West  Australia  and 
South  Africa"  (52,  p.  36).  "The  fertile  portions  of  New  South 
Wales,  Victoria,  South  Australia,  and  West  Australia  do  not 
probably... exceed  in  area  Spain,  Italy,  Greece,  and  European 
Turkey,  and  contain  perhaps  half  as  many  more  flowering 
plants"  (55  b,  p.  xxxi). 

Endemism,  though  it  is  most  commonly  associated  with 
islands  in  people's  minds,  is  by  no  means  a  phenomenon  con- 
fined to  them.  It  is  very  strongly  marked  in  comparatively 
isolated  mountains,  such  as  Kilimandjaro  (and  cf.  117  and  122), 
and  in  mountain  chains,  and  in  these  cases  the  flora  presents,  as 
a  general  rule,  less  relation  to  that  of  the  plains  than  does  the 
flora  of  an  island  to  that  of  the  nearest  mainland1.  This  may  be 
largely  due  to  the  fact  that,  as  explained  upon  p.  37,  mountains 
may  act  as  highways  of  migration  for  the  plants  of  other  coun- 
tries and  climates. 

Endemism  is  also  strongly  marked  upon  continental  areas, 
and  while  the  maximum  proportion  is  in  West  Australia  and 
South  Africa — regions  where  conditions  are  rather  extreme — all 
the  southern  land  masses,  more  especially,  show  a  great  pro- 
portion of  their  species  confined  to  themselves. 

Whilst  the  largest  numbers  and  proportions  of  endemics  are 
chiefly  in  the  more  southern  countries,  there  are  also  large 
numbers  and  proportions  in  several  of  the  northern,  e.g.  in 
Mongolia,  California,  the  region  about  the  Mediterranean  Sea, 
etc.  There  are  a  few  endemics  on  the  west  coast  of  Europe,  the 
Alps  contain  about  200,  and  Italy  about  the  same;  and  the 

1  "  A  great  deal  too  much  has  been  made  of  the  assumed  extreme  differen- 
tiation exhibited  by  insular  floras  as  compared  to  the  continental  flora" 
(52,  p.  387). 


150   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES   [pt.  n 


Iberian  peninsula  contains  about  800,  or  roughly  the  same  as 
Ceylon,  which,  however,  has  only  one-ninth  of  the  area.  The 
really  large  numbers  are  south  of  the  tropic  of  Cancer.  The 
Hawaiian  Islands  have  600,  Ceylon  800,  New  Zealand  over  1000, 
Australia  about  7500,  Mexico  and  Central  America  about  8000, 
and  Brazil  perhaps  12,000.  They  are  especially  common  in 
mountainous  country,  and  it  is  worth  noting  that  most  islands 
are  also  mountainous. 

No  country  or  island  has  all  its  species  endemic,  though  in 
several  or  most  places  where  there  is  a  very  large  proportion  of 
endemic  species,  like  Hawaii  or  New  Zealand,  it  is  very  common 
to  find  genera  with  all  their  species  endemic  (cf.  reply  to  objec- 
tion 28,  p.  95).  St  Helena,  with  a  very  small  flora,  seems  to 
have  perhaps  the  highest  proportion  of  endemic  species,  but  of 
countries  with  any  large  number,  West  Australia,  with  85  per 
cent,  of  its  species  endemic,  takes  the  first  place.  The  Hawaiian 
Islands,  with  82  per  cent.,  are  close  behind.  New  Zealand  (37; 
has  72  per  cent.,  the  Galapagos  46  per  cent.,  the  Bahamas  14  per 
cent.,  thus  illustrating  the  fact  that  on  the  whole  the  further  out 
and  more  isolated  an  island  is,  the  greater  is  its  proportion  of 
endemic  species.  Fiji  and  Tahiti  have  much  smaller  proportions 
than  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  but  Fiji,  with  50  per  cent.,  is  much 
nearer  to  the  mainland  than  Tahiti  with  35  per  cent.,  so  that  this 
alone  is  not  sufficient  explanation.  Nearly  half  the  ferns  and 
lycopods  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands  are  peculiar  to  the  group,  in 
Fiji  and  Tahiti  only  about  8-9  per  cent. 

A  study  of  the  areas  occupied  by  endemic  species  soon  shows 
that  they  may  be  of  any  size  from  a  few  square  yards  upwards, 
and  that  there  is  no  difference  to  be  seen  between  them  and 
species  that  are  not  usually  considered  endemic,  and  which  may 
have  areas  of  larger  and  larger  size,  up  to  one  of  a  large  portion 
of  the  globe.  It  was  these  extraordinary  differences  in  area 
occupied,  between  species  closely  resembling  one  another,  and 
differing  only  in  characters  which  could  not,  by  any  stretch  of 
imagination,  be  looked  upon  as  fitting  or  unfitting  them  in  any 
way  for  the  struggle  for  existence,  that  first  caused  me  to  begin 
studying  areas,  and  searching  for  some  more  potent  agent  in 
distribution  than  adaptation,  a  search  which  ultimately  led  me 
to  Age  and  Area. 

This  new  point  of  view,  that  the  mere  area  occupied  by  a 
species  has  some  more  definite  immediate  interest  than  simply  as 
an  expression  of  some  unknown  character  in  the  protoplasm,  or 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  151 


some  unsuspected  property  in  apparently  meaningless  external 
characters,  receives  great  support  when  the  actual  areas  upon 
which  species  occur  in  any  country  are  mapped  out  by  drawing 
lines  round  their  outermost  locations.  We  shall  begin  with  very 
localised  endemics. 

Mr  H.  N.  Ridley  (90,  p.  555)  found  two  plants  of  Didy mo- 
carpus  Perdita  Ridl.  "  on  a  bank  in  the  centre  of  Singapore,  sur- 
rounded by  extensive  cultivation.  It  has  never  been  seen  again." 
Dr  Thwaites  (37)  found  in  the  forest  at  Hakgala  in  Ceylon  a  few 
plants  of  Christisonia  albida  Thw.  (C.  P.  3929).  This  differed 
from  its  nearest  relative,  C.  bicolor  Gardn.,  in  having  the  scales 
of  the  scape  ovate  and  glabrous,  instead  of  oblong-obtuse  and 
pubescent;  the  bractlets  below  the  flower  instead  of  near  the 
base  of  the  peduncle;  calyx  glabrous  instead  of  pubescent,  with 
linear  instead  of  triangular  segments;  and  the  corolla  larger. 
Taken  together  with  the  fact  that  the  whole  plant  was  white, 
instead  of  the  brownish  colour  usual  in  the  Orobanchaceae,  these 
differences  were  so  large  that  the  species  was  regarded  as  a 
Linnean  species,  and  accepted  as  such  in  the  Flora  of  British 
India,  iv,  p.  323.  The  plant  has  never  been  seen  again,  though 
the  area  of  forest  at  Hakgala  which  could  be  reached  by  the 
invalid  Dr  Thwaites  is  very  limited,  and  there  is  a  botanic 
garden  beside  it,  in  which  many  botanists  have  worked,  search- 
ing the  forest  thoroughly.  Probably  in  both  the  cases  just  men- 
tioned, the  taking  of  a  few  specimens  was  sufficient  to  exter- 
minate the  species;  and  in  the  latter  case,  it  is  probable  that  the 
white  colour  alone  would  have  been  such  a  disadvantage  as  to 
ensure  its  extermination  by  nature  in  any  event. 

The  next  stage  may  be  seen  in  such  a  case  as  that  of  Coleus 
elongatus  Trim.,  endemic  only  to  the  summit  of  Ritigala  in 
Ceylon  (p.  14).  It  occurs  as  about  a  dozen  or  two  of  plants  upon 
open  rocky  places  at  the  very  summit,  and  differs  so  much  from 
other  Colei  that  it  is  a  very  distinct  Linnean  species,  even  if  not 
subgenerically  separate.  Its  nearest  relative  is  C.  barbatus, 
which  also  occurs  on  the  summit,  as  well  as  in  tropical  Asia  and 
Africa.  The  distinctive  characters  may  be  tabulated  as  on  the 
following  page. 

It  is  all  but  impossible  to  imagine  that  any  of  these  characters, 
and  especially  the  two  most  important,  the  peculiar  inflorescence 
and  calyx,  have  any  serious  effect  upon  the  capacity  of  the 
species  to  survive  or  progress,  or  that  any  of  them  can  be 
seriously  disadvantageous.  It  is  worth  while  in  this  connection 


152   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  n 


C.  barbatus 
(Bot.  Mag.  T.  2318) 

Stem  cylindrical,  tending  to  quad- 
rangular in  inflorescence 

Stem  pubescent  with  long  hair 

Leaves  oblong-oval,  1-2  inches 

Leaves  closely  pubescent 

Leaves  rather  thick 

Petioles  rather  short 

Inflorescence  of  condensed  cymes, 
each  about  5 -flowered,  forming 
false  whorls  of  10  flowers  at  each 
node 

Flowers  large 

Bracts  large 

Calyx  with  long  hairs 

Calyx  of  one  large  ovate  upper  tooth 
and  four  small  lower 

Corolla  rich  purple  or  white 

Grows  on  rocky  places 


C.  elongatus 

(Fig.  in  Trimen's  Ceylon  Flora, 
T.  74) 
Stem  quadrangular 

Stem  pubescent  with  short  hair 

Leaves  ovate-triangular,  1-2  inches 

Leaves  finely  pubescent 

Leaves  rather  thin 

Rather  longer  and  slenderer 

Inflorescence  of  one-sided  cymes, 

looking  like  racemes,  about  1£ 

inches  long,  one  at  each  side  of 

each  node 
Flowers  small 
Bracts  small 
Calyx  with  short  hairs 
Calyx  of  five  almost  exactly  equal 

teeth 
Corolla  pale  purple 
Trails  over  rocks 


to  look  at  the  distribution  of  the  other  Ceylon  Colei,  already 
described  on  p.  54.  There  is  no  such  difference  in  the  method  of 
dispersal  as  will  account  for  the  great  differences  in  area  occupied, 
nor  is  there  any  difference  in  the  other  characters  of  the  plants 
that  one  can  point  to,  as  advantageous  or  disadvantageous. 

A  somewhat  larger  area  than  that  of  Coleus  elongatus  is  that 
occupied  by  Campanula  Vidalii,  which  is  found  (47,  p.  427)  on 
rocks  near  the  sea  on  Flores  and  two  other  islands  of  the  Azores. 
A  still  more  interesting  case  is  Cenchrus  insularis,  which  is  found 
only  on  one  islet  of  the  Alacran  reef  (75),  about  thirty  miles  off 
the  coast  of  Yucatan,  while  Cakile  alacranensis  and  Tribulus 
alacranensis  are  found  on  all  the  four  islets  of  the  reef,  the  largest 
being  less  than  half  a  mile  long,  and  very  narrow.  There  seems 
some  reason  to  imagine  that  the  evolution  of  these  species  has 
been  fairly  rapid,  as  they  were  not  noticed  by  the  Admiralty 
expedition  that  visited  the  islands  fifty-seven  years  previously. 
And  scores  of  similar  cases  of  distribution  might  be  cited. 

We  may  go  on  to  deal  with  genera  containing  several  species 
in  the  same  neighbourhood,  all  or  most  of  them  endemic,  giving 
a  few  actual  instances.  Doona,  for  example,  a  Ceylon  endemic 
genus  of  Dipterocarpacese,  has  11  species,  whose  local  distribu- 
tion (fig.  on  p.  153)  is  typical  of  that  of  many  local  genera,  or 
genera  with  many  species  (mostly  endemic)  in  one  locality. 
The  whole  range  of  the  genus  (about  4000  square  miles  in  south- 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  153 


west  Ceylon)  is  occupied  by  one  of  its  species,  D.  zeylanica,  while 
the  others  occupy  smaller  and  smaller  areas  within  this,  down 
to  a  comparatively  few  square  miles.  This  is  perhaps  the  most 
common  type  of  distribution  with  genera  of  small  area,  which 
upon  the  theory  of  Age  and  Area  are  to  be  regarded  as  young 
beginners.  Another  instance  is  Haastia  in  New  Zealand  (fig.  on 
p.  154). 

Distribution  of  the  same  type,  but  more  extended,  is  shown 
by  the  (chiefly  endemic)  species  of  Ranunculus1  in  New  Zealand 
(fig.  on  p.  156),  and  by  very  many  other  genera  in  that  coun- 
try. In  this  map  the  widely  distributed  species,  i.e.  those  occur- 
ring outside  of  New  Zealand,  are  shown  by  dotted  lines,  and  it 


will  be  noticed  that  three  of  them  range  all  over  New  Zealand 
(including  the  little  Stewart  Island  to  the  south),  and  also  to  the 
Chathams,  375  miles  to  the  eastward,  while  the  fourth  only 
ranges  from  the  far  south  up  to  the  middle  of  North  Island.  The 
endemics  all  have  ranges  within  that  of  the  first  three  wides, 
among  which  probably,  upon  the  general  implications  of  Age 
and  Area,  one  must  principally  look  for  their  parent  or  parents. 
The  endemic  with  the  greatest  range  covers  slightly  more  ground 
than  the  wide  of  least  range,  and  the  others  occupy  smaller  and 
smaller  areas,  becoming  steadily  more  numerous  in  going  south, 
till  a  maximum  is  reached  a  little  south  of  the  middle  of  South 
Island,  as  indicated  in  the  following  figures  (cf.  p.  77),  which 


154   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  n 


J 



,.  » 

— 

1  HA/ 

* 

ySTIA 

Diagram  showing  the  areas  occupied  by  the  species  of  Haastia  in 
New  Zealand. 
(By  courtesy  of  the  Editor,  Annals  of  Botany.) 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  155 

show  the  numbers  that  occur  in  each  zone  of  100  miles  from 
north  to  south  in  the  two  large  islands : 

Wides  3334444444 
Endemics  -    2    3    5    7  11  12  18  18  10 

If  instead  of  taking  the  distribution  in  this  way  by  zoning,  one 
take  the  actual  longitudinal  range  of  the  different  species,  one 
finds  that  of  the  28  endemic  Ranunculi,  10  have  a  range  not 
exceeding  60  miles  longitudinally  in  New  Zealand,  while  of 
ranges  120,  180,  240,  etc.,  there  are  only  1,  3,  1,  2,  4,  1,  1,  1,  2, 
0,  1,  0,  1.  The  great  bulk  are  obviously  crowded  towards  the 
short  ranges.  If  one  make  five  groups,  occupying  ranges  from 
0-200,  200-400,  400-600,  600-800,  800-1000  miles,  one  finds 
that  they  contain  14,  7,  5,  1  and  1  species  respectively.  If,  now, 
one  plot  these  figures  in  a  curve  (fig.  on  p.  162,  curve  7), 
one  obtains  a  curve  which  is  concave  upwards,  or  what  we  may 
term  a  hollow  curve.  This  type  of  curve  we  shall  presently  see  to 
be  almost  universal  in  distribution — and  it  proves  of  late  to  be 
equally  so  in  evolution  itself.  At  first,  perhaps,  its  presence  will 
not  be  readily  noticed,  but  when  one  finds  the  figures  for  any 
example  of  distribution  or  evolution  showing  a  great  accumula- 
tion at  one  end,  and  the  first  two  or  three  descending  very  rapidly, 
while  the  remainder  tend  to  taper  away  gradually,  one  will 
generally  find  this  type  of  curve  shown,  on  actually  plotting  the 
figures.  It  shows  very  strikingly  in  many  of  the  examples 
described  below,  e.g.  the  distribution  of  the  Hawaiian  endemic 
species  of  Cyrtandra  described  on  p.  160,  (same  fig.  curve  6). 

Or  one  may  take  such  a  genus  as  Epilobium  in  New  Zealand 
(37,  p.  171).  E.  purpuratum  is  confined  to  the  Alps  of  Otago, 
4000-6000  feet,  E.  brevipes  to  the  northern  half  of  South  Island, 
E.  crassum  to  the  greater  part  of  the  length  of  South  Island; 
E.  melanocaulon  ranges  the  whole  length  of  South  and  the  southern 
half  of  North  Island,  E.  microphyllum  ranges  yet  farther  north, 
E.  glabellum  farther  again,  while  E.  rotundifolium  ranges  the 
whole  length  of  both  islands,  and  reaches  Stewart  and  the 
Chathams.  E.  nummular  if olium  reaches  all  this,  and  also  Auck- 
land and  Macquarie  Islands  to  the  south,  while  E.  pallidiflorum 
ranges  this  and  reaches  Australia  and  Tasmania.  This,  or  some- 
thing like  it,  is  the  common  type  of  distribution  in  New  Zealand. 

If  we  take  a  genus — and  there  are  many — that  has  no  wides 
in  New  Zealand  at  all  (cf.  p.  95),  we  find  the  same  thing  shown, 
as,  for  example,  in  Gunner  a  (fig.  on  p.  158).  Here  there  is  one 


156   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  n 


ch.xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  157 


endemic  species  that  covers  all  New  Zealand,  and  reaches  the 
Chathams,  and  the  other  endemics  occupy  smaller  and  smaller 
areas  within  this.  The  figures  by  zones  show: 

2235556665 

a  result  exactly  similar  to  that  for  Ranunculus.  The  presence  of 
wides  does  not  seem  in  any  way  necessary,  nor  to  cause  the 
species  of  a  genus  to  behave  in  any  way  differently. 

If  we  go  to  Ceylon,  and  take  a  few  species  of  the  pan-tropical 
genus  Eugenia,  of  which  Ceylon  has  29  species  endemic  to  the 
island  and  14  found  elsewhere  (6  only  in  southern  India),  we 
find  that  E.  cyclophylla  occurs  only  on  Adam's  Peak,  E.  lucida 
on  several  peaks  close  together,  E.  sclerophylla  on  a  number  of 
peaks  and  in  the  plains  between,  E.  assimilis  throughout  the 
mountains  and  in  the  moist  plains,  E.  hemispherica  in  all  this 
and  also  in  South  India,  and  E.  operculata  in  these  regions,  and 
also  in  Burma,  Malaya,  and  China.  And  many  other  genera 
show  the  same  type  of  dispersal,  which,  in  fact,  a  little  study 
soon  shows  to  be  the  usual  type.  If  one  go  to  the  state  of  Rio 
de  Janeiro  in  South  Brazil,  which  has  an  area  about  equal  to 
Ceylon,  one  finds  52  Eugenias  endemic  to  the  state  (which  is 
very  mountainous),  and  6  going  beyond  it,  3  only  into  Minas, 
the  next  state,  the  other  three  as  far  as  the  states  of  Alagoas 
(1000  miles  north  along  the  coastal  plain),  Rio  Grande  do  Sul 
(the  same  south)  and  Goyaz  (600  miles  inland,  across  the  moun- 
tains). And  one  may  find  Eugenia  behaving  in  the  same  manner 
in  many  other  places.  In  Brazil  it  has  many  endemic  species  in 
Minas,  the  next  state  to  Rio,  but  on  the  other  and  drier  side 
of  the  mountains  that  fringe  the  coast. 

This  general  type  of  distribution  shows  very  clearly  in  the 
case  of  very  many  genera,  whether  they  be  endemic  genera  with 
all  their  species  in  a  confined  area,  like  Doona  in  Ceylon,  or 
whether  they  be  genera  of  wide  distribution  that  have  developed 
many  endemic  species  within  a  certain  small  area,  like  Ranun- 
culus in  New  Zealand.  In  such  cases  they  do  not  seem  as  yet  to 
have  encountered  any  barriers  of  a  very  serious  kind.  But  one 
may  also  find  a  great  number  of  genera,  or  sections  of  genera,  in 
which  the  same  thing  is  displayed  over  a  very  much  larger  area 
than  what  would  entitle  the  contained  species  to  be  considered 
endemic.  In  Callitris,  for  example,  C.  glauca  occupies  the  whole 
range  of  the  genus  over  Australia  and  Tasmania  (130)';  two 
others  range  from  New  South  Wales  to  Tasmania  and  to  West 


158   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  ii 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  159 


Australia,  while  the  remaining  15  species  of  the  genus  cover 
smaller  ranges.  In  Dillenia,  D.  indica  covers  practically  the 
range  of  the  genus  throughout  Indo-Malaya,  while  there  are 
many  other  species  covering  smaller  and  smaller  ranges  within 
this.  In  Gymnema,  G.  sylvestre  covers  almost  the  whole  range  of 
the  genus  from  West  Africa  to  Australia,  whilst  in  Cissampelos, 
C.  Pareira  is  found  from  tropical  America  through  Africa  and 
Asia  to  the  Philippines,  almost  covering  the  whole  range  of  this 
cosmotropical  genus.  In  Najas,  finally,  N.  marina  is  cosmo- 
politan, while  five  other  species  occupy  very  large  areas,  nine 
occupy  areas  of  moderate  size,  and  seventeen  areas  of  small  size. 

Another  very  frequent  case  in  endemic  genera  of  small  area, 
or  in  genera  with  a  number  of  endemic  species  within  a  small 
area,  is  to  have  one  species  occupying  a  "circle"  of  some  size, 
and  another  a  (usually)  smaller  circle  touching,  or  near  to,  the 
first,  thus  giving  the  impression  that  the  plants  occupying  it 
have  possibly  sprung  from  some  unusually  isolated  members  of 
the  first  species,  in  the  case  of  an  endemic  genus  which  has  no 
species  covering  the  range  of  both.  In  Ceylon,  for  example,  in 
the  endemic  genus  Hortonia,  which  has  three  species,  H.  angusti- 
folia  occurs  in  the  moist  plains,  and  to  2000  feet  in  the  moun- 
tains, while  H.  floribunda  occurs  only  in  the  mountains  above 
4000  feet,  and  H.  ovalifolia  is  confined  to  Adam's  Peak.  Or  in 
the  Ceylon  endemic  genus  Schumacheria,  S.  castaneaefolia  is 
common  to  a  height  of  1000  feet,  S.  alnifolia  above  that  level, 
and  S.  angustifolia  occupies  a  tiny  circle  within  the  area  of  the 
first  named,  but  a  long  way  from  S.  alnifolia. 

This  type  of  distribution,  in  smaller  circles,  usually  over- 
lapping one  another  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  while  there  is  no 
single  one  covering  the  whole  range,  is  also  very  common.  To 
take  an  example  at  random  from  the  Indian  flora,  Christisonia 
(37,  iv,  p.  323)  has  three  species  in  Ceylon,  one  frequent  in  the 
hills,  two  confined  each  to  one  spot  (cf.  p.  151),  three  in  the 
Dekkan  or  the  Konkan,  three  in  both  Ceylon  and  South  India, 
and  one  in  Sikkim  and  the  Khasias.  None  has  individually  a 
very  large  range,  yet  the  genus  covers  much  ground,  and  there 
is  some  overlapping  of  species.  One  may  see  the  same  type  of 
distribution  upon  a  fairly  large  scale  by  taking  such  a  genus  as 
Cyrtandra,  whose  species  are  distributed  as  follows  (25,  v,  i): 


160   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  n 


No. 

Java,  Sumatra,  Singapore  to  Tenasserim  55 

Sumatra,  Penang,  Borneo,  Celebes,  Amboina,  Papua       ...  56 

Java,  Borneo,  Philippines   5 

Java,  Celebes,  Timor   .  .104 

Java,  Celebes,  Ternate  25 

Java,  Sumatra  .  .  .  2,6,17,24,77,79,84,87,110,113,116 
Sumatra  4,  8, 14, 18,  57,  58,  73,  74,  75,  78,  82,  85,  86,  88,  90,  91, 114, 163-5 
Sumatra  and  Penang  or  Malacca     .       .       .       .       .       .       .    1,  76 

Java   19,20,21,23,71,72,107,108,109,118 

Java,  Singapore,  and  Celebes,  or  Ternate  ...  83,  106,  115 
Borneo    3,  7,  9, 10,  11, 12, 13, 16,  22,  64,  66-70,  80-1,  99-102, 112,  117,  160 

Celebes  15, 25,  65 

Moluccas,  Ternate  Ill 

Ceram  (Moluccas)  105 

Philippines   92,  93,  95,  119,  158,  159 

China  94, 

New  Guinea   89,  97,  98,  103 

Carolines  96 

New  Hebrides  125,  157 

Fiji  Islands  .  .  51-4,  59,  124,  128-9,  132-3,  139-40,  151-6,  161-2 
Samoas  ....  127,  130-1,  134-5,  141,  149-50,  150,  166-7 
Societies,  Low  Archipelago      .        .       .       .       .       .       .  .137 

Societies   120-22,  126,  136,  138,  146-8 

Sandwich  Islands   27-50,  60-3,  123,  142-5 


The  whole  range  of  the  genus  is  from  Tenasserim  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  yet  no  single  species  reaches  half  this  distance.  Most 
have  very  small  ranges,  e.g.  most  of  those  upon  Java  or  Sumatra, 
which  are  usually  confined  to  portions  of  these  islands,  but  there 
are  a  fair  number,  e.g.  those  in  lines  3,  4,  5  and  6,  which  have 
rather  large,  and  two  at  the  top  with  very  large,  ranges  (cf.  fig. 
on  p.  162,  curve  1). 

One  may  even  follow  them  into  more  minute  detail,  for  ex- 
ample, in  the  Pacific  Archipelagoes.  In  the  Sandwich  Islands, 
1  species  occupies  four  islands,  2  occur  on  three,  2  on  two,  whilst 
there  are  24  on  single  islands,  viz.  11  on  Oahu,  4  each  upon 
Kauai  and  Maui,  3  upon  Molokai,  and  2  upon  Hawaii.  The  same 
thing  may  be  seen  upon  the  Samoan  and  other  islands;  this 
"hollow  curve"  type  of  distribution  is  general,  as  we  shall  see 
below  (cf.  fig.  on  p.  162,  curve  6). 

One  may  follow  this  type  of  distribution  into  the  small 
varieties  of  Linnean  species,  to  which  specific  rank  is  often  given 
by  local  botanists.  For  example,  dipping  into  Linton's  British 
Hieracia,  and  taking  the  section  Nigrescentia,  one  finds  4  species 
occupying  six  to  ten  counties,  and  9  in  one  to  five,  but  no  single 
one  covering  all  the  range.  These  two  cases,  (1)  that  there  is  one 
or  a  few  widely  ranging  species  with  larger  and  larger  numbers 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  161 


of  more  and  more  localised  species  scattered  about  within  or 
close  to  their  range,  and  (2)  that  there  are  many  species  of 
local  range,  usually  more  or  less  overlapping  one  another,  and 
themselves  overlapped  in  many  places  by  fewer  species  of 
rather  wider  range,  and  in  the  total  occupying  considerable 
areas,  which  are  as  continuous  as  intrusions  of  the  sea  and 
other  barriers  will  allow,  seem  to  cover  the  case  of  the  bulk  of 
existing  genera.  The  latter  case  also  makes,  though  not  so 
strikingly,  a  hollow  curve,  for  there  are  more  species  of  small 
areas.  , 

It  is  clear  that  the  types  of  distribution  shown  by  endemic 
species,  whether  of  endemic  genera  or  not,  are  the  same  types 
that  one  may  see  in  the  dispersal  of  genera,  species,  and  varieties 
of  wider  range;  there  is  no  place  at  which  one  can  draw  a  line, 
and  say  that  here  is  the  distinction  between  endemic  and  non- 
endemic  species. 

But  the  resemblances  between  endemic  and  non-endemic 
species  may  be  carried  much  further.  In  the  case  of  the  former, 
as  we  have  seen  above,  their  usual  grouping  in  a  country  shows 
a  few  in  the  class  containing  those  of  widest  local  dispersal,  and 
larger  and  larger  numbers  as  one  goes  down  the  scale  to  the  more 
localised  classes.  And  this  grouping  shows,  not  only  for  the 
grand  total,  but  for  the  individual  families  and  larger  genera. 
The  actual  figures  for  New  Zealand  show  that  the  curve  so  pro- 
duced is  a  hollow  one  (fig.  on  p.  162,  curve  5).  The  peak  in 
the  middle  of  the  curve  is  accounted  for,  perhaps,  by  the  opening 
of  Cook's  Strait  having  checked  the  dispersal  of  some  of  the 
species  (127,  p.  455).  If,  dipping  at  random  into  the  New 
Zealand  flora,  one  take  the  Boraginaceae,  and  divide  the  en- 
demics into  five  classes,  one  finds  2/1  (two  in  class  1),  1/2,  2/3, 
5/4,  13/5;  or  if  one  take  Olearia,  one  finds  2/1,  5/2,  4/3,  6/4,  14/5. 
Always  the  same  type  of  curve  is  formed,  with  an  accumulation 
of  species  at  one  end. 

But  this  same  phenomenon  shows  in  the  case  of  all  other 
species,  whether  endemic  or  not.  In  Doona  in  Ceylon,  for  ex- 
ample, one  finds  one  species  of  large  area,  three  of  smaller,  and 
seven  of  areas  smaller  yet.  With  the  largest  endemic  genus  in 
the  Hawaiian  Islands,  Cyanea,  one  finds  (cf.  Cyrtandra  above) 
one  species  on  four  islands,  six  on  two,  and  21  on  a  single  island. 
Pelea,  the  next  largest  genus,  shows  1/8  (one  species  on  all 
islands),  3/4,  3/3,  2/2,  11/1,  again  a  hollow  curve,  running  out 
very  much  at  one  end.  If  one  add  up  all  the  species  of  the 
w.a.  11 


162   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  ii 


Arck  occupied 


Endemic  species  by  area  from  small  to  large 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  163 

endemic  genera  of  the  Sandwich  Islands,  and  compare  them  with 
the  endemic  species  in  the  non-endemic  genera,  one  gets : 

Table  showing  the  numbers  and  proportions  of  species  of  endemic 
and  of  non-endemic  genera  that  occur  on  all  the  Hawaiian  Islands, 
or  on  four  to  six  islands,  etc.  Thus  on  all  islands  there  occur  3-1  per 
cent,  of  the  species  of  endemic,  9-5  per  cent,  of  the  endemic  species 
of  non-endemic  genera. 


Species  of 
endemic  genera 

Endemic  species  of 
non-endemic  genera 

A 

Occurring  on 

r 

species 

% 

( 

species 

/o 

All  islands 

7 

31 

34 

9-5 

4-6 

23 

10-2 

51 

14-3 

3 

25 

111 

55 

15-4 

2 

41 

18-2 

72 

20-2 

1  island 

129 

57-2 

144 

40-4 

225 

99-8 

356 

99-8 

Average  dispersal    1-8  islands 

2-3  islands 

Thus  the  species  of  the  endemic  genera  are  dispersed  on  the 
average  some  25  per  cent,  less  than  those  of  the  non-endemic 
genera.  This  proves  on  examination  to  be  a  general  rule,  and  is 
a  powerful  argument  against  local  adaptation.  It  shows  with 
equal  clearness  in  New  Zealand  and  in  Ceylon  (123,  p.  324). 

If  one  go  on  to  Ranunculus  in  New  Zealand,  which  has  "  wides  " 
as  well  as  endemics,  while  Olearia  (above)  has  not,  one  finds  1/1, 
1/2,  5/3,  7/4,  and  14/5,  taking  only  five  classes  instead  of  ten. 
If  one  take  at  random  in  Vol.  iv  of  Hooker's  Indian  Flora  a  few 
genera,  one  finds  in  Exacum  one  species  with  large,  six  with  inter- 
mediate, and  nine  with  small  areas.  In  Christisonia,  where  there 
is  no  single  widely  ranging  species,  there  are  4  with  moderate 
areas,  and  6  with  small.  In  Ebermaiera  1  has  a  very  large,  6  an 
intermediate,  and  21  a  small  area.  Or,  finally,  take  Cyrtandra 
(above);  there  are,  roughly,  2  with  very  large  areas,  about  20 
with  fairly  large,  and  about  145  with  small,  these  latter  again 
showing  gradations  down  to  the  smallest,  as  we  have  just  seen 
(p.  160). 

It  is  clear  that  the  distribution  of  endemics  is  only  a  special 
case  of  a  wide  general  phenomenon — that  there  are,  in  any  family 
or  genus  of  reasonable  size,  a  few  species  of  wide  dispersal,  and 
others  of  less  and  less  dispersal  in  increasing  numbers,  the  in- 
crease being  more  rapid  as  one  descends  the  scale,  so  that  the 
curve  produced  is  hollow.  When,  as  in  very  many  genera,  there 


164    ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  n 


is  one  species  covering  the  whole  range  of  dispersal,  the  classifica- 
tion can  be  carried  into  greater  detail,  but  even  in  such  cases  as 
Cyrtandra,  where  there  is  not  such  a  species,  the  phenomenon 
can  be  quite  clearly  seen.  It  is  evidently  perfectly  general,  and 
we  shall  see  many  further  examples  of  it  in  the  next  chapter, 
and  go  on  to  consider  its  general  bearings  in  later  chapters. 

When  one  goes  on  to  examine  into  the  genera  and  families  to 
which  endemic  species  chiefly  belong,  one  discovers  that  in  most 
countries  the  bulk  of  the  endemic  species  do  not  belong  to  the 
endemic  genera.  Even  in  a  region  of  such  marked  endemism  as 
the  Hawaiian  Islands  (37),  for  example,  where  there  are  several 
very  large  endemic  genera,  only  225  out  of  581  endemic  species 
belong  to  the  endemic  genera,  or  38  per  cent.  In  New  Zealand 
less  than  5  per  cent,  do  so,  and  in  Brazil  perhaps  10  per  cent. 

The  numerous  endemic  species  that  do  not  belong  to  endemic 
genera  are  found  on  examination  to  belong,  not,  as  one  might 
perhaps  expect,  to  small  and  broken  genera,  which  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  consider  moribund,  but  in  greater  proportion  to 
the  larger  and  more  important  genera.  The  average  number  of 
species  in  a  genus,  taking  the  whole  world,  is  about  12-7,  and  in 
the  Hawaiian  Islands,  taking  the  first  hundred  genera  in  the 
flora  (37),  we  find  that  of  the  47  that  contain  endemics,  but  are 
themselves  widely  dispersed,  36  are  above  the  average  size  in 
the  world,  and  have  102  local  endemics,  while  11  are  below,  and 
have  22  endemics.  Of  these  11  belong  to  Lipochaeta,  which  only 
occurs  outside  these  islands  as  a  single  species  in  the  Galapagos. 
The  average  size  of  the  whole  47  genera  (in  the  world)  is  97 
species,  or  eight  times  the  average.  Of  these  genera  8  are  cosmo- 
politan in  their  dispersal,  11  are  tropical  and  subtropical,  8  are 
tropical,  these  three  categories  including  57  per  cent,  of  the  total 
(cf.  Chajrter  xu,  Size  and  Space).  A  further  9,  bringing  the  total 
to  76  per  cent.,  occur  in  both  Old  and  New  Worlds. 

If  we  turn  to  New  Zealand,  and  take  the  first  100  genera  (37), 
of  those  with  endemics  43  are  above  the  average  in  the  world, 
and  only  14  below,  while  the  average  world-size  of  one  of  these 
57  is  73  species,  or  six  times  the  world-average.  The  same  thing 
shows  wherever  I  have  tested  it.  For  example,  if  one  take  the 
first  100  genera  in  Vol.  iv  of  the  Indian  Flora  (37),  most  of  them 
as  it  happens  being  Asclepiads,  which  are  unusually  small  genera, 
one  finds  52  non-endemic  genera,  of  which  38  are  above,  and 
14  below,  the  average  world-size.  The  remaining  48  are  largely 
endemic  genera,  for  India,  like  all  large  areas,  has  a  greater  pro- 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  165 


portion  of  its  genera  endemic  than  have  the  outlying  islands, 
etc.  The  average  size  of  all  52  is  52  species,  or  still  much  larger 
than  that  for  the  world,  though  less  than  for  New  Zealand. 

The  further  out  one  goes  from  the  centres  of  greatest  massing 
of  genera  and  species,  in  other  words,  the  larger  on  the  average 
(in  size  in  the  world)  do  the  non-endemic  genera  become.  The 
oenera  above  mentioned  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  New  Zealand, 
and  India,  that  are  below  the  average  world  size,  are  in  all  39 
with  89  endemics,  while  those  above  are  117  with  688.  This  fits 
in  with  what  was  said  above  (p.  115)  about  Size  and  Space,  that 
on  the  whole  the  larger  the  genera,  the  larger  the  area  they 
occupy. 

This  fact,  that  the  endemic  species,  in  all  regions  of  the  world, 
belong  in  greater  proportion,  not  to  the  small  and  local  genera, 
but  to  the  large  and  widespread,  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
features  that  spring  to  attention  when  one  begins  to  study 
endemism.  In  New  Zealand,  for  example  (37),  the  genera  that 
have  most  endemic  species  are  Ranunculus1  (with  32),  Epilobium 
(24),  Coprosma1  (40),  Olearia1  (35),  Celmisia1  (42),  Senecio1  (29), 
Myosotis  (21),  Veronica1  (81),  Carex1  (36)  and  Poa1  (21),  a  fairly 
well-known  list  of  genera.  These  ten  contain  no  less  than  36  per 
cent,  of  the  endemics  of  New  Zealand.  Or  in  Ceylon,  the  largest 
numbers  of  endemics  are  in  Eugenia  (29),  Memecylon  (21),  He- 
dyotis  (16),  Symplocos  (17)  and  Strobilanthes  (25),  again  not 
altogether  unknown  genera,  the  five  containing  13  per  cent,  of 
the  endemics  of  the  island.  And  if  one  study  the  endemic  or 
local  species  of  the  world,  one  finds  these  same  genera  appearing 
in  many  other  places  with  large  numbers  of  local  species;  Eu- 
genia, for  instance,  has  about  240  in  Brazil  (52  in  the  little  state 
of  Rio).  If  one  adopt  the  explanation  of  dying  out,  these  great 
genera  must  have  become  world-wide  very  early,  and  have  left 
all  these  endemics  as  stragglers,  dying  out  before  the  advancing 
host  of  those  species  which  had  proved  the  best  adapted  to  the 
conditions. 

The  view  to  which  all  this  leads  is  simply,  as  has  already  been 
mentioned  (p.  61),  that  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  endemic 
species  are  young  species  comparatively  recently  evolved,  and 
still  in  the  earlier  stages  of  their  distribution  about  the  globe, 
while  they  show  no  points  of  distinction  from  species  of  larger 

1  These  genera  also  occur  with  endemic  representatives  on  the  outlying 
islands  (Kermadecs,  Chathams,  Aucklands),  where  they  have  27  out  of  the 
grand  total  of  73  endemics  of  these  islands,  or  37  per  cent. 


166   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES    [pt.  ii 


area,  being  distributed  upon  exactly  similar  principles,  and  like 
them  showing  many  of  small  area,  with  numbers  diminishing  at 
first  rapidly,  and  then  more  slowly,  towards  the  few  that  occupy 
large  areas,  the  effect  of  the  figures,  when  plotted  graphically, 
being  to  form  a  hollow  curve  (fig.  on  p.  162). 

One  may  almost  regard  the  question  of  endemism  as  the  central 
point  of  taxonomic  distribution,  upon  which  all  the  rest  depends. 
Controversy  has  largely  centred  around  it,  and  there  are  at  least 
three  rival  explanations  in  the  field  at  the  present  time.  These 
are  (1)  that  endemics  are  very  specialised  species  (and  genera) 
suited  only  to  the  areas  upon  which  they  are  found;  (2)  that 
they  are  old  species  (and  genera)  which  have  been  driven  into 
quiet  nooks,  or  left  in  odd  corners,  by  the  competition  of  better 
adapted  species;  and  (3)  the  explanation  just  given,  that  in 
general  they  are  young  beginners,  descended  from  the  "wides." 

The  first  and  second  explanations  were  based  upon  incom- 
plete knowledge  of  the  distribution  of  endemics,  and  can  no 
longer  be  regarded  as  general.  One  has  only  to  think  over  what 
has  been  pointed  out  above  (and  cf.  p.  55).  The  facts  (1)  that 
the  endemics  are  distributed  in  "wheels  within  wheels"  (cf. 
maps  given  above),  (2)  that  the  numbers  in  any  genus  in  a 
country  increase  from  the  edge  up  to  a  maximum  at  some  point 
or  region,  (3)  that  this  is  the  same  place  at  which  many  other 
genera  have  also  their  maxima,  (4)  that  there  may  be  more  than 
one  place  in  a  single  country  (p.  78)  where  these  maxima  aggre- 
gate together,  (5)  that  the  distribution  of  the  endemics  by  areas 
forms  hollow  curves,  increasing  most  rapidly  to  the  smallest 
areas  of  all,  (6)  that  these  hollow  curves  show  for  country  by 
country,  for  family  by  family,  even  for  genus  by  genus,  (7)  that 
there  is  no  difference  in  type  of  distribution  between  the  species 
of  endemic  genera,  those  of  widely  distributed  genera  with  all 
species  endemic,  and  those  of  widely  distributed  genera  with 
some  species  endemic  and  some  not,  (8)  that  the  species  of 
endemic  genera  show  less  dispersal  in  a  country  than  the  endemic 
species  of  non-endemic  genera,  (9)  that  the  endemic  species 
mainly  belong,  not  to  the  endemic  genera,  or  to  small  and  broken 
genera,  but  to  the  large,  widely  distributed,  and  "successful" 
genera  of  the  world,  (10)  that  endemic  species  are  distributed, 
and  behave,  just  like  other  species,  (11)  that  endemics  increase 
in  numbers  and  proportion  towards  the  south;  to  say  nothing 
of  other  facts  already  brought  up,  or  of  the  difficulties  in  explain- 
ing in  any  single  case  what  characters  are  disadvantageous  (as 


ch.  xv]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  SPECIES  167 


required  for  dying  out),  or  advantageous  (as  required  for  local 
adaptation),  these  facts,  we  repeat,  are  very  much  against  any 
explanation  that  is  based,  as  are  the  two  first  named,  upon 
natural  selection.  Further,  upon  these  suppositions  it  is  impos- 
sible to  make  any  of  the  predictions  that  have  already  been  so 
successfully  made. 

There  remains  the  third  hypothesis,  that  in  general  endemics 
are  species  so  young  that  they  have  not  yet  had  time  to  spread 
to  any  great  extent,  or  in  other  words  that  they  are  in  general  the 
most  recent  appearances  of  species  in  the  genera  to  which  they 
belong.  Only  in  some  such  way  can  one  explain  the  appearance 
of  such  maps  as  those  given  above  for  Doona  or  Ranunculus,  or 
the  "hollow  curves"  of  distribution.  No  valid  evidence  has  yet 
been  brought  up  to  show  that  this  is  not  the  correct  view  to  take 
of  the  existence  of  the  majority  of  endemics.  There  can  be  little 
doubt,  however,  that  quite  an  appreciable  number  of  existing 
species  must  be  looked  upon  either  as  relics,  or  as  local  adapta- 
tions. The  relics  may  or  may  not  be  dying  out  (cf.  replies  to 
objections,  pp.  88  to  94).  The  local  adaptations  must,  of  course, 
be  looked  upon  as  simply  a  special  case,  i.e.  as  species  which 
appeared  at  first  (as  all  species,  to  survive  at  all,  must  do)  as 
eminently  suited  to  the  local  conditions  that  obtained  at  their 
birthplace,  but  which  have  not  been  able  to  spread  far,  by  reason 
of  ecological  boundaries  caused  by  changes  of  conditions  at  a 
very  short  distance. 

There  are  many  points  in  favour  of  this  third  hypothesis.  It 
explains  as  well  as  the  other  two  all  the  phenomena  that  they 
were  able  to  account  for,  and  also  very  many  to  which  they  were 
quite  inapplicable,  as,  for  example,  the  eleven  given  on  p.  166. 
It  also  enables  us  to  make  predictions  about  distribution,  which 
an  examination  of  the  facts  shows  to  be  justified,  and  it  has 
already  been  successfully  employed  in  this  way  nearly  a  hundred 
times.  Under  these  circumstances,  Age  and  Area  may  perhaps 
be  regarded  as  at  any  rate  possessing  a  greater  basis  of  probability 
than  either  of  the  two  hypotheses  based  upon  natural  selection. 

Summary 

It  is  shown  that  no  real  difference  can  be  pointed  out  between 
endemic  and  non-endemic  species  (or  genera).  The  former  are 
frequent  upon  mountains,  upon  islands,  and  in  isolated  pieces 
of  country,  or  in  regions  in  which  dispersal  is  very  slow,  or 


168 


ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION   [pt.  ii,  ch.  xv 


hindered  by  surrounding  barriers.  Instances  are  given  of  the 
space  occupied  by  endemics,  beginning  with  very  minute  areas, 
and  going  on  to  larger;  the  latter  show  no  break  as  one  goes  on 
to  areas  larger  again,  up  to  any  size  possible  for  a  species.  No 
difference  can  be  seen  between  endemic  and  non-endemics. 

It  is  shown  that  endemics  are  distributed  in  "wheels  within 
wheels"  (cf.  maps);  and  that  other  features  obtain  in  their  dis- 
tribution, of  which  a  brief  list  is  given  on  p.  166.  None  of  these, 
or  but  few,  can  be  explained  on  the  supposition  that  endemics 
are  local  adaptations,  or  are  relics,  and  the  only  possible  explana- 
tion, for  the  vast  majority,  seem  to  be  that  provided  by  Age  and 
Area  and  Size  and  Space,  that,  in  general,  they  are  young 
beginners,  descended  from  the  "  wides." 

The  most  important  general  feature  in  the  distribution  of 
endemics  is  probably  that  it  is  always  of  the  "hollow  curve" 
type  (fig.  on  p.  162)  with  most  species  on  the  small  areas, 
and  numbers  rapidly  decreasing  upwards  to  the  large.  This  same 
type  of  distribution  proves  to  be  the  rule  for  all  genera,  however 
large  they  may  be,  and  however  large  an  area  they  may  occupy. 
Endemics  simply  present  a  miniature  of  the  general  distribution 
in  the  world. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA 

We  have  seen  that  endemic  species  are  especially  common 
upon  islands,  upon  mountain  chains,  and  in  more  or  less  isolated 
localities  (small  or  large),  and  that  in  all  such  regions  they  in- 
crease, on  the  whole,  in  passing  from  north  to  south,  up  to  a 
certain  limit.  We  have  also  seen  that  it  is  probable  that  the  great 
bulk  of  them  must  be  regarded  as  young  beginners.  But  if  this 
be  so,  there  is  no  logical  reason  why  the  same  should  not  be  true 
of  endemic  genera,  which  occur  in  similar  places,  and  there  is 
every  probability  in  its  favour.  Of  course,  just  as  in  the  case  of 
species,  there  are  doubtless  many  exceptions  here  and  there,  but 
we  are  speaking  of  the  genera  in  the  bulk. 

When  the  number  and  proportion  of  endemic  species  is  large, 
there  are  generally  to  be  found  a  fair  number  of  endemic  genera 
also,  but  there  seems  no  necessary  relation  between  number  of 
species  and  number  of  genera;  or  perhaps  rather,  this  relation 
may  be  much  interfered  with  by  other  causes.  The  Hawaiian 
Islands  have  more  endemic  genera  than  Ceylon  or  New  Zealand, 
though  they  have  many  fewer  endemic  species ;  on  the  other  hand, 
they  are  more  isolated.  This  matter  still  requires  more  careful 
investigation. 

The  number  of  genera  confined  to  islands  or  mountain  chains 
seems  to  increase  with  at  least  three  factors — with  the  size  of 
the  island  or  mountain  chain,  with  the  isolation  of  the  same,  and 
with  increased  southern  latitude,  up  to  45-50°  S.  The  effects  of 
all  these  factors  may  be  seen  in  the  list  below,  by  comparing,  for 
example,  Ceylon  and  Java,  Ceylon  and  the  Hawaiian  Islands, 
and  Ceylon  and  New  Caledonia  (which  is  much  smaller). 

The  greatest  proportion  of  endemic  genera  to  area  is  to  be 
found  in  some  of  the  southern  and  comparatively  isolated  loca- 
tions, e.g.  in  the  islands  of  Juan  Fernandez,  the  Mascarenes,  or 
New  Caledonia,  in  south-west  South  Africa,  in  parts  of  West 
Australia,  etc.  But  the  actual  numbers  of  endemic  genera  in- 
crease with  increasing  area,  as  the  rough  figures1  on  p.  170  show. 

As  in  the  case  of  species,  no  country  has  all  its  genera  endemic, 
and  most  are  very  far  indeed  from  this  condition.  Contrary  to 

1  Taken,  without  criticism,  from  my  Dictionary,  and  not  revised  in  detail. 


170  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  n 


Islands 


Endemic 
genera 
about 


Endemic 
genera 

Continental  about 


British  Islands 

Macaronesia 

Ceylon 

Japan 

Fiji 

Hawaiian  Islands 

Borneo 

Java 

New  Guinea 
New  Caledonia 
New  Zealand 
Madagascar 
Mascarenes 
Juan  Fernandez 


0 

20 
23 
69 
56 
45 
71 
62 
146 
134 
32 
266 
64 
10 


Mediterranean  region  280 

India  320 

Australia  470 

Colombia  87 

Peru  75 

Chile  140 

Brazil  533 

Argentina  47 

South  America  1731 

South  Africa  523 

Africa  1733 


what  is  often  supposed,  the  proportions  of  endemic  genera  upon 
islands  are  usually  small :  they  range  from  nothing  for  the  British 
Islands  to  about  12-20  per  cent,  upon  such  islands  as  Juan 
Fernandez,  the  Mascarenes,  and  New  Caledonia,  being  as  usual 
larger  in  the  more  southern  islands.  On  larger  areas  of  ground 
the  proportions  are  greater;  Brazil  has  about  21  per  cent,  of  its 
genera  endemic,  and  so  has  Chile,  Australia  about  30  per  cent., 
South  Africa  about  35  per  cent.  Africa  as  a  whole  has  about 
46  per  cent.,  and  the  proportions  increase  with  increasing  area 
till  one  finds  100  per  cent,  endemic  in  the  world. 

Whilst  in  general  it  is  true  that  increasing  size  of  area,  greater 
isolation,  and  greater  nearness  to  the  southern  limit  of  about 
40-48°  S.  are  accompanied  by  increasing  number  and  proportion 
of  local  genera,  these  are  probably  not  the  only  factors  in  the 
question.  If  the  county  from  which  the  invasion  of  plants  has 
come  be  inhabited  by  great  numbers  of  them,  or  if  the  communi- 
cation between  them  be  broad,  the  proportion  of  local  genera 
will  be  more  likely  to  be  large. 

There  is  no  definite  and  demonstrable  difference  between  en- 
demic genera  and  others,  and  we  shall  endeavour  to  show,  just 
as  in  the  case  of  species,  that  the  phenomena  exhibited  by  them 
are  simply  a  miniature  of  those  exhibited  by  genera  as  a  whole. 

One  may,  to  a  very  large  extent,  repeat  the  preceding  chapter, 
but  with  genus  substituted  for  species,  and  family  for  genus,  and 
find  it  to  agree  with  the  facts  about  endemic  genera,  which 
behave  like  the  species.  Just  as  in  their  case,  the  areas  occupied 
by  genera,  whether  so  local  that  they  are  classed  as  endemic,  or 
whether  of  larger  size,  are  nicely  graduated  from  small  to  large. 


ch.xvi]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA  171 


Inasmuch  as  a  genus  consists  on  the  average  of  over  twelve 
species,  which  never  all  occupy  the  same  area,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  average  area  occupied  by  a  genus  must  be  larger  than  that 
occupied  by  a  species,  but  that  does  not  affect  the  argument. 

Some  endemic  genera  occupy  very  small  areas,  e.g.  Homalo- 
petalum  in  three  parishes  in  Jamaica,  Itatiaia  on  one  mountain 
in  southern  Brazil,  Sphagneticola  in  a  suburb  of  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
Leichhardtia  on  the  Daintree  River,  Carpolyza  in  the  immediate 
suburbs  of  Cape  Town,  Traunia  and  Spondiopsis  upon  Kili- 
mandjaro,  Cladopus  in  one  or  two  streams  in  Java,  Alsinidendron 
upon  Oahu  Island,  Neobracea  upon  several  of  the  Bahama  islands, 
Podadenia  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ratnapura  in  Ceylon,  and 
so  on.  Or  if  one  take  a  single  country,  New  Zealand,  for  example, 
and  take  a  few  of  its  endemic  genera,  one  finds  Siphonidium  and 
Townsonia  upon  very  small  areas,  Pachycladus  upon  one  slightly 
larger.  Colensoa  reaches  about  80  miles  along  New  Zealand, 
Tetrachondra  about  100,  Anagosperma  about  140,  Notospartium 
about  240,  Ixerba  about  300,  Hoheria  700,  Tupeia  1000,  and 
Carpodetus  the  whole  length  of  1080  miles  from  North  Cape  to 
the  south  of  Stewart  Island.  Of  the  eighteen  genera  endemic  to 
New  Zealand  which  have  one  species  each  (37),  six  are  confined 
to  areas  not  over  140  miles  in  length,  or  33  per  cent,  of  the 
genera  upon  areas  not  exceeding  13  per  cent,  of  the  whole,  so 
that  the  tendency  even  here  is  to  give  a  hollow  curve  (cf.  pre- 
ceding chapter). 

In  Ceylon,  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  and  elsewhere  one  finds  the 
same  type  of  distribution,  and  if  one  go  on  to  larger  and  larger 
areas  one  finds  larger  and  larger  areas  for  genera  in  the  same 
graduated  way,  until  one  comes  to  such  a  world-ranging  genus 
as  Senecio,  or  Astragalus.  Though  of  course  there  are  many 
exceptions,  on  the  whole  the  size  of  the  genera  (number  of  their 
contained  species)  becomes  steadily  larger  with  the  increasing 
area,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out  in  Chapter  xn;  of  course 
allied  groups  only  being  compared. 

If  instead  of  taking  individual  genera,  or  the  endemic  genera 
of  a  single  country,  one  take  all  the  genera  of  a  small  family,  one 
finds  the  same  graduation  of  areas.  Take,  for  example,  the 
Polemoniaceae  (from  the  Pflanzenreich).  Of  its  twelve  genera, 
three,  with  one  species  each,  occupy  (roughly)  California  and 
Utah,  Mexico  and  Guatemala,  and  the  Pacific  United  States. 
One  with  five  species  is  found  in  California,  Utah,  Nevada,  and 
Arizona,  one  with  six  in  the  Andes  from  Colombia  to  Chile. 


172   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  ii 


There  are  two  with  nine  species,  one  in  the  Andes  from  Mexico 
to  Chile,  including  Venezuela,  and  the  other  with  eight  species 
in  Pacific  North  America  arid  one  in  Atlantic.  So  far  the  areas 
occupied  are  closely  correlated  with  the  number  of  species,  but 
in  the  bigger  genera  there  is  more  variation.  Loeselia  with  twelve 
species  runs  from  California  and  Texas  to  Colombia  and  Vene- 
zuela. Gilia  with  109  and  Navarretia  with  41  both  occupy  North 
America,  the  Andes,  and  Argentina,  while  Phlox  with  48  covers 
North  America  and  part  of  Siberia.  Finally,  Polemonium,  which 
has  only  29  species1,  covers  North  and  South  America,  and  north 
temperate  Europe  and  Asia.  Except  for  this  last  genus,  which 
covers  the  whole  family  range,  the  area  is  roughly  proportional 
to  the  number  of  species  (cf.  Chapter  xn)  and  the  grouping  is 
just  like  that  of  the  endemic  species  or  genera. 

This  type  of  distribution  is  very  common  indeed,  showing  in 
perhaps  the  greater  number  of  the  families.  One  genus,  usually 
with  many  species,  covers  the  whole  or  most  of  the  family  range, 
the  smaller  genera,  with  more  restricted  ranges,  being  the  more 
numerous,  and  on  the  whole  increasing  in  number  the  smaller 
they  are,  and  the  more  restricted  their  range.  In  the  Polemoni- 
aceae,  there  are  eight  genera  below,  and  four  above,  the  average 
size  for  the  family,  one  of  the  latter  occupying  the  whole  family 
range. 

If  one  take  the  Cistaceae  (37),  one  finds  Halimium  with  26 
species  covering  the  whole  family  range,  while  Helianthemum 
with  70  covers  the  Old  World  from  Macaronesia  to  Beluchistan 
and  Arctic  Europe,  and  Lechea  with  13  covers  North  and  Central 
America  and  the  West  Indies.  The  rest,  with  20,  12,  9  and  3 
species,  cover  smaller  ranges  within  these. 

Or  if  one  take  the  large  and  widespread  Menispermaceae  (fig. 
on  p.  173),  one  finds  (37)  Cocculus  and  Cissampelos  with  a 
distribution  practically  covering  that  of  the  family,  Stephania 
and  Tinospora  covering  most  of  the  Old  World,  and  Hyperbaena 
most  of  the  New  World,  range.  Within  these  are  many  genera 
of  smaller  and  smaller  range  till  one  comes  down  to  the  12 
in  West  Africa,  5  in  Brazil,  5  in  Madagascar,  etc.  There  are 
2  genera  of  maximum  range,  4  of  rather  less  (including  Meni- 

1  This  curious  point,  that  the  most  widely  spread  genus  of  all  has  fewer 
species  than  some  of  the  others,  is  by  no  means  unique,  but  occurs  in  a 
number  of  families,  e.g.  also  in  the  Menispermaceae,  Cistaceae,  and  Hydro- 
phyllaceae.  It  requires  careful  investigation  with  the  aid  of  paleobotany, 
for  it  seems  to  me  not  impossible  that  the  deficiency  in  species  may  be 
connected  with  the  occurrence  of  the  glacial  period. 


174  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  ii 


spermum  in  Atlantic  North  America  and  north-east  Asia),  about 
19  in  the  next  class,  and  24  or  more  in  the  lowest  class. 

This  type  of  distribution  corresponds  to  that  of  the  species  of 
Doona,  Gymnema,  Cissampelos,  etc.,  described  in  the  preceding 
chapter  (p.  157).  But  the  Cyrtandra  type  (p.  159)  can  also  be 
matched,  e.g.  by  the  family  Monimiaceae  (37),  in  which  there 
are  22  genera  with  small  areas  (the  largest  being  New  Guinea  and 
Celebes)  and  49  species  in  all  (average  2-2  species  per  genus), 
5  genera  with  areas  of  moderate  size  (and  22  species,  average  4-4), 
and  5  with  areas  of  large  size  (and  196  species,  average  39-2). 
These  larger  areas  overlap  one  another  to  some  extent  in  some 
cases,  but  there  is  no  single  genus  covering,  or  nearly  covering, 
the  range  of  the  family. 

All  these  groups  of  genera,  it  will  be  seen,  give  indications,  even 
when  considered  singly,  that  the  areas  they  occupy  go  with  their 
number  of  species,  and  if  taken  in  groups,  the  applicability  of 
Size  and  Space  is  clearly  obvious. 

So  far,  in  dealing  both  with  endemic  (and  other)  species,  and 
with  endemic  (and  other)  genera,  we  have  been  considering  only 
the  areas  occupied  by  them,  and  we  have  seen  that  these  are 
graduated  from  many  very  small  areas  through  a  good  many  of 
a  size  somewhat  larger  up  to  a  tail  of  a  very  few  that  occupy  the 
largest  areas.  Plotted  graphically,  as  in  fig.  on  p.  162,  the 
numbers  always  form  a  hollow  curve. 

But  now,  if  age  be  the  chief  determinant  of  spread1,  as  would 
appear  to  be  the  case  from  all  the  figures  that  have  been  given, 
and  from  the  success  of  the  many  predictions  based  upon  it  that 
have  been  made ;  and  if  Size  and  Space  be  equally  valid,  then  it 
would  seem  that  the  sizes  of  the  genera  (i.e.  their  numbers  of 
species)  in  any  group  of  endemics  should  also  be  arranged  in  a 
hollow  curve.  If  Age,  Size,  and  Space  (or  Area)  go  together,  then, 
as  age  is  the  only  active1  factor  of  the  three,  it  is  clear  that  what- 

1  As  already  pointed  out,  age  of  itself  effects  nothing,  but  the  fact  that 
dispersal  goes  so  largely  with  age  shows  that  the  various  factors  that  are 
operative  produce  an  average  or  resultant  effect,  so  that  in  twice  the  time, 
twice  the  dispersal  will  occur,  unless  barriers  (physical  or  ecological)  inter- 
fere. The  essential  difference  between  this  view  and  the  older  one  is  that 
under  Age  and  Area  all  species  (with  few  exceptions)  are  looked  upon  as 
enlarging  their  area,  instead  of  a  few  doing  so,  and  many  contracting  theirs. 

Many  people  take  the  popular  view,  which  is  based,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, upon  an  assumed  efficacy  of  natural  selection  for  which  as  yet  there 
is  little  proof,  that  species  with  small  areas  of  distribution  owe  the  fact  that 
those  areas  are  small  to  the  competition  of  other  more  successful  types. 
But  there  is  little  evidence  for  such  a  belief.  It  is  simply  a  way  of  looking 


ch.  xvi]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA  175 


ever  phenomena  are  shown  by  space  should  also  be  more  or  less 
paralleled  by  those  shown  by  size.  We  are  thus  led  on  to  the 
investigation  of  the  sizes  of  genera,  to  see  whether  they  may  not 
show  some  definite  relationships  to  one  another,  such  as  might 
be  expressed  by  the  aid  of  curves. 

Very  little  investigation  is  required  to  show  that  this  is  indeed 
the  case.  If  we  take  16/1  to  mean  16  genera  of  one  species  each, 
3/2  to  mean  3  genera  of  two  species  each,  and  so  on,  then  examine 
the  endemic  flora  of  all  the  islands  of  the  world,  and  pick  out 
those  genera  that  are  actually  endemic  to  the  islands,  one  finds 
that  all  the  islands  show  the  same  type  of  arrangement,  as  may 
be  seen  in  the  following  list  of  examples : 

Table  showing  the  numbers  of  Endemic  Genera 
of  different  Sizes  upon  a  number  of  Islands 
Azores,  Canaries,  Madeira    16/1,  3/2,  1/4 


Borneo 
Ceylon 
Cuba 

Hawaiian  Islands 

Japan 
Java 

Madagascar 

New  Caledonia 

New  Zealand  (proper) 
Socotra  . 


59/1,  8/2,  2/4,  1/5 

19/1,  2/2,  1/3,  1/5,  1/11,  1/15 

58/1,  9/2,  2/3,  2/4,  1/6 

14/1,  6/2,  7/3,  4/4,  3/5,  2/6,  2/7,  1/9, 

1/11,  2/12,  1/14,  1/17,  1/28 
54/1,  9/2,  1/3,  2/4,  1/8 
57/1,  2/2 

191/1,  37/2,  10/3,  7/4,  9/5,  2/6,  2/7, 
1/8,  5/10,  1/12,  1/18,  1/20 

73/1,  27/2,  6/3,  4/4,  4/5,  4/6,  2  7, 
1/9,  3/10,  2/12,  1/15 

22/1,  2/2,  3/3,  2/4,  1/5,  1/9 

17/1,  1/2,  1/3 


On  such  large  islands  as  Madagascar,  where  there  are  many 
endemics,  the  same  phenomenon  is  shown  even  by  single  families. 
Thus  the  Madagascar  Compositae  show  11/1,  2/2,  1/3,  1/5,  and 
1/10,  the  Rubiaceae  14/1,  3/2,  1/4.  . 

Every  island  in  the  world  that  possesses  any  endemic  genera 

at  the  actual  fact,  which  is  all  we  have  to  go  upon,  that  A  occupies  a  large 
and  B  a  small  area.  My  way  of  looking  at  the  same  fact  is  to  suppose  that 
A  is  older  than  B.  This  is  really  a  much  more  simple  explanation,  especially 
when  we  remember  that  the  areas  occupied  by  the  different  species  in  a 
genus,  or  the  different  genera  in  a  family,  usually  increase  fairly  regularly 
from  very  small  to  large.  If  one  have  areas  represented  by  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6, 
7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  it  seems  an  unnecessarily 
oblique  way  of  looking  at  the  facts  to  say  that  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5  must  be 
regarded  as  dying  out,  while  16  to  20  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  successful 
and  expanding  species,  and  no  two  authors  can  agree  about  whether  the 
intermediate  species  6  to  15  are  one  thing  or  the  other.  It  is  far  more 
simple  to  regard  all  as  still  in  process  of  expansion,  but  that  some,  by  reason 
of  greater  age  and  perhaps  other  advantages,  have  grown  larger  than  others. 


176  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  ii 


shows  them  arranged  in  this  way,  with  many  monotypes  (or 
genera  with  one  species  only),  a  fair  number  of  ditypes,  and  a 
tail  of  a  few  larger  genera.  When  plotted  graphically  they  con- 
sequently form  the  hollow  curve  that  we  have  begun  to  meet  so 
often  in  dealing  with  distribution  (cf.  fig.  on  p.  177).  One 
must  make  allowance,  in  considering  the  figures  above  given,  for 
the  "lumping"  that  is  practised  in  my  Dictionary,  especially  at 
the  fives  and  tens. 

If  one  add  up  the  grand  total  of  1582  endemic  genera  of  all 
the  islands  of  the  world,  one  finds  that  they  show  1037/1  (1037 
of  one  species),  or  65  per  cent,  of  the  total,  and  233/2,  or  14-7 
per  cent.,  these  two  making  up  nearly  four-fifths  of  the  whole. 
There  are  104/3,  or  6-5  per  cent.,  53/4,  49/5,  and  so  on,  the  largest 
endemic  genus  of  islands  being  Oncostemon  with  60  species.  If 
one  take  for  comparison  the  endemic  genera  of  Brazil,  533  in 
number,  one  finds  334/1,  or  62  per  cent.,  91/2,  or  15-2  per  cent., 
33/3,  or  6-2  per  cent.,  and  so  on,  the  largest  having  50  species. 
In  both  these  cases  the  same  type  of  result,  showing  a  well- 
marked  hollow  curve,  is  obtained,  and  one  gets  the  same  what- 
ever region  of  the  world  one  may  try  for  endemic  genera,  e.g.  any 
of  the  other  countries  of  South  America,  or  South  Africa  (cf.  the 
first  two  and  4th  and  7th  curves  in  fig.  on  p.  177). 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  in  these  two  instances,  the  islands 
and  Brazil,  the  percentages  of  genera  of  different  sizes  are  much 
the  same,  the  monotypes  for  example  being  65  per  cent,  in  the 
one,  and  62  per  cent,  in  the  other.  The  islands,  which  actually 
cover  about  two  million  square  miles,  would  probably  be  nearly 
equal  to  Brazil  if  the  included  seas  were  taken.  The  average 
number  of  species  per  genus  is  also  not  unequal  (islands 
1582/3461,  average  2-1;  Brazil  533/1291,  average  2-4). 

The  endemics  of  mountains  are  also  as  a  rule  small  genera, 
though  there  are  a  fair  number  of  exceptions  to  this,  but  only 
in  the  large  mountain  chains.  In  the  Andes,  for  example,  there 
are  Chaetanthera  (30  species),  Cinchona  (40),  Cristaria  (30),  Nas- 
sauvia  (50),  Psammisia  (35),  Puya  (25),  and  many  more  of 
smaller  size. 

One  may  go  on  to  deal  with  still  larger  floras,  and  find  that 
they  are  arranged  in  precisely  the  same  way,  so  that  the  pheno- 
mena shown  by  the  endemic  genera  are  exactly  paralleled  by 
those  shown  by  genera  that  occupy  more  area.  If  one  take  (as 
usual  from  my  Dictionary,  in  which  uncertain  fours  are  counted 
as  fives,  etc.)  the  genera  that  are  confined  to  single  continents 


ch.  xvi]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA  177 


r/ 

X 

u 

(0 


-IN 

X 
c 


E  MDLMICS. 

Geneva,  grouped   by  £>iz.e. 
Ea.ch  cvjri/e  is  5  squires 
diagonal  1^  abcwe  the  last. 


oo 
X 

J 

"o 
O 

O 

U 


Number  of  6petie&. 

Curves  showing  the  numbers  of  genera  of  one,  two,  three,  five,  ten  (and 
sometimes  more)  species,  in  various  groups  of  endemic  genera.  Always 
there  is  a  great  preponderance  of  ones  and  twos  and  a  tail  of  few  larger 
genera.  The  monotypes  are  at  the  left-hand  end  of  the  curves  (1). 

w.a.  12 


178   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  ii 


or  continuous  areas,  one  finds,  for  example,  that  in  Africa  there 
are  835/1,  254/2,  136  3,  86  4.  97  5,  48  6.  and  so  on,  the  largest 
genus  having  350  species.  In  tropical  Asia  one  finds  445/1,  175  2. 
90  3.  68  4.  77/5.  56/6,  and  so  on.  the  largest  genus  having  600 
species.  In  the  north  temperate  region  of  the  Old  World  one 
finds  385/1,  135/2,  75  3.  45  4.  49  5.  29  6,  and  so  on  to  250.  From 
this  one  may  go  on  to  the  world  itself,  and  one  finds  (in  the  total 
of  12,571)  4853/1,  1632/2,  921/3,  and  so  on  to  1600.  All  these 
groups  of  figures  exhibit  markedly  hollow  curves  when  plotted 
graphically. 

The  various  figures  that  have  just  been  given  for  islands, 
countries,  continents,  etc.,  show  in  a  very  distinct  way  that  the 
larger  genera  are  found  upon  the  larger  and  more  isolated  areas, 
whether  of  islands  or  of  countries  on  the  mainland,  as  would  be 
expected  upon  the  principle  of  Size  and  Space  (Chapter  xii). 
Thus,  while  Java  has  no  endemic  genus  of  more  than  two  species, 
nor  Socotra  of  more  than  three,  Borneo  reaches  five.  Xew  Cale- 
donia 15.  Madagascar  20,  and  the  very  isolated  Hawaiian  Islands 
28.  The  largest  island  endemic  genus,  Oncostemon  with  60  species, 
is  found  in  Madagascar  and  the  Mascarenes,  a  large  total  area. 
Astronia,  the  next  largest,  with  30  species,  occupies  large  parts 
of  the  Malay  Archipelago  and  Polynesia.  The  largest  genus  con- 
fined to  Xew  Zealand  proper  has  only  9  species,  but  that  con- 
fined to  Xew  Zealand  and  surrounding  islands  (p.  66)  has  20. 
In  the  same  way,  the  possible  size  of  a  genus  increases  with  the 
increasing  size  of  the  area,  till  we  reach  600  species  in  a  genus  of 
Tropical  Asia,  and  1600  in  the  world. 

All  these  groupings  of  genera,  whether  usually  considered  en- 
demic, or  not,  whether  confined  to  small  areas,  or  found  on 
larger  (even  up  to  the  whole  world),  show  the  same  type  of 
arrangement,  with  the  bulk  of  their  number  monotypic  or  di- 
typic,  and  a  tail  running  out  to  the  larger  genera,  the  tail  being 
longer  the  larger  the  size  of  the  area  dealt  with.  There  is  no 
difference  between  the  endemic  genera  and  the  rest. 

It  is  also  evident  that  the  sizes  of  genera  are  grouped  in  the 
same  way  as  the  areas  occupied  by  their  species.  Both  go  with 
age ;  the  older  the  genus,  the  more  space  will  it  occupy,  and  the 
more  species  will  it  have.  Of  course  one  must  only  deal  with 
groups  of  say  ten  genera,  and  must  only  compare  allied  forms, 
to  get  results  that  are  at  all  reliable  and  comparable. 

It  is  clear  that  the  general  types  of  relationship  shown,  whether 
between  endemic  genera  only,  between  genera  of  larger  area 


ch.  xvi]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA  179 


only,  or  between  these  two  classes,  are  the  same,  and  that  they 
are  the  same  whether  we  consider  the  areas  occupied  by  the 
species  of  the  genera,  or  the  numbers  of  species  in  the  genera 
themselves.  The  same  type  also  ajDpears  in  the  population  of  a 
country  by  its  flora,  whether  some  of  it  is  endemic  or  not.  In 
all  cases  of  distribution,  whether  it  be  distribution  by  areas 
occupied — geographical  distribution  or  distribution  in  space — 
or  by  numbers  of  species  in  the  genera — evolution  or  distribution 
in  time — the  distribution  seems  to  have  been  determined  largely 
by  time.  If  age  alone  were  operative1,  one  would  get  much  the 
same  distribution  as  at  present  exists,  when  one  allows  for  geo- 
logical happenings,  and  the  action  of  barriers.  Among  these 
latter,  of  course,  ecological  barriers  are  of  great  importance,  but 
the  general  evidence  goes  to  show  that  their  action  is  principally 
negative,  like  that  of  physical  barriers. 

Just  as  with  species,  endemic  genera  have  been  regarded  as 
(1)  locally  adapted — a  view  which  has  largely  died  out,  especi- 
ally since  it  was  realised  how  difficult  it  would  be  to  find  anything 
to  which  such  a  list  of  genera  as  those  given  above  for  New 
Zealand  (p.  171)  could  be  adapted,  and  a  view  upon  which  it  is 
impossible  to  explain  such  an  arrangement  of  genera  in  order  of 
size  as  we  have  just  seen  to  be  the  rule;  (2)  as  survivals;  and 
(3)  as  in  general  new  genera  beginning  life  as  such. 

As  islands  have  always  been  regarded  as  the  typical  location 
in  which  to  look  for  endemics — species,  and  still  more  genera — 
we  ma}*  do  well  to  consider  them. 

Now  if  the  endemic  genera  of  islands  be  in  reality  survivals, 
one  would  expect  that  they  would  at  least  show  a  tendency  to 
belong  to  families  that  are  small  or  of  broken  distribution,  i.e. 
such  families  as  we  have  been  accustomed  to  look  upon  as  more 
or  less  moribund.  And  in  any  case,  one  would  not  expect  the 
great  bulk  of  them  to  belong  to  the  large  and  " successful*' 
families.  If,  on  the  other  hand.  Age  and  Area  hold  o-ood,  they 
should  be  found  to  occur  upon  islands  (provided  the  connection 
was  mainly  by  land)  in  proportions  not  dissimilar  to  the  pro- 
portionate sizes  of  existing  families. 

In  order  to  test  this  question  thoroughly  (135),  I  have  added 
up  from  my  Dictionary  (1 )  all  the  endemic  genera  of  all  the  islands 
in  the  world,  (2)  all  the  endemic  genera  of  West  Australia.  South 
Africa,  and  Brazil,  three  areas  very  rich  in  endemics,  and  with 
much  variety  of  habitat.  (3)  all  the  genera  confined  to  Australia. 
1  I.e.  if  the  average  speed  of  dispersal  of  a  species  were  constant. 

12  o 


180  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  ii 

Africa,  and  South  America,  and  (4)  all  the  genera  of  the  world. 
Arranging  the  families  in  groups  of  ten  in  the  order  of  their  size 
in  the  world  (as  judged  by  number  of  genera),  and  taking  for 
each  of  the  other  three  areas  the  number  of  genera  in  the  same 
ten  families,  one  gets  the  following  table : 

Table  showing  in  each  pair  of  columns  the  number,  and  the  per- 
centage, of  genera  that  occur  in  the  world,  and  that  are  confined 
to  three  sections  of  it  (ending  with  those  confined  to  the  islands). 
The  first  horizontal  line  shows  the  figures  for  the  ten  largest 
families  in  the  world  for  each  of  these,  and  the  following  lines 
those  for  the  second,  third,  etc.  tens  of  families  in  the  world.  The 
percentages  are  counted  downwards;  the  40  per  cent,  at  the  top 
of  the  first  column  means  40  per  cent,  of  the  genera  of  the  world. 


Tens  of 
families 
(world 

World 

Australia, 

Africa, 
S.  America 

W.  Australia, 
S.  Africa, 
Brazil 

Islands 

order) 

Genera 

/o 

Genera 

/o 

Genera 

/o 

Genera 

/o 

1 

5019 

401 

1579 

391 

459 

40-5 

606 

38-3 

2 

1868 

14-9 

592 

14-6 

176 

15-5 

285 

180 

3 

1094 

8-7 

360 

8-9 

86 

7-6 

144 

91 

4 

874 

6-9 

325 

80 

78 

6-8 

115 

7-2 

5 

695 

5-5 

271 

6-7 

75 

6-6 

83 

5-2 

6 

561 

4-4 

216 

5-3 

57 

50 

82 

51 

7 

456 

3-6 

83 

20 

19 

1-6 

55 

3-4 

8 

355 

2-8 

111 

2-7 

30 

2-6 

48 

30 

9 

296 

2-3 

99 

2-4 

24 

21 

29 

1-8 

10 

233 

1-8 

79 

1-9 

29 

2-5 

37 

2-3 

Total 

11,451 

91-4 

3715 

921 

1033 

911 

1484 

93-7 

11  to  20 

919 

7-3 

278 

6-8 

90 

7-9 

86 

5-4 

21  to  29-1 

147 

11 

38 

0-9 

10 

0-9 

12 

0-75 

Grand  total 

12,517 

99-8 

4031 

99-8 

1133 

99-9 

1582 

99-85 

The  percentages  agree  with  one  another  in  the  four  columns 
in  the  most  remarkably  close  manner,  as  a  little  inspection  will 
soon  show.  The  greatest  difference  in  the  whole  table  occurs  in 
the  second  line,  between  14-6  per  cent,  for  Australia,  etc.,  and 
18-0  per  cent,  for  islands,  a  difference  of  3-4  per  cent.  The  second 
greatest  is  in  the  first  line,  between  38-3  for  islands  and  40-5  for 
West  Australia,  etc.,  a  difference  of  2-2  only. 

If  these  percentages  be  plotted  as  curves,  they  give  the  re- 
markable figure  shown. 

The  close  coincidence  of  these  (hollow)  curves  is  very  remark- 


ch.  xvi]  ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA  181 


able,  and  after  looking  at  them  it  is  difficult  any  longer  to  main- 
tain the  position  that  endemic  genera  in  general  are  survivals  of 
old  floras.  Of  course  there  are  many  single  examples  that  are 
such,  but  they  are  quite  lost  in  the  crowd  when  one  deals  with 
large  numbers.  Survivals  would  never,  so  far  as  one  can  conceive, 
be  graduated  like  this. 


The  four  columns  of  percentages  in  the  table  above,  plotted  as  curves. 
Vertical  readings  are  the  percentages,  horizontal  the  number  of  the  group 
of  ten  families.    (By  courtesy  of  the  Editor,  Annals  of  Botany.) 

Confirmatory  evidence  may  be  obtained  in  various  ways. 
Families  that  have  been  long  enough  upon  islands  to  give  rise 
to  endemic  genera  must  be  very  old,  and  so  must  families  that 
have  reached  both  Old  and  New  Worlds.  One  will  therefore 
expect  these  two  lists  to  coincide  to  a  large  extent,  and  in  fact 
one  finds  that  90  per  cent,  of  the  island  families  that  contain 
island  endemic  genera  also  reach  both  worlds.  Or  again,  one 
will  expect  that  the  oldest  families  will  have  reached  most 
islands,  and  should  contain  the  most  endemic  genera  by  reason 
of  their  age.  This  is  easily  found  to  be  the  case ;  the  West  Indies 


182   ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA   [pt.  ir 


have  195  endemic  genera  in  43  families  that  also  occur  in  the 
islands  of  Indo-Malaya,  and  only  19  in  the  16  families  that  do  not. 
They  have  187  in  39  families  that  occur  on  the  African  islands, 
and  27  in  20  families  that  do  not. 

Incidentally,  the  close  correspondence  of  these  curves  shows 
that  it  is  all  but  certain  that  the  floras  of  the  world,  in  the  mass, 
must  have  been  distributed  by  land  connections,  and  at  any 
rate  those  of  the  bulk  of  the  islands,  though  some  of  the  far  out- 
lying ones,  with  few  endemic  genera,  probably  were  oceanic. 

Just  as  the  endemic  species  belonged  to  the  large  and  "suc- 
cessful" genera  in  greater  proportion,  so  the  endemic  genera 
belong  to  the  large  and  "successful"  families,  and  only  a  very 
few  indeed  to  endemic  families.  An  analysis  of  the  above  table 
of  1582  endemic  genera  of  islands  shows  that  1150  of  them,  or 
72-6  per  cent.,  are  found  in  the  40  largest  families  in  the  world, 
which  only  contain  70-6  per  cent,  of  the  total  genera  in  the 
world,  i.e.  these  families  contain  rather  more  than  their  proper 
proportion  of  endemics.  The  remainder  occur  in  another  110 
families,  leaving  141  which  are  not  represented  upon  islands  by 
any  endemic  genera  at  all.  The  largest  of  these  latter  families  is 
the  Chenopodiaceae  with  86  genera,  and  the  whole  number  only 
contain  890  genera,  or  6  per  family,  against  77  per  family  for 
those  which  have  island  endemic  genera.  The  proportion  of 
endemic  genera  diminishes  from  top  to  bottom  of  the  table 
(cf.  135,  p.  509). 

The  further  out,  and  more  isolated,  the  island  is,  i.e.  in  general 
the  more  ancient  the  date  of  its  peopling  with  plants,  the  more 
do  the  endemic  genera  tend  to  belong  to  the  larger  families.  If 
one  divide  the  150  families  that  possess  them  upon  islands  into 
75  larger  and  75  smaller,  one  finds  that  in  Madagascar  62  of  the 
families  with  endemic  genera  belong  to  the  larger,  18  to  the 
smaller.  In  New  Zealand  the  proportion  is  16/4,  and  in  the 
Hawaiian  Islands  13/1. 

If  endemic  genera  were  really  largely  relics,  one  would  expect 
that  there  would  be  a  fair  number  of  endemic  families,  but,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  these  are  few  and  small,  and  of  the  five  that 
are  found  only  upon  islands  (Chlaenaceae,  Balanopsidaceae, 
Corynocarpaceae,  Lactoridaceae,  and  Cercidiphyllaceae),  the 
largest  is  upon  the  largest  island  (Madagascar)  that  is  also  a 
good  way  out  from  the  mainland. 

Putting  together  all  the  facts  about  endemic  genera  that  have 
been  given  above,  and  which  show  that  in  the  mass  they  behave 


ch.xvi]  EXDEMISMAXD  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERA  183 


like  endemic  species,  and  that  both  endemic  species  and  genera 
behave  like  non-endemic,  it  is  clear  that  nothing  but  a  mechanical 
explanation  will  serve  for  the  chief  features  of  their  distribution, 
when  one  is  dealing  with  the  mass.  Age  supplies  such  an  explana- 
tion, but  this  is  hardly  possible  to  the  supposition  either  that 
they  are  chiefly  relics,  or  that  they  are  chiefly  local  adaptations. 
It  would  thus  seem  to  follow  that  endemics  in  the  mass,  whether 
species  or  genera,  are  chiefly  young  beginners,  descended  in 
general  from  the  more  widely  distributed  forms  about  them. 
The  smaller  the  area  occupied,  on  the  average,  the  younger  the 
species  or  genus. 

Only  in  comparatively  rare  cases  can  we  look  on  forms  of 
small  area  as  relics.  The  fact  that  in  every  family  the  monotypes 
are  from  two  to  three  times  as  numerous  as  the  ditypes  is  fatal 
to  any  idea  of  relic  nature  for  the  great  bulk  of  them.  Of  course, 
just  as  in  the  case  of  species,  we  must  make  various  provisos  for 
the  use  of  Age  and  Area,  such  as  that  the  genera  be  only  com- 
pared in  groups  of  ten  allies  on  either  hand  of  the  comparison, 
that  they  be  only  taken  in  tens  in  any  case  (to  lose  the  relies  in 
the  crowd),  and  that  conditions  remain  reasonably  constant. 
Species  and  genera  are  endemic  simply  because  they  have  not 
yet  had  time  to  spread  abroad,  or  because  they  have  been  pre- 
vented by  barriers,  sometimes  physical,  sometimes  ecological. 

Summary 

Endemic  genera  occur  in  similar  places  to  endemic  species, 
and  instances  are  given  of  the  numbers  that  occur  in  various 
parts  of  the  world,  from  which  it  appears  that  islands  in  general 
have  the  smallest  proportions,  while  the  proportion  increases 
with  increasing  area,  up  to  100  per  cent,  for  the  world.  Examples 
are  quoted  of  very  small  areas  occupied  by  many  endemic  genera, 
usually  monotypic,  and  more  detail  is  given  of  the  distribution 
of  genera  in  several  families,  showing  that  on  the  whole  the  area 
varies  roughly  with  the  number  of  species,  and  that  both  types  of 
distribution  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter — one  species  covering 
the  whole  generic  range,  or  several  species  dividing  it  among  them 
— can  be  matched  in  the  families,  and  the  genera  pertaining  to 
them. 

It  is  then  shown  that  endemic  genera  are  distributed  in  different 
countries  in  regular  order,  with  many  monotypes,  fewer  (but 
still  many)  ditypes,  and  numbers  tapering  away  to  the  larger 


184        ENDEMISM  AND  DISTRIBUTION    [pt.  ii,  ch.  xvi 


genera,  which  are  usually  found  only  in  large  islands  or  other 
large  areas.  If  plotted  as  graphs  the  figures  give  the  usual 
hollow  curves,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  sizes  of  the  genera  depend 
on  factors  similar  to  those  that  determine  the  sizes  of  areas 
occupied  by  species. 

Still  larger  floras,  e.g.  those  of  single  continents,  or  of  the 
whole  world,  show  the  same  type  of  arrangement  of  the  genera, 
with  many  monotypes,  fewer  (but  still  many)  ditypes,  these  two 
making  about  half  the  total,  while  the  larger  genera  taper  away 
steadily  in  number  in  a  long  tail. 

It  is  clear  that  neither  the  supposition  that  endemics  and 
small  genera  are  relics,  nor  that  they  are  special  adaptations 
will  avail  to  explain  the  phenomena  presented  by  the  great  mass. 

Endemic  genera  further  prove  to  belong  more  to  the  large 
families,  just  as  endemic  species  belong  to  the  larger  genera. 

The  case  of  islands,  usually  regarded  as  the  typical  home  of 
endemic  genera,  is  then  considered  in  more  detail,  and  it  is 
shown  that  the  proportions  of  endemic  genera  in  (1)  the  islands 
of  the  world,  in  (2)  West  Australia,  South  Africa,  and  Brazil, 
and  in  (3)  Australia,  Africa,  and  South  America,  are  much  the 
same  for  all  three,  for  each  group  of  ten  families  in  order  of  size, 
and  this  proportion  is  the  same  as  occurs  in  the  world  for  each  of 
these  groups.  Confirmatory  evidence  is  also  given,  the  result  of 
the  whole  being  to  show  that  in  the  mass  endemic  genera  are 
simply,  like  endemic  species,  young  beginners,  and  probably  the 
descendants  of  other  genera  still  existing. 


CHAPTER  XVII 


THE  MONOTYPIC  GENERA,  AND  GENERA 
OP  LARGER  SIZE 

Passing  on  now  to  deal  with  monotypic  genera,  or  genera  with 
one  species  only,  one  soon  notices  that  they  show  the  same 
phenomena  that  we  have  already  seen  in  the  endemic  genera. 
This  is  what  we  should  expect  upon  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and 
Area,  as  expanded  by  Size  and  Space,  implying  as  they  do  that 
small  genera,  endemic  or  not,  are  on  the  whole  younger  than, 
and  occupy  less  territory  than,  the  larger  genera  in  the  same 
circles  of  affinity. 

Few  people,  perhaps,  have  realised  how  numerous  the  mono- 
types are.  No  less  than  4853  out  of  the  12,571  genera  of  flower- 
ing plants  in  my  Dictionary  (4th  ed.)  are  monotypic,  and  are 
usually  so  restricted  in  area  that  most  people  would  call  them 
endemics.  A  number  will  doubtless  prove  to  have  more  than  one 
species  when  we  finally  know  the  flora  of  the  world,  but  new  ones 
are  frequently  discovered,  or  created  by  the  splitting  of  other 
genera,  and  there  is  little  likelihood  that  the  percentage  will  fall 
much  below  its  present  figure  of  38-6  per  cent,  of  the  total.  The 
ditypes,  or  genera  of  two  species  each,  are  also  very  numerous, 
and  include  1632  genera,  or  12-9  per  cent.  In  other  words,  the 
monotypes  and  ditypes  alone  include  more  than  half  the  genera 
at  present  existing,  or  51-5  per  cent.,  while  the  tritypes  include  a 
further  921,  bringing  the  total  to  58-9  per  cent.  The  monotypes 
are  approximately  three  times  as  numerous  as  the  ditypes,  and 
these  almost  twice  as  numerous  as  the  tritypes.  Beyond  ten 
species  the  figure  for  number  of  genera  goes  below  500,  and  at 
twenty-five  species  below  200,  tapering  out  in  an  enormously 
long  tail  to  the  final  genera  Senecio  (1450  species)  and  Astragalus 
(1600). 

We  have  already  seen  many  instances  of  the  hollow  curve,  and 
when  the  genera  of  the  world  are  plotted  by  numbers  containing 
1,  2,  3,  etc.,  species,  one  gets  a  beautiful  example  of  it.  It  is  idle 
to  suggest  that  further  work  will  alter  the  form  of  this  curve. 
The  monotypes  exceed  the  ditypes  by  3221,  and  the  ditypes 
exceed  the  tritypes  by  711,  and  so  on  right  through  the  list. 

One  may  even  go  beyond  the  genera,  and  find  that  the  families 


186 


THE  MONOTYPIC  GENERA  [pt.  ii 


are  arranged  in  the  same  way  with  regard  to  the  numbers  of 
genera  contained  in  them.  There  are  54/1  (54  of  one  genus), 
45/2-3  (45  of  2  or  3  genera),  40/4-6,  32/7-13,  28/14-23,  25/24-38, 
22/39-63,  20/64-100,  15/101-200,  13/201-1143.  The  numbers 
steadily  decrease,  while  at  the  same  time  the  number  of  species 
included  increases,  being  1,  2,  3,  7,  10,  15,  25,  37,  100,  943,  again 
forming  a  hollow  curve. 

But  if  the  whole  flora  of  the  world  show  such  a  remarkable 
grouping  of  its  genera  into  sizes,  then  one  will  expect  the  same 
type  of  arrangement,  in  a  hollow  curve,  to  hold  for  the  individual 
families,  and  in  actual  fact  one  finds  that  this  type  of  grouping 
into  sizes  holds  for  the  genera  of  any  single  family,  with  a  few 
trifling  variations  among  the  very  small  families.  For  example: 

The  families  Contain 
Acanthaceae  (266  gen.)  119/1,  32/2,  20/3,  9/4,  15/5,  and  so  on  to  300 

Aceraceae  (6)  1/1,  1/3,  1/4,  1/5,  and  7  and  115 

Aizoaceae  (20)  8/1,  3/2,  1/3,  1/4,  2/5,  and  so  on  to  15 

Alismaceae  (15)  5/1,  3/2,  3/3,  1/4,  and  so  on  to  33 

Amarantaceae  (72)  29/1,  10/2,  7/3,  2/4,  2/5,  and  so  on  to  100 

Amaryllidaceae  (94)  28/1 ,  15/2,  10/3,  6/4,  3/5,  and  so  on  to  100 

Commelinaceae  (38)       15/1,  4/2,  3/3,  2/4,  2/5,  and  so  on  to  110 
Compositae  (1143)         446/1, 140/2, 97/3, 43/4,  55/5,  and  so  on  to  1450 
Coniferae  (45)  14/1,  8/2,  2/3,  5/4,  1/5,  and  so  on  to  70 

Saxifragaceae  (96)  51/1,  12/2,  2/3,  5/4,  1/5,  and  so  on  to  225 

Scrophulariaceae  (241)   88/1,  32/2,  18/3,  12/4,  8/5,  and  so  on  to  250 
Simarubaceae  (39)  17/1,  6/2,  2/3,  2/4,  3/5,  and  so  on  to  30 

The  whole  number  of  families  form  similar  hollow  curves;  the 
Coniferae  are  one  of  the  most  aberrant  families  of  the  entire  list. 
As  a  general  rule,  the  genera  with  one  and  two  species  make  up 
about  half  the  total  (cf.  fig.  on  p.  187). 

This  type  of  grouping  even  holds  for  families  of  lower  type 
than  the  flowering  plants;  for  example,  the  Jungermanniaceae 
acrogynae  show  21/1,  6/2,  9/3,  4/4,  6/5  and  so  on,  the  Rhodo- 
melaceae34/l,  16/2, 5/3, 5/4, 6/5  and  so  on,  the  Hymenomycetineae 
23/1,  10/2,  3/3,  8/4,  3/5,  and  so  on.  The  numbers  are  more  irregu- 
lar, but  the  hollow  curve  is  clearly  shown. 

It  is  clear  that  this  type  of  distribution  of  the  genera  by  the 
number  of  their  contained  species  is  a  perfectly  general  phe- 
nomenon. There  are  no  exceptions,  when  allowance  is  made  for 
the  lumping  in  my  Dictionary.  If  endemic  genera,  or  monotypes, 
were  really  mainly  relics  or  special  adaptations,  such  distribution 
as  this  would  be  inconceivable,  obtaining  as  it  does  in  every 
locality,  and  agreeing  with  the  distribution  of  genera  about  the 


ch.  xvn]      AND  GENERA  OF  LARGER  SIZE 


187 


world,  and  with  their  distribution  into  families,  as  well  as  with 
the  distribution  of  species — endemic  or  not — by  area  occupied. 
All  show  the  same  hollow  curves. 

FaHILICS   in  ORDER  OF  SIZE  *  £^ 

SHOWING  Mun&ERS  Of  GEMEM  _•  J  <J 


Number    of  SpecUs 


Hollow  curves  exhibited  by  the  grouping  into  sizes  of  the  genera  in  the  first 
15  largest  families  of  flowering  plants.  Each  curve  is  diagonally  above  the 
preceding  one,  as  indicated  by  the  heavy  black  dots  (points  of  origin).  Note 
that  the  curve  almost  always  turns  the  corner  between  the  point  marking  the 
number  of  genera  with  3  species,  and  that  marking  the  number  with  5 
(indicated  by  the  dotted  lines).  The  number  after  the  name  of  the  family  shows 
the  number  of  genera  in  it. 

Not  only  so,  but  the  biggest  genera  are  in  general  in  the  largest 
families,  i.e.  in  general  the  oldest  families.  If  one  take  (from  my 
Dictionary,  as  usual)  the  largest  genus  in  each  family,  and  average 
them,  one  finds 


188 


THE  MONOTYPIC  GENERA 


[PT.  II 


(genera) 
1 


Size  of 
family 


Number  of 
families 


Average  of 
largest  genera 
in  each 
(species) 


Size  of 
largest 
genus 
(species) 


over  100 


2-3 
4-6 
7-13 
14-23 
24-38 
39-63 
64-100 


54 
45 
38 
32 
28 
25 
22 
20 
28 


1600 


700 


600 


again  a  hollow  curve.  One  may  even  find  the  sections  of  this 
curve  regularly  arranged.  The  families  with  one  genus  show  12/1 
(twelve  with  one  species),  8/2,  6/3,  3/4,  3/5,  2/6-7,  3/10,  3/15, 
and  so  on  to  290  (Symplocos).  This  result  agrees  absolutely  with 
what  has  been  said  under  Size  and  Space  in  Chapter  xn. 

There  is  no  demonstrable  difference  between  monotypes  and 
genera  of  larger  size,  except  in  the  smaller  number  of  species, 
and  (usually)  smaller  area  occupied.  Of  the  4853  of  them,  1037 
occur  only  upon  the  islands  of  the  world,  usually  only  upon  one ; 
887  occur  in  South  America,  usually  only  in  small  portions  of  it; 
835  in  Africa,  612  in  North  America.  These  four  divisions  of  the 
world  contain  in  all  3371  monotypes,  or  69  per  cent,  of  the  total 
number  in  the  world.  But  if  one  count  up  the  number  of  ditypes 
they  contain,  one  finds  it  to  be  only  59  per  cent,  (or  a  much  smaller 
proportion)  of  those  in  the  world.  The  number  of  tritypes  con- 
fined to  these  portions  of  the  world  is  only  51  per  cent.,  or  a 
lesser  proportion  again,  that  of  genera  with  5  species  46  per  cent., 
of  genera  with  10  33  per  cent.,  of  genera  with  50  20  per  cent.,  of 
genera  with  100  species  10  per  cent.,  and  of  genera  with  more  than 
100  species  they  contain  only  3  per  cent,  of  those  in  the  world. 
It  is  clear  that  what  was  said  above  under  Size  and  Space  is  in 
general  correct,  and  that  the  larger  genera  tend  to  occupy  larger 
areas  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  species  that  they  contain 
(for  the  proportions  decrease  with  perfect  regularity).  Distribu- 
tion about  the  world,  and  number  of  species,  go  mainly  with 
Age.  It  is  inconceivable  that  natural  selection  should  group 
genera  like  this. 

This  regular  curve  for  the  occurrence  of  genera  not  only  shows 
with  a  large  number,  such  as  those  just  considered,  but  also  with 
much  fewer.  If  we  divide  the  world  into  continents  and  larger 
areas,  and  enumerate  for  each  region  the  genera  confined  to  it, 
we  get: 


ch.  xvh]      AND  GENERA  OF  LARGER  SIZE 


189 


Table  showing,  in  each  line,  the  percentages  of  genera  confined  to 
the  Islands,  Australia,  etc.,  and  containing  1,  2,  3,  or  other  number 
of  species.  The  percentage  is  of  the  total  number  of  genera  con- 
taining 1,  or  2,  etc.,  species,  not  of  the  total  number  of  genera 
confined  to  the  islands,  etc.  Thus  21  per  cent,  of  all  the  mono- 
types are  found  upon  the  islands,  49  per  cent,  of  the  genera  with 
75-125  species  occur  in  both  Old  and  New  Worlds. 


Percentages  of  Genera  of  different  sizes  (numbers  of  species) 


No.  of  species  in  genus 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

10 

50 

75- 
125 

Above 
125 

Islands 

21 

14 

11 

8-9 

7-8 

3-6 

Australia 

4-9 

4-5 

5 

4-7 

4-3 

1-7 

1-6 

1-7 

1-6 

Africa 

17 

15 

14 

14 

15 

10 

10 

3-4 

16 

South  America 

18 

16 

13 

12 

13 

11 

7-3 

6 

0-5 

Tropical  America 

2-9 

5-7 

9 

11 

11 

17 

14 

13 

10 

North  America 

12 

13 

12 

10 

9 

8 

2-4 

0-8 

0-5 

N.  Temp.  Old  World 

8 

8 

8 

7 

7 

7 

7-3 

6-3 

1-6 

Tropical  Asia 

9 

10 

9 

11 

12 

11 

6-5 

4 

2-7 

Palaeotropical 

0-7 

2-9 

5 

6 

6 

9 

14 

13 

5-9 

New  and  Old  Worlds 

1-3 

4-2 

4-9 

6 

7 

14 

31 

49 

73 

Miscellaneous,  mostly 

of  large  areas  in  Old 

World 

51 

6-6 

9 

9-3 

7-8 

7-6 

5-8 

2-7 

2-5 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100* 

100 

100 

100 

100 

This  is  a  very  remarkable  table.  In  the  case  of  Islands,  Africa, 
South  America,  and  North  America  (with  a  slight  exception  at 
the  monotypes),  the  proportions  of  genera  of  different  sizes 
decrease  regularly  (allowing  for  the  lumping  of  uncertain  fours 
and  sixes  as  fives).  This  fact  seems  to  me  practically  to  exclude 
the  idea  of  local  adaptation,  as  well  as  that  of  relic  nature,  for 
the  great  bulk  of  genera,  though  there  must  of  course  be  many 
exceptions  to  this  rule.  But  if  this  be  so,  then  the  idea  that 
plants  have  been  guided  in  their  evolution  by  natural  selection 
must  also  suffer  something  of  an  eclipse.  One  cannot  imagine 
natural  selection  producing  genera  in  careful  graduation  of  sizes 
(and  areas)  like  this.  One  would  get  distribution  almost  exactly 
of  this  type  by  the  simple  operation  of  the  "mechanical"  prin- 
ciple of  Age  and  Area1  as  expanded  by  its  corollary  Size  and  Space. 
If  these  two  worked  alone,  and  absolutely,  one  would  get  this 

1  As  already  several  times  explained,  the  general  meaning  of  Age  and 
Area  is  simply  that  on  averages  and  in  the  long  run  species  and  genera 
spread  at  a  more  or  less  uniform  rate,  interfered  with  by  barriers,  physical  or 
ecological.  On  the  older  view  it  was  imagined  that  distribution  was  so 
rapid  that  all  forms  had  already  reached  their  limits,  and  that  many  were 
in  process  of  contracting  their  area  of  dispersal. 


190 


THE  MONOTYPIC  GENERA 


[PT.  II 


type  of  distribution  shown  in  minute  detail;  and  working  upon 
large  numbers,  one  gets  it  shown  quite  clearly. 

One  may,  however,  go  further  than  merely  splitting  up  the 
world  into  continents.  If  one  take  the  genera  endemic  to  South 
America,  and  divide  these  up  among  the  countries  to  which  the 
bulk  of  them  are  confined,  and  then  take,  for  example,  Brazil, 
one  finds  that  it  contains  6-8  per  cent,  of  the  world's  monotypes 
(genera  of  one  species),  but  only  5-5  per  cent,  of  the  ditypes, 
3-5  per  cent,  of  the  tritypes,  0-7  per  cent,  of  the  genera  with  ten 
species,  and  so  on.  The  other  countries  of  South  America  show 
similar,  but  not  quite  so  regular,  results  (on  account  of  the  smaller 
numbers).  Individual  islands,  when  they  have  sufficient  endemic 
genera,  also  show  the  same.  Thus  Madagascar  contains  3-9  per 
cent,  of  the  world's  monotypes,  2-2  per  cent,  of  the  ditypes,  and 
1  per  cent,  of  the  tritypes,  the  numbers  afterwards  becoming 
irregular  on  account  of  their  insignificant  totals,  but  none  of 
them  approaching  the  figure  for  the  ditypes  (the  highest  is 
1-4  per  cent.). 

If  now,  returning  to  the  table,  one  look  at  the  figures  for  the 
largest  area  (New  and  Old  Worlds),  which  includes  in  general 
genera  that  occur  throughout  the  north  temperate  zone,  the 
tropics,  or  the  world,  but  also  includes  a  number  that  are  only 
found  in  eastern  Asia  and  in  North  America  (i.e.  really  quite  a 
small  area),  one  finds  the  figures  to  go  in  the  reverse  direction, 
from  1*3  per  cent,  of  monotypes  to  73  per  cent,  of  the  large 
genera.  This  agrees  absolutely  with  what  has  been  said  above 
under  Size  and  Space;  the  surprising  feature  is  that  the  figures 
increase  regularly. 

If  now  one  take  the  Palaeotropical  region  (tropical  Asia  and 
Africa,  North  Australia,  Polynesia),  one  finds  the  proportions  to 
increase  up  to  about  genera  of  50  species,  and  regularly,  and 
then  to  diminish  regularly.  Tropical  America  behaves  in  the 
same  way,  but  the  decrease  begins  sooner.  In  other  words, 
genera  of  larger  size  tend  to  occur  in  both  Old  and  New  World 
tropics.  In  tropical  Asia,  a  much  smaller  area,  the  falling-off 
begins  much  sooner,  and  so  it  does  in  Australia.  In  the  north 
temperate  regions  of  the  Old  World  it  does  not  begin  till  about 
the  size  of  50  species  (the  flora,  however,  is  more  herbaceous). 

There  are  many  very  interesting  points  to  be  made  out  from 
the  study  of  such  statistics  as  these,  and  still  more  interesting 
features  can  be  discovered  by  breaking  them  up,  and  studying 
individual  regions,  and  families,  or  types  of  vegetation,  in  detail, 


ch.  xvn]      AND  GENERA  OF  LARGER  SIZE 


191 


but  it  must  suffice  to  have  drawn  attention  to  them,  and  to  the 
very  clear  way  in  which  they  show  that  on  the  large  scale  and  in 
the  long  run  distribution  is  a  very  mechanical  process,  i.e.  that 
the  various  factors  causing  it  act  at  a  very  uniform  rate,  and 
that  it  is  usually  only  stopped  by  actual  barriers. 

The  individual  area  occupied  by  a  monotype  genus  may  vary 
enormously,  but  is  usually  rather  limited.  1037  of  them  occur 
upon  islands,  and  when  the  island  is  of  any  large  size  are  usually 
restricted  to  a  portion  of  it.  The  great  bulk  of  those  mentioned 
as  found  only  in  South  or  North  America,  or  in  Africa,  and  the 
241  of  Australia,  are  similarly  restricted,  and  so  are  most  of 
those  in  the  other  great  regions  of  the  globe.  When  one  comes 
to  genera  found  in  both  worlds,  one  finds  that  only  66  of  them 
are  monotypic,  or  a  mere  5-6  per  cent,  of  the  genera  that  occur 
in  both.  All  but  about  20  of  these  are  found  only  in  the  north 
temperate  zone,  which  by  reason  of  its  connections  by  way  of 
the  arctic  regions,  formerly  passable  for  plants,  is  not  really  so 
large  in  proportion  as  it  seems.  Bolboschoenus,  Brasenia,  Hakon- 
echloa,  Hippuris,  Montia,  and  Zannichellia  are  more  or  less 
cosmopolitan,  and  of  the  remaining  genera  three  are  coastal 
plants  carried  by  sea  currents,  and  four  are  tropical  American 
and  West  African — countries  united  by  a  current  that  crosses  in 
about  three  months.  Pistia  is  a  water  plant,  and  some  of  the 
others  are  doubtful  identifications,  so  that  there  remain  a  bare 
half-dozen  that  have  a  very  large  range,  evidently  acquired  by 
land,  or  much  less  than  0-25  per  cent,  of  the  total  of  monot)^pes. 
These  are  Christiana,  Eulophidium,  Manisuris,  Remirea,  Rhabdia, 
and  Sphenoclea.  In  fact,  it  is  fairly  evident  that  if  one  were  to 
determine  accurately  the  areas  of  the  4853  monotypes,  one  would 
obtain  the  usual  hollow  curve,  beginning  with  a  great  many  of 
very  small  area,  and  tapering  away  to  the  other  end  as  areas  were 
reached  of  larger  and  larger  size. 

In  any  country  in  which  there  are  many  monotypes,  their 
areas  tend  to  overlap  like  those  of  the  endemic  species.  Thus  in 
New  Zealand,  in  any  zone  of  100  miles  from  north  to  south  on 
the  main  islands,  there  are  never  less  than  seven  monotypic 
endemic  genera,  though  of  the  eighteen  such  genera  six  are 
northern,  ceasing  towards  the  south,  and  twelve  are  southern, 
two  only  of  which  reach  the  far  north.  Just  as  with  the  species, 
the  genera  show  a  maximum  number  about  the  centre  of  New 
Zealand.  What  reason  (in  adaptation  or  relic  nature)  can  one 
find  for  the  fact  that  one  genus  reaches  from  the  far  north  to 


192 


THE  MONOTYPIC  GENERA 


[PT.  II 


about  halfway  down  New  Zealand,  while  another  begins  there 
and  reaches  the  remainder  of  the  distance?  Further,  these  mono- 
typic  endemics  have  an  average  range  of  about  446  miles,  and 
in  a  varied  country  it  is  a  little  difficult  to  imagine  conditions  to 
which  they  can  be  just  suited  in  such  a  range. 

If  one  take  the  families  in  groups  of  ten,  in  order  of  their  size 
in  the  world  (as  measured  by  the  number  of  genera  given  in  my 
Dictionary),  one  finds  that  the  column  of  monotype  numbers 
follows  that  of  numbers  of  genera  with  wonderful  closeness ;  the 
first  exception  comes  only  at  the  seventeenth  group  of  ten 
families,  a  group  including  only  59  genera,  or  six  per  family. 
Even  beyond  this  the  numbers  continue  closely  parallel,  and 
there  is  only  once  an  exception.  The  percentages  also  show  clearly 
that  (just  as  with  endemics)  the  greatest  proportion  of  mono- 
types is  in  the  largest  (i.e.  on  our  hypotheses,  in  general  the 
oldest)  families,  falling  steadily  from  40  per  cent,  in  the  first 
forty  families  to  30  per  cent,  in  the  final  group  of  131  very  small 
ones. 

Analysing  from  my  Dictionary,  as  corrected  to  date,  the  pro- 
portion of  monotypes  in  the  various  families,  one  finds  that  in 
the  families  with  over  100  genera  the  percentages  vary  between 
28  and  56,  with  three-quarters  of  the  whole  total  between  33 
and  44.  Those  below  100  genera  vary  between  11  and  68  per 
cent.,  or  twice  as  much,  with  three-quarters  between  23  and  50. 
The  percentage  in  the  larger  families  is  evidently  a  little  higher, 
as  has  already  been  pointed  out. 

There  is  a  fair  amount  of  difference,  therefore,  between  indi- 
vidual families.  In  the  first  ten,  the  largest  percentage  is  in  the 
Asclepiads  (54  per  cent.),  the  lowest  in  the  Orchids  (35  per  cent.), 
but  there  is  not  the  least  reason  to  suppose  the  former  to  be  a 
specially  moribund  family.  Other  families  with  more  than  50  per 
cent,  of  monotypes  are  Burseraceae,  Lythraceae,  Menisperm- 
aceae,  Portulacaceae,  Saxifragaceae,  Juncaceae,  etc. 

Explanations  of  the  facts  of  monotypism  have  followed  much 
the  same  lines  as  those  of  endemism,  the  genera  being  regarded 
as  local  adaptations  or  as  relics,  according  to  taste.  But  what 
has  been  pointed  out  above  shows  that  there  is  a  very  definite 
arithmetical  relationship  between  monotypes  and  genera  of 
larger  size,  not  only  on  the  total,  but  also  in  very  fair  detail. 
This  alone  is  almost  a  conclusive  argument  against  either  of  the 
suppositions  just  mentioned  as  a  general  explanation,  though 
of  course  there  must  be  many  individual  exceptions,  better 


ch.  xvn]       AND  GENERA  OF  LARGER  SIZE 


193 


explainable  by  their  aid.  How  could  local  adaptations  be  gradu- 
ated in  this  regular  order,  or  how  could  there  be  a  vast  number 
at  the  last  stage  of  relicdom,  and  fewer  and  fewer  at  the  stages 
leading  up  to  that,  and  that  in  every  family  or  country? 

Another  great  difficulty  for  the  older  explanations  is  provided 
by  the  increase  of  monotypes,  as  of  endemic  genera  and  species, 
as  one  goes  southwards  and  outwards.  Why  should  New  Cale- 
donia, the  Mascarenes,  and  Juan  Fernandez  require  so  many 
more  per  thousand  square  miles  than  the  Sandwich  Islands, 
Formosa  and  Cuba,  in  similar  northern  latitudes,  especially  as 
their  non-endemic  genera  are  in  general  very  large  and  "suc- 
cessful" world-ranging  genera?  Why  should  Chile  have  about 
100  local  monotypes,  while  there  are  only  about  77  in  Europe, 
with  more  than  ten  times  the  area?  Why  should  Western  Asia 
require  so  many  more  than  Europe?  and  so  on. 

The  only  reasonable  explanation  of  the  very  striking  facts  that 
have  been  set  forth  in  the  last  three  chapters,  so  far  as  I  can  at 
present  see,  is  that  provided  by  Age  and  Area  with  its  corollary 
Size  and  Space,  that  the  smaller  genera  are  as  a  rule  the  younger, 
that  they  are  probably  the  descendants  of  the  larger  genera, 
that  they  gradually  increase  their  area  with  their  age,  and  that 
as  the  area  increases,  so  does  the  number  of  species,  these  also 
increasing  their  area  with  their  age.  As  a  general  explanation 
of  the  phenomena  seen  in  the  distribution  of  plants  about  the 
globe,  this  commends  itself  by  its  extreme  simplicity,  and  by  the 
fact  that  it  explains  what  has  hitherto  been  regarded  as  an  in- 
soluble problem.  Distribution  is  an  extremely  slow  process, 
allowing  time  for  acclimatisation,  and  the  effect  of  all  the  various 
factors  that  act  upon  it  is  to  cause  it  to  take  place  at  a  regular 
rate,  so  that  it  becomes  a  measure  of  age,  or  vice  versa.  Barriers 
alone  interfere  with  it,  but  they  may  be  of  many  kinds. 


Summary 

The  monotypic  genera  are  very  numerous,  being  4853  out  of 
12,571  in  the  world,  or  38-6  per  cent.  The  ditypes  are  also  nume- 
rous, but  are  only  1632,  or  a  drop  of  over  3000  from  the  mono- 
types, while  there  is  another  drop  to  the  921  tritypes,  and  then 
the  numbers  of  genera  of  different  sizes  taper  away  in  a  long  tail 
to  Astragalus  at  1600  species.  The  mono-  and  di-types  include 
more  than  half  of  the  total,  and  a  very  regular  hollow  curve  is 
formed.  The  individual  families  are  arranged  in  the  same  way, 
w.a.  13 


194 


THE  MONOTYPIC  GENERA       [pt.  n,  ch.  xvii 


each  commencing  with  a  great  number  of  monotypes,  and  giving 
a  hollow  curve. 

In  the  smaller  areas  of  the  world,  like  the  single  continents, 
one  finds  the  proportion  of  monotypes  very  high,  while  that  of 
ditypes  is  lower,  and  it  falls  off  steadily  to  an  insignificant  figure 
for  the  larger  genera.  In  the  genera  found  in  both  worlds,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  exact  reverse  is  the  case,  and  intermediate 
phenomena  show  in  intermediate  areas. 

The  area  occupied  by  a  monotype  may  vary  enormously,  but 
in  general  is  small;  only  66  of  them  occur  in  both  Old  and  New 
Worlds. 

The  greatest  percentage  of  monotypes  is  in  the  larger  families, 
and  it  diminishes  steadily  with  the  lessening  sizes  of  the  families, 
when  these  are  taken  in  groups  of  40. 

This  marked  arithmetical  relationship  of  the  monotypes  to 
other  genera  shows  that  the  usual  explanations — that  they  are 
relics,  or  that  they  are  special  adaptations — are  in  general  in- 
applicable, and  that  the  explanation  offered  by  Age  and  Area, 
with  its  implications,  that  as  a  rule  they  are  young  beginners, 
and  probably  descended  from  the  larger  genera,  must  in  all 
probability  be  correct  for  the  great  majority. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

THE  HOLLOW  CURVE  OF  DISTRIBUTION 

By  far  the  most  remarkable  feature  that  stands  out  through  all 
the  work  described  in  the  preceding  pages  is  what  may  be  termed 
the  "  Hollow  Curve  of  Distribution."  It  was  first  noticed  in  1912, 
when  working  up  the  flora  of  Ceylon  for  the  first  paper  upon  Age 
and  Area  (123).  This  flora  of  1028  genera  was  composed  of  573/1 
(573  genera  of  one  species  in  Ceylon),  176/2,  85/3,  49/4,  36/5, 
20/6,  and  so  on,  the  numbers  becoming  somewhat  irregular  after 
six,  but  decreasing  fairly  regularly  if  taken  in  twos  (genera  of 
7  and  8  species,  9  and  10,  etc.).  Having  already  the  knowledge, 
familiar  to  systematists,  that  genera  of  one  and  two  species  were 
the  most  numerous,  it  was  thought  that  the  regular  decrease  of 
the  numbers  might  be  accidental,  and  time  did  not  then  permit 
of  comparisons  with  other  floras1.  The  hollow  curve,  however, 
appeared  again  in  1916,  in  counting  up  the  areas  of  distribution 
of  the  endemics  of  New  Zealand.  Unlike  Ceylon,  New  Zealand 
was  treated  by  actual  measurement,  and  when  the  endemics 
were  divided  into  ten  classes  by  area,  it  was  found  that  the  lowest 
class,  though  it  occupied  much  the  smallest  area  (40  miles  by 
length  of  New  Zealand  against  120  for  most  classes),  contained 
much  the  largest  number  of  species,  having  168  out  of  902,  while 
the  ninth  class  came  next  with  128.  The  two  classes  contained 
32-8  per  cent,  of  the  whole  number  of  endemics  (of  New  Zealand 
proper),  although  their  area  was  only  barely  15  per  cent,  of  the 
total. 

1  In  actual  fact,  as  may  be  quickly  verified,  all  (or  most)  local  floras 
show  the  same  thing,  with  their  genera  arranged  in  hollow  curves  when 
grouped  by  the  number  of  their  (local)  species.  This  is  what  one  would 
expect  if  genera  are  produced  from  other  genera  at  a  more  or  less  uniform 
rate,  and  in  a  more  or  less  "casual"  way.  The  subject  will  be  treated  in 
greater  detail  in  another  place,  and  it  will  suffice  for  the  present  to  call 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  hollow  curve  is  regularly  shown,  as  by  the 
Ceylon  local  flora  (above,  and  cf.  curve  4  on  p.  237).  The  British  flora  shows 
223/1,  90/2,  35/3,  32/4,  16/5,  15/6,  5/7,  7/8,  2/9,  6/10,  and  so  on  to  71,  the 
numbers  becoming  rather  irregular  after  6.  The  flora  of  Cambridgeshire 
(Babington,  omitting  Rubus,  Hieracium,  and  Salix)  shows  210/1,  61/2,  36/3, 
21/4,  14/5,  6/6,  and  so  on  {I.e.  curve  6).  That  of  Wicken  Fen,  which  is  only 
a  very  small  area  in  the  same  county,  is  graduated  in  the  same  manner. 
The  flora  of  Italy  (I.e.  curve  9)  shows  the  same  thing,  and  so  do  the  floras 
of  Greece,  British  India.  New  Zealand,  the  Bahama  Islands,  and  others 
that  have  been  tested. 


13—2 


196     THE  HOLLOW  CURVE  OF  DISTRIBUTION    [pt.  ii 


These  results  are  shown  on  pp.  162,  237.  The  middle  class  for 
New  Zealand  is  rather  high,  but  this  is  probably  due,  as  I  have 
elsewhere  shown,  to  the  occurrence  of  Cook's  Strait  in  the  middle 
of  New  Zealand,  and  it  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  New  Zealand, 
from  which  such  strong  evidence  has  been  derived  in  support  of 
my  contention  that  age  is  the  main  factor  in  distribution,  shows 
the  most  irregular  curve  that  has  as  yet  been  met  with  in 
examining  many  hundreds.  The  fact  of  the  division  of  the  islands 
by  straits,  and  the  probable  occurrence  of  several  different  in- 
vasions of  plants  (127,  131)  are  likely  enough  to  account  for  this. 

As  both  these  curves  agreed  in  type,  and  as  the  figures  for  the 
endemics  of  Ceylon,  though  only  estimates  and  not  actual 
measurements,  seemed  to  hint  at  something  of  the  same  kind, 
my  attention  was  thus  roused,  and  especially  so  when  the  next 
figures  that  I  obtained,  those  for  the  distribution  of  the  endemics 
in  the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  (129,  pp.  329, 331),  showed 
the  same  curve,  but  in  a  reversed  direction,  the  maxima  being 
upon  the  largest  areas.  It  was  next  shown  by  the  endemics  of 
the  Hawaiian  Islands,  where  47  per  cent,  were  confined  to  one 
island,  and  20  per  cent,  more  to  two  (out  of  seven),  and  the  num- 
bers rapidly  diminished  upwards  (p.  162,  curve  3);  then  by  the 
species  of  Callitris  in  Australia  (130)  and  their  local  distribution, 
and  afterwards  by  other  things. 

Numerous  instances  of  the  hollow  curve  have  been  given  above, 
for  example  (in  species  first  of  all),  in  the  distribution  of  the 
species  of  Ranunculus  in  New  Zealand  (pp.  153-6),  in  the 
general  distribution  of  the  species  of  Cyrtandra  and  their  local 
distribution  within  the  Hawaiian  Islands  (p.  160),  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  Boraginaceae  in  New  Zealand  (p.  161),  of  Olearia  in 
that  country  (p.  161),  of  Doona  in  Ceylon,  of  Cyanea  and  Pelea 
in  the  Hawaiian  Islands  (p.  161),  of  the  species  of  endemic  and 
non-endemic  genera  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands  (p.  163),  of  Exacum* 
Christisonia  and  Ebermaiera  in  India  (p.  163),  and  so  on.  In- 
numerable instances  of  its  applicability  could  if  necessary  be 
produced.  Most  of  these  curves  are  shown  on  p.  162. 

In  the  same  way,  the  curve  applies  to  genera,  and  instances 
have  already  been  given,  for  example,  in  the  geographical  dis- 
tribution of  the  Polemoniaceae  (p.  171),  the  Cistaceae  (p.  172), 
the  Menispermaceae  (p.  172),  and  the  Monimiaceae  (p.  174). 

The  curve  is  thus  a  general  feature  of  the  distribution  of 
species  by  areas  occupied,  and  goes  to  show  that  age  is  of  enor- 
mous importance  in  geographical  distribution.  In  view  of  these 


ch.  xviii]  THE  HOLLOW  CURVE  OF  DISTRIBUTION  197 


facts,  and  of  the  striking  way  in  which  it  has  been  found,  in 
regard,  for  instance,  to  the  flora  of  New  Zealand,  that  predictions 
as  to  distribution  may  be  made  upon  a  basis  of  age  only,  and  yet 
be  reasonably  accurate,  it  would  seem  probable  that  age  is  by 
far  the  principal  factor  in  determining  geographical  distribution. 

This  of  course  simply  means,  as  has  already  been  explained, 
that  the  resultant  effect  of  the  many  factors  that  are  operative 
upon  any  individual  species  (and  still  more  upon  any  group  of 
ten  allied  forms)  is  so  uniform,  when  long  periods  of  time  are 
dealt  with,  that  dispersal  goes  very  largely  with  age.  The  great 
difference  between  this  and  the  older  view  is  that  we  can  no 
longer  look  upon  the  dispersal  of  species  as  having  reached  its 
limits.  Before  the  rise  of  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  as  has 
been  pointed  out  on  p.  3,  the  effects  of  age  were  recognised,  but 
in  the  last  sixty  years  they  have  been  more  and  more  lost  to 
view.  The  figures  that  have  been  given  above,  however,  show 
that  in  reality  they  are  perhaps  the  principal  features  that  are 
apparent  in  distribution.  • 

But  Size  and  Space  also  enters  into  the  question,  and  if  we 
consider  this  principle  also  to  be  valid,  as  indeed  seems  shown 
by  the  many  cases  of  its  application  that  have  been  given  above, 
then  we  shall  expect  that  as  Age,  Size,  and  Space  (or  Area)  go 
together,  the  phenomena  exhibited  by  Size  will  be  more  or  less 
like  those  exhibited  by  Space,  inasmuch  as  Age  is  the  only  active 
factor  of  the  three.  Actual  examination  soon  shows  that  this  is 
the  case,  and  that  genera  of  one  country,  endemic  or  not,  ar- 
ranged by  sizes,  form  a  hollow  curve  like  those  formed  by  species 
in  order  of  area;  they  begin  with  many  monotypes,  and  a  good 
many  ditypes,  and  taper  off  into  a  more  or  less  long  tail  of  larger 
genera.  This  of  course  means  that  the  hollow  curve  enters  not 
only  into  geographical  distribution,  but  also  into  evolution,  for 
nothing  but  evolution  could  produce  the  size  of  a  genus. 

The  hollow  curve  shows  in  the  distribution  into  sizes  of  the 
endemic  genera  of  all  islands  (p.  176),  of  the  endemic  genera  of 
individual  islands  (p.  175),  of  those  of  Brazil  (p.  176),  and  other 
countries.  It  shows  again  in  the  composition,  by  sizes  of  genera, 
of  the  floras  of  Great  Britain,  Ceylon,  New  Zealand,  India,  etc., 
and  shows  in  the  division  of  these  into  portions  of  the  country, 
single  families  of  reasonable  size,  and  so  on;  it  shows  again  in 
the  composition  of  the  lists  of  genera  with  one,  two,  three,  or 
more  species.  Once  more  it  shows  in  the  composition  of  the 
lists  of  genera  confined  to  larger  areas  of  the  world,  such  as  single 


198      THE  HOLLOW  CURVE  OF  DISTRIBUTION    [ft.  ii 


continents,  and  to  the  whole  world  (p.  185).  It  shows,  and  that 
very  conspicuously,  in  the  composition  of  the  various  families 
by  sizes  of  genera  (p.  186),  as  well  as  in  the  average  size  of  the 
largest  genus  in  each  family  (taking  the  families  in  order  of  size, 
p.  188).  It  shows  in  the  four  curves  of  percentages  given  on 
p.  181.  And  it  shows,  finally,  with  great  regularity  of  expression 
in  the  curve  for  all  the  genera  of  flowering  plants  grouped  by 
sizes  (p.  185),  and  in  other  features.  There  is  no  limit  to  the 
number  of  instances  that  could  if  needful  be  produced. 

Now  this  is  really  a  very  remarkable  state  of  affairs,  and  that 
it  has  not  been  discovered  at  a  much  earlier  period  can  only  be 
attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  rise  of  the  theory  of  natural 
selection  diverted  effort  from  the  lines  which  it  is  clear  (cf.  p.  3) 
that  it  was  beginning  to  follow  in  1853.  Until,  however,  the 
theory  of  evolution  was  firmly  established,  it  seems  doubtful  if 
much  could  have  come  of  any  demonstration  of  the  effects  of 
age.  The  clear  arithmetical  relationships  that  exist  between  the 
various  groups  of  plants,  "wides"  and  endemics  for  example,  are 
only  explicable  if  one  consider  that  they  are  mutually  related. 
The  Darwinian  theory  established  for  us  the  law  of  evolution, 
and  it  now  remains  to  carry  the  work  a  stage  further. 

It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  perceive  why  the  now  clearly 
demonstrated  fact,  that  age  is  the  most  powerful  element  in  the 
dispersal  of  species,  should  rouse  so  much  opposition.  That  an 
older  species  should  occupy  more  area  than  a  younger  one  that  is 
closely  related  to  it,  seems  almost  axiomatic,  and  was  evidently 
clearly  recognised  by  Lyell  and  Hooker  (cf.  p.  3).  If  two  species 
A  and  B  have  much  the  same  dispersal  methods,  and  are  suited 
to  much  the  same  soils  and  climates,  then  it  is  clear  that  if  we 
call  these  three  factors  a,  6,  and  c,  the  dispersal  of  these  two 
species  will  be  represented  by  the  formula: 

dispersal  =  (a  +  b  +  c)  x  age. 

If  the  dispersal  is  the  same,  therefore,  the  age  will  be  about  the 
same,  while  if  the  dispersal  of  A  is  greater  than  that  of  B,  its  age 
will  be  greater.  If  we  transfer  age  to  the  left-hand  side  of  the 

equation,  we  get  <^sPersa^  =  a  +  #  _j_  c?  showing  that  dispersal 

age 

goes  with  age  only.  But  age  simply  represents  the  total  effect 
of  the  operative  factors  a,  b,  and  c,  which  will  be  the  greater  the 
longer  the  time  during  which  they  have  been  acting. 

For  the  last  half  century,  however,  we  have  been  under  the 


ch.  xviii]  THE  HOLLOW  CURVE  OF  DISTRIBUTION  199 


sway  of  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  which  demands  origin 
of  species  upon  large  areas,  as  well  as  the  occurrence  of  many 
species  that  are  "going  under"  in  the  struggle  for  existence. 
The  result  has  been,  consequently,  that  the  species  of  small  areas 
have  been  regarded  as  the  failures,  and  this  has  derived  support 
from  the  fact  that  fossil  botany  shows  that  there  are  vast  num- 
bers of  extinct  forms.  Most  botanical  work  has  been  done  in 
the  regions  that  were  affected  by  the  last  glacial  period,  which 
has  left  very  many  survivals  in  them  (cf.  p.  86,  footnote).  It  is 
not  fully  realised  that  though  there  may  be  perhaps  a  thousand 
of  such  survivals,  they  are  completely  lost  in  the  crowd  when  one 
deals  with  the  forms  of  limited  area,  or  with  the  monotypic 
genera  as  a  whole.  It  would  be  absurd  to  apply  the  explanation 
of  relicdom  in  face  of  such  facts  as  those  given  in  Chapters  xv 
to  xvii.  Few  people  would  now  be  found  to  express  themselves 
in  support  of  natural  selection  as  a  cause  for  origin  of  species,  but 
though  the  premises  of  the  argument  are  damaged  or  abandoned, 
they  hold  strongly  to  the  deductions  that  were  made  from  them, 
chief  among  which,  in  the  present  connection,  is  that  species 
have  reached  their  limits  of  possible  dispersal,  and  that  those  of 
small  area  are  the  defeated  in  the  struggle  for  existence. 

So  long  as  such  a  view  was  taken  of  distribution,  so  long  would 
it  have  seemed  absurd  to  expect  to  get  any  result  from  statistical 
investigations.  But  the  figures  that  have  actually  been  obtained, 
and  of  which  many  instances  are  given  above,  show  that  what  we 
have  called  the  hollow  curve  obtains  throughout.  It  obtains,  for 
example,  in  the  grand  total  of  genera  in  the  world,  and  for  the 
totals  of  genera  in  every  single  family:  for  the  distribution  of 
endemics,  and  of  local  floras,  whether  for  areas  occupied  by  the 
species,  or  for  the  sizes  of  the  genera;  for  animals  as  well  as  for 
plants.  The  hollow  curve  is  apparently  a  universal  principle  of 
distribution,  whether  it  be  distribution  in  space — geographical 
distribution — or  distribution  in  time — evolution.  A  species  as 
it  increases  in  age,  expands  its  area,  while  a  genus  increases  its 
number  of  species,  the  younger  occupying  smaller  and  smaller 
areas,  usually  within  the  area  of  the  first  species,  until  that 
becomes  very  large  (and  sometimes  even  then). 

The  very  important  bearings  of  this  work  upon  the  general 
theory  of  evolution  must  be  left  for  later  publications.  It  will 
suffice  to  have  called  attention  to  the  facts. 


CHAPTER  XIX 


APPLICABILITY  OF  AGE  AND  AREA  TO  ANIMALS 

At  an  early  period  of  my  studies  of  Age  and  Area,  when  once 
I  had  found  how  universally  operative  it  was  in  the  Vegetable 
Kingdom,  it  seemed  to  me  that  in  all  probability  it  must  also 
apply  to  animals,  though  perhaps  with  less  force  on  account  of 
their  capacity  for  movement.  Accordingly,  I  asked  Professor 
J.  Stanley  Gardiner,  F.R.S.,  for  help,  which  was  given  in  the 
most  unstinted  manner,  and  for  which  I  take  this  opportunity 
of  expressing  my  most  grateful  thanks.  By  his  advice  I  investi- 
gated some  groups  of  Land  Mollusca — animals  whose  locomotive 
capacity  is  somewhat  limited — and  I  found  that  their  distribu- 
tion agreed  fairly  closely  with  what  would  be  expected  under  the 
hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area.  One  or  two  other  groups  that  he 
also  recommended  showed  the  same  thing.  The  great  difficulty 
in  applying  Age  and  Area  to  animals  rests  upon  the  fact  that 
Professor  Stanley  Gardiner  pointed  out,  that  in  very  many 
groups  either  the  systematic  grouping  or  the  geographical  dis- 
tribution is  but  imperfectly  known,  and  that  there  are  com- 
paratively few  groups  in  which  our  knowledge  of  both  is  fairly 
complete.  And  of  course  in  applying  a  new  principle  like  Age 
and  Area  to  the  Animal  Kingdom  one  must  be  very  sure  of  one's 
facts,  and  not  leave  it  possible  for  any  one  to  say  that  a  more 
complete  knowledge  of  the  subject  would  yield  quite  different 
results. 

At  this  stage  I  left  the  subject  for  a  while,  being  much  occupied 
with  the  extension  of  its  application  to  plants.  At  a  later  period 
Professor  Stanley  Gardiner  recommended  me  to  apply  for  help 
to  Mr  Edward  Meyrick,  F.R.S.,  the  well-known  investigator  of 
the  Micro-Lepidoptera,  who  had  at  his  command  all  the  known 
facts  about  the  systematic  grouping  and  geographical  distribu- 
tion of  this  group.  Mr  Meyrick  was  so  kind  as  to  furnish  me  with 
the  figures  of  the  numbers  of  species  that  occurred  upon  New 
Zealand  and  upon  other  islands,  and  the  genera  to  which  they 
belonged,  and  from  these  I  was  able  to  determine  that  this  group 
also  had  closely  followed  Age  and  Area  in  its  distribution;  not 
so  closely,  perhaps,  as  the  plants,  but  with  sufficient  approxima- 
tion for  the  fact  to  be  unmistakable. 


pt.  ii,  ch.  xix]    AGE  AND  AREA  IN  ANIMALS 


201 


6 

>< 

o 


Number      spcclts  per  genus. 


Hollow  curves  of  distribution  of  sizes  of  genera  in  various  families  of 
animals,  plotted  in  the  same  way  as  those  for  plants  on  p.  187.  The 
almost  exact  parallelism  of  the  curves  for  both  animals  and  plants 
may  be  seen  in  the  fig.  on  p.  237. 


202 


APPLICABILITY  OF  AGE  AND  AREA      [pt.  ii 


It  was  thus  becoming  gradually  clear  to  me  that  with  perhaps 
rather  greater  deviations  than  in  plants,  Age  and  Area  was  also 
a  rule  for  animals,  and  in  the  latter  half  of  1920  I  began  to  write 
a  paper,  which  I  hoped  might  be  published  by  one  of  the  zoo- 
logical journals,  upon  the  application  of  Age  and  Area  to  such 
questions.  But  as  about  this  time  the  work  upon  the  "hollow 
curve,"  described  above,  began  to  show  promise  of  very  striking 
results,  I  decided  that  it  would  be  better  to  leave  the  matter 
alone  for  the  meanwhile. 

Since  finding  that  the  hollow  curve  is  practically  universal  in 
the  distribution,  and  also  in  the  actual  evolution,  of  plants,  and 
that  it  can  be  traced  by  merely  adding  up,  and  sorting  into  sizes, 
the  genera  that  make  up  any  group,  the  application  of  the  theory 
to  animals  has  been  rendered  a  much  more  simple  matter. 
Professor  Stanley  Gardiner  once  more  came  to  my  assistance, 
and  gave  me  a  start  with  the  names  of  reliable  catalogues  of 
genera  and  species,  such  as  those  of  Boulenger  (Lizards,  Snakes, 
Amphibia,  Perciform  Fish);  and  Miss  Taylor,  Librarian  of  the 
Balfour  Library,  Cambridge,  showed  me  a  number  of  others. 
Finally,  Professor  Stanley  Gardiner  recommended  me  to  apply 
to  Dr  Hugh  Scott,  the  Curator  in  Entomology,  and  an  authority 
upon  the  Beetles.  With  his  assistance,  which  was  freely  and 
liberally  given,  I  have  been  able  to  enumerate  a  number  of 
families  of  this  group. 

The  result  of  all  these  enumerations  is  to  show  that  the 
"hollow  curve"  is  as  well  marked  in  zoology  as  in  botany,  for 
I  have  found  it  to  show  clearly  even  in  such  small  groups  as 
the  lizards  and  the  snakes  (fig.  on  p.  201),  and  it  is  as  evident 
in  the  Ungulate  Mammals  (Lydekker,  1916),  the  Chiroptera 
(Anderson,  1912),  the  Amphipodous  Crustacea  (Bate,  1862), 
the  Marsupials  (Oldfield  Thomas,  1888),  the  Mycetozoa  (Lister, 
1894),  and  even  in  such  small  groups  as  the  Cyclostomatous 
Polyzoa  (Buck,  1875). 

Some  of  these  curves  are  shown  in  the  fig.  on  p.  201.  As  it 
might  be  thought  that  parasitic  animals  would  show  a  different 
curve,  I  counted  the  Ichneumonidae  (de  Dalla  Torre,  Cat.  Hym., 
1901)  upon  Dr  Scott's  suggestion,  and  the  illustration  shows 
that  this  group  also  exhibits  the  hollow  curve,  though  there  is 
one  irregularity  shown  at  an  earlier  stage  than  usual.  There  are 
60  with  four  species  and  only  50  with  three,  whereas  the  numbers 
usually  do  not  show  much  irregularity  till  one  comes  down  to 
about  20. 


r 


ch.  xix]  TO  ANIMALS  203 

In  the  Beetles  the  curve  shows  clearly  in  all  groups  counted. 
For  example,  the  Tenebrionidae  (Gebien,  Col.  Cat.  15,  22,  28,  37, 
1910-11)  show  489/1,  154/2,  103/3,  73/4,  40/5,  48/6,  32/7,  32/8, 
24/9,  10/10,  and  so  on;  the  same  kind  of  figures  are  shown  by  the 
Coccinellidae  (Gemminger  and  Harold,  Col.  Cat.  1876),  and  the 
Chrysomelidae  (lb.  1876),  as  well  as  other  smaller  groups  that 
were  counted.  Unfortunately,  I  counted  the  Coccinellidae  and 
Chrysomelidae  from  an  old  catalogue,  and  the  new  catalogue  is 
not  yet  sufficiently  complete  to  enable  a  comparison  to  be  insti- 
tuted. The  result  of  comparing  floras  of  different  dates  and  by 
different  types  of  systematists,  however,  leads  one  to  suppose 
that  the  result  would  be  very  similar. 

Not  only  does  the  curve  show  in  general  lists  of  the  animals  of 
the  world,  like  these,  but  also,  just  as  in  the  case  of  plants,  it 
can  be  seen  in  local  faunas.  Thus  taking  Barrett's  British  Lepi- 
doptera  (London,  1905),  one  finds  that  the  genera  whose  names 
begin  with  A,  B,  C  or  D  show  62/1  (62  of  one  species  in  Britain), 
28/2,  13/3,  4/5,  and  so  on;  those  with  E,  G,  H  or  L  show  54/1, 
18/2,  14/3,  10/5,  and  so  on;  those  with  M,  N,  O  or  P  63/1,  15/2, 
9/3,  8/5,  and  so  on;  and  those  with  R  to  Z  36/1,  7/2,  6/3,  4/5, 
and  so  on.  The  total  shows  215/1,  68/2,  42/3,  26/5,  and  so  on. 

The  British  Echinoderms  (Bell,  1892)  show  39/1,  16/2,  5/3, 
and  so  on.  Even  so  small  a  group  as  the  British  Spiders  does  its 
little  best  to  follow  the  curve.  It  is  clear  that  the  rule  holds  as 
well  for  animals  as  for  plants,  as  will  be  seen  by  examining 
the  fig.  on  p.  237,  where  the  curves  for  animals  and  for  plants, 
for  local  floras  and  for  local  faunas,  etc.,  are  mixed  up  together. 
The  same  rules  have  evidently  guided  the  evolution  and  the 
geographical  distribution  of  both  groups,  and  the  extraordinary 
parallelism  of  the  curves  goes  to  show  that  both  evolution  and 
geographical  distribution  were  largely  guided  by  factors  that 
acted  in  a  mechanical  way.  The  very  interesting  suggestion  has 
been  made  that  the  parallelism  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that 
animals  are  (in  the  long  run)  a  function  of  plants.  But  ft  does 
not  seem  to  me  that  this  is  quite  sufficient  to  explain,  for  instance, 
the  fact  that  the  Ichneumons  show  a  curve  parallel  to  the  others. 


CHAPTER  XX 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 

No  subject  in  biology  has  been  the  cause  of  such  excited  debate 
and  controversy  as  has  this,  since  the  publication  of  Darwin's 
Origin  of  Species  in  1859.  Were  it  not  that  Age  and  Area  seems 
to  have  some  not  unimportant  bearings  upon  the  subject,  we 
should  not  bring  into  this  book  so  thorny  a  matter  of  dispute. 

If  in  this  chapter  or  elsewhere  I  seem  severely  to  criticise  the 
Darwinian  theory,  it  is  not  because  I  do  not  appreciate  its  many 
strong  points,  nor  is  it  that  I  am  trying  to  throw  contempt  upon 
it.  The  theory  is  as  legitimate  a  subject  for  criticism  as  is  any 
other.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  it  has  been  properly  realised 
that  the  "Darwinian  theory"  has  two  separate  sides.  Darwin's 
immortal  service  to  science  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  established 
the  theory  of  Evolution — until  then  regarded  with  contempt — 
in  an  unshakeable  position,  which  all  subsequent  research  has 
only  strengthened.  But  to  establish  it  he  had  to  invent  some 
machinery  by  means  of  which  it  might  be  supposed  to  work,  and 
for  this  purpose  he  devised  the  very  simple  and  beautiful  mechan- 
ism of  natural  selection.  So  strong  was  the  a  priori  evidence  in 
favour  of  this,  and  so  well  did  natural  selection  seem  to  explain 
almost  everything  in  animated  nature,  that  within  a  short  time 
it  was  accepted  all  round,  and  with  it  the  theory  of  evolution, 
which  is  now  established  as  the  ruler  of  thought,  not  only  in  the 
scientific  world,  but  outside  of  it.  The  mechanism  of  natural 
selection  has,  however,  been  for  a  long  time  subject  to  an  in- 
creasing severity  of  criticism,  and  as  a  working  theory  is  now 
becoming  largely  moribund. 

No  theory  as  yet  brought  forward  in  biology  has  been  for  so 
long  a  time  a  stimulant  to  research,  nor  has  any  proved  so 
fruitful  in  educing  valuable  work.  It  may  suffice  to  call  attention 
to  the  very  different  position  of  biology  in  1859,  and  at  the 
present  time.  It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  all,  or  nearly 
all,  the  work  done  during  that  time  owes  its  inception,  at  least, 
to  the  influence  of  the  Darwinian  theory.  Not  only  so,  but  it 
has  produced  the  most  far-reaching  effects  in  all  branches  of 
human  thought. 

The  literature  in  praise  of  the  theory  is  already  very  bulky, 


pt.  ii,  ch.  xx]      THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


205 


and  my  present  object  is  not  to  add  to  it,  but  to  criticise  certain 
aspects  of  the  theory,  and  to  show  in  what  directions  it  has 
failed  to  give  us  satisfactory  explanations  of  phenomena,  or 
fruitful  subsidiary  hypotheses  upon  which  to  work.  To  suggest 
a  doubt  of  its  enormous  value  in  the  advance  of  knowledge  would 
be  to  rank  all  the  workers  of  the  last  sixty  years  as  upon  the 
intellectual  level  of  the  Bushman  or  the  Esquimaux. 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that  during  recent  years 
the  theory  of  natural  selection  has  become  what  we  may  call  a 
limiting  factor  in  the  progress  of  biology,  and  the  time  seems  to 
me  to  have  arrived  when  we  ought  to  consider  the  advice  given 
by  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  soon  after  his  first  acceptance  of  the 
theory  : 

"The  advocate  of  creation  by  variation  may  have  to  stretch 
his  imagination  to  account  for  such  gaps  in  a  homogeneous 
system  as  will  resolve  its  members  into  genera,  classes,  and 
orders,  but  in  doing  so  he  is  only  expanding  the  principle  which 
both  theorists  (i.e.  special  creationists  and  natural  selectionists) 
allow  to  have  operated  in  the  resolution  of  some  groups  of  indi- 
viduals into  varieties  .-...Natural  Selection  explains  things  better 
...it  is  to  this  latter  that  the  naturalist  should  look... holding 
himself  ready  to  lay  it  down  when  it  shall  prove  as  useless  for 
the  further  advance  of  science,  as  the  long  serviceable  theory  of 
special  creations,  founded  on  genetic  resemblances,  now  appears 
to  me  to  be." 

Went  (112,  p.  270)  has  said  that  we  ought  to  drop  all  teleo- 
logical  explanations,  and  not  consider  nature  as  having  any  aim. 
This  may  seem  somewhat  drastic,  but  as  yet  we  are  without 
any  evidence  as  to  what  is  the  aim  of  nature,  though  the  work 
that  has  been  described  above  seems  to  show  that  she  perhaps 
has  one,  for  it  seems  evident  that  the  evolutionary  clock  was 
wound  up  to  run  on  a  very  definite  plan.  But  for  what  nature 
is  aiming  in  this  definite  way,  we  are  completely  ignorant,  and 
it  will,  it  seems  to  me,  prove  more  wise,  in  the  present  state  of 
science,  to  follow  Went's  advice,  leaving  out  of  serious  account 
as  yet  any  suppositions  as  to  the  ultimate  aim  of  nature. 

We  have  shown  in  the  preceding  chapters  that  the  phenomena 
of  distribution,  whether  it  be  distribution  in  space  of  species 
and  genera,  or  distribution  in  time,  as  exhibited  by  the  grouping 
of  species  into  genera  of  various  sizes,  can  be  graphically  repre- 
sented by  hollow  curves,  which  could  if  required  be  produced 
in  tens  of  thousands.  It  is  clear  that  such  a  general  phenomenon 
must  have  a  general  explanation,  and  that  this  must  be  largely 


206 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES  [pt.  ii 


mechanical.  These  phenomena,  as  has  already  been  shown,  can- 
not be  satisfactorily  explained  by  any  of  the  many  suppositions 
that  have  long  been  current,  based  upon  natural  selection.  A 
differentiating  cause  like  natural  selection  could  not  produce 
such  uniformity  of  expression,  and  at  the  present  time,  the  only 
feasible  explanation  in  the  field  seems  to  be  that  provided  by 
Age  and  Area,  which  explains  the  species  and  genera  as  developed 
in  successive  order  and  gradually  expanding  their  area  (and 
their  number  of  species,  in  the  case  of  genera)  as  time  goes  on. 

But  if  this  explanation  be  correct,  it  is  clear  that  the  smaller 
the  area  occupied  by  a  species,  the  younger  on  the  average  will 
it  be,  in  its  own  circle  of  affinity.  The  only  logical  conclusion  to 
this  is  that  in  general  the  minimum  area  is  that  occupied  by 
species  just  commencing  their  life  as  such.  But,  as  already  shown 
(pp.  54,  55),  this  may  be  very  small  indeed;  a  species  may  be 
easily  limited  to  a  dozen  or  two  of  individuals,  if  it  does  not 
actually  begin  with  one  or  the  progeny  of  one1.  It  is  clear  that 
we  cannot  regard  as  the  formative  cause  of  the  genesis  of  the 
species  a  struggle  for  existence  resulting  in  the  conservation  of 
favourable  variations,  especially  if  these  be  of  the  kind  that  we 
understand  as  infinitesimal  or  fluctuating. 

The  new  species  just  commencing  will  have  to  undergo  a 
struggle  for  existence,  usually  of  a  very  strenuous  kind,  imme- 
diately, and  if  in  any  way  unsuitable  to  the  conditions  that  pre- 
vail at  the  exact  place  and  time  of  its  birth,  will  at  once  die  out, 
as  a  rule  leaving  no  trace.  If  it  survive,  it  may  continue  to 
spread  so  long  as  it  finds  conditions  in  which  it  can  grow,  and 
the  ultimate  area  that  it  covers  will  depend  upon  that  and  upon 
its  age  (cf.  de  Vries,  below,  p.  227). 

One  of  Darwin's  innumerable  services  to  the  cause  of  science 
was  to  call  attention  to  the  struggle  for  existence.  Even  he, 
however,  perhaps  hardly  emphasised  sufficiently  the  intensity 
of  that  which  probably  takes  place  at  the  birth  of  a  species, 
except  upon  more  or  less  virgin  soil.  If  in  any  way  unsuited  to 
the  conditions  obtaining  at  the  time  and  place,  it  will  be  all  but 
certain  to  succumb.  Mere  heredity,  however,  will  tend  to  make 
it  more  or  less  suitable.  But  even  if  well  suited,  the  new  species 

1  A  few  days  before  I  left  Rio,  Dr  Lofgren  found,  on  a  little  island  about 
three  miles  off  the  coast,  a  new  and  very  distinct  Rhipsalis,  of  enormous 
size.  He  told  me  that  there  were  only  four  examples  on  the  island.  I  could 
only  find,  on  the  summit  of  Ritigala,  about  a  dozen  examples  of  Coleus 
elongatus  (p.  54).  And  cf.  Didymocarpus  and  Christisonia,  p.  151. 


CH.  XX] 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


207 


must  probably  have  some  degree  of  luck.  It  may  not  chance 
upon  a  spot  where  it  can  grow,  the  ground  being  already  fully 
occupied  by  a  closed  association  of  plants;  or  it  may  easily  be 
destroyed  by  a  fire  or  a  flood  or  other  accident  (cf.  Didymocarpus 
and  Christisonia  on  p.  151). 

The  older  view,  that  species  arose  by  gradual  accumula- 
tion of  infinitesimal  or  fluctuating  variations  (up  and  down 
variations,  such  as  always  show  in  any  character,  as  when  a  leaf 
varies  in  length  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  inches  on  the  same 
species),  is  now  dying  out  in  favour  of  mutations,  or  sudden 
alterations  of  form  which  have  their  origin  in  changes  that  have 
occurred  in  the  material  bearers  of  heredity.  It  is  conceivable 
that  any  changes,  however  great,  might  be  brought  about  by 
the  accumulation  of  fluctuating  variation,  provided  (1)  that  the 
variations  were  fully  hereditary,  (2)  that  they  were  not  linear, 
showing  the  same  character  in  greater  or  less  degree,  but  dif- 
ferentiating, a  simple  leaf,  for  example,  showing  a  tendency  to 
compoundness,  (3)  that  the  necessary  variations  appeared,  and 
(4)  that  natural  selection  should  be  able  to  act,  i.e.  that  the 
appearance  of  the  variation  should  give  to  the  plant  or  plants 
possessing  it  such. advantages  as  should  ensure  their  survival  in 
at  least  the  majority  of  cases. 

In  regard  to  the  first  supposition,  so  far  as  we  know,  infini- 
tesimal variation  is  not  fully  hereditary,  but  always  regresses  or 
falls  back,  so  that  while  one  may  make  great  improvements  by 
selection  (as,  for  example,  in  the  speed  of  trotting  horses,  or  the 
content  of  sugar  in  the  root  of  the  beet)  there  always  comes  a 
point  beyond  which  one  cannot  go.  It  is  sometimes  stated  that 
the  wonderful  varieties  of  our  cultivated  crops  owe  their  origin 
to  the  selection  of  infinitesimal  variations,  and  that  when  left 
to  themselves  they  go  back  to  the  wild  form,  but  this  is  not  the 
case,  however;  as  Hooker  long  ago  pointed  out,  the  cultivated 
apple  goes  back,  not  to  the  crab,  as  is  popularly  supposed,  but 
to  crab  types  of  cultivated  forms. 

These  facts  agree  with  ordinary  observation,  which  gives  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  continuous  change  is  going  on.  Hooker 
(55  a,  p.  x)  has  so  well  put  the  argument  in  favour  of  the  general 
permanence  of  species  that  it  would  be  presumptuous  to  try  to 
better  it  (I  have  shortened  it). 

"(1)  The  fact  that  the  amount  of  change  produced  by  ex- 
ternal causes  does  not  warrant  our  assuming  the  contrary  as  a 
general  law. 


208 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


[PT.  II 


(2)  The  permanence  with  which  widely  dispersed  species  re- 
tain their  characters,  whether  naturally  or  artificially  dispersed. 

(3)  With  comparatively  few  exceptions,  plants  are  confined 
within  well-marked  limits;  sporadics  (discontinuously  dis- 
tributed) are  rare.  If  they  varied  indefinitely,  sporadic  distribu- 
tion would  be  the  rule. 

(4)  A  multitude  of  allied  species  of  plants  grow  close  together 
without  any  interchange  of  specific  character. 

(5)  The  individuals  that  inhabit  the  circumference  of  the  area 
occupied  by  a  species  are  not  found  passing  into  other  species, 
but  ceasing  abruptly... may  meet  or  overlap  similar  species. 

[(6)  A  negative  argument  in  favour  of  distribution  from  one 
centre.] 

(7)  The  species  of  the  lowest  orders  (now  families)  are  not 
only  the  most  widely  distributed,  but  their  specific  characters 
are  not  modified  by  the  greatest  changes  of  climate. 

(8)  The  fact  that  no  plant  has  been  acclimated  in  England 
within  the  experience  of  man." 

A  little  consideration  will  show  that  these  arguments,  with 
the  possible  exception  of  the  eighth  and  last,  are  as  sound  to-day 
as  when  they  were  written,  and  all  the  work  and  experience  of 
Jordan  (62),  Johannsen  (61),  and  the  many  ecological  writers 
of  recent  years  has  but  added  strength  to  them.  But  the  stronger 
they  become,  the  greater  is  the  argument  in  favour  of  sudden 
change  by  mutation. 

The  second  and  third  provisos  (about  fluctuating  variation) 
above  given  really  go  together,  for  we  have  no  evidence  that 
differentiating  variations  can  appear  at  all,  unless  so  large  and 
sudden  that  they  are  really  mutations,  not  connected  with  the 
preceding  form  by  infinitesimal  stages.  Fluctuating  or  in- 
finitesimal variation  is  simply  up  and  down  in  the  same  charac- 
ters; one  never  finds  a  leaf  varying  by  imperceptible  stages  in 
the  direction  of  a  tendril,  or  of  compoundness,  or  towards  a 
pitcher. 

A  great  difficulty  for  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  though 
indeed  it  is  no  less  for  any  other  theory,  is  to  explain  the  occur- 
rence of  correlated  variations.  Why,  when  a  plant  produces 
tendrils,  or  climbing  leaves,  should  its  stem  at  the  same  time  be 
weak  and  flexible?  Yet  the  one  would  be  useless,  if  not  dis- 
advantageous, without  the  other.  It  often  happens,  in  these 
correlated  characters,  that  while  one  confers  advantage,  the 
other  is  disadvantageous.  It  is  not  altogether  wise  or  reasonable 
to  talk  about  advantage  as  having  determined  progress  in  nature. 
To  take  the  single  instance  of  Coleus  elongatus  (p.  151),  its  two 


CH.  XX] 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


209 


most  marked  characters  of  difference  from  its  allies  are  its 
peculiar  inflorescence  and  different  calyx.  Neither  could  be 
"useful"  under  any  conceivable  circumstances,  nor  could  any 
of  the  other  characters  of  difference  between  it  and  C.  barbatus, 
but  neither  can  one  say  that  any  are  disadvantageous.  But  to 
get  the  one  calyx  from  the  other  means  that  one  sepal  must 
narrow,  while  the  others  broaden,  and  all  experience  of  fluctu- 
ating variation  shows  that  all  homologous  members  vary  in  the 
same  direction,  so  that  nothing  but  a  mutation  can  produce  this 
difference. 

There  are  so  many  characters  in  plants  to  which  no  amount  of 
ingenuity  can  attach  any  quality  of  advantage  or  the  reverse, 
that  though  at  first  the  natural  selectionists  said  that  we  did 
not  know  enough  about  them,  it  soon  became  evident  that  this 
would  not  serve  as  a  general  explanation,  and  it  was  then  said 
that  they  were  correlated  with  useful  characters.  Gradually, 
however,  it  has  been  realised  that  the  bulk  of  morphological 
characters  come  under  this  head,  and  that  the  useless  structural 
characters  in  plants  outnumber  the  useful  by  an  enormous 
percentage. 

Lastly  comes  the  question  under  the  fourth  proviso  above, 
whether  natural  selection  can  act  upon  the  first  beginnings 
of  characters.  While  there  are  some  cases  in  which  it  might  be 
imagined  to  do  so,  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  vast  majority 
of  cases,  where  no  use  can  be  even  suggested  for  the  mature 
character,  it  could  not  take  hold  of  the  first  rudimentary  be- 
ginnings. Take,  for  example,  at  random,  the  pollen  patterns  in 
Acanthaceae  (genus  and  subtribe  characters),  the  adnation  in 
Solanaceae  (genus),  the  adventitious  shoots  in  Podostemaceae 
(family),  the  translators  of  the  pollen  in  Asclepiadaceae  (family), 
the  various  aestivations  of  the  corolla  (genus  and  family),  the 
dehiscent  or  indehiscent  fruit  (ditto),  the  monoclinous  or  diclinous 
flower  (ditto),  the  ruminate  endosperm  of  Anonaceae  (ditto), 
the  phylloclades  of  Asparagus  (genus),  the  valvular  opening  of 
anthers  in  Berberidaceae  (family),  the  septifragal  opening  of 
capsule  (tribal),  the  "boragoid"  inflorescence  (family  or  genus), 
the  tubers  of  potato,  the  bulbils  of  Agave,  and  hundreds  more. 
One  cannot  conceive  of  natural  selection  getting  any  grip  upon 
the  early  stages  of  these,  and  indeed,  in  great  numbers  of  these 
and  other  characters,  early  stages  are  not  conceivable. 

Not  only  so,  but  many  things  that  were  once  explained  as 
adaptations  to  something  or  another  are  now  proving  to  be  in 

W.A.  14 


210 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


[PT.  II 


reality  of  little  or  no  value  to  the  organism  concerned.  It  will 
suffice  to  recall  to  memory  the  controversies  about  Drosera  and 
its  insectivorous  habits,  the  work  of  Kamerling  upon  xerophily, 
or  the  characters  of  the  Podostemaceae  and  Tristichaceae  (124), 
which  are  extremely  striking  and  varied,  though  there  are  no 
differences  in  conditions  to  which  to  be  adapted.  Stomata  with 
an  outer  pit  entrance  undoubtedly  diminish  transpiration,  and 
were  once  considered  an  adaptation  to  that  end,  but  one  finds 
them  on  the  inner  wall  of  the  fruit  in  the  opium  poppy,  where 
transpiration  cannot  matter  (112).  Ant-plants  were  supposed 
to  gain  from  their  association  with  ants,  but  one  may  see  the 
Cecropia  flourishing  without  ants  all  over  the  forests  of  Southern 
Brazil,  and  the  ants  bring  aphides,  which  must  do  much  harm 
to  the  plants.  Epiphytes  were  supposed  to  be  a  particular 
adaptation,  till  Schimper  showed  that  plants  became  epiphytic 
when  they  had  three  properties  in  common — easily  dispersed 
seeds,  clasping  roots,  and  capacity  to  resist  drought  for  long 
periods.  And  so  on;  the  old  adaptation  explanation  has  been 
shown  to  be  of  service  in  many  fewer  cases  than  had  been 
supposed  the  case. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  idea  of  adaptation  was  pushed 
to  extremes,  and  that  adaptations  were  found  in  many  features 
that  have  since  proved  to  be  almost  or  quite  indifferent.  Went 
(112,  p.  260)  has  treated  this  subject  so  fully  that  there  is  no 
need  to  repeat  his  criticisms,  and  he  has  also  pointed  out  that 
when  real  adaptation  exists,  it  is  chiefly  in  plants  that  live  under 
extreme  conditions,  and  that  it  is  rare  in  mesophytic  types,  to 
which  probably  the  bulk  of  plants  belong.  It  is  quite  possible 
that  it  is  in  this  way  that  one  may  explain  the  fact  that  in  the 
Bahamas  the  local  endemics  are  almost  as  widely  distributed  as 
the  "wides"  (p.  64). 

Another  great  difficulty  for  natural  selection  is  that  in  many 
cases  the  distinguishing  characters  do  not  appear  (119)  until  the 
struggle  for  existence  is  long  over,  for  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
vast  proportion  of  the  mortality  is  among  the  young  seedlings. 
What  possible  difference  can  it  make  to  a  plant  that  does  not 
flower  till  it  is  thirty  years  old,  to  take  a  single  instance,  whether 
its  calyx  is  smooth  or  ribbed? 

The  fact  that  allied  species  usually  live  near  together  is  a 
strong  general  argument  against  the  idea  that  advantage  has 
anything  to  do  (in  any  important  measure)  with  the  origin  of 
most  species.  Another  is  that  for  selection  to  produce  any  great 


CH.  XX] 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


211 


effect,  it  should  be  between  large  numbers,  whereas  a  plant  can- 
not on  the  average  have  more  than  six  like  itself  around  it. 

A  consideration  of  the  instances  just  given,  or  of  still  more 
" important"  differences,  such  as  that  between  the  embryo  in 
Dicotyledons  and  Monocotyledons,  soon  shows  that  infinitesimal 
or  fluctuating  variation,  though  it  occurs  in  every  character  of 
every  plant,  is  inconceivable  as  a  means  of  effecting  the  great 
differences  that  actually  exist  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.  In- 
finitesimal variations  would  at  once  be  lost  by  crossing  with 
their  surrounding  unmodified  neighbours,  and  only  if  all  were 
modified  in  the  same  direction  by  the  action  of  some  definite 
cause,  e.g.  the  environment,  would  there  be  any  likelihood  of 
the  survival  of  the  new  form.  And  even  then,  it  is  hardly  con- 
ceivable that  such  changes  as  those  instanced  above  should  take 
place  in  gradual  stages. 

The  view  that  evolution  is  not  directly  guided  by  the  need 
of  response  to  the  actual  necessities  of  plants,  but  is  a  more 
mechanical  process,  going  on  in  comparative  indifference  to 
them,  but  with  the  disadvantageous  variations  at  once  thrown 
out  by  natural  selection,  has  been  gaining  in  definition  for  many 
years,  especially  since  the  rise  of  the  study  of  genetics  on  Men- 
delian  lines;  and  the  "hollow  curve"  observations,  described 
above,  seem  to  show  clearly  that  it  has  followed  a  definite  more 
or  less  determined  course. 

Nothing  but  mutation,  understanding  by  that  a  change  of 
measurable  amount,  hereditary,  not  connected  by  infinitesimal 
stages  with  the  more  "typical"  form  of  the  parent,  and  usually 
differentiating,  seems  capable  of  explaining  the  bulk  of  the 
specific,  generic,  and  family  characters  that  at  present  exist. 

Large  mutations,  often  covering  several  characters  of  a  plant, 
are  by  no  means  unknown,  and  go  by  the  name  of  sports.  Actual 
observation  has  shown  that  a  great  number  of  these  are  here- 
ditary, as  in  the  well-known  instance  of  the  cockscomb.  But 
that  such  sports  can  give  rise  to  new  species  has  been  strenuously 
denied,  because  no  instance  of  their  undoubted  survival  in  nature 
has  been  recorded.  But,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  instance  of  the 
formation  of  even  a  small  variety  by  natural  selection  of  in- 
finitesimal or  fluctuating  variations  has  been  recorded,  and  the 
theory  was  accepted  on  account  of  its  a  priori  probability.  When 
this  difficulty  is  cast  up  to  the  supporters  of  natural  selection, 
they  insist  that  there  has  not  been  time  enough  for  the  formation 
of  anything  since  man  began  to  observe  such  things.  But,  as 

14—2 


212 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES  [pt.  ii 


we  shall  endeavour  to  show,  the  same  reply  is  valid  in  the  case 
of  mutation.  To  expect  to  see  the  formation  of  a  new  species, 
i.e.  the  survival  of  a  mutation,  in  the  short  time  since  man  began 
to  observe  such  matters,  is  rather  sanguine  than  reasonable,  and 
especially  in  the  north,  where  the  adjustment  of  plant  associ- 
ations to  the  environment  is  probably  very  perfect,  and  where 
consequently  the  establishment  of  a  new  form  is  correspondingly 
difficult.  Lord  Rayleigh  has  estimated  the  period  since  the 
Eocene  alone,  which  covers  but  a  portion  of  that  occupied  in 
the  evolution  of  the  higher  plants,  at  30,000,000  years.  But  if 
we  suppose  one  mutation  in  50  years  to  survive,  we  should  get 
the  whole  of  the  existing  160,000  species  of  flowering  plants  in 
8,000,000  years,  which  is  only  26  per  cent,  of  that  time.  And 
this  mutation,  be  it  remembered,  may  appear  upon  any  small 
spot  anywhere  in  the  world,  most  of  which  is  not  under  sufficiently 
close  observation  for  us  to  be  able  to  say  whether  or  not  any  of 
the  many  species  that  are  confined  to  very  minute  areas  has 
arisen  within  the  history  of  human  record.  If  Tribulus  aid- 
er anensis  (p.  152),  or  one  of  the  other  two  Alacran  species,  has, 
as  is  possible,  arisen  in  the  last  50  years,  then  there  is  no  need 
for  any  more  species  to  arise  for  50  (perhaps  150)  years  to  come, 
to  keep  up  nature's  average  rate  of  evolution. 

When  one  considers  how  difficult  it  is  for  seed  to  get  a  chance 
of  germinating,  growing,  and  surviving  upon  any  given  spot, 
well  covered,  as  most  spots  are,  with  a  dense  association  of  plants 
that  have  already  proved  their  suitability  to  the  locality  and  its 
conditions,  it  is  clear  that  a  new  form  must  have  the  most  com- 
plete suitability  at  its  birth  to  the  local  conditions,  to  get  any 
foothold.  Not  only  so,  but  it  must  suit  those  conditions  as  they 
will  be  modified  by  its  own  appearance  and  addition  to  the 
association  of  plants  already  there.  Clearly,  therefore,  to  talk 
about  advantage  as  having  guided  its  evolution  is  to  go  some- 
what beyond  the  warranty  afforded  by  any  of  the  facts  as  yet 
at  our  disposal. 

Man  can,  and  does,  easily  propagate  a  novelty1  by  clearings 

the  ground  of  rivals,  but  in  nature  this  will  rarely  happen.  It 

may  be  that  the  very  common  presence  of  young  species  upon 

islands  and  upon  mountains  is  due  to  the  fact  that  these  places, 

1  "We  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  we  have  violated  nature's  laws  in 
producing  a  new  variety  of  wheat — we  may  have  only  anticipated  them; 
nor  is  its  constitution  impaired  because  it  cannot,  unaided,  perpetuate  its 
race;  it  is  in  as  sound  and  unbroken  health  and  vigour  during  its  life  as 
any  wild  variety  is  "  (55  b,  p.  ix). 


ch.  xx]  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


213 


being  somewhat  isolated,  have  comparatively  small  floras,  which 
have  not,  therefore,  been  able  as  yet  to  form  very  elaborate 
plant  societies  suited  to  their  various  conditions,  and  into  which, 
therefore,  a  newcomer  may  more  easily  enter.  In  the  same  way, 
the  frequent,  and  apparently  quite  casual,  appearance  of  young 
and  localised  species  in  the  great  forests  may  be  due  simply  to 
the  fact  that  the  fall  of  a  great  tree  has  for  the  time  so  changed 
the  conditions  as  to  give  the  newcomer  a  better  chance  of  estab- 
lishing itself  before  the  old  conditions  are  completely  restored. 
The  further  out  one  goes,  the  smaller  on  the  average  does  the 
number  of  species  per  genus  become,  and  perhaps  therefore  the 
plant  societies  may  tend  to  be  more  open. 

Whether  a  new  form  upon  its  appearance  will  or  will  not 
survive,  will  depend  chiefly  upon  natural  selection,  for  it  will 
at  once  have  a  struggle  for  existence  of  the  most  remorseless 
kind.  It  will  also  depend  appreciably  upon  mere  chance  (cf. 
Didymocarpus  and  Ckristisonia  on  p.  151).  A  fire  or  a  flood  may 
easily  kill  it  out,  however  perfectly  suited  to  its  environment  it 
may  be. 

As  our  object  in  the  present  work  is  simply  to  criticise  some 
of  the  directions  in  which  existing  theories  do  not  seem  properly 
to  meet  the  facts,  and  to  suggest  some  directions  in  which  it  is 
conceivable  that  they  may  be  improved,  there  is  no  need  to  go 
into  any  discussion  of  possible  causes  of  mutation.  If,  as  is  not 
impossible,  they  depend  immediately  upon  some  chemical  change 
that  has  somewhere  taken  place,  one  can  understand  why 
changes  should  be  mutational,  for  chemical  change  does  not 
usually  take  place  by  continuous  variation. 

On  account  of  the  insuperable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  evo- 
lution by  means  of  the  natural  selection  of  infinitesimal  variations, 
opinion  has  for  a  long  time  been  steadily  coming  round  to  favour 
the  idea  of  change  by  mutation.  Even  the  most  enthusiastic 
supporters  of  infinitesimal  variation  now  generally  begin  with  a 
measurable  change,  improving  it  afterwards  by  the  old  method. 
A  recent  writer  of  this  school,  for  example,  cites  a  change  from 
inches  to  feet  as  an  infinitesimal  variation. 

The  work  upon  Age  and  Area  outlined  in  Part  I  provides,  as 
has  already  been  indicated,  strong  arguments  against  infinitesimal 
variation,  and  the  further  work  given  in  the  last  few  chapters, 
which  seems  to  show  that  when  one  deals  with  large  numbers 
and  the  long  run  evolution  of  new  genera  and  species,  and  their 
distribution  about  the  world,  is  very  much  a  process  which  has 


214 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


[PT.  II 


gone  onward  in  a  mechanical  way,  and  whose  progress  can  to 
some  extent  be  predicted  from  the  laws  of  probability,  supple- 
mented by  the  principles  of  Age  and  Area,  Size  and  Space,  etc., 
provides  a  still  stronger  argument.  If  the  "hollow  curve"  type 
of  distribution  of  numbers  of  families  in  the  world,  of  numbers 
of  genera  in  families,  of  numbers  of  species  in  genera,  of  dis- 
tribution of  families,  genera  and  species  by  area,  of  distribution 
of  genera  in  a  given  flora,  of  the  bulk  of  the  phenomena  of  evo- 
lution and  geographical  distribution,  etc.,  held  only  for  grand 
totals,  it  might  still  be  possible  to  say  that  natural  selection  had 
had  much  to  do  with  the  guiding  of  evolution,  and  that  simply 
because  one  was  dealing  with  very  large  numbers  the  final  result 
came  out  more  or  less  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  probability 
and  of  compound  interest.  But  when,  as  has  been  shown,  this 
result  is  exhibited  family  by  family,  genus  by  genus,  country 
by  country,  and  in  animals  as  well  as  plants,  it  seems  clear  that 
in  general  evolution  and  distribution,  in  some  detail,  have 
followed  "mechanical"  laws,  some  of  which,  perhaps,  in  the 
shape  in  which  we  have  described  them — as  Age  and  Area,  Size 
and  Space,  etc. — the  work  described  in  this  book  may  have  done 
something  to  bring  into  more  clear  definition. 

One  cannot  imagine  species  or  genera  arising  by  gradual  change, 
and  producing  such  an  arrangement  of  "wheels  within  wheels" 
as  that  shown  in  the  figure  upon  p.  156,  or  such  curves  as  those 
upon  pp.  177  and  187,  with  the  monotypes  in  a  fairly  definite 
relation  to  the  ditypes,  these  to  the  tritypes,  and  so  on,  the 
curve  practically  always  turning  the  corner  between  3  and  5.  To 
produce  such  an  arrangement  by  gradual  variation,  natural 
selection  is  evidently  incompetent,  and  some  definite  law  to  guide 
it,  at  present  inscrutable,  is  required.  In  this  connection  one 
must  not  forget  that  very  strong  evidence  against  such  a  sup- 
position is  provided  by  the  fact  that  one  finds  very  few  con- 
tinuous really  intermediate  stages,  whether  living  or  fossil,  be- 
tween species  or  between  genera;  in  the  enormous  majority  of 
cases  they  are  discontinuous.  One  may  easily  find  species  that 
have  say  four  characters  of  one  genus  and  five  of  another,  or 
varieties  behaving  in  the  same  way  between  species,  but  really 
intermediate  characters  are  very  rare;  and  indeed,  as  we  have 
pointed  out  above,  they  are  frequently  impossible. 

We  shall  see  in  Chapter  xxii  that  the  hollow  curve  really 
represents  an  approximation  to  the  compound  interest  rule,  and 
one  cannot  imagine  it  to  arise  by  continuous  variation,  though 


,  CH.  XX] 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


215 


one  can  imagine  a  genus  arising  from  another  by  successive 
mutation  of  a  large  number  of  the  characters  of  the  latter. 

But  if  evolution  be  thus  to  an  appreciable,  if  not  (as  seems 
more  probable)  a  very  large,  extent  predetermined  and  governed 
in  its  unfolding  largely  by  definite  laws,  or  by  mechanical  con- 
siderations like  age,  then  it  is  clear  that  it  is  no  longer  safe  to 
consider  that  advantage  to  the  species  has  had  anything  to  do 
with  the  actual  evolution  of  that  species,  though  it  will  have 
determined  to  a  very  large  extent  whether  or  not  that  species 
shall  survive.  It  may  have  been  directly  concerned  in  the  evolu- 
tion, but  it  will  be  safer  to  leave  it  out  of  consideration,  and  to 
study  evolution  in  much  more  detail  before  committing  our- 
selves. This  study  must  be  especially  from  an  experimental 
standpoint,  perhaps  largely  Mendelian,  and  we  must,  it  seems 
to  me,  work  without  any  ulterior  idea  of  any  aim  to  which 
evolution  may  be  directed  (even  the  very  local  one  of  immediate 
advantage  to  the  species),  until  we  really  possess  some  facts 
upon  which  we  may  reconstruct  a  theory  of  its  operations.  The 
work  described  in  this  book  is  largely  iconoclastic,  and  I  do  not 
propose,  in  the  present  volume,  to  try  to  substitute  any  new 
theory  of  evolution  for  that  which  has  for  so  long  held  the  field, 
but  merely  to  suggest  a  point  of  detail  in  which  the  latter  theory 
may  in  my  opinion  be  altered  with  advantage,  by  the  acceptance 
of  the  theory  of  mutation,  whilst  in  a  later  work  I  shall  attempt 
to  bring  forward  some  of  the  conclusions  about  evolution  to 
which  the  latest  extension  of  the  work  upon  Age  and  Area 
has  led. 

If  we  remove  advantage  from  the  list  of  factors  that  may  be 
operative  in  evolution — and  it  is  clear  that  at  most  it  can  only 
be  a  small  one — then  it  is  evident  that  the  mutations  that  dis- 
tinguish species  from  one  another  cannot  proceed  in  easy  stages, 
unless  there  be,  as  is  of  course  by  no  means  impossible,  some  at 
present  inscrutable  law  guiding  them.  The  whole  change,  it 
would  seem,  must  take  place  at  once.  And  this  brings  us  to  the 
question  of  how  large  a  mutation  may  be. 

Size  of  Mutations.  Many  people  think  that  a  mutation  must 
be  very  small,  like  the  differences  in  the  "Jordanian"  species  of 
Erophila  verna  which  are  so  numerous  in  Europe,  or  in  the 
British  Rubi  or  Hieracia.  My  own  opinion,  which  I  have  held 
for  the  last  eighteen  years,  and  have  published  on  various 
occasions  (especially  in  123,  p.  329),  is  that  this  is  simply  placing 
an  unnecessary  handicap,  for  which  there  is  no  positive  evidence, 


216 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


[PT.  II 


upon  the  theory  of  mutation.  We  have  no  evidence  to  show  that 
a  Jordanian  species  will  proceed  further  towards  a  Linnean 
species.  One  cannot  imagine  the  11  Doonas,  or  the  15  species  of 
Stemonoporus  in  Ceylon  (p.  152)  arising  in  this  way.  The 
Jordanian  varieties  show  the  same  phenomena  of  dispersal  as 
do  the  Linnean  species  of  Ceylon  and  elsewhere,  and  often 
occupy  as  large  areas,  while  they  still  remain  true-breeding,  and 
show  no  sign  of  variation.  As  a  general  rule,  it  is  not  hard  to 
place  a  Jordanian  species  in  its  proper  "Linnean"  aggregate. 

In  view  of  the  large  mutations  that  have  been  recorded,  e.g. 
Capsella  Heegeri  (104)  and  others  (cf.  list  in  39,  p.  308),  and 
upon  general  grounds  of  comparison  of  the  characters  used  in 
systematic  work  upon  the  classification  of  the  flowering  plants, 
it  seems  to  me  that  mutations  may  at  times  be  of  the  necessary 
size  to  give  rise  at  once  to  Linnean  species.  One  cannot  con- 
ceive of  the  many  species  of  Ranunculus  in  New  Zealand,  for 
example,  arising  by  the  gradual  separation  of  Jordanian  varieties, 
especially  when  these  breed  true.  We  have  no  evidence  to 
show  that  the  intermediate  forms,  as  would  be  necessary  on  this 
hypothesis,  die  out.  The  struggle  for  existence  comes  at  the 
moment  of  birth  of  a  species,  and  if  it  survives  it  may  spread. 

The  view  that  mutations  are  necessarily  small  rests  upon  the 
opinion,  often  put  forward  as  if  it  were  a  general  rule  (e.g.  67), 
that  a  Linnean  species  consists  of  a  great  assemblage  of  micro- 
species,  which  breed  true,  as  has  been  shown  to  be  the  case  in 
Erophila  verna,  for  example.  But  this  opinion  requires  a  com- 
plete revision  in  view  of  the  facts  that  have  been  set  forth  above 
in  regard  to  Age  and  Area.  A  species  can  only  consist  of  such 
an  assemblage,  obviously,  if  it  consist  of  many  individuals,  and 
occupy  a  large  area  of  ground.  Now  in  the  north  temperate  zone, 
where  most  of  our  botanical  research  is  carried  on,  this  is  in  fact 
true  of  nearly  all  species;  and  only  a  few  are  localised,  for  in- 
stance in  the  Alps  or  the  Rockies,  or  to  a  less  extent  in  the 
plains,  particularly  of  North  America  and  West  Asia.  These 
localised  species  have  been  looked  upon  as  relics  or  special  local 
adaptations,  and  often  disregarded  from  an  evolutionary  point 
of  view.  But  the  work  that  has  been  done  upon  Age  and  Area 
shows  that  such  species,  except  to  some  extent  within  the  range 
of  the  effects  of  the  glacial  periods,  must  be  regarded  as  young 
beginners.  Now  in  their  case,  where  often  the  whole  species  is 
only  represented  by  a  few  individuals,  it  is  clear  that  unless  every 
plant  or  two  is  different  in  hereditary  characters,  the  species 


CH.  XX] 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


217 


cannot  be  composed  of  many  true-breeding  micro-species,  but 
that  the  formation  of  these  must  be  later  in  the  life  of  a  species 
than  the  formation  of  the  species  itself,  and  that  it  is  after  it  is 
formed  that  a  species  breaks  up  into  micro-species,  not  that  a 
species  is  formed  by  the  accumulation  of  micro-differences.  This 
agrees  with  what  Bateson  has  said  in  his  Presidential  Address 
(6);  and  simply  expresses  what  has  long  been  an  axiom  with 
workers  in  ordinary  systematic  botany,  that  it  is  in  large  and 
widely  distributed  species  that  much  variation  is  found.  Work- 
ing in  regions  where  most  species  actually  occupy  fairly  large 
areas,  people  have  acquired  an  exaggerated  opinion  of  the 
variability  of  Linnean  species,  and  unless  it  can  be  shown,  by 
.genetic  or  other  investigations,  that  local  Linnean  species,  which 
exist  in  enormous  numbers,  especially  in  the  south,  are  equally 
variable,  we  must  prefer  to  go  upon  the  positive  facts  shown 
by  Age  and  Area,  confirmed  as  they  are  by  the  ordinary  experi- 
ence of  every  systematist. 

It  has  long  been  the  fashion  to  sneer  at  the  "mere  systema- 
tist," and  to  regard  him  simply  as  a  useful  hod-carrier  for  the 
real  work  of  Botany,  and  this  especially  since  the  incoming  of 
modern  theories  of  evolution,  of  which,  by  a  kind  of  instinct,  he 
has  rarely  been  a  supporter  in  any  enthusiastic  way — in  itself 
an  offence  to  those  who  think  that  by  this  or  that  theory  botany 
will  at  last  come  to  an  end  of  its  difficult  and  slow  beginnings. 
No  great  systematist  has  taken  up,  for  example,  the  modern  cult 
that  the  only  species  that  are  species,  and  that  are  worth  con- 
sideration, are  the  minute  varieties  of  Jordan  and  other  writers. 

It  will  be  worth  while,  in  this  connection,  to  quote  some  of  the 
axioms  of  the  great  systematists,  as  they  are  in  danger  of  being 
forgotten  in  the  enthusiasm  for  the  study  of  micro-species.  For 
example,  Darwin  uses  as  headlines  in  the  Origin  of  Species  the 
following,  which  have  never  been  disputed.  "Wide-ranging, 
much  diffused,  and  common  species  vary  most."  "Species  of 
the  larger  genera  in  each  country  vary  more  frequently  than  the 
species  of  the  smaller  genera."  "Many  of  the  species  included 
within  the  larger  genera  resemble  varieties  in  being  very  closely, 
but  unequally,  related  to  each  other,  and  in  having  restricted 
ranges." 

From  Hooker  (55  a  and  b)  I  take  (order  in  his  sense  is  now 
called  family)  "The  varying  species  are  relatively  most  numerous 
in  those  classes,  orders,  and  genera,  which  are  the  simplest  in 
structure."  "As  with  species,  so  with  genera  and  orders... upon 


218 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


[PT.  II 


the  whole  those  are  the  best  limited  which  consist  of  plants  of 
complex  floral  structure."  "Those  classes  and  orders  which  are 
the  least  complex  in  organisation  are  the  most  widely  distributed, 
that  is  to  say  they  contain  a  larger  proportion  of  widely  diffused 
species.... This  tendency  of  the  least  complex  species  to  be  most 
widely  diffused  is  most  marked  in  Acotyledons  (Cryptogams), 
and  least  so  in  Dicotyledons."  "The  most  widely  distributed 
and  commonest  species  are  the  least  modified." 

It  is  clear,  after  reading  these  axioms,  that  another  explana- 
tion of  the  greater  commonness  of  new  (endemic)  species  upon 
islands,  southern  land  masses,  and  mountains  is  thus  opened, 
and  one  which  may  prove  to  be  of  great  importance.  Age  and 
Area  shows  that  these  widely  distributed  forms,  which  are  the 
most  variable,  are  the  oldest,  and  probably  the  parents  of  the 
forms  of  lesser  distribution.  But  at  the  edge  of  the  dispersal  of 
any  genus  or  other  group,  one  will  get,  most  markedly,  the 
oldest  types;  these  being  the  most  variable,  will  be  the  most 
likely  to  give  rise  to  new  forms,  and  this,  with  the  probable 
comparative  openness  of  the  associations,  may  be  the  simplest 
explanation  of  the  frequency  of  endemics  in  the  regions  we  have 
indicated.  A  cursory  examination  of  a  number  of  genera  shows 
that  this  is  very  probably  a  general  rule,  but  it  would  lead  too 
far  to  go  into  it  in  more  detail  at  present;  this  must  be  left  for 
later  work. 

There  is  as  yet  practically  no  evidence  that  several  mutations 
are  required  to  form  a  Linnean  species.  We  have  no  reason  to 
say  that  a  new  and  strictly  local  species  is  appreciably  better 
adapted,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  than  the  older  one, 
unless  for  the  conditions  in  which  it  first  finds  itself  upon  its 
evolution.  If  species  A  give  rise  to  species  5ata  certain  point 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  X 
B 

then,  unless  B  is  suited  to  the  conditions  that  obtain  at  that 
point  in  the  year  in  which  it  was  evolved,  it  is  going  to  die  out 
again.  For  the  immediate  conditions  at  B,  then,  it  may  be 
better  adapted  than  A  (as  for  example,  perhaps,  the  endemics 
of  the  Bahamas,  p.  64),  but  when  both  species  arrive  at  X,  there 
is  no  reason  why  B  should  be  better  adapted  than  A  to  the  con- 
ditions there.  It  will  be  mainly  a  matter  of  chance. 

This  being  so,  there  seems  no  reason  why  intermediate  muta- 
tions, if  they  were  formed,  should  die  out,  especially  as  the 


ch.  xx]  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


219 


original  species,  which  we  must  look  upon  as  the  probable  parent 
(e.g.  Dillenia  indica,  p.  159),  often  survives  in  the  same  locality. 
A  few  cases  like  Acrotrema  dissectum  (Trimen's  Flora  of  Ceylon,  i, 
p.  9),  where  intermediate  forms  (possibly  hybrids)  occur,  have 
been  noticed,  but  more  usually  the  local  species  is  fairly  well 
distinguished  from  the  wide-ranging  form.  And  in  some  instances 
transitions  are  impossible,  as,  for  example,  with  Coleus  elongatus 
(detailed  characters  given  on  p.  152).  I  may  quote  here  what 
has  already  been  said  about  it  in  a  paper  of  1907  (118): 

"The  species  is  too  entirely  different  from  the  other  species 
of  Coleus,  whether  we  take  C.  barbatus  or  one  of  the  others,  for 
evolution  by  means  of  continuous  variations  to  have  been 
possible.  To  take  some  of  the  characters,  especially  those  that 
are  most  prominent,  how  is  the  one  type  of  inflorescence  going 
to  develop  into  the  other  by  any  possible  continuous  variation? 
The  mind  cannot  conceive  of  such  a  process,  unless  it  be  by  dis- 
continuous variation.  Still  more,  how  is  a  calyx  with  one  big 
tooth  on  top  and  four  small  ones  below  going  to  develop  into 
one  with  five  equal  teeth?  The  study  of  infinitesimal  variation 
shows  that  the  maximum  change  to  be  expected  in  one  generation 
would  be  a  mere  fraction  of  the  width  of  a  tooth,  and  how  is  this 
to  prove  of  sufficient  advantage  or  disadvantage  to  be  of  any 
material  import  in  the  struggle  for  existence?  The  question  is 
equally  hard  if  we  suppose  a  common  ancestor,  for  what  kind  of 
calyx  or  inflorescence  will  be  intermediate?  " 

And  cf.  above,  p.  209,  as  to  changes  in  calyx  teeth. 

In  this  case  the  species  that  one  must  regard  as  ancestral, 
C.  barbatus,  is  also  found  in  the  same  locality;  it  is  as  frequent 
on  the  summit  of  Ritigala  as  C.  elongatus,  and  grows  in  similar 
spots  on  the  exposed  rocks.  Both  suit  the  same  conditions,  and 
if  they  have  descended  from  a  common  ancestor,  not  one  from 
the  other,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  one  should  be  confined  to 
Ritigala,  one  common  to  tropical  Asia  and  Africa. 

Nearly  seventy  years  ago,  Lyell  (69,  p.  394)  said  "Might  not 
the  births  of  new  species,  like  the  deaths  of  old  ones,  be  sudden?  " 
and  it  appears  to  me,  that  when  one  puts  together  the  facts  of 
distribution  as  understood  in  the  light  of  Age  and  Area,  and  the 
still  more  surprising  fact  of  the  agreement  of  the  type  of  dis- 
persal of  species,  both  by  area  and  into  genera,  and  of  genera  by 
area  and  into  families,  etc.,  as  more  fully  described  above,  one 
can  hardly  arrive  at  any  other  conclusion.  Advantage  as  a  cause 
in  evolution  seems  to  be  ruled  out  with  practical  completeness, 
though  it  will  determine  whether  the  newly  evolved  form  will 
survive  or  not;  and  if  advantage  cannot  be  adduced,  then  one 
can  hardly  conceive  of  the  changes  that  distinguish  one  species 


220 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


[PT.  II 


from  another  having  taken  place  gradually,  whether  by  in- 
finitesimal stages,  or  by  small  mutations,  unless  there  be  some 
at  present  inscrutable  law  that  determines  that  such  shall  be 
the  case.  It  will  be  much  safer  for  the  present,  at  any  rate,  to 
leave  out  of  account  such  a  supposition,  and  to  work  upon  the 
idea  that  the  whole  distinction  of  a  species  may  appear  at  once. 

Now  the  new  and  distinct  forms  that  have  come  into  existence 
range  from  the  minute  varieties  of  the  Drabas  and  Hieraciums 
of  northern  Europe  to  differences  of  well-marked  Linnean- 
specific  rank,  and  one  must  therefore  suppose  that  mutations 
giving  rise  to  such  forms  may  be  of  similar  variation  in  size. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  this  is  being  laid  down  as  an 
absolute  rule,  but  it  would  seem  probable  that  it  is  a  very 
general  one.  Individual  forms  may  owe  their  origin  to  many 
causes,  but  in  most  cases  it  would  seem  to  have  been  due  (im- 
mediately) to  a  mutation  small  or  large,  which  differentiated  the 
new  form  from  its  predecessor,  but  there  seems  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  new  form  is  necessarily  better  adapted  than  its 
predecessor,  and  will  kill  it  out  in  competition.  The  widely  dis- 
tributed, and  presumably  parental,  Ranunculi  of  New  Zealand 
are  just  as  common  in  the  south  of  South  Island,  where  there  is 
such  a  mass  of  endemics  (fig.  on  p.  156). 

Natural  selection  comes  in,  not  as  a  causative  and  positive 
agent,  but  as  a  destructive  and  negative  one.  The  new  form  will 
instantly  have  a  most  strenuous  struggle  for  existence,  so  that, 
if  not  perfectly  suited  to  the  conditions  that  obtain  upon  the 
spot  where  it  is  born,  and  at  the  moment  of  its  birth,  it  will  be 
remorselessly  killed  out.  If  it  passes  successfully  through  this 
competition,  it  may  be  regarded  as  eminently  suited  to  that  spot 
and  those  conditions,  and  may  then  spread  as  long  as  it  can  find 
suitable  conditions  into  which  to  travel.  Not  infrequently  it  will 
meet  with  conditions  that  suit  it  even  more  perfectly  than  those 
to  which  it  was  born,  and  we  shall  be  liable  to  imagine  it  specially 
adapted  to  them,  when  really  it  is  only  they  that  are  suited  to 
it.  Actual  experience  of  the  great  changes  in  climatic  conditions 
that  go  on  from  year  to  year  shows  that  most  species  are  really 
suited  to  a  somewhat  wide  range  of  conditions.  This  being  so, 
there  is  little  reason  why  the  child  should  suppress  the  parent  in 
competition.  The  latter  will  have  proved  its  suitability  to  the 
conditions,  and  will  probably  have  a  much  wider  range,  and  the 
chance  of  a  direct  and  severe  struggle  between  the  two  is  but 
small.  Even  if  the  child  should  suppress  the  parent  in  portions 
of  its  range,  it  will  not  be  likely  to  overtake  it  over  the  whole, 


CH.  XX] 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES 


221 


and  the  parent  will  probably  survive  in  the  outer  portions  of  its 
range  at  any  rate. 

It  is  clear,  if  the  Age  and  Area  explanation  of  the  facts 
of  distribution  be  accepted — and  as  yet  no  other  satisfactory 
hypothesis  is  forthcoming — that  the  endemics  must  in  general 
be  younger  than  the  "wides,"  and  it  seems  natural  to  suppose 
that  they  have  been  derived  from  the  latter.  But  if  this  be  so, 
then  both  parent  and  child  occur  together,  or  near  together,  in 
most  cases,  and  if  one  push  this  consideration  to  its  logical  con- 
clusion, one  will  see  that  there  is  no  reason  why  the  whole  tree 
of  the  evolution  of  a  genus  (or  even  family)  should  not  survive 
upon  the  earth  at  the  present  moment,  as  I  have  contended  for 
the  last  fifteen  years  (120).  Destruction  such  as  that  wrought 
by  the  glacial  periods,  or  other  geological  convulsions,  might  of 
course  kill  out  genera  or  families,  but  so  long  as  conditions 
remain  reasonably  constant,  there  seems  no  reason  why  they, 
or  intermediates,  should  be  killed  out. 

If,  as  seems  probable,  destruction  in  the  struggle  for  existence 
is  to  fall  largely  out  of  consideration  as  potent  in  the  evolution 
that  has  gone  on  (except  that  it  must  have  destroyed  tens  of 
thousands  of  incipient  species,  many  of  which  might  have  been 
of  great  value  had  man  been  there  to  preserve  and  investigate 
them),  we  cannot  regard  Jordanian  species  as  stages  in  the  evo- 
lution of  Linnean,  for  to  get  the  localised  Linnean  from  Jordanian 
species,  wholesale  destruction  must  have  gone  on,  killing  out 
altogether  many  of  the  latter. 

Whilst  the  exclusion  of  advantage  to  the  species  as  a  serious 
factor  in  its  evolution  (though  of  great  importance  in  deter- 
mining whether  or  not  it  shall  survive)  practically  compels  us 
to  accept  the  theory  of  mutation,  and  that  such  as  may  give  rise 
at  once  to  Linnean  species,  it  also  seems  to  me,  when  taken  in 
conjunction  with  other  phenomena  which  are  now  clearly  visible, 
to  involve  other  changes  in  our  views.  Chiefly  important  among 
these  is  the  new  view  of  evolution,  first  proposed  by  Guppy  in 
1906,  and  by  the  writer  in  the  following  year,  that  evolution  did 
not  proceed  from  individual  to  variety,  from  variety  to  species, 
from  species  to  genus,  and  from  genus  to  family,  but  inversely, 
the  great  families  and  genera  appearing  at  a  very  early  period, 
and  subsequently  breaking  up  into  other  genera  and  species.  The 
final  results  of  the  study  of  Age  and  Area,  with  its  demonstration 
of  the  universality  of  the  hollow  curve,  seem  to  me  at  present 
almost  to  involve  the  acceptance  of  this  view,  and  the  subject 
will  be  fully  developed  in  a  subsequent  book. 


CHAPTER  XXI 


AGE  AND  AREA  AND  THE  MUTATION  THEORY 
By  Hugo  de  Vries,  F.M.R.S. 

The  main  principle  of  the  mutation  theory  is  that  species  and 
varieties  have  originated  by  mutation,  but  are,  at  present,  not 
known  to  have  originated  in  any  other  way.  Originally  this  con- 
ception has  been  derived  from  the  hypothesis  of  unit-characters 
as  deduced  from  Darwin's  Pangenesis,  which  led  to  the  expecta- 
tion of  two  different  kinds  of  variability,  one  slow  and  one 
sudden. 

Freed  from  the  assumption  of  a  transportation  of  gemmules 
through  the  organism,  the  conception  of  Pangenesis  is  the  clear 
basis  of  the  present  manifold  theories  of  heredity.  An  organic 
being  is  a  microcosm,  says  Darwin,  a  little  universe,  formed  of 
a  host  of  self-propagating  organisms,  inconceivably  minute,  and 
numerous  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  In  honour  of  Darwin,  I  have 
proposed  to  call  these  minute  organisms  pangenes,  and  this  name 
has  now  been  generally  accepted  under  the  shortened  form  of 
genes.  They  are  assumed  to  be  the  material  bearers  of  the  unit- 
characters  of  species  and  varieties. 

This  principle  leads  almost  directly  to  the  distinction  of  two 
different  kinds  of  variation.  For  the  first,  no  material  change  of 
the  genes  is  required ;  they  remain  what  they  are.  No  two  leaves 
on  a  tree  are  exactly  alike;  no  two  individuals  of  a  species  are 
the  same  in  every  detail.  These  two  well-known  propositions  are 
the  essence  of  what  we  now  call  fluctuating  variability.  In  their 
visible  features  characters  usually  oscillate  around  a  mean  value, 
but  this  does  not  affect  their  material  bearers.  The  researches  of 
Quetelet  and  Galton  have  shown  that  such  oscillations  follow 
the  law  of  chance.  Starting  from  this  idea,  fluctuating  variability 
of  animals  and  plants  has  now  become  a  main  branch  of  bio- 
logical study. 

Besides  these,  changes  may  be  expected,  which  involve  the 
material  bearers  of  heredity,  or  the  genes,  themselves.  Some 
may  be  lost,  either  really  or  apparently,  and  new  ones  may  be 
added  to  the  stock,  this  latter  process  consisting  probably  in  the 
transformation  of  old  genes  into  new  types.  In  consequence  of 
such  changes  the  external  features  of  an  organism  may  become 


pt.  ii,  ch.  xxi]     THE  MUTATION  THEORY 


223 


altered,  and  these  alterations  are  now  generally  called  mutations. 
The  theory  assumes  that  these  only  are  connected  with  the  origin 
of  species  and  varieties. 

Darwin  recognised  both  mutation  and  fluctuation  as  steps  in 
the  general  process  of  evolution.  For  this  assertion  he  mainly 
relied  on  his  studies  of  the  variation  of  animals  and  plants  under 
domestication,  since  organisms  in  the  wild  condition  did  not,  at 
his  time,  afford  a  sufficient  basis  for  controlling  his  conception. 
He  assumed  mutations  to  be  of  subordinate  significance,  explain- 
ing the  main  lines  of  the  evolutionary  process  on  the  assumption 
of  individual  or  gradual  variation.  This  variation  he  had  shown 
to  occur  everywhere,  but  as  to  its  capability  of  achieving  lasting 
changes,  he  had  no  facts  at  hand  to  give  a  definite  proof. 

In  my  book  on  the  Mutation  Theory  I  have  given  an  elaborate 
"Review  of  the  Facts,"  especially  on  the  botanical  side,  in  order 
to  show  that  fluctuating  variability  does  not  lead  to  durable 
changes  in  the  hereditary  composition  of  a  type.  Wherever  such 
changes  occur  they  may  be  shown  to  be  historically,  or  at  least 
probably,  due  to  saltations.  These  critical  considerations  led  to 
the  proof  that  the  conception  of  mutations  was  in  full  harmony 
with  our  knowledge  of  the  variability  of  plants,  as  it  occurs 
everywhere  in  nature  as  well  as  in  horticultural  and  agricultural 
breeding. 

The  mutation  theory  is  intended  to  be  a  support  and  a  corol- 
lary of  the  selection  theory  of  Darwin.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  Darwin  correctly  set  forth  the  essential  steps  in  the  evo- 
lutionary process  and  that  changes  in  his  views  mostly  relate 
to  those  minor  points,  for  which,  at  his  time,  the  material  of 
facts  was  not  adequate  to  a  correct  decision.  The  mutation  theory 
claims  to  remove  many  of  the  difficulties,  inherent  to  the  Dar- 
winian doctrine,  as  e.g.  the  general  occurrence  of  useless  charac- 
ters and  the  impossibility  of  explaining  the  first  beginning  of  a 
selection  on  the  ground  of  its  usefulness. 

In  order  to  become  generally  accepted  this  theory  has  to  be 
considered  from  two  main  points  of  view.  The  contention  that 
species  and  varieties  originate  by  mutation  is  essentially  experi- 
mental in  its  nature.  But  the  thesis  that  they  cannot  be  shown 
to  have  ever  originated  in  another  way  has  to  be  studied  in  the 
field  of  systematic  botany  and  zoology,  and  partly  in  that  of 
palaeontology.  Mutations  were  well  known  to  Darwin  to  occur 
from  time  to  time,  and  of  late  numerous  observations  of  special 
cases  in  animals  and  plants  have  been  published.  A  list  of  them 


224 


AGE  AND  AREA 


[PT.  II 


has  been  prepared  by  Gates  in  his  new  book  on  Mutations  and 
Evolution. 

In  the  fruit-fly  Drosophila  over  two  hundred  instances  have 
been  studied  by  Morgan  and  his  co-workers,  and  the  evening 
primroses,  or  Oenotheras,  have  afforded  some  dozens,  many  of 
which  differ  more  widely  from  their  parent  form  than  recog- 
nised wild  species  of  this  polymorphic  genus  do  among  them- 
selves. On  the  other  hand,  no  observations  have  been  adduced 
of  new  forms  originating  experimentally  from  fluctuating  vari- 
ations. 

The  experimental  work  has  not,  however,  chosen  for  its  scope 
the  proof  of  the  reality  of  mutations,  but  has  preferred  other 
lines  of  research.  In  the  studies  of  Morgan  the  distribution  of 
the  genes  along  the  chromosomes,  as  predicted  from  the  prin- 
ciple of  Pangenesis,  has  been  the  main  aim.  With  Oenothera  the 
prominent  question  was  the  search  for  a  method  of  studying 
the  internal  and  external  causes,  which  induce  mutations  to 
occur  repeatedly.  A  thorough  knowledge  of  these  causes  must, 
in  the  end,  enable  us  to  produce  artificially  distinct  changes, 
determined  beforehand.  In  other  words,  it  must  afford  the  means 
of  evolving  arbitrarily  new  useful  varieties  of  chosen  qualities, 
in  agricultural  and  in  horticultural  plants. 

In  systematic  studies  it  is  now  generally  recognised  that  the 
characters  used  in  the  diagnostic  distinction  of  related  species 
are  not  such  as  would  be  expected  on  the  ground  of  Darwin's 
selection  theory.  As  a  rule  they  relate  to  qualities,  which  cannot 
be  explained  on  the  assumption  of  an  origin  by  the  accumulation 
of  infinitesimal  steps  on  the  basis  of  their  usefulness  for  the 
species.  They  are  not  observed  to  increase  the  chance  of  success 
in  the  struggle  for  life.  Most  forms  would  thrive  as  well  without 
their  aid.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  morphological  charac- 
ters, whereas  adaptation  to  such  environmental  conditions  as 
moisture  or  dryness,  shadow  or  open  field,  physical  and  chemical 
constitution  of  the  soil,  etc.,  might  far  more  easily  be  imagined 
to  evolve  slowly.  But  even  here  direct  proofs  are  wanting. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  most  of  the  striking  instances  of 
beautiful  adaptation  to  special  forms  of  life  are  characters  of 
genera  and  subgenera,  or  even  of  whole  families,  but  not  of 
single  species.  Climbing  plants  and  tendrils,  insectivorous  plants, 
desert  types  of  Cactus,  Euphorbia,  and  so  many  others,  sub- 
merged water  plants,  and  numerous  other  instances  could  be 
adduced.  Since  we  do  not  know  when  and  where  and  under 


ch.  xxi]        AND  THE  MUTATION  THEORY 


225 


which  external  conditions  those  types  have  originated,  all  specu- 
lations concerning  their  evolution  on  the  ground  of  their  uses 
must  be  considered  to  be  more  of  a  poetical  than  of  a  really 
scientific  nature.  Wherever  striking  adaptations  to  the  environ- 
ment are  met  with,  we  will  always  have  to  grant  that  they  did 
not  originate  under  the  conditions  of  the  locality,  where  we 
observe  them,  but  elsewhere  and  in  long  forgotten  times,  the 
environmental  conditions  of  which  are  necessarily  unknown  to  us. 

Hitherto  systematic  enquiry  was  obviously  handicapped  by 
the  weight  of  such  objections,  and  they  were  simply  left  out  of 
consideration.  No  principle  was  known,  which  would  enable  us 
to  decide  the  question,  whether  advantageousness  to  their 
bearers  had  played  any  role  in  the  evolution  of  new  characters. 
Later  on,  after  many  wanderings  of  a  species  into  different  new 
environments,  a  character  might  prove  to  be  useful  in  some  of 
the  new  localities,  and  here  induce  a  rapid  multiplication. 
Striking  adaptations,  such  as  those  of  desert  plants,  may  be 
the  consequence.  But  whether  the  characters  have  evolved 
under  analogous  or  under  quite  different  conditions,  we  do  not 
know. 

It  is  at  this  point  that  the  theory  of  Age  and  Area  has  come 
into  the  discussion.  It  showed  that  the  dispersal  of  species, 
especially  in  the  first  period  after  their  birth,  is  independent  of 
their  distinctive  morphological  characters.  This  phenomenon 
may  be  studied  on  a  purely  statistical  basis  without  the  aid  of 
personal  appreciations  of  biological  qualities. 

In  the  first  place,  the  discovery  that  endemic  species  are,  as 
a  rule,  the  youngest  in  their  country,  has  provided  us  with  a 
means  of  judging  the  value  of  their  characters  in  the  struggle 
for  life.  But  even  here  such  a  relation  is  not  observed.  The  en- 
demic forms  of  Coleus  of  Ceylon,  and  numerous  other  instances, 
show  their  marks  to  be  minute  and  of  subordinate  importance, 
although  they  are  recognised  by  the  best  systematists  as  having 
full  specific  value.  Many  endemic  species  are  still  living  in  the 
same  locality  and  obviously  under  at  least  almost  the  same  con- 
ditions as  those  under  which  they  have  originated.  But  no 
relation  of  their  new  marks  to  any  use  in  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence can  be  pointed  out.  They  have  inherited  their  adaptation  to 
the  environment  from  their  ancestors,  but  are  rarely  known  to 
have  increased  it.  Only  in  some  cases  they  have  succeeded  in 
spreading  rapidly  and  widely,  and  then,  of  course,  an  improve- 
ment in  adaptation  may  be  granted.  But  even  here  there  is 
w.a.  15 


226 


AGE  AND  AREA 


[PT.  II 


nothing  to  show  that  the  evolution  of  the  character  was  due  to 
this  cause. 

The  conclusion  obviously  is,  that  specific  characters  have 
evolved  without  any  relation  to  their  possible  significance  in 
the  struggle  for  life.  The  facts  are  contrary  to  the  main  principle 
of  the  selection  theory  of  Darwin.  Moreover,  intermediate  steps 
between  the  endemic  species  and  their  parents,  in  the  midst  of 
which  they  are  ordinarily  still  living,  are  wanting,  and  therefore 
must  be  assumed  never  to  have  existed.  Endemic  species  must 
have  appeared  at  once,  by  means  of  one  or  a  few  distinct  steps, 
which  embrace  their  whole  differentiation  from  the  parent  type. 
Considered  in  this  way,  it  is  evident  that  their  origin  is  in  full 
accord  with  the  principles  of  the  mutation  theory,  and  has  to 
be  considered  as  one  of  the  best  proofs  of  its  applicability  to 
evolution  in  general. 

Starting  from  the  endemic  species,  Willis  has  worked  out  his 
statistical  methods  of  studying  the  relation  of  age  to  dispersal 
for  larger  and  larger  groups.  Everywhere  this  relation  is  shown 
to  be,  in  the  main,  independent  of  the  specific  characters.  It 
obeys  the  same  laws  in  widely  different  genera  and  families. 
Dispersal  is  not  due  to  special  adaptation,  and  often,  as  in  the 
Podostemonaceae,  the  most  beautifully  adapted  forms  are  the 
local  ones,  whereas  the  universally  spread  species  of  the  same 
group  show  the  smallest  degree  of  specialisation. 

In  other  words,  the  area  occupied  in  a  country  by  any  given 
species  depends  upon  the  age  of  that  species  in  that  country, 
and  not  upon  special  characters.  Of  course  this  law  applies  to 
the  common  type  of  species,  and  exceptions  may  be  expected  to 
occur.  For  this  reason  the  species  are  not  studied  singly,  but  in 
small  groups  of  twenty  or  so,  and  on  this  basis  the  law  has  been 
found  to  be  everywhere  the  same  in  the  animal  and  in  the  vege- 
table kingdom. 

Leaving  the  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  this  principle 
for  pure  systematic  studies  and  for  the  construction  of  family 
pedigrees  to  other  judges,  I  might  here  point  out  its  bearing  on 
the  mutation  theory.  It  affords  a  full  proof  that  everywhere  in 
nature,  in  geological  periods  as  well  as  at  present,  the  morpho- 
logical characters  of  newly  originated  types  have  no  special 
significance  in  the  struggle  for  life.  They  are  not  known  to  aid 
them  in  their  initial  dispersal.  They  may  afterwards  prove  to  be 
useful  or  useless,  but  this  has  no  influence  upon  their  evolution. 
Obvious  instances  of  usefulness  occur,  as  a  rule,  only  at  much 


ch.  xxi]        AND  THE  MUTATION  THEORY 


227 


later  periods  during  the  wandering  of  the  new  forms,  when  un- 
expectedly they  arrive  in  environments  specially  fitted  for  them. 

The  usual  phrase,  that  species  are  adapted  to  their  environ- 
ment, should  therefore  be  read  inversely,  stating  that  most 
species  are  now  found  to  live  under  conditions  fit  for  them.  The 
adaptation  is  not  on  the  side  of  the  species,  but  on  that  of  the 
environment.  In  a  popular  way  we  could  say  that  in  the  long 
run  species  choose  their  best  environment.  Favourable  local 
conditions  induce  a  rapid  multiplication,  whereas  elsewhere  the 
forms  remain  rare,  or  are  seen  to  disappear  slowly. 

The  general  belief  in  adaptation  as  one  of  the  chief  causes  of 
the  evolution  of  specific  characters  is  thus  directly  contradicted 
by  the  statistical  studies  of  Willis,  which  are  independent  of  all 
personal  appreciation  or  estimation  of  a  supposed  value.  This 
result  must  be  considered  as  the  one  great  proof,  which  the 
mutation  theory  still  wanted  for  its  acceptance  in  the  field  of 
systematic  zoology  and  botany. 


15—2 


CHAPTER  XXII 


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION:  GENERAL 

Our  general  outlook  upon  biological  problems  has  been,  and  to  < 
a  great  extent  still  is,  principally  governed  by  the  theory  of 
natural  selection — the  mechanism  by  whose  invention,  and  by 
virtue  of  whose  a  priori  reasonableness,  Darwin  was  able  to 
render  the  immortal  service  of  establishing  the  theory  of  evo- 
lution. Few  people  nowadays  would  be  found  to  give  a  complete 
assent  to  the  doctrine  of  natural  selection,  but  though  the  pre- 
mises are  therefore  weakened  or  destroyed,  the  conclusions 
drawn  from  them  are  still  accepted  with  little  or  no  question. 
Somewhat  to  my  surprise  I  have  found  many  who  no  longer 
accept  natural  selection  as  operative  in  evolution  in  a  positive 
(rather  than  negative)  manner,  but  who  are  prepared  to  fight  to 
the  death  for  conclusions  that  are  essentially  based  upon  it,  such 
as  that  species  of  small  area  are  usually  relics. 

When  one  comes  to  look  at  the  history  of  the  subject  of  geo- 
graphical distribution,  one  soon  realises  that  since  the  impulse 
which  was  first  given  to  it  by  the  acceptance  of  the  theory  of 
natural  selection  has  spent  its  force,  little  work  of  any  import- 
ance1 dealing  with  the  broad  general  distribution  of  plants  about 
the  world  (as  distinguished  from  their  local  distribution  into 
societies  and  associations  occupying  various  types  of  habitat) 
has  been  carried  on.  The  limiting  factor  in  progress  at  the  present 
time  is  the  lack  of  a  proper  theoretical  background  from  which 
fruitful  hypotheses  may  be  derived.  The  facts  of  distribution 
remain  an  insoluble  problem  so  long  as  one  endeavours  to  explain 
them  by  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  and  the  more  that  the 
attempt  is  made,  the  greater  is  found  to  be  the  incompatibility 
between  theory  and  practice.  The  serious  study  of  geographical 
distribution  has  consequently  been  more  and  more  neglected, 
whilst  at  the  same  time  it  has  been  admitted  in  a  vague  theoretical 
way  that  no  theory  of  evolution  can  stand  which  will  not  explain 
the  facts  of  dispersal. 

Chief  among  the  deductions — consciously  or  unconsciously 

1  The  last  important  work  was  probably  that  of  Guppy  (44,  46,  47),  and 
it  is  to  be  noted  that  this  work  has  led  him  to  conclusions  (expressed  in  his 
Theory  of  Differentiation)  diametrically  opposed  to  the  theory  of  Darwin. 


pt.  ii,  ch.  xxii]    GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  229 


made — from  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  which  are  to-day 
strenuously  supported,  and  the  belief  in  which  seems  to  me  the 
chief  preventive  to  further  progress  in  the  study  of  distribution, 
are  perhaps  the  following: 

(1)  That  distribution  of  species  about  the  world  has  in  general 
been  rapid. 

(2)  That  the  present  distribution  of  species  and  genera  about 
the  world  represents  the  maximum  possible  to  those  species  and 
genera,  and  that  distribution  is  consequently  a  closed  chapter. 

(3)  That  species  and  genera  now  existing  occupy,  as  a  rule, 
just  those  places  to  which  they  are  suited. 

(4)  That  species  and  genera  occupying  small  areas  are  as  a 
general  rule  species  and  genera  that  are  dying  out  (relics). 
Natural  selection  could  not  produce  them  upon  areas  so  small 
as  are  occupied  by  a  great  many.  It  also  demands  that  there 
shall  be  a  good  many  moribund  forms;  and  therefore  these 
localised  forms  are  assumed  to  be  dying  out. 

(5)  That  on  the  whole,  in  the  same  way,  small  genera  (with 
few  species)  are  to  be  regarded  as  relics,  and  as  in  process  of 
dying  out. 

As  regards  the  first  two  of  these,  we  have  seen  in  Chapters  n 
to  v  that  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  as  a  general  rule 
dispersal  in  nature  is  anything  but  extraordinarily  slow,  the 
ground  being  usually  fully  occupied  by  societies  or  associations 
of  plants,  into  which  entry  will  be  difficult  or  even  impossible. 
This  is  confirmed  by  ordinary  observation,  for  if  one  remember 
the  position  of  various  clumps  of  plants  from  one's  childhood, 
one  soon  realises  that  if  man  have  made  no  alterations  in  the 
neighbourhood  they  will  be  found  in  the  same  places,  without 
having  extended  their  area  except  in  very  rare  instances.  Dis- 
persal may  be  rapid  if  there  be  (which  is  very  rarely  the  case) 
virgin  soil  available,  or  if  man  or  other  cause  have  made  some 
great  alteration  in  conditions,  but  usually  it  will  be  a  matter  of 
the  most  extreme  slowness.  The  figures  for  areal  distribution 
that  have  been  given  above,  showing  that  the  "hollow  curve" 
is  apparently  a  universal  rule,  not  only  for  totals,  but  for  indi- 
vidual families  and  genera,  show  clearly  that  dispersal  follows  a 
largely  "mechanical"  course,  and  that  if  a  species  now  occupy 
a  small  area,  it  is  in  most  cases  because  it  has  not  had  time  to 
occupy  a  larger  one.  If  the  areas  occupied  had  been  determined 
by  natural  selection,  it  is  inconceivable  that  they  should  have 
been  thus  graduated  in  sizes  from  many  small  to  few  large,  with 


230  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION         [pt.  ii 


no  breaks  in  the  continuity  of  the  figures,  and  that  not  only  on 
the  totals,  but  in  individual  families  and  genera.  We  have  also 
seen  that  there  is  no  need  for  rapid  dispersal,  when  the  time 
available  is  considered  (cf.  p.  33). 

It  is  thus  fairly  clear  that  the  existing  distribution  of  species 
and  genera,  in  probably  the  great  majority  of  cases,  represents 
only  the  dispersal  possible  in  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  their 
evolution.  If  one  could  return  to  the  world  after  ten  thousand 
years,  one  might  find  an  appreciable  extension  of  their  area  by 
existing  species,  but  to  expect  it  in  a  short  time  is  more  sanguine 
than  reasonable. 

The  fact  that  the  composition  and  distribution  of  the  floras  of 
the  outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand  can  to  a  large  extent  be 
predicted  from  a  knowledge  of  the  distribution  in  New  Zealand 
of  the  New  Zealand  flora  (pp.  66-75)  is  a  very  strong  argument 
indeed  in  favour  of  the  view  that  dispersal  depends  chiefly  upon 
age,  i.e.  that  it  is  determined  by  various  factors  which  when  one 
deals  with  long  periods  are  found  to  act  at  a  more  or  less  uniform 
speed,  and  that  consequently  the  existing  dispersal  of  species 
does  not  represent  the  end  of  the  chapter,  but  only  the  point 
which  has  so  far  been  reached. 

If  one  accept  the  two  suppositions  under  discussion,  it  is  quite 
impossible  to  explain  numerous  facts  in  distribution  which  are 
easily  explained  by  aid  of  Age  and  Area,  for  instance,  the  fact 
that  the  Auckland  Islands  have  45  per  cent,  of  their  flora  mono- 
cotyledonous,  the  Chathams  31  per  cent.,  and  the  Kermadecs 
only  21  per  cent.;  or  that  the  plants  of  the  floras  of  these  out- 
lying islands  (p.  67)  are  unusually  widespread  in  New  Zealand, 
and  those  of  the  Chathams  much  more  so  than  those  of  the 
Aucklands  and  the  Kermadecs.  It  is  impossible  with  these  sup- 
positions to  do  any  prediction  about  distribution  at  all,  whereas 
nearly  a  hundred  predictions  have  already  been  successfully 
made  with  the  assistance  of  Age  and  Area,  and  have  added  con- 
siderably to  our  knowledge  of  the  distribution  of  plants  in  the 
New  Zealand  area. 

In  regard  to  the  third  hypothesis  (p.  229),  the  supposition  that 
species  and  genera  occupy  just  those  places  to  which  they  are 
suited  has  usually  been  taken  for  granted,  and  a  vast  amount  of 
energy  has  been  devoted  to  the  problem  of  finding  out  why  they 
are  suited.  But,  as  has  just  been  pointed  out,  we  can  no  longer 
safely  draw  this  conclusion.  If  a  species  is  not  suited  to  its  loca- 
tion, it  will  probably  die  out,  as  is  apparently  happening  with 


ch.  xxii]      GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION 


231 


Cupressus  macrocarpa  at  Monterey  (p.  88),  though  this  species 
is  admirably  suited  to  life  in  a  climate  a  little  damper.  But  it  is 
stretching  our  imaginations  somewhat  to  imagine  that  most 
localised  species  are  suited  only  to  the  places  in  which  they  occur. 
Conditions  change  so  much  from  year  to  year  that  unless  a 
species  is  suited  to  a  considerable  range,  it  will  not  be  able  to 
survive  at  all.  It  would  not  obtain  a  greater  change  by  moving 
to  another  locality  not  too  far  away.  It  is  probable  that  the 
slow  acclimatisation  practised  by  nature  will  ultimately  ac- 
custom species  to  widely  different  conditions,  but  long  time 
must  be  allowed. 

The  arithmetical  facts  disclosed  in  this  book  are  much  opposed 
to  any  such  supposition.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  suggest  con- 
ditions to  which  the  overlapping  species  in  the  map  on  p.  56,  or 
the  grouped  species  of  varying  size  of  area  on  p.  156,  can  be 
suited.  The  point  of  view  usually  taken  up  on  this  matter  has 
been  very  well  put  by  Huxley  (59,  p.  123),  who  says: 

"We  are  very  much  in  the  habit  of  tacitly  assuming  that 
because  certain  plants  and  certain  animals  exist  only  under  cer- 
tain climatal  conditions,  there  is  something  in  what  we  vaguely 
call  the  'constitution'  of  the  plant  or  animal  which  binds  them 
to  these  conditions,  and  renders  it  impossible  for  them  to  live 
elsewhere.  I  wish  we  could  get  rid  of  this  word  'constitution'; 
for  I  take  it  to  be  one  of  the  many  verbal  anodynes  by  which  the 
discomfort  of  ignorance  is  dulled." 

The  arrangement  of  species  in  areas  that  are  concentrated 
about  particular  points,  as  is  shown  in  the  curves  and  maps  on 
pp.  79,  80,  153,  156,  goes  to  show  that  local  adaptation  has  had 
little  to  do  with  the  dispersal.  If  not  locally  adapted,  the  species 
would  die  out  without  spreading  at  all;  but  once  established 
they  begin  to  spread,  at  an  average  rate  determined  by  the 
various  factors  that  act  upon  them.  The  fact  that  the  northern 
invasion  of  New  Zealand  (cf.  table  on  p.  77,  and  curves  on  pp.  79, 
80)  does  not  show  any  increase  of  local  species  at  the  region 
where  the  southern  invasion  shows  its  maximum,  and  vice  versa, 
is  a  strong  proof  against  local  conditions  having  anything  serious 
to  do  with  multiplication  of  species. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  suppositions,  that  species  of  small  area, 
and  genera  of  one  or  few  species,  are  dying  out,  are  those  most 
strenuously  adhered  to,  but  in  view  of  the  facts  set  forth  in  this 
book  seem  to  form  a  very  difficult  position  to  uphold.  It  need 
not  be  entirely  abandoned,  but  in  place  of  supposing  most  such 


232  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  [pt.  ii 


species  and  genera  to  come  under  this  head,  one  must  be  satisfied 
with  a  small  number;  to  the  great  bulk  the  contention  is  not 
applicable.  We  have  seen,  and  seen  it  so  strikingly  in  numerous 
instances  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  a  general  rule, 
that  the  species  in  a  given  country,  endemic  or  not,  are  grouped 
there  (according  to  the  areas  that  they  occupy)  in  a  perfectly 
definite  manner,  which  is  always  the  same.  The  wides  are  found 
(when  there  are  also  endemics)  with  many  in  the  class  of  largest 
area,  and  numbers  decreasing  downwards,  the  endemics  arranged 
in  the  reverse  direction.  This  regular  arrangement  is  completely 
opposed  to  the  idea  of  relic  nature,  for  how  could  there  be  many 
at  the  last  stage  of  relicdom,  fewer  at  the  last  but  one,  still  fewer 
at  the  last  but  two,  and  so  on?  It  is  equally  opposed  to  the  idea 
of  local  adaptation,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  point  out,  for  why 
should  there  be  many  adapted  to  the  smallest  areas,  with  num- 
bers steadily  decreasing  upwards.  Still  more  difficult  is  it  to 
explain,  upon  either  of  these  suppositions,  why  the  wides  (if 
endemics  occur  also)  should  be  arranged  in  the  reverse  direction1. 
If  there  be  special  local  adaptation,  then  the  wides  must  be 
much  better  suited  to  the  country  than  the  locally  evolved 
forms ! 

Inasmuch  as  all  families  and  genera,  of  reasonable  size,  agree 
in  arrangement,  some  mechanical  explanation  is  needed  to  ac- 
count for  the  mechanical  regularity,  and  the  only  reasonable  one 
suggested  is  age  (for  youth  cf.  pp.  89,  92).  Age  in  itself,  as  already 
explained,  does  nothing,  but  it  allows  time  for  the  active  factors 
in  distribution  to  produce  their  effect.  To  accept  age  as  a  mechani- 
cal explanation  simply  means  that  we  regard  these  factors  as 
producing  a  resultant  or  total  effect  which  goes  on  at  an  average 
speed,  so  that  age  becomes  a  measure  of  dispersal.  The  dispersal 
is  of  course  stopped  sooner  or  later  by  barriers,  physical  or  eco- 
logical, including  the  barrier  imposed  by  the  fact  that  a  species 
has  reached  the  extreme  of  temperature,  dryness,  etc.,  that  it 
can  withstand.  The  real  difference  between  the  old  view  of  dis- 
persal and  that  given  by  Age  and  Area  is  that  under  the  latter 
we  regard  almost  all  species  as  in  process  of  extending  their  areas 
of  dispersal,  not  some  as  extending  their  areas  and  as  many  or 
more  contracting  theirs  (cf.  footnote  on  p.  174).  The  exceptions 
to  this — the  real  relics — are  comparatively  few  and  far  between, 

1  When,  as  in  Britain,  there  are  no  endemics,  the  wides  diminish  upwards, 
but  show  considerable  numbers  in  the  most  widely  dispersed  classes,  owing 
to  accumulation  there  of  species  that  could  not  rise  higher. 


ch.  xxii]      GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION 


233 


forming  perhaps  1-2  per  cent,  of  the  total  of  species  of  very 
restricted  area. 

Very  many  arguments  against  the  old  position  have  been 
brought  up  above,  e.g.  on  pp.  58,  81,  88-94,  141,  164-6,  and  179. 
No  one  has  yet  attempted  to  reply  to  any  of  these,  which  have 
mostly  been  already  published,  but  the  position  is  obstinately 
held,  and  the  facts  brought  out  by  the  study  of  Tertiary  floras 
are  especially  appealed  to.  These  show  that  there  are  without 
doubt,  in  the  north  temperate  zone,  a  number  of  forms,  perhaps 
even  as  many  as  600  to  1000,  rather  widely  separated  from  their 
nearest  allies  (when  they  have  any  such),  and  probably  Tertiary 
relics ;  but  it  is  not  properly  realised  that  these  are  a  mere  trifle 
when  compared  to  the  local  species  that  occur  south  of  the  tropic 
of  Cancer.  Brazil  alone  has  about  12,000  endemic  species,  usually 
well  localised;  even  the  little  island  of  Ceylon  has  nearly  250 
species  of  the  most  localised  distribution  possible,  almost  half  of 
them  occurring  each  on  one  mountain  top  only,  and  it  has  nearly 
800  whose  area  does  not  exceed  4000  square  miles  (63  x  63  m.). 

In  view  of  the  facts  that  have  been  brought  up  above,  showing 
the  way  in  which  not  only  the  areas  occupied  by  endemics,  but 
those  occupied  by  other  species,  are  arranged  in  hollow  curves, 
and  showing  that  this  same  type  of  arrangement  also  occurs  in 
the  grouping  of  genera  and  families  into  sizes,  the  idea  of  relic 
nature,  or  of  special  local  adaptation  (except  in  so  far  as  this  is 
needful  for  all  species,  if  they  are  to  survive),  must,  it  seems  to 
me,  be  abandoned  for  the  great  majority  of  cases,  and  the 
mechanical  explanation  adopted  in  its  stead,  that  area  occupied 
goes  with  age.  Nearly  all  forms  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  in- 
creasing their  area,  and  only  a  few,  not  most,  as  moribund. 

That  this  view  is  in  all  probability  the  right  one  to  take  of 
the  phenomena  of  dispersal  is  shown  very  clearly  by  the  way  in 
which,  accepting  it,  predictions  as  to  distribution  may  be  made, 
and  have  as  yet  been  uniformly  successful  (in  almost  a  hundred 
instances).  Very  strong  evidence,  and  evidence  based  upon 
definite  facts,  not  upon  a  priori  reasoning,  is  now  required  to 
show  that  the  hypothesis  of  Age  and  Area  is  unsound. 

But  not  only  have  we  seen  reason  to  accept  Age  and  Area,  but 
also  to  accept  the  similarly  "mechanical"  hypothesis  of  Size  and 
Space  (Chapter  xn,  p.  113),  which  asserts  that  when  one  deals 
with  groups  of  allied  genera  the  size  of  a  genus  depends  largely 
upon  the  area  that  it  covers,  i.e.  ultimately  upon  its  age.  This 
follows  almost  of  itself  when  one  has  once  accepted  Age  and 


234  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  [pt.  ii 


Area  with  its  implication  that  all,  or  nearly  all,  species  are  in 
process  of  enlarging  their  area  of  dispersal,  not  some  enlarging 
and  some  contracting  it.  There  is  no  need  to  quote  the  evidence 
a  second  time  (cf.  Chapter  xn,  and  pp.  132,  164,  165,  174,  178, 
188,  190,  197). 

But  if  these  new  views  be  accepted,  it  is  clear  that  a  good 
many  changes  must  take  place  in  our  mode  of  viewing  the 
problems  of  distribution,  which  it  must  not  be  forgotten  have 
hitherto  been  regarded  as  insoluble.  One  of  the  chief  among 
these  is  the  problem  of  Invasions  of  plants  from  other  countries. 
If  it  be  supposed  that  the  dispersal  of  a  species  depends  simply 
upon  its  age  (representing  the  average  effect  of  the  active  factors) 
and  the  barriers  that  it  meets,  and  that  when  once  it  is  estab- 
lished in  any  place  it  will  rarely  die  out  there  except  as  the  result 
of  rather  sudden  or  violent  changes  of  conditions1,  and  further 
that  only  when  these  changes  attack  it  at  the  margin  of  its  area 
will  they  cause  any  diminution  of  total  area  "occupied,"  then 
it  is  clear  that  the  problem  of  invasions  can  be  studied  with  some 
hope  of  obtaining  results.  This  has  been  illustrated  in  Chapter 
viii,  which  deals  with  the  invasions  of  New  Zealand.  It  was  there 
shown  that  by  taking  the  places  at  which  the  maxima  of  species, 
endemic  and  wide,  occur,  one  may  get  a  clue  to  the  different 
invasions  that  have  reached  the  country,  and  the  directions  from 
which  they  came.  But  in  a  country  without  any  endemics  at  all, 
the  same  principles  may  be  applied  to  its  "  wides."  This  has  lately 
been  done  for  Britain  by  Mr  J.  R.  Matthew,  whose  work  (74) 
gives  great  promise  for  the  future  (and  cf.  p.  114).  Careful  account 
must  be  taken  of  the  conclusions  of  geology,  but  if  we  get  rid 
of  the  ideas  that  (proportionately)  many  species  are  necessarily 
dying  out,  and  that  most  have  reached  their  possible  limits  of 
dispersal,  we  can  study  invasion  and  spread  with  some  hope  of 
arriving  at  definite  results,  a  proceeding  which  has  been  im- 
possible under  the  older  views  of  these  matters. 

If  genera  give  rise  to  others  in  a  casual  way,  and  at  more  or 
less  casual  spots  (as  the  way  in  which  the  endemic  genera  in  any 
country  occur  at  scattered  points  would  seem  to  indicate),  then 
it  is  clear  that  in  any  part  of  the  world  one  must  expect  to  find 
a  casual  mixture  of  genera  of  different  sizes,  made  up  in  much 
the  same  way  as  is  the  entire  flora  of  the  world,  or  one  of  the 

1  E.g.  the  oncoming  of  excessive  cold,  heat,  dryness,  dampness ;  clearance, 
fire,  submergence,  etc. 


ch.  xxii]      GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  235 


families  of  which  it  is  composed  (fig.  on  p.  187).  A  very 
little  examination  of  local  floras  suffices  to  show  that  this  is 
indeed  the  case. 

If,  for  example,  one  take  the  flora  of  Britain  (37),  one  finds 
that  the  families,  by  numbers  of  genera,  are  arranged  in  regular 
order,  diminishing  as  the  number  of  genera  increases,  thus :  33/1 
(33  of  1  genus),  17/2,  9/3,  6/4,  3/5,  2/6,  2/7,  2/8,  1/9,  2/10,  and 
so  on  in  scattered  numbers  to  46.  The  genera  by  numbers  of 
their  species  in  Britain  are  223/1,  90/2,  35/3,  32/4,  16/5,  15/6, 
and  so  on.  Until  the  numbers  become  small  there  is  no  break  in 
the  regularity.  The  first  two  or  three  numbers  contain  the  great 
bulk  of  the  total ;  50  families  out  of  92  contain  one  or  two  genera, 
and  313  genera  out  of  512  contain  one  or  two  species.  This  will 
be  found  upon  examination  to  be  a  general  rule  for  all  floras.  In 
New  Zealand,  for  example,  one  finds  the  genera  (total  329)  to 
be  155/1,  54/2,  29/3,  17/4,  12/5,  11/6,  11/7,  5/8,  5/9,  4/10,  and  so 
on.  In  Ceylon  (total  1027)  one  finds  573/1,  176/2,  85/3,  49/4, 
36/5,  20/6,  19/7,  and  so  on.  In  Vol.  I  (only)  of  the  Flora  of 
British  India  one  finds  173/1,  70/2,  33/3,  19/5,  7/10,  and  so  on. 
All  form  markedly  hollow  curves,  with  the  great  bulk  of  the 
genera  in  the  first  two  figures,  so  that  there  is  a  very  steep  drop 
until  the  third  or  fourth  figure  is  reached,  and  then  a  gradual 
tapering  away  to  the  larger  genera.  The  larger  the  country,  on 
the  whole,  the  larger  the  size  of  the  biggest  genera. 

One  may  push  this  type  of  distribution,  shown  in  the  hollow 
curve,  into  yet  more  detail,  and  find  that  not  only  the  whole 
local  flora  of  a  country,  say,  for  example,  Britain,  shows  this 
curve,  but  also  portions  of  that  flora.  The  same  curve  is  shown 
by  the  Monocotyledons  and  Dicotyledons  of  the  British  flora, 
and  even  by  the  individual  families,  when  of  reasonable  size,  the 
grasses  for  instance  showing  24/1,  13/2,  1/3,  4/4,  1/5,  2/6,  and  8, 
11,  13.  The  line  is  wavy,  but  the  numbers  are  small,  and  there  is 
no  doubt  about  the  shape  of  the  curve. 

Or  one  may  take  portions  of  the  country  inhabited  by  more 
or  less  definite  associations,  or  groups  of  associations,  of  plants, 
and  find  the  same  thing.  Thus  if  we  take  Cambridgeshire,  the 
Wisbech  division  of  the  county  (fen),  and  the  very  local  Wicken 
fen,  from  Babington's  Flora  of  Cambridgeshire,  we  get  the  same 
type  of  curves  (cf.  curve  6  in  fig.  on  p.  237).  One  might 
expect  certain  genera  to  prove  unusually  suitable,  and  to  be 
disproportionately  represented,  but  this  does  not  seem  to  be  the 
case. 


236  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  [pt.ii 


In  the  Mixed  curves  on  p.  237,  the  fourth  curve  shows  the  whole 
flora  of  Ceylon  arranged  in  order,  beginning  with  573  genera  of 
one  species  each,  and  forming  the  usual  hollow  curve;  the  6th 
curve  shows  the  flora  of  Cambridgeshire  (Babington),  the  9th 
the  flora  of  Italy.  All  the  floras  so  far  examined  give  similar 
results,  and  the  same  is  the  case  in  local  faunas,  as  the  10th 
curve  (Birds  of  British  India)  and  the  15th  (British  Echinoderms) 
illustrate.  The  curve  is  exactly  like  the  curve  given  by  other 
combinations  of  animals  or  plants,  as  may  be  seen  by  comparing 
them  with  the  other  curves  in  the  same  figure,  e.g.  for  the  Com- 
positae  or  the  Chrysomelid  beetles,  the  endemics  of  islands,  or 
those  of  Brazil.  The  tails  in  the  figure  are  of  course  cut  short: 
their  length  depends  in  general  upon  the  size  of  the  flora;  the 
larger  it  is,  the  larger  size,  as  a  rule,  do  its  genera  reach  to. 

Or  if  one  take  the  flora  of  Ireland,  one  finds  it  to  be,  except 
for  a  few  Iberian  plants  in  the  south-west,  a  reduced  copy  of 
that  of  Britain,  and  the  way  in  which  age  alone  has  been  the 
chief  determinant  of  what  species  shall  occur  there  is  very 
strikingly  shown  by  the  following  figures,  extracted  from  Moore's 
Cybele  Hibernica. 

The  plants  of  Britain  in  the  Cybele  Britannica  are  grouped  in 
hundreds  according  to  degree  of  frequency  in  Britain  {i.e.  the 
number  of  Watson's  vice-counties  in  which  they  occur).  Of  the 
first  hundred  all  occur  in  Ireland,  of  the  second  and  third  hun- 
dreds all,  of  the  fourth  98,  fifth  97,  sixth  93,  seventh  84,  eighth 
74,  ninth  63,  tenth  66  (the  only  exception),  eleventh  43,  twelfth 
26,  thirteenth  16,  and  fourteenth  8,  a  steady  diminution  from 
top  to  bottom. 

But  if  size  also  depends  upon  age,  then  it  is  clear  that  in  any 
local  flora  the  genera,  which  as  a  rule  will  not  be  endemic,  should 
be  arranged  in  the  same  way.  The  genera  arriving  for  example 
in  Britain  will  not  all  arrive  simultaneously,  but  some  will  arrive 
sooner  than  others,  and  these  will  tend  to  be  the  larger  genera  of 
the  nearest  source  of  supply,  for  the  larger  genera  will  usually  be 
the  more  widespread.  The  ultimate  result  will  tend  to  be  that 
these  genera  will  not  only  arrive  first,  but  will  tend  to  be  repre- 
sented by  more  species,  so  that  one  will  expect  the  most  widely 
distributed  species  in  the  large  genera  {i.e.  large  for  the  country 
in  question,  being  represented  there  by  many  species)  to  be 
more  widely  dispersed  than  those  of  the  small.  This  we  have 
already  seen  to  be  the  case  in  the  most  striking  way  (p.  114). 

But  one  may  push  this  arithmetical  regularity  further  yet.  If 


ch.  xxii]      GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  237 


one  take  the  number  of  species  per  family  in  the  British  flora, 
one  finds  it  to  increase  steadily  with  the  number  of  genera ;  there 
are  no  breaks,  as  one  would  be  inclined  to  expect.  The  families 


ns 


Number  of  species  (or  size  of  area  .J 

Mixed  curves,  to  show  the  close  agreement  of  the  hollow  curves,  whether 
derived  from  families  of  plants  grouped  by  sizes  of  genera  (Compositae, 
Hymenomycetineae,  Simarubaceae),  families  of  animals  (Chrysomelidae, 
Amphipodous  Crustacea,  Lizards),  endemic  genera  grouped  by  sizes 
(Islands,  Brazil,  New  Caledonia),  local  floras  grouped  by  (local)  sizes  of 
genera  (Ceylon,  Cambridgeshire,  Italy),  local  faunas  (Birds  of  British 
India,  British  Echinoderms),  Tertiary  fossils  by  sizes  of  genera,  or 
Endemic  Compositae  of  the  Galapagos  by  area.  [By  courtesy  of  the 
Editor  of  Nature.] 

with  one  genus  show  an  average  of  2-2  species  per  family,  those 
with  two  an  average  of  8-3,  with  three  of  10-7,  with  four  of  12-3, 
with  five,  six  or  seven  genera  of  15,  with  eight,  nine,  or  ten  of 


238 


GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION         [pt.  ii 


40,  and  with  more  genera  than  ten  of  73.  The  numbers  increase 
regularly  with  the  number  of  genera. 

One  may  even  find,  here  as  elsewhere,  that  (as  a  general  rule) 
the  small  families,  which,  as  already  explained  under  Size  and 
Space  in  Chapter  xn,  will  tend  to  be  the  latest  arrivals,  have 
fewer  species  per  genus.  While  the  families  of  one  genus  in 
Britain  have  2-2  species  per  genus,  those  with  more  than  one 
genus  have  a  generic  average  of  3-3  species.  If  one  take  New 
Zealand,  one  finds  the  34  families  of  one  genus  to  average  2-8 
species  per  genus,  those  with  more  4-3. 

One  may  even  take  the  families  of  one  genus  in  a  country,  and 
find  that  they  are  arranged  in  arithmetical  order.  In  Britain 
there  are  20  of  these  with  one  species,  7  with  two,  and  six  more 
with  larger  numbers.  In  New  Zealand  there  are  18/1,  6/2,  3/3, 
and  seven  more.  And  this  rule  appears  to  hold  everywhere.  If 
one  take  the  British  families  of  two  genera,  one  finds  12  genera 
with  one  species,  7  with  two,  3  with  three,  and  12  others.  In 
Ceylon  the  bi-generic  families  show  26/1,  8/2,  3/3,  2/4,  1/5,  1/6 
and  9, 19,  and  20  species.  Everywhere  the  arrangement  of  genera 
by  species  follows  this  simple  arithmetical  rule,  forming  hollow 
curves.  Even  the  proportions  of  families  and  genera  of  different 
sizes  in  a  country  show  some  resemblance.  In  Britain  35  per  cent, 
of  the  families  are  monogeneric,  in  New  Zealand  37  per  cent.,  in 
Ceylon  44  per  cent.  In  larger  and  less  isolated  areas  the  pro- 
portions are  smaller,  and  in  the  world  they  are  only  18  per  cent. 

Another  matter  upon  which  it  becomes  needful  to  adopt  a 
somewhat  different  view-point  is  the  Struggle  for  Existence. 
We  have  seen  that  it  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  an  important 
determining  cause  in  evolution,  and  that  it  is  most  strenuous  for 
the  individuals  of  new  species  that  are  just  commencing.  If 
they  cannot  succeed  in  this  first  struggle,  they  will  simply  die 
out  and  leave  no  trace,  but  if  they  do  succeed,  they  may  be 
looked  upon  as  having  passed  through  the  sieve  of  natural 
selection,  and  being,  so  to  speak,  certified  as  fit  for  existence  in 
the  region  where  they  arose.  Until  they  have  spread  to  some  little 
distance,  however,  they  can  hardly  be  looked  upon  as  established, 
for  they  will  be  very  liable  to  sudden  extermination,  whether 
ideally  or  badly  equipped  for  life.  A  fire  on  the  tiny  summit  of 
Nillowe-kanda  in  Ceylon  (p.  55),  for  example,  would  probably 
exterminate  the  three  species  that  are  confined  to  it  (and  cf. 
Didymocarpus  and  Christisonia  on  p.  151).  Once  established  on 


ch.xxii]      GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  239 


a  reasonable  area,  only  individuals,  and  not  the  species,  will 
usually  be  affected  by  the  struggle  for  existence.  Only  very 
rarely  will  a  new  form  overtake  its  parent  over  the  whole  or  the 
greater  part  of  its  range,  and  destroy  it.  We  are  no  longer 
obliged  to  regard  a  new  species  as  coming  into  existence  at  the 
expense  of  its  ancestors. 

Another  important  general  result  of  the  work  upon  Age  and 
Area  outlined  above  is  to  show  that  in  any  given  country,  and 
therefore  in  the  world  in  general,  the  "wides,"  which  occupy 
the  largest  areas  (on  the  average),  are  the  oldest  forms,  i.e.  that 
they  were  the  first  to  appear.  The  facts  set  forth  showing  the 
distribution  of  the  various  classes  are  indisputable  at  the  stage 
that  the  work  has  now  reached,  and  they  are  wonderfully  con- 
cordant from  one  country  to  another.  No  one  has  attempted  to 
contradict  them,  but  there  has  been  much  a  priori  reasoning  to 
the  effect  that  this  or  that  has  not  been  allowed  for,  that  it  is 
obvious  that  so-and-so  must  produce  great  effects,  etc.  None  of 
this  reasoning,  however,  has  attempted  to  explain  the  facts, 
which  are  so  striking  and  so  consistent  that  they  must  have  an 
explanation,  and  that  a  mechanical  one,  on  account  of  their 
mechanical  regularity.  The  only  reasonable  one  is,  as  frequently 
pointed  out,  that  the  factors  acting  upon  dispersal  produce  in 
the  long  run  a  very  uniform  effect,  so  that  age  forms  a  measure 
of  dispersal. 

But  if  this  be  so,  there  is  no  possible  and  reasonable  explana- 
tion of  the  endemics,  which  in  general  are  younger  than  the 
wides,  and  occur  beside  or  near  them,  except  that  they  are 
descended  from  the  wides,  directly  or  through  other  endemics. 
But  when  a  new  endemic  arises  in  this  way,  unless  it  is  much 
better  suited  to  a  variety  of  conditions  than  its  parent,  it  will 
never  overtake  the  latter,  and  we  have  seen  that  there  is  little 
reason  to  suppose  a  combat  a  Voutrance  between  them.  The 
parent  will  most  often,  probably,  survive  beside  the  child.  At 
times  it  is  possible  that  it  may  survive  only  beyond  it;  but  the 
distribution,  for  example,  of  the  Ranunculi  of  New  Zealand, 
where  the  parental  wides  are  just  as  common  in  the  region  where 
the  crowd  of  endemics  occurs,  as  in  the  far  north  where  there  are 
none  (cf.  map  on  p.  156),  gives  little  evidence  in  favour  of  this 
latter  supposition.  In  my  various  papers  I  have  assumed  that 
the  wides  give  rise  to  the  endemics,  and  have  made  nearly  a 
hundred  predictions  upon  this  basis.  As  these  predictions  have 


240  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  [pt.  ii 


always  been  successful,  the  assumption  is  therefore  probably- 
correct. 

The  endemics,  then,  of  course  with  a  good  many  exceptions, 
are  in  general  to  be  regarded  as  derived  from  the  wides  that 
occur  among  them.  In  many  cases,  as  we  have  seen,  and  those 
most  often  cases  in  which  there  is  reason  to  suspect  greater  age 
than  usual,  a  genus  in  any  single  country  may  have  only  endemic 
species  (cf.  pp.  95,  155),  sometimes  only  one,  sometimes  more, 
and  in  these  cases  we  may  suppose  some  mutation,  perhaps  at 
once,  in  the  first  wide  to  arrive,  or  perhaps  subsequently  and 
en  masse. 

But  now,  if,  in  general,  the  appearance  of  a  new  form  does  not 
imply,  as  it  did  under  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  the  dis- 
appearance of  its  ancestral  forms,  there  seems  little  reason  why 
both  should  not  survive  upon  the  earth,  or,  in  other  words,  why 
the  whole,  or  great  part,  of  the  tree  of  a  family  or  genus  should 
not  survive.  I  have  already  worked  out  this  question  in  regard 
to  the  Dilleniaceae  (120),  suggesting  that  Tetracera,  a  wide- 
spread and  very  simple  genus,  may  have  been  the  ancestral 
form  from  which  the  family  was  derived.  In  the  same  way  the 
Polemoniaceae  (p.  171)  might  have  been  derived  from  Pole- 
monium,  the  Menispermaceae  from  Cocculus  and  Cissampelos, 
whilst  in  Cissampelos  itself,  C.  Pareira  (p.  159)  might  have  been 
the  parent  of  the  other  species,  directly  or  indirectly.  In  Doona 
(p.  152),  D.  zeylanica  may  in  the  same  way  be  looked  upon  as  the 
probable  parent,  direct  or  indirect,  of  the  other  species,  and 
so  on. 

It  is  clear  that  when  once  the  general  principle  of  Age  and 
Area  is  established — and  already  the  evidence  in  its  favour  is 
very  strong — it  may  be  called  into  service  in  the  study  of 
phylogeny.  But  if  it  be  accepted,  it  is  clear  that  Guppy's 
Theory  of  Differentiation  (p.  221)  must  almost  necessarily  be 
accepted  also.  This  subject  will  be  dealt  with  in  a  later  book 
upon  Evolution  generally,  and  can  only  be  mentioned  here. 

Just  as  the  endemics  of  small  area  are  to  be  looked  upon  as 
descended  from  species  of  larger  area,  so  also  we  have  seen  that 
the  monotypic  genera  are  to  be  looked  upon  in  general  as 
descended  from  larger  genera.  The  way  in  which  the  numbers  of 
genera,  not  only  in  the  total,  but  family  by  family,  are  arranged 
(cf.  p.  187)  in  hollow  curves,  with  a  great  preponderance  of  mono- 
types and  steady  decrease  to  a  few  of  large  numbers,  shows  that 


ch.  xxii]      GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION 


241 


there  is  a  definite  mechanical  relationship  between  them.  If  we 
imagine  existing  genera  to  give  rise  to  new  genera,  as  they  give 
rise  to  new  species,  by  mutations  at  intervals,  we  shall  then 
expect  that  genera  as  a  whole  will  follow  the  law  of  compound 
interest.  But  if  this  be  the  case,  then  it  follows  that  whilst  the 
number  of  genera  plotted  to  the  numbers  of  species  that  they 
contain  will  give  a  hollow  curve  like  those  on  p.  237,  the  loga- 
rithm of  the  number  of  genera  plotted  to  the  logarithm  of  the 
numbers  of  species  that  they  contain  will  give  a  straight  line1. 

Number  of  species 


0        2        4       -6       -8       10      1-2      14      16      18      20      22  24 

log  (N9  of  species) 


Logarithm  curve  for  all  Flowering  Plants  (from  Willis,  Dictionary). 
(By  courtesy  of  the  Editor  of  Nature.) 

That  this  is  in  fact  very  close  to  the  actual  truth  when  con- 
siderable numbers  are  dealt  with  is  shown  by  the  figures  on 
pp.  241,  242,  which  give  the  logarithmic  curves  for  all  flowering 
plants,  for  the  Rubiaceae,  and  for  the  Chrysomelid  beetles.  This 
subject  must  also  be  left  for  further  consideration  in  a  later  book. 
Suffice  it  to  say  for  the  present  that  the  evidence  is  decidedly  in 
favour  of  the  origin  of  new  species  and  genera  from  old  by 
mutation,  which  in  the  long  run  has  followed  a  very  definite 

1  For  this  deduction  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  Mr  G.  Udny  Yule, 
C.B.E.,  F.R.S. 


W.A. 


16 


242  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  [pt.  ii 


N2  of  species 

10  30  ioo 


•  2  -4  6  -8  10  1-2         1-4         16  18  2 

log  (N?  of  species) 

Logarithm  curve  for  Rubiaceae  (from  Willis,  Dictionary). 

(By  courtesy  of  the  Editor  of  Nature.) 


•2  4     "     -6  8  10  1-2     1     14    '      16  18 

log  (Number  of  species) 
5  B  10   r       7     20  30 

Number  of  species 

Logarithm  curve  for  Chrysomelid  beetles  (from  old  Catalogue). 
(By  courtesy  of  the  Editor  of  Nature.) 


2 

100 


ch.  xxii]     GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  243 


plan,  new  mutations  being  cast  on  the  average  at  a  fairly  definite 
speed,  differing  of  course  for  different  classes  of  animals  and 
plants. 

The  acceptance  of  the  view  that  B  is  the  direct  descendant  of 
A,  another  living  species,  instead  of  both  being  the  descendants 
of  some  hypothetical  a  (an  ancestor  which  by  the  way  has  never 
been  found  in  the  fossil  state,  so  far  as  I  know,  though  on  the 
current  theory  there  should  be  hundreds  of  thousands  of  them) 
will  make  the  work  of  tracing  phylogenies  easier,  though  if 
mutations  may  be  of  large  size,  this  will  not  always  be  easy. 

Except  in  cases  where  we  have  geological  evidence  of  former 
greater  spread,  when  of  course  the  "fossil"  area  must  be  added 
to  that  occupied  by  the  living  plants,  we  may  leave  out  of 
account  the  more  local  genera  in  tracing  phylogenies,  and  it  is 
clear  that  species  or  genera  that  are  widely  separated  in  space, 
and  in  whose  case  no  fossils  can  be  found  filling  up  the  spacial 
gap,  cannot,  without  great  risk  of  error,  be  looked  upon  as 
necessarily  closely  related,  however  much  alike  they  may  be 
(cf.  130,  p.  346).  Their  resemblance  may  be  due  to  parallel 
mutation,  and  their  ancestors  may  have  been  more  widely 
separated  than  they  themselves  are. 

In  the  same  way,  no  fossil  that  is  not  of  wide  dispersal  can 
safely  be  regarded  as  an  immediate  ancestor  for  anything  that 
is  of  equal  or  nearly  equal  dispersal,  and  still  less  if  it  be  of 
greater.  Nor  must  widely  separated  fossils  be  regarded  as  nearly 
related  without  links.  Nor  is  it  safe  to  regard  two  layers  as  of 
the  same  horizon  without  a  number  of  fossils  in  common;  and 
so  on. 

Age  and  Area  also  throws  light  upon  the  question  of  Floral 
Regions,  which  are  usually  defined  as  marked  out  by  containing 
large  numbers  and  proportions  of  endemic  forms,  and  as  being 
the  better  marked  and  more  natural  the  higher  the  rank  of  these. 
Great  difficulty  has  always  been  encountered  in  defining  such 
regions;  and  to  make  them  agree  with  those  of  the  zoologists  is 
usually  regarded  as  hopeless.  In  the  accepted  grouping  of  them, 
the  southern  regions  are  very  much  smaller  than  the  northern, 
owing  to  the  fact  that  endemics  increase  in  number  and  propor- 
tion towards  the  south  (p.  149).  Thus  south-west  South  Africa 
is  regarded  as  a  region  equivalent  to  the  Mediterranean  region, 
which  includes  all  the  land  around  that  sea  as  far  as  Beluchistan; 
and  even  to  the  whole  of  tropical  America,  including  the  West 

16—2 


244  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  [pt.ii 


Indies,  a  region  which  contains  colossal  numbers  of  endemic 
forms.  Other  regions  of  absurdly  small  size  are  the  Galapagos, 
Juan  Fernandez,  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  Kerguelen,  etc. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  so  much  energy  and  labour 
has  been  applied  to  the  problem  of  differentiating  floral  regions, 
for  one  fails  to  perceive  any  object  which  is  gained  by  defining 
them,  for  example,  any  progress  in  the  study  of  geographical 
distribution.  The  term  floral  region  may,  it  seems  to  us,  be  added 
to  "constitution"  in  the  extract  from  Huxley  given  on  p.  231, 
as  one  of  the  verbal  anodynes  by  which  the  discomfort  of  igno- 
rance is  dulled.  When  we  say  that  Lactoris  fernandeziana  (which 
is  now  usually  regarded  as  of  family  rank)  is  characteristic  of 
the  Juan  Fernandez  floral  region,  it  sounds  as  if  we  knew  more 
about  it  than  if  we  simply  stated  the  bald  truth,  that  it  occurs 
upon  the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez.  In  plain  fact  it  is  no  more 
specially  characteristic  of  that  island  than  Centaurodendron 
dracaenoides,  an  endemic  genus  of  Compositae,  or  Spergularia 
rubra,  which  is  of  enormously  wide  distribution. 

What  it  really  comes  to  is  that  as,  on  the  whole,  in  recent  periods 
of  the  world's  history,  migration  of  plants  has  been  largely 
southwards  (owing  to  the  cooling  of  the  north),  and  the  subse- 
quent northward  migration  has  not  yet  had  time  to  show  very 
obvious  results,  the  southern  regions  contain  greater  proportions 
of  endemics.  In  the  same  way,  the  islands  being  at  the  edge  of 
the  dispersal  that  has  gone  on,  where  the  oldest  and  most 
variable  (p.  218)  types  occur,  and  being  also  isolated,  show  great 
numbers  of  them.  But,  as  pointed  out  on  p.  170,  it  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  the  larger  regions  of  the  world  have  greater  pro- 
portions than  the  small. 

Very  little  consideration  is  required  to  show  that  these  divisions 
or  floral  regions  are  very  arbitrary,  but  very  little  trial  of  the 
actual  facts  is  needed  to  prove  to  an  enquirer  that  it  is  a  matter 
of  extraordinary  difficulty  to  improve  upon  them.  The  islands, 
by  being  clearly  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  are  evident 
divisions  to  make,  but  to  divide  the  continents,  except  to  cut 
off  a  few  such  obvious  regions  as  South  Africa  or  West  Australia, 
is  quite  a  different  matter. 

The  one  thing  that  comes  clearly  out  is  that  endemics  are  not 
a  good  test  to  apply,  and  with  the  new  light  that  is  thrown  above 
upon  the  question  of  endemism,  it  would  seem  probable  that 
this  test  will  no  longer  be  used.  It  gives  a  much  greater  pro- 
portionate value  to  small  areas  in  the  south  or  upon  islands  than 


ch.  xxii]     GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  245 


they  have  any  real  right  to  possess.  Of  the  32  floral  regions 
accepted  in  the  latest  work,  9  are  upon  islands,  and  7  upon  small 
southern  areas,  and  12  in  all  are  in  the  south,  against  only  14  for 
the  very  much  larger  land  masses  of  the  north. 

The  work  upon  Age  and  Area  described  above  makes  it  much 
more  clear  why  these  difficulties  arise.  No  two  genera,  in  all 
likelihood,  will  spread  about  the  world  at  the  same  rate,  so  that 
it  is  evident  that  what  may  be  a  marked  floral  region  for  one 
genus  of  plants  (or  animals)  will  not  be  so  for  another,  unless  the 
region  has  been  well  isolated  for  a  long  time,  when  it  will,  as  in 
the  case  of  many  islands,  contain  many  endemics  of  many 
different  families.  The  whole  subject  requires  a  complete  re- 
consideration in  the  light  of  the  results  provided  by  Age  and 
Area,  before  it  will  be  safe  to  try  to  divide  up  the  world  in  this 
manner.  All  that  can  be  safely  said  at  present  is  that  regions 
with  great  numbers  of  endemics  in  many  families  can  be  regarded 
as  regions  that  have  existed  for  a  long  time,  perhaps  in  compara- 
tive isolation. 

Another  thing  that  seems  indicated  by  the  work  outlined  above 
is  that  in  general  the  floras  of  the  world,  including  those  of  most 
of  the  islands,  must  have  reached  their  present  positions  over 
land  or  narrow  straits  which  would  not  seriously  interfere  with 
the  passage  of  species.  The  arithmetical,  systematic,  and  other 
relationships  between  them,  are  too  complex,  and  too  evident, 
to  have  resulted  from  transport  over  wide  stretches  of  sea,  a 
process  which  would  sift  out  a  very  few  from  a  comparatively 
large  flora. 

A  way  in  which  Age  and  Area  may  prove  incidentally  useful 
has  been  indicated  above,  and  in  a  number  of  papers  (126-134). 
For  example,  in  New  Zealand  (127,  p.  452)  a  number  of  widely 
distributed  species,  many  more  than  would  be  expected,  were 
found  in  the  class  of  smallest  area.  On  examination,  they  proved 
to  be,  so  to  speak,  the  leavings  of  the  flora.  Twelve  of  21  were 
Monocotyledons,  four  were  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Kaitaia, 
and  so  on ;  it  was  clear  that  many  of  them,  though  they  perhaps 
appeared  to  be  really  native,  were  in  fact  introductions  to 
the  country.  Pomaderris  apetala  proved  to  be  a  very  marked 
exception  among  the  plants  of  the  Chathams  in  regard  to  its 
distribution  in  New  Zealand  (129,  p.  332),  and  therefore  was 
probably  an  introduction.  The  doubtful  natives  of  Jamaica  were 


246       GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION    [pt.  ii,  ch.  xxii 


picked  out  in  the  same  way,  through  showing  irregularities  in 
regard  to  their  distribution,  judged  by  Age  and  Area  (130, 
p.  337),  and  so  on.  Whenever  a  species  is  found  whose  distribu- 
tion is  markedly  different  from  what  one  would  expect  under 
this  hypothesis,  that  species  is  nearly  always  found  to  be  an 
introduction,  or  of  doubtful  identification,  or  in  some  way 
irregular. 

Sufficient  has  been  said  in  Chapter  xvm  about  the  Hollow 
Curve  of  Distribution,  and  both  this  subject  and  that  of  Evolu- 
tion will  be  treated  of  in  fuller  detail  in  a  later  book.  It  is  clear 
that  Age  and  Area  becomes  simply  a  corollary  of  the  larger  law 
that  was  indicated  in  what  was  said  about  Evolution. 

There  are  many  other  directions  in  which  Age  and  Area  may 
prove  to  be  a  very  useful  hypothesis  in  dealing  with  problems 
of  distribution,  but  in  the  present  somewhat  controversial  stage 
in  which  the  matter  remains,  it  is  better  not  to  attempt  too 
closely  to  define,  or  even  to  outline,  new  positions.  The  fact 
remains  that  Age  and  Area  (with  its  subsidiary  hypothesis  of 
Size  and  Space)  is  strongly  supported  by  very  numerous  facts 
which  demand  an  explanation  that  is  largely  mechanical,  and 
that  the  more  inasmuch  as  the  same  type  of  facts  is  exhibited 
both  by  animals  and  by  plants.  It  is  also  clear  that  in  dealing 
with  questions  of  Geographical  Botany,  the  statistical  method, 
which  has  remained  almost  untouched  since  Hooker  long  ago 
(p.  104)  pointed  out  its  usefulness,  will  probably  play  an 
important  part. 


LIST  OF  LITERATURE 


(1)  Andrews,  E.  C.  The  Development  and  Distribution  of  the  Legu- 

minosae.  Proc.  R.  S.,  N.S.W.,  xlviii,  1914.  p.  333. 

(2)    The  Development  of  the  Myrtaceae.  Proc.  Linn.  Soc,  N.S.W., 

xxxvm,  1913,  p.  529. 

(3)  Arber,  A.  On  the  Law  of  Age  and  Area,  in  relation  to  the  extinction 

of  Species.  Ann.  of  Bot.  xxxiii,  1919,  p.  211. 

(4)    Water  Plants.  Cambridge,  1920. 

(5)  Bartlett,  H.  H.  Mass  Mutation.  Bot.  Gaz.  lx,  1915,  p.  425,  and 

Amer.  Nat.  xxxix,  1915,  p.  129. 

(6)  Bateson,  W.  Presidential  Address,  Brit.  Assoc.,  Australia,  1914. 

(7)  Bentham,  G.  Notes  on  the  Classification,  History  and  Geographical 

Distribution  of  the  Compositae.  Linn.  Soc.  Jl.  xm,  1873,  p.  335. 

(8)  Bergson,  H.  Creative  Evolution  (Engl,  trans.).  London,  1914. 

(9)  Berry,  E.  W.  A  Note  on  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis.  Science,  xlvi, 

1917,  p.  539. 

(10)  Beyer,  B.    ...Ueberpflanzen  ausserhalb  der  Tropen.    Abh.  B.  V. 

Brandenb.  xxxvn,  p.  105. 

(11)  Black,  J.  M.  The  Naturalised  Flora  of  South  Australia.  Adelaide, 

1909. 

(12)  Blaringhem,  L.  et  Viguier,  P.    Une  nouvelle  espece... Capsella 

Viguieri...nee  par  mutation.  Comptes  Rendus,  cl,  1910,  p.  988. 

(13)  Breakwell.  E.  The  Gramineae  and  the  Age  and  Area  hypothesis. 

Proc.  Linn.  Soc,  N.S.W.,  xui,  1917,  p.  303. 

(14)  Burtt-Davy,  J.  Alien  Plants. .  .Transvaal.  Rep.  S.  Afr.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci. 

1904,  p.  252. 

(15)  Chandler,  M.  E.  J.  The  arctic  Flora  of  the  Cam  Valley  at  Barnwell, 

Cambridge.  Q.  J.  G.  S.  lxxvii,  1921. 

(16)  Clements,  F.  E.  Plant  Succession.  Washington,  1916. 

(17)  Copeland,  E.  B.  Natural  Selection  and  the  Dispersal  of  Species. 

Phil.  Jl.  Sci.  xi,  1916,  p.  147. 

(18)    The  Comparative  Ecology  of  the  San  Bamon  Polypodiaceae. 

Ibid,  ii,  1907,  p.  1. 

(19)  Cockayne,  L.   Observations  concerning  Evolution....  Trans.  N.  Z. 

Inst,  xliv,  1911,  p.  1. 

(20)  Coulter,  M.  C.  Beviews  in  Bot.  Gaz.  lxiit,  1917,  p.  419,  and  lxv, 

1918,  p.  116. 

(21)  Darw  in,  C.  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication,  2nd  ed.  London, 

1890. 

(22)    Life  and  Letters,  Ed.  by  F.  Darwin.  London,  1888. 

(23)    Origin  of  Species.  6th  ed.  London,  1872. 

(24)  De  Candolle,  A.  Geographic  Botanique.  Geneva,  1855. 

(25)  De  Candolle,  C.  Monographiae  Phanerogamarum.  Paris,  1878. 

(26)  deVries,H.  Die  endemische  Pflanzen  von  Ceylon  und  die  mutierende 

Oenotheren.  Biol.  Centr.  xxxvi,  1916,  p.  1. 

(27)    L'evolution  des  etres  organises  par  sautes  brusques.  Scientia, 

xix,  1916,  No.  1. 

(28)    The  Distribution  of  endemic  spp.  in  New  Zealand.  Science,  xlv, 

1917,  p.  641. 

(29)    The  Mutation  Theory  (Engl,  trans.).  London,  1910. 


248  LIST  OF  LITERATURE 

(30)  de  Vries,  H.  The  Origin  by  Mutation  of  the  endemic  Plants  of 

Ceylon.  Science,  xliii,  1916,  p.  785. 

(31)    The  relative  age  of  endemic  species.  Ibid,  xlvii,  1918,  p.  629. 

(32)    Van  Amoebe  tot  Mensch  (with  Engl,  trans.).  Utrecht,  1918. 


(33)  Drude,  O.  Manuel  de  Geographic  Botanique  (French  trans.).  Paris, 

1897. 

(34)  Ernst,  A.  The  new  Flora  of  the  Volcanic  Island  of  Krakatau  (Engl. 

trans.).  Cambridge,  1908. 

(35)  Ewart,  A.  J.  The  Weeds... of  Victoria.  Melbourne,  1909. 

(36)  Farrow,  E.  P.  The  Ecology  of  Breckland.  Journ.  Ecol.  1916,  et  seq. 

(effects  of  rabbits,  1917,  p.  1). 

(37)  Floras  employed  include  Babington's  Cambridgeshire,  Bolle's  Canaries, 

Britton  and  Millspaugh's  Bahamas,  Cheeseman's  New  Zealand, 
Christ's  Canaries,  Engler's  Naturlichen  Pflanzenfamilien  and 
Pflanzenreich,  Hillebrand's  Hawaiian  Islands,  Hooker's  British 
India,  London  Catalogue,  8th  ed.,  McNeill's  Colonsay,  Praeger's 
Clare  Island,  Reiche's  Chile,  Spence's  Orkneys,  Thwaites'  and 
Trimen's  Ceylon,  and  others. 

(38)  Gates,  F.  C.  The  revegetation  of  Taal  volcano.  Plant  World,  xx, 

1917,  p.  195. 

(39)  Gates,  R.  R.  The  Mutation  Factor  in  Evolution.  London,  1915. 

(40)  Grisebach,  A.  H.  R.  Die  Vegetation  der  Erde.  2  Aufl.  Leipzig,  1884. 

(41)  Guppy,  H.  B.  America's  Contribution  to  the  Story  of  the  Plant  World. 

Journ.  Ecol.  ix,  1921,  p.  90. 

(42)    Distribution  of  Plants  and  Animals.  Peterm.  Mitt.  1910,  Heft  2. 

(43)    Fossil  Botany  in  the  Western  World.  Amer.  Jl.  Sci.  xlix,  1920, 

p.  372. 

(44)    Observations  of  a  Naturalist  in  the  Pacific.  London,  1906. 

(45)    Plant  Distribution  from  an  old  Standpoint.  Trans.  Vict.  Inst., 

April,  1907. 

(46)    Plant  Distribution  from  the  Standpoint  of  an  Idealist.  Linn. 

Soc.  Journ.  xliv,  1919,  p.  439. 

(47)    Plants,  Seeds,  and  Currents  in  the  West  Indies  and  Azores. 

London, 1917. 

(48)    The  Dispersal  of  Plants  as  illustrated  by... Keeling  or  Cocos 

Islands.  Vict.  Inst.  1890. 

(49)    The  Island  and  the  Continent.  Journ.  Ecol.  vn,  1919,  p.  1. 

(50)    The  Testimony  of  the  Endemic  Species  of  the  Canary  Islands 

in  favour  of  the  Age  and  Area  Theory  of  Willis.  Ann.  of  Bot. 
xxxv,  1921,  p.  513. 

(51)  Hemsley,  W.  B.  In  Biologia  Centrali- Americana,  London,  1879-88. 

(52)    Insular  Floras.  Sci.  Progr.  1894,  p.  27. 

(53)    Insular  Floras  in  Rep.  Bot.  Challenger  Exp.  I,  1885. 

(54)  Hildebrand,  F.  Die  V erbreitungsmittel  der  Pfianzen.  Leipzig,  1873. 

(55)  Hooker,  J.  D.    Botany  of  the  voyage...'''' Erebus'1''  and  "Terror." 

(a)  II.  Flora  Nov.  Zeal.  1853;  (b)  III.  Flora  Tasmanieae,  1860. 

(56)    In  Biologia  Centr.-Amer.  p.  lxii. 

(57)    Life  and  Letters.  London,  1918. 

(58)    Outlines  of  the  Distribution  of  Arctic  Plants.  Trans.  Linn.  Soc. 

xxin,  1860,  p.  251. 

(59)  Huxley,  T.  H,  The  Gentians....  Journ.  Linn.  Soc.  xxiv,  1888,  p.  101. 

(60)  Jessen,  Knud.  Moserundersogelser  i  det  nordostlige  Sjaelland.  Dan- 

marks  geol.  undersog.  n  Raekke,  no.  34. 

(61)  Johannsen,  W.  Elemente  der  exacten  Erblichkeitslehre  (Germ,  trans.). 

Jena, 1909. 


LIST  OF  LITERATURE 


249 


(62)  Jordan,  A.  Diagnoses  cTesp&ces  nouvelles  ou  meconnues.  Paris,  1864. 

(63)  Kryshtofovich,  A.  A  new  fossil  Palm  and  some  other  Plants  of  the 

Tertiary  Flora  of  Japan.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Tokyo,  xxvn,  1920. 

(64)  Leavitt,  R.  G.   The  Geographical  Distribution  of  nearly  related 

Species.  Amer.  Nat.  xli,  1907,  p.  207. 

(65)  Lotsy,  J.  P.  Die  endem.  Pflanzen  von  Ceylon  und  die  Mutations- 

hypothese.  Biol.  Centr.  xxxvi,  1916,  p.  207. 

(66)    Evolution  by  means  of  Hybridisation.  The  Hague,  1916. 

(67)    On  the  Origin  of  Species.  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  1914,  p.  73. 

(68)  Lyell,  Sir  C.  Antiquity  of  Man.  4th  ed.  London,  1873. 

(69)    Principles  of  Geology.  9th  ed.  London,  1853. 

(70)  MacDougall,  D.  T.  Review  of  Age  and  Area.  Plant  World,  1916, 

p.  79. 

(71)  MacLeod,  J.  List  of  literature  relating  to  seed-dispersal.  Bot.Jahrb. 

Gent.  in.  1891,  p.  192.  And  cf.  Small,  no.  103,  p.  182. 

(72)  Marr,  J.  E.  An  arctic  Flora  in  Pleistocene  beds,  Barnwell,  Cambridge. 

Geol.  Mag.  1916. 

(73)  Massee,  G.  A  revision  of...Cordyceps.  Ann.  of  Bot.  ix,  1895,  p.  1. 

(74)  Matthew,  J.  R.  The  Distribution  of  certain  elements  in  the  British 

Flora.  Brit.  Assoc.  1921 ;  abstract  in  Journ.  Bot.  Jan.  1922,  p.  26. 

(75)  Millspaugh,  C.  F.  Flora  of  the  Alacran  shoal.  Publ.  Field  Mus., 

Bot.  ii,  1916,  p.  421. 

(76)  Morgan,  T.  H.  Contr.  to  the  Genetics  of  Drosophila.  Washington,  1919. 

(77)    Evolution  and  Adaptation.  New  York,  1903. 

(78)  Nathorst,  A.  G.  Contr.  a  la  Flore  Fossile  du  Japon.  Acad.  Roy.  du 

Sc.  Su&de.  Stockholm,  1883. 

(79)    Zurfossilen  Flora  Japons.  Palaeont.  Abh.  1,  part  3.  Berlin,  1888. 

(80)  Oswald,  F.  The  Sudden  Origin  of  new  Types.  Sci.  Progr.  xix,  1911, 

p.  396. 

(81)  Pearson,  H.  H.  W.  The  Botany  of  the  Ceylon  Patanas.  Linn.  Soc. 

Journ.  xxxiv,  1900,  p.  300. 

(82)  Reid,  C.  The  Plants  of  the  late  glacial  deposits  of  the  Lea  Valley. 

Q.  J.  G.  S.  lxxi,  1916. 

(83)  Reid,  C.  and  E.  M.  The  pre-glacial  Flora  of  Britain.  Journ.  Linn. 

Soc.  xxxvm,  1908. 

(84)    The  fossil  Flora  of  Tegelen-sur-Meuse.  Verh.  k.  Akad.  Wetens., 

Amsterdam,  xxn,  no.  6,  1907.  • 

(85)    A  further  investigation  of  the  fossil  Flora  of  Tegelen-sur-Meuse. 

Ibid.  Versl.  Afd.  Natuurk.  pt.  xix,  1910. 

(86)    The  Pliocene  Floras  of  the  Dutch-Prussian  border.  Med.  Rijks- 

opsporing  v.  Delfstoffen,  No.  6,  1915. 

(87)  Reid,  E.  M.  Two  pre-glacial  Floras  from  Castle  Eden.  Q.  J.  G.  S. 

lxxvi,  1920. 

(88)    A  comparative  review  of  Pliocene  Floras.  Ibid. 

(89)    Rech.  sur  quelques  graines  Pliocenes  du  Pont-de-Gail  (Cantal). 

Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  xx,  1920. 

(90)  Ridley,  H.  N.  Endemism  and  the  Mutation  Theory.  Ann.  of  Bot. 

xxx,  1916,  p.  551. 

(91)    On  the  Dispersal  of  Seeds  by  Mammals.  Journ.  Straits  As.  Soc. 

1894. 

(92)    On  the  Dispersal  of  Seeds  by  Wind.  Ann.  of  Bot.  xix,  1905, 

p.  351. 

(93)  Samuelsson,  G.  Ueb.  d.  Verbreitung  ein.  endem.  Pflanzen.  Ark.  f. 

Bot.  Stockholm,  ix,  1910,  No.  12. 

(94)  Seward,  A.  C.  Darwin  and  Modern  Science.  Cambridge,  1909. 


16—5 


250 


LIST  OF  LITERATURE 


95)  Sinnott,  E.  W.  Comparative  Rapidity  of  Evolution  in  various  Plant 

Types.  Amer.  Nat.  i,  1916,  p.  466. 

96)    The  Age  and  Area  Hypothesis  and  the  Problem  of  Endemism. 

Ann.  ofBot.  xxxi,  1917,  p.  209. 

97)    The  Age  and  Area  Hypothesis  of  Willis.  Science,  xlvi,  1917, 

p.  457. 

^98)  Sinnott,  E.  W.  and  Bailey,  I.  W.  Foliar  Evidence  as  to  the  Ancestry 
and  Climatic  Environment  of  the  Angiosperms.  Amer.  Journ. 
Bot.  ii,  1915,  p.  1. 

99)      The  Origin  and  Dispersal  of  Herbaceous  Angiosperms. 

Ann.  of  Bot.  xxvm,  1914,  p.  547. 

100)  Small,  J.  Geographical  Distribution  of  the  Compositae.  Rep.  Brit. 

Assoc.  1916,  p.  509. 

101)    Modern  Theories  of  Evolution.  Pharm.  Jpurn.  xcvn,  1916, 

p.  612;  xcvm,  1917,  p.  3. 

102)    The  Age  and  Area  Law.  Science  Progr.  xn,  1918,  p.  439. 

103)    The  Origin  and  Development  of  the  Compositae.  New  Phytol. 

Repr.  xi.  London,  1919.  Cf.  lists  of  literature  on  pp.  182  (seed 
dispersal),  214  (geographical  distribution),  and  242  (evolution). 

104)  Solms-Laubach,  Graf  zu.   Cruciferen-Studien.  Capsella  Heegeri. 

Bot.  Zeit.  1900,  p.  167. 

105)  Taylor,  N.  Endemism  in  the  Bahama  Flora.  Ann.  of  Bot.  xxxv, 

1921,  p.  523. 

106)    Endemism  in  the  Flora  of  the  Vicinity  of  New  York.  Torreya, 

xvi,  1916,  p.  18. 

107)  Thellung,  A.  Flore  Adventive  de  Montpellier.  Cherbourg,  1912. 

108)  Townsend,  F.  Contr.... Flora... Scilly  Is.  Journ.  Bot.  n,  1864,  p.  102. 

109)  Treub,  M.  Notice  sur  la  nouv.  Flore  de  Krakatau.  Ann.  Builenz. 

vii,  1888. 

110)  Wallace,  A.  R.  Darwinism.  London,  1890. 

111)    Island  Life.  2nd  ed.  London,  1892. 

112)  Went,  F.  A.  F.  C.  Ueb.  Zwecklosigkeit  in  der  lebenden  Natur.  Biol. 

Centr.  xxvn,  1907,  p.  257. 

113)  Willis,  J.  C.  A  Dictionary  of  the  Flowering  Plants  and  Ferns.  4th  ed. 

Cambridge,  1919. 

114)    Agriculture  in  the  Tropics.  2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  1914. 

115)    Catalogue  of  Ceylon  Plants.  London,  1911. 

116)    Studies... Podostemaceae.  Ann.  Perad.  i,  1902,  p.  267. 

117)    The  Flora  of  Ritigala,  a  study  in  Endemism.  Ibid,  in,  1906, 

p.  271. 

118)    Some  Evidence  against  the  Theory  of.. .Nat.  Selection  of 

Infinitesimal  Variations  Ibid,  iv,  1907,  p.  1. 

119)    Further  Evidence.  Ibid.  p.  17. 

120)    The  Geographical  Distribution  of  the  Dilleniaceae,  as  illus- 
trating the  Treatment  of  this  subject  on  the  Theory  of  Mutation. 
Ibid.  p.  69. 

121)    Hill-Top  Floras  of  Ceylon.  Ibid.  p.  131. 

122)    The  Flora  of  Naminakuli-kanda.  Ibid,  v,  1911,  p.  217. 

123)    The  Endemic  Flora  of  Ceylon....  Phil.  Trans.  B,  ccvi,  1915, 

p.  307,  and  correction  in  Proc.  R.  S.  B,  lxxxix,  1916. 

124)    On  the  Lack  of  Adaptation  in  the  Trist.  and  Podostem.  Proc. 

R.  S.  B,  lxxxvii,  1914,  p.  532. 

125)    The  Origin  of  the  Trist.  and  Podostem.  Ann.  of  Bot.  xxix, 

1915,  p.  299. 

126)    The  Evolution  of  Species  in  Ceylon.  Ibid,  xxx,  1916,  p.  1. 


LIST  OF  LITERATURE 


251 


(127)  Willis,  J.  C.  Distribution  of  Species  in  New  Zealand.  Ann.  of  Bot. 
•  xxx,  1916,  p.  437. 

(128)    Relative  Age  of  Endemic  Species.  Ibid,  xxxi,  1917,  p.  189. 

(129)    Distribution  of  Plants  of  the  Outlying  Islands.  Ibid,  xxxi, 

p.  327. 

(130)    Further  Evidence  for  Age  and  Area.  Ibid,  xxxi,  p.  335. 

(131)    Sources  and  Distribution  of  the  New  Zealand  Flora.  Ibid. 

xxxii,  1918,  p.  339. 

(132)    The  Flora  of  Stewart  Island.  Ibid,  xxxiii,  1919,  p.  23. 

(133)    The  Floras  of  the  Outlying  Islands  of  New  Zealand.  Ibid.  p.  479. 

(134)    Plant  Invasions  of  New  Zealand.... Ibid,  xxxiv,  1920,  p.  471. 

(135)    Endemic  Genera  of  Plants.  Ibid,  xxxv,  1921,  p.  493. 

(136)    The  Age  and  Area  Hypothesis.  Science,  xlvii,  1918,  p.  626. 

(137)  Willis,  J.  C.  and  Burkill,  I.  H.  The  Flora  of  the  Pollard  Willows 

near  Cambridge.  Proc.  Comb.  Phil.  Soc.  viii,  1893,  p.  82. 

(138)  Willis,  J.  C.  and  Gardiner,  J.  Stanley.  The  Botany  of  the  Maldive 

Islands.  Ann.  Perad.  i,  1901,  p.  45. 

(139)  Bews,  J.  W.  Plant  Succession  and  Plant  Distribution  in  S.  Africa. 

Ann.  of  Bot.  xxxiv,  1920,  p.  287. 

(140)    Some  general  Principles  of  Plant  Distribution,  as  illustrated  by 

the  S.  African  Flora.  Ann.  of  Bot.  xxxv,  1921,  p.  1. 

(141)  de  Vries,  H.  The  present  position  of  the  Mutation  Theory.  Nature, 

civ,  1919,  p.  213. 

(142)  Hooker,  J.  D.  On  Insular  Floras.  Journ.  Bot.  1867,  p.  23. 

(143)  Hayward,  I.  and  Druce,  G.  C.  The  Adventive  Flora  of  Tweedsidc. 

Arbroath,  1919. 

(144)  Lang,  W.  D.  Old  Age  and  Extinction  in  Fossils.  Proc.  Geol.  Ass. 

xxx,  1919,  p.  102. 

(145)  Willis,  J.  C.  and  Yule,  G.  U.  Some  Statistics  of  Evolution  and 

Geographical  Distribution  in  Plants  and  Animals,  and  their 
Significance.  Nature,  109,  Feb.  9,  1922,  p.  177. 


INDEX 


Acclimatisation,  29,  45.  And  cf. 
Introduction 

Acrotrema  dissectum,  with  inter- 
mediate stages,  219 

Adam's  Peak,  endemics  of,  55 

Adaptation,  19,  55,  57,  59,  87,  148, 
209,  210,  220,  224,  227,  229,  230, 
231.  And  cf.  Correlated  varia- 
tion, Endemic  genera  and  species, 
Evolution,  Intermediates,  Local 
adaptation,  Natural  selection, 
Species,  Struggle  for  existence 

Advantage  as  a  guide  in  evolution, 
189,  212,  215,  221,  225;  ruled  out, 
215,  219,  221 

Africa,  endemic  genera,  170,  178; 
monotypes,  188,  189.  And  cf. 
Canary  Islands,  Madagascar,  Mas- 
carene  Islands,  St  Helena 

Age,  effects  of,  3,  4,  5,  6,  61,  62,  85, 
99,  174  196:  the  most  powerful 
factor,  6,  197,  198 

Age  and  Area,  4,  5,  6,  54,  61,  63 
(statement  of  rule),  85,  103,  147, 
150,  189,  206,  221,  225;  applica- 
tion to  single  species,  84,  85 ;  to 
animals,  200;  to  unallied  forms, 
86;  and  ecological  results,  98;  and 
palaeobotanical  study,  137,  147; 
and  the  mutation  theory,  222; 
confirmation  by  prediction,  66, 
76,  87,  230;  in  Australia,  64;  in 
Ceylon,  54;  in  Compositae,  119; 
in  New  Zealand,  64;  invasions, 
76,  139,  234;  objections  to,  70, 
84;  position  of  the  theory,  101; 
reservations,  63,  70 

Aim  of  nature,  205,  215 

Alacran  reef,  endemics  of,  152,  212 

Allied  forms  only  comparable  under 
age  and  area,  62,  85 

America.  See  North  America,  South 
America,  Tropical  America.  And 
cf.  Alacran,  Andes,  Argentina, 
Bahamas,  Brazil,  Chinese,  Eu- 
genia, Galapagos,  Jamaica,  Juan 
Fernandez,  Lacloris,  Mexico,  New 
York,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Sequoia 

Andes,  endemics  of,  176 

Animals,  applicability  of  age  and 
area  to,  200 

Anodynes,  verbal,  231,  244 

Anthemideae,  127,  135,  136 

Antiquity  and  amplitude,  116 

Anuradhapura,  climate  of,  43 


Arber,  Mrs  A.,  92 

Arctotideae,  126,  127,  136 

Area,  broken,  89;  differences  in, 
occupied,  2,  33,  55;  early  species 
gain  in,  on  later,  34;  fossil,  243; 
graduation  of,  58,  170,  229;  in- 
creasing more  rapidly  with  age, 
33;  increasing  with  size  of  genus, 
114-18;  large,  due  to  spreading, 
11;  minimum,  occupied  by  com- 
mencing species,  206;  necessary 
for  origin,  10;  of  endemic  genera, 
171 ;  of  endemic  species,  56,  150; 
occupied,  2,  11,  33,  55,  115,  150, 
151,  170,  191;  phenomena  matched 
by  those  of  size,  175;  plants  of 
smaller,  the  younger,  206 ;  possible 
of  occupation,  49;  restricted,  57; 
to  which  suited,  11.  And  cf. 
Age  and  Area,  Dispersal,  En- 
demic, etc. 

Argentina,  spread  of  introductions 
in,  26 

Argument  of  Part  1,7;  of  Part  II,  107 
Asia,  tropical,  endemic  genera,  178. 
And  cf.  Ceylon,  Chinese,  India, 
Krakatau,  Maldives,  Monsoons, 
Taal 

Associations  of  plants,  20,  25,  30,  35, 

50  51  229 
Astereae',  129,  130,  131,  134,  135 
Auckland  Islands,  66-74,  230 
Australia,  age  and  area  in,  64; 

endemic   genera   of,    170,  190; 

endemic  species  of,  150;  grasses 

of,  64.   And  cf.  West  Australia, 

New  Caledonia 
Average  generic  area,  126 ;  necessary 

in  age  and  area,  61 
Axioms  of  the  systematists,  105,  217 

Bahama  Islands,  endemics  of,  64, 
150,  210 

Barriers  to  spread,  12, 13,  16,  20,  21, 

36;  especially  Chap,  v 
Bateson,  W.;  217 

Beetles,  hollow  curve  in,  202,  203, 

236;  logarithmic  curve,  241 
Birds,  dispersal  by,  12-18  , 
Boraginaceae,  distribution  in  New 

Zealand,  161 
Brazil,  endemics  of,  150,  170,  190, 

233;  endemic  genera,  170,  176; 

sizes  of  genera,  190.    And  cf. 

Eugenia 


254 


INDEX 


Break  well,  E.,  64 

Britain  and  Ireland,  and  outlying 
islands,  distribution  in,  70,  73; 
flora  of  genera  and  families  by 
sizes,  235;  Hieracia  in,  160;  in- 
vasions of,  234,  236;  species  per 
family,  237.  And  cf.  Cambridge- 
shire, Clare,  Colonsay,  Ireland, 
Orkneys,  Scilly,  Wicken,  Willow, 
etc. 

Broken  areas,  89 
Burkill,  I.  H.,  12 

Cakile  alacranensis ,  distribution  of, 
152 

Calcutta  climate,  43 
Calenduleae,  126,  127,  134 
Callitriche,  distribution  of,  92 
Callitris,  distribution  in  Australia, 
157,  64 

Cambridgeshire  flora,  235,  237 
Campanula  Vidalii,  distribution  of, 
152 

Canary  Islands,  flora  of,  27,  88 
Causes  favouring  or  hindering  dis- 
persal, 32 
Cenchrus  insularia,  distribution  of, 
152 

Ceylon ,  age  and  area  in ,  54 ;  catalogue 
of  flora,  59;  distribution  of  classes 
in  flora  by  area,  59;  distribution 
of  species  in,  59;  dry  and  wet 
zones,  14;  endemics,  54,  55,  56, 
150,  152,  233;  endemics  mainly  in 
big  genera,  165;  endemic  genera, 
170;  genera  by  sizes,  235;  spread 
of  introductions  in,  25-6.  And  cf. 
Adam's  Peak,  Anuradhapura, 
Christisonia,  Coleus,  Doona,  Eu- 
genia, Hakgala,  Hinidun-kanda, 
Hortonia,  Kandy,  Ritigala,  Schu- 
macheria,  Thwaites,  Tithonia, 
Trimen 

Change  in  living  world,  rate  of,  3; 
of  conditions,  39-44,  51 ;  of  tem- 
perature, 44;  greater  in  greater 
time,  144 

Characters,  family  and  generic,  209 ; 
intermediate  usually  not  possible, 
209,  211,  219;  often  appear  late, 
210;  rudimentary  beginnings  of, 
209 ;  usually  evolved  without  refer- 
ence to  usefulness,  226;  usually 
indifferent,  152,  209,  224,  225. 
And  cf.  Intermediates, Species, etc. 

Chatham  Islands,  66-74,  230;  plants 
oldest  in  New  Zealand,  67 

Cherrapunji  climate,  43 

Chinese-North- American  flora,  88, 
140,  144 

Christisonia,  151 ;  distribution  of,  159 


Cichorieae,  130,  135,  136 
Cissampelos,  distribution  of,  159, 
172 

Cistaceae,  distribution  of,  172 

Clare  Island,  distribution  of  flora,  70 

Classes  bv  area,  60,  61 

Clements",  F.  E.,  20 

Climate,  40;  climatic  boundary,  45; 

changes    of,    as    barriers,  40; 

changes  of,  as  directing  forces  in 

migration,  138 
Closed  plant-societies,  20,  30,  50,  51 
Cockayne,  L.,  26 

Coffee,  Liberian,  acclimatisation  of, 
29 

Coleus,  dispersal  of  Ceylon  species, 
2,  54;  C.  elongatus,  2,  54,  151, 152, 
208,  219 

Colonsay,  distribution  of  flora,  70 
Commencing  species,  10 
Comparison  of  unallied  forms,  86 
Compositae,  age  and  area  in,  119; 
distribution  of,  18,  22,  48,  85, 
Chap,  xm ;  evolutionary  history, 
132;  of  Madagascar,  175;  size  and 
space  in,  132 
Compound  interest  law,  241 
Constitution  of  plant  or  animal,  231 
Copeland,  E.  B.,  5,  50 
Correlated  variations,  208,  209 
Cosmopolitan  genera,  21 
Cromerian  flora,  137-8 
Cupressus  macrocarpa,  88,  113 
Currents,  dispersal  by,  14-17 
Cyanea,  distribution  in  Hawaii,  161 
Cynara,  spread  of,  27;  Cynareae, 

127,  134, 135 
Cyrtandra,  distribution  of,  159;  in 
Hawaiian  Islands,  160 

Darwin,  C,  4,  10,  204,  217,  222; 
Darwinian  theory,  102,  204 

Destruction  in  struggle  for  exist- 
ence, 113,  221 

De  Vries  on  Age  and  Area  and  the 
Mutation  Theory,  222 

Diagnostic  characters  usually  indif- 
ferent, 152,  224,  225 

Didymocarpus  Perdita,  species  of  two 
individuals  only,  151 

Differentiation,  18,  103,  105,  221, 
228  n.,  240 

Dillenia,  distribution,  159,  219; 
Dilleniaceae,  family  tree,  240 

Dipterocarpaceae,  distribution  of, 
19,  36,  85,  152 

Dispersal  of  plants,  10,  12,  24,  32, 
85, 101 ,  228 ;  a  measure  of  age,  61 , 
197,  230;  by  birds,  explosions, 
mammals,  sea,  vegetative  repro- 
duction, wind,  etc.,  12-19 ;  average 


INDEX 


255 


rate  probably  very  uniform,  99; 
causes  favouring  or  hindering,  32 ; 
due  to  youth,  89,  92;  into  virgin 
areas,  12,  14,  15,  19-21;  mainly 
by  land,  21,  182,  245;  mainly 
conditioned  by  barriers,  48; 
mechanical,  21,  22,  36,  61,  229; 
methods,  12-22;  of  introductions, 
24-27;  of  unrelated  forms,  36; 
oldest  types  at  edge  of,  218; 
present,  the  maximum  possible, 
11,  197,  229,  230;  rapid,  11,  19, 
20,  26,  94,  229;  rapid,  not  neces- 
sary, 33;  reached  possible  limit, 
11,  27,  229;  regular  and  irregular, 
12;  slow,  20,  30,  33-52;  to  short 
distance  only,  14,  20,  32,  35; 
without  alteration  of  conditions,  25 

Distribution,  101,  228;  a  closed 
chapter,  11,  27,  230;  determined 
largely  by  time,  179;  discontin- 
uous, 11;  general,  228;  largely 
mechanical,  6,  61,  191,  203,  206, 
214,  229;  due  to  interaction  of 
many  factors,  1,  2,  5,  85,  87; 
limited,  3,  4;  of  endemics,  54,  58, 
163,  166;  of  rainfall  and  moisture, 
43-4;  of  wides  greater  than  of 
endemics,  60;  to  what  due,  1,  5; 
vital  factors  in,  2.  And  cf.  Dis- 
persal, Endemics,  Species,  and 
the  various  countries 

Ditypes,  185 

Doona  in  Ceylon,  94,  152,  161 
Drosophila,  mutation  in,  224 
Dying  out,  1,4, 10,  58,  81,  88,  89,  90, 
91,  93,  142,  144,  148,  165,  186, 
192-3,  229-34.    And   cf.  Inter- 
mediates, Killing  out,  Relics,  etc. 

Early  species  gain  upon  later,  34 
Ebermaiera ,  distribution  in  India ,  1 63 
Ecology,  20;  ecological  barriers  or 
aids  to  spread,  46,  99,  100;  re- 
sults, and  Age  and  Area,  98 
Effects  of  barriers,   12,   13,  and 
Chap,  v 

Elodea,  dispersal,  and  spread,  17,  26, 
27,  51 

Endemic  genera,  169;  areas  oc- 
cupied, 170;  as  local  adaptations, 
57-8,  87,  166,  179;  as  relics,  166, 
179, 182;  as  young  beginners,  166, 
179,  183;  belong  chiefly  to  larger 
families,  182;  distribution  of,  169; 
explanations  of,  179;  of  contin- 
ents, 177-8;  of  islands,  175-83; 
number  increases  with  various 
factors,  169;  and  with  increasing 
area,  169;  phenomena  paralleled 
by  genera  of  larger  area,  176; 


with  small  areas,  171.  And  cf. 
Endemic  species,  Evolution,  and 
the  various  countries 

Endemic  species,  areas  occupied, 
150;  as  local  adaptations,  54,  87, 
166,  186;  as  relics,  58,  81,  88,  93, 
141,  148,  166,  186;  as  young  be- 
ginners, 165-7;  belong  chiefly  to 
large  genera,  91,  165;  commoner 
in  the  south,  etc.,  218;  descended 
from  wides,  61,  74,  77,  86,  153, 
221,  239,  240;  explanations,  218; 
families  and  genera  to  which  be- 
long, 164;  increase  to  southwards, 
etc.,  149 ;  localities  in  which  occur, 
149;  of  Bahamas,  64;  Ceylon,  54; 
Galapagos,  150;  Hawaiian  Islands, 
150, 164  (including  of  endemic  and 
non-endemic  genera,  163),  India, 
164;  mountain  tops,  54,  55,  58; 
New  York,  64;  New  Zealand, 
or  New  Zealand  and  outlying 
islands,  64,  66-74,  164;  North 
America,  86;  resemblance  to  non- 
endemics,  161 ;  relation  to  wides, 
61,  77,  86,  198;  their  distribution 
a  special  case,  163;  types  of  dis- 
tribution same  as  wides,  161 ;  un- 
related to  wides,  86  n.;  with 
maximum  numbers  at  certain 
spots,  77-8;  without  differences 
in  conditions,  88;  younger  than 
wides,  89,  221.  And  cf.  Age  and 
Area,  Dispersal,  Distribution, 
Local  adaptation,  Relics,  Species 

Endemism,  17,  54,  148,  166;  a  sign 
of  age,  84;  and  distribution, 
(species)  148,  (genera)  169;  and 
isolation,  148-9;  especially  to  the 
southwards,  149,  170;  explana- 
tions of,  166;  on  continents,  149; 
on  mountains,  149,  150.  And  cf. 
above,  and  Killing  out,  Local 
adaptation,  Relics,  Wides,  etc. 

Epilobium,  distribution  in  New 
Zealand,  155 

Eugenia,  in  Brazil,  157,  165;  in 
Ceylon,  58,  115,  157,  165 

Eupatorieae,  126,  127,  134,  136 

Europe,  endemics  of,  149.  And  cf. 
Britain,  Italy 

Europeans  in  the  Tropics,  locations 
of,  24 

Euryale,  formerly  of  great  extension, 
141 

Evolution,  bv  infinitesimal  varia- 
tion, 2,  10/207,  213;  by  differen- 
tiation, cf.  Differentiation;  by 
mutation,  cf.  Mutation ;  guided  by 
advantage  or  natural  selection, 
189,  212,  214,  215;  mechanical, 


256 


INDEX 


203,  205-6,  211,  214;  predeter- 
mined, 215;  theory,  204;  tree  of, 
surviving  to  present  time,  221 ; 
type  of,  101;  without  adaptation, 
57,58,224-6.  And cf.  Adaptation, 
Natural  selection,  etc. 
Exacum,  distribution  in  India,  163 
Exceptions  to  Age  and  Area,  67,  68, 

84;  exceptional  species,  245 
Expectation  of  life,  5 
Explosions,  dispersal  by,  16 
Extermination,  140,  238;  regional, 
140 ;  specific,  142.   Cf.  Killing  out 
and  Dying  out 
Extinction  of  species,  142-4.  Cf. 
Killing  out  and  Dying  out 

Factors    in    dispersal,    etc.  Cf. 

Causes,  Dispersal,  etc. 
Families  to  which  endemics  belong, 

182;  sizes  of,  in  hollow  curves, 

186.  And  cf.  Genera 
Faunas,  local,  203 
Festuca  on  different  types  of  soil  38 ; 

on  the  downs,  51 
Fixity  of  vegetation  at  a  given  spot, 

20 

Fleshy  fruits,  13 

Floral  regions,  243 

Floras.    Cf.  under  countries,  etc.; 

due  to  land  connections,  182,  245 
Fluctuating  variation,  207,  211,  213, 

222 

Foreign  species,  introduction  and 

spread  of,  24 
Forest,  42,  47,  51 
Fossil  areas,  243 

Galapagos,  endemics  of,  150 
Gardiner,  J.  Stanley,  14,  200,  202 
Genera,  as  local  adaptations,  189; 
as  relics,  189;  ditypic,  etc.,  185; 
endemic,  169;  form  more  species 
with  increasing  area,  117;  formed 
in  a  casual  way,  234;  grouped  by 
number  of  species,  186;  largest  in 
largest  families,  187 ;  monotypic, 
185;  number  of  species  in,  related 
to  variety  of  conditions,  115;  of 
endemics  only,  95,  18,  155;  of  few 
species  usually  relics  (?),  229;  of 
one  or  more  species,  185  ;  of  Old 
and  New  Worlds,  21 ;  on  both 
sides  of  a  barrier,  39 ;  percentage 
confined  to  various  areas,  189, 
190;  possible  size  increasing  with 
increasing  area,  178;  sizes  of,  in 
hollow  curves,  174,  178,  186 
Geographical  distribution.  Cf.  Dis- 
tribution, Limiting  factor,  Pro- 
gress 


Geological    changes,    1,    52,  and 

Chap,  xiv 
Glacial  period,  2,  172  n.,  199 
Gnaphalieae,  126,  128,  134,  135 
Goats,  effect  of,  upon. vegetation,  26 
Graduation,  of  areas  of  endemics 

and  wides,  60,  61 ;  of  areas  of 

genera  from  small  to  large,  170; 

of  areas  of  species  from  small  to 

large,  58 
Gramineae  of  Australia,  64 
Great  Britain.  Cf.  Britain 
Gunner  a,  distribution  of,  in  New 

Zealand,  155 
Guppy,  H.  B.,  17,  49,  95,  101,  117, 

130;  his  theory  of  differentiation, 

18,  103,  221,  228,  240 
Gymnema,  distribution  of,  159 

Haastia,  distribution  in  New  Zea- 
land, 153 

Habit,  types  of,  effects  upon  dis- 
persal, 49 

Hakgala  (Ceylon),  151 

Hawaiian  Islands,  age  and  area  in, 
64;  Cyanea  in,  161;  Cyrtandra  in, 
160;  endemics  of,  150,  163,  164, 
170;  endemics  of  endemic  and 
non-endemic  genera  compared, 
163;  genera  above  average  world 
size,  164;  Pelea  in,  161.  And  cf. 
Waialeale 

Helenieae,  126,  131,  134,  136 

Heliantheae,  128,  134,  135 

Helobieae,  size  and  space  in,  116 

Herbs,  shrubs,  and  trees,  46;  her- 
baceous vegetation  and  drier 
climate,  42:  advantages  of,  48; 
younger  than  forest,  46 

Hieracia  in  Britain,  distribution  of, 
160 

Hindrances  to  dispersal,  32-53;  to 
progress,  228-9 

Hinidun-kanda  species,  55 

Hollow  curves,  155,  161,  163,  166, 
171,  174,  176,  180,  185,  186,  187, 
188,  195  (Chapter),  199,  202,  205, 
211,  214,  229,  235,  236-7,  240 

Hooked  fruit,  12 

Hooker,  Sir  J.  D.,  on  age  and  area, 
4;  axioms,  217;  on  Botanical 
Geography,  6,  104;  on  dying  out, 
4;  on  natural  selection,  205;  on 
proportion  of  mono-  to  di-coty- 
ledons,  22;  on  general  perman- 
ence of  species,  207 

Hortonia  in  Ceylon,  distribution  of, 
159 

Huxley,  T.  H.,  2,  231 
Hydrocotyle,  46;  acclimatisation  to 
different  climates,  30 


INDEX 


257 


Increase  of  area  occupied,  33 
India,   endemic   genera    of,  170; 

genera  by  sizes,  235 ;  genera  above 

average  world  size,  164 
Infinitesimal  variation, evolution  by, 

2,  207,  211,  213,  214,  222 
Interaction  of  factors  in  dispersal,  1, 

2'5 

Intermediates,  between  diagnostic 
characters  usually  impossible, 
209,  211,  219;  between  genera  and 
species,  not  found,  214,  226;  in 
Acrotrema,  219 ;  no  need  for  them 
to  die  out,  218 

Introduction  of  foreign  species,  24; 
on  continental  areas,  25 

Inuleae,  126,  134,  135;  diphyletic 
origin,  126;  limited,  126,  127,  136 

Invasions,  20,  234;  of  New  Zealand, 
76, 139 

Ireland,  flora  of,  236 

Irregular  dispersal,  12-16 

Islands  and  endemics,  148-50,  175- 
83;  monotypes,  188-9 

Isolation,  17,  148,  169,  170 

Italy,  flora  of,  236 

Jamaica,  age  and  area  in,  64 
Jordanian  species,  215-21 
Juan  Fernandez,  endemic  genera  of, 
169-70,  244 

Kandy  climate,  43 
Kermadec  Islands,  66-74,  230 
Killing  out,  1,  157,  135,  142,  144 
Krakatau,  flora  of,  15 

Lactoris,  distribution  of,  244 
Land  connections,  21,  182,  245 
Landslips,  37,  48 

Large  families  and  genera  the  suc- 
cessful ones,  113 

Larger  genera,  117,  185;  on  larger 
areas,  178 

Largest  families  in  the  world,  21 

Light,  effects  of,  45 

Light  seeds,  13 

Limit  of  distribution,  45 

Limiting  factor  in  progress ,  3 ,205 ,228 

Linnean  species,  and  splitting,  98, 
216,  218,  221 

Literature,  247 

Local  adaptation,  54,  57,  58,  87, 148, 
216,  231;  species,  50,  151,  217 
(and  cf.  Endemic) ;  distribution,  3, 
4;  faunas  and  hollow  curve,  202; 
floras  and  hollow  curve,  236; 
migration,  20,  32,  35 

Lofgren,  A.,  206 

Logarithmic  curves,  241 

Lyell,  Sir  C,  3,  20,  219 


Madagascar,  endemic  genera  of, 
175,  178;  sizes  of  endemic  genera, 
190 

Maldive  Islands,  flora  of,  14 

Mammals,  dispersal  by,  19 

Man,  action  of,  52 

Mascarene  Islands,  endemic  genera 
of,  169,  170 

Matthew,  J.  R.,  234 

Mechanical  explanations  necessary, 
89,  183,  206,  232,  233 

Mechanisms  for  dispersal,  12;  not 
imperative,  34 

Menispermaceae,  distribution  of,  172 

Mesophytic  plants,  dispersal  of,  49; 
adaptation  rare  in,  210 

Mexico,  endemics  of,  150 

Meyrick,  E.,  200 

Microspecies,  98,  216 

Migration,  138 

Mogi  flora  (Japan),  145-6 

Moisture  of  air,  distribution  of,  43 

Monimiaceae,  distribution  of,  174 

Monocotyledons  in  islands  off  New 
Zealand,  230 

Monotypic  genera,  185;  areas  oc- 
cupied by,  191 ;  as  relics,  186, 
191-3;  as  special  adaptations, 
186, 191-2;  descended  from  larger 
genera,  240;  explanations  of,  192; 
greatest  proportion  in  largest 
families,  192;  increase  south- 
wards and  outwards,  193 

Monsoons,  14,  41 

Moribund  species.  Cf.  Relics,  and  148 
Mountains,  as   agents  facilitating 
migration,  37;  as  barriers,  36,  40; 
as  last  resorts,  58;  and  climate, 
40-42;  and  endemics,  55,  92,  149; 
endemics  as  relics,  92;  endemic 
genera  of,  176 
Multiple  origin,  11,  47,  105 
Mutation,   208,   211-21,   222  (de 
Vries),  223;  causes  of,  213;  large, 
216;  Lyell  on,  219;  parallel,  243; 
several,  not  necessary  for  forma- 
tion of  species,  218;  size  of,  215; 
small,  216;  theory  and  age  and 
area,  222 
Mutisieae,  126,  127,  131,  135 

Najas,  distribution  of,  159;  fossil 
record  of,  143 

Natural  selection,  and  explanations 
based  upon  it,  10,  58,  61, 104,  148, 
188,  198,  199,  204,  206,  208-14, 
220,  229;  a  destructive  and 
negative  agent,  220;  governing 
general  outlook  upon  biological 
problems,  228 

Nest  making,  12,  13 


258 


INDEX 


New  and  Old  World  genera,  190 
New  Caledonia,  endemic  genera  of, 
169,  170 

New  forms  at  commencement  of 
life,  212,  213;  most  frequent  at 
edges  of  dispersal,  218 ;  range  from 
small  to  large,  220 
New  species,  formation  of,  34-5 
New  York,  endemics  of,  64 
New  Zealand,  age  and  area  in,  64; 
endemics  of,  150;  of,  and  islands, 
69;  endemics  belong  to  large 
genera,  165;  endemic  genera,  170, 
171 ;  flora  of  outlying  islands,  66, 
72;  genera  above  average  world 
size,  164;  genera  by  sizes,  235; 
invasions  of,  76,  139;  predictions 
about  flora  of  New  Zealand  and 
islands,  66-74;  Ranunculus  in, 
153;  species  per  family,  238; 
spread  of  introductions  in,  26;  the 
most  irregular  curve  of  all,  196. 
And  cf.  Auck lands,  Chathams, 
Epilobium,  Gunnera,  Haastia, 
Kermadec,  Monocotyledon,  Olear- 
ia,  Outlying,  Ranunculus,  Stewart, 
Vegetation,  etc. 
North  America,  spread  of  introduc- 
tions in,  26;  endemics  of,  86; 
monotypes,  188,  189 

Objections  to  hypothesis  of  age  and 

area,  70,  84 
Oenothera,  mutation  in,  224 
Oldest  and  most  variable  types  at 

edge   of  dispersal,   218;  living 

species,  143 
Olearia,  distribution  in  New  Zealand, 

161 

Open  plant  societies,  20,  27,  50, 
213 

Origin  of  species,  10,  204 
Orkneys,  distribution  of  flora,  70 
Outlying  islands  of  New  Zealand, 
flora  of,  66 

Pacific  Islands,  plants  of,  17 
Palaeobotanical  study  and  age  and 

area,  137 
Palaeotropical  genera,  190 
Pangenesis,  222 

Parent  and  child  occur  together, 

219,  220,  221 
Pelea,    distribution    in  Hawaiian 

Islands,  161 
Permanence  of  species,  207 
Phylogeny,  240 
Physical  barriers,  36 
Plant  migration,  137 
Plant  societies  or  associations,  20, 

50 


Podostemaceae,  4;  distribution,  57, 

92;  characters,  210 
Polemoniaceae,  distribution  of,  171 
Pollard  Willow  flora,  12 
Polyphyly,  11,  47,  105 
Pomaderris  apetala,  distribution,  67 
Pont-de-Gail  flora,  137,  143,  146 
Prediction,  66,  76,  87,  230 
Progress  in  knowledge  of  geographical 

distribution,   3,   228,   229.  Cf. 

Limiting  factor 

Rainfall,  41-4;  distribution  of,  43 
Rank  and  range,  105,  118,  130 
Ranunculus,   153;   distribution  in 

New  Zealand,  153,  163,  216,  220, 

239 

Rapid  spread  of  introductions,  24, 
25,  94 

Rayleigh,  Lord,  33,  145,  152,  212 
Regional  extermination,  140 
Regression,  207 

Regular  mechanisms  for  dispersal, 
12-19 

Reid,  Mrs  E.  M.,  82,  137 

Relics,  86,  88,  93,  186,  192-3,  199, 

216,  229,  231-3;  explanation  of 

endemism,  58-9.  And  cf.  Dying 

out,  Killing  out 
Reservations  in  regard  to  age  and 

area,  63,  70 
Reversion,  207 
Ridley,  H.  N.,  18,  151 
Rio  de  Janeiro  climate,  43 
Ritigala,  and  flora  of,  14,  54,  55 
Rivers  as  barriers,  37 
Rubiaceae,  logarithmic  curve,  241 

St   Helena,    endemic   flora,  150; 

spread  of  introductions  in,  26 
Salsola  Kali,  distribution  of,  49 
Schumacheria  in  Ceylon,  distribution 

of,  159 

Scilly  Islands ,  distribution  of  flora ,  70 
Scott,  H.,  202 

Sea,  dispersal  by,  14-17;  as  barrier, 
36 

Seed,  quantity  of,  necessary  for 
transport  to  a  distance,  32 

Senecioneae,  126,  128,  134 

Sequoia,  formerly  of  great  dispersal, 
141 

Sinnott,  E.  W.,  95;  and  Bailey,  I. 
W.,  46 

Size  and  space,  71, 74, 113  (chapter), 
115,  171-2,  174,  178,  185,  188, 
190,  197,  233;  in  Britain,  113;  in 
Compositae ,  1 32 ;  in  Helobieae  ,116 

Sizes  of  families  in  hollow  curves, 
186;  of  genera  in  hollow  curves, 
174,  178;  of  mutations,  215 


INDEX 


259 


Small,  J.,  18,  119 

Societies,  plant,  20,  27,  32,  50-2, 
229 

Soil   as  barrier  or  assistance  to 

spread,  38 
South  America,  endemics  of,  190; 

monotypes   and   larger  genera, 

188-90 
Spartina,  spread  of,  26 
Specialisation  of  plants,  49  (twice), 

50 

Species,  best  limited  when  of  com- 
plex floral  structure,  217-8 ;  causes 
favouring  or  hindering  dispersal, 
32;  commencing  life,  36;  diagnostic 
characters  usually  indifferent, 
224-6;  dispersal,  cf.  Dispersal; 
early  gaining  on  late,  34;  endem- 
ism  and  distribution,  148;  foreign, 
introduction  and  spread,  24; 
general  permanence,  207;  going 
under,  cf.  Relics;  least  complex 
that  are  most  widely  distributed, 
218;  local,  50,  216,  and  cf.  En- 
demics; occupying  just  those 
places  to  which  suited,  229,  230; 
occupying  overlapping  areas,  57 ; 
of  large  genera  often  resemble 
varieties,  217;  on  smaller  areas  in 
general  younger,  206;  per  family 
or  genus  in  local  floras,  237-8; 
that  vary  most,  217.  And  cf. 
Endemic  species,  Evolution,  Local 
adaptation,  Relics,  etc. 

Specific  extermination,  135 

Splitting  of  Linnean  species,  98 

Sports,  211 

Spread  of  introductions,  24;  with 

alteration   of  conditions,  25-6; 

often  rapid,  27 
Statistical  treatment  of  geographical 

distribution,  6,  246 
Stewart  Island,  71,  72 
Stratiotes,  succession  of  species,  143 
Struggle  for  existence,  50,  148,  206, 

210,  213,  220-1,  238 
Successful  and  unsuccessful  species, 

55 

Succession,  20,  51,  138 
Survival  of  species,  142 
Swamping,  95,  18 
Systematist,  the,  101,  105,  217 

Taal  volcano,  re  vegetation  of,  16 
Taylor,  N.,  64 

Temperature  changes  as  barriers,  44 
Tertiary  flora,  2,  34,  49,  88, 137,  233 
Theory  of  differentiation,  18,  103, 

105,  221,  228  n.,  240 
Thiselton  Dyer,  W.  T.,  49 


Thwaites,  G.  H.  K.,  151 

Time  available  for  evolution  and 

dispersal,  33,  145,  152,  212 
Tithonia,  dispersal  of,  17,  26 
Tree,  ancestral,  of  genus  or  family, 

surviving,  20,  243  21,  24 
Trees,  of  multiple  origin,  47.  And 

cf.  Herbs 
Trees,  shrubs,  and  herbs,  46 
Treub,  M.,  15 

Tribulus  alacranensis,  distribution 

of,  152,  212 
Trimen,  H.,  54,  56 
Tristichaceae,  dispersal  of,  92 
Tritypes,  185 

Tropical  America,  endemic  genera  of , 

190 ;  Asia,  endemic  genera  of,  190 
Type  of  vegetation,  as  barrier,  50-1 

Unallied    forms    not  comparable 

under  age  and  area,  63,  85,  86 
Useless  characters,  209 

Variation  a  centrifugal  force,  105; 
variations,  correlated,  208;  most 
common  in  genera  simplest  in 
structure,  in  species  of  larger 
genera,  and  in  wide-ranging 
species,  217 

Vegetation,  of  northern  type  in  New 
Zealand,  40;  tvpe  of,  as  barrier, 
50-1 

Vegetative  reproduction,  16 
Verbal  anodvnes,  231,  244 
Vernonieae,  126,  127,  136 
Virgin  soil,  dispersal  into,  12,  14,  15, 
19-21 

Vital  factors  in  distribution,  2,  4 

Waialeale,  climate,  43 

Water-plants,  dispersal  of,  49 

Went,  F.  A.  F.  C,  205 

West  Australia,  endemism  in,  149, 
169,  170 

Wicken  Fen  flora,  235 

Wides,  59;  endemics  descended 
from,  61,  74,  167,  221,  239;  first 
to  appear,  239 ;  most  widely  dis- 
tributed in  a  country,  60;  of 
wide  dispersal,  84;  oldest  forms, 
61,  72,  239 

Widespread  genera,  21 

Willow,  pollard,  flora,  12 

Wind,  as  barrier,  etc.,  45;  dispersal 
by, 13-17 

World,  endemic  genera  of,  178 

Youth,  greater  distribution  due  to, 

89,  92 
Yule,  G.  U.,  241 


PRINTED  IN  ENGLAND 
AT  THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
BY  J.  B.  PEACE,  M.A. 


Date  Due 

Library  Bureau  Cat.  No.  1137 


OHM  .115 


w,»S  J3c  5002  00189  1451" 

Age  and  area;  a  study  in  geographical  di 


f 


38MMH 


TTlTTfTnr  T  TTfiF 


