THE  AMERICAN  BOARD  AND  AMERICAN 
SLAVERY. 


SPEECH 

THEODORE  TILTON, 

IN 

PLYMOUTH  CHURCH,  BROOKLYN, 
January  28,  1860, 

Reported  by  Wm.  Henbt  Burb. 


NOTE. 

At  the  late  annual  grating  of  the  Plymouth  Church,  Brook'ya, 
held  at  the  IWianing  oMke  present  X£ar,  a  discussion  arose,  which 
•was  protractecK  to  five  eS^ings^reSpcbukig  the  use  to  be  made  of 
funds  collected  A  Foreign  Missions .  The  main  question  at  issue  was 
involved  in  the  following  resolution: 

w  Resolved,  That  this  Church  contribute  bo  more  money  to  the 
Americin  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions." 

The  ground  of  this  proposed  discontinuance  of  contributions  to  th» 
American  Board  was  the  alleged  comnUcity  of  that  corporation  with 
the  system  of  AmericaWSlavery,  bj^nstaining  slaveholding  Mission 
Churches  among  jtn\NoJh  American  Indians. 

On  the  fourth  night  of  thexfebate,  the  pastor  of  the  Church,  the 
Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  made  an  address,  two  hours  in  length, 
maintaining — 

41  That  the  American  Board  was  the  proper  depository  of  the  con- 
tributions of  Plymouth  Church  for  Foreign  Missions;  that  the  Board 
had.  to  an  unparalleled  degree,  kept  pace  with  public  eeutiment  on 
the  subject  of  slavery;  that  it  now  held  anti-slavery  doctrines,  aud 
had  faithfully  and  consistently  applied  these  coctrines  to  missionary 
work;  and  that  its  record,  on  this  whole  subject,  was  clean,  clear, 
and  pure." 

At  the  conclusion  of  h»s  speech,  Mr.  Tilton  obtained  the  floor  for 
an  immediate  reply,  but  gave  way,  owing  to  the  lateness  of  the  hour, 
to  a  motion  for  adjournment;  with  the  understanding  that  he  shouid 
open  the  debate  on  the  foliowing  evening.  The  geceral  interest 
excited  by  the  discussion  drew  together,  on  the  closing  night,  an 
audience  that  crowded  the  large  edifice  in  every  part.  Mr.  Til  ton's 
argument,  in  reply,  is  given  in  full  in  the  following  pages.  At  the 
close  of  its  delivery,  Mr.  Beecher  added  a  rejoinder,  after  which,  the 
"previous  question  "  was  called,  and  the  vote  taken.  The  result 
was  (for  various  reasons,  not  unexpectedly)  a  majority  in  favor  of 
the  American  Board. 


SPEECH 

OF 

THEODORE  TILTON. 


My  very  dear  friend,  to  whose  speech  I  now  undertake 
to  reply,  was  so  frank  and  generous,  last  Monday  evening 
in  his  allusions  to  some  of  the  young  men  of  this  Church 
who,  growing  up  for  years  under  his  teachings,  had  at 
last  found  themselves  differing  in  certain  points  from  their 
teacher,  that  I  cannot  but  tarry  a  moment,  at  the  threshold 
of  my  argument,  to  thank  him  for  his  kindness.   I  think 
sir,  you  will  agree  with  me,  it  was  characteristic  of  the 
mail.   It  was  a  fresh  instance  of  that  large-hearted  ness, 
that  generosity,  that  warmth  of  nature  that  have  won  for 
mm  the  admiration  and  affection  not  only  of  the  young 
men  of  his  Church,  but  of  the  old  men-and  not  only  of 
his  Church,  but  everywhere.   I  remember  reading  of  a 
nobleman  of  the  Court  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  who  thought 
it  a  sufficient  honor  to  himself  to  be  called  » the  friend  of 
b'-r  Philip  Sidney."   On  very  many  occasions,  both  in 
private  and  in  public,  I  have  been  received  into  new  cir- 
cles of  society  as  the  friend  of  the  pastor  of  this  Church  : 
and  I  am  sure  that  never  in  my  life  have  I  been  more 
proud  of  any  introduction !    When  Louis  Kossuth  called 
Walter  bavage  Landor  his  friend,  the  old  poet  lifted  up 
his  hands  and  exclaimed,  «  Henceforth,  no  man  can  honor 
me  i     i  need  not  say  to  any  member  of  this  Church  that 
l0!eT  lts  minister,  almost  as  1  love  no  other  man  I  Nor 
need  !  say  that  when  I  come  to-night  to  speak  in  opposi- 
tion to  his  views,  it  is  from  no  lack  of  good-fellowship  or 


good  feeling  towards  him  ;  for,  standing  in  this  pulpit,  in 
the  presence  of  this  Church  which  has  grown  up  under 
his  labors  and  his  prayers,  I  humbly  now  invoke  upon 
him  the  blessing  of  God,  and  pray  that  he  may  be 
sustained  with  unabated  strength  in  his  noble  and  suc- 
cessful Fervice  in  this  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  until,  after 
many  years,  he  shall  be  as  old  and  white-haired  as  that 
venerable  man,  his  father,  who  now,  past  four-score,  has 
travelled  up  so  near  to  the  summit  of  the  Mount  of 
Vision  that  his  head  is  already  among  its  snows,  waiting 
to  break  through  into  the  glory  beyond  ! 

My  friend's  generous  words,  on  Monday  night,  were  of 
themselves  a  sufficient  rebuke  to  those  gentlemen  who  so 
privately,  yet  industriously,  have  labored  to  make  it  ap- 
pear, to  the  minds  of  many  on  whose  votes  shall  rest  the 
decision  of  this  debate,  that  when  a  young  man  in  this 
Church  ventures  to  speak  a  word  in  opposition  to  words 
spoken  by  the  minister,  the  act  is  to  be  frowned  upon  as 
presumptuous  and  impertinent.  I  come  to  this  platform 
because,  having  been  a  member  of  this  Church  for  well 
nigh  seven  years,  the  teachings  which  I  have  received  in 
this  place,  delivered  from  this  desk,  have  led  me  hither  by 
their  own  natural  force.  For  I  may  truly  say  that  I  am 
indebted  for  my  anti-slavery  convictions  to  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  pastor  of  this  Church.  It  is,  therefore,  Mr. 
Beecher's  own  strong  right  hand  that  has  drawn  me  to 
the  opposite  side  of  this  question !  I  never  have  believed 
in  the  old  dogma  that  the  "  king  can  do  no  wrong,"  nor 
will  I  believe  in  the  newer  dogma,  which  seems  to  prevail 
to  a  too  great  extent  throughout  the  Church,  that  the 
"minister  can  say  no  wrong."  Therefore  I  speak,  and 
speak  freely. 

In  the  beginning,  I  beg  to  remind  the  audience  that 
this  discussion,  although  it  be  with  respect  to  the  disposi- 
tion of  collected  funds,  is  nevertheless  not  one  of  money, 
but  of  principle.  I  say  this  to  disabuse  the  mind  of  my 
friend,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Field,  of  The  Evangelist,  whom  I 
met  yesterday  at  dinner,  and  who  proposed,  as  the  easiest 
solution  .of  our  difficulties,  that  we  should  settle  the 


5 


question  by  "dividing  the  money  among  the  principal 
speakers ! "  (Laughter). 

The  main  question— not  the  technical  question,  but  the 
main  question  which  underlies  this  discussion — the  great 
illuminated  background  against  which  the  present  subject 
stands  out  in  strong  relief — is  the  system  of  American 
slavery  and  the  relation  which  the  American  Church 
bears,  and  ought  to  bear,  to  it. 

I  need  not,  to-night,  characterize  with  any  new  terms 
of  condemnation  that  system  which  crushes  down  four 
millions  of  human  beings,  in  this  nation,  to  a  level  so  low 
that  other  men's  feet  are  set  upon  their  necks  !  I  wili 
not  draw  any  fresh  picture  of  its  horrors  !  it  is  enough 
to  say  that  it  is  a  system  which  denies  to  men  their  own 
manhood  ;  that  strikes  down  womanhood  with  despoiling 
lust ;  that  lays  violent  hands  on  little  children,  disregard- 
ing every  plea  of  pity  ;  that  sunders  every  sacred,  domes- 
tic tie  }  that,  with  cruel  oppression,  crushes  down  God's 
children,  and,  in  the  moment  of  its  cruelty,  points  to  God's 
Word  for  precedent,  and  to  God's  Church  for  the  protect- 
ing shadow  of  its  spire  I  I  call  your  attention  to  the  fact 
that  tbe  American  Church  is  in  complicity  with  this  sys- 
tem to  an  extent  which  you  will  scarcely  credit  when  I 
give  you  the  facts  and  figures.  Listen  a  moment !  I 
have  an  authentic  table  of  statistics,  from  which  it  appears 
that  the  number  of  slaves  owned  by  ministers  and  mem- 
bers of  the  Methodist  Church  is — how  many  do  vou. 
think?    Why,  219,000! 

Mr.  Beecher — That  is,  I  suppose,  in  the  Methodist 
Church  South  ? 

Mr.TiLTON — No,  sir  ;  in  the  Church  South  and  North 
together  ;  fur  both  hold  slaves.  Tbe  number  of  slaves 
owned  by  ministers  and  members  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  Old  School  and  New,  is  77,000  ;  by  Baptists, 
125,000;  by  Reformed  Baptists  (I  don't  think  they  are 
altogether  reformed),  101,000  ;  by  Episcopalians,  88,000  ; 
by  all  other  denominations  (and  1  am  glad  that  in  the 
paper  from  which  I  read  our  own  denomination  is  not  put 
down  by  name),  about  55,000  ;  making  altogether  a  sum 


6 


total  of  more  than  600,000  human  beings— men,  women 
and  children ! — for  whom  the  walla  of  the  Christian 
Church  are  only  a  prison  !  Think  of  it  !  In  this  nine- 
teenth century,  after  the  gospel  of  Christianity  has  been 
for  nearly  two  thousand  years  workiDg  its  way  into  the 
hearts  of  men,  the  Church — claiming  Christ  as  its  founder, 
and  attempting  to  lead  men  along  the  only  way  to  the 
gate  of  Heaven — holds  six  hundred  thousand  human 
beings  in  personal  and  life  long  bondage  to  its  ministers 
and  members!  I  do  not  wonder  that  Albert  Barnes 
said,  if  it  were  not  for  the  American  Chnrch,  American 
slavery  could  not  exist  for  an  hour !  You  must  remem- 
^tr,  too,  that  this  great  multitude  of  slaves,  held  by 
church-members  and  church-ministers,  are  held  every- 
where under  one  and  the  same  pretence.  The  universal 
plea  is  that  "the  circumstances  are  justifiable"!  No 
elavehol^i  who  communes  with  a  Church  will  dare  to 
e;  .ii  aid  mouth  and  say  to  the  world  that  he  holds  his 
siaves  as  the  mass  cf  slave-owners  outside  the  Church 
boid  theirs.  He  denies  that  he  keeps  his  human  property 
for  his  selfish  profit,  and  puts  forth,  instead,  the  miserable 
pretence  that  his  oppression  is  meant  for  the  slaves'  moral 
and  religious  instruction,  and  their  highest  spiritual  good ! 
Nothing  is  more  common  -in  the  Church  than  the  apology 
that  slavery  is  a  benign  missionary  institution! 

Now,  1  wi^h  this  Church  to  aid  in  no  way,  not  even 
by  the  smallest  contribution,  any  Society  or  Board  that 
is  k,  complicity  with  this  cruel  system.  I  shall  attempt 
to  pro^e  that  tbe  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for 
Foreign  M  lesions  is  at  this  moment  in  complicity  with 
this  wroor;  ard  c  rime.  If  I  prove  this,  it  will,  of  course, 
follow  tnut  this  Church  ought  at  once  to  sever  its  con- 
nection with  this  Board. 

Bat,  in  the  first  place,  allow  me  to  express  my  surprise 
at  tbe  way  in  which  my  friend  undertook  to  vindicate  the 
American  Board.  One  of  his  strong  arguments — and  it 
struck  me  with  great  astonishment  I — was  that  this  was 
a  "  venerable  institution  " !  I  say  it  struck  me  with 
astonishment ;  for  I  have  heard  him  declare,  in  this  very 
1* 


7 


pulpit,  that  he  "  would  never  be  moved  by  reverence  one 
step  even  towards  the  worship  of  God ! "  Nay,  sir, 
standing  in  the  presence  of  hoary  institutions  that  have 
claimed  honor  on  account  of  age,  he  has  always  exclaimed, 
"  No!  I  have  iron  knees  1  I  will  not  bow  down  !  "  And 
yet,  on  Monday  night,  be  said,  and  repeated  it  again  and 
again, "  The  American  Board  is  a  venerable  institution !  " 
Sir,  what  if  it  be  venerable  ?  It  is  not  therefore  sacred  ! 
My  friend  will  pardon  me  if  I  say  that  when  he  offered 
that  vindication,  I  took  it  as  a  sarcasm — equalled  only  by 
the  exquisite  humor  that  lay  unconsciously  hid  under  an- 
other argument  which  he  immediately  afterward  alleged, 
that  he  loved  the  American  Board  because,  in  his  early 
life,  he  bad  driven  fast  horses  with  some  of  the  mission- 
aries !  (Laughter.) 

But  the  most  significant  part  of  my  friend's  address 
was  his  plea  for  the  admission  of  slaveholders  into  the 
Church.  I  confess,  sir,  this  was  new  to  me !  For  during 
seven  years  past,  up  to  Monday  night,  if  anybody  had 
asked  me,  "  Would  Plymouth  Church,  under  any  circum- 
stances, admit  a  slaveholder  to  its  membership?"  I 
would  have  answered  most  unqualifiedly, "  No."  I  do 
not  now  refer  to  Mr.  Beecber's  ingenious  and  adroit 
explanation  of  "  immediate  emancipation,"  nor  to  his 
very  humorous  references,  often  made  in  this  pulpit,  to 
"  slavery  per  se."  The  question  is  not  whether  it  is  pos- 
sible instantaneously,  without  a  moment's  flight  of  time 
between  the  will  and  the  deed,  for  a  slaveholder  to  eman- 
cipate his  slave  ;  nor  whether  you  cannot  conceive  of  a 
case  of  slavebolding  which  is  not  a  sin  per  se  ;  but  whe- 
ther a  Christian  Church,  looking  upon  men  who  own  and 
hold  slaves,  shall  take  to  herself,  what  the  world  will  be 
very  ready  to  give,  the  reproach  of  their  admission  into 
her  fellowship !  For,  granting,  for  the  argument's  sake, 
that  a  slaveholder  may,  in  some  rare,  infrequent  instance, 
hold  to  day  without  guilt  a  slave  whom  he  means  to  set 
free  to-morrow — holding  him  not  as  a  slave,  but  as  a  man 
—holding  him  not  in  a  moral  enslavement,  but  under  the 
mere  hollow  shell  of  some  legal  bond  that  cannot  at  this 


8 


moment  be  broken — granting  that  there  can  be  such  a 
case  (and  no  one  will  deny  that  there  may,  although 
the  owner  is  then  the  unwilling  master  of  a  volun- 
tary slave,  and  therefore  not  a  slaveholder,  but  a  man- 
holder),  the  question  is,  Shall  such  a  man,  standing  in  such 
a  relation,  be  received  into  a  Cnurch  which  is  commanded 
to  obey  the  apostolic  injunction  to  avoid  even  the  appear- 
ance of  evil  ? 

Now,  this  is  the  best  possible  or  supposable  case.  But 
in  fifteen  free  States,  even  such  a  possible  case  is  made 
impossible  on  their  own  soil ;  for  if  a  slave  be  brought 
into  New  York,  by  his  master's  consent,  the  slave  is  free 
by  law,  the  moment  he  crosses  the  line.  A  master  can- 
not bring  his  slave  into  a  free  State  under  such  a  regula- 
tion as  my  friend  proposes  to  establish  for  a  Church. 
If,  therefore,  when  a  State  says  to  a  master," bringing  his 
slave  across  its  borders,  "  The  slave  is  free !  "  do  we  make 
any  extraordinary  demand  when  we  turn  to  the  Church 
and  ask  it  to  say  the  same  thing?  to  say  that  when 
a  slaveholding  church-member,  standing  in  his  pew, 
turns  round  and  sees  his  own  slave  coming:  up  the  aisle 
to  take  a  seat  at  the  communion-table,  the  Church  should 
call  out  to  the  slave,  as  the  State  calls  out,  u  From  the 
moment  you  have  crossed  my  threshold,  you  are  free  I " 
Tell  me,  sir,  shall  the  Christian  Church  be  behind  the 
legislative  progress  of  fifteen  States? 

A  slaveholder  is  a  man  and  something  more — a  man 
with  a  chattel.  Now,  I  would  make  the  doors  of  the 
Church  so  narrow  that  when  the  man  tries  to  get  in,  the 
chattel  that  clings  to  him  shall  be  rubbed  off  and  dropped 
behind ! 

But  do  you  tell  me  that  it  is  illiberal  to  exclude  from 
a  Church  a  slave  owner  who  can  prove  that  he  stands  in 
this  supposable  innocent  relation  to  his  slave?  I  reply 
that  if  the  Church  were  itself  liberal  in  all  other  respects 
— if  it  were  to  break  down  its  high  strong  walls  and 
widen  its  platform  to  all  the  world — if  an  evangelical 
Church  would  admit  a  Christian  man  to  membership 
even  if  be  were  a  Unitarian  or  a  Universalist— if  an 


9 

orthodox  congregation  would  give  their  fellowship  and 
open  their  membership  to  a  sincere  and  devout  Roman 
Catholic  (and  my  friend  has  said,  in  this  pulpit,  that 
many  a  Roman  Catholic  has  been  a  sincere  Christian) — 
then,  I  say,  I  will  have  no  objection  to  the  admission  into 
the  Church  of  a  pious  and  devout  slaveholder,  whenever 
you  can  find  such  a  rarity  in  the  land !  Bat  so  long  as 
a  Church  employs  a  committee  to  sit  at  its  gate3,  as  the 
elders  sat  at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem,  to  make  inquisition 
of  every  man  who  knocks  for  admission — to  inquire  of 
every  new  applicant  what  is  his  belief,  and  what  is  big 
practice — so  long  as  no  man  is  allowed  to  come  in  who 
denies  certain  articles  in  our  creed,  or  who  indulges  in 
certain  sins  and  peccadilloes  which  oar  Church  condemas— 
so  long  as  the  Church  determines  to  be  stringent  with  her 
candidates  in  all  these  respects,  then,  sir,  I  say,  let  her  be 
equally  stringent  in  her  inquiries  of  every  man  who  comes 
to  her  threshold  carrying  in  his  hands  the  symbols  of  bon- 
dage by  which  he  holds  his  fellow-men  under  the  yoke  ! 
That  is  all  1  ask ! 

Is  this  unreasonable  ?  Look  at  it !  A  man  applies 
for  admission  to  thi*3  Church.  My  friend,  Mr.  Corning,  is 
a  member  of  the  Examining  Committee.  He  puts  close 
questions  to  the  stranger.  Mr.  Corning  is  a  well  known 
temperance  man  ;  and  he  asks,  "  Do  you  use  intoxicating 
liquors  as  a  beverage  ?  "  or  "  Do  you  sell  liquor  ?  " 
u  Yes,  sir,"  is  the  reply.  "  Then  you  cannot  come  into 
the  membership  of  this  Church."  "  But,"  says  the  man 
to  my  friend,  questioning  him  in  return,  "  do  you  believe 
that  to  drink  a  glass  of  wine  is  a  sin  per  se  ? "  Mr. 
Corning  cannot  say  "  yes."  "  Do  you  believe  that  to  seii 
a  gallon  of  whiskey  is  a  sin  per  se  ?  "  Mr.  Corning  can- 
not say  "  yes."  Nevertheless,  Mr.  Corning  does  not 
hesitate  to  declare  that  the  man  must  not  be  admitted  ! 
But  when,  instead  of  a  rumseller,  there  comes  a  slave- 
holder knocking  at  the  door  of  Christ's  fold,  what  is  Mr. 
Coming's  reply  ?  Why,  Mr.  Corning  would  ask  him  a 
few  preliminary  questions  about  justificatory  circum- 
stances, and  then  say, "  Come  in  I  come  in  !  "   But,  sir, 


It10 

If  joa  exclude  a  dram-drinker,  without  stopping  to  prova 
a  sin  per  se,  how  can  you  admit  a  slaveholder,  under  the 
apology  of  no  ein  per  se  ? 

But  Mr.  Corning  took  especial  pains  to  say,  a  few 
evenings  ago,  that  he  would  stand  on  the  platform  of  the 
Temperance  Society  side  by  side  with  slaveholders.  Sup- 
pos2  he  would  ;  what  has  that  to  do  with  standing  side  by 
side  with  them  in  the  Church?  No  Christian  profes- 
sion is  required  of  a  man  who  enters  the  Temperance 
Society.  If  only  he  be  opposad  to  strong  drink,  he  may 
believe  in  every  heresy  that  ever  a  Church  barred  out 
of  its  creed.  Yet,  when  Mr.  Corning  spoke  so  warmly 
and  earnestly  of  a  certain  Southern  slaveholder,  whom 
he  almost  mentioned  by  name — a  man  prominent  in  the 
Temperance  Union — a  man  with  whom,  as  he  said,  he 
was  not  ashamed  to  stand  anywhere,  by  which  I  suppose 
he  meant  in  the  Church  or  out,  I  could  not  help  saying 
to  myself,  "Ah !  Mr.  Corning,  I  can  tell  you  a  story  of 
that  man !  "  Let  me  tell  it  now !  The  man  is  a  J udge 
in  a  Southern  Court.  A  negro  was  once  brought  before 
him  for  trial,  whose  offence  consisted  in  having  fallen  in 
love  with  a  slave  girl,  and  in  afterward  attempting  to 
steal  her  away  by  night  to  marry  her.  He  was  caught, 
convicted  and  sentenced.  And  what  was  the  sentence  ? 
It  was  the  dark  decree  of  death  ! — as  if  the  crime  had 
been  murder  1  When  the  Judge  was  written  to  in  remon- 
strance by  some  gentlemen  in  the  North,  he  replied,  by 
return  mail,  that  he  had  awarded  the  sentence  on  the 
authority  of  the  Holy  Bible — adding,  "  I  am  surprised 
that  you  should  ha7e  overlooked  the  text :  *  He  that 
stealeth  a  man  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his 
bands,  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death  ! ' "  Now,  it  may 
be  very  safe  for  Mr.  Corning  to  call  this  gentleman  to 
his  side,  to  stand  with  him  in  mutual  cooperation  on  the 
Temperance  platform,  but  what  would  Mr.  Coming's 
friends  in  this  Church  say  if  they  were  to  see  him  calling 
out  to  this  same  chivalric  South  Carolina  Judge  to  come 
and  sit  by  his  side  at  the  communion-table  spread  out  in 
front  ef  this  pulpit,  and  under  this  roof  1 


11 


Bat,  sir,  we  are  not  calied  upon  to  deal  with  romantic* 
ideal  case3  of  slaveholdin?,  where  the  bondage  is  do 
bondage,  bat  only  the  shadow  of  it.  We  are  called  npon 
to  deal  with  slavery  as  blaek  men  experience  it  at  the 
hands  of  red  men  ;  slavery  in  which  slaves  are  held 
not  becanse  it  is  impossible  to  free  them  ;  not  becaa3e 
they  coald  not  take  care  of  themselves  if  they  were  free  ; 
not  becaase  they  are  old  or  iofirm  ;  bat  because  the  mas- 
ters who  own  them  would  lose  their  market-value  by 
emancipating  them  ;  because  they  are  hcuse-servants  who 
are  still  every  day  needed  to  do  the  service  of  the  house  ; 
becaase,  belonging  to  owners,  their  owners  require  that 
they  should  be  put  to  a  proStable  use.  I  need  not  say 
that  they  are  inhumanely  treated.  I  do  not  mean  that 
any  man  shall  trip  me  up  to-night  on  the  easy  charge  that 
I  am  a  fanatic.  These  slaves,  cn  whose  slavery  fail3  the 
solemn  and  silent  shadow  of  the  American  Board,  are 
held  in  the  same  common  bondage  with  the  great  mass 
of  their  brethren  who  suffer  servitude  at  the  hands  of 
ministers  and  members  of  the  great  American  Church. 
Jn  a  word,  they  are  deprived  of  tneir  liberty  without 
their  consent.  This  is  enough.,  even  if  nothing  else  be 
added.  It  is  against  such  slaveholding  a3  this— actual, 
not  imaginary—real,  and  not  ideal— that  I  ask  this 
Church  to  bear  its  testimony. 

Now,  sir,  I  had  always  supposed  that,  holding  these 
views,  1  held  them  in  common  with  the  pastor  of  this 
Church.  A  remark  was  reported  to  me  the  other  day, 
since  thisj  discussion  began,  that  when  the  Congregational 
Church  iu  the  other  district  of  this  city,  of  which  a 
brother  of  Mr.  Beecher  was  chosen  minister,  met  in  coun- 
cil to  decide  upon  a  form  of  government,  the  inquiry 
arose  as  to  whether  they  should  put  into  the  covenant  a 
provision  in  reference  to  the  exclusion  of  slaveholders. 
Our  pastor  said, u  In  the  covenant  of  Pjymouth  Church, 
there  is  no  tuch  provision  ;  bat  we  have  an  examining 
committee  who  are  sharp  encugh  to  detect  any  rumseller 
or  slaveholder  ;  and  you  may  be  sure  that  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other  would  ever  get  in  1 5>   Moreover,  I  have  the 


12 


printed  testimony  of  tbe  pastor  of  tbis  Church  in  which 
he  denies  the  very  position  be  took  the  other  night !  1 
can  qaote  Henry  Ward  Beecher  against  Henry  Ward 
Beecber  (laughter).  Listen  while  I  read  from  a  report 
of  a  speech  delivered  from  this  desk,  and  on  this  very 
subject,  in  the  year  1855.  After  speaking  of  the  Ameri- 
can Home  Missionary  Society,  be  says : 

"  But  there  is  another  Society  that  solicits  your  bene- 
factions— the  American  Missionary  Association.  This  is 
an  Anti-Slavery  Missionary  Society,  and  a  large  number 
of  you,  1  know,  are  interested  in  it.  It  has  missionaries 
in  tbe  slave  States,  who  establish  Churches  th*t  refuse  fel- 
lowship with  slaveholders.    That  is  right;  they  ovght  to  be 

BARRED  OUT  EVERYWHERE  !  " 

Now,  this  is  quoting  the  gentleman  point  blank  against 
himself.  Well,  what  does  it  mean  ?  It  means  this.  In 
1855  a  slaveholder  knocks  at  the  door  of  Plymouth 
Church,  and  Mr.  Beecber,  hearing  tbe  rap,  says,  "Bar 
him  out!  "  In  tbe  year  1860  tbe  slaveholder  knocks  at 
the  same  door,  and  Mr.  Beecher,  after  five  years'  reflec- 
tion, spys, "  Let  him  in  1  " 

A  Voice— No! 

Mr.  Tilton — No?  Let  me  report  the  rumors  of  tbe 
streets  and  the  market-place  1  Wherever  I  go,  whether 
in  the  stage,  in  the  railroad  car,  in  the  ferry-boat,  or  on 
foot  np  and  down  the  etreets,  I  am  perpetually  accosted 
with  tbe  question,  "Is  tbe  pastor  of  Plymouth  Church' 
changing  his  views  ?  Is  Mr.  Beecher  growing  more  con- 
servative?" I  have  always  answered  these  salutations 
with  an  emphatic  No  ;  and  until  Monday  night  I  always 
believed  No.  But  what  am  I  now  to  say  if  my  friend 
puts  up  the  bars  in  1855,  only  to  let  them  down  in  1860  ? 
Martin  Luther  nailed  to  the  church  door  at  Wittemberg 
bis  ninety-five  propositions  and  challenged  all  tbe  world 
to  dispute  them.  I  have  many  a  time  heard  the  pastor 
of  this  Church  called  the  new  Martin  Luther  of  tbe  nine- 
teenth century.  Five  year3  ago,  he  nailed  upon  hi 
church  door  the  declaration  that  no  rumseller  or  slave- 
bolder  should  be  admitted  to  fellowship  inside.    Does  he 


13 


now  tear  down  the  parchment  that  has  been  hanging  on 
these  doors  ever  since  I  knew  this  Church  ?  Nay,  sir,  will 
he  pluck  away  the  greenest  leaves  of  the  laurel  that  has 
been  growiog  greener  and  greener  about  his  head  for  thirty 
years?  Everjbody  asks,  "  Js  be  changing?"  I  reply 
only,  "  Everybody  says  he  is !  "  I  beg  of  him,  if  this  be 
an  unjust  impression  which  everybody  holds,  to  rid  the 
public  mind  of  it  at  once ;  I  beg  of  him  to  clear  away 
such  an  imputation — in  justice  to  himself,  in  justice  to 
this  Church,  in  justice  to  the  Lord  Jesus  whose  minister 
he  is  !  ' 

Now,  sir,  I  charge  the  American  Board  with  compli- 
city with  slavery  because  it  sustains  the  Cherokee  mis 
sion.  During  the  last  ten  or  fifteen  years,  there  has  beeD, 
among  the  Churches  that  patronize  the  Board,  a  discus- 
sion on  the  subject  of  the  Choctaw  and  Cherokee  mis- 
sions. The  anti-slavery  sentiment  has  always  been 
directed  against  these  two  missions,  as  putting  the  Board 
in  complicity  with  slavery.  Last  year,  the  Choctaw 
mission  was  cut  off— for  what  reasons  I  will  not  here  state. 
The  general  impression  among  the  Churches  is  that  the 
Cherokee  mission  was  cut  off  with  the  Choctaw,  and 
that,  therefore,  no  slavery  now  remains,  to  subject  the 
Board  any  longer  to  the  charge  of  oppression.  Only 
yesterday,  I  met  the  Rev.  Mr.  Houghton,  editor  of  the 
American  Presbyterian,  who  said  to  me, "  What  are  you 
discussing  in  your  Church  ?  "  I  replied,  "  Thf>  complicity 
of  the  American  Board  with  slavery  in  its  missions 
among  the  Indians."  "  But,"  said  he,  "  the  Board  have 
cut  off  the  Choctaws,  and  have  bo  cut  off  slavery." 
"  Yes,"  said  I,  11  but  they  still  retain  the  Cherokees." 
"  What !  "  he  inquired,  "  is  there  slaveholdiog  among  the 
Cherokees  ?  "  So  here  was  an  editor  of  a  religious  news- 
paper published  in  Philadelphia  who  did  not  know  that 
the  Cherokee  mission  was  still  in  connection  with  the 
American  Board,  and  that  slaveholders  were  in  connec- 
tion with  the  mission.  A  similar  erroneous  impression 
prevails  widely  among  the  Christian  public. 

If  you  look  at  that  map  [pointing  to  a  large  map 
2 


14 


behind  the  platform],  you  will  see  that  the  Cherokeea 
occupy  tbe  whole  north  of  Indian  Territory,  and  the 
Cboctaws  the  whole  soath.  The  territory  of  "the  Chero- 
kees  is  about  as  large  as  tbe  State  of  Massachusetts. 
These  Indians  are  famous  slaveholders.  I  have  received 
direct  information  from  a  black  man  now  in  Kansas — 
who  was  formerly  a  slave  in  the  South — who  has  been 
bought  and  sold  at  different  times  in  and  out  of  three 
different  States  of  the  Uoion — who  was  at  last  bought 
by  a  Cherckee  owner,  from  whom  he  ran  away  and 
escaped  into  Ean?as.  For  slaves  run  out  of  the  Chero- 
kee nation  into  Kansas,  just  as,  nearer  home,  they  run 
out  of  Delaware  and  Maryland  into  Pennsylvania.  Thi3 
man  declares  that  he  did  not  suffer  in  any  State  such 
eruel  bondage  as  among  the  Cherokees.  Wby?  Be- 
cause tbe  masters  are  Indians  and  have  been  savages.  It 
is  natural  to  suppose  that  oppression  is  more  cruel  under 
Indians  than  under  whites.  I  have  word  also  from  an- 
other slave  in  Kansas,  who  goes  by  the  name  of  *'  Chero- 
kee Bill  " ;  and  he  gives  a  similar  testimony. 

I  will  mention  another  circumstance  to  show  the  char- 
acter of  slavery  among  the  Cherokees.  If  a  fugitive 
escapes  from  Missouri  into  Kansas,  and  the  owner  sends 
a  slave-catcher  after  him,  tbe  hunter,  if  a  successful 
hunt  has  yielded  him  bis  prey,  sometimes  carries  him  back 
to  his  master,  to  be  repaid  by  the  proceeds  of  half  the 
slave's  value  realized  in  cash  at  public  auction,  but  very 
often,  instead  of  carrying  him  back,  he  marches  him 
across  the  Kansas  line  into  tbe  Cherokee  nation,  to  sell 
bim  captive  to  the  Indiana,  from  whom  often  he  can  get 
more  money  than  a  mere  naif  price  !  So  that  the  slave- 
hunters  carry  on  a  double  knavery  ;  first,  catching  the 
slaves  when  they  escape,  and,  then,  when  tbey  are  caught, 
taking  them  to  more  rigorous  masters,  who  will  pay  a 
higher  price. 

Such  are  some  of  the  features  of  slave-hunting  and 
3laveholding  as  practised  by  the  Cheerokees ! 

I  now  undertake  to  review  the  historic  action  of  the 
American  Board  on  the  subject  of  slavery,  with  a  view 


1& 


to  show  its  lamentable  complicity  with  this  terrible  sys- 
tem as  it  exists  among  these  Indians. 

Mr.  Beecher  began  his  review,  in  detail,  at  1845  ;  I 
begin  mine  at  1841.  At  the  meeting  of  that  year,  held 
in  Philadelphia,  a  memorial  was  presented  from  seventeen 
m'nisters  of  New  Hampshire,  most  of  whom  were  hono- 
rary members  of  the  Board,  asking  it  to  break  what  ap- 
peared to  them  "  a  studied  sileoc'e  on  the  subject  of  Ame- 
rican slavery."   The  memorialists  said  : 

"  We  do  think  that  American  slavery  is  such — and 
brought,  in  the  providence  of  God,  so  distinctly  into  the 
notice  of  American  Christians — that  no  man  or  body  of 
men  can  innocently  maintain  a  doubtful  position  in  rela- 
tion to  it." 

What  did  the  Board  reply  ?  They  replied  : 
"  In  regard  to  the  particular  object  of  the  memorialists 
— that  of  obtaining  a  formal  expression  of  the  views  and 
feelings  of  the  Board  respecting  slavery — your  Commit- 
tee do  not  think  that  such  a  measure  is  called  for  y  or  that  it  would 
be  right  or  expedient  I ,} 

At  the  next  meeting,  which  was  in  Norwich,  Ct,  in 
1842,  the  attention  of  the  Board  was  called  to  the  ques- 
tion, "  whether  any,  or,  if  any,  how  many,  of  its  missiona- 
ries were  slaveholders."  It  then  appeared  that  the  Pru- 
dential Committee  had,  for  six  years,  had  a  letter  in 
their  hands,  written  by  one  of  their  missionaries,  stating 
the  fact  of  his  holding  slaves.  For  six  years  !  Yes,  sir ; 
and  during  all  this  time  his  letter  was  lying  in  the  Mis- 
sionary House,  suppressed  by  the  Committee.  Yet  Mr. 
Beecher  said  (I  believe,  without  his  knowing  the  facts) 
that,  from  the  beginning  until  now,  the  Board  had  acted 
up  to  its  highest  light  and  had  kept  pace  with  the  pro- 
gress of  the  times  on  the  subject  of  slavery !  But  the 
Board  said  of  slavery,  that  very  year  : 

"  We  consider  it  as  one  of  the  obvious  evils  which  exist 
in  the  community,  the  removal  of  which,  though  we 
regard  it  as  au  olject  of  fervent  desire  and  prayer,  does 
not  fall  within  our  province  as  a  Missionary  Board.  These 
are  our  settled  principles," 


15 


Bat  the  memorialists  urged  that  the  Board  had  taken 
occasion  to  condemn  other  evils,  and  why  not  slavery,  the 
sum  of  evils  ?   To  this  the  Board  replied  : 

"  It  is  alleged  by  tbe  memorialists  that  the  Board  has 
departed  from  these  principles  and  has  expressed  opinions 
relative  to  other  prevailing  evils.  Respecting  intemper- 
ance, licentiousness,  Indian  oppression,  and  some  other 
hindrances  to  the  progress  of  Christianity,  as  tbey  pre- 
vailed in  the  countries  where  the  missions  of  the  Board 
are  established,  and  powerfully  counteracted  the  labors 
of  the  missionaries,  and  in  some  iostanses  subjected  them 
to  great  peril,  the  Board  has  stated  the  facts  as  they  occurred, 
and  in  various  forms,  more  or  less  explicit,  has  uttered  the  Ian- 
guage  of  condemnation.  These  evils,  existing  in  the  coun- 
tries where  tbe  missions  are  operating,  and  standing 
directly  in  tbe  way  of  the  Board's  accomplishing  its 
object,  were,  of  course,  legitimate  and  proper  subjects  for  its 
animadversion  If  it  has  at  any  time  gone  further  than 
this,  and  expressed  opinions  relative  to  immoralities  or 
evils  of  any  kind,  prevailing  in  this  country,  and  not 
directly  counteracting  the  labors  of  the  missionaries,  your  Com- 
mittee regard  such  action  as  a  departure  from  the  great 
principles  on  which  the  Board  was  organized,  and  by 
which  they  think  its  proceedings  should  always  be 
governed." 

Now,  what  is  the  meaning  of  these  words  ?  Sir,  they 
mean  that  intemperance,  licentiousness  and  Indian  oppres- 
sion are  hindrances  to  the  missions  ;  but  that  slavery  is 
no  hindrance !  That  is  a  Christian  discrimination  for 
you  1  Yet  Mr.  Beecher,  in  speaking  of  the  Board  as  it 
stood  in  1845,  said,  "  You  must  remember  the  general 
sentiment  on  temperance  then — how  lax  it  was."  Bat 
even  three  years  before  1845,  in  1842,  the  Board  was 
already  leading  public  sentiment  on  this  subject ;  it  had 
already  expressed  unequivocally  its  condemnation  of  in- 
temperance among  the  Cherokees ;  it  had  done  this  not- 
withstanding what  my  friend  called  the  "  general  laxity 
of  public  sentiment  in  respect  to  intemperance  "  ;  but  at 
the  same  time,  it  let  slavery  entirely  alone. 

You  perceive  that  it  bore  testimony  against  licentious- 


11 


ness.  .  What  is  the  most  fruitful  cause  of  licentiousness 
in  a  slaveholding  country?  Slavery !  And  why  ?  Be- 
cause it  breaks  down  all  barriers  to  honor,  because  it 
despoils  chastity,  because  it  invades  the  sanctity  of  the 
family,  because  it  destroys  every  personal  right !  Yet 
the  Board,  in  testifying  against  these  separate  evils,  said 
not  a  single  word  against  that  which  was  at  that  very  time 
the  fruitful  mother  of  them  all ! 

The  report  speaks  of  "  Indian  Oppression ! "  Ah,  yes  ! 
how  near  it  came  to  saying  the  right  word  !  It  saved 
itself  only  by  making  it  plainly  appear  that "  Indian 
oppression  "  meant  oppression  by  Indians  in  the  East,  not 
by  Indians  in  the  West ! 

The  next  meeting  was  at  Worcester,  in  1844.  The 
memorials  kept  pouring  in !  Yet,  if  the  Board  was  really 
up  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  why  was  it  troubled  with 
such  a  host  of  memorials  ?  What  did  the  memorialists 
ask  ?   They  said  : 

M  We  ask  the  Board  earnestly  to  entreat  all  the  mis- 
sionaries and  agents  under  its  patronage  to  bear  decided 
testimony  against  the  sin  of  oppression,  wherever  and 
in  whatever  form  it  exists ;  and  most  especially  to 
declare,  in  the  name  of  the  Board,  of  the  Churches  repre- 
sented by  it,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  whom  they  preach,  that 
American  slavery  is  a  sin  against  God,  and  that  its  exist- 
ence in  a  Christian  land  is  in  nowise  chargeable  to  the 
Christian  religion  which  they  are  commissioned  to  preach, 
bat  is  grossly  at  variance  with  all  its  holy  doctrines  and 
precepts.  And  we  further  pray  that  the  Board  would  imme- 
diately take  measures  to  ascertain  to  what  extent  slavery  or  oppres- 
won  exists  in  the  Churches  under  its  patronage,  and  especially 
among  the  Choctaws  and  other  Indian  tribes ;  and  take  such, 
action  at  this  meeting  as  shall  speedily  remove  the  evil,  or  exone- 
rate them  and  their  missionaries  from  all  the  responsibility  and 
guilt  of  its  continuance  or  toleration" 

Now,  my  friend  says  we  must  remember  the  difference 
in  public  sentiment  between  that  time  and  this.  But  this 
appeal  in  1844  is  all  we  ask  in  1860 !  We  ask  no  more 
now  than  those  memorialists  asked  then !  But  so  far 
from  the  Board  keeping  pace  with  the  times  on  this  sub- 


IS 


ject,  before  the  very  next  annual  meeting  the  Rev.  Amos 
A.  Phelps  wrote  and  left  on  record  these  words : 

u  The  position  of  the  Board,  from  the  beginniug  of  the 
preseot  movement  in  behalf  of  the  slave,  ifl  that  of  resist- 
ance to  the  general  progress,  and  on  the  side  of  slavery." 

It  is  too  late,  therefore,  for  Mr.  Beecher  to  say  in  1860 
that  the  Board  kept  pace  with  the  progress  of  the  age, 
when  in  1844,  an  eye  witness  of  the  progress  which  the 
age  was  making  declared  that  the  Board  was  resisting 
that  general  progress,  and  on  the  side  of  slavery  I 

What  was  doBe  by  the  Board  in  that  year?  Tbey 
quoted  their  declaration  of  the  preceding  year,  adding 
only  these  words : 

'*  It  is  quite  certain  that,  without  a  change  of  views, 
the  Board  can  do  nothiog  beyond  this." 

A  change  of  views !  That  is  what  I  charge — that  they 
Deeded  a  change  of  views !  Tbey  had  Dot  yet  been  con- 
verted to  anti-slavery  sentiment.  In  genuine  conversion 
there  are  two  thing?,  Damely,  a  change  of  views  and  a 
change  of  conduct.  The  Board  had  not  then  come  even 
to  a  change  of  views! 

Then  followed  the  meeting  in  1845,  with  which  Mr. 
Beecher  begaD  bis  speech.  So  lcng  ago  as  that  year,  he 
said,  the  Board  gave  utterance  to  anti-slavery  principles. 
Be  quoted  from  the  annual,  report  an  allusion  to  Dr. 
Chalmers's  admission  that  slavehoiding  was  not  necessarily 
sinful.  The  words  of  the  quotation  were  scarcely  out  of 
his  mouth  before  a  note,  written  in  lead-pencil,  was  passed 
to  me  in  my  seat  by  a  stranger  in  the  audience.  It  was 
in  these  words : 

"  The  opinion  of  Dr.  Chalmers  end  others  of  the  Scotch 
Free  Church  was  delivered  at  a  time  when  a  deputation 
had  visited  tbe  United  States  to  collect  funds  for  tbe  sup- 
port of  the  Free  Church.  The  people  of  Scotland  (the 
Dissenters)  held  pubiic  meetings,  at  which  it  was  urged 
that  the  Free  Church  should  4  cast  back  to  America  the 
impious  gift.7  " 

Mere  than  that,  wLen  I  went  to  my  office  cext  morning, 
2* 


19 


I  found  on  my  desk  a  note  from  another  gentleman  to 
whom  Mr.  Beecber  referred  by  name,  in  reading  his  quo- 
tation from  Dr.  Chalmers  ;  I  mean  Mr.  M'Kay,a  Scotch- 
man and  a  member  of  Plymouth  Church.  I  will  read 
part  of  it: 

"  I  ask  you  to  vindicate  lAul&  Scotia 9  for  her  own  sake, 
and  for  mine.  In  the  year  1843,  the  *  Disruption  9  gave 
birth  to  the  Free  Churca  of  Scotland.  They  were  in  want 
of  money,  and  sent  a  deputation  from  Scotland  to  these 
United  States  for  the  purpose  of  soliciting  their  sympathy 
and  assistance.  They  went  to  the  Southern  States, 
received  the  hospitality  and  contributions  of  slaveholders 
and  slaveholdiug  Churches,  and  this  in  spite  of  a  protest 
made  to  them  on  their  arrival  at  New  York.  They  went 
back  to  Scotland  with  a  good  deal  of  money — and  a  great 
deal  of  disgrace  (laughter)  ;  and  from  the  Tweed  to  John 
O'Groat's  the  Free  Church  became  a  hiseing  and  a  bye- 
word,  so  much  so  that  you  might  have  seen  placarded, 
around  the  streets  of  Edinburgh, 4  Send  back  the  money 
—Send  back  the  money.' J) 

Mr.  Beecher— Did  they  send  it  back?  (Laughter.) 

Mr.  Tilton — I  do  not  know ;  but  they  ought  to  have 
sent  it  back  (renewed  laughter  and  applause).  So  much 
for  Dr.  Chalmers  1 

Now,  this  report  of  1845  cites  some  facts,  among  which 
I  select  two.   It  says  : 

"  In  Christian  instruction  and  care,  both  of  their  chil- 
dren and  tbeir  slaves,  the  missionaries  represent  these 
Indian  church-members  as  being  generally  and  often  greatly 
deficient.77 

Also, 

"Among  the  Cherokees  and  Cboctaws  the  church-mem- 
bers are  but  poorly  qualified  to  give  religious  instruction  ; 
and  often  the  slave*- — owing  to  their  better  knowledge  of 
the  English  language,  and  consequently  their  easier  inter- 
course with  the  missionaries  and  others — are  more  intelligent 
on  religious  subjects  than  their  masters." 

g  And  yet  Mr.  Beecher  thicks  that  tbe  Report  of  1845 
expresses  a  true  sentiment  on  tbe  subject  of  slavery. 


20 


What  sentiment  does  it  express  ?  Not  that  an  ignorant 
slave  shall  be  held  by  a  kind-hearted  master  and  trained 
and  educated,  until  he  shall  at  last  be  lifted  up  into  the 
light  and  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God  ;  but  that  an  intdW 
gent  slave,  well-informed  on  religious  subjects,  having  the 
grace  of  God  in  his  heart,  shall  be  held  in  bondage  by  an 
ignorant  man,  who  wrongly  treats  not  only  his  own  slaves, 
but  his  own  children  ! 

I  need  not  a3k  him  to  answer  whether  that  is  a  "  true 
sentiment  on  the  subject  of  slavery  " ! 

In  view  of  these  facts,  laid  before  the  Board,  what  was 
done?  NothiDg  1  Mark  you,  the  Board  knew  that  igno- 
rant men,  unable  to  take  care  of  their  own  children,  were 
trying  to  take  care  of  slaves  who  knew  more  than  their 
masters  ;  and  yet  the  Board,  knowing  full  well,  from  the 
testimony  of  their  own  Secretary,  that  this  was  the  char- 
acter of  these  slaveholders,  approved  their  admission  to 
the  Mission  Churches !  Is  it  possible,  then,  that  Mr. 
Beecher  can  believ  e  "  the  Board  was  up  to  the  progress  of 
the  times  on  the  subject  of  slavery 99  ?  Is  it  possible  that 
he  can  sav, "  I  am  not  ashamed  to  stand  where  they 
stood"? 

Ah,  sir,  what  must  have  been  the  feelings  of  those 
intelligent  slaves  whom  this  report  so  highly  compliments? 
— those  slaves  who  kDew  more  than  their  masters — those 
slaves  so  well  informed  on  religious  subjects — those  slaves 
whose  minds  God  had  enlightened  and  whose  hearts  he 
had  touched  with  his  love  ? — I  ask,  sir,  what  must  have 
been  their  emotions  when  this  report  from  the  Board 
reached  their  hovels  and  cabins  ?  I  think  I  can  almost 
see  the  figure  of  Christ  standing  once  again,  as  of  old, 
among  bis  poor  on  earth,  and  with  that  divine  voice  that 
spake  as  never  man  spake,  saying,  with  sad  reproach,  to 
that  Missionary  Board,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  unto 
the  least  of  these,  ye  did  it  not  unto  me!  " 

Now,  sir,  I  am  willing  to  admit  that  there  are  a  great 
many  thiugs  in  this  report  that  are  sound,  frank  and  anti- 
slavery  ;  but  what  was  the  action  which  followed  the 
words  ?    The  action !    Was  it  up  to  the  progress  of  the 


M 


age  ?  No,  air !  For  almost  at  that  very  moment— after 
this  message  had  been  sent  by  the  American  Board  to 
those  slaves — the  new  Society,  the  American  Missionary 
Association,  sprang  into  existence  as  a  living  protest 
against  the  Board's  complicity  with  slavery.  It  was  formed 
because  the  Board  had  proved  itself  behind  the  progress 
of  the  times.  The  American  Missionary  Association 
arose  in  testimony  against  that  backwardness;  and  to- 
day, every  one  of  its  missionaries  and  agents,  every  one  of 
its  members  and  contributors,  makes  a  virtual  protest 
against  the  Board's  complicity  with  slavery.  Every  one 
of  its  distant  mission  stations— in  the  West  Indies,  in 
Africa,  in  the  Sandwich  Islands,  among  the  Copts  of 
Egypt,  and  nearer  home,  in  Canada,  among  the  Obijue 
and  Ottawa  Indians— makes  a  perpetual  protest  against 
that  Board  I  Yes,  sir,  even  among  the  Indians.  For  the 
Indians  of  one  tribe,  receiving  their  religious  teachings 
from  the  Missionary  Association,  rise  up  in  protest  against 
the  slavery  practised  by  another  tribe  who  are  sanctioned 
in  their  oppression  by  the  American  Board  I 

Mr.  Beecher — I  would  like  to  ask  whether  Mr.  TiUon 
would  prefer  that  any  misstatement  of  fact  he  makes 
respecting  my  speech  should  be  met  at  the  time,  or  whe- 
ther I  should  reserve  the  correction  until  he  finishes  his 
speech. 

Mr.  Tilton— I  would  consult  your  own  preference, 
not  mine,  in  regard  to  that. 

Mr.  Beecher— I  did  not  undertake  to  say  that  the 
Board,  in  1841, 2, 3,  5,  nor  1848,  were  up  to  the  standard 
of  the  present  time,  nor  up  to  the  standard  of  some  of  the 
most  enlightened  men  of  those  times.  I  merely  said,  com- 
prehensively, that,  looking  at  the  Board,  in  its  action  from 
1845  up  to  this  day,  it  had  been  influenced  by  the  times 
and  had  come  up  to  their  standard. 

Mr.  Tilton — Any  remarks  which  my  friend  may  make, 
I  shall  receive  in  the  spirit  of  kindness  and  courtesy. 

1  now  come  to  the  meeting  of  1848,  held  at  Boston — 
the  year  in  which  Mr.  Treat  made  his  famous  report.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  my  friend  compared  Mr.  Treat's 


report  to  the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians !  Now,  let  as 
see  what  it  is  that  is  so  much  like  the  Epistles  to  the 
Corinthians  (laughter).  In  respect  to  the  number  of 
slaves,  Mr.  Treat  writes  : 

"  Some  say  that  among  the  Cherokees  there  are  not 
more  than  seven  hundred  ;  while  others  tbink  there  are 
as  many  as  fifteen  hundred.  The  )atter  is  the  estimate  of 
the  Principal  Chief,  and  it  is  most  likely  to  be  correct. 
At  any  rate  we  must  suppose  the  proportion  of  slaves  to 
Cherokees  to  be  nearly,  if  not  quite,  one  to  ten.  It  is 
hardly  possible  that/ persons  held  in  bondage  by  such  a 
people  should  be  in  as  favorable  circumstances  as  those 
who  have  fallen  into  the  bands  of  enlightened  and  humane 
masters  in  the  States;  esppcially  if  those  masters  are 
under  the  influence  of  Christian  principle,  and  are  endea- 
voring to  treat  their  slaves  according  to  the  injunctions  of 
the  gospel." 

Now,  these  extracts  show  that  these  slaves  were  not  in 
so  happy  a  condition  as  others  in  other  places,  who  had 
access  to  the  New  Testament.  This  deprivation  of  the 
Scriptures,  however,  was  soon  to  be  remedied  in  part ; 
for  as  soon  as  Mr.  Treat  could  send  them  his  letter,  they 
would  have,  if  not  the  whole  Scriptures,  at  least  the 
Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  (laughter).  I  will  read  some 
more  verses  from  these  Epistles : 

"  The  predominant  influence  in  both  nations  is  mainly 
in  the  hands  of  slaveholders.  The  intelligence  and  enter- 
prise which  enable  them  to  acquire  this  species  of  pro* 
perty  also  qualify  them  for  an  active  and  successful  par- 
ticipation in  public  affairs.  And  many  belonging  to  this 
class  would  certainly  resist,  to  the  utmost,  any  proposal 
tending  to  the  abolition  of  slavery." 

Give  good  heed,  for  I  am  quoting  from  Mr.  Beecher's 
Scriptures  (laughter). 

"  It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  aim  of  the  brethren 
to  exert  any  direct  influence,  either  by  their  public  or  their 
private  teachings,  upon  the  system  of  slavery.  And  they 
discovered,  as  they  supposed,  a  sufficient  warrant  for  this 
course  in  the  JStw  Testament." 

What?   In  the  Eputies  to  the  Corinthians?  Yes! 


22 

For,  if  not  in  the  old  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  at  least  in  the 
Dew  Epistle  of  St.  Treat !  (Laughter.) 

Mr.  Beecher— I  think  you  have  extracted  from  two 
documents ;  the  first  a  letter,  the  second  a  report.  My 
remark  in  reference  to  the  uninspired  book  of  Corin- 
thians (laughter)  was  to  the  letter  and  not  the  report. 

Mr.  Tilton — Well,  sir,  it  makes  very  little  difference; 
both  are  from  Mr.  Treat. 

What,  now,  are  the  views  of  the  missionaries  them- 
selves? The  missionaries  among  the  Cherokees  have 
said,  in  a  document  signed  by  all  their  number  : 

"  In  regard  to  the  question  of  rejecting  any  person  from 
the  Church  simply  because  he  is  a  slaveholder,  we  cannot 
for  a  moment  hesitate.  For  we  regard  it  as  certain  that 
the  Apostles,  who  are  our  patterns,  did  receive  slavek.ldtrs  to  the 
communion  of  the  Church;  and  we  have  not  yet  beea  able 
to  perceive  any  such  difference  between  their  circum- 
stances and  ours  as  to  justify  us  in  departing  from  their 
practice  in  this  respect." 

Thus  they  defend  slaveholding  from  the  Bible !  They 
say,  moreover : 

"  Nor  can  we  even  make  it  a  test  of  piety,  or  a  condi- 
tion of  admission  to  the  privileges  of  the  Courcb,  that  a 
candidate  should  express  a  determination  not  to  live  and  die  a 
slaveholder.77 

That  is  to  say,  they  would  not  only  receive  slaveholders, 
but  would  not  require  them  to  give  a  pledge  that  they 
would  not  live  and  die  slaveholders.    Still  further  : 

"  You  asked  (say  the  missionaries),  among  other  things, 
whether  we  would  undertake  to  discipline  a  church  mem- 
ber for  buying  or  selling  slaves  as  merchandise,  for  g*in." 

Now,  the  letter  of  the  missionaries  goes  on  to  give  a 
large  number  of  instances.   I  will  recite  one : 

"  Between  the  two  extremes  of  purchasing  for  t^e 
slave's  sake,  and  buying  and  selling  wiih  a  total  disre- 
gard of  the  interest  of  the  slave,  there  are  many  cases  of 
mixed  motive,  whtre  the  buyer  or  seller  might  allow  that  he  had 
regard  to  his  own  interest;  but  yet,  as  he  makes  the  condition  of 
the  slave  no  worse  but  perhaps  much  belter,  by  the  transfer* 
neither  he  nor  most  of  his  brethren  in  the  Church  could  be  led  to 
%te  thai  he  had  been  guilty  of  any  violation  of  the  law  of  l-ove" 


24 


Oh,  yes !   That  is  the  argument  that  seeks  to  promote  j 
the  revival  of  the  slave  trade  !   To  briDg  the  benighted 
African  to  this  country  to  receive  the  benefits  of  Christian  I 
institutions ! 

"Occasional  exchanges  of  masters,"  they  add,  "  are  so  J 
inseparable  from  the  existence  of  slavery  that  the  Churches 
could  not  consistently  receive  slaveholders  to  their  com-  J 
munion  at  all,  and  at  the  same  time  forbid  all  such  ex-  ] 
cbaDges.  We  regard  it,  therefore,  as  impossible  to  exercise  i\ 
discipline  for  the  buying  or  selling  of  slaves,  except  in  flagrant  j| 
cases  of  manifest  disregard  to  the  weltare  of  the  slave."  j 

Is  this  the  commentary  on  the  Epistles  to  the  Corin- 11 
tbians  ?    Why,  sir,  print  that  and  send  it  to  Italy  ;  let  it  9 
find  its  way  into  Florence,  where  Mrs.  Stowe  is  now  re-  I 
siding ;  say  that  Henry  Ward  Beecher's  name  is  at  the 
bottom  of  it  as  endorsement ;  what  would  Mrs.  Stowe 
pay  ?  She  would  exclaim,  with  a  b!u9b,  "  It  is  a  forgery  of  I 
his  name  !  "  Nay,  sir,  the  pastor  of  this  Church  would  him-  I 
self  blush  to  see  his  name  signed  to  any  such  sentiment  as  I 
that !    Baying  and  selling  slaves !    What  i3  that  but  the  I 
Slave  Trade  ?    And  what  is  the  Slave  Trade  ?    Ah,  sir,  fl 
on  the  high  seas,  it  is  pronounced  piracy,  but — wonderful  j 
anomaly ! — on  land  it  is  pronounced  Christianity  !    Yet  18 
what  is  the  difference  between  the  horrors  of  the  middle  J 
passage  and  the  horrors  of  the  overland  passage  ?  What 
.«s  the  difference  between  the  sufferings  of  the  lower  deck  J 
and  the  terrors  of  the  chain  gang  ?   None  at  all,  sir  1 
I  tell  you  there  is  just  as  much  deep  despair  and  hopeless  *| 
horror  in  the  slave  jail  as  there  ever  was  in  the  slave  ^ 
ship!    And  yet  these  missionaries  have  set  their  hand  J 
and  seal  to  this  paper,  which  declares  that  they  cannot  1 
forbid,  even  in  their  own  Churches,  the  buying  and  selling:  | 
of  men  and  women  !    In  other  words,  under  the  name  of  I 
carrying  on  missionary  operations,  they  are  carrying  on 
the  slave  trade !   They  say  further  : 

"  In  regard  to  the  separation  of  parents  and  children, 
we  must  first  remark  that  it  is  one  of  those  things  which 
are  not  forbidden  by  any  express  injunction  of  Scripture." 
*****  Very  young  children,  we  believe,  are  seldom  sepa- 


25 


rated  from  their  mothers,  In  our  Churches,  we  do  not  re- 
member to  have  known  an  instance.  In  regard  to  older 
children,  many  cases  may  arise  where  neither  the  condition  of  the 
parent  nor  that  of  the  child  will  be  rendered  wor^e,  but  that  of  on* 
of  them  may  be  greatly  improved  by  the  proposed  separation  ;  and 
where  it  cannot  be  readily  shown  to  bs  any  more  a  viola- 
tion of  the  law  of  love  than  any  other  transfer  of  a  slave 
from  one  master  to  another.  It  is  impossible,  in  our  circum 
stances,  to  make  it  a  general  rule  that  the  separation  of  parents 
and  children,  by  sale  or  purchase ,  shall  be  regarded  as  a  discipli- 
nable offence  V 

These  are  the  views  of  the  missionaries !  Now,  who 
wrote  this  statement  of  principles?  It  was  written  by 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Worcester,  whose  name  signs  it.  Yet,  do 
you  not  remember  how  Mr.  Beecher  eulogized  this  same 
Rev.  Mr.  Worcester,  the  other  night  ?  You  have  not 
yet  forgotten  bow  he  described  him  with  glowing  words 
as  a  man  in  whose  veins  flowed  New  England  blood,  upon 
whose  arms  had  hung  prisoners'  chains,  and  who  once 
had  been  thrown  into  a  dungeon  for  Christ's  sake !  My 
friend  asked, "  Could  such  a  man,  with  such  New  Eng- 
land blood,  be  anything  else  than  ah  anti-slavery  man  ?  M 
But,  sir,  that  was  the  very  man  whose  hand  wrote  these 
lines  !  Archbishop  Cranmer,  in  a  moment  of  weakness, 
recanted  his  Protestant  faith  ;  afterwards,  when  his  con- 
science reproached  him,  he  recanted  his  recantation  ;  he 
was  soon  after  brought  to  suffer  at  the  stake.  While  the 
fires  of  martyrdom  were  kindling  about  him,  be  stretched 
out  hi3  right  hand  into  the  flames,  and  there  held  it  until  it 
was  burned  off,  and  fell  to  ashes,  crying  out  the  while, 
"  Unworthy  hand  !  unworthy  hand  ! "  Sir,  if  I  had  writ- 
ten only  the  single  sentence  that  I  have  read  from  this 
statement,  so  quietly  and  sacredly  sanctioning  the  tearing 
away  of  children  from  their  parents,  whenever  I  looked 
upon  the  hand  that  had  held  the  pen,  I  would  have  cried 
out,  "  Unworthy  band  !  unworthy  band  !  " 

^  And  yet  my  friend  stood  on  these  boards  on  Monday 
night  to  picture  to  us,  in  complimentary  strain,  the  cur- 
rent of  New  England  blood  that  flowed  in  this  man's 
veins,  and  to  say,  pointing  with  his  emphatic  finger, 
3 


26 

"  Here  waa  an  anti-slavery  man !  "  Sir  [turning  to  Mr. 
Beecher],  I  know  too  well  your  quick  instinct  for  freedom 
ever  to  believe  that  yon  were  cognizant  of  these  facta 
when  you  uttered  that  eulogy  ! 

But,  besides,  io  regard  to  the  impression  which  my 
friend  produced,  that  Mr.  Worcester  was  thrown  into 
prison  because  of  his  allegiance  to  the  anti-slavery  cause, 
this  is  an  entire  mistake.  The  facts  were  6imply  these  : 
The  Cherokee  mission  was  at  that  time  in  the  State  of 
Georgia.  The  Legislature  of  Georgia  tried  to  crowd  out 
the  Indians  from  the  State  in  order  to  seize  their  lands. 
Mr.  Worcester,  who  was  at  that  early  day  a  missionary, 
defended  the  Indians.  For  that  reason,  and  for  that 
reason  alone,  he  was  put  in  jriil.  There  was  not  a  shadow 
of  anti  slavery  principle  involved  io  the  matter. 

Now,  what  did  the  Board  do  after  all  these  statements 
h  id  been  received  from  the  missionaries,  at  that  famous 
meeting  of  1848?  Why,  sir,  Dr.  Blancbard,  who  baa 
since  been  President  of  Knox  College,  offered  the  follow- 
ing resolution  : 

"  Resolved,  That  this  Board  distinctly  admits  and 
affirms  the  principle  that  slaveholdiug  is  a  practice  which 
is  not  to  be  allowed  in  the  C&ristian  Church." 

How  was  this  resolution  received  ?    Look  at  the 
annual  report  of  1848 !     Here  is  the  neat  and  pretty  i 
record.    The  report  remarks  : 

"  Dr.  Blancbard  having  been  requested  to  withdraw 
these  resolutions,  consented  to  do  so  ;  and  the  Board  per- 
mitted thetn  to  be  inserted  in-the  minutes  of  the  meeting." 

Now,  would  not  any  one  suppose,  on  reading  these 
minutes,  that  Dr.  Blancbard,  after  having  offered  his  re- 
solution, finally  came  to  a  sober  second  thought,  and 
thoaght  it  better  to  withdraw  it?  Certainly!  But 
turn  back  to  the  newspaper  files  of  that  day  and  see  what 
was  the  sentiment  of  that  meeting.  The  moment  it  be- 
came apparent  that  tke  Board  was  going  to  sweep  awsy 
the  resolution,  without  leaving  even  so  much  as  a  record 
of  it  on  the  minutes,  the  Rev.  Edward  Beecher  rose  to 
his  feet  and  protested,  saying,  "  Gentlemen,  you  must  not 
do  that ! "   Dr.  Lyman  Beecher  followed  his  son,  protest- 


21 

ing,  with  all  the  eloquence  of  his  palmiest  days, "  Brethren, 
you  must  not  do  that ! "  Bat  the  resolution  could  not 
be  passed,  and  the  only  way  to  get  it  on  the  records 
at  all,  in  a  parliamentary  manner,  was  for  Dr.  B!an- 
chard  to  withdraw  it.  So  it  was  withdrawn,  not  will- 
ingly, but  necessarily.  But  the  Rev.  Henry  Ward 
Beecher  says  that,  comprehensively,  he  has  agreed  to 
sympathize  with  the  Board  from  the  beginning !  Will 
he  sympathize  with  that  against  which  both  his  brother 
and  his  father  protested?  His  brother  Edward  was  then, 
as  be  is  now,  an  older  man  than  he,  by  some  years  ;  and 
perhaps,  therefore,  their  disparity  of  views  may  be  put 
down  to  the  "  Conflict  of  Ages"  (loud  laughter). 

Skipping  now  the  long  interval  of  seven  years  of  silence, 
we  come  to  the  visit  of  Secretary  Wood  to  the  Choctaws 
and  Cherokees,  in  1855.  We  come  to  the  Good  water 
document.  Mr.  Beecher  says  that  the  case  must  stand  or 
fall  with  the  Good  water  document.  That  paper  begins 
as  follows : 

"Slavery,  as  a  system,  and  in  its  own  proper  nature,  is 
what  it  is  described  to  be  in  the  General  Assembly's  Act 
of  1818,  and  the  Report  of  the  American  Board  adopted 
at  Brooklyn  in  1845." 

I  have  already  read  a  sufficient  part  of  the  report  of 
1845  to  show  that  it  meant  nothing.  Now,  what  is  the 
"General  Assembly's  Act  of  1818"? 

Here  let  me  ask,  Has  anybody  in  this  wide  land  ever 
been  more  severe  against  the  Colonization  Society  than 
the  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher?  Every  one  who  is 
familiar  with  bis  speeches  will  say  "  No."  You  know  that 
that  Society  says  to  the  black  man  who  wants  liberty, 
"You  can  get  it  only  at  the  price  of  expatriation  and 
exile."  And  yet,  by  accepting  this  report  of  the  General 
Assembly  of  1818,  the  missionaries  distinctly  declare 
their  adhesion  to  the  principles  of  the  Colonization  So- 
ciety, and  express  their  desire  to  carry  on  its  work  of 
expatriation ! 

Still  further.  Does  the  testimony  of  1818  make  the 
buying  and  selling  of  slaves  a  disciplinable  offence  ?  No, 


28 


only  so  far  as  "  selling  slaves  to  those  who  will  either 
themselves  deprive  these  unhappy  people  of  the  blessings 
of  the  gospel,  or  who  will  transport  them  to  places  where 
the  gospel  is  not  proclaimed."  And  yet  this  document 
is  what  Mr.  Beecher  says  he  is  willing  to  stand  or  fall  by  1 

I  admit  that  there  are  many  strong  utterances  in  the 
General  Assembly's  Act  of  18i8  ;  but  tell  me  why  this 
Presbyterian  document  was  sent  for  signature  to  a  Con- 
gregational mission  ?  When  the  Prudential  Committee 
wanted  the  missionaries  to  utter  a  testimony  against 
slavery,  why  did  they  not  ask  the  missionaries  to  write 
their  testimony  with  fresh  ink  and  on'fresh  paper?  Why 
did  the  Prudential  Committee  dig  up  out  of  the  dust  a 
dingy  parchment  well-nigh  fifty  years  old  ?  The  reason 
is  plain!  From  the  very  year  of  the  signing  of  that 
document  down  through  all  the  long  lapse  of  time  until 
to-day,  that  act  has  been  a  dead  letter.  I  speak  the  truth  ! 
No  man  can  gainsay  it !  For,  what  kind  of  testimony  is 
that,  against  slavery,  under  which,  as  I  have  already  read, 
there  has  grown  up  a  Presbyterian  Church  which  at  this 
moment  is  holding  in  bonds  thousands  and  tens  of  thou- 
sands of  human  beings !  Under  the  shadow  of  that  Act 
of  1818,  there  has  been  gathered  together,  in  the  Pres- 
byterian Church,  so  great  a  multitude  of  slaves,  owned 
by  its  members  and  its  ministers,  that  if  they  were  mar- 
shalled into  one  host,  th:y  would  make  an  Emperor's 
grand  army  I  I  gave  you,  from  a  table  of  statistics,  the 
exact  number — 77,000 !  Listen  to  a  story  which  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Fee,  of  Kentucky,  tells : 

"  I  know  the  case  of  a  minister  in  this  same  Cburcb, 
and  in  our  State,  who,  that  he  might  take  another  man's 
wife  from  him  (which  woman  he  claimed  as  his  slave,  and 
said  to  be  so  white  that  she  was  freckled),  hastened  from 
house  to  home  on  Sabbath  morning  to  hire  the  pons  of 
Presbyterian  elders  to  go  forthwith  and  bunt  his  slave 
woman  ;  and  being  reproved  by  a  Methodist  sister  for 
tempting  the  young  men  to  go  and  desecrate  the  Sabbath, 
he  replied,  *  Madam,  it  is  the  preacher's  nigger.'  And 
yet,  that  man  was  and  is  a  preacher  in  good  and  regular 
standing  in  that  body." 

This  is  the  kind  of  anti-slavery  sentiment  and  practice 

\ 


29 


that  has  grown  up  in  the  great  Presbyterian  Church, 
Old  School  and  New,  under  the  shadow  of  the  General 
Assembly's  Act  of  1818,  by  which  my  friend  declares  he 
will  either  stand  or  fall ! 

What  is  the  next  thing  in  this  Goodwater  platform  ? 

"Privation  of  liberty  in  holding  slaves  is,  therefore, 
not  to  be  ranked  with  things  indifferent,  but  with  those 
which,  if  not  made  right  by  special  justificatory  circum- 
stances and  the  intention  of  the  doer,  are  morally  wrong." 

Now,  let  me  ask,  what  is  it,  in  any  case,  that  makes 
slaveholding  justifiable  ?  I  call  to  your  mind  the  Golden 
Rule — "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you, 
do  ye  even  so  to  them."  Now,  who  is  to  be  the  judge  ? 
Who  is  to  decide  what  are  justifiable  and  what  are  un- 
justifiable circumstances  ?  Is  it  the  missionary  ?  Is  it 
the  Church  ?  Is  it  the  slaveholder  ?  No !  I  declare,  in 
the  name  of  the  divine  Author  of  the  Golden  Rule,  that 
neither  of  these  is  to  be  the  judge !  Who  then  ?  Sir,  I 
hold  that  you  must  go  first  and  go  only  to  the  slave  / 
Ask  him  if  he  be  justifiably  held  in  his  chains !  If  he  says 
"  Yea  !  "  then  your  bondage  may  be  innocent ;  but  if  he 
says  "  Nay,"  then,  though-master,  missionary,  church  and 
all  were  to  cry  out,  "  He  is  rightfully  enslaved,"  I  declare, 
in  the  name  of  the  God  of  justice,  that  no  plea  that  goes 
by  the  name  of  a  justifying  circumstance  will,  for  a 
moment,  prevail  before  the  great  bar  of  Him  whose  judg- 
ment is  righteous  and  just !  God  will  accept  repentance 
of  the  wrong,  but  not  a  vindication  of  it  I  And  if  a 
slave,  held  in  slavery  by  a  man  who  is  a  member  of 
Christ's  Church,  declares  that  he  is  deprived  of  bis  liberty 
without  his  consent,  then,  sir,  the  Great  Teacher  of 
the  Golden  Rule,  and  all  the  great  host  of  God's  elect 
that  look  down  from  heaven  to  earth,  protest  against  the 
bondage,  and  pronounce  it  sin !  Ah !  I  recall  those 
searching  words  of  Christ — 11  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to 
the  altar  and  there  rememberest  that  thy  brother  hath 
aught  against  thee,  leave  there  thy  gift  upou  the  altar, 
and  go  thy  way ;  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother  and 
then  come  and  offer  thy  gift " !  N  ow,  when  a  slaveholder 
comes  to  the  communion-table  with  his  slave  by  his  side, 


30 


let  him  before  he  sits  down  to  eat  and  driDk  the  body  and 
Wood  of  Ch-ist,  tarn  round,  and,  looking  into  the  face  of 
tbat  dusky  man,  and  remembering  the  scripture,  ask 
himself,"  Has  my  brother  aught  against  me?"  and  if 
there,  ueder  the  arches  of  Christ's  Churcb-if  there,  in 
the  presence  of  Christ's  m^sty-the  bondman  should 
say  that  he  is  willingly  held  in  his  bonds,  and  has 
naught  against  bis  oppressor,  that  may  be  a  justifiable 
circumstance.  But  I  declare,  by  the  authority  of  the 
(xo<pel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  there  is  no  other 
justifiable  circumstance  uuder  the  sun!  If  the  slave 
gives  bis  o*n  consent,  I  interpose  no  objection:  but  if 
the  slave  be  unwillingly  bound,  I  ask  the  Church  to 
break  the  chain  ! 

Mr.  Beeeber  left  the  impression  upon  his  audience  that 
tne  iuw3  of  the  Cherokee  nation  forbid  or  prevent  emanci- 
pation. Now,  I  have  searched  to  find  some  such  law. 
I  have  found  none.  Oa  the  contrary,  I  have  found 
quite  a  different  law.  Tue  legislation  of  the  Cherokees, 
so  far  as  it  affects  free  negroes  and  slaves,  appears 
to  be  milder  than  that  of  most  of  the  States.  The 
only  restriction  is  this  :  if  a  slave  be  emancipated, 
bis  master  shall  be  responsible  for  what  he  does  after 
his  emancipation,  as  before ;  that  is,  if  be  robs  a  ben- 
roost  or  an  orchard,  his  former  master  shall  pay  the 
damages.  That  is  all.  There  is  no  prohibition  in  the 
way  of  emancipation.  Mr.  Beecber  cannot  say  that  the 
slaves  in  tbe  Cherokee  Churches  are  held  in  slavery 
because  the  strong  arm  of  the  law  i?  over  them.  Tup 
arm  0f  the  law  is  powerless  to  prevent  their  emancipation, 
the  masters  are  at  liberty  to  emancipate  their  slaves,  if 
tbey  will,  but  they  will  not!  That  la  tbe  reason  why  I 
arraign  the  Cherokee  Mission  and  the  Bbard  that  sustains 

I  now  ccme  to  a  passage  in  the  Good  water  platform 
which  my  friend  omitted  to  read.  Sometimes  swift 
sfcatere,  on  coming  suddenly  to  an  air-hole  in  the  ice 
instinctively  and  without  stopping  to  look,  leap  over  it  at 
a  bound  !  So  my  friend,  in  the  rapidity  of  his  reading, 
on  nndicg  himself  coming  into  a  dangerous  place,  half 


31 


tinconsciouslv  leaped  over  a  significant  sentence  in  the 
Good  water  Platform.  Speaking  of  a  missionary's  duties, 
the  platform  says  : 

44  As  a  missionary,  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  political  ques- 
tions and  agnations  !  " 

Now,  1  do  not  say  that  my  friend  omitted  these  words 
intentionally  ;  I  believed  at  the  time,  and  believe  now, 
that  he  did  not  notice  what  be  was  omitt»o<r ;  but  yon 
remember,  when  I  called  his  attention  to  the  slighted  sen- 
tence, aod  asked  him  to  read  it  with  the  rest,  he  turned 
back  aud  read  it,  and  then  turned  around  and  f  xclaimed 
rather  humorously, 44  Make  the  most  of  it ! Yes,  sir,  I 
will  make  the  most  of  it;  I  hope  to.  make  a  gorddeal 
of  it  (laughter).  I  want  to  know  if  it  has  not  been 
the  testimony  of  thi3  Church,  aod  of  its  minister,  from 
the  beginning  until  now,  that  the  Church  of  Christ,  and 
its  ministers,  must  have  something  to  do  with  "  political 
questions  and  agitations 99  ?  Nay,  sir,  I  can  once  more 
quote  Beecher  against  Beecher  !  For  only  last  evening 
be  delivered  a  lecture  in  New  York  on  "  Politics  and 
Religion,"  in  which,  as  if  on  purpose  to  throw  out  a  quiet 
commentary  on  his  speech  of  the  night  before,  be  uttered 
these  words,  which  [  find  in  The  Tribune's  report : 

44  Wherever  you  fiad  a  man  wbo89  politics  aod  religion 
are  kept  separate,  you  always  find  that  his  politics  are  the 
cream,  aud  his  religion  the  ekim  milk."  To  which  the 
reporter's  account  then  adds,  **  great  applause  ! "  (Laugh- 
ter.) 

Now,  sir,  this  is  called  the  Good  water  piatform  ;  let  ui 
call  it  rather  the  good  milk  and  water  platform  !  (Loud 
laughter.) 

But  some  of  the  missionaries  them  elves  have  repudi- 
ated these  very  Good  water  declarations.  I  quote  a  letter 
from  the  Choctaw  missionaries,  printed  in  'Ike  New  York 
Observer  of  Dec.  2d,  1858.  1  will  merely  state  that  as 
soon  as  the  missionaries  had  signed  aud  sealed  this  docu- 
ment, the  Board  at  Utica  said, 44  We  have  got  the  mis- 
sionaries to  say  something  99  ;  the  anti-slavery  men  said, 
|  We  have  something  to  be  satisfied  with  99 ;  but  the  very 
moment  the  missionaries  heard  of  what  the  Board  said, 


32 


tbey  repudiated  what  they  themselves  said.  They  wrote 
in  a  letter : 

"  The  construction  pufc  upon  the  Goodwater  platform, 
by  the  Board  at  Utica,  makes  it  impossible  for  us  to 
regard  that  as  an  expression  of  our  principles." 

So  much,  therefore,  for  the  Goodwater  platform  ! 

Now,  last  of  all  in  this  documentary  chain,  I  come  to 
the  last  annual  report ;  that  of  1859.  Mr.  Treat,  hav- 
ing done  with  the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  now  under- 
takes to  write  an  Epistle  to  the  Choctaws.   He  says  : 

"  It  is  proper  that  we  should  review,  in  the  fewest  pos- 
sible words,  the  history  of  a  question  which  has  received 
so  lunch  attention  within  the  la6t  few  years.  You  remark 
that  your  policy  had  i  the  full  approbation  of  the  Secretaries 
and  the  Prudential  Committee  for  more  than  five-and  twenty 
years,  and  was  finally  approved  with  perfect  unanimity  by  the 
Board  at  Brooklyn.1  For  much  of  the  time  since  the  meeting  at 
Brooklyn,  ive  have  supposed  that  there  was  no  material  difference 
bit  ween  your  mission  and  ourselves.  In  the  year  1848,  indeed, 
there  seemed  to  be  some  divergency  ;  but  in  the  following  year  you 
declared  your  assent  to  the  letter  of  the  Cherokee  mission,  dated 
March  21,  1848,  *  as  expiessing  in  a  clear  and  condensed  man- 
ner 7  your  i  main  vievss  and  principles  1  ;  and  verbal  statements, 
subsequently  made  by  some  of  your  number,  gave  the  Committee 
very  great  satisfaction." 

What,  sir,  13  the  implication  of  this  paragraph  ?  What 
was  it  that  gave  the  Committee  such  u  very  great  satis- 
faction ?'  ?  It  was  in  looking  back,  in  1859,  to  the  "  main 
views  and  principles"  of  1848.  What  were  these  ?  Why, 
tbey  were  the  declarations  drawn  up  by  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Worcester,  which  I  have  already  read  ;  showing  that  the 
missionaries  had  found  a  way  to  receive  slaveholders  into 
the  Church,  and  to  sanction  it  from  the  Bible  ;  that  they 
bad  found  a  way  of  admitting  them  to  Christ's  commu- 
nion without  exacting  a  pledge  That  they  u  would  not  live 
and  die  slaveholders  " ;  that  they  had  found  a  way  of 
giving  them  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  in  the  Church 
and  stili  allowing  them  to  buy  and  sell  their  fellow-men, 
as  property,  under  the  pleasant  and  easy  phrase  of  u  occa- 
sional exchanges  of  masters  "  ;  that  they  bad  found  a  way 
of  advancing  Christ's  kingdom  on  the  earth  by  the  sepa- 
ration of  little  children  from  their  parents,  and  sending 


33 


them  to  the  auction-block  to  be  sold  !  These,  sir,  these 
were  the  "  main  views  and  principles  "  which  gave  the 
Committee  such  *'  very  great  satisfaction  " ! 

Yet  here  is  where  my  friend  says  he  stands,  and  where 
he  is  not  ashamed  to  stand  !  At  this  point  he  takes  leave 
of  the  argument,  and  says  to  this  Missionary  Board,  "  God 
speed,  venerable  Board!"  Here  he  remembers,  and 
recounts  with  bewitching  humor,  how,  in  his  early  days, 
he  drove  a  fast  horse  with  a  missionary,  and  got  over,  in 
half  an  hour,  a  road  which  it  took  his  father  an  hour  and 
a-balf  to  travel  (laughter). 

Now,  what  was  the  action  of  the  Board  at  its  last 
meeting?  The  history  of  forty-three  years  was  well 
known.  The  fact  of  slaveholding  in  the  Mission  Churches 
was  well  known.  The  uninterrupted  agitation  since  1841 
was  well  known.  The  steadfast  resistance  of  the  Board 
to  the  cause  of  freedom  was  well  known.  All  this  was 
known — known  for  years,  and  known,  moreover,  as  stig- 
matized by  thousands  of  Christian  men  as  a  shame  and  a 
reproach.  But  now  came  another  annual  meeting ;  now 
came  another  chance  of  remedying  the  past ;  now  came 
a  full  and  free  opportunity  to  speak  a  word  which  should 
at  last  atone  for  the  silence  cf  forty  years  !  But  what 
was  done  at  this  last  meeting,  held  in  Philadelphia  ?  A 
resolution  was  offered  declaring  that  slaveholding  should 
be  regarded  as  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  slaveholder 
was  unfit  for  church  membership.  It  was  drawn  by  Dr. 
Cheever,  in  the  following  words  : 

"That,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Board,  the  holding  of 
slaves  be  pronounced  an  immorality,  inconsistent  with 
membership  in  any  Christian  Church  ;  and  that  it  ought 
to  be  required  that  these  Missionary  Churches  should 
immediately  put  away  from  themselves  this  sin,  and 
should  cease  to  sanction  it  even  in  appearance." 

What  is  the  meaning  of  that  resolution  ?  It  means  that 
when  a  man,  holding  a  yoke  on  the  neck  of  a  slave, 
comes  and  asks  admission  to  the  Church,  the  fact  should 
be  regarded,  at  first  blush,  as  a  strong  evidence  against 
him,  and  that  he  should  be  required  to  prove  himself  clear 
of  guilt  before  he  could  be  received.  Was  that  not  fair  ? 


34 


K"ay,  sir,  was  that  pot  moderate  ?  If  the  Board  had 
been  at  that  time,  as  Mr.  Beecher  claimed  it  to  be,  an 
an  ti  slavery  body,  would  not  an  anti  slavery  body  have 
passed  that  resolution  ?  Well,  sir,  what  was  the  fate  of 
the  resolution  ?  It  was  swept  clear  of  the  house  by  a 
unanimous  vote  to  lay  it  upon  the  table  ! 

Nor  was  this  all.  A  respectful  and  temperate  memo- 
rial against  the  revival  of  the  slave  trade  was  similarly 
cleared  from  the  docket — crowded  over  into  another  year, 
in  order  to  be  pushed  to  a  safe  distance  from  the  critical 
time  when  it  was  most  needed  !  This  is  the  Board's  last 
record  on  the  subject  of  slavery — a  refusal  to  utter  a  word 
of  condemnation  against  a  traffic  which  consists  in  the 
theft  of  human  beings ! 

In  view,  therefore,  of  these  evidences — aod  these  are 
but  a  small  part  of  what  might  have  been  given — I  openly 
declare  that  the  American  Board  is  in  palpable  compli- 
city with  American  slavery.  I  have  quoted  to  you  their 
own  reports.  I  have  made  no  statements  of  fact  of  which 
I  have  not  furnished  documentary  proof.  Have  I  not,  in 
view  of  these  proof*?,  shown  that  my  friend  uttered  a  mis- 
taken judgment  when  he  declared  that  the  record  of  the 
Board,  on  tbe  subject  of  slavery,  was  "  clean,  clear  and 
pure  ?  " 

But,  sir,  shut  the  books  and  records !  I  have  no  taste 
for  this  kind  of  reasoning ;  I  do  net  like  mere  technical 
argument ;  I  never  was  born  to  be  a  lawyer.  What  are 
the  great  facts  that  have  been  for  forty  years  staring  the 
whole  world  in  the  face  ? 

This  mission  to  the  Cherokees  was  founded  in  1817  ; 
it  is  now  more  than  two-score  years  old  ;  the  missionaries 
have  been  at  their  work  until  they  have  grown  gray  ; 
they  have  moulded  the  mission  with  their  own  hands  ; 
they  have  made  it  a  moral  p^ower  against  all  tbe  sins  of 
tbe  Indians,  except  their  greatest  sin  ;  they  have  set  on 
foot  among  that  semi  barbarous  people  ail  the  reforms  of 
Christianity,  except  the  single  one  that  was  most  needed  ; 
they  have  made  Christian  quarrel  with  every  wrong,  but 
tbe  greatest  wrong  ;  they  have  borne  testimony  against 
every  villany,  but  the  sum  of  all  villanies  !   To-day,  there 


35 


is  drunkenness  among  those  Indians,  and  the  missionaries 
testify  against  that ;  thnre  is  gambling,  and  they  testify 
against  that ;  there  is  theft,  and  they  testify  against  that ; 
there  is  slavery,  and  tbey  shut  their  mouths  ! 

The  missionaries  have  to  a  great  degree  shaped  the 
civilization  of  the  Cberokees ;  yet  in  reclaiming  these 
savages  from  one  barbarism,  tbey  have  sanctioned  tbem 
in  another  ;  tbey  have  converted  them  from  a  heathenism 
of  ignorance  to  teach  them  a  heathenism  of  oppression. 
The  Indians,  growing  up  under  the  irjfiuence  ot  the  mis- 
sion stations,  have  been  taught  to  believe  that  tbey  can 
hold  their  slaves  inside  the  Church  as  tbey  held  them  out- 
side. The  teachings  of  the  missionaries,  and  the  action 
of  the  Board,  have  failed  to  make  the  impression  upon 
those  haughty  balf-breeds  that  to  hold,  and  buy,  and  sell 
their  fellow- creatures  as  property  is  incompatible  with  the 
Christian  religion  ! 

You  will  recollect  that,  years  ago,  this  Missionary 
Board  arose,  in  the  providence  of  God,  to  such  wide  in- 
fluence and  power  in  this  land  that  its  decisions  went  forth 
almost  like  the  imperial  decrees  of  the  first  Napoleon  from 
Paris  !  If  the  Board  bad  chosen  to  act  against  slavery, 
it  would  have  set  in  motion  one  of  the  greatest  engines  in 
the  Church!  It  would  have  been  like  a  battering-ram 
against  the  bulwark  of  oppression.  I  have  aiieady 
quoted  the  words  of  Albert  Barnes,  that  slavery  could 
not  exist  a  day  agairjst  the  power  of  the  Church.  The 
American  Board  could  have  spoken  the  word  and  done 
the  work ;  it  wielded  the  power  of  well-nigh  half  the 
American  Church  ;  but  it  chose  rather  to  allow  the  great 
opportunity  of  the  age  to  go  by  ;  it  shut  its  mouth  and 
was  dumb ! 

Mr.  Treat  made  a  very  significant  remark  in  1848. 
He  said,  speaking  of  the  Board's  efforts  among  these 
Indians  : 

"  It  is  very  clear  tbnt  the  influence  of  the  missions  is 
neutralized  to  seme  extent  by  the  rxUtence  of  slavery." 

To  this  statement  of  Mr.  Treat,  I  add  a  commentary 
of  facts.   In  the  Cherokee  mission, 


36 


In  1836  there  were  260  members. 
"  1848        "        236  " 
"  1855        "        200  M 

You  perceive  the  gradual  decrease.  But  why  should 
there  be  a  decrease?  Did  Dot  Mr.  Beecher  say  that 
u  usually  there  are  more  converts  in  Churches  among  the 
heathen  than  in  Churches  at  home"?  What,  then,  is 
the  cause  of  the  reversal  of  the  general  rule,  among  the 
Cherokees  ?  Mr.  Treat  fatally  gives  the  answer  himself 
— "  Slavery  neutralizes  the  missions  "  / 

That  noble  man  and  missionary,  David  T.  Stoddard, 
who  spent  his  life  in  the  East,  said  : 

"We  do  not  dare  to  let  our  converts  know  that  slavery  exists  in 
America  ;  for  how  could  we  reconcile  it  with  our  professions  as  a 
Christian  nation  ?  " 

But  Mr.  Beecher  says  that  in  looking  at  the  past  his- 
tory of  the  Board,  he  finds  evidence  that  it  has  been  gra- 
dually growing  better  and  better.  Does  be  remember 
bow,  year  after  year,  Nehemiah  Adams,  the  man  who 
sees  only  the  "  South-side  view,"  has  been  invariably 
reelected  a  member  of  the  Prudential  Committee  ?  Mr. 
Beecher,  in  his  last  evening's  lecture,  let  fly  at  this  same 
Dr.  Adams  an  arrow  that  might  well-nigh  have  stung 
him  to  death.  v  Does  Mr.  Beecher  think  that  Nehemiah 
Adams  is  wrong  everywhere  else,  but  right  in  the  Pru- 
dential Committee?  Daes  he  not  know  that  this  annual 
reelection  is  made  the  occasion  of  an  annual  boasting  as 
a  triumph  over  what  is  called  the  fanatical  New  England 
sentiment  ?  But  Mr.  Beecher  says  the  Board  is  improv- 
ing. Well,  improving  how  ?  I  heard,  the  other  day,  a 
capital  story  of  Mr,  Litteil,  the  publisher  of  the  Living 
Age,  He  was  afflicted  with  a  sore  leg  ;  he  called  a  phy- 
sician from  a  distance ;  the  leg  was  treated  as  a  serious 
ease ;  the  recovery  was  very  slow ;  at  last  the  physician 
went  away,  leaving  directions  behind  him,  and  telling  his 
patient  to  report  by  letter ;  at  the  end  of  two  or  three 
months,  the  doctor  received  a  letter* somewhat  as  follows : 
"  Dear  Sir  :  My  leg  is  improving  ;  if  I  look  at  it  day  by 
day,  I  do  not  see  any  advance ;  if  I  compare  it  week  by 
week,  I  notice  only  very  little  ;  if  I  look  back  month  by 
month,  I  see  only  a  little  more ;  but  three  months  ahead 


37 


perhaps  I  shall  be  able  to  see  considerable  improvement. 
On  the  whole,  my  leg  may  eventually  get  well,  but  not  in 
my  day  "  (great  laughter).  Now,  sir,  I  am  willing  to 
Sclmit  that  the  American  Board  may  be  improving  little 
by  little,  year  by  year ;  nay,  sir,  comparing  long  inter- 
vals, it  may  be  improving  considerably ;  still,  I  do  not 
think  it  will  be  well  in  our  day  (laughter).  What  does 
it  need  ?  It  needs  the  surgeon's  knife,  and  that  is  what  I 
ask  this  Church  to  give  it  1 

Now,  I  beg  you  to  bear  in  mind  one  thing.  In  the 
report  of  1848  it  is  declared  that 

"  The  Board  is  directly  responsible  for  the  teachings  of  the 
missionaries." 

It  is  declared  also  that 

"  When  evils  exist  in  the  Mission  Churches,  the  Prudential 
Committee  may  and  must  inquire  whether  the  missionaries  are 
performing  their  duty" 

Now,  we  have  been  told,  in  this  debate,  that  the  Board, 
not  being  an  ecclesiastical  body,  can  have  no  ecclesiastical 
power.  The  Churches  under  its  patronage,  it  is  said,  are 
independent  of  its  control.  The  adroit  excuse  is  offered, 
that  the  Prudential  Committee  at  Boston  have  no  autho- 
rity over  the  mission  at  Goodwater.  No,  sir,  this  excuse 
is  not  valid.  We  do  not  ask  the  Committee  to  exercise 
ecclesiastical  power  over  the  missionaries.  We  wish  them 
to  say  only  this :  "  To  our  brethren  over  the  prairies, 
greeting  :  we  have  no  control  over  you  or  your  Churches, 
and  we  wish  none  ;  but  we  are  put  in  trust  with  and  have 
control  over  the  funds  with  which  you  are  supported  ; 
now,  we  say  to  you  frankly,  if  you  receive  slaveholders 
into  your  Churches,  and  so  put  us  in  complicity  with 
slavery,  we  will  give  you  no  more  money ! "  That  would 
end  the  controversy  in  short  order ! 

Suppose  it  were  reported  at  the  Missionary  House  in 
Pemberton  Square  that  the  missionaries  among  the 
Cherokees  were  receiving  into  their  Churches  Unitarians, 
or  Universalists,  or  Koman  Catholics ;  what  would  the 
Prudential  Committee  do  ?  I  tell  you  that  the  Pope  of 
Rome  never  thundered  a  bull  of  excommunication  more 
4 


suddenly  at  renegade  priest  or  Protestant  heretic  than 
the  American  Board  would  send  forth  a  letter  of  excom- 
munication of  those  backsliding  missionaries !  When 
any  sin  but  the  national  sin  comes  to  light,  Pemberton 
Square  gathers  blackness  and  thunders  forth  its  voice  I 
Let  the  cry  of  adultery  be  raised  against  an  unfortunate 
Secretary,  and  the  Prudential  Committee  rise  up  in  their 
majesty  and  might,  and,  before  the  evidence  is  rendered, 
before  the  facts  are  known,  on  the  first  blush  of  suspicion, 
they  say,  "  Cut  him  off!  cut  him  off! "  Thus  they  cut 
off  Dr.  Pomroy  before  there  was  the  slightest  evidence,  of 
his  guilt ;  sentencing  him  on  a  day's  suspicion  ;  while 
there,  in  their  Cherokee  Churches,  they  had  abundant 
evidence  that,  not  for  a  day,  but  for  forty  years,  there  has 
been  sanctioned  and  sustained  a  system  which  is  not  only 
the  mother  of  adultery,  but  of  every  other  sin ;  and  yet 
the  Prudential  Committee,  with  marvellous  consistency, 
cut  loose  their  Secretary,  but  hold  fast  their  slaveholders  I 
I  have  beard  of  a  woman  who  was  asked  what  she  thought 
of  the  doctrine  of  total  depravity,  and  who  replied  that  it 
was  "  a  very  good  doctrine  if  people  would  only  livt  up 
to  it  "  (laughter).  Now,  the  Prudential  Committee,  of 
course,  instruct  their  missionaries  to  preach  the  doctrine 
of  total  depravity  ;  the  missionaries  preach  it,  and  are  in 
that  respect  very  orthodox  and  sound  ;  but,  in  justice  to 
them,  it  must  be  also  said  that  they  not  only  preach,  but 
practise  it  (laughter). 

My  friend,  in  one  of  his  rapid  incidental  references, 
mentioned  that  "the  opposing  Society,  the  American 
Missionary  Association,  had  been  brought  to  deal  with 
slave-hiring  among  their  own  missionaries."  The  fact  is 
not  exactly  as  Mr.  Beecber  stated  it.  There  is  in  Siam 
an  institution  resembling  slavery.  A  man  is  in  debt  and 
cannot  pay ;  he  is  held  in  bondage  till  he  can  :  the  worst 
way  in  the  world  to  pay  a  debt !  I  am  willing  to  admit 
that  this  is  slavery.  Now,  one  of  the  missionaries  of  the 
new  Society,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Bradley,  employed  in  his  ser- 
vice a  man  who  was  held  in  that  kind  of  bondage  for 
debt.  But  what  then  ?  The  other  missionaries  of  the 
station  immediately  came  together  and  said,  "This  is 


39 

hiring  slaves,  and  we  must  discountenance  it."  So,  by  a 
unanimous  vote,  they  disapproved  his  act,  and  Bent  the 
record  of  their  disapproval  to  the  Executive  Committee 
at  New  York.  Their  resolution  was  commended  by  the 
Committee,  who  sent  back  explicit  word  to  the  missiona- 
ries never  again  to  hire  a  man  whose  labor  brought  no 
reward  to  himself.  But  can  Mr.  Beecher,  or  can  anybody 
else,  tell  me  why  it  was  that  Dr.  Bradley  fell  into  the 
error  of  employing  slave  labor  ?  I  will  tell  you  how  it 
happened.  Dr.  Bradley  had  been  newly  received  into 
the  employment  of  the  new  Society,  after  having  spent 
many  years  in  the  service  of  the  American  Board — and 
there  is  where  he  learned  it !  (Laughter.) 

My  friend  said  that  the  American  Board  had  purged 
its  missions  from  Caste.  You  know  that  caste  among 
the  Hindoos  operates  almost  as  slavery  among  U3.  Mr. 
Beecher  had  a  right  to  speak  of  this  freedom  from  caste  as 
a  credit  to  the  Board.  But  how  did  the  Board  clear  itself 
of  caste  ?  Kev.  Mr.  Winslow  was  the  first  man  among 
the  missionaries  to  attack  it.  He  exccmmunicated  seven 
members  from  his  Church  because  of  their  adherence  to 
caste.  Tell  me  what  that  caste  was  1  If  a  man  of  high 
caste  was  converted  and  came  into  the  Church,  and  a 
man  of  low  caste  was  converted  and  came  into  the 
Church,  they  preserved  their  caste  inside,  as  they  had 
preserved  it  outside,  the  Church  ;  like  the  Jews  and  the 
Samaritans,  they  would  have  no  dealings  with  each 
other.  Mr.  Winslow  said  to  these  men,  M  But  you  must 
sit  and  eat  at  the  same  communion-table,  because  you  are 
all  brethren  in  Christ  "  ;  and  because  they  refused,  one 
caste  standing  on  one  side  of  the  wall  and  another  on  the 
other,  he  excommunicated  them.  And  afterwards  the 
Madura  mission  excommunicated  seventy-two  members  at 
one  blow,  most  of  whom  were  catechists,  or  native  teachers, 
because  not  one  of  them  would  come  into  a  house  and 
eat  bread  with  another  of  a  different  caste !  Now,  I  say, 
if  the  American  Board  regards  the  fact  that  one  man 
will  not  eat  bread  with  another  in  his  own  house  such  a 
sin  that  they  must  cut  off  seventy-two  church  members 
for  the  offence,  is  it  not  high  time  that  the  Prudential 


40 


Committee  should  say,  "As  we  have  cat  off  these  seventy- 
two  members  for  refusing  to  eat  bread  together,  shall  we 
not  the  rather  cut  off  seventeen  members  who,  for  forty 
years,  btwe  been  stealing  the  labor  of  black  men  and  sell-  . 
ing  their  wives  and  children  ? "  For,  am  I  unreasonable 
when  I  hold  it  to  be  a  greater  sin  to  enslave  a  man  than 
to  refuse  to  eat  with  him  ? 

My  friend's  allusion,  therefore,  to  the  Board  as  having 
freed  itself  from  caste  was  a  very  unfortunate  one  for  his 
argument ;  for  the  only  thing  we  ask  of  the  American 
Board  is  to  free  itself  from  slavery,  .with  as  much  zeal  as 
it  freed  itself  from  caste,  and  in  exactly  the  same  way — 
by  cutting  off  the  offender.  Does  not  consistency  require 
it  ?  If  the  excision  be  needed  in  one  case,  is  it  not  more 
needed  in  the  other  ? 

The  inquiry  now  arises,  Why  should  we  cut  off  our 
contributions  from  the  Board  just  at  the  present  time  ? 
1  will  tell  you  why,  and  this  was  one  reason  why  I 
brought  this  map.  [Mr.  Tilton  here  referred  again  to  the 
map  of  Indian  Territory.]  You  perceive  that  on  the 
north  of  Indian  Territory  lies  Kansas,  on  the  east  Mis- 
souri, and  on  the  south  Arkansas.  Now,  sir,  at  this  very 
moment  secret  machinations  are  going  on,  between  the 
Southern  Missourians  and  the  Cherokee  leaders,  to  bring 
in  the  Cherokee  nation  as  a  new  territory  by  itself,  and 
of  course  as  a  slave  Territory.  You  will  see  the  geogra- 
phical reason  for  this  attempt.  Missouri  is  to  be  free  in 
a  very  few  years  (sagacious  men  on  the  ground  say  five 
years),  not  by  emancipating  her  slaves,  as  many  people 
at  the  East  suppose,  but  by  selling  them  to  other  mas- 
ters. Now,  if  they  sell  them,  whither  shall  they  be  taken  ? 
Not  to  Kansas,  for  that  is  free  ;  not  to  Arkansas,  for  the 
people  are  too  poor  to  pay  a  high  price  ;  not  to  Texas, 
for  that  is  too  far  away.  There  is  no  place,  then,  where 
Missouri  can  empty  out  her  slaves  unless  the  Indian 
country  can  be  made  into  slave  States.  The  first  pro- 
posed slave  State  is  the  Cherokee  district.  Therefore  the 
politicians  want  to  make  it  certain  that  this  intermediate 
ground  shall  be  opened  to  slavery,  on  the  firm  foundation 
of  State  governments,  and  hence  their  machinations  to 


41 


accomplish  that  object.  Now,  against  these  secret,  poli- 
tical plottiDgs,  remember  thai:  there  is  do  indoctrina- 
tion of  the  gospel  of  liberty,  no  exertion  of  the  moral 
power  of  the  Church,  no  steady  offsetting  influence  by  the 
missionaries.  How  far  has  this  game  gone  on?  Mr. 
Sebastian,  the  other  day,  introduced  a  resolution  into  the 
Senate  providing  that  the  same  laws  and  regulations 
which  are  usually  given  for  the  government  of  the  terri- 
tories be  extended  to  the  Cherokee  nation ;  so  that 
already  the  movement  is  on  foot. 

Now,  sir,  tell  me  how  that  beautiful  country  that  lies 
north  of  the  Cherokees  was  saved  to  freedom  ?  [pointing 
to  Kansas].  Mr.  Beecher  can  tell !  It  was  done  by  the 
rousing  of  the  whole  North  to  the  necessity  of  making 
Kansas  a  free  State.  It  was  by  the  universal  excitement 
created  in  the  North  that  Kansas  was  saved.  And  how 
did  we  save  it  ?  I  will  tell  you  a  story  of  a  green  bag. 
[Mr.  Tilton  here  produced  a  green  bag,  which,  on  being 
opened,  was  found  to  contain  a  Sharp's  rifle,  which  he 
held  up  to  the  audience.]  I  wish  to  remind  Mr.  Beecher 
how  he  helped  to  make  Kansas  a  free  State. 

Mr.  Garbett— I  rise  to  a  point  of  order.  The  gentle- 
man's remarks  are  not  to  the  question.  What  relation 
has  this  rifle  to  the  American  Board  ? 

Mr.  Tilton— I  will  tell  you !  Thig  instrument — well 
dinted  by  long  use— was  dedicated  by  the  pastor  of  this 
Church  to  the  cause  of  freedom  in  Kansas. 

Mr.  Garbett  continued  his  interruption  on  the  point 
of  order,  but  was  called  to  order  by  the  chair. 

Mr.  Tilton— Thi3  was  one  of  the  original  twenty-five 
rifles  for  which  Mr.  Beecher,  during  the  Kansas  excite- 
ment, went  around  among  the  members  of  his  Church 
making  personal  solicitation  and  continual  appeal  to 
every  one,  saying, "  Give  me  money  to  buy  twenty-five 
rifles  for  Kansas.'*  This  rifle  has  performed  its  mission  ; 
it  has  seen  good  service  there  (applause). 

A  Gentleman— Is  it  loaded  ?  (Laughter.) 

Mr.  Tilton — No!  (laughter) — only  with  an  argu- 
ment !  I  will  not  stop  to  tell  you  the  history  of  this 
weapon  ;  only  that  it  was  carried  three  months  by  Capt. 


42 


John  Brown  (applause  and  hisses).  It  was  present  at 
the  battle  of  O*awatomie  (load  applause  followed  by 

hisses  and  renewed  applause). 

The  Chair— Gentlemen  are  provoking  by  their  hisses 
the  very  thing  they  are  trying  to  stop.  I  insist  upo& 
order.  I 

Mr.  Tilton — I  will  tell  you  the  reason  why  I  exhibit 
this  weapon.  When  that  territory  (pointing  to  Kansas) 
was  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Slave 
Power,  Mr.  Beecher's  heart  was  touched  to  such  a  degree 
that  he  went  around  among  you  all,  and,  by  personal 
appeal,  procured  the  money  to  purchase  this  rifle,  which 
was  sent,  with  two  dozen  others,  to  guard  the  liberties  of 
the  people  of  Kansas.  But  at  this  moment,  sir,  at  this 
very  moment,  the  Cherokee  country  is  in  the  same  peril 
of  coming  into  the  Union  as  a  new  slave  Territory,  and  I 
come  to  Mr.  Beecher  and  ask  him  to  send — what  ?  A 
rifle  ?  No.  But  only  the  testimony  of  a  strong  word  1] 
1  ask  him  to  remember  his  heroic  appeals  of  '56,  and  now, 
when  there  is  no  necessity  for  weapons  of  carnal  warfare,' 
now  that  the  time  has  come  when  the  shedding  of  blood  is 
no  longer  required,  I  ask  him  only  to  send  forth,  in 
place  of  his  Sharp's  rifles,  an  easier  and  milder  testi- 
mony, which  will  make  glad  again  the  hearts  of  those  free 
men  who  made  Kansas  free !  (Applause.) 

Sir,  I  have  dene  with  the  gun  (laughter).   But  let  me 
say  a  word  in  conclusion.   My  friend,  Mr.  Benedict,  the  I 
merchant,  in  the  early  part  of  this  debate,  charged  me  with 
chasing  one  idea,  as  he  said,  "  up  hill  and  down  dale."  I 
Well,  sir,  here  [pointing  to  the  Cherokee  country]  are  I 
hills  and  dales ;  and  I  know  of  one  idea,  sir,  which  I  I 
would  chase  up,  and  down,  and  over,  and  through  these  I 
same  hiils  and  dales — an  idea  which  I  would  chase  through  J 
every  cabin  and  hovel,  through  every  cave  and  solitary-! 
place,  through  every  forest  and  plantation  ;  I  mean,  sir,  I 
the  idea  that  this  beautiful  country  shall  ever  be  brought 
into  the  Union  as  a  slave  State !   Yes,  sir,  I  would  chase 
it  through  every  mission  station,  and  every  Church ;  I 
would  chase  it  up  and  down  everywhere,  until  it  should  I 
be  chased  out  even  from  the  dingy  Missionary  House  in 


43 


Pemberton  Square !   I  am  not  afraid  of  chasing  one  idea 
— particularly  the  idea  that  the  American  nation  is  to 
1  suffer  the  shame  of  a  new  slave  State  without  a  struggle 
to  save  itself  against  the  encroachment,  without  an  arous- 
ing of  the  North  to  this  new  peril  of  freedom,  without  the 
pounding  of  a  trumpet  to  the  American  Board,  invoking 
it  to  utter  the  voice  of  its  missions  against  so  great  a 
crime,  without  an  appeal  to  this  Church,  that  once  raised 
•  its  strong  rijrht  hard,  armed  like  a  warrior,  to  defend  the 
I  freedom  of  Kansas,  to  lift  up  at  least  its  solemn  warning 
voice  against  the  wrong  of  wicked  men  seizing  a  new, 
young  State  and  leading  it  into  the  Union  in  chains  I 

Sir,  if  I  ever  chase  one  idea,  I  only  say,  let  it  be  an 
idea  which  is  worth  chasing  I  (Laughter.) 

I  tell  you,  friends  and  brethren,  if  the  Cherokee  nation 
is  finally  made  a  slave  State,  then,  in  the  language  of  the 
^ovenanf.  which  the  minister  of  this  Church  reads  from 
■his  pulpit  to  every  new-coming  member  on  his  profession 
^f  faith,  u  This  day  and  this  hour  will  be  everlasting  wit* 
nesses  against  you  "  /  But  if  this  Territory  be  saved  as  a 
free  State,  then,  as  of  old  the  very  stones  cried  out  when 
men  held  their  peace,  the  corner-stone  of  its  freedom  will 
bear  witness  that  it  was  laid  this  night  in  this  Church ! 

Sir,  the  name  of  this  Church,  and  of  its  minister,  will 
go  into  history.    Many  men  in  many  lands,  lovers  of 
their  race  and  watchers  of  the  progress  of  the  age,  are 
[looking  to  this  Church  as  fulfilling  many  noble  and  gene- 
'  rous  hopes.   We  are  a  marked  Church  ;  this  man  is  a 
marked  minister.   A  city  that  is  set  upon  a  hill  cannot 
be  hid.   We  are  watched  from  afar — across  the  sea,  and 
in  foreign  lands!   We  are  known  everywhere  as  a 
Church  that  stands  for  the  Eights  of  Men.   I  never  have 
|\been  in  Europe,  but  I  have  been  told  that  in  the  famous 
*T)hurch  of  St.  Ouen,  in  one  of  the  cities  of  France,  if  you 
t  look  into  the  font  you  will  see,  reflected  in  the  water,  the 
'  whole  grand  architecture  of  pillar,  and  arch,  and  roof 
So,  when  the  world  looks  into  Plymouth  Church,  it  sees 
reflected  in  the  light  of  this  single  question  its  whole  his- 
tory, and  character,  and  glory !   By  and  bye,  when  the 
long  story  of  this  great  struggle  comes  to  be  written, 


44 


when  the  full  record  of  these  stormy  times  comes  at 
last  to  be  made  up  and  completed,  the  question  will  be 
asked, "  Where  did  this  Church  stand  ?  where  did  its 
minister  stand  ?  "*  Ab,  sir,  if  our  answer  to-night  be  not 
clear  and  true,  we  shall  ca3t  upon  our  fair  fame  a  shadow 
and  a  cloud ! 

To-night  there  come  to  us  from  the  prairies,  through 
the  long  distance  of  a  thousand  miles,  the  piteous  appeals 
of  two  thousand  slaves  in  the  land  of  the  Cherokees  to 
two  thousand  free  men  in  Plymouth  Church.  They  say 
to  us  to  night, "  Brethren,  we  are  in  bonds  ;  we  have  reli- 
gious teachers  among  us  who  teach  the  strange  religion 
that  Christian  men  may  hold  us  in  unchristian  bonds ; 
we  have  heard  of  your  Church,  and  of  your  minister ;  we 
have  been  told  that  you  are  the  friends  of  the  oppressed  ; 
we  are  in  chains ;  we  send  you  an  appeal  for  liberty.  Bre- 
thren, hear  us,  and  loose  us  from  our  bonds !  V 

Men  and  women  of  Plymouth  Church !  This  is  the 
touching  plea  that  comes  to  us  at  this  hour !  Hark ! 
You  can  hear  it  at  this  moment,  mingled  with  the  sigh- 
ings  of  the  west  wind !  A  plea  that  comes  again,  as  once 
before,  when  we  all  listened  and  wept,  from  under  the 
thatched  roof  of  the  cabin  of  Uncle  Tom !  What . 
answer  shall  we  send  back  to  these  petitioners  ?  If  you 
cast  your  vote  to  sustain  this  Missionary  Board,  to 
endorse  its  complicity  with  the  enslavement  of  these 
Christian  slaves,  you  say  to  every  one  of  those  dusky  men 
and  women  who  are  now  crying  out  to  this  Church, 
"  Hush  your  plea !  smother  your  cry !  wear  your  chains !  " 

Are  you  willing  to  make  such  a  record,  while  God 
stands  looking  down  from  Heaven  to  read  it  ?  In  the 
name  of  justice,  in  the  name  of  humanity — nay,  sir,  in  the 
name  of  Christ's  love,  and  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  poor — 
I  beseech  you  to  stand  with  the  oppressed  against  the 
oppressor !  I  pray  God  to  give  us  wisdom,  and  justice, 
and  courage ! 

[Mr.  Tilton  took  his  seat  amid  loud  and  long-continued 
applause.] 


