|  /hi  (Liillriir. 

KT.T.A  SMITH  ELBERT  «8S 

Jlniltauuunum 

KATHARINE  E.  COMAN 

YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 

BY  MRS.  BUTLER, 

LATE   FANNY  KEMBLE. 

DT    TWO  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 


NEW  YORK: 
WILEY  &  PUTNAM,  161  BROADWAY. 

1847. 


ROBERT  CRAIGHEAD,   PRINTER,  T.  B.  SMITH,  STEREOTYPER, 

112  FULTON  STREET.  216  WILLIAM  STREET. 


TO 

EDWARD  SARTORIS,  Esq., 

THIS  BOOK 

18    AFFECTIONATELY    AND    GRATEFULLY  INSCRIBED. 


Dear  Edward, 

A  year's  experience  and  observation  of  your  fine  taste 
and  critical  judgment  would  hardly  have  encouraged  me  to  place 
your  name  on  the  title-page  of  my  book  ;  but  a  sojourn  of  that 
length  under  the  shelter  of  your  roof  has  enabled  me  to  appeal, 
with  perfect  confidence,  to  your  kindness  and  indulgence.  To 
them,  and  the  affectionate  and  generous  interest  you  have  ever 
shown  me,  I  venture  to  offer,  as  a  most  inadequate  token  of 
gratitude,  this  record  of  the  happy  year  I  spent  in  Italy. 

FANNY. 


London,  April,  1847. 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION, 


Saturday,  20th  December.— -Le ft  Southampton  per  steamboat, 
for  Havre,  at  ten  o'clock  at  night — the  weather  clear  over  head, 
but  blowing  very  hard — horrible  little  boat — where,  objecting  to 
lie  close  to  two  old  women,  the  only  empty  berths  were,  one  into 
which  the  water  forced  itself,  or  one  in  close  proximity  to  the 
boiler — in  the  latter  I  slept.  The  gale  increased  to  a  perfect 
hurricane  :  luckily  it  was  in  the  stern  of  the  ship  ;  but  what 
with  it  and  the  thumping  of  the  water,  pursuing  and  overtaking 
the  little  steamboat,  I  thought  its  poop  would  be  driven  in.  I 
have  crossed  the  Atlantic  six  times,  and  have  never  spent  a  more 
terrible  night  at  sea.  Came  to  the  bar  by  eight  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  but  the  tide  was  out — the  inner  harbor  without  suffi- 
cient water  to  admit  us  ;  we  therefore  lay  till  twelve  o'clock, 
beaten  by  a  furious  wind  and  frothing  angry  sea,  as  sick  as 
possible,  and  a  great  deal  crosser.  The  landing,  custom-house, 
&c,  all  went  smoothly  enough,  to  the  great  delight  of  my 
inexperience,  which  had  imagined  to  itself  all  manner  of 
horrors. 

Put  up  at  the  Hotel  de  l'Amiraute — -like  an  old  French  noble 
house — the  great  quaint  room,  with  its  grey  boiserie — innume- 
rable doors  of  communication,  and  bed-rooms  and  dressing-rooms 
running  into  each  other  in  most  ingenious  intricacy.  With 
a  roaring  wood  fire,  and,  pulling  the  chilly  furniture  all  round 
it,  it  got  to  look  quite  comfortable,  but  the  doors,  and  cupboards, 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


and  exits,  and  entrances,  confound  me — the  place  looks  made 
for  playing  at  hide  and  seek  all  one's  life.  The  charges  high, 
the  people  civil,  and  the  house  comfortable  enough.  Horrible 
day, — rainy  and  cold, — the  sea,  over  which  our  window  looks, 
yellow,  bilious-looking,  and  full  of  foaming  ridges  as  far  as  eye 
can  reach,  the  wind  howling  over  it,  and  shaking  up  the  loose 
carpets  on  the  brick  floors  under  our  feet,  from  the  great  gaps 
below  the  shrunken  doors.    To-morrow  towards  Rome. 

Monday,  22d. — It  is  a  very  great  blessing  to  have  a  comfort- 
able maid,  and  the  next  blessing  to  that  is  to  have  an  entertaining 
one — to  expect  both  would  be  unreasonable,  for  the  creature, 
maid,  cannot  by  possibility  be  both  useful  and  amusing.  This 
morning,  as  I  looked  at  the  pale  golden  bars  of  light  in  the  east, 
flecked  with  dark  copper-colored  clouds  that  gradually  grew 
dusky  red  as  the  great  fire  of  the  day  kindled  behind  them,  and 

exclaimed,    "  How  beautiful  !"  ,  with  her  innocent 

mouth  wide  open,  and  her  grey  lack-lustre  eyes  steadily  fixed 
upon  the  glowing  splendor,  said,  in  a  tone  of  philosophic  sugges- 
tion, "  I  suppose  the  sun  is  going  to  come  up  somewhere  about 
there."  I  suggested  the  moon,  or  a  great  fire,  but,  with  a  smile 
infinitely  more  stupid  than  her  seriousness  even,  she  said,  "  No, 
she  knew  better  than  that !"  What  a  delicious  thing  pure 
niaiserie  is  !  Shakspeare  has  done  it  like  everything  else — 
better  than  any  one  else — the  clown  in  Antony  and  Cleopatra, 
Audrey,  Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek — jewels  of  the  first  water  all 
of  them. 

In  spite  of  my  agonized  entreaties  to  be  allowed  to  get  off  in 
time,  having  still  my  passport  to  obtain,  the  cool  and  easy  people 
of  the  house  kept  me  waiting  for  a  coach  any  length  of  time, 
assuring  me  with  all  their  hideous  shrugs  and  hateful  grimaces 
that  I  had  plenty  of  time.  To  the  Police-office  I  went  for  this 
indispensable  pass  ;  it  was  past  the  office  hours,  but  the  func- 
tionary had  not  arrived,  and  when  he  did,  he  leisurely  first  took 


ROUTE  TO  ROUEN. 


3 


off  his  hat  and  drew  on  a  warm  fur  cap,  then  stripped  off  his  coat, 
edifying  us  with  his  shirt-sleeves  the  while,  and  transferred  him- 
self to  some  more  easy  working  jacket ;  and  finally  having,  I 
sincerely  hope,  made  himself  quite  comfortable,  turned  his 
attention  to  our  business.  He  merely  returned  my  own  passport, 
bidding  me  walk  into  another  room  and  get  the  passe  provisoire. 
The  other  room,  though  long  after  office  hours,  was  not  yet 
open,  and  nobody  had  arrived  to  attend  to  Messieurs  les  voyageurs. 
I  stood  perplexed ;  the  Diligence  in  which  our  places  were  taken 
started  at  half-past  nine.  I  was  afraid  I  should  lose  them  ;  the 
little  gamin  du  Havre,  who  had  thought  fit  to  stick  to  me  as  my 
Cicerone  through  this  intricate  passage  of  my  life,  assured  me  I 
could  go  perfectly  well  without  further  ceremonies ;  but  remem- 
bering my  father's  injunctions  about  always  having  my  passport 
en  regie,  with  the  fear  of  the  gensdarmes,  the  Commissaire  ds 
Police,  a  march  under  military  escort  through  the  streets,  and 
the  eventual  prison  Mr.  Murray  so  obligingly  hints  at,  I  rushed 
back  into  the  den  of  the  comfortable  gentleman,  and  asked  him 
if  I  really  could  proceed  without  having  the  necessary  alteration 
made  in  my  passport,  to  which  he  very  cheerfully  replied, — 

"  Mais  puisque  ces  messieurs  ne  sont  pas  la,  je  crois  que  vous 
n'en  mourrez  pas," — whereupon,  with  a  blessing  on  their  loose 
business  habits,  I  departed. 

We  got  into  our  coupe,  and  so  off  to  Rouen.  Before  we  were 
well  out  of  Havre,  a  heavy  snow-storm  came  on,  and  the  horses 
of  our  grotesque  equipage  were  the  only  part  of  the  prospect 
which  the  blinding  storm  left  visible.  As,  however,  I  had  never 
travelled  by  diligence  before,  they  furnished  me  with  abundant 
amusement — the  variety  of  their  equipment,  size,  and  gait — the 
obstinate  little  trot  of  some,  and  the  unprevailing  frantic  canter 
of  others  ;  especially  did  I  admire  the  ingenious  twisting  up 
of  their  tails,  which,  with  an  eye  to  my  own  back  hair,  as 
Dickens  calls  it,  I  should  like  mightily  to  have  the  recipe  for, 


4 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


because  they  all  held  up  without  any  combs.  At  one  pretty 
steep  hill  we  had  an  addition  of  another  horse,  and  thus  went 
with  seven, — four,  and  three  abreast.  At  the  hill  of  La  Valette, 
which  is  both  long  and  steep,  we  took  an  addition  of  three  horses, 
and  thus,  with  three  file  of  three,  proceeded  to  climb  the  ascent, 
a  postilion  having  mounted  the  near  horse  of  the  first  file.  Tt  so 
happened,  however,  that  the  middle  horse  of  this  rank  had  an 
invincible  repugnance  to  move,  the  consequence  of  which  was, 
that  the  second  and  third  rank  came  close  upon  the  haunches  of 
the  first,  and  a  scene  of  most  ludicrous  confusion  ensued  ;  the 
insane  postilion  exhausting  himself  in  blows,  oaths,  and  kicks, 
ineffectually.  The  conducteur  having  come  down  (from  heaven, 
as  it  appeared),  applied  an  equal  amount  of  oaths  on  the  opposite 
side,  and  as  many  cuts  with  a  whip  as  could  be  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  obdurate  middle-man  under  the  bellies  and  over  the 
backs  of  his  companions,  whose  liveliness  increasing  wonderfully 
by  this  process,  while  his  steadfastness  remained  unmoved, 
I  expected  to  see  them  and  the  diligence  finally  go  bodily  over 
the  consistent  quadruped.  Suddenly  the  postilion  pulled  up  his 
blue  blouse,  snatched  a  knife  out  of  his  pocket,  and  opening  it 
very  emphatically,  stabbed  his  horse  twice.  Whether  this  pro- 
cess was  medicinal  or  moral  I  know  not — our  exceedingly  efficient 
first  file  was  then  marched  off,  and  by  dint  of  their  departure,  we 
achieved  the  ascent. 

The  railroad  crosses  a  deep  valley  just  here  by  a  very  lofty 
viaduct  of  many  arches,  through  which  the  landscape,  even  at 
this  season,  and  veiled  in  the  cheerless  covering  of  the  new-fallen 
snow,  looked  picturesque  and  pretty  enough  to  make  one  wish  one 
had  seen  it  in  spring  under  the  rosy  mantle  of  its  apple-blossoms. 
Nothing  can  be  flatter  or  duller  than  our  route — through  vast 
uninclosed  fields,  at  this  season  bare  and  dreary  in  the  extreme, 
and  varied  only  by  little  inclosures,  like  mock  fortifications,  con- 
sisting of  an  embankment  three  or  four  feet  high,  planted  with 


ARRIVAL  AT  PARIS. 


5 


stiff  trees,  which  curtain  and  conceal  the  dwellings  of  such  of  the 
inhabitants  as  are  not  congregated  in  the  villages  we  passed 
through.  Descending  a  steep  hill  into  the  suburbs  of  Rouen,  one 
of  our  wheel-horses  fell ;  no  notice,  however,  was  taken  of  the 
accident,  and — the  carriage  coming  rapidly  upon  the  poor  brute 
— he  regained  his  legs,  as  a  measure  of  personal  safety,  and  no 
one  but  himself  was  the  wiser.  I  think,  generally,  the  French 
are  more  brutal  in  the  treatment  of  their  animals  than  we  are ; 
perhaps,  however,  the  noisy  demonstrations  with  which  they 
accompany  everything  they  do,  make  them  seem  more  ferocious 
than  our  quieter  people. 

At  Rouen  we  got  a  mouthful  of  dinner,  and  having  resumed 
our  seats  in  the  diligence,  proceeded  to  the  railroad,  where  we 
stopped  under  a  species  of  square  gateway,  the  top  of  which  was 
occupied  by  some  machinery,  whence  depended  four  powerful 
iron  bars,  with  hooks  at  their  extremities ;  these  having  been 
fastened  to  the  diligence,  the  machinery  at  the  top  was  set  in 
motion,  and  gradually  the  huge  machine — baggage,  passengers, 
and  all — was  lifted  bodily  off  its  own  wheels,  and  transferred  to  a 
set  of  railroad  wheels,  upon  which  it  was  lowered,  and  took  its 
place  immediately  in  the  train — the  common  road  wheels  being 
dragged  off,  I  should  think  with  much  self-gratulation,  by  the  team 
that  brought  the  monstrous  load  upon  them  to  the  railroad.  The 
rest  of  our  route  was  made  in  the  dark,  in  rain,  sleet,  and  bitter 
cold  wind,  in  spite  of  which  a  second  class  carriage  immediately 
before  ours — without  any  roof  or  shelter  to  it  whatever, — was 
filled  with  poor  people  ;  many  of  them  women,  without  any  pro- 
tection for  their  heads  but  the  cap  which  the  lower  order  of 
women  habitually  go  out  in.  We  reached  Paris  at  10  o'clock, 
and  were  again  craned  up  from  the  railroad  cars,  and  let  down 
to  a  set  of  common  wheels,  wherewith  we  made  our  way  to  the 
messageries.  It  is  twenty  years  since  I  was  last  in  Paris  a 
school -girl. 


6 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


If  I  had  travelled  more  on  the  Continent  before  I  went  to 
America,  I  should  have  been  infinitely  less  surprised  and  amazed 
than  1  was  at  the  various  unpleasant  peculiarities  of  its  inhabit- 
ants. Since  residing  in  the  United  States,  I  have  returned  to 
Europe,  and  travelled  in  Germany,  and  have  had  some  opportu- 
nity of  comparing  smoking  and  spitting  on  the  Rhine  to  the  same 
articles  on  the  Hudson,  and  really  hardly  know  to  which  to 
award  the  preference ;  and  after  raving  at  every  inn  I  put  up  at 
in  America  for  insufficient  ablutionary  privileges,  find  myself 
now  in  one  of  the  best  hotels  in  Paris,  with  a  thing  like  a  small 
cream  jug  for  a  water  vessel  in  my  bedroom,  and  a  basin  as  big 
as  a  little  pudding-bowl :  moreover,  when  I  asked  for  warm 
water  this  morning  for  my  toilet,  they  produced  a  little  copper 
pot,  with  an  allowance  such  as  the  youngest  gentleman  shaving 
the  faintest  hopes  of  a  beard,  might  have  found  insufficient  for 
his  purposes — in  short,  I  believe  England  is  the  only  place  in 
the  world  where  people  are  not  disgustingly  dirty  ;  and  I  believe, 
as  a  dear  friend  of  mine  once  assured  me,  that  exceedingly  few 

people  are  clean  there.    I  sent  a  note  to   ,  and  he  called 

upon  me  to-day.    His  account  of  Lord  John  Russell  and  Peel's 

alternate  rushings  down  to  Windsor  is  very  funny.   's 

book  interests  me  very  much  indeed :  it  is  exceedingly  well 
written. 

What  a  root  that  hatred  between  the  Catholic  and  Protestant 
Irish  has  struck  into  the  very  being  of  them,  that  even  in  Ame- 
rica,— the  wide  common  where  every  religious  persuasion  has 
its  right  of  way — the  bitter  burning  feud  lighted  cities  from  one 
end  to  the  another  with  the  blaze  of  Catholic  churches,  and 
cannon  were  planted  in  the  streets  of  Philadelphia  round  the 
cathedral  to  protect  it  from  destruction.  I  remember  for  two 
whole  days  and  nights  the  streets  were  alight  with  these  hell  fires 
of  hate  and  bigotry,  and  the  air  vibrated  incessantly  with  the 
alarm-bell  sounding  from  one  district  to  another  of  the  city  of 


ROUTE  TO  CHALONS. 


7 


brotherly  love.  A  cab  driver  taking  me  home  at  night  could 
hardly  be  persuaded  to  drive  me  to  the  part  of  the  town  where  I 
lived,  for  fear  of  outrage,  because  he  was  a  Catholic  ;  and  I  was 
myself  accosted  in  the  street  as  a  Papist,  because  of  the  little 
iron  crucifix,  that  badge  of  the  universal  religion  of  sorrow, 
which  I  wear  round  my  neck.  The  Americans  made  use  of 
this  in  their  party  politics,  as  they  would  of  facts  in  chemistry  I 
verily  believe,  if  they  could;  but  the  only  feeling  in  the  whole 
business  was  that  of  Irish  against  Irishman — of  Orangeman 
against  Papist, — and  the  proof  of  it  is,  that  the  ranks  of  the 
Native  American  party,  as  it  calls  itself,  are  full  of  Irish  Protest- 
ants, while  the  Catholics  are  the  only  "  imported  foreigners," 
rejected  as  such  by  the  framers  of  that  singular  party.    By  the 

by,  writes  me  word  that  there  has  been  an  attempt  to  get 

up  a  Native  American  Party  in  Massachusetts,  which  has  sig- 
nally failed.  Those  New  England  States,  I  do  believe,  will  be 
the  noblest  country  in  the  world  in  a  little  while.  They  will  be 
the  salvation  of  that  very  great  body  with  a  very  little  soul,  the 
rest  of  the  United  States ;  they  are  the  pith  and  marrow,  heart 
and  core,  head  and  spirit  of  that  country. 

Friday,  26th  December. — Having  been  assured  by  the  host  at 
the  Hotel  de  France,  at  Nevers,  that  we  could  get  places  in  the 
diligence  to  Chalons,  and  finding  the  suite  of  the  Persian  Ambas- 
sador extremely  anxious  to  possess  our  rooms,  we  took  our  way 
to  the  Bureau,  and  there,  upon  inquiry  for  the  coach,  became 
aware  that  these  cross-road  conveyances  were  altogether  above 
special  hours,  which  occasioned  me  some  slight  misgiving.  But, 
however,  the  matter  could  not  be  helped  ;  we  sat,  therefore, 
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  entertaining  ourselves  with  impatience, 
and  finally  a  little  cross-country  coach,  a  diligence  of  an  inferior 
grade,  and  with  its  head  and  its  tail  cut  off,  inasmuch  as  it  had 
only  three  horses,  and  no  rotonde,  made  its  appearance.  Into 
this  exceedingly  wretched  vehicle  we  put  ourselves,  and  it  was 


8 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


some  comfort  to  me  to  see  the  Chef  de  Bureau  put  a  heavy  sack 
of  money  into  the  hands  of  the  conducteur,  inasmuch  as  it  proved 
that  he  was  to  be  trusted  to  the  extent  of  a  thousand  francs  (the 
sum  he  named),  giving  him  certain  directions  about  the  disposal 
of  it. 

Our  road  lay  for  a  while  through  a  country  reminding  me  very 
much  of  England, — rolling  slopes  of  ploughed  fields,  and  green 
meadows  divided  by  hedges,  and  diversified  by'clumps  of  trees, 
and  scattered  farm-houses, — an  infinitely  more  agreeable  style  of 
landscape  than  the  flat  uninclosed  fields  of  Normandy,  or  the 
wearisome  withered  vineyards,  with  their  sheaves  of  sticks, 
through  which  we  travelled  from  Orleans  to  Nevers.  By  degrees, 
however,  the  country  lost  its  amenity,  and  assumed  a  wilder  and 
less  cultivated  aspect.  The  Pays  Bas,  as  they  call  it,  of  the 
Nivernois,  was  lying  behind  and  beneath  us  as  we  gradually 
ascended  through  withered  stunted  woodland  to  the  Morvan,  the 
most  picturesque,  but  wildest  part  of  the  Department,  across 
which  I  was  venturing  upon  the  faith  of  friends  who  had  traversed 
it  in  summer, — a  very  different  undertaking,  as  I  presently  disco- 
vered, from  my  present  December  trip.  The  road  was  now  one 
continuous  ascent,  and  the  unbroken  dreary  woodland  that 
stretched  on  either  hand,  chiefly  composed  of  dwarf  oak  and 
elms,  with  rubbishing  underbrush,  reminded  me  of  parts  of  the 
woods  of  New  Jersey,  in  the  United  States ;  with  this  difference, 
that,  whereas  the  scrub  forests  cover  low  swamp  lands  there — 
here,  the  sides  of  the  hills,  gradually  growing  into  mountains, 
were  bristling  all  over  with  this  shabby  dwarf  forest. 

As  the  short  winter  day  died  out,  the  wind  became  piercing 
cold,  and  when  we  arrived  at  the  wretched  inn,  where  we  were 
let  out  to  eat  something,  at  Chatillon  le  Baxoir,  it  was  as  dark  as 
pitch,  and  a  perfect  hurricane  howled  over  the  dismal  hill-tops. 
At  this  filthy  inn,  crowded  with  men  in  blue  blouses  and  with  black 
muzzles,  we  received  the  most  discouraging  accounts  of  the  road 


ROUTE  TO  CHALONS. 


0 


further  on,  which  we  were  assured  was  blocked  up  with  snow ; 
still,  having  received  the  assurance  that  the  carriage  I  was  in 
would  take  me  on  to  Chalons,  I  determined  to  proceed  with  it : 
accordingly  we  sallied  forth  again,  and  I  soon  perceived  by  the 
muffled  sound  of  the  horses'  feet,  and  the  increased  slowness  with 
which  we  toiled  up  our  still  ascending  way,  that  the  report  of  the 
snow  was  true.  By  the  rapid  glare  thrown  by  the  single  lamp 
of  our  wretched  vehicle  upon  the  fields  as  we  passed  them,  I  saw 
that  they  were  sheeted  with  white ;  and  at  Moulins  en  Gilbert,  a 
forlorn  congregation  of  rickety  old  houses,  where  the  conducteur 
took  out  his  horses,  and  left  us  for  half  an  hour  in  the  middle  of 
the  street,  the  peasants  congregated  round  the  carriage,  talked 
together  of  the  impossibility  of  our  getting  on,  and  how  the  dili- 
gences had  none  of  them  been  able  to  come  up  into  that  district 
for  several  days  on  account  of  the  snow.  Still,  I  remembered  the 
emphatical  reply  of  the  Chef  de  Bureau  to  my  emphatical  ques- 
tion : — 

"  M. —  cette  voiture  me  conduit  jusqu'a  Chalons  V 
"  Oui,  Madame,  cette  voiture  vous  conduit  jusqu'a  Chalons," — 
and  sal  resigned  to  my  fate. 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  discomfort  of  the  carriage  itself  in 

which  we  were  ;  poor  ,  worn  out  with  fatigue,  had  stretched 

herself  at  the  bottom  of  the  coupe,  in  the  straw  ;  I  did  the  same 
upon  the  seat,  upon  which  besides  it  was  not  possible  to  sit  with- 
out sliding  off  every  five  minutes.  By  and  by,  through  the 
dreary  street,  we  heard  the  jingle  of  our  horses,  and  presently, 
with  sundry  foreboding  warnings  bawled  after  us  by  the  popula- 
tion of  Moulins,  we  set  off  again,  wearied  out  with  cold  and  long 
journeying.  We  were  both  at  length  fast  asleep,  when  suddenly 
the  carriage  stopped,  and  the  conducteur  opening  the  door  against 

which  leaned,  she  very  nearly  fell  out ;  we  now  received 

a  summons  to  get  out,  and  the  agreeable  intelligence,  that  here 

we  were  to  change  coach,  and  that  the  coach  not  having  arrived, 
2* 


id 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


we  must  alight,  and  wait  for  it  at  the  inn  of  Chateau  Chinon, 
where  we  had  arrived. 

My  dismay  and  indignation  were  intense  ;  the  rain  was  pour- 
ing, the  wind  roaring,  and  it  was  twelve  o'clock  at  night.  The 
inn  into  which  we  were  shown  was  the  most  horrible  cut-throat- 
looking  hole  I  ever  beheld  ;  all  the  members  of  the  household 
were  gone  to  bed,  except  a  dirty,  sleepy,  stupid  serving  girl,  who 
ushered  us  into  a  kitchen  as  black  as  darkness  itself  and  a  single 
tallow-candle  could  make  it,  and  then  informed  us  that  here  we 
must  pass  the  night,  for  that  the  coaches  which  generally  came 
up  to  meet  our  conveyance,  had  not  been  able  to  come  over  the 
mountains  on  account  of  the  heavy  snow  for  several  days.  I 
was  excessively  frightened  ;  the  look  of  the  place  was  horrible, 
that  of  the  people  not  at  all  encouraging ;  when  the  conducteur 
demanded  the  price  of  the  places,  which  I  then  recollected  the 
Chef  de  Bureau  had  most  cautiously  refused  to  receive,  because 
then  I  should  have  found  out  that  I  was  not  going  to  Chalons  in 
his  coach,  but  to  be  shot  out  on  the  highest  peak  of  the  Morvan, 
midway  between  Chalons  and  Nevers.  I  refused  to  pay  until, 
according  to  agreement,  I  was  taken  to  Chalons ;  he  then  refused 
to  deliver  up  my  baggage,  and  I  saw  that  all  resistance  was 
vain,  whereupon  I  paid  the  money  and  retreated  again  to  the 

black  filthy  kitchen,  where  I  had  left  poor  ,  bidding  her 

not  stir  from  the  side  of  the  dressing-case  and  writing-box  I  had 
left  in  her  charge,  with  my  precious  letters  of  credit  and  money- 
bag. 

The  fire  of  the  kitchen  was  now  invaded  by  a  tall  brawny- 
looking  man,  in  a  sort  of  rough  sporting  costume  ;  his  gun  and 
game-bags  lay  on  the  dresser  ;  two  abominable  dogs  he  had  with 
him  went  running  in  and  out  between  our  feet,  pursuing  each 
other,  and  all  but  knocking  us  down.  I  was  so  terrified,  dis- 
gusted, and  annoyed,  that  I  literally  shook  from  head  to  foot,  and 
could  have  found  it  in  my  heart  to  have  cried  for  very  coward- 


CHATEAU  CHINON. 


1 1 


ice.  I  asked  this  person  what  was  to  be  done  ;  he  answered  me 
that  he  was  in  the  same  predicament  with  myself,  and  that  I 
could  do,  if  I  liked,  as  he  should, — walk  over  the  mountain  to 
Autun  the  next  day. 

"  What  was  the  distance  ?" 

"  Ten  leagues."    (Thirty  miles.) 

I  smiled  a  sort  of  verjuice  smile,  and  replied, — "Even  if  we 
two  women  could  walk  thirty  miles  through  the  snow,  what  was 
to  become  of  my  baggage  ?" 

"  Oh,  he  did  not  know  ;  perhaps  if  the  snow  was  not  higher 
than  the  horses'  bellies,  or  if  the  laborers  of  the  district  had 
been  out  clearing  the  roads  at  all,  the  master  of  the  house  might 
contrive  some  means  of  sending  us  on." 

In  the  midst  of  the  agony  of  perplexity  and  anxiety,  which 
all  these  perhapses  occasioned  me,  I  heard  that  the  devilish  con- 
ductor and  conveyance  which  had  brought  me  to  this  horrid  hole, 
would  return  to  Nevers  the  next  day  at  five  o'clock,  and  making 
up  my  mind,  if  the  worst  came  to  the  worst,  to  return  by  it 
thither,  and  having  blown  the  perfidious  Chef  du  Bureau  of  the 
country  diligence  higher  than  he  had  sent  me  in  his  coach,  take 
the  Paris  diligence  on  its  way  through  Nevers  for  Lyons  straight, 
— this  of  course  at  the  cost  of  so  much  money  and  time  wasted. 

With  this  alternative,  I  had  my  luggage  carried  up  to  my  room, 

and  followed  it  with  my  faithful  and  most  invaluable  , 

who  was  neither  discouraged,  nor  frightened,  nor  foolish, — nor 
anything  that  I  was, — but  comported  herself  to  admiration.  The 
room  we  were  shown  into  was  fearful  looking  ;  the  wind  blew 
down  the  huge  black  gaping  chimney,  and  sent  the  poor  fire, 
we  were  endeavoring  in  vain  to  kindle,  in  eye-smarting  clouds 
into  our  faces.  The  fender  and  fire-irons  were  rusty  and  broken, 
the  ceiling  cracked  all  over,  the  floor  sunken,  and  an  inch  thick 
with  filth  and  dirt.  I  threw  open  the  shutters  of  the  window, 
and  saw  opposite  against  the  black  sky,  the  yet  thicker  outline 


12 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


of  the  wretched  hovels  opposite,  and,  satisfied  that  at  any  rate 
we  were  in  the  vicinity  of  human  beings  of  some  description, 
we  piled  our  trunks  up  against  a  door  that  opened  into  some  other 
room,  locked  the  one  that  gave  entrance  from  the  passage,  and 
with  one  lighted  tallow  candle,  and  one  relay,  and  a  box  of 
matches  by  my  bed-side,  I  threw  myself  all  dressed  upon  the 
bed.   did  the  same  upon  a  sofa,  and  thus  we  resign- 
ed ourselves  to  pass  the  night. 

I  did  not  close  my  eyes,  however ;  the  nervous  anxiety  I  was 
suffering,  the  howling  of  the  storm,  beating  the  heavy  wooden 
shutters  against  the  windows,  the  pattering  of  the  rain  which  fell 
through  the  roof  of  the  house  and  the  broken  ceiling  of  the  room, 
on  the  floor  by  the  bed-side ;  all  was  so  wretched  and  forlorn, 
that  I  lay  awake  and  exceedingly  uncomfortable  till  daylight, 
when  I  fell  asleep.  It  was  an  extreme  comfort  to  me  to  have 
found  that,  besides  the  above  mentioned  Nimrod,  a  decent  peace- 
able looking  soldier  and  a  young  peasant  lad  were  among  the 
detenus,  as  well  as  ourselves,  at  this  miserable  hostelry.  I  had 
some  thoughts  of  hiring  the  soldier  at  double  his  daily  pay,  to 
act  as  my  body-guard  to  Chalons.  I  wonder  how  it  is  that  I  am 
considered  a  brave  woman,  which  I  very  generally  am  ;  I  cer- 
tainly am  one  of  the  most  cowardly  ones  I  ever  knew.  The  day- 
light having  a  little  quieted  my  nerves,  I  fell  asleep,  from  which 

state  of  beatitude  awoke  me,  by  informing  me  that 

some  one  was  at  the  door.  I  bade  her  open  it,  and  a  most  ill- 
looking  man,  with  only  one  eye,  extremely  marked  with  the 
small-pox,  and  with  his  white-brown  face  set  in  a  thick  frame  of 
bushy  black  hair,  and  clad  in  the  everlasting  coarse  blue  blouse, 
made  his  appearance.  He  said  he  was  the  master  of  the  house, 
and  post-master  likewise,  and  that  hearing  that  I  wanted  to  go 
on  to  Autun,  he  was  come  to  tell  me  that  he  would  take  me  on 
in  some  conveyance  of  his  own,  but  that  he  would  not  engage 
to  do  it  under  sixty  francs,  because  he  must  have  four  horses, 


CHATEAU  CHINON. 


13 


and  perhaps  a  yoke  of  oxen  to  get  us  over  the  mountain.  This 
appeared  to  me  perfectly  outrageous,  and  I  declined  the  offer, 
whereupon  this  ill-visaged  host  of  ours  withdrew.    I  found  that 

even  the  very  steady  nerves  of  — ;  were  not  proof  against 

the  forbidding  appearance  of  this  man,  and  she  advised  me  by 
no  means  to  trust  myself  with  him,  especially  as  he  had  said  that, 
on  account  of  the  depth  of  the  drifts,  it  might  be  necessary  to 
turn  off  the  road  into  the  woods  and  across  the  fields. 

I  now  determined  to  send  for  the  chasseur  of  the  night  before. 
I  had  ascertained  from  the  people  of  the  inn  that  he  was  a  man 
of  some  property  in  the  district,  and  I  thought  I  had  better  inquire 
of  him  what  my  best  course  would  be  ;  he  came  into  my  room 
with  his  coat  all  tucked  up  to  his  waist,  ready  for  his  expedition. 
He  said  the  price  the  man  asked  was  exorbitant,  but  that  he 
thought  I  could  trust  myself  with  him  in  perfect  safety,  and  that 
he  would  guarantee  our  arriving  in  all  security  at  Autun.  He 
described  the  country  we  were  going  through  as  extremely  pic- 
turesque and  well  worth  seeing  in  summer,  but  highly  undesira- 
ble for  travelling  in  in  winter  ;  said  the  roads  were  often  impas- 
sable for  weeks  together,  and  that  during  the  winter  the  villages 
scattered  among  the  mountains  were  snowed  up  so  as  to  be  utterly- 
inaccessible.  He  still  expressed  his  determination  to  walk,  which 
he  said  the  soldier  and  the  peasant  boy  were  prepared  to  do  also. 
I  entreated  him  to  give  me  the  protection  of  his  company  in  the  * 
carriage  we  were  going  in  ;  he  laughed,  and  said  that  the  sort  of 
carriage  we  were  going  in  would  very  barely  hold  two  persons, 
but  that  he  and  the  soldier  would  fasten  their  small  luggage  on 
with  ours  and  keep  our  conveyance  in  view  the  whole  time. 
Much  comforted  by  this,  we  proceeded  to  dress,  and  sent  word 
to  the  Polypheme,  our  host,  that  we  agreed  to  his  terms. 

The  violent  rain  of  the  night  had  washed  away  the  snow  very 
much,  and  word  was  brought  that  the  cantonniers  were  out  along 
the  road  clearing  the  places  where  it  had  been  blown  into  deep 


14 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


drifts.  To  my  unspeakable  satisfaction  I  saw  it  streaming  from 
the  filthy  and  tattered  thatch  of  the  mud-colored  houses,  and  the 
blessed  sun  beckoned  us  on  with  an  encouraging  gleam.  It  was 
in  vain,  however,  that  I  urged  our  departure.  I  little  knew  the 
preparations  making  for  our  comfort.  Meantime  the  gentleman 
campagnard,  to  whom  I  perceived  my  anxiety  and  alarm  occa- 
sioned some  amusement,  entertained  me  with  some  account  of 
the  country,  and  of  his  own  hunting  exploits  and  adventures 
therein.  This  district  lies  remote  from  any  direct  line  of  travel, 
and  the  climate  being  severe,  and  the  soil,  in  such  patches  as 
are  not  clothed  with  forest,  poor — the  people  are  extremely  mise- 
rable and  uncivilized.  Some  of  the  largest  estates  of  some  of 
the  oldest  families  of  France  lie  however  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Montagne  du  Mowan,  but  are  visited  only  rarely  for  short  inter- 
vals of  time  by  the  proprietors,  whose  brief  and  infrequent  sojourn, 
made  chiefly,  too,  solely  for  the  purpose  of  hunting  excursions, 
does  not  in  any  way  much  benefit  the  inhabitants  of  these  moun- 
tains. The  forest  with  which  they  are  covered,  and  which  ex- 
tends for  many  leagues,  is  the  great  wood  reservoir  of  Paris,  the 
woods  being  partially  reaped  every  few  years,  to  supply  Paris 
with  fuel.  Foxes,  wild  goats,  wild  boars,  and  wolves,  my 
informant  assured  me,  were  abundant  all  through  the  district  : 
and  he  wound  up  his  catalogue  of  its  rather  savage  recommenda- 
tions by  saying,  that  last  year  a  band  of  robbers  infested  the 
road  through  the  mountains,  sixty  of  whom  had  been  secured, 
which  had  broken  up  the  speculation.  I  thought  my  sporting 
friend  was  trying  the  extent  of  my  anxiety,  but  defeated  his  own 
purpose,  for  that  story  made  me  laugh,  which  was  more  than  his 
account  of  crossing  the  mountain  once  on  horseback,  and  being 
compelled  to  dismount  and  fray  a  passage  for  himself  and  his 
horse,  breast  high  in  the  drifted  snow  did.  This  was  rather 
more  the  complexion  of  danger  that  I  apprehended,  and  I 
conjured  him,  together  with  the  soldier  and  peasant-lad,  who  now 


DEPARTURE  FROM  CHATEAU  CHINON. 


IS 


made  their  appearance,  to  keep  us  in  sight  in  case  of  any  acci- 
dent befalling  our  conveyance.  This  they  promised  to  do  ;  and 
from  the  time  of  our  leaving  the  inn-door  we  saw  no  more  of  any 
one  of  them.  By  the  by,  I  think  it  not  amiss  to  add,  for  the 
benefit  of  future  ladies-errant,  who  may  chance  to  be  left  at 
Chateau  Chinon,  and  to  the  tender  mercies  of  its  post-master  and 
country  gentlemen,  that  when  I  appealed  to  the  latter  on  the 
subject  of  the  monstrous  charge  of  the  former,  he  coolly  replied, 
that  it  was  rather  exorbitant,  but  that  such  an  occasion  did  not 
often  fall  in  mine  host's  way,  and  he  naturally  wished  to  profit 
by  it. 

Remonstrance  was  vain.  We  were  at  length  summoned  to 
proceed,  and  found  a  crazy,  dirty,  rickety  sort  of  gig,  or  cabrio- 
let, at  the  door,  to  which  were  harnessed,  with  chains,  ropes,  and 
packthread,  in  equal  proportions,  and  tandem  fashion,  a  crazy, 
dirty,  rickety  pair  of  miserable  horses.  The  team  of  four  horses 
and  oxen  were  nowhere  apparent,  for  which  I  was  going  to  pay 
sixty  francs ;  but,  as  I  wanted  to  go  in  any  way  and  at  any  cost, 
I  said  nothing,  but  climbed  into  the  seat,  which,  partly  from  its 
shape,  and  partly  from  the  hay  with  which,  for  our  protection 
from  the  cold,  it  had  been  stuffed,  seemed  to  me  very  like  trying 
to  sit  in  a  manger.  Our  trunks  were  chained,  corded,  and 
packthreaded  (JiceUt)  on  behind,  all  but  one  large  one,  which 
lay  across  our  feej  before,  and  served  our  one-eyed  Jehu  for  a 
seat.  Thus  we  set  forth,  I  confess,  with  most  fearful  misgivings 
on  my  side,  that  such  an  equipage  was  likely  to  give  out  in  more 
than  one  of  its  parts  on  such  a  road. 

Moving  from  the  yellow,  squalid-looking  village,  we  immedi- 
ately descended  a  deep  valley,  where  patches  of  the  vivid  green 
that  is  seen  on  the  mountain  sides  of  Switzerland  appeared  here 
and  there,  where  the  rain  had  washed  the  snow  thin,  and  the 
sun  had  laid  them  bare  ;  between  them  ran  gushing  brooks 
of  living  water,  and  far  below,  in  alternate  basins  and  cones, 


16 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


rose  and  sank  the  deep  gullies  and  steep  ridges  of  the  dreary  fuel 
district.  The  road  itself  across  the  mountain  is  admirable, 
broad,  and  well  made,  and  in  summer  I  have  no  doubt  that  it 
would  be  worth  while  to  pass  this  way,  for  the  mere  wild  beauty 
of  the  scenery,  which  now  reminded  me  forcibly  of  America, 
and  some  of  the  wood  and  mountain  wildernesses  round  Grey 
Lock.  The  driver  informed  me  that  all  the  springs,  of  which 
these  mountains  were  full,  and  which  rolled  in  sparkling  abun- 
dance through  the  snow  on  all  sides  of  us,  were  tepid  in  winter, 
and  so  cold  in  summer  as  to  make  it  dangerous  to  drink  of  them. 
In  the  emerald  strip  of  valley  between  two  snowy  hills,  he  showed 
me  the  head  waters  of  the  river  Yonne,  a  rapid,  turbulent,  narrow 
mountain  stream,  which,  further  down  in  its  course,  is  tamed  to 
the  subjection  of  carrying  the  timber  felled  in  the  forests  to  the 
Seine  in  rafts.  We  now  began  to  ascend,  and  continued  to 
strain  up  the  snowy,  dismal  mountain-side  for  upwards  of  an 
hour  and  a  half ;  the  ascent  was,  according  to  the  driver,  three 
leagues — nine  miles,  and  seemed  to  follow  one  half  the  ridge  of 
a  huge  bowl  in  the  earth,  the  sides  of  which,  bristling  with 
wintry  woods,  and  skirted  with  snow,  sank  deeply  and  darkly 
down  into  a  circular  valley,  where  at  distant  intervals  we 
descried,  made  visible  by  their  black  thatched  roofs,  huddled 
together  like  clusters  of  dark  fungi,  the  miserable  villages  of  the 
district.  Far  across  this  gulf,  and  right  against  the  sky,  on  a 
line  level  with  the  heights  which  we  were  slowly  climbing  to, 
he  pointed  out  the  roof  of  a  house,  and  saying,  "  the  road  passes 
by  that,  and  afterwards  ascends  for  another  mile,  then  keeps  the 
ridge  of  the  mountains  in  the  woods,  for  three  leagues,  and  then 
descends,"  gave  us  some  faint  idea  of  the  expedition  that  lay 
before  us.  The  cold  was  bitter,  and  became  momentarily  more 
intense.  The  mountain-tops,  over  which  the  skirts  of  the  clouds 
were  trailing  heavily,  gradually  drew  them  down  in  ominous 
grey  tatters  across  the  sky,  and  the  first  flakes  of  a  snow-storm 


ARLEAFF. 


17 


really  made  me  feel  extremely  uncomfortable  as  to  the  possible 
termination  of  our  journey  :  this  anxiety  passed  off,  however,  as 
we  reached  the  point  so  long  before  indicated  to  us,  and  found 
that  we  had  accomplished  within  a  mile  the  ascent  of  the  moun- 
tain. The  blue  sky  smiled  through  the  grey  cobwebs  of  snow- 
clouds  floating  about  us,  and  sun-light  suddenly  struck  the  grim 
mountain  tops  all  round,  and  then  darted  midway  into  the  wintry 
valleys  between  them.  At  this  point  of  the  route  we  came  upon 
a  church  and  a  large  scattered  village  of  wretchedly  poor  houses, 
the  most  considerable,  as  our  driver  informed  us,  of  all  the  dis- 
trict. Arleaff  was  the  name  of  this  pinnacle  of  savage  poverty  ; 
and  the  church  suggesting  ideas  of  a  priest  and  some  secure 
shelter,  I  comforted  myself  with  thinking  that,  in  case  of  acci- 
dent, Arleaff  would  be  a  refuge  nine  miles  nearer  than  our  horrid 
resting-place  of  last  night.  Still  we  went  up,  up,  up, — and  ridge 
upon  ridge  of  hills  heaved  like  a  brown  sea  in  sight — mournful, 
monotonous,  and  yet  not  without  a  wild  grandeur ;  through  one 
of  the  gaps  in  the  mountain  view,  the  driver  pointed  out  Autun, 
our  destination,  still  upwards  of  twenty  miles  distant. 

Thus  far,  the  road,  though  savage  enough  in  its  surrounding 
scenery,  was  by  no  means  either  as  difficult  or  as  dangerous  as 
he  had  reported  it.  In  some  places,  where  the  snow  had  drifted 
deep,  the  peasants  had  already  cleared  a  passage  through  it,  and 
though  long  and  tedious  for  the  miserable  beasts  dragging  us,  there 
was  nothing  whatever  to  justify  the  threat  of  four  horses  and  oxen 
with  which  my  promise  of  sixty  francs  had  been  extorted.  We 
now  began  to  descend,  and  the  woods  closing  around  us,  hid  the 
mountain  tops  and  the  valleys,  and  all  but  their  own  bare  and 
dismal  depth  ;  suddenly  across  the  road,  from  a  bank  often  feet 
high,  a  sparkling  little  waterfall  sprang  down,  and  ran  laughing 
into  the  dark  wood  below.  My  passion  for  live  water  is  irresisti- 
ble ;  with  all  sorts  of  irrational  apprehensions  and  terrors,  and 
some  ground  for  rational  anxiety  as  to  the  possibility  of  our  get- 


18 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


ting  out  of  these  snowy  solitudes  while  the  daylight  still  favored 
us,  I  could  have  found  in  my  heart  to  have  jumped  out  of  the 
carriage,  and,  accepting  the  challenge  of  the  little  saucy  Undine, 
raced  down  with  it  into  the  black  forest  depths,  where  it  had  hid 
itself.  We  now  came  to  a  narrow  green  gorge,  where  a  whole 
web  of  glittering  brooklets  ran  twining  like  a  company  of  silver 
snakes  through  the  glen.  Here  stood  the  stone  boundary  mark- 
ing the  line  between  the  two  departments  of  the  Loire  and  Haute 
Saone.  And  now,  with  the  capriciousness  of  a  mountain  climate, 
the  rain  began  to  distil  gently  upon  us.  It  seemed  to  be  the 
head-quarters  of  the  water-nymphs  of  the  region.  I  thought 
lamentably  of  my  trunks  covered  only  with  a  layer  of  straw  and 
some  coarse  sacking.  Another  anxiety  presently,  however, 
superseded  this — rising  from  this  valley  of  fountains,  we  gradu- 
ally approached  a  more  dismal  mountain  wall  than  any  we  had  yet 
traversed ;  and  here,  where  a  narrow  wood  path  struck  off  from 
the  road  into  the  forest,  our  driver  descended  from  his  seat,  and 
walking  forward,  said,  that  he  should  turn  into  this  by-path, 
because  most  likely  the  road  beyond  was  impassable.  I  confess 
to  an  unspeakably  distressing  pang  of  universal  dismay  at  this 
proposition.  There  we  were  to  be  murdered.  How  1  whether 
with  the  stout  wood-knife  our  guide  carried  in  his  pocket,  or  the 
whip-cord  of  which  he  drew  interminable  supplies  from  beneath 
his  blouse,  and  of  which  I  began  to  think  he  had  an  interior 
manufactory  ;  whether  he  would  finish  us  outright,  or  leave  us 
disabled  and  wounded,  to  starve  in  the  woods ;  what  snow-drift 
he  would  bury  us  in,  or  what  rushing  stream  commit  us  to  ; 
whether  he  had  gone  on  to  ascertain  that  help  for  him  or  none 
for  us  was  at  hand  ;  what  my  father  would  think  of  it ;  and  how 
it  would  seem  to  my  children,  were  all  agreeable  hypotheses 
that  rushed  simultaneously  into  my  bewildered  brain.  My 
faithful  and  imperturbable  here  turned  upon  me  a  coun- 


RELIEF  FROM  ANXIETY. 


19 


tenance  stupider  than  ever  with  dismay,  and  it  was  very  evident 
that  our  panic  was  simultaneous. 

"  What  is  he  going  to  do  now  V  gasped,  she. 

"  Hold  your  tongue  and  don't  utter  a  word,"  was  my  encourag- 
ing reply,  being  always  remarkably  cross  when  I  am  frightened. 
The  one-eyed  hideous  man  returned,  reseated  himself,  drove  a 
few  yards  further,  and  suddenly  a  company  of  at  least  a  dozen 
countrymen,  their  ruddy  coarse  faces  shining  with  labor,  were 
revealed,  lustily  shovelling  the  snow  from  the  road — where  pass- 
ing at  the  foot  of  the  bleak  mountain  wall  I  have  mentioned,  it 
suddenly  turned  the  broad  shoulder  of  a  lower  eminence,  and 
went  winding  down  into  a  most  picturesque  and  beautiful  glen, 
upon  whose  side,  and  the  little  brown  hovels  dotting  it  all  over, 
the  ruddy  December  afternoon  sun  was  glowing.  Cherubina 
herself  can  never  have  been  more  exquisitely  terrified  or  relieved 
than  I  was  by  these  very  simple  events ;  and  having  traversed 
safely  the  few  rods  where  the  wind  had  swept  the  snow  to  a 
depth  of  three  or  four  feet  by  the  space  cut  by  the  cantonniers, 
we  now  wound  rapidly  down  a  steep,  broad,  beautiful  road,  over- 
hanging a  most  picturesque  glen,  at  the  bottom  of  which,  over  a 
strip  of  fairy  green  sward,  rushed  a  crystal  clear  trout  stream, 
full  of  limpid  shallows  and  foaming  sparkling  reaches.  The 
steep  precipitous  bank  on  the  opposite  side  rose  covered  with 
skeleton  woods  to  a  vast  height,  and  from  their  leafless  trunks 
bold  masses  of  grey  green  rock  jutted  forth  like  wardens  and 
donjon  keeps  overlooking  the  glen.  Our  guide  pointed  out  to  me 
a  gorge  running  sharply  up,  as  though  a  wedge  had  been  driven 
into  the  mountains,  at  the  extremity  of  which  he  said  there  was 
a  cascade  of  upwards  of  a  hundred  feet.  The  sscenery  of  this 
region  must  certainly  be  exceedingly  charming  in  summer.  The 
gentleman  sportsman  at  the  inn  had  spoken  to  me  of  the  fine 
trout  in  the  streams  here,  and  said  that  several  gentlemen  of  that 
neighborhood  belonged  to  trouting  clubs,  and  had  actually  gone 


20 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


to  Norway  and  to  Canada  for  the  sole  and  simple  pleasure  of 
trout  fishing.  I  had  no  idea  that  Frenchmen  were  ever  such 
keen  sportsmen.  Reverting  to  this  in  my  conversation  with  our 
driver  as  we  drove  along  the  margin  of  this  lovely  brook  (a  tri- 
butary of  the  Arroux),  he  informed  me  that  the  inhabitants  who 
did  not  profess  to  be  sporting  gentlemen  often  threw  quick-lime 
into  these  brooks,  and  by  that  means  caught  and  destroyed  a 
quantity  of  fish.  This  was  a  method  of  poaching  I  never  heard 
of  before. 

As  we  neared  the  bottom  of  the  glen  where  the  road  defiled 
as  through  a  rocky  portal  into  the  smiling  friendly  plain  beyond 
(how  well  1  did  now  understand  that  word  freundlich  as  perpe- 
tually applied  by  the  Germans  in  their  wild  legends  to  the  plains 
contrasted  with  the  mountains),  I  gathered  courage  enough  to 
mention  to  my  one-eyed  charioteer  Mr.  Rochette's  account  of  the 
robbers  in  the  mountain  ;  he  laughed,  and  yet  said  it  was  by  no 
means  absolutely  false,  for  that  there  were  at  that  time,  a  year 
ago,  two  men  escaped  from  justice,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the 
woods  of  the  mountains,  and  who  inspired  the  whole  community 
with  terror ;  not  that  they  attempted  any  outrages,  for  their  ob- 
ject was  merely,  he  said,  to  hide  themselves.  But  the  whole 
country,  and  the  courageous  gentlefolks  of  Autun  especially, 
were  terrified  beyond  measure  at  them.  One  was  retaken,  the 
other  never  heard  of. 

I  talked  with  him  of  the  condition  of  the  laboring  population 
about  here,  and  he  described  it  as  exceedingly  wretched  ;  the 
poverty  of  the  soil  and  severity  of  the  climate  combining  to  make 
the  means  of  existence  both  insufficient  and  precarious  among 
them.  He  said  the  oldest  families  in  France  owned  property  in 
that  region,  and  named  some  of  the  haute  noblesse  as  among  the 
seigneurs  of  the  environs.  I  was  very  willing  to  talk  to  the  man, 
and  yet  his  revolting  appearance,  and  something  particularly  low 
and  brutal  in  his  manner,  disgusted  me  extremely.    He  was  a 


ARRIVAL  AT  AUTUN. 


21 


political  malcontent,  and  though  a  placeman  (postmaster)  abused 
the  government  in  a  coarse  slang  that  was  at  once  odious  and 
curious.  I  found  he  knew  Paris  very  well,  and  when  he  began 
discoursing  of  the  changes  taking  place  round  Notre  Dame,  and 
the  old  nests  of  squalid  iniquity  that  were  being  removed  about 
there,  I  began  to  think  of  Eugene  Sue  and  his  Mysteres  de  Paris, 
and  what  with  the  man's  savage  and  grotesque  addresses  to  his 
horses,  whom  he  alternately  execrated  and  coaxed  in  the  lowest 
jargon,  his  brawny  figure,  horrible  face,  and  wall  eye,  thought 
he  might  have  sat  very  well  for  the  original  of  le  Maitre  d'Ecole, 
or  some  of  his  choice  associates. 

About  a  league  from  Autun,  which  we  now  discovered  scat- 
tered about  on  a  mountain  side,  surrounded  with  an  amphitheatre 
of  hills,  and  glowing  like  a  copper  city  in  the  setting  sunlight, 
we  passed  a  curious  moated  old  country  house,  round  whose  very 
dead-looking  walls  and  closed  persiennes  the  gambolling  little 
trout-stream  we  had  followed  ran  with  all  its  might,  and  then 
with  all  its  might  away,  which,  considering  the  lugubrious  aspect 
of  the  place,  did  not  surprise  me. 

Opposite  to  the  Chateau  rose  a  forlorn-looking  mountain,  with 
three  crosses  on  its  summit. 

"  That,"  said  our  driver,  "  was  a  Calvary,  to  which  Madame  de 
 ,  proprietress  of  the  Chateau,  had  herself  taken  occasion- 
ally in  her  carriage  when  she  visited  the  estate,  and  from  whence 
with  a  telescope  she  enjoyed  a  most  extensive  and  beautiful 
view." 

By  the  by,  those  dismal  woods  and  dreary  mountain  tops  we 
traversed  to-day,  were  all  studded  with  black  wooden  crosses, 
which,  accordingly  as  I  thought  my  driver  meant  to  rob  and 
murder  me,  or  only  cheat  me  of  sixty  francs,  assumed  a  most 
melancholy  or  cheering  aspect.  They  were  all  black,  and  as 
like  as  sisters.  Between  four  and  five  o'clock,  we  crossed  the 
bridge  of  the  Arroux,  and  passed  the  ancient  Roman  ruin  called 


22 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  Temple  of  Janus,  opposite  to  which  the  driver  pointed  out 
the  race-course,  where,  he  said,  one  of  their  first  and  wealthiest 
proprietaries,  a  Mr.  Mac  Mahon,  had  broken  his  neck  by  a  fall 
from  his  horse,  and  died  on  the  spot.  "  It  was  very  lucky,"  he 
added,  "  it  happened  on  the  last  day  of  the  races.  It  would  have 
spoilt  all  the  fun  else."  He  drove  to  the  Hotel  de  la  Poste, 
and  there  my  worthy  conducteur,  in  spite  of  the  perfect  ease 
with  which  he  had  brought  us  in  that  light  carriage,  with  only 
two  horses,  persisted  in  demanding  his  sixty  francs,  which  I  gave 
him,  and  he  departed. 

I  had  fasted  all  day,  not  caring  to  eat  anything  in  that  hole  at 
Chateau  Chinon  ;  and,  therefore,  the  clean  good  dinner  and  com- 
fortable rooms  at  the  Poste  were  a  great  satisfaction  to  me. 
There  is,  however,  no  rest  for  the  wicked.  The  diligence  to 
Chalons  was  expected  at  any  hour  from  ten  till  five  in  the  morn- 
ing :  going  to  bed  was,  therefore,  out  of  the  question,  and  alter- 
nate naps  on  the  sofa  were  all  and  myself  could 

indulge  in.  At  half  past  one  the  huge  nuisance  arrived,  and  all 
the  places  that  we  were  able  to  obtain  in  it  were  two  seats  in  the 
interior,  which  was  already  possessed  with  four  lumbering  men. 
The  atmosphere  of  a  snuffy  German,  a  Frenchman  reeking  of 
stale  cigar  smoke,  one  or  two  India-rubber  cloaks,  and  all  our 
respirations,  was  really  atrocious.  I  kept  the  window  by  my 
face  open,  and  so  came  alive,  not  dead,  into  Chalons,  the  dim 
dawn  and  struggling  starlight  having  revealed  nothing  of  the 
country  we  travelled  through  but  the  hazy  outline  of  the  hills 
against  the  sky.  At  one  time  a  loud-voiced,  disputatious  brook 
ran  arguing  with  us  in  the  dark,  close  by  the  carriage  side,  and, 
finally  disgusted,  jumped,  with  a  white  gleam,  into  the  wood  ; 
but  more  of  the  accidens  du  paysage,  as  the  French  people  call 
them,  I  know  not.  Now,  when  we  arrived  at  Chalons,  at  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  river  was  too  high,  and  the  steam- 
boats could  not  pass  under  the  bridges.    The  traveller  will  per- 


DEPARTURE  FROM  CHALONS. 


23 


ceive,  therefore,  as  the  guide-books  say,  that  unless  he  wishes 
especially  to  visit  the  black  mountains  and  forests  of  the  Mowan 
for  their  own  sake,  and  crosses  the  Channel  and  half  France  for 
that  purpose,  it  is  hardly  worth  his  while  to  leave  the  main  road 
from  Paris  to  Lyons  for  the  facilities  and  pleasures  of  a  night  at 
Chateau  Chinon,  a  drive  in  the  fuel  forests  of  the  Nievre  at  six 
francs  a  league,  and  the  eventual  satisfaction  of  finding  the  Saone 
too  dry  in  summer  and  too  wet  in  winter,  and  be  compelled  (as 
we  must  now)  to  take  the  diligence,  after  all,  for  Lyons,  if  that 
be  his  ultimate  object. 

The  inn  is  comfortable,  and  I  must  especially  celebrate  it  in 
an  admirable  perch  from  the  Saone  I  had  for  dinner,  which  must 
have  weighed  nearly  two  pounds  ;  it  was  delicious  to  eat,  nothing 
could  be  better,  but  catching  it.  I  shall  sleep  in  a  bed  for  the 
first  time  to-night,  since  last  Wednesday,  24th ;  this  is  Monday, 
the  29th.  What  a  pity  we  make  our  luxuries  things  of  every 
day  and  night.  I  positively  look  forward  to  my  bed.  Who  that 
goes  to  bed  every  night  ever  does  ? 

We  were  hurriedly  called  up  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning,, 
the  diligence  from  Paris  having  arrived,  which,  failing  the  boat, 
was  our  only  hope  for  Lyons.  We  hurried  on  our  clothes,  and 
ran  down  into  the  dark  dirty  street,  where  the  hugh  caravan  was 
waiting.  The  coupe  was,  alas  !  already  invaded  by  a  fat  elderly 
gentleman,  who,  singularly  enough,  maintained  his  station  by  the 
door,  at  which  we  were  obliged  to  climb  in  over  his  legs  and 
knees,  he  all  the  time  exclaiming,  "  c'est  cela  marcher  moi  sur 
les  pieds — allez,  n'ayez  pas  peur,  vous,  n'etes  pas  lourde — vous 
ne  me  ferez  pas  mal " — the  wretch,  as  I  afterwards  discovered, 
had  had  a  threatening  of  gout,  and  was  trembling  under  the 
terror  of  a  return  of  it ;  he  was  a  Frenchman,  but  muffled 
in  dreadnaughts,  leggings,  and  with  air-cushions  under  him,  and 
round  his  neck,  after  the  fashion  of  one  of  our  own  self-preserv- 
ing, comfortable  gentry ;  for  a  long  time  it  puzzled  me  execs* 


24 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


sively  to  conceive  what  his  motive  could  have  been  for  allowing 
us  to  climb  across  him  to  our  places,  to  his  and  our  own  intense 
inconvenience,  rather  than  remove  himself  to  the  seat  at  the 
other  side  of  the  carriage.  Upon  my  letting  down  the  glass  next 
me,  however,  he  exclaimed,  with  sudden  sensibility,  "  Ah  !  mon 
Dieu,  Madame,  vous  allez  vous  enrhumer ;  le  vent  vient  pre 
cisement  de  ce  cdte  la;"  which  explained  his  pertinacious  avoid- 
ance of  it. 

It  was  dark  long  after  we  set  forth  from  Chalons,  but  the  day 
began  to  break  brightly  and  beautifully  as  we  reached  the  small 
town  of  Sennecy,  among  the  hills,  and  as  we  attained,  after  a 
continuous  ascent  of  some  miles,  the  height  above  Tournus,  we 
had  a  beautiful  view  into  the  valley  below,  where  lay  sparkling, 
like  a  vast  lake,  the  overflowing  waters  of  the  Saone,  stretching 
over  meadows  and  roads  far  beyond  its  native  bed,  overlooked 
by  the  picturesque  brown  outline  of  the  irregular  little  town, 
and  surrounded  towards  the  horizon,  on  each  hand,  by  mountain- 
tops  glowing  in  the  red  morning  light.  We  have  been  most 
particularly  unlucky  in  our  route,  the  overflowing  of  the  Saone 
has  prevented  our  going  down  the  river,  giving  us  a  wearisome 
journey  of  sixteen  hours  in  a  coach  instead  of  eight  in  the  steam- 
boat. Moreover,  the  waters  were  out  all  over  the  shortest  coach 
road,  so  that  we  were  compelled  to  take  the  longest — and,  as  it 
was  expected  that  the  river  would  be  navigable,  and,  of  course, 
resorted  to  in  preference  to  the  road,  no  relays  of  horses  were  to 
be  had,  and,  on  our  arrival  at  Tournus,  the  conducteur  most 
obligingly  informed  us  that  the  time  of  our  stay  there  would 
be  uncertain,  inasmuch  as  there  were  no  horses  to  be  had,  and 
we  must  wait  until  the  diligence  from  Lyons  arrived,  when  we 
should  take  their  tired  horses,  and  they  ours,  with  this  difference 
to  our  disadvantage,  that  their  team  would  be  taken  immediately 
from  their  coach,  and  transferred  to  ours,  while  ours  would,  at 
least,  have  rested  a  short  space  of  time  before  they  were  again 


CHURCH  OF  TOURNUS. 


25 


put  into  harness.  Resignation  is  the  virtue  I  recommend  to  tra- 
vellers in  all  parts  of  the  world,  but  England,  where  they  have 
comparatively  no  need  of  it. 

Our  companion  of  the  coupe  was  a  well-informed  and  intelli- 
gent man,  who  had  travelled  a  great  deal  all  over  Europe,  and 
was  now  engaged  in  some  mission  of  observation  concerning  the 
muslin  manufactories  in  various  parts  of  France,  which  are 
undersold  by  the  Swiss,  who  produce  in  great  quantities  an 
inferior  article,  which  is  brought  into  France,  and  sold  cheaper 
than  the  native  manufacture.  My  friend  was  chief  inspector  of 
the  Customs  at  Lyons,  and  had  been  sent  on  this  muslin  mission 
by  the  Minister  of  the  Home  Department.  He  was  a  very 
agreeable  companion,  and  a  great  antiquarian  and  amateur  in 
matters  of  art  and  vertu,  and  having  fortified  his  indisposition  by 
an  early  and  abundant  meal,  proposed  to  me  to  employ  our  lei- 
sure (which  was  likely  to  prolong  itself  indefinitely)  by  visiting 
the  curious  old  Romanesque  church  of  Tournus,  dedicated  to  St. 
Philibert ;  it  once  belonged  to  a  very  large  and  important  abbey 
of  Benedictine  monks,  some  remains  of  whose  dwellings  are  to 
be  detected  incorporated  in  the  irregular  buildings  which  sur- 
round the  church  ;  it  is  itself  extremely  picturesque  and  curious. 
In  observing  attentively  the  square  towers  with  their  elegant 
round  open  arches,  we  were  much  puzzled  to  remark  at  the 
angle  of  one  of  them  a  single  figure  standing  caryatid  fashion, 
of  extremely  old  workmanship,  crowned,  and  representing  proba- 
bly some  queen  or  royal  saint  whose  legend  must  in  some  way 
connect  itself  with  the  building  :  the  figure,  which  is  extremely 
coarsely  executed,  is  clad  in  a  short  garment,  reaching  only 
half-way  down  the  leg  ;  and  the  feet  not  resting  on  the  cornice, 
which  is  at  some  distance  below  them,  it  has  the  appearance  of 
being  hung  at  the  corner  of  the  tower,  rather  than  supporting  it. 
On  entering  the  church,  my  antiquarian  companion  explained  to 
me  that,  in  all  probability,  the  narthex  or  vestibule  had  its 

3 


26 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


original  pavement  much  below  the  one  which  we  now  stood 
upon  ;  this  he  deduced  from  the  evidently  truncated  appearance 
of  the  thick  round  pillars  which  supported  it,  and  which  he  said 
he  felt  satisfied  must  be  some  ten  or  twelve  inches  below  the 
surface  of  the  present  pavement ;  as  the  latter  gradually  sank 
by  a  most  perceptible  inclination  to  that  of  the  nave  of  the 
church,  there  seemed  some  probability  in  his  suggestion,  and  the 
pillars  themselves  had  a  singular  appearance  of  disproportionate 
thickness,  which  gave  it  further  force.  He  told  me  that  all  the 
churches  built  at  a  very  early  period,  of  which  this  was  evidently 
one,  descended  by  a  step  or  two  from  the  ground  without ;  the 
action  of  thus  stepping  down  into  the  sanctuary  being  considered 
typical  of  the  descent  of  Jesus  into  the  water  of  the  Jordan. 

It  is  extremely  painful  to  me  to  come  from  a  mere  motive  of 
curiosity  into  a  temple  dedicated  to  God  ;  my  conscience  rebukes 
and  troubles  me  the  whole  time,  and  all  other  considerations  are 
lost  in  the  recollection  that  I  am  in  the  house  of  prayer,  conse- 
crated by  the  worship  of  thousands  of  souls  for  hundreds  of 
years.  To  gaze  about,  too,  with  idle,  prying  eyes,  where  sit 
and  kneel  my  fellow-Christians  with  theirs  turned  to  the  earth  in 
solemn  contemplation  or  devotion,  makes  me  feel  sacrilegiously ; 
and  I  do  not  know  what  will  become  of  me  in  Italy,  where  every 
church  is  a  galantee  show.  I  prayed  as  I  stood  before  the  altar 
in  this  dear  little  old  church,  and  presently  we  encountered  M. 
le  Cur£,  with  whom  my  companion  (an  exceedingly  companion- 
able soul)  began  a  lively  discussion  about  the  repairs  being  car- 
ried  on  in  the  church,  which  is  a  building  belonging  to  the 
Government,  and  is  being  restored  with  considerable  care. 
Some  of  the  old  capitals  of  the  pillars  had  grotesque  figures  of 
animals  on  them,  others  elegant  floral  adornments,  but  they  were 
all  of  them  various.  The  Cure,  to  whom  my  antiquary  explained 
the  fact  of  the  ancient  floor  of  the  narthex  being  in  all  probability 
below  the  present  one,  seemed  incredulous,  but  said  there  was  a 


CHURCH  OF  TOURNUS. 


27 


crypt  below,  with  a  painting  in  fresco  of  the  ninth  century, 
whereof  the  antiquary,  in  his  turn,  seemed  incredulous.  He 
pointed  out  to  the  Cure,  with  extreme  warmth,  the  remains 
demonstrating  the  existence  of  a  jube,  or  rood  loft,  above  the 
high  altar,  and  besought  him  pathetically  to  exert  himself  to  have 
it  restored.  The  conversation,  owing  to  the  antiquary's  general 
enthusiasm  for  old  churches,  and  the  Cure's  special  enthusiasm 
for  his  own  old  church,  was  extremely  amusing  and  interesting 
to  me.  The  former  objected  vehemently  to  some  wretched 
engravings  surrounding  the  walls,  representing  the  seven  sta- 
tions, as  the  Catholics  call  them,  of  Jesus  bearing  his  cross. 
For  me,  alter  one  glance  cast  at  these  abominations — I  had  for- 
borne to  look  again — all  representations  of  Christ  being  revolting 
to  me,  all  representations  of  his  agony  absolutely  intolerable  ; — 
what  will  become  of  me  in  Italy  !  In  spite  of  the  positive  pain 
and  disquiet  which  these  desecrations  cause  me,  I  could  not  help 
smiling  at  the  artistical  point  of  view  in  which  my  travelling 
companion  regarded  the  matter. 

"  Le  peuple  ignorant,"  said  M.  le  Cure,  "  a  besoin  d'objets 
visibles  qui  lui  frappent  les  sens  " — 

"  Eh  bien,  eh  bien,"  said  the  antiquary  ;  "  donnez-lui  en,  de 
par  le  diable  mettez  une  croix  a  chacune  de  ces  stations,  et 
6tez-moi  ces  affreuses  gravures,  car  je  vous  demande  un  peu,  si 
le  bon  Dieu  que  voila  ne  fait  pas  une  bien  vilaine  grimace  ?  Et 
le  peuple  ignorant,  il  faut  lui  donner  le  bon  gout,  l'amour  du 
beau  dans  les  arts,  et  la  religion  en  meme  temps." 

He  objected  too,  and  with  some  allowance  from  M.  le  Cure,  to 
the  engraving  representing  St.  Veronica  wiping  the  sweat  from 
our  Saviour's  brow,  while  he  is  dragging  his  cross  on  his  hands 
and  knees,  as  a  legend  unauthorized  by  Scripture. 

Supposing  that  the  horses  must  have  come,  we  took  leave  of 
the  curious  old  church  and  its  modest  Cure,  and  wended  our 
way  through  the  crooked  filthy  streets,  back  to  la  Poste :  on  the 


28  A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


way  I  met  an  old  peasant  woman,  with  the  singular  black  beaver 
hat  with  lace  lappets  that  the  peasants  of  a  district  not  far  from 
Tournus  wear — it  is  a  mere  ornament,  for  it  covers  no  part  of 
the  head,  being  set  down  upon  the  forehead  and  up  behind,  and 
fastened  round  the  head,  which  is  covered  with  a  cap,  by  a  broad 
black  silk  riband.  Arrived  at  the  Poste,  we  found  the  horses 
were  not  yet  come,  and  walked  on  to  the  suspension-bridge,  over 
the  Saone,  whose  swollen  rapid  current  had  invaded  its  banks  on 
both  sides  far  beyond  its  proper  bed.  Presently,  the  welcome 
intelligence  of  the  Lyons  diligence — the  wretched  horses  from 
which  being  transferred  to  our  vehicle,  we  immediately  set  off 
to  take  them  over  the  same  ground.  A  little  beyond  Tournus, 
as  the  diligence  was  slowly  ascending  a  steep  hill,  a  very  pretty- 
looking  countrywoman  hailed  it,  and  asked  for  a  seat ;  there  was 
none  inside,  and  the  conductor,  and  even  our  companion  in  the 
coupC,  in  vain  endeavored  to  persuade  her  that  there  was  neither 
danger  nor  difficulty  in  climbing  to  the  top,  outside  the  huge  moun- 
tain of  a  carriage  ;  this,  however,  she  declined.  I  think  the  self- 
ishness of  Frenchmen  far  more  revolting  than  that  of  my  own 
countrymen,  because  it  is  accompanied  by  an  everlasting  gri- 
mace of  politeness  and  courtesy  which  means  nothing  whatever. 

As  we  continued  our  road,  it  became  alive  with  groups  of  men 
and  women,  the  latter  all  with  the  curious  little  black  beaver  hat, 
and  in  a  gay  and  singular  costume  not  unlike  that  of  some  of  the 
Swiss  cantons.  They  were  all  carrying  baskets  and  leading  or 
driving  cattle,  and  from  groups  of  two  and  three  at  a  time,  pre- 
sently increased  almost  to  a  continuous  stream,  till  we  reached  a 
little  village,  whose  name,  as  far  as  I  could  distinguish  what  they 
said  to  me,  was  Ste.  Pivie.  Here  there  was  a  fair,  which  had 
already  lasted  two  days,  and  was  to  end  this  evening  by  a  dance  ; 
the  streets  were  thronged,  and  we  absolutely  drove  between  two 
dense  walls  of  human  beings — the  men  all  in  the  coarse  blue 
blouse,  which  seems  universal  to  French  mankind  :  the  women  in 


FAIR  OF  STE.  PIVIE. 


29 


a  curious  costume — dark  petticoats,  bright  scarlet  handkerchiefs 
over  their  bosoms,  caps  on  their  heads,  and  the  peculiar  beaver 
hat  I  have  mentioned,  stooping  forward  almost  to  their  noses — 
many  of  these  were  covered  with  an  immense  profusion  of  black 
lace,  and  ornamented  with  gold  cord  and  tassels,  the  whole  effect 
being  striking  and  picturesque,  though  from  the  narrow  form  of 
their  dress  across  the  bosom  and  shoulders,  it  was  individually 
unbecoming.  My  antiquarian  friend  and  myself  looked  in  vain 
from  each  window  for  a  pretty  face  to  set  off  this  peculiar  attire ; 
in  all  the  population  of  the  district  gathered  together  there  for  the 
fair,  we  saw  but  one  good-looking  girl — a  small  allowance  among 
so  many  hundreds.  We  stopped  in  the  market-place,  and  a  man 
issuing  from  one  of  the  shops  offered  to  sell  me  one  of  the  hats 
which  the  women  wore.  I  was  tempted  to  buy  one,  but  declined 
upon  his  demanding  forty  francs  for  it,  nor  would  I  renew  the 
treaty,  though  he  immediately  offered  it  to  me  for  thirty,  and 
assured  me  that  many  of  the  peasant  women  bought  them  at  a 
hundred  francs.  They  evidently  take  great  pride  and  pleasure 
in  them,  and  in  spite  of  the  everlasting  fitness  of  things,  which 
they  offend  outrageously,  they  are  very  pretty. 

As  we  proceeded  on  our  way,  I  began  already  to  observe  the 
flattening  roofs,  with  their  gentle,  gradual  slope,  like  those  of 
Italian  houses,  so  different  from  the  high-peaked  Norman  roofs, 
which  seem  kindred  to  the  caps  of  the  Normandy  women.  We 
now  began  to  see  hanging  under  the  projecting  eaves  of  the  houses 
long  strings  of  maize  or  Indian  corn — the  ears  were  strung  to  each 
other  like  branches  of  bananas,  and,  covered  over  with  nets,  hung 
their  great  golden  clusters  round  the  houses,  upon  whose  walls 
the  withered  brown  tracery  of  the  vines  attested  the  milder 
climate  we  were  approaching.  We  did  not  reach  Bourges  till 
night,  so  saw  nothing  of  its  fine  cathedral,  which  is  so  curious  and 
so  beautiful.  A  stage  beyond  that  we  remained  from  ten  till 
twelve  at  night,  in  the  middle  of  the  road,  waiting  for  horses,  as 


30 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


we  had  done  at  Tournus  ;  a  more  wretched  night  I  never  passed. 
We  did  not  reach  Lyons  till  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  of 
Tuesday,  having  started  from  Chalons  at  five  o'clock  on  Monday, 
a  most  horrible,  tedious,  and  fatiguing  journey,  though  the  roads 
were  far  from  bad. 

I  went  to  the  Hotel  de  PEurope,  where  I  would  not  advise  any 
one  to  go  who  is  not  inclined  to  be  shamelessly  fleeced  :  the  rooms 
we  were  shown  into  were  surrounded  with  gods  and  goddesses, 
the  painted  panels  representing  Venus  presenting  Cupid  to 
Vulcan,  Juno  suckling  Hercules,  Nessus  attempting  to  carry  ofF 
Dejanira,  and  on  the  ceiling,  the  whole  synod  of  the  gods  of 
Greece ;  en  revanche,  in  our  bed-rooms  we  had  less  than  the 
usual  scanty  allowance  of  washing  apparatus,  and  as  neither  the 
beds  nor  table  were  particularly  good,  I  mention  the  decorations 
that  future  travellers  may  know  for  what  advantages  they  are 
expected  to  pay  more  dearly  than  at  the  first  hotels  in  Paris.  In 
driving  to  the  banker's,  and  to  make  a  few  purchases,  I  had  some 
opportunity  of  seeing  the  city,  which  has  some  very  fine  streets 
and  buildings.  The  windows  of  our  hotel  overlook  the  market- 
place, with  its  ruddy  and  golden  fruit-stalls,  and  its  peasant 
women,  in  broad-brimmed  straw  hats  over  close  caps,  some  of 
whom  became  their  picturesque  head-dress  extremely.  Beyond 
the  turbid,  swollen  Saone,  which  threatens  another  inundation, 
the  old  cathedral  and  a  row  of  fine  modern  buildings  skirt  the 
river,  and  rising  abruptly  behind  them,  the  steep  heights  of 
Fourvieres,  with  their  girdle  and  crown  of  fortifications,  draw  an 
irregular  picturesque  indented  outline  midway  up  the  sky. 

Lyons,  however,  with  its  fearful  and  bloody  recollections  of 
early  martyrdom  and  late  insurrection,  together  with  the  horrible 
memories  of  revolutionary  butchery  which  have  baptized  the 
streets,  overflowing  with  human  blood,  with  names  which  per- 
petuate the  butcheries  of  Collot  d'Herbois  and  his  barbarous 
associates,  is  to  me  a  very  painful  place  even  to  sojourn  in,  and 


LYONS. 


31 


the  knowledge  of  its  swarming  population,  whose  turbulent 
viciousness  and  poverty  are  alone  kept  in  check  by  the  batteries 
which  grin  down  upon  the  city  from  every  surrounding  height, 
made  me  glad  to  shake  the  dust  of  it  off  my  shoes.  During  the 
course  of  the  day  I  had  two  visits  from  my  travelling  companion, 
who,  having  reached  his  house,  and  shaved,  and  comforted  him- 
self, and  ascertained  the  safety  of  certain  valuable  and  beautiful 
candelabra  he  was  bringing  with  him  from  Paris,  as  an  addition 
to  a  collection  of  objects  of  vertii,  in  Avhich  he  takes  great  pride 
and  delight,  came  to  pay  his  respects  to  me.  He  returned  again 
in  the  evening,  bringing  with  him  an  extremely  pretty  and 
ladylike  person,  his  daughter,  and  followed  by  a  servant,  carry- 
ing certain  objects  from  his  collection,  of  which  he  had  spoken  to 
me  on  our  road,  and  which  he  was  determined  I  should  not  leave 
Lyons  without  seeing.  These  were  some  extremely  beautiful 
miniature  copies  of  the  Marriage  of  St.  Catharine  and  the 
Madonna  della  Seggiola,  by  his  eldest  daughter;  they  were 
admirably  executed,  and  certainly  bespoke  a  very  great  talent, 
both  as  copyist  and  miniature  painter  ;  he  next  showed  me  a 
very  curious  old  casket  enamelled  upon  gold,  and  representing 
the  twelve  labors  of  Hercules.  The  hypothesis  by  which  the 
worthy  owner  of  this  veritabfe  antique  traced  its  original 
possession  to  some  royal  Mary  or  Margaret  of  France,  reminded 
me  a  little  of  Mr.  Oldbuck  ;  nevertheless  it  was  undoubtedly  very 
old  and  very  curious.  The  next  treasure  he  showed  me, — and 
it  was  one, — was  a  steel  spur  which  had  belonged  to  Francis  I., 
and  was,  he  said,  the  undoubted  work  of  Benvenuto  Cellini ;  it 
was  originally  in  the  royal  collection  in  Paris,  and  at  the  time  of 
the  Revolution,  when  its  valuable  contents  were  abandoned  to  the 
pillage  of  the  public  assassins, — for  whom  Garrat  demanded  the 
salarv  of  judges,  inasmuch  as  their  butcheries  were,  according 
to  him,  the  sacred  ministry  of  justice, — fell  into  the  hands  of  a 
gentleman  who  subsequently  sold  it  to  my  friend.    The  Govern- 


32 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


ment  exerted  itself  after  the  Revolution  to  recover  some  of  the 
more  valuable  articles  which  had  been  removed  from  the  garde 
meuble  royal,  but  an  immense  number  had  been  dispersed  beyond 
recovery,  and  such  objects  as  were  made  of  the  more  precious 
metals  melted  and  sold  ;  fortunately,  this  beautiful  spur  being  in 
steel,  escaped  all  injury,  and  came  into  the  hands  of  a  most 
enthusiastic  and  worthy  possessor  ;  there  were  no  less  than  six- 
teen figures,  several  of  them  spirited  equestrian  ones,  upon  the 
sides  of  the  spur,  and  it  was  altogether  elegant  and  beautiful 
enough  to  deserve  the  credit  of  being  Benvenuto  Cellini's  work- 
manship, and  Francis  the  First's  sign  of  knighthood.  At  ten 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  Wednesday,  31st  December,  we  left 
Lyons  by  the  boat  for  Valence,  none,  as  ill-luck  would  have  it, 
going  for  Avignon  to-day,  so  that  we  have  another  stoppage  on 
the  road.  The  ticket-office  where  we  secured  our  passages  was 
besieged  with  men  and  women,  stinking  of  garlic,  and  otherwise 
so  utterly  foul  and  offensive  that  I  thought  I  should  have  fainted 
while  squeezing  my  way  through  them  to  obtain  our  tickets. 

The  Rhone  is  like  a  younger  Rhine,  with  lower  hills,  a  nar- 
rower stream,  and  fewer  castellated  ruins.  It  is  very  beautiful, 
however  ;  and  even  at  this  bleak  and  dreary  season  gives  token 
of  what  its  glory  must  be  wten  the  earth  is  in  her  holiday 
attire.  Towards  Valence  it  becomes  exceedingly  picturesque  ; 
and  when  we  stopped  for  the  night  below  the  suspension-bridge, 
the  scene  was  very  perfect  with  its  romantic  rocky  outline  scol- 
loping the  evening  sky,  the  exulting  and  abounding  river  rush- 
ing whirling  and  eddying  away,  and  the  old  clay-colored  towers 
rising  in  irregular  masses,  backed  by  the  distant  mountains, 
whose  dark  blue  line  melted  into  the  cloud-curtain  that  drooped 
over  them. 

I  put  up  with  a  wretched  double-bedded  room  on  the  second 
floor,  the  only  one  we  could  obtain.  It  is  curious  enough  that 
in  the  most  miserable  and  filthy  inns  in  France,  where  the  floors 


ARRIVAL  AT  VALENCE. 


33 


of  the  rooms  are  unconscious  of  brooms,  scrubbing-brushes,  or 
even  the  despicable  French  succedaneum  cirage,  you  are  sure 
to  get  good  beds,  clean  bed  and  table  linen,  good  coffee,  com- 
paratively good  food,  and  almost  elegant  china. 

On  board  the  boat  to-day,  the  filth  of  which  was  really  all  but 
intolerable,  food  was  being  served  to  the  passengers,  the  clean- 
liness and  nice  appearance  of  which  was  really  curious,  con- 
trasted with  the  disgusting  dirt  of  the  decks.  Oh,  my  poor  dear 
American  fellow-citizens !  how  humbly,  on  my  knees,  I  do  beg 
your  pardon  for  all  the  reproaches  I  have  levelled  against  your 
national  diversion  of  spitting,  and  the  consequent  filth  which 
you  create  around  you.  Here  I  sat,  in  the  cabin  of  this  boat, 
surrounded  with  men  hawking  and  spitting ;  and,  whereas  spit- 
toons have  been  hitherto,  the  bane  of  my  life  in  the  United  States, 
a  spittoon  here  to-day  would  have  been  the  joy  of  my  heart  and 
the  delight  of  my  eyes.  How  I  thought,  too,  of  the  honor  and 
security  in  which  a  woman  might  traverse  alone  from  Georgia 
to  Maine,  that  vast  country,  certain  of  assistance,  attention,  the 
most  respectful  civility,  the  most  humane  protection,  from  every 
man  she  meets,  without  the  fear  of  injury  or  insult,  screened  by 
the  most  sacred  and  universal  care  from  even  the  appearance  of 
neglect  or  impertinence, — travelling  alone  with  as  much  safety 
and  comfort  as  though  she  were  the  sister  or  the  daughter  of 
every  man  she  meets. 

Sitting  in  the  boat  with  my  back  to  a  cutting  wind  all  day,  I 
was  seized  on  my  arrival  at  Valence  with  a  violent  chill.  I  got 
to  bed  in  all  haste,  but  passed  the  night  in  a  high  fever,  and 
began  to  fear  I  should  be  too  ill  to  proceed  in  the  morning.  For- 
tunately this  passed  off,  and  on  rising  I  found  myself  considerably 
better.  A  boat  went  by  the  wharf  at  about  nine  o'clock,  but 
not  having  been  led  to  expect  one  so  early,  we  were  not  ready. 
As  soon  as  I  was  dressed  and  had  breakfasted,  as  the  morning 
was  beautiful,  I  took  a  walk  on  the  suspension-bridge.  The 
3* 


34 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


day  was  lovely,  the  old  Chateau  de  Crussol  sprang  up  from  its 
rocky  pedestal  into  the  morning  blue ;  and  the  river  turned  up 
its  eddies  of  chrysoprasus  to  the  gleams  of  the  sun,  and  glanced 
away  in  huge  swathes,  like  some  bright  molten  metal.  The 
bridge  is  itself  a  beautiful  object,  with  its  classical  arch  in  the 
middle,  the  noble  stream  it  spans,  and  the  varied  mountain  out- 
lines between  which  it  swings  like  a  delicate  spider's  web  of 
man's  spinning,  hanging  mid-way  between  heaven  and  earth. 
At  twelve  o'clock  the  boat  came  down  to  the  wharf,  and  we 
embarked.  I  did  not  dare  stay  on  deck  for  fear  of  catching 
cold,  and  came  to  the  pavilion  where  I  lay  down.  Here,  again, 
I  had  reason  to  think  of  my  strictures  on  the  Americans ;  here 
was  a  room  full  of  children,  and  every  one  of  them  stuffing. 
I  must,  however,  state  in  favor  of  the  Erench  system,  that  they 
were  not  eating  cakes  or  candy,  but  bread  and  chicken, — an 
infinitely  less  deleterious  process.    I  passed  the  day  below. 

Although  the  weather  was  beautifully  fine,  we  had  the  annoy- 
ance and  disappointment  of  being  informed  by  the  captain  of 
the  boat  that  he  should  stop  at  St.  Esprit,  thirty  miles  from 
Avignon,  because  the  daylight  would  not  serve  him  beyond  the 
former  place,  and  the  current  runs  so  very  strong  that  the  navi- 
gation would  not  be  safe.  This  is  really  too  bad.  Thus  we 
lose  to-night's  malle  poste  from  Avignon,  and  must  moreover  lose 
the  whole  day  to-morrow, — the  coaches  only  leaving  Avignon  in 
the  evening.  At  five  o'clock,  we  came  alongside  the  wharf  at 
St.  Esprit,  and  between  the  rosy  sunset  and  the  pale  uprising  of 
a  young  moon,  with  a  bright  star  that  seemed  come  out  to  look 

after  her,  and  I  threaded  our  way  through  the  narrow  dark 

streets,  to  the  stone  bridge  over  the  river,  and  walked  over  to 
the  other  side  and  back  again.  It  is  the  longest  stone  bridge  in 
the  world,  and  the  passage  of  it  is  attended  with  some  danger, 
the  current  running  furiously,  and  with  some  most  sudden 
sweeps  and  eddies  through  it.    The  view  from  it  of  the  town 


HOTEL  DE  L'EUROPE. 


35 


and  its  back-ground  of  mountain  points  was  very  picturesque. 
We  came  back  to  the  boat  to  pass  the  night  there,  preferring 
that  to  the  beds  and  bugs  of  the  best  inn  of  St.  Esprit. 

Friday,  2d  January. — Though  our  sofa-beds  in  the  cabin  were 
narrow,  cold,  and  hard,  the  report  of  our  fellow-travellers,  who 
had  gone  on  shore  to  sleep,  confirmed  me  in  the  belief  that  we 
had  chosen  the  better  part.  As  for  the  unhappy  wretches,  fe- 
male and  male,  who  had  herded  all  together  in  the  larger  cabin 
of  the  boat,  because  there  was  a  fire  there,  their  undone  looks, 
as  the  French  say,  proclaimed  enough  the  nature  of  their  sleep- 
ing privileges.  At  about  half-past  six  we  started  for  Avignon  : 
a  brilliant  sun  darted  almost  oppressively  into  the  cabin,  while 
the  wind  on  deck  was  so  piercingly  cold,  that  it  was  impossible 
for  anything  that  had  not  the  hide  of  a  rhinoceros  to  endure  it. 

No  carriage  being  to  be  obtained  at  the  wharf,  we  set  out  to 
walk  to  the  Hotel  de  l'Europe,  and  encountered  in  its  full  per- 
fection the  aerial  pest  of  this  part  of  the  country — the  horrible 
mistral,  and  certainly  Eolus  has  no  more  detestable  progeny. 
I  do  not  think  the  sirocco  can  be  more  intolerable  than  this  cruel, 
keen  blast,  piercing  one's  very  bones,  and  chilling  one's  mar- 
row, and  choking  up  eyes,  mouth,  and  nose — the  very  doors  and 
windows  of  life,  with  dust,  while  a  satirical  scorching  sun  shines 
mercilessly  down  on  one,  glaring,  blinding,  and  yet  giving  not 
a  particle  of  warmth.  A  carriage  met  us  half  way,  and  carried 
us  up  to  the  Hotel  de  l'Europe. 

Looking  at  the  crumbling  arches  of  the  ruined  stone  bridge 
across  the  Rhone,  I  said  to  our  guide  : — 

"  Ce  sont  les  eaux  qui  ont  fait  cela  V 

"  Pardon,  Madame,  c'est  la  revolution."  Truly  floods  and 
fires  are  fearful  things, — the  heart  of  man  is  far  more  fearful, 
and  the  desolations  of  outward  nature  smile  beside  the  abomina- 
tion of  desolation  which  human  nature  in  its  wickedness  creates. 
At  the  Hotel  de  l'Europe  we  were  shown  into  a  comfortable 


36 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


room,  with  an  equally  comfortable  bed-chamber  adjoining.  Our 
breakfast,  which  was  excellent,  was  served  without  a  moment's 
delay ;  and  having  ascertained,  to  my  inexpressible  delight,  that 
a  diligence  would  be  starting  in  half  an  hour  for  Marseilles,  the 
conscientious  and  obliging  host  took  the  utmost  pains  to  facilitate 
my  departure  by  it,  although,  of  course,  himself  the  loser  of 
my  day's  sojourn  in  Avignon.  The  coach  was  one  coming  from 
Lyons,  and  fortunately  vacant  places  were  to  be  obtained  in  it ; 
we,  therefore,  prepared  joyfully,  instantly  to  depart,  the  hostess 
of  the  inn  coming,  with  the  utmost  kindness  and  civility,  to  take 
leave  of  us,  presented  me  with  a  beautiful  bunch  of  flowers, 
roses,  violets,  myrtle,  and  laurestinus.  Murray  speaks  of  this 
as  one  of  the  most  agreeable  and  comfortable  inns  in  all  France, 
and  especially  celebrates  the  courtesy  and  attention  of  the  land- 
lord, and  I  am  sure  I  have  reason  to  do  the  same,  for,  during  the 
short  stay  I  made  there,  nothing  could  exceed  the  civility  I  met 
with  ;  the  prices,  too,  appeared  to  me  extremely  moderate,  and 
everything  that  was  furnished  to  us  was  good,  with  the  exception 
of  the  butter — which,  however,  can  only  be  had  of  a  very  infe- 
rior quality,  because  it  is  brought  all  the  way  from  Lyons,  the 
neighborhood  of  Avignon  furnishing  no  pasturage  whatever. 

On  entering  the  diligence,  I  found  only  one  place  in  the  body 
of  the  coach,  and  one  in  the  coupe  vacant ;  such,  however,  was 
my  desire  to  proceed,  that  I  separated  myself  for  the  first  time 

from  my  beloved  ,  and  putting  her  into  the  interior, 

ascended  the  coupe  with  two  of  our  fellow-travellers  down  the 
Rhone,  from  whom  I  learnt  in  the  course  of  conversation,  that 

Mr.  's  courier  might  have  secured  the  whole  coupe  to 

me.  and  only  failed  of  it  by  some  mistake, — by  which,  however, 
they  profited  to  pursue  their  journey  without  delay.  I  was  not 
quite  selfish  enough  to  regret  this,  although  I  was  half  squeezed 
to  death  in  the  small  portion  of  what  ought  to  have  been  all  my 
coupe,  which  these  gentlemen  allowed  me.     I  found  in  the 


UNITED  STATES— PUBLIC  SECURITIES. 


37 


course  of  conversation  that  they  were  Lyonese,  having  business 
relations  with  Marseilles.  Mention  having  been  made  of  the 
enormous  quantity  of  lard  and  pork  lately  sent  from  America  to 
the  port  of  Marseilles,  the  conversation  turned  upon  the  national 
credit,  perhaps  I  ought  to  say  discredit,  of  the  United  States.  It 
is  impossible  to  conceive  anything  more  painful  and  mortifying 
to  one,  either  by  birth  or  adoption  an  American,  than  the  con- 
temptuous and  reproachful  comments  which  any  mention  of  the 
United  States  is  sure  to  elicit.  The  commercial  and  financial 
delinquencies  of  some  of  the  States,  but  principally  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, have  created  an  universal  impression  throughout  Europe 
of  utter  want  of  faith,  honor,  and  integrity,  on  the  part  of  the 
whole  nation.  The  Florentine  millionaire,  the  Lyons  antiquary, 
and  these  Marseilles  merchants,  all  within  three  days,  have 
uttered  opinions  respecting  the  character  of  the  Americans, 
which,  however  mistaken  and  exaggerated  in  some  respects, 
have  quite  foundation  enough,  in  fact,  to  occasion  bitter  annoy- 
ance to  any  one  loving  America,  and  wishing  to  honor  her.  It 
is  the  most  difficult  thing  in  the  world  to  make  these  people  com- 
prehend the  complex  movement  of  the  federal  and  state  govern- 
ments, or  to  explain  to  them,  that  while  in  certain  of  the  states, 
from  real  inability,  ai*i  in  others,  perhaps,  from  positive  dis- 
honesty, the  public  securities  have  turned  out  no  securities  at 
all,  there  exist  others,  again,  whose  credit,  both  financial  and 
moral,  is  as  solid,  whose  investments  are  as  safe,  as  any  in  the 
world  : — it  is  impossible  to  make  them  understand  it  ;  the 
general  government  appears  To  them  responsible  for  the  State 
insolvencies.  The  United  States  Bank  is,  to  their  apprehension, 
a  government  institution,  instead  of  a  private  speculation  ;  and 
President  Polk  and  Nicholas  Biddle,  and  Pennsylvania,  Illinois, 
Massachusetts,  and  South  Carolina,  are  all  involved  together  in 
one  broad  sentence  of  national  dishonesty  and  want  of  faith. 


33 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


If  there  had  been  no  dishonesty  and  no  want  of  faith,  of  course 
these  sweeping  judgments  could  not  have  gone  forth. 

The  Americans  console  themselves  for  the  strictures  of  Eng- 
lishmen, by  attributing  them  to  national  jealousy,  envy,  or  preju- 
dice ;  but  I  have  heard  in  France  more  severe  animadversions 
upon  their  delinquencies  than  any  since  the  days  of  Sidney 
Smith's  indignant  addresses  to  the  Pennsylvanians. 

While  discoursing  upon  these  matters  we  travelled  along  the 
banks  of  the  Durance.  One  of  the  earliest  recollections  of  my 
school-days  is  the  old  French  romance  of  "  Aux  Bords  de  la 
Durance ;  "  and  now,  as  Nell,  in  the  Devil  to  Pay,  says,  "  This 
is  it."  But,  oh !  for  the  imaginations  of  those  days,  and  the  re- 
ality of  this.  The  Durance  races  in  three  turbid  yellowish 
strings,  along  a  huge  dry  bed  of  dusty  pebbles,  attesting  indeed 
what  its  width  must  be  when,  swollen  with  the  melted  snows  and 
rains  of  spring,  it  overflows  this  valley,  now  showing  its  bare 
bones  to  the  scorching  sun  and  pitiless  wind.  I  never  saw  so 
bleak  and  forbidding  a  prospect  in  its  intolerable  glaring  barren- 
ness ;  the  hills  rose  sharp  and  hard  into  U  beau  del  de  la  Pro- 
vence— their  stony  craggy  elbows  coming  through  their  thin  tat- 
tered cloak  of  rusty  brown.  The  three  threads  of  water  left 
of  the  river  scampered  over  heaps  of  shingly  pebbles  ;  the 
road,  like  a  huge  chalk-mark  across  the  arid  land,  was  betrayed, 
where  the  eye  could  no  longer  follow  it,  by  the  clouds  of  white 
dust  rising  for  miles  along  its  dreary  course,  swept  by  the  mistral. 
The  sun  shining  into  the  narrow  coupe  threatened  to  bake  us.  One 
window  opened  let  in  a  hurricane  of  ice-cold  wind  ;  another  a 
suffocating  mist  of  white  powder.  The  sentence  of  "  Dust  thou 
art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return,"  seemed  literally  accom- 
plishing itself  in  us  ;  and  before  we  had  travelled  an  hour,  I  am 
sure  we  might  have  presented  ourselves  en  costume  de  Louis  XV., 
as  far  as  powder  was  concerned,  at  any  masquerade.  What 
struck  me  particularly  was,  that  on  each  side  of  the  road  ran 


LA  MONTAGNE  DES  TAILLANDES. 


39 


full  brooks  of  water ;  and  we  passed  frequently  little  fountains 
and  wells,  small  ponds,  and  springs,  like  sapphires  set  in  ivory 
in  this  white  parched  soil,  which  looks  unconscious  of  a  drop  of 
moisture,  and  crumbles  by  the  side  of  these  very  rills  and  springs, 
like  the  "  remainder  biscuit  after  a  voyage."  It  is  the  thirstiest 
looking  soil  I  ever  beheld  ;  and  my  throat  became  absolutely 
parched  with  only  looking  at  it. 

Rising  a  long  ascent,  called  La  Montague  des  Taillandes,  we 
came  to  some  important  works  which  are  being  carried  on  for 
the  formation  of  the  great  canal  to  transport  the  waters  of  the 
Durance  to  Marseilles — an  immense  undertaking,  and  one  which 
will  reflect  the  highest  credit,  and  confer  the  utmost  benefit  upon 
that  town.  Just  as  we  reached  the  summit,  I  observed  a  mass 
of  buildings  which  had  the  appearance  of  some  villa ;  but  so 
singularly  situated,  that  if  they  were  indeed  such,  the  owner 
must  have  had  the  taste  of  a  Trappist.  Into  the  hollow  cup  of 
an  arid  glaring  valley,  surrounded  by  arid  glaring  hills,  one 
single  spur  covered  with  dark  pines  ran  like  a  green  promontory, 
on  the  top  of  which,  overlooking  this  scene  of  desolation,  rose 
the  dwelling  in  question.  A  more  solitary  abode  or  sadder  pros- 
pect I  cannot  well  conceive,  for  the'  deep  blue  evergreen  of  the 
fir  is  the  most  mournful  of  all  nature's  infinite  varieties  of  green  ; 
and,  except  the  barrenness  around  it,  nothing  could  be  less  cheer- 
ful than  this  forest  of  unchanging  trees.  After  crossing  this 
mountain,  the  country  assumed  a  somewhat  more  fertile  appear- 
ance :  vineyards,  olive,  and  almond  orchards,  diversified  the 
prospect ;  and  though  the  silver-grey  foliage  of  the  olive  is  far 
from  lively,  it  was  a  great  relief  to  see  anything  with  any  leaves 
at  all  after  the  desolate  district  we  had  just  passed  through.  We 
reached  Aix  by  early  moonlight,  and  driving  just  within  the 
barrier,  alighted  at  a  species  of  coffee-house  to  obtain  some  re- 
freshment. 

Having  taken  nothing  since  breakfast,  we  were  glad  to  get  a 


40 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


bowl  of  soup  and  some  grapes,  fortified  with  which  we  returned 
to  the  diligence  and  pursued  our  way.  The  moonlight  betrayed 
but  little  of  the  scene  through  which  we  were  passing,  and  the 
chief  incidents  of  the  road  were  the  interminable  strings  of  huge, 
heavy,  lumbering  wagons,  journeying  slowly  along  under  their 
wealthy  loads  of  southern  produce ;  and  the  enormous  barns 
occurring  at  every  quarter  of  a  mile,  whose  vast  open  portals 
invited  the  drivers  of  these  ponderous  equipages  to  repose  them- 
selves and  their  teams.  Presently,  as  we  reached  the  brow  of  a 
steep  ascent,  my  eyes,  which  were  questioning  the  imperfectly 
lighted  landscape  with  the  eager  desire  of  a  long  cherished  ex- 
pectation about  to  be  realized,  rested  on  a  broad  expanse  of 
smooth  brightness,  reaching  to  the  horizon — a  silver  shield  set  in 
ebony — it  was  the  Mediterranean,  the  sea  of  many  memories. 
Salve  !  salve  !  salve  !  I  could  hardly  believe  the  first  impression 
that  it  must  be  so,  when  one  of  my  companions,  who  had  regret- 
ted my  losing  the  daylight  view  of  the  entrance  to  Marseilles, 
confirmed  it  with,  "  Tenez,  tenez,  Madame.  Voila  la  Mediter- 
rannee  \" 

The  long  suburb  through  which  we  now  passed  appeared  inter- 
minable, but  at  a  little  after  eight  our  journey  was  accomplished, 
and  we  reached  the  diligence  office,  where  my  two  travelling 
companions  left  me  running  about  the  court-yard  in  quest  of  my 
luggage,  without  a  single  offer  of  service,  or  word  of  civility — 
not  even  the  decent  form  of  the  traveller's  leave-taking.  It  is 
now  twenty  years  since  I  was  in  France ;  and  the  common 
opinion  of  English  people,  and  of  the  French  themselves  too,  is, 
that  they  have  very  much  departed  from  the  affable  and  courte- 
ous manners  which  were  once  a  sort  of  national  characteristic 
among  them.  If  my  present  progress  from  one  end  of  France 
to  another  in  every  variety  of  public  conveyance,  affords  any 
opportunity  of  judging,  I  should  certainly  incline  to  that  opinion  ; 
there  appears  a  total  absence  of  the  reference  to  other  people's 


TRAVELLING  IN  AMERICA. 


41 


convenience  and  pleasure,  which  certainly  formerly  did  distin- 
guish French  people  of  every  class.  The  desire  of  pleasing 
which  exhibited  itself  frequently  drolly  to  a  stranger,  but  often 
in  very  graceful  expressions  of  courtesy  and  kindness,  appears 
to  have  given  way  to  a  selfish  disregard  of  others,  which  mani- 
fests itself  in  a  rudeness  of  deportment  quite  as  offensive  as  the 
sullen  mixture  of  pride  and  shyness  which  so  long  distinguished 
the  travelling  English,  wherever  they  were  met  with.  While 
losing  the  graces  of  their  (perhaps  superficial)  politeness,  the 
French  have  acquired  none  of  the  decorum  and  decency  of 
deportment,  the  absence  of  which  was  always  severely  felt  in 
the  midst  of  their  most  courteous  demonstrations  ;  and  while 
acquiring  something  of  the  morose  selfish  carriage  of  our  own 
people,  they  have  failed  to  adopt  one  particle  either  of  their 
cleanliness  or  propriety  of  person,  language,  or  manners.  Thus, 
a  Frenchman  hawks  and  spits  close  to  your  cheek,  blows  his 
nose  like  a  trumpet  in  your  ear,  and  yawns  and  coughs  under 
your  nose.  Their  language  is  frequently  positively  exceedingly 
indecent,  and  the  tone  of  it  always  more  or  less  borders  upon 
what  Englishmen  would  consider  unwarrantable  freedom.  I 
do  not  wonder  Frenchwomen  do  not  travel  much,  but  I  sincerely 
hope  that  before  long  they  may  be  induced  to  do  so,  as  nothing 
else,  probably,  will  render  Frenchmen  tolerable  travelling  com- 
panions to  the  women,  who  at  present  have  the  misfortune  to  be 
thrown  in  public  conveyances  into  their  society.  Englishmen 
are  the  only  men  I  know  who,  met  thus  accidentally  on  the  road, 
are  generally  perfectly  inoffensive  in  their  persons,  manners, 
language,  and  deportment :  on  the  other  hand,  courtesy,  civility, 
or  any  species  of  assistance,  is  not  to  be  expected  from  them  ; 
they  will  take  care  not  to  insult  or  annoy  you,  but  as  for  assist- 
ing or  entertaining  their  chance  companions,  that  is  certainly  not 
their  speciality.  The  very  cheap  rate  of  travelling  in  America, 
which  enables  everybody,  without"  exception,  to  travel,  and  the 


42 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


absence  of  all  distinctions  of  place  or  price  in  the  public  con- 
veyances, which  compels  everybody  to  travel  together,  of  course 
brings  refined  and  fastidious  pilgrims  into  most  painful  proximity 
with  their  coarse  and  unpolished  brethren  ;  and  from  the  uncouth 
deportment  and  strange  manners  of  the  lower  classes  of  people 
from  half-civilized  districts,  infinite  annoyance,  as  well  as  amuse- 
ment, is  derived  by  those  whom  the  unrespecting  providence  of 
American  railroads  and  steamboats  compels  to  consort  with  them 
upon  a  footing  of  at  least  travelling  equality  ;  but  (and  I  have 
said  my  say  in  my  time  upon  the  subject  of  American  tobacco- 
chewers,  cigar-smokers,  and  question-askers)  a  woman  cannot 
possibly  travel  in  any  part  of  the  world  with  equal  security  as 
in  America  ;  the  law  of  the  land — public  opinion — secures  to 
women  the  first  choice  of  accommodation  on  every  road  and  at 
every  inn  ;  a  look,  word,  or  gesture  of  intentional  impertinence 
will  not  assail  her,  nor  a  single  offensive  expression  reach  her 
ear  in  passing  from  one  corner  to  another  of  that  vast  and  half- 
savage  continent.  So  great  and  universal  is  the  deference  paid 
to  the  weaker  vessel,  indeed,  in  the  United  States,  that  I  think 
the  fair  Americans  rather  presume  upon  their  privileges  ;  and  I 
have  seen  ladies  come  into  crowded  steamboats  and  railroad 
cars,  and  instantly  assume  the  seats  that  have  been  as  instantly 
resigned  by  gentlemen  upon  their  entrance,  without  so  much  as 
a  gracious  word  or  look  of  acknowledgment ;  so  certain  is  the 
understanding  that  every  accommodation  is  not  only  to  be  fur- 
nished, but  given  up,  to  them, — and  this  not  to  young,  pretty  ladies, 
but  to  women  old  or  young,  pretty  or  ugly — of  the  highest  or  the 
lowest  class.  Though  the  virtue  on  the  part  of  the  American 
men  is  certainly  very  great,  I  think  it  has  made  their  women 
quite  saucy  in  their  supremacy,  and  altogether  unblushing  in 
their  mode  of  claiming  and  receiving  it.  In  churches,  concert- 
rooms,  and  theatres,  no  man  keeps  his  seat  when  women  appear 
standing ;  and  on  board  the  splendid  steamboats  of  the  North 


HOTEL  D'ORIENT. 


43 


and  East  Rivers,  state-rooms  secured  by  gentlemen  alone  cannot 
be  retained  if  women  come  on  board  and  desire  to  have  them. 
This,  it  must  be  allowed,  is  pushing  courtesy  to  the  very  verge 
of  injustice,  and  though  one  of  the  profiting  party,  I  think  this 
is  more  than  the  largest  construction  of  the  "  rights  of  women  " 
requires. 

The  Hotel  de  Richelieu,  to  which  my  father  had  directed  me 
in  Marseilles,  having,  it  seems,  failed  at  least  two  years  ago,  I  was 
taken  to  the  Hotel  d 'Orient,  a  pretty  long  step  from  the  place  where 
the  diligence  deposited  us,  and  though  only  eight  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  not  a  coach  was  to  be  had  for  love  or  money  ;  the 
hackney  coachmen  of  Marseilles  being,  as,  indeed,  the  whole 
native  population  of  that  place  are,  quite  original,  and  very 
independent  in  their  proceedings ;  never  remaining  on  their 
stands  after  dark  ;  never  appearing  on  them  when  it  rains  ;  and 
never  stirring  from  them  for  love  or  money  during  the  heat  of 
the  day,  in  the  summer  season.  When  all  this  is  taken  into 
consideration,  they  must  certainly  be  a  very  admirable  public 
convenience. 

At  the  Hotel  d 'Orient,  an  immense  house,  we  could  procure 
no  sitting-room,  only  a  very  mediocre  bedroom  on  the  second- 
floor,  with  another  for  my  maid,  the  dimensions  of  which  scarcely 
entitle  it  to  more  than  the  name  of  a  closet.  For  this  accommo- 
dation, however,  I  was  made  to  pay  six  francs  a  day,  and  the 
whole  scale  of  charges  appeared  to  me  not  only  exorbitant,  but 
absolutely  dishonest.  There  was  a  daily  charge  made  for  tea, 
which  I  invariably  carry  with  me,  not  choosing  to  depend  upon 
the  detestable  decoction  with  which  travellers  are  poisoned  in 
France,  under  pretence  of  tea ;  and  though  I  remonstrated  upon 
the  subject,  1  was  assured  that  travellers  at  the  Hotel  d'Orient 
paid  for  what  they  furnished  themselves  quite  as  dearly  as  for 
what  the  house  provided  them.  In  short,  I  do  not  recommend 
any  one,  who  has  not  a  special  satisfaction  in  being  fleeced,  to  try 


44 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  hospitality  of  that  house.  The  Hotel  Beauveau  and  the 
Hotel  des  Empereurs  are  both,  according  to  the  report  of  tra- 
vellers who  know  them,  equally  good,  much  cheaper,  and  far 
more  civil. 

Having  sent  my  letters  early  to  Mr.  and  his  daughter- 
in-law,  he  and  his  wife,  together  with  Mme.  ,  did  me  the 

favor  to  call  upon  me  on  Saturday  morning ;  they  were  profuse 
in  their  offers  of  kindness  and  civility,  and  as  I  wished  to  make  a 
few  last  purchases  before  leaving  France,  the  younger  lady  was 
kind  enough  to  accompany  me  to  several  shops.  I  did  not  find  the 
things  I  saw  either  pretty  or  cheap,  and  incline  to  think  that  the 
better  provided  travellers  are  when  they  come  to  Marseilles  the 
more  advantageous  they  will  find  it,  as  it  is  about  the  dearest 
place,  in  every  respect,  in  France, — infinitely  dearer  than  Paris. 

At  a  few  steps  from  the  hotel,  Mme.  pointed  out  to  me 

the  French  Protestant  Church.  Upon  asking  her  husband  some 
questions  respecting  the  service  and  congregation  here,  he  in- 
formed me  that  it  was  the  same  as  the  church  de  L'Oratoire,  the 
French  Calvinist  service  ;  that  there  were  not  above  twenty  seats 
permanently  retained  for  the  year,  and  that  of  these  twenty  it 
was  extremely  rare  that  half  should  be  occupied  ;  that  the  elders, 
whose  presence  was  in  some  sort  expected  as  a  matter  of  deco- 
rum, appeared  only  as  a  pure  ceremony,  and  one  which,  for  the 
most  part,  they  were  glad  to  escape  as  often  as  possible ;  that  the 
service  and  preaching  were  utterly  uninteresting  to  the  people, 
and  the  congregation  meagre  and  indifferent  in  the  extreme. 
This  was  a  sad  account ;  and  yet,  what  is  to  be  done  when  the 
mere  empty  form  of  religion,  a  dead  corpse,  stands  up  alone, 
beckoning  with  languid  hands  a  people  whose  hearts  are  dead  to 
a  dead  worship  ?  Who  can  wonder  that  living  men  who  think, 
and  women  who  feel,  should  find  but  little  within  them  to  answer 
such  a  call  ?  Good  God  !  how  wonderful  it  is  that  that  religion, 
whose  very  essence  is  immortal,  the  element  of  incessant  acti- 


DESECRATION  OF  SUNDAY. 


45 


vity,  of  endless  progress,  strength,  vitality,  spirituality,  should 
become  such  a  thing  as,  for  the  most  part,  throughout  Christendom 
it  is  !  Nevertheless,  it  cannot  perish,  and  doubtless  these  people 
will  in  good  time  reject  these  stones  that  are  given  them  for  the 
bread  of  life,  and  these  stagnant  waters,  so  different  from  the 
well  of  living  waters  that  Christ  has  promised  to  those  who  be- 
lieve in  him. 

Sunday,  Uh  January. — Things  that  I  had  ordered  at  shops  were 
brought  home  this  morning,  as  well  as  my  linen  from  the  washer- 
woman's. We  have  now  been  travelling  three  weeks  in  France, 
and  of  course  this  desecration  of  Sunday  is  no  surprise.  I  found 
my  washing-bill,  like  everything  else,  inordinately  dear  ;  water 
is  among  the  scarcities  of  Marseilles,  and  of  course,  this  being 
the  case,  all  cleansing  processes  must  be  both  rare  and  costly. 
Truly,  the  arrival  of  the  Durance  will  be  an  inestimable  bless- 
ing to  the  residents  of  this  driest  of  cities,  and  the  ladies  will  not 
only  be  able  to  keep  their  plants  alive  during  the  heat  of  the 
summer,  but  indulge  probably  at  a  more  reasonable  rate  in  the 
hardly  lesser  luxury  of  abundant  clothes-washing  and  change  of 
linen. 

I  had  a  delightful  visit  from  the  younger  Mr.  ,  who,  in 

the  absence  of  his  father,  gave  me  many  details  of  extreme  in- 
terest with  regard  to  his  early  establishment  of  their  factory  at 
Marseilles,  coming  here  a  foreigner,  having  to  contend  with  all 
the  national  prejudices,  jealousies,  and  interests  of  the  people 
among  whom  he  established  himself,  assailed  on  all  hands  by 
predictions  of  the  equal  impossibility  of  bringing  with  him  a 
colony  of  English  workmen,  or  employing  the  violent  and  un- 
tractable  native  material  around  him.  He  made  no  attempt  to 
import  English  workmen,  but  taking  immediately  such  as  he 
found  at  hand,  began  with  twenty  men  in « his  workshop  ;  the 
number  of  his  hands  is  now  five  hundred  :  peaceable,  orderly, 
humane  towards  each  other,  respectful  and  attached  to  their  su- 


46 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


periors,  they  are  noted  in  the  whole  community  as  a  body  apart 
for  their  good  conduct  and  irreproachable  demeanor.  The  enter- 
prise has  gone  on  thriving,  the  works  increasing,  the  buildings 
and  establishment  growing,  every  year  adding  to  the  number  of 
workmen,  and  the  importance  of  the  undertaking ;  the  French 
merchants  and  masters  remaining  amazed  at  this  success,  where 
they  had  predicted  the  most  signal  failures  ;  the  civil  authorities 
inquiring  of  Mr.  the  average  amount  of  crime,  and  re- 
ceiving for  answer  that  they  had  had  no  instance  of  crime  whatever 
among  them, — petty  misdemeanors  which  were  visited  by  the 
universal  indignation  and  reprobation  of  the  workmen  themselves, 
but  no  crime  ;  Government  enterprises  of  the  same  description 
sending  to  request  to  see  the  rules  by  which  the  establishment  was 
governed,  receiving  for  answer  that  there  were  no  written  or 
printed  rules  or  specific  code  of  government ;  that  a  feeling  of 
mutual  confidence  and  respect,  justice  on  both  hands,  honorable 
dealings  from  master  to  man,  ample  compensation  in  the  shape 
of  high  wages,  and  that  which  is  a  thousand  times  more  efficient, 
a  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  men  of  being  treated  with  hu- 
manity and  with  sympathy  ;  these  were  the  only  laws,  rules,  or 
contracts  existing  between  them  and  their  dependants.  Oh  !  my 
dear,  dear  countrymen,  how  truly  I  believe  that  you,  and  you 
alone,  could  have  achieved  such  a  noble  triumph.  My  heart 
melted  and  my  eyes  filled  with  tears  while  listening  to  these  most 
interesting  details,  and  1  could  not  repress  a  feeling  of  patriotic 
pride  in  the  belief  that  none  but  Englishmen  could  thus  have 
undertaken  and  thus  accomplished. 

Mr.  went  on  to  tell  me  some  details  of  the  yearly  cele- 
bration of  his  father's  birthday  by  his  workmen,  to  whom  on  that 
day  they  give  a  dinner,  to  which  all  the  civil  authorities  and 
principal  people  of  the  town,  their  ladies  and  friends,  are  invited, 
when  these  five  hundred  men  march  in  two  by  two,  the  appren- 
tices carrying  large  baskets  of  nosegays,  which  they  distribute 


DRIVE  ON  THE  PRADO. 


47 


to  the  lady  guests — a  tribute  from  the  workmen  themselves  to 
their  master's  friends.  An  abundant  repast  is  furnished  them — 
wine  d  discretion  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  most  unbounded 
gaiety  and  enjoyment,  not  a  single  instance  of  intoxication  is 
seen,  nor  does  the  destruction  of  any  sort  amount  to  more  than 

the  accidental  breakage  of  a  few  plates  and  glasses.  Mr.  

opens  on  this  occasion  his  own  garden  to  his  workmen,  and  not  a 
single  flower  is  touched,  not  a  box-border  trodden  on  ;  and  Mr. 

 told  me  that  on  one  of  these  occasions,  hastening  himself 

to  the  place  where  he  was  going  to  superintend  some  fire- works 
which  were  to  be  let  off,  he  was  jumping  over  one  of  the  beds  in 
his  father's  garden,  when  one  of  the  workmen,  not  recognising 
him,  seized  him  by  the  collar,  exclaiming,  "  Ah,  malheureux,  tu 
abuses  de  la  confiance  qu'on  nous  montre,  en  detruisant  le  jardin 

de  M.   ."    The  mistake  was  soon  discovered,  and  the 

young  master  thanked  his  workman  for  the  zeal  with  which  he 
defended  his  father's  property.  He  said  that  few  of  the  spec- 
tators of  this  truly  patriarchal  fete  remained  unmoved  at  the 
greeting  between  the  father  and  the  men  ;  and  I  can  well  believe 
it,  for  the  mere  description  of  it  affected  me  profoundly.  God 
prosper  the  work  ! — these  men  are  missionaries  in  the  strictest 
sense  of  the  term.  Dismissal  and  his  father's  censure  are  the 
only  punishments  among  them.    Towards  three  o'clock,  Mrs. 

 called  for  me  to  drive  with  her  on  the  Prado. 

We  set  forth  together,  and  drove  under  the  golden  light  of  a 
most  glorious  afternoon  along  a  fine  avenue,  planted  with  trees, 
and  bordered  with  houses  of  such  various  forms  and  fashions  as 
to  redeem,  by  the  agreeable  variety  of  the  whole,  the  slightly 
fantastic  appearance  of  many  of  them  individually.  On  each 
hand  a  noble  range  of  hills,  with  clean  sharp  outline,  scooped 
the  exquisite  sky  ;  and  at  the  end,  the  Mediterranean,  in  all  its 
glory,  rolled  a  sea  of  molten  gold  almost  to  our  carriage  wheels. 
The  declining  sun  burnished  the  level  ocean,  so  that  its  prover- 


4S 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION 


bial  sapphire  hue  was  lost  in  the  blaze  of  light ;  wave  after 
wave,  as  it  curved  to  the  shore,  upheaved  a  crystal  vault  of 
golden  green,  through  which  the  sun  shone  as  through  a  huge 
wall  of  the  delicate  Bohemian  glass.  The  sound,  the  sight,  the 
present  beauty,  the  intense  longing  of  many  years  fulfilled,  all 
combined  to  excite  and  touch  me  most  deeply  ;  the  rocky  pro- 
montories, with  their  deep-jagged  outlines,  stony  and  stern  in 
their  unvarying  beauty,  contrasting  with  the  curving,  undulat- 
ing, yielding,  exquisite  element  at  their  feet,  canopied  with  that 
limpid  sky,  whose  richness  and  softness  lent  tenderness  and 
brightness  to  the  whole.  It  was  only  less  beautiful  than  the 
moral  glory  I  had  contemplated  in  my  conversation  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  I  devoutly  thanked  God  for  both  :  oh,  great  and  good 
Father,  all  thy  works  praise  thee ;  especially  doth  the  soul  of 
man,  thy  noblest  work,  praise  thee,  when  it  shows  forth  thy  will, 
and  walks  in  thy  way.  As  We  were  turning  away  for  the  last 
time  from  this  scene  of  enchantment,  I  could  not  resist  the  desire 
to  dip  my  hands  in  the  clear  waves  ;  and,  stopping  the  carriage, 
ran  down  to  the  shore.  The  golden  waters  with  their  silver 
fringe  rolled  in  gorgeous  sheets  up  the  sand.  I  gathered  one 
handful  of  the  Nereid's  crown  that  lay  at  my  feet,  and  having 
baptized  them  in  one  far-reaching  wave,  ran  back  with  my  trophy 
to  the  carriage. 

Monday,  5th. — I  went  early  to  the  banker's  to  get  my  letter  of 
credit  changed,  and  was  nj*jch  surprised,  at  one  of  the  first  bank- 
ing-houses in  Marseilles,  to  be  made  to  pay  eight  francs  discount 
upon  Coutts's  bill.  This,  however,  it  seems,  is  the  mode  in 
which  business  is  carried  on  at  Marseilles,  and  truly  it  cannot  be 
accused  of  liberality.  Much,  however,  I  suppose,  is  to  be  ex- 
cused in  a  population  without  fresh  water,  without  cows,  whose 
poultry  comes  from  Nice,  and  whose  butter  is  brought  from  Ly- 
ons.   Let  us  earnestly  hope  that  with  irrigation,  and  consequent 


DEPARTURE  FROM  MARSEILLES. 


49 


fertility,  the  waters  of  the  Durance  may  bring  an  influx  of  libe- 
rality to  the  dealings  of  the  inhabitants  of  Marseilles. 

We  took  boat  at  about  two  o'clock  at  the  foot  of  the  Canne- 

m 

Mere,  the  great  street  of  Marseilles,  and  main  pride  of  its  inha- 
bitants, our  trunks  having  been  again  opened,  and  examined  by 
a  policeman,  on  the  open  wharf.  We  now  traversed  the  magni- 
ficent natural  basin  where  lies  the  vast  and  various  forest  of  ship- 
ping, which  attests  the  extensive  commerce  of  the  place  ;  flags 
of  every  nation  floated  from  the  masts,  and  the  picturesque  lat- 
teen  sails  of  the  Mediterranean  coasting- vessels,  mingled  in  a 
charming  effect  with  the  square  rigging  of  the  other  vessels. 

 pointed  out  to  me  a  boat  full  of  huge  oil-jars,  the  very 

fellows,  I  should  think,  of  those  in  which  Morgiana  boiled  the 
forty  thieves.  Magnificent  as  the  extent  of  this  natural  dock  is, 
the  absence  of  tide,  and  the  abominable  foulness  of  the  port,  ren- 
ders it,  even  at  this  season  of  the  year,  one  huge  sewer ;  and 
when  the  intense  heat  of  summer  beats  upon  this  never-refreshed 
water,  with  its  hourly  tribute  of  every  conceivable  abomination, 
it  must  really  be  a  most  pestilential  reservoir  of  ill  smells  and 
noxious  exhalations.  Three  several  proposals  have  been  made 
to  the  French  Government  for  furnishing  them  with  the  means 
of  purifying  this  port ;  but  owing  to  the  centralizing  policy  which 
makes  every  measure  of  every  sort  emanate  from  Paris,  so  much 
time  is  lost  in  trafficking  with  the  authorities  there,  in  pour  et 
contre  with  powers  at  a  distance  from  the  immediate  scene  of  ac- 
tion, that  both  money  and  opportunity  are  wasted,  and  nothing 
but  barren  negotiations  achieved,  instead  of  active  improvement. 
How  great  is  the  virtue  of  freedom ! — how  infinite  the  scope  it 
lends  to  human  intelligence  ! — how  marvellous  it  seems  that  hu- 
man beings,  conscious  that  God  has  given  free  will,  and  not 
imposed  absolute  laws  of  action  upon  his  children,  should  not 
have  perceived  that  freedom  must  be  essential  to  goodness,  since 
God  himself  has  not  infringed  upon  it !  How  much  coming 
4 


50 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


abroad  makes  us  love  England  ! — how  much  more  the  institu- 
tions of  America !  But  whereas  the  spirit  of  Englishmen  has 
been  often  above  their  institutions — the  spirit  of  Americans  has 
been,  alas !  almost  always  below  theirs  ;  to  be  sure,  it  is  the 
highest  theory  of  all.  Oh,  what  a  people  they  would  be  if  once 
they  apprehended  the  glory  of  their  own  political  profession  ! 

Having  seen  me  on  board,  and  consigned  me  most  kindly  to 
the  care  and  attention  of  the  captain  of  the  Leopoldo  Secondo, 

who,  I  was  glad  to  find,  was  an  Englishman,  left  me. 

He  had  hardly  done  so,  when  his  younger  brother  came  on  board 
to  take  leave  of  me.  I  was  extremely  amused  at  the  pathetio 
address  of  a  worthy  Marseillois  to  him,  who  had  evidently  taken 
a  glass  too  much,  and  who,  with  his  hat  in  his  hand,  kept  follow, 
ing  my  young  friend  about,  beseeching  him  in  the  most  moving 

terms,  to  patronize  his  son,  who,  it  seems,  is  one  of  's 

workmen. — "  Tenez,  M.  Edouard,"  said  the  worthy  man,  "  vous 
voyez  comme  je  vous  parle  de  la  maniere  la  plus  humble  et  la 
plus  humiliante  le  chapeau  a  la  main  ;  et  s'il  le  fallait,  ce  serait 
bien  encore  le  genou  en  terre  pour  que  vous  vous  interessiez  au 

sort  de  mons  fils."    Upon  desiring  him  to  put  his  hat  on, 

he  replied  with  a  crescendo  of  pathos  and  emphasis, — "  Non, 
Monsieur ;  et  ce  ne  serait  point  le  temps  le  plus  intrepide  qui  m'y 
forcerait  aupres  de  vous  qui  pouvez  proteger  mon  fils." 

While  waiting  our  departure,  I  was  amused  with  seeing  the 
arrival  of  my  fellow-passengers.  A  cargo  came  on  board  of  two 
clean,  cross-looking  men,  and  four  veiled  women,  who  began 
stumping  up  and  down  the  deck,  each  on  her  own  hook,  betray- 
ing in  the  very  hang  of  their  multitudinous  shawls,  the  English 
creature — how  peculiar  they  are,  to  be  sure  !  I  had  imagined 
that  by  taking  a  cabin  on  deck,  I  should  be  sure  to  secure 
abundant  fresh  air  and  the  absence  of  proximity.  And  so  I  did, 
except  the  neighborhood  of  the  wheel,  the  jerking  and  shaking 
of  which  were  all  but  intolerable,  and  rendered  everything  like 


SIGHTS  IN  GENOA. 


51 


sleep,  or  even  rest,  impossible.  With  a  degree  of  liberal  fore- 
sight, which  I  cannot  sufficiently  commend,  in  whoever  devised 
the  arrangement,  the  dinner  was  not  served  until  the  very  mo- 
ment when  we  were  going  out  of  port.  The  rough  encounter 
of  the  Mediterranean  outside  the  harbor,  saved  the  purveyors  of 
the  Leopoldo  Secondo  a  portion  pour  deux  at  any  rate  (and,  as  I 
subsequently  heard,  much  more),  for  nothing  was  left  for  it  but 
bed,  so  violent  was  the  motion  of  the  boat,  and  so  rough  the  sea. 
From  my  wretched  bed  my  wretched  body  did  not  stir  till  Tues- 
day evening  the  6th,  when  we  boiled  by  the  pier  of  Genoa,  and 
came  to  moorings  in  the  bay.  I  then  jumped  up,  hurried  on  my 
clothes,  and  went  on  deck  ;  a  clear  moonlight  revealed  enough 
of  the  scene  to  show  its  admirable  beauty  ;  and  I  remained  gaz- 
ing from  the  silver  sea  to  the  mountains,  and  the  white  masses  of 
buildings  shining  at  their  feet,  till  I  got  pinched  with  cold,  and 
retired,  remembering  that  probably  I,  and  certainly  Genoa,  would 
be  in  that  place  to-morrow. 

Wednesday,  January  1th. — The  sun  came  gloriously  up  out 
of  the  blue  waters,  and  as  fast  as  I  could  I  despatched  dress- 
ing and  breakfast,  and  with  my  faithful  made  a  descent 

upon  the  coast.  We  hastened,  under  the  escort  of  our  boatman 
Dominico,  to  the  nearest  coach-stand,  and  finding  ourselves  im- 
mediately in  front  of  the  Church  of  the  Annunciata,  we  went  in. 
The  splendor  of  the  interior  was  really  something  quite  astonish- 
ing. After  walking  as  if  on  eggs  all  round  the  church — for  I 
have  always  a  sort  of  feeling  that  I  ought  to  be  turned  out,  since 
I  don't  come  there  to  pray — we  returned  to  the  coach-stand, 
where,  having  made  a  bargain  with  a  charioteer  to  drive  us  hither 
and  thither  for  five  hours,  we  proceeded  in  regular  traveller's 
fashion  to  do  all  the  churches,  palaces,  gardens,  and  fountains, 
that  could  be  crammed  into  the  time.  The  result  of  all  which, 
in  my  mind,  was  one  huge  hodge-podge  of  black,  red,  and  white 
marble,  gilding,  pictures,  statues,  pretty-colored  floors,  and  ceil- 


52 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


ings.  Fortunately  the  divine  blue  sky,  and  the  pleasant  hanging 
gardens,  with  their  dark-green  leaves  and  golden  fruit,  gave  me 
some  repose  between  each  sight ;  but  I  think,  to  look  at  a  kalei- 
doscope for  an  hour  together  is  nearly  as  pleasant,  and  quite  as 
profitable  as  this  sort  of  succession  of  sights.  The  time  passed 
quickly  in  this  pious  manner,  and  at  half-past  three  I  returned 
on  board. 

The  town  is  beautiful  in  itself,  and  most  beautifully  situated. 
I  should  like  to  have  stayed  there  for  six  months.  The  boat 
kicked  like  an  old  rusty  fowling-piece,  and  though  the  sea  was 
as  smooth  as  glass,  and  there  was  very  little  wind,  the  intolerable 
jerking  and  shaking  of  the  wheel,  close  to  which  my  cabin  was, 
prevented  my  closing  my  eyes  all  night.  I  lay  on  my  elbow, 
with  my  head  on  the  sill  of  the  little  window  in  my  berth,  and 
watched  the  gradual  departure  of  the  night.  The  moon,  after 
flooding  the  heavens  and  the  waters  with  mellow  light,  dipped 
like  a  golden  goblet  beneath  the  waves ;  the  stars  grew  pale,  and 
seemed  to  withdraw  into  the  depths  of  the  sky  as  into  their  sock- 
ets, and  gradually  the  victorious  banners  of  the  sun  reddened 
the  east,  and  threw  their  ruddy  shadow  upon  the  waters.  It  was 
a  perfect  pageant — the  sky  shows  it  every  moment  at  day-break, 
— and  it  does  not  dim,  nor  alter,  nor  faint,  nor  fade,  nor  wear 
out — a  daily  resurrection — a  miracle  of  wonder  and  of  beauty. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  Thursday  the  8th,  we  brought  to, 
within  the  harbor  of  Leghorn.  Most  of  our  passengers  went  on 
shore,  intending  to  take  the  railroad  trip  to  Pisa,  and  return  in 
the  afternoon.  Being  alone,  I  was  afraid  to  undertake  this  expe- 
dition, as  the  boatmen  and  lower  class  of  people  at  Leghorn  have 
the  character  of  being  peculiarly  coarse  and  savage.  I  do  not 
know  what  those  saw  who  went ;  but  though  the  Campo  Santo 
would  have  been  an  object  of  extreme  interest  and  pleasure  to 
me,  I  doubt  anything  surpassing  the  glory  of  the  scene  which 
surrounded  me  on  all  sides  as  I  walked  up  and  down  the  deck 


EVENING  SCENE  AT  SEA. 


53 


of  our  vessel.  The  English  passengers  on  board,  of  course, 
afforded  immense  amusement  to  all  the  other  passengers,  the 
women  especially,  by  their  extraordinary  jargon,  and  still  more 
extraordinary  manners.  What  very  strange  human  beings  we 
are  !  I  saw  in  the  cabin  a  splendid  specimen  of  the  peculiar 
nosegays  made  in  Genoa — for  the  Genoese  are  as  famous  for 
their  arrangement  of  real  flowers  as  for  their  artificial  imitations 
of  them.  Indeed,  the  one  craft  has,  to  my  mind,  infected  the 
other,  and  the  live  flowers  are  put  up  in  these  singular  nosegays 
so  as  to  look  as  little  like  real,  and  as  much  like  artificial  ones, 
as  possible.  This  bouquet,  which  had  been  brought  from  Genoa 
to  Leghorn  for  some  wedding  solemnity,  looked  exactly  like  a 
piece  of  rich  carpet  pattern.  A  thick  row  of  orange  flowers 
formed  the  outward  edge  of  it,  and  regular  circles  of  violets, 
dark  and  pale, — roses,  laurustinus,  and  myrtle,  were  wound 
round  and  round  to  a  camellia  centre,  the  whole  presenting  a 
smooth  variegated  surface,  where  no  one  leaf  or  sprig  protruded 
beyond  the  other — a  sort  of  floral  shield,  with  which  the  Spring 
might  arm  herself  to  drive  out  the  Winter — fanciful  and  sweet, 
but  not  half  so  beautiful  as  the  same  quantity  of  flowers  thrown 
into  a  basket  without  order,  form,  or  system.  There  are  some 
things  that  art  should  touch  with  fearful  hands — flowers  are 
among  them. 

The  view  of  this  bay  and  the  surrounding  scenery  pleased  me 
better  upon  the  whole  even  than  that  of  Genoa  ;  but  we  had  such 
a  splendid  sky  over  the  whole,  that,  perhaps,  some  of  the  charm 
lay  in  the  lighting  up.  I  observed  a  great  number  of  English 
vessels  at  anchor  round  us,  and  the  stars  and  stripes  of  the 
United  States  fluttering  in  all  directions  too  ;  the  sea  gulls  ca- 
reered in  and  out  like  sea  butterflies,  through  and  round  the 
shipping ;  the  boats  went  gliding  by  our  vessel's  side  with  one 
sharp  white  pointed  sail,  exactly  like  the  wing  of  one  of  them. 
The  cold  white  line  of  the  Maritime  Alps  lay  like  a  mass  of 


54 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


unburnished  silver  upon  the  blue  sky,  as  evening  came  on,  and 
the  clear  golden  moon  and  stars  glittered  upon  the  darkening 
sea,  while  the  outline  of  Gorgona  and  Corsica  stood  like  a  black 
silhouette  against  a  broad  western  streak  of  dazzling  orange 
light.  I  certainly  thought  I  had  never  seen  anything  so  beauti- 
ful in  all  nature  before  :  the  coloring  of  the  sky  is  the  same  as 
that  of  America,  the  same  transparent  clearness,  the  same  daz- 
zling brilliancy,  the  same  splendor  and  variety  ;  but  oh  the  dif- 
ference of  all  that  the  sky  looks  upon  !  I  remember  that  Chan- 
ning  once  said  to  me,  "  The  earth  is  yours  (speaking  of  Eng- 
land), but  the  heavens  are  ours."  The  thought  of  Shelley,  his 
great  genius,  and  the  premature  end  (if  any  end  is  premature, 
by  the  by)  he  found  in  these  lovely  southern  waters,  haunted 
me  as  I  looked  towards  Spezzia.  If  he  had  lived  England  would 
have  had  a  dramatic  poet  again  ;  for  the  "  Cenci "  was  a  suffi- 
cient pledge  of  power,  even  in  spite  of  the  weakness  which  the 
choice  of  such  a  subject  indicated. 

The  horrible  vicinity  of  the  wheel  prevented  my  sleeping  again 
all  night — I  think,  too,  something  of  the  anxiety  and  excitement 
with  which  I  began  to  look  to  the  close  of  my  winter  pilgrimage. 
The  whole  night  I  watched  the  black  coast  of  Corsica  and  Elba, 
and  the  phosphorescent  waves  that  sparkled  and  shimmered  all 
round  our  ship's  side,  as  the  wheels  beat  them  up  into  a  foam  of 
stars.  With  daylight  we  arrived  at  Civita  Vecchia  ;  and  here  I 
must  pay  a  just  tribute  to  the  extreme  meanness  and  dirty  spirit 
of  extortion  in  which  all  the  transactions  of  the  company  to 
which  the  Leopondo  Secoldo  belongs  are  carried  on.  On  coming 
on  board  the  ship  a  charge  of  32  francs  was  made  for  our  meals 
during  the  voyage  ;  to  this  very  sufficient  charge  was  now  added 
another  for  two  breakfasts,  which  I  had  taken  this  morning  and 
yesterday,  the  understanding  being,  it  seems,  that  the  passengers 
are  only  furnished  with  food  while  the  ship  is  in  motion, — and 
they  cannot  eat  it ;  but  as  they  spend  the  better  part  of  one  day 


THE  DILIGENCE. 


55 


in  the  harbor  of  Genoa,  and  of  another  in  that  of  Leghorn,  dur- 
ing all  that  time,  when  it  might  be  possible  for  one  to  eat  some- 
thing, whatever  is  furnished  is  immediately  made  into  an  extra 
charge.  There  is  something  in  the  excessive  illiberality,  not  to 
say  dishonesty,  of  these  proceedings  which  reflects  extreme  dis- 
credit on  the  management  of  the  whole  concern,  and  disgusts 
travellers  in  the  highest  degree,  who  would  have  made  no  sort 
of  objection  to  paying  42  francs  at  starting,  or  anything  else  that 
was  required  of  them,  as  the  understood  price  of  their  accommo- 
dation. The  same  thing  was  done  with  regard  to  the  stewards, 
whose  services  were  also  charged  for  beforehand,  and  claimed 
over  again  at  landing.  In  the  same  way,  on  going  on  shore,  the 
mere  conveyance  of  my  luggage  from  the  wharf  to  the  diligence, 
a  distance  of  a  few  yards,  together  with  a  look  that  a  gentleman 
(one  of  the  agents  of  this  screwing  company)  gave  my  passport, 
laid  me  under  obligations  to  the  tune  of  12  francs  more  ;  and  I 
was  not  surprised  when  I  found  this,  that  the  captain  of  the  boat, 
who  very  good-naturedly  volunteered  to  see  me  through  all  these 
civilities,  withdrew  a  little  before  the  charge  for  them  was  pre- 
sented to  me.  The  whole  thing  is  disgraceful,  and  reflects  infi- 
nite discredit  upon  this  illiberal  company,  who,  not  content  with 
charging  a  very  sufficient  price  for  the  accommodations  they 
afford  travellers,  fleece  them  in  this  petty  manner,  or  permit 
them  to  be  so  fleeced,  by  a  parcel  of  needy  catch-pennies,  who 
make  their  exactions  under  the  plea  of  being  the  agents  of  the 
said  company. 

I  had  now  my  choice  of  proceeding  to  Rome,  either  in  a  small 
carriage  with  post-horses  by  myself,  or  taking  a  place  in  the 
diligence.  Not  wishing  to  encounter  the  further  annoyance  of 
driving  or  bribing  a  parcel  of  thievish  postilions,  I  preferred  the 
latter,  supposing  that  a  service  done  for  and  by  the  Government 
would  be  more  efficient,  and  probably  more  comfortable  than 
that  which  single  travellers,  especially  women,  could  procure  for 


56 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


themselves.  When,  however,  I  saw  the  crazy,  rickety,  dusty, 
dirty,  ragged,  filthy  conveyance  which  carries  the  mails  of  his 
Holiness  the  Pope,  my  mind  did  greatly  misgive  me  ;  however, 
I  had  taken  the  places,  and  remembering  how  near  I  was  now  to 
the  end  of  my  miseries,  clomb  by  three  horrid  hoes,  that  scraped 
my  shins  to  death,  up  into  the  horrid  body  of  this  horrid  coach, 
which  looked  like  nothing  under  heaven  but  a  mean  kind  of 
omnibus,  past  all  use.  The  middle  division  of  this  delectable 
equipage — for  it  had  a  head,  a  body,  and  a  tail — I  had  retained 
entirely  for  the  inconvenience  of  myself  and  my  maid.  Though 
separated  from  the  other  two  apartments,  it  communicated  with 
them  compulsatorily  by  window  frames,  which  could  neither  be 
let  down  nor  pulled  up,  and  had  no  glasses  besides,  if  they  could. 
And  now,  at  starting,  the  sights  and  sounds  by  which  I  found 
myself  surrounded  were  too  irresistibly  droll ;  immediately  before 
us  sat  a  prim,  precise,  and  extremely  polite  Belgian,  who  had 
been  our  fellow-traveller  on  board  the  boat ;  behind,  in  a  narrow 
space  unequal  to  one  and  a  half  of  them,  sat  three  Germans ; 
the  Belgian  spoke  French,  I  and  my  maid  English  ;  the  Ger- 
mans, of  course,  their  own  Teutonic  tongue  ;  and  a  lively 
expression  of  feeling  went  forward,  in  this  leash  of  languages, 
upon  the  abominable  extortions  we  had  just  been  subject  to,  and 
the  atrocious  accommodations  travellers  were  furnished  with  in 
the  Roman  States.  This  movement  had  reached  a  climax,  when 
a  simultaneous  appeal  from  the  porters  of  the  custom  house,  at 
the  various  doors  of  the  diligence,  caused  a  volley  of  French 
execrations  and  German  imprecations  which  literally  sent  me 
into  convulsions  of  laughter,  the  whole  scene  was  so  ludicrous. 
At  each  stage  where  we  changed  horses,  the  postilions  came  up 
and  claimed  a  bounty  to  which  they  were  not  in  the  slightest 
degree  entitled,  but  which  I  paid  in  the  hopes  of  accelerating 
their  extremely  leisurely  movements. 

The  day  was  brilliantly  warm  and  fine,  and  the  road,  with  the 


THE  CAMPAGNA. 


57 


sparkling  Mediterranean  on  one  side,  and  that  dry  sea  (as  

calls  the  prairies)  the  Campagna  on  the  other,  delighted  me  ;  the 
myrtle  and  box  bushes  exhaled  a  bitter  aromatic  smell  in  the 
warm  air,  and  the  short,  thick,  tawny  grass  was  all  starred  over 
with  wide-eyed  daisies  ;  the  ilex  here  and  there  spread  its  heavy, 
colored  foliage  over  a  stone  gate  all  hung  with  ivy,  and  the  whole 
vegetation,  together  with  the  vast  open  expanse  of  yellow  down, 
reminded  me  of  the  Savannahs  of  Georgia,  to  which  it  all  bore 
an  absolute  resemblance.  I  cannot  perceive  any  difference 
whatever  between  the  ilex  and  the  live  oak  of  the  southern 
United  States,  except  the  infinitely  larger  and  more  picturesque 
growth  of  the  latter,  and  the  wild  drapery  of  grey  moss  with 
which  it  is  covered,  making  some  of  the  huge  old  trees  look  like 
hoary  Druids,  transformed,  all  but  their  matted  grisled  hair  and 
beard,  into  the  trees  they  worshipped. 

The  climate  was  precisely  what  that  of  Georgia  is  in  Decem- 
ber and  January.  I  was  agreeably  surprised  at  the  much 
greater  amount  of  agriculture  and  cultivation  in  the  Campagna 
during  the  first  part  of  the  route  than  I  had  expected  to  see  ;  the 
soil  was  of  the  finest  color,  and  seemed  to  indicate  the  most  fer- 
tile properties  ;  troops  of  picturesque,  black-eyed,  golden-skinned 
men,  in  goat-skin  coats  and  breeches,  and  wild  tangled  coal-black 
locks  and  beards,  were  laboring — for  the  most  part,  however, 
as  the  slaves  do,  either  with  the  spade,  or  hoe,  or  pick-axe.  I 
saw  not  a  single  plough  ;  large  flocks  of  sheep,  too,  which  at  a 
distance  could  hardly  be  discriminated  from  the  brown  woolly 
pasture  they  were  cropping  ;  and  herds  of  beautiful  iron-grey 
oxen,  with  magnificent  long  horns,  grazed  over  the  vast  plain, 
and  here  and  there  a  large  deep  stone  basin  full  of  fresh  deli- 
cious-looking water,  sparkled  like  a  sapphire,  dropped  on  this 
dry  wilderness  for  the  blessing  of  man  and  beast. 

Far  on  the  distant  verge  of  the  huge  sunny  plain — some  ruins 
rose  upon  a  forlorn  hillock,  against  the  blue  sky,  and  a  dark  ilex 

4* 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


wood,  of  apparently  great  extent,  relieved  the  eye  with  its  som- 
bre colors,  and  the  imagination  with  the  idea  of  shade  ;  beyond 
this,  again,  we  presently  saw  the  outline  of  the  Sabine  hills, 
reflecting  the  rosy  tints  which  the  setting  sun  was  beginning  to 
fuse  his  light  in  ;  full,  mellow,  golden  moonlight  gradually 
mingled  with  the  last  flush  in  the  sky ;  and  as  the  evening  closed 
in,  the  aspect  of  the  Campagna  really  did  become  desolate,  as 
the  dreary  interminable  winding  road  led  us  over  a  grey  waste 
of  hillocks  like  the  leaden  ripples  of  a  measureless  lake.  My 
weary  spirits  revived  with  the  sight  of  the  first  vine  enclosures  ; 
and  as  we  presently  began  to  travel  between  high  walls,  I  remem- 
bered all  the  descriptions  of  travellers  that  I  had  read,  and  knew 
that  we  must  be  even  at  the  gate  of  Rome  ;  suddenly  against  the 
clear  azure  of  the  sky,  a  huge  shadowy  cupola  rose  up.  I  felt 
a  perfect  tumult  of  doubt,  fear,  and  hope — such  as  I  experienced 
when,  through  the  overhanging  thickets  that  fringe  them,  I  first 
saw  the  yeasty  waters  of  Lake  Erie  rushing  to  their  great 
plunge.  The  great  vision  rose  higher  and  higher  as  we  drove 
under  its  mighty  mass  ;  and  as  we  turned  within  the  Porta  de 
Cavallegieri,  and  stopped  again  at  the  barrier,  St.  Peter's  stood 
over  against  us,  towering  into  the  violet- colored  sky, — and  it  was 
real, — and  I  really  saw  it ;  I  knew  the  whole  form  of  the  great, 
wonderful  structure  ;  I  knew  the  huge  pillars  of  the  noble  arcade, 
and  the  pale  ghost-like  shining  of  the  moonlit  fountains  through 
the  colonnade.  I  was  in  Rome,  and  it  was  the  very  Rome  of  my 
imagination. 

The  dark,  deep,  dismal,  stinking  streets  through  which  we  now 
rattled,  however,  were  new  experiences.  I  never  looked  up  from 
between  houses,  and  saw  the  heavens  at  such  an  immense  height 
above  me,  as  in  these  chasm-like  streets,  through  which  we 
seemed  making  an  interminable  progress,  stopping  at  infinite  places, 
till  my  impatience  at  these  delays,  on  the  very  threshold  of  arrival, 
became  almost  intolerable.    Again  to  the  custom-house,  to  stand 


LINES  ON  ITALY. 


59 


shivering  on  the  cold  stone  pavement,  under  cold  stone  arches, 
while  my  trunks  and  carpet-bags  were  again  rummaged.  What 
an  intolerable  nuisance,  to  be  sure,  these .  disgraceful  and  vexa- 
tious hindrances  are  !  My  sister's  servant  met  me  here  ;  and  at 
length,  transferred  to  an  open  carriage,  we  rolled  through  the 
streets,  where  the  houses  looked,  by  contrast  of  moonlight  and 
shadow,  like  actual  carvings  of  ivory  and  ebony — up  steep  and 
slippery  pavements  to  the  Pincio,  where,  at  a  lighted  upper  win- 
dow, I  saw  a  woman's  figure.  I  scrambled  up  three  pairs  of 
stone  stairs,  and  so  into  my  sister's  arms,  worn  out,  and  ready  to 
die  with  the  fatigue  of  coming,  and  the  emotion  of  being  come. 

Early  in  life,  when  hope  seems  prophecy, 
And  strong  desire  can  sometimes  mould  a  fate, 
My  dream  was  of  thy  shores,  Oh,  Italy  ! 
Of  thy  blue  deep,  that  even  for  awhile 
Will  not  forsake  its  spicy  pine-girt  beaches  ; 
Of  the  unutter'd  glories  of  thy  sky, 
Of  the  unnumber'd  beauties  of  thy  earth, 
And  all  the  immortal  memories,  that  rest 
For  ever  like  an  atmosphere  above  thee. 
Thus  towards  the  south  my  spirit's  flight  was  turn'd, 
For  ever  with  the  yearning  of  one  born  there, 
And  nursed  upon  its  warm  and  fragrant  bosom  : 
Awhile  the  sunny  dream  shut  out  all  else, 
And  fill'd  the  horizon  of  my  contemplations. 
Slowly,  and  by  degrees,  the  toiling  years, 
Breathed  o'er  the  bright  illusion,  dimming  it, — 
And  gather' d  close  about  me  sterner  things. 
The  graceful  lines,  the  gorgeous  hues,  the  forms 
Of  grandeur  and  of  beauty  that  my  thoughts 
Had  dwelt  amidst,  as  in  their  proper  home, 
Melted  and  faded — broke,  dissolved  away, 


AO 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Till  the  last,  lovely,  lingering  trace  had  vanish'd, 

And  I  forgot  to  hope  it  might  return. 

Across  an  ocean — not  thy  sapphire  waves. 

Oh,  Mediterranean,  sea  of  memories  ! 

But  the  dark  marhle  ridges  of  th'  Atlantic, 

Destiny  led  me — not  to  thy  bright  shores, 

Ausonia,  but  that  wondrous  wilderness, 

That  other  world,  where  Hope  supreme  beholds 

All  things  unshapcd— one  huge  eventful  promise. 

Ah,  not  to  thee,  thou  treasure-house  of  Art, 

Thou  trophy-loaded  Temple  of  the  Past, 

Hung  with  triumphant  spoils  of  all  the  ages  ! 

But  to  that  land  where  Expectation  stands, 

All  former  tilings  behind  her — and  before 

The  unfathom'd  brightness  of  Futurity, 

Rolling  its  broad  waves  to  the  feet  of  God. 

Upon  that  distant  shore,  a  dream  more  fair 

Than  the  imaginations  of  my  youth 

Awhile  entranced  me  ;  lightning-like  it  fled, 

And  I  remained  utterly  desolate. 

Love  had  departed  ;  Youth,  too,  had  departed  ; 

Hope  had  departed  ;  and  my  life  before  me 

Lay  cover'd  with  the  ashes  of  the  Past, — 

Dark,  barren,  cold,  drear,  flinty,  colorless. 

As  thro'  the  cheerless  grey  of  waning  night, 

When  its  black  veils  wear  thin  and  part  like  film, 

Beautiful  light,  like  life  begins  to  "low, 

And  the  great  picture  of  the  earth  is  sketched 

Faintly  upon  the  canvas  of  the  dark, 

Brighter  and  brighter  growing,  as  the  day 

Holds  its  great  torch  against  God's  master-piece, 

Till  the  whole  work  in  perfect  glory  shines  : 

So  rose  once  more  that  southern  vision's  splendor 


LINES  ON  ITALY. 


6i 


Upon  the  cheerless  twilight  of  my  fate ; 

The  last  grim  pages  of  my  book  of  life, 

Fill'd  with  a  mean  and  grinding  martyrdom, 

Washed  with  unceasing  tears  at  length  gave  back 

The  glorious  legend  written  on  my  youth. 

Again,  again,  the  glorious  shapes  returned  ; 

Again,  the  lovely  lines  like  magic  drew  me  ; 

Again  the  splendor  of  the  southern  heavens 

Shed  rosy  light  and  golden  glories  round  me, 

And  Art  and  Nature,  twins  immortal,  stood 

Upon  the  threshold  of  earth's  Paradise, 

And  waved  me  tow'rds  it.    And  at  last  I  came, — 

But  with  a  broken  heart  and  tear-dimm'd  eyes, 

And  such  a  woeful  weight  of  misery  laden, 

As  well  might  challenge  the  great  ministry 

Of  the  whole  universe,  to  comfort  it. 

Thus  did  I  seek  thy  shores,  Oh,  Italy  ! 

Land — not  of  promise — but  of  consolation  ; 

Not  in  that  season  of  my  life,  when  life 

Itself  was  rich  enough  for  all  its  need, 

And  I  yet  held  its  whole  inheritance  ; 

But  in  the  bankrupt  days  when  all  is  spent, 

Bestow 'd,  or  stolen,  wasted,  given  away, 

To  buy  a  store  of  bitter  memories : 

In  the  first  hour  of  lengthening  evening  shadows, 

When  Resolution  on  life's  summit  stands, 

Looks  back  on  all  its  brightness,  and  looks  forward 

Thro'  gathering  downward  darkness  to  the  grave. 

Hail,  then,  most  fair,  most  glorious,  long  desired — 

Long  dreamed  of — hoped  for — Italy,  hail !  hail ! 

I  kiss  thy  earth,  weeping  with  joy,  to  think 

That  I,  at  last,  stand  on  thy  sacred  soil. 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Saturday,  10th  January. — I  had  seen  my  sister's  children 
asleep  in  their  cribs  last  night ;  their  cooing  and  chirping  woke 
me  in  the  morning.    While  I  was  still  in  my  dressing-gown 

«  called  me  out  to  see  the  view.    We  are  on  the  very  top 

of  the  Pincio  ;  Rome  lay  like  a  map  at  our  feet,  bathed  far  and 
near  with  glorious  sunlight,  against  which  on  the  opposite  horizon 
the  stone  pines  of  the  Doria  Pamfili  spread  out  their  dark  roofs. 
Our  apartment  reminds  me  extremely  of  all  the  houses  I  ever 
was  in  in  the  southern  states  of  America — large  lofty  rooms, 
with  not  a  window  or  door  that  can  shut,  and  those  that  do, 
giving  one  one's  death  by  the  imperfect  manner  in  which  they 
close, — a  great  deal  more  than  if  they  stood  for  ever  wide  open  ; 
coarse  common  carpets  laid  over  a  layer  of  straw  ;  in  short,  the 
whole  untidy  discomfort  which  characterizes  the  dwellings  of  all 
southern  people,  as  far  as  my  observation  goes. 

Now  for  the  chapter  of  compensations  :  my  bed-room  door  and 
window  open  upon  a  terraced  garden  at  least  forty  feet  above  the 
street,  full  of  orange  and  lemon  trees,  magnolias,  myrtles,  olean- 
ders and  camellias,  roses  and  violets,  in  bloom ;  a  fountain  of  the 
acqua  felice  trickles  under  the  superintendence  of  a  statue  into 
a  marble  shell,  and  thence  escapes  under  the  garden.  The  view 
from  thence  of  the  Eternal  City  and  its  beauteous  girdle  of  hills 
surpasses  all  description,  and  the  twin  towers  of  the  Trinita  rise 
close  to  it  up  into  the  blue  sky,  which  looks  through  the  belfry 
arches  as  through  windows  down  into  my  sleeping- room.  The 
colored  tiles  of  all  our  ante-rooms  and  passages  enchant  me  ;  so 
do  the  gay  painted  ceilings.  The  little  room  where  I  bathe  is  a 
perfect  delight  to  me,  with  its  Latin  inscription  on  the  lintel,  its 
marble  bath,  its  walls  covered  with  fresco  Cupids  and  dolphins, 
and  altars  with  flames,  and  baskets  with  flowers,  all  strung  to- 
gether by  waving  patterns  of  wreaths  and  garlands.  This  after- 
noon we  drove  through  the  streets  of  Rome,  out  to  a  place  that 
was  once  one  of  the  innumerable  Cenci  possessions,  but  which  is 


WATER  TYPICAL  OF  TRUTH. 


63 


now  a  farm-house  of  the  Borghese.  In  one  corner  of  the  littered 
stable-yard,  where  heaps  of  manure  occupied  most  of  the  ground, 
stood  a  stone  sarcophagus,  with  spirited  and  graceful  rilievi,  into 
which  fresh  water  was  pouring  itself  in  a  glassy  stream.  As  we 
went  round  the  house,  we  came  upon  another  stone  basin,  of 
beautiful  form  and  proportions,  into  which  another  gush  of  living 
water  was  falling  in  the  bright  sunshine :  further  on,  again,  be- 
neath a  sombre  avenue  of  ilex,  another  of  these  precious  reser- 
voirs sparkled  and  gleamed.  I  cannot  describe  my  delight  in 
living  water :  these  perpetually  running  fountains  are  a  perpetual 
baptism  of  refreshment  to  my  mind  and  senses.  The  Sweden- 
borgians  consider  water,  when  the  mention  of  it  occurs  in  the 
Bible,  as  typical  of  truth.  I  love  to  think  of  that  when  I  look  at 
it,  so  bright,  so  pure,  so  transparent,  so  temperate,  so  fit  alPem- 
blem  for  that  spiritual  element  in  which  our  souls  should  bathe 
and  be  strengthened,  at  which  they  should  drink  and  be  refresh- 
ed. Fire  purifies,  but  destroys  ;  water  cleanses  and  revives. 
Christ  was  baptized  in  water,  and  washed,  himself,  in  the  rege- 
nerating element  His  disciples'  feet.  He  promised  living  waters 
to  all  those,  who,  thirsty,  drew  near  to  Him,  and  spoke  of  that 
well  of  everlasting  life,  which  those  to  whom  He  gave  to  drink 
possessed  for  ever  in  their  souls.  I  do  not  wonder  at  all  the 
marvellous  wasser-cur  reports.  I  believe  the  material  element 
to  be  as  potent  in  regenerating  and  healing  the  body,  as  the 
spiritual  element  its  clearness  dimly  represents  is  to  regenerate 
and  heal  the  mind. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  soft  beauty  of  everything  that 
surrounded  us  here  ;  the  ilex  trees,  the  graceful  stone  pines,  the 
picturesque  color  and  outline  of  the  house  itself,  the  sunny  far- 
stretching  campagna,  with  its  purple  frame  of  mountains ;  So- 
racte,  standing  isolated  like  the  vanguard  of  the  chain  ;  the 
sullen  steeps  of  the  Sabine  ;  the  smiling  slopes  of  the  Alban 
hills  ;  Frascati,  Tivoli,  glittering  in  the  sunshine,  on  their  skirts  ; 


64 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  light  over  all  radiant  and  tender ;  the  warmth  and  balmy- 
softness  of  the  atmosphere — everything  was  perfect  enchantment. 
Everything  was  graceful,  harmonious,  and  delightful  to  the  eye, 
and  soothing  beyond  expression  to  the  mind.  Presently  came 
two  of  the  beautiful  mouse-colored  oxen  of  the  campagna,  slowly, 
through  the  arched  gateway  of  the  farm-yard,  and,  leaning  their 
serious-looking  heads  upon  the  stone  basin,  drank  soberly,  with 
their  great  eyes  fixed  on  us,  who  sat  upon  the  hem  of  the  foun- 
tain ;  I,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  almost  comprehending  the 
delight  of  listless  inactivity.  As  the  water  ran  lullingly  by  my 
side,  and  between  the  grey  "shafts  of  the  tall  pine  trees,  and 
beneath  the  dark  arches  of  their  boughs,  the  distant  landscape, 
forrned  into  separate  and  distinct  pictures  of  incomparable  beau- 
ty, a^ested  my  delighted  eyes.  Yes,  I  think  I  actually  could  be 
content  to  sit  on  that  fountain's  edge,  and  do  nothing  but  listen 
and  look  for  a  whole  summer's  afternoon.  But  no  more — "  up, 
and  be  doing,"  is  the  impulse  for  ever  with  me ;  and  when  I  ask 
myself,  both  sadly  and  scornfully,  what  ?  both  my  nature  and 
my  convictions  repeat  the  call,  "  up,  and  be  doing for  surely 
there  is  something  to  be  done  from  morning  till  night,  and  to  find 
out  what,  is  the  appointed  work  of  the  onward-tending  soul. 

Returning  home,  the  arches  of  the  aqueducts  were  all  gilt 
within  with  the  sunset.  How  beautiful  they  are,  those  great 
chains,  binding  the  mountains  to  the  plain,  with  their  veins  of 
living  water  !  The  links  are  broken,  and  the  graceful  line  inter- 
rupted, and  the  flowing  element  within  withdrawn  to  its  heart  in 
the  mountains,  and  now  they  are  only  the  most  beautiful  ruins 
in  the  whole  world.  Sometimes,  when  seen  from  a  height 
which  commanded  a  long  stretch  of  their  course,  they  reminded 
me  of  the  vertebree  of  some  great  serpent,  whose  marrow  was 
the  living  water,  of  which  Rome  drank  for  centuries.  We  re- 
turned to  the  city  by  the  beautiful  Porta  Maggiore,  and  just 
within  it  met  Mr.    and  Mr.   ,  who  challenged 


COLISEUM— ST.  PETER'S. 


65 


 to  a  walk.    He  accordingl)-  left  us,  and  we  drove  on  to 

the  Coliseum.  I  was  again  surprised  to  find  how  absolutely  cor- 
rect the  imagination  I  had  formed  of  it  was.  How  curious  this 
is  !  or  rather,  indeed,  it  is  not  curious,  that  the  face  of  Nature 
and  the  human  countenance  can  never  be  so  described  as  to  give 
an  absolute  and  positive  image  to  the  mind  which  shall  be  iden- 
tical with  the  reality, — while,  with  these,  the  most  stupendous 
works  of  the  hand  of  man,  measurement,  description,  and  imita- 
tion, can  make  us  perfectly  and  familiarly  acquainted.  I  believe 
the  height  of  the  Coliseum,  as  well  as  that  of  St.  Peter's,  was 
rather  greater  than  I  had  expected.  We  stopped  for  a  while 
looking  from  this  great  ruin  to  the  beautiful  Arch  of  Constan- 
tine ;  and  then  driving  up  the  Via  Sacra,  through  the  Arch 
of  Titus,  by  the  ruins  of  the  Palace  of  the  Csesars,  the  Forum, 
and  Trajan's  Pillar,  we  returned  home.  I  have  seen  all  this  !  It 
is  mine  ! 

Sunday,  11th  January. — We  drove  up  the  Monte  Mario  to  a 
beautiful  villa,  formerly  the  Villa  Mellini,  now  called  the  Villa 
Falconieri ;  from  this  place  the  view  of  Rome,  the  Tiber,  the 
hills,  the  campagna,  and  the  sea,  was  most  glorious.  The  house 
stands  like  a  fortress,  on  the  very  top  of  a  precipitous  hill,  which 
is  crowned  with  ramparts  of  ilex  and  cypress.  Here  (as  every- 
where) we  were  pursued  by  the  shameless,  wretched  pauperism 
that  disgusts  and  pains  one  the  whole  time,  and  makes  the  ruined 
aspect  of  the  great  outward  things  about  one  cheerful,  compared 
with  the  abject  degradation  of  that  which  God  has  made  in  his 
own  image.  Oh  !  I  would  not  live  among  these  people  for  any- 
thing in  the  world  ;  and  when  1  think  of  England  and  of  Ame- 
rica, I  thank  God  that  I  was  born  in  the  one,  and  shall  live  in 
the  other.  Driving  home  we  went  to  the  Acqua  Paola,  the  foun- 
tain in  Rome  where  the  volume  of  water  is  most  satisfactory. 
The  very  ornaments  with  which  they  adorn  them,  gods  and  god. 
desses,  dolphins,  shells,  &c,  interfere  with  the  effect  of  the 


66 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


beautiful  element  itself ;  and  though,  of  course,  there  is  no  com- 
parison between  the  graceful  forms  of  the  basin  of  the  Acqua 
Paola,  Trevi,  &c,  and  the  simple  turf  bank  that  surrounds  the 
fountain  in  the  park  at  New  York,  the  volume  of  water  thrown 
to  a  height  of  nearly  sixty  feet,  and  falling  back  in  a  cataract,  is 
a  finer  thing  in  itself  than  a  whole  Olympus  of  carved  stone  di- 
vinities. From  this  fine  fountain,  by  the  side  of  which  one  enjoys 
a  noble  view  of  Rome,  we  went  to  St.  Peter's ;  and  here  I  was 
only  astonished  at  finding  how  perfectly  I  knew  it — how  abso- 
lutely like  what  I  had  imagined  it  it  was ;  so  that,  except  that 
the  roof  was  a  little  higher  than  I  expected,  I  felt  as  if  I  had 
been  there  a  hundred  times,  and  it  in  no  way  exceeded  or  differed 
from  my  expectations.  The  four-post  bed  (the  only  idea  those 
horrid  canopies  over  the  high  altars  ever  suggest  to  me)  in  the 
middle  arrested  the  sweep  of  the  eye  from  end  to  end  of  this 
majestic  temple,  and  disfigured  it  painfully  to  me  ;  but,  except  that 
there  was  nothing  in  the  whole  that  was  not  simple,  sublime,  and 
absolutely  satisfactory  in  its  huge,  beautiful  proportions.  I  was 
not  prepared,  and  was  proportionately  thankful,  for  the  absence 
of  all  the  tawdry,  tinselly,  holy  trumpery,  so  perpetually  hang- 
ing about  the  different  shrines  in  Catholic  churches,  making  them 
look  like  old  curiosity  shops,  and  disfiguring  both  their  beautiful 
forms  and  the  beautiful  materials  they  are  built  of. 

Monday,  \2th  January. — We  drove  round  the  Pincio,  from  the 
various  sides  of  which  Rome  and  its  guardian  hills  are  seen, 
with  all  their  infinite  beauty  of  contrast  and  of  harmony.  We 
went  to  several  shops  to  make  purchases.  The  quality  of  every- 
thing I  looked  at  was  very  indifferent,  the  prices  enormous  ;  and 
the  shop-keepers,  with  an  audacity  and  dishonesty  inconceivable 
to  a  stranger,  invariably  take  half  the  original  price  which  they 
demand  for  everything.  The  filth  and  stench  of  the  streets  give 
one  an  imaginary  fever  as  one  drives  through  them.  I  wonder 
these  people  don't  have  the  plague  every  year  in  this  city.  The 


INQUISITIVENESS  OF  BANKERS. 


67 


great,  wide,  beautiful  stairs  leading  up  from  the  Piazza  di  Spagna 
immediately  to  the  door  of  our  lodging  are  the  favorite  haunt  of 
all  the  painters'  models ;  old  men  with  grizzled  beards  and  hair, 
and  lads  with  blue-black  locks  falling  all  round  the  most  won- 
derful eyes  ever  beheld  ;  girls  in  the  picturesque  costume  of  the 
lower  orders  here,  with  splendid  heads  and  shoulders,  and  scarlet 
jackets,  and  daggers  thrust  through  the  braids  of  their  hair  : 
here  they  sit  and  stand,  and  lounge  and  loll  in  the  sun,  screaming, 
shouting,  laughing,  gesticulating,  or  dozing  like  cats  with  half- 
closed  eyes  upon  the  worn  stone  steps ;  or  with  true  brotherly 
humanity  exploring  the  animated  nature  of  each  other's  elf-locks 
— beautiful  beastly  creatures.  With  those  specimens  of  all  that 
is  finest  in  form  and  color,  lie  a  rabble  of  hideous  deformities, 
whose  sole  occupation  it  is  to  extort  money  from  every  passenger 
that  walks,  or  carriage  that  drives  by  them ;  women  with  huge 
goitres,  men  with  withered  arms,  hump-backed,  blear-eyed,  fever- 
smitten,  halting,  squinting,  idiots  lolling  out  their  tongues  and 
goggling  their  eyes,  the  blind,  the  maimed,  babies  in  arms,  and 
old  creatures  on  crutches, — all  swarm  round  the  wretched  way- 
farer, and  with  vociferous  outcries  persecute  him  for  an  alms. 
Words  fit  only  for  dogs  do  not  repel  them,  nor  the  threatened 
arm  and  lifted  hand ;  they  have  lost  all  sense  of  shame,  or  of 
injury  ;  they  are  triplecased  in  the  impervious  callousness  of  the 
lowest  degradation.  We  drove  to  the  Capitol  to-day,  where  the 
Antinous  pleased  me  better  than  anything  else  that  I  saw,  even 
than  the  Venus  and  the  Dying  Gladiator.  The  cold  brick  pave- 
ments chill  me  through  and  through  ;  I  don't  understand  why 
everybody  does  not  die  in  Rome. 

Tuesday ',  13th  January. — Went  to  Torlonia's  to  get  one  of 
my  bills  changed.  The  person  who  transacted  this  clerk's 
business,  and  who,  as  I  was  afterwards  informed,  was  a  half- 
brother  of  the  banker,  asked  me  such  a  string  of  impertinent 
questions,  that  at  first  I  supposed  the  interrogatory  I  was  under- 


6S 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


going  was  part  of  some  police  ceremonial,  and  that  as  one  cannot 
come  from  Civita  Vecchia  to  Rome  without  having  one's  baggage 
rummaged  three  times,  so  one  could  not  get  twenty  pounds  with- 
out giving  information  of  one's  name,  where  one  lives,  who  one 
lives  with,  how  long  one  means  to  stay,  and  a  whole  string  of 
questions,  which  if  a  clerk  in  an  English  banking-house  were  to 
ask  one,  one  should  probably  request  him  to  hold  his  tongue  and 
mind  his  business.  Here,  however,  the  case  is  different,  and 
whoever  banks  at  Torlonia's  must,  it  seems,  be  prepared  to 
satisfy  his  clerk  upon  all  matters  concerning  their  own  personal 
history,  which  he  may  think  proper  to  inquire  into.  I  wonder 
anybody  chooses  to  bank  with  him,  cela  etant.  After  this  we 
drove  to  a  sort  of  house  of  refuge  for  poor  girls.  We  passed 
through  some  horrible  court-yards,  that  looked  as  though  they 
were  swarming  with  fleas,  bugs,  and  lice ;  dirty  brooms  and 
brushes,  filthy  rags  and  nasty  people,  lay,  hung,  and  stood  all 
about ;  chickens  and  ducks  cackled  and  gabbled  in  every  direc- 
tion, depositing  their  tribute  of  dirt  all  over  broken  capitals  of 
noble  columns,  corners  of  friezes,  and  bits  of  verd  antique.  We 
ascended  some  steps,  where  one  hardly  dared  tread  without  look- 
ing, and  after  looking,  felt  as  if  one  could  not  tread.  At  the  top 
of  these  lay  a  high  wilderness  of  a  garden  full  of  orange  trees 
and  artichokes,  a  singular  union  of  the  homely  and  the  poetical. 
A  ruinous-looking  fountain  sent  up  a  thin  stream  of  water  a  few 
inches  from  its  almost  stagnant  surface.  It  was  a  very  desolate- 
looking  place.  Having  crossed  it,  we  found  ourselves  on  the 
very  top  of  the  Basilica  Maxentia,  whose  huge  wondrous  arches 
rose  beneath  us,  and  seemed  now  as  though  they  reared  them- 
selves so  high  and  vast  into  the  sky  only  to  carry  the  delicate 
fantastical  foxglove,  that  sprung  out  from  their  rifted  brick- work, 
and  nodded  its  lilac  bells  at  the  tiny  Roman  people  down  below. 
The  view  of  Rome,  and  of  the  Coliseum  especially,  through  a 
high  narrow  niche,  was  very  beautiful.    The  afternoon  was  sad 


THE  COLISEUM. 


69 


and  lead-colored,  but  just  towards  sunset  a  streak  of  light  opened 
itself  like  a  crack  in  the  western  sky,  and  the  effect  upon  the 
Sabine  hills  was  indescribable.  A  huge  dark-blue,  sulky-looking 
mountain  frowned  in  that  direction,  over  whose  shoulder  peered 
another,  covered  with  snow,  and  all  rosy  with  the  reflection  of 
the  crimson  sunset :  I  never  saw  so  beautiful  and  wonderful  a 
contrast.    We  descended  from  this  place,  and  I  went  to  the 

Coliseum  with   .    The  coloring  of  the  whole  was  what 

pleased  me  most :  the  ruddy  walls,  the  grey  buttresses,  the  rich 
tufts  of  tender  ruin-haunting  verdure,  produced  the  most  ex- 
quisitely harmonious  combination.  While  we  stood  silently 
looking  round,  a  bird  sang  loud  and  clear  its  evening  song. 
How  strange  and  sweet  it  sounded,  that  voice  of  melody,  here,  in 
this  place  of  a  thousand  groans,  and  shrieks,  and  acclamations ! 
It  is  marvellous  to  stand  by  the  Cross,  in  the  very  middle  of  this 
field  of  Christian  martyrdom,  and  look  at  the  hideous  daubs  of 
Christ's  passion  which  sanctify  and  disfigure  it,  and  for  whose 
sake  alone  these  great,  graceful  walls  are  not  now  level  with  the 
dust.  Oh,  Truth  triumphant,  Love  victorious,  how  surely  shall 
the  whole  earth  belong  to  ye !  We  drove  home  through  the 
vault-like  streets,  which  seem  to  me  to  strike  a  deadly  chill  into 
one's  very  soul  after  coming  out  of  the  genial  sunshine. 

Wednesday,  14th  January. — I  rode  out  into  the  campagna  with 
 ,  and  saw  the  sun  and  the  clouds,  and  the  lights  and  sha- 
dows, play  at  hide-and-seek  all  over  the  vast  tawny  wilderness, 
and  up  the  sides  of  the  hills,  till  I  was  tired  of  exclaiming  with 
delight  and  wonder.  Sometimes  every  wrinkle  in  the  old  hard- 
featured  mountains  came  out  under  the  pearly  light  like  the 
lines  on  a  deep-furrowed  face ;  and  then  a  shadow  fell  all  over 
them,  that  looked  as  if  you  could  have  hewn  great  solid  blocks 
of  blackness  out  of  it — it  was  a  marvellous  pageant.  Coming 
home,  we  rode  round  the  Villa  Borghese. 

Thursday,  Ibth  January. — Took  a  delicious  walk  in  the  gar 


70 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


dens  of  the  Villa  Medici.    Visited  Mme.  ,  who  showed  me 

some  very  interesting  and  well-executed  sketches  of  Etruscan 
ruins  in  the  campagna.  Happy  woman !  She  can  afford  to 
carry  her  architect  and  painter  with  her,  to  seize  upon  and  bring 
away  for  her  the  very  aspect  and  countenances  of  all  these 
beautiful  places. 

In  passing  through  the  Vatican,  Mme.  pointed  out  to  me 

a  painting  on  the  wall,  representing  the  raising  of  the  Great 
Obelisk  before  St.  Peter's,  and  told  me  the  following  anecdote 
about  it : — After  the  proposal  and  adoption  of  an  infinite  variety 
of  plans  for  its  erection,  the  trial  of  which  had  caused  an  enor- 
mous outlay  to  the  government,  and  always  resulted  in  failure, 
the  Pope,  Sixtus  V.,  at  length  declared,  that  if  another  scheme 
for  the  purpose  was  unsuccessfully  attempted,  the  architect  who 
furnished  it  should  be  put  to  death.  This  determination  on  the 
part  of  his  Holiness,  naturally  put  a  stop,  at  least  for  a  time, 
to  the  suggestion  of  new  experiments.  At  length,  however,  an 
engineer  more  sure  of  his  plan,  or  less  afraid  of  death  than  his 
predecessors,  presented  himself  to  the  Pope,  and  laid  a  scheme 
before  him  for  the  erection  of  the  obelisk.  His  Holiness  looked 
over  the  proposal,  and  admitted  that  it  appeared  to  promise 
admirably  well,  but  at  the  same  time  observed,  that  the  carrying 
it  into  effect  would  cost  an  enormous  sum  of  money,  and  reminded 
him  of  the  penalty  affixed  to  failure.  The  architect,  Fontana, 
agreed  to  run  the  risk,  provided  only  that  his  Holiness  would 
publish  a  command,  that  during  the  process  of  raising  the  monu- 
ment, the  most  perfect  silence  should  be  observed  among  the 
workmen  and  assistants  ;  stating,  that  the  main  cause  of  the 
hitherto  failures  of  all  his  predecessors  were  the  confused  out- 
cries, exclamations,  and  execrations  of  the  multitude,  engaged 
in  the  work  or  standing  by.  The  Pope  immediately  consented 
to  this  condition,  and  on  the  appointed  day,  having  caused  four 
gallows  to  be  erected  at  the  four  corners  of  the  great  place  of 


ANECDOTE. 


71 


St.  Peter's,  and  proclaimed  that  the  first  person  who  was  heard 
to  speak  aloud  should  forthwith  be  hung,  the  experiment  went 
forward  in  presence  of  his  Holiness,  his  whole  court,  and  an 
innumerable  assemblage  of  people,  who,  in  wholesome  terror 
of  the  gibbets,  preserved  an  universal  silence.  With  infinite  trou- 
ble, labor,  and  anxiety,  the  great  Egyptian  needle  was  at  length 
raised  from  a  horizontal  to  a  perpendicular  position.  No  accla- 
mation hailed  the  success  of  the  undertaking  !  Thus  far,  it  still 
remained  to  raise  the  vast  mass  from  the  earth  to  a  level  with  its 
pedestal,  by  far  the  most  arduous  part  of  the  task ;  intense 
anxiety  was  depicted  on  the  upturned,  eager  faces  of  the  breath- 
less multitude.  The  obelisk  was  slowly  raised,  till,  when  its 
base  was  within  half  an  inch  of  the  top  of  the  pedestal,  the  ropes 
by  which  it  was  being  drawn  up  became  so  tense  with  the  enor- 
mous weight,  that  they  were  seen  to  smoke  ;  another  moment, 
^.nd  the  monstrous  mass  would  have  fallen  from  their  support. 
The  wretched  Fontana,  sweating  blood,  saw  the  impending 
catastrophe  of  his  all  but  successful  attempt ;  suddenly,  one  of 
the  workmen  cried  aloud,  "  Acqua  !"  The  crowd  rushed  to  the 
fountains,  the  saving  element  was  dashed  over  the  strained  and 
tightened  ropes,  the  final  haul  was  given,  and  the  obelisk  lodged 
upon  its  pedestal,  when  one  universal  shout  that  rent  the  sky, 
broke  forth,  and  hailed  the  accomplishment.  The  Pope,  how- 
ever, commanding  silence  again,  called  before  him  the  artisan 
who,  in  spite  of  his  command,  had  ventured  to  speak.  The  poor 
fellow  acknowledged  himself  worthy  of  death  for  having  spoken, 
but  pleaded  that  the  salvation  of  the  obelisk  deserved  some  reward. 
The  Pope  allowed  the  justice  of  the  claim,  and  gave  his  forfeited 
life,  adding  graciously,  permission  to  choose  any  boon  he  might 
name  for  the  service  he  had  rendered.  The  man  besought  for 
himself  and  his  family  the  monopoly  of  the  sale  of  palm-branches 
on  Palm  Sunday,  in  the  square  of  St.  Peter's ;  and  to  this  day 


72 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


his  descendants  exercise  that  traffic,  and  derive  from  it  a  very 
considerable  yearly  profit. 

Another  story  she  told  me  was  this.  Speaking  of  the  admira- 
ble dexterity  of  the  Jews  of  the  Ghetto  here,  in  repairing,  in  a 
manner  absolutely  invisible,  the  most  incurable  rents  in  clothes,  to 
which  industry  the  jealous  tyranny  of  custom  confines  them,  as 
they  are  not  permitted  to  exercise  any  trade  or  handicraft  of  any 
kind  in  Rome  ;  she  mentioned  that  they  were  famous  for  the  same 
proficiency  in  darning  in  the  East.  She  said  that  a  man  at  Con- 
stantinople having  left  in  the  charge  of  a  friend  of  his  a  purse 
without  seam  or  join,  in  which  he  had  placed  a  certain  number 
of  diamonds,  complained,  on  his  return  from  distant  travel,  that 
his  number  of  jewels  was  not  correct.  The  friend  maintained 
the  integrity  of  his  trust,  and  adduced  as  proof  the  entire  woof 
of  the  purse,  in  which  neither  seam  nor  join  appeared,  and  the 
seal  of  the  owner  still  remained  untouched  at  the  mouth  of  the 
purse.  The  owner  of  the  jewels  was  forced  to  admit  both  these 
facts,  but  still  pevsisted  in  asserting  that  the  amount  of  diamonds 
was  no  longer  what  he  had  left.  The  case  was  brought  before 
more  than  one  magistrate,  but  nothing  could  be  elicited  upon 
the  subject ;  and  the  unaltered  condition  of  the  purse,  which  the 
owner  could  not  deny,  was  considered  conclusive  evidence  against 
his  claim.  In  despair  he  applied  to  the  Sultan  himself,  and  the 
strange  persistency  of  his  demand  impressed  the  latter  so  much, 
that,  though  compelled  upon  the  face  of  the  facts  to  dismiss  his 
claim  as  untenable,  the  subject  remained  impressed  singularly 
upon  his  mind,  and  induced  him  to  try  the  following  experi- 
ment. At  morning  prayer  the  next  day,  when  the  slave  who 
usually  brought  the  carpet  upon  which  he  knelt  had  withdrawn, 
he  made  a  long  slit  in  it,  and  left  it  to  be  again  withdrawn  by  the 
slave.  When  the  latter  came  to  fulfil  his  duty  of  rolling  up  and 
removing  the  precious  carpet,  he  remained  aghast  at  the  injury 
it  had  received,  and  immediately,  apprehending  the  dreadful 


PRIORATE  OF  KNIGHTS. 


73 


effect  of  the  Sultan's  displeasure,  hastened  with  the  rug  to  the 
quarter  of  the  city  where  the  Jews  resided  ;  and  seeking  out  one 
peculiarly  renowned  for  his  skill,  committed  the  costly  carpet  to 
his  best  exercise  of  it,  and  carried  it  back  so  restored,  that  the 
next  morning  it  lay  spread  ready  for  the  Sultan's  use,  without 
the  trace  of  either  damage  or  reparation.  The  Sultan  no  sooner 
perceived  what  had  been  done  than  he  called  the  slave,  who 
tremblingly  confessed  what  he  had  done.  He  was  immediately 
despatched  in  search  of  the  pre-eminent  cobbler,  and  the  Jew 
no  sooner  appeared  before  the  Sultan  than  the  latter,  sending 
for  the  sealed  purse  about  which  the  controversy  had  been  held, 
charged  him  with  having  in  like  manner  repaired  a  slit  in  the 
woof  of  the  apparently  uninjured  bag.  The  Jew  instantly  ad- 
mitted the  fact ;  and  thus  the  reclamation  of  the  poor  defrauded 
friend  and  diamond  owner  was  substantiated. 

Monday,  February  9th. — Drove  to  the  Aventine — to  the  old 
Priorate  of  the  Knights  of  Malta — strolled  about  the  very  old- 
fashioned  box-bordered  garden,  and  looked  down  the  turbid  yel- 
low course  of  the  Tiber — went  into  the  chapel  of  the  Priory. 
There  are  one  or  two  monuments  of  members  of  the  order,  a 
very  old  and  roughly-carved  marble  chest  for  the  reception  of 
relics,  and  a  curious  sarcophagus,  in  which  every  one  of  the 
figures  in  the  bas-relief  has  something  like  a  feather  in  its  hat, 
cap,  or  head,  which,  as  the  thing  is  very  ancient,  is  a  curious 

circumstance.    In  the  evening  and  called  upon 

us.  The  latter,  in  speaking  of  the  records  of  the  Cenci  family, 
which  existed  in  the  papal  library,  and  to  which  Shelley  mentions 
having  obtained  access,  told  us,  that,  together  with  this  story, 
another  was  to  be  found  of  a  tragical  event,  which  occurred 
about  the  same  time — it  related  to  the  fate  of  an  extremely  beau- 
tiful young  woman,  belonging  to  the  mezzo  ceto,  or  middling 
class,  at  L'Arricia,  for  whom  a  prince  of  the  Savelli  family  con- 
ceived a  violent  passion  ;  which,  however,  the  girl  was  so  far 
5 


74 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


from  returning,  that  she  was  much  attached  and  affianced  to  a 
young  man  who,  in  some  capacity  or  other,  was  a  sort  of  depend- 
ant upon  the  Savelli.  This  circumstance  increased  the  difficulty 
of  the  young  woman's  position,  and  induced  her  family  to  hasten 
her  marriage,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  put  a  stop  to  the  pursuit 
of  the  nobleman :  the  remedy,  however,  proved  ineffectual,  and 
the  poor  girl's  troubles  were  only  added  to  by  the  extreme  jea- 
lousy of  her  husband,  who,  soon  after  their  marriage,  sent  a 
message  to  the  Prince  Savelli,  desiring  an  interview  with  him  in 
his  wife's  name.  The  unlucky  lover  fell  into  the  snare,  and 
coming  to  the  appointed  place,  was  received  by  the  infuriated 
husband  with  a  phrensy  of  rage,  and  murdered  on  the  very  spot 
by  him  ;  after  which  the  murderer  made*  his  escape,  leaving 
his  unfortunate  wife  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  suspicions  which 
immediately  fell  upon  her.  At  the  suit  of  the  Savelli  family, 
she  was  seized,  imprisoned,  and  subjected  to  every  species  of  tor- 
ture practised  in  those  torturing  times,  in  vain  protesting  her 
innocence.  She  was  finally  rescued  from  further  suffering  by 
the  intercession  of  a  German  archduchess,  who,  passing  through 
Rome,  and  becoming  acquainted  with  her  history,  interceded  for 
her,  and  obtained  leave  to  take  her  in  her  suite  with  her  to  Par- 
ma, where  she  remained  until  she  died.  The  husband  was 
heard  of  in  Palestine  some  years  after,  but  nothing  positive  was 
known  of  the  fate  of  either  of  them  after  her  trial. 

After  this  story,  the  conversation  turned  upon  the  serpents, 
which,  it  seems,  the  wrarm  weather  is  already  tempting  forth  in 
the  Villa  Pamfili  gardens,  and  other  warm  and  lonely  places. 

Mme.  told  us,  that  while  at  Genoa  she  made  an  exploring 

excursion  thirty  miles  off,  to  the  ruins  of  a  place  called  Libarna, 
where  some  interesting  antique  remains  had  excited  her  curiosity. 
While  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  ruined  foundations  of  some 
ancient  edifice,  and  directing  her  workmen,  who  were  excavating 
under  her  orders,  endeavoring  to  trace  the  precise  form  of  the 


MOUNTAIN  TORRENT— SERPENT. 


75 


buildings,  they  uttered  a  simultaneous  cry  ;  and  she  declares 
that  a  serpent  at  least  sixteen  feet  long,  and  as  thick  as  a  man's 
thigh,  absolutely  leaped  by  where  she  stood,  and  plunged  down 
into  the  heaps  of  ruins  beneath  her.  She  told  us  also  of  a  very 
curious  scene,  which  two  workmen  described  to  her,  and  which 
took  place  at  the  time  that  a  violent  flood  had  swollen  the  waters 
of  a  mountain  stream,  in  the  vicinity  of  Libarna.  The  waters 
rose  immensely  above  their  usual  level,  and  the  swollen  torrent 
pouring  down  from  the  mountains,  carried  with  it  trees,  and 
houses,  and  land,  and  everything  that  it  could  sweep  away  in  its 
course ;  the  quantity  of  timber  floated  down  from  an  extensive 
forest,  many  of  whose  oldest  trees  were  uprooted  and  carried 
away,  found  fuel  for  several  winters  for  the  proprietors  on  the 
banks  of  the  stream,  whose  peasantry  collected  themselves  at  the 
points  where  they  could  most  advantageously  arrest  those  masses 
in  their  downward  progress,  and  drew  them  to  shore.  While 
thus  employed,  a  body  of  them  saw  an  enormous  ilex,  roots, 
earth,  branches  and  all,  tumbling  headlong  down  the  swollen 
torrent ;  they  prepared,  with  hooks  and  ropes  and  iron  crooks,  to 
seize  and  draw  it  to  the  bank,  when,  to  their  horror,  they  per- 
ceived that  an  enormous  serpent  lay  coiled  up  among  its  branches. 
At  each  attempt  that  they  made  to  seize  the  tree,  the  hideous 
creature  raised  itself,  and  appeared  about  to  dart  upon  them  ; 
and  so  terrible  was  its  aspect,  and  so  threatening  its  attitude,  that 
for  a  long  time  it  successfully  defended  its  floating  throne  from 
their  attacks.  At  length,  however,  one  of  their  number  seized 
a  huge  stone,  and  hurling  it  at  the  creature,  the  latter  plunged 
from  the  tree  into  the  stream,  and  disappeared  ;  after  which, 
almost  immediately,  and  by  miracle,  as  the  peasants  assured 

 ,  the  turbid  swollen  waters  began  to  subside  into  their 

usual  channel. 

From  this  topic  we  passed  to  the  less  terrible  but  not  much 
more  agreeable  one  of  spiders  and  scorpions,  and  Mr.  1 


76 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


amused  us  by  describing  his  experiments -upon  a  number  of 
tarantulas  which  he  caught  and  confined  in  a  tumbler  together. 
He  said  their  first  movement  was  to  construct  within  that  narrow 
space  each  a  sort  of  fortress  of  its  own,  from  which  sallying 
forth,  they  immediately  fell  upon,  and  with  incredible  fury  and 
rapidity,  devoured  each  other,  the  conquerors  increasing  in  size 
as  the  process  of  victory  and  cannibalism  proceeded,  until  there 
remained  at  the  bottom  of  the  glass  one  huge  hideous  creature,  who 
was  the  universal  conqueror,  and  whose  bloated  body  had  become 
the  sepulchre  of  his  enemies  as  fast  as  he  had  demolished  them. 
Certainly  a  more  disgusting  or  hateful  spectacle  cannot  be  con- 
ceived. 

Saturday,  \Uh  February. — St.  Valentine's  day,  the  first  day 

of  the  Carnival,  soon  after  breakfast,  and  my  sister  and 

I  walked  down  and  up,  for  it  is  both,  several  times  to  the  Villa 
Massimo,  formerly  the  Villa  Negroni.  We  sauntered  through 
the  vineyards  and  gardens,  under  the  intense  warmth  of  the 
unclouded  sun  ;  the  delicate  blossoms  of  the  almond  trees  stood 
like  silver  branches  against  the  deep  azure  ground  of  the  sky, 
the  laurustinus  bushes  were  in  full  bloom,  the  little  green  and 
gold  lizards  glided,  and  darted,  and  rustled  along  the  hot  stone 
walls,  and  among  the  spiked  leaves  of  the  cardoni.  We  sat 
ourselves  down,  with  our  faces  towards  the  purple  hazy  hills,  and 
listened  to  the  jangling  bells  that  came  through  the  warm  air, 
across  the  vineyard,  an  hour  of  Italian  enjoyment  of  mere  being. 
At  about  two  o'clock,  with  our  carriage  duly  lined  with  white 
calico,  and  my  green  velvet  bonnet  covered  with  the  same,  we 
set  forth  to  observe  the  solemnities  of  the  Carnival.  On  the  seat 
opposite  to  us  was  a  large  tray,  heaped  with  small  bunches  of 
fresh  flowers  and  violets ;  under  the  seat  were  two  baskets  filled 
with  sugar  plums  of  every  variety,  some  of  them  the  size  of  very 
large  bullets, — formidable  missiles,  as  we  found  when  we  re- 
ceived a  volley  of  them.    At  our  feet  was  a  deep  large  basket, 


THE  CARNIVAL. 


77 


filled  with  the  confetti  as  they  are  called ;  a  species  of  small 
shot,  made  of  dried  peas  covered  with  flour,  and  in  throwing 
handfuls  of  which  consists  the  chief  warfare  of  the  Corso.  A 
couple  of  wire  masks,  rounded  to  fit  the  face,  colored  pink  to 
become  it,  and  furnished,  screen  fashion,  with  a  handle,  com- 
pleted our  equipment ;  and  thus  we  descended  to  the  field  of  bat- 
tle, our  dresses  being  as  nearly  white  as  possible,  and  my  sister 
having  a  large  white  bournous,  and  I  a  large  white  shawl  on,  the 
policy  of  which  miller-like  equipment  we  very  soon  discovered. 
Passing  through  the  Piazza  di  Spagna,  we  found  it  filled  with 
soldiers  on  horseback,  and  every  street  was  sending  up  to  the 
great  rout  its  string  of  carriages  and  stream  of  eager  hurrying 
pedestrians  ;  groups  of  masks  went  dancing  and  laughing  by ; 
Harlequins  and  Pantaloons,  Turks,  Albanians,  Spanish  Dons,  and 
girls  in  short  white  skirts  and  colored  bodies,  with  blue  or  pink 
silk  boots,  and  very  freely-shown  legs.  Most  of  these  groups 
had  their  faces  covered  either  with  grotesque  masks  or  the  clas- 
sical black  silk  visor :  in  passing  the  carriage,  they  threw  us 
confetti  or  nosegays,  or  merry  words.  We  were  deposited  at  a 
house  in  the  Corso,  where  we  had  the  privilege  of  occupying 

Mrs.  's  balcony.    We  had  hardly  taken  our  stations  here, 

when,  from  a  neighboring  balcony,  a  shower  of  sweetmeats  and 
flowers  assailed  us,  and  we  found  ourselves  the  marlcof  a  little 
man,  who,  with  a  most  bright  and  delighted  countenance,  kept 
exercising  his  skill  upon  us,  and  enjoying  apparently  equally  our 
awkwardness  in  missing  him,  and  his  own  dexterity  in  hitting 
us.  While  busily  engaged  with  him,  sundry  treacherous  shots 
reached  us  from  another  direction ;  and  we  found  that  we  were 
commanded  by  a  balcony  opposite  to  us,  and  higher  than  ours, 
from  which  sundry  demure  gentlefolks — our  own  countrymen  I 
suspect — were  pelting  us  sans  faire  semblant  de  rien,  and  with 
certain  peculiarly  convenient  tin  horns  overwhelmed  the  luckless 
passengers  in  the  street  with  perfect  hail-storms  of  confetti,  which 


78 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


rattled  upon  the  men's  hats  and  masks,  and  were  received  with 
shouts  of  laughter  both  by  the  sufferers  and  the  lookers-on.  The 
long  irregular  street  presented  the  most  singular  and  animated 
scene  ;  every  window  was  filled  with  spectators,  every  balcony 
or  jutting  window  from  which  a  convenient  view  could  be  ob- 
tained was  adorned  with  hangings  either  of  crimson  and  gold,  or 
gay  rose  color  and  white ;  the  little  balcony  in  which  we  stood 
was  all  festooned  with  the  latter  colors,  and  tapestry  and  curtains 
and  carpets  were  put  in  requisition  to  render  commodious  and 
gay  every  point  where  a  station  could  be  obtained.  The 
entrances  to  many  of  the  shops  were  turned,  by  dint  of  screens 
and  partitions  and  temporary  wooden  erections,  into  small  apart- 
ments, open  to  the  street,  and  filled  with  women  of  the  middle 
class  in  gay  and  bright  fancy  dresses,  where  scarlet  and  gold, 
and  ribbons  and  flowers,  and  neck-chains  and  ear-rings,  together 
with  their  own  beautiful  faces  and  magnificent  braided  hair, 
formed  a  most  attractive  and  curious  part  of  the  show.  The 
beauty  of  the  women  of  the  middle  and  lower  class  of  Rome  is 
something  really  wonderful ;  the  richest  coloring,  great  purity 
of  features  and  nobility  of  fora^  particularly  in  the  outline  of  the 
head,  and  its  position  on  the  shoulders.  Their  persons  are  gene- 
rally clumsy,  however,  and  their  feet  and  ankles  extremely  ugly, 
thick,  and  ill-shaped :  their  divinity  comes  no  lower  than  their 
shoulders. 

While  we  were  gazing  up  and  down  the  Corso,  with  its  lining 
of  bright  human  countenances,  the  military  suddenly  appeared 
in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo,  and  came  slowly  down  the  street ;  a 
large  body  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  with  trumpets  blowing,  and 
drums  beating,  and  alternate  snatches  of  music  from  the  shrill 
fifes,  and  the  fuller  harmony  of  the  brass  band.  During  their 
passage  through  the  Corso,  which  every  day  opens  the  Carnival, 
the  irregular  warfare  which  had  preceded  their  arrival  was 
suspended.     We  remained  with  our  hands  full  of  menacing 


SCENE  AT  THE  CORSO. 


79 


confetti,  ready  for  the  next  occasion  of  returning  to  somebody  the 
pelting  somebody  else  had  given  us.  As  we  looked  down  in  this 
threatening  attitude,  the  old  general  who  rode  at  the  head  of  the 
troops  looked  up  towards  us,  and,  seeing  our  malicious  purpose, 
shook  his  sword  smilingly  at  us,  which  warning  we  received 
with  infinite  amusement.  The  soldiers  had  no  sooner  stationed 
themselves  at  the  various  posts,  where  they  were  to  maintain 
order,  and  left  the  street  again  empty,  than  from  every  cross 
street  and  alley  debouched  the  pent-up  stream  of  folly  ;  carriages 
rushed  from  every  direction  into  the  Corso,  and  forming  them- 
selves into  two  compact  lines,  drove  slowly  up  and  down,  with 
their  cargoes  of  pelting,  screaming,  laughing  human  beings ;  the 
carriages  skirmished  with  each  other,  and  with  the  lower  bal- 
conies, and  with  the  foot-passengers ;  the  lower  balconies  sent 
confetti,  nosegays,  bonbons,  and  funny  speeches  to  the  carriages, 
and  through  the  stream  of  pedestrians,  who  divided  their  attention, 
equally  above,  below,  and  around  ;  while  from  the  higher 
balconies  the  masqueraders  fought  with  their  opposite  neighbors 
across  the  street,  their  right  and  left  hand  neighbors  in  the 
adjoining  balconies,  and  every  now  and  then  showered  down 
on  the  devoted  heads  of  the  walkers  and  drivers,  whole  baskets 
full  of  that  hateful  little  hail  ;  with  occasional  gallantries  to 
objects  of  special  admiration,  in  the  shape  of  huge  hard  bonbons, 
that  struck  one  like  so  many  small  cricket-balls,  leaving  bruises 
to  attest  their  arrival, — nosegays  so  thick  and  heavy,  that  they 
stove  in  one's  bonnet, — or,  finally,  as  the  very  climax  of  good 
will  and  civility,  lemons  and  oranges,  which,  being  in  a  state  of 
unripeness,  which  protected  one's  clothes  from  injury,  were  also 
so  hard,  that  the  compliment  of  receiving  one  was  as  much  as 
one's  life  was  worth.  The  bright  air  resounded  with  the  accla- 
mations of  joyful  human  voices,  and  was  misty  with  the  fine 
flour,  hail,  and  nosegays  flying  in  all  directions.  We  soon  left 
our  balcony,  and  finding  our  carriage  waiting  in  an  adjoining 


so 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


street,  got  into  it,  and  joined  the  stream  of  busy  absurdity  in  the 
Corso.  It  is  well  to  see  the  coup  d'eril  from  the  shelter  and 
security  of  a  window  or  balcony,  but  it  is  infinitely  more  amusing 
to  be  among  the  people  themselves,  whose  good  humor,  fantastic 
and  grotesque  gaiety,  droll  fancies,  and  withal  decent  deport- 
ment, no  foreigner  can  form  the  least  idea  of  without  having 
seen  it ;  whereas,  in  England,  drunkenness,  riot,  and  violence, 
would  have  been  the  inevitable  result  of  this  universal  license. 
The  only  intoxication  to  be  seen  was  the  ludicrous  assumption 
of  it  by  pantaloons  reeling  between  the  carriages,  bottle  in  hand, 
and  with  whitened  faces  ;  and  the  only  angry  and  disputatious 
voices  were  those  of  pretended  poets,  lawyers,  and  improvisatori, 
who,  in  full  court  costume,  swords,  powder  and  bag-wigs, 
harangued  at  the  full  blast  of  their  lungs,  to  the  infinite  ecstasy 
of  the  crowd  which  gathered  densely  round  them.  The  whole  day 
passed  in  this  curious  succession  of  picturesque  and  ludicrous 
scenes  ;  our  carriage  was  loaded  with  elegant  and  pretty  bon- 
bons, which  were  generally  deposited  on  our  knees,  or  in  our 
hands,  by  masked  pedestrians,  with  sundry  sweet  words  thereto ; 
and,  as  the  daylight  thickened  in  the  deep  defile  of  the.  Corso,  we 
regained  our  balcony  to  see  the  race  of  the  Barberi.  A  cannon 
fired  gave  the  signal  for  clearing  the  Corso  ;  after  which,  the 
guard  on  horseback  dashed  at  full  gallop  down  the  street,  and 
sentinels  were  posted  at  a  few  yards  distance  from  each  other  to 
keep  back  the  impatient  crowd,  who,  in  spite  of  these  precautions, 
kept  breaking  bounds  and  overflowing  beyond  this  military  cor- 
don, in  their  extreme  anxiety  to  catch  the  first  glimpse  of  the 
horses. 

At  length  the  shout  of  a  thousand  voices,  rolling  towards 
■  t  us  like  a  great  wave  of  the  sea,  announced  their  having  started, 
and  presently,  full  tear  down  the  crowded,  gaping  street,  rushed 
eleven  or  twelve  horses>  covered  with  ribbons,  knots,  artificial 
flowers,  streaks  of  bright  red  paint,  and  various  other  intended 


HORSE  RACING. 


81 


decorations ;  to  which  were  added  appendages  of  a  less  harmless 
and  benevolent  character  : — plates  of  brass  and  wood,  acting  as 
flappers  by  the  rapid  motion  of  the  horses  ^  crackers  and  squibs, 
igniting  and  going  off  as  they  ran  ;  and  onions  stuck  full  of  pins 
and  needles,  which,  hanging  by  cords  to  their  manes  and  upon 
their  flanks,  performed  the  part  of  spurs,  whose  impulse  became 
more  sharp  and  constant  in  proportion  as  the  terrified  creatures 
increased  their  speed.  This  part  of  the  ceremonies  of  the  Carni- 
val may  be  an  improvement  upon  the  former  custom  of  making 
the  unfortunate  Jews  race  through  the  Corso,  for  the  edification 
of  their  Christian  fellow-creatures  ;  but  it  is  still,  in  its  present 
less  offensive  form,  the  least  agreeable  part  of  the  Carnival  to 
me.  The  terror  and  agony  of  the  poor  horses  is  most  distressing, 
as  is  also  the  risk  incurred  by  the  spectators,  whose  uncontrolla- 
ble excitement  renders  it  almost  impossible  for  them  to  repress  it 
within  safe  bounds. 

By  some  curious  old  privilege,  dating  many  years  back,  the 
head  of  the  noble  house  of  Piccolomini  receives  a  small  sum 
upon  every  horse  admitted  to  run.  They  start  from  an  inclosure 
in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo,  and  are  caught  between  two  large 
cloths  like  sails  let  down  before  and  behind  them  in  the  narrow 
street  at  the  end  of  the  Piazza  di  Venezia,  called,  from  that  cir- 
cumstance, Via  della  Ripresa  dei  Barberi.    I  did  not  see  their 

start  on  any  day.  but  was  assured  by  that  it  was  a  very 

curious  thing  to  see  them  brought  to  the  bar,  each  held  only  by  a 
single  man,  who.  together  with  the  plunging,  rearing,  eager,  terri- 
fied horse,  realized  and  repeated  to  the  life  seme  of  the  fine  an- 
tique statues.  After  the  horse  race,  the  tide  of  biped  life  again 
poured  into  the  Corso,  and  the  universal  pelting  went  on  till 
evening  sent  the  carnivalisti  home  to  dinner  or  to  supper,  accord- 
ing as  they  were  English  or  Italians.  Nothing  amused  me  more 
than  the  perfect  Babel  of  languages  resounding  on  all  sides  ;  as 
for  us,  we  held  our  laughing  colloquies  with  the  passengers,  who 


§9 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


challenged  us  in  a  leash  of  tongues — English,  French,  and  Ita- 
lian ;  and  we  were  even  called  upon  to  respond  to  Russian  and 
Spanish,  which,  however,  we  were  forced  to  decline.  Our  re- 
turn home  was  anything  but  as  triumphant  as  our  going  forth  ; 
and  I  am  sure  would  have  furnished  an  admirable  subject  for  a 
caricature.  The  white  lining  of  the  carriage  half  torn  off;  the 
floor  of  it  ankle-deep  in  confetti,  sugar-plums,  and  nosegays, 
which  had  been  thrown  to  and  fro  till  they  formed  one  brown 
agglomeration  of  dirty  rubbish ;  the  seats  under  us  heaped  with 
the  same  pervading  trash.  Heaven  knows  how  it  got  there. 
Hoarse  with  laughing ;  our  arms  aching  with  hurling  things  at 
our  fellow-creatures ;  our  shawls  awry ;  our  faces  all  smeared 
with  flour ;  our  bonnets  battered  and  dented  into  cocked  hats 
with  the  thumps  from  nosegays  thrown  at  us ;  our  very  stays 
filled  with  the  horrid  little  confetti,  that  had  fallen  into  our  bo- 
soms, and  down  our  backs,  and  all  over  us.  A  more  complete 
sample  of  "  After  the  Battle"  I  never  saw.  To  be  sure,  we 
brought  home  spolia  opima.  in  the  shape  of  sundry  most  elegant 
and  fanciful  little  boxes  and  baskets  full  of  bonbons,  that  had 
been  thrown  or  given  to  us,  and  which  we  piled  like  a  trophy 

before  ,  who,  having  done  his  Carnival  thoroughly  some 

years  ago,  looks  with  eyes  of  superior  wisdom  upon  our  folly  in 
doing  ours  now. 

After  this  fashion  passed  all  the  days  of  this  strange  Saturna- 
*  lia.  In  the  evening  we  went  three  times  while  it  lasted  to  the 
masked  ball  at  the  theatre,  which  the  Italians  call  indifferently 
Veglioni  or  Festini.  We  took  a  box  each  time,  and  going  pro- 
vided with  black  dominoes,  hoods,  and  masks,  entertained  our- 
selves with  mystifying  some  of  our  friends  and  being  mystified 
by  them.  The  principal  of  these  balls  takes  place  on  the  Fri- 
day night,  or  rather  Saturday  morning,  of  the  Carnival.  Friday 
being  the  day  which  is  rather  kept  holy,  as  we  keep  Sunday 
here,  there  was  a  suspension  of  racket  and  rout  all  day.  There 


MASQUERADE. 


was  no  Corso,  and  nothing  indicated  that  we  were  in  the  Carni- 
val ;  but  to  atone  for  this,  no  sooner  had  it  struck  midnight  than 
the  whole  population  of  Rome  able  to  pay  an  entrance-fee  rushed 
to  the  Theatre  of  Apollo,  where  the  Festino  was  held,  and  made 
up  by  the  busy  folly  of  the  whole  night  for  the  fast  of  the  day. 
Our  box  was  filled  with  a  perpetual  stream  of  men  and  women, 
who,  in  grotesque  dominoes  and  those  hideous  black  masks, 
came  and  saluted  us,  and  in  the  high  falsetto  squeak  which  is 
the  conventional  tone  of  the  Mascherata,  held  conversations  with 
us,  which  were  not,  I  must  say,  up  to  the  pitch  of  brilliant  wit 
and  fanciful  humor  which  the  license  of  the  occasion  and  our 
old  playwrights  had  led  me  to  anticipate  ;  and  we  generally  beat 
our  masked  visitors  very  soon,  not  only  out  of  their  small  stock 
of  ideas,  but  even  out  of  their  assumed  voices,  and  reduced  them 
to  grumble  their  flat  common-place  in  the  usual  key  of  habitual 
social  dulness.  Nor  did  I  perceive  any  difference  in  this  respect 
between  the  natives  and  our  own  proverbially  heavy  unconver- 
sational  people.  The  Italians  who  visited  us  seemed  quite  as 
dull  as  the  English  ;  and  I  was  surprised  to  find  how  little  the 
removal  of  the  usual  formalities  and  restraints  of"  civilized  soci- 
ety added  to  the  brilliancy  or  wit  of  conversation. 

The  pit  and  stage  of  the  theatre  were  thronged  with  a  dense 
mass  of  people,  swarming  round  and  round  like  ants  upon  an 
ant-hill — or,  when  we  looked  at  the  whole  mass  rather  than  its 
individual  particles,  like  some  great  black  cauldron  slowly  boil- 
ing up  to  the  brim  and  subsiding  again.  The  prevalence  of  the 
dark  modern  man's  dress,  and  of  the  black  silk  dominoes,  made 
the  whole  thing  dark  in  spite  of  the  brilliant  chandeliers  and 
profusion  of  wax-lights  which  illuminated  the  house.  The 
squeaking  masquerade  voice  rose  in  shrill  chorus  from  this  black 
maelstrom,  and  the  music  of  the  orchestra  could  hardly  be  de- 
tected by  the  ear  in  the  midst  of  the  huge  hubbub,  any  more 
than  the  small  circle  of  dancers  could  by  the  eye,  in  the  middle 


64 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION 


of  the  rolling  multitude  that  swayed  and  pressed  and  wavered  to 
and  fro  beneath  us  :  it  was  a  very  strange  sight.  After  a  while, 
we  put  on  our  dominoes  and  masks,  and  descended  into  this  hu- 
man sea  :  we  stopped  at  the  boxes  of  several  of  our  friends  which 
were  in  the  pit  tier,  and  held  conversations  with  them  ;  and  I 
was  surprised  to  find  how  completely  the  disguise  of  the  domino, 
and  the  assumed  voice,  took  in  people  whom  I  really  had  no  idea 
at  the  time  that  I  had  imposed  on.  After  one  turn  through  this 
dense  mass  of  foolish  humanity,  we  were  glad  to  return  to  our 
box  ;  the  crowd  was  all  but  impenetrable,  and  the  suffocating 
heat  of  the  costume  intolerable,  so  we  regained  our  box  and  saw 
out  the  sport  from  thence. 

I  believe  I  have  nothing  more  to  say  of  the  Carnival,  but  to 
notice  the  closing  in  of  the  last  evening,  when,  as  the  daylight 
grew  thick,  suddenly  a  thousand  tapers  from  the  street,  the 
carriages,  the  windows,  the  balconies,  the  housetops,  shone  out 
upon  the  dusky  twilight.  The  Corso  looked  like  a  whole  street 
full  of  fire-flies  ;  everybody  carried  in  their  hands  a  sheaf  of 
small  wax  tapers,  and  the  swarming  sparks  in  a  burning  piece 
of  paper,  or  an  assembly-general  of  all  the  ignes  fatui  in  the 
world,  or  the  Milky  Way  suddenly  fallen  from  ^he  sky  into  the 
Corso,  are  the  only  things  I  can  compare  this  wonderful  and  beau- 
tiful spectacle  to.  Far  down  the  thronged  irregular  thoroughfare 
this  magical  illumination  flickered  and  twinkled ;  the  street  was 
alive  with  light ;  the  carriages  formed  little  clusters  or  constella- 
tions of  burning  tapers  ;  from  the  projecting  parts  of  every  house 
the  little  maccoli  were  held  aloft ;  sticks,  with  lights  fastened  to 
them,  were  pushed  far  out  from  the  very  tops  of  the  houses,  like 
strings  of  strange  stars  up  against  the  violet-colored  evening  sky  ; 
little  boats  of  green  and  red  oiled  silk,  with  burning  tapers  in 
them,  were  set  afloat  in  the  air,  and  came  flickering  down  like 
showers  of  illuminated  flowers  into  the  street.  No  words  can 
convey  any  adequate  idea  of  the  brilliancy  and  singularity  of 


SCENE  AT  THE  CORSO. 


83 


the  spectacle.  In  the  meantime  the  sport  consisted,  not  in  the 
beauty  and  strangeness  of  the  sight,  but  in  everybody's  endeavor- 
ing to  extinguish  everybody  else's  light,  and  keep  his  own  from 
being  extinguished.  This,  which  might  be  supposed  a  satirical 
representation  of  society,  was  carried  on  with  a  frantic  activity 
irresistibly  ludicrous  to  a  looker-on.  We  had  gone  to  our 
balcony,  the  better  to  enjoy  the  coup  d'aril,  and  anything  more 
magical,  more  fairy-like,  and  more  devilish  at  the  same  time, 
cannot  be  conceived ; — pocket-handkerchiefs,  sticks  with  little 
flags  tied  to  them,  wisps  of  paper,  and  all  imaginable  weapons 
were  used  to  put  out  the  little  moccoli — extinguishers  of  oiled 
paper  or  parchment,  fastened  to  long  sticks,  were  in  great  requisi- 
tion, and  everywhere  the  little  tapers  burnt  and  flamed,  and  were 
blown  out  and  re-lighted,  while  screams  of  laughter  and  shouts 
of  "  Senza  moccolo,  senza  moccolo !"  resounded  from  one  end 
of  the  street  to  the  other.  For  awhile  I  remained  intent  upon 
preserving  my  light  from  extinction,  but  the  blows  and  blasts 
aimed  at  it  from  above,  below,  and  all  round,  rendered  it  impossi- 
ble ;  and,  finding  that  this  individual  care  for  my  own  luminary 
was  depriving  me  of  the  curious  spectacle,  I  put  mine  out  once 
for  all,  and  gave  myself  up  to  gazing  at  the  comic  rout  all  round. 
At  length  we  retreated  from  our  stand,  and  threading  our  way 
through  the  crowd,  regained  our  carriage.  Immediately  on  leav- 
ing the  Corso,  all  seemed  dark  and  still,  and  though  the  blaze  still 
streamed  partly  up  some  of  the  side  streets  communicating  with 
it,  and  the  confused  uproar  followed  us  like  the  sound  of  a  distant 
beach  some  way  after  we  had  turned  homewards,  when  we 
reached  our  own  serene  height  on  the  Pincio,  not  a  sound  was  to 
be  heard  but  our  own  carriage- wheels,  nor  a  light  seen  but  the 
everlasting  stars  of  heaven,  which  seemed  to  look  down  in  quiet 
supremacy  and  an  easy  consciousness  that  they  were  not  soon 
likely  to  be  flapped  out. 

We  dined  hastily,  and  dressed  and  hurried  to  the  theatre,  to 


86  A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 

see  the  death  of  the  Carnival  and  the  grim  entrance  of  Lent ; 
with  all  our  best  haste,  however,  we  did  not  reach  the  ball  till 
near  eleven,  and  it  was  already  over — the  last  day  of  the  Carnival, 
the  ball  beginning  at  eight  or  seven  o'clock,  and  ending  an  hour 
before  midnight.  The  crowd  now  began  to  ebb  from  the  boxes 
and  pit;  the  military  had  already  marched  half  down  the  stage, 
driving  before  them  the  lingering  revellers,  and  leaving  the 
space  behind  to  the  dominion  of  darkness  and  silence  :  a  few  peo- 
ple like  ourselves  still  hung  over  their  boxes,  contemplating  the 
gradual  extinction  of  the  poor  Carnival ;  on  all  sides  resounded 
the  melancholy  words  "  Tutto  e  finito" — "It's  all  over" — "Jetzt 
ist  das  ende" — lamentable  bows  and  shakes  of  the  head,  and 
wavings  of  hands,  were  exchanged  by  sundry  and  various  per- 
sonages, who,  during  this  season  of  universal  acquaintance,  had 
exchanged  nods  and  looks  and  smiles,  and  were  thenceforth  to 
know  each  other  no  more.  From  the  pit,  a  young  man,  who  had 
often  met  us  in  the  Corso  with  flowers  and  pretty  devices,  held  up 
his  hands,  and  with  mournful  gestures  signed  his  farewell  to  us. 
The  door  of  our  box  was  vehemently  thrown  open,  and  a  man  in 
mask  and  domino  squeaked,  in  the  last  notes  of  the  masquerade 
and  villanous  English-accented  Italian,  "  Tutto  e  finito," — and  at 
the  same  time,  from  the  box  above,  a  nosegay  of  gay  artificial 
flowers  was  thrown  down  to  us  with  a  doleful  exclamation  of 
"  Ah,  the  Carnival  is  over  !"  It  was  really  quite  affecting.  The 
wax-lights,  blown  out  by  an  insensible  candle-snuffer,  gave  forth 
a  most  appropriate  incense  to  the  funeral  of  folly — the  hot,  blazing, 
dusty  atmosphere  grew  dark  and  chilly  as  the  lights  went  out, 
and  the  night-air  rushed  in.  The  depths  of  the  stage  were 
already  undiscernible — dancers,  orchestra,  all  had  vanished,  and 
twos  and  threes  of  lingering  masks  drained  slowly  away,  like 
last  drops,  from  that  floor  so  lately  covered  over  with  waves 
of  human  absurdity.  The  great  chandelier  was  slowly  lowered 
down,  the  lights  were  one  by  one  extinguished,  the  very  carcase 


BARBERINI  PALACE. 


<>7 


of  the  carnival  lay  before  us — dust,  darkness,  and  foul  smells  ; 
and  so  we  rushed  off  and  home,  and  nothing  remains  but  a  harle- 
quin-like vision  of  absurdity,  and  a  nice  little  mountain  of  all  sorts 
of  pretty  things,  bestowed  on  us  by  our  many  friends  of  those 
nine  days. 

I  have  been  to  the  Barberini  palace,  to  see  the  picture  of 
Beatrice  Cenci.  It  is  in  the  room  with  several  other  paintings, 
among  which  Raphael's  Fornarina,  and  a  female  portrait  ascribed 
to  Titian,  are  the  most  remarkable.  The  picture  of  the  Cenci 
itself  does  not  appear  to  me  either  a  very  beautiful  painting  or 
the  portrait  of  a  very  beautiful  woman.  It  seems  that  the  learn- 
ed in  such  matters  are  now  entertaining  doubts  as  to  its  being 
either  the  work  of  the  artist  to  whom  it  has  hitherto  been  ascribed, 
or  the  picture  of  the  person  whom  it  has  hitherto  been  supposed 
to  represent.  I  looked  at  it,  endeavoring  only  to  free  myself 
from  the  power  of  association,  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  form  some 
independent  judgment  upon  it.  I  have  heard  it  asserted  that  it 
was  a  picture  of  which  no  idea  could  possibly  be  conveyed  by 
any  copy.  With  this  opinion  I  differ  entirely :  I  have  seen 
copies  of  it,  which,  upon  a  long  contemplation  of  the  original, 
still  appear  to  my  memory  to  have  been  both  faithful  and  satis- 
factory. The  painting  does  not  appear  to  me  eminently  beautiful 
as  a  work  of  art,  and  the  smallness  of  the  mouth — always  a  de- 
fect in  a  face,  and  in  this  one,  owing  to  its  being  half  opened,  a 
defect  not  only  destroying  beauty,  but  absolutely  giving  a  vague 
and  almost  foolish  expression  to  the  countenance — makes  it,  in 
spite  of  the  lovely  outline  of  the  other  features,  and  the  soft  tear- 
wearied  eyes,  a  human  face  almost  without  character  or  expres- 
sion of  any  sort  but  that  of  sweetness  and  suffering.  The  mouth 
has  always  appeared  to  me,  in  the  copies  of  this  picture,  as  if  it 
could  not  possibly  be  like  that  original,  and  now  that  I  see  the 
original,  I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  the  mouth  was  like 
Beatrice  Cenci's ;  it  expresses  neither  intelligence,  sorrow,  nor 


88 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


determination ;  it  is  a  pretty,  round,  silly,  sensual,  open  mouth, 
and  that  is  all.  Of  the  picture  of  the  Fornarina  it  would  be  idle 
for  me  to  speak  critically,  were  it  not  that  there  are  certain  pro- 
vinces of  criticism  which  belong  even  to  those  who  know  little 
of  the  mechanical  rules  of  art,  or  the  technical  terms  by  which 
they  are  expressed.  In  the  first  place,  a  half  naked  woman  with 
a  splendid  turban  on  is  a  disagreeable  object  to  me,  because  the 
nakedness  is  conscious  and  for  a  purpose ;  unconscious  naked- 
ness is  the  attire  of  innocence — partial  nakedness,  for  the  purpose 
of  revealing  some  special  beauty  in  a  woman,  is  indecent,  and 
therefore  highly  displeasing.  The  face  of  the  Fornarina  is  also 
extremely  disagreeable  to  me  ;  without  feeling  or  meaning,  a 
stupid-looking,  staring,  handsome  creature,  whose  regular  fea- 
tures and  rich  coloring  present,  nevertheless,  a  most  unattractive 
and  unlovely  countenance ;  most  different,  indeed,  from  that 
beautiful  picture  in  the  Florence  gallery,  misnamed 'the  Forna- 
rina, and  which  is  now  by  some  supposed  to  be  a  portrait  of 
Vittoria  Colonna.  The  forms  of  the  bosom,  arms,  shoulders, 
and  hands,  are  perfect,  and  most  perfectly  painted ;  nature  could 
not  be  more  beautiful,  nor  art  more  wonderful,  than  they  are  here 
shown.  The  third  picture  to  which  my  attention  was  drawn, 
and  the  only  one  on  which  I  dwelt  with  unmixed  pleasure,  was 

a  female  portrait,  said  to  be  by  Titian,  but  thought  it 

rather  the  work  of  Palma  Vecchio.  The  person  of  this  woman 
was  enveloped  in  rich,  but  burly,  ungraceful  attire,  even  to  one 
of  her  hands,  which  was  covered  with  a  clumsy  glove.  This, 
and  something  in  the  coloring,  and  in  the  soft  thick-looking  golden 
hair,  recalled  to  me  the  holy  love  of  Titian  in  that  beautiful  pic- 
ture which  he  has  called — who  can  tell  why  ? — Holy  and  Profane 
Love.  The  countenance  of  the  lady  was  serene  and  sweet,  the 
mouth  full  of  nobility,  grace,  and  even  wit.  The  eyes  deep  set, 
and  of  a  dark  blue  color,  the  form  of  the  forehead  and  face  full 
of  character — majestic  and  lovely, — the  beautiful  hair,  together 


GOETHE'S  WERTHER. 


S9 


with  the  warm  reflection  it  cast  like  a  golden  curtain  on  her 
throat,  seemed  to  me  the  very  perfection  of  mere  mechanical  art. 
She  was  a  most  fair  and  gracious  lady  ;  and  as  we  left  the  room, 
turning  to  look  at  her  again,  my  sister  said  she  looked  like  Portia, 
grown  to  mid-womanhood — and  so  she  did. 

Mr.  came  and  paid  us  a  farewell  visit  the  other  morn- 
ing ;  among  many  things  of  much  interest  which  he  told  us,  he 

mentioned  that  Mr.  ,  the  Hanoverian  minister  here,  was 

the  son  of  Goethe's  Charlotte, — for,  he  added,  to  my  great  sur- 
prise, that  Werther  was  not  a  creation,  but  an  experience  of 
Goethe's  ;  that  it  was  not,  as  I  supposed,  a  satire  upon  others, 

but  a  history  of  himself;  that  Mine.    and  her  husband 

were  the  originals  of  Charlotte  and  Albert,  as  he  of  Werther  ; 
that  she  was  a  handsome,  accomplished  woman,  who  received 
his  letters,  full  of  adoration,  passion,  worship,  and  poetry,  which 
spent  itself  in  expressions  of  idolatry,  even  about  her  ribands 
and  flowers,  with  the  utmost  equanimity  :  he  wound  up  by  say- 
ing, that  all  Goethe's  letters  to  this  lady  are  now  in  existence, 

and  in  the  hands  of  her  son,  Mr.   ,  who  entertained 

strongly  the  purpose  of  publishing  them  :  certainly  Werther 
itself  would  be  infinitely  less  interesting  than  these  records  of  a 
passion  that  suggested  it ;  I  hope  he  will  do  so. 

Since  our  visit  to  the  Barberini,  we  have  been  to  the  Sciarra 
palace,  and  saw,  among  many  others,  three  pictures  worthy  of 
all  praise  ;  the  first  was  a  landscape,  by  Poussin, — a  view  of  the 
banks  of  the  Tiber,  a  most  perfect  picture,  which  made  me  ex- 
claim with  delight  and  admiration,  as  soon  as  I  saw  it :  the  yel- 
low untidy  shelving  banks,  the  thick  muddy  water  rolling  its 
dirty  white  eddies  like  a  solution  of  putty,  were  objects  that 
could  not  in  themselves  be  called  beautiful ;  but  the  purple  light, 
or  rather  darkness  that  enveloped  the  whole,  the  truth,  the  reali- 
ty, and  ideality  at  once  of  it,  were  marvellous.  I  greatly  prefer 
a  fine  landscape  to  a  fine  portrait ;  the  copy  of  the  human  coun- 


90 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


tenance,  like  the  human  countenance  itself,  suggests  the  nature 
of  man — unrest ;  the  copy  of  nature,  like  nature  itself,  suggests 
God — repose.  In  the  next  room  we  found  two  lovely  pictures, 
full  of  thought  and  expression,  and  in  proportion  fatiguing  to  look 
at— Titian's  Belladonna,  and  Raphael's  Suonatore  ;  the  last  is 
the  most  wonderful  picture  I  have  ever  seen,  and  I  stood  gazing 
into  that  dark  face  till  I  was  surprised  that  it  did  not  smile  at 
being  so  steadily  stared  at.  There  were  several  copies  of  each 
of  these  noble  portraits  exhibited  by  their  side,  if  possible,  I 
suppose,  to  enhance  their  beauty  and  merit ;  the  pale  unripe 
pink,  with  which  the  modern  artists  had  copied  the  warm  yel- 
lowish ivory-white  of  the  neck  and  shoulders  in  Titian's  picture, 
was  certainly  an  admirable  comment  upon  the  art  of  painting 
flesh,  and  the  chalky  folds  that  professed  to  imitate  the  exquisite 
color  and  texture  of  the  white  drawn  round  the  bosom,  an  equally 
lively  illustration  of  how  linen  should  not  be  colored.  It  is  a 
curious  thing,  which  I  have  had  very  frequent  occasion  to  ob- 
serve, that  when  indifferent  artists  have  to  paint  eyes,  whose 
beauty  consists  in  their  expression,  they  invariably  make  them  a 
great  deal  too  large  ;  this  was  the  case  in  all  the  copies  of  these 
admirable  portraits,  where  the  eyes  are  not  large,  but  beautifully 
shaped,  and  of  a  most  wonderful  depth,  and  set  in  the  head  in  a 
manner  which  is  at  once  full  of  expression  in  itself,  and  extremely 
difficult  to  imitate.  In  the  same  room  with  these  were  the 
Vanity  and  Modesty  of  Linardo  da  Vinci,  a  fine  picture,  that  I 
do  not  like  ;  the  Gamblers  of  Caravaggto,  a  very  expressive  and 
spirited  picture,  and  two  copies  of  a  Magdalen,  by  Guido,  in 
which  the  sickly  green  coloring  of  the  flesh  suggested  to  me  no 
idea  but  that  of  a  woman  dying,  or  dead  of  cholera.  After  look- 
ing round  the  room,  my  eyes  became  again  riveted  on  the 
Suonatore,  and  I  remained  literally  fascinated,  unable  to  turn 
them  away  till  we  departed.  We  have  been  since  this  to  the 
Villa  Albani,  to  look  at  the  collection  begun  by  Winckelman, 


"  THE  EDUCATION  OF  BACCHUS." 


91 


whose  great  work  upon  ancient  art  is  one  of  the  remembered 
delights  of  my  childhood,  with  its  interminable  samples  of  hel- 
mets, and  sandals,  &c,  and  infinite  illustrations  of  ancient  art, 
all  which,  to  my  fascinated  gaze,  appeared  in  the  large  books  as 
I  pored  over  them,  merely  in  the  simple,  but  all  comprehensive 
light  of  "  pictures.'"' 

The  thing  that  particularly  wished  us  to  see  was  the 

specimen  of  Archaic  sculpture,  known  by  the  name  of  "  The 
Education  of  Bacchus,"  preserved  there.  It  is  altogether  a  less 
interesting  sample  of  the  earliest  Greek  art  than  the  Xanthian 
Marbles,  but  resembles  them  in  style  and  conception ;  having  at 
the  same  time  more  of  the  angular  stiffness  of  the  very  early 
plastic  art,  which  they  also  exhibit,  and  less  variety  in  the  forms 
and  freedom  and  grace  in  the  draperies — these  perfections  which 
were  subsequently  so  magnificently  developed  in  the  statues  of 
the  Parthenon.  The  only  other  objects  in  the  collection  which 
I  particularly  examined  were  a  noble  Minerva,  standing  as 
though  about  to  utter — 

"  Self-reverence,  self-knowledge,  self-control, 
Are  the  three  hinges  of  the  gates  of  life, 
That  open  into  power  every  way ;" 

and  the  beautiful  group  of  the  Mercury,  Eurydice,  and  Orpheus. 
Tenderness  and  sorrow,  grace  and  dignity,  are  so  admirably 
combined  in  this  exquisite  conception,  that  the  longer  one  looks 
at  it  the  more  charmed  one  is  into  a  pleasure  almost  like  that 
derived  from  a  perfect  musical  harmony  ;  it  is  withal  exceed- 
ingly sad  as  well  as  lovely.  We  stopped  to  look  at  the  deformed 
bust  and  pathetic  intellectual  face  called  JEsop ;  it  looks  just 
like  him,  that  is  to  say,  if  there  ever  was  such  a  person  he  ought 
to  have  looked  like  that.  The  strangest,  though  by  no  means 
the  loveliest  object  we  encountered  in  the  Villa  Albani  was  Pro- 
fessor  ,  with  a  tail  of  German  thirst-for-knowledge  ladies, 


92 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


young,  middle-aged,  and  old,  who  followed  him  from  room  to 
room,  and  from  statue  to  statue,  while  he  expounded,  in  an  audi- 
ble lecture-pitch  of  voice,  the  history  and  merits  of  every  parti- 
cular object,  directing  the  attention  of  his  female  class  now  to 
the  finely-turned  thigh  and  leg,  and  now  to  the  nobly  proportioned 
chest  of  some  antique  specimen  of  marble  beauty.  As  the  whole 
thing  looked  ridiculous,  I  thought  it  very  good-natured  of  him  to 
do  it ;  and  as  he  is  one  of  the  most  learned  antiquarians  and 
critics  in  matters  of  art  of  the  present  day,  if  I  could  have  un- 
derstood his  address,  which  being  in  German  I  could  not,  I  should 
most  assuredly  have  joined  myself  to  his  class,  and  listened  with 
my  eyes  and  mouth  open  too.  instead  of  which  I  went  out  on  the 
balcony  with  my  sister  and  spent  the  time  there  overlooking  the 
lordly  gardens,  with  their  broad  stripes  of  greensward  all  frosted 
with  daisies  ;  the  smooth  box  hedges,  with  their  new  pieces  of 
tender  vivid  green  let  into  the  dark  verdant  wall  like  the  repairs 
of  the  spring  ;  the  fountains  dancing  up  and  down  in  the  sun, 
and  the  warm  air  just  creeping  round  the  rose-bushes  and  twitch- 
ing their  outer  branches ;  the  red  and  white  gilly-flowers  smell- 
ing so  spicy  and  sweet ;  the  statues,  the  columns,  the  busts,  the 
vases,  the  flights  of  steps  below  us,  the  noble  mountains  beyond, 
the  perfect  blue  above — it  was  enchanting  and  not  German. 
"  There  is  neither  sound  nor  speech,"  &c. 

We  went  two  days  ago  to  the  studio  of  Cornelius,  to  see  the 
cartoon  which  he  has  just  finished  for  the  Campo  Santo  at  Ber- 
lin. It  is  the  first  and  only  one  he  has  executed,  though  the 
whole  series  is  already  finished  in  designs  of  a  small  size, 
which,  I  am  happy  to  say,  are  about  to  be  published  and  given 
to  the  world.  It  is  intended  to  cover  the  four  walls  of  a  square 
building,  with  an  equal  number  of  fresco  paintings  of  colossal 
proportions.  The  subjects  are  all  scriptural,  and  chiefly  from 
the  New  Testament.  Between  them  are  single  figures,  illus- 
trating the  beatitudes,  from  the  "  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;"  and 


CORNELIUS. 


93 


below  and  above  each  panel  or  compartment  is  a  smaller  design, 
representing  some  passage  of  Holy  Writ — the  three  subjects 
illustrating  each  other  by  some  moral  or  spiritual  connexion  in 
the  most  beautiful  manner ;  the  whole  is  connected  and  woven 
together  by  ornamental  designs  of  great  elegance.  Before  all 
other  things,  in  speaking  of  this  great  work,  which  should  confer 
happiness  in  its  conception  as  well  as  glory  in  its  execution  upon 
its  author,  I  must  express  the  deep  satisfaction  which  his  mode  of 
treating  his  subject  gave  me.  Mr.  Cornelius  is,  as  his  friend  Pro- 
fessor  ,  who  accompanied  us,  informed  us,  a  devout  Roman 

Catholic,  yet,  in  his  illustrations  of  the  life  of  Christ,  there  was 
nothing  sectarian,  nothing  especially  revealing  his  own  peculiar 
form  of  Christianity,  nothing  that  was  not  the  highest  expression 
of  the  religion  of  Christ ;  not  that  of  any  particular  body  of  his 
followers.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  tell,  from  contem- 
plating these  designs,  to  what  denomination  their  author  belonged, 
and  equally  impossible  not  to  feel  assured  that  he  was  a  devout 
Christian.  The  enormous  labor  of  the  whole  thing  struck  me 
extremely ;  and  the  great  variety  of  subjects,  all  illustrating  and 
commenting  each  other  in  the  profoundest  manner,  the  beauty 
of  the  separate  designs,  the  religious  harmony  of  the  whole, 
seemed  to  me,  like  Milton's  "  Paradise  Lost,"  a  noble  prayer — 
the  worthy  offering  of  one  of  God's  inspired  to  the  Father  of  all 
inspirations.  In  comparing  the  subjects  which  I  had  seen  treated 
before  in  the  works  of  other  masters,  there  appeared  to  me  to  be 
a  great  superiority  in  grace  and  tenderness  in  the  conceptions  of 
Cornelius.  The  Raising  of  Lazarus  appeared  to  me  more  simple 
and  impressive  than  the  famous  Sebastian  del  Piombo.  The 
Woman  taken  in  Adultery  pleased  me  infinitely  better  than 
Rembrandt's  picture,  the  deep  and  gorgeous  coloring  of  which 
does  not  in  any  degree  compensate  to  me  for  the  ignoble  and 
vulgar  forms  of  every  figure  in  it,  to  which  that  of  our  Saviour 
is  no  exception.    In  Cornelius's  design  he  has  treated  the  subject 


94 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


in  a  novel  manner,  by  representing  Jesus  in  the  act  of  writing 
with  his  ringer  upon  the  sand.  The  position  and  figure  of  the 
Adulteress  is  perfectly  exquisite.  Another  of  the  drawings,  the 
Raising  to  Life  of  the  Young  Man  of  Nain,  afforded  me  an 
opportunity  for  a  comparison,  which  was  again  in  favor  of  Cor- 
nelius. I  had  seen  quite  lately  an  etching  of  the  same  subject 
by  Overbeck,  which,  in  spite  of  great  merits,  appeared  to  me 
crowded  and  confined,  and  wanting  in  the  pathetic  effect  which 
so  eminently  belongs  to  the  subject.  On  the  contrary,  the 
design  of  Cornelius  was  simple  in  the  extreme,  and  the  attitude 
of  the  disconsolate  mother  full  of  expression  and  beauty,  while 
the  attention  was  not  diverted,  as  in  the  composition  of  Overbeck, 
from  the  principal  figures  in  the  scene  by  the  crowd  of  mourners, 
spectators,  and  attendants.  His  treatment  of  that  most  hack- 
neyed subject  among  Italian  painters,  the  Pieta,  was  full  of  the 
deepest  pathos.  In  short,  it  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate 
all  the  designs  in  this  great  work,  which  struck  me  as  remark- 
able for  their  dignity,  grace,  and  simplicity,  and  which  pleased 
me  better  than  any  treatment  of  the  same  subjects  I  had  ever 
seen.  The  attitude  of  Adam  and  Eve  after  the  fall  was 
extremely  striking  and  beautiful ;  the  man  absorbed  in  remorse 
and  utter  wretchedness,  apparently  unconscious  even  of  the 
woman's  presence  ;  while  she,  in  the  midst  of  her  agony  and 
shame,  still  stretched  one  hand  in  sympathy  and  supplication  to 
him.  Between  each  of  these  large  panels  is  a  figure,  or  group 
of  figures,  illustrating  one  of  the  beatitudes  from  "  Christ's  Ser- 
mon on  the  Mount."  The  majority  of  these  figures  were  male  ; 
and  at  first  I  felt  a  little  inclined  to  cavil  at  the  illustration  of 
"  Blessed  are  the  Peacemakers,"  by  an  aged  man,  full  of  tender- 
ness and  dignity,  parting  two  youths  about  to  engage  in  fight. 
It  seemed  to  me  that  this  subject  might  have  found  its  more 
fitting  expression  in  some  female  representative.  Upon  reflec- 
tion, however,  I  feel  no  longer  sorry,  but  glad  that  Cornelius 


CARTOONS. 


95 


has  restored  some  of  the  virtues  of  Christianity  to  humanity  at 
large  ;  for  chastity,  modesty,  temperance,  meekness,  humility, 
patience,  and  the  forgiveness  of  injuries,  have  really  been  made 
feminine  instead  of  Christian  attributes  quite  too  long.  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn"  was  most  strikingly  illustrated  by  a  woman 
whose  whole  attitude  is  that  of  perfect  misery,  while,  beside  her, 
a  child  uplifts  its  hand  and  eyes  to  Heaven,  with  that  appeal  that 
"  findeth  sure  reply." 

After  looking  over  these  designs,  the  very  first  of  which  is 
connected  with  the  very  last  by  some  fine  link  of  spiritual  asso- 
ciation, we  sat  down  before  the  one  cartoon,  the  first  which  he 
has  finished.  It  represents  the  passage  of  Revelations  where  the 
phials  of  God's  wrath  are  poured  out  upon  the  earth,  and  the 
destruction  of  the  human  species  by  Death,  War,  and  Pestilence. 
High  in  the  middle  of  the  picture,  on  a  colossal  horse,  sits  a  co- 
lossal figure,  beautiful  and  terrible  to  behold ;  the  form  of  the 
face  is  perfect,  and  the  compressed  lips,  the  dilated  nostrils,  the 
knit  dark  brows  and  fatal  flashing  eyes ;  the  head  with  its  helmet ; 
the  bare  body,  with  determination  in  every  nerve  and  muscle  of 
it ;  and  the  uplifted  arms  and  hands  clenching  the  fiery  sword 
that  is  about  to  fall  like  a  meteor  upon  the  tribes  of  the  children 
of  men,  form  one  of  the  finest  and  grandest  conceptions  of  terror 
and  destruction  that  I  ever  saw.  The  countenance  forcibly  re- 
minded me  of  Lawrence's  picture  of  Satan  calling  his  comrades 
from  the  pool  of  Hell.  Before  this  vision  of  dismay,  right  under 
the  upreared  impending  hoofs  of  his  horse,  kneels  a  woman, 
whose  might  of  mother's  love  seems  almost  as  though  it  could 
avert  the  fate  that  overwhelms  the  world  ;  her  open  lips  utter  the 
cry  of  horror ;  her  dilated  eye,  outstretched  throat,  and  uplifted, 
deprecating  arms,  seem  to  keep  suspended  the  trampling  ruin 
that  covers  her  like  a  vault.  Her  child,  with  his  limbs  stiff  with 
terror,  props  himself  against  her  breast,  and  upturns  his  face, 
full  of  fear  and  agony,  to  the  great  doom  above  him.  Another 


95 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


woman  kneels  beside  her,  the  twin  of  her  anguish  and  horror ; 
across  her  knee  lies  the  lifeless  body  of  her  child.  The  group 
has  but  one  fault, — the  sameness  in  the  faces,  features,  and  ex- 
pressions of  the  women.  The  similarity  of  action  in  the  out- 
stretched arm  may  be  a  defect,  but  seemed  to  me  a  beauty. 
Beside  this  vision  of  doom  sits  an  old  and  meagre,  but  malignant 
fiend, — his  gaunt,  greedy-looking  horse  comes  head  and  hoofs 
downwards  upon  the  heap  of  dead  and  dying  beneath  him.  The 
old  man  who  represents  Death  sets  his  teeth  hard, — the  mouth 
has  a  sinister  grin  of  savage  delight,  and  from  beneath  white 
bushy  eyebrows  a  fiendish  light  of  hatred  gleams  like  the  shining 
of  a  half-sheathed  knife.  A  scythe  is  about  to  follow  the  down- 
ward sweep  of  this  remorseless  figure,  reaping  the  world ;  be- 
neath him  lies  a  noble  pile  of  death,  a  man  whose  every  limb  is 
dead, — a  woman  prone  upon  him,  her  hands  buried  with  an  action 
of  admirable  despair  in  the  thick  tresses  of  hair  at  the  back  of 
the  head  ;  above  her  body  a  child  survives,  turning  up  its  forlorn 
countenance  to  the  grim  reaper ;  here  again  the  only  defect  of 
this  sublime  composition  makes  itself  felt  in  the  resemblance  of 
this  to  the  face  of  the  other  child.  There  are  also  two  old  men's 
heads,  which  are  very  similar  in  their  noble  outline  and  expres- 
sion. To  the  left  of  the  fine  middle  figure  on  the  rearing  horse, 
are  two  admirable  representations  of  the  third  devastating  curse 
sent  to  depopulate  the  earth  ;  two  lean,  lithe,  wiry  figures,  with 
thick  Ethiopian  lips,  low  receding  foreheads,  and  turbans  sur- 
mounting their  hideous  ghastly  countenances,  stretch  themselves 
eagerly  over  their  horses, — the  one  sends  the  poisoned  arrow  from 
his  bow  as  he  lies  along  the  gaunt  neck  of  his  horse,  that  looks  like 
a  bestial  personification  of  the  plague  ;  while  the  other,  with  scales 
high  uplifted  in  one  bony  hand,  and  the  other  raised,  as  though 
in  warning^  seems  uttering  a  cry  from  his  swollen  lips  that  might 
sound  across  the  deserts  of  the  earth  to  its  places  of  thickest 
population,  the  coming  of  pestilence  sweeping  from  the  barren 


CARTOONS. 


97 


regions  of  the  east  to  cover  the  world  with  its  livid  blue  and 
green  and  yellow  plague-spots.  These  two  figures  are  admira- 
ble, so  are  their  horses  :  indeed,  one  of  the  finest  things  in  the 
composition  appears  to  me  the  great  variety  and  expression  in 
the  figures  and  countenances  of  these  ghastly  steeds.  The 
group  is  unlike  any  other  group  of  horses  I  ever  saw,  and  is 
really  wonderful  in  its  power,  terror,  and  beauty.  Above  this 
ghastly  company  of  destroyers  floats  in  the  air  the  fearful  band 
of  the  spirits  enfranchised  by  their  dreadful  ministry  :  they  seem 
to  hover  just  above  the  death-strewn  earth,  in  an  atmosphere  of 
stillness  ;  they  look  with  steadfast  calmness  to  those  about  to 
follow  them  ;  they  are  not  afar  off,  but  near,  yet  the  great  gulf, 
that  parts  the  dead  and  the  living,  lies  between  them  ; — perhaps, 
indeed,  only  thus  little  removed  are  those  who  have  put  off  mor- 
tality from  us,  who  yet  wear  it ;  perhaps  the  cloud  of  witnesses 
which  encompasses  us  is  but  a  little  way  beyond  those  visible 
clouds  through  which  we  look  towards  what  we  call  heaven. 
Oh  !  they  are  nearer  at  hand,  and  behold  us  with  peaceful,  so- 
lemn steadfastness,  for  they  know  what  we  but  guess ;  and  the 
great  mysteries — sin  and  sorrow — are  revealed  to  them  in  all 
their  sublime  significance.  Before  ending  this  meagre  remem- 
brance of  this  noble  work  of  Christian  art,  I  must  not  omit  to 
mention  the  illustration  its  author  has  chosen  for  the  coming  of 
Christ  to  judgment.  The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins  has  been 
adopted  by  him  for  the  subject  of  this  cartoon,  and  nothing  can 
be  more  beautiful  than  the  truth,  variety,  and  expression  of  the 
figures,  in  their  various  attitudes  of  slothful  oblivion  or  dismay, 
and  graceful,  joyful  alacrity. 

Riding  out  with    and    yesterday,  we  met  a 

couple  of  white  mules  drawing  a  cart-load  of  mould.  Our 
Italian  friend  told  us  that  these  white  mules  belonged  to  the  Pope, 
to  whose  service  they  were  especially  dedicated,  and  added,  with 
something  of  a  sneer,  that  they  had  the  honor  of  carrying  His 
6 


95 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Holiness's  dead  body  to  be  buried  whenever  it  occurred  to  him 
to  die.  From  this  we  got  into  a  conversation  upon  the  govern- 
ment and  condition  of  the  people,  such  as  it  is  difficult  enough 
to  have  with  any  native  here,  who,  as  far  as  I  have  seen  them, 
or  talked  with  them,  keep  their  discourse  innocent  of  any  but  the 
most  absolutely  trivial  matter.  He  said,  which  indeed  is  tolerably 
apparent,  that  the  mass  of  the  common  people  were  very  well  off, 
and  very  contented.  Labor  is  dear,  and  the  wages,  considering 
especially  the  cheapness  of  food,  are  high.  The  Roman  popu- 
lation have  however  a  decided  objection  to  labor,  as  a  degradation 
as  well  as  a  bore  ;  and  the  greater  proportion  of  the  peasants 
whom  one  sees  working  in  the  campagna  and  about  the  vineyards 
and  gardens  come  from  the  Neapolitan  and  Tuscan  States.  One 
meets  them  in  bands,  carrying  their  implements  with  them,  like 
the  Irish  reapers  in  harvest-time  in  England  ;  and  more  than 
once  the  great  resemblance  between  the  two  races  has  struck  me 
most  forcibly.  The  comfortable  condition  of  the  lower  classes 
in  the  Roman  States  is  such,  that  when  the  last  revolution  at 
Bologna  broke  out,  the  Government  entertained  little  or  no  appre- 
hension of  any  rising  among  the  people  at  Rome ;  and  the  Pope 
even  dismissed  his  guard,  to  express  his  confidence  in  their  good 
dispositions.  The  physical  well-being  of  the  great  mass  of  the 
population  is  of  course  decidedly  inimical  to  any  revolution,  for 
physical  well-being  is  all  that  the  unenlightened  desire,  and  the 
great  mass  of  all  societies  must  consist  of  the  unenlightened  for 
yet  a  long  space  of  years.  The  middle  class  here,  the  profes- 
sional men,  are  the  discontented  leaven  in  the  mass.  Of  course, 
if  they  could  depend  upon  the  action  of  the  whole  population, 
important  changes  might  ensue  ;  but  though  revolutions  require, 
for  the  most  part,  heads  as  well  as  bodies,  it  is  easier  for  the 
great  bulk  of  a  people  to  effect  changes  for  themselves  (though 
without  guiding  spirits  they  can  only  be  temporary  outbreaks, 
causing  temporary  change),  than  for  the  most  enlightened  intelli- 


CONDITION  OF  THE  LOWER  CLASSES.  99 

gences  to  force  an  unenlightened  and  physically  contented  popu- 
lation into  revolutionary  action.  To  produce  great  and  perma- 
nent alterations  in  a  government,  great  popular  grievances  must 
exist,  affecting  with  an  equal  desire  of  change  the  bulk  of  the 
population  and  some  portion  of  the  more  educated  classes  ;  with- 
out this  union  nothing  can  be  achieved  but  fruitless  outrages  of 
mobs,  or  the  still  more  hopeless  action  of  unripe  conspiracies, 
ending  either  in  bloodshed  in  the  street  gutters,  on  scaffolds,  or 
the  more  modern  retribution  of  a  life-long  penance  in  some  fort- 
ress, like  the  Spielberg — political  prisons,  where  noble  spirits 
expiate  the  error  of  having  undertaken  single-handed  national 
causes  against  oppression,  which  required  a  national  movement 
to  make  them  successful.  The  superstition,  profligacy,  insuffi- 
ciency, and  venality  of  the  Government  here,  are  nevertheless 
so  little  the  cause  of  physical  suffering  to  the  great  bulk  of  the 
people,  that  a  very  general  spirit  of  easy  contentment  prevails, 
and  such  abuses  as  are  too  manifest  to  escape  the  keen  observa- 
tion of  a  very  quick-witted  and  naturally  shrewd  people,  are  dis- 
cussed and  ridiculed  with  a  freedom  which  might  seem  at  first 
anomalous  in  such  a  state  of  things,  but  which,  in  fact,  is  another 
safety-valve  which  the  Government  very  prudently  allows  to 
those,  who,  forbidden  to  speak,  might  possibly  undertake  to  act. 
There  exists,  therefore,  in  Rome  generally  a  very  great  extent 
of  license  in  this  respect,  and  public  and  political  matters  are 
canvassed  with  a  freedom  that  might  seem,  at  first  glance,  quite 
incompatible  with  the  generally  low  mental  condition  of  the  peo- 
ple and  the  absolutism  of  the  Government.  In  the  religious 
institution  of  confession,  the  latter  holds  an  enormous  political 
power,  and  it  is  the  most  frequent  engine  employed  for  the  dis- 
covery and  defeat  of  conspiracies ;  the  party  confessing  to  any 
knowledge  of  such  machinations  being  always  scrupulously  held 
harmless  in  whatever  retribution  follows  the  revelation. 

—  recited  to  us  some  highly  satirical  sonnets  written  upon  the 


100 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Government  by  a  man  who  is  a  clerk  in  one  of  the  government 
offices,  and  who,  of  course,  that  being  the  case,  dares  neither 
publish  nor  otherwise  make  known  his  authorship.  As  always 
happens,  however,  in  such  cases,  the  offensive  matter  finds  circu- 
lation, and  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  amount  of  importance 
of  such  expressions  of  public  sentiment,  to  which  secresy  and  the 
fear  of  danger  to  those  who  originate  and  those  who  propagate 

them  add  an  infinite  zest.    The  lines  ■  repeated  to  us  were 

witty  and  pithy,  and  reminded  me  not  a  little  of  some  of  Be- 
renger's  sallies.  He  said  the  same  man  had  written  an  enormous 
number  of  these  political  sonnets,  chiefly  in  the  sort  of  dialect 
in  which  the  common  people  express  themselves,  many  of  them 
extremely  coarse,  but  all  of  them  full  of  satirical  power  and  wit. 

He  said  that  there  was  no  career  here  for  a  gentleman  of 
family  unless  he  chose  to  become  a  priest.  He  spoke  with  great 
good  sense,  and  at  the  same  time  much  bitterness,  of  the  ineffi- 
cient education  to  which  the  sons  of  their  noble  families  were 
condemned  ;  of  the  miserable  intellectual  results  of  their  college 
and  private  tuition,  from  the  prevalence  of  the  priestly  spirit 
throughout  all,  which  narrowed  and  reduced  all  mental  training 
here  to  the  most  pitiful  products.  He  spoke  of  the  invariable 
custom  which  exists  here,  of  giving  young  gentlemen  of  family 
entirely  into  the  charge  of  some  priest  or  abbate,  who,  from 
their  earliest  childhood,  is  by  turns  nursery  governess,  tutor,  and 
companion,  till  the  attainment  of  majority  at  once  enfranchises 
the  youth  from  this  incessant  supervision,  and  leaves  him,  as  it 
were,  suddenly,  and  from  one  hour  to  another,  the  entire  master 
of  his  own  actions, — in  freedom  a  man  ;  in  fact  and  truth,  an 
inexperienced  child.  The  results  of  such  an  instantaneous 
transition  from  absolute  restraint  to  absolute  liberty,  at  the  age 
of  one-and-twenty,  may  be  easily  imagined.    One  of  its  most 

deplorable  consequences,  according  to  ,  was  the  number  of 

unworthy  marriages,  which  the  utter  inexperience  of  many  of 


COMPULSORY  CONFESSION. 


101 


these  young  noblemen  had  induced  them  to  make  with  artful 
and  designing  women  of  the  lower  classes  ;  disgraceful  and 
wretched  unions,  entered  into  in  the  blindness  of  a  first  youthful 
passion,  and  entailing  regret  and  bitter  mortification  as  their 
least  miserable  results. 

As  an  illustration  of  this  system,  we  meet  daily  in  our  drives 
or  walks  on  the  Pincio,  or  in  the  Borghese  gardens,  one  of  the 

sons  of  the  Prince  ,  a  young  man  born  to  one  of  the  noblest 

names  and  greatest  fortunes  of  Rome,  and  who  daily  takes  his 
airing,  like  a  sick  dowager  (for  girls  in  England  have  more 
freedom),  in  an  open  carriage,  accompanied  by  his  inseparable 
abbate,  from  whom,  however,  to  judge  by  his  appearance,  a  very 
short  time  must  divorce  him,  leaving  him  free  to  follow  his 
instructions,  or  to  buy  wisdom  at  its  sole  and  costly  price — expe- 
rience. From  this  talk  we  fell  into  discussions  of  the  approach- 
ing Easter  ceremonies,  and  I  learned  with  amazement  that  con- 
fession and  attendance  at  the  communion  table  and  at  certain 
preparatory  religious  exercises  were  expected,  and  I  may  say 
exacted,  from  everybody  during  the  Holy  Week — an  enforced 
observance  worse  than  meaningless,  and  which  induces  a  spirit 
of  bitter,  secret  ridicule  in  those  who  are  compelled  to  it  by  a 
species  of  social  tyranny,  which,  with  the  great  majority,  must 
necessarily  degenerate  into  contempt  and  dislike  to  all  religion — 
this  obligatory  ceremonial  being  the  only  thing  so  called  with 

which  they  are  acquainted.    subsequently  told  me  that 

every  member  of  every  parish  who  did  not  confess  and  take  the 
sacrament  some  time  during  the  Easter  festivities  was  actually 
posted  up  publicly.  What  further  catastrophe  ensued  I  do  not 
know,  but  few  people  brought  up  in  a  priest-ridden  community 
such  as  this  would  care  to  affront  the  obloquy  of  such  a  publica- 
tion. I  presume  that  to  any  one  hardy  enough  to  brave  it, 
however,  admonition  and  eventual  excommunication  would  be 
the  conseauence.    After  all,  bigoted  and  illiberal  as  all  this  may 


102 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


appear,  it  is  not  by  any  means  peculiar  to  this  country  or  this 
sect.  And  when  I  remember  that  in  the  heart  of  America,  the 
self-styled  land  of  political  freedom  and  religious  toleration,  in 
the  city  of  brotherly  love  (so  called),  I  have  seen  the  sky  blood- 
red  with  the  light  of  burning  Catholic  churches ;  when,  in 
Massachusetts,  a  priest  can  illustrate  his  discourse  by  designating 
from  his  pulpit,  as  a  warning  to  the  rest  of  his  congregation, 
such  among  them  as  happen  to  differ  from  his  orthodoxy  in 
opinion,  the  particular  folly  and  tyranny  of  one  set  of  sectarians 
loses  its  miserable  prominence,  when  brought  into  comparison 
with  similar  exhibitions  of  the  same  spirit,  under  different  names 
and  in  different  parts  of  the  world  ;  there  is  through  all,  unfor- 
tunately, a  strong  family  likeness.  Our  landlord  informed  us, 
to  our  great  surprise,  that  the  holiness  of  Easter  extended  through 
the  whole  week  following  Easter  Sunday,  to  that  degree,  that  in 
the  Roman  Catholic  church  no  marriages  were  allowed  during 
that  time. 

I  have  seen  to-day  the  first  acacia  blossoms  of  the  spring. 

UPON  A  BRANCH  OF  FLOWERING  ACACIA. 

The  blossoms  hang  again  upon  the  tree, 

As  when  with  their  sweet  breath  they  greeted  me 

Against  my  casement,  on  that  sunny  morn, 

When  thou,  first  blossom  of  my  spring,  wast  born 

And  as  I  lay,  panting  from  the  fierce  strife 

With  death  and  agony  that  won  thy  life, 

Their  snowy  clusters  hung  on  their  brown  bough, 

E'en  as  upon  my  breast,  my  May-bud,  thou. 

They  seem  to  me  thy  sisters,  Oh,  my  child  ! 

And  now  the  air,  full  of  their  fragrance  mild, 

Recalls  that  hour ;  a  tenfold  agony 

Pulls  at  my  heart-strings,  as  I  think  of  thee. 


UPON  A  BRANCH  OF  FLOWERING  ACACIA. 


103 


Was  it  in  vain  !    Oh,  was  it  all  in  vain  ! 

That  night  of  hope,  of  terror,  and  of  pain, 

When  from  the  shadowy  boundaries  of  death, 

I  brought  thee  safely,  breathing  living  breath 

Upon  my  heart — it  was  a  holy  shrine, 

Full  of  God's  praise — they  laid  thee,  treasure  mine ! 

And  from  its  tender  depths  the  blue  heaven  smiled, 

And  the  white  blossoms  bowed  to  thee,  my  child, 

And  solemn  joy  of  a  new  life  was  spread, 

Like  a  mysterious  halo  round  that  bed. 

And  now  how  is  it,  since  eleven  years 

Have  steeped  that  memory  in  bitterest  tears  ? 

Alone,  heart-broken,  on  a  distant  shore, 

Thy  childless  mother  sits  lamenting  o'er 

Flowers,  which  the  spring  calls  from  this  foreign  earth, 

Thy  twins,  that  crowned  the  morning  of  thy  birth. 

How  is  it  with  thee — lost — lost — precious  one  ! 

In  thy  fresh  spring-time  growing  up  alone  ? 

What  warmth  unfolds  thee  ? — what  sweet  dews  are  shed, 

Like  love  and  patience  over  thy  young  head  ? 

What  holy  springs  feed  thy  deep  inner  life  ? 

What  shelters  thee  from  passion's  deadly  strife  ? 

What  guards  thy  growth,  straight,  strong,  and  full  and  free, 

Lovely  and  glorious,  oh,  my  fair  young  tree  ? 

God — Father — thou — who  by  this  awful  fate 

Hast  lopp'd,  and  stripp'd,  and  left  me  desolate  ! 

In  the  dark  bitter  floods  that  o'er  my  soul 

Their  billows  of  despair  triumphant  roll, 

Let  me  not  be  o'erwhelmed  ! — Oh,  they  are  thine 

These  jewels  of  my  life — not  mine — not  mine ! 

So  keep  them,  that  the  blossoms  of  their  youth 

Shall,  in  a  gracious  growth  of  love  and  truth, 


104 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


With  an  abundant  harvest  honor  Thee : 

And  bless  the  blight  which  Thou  hast  sent  on  me  ; 

Withering  and  blasting,  tho'  it  seem  to  fall, 

Let  it  not,  oh,  my  Father !  drink  up  all 

My  spirit's  sap — so  from  this  fate  shall  grow 

The  palm  branch  for  my  hand  and  for  my  brow, 

With  which,  a  hopeful  pilgrim,  I  may  tread 

The  shadowy  path  where  rest  awhile  the  dead, 

Ere  they  rise  up,  a  glorious  company, 

To  find  their  lost  ones,  and  to  worship  Thee ! 

I  have  been  taking  a  series  of  beautiful  rides  in  the  campagna  ; 
I  wish  very  much  to  preserve,  if  possible,  some  record  of  the 
various  features  of  that  vast,  wonderful  plain,— but  words  multi- 
plied to  weariness  can  very  hardly  express  one  tithe  of  the  love- 
liness and  sublimity  that  the  eye  sweeps  over  in  a  minute  on  that 
enchanted  ground  ;  and  first,  we  come  upon  some  point  of  it 
where  it  spreads  out  before  us  a  wide,  flat  expense,  hazy  and 
unbroken  as  a  summer  sea,  over  whose  level  surface  whole  com- 
panies of  larks  trill,  and  twitter,  and  twinkle,  with  a  perfect  cho- 
rus of  jubilant  song,  of  which  our  lonely  field-singer  gives  not 
the  faintest  conception.  It  is  very  curious,  by  the  by,  the  fuller 
life  to  which  all  things  seem  ripened  by  this  southern  climate  : 
not  only  do  the  larks  appear  in  perfect  cohorts  over  these  sunny 
plains,  and  sing  with  a  loud  clearness,  unequalled,  certainly,  by 
our  solitary  morning  bird  ;  but  the  same  sort  of  difference  mani- 
fests itself  in  flowers  common  to  both  countries.  The  daisies  here 
have  a  wide-awake  determined  air,  which  would  have  made 
Burns's  address  to  them  absolutely  ironical  ;  their  buds  are  of 
the  deepest  crimson,  their  flowers  are  of  the  most  unhesitating 
white,  with  little  stiff-necked  stalks,  and  faces  all  turned  up  to 
the  sky  with  a  degree  of  self-possession  quite  astonishing  in  a 
mere  daisy.    The  China  roses  have  all  a  much  deeper  color,  and 


RIDES  THROUGH  THE  CAMPAGNA. 


105 


stronger  perfume  than  with  us.  I  saw  one  to-day,  a  bud  sitting 
under  some  fresh  taper  polished  green  leaves,  beneath  which  a 
single  ray  of  the  sun  darted  upon  the  passionate-colored  crimson 
flower,  that  sat  beneath  its  canopy,  in  an  atmosphere  of  living 
light,  and  glowed  in  a  sunshine  all  to  itself,  like  a  jewel :  I  never 
saw  such  a  magical  effect  of  color  in  my  life.  Then,  too,  the 
violets  here  could  never,  even  by  the  most  courteous  device  of 
poetry,  have  been  celebrated  for  their  modesty  ;  from  fresh  vigor- 
ous tufts  of  veined  leaves  they  shoot  long  slender  stalks,  with 
deep-colored  red  purple  blossoms,  in  absolute  sheaves — not  low 
down — not  nestling  under  shade — not  shrinking  into  moss  and 
retirement  ;  but  looking  as  everything  here  seems  to  do — towards 
the  sun,  and  opening  their  sweet  bosoms  to  the  warm  air,  that 
at  noon  in  our  little  terrace  garden  was  full  of  their  perfume. 

But  to  return  to  the  campagna,  after  loosing  our  reins,  and 
giving  our  horses  their  heads  in  a  swinging" gallop  over  this 
flowery  ocean,  it  gradually  seems  to  rise  and  fall  around  us, 
and  the  level  plain  sinks  and  swells  into  billows  and  waves  of 
undulating  green,  flowing  and  melting  into  each  other,  like  the 
beautiful  limbs  of  the  gigantic  statues  of  the  Parthenon.  Small 
valleys  open  into  each  other  between  these  swellings,  all  golden 
with  butter-cups,  or  powdered,  as  with  the  new-fallen  snow, 
with  daisies  ;  gradually  these  gentle  eminences  rise  into  higher 
mounds,  with  rocky  precipitous  sides  and  cliffs,  and  rugged  walls 
of  warm  yellow-colored  earth  or  rock,  with  black  mouths  opening 
into  them,  half  curtained  with  long  tangled  tresses  of  wild  briar 
and  ivy,  and  crested  with  gold  fringes  of  broom  and  gorse,  and 
blue-black  tufts  of  feathery  verdure.  At  a  distance,  where  the 
plain  opens  again  before  us,  clumps  of  wood,  of  insignificant 
appearance,  dot  the  level  ground ;  on  nearer  approach,  they  lose 
the  dwarf,  stunted  look  which  the  wide  field  on  which  they  stand 
tends  to  give  them,  and  presently  we  ride  slowly  between  the 
talon-like  roots,  and  under  the  twisted  gnarled  boughs  of  cork  and 

6* 


106 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


ilex  trees,  warped  into  fantastic  growth  by  the  sweeping  of  the 
winds,  and  covering  with  their  dusky  foliage  a  wild  carpet  of 
underbrush,  all  strewed  with  flowers — violets,  purple  hyacinths, 
with  their  honey-sweet  smell  and  dark-blue  blossoms,  white  spires 
of  delicate  heaths,  the  clear  azure  stars  of  the  periwinkle,  and  the 
tall  flower-fretted  stalks  of  the  silver  rod — asphodel ;  these,  woven 
into  one  cloak  of  beauty,  spread  themselves  over  the  ragged  sides 
and  rough  gullies  of  these  patches  of  forest,  and  every  now  and 
then  we  reach  an  eminence  from  which  a  fine  dark  sea  of  hoary 
woodland  rolls  down  into  the  neighboring  hollows,  and  crests 
the  rounded  promontories  all  round  us.  Again  we  come  to  free 
level  ground,  and  cantering  along,  find  ourselves  on  the  brink  of 
sudden  rifts  in  the  smooth  surface  of  the  land — deep  rents,  torn 
by  the  rain  in  the  crumbling  volcanic  soil — tattered  gullies,  with 
a  sparkling  thread  of  live  water  running  through  them,  and 
thickets  of  exquisite  wild  hedge-growth  fringing  them ;  snow- 
white  drifts  of  hawthorn,  and  honeysuckle  wreaths,  send  up 
their  mingled  perfume  towards  the  sun — a  paradise  of  wild  sweet- 
ness, enchanting  the  senses  of  the  wanderer  through  this  wonder- 
ful wilderness ;  here  and  there  we  came  to  perfect  rummages  in 
the  banks  by  wind  and  weather — slides  of  rich  brown  earth,  over 
which  scars  in  the  earth's  bosom  Nature  makes  haste  to  draw  the 
edges  of  her  flowery  mantle ;  and  now  our  horses'  hoofs  spring 
over  long  strips  of  emerald  sward,  flowing  like  broad,  winding 
rivers  between  level  ranges  of  low  hills.  The  close  grain  of  the 
thick  grass  is  starred  with  the  tiny  blossoms  of  the  wild  geranium, 
and  every  now  and  then  we  trample  a  patch  of  narcissus  with 
their  cream-colored  blossoms  and  blue  stiff  leaves,  and  think  how 
preciously  we  should  have  gathered  them  from  a  northern  gar- 
den. On  each  side  of  these  long  narrow  valleys  young  wood 
growth  stretches  a  light  screen,  fragrant  with  the  freshness  of  the 
spring,  or  vocal  with  its  thousand  melodies.  Rounding  the  grassy 
slope  of  a  hill-side,  we  come  upon  one  of  the  scattered  habitations 


RIDES  THROUGH  THE  CAMPAGNA. 


107 


of  the  campagna — hardly,  however,  a  human  habitation — a  low- 
thatched  shed,  scarcely  large  enough  to  permit  one  man  or  two 
dogs  to  be  curled  up  beneath  its  shelter  from  sun  or  rain. 
Further  on  stands  the  untidy,  stinking  cottage,  with  its  sheep- 
pens  of  nets  stretched  over  the  neighboring  pasture,  within  whose 
bounds  the  brown  sheep  stray  nibbling  ;  their  undyed  wool  forms 
the  clothing  of  the  friars,  whose  dress  is  a  constant  source  of 
delight  to  me,  from  its  fine  rich  color,  and  ample  folds.  With- 
out the  net,  and  wandering  on  a  sort  of  free  guard,  the  white 
wolfish  dogs  of  the  campagna  prowl  round  the  settlement,  and 
come  yelling,  and  barking,  and  bounding  furiously  towards  us, 
while  leaning  lazily  on  his  staff,  as  we  go  by,  the  shepherd  him- 
self completes  the  picture ;  with  his  goat-skin  breeches,  and 
sheep-skin  cloak,  and  matted  black  mane  of  his  own  tangled 
locks,  out  of  which  his  eyes  gleam  like  coals  of  fire.  Far  off  we 
see  the  grey  fortress  farms  rising  in  masses  from  steep  founda- 
tions, and  looking  over  the  flowery,  sunny  waste  for  miles  to  their 
distant  fraternity, — the  tombs  of  ancient  Italy,  the  watch-towers 
and  castles  of  the  middle  ages,  the  peaceful,  romantic  dwellings 
of  the  peasants  and  herdsmen  and  vine-dressers  of  modern  Rome. 
On  some  neighboring  hill-side  shines,  like  a  sapphire  in  a  white 
stone  setting,  one  of  those  long  basins,  wherein  the  fresh  springs 
of  the  campagna  are  treasured  up — upon  the  hot  margin  of  which 
the  golden,  green,  and  black  enamelled  lizards  run  up  and  down, 
sunning  themselves,  and  rustle  away  through  the  grass  as  we 
slowly  pass  along  by  the  stone  hem  of  the  fountain.  Here  we 
look  down  upon  a  glaring  road  winding  far  up  to  the  mountains, 
and  betraying  its  course  by  the  fine  clouds  of  dust  that  tell  where, 
lazily  along  the  blinding  way,  the  mouse-colored  oxen  in  sober 
society  draw  the  lumbering  carts,  wherein  or  whereon  lie 
stretched  the  sleeping  hinds  that  should  lead  or  guide  them. 
Long  trains  of  rusty  mules,  fastened  by  the  tail  to  each  other's 
heads,  walk  invisibly  beneath  a  high,  thorny,  tottering  mountain 


108 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


of  brushwood,  piled  on  each  side  and  all  over  them  like  a  brown 
mist,  now  tipped  here  and  there  with  vivid  green,  the  young 
twigs  having  been  cut  full  of  sap  and  buds  and  yellow  golden 
sprouts  ;  from  beneath  which  curious  canopy  nothing  is  seen 
but  the  head  fastened  to  the  tail  of  its  predecessor,  and  the 
tail  tied  to  the  head  of  its  successor.  Beside  these  jingle 
merrily  along  those  little  carts  laden  with  small  wine-casks, 
with  their  curious  canopy  formed  out  of  the  main  branches 
and  boughs  of  some  tree ;  this  is  lodged  somewhere  in  the 
body  of  the  vehicle,  covered  with  skins  and  leather,  stuffed 
with  straw,  lined  with  coarse  sackcloth,  and  so  contrived  as  to 
turn  round  and  screen  from  either  side  the  driver,  who,  half 
lying,  half  sitting  under  this  shelter,  half  opens  his  bead-like 
eyes  and  pushes  the  pointed  hat,  with  its  bright  bunch  of  crimson 
stocks  or  orange-colored  wall-flowers,  half  off  his  blue-black 
hair  to  scratch  his  head,  as  lazily  as  if  he  grudged  the  trouble, 
while  his  bronze  face  sparkles  through  all  its  sleepiness  with  the 
brilliant  coloring  and  vivid  expression  peculiar  to  this  singularly 
handsome  race.  Passing  these  at  a  more  rapid  pace  comes  the 
mounted  peasant  or  cattle-driver ;  his  short  jacket,  tight  breeches, 
and  leather  gaiters,  buckled  like  armor  round  his  legs,  showing 
admirably  his  straight  and  well-proportioned  limbs  ;  his  dark 
green  or  brown  cloak  is  strapped  to  the  high-peaked  saddle,  and 
in  his  hand  he  carries  a  long  light  lance  headed  with  a  goad, 
which  adds  immensely  to  the  picturesqueness  of  his  appearance. 
By  the  side  of  some  of  these  roads,  marking  wherever  they  re- 
main the  lines  of  the  old  Roman  ways,  stand  the  ruined  tombs, 
that  have  not  been  converted  into  habitations  for  the  living, — 
nameless  monuments  of  nameless  existences,  long  since  gone  out 
amid  the  perpetual  extinguishment  of  life,  whose  mellow-tinted 
walls  yet  raise  above  the  sward  of  the  campagna  their  crumbling 
ivy-clasped  fragments.  Among  these  ruins,  some  are  land- 
marks and  special  features  in  the  wide  waste,  as  all  know  who 


RIDES  THROUGH  THE  CAMPAGNA. 


109 


have  directed  their  gallop  across  it  by  the  round  tower  of  Cecilia 
Metella,  the  arch  of  the  Torre  de'  Schiavi,  or  the  congregation 
of  ruined  walls  at  the  Sette  Bassi.  The  chief  glory  of  the  whole 
scene,  however,  its  grandest  and  loveliest  feature,  are  the  broken 
links  of  those  thirteen  chains  that  once  bound  the  mountains  to 
Rome  by  streams  of  living  water.  The  crown  of  the  campagna, 
the  graceful  and  sad-looking  aqueducts, — for  nothing  can  be  seen 
of  a  more  melancholy  beauty  than  ^ese  broken  arches  and  in- 
terrupted channels,  the  flowers  sown  by  many  hundred  springs, 
waving  from  every  crevice  and  cranny,  the  ivy  climbing  up 
each  pier  and  buttress,  and  the  whole  campagna,  with  its  boun- 
dary of  glorious  hills,  seen  through  their  arches,  like  a  magnifi- 
cent series  of  enchanting  pictures,  each  more  perfect  than  the 
other.  From  these  witnesses  of  the  power  of  Rome's  Csesars, 
the  eye  passes  naturally  to  the  mountains,  and  the  mind  to  Him, 
the  King  of  Kings,  whose  monuments  they  are.  They  stand 
round  this  vast  plain,  which  is  the  noble  margin  of  Rome, — a 
fitting  frame  to  the  great  picture, — in  pearly  light  that  reveals 
every  fold  and  plait  of  their  recesses  in  purple  shadow,  that 
seems  as  though  the  hand  could  feel  its  thickness  in  every  variety 
of  form  and  aspect,  rugged,  savage,  wild,  gentle,  smiling,  and 
majestic ;  they  circle  round  half  the  wondrous  plain,  the  silver 
shining  of  the  Mediterranean  bounds  the  other  half,  and  the  un- 
spotted arch  of  this  proverbial  sky  bends  its  perfect  azure  over 
all.  To  these  things  which  the  eye  beholds,  let  the  mind  add  (as 
how  can  it  forbear  ?)  but  one  tithe  of  the  recollections  that 
throng  every  part  it  dwells  upon,  and  where  can  be  found  in  all 
the  world  a  scene  of  equal  interest  and  beauty.  Beneath  the 
ruined  arch  below  the  holy  wood,  the  fountain  of  Egeria  still 
pours  on  its  legendary  stream ;  over  the  turbid  waters  of  the 
Tiber  hover  the  heroic  forms  that  history  has  but  lately  and  re- 
luctantly yielded  to  the  domain  of  poetry.  Upon  the  Monte 
Sacro  the  shadowy  host  of  a  whole  people  stand,  claiming  from 


110 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


their  oppressors  those  rights  so  slowly  wrested  from  them  through 
the  domestic  strife  of  centuries.  Along  the  banks  of  the  Allia, 
the  Gaulish  hordes  rush,  shaking  the  earth  beneath  their  multitu- 
dinous trampling  feet,  rending  the  sky  with  their  barbaric  war 
shouts.  Along  the  Appian  Way  Paul  walks  with  steadfast  feet 
towards  martyrdom  ;  and  by  the  bridge  of  Milvius,  the  blinding 
vision  of  the  Cross  smites  Constantine  with  instantaneous  faith. 
Rome  herself,  as  we  looked  long  at  her  to-day,  sits  in  a  silver 
mist  of  snowy  blossoming  trees,  the  focus  towards  which,  as  to- 
wards their  proper  centre,  all  these  glorious  recollections  tend — 
crowned  Queen  of  the  world  by  reverential  memory,  as  once 
she  ruled  by  absolute  dominion  and  the  great  genius  of  the  men 
she  bore. 


VERSES  ON  ROME. 

Oh  !  Rome,  tremendous,  who,  beholding  thee, 

Shall  not  forget  the  bitterest  private  grief 

That  e'er  made  havoc  of  one  single  life  ? 

Oh  !  triple  crown'd,  by  glory,  faith,  and  beauty, 

Thine  is  the  tiara  which  thy  priest  assumes, 

By  conquest  of  the  nations  of  the  earth, 

By  spiritual  sovereignty  o'er  men's  souls, — 

By  universal  homage  of  all  memory. 

When  at  thy  capitol's  base  I  musing  stand, 

Thy  ruined  temple  shafts  rising  all  round  me, 

Masts  of  the  goodliest  wreck,  'neath  Time's  deep  flood, 

Whose  tide  shall  ne'er  rise  high  enough  to  cover  them  ; 

Thou  comest  in  thy  early  strength  before  me, 

Fair — stern — thy  rapid  foot-prints  stamp'd  in  blood  ; 

The  iron  sword  clench'd  in  thy  hand  resistless, 

And  helmeted  like  Pallas,  whose  great  thoughts 

Still  made  thy  counsels  as  thy  deeds  victorious. 


VERSES  ON  ROME. 


Ill 


Beautiful — terrible — looking  o'er  the  earth 
With  eyes  like  shafts  of  fire,  and  with  a  voice 
That  uttered  doom,  calling  its  ends  thy  border ; 
Resolute,  absolute,  steadfast,  and  most  noble  ; 
A  mistress  whom  to  love  was  to  obey, 
For  whom  to  live  was  to  be  prmnpt  to  die 
Whose  favor  was  the  call  to  sterner  duty, 
Whose  frown  was  everlasting  ignominy. 
So  stand  'st  thou,  Virgin  Rome,  before  mine  eyes, 
Type  of  all  heathen  national  strength  and  virtue. 

When  thro'  the  Vatican's  sounding  halls  I  stray, 

Thy  second  sov 'reign ty  comes  sweeping  towards  me, 

In  gold  and  blood-red  splendor  borne  aloft, 

The  color  of  thy  garments  still  kept  fresh, 

With  blood  of  thy  confessors  and  deniers, 

Pour'd  for  and  by  thee  over  the  whole  earth  ; 

So  come  those,  carried  in  thy  insolent  meekness 

Upon  the  shoulders  of  obedient  Emperors, 

Shrouded  in  clouds  of  mystic  incense,  voices 

Of  adoration  in  a  thousand  tongues, 

Like  mingling  waters  rolling  round  thy  feet ; 

The  cross,  the  sword,  the  keys, — potent  insignia 

Of  thy  stupendous  double  majesty, 

Shining  amid  the  lightnings  of  those  curses 

Which  gleam  with  ominous  brightness  round  thy  path  ; 

So  sweeps  thy  second  empire,  Rome,  before  me. 

And  even  now  the  pageant  vanishes 

Out  from  the  portals  of  the  palaces 

Where  it  hath  dwelt  so  long  ;  I  see  the  last 

Waving  and  glancing  of  its  impotent  splendor, 

And  a  dim  twilight  fills  the  place  it  filled. 

Twilight  of  coming  night  or  coming  morning, 


112 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Who  shall  decide,  save  Him  who  rules  them  both  ? 

And  in  the  doubtful  grey,  one  man  alone 

Stands  in  the  place  of  that  great  mummery, 

The  throne  borne  on  the  backs  of  emperors 

Lies  at  his  feet ;  and  lo  !  a  ghastly  bed, 

Where,  'mid  diseases  md  corruptions  loathsome, 

Infirm,  decrepid,  crippled,  impotent, 

Yet  bright-eyed  with  vitality  unconquerable, 

At  its  great  heart  the  ancient  faith  lies  gasping ; 

Beneath  his  hand  a  glorious  shape  springs  up, 

From  whose  bright  veins  a  stream  of  healing  youth 

Is  poured  into  the  withered  blood-conduits 

Of  the  bed-ridden  Church  ;  and  she  arises — 

And  they  two  stand  together,  and  uplift 

That  song  of  praise  whose  first  unearthly  sound 

Was  the  loud  death-cry  sent  from  Calvary  ; 

Whose  sweetness  yet  shall  sound  thro'  all  the  world, 

And  rise  to  heaven,  whence  it  shall  echo  back 

His  praise  whose  service  shall  be  perfect  freedom. 

Loveliest  and  dearest  art  thou  to  me,  Rome, 

When  from  the  terrace  of  my  sometime  home, 

At  early  morning  I  behold  thee  lying, 

All  bathed  in  sunshine  far  below  my  feet. 

Upon  the  ancient,  sacred  Quirinal, 

Gleam  the  white  palaces  and  orange  gardens, 

Towards  which  are  turned  all  eyes,  are  stretched  all  hands, 

Where,  guarded  round  by  Faith,  and  Hope,  and  Love, 

The  expectation  of  the  people  dwells. 

On  the  pale  azure  of  the  tender  sky 

Thy  mighty  outline  lies  like  the  huge  features 

Of  some  divine  colossal  type  of  beauty  ; 

Far  to  the  left,  beyond  the  Angel's  tower, 

Rises  the  temple  of  the  world,  and  stretch 


VERSES  ON  ROME. 


113 


The  Vatican's  glorious  arsenals  of  art, 

Where  still  abide  the  immortal  gods  of  Greece, 

Where  worship  still  the  tribes  of  all  the  earth  ; 

While  from  the  blue  and  tufted  Doria  pines, 

My  eye  delighted  round  the  horizon  wanders 

To  where  the  Falconieri  cypress  shafts 

Pierce  the  transparent  ether.    Close  at  hand, 

Over  the  nunnery  wall,  where,  in  sweet  mockery, 

The  bridal  flower  its  silver  blossoms  spreads, 

Rises  a  chorus  of  clear  virgin  voices, 

Chanting  sweet  salutations — greetings  holy — 

As  once  did  Gabriel  to  the  "  blest  'mong  women." 

No  other  sound  makes  vibrate  the  still  air, 

Save  the  quick  beating  of  the  wings  of  doves, 

That  from  the  sanctuary  come  to  drink 

At  the  clear  dropping  fountain  in  our  garden. 

Upon  its  curving  margin  they  alight, 

And  make  alive  the  graceful  image  traced 

In  the  stone  painting  of  the  antique  artist. 

To  me  they  call  a  lovelier  image  up — 

A  fair  young  girl,  with  shining  braided  hair. 

And  graceful  head  divine,  gently  inclined 

Towards  her  shoulder,  where  a  dove  has  lighted, 

That  with  quick  glancing  eye  and  beak  familiar, 

And  soft  round  head,  and  swelling  purple  breast, 

Stands  friendly,  while  the  child  towards  it  turns 

Eyes  like  two  streams  of  liquid  light,  and  lips 

Parted  in  smiling  rosy  eagerness. 

Oh,  Rome  !    I  do  not  see  thee  any  more ; 

This  do  I  see — this  loveliest,  dearest  vision 

But  for  a  moment,  and  my  tears  have  blotted 

Thy  glory  and  its  sweetness  out  together. 


114 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


The  holy  week  is  over,  the  religious  carnival  of  Rome— dur- 
ing which  the  curiosity  and  ill  manners  of  foreigners  render 
every  Catholic  place  of  worship  a  perfect  bear-garden,  and  would 
almost  make  it  impossible  to  believe  that  the  same  seasons  were 
held  equally  sacred  by  all  denominations  of  Christians.  On  Palm 
Sunday  we  went  to  St.  Peter's,  to  see  the  benediction  of,  and  the 
procession  of  palms.  We  made  the  best  of  our  way  to  one  of 
the  tribunes,  for  which  we  had  tickets,  through  a  crowd  of  frantic 
women  who  certainly  made  all  sorts  of  Amazonian  legends  cre- 
dible ;  the  poor  Italian  gentleman  who  stood  at  the  entrance  of 
the  tribune  seemed  in  imminent  peril  of  being  crushed  to  death 
by  this  flood  of  feminine  intrepidity.  A  woman  before  me  who 
had  been  separated  from  her  friends  by  the  throng,  kept  loudly 
exhorting  them  to  "  push  on  and  not  to  mind  her,  that  she  would 
follow," — and  follow  she  did  undauntedly,  by  pushing  between 
my  sister  and  myself,  and  forcibly  separating  us,  though  for 
greater  security  we  had  hold  of  each  other's  hand.  Upon  my 
beseeching  her  not  to  separate  me  from  my  companion,  she 
replied  at  the  very  top  of  her  voice,  "  I  might  as  well  say  the 
same  thing  to  you,  ma'am ;  besides,  the  place  is  not  so  large, 
you'll  find  your  party  again,  I  dare  say."  This,  uttered  with  a 
face  crimson  with  obstreperous  struggles,  and  arms  and  legs 
working  like  the  wings  of  a  windmill  in  every  direction,  accom- 
panied by  a  loud  exhortation  to  her  party  "  to  get  on,  that  she 
would  make  out,"  &c,  were  my  sole  consolation. 

The  chanting  of  High  Mass  was  long  and  tedious,  and  I  took 
advantage  of  it  to  read  the  service  for  the  day  in  my  own  prayer- 
book  ;  the  splendid  church,  with  its  motley  crowd  of  gazers  and 
worshippers ;  its  priests,  in  purple  robes  and  grey  fur  tippets ; 
its  brown  bare-headed  friars ;  the  servant  and  peasant  girls  in 
their  scarlet  jackets  and  picturesque  head  gear ;  the  lady  spec- 
tators in  their  becoming  Spanish  costume  ;  and,  above  all,  the 
glorious  and  beautiful  effects  of  light  and  shade  upon  the  whole 


CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARK. 


115 


pageant,  delighted  me  extremely.  The  procession  itself  did  not 
strike  or  please  me  so  much  as  that  of  Candlemas,  and  I  was 
much  disappointed  with  the  appearance  of  the  palms  themselves, 
which,  though  indeed  branches  of  trees,  were  peeled  of  their 
green  bark,  stripped  of  their  leaves,  and  curled  and  twisted  into 
an  appearance  so  perfectly  artificial,  that  it  required  absolute 
knowledge,  or  absolute  faith,  to  realize  that  they  were  not  entirely 
artificial  products.  I  had  imagined  the  whole  throng  of  splen- 
didly dressed  priests  and  officers  bearing  real  branches  and  palms 
in  their  hands,  like  that  multitude  who,  drunk  with  the  excite- 
ment of  admiration  and  awe,  cast  down  their  garments  in  the 
way,  and  filled  the  air  with  Hosannas  as  Christ  passed  on  into 
Jerusalem,  from  which  he  was  to  go  forth  again  so  soon,  dragging 
his  own  cross  amid  the  groans  and  insults  of  that  very  populace. 
The  form  of  worship,  too,  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  Romish 
Church  disturbs  me  excessively,  because  it  is  ridiculous  to  me. 
I  hate  to  look  at  the  holy  things  of  my  brethren  with  unsympa- 
thizing  eyes,  and  I  cannot  help  it ;  nor,  when  they  set  the  Pope 
down,  and  take  him  up,  and  cover  his  legs,  and  uncover  them, 
and  kiss  and  bow  and  bend,  and  hand  him  here  and  there  like  a 
poor  precious  little  old  doll,  can  I  refrain  from  a  feeling  of  dis- 
gust and  displeasure  ;  so  that,"  upon  the  whole,  these  church 
spectacles  are  very  unsatisfactory  to  me. 

The  next  morning  early,  in  my  daily  walk  of  discovery,  I 
wandered  into  the  little  church  of  St.  Mark,  attached  to  the 
Venetian  palace,  which  is  now  the  residence  of  the  Austrian 
Embassy.  The  chapel,  for  it  was  hardly  larger  than  one,  was 
full  of  gorgeous  colors,  gilding,  rich  marbles,  and  profuse  orna- 
ments ;  most  of  the  funeral  tablets  bore  Venetian  names.  Mass 
was  going  on,  and  round  a  species  of  temporary  enclosure,  formed 
by  low  square  scarlet-covered  benches,  knelt  a  number  of  young 
boys  and  girls ;  the  white  dresses  and  veiled  heads  of  the  latter 
announced  that  they  were  going  through  the  ceremony  of  their 


116 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


first  communion  ;  round  them  sat  and  stood,  in  various  attitudes 
of  anxiety  and  sympathy,  a  company  of  mothers  and  female 
friends.  Mass  was  said,  and  some  beautiful  chanting  enlivened 
the  pious  mummery ;  after  which  an  aged  priest,  apparently,  by 
his  dress,  of  high  church  rank,  entered  the  enclosure,  and  kneel- 
ing on  a  crimson-colored  hassock,  began  a  discourse  in  Italian, 
upon  the  subject  of  the  ceremony  about  to  be  performed  by  the 
young  communicants.  This  address,  which  he  made  in  the  per- 
son of  the  children  themselves,  alternately  to  the  Redeemer  and 
the  Virgin  Mary,  became,  by  degrees,  more  and  more  passion- 
ate, the  preacher  throwing  his  arms  about,  striking  his  breast, 
wringing  his  hands,  and  uttering  the  most  violent  exclamations 
of  sorrow  and  repentance  at  the  "  tanti  peccati "  which  the 
children  had  committed,  "  tanti  disgusti  "  they  had  given  the 
Saviour  and  his  Divine  Mother.  During  this  discourse,  or 
rather  series  of  ejaculations,  the  emotion  of  the  children,  espe- 
cially the  young  girls,  went  gradually  crescendo,  until,  when 
the  preacher  arrived  at  the  climax  of  mercy  shown  to  these 
poor  sinning  souls — in  now  being  permitted  to  eat  the  very 
body  of  this  their  offended  and  pardoning  God, — there  was 
one  response  of  sobs,  wails,  and  hysterical  cries,  and  for 
awhile  the  prayer  was  interrupted  by  the  explosion  of  excited 
feeling  it  had  occasioned.  I  do  not  wonder  at  such  an  effect 
being  produced  upon  young  imaginations  and  young  nerves ; 
what  with  the  thrilling  music,  the  faint  smell  of  the  incense 
which  pervaded  every  part  of  the  church,  the  infectious  emotion 
of  their  companions,  and  the  passionate  cries  and  appeals  of  the 
priest  addressing  them — the  dose  of  excitement  was  certainly 
pretty  strong  for  young  southern  girls  of  from  twelve  to  fourteen 
years  old :  what  good  result  might  spring  from  so  much  purely 
physical  emotion  and  so  much  overstrained  imagination,  I  know 
not.  I  prayed  heartily,  and  with  all  my  soul,  for  those  young 
creatures,  for  whom  my  sympathy  was  deeply  excited,  even  by 
what  appeared  to  me  the  danger  of  the  process  they  were  under- 


YOUNG  COMMUNICANTS. 


117 


going.  Most  of  the  girls  had  their  faces  buried  in  their  handker- 
chiefs ;  one  of  them,  a  very  pretty  lassie,  whose  dress  was  rather 
more  elegant  than  the  rest,  removed  hers  to  look  at  somebody 
near  her,  and,  to  my  astonishment,  her  eyes  were  perfectly  tear- 
less, and  her  face  smiling  rather  maliciously — that  girl's  nerves 
must  be  incomparably  strong  :  the  impression  of  that  laughing 
young  face,  hidden  again  almost  instantaneously  in  the  handker- 
chief, was  like  a  sudden  discord  in  sweet  music.  When  the 
tumult  of  religious  fervor  had  a  little  subsided,  another  priest 
entered  the  enclosure  bearing  the  Sacrament,  and  it  was  given 
to  each  of  the  children.  It  was  curious  to  detect  the  mothers 
and  friends  of  each  by  the  tender  sympathy  expressed  in  their 
faces,  and  their  gradual  eager  approach  as  their  particular  charge 
received  the  sacred  wafer  ;  another  priest  then  gave  to  each  of 
them  a  small  ticket — a  species  of  voucher  testifying  that  they  had 
gone  through  this  holy  ceremony — and  so  it  all  ended.  As  I 
turned  away  I  saw,  kneeling  in  a  confessional,  a  man  who  was 
unburdening  his  conscience  of  its  sins.  He  was  not  kneeling,  as 
is  most  customary,  in  one  of  the  side  compartments,  and  speak- 
ing through  the  usual  small  opening,  but  the  door  of  the  confes- 
sional was  open,  and  he  was  kneeling  between  the  feet  of  the 
priest,  whose  hand,  with  a  singular  gesture  of  tenderness,  was 
placed  round  his  shoulder,  while  his  head  inclined  towards  him, 
so  as  to  hear  alone  the  revelation  that  was  being  made.  This 
group  struck  me,  and  I  waited  to  see  them  move.  The  confes- 
sion ended,  the  penitent  rose,  but  turned  from  me,  and  I  did  not 
see  his  face  ;  that  of  the  priest,  who  was  quite  a  young  man,  was 
beautiful,  sweet,  and  calm,  and  most  benevolent ;  the  affectionate 
and  commiserating  attitude  had  not  deceived  me.  How  wonder- 
fully expressive  the  whole  body  of  an  earnest  human  being  is — 
how  eloquent  of  any  pervading  and  habitual  feeling  the  whole 
carriage  and  deportment  becomes. 

On  Thursday,  in  Passion  Week,  we  went  to  St.  Peter's,  intend- 


118 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


ing  to  proceed  to  the  Sistine  chapel,  and  hear  Allegri's  Miserere, 
which  we  had  been  informed  was  to  be  chanted  there.  We 
neglected,  however,  to  dress  ourselves  in  black,  and  the  want  of 
this  proper  formality  prevented  our  being  able  to  go  to  the  Pope's 
chapel,  where,  however,  after  all,  the  famous  composition  of 
Allegri  was  not  performed.  There  is  a  species  of  rivalry  be- 
tween  the  choir  of  St.  Peter's  and  that  of  the  Sistine  chapel,  and 
the  several  priests  belonging  to  each  do  not  scruple  to  give  the 
most  untrue  accounts  to  foreigners  who  ask  information  of  them, 
always  taking  care  to  make  it  appear  that  whatever  is  best  worth 
hearing  or  seeing  is  going  on  at  their  own  particular  chapel  or 
church.  They  are  like  rival  showmen  or  managers.  Thus 
disappointed  of  our  intended  afternoon's  entertainment,  or  edifi- 
cation, as  I  suppose  it  would  be  more  proper  to  say,  we  seated 
ourselves  in  one  of  the  chapels  of  St.  Peter's,  opposite  to  that 
which  is  used  as  the  choir,  and  resigned  ourselves  to  listen  to  the 
chanting  which  was  being  performed  there,  and  which  came 
across  the  vast  dome  to  us  in  wailing  melodious  snatches,  the 
effect  of  which  was  most  melancholy,  vague,  and  striking  at 
the  same  time.  We  sat  here  for  a  long  time,  the  light  gradually 
dying  out  from  the  lower  and  further  parts  of  the  great  build- 
ing ;  group  after  group  of  worshippers  or  gazers  passed  down 
the  nave,  while  priests  and  monks,  and  country  men  and  women, 
in  picturesque  dresses,  came  one  after  another,  and  kneeled  near 
where  we  sat,  to  say  a  prayer  or  two,  sauntering  off  again  in 
the  twilight,  which  began  to  thicken  all  round  us.  I  presently 
perceived  that  a  man  had  placed  himself  on  the  bench  by  my 
sister,  and  was  whispering  to  her.  He  was  well  dressed,  and 
decent  looking ;  my  surprise  was  all  the  greater  when  she  in- 
formed me  that  he  was  a  beggar,  who  had  thought  proper  to 
address  his  reclamations  to  her  in  that  familiar  and  peculiar 
manner.  After  remaining  here  until,  what  with  the  dim  light, 
the  distant  chanting,  the  monotonous  shuffling  of  feet  upon  the 


CONFESSION  OF  A  CRIMINAL. 


119 


pavement,  and  the  faint  smell  of  incense  pervading  the  air,  I 
was  falling  into  a  sort  of  dream  of  St.  Peter's,  we  rose  and 
walked  towards  another  chapel,  where,  as  part  of  some  of  the 
peculiar  ceremonies  of  the  day,  some  hundreds  of  tapers  were 
burning.  The  effect  of  this  illuminated  altar,  before  which  knelt 
a  large  and  most  picturesque  congregation  of  adorers,  contrasted 
with  the  gloom  which  was  beginning  to  invade  the  rest  of  the 
church,  was  very  beautiful  and  striking.  In  coming  hither  we 
had  passed  the  confessional  where,  on  this  one  day  of  the  year, 
a  Cardinal  appointed  for  the  purpose  receives  in  public  the  con- 
fession of  certain  great  criminals,  who  have  committed  offences 
for  which  the  ordinary  priest's  absolution  is  not  sufficient.  The 
time  for  the  Cardinal's  entering  the  confessional  had  not  arrived 
when  we  passed  it,  but  there  was  already  kneeling  there  a  poor 
man,  in  the  dress  of  a  peasant,  with  his  head  buried  in  his 
hands,  in  an  attitude  which  might  have  been  either  that  of  intense 
devotion  or  bitter  self-reproach.  On  our  return  from  the  illu- 
minated altar  we  found  the  crowd  speedily  gathering  round  this 
part  of  the  church  in  anxious  expectation  of  the  Cardinal's  arri- 
val— the  penitent  neither  moved  from  his  place  nor  altered  his 
attitude,  while  group  after  group  of  eager  spectators  joined  them- 
selves to  the  numbers  waiting  to  witness  his  humiliation.  The 
confessional  was  raised  considerably  above  the  pavement  of  the 
church — a  species  of  enclosure  was  formed  all  round  it,  within 
which  as  many  privileged  and  intrepid  people  as  could  effect  an 
entrance  placed  themselves.  At  length  the  Cardinal  entered  the 
enclosure,  and  seated  himself ;  and  the  man  who  had  been 
awaiting  his  arrival  took  his  place  at  his  feet,  and  kneeling  so 
that  the  Cardinal  by  inclining  his  head  brought  his  ear  nearly  on 
a  level  with  his  mouth,  the  confession  began. 

I  had  always  been  very  desirous  of  witnessing  this  singular 
scene.  I  once  saw  a  picture  of  it  at  the  exhibition  in  the  Na- 
tional Gallery  j  and     ■  had  given  me  a  description  of  it 


120 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


that  had  interested  me  deeply.  For  a  length  of  time  the  two 
actors  in  the  strange  scene  preserved  the  same  attitudes,  and  it 
was  difficult  to  tell  from  their  deportment  that  anything  so  solemn 
as  the  confession  of  a  deadly  crime  was  passing  between  them. 
The  crowd  in  the  meantime  remained  silent  and  riveted,  watch- 
ing with  intense  interest  and  curiosity  the  effect  of  what  he  was 
hearing  upon  the  Cardinal's  features  ;  at  length  they  became 
expressive  of  great  disturbance.  The  crowd  and  the  imperfect 
light  combined  to  make  it  difficult  to  see  distinctly  ;  but  as  I  ea- 
gerly bent  forward  to  watch  what  was  passing,  I  saw  his  face 
flushed,  and  his  brow  knit ;  he  clutched  his  fur  tippet  repeatedly 
with  a  gesture  of  great  nervous  agitation, — wiped  his  forehead 
hastily  once  or  twice,  and  then  spoke  so  low  indeed  that  no  syl- 
lable transpired,  but  with  an  appearance  of  earnestness  and  ve- 
hement solemnity  that  was  very  striking.  After  addressing  the 
penitent  in  this  extremely  emphatic  manner  for  some  time,  he 
signed  the  cross  repeatedly  and  hurriedly  over  him ;  and  the 
impression  left  on  my  mind  by  his  manner  was  that  of  extreme 
annoyance  and  moral  disgust  at  the  impartment  he  had  received. 
As  the  poor  man  who  had  thus  purchased  rest  to  his  conscience 
traversed  the  crowd  to  depart,  we  saw  his  face  quite  distinctly. 
It  was  a  common  stolid  countenance,  with  no  peculiar  indication 
of  passion  or  depravity  upon  it ;  and,  considering  the  scene  in 
which  he  had  just  borne  so  conspicuous  and  unenviable  a  part, 
his  deportment  was  singularly  careless  and  unimpressed.  The 
remaining  spectators  now  pressed  forward  in  rapid  succession  to 
be  touched  by  a  wand  which  had  been  placed  in  the  Cardinal's 
hand,  and  which  he  extended,  I  presume,  in  benediction  over  all 
who,  passing  before  him,  made  an  obeisance.  I  never  saw  any- 
thing more  disgusting  than  the  carriage  of  the  various  foreign 
women  who  surrounded  us  this  afternoon  ;  but  principally,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  Englishwomen.  Their  indecent  curiosity,  and 
eagerness  to  satisfy  it ;  their  total  apparent  forgetfulness  of  the 


GOOD  FRIDAY. 


121 


sacred  purposes  to  which  the  place  where  they  were  was  dedi- 
cated ;  the  coarse  levity  of  their  observations  and  comments  upon 
what  was  going  on ;  their  determined  perseverance  in  their  own 
flirtations  and  absurd  conversation  in  the  midst  of  the  devotions 
of  the  people  whose  church  they  were  invading  ;  their  discus- 
sions of  their  own  plans  of  amusement,  all  really  gave  a  most 
painful  impression  of  their  want  of  good  feeling,  good  sense,  and 
good  manners.  As  we  were  passing  round  the  church  we  were 
suddenly  summoned  to  make  way,  and  several  of  the  Swiss  guard 
of  the  Pope  pushed  by,  escorting  a  couple  of  ladies  dressed  in 
black,  and  making  way  for  them  among  the  crowd  ;  we  hurried 
after  them,  and  found  that  they  were  going  to  meet  the  procession 
of  female  pilgrims,  who  come  up  yearly  to  the  Easter  festivals 
to  Rome,  and  who,  on  their  arrival,  are  received  by  a  charitable 
sisterhood,  the  members  of  which  are  taken  from  all  classes  of 
Roman  women,  many  of  whom  are  of  the  highest  birth  and  rank  ; 
they  meet  these  poor  women  at  the  gate  of  St.  Peter's,  and  escort 
them  up  the  church  to  the  illuminated  altar,  where  they  pay 
their  devotions,  after  which  they  are  taken  to  the  Hospital  of  the 
Pilgrims,  where  they  are  lodged  and  entertained  for  three  days 
and  nights.  Just  as  we  reached  the  entrance  of  the  church  the 
procession  was  entering,  and  we  stood  to  see  them  go  down  the 
nave  ;  weary-looking,  dirty,  sickly,  miserable  creatures,  in  the 
coarse  peasant's  dress  of  the  poorest  class  of  country  people, 
walking  two  and  two ;  between  each  couple,  one  of  the  Roman 
sisterhood  of  Charity  leading  them  by  the  hand.  The  procession 
was  extremely  numerous,  and  filled  the  vast  building  from  one 
end  to  another.  We  did  not  stay  to  see  them  all  pass  in,  but 
weary  of  our  traveller's  business  of  looking  and  listening,  left  the 
great  church,  while  the  swarm  was  still  pouring  in  endless  suc- 
cession through  its  open  gate  into  its  dim  depths,  which  were 
now,  at  the  furthest  extremity,  quite  lost  in  darkness. 

Good  Friday. — We  were  determined  not  to  lose  the  services  at 
7 


122 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  Sistine  Chapel  to-day,  so  in  good  time,  and  duly  equipped  in 
full  Spanish  costume,  we  drove  to  St.  Peter's  ;  but  we  were  so 
far.  from  being  the  first,  that  it  was  impossible  even  to  obtain  en- 
trance into  the  chapel ;  at  least  we  thought  so,  until  we  saw  some 
Russian  ladies,  who  arrived  after  us,  shoulder  and  elbow  their 
way  through  the  dense  mass  of  humanity  that  blocked  up  the 
door,  with  a  moral  courage  and  physical  strength  that  excited 
our  admiration,  without,  however,  inspiring  us  to  imitate  it.  A 
poor  priest,  who,  like  ourselves,  was  content  to  listen  to  such  of 
the  holy  strains  as  escaped  beyond  the  precincts  of  the  chapel, 
was  literally  so  hustled  by  these  ladies,  that,  au  ddsespoir  de 
cause,  he  fairly  retreated,  leaving  them,  after  the  usual  fashion 
of  the  world,  to  enjoy  the  place  out  of  which  they  had,  by  dint 
of  effrontery,  ejected  their  betters.  Thus,  in  the  heat,  suffoca- 
tion, and  intolerable  stench  of  an  Italian  crowd  (which  those 
who  have  experienced  once  will  not  have  forgotten),  I  heard 
through  the  door,  blocked  up  with  human  figures,  the  few  notes 
of  the  miserere  which  oozed  through  the  living  wall,  and  saw 
above  their  heads,  for  the  first  time,  the  visions  of  glory  with 
which  the  vault  of  the  Sistine  Chapel  is  clothed.  It  wa,s  not, 
after  all,  we  found,  the  famous  miserere,  but  one  by  a  modern 
composer,  who  has  a  great  reputation  here,  of  the  name  of  Baini. 
After  standing  in  this  uneasy  listening  post  till  all  was  ended,  we 
descended  to  the  church,  where  the  Pope  was  expected  to  come 
and  worship  certain  relics ;  among  others,  the  pocket-handker- 
chief with  which  St.  Veronica  wiped  our  Saviour's  forehead,  as 
he  carried  his  cross  towards  Calvary  ;  precious  objects  of  Ro- 
man Catholic  veneration,  which  are  only  exposed  to  the  adora- 
tion of  the  faithful  on  this  one  day  of  the  year.  It  was  already 
late  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  beautiful  church  was  filled  with 
solemn  shadows  ;  nothing  could  exceed  the  wonderful  effect  of 
these  great  long  aisles  and  sublime  domes,  under  this  soft  and 
awful  light.    The  presence  of  the  Pope's  guard,  and  the  long 


HOSPITAL  OF  THE  PILGRIMS. 


123 


procession  of  Cardinals,  gave  splendor  and  infinite  variety  to  the 
scene,  while  in  one  of  the  side  aisles,  the  Brethren  of  Mercy,  in 
their  hideous  black  dominoes,  looking  like  story-book  pictures  of 
devils  more  than  anything  else,  came  on  in  slow  march,  bearing 
banners,  crucifixes,  and  lamps, — the  most  unearthly  procession 
conceivable.  The  Pope  himself  did  not  come  to  worship  the 
relics  after  all ;  the  duties  of  the  holy  week  are  extremely  ardu- 
ous, and  the  poor  old  gentleman  was  too  much  exhausted  to  go 
through  this  part  of  the  ceremonies  of  the  day.  At  a  high  sort 
of  balcony,  looking  down  upon  the  baldacchino  over  the  high 
altar,  some  priests  now  appeared,  and  walking  backwards  and 
forwards,  paraded  something  in  their  hands  to  the  eyes  of  the 
devout  and  edified  crowd  ;  all  went  down  on  their  knees,  but  as 
the  objects  they  professed  to  see  were  at  a  height  of  at  least  a 
hundred  feet  above  them,  my  eyes  would  not  serve  me,  and  hav- 
ing thus  neither  sight  nor  faith,  I  cannot  tell  what  was  exhibited 
at  that  exalted  station.  No  sooner  had  the  crowd  dispersed  after 
this  ceremonial,  than  we  hurried  to  our  carriage,  and  drove  to 

the  house  of  Monsignore  ,  who  had  obligingly  promised 

to  obtain  an  entrance  for  us  at  the  Hospital  of  the  Pilgrims,  to 
see  the  ceremony  of  washing  their  feet ;  we  went  thither  ac- 
cordingly, and.  parting  from  our  male  companions  at  the  door, 
who  were  taken  on  one  side  to  see  the  ceremony  performed  by 
the  Roman  gentlemen  upon  the  feet  of  the  male  pilgrims,  we 
were  introduced  into  the  female  department  of  the  Charity  by 

Monsignore   ,  who,  in  a  sort  of  geranium-colored  calico 

blouse,  with  a  white  apron  over  it,  ushered  us  into  an  apartment, 
where  the  door  was  kept  by  another  church  dignitary,  similarly 
accoutred.  Here  we  found  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  the  chari- 
table  sisterhood  of  which  I  spoke  yesterday,  whose  members  re- 
ceived the  pilgrims,  and  led  them  up  the  church  of  St.  Peter's. 
These  ladies  were  attired  all  of  them  either  in  colored  cotton 
gowns,  or  black  silk  ;  over  their  dresses  they  all  had  red  aprons, 


124 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


with  a  large  badge  or  device,  probably  that  of  the  Charity  they 
belong  to,  fastened  upon  the  breast.  This  association  is  extremely 
numerous,  and  includes  women  of  various  ranks  in  society.  One 

of  the  principal  members  of  it  is  the  Princess  ,  who  was 

pointed  out  to  me  with  an  -air  of  great  satisfaction  by  one  of  the 
humbler  members  of  the  sisterhood.  Upon  our  entrance  we 
were  led  down  into  a  lower  room,  where  two  long  tables  were 
being  laid  for  the  pilgrims,  who  were  to  eat  the  supper  provided 
for  them  there  after  their  feet  had  been  washed  ;  we  were  inclosed 
in  a  sort  of  narrow  alley  between  these  two  hospitable  boards. 
The  space  was  crowded  with  visitors  like  ourselves,  most  of 
them  Englishwomen,  and  I  again  had  to  admire  sorrowfully 
the  exquisite  bad  taste  of  their  deportment,  and  the  comments 
they  indulged  in  upon  everything  about  them  ;  but  especially  the 
dress,  air,  manner  and  looks  of  the  gentlemen,  who,  in  the  livery 
of  the  Charity,  L  c,  the  red  blouse  and  white  apron,  guarded  the 
outer  door,  through  which  we  were  to  pass  to  the  washing  apart- 
ment, and  who,  when  all  things  were  in  a  due  state  of  prepara- 
tion, removed  a  bar  and  permitted  our  egress,  not  without,  how- 
ever, repeated  and  most  necessary  entreaties  to  the  lady  visit- 
ors that  they  would  proceed  gently  and  in  order.  We 
descended  a  narrow  stairs,  lined  with  ladies  in  their  charity 
costume,  and  arrived  at  a  low  white-washed  room  with  a 
stone  floor,  around  which  ran  a  wooden  bench,  upon  which,  with 
their  shoes  and  stockings  off,  sat  a  number  of  the  poor  women  for 
whose  supposed  benefit  the  ceremony  was  about  to  take  place. 
I  am  compelled  to  say  supposed,  for  I  think  that  nobody,  looking 
at  the  whole  scene  with  the  eye  of  common  sense,  would  have 
seen  anything  but  awkwardness,  embarrassment,  and  a  sort  of 
terrified  surprise,  fatigue,  and  shy  dismay,  depicted  on  the  coun- 
tenances of  the  poor  creatures,  as  they  sat  with  bare  feet,  the 
gaze  of  the  mob  of  chattering,  giggling  women,  who  filled  the 
room.    It  is  a  rule  that  each  of  these  pilgrims  must  have  walked 


HOSPITAL  OF  THE  PILGRIMS. 


125 


a  hundred  miles  to  entitle  them  to  the  hospitality  of  this  institu- 
tion, which,  besides  the  problematical  comfort  of  this  public  feet- 
washing,  provides  them  with  the  less  doubtful  accommodation  of 
food  and  lodging  for  three  days.  Most  of  these  poor  creatures 
were  in  the  meanest  and  coarsest  peasant's  apparel  :  their  filthy 
shoes  and  stockings  lay  beside  them,  ready  to  cover  again  the 
feet  after  the  unwonted  ablution  ;  many  of  them  looked  ill  and 
faint,  all  of  them  weary  and  stupified  with  the  strangeness  of  the 
scene,  in  which  they  appeared  most  confused  and  suffering 
actors.  Before  each  of  them  knelt  the  lady  who  was  to  wash 
their  feet,  with  hands  crossed  upon  her  breast  in  the  attitude  of 
prayer.  In  the  midst  of  the  room  swarmed  and  flitted,  like  a 
parcel  of  flies,  the  foreign  gazers,  and  to  and  fro,  through  the  idle 
crowd,  like  so  many  bees,  buzzed  and  hummed,  upon  their  busy 
errand  of  charity,  the  red-apron'd  ladies  hospitallers.  Presently 
one  of  the  gentlemen  in  a  blouse  (I  presume  of  course  a  priest) 
appeared  ;  he  pronounced  a  short  prayer,  and  the  word  of  com- 
mand, "  Lavate,"  was  given,  when  the  process  of  cleansing 
began,  during  which  the  same  minister  read  aloud  from  an  open 
book,  and  by  the  light  of  the  candle  held  by  one  of  the  officiating 
ladies,  a  sort  of  church  service,  which  lasted  while  the  washing 
went  on.  When  it  was  over  with  this  set, — for  the  number  being 
more  than  the  room  could  accommodate,  they  came  down  by 
relays  from  the  chamber  above — we  withdrew  to  the  supper- 
rooms  to  see  the  preparations  for  their  refreshment.  We  were 
informed  that  between  two  and  three  hundred  pilgrims  had 
arrived  the  evening  before — as  many  this  evening  ;  and  that  a 
still  greater  number  might  be  expected  to-morrow, — the  last  day 
of  the  Holy  Week,  and  of  their  hospitable  reception.  The  scene 
in  the  great  supper-room  was  curious  in  the  extreme,  and  must 
have  been  extremely  gratifying  to  those  who,  like  ,  par- 
ticularly desired  to  see  a  real  princess  perform  the  offices  of  a 
servant-maid.    The  tables  were  set,  knives  and  forks,  plates, 


126 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


spoons,  and  glasses,  all  placed  in  order  by  ladies  of  various  ranks 
of  nobility,  and  great  trays  full  of  dishes  of  food  were  brought  in, 
in  apparently  endless  succession,  and  their  contents  deposited  on 
the  long  tables  by  the  same  noble  and  gentle  personages.  The 
young  girls,  of  whom  there  were  a  great  number,  who,  in  the 
uniform  of  the  Charity,  bustled  about,  laughing,  talking,  and 
apparently  enjoying  extremely  their  temporary  transformation 
into  waiting-women,  gave  great  liveliness  and  animation  to  the 
scene ;  while  to  the  elder  ladies  it  appeared  a  rather  more 
onerous  duty,  especially  as  the  vast  room  was  filled  to  suffoca- 
tion with  visitors,  many  of  whom  were  their  personal  acquaint- 
ance; to  whom  they  had  to  do  the  honors  of  the  sight,  and 
between  whom  and  the  pilgrims  their  attentions  were  divided 
with  infinite  zeal  and  alacrity  :  they  must  have  been  most  dread- 
fully tired,  I  am  sure  ;  for  the  din,  and  confusion,  and  hot  air  of 
human  breath,  and  steam  of-  food,  and  smell  of  dirty  fellow- 
creatures  (I  regret  to  say  it,  pilgrims  though  they  were),  almost 
made  me  faint.  In  one  room  the  poor  creatures  who  had  gone 
through  their  washing,  were  all  penned  up  together  like  so  many 
cattle  ;  and,  indeed,  they  looked  like  nothing  but  frightened  sheep 
and  cows,  and  so  weary  were  they  with  their  long  foot-travel  and 
these  prolonged  ceremonies,  that  many  of  them  fell  together  in 
deep  sleep,  and  could  hardly  be  awakened  when  the  numerous 
preparations  for  their  supper  were  at  an  end,  and  they  were 
called  to  take  their  places  at  the  tables.  Even  then,  with  the 
savory  and  smoking  plate  of  soup  under  their  noses,  there 
occurred  a  most  tantalizing  delay  of  some  time,  occasioned  by  the 
non-arrival  of  the  Cardinal  whose  special  office  it  was  to  pro- 
nounce a  benediction  upon  the  food  placed  before  them.  This 
dignitary  having  finally  arrived,  and  the  blessing  being  duly 
uttered,  we  departed,  leaving  the  hungry  to  the  enjoyment  of 
their  meal,  and  the  charitable  to  the  consciousness  of  their  virtue. 
Of  the  merit  of  charity  and  hospitality  thus  exercised  I  say 


CELEBRATION  OF  EASTER-DAY. 


127 


nothing.  I  went  to  see  the  ceremony  as  a  sight,  and  a  most 
curious  sight  indeed  it  was, — illustrating  in  the  most  striking 
manner  the  very  different  views  of  duty  which  the  human  mind 
accepts ;  but  certainly  not  deriving  much  of  its  edification  from 
the  fulfilment  of  that  injunction  which  forbids  that  the  left  hand 
should  know  the  good  that  the  right  hand  does. 

Saturday  Morning. — We  were  alarmed  and  astonished  at  a 
perpetual  and  almost  universal  discharge  of  guns,  and  squibs, 
and  crackers.  Upon  inquiry  I  found  that  these  demonstrations 
were  in  honor  of  Easter-day — which,  indeed,  is  only  to-morrow  ; 
but  the  days  of  the  Holy  Week  not  sufficing  for  all  the  religious 
ceremonies  and  celebrations  which  are  performed  in  them, 
many  of  them  are  shifted  from  the  days  to  which  they  properly 
belong,  to  other  seasons  when  they  can  be  more  conveniently 
accomplished.  To-day,  therefore,  being  the  day  before  Easter- 
day,  those  squibs  and  crackers  were  fired  off  in  honor  of  the 
Resurrection,  the  proper  commemoration  of  which  does  not,  of 
course,  occur  till  to-morrow.  The  fashion  which  prevails  in 
America  of  firing  out  the  old,  and  in  the  New  Year,  with  guns 
and  rockets,  &c,  always  appeared  to  me  singularly  irreverent 
and  inappropriate  ;  but  this  mode  of  celebrating  the  day  of 
Christ's  victory  over  the  grave,  struck  me  as  ludicrous  in  the 
extreme  ;  and  when  a  whole  fringe  of  squibs  which  our  own 
servants  had  affixed  to  the  balustrade  of  our  terrace-garden, 
went  off  in  detestable  succession,  the  inappropriateness  of  this 
homage  to  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion  was  most  absurd  and 
annoying.  To-day  was  a  sort  of  climax  to  the  religious  carni- 
val of  the  whole  week,  and  the  number  of  sights  to  be  seen  in 
the  shape  of  strange  religious  ceremonies  was  really  quite  em- 
barrassing.   The  eagerness  with  which  Monsignore  urged 

upon  us  the  curiosity  and  beauty  of  these  various  holy  spectacles 
struck  me  as  very  strange.  I  find  it  difficult  to  imagine  that 
frame  of  mind  which  rejoices  in  the  unsympathizing  presence 


12S 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


of  crowds  of  strangers  at  the  sacred  services  of  one's  religion ; 
and  it  is  always  a  marvel  to  me  that  the  Catholic  clergy,  and 
even  the  people  themselves,  do  not  object  to  the  careless  show 
which  foreigners  make  of  their  places  of  worship  and  religious 
ceremonies.  To  be  sure,  foreigners  are  a  very  considerable  item 
of  profit  to  the  Roman  people  and  Catholic  places  of  worship, 
and  so  the  thing  resolves  itself  into  natural  elements.  On  the 
day  before  Easter,  every  year,  a  Jew  is  converted  to  the  Roman 
Catholic  faith,  whose  christening  in  the  splendid  Baptistry  of 
St.  John  Lateran,  is  one  of  the  great  spectacles  of  the  day. 
The  invariable  occurrence  of  the  annual  Jew,  whose  yearly 
conversion  happens  so  opportunely,  might  give  cavillers  ground 
for  objection  ;  but  as  it  was  determined  that  we  should  not  attend 
this  performance,  I  had  no  opportunity  of  asking  any  of  the 
many  questions  that  the  mere  account  of  the  celebration  sug- 
gested.   I  thought  of  and  the  compassionate  sorrow  that 

would  have  shaded  her  noble  and  beautiful  face,  at  this  instance 
of  faithlessness  in  one  of  her  race.  How  strange  a  thing  is  the 
human  mind — how  curious  this  love  of  conquest  and  of  power, 
extending  even  into  the  abstract  regions  of  religious  faith,  and 
imposing  certain  laws  upon  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the 
conquered  !  I  wonder  in  how  many  centuries  of  centuries 
Christians  will  believe,  and  above  all,  and  allow  that  the  service 
of  God  is  perfect  freedom. 

Monsignore    persuaded  us  to  go  to-day  to  the  Arme- 

nian Church,  where,  by  his  account,  the  celebrations  and  ser- 
vices were  remarkably  beautiful  and  imposing.  Thither  accord- 
ingly we  went,  and  were  conducted  into  a  very  small  church  or 
chapel,  formed  in  every  respect  like  a  theatre.  In  front  of  the 
benches,  which  occupied  the  floor  of  the  room,  and  which  exactly 
resembled  the  arrangement  and  furnishing  of  a  pit,  was  a  row 
of  arm-chairs,  reserved  seats  or  stalls,  for  certain  high  church 
dignitaries  ;  immediately  before  these  rose  a  sort  of  stage,  with 


THE  ARMENIAN  CHURCH. 


129 


two  columns  forming  exactly  a  proscenium,  between  which  was 
hung  a  curtain  of  gaudy-colored  flowered  calico.  In  front  of 
this  curtain  was  a  small  portable  reading-desk ;  to  the  right  and 
left  of  the  walls  were  gaudy  pictures  and  tawdry  altars,  and, 
compared  with  the  splendid  decorations  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
churches,  the  whole  thing  appeared  like  one  of  the  theatres  on 
the  Boulevards  at  Paris,  compared  with  the  Academie  Royale. 
At  the  back  of  the  pit  was  a  low  sort  of  wooden  screen,  and  be- 
tween this  and  the  gate  which  opened  upon  the  street,  a  nume- 
rous, noisy,  dirty  crowd  of  gaping  spectators  pressed  themselves 
with  unceremonious  curiosity.  After  waiting  a  long  while  for 
the  service  to  begin,  a  priest,  in  an  extremely  gay  dress  of 
pink  and  green  satin,  profusely  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver, 
came  from  behind  the  curtain,  and  opening  a  book  on  the  desk — 
the  Scriptures,  I  believe — began  reading,  or  rather  chanting 
aloud  in  a  most  monotonous  nasal  tone,  which  was  as  unpleasant 
as  ludicrous  to  ears  unaccustomed  to  it.  This  chanting  lasted  a 
very  long  time,  and  towards  the  end  of  it,  five  other  priests  came 
also  from  behind  the  curtain  and  stationed  themselves  in  front  of 
it,  joining  their  voices  in  alternate  responses  to  the  performance 
of  their  predecessor.  At  length  the  calico  curtains  were  drawn 
aside,  and  the  high  altar  was  revealed,  with  the  primate  or  high 
priest  most  gorgeously  adorned,  standing  in  front  of  it,  supported 
by  two  other  priests  in  almost  equally  splendid  dresses.  This 
priest  had  been  pointed  out  to  me  in  the  gardens  of  the  Villa 
Borghese  one  day,  and  I  had  then  been  struck  with  his  extremely 
fine  head  and  face,  and  the  picturesque  dignity  of  his  whole 
appearance ;  to-day,  therefore,  in  his  shining  gold  and  silver 
robes,  and  peculiar-shaped  rich  mitre,  the  whole  effect  of  his 
person  was  most  striking.  The  dresses  of  all  the  priests  were 
extremely  gorgeous ;  but  it  irked  me  excessively,  under  the 
green,  and  pink,  and  yellow  satin  robes  of  the  choristers  and 
assistants,  to  detect  the  dirty  stockings  and  coarse  boots  and 


130 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


shoes  of  common  every-day  modern  attire  ;  the  whole  thing  was 
so  like  an  indifferent  theatrical  spectacle,  where  the  very  same 
show  of  dirty  boots  and  shoes,  and  trowser  legs,  obtrudes  itself 
below  the  costumes  of  some  splendid  Eastern  guard,  or  Roman 
senator's  red-striped  toga.  The  service  now  performed  by  these 
priests  exceeded  in  the  grotesqueness  of  the  intonations  in  which 
it  was  chanted  anything  I  ever  heard,  or  could  have  surmised  ; 
and  in  spite  of  the  most  serious  annoyance  at  experiencing  such 
an  effect  from  any  worship,  I  found  myself  almost  in  convulsions 
of  suppressed  laughter,  which  I  in  vain  endeavored  to  control  or 
conceal,  and  which  painfully  seized  and  shook  me  from  head  to 
foot,  at  each  renewal,  after  a  pause  of  these  extraordinary 
sounds.  I  have  seen  the  uncouth  and  hideous  religious  gambols 
of  the  Shaking  Quakers,  but  even  their  most  grotesque  worship  did 
not  affect  me  as  the  howling  and  whining  and  nasal  droning  of 

DO  O 

this  extraordinary  Armenian  service.  I  dared  not  look  either  to 
the  right  or  the  left,  and  was  in  terror  lest,  by  some  sudden  ex- 
plosion of  laughter,  I  should  disgrace  myself  among  my  compa- 
nions, and  desecrate  the  solemnity.  How  I  did  repent  coming  to 
a  church  out  of  curiosity  !  No  description  can  give  any  cor- 
rect idea  of  these  singular  sounds,  which  began  in  a  discordant 
plaintive  whine  through  the  nose  by  one  priest  at  a  time,  and 
gradually  swelled  to  a  sort  of  howl  or  yell  by  the  joining  in  of 
the  others,  and  then  it  died  away  in  quavering  uncertainty,  and 
then  rose  again  in  the  same  solitary  disconsolate  whine.  How 
they  ever  learn  to  do  it,  or  having  learnt  remember  how  to  do  it 
right, — if  there  is  a  right  or  a  wrong,  or  if  the  whole  be  not  one 
grand  nasal  ad  libitum, — were  ideas  which,  in  the  interval  of  my 
inward  spasms  of  laughter,  exercised  my  mind  extremely  ;  it  is 
impossible  to  experience  a  greater  sense  of  relief  than  I  did  when 

the  whole  was  ended.   said  the  chanting  bore  a  strong 

resemblance  to  certain  musical  performances  of  the  Arabs.  It 
is  curious  that  among  the  things  borne  round  the  altar  in  their 


THE  ARMENIAN  CHURCH. 


131 


various  processions  by  the  priests,  were  some  cymbals  of  an  ex- 
tremely ancient  form,  resembling  very  nearly  certain  Egyptian 
instruments  used  in  the  sacred  ceremonies  of  Isis.  The  winding 
up  of  this  extraordinary  exhibition  was  worthy  of  the  whole. 
One  of  the  priests  came  forward  with  a  basket  of  consecrated 
wafers,  of  which  he  presented  one  to  each  of  the  personages  in 
the  front  row  of  the  congregation  ;  an  immediate  rush  of  the 
whole  assembly  followed  ;  the  basket  and  priest  were  all  but 
annihilated ;  people  got  upon  chairs  and  benches,  and  pushed 
each  other,  and  thrust  themselves,  and  struggled,  and  kicked,  and 
fought  for  these  wafers  ;  one  poor  man  was  thrown  down,  and  in 
great  danger  of  being  converted  into  instantaneous  dust  under 
the  feet  of  the  pious  crowd,  and  it  was  not  without  considerable 
difficulty,  that,  without  venturing  to  make  the  slightest  preten- 
sions to  the  possession  of  a  holy  wafer,  we  extricated  ourselves, 
and  made  good  our  retreat  with  life  and  limb  from  the  holy  tu- 
mult. I  was  extremely  amused  before  the  services  began,  and 
while  we  were  silently  waiting  for  their  commencement,  at  ob- 
serving a  furious  dumb  dispute  going  on  between  an  impudent 
brazen-looking  Italian,  and  a  spiteful  sour-faced  Englishwoman, 
for  a  chair,  which  the  former  had  seized  upon,  and  though,  not 
using,  chose  to  retain,  and  to  which  the  latter  kept  giving  a 
series  of  persistive  pertinacious  twitches,  in  spite  of  the  dragon 
glances  by  which  it  was  forbidden  her  to  touch  it.  The  counte- 
nances of  the  two  women,  too,  were  comical ;  the  audacious 
effrontery  of  the  one,  the  bitter  sharp  insistive  determination  of 
the  other  ;  it  was  really  a  most  curious  scene  ;  the  Italian  had 
the  best  of  it.  In  the  first  place,  she  had  original  possession  of 
the  chair,  and  so  the  Englishwoman's  case  was  hopeless  ;  but 
she  comforted  herself  by  keeping  her  fingers  tight  clenched  upon 
the  back  of  it,  and  her  curds-and-whey  face,  with  its  pale  unripe 
blue  eyes,  and  thin  compressed  lips,  fastened  with  a  sort  of  spiteful 
fascination  upon  the  coarse  bronzed  features  of  her  antagonist. 


132 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


 did  not  dine  at  home  to-day,  having  appointed  to  go 

with  his  uncle  to  a  certain  church  where  the  congregation,  of 
men  only,  perform  on  this  evening  of  the  year  a  holy  flagella- 
tion upon  themselves.  The  lights  at  a  given  signal  are  extin- 
guished, and,  during  a  loud  voiced  exhortation  from  the  pulpit,  a 
castigation  of  about  ten  minutes  is  zealously  carried  forward  by 
the  devoutly-disposed,  who  are  furnished  with  ropes'-ends  or 
leathern  thongs  for  this  purpose,  to  the  considerable  peril  of 
unparticipating  assistants,  who  occasionally  receive  some  of  the 
blows   intended    for   the   self-edification   of  the  performers. 

 and  his  uncle  protected  their  faces  with  their  hats, 

under  this  apprehension  ;  and,  by  his  account,  the  ceremony 
must  have  been  a  very  curious  one. 

The  moon  being  nearly  full,  we  drove  to  the  Coliseum,  and 
the  change  of  associations  and  impressions  from  all  these  sense- 
less observances,  and  the  gaudy,  and,  at  the  same  time,  mean 
church  pageants  we  had  been  seeing,  to  the  still  solemnity 
of  beautiful  night  among  those  sublime  ruins,  was  most  impres- 
sive. We  wandered  up  and  down  the  vast  area,  all  flooded 
with  the  soft  light  which  had  wooed  forth  numbers  like  our- 
selves to  the  enjoyment  of  the  beautiful  scene.  The  gro  ips 
that  passed  and  re-passed  us  spoke  all  the  languages  of  Europe — 
French,  German,  English,  Russian — and  it  was  a  strange  thing 
to  see  them  lingering  round  the  Cross  that  marks  the  centre 
of  the  great  slaughter-ground  where  the  barbarian  forefathers 
of  their  races  made  sport  with  their  death  agonies  for  the  great 
Roman  people.  I  often  think,  if  I  were  a  modern  Italian,  but 
especially  one  of  those  who  live  under  the  Austrian  yoke,  my 
principal  enjoyment  would  be  looking  at  the  statue  of  the  Dying 
Gladiator,  in  the  Capitol,  and  remembering  the  time  when  the 
hordes  of  Germanic  tribes  furnished  the  lives  that  were  sacrificed 
for  "  a  Roman  holiday."  This  is  not  very  amiable  ;  but  I  am 
afraid,  if  I  were  an  Italian,  I  should  rather  incline  to  such  senti- 


ASPIRATIONS  AFTER  PERFECTION. 


133 


ments,  and  yet  the  wiser  among  them  may  well  take  patience — 
the  great  field  of  Roman  glory  is  but  lying  fallow.  For  the  full 
ripening  of  such  a  power  as  that  colossal  empire,  how  may  hun- 
dreds of  years  were  needed  ? — there  must  be  a  proportionate  time 
of  rest  before  the  people  of  those  lands  can  re-produce  the  elements 
of  political  greatness.  The  priest-ridden  ignorance  and  supersti- 
tion, the  laziness,  the  imbecility  of  the  present  government,  are 
but  like  the  dung  spread  over  the  soil ;  the  seeds  ferment  below 
that  shall  again  cover  these  glorious  countries  with  the  noblest 
harvests  of  humanity ;  for  in  the  moral,  as  the  physical 
world,  corruption  is  the  cause  of  regeneration,  just,  unfortu- 
nately, as  in  civilization,  ripeness  has  hitherto  preceded  rotten- 
ness but  by  a  little  space.  It  yet  remains  to  be  proved  if 
Christianity,  when  it  shall  have  begun  to  actuate  nations,  as  well 
as  individuals,  cannot  prevent  this  h'itherto  infallible  progress. 

To  return  to  Rome  :    said,  that  drawing  among  the 

ruins  of  the  Palace  of  the  Caesars,  made  him  sad  to  think 
of  the  great  glories  past,  the  present  shame.  As  a  Roman 
I  too  should  feel  sad,  and  I  do  pity  those  of  her  sons  who 
have  a  consciousness  of  her  degradation ;  for  God  may  well 
be  patient  with  defect,  whose  absolute  perfection  surveys 
time  but  as  a  part,  while  we,  shut  in  within  the  limits  of  our 
span-short  life,  would  have  the  great  world-picture  complete  be- 
fore us,  and  every  individual  life  about  us  perfect ;  because  the 
smallest  particle  of  that  part — Time — is  all  that  we  inherit  here. 
Nor  is  it  impatience  of  incompleteness  and  defect  alone  that 
makes  our  discontent — it  is  the  dear  desire  of  perfection,  the 
charter  of  our  immortality,  the  title-deed  and  proof  of  our  own 
power  of  progress,  that  causes  the  discontent  of  the  soul,  that, 
like  a  defeated  heir,  is  condemned  to  toil  upon  a  narrow  corner 
of  its  own  wide  and  rich  inheritance.  As  a  pilgrim,  however, 
to  this  land  of  noble  memories,  I  look  with  hopeful  eyes  upon  the 
mental  and  mortal  torpor  that  brood  over  it.    This  swoon  is  but 


134 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


for  a  time ;  it  is  a  deep  sleep,  in  which  strength  is  gradually 
gathered  for  a  resurrection  ;  the  smouldering  fire  of  liberty  lies 
under  the  dust  and  ashes  that  cover  it,  and  every  now  and  then 
the  sparks  escape,  and  lambent  flames  play  here  and  there  about 
the  embers,  that  give  token  of  the  light  and  heat  within,  and 
foretell  the  ultimate  blaze  that  shall  break  forth  and  irradiate 
this  garden  of  the  earth.  To  return  to  the  Coliseum  :  many 
parties  were  wandering  separately  above  and  below  through  the 
ruined  arches  of  the  building,  and  the  contrasts  of  light  produced 
by  the  white  moonlight,  and  the  ruddy  glow  of  the  torches  pass- 
ing along  the  passages  and  up  the  flights  of  steps,  together  with 
the  shadowy  figures  preceding  and  following  them,  were  won- 
derfully beautiful.  After  wandering  round,  we  sat  down  and 
rested  awhile  on  some  fallen  fragments  of  columns.  How  many 
thoughts  were  suggested  by  the  solemn  scene  and  season,  now  at 
this  great  rejoicing  time  of  the  followers  of  Christ !  How  strange 
it  was  for  us  to  sit  here,  where  his  early  confessors  sealed  their 
despised  faith  with  their  lives !  How  that  triumphant  cross, 
whose  sanctity  now  guards  the  grand  heathen  ruin  crumbling 
round  it,  carried  back  one's  mind  to  the  victims,  whose  blood  was 
poured  out  like  water  upon  the  very  soil  where  it  now  stands ! 
Imagination  suggested  the  spirits  of  these  holy  martyrs  now  at 
this  sacred  season  hovering  over  this  scene  of  their  agony,  and 
the  wondrous  world-history  unrolled  itself  back  to  that  most 
wondrous  page  in  it,  the  crucifixion  of  the  despised  Nazarene, 
whose  worship,  like  the  gradual  growing  of  the  light  of  day,  is 
spreading  itself  abroad  over  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  After 
leaving  this  wonderful  place — thrice  wonderful  !  thrice  beauti- 
ful ! — we  proceeded  home  through  the  Forum,  and  here  we 
stopped  the'  carriage  again,  and  paused  to  look  round  and  remem- 
ber. Visions  of  the  old  glorious  Rome  rose  before  us  in  the  clear 
moonlight — the  joyful  procession  of  those  early  conquerors,  in 
the  fabulous  times  of  her  history — the  white-robed  Roman  youths 


EASTER  EVE. 


135 


marching  from  Veii,  and  bearing  the  image  of  Juno  Regina  to 
her  new  temple  on  the  Capitol — the  blue-eyed  wondering  Gauls, 
wandering  through  the  deserted  streets  and  places,  and  gazing 
up,  even  as  we  then  did,  at  the  fortress  that  then  held,  within  its 
narrow  precincts  the  future  hopes  and  fortunes  of  Rome,  and 
folded,  as  within  its  kernel,  the  great  future  tree,  that  life  of  con- 
quest and  renown,  whose  rumor  still  fills  the  world — that  Caesar 
who  was  to  subjugate  their  tribes  with  his  sword,  and  chronicle 
them  with  his  pen.  Then  floating  down  the  broader,  brighter 
stream  of  history,  we  thought  of  the  tumult,  the  alarm,  the  rush- 
ing of  people,  the  stir  of  voices,  and  the  tramp  of  hurrying  feet, 
when  Brutus,  waving  his  dagger  above  his  head,  red  with  that 
very  conqueror's  blood,  and  followed  by  the  mass  of  the  whole 
Senate,  came  down  to  quell  the  raging  of  the  people,  and  justify 
the  murder  of  their  idol.  What  place  was  ever  yet  so  rich  in 
memory,  so  full  of  thought !  After  leaving  this  consecrated 
quarter  of  Rome — no  offence  to  St.  Peter's  or  the  Vatican — it 
was  strange  enough  to  drive  along  the  streets  full  of  holiday 
folks  on  Easter-eve  errands.  The  cheese  and  bacon  shops  pre- 
sented a  most  peculiar  aspect ;  they  were  hung  with  garlands, 
frescoes  were  painted  all  down  the  sides  of  the  flitches  of  bacon, 
and  between  the  rows  of  symmetrically-arranged  cheese,  little 
flaring  lamps  were  placed,  giving  to  the  whole  shop  a  brilliancy 
of  illumination  little  short  of  a  prophecy  of  the  lighting  up  of  St. 
Peter's  to-morrow.  The  pastrycooks'  shops  are  full  of  holy 
symbols  done  in  comfits  ;  and  lambs  bearing  crosses,  and  doves 
and  triangles  surrounded  with  glories,  and  other  mystical  types 
of  the  holiest  things  of  the  Christian  faith,  are  exposed  in  sugar 
and  butter  to  tempt  the  appetites  of  the  devoutly-disposed. 
Great  baskets  full  of  the  Easter  eggs  stand  at  the  shop-doors, 
and  the  pervading  love  of  ornament  of  this  most  ornamental 
people  has  even  extended  itself  to  the  decking  of  these  with  little 
bunches  of  artificial  flowers  and  tufts  of  feathers.    I  cannot  say, 


136  A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 

however,  that  they  were  by  any  means  as  beautiful  as  the 

elegant  and  splendid  Easter  eggs  which  brought  with 

her  from  Russia. 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


A 


YEAR   OF  CONSOLATION. 


BY  MRS.  BUTLER, 

LATE    FANNY  KEMBLE. 


IN*     TWO  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  II. 


NEW  YORK: 
WILEY  &  PUTNAM,  161  BROADWAY. 

1847. 


ROBERT  CRAIGHEAD,   PRINTER,  T.  B.  SMITH.  STEREOTYPER, 

112  FULTON  STREET.  216  WILLIAM  STREET. 


A  YE  AK  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Easter  Sunday. — I  was  not  well,  and  missed  the  great  climax 
of  the  holy  ceremonies — the  Pope's  blessing  of  the  people.  From 
the  terrace  of  the  Villa  Medici,  I  watched  the  sudden  gleams 
and  slow  curling  clouds  from  the  cannons  of  the  castle  of  St.  An- 
gelo,  which  proclaimed  the  universal  benediction.  To  be  blessed 
by  sound  of  cannon,  seemed  to  me  strange,  especially  by  Christ's 
Vicar,  and  in  Christ's  name  ;  but  to  be  blessed,  at  any  rate,  is 
something,  and  that  the  city  and  the  world  have  been  by  word 
of  Pope  this  day.  In  the  evening  we  drove  to  St.  Peter's,  to  see 
the  illumination,  the  stream  of  human  life  setting  in  from  every 
avenue,  and  street,  and  alley,  and  gathering  as  it  rolled  towards 
one  common  point,  the  multitudinous  voices  of  all  these  living 
rills,  as  they  poured  down  beside  our  carriage, — the  flaring  lights 
of  the  windows,  which  were  filled  with  people,  whose  bodies 
were  all  eagerly  stretched  towards  the  quarter  of  St.  Peter's, 
and  whose  faces,  as  we  drew  nearer  the  great  illumination,  were 
shining  as  with  the  light  of  day  ;  all  presented  a  most  curious 
and  exciting  spectacle.  At  length  we  reached  the  end  of  the 
street  of  the  Borgio  di  San  Spirito,  and  debouched  together  with 
the  crowds  of  pedestrians  abreast  of  us  in  the  great  place  of  St. 
Peter's ;  the  vast  and  noble  church,  and  graceful  colonnades, 
with  their  outline  defined  in  pale  white  fire  ;  the  springing  spray 
of  the  beautiful  fountains  turned  into  showers  of  yellow  light ; 
the  huge  mass  of  compact  blackness  formed  by  the  thousands  of 
spectators ;  the  confused  jarring  and  rattling  and  hurtling  of  the 


6 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


crowded  carriages  ;  the  rearing  and  backing  of  the  horses ;  the 
outcries  and  violent  movements  of  the  mounted  police,  whose 
drawn  sabres  and  accoutrements  glittered  in  the  pervading  light ; 
above  all,  the  sea  of  upturned  wondering  human  faces  all  flooded 
with  it,  and  the  hoarse  murmur,  like  the  great  voice  of  the  ocean, 
rising  from  this  mass  of  people,  that  rolled  its  black  billows  to 
and  fro,  as  the  sudden  breaking  of  some  carriage  from  the  ranks, 
or  darting  forward  of  some  trooper  to  intercept  it,  caused  them 
to  recede  or  advance,  was  all  indescribably  strange  and  striking. 
We  sat  for  some  time  gazing  with  undiminished  wonder  and  ad- 
miration, when  the  great  bell  of  St.  Peter's  tolled  the  hour. 
Suddenly  the  cornices,  the  friezes,  the  pediment,  the  dome,  the 
lantern,  the  very  ball  and  cross,  high  up  in  the  dizzy  neighbor- 
hood of  the  stars,  became  alive  with  human  figures;  men,  reduc- 
ed by  their  fearful  height  above  us  to  the  size  of  black  pigmies, 
ran  like  so  many  glow-worms,  each  carrying  a  light,  all  over  the 
huge  fabric,  and  the  hitherto  pale  illumination  became  fiery  red 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye — it  was  marvellous !  Five  hundred 
men  are  thus  employed  twice  every  year,  Easter-day  and  on  the 
Feast  of  St.  Peter's :  for  three  days  previous  they  are  not  per- 
mitted.to  touch  wine,  and  they  all  confess  and  receive  absolution 
before  ascending  to  their  perilous  task.  After  blunting  the  edge 
of  our  amazement  with  gazing, — to  have  exhausted  it  would  have 
been  impossible — we  turned  homewards.  Our  carriage  rolled 
slowly,  or  rather  waded,  through  the  crowded  streets  at  a  foot- 
pace, and  when  we  came  to  the  Ponte  Sisto  we  beheld  another 
illumination,  which  turned  the  pageant  we  had  just  seen  into  a 
splendid  tawdry  toy.  The  full  moon  hung  above  the  river  in  a 
sea  of  mellow  light,  indescribably  soft  and  powerful ;  the  purple 
line  of  the  Alban  hills  was  distinctly  visible  against  the  pearly 
horizon,  while  the  roses  in  the  gardens,  near  the  bridge,  showed 
their  colors  as  though  by  day,  so  potent  was  the  moonlight, — with 
us,  so  wan  and  colorless.    Opposite  this  great  and  lovely  glory, 


ROMAN  FISH-MARKET. 


7 


St.  Peter's  flamed  in  the  distance  like  a  huge  gold  filigree  thim- 
ble. The  pageant  vouchsafed  to  us  nightly  is  a  fine  thing ;  it  is 
well  to  see  it  confronting  the  yearly  pageant  of  the  great  church 
of  Rome,  to  be  reminded  how  fine, — what  an  insensible,  brutish, 
dull,  irreverend  thing  is  custom.  Coming  home  we  found  a  per- 
fect opera  congregation  of  carriages  on  the  Pincio,  a  sort  of  Hay- 
market  and  King  Street  row.  The  view  of  St.  Peter's  is  very 
fine  from  here,  and  many  people  had  driven  up  to  enjoy  it.  I 
went  to  my  stand  on  the  terrace  of  our  charming  little  garden, 
and  here  looked  up  at  the  moon  and  down  at  St.  Peter's,  till  the 
rolling  wheels  had  all  rattled  away,  and  the  shuffling  feet  all  de- 
parted, and  the  sound  of  the  fountain  in  the  Piazza  di  Spagna 
came  up  to  answer  the  tiny  tinkle  of  the  fountain  in  the  garden, 
whose  roses  and  orange  blossoms  and  thousand  cups  of  incense 
were  sending  up  fragrance  into  the  night  air  like  prayer. 


IMPROMPTU. 

Sorrow  and  sin,  and  suffering  and  strife, 

Have  been  cast  in  the  waters  of  my  life ; 

And  they  have  sunk  deep  down  to  the  well-head, 

And  all  that  flows  thence  is  embittered. 

Yet  still  the  fountain  up  towards  Heaven  springs, 

And  still  the  brook  where'er  it  wanders  sings  ; 

And  still  where'er  it  hath  found  leave  to  rest, 

The  blessed  sun  looks  down  into  its  breast ; 

And  it  reflects,  as  in  a  mirror  fair, 

The  image  of  all  beauty  shining  there. 

April  19th. — In  my  walk  before  breakfast,  this  morning,  I 
penetrated  to  the  Roman  fish-market,  whither  I  advise  no  one 
else  to  penetrate  who  is  not  curious  in  foul  sights  and  smells.  I 
think  it  is  the  only  open  space  that  I  have  yet  seen  in  Rome 


8 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


without  a  fountain.  As  for  the  fish  itself,  except  a  few  monstrous 
and  vicious-looking  conger  eels,  I  saw  none.  A  row  of  little 
mean  stalls,  most  of  which,  however,  were  shut  up,  entitled  the 
place,  I  presume,  to  its  appellation  ;  but  the  only  fish  I  saw  for 
sale,  were  heaps  of  little  scaly  nondescripts,  lying  in  uncleanly 
flat  baskets,  bought  by  filthy  purchasers  of  filthy  venders,  and, 
thinking  upon  Hungerford  Market  and  Mr.  Grove's,  I  made  my 
escape.  Rome  is  certainly  not  famous  for  fish,  although  they 
have  some  that  are  not  despicable — sardines  of  excellent  flavor, 
very  good  mullet,  and  a  species  of  fish  of  which  I  do  not  know 
the  English  name  (indeed  I  do  not  think  we  have  it),  but  which 
resembles  very  much  the  shad  of  the  North  American  waters, 

and  is  a  very  good  creature.   dined  with  us.    We  had 

some  talk  about  the  state  of  politics  here,  as  it  affects  personal 
freedom,  liberty  of  discussion,  and  so  forth,  and  his  account  was 

less  favorable  than  that  of  ,  of  the  condition  of  the  Romans 

in  this  respect.  To  be  sure  the  latter  compares  Rome  with  the 
Austrian  Italian  governments,  and  I  suppose  the  service  of  the 
Pope  is  really  perfect  freedom  compared  with  that  of  the  Em- 
peror.   At  dinner  we  had  some  interesting  talk  about  art  and 

phrenology.   still  remains  a  believer  in  the  latter;   

is  absolutely  sceptical  (as  I  think  he  is  in  most  matters);  and  I 
(as  I  do  in  most  matters)  remain  suspended,  like  Mahomet's  cof- 
fin, between  belief  and  incredulity  :  mention  being  made  of  the 
fine  skull  which  was  found  some  years  ago  in  Rome,  and  sup- 
posed for  a  time  to  be  Raphael's,  and  upon  a  cast  from  which,  as 
Raphael's,  I  remember    gave  me  a  long  lecture,  illus- 

trative of  the  truths  of  phrenology ;  it  now  appears  that  the  skull 
is  not  Raphael's,  but  that  of  his  intimate  friend,  the  learned, 
amiable,  and  accomplished  ,  founder  of  the  Academy  of 

St.  Luke.  After  dinner,  we  proceeded  to  the  Vatican  to  see  the 
statues  by  torch-light  ;  I  had  not  yet  seen  them  by  any  light,  and 
felt  a  sort  of  nervous  trepidation  at  the  great  pleasure  I  antici- 


VISIT  TO  THE  VATICAN  BY  TORCH  LIGHT. 


9 


pated.  Arrived  under  the  colonnade  of  St.  Peter's,  we  sat  down 
on  one  of  the  benches  appropriated  to  the  Swiss  guard,  to  wait 
for  the  rest  of  our  party.  The  middle-age  dress  of  these  soldiers 
delights  me,  and  has  a  double  charm  of  association  for  me — that 
of  the  days  of  the  battle  of  the  Spurs,  and  of  the  noble  encoun- 
ters of  the  Swiss  with  the  French  armies  under  Louis  the  Twelfth 
and  Francis  the  First ;  and  it  also  recalls  a  charming  edition  of 
some  military  work  of  Vauban's  in  my  father's  library,  full  of 
incomprehensible  tactics  and  coarse  wood  cuts,  with  squares,  and 
rounds,  and  octagons,  and  pentagons,  and  every  conceivable 
figure  made  of  little  hallebardiers  in  this  very  dress ;  and  end- 
less plans  of  fortifications,  manned  in  every  direction  with  this 

identical  cut  of  doublet  and  trunk-hose.    By  degrees  and 

her  daughters  ,  and  a  couple  of  French  ladies,  friends  of 

 ,  joined  us  ;  one  of  the  latter  was  introduced  as  a  stranger 

to  my  sister,  and  made  conversation  with  her  till  our  party  was 
complete  in  a  voix  glapissante,  and  with  an  accent  criard  such  as 
I  thought  no  woman  of  good  society  in  France  could  be  guilty 
of ;  the  presence  of  this  lady  was,  I  presume,  the  inevitable 
earthly  alloy  to  the  delight  of  seeing  the  statues  of  the  Vatican 
for  the  first  time  :  those  that  principally  charmed  me,  were  a 

noble  Minerva,  who  was  extremely  like  ,  and  it  is  curious 

enough  that  all  the  antique  heads  of  Minerva  are  more  or  less 
like  her ;  there  is  the  same  fineness  of  features  and  sternness  of 
expression  ;  the  moral  suitability  of  the  resemblance  pleases  me 
amazingly  ;  the  beautiful  little  head  of  Augustus,  which  is  beau- 
tiful in  itself,  beautiful  as  art,  and  exceedingly  like  Napoleon  ; 
the  Mercury  called  Antinous,  which  however  I  do  not  admire 
as  much  as  that  of  the  Capitol ;  the  sleeping  Ariadne ;  the  Eros, 
or,  as  they  now  call  it,  the  Genius  of  the  Vatican,  that  exquisitely 
ideal  head ;  the  brother  of  my  Goddess,  the  Neapolitan  Psyche  ; 
and  last  the  Apollo ;  as  for  this,  from  the  moment  I  set  my  feet  in 
the  Vatican  I  was  possessed  with  a  sort  of  nervous  terror  lest  I 

1* 


10 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


should  be  utterly  disappointed  in  it ;  this  feeling  increased  with 
every  chamber  I  entered,  to  such  a  degree  as  to  cause  me  tp  feel 
absolutely  sick  with  excitement ;  I  feared  to  look  round  each 
new  room  lest  I  should  confront  this  great  divinity,  and  remain 
unmoved  ;  "each  time  I  experienced  a  sense  of  absolute  relief 
when  I  found  we  had  not  yet  reached  that  shrine,  and  I  believe 
if  it  had  been  proposed  to  me  to  leave  the  Vatican  without  see- 
ing the  Apollo  at  all  I  should  have  been  well  pleased  to  have 
done  so  ;  and  yet  for  all  future  time  I  shall  know  better.  All 
that  has  been  written,  all  that  has  been  said,  all  that  has  been 
copied  in  drawing,  painting,  or  sculpture,  of  this  wonderful  sta- 
tue, has  left  the  marvel  of  its  beauty  unimpaired  ;  no  foreknow, 
ledge  can  prepare  one  for  it,  nor  any  description  give  one  an 
idea  of  its  grace  and  lightness,  nor  any  number  of  ecstasies  rub 
off  the  bloom  of  its  divinity.  I  could  believe  the  legend  of  the 
girl  who  died  for  love  of  it ;  for  myself,  my  eyes  swam  in  tears 
and  my  knees  knocked  together,  and  I  could  hardly  draw  my 
breath  while  I  stood  before  it ;  the  guides  held  up  torches  to 
show  the  light  through  the  marble  drapery,  while  I  was  dazzled 
with  the  light  shining  through  the  marble  face  ; — and  the  French 
lady  emitted  opinions  in  a  voice  as  sharp  as  needle-points.  Hea- 
ven !  what  a  witness  to  the  glory  of  the  human  soul  is  such  a 
conception  as  this !  Man's  thought  devised,  man's  fingers 
wrought  this  god  !  This  perfect  creation  had  its  origin  in  the 
yet  fairer  idea  of  a  man's  brain,  for  who  yet  ever  worked  as  he 
imagined  !  There  was  a  lovelier  and  a  grander  shape  in  the 
mind  of  him  who  made  this,  than  even  this,  that  he  has  made  ! 
Oh,  well,  well  may  we  thank  the  only  true  God  for  being  formed 
capable  of  such  things.  I  have  no  words  to  speak  my  sense  of 
gratitude  for  these  new  revelations  of  beauty  and  of  grace, 
vouchsafed  to  me  in  this  the  very  mourning-time  of  my  life — 
angels  have  ministered,  do  minister,  to  me  incessantly,  and  this 
enchanting  presence,  this  divinity  of  the  beauty-worshipping 


ABUNDANCE  OF  VEGETABLES. 


li 


heathens,  is  to  me  a  very  messenger  of  my  God  bidding  me 
bless  him  who  hath  permitted  me  to  behold  it ! 

Sunday,  20th  April. — Seduced  by  a  sweet-sounding  name, 
Campo  de  Fiori,  I  set  out  before  breakfast  to  seek,  as  I  supposed, 
a  flower-market.  I  found  an  open  square,  with  certainly  one 
very  fine  geranium,  covered  with  jets  of  flame-colored  flowers, 
blooming  over  a  sort  of  cobbler's  stall  ;  the  rest  of  the  square  was 
filled  with  dirty  shops,  dirty  people,  dirty  smells,  and  nothing 
else.  I  perceived  in  passing  through  the  streets,  that  the  mar- 
keting, usually  done  with  us  on  Saturday  evening  among  the 
lower  classes,  was  being  busily  carried  forward  to-day  among 
the  same  order  in  Rome.  The  abundance  of  capital,  fine,  fresh 
/  vegetables  in  Rome  is  a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  me  ;  I 
do  not  mean  to  my  taste  merely,  but  to  my  eyes,  and  above  all, 
my  humanity.  These  beneficent  products  of  the  earth  exist 
here  in  a  plenteousness  and  variety  quite  unknown  to  our  poor 
English.  The  supply  of  the  midland  States  of  America 
is  very  much  the  same  ;  there  appears  to  be  no  special  mar- 
ket for  vegetables  here,  like  Covent-garden  with  us,  but  what 
we  should  call  the  green-grocers'  shops,  present  a  beautiful  array 
of  clean  and  fresh-looking  vegetables  ;  and  abounding,  unforced, 
and  above  all,  not  paid  for  at  the  price  of  gold,  the  bounteous 
season  has  already  produced  here  strawberries,  and  new  pota- 
toes, cheap  enough  for  the  use  of  all  classes,  not  to  be  looked  at 
and  longed  for,  by  those  who  fast,  and  feasted  on  by  those  who 
surfeit. 

Among  the  vegetables  which  load  the  stalls  at  the  street  cor- 
ners, I  perceive  one  here  with  which  I  am  unacquainted ;  it  is 
the  root  of  the  fennel,  whose  green  delicate  foliage  is  for  some 
reason  inseparably  associated  in  one's  stomach,  and  therefore 
one's  mind,  with  boiled  mackerel.  We  had  some  at  dinner  the 
other  day  ;  it  was  stewed  like  celery,  and  was  not  otherwise  than 
very  good.    The  stalls,  where  the  frying  of  fish  is  carried  on  in 


12 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  streets,  amuse  me  excessively.  The  whole  process  has, 
strange  to  say,  a  cleanly  and  inviting  appearance,  and  the  groups 
occupied  in  cooking  and  in  eating  at  these  booths,  with  their 
green  bowers  of  branches,  and  colored  paper  lamps,  would  make 
most  capital  and  spirited  sketches  if  they  could  be  faithfully  co- 
pied. In  a  country  where  fruit  and  vegetables  are  abundant  and 
cheap,  I  know  nothing  prettier  or  more  pleasant  than  the  sight 
of  a  fine  market  ;  the  beautiful  colors,  graceful  forms,  and 
sweet  smells,  are  most  agreeable  ;  and  the  beneficence  that  pro- 
vides this  plenty  is  naturally  suggested  to  a  thankful  mind,  where 
there  does  not  exist,  as  with  us,  such  a  cruel  disparity  in  the 
means  of  the  purchasers.  The  market  in  Philadelphia  is  one 
of  the  cheapest  and  most  abundant  I  have  ever  seen,  and  I 
know  few  more  satisfactory  sights  than  that  which  it  presents  at 
Midsummer,  with  its  great  baskets  of  precious-looking  tomatoes ; 
piles  of  Indian  corn,  like  strings  of  Roman  pearl  ;  heaps  of  the 
finest  purple  polished  egg  plant  ;  huge  water  melons,  cut  to 
show  the  firmness  and  freshness  of  their  quality,  with  that  beau- 
tiful combination  of  colors,  the  dark-green  rind,  the  rosy  pulp, 
and  shining  jet-black  seeds  ;  and  ihen  the  mountains  of  downy 
peaches,  of  every  conceivable  tint,  from  a  sort  of  purple  pink,  to 
a  warm  gold  color ;  these  interspersed  with  huge  fan-like  nose- 
gays of  dahlias,  bunches  of  jasmine,  and  heavy-leaved  magnolias, 
and  fragrant  tube-roses,  have  often  caused  me  mentally  to  ex- 
claim : — "  Thou  openest  Thine  hand,  and  fillest  all  things  living 
with  plenteousness  I"  It  is  very  pleasant  to  live  in  a  country 
where  there  is  great  abundance,  and  little  poverty,  though  the 
one  does  not  by  any  means  make  the  other,  and  that  this  fertile 
land  of  Italy  testifies,  where,  in  the  midst  of  their  olive  and  vine- 
yards, and  golden  harvests,  and  smiling  orchards,  the  people  go 
ragged,  and  squalid,  and  miserable-looking — working,  and  beg- 
ging too — a  most  degraded  race,  whose  lovely  country  seems 
accursed  because  of  men ;  to  those  who  have  lived  where  hu- 


PROCESSION  OF  THE  HOST. 


13 


inanity  is  nobler,  though  nature  is  less  rich — an  admirable  sam- 
ple of  the  fact  that  prosperity  is  a  moral  and  not  a  physical 
growth.  A  less  agreeable,  but  very  necessary  article  of  con- 
sumption attracted  my  attention  this  morning.  The  butchers' 
shops  were  full  of  people,  and  the  price  of  lamb,  which  they 
were  selling  at  four  bajocchi  (2d.)  a  pound,  made  me  think  of 
our  people's  food  in  London,  and  of  some  of  those  agreeable  de- 
tails of  ways  and  means  suggested  by  the  ingenuity  of  charity  (?) 
such  as  one  sees  in  poor-house  reports,  and  the  accounts  of  com- 
mittees for  the  relief  of  the  starving,  and  finds  occasionally  in 
the  speeches  of  gentlemen  and  noblemen  anxious  to  exert  them- 
selves, and  devise  help  for  that  awful  innumerable  host  of  un- 
helpables — the  poor  of  the  wealthiest  nation  in  the  world.  In 
the  course  of  my  walk  this  morning  I  met  the  procession  of 
the  Host  twice.  I  was  at  a  loss  to  account  for  its  being  each 
time  preceded  by  men  dressed  in  servants'  liveries  of  the  rich- 
est description.  I  thought  there  must  be  a  noble  epidemic 
afoot ;  but  upon  inquiring,  found  that  these  men  whom  I  had 
supposed  servants  of  great  houses,  were  merely  hired  and  dressed 
in  that  manner  for  the  occasion — I  had  begun  to  fear  there  was 
a  mortality  among  the  Cardinals.  The  extreme  devotion  of  the 
people  in  the  street  struck  me  very  much,  all  kneeling  down  in 
the  mud  upon  the  passage  of  the  Holy  Sacrament,  and  those  at  a 
considerable  distance  up  other  streets,  merely  because  it  was  in 
sight,  remaining  uncovered  and  bowed  in  an  attitude  of  reverence 
and  devotion.  I  ended  my  morning's  expedition  by  going  into 
the  church  of  the  Trinita  dei  Monti — the  only  church  in  Rome 
where  female  voices  are  to  be  heard  chanting  the  religious  ser- 
vices. It  belongs,  together  with  the  adjoining  convent,  to  the 
French  nuns  of  the  Sacre  Coeur  ;  it  is  charming  to  hear  the 
fresh,  shrill,  sweet  tones  of  the  young  girls  who  are  being  edu- 
cated here,  rising  to  the  church  roof — the  songstress  invisible  the 
while, — imagination  left  to  match  the  voice  of  the  young  wor 


14 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


shipper  with  such  a  form  and  face  as  may  best  seem  to  belong  to 
it.  I  was  very  much  struck  with  the  serene  and  winning  coun- 
tenance of  one  of  the  nuns,  from  whom  I  obtained  a  chair ;  it 
was  a  living  argument  in  favor  of  a  nunnery  life,  that  is  to  say, 
if  it  had  anything  to  do  with  any  peculiar  form  of  life,  and  not 
rather  with  that  which  is  the  only  wholesome  spirit  of  all  life. 
They  have  a  fine  picture  of  the  Descent  from  the  Cross  in  this 
church,  and  while  looking  round,  I  found  my  feet  were  on  the 
funeral  tablet  of  Claude  Lorraine. 

I  went  this  morning  before  breakfast  to  the  pavilion  of  the 
Rospigliosi  Palace,  to  see  Guido's  Aurora.  It  is  a  picture  for 
which,  from  dear  and  pleasant  association  with  a  fine  engraving 
of  it  that  hangs  in  a  room  of  a  house  that  I  love,  I  have  an  espe- 
cial affection,  and  the  consequence  was,  that  it  took  me  some 
time  to  recover  from  the  dislocation  of  neck  occasioned  by  the 
long  devotion  of  my  regards  to  it.  The  whole  collection  of  pic- 
tures is  contained  in  three  rooms,  and  among  many  performances 
ascribed  to  great  names,  I  was  particularly  struck  with  the  heads 
of  the  twelve  Apostles  by  Rubens,  and  a  picture  which,  though 
said  to  be  by  Giorgione,  seemed  more  like  a  production  of  the 
Flemish  school,  by  the  want  of  grace  and  dignity  in  the  figures 
and  faces  ;  in  spite  of  which  it  seized  upon  my  attention,  and 
riveted  me  and  delighted  me  extremely.  The  coloring  was 
very  rich  and  fine,  and  there  was  an  intense  expression  in  the 
attitude  and  look  of  the  two  people,  a  man  and  woman  sitting 
beside  each  other,  with  their  hands  joined,  that  made  a  very 
strong  impression  upon  me.  To  me  it  was  a  very  good  picture ; 
but  I  know  nothing  whatever  of  art.  After  leaving  the  gallery, 
I  loitered  in  the  garden  while  the  gardener  collected  a  nosegay 
for  me  ;  and  certainly,  if  Heaven  could  come  to  one  through 
one's  eyes  and  nose,  I  might  have  imagined  myself  there  during 
that  half-hour.  The  fine  mass  of  the  Rospigliosi  Palace  rose  up 
against  the  brilliant  blue  sky ;  the  little  terrace-garden,  lifted 


THE  GALATEA. 


15 


high  up,  as  though  to  meet  the  sun,  basked  in  the  vivid  light  and 
potent  warmth  of  its  rays ;  fountains,  some  springing  up  like  jets 
of  moonlight,  under  cool  black,  sheltering  arches  ;  others  pour- 
ing out  a  whole  gush  of  diamonds  into  a  large  basin  glittering 
in  the  sunshine,  made  delicious  conversation  to  each  other  ;  and 
while  I  walked  to  and  fro,  screened  from  the  intense  heat  by  the 
broad,  dark,  polished  leaves  of  a  covered  walk  of  lemon-trees, 
whose  fruit  and  flowers  hung  above  my  head  and  perfumed 
the  air,  whiffs  of  warm  fragrance  were  wafted  to  me  from  low 
beds  of  mignonette  and  bushes  literally  bending  under  their  freight 
of  delicate  pink  and  straw-colored  tea-roses.  Such  exquisite 
sensual  enjoyment  can  neither  be  described  nor  imagined,  nor,  I 
think,  out  of  Italy,  enjoyed  ;  for,  joined  to  all  this,  the  vision 
of  the  beautiful  works  of  art  I  had  just  seen,  filled  my  fancy,  and 
I  really  admired  at  the  combination  of  pleasure  comprised  in 
one  short  hour  in  this  pre-eminent  home  of  all  beautiful  things. 
This  was  the  morning.  In  the  afternoon  we  drove  to  the  Far- 
nesina  to  see  the  room  where  Raphael's  friend  and  patron  feasted 
the  Pope  when  the  great  painter  had  finished  adorning  it  with 
his  immortal  frescoes.  I  was  already,  of  course,  familiar  with 
those  through  engravings,  and  also  some  copies  of  them  I  remem- 
ber delighting  in  at  Bowood.  They  are  not  susceptible  of 
description  further  than  as  the  guide-books  describe  them.  I 
believe,  upon  the  whole,  they  gave  me  more  pleasure  than  any 
work  of  Raphael  I  have  seen, — always  excepting  the  Suonatore. 
From  the  empty  and  deserted  banqueting-hall,  from  whose 
walls  this  glorious  work  still  seems  to  shed  down  splendor  and 
gaiety,  we  went  to  see  the  Galatea,  in  a  room  still  more  bare, 
forlorn,  and  desolate  looking  ;  surrounded  with  artists'  dusty 
scaffoldings,  and  what  was  far  worse,  with  glaring  impudent 
copies,  we  contrived  to  see  the  beautiful  creation,  whose  elegant 
forms  and  light  lovely  composition,  preserved  in  Morghen's 
engravings,  is  also  one  of  the  earliest  impressions  of  art  of  my 


16 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


youth.  It  is  really  piteous  to  see  these  exquisite  things  so  sur- 
rounded with  desolation  and  apparent  neglect.  The  palace 
belongs  to  the  Neapolitan  government ;  it  really  seems  as  though 
some  decent  care  of  repairs  and  preservation  was  due  to  the 
shrine  containing  these  treasures ;  but  the  whole  place,  inside 
and  out,  with  its  dilapidated,  empty,  dusty,  resounding  chambers, 
and  its  rough  orchard  of  fruit-trees  and  artichokes,  is  the  very 
pattern  of  a  noble  forsaken  house.  What  a  pity  that  these 
divinities  must  needs  stay  here  ! 

My  friend    has  given  me  a  charming  little  Sicilian 

song,  of  which  the  following  is  a  free  translation.  The  pathetic 
and  graceful  idea  is,  however,  a  thousand  times  more  appro- 
priately clothed  in  the  soft  dialect  from  which  I  have  transferred 
it : — 

I  planted  in  my  heart  one  seed  of  love, 

Water'd  with  tears,  and  watched  with  sleepless  care ; 
It  grew — and  when  I  look'd  that  it  should  prove 

A  gracious  tree,  and  blessed  harvests  bear, 
Blossom  nor  fruit  was  there  to  crown  my  pain, 
Tears,  cares,  and  labor,  all  had  been  in  vain  ; 
And  yet  I  dare  not  pluck  it  from  my  heart, 
Lest  with  the  deep-struck  root  my  life  depart. 

April  30th. — To-day  was  holden  the  annual  celebration  of  the 
artists'  fete  at  Cervara,  about  ten  miles  from  Rome.  Not  feeling 
ourselves  equal  to  the  fatigue  of  the  whole  day,  we  determined 
to  go  out  early  in  the  morning,  and  see  their  muster  at  Torre  de 
Schiavi  ;  and  then  returning  to  Rome  during  the  heat  of  the  day, 
drive  again  out  towards  evening  to  their  final  place  of  assembly  at 
Cervara.  We  started,  therefore,  at  seven,  and  found  the  roads 
already  alive  with  early  masqueraders,  proceeding  to  the  place 
of  rendezvous,  some  on  foot  and  some  on  asses  and  some  on  sorry 


THE  TOR  DI  SCHIAVI. 


17 


hacks,  and  some  on  showy  horses,  caparisoned  according  to  the 
costume  of  their  riders,  and  apparently  to  the  full  as  pleased  with 
their  finery.  The  trees  were  all  in  blossom  and  in  fragrance, 
and  as  we  drove  along  between  the  envious  stone  walls  of  the 
suburban  villas,  blooming  bushes  of  white  and  crimson  stocks, 
and  delicate  China  roses,  peeped  over  the  terrace  walls,  like 
boarding-school  beauties,  at  us ;  green  pendant  tresses  of  the 
golden  willow  drooped  over  the  enclosures,  and  every  now  and 
then  a  noble  iron  gate,  set  in  massive  stone  pillars,  gave  us 
glimpses  into  the  paradise  of  dark  evergreens  and  long  walks, 
between  walls  of  roses,  which  they  defended  ;  along  the  road- 
side the  acacia  swung  a  thousand  silver  censers  in  the  morning 
air,  and  the  whole  aspect  of  Nature  was  that  of  a  brilliant  spring 
holiday  in  the  garden  of  the  world.  Group  after  group  passed 
us  of  grotesque  and  ludicrous  figures,  singing,  laughing,  jesting, 
and  all  hurrying  forward  to  the  meeting  ground.  Not  one  was 
so  sober  or  so  poor  but  his  hat  had  its  flower  or  its  bunch  of  feath- 
ers, his  waist  its  bright  colored  scarf,  and  his  arm  its  gay  ribbon 
badge  ;  some  were  accoutred  point  de  vice  in  brilliant  middle-age 
or  eastern  costume ;  and  in  a  narrow  lane  we  came  upon  a  Si- 
cilian noble  of  the  sixteenth  century,  whose  crimson  velvet  tunic 
and  cap,  with  their  border  of  ermine  and  snow-white  plume, 
presented  really  a  most  elegant  and  tasteful  picture,  especially 
as  the  wearer  was  handsome  and  young  ;  a  little  further  on  the 

triumphal  chariot  of  the  great  ruler  of  the  feast  (Mr.  ) 

passed  us,  slowly  wending  its  way  to  the  Tor  de  Schiavi ;  the 
gilt  and  garlanded  wheels  and  sides  sufficiently  disguised  the  ra- 
ther rude  form  of  the  vehicle,  which  was  drawn  by  two  splendid 
silver-grey  oxen,  from  whose  vast  foreheads  and  wide-spread 
horns,  great  bunches  and  wreaths  of  roses  hung  heavily,  as  they 
solemnly  proceeded  along  the  road.  Arrived  at  the  open  space 
at  the  Tor  de  Schiavi,  the  spectacle  was  really  a  most  singular 
one.    Hundreds  of  artists,  all  in  various  eccentric  and  pictu- 


18 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


resque  dresses,  scoured  about  the  campagna  or  mustered  gradually 
in  bands,  whose  badges  and  banners  belonged  to  their  several 
nations.  Carriages,  in  crowds,  were  drawn  up  round  the  pic- 
turesque ruin.  A  long  line  of  dust,  through  which  flashed  every 
now  and  then  the  harness  and  wheels  of  other  vehicles,  or  the 
brilliant  colors  of  some  belated  masquerader,  marked  the  way 
back  to  Rome.  Donkeys  brayed,  horses  neighed,  human  beings 
laughed  loud  and  merrily  ;  Cossacks,  Turks,  Albanians,  Knights 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  Generals  in  powder  and  pig-tails,  and  gens 
d'armes,  with  paper  helmets  and  wooden  swords,  pranced  here 
and  there  between  the  carriages ;  the  golden  morning  light 
touched  the  whole  world  with  glory  ;  the  grand  and  melancholy 
campagna  spread  itself  all  around,  and  the  purple  line  of  the 
Alban  and  Sabine  hills  framed  in  the  splendid  view  and  singular 
daylight  masquerade.  The  concourse  of  artists  had  hardly 
ranged  themselves,  each  about  their  national  banner,  and  a  species 
of  disorderly  order,  such  as  is  most  common  among  volunteers, 
been  obtained,  when  the  great  chief  of  the  celebration  and  master 

of  the  revels,  Mr.  ,  the  head  of  the  German  school  of 

artists  at  Rome,  appeared  in  full  costume  of  Henri  Quatre  mount- 
ed on  his  triumphal  car.  His  arrival  was  hailed  with  universal 
applause  ;  and  a  speech  which  he  made,  and  of  which  we  were 
too  far  off  to  hear  anything  but  the  sound,  appeared  by  the  bursts 
of  laughter  and  the  acclamations  which  interrupted  it,  to  give 
very  universal  satisfaction.  The  next  move  was  an  adjournment 
of  a  certain  number  of  the  artists  to  the  Tor  de  Schiavi.  Climb- 
ing the  ruined  wall,  they  congregated  beneath  the  remaining 
vault  of  the  building,  and  here  sang  a  very  vehement  and  ap- 
parently satisfactory  concert,  in  the  burden  of  which  an  ac- 
companiment ad  libitum  of  sticks,  and  drums,  and  innumerable 
human  voices,  utterly  incapable  of  a  tune,  joined  with  most 
exemplary  zeal.  Something  of  the  freedom  of  the  Carnival 
appeared  to  prevail  during  this  singular  celebration  ;  for  we 


ANECDOTE. 


19 


were  bowed  to  more  than  once  by  persons  whom  wc  did  not 
know ;  and  while  making  my  way  through  the  rather  tre- 
mendous crowd  of  carriages  and  horses  to  the  scene  of  the 
chorus  singing,  a  German,  whose  horse  we  had  been  admiring 
very  much  as  it  stood  beside  our  carriage,  very  good-naturedly 
made  way  for  me,  and  led  me  to  a  good  place  for  seeing  and 
hearing.    The  words  were  composed  for  the  occasion  by  Mr. 

 ,  and  were  quite  as  good  as  the  occasion  required  ;  the 

music  was  a  popular  theme  from  some  modern^talian  opera.  I 
regretted  this,  and  asked  my  companion  why  they  did  not  sing 
some  of  the  beautiful  Volkslied  of  his  own  country.  He  said, 
because  in  these  the  French  and  Italian  artists  could  not  join, 
and  what  they  wanted  to  obtain  was  unanimity  rather  than  beauty 
in  the  performance.  When  it  was  concluded,  the  whole  motley 
army  denied  out  of  the  ruin  and  off  the  ground,  and  taking  the 
road,  escorted  by  most  of  the  carriages  and  infinite  amateurs  on 
horseback,  proceeded  to  Cervara,  while  we  wended  our  way  back 

to  Rome.    On  our  way  to  town  ,  who  is  extremely  lively 

and  entertaining,  told  us  the  following  anecdote  of  Madame 

 ,  which  very  nearly  killed  me  with  laughing.    It  seems 

that  she  has  enjoyed  a  prolonged  youth,  unknown  to  all  but  god- 
desses and  ambassadresses  ;  dressing  herself  with  juvenile  sim- 
plicity and  airiness,  being  made  love  to  with  juvenile  ardor,  and 
dancing  with  juvenile  industry  and  application,  till  hard  upon  the 
age  of  seventy.  After  a  ball,  at  which  it  is  to  be  supposed  she 
had  been  unwontedly  artless,  amorous,  and  active,  she  had  a 

very  severe  indisposition,  and  the  great  Roman  physician  

was  sent  for.    In  the  room  adjoining  the  lady's  bed-chamber,  he 

was  met  by  the  young  M.  de  ,  her  devoted  and  afflicted 

lover,  who,  with  eyes  suffused  with  tears,  and  a  frame  agitated 
with  the  most  anxious  apprehension,  led  him  to  the  bed-side  of 
the  interesting  invalid.  Summoning  at  once  her  remaining 
strength  and  charms,  she  raised  herself  languidly  : — "  Ah,  M.  le 


20 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Docteur,  je  suis  bien  mal,  mais  ce  ne  sera  rien,  n'est-ce-pas  ? 
Le  fait  est,  que  j'ai  trop  danse  au  bal  hier  soir;  mais  cela  se 
passera."  "  Madame  !"  interrogated  the  worthy  doctor,  at  a  loss 
to  reconcile  the  testimony  of  his  eyes  and  ears  : — "  Eh  oui,  mon 
Dieu,  c'est  cela,  j'ai  trop  danse  a  ce  bal  hier  au  soir — voila 
tout."    "  Ah,  mon  Dieu  !"  cried  the  doctor,  turning  to  the  lover ; 

"  Prenez  bien  garde  a  Madame  votre  mere,  M.  ,  car  elle 

perd  la  tete  ;  elle  deraisonne ;  elle  aura  de  la  fievre,  sans  doute 
du  delire."  TJ^  indignant  beauty's  pillow  at  his  head  inter- 
rupted the  unfortunate  doctor,  who  was  thenceforth  ignominiously 
dismissed,  as  utterly  ignorant  of  the  manners  of  decent  society, 
the  relations  of  polite  life,  or  the  long  juvenility  of  ambassa- 
dresses. 

In  the  afternoon,  we  returned  again  to  the  fete,  and  this  time 
proceeded  the  whole  way  to  Cervara,  where  the  artists,  having 
dined  in  the  large  curious  tufo  caves  that  there  open  themselves 
in  the  middle  of  the  campagna,  like  great  holes  in  its  volcanic  crust, 
were  finishing  the  afternoon  in  a  variety  of  games,  rather  riotous 
than  classical.  The  whole  scene  reminded  me  excessively  of  a 
race-ground  in  England  ;  the  carriages  laden  with  spectators, 
chiefly  ladies,  the  horses  taken  out,  and  picketted  on  the  outskirts 
of  the  crowd.  The  most  beautiful  part  of  that  species  of  show, 
however,  was  wanting — the  noble  horses  and  capital  riding  of  the 
gentlemen  spectators.  The  Cervara  worthies  had  had  mystical 
celebrations  in  the  caverns,  apparitions  of  the  ancient  Sybil,  and 
prognostications  of  future  destinies ;  honors  and  badges,  too,  had 
been  delivered  to  various  members  of  the  fraternity,  and  when 
we  arrived,  foot  races,  donkey  races,  and  horse  races,  were  to- 
ward. There  was  more  merriment  than  merit  of  any  sort  in 
these  performances  ;  the  assembly  was  not  the  most  orderly  in 
the  world,  and  the  demeanor  of  some  of  the  parties  very  clearly 
indicated  that  it  was  after  dinner  with  them.  Among  the  other 
pastimes,  a  large  caricature  was  brought  forward,  intended  to 


MYSTICAL  CELEBRATIONS. 


21 


represent  the  spirit  of  hostile  criticism  in  general,  but  which,  to 
the  initiated,  bore,  moreover,  considerable  resemblance  to  a  cer- 
tain well-known  German  essayist,  whose  strictures  upon  the  art 
and  artists  of  the  present  day  have  not,,  it  seems,  made  him 
popular  among  the  latter.  This  very  odious  portrait,  with  its 
owl's  nose  and  eyes,  and  hand  like  a  claw,  clutching  the  critic's 
dagger — the  goose  quill — was  set  up  at  one  end  of  the  ground, 
and  the  artists  exercised  themselves  in  throwing  small  light 
pointed  reeds,  with  little  rose-colored  flags  attached  to  them,  at 
it ;  every  blow  that  hit  the  nose,  eyes,  or  much  offending  hand, 
was  hailed  with  rapture  ;  and  when  the  obnoxious  image  resem- 
bled nothing  but  a  very  much  abused  colander,  a  general  rush 
was  made  at  it,  and  it  was  battered  to  pieces  and  trampled  under 
foot  with  yells  of  detestation  and  vengeance,  such  as  could  only 
become  savages,  or  artists  who  had  been  severely  criticised. 

Our  drive  back  to  Rome  was  extremely  disagreeable ;  many 
were  returning  to  the  city,  like  ourselves ;  still  more  were  on 
their  way  out  to  Cervara  ;  a  double  file  of  vehicles  of  every  des- 
cription encumbered  the  road  ;  we  were  compelled  to  go  at  a  foot 
pace ;  the  heat  of  the  sun  was  fearful ;  the  clouds  of  dust  all  but 
intolerable ;  and,  having  turned  our  back  upon  the  whole  mas- 
querade, nothing  broke  the  very  unpleasant  monotony  of  this 
slow,  hot,  suffocating  progress,  except  when  every  now  and  then 
a  Saracen  would  scour  by  us  over  the  plain,  or  a  Knight  of  the 
Middle  Ages  halt  above  the  dusty  defile  we  were  engaged  in — 
recalling  the  festivity  of  Cervara,  and  suggesting  the  romantic 
recollections  of  the  times  they  represented.  I  was  a  little  sur- 
prised at  the  appearance  of  young  and  Mr.  de  on 

the  ground,  the  one  in  the  dress  of  a  Hungarian  peasant,  the  othe* 
in  a  correct* and  beautiful  French  costume  of  the  thirteenth  cen- 
tury— black  velvet  and  crimson,  with  trappings  and  housings  for 
his  horse  to  match.  That  the  artists,  joining  all  together  to  keep 
up  this  annual  celebration,  which,  doubtless,  has  many  pleasant 


22 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


and  wholesome  uses  in  the  sympathies  and  spirit  of  artistical 
brotherhood  it  engenders  and  preserves,  should  go  out  in  these 
quaint  dresses,  and  divert  themselves  and  others  by  so  doing, 
seems  not  at  all  amiss ;  but  that  young  gentlemen,  having  no 
pretensions  to  the  distinction  of  being  artists,  should,  simply  for 
the  sake  of  exhibiting  themselves  and  their  dresses,  do  the  same, 
seems  to  me  singular.    My  heart  really  bled  for  the  beautiful 

ball-room  costume  of  Mr.  de  ,  dragging  about  under  the 

heat,  and  through  the  dust  of  such  an  expedition. 

This  morning  I  walked  before  breakfast  to  Trajan's  Forum, 
and  ascended  the  pillar.  The  view  of  Rome  itself,  and  the  sur- 
rounding country,  is  not  finer  than  that  obtained  from  many  other 
heights ;  but  the  whole  of  the  Coliseum  is  seen  from  this  particu- 
lar point  to  very  grand  advantage.  I  then  went  into  the  church 
of  Santa  Maria  de  Loreto,  where  I  remarked  what  had  already 
struck  me  so  extremely  in  several  of  the  churches,  a  notice  put 
up  to  the  effect,  that  whoever  was  buried  in  that  church,  might, 
through  the  agency  of  certain  masses,  deliver  their  souls  from  so 
many  years  of  purgatory.  There  is  something  in  these  particu- 
lar exhibitions  of  Catholicism  that  invariably  suggests  to  me  the 
idea  of  the  necessary  and  inevitable  knavery  of  those  who  are  at 
the  head  of  such  a  spiritual  machinery ;  to  be  sure  Gregory  the 
Great  invented  purgatory,  and  perhaps,  that  being  the  case,  his 
heirs  have  a  right  to  dispose  of  it.  Such  propositions,  however, 
do  not  cease  to  amaze  me.  How  much  that  is  excellent  must 
there  have  been  and  still  be !  how  much  of  the  immortal  vitality 
of  true  Christianity,  in  the  religion  which  survives  this  overlay- 
ing mass  of  absurdity,  superstition,  and  disbelief  !  I  feel  in  Rome 
like  nothing  but  Boccaccio's  Jew.  Returning  home,  I  called  at 
the  shoemaker's  about  some  boots  I  had  ordered,  and  which  were 
not  finished  at  the  appointed  time — now,  considerably  after  the 
time,  they  were  finished,  and  produced  ;  a  pair  of  black,  double- 
soled,  thick,  heavy,  half-leather,  stuff  boots.    I  had  myself  given 


CHARACTERS  OF  TRADES-PEOPLE. 


23 


the  order  for  a  pair  of  light-colored  holland  ones,  with  mere  toes 
of  patent  leather,  and  the  thinnest  soles  that  could  be  made.  The 
shopman  shrugged  his  shoulders,  smiled,  said  it  was  a  mistake, 
and  would  I  take  the  ones  I  did  not  want,  and  wait  till  such  as  I 
did  want  could  be  made.  I  walked  out  of  the  shop,  and  did 
neither.  English  people  are  the  only  honest  tradespeople  that  I 
am  acquainted  with,  and  I  say  it  advisedly  ;  for  Americans  are 
unpunctual,  and  an  appointment  is  a  contract  with  time  for  its 
object,  and  they  are  as  regardless,  for  the  most  part,  of  that 
species  of  contract  as  of  some  others  of  a  different  kind.  I 
have  now  been  six  months  in  Rome,  and  have  had  leisure  and 
opportunity  to  see  something  of  the  morals  of  retail  trade  ;  at  any 
rate  in  matters  of  female  traffic,  among  the  shopkeepers  here.  In 
the  first  place,  the  most  flagrant  dishonesty  exists  with  regard  to 
the  value  of  the  merchandise,  and  the  prices  they  ask  for  it  of  all 
strangers,  but  more  particularly  of  the  English,  whose  wealth, 
ignorance,  and  insolence,  are  taxed  by  these  worthy  industriels 
without  conscience  or  compassion.  Every  article  purchased  in 
a  Roman  shop  by  an  English  person  is  rated  at  very  nearly  double 
its  value ;  and  the  universal  custom  here,  even  among  the  peo- 
ple themselves,  is  to  carry  on  a  haggling  market  of  aggression  on 
the  part  of  the  purchaser  and  defence  on  that  of  the  vendor,  which 
is  often  as  comical  as  it  is  disgusting.  In  Nataletti's  shop  in 
Rome,  the  other  day,  I  saw  a  scene  between  the  salesman  and  a 
lady-purchaser,  an  Italian,  that  would  have  amazed  as  well  as 
amused  the  parties  behind  and  before  the  counters  of  Howell  and 
James,  Harding's,  &c.  The  lady,  after  choosing  her  stuff  and 
the  quantity  she  required,  began  a  regular  attack  upon  the  shop- 
man ;  it  was  mezza  voce,  indeed,  but  continuous,  eager,  vehement, 
pressing,  overpowering,  to  a  degree  indescribable  ;  and  the  luck- 
less man  having  come  for  a  moment  from  behind  the  shelter  of 
his  long  table,  the  lady  eagerly  seized  him  by  the  arm,  and  hold- 
ing him  fast,  argued  her  point  with  increasing  warmth.  She 


24 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


next  caught  hold  of  the  breast  of  his  coat,  her  face  within 
a  few  inches  of  his,  her  husband  meanwhile  standing  by  and 
smiling  approvingly  at  the  thrift  and  eloquence  of  his  wife  ; 
I  think,  however,  she  did  not  succeed.  The  shopman  looked 
disgusted,  which  I  am  afraid  is  a  consequence  of  their  having 
adopted  the  English  mode  of  dealing  in  that  house,  as  they  them- 
selves informed  me,  to  signify  that  they  did  not  cheat,  lie,  or 
steal,  but  dealt  like  honest  people.  I  felt  proud  of  his  manner  of 
speech  :  "  Madame,  nous  avons  adopte*  la  maniere  Anglaise  ;  nous 
vendons  au  prix  juste,  nous  ne  surfaisons  pas,  et  nous  ne  change- 
ons  pas  nos  prix,"  so  that  to  deal  in  the  English  fashion  is  syno- 
nymous to  dealing  justly.  It  pleases  me  greatly,  and  it  is  true, 
for  in  France  too  they  have  abandoned  the  abominable  system  of 
prices  for  the  English ;  and  it  delights  me  to  think  that  integrity, 
justice,  truth,  cleanliness,  and  comfort,  follow  in  the  footsteps  of 
my  own  people  wherever  their  wandering  spirit  leads  them  through 
the  world.  It  is  very  fit  and  just  that  they  should  bring  such 
compensations  to  the  foreign  people,  among  whom  they  so  often 
introduce,  also,  habits  of  luxury,  of  ostentation,  and  that  basest 
habit  of  bartering  for  money  the  common  courtesies  and  amenities 
of  life,  the  civilities  and  the  serviceableness  which  are  priceless, 
which  the  continental  people  have,  and  our  own  have  not,  and 
which  we  should  have  learnt  to  imitate  rather  than  taught  them 
to  sell.  I  may  as  well  mention  here,  that  I  have  found  Nataletti's 
shop  the  best  in  Rome,  in  every  respect.  In  one  morning's  shop- 
ping, the  other  day,  we  had  two  or  three  curious  instances  of  the 
shopkeeping  morality  here  :  going  into  Gagiati's,  in  the  Corso, 
the  great  omnium  gatherum,  or,  as  the  Americans  would  call  it, 
variety  store,  they  first  attempted  to  cheat  my  sister  upon  the 
change  due  to  her  for  some  gold  she  gave  them  ;  I  was  looking 
at  some  fans  which  were  being  shown  to  an  Italian  purchaser,  at 
the  same  time  ;  I  had  taken  up  one  which  the  shopman  told  me 
was  worth  eighteen  scudi  ;  the  Roman  buyer  took  up  another 


SHOPKEEPING  MORALITY. 


25 


which  had  been  shown  me  at  the  same  price,  and  with  sundry 
"  nods  and  becks  and  wreathed  smiles"  at  the  shopkeeper,  said 
in  an  under  tone,  "  Dunque  quindici  ?"  the  latter  nodded,  return- 
ing the  significant  pantomime,  and  adding  "  Eh  !  capite."  I 
capited  too,  and,  perceiving  that  I  was  attentively  observing  what 
was  going  on,  the  salesman  took  the  fan  I  had  in  my  hand,  and 
without  uttering  a  syllable  said,  "Ebbene,  Signora,  seidici  scudi;" 
"  but,"  said  I,  "  a  moment  ago  you  told  me  the  price  was  eight- 
een." "  Oh  !"  exclaimed  he,  with  the  most  dauntless  impudence, 
"  se  piace  a  lei  di  pagar  dieci  otto  va  bene  e  padrona."  I  was  so 
utterly  disgusted  that  I  laid  the  commodity  down  without  another 
word.  Further  on  we  bought  some  tin  pails  and  water  buckets 
for  our  bed-rooms  in  the  country.  At  one  shop  I  was  made  to 
pay  nearly  three  scudi  for  that  which  my  sister  purchased  im- 
mediately after  for  a  scudo  and  a  half  a  little  distance  further  on, 
and  she  no  doubt  paid,  as  an  Englishwoman,  much  more  than  the 
goods  were  worth.  We  then  proceeded  to  a  perfumer's  for  some 
hair  pomatum — we  had  already  repeatedly  purchased  the  same 
thing  repeatedly  at  the  same  place.  On  this  occasion,  however, 
we  were  charged  an  additional  paul  upon  each  small  article,  and 
upon  remonstrating,  and  stating  that  we  had  repeatedly  bought 
the  same  thing  at  the  same  place,  and  always  paid  such  a  sum 
for  it,  the  shopman  replied,  "  Yes,  that  was  true,  but  now  they 
had  altered  the  price  " — a  sort  of  ad-libitum  mode  of  dealing 
which  may  be  pleasant  and  mournful  to  the  souls  of  the  vendors, 
but  is  mournful  alone  to  those  who  buy.  Of  truth  and  its  invio- 
lable sacredness  the  Italians  generally  seem  to  have  as  little  per- 
ception as  the  French,  and  dishonesty  and  falsehood  are  so  little 
matters  of  shame,  that  detection  in  either  of  them  only  excites  a 
shrug  and  a  grin  on  the  part  of  the  offender.  The  watering-place 
sort  of  character  of  Rome — which  in  the  winter  swarms  with 
foreigners,  and  in  summer  is  utterly  deserted  by  them — makes 
of  course  the  trade  of  certain  shopkeepers  a  mere  matter  of  tem- 

VOL.  II.  2 


26 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


porary  speculation.  During  the  Roman  season  they  therefore 
make  all  the  money  they  can,  because  when  that  is  over  they 
make  little  or  none.  This  is  always  unfavorable  to  steady  and 
honest  dealing,  and  the  innate  indolence  of  the  people,  and  little 
competition,  compelling  foreigners  to  put  up  with  inferior  goods 
and  superior  prices,  or  go  altogether  without  what  they  want, 
leave  but  a  remote  hope  of  improvement  in  these  respects.  Nor 
have  we  found  what  Lafontaine  calls  "  l'innocence  des  champs  " 
one  whit  behind  the  craft  of  the  city  in  these  matters — let  the 
object  of  treaty  be  what  it  will,  purchase  or  employment,  the 
same  desperate  and  universal  want  of  honesty  prevails  in  the 
country  as  in  town  ;  the  same  audacious  and  incessant  endeavor 
to  cheat  and  defraud  ;  and  the  same  facetious  admission  of  the 
fact  whenever  it  is  charged  home  to  them.  It  matters  not  how 
explicit  you  have  been  in  making  the  terms  of  your  agreement  or 
bargain  ;  how  distinctly  the  conditions  have  been  laid  down ;  how 
absolutely  embraced,  how  just,  or  how  generous  they  may  have 
been, — whenever  the  moment  of  payment  arrives,  more  is  inva- 
riably claimed  than  is  due  by  the  stipulations.  Misunderstandings 
are  pleaded,  misrepresentations  made,  misstatements  given  ;  no 
effort  of  ingenuity  is  left  unattempted  to  depart  from  and  evade 
the  bargain  they  have  themselves  made.  If  all  this  fails,  and 
that  lying,  cheating,  cajolery,  and  endless  floods  of  furious  words 
avail  nothing,  they  then  instantly  assume  the  deportment  of  the 
most  abject  beggary,  and  hold  out  their  hands  for  more,  in  the 
shape  of  a  gift,  a  charity,  an  alms,  without  shame  or  hesitation. 
I  do  not  know  anything  that  fills  one  with  a  more  painful  sense 
of  human  degradation  than  the  utter  and  deplorable  want  of  self- 
respect  these  people  exhibit.  The  beggary  in  Rome  is  incessant, 
and  sometimes  most  insolent ;  and  the  swarm  of  importunate  objects, 
from  the  mere  torso,  who,  armless  and  legless,  nevertheless  pursues 
you  like  Briareus  or  a  centipede,  to  the  authorized  vagabonds,  who 
come  and  show  you  their  medal, — the  permit  given  by  the  police 


ITALIAN  DISHONESTY. 


27 


authorities,  and  licensing  their  preying  on  the  public, — embitter 
one's  daily  walks  there  till  one  becomes  callous  to  them.  Still, 
beggary  is  a  usual  inhabitant  of  cities,  and  the  mendicant  life  in 
Rome  is  for  the  most  part  chosen  deliberately,  like  any  other 
trade  or  profession,  and  exercised  rather  as  a  luxury  than  other- 
wise, it  being  well  understood  that  those  who  beg  do  not  work  ; 
but  in  the  country,  those  who  work,  and  work  hard,  beg  too. 
No  laborer  passes  you  on  the  road  with  his  scythe  and  water- 
barrel,  without  entreating  your  charity  ;  and  from  the  light- 
hearted  groups,  who  sing  at  the  vine-dressing,  one  universal 
whine  of  "  Dammi  qualche  cosa"  rises  as  one  goes  by.  Their 
wages  are  very  small ;  the  men  earn  twenty  bajocchi — ten-pence 
a  day  ;  the  women  not  more  than  half  that  sum.  Perhaps  a 
man  can  hardly  be  expected  to  value  himself  very  highly  whom 
others  rate  so  low  ;  but  it  is  a  comfort  to  think  that  food  is  abun- 
dant and  cheap,  and  that  cover  and  shelter,  whether  of  roof  or 
of  clothes,  may  be  in  a  great  measure  dispensed  with  under  this 
benignant  sky.  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  been  very  favorably 
impressed  with  the  honesty  of  the  Italians,  in  any  capacity 
whatever  ;  indolence  and  recklessness,  if  not  absolute  dishonesty, 
appear  to  pervade  all  walks  of  business,  as  well  public  as  pri- 
vate. Our  letters  from  Frascati,  if  paid,  and  they  must  be  so 
to  go  at  all,  are  pretty  sure  not  to  go  at  all ;  and  my  sister,  hav- 
ing lately  sent  her  watch  to  have  a  glass  put  into  it,  the  watch- 
maker departed  with  it  to  Rome,  and  there  kept  it,  refusing  to 
give  it  up,  and  either  pawning  it  or  otherwise  making  it  subser- 
vient to  his  own  uses  ;  the  Governor  or  Mayor  of  Frascati  being 
applied  to  upon  the  subject  by  the  servant  who  had  himself 
given  my  sister's  watch  into  this  man's  charge,  said  he  wo^M 
attend  to  the  business,  and  even  professed  to  write  immediately 
to  the  Chief  of  Police  at  Rome  about  it ;  but  it  was  not  until  a 

fortnight  had  elapsed,  and  Mr.  himself  waited  upon  him, 

that  he  really  did  do  anything  about  the  matter.    A  different 


2b 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


species  of  honesty,  but  one  that,  nevertheless,  is  most  deeply 
influential  upon  national  morality  and  prosperity,  is  involved  in 
the  answer  made  to  an  observation  of  mine,  by  a  lady  who  has 
now  lived  here  for  several  years,  and  had  abundant  opportunities 
of  observation.  I  complained,  that  in  the  apartment  we  had 
taken  for  the  summer  at  Frascati,  our  rooms  were  in  one  respect 
very  uncomfortable,  for  that  our  ladies'  maids  were  all  shut  up 
within  our  rooms,  and  were  constrained  to  pass  through  them  to 

get  to  the  offices  or  out  of  doors.    "  Oh,"  said  Miss  ,  "  that 

would  just  suit  the  Italians,  and  they  would  consider  it  quite  a 
recommendation,  for  they  always  lock  up  their  women  servants 
at  night,  and  all  the  windows  of  their  rooms  are  barred  and 
barricaded."  The  Italian  theory  about  women  is,  that  they  are 
not  to  be  trusted  on  any  one  occasion.  A  friend  of  mine,  walk- 
ing in  the  streets  of  Milan,  followed  by  her  two  young  nieces, 
was  known,  by  the  fact  of  her  not  making  the  young  ladies  walk 
before  her,  so  that  she  could  see  them,  not  to  be  an  Italian. 
And  a  Roman,  speaking  of  English  wives,  said  :  "  Well,  let 
them  do  what  they  will,  and  have  what  faults  they  will,  and 
plague  their  husbands  as  they  will,  at  least  they  are  faithful." 
The  commendation,  however  less  generally  deserved  than  the 
worthy  man  may  have  supposed,  was  still,  doubtless,  by  com- 
parison, tolerably  just.  Another  instance  of  petty  dishonesty 
has  just  occurred  to  me,  which  I  will  mention  in  conclusion  of 
this  disagreeable  part  of  my  observations :  a  man,  bringing 
me  this  morning  change  for  a  gold  piece  of  ten  scudi,  kept  back 
two  pauls,  taking  it  for  granted,  perhaps,  that  I  should  not  count 
my  returns.  On  finding  the  deficit,  I  spoke  to  him  about  it,  and 
proceeded  to  demonstrate  it  by  counting  the  money  before  him. 
This  time,  however,  it  appeared  that  he  had  brought  me,  instead 
of  too  little,  too  much  ;  and,  a  good  deal  perplexed  at  finding 
that,  instead  of  two  pauls  minus,  I  had  more  than  a  scudo  over 
the  right  change,  I  was  proceeding  to  put  this  surplus  into  the 


WALKS  THROUGH  ROME. 


29 


man's  hands,  who  had  stood  watching  me,  and  acquiesced  en- 
tirely in  this  new  view  of  the  transaction,  when  suddenly  I 
became  aware  that  in  reckoning  it  over  again,  he  had  permitted 
me  to  count  three  paul  pieces  for  five  paul  pieces,  and  was  very 
quietly  proceeding  to  pocket  this  result  of  my  ignorance  of  the 
smaller  silver  coins.  Aware  of  my  mistake,  I  asked  him  how 
he  could  stand  by  and  permit  me  to  defraud  myself  so ;  he 
laughed,  and  shrugged,  and  said,  "  You  counted  it  yourself." 
Of  such  experiences  one  day  in  Italy  is  full,  and  not  all  the 
glory  of  the  past  can  atone  to  me  for  the  present  shame  of  the 
people,  nor  all  the  loveliness  of  external  things  make  up  for  the 
ugliness  of  human  souls  without  truth  or  honor ;  women  without 
chastity,  and  men  without  integrity,  and  a  whole  country  without 
religion,  make  a  poor  residence,  in  my  humble  judgment,  unless 
one  could  be  turned  into  eyes,  and  all  one's  perceptions  be 
limited  to  the  faculty  of  seeing  the  divine  beauty  which  all  this 
baseness  mars. 

I  walked  out  this  morning, — passed  that  beautiful  fountain  of 
Trevi,  which  I  contrive  to  take  in  or  out  of  my  way  every  day 
for  the  love  I  bear  it,  it  is  so  wonderfully  beautiful ;  the  images 
of  the  Virgin  at  the  corners  of  the  streets  please  me,  not  that 
they  are  by  any  means  lovely  in  themselves,  but  there  is  some- 
thing in  the  constant  repetition  of  this  type  of  the  purest  earthly 
love  that  touches  those  who  are  unhardened  by  use  to  it ;  some- 
times these  medallion  pictures  or  bas-reliefs  have  rather  ambi- 
tious addresses  inscribed  beneath  them,  such  as  the  one  at  the 
Palazzo  Muti ;  sometimes  a  short  and  touching  ejaculation,  like 
the  "  Maria  rifugio  dei  tribulati,  ora  pro  nobis  !"  under  the  quaint 
little  effigy  of  the  Holy  Mother  which  hangs  upon  the  ruined 
wall  of  the  picturesque  bridge  over  the  Anio,  on  the  Via  Nomen- 
tana  ;  sometimes  nothing  but  a  poor  little  bunch  of  flowers,  such 
as  the  nosegay  of  sweet-williams  I  stopped  to  look  at  this  morn- 
ing, piously  stuck  beneath  the  gracious  image, — a  poor  offering, 


30 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


that  may  nevertheless  have  brought  rich  blessings  to  the  donor. 
Walking  early  in  the  morning  through  Rome,  I  find  the  streets 
encumbered  by  numerous  flocks  of  goats,  directed  the  way  they 
should  go  by  a  peculiarly  shrill  whistle  of  their  driver,  and  stop- 
ping before  almost  every  house  to  leave  a  supply  of  milk,  which 
seems  infinitely  more  generally  used  than  that  of  cows,  at  least 
among  the  Italians  themselves.  I  passed  this  morning  through 
the  Forum,  that  place  for  meditation  where,  having  once  arrived, 
it  almost  seems  impossible  to  go  beyond  it ;  I  did,  however, 
having  but  a  shallow  and  easily  exhausted  fund  of  reflections. 
I  walked  along  the  Campo  Vaccino,  under  nature's  triumphal 
arch  of  flowering  acacia-trees,  to  the  great  Jewish  heart-burn, 
the  arch  of  Titus,  and  thence  down  the  Via  Sacra,  to  the  Coli- 
seum, where  I  sat  down  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  to  rest  and 
ruminate.  The  sun  searched  with  a  delicious  warmth  the 
recesses  of  the  great  ruin — the  blue  sky  roofed  it  in  with  tender 
glory,  and  looked  with  limpid  clearness  through  the  beautiful 
arches,  as  they  rose  tier  above  tier  into  the  morning  air,  and 
from  every  rift  and  crevice,  and  stony  receptacle,  where  an 
inch  of  soil  could  lodge,  curtains  of  exquisite  wild  spring  flowers 
fell  over  the  brown  rich  masses  of  masonry — delicate  garlands 
wound  themselves  round  the  bases  of  huge  fallen  columns — full 
tufted  bushes  of  dark  green  verdure  rocked  and  swayed  in  the 
spring  breath  along  the  ranges  where  the  heroic  Roman  people 
had  thronged  the  seats  of  their  great  slaughter-house, — and  high 
up  against  the  transparent  sky,  light  feathery  wands  of  blossom 
sprang  from  the  huge  wall,  crowning  the  grim  battlement  with 
their  most  fragile  beauty.  There  are  no  words  and  no  color  for 
all  this  ;  poetry  or  painting  shall  not  copy  it ;  the  noble  eye — 
the  mirror  of  God's  universe  alone — shall  be  capable  of  reflect- 
ing it ;  but  let  all  who  may,  come  hither  and  see,  for  none  that 
have  not,  shall  ever  know  how  these  things  look.  The  ruins  of 
Rome,  at  least,  so  says  an  intelligent  observer,  have  each  their 


WALKS  THROUGH  ROME. 


31 


peculiar  Flora,  and  are  adorned  with  wild  plants  especially- 
belonging  to  them  ; — this,  if  true,  is  very  curious,  and  it  might 
be  matter  of  amusing  speculation  to  trace  the  affinity  between 
these  lovely  creatures  and  the  special  places  where  they  incline 
to  grow.  After  a  while  I  went  on  my  way  to  St.  John  Lateran's, 
and  after  worshipping  the  mountains  from  its  threshold,  turned 
into  the  church,  and  thence  to  the  Baptistery,  with  which  I  was 
amazingly  delighted.  Coming  home,  I  passed  through  the  Santa 
Maria  Maggiore,  for  which,  in  spite  of  my  late  experience  in 
churches,  I  retain  the  predilection  it  first  inspired  me  with.  An 
unusual  ceremony  was  going  on, — a  high  catafalque  was  raised 
in  the  middle  of  the  church  ;  it  was  like  a  very  enormous  bed, 
covered  all  over  with  a  splendid  gold  cloth,  with  a  deep  border 
of  black  velvet,  embroidered  with  skeletons.  Upon  this  funeral 
couch,  as  upon  a  soldier's  coffin,  lay  the  hat  and  badges  of  the 
office  and  dignity  of  the  dead  prelate.  Upwards  of  thirty  lamps 
upon  immensely  high -stands  were  burning  all  round  it,  and  the 
chapter  was  all  assembled  in  the  choir,  chanting  the  service  for 
the  dead.  Presently  they  all  marshalled  themselves  in  proces- 
sion, and  marched  towards  the  catafalque  ;  on  leaving  the 
tribune,  however,  they  had  to  perform  a  series  of  genuflexions 
the  most  embarrassing  and  awkward  conceivable — first  to  the 
high  altar,  and  then  to  the  chapel  on  the  right,  and  then  to  the 
chapel  on  the  left,  and  finally  to  the  catafalque  itself.  As  they 
succeeded  each  other  pretty  rapidly  in  their  procession,  I  really 
was  afraid  they  would  push  each  other  down  in  their  complicated 
performance.  Tapers  were  placed  in  all  their  hands,  and  a  sort 
of  ballet-master  having  arranged  them  in  order,  they  surrounded 
the  dead  bed  in  the  middle  of  the  church.  Two  high  dignitaries 
in  magnificent  robes  of  state  then  came  forward,  the  ore  appa- 
rently merely  supporting  the  other,  and  holding  up  the  heavy 
folds  of  his  gold-embroidered  mantle  while  he  performed  the 
office  of  sprinkling  the  catafalque  with  holy  water  and  swinging 


32 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


a  censer  round  it.  During  these  ceremonies  the  choir  began  a 
very  fine  chant,  which  they  performed,  musically  speaking, 
admirably,  though  their  deportment  and  demeanor  was  by  no 
means  edifying ;  they  all  had  an  air  of  as  perfect  indifference  as 
the  provoking  disinterestedness  of  the  chorus  in  a  pathetic  opera  ; 
some  were  taking  snuff  with  each  other,  while  some  were  rapidly 
and  mechanically  crossing  themselves ;  they  talked,  laughed, 
pushed,  and  jostled  each  other  during  the  whole  chant ;  and  the 
beautiful  church,  fine  music,  and  careless  mummery  of  the 
ceremony  formed  a  most  curious  jumble  as  I  sat  at  the  base  of  a 
pillar,  receiving  the  combined  impressions  of  the  whole. 

LINES. 

Upon  the  altar  of  my  life  there  lies 

A  costly  offering :  its  great  price  I  know  ; 

Its  power,  its  wealth,  its  splendor,  and  its  beauty  ; 

Yet  it  lies  there,  and  darkness  covers  it. 

It  has  not  burn'd  towards  Heaven  in  holy  flames, 

Worshipping  God,  warming  and  lighting  man  ; 

No  fire  has  quicken'd  it. — Love,  like  a  torch 

Quench'd  in  foul  mist,  pass'd  over  it  in  vain  : 

A  flickering  ray  of  pale  uncertain  happiness 

Play'd  round  it  once,  too  weak  to  kindle  it. 

Strike,  strike  then  now,  ye  lightning  fires  of  sorrow ! 

Devouring  flames  !  ye  that  have  all  consumed 

Love,  Hope,  and  Happiness,  do  your  whole  work  ! 

Light  up  the  gifts  that  lie  on  my  life's  altar, 

Kindle  the  precious  sacrifice  my  soul 

Has  heap'd  in  vain :  so  shall  it  burn  towards  Heaven, 

And  glorify  the  Giver  of  all  gifts, 

The  Sender  of  all  earthly  destinies. 


LIZARDS,  VIPERS,  SERPENTS,  &c.  33 

We  had  a  very  interesting  visit  from    to-day,  who 

gravely  asserted  the  truth  of  the  story,  that  the  lizards,  in  the 
campagna,  fly  to  meet  men  when  pursued  by  the  vipers  that 
abound  there  ;  and,  moreover,  that  the  sleeping  shepherds  are 
apprised  of  the  approach  of  serpents  by  lizards,  who  come  and 
walk  over  their  faces  to  awaken  them,  and  warn  them  of  the 
danger.  It  is  not  wise  to  be  in  haste  to  disbelieve  ;  and  igno- 
rance, which  is  said  to  be  the  parent  of  credulity,  in  my  humble 
judgment,  seems  to  me  to  be  the  mother  of  twins,  abject  faith 
and  presumptuous  denial.  This  may  be  true  ;  she  is  very  acute 
and  observing,  and,  moreover,  cites  the  universal  belief  of  the 
Italian  country-people  in  these  facts.  They  are  very  strange,  if 
they  are  true.  These  statements  were  corroborated  by  the  asser- 
tions of  the  country-people  round  Frascati.  She  diverted  us 
excessively  during  a  conversation,  which  turned  on  the  national 
peculiarities  of  the  English,  by  an  account  of  a  conversation  she 
once  had  with  a  large  and  respectable  silk-manufacturer  at  Turin, 
who  informed  her,  that  for  French  and  Italian  purchasers  he  had 
one  and  the  same  price  (a  fair  and  reasonable  one),  while  from 
English  and  Russian  ladies  he  invariably  demanded  more, 
because,  he  said,  the  Russians,  if  he  asked  as  moderate  a  price 
as  possible,  would  still  beat  him  down  at  least  a  third  of  what  he 
asked  ;  therefore,  allowing  for  this  peculiarity,  he  always  asked 
them  a  third  more  than  the  value  of  the  article  ;  while  the  Eng- 
lish would  not  purchase  anything  whatever,  unless  the  price 
demanded  for  it  was  exorbitant,  and  full  a  third  more  than  any- 
one else  would  choose  to  give.  His  mode  of  accommodating  the 
various  tastes  of  his  customers  was  quite  sensible,  I  thought. 

 went  on  to  tell  of  a  certain  glove-manufacturer  in  Cologne, 

who,  being  required  by  an  English  lady  to  show  her  some  gloves, 
found  that  she  would  not  purchase  them  because  they  were 
cheaper  than  she  imagined  them  to  be  :  he  told  her  they  were 
identically  the  same  gloves  as  those  she  had  bought  of  him  some 


2* 


✓ 

34  A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


time  before  at  a  higher  price,  and  that  their  value,  from  some 
cause  or  another,  had  diminished.  She  refused  to  buy  them,  and 
the  poor  manufacturer  was  much  puzzled  what  to  do,  when  his 
wife,  less  conscientious  than  himself,  brought  from  an  inner 
store-room  some  that  she  said  were  at  the  old  price  ;  and  the 
English  lady,  delighted,  purchased  an  article  identical  with  the 
one  she  had  rejected,  for  a  third  more  money.    The  glove-maker, 

whom  knew  personally  to  be  an  extremely  honest  man, 

was  so  annoyed  at  what  he  considered  the  injustice  of  his  profit, 
that  he  sent  the  money  to  a  poor's-box. 

We  went  in  the  afternoon,  to  a  fete,  given  by  ■  ,  at  the 

Villa  Albani ;  everything  was  very  pretty,  and  the  whole  was 
a  failure,  which  will  happen  sometimes  :  some  said  it  was  the 
weather,  which  was  gusty  and  uncertain  ;  some,  that  it  was  the 
cold  dinner,  which  should  have  been  hot ;  some,  that  it  was  the 
division  of  men  and  women  at  the  dinner,  who  should  have  been 
together;  but  the  greater  number  of  reasonable  people  attributed 
the  want  of  entrain  and  dullness  of  the  whole  thing  to  the  pre- 
sence of  Monsignore   .    I  was  shown,  in  the  refreshment 

room,  a  little  antique  female  fawn,  a  great  curiosity,  as  it  is  sup- 
posed to  be  the  only  specimen  of  the  kind  extant ;  it  is  quite 
enough,  of  course,  however,  to  establish  the  existence  of  the  two 
sexes  in  the  race,  and  therefore  to  make  the  habitual  deportment 
of  the  satyrs  towards  the  nymphs  inexcusable.  I  walked  to  the 
Santa  Maria  Maggiore  this  morning,  and  found  the  streets  lined 
with  little  extemporaneous  altars  to  the  Virgin  Mary  :  they  con- 
sisted, for  the  most  part,  of  an  old  rush-bottomed  chair,  covered 
with  a  cloth  or  handkerchief ;  a  coarse  picture  or  engraving  of 
the  Virgin  was  leaned  against  the  back  of  the  chair,  and  before 
it  a  bunch  of  flowers,  and  a  little  lamp.  Ragged  boys  and  girls 
were  the  officiating  clergy  of  these  strange  little  shrines,  and 
pursued  us  down  the  street,  shrilly  shouting  their  "  Dami  un 
bajoc"  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Virgin.    It  reminded  me  of  the 


GARDENS  AND  VI XE YARDS  OF  ROME.  35 


"  Please  remember  the  grotto"  of  our  street  urchins,  but  has  a 
more  classical  and  ancient  origin,  for  it  is  a  special  celebration 
in  honor  of  the  first  Sunday  in  May,  and  the  Beata  Vergine  re- 
ceives the  worship  of  the  heathen  Flora.  I  returned  home 
through  the  Villa  Negroni.  Most  fit  and  natural  it  is,  that  either 
with  or  without  intermediation,  men  should  praise  and  worship 
God  at  this  most  holy  season,  and  that  the  most  exquisite  elo- 
quence of  the  material  creation  should  find  its  crowning  utterance 
in  the  soul  and  tongue  of  man  : — 

"  Hail,  bounteous  May,"  &c. 

The  vegetable  gardens  that  cover  the  sunny  slopes  all  round 
Rome,  are  a  source  of  infinite  pleasure  to  me ;  they  are  extreme- 
ly well  tended  and  kept,  and  the  bright  green  files  of  lettuce  upon 
the  rich  soft  brown  mould  have  a  special  beauty  of  their  own, 
combined  of  positive  elements  of  symmetry,  regularity,  and  the 
association  of  ideas  of  peaceful  industry,  plenty,  and  physical 
well-being  :  these  modest  patches  of  lowly  labor  look  especially 
well  below  the  ruined  arches  of  the  aqueducts,  and  the  crum- 
bling masses  of  the  palace  of  the  Caesars.  It  is  peculiar,  I  think, 
to  this  wonderful  place,  that  nothing  most  common  and  common- 
place, but  becomes,  from  juxta-position  with  its  heroic  and  grace- 
ful elements,  a  new  charm  of  contrast,  making  of  the  whole 
something  unmatched  in  harmony  and  in  variety.  As  I  walked 
through  the  lovely  vineyard,  with  its  green  arches  and  little 
stacks  of  cane,  all  wreathed  with  the  downy  vine  leaves  and 
fragrant  blossoms,  the  path  I  followed  was  like  a  flowery  belt — a 
broad,  undulating,  many-colored  ribbon, — thrown  across  the 
estate  ;  poppies,  with  the  sunlight  shining  through  them,  rocked 
and  nodded  to  each  other  ;  blue  and  white  and  purple  blossoms, 
gold  and  silver  grasses,  formed  the  most  exquisite  combinations 
of  form  and  color  to  carpet  the  vine-dresser's  way — up  to  that 
hill  with  its  dark  diadem  of  cypresses,  between  whose  shafts  the 


36 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


campagna  and  the  mountains,  and  Rome,  are  seen  framed  in 
separate  pictures  :  then  I  descended  through  the  lowly  demure- 
looking  salad  beds,  to  the  old  tower  of  the  baths  of  Diocletian, 
and  a  broad  avenue,  lined  with  rich  dark  orange  trees,  in  full 
blossom, — a  wonderful  mass  of  fragrance, — to  the  gate  of  the 
Palazzo,  and  this  was  shut.  I  did  not  want  to  turn  back  ;  the 
path  through  the  vineyard  had  been  lovely,  but  my  soul  abhors 
turning  back,  and  so  I  startled  the  lonely  echoes  of  the  lonely 
garden  and  villa  with  every  species  of  invocation  that  I  thought 
might  bring  human  help  and  a  key.  I  never  so  completely  re- 
alized and  execrated  the  nature  of  the  national  Italian  employ- 
ment, the  Dolce  far  niente,  as  on  seeing  through  this  inexorable 
and  heaven-high  iron  gate,  a  cat  and  dog  lying  in  the  sun,  within 
a  yard  of  each  other,  both  with  their  eyes  and  head  turned  to  me, 
but  quite  too  lazy  either  to  mew  or  bark,  which  I  vainly  tried, 
by  my  outcries  and  exclamations,  to  induce  them  to  do,  and  by 
that  means  arouse  the  dwellers  of  the  house,  into  whom  the  spirit 
of  the  Seven  Sleepers  seemed  to  have  passed.  "There  is  a 
blessing  for  those  who  wait,"  says  the  proverb,  to  which  proverb 
the  wise  man  or  woman  will  always  add  "long  enough."  My 
blessing  came  in  the  shape  of  a  pretty  young  girl,  who  opened 
the  gate,  and  ushered  me  into  the  desolate  garden  of  the  villa, 
where  I  sat  in  a  wilderness  of  blossoms,  in  the  midst  of  which 
sprung  up  a  silver-fringed  fountain,  and  rested  while  she  robbed 
the  orange  trees  of  their  bridal  garland  for  me. 

May  4//t. — This  morning  I  went  to  the  Santa  Maria  degli  An- 
gioli — a  splendid  church — part  of  the  baths  of  Diocletian  con- 
verted to  Christianity  by  Michael  Angelo.  Unfortunately  most 
of  the  altars  in  it  are  like  little  cabinets  at  a  French  restaurant, 
with  vile  painted  marble  pillars ;  but  the  proportions  of  the 
church  are  most  splendid.  From  thence  I  went  to  the  Santa 
Maria  della  Vittoria,  a  gaudy  rich  little  church,  like  some 
wealthy  private  chapel,  full  of  costly  marbles,  gilding,  and  paint- 


VISIT  TO  TIVOLI.  37 

ings,  and  the  most  extraordinary  sculpture ;  consisting  of  what 
one  might  call  marble  pictures,  by  Bernini,  of  sundry  Cardinals 
and  ecclesiastical  dignitaries,  and  a  statue  of  St.  Theresa,  which 
represents  her  in  a  sort  of  ecstatical  trance,  while  an  angel,  as- 
tonishingly like  a  Cupid,  both  in  appearance  and  occupation,  is 
about  to  pierce  her  heart  with  the  arrow  of  (divine)  love.  This 
is  a  very  curious  performance  and  conception  ;  the  mechanical 
merit  of  it  is  very  great,  I  believe  ;  I  thought  it  was  a  pity  it  was 
not  done  in  wax  ;  the  "  moral  suitability  "  of  such  a  work  in 
marble  is  none.  After  this,  crossing  over  by  the  Acqua  Felice, 
I  walked  by  mistake  into  the  cloisters  of  the  Benedictine  monks, 
whence  I  was  recalled  in  horror  by  some  one  passing  by,  who 
indicated  to  me  the  proper  entrance  of  their  small  church,  which 
I  was  in  search  of. 

We  have  just  made  an  expedition  to  Tivoli,  which  was  highly 

prosperous  till  its  very  close.    Directed  by  to  one  inn  in 

preference  to  the  rival  establishment,  we  repaired  to  the  Queen 
of  England,  and  found  her  most  gracious  majesty  dark,  dingy, 
dirty, — in  short,  indescribably  dreadful :  but,  however,  thanks  to 

some  omnipotent  charm,  which  we  alas  had  not !    had 

found  sweet  smells  and  savory  food,  and  sunny  sights,  while  our 
experience  was — of  dirt  to  eat,  dirt  to  drink,  and  dirt  to  sleep  in. 
Travellers  sent  to  that  inn  by  our  friend  should  at  least  be  fur- 
nished too  with  his  talisman  (a  good  conscience  and  a  contested 
spirit,  I  presume),  which  made  him  careless  of  all  the  usual  ne- 
cessities of  life.  Soon  after  our  arrival,  donkeys  were  procured, 
and  we  started  on  the  usual  giro  of  the  valley,  beginning  our 
pilgrimage  at  the  Villa  D'Este,  where  we  sat  by  fountains  fall- 
ing in  this  lovely  solitude,  and  gathered  branches  thick  with 
orange  blossoms,  and  looked  from  crumbling  princely  terraces 
over  the  glorious  campagna,  and  heard, — in  a  sort  of  dark  cham- 
ber of  cypress  trees  with  the  red  buds  of  delicate  China  roses 
blooming  at  their  feet, — the  loud  sweet  singing  of  a  fearless 


38 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


nightingale.  Thence  we  proceeded  to  what  is  called,  by  those 
who  know,  MaecenaV  villa ;  and  by  those  who  know  better,  the 
temple  of  Hercules.  I,  who  neither  know,  nor  know  better,  saw 
a  fine  collection  of  extensive  iron  forges,  a  species  of  place  that 
I  have  the  greatest  delight  in,  because  of  their  picturesque  black 
chambers,  and  fiery  furnaces,  and  sooty  population,  all  which  we 
had  in  great  perfection  here  ;  for  after  walking  out  on  the  huge 
noble  roof  that  juts  like  a  promontory  over  the  glen,  its  sides  all 
garlanded  with  young  verdure,  amidst  which  the  milk-white  cas- 
catelle  went  rolling  in  round  fleecy  ropes  down  the  steep  cliff, 
we  descended  to  visit  the  valley,  passing  through  the  iron  works 
— through  dark  passages,  where  the  sound  of  rushing  waters 
rolled  above  our  heads — and  where  some  sudden  furnace  gleam 
betrayed  them  hurrying  fast  beneath  the  planks  under  our  feet. 
Huge  bellows  and  hammers,  wielded  by  the  subject  elements, 
resounded  with  deafening  clangor  through  the  black  vaults.  Pre- 
sently we  passed  deep  glowing  furnaces,  from  one  of  which  a  long 
bar  of  iron  that  had  writhed  itself  crooked  in  the  intense  heat, 
was  drawn  out,  and  thrown  like  a  red  snake  upon  the  ground  ; 
close  to  those  toiling  fires  sprang  up  white  sheets  of  toiling  water, 
wrestling  with  powerful  wheels  that  they  lashed  till  they  turned 
the  appointed  way ;  and  sweating,  begrimed,  sooty, — smaller 
than  the  smallest  part  of  this  vast  machinery,  and  weaker  than 
its  weakest, — stood  in  the  midst  of  these,  his  bright  powerful 
slaves,  the  mighty  task-master — man.  Leaving  these  vulcanic 
regions,  we  descended  a  steep  path,  through  vineyards,  where  the 
vines,  instead  of  being  cut  short  and  fastened  in  little  stacks  to 
reeds  a  few  feet  high,  are  spread  all  over  trellises — a  mode  of 
training  them,  disadvantageous,  it  is  said,  to  the  grapes,  but 
which  produces  a  very  pleasant  appearance,  and,  looked  down 
upon  from  above,  has  the  effect  of  a  sort  of  false-bottom  to  the 
whole  country — that  which  seems  the  verdant  ground  being 
nothing  but   the  vine-covered  trellis  that  hides  it.    The  whole 


VISIT  TO  TIVOLI. 


39 


valley,  as  we  wound  round  it,  was  exquisitely  beautiful,  and  we 
paused  by  some  golden  tufts  of  broom  opposite  the  cascatelle  to 
enjoy  the  view.  Our  montures  were  not  of  the  choicest  descrip- 
tion, and  their  gear  was  judiciously  on  a  par  with  their  personal 
virtues.  I  rode  on  a  man's  saddle,  to  which  a  pair  of  horns, 
copied  certainly  from  those  of  some  "  curst  cow,"  were  affixed 
by  means  of  a  sort  of  swivel,  so  that  for  my  greater  convenience 
they  incessantly  turned  round,  and  I  on  my  "jack-2/s"  might 
have  performed  a  series  of  sedentary  ronds  dejambes.  Presently, 
however.  I  was  called  upon  to  execute  no  less  peculiar  a  feat, 
for  the  whole  saddle  turning  at  the  moment  the  quadruped  re- 
ceived a  sudden  and  rather  violent  encouragement  from  the 
guide,  I  found  myself  with  one  leg  stuck  over  the  pummel,  hop- 
ping with  great  alacrity  on  the  other  by  the  side  of  the  donkey, 
who  was  then  performing  a  lively  piece  of  trot.  In  spite  of  all 
this,  the  whole  expedition  was  lovely — the  great  fall  disap- 
pointed me  from  the  extremely  artificial  appearance  given  to  it 
by  the  tunnel  through  which  it  now  passes  previous  to  pouring 
itself  into  the  glen.  It  is  true  that  to  sacrifice  half  a  town  and 
its  inhabitants  every  spring  or  autumn  to  the  picturesque  beauty 
of  a  waterfall  is  making  rather  a  grim  goddess  of  the  nymph  of 
these  bright  waters  ;  but  certainly  she  has  lost  some  of  her 
charms,  as  well  as  her  terrors,  since  she  has  been  led  through 
these  artificial  channels  instead  of  tearing  her  way  through  the 
grotto  of  Neptune,  and  the  houses  that  surrounded  it.  Arrived 
at  the  entrance  of  the  tunnel  through  which  the  river  is  led  in 
two  channels  for  a  space  of  (as  nearly  as  I  can  guess)  a  quarter 
of  a  mile,  I  turned  under  the  vault,  wishing  to  go  through  the 
passage  ;  a  footpath  by  the  side  of  the  canal  is  provided  for  this 
purpose,  and  the  rushing  of  the  waters  in  the  contrary  direction 
from  that  in  which  I  was  running,  together  with  the  imperfect 
light,  which  towards  the  middle  of  the  tunnel  was  a  good  deal 
obscured,  produced  rather  a  nervous  sensation  in  me,  which  was 


40 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


suddenly  and  most  disagreeably  increased  by  a  diabolical  noise 
of  shouting  and  howling,  which  the  hollow  vault  rendered  super- 
naturally  sonorous,  and  which  proceeded  from  a  man  who  was 
rapidly  following  me.  My  first  impression  was  that  he  might  be 
drunk,  and  the  issue  of  a  contested  passage  seemed  doubtful  ; 
while  this  pleasant  contingency  rapidly  passed  though  my  mind, 
the  howling  individual  joined  me,  and  proved  to  be  our  guide, 
who  in  anxious  solicitude  lest  I  should  fall  into  the  water,  had 
pursued  me  with  this  terrific  noise,  which  very  nearly  caused  me 
to  do  so.  He  apprised  me  that  a  young  English  girl  had  fallen 
into  the  water  under  this  tunnel,  and  showed  me  a  tablet  in  the 
wall  testifying  the  same  ;  she  was  fortunately  not  drowned,  and 
indeed  I  should  not  think  there  was  much  danger  of  such  a 
catastrophe  ;  ^for  though  the  current  is  extremely  rapid  and  the 
channel  perfectly  smooth,  it  is  by  no  means  deep.  On  emerging 
from  this  passage  one  comes  upon  a  very  pretty  peaceful  land- 
scape, where  the  remaining  waters  of  the  river  flow  winding 
beneath  willow  trees  through  some  garden  grounds  to  the  town. 
To  return  to  my  party  I  had  to  retrace  my  steps,  and  took  the 
second  tunnel,  parallel  to  the  one  I  had  before  come  through — 
for  the  passage  consists  of  two.  This  channel  is  deeper  than 
the  other,  and  less  agreeable  to  pass  through,  inasmuch  as  the 
footpath  is  made  slippery  and  uncomfortable  by  water  dropping 
from  the  roof.  At  the  end  of  the  passage,  a  great  number  of 
tablets  inserted  in  the  wall  testify  to  the  fact  of  various  royal  and 
illustrious  personages  having  made  the  same  expedition.  As  I 
shall  surely  not  be  tableted,  I  think  it  fit  here  to  record  the 
interesting  fact  of  my  having  passed  through  the  tunnel  of  the 
Anio.  I  regret  very  much  for  the  sake  of  my  readers,  who,  I 
am  sure,  would  be  interested  by  the  circumstance,  that  I  did  not 
look  at  my  watch  to  ascertain  the  precise  hour  of  the  day.  Va- 
rious marks  on  the  side  of  the  arch  show  how  high  its  majesty 
the  river  rises  during  the  period  of  sudden  and  violent  rains ; 


LINES  ON  THE  ANIO  AT  TIVOLI. 


41 


and  some  testify  that  the  waters  must  very  nearly  at  one  time 
have  filled  up  the  whole  channel,  and  that  the  smooth  back 
of  the  swollen  current  must  have  all  but  grazed  itself  against 
the  high  roof  of  the  arch  above  it.  When  it  thus  comes  brim- 
ming up  to  the  very  top  of  the  portals  made  for  it,  and  pouring 
over  the  rocky  battlements  of  the  glen,  it  must  be  a  fine  sight  to 
see  ;  to-day  it  was  a  well-bred  waterfall,  and  as  we  threw  light 
branches  and  boughs  down  on  the  glassy  sheet  that  ran  so 
smoothly  to  the  foaming  leap  below,  I  thought  of  the  white  wreath 
of  immortelles  that  I  had  watched  churning  round  and  round  in 
the  wild  waters  of  the  Nixie's  glen  in  the  deep  mountain  cham- 
bers of  Taconach.  From  this  point  we  descended  to  the  empty 
hollow  of  Neptune's  Grotto,  where  the  waters  formerly  poured 
themselves,  but  where  now  only  a  small  portion  of  them  finds  a 
vent ;  the  basin  in  the  rocks  is  splendid  and  beautiful,  and  the 
cavern  below,  called  the  Syren's  Cave,  into  which  the  waters 
disappear  with  a  frightful  leap,  is  vastly  the  most  picturesque 
thing  of  the  whole.  When  the  whole  river  came  thundering 
down  into  this  abyss,  it  must  have  been  a  magnificent  spectacle. 
As  it  is,  the  dark  depth  below  one,  the  rocky  well  through 
which  one  looks  up  to  the  sky,  with  its  sides  all  garlanded  with 
exquisite  verdure,  and  high  against  the  distant  blue,  on  the  very 
rim  of  this  grim  bowl,  the  graceful,  perfect  form  of  the  Temple 
of  Vesta,  constitute  a  most  striking  and  beautiful  scene. 

LINES  ON  THE  ANIO  AT  TIVOLI. 

One  river  from  the  mountain  springs  was  born, 

Into  three  several  streams  its  course  was  torn. 

One  had  a  royal  pathway  made,  and  ran, 

Sheltered  and  screened,  through  channels  paved  by  man  : 

A  noble  flood,  a  bounteous,  beauteous  river, 

In  light  and  glory  rolling  forth  for  ever. 


49 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


One,  to  the  children  of  the  earth  became 

A  slave  unwilling,  bound,  but  never  tame. 

Round  lashing  wheels  its  silver  foam  was  spread, 

Thro'  murky  chambers  its  bright  waves  were  led, 

Dread  clangor  of  huge  engines  drown'd  its  voice, 

At  its  dark  work  forbidden  to  rejoice ; 

Close  by  its  fiery  foe  its  white  waves  boil, 

Fierce  ruddy  flames  beside  it  glow  and  toil, 

Striving  and  laboring,  panting,  rushing  past, 

All  stained  and  sullied  it  leaps  free  at  last, 

And  down  the  huge  cliffs  with  one  shouting  bound 

Joins  its  fair  sister  on  the  level  ground 

Of  a  green  valley.    One  sad  stream  was  led 

By  God,  not  man,  thro'  chasms  dark,  drear,  and  dread : 

Horrible  depths  ne'er  visited  by  light, 

Caves  of  despair,  dismay,  and  thickest  night ; 

There  in  an  agony  the  lonely  river 

Leapt  down,  and  turned,  and  writhed,  and  plunged  for  ever ; 

Seeking  escape  from  out  the  hideous  deep, 

Where  its  wild  waters  were  condemned  to  weep ; 

But  this  tormented  stream  too  found  its  way, 

At  length  to  the  sweet  air  of  upper  day ; 

And  altogether  they  flow  down  to  rest 

One  with  the  other  in  the  Ocean's  breast. 

So  ends  all  life  that  is  but  mortal  breath, — 

All  fates  are  equal  in  the  lap  of  Death. 

We  returned  to  the  inn  for  rest  and  refreshment ;  of  the  latter 
we  got  little,  except  what  we  derived  from  laughing  at  our  food, 
the  only  alternative,  as  we  did  not  wish  to  cry,  and  our  spirits  at 
least  being  refreshed  by  the  process,  we  set  out  with  sundry 
guides,  bundles  of  tapers,  and  trusses  of  hay  and  straw,  to  scare 
the  syren  in  her  lair  by  torch-light.    It  had  rained,  for  as  we  re- 


RAMBLE  BY  TORCHLIGHT. 


43 


turned  home  in  the  morning  we  were  overtaken  by  a  sharp 
shower,  and  the  evening  was  wild  and  gusty.  It  was  very  dark, 
and  as  we  passed  through  the  steep  streets  of  the  little  town,  the 
sudden  flares  of  the  wind  blew  the  cloaks  of  the  gentlemen,  and 
the  petticoats  of  the  women,  and  the  red  streams  of  torch-light, 
in  wild  confusion  before  them.  As  we  wound  down  the  steep 
paths  to  the  cavern,  the  trees  through  which  we  passed  glittered  all 
in  the  rain  that  still  rested  on  them,  and  added  much  to  the  beau- 
tiful effect  of  the  shadowy  procession  moving  in  torch-light 
through  the  surrounding  gloom,  and  descending  apparently,  into 
the  very  bowels  of  the  earth.  Arrived  at  the  bottom  of  Nep- 
tune's Cave,  which  is  the  top  of  the  Syren's  Grotto,  all  sorts  of 
illuminations  took  place.  Bundles  of  hay  were  piled  beneath 
the  rocky  arch,  below  which  the  waters  disappeared,  and  being 
set  fire  to,  the  sudden  light  sent  a  blood-red  flare  deep  down 
into  the  gulf  and  upon  the  foaming  waters.  Wreaths  of  burn- 
ing straw  were  floated  down  into  the  abyss,  whose  darkness 
swallowed  them  instantly  ;  the  rocky  roof  and  eager  forms  and 
faces  of  the  assistants,  and  terrified  leaping  wild  waters,  all  being 
suddenly  illuminated  by  the  strong  light  only  for  a  few  seconds. 
Then  fires  were  lighted  half  way  up  the  glen  in  a  sort  of  rocky 
gallery,  with  open  arches  looking  down  into  the  deep.  Here,  as 
we  stood  below  and  opposite,  we  saw  the  men  who  were  em- 
ployed in  lighting  these  fires  run  to  and  fro  through  the  ruddy 
rock  passage  :  the  effect  was  perfectly  infernal  ;  and  nothing 
but  demons,  or  some  religious  rites,  such  as  men  have  devised 
for  themselves,  and  which  are  fit  only  for  devils,  were  suggested 
by  this  strange  spectacle.  Then  the  red  flaring  fires  were  ex- 
tinguished, and  a  pale  white  chemical  light  was  made  to  pour  its 
radiance  into  the  rocky  cup,  at  the  bottom  of  which  we  stood. 
The  mild,  but  powerful  light,  like  brightest  moonlight  intensified, 
searched  every  nook  of  the  cavern,  and  falling  full  on  the  white 
robe  of  the  waterfall,  made  it  appear  like  some  gigantic  ghost. 


44 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


In  short,  there  was  no  end  to  the  tricks  played,  and  the  exhibi- 
tions made  of  those  beautiful  and  awful  scenes ;  and  as  the  mas- 
ter of  the  inn,  like  an  expert  showman,  made  us  stand  first  in 
one  place  and  then  in  another,  while  he  produced  his  effects  of 
red  lights,  and  white  lights,  and  hay  light,  and  straw  light,  and 
torch  light,  I  was  seized  with  disgust  at  the  whole  process,  and 
heartily  wished  he  might  fall  into  the  cataract,  while  he  was 
showing  it  off  in  that  familiar  and  theatrical  style.  I  am  sorry 
for  this  ill  feeling,  but  I  do  not  like  liberties  taken  with  nature. 
Coming  to  see  the  scenery  by  torch-light,  I  should  not  have  ob- 
jected to ;  but  these  buffooneries  displeased  me,  in  spite  of  the 
striking  effect  produced  by  some  of  them.  I  have  always  a 
spiteful  feeling  at  people  who  make  vulgar  exhibitions  of  grand 
and  fearful  natural  objects,  and  never  yet  saw  a  menagerie,  and 
heard  the  impertinent  observations  of  the  keepers  upon  elephants, 
lions,  tigers,  and  such  small  gear,  and  saw  the  intolerable  jokes 
they  practise  upon  these  very  superior  animals,  that  I  did  not 
wish  the  bars  of  the  cage  might  break,  and  the  two  beasts  be 
brought  into  a  more  natural  confronting  of  each  other.  If  we 
must  have  collections  of  noble  savage  beasts,  and  keep  them  in 
cages,  let  them  be  treated  with  proper  respect ;  and  if  we  may 
go  and  peep  shuddering  over  the  brink  of  such  secrets  as  those 
of  the  Syren's  Grotto  at  Tivoli,  let  us  do  it  devoutly,  and  not  in 
a  spirit  of  impertinent  levity,  with  all  sorts  of  mountebank  illus- 
trations of  our  own  devising.  Sitting  in  the  night  beside  that 
fearful  subterranean  waterfall  would,  after  all,  have  been  a  finer 
thing  than  all  the  things  we  did. 

THE  SYREN'S  CAVE  AT  TIVOLI. 

As  o'er  the  chasm  I  breathless  hung, 
Thus  from  the  depths  the  Syren  sung  : 
"  Down,  down  into  the  womb 
Of  earth,  the  daylight's  tomb, 


LINES  ON  THE  SYREN'S  CAVE. 


45 


Where  the  sun's  eyes 

Never  may  shine, 

Nor  fair  moon  rise 

With  smile  divine  ; 

Where  caverns  yawn 

Black  as  despair, 

Fatally  drawn 

I  plunge  down  there  ; 

And  with  the  bound 

The  rocks  resound, 

And  round  and  round 

My  waves  are  wound 
Into  the  gaping  rifts  of  the  mid  earth  : 
Oh,  for  the  sunny  springs  where  I  took  birth  ! 

The  gentle  rills, 

The  tiny  brimming  fountain, 

That,  scoop'd  in  the  warm  bosom  of  the  mountain, 

Each  May  shower  over-fills  I 
Whence  I  and  my  fair  sister  came  ;  and  she 
Rolls  her  smooth  silver  flood  along  the  way, 
That  princes  made  for  her,  so  royally, 
Piercing  the  rock  to  give  her  ample  way. 

Down  the  bright  sunny  steep 

Her  waters  leap, 
Myrtle,  and  bay,  and  laurel,  and  wild  vine, 
A  garland  for  her  flowing  tresses  twine  ! 
The  green  moss  stars  the  rocks  whereon  she  leaps, 
Over  her  breast  the  fragrant  locust  weeps  ; 
The  air  resounds  with  her  wild  shouts  of  laughter, 
The  echoes  of  the  hills  in  chorus  after 
Repeat  the  sound,  and  in  her  silvery  spray 
Rainbows  are  woven  by  the  light  of  day ! 


46 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Down  in  the  valley  she  springs 

And  sings, 
And  the  sky  bends  over 
Her,  like  a  lover  ; 
And  glittering  and  sparkling  her  waters  run, 
A  bright  sea  of  snow  in  the  summer  sun  ! 

Darkness  broods  over  me  the  while  ; 
Grim  rocks  that  sweat 
With  my  cold  clammy  spray, 
As  down  the  hopeless  way 
In  one  wild  jet 
My  tortur'd  billows  lash,  and  leap,  and  boil ; 
So  deep  my  bed  of  darkness  lies, 
That  scarce  the  voice  of  my  great  agony 
Reaches  the  skies, 
And  all  ye  see 
With  fearful  eyes 
Who  question  me, 
Is  the  grey  whirling  mist  that  covers  all 
As  with  a  pall. 

Light !  light  upon  the  rocks  !  sudden  and  fierce 

The  sharp  flames  pierce  ; 

Glaring  upon  my  water 

Like  the  blood-hue  of  slaughter 

A  red  torch  flashes  ; 

As  down  my  wild  flood  dashes 
Wide  flaring  brightness  streams  upon  my  foam, 

And  flaming  fire-wreaths  come 

Hissing  into  my  waves,  to  find  their  doom 

In  the  same  blackness  that  devours  me. 

The  huge  rocks  grin,  as  with  a  sudden  glee, 


THE  TEMPLE  OF  VESTA. 


47 


At  this  strange  visitation  of  the  light, 

And  they  are  made  not  beautiful,  but  bright, 

As  all  their  horrid  piles  and  masses  show, 

Hanging  above,  and  heaped  below, 

Searched  by  the  ruddy  glow. 
Oh,  let  me  still  in  darkness  dwell ! 

And  not  in  this  hell 

Of  lurid  light, 

That  scares  the  night, 

Hence  with  the  leaping  glare, 

Whose  fiery  stare 
Reveals  the  secrets  of  my  dismal  bed  ; 
Hence  with  the  voices  that  profane  the  dread 
Of  my  dark  chambers  !" — thus  the  Syren  cried, 
As  o'er  the  rocky  chasm's  black  hideous  side 
I  hung  entranc'd  with  terror  and  dismay, — 
And  at  that  piteous  cry  I  fled  away. 

The  next  morning  we  took  a  walk  to  the  Temple  of  Vesta,  and 
bade  farewell  to  this  enchanting  place.  The  hills  and  waterfalls 
delight  me  ;  but  the  carefully  cut  paths,  and  steps,  and  civilized 
facilities  for  sight-seeing  irk  me  too,  when  I  think  of  the  exqui- 
site scenery  hidden  in  the  wild  recesses  of  the  mountains  in 
America ;  of  the  long,  laborious,  uncertain  wandering  through 
the  forests  ;  of  the  adventurous  exploring  half  up  the  bright 
waters  of  some  wild  mountain  stream  (an  easier  path  often  than 
may  be  found  along  its  rocky  precipitous  banks) ;  of  the  delight 
of  finding,  at  last,  through  much  difficulty  and  some  danger,  the 
hidden  cataract,  whose  voice  had  called  us  on  through  the  thick 
veil  of  interposing  wood  ;  of  the  noon-day  plunge  in  the  cold 
sparkling  waters,  curtained  round  with  the  dark  folds  of  the 
bemlock  pines,  below  whose  screen  the  delicate  birch^trees  wave 
their  golden  tapestry ;  the  blue  sky,  purer  and  more  brilliant  than 


48 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


even  that  of  Italy,  roofing  in  the  paradise,  encircled  by  the 
primeval  forest,  and  secure  from  even  thought  of  human  proxi- 
mity. There  is  something  tame  in  all  this  tourist-haunted  nature 
compared  with  the  lovely  wild  scenery  buried  in  the  unvisited 
and  hardly  known  regions  of  that  most  beautiful  western  conti- 
nent. As  we  drove  out  of  Tivoli  on  our  return  to  Rome,  we  met 
three  girls  walking  with  intertwined  arms  and  bare  heads,  whose 
beauty  was  extremely  remarkable ;  as  they  went  singing  and 
laughing  down  the  street,  they  would  have  formed  a  splendid 
study  for  a  painter,  with  their  fine  heads  and  full  figures  and  free 
reckless  bearing  ;  they  looked  dirty  and  saucy,  but  most  emi- 
nently picturesque.  Our  next  adventure  was  less  agreeable. 
At  the  very  beginning  of  the  long  steep  hill  which  leads  from 
Tivoli  to  the  level  campagna,  the  horses  of  the  carriage  in  which 

 and  Mr.   were  became  restive,  and  after  kicking 

and  plunging  in  a  most  frightful  manner,  set  off  full  gallop  down 

the  bill.   and  Mr.  fortunately  had  time  to  get 

out,  and  the  coachman  and  servant  had  also  dismounted.  The 
infuriated  creatures  came  tearing  down  the  bill,  with  the  car- 
riage tossing  like  a  ship  behind  them.  They  struck  it  violently 
against  a  tree,  which  broke  it,  and  set  them  free,  and  they  then 
pursued  their  frantic  career,  followed  by  the  despairing  coach- 
man and  our  very  efficient  and  steady  man,  Pietro.  We  had 
hardly  received  the  ship-wrecked  travellers  into  our  carriage, 
and  stowed  their  carpet-bags,  guide-books,  and  all  the  endless 
lumber  of  a  trip,  and  were  proceeding  leisurely  towards  the 
bottom  of  the  long  hill,  when  we  met  the  forlorn  procession  re- 
turning ;  Pietro  pale  and  with  quivering  lips  ;  the  horses  with  their 
tails  all  covered  with  blood  whisking  against  their  bleeding  legs, 
which  they  had  cut  and  mangled  shockingly  in  kicking  against 
the  carriage  :  the  coachman  brought  up  the  train  like  Niobe,  all 
tears.  No  sooner  did  he  perceive  u%,  than  he  broke  out  into  a 
southern  tempest  of  lamentations,  wringing  his  hands,  beating  his 


LINES  ON  HADRIAN'S  VILLA. 


49 


breast,  tearing  his  hair,  rolling  his  eyes  up  to  heaven,  sobbing, 
snivelling,  and  finally  falling  in  a  demi-syncope  upon  a  bank  ; 
while,  in  the  deep  abandonment  of  his  grief,  he  let  go  the  horses' 
reins  again,  thereby  giving  them  an  opportunity  of  renewing 
their  late  successful  scappata.  How  an  Englishman  would  have 
scowled  at  the  howling  Roman  as  he  reclined  weeping  and  woe- 
begone by  the  road-side  !    We  comforted  him  all  we  could,  and 

proceeded  to  Hadrian's  Villa,  where  ,  who  had  sprained 

his  foot  in  jumping  from  the  carriage,  having  procured  a  horse, 
we  spent  some  beatific  time  amid  the  grand,  graceful  ruins  round 
which  the  spring  had  twined  a  thousand  fresh  garlands,  making 
glad  the  wrecks  of  man's  greatness  with  the  never-fading  great- 
ness of  God.  It  was  a  great,  beautiful,  and  sublime  scene,  and 
for  a  moment  I  was  seized  with  the  Lotos  Eater's  phrensy,  and 
felt  inclined  to  remain  there  the  rest  of  my  natural  life. 


HADRIAN'S  VILLA 


Let  us  stay  here  :  nor  ever  more  depart 

From  this  sweet  wilderness  Nature  and  Art 

Have  made,  not  for  light  wandering  feet  to  stray, 

Through  their  fair  chaos  half  one  sunny  day  ; 

But  for  th'  abiding  place  of  those  whose  spirit 

Is  worthy  all  this  beauty  to  inherit. 

Pervading  sunlight  vivifies  the  earth, 

The  fresh  green  thickets  rock,  as  though  in  mirth, 

Under  its  warmth,  and  shaken  by  the  breeze, 

That  springs  down  into  them  from  waving  trees, 

Whose  dark  blue  branches  spread  themselves  on  high, 

On  granite  shafts,  that  seem  to  prop  the  sky. 

Around,  a  rocky  screen  the  mountains  spread, 

Wood-mantled  to  their  middle,  but  each  head 
VOL.  II.  3 


50 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Grey,  bare,  and  bald,  save  where  a  passing  veil, 
Vaporous,  and  silv'ry  soft,  the  low  clouds  trail 
Over  their  craggy  brows : — down  their  steep  sides 
The  light  procession  of  fleet  shadow  glides, 
Garlands  of  melting  gloom,  that  join  and  sever, 
And  climb,  and  then  run  down  the  hills  for  ever, 
Like  rapid  outspread  wings,  flying  away 
Before  the  golden  shafts  of  the  bright  day. 
Turn  from  the  rocky  wall,  and  lo !  a  sea 
Of  level  land,  like  an  eternity, 
Spreads  its  vast  plain  beneath  the  hazy  light, 
Till  far,  far,  on  th'  horizon's  edge,  one  bright 
And  blinding  streak  betrays  the  distant  verge, 
Where  earth  and  ocean  in  each  other  merge. 
Look  from  this  promontory  made  of  ruin, 
Thro'  whose  brown  broken  arches  the  soft  wooing 
Of  the  Spring  air  in  murmurs  low  is  heard, 
Answering  the  voice  of  that  triumphant  bird, 
Who,  hid  'mid  fragrant  wreaths  of  hawthorn  bloom, 
Sings  loud  and  sweet,  here,  in  this  wondrous  tomb 
Of  the  earth's  greatness  : — look  below,  around, 
Above, — survey  this  magic  sky  and  ground  ; 
These  crumbling  arches,  that  blue  vault  of  Heaven, 
These  pillars,  and  these  friezes,  fall'n  or  riv'n 
From  their  stone  sockets  ;  those  fair  cypress  trees, 
Those  vine  and  ivy  garlands,  Nature's  frieze  ; 
These  graceful  fragments,  over  which  she  flings 
The  still  fresh  mantle  of  a  thousand  Springs ; 
Hear  from  it  all  the  strange  and  solemn  story, 
Decay  and  Death  reaping  all  human  glory. 
Ho,  Adrian  !  Emperor,  Conqueror,  Priest,  and  Lord  ! 
Who  the  great  Roman  world  swayedst  with  a  word  ! 


ROAD  TO  OSTIA. 


51 


Thou  who  didst  cast  off  power  without  measure, 

To  dwell  in  joy,  possessing  only  pleasure  ! 

The  wild  bee  hums  in  the  wild  wreaths  of  thyme 

That  carpet  o'er  thy  halls  and  courts  sublime  ; 

The  nightingale,  sweet  single  chorister, 

Fills  the  void  circle  of  thy  theatre, 

And  northern  pilgrims,  with  slow  lingering  feet, 

Stray  round  each  vestige  of  thy  lov'd  retreat, 

And  spend  in  homage  half  one  sunny  day 

Before  they  pass  upon  their  wandering  way, 

Leaving  thy  royal  ruin  of  delight 

Lordly  and  lonely,  lovely,  sad,  and  bright. 

We  have  made  another  expedition  in  the  opposite  direction, 
which  has  enchanted  us  extremely.  Leaving  Rome  by  the  San 
Paolo  fuor  le  Mura,  we  took  the  road  to  Ostia  ;  and,  following  the 
windings  of  the  Tiber,  with  our  backs  to  the  beautiful  mountain 
screen  that  stands  round  Rome,  we  drove  towards  the  sea.  The 
spring  was  in  all  its  beautiful  southern  glory  :  as  long  as  we 
drove  through  the  suburbs,  every  wall  was  crowned  with  profuse 
bushes  of  roses,  and  every  path  shaded  with  the  silver  bunches 
of  the  acacia  blossom  ;  the  great  long  lordly  sweeping  meadows 
of  the  campagna  were  all  carpeted  with  soft  green  and  a  thousand 
blossoms ;  and  the  very  edges  of  the  ditches  by  the  road-side 
were  gay  with  gorgeous  colors — now  an  army  of  scarlet  poppies 
that  "  made  the  rash  gazer  wipe  his  eye,"  and  then  a  heaven- 
blue  cloud  of  delicate  azure-tinted  burridge,  with  its  red-brown 
stalks  and  downy  leaves ;  while  above,  wild  hawthorn  and 
honeysuckle  hung  fragrant  draperies  over  every  hedge.  Spring 
is  the  season  for  Italy — Italy  is  the  place  to  see  the  spring,  and 
know  how  triumphant  a  thing  this  resurrection  of  the  year  may 
be.  Midway  to  Ostia,  and  just  beyond  a  bit  of  the  ancient  Via 
Severiana,  stands  the  Osteria  of  Malafede ;  and  here  begins  the 


52 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


vast  extent  of  alternate  marsh  and  forest  that  stretches  along  the 
coast  as  far  as  Nettuno.  From  a  rise  in  the  road  just  at  this 
point,  the  view  is  very  striking  ;  the  wide  tract  of  dwarf  forest, 
scrub  hawthorn,  and  oak,  stretches  down  over  the  skirts  of  the 
campagna,  like  a  dark  shadow,  to  the  salt  marshes,  and  desolate 
lonely  town  of  Ostia.  Fever  and  ague  have  scared  away  all 
human  inhabitants  from  this  wild  district,  which  has  a  peculiar 
forlorn  grandeur  and  picturesqueness  of  its  own.  The  people 
employed  at  the  salt  works  are  pretty  much  the  only  residents  in 
Ostia,  where  there  is  a  church  and  inn,  and  the  fine  old  middle- 
age  castle,  in  which  Csesar  Borgia  was  confined  for  a  time. 
Leaving  this  uninviting  place,  we  drove  about  half  a  mile  over 
short  sea-grass,  in  a  parallel  direction  with  the  coast,  and  crossing 
a  small  bridge  over  a  widish  brook  that  flows  from  the  forest 
marshes  to  the  sea,  we  entered  the  domain  of  Castel  Fusano,  the 
property  of  the  Chigi  family,  and  found  ourselves  in  a  sort  of 
sylvan  temple,  of  the  noblest  and  grandest  proportions :  all 
round  the  old  weather-stained  mansion  a  semi-circle  of  glorious 
stone  pines  formed  a  natural  hall,  more  beautiful  than  ever  yet 
rose,  propped  on  granite  or  marble — it  was  impossible  not  to  be 
struck  with  delight  and  almost  awe,  standing  in  the  midst  of  this 
ring  of  forest  giants ;  behind  them  stretched  the  various  wood  of 
beech  and  oak,  with  their  gnarled  fantastic  forms,  and  new  fresh 
verdure,  and  far-winding  wooing  avenues,  forming  the  most 
delicious  contrast  to  the  solemn  grandeur  of  this  fine  colonnade. 
All  round  the  house  reigned  a  sunny  open  space,  girt  every- 
where with  exquisite  woodland  scenery  ;  and  towards  the  sea, 
the  great  pine  forest  stretched  its  dark-blue  vault  over  the  earth, 
fragrant  with  its  aromatic  warm  colored  sheddings,  on  which  we 
walked,  rejoicing  in  all  things.  A  broad  avenue,  paved  with  the 
large  stones  of  the  Roman  road,  and  extending  for  nearly  a  mile 
and  a  half,  led  through  this  strange  paradise.  On  either  hand, 
the  shafts  of  the  stone  pines  rose  shining  like  porphyry  columns ; 


THE  AUTUMN  CYCLAMEN. 


53 


ilex  and  oak,  and  brilliant  evergreen  growth,  filled  up,  as  with 
green  curtains,  the  spaces  between ;  the  feathery  snow-white 
heather  darted  its  elegant  spires  up  against  this  dark  back-ground  ; 
profuse  branches  of  rose-blossomed  daphne,  and  fragrant  pale-blue 
rosemary,  swelled  in  rounded  tufts  below,  and  close  upon  the 
dark  cone-strewed  earth,  like  jewels  scattered  upon  the  pavement 
of  these  magical  woods ;  the  glowing  blossoms  of  the  sweet  cycla- 
men shone  ruby  red  in  the  gleams  of  sunlight  that  crept  beneath 
the  boughs  to  make  them  bright.  A  more  wonderful  and  beauti- 
ful woodland  scene  I  never  saw  ;  and  when,  towards  the  end  of 
this  triumphant  way,  the  dazzling  white  sand  and  sapphire  blue 
waters  of  the  Mediterranean  rose  up  against  the  horizon,  we  all 
cried  out  with  delight  and  amazement  at  the  beauty  of  the  scene. 
The  day  passed  rapidly  away — it  is  one  of  those  filled  only  with 
beautiful  things,  which  I  remember  separately  in  my  life. 


THE  AUTUMN  CYCLAMEN. 

These  beautiful  little  flowers,  whose  most  appropriate  title 
among  the  Italian  country  people  is  Viole  pazze  (mad  violets), 
early  in  spring  fill  these  southern  woods  with  their  amaranth- 
colored  blossoms,  and  exquisite  fragrance.  They  disappear 
before  the  increasing  heat  of  summer,  but  when  the  autumn 
comes  return  and  cover  every  mossy  bank  and  sheltered  copse 
with  profuse  blossoms,  which,  however,  look  like  the  flowery 
spectres  of  their  sweet  spring  existence  ;  colorless  and  scentless, 
they  haunt  the  woods  and  meadows  till  the  fall  of  the  year ; 
when  even  these  floral  apparitions  vanish,  their  petals  dropping 
off,  the  slight  stems,  generally  two  or  three  inches  long,  roll 
themselves  tightly  up,  and  either  lie  thus  curled  up  under  the 
earth's  surface,  or  perhaps  merely  beneath  its  warm  winter 
covering  of  fallen  leaves,  until  the  spring  restores  to  them  their 
amaranthine  vests  and  fragrant  breath. 


54 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


We  are  the  ghosts  of  those  small  flow'rs, 
That  in  the  opening  of  the  year, 

'Neath  rosemary  and  myrtle  bow'rs, 
In  crimson  vests  appear. 

Far,  underneath  the  blue  pine  wood, 
Between  its  massive  porphyry  stems, 

The  mossy  ground  we  overstrewed 
With  ruby-colored  gems. 

The  slender  heath  spires  o'er  us  wav'd 
Their  lordly  snow-white  feathers  fine, 

And  round  our  feet  the  earth  was  pav'd 
With  sheddings  of  the  pine. 

The  flow'r  Apollo  lov'd,  its  bloom 
In  rosy  bunches  o'er  us  spread, 

And  heavy  hanging  golden  broom 
Deep  golden  shadows  shed. 

Above,  around,  and  underneath, 

The  aromatic  air  was  filled 
With  the  wild  sweetness  of  our  breath, 

Like  honey-combs  distilled. 

The  spring  breeze  flying  towards  the  sea 
Entranced,  remain'd,  and  o'er  us  hung  ; 

And  in  our  cups  the  soft  brown  bee 
Bending  our  blossoms  swung. 

The  blue  sea  sang  to  us  a  deep, 

Sonorous,  solemn,  melody ; 
The  sun  stoop'd  'neath  the  boughs  to  peep 

At  our  fair  company. 


THE  AUTUMN  CYCLAMEN. 


And  you  went  by ;  in  your  white  hand 
Was  many  a  slender,  brittle  stem, 

That  you  had  gather'd  from  our  band  ; 
We  wished  we  were  with  them. 

Now,  here  we  are  a  ghostly  train  ; 

Who,  in  the  closing  of  the  year, 
From  the  dark  earth-cells  rise  again, 

And  sadly  do  appear. 

The  red  hues  of  our  coronal, 

All  pale  and  wintry  white  have  grown ; 
Our  leaves,  in  wild  disorder,  all, 

By  the  rough  winds  are  blown. 

The  sun-beams  faint,  and  thin,  and  chill, 
Look  at  us  thro'  dark  walls  of  cloud, 

And  o'er  the  grey  ridge  of  the  hill, 
The  storm  howls  fierce  and  loud. 

'Neath  many  a  black  green  ivy  wreath, 
Steep'd  in  the  cold  and  glittering  showers, 

We  send  a  faint  and  scentless  breath, 
Thro'  gloomy  laurel  bow'rs. 

The  hard  pine-cones  come  shaken  down, 
Bruising  us,  where  we  clustered  grow, 

Brown,  thorny,  wild  briar  arms  are  thrown 
Across  our  breasts  of  snow. 

The  threatening  thunder  heavily 

Rolls  thro'  the  darkening  realms  of  space ; 
And  in  the  lightning  glares  we  see 

Each  other's  wet,  wan  face. 


56 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


We  are  the  ghosts  of  those  gay  flow'rs, 
That  in  your  soft  white  hand  you  bore  ; 

And  soon  the  cheerless  wintry  bow'rs 
Will  see  e'en  us  no  more. 

This  morning  we  went  to  the  Sistine  Chapel ;  our  last  expedi- 
tion to  it  had  ended  in  quasi  suffocation  among  the  crowd  outside 
the  door,  listening  to  Pacini's  Miserere,  which  we  could  not  hear, 
and  supposing  it  was  Allegri's  ;  to-day  we  entered  without  let  or 
hindrance,  and  found  all  silent  and  empty — two  diligent  German 
sight-seers,  book  in  hand,  alone  wandered  round  with  us  ;  and 
we  remained  for  a  length  of  time  admiring  the  grandest  pictorial 
conceptions  in  the  whole  world.  It  is  impossible  to  describe 
them ;  but  I  have  never  been  impressed  by  any  pictures  as  by 
these  colossal  figures  of  the  sybils  and  prophets — grand  and 
natural,  simple  and  sublime,  beyond  any  pictures  I  ever  beheld. 
The  great  picture  of  the  Last  Judgment,  which  stands  behind 
the  altar,  did  nothing,  however,  but  horrify  me.  Drawing, 
grouping,  anatomy,  may  all  triumph  in  this  vast  composi- 
tion ;  but  the  conception  of  it  is  so  gross,  so  coarse,  so 
earthly,  and  withal  so  childish,  that  it  displeased  me  utterly. 
As  for  the  Judge  Supreme,  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  I  was 
more  shocked  with  the  brutal  form  and  expression  lent  to  Him, 
than  with  any  other  representation  of  that  Divine  Humanity  I 
ever  beheld — though  I  involuntarily  turn  away  my  eyes  from  all 
of  them.  This  was  indeed  horrible, — the  subject  of  the  whole 
thus  treated  is  exceedingly  displeasing,  and  I  turned  from  it  to 
gaze  with  still  increasing  wonder  and  delight  at  the  miracles  on 
the  vault.  A  rather  comical  piece  of  consideration  was  shown, 
it  seems  to  me,  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  the  late  Pope. 
While  his  body  lay  in  state  in  the  chapel,  a  curtain  was  drawn 
across  the  picture  of  the  Last  Judgment,  with  a  view,  I  suppose, 
to  avoid  the  suggestion  of  any  ideas  upon  that  subject  in  which 


A  VISIT  TO  THE  CATACOMBS. 


57 


the  dead  Pontiff  might  be  disrespectfully  implicated  :  in  spite  of 
which  precaution  shrewd  guesses  were  not  avoided  ;  and  a  letter 
was  taken  from  the  post-office  a  short  time  ago,  directed  "  To 
Gregory  the  Sixteenth,  in  Hell  /"  and  containing  a  copy  of  the 
amnesty  promulgated  immediately  after  Tiis  accession  by  his 
successor.  As  we  left  the  Vatican,  a  most  beautiful  effect  of 
light  struck  me  ;  the  staircase  we  descended  was  in  a  sort  of 
mellow  twilight ;  the  long  gallery,  beyond  where  stood  and  sat 
the  Swiss  Guard,  was  perfect  salmon-color,  with  the  sunlight 
pouring  through  the  open  windows  towards  the  great  court ;  and 
at  the  end  of  all,  between  the  large  pillars  of  the  colonnade,  the 
place  of  St.  Peter's  Fountain,  people,  and  the  long  Via  del  Borgo 
were  one  blaze  of  sunlight.  It  was  wonderful  ;  but  could  hardly 
have  been  painted  any  more  than  described.  We  walked  out  at 
the  Porta  Angelica,  and  went  home  across  the  meadows  behind 
St.  Angelo,  along  a  lane  filled  with  acacias  and  honeysuckle ; 
we  crossed  the  Tiber  by  a  most  primitive  rope  ferry  in  a  most 
filthy  ferry-boat,  and  landing  in  the  Via  Ripetta  went  up  to  our 
home  on  the  Pincio,  which  seems  to  me  one  of  the  very  choice 
positions  in  all  Rome. 

In  the  afternoon  we  drove  out  to  the  Via  Nomentana,  beyond 
St.  Agnes,  intending  to  visit  the  catacombs  ;  walking  through 
some  ground,  part  meadow,  part  vineyard,  to  a  tumble-down 
cottage,  a  man  issued  from  it  armed  with  a  proper  proportion  of 
tapers,  who  guided  us  to  a  sort  of  cellar  door,  opening  into  the 

ground.    First  went  our  guide,  next  Mr.  ,  down  the  steep 

narrow  stone  steps  ;  I  was  about  to  follow,  followed  myself  by 

my  sister  and  Mrs.   ,  when  happening  to  look  upwards,  I 

perceived  that  the  vault,  on  which  the  torchlight  and  daylight 
played  together,  was  literally  lined  with  huge  hairy  spiders,  a 
perfect  net-work  of  running  legs  and  round  black  bodies.  This 
was  enough  for  me  ;  I  would  have  gone  down  there  to  have 
saved  a  person's  life,  perhaps ;  as  it  was,  I  forthwith  wheeled 

3* 


5S 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


about  and  fled.  Mrs.  and  my  sister  followed  my  exam- 
ple ;  the  latter,  indeed,  for  pure  conformity's  sake,  for  she  does 

not  mind  spiders.    Mr.   remained  at  the  bottom  of  the 

stairs,  adjuring,  imploring,  exhorting — "  Caroline  !  Adelaide  ! 
Mrs.  Butler !  There  are  no  more  spiders  as  soon  as  you're  down 
the  stairs  ;  they're  only  old  men — not  real  spiders,  what  d'ye 
call  them,  daddy-long-legs.  Oh,  come  here  !  see  ! — the  early 
Christians  !  Here  they  are !"  But  the  latest  Christians  fled 
amain,  and  we  saw  no  catacombs  ;  in  spite  of  which,  my  con- 
ception of,  and  admiration  for,  all  that  these  saints  and  martyrs 
of  our  faith  endured,  is,  I  am  persuaded,  infinitely  greater  than 
if  I  had  seen  the  catacombs,  and  not  the  spiders.    To  divert  the 

time  while  Mr.  pursued  his  spidery  way,  my  sister  and 

myself  went  into  the  curious  old  church  of  St.  Agnes,  which  is 
quite  at  a  considerable  depth  below  ground, — a  most  picturesque 
old  church,  sunny  and  lonely  and  still :  it  struck  us  both 
extremely.  There  was  a  beautiful  marble  head  of  Christ,  attri- 
buted to  Michael  Angelo,  on  a  small  side  altar  ;  the  whole  church, 
empty  of  all  but  the  still  sunlight,  seemed  to  me  full  of  devotion. 
The  priest  who  showed  it  to  us  led  us  from  thence  to  the  adjoin- 
ing baptistery  or  church  of  Sta.  Costanza,  an  exquisite  round 
building,  with  a  double  colonnade  of  marble  pillars  ;  a  roof  covered 
with  various  and  most  curious  mosaic,  and  a  little  side  door, 
which  standing  half  opened,  showed  a  rich  foreground  of  golden 
green  foliage,  and  the  sunny  campagna  beyond.  The  whole 
was  most  magnificent  in  its  effect,  and  I  regretted  neither  the 
spiders  nor  the  catacombs.  This  was  our  last  day  in  Rome  ;  the 
spring  beckoned  us  to  our  villeggiatura  at  Frascati,  and  the  next 
morning  we  departed  for  the  Alban  hills,  and  the  green  woody 
slopes  of  Tusculum. 

It  is  a  certain  fact  that  descriptions  describe  nothing  ;  that  is  to 
say,  they  do  not  convey  any  distinct  idea  whatever  of  either 
places  or  people  to  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  them  ; 


PAULINE  BORGHESE'S  PALACE. 


59 


their  use,  I  take  it,  is  to  recall  vividly,  if  they  are  good,  places  or 
people,  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with  them.  Thus,  while 
reading  such  descriptions,  as  while  looking  at  a  picture  of  a  loved 
face,  or  a  familiar  haunt,  we  bear  testimony  to  the  merit  of  the 
copy  by  forgetting  it,  and  exclaiming,  with  our  minds  full  of  the 
original,  "  Ah,  how  lovely  it  was !"  To  that  happy  company  of 
friends  gathered  during  the  bright  hours  of  that  summer  (of  1846) 
under  one  roof,  and  from  whtse  national  and  individual  dissimi- 
larities no  element  of  discord  arose,  but  only  variety  of  harmony, 
during  an  uninterrupted  season  of  delightful  intercourse, — I  de- 
dicate these  remembrances  of  that  beautiful  residence,  and  those 
fortunate  hours,  during  which  memories  were  planted  that  will 
outbloom  all  seasons,  and  spirits  joined  together  in  bonds  that  will 
survive  all  time.  The  house  we  resided  in  was  one  of  the  many 
Borghese  palaces,  and  had  been  a  favorite  residence  of  the  Bor- 
ghese  (not  par  excellence)  Pauline,  the  Venere  Vincitrice — no 
longer  inhabited  by  its  owners,  it  had  been  let  in  several  apart- 
ments to  different  families,  and  this  year  we  were  fortunate 
enough  to  secure  one  of  them.  The  large  and  rather  dilapidated 
rooms  were  but  scantily  provided  with  furniture,  more  various 
than  well-assorted,  and  tending  to  unsatisfactory  splendor  rather 
than  to  solid  comfort.  Few  of  the  tables  or  chairs  stood  fairly 
on  their  legs ;  but  then  in  almost  every  room  was  some  precious 
slab  of  beautifully  veined  marble.  The  sofas  were  repulsive 
and  not  inviting,  but  the  walls  and  ceilings  were  variegated  with 
that  profusion  of  graceful  ornament  which  makes  us  wonder  at 
the  bare  whitewashing  and  monotonous  one-patterned  papers  of 
our  northern  abodes  ;  and  if  the  brick  floors  and  doors  loath  to 
shut,  threatened  a  little  to  the  rheumatic  apprehensions  of  Eng- 
lish people,  what  sunlight,  incessant,  brilliant,  glorious,  blessed, 
poured  from  those  cloudless  heavens  through  the  open  windows 
day  after  day  !  and  how  in  the  panting  summer  afternoons  we 
looked  through  the  cheerful  vista  of  the  long  gallery,  where  we 


60 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


sat,  to  the  pleasant  vine-covered  trellis,  with  its  hanging  bunches 
of  grapes ;  the  dark-leaved  gigantic  growth  of  the  hydrangea, 
with  its  heavy  tufts  of  cool,  pale-blue  blossoms,  and  the  sparkling 
fringes  of  the  fountain  that  fell  down  beyond  into  the  stone  basin, 
in  the  midst  of  its  smooth  clipped  shining  screen  of  polished 
laurel !  What  moonlight  nights  lured  us  forth  upon  the  broad 
terraces  with  their  graceful  urns  and  slender  cypress  spires,  like 
delicate  shadows  piercing  the  violet  sky  !  What  delicious  hours 
of  mere  breathing  that  pleasant  summer  residence  afforded,  with 
its  infinite  combinations  of  natural  and  artificial  beauty  !  My  own 
special  apartment  was  most  charming. 

Three  windows  cheerfully  poured  in  the  light : 
One  from  the  east,  where  o'er  the  Sabine  hills 
The  sun  first  rose  on  the  great  Roman  plain, 
And  shining  o'er  the  garden,  with  its  fountains, 
Vine-trellises,  and  heaps  of  rosy  bloom, 
Struck  on  the  glittering  laurel  trees,  that  shone 
With  burnished  golden  leaves  against  my  lattice. 
One  towards  the  north,  close  screened  with  a  dark  wall 
Of  bay  and  ilex,  with  tall  cypress  shafts, 
Piercing  with  graceful  spires  the  limpid  air, 
Like  delicate  shadows  in  transparent  water. 
One  towards  the  west — above  a  sunny  green, 
Where  merry  black-eyed  Tusculan  maidens  laid 
The  tawny  woof  to  bleach  between  the  rays 
Of  morning  light  and  the  bright  morning  dew. 
There  spread  the  graceful  balustrade,  and  down 
Swept  the  twin  flights  of  steps,  with  their  stone  vases, 
And  thick-leav'd  aloes,  like  a  growth  of  bronze, 
To  the  broad  court,  where,  from  a  twilight  cell, 
A  Naiad,  crowned  with  tufts  of  trembling  green, 
Sang  towards  the  sunny  palace  all  day  long. 


ITALIAN  SCENERY. 


61 


How  charming  the  life  was,  too,  with  its  monotony  and  variety, 
like  that  of  beautiful  nature  itself.  The  early  morning  walk, 
through  dewy  vineyards,  where  I  forestalled  my  breakfast,  pick- 
ing from  the  purple  and  amber  bunches,  like  a  greedy  bird,  the 
finest  grapes,  all  bathed  in  bloom  and  freshness,  or  breaking  from 
the  branches  over  my  head  the  heavy-hanging  luscious  figs, 
while  my  eyes  slowly  wandered  from  the  Sabine  hills  to  the 
Alban  mountain,  and  from  the  shining  glorious  campagna  to  the 
glittering  Mediterranean.  Then  the  noon-day  plunge  in  the  cool 
fountain,  with  those  beautiful  children,  their  round  rosy  limbs 
shining  through  the  clear  water,  and  their  bead-like,  glancing 
eyes  bright  with  delight.  Then  the  readings,  and  the  music  ; 
that  exquisite  voice,  and  learned  lovely  art,  enchanting  the  hours 
with  the  songs  of  every  land ;  the  earnest,  silent,  begrimed, 
absorbed,  drawing  hours ;  the  quiet  enthusiasm  of  our  artist 
friend,  the  infinite  anecdote,  varied  learning,  marvellous  memory, 
and  eloquent  outpourings  of  our  traveller  ;  the  graceful  universal 
accomplishment  and  most  gentle  chivalrous'  benevolence  of  our 
dear  Excellency.  How  many,  many  elements  of  pleasure  and 
of  happiness  were  there  !  How  perfectly  all  the  elements  were 
united  and  tempered  and  attuned !  The  evening  rides,  when 
the  sun  began  to  withdraw  his  potent  presence  ;  the  merry 
meeting  of  the  numerous  cavalcade,  in  front  of  the  fine  mansion  ; 
the  salutations  from  balcony  and  terrace  from  those  who  stayed, 
alas  !  behind,  to  those  who,  blessed  with  health  and  strength, 
went  forth  to  increase  them  both  by  pleasure.  The  sober  pro- 
cession at  starting  up  the  broad  ilex  avenue,  the  unfailing  excla- 
mations of  delight  and  admiration  as  we  stood  on  the  royal 
terrace  of  the  Dragon's  mount,  and  then  the  sweeping  gallops 
over  the  wide  campagna  to  the  Lake  Regillis,  Gabii,  Pentana, 
Lunghezza,  or  through  the  chestnut- woods  below  Rocco  di  Papa, 
and  at  the  base  of  Monte  Cavo,  or  along  the  smooth  verdant 
sward  (smoother  and  greener  in  the  spring  and  autumn  than 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


green  Ireland  ever  saw)  of  the  long  Latin  valley,  and  then  the 
return,  by  rosy  sunset  or  pearly  moonlight,  through  the  filbert- 
woods  of  Tusculum,  by  the  Camaldoli,  and  down  the  fragrant, 
warm,  mysterious  cypress  avenue.  It  was  a  perfect  life,  and  to 
have  led  it  for  several  months  is  a  miracle. 

LIFE. 

At  morn — a  mountain  ne'er  to  be  climbed  o'er, 

A  horn  of  plenty,  lengthening  evermore  ; 

At  noon — the  countless  hour-sands  pouring  fast, 

Waves  that  we  scarce  can  see  as  they  run  past ; 

At  night — a  pageant  over  ere  begun, 

A  course  not  even  measured  and  yet  run, 

A  short  mysterious  tale — suddenly  done. 

At  first — a  heap  of  treasure,  heaven-high  ; 

At  last — a  failing  purse,  shrunk  lean  and  beggarly. 

Established  at  the  Villa  Taverna,  one  of  our  first  expeditions 
was  to  the  ancient  Latin  city,  the  birth-place  of  the  Catos — the 
summer  resort  of  Cicero.  At  the  back  of  our  house  a  noble 
avenue  of  ilex  leads  up  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  gradual 
ascent  to  the  Villa  Mondragone,  the  noblest  of  all  the  princely 
houses  that  cluster  above  Frascati — a  huge  block  of  building 
through  whose  long  ranges  of  empty  windows  the  bright  sky 
looks  like  some  sparkling  blue  eye  through  the  sockets  of  a 
skeleton,  covering,  I  should  suppose,  upwards  of  two  acres  of 
ground.  The  princely  mansion  commands  the  whole  near  and 
far  country  most  royally — in  front,  a  spacious  terrace,  all  grass- 
grown  and  desolate,  overlooks  the  splendid  prospect ;  a  broken, 
tottering  stone  balustrade  still  ornaments  it,  but  the  visitor,  gaz- 
ing on  the  varied  and  lovely  scene,  had  better  beware  of  the 
treacherous  support  of  its  tottering  pillars, — here  and  there  great 
gaps  are  broken  in  its  graceful  line,  and  the  irregular  tufts  of 


THE  MONKS  OF  CAMALDOLI. 


63 


ivy,  clematis,  and  wild  briar,  have  climbed  from  the  green  depths 
below,  and  hung  their  tapestry  over  the  ruin  ;  four  pillars,  with 
dragons'  heads  for  capitals,  and  surmounted  by  iron  crosses, 
mark  the  corners  of  this  terrace — land-marks  seen  for  miles 
from  below ;  and  a  dry  fountain,  full  of  weeds  and  nettles, 
stands  in  the  midst  of  it,  whence  looking  at  sunset,  the  world 
cannot  show  a  grander  or  more  melancholy  scene.  To  the  right, 
the  irregular  buildings  of  Monte  Porzio,  perched  on  their  vine- 
clad  hills  ;  and  above  and  beyond,  the  whole  line  of  the  Sabine 
mountains.  To  the  left,  the  waving  oak  and  chestnut  woods  of 
Tusculum,  the  stone  pines  of  the  Rufinella,  the  cypress  spires 
of  the  Falconieri ; — in  the  middle  distance,  the  carnpagna,  one 
sea  of  light ;  with  St.  Peter's,  like  a  huge  shadowy  buoy,  float- 
ing on  the  sunny  vapor  ; — along  the  horizon,  the  bright  blue  line 
of  the  Mediterranean  ;  and  immediately  below  our  feet,  leading 
up  to  the  palace,  a  broad  grassy  avenue,  with  two  compact  walls 
of  noble  cypress  trees,  whose  black  spires  against  the  red  glow 
of  sunset,  or  the  violet  star-sown  evening  sky,  produce  one  of  the 
most  solemn  and  beautiful  effects  I  ever  saw.  We  left  this  royal 
stand  unwillingly,  and  passing  through  the  gate,  still  guarded  by 
the  remains  of  the  dragon  and  eagle,  both  crowned,  pursued  our 
road  towards  Tusculum,  passing  on  our  way  the  picturesque 
convent  of  the  Camaldoli,  a  sort  of  Trappist  institution,  where 
the  monks  have  entirely  separate  residences,  and  never  associate 
with  each  other  but  on  some  special  occasions,  once  or  twice  in 
the  year.  The  late  Pope,  Gregory  XVI.,  was  one  of  these 
monks,  and  habitually  wore  their  dress  when  not  in  his  papal 
robes.  They  own  a  good  deal  of  land  in  the  neighborhood,  and 
must  have  been,  at  any  rate,  supposed  to  possess  some  property, 
for  in  the  days  of  Gasperoni,  his  band  carried  off  a  number  of 
them  into  the  mountains,  for  the  sake  of  a  ransom  of  some  hun- 
dred scudi,  which,  I  believe,  the  good  fathers  paid.  At  some 
distance  from  the  convent  gate  are  two  iron  crosses  on  stone  pe- 


64 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


destals.  I  read  on  one  of  them,  that  any  woman  passing  beyond 
that  spot  was  excommunicated  and  anathematized,  in  every  sense 
of  the  term.  We  climbed,  just  here,  a  breezy  knoll,  covered 
with  wild  thyme,  purple  bell  blossoms,  and  bushes  of  golden 
broom,  whose  color  looked  as  though  one  might  have  warmed 
one's  hands  at  them ;  over  this  splendid  carpet,  spread  upon  the 
hills,  we  looked  down  into  the  campagna,  which  affects  me 
always  with  the  same  sense  of  vast  melancholy  grandeur  as  the 
sea. 

After  resting  here,  we  went  on  through  steep  shady  walks,  all 
vaulted  over  with  hazel  boughs,  to  Tusculum.  On  the  very  top 
of  the  hill  rises,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  sinks,  the  graceful 
stone  circle  of  the  ancient  theatre ;  its  proportions  are  small,  but 
the  whole  structure  is  still  entire  in  form  :  the  stage  and  orches- 
tra, and  the  perfectly  defined  stone  seats,  unbroken,  rise  one 
above  another,  with  nodding  scarlet  poppies  growing  between 
their  crevices,  the  brown  rocky  mass  of  the  ancient  citadel  of 
Tusculum  rising  behind  like  a  screen  ;  and-  above,  the  blue  sky 
spreads  its  transparent  canopy ;  and  all  below,  the  land  falls  in 
gradual  various  lovely  slopes  and  breaks,  to  the  level  seat  of 
Rome  the  victorious.  From  a  ridge  just  beyond  this  gem  of  a 
ruin,  we  looked  into  the  Latin  valley,  along  the  ancient  Via 
Latina,  to  the  blue  ridges  of  the  Algidus,  and  the  Volscian  sum- 
mits ;  beyond,  whole  slopes  of  golden  broom  blossoms  spread 
themselves  along  the  valley,  and  waving  tracts  of  beautiful  dark 
green  woodland  rising  above  these  amber  fields  led  the  eye  up- 
wards,  to  where  the  grey,  harmonious  heap  of  buildings,  formed 
by  Rocca  di  Papa,  crowns  one  steep  acclivity  ;  and  above,  rising 
higher  into  the  sky,  the  convent-crested  summit  of  Monte  Cavo. 
It  was  a  warm,  sunny,  windy,  delicious  spring  day,  when  we 
first  saw  Tusculum,  a  day  whose  very  atmosphere  I  remember. 
Descending  from  the  little  theatre,  we  passed  what  is  shown  as 
the  site  of  Cicero's  villa,  and  came  down  gradually  along  a  sort 


THE  LANDGRAFF  OF  THURINGIA. 


65 


of  mountain  ridge,  by  a  smooth  garden  walk,  through  plantations 
of  chestnut,  oak,  and  flowering  acacia,  through  whose  branches, 
as  from  a  heaven-high  balcony,  we  every  now  and  then  had  deep 
views  down  into  the  Roman  campagna,  between  sweeping  woody 
promontories,  all  fringed  with  flowering  shrubs,  sinking  splen- 
didly to  the  level  plain,  bounded  far  beyond  again  by  the  blue  wall 
of  the  Sabine  mountains.  We  sat  down  to  rest  close  by  a  knot 
of  dark  stone  pine  trees,  with  a  golden  carpet  of  broom  at  their 
feet ;  the  effect  of  coloring  was  magical.  Our  path  home  lay 
through  the  vineyards  of  the  Villa  Rufinella,  and  so  we  concluded 

our  first  day's  walk  on  the  Alban  hills.    Our  friend  told 

me  this  evening  the  following  anecdote,  which  I  have  amused 
myself  with  putting  into  rhyme. 

THE  LANDGRAFF. 

Thro'  Thuringia's  forest  green, 

The  LandgrafF  rode  at  close  of  e'en, 

Huntsmen  and  hounds  were  left  behind, 

While  following  fierce  a  dappled  hind  ; 

And  tho'  the  day  grew  thick  apace, 

The  brave  steed  distanc'd  in  the  chase, 

Still  by  his  rider  urg'd  amain, 

While  daylight  served,  to  reach  the  plain, 

Sped  thro'  the  mazes  of  the  wood  ; 

The  crimson  light  like  drops  of  blood 

Sprinkled  upon  the  foliage  lay  ; 

And  thro'  green  arches  far  away, 

Some  sudden  gaps  let  in  the  light, 

And  made  the  rough  old  tree  trunks  bright. 

Fast  sped  the  steed,  but  still  more  fast 

The  fiery  steeds  of  heav'n  sped  on  ; 
Oak,  glade,  and  hazel  copse  flew  past, 

But  the  red  sunlight  all  was  gone  : 


66 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Twilight's  dim  shadows  gather'd  round, 
With  light  departed  every  sound  ; 
The  sudden  strain  of  some  late  bird 
From  the  high  boughs  no  more  was  heard ; 
And  save  the  thundering  hoofs  that  ring 
Along  the  path,  and  fluttering  wing 
Of  bats  low  flying  thro'  the  grey, 
Deep  solemn  silence  sealed  the  day : 
One  after  one,  the  twisted  form 

Of  each  huge  chestnut  tree  grew  dim, 
And  with  the  blackness  of  a  storm, 

The  coming  night  look'd  wild  and  grim. 
With  slower  step,  and  head  bent  low, 
The  gallant  steed  went  forward  now  ; 
Quoth  the  good  Landgraff,  in  his  mind, 
"  To-night  we  shall  no  shelter  find, 
But  thou  and  I,  old  horse,  shall  lie 

Beneath  the  oak  tent  of  the  wood  ; 
Keen  hunter,  ev'n  of  lineage  high, 

Finds  red-brown  moss  a  pillow  good." 
Just  then,  a  sudden  ruddy  glare, 

Streamed  from  the  forest  depths  of  green  ; 
The  Landgraff  gave  a  lusty  cheer, 

Well  pleased  the  light  to  see,  I  ween  ; 
And  with  a  hopeful  snort,  the  steed 
Sprang  on  with  fresh-awaken'd  speed. 
From  a  low  smithy  lined  with  light, 
The  red  glow  pour'd  upon  the  night ; 
And  that  which,  when  beheld  afar, 
Shone  like  a  friendly  twinkling  star, 
Search'd  every  nook  and  cranny  round  ; 
Show'd  each  brown  leaf  upon  the  ground  ; 
Each  ivy  snake's  fine  hairy  feet, 


THE  LANDGRAFF  OF  THURINGIA. 


67 


Climbing  the  pine-shafts  grey  and  stern — 
Great  golden  oak  boughs  spread'and  meet 

Above  a  sea  of  golden  fern ; 
The  foaming  brook  all  glancing  bright, 

In  golden  waves  went  rolling  by  ; 
From  the  low  roof  a  jet  of  light 

Sprang  upwards  to  the  murky  sky  : 
The  fierce  flames  roar'd,  the  bellows  blew, 
Round  a  red  rain  of  fire-sparks  flew  ; 
The  sweat  fell  from  the  stout  smith's  brow, 
And  ever  with  each  stalwart  blow, 
He  cried,  "  Oh,  Landgraff,  grow  thou  hard  !" — 
Amaz'd,  the  wondering  Landgraff  heard  ; 
And  stepping  forth  out  of  the  night 
Into  the  smithy's  ruddy  light, 
He  and  his  horse  together  stood, 
Like  shadowy  demons  of  the  wood. 
11  Good  friend,"  quoth  he,  "  I've  lost  my  way, 
Here  in  the  forest,  and  I  pray 
That  thou  wilt  suffer  me  to  rest, 
Till  by  the  sky  I  guess  the  east  ?" 
The  toil-worn  workman  wiped  his  brow  ; 
He  pointed  to  a  settle  low, 
And  to  his  humble  pallet  bed  : — 
"  To  all  I  have,  welcome  !"  he  said — 
"  Thy  horse  must  stable  in  the  wood  ; 
The  water  of  the  brook  is  good  ; 
Here  is  the  black  loaf  that  I  eat, 
To  work  and  weariness  'tis  sweet." 
And  then,  without  another  word, 
He  cried,  "  Oh,  Landgraff,  grow  thou  hard  !" — 
And  struck  the  iron  bar  amain — 
The  furious  sparks  flew  forth  again  ; 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


And  thus  he  wrought,  and  thus  he  pray'd, 
Till  the  stout  bar  of  iron  made  ; 
He  paused  awhile,  with  panting  breast, 
And  sat  him  down  beside  his  guest, 
Who  cried,  "  Good  friend,  I  prithee  say, 
Wherefore  thus  strangely  thou  dost  pray  V 

"  Oh,  sir,"  replied  the  brawny  man, 

"  To  pray  and  pray  is  all  we  can  ; 
Our  Earl  is  good,  may  God  reward 
His  gentleness,  and  make  him  hard  ; 
He  loves  the  poor,  he  grinds  us  not ; 
He  leaves  us  all  a  peaceful  lot, 
And  were  there  none  between  his  grace  \ 
And  the  poor  vassal's  down-trod  race,  > 
His  people's  were  a  blessed  case  :  ) 
But  between  us  poor  men  and  him, 
A  tribe  of  barons,  hard  and  grim, 
Harrow  and  drive,  and  strip  and  spoil, 
The  wretched  tillers  of  the  soil ; 
And  the  great  God,  who  out  of  heaven 
The  charge  of  us,  his  poor,  hath  given 
To  princes,  who  our  rights  should  guard, 
Make  towards  these  fiends  our  LandgrafF  hard  ; 
And  save  us  through  his  mighty  hand 
From  these  destroyers  of  the  land  : 
Because  our  Earl  is  mild  and  good, 
This  greedy,  bloody,  wolfish  brood 
Make  us  a  people  most  ill-starred, 
So,  great  God,  make  our  LandgrafF  hard  I" 
They  both  sat  silent,  while  the  brook 
With  rippling  voice  the  burden  took, 
And  seemed  to  echo  back  the  word, 

"  Oh,  great  God,  make  our  LandgrafF  hard  !" — • 


THE  LANDGRAFF  OF  THURINGIA. 


69 


"  Hast  thou  no  wife,  hast  thou  no  child 
To  cheer  thee  in  this  forest  wild  V — 
"  I  had  two  children  and  a  wife," 
The  smith  replied,  "  to  cheer  my  life — 
I  saw  my  boy  borne  past  my  door 
Bound  to  a  stag  all  streaming  gore, 
Followed  by  devilish  men  and  hounds, 
Because  within  the  forest  bounds 
Of  Ravenstein  a  fawn  he  found, 
And  lifted  dying  from  the  ground. 
A  forester  of  Ravenstein 

Strove  with  him  once,  and  fared  the  worse, 
And  sware  that  luckless  boy  of  mine 

Should  live  that  fatal  fray  to  curse. 
I  saw  him  hunted  through  the  wood, 
And  track'd  him  by  the  streaks  of  blood, 
To  where  the  fern  banks  hide  the  river ; 
But  after  that  I  saw  him — never. 
I  had  a  daughter, — God  be  praised  ! 

She  to  a  distant  town  is  gone, 
A  fair,  fair  girl  !" — His  head  he  raised 

And  wiped  the  big  tears,  one  by  one, 
From  his  brown  face — "  To  let  her  go 
I  was  right  glad — 'twas  better  so. 
The  wicked  Lord  of  Falconsheight 

Met  her  one  morning  by  the  brook ; 

She  told  her  mother  of  his  look 
And  loathsome  words,  as  wild  with  fright 
She  fled  away  ;  that  very  night, 
Like  God's  good  angel,  through  the  glade 
A  young  companion  of  my  trade 
Came  travelling  by — short  time  he  stayed, 
And  when  he  went,  took  hence  the  maid. 


i 


70 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


We  gave  our  darling  child  to  him, 

And  sav'd  her  so  from  shame." — The  dim 

Red  embers  on  the  anvil  show'd 

The  fierce  and  fiery  flush  that  glow'd 

Over  the  swart  smith's  knotted  brow  : 

"  Their  mother  pined  away — and  now, 

I  am  alone     he  said,  and  rose — 

Fast  flew  the  sparks,  fast  fell  the  blows, 

But  neither  said  another  word, 

Save  as  the  hammer  fell  with  might, 

From  time  to  time,  through  the  whole  night 

The  prayer  :  "  Oh,  make  our  LandgrafT  hard  !" 

The  daylight  dawn'd  ;  the  LandgrafT  rode 

From  the  smith's  cottage  in  the  wood, 

And  through  Thuringia,  far  and  wide, 

From  that  day  forth  was  checked  the  pride 

Of  the  fierce  barons, — while  the  poor, 

From  wrong  and  cruelty  secure, 

Praised  the  good  Earl,  whose  just  command 

With  might  and  mercy  ruled  the  land. 

Among  the  events  of  this  sweet  summer  life  has  been  the 
pleasure  we  have  enjoyed  in  hearing  the  original  correspondence 
between  Goethe,  then  a  young  man  of  four-and-twenty,  and  M. 

and  Mme  ,  the  father  and  mother  of  our  charming  and 

excellent  friend,  and  the  originals  of  the  Albert  and  Charlotte  of 
his  Werther.  Several  mornings  have  been  enchantingly  spent  in 
listening  to  these  interesting  letters,  which  I  sincerely  hope  he 
will  ere  long  give  to  the  world.  They  contain  the  germ, — the 
kernel  of  reality,  which  Goethe  afterwards  unfolded  in  the  fiction 
of  Werther.  I  had  just,  for  the  first  time,  read  his  celebrated 
romance,  and  was  therefore  doubly  delighted  at  thus  becoming 
acquainted  with  the  real  ground-work  of  it.    In  reading  these 


I 


GOETHE  AND  WERTHER. 


71 


letters  it  is  most  curious  to  observe  how  wonderfully  the  hand  of 
genius  has  wrought  with  the  elements  of  reality,  occasionally 
transcribing  verbatim  the  sensations  and  experience  of  his  own 
heart  and  mind ;  occasionally  the  minuter  events,  and  fine 
unimaginable  details,  of  his  passionate  and  yet  uneventful  inti- 
macy with  Mme  ;  and  occasionally,  again,  interweaving 

with  this  web  of  truth  such  threads  of  fiction  as  the  artist's  taste 
and  perception  suggested  j  or  mixing  with  the  real  personages  of 
his  drama,  himself,  M.  and  Mme  — — ,  circumstances  true  in 
themselves,  but  belonging  to  distinct  and  different  persons  :  such, 
for  instance,  as  the  melancholy  death  of  poor  young  Jerusalem, 
who,  partly  from  disappointed  affection,  and  partly  from  difficulty 
in  his  affairs,  and,  mostly  of  all,  from  the  morbid  influence  of  a 
disordered  imagination,  committed  suicide  with  a  pistol  which  he 

borrowed  for  the  express  purpose,  from  M.  .    The  latter, 

much  shocked  by  the  occurrence,  and  his  own  involuntary  parti- 
cipation in  it,  wrote  a  detailed  and  most  interesting  account  of  the 
circumstance  to  Goethe,  who  was  then  winding  up  the  thread  of 
his  romance  and  seized  upon  this  event  as  its  conclusion,  and 
literally  transcribed  verbatim,  in  the  description  of  the  death  of 

Werther,  M.  's  letter  to  him  containing  the  details  of 

Jerusalem's  unfortunate  suicide.  The  charming  description  of 
his  first  meeting  with  Charlotte,  and  their  first  ball  together,  was 
taken  from  reality  ;  but  the  publication  of  these  letters,  interest- 
ing m  every  possible  respect,  and  creditable  to  the  great  genius 
himself  and  the  friends  so  worthy  of  his  esteem  and  affection, 

would  be  but  an  act  of  absolute  justice  towards  Mme  , 

whose  character  has  certainly  lost  by  its  fusion  into  that  of 
Goethe's  heroine  ;  who,  for  the  necessary  purposes  of  his  ro- 
mance, is  represented  as  indifferently  attractive,  and  by  no  means 
so  estimable  as  the  charming  original  from  which  some  of  her 
features  were  drawn.  It  is  almost  hard  that  through  Germany, 
universally,  Mme  should  have  been  entirely  confounded 


72 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


with  her  ideal  namesake,  round  whom  the  author  has  thrown 
every  charm,  which  nevertheless  cannot  atone  for  her  silent 
encouragement  of  a  man's  love  whom  she  could  not  marry ;  for 
her  toleration  of  its  incessant  manifestations  after  marriage  with 
another ;  and  for  that  closing  scene  of  passion  which  leaves  us  to 
pity  more  than  to  admire  the  wife  of  poor  Albert,  and  to  consider 
that,  upon  the  whole,  the  wretched  death  of  Werther  probably 
averted  consequences  only  more  wretched,  of  ill-governed  affec- 
tions on  the  part  of  the  lover  and  unprincipled  indulgence  on  that 
of  the  heroine.    Most  different,  indeed,  was  all  this  from  the 

truth.    Admitted  by  himself  to  the  intimate  intercourse 

of  his  betrothed,  Goethe  became  most  passionately  enamored  of 
her  ;  but  with  that  indiscriminating  loyalty  of  love  which  mea- 
sures no  difference,  Charlotte  remained  perfectly  true  to  her 
plighted  allegiance  ;  and,  in  daily  communion  with  a  man  whose 
mind  was  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  extraordinary  that  has  in- 
fluenced humanity  in  modern  times — one  of  the  great  exceptional 
intellects  of  all  times — retained  her  perfect  truth  and  undiminished 
affection  for  the  manly  and  excellent  person  to  whom  she  was  affi- 
anced, whose  noble  generosity  and  trust,  both  in  her  and  his  friend, 
was  fitly  rewarded  by  the  faith  of  both  ;  for  his  Charlotte,  untainted 
by  vanity  or  inconstancy,  remained,  under  the  strong  temptation  of 
such  a  passion,  devoted  to  her  worthy  lover  ;  and  Goethe,  after 
four  months  of  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  her  society,  resolutely 
tore  himself  away,  parting  both  from  her  and  his  friend,  rather 
than  run  the  risk  of  disturbing  their  peace  by  useless  demonstra- 
tions of  a  hopeless  passion.  The  style  of  Werther,  which  is  its 
great  charm  and  merit,  appeared  to  rne  incomparable  in  its 
tenderness  and  truth  to  nature — its  exquisite  pathos  and  simpli- 
city ;  indeed,  the  wonder  is  not  that  such  writing  was  the  result 
of  a  real  passion  ;  as  the  expression  of  a  merely  imaginary  one, 
it  would  have  been  impossible.  Till  I  read  the  real  correspond- 
ence,  from  many  of  which  passages  are  transcribed  into  the  let- 


GOETHE  AND  WERTHER. 


73 


ters  of  the  romance,  I  thought  nothing  could  exceed  the  charm 
of  sentiment  and  passion  in  the  latter ;  but  truth  here,  as  every, 
where,  is  alone  most  beautiful ;  and  there  is  one  passage  in  one 


in  Werther.  Writing  to  her  his  farewell,  on  the  night  before 
his  departure,  and  referring  to  his  daily  delight  of  seeing  and 
being  with  her,  he  says  : — "  And  so  to-morrow  I  shall  not  see 
you  !  Oh,  not  to-morrow  is  never  !"  Among  this  collection  of 
letters  is  one,  if  I  mistake  not,  of  Herder's,  giving  a  most 

interesting  description  of  Madame  ,  from  the  time  when, 

at  an  unusually  early  age,  she  became,  in  consequence  of  her 
mother's  death,  the  head  of  her  father's  family,  the  mistress  of 
his  house,  and  the  guide  and  support  of  her  younger  brothers 
and  sisters,  to  the  period  when,  herself  the  mother  of  a  large 
family,  she  still  retained  much  of  the  charm  which  had  belonged 
to  her  in  early  years,  and  was  the  pride  and  blessing  of  her 
husband's,  as  she  had  been  of  her  father's  house.  Of  an  exqui- 
sitely gentle  and  cheerful  temper,  of  admirably  sound  judgment, 
and  a  most  winning  and  gracious  deportment,  she  was  then  what 
my  American  fellow-citizens  would  call  a  "  lovely  old  lady;" 
using  the  term  "  lovely"  in  a  moral  rather  than  physical  sense, 
and  yet  conveying  by  it  something  more  than  the  loveable,  which 
might  belong  simply  to  a  person's  mind  and  disposition  ;  some- 
thing of  manner,  and  the  charm  of  personal  appearance,  but 
more  still  of  that  inward  and  spiritual  grace,  of  which  they  are 
but  the  outward  and  visible  sign.  This  letter  alone,  it  appears 
to  me,  ought  to  offer  a  strong  inducement  to  M.  — —  to  pub- 
lish the  collection  of  which  it  forms  a  part — such  a  picture  of 
one's  mother  is  a  precious  inheritance.  By  far  the  most  re- 
markable and  striking  part  of  this  history  of  a  friendship  is  the 
first  publication  of  Werther,  and  its  effect  upon  the  relation 

between  Goethe  and  M.  and  Mme  .    While  the  constant 

and  enthusiastic  letters  of  the  genius  to  his  less  gifted  friends 

VOL.  II.  4 


of  Goethe's  letters  to  Mme 


more  touching  than  anything 


74 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


were  to  them  but  a  source  of  affectionate  delight,  the  expression 
of  a  love  and  sympathy  to  which  his  wonderful  gifts  appeared  in 
truth  to  add  but  little  value  in  their  heart-estimation  ;  theirs  to 
him — all  his  intercourse  with  Charlotte  and  her  husband,  all  his 
own  passionate  delight  in  her  society,  and  passionate  sorrow  for 
her  loss — the  enchantment  of  first  acquaintance,  the  growing 
charm  of  unblamed  intimate  intercourse — the  difficult  and  dark 
season  when  to  him  this  intercourse  became  impossible,  except 
as  a  daily  torment — the  separation  bitterer  than  death — the 
sweet  and  tender  memories — all  this  truth,  this  life,  this 
deepest  reality  was  becoming  gradually  the  property  of  Goethe's 
mind,  after  being  the  experience  of  his  heart ;  and  with  that 
marvellous  spirit  of  appropriation,  that  royal  claim  which  genius 
lays  upon  everything  it  comes  in  contact  with — the  innermost 
workings  of  its  own  nature,  as  well  as  all  other  things — he  was 
about  to  reproduce,  moulded  into  the  form  of  the  gracefullest  and 
most  pathetic  fiction — the  love  and  friendship  which  had  filled 
his  heart  and  life,  and  been  to  him,  for  a  while,  the  dearest  of 
realities.  Delighted  himself  with  the  utterance  he  had  thus 
found  for  his  feelings  (a  world-wide  utterance  such  as  not  love 
or  friendship,  but  only  genius,  needs),  he  worked  with  enthusi- 
asm at  this  picture  of  the  past,  and  could  not  even  refrain  from 
repeatedly  alluding  to  the  tribute  he  was  about  to  pay  his  friend 

and  Mme  ,  in  his  letters  to  them,  with  a  sort  of  childish 

delight,  and  impatience  of  his  own  secret,  most  remarkable  and 
interesting.  At  length  Werther  appeared,  Germany  wept,  and 
went  into  romantic  ecstasies  over  the  love-lorn  hero's  destiny. 
The  author  was  overwhelmed  with  admiration,  praise,  and 
wonder  ;  young  ladies  declined  bearing  their  name  of  Charlotte, 
because  his  heroine's  surpassing  loveliness  made  them  ashamed 
of  their  own  unworthiness  of  being  her  namesake  ;  and  in  the 
midst  of  this  sudden  flood  of  glory,  he  laid  his  work  at  the  feet  of 
his  friends,  and  received  in  reply  the  mournfullest  complaint  of 


GOETHE  AND  WERTHER. 


75 


wounded  delicacy — of  desecrated  privacy — of  a  noble,  trusting, 
and  beloved  husband,  represented  as  a  cold,  and,  above  all,  an 
unloved  one ; — of  the  most  blameless  and  perfect  womanly 
purity,  distorted,  for  the  purpose  of  a  romance,  into  something 
resembling  the  character  of  a  sentimental  coquette,  trifling  with 
the  most  dangerous  feelings  in  another,  till  she  only  escapes 
falling  herself  a  victim  to  their  violence  by  her  lover's  death. 

M.  rejected  with  indignation  his  representation  as  Albert, 

with  fourfold  indignation  his  wife's  misrepresentation  as  Char- 
lotte ;  and  Goethe,  amazed,  confounded,  and  most  bitterly 
grieved  at  the  irreparable  injury  he  had  inflicted  on  his  friends, 
writes,  in  the  midst  of  his  newly-blown  honors,  and  the  intoxi- 
cating praise  and  admiration  that  was  lavished  on  him  from 
all  sides,  the  most  pathetic  entreaties  for  forgiveness 
— nothing  more.  There  is  one  letter  of  his,  written  at  this 
time,  which  literally,  I  think,  contains  nothing  but  the 
humblest  and  most  tender  and  touching  entreaty  for  pardon  for 
the  offence  he  had  so  unwittingly  given  those  to  whom  he  would 
most  have  delighted  to  give  honor,  and  to  direct  the  world's  honor. 
This,  however,  could  not  last — Genius,  like  Wisdom,  is  justified  of 
all  her  children ;  he  fell  back,  gradually  and  involuntarily,  upon 
the  beauty  of  the  work  he  had  produced,  and  its  immense  success 

and  popularity  ;  M.  and  Mme  gradually  recovered  from 

the  first  shock  of  the  unwelcome  halo  thus  thrown  round  their 
intercourse  with  Goethe  :  but  in  one  of  his  letters  to  a  third 
friend,  he  says — "  After  all,  Werther  had  to  be  written  ;"  and 

in  one  of  's  to  another  friend  he  says,  that  he  "  is  on  his 

guard  for  the  rest  of  his  life  with  genius  friends."  And  though 
the  affectionate  intercourse  of  their  correspondence  continued  for 
many  years  after  this,  the  vitality  of  their  love  had  received  a 
wound,  from  this  moment,  from  which  it  never  recovered. 
Goethe  in  vain  strove  to  make  them  comprehend  the  right  of  art 
over  reality ;  they  in  vain  represented  to  him  a  reality,  over 


76 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


which  art  had  no  claims.  The  unutterable  difference  between 
genius  and  its  less  gifted  fellows,  made  itself  felt  most  keenly  to 
both  parties  ;  and  the  bleeding  and  suffering  of  the  tender  human 
sympathies  that  bound  them,  is  one  of  the  saddest  illustrations  of 
the  kind  that  I  ever  met  with.    Goethe  promised  to  write  another 

Charlotte,  that  should  in  very  deed  be  his  Charlotte,  's 

Charlotte  ;  but  he  never  kept  his  word.  His  intellect  needed  no 
second  production  of  the  kind ;  the  world  would  have  believed 
in  no  other  Charlotte  ;  the  truth  he  wanted,  he  had  taken, — that 
which  he  did  not  want,  he  had  rejected ;  his  work  was  complete, 
and  the  affectionate  desire  of  his  heart  in  vain  solicited  his  inven- 
tion for  a  second  creation,  which  should  supersede  the  past.  Nor 
can  anything  remove  from  the  mind  of  the  German  public  the 
impression  that  Werther's  Charlotte  is,  in  every  particular,  Mme 

 ,  but  the  publication  of  these  very  letters,  which  can 

alone  do  ample  justice  to  her  and -her  husband,  at  the  same  time 
that  they  display  Goethe  himself  in  the  most  amiable  and  at- 
tractive light,  in  spite  of  what  he  considered  his  glorification  of 
his  friends,  and  they  his  pillorizing  of  them. 

THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  GENIUS. 

Oh,  hearts  of  flesh  !    Oh,  beating  hearts  of  love ! 

Oh,  twining  hands  of  human  dear  desire ! — 
How,  when  your  glorious  mate  begins  to  move, 

How  shall  ye  follow  those  wide  wings  of  fire 
That  bear  him  up  ?    Ah  !  to  the  chariot  wheels, 

That  wrap  the  child  of  genius  to  the  sky, 
Breathless  ye  cling  till  round  the  great  world  reels, 

And  ye  fall  fainting  down  despairingly  ! 
Bleeding  and  blind  ye  fall,  and  still  his  flight, 
Serene  and  strong,  is  upward  to  the  light, 
Nearer  the  sun  and  further  yet  from  ye, 
Kindred  alone  of  his  mortality. 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  GENIUS. 


77 


Awhile  he  stood  beside  ye,  and  awhile 

His  tender  eyes,  and  lovely  loving  smile, 

Made  you  believe  he  was  indeed  your  brother : 

But  deep  within  that  being  lay  another 

Fearful  as  fair,  no  simple  son  of  earth, 

Of  all  created  things  the  wondrous  birth  ; 

Immortal,  Infinite,  born  to  inherit 

Matter,  and  mind,  and  sense,  and  subtlest  spirit. 

Lo !  ye  have  called  this  King  of  all  creation 

Your  fellow,  and  forgot  the  Heaven-high  station 

Whence  he  must  gather  his  great  revenue  : 

Past,  Present,  Future,  all  things  old  and  new, 

All  things  in  earth  and  heaven  to  him  belong ; 

And  in  the  paeans  of  his  conquering  song 

Love  is  but  one  sweet  sound,  one  single  verse, 

In  the  great  chorus  of  the  universe  ; 

Which,  with  a  voice  resounding  and  sublime, 

He  utters  forth  unto  all  space  and  time. 

Oh,  piteous,  precious,  hapless,  human  love  ! 

Thou  shalt  be  reap'd  by  this  bright  son  of  Jove. 

One  flow'r  'mid  the  whole  harvest  of  the  world — 

And  when  his  mighty  wings  are  gently  furl'd, 

Upon  his  heart  thou  shalt  lie  tenderly  ; 

But  when  the  summons  of  his  destiny 

Calls  to  him  through  the  ages  to  awake, 

One  heavenward  spring  the  drooping  bud  shall  shake 

Back  to  the  earth,  where  it  shall  withering  lie 

In  the  broad  light  of  Immortality. 


78 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


GENIUS  AND  LOVE. 

Genius  and  Love  together  stood 

At  break  of  day  beside  clear  fountains, 
In  gardens  hedg'd  with  laurel  wood, 

Screen'd  by  a  wall  of  purple  mountains  ; 
As  hand  in  hand  they  smiling  stray'd, 

Love  twin'd  a  wreath  of  perfect  roses 
On  Genius's  brow,  "And  thus,'"'  he  said, 
"  My  soul  on  thy  bright  soul  repose." 
And  round  and  round  they  joyous  flew, 

On  rapid  now,  now  lingering  pinion, 
And  blissful  Love  ne'er  weary  grew 

Of  measuring  o'er  his  bright  dominion. 
Anon  they  rested  from  their  flight, 

And  thro'  the  fringes  of  clear  water, 
All  rainbow-touch'd  Love  chased  a  sprite, 

The  silver  Naiad's  snowy  daughter, 
While  Genius  lay  with  flashing  eyes, 
Looking  into  the  distant  skies. 
Love  paused  and  said,  "  What  dost  thou  see  ?  " 
"  The  far-off  shining  of  the  sea — 

Say,  wilt  thou  thither  fly  with  me?" 
"  Is  there  a  home  by  the  wild  flood  ? 
Ah,  leave  we  not  our  pleasant  wood ! " 
But  suddenly,  with  eager  wings, 
Towards  his  desire  Genius  springs  ; 
So  strong  his  flight,  the  rosy  crown 
At  Love's  sad  feet  fell  broken  down, 
And  lay  beside  him  where  he  sate, 
Waiting  the  coming  of  his  mate : 
And  he  return'd  all  gloriously, 

:  S 


GENIUS  AND  LOVE. 


79 


From  the  foam-caverns  of  the  sea, 
And  brought  strange  heaps  of  shining  treasure 
To  Love,  who  priz'd  beyond  all  measure 
His  mere  return  : — And  now  his  sight, 
Swift  as  the  eagle's  sunward  flight, 
Rested  upon  the  mountain's  height — 

"  Look  !  wilt  thou  thither  with  me  fly, 
Dear  Love  ?" — he  cried  ;  and  rapidly 
Beat  with  his  golden  wings  the  air. 

"  Is  there  a  home  for  us  up  there  ? 
What  seek'st  thou  on  the  mountain's  brow  V 

"  To  see  the  wide  world  lie  below." 
So  he  swept  thither  like  the  wind, 
And  Love  remained  dismay 'd  behind  : 
And  now  a  spirit  of  the  air 
Garlands  of  noble  amaranth  bare 
To  the  Love  god  beside  the  fountain, 
And  spake — "  Lo  !  Genius  from  the  mountain 
Sends  thee,  dear  Love,  eternal  flowers, 
To  deck  thy  pleasant  myrtle  bowers." 

"  Ah  !"  answered  Love,  despondingly, 

"  Sweet  roses  would  have  done  for  me ; 
Look,  they  grow  here  upon  the  ground, 
Close  to  our  very  home,  all  round, 
And  morn  and  even  may  be  found1 — 
When  comes  he  back  ?"    "  Into  the  sky 
I  saw  him  from  the  mountain  fly 
Higher  and  higher  towards  the  sun." 
Love  sighed,  "  The  day  must  soon  be  done, 
And  evening  shall  the  wanderer  bring, 
With  sated  soul  and  weary  wing." 
Love  knew  not  that  bold  Genius'  flight 
Had  passed  the  realms  of  day  and  night, 


so 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Till,  from  the  blue,  a  glorious  crown 

Of  starry  light  was  towards  him  thrown  ; 

He  saw  th'  immortal  circlet  burn, 

And  knew  his  mate  would  ne'er  return : 

He  gather'd  up  the  rosy  wreath, 

With  wither'd  leaves,  and  faint  sweet  breath, 

And  turning  to  the  dark'ning  skies 

The  tender  longing  of  his  eyes, 

He  bitterly  began  to  weep, 

And  wept  himself  at  last  to  sleep. 

THE  IDEAL. 

Thou  shalt  behold  it  once,  and  once  believe 

Thou  may'st  possess  it — Love  shall  make  the  dream, 

Impossible  and  glorious,  palpable  seem, 

And  with  the  bliss  thy  soul  awhile  deceive — 

When  from  that  trance  thou  wakest,  never  more 

On  earth  hope  for  it,  or  thy  life  is  o'er ; 

That  one  approach  of  the  Divinity 

Is  but  the  pledge  of  thy  affinity. 

That  lovely  vision  shall  not  be  renew'd, 

Though  thro'  all  forms  of  being  close  pursued  ; 

The  light  must  pass  into  the  heavens  above  thee, 

Thy  polar  star,  to  warn  and  lead  and  move  thee. 

If  thou  seek  lower  for  it  thou  shalt  follow 

A  fatal  marsh-fire,  fleeting,  false,  and  hollow ; 

Unto  the  glorious  truth  thou  shalt  not  soar, 

But  sink  in  darkness  down  for  evermore. 

Not  to  behold  it  once,  is  not  to  live, 

But  to  possess  it,  is  not  life's  to  give. 

We  have  just  returned  from  an  expedition  to  Monte  Cavo. 
We  drove  out  of  Frascati,  and  took  to  our  donkeys  about  a  mile 


ITALIAN  CHARACTER. 


SI 


out  of  the  town.  We  made  a  slow  asinine  progress  through 
some  vineyards  up  to  a  splendid  chestnut  wood,#  where  each 
tree  was  a  perfect  study,  as  fine,  I  think,  in  their  own  kind,  as 
the  huge  twisted  grey  forest  pillars  at  Birnham  Beeches.  The 
rich  undergrowth  of  broom  and  fern,  and  blessed  "  accidents,'' 
as  the  painters  call  them  (providences,  I  think  they  are),  of  light 
and  shade,  made  the  whole  a  most  admirable  specimen  of  wood- 
land scenery*.  Our  donkey  guides  are  a  source  of  infinite 
amusement  to  me  ;  my  sister's  pompous,  conceited,  jabbering 
cicerone,  who,  with  a  crimson  rose  that  looked  and  smelled  as  if  it 
had  been  dipped  in  Burgundy,  the  very  type  of  the  coming  summer 
stuck  in  his  bonnet,  swaggered  beside  her,  discoursing  in  French, 
English,  German,  and  Italian,  by  morsels,  and  mixing  up  his 
local  lore  and  guide-book  advertisements  with  stupendous  pieces 
of  his  own  biography,  and  certain  howls  which  made  the  woods 
resound,  which  he  had  caught  from  some  jodehung  French  ar- 
tists. My  protector  was  a  little  Flibbertigibbet  of  about  four- 
teen, slight,  slender  as  a  greyhound,  and  as  graceful  too,  with 
one  of  those  indescribable  southern  faces,  full  of  brilliancy, 
sweetness,  and  melancholy — a  most  beautiful  countenance,  with 
beautiful  features  ;  such  a  face  as  one  never  sees  in  England  or 
America,  or,  I  suppose,  indeed,  out  of  Italy — combining  as  it 
does  with  all  this  loveliness  a  capacity  for  sudden  savage  expres- 
sions of  hatred  and  fierce  passion,  wonderful  and  terrible  to  be- 
hold. Hardly  anywhere  else  I  suppose,  either,  would  a  little 
ragged  donkey  boy  utter  poetical  ecstasies  about  the  features  of 
the  landscape,  or  the  colors  of  the  sky  ;  or,  pointing  to  the  sun 
and  moon,  which  on  a  rosy  summer's  sunset  stood  at  opposite 
sides  of  the  heavens,  say,  "  The  sun  and  moon  greet  each  other ; 
she  says  4  Good  night'  to  him,  for  he  is  going ;  and  he  1  Good 
day  to  her,  for  she  is  coming !"  Another  time  he  bade  me, 
when  I  returned  to  my  own  country,  greet  it  for  him  : — "  Che 
1'Italia  saluta  l'lnghilterra,"  he  added.    Thus  poetically  escorted, 


82 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


we  wound  our  way  up  to  Rocca  di  Papa  ;  at  every  turn  in  the 
road  we  had^splendid  views  of  the  campagna,  the  Sabine  hills, 
and  all  the  beautiful  forest  scenery  that  was  gradually  sinking 
far  below  us  ;  the  village,  perched  like  an  eagle's  eyrie  upon  a 
rocky  cone,  was  swarming  with  people  in  holiday  attire.  We 
made  our  way  up  the  steep  slippery  streets  through  the  throng  of 
women  in  scarlet  spencers  and  head-kerchiefs,  and  men  in  black 
or  brown  velvet  jackets,  all  with  some  bright-colored  scarf  round 
their  waist,  or  brilliant  flowers  in  their  hat :  the  perfect  pictu- 
resqueness  of  them  all  is  not  to  be  described,  old  and  ugly  quite 
as  much  as  young  and  handsome.  I  was  almost  startled  by  the 
wonderful  effect  produced  by  a  hard-featured  bronze-colored  wo- 
man, with  a  splendid  colored  red  head-gear,  standing  a  little  back 
from  the  black  aperture  of  a  window  without  glass,  framed  in  a 
brown  stone  house  :  the  whole  thing  was  a  perfect  Rembrandt. 
We  proceeded,  still  climbing,  to  a  high  table  land  called  Hanni- 
bal's camp,  from  the  tradition  that  the  Carthaginian  halted  there 
on  his  way  down  to  Rome  :  the  hills  rose  abruptly  round  this 
small  level  plain,  lifted  up  itself  upon  the  steep  summits  of  the 
lower  range  ;  in  the  middle  of  it  was  a  long  low  building,  appro- 
priated to  keeping  the  supplies  of  snow  gathered  during  the  win- 
ter for  summer  refreshment.  Ascending  again  from  this  mid 
mountain  plain,  we  found  ourselves  upon  the  broad  slabs  of  the 
Via  Triumphalis,  the  best  preserved  of  all  the  ancient  Roman 
roads  :  here  the  Roman  consuls  came  to  triumph  when  the  Latin 
states  became  merged  in  the  Roman  commonwealth, — to  the 
great  temple  of  the  Latian  Jupiter,  whose  colossal  statue,  standing 
on  the  summit  of  Monte  Cavo,  could  be  descried  from  Rome. 
Truly  a  triumphal  way  this  was  to-day  to  us,  with  downward 
revelations  of  forest  and  town,  the  lakes  of  Albano  and  Nemi, 
the  great  sunny  plain  and  Rome  the  glorious,  and  the  wide  forest 
on  the  coast  like  a  dark  cloud  shadow,  and  the  bright  shining  of 
the  sea  half-way  up  the  summer  sky,  the  sweep  of  the  distant 


MONTE  CAVO. 


S3 


shore,  the  yellow  margin  of  the  sand  along  the  blue  waters,  the 
dark  shape  of  the  Circeian  promontory,  and  a  purple  spot  on  the 

silver  shield  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  said  was  Nisi- 

da,  or  Procida.  Still  we  went  up  the  Via  Triumphalis,  under 
chestnut  boughs  of  freshest  green,  delicate  branches  of  pale  yel- 
low laburnums,  drooping  over  on  the  banks  on  either  side, 
wrought  like  a  thick  carpet  with  wild  thyme  and  count- 
less blossoms  of  every  lovely  shape  and  color,  and  under  our 
feet  the  great  smooth  broad  stones,  that  the  Roman  consuls 
and  their  trains  had  marched  over,  going  to  sacrifice  upon 
assuming  their  office  to  the  great  temple  of  the  Alban  Moun- 
tain. In  the  full  tide  of  these  heroic  memories,  my  mind 
was  suddenly  recalled  to  that  Christian  republic  to  which,  if  it  is 
but  wise  and  virtuous,  God  seems  to  have  appointed  the  greatest 
Empire  of  the  earth  in  the  coming  centuries.  A  turn  in  the  road 
shut  out  Rome,  and  Albano,  and  Castel  Gandolfo,  and  the  vol- 
canic lakes  ;  while  the  wood-screen  through  which  we  looked, 
showed  a  bold,  lonely  sweep  of  forest  scenery,  mountain  side 
rolling  down  upon  mountain  side,  all  clothed  with  waving  woods ; 
great  bare  and  desolate  patches  all  scarred  with  stumps  of  noble 
felled  trees ;  the  black  mounds  of  the  charcoal-burners,  sending 
their  blue  and  silver  smoke  up  against  the  hill  sides  in  exquisite 
wreaths  of  grace  and  brightness ;  the  dark  purple  ridges  beyond, 
the  clear  brilliancy  of  the  sky,  and  for  once  utter  loneliness  ;  no 
sight  of  human  habitation,  village,  monastery,  palace,  or  wayside 
chapel, — it  was  really  like  America  ;  and  as  I  gazed  at  it  from 
the  heart  of  this  land  of  great  past  things,  how  deeply  my  spirit 
was  stirred  with  the  thought  of  the  probable  fortunes  of  that  land 
of  futurity,  that  land  without  memory,  that  land  of  hope  !  I  can- 
not express  the  solemnity  and  emotion  with  which  all  that  I  see 
in  these  countries  of  Europe  impresses  my  mind  with  regard  to 
America.  Here,  on  these  great  hearths  heaped  with  the  ashes 
of  many  civilizations  ; — here,  where  one  national  existence  after 


84 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


another  has  been  kindled,  burned  brightly,  and  been  extinguish- 
ed ; — here,  where  the  fine  Etruscan  race  was  ground  out  beneath 
the  iron  heel  of  Rome  ; — here,  where  the  deluge  of  northern 
barbarism  swept  the  degenerate  Roman  empire  down  ; — here, 
where  the  huge  conception  of  spiritual  dominion  took  body  in  that 
great  church  supremacy,  which  is  vanishing  like  the  ghost  of  a 
giant  before  the  breath  of  the  almighty  Truth,  the  immortal, 
universal  conqueror  of  these  later  days  of  the  earth  ; — here, 
amid  these  stupendous  memories  and  thoughts,  how  often  do  I 
muse  upon  that  wonderful  world  beyond  the  Atlantic  !  Dowe/ed 
with  a  natural  wealth  unparalleled  ;  the  latest  born  of  Time  ; 
peopled  by  the  descendants  of  the  freest  and  wisest  nation  now 
on  earth  ;  not  led  through  doubtful  twilight  ages  of  barbarous 
savageness  and  feudal  semi-civilization,  but  born  like  Pallas  from 
the  head  of  Jove,  inheriting  the  knowledge  of  all  previous  times  ; 
endowed  with  the  experience  of  all  former  nations  ;  whose  heroic 
age  boasts  of  but  one  victory,  the  victory  of  Freedom — but  of  one 
demigod,  Washington.  Oh  !  if  wisdom  and  virtue  should  yet  by 
times  govern  the  counsels  of  that  people  ;  if  the  consciousness  of 
their  unexampled  position,  betokening  a  ministry  of  infinite  im- 
portance in  the  world,  should  ever  appear  to  them  in  all  its  most 
majestic  significance ;  if  the  spirit  of  that  nation  should  ever  fit 
the  gigantic  material  proportions  and  incalculable  physical  re- 
sources of  their  country  ;  then,  indeed,  a  glorious  Christian  com- 
monwealth may  arise,  and  that  kingdom  of  God,  for  whose  coming 
all  Christ's  followers  daily  pray,  begin  to  manifest  itself  in  the 
holy  national  existence  of  a  people  who  have  made  Christianity 
a  government.  How  much  these  speculations  on  the  possible 
glorious  future  destinies  of  that  wonderful  country  are  darkened 
by  the  mean  and  miserable  manifestations  of  the  present  spirit  of 
its  people,  I  can  hardly  say  ;  my  perception  of  the  one  is  equal 
to  my  anticipation  of  the  other.  And  when  I  remember  the  God- 
gifted  earth  and  sky,  the  huge  expanse  of  territory,  the  variety 


CONVENT  OF  PASSIONIOTI. 


85 


of  climate  and  soil  and  produce,  the  free  and  noble  theory  of  go- 
vernment, the  free  and  wholesome  action  of  the  spirits  of  men, 
the  marvellous  rapidity  of  progress,  the  portentous  mental  and 
physical  activity  at  work  among  all  these  mighty  elements — ad- 
miration, astonishment,  disgust,  dismay,  and  fear  and  hope,  alter- 
nate in  my  mind,  till  all  resolves  itself  in  earnest  prayer  that  God 
will  save  that  people  from  becoming,  by  the  light  of  their  own 
great  gifts  and  greater  promises,  the  despair  instead  of  the  hope 
of  the  world. 

At  length  we  reached  the  summit  of  Monte  Cavo  and  the  con- 
vent of  Passionioti,  whose  foundations  are  the  stones  of  the  temple 
of  the  great  Latian  Jupiter.  We  went  into  the  church  ;  it  was 
the  feast  of  the  Ascension  ;  the  little  rustic  place  of  worship  was 
all  decked  out  with  flowers  and  misty  with  incense ;  and  three 
priests,  in  festival  robes,  were  performing  mass.  One  of  them,  a 
huge  hulk  of  a  man,  with  a  dark  powerful  complexion,  bushy 
black  eyebrows,  and  blue-black  lumps  of  hair,  a  sort  of  model 
for  Samson,  every  now  and  then  came  forward  towards  the  con- 
gregation, and,  with  eyes  meekly  downcast,  and  hands  mildly 
folded  on  his  breast,  uttered  a  series  of  bellowings  which  became 
his  physical  appearance  better  than  the  spiritual  office  he  was 
discharging,  and  very  nearly  threw  us  into  convulsions  of 
laughter.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  mass  there  were  a  series  of 
embraces  between  the  priests  that  marvellously  resembled  simi- 
lar performances  on  the  stage  ;  the  hands  resting  on  each  other's 
shoulders,  and  the  head  turned  discreetly  away  so  as  to  ensure 
the  least  possible  cordiality  and  reality  in  the  affectionate  demon- 
stration ;  moreover,  there  was  a  gradual  declension  in  the 
warmth  of  this  very  formal  accolade  as  it  passed  through  four 
degrees,  from  the  chief  dignitary  officiating  at  the  high  altar,  to 
the  poor  serving  brother  who  brought  in  the  various  holy  imple- 
ments, whose  kiss  of  peace,  delivered  to  him  by  the  above-men- 
tioned burly  superior  officer,  was  quite  the  poorest  allowance  of 


86 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Christian  equality  that  I  ever  saw  conveyed  in  a  kiss.  Outside 
the  church,  and  almost  dividing  with  the  convent  the  small  table 
land  at  the  top  of  the  mountain,  was  a  splendid  beech-tree,  that 
reminded  me  of  the  noble  forest-pillars,  with  their  twisted  Saxon 
architecture,  at  Birnham.    I  got  up  into  it,  and  sat  remembering 

our  friend  Mrs.   's  leafy  arm-chair,  on  the  edge  of  that 

beautiful  wood,  while  a  bird  sang  sweetly  over  my  head,  and 
the  monks  chanted  far  below  my  feet.  We  rested  a  pleasant 
half-hour  on  the  mountain,  my  sister  and  myself  singing,  while 

Mr.  sketched  the  beautiful  view  below  our  forest  balcony. 

Our  way  home  lay  through  some  splendid  woodland  scenery, 
that  again  reminded  me  of  America.  We  passed  close  along 
the  lake  of  Albano,  whose  melancholy,  cheerless-looking  water 
goes  deep  down  from  the  very  banks — drowning,  dismal-looking 
water,  like  a  smooth  polished  floor  of  solid  dark-green  marble — 
it  made  me  shudder.  The  water  has  taken  the  place  of  the  fires 
of  a  volcano ;  and  the  gloomy  stillness  that  broods  over  the  whole 
resembles  the  repose  of  exhausted  convulsion,  and  filled  me  with 
a  sort  of  awe  in  spite  of  its  smiling  walls  of  vivid  chestnut,  and 
moonlight-looking  patches  of  silvery  olive-trees,  and  green  gar- 
lands of  the  vineyards  on  its  banks.  How  much  less  beautiful  I 
thought  it,  because  so  much  less  friendly  and  humane,  than  the 
lovely  little  lake  between  Lenox  and  Stockbridge,  with  its  shal- 
low sunny  shores,  where  the  transparent  water  plays  over  broad 
slabs  of  glittering  granite — its  middle  depths  of  darkest  sapphire, 
and  the  mysterious  bower  of  pine  trees  whence  the  springs  that 
feed  it  come,  under  which  the  white  fragrant  water-lilies,  like  a 
company  of  nymphs,  float  and  rock  in  the  shade.  At  mid-day 
we  rested  and  eat  our  lunch  under  a  noble  tree  high  above  the 
lake ;  thence  passing  along  the  upper  gallery,  as  it  is  called,  a 
winding  road  with  splendid  single  trees  leaning  over  it,  produc- 
ing the  most  enchanting  effect  of  light  and  shade.  At  Albano 
we  resumed  our  carriage  and  returned  home  through  Castel 


SYMPHONY  OF  BEETHOVEN. 


87 


Gandolfo  and  along  the  side  of  the  lake,  where  the  great  Roman 
emissary  was  made,  when,  in  the  twilight  times  of  the  conquest 
of  Veii,  it  overflowed  its  banks.  The  whole  drive  was  admira- 
bly beautiful  :  on  one  side  of  us  the  deep*lying,  verd  antique 
lake — the  campagna,  bounded  by  the  glittering  Mediterranean, 
on  the  other.  There  are  no  words  for  the  splendor  and  beauty 
of  the  scene.  Behind  Marino  we  passed  a  beautiful  glen,  a  fine 
wood,  and  the  grey  buildings  of  the  village  hemming  it  in  on 
either  side  ;  while,  in  the  deep  rocky  ravine,  a  large  stone  foun- 
tain, a  rushing  brook,  and  an  ivy-mantled  ruined  tower,  formed 
a  perfect  and  most  romantic  picture.  Our  day  was  faultless  in 
its  elements  of  pleasure,  and  our  Russian  companion,  and  his 
conversation  about  his  own  country,  very  agreeable  and  inte- 
resting. 

ON  A  SYMPHONY  OF  BEETHOVEN. 

Terrible  music,  whose  strange  utterance 

Seem'd  like  the  spell  of  some  dread  conscious  trance ; 

Impotent  misery,  helpless  despair, 

With  far-off  visions  of  things  dear  and  fair  ; 

Restless  desire,  sharp  poignant  agonies  ; 

Soft,  thrilling,  melting,  tender  memories ; 

Struggle  and  tempest,  and  around  it  all, 

The  heavy  muffling  folds  of  some  black  pall 

Stifling  it  slowly  ;  a  wild  wail  for  life, 

Sinking  in  darkness — a  short  passionate  strife 

With  hideous  fate,  crushing  the  soul  to  earth  ; 

Sweet  snatches  of  some  melancholy  mirth  ; 

A  creeping  fear,  a  shuddering  dismay, 

Like  the  cold  dawning  of  some  fatal  day  : 

Dim  faces  growing  pale  in  distant  lands  ; 

Departing  feet,  and  slowly  severing  hands ; 


88 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Voices  of  love,  speaking  the  words  of  hate, — 
The  mockery  of  a  blessing  come  too  late  ; 
Loveless  and  hopeless  life,  with  memory, — 
This  curse  that  music  seem'd  to  speak  to  me. 

Our  quiet  villeggiatura  is  becoming  much  excited  and  dis- 
turbed by  the  news  our  friends  bring  us  daily  of  all  that  is 
going  on  in  Rome,  and  the  perpetual  solicitations  we  receive  to 
go  in  and  see  the  ceremonies  attending  the  Pope's  funeral,  and 
the  election  of  his  successor.  Hitherto,  however,  we  have  con- 
tented ourselves  with  the  details  we  receive  from  more  zealous 
sight-seers  than  ourselves,  and  the  singular  accounts  we  have 

from  our  friends,  the   ,  who  still  remain  in  Rome,  in 

spite  of  the  advanced  season.  The  circumstances  gradually 
beginning  to  transpire  of  the  details  of  the  Pope's  death  are 
really  most  curious,  and  certainly,  if  true,  form  a  most 
extraordinary  comment  upon  the  absolute  and  positive,  not 
philosophic  and  abstract,  vanity  of  earthly  greatness.  It  is  now 
pretty  openly  stated,  that  the  Pope  literally  died  for  want  of 
assistance,  and  partly,  if  not  absolutely,  for  want  of  food.  His 
favorite  and  inseparable  attendant,  the  brother  of  his  barber,  a 
man  whom  he  had  raised  from  the  condition  of  a  servant  to  that 
of  his  confidential  adviser,  and  through  whom  alone  he  was  ap- 
proached, having  amassed  an  enormous  fortune  by  every  species 
of  iniquity,  began,  it  is  conjectured,  to  be  weary  of  a  service  of 
which  he  was  more  desirous  of  enjoying  the  fruits  than  prolong- 
ing the  duties,  such  as  they  were.  The  feeble  old  Pope's  illness 
appeared  to  offer  an  approaching  term  to  his  obligations  ;  and  it 
is  now  universally  reported  that  he  was  the  undoubted  means  of 
hastening  the  catastrophe  of  his  sovereign's  death,  which  might 
have  been  averted  at  least  for  some  months.  During  the  last 
two  days  of  his  illness,  stationed  in  his  antechamber,  he  denied 


POPE  LIES  IN  STATE. 


89 


admittance  to  every  one  who  endeavored  to  approach  the  Pope  ; 
declaring  that  His  Holiness  had  strictly  enjoined  him  to  allow 
ingress  to  no  one,  and  adding  that  whoever,  under  those  circum- 
stances, intruded  himself  within  the  dying  Pope's  chamber,  did 
so  at  his  own  peril.  Thus  deterred,  the  cardinals,  his  friends 
and  counsellors,  turned  from  the  forbidden  door ;  and  the  condi- 
tion of  the  poor  old  Pope's  body,  when  it  was  subjected  to  the 
process  of  embalming,  proved  that  he  must  have  been 
without  nourishment  for  a  considerable  space  of  time,  and  that 
there  is  every  probability  that  he  died  absolutely  of  exhaustion 
and  inanition.  His  infamous  favorite  withdrew  immediately  upon 
his  death  from  the  Papal  States  and  the  universal  execration  with 
which  he  was  regarded,  and  went  into  some  part  of  Italy  where 
he  was  less  known,  to  enjoy  the  harvest  of  iniquity  he  had 
reaped  under  the  late  Pope.  As  soon  as  it  is  ascertained  that 
the  Pope  is  really  dead,  a  procession,  consisting  of  his  principal 
counsellors,  the  cardinals,  and  certain  other  eminent  personages, 
enter  the  chamber  where  he  is  lying,  when  one  of  them,  whose  espe- 
cial office  this  is,  proceeds  to  strike  him  upon  the  forehead  with  a 
small  golden  hammer,  exclaiming,  "  Santo  Padre,  rispondete." 
This  is  repeated  three  times,  when,  the  Holy  Father  not  answering, 
the  officiating  dignitary  turns  about  and  deliberately  proclaims 
to  the  assembly  that  "  II  Santo  Padre  e  morto."  The  office  of 
the  Guardia  Nobile,  during  these  dreadfully  hot  days,  has  been 
something  intolerable  ;  in  the  first  place,  their  enforced  presence 
at  the  ceremony  of  embalmment,  and  then  their  constant  guard, 
relieving  each  other  only  every  four  hours  round  the  bier,  upon 
which  the  Pope's  body  lies  in  state  in  the  Sistine  Chapel,  where 
the  incessant  thronging  of  the  curious  and  the  pious,  combined 
with  the  distressing  and  nauseous  effluvium  proceeding  from  the 
corpse  itself,  and  the  horrible  heat  of  the  weather,  have  really 
made  their  duty  most  onerous.  From  lying  in  state  in  the  Sistine 
Chapel,  the  Pope's  body  was  removed  to  one  of  the  chapels  in 


90 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


St.  Peter's,  where,  with  the  feet  passed  through  the  grating  of 
the  gate,  it  remained  for  some  time,  to  receive  the  adorations  of 
its  former  subjects,  who  came  to  pay  their  last  homage  by  kiss- 
ing the  feet  thus  placed  to  receive  their  salutations.  From 
thence  the  corpse  was  again  removed  to  a  sort  of  hanging  station 
above  the  door  of  the  chapel  used  as  the  choir  in  St.  Peter's  ; 
and  its  raising  thither  in  a  coarse  deal  box,  by  men  in  shirt 
sleeves,  who  performed  the  whole  operation  with  the  most  care- 
less and  gross  indifference,  was  described  to  me  as  one  of  the 
most  disgusting  and  shocking  spectacles  imaginable.  The  rough 
coffin  in  which  the  body  was  hitched  up  to  its  niche  above  the 
chapel  gate,  not  being  swung  straight,  was  drawn  up  with  one 
end  much  below  the  other,  when  one  of  the  carpenters  delibe- 
rately jumped  upon  the  upper  end,  and  thus  brought  the  coffin 
into  a  state  of  equilibrium.  We  went  into  Rome  at  the  conclu- 
sion of  all  these  ceremonies,  to  see  what  we  supposed  would 
repay  the  trouble  of  doing  so — the  catafalque  raised  to  the  dead 
Pope  in  the  middle  of  St.  Peter's,  and  which  was  represented  to 
us  as  remarkably  beautiful  and  splendid.  Our  disappointment 
was  extreme  at  finding  the  noble  church  disfigured  by  the  erec- 
tion, in  the  middle  of  the  nave,  of  an  enormous  pasteboard  sort 
of  temple,  in  the  most  indifferent  taste  possible,  within  which  lay 
the  imaginary  sarcophagus  of  the  late  Pope  Gregory  the  XVIth, 
covered  with  crimson  velvet  draperies,  lighted  with  funeral 
lamps.  The  edifice  was  surmounted  by  various  emblematic 
figures  ;  among  others,  a  colossal  pasteboard  Religion,  which, 
happening  to  fall  from  its  pre-eminent  station  on  the  top  of  it, 
occasioned  a  great  many  bad  jokes  and  impertinent  prophecies. 
The  whole  thing  was  mean  and  tawdry,  and  reminded  me  of  no- 
thing so  much  as  the  operatical  representations  of  the  tomb  of 
Ninus  in  the  Semiramide  ;  some  theatrical  exhibitions  of  which 
that  I  have  seen,  indeed,  have  been  vastly  more  impressive,  and 


CURIOUS  ANECDOTE. 


91 


in  better  taste,  than  this  funeral  decoration — to  use  the  only- 
appropriate  phrase — of  St.  Peter's. 

The  ceremonies  of  the  assembling  of  the  conclave,  and  of  the 
proclamation  of  the  new  Pope,  are  too  well  known  to  require  any 
description,  especially  from  one  who  did  not  personally  witness 
them.  One  curious  custom,  however,  was  told  me,  with  which 
1  was  not  before  acquainted.  The  carriages  of  all  the  cardinals 
assembled  in  conclave  are  all  daily  drawn  up  on  the  open  space 
before  the  Quirinal.  As  soon  as  the  breaking  down  of  the 
walled-up  window,  and  the  public  announcement  of  the  new 
Pope's  election  through  it,  takes  place,  his  coachman  breaks  his 
whip,  and,  driving  to  his  own  house,  takes  possession  of  the  car- 
riage, horses,  harness,  &c,  of  his  former  master,  who  is  thence- 
forth of  course  only  conveyed  about  in  the  papal  equipage.  A 
comical  story  was  told  of  the  coachman  of  Cardinal  Gizzi,  who, 
it  was  said,  entertained  such  a  profound  conviction  of  the  cer- 
tainty of  his  master's  election,  that  returning  home  from  his  first 
day  of  expectation  on  the  Monte  Cavallo,  he  gave  himself  up  to 
such  ecstasies  of  anticipated  glory  as  to  break  and  demolish 
almost  everything  he  laid  his  hands  upon  in  the  offices — an 
unfortunate  demonstration  of  fallacious  delight  for  his  eminence, 
Cardinal  Gizzi,  who,  on  his  return  from  the  conclave,  was  not 
Pope,  and  probably  found  his  hatterie  de  cuisine  much  injured  by 
his  too  sanguine  charioteer's  hopeful  demonstrations.  Almost 
immediately  upon  the  death  of  the  Pope,  innumerable  political 
jibes  and  pasquinades  were  afloat,  both  with  regard  to  his  past 
government  and  the  proceedings  of  the  conclave.  A  curious 
anecdote  was  told  of  Cardinal  Micala,  who,  going  into  the  con- 
clave with  Lambruschini,  said  to  him,  "  Now,  we  shall  see 
whether  the  Holy  Spirit  or  the  devil  presides  at  our  delibera- 
tions :  if  the  former,  Mai  or  Mastai  will  be  elected ;  if  the  latter, 
it  will  be  you  or  me."  A  ridiculous  caricature  was  circulated 
during  the  sitting  of  the  conclave,  representing  the  Holy  Dove 


92 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


hovering  above  the  assembled  cardinals,  who  were  all  zealously 
employed  in  driving  it  off  with  their  pocket-handkerchiefs. 

Cardinal  Micala  was  chiefly  noted  for  the  rigorous  asceticism 
of  his  religious  life,  his  hatred  of  all  foreigners  and  their  influence 
in  Rome,  and  the  noble  and  striking  venerableness  of  his  appear- 
ance ;  wearing  habitually  the  dress  of  the  fraternity  to  which  he 
belonged,  his  long  white  flowing  beard  and  grave  majestic  coun- 
tenance rendered  him  an  object  of  interest  and  curiosity  wherever 
he  was  seen.  Cardinal  Lambruschini  enjoyed  during  the  deli- 
berations of  the  conclave,  and  has  continued  to  enjoy  since  the 
election  of  Pius  IX.,  the  unenviable  notoriety  of  extreme  unpopu- 
larity. The  representative  of  the  Austrian  policy  in  the  Roman 
councils,  the  dread  of  his  becoming  Pope  at  the  death  of  Gregory 
XVI.  was  one  of  the  main  motives  that  determined  the  votes  of 
many  members  of  the  conclave  in  favor  of  Cardinal  Mastai.  His 
known  illiberality  and  devotion  to  the  narrow  and  imbecile  govern- 
ment of  the  late  Pope  had  earned  him  unenviable  distinction  in 
popular  opinion,  and  as  soon  as  the  election  of  Cardinal  Mastai 
appeared  to  j^mise  comparative  impunity  to  the  utterance  of  the 
feeling  against  him,  it  displayed  itself  openly, — repeatedly  in  the 
groans  and  hisses  with  which  his  carriage  was  followed  in  the 
streets,  and  one  or  two  exhibitions  of  public  feeling  of  even  a 
broader  nature,  such  as  fastening  a  tin  kettle  to  his  carriage ;  a 
distinction  generally  awarded  to  obnoxious  animals  rather  than 
Roman  Catholic  eminences.  Cardinal  Mai  is  best  known  out  of 
Rome,  as  the  guardian  of  the  precious  collections  of  the  Vatican, 
and  the  learned  discoverer  and  interpreter  of  the  famous  palimpsest 
Republic  of  Cicero. 

We  have  just  had  a  visit  from  Monsignor   ,  who  has 

been  talking  for  about  an  hour  incessantly  of  the  Pope.  He 
belonged  to  the  household  of  the  late  Gregory  XVI.,  and  always 
appeared,  when  we  saw  him,  to  be  in  a  state  of  perfect  loyalty 
as  regarded  his  temporal  and  spiritual  sovereign.    Now,  how- 


PAPAL  SPIES. 


93 


ever,  he  confesses  that  the  torment  of  living  in  a  state  of  per- 
petual fear  and  falsehood,  to  which  he  was  condemned,  is  not  to 
be  described ;  that  under  the  late  Pope  it  was  impossible  ever  to 
be  for  a  moment  off  one's  guard,  for  that  society  itself  was  made 
up  of  spies,  and  a  man  could  not  speak  with  safety  to  his 
most  intimate  acquaintance  upon  any  matter  touching  the 
government ;  that  Roman  princesses  and  countesses  were  paid 
spies  in  the  papal  service,  and  that  it  was  dangerous  in  the 
extreme  to  utter  any  opinion  upon  any  but  the  most  indifferent 
subjects,  for  that  ruin  might  have  been  the  consequence  of  an 
unguarded  word  to  persons  whom  one  would  have  supposed  least 
likely  to  betray  one.  This  is  certainly  an  agreeable  state  of 
things  to  exist  in.  The  matter  however  now,  it  seems,  is  quite 
otherwise.  Monsignor  says,  the  enthusiasm  of  the  peo- 
ple for  their  new  sovereign  is  not  to  be  described.  Immediately 
after  the  amnesty  the  men  who  had  recovered  their  liberty 
flocked  to  the  churches  and  received  the  sacrament,  without 
exception,  with  extreme  devotion.  Moreover,  he  added  that 
Heaven  had  certainly  appointed  this  man  to  the  exigency  of  the 
times,  for  that  the  whole  papal  government  was  tottering  to  its 
foundations.  If  anything  can  save  it,  as  a  government,  I  suppose 
this  may  ;  but  it  is  far  more  likely  to  prove  the  preparatory  pro- 
cess for  entire  change  ;  and  in  this  respect  most  fitly  may  the 
present  Pope  be  considered  God's  messenger,  and  the  appointed 

instrument  of  the  appointed  time.    Monsignor    told  us 

several  admirable  anecdotes  of  his  benevolence  and  activity. 
The  day  of  the  procession  of  St.  John  Lateran,  a  poor  old  beg- 
gar woman,  stretched  by  the  wayside,  called  out  to  Christ's  suc- 
cessor upon  earth  for  help,  "  Santo  Padre,  ajutatemi  che  sto  qui 
povera  vecchia  abbandonata  sopra  la  paglia  e  muojo  di  fame." 
The  Pope  sent  her  immediately  a  gold  piece,  and  passed  on  in 
the  procession.  At  night,  in  the  dress  of  an  Abbate,  having 
perfectly  remembered  the  house  indicated  to  him  as  that  where 


94 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  woman  lived,  he  went  to  seek  her,  and  found  her  absolutely 
lying  upon  straw,  and  in  a  state  of  miserable  destitution.  He 
immediately  proceeded  to  the  house  of  the  curate  of  the  parish  ; 
the  latter,  called  up  not  without  considerable  demur  and  difficul- 
ty (not  knowing  from  whom  the  summons  came)  from  his  com- 
fortable bed,  was  lost  in  amazement  and  dismay  at  the  sight  of 
the  Pope,  who,  reprimanding  him  severely  for  his  neglect 
of  the  poor  under  his  charge,  bade  him  send  immediately  money, 
food,  bed  and  bedding  to  the  poor  old  beggar,  whom  he  had  just 
visited.  His  Holiness,  it  seems,  has  a  box  at  the  post-office,  of 
which  he  himself  keeps  the  key  ;  and  whereas  no  letter  whatever 
Was  ever  allowed  to  reach  the  late  Gregory  the  Sixteenth,  it  is 
an  understood  thing  that  this  box,  with  everything  put  into  it, 
is  delivered  immediately  into  the  Pope's  hands.  A  certain 
sum  of  money  having  been  charitably  appropriated,  I  do  not  pre- 
cisely remember  by  whom  now,  in  dower-money,  for  a  certain 
number  of  poor  young  Roman  girls  in  one  of  the  parishes  in 
Rome,  one  among  the  number,  a  poor  deformed  girl,  was  de- 
frauded by  the  priest  in  whose  hands  the  money  was  lodged,  and 
who  retained  hers.  The  girl  ventured  herself  to  address  a  letter 
to  the  Pope,  stating  how  her  portion  had  been  withheld  from  her. 
Without  loss  of  time  the  defaulter  was  summoned  and  condemned 
by  the  Pope  to  pay  the  poor  crippled  girl  fifty  scudi  out  of  his 
own  pocket,  besides  the  twenty-five  which  were  the  portion  due 
to  her.  Some  evenings  after  this,  in  his  usual  incognito  dress  of 
an  Abbate,  he  knocked  at  the  door  of  an  asylum  for  poor  chil- 
dren, the  management  of  which  was  not  supposed  to  be  alto- 
gether conscientiously  conducted.  The  porter  refused  to  open 
the  door,  alleging  that  the  children  were  at  supper,  and  just 
going  to  bed,  and  that  nobody  could  be  let  in.  At  last,  the 
magical  "  Aprite  che  sono  il  Papa,"  threw  the  door  wide,  and 
the  porter,  in  an  ecstasy  of  fright,  was  running  to  rouse  the  whole 
establishment  with  the  news,  which,  however,  His  Holiness  for- 


POPULARITY  OF  PIUS  IX. 


96 


bade  ;  and,  merely  desiring  the  dismayed  superior  to  conduct 
him  to  the  children's  eating-room,  he  proceeded  to  taste  the  bread 
and  wine  set  before  them  for  their  supper.  He  then  turned  to 
the  superior,  and  said  : — "  To-morrow,  sir,  let  the  bread  and 
wine  put  before  these  poor  children  be  such  as  it  ought  to 
be  ;  and  remember  that  I  have  my  eye  upon  you  :"  with  which 
salutary  warning  he  departed.  There  is  something  rather 
Haroun  Alraschid  in  these  nocturnal  expeditions  of  His  Holiness. 
On  fixed  days  in  the  week,  for  a  certain  number  of  hours, 
he  receives  indiscriminately  all  persons  who  wish  to  see 
and  speak  with  him.  They  are  admitted  without  any  distinc- 
tion, one  by  one,  according  to  number  ;  and  the  Pope,  permit- 
ting them  to  seat  themselves,  hears  their  grievances,  receives  their 
petitions,  and,  warning  them  that  any  attempt  to  impose  upon 
him,  or  in  any  way  alter  the  truth,  will  be  detected  and  pun- 
ished, takes  their  name  and  address,  and  has  their  business  in- 
quired into  and  put  to  rights.  As  for  the  women,  said  Monsignor, 
they  perfectly  adore  him,  for  nothing  can  exceed  his  graciousness 
and  kindness  to  them  : — "e  davero,"  added  he  with  Christianly 
humanity  ;  "  bisogna  pensarlo  che  sono  poverette  anche  lei  crea- 
ture di  Dio  !"  for  which  allowance  we  heretical  females  were 

duly  grateful.    Since  Monsignor's  visit,  we  have  seen  , 

who,  like  the  rest  of  the  Romans,  is  open-mouthed  in  his  enthusi- 
asm for  the  Pope.  He  has  been  composing  a  popular  patriotic 
chant,  in  honor  of  His  Holiness,  which  he  hopes  to  get  sung  in 
the  Piazza  del  Popolo,  on  the  eighth  of  September,  on  the  occa- 
sion of  the  Pope's  going  to  the  Santa  Maria  del  Popolo.  He  said 
that  people  were  coming  daily  from  Bologna  and  Ancona,  and 
various  of  the  hitherto  most  disaffected  districts  of  the  papal 
territory,  with  enthusiastic  demonstrations  of  loyalty,  fidelity, 
patriotism,  and  devotion  to  the  Pope.  Perhaps  the  most  touching 
and  remarkable  effect  of  the  new  disposition  of  men's  minds  in- 
duced by  the  popularity  of  the  new  Government  is,  that  instead 


90 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


of  the  spirit  of  distrust,  jealousy,  and  suspicion,  which  existed 
between  the  people  of  Rome  and  those  of  the  provinces,  a  kindly- 
feeling  of  free  brotherhood  seems  now  to  animate  them  all  towards 

each  other.   spoke  with  delight  and  astonishment  of  the 

almost  miraculous  change  wrought  in  the  public  mind  and  feel- 
ing in  the  space  of  two  months ;  adding,  that  had  Pope  Gregory 
XVI.  lived,  the  last  two  months  would  hardly  have  passed  over 
without  some  demonstration  of  popular  discontent  against  the 
besotted  tyranny  of  the  Government.  It  is  a  curious  fact,  if  it 
be  true,  but  I  know  not  upon  what  authority  the  anecdote  rests,  that 
Pius  IX.  had  been  for  some  years  past  engaged  in  writing  a  book 
upon  the  political  condition  of  the  Roman  states,  upon  the  necessary 
and  inevitable  changes  in  the  administration,  and  in  short  all  the 
questions  of  vital  import  that  concern  the  national  existence  of  the 
people.  This  work,  it  is  said,  he  had  intended  at  his  death  to  be- 
queathe to  whoever  should  be  the  reigning  Pope,little  imagining  that 
so  much  labor  and  thought  were  to  find  their  result  in  the  measures 
of  his  own  government,  and  that  God  would  call  him  who  intended 
thus  to  serve  his  country  after  his  death  to  serve  it  yet  more  effec- 
tually by  his  life.    Among  many  others,   told  us  two 

beautiful  anecdotes  of  his  humanity  and  wisdom.  While  he  was 
archbishop  of  Spoleto,  a  list  of  persons  suspected  of  political 
liberalism  was  brought  to  him,  and  he  was  earnestly  recom- 
mended to  forward  it  to  Rome,  as  an  exhibition  of  zeal  that  would 
be  highly  serviceable  to  himself ;  he  said  he  would  take  care  of 
it,  and  immediately  tore  it  up,  and  threw  it  into  the  fire.  Since 
the  proclamation  of  his  act  of  amnesty,  a  subscription  was  set 
on  foot  in  Rome  to  raise  a  sum  of  money  for  the  poor  men  whose 
long  detention  in  the  papal  prisons  had,  of  course,  not  sent  them 
back  into  the  world  with  very  full  pockets.  A  list  of  the  sub- 
scribers' names  was  brought  to  the  Pope  by  the  governor  of  Rome, 
Marini,  who  suggested  that  it  would  be  very  desirable  to  keep 
it,  as  a  future  means  of  ascertaining  who  were  tainted  with  sym- 


SONNET. 


j7 


pathy  for  liberal  opinions.  The  Pope  said  he  thought  it  was 
highly  desirable  to  make  that  use  of  it,  immediately  wrote  down 
his  own  name,  with  a  donation  of  a  hundred  scudi,  and  engaged 
Monsignor  Marini  to  follow  his  example,  and'record  himself  as  a 
friend  of  those  who  had  suffered  for  liberal  opinions.  There  is 
a  touch  of  humor  about  this  anecdote  that  makes  it  perfectly  en- 
chanting. 

While  archbishop  of  Imola,  he  was  already  known  to  have 
exhibited  his  sympathy  for^  those  suffering  in  the  cause  of  politi- 
cal reform,  by  furnishing  many  of  the  exiled  patriots  with 
money.  A  beautiful  anecdote  is  related  of  his  merciful  and  hu- 
mane disposition  while  he  was  in  this  situation.  Among 
the  other  duties  of  the  archbishop  is  that  of  a  periodical 
survey  of  the  prisons,  in  the  course  of  which,  visits  of  greater 
or  less  length  may  be  paid  by  him  to  the  cells  of  each  or 
any  of  the  criminals.  An  unfortunate  woman,  whose  husband 
had  been  confined  for  upwards  of  a  year,  and  who  had  in  vain 
solicited  permission  to  see  him,  at  length,  in  despair,  applied 
to  the  archbishop,  whose  office,  however,  gave  him  no  power 
of  furnishing  her  with  the  required  permission.  Much  moved, 
however,  by  the  poor  creature's  misery,  the  humane  man  remem- 
bered her  petition,  and  on  the  occasion  of  his  next  official  visit 
to  the  prison,  sent  word  to  her  to  join  the  train  which  usually 
attended  his  progress  on  these  occasions.  Arrived  at  the  cell 
where  her  husband  was  incarcerated,  he  bade  the  woman  enter 
it,  and  sat  himself  at  the  dungeon-door  for  an  hour,  during  which 
space  of  time  the  unfortunate  couple  enjoyed  once  more  the 
blessing  of  being  reunited. 

SONNET. 

If  there  were  any  power  in  human  love, 
Or  in  th'  intensest  longing  of  the  heart, 
Then  should  the  oceans  and  the  lands  that  part 

Ye  from  my  sight  all  unprevailing  prove, 

VOL.  II.  5 


98 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Then  should  the  yearning  of  my  bosom  bring 

Ye  here,  thro'  space  and  distance  infinite  ; 
And  life  'gainst  love  should  be  a  baffled  thing, 

And  circumstance  'gainst  will  lose  all  its  might. 
Shall  not  a  childless  mother's  misery 

Conjure  the  earth  with  such  a  potent  spell — 

A  charm  so  desperate — as  to  compel 
Nature  to  yield  to  her  great  agony  ? 

Can  I  not  think  of  ye  till  ye  arise, 

Alive,  alive,  before  my  very  eyes  ? 

Livy,  Horace,  Nibby,  and  Arnold,  having  excited  an  intense 

curiosity  in  my  mind  upon  the  subject  of  Mount  Algidus,  

the  historians,  from  their  incessant  reference  to  it  as  the  favorite 
encampment  of  all  the  early  enemies  of  Rome  ;  and  the  poet 
and  antiquarian,  from  their  description  of  its  savage  and  romantic 
wildness, — it  was  determined  that  we  should  make  an  expedition 
thither ;  and,  accordingly,  having  ordered  on  the  donkeys,  we  set 
forth  in  the  carriage  as  far  as  the  road  was  held  to  be  carozzabile. 
We  drove  along  the  Latian  valley,  between  the  heights  of  Monte 
Cavo  and  Tusculum  ;  the  way,  sandy  and  level,  was  divided 
into  parallel  strips  of  road  by  lovely  islands  of  flowering  broom, 
hawthorn,  and  sweet-briar.    At  the  distance  of  about  eight  miles 
from  Frascati,  we  reached  the  end  of  our  journey  on  wheels, 
arriving  at  one  of  the  most  beautiful  scenes  I  ever  beheld — a 
wide,  circular  plain,  surrounded  with  an  amphitheatre  of  hills ; 
in  the  midst,  a  shallow,  sparkling  lake — numerous  herds  of  the 
noble  grey  oxen  of  the  campagna  grazing  about,  or  standing  knee- 
deep  in  the  bright  pool — a  long  stone  fountain,  with  about  twenty 
shepherds  grouped  around  it — and  between  the  sunny  hills,  where 
their  sloping  lines  intersected  each  other,  glimpses  into  purple 
mountain  distances  beyond.    It  was  a  perfectly  ideal  landscape, 
such  as  I  have  only  seen  once  before  in  my  life,  at  the  twin  lakes 


MOUNTAIN  SCENERY. 


99 


of  Salisbury,  in  Connecticut.  We  began  our  progress  up  the 
mountain  under  the  guidance  of  an  old  herdsman,  who,  though 
between  sixty  and  seventy  years  old,  stumped  fast  and  firm  before 
us  ;  his  keen  eyes  glittering  under  white  eyebrows,  his  ruddy 
cheeks  glowing  like  winter  apples,  and  his  open  shirt  showing  a 
brown  brawny  breast  covered  with  curling  silver  hairs, — a  most 
robust  specimen  of  hale  old  age.  He  was  armed  and  supported 
by  a  stout  long  staff,  with  a  heavy  knob  at  one  end,  such  as  they 
use  to  drive  the  cattle  with,  and  followed  by  a  sort  of  black 
lurcher.  We  presently  entered  a  fine  forest  of  chestnut  trees ; 
some  felled  trunks  lay  here  and  there,  of  monstrous  girth  ;  others 
doomed  to  the  same  fate  still  stood  erect,  all  charred  and  black, 
their  vitals  burnt  out,  and  yet  still  wearing  their  fresh  and  vigor- 
ous  coronal  of  green.  We  came  frequently  upon  charcoal  pits, 
the  only  human  token  in  this  savage  place,  which  reminded  me 
exceedingly  of  the  forest  scenery  in  America  ;  with  this  differ- 
ence, that  there  was  less  variety  in  the  wood,  and  none  of  those 
exquisite  mountain  torrents,  which  I  have  always  found  in  simi- 
lar scenes  among  the  mountains  in  America.  The  single  chest- 
nut trees,  that  reared  themselves  amid  the  tangled  wilderness  of 
undergrowth,  were,  I  think,  the  finest  I  ever  saw.  We  now 
began  to  perceive  decided  symptoms  of  fright  and  excessive  ill- 
humor  in  our  donkey  guides,  who  seemed  unwilling  to  adventure 
themselves  in  the  savage  solitudes  of  the  Algidus.  They  had 
read,  I  believe,  neither  Horace  nor  Nibby,  but  tradition  of  much 
later  date  gave  this  mountain  forest  to  Gasperoni  and  his  banditti 
as  their  chief  stronghold,  and  the  intimate  acquaintance  our  old 
guide  professed  with  the  former  haunts,  persons,  and  practices  of 
these  worthies  did  not  seem  at  all  to  re-assure  our  valiant  pro- 
tectors, who,  nevertheless,  impelled  by  our  rashness,  were  fain 
to  follow  our  guide,  who,  with  sturdy  determination,  plunged  into 
the  green  billows  of  the  forest,  leading  the  way  through  paths 
utterly  invisible,  for  the  upward-springing  and  downward-hang- 


100 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


ing  vegetation,  and  where  the  movement  he  made  as  he  waded 
through  the  thickets  was  all  the  indication  we  had  of  our  way. 

 ,  on  his  invaluable  little  campagna  pony,  followed  close 

on  his  heels,  my  sister  on  her  donkey,  with  Antonio  next,  and  I 
brought  up  the  rear  with  my  little  Flibbertigibbet,  whose  bright 
eyes  peering  up  from  among  the  bushes,  where  he  walked  invisi- 
ble, was  all  that  I  could  discern  of  him  while  he  led  my  donkey. 
The  verdant  curtains  of  the  wood,  thrust  aside  as  we  passed,  closed 
immediately  behind  each  of  us,  leaving  those  who  followed  to 
divine  the  course  of  those  before,  by  the  disturbed  waving  of  the 
boughs,  and  their  voices  calling  through  the  thick  foliage.  But  for 
the  bird-nets  here  and  there  spread  between  the  summits  of  the 
high  trees,  we  might  have  imagined  that  no  human  creature  but  our- 
selves  ever  traversed  this  labyrinth,  where,  more  than  once,  our  old 
guide  himself  mistook  the  way,  to  the  infinite  dismay  and  discom- 
fort of  the  others.  Suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  most  appropriate  dis- 
courses touching  the  bandit  who  formerly  infested  this  mountain, 
Antonio  hailed,  in  a  voice  of  stupendous  terror,  something  that 
he  saw  moving  among  the  boughs.  A  boy's  voice  responded 
shrill  and  clear  through  the  leafy  screen,  and  our  donkey  hero 
resuming  his  blustering,  bullying  demeanor,  transferred  his  fright 
to  the  more  becoming  expression  of  indignant  astonishment  at  the 
boy's  lonely  presence  in  that  solitude,  where  he  could  not  possibly 
have  any  particular  business  or  pleasure,  according  to  his  think- 
ing. Our  guide  told  us,  that  some  years  ago,  when  Lucien  Bo- 
naparte was  passing  the  summer  at  the  Villa  Rufinella,  the  bandits 
made  a  descent  upon  the  house,  and  carried  off  a  French  painter 
who  was  staying  there,  supposing  that  they  had  secured  the 
prince,  who,  having  had  the  alarm,  escaped  through  a  window, 
while  his  less  illustrious  fellow-countryman  was  conveyed  by  the 
brigands  to  the  recesses  of  the  Algidus ;  here  they  kept  him  until 
Lucien  Bonaparte  relieved  his  very  unwilling  proxy  by  paying 
a  ransom  of  three  hundred  scudi  for  him.    Our  way  was  becom- 


THE  ALGIDUS. 


101 


ing,  in  the  meantime,  more  and  more  intricate,  and  we  were 
really  not  sorry  when  we  reached  an  open  space  near  the  top  of 
the  mountain.  We  here  left  our  beasts  with  Augusto  Flibberti- 
gibbet, and  climbed,  and  crept,  and  clung  our  way  up  by  ton 
thousand  impossible  turns  and  scramblings,  to  some  huge  blocks 

of  ancient  wall,  amid  which  we  seated  ourselves  ;  and  

and  our  guides  left  us  to  explore  more  fully  the  ruinous  remains. 
While  we  sat  there  alone,  two  men  came  by,  armed,  the  one  with 
a  gun,  and  the  other  with  a  hatchet ;  they  looked  at  us,  naturally 
enough,  and  we  were  rather  frightened — I  think  naturally  enough 
too ;  but  either  "  they  were  not  the  men  we  took  them  for,"  or 
we  did  not  look  worth  ransoming,  so  they  went  on  :  and  presently 

 and  our  guides  returned,  and  we  descended,  not  without 

repeatedly  missing  our  way,  to  the  place  where  we  had  left  the 
boy  and  the  donkeys.  Here,  high  throned  above  a  mountain  of 
most  noble  forest,  we  looked  over  the  deep  valleys  below,  and  the 
great  hill  shoulders  with  their  mantles  of  green  ;  and  having 
rested  and  lunched,  we  set  forth  to  descend  the  mountain  on  the 
other  side.  For  a  while  we  followed  a  path  that,  though  really 
not  two  feet  wide,  and  with  branches  and  roots  intersecting  it 
every  two  yards,  might  have  been  called  a  turnpike,  in  compari- 
son with  that  by  which  we  had  come.  Presently,  however,  our 
neatherd  made  demonstrations  of  replunging  into  the  twilight 
vaults  of  the  forest,  whereat  the  heroic  Antonio  fell  into  another 
agony  of  apprehension.    We  passed  through  a  glen,  where  the 

chestnut  trees  were  the  finest  I  ever  saw.   said,  it  was 

no  wonder  Diana  loved  the  Algidus ;  and  it  seemed  to  me  as  if 
the  silver  sandals  of  the  huntress  must  shine  presently  upon  the 
path,  and  the  rustling  of  her  quiver  be  heard  in  the  awful  solitude. 
Our  guide  now  struck  fairly  again  in  the  deep  wood,  and  Antonio 
broke  out  into  open  rebellion,  whereupon  the  old  bandit's  com- 
panion told  him,  that  unless  he  intended  to  spend  the  night  in 
the  woods,  which  he  would  leave  him  to  do  if  he  preferred  it,  he 


102 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


must  follow  the  path  he  was  taking.  This  suggestion  silenced 
Parolles,  and  we  proceeded,  and  finally  achieved  our  exit  from 
the  forest,  our  descent  from  the  mountain,  and  our  return  to  the 
open  plain,  with  its  sandy  roads  all  overarched  with  golden  ca- 
nopies of  broom,  the  broad  daylight  and  level  land  comforting 
more  or  less  all  our  spirits.  Infinite  discourse  went  forward 
touching  Gasperoni  and  his  band — their  exploits  and  daring 
— their  good  dealings,  at  least  according  to  our  guide,  with  the 
poor  peasantry,  from  whom  they  never  took  anything  in  the 
shape  of  provisions,  without  liberally  paying  for  it — their 
final  betrayal  through  the  means  of  a  priest.  And  when  it  came 
to  this  clerical  climax,  it  was  really  most  curious  to  hear  the 
men,  and  even  the  lad  leading  my  donkey,  break  into  one  hearty 
and  simultaneous  execration  of  the  priesthood,  under  whose  do- 
minion they  live  ;  their  hardness  and  indifference  to  the  poor ; 
their  avarice,  their  rapacity,  their  profligacy,  their  hypocrisy. 
God  knows,  it  was  enough  to  make  one  ask  how  long  a  govern- 
ment, thus  esteemed  by  its  subjects,  could  possibly  endure ;  be- 
cause, with  all  due  allowance  made  for  the  character  of  the 
authority  from  which  we  were  receiving  these  details,  there  was 
obvious  truth  enough  in  what  they  said,  to  make  the  vehement 
accordance  with  which  they  all  bore  witness  to  it  most  striking. 
Our  guide  wound  up  by  assuring  us,  that,  contrary  to  the  com- 
mon opinion,  Gasperoni  himself  had  never  been  taken  alive  ; 
he  rejected  the  imputation  even,  I  thought,  with  rather  a  touch 
of  indignation  ;  spoke  of  his  intimate  personal  acquaintance  with 
Gasperoni,  whom  he  described  as  eminently  striking  looking  and 
handsome  ;  said  he  had  seen  him  himself  after  he  was  shot,  with  a 
number  of  his  comrades,  at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the 
band  ;  and  ended  with  adding,  that  the  robber  confined  in  the 
prison  at  Civita  Vecchia  {where  he  himself  had  passed  some  time 
in  his  company),  and  always  shown  to  visitors  as  Gasperoni,  was 
one  Salvatore,  the  principal  companion  and  friend  of  the  brigand- 


INHABITANTS  OF  FRASCATI. 


103 


chief.  We  listened  with  considerable  interest  to  these  very  au- 
thentic details,  and  remembered  them  with  still  more,  when  we 
afterwards  heard  that  our  sturdy  old  guide  to  the  Algid  us  had 

been  himself  one  of  Gasperoni's  famous  band.    had 

loitered  behind,  and  after  regaining  the  carriage  we  drove  on 
at  a  brisk  rate,  leaving  him  to  follow ;  and  for  some  time  after 
we  reached  home,  as  he  did  not  appear,  we  were  rather  anxious 
about  him  :  but  he  finally  rejoined  us,  and  related  how,  having 
found  our  old  guide  after  we  had  parted  from  him  at  the  shep- 
herd's fountain,  and  offered  to  pay  him  for  his  trouble  in  escort- 
ing us,  the  latter  had  most  conscientiously  informed  him  that  we 
had  already  paid  him — a  worthy  member  of  Gasperoni's  band, 
truly ! 

In  my  early  walks  about  the  neighborhood  of  our  beautiful 
villa,  I  have  made  numerous  acquaintances  among  the  country 
people,  whom  I  meet  at  work  in  the  vineyards,  and  have  been 
able  to  form  some  notion  of  the  general  condition  of  those  inha- 
biting Frascati  and  its  vicinity.  They  are  for  the  most  part 
good-natured,  friendly  folk,  who  generally  commence  our  inter- 
course by  asking  me  if  I  was  not  afraid  to  walk  alone,  which 
gives  me  an  indifferent  opinion  either  of  their  honesty  or  their 
courage  ;  but  I  believe  the  latter  is  chiefly  in  fault.  One  morn- 
ing lately  I  met  a  young  peasant  girl,  who,  although  in  the  same 
predicament  herself,  exclaimed,  with  much  apparent  astonish- 
ment, "  Ma  come,  siete  sola  !"  to  which,  or  rather  to  my  own 
thoughts,  I  answered  "  Si ;  sola,  sola  to  which,  or  perhaps  to 
her  own  thoughts,  the  girl  replied,  "  E  meglio  sola  che  mal  ac- 
compagnata." — God  keep  her  in  that  mind  ! 

The  peasantry  of  this  district  find  their  chief  occupation  in 
tending  the  vines  with  which  the  hills  are  principally  covered, 
and  which  form  the  agricultural  wealth  of  the  small  communi- 
ties gathered  in  their  fortress-like  looking  villages,  on  the  summit 
of  the  eminences  that  are,  as  it  were,  a  sort  of  intermediate  step 


104 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


between  the  level  plain  of  the  campagna  and  the  summits  of  the 
Alban  and  Sabine  hills.  In  the  spring,  the  raising  the  plants, 
and  restoring  them  to  the  support  of  the  canes  that  for  the  most 
part  prop  them,  and  which  the  snows,  which  sometimes  lie  heavy 
on  these  mountain  sides,  beat  down,  is  the  earliest  process. 
Towards  the  end  of  May,  the  enclosures  are  filled  with  compa- 
nies of  peasants,  chiefly  girls  and  women,  busied  in  removing  the 
tendrils  from  the  vines,  by  breaking  off  which,  the  surplus  vigor, 
diverted  into  those  twining  and  profuse  offshoots,  is  restored  to 
the  fruitbearing  parts  of  the  plant,  which  are  now  in  full  blos- 
som. Towards  the  beginning  of  September,  the  same  female 
troops  spread  themselves  over  the  vineyards,  removing  almost  all 
the  graceful  and  beautiful  foliage  from  the  vines,  so  as  at  once 
to  give  the  fruit  the  full  benefit  of  its  last  month's  genial  sun- 
ning, and  to  render  the  work  of  stripping  the  branches  off  for 
the  vintage  quicker  and  easier.  The  end  of  September  and 
the  beginning  of  October  is  the  season  of  the  grape  gathering 
and  wine  making,  when  the  entire  population  seems  poured 
into  the  vineyards :  the  whole  country  resounds  with  the  loud 
monotonous  nasal  howl  which,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  the  national 
music  of  this  part,  at  any  rate,  of  the  land  of  song  ;  and  the  warm 
warm  air  is  tipsy  with  the  smell  of  the  grapes,  borne  in  tubs 
on  the  backs  of  mules,  in  incessant  procession  up  every  steep 
winding  village  path,  to  the  huge  vats,  where  the  process  of  tread- 
ing them  is  performed. 

From  the  glory  and  the  grace  of  the  fragrant  vine-bunches, 
hanging  like  precious  grapes  of  amethyst  and  amber,  with  their 
exquisite  bloom  on  them,  under  their  fresh  glittering  leaves,  to 
the  half-smashed  dirty  amalgamation  of  bruised  discolored  ber- 
ries, and  stocks  jolted  to  a  sort  of  ill-looking  puree  aux  pois,  in 
nasty  high  narrow  tubs  on  a  mule's  back ;  and  then  again  from 
even  that  to  the  hideous-looking  red-brown  scum,  in  which  a 
hairy,  sweating,  brawny  peasant  prances,  with  his  breeches 


MODE  OF  SPINNING. 


105 


rolled  more  than  half-way  up  his  thighs,  and  his  limbs  besmeared 
as  though  with  blood,  with  the  revolting-looking  contents  of  the 
huge  vat,  in  which  he  takes  his  exercise,  there  is  a  declension 
in  beauty  and  poetry  not  to  be  described.  -  The  vintage  over, 
the  agricultural  labors  of  the  women  of  this  neighborhood  end. 
The  gathering  of  the  olives  is  principally  performed  by  the  men, 
and  is  often  protracted  far  into  the  winter,  when  the  cold,  even 
on  the  lower  slopes  of  these  hills,  is  sometimes  very  severe.  As 
soon  as  they  have  done  busying  themselves  with  the  vines,  the 
women  take  up  a  life  of  spinning,  as  incessant  as  the  German 
female  knitting  existence.  I  asked  several  of  the  vine-laborers 
the  amount  of  their  wages,  and  the  answer  was  the  same 
throughout  the  neighborhood — two  pauls,  or  twenty  bajocchi, 
about  ten  pence  a  day  for  the  men,  and  for  the  women  half  as 
much.  I  never  can  refrain  from  contrasting  the  price  of  labor 
in  Europe  with  its  value  in  America ;  and  used  often  and  often 
both  to  smile  and  sigh  when  I  heard  this,  and  remembered  the 
dollar  (four  and  sixpence)  a  day,  which  is  the  lowest  pay  of 
the  lowest  day  laborer  in  America  ;  that  such  a  thing  as 
a  woman  laboring  in  the  fields  is  not  known  from  one  end  to 
another  of  the  free  States.  Of  course,  as  might  be  naturally 
expected,  they  are  among  the  hardest- worked  of  the  miserable 
slave  population  of  the  South  ;  the  pay  of  a  sort  of  garde  cham- 
petre  (gamekeepers  they  cannot  be  called,  because  there  is  no 
game),  of  which  each  of  the  estates  adjoining  ours  has  one  or 
more,  is  six  scudi  a  month,  and  some  sort  of  residence  for  him- 
self and  family — often  some  half  ruined  portion  of  a  dismantled 
farm-house,  or  even  tumble-town  palazzo.  The  flax  of  which 
their  women  spin  and  weave  themselves  all  the  coarse  linen 
garments  that  they  wear,  grows  in  the  flat-lands  of  the  cam- 
pagna,  where  they  pay,  for  the  privilege  of  planting  it,  a  sort  of 
ground-rent  to  the  land-owner ;  they  cut,  and  carry,  and  hackle 
it  all  themselves,  and  spin  it  without  the  more  modern  invention 
5* 


106 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


even  of  the  spinning-wheel,  but  with  nothing  but  that  most  primi- 
tive and  elegant  implement — the  spindle.  I  could  not  discover 
such  a  thing  as  a  fly-loom  in  all  Frascati ;  but  women  working 
at  exceedingly  clumsy  and  wretched  old  hand-looms  told  me, 
that  one  paul  a  day,  that  is  about  five  pence,  was  the  most  that 
they  could  earn  with  their  utmost  diligence.  So  antiquated  a 
machine  as  a  hand-loom,  I  suppose,  could  hardly  be  found  now 
in  Philadelphia  ;  but  a  worker  there  at  the  fly-loom  earns,  with- 
out the  slightest  difficulty,  a  dollar  and  a  half,  or  between  six 
and  seven  shillings  a  day ;  the  wages  of  handicraftsmen  and 
artisans,  such  as  carpenters,  bricklayers,  and  masons,  in  these 
small  villages  in  the  vicinity  of  Rome,  are  very  fair,  amounting 
to  about  a  scudo  a  day  ;  not,  indeed,  equal  to  the  nine  dollars  a 
week  of  an  industrious  American  journeyman,  but  still,  com- 
pared with  the  agricultural  wages,  excellent. 

In  speaking,  as  I  perpetually  do,  of  the  extraordinary  advan- 
tage workmen  in  America  enjoy  over  the  same  class  in  England, 
and  other  countries  in  Europe,  I  do  not  wish  at  all  to  be  under- 
stood to  state,  that  they  can  live  more  cheaply  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Atlantic  ;  for  directly  the  reverse  is  the  case,  as  I  have  been 
repeatedly  assured  by  members  of  the  working  classes  who  had 
emigrated  from  England  to  America,  and  who  found  living  there 
much  dearer  than  in  the  old  country.  The  only  item  of  expendi- 
ture that  is  really  cheap  in  Philadelphia  and  its  neighborhood,  is 
food.  Provisions  are  infinitely  cheaper  than  in  England  ;  and  if 
men  could  live  by  bread  alone,  the  difference  between  the  costli- 
ness of  existence  in  the  New  and  Old  World  would  indeed  be 
immense.  But  almost  everything  else  necessary  for  physical 
existence  is  either  as  dear  or  dearer  than  in  England  ; — all 
materials  for  and  articles  of  clothing  infinitely  dearer  and  by  no 
means  so  good  ;  all  implements  of  industry,  whether  mechanical 
or  agricultural,  infinitely  dearer  and  not  so  pood  ;  fuel  as  dear, 
or  dearer  ;  and  house-rent  for  the  poorer  classes  much  upcna  the 
same  scale  in  both  countries.    With  regard  to  the  advantage  that 


DOMESTIC  ECONOMY. 


107 


might  be  derived  from  the  great  abundance  and  cheapness  of 
food,  a  law  of  apparently  universal  application  in  human  affairs 
holds  good,  and  that  which  is  cheaply  and  easily  procured  is 
lavishly  used  and  most  frequently  wasted.  •  The  Americans  are, 
in  almost  every  respect,  the  most  extravagant  people  I  have  ever 
seen  :  among  the  wealthier  classes  an  inordinate  ostentation  and 
love  of  display,  and  among  the  poorer  ones  a  reckless  disregard 
of  economy  in  the  details  of  daily  expenditure,  are,  perhaps,  a 
very  natural  result  of  the  ease  with  which  money  is  earned,  and 
the  rapidity  with  which  fortunes  are  made  in  that  country  of 
hitherto  unexhausted  resources  and  unexampled  activity.  But 
anything  like  the  carefulness  and  scrupulous  management  in  the 
adjustment  of  means  and  expenditure  practised  in  England,  not 
only  by  the  poorer,  but  by  the  middling  classes,  is  unknown  in 
any  class  in  America.  The  perfect  proportions  kept  between 
the  income  and  the  outlay  by  the  majority  of  English  people  of 
moderate  means,  is  a  thing  unknown  to  the  same  class  of  people 
on  the  other  side  of  the  water.  There  is  one  very  sad  reason  for 
this :  the  frightful  fever  for  speculation  ;  the  gambling  propensi- 
ty prevalent  to  a  most  extraordinary  extent  in  America  ;  the 
thirst  for  excitement,  so  keen,  that  nothing  but  perpetual  political 
contest,  and  incessant  suspension  of  fortune,  between  sudden 
wealth  or  as  sudden  destitution,  can  sufficiently  minister  to  it. 
This  extraordinary  national  characteristic,  arising,  doubtless,  in 
great  part  from  the  natural,  but  withal  unexampled,  impulse 
given  by  free  institutions  in  a  new  world  to  a  young  and  energetic 
society,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable,  and  1  should  almost  say 
almost  appalling,  peculiarities  of  the  present  American  people. 
When  it  can  be  said  that  not  stock-jobbers  and  brokers ;  bankers 
and  men  of  financial  speculation  ;  and  merchants,  men  of  com- 
mercial speculation,  alone,  but  almost  every  professional  man  in 
Philadelphia,  at  one  time — lawyer,  physician,  and,  I  believe  I  might 
almost  add,  clergyman — was  engaged  in  some  scheme,  some  ha- 
zard, some  speculation,  for  the  rapid,  or  rather  sudden  increase  of 


108 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


his  fortune ;  a  chance  which  of  course  involved  its  opposite 
chance  of  sudden  ruin ;  it  will  easily  be  conceived  how 
absolutely  destructive  such  a  state  of  things  must  be  of 
everything  like  habits  of  economy  or  the  regular  management 
and  careful  administration  of  certain  means.  I  have  heard 
American  women  repeatedly  say,  that  their  husbands  never 
informed  them  of  anything  relating  to  their  affairs  ;  that  they  had 
not  the  remotest  idea  of  the  amount  of  their  income  ;  and  that  it 
was  the  most  unusual  thing  among  them  for  a  woman  to  be  at 
all  aware  of  the  extent  of  her  husband's  means.  To  English 
lawyers',  physicians',  clergymen's,  or  professional  men's  wives, 
whose  task  it  is  invariably  to  hold  the  proportion  between  their 
husbands'  income  and  the  necessary  outlay  of  their  families,  this 
state  of  things  appears  incredible  ;  but  it  ceases  to  be  so  singu- 
lar, when  one  reflects  that  a  man  engaged  in  wild  speculations, 
which  may  at  any  moment  double  or  treble  his  fortune  or  sweep 
from  him  the  bare  means  of  existence,  cannot  very  well  consider 
himself  possessed  of  any  fixed  income,  or  reckon  his  certain 
means  at  any  specific  sum.  Nor  is  it  very  likely  that  any  man 
would  care  to  burden  the  heart  and  mind  of  his  wife,  in  the 
midst  of  her  domestic  duties  and  anxieties,  with  the  intense  ner- 
vous expectation — the  incessant  tension  of  acute  apprehension — 
of  a  condition  hovering  perpetually  between  such  reverses  of 
fortune.  That  uncertainty  which  necessarily  belongs  alone  to 
the  results  of  certain  peculiar  callings,  and  the  extreme  of  which 
wisdom  and  foresight  in  those  exercising  them  endeavor  as  much 
as  possible  to  guard  against,  a  whole  nation  by  choice  and  deli- 
beration (if  such  madness  can  be  so  called)  incurs.  This  will 
sufficiently  account  for  the  absence  of  anything  like  a  judicious 
regulation  of  expenditure  and  practice  of  economy  among  the 
wealthier  portions  of  the  community  in  America  ;  as  it  accounts 
too,  sufficiently  enough,  for  the  innumerable  failures,  ruins,  bank- 
ruptcies, sudden  uprisings  of  sudden  large  fortunes,  sudden  fall- 
ings in  of  equally  large  ones, — banishment  of  well-educated, 


DOMESTIC  ECONOMY. 


109 


luxuriously  bred  families,  to  the  wild  regions  of  the  west,  and  all 
the  extraordinary  fluctuations  in  the  social  character  of  American 
cities — mutations  unexampled  in  their  number  and  rapidity,  and 
which  deprive  society  there  of  all  stability,  consistency,  and  dignity, 
and  do  away  with  half  the  advantages  of  wealth,  by  its  perpetual 
shifting  from  reckless  and  careless  hand  to  hand.  To  these 
causes  too,  doubtless,  may  be  attributed  the  frightful  prevalence 
of  insanity,  that  most  awful  of  human  liabilities,  that  most  fre- 
quent result  of  turning  life  into  a  desperate  game  of  chance,  and 
the  instances  of  which  so  far  outnumber  in  America  those  known 
in  Europe.  But,  to  return  to  the  poorer  classes,  English  labor- 
ers and  artisans  going  to  America,  find  food  amazingly  cheap, 
and  gradually  and  naturally  relax  in  the  strict  and  penurious 
economy  they  are  obliged  to  practise  with  regard  to  it  in  their 
own  country,  where  it  is  very  dear.  A  step  further,  however, 
leads  to  an  almost  inevitable  transition  in  human  affairs,  from  use 
to  abuse :  the  American  laborers  and  artisans  squander  food  ; 
they  have  rather  a  contempt  for  economy  in  this  particular,  and 
ignorance  in  many  places  is  as  fruitful  of  extravagance  as  reck- 
lessness itself.  For  instance,  I  know  a  part  of  New  England, 
where  the  good  housewives  are  in  the  habit  of  throwing  away 
their  calves'  heads  and  feet  as  useless  and  unprofitable  portions  of 
the  animal.  To  the  English  poor,  therefore,  the  benefits  of  the 
abundant  cheap  provisions  of  the  Western  world  are  soon  neu- 
tralized by  this  change  of  domestic  economy  ;  the  ease  with 
which  employment  is  obtained,  and  its  ample  compensation,  still 
remain  as  sufficient  inducements  for  emigration ;  to  which  must 
never  be  forgotten  to  be  added,  the  wide  field  open  to  every 
species  of  industry,  which,  by  affording  ample  means  of  subsist- 
ence to  all  who  will  labor,  relieves  the  heart  of  the  poor  man 
from  the  dire  pressure  of  anxiety  for  his  children,  and  converts 
into  the  blessing  it  was  intended  to  be,  that  offspring,  which  in 
England  becomes  to  the  unfortunate  laborer  or  artisan  his 


110 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


heaviest  burden  and  the  bitterest  curse  of  his  existence,— 
throwing  over  a  present,  made  tolerably  prosperous  only  by 
incessant  efforts,  the  dismal  shadow  of  an  uncertain  future, 
and  the  haunting  apprehension  for  the  fate  of  those  whose  sole 
dependence  in  life  is  a  desperate  struggle  with  innumerable  com- 
petitors,  whose  poverty  and  industry  choke  up  with  ceaseless 
and  unavailing  efforts  every  channel  of  employment ;  where  the 
most  strenuous  endeavor  barely  wards  off  immediate  misery, 
and  never  protects  from  heart-sickening  uncertainty. 

These  inducements  America  still  holds  forth  to  the  harassed 
poor  of  Europe ;  these,  and  the  privilege  not  only  of  present 
existence,  but  of  progress  in  the  social  scale.  A  few  years  of 
industry  and  economy  may  convert  the  poorest  emigrant  into  a 
lord  of  the  soil  in  the  great  fertile  wilderness,  into  whose  ample 
bosom  the  crowded' populations  of  ancient  lands  are  daily  pouring 
themselves,  and  where  the  unfettered  action  of  human  activity 
and  energy  resembles  the  healthful  coursing  of  the  blood  through 
the  veins  of  a  child,  unimpeded  by  ligaments  and  compressions, 
and  left  to  move  and  grow  as  God  has  ordained. 

The  terrible  malaria  infesting  the  Roman  campagna,  and 
extending  its  pestilential  influence  considerably  up  the  hill  sides, 
accounts  sufficiently  for  the  absence  of  scattered  dwellings  and 
isolated  habitations  among  the  vineyards,  that  drop  their  green 
folds  to  the  mountain's  feet.  Security,  too,  in  earlier  and  more 
savage  times,  probably  induced  the  laborers  to  huddle  together  in 
villages,  under  the  doubtful  protection  of  some  feudal  lord,  as  at 
Colonna,  rather  than  live  scattered  in  separate  farms  and  cot- 
tages ;  and  the  combination  of  both  motives  caused  the  gathering 
of  swarming  populations  into  the  rock-perched  hamlets  that  are 
planted  on  every  tolerably  accessible  eminence  all  round  the 
great  curtain  of  hills  that — except  towards  the  sea — bound  the 
Roman  horizon.  These  villages,  many  of  them  springing  up  from 
such  pinnacles  as  to  be  most  difficult  of  access,  form  one  of  the 


ITALIAN  VILLAGES. 


Ill 


most  picturesque  features  of  that  landscape  of  unequalled  variety 
and  beauty  ;  and  from  a  certain  distance,  raising  their  time- 
stained  and  irregular  buildings  high  up  against  the  admirable 
purity  and  brilliancy  of  the  sky — their  steep  rocky  foundations 
giving  them  almost  the  appearance  of  fortresses, — they  delight 
the  eye  and  invite  the  approach  of  the  beholder;  but  let 
him  be  satisfied  with  their  distant  aspect ;  it  is  infinitely  their 
best,  and  a  nearer  approach  will  only  produce,  in  recompense 
for  toiling  up  steep,  stinking,  slippery  streets,  lined  with  squalid 
habitations,  and  thronged  with  filthy  inhabitants,  the  com- 
monest of  all  earthly  experiences — disappointment.  The  pea- 
sants, thus  perched  above  their  land  of  labor,  go  forth  at  early 
morning  and  return  in  the  evening  to  their  pinnacles.  A  general 
attendance  at  mass  precedes  their  descent  to  the  plain,  and  the 
Ave  Maria  calls  them  home  again  from  field  and  vineyard  in 
multitudinous  streams  of  toil-weary  life,  climbing  the  steep  paths 
back  towards  their  rocky  abodes.  It  is  a  dreadful  pity  that  it  is 
utterly  impossible  to  reverse  the  order  of  nature,  so  that  they 
could  go  down  in  the  evening  and  up  in  the  morning  before  their 
day's  work ;  with  the  utmost  exercise  of  ingenuity,  however,  I 
never  could  discover  any  mode  of  so  adjusting  it# 

The  exalted  station  of  their  homes  appeared  to  be  a  double 
hardship  to  the  women  ;  for  the  fountains  where  they  wash,  and 
where  they  procure  all  the  water  for  their  household  purposes, 
are  generally  at  a  considerable  distance  below  the  villages, — at 
Monte  Porzio,  nearly  half  a  mile  ;  at  the  beautiful  village  of 
Rocca  Priori,  much  further  down  the  precipitous  mountain  road  • 
and,  admirable  as  the  groups  often  are  at  these  picturesque 
watering-places,  and  beautiful  the  antique  form  of  the  copper 
vessels  which  the  women  bear  on  their  heads  returning  from 
them,  it  grieves  my  heart  to  meet  them,  as  we  do  perpetually  in 
our  rides,  toiling  thus  burdened  up  the  steep  ascent.  Their 
houses  and  lodgings  are  wretchedly  dirty  and  miserable,  often 


112 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


half  ruinous  and  dismantled  tenements,  without  glazing  to  the 
windows ;  and  yet,  it  seems  to  me,  more  wretched,  from  want  of 
cleanliness  and  care,  than  they  need  be  ;  but,  alas !  for  the  law 
"  to  those  who  have  shall  be  given,"  &c.  It  is  one  of  the  most 
deplorable  effects  of  poverty,  that  those  afflicted  with  it  have  less 
of  the  conservative  principle  than  those  who  have  more  to  lose, 
and  waste  what  their  betters-off  would  save.  The  Italian  pea- 
sants live  literally  out  of  doors ;  they  eat  at  morning  and  even- 
ing in  huge  dingy  sort  of  cellars,  where  they  congregate  for  that 
purpose,  in  places  like  vaults,  with  earthen  floors,  and  the  coarsest 
wooden  tables  and  settles.  The  idea  of  preparing  or  eating  food 
in  their  own  houses  or  lodgings,  is,  I  believe,  a  thing  undreamt  of 
among  them ;  and  in  this  respect,  indeed,  they  do  but  follow  the 
demoralizing  practice  of  the  best  classes  of  Roman  workmen 
and  artisans,  who  invariably,  and  without  exception,  take  their 
meals — wives,  children,  and  all — at  the  trattoria  or  osteria 
cuccinante,  where  the  unemployed  portion  of  the  family  loiter 
and  lounge  through  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  retiring  to  what 
in  England  would  be  called  their  home,  but  which  here  really 
cannot  be  so  entitled,  merely  to  sleep.  Not  the  .  total  want  of 
domesticity  in  their  habits,  or  the  absence  of  decent  cleanliness 
and  comfort  in  their  abodes,  however,  can  amaze  the  English 
traveller  half  as  much,  especially  if  he  have,  like  myself,  resided 
long  in  America,  as  the  universal  spirit  of  shameless  pauperism 
which  the  inhabitants  of  this  most  beautiful  and  fertile  region  exhibit. 

The  idea  of  degradation  attached  to  that  of  beggary  never 
seemed  to  enter  their  heads  ;  nor,  at  the  end  of  infinite  appeals 
and  remonstrances  to  them  upon  the  subject  during  my  summer 
residence  among  them,  have  I  ever  been  able  to  produce  any 
impression  other  than  expressed  itself  in  the  air  of  ludicrous 
perplexity.  Once,  and  once  alone,  at  the  end  of  an  eloquent 
discourse  to  a  woman  who  accosted  me  in  the  street  of  Frascati, 
and  who  was  sitting  very  comfortably  at  her  door  spinning, 


PAUPERISM. 


113 


while  her  children,  very  well  clothed  and  munching  very  sub- 
stantial lumps  of  bread,  rolled  round  her  in  the  disgusting 
street,  an  old  woman,  who  listened  to  what  I  was  addressing  to 
her  neighbor,  said,  that  it  was  just  enough ;  for  that  they  who 
were  healthy  could  work,  and  that  those  only  ought  to  beg  who 
could  not.  This  was  the  only  convert  I  am  conscious  of  having 
made ;  the  rest  of  my  auditory  grinned  round  me  in  uncon- 
vinced good  humor.  The  truth  is,  they  beg  not  at  all  from 
absolute  want  and  destitution,  but  as  an  easy  way  of  earning 
money.  They  hate  trouble,  how  right  they  are !  (and  how 
wrong !)  and  find  the  half  paul  thrown  them  by  the  forestieri, 
in  reply  to  their  sometimes  most  indplent  "  Dammi  qualche 
cosa,"  better  pay  than  the  whole  one  wrought  out  of  their  whole 
day's  labor  in  the  vines.  Food  is  abundant  and  cheap  in  this 
land  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil ;  and,  judging  from  the  generally 
comfortable  clothing  of  even  the  poorest  classes  here,  and  the 
.absence  of  rags  and  tatters  among  them,  I  should  suppose 
clothing  was  not  dear ;  but  they  need  but  little  under  their 
beneficent  heavens.  Italians  of  all  classes  seem  to  abhor  the 
proximity  of  fire  ;  and  the  crazy  shelters  whither  they  retire 
for  the  night  suffice  for  protection  against  the  short-lived  incle- 
mency of  their  winter  season.  I  think,  therefore,  upon  the  whole, 
that  the  incessant  clamor  for  alms  set  up  by  the  whole  population 
in  these  districts,  not  being  really  the  result  of  what  one  would 
at  first  suppose  it — absolute  starvation,  should  rather  be  con- 
sidered in  the  light  of  industry  ;  it  is  the  only  form  of  it  which 
I  ever  saw  any  of  them  zealous  in.  There  are  in  these  villages 
nothing  resembling  public  poor-houses  or  regular  provision  made 
for  the  poor  by  the  public ;  in  all  the  churches  there  are  poor- 
boxes,  and  contributions  or  quetes  are  levied  frequently  on  the 
religious  festivals  and  saint-days.  The  curates  are  obliged,  as 
part  of  their  parochial  duty,  to  look  after  and  assist  the  poor ; 
and  a  surgeon  and  physician,  of  very  tolerable  ability,  are  paid 


114 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


by  most  of  these  small  communities  for  the  gratuitous  relief  of 
the  sick,  whose  means  are  too  small  to  admit  of  their  procuring 
such  succor  for  themselves.  Their  salary,  however,  is  extremely 
miserable.  At  Monte  Porzio,  which  is  a  very  populous  village, 
about  two  miles  from  Frascati,  the  public  Esculapius  receives 
but  fifteen  scudi  a  month  for  the  healing  of  the  commonwealth. 
In  Frascati  there  exists  a  society  of  charitable  women  calling 
themselves  Sisters  of  Charity,  without,  however,  peculiar  vows 
or  dresses — twenty-four  of  them  being  more  properly  soeurs 
visitandines, — while  they  admit  into  their  ranks  an  unlimited 
number  of  merely  subscribing  members.  This  society,  as  some 
of  its  members  who  called  upon  us  for  money  in  aid  of  their 
benevolent  efforts  informed  us,  was  chiefly,  however,  for  the 
relief  of  the  bed-ridden,  infirm,  and  incapable  of  work.  As  for 
the  able-bodied,  .stout,  and  only  disinclined  to  work,  they  come 
up,  day  after  day,  to  claim  our  charitable  assistance,  and  the 
claims  put  forth  by  some  of  them  are  really  irresistibly  ludi- 
crous sometimes.  Thus,  my  sister  had  a  visit  some  days  ago 
from  a  strapping  damsel,  who  brought  a  petition  written  for  her, 
and  setting  forth,  that,  wishing  to  enter  the  holy  estate  of  wed- 
lock, and  being  without  means,  money,  or  friends,  she  implored 
the  succor  of  the  charitably  disposed  to  enable  her  "  di  far 
decente  il  letto  matrimoniale."  My  sister  ventured  to  suggest, 
that  marrying  under  circumstances  which  might  with  propriety 
be  called  so  uneasy,  did  not  appear  to  her  a  very  prudential 
measure  ;  the  devotee  to  Hymen,  however,  merely  responded, 
"  eh,  come  si  ha  da  far  ?"  with  a  grin  and  a  shrug,  and  that 
really  was  so  unanswerable  a  suggestion,  that  it  put  an  end  to 
further  representations  of  expediency. 

The  schools  for  the  poor  in  these  villages  are  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  priests  of  course,  and  the  course  of  instruction  to 
which  they  are  subjected  bears  witness  thereto.  I  have  fre- 
quently looked  over  the  small  library  of  school-books,  which  the 


RELIGIOUS  FESTIVALS. 


115 


peasant  lads  of  the  neighborhood  were  carrying  with  them  thi- 
ther, and  among  as  many  as  five  class  books  have  never  found 
more  than  one  that  was  not  a  religious  book,  and  that  one  was 
always — ponder,  oh  ye  utilitarians! — a  grammar.  The  rest 
were  always  catechisms,  mass  books,  and  collections  of  Bible 
stories — not  taken  verbatim  from  the  Scripture,  but  paraphrased 
by  some  better  master.  The  chief,  indeed  the  only,  diversions 
of  the  people  are  their  religious  festivals,  which  occur  so  fre- 
quently as  effectually  to  break  up  all  habits  of  industry :  no 
work  is  done  on  a  festa,  and  I  should  say  every  third  day  in  the 
week,  on  an  average,  was  sacred  to  some  saint,  or  rather  to  the 
great  god  of  the  Italians — Idleness.  These  religious  celebrations 
have  less  of  a  devotional  character  than  could  be  imagined  by 
any  one  not  assisting  at  them.  They  are  enlivened  by  an  inces- 
sant firing  of  guns  and  crackers  ;  horse-races,  donkey-races,  and 
foot-races,  generally  go  forward  during  some  part  of  the  day,  and 
the  holy  evening  closes  with  some  display  of  fire-works.  At  the 
festival  of  San  Salvatore,  a  species  of  religious  play-bill  was  sent 
all  round  this  neighborhood,  setting  forth  the  various  amusements 
to  which,  as  well  as  to  the  saint,  the  day  was  consecrated.  The 
dresses  of  the  peasants,  who  on  these  occasions  assemble  on  the 
town  piazza,  before  the  principal  church,  are  extremely  pictu- 
resque ;  and  the  uncommon  beauty  of  many  of  the  figures  and 
faces,  both  of  men  and  women,  makes  such  gatherings  still  more 
striking.  The  great  superiority  of  these  southern  people  in  phy- 
sical comeliness  over  our  northern  races  is  wonderful.  It  is 
not  only  positive  beauty  of  form  and  brilliancy  of  coloring,  but 
a  noble  carriage,  an  ease,  a  grace,  a  dignity  in  all  their  move- 
ments, and,  above  all,  the  grand  style  of  their  heads,  that  makes 
them  pre-eminently  subjects  for  artistical  illustration.  It  is  only 
in  Italy  that  I  have  seen  men's  faces  as  positively  beautiful  as 
women's,  and  that  frequently — in  England,  I  remember  but  one 
instance  of  the  sort. 


116 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


,  The  inhabitants  of  these  small  villages  appear  to  participate 
heartily  in  the  Roman  passion  for  lotteries,  and  these  mischie- 
vous institutions  take  up  large  portions  of  their  slender  means, 
encouraging  amongst  them  the  demoralizing  spirit  of  gambling, 
and  the  most  unbounded  superstition  ;  not  one  of  them  who 
can  read  but  has  his  book  of  lottery  numbers  always  about  him, 
and  no  event  of  the  four-and-tvventy  hours  occurs  without  (if  he 
has  the  means)  his  referring  it  to  its  appointed  figure,  and  imme- 
diately risking  some  portion  of  his  earnings  on  the  hazard.  M. 

 gave  us  a  most  amusing  account  of  a  servant  of  his,  at 

whose  feet  a  man  suddenly  fell  dead  in  the  street.  He  instantly 
seized  his  lottery  book,  took  the  number  of  the  accident,  the 
number  of  the  house,  and  the  hour  of  the  day,  and  the  numbers 
corresponding  to  the  word  "  steeple,"  one  being  in  sight ;  and 
then  ran  off  to  the  lottery,  to  embark  as  much  as  he  could,  or 
could  not,  afford,  upon  these  various  ventures.  These  abomina- 
ble institutions  are  government  speculations ;  and  in  these  little 
villages  Sunday  is  a  favorite  day  for  drawing  the  lottery,  round 
the  door  and  window  of  which  an  eager  crowd,  many  of  whom 
are  often  priests,  is  gathered  on  the  day  of  declaring  the  results. 

I  was  surprised  to  find  a  great  deal  of  inebriety,  amounting,  in 
some  instances  that  came  to  our  personal  knowledge,  to  habitual 
drunkenness,  among  the  peasantry  here.  I  had  thought  that  a 
vice  confined  to  our  colder  climates  and  more  stagnant  blood  ; 
but  I  think  the  "  spaccio  di  acqua  vitae"  is  almost  as  frequent 
here  as  are  our  gin-palaces  in  London  ;  and,  though  the  same 
amount  of  habitual  intoxication  among  the  lower  orders  does  not 
exist,  habits  of  intemperance  are  infinitely  more  common,  espe- 
cially here  in  the  country,  than  I  had  any  idea  of ;  boys  of  twelve 
and  fourteen  years  old  not  unfrequently  getting  drunk  upon 
spirits  at  an  early  hour  in  the  day.  God  knows  they  need  no 
such  stimulants  to  increase  the  fiery  temper  of  their  blood — 
their  sober  gusts  of  passion  are  something  appalling,  and  the 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  FRASCATANI. 


117 


fatal  cottellata  is  the  most  frequent  umpire  of  their  furious  con- 
troversies. 

The  general  disposition  of  the  people  in  Frascati  and  our 
neighborhood  appears  indolent,  vivacious,  intelligent,  dishonest, 
lying,  bragging,  passionate,  and  withal  good-natured,  and  mon- 
strous cowardly.  I  say  their  disposition  in  this  neighborhood, 
for  a  very  small  geographical  distance  here  (it  is  averred  by  the 
people  themselves)  makes,  for  some  cause  or  another,  an  amazing 
difference  in  the  character  of  whole  villages.  Thus,  the  Fras- 
catani  are  considered  "  buona  gente,"  "  buono  sangue" — the 
inhabitants  of  Tivoli,  about  eighteen  miles  off,  quite  the  con- 
trary— and  there  is  a  little  village  about  five  miles  from  here 
called  Marino,  where  the  people  are  "  cattivissimo  sangue," 
notorious  for  their  savage  and  lawless  disposition.  This  is  very 
curious — lying  in  the  same  folds  of  these  beautiful  mountains, 
enriched  by  the  same  benignant  vegetation,  smiled  upon  by  the 
same  still  gracious  heavens,  with  neither  difference  of  soil  nor  cli- 
mate to  account  for  it,  it  seems  hardly  credible  that  any  original 
difference  of  race  can  have  existed,  or  at  any  rate  have  per- 
petuated itself  in  communities  so  little  distant,  and  whose  habits 

and  mode  of  life  appear  so  similar ;  yet  I  remember  said 

that  he  believed  that  one  reason  why  the  people  of  Tivoli  were 
"  cattivo  sangue"  was,  that  in  all  the  inroads  of  the  Germans 
into  these  parts  of  Italy  from  the  earliest  times,  dregs  of  their 
tribes  had  settled  like  bad  lees  here,  and  that  he  attributed  to  this 
fact  the  less  purely  Italian  character  of  the  people  :  this  greater, 
or  perhaps  I  should  say  different,  savageness  of  the  northern 
savage,  grafted  on  the  southern  savage,  makes  a  most  brutal  and 
hateful  admixture  ;  and  the  saying  among  the  Italians  them- 
selves is,  "  che  un  tedesco  italianizato  e  il  diavolo  incarnato." 
By  the  bye,  in  a  notch  of  the  Sabine  hills,  on  a  peak  to  which 
the  bright  finger  of  the  sun  sometimes  points  dazzlingly  amid 
their  purple  masses,  stands  a  most  curious  and  wild  village  called 


113 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Saracenesco.  The  people  here,  it  is  averred,  are  really  a  rem- 
nant of  the  Saracenic  invasions  of  Italy,  part  of  some  tribe  of  the 
eastern  barbarians  having  remained  and  settled  on  this  single 
point.  The  inhabitants  of  this  poor  and  miserable  hamlet  are 
darker,  and  of  a  different  physiognomy,  from  the  Italian  dwellers 
in  the  Sabine  range,  and  the  name  of  their  village  perpetuates 
the  tradition  of  their  different  blood. 

Riding  round  the  convent  of  Grotta  Ferrata  the  other  day, 

 gave  me  a  most  curious  account  of  the  Monks  there,  which 

 confirmed  since  by  a  similar  narration ;  and  which,  I  think, 

fully  entitles  the  brethren  of  the  convent,  if  not  the  rest  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Grotta  Ferrata,  to  the  qualification  of  eminently 
"  cativo  sangue."  For  some  years  past,  it  seems  that  the  disorders 
of  this  fraternity  had  been  an  absolute  scandal,  calling  loudly, 
but  in  vain,  for  reform.  The  idle  dissoluteness  of  the  priests 
surpassed  even  the  large  license  given  them  here  for  both  lazi- 
ness and  profligacy  ;  and  among  other  agreeable  distractions  to 
the  monotony  of  their  monastic  life  had  finally  been  the  intro- 
duction of  women  into  the  convent,  and  getting  up  of  private 
theatricals  with  their  assistance.  While  matters  were  thus 
prospering,  and  the  holy  fathers  cultivating  the  drama,  and 
devoting  themselves  to  the  Muses  and  Graces,  their  abbot 
died,  and  a  new  abbot,  of  a  different  temper,  replaced  him.  A 
reform  was  immediately  set  on  foot  by  him,  which,  however, 
the  godly  community  vehemently  resisted.  A  man  of  deter- 
mined spirit,  and  resolute  in  his  purpose  of  suppressing  the 
scandalous  abuses  of  the  community  over  which  he  had  been 
called  to  preside,  he  found  himself  engaged  in  absolute 
warfare  with  his  refractory  "  sons,"  which  warfare  speedily 
became  more  than  moral,  inasmuch  as  one  fine  night,  having 
purposely  fired  a  blank  cartridge  at  his  window  in  order  to  attract 
him  to  it,  some  of  the  worthy  brotherhood  followed  up  the  alarm 
by  directing  a  well-aimed  bullet  at  their  abbot :  on  his  guard, 


SONNET. 


119 


however,  against  this  infamous  attempt,  the  incensed  superior  im- 
mediately proceeded  to  Rome,  to  complain  to  the  Pope,  and  demand 
enforcement  of  his  rights,  and  the  punishment  of  the  rebellious 
members  of  his  community.  The  monastery,  however,  is  a  very 
rich  and  influential  one,  and  contrived  so  well  to  deafen  the  ears 
to  which  this  appeal  was  made,  that  every  effort  was  used  in 
Rome  to  dissuade  the  superior  from  pursuing  his  purpose  of 
bringing  his  convent  into  subjection ;  higher  and  more  advan- 
tageous positions  were  proffered  him,  which  he  indignantly 
rejected,  desiring  to  be  empowered  to  fulfil  his  duty  in  the  station 
to  which  he  had  been  appointed.  The  venal  and  abominable 
authorities  to  whom,  however,  he  thus  appealed,  were  entirely 
sold  to  the  party  of  the  monastery,  and  the  man  was  allowed 
actually  to  die  of  mortification  and  sorrow  under  the  entire  fail- 
ure of  his  incessant  attempts  to  obtain  justice  from  the  depraved 
tribunal  to  which  he  appealed.  What  manner  of  superior  suc- 
ceeded him  I  did  not  hear,  nor  whether  the  worthy  friars  were 
still  busy  getting  up  Goldoni  in  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  clois- 
ter.   Their  ignorance  is  such,  assured  me,  that  though 

professing  to  be  Greek  Catholics,  their  mass  books  had  need  to 
be  put  into  Latin  for  them,  as  they  had  even  lost  the  comprehen- 
sion of  the  Greek  character.  Their  convent,  besides  being  most 
beautifully  situated  at  the  green  foot  of  Monte  Cavo,  boasts  of 
treasures  of  art,  in  the  shape  of  some  fine  frescoes  by  Domeni- 
chino,  and  their  library  contains  some  precious  samples  of 
palimpsest  manuscript. 

SONNET. 

Thy  mother's  name  fills  thy  young  eyes  with  tears, 
Oh,  my  belov'd !  they  have  not  taught  thee  yet 
That  hapless  mother's  image  to  forget. 

Ah  !  they  may  trust  the  cruel  coming  years, 


120 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Whose  wings  shall  brush  that  waning  form  away, 
While,  trooping  by,  the  pageant  grand  and  gay 

Of  life  shall  fill  the  mirror  of  thy  sight ; 

Its  last  faint  lineaments  effacing  quite. 
So  must  it  be,  while  from  my  aching  heart 

Thy  blessed;  lovely  vision  day  by  day 

All  other  images  shall  chase  away, 
Till  one  by  one  all  other  forms  depart, 

And  I  am  left  haunted  by  the  dear  sadness 

Of  that  one  presence  into  longing  madness. 

I  have  been  reading  with  much  interest  a  small  volume, 
published,  I  think,  in  Paris,  of  very  pestilent  matter,  as  it  is 
considered  here,  being  a  collection  of  forbidden  treatises  upon 
political  subjects — Azeglia's  Ultime  Case  della  Romagna,  a 
striking  report  upon  the  late  trials  (! ! !)  of  the  insurrectionists 
at  Bologna,  Foligno,  &c,  by  Capponi ;  the  whole  collection 
closing  with  a  most  curious  address  to  the  last  Pope,  Gregory 
XVI.,  by  an  American  clergyman,  of  the  New  England  States, 
which  very  forcible  statement  of  the  evils  of  His  Holiness's 
government  will,  I  am  afraid,  never  have  come  under  his  cogni- 
sance. These  pamphlets,  for  they  are  none  of  them,  not  even 
Azeglia's  publication,  anything  more  in  bulk,  are  full  of  interest, 
and  appeal  most  pathetically  by  their  mere  statement  of  facts  to 
the  whole  heart  of  humanity,  in  behalf  of  this  beautiful,  but  most 
oppressed  country.  Since  I  have  read  them,  however,  a  mar- 
vellous sequel  has  transpired  to  the  episode  of  Renzi,  the  Roman 
patriot,  whose  peculiar  and  pre-eminent  share  in  the  last  liberal 
movements  under  Gregory  XVI.,  made  him  individually  an 
object  of  so  much  interest  to  those  who  sympathized  with  it. 

When  such  of  the  unfortunate  men  implicated  in  these  ill- 
fated  attempts  as  escaped  the  tremendous  inquisition  of  the  espe- 
cial tribunals,  immediately  organized  to  punish  the  past  and 


RENZI. 


121 


suppress  the  future  efforts  of  the  reformers,  had  made  their  way- 
out  of  the  Roman  states,  and,  escaping  through  Tuscany,  saved 
themselves,  by  an  exile  of  utter  destitution  and  misery,  from  the 
deadly  vengeance  of  the  papal  government,  Renzi  mysteriously, 
unaccountably,  indeed,  returned,  and  being  demanded  of  the 
Tuscan  authorities,  into  whose  hands  he  fell,  was  delivered  over 
to  the  Roman  government,  and  thrust  into  prison.  Many  were 
tHe  stories  and  conjectures  afloat  to  account  for  his  lingering, 
conspicuously  odious  as  he  was  to  the  Pope  and  his  ministers, 
within  peril  of  again  falling  into  their  hands.  A  touching  and 
passionate  love  story  was  wrought  up  with  the  interest  inspired 
by  his  devoted  patriotism,  to  add  to  the  sympathy  all  felt,  but 
none  dared  express,  for  his  noble  misfortunes  ;  and  it  was  said 
that  his  return  to  Tuscany,  and  consequent  delivery  to  the  Ro- 
man government,  was  the  result  of  an  attachment  he  had  formed, 
and  from  the  object  of  which  he  found  it  impossible  to  separate 
himself. 

When  the  act  of  amnesty,  promulgated  by  Pius  IX.  immedi- 
ately on  his  accession,  opened  the  political  dungeons  of  the  Roman 
states,  and  set  free  thousands  of  wretched  men  who  were  expa- 
tiating in  their  gloomy  chambers  their  aspirations  for  their  coun- 
try's good,  it  was  stated  that  the  Pope  himself  had  had  a  personal 
interview  with  Renzi,  who,  generally  looked  upon  as  a  sort  of 
chief  and  leader  of  the  patriots,  made  a  species  of  personal  act 
of  future  homage  and  loyalty  to  his  sovereign  and  liberator.  It 
now  appears,  monstrous  as  it  may  seem,  that  this  very  man,  the 
seeming  patriot,  the  devoted  reformer,  the  ardent  and  enthusiastic 
leader  of  the  unfortunate  Italian  revolutionists,  was,  in  fact,  a 
spy  in  the  pay  of  the  late  Pope's  government ;  as  such  had  been 
the  means  of  inveigling  and  betraying  hundreds  of  his  country- 
men, of  whose  political  tendencies  his  apparent  sympathy  had 
made  him  aware  ;  as  such,  and  not  led  by  the  irresistible  impulse 
of  an  invincible  attachment,  he  had  returned  to  Tuscany,  where 

VOL.  II.  6 


122 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


his  being  detained  and  delivered  to  the  Roman  government  was  a 
mere  continuation  of  the  farce,  by  which  he  was  to  pursue  his 
detestable  career  of  treachery.  I  think  he,  rather  than  Brutus 
or  Cassius,  ought  to  be  in  company  with  Judas  Iscariot  between 
the  teeth  of  Dante's  great  devil.  It  is  remarkable,  that,  for  so 
long  a  space  of  time,  this  wretch,  whose  fees  from  the  Roman 
government  were  enormous,  contrived  to  deceive  the  numerous 
individuals  who  were  given  up  chiefly  through  his  agency,  with- 
out exciting  the  smallest  suspicion.  One  man  only  is  known  to 
have  said  upon  being  seized,  "  Renzi  is  the  only  man  who  can 
have  betrayed  me,  for  he  alone  was  aware  of  such  and  such  cir- 
cumstances." This  single  voice,  however,  of  detection  was  soon 
interred  in  the  depths  of  some  political  dungeon,  and  Renzi  con- 
tinued to  receive  and  betray  the  confidence  of  hundreds  of  his 
wretched  compatriots. 

It  is  a  curious  thing  that  a  rumor  was  in  circulation  just  before 
I  left  Rome  that  there  had  been  a  disturbance  in  the  prisons,  and 
that  a  spy  had  been  detected  and  nearly  torn  to  pieces  among 
the  prisoners  ;  moreover,  it  was  supposed  that  fifty  of  the  political 
offenders  included  in  the  amnesty  were  still  detained — of  course 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  Pope — for  fear  they  should  make 
disclosures  as  to  the  barbarous  treatment  they  had  been  subjected 
to.  The  late  report  of  the  Legate  of  Spoleto  upon  the  state  of 
the  prisons  there,  represents  the  condition  of  persons  committed 
and  merely  awaiting  their  trial  as  something  too  dreadful  if  it 
were  the  punishment  of  convicted  criminals,  instead  of  persons 
who  may  be  innocent  of  any  offence :  many  of  them  have  been 
kept  for  months  chained  to  the  ground,  fed  upon  bread  and  water, 
and  repeatedly  flogged,  at  the  will  either  of  their  jailor  or  still 
higher  authorities  ;  and  in  spite  of  these  detestable  iniquities,  a 
commission  appointed  to  visit  the  prisons  and  examine  the  condi- 
tion of  the  prisoners,  reported  most  favorably  of  the  whole  ad- 
ministration, 


AMARI'S  HISTORY  OF  SICILY. 


123 


Another  proscribed  book,  which  I  have  read  with  extreme 
interest,  is  Amari's  History  of  Sicily  during  the  eleventh  and 
twelfth  centuries,  embracing  the  period  of  the  national  revolution 
against  the  French  supremacy,  of  which  the  Sicilian  vespers  was 
the  first  outbreak,  and  which  throws  some  very  curious  and  new 
light  upon  the  events  of  that  period.  As  in  Niebuhr's  Roman 
History,  the  romance  of  the  story  suffers  not  a  little  from  the 
clear  and  vigorous  demonstration  of  facts  with  which  he  encoun- 
ters the  long  prevalent  traditions  respecting  Giovanni  di  Procida's 
conspiracy.  The  style,  through  an  affectation  of  terseness,  is 
occasionally  obscure,  and  the  history  itself,  from  the  amazing 
number  of  authorities,  documents,  and  references  collected  by 
the  author  to  establish  the  positions  he  assumes,  rather  laborious 
reading ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  highly  interesting,  and  an  ex- 
tremely valuable  work,  from  the  immense  research  and  care 
with  which  it  is  compiled.  The  story  of  its  publication  is  curi- 
ous enough.  Amari  submitted  it  to  the  censure  at  Palermo, 
where  he  was  living,  and  received  its  sanction  for  the  publication. 
The  work,  however,  was  hardly  through  the  press,  and  ready  to 
be  issued,  than  a  revocation  of  the  license  to  publish  it  was  sent 
to  the  author,  with  further  injunctions  to  place  the  whole  edition 
about  to  be  issued  in  the  hands  of  the  police.  Amari,  unwilling 
to  see  the  fruit  of  so  much  labor  and  time,  and  his  just  claim  to 
fame  and  the  gratitude  of  his  countrymen,  thus  arbitrarily  sacri- 
ficed, rapidly  made  all  preparations  for  leaving  Sicily,  packed 
his  precious  history  in  one  case,  which  he  put  on  board  a  French 
vessel,  sent  a  carefully  closed  box  of  carrots  and  other  rubbish 
to  personate  it  to  the  office  of  the  censorship ;  and  himself  in 
disguise,  with  the  passport  of  a  friend,  embarked  immediately  for 
Marseilles.  Thither  his  work  safely  followed  him,  and  having 
made  his  way  to  Paris,  he  there  issued  it,  bearing  the  stamp  of 
Palermo  upon  its  title-page  ;  and  has  since  republished  a  second 
edition  in  Paris,  the  work  having  excited  great  interest  and  curi- 


124 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


osity,  both  from  its  own  intrinsic  merits,  and  the  circumstances 
of  persecution  under  which  its  author  gave  it  to  the  world. 

After  going  through  these  various  prohibited  publications,  I 
have  been  entertaining  myself  with  a  number  of  tracts,  sent  me 
by  my  friend  ,  all  bearing  the  permission  of  the  censor- 
ship upon  them,  and  giving,  on  the  other  hand,  an  excellent  idea 
of  the  literature  that  is  allowed  and  encouraged  through  the 
Roman  States,  for  the  edification  of  their  population.  These 
little  pamphlets,  each  costing  a  few  bajocchi,  and  containing  from 
six  to  twenty  coarsely  printed  pages,  are  all  metrical,  and  but  for 
their  length  might  perhaps  be  called  ballads.  They  consist  of 
some  clumsy  fable,  generally  opening  with  an  invocation  to  the 
Virgin  or  some  of  the  saints,  and  closing  with  a  similar  apo- 
strophe. Some  are  legends  of  incredible  conversions,  and  mira- 
culous performances  of  saints,  rescued  from  obscurity,  I  should 
think,  chiefly  by  these  illustrious  records  of  their  deeds, — some 
are  accounts  of  the  crimes,  atrocities,  adventures,  and  retribution 
of  notorious  criminals,  bandits,  and  assassins — some  are  extra- 
ordinary rifaccimentoes  of  portions  of  ancient  history,  such  as 
the  combat  of  the  Horatii  and  Curiatii.  The  opening  address  of 
one  of  these,  to  St.  Joseph,  is  the  most  ludicrous  piece  of  blas- 
phemy I  ever  read ;  the  language  and  details  of  every  one  of 
these  productions  (of  which  I  have  read  upwards  of  twenty)  are 
low  and  common  in  the  extreme.  There  is  nothing  indecent  or 
immoral  in  them,  though  occasionally  great  coarseness  and  vul- 
garity— but  upon  the  last  leaf  of  almost  every  one,  opposite  to 
the  pious  ejaculations  which  close  the  poems,  are  lottery  numbers, 
and  directions  for  successfully  putting  into  the  lottery,  and  nu- 
merous details  of  tricks  of  sleight-of-hand,  &c. :  this  is  the  popular 
literature  printed  and  disseminated  by  the  Roman  clergy,  in 
whose  hands  the  censorship  as  well  as  every  other  branch  of  the 
government  lodges,  among  the  people,  whose  minds  and  souls  are 
committed  to  their  care.    One  only  in  the  whole  number  I  read 


DESPAIR. 


125 


was  not  absolutely  and  revoltingly  stupid,  and  that  was  a  rambling 
story  of  a  certain  princess  Olive,  the  tissue  of  whose  adventures, 
in  their  variety,  improbability,  and  wildness,  reminded  me  of  the 
subjects  of  some  of  our  old  play-wrights — a  more  improbable  and 
less  interesting  web  of  events,  than  the  Winter's  Tale,  or  Pericles, 
Prince  of  Tyre,  but  that  style  of  recital. 


DESPAIR. 

Whene'er  those  forms  arise  before  my  sight, 

E'en  as  from  hideous  visions  of  the  night, 

I  cover  up  my  eyes,  I  veil  my  head, 

I  shrink  in  terror,  and  dismay,  and  dread, 

And  wave  them  from  me ;  and  in  agony 

Unto  the  saving  feet  of  God  I  fly, 

Lest  I  be  scared  to  madness  with  the  dream 

Of  all  that  I  have  lost — so  that  I  seem 

To  loathe  that  which  I  love  beyond  all  measure : 

Like  to  a  miser  robbed  of  his  dear  treasure, 

Clutching  for  ever  a  distracting  vision 

Of  gold  and  jewels,  'twixt  the  apparition 

And  his  real  beggary  lash'd  to  utter  madness. 

If  on  the  midnight  void  of  my  deep  sadness, 

The  dear  delusion  of  your  presence  shine, 

I  fear  to  look  upon  ye,  treasures  mine, 

Lest  the  tormented  heart  and  failing  brain 

Rest  in  delirium  from  too  fierce  a  pain ; 

Change  hopeless  sorrow  for  insanity, 

And  mental  ruin  end  this  misery. 

And  it  were  better — better  thus  to  dwell 

In  a  mad  Heav'n,  than  in  a  conscious  Hell ; 

Better  to  lose  this  lurid  light  of  reason, 

Which  shows  me  but  a  dark  and  empty  prison. 


126 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Oh,  come,  I  will  not  fly  ye  any  more, 
Come,  come,  dear  fatal  visions,  and  before 
This  light  of  truth,  that  shows  ye  are  not  here, 
Spread  sweet  delusions  !    Come,  I  will  not  fear ; 
Let  reason,  faith,  and  fortitude  forbear 
Their  ministry  of  torture — hail,  despair  ! 
And  welcome  ye,  ye  long-departed  dreams, 
In  which,  once  more,  my  life  a  blessing  seems ; 
Oh,  gracious  shapes  !  oh,  silver  ringing  voices  ! 
At  whose  dear  sound  my  heart  once  more  rejoices ; 
Oh,  floating,  glorious  braids  of  sunny  hair ! 
Oh,  eyes  of  morning  light,  keen,  soft,  and  fair  ! 
Oh,  sinless  brows  of  holy  innocence  ! 
Stay,  stay  with  me,  depart  not  ever  hence  ; 
Shut  out  all  forms  of  dire  reality. 
Beloved  phantoms,  speak — oh,  speak  to  me 
Sweet  words  of  love — walk  ever  by  my  side, 
The  hateful  witness  of  all  sense  denied ; 
Nothing  will  I  behold,  naught  feel,  naught  hear, 
Save  ye,  most  precious !  ye  alone,  most  dear ! 
Oh,  ye  pale  ghosts  of  love  and  joy,  to  ye 
I  dedicate  all  that  remains  of  me  ! 
I  can  no  more  endure,  no  longer  strive, 
Madness  from  sin  shall  save  my  soul  alive. 

Our  beautiful  summer,  hitherto  brilliant  and  splendid,  without 
shadow  by  day  or  cloud  by  night  to  dim  its  uninterrupted  bright- 
ness, is  breaking  up  ;  every  day,  now,  the  weather  becomes  less 
and  less  certain  ;  to  mornings  of  serene  glory  succeed  afternoons 
of  scowling  storms  ;  our  blue  sky  is  wrapped,  day  after  day,  in 
livid  leaden  clouds,  which  shut  out  our  glorious  prospects,  and 
surround  as  with  walls  of  almost  palpable  darkness,  down  which 
the  zig-zags  of  the  lightning  run  like  sudden  cracks  letting 


SUMMER  ON  THE  WANE. 


127 


through  the  light ;  the  mountains  are  shrouded  in  perpetual  mist, 
and  all  around  the  horizon  wedges  or  blocks  of  solid-looking  rain 
are  seen  pouring  upon  the  distant  landscape.  We  have  not  seen 
my  paragon  of  mountains,  Soracte,  for  a  whole  day  together,  for 
I  do  not  know  how  long — that  beautiful  form,  that  stands  like  the 
advanced  guard  of  the  Sabine  range,  isolated  from  the  rest,  and 
rising  so  symmetrically  in  the  transparent  atmosphere,  that  it 
looks  like  some  island  of  the  air,  more  than  a  mere  elevation  from 
the  earth's  surface  ;  furious  winds  howl  round  our  abode,  and 
not  an  afternoon  passes  without  wild  gusts  of  tempestuous  rain 
and  heavy  thunder  storms  ;  it  is  true,  that  to  these  succeed, 
sometimes,  evenings  all  lighted  with  a  pale  golden  splendor, 
illuminating  the  wide  campagna  even  to  the  Mediterranean, — 
gorgeous  processions  of  resplendent  clouds, — rainbow  arches 
spanning  the  glittering  landscape,  all  steeped  in  mingled  rain  and 
sunlight,  and  flushes  of  rosy  brightness  suddenly  suffusing  the 
whole  heavens,  and  reflecting  a  glow  of  unutterable  richness, 
softness,  and  beauty,  over  the  whole  earth  ;  but  the  stability  of  our 
sweet  summer  season  is  shaken  ;  we  look  doubtfully  up  to  the 
morning  sky,  and  the  promise  of  its  brilliancy  no  longer  satisfies 
our  faith  from  hour  to  hour  as  it  has  hitherto  done,  through  a  suc- 
cession of  perfect  days  and  weeks.    Our  charming  and  excellent 

friend  is  summoned  away  by  the  duties  of  his  station  to 

Naples,  and  a  sad  breaking  up  of  our  serene  social  atmosphere 
is  the  consequence  of  his  departure  ;  he  carries  away  much  of 
the  genial  warmth  and  brightness  we  have  lived  in  all  together. 

 's  seasons  of  sojourn  among  us  are  becoming  necessarily 

less  frequent.   ,  after  vainly  conjuring  the  heavens  to 

restore  to  him  his  beloved  "  teintes  chaudes,"  has  departed  for 
Paris,  and  our  moral  summer,  as  well  as  that  of  the  earth,  is  gra- 
dually losing  its  rays,  one  by  one. 


128 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


CLOSE  OF  OUR  SUMMER  AT  FRASCATI. 

The  end  is  come :  in  thunder  and  wild  rain 

Autumn  has  stormed  the  golden  house  of  Summer. 

She  going — lingers  yet — sweet  glances  throwing 

Of  kind  farewell  upon  the  land  she  loves 

And  leaves.    No  more  the  sunny  landscape  glows 

In  the  intense,  uninterrupted  light 

And  splendor  of  transparent,  cloudless  skies  ; 

No  more  the  yellow  plain  its  tawny  hue 

Of  sunburnt  ripeness  wears  ;  even  at  noon 

Thick  watery  veils  fall  on  the  mountain  ranges, 

And  the  white  sun-rays,  with  pale  slanting  brushes, 

Paint  rainbows  on  the  leaden-colored  storms. 

Thro'  milky,  opal  clouds  the  lightning  plays, 

Visible  presence  of  that  hidden  power — 

Mysterious  soul  of  the  great  universe, 

Whose  secret  force  runs  in  red,  human  veins, 

And  in  the  glaring,  white  veins  of  the  tempest, 

Uplifts  the  hollow  earth,  the  shifting  sea ; 

Makes  stormy  reformations  in  the  sky, 

Sweeping,  with  searching  besoms  of  sharp  winds, 

The  foul  and  stagnant  chambers  of  the  air, 

Where  the  thick,  heavy,  summer  vapors  slumber  ; 

And,  working  in  the  sap  of  all  still-growth, 

In  moonlight  nights,  unfolding  leaves  and  blossoms  ; 

Of  all  created  life  the  vital  element, 

Appearing  still  in  fire — whether  in  the  sea, 

When  its  blue  waves  turn  up  great  swathes  of  stais ; 

Or  in  the  glittering,  sparkling,  winter  ice  world  ; 

Or  in  the  flickering  white  and  crimson  flames, 

That  leap  in  the  northern  sky  ;  or  in  the  sparks 

Of  love  or  hate,  that  flash  in  human  eyes. 


CLOSE  OF  OUR  SUMMER  AT  FRASCATI. 


129 


Lo,  now,  from  day  to  day,  and  hour  to  hour, 
Broad  verdant  shadows  grow  upon  the  land, 
Cooling  the  burning  landscape  ;  while  the  clouds, 
Disputing  with  the  sun  his  heaven-dominion, 
Chequer  the  hill-sides  with  fantastic  shadows. 
The  glorious  unity  of  light  is  gone, 
The  triumph  of  those  bright  and  boundless  skies ; 
Where,  thro'  all  visible  space,  the  eye  met  nothing 
Save  infinite  brightness — glory  infinite. 
No  more  at  evening  does  the  sun  dissolve 
Into  a  heaving  sea  of  molten  gold  ; 
White  over  it  a  heaven  of  molten  gold 
Panted,  with  light  and  heat  intensely  glowing, 
While  to  the  middle  height  of  the  pure  ether, 
One  deepening  sapphire  from  the  amber  spreads. 
Now  trains  of  melancholy,  gorgeous  clouds, 
Like  mourners  at  an  Emperor's  funeral, 
Gather  round  the  down-going  of  the  sun  ; 
Dark  splendid  curtains,  with  great  golden  fringes, 
Shut  up  the  day  ;  masses  of  crimson  glory, 
Pale  lakes  of  blue,  studded  with  fiery  islands, 
Bright  golden  bars,  cold  peaks  of  slaty  rock, 
Mountains  of  fused  amethyst  and  copper, 
Fierce  flaming  eyes,  with  black  o'erhanging  brows, 
Light  floating  curls  of  brown  and  golden  hair, 
And  rosy  flushes,  like  warm  dreams  of  love, 
Make  rich  and  wonderful  the  dying  day, 
That,  like  a  wounded  dolphin,  on  the  shore 
Of  night's  black  waves,  dies  in  a  thousand  glories. 
These  are  the  very  clouds  that  now  put  out 
The  serene  beauty  of  the  summer  heavens. 
The  autumn  sun  hath  virtue  yet,  to  make 
Right  royal  hangings  for  his  sky-tent  of  them  ; 
2* 


130 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


But,  as  the  days  wear  on,  and  he  grows  faint, 
And  pale,  and  colorless,  these  are  the  clouds 
That,  like  cold  shrouds,  shall  muffle  up  the  year, 
Shut  out  the  lovely  blue,  and  draw  round  all — 
Plain,  hill,  and  sky — one  still,  chill,  wintry  grey. 

The  end  is  come ;  the  golden  links  are  parting, 

That  in  one  chain  of  happy  circumstance, 

And  gentle,  friendly,  human  fellowship, 

Bound  many  hearts  for  many  a  day  together. 

The  precious  bond  dissolves  ;  one  friend  departs 

With  the  departing  summer,  and  the  end,  * 

Ominous  of  the  loss  of  all,  begins  : 

Here  it  begins ;  with  these  first  feet,  that  turn 

From  walking  in  the  paths  of  daily  life, 

Where  hand  in  hand,  with  peace  and  joy,  all  walked. 

And  now,  from  day  to  day,  and  hour  to  hour, 

The  brightness  of  our  summer-life  grows  dim  ; 

The  voice  that  speaks  to  us  from  far  already, 

Soon  in  the  distance  shall  be  heard  no  more. 

The  perfect  circle  of  this  pleasant  life 

Hath  lost  its  form — type  of  eternity — 

And  lies  upon  the  earth  a  broken  ring, 

Token  and  type  of  every  earthly  thing. 

Our  sun  of  pleasure  hastens  towards  the  west, 

But  the  green  freshness  of  fair  memories 

Lives  over  these  bright  days  for  evermore  ; 

The  chequered  lights,  the  storms  of  circumstance, 

Shall  sweep  between  us  and  their  happy  hours, 

But  not  to  efface  them.    Oh,  thou  wealthy  Past, 

Thine  are  our  treasures  ! — thine  and  ours  alone 

Thro'  thee  ;  the  Present  doth  in  fear  rejoice  ; 

The  Future,  but  in  fantasy  :  but  thou 


FRIGHTFUL  STORMS. 


131 


Holdest  secure  for  ever  and  for  ever, 
The  bliss  that  has  been  ours  ;  nor  present  woe, 
Nor  future  dread,  can  touch  that  heritage 
Of  joy  gone  by — the  only  joy  we  own. 

Some  of  our  nights  lately  have  been  terrific  ;  the  oppression 
of  atmosphere  absolutely  indescribable,  such  as  to  wake  me  from 
my  sleep  with  a  sensation  of  immediate  suffocation  ;  the  wind,  in 
the  meanwhile,  raging  round  the  house,  and  the  thunder  rolling 
without  intermission  from  mountain  ridge  to  mountain  ridge — the 
whole  air  seemed  filled  with  howling,  and  moaning,  and  raving 
fiends  ;  and  though  I  have  witnessed  frightful  storms — indeed, 
more  violent  thunder  and  lightning  a  good  deal  in  America, — I 
never  experienced  such  intolerable  atmospheric  effects,  or  saw 
such  a  protracted  succession  of  tempests  of  rain  and  wind. 

It  strikes  me  as  quite  peculiar  to  this  country,  or,  at  any  rate, 
to  this  part  of  it,  that  after  a  most  tremendous  storm,  such  as 
elsewhere  would  effectually  clear,  and  refresh,  and  lighten  the 
air,  and  render  the  atmosphere  at  once  cooler  and  lighter,  the 
very  same  oppressive  closeness  returns  almost  immediately ; 
the  atmosphere  is  as  hot  and  hazy,  the  clouds  as  low,  the  whole 
air  as  like  lead  in  color  and  weight,  and  portentously  close,  as  if 
there  had  been  no  sfogo  of  the  elements.  The  physical  oppres- 
sion and  mental  dejection  of  this  sort  of  never-ending  thunder- 
storm is  not  to  be  described  ;  there  is  something  positively  ma- 
lignant both  in  the  look  and  feeling  of  this  weather.  The  sea- 
son, however,  has  been  unusual  in  the  intensity  of  the  heat,  and 
the  breaking  up  of  the  summer  is,  I  suppose,  proportionally  vio- 
lent. Yesterday,  for  a  wonder  (now),  the  day  was  uninterrupt- 
edly clear  and  bright,  the  morning  still  and  glorious,  as  was  the 
wont  of  our  former  mornings  ;  and  towards  the  afternoon  no 
storm  arose,  contrary  to  the  later  practice  of  the  weather,  to 
sweep  over  the  sweet  and  lovely  face  of  nature.    My  sister  and 


132 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


 were  out  on  horseback  ;  I  had  remained  at  home,  and 

was  reading  in  my  own  room,  occasionally  raising  my  eyes  to 
the  spectacle  of  unequalled  beauty  which  my  window  com- 
manded. There  was  not  a  breath  of  air  stirring,  and  the  world 
seemed  fallen  into  a  deep  trance  of  sunny  splendor  ;  suddenly 
all  the  windows  of  my  room  rattled,  a  sound  like  a  gust  of  wind 
(though  there  was  none)  rushed  round  the  house,  the  floor  gave  a 
very  slight  jog  beneath  my  feet,  and  I  turned  excessively  sick. 
Very  much  astonished  at  this  peculiar  process,  I  went  to  the  next 
room,  to  ask  if  any  one  had  let  any  heavy  thing  fall,  or  had  run 
violently  across  the  floor ;  the  answers,  however,  were  unsatis- 
factory, and,  after  a  moment's  consideration,  I  became  convinced 
that  I  had  made  my  first  acquaintance  with  earthquakes.  Later 
in  the  day,  our  other  friends  in  the  house,  who  have  experienced 
these  shocks  before,  spoke  of  it,  and  confirmed  my  surmise  ;  and 
I  suppose  we  have  been  enjoying  the  benefit  of  some  sympathetic 
communication  between  the  earth's  interior  economy  here  and 
at  Leghorn  and  Pisa,  where  the  late  fearful  earthquakes  have 
caused  such  terror  and  damage  to  the  dwellers  upon  its  surface. 

In  these  volcanic  regions,  says,  one  always  feels  nearer 

to  nature  than  in  our  nebulous,  chilly,  northern  climates  ;  but  I 
do  not  know  that  a  nearness  revealed  by  such  experiences  is  alto- 
gether agreeable.  Some  years  ago  Frascati  and  all  this  neigh- 
borhood was  visited  by  very  severe  shocks  of  an  earthquake ;  in 
the  grounds  of  the  Villa  Rufinella  are  several  cottages,  or  huts 
rather,  built  entirely  of  thatch  and  the  lightest  materials,  to 
which  Louis  Bonaparte  and  his  family  betook  themselves  during 
the  convulsions  ;  and  at  Larriccia,  where  great  injury  was  sus- 
tained in  consequence  of  them — houses  thrown  down  and  lives 
lost, — the  inhabitants  protected  themselves,  more  devoutly  per- 
haps, but  less  practically,  by  writing  on  their  doors,  "  Viva  il 
sangue  di  Jesu  /"  as  a  preservative  against  the  dreaded  shocks  of 
the  terremoto.    After  all,  this  is  an  amazingly  beautiful  country, 


A  NEW  VOLCANO. 


133 


no  doubt  j  but  there  is  something  rather  "  uncannie,"  as  the 
Scotch  say,  in  looking  into  the  depths  of  a  smooth  lake,  and 
knowing  that  it  fills  the  place  of  a  boiling  fire-pit ;  or  upon  the 
sunny  surface  of  a  gently  scooped  meadow,  which  was  once 
covered  with  the  crystal  waters  of  a  lake — these  transformations, 
and  the  lava  soil  on  which  you  stand  to  admire  them,  are  sug- 
gestive of  insecurity,  and  the  "  sure  and  firm-set  earth"  ceases 
to  be  to  you  by  any  means  as  comfortable  (however  much  more 
beautiful)  as  it  is  in  some  of  its  less  picturesque  regions.  It  seems 
that  we  are  threatened  with,  or  promised,  I  know  not  which  to 
say,  a  new  volcano  in  our  immediate  vicinity  ;  the  Solfatara,  the 
little  infernal  lake  at  the  foot  of  the  Sabine  hills,  which  one 
passes  on  the  road  from  Rome  to  Tivoli,  and  whose  suffocating 
sulphureous  waters  are  said  to  be  unsoundable,  has,  it  seems, 
been  sending  up  slight  wreaths  of  smoke.  Similar  vapors  have 
been  observed  issuing  from  the  sulphuric  soil  all  round  it ;  and 
a  very  lively  expectation  has  been  excited  of  the  re-opening  of 
one  of  the  earth's  chimneys  in  this  spot,  where  such  a  vent  for 
the  central  fires  indubitably  existed,  although  no  record  of  its 
being  in  active  operation  within  human  memory  remains.  I 
should  like  very  well  to  see  the  uprising  of  a  volcano  from  those 
bituminous  waters,  though  the  distance,  or  rather  proximity,  to 
our  abode  might  render  the  process  more  interesting  than  safe  to 
the  lookers-on  at  the  Villa  Taverna. 

Meantime  autumn  is  gradually  conquering  the  year ;  our 
mornings  are  chilly,  our  evenings  rainy.  We  have  abandoned 
our  beautiful  long  gallery,  opening  upon  the  garden,  and  have 
taken  refuge  in  a  sunny  room  of  less  magnificent  dimension. 
The  earth  is  drenched  with  incessant  torrents  of  rain,  and  the 
day  before  yesterday,  one  of  our  few  bright  days  of  late,  riding 
along  our  favorite  and  beautiful  road  through  the  chestnut  woods 
up  to  Rocca.  Priori,  we  saw  one  of  the  distant  peaks  of  the  Sa- 
bine Range  covered  with  snow.    Around  us  all  was  enchantingly 


134 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


bright  and  warm  ;  the  whole  land  was  alive  with  the  gay  and 
graceful  labors  of  the  vintage  ;  the  steep  rocks  above  us,  and  the 
deep  chestnut  forests  that  rolled  far  below  us  again,  basked  in 
the  rays  of  the  unclouded  heavens;  but  that  snow  mountain 
struck  a  chill  to  my  heart,  and  I  felt  the  first  kiss  of  the  northern 
ice-god  across  the  sunny  valley,  that  stretched  shining  and 
sparkling  for  miles  between  me  and  that  ominous  vision. 


A  SUMMONS. 

THE    FIRST    SNOW  MOUNTAIN    SEEN    FROM    A    SUNNY  HILL-SIDE,  NEAR 
ROCCA  PRIORI,  IN  THE  AUTUMN  OF  1846. 

Look,  love,  to  yonder  mountain's  brow : 
Seest  thou  that  beckoning  hand  of  snow  ? 
Stern  Winter  dares  no  further  come, 
But  waves  me  towards  his  northern  home. 
The  sun  upon  this  glad  earth  pours 
His  blessing,  in  warm  golden  show'rs ; 
Down  the  steep  path,  with  busy  hum, 
The  black-eyed  sturdy  peasants  come  ; 
Patches  of  colors  bright  and  gay 
Hang  o'er  their  cheeks  of  ruddy  brown, 
Loud  laugh  and  jest  make  light  their  way, 
From  rock-perch'd  hamlets  winding  down. 
The  jogging  mule  goes  clattering  light, 
His  wooden  tubs  to  seek  their  freight ; 
While  others,  with  their  vintage  load, 
Strain  up  the  steep  and  stony  road, 
And,  all  the  sunny  paths  along, 
Snatches  of  loud  monotonous  song 
Come  down  from  hill  and  up  from  glade, 
And  through  the  broad-leav'd  chestnut  shade  ; 


A  SUMMONS. 


135 


From  vineyards  where  a  merry  band 
Pile  the  ripe  treasure  of  the  land, 
Amber  and  amethyst  shining  through 
Soft  purple  bloom  and  sparkling  dew. 
Dark  white-veined  glittering  ivy,  wed 
To  wreaths  of  vine-leaves  touch'd  with  red, 
Hang  from  the  brown  brows  of  the  rocks, — 
A  garland  meet  for  Bacchus'  locks. 
The  fields,  the  woods,  the  air,  the  ground, 
Smell  of  the  vintage  all  around, 
And  from  the  sunny  earth  and  sea 
Rises  a  shout  of  jubilee. 

From  this  steep  road  look  down,  where  grow 

The  chestnut  forests  deep  below ; 

Behold  how  far  beneath  our  feet 

The  huge  wood  billows  spread  and  meet — 

A  waving  sea  of  noble  trees, 

Rolling  their  green  crests  in  the  breeze  ; 

Mark  the  bright  vale,  the  mountain  chain, 

The  distant  lines  of  that  great  plain, 

Where  Rome,  eternal  Empress,  sits 

Beneath  the  cloudless  light,  that  fits 

The  lordliest  and  the  loveliest  scene 

Time  e'er  shall  see — Time  yet  hath  seen  ! 

Oh,  land  of  glorious  memories, 

Oh,  land  as  fair  as  Paradise, 

Oh,  thou  belov'd,  by  whom  I  stand, 

Straining  in  mine  thy  kindred  hand, 

Farewell ! — on  yonder  mountain's  brow 

I  see  a  beckoning  hand  of  snow  ; 

Stern  winter  dares  no  nearer  come, 

But  waves  me  towards  his  northern  home. 


136 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


We  have  made  one  more  expedition,  the  longest  and  most 
interesting  we  have  hitherto  undertaken,  to  the  top  of  Monte 
Gennaro,  the  highest  peak  of  the  Sabine  range.  We  drove  to 
Tivoli  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  the  next  day,  the  9th  October, 
starting  about  ten  o'clock,  proceeded  to  ascend  the  mountain. 
It  was  a  fatiguing  expedition  of  several  hours ;  and  when  we 
arrived  near  the  top,  two  only  of  the  ladies  of  the  party  had 
courage  and  strength  sufficient  left  to  proceed  to  the  very  sum- 
mit, and  enjoy  the  reward  of  seeing  so  large  (or  small)  a  portion 
of  the  world  beneath  them.  While  they  energetically  accom- 
plished their  purpose,  my  sister  and  myself  (who  had  sprained 
my  foot  from  a  fall  from  my  horse,  in  the  ascent,)  proceeded 

leisurely  towards  the  resting-place,  where  our  friends  , 

who  had  already  made  an  expedition  hither,  bade  us  wait  for 
them.  After  scaling,  for  so  long  a  space  of  time,  the  stony  and 
precipitous  ribs  of  the  bleak-looking  barren  mountain  ;  after 
scrambling  slowly,  and  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  up  all  but 
vertical  paths,  which  were  indeed  nothing  but  the  bare  bed  of 
winter  torrents,  which  had  torn  for  themselves  a  way  down  the 
rocky  descent,  and  had  shrunk  under  the  scorching  rays  of  the 
sun  back  to  their  springs  on  the  mountain  summits,  leaving  an 
irregular  channel  of  loose  tumbling  stones — the  only  road  for 
adventurous  explorers  to  follow  them  up  thither — the  scene 
which  burst  upon  us  at  the  end  of  our  ascent  was  as  unexpected 
as  it  was  enchanting. 

Upon  the  very  summit  of  the  mountain,  above  its  precipices, 
its  huge  sloping  shoulders,  the  dwarf  stunted  shrubbery  clinging 
to  its  skirts,  and  the  stony  rifts  opening  in  its  ample  sides,  lifted 
up  close,  as  it  seemed,  to  the  blue  sky  and  silver  clouds,  and 
propped  upon  the  everlasting  foundation  of  the  hills, — a  long, 
soft,  sunny  meadow  spread  itself ;  the  turf  was  more  elastic, 
closer  and  finer  grained,  than  that  of  the  most  carefully  kept 
lawn — its  color  fresh,  tender,  and  vivid.  On  either  side,  rising 
from  it  with  a  regular  symmetry,  that  proclaimed  beyond  mis- 


MONTE  GENNARO. 


137 


take  their  ancient  office  of  banks  to  the  fair  lake  which  once 
spread  itself  over  this  magical  carpet  of  verdure,  swelled  the 
softly-rounded  mountain  crests,  which  here  were  covered  with 
a  lordly  growth  of  magnificent  forest  trees:  Over  this  bright 
and  lovely  wilderness,  thus  high  uplifted  above  the  earth's 
common  level,  herds  of  cattle  strayed,  who,  with  their  keepers, 
are  the  only  inhabitants  of  these  beautiful  solitudes,  which 
during  the  summer  afford  them  abundant  pasturage ;  the  winter 
drives  them  downwards  towards  the  neighborhood  of  man,  and 
leaves  these  scenes  of  summer  loveliness  to  the  stern  dominion 
of  the  deep  snows  that  cover  them,  over  whose  glittering  and 
forbidding  surface  the  eagle  sweeping  through  the  heavens  alone 
throws  a  living  shadow. 

We  proceeded  leisurely  with  our  guide  and  the  faithful 
Vincenzo  along  this  beautiful  vast  meadow,  and,  descending 
again  by  some  rocky,  broken,  dry  water- courses,  arrived  at 
another,  if  possible,  more  beautiful  scene  of  the  same  descrip- 
tion. Here,  for  the  first  time,  I  observed  upon  one  of  the  ilex 
trees,  hanging  in  profuse  masses,  the  same  kind  of  grey  moss 
with  which  the  evergreen  oaks  of  Georgia  are  sometimes 
smothered  alive, — it  is  the  only  instance  I  have  seen  of  it  in 
Italy,  but  confirms  me  in  the  belief  that  the  live  oak  and  ilex 
must  be  in  reality  the  same  tree,  however  altered  in  some  of  its 
conditions  by  the  different  climates  and  soils  to  whose  influences 
it  is  exposed.  Passing  again  through  the  second  meadow,  we 
arrived  at  the  Fontanone,  our  appointed  resting-place,  where  we 
sat  down  to  wait  for  our  more  adventurous  companions.  At  the 
foot  of  a  steep  eminence,  clothed  with  beautiful  trees,  an  enormous 
stone  fountain,  of  graceful  form  and  proportions,  receives  the 
liquid  treasures  of  the  mountain  springs.  The  volume  of  water 
poured  from  a  still  bright  well,  sheltered  from  all  pollution  by  an 
arch  of  stone,  into  two  immense  stone  troughs,  whence  its  bright 
brimming  current  flowed  down  again  into  lesser  stone  conduits,  and 


138 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


thence  into  a  thousand  sparkling  rills  down  to  the  deep  valleys 
that  fell  on  all  sides  of  us,  was  something  wonderful.  Nor,  after 
a  long  and  most  fatiguing  march  under  a  fierce  unmitigated  sun, 
can  anything  be  conceived  more  welcome  and  more  enchanting 
than  the  sight  of  this  exquisite  fountain.  A  fine  oak  tree,  whose 
huge  roots  clasped  the  rocky  mountain  side  whence  poured  these 
living  streams,  spread  its  twisted  boughs  far  out  over  their 
source,  and  we,  throwing  down  our  shawls,  bournous,  and 
provision  baskets,  lay  down  beneath  its  shelter,  and  looked  with 
unutterable  delight  over  the  perfect  Arcadia  that  surrounded  us. 
We  were  so  high  upon  the  mountain  tops  that  their  highest  peaks 
only  rose  like  gentle  hills  above  us.  To  our  right,  bathed  in 
sunshine  and  curtained  round  with  beautiful  woodland,  lay  the 
verdant  pasturages  through  which  we  had  just  passed,  and  in  front 
of  us  a  tangled,  picturesque  glen  received  the  glittering  threads 
that  streamed  across  the  path  from  the  over-brimming  fountains. 
To  the  left,  sank  down  the  deep  valleys  through  which  lay  our 
gradual  descent  from  heaven,  and  far,  far  between  the  moun- 
tain summits  all  round  us  the  purple  peaks  of  distant  ranges  rose 
above  one  another,  luring  the  imagination  to  fancied  scenes  of 
wilder  beauty  amid  their  distant  dim  recesses,  while  the  eye  per- 
petually reverted  to,  and  the  heart  reposed  again  upon,  the  love- 
liness that  immediately  surrounded  us.  Over  all  spread  the 
orange  light  of  approaching  sunset, — the  glory  and  the  beauty  of 
an  Italian  afternoon.  Claude  Lorraine  alone  has  ever  painted 
such  a  sky,  Poussin  such  an  earth, — and  both  of  them  would 
have  despaired  of  representing  the  combined  beauties  of  earth  and 
sky,  as  we  then  saw  them. 

Our  friends  from  the  mountain-top  soon  rejoined  us,  and  a 
season  of  less  romantic,  but  most  necessary  refreshment  followed. 
One  or  two  herdsmen,  whose  flocks  were  grazing  near,  gathered 
round  the  fountains  as  we  departed,  and  having  secured  among 
them  a  guide  (for  the  professional  ciceroni  who  had  attached 


EVENING. 


139 


themselves  to  our  expedition  at  starting  from  Tivoli,  proved 
absolutely  incompetent),  we  began  our  descent  from  our  most 
beautiful  resting-place.  As  the  evening  came  on,  the  wildness 
and  loveliness  of  our  steep  downward  path  through  the  narrow 
winding  staircases  of  the  mountains  was  increased  by  its  soft 
lights  and  softer  shadows ;  the  clear  glittering  stars  began  to  look 
through  the  violet  dome  of  the  upper  heavens,  while  just  as  we 

reached  Rocca  Giovane,  so  called,  surmised,  from  the 

impregnable  position  of  its  former  castle, — one  deep  rosy  flush 
pervaded  the  lower  portion  of  the  sky,  reflected  a  maidenly  blush 
over  the  maiden  fortress,  and  threw  a  warm  and  delicate  atmo- 
sphere of  tenderest  light  down  into  the  valley  of  the  Licenza. 
The  rapidly  waning  daylight,  and  the  dreadful  condition  of  all 
the  mountain  paths,  obliged  us  to  relinquish  our  design  of  visiting 
Horace's  Farm  ;  and,  indeed,  purple  twilight  deepened  to  abso- 
lute darkness  before  we  emerged  from  the  long  winding  valley, 
the  outline  of  whose  mountain  walls,  together  with  the  bright 
course  of  its  rapid  stream,  were  the  only  objects  that  remained 
distinguishable,  long  before  we  reached  the  convent  of  San 
Cosimato,  which  closes  and  commands  the  defile,  and  where  we 
found  our  carriage  waiting  to  receive  us. 

EVENING. 

Now  in  the  west  is  spread 
A  golden  bed  ; 

Great  purple  curtains  hang  around, 
With  fiery  fringes  bound, 
And  cushions,  crimson  red, 
For  Phoebus'  lovely  head  ; 
And  as  he  sinks  thro'  waves  of  amber  light, 
Down  to  the  crystal  halls  of  Amphitrite, 
Hesper  leads  forth  his  starry  legions  bright 
Into  the  violet  fields  of  air — Good  night ! 


140 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


The  next  morning  we  drove  by  brilliant  sunlight  along  that 
part  of  the  road  which  we  traversed  the  previous  night  in  dark- 
ness.  I  did  not  accomplish  the  object  of  my  chief  desire,  to  look 
once  more  by  daylight  along  that  enchanting  valley  whose  twilight 
aspect  had  so  fastened  upon  my  imagination  ;  but  the  drive  along 
the  banks  of  the  Anio,  in  between  the  folds  of  the  mountains,  and 
especially  the  view  of  the  rocks  of  St.  Cosimato,  raising  their 
rose-tinted  masses  from  the  deep  glen  where  the  river  foamed  and 
roared,  were  almost  compensations.  In  the  afternoon  we  drove 
back  to  Frascati,  through  brooks  whose  bridges  had  been  swept 
away  by  the  late  torrents,  and  over  roads  whose  surfaces — for 
they  were  various — compelled  us  to  hold  each  other  and  the  sides 
of  the  carriage  fast ;  in  spite  of  which  we  laughed  incessantly,  to 
the  evident  horror  of  our  poor  coachman,  who,  pale  with  terror, 
looked  at  us  as  we  emerged,  by  dint  of  Heaven  and  him,  out  of 
each  malpasso,  with  an  expression  of  reprobation  which  increased 
rather  than  checked  our  levity. 

This  was  our  last  mountain  expedition  ;  a  few  days  after,  laden 
with  the  spoils  of  our  charming  garden,  with  heavy  hearts  and 
tearful  eyes,  we  departed  from  the  house  where  we  had  lived  so 
happily — the  beautiful  home  of  our  most  beautiful  summer. 

PAST  HOURS. 

Two  angels  have  them  in  eternal  keeping. 

He  that  beside  the  deep  vaults  of  the  past 
Stands  to  receive  the  treasures,  that  with  weeping 

And  lamentation  into  them  men  cast, 
Forgetting  that  alone  they  hold  that  fast 

Which  to  his  marble  store-house  they  commit ; 
And  He,  that  spirit  bright  and  terrible, 

Who  at  the  feet  of  God  doth  thoughtful  sit, 

Upon  whose  scroll,  in  lines  of  flame  are  writ 


REQUISITES  FOR  CRITICAL  COMPETENCY.  141 


Each  hour  of  every  day  of  those  who  dwell 
Upon  this  earth  :  He  hath  those  days  and  hours, 
Which,  as  they  smiled  on  us,  we  counted  ours ; 
And  who,  when  that  great  history  appears, 
Shall  make  us  answer,  as  if  we  were  theirs. 

Since  my  return  to  Rome,  my  principal  anxiety  has  been  to 
see  so  as  to  know  some  of  the  beautiful  works  of  art  gathered  in 
its  innumerable  treasure-houses.  There  is  nothing  of  which  the 
impression  has  become  deeper  in  my  mind  than  the  necessity  of 
an  absolute  education  for  anything  like  a  due  appreciation  of  that 
which  is  most  beautiful  in  art.  In  those  alone  possessed  of  the 
intuitive  perceptions  and  exceptional  organization  of  genius,  the 
process  of  appreciation  may  be  rapid  ;  to  the  majority  it  must  be 
like  all  their  accomplishments — most  gradual.  There  is  something 
absolutely  piteous  in  watching  the  procession  of  thronging  sight- 
seers who  visit  these  wonderfnl  shrines,  and  knowing  how  little 
pleasure  and  less  profit,  they  bear  away  from  their  cursory  and 
yet  laborious  pilgrimages.  It  is  the  work  of  years,  to  one  not 
especially  gifted,  to  learn  to  discriminate  (in  all  art,  but  in  paint- 
ing, I  should  say,  especially)  bad  from  good,  and  good  from  what 
is  best.  Perfect  senses,  vivid  sensibilities,  imagination  for  the 
ideal,  judgment  for  the  real,  knowledge  of  what  is  technical  in 
the  execution,  critical  competency  to  apprehend  the  merits  and 
the  claims  of  that  which  is  purely  intellectual,  the  concep- 
tion ;  knowledge  to  furnish  comparisons  with  what  is  prescriptive 
in  art,  reflection  to  suggest  that  which  is  paramount  in  nature, 
long  habits  of  observation  exercised  on  various  and  numerous 
works,  and  that  which  most  hardly  preserves  itself  through  all 
this,  and  yet  without  which  all  this  makes  but  a  common-place 
perceiver  of  faults  and  beauties, — freshness  of  mind  and  depth 
of  feeling,  from  which  alone  (combined  with  the  rest)  can  spring 
the  faculties  of  an  appreciator — these,  it  appears  to  me,  are  the 


142 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


absolutely  indispensable  qualifications  for  those  who  would  not 
only  see  but  comprehend  art. 

Arrived  within  a  short  period  of  my  departure  from  Rome  and 
all  its  precious  collections,  I  have  in  some  degree,  I  think,  the 
feeling  they  must  experience  who  have  arrived  at  the  term  of 
their  earthly  existence  : — an  overwhelming  sense  of  what  is  to 
be  done  for  which  no  adequate  space  of  time  remains — an  un- 
speakable regret  for  invaluable  opportunities  neglected — eager 
desire  to  snatch  at  such  occasions  as  yet  remain  to  be  profited 
by — the  bitter  pain  of  parting  with  such  scenes  of  delight — the 
clinging  affection  which  at  such  a  time  makes  the  days  and  hours 
appear  as  though  they  devoured  each  other  in  our  despite — all 
this  haunts  me  as  day  by  day  I  visit  some  one  or  other  of  Rome's 
glorious  things,  or  gaze  at  its  whole  beautiful  aspect  from  the 
terrace  of  our  home  ;  that  which  I  have  seen,  however,  in  these 
my  last  Roman  days,  I  have  seen  well — my  memory  has  taken 
hold  of  it — my  soul  possesses  it. 

TORRE  NUOVO. 

The  water  has  flowed  forth  a  year, 

Since,  sitting  by  the  fountain's  side, 
We  look'd  into  the  basin  clear, 

Where  sparkles  still  the  gushing  tide, 
And  watch'd  the  crystal  current  pour, 
During  one  bright  enchanting  hour. 

The  sun  slop'd  low  upon  the  plain — 

The  mellow  southern  winter  sun — 
And  purple  rose  the  mountain  chain, 

Which  then  I  first  did  look  upon  ; 
While  o'er  its  shadowy  crests  were  seen 
Bright,  dazzling  peaks  of  snowy  sheen. 


THE  CAPITOL. 


143 


The  limpid  heavens  o'er  our  head 

Were  clear  as  truth,  and  soft  as  love  ; 

The  dark-blue  tufted  pine-trees  spread 
Their  solemn  shade  our  rest  above. 

And,  framed  between  their  pillars  grey, 

The  landscape's  magic  pictures  lay. 

A  year  that  water  hath  flowed  forth ; 

A  year  my  golden  hours  have  flowed; 
And  towards  the  regions  of  the  north 

I  turn,  to  leave  this  blest  abode, 
Where  I  have  dwelt  in  constant  joy, 
In  peace  and  rest,  without  alloy. 

Pain  has  been  far  from  me,  and  pleasure 

Has  kept  the  record  of  my  days ; 
Glory  and  beauty,  without  measure, 

Have  haunted  my  familiar  ways, 
And  made  a  year's  existence  seem 
Bright,  brief,  and  wondrous  as  a  dream. 

Now  I  depart,  and  bear  with  me 

The  gather'd  riches  of  these  days  ; 
No  shade  the  stern'st  futurity 

Upon  their  perfect  brightness  lays  ; 
Life  shall  possess  them  to  the  last : 
The  blackest  fate  must  spare  the  past. 

I  have  visited  the  Capitol  every  morning  now  for  a  week, 
and  here  note  down  those  things  in  it  which  principally  charm 
me  : — 

The  Centaur  ; 

The  Wounded  Amazon ; 


144 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


The  Mercury  (commonly  called  Antinous)  ; 

The  Dying  Gladiator  ; 

And  especially  the  noble  head  of  Ariadne. 

For  the  beautiful  Venus  I  do  not  entertain  so  great  an  admira- 
tion as  is  usually  expressed  ;  but  this  is  perhaps  owing  to  the 
very  tyro-like  tendency  of  which  I  cannot  divest  myself,  of  lik- 
ing or  disliking  works  of  art  chiefly  for  their  subject  or  senti- 
ment. The  Venus  of  the  Capitol,  exquisite  in  workmanship, 
and  of  most  admirable  preservation,  is  pervaded  in  all  her  beau- 
tiful person  (to  my  judgment)  with  a  species  of  voluptuous  refine- 
ment, which  is  disagreeable  to  me  ;  there  is  no  intellect  in  the 
face,  such  as  makes  divine  the  countenance  of  the  Neapolitan 
Psyche ;  and  compared  with  the  chaste,  noble,  and  beautiful 
Venus  of  Milo,  she  is  like  a  fine  lady  to  a  goddess. 

I  went  the  other  day  with  and  the  to  the  Cor- 

sini  Palace,  to  see  the  pictures,  of  which  there  is  a  very  fine 
collection.  The  house  itself,  a  noble  mansion  on  the  Lungara, 
opposite  the  beautiful  Farnesina,  struck  me  very  much  with  its 
fine  spacious  colonnade  and  princely  staircase.  Of  the  pictures 
I  cannot  speak,  because  they  were  so  very  numerous,  and  our  time 
so  short,  that  I  really  had  not  leisure  to  look  at  one-tenth  of  them. 

My  dear  had  requested  me  especially  to  look  at  one,  an 

Ecce  Homo  of  Guido's,  which  she  said  had  impressed  her  more 
than  any  picture  she  had  ever  seen.  In  order  to  obey  her  in- 
junction, I  conquered  my  almost  invincible  repugnance  to  pic- 
tures of  this  subject,  and  carefully  contemplated  it ;  but  there 
was  nothing  in  the  habitually  sickly  coloring  and  feeble  expression 
of  Guido's  painting  to  counteract  the  intolerable  effect  of  horror 
and  disgust  always  produced  upon  me  by  representations  of  the 
physical  agony  of  Christ ;  and  it  appeared  to  me,  upon  the  whole, 
far  less  meritorious  as  a  picture,  than  the  same  subject  immediate- 
ly below  it,  by  Guercino,  and  one  opposite  it,  by  Correggio  ; 
beneath  which  was  again  another  by  some  great  master,  whose 


SCRAPS. 


W 

145 


name  I  have  forgotten.  The  position  of  these  four  dreadful  re- 
presentations of  mortal  agony  (that  mortal  agony),  would,  I  think, 
effectually  deter  me  from  ever  entering  this  gallery,  at  the  en- 
trance of  which  they  hang  ;  although  towards  the  end  of  it  there 
is  a  splendid  portrait,  by  Titian,  of  Philip  the  Second — a  picture, 
where  the  artist  has  made  a  prince  out  of  one  of  the  meanest  and 
most  ill-looking  men  imaginable.  In  the  next  room  to  this  was 
Guido's  famous  picture  of  Herodias'  daughter,  the  engraving  from 
which  had  been  one  of  my  earliest  and  most  delightful  impressions 
of  art.  Having  now  seen  both,  I  prefer  it  to  the  painting,  where, 
as  in  all  Guido's  pictures,  I  find  something  affected  and  weak. 
The  one  picture  of  this  often-treated  subject  that  surpasses  all 
others  that  I  have  ever  seen,  is  the  glorious  Titian  in  Lord  Ash- 
burton's  collection. 

An  accident  met  with  curtailed  our  visit  to  the  Corsini, 

from  which,  however,  I  have  brought  away  few  distinct  impres- 
sions, owing  to  the  nature  of  the  collection  and  our  limited  leisure. 
I  have  been  again  to  the  Palazzo  Sciarra,  and  seen  the  most 
wonderful  picture  I  ever  saw,  the  Suonatore,  for  the  last  time. 
How  fortunate  are  they,  who,  looking  at  it,  may  hope  to  do  so 
again  ! 

SCRAPS. 

Raise  it  to  Heaven,  when  thine  eye  fills  with  tears, 
For  only  in  a  watery  sky  appears 
The  bow  of  light ;  and  from  th'  invisible  skies 
Hope's  glory  shines  not,  save  thro'  weeping  eyes. 

Youth  with  swift  feet  walks  onward  in  the  way, 

The  land  of  joy  lies  all  before  his  eyes ; 
Age,  stumbling,  lingers  slower  day  by  day, 

Still  looking  back,  for  it  behind  him  lies. 


146 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Thursday,  19th  November. — To  me  a  memorable  date.  We 
went  in  the  afternoon,  my  sister,  ,  the  ,  and  my- 
self, to  the  Villa  Ludovisi,  to  see  the  sculpture  gallery  and 
Guercino's  Aurora.  It  is  made  rather  a  matter  of  difficulty  and 
favor  to  obtain  admittance  to  this  collection,  yet  I  would  advise 
no  one  to  neglect  visiting  it  who  would  not  depart  from  Rome 
without  seeing  one  of  its  greatest  wonders.  The  collection  of 
statues  is  not  by  any  means  large,  but  contains  several  beautiful, 
and  one  surpassing  work.  I  admired  extremely  two  statues  of 
exquisite  grace  and  beauty,  called  Mars,  and  representing  the 
God  of  War  in  different  attitudes  of  repose.  The  ease  and  na- 
ture of  the  position,  the  lightness  and  beauty  of  the  limbs  and 
figure,  and  the  charming  expression  of  perfect  quietude  thrown 
over  the  whole  countenance  and  person,  render  them  certainly 
the  most  attractive  representations  of  this  divinity  that  I  ever  saw. 
I  incline  to  think  the  likeness  must  have  been  taken  during  his 
liaison  with  Venus ;  there  is  a  softness  and  almost  tenderness 
about  them  otherwise  unaccountable.  A  noble  veiled  semi-colos- 
sal head  of  Juno  detained  my  sister  and  myself  long  in  charmed 
contemplation,  and  for  a  moment  I  supposed  I  stood  before  that 
which  we  had  come  expressly  to  see,  and  which  Goethe  proclaim- 
ed the  grandest  thing  that  he  had  seen  in  Rome.  Presentlj; 
however,  we  turned  away,  and  walking  towards  the  other  end  of 
the  gallery,  the  words  I  was  speaking  died  away  on  my  lips, 
and  my  feet  were  riveted  to  the  ground,  as  I  suddenly  perceived 
the  colossal  head  of  Juno,  of  which  he  thus  spoke.  I  think  it 
must  have  been  nearly  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  I  spoke  or 
moved,  and  the  first  idea  I  was  conscious  of — beholding  having 
absorbed  my  existence  during  that  time — was  the  cataract  of 
Niagara.  I  cannot  conceive  how  or  why  that  stupendous  volume 
of  sound  and  motion  should  have  been  suggested  by  the  awful 
grandeur,  the  sublime  stillness,  and  incomparable  sweetness  and 
majesty  of  this  great  work  of  art — as  there  were  no  words  given 


OVERBECH'S  STUDIO. 


147 


to  me  then  to  express  what  I  felt,  so  have  I  none  now  to  describe 
what  I  saw.  In  the  garden  I  met  with  an  accident  which  caused 
me  severe  pain,  at  the  price  of  which  I  was  very  thankful  to 
escape  seeing  anything  else  after  that  divine  head. 

Sunday,  22d  November. — I  went  with  by  appoint- 
ment to  visit  Overbech's  studio.  He  received  us  himself  most 
kindly  and  courteously,  and  for  some  time  I  was  more  interested 
by  his  demeanor  and  countenance,  than  by  anything  else  I  saw 
in  his  room.  I  had  been  much  impressed  by  various  accounts  I 
had  received  of  Overbech's  character,  from  persons  who  know 
him  and  admire  him  extremely,  and  I  regretted  deeply  not  being 
able  to  hear  some  of  his  conversation  as  well  as  look  at  his  works. 
We  found  here  the  original  drawing  from  which  his  great  picture 
at  Frankfort,  of  the  influence  of  religion  upon  art,  was  executed. 
Having  seen  the  picture  itself,  the  drawing  of  course  interested 
me  less,  although  I  had  not  to  encounter  in  it  that  which  dis- 
pleases so  much  in  the  picture,  its  raw  and  inharmonious  coloring. 
The  composition  is  very  elaborate,  and  in  several  of  its  groups 
very  beautiful  and  graceful ;  it  appears  to  me,  however,  to 
divide  itself  too  distinctly  into  separate  parts,  and  the  charm- 
ing group  to  the  right  of  the  picture  recalls,  too  forcibly  for 
any  one  to  escape  the  association  who  has  seen  the  two  com- 
positions, the  famous  mathematical  group  in  Raphael's  School  of 
Athens.  There  were  no  pictures  in  the  studio,  and  only  one 
drawing  for  one,  of  which  I  shall  speak  presently ;  the  rest  of 
what  we  saw  consisted  of  very  beautiful  drawings  for  engraving, 
all  upon  subjects  taken  from  our  Saviour's  life,  and  for  the  most 
part,  therefore,  painful  and  distressing  to  me.  Two  of  the  sub- 
jects, however,  representing  Jesus  in  his  childhood,  being  merely 
ideal,  did  not  affect  me  so  unpleasantly,  and  my  admiration  of 
their  grave  simplicity  and  devotional  character  was  undisturbed 
by  the  overwhelming  associations  which  all  representations  of 
Christ,  drawn  from  the  records  of  his  life,  invariably  suggest  to 


148 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


me.  One  of  these  drawings  represented  the  infant  Saviour  sleep- 
ing— his  arms  thrown  open  in  an  attitude  of  the  most  graceful 
and  natural  repose — representing,  nevertheless,  the  type  of  his 
bitter  death,  in  the  form  of  the  cross,  which  they  describe ;  an 
idea  which  Overbech  has  produced  with  exquisite  effect  in 
another  work  :  and  there  is  something  in  this  unconscious  pro- 
phecy combined  with  the  wrapt  and  tender  contemplation  of  the 
Holy  Mother,  into  whose  soul  the  iron  was  to  enter  so  deeply, 
which  makes  the  whole  inexpressibly  touching. 

The  next  drawing  we  saw  was  one  of  Jesus  surrounded  by  his 
Mother,  St.  Joseph,  and  St.  Anna,  and  I  am  not  sure  whether 
there  is  not  another  male  figure  in  the  group :  they  are  all  at- 
tentively observing  the  child,  who,  represented  at  about  the  age 
of  six  or  seven  years  old,  is  endeavoring,  with  the  implements  of 
his  father's  trade,  to  saw  the  form  of  a  cross.  There  is  some- 
thing striking  in  the  conception  (whether  borrowed  or  not  from 
any  of  the  innumerable  legends  of  our  Saviour's  childhood,  I  do 
not  know),  and  the  expressions  of  all  the  countenances  are 
remarkably  beautiful  and  appropriate — like  everything  which 
Overbech  does,  there  is  a  deep  piety  in  the  whole  composition. 
After  this  followed  scenes  from  the  Gospel ;  a  Last  Supper, 
where  the  artist  has  very  judiciously  made  an  overturned  seat 
the-  sole  representative  of  the  troubled  soul  of  that  unfortunate 
one  who  betrayed  the  Just.  Another  drawing,  representing  the 
"  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me  !"  excited  the  utmost 
enthusiasm  of  some  Russian  ladies,  who,  like  ourselves,  were 
admitted  to  the  privilege  of  seeing  these  beautiful  things  ;  but, 
for  me,  I  ceased  very  soon  to  distinguish  it  through  the  blinding 
tears  that  filled  my  eyes.  Oh  !  how  can  people  bear  to  see 
representations  of  these  things — ideal  representations  of  that 
reality  ?  If  we  had  a  friend,  a  benefactor,  a  deliverer,  to  whom 
we  owed  more  than  life ;  for  whom,  though  we  had  never  seen 
him,  our  love  was  greater  than  any  human  being  whom  we  ever 


OVERBECH'S  STUDIO. 


k49 


had  seen  j  and  that  imaginary  representations  were  brought  to 
us,  of  this  our  most  precious  friend,  what  should  we  say  ?  Should 
we  not  turn  with  almost  a  feeling  of  insult,  from  a  pretended 
likeness  of  what  was  to  us  so  dear  and  venerable  ?  It  seems  to 
me  that  just  in  proportion  as  any  real  record  or  representation  of 
Jesus  Christ  would  be  inestimable  to  us  (so  inestimable,  that  I 
think  in  denying  us  any  such  vestige  Almighty  God  has  merci- 
fully saved  us  from  the  danger  of  an  almost  rational  idolatry),  so 
worthless  and  even  offensive  appear  to  me  all  these  invented 
images  of  Him — so  inadequate,  when  they  merely  seek  to  repre- 
sent that  face  and  form,  the  like  of  which  was  never  seen  here 
on  earth — so  intolerable,  when  they  repeat  the  closing  scenes  of 
that  unparalleled  life,  through  which  the  world  was  redeemed. 
For  all  these  reasons  I  was  most  especially  struck  and  affected 
by  a  large  design  Overbech  showed  us  for  a  picture,  which,  I 
think,  he  had  executed  for  some  church,  representing  our  Sa- 
viour's agony  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  The  subject, 
indeed,  is  one  from  which  I  always  shrink,  but  the  mode  in 
which  the  artist  had  treated  it  was  free  at  least  from  all  the  ob- 
jections I  have  made  to  such  pictures  in  general ;  in  the  fore- 
ground of  the  lower  part  of  the  picture  lay  those  whose  poor 
exhausted  humanity  had  taken  refuge  from  sorrow  and  dismay 
in  sleep,  which  even  love  was  too  weak  to  drive  from  their 
heavy  eye-lids.  Above,  upon  a  projecting  piece  of  rock,  knelt 
the  figure  of  Christ ;  his  back  is  turned  to  the  picture  ;  there  is 
no  audacious  representation  of  that  countenance  stamped  with 
the  agony  of  that  supreme  hour.  Before  him,  confronting,  there- 
fore, those  who  look  at  the  picture,  kneels  an  angel  of  the  Lord, 
who,  with  an  incomparable  expression  of  love  and  sorrow,  pre- 
sents to  him  the  inevitable  cross  ;  light  streams  from  the  ignomi- 
nious engine  of  torture  over  the  whole  picture,  and  seems  to  con- 
centrate its  reflection  upon  the  Christ,  who,  with  his  head  bowed, 
and  his  arms  extended,  so  as  almost  to  meet  the  form  of  the  cru- 


150 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


cifix  presented  to  him,  seems  uttering  that  watchword  of  our 
salvation,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  This  picture  affected  me  most 
deeply  ;  the  conception  of  it  appeared  to  me  most  original,  pa- 
thetic, and  sublime.  But  I  still  wonder  at  those  whose  pencil 
does  not  fall  from  their  hands  at  the  contemplation  of  such  a 
subject,  especially  when  they  are,  as  in  Overbech's  instance, 
even  more  devout  and  holy  Christian  men  than  inspired  artists. 
In  the  representations  of  these  especial  agonies,  I  have  stated  my 
various  objections ;  I  have,  however,  an  unconquerable  aversion 
to  all  representations  of  physical  pain  in  works  of  art ;  the 
sufferings  of  the  nobler  part  of  our  nature,  our  heart  and  mind, 
appear  to  me  the  only  ones  to  be  portrayed  by  those  ministers, 
whose  medium  should  always  be  positive  beauty.  And,  how- 
ever small  the  element  of  physical  pain  may  be  compared  with 
the  nobler  sorrow,  to  which  its  expression  is  allied,  I  should 
always  like  to  banish  that  portion  of  them  from  all  works  of  art, 
where  their  presence  usurps  the  slightest  degree  of  that  attention 
due  to  nobler  considerations.  I  always  feel  affronted  at  having 
my  sympathies  appealed  to  by  so  obvious  and  irresistible  a 
method,  and  give  but  little  credit  to  an  artist  who  (as  even  that 
admirable  painter,  Poussin,  has  done)  turns  me  sick,  and  sets  me 
shivering  from  head  to  foot,  by  a  representation  of  a  man  whose 
bowels  are  being  dragged  from  him  by  ropes  and  a  windlass ;  a 
nervous  band  of  iron  seems  to  knot  itself  round  my  brows  when 
I  look  at  the  blood-distilling  crown  of  thorns  on  the  forehead  of 
those  dreadful  Ecce  Homos — the  beautiful  and  pathetic  repre- 
sentations of  St.  Sebastian  by  Guido,  Domenichino  and  Titian, 
make  me  quiver  with  those  dreadful  arrows  sticking  in  him,  and 
even  the  world-renowned  Laocoon  is  to  me  an  intolerably  pain- 
ful miracle  of  art.  The  Dying  Gladiator,  or  more  properly  the 
dying  Gaulish  chief,  and  the  piteous  wounded  Amazon  of  the 
capitol,  in  whose  pathetic  gesture  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether 
shame,  sorrow,  or  pain  predominates,  are  about  the  only  works 


OVERBECH'S  STUDIO. 


151 


of  art  I  am  acquainted  with,  where  the  admixture  of  physical 
suffering  is  so  admirably  treated  as  to  be  endurable. 

The  principal  defect  of  Overbech's  works  is  something  at 
once  feeble  and  stiff  in  the  drawing,  a  consequence,  it  appears  to 
me,  of  his  very  close  imitation  of  the  manner  of  the  earlier 
Italian  devotional  paintings — Pinturiccio,  the  first  manner  of 
Raphael,  and  more  especially,  perhaps,  Perugino,  the  peculiari- 
ties of  whose  style  seemed  revived  again  in  the  drawings  of 
Overbech.  I  was  particularly  struck  with  this  one  morning, 
when  visiting  the  Gallery  of  Paintings  at  the  Vatican.  I  found 
an  artist  making  a  drawing  from  Perugino's  picture  of  the 
Resurrection — but  for  the  original  before  me  I  should  have 
thought  it  belonged  to  the  charming  series  of  drawings  I  had 
seen  a  few  days  before  at  Overbech's  studio,  so  perfect  was  the 
resemblance  between  the  quaint  simplicity  and  stiffness  of  the 
old  Italian  and  its  imitation  by  the  modern  German  painter. 
This  is  a  great  pity  ;  the  reproduction  of  the  defects  of  great 
masters  is  certainly  the  easiest  way  of  imitating  their  works — but 
to  affect  the  meagre  and  formal  drawing,  and  raw  inharmonious 
coloring  of  those  great  early  masters,  in  the  present  day,  is  like 
returning  to  the  language  of  Chaucer,  or  even  the  peculiar  but 
more  intelligible  style  of  our  early  playwrights,  in  search  of  this 
fresh  simplicity  and  manly  vigor.  Quaintness  is  a  mere  virtue 
of  association  ;  there  is  nothing  charming  in  itself,  but  merely 
in  the  more  simple  and  earnest  spirit  of  the  times  to  which  it 
appears  peculiar ;  although,  being  in  fact  a  mere  quality  of 
time,  we  may  hope  to  appear  quaint  in  all  our  various  manifes- 
tations, from  petticoats  to  poetry,  to  our  great-great-grandchildren, 
without  throwing  ourselves  back  to  the  forms  of  art  and  litera- 
ture in  the  sixteenth  century,  for  the  sake  of  being  prematurely 
so.  Overbech's  works,  however,  have  not  alone  the  defect  of 
those  which  he  has  made  his  model — they  have  their  merit  also  ; 
tenderness,  grace,  purity,  and  a  depth  of  devotional  spirit,  drawn 


152 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


from  the  fountain  of  his  own  soul,  and  most  touching  and  beau- 
tiful is  their  expression  in  all  his  works. 

The  house  to  which  we  went  to  visit  Overbech  was  no  other 
than  the  old  palace  of  the  Cenci,  and  over  the  very  stairs  which 
we  ascended,  poor  Beatrice's  feet  have  passed  to  and  fro.  The 
associations  with  this  place  are  horrible — I  wonder  Overbech  can 
bear  to  live  there. 

I  have  seen  the  Vatican  for  the  last  time — for  a  month  now  I 
have  gone  thither  daily  for  nearly  two  hours  early  in  the  morn- 
ing.   The  custodi,  apprised  by  my  kind  friend  ,  have 

admitted  me  at  a  time  when  the  doors  are  not  open  to  the  public, 
and  for  a  whole  month  these  galleries,  these  halls,  these  splendid 
chambers,  these  vast  marble  staircases,  and  all  the  glorious  com- 
pany of  divine  creations,  assembled  within  them,  have  been 
mine.  I  have  walked,  and  stood,  and  sat  among  them,  in  earnest, 
blissful,  lonely  contemplation.  I  have  lived,  as  it  were,  in 
Olympus.  I  do  not  know  how  I  shall  ever  live  among  mere 
mortals  again.  Daily,  passing  through  the  outer  gallery  of  the 
Swiss  guard,  and  emerging  from  the  vaulted  passage  which  leads 
to  the  court  of  San  Dalmasio,  have  I  stood  to  look  at  the  beauti- 
ful building  rising  round  me,  all  golden  with  the  sunlight  against 
the  deep-blue  sky.  Daily  have  I  walked  with  slow  feet,  un- 
willing almost  to  pass  from  one  image  of  beauty  to  another, 
along  the  Loggie  of  Raphael,  worshipping  as  I  went  the  creations 
of  his  most  graceful  spirit.  I  have  looked  daily  over  the  lonely 
sunny  gardens,  open  like  the  palace  halls  to  me,  where  the  wide 
sweeping  orange  walks  end  in  some  distant  view  of  the  sad  and 
noble  campagna — where  silver  fountains  call  to  each  other  through 
the  silent  over-arching  cloisters  of  dark  and  fragrant  green,  and 
where  the  huge  bronze  pine,  by  which  Dante  measured  his 
great  giant,  yet  stands  in  the  midst  of  graceful  vases  and  bas- 
reliefs,  wrought  in  former  ages,  and  the  more  graceful  blossoms 
blown  within  that  very  hour.    Daily  have  I  wandered,  as  in 


DECAY  OF  FRESCOES. 


153 


some  wonderful  trance,  from  form  to  form  of  perfect  beauty. 
Daily  departing  have  I  stood  upon  the  threshold  of  the  great 
gallery  of  inscriptions,  and,  leaving  behind  me  the  ancient  mira- 
cles of  art,  looked  over  the  whole  expanse  of  Rome  to  the  purple 
Alban  mountains,  and  the  morning  sky,  full  of  the  glory  of  a 
new  day,  and  blesed  God  for  the  ever  new  miracle  of  nature. 
Daily,  descending  from  these  glorious  things,  have  I  turned 
homewards  with  a  spirit  so  raised  with  their  contemplation,  and 
thoughts  so  wrapped  in  their  remembrance,  that  I  have  not  felt 
the  ground  on  which  I  trod,  and  immortality  seemed  for  a  short 
time  to  possess  me  rather  than  life  ;  and  now  all  this  is  past.  I 
have  crossed  for  the  last  time  those  glorious  thresholds.  I  shall 
stand  beneath  those  lordly  domes  no  more  :  as  I  passed  to-day 
the  iron  gates,  which  the  keeper  opened  with  his  usual,  "  A 
rivederla,  Signora,"  I  answered,  like  one  despairing,  "  Ah  !  no, 
non  torno  piu,"  and  went  weeping  away,  like  one  overtaken  by 
some  dire  calamity. 

Sculpture  is  to  me  more  impressive  than  painting  ;  it  appears 
to  me  to  need  far  less  qualifications  to  appreciate  its  beauties. 
In  the  picture  gallery,  the  Madonna  di  Foligno  was  beyond 
everything  else — even  than  the  glorious  transfiguration  itself — 
enchanting  to  me.  I  spent  many  hours  in  the  Camere,  where 
the  deplorably  injured  condition  of  Raphael's  grandest  concep- 
tions was  about  as  great  a  grief  as  their  beauty  was  a  delight  to 
me.  How  infinitely  lamentable  it  is  that  these  precious  things 
were  not  originally  upon  canvas,  for  thus  the  modern  method 
of  transferring  might  have  saved  the  world  from  their  loss,  as 
well  as  that  of  all  the  beautiful  decorations  of  the  Farnesina, 
and  that  most  lovely  Galatea.  The  Sybils,  too,  at  the  Santa 
Maria  della  Pace  are  stained  and  defaced,  and  so  miserably  situ- 
ated, that  they  can  hardly  be  seen  distinctly  ;  and,  unless  some 
hitherto  unknot  r.  method  of  preserving  frescoes  is  devised,  these 
beautiful  and  noble  works  must  perish  more  and  more ;  but 
7* 


154 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


while  one  figure,  I  had  almost  said  one  line  of  them  remains,  it 
will  testify  to  the  perfection  with  which  their  great  author  de- 
vised and  wrought. 

My  last  visit  to  the  Vatican  was  to  the  curious  and  interesting 
little  chapel,  whose  walls  are  covered  with  frescoes,  by  Fra  An- 
gelico  da  Fiesole.  This  small  oratory,  for  it  is  really  nothing 
more,  was  closed  up  during  some  repairs  of  the  Vatican,  and  for 
a  long  time,  although  its  existence  was  perfectly  well  known, 
the  entrance  to  it  remained  blocked  up  and  undiscovered.  It 
is  curious  to  a  lover  of  art,  as  containing  figures  and  paintings  of 
an  unusually  large  size  for  this  painter  ;  in  which,  in  spite  of 
much  stiffness  and  quaint  awkwardness,  the  composition  is  good, 
and  the  faces  have  that  peculiar  earnestness  and  devotional 
expression,  remarkable  in  all  his  smaller  pictures.  From  this 
small  beautiful  chapel  we  descended  to  the  Sistine  chapel, 
which  contains  what  are,  to  me,  the  finest  paintings  in  the  world 
— always  excepting  the  Suonatore — between  which,  and  Michael 
Angelo's  giant  frescoes,  of  course,  no  comparison  is  intended  ; 
but  which  I  merely  mention  thus,  because  it  is  to  me  an  excep- 
tion in  the  whole  world  of  art. 

The  prophets  and  sybils  on  the  walls,  the  awful  representa- 
tions of  the  Divinity,  and  his  first  human  creatures,  on  the  roof 
of  the  Sistine  Chapel — these  stupendous  conceptions  and  perfect 
works  of  Michael  Angelo  were  my  last  vision  of  the  Vatican ! 

A  VISION  OF  THE  VATICAN. 

In  the  great  palace  halls,  where  dwell  the  gods, 
I  heard  a  voice  filling  the  vaulted  roof ; 
The  heart  that  uttered  it  seem'd  sorrow  proof, 

And,  clarion-like,  it  might  have  made  the  clods 
Of  the  dead  valley  start  to  sudden  life, 
With  such  a  vigor  and  a  joy  'twas  rife. 


POPE  PIUS  IX. 


155 


And,  coming  towards  me,  lo  !  a  woman  past, 
Her  face  was  shining  as  the  morning  bright, 
And  her  feet  fell  in  steps  so  strong  and  light, 

I  scarce  could  tell  if  she  trode  slow  or  fast : 

She  seem'd  instinct  with  beauty  and  with  power, 
And  what  she  sang,  dwells  with  me  to  this  hour. 

"  Transfigur'd  from  the  gods'  abode  I  come, 
I  have  been  tarrying  in  their  awful  home  ; 
Stand  from  my  path,  and  give  me  passage  free, 
For  yet  I  breathe  of  their  divinity. 
Jove  have  I  knelt  to,  solemn  and  serene, 
And  stately  Here,  heaven's  transcendent  queen  ; 
Apollo's  light  is  on  my  brow,  and  fleet, 
As  silver-sandall'd  Dian's,  are  my  feet; 
Graciously  smiling,  heavenly  Aphrodite 
Hath  filled  my  senses  with  a  vague  delight ; 
And  Pallas,  steadfastly  beholding  me, 
Hath  sent  me  forth  in  wisdom  to  be  free." 


When  at  the  portal,  smiling  she  did  turn, 

And,  looking  back  thro'  the  vast  halls  profound, 
Re-echoing  with  her  song's  triumphant  sound, 

She  bow'd  her  head,  and  said — "  I  shall  return !" 
Then  raised  her  face,  all  radiant  with  delight, 
And  vanished,  like  a  vision  from  my  sight. 


The  extreme  interest,  which  we,  in  common  with  all  the  inha- 
bitants of  Rome,  whether  native  or  foreign,  have  felt  in  the  cha- 
racter and  measures  of  the  new  Pope,  has  induced  me  to  gather 
together  all  the  information,  and  every  anecdote  which  I  have 
been  able  to  obtain  relating  to  him.  Of  the  latter,  it  may  be, 
that  some  have  no  other  foundation  than  the  general  character 


156 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


and  known  disposition  of  the  individual  to  whom  they  are  attri- 
buted ;  but,  even  in  this  point  of  view,  they  are  valuable,  as 
indicating  clearly  the  opinions  entertained  of  him,  the  esteem 
in  which  he  is  held,  that  which  is  generally  believed,  and  that 
which  is  expected  of  him. 

The  youngest  of  the  Cardinals  in  the  Conclave,  it  became  his 
duty  to  collect  the  votes  and  proclaim  who  had  obtained  the 
suffrages  of  the  majority  ;  having  reached  the  number  at  which 
his  own  election  became  the  evident  result,  he  paused,  and  re- 
minding the  Conclave  that  it  was  yet  time  to  alter  their  proceed- 
ings, solemnly  adjured  them  to  take  heed  to  what  they  were  about 
to  do.  This  conscientious  appeal  probably  only  affected  more 
favorably  an  assembly,  bent  principally,  at  all  hazards,  upon 
defeating  the  election  of  a  most  unpopular  member,  the  Cardinal 
Lambruschini,  to  achieve  whose  election  no  effort  of  intrigue  and 
intimidation  had  been  spared ;  and  Cardinal  Mastai,  proceeding 
in  his  office,  proclaimed  himself  the  object  of  the  preponderating 
votes.  On  his  first  interview  with  one  of  his  devoted  friends,  and 
now  one  of  his  most  efficient  officers,  Monsignor  Pentini,  his  first 
exclamation  was :  "  Vedete,  che  cosa  hanno  fatto  and  it  was 
some  little  time  before  he  became  reconciled  to  the  exchange  of 
his  habitual  cardinal's  costume  for  the  Papal  habiliments,  or  his 
more  private  apartments  for  those  usually  inhabited  by  the  Pope. 
In  one  respect,  Pius  IX.  and  the  people  he  is  called  to  govern, 
enjoy  a  great  good  fortune  in  the  circumstance  of  his  not  belonging 
to  any  monkish  fraternity,  like  the  last  Pope,  and  most  indeed  of 
his  predecessors,  or  having  even  been  bred  to  the  priesthood. 
His  training  and  education  was  liberal  and  general,  and  his  first 
choice  of  a  career  was  in  favor  of  a  military  one,  having  applied 
for  admission  into  the  Guardia  Nobile,  which,  however,  Cardinal 
Barberini,  on  whose  acceptance  it  is  alone  obtained,  refused.  On 
the  late  occasion  of  the  homage  of  the  cardinals  to  their  new 
sovereign,  the  Pope  reminded  his  Eminence  of  this  circumstance, 


POPE  PIUS  IX. 


157 


when  the  cardinal,  with  a  happiness  that  caused  some  surprise 
(as  he  is  not  generally  suspected  of  much  ready  wit),  replied,  that 
he  had  refused  the  admission  to  the  Guardia  Nobile,  persuaded 
that  the  applicant  for  it  was  reserved  for  infinitely  higher  things, 
One  of  the  earliest  proceedings  of  the  new  Pope,  which  obtain- 
ed currency  by  public  report,  was  his  reformation  of  his  own 
household,  and  his  unsparing  curtailment  of  its  most  useless 
expenses.  He  immediately  suppressed  the  confectioner's  depart- 
ment— an  enormous  item  of  expenditure  in  the  former  Pope's 
establishment  5  and  having  observed  in  the  accounts  which  he 
demanded,  and  of  which  he  examined  himself  the  details,  a  most 
exorbitant  daily  charge  for  lemonade,  remarked  that  when  he 
was  a  private  individual,  he  used  to  refresh  himself  at  a  cafe 
with  lemonade  at  so  much  per  glass,  and  requested  that  he  might 
be  furnished  with  it  thenceforward  upon  the  same  terms ;  indeed, 
he  added,  that  the  increase  in  the  value  of  his  sustenance  as  Pope, 
compared  to  what  it  was  as  an  abbate,  appeared  to  him  entirely 
disproportionate ;  and  that,  allowing  that  a  Monsignore  required 
a  more  costly  dinner  than  an  abbate,  a  cardinal  than  a  Monsig- 
nore, and  a  Pope  than  a  cardinal,  he  still  could  not  bring  the  gra- 
dually ascending  scale  to  anything  like  the  estimate  made  for 
him,  and  which  he  therefore  requested  might  be  lowered  to  a 
more  rational  one.  He  has  once  or  twice  invited  some  of  his 
cardinals  to  dine  with  him,  a  thing  unknown  during  the  late 
Pope's  reign ;  who,  according  indeed  to  the  usual  pontifical 
etiquette,  invariably  ate  alone.  Some  persons  have  suggested 
that  this  innovation  may  be  merely  a  measure  of  security  against 
poison ;  but  it  is  better  accounted  for  by  the  liberal  and  rational 
character  of  the  Pope,  and  the  corresponding  changes  both  of  a 
lesser,  as  well  as  a  greater  nature,  which  may  be  expected  from 
him.  He  has  given,  too,  a  splendid  dinner  to  his  Guardia  Nobile, 
during  which  he  presented  himself  in  the  room  where  they  were 
assembled,  to  greet  and  bid  them  welcome. 


158 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


The  measures  of  public  improvement  most  urgently  needed, 
both  for  the  city  and  the  country,  and  which  were  in  vain  peti- 
tioned from  the  late  Pope's  timid  and  tyrannical  policy,  have  ob- 
tained the  ready  sanction  of  his  successor  ;  and  gas  in  the  streets 
of  Rome,  and  railroads  in  the  Roman  States,  will  soon  bear  wit- 
ness to  a  more  enlightened  spirit ;  and  while  the  one  will  tend  to 
the  increase  of  order,  comfort,  and  security  in  the  city,  the  other 
will  awaken  the  dormant  energies  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country — affording  them  means  of  easy  transport  for  their  agri- 
cultural produce,  bringing  markets  within  reach  of  supplies,  and 
quickening  all  the  commercial  energies  of  the  various  cities, 
hitherto  so  deplorably  stagnant,  by  opening  lines  of  rapid  com- 
munication between  the  inland  territory  and  the  coast,  from  Ci- 
vita  Vecchia  to  Ancona.  On  the  occasion  of  the  Pope's  act  of 
amnesty,  his  council  consisted  of  six  cardinals,  of  whom  one 
only  was  in  favor  of  it.  Fortunately  the  Pope's  prerogative 
could,  and  did,  dispense  with  their  concurrence.  His  mode 
of  receiving  the  popular  enthusiasm  on  the  occasion  of  that 
great  act  of  wisdom  and  mercy  was  eminently  characteristic ; 
he  said  that  the  political  offenders  had  in  no  way  sinned 
against  him  ;  that  their  attempts  were  directed  against  the  go- 
vernment of  Gregory  XVI.,  who  might  indeed  have  deserved 
praise  and  thanks  for  pardoning  them,  whereas  he  could  claim 
none  for  forgiving  people  who  had  done  nothing  against  him. 
This  modest  and  magnanimous  disclaimer  on  his  part,  did  not, 
as  may  well  be  imagined,  check  the  enthusiasm  of  the  people. 
On  the  occasion  of  his  first  driving  out,  they  took  the  horses  from 
his  carriage,  and  drew  him  home  to  the  Quirinal — a  demonstra- 
tion, against  the  repetition  of  which  he,  however,  entered  his 
most  solemn  and  positive  protest.  Anagrams  of  his  name  are 
ingeniously  made  to  discover  in  it  the  titles  of  liberator  and 
father,  and  the  very  colors  on  his  coat  of  arms — the  tricolor — are 


POPE  PIUS  IX. 


159 


held  significant  of  his  political  tendencies.  A  curious  anecdote 
was  told  me  the  other  day,  exhibiting  the  impatient  temper  of 
the  times  and  people,  and  suggesting,  as  indeed  everything  else 
abundantly  does,  the  enormous  difficulty  of  the  present  Pope's 
position,  between  the  excited  and  exaggerated  expectation  of  im- 
possible changes  entertained  by  his  people,  and  the  narrow  and 
shallow  scope  of  his  power  and  possibilities.  His  arms  contain 
two  lions,  and  an  anonymous  letter  was  forwarded  to  him  lately, 
in  which  his  shield  was  painted  with  two  tortoises  substituted  in 
their  stead,  a  suggestion  that  he  did  not  proceed  rapidly  enough 
with  the  expected  reforms  of  government.  The  Pope,  it  is  said, 
smiled  at  this  illustration,  and  showing  it  to  somebody,  observed, 
that  the  tortoise,  though  very  slow,  was  very  sure  in  its  progress. 

To  supply  the  immediate  and  pressing  necessities  of  his  go- 
vernment, he  levied,  soon  after  his  accession,  a  tax  of  three  scudi 
upon  all  monasteries,  and  borrowed  a  very  considerable  sum  of 
money  from  the  Jesuits  ;  a  measure  of  very  popular  economy, 
which  he  adopted  at  the  same  time,  was  the  entire  suppression 
of  all  moneys  for  the  purpose  of  paying  spies,  surveillance,  &c. 
The  rather  compulsory  nature  of  the  loan  thus  contracted  with 
the  Jesuits  is  not  supposed  to  have  by  any  means  rendered  that 
powerful  body  more  propitious,  either  to  Pius  IX.  personally,  or 
the  policy  of  his  government,  and  a  ludicrous  instance  was  given 
of  the  people's  apprehension  of  the  ill-will  borne  their  sovereign 
by  the  whole  order,  when,  on  the  occasion  of  his  first  visit  to  the 
Jesuits,  the  crowd  in  the  streets  ran  by  the  side  of  his  carriage, 
calling  to  him,    "  Santo  Padre  non  prender  la  cioccolata." 

 told  us  too  of  a  curious  conversation  he  had  overheard 

among  some  workmen,  employed  in  some  repairs  at  the  Hano- 
verian minister's  house.  These  men  were  dilating  upon  the  ad- 
mirable qualities  of  their  new  Pope,  and  the  consequent  ill-will 
borne  him  by  certain  of  the  cardinals,  and  more  especially  by  all 
the  Jesuits,  who  are  themselves  objects  of  extreme  dislike  to  the 


160 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


Roman  people  generally.  One  of  the  number,  alluding  to  the 
malignity  of  the  Pope's  enemies,  said  he  must  take  good  care,  or 
they  would  be  giving  him  the  "  Boccone  "  (literally,  "  the  mouth- 
ful " — i.  e.,  poison),  to  which  the  others  responded,  that  if  they 
did  so,  he  would  be  the  last  Pope  in  Rome,  as  in  the  event  of 
his  so  perishing,  the  people  would  rise  and  have  no  successor  to 
him.  So  violent,  indeed,  is  the  feeling  of  the  people,  at  present, 
in  favor  of  the  Pope  and  against  all  who  are  supposed  to  be  ini- 
mical to  him,  that  the  latter  are  bound  to  pray  day  and  night  for 
his  safety  ;  for  if  he  were  to  die  from  a  fall  from  his  carriage, 
or  the  most  undeniably  natural  death  in  the  world,  his  end  would 
not  fail  to  be  attributed  to  the  machinations  of  his  enemies,  who, 
in  any  popular  outbreak,  sure  to  follow  upon  such  a  catastrophe, 
would  inevitably  be  made  the  first  victims  of  the  violence  of  the 
people.    The  enthusiasm  of  all  classes  (except,  indeed,  the 

higher  ones)  is  not  confined  to  Rome  ;  in  Ancona,  told 

us  he  did  not  think  there  was  a  single  house  without  a  bust  or 
engraving  of  him  ;  in  Bologna,  the  very  hearth  hitherto  of  dis- 
affection and  disturbance,  the  same  spirit  prevails.  An  unfortu- 
nate priest  very  narrowly  escaped  annihilation  there,  who  ventured 
to  suggest  a  doubt  as  to  the  wisdom  of  the  act  of  amnesty.  Silk 
cravats,  of  alternate  stripes  of  yellow  and  white  (the  papal 
colors),  with  "  Viva,  Pio  Nono,"  embroidered  in  gold  upon  their 
ends,  are  worn  by  all  the  men,  and  the  women  fasten  their  waists 
with  long  sashes  of  the  same  colors  similarly  adorned.  In  Rome, 
the  rejoicing  over  the  act  of  amnesty  gave  rise  to  some  touching 
expressions  of  public  feeling,  and  more  than  one  house,  to  which 
father,  sons,  or  brothers  returned,  whose  Untimely  burial  in  poli- 
tical dungeons  had  covered  them  with  gloom,  were  hailed  and 
cheered  by  the  assembled  multitude,  who  shared  in  the  joy  of 
their  restoration  to  their  homes  and  families.  A  ludicrous  anec- 
dote was  told  us,  for  the  truth  of  which,  however,  I  do  not  vouch, 
that  Cardinal  Lambruschini,  finding  no  other  vent  for  his  dis- 


POPE  PIUS  IX. 


161 


pleasure  at  all  that  was  going  forward,  had  caused  prayers  to  be 
put  up  in  some  church  under  his  especial  charge,  for  the  enlight- 
ening of  the  Pope  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  of  which  rather  insolent 
interest  in  his  well-doing,  Pius  IX.  being  apprised,  he  expressed 
his  entire  approval  of  it,  and  his  own  extreme  need  of  the  as- 
sistance of  God's  directing  and  enlightening  grace. 

A  rumor  has  been  current  for  some  time,  that  he  intends  to 
organize  something  approximating  to  a  representative  govern- 
ment, by  permitting  the  various  states  and  towns  in  his  dominion 
to  send  up  deputies  to  Rome,  properly  instructed  to  represent  the 
grievances  and  wants  of  the  people.  This  would,  indeed,  be  an 
amazing  stride  forward.  It  is,  moreover,  added,  that  being  warn- 
ed that  this  and  similar  innovations  would  probably  induce  the 
people  to  demand  a  constitution,  the  Pope  replied,  with  much  tran- 
quillity, that  he  did  not  know  that  it  might  not  be  a  very  good  thing 
to  give  them  one.  In  the  meantime,  the  hearts  of  the  hitherto  most 
disaffected  are  all  turned  towards  him,  and  in  all  the  processions 
in  his  honor  which  succeeded  the  promulgation  of  his  amnesty, 
the  most  prominent  personages  were  the  very  young  men  whom 
the  police  had  especial  charge  to  watch  under  the  former  govern- 
ment. He  receives,  as  I  have  before  stated,  all  petitions  present- 
ed to  him,  and  an  anecdote  is  told  of  his  having  torn  a  small  piece 
from  the  cover  of  one,  which  particularly  attracted  his  attention, 
and  which,  delivering  over  to  the  functionary  appointed  to  receive 
them,  until  His  Holiness  had  leisure  to  examine  them,  was  not 
presented  among  the  rest ;  he  immediately  perceived  its  absence, 
and  demanded  it ;  and  it  is  said  to  have  contained  a  revelation  of 
malpractices  affecting  Cardinal  Lambruschini,  and  various  other 
eminent  personages.  The  access  which  he  permits  to  his  pre- 
sence, on  certain  days  in  the  week,  to  all  supplicants,  has  given 
rise  to  innumerable  stories  of  his  benevolence  and  kindness, 
which  are  eagerly  seized  on  by,  and  disseminated  among,  the 
people.    Thus  it  is  told,  that  he  ordered  one  of  his  state  horses 


162 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


to  be  given  to  a  poor  man,  whose  sole  wealth  consisted  in  his, 
which  had  just  died.  He  is,  moreover,  said  to  have  appointed  a 
small  room  in  the  Quirinal,  as  lodging  to  a  poor  old  woman,  who 
had  been  turned  out  of  her  own  by  Cardinal  Patrizi,  because  she 
was  unable  to  pay  the  rent.  A  pretty  and  I  believe  authentic 
anecdote  is  told  of  a  young  lad  of  about  twelve  years,  the  only 
son  of  his  mother,  who  was  a  poor  widow,  and  who  had  strained 
every  nerve  to  procure  for  him  a  good  education.  The  boy,  re- 
markably intelligent  and  industrious,  was  about  to  forfeit  a  chance 
of  advancement  into  some  higher  school  for  want  of  means  to 
purchase  the  class  books  required  for  his  studies  there.  He  pre- 
sented a  petition  to  the  Pope,  and  in  due  time,  to  his  mother's 
amazement,  received  an  official  summons  to  the  presence  of  His 
Holiness,  who,  having  heard  his  story,  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket, 
and  gave  the  lad  a  gold  piece,  worth  something  between  two  and 
three  scudi  ;  the  boy,  however,  returned  it,  saying,  that  it  was 
of  no  use  to  him,  as  it  was  not  sufficient  to  purchase  the  books 
he  wanted,  the  cost  of  which  amounted  to  something  more  than 
three  scudi.  The  Pope,  much  amused  and  pleased  with  the  boy's 
intelligence,  gave  him  the  requisite  sum,  and  sent  assistance  to  his 
mother,  and  his  commendation  for  the  training  she  was  bestowing 
on  her  child.  In  the  meantime,  demonstrations  of  loyalty  and  of 
political  activity  of  an  unwonted  nature  in  Rome  are  betokening 
imminent  change,  and  filling  the  souls  of  all  faint-hearted  wor- 
shippers of  present  things  with  dismay. 

On  the  8th  of  September,  the  day  of  the  Pope's  triumphant 
procession  to  the  Santa  Maria  del  Popolo,  not  only  were  the  in- 
scriptions condemned  by  the  police  as  of  a  dangerous  and  too 
liberal  tendency,  merely  covered  over  with  silver  paper,  so  that 
they  were  distinctly  legible  through  it ;  but  in  the  evening  the 
crowd,  which  had  poured  abroad  to  see  the  illumination,  actually 
compelled  the  carriages  to  turn  out  of  the  Corso,  and  make  a 
giro,  instead  of  pursuing  this  way  through  the  narrow  thorough- 


POPE  PIUS  IX. 


163 


fare,  choked  up  with  a  dense  mass  of  human  beings,  who  must 
have  run  a  considerable  risk  of  being  crushed  under  the  horses' 
hoofs  and  wheels  had  they  persisted  in  their  progress.  This  un- 
wonted demonstration  of  popular  will  struck  terror,  at  the  time, 
to  the  hearts  of  all  Conservatives ;  and  the  groans  and  hisses  by 
which  the  dangerous  vehicles  were  alone  repelled  in  their  ad- 
vance, sounded  to  them  as  ominous  of  the  downfall  of  order,  and 
the  ruin  of  society,  as  the  cheers  and  acclamations  with  which 
the  people  greeted  their  sovereign  on  the  same  morning ;  the  like 
of  which  had,  it  was  averred,  never  been  heard  in  Rome.  To  an 
Englishwoman,  accustomed  to  hear  the  voice  of  her  countrymen 
expressing  heartily  and  feelingly  their  public  discontent  and  joy, 
both  sounded  faint  enough ;  the  Roman  people  of  these  days 
know  neither  how  to  groan  nor  cheer  ;  but  if  matters  do  not  alter, 
it  will  not  be  long  before  they  learn  both  from  Pius  IX.  and  his 
faithless  opposers. 

Another  still  more  portentous  event  has  just  taken  place  in 
Rome  ;  a  public  political  dinner  in  honor  of  the  Pope.  It  was 
an  unfortunate  accident,  if  not  an  act  of  deliberate  folly,  that 
there  was  a  great  ball  given  the  same  night  at  the  Palazzo 
Borghese ;  some  said  with  a  view  of  withdrawing  any  of  the 
young  men  of  the  higher  classes,  who  might  have  felt  disposed 
to  join  the  liberalist  festival,  and  others  considered  it  merely  as 
an  expression  of  total  indifference  on  the  part  of  those  classes, 
and  especially  of  the  noble  house  where  they  met,  and  which  is 
known  to  be  little  friendly  to  the  present  government,  and  com- 
pletely devoted  to  the  influence  of  the  Jesuits.  At  the  close  of 
the  dinner,  when  the  utmost  enthusiasm  and  the  utmost  order 
also  prevailed,  a  number  of  those  who  had  assisted  at  it,  repaired 
to  the  piazza  in  front  of  the  Borghese  Palace,  and  there  de- 
manded that  lights  should  be  placed  in  the  windows  in  honor  of 
the  Pope.  This,  however,  was  not  only  not  complied  with,  but 
the  blinds  were  immediately  closed,  so  as  to  exhibit  the  most 


164 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


perfect  disregard  to  the  popular  request — a  proceeding  which 
elicited  no  further  mark  of  displeasure  on  the  part  of  the 
crowd  than  some  angry  groans  and  hisses,  after  which  they  dis- 
persed.   My  friend  ,  who  was  among  them,  reported  to 

me  that  their  behavior  was  in  no  respect  violent  or  disorderly, 
and  their  demonstrations  of  resentment  such  as  would  have  been 
thought  nothing  of  in  any  constitutional  country ;  while,  to  show 
how  differently  conclusions  are  drawn,  according  to  people's 

prejudices,  Mr.  de   went  home  to  his  wife  as  pale  as  a 

ghost,  and  assured  her  that  Metternich  would  have  to  interfere 
immediately  to  put  down  the  frightful  revolutionary  spirit  of  the 
rabid  Roman  patriots.  Upon  the  whole,  it  seems  to  me  a  pity 
that  the  small  token  of  sympathy  demanded  on  this  occasion  was 
withheld  ;  the  stream  of  popular  opinion  and  feeling  may  be 
resisted  and  withstood  successfully  only  to  a  certain  point ;  and 
beyond  that,  those,  who  would  not  be  overwhelmed  by  it,  must 
throw  themselves  upon  its  surface,  and  by  a  timely  consent  to 
its  direction,  in  time,  perhaps,  obtain  the  direction  of  it.  It 
is  a  thousand  pities  that  those  whose  interests  are  most  at 
stake  in  perceiving  this,  so  seldom  do,  before  it  is  too 
late.  The  refusal  to  illuminate  the  windows,  and  the  closing 
of  the  blinds,  at  the  Palazzo  Borghese,  are  said  to  have  been 
instigated  by  the  governer  of  Rome,  Monsignor  Marini,  whose 
unpopularity  was  already  quite  great  enough,  without  this 
additional  score  against  him  in  the  public  memory. 

Without,  of  course,  understanding  the  detail  of  the  political 
questions  which  render  the  measures  of  the  present  Papal 
government  so  deeply  interesting,  in  one  way  or  other,  to  the 
whole  of  Europe,  there  is  something  in  the  unbounded  expecta- 
tions of  Pius  the  IX. 's  own  subjects,  mixing  up,  as  they  undoubt- 
edly do,  the  idea  of  his  pre-eminent  religious  sovereignty  with 
that  of  his  political  power  and  capacity,  extremely  touching  to 
one  who  perceives  the  enormous  disparity  between  the  two. 


POPE  PIUS  IX. 


165 


Surrounded  by  governments  hostile  to  all  liberal  reform,  and 
watching  with  a  jealous  eye  the  faintest  expression  of  that  spirit 
in  the  population  of  their  neighbors'  territories,  of  which  they  so 
dread  and  detest  the  manifestations  in  their  own — unsupported  by 
the  nobles,  whose  sympathies  (as  when,  except  in  rare  individual 
cases,  were  they  otherwise  ?  and  the  instinct  is  just,  for  their 
conservatism  is  but  self-preservation)  are  all  against  progress — 
feared  and  disliked  in  his  more  liberal  policy  by  the  generality 
of  his  priesthood — mortally  hated  by  that  powerful  body,  the 
Jesuits,  and  the  vast  multitudes  who  directly  or  indirectly  are 
influenced  by  them — unsupported  by  the  more  ardent  and  ex- 
treme reformers,  whose  abhorrence  of  former  tyrannies  has  led 
them  to  adopt  republican  theories  of  government,  and  who, 
therefore,  fear  his  partial  reforms  as  likely  to  satisfy  the  people 
whom  they  would  fain  see  carried  towards  the  issues  they  em- 
brace, and  which,  of  course,  the  Pope  cannot  adopt — blindly 
and  enthusiastically  worshipped  by  the  middling  and  lower 
classes,  whose  eager  desire  for  change  will  be  as  ready  to  accuse 
him  in  their  impatience  of  a  moderate  and  gradual  course,  as 
they  now  are  to  admire  him  for  the  mere  promise  of  reform  they 
find  in  his  first  measures — with  only  one  minister  of  ability, 
integrity,  and  personal  devotion  to  him  (the  liberal  and  enlight- 
ened Cardinal  Gizzi,  unfortunately  a  man  of  nearly  ninety  years 
old) — with  an  empty  exchequer,  and  finances  crippled  by  de- 
plorable mismanagement  of  the  last  administration — such  is  the 
present  position  of  Pius  IX.,  upon  whose  most  benevolent  and 
refined  countenance  few  traces  are  discernible  of  a  spirit  capa- 
ble of  engaging  single-handed  with  such  difficulties. 

The  anomaly,  as  well  as  the  difficulty,  of  this  position  strikes 
me  forcibly.  I  have  seen  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  in  the 
United  States,  the  faith  of  implicit  obedience,  and  absolute  sub- 
serviency, encountering  the  political  spirit  of  unbridled  demo- 
cracy— perhaps  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  social  phenomena 


166 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


that  wonderful  country  presents  ;  and  the  Roman  Catholic 
religion  thrives,  and  spreads,  and  flourishes,  because  it  is  sepa- 
rate from  the  political  government,  and  lends  itself  with  that 
admirable  faculty  of  adaptation — one  of  its  vital  merits  and 
chief  security  for  its  duration — to  the  paramount  spirit  of  the 
institutions,  and  universal  direction  of  the  public  mind.  The 
Roman  Catholic  religion  can  subsist,  and  greatly  prosper,  even 
in  republican  America,  but  it  is  because  it  is  there  a  religion  and 
not  a  government :  as  religion  it  is  the  most  pliant,  malleable, 
insinuating,  pervading,  and  powerful  that  has  yet  existed;  as 
government,  it  is  rigid,  uncompromising,  despotic,  and  incapable 
of  either  receiving  or  accepting  the  impulse  towards  universal 
freedom,  which  the  world  in  these  latter  times  seems  to  obey. 
The  Bishop  of  Rome  may  yet  be  the  powerful  head  of  the  most 
powerful  sect  of  Christendom  ;  I  doubt  if  he  can  ever  be  the 
enlightened  sovereign  of  a  people  with  free  institutions ;  there- 
fore it  is  that  the  acclamations  which  precede  and  follow  the 
present  Pope's  footsteps  seem  sad  to  me,  for  they  seem  to  me 
to  demand  impossibilities,  and  to  foretell  disappointments.  It 
may  be  that  his  apparent  sympathy  with  the  people  may  grow 
cold,  for  Gregory  XVI.  began  his  reign  too  with  an  amnesty  ; 
it  may  be  that,  appointed  by  God  to  the  especial  ministry  of 
these  times,  he  may  only  have  opened  the  flood-gates  whence 
the  torrent  issuing  shall  bear  him  to  the  ground :  if,  however,  no 
subsequent  acts  of  his  own  belie  the  promise  of  his  present  mea- 
sures, even  if  the  spirit  that  he  evokes  is  too  powerful  for  him, 
and  he  should  fall  a  sacrifice  to  the  results  of  his  own  actions,  he 
has  earned  the  love  of  his  people  and  the  sympathy  and  admira- 
tion of  the  world  already,  and  built  himself,  with  one  great  act 
of  wisdom  and  of  mercy,  a  monument  of  noble  memories,  round 
which  the  blessings  of  the  Roman  people  will  never  cease 
to  rise. 


THE  POPE  GOING  TO  THE  LATERAN. 


167 


TO  PIUS  IX. 

It  may  be  that  the  stone  which  thou  art  heaving 

From  off  thy  people's  neck  shall  fall  and  crush  thee  ; 
It  may  be  that  the  sudden  flood  shall  push  thee 

From  ofF  the  rock,  whence,  prophet-like,  believing 

In  God's  great  future,  thou  dost  set  it  free ; 
Yet  heave  it,  heave  it,  Heaven  high,  nor  fear 
To  be  o'erwhelm'd  in  the  first  wild  career 

Of  those  long-prison'd  tides  of  liberty. 

That  stone  which  thou  hast  lifted  from  the  heart 
Of  a  whole  nation  shall  become  to  thee 

A  glorious  monument,  such  as  no  art 
E'er  piled  above  a  mortal  memory  : 

Falling  beneath  it,  thou  shalt  have  a  tomb 

That  shall  make  low  the  loftiest  dome  in  Rome. 


We  went  on  Sunday  to  see  the  Pope  take  possession  of  the 
Lateran, — a  ceremony  of  particular  interest,  from  all  the  pecu- 
liar circumstances  connected  with  the  new  reign.  The  church 
of  the  Lateran  is  held  in  even  higher  veneration  than  that  of  St. 
Peter's,  being  built  upon  the  site  of  the  first  Christian  church 
founded  by  Constantine  the  Great.    From  the  windows  of  the 

Palazetto  Torlonia,  the  lodgings  of  the  ,  who  most  kindly 

invited  us  to  them,  we  saw  to  perfection  the  procession  debouch 
from  the  Via  San  Romualdo,  on  its  descent  from  the  Quirinal 
into  the  Piazza  del  Gesu.  The  Pope  alone  being  in  his  carriage, 
and  everybody  else  on  horseback,  the  reverend  body  (or  bodies) 
of  cardinals  were  exempted  from  this  part  of  the  day's  duty, 
which  would  have  been,  to  many  of  them,  all  but  impossible. 
The  thronged  and  tapestried  streets,  the  crowded  windows  and 
balconies,  the  wreaths  and  branches  of  flowers  and  evergreens, 


168 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


the  universal  enthusiasm  and  "  allegria,"  recalled  the  days  of 
the  Carnival.  A  very  different  procession,  however,  presently 
filled  the  many-colored  avenue,  and  suggested  memories  of  a 
far  more  serious  nature ;  the  Crucifero,  in  his  splendid  purple 
robes,  bare-headed,  his  black  hair  falling  on  his  shoulders,  and 
his  grave  and  handsome  countenance,  admirably  becoming  the 
solemnity  of  his  costume  and  office,  riding  on  a  snow-white  mule, 
and  bearing  a  huge  golden  crucifix  ;  then  the  Guardia  Nobile, 
surrounding  the  Pope ;  the  Captain  of  the  Swiss  Guard,  clad  in 
complete  sheath  armor ;  the  secretaries  in  middle-age  costumes, 
of  the  richest  and  most  picturesque  black  velvet  and  gold  ;  and 
then  the  numerous  train  of  Prelati,  some  in  scarlet  and  point 
lace, — others  attired  in  purple  robes,  with  short  over-skirts  of 
fine  lawn  and  lace,  with  a  hood  or  wimple  of  the  same  sur- 
mounted by  a  round  black  hat,  precisely  the  costume  with  which 
all  Petrarch's  representations  have  rendered  us  so  familiar  ;  all 
of  them  mounted,  their  horses  led  at  a  foot's-pace  by  serving 
men  on  foot.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  anything  more  beau- 
tiful in  point  of  color,  or  more  picturesque  in  every  respect, 
than  this  fine  procession  passing  along  by  the  Doria  and  Alfieri 
palaces,  and  all  that  noble  range  of  buildings  which  fronts  the 
Piazza  di  Venezia  and  the  Piazza  del  Gesu.  At  one  moment 
particularly  the  coup  oVodl  was  splendid  ;  a  few  drops  of  rain 
fell,  and  all  the  prelates  in  scarlet  dresses  drew  over  their  heads 
the  scarlet  silk  hoods,  which  were  hanging  on  their  shoulders,  a 
measure  of  prudence  for  which  a  painter  would  have  offered  up 
infinite  thanks  to  the  weather.  We  have  had  tickets  of  admis- 
sion given  us  for  the  Coliseum,  but,  fearful  of  losing  the  bene- 
diction, we  omitted  going  there,  and  proceeded  straight  to  the 
Lateran.  We  might  have  done  both  very  well,  and  I  regret  ex- 
tremely that  we  did  not,  for  1  am  sure,  from  's  account, 

nothing  could  have  been  finer  than  the  view  obtained  by  those 
(and  they  were  thousands)  who,  filling  once  more  with  eager  ex- 


THE  POPE  GOING  TO  THE  LATERAN. 


169 


pectation  the  arches  and  galleries  of  the  Coliseum,  and  looking 
towards  the  Capitol,  beheld  the  scarlet  and  purple  procession 
wind  down  from  it,  traverse  the  forum,  and,  passing  underneath 
the  arch  of  Titus,  unroll  itself  along  the  Via  Sacra.  At  the 
time  in  which  we  might  have  seen  this  and  did  not,  we  were, 
however,  unconscious  of  our  loss,  and  very  happy  in  the  excel- 
lent position  where  we  obtained  seats  nearly  opposite  the  Church 
of  St.  John  Lateran.  As  the  Papal  procession  approached,  the 
vacant  space  before  the  church,  and  almost  half  way  to  San  Pie- 
tro  in  Vinculii,  became  thronged  with  a  dense  mass  of  people, 
through  which  the  pageant  slowly  made  its  way.  We  watched 
the  Pope's  entrance  into  the  Basilica,  by  the  movement  of  the 
white  peacock's  fans,  and  the  canopy  borne  over  him  ;  and  after 
the  scarlet  priests  and  purple  monsignori  had  all  disappeared  un- 
der the  sacred  portals,  we  directed  our  attention  to  the  crowd 
rolling  round  us,  where  the  variety  and  picturesqueness  of  cos- 
tume, and  the  great  beauty  of  the  men  and  women  of  the  lower 
classes,  and  the  peasants  who  had  come  into  Rome  for  the  cele- 
bration, kept  our  attention  perpetually  alive  and  interested  ;  from 
time  to  time  we  looked  to  the  great  window  above  the  middle 
portal  of  the  church,  but  the  dark  crimson  balcony  and  alcove 
were  filled  only  with  choristers,  and  every  now  and  then  a  cardinal 
appeared  and  looked  down  on  the  vast  assembly  which  was  every 
moment  growing  more  numerous.  At  length  the  clerical  subal- 
terns were  seen  to  arrange  themselves  in  ceremonious  order ; 
huge  wax  tapers,  carried  by  white-robed  priests,  came  slanting 
forwards  in  the  dark  recess ;  presently  the  white  peacock  fans 
were  seen,  and  the  Pope  was  borne  to  the  front  of  the  balcony  : 
immediately  profound  silence  filled  the  whole  wide  expanse ;  the 
crowd  suddenly  ceased  to  move,  to  speak,  it  almost  seemed,  to 
breathe  ;  and  the  choristers  began  chanting  a  few  bars,  during 
which  the  stillness  became  absolutely  perfect ;  then  the  Pope 
rose  up,  robed  all  in  white,  under  that  crimson  dome,  and  thus 


170 


A  YEAR  OF  CONSOLATION. 


lifted  above  all  heads,  looking  like  some  colossal  statue,  he 
chanted  with  a  loud  sonorous  voice,  that  resounded  over  the 
kneeling  crowd,  his  invocation  of  the  Trinity,  and  spreading 
wide  his  arms  showered  down  his  benediction  upon  the  city  and 
the  world,  to  which  the  people  responded  with  an  amen  of  accla- 
mations, amid  which  their  sovereign  was  borne  back  from  their 
sight.  I  am  persuaded  that  this  must  be  a  finer  thing  than  even 
the  benediction  from  St.  Peter  ;  for  St.  John  Lateran  is  a  beau- 
tiful church,  and  standing  close  to  the  walls  of  Rome — looks 
over  them,  the  broken  arches  of  the  aqueducts,  the  campagna, 
and  the  Sabine  and  Alban  mountains. 

On  Monday,  the  7th  of  December,  I  went  to  the  fountain  of 
Trevi — for  those  who  drink  of  its  sweet  waters  return,  it  is  said, 
to  Rome.  It  was  a  dark  and  gloomy  day,,  and  raining  fast ;  but 
I  knelt,  nevertheless,  upon  the  edge  of  the  beautiful  fountain  to 
drink  to  my  return. 

DEPARTING. 

Pour  we  libations  to  the  father,  Jove, 

And  bid  him  watch  propitious  o'er  our  way  ; 

Pile  on  the  household  altar  fragrant  wreaths, 

And  to  th'  auspicious  Lares  bid  farewell, 

Beneath  whose  guardianship  we  have  abode. 

Blest  be  the  threshold  over  which  we  pass, 

Turning  again,  with  hands  devout  uplifted  ; 

Blest  be  the  roof-tree,  and  the  hearth  it  shelters ; 

Blest  be  the  going  forth  and  coming  home 

Of  those  who  dwell  here ;  blest  their  rising  up, 

And  blest  their  lying  down  to  holy  slumber  ; 

Blest  be  the  married  love,  sacred  and  chaste  ; 

Blest  be  the  children's  head,  the  mother's  heart, 

The  father's  hope.    Reach  down  the  wanderer's  staff, — 


DEPARTING. 


171 


Tie  on  the  sandals  on  the  traveller's  feet : 
The  wan-eyed  morn  weeps  in  the  watery  east : 
Gird  up  the  loins,  and  let  us  now  depart. 

On  Thursday,  the  8th  of  December,  I  left  Rome. 


THE  END. 


WILEY  &  PUTNAM'S 

CATALOGUE 

OF 

THEIR  VARIOUS  PUBLICATIONS, 

INCLUDING 

MANY  WORKS  OF  VALUE  AND  INTEREST 

IN  THE  DIFFERENT  DEPARTMENTS  OF  THEOLOGY,  THE  SCIENCES 
AND  USEFUL  ARTS,  GENERAL  LITERATURE,  POETRY, 
HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  CRITICISM,  ETC. 

WITH  A  NUMBER  OF 

NEW    AND  POPULAR 

ILLUSTRATED  JUVENILE  BOOKS. 

FOR  SALE    BY    THE  BOOKSELLERS  GENERALLY. 


WILEY  AND  PUTNAM, 
161   BROADWAY,  NEW  YORK. 

1847. 


WILEY  AND  PUTNAM'S 

LIBBARY  OF  CHOICE  READING. 

"BOOKS  WHICH  ARE  BOOKS." 

161  Broadway,  Jan.,  1847 
The  publishers  of  the  Library  of  Choice  Reading  beg  leave  to 
call  attention  to  the  following  books,  published  in  the  series,  by 
which  it  will  appear  that  novelty,  variety,  and  standard  merit, 
have  always  been  preserved,  and  the  promise  of  the  original 
prospectus  faithfully  kept.  It  was  proposed  to  publish  "  the  best 
books  of  Travels,  Biographies,  works  of  Classic  Fiction — where 
the  moral  is  superior  to  the  mere  story,  without  any  sacrifice  of 
the  interest — occasional  choice  volumes  of  Poetry,  Essays,  Criti- 
cisms, contributions  to  History,  and  generally  such  single  volumes, 
written  by  men  of  genius,  as  will  equally  delight  the  scholar  and 
the  general  reader." 

In  accordance  with  the  prospectus,  the  series  of  publications 
was  commenced  in  March,  1845,  with  Eothen,  and  has  since 
been  rapidly  continued,  averaging,  up  to  the  present  date,  includ- 
ing the  parallel  series  of  American  books,  one  volume  per  week. 
The  reception  of  these  books  by  the  public  and  the  press  has 
been  unequivocal  in  their  favor.  The  series  will  be  continued  in 
the  same  spirit  with  which  it  has  been  hitherto  conducted.  Ar- 
rangements have  been  made  for  new  copyright  works  at  home, 
and  for  the  simultaneous  publication,  by  contract  with  the  Eng- 
lish authors,  of  new  books  of  interest  appearing  abroad.  Several 
important  works  are  now  in  preparation. 

The  two  series  now  include  valuable  productions  by  the  fol- 
lowing authors : — Thomas  Carlyle,  William  Hazlitt,  Leigh 
Hunt,  Martin  Farquhar  Tupper,  Professor  Wilson,  Thomas 
Hood,  John  Keats,  Charles  Lamb,  W.  M.  Thackeray,  Charles 
Dickens,  Lord  Mahon,  Basil  Montagu,  Mrs.  Jameson,  Elliott 
Warburton,  Sir  Francis  Head,  Kinglake,  Laman  Blanchard, 
La  Motte  Fouque,  Victor  Hugo,  Goethe,  &c,  &c. 

The  American  series  contains  works  by  S.  Margaret  Fuller, 
Mrs.  C.  M.  Kirkland,  Edgar  A.  Poe,  Cornelius  Mathews, 
W.  G.  Simms,  George  H.  Calvert,  J.  T.  Headley,  J.  Bayard 
Taylor,  Rev.  W.  Ingraham  Ktp,  James  Hall,  Rev.  George  B. 
Cheever,  J.  G.  Whittier,  Nathaniel  Hawthorne. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


"  A  series  which  is  now  universally  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  ever 
issued  in  this  country." — Courier  and  Enquirer,  Dec,  1846. 

"  This  library  is  put  up  in  beautiful  style,  as  well  as  offered  at  a  very 
cheap  rate.  We  are  pleased  to  sea»such  good  paper  and  print,  for  we 
think  the  habit  of  reading  ill-printed,  dingy  books  deteriorates  not  only  the 
eye-sight  but  the  taste.  Books,  if  good  for  anything,  deserve  a  cleanly  dress. 
To  degrade  them,  even  outwardly,  has  the  same  tendency  as  the  use  of 
tobacco,  to  pollute  and  vulgarize  all  the  habits  of  life." — .V.  P.  Tribune. 

"  This  is  printed  in  a  cheap  form,  but  so  attractively  that  the  volumes 
really  invite  perusal.  The  intention  of  the  publishers  is  to  supply  the  de- 
mand for  the  choicest  literary  publications  of  the  day — to  present  that  read- 
ing which  cherishes  refined  and  cultivated  taste,  and  affords  at  once  in- 
struction and  delight." — Baltimore  American. 

"  Wiley  and  Putnam's  '  Library  of  Choice  Reading.' — Under  this  title,  a 
series  of  the  most  valuable  and  agreeable  reading  has  been  commenced  in 
New  York,  to  supply  a  deficiency  in  the  general  character  of  '  cheap  litera- 
ture.' The  works  already  published  are  admirable  selections  for  a  library, 
and  as  the  publishers  express  the  determination  to  issue  nothing  but '  books 
which  ARE  books,'  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  others  equally 
worthy  of  universal  circulation  are  in  store  ;  and  their  circular  convinces 
us  it  is  so." — Auburn  Journal. 

[Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Samuel  8.  Randall,  Esq.,  JVew  York  State 
Superintendent  of  Common  Schools.} 

"  I  have  regularly  procured  and  perused  the  numbers  of  your  '  Library 
of  Choice  Reading'  as  they  have  appeared,  and  am  happy  to  perceive  that 
the  first  twenty  volumes,  neatly  and  strongly  bound,  are  offered  at  a  price 
which  places  them  within  the  reach  of  our  District  Libraries.  I  know  of 
no  series  of  books  of  a  similar  kind,  which,  in  my  judgment,  are  more  de- 
serving of  public  approbation,  and  of  the  favorable  attention  of  inhabitants 
and  trustees  of  School  Districts.  The  '  well  of  English  undefiled,'  which 
so  eminently  characterizes  the  writings,  and  pervades  the  clear  and  flow- 
ing style  of  Lamb,  Hazlitt,  and  Leigh  Hunt — the  valuable  information  and 
attractive  descriptions  of  foreign  tourists,  and  especially  of  our  talented 
countryman,  Mr.  Headley — and  the  vein  of  inimitable  pleasantry,  rich 
humor  and  refined  sentiment  which  runs  through  the  lighter  portions  of 
the  series — all  combine  to  warrant  the  claim  in  favor  of  this  collection, 
that  it  comprises  '  books  which  are  books.'  In  common  with  thousands  of 
our  fellow-citizens,  I  watched  with  deep  interest  the  progress  of  an  under- 
taking confessedly  designed  to  create  and  supply  in  the  public  mind  a 
taste  for  the  higher  departments  of  English,  European  and  American 
literature,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  wretched  trash,  which,  under  the  guise 
of  fiction,  seemed  to  have  established  a  permanent  dominion  over  the  read- 
ing masses  of  our  land.  The  triumphant  success  of  such  an  enterprise, 
followed  up  as  it  has  been  by  republications  of  many  of  the  most  standard 
productions  of  the  age,  heretofore  virtually  debarred  from  the  perusal  of 
the  multitude,  reflects  the  highest  credit  upon  the  intelligence  and  sound 
discrimination  as  well  of  the  publishers,  as  of  the  reading  community,  and 
may  well  be  regarded  as  the  harbinger  of  a  new  and  brighter  era  in 
American  literature." 


WILEY  &  PUTNAM'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS. 


LIBRARY  OF  CHOICE  READING 


Kinglake's  Eothen. 

"  The  best  book  of  Eastern  travel  that  we  know." — London  Examiner— 50  cents. 

No.  2. 

The  Amber  Witch. 

"  It  is  worthy  (we  can  give  no  higher  praise)  of  De  Foe."— Quarterly  Review. 
"  We  shall  have  forgotten  the  Jeanie  Deans  of  Scott,  and  the  Little  Nell  of  Dickens, 
when  we  forget  the  Mary  Schweidler  of  Doctor  Meinhold." — Examiner. — 37i  cents. 

No.  3. 

Undine  and  Sintram. 

"  Undine  is  a  most  exquisite  work." — S.  T.  Coleridge. — 50  cents. 

No.  4. 

Leigh  Hunt's  Imagination  and  Fancy. 

"  A  better  work  than  this  for  the  purposes  of  the  '  Library '  could  scarcely  have  been 
selected."— JV.  P.  Willis.— 50  cents. 

No.  5. 

Diary  of  Lady  Willoughby. 

"  This  book  is  more  like  lifting  the  lid  of  the  lily's  heart,  and  seeing  how  the  perfume  is 
distilled,  than  anything  less  poetical  that  we  can  think  of." — Evening  Mirror.— -25  cents. 

Nos.  6—7. 

Hazlitt's  Table-Talk. 

"  Hazlitt  never  wrote  one  dull  nor  one  frigid  line." — TaWs  Magazine. — 37£  cents  each. 

No.  8. 

Headlong  Hall  and  Nightmare  Abbey. 

"  This  is  a  witty,  amusing  book." — JVezo  York  Tribune. — 37£  cents. 

No.  9. 

The  French  in  Algiers. 

"  There  is  something  refreshing  in  reading  of  the  men  of  instinct,  such  as  the  Bedouins." 
— Tribune.— 37£  cents. 

No.  10. 

Tales  from  the  Gesta  Romanorum. 

"  A  quiet  humor,  a  quaintness  and  terseness  of  style,  will  strongly  recommend  them." — 
English  Churchman. — 37£  cents. 

Nos.  11—12. 

Warburton's  Crescent  and  the  Cross. 

"  This  delightful  work  is,  from  first  to  last,  a  splendid  panorama  of  Eastern  scenery,  in 
the  full  blaze  of  its  magnificence." — London  Morning  Post. — 50  cents  each. 

No.  13. 

Hazlitt's  Literature  of  the  Age  of  Elizabeth. 

"  Hazlitt's  taste  was  not  the  creature  of  schools  and  canons — it  was  begotten  of  Enthu- 
siasm by  Thought." — Sir  Edward  Bulwer  Lytton. — 50  cents. 

Nos.  14  and  20. 

Leigh  Hunt's  Indicator. 

"  Wit,  poet,  prose-man,  party-man,  translator, 
Hunt,  thy  best  title  yet  is  Indicator  '." — Charles  Lamb.—bO  cents. 


WILEY  &  PUTNAM'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS. 


Nos.  15  and  37. 

Heinrich  Zsehokke's  Tales. 

"  Zsehokke's  Tales  exhibit  talent,  grace,  and  facility  of  style,  and  are  particularly  dis- 
tinguished for  their  good  moral  tendency." — Ency.  Britannica. — 50  cents  each. 

Nos.  16  and  19. 

Hood's  Prose  and  Verse. 

"  A  very  judicious  selection,  designed  to  embrace  Hood's  more  earnest  writings,  those 
which  were  written  most  directly  from  the  heart,  which  reflect  most  faithfully  his  life  and 
opinions." — Broadway  Journal. — 37£  cents  each. 

No.  17. 

Hazlitt's  Characters  in  Shakspeare's  Plays. 

"  An  admirable  book,  full  of  simple,  earnest,  profound  criticism,  with  an  excellent  tone 
of  feeling."— Jfew  York  Evangelist.— 50  cents. 

No.  18. 

The  Crock  of  Gold. 

■  A  powerful  tale  by  Martin  Farquhar  Tupper,  author  of  'Proverbial  Philosophy.  "— 
AV»  Yerrk  Observer.— -37 J  cents. 

No.  21. 

Professor  Wilson's  Genius  and  Character  of  Burns. 

"  This  glorious  work  needs  no  commendation."—  Tribune.— 50  cents. 

Nos.  22—23. 

Charles  Lamb's  Essays  of  Elia. 

"  Shakspeare  himself  might  have  read  them,  and  Hamlet  have  quoted  them  :  for  truly 
was  our  excellent  friend  of  the  genuine  line  of  Yorick."— Leigh  Hunt's  London  Journal.— 
37J  cents  each. 

No.  24. 

Sir  Francis  Head's  Bubbles  from  the  Brunnen. 

"  At  once  an  instructive  and  amusing  book.  It  contains  a  great  deal  of  information." — 
London  Times. — 50  cents. 

Nos.  25  and  59. 

Hazlitt's  Table-Talk.— (2d  Series.) 

"  In  a  number  of  fine  passages,  which  one  would  read  not  only  once,  but  again  and 
again,  we  hardly  know  in  the  whole  circle  of  English  literature  any  writer  who  can  match 
Hazlitt." — Penny  Cyclopedia—  50  cents  each. 

No.  26. 

Basil  Montagu's  Selections 

From  TAYLOR,  SOUTH,  BARROW,  FULLER,  &c— 50  cents. 

No.  27. 

"  The  Twins"  and  "  Heart,"  by  Tupper. 

"  In  style,  sentiment,  and  purpose,  equally  commendable  with  that  valuable  work  '  The 
Crock  of  Gold.'  " — Evening  Mirror. — 50  cents. 

No.  28. 

Hazlitt's  Comic  Writers  of  England. 

"  He  at  once  analyzes  and  describes— so  that  our  enjoyments  of  loveliness  are  not  chilled 
but  brightened  "—Edinburgh  Review.— 50  cents. 

Nos.  29— 3a 

Charles  Lamb's  Dramatic  Poets. 

"  Nowhere  are  the  resources  of  the  English  tongue  in  power,  in  sweetness,  terror, 
pathos  ;  in  description  and  dialogue,  so  well  displayed."—  Broadway  Journal.— 50  cts  each. 


WILEY  &  PUTNAM'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS. 


Nos.  31—32. 

Tupper's  Proverbial  Philosophy. 

"  One  of  the  most  thoughtful,  brilliant,  and  finished  productions  of  the  age."— Banner 
of  the  Cross.— 25  cents  each. 

No.  33. 

Goldsmith's  Vicar  of  Wakefield. 

"  Its  language,  in  the  words  of  an  elegant  writer,  is  what '  angels  might  have  heard  and 
virgins  told.'  "—  Washington  Irving.— Ti '4  cents  each. 

Nos.  34—35. 

Lord  Mahon's  Life  of  the  Great  Conde. 

"  A  very  interesting  and  skilful  narrative." — Quarterly  Review. — 374  cents  each. 

No.  36. 

Hazlitt's  English  Poets. 

"  In  the  laboratory  of  his  intellect,  analysis  was  turned  to  the  sweet  uses  of  alchemy — 
He  is  seldom  merely  critical." — Serjeant  Talfourd. — 50  cents. 

No.  38. 

Hervey's  Book  of  Christmas. 

"Every  leaf  of  this  book  affords  a  feast  worthy  of  the  season."— Dr.  Hawk's  Church 
Record. — 50  cents. 

Nos.  39—42. 

Cromwell's  Letters  and  Speeches  by  Carlyle. 

"  We  believe  it  to  be  without  precedent  or  example  as  a  book  of  patient,  honest,  dignified 
research  ;  as  a  book  of  unwearied  diligence  and  labor  ;  and  as  a  manly  and  high  voiced 
appeal  from  the  shows  and  shadows  of  ignorance  and  imperfect  judgment,  to  the  eternal 
substance  of  Truth  and  History." — London  Examiner — 50  cents  each. 

Nos.  43—44. 

Autobiography  of  Benvenuto  Cellini. 

"  More  amusing  than  any  work  I  know." — Horace  Walpole. — 50  cents  each. 

Nos.  45 — 46. 

The  Rhine.    By  Victor  Hugo. 

u  His  descriptions  are  wonderfully  spirited." — Quarterly  Review. — 37£  cents  each. 

No.  47. 

Memoirs  of  Father  Ripa. 

u  As  interesting  a  work  as  Borrow's  Bible  in  Spain." — London  Spectator. — 37|  cents. 
Nos.  48—49. 

Tasso's  Jerusalem  Delivered.    By  Fairfax. 

"  The  completest  translation  and  nearest  like  its  original  of  any  we  have  seen."— Leigh 
Hunt. — 50  cents  each. 

Nos.  50—51. 

Laman  Blanchard's  Sketches  from  Life. 

EDITED  BY  BULWER. 
"  An  abundance  of  vivacity,  shrewd  narration,  and  kindly  feeling.'*— London  Examiner. 
— 374  cents  each. 

Nos.  52—54. 

Leigh  Hunt's  Italian  Poets. 

"  Mr.  Hunt's  book  has  been  aptly  styled,  a  series  of  exquisite  engravings  of  the  magnifi- 
cent pictures  painted  by  these  great  Italian  masters."— Journal  of  Commerce.— 374  cents 
each. 


WILEY  &  PUTNAM'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS. 


No.  55. 

Dickens's  Cricket  on  the  Hearth. 

"  A  gay,  good  humored  tale,  with  a  charming  moral." — London  Examiner. — '25  cents. 
Nos.  56 — 57. 

Poetical  Works  of  John  Keats. 

"  They  are  flushed  all  over  with  the  rich  lights  of  fancy  ;  and  so  colored  ana  bestrewn 
with  the  flowers  of  poetry  that,  even  while  perplexed  and  bewildered  in  their  labyrinths, 
it  is  impossible  to  resist  the  intoxication  of  their  sweetness,  or  to  shut  our  hearts  to  the 
enchantment  they  so  lavishly  present." — Francis  Jeffrey. — 37£  cents  each. 

No.  58. 

Journey  from  Cornhill  to  Cairo. 

"  It  is  wonderful  what  a  description  of  people  and  things,  what  humorous  pictures,  what 
innumerable  remarks  and  allusions  it  contains." — Douglas  Jerrold's  Magazine. — 37£  cents. 

Nos.  60—61. 

Thiodolf  the  Icelander  and  Aslauga's  Knight. 

BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF  "  UNDINE." 
"  As  a  work  full  of  fine  thought,  sentiment,  manly  practice,  rules  and  examples  of  con 
duct  and  of  pure  religion.  Thiodolf  should  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  children  and  youth  of 
both  sexes." — Evening  Mirror. — 37£  cents  each. 

No.  62. 

Poems  by  Thomas  Hood. 

" These  are  verses  you  admire  and  talk  about;  these  are  verses  you  treasure  up  for 
solitary  and  silent  hours." — Examiner. — 50  cents. 

No.  63. 

Dickens's  Pictures  from  Italy. 

"We  believe  this  is  as  much  as  can  be  made  of  travel.  We  cannot  conceive  its  im 
pressions  conveyed  more  vividly,  with  a  keener  sense  of  enjoyment,  with  a  more  pene- 
trating power  of  observation,  or  in  a  style  of  greater  strength  and  vivacity."— Examiner 
— 37£  cents. 

No.  64. 

Mrs.  Jameson's  Memoirs  and  Essays 

ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  ART,  LITERATURE  AND  SOCIAL  MORALS. 
"We  have  here  papers  on  Washington  Allston  and  the  Xanthian  Marbles;  an  admirable 
essay  on  Woman's  Mission  and  Woman's  Position  ;  another  on  Mothers  and  Governesses ; 
and  an  enthusiastic  eloge  of  Adelaide  Kemble.  But  the  paper  which  should  be  most 
popular  is,  the  House  of  Titian.  Nothing  can  be  more  true  in  tone  than  this." — London 
Athenceum. — 37£  cents. 

Nos.  65—66. 

Beckford's  Italy,  Spain,  and  Portugal. 

"  Glowing  with  genius."— Gentleman's  Magazine. — 50  cents  each. 

Nos.  67—68. 

Hochelaga  ;  or  England  in  the  New  World. 

EDITED   BY  WARBURTON. 

"  A  piece  of  fresh,  lively,  and  instructive  midsummer  reading." — London  Athenaum. — 
37J  cents  each. 

No.  69. 

Carlyle's  Heroes  and  Hero  Wor&hip. 

"  A  book  full  of  original,  fiery  thought,  to  stir  the  minds  of  men.'  —Journal  cf  Com- 
merce.— 50  cents. 


WILEY  &  PUTNAM'S  LIST  OF  BOOKS 


No.  70. 

Hazlitt's  Spirit  of  the  Age. 

"  Hazlitt,  prince  of  critics  !  always  bright,  always  genial,  always  appreciating."— Har- 
binger.— 50  cents. 

No.  71. 

Dickens's  Chimes  and  Christmas  Carol. 

"  These  Christmas  Tales  of  Mr.  Dickens  have  carried  to  almost  every  fireside,  with  new 
enjoyment  of  the  season,  a  new  apprehension  of  its  claims  and  duties  ;  they  have  mingled 
grave  and  glad  thoughts  with  rich  advantage  to  both ;  they  have  brought  within  reach  of 
the  charities  what  seemed  too  remote  for  them  to  meddle  with,  and  what  was  near  and 
familiar  they  have  touched  with  a  dearer  domestic  tenderness  ;  they  have  comforted  the 
generous,  rebuked  the  selfish,  cured  not  a  little  folly  by  ridicule  and  concise  humor,  and 
for  how  many  of  their  readers  may  not  even  have  revised  (as  the  philosopher  tells  us  one 
happy  thought  has  often  done)  the  whole  manner  of  a  life,  and  said,  "Thus  you  have  done, 
but  it  were  better  thus." — London  Examiner. — 37£  cents. 

Nos.  72—73. 

Mrs.  Southey's  Poems. 

"  What  is  chiefly  remarkable  in  her  poetry,  is  a  charming  naturalness.'"— Mrs.  Kirk- 
land's  Christian  Enquirer.— 37£  cents. 

No.  74. 

Carlyle's  Sartor  Resartus 

"  Is  unquestionably  the  great  work  of  Carlyle.  It  is  the  philosophical  picture  of  the 
inner  life  of  a  real  man  in  the  world.  The  strong,  keen,  practical  satire  is  almost  as  admi- 
rable as  the  higher  efforts  of  enthusiastic  eloquence." — W.  A.  Jones. — 50  cents. 

Nos.  75—76. 

Goethe's  Autobiography. 

"  A  personal  narrative  moving  along  in  soft  clearness,  shows  us  a  man  and  the  objects 
that  environ  him,  under  an  aspect  verisimilar  yet  lovely,  with  an  air  dignified  and  earnest, 
yet  graceful,  cheerful,  even  gay — a  story  as  of  a  Patriarch  to  his  children." — Thomas  Car- 
lyle.— 50  cents  each. 

No.  77. 

Leigh  Hunt's  Wit  and  Humor. 

"  Wit  and  Humor  is  the  second  volume  of  the  series  of  which  Imagination  and  Fancy 
was  the  first,  and  Action  and  Passion  is  promised  as  the  third.  They  are  selections  of  the 
best  things  some  of  our  best  authors  have  said,  accompanied  with  short  but  delicate  expo- 
sitions and  enforcements  of  their  beauties.  With  their  prefatory  notices  of  each  poet, 
their  critical  notes  on  each  quotation  from  him,  and  their  italics  indicating  the  selector's 
favorite  lines, — it  is  as  though  a  friend  took  down  volume  after  volume  from  our  shelves ; 
read  aloud  their  choicest  passages ;  marked,  by  the  emphasis  of  his  voice,  what  he  liked 
the  best;  and  interspersed  his  readings  with  brief,  graceful,  deep-felt  comments  on  the 
author  and  his  ideas.  They  are  truly  most  genial,  agreeable,  social  books."— London 
Examiner. — 50  cents. 

Nos.  78—79-80. 

Carlyle's  History  of  the  French  Revolution. 

"  In  its  pages  the  awful  Revolution  is  seen  by  a  fitful  but  intense  light,  like  the  glimpses 
of  the  storming  of  a  city,  caught  by  the  glare  of  lightning."— Even.  Mirror. — 67  cts  each. 

Nos.  81—82. 

Izaak  Walton's  Lives  of  Donne,  Wotton,  Hooker, 
Herbert  and  Sanderson. 

"  The  Lives  are  the  most  delightful  kind  of  serious  reading.  Walton  possesses  an 
inimitable  simplicity  and  vivacity  of  style." — Mrs.  C.  M.  Kirkland. — 37£  cents  each. 


