AN    ACCOUNT 


Off 


SOME    OF    THE    PRINCIPAL 


SLA  YE    INSURRECTIONS, 


AND    OTHERS,    WHICH    HAVE    OCCURRED,    OR    BEEN     ATTEMPTED, 
IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    AND    ELSEWHERE,    DURING 

THE   LA3T    TWO    CENTURIES. 


WITH    VABIOU3    REMARKS, 


COLLECTED   FROM  VARIOUS  SOURCES  BY 

JOSHUA     COFFIN. 


NEW    YORK: 

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  AMERICAN  ANTI-SLAVERY  SOCIETY. 

18G0. 


4  SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS. 

men  who  act,  apparently,  on  the  supposition  that  those  who 
foresee  and  foretell  any  calamity  are  as  guilty  as  those  who 
create  it,  and  that  the  only  way  to  obviate  any  impending 
danger  is  not  to  see  it.  Such  persons  not  only  refuse  to  see 
and  hear  themselves,  but  do  what  they  can  to  keep  their 
neighbors  in  like  ignorance. 

It  has  been  truly  said  that  "  the  power  of  slavery  lies  in 
the  ignorance,  the  degradation,  the  servility  of  the  slaves,  and 
of  the  non-slaveholdi ng  whites  of  the  South,  and  of  the  corre- 
sponding classes  in  the  Free  States.  It  is  through  this  igno- 
rance and  servility  that  the  slaveholders  manage  to  dictate  to 
ecclesiastical  bodies,  to  have -power  to  control  pulpits,  presses, 
Colleges,  Theological  Seminaries,  and  Missionary  and  Tract 
Societies."  To  keep  the  blacks  and  non-slavehoiding  whites 
in  ignorance  is,  doubtless,  the  reason  why  such  pains' are  taken 
in  Congress  to  prevent  the  circulation  of  Helper's  book  at  the 
South,  which  was  compiled  by  a  non-slaveholder  for  the 
special  benefit  of  the  men  of  his  class.  The  population -of 
the  Free  States  is  now  about  eighteen  millions ;  of  the  Slave 
States,  eight  millions.  The  slaves  number  about  four  mil- 
lions, who  are  held  as  property  by  only  347,545  persons, 
men,  women  ana  children.  Tins  number,  small  as  it  is,  con- 
stituting about  one  sixth  part  of  the  United  States,  have  thus 
far  controlled  the  legislation  of  the  country.  How  this  power 
has  been  acquired  is  easily  understood  when  we  examine  the 
false  ideas  respecting  slavery  which  are  everywhere  preva- 
lent ;  such  as  the  weakness  of  the  public  conscience,  in  the 
absence  of  a  practical  and  experimental  knowledge  of  the 
truth  of  God's  word  — in  the  atheistic  notion,  prevailing  even 
in  the  Church  and  in  the  ministry,  that  the  unrighteous  enact- 
ments of  wicked  men  are  paramount  in  authority  to  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Great  Jehovah.  Hundreds  of  clergymen, 
in  all  parts  of  the  Union,  profess,  to  believe  that  the  Bible 
sanctions  American  slavery,  —  a  system  which,  of  necessity, 
cannot  exist  without  a  continual  violation  of  every  command- 
ment of  the  Decalogue. 

If  the  Bible  sanctions  slavery,  (as  many  profess  to  believe,) 
why  does  not  the  God  of  the  Bible  sanction  it  ?  In  other 
words,  if  slavery  is  sanctioned  by  the  revealed  will  of  God, 
why  are  not  the  dispensations  of  his  providence  in  accordance 
with  that  will  ?     Could  it  be.  fairly  proved  that  slavery  is  in 


SLATE   INSURRECTIONS.  5 

accordance  with  the  will  of  God,  it  must  necessarily  follow 
that  obedience  to  his  will  is  not  only  highly  advantageous, 
but  perfectly  safe ;  for,  surely,  no  Christian  can,  for  a  mo- 
ment, believe  that  the  providence  of  God  ever  militates 
against  the  precepts  of  his  word.  As,  however,  the  conse- 
quences of  slavery  have  been,  in  all  cases,  when  not  averted 
by  timely  repentance,  disastrous  in  the  extreme,  it  is  there- 
fore undeniably  evident  that  slavery  is  in  direct  opposition  to 
the  revealed  will  of  God,  and,  consequently,  that  those  who 
so  violently  oppose  the  abolition  of  slavery,  for  fear  of  sup- 
posed dangerous  consequences,  may  truly  be  said  "  to  know 
not  what  they  do."  The  truth  on  this  subject  is  so  plain,  and 
the  facts  so  abundant,  that  he  who  runs  may  read,  and  know 
to  a  certainty  the  entire  safety  of  immediate  emancipation ; 
and  that  clanger  arises  from  liberty  withheld,  and  not  from 
liberty  granted.  The  general  opinion  seems  to  be,  that  the 
moment  you  proclaim  u  liberty  to  the  captive,"  and  make  the 
slave  a  freeman,  be  the  conditions  and  restrictions  what  they 
may,  that  moment  you  make  him  a  vagabond,  a  thief,  and  a 
murderer,  whom  nothing  will  satisfy  but  the  blood  of  those 
who  had  been  so  "  fanatical  and  insane  "  as  to  treat  him  like 
a  human  being.  Whence  this  opinion  is  derived,  no  one  can 
tell ;  for  it  is  in  direct  opposition  to  reason,  common  sense, 
the  nature  of  the  human  mind,  and  is  entirely  unsustained  by 
facts.  Indeed,  so  far  as  the  evidence  of  facts  is  concerned, 
the  advocates  of  immediate  abolition  have  a  complete  mono- 
poly. All  experience  proves  two  things,  viz.,  the  entire 
safety  of  immediate  emancipation,  and  that  all  clanger  has 
arisen  from  its  indefinite  postponement ;  for  this  is  really  the 
true  definition  of  gradual  emancipation. 

We  all  know  the  results  of  slavery  in  Greece  and  Rome. 
Troy  perished  by  her  slaves  in  a  single  night ;  and  as  like 
causes  always  produce  like  effects,  our  obligations  to  our 
slaveholding  brethren  imperiously  demand  that  we  should 
urge  on  them,  in  the  most  earnest  manner,  the  duty  of  imme- 
diately abolishing  slavery  as  their  only  hope  of  safety,  —  the 
only  means  by  which  they  can  escape  the  just  judgments  of 
God.  The  safety  of  immediate  emancipation  has  been  proved 
by  Buenos  Ayres  in  1816,  Colombia  in  1821,  Guatemala  in 
1824,  Peru  and  Chili  in  1828,  Mexico  in  1829,  and  espe- 
cially on  the  1st  of  August,  1834,  when  800,000  slaves  wero 


6  SLAVE   tNSUHRSCTlONg. 

set  free  in  a  single  day  in  the  British  West  India  Islands ; 
and  thus  far,  not  a  single  life  has  been  lost,  not  a  drop  of 
blood  shed,  in  consequence  of  that  beneficent  and  righteous 
act.  The  consequences  of  holding  slaves  in  bondage,  and  re- 
fusing to  emancipate  them,  have  always  been  disastrous.  In 
our  present  exemption  from  slavery  in  the  Free  States,  we 
have  no  cause  of  boasting,  but  rather  of  deep  humiliation. 
We  are  all  involved  in  the  guilt,  and  must  share  in  the  pun- 
ishment, unless  timely  and  thorough  repentance  avert  the  im- 
pending blow.  To  do  this  effectually,  information  must  be 
spread,  the  spirit  of  inquiry  aroused,  the  temple  of  God  be 
purified,  and  "  the  book  of  the  law  be  read  in  the  ears  of  all 
the  people,"  that  thus  the  gross  mistakes  and  misapprehen- 
sions which  everywhere  exist  on  the  subject  of  slavery  and  its 
abolition  may  be  corrected. 

Of  these  mistakes,  no  one  is  more  prevalent  or  more  dan- 
gerous than  the  one  just  mentioned,  that  insurrection,  rapine 
and  bloodshed  are  the  necessary  consequences  of  immediate 
emancipation ;  and  that  the  only  way  to  avert  the  evils  and 
the  curse  of  slavery,  is  to  continue  in  the  sin  for  the  present, 
promise  future  repentance,  and  in  the  meantime,  whilst  we 
are  preparing  to  get  ready  to  begin  to  repent,  do  every  thing 
that  in  us  lies  to  extinguish  every  good  feeling,  and  cultivate 
and  bring  into  action  every  bad  feeling  of  the  human  heart. 
That  such  is  the  belief,  and  consequent  practice,  to  an  alarm- 
ing extent,  throughout  our  country,  and  that  such  a  course  is 
impolitic,  because  it  is  wicked  and  dangerous,  because  it  is 
unjust,  facts  abundantly  show. 

Since  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  British  dominions,  no 
trouble  has  arisen,  no  danger  been  feared  or  apprehended. 
A  thousand  John  Browns,  each  with  nineteen  white  men  and 
five  black  men,  could  not  cause  any  tumult  in  any  part  of  the 
British  West  Indies.  Why  is  it,  then,  that  one  John  Brown 
and  company  have  created  so  wide-spread  an  alarm  and  con- 
sternation throughout  the  Slave  States?  The  Governor  of 
South  Carolina  has  sent  a  dispatch  (Nov.  21)  to  Gov.  Wise, 
tendering  any  amount  of  military  aid  to  the  defence  of  Vir- 
ginia !  Gov.  Wise  had  several  companies  of  the  military 
present  on  the  day  of  the  execution  of  John  Brown  and  others, 
and  assured  the  Governor  of  South  Carolina  that  Virginia  is 
able  to  defend  herself.     What  causes  all  this  tumult  and  ap- 


ntAVti  INgtffiRjECttOflg.  7 

prehension  1  Slavery  !  And  yet,  strange  as  it  may  neem, 
the  Virginians,  with  a  stupidity  and  infatuation  which  no  lan- 
guage can  describe,  are  seriously  discussing  the  propriety  of 
enslaving  the  free  negroes  of  that  State.  Such  a  proceeding 
would  resemble  a  physician  who  should  order  a  dose  of  arsenic 
to  cure  a  patient  w7ho  had  taken  strychnine,  or  attempt  to 
extinguish  a  conflagration  by  throwing  oil  on  the  flames. 

How  the  consequences  of  abolishing  slavery  would  be  dread- 
ful and  horrible,  neither  history  nor  experience  informs  us. 
Let  us,  then,  see  what  they  tell  us  of  the  consequences  of 
holding  men  in  bondage.  In  every  instance  which  has  fallen 
under  my  notice,  insurrections  have  always  been  projected 
and  carried  on  by  slaves,  and  never  (with  the  exception  of 
Denmark  Vesey  in  1822,  in  Charleston,  S.  C.)  by  the  free 
blacks. 

The  contest  between  truth  and  falsehood,  right  and  wrong, 
justice  and  injustice,  has  always  continued  from  the  earliest 
ages  to  the  present  moment.  More  especially  is  it  true 
concerning  American  slavery,  that  "  sum  of  all  villanies/'  a 
crime  which  involves  the  continual  violation  of  every  one  of 
the  Ten  Commandments.  I  propose,  therefore,  to  give,  with 
other  incidents,  an  abstract  of  some  of  the  attempts  of  the 
oppressed  to  throw  off  the  yoke  which  held  them,  or  threaten- 
ed to  hold  them,  in  bondage. 

The  first  instance  which  has  come  to  my  knowledge  in  this 
country  of  an  insurrection  on  a  small  scale,  occurred  on  Nod- 
dle's Island,  now  East  Boston,  in  1638.  In  John  Josselyn's 
account  of  his  first  voyage  to  New  England  may  be  found  the 
following.  Having  previously  stated  that  he  was  a  guest  of 
"  Mr.  Samuel  Maverick,  the  only  hospitable  man  (as  he  says) 
in  all  the  country,  giving  entertainment  to  all  comers  gratis/' 
he  thus  writes  :  — 

"The  second  of  October  about  9  of  the  clock  in  the  morn- 
ing Mr.  Maverick's  negro  came  to  my  chamber  window,  and 
in  her  own  Countrey  language  and  tune  sung  very  loud  and 
shrill.  Going  out  to  her  she  used  a  great  deal  of  respect  to- 
wards me,  and  willingly  would  have  expressed  her  grief  in 
English,  but  I  apprehended  it  by  her  countenance  and  deport- 
ment, whereupon  I  repaired  to  my  host  to  learn  of  him  the 
cause,  and  resolved  to  intreat  him  on  her  behalf  for  that  I 


&  SLATE   INSURRECTIONS. 

understood  before  that  she  had  been  a  Queen  in  her  own  Coun- 
trey,  and  observed  a  very  dutiful  garb  used  toward  her  by 
another  Negro  who  was  her  maid.  Mr.  Maverick,  was  de- 
sirous to  have  a  breed  of  Negroes,  and  therefore  seeing  she 
would  not  yield  by  persuasion  to  company  with  a  Negro  young 
man  he  had  in  his  house,  he  commanded  him,  will'd  she,  nill'd 
she,  to  go  to  bed  to  her,  but  she  kickt  him  out  again.  This 
she  took  in  high  disdain  beyond  her  slavery,  and  this  was  the 
cause  of  her  grief/' 

From  this  statement  it  appears  that  Maverick  had  at  least 
three  slaves;  but  of  the  number  held  in  the  Province,  no 
record  informs  us.  In  1641,  the  Massachusetts  Colony  passed 
the  following  law :  — 

"  There  shall  never  be  any  bond  slaverie,  villinage  or  cap-* 
tivitie  amongst  us  unless  it  be  lawful!  captives  taken  in  just 
warres,  and  such  strangers  as  willingly  sell  themselves.  And 
these  shall  have  all  the  liberties  and  christian  usuages,  which 
the  law  of  God  established  in  Isreal  concerning  such  persons 
doth  morally  require.  This  exempts  none  from  servitude, 
who  shall  be  judged  thereto  by  authority." 

"  He  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found 
in  his  hand,  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  —  Ex.  21:  16. 

In  1616,  one  James  Smith,  a  member  of  Boston  church, 
brought  home  two  negroes  from  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  had 
been  the  means  of  killing  near  a  hundred  more.  In  conse- 
quence  of  this  conduct,  the  General  Court  passed  the  follow- 
ing order :  — 

"  The  General  Court  conceiving  themselves  bound  by  the 
first  opportunity  to  bear  witness  against  the  heinous  and  cry- 
ing sin  of  man-stealing,  as  also  to  prescribe  such  timely  re- 
dress for  what  is  past  and  such  a  law  for  the  future,  as  may 
sufficiently  deter  all  others  belonging  to  us  to  have  to  do  in 
such  vile  and  odious  courses,  justly  abhorred  of  all  good  and 
just  men,  do  order  that  the  negro  interpreter  with  others  un- 
lawfully taken,  be  by  the  first  opportunity  at  the  charge  of 
the  country  for  the  present,  sent  to  his  native  country  (Guinea) 
and  a  letter  with  him  of  the  indignation  of  the  Court  there- 
abouts, and  justice  thereof  desiring  our  honored  Governor 
would  please  put  this  order  in  execution." 


SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS.  0 

From  this  time  till  about  1700,  the  number  of  slaves  im- 
ported into  Massachusetts  was  not  large.  In  1680,  Governor 
Simon  Braclstreet,  in  answer  to  inquiries  from  "  the  lords  of 
his  Majesties  privy  council,"  thus  writes  :  — - 

"  There  hath  been  no  company  of  blacks  or  slaves  brought 
into  the  country  since  the  beginning  of  this  plantation,  for  the 
space  of  50  years,  only  one  small  vessell  about  two  yeares 
since  after  20  month's  voyage  to  Madagasca  brought  hither 
betwixt  40  and  50  negros,  most  women  and  children,  sold  for 
£10,  £15  and  £20  apiece,  which  stood  the  merchants  in  near 
£40  apiece  one  with  another :  now  and  then  two  or  three  ne- 
gros are  brought  hither  from  Barbados  and  other  of  his 
majesties  plantations,  and  sold  here  for  about  £20  apiece,  so 
that  there  may  bee  within  our  government  about  100  or  120, 
and  it  may  bee  as  many  Scots  brought  hither  and  sold  for  ser- 
vants in  the  time  of  the  war  with  Scotland,  and  most  now 
married  and  living  here,  and  about  halfe  so  many  Irish 
brought  hither  at  several  times  as  servants." 

The  number  of  slaves  at  this  period  in  the  middle  and 
southern  colonies  is  not  easily  ascertained,  as  few  books,  and 
no  newspapers,  were  published  in  North  America  prior  to 
1704.  In  that  year,  the  Weekly  News  Letter  was  com- 
menced, and  in  the  same  year  the  "  Society  for  the  propaga- 
tion of  the  Gospel  in  foreign  parts  opened  a  catechising  school 
for  the  slaves  at  New  York,  in  which  city  there  were  then 
computed  to  be  about  1500  negro  and  Indian  slaves,"  a  suf- 
ficient number  to  furnish  materials  for  the  "  irrepressible  con- 
flict" which  had  long  before  begun.  The  catechist,  whom 
the  Society  employed,  was  "  Mr.  Elias  Neau,  by  nation  a 
Frenchman,  who,  having  made  a  confession  of  the  Protestant 
religion  in  France,  for  which  he  had  been  confined  several 
years  in  prison,  and  seven  years  in  the  gallies."  Mr.  Neau 
entered  upon  his  office  "  with  great  diligence,  and  his  labors 
were  very  successful ;  but  the  negroes  were  much  discouraged 
from  embracing  the  Christian  religion  upon  account  of  the 
very  little  regard  showed  them  in  any  religious  respect. 
Their  marriages  were  performed  by  mutual  consent  only,  with- 
out the  blessing  of  the  Church ;  they  were  buried  by  those  of 
their  own  country  and  complexion,  in  the  common  field,  with- 
out any  Christian  office;    perhaps  some  ridiculous  heathen 


10  *LAVK    INSURRECTIONS. 

rites  were  performed  at  the  grave  by  some  of  their  own  peo- 
ple. No  notice  was  given  of  their  being  sick,  that  they  might 
be  visited  ;  on  the  contrary,  frequent  discourses  were  made  in 
conversation,  that  they  had  no  souls,  and  perished  vas  the 
beasts,"  and  "  that  they  grew  worse  by  being  taught,  and 
made  Christians." 

In.  1711,  May  15,  Gov.  Gibbes,  of  South  Carolina,  in  his 
address  to  the  Legislature  of  that  Province,  thus  speaks  :  ■ — 

"  And,  gentlemen,  I  desire  you  will  consider  the  great 
quantities  of  negroes  that  are  daily  brought  into  the  govern- 
ment, and  the  small  number  of  whites  that  comes  amongst  us  : 
how  insolent  and  mischievous  the  negroes  are  become,  and  to 
consider  the  Negro  Act  already  made,  doth  not  reach  up  to 
some  of  the  crimes  they  have  lately  been  guilty  of,  therefore 
it  might  be  convenient  by  some  additional  clause  of  said  Ne- 
gro Act  to  appoint  either  hy  gibbets  or  some  such  like  way, 
that  after  executed,  they  may  remain  more  exemplary  than 
any  punishment  that  hath  been  inflicted  on  them." 

In  the  next  month,  June,  the  Governor  thus  writes :  — 

"  We  further  recommend  unto  you  the  repairs  of  the  forti- 
fications about  Charleston,  and  the  amending  of  the  Negro 
Act,  who  are  of  late  grown  to  that  height  of  impudence,  thai 
there  is  scarce  a  day  passes  without  some  robbery  or  insolence^ 
committed  by  them  in  one  part  or  other  of  this  province" 

"  In  the  year  1712,"  says  the  Rev.  D.  Humphreys,  "  a 
considerable  number  of  negroes  of  the  Carmantee  and  Pappa 
Nations  formed  a  plot  to  destroy  all  the  English,  in  order  to 
obtain  their  liberty;  and  kept  their  conspiracy  so  secret,  that 
there  was  no  suspicion  of  it  till  it  came  to  the  very  execution. 
However,  the  plot  was  by  God's  Providence  happily  defeated. 
The  plot  was  this.  The  negroes  sat  fire  to  a  •  house  in  York 
city,  and  Sunday  night  in  April,  about  the  going  down  of  the 
moon.  The  fire  alarmed  the  town,  who  from  all  parts  ran  to 
it ;  the  conspirators  planted  themselves  in  several  streets  and 
lanes  leading  to  the  fire,  and  shot  or  stabbed  the  people  as 
they  were  running  to  it.  Some  of  the  wounded  escaped,  and 
acquainted  the  Government,  and  presently  by  the  firing  of  a 
great  gun  from  the  fort,  the  inhabitants  were  called  under 
arms  and  pretty  easily  scattered  the  negroes ;  they  had  killed 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  11 

about  8  and  wounded  12  more.  In  their  flight  some  of  them 
shot  themselves,  others  their  wives,  and  then  themselves ; 
some  absconded  a  few  days,  and  then  killed  themselves  for 
fear  of  being  taken;  bul  a  great  many  were  taken,  and  IB  of 
them  suffered  death.  This  wicked  conspiracy  was  at  first  ap- 
prehended to  be  general  among  all  the  negroes,  and  opened 
the  mouths  of  many  to  speak  against  giving  the  negroes  in- 
struction. Mr.  Neau  durst  hardly  appear  abroad  for  some 
clays ;  his  school  was  blamed  as  the  main  occasion  of  this  bar- 
barous plot.  On  examination,  only  two  of  all  his  school 
were  so  much  as  charged  with  the  plot,  and  on  full  trial  the 
guilty  negroes  were  found  to  be  such  as  never  came  to  Mr. 
Neau's  school ;  and  what  is  very  observable,  the  persons, 
whose  negroes  were  found  to  be  most  guilty,  were  such  as 
were  the  declared  opposers  of  making  them  Christians.  How- 
ever a  great  jealousy  was  now  raised,  and  the  common  cry 
very  loud  against  instructing  the  negroes." 

From  the  Boston  Weekly  Journal,  of  April  8th,  1724,  I 
make  the  following  extract :  —  ■  ■ 

"  Every  reasonable  man  ought  to  remember  their  first  vil- 
lanous  attempt  at  New  York,  and  how  many  good  innocent 
people  were  murdered  by  them,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the 
-garrison  there,  that  city  would  have  been  reduced  to  ashes, 
and  the  greatest  part  of  the  inhabitants  murdered." 

On  the  6th  of  May,  1720,  the  negroes  in  South  Carolina 
murdered  Mr.  Benjamin  Cattle,  a  white  woman,  and  a  negfo 
boy.  Forces  were  immediately  raised,  and  sent  after  them, 
twenty-three  of  whom  were  taken,  six  convicted,  three  execu- 
ted, and  three  escaped. 

In  October,  1722,  about  two  hundred  negroes  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Rappahannock  river,  Virginia,  got  together  in  a 
body,  armed  with,  an  intent  to  kill  the  people  in  church, 
but  were  discovered,  and  lied. 

On  the  18th  of  April,  1723,  Gov.  Bummer  issued  a  pro- 
clamation with  the  following  preamble,  viz. :  — 

"  Whereas  within  some  short  time  past,  many  fires  have 
broke  out  within  the  town  of  Boston,  and  divers  buildings 
have  thereby  been  consumed  :  which  fires  have  been  designed- 
ly and  industriously  kindled  by  some  villanous  and  desperate 


12  SLATE    INSURRECTIONS. 

Negroes,  or  other  dissolute  people,  as  appears  by  the  confes- 
sion of  some  of  them  (who  have  been  examined  by  authority) 
and  many  concurring  circum stances;  and  it  being  vehemently 
suspected  that  they  have  entered  into  a  combination  to  burn 
and  destroy  the  town,  I  have  therefore  thought  fit,  with  the 
advice  of  his  Majesty's  Council,  to  issue  forth  this  Proclama- 
tion," &c. 

On  the  18th  of  April,  1723,  Rev.  Joseph  Sewall  preached 
a  discourse,  particularly  occasioned  "by  the  late  fires  yfc  have 
broke  out  in  Boston,  supposed  to  be  purposely  set  by  ye  Ne- 
groes." # 

On  the  next  day,  April  19th,  the  Selectmen  of  Boston 
made  a  report  to  the  town  on  the  subject,  consisting  of  nine- 
teen articles,  of  which  the  following  is  No.  9  :  — 

"  That  if  more  than  Two  Indians,  Negro  or  Molatto  Ser- 
vants or  Slaves  be  found  in  the  Streets  or  Highways  in  or 
about  the  Town,  idling  or  lurking  together  unless  in  the  ser- 
vice  of  their  Master  or  Employer,  every  one  so  found  shall  be 
punished  at  the  House  of  Correction." 

So  great  at  that  time  were  the  alarm  and  danger  in  Bos- 
ton, occasioned  by  the  slaves,  that  in  addition  to  the  common 
watch,  a  military  force  was  not  only  kept  up,  but  at  the 
breaking  out  of  every  fire,  a  part  of  the  militia  were  or- 
dered out  under  arms  to  keep  the  slaves  in  order  !  ! 

The  report  of  nineteen  articles,  submitted  to  the  town  of 
Boston,  was  finally  embodied  in  a  Negro  Act  of  fifteen  sec- 
tions, of  which  the  15th  was  as  follows  :  — 

"  That  no  Indian,  negro  or  mullatto,  upon  the  breaking 
out  of  fire  and  the  continuance  thereof  during  the  night  sea- 
son,  shall  depart  from  his  or  her  master's  house,  nor  be 
found  in  the  streets  at  or  near  the  place  where  the  fire  is, 
upon  pain  of  being  forthwith  seized  and  sent  to  the  common 
gaol,  and  afterwards  whipt,  three  days  following  before  dis- 
mist,  &c." 

From  the  N.  E.  Courant,  Nov.  1724,  I  take  the  following 
extract :  — 

"  It  is  well  known  what  loss  the  town  of  Boston  sustained 


*  Diary  of  Rev.  Samuel  Dexter. 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  13 

by  fire  not  long  since,  when  almost  every  night  for  a  consid- 
erable time  together,  some  building  or  other  and  sometimes 
several  in  the  same  night  were  either  burned  to  the  ground 
or  some  attempts  made  to  do  it.  It  is  likewise  well  known 
that  those  villanies  were  carried  on  .by  Negro  servants,  the 
like  whereof  we  never  felt  before  from  unruly  servants,  nor 
ever  heard  of  the  like  happening  in  any  place  attended  with 
the  like  circumstances." 

Like  causes  produce  like  effects.  Since  the  abolition  of 
slavery  in  Massachusetts,  no  one  has  felt  alarmed  at  seeing 
"  two  or  more  colored  men  lurking  together "  in  Boston. 
Prior  to  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  British  West  Indies, 
the  militia  were  always  called  out  under  arms  on  the  Christ- 
mas holidays,  in  order  to  prevent  any  attempts  at  insurrec- 
tion among  the  slaves.  Since  that  time,  there  has  been  no 
apprehension  of  any  disturbances,  and,  of  course,  no  calling 
out  of  the  militia. 

In  1728,  an  insurrection  of  slaves  occurred  in  Savannah, 
Georgia,  who  were  fired  on  twice  before  they  fled.  They  had 
formed  a  plot  to  destroy  all  the  whites,  and  nothing  pre- 
vented them  but  a  disagreement  about  the  mode.  At  that 
time,  the  population  consisted  of  3000  whites  and  2700 
blacks. 

In  January,  1729,  the  slaves  in  Antigua  conspired  to  de- 
stroy the  English,  which  was  discovered  two  or  three  days 
before  the  intended  assault.  Of  the  three  conspirators, 
two  were  burnt  alive !  !  "  'Twas  admirable"  says  the 
account,  "  to  see  how  long  they  stood  before  they  died,  the 
great  toood  not  readily  burning,  and  their  cry  was  icater, 
water  !  " 

In  August,  1730,  an  insurrection  of  blacks  occurred  in 
Williamsburgh,  Va.,  occasioned  by  a  report,  on  Col.  Spots- 
wood's  arrival,  that  he  had  direction  from  his  Majesty  to 
free  all  baptized  persons.  The  negroes  improved  this  to  a 
great  height.  Five  counties  were  in  arms  pursuing  them, 
with  orders  to  kill  them  if  they  did  not  submit. 

In  August,  1730,  the  slaves  in  South  Carolina  conspired 
to  destroy  all  the  whites.  This  was  the  first  open  rebellion 
in  that  State,  where  the  negroes  were  actually  armed  and 
embodied,  and  took  place  on  the  Sabbath. 


16  SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS. 

Iii  1704,  the  slaves  in  Jamaica  projected  a  rebellion,  and 
intended  to  destroy  all  the  whites  on  the  island. 

In  1767,  there  was  a  rebellion  among  the  slaves  in  Gre- 
nada. 

In  1768,  when  Gen.  Gage  was  in  command  of  the  British 
troops  in  Massachusetts,  one  Capt.  John  Wilson,  of  the  59th 
regiment,  made  an  attempt  to  excite  the  few  slaves  in  Boston 
[about  300]  to  rise  against  their  masters.  He  assured  the 
slaves  that  the  foreign  troops  had  come  to  procure  their  free- 
dom, and  that  "  with  their  assistance,  they  would  be  able  to 
drive  the  Liberty  Boys  to  the  devil."  In  October,  the 
Selectmen  made  a  complaint  against  him  ;  had  him  arrested, 
and  bound  over  for  trial,  but  by  the  influence  of  British  offi- 
cials, the  indictment  was  quashed,  and  Wilson  fled,  satisfied 
that  Boston  would  not  be  a  safe  place  for  him. 

In  1765,  symptoms  of  a  rebellious  and  insurrectionary 
spirit  were  manifested  in  various  parts  of  the  thirteen  colo- 
nies, then  nominally  at  least  subjects  of  King  George.  This 
spirit  was  aroused  by  the  passage,  by  the  British  Parliament, 
of  the  Stamp  Act  on  the  22d  of  March  of  that  year.  As 
the  British  government  were  unable  to  enforce  this  Act,  it 
was  graciously  repealed  on  the  22d  of  February,  1766,  but 
coii^  1  id  with  the  declaratory  Act,  that  "  the  Legislature  of 
Great  Britain  had  authority  to  bind  the  colonies  in  all  cases 
whatsoever."  On  the  20th  of  November,  1767,  the  Act 
previously  passed,  imposing  a  duty  of  three  pence  per  pound 
on  tea,  was  to  take  effect.  From  this  Act,  with  other  causes 
combined,  many  commotions  were  excited  anew  among  the  peo- 
ple. On  the  5th  of  March,  1770,  the  Boston  massacre  occurred. 
The  skirmish  at  Lexington  and  Concord  on  the  19th  of 
April,  and  the  battle  on  Breed's  hill  on  the  17th  of  June, 
1775,  greatly  increased  the  excitement.  About  the  middle 
of  July,  the  year  Lord  Dunmore,  the  royal  governor  of  Vir- 
ginia, ceased  to  exercise  the  functions  of  his  office,  having 
with  his  wife  and  children,  for  fear  of  the  people,  taken  ref- 
uge on  board  the  Fowey  man  of  war.  With  the  hope  that 
he  should  succeed  in  reducing  the  Virginians  to  subjection, 
Lord  Dunmore  gave  out  that  he  should  instigate  the  slaves, 
who  were  extremely  numerous,  to  revolt  against  their  mas- 
ters. The  dread  of  the  consequences  of  such  a  revolt  deci- 
ded the  Virginians    to    form    a   convention,  in   which  they 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  17 

placed  great  confidence.  The  governor  expected,  but  in  vain, 
that  the  people  would  rise,  and  take  arms  in  favor  of  the 
king.  Hoping,  however,  that  with  such  force  as  he  had, 
and  with  the  frigates  on  that  station,  he  should  make  some 
impression  on  the  surrounding  country,  he  surprised  the 
town  of  Hampton,  situated  on  the  bay  of  the  same  name, 
and  devoted  it  to  the  flames.  He  then  proclaimed  martial 
law,  "  declared  free  all  slaves  or  servants,  black  or  white, 
belonging  to  rebels,  provided  they  would  take  up  arms  and 
join  the  royal  troops."  The  governor  again  came  on  shore 
at  Norfolk,  wThere  some  hundreds  of  loyalists  and  negroes 
joined  the  governor.  With  this  motley  force,  aided  by  two 
hundred  soldiers  of  the  line,  he  made  an.  unsuccessful  attack 
on  the  provincials  on  the  9th  of  December.  He  again 
repaired  on  board  of  one  of  the  ships,  and  on  the  first  of 
January,  1776,  the  frigate  Liverpool,  two  corvettes  and  the 
governor's  armed  sloop,  opened  a  terrible  fire  on  the  city ; 
and  at  the  same  time,  a  detachment  of  marines  landed,  and 
set  fire  to  the  houses.  In  this  manner  wras  destroyed  one  of 
the  most  opulent  and  flourishing  cities  of  Virginia. 

On  the  4th  of  July,  1776,  after  eleven  years  of  unavail- 
ing negotiation  and  some  fighting,  the  delegates  of  the  thir 
teen  Colonies,  not  believing  the  modern  dogma  that,  however 
bad  the  laws  may  be,  they  must  be  obej-ed  till  they  arc 
repealed,  raised  the  standard  of  rebellion,  and  bade  defiance  tc 
the  colossal  power  of  Great  Britain,  declaring  that  they 
were,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and  independent,  and 
making  the  following  declaration,  viz. :  — 

"  We  hold  these  truths  to  be  self-evident :  that  all  men 
are  created  equal ;  that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator 
with  certain  inalienable  rights ;  that  among  these  are  life, 
liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness." 

This  was  an  insurrection  on  a  great  scale  ;  and  as  the 
insurgents  were  white  men,  and  were  successful,  they  "were,  of 
course,  right.  Says  Jefferson,  in  1814,  "  What  an  incompre- 
hensible machine  is  man !  who  can  endure  toil,  famine, 
stripes,  imprisonment,  and  death  itself,  in  vindication  of  his 
own  liberty ;  and  the  next  moment  be  deaf  to  all  these 
motives,  whose  power  supported  him  through  his  trials,  and 
inflict  on  his  fellow-man  a  bondage,  <me  hour  of  which  is 


18  SLAVE   INSURRECTION'S. 

fraught  with  more  misery  than  ayes  of  that  which  he  rose  in 
rebellion  to  oppose." 

The  insurrection  of  tlie  people  of  France  against  their 
king,  which  is  generally  called  the  French  revolution,  is  with 
all  its  horrors  too  well  known  to  require  notice. 

The  scenes  of  St.  Domingo  next  claim  our  attention.  The 
incidents  are  given  in  the  language  of  an  author^  whose 
name  I  do  not  recollect. 

When  the  French  Kevolution?  which  decreed  equality  of 
rights  to  all  citizens,  had  taken  place,  the  free  people  of  color 
of  St.  Domingo,  many  of  whom  were  persons  of  large  prop- 
erty and  liberal  education,  petitioned  the  General  Assembly 
that  they  might  enjoy  the  same  political  privileges  as  the 
whites.  At  length,  in  March,  1790,  the  subject  of  the  peti- 
tion was  discussed,  when  the  Assembly  adopted  a  decree  con- 
cerning it.  The  decree,  however,  was  worded  so  ambigu- 
ously, that  the  two  parties  in  St.  Domingo  —  the  vjhites  and 
the  people  of  color — -  interpreted  each  in  their  own  favor. 
This  difference  of  interpretation  gave  rise  to  animosities 
between  them,  which  were  augmented  by  political  party 
spirit,  according  as  they  were  royalists,  or  partisans  of  the 
French  revolution,  so  that  disturbances  took  place,  and  blood 
was  shed. 

In  the  year  1791,  the  people  of  color  petitioned  the 
Assembly  againr  but  principally  for  an  explanation  of  the 
decree  in  question. 

On  the  15th  of  May,  the  subject  was  taken  into  considera- 
tion, and  the  result  was  another  decree  in  more  explicit 
terms,  which  determined  that  the  people  of  color  in  all  the 
French  islands  were  entitled  to  all  the  rights  of  citizens^  pro- 
vided they  were  born  of  free  parents  on  bath  sides.  The 
news  of  this  decree  no  sooner  arrived  at  the  Cape,  than  it 
produced  an  indignation  almost  amounting  to  frenzy  among 
the  whites.  They  directly  trampled  under  foot  the  national 
cockade,  and  with  difficulty  were  prevented  from  seizing  all 
the  merchant  ships  in  the  roads.  After  this,  the  two  parties 
armed  against  each  other.  Even  camps  began  to  be  formed. 
Horrible  massacres  and  conflagrations  followed,  the  reports  of 
which,  when  brought  to  the  mother  country,  were  so  terrible 
that  the  Assembly  rescinded  the  decree  in  favor  of  the  peo- 
ple of  color  in  the  same  year. 


SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS.'  19 

In  1792,  the  news  of  this  new  decree  reached  St.  Domingo, 
and  produced  as  much  irritation  among  the  people  of  color, 
as  the  news  of  the  former  had  done  among  the  whites ;  and 
hostilities  were  renewed  on  both  sides. 

As  soon  as  these  events  became  known  in  France,  the  Con- 
ventional Assembly,  which  had  then  succeeded  the  Legisla- 
ture, seeing  no  hope  of  reconciliation  on  either  side,  knew 
not  what  other  course  to  take  than  to  do  justice,  whatever  the 
consequences  might  be.  They  resolved  accordingly,  in  the 
month  of  April,  that  the  decree  of  1791,  which  had  been 
first  made  and  reversed  by  the  preceding  Assembly,  should 
be  made  good;  thus  restoring  to  the  people  of  color  the 
privileges  which  had  been  before  voted  to  them  ;  and  they 
appointed  Santhonax,  Polverel,  and  another  to  repair  as 
Commissioners  to  St.  Domingo,  with  a  large  body  of  troops, 
in  order  to  enforce  the  decree,  and  to  keep  the  peace. 

In   the  year   1793,  the  same  division  and  bloodshed  con- 
tinuing, notwithstanding  the  arrival  of  the  commissioners,  a 
very  trivial  matter,  a  quarrel  between  a  mulatto  and  a  white 
man,  (an  officer  in  the  French  marines,)  gave  rise  to  new  dis- 
asters.    The  quarrel  took  place  at  Cape  Francois  on  the  20th 
of  June.     On  the  same  day,  the  seamen  left  their   ships  in 
the  roads,  and  came  on  shore,  and  made  common  cause  with 
the  white  inhabitants  of  the  town.     On  the  other  side  were 
ranged  the  mulattoes   and  other  people   of  color,   and  these 
were  afterwards  joined  by  some  insurgent  blacks.     The  bat- 
tle lasted  nearly  two  days.     During  this  time,  the  arsenal 
was  taken  and  plundered,  some  thousands  were  killed  in  the 
streets,  and  more  than  half  of  the  town  wTas  burned.     The 
commissioners,  who  were  witnesses  of  the  horrible  scene,  and 
who  had  done  all  that  they  could  to   restore  peace,  escaped 
unhurt ;  but  they  were  left  upon  a  heap  of  ruins,  and  with 
little  more  power   than  the  authority  which  their  commis- 
sion gave  them.     They  had  only  about   a   thousand  troops 
left  in  the  place.    -They  determined,  therefore,   under  these 
circumstances,  to  call  in  the  slaves  in  their  neighborhood  to 
their  assistance.     They  issued  a  proclamation  in  consequence, 
by  which  they  promised   to   give  freedom   to  all  the  blacks 
who  were  willing  to  range  themselves   under  the  banner  of 
the  republic. 

This  was  the  first  proclamation  made  by  public  authority- 


20  SLATE   INSURRECTIONS. 

for  emancipating  slaves  in  St.  Domingo,  and  was  usually 
called  the  proclamation  of  Santhonax.  The  result  of  it  was, 
that  a  considerable  number  of  slaves  came  in,  and  were 
enfranchised. 

Soon  after  this  transaction,  Polverel  left  his  colleague, 
Santhonax,  at  the  Cape,  and  went  in  his  capacity  of  commis- 
sioner to  Port  au  Prince,  the  capital  of  the  West.  Here 
he  found  every  thing  quiet,  and  cultivation  in  a  flourishing 
state.  From  Port  au  Prince  he  visited  Aux  Cayes,  the 
capital  of  the  South.  He  had  not,  however,  been  long  there, 
before  he  found  that  the  minds  of  the  slaves  began  to  be  in  an 
unsettled  state.  They  had  become  acquainted  with  what  had 
taken  place  in  the  North  ;  not  only  with  the  riots  at  the 
Cape,  but  the  proclamation  of  Santhonax.  Polverel,  there- 
fore, seeing  the  impression  which  it  had  begun  to  make  on 
the  minds  of  the  slaves  in  these  parts,  was  convinced  that 
emancipation  could  neither  be  prevented,  nor  even  retarded ; 
and  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary,  for  the  personal  safety 
of  the  white  planters,  that  it  should  be  extended  to  the  whole 
island.  He  was  so  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  this,  that 
in  September,  1793,  he  drew  up  a  proclamation  without  fur- 
ther delay  to  that  effect,  and  put  it  into  circulation.  He 
dated  it  from  Aux  Cayes.  He  exhorted  the  planters  to  pat- 
ronise it.  He  advised  them,  if  they  wished  to  avoid  the 
most  serious  calamities,  to  concur  themselves  in  the  proposi- 
tion of  giving  freedom  to  their  slaves.  He  then  caused  a 
registry  to  be  opened  at  the  government  house,  to  receive  the 
signatures  of  those  who  should  approve  of  his  advice.  It 
was  remarkable  that  all  the  proprietors  in  these  parts 
inscribed  their  names  in  this  book.  He  then  caused  a  simi- 
lar registry  to  be  opened  at  Port  au  Prince  for  the  West. 
Here  the  same  disposition  was  found  to  prevail.  All  the 
planters,  except  one,  gave  in  their  signatures.  They  had 
become  pretty  generally  convinced,  by  this  time,  that  their 
own  personal  safety  was  connected  with  the  measure.  We 
may  now  add  that,  in  the  month  of  February,  1794,  the 
Conventional  Assembly  of  France  passed  a  decree  for  the 
abolition  of  slavery  throughout  the  whole  of  the  French  Colo- 
nies. Thus  the  government  of  the  mother  country  confirmed 
freedom  to  those,  on  whom  it  had  been  bestowed  by  the  com 
Biissioners.     This  decree,  therefore,  put  the  fazishmg  stroke 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  21 

to  the  whole.     It  completed  the  emancipation  of  the  tuhole 
slave  population  of  St.  Domingo. 

With  regard  to  the  conduct  of  those  who  were  emancipa- 
ted by  Santhonax  in  the  North,  I  find  nothing  particular  to 
communicate.  With  respect  to  those  emancipated  in  the 
South  and  West  by  Polverel,  we  are  enabled  to  give  a  pleas- 
ing account.  Colonel  Mai  enfant,  who  was  residing  in  the 
island  at  the  time,  has  made  us  acquainted  with  their  general 
conduct  and  character.  "  After  the  public  act  of  emancipa- 
tion," says  he,  (by  Polverel,)  "  the  negroes  remained  quiet, 
both  in  the  South  and  in  the  West,  and,  they  continued  to 
work  on  all  the  plantations.  There  were,  indeed,  estates 
which  had  neither  owners  nor  managers  resident  on  them. 
Some  of  these  had  been  put  in  prison  by  Mount  Brun ;  and 
others,  fearing  the  same  fate,  had  fled  to  the  quarter  which 
had  just  been  given  up  to  the  English.  Yet  on  these 
estates,  though  abandoned,  the  negroes  continued  their  labors, 
where  there  were  any  (even  inferior)  agents  to  guide  them  ; 
and  on  those  estates  where  no  white  men  were  left  to  direct 
them,  they  betook  themselves  to  the  planting  of  provisions  ; 
but  on  all  the  plantations  where  the  whites  resided,  the  blacks 
continued  to  labor  as  quietly  as  before." 

A  little  further  on,  in  the  same  work,  ridiculing  the  notion 
entertained  in  France,  that  the  negroes  would  not  wTork  with- 
out compulsion,  he  takes  occasion  to  allude  to  other  negroes 
who  had  been  liberated  by  the  same  proclamation,  but  who 
were  more  immediately  under  his  own  eye.  "  If,"  says  he, 
"you  will- take  care  not  to  speak  to  them  of  their  return  to 
slavery,  but  talk  to  them  about  their  liberty,  you  may,  with 
this  latter  word,  chain  them  down  to  labor.  How  did  Tons- 
saint  succeed  ?  How  did  I  succeed  also,  before  his  time,  in 
the  plain  of  the  Gul  de  Sac,  and  on  the  plantation  Gouraud, 
more  than  eight  months  after  liberty  had  been  granted  (by 
Polverel)  to  the  slaves?  Let  those  who  knew  me  at  the 
time,  and  even  the  blacks  themselves,  be  asked.  They  will 
all  reply  that  not  a  single  negro  gh  that  plantation,  consist- 
ing of  more  than  460  laborers,  refused  to  work  ;  and  yet 
this  plantation  was  thought  to  be  under  the  worst  discipline, 
and  the  slaves  the  most  idle  in  the  plain,  1,  myself,  inspired 
the  same  activity  into  three  other  plantations,  of  which  I 
had  the  management/' 


22  SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS. 

The  above  account  is  far  beyond  any  thing  that  could 
have  been  reasonably  expected  ;  indeed,  it  is  most  gratify- 
ing. We  find  that  the  liberated  negroes,  both  in  the  South 
and  West,  continued  to  work  on  their  old  plantations,  and 
for  their  old  masters  ;  so  that  there  was  also  a  spirit  ot 
industry  among  them ;  for  they  are  described  as  continuing 
to  work  as  quietly  as  before.  Such  was  the  conduct  of  the 
negroes  for  the  first  nine  months  after  their  liberation,  up  to 
the  middle  of  1794.  Of  the  conduct  of  the  negroes  during 
the  year  1795,  and  part  of  1796,  I  find  no  account.  Had 
there  been  any  outrages,  they  would  have  been  mentioned. 
Let  no  one  connect  the  outrages,  which  assuredly  took  place 
in  St.  Domingo  in  1791  and  1792,  with  the  effects  of  the 
emancipation  of  the  slaves.  The  great  massacres  and  confla- 
grations which  at  that  time  made  so  frightful  a  picture  in 
the  history  of  this  unhappy  island,  occurred  in  the  days  oj 
slavery,  before  the  proclamation  of  Santhonax  and  Polverel, 
and  before  the  great  conventional  decree  of  the  mother  coun- 
try was  known.  They  had  been  occasioned,  too,  not  origi- 
nally by  the  slaves  themselves,  but  by  quarrels  between  the 
white  and  colored  planters,  and  between  the  royalists  and  the 
revolutionists,  who,  for  the  purpose  of  wreaking  their  ven- 
geance on  each  other,  called  in  the  aid  of  their  slaves ;  and 
as  to  the  insurgent  negroes  of  the  North,  who  filled  that  part 
of  the  colony  in  those  years  with  terror  and  dismay,  they 
were  originally  put  in  motion,  according  to  Malenfant,  by 
the  royalists  themselves,  to  strengthen  their  own  cause,  and 
to  put  down  the  partisans  of  the  French  revolution. 

When  Jean  Francois  and  Brasson  commenced  the  insurrec- 
tion, there  were  many  white  royalists  among  them,  and  the 
negroes  were  made  to  wear  the  white  cockade. 

I  now  come  to  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1796,  and  we 
shall  find  that  there  was  no  want  of  industry  or  of  obedience 
in  those  who  had  been  emancipated.  "  The  colony,"  says 
Malenfant,  "  was  flourishing  under  Toussaint ;  the  whites 
lived  happily  on  their  estates,  and  the  negroes  continued  to 
work  for  them.'9  Now,  Toussaint  came  into  power,  being 
G-eneral-in-cliief  of  the  armies  of  St.  Domingo,  near  the  end 
of  the  year  1796,  and  remained  in  power  till  the  year  1802, 
or  till  the  invasion  of  the  island  by  the  French  expedition  by 
Bonaparte,  under  Le  Clerc.     Malenfant,  therefore,  means  to 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  23 

state  that  from  1796  to  1802,  a  period  of  six  years,  the  plan- 
ters and  farmers  kept  possession  of  their  estates ;  that  they 
lived  on  them  peacefully,  and  without  interruption  or  dis- 
turbance ;  and  that  the  negroes,,  though  they  had  all  been  set 
free,  continued  to  be  their  laborers. 

Gen.  La  Croix,  who  published  his  "  Memoirs  for  a  History 
of  St.  Domingo  "  at  Paris  in  1819,  informs  us  that  when 
Santhonax  returned  to  the  colony  in  1796,  "he  was  astonished 
at  the  state  in  which  he  found  it  on  his  return.''''  This,  says 
La  Croix,  was  owing  to  Toussaint,  who,  while  he  had  suc- 
ceeded in  establishing  perfect  order  and  discipline  among  the 
black  troops,  had  succeeded  in  making  the  black  laborer  re- 
turn to  the  plantation,  there  to  resume  the  drudgery  of  cul- 
tivation. 

But  the  same  author  tells  us  that,  in  the  next  year,  1797, 
the  most  wonderful  progress  had  been  made  in  agriculture. 
He  uses  these  remarkable  words  :  —  "  The  colony  marched  as 
by  enchantment  to  its  former  splendor  ;  cultivation  prospered  ; 
every  day  produced  perceptible  proofs  of  its  progress.  The 
city  of  the  Cape  and  the  plantations  of  the  North  rose  up 
again  visibly  to  the  eyeT  To  effect  this  wonderful  improve- 
ment, many  circumstances  conspired,  but  principally  the 
fact  that  the  negroes,  being  free,  had  a  powerful  motive  to  be 
industrious  and  obedient. 

The  next  witness  is  Gen.  Vincent,  who  was  a  colonel,  and 
afterwards  a  general  of  brigade  of  artillery  at  St.  Domingo, 
and  was  there  during  the  time  of  Santhonax  and  Toussaint. 
He  was  called  to  Paris  by  Toussaint,  where  he  arrived  just  at 
the  moment  of  the  peace  of  Amiens,  and  found,  to  his  in- 
expressible surprise  and  grief,  that  Bonaparte  was  preparing 
an  immense  armament,  to  be  commanded  by  Le  Clerc,  for  the 
purpose  of  restoring  slavery  in  St.  Domingo  I  Against  this 
expedition,  the  General  remonstrated  with  the  First  Consul, 
telling  him  that,  though  the  army  destined  for  this  purpose 
was  composed  of  the  brilliant  conquerors  of  Europe,  it  wcu'd 
do  nothing  in  the  Antilles,  and  would  assuredly  be  destroyed 
by  the  climate  of  St.  Domingo,  if  not  destroyed  by  the  blacks. 
He  stated  that  every  thing  was  going  on  well  in  St.  Domingo 
and  therefore  conjured  him,  in  the  name  of  humanity,  not  to 
attempt  to  reverse  this  beautiful  order  of  things.  His  efforts 
were  ineffectual.     The  armament  sailed,  and,  arriving  on  the 


24  SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS. 

shores  of  St.  Domingo,  a  scene  of  blood  and  torture  followed, 
such  as  history  had  seldom  if  ever  before  disclosed,  which , 
though  planned  and  executed  by  whites,  all  the  barbarities 
said  to  have  been  perpetrated  by  the  insurgent  blacks  of  the 
North  amounted  comparatively  to  nothing.  At  length,  the 
survivors  of  that  vast  army  were  driven  from  the  island,  with 
the  loss  of  sixty  thousand  lives.  Till  that  time,  the  planters 
had  retained  their  estates ;  and  then  it  was,  and  not  till  then, 
that  they  lost  their  alL  The  question  may  be  asked,  why  did 
the  First  Consul  make  this  frightful  invasion  ?  It  was  owing,, 
not  to  the  emancipated  negroes,  who  were  'peaceful,  industrious \ 
and  beyond  example  happy,  but  to  the  prejudices  of  their  for- 
mer masters —-prejudices  common  to  almost  all  slaveholders. 
Accustomed  to  the  use  of  arbitrary  power,  they  could  not 
brook  the  loss  of  their  whips.  Accustomed  to  look  down  on 
the  negroes  as  an  inferior  race  of  beings,  as  mere  reptiles  of 
the  earth,  they  could  not  bear,  peaceably  as  these  had  con- 
ducted  themselves,  to  come  into  that  familiar  contact  with 
them  as  free  laborers,  which  the  change  in  their  condition  re- 
quired. They  considered  them,  too,  as  property  lost,  and 
which  was  to  be  recovered.  In  an  evil  hour,  they  prevailed 
on  Bonaparte,  by  false  representations  and  promises  of  pecu- 
niary support,  to  undertake  to  restore  things  to  their  former 
state  ;  and  the  result  is  before  the  world  as  an  example  and  a 
warning.  When  will  our  slaveholding  brethren  learn  that  the 
advocates  of  immediate  emancipation  are  the  only  true  friends 
of  both  slaveholders  and  slaves,  and  that  the  only  path  of 
safety  is  the  path  of  duty,  which  demands  the  immediate  re- 
pentance of  all  sin,  and  especially  that  "sum  of  all  villanies," 
slavery  ? 

In  the  year  1800,  the  city  of  Richmond,  Va.,  and  indeed 
the  whole  slaveholding  country  were  thrown  into  a  state  of 
intense  excitement,  consternation  and  alarm,  by  the  discovery 
of  an  intended  insurrection  among  the  slaves.  The  plot  was 
laid  bj  a  slave  named  Gabriel,  who  was  claimed  as  the  prop- 
erty of  Mr.  Thomas  Prosser.  A  full  and  true  account  of 
this  General  Gabriel,  and  of  the  proceedings  consequent  on 
the  discovery  of  the  plot,  has  never  yet  been  published.  In 
1831  a  short  account,  which  is  false  in  almost  every  particu-: 
tar,  appeared  in  the  Albany  Evening  Journal  under  the  head 
of  "  Gabriel 'a  Defeat."      It  was  the  same  year  republished  in 


SLA  YE  INSURRECTIONS.  25 

the  first  volume  of  the  Liberator,  and  during  the  last  year 
(1859)  has  been  extensively  republished  in  many  other 
papers.  The  following  is  the  copy  of  a  letter  dated  Sept. 
21,  1800,  written  by  a  gentleman  of  Richmond,  Va.,  and 
published  in  the  Boston  Gazette,  Oct.  6th  :  — 

"By  this  time,  you  have  no  doubt  heard  of  the  conspiracy, 
formed  in  this  country  by  the  negroes,  which,  but  lor  the 
interposition  of  Providence,  would  have  put  the  metropolis  of 
the  State,  and  even  the  State  itself,  into  their  possession.  A 
dreadful  storm  with  a  deluge  of  rain,  which  carried  away  the 
bridges  and  rendered  the  water  courses  every  where  impassa- 
ble, prevented  the  execution  of  their  plot.  It  ivas  extensive 
and  vast  in  its  design.  Nothing  could  have  been  better  con- 
trived. The  conspirators  ivere  to  have  seized  on  the  magazine, 
the  treasury,  the  mills,  and  the  bridges  across  James  river. 
They  were  to  have  entered  the  city  of  Richmond  in  three 
places  with  fire  and  sword,  to  commenoe  an  indiscriminate 
slaughter,  the  French  ouly  excepted.  They  were  then  to 
have  called  on  their  fellow  negroes  and  the  friends  of 
humanity  throughout  the  continent,  by  proclamation,  to  rally 
round  their  standard.  The  magazine,  which  was  defenceless, 
would  have  supplied  them  with  arms  for  many  thousand  men. 
The  treasury  would  have  given  them  money,  the  mills  bread, 
and  the  bridges  would  have  enabled  them  to  let  in  their 
friends,  and  keep  out  their  enemies.  Never  was  there  a  more 
propitious  season  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  purpose. 
The  country  is  covered  with  rich  harvests  of  Indian  corn ; 
flocks  and  herds  are  every  where  fat  in  the  fields ;  and  the  lib- 
erty and  equality  doctrine,  nonsensical  and  wicked  as  it  is,  (in 
this  land  of  tyrants  and  slaves,)  is  for  electioneering  purposes 
sounding  and  resounding  through  our  valleys  and  mountains 
in  every  direction.  The  city  of  Richmond  and  the  circum- 
jacent country  are  in  arms,  and  have  been  so  for  ten  or  twelve 
days  past.  The  patrollers  are  doubled  through  the  State, 
and  the  Governor,  impressed  with  the  magnitude  of  the  dan- 
ger, has  appointed  for  himself  three  Aids  de  Camp.  A 
number  of  conspirators  have  been  hung,  and  a  great  many 
more  are  yet  to  be  hung.  The  trials  and  executions  are  going 
on  day  by  day.  Poor  deluded  wretches  !  Their  democratic 
deluders,  conscious  of  their  own  guilt,  and  fearful  of  the 
2 


26  SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS, 

public  vengeance,  are  most  active  in  bringing  them  to  pun- 
ishment.  "  Quicquid  delirant  reges7  plectimtur  Achivi  "  ! 
Two  important  facts  have  been  established  by  the  witnesses 
on  the  different  trials.  First,  that  the  plan  of  the  plot  was* 
drawn  by  two  Frenchmen  in  Richmond,  and  by  them  given 
to  the  negro  General  Gabriel,  who  is  not  yet  canght ;  and 
secondly,  that  in  the  meditated  massacre,  not  one  Frenchman 
was  to  be  touched.  It  is  moreover  believed,  though  not  posi- 
tively known,  that  a  great  many  of  our  profligate  and  aban- 
doned whites  (who  are  distinguished  by  the  burlesque  appel- 
lation of  democrats)  are  implicated  with  the  blacks,,  and 
would  have  joined  them  if  they  had  commenced  their  oper ac- 
tions. The  particulars  of  this  horrid  affair  you  will  probably 
see  detailed  in  Davis'  paper  from  Richmond,,  but  certainly  in 
Stewart's  paper  in  Washington.  The  Jacobin  printers  and 
their  friends  are  panic  struck.  Never  was  terror  more 
strongly  depicted  in  the  countenances  of  men.  They  seer 
they  feel,  the  fatal  mischiefs  that  their  preposterous  princi- 
ples and  ferocious  party  spirit  have  brought  upon  us." 

The  Virginia  Gazette  of  Sept.  1 2th  thus  writes  :  —  "  The 
public  mind  has  been  much  involved  in  dangerous  apprehen- 
sions concerning  an  insurrection  of  the  negroes  in  several  of 
the  adjoining  counties.  Such  a  thing  has  been  in  agitation 
by  an  ambitious  and  insidious  fellow  named  Gabriel,  the 
property  of  Mr,  Thomas  Prossor.  #  W  m  #  Yesterday 
a  Court  was  held  at  the  Court  House  in  this  city,  when  six 
of  them  were  convicted,  and  condemned  to  be  executed  this 
day,  Sept,  12th." 

"  On  Thursday,  Sept.  18th,"  says  the  New  York  Spectator? 
"  five  more  were  executed  near  the  city  of  Richmond,  who 
were  concerned  in  the  insurrection." 

These  eleven  negroes  wrere  executed  before  the  apprehen- 
sion of  Gen.  Gabriel,  for  whose  arrest  Gov.  Monroe  offered  a 
reward  of  $300.  The  following  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  dated 
Norfolk,  Sept.  25th,  1800  :  — 

"  Last  Tuesday,  on  information  being  given  that  Gen. 
Gabriel  was  on  board  the  three-masted  schooner  Mary, 
Richardson  Taylor  skipper,  just  arrived  from  Richmond, 
lie  was  committed  to  prison  in  irons.     It  appeared  on  his 


SLAVB   INSURRECTIONS,  27 

examination  that  he  went  on  board  on  the  14th  inst.,  four 
miles  below  Richmond,  and  remained  on  board  eleven  days ; 
that  when  he  went  first  on  board,  he  was  armed  with  a  bayo- 
net and  bludgeon,  both  of  which  he  threw  into  the  river." 

"  On  Saturday  last,"  (Sept.  27th,)  says  a  Richmond  paper, 
* '  the  ©oted  Gabriel  arrived  here  by  water,  under  guard  from 
Norfolk,  and  was  committed  to  the  Penitentiary  for  trial. 
We  understand  that  when  he  was  apprehended,  he  manifested 
the  greatest  marks  of  firmness  and  composure,  showing  not 
the  least  disposition  to  equivocate,  or  screen  himself  from 
justice.  He  denied  the  charge  of  being  the  first  in  exciting 
the  insurrection,  although  he  was  to  have  had  the  chief  com- 
mand, but  that  there  were  four  or  five  persons  more  ma- 
terially concerned  m  the  conspiracy,  and  said  that  he  could 
mention  several  in  Norfolk  ;  but  being  conscious  of  meeting 
with  the  fate  of  those  before  him,  he  was  determined  to  make 
no  confession." 

"  It  was  stated,"  says  a  New  York  paper,  ■"  to  be  the 
best  planned  and  most  matured  of  any  before  attempted." 
4i  Gabriel  was  condemned,"  says  another  paper,  "  on  the  3d 
of  October,  and  executed  on  the  7th,  (having  been  respited 
from  the  4th, )  without  making  any  useful  confession.  On 
the  3d  of  October,  ten  more  negroes  were  executed,  and  on 
the  7th,  fifteen  more- —  viz. :  five  at  the  Brook,  five  at  Four 
Mile  Creek,  and  four  with  Gabriel  at  the  Richmond  gal- 
lows." 

These  fifteen,  as  far  as  we  have  any  account,  were  the  last 
who  were  either  executed  or  tried.  The  Court,  in  their  eager 
haste  to  apprehend  and  punish  the  conspirators,  of  whom 
five,  six,  ten  and  fifteen  at  a  time  were  executed,  and  that 
only  the  day  after  trial,  of  whom  not  one  had  committed  any 
overt  act,  and  against  whom  no  testimony  appears  to  have 
been  furnished  by  asry  white  witness,  found,  after  the  appre- 
hension of  General  Gabriel,  that  they  had  made  some  sad 
mistakes.  This  fact,  with  others,  caused  such  a  revulsion  of 
feeling,  and  excited  so  great  a  sympathy  in  behalf  of  the 
poor  creatures,  that  they  were  obliged,  by  a  moral  necessity, 
to  pause  in  their  course. 

Under  date  of  Oct  13th,  the  Commercial  Advertiser  thus 
writes :  — 


28  SLA  YE   INSURRECTIONS. 

"  The  trials  of  the  negroes  concerned  in  the  late  insurrec- 
tion are  suspended  until  the  opinion  of  the  Legislature  can 
be  had  on  the  subject.  This  measure  is  said  to  be  owing  to 
the  immense  numbers,  who  are  implicated  in  the  plot,  whose 
death,  should  they  all  be  found  guilty  and  be  executed,  will 
nearly  produce  the  annihilation  of  the  blacks  in  this  part  of 
the  country." 

The  next  day,  Oct.  14th,  a  correspondent  from  Richmond 
makes  a  similar  statement  with  this  addition :  — 

"  A  conditional  amnesty  is  perhaps  expected.  At  the 
next  session  of  the  Legislature  of  Virginia,  they  took  into 
consideration  the  subject  referred  to  them,  in  secret  session, 
with  closed  doors.  The  ivhole  result  of  their  deliberations 
has  never  yet  been  made  public,  as  the  injunction  of  secrecy 
has  never  been  removed.  To  satisfy  the  Court,  the  public, 
and  themselves,  they  had  a  task  so  difficult  to  perform,  that 
it  is  not  surprising  that  their  deliberations  were  in  secret." 

From  1800  till  1816,  nothing  was  divulged.  In  the  spring 
of  1816,  the  Hon.  Charles  Fenton  Mercer,  in  a  speech  deliv- 
ered by  him  in  1833,  says,  "  The  intelligence  broke  in  upon 
me,  like  a  ray  of  light  through  the  profoundest  gloom,  and 
by  a  mere  accident,  which  occurred  in  the  spring  of  1816, 
that,  upon  two  several  occasions,  the  General  Assembly  of 
Virginia  had  invited  the  United  States  to  obtain  a  territory 
beyond  their  limits,  whereon  to  colonize  certain  portions  of 
our  colored  population.  For  the  evidence  of  these  facts, 
then  new  to  me,  I  was  referred  to  the  Clerk  of  the  Senate ; 
and  in  the  private  records  I  found  them  verified." 

On  the  21st  of  December,  1800,  the  Virginia  House  of 
Delegates  passed,  in  secret  session,  the  following  resolution  :  — 

"  Resolved,  That  the  Governor  [Monroe]  be  requested  to  correspond 
with  the  President  of  the  United  States,  on  the  subject  of  purchasing 
land  without  the  limits  of  this  State,  whither  persons  obnoxious  to  the  laws, 
or  dangerous  to  the  peace  of  society,  may  be  removed?' 

The  General  Assembly  of  Virginia,  having  through  their 
agent,  Mr.  Jefferson,  failed  in  "1800,  1802  and  1804,  to 
obtain  a  place  of  banishment  for  that  portion  of  their  col- 
ored population  whom  they  were  afraid  to  hang,  and  unwil- 
ling to  pardon,  passed  on  Jan.  22,  1805,  still  in  secret  ses» 
sion,  the  following  resolution  :  — 


SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS.  29 

**  Resolved,  That  the  Senators  of  this  State  in  the  Congress  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  be  instructed,  and  the  Representatives  he  requested,  to  exert 
their  best  efforts  for  the  obtaining  from  the  General  Government  a  compe- 
tent portion  of  territory  in  the  country  of  Louisiana,  to  be  appropriated 
to  the  residence  of  such  people  of  color  as  have  been,  or  shall  be,  emancipated, 
or  may  hereafter  become  danyerons  to  the  public  safety,"  fyc.  —  [See  African 
Repository,  June,  1832,  and  November,  1833.] 

The  Legislature  of  Virginia  having  failed  ia  all  their 
attempts  to  find  a  suitable  Botany  Bay,  to  which  the  free 
people  of  color,  convicts,  and  other  dangerous  persons  could 
l5e  banished,  passed  in  1805  a  law  prohibiting  emancipation, 
except  on  the  condition  that  the  emancipated  should  leave 
the  State  j  or,  if  remaining  in  the  State  more  than  twelve 
months,  should  be  sold  by  the  overseers  of  the  poor  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Literary  Fund. 

Here  we  see  another  consequence  of  the  attempt  of  slaves 
to  obtain  their  freedom,  viz,,  an  increased  persecution  of  the 
free  people  of  color,  a  law  to  prevent  their  increase,  and  a 
desire  to  banish  all  of  them  from  the  State,  The  conspiracy 
of  Gen,  Gabriel  and  his  coadjutors  was,  therefore,  the  occa- 
sion, if  not  the  cause,  of  the  formation,  in  1817,  of  the 
Colonization  Society,  whose  great  object  was,  by  removing  all 
disturbing  causes,  to  make  slavery  secure,  lucrative,  and  per- 
petual. Another  noticeable  fact,  made  manifest  by  the 
intended  insurrection,  is  the  state  of  fearful  insecurity  in 
which  the  residents  of  a  slaveholding  community  must  feel 
that  they  are  living.  The  late  assertion  of  Gov,  Wise,  that 
"  We,  the  Virginians,  are  in  no  danger  from  our  slaves  or  the 
colored  people,"  — or  that  of  Senator  Mason,  "We  can  take 
care  of  ourselves," — -or  that  of  Miles,  of  South  Carolina,  "We 
are  impregnable,1"  —  betrays  the  depth  and  extent  of  their 
fear  by  the  very  attempt  to  conceal  it;  like  timid  boys 
"  ejaculating  through  white  lips  and  chattering  teeth,"  Who's 
afraid  ?  In  the  wide-spread  panic  of  1800,  the  slaveholders 
appear  to  have  been  excessively  puzzled  to  ascertain  what 
could  have  induced  their  slaves  to  engage  in  such  a  conspiracy. 
They,  of  course,  could  not  have  originated  such  a  plot,  and 
had  been,  in  their  opinion,  so  well-treated  that  they  could  have 
no  motive  to  wish  for  their  freedom.  It  was  at  first  rumored 
that  Gabriel  had  in  his  possession  letters  written  by  white 
men;  then,  that  the  conspiracy  of  the  negroes  was  "occasioned 
by  the  circulation  of  some  artfully  written  hand-bills,  drawn 
2* 


80  SLATE   INSURRECTIONS. 

up  by  the  noted  Cal lender  in  prison,  and  circulated  by  two 
French  people  of  color  from  Guadaloupe,  aided  by  a  United 
Irish  pretended  Methodist  preacher";  then,  " that  the  instiga- 
tors of  the  diabolical  plan  wished  thereby  to  insure  the  elec- 
tion of  Adams  and  Pinckney,  and  that  the  blacks,  as  far  as 
they  were  capable,  reasoned  on  the  Jeffersonian  principles  of 
emancipation."  They  were,  at  last,  unwillingly  compelled  to 
believe  that  the  whole  plot  originated  with  slaves,  and  was 
confined  to  them  exclusively,  and  that,  like  all  other  human 
beings,  deprived  by  arbitrary  power  of  all  their  just  rights, 
they  were  determined  to  be  free. 

In  a  letter  written  in  1800,  by  Judge  St.  G-eorge  Tucker, 
of  Virginia,  and  published  in  Baltimore,  he  thus  speaks :  — 

"  The  love  of  freedom  is  an  inborn  sentiment,  which  the  God  of  nature 
lias  planted  deep  in  the  heart.  Long  may  it  be  kept  under  by  the  arbi- 
trary institutions  of  society;  but,  at  the  first  favorable  moment,  it  springs 
forth  with  a  power  which  defies  all  check.  This  celestial  spark,  which 
fires  the  breast  of  the  savage,  which  glows  in  that  of  the  philosopher,  is 
not  extinguished  in  the  bosom  of  the  slave.  It  may  be  buried  in  the  em- 
bers, but  it  still  lives,  and  the  breath  of  knowledge  kindles  it  into  a  flame. 
Thus  we  find  there  never  have  been  slaves  in  any  country,  who  have  not 
seized  the  first  favorable  opportunity  to  revolt.  These,  our  hewers  of  wood 
and  drawers  of  water,  possess  the  power  of  doing  us  mischief,  and  are 
prompted  to  it  by  mctives  which  self-love  dictates,  which  reason  justifies.  Our 
sole  security,  then,  consists  in  their  ignorance  of  this  power,  and  their 
means  of  using  it  —  a  security  which  we  have  lately  found  is  not  to  be  re- 
lied on,  and  which,  small  as  it  is,  every  day  diminishes.  Every  year  adds 
to  the  number  of  those  who  can  read  and  write;  and  the  increase  of  knowl- 
edge is  the  principal  agent  in  evolving  the  spirit  we  have  to  fear.  *  *  *  By 
way  of  marking  the  prodigious  change  which  a  few  years  have  made  among 
that  class  of  men,  compare  the  late  conspiracy  with  the  revolt  under  Lord 
Dunmore.  In  the  one  case,  a  few  solitary  individuals  flocked  to  that  stand- 
ard, under  which  they  were  sure  to  find  protection.  In  the  other,  they,  in 
a  body,  of  their  own  accord,  combine  a  plan  for  asserting  their  freedom, 
and  rest  their  safety  on  success  alone.  The  difference  is,  that  then  they 
sought  freedom  merely  as  a  good ;  now  they  also  claim  it  as  a  right.  *  *  * 
Ignorant  and  illiterate  as  they  yet  are,  they  have  maintained  a  correspon- 
dence, which,  whether  we  consider  its  extent  or  duration,  is  truly  astonish- 
ing." 

Thus  far  Judge  Tucker. 

Monday,  Sept.  1st,  was  the  day  set  by  General  Gabriel  and 
his  associates  to  make  the  attack  on  Richmond  with  fire  and 
sword.  The  plot  was,  however,  discovered  only  the  day  pre- 
vious, and,  as  I  have  been  informed,  was  made  known  by  a 
slave  named  Ben,  who  was  unwilling  that  his  master  (a  Mr. 
W.  who  had  been  very  kind  to  him)  should  lose  his  life. 


SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS.  31 

The  incidents  of  thin  conspiracy  were  embodied  in  a  song, 
and  set  to  a  time,  both  of  which  were  composed  by  a  colored 
man.     The  song  is  still  sung. 

In  the  New  York  Spectator,  of  Sept,  24th,  1800,  is  a  let* 
ter  dated  Charleston,  S.  C,  Sept,  13th,  which,  says  that 
"  the  negroes  have  rose  in  arms  against  the  whites  in  this  coun- 
try, and  have  killed  several.  All  the  troops  of  light  horse 
are  ordered  out  by  the  Governor  to  suppress  the  insurrection, 
Some  reports  state  the  number  of  insurgents,  who  were  em- 
bodied about  thirty  miles  from  the  city,  to  be  about  four  or 
five  thousand  strong.  Others  decreased  this  number  to  seven 
or  eight  hundred." 

In  June,  1816,  a  conspiracy  was  formed  in  Camden,  South 
Carolina ;  but  information  of  the  intent  was  given  by  a  favo- 
rite and  confidential  slave  of  Col.  Chesnut. 

On  May  30th,  1822,  a  "faithful  and  confidential  slave" 
disclosed  to  the  Intendant  of  Charleston,  S.C.,  that,  on  Sun- 
day evening,  June  16th,  the  slaves  had  determined  to  rise  in 
rebellion  against  the  whites,  "set  fire  to  the  Governor's  house, 
seize  the  Guard-house  and  Arsenal,  and  sweep  the  town  with 
fire  and  sword,  not  permitting  a  white  soul  to  escape."  Of 
the  supposed  conspirators,  one  hundred  and  thirty-one  were 
committed  to  prison,  thirty-five  executed,  and  thirty-seven 
banished.  Of  the  six  ringleaders,  Ned  Bennet,  Peter  Pojras, 
Rolla,  Batteau,  Jesse,  and  Denmark  Yesey,  all  were  slaves, 
except  Yesey,  who  had  been  a  slave  thirty-eight  years,  a  free 
man  twenty-two  years,  having  in  1800  purchased  his  freedom. 

On  July  12th,  two  slaves  were  executed:  July  26th, 
twenty-two ;  July  30th,  four ;  and  August  9th,  one. 

In  1826,  the  inhabitants  of  Newbern,  Tarborough  and  Hills- 
borough were  alarmed  by  insurrectionary  movements  among 
their  slaves.  The  people  of  Newbern,  being  informed  that 
forty  slaves  were  assembled  in  a  swamp,  surrounded  it,  and 
killed  the  whole  party  !  ! 

In  August,  1831,  there  was  an  insurrection  of  slaves  in 
Southampton,  Virginia,  headed  by  a  slave,  who  called  himself 
Gen.  Nat.  Turner,  who  declared  to^fns  associates  that  he  was 
acting  under  inspired  directions,  and  that  the  singular  appear- 
ance  of  the  sun  at  that  time  was  the  signal  for  them  to  com- 
mence the  work  of  destruction ;  which  resulted  in  the  murder 
of  sixty-four  white  persons,  and  more  than  one  hundred  slaves 


82  SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS* 

were  killed.  The  excitement  extended  throughout  Virginia 
and  the  Carolinas.  "  Another  such  insurrection,"  says  the 
Richmond  Whig,  "  will  be  followed  by  putting  the  whole  race 
to  the  sword."  In  the  same  year,  insurrections  occurred  in 
Martinique,  Antigua,  St.  Jago,  Caraccas,  and  Tortola* 

In  January,  1832,  James  McDowell,  Jr.,  in  reply  to  a 
member  who  called  the  Nat.  Turner  insurrection  a  "  petty 
affair,"  tkus  spoke  in  the  Virginia  House  of  Delegates  :  — 

"  Now,  sir,  I  ask  you,  I  ask  gentlemen,  In  conscience  to  say,  was  that  a 
< petty  affair'  which  startled  the  feelings  of  your  whole  population^  which 
threw  a  portion  of  it  into  alarm,  a  portion  of  it  into  panic;  which  wrung 
out  from  an  affrighted  people  the  thrilling  cry,  day  after  day,  conveyed  t© 
your  executive,  i  We  arc  in  peril  of  our  lives* — send  its  an  army  for  defence  ! ' 
Was  that  a  '  petty  affair/  which  drove  families  from  their  homes';  which 
assembled  women  and  children  in  crowds,  without  shelter,  at  places  of  com* 
mon  refuge,  in  every  condition  of  weakness  and  infirmity,  under  every  suf* 
fering  which  want  and  terror  could  inflict,  yet  willing  to  endure  all,  willing 
to  meet  death  from  famine,  death  from  climate,  death  from  hardships,  pre* 
ferring  any  thing  rather  than  the  horrors  of  meeting  it  from  a  domestic  as* 
sassin  ?  Was  that  a  '  petty  affair,'  which  erected  a  peaceful  and  confiding 
portion  of  the  State  into  a  military  camp";  which  otillatfed  from  piiy  the  un- 
fortunate beings  whose  brothers  had  offended ;  which  barred  every  door,  pene- 
trated every  bosom  with  fear  or  suspicion;  which  so  banished  every  sense 
of  security  from  every  man's  dwelling,  that,  let  but  a  hoof  or  horn  break 
upon  the  silence  of  the  night,  and  an  aching  throb  would  be  driven  to  the 
heart  ?  The  husband  would  look  to  his  weapon,  and  the  mother  would 
shudder,  and  weep  upon  her  cradle  !  Was  it  the  fear  of  Nat.  Turner  and 
his  deluded,  drunken  handful  of  followers,  which  produced  such  effects  ? 
Was  it  this  that  induced  distant  counties,  where  the  very  name  x>i  South- 
ampton was  strange,  to  arm  and  equip  for  a  struggle  ?  No,  sir,  it  was  the 
®uspicio?i  tfernall$  attached  to  the  slave  himself;  the  suspicion  that  a  Nat, 
Turner  might  be  in  every  family  —  that  the  same  bloody  deed  might  be 
acted  over  at  any  time,  and  in  any  place  —  that  the  materials  for  it  were 
spread  through  the  land,  and  were  always  ready  for  a  like  explosion.  Noth- 
ing but  the  force  of  this  withering  apprehension,  nothing  but  the  para- 
lyzing and  deadening  weight  with  which  it  falls  upon  and  prostrates  the 
heart  of  every  man  who  has  helpless  dependants  to  protect,  nothing  but 
this  could  have  thrown  a  brave  people  into  consternation,  or  could  have 
made  any  portion  of  this  powerful  Commonwealth,  for  a  single  instant,  to 
have  quailed  and  trembled.'' 

In  the  same  year  and  month,  Henry  Berry,  Esq.,  another 
delegate,  thus  spoke :  — 

"  Sir,  I  believe  that  no  cancer  on  the  physical  body  was  ever  more  cer- 
tain, steady  and  fatal  in  its  progress,  than  this  cancer  on  the  political  body 
of  Virginia.  It  is  eating  into  her  Very  vitals.  And  shall  we  admit  that 
the  evil  is  past  remedy  ?  Shall  we  act  the  part  of  a  puny  patient,  suffer- 
ing under  the  ravages  of  a  fatal  disease,  who  would  say  the  remedy  is  too 
gainful  ?     Pass  as  severe  laws  as  you  will  to  keep  these  unfortunate  crea- 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  33 

tures  in  ignorance,  it  is  in  vain,  unless  you  can  extinguish  that  spark  of 
intellect  which  God  has  given  them.  Sir,  we  have,  as  far  as  possible,  closed 
every  avenue  by  which  light  might  enter  their  mi?ids.  We  have  only  to  go  one 
step  further  —  to  extinguish  the  capacity  to  see  the  light  —  and  our  work 
will  be  completed.  They  would  then  be  reduced  to  the  level  of  the  beasts 
of  the  field,  and  we  should  be  safe ;  and  I  am  not  certain  that  we  would 
not  do  it,  if  we  could  find  out  the  necessary  process,  and  that  under  the 
plea  of  necessity.  But,  sir,  this  is  impossible;  and  can  man  be  in  the 
midst  of  freemen,  and  not  know  what  freedom  is  ?  Can  he  feel  that  he  has 
the  power  to  assert  his  liberty,  and  will  he  not  do  it  ?  Yes,  sir,  with  the  cer- 
tainty of  Time's  current,  he  will  do  it  whenever  he  has  the  power.  The  data  are 
before  us  all,  and  every  man  can  work  out  the  process  fcr  himself.  Sir,  a 
death-struggle  must  come  between  the  two  classes,  *  in  rvhich  one  or  the  other  will 
be  extinguished  forever.  Who  can  contemplate  such  a  catastrophe  as  even 
possible,  and  be  indifferent  ?  " 

In  an  essay  written  by  Judge  St.  George  Tucker,  and  pub- 
lished in  1796,  be  expresses  similar  sentiments,  in  language 
equally  forcible,  and  concludes  by  saying  :  — 

"  I  presume  it  is  possible  that  an  effectual  remedy  for  the  evils  of  slavery 
may  at  length  be  discovered.  Whenever  that  happens,  the  golden  age  of  our 
country  will  begin.     Till  then, 

"  Won  hospes  a  hospite  tutus 

Non  Herus  a  Famulis,  fratrum  quoque  gratia  raraP 

"  I  tremble  for  my  country  when  I  reflect  that  God  is  just, 
that  his  justice  cannot  sleep  forever,"  and  "that  the  Almighty 
has  no  attribute  that  can  take  sides  with  us  in  such  a  contest," 
viz.,  "an  exchange  of  situation"  [with  the  slaves,]  are  the 
well-known  words  of  Jefferson. 

In  1832,  a  general  insurrection  of  the  slaves  occurred  in 
Jamaica,  when  between  two  and  three  thousand  slaves  were 
killed,  and  a  large  number  of  whites.  The  loss  occasioned  by 
the  rebellion  was  estimated  at  five  millions  of  dollars,  a  part 
of  which  was  occasioned  by  the  burning  of  one  hundred  and 
fifty  plantations.  Now,  the  British  West  Indies  are  forever 
exempted  from  all  danger  of  insurrection,  while  the  danger  of 
a  servile  war  in  America  will,  until  slavery  is  abolished,  every 
year  increase. 

In  the  month  of  June,  1839,  a  vessel,  called  the  Amistad, 
Ramon  Ferrer,  Captain,  sailed  from  Havana  for  Principe, 
about  one  hundred  leagues  distant,  with  fifty-four  negroes  and 
two  white  passengers,  (Spaniards,)  viz.,  Pedro  Montez  and 
Jose  Ruiz,  one  of  whom  claimed  to  be  the  owner  of  the  ne- 


*  "  Irrepressible  Conflict/' 


82  SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS, 

were  killed.  The  excitement  extended  throughout  Virginia 
and  the  Carolines.  "  Another  such  insurrection,"  says  the 
Richmond  Whig,  "will  be  followed  by  putting  the  whole  race 
to  the  sword."  In  the  same  year,  insurrections  occurred  in 
Martinique,  Antigua,  St.  Jago,  Caraccas,  and  Tortola* 

In  January,  1832,  James  McDowell,  Jr.,  in  reply  to  a 
member  who  called  the  Nat.  Turner  insurrection  a  "  petty 
affair,"  thus  spoke  in  the  Virginia  House  of  Delegates  v— 

"  Now,  sir,  I  ask  jou,  I  ask  gentlemen,  in  conscience  to  say,  was  that  a 
*  petty  affair'  which  startled  the  feelings  of  your  whole  population^  which 
threw  a  portion  of  it  into  alarm,  a  portion  of  it  into  panic";  which  wrung 
out  from  an  affrighted  people  the  thrilling  cry,  day  after  day,  conveyed  to 
your  executive,  '  We  arc  in  peril  of  our  lives- — send  ns  an  arm:§  for  defence  ! ' 
Was  that  a  '  petty  affair/  which  drove  families  from  their  homes;  which 
assembled  women  and  children  in  crowds,  without  shelter,  at  places  of  com- 
mon refuge,  in  every  condition  of  weakness  and  infirmity,  under  every  su£» 
fering  which  want  and  terror  could  inflict,  yet  willing  to  endure  all,  willing 
to  meet  death  from  famine,  death  from  climate,  death  from  hardships,  pre- 
ferring any  thing  rather  than  the  horrors  of  meeting  it  from  a  domestic  as* 
isassin  ?  Was  that  a  '  petty  affair,'  which  erected  a  peaceful  and  confiding 
portion  of  the  State  into  a  military  camp';  which  outlawed  from  pity  the  un- 
fortunate beings  whose  brothers  had  offended;  which  barred  every  door,  pene- 
trated every  bosom  with  fear  or  suspicion",  which  so  banished  every  sense 
of  security  from  every  man's  dwelling,  that,  let  but  a  hoof  or  horn  break 
upon  the  silence  of  the  night,  and  an  aching  throb  would  be  driven  to  the 
heart  ?  The  husband  would  rook  to  his  weapon,  and  the  mother  would 
shudder,  and  weep  upon  her  cradle  !  Was  it  the  fear  of  Nat.  Turner  and 
his  deluded,  drunken  handful  of  followers,  which  produced  such  effects  ? 
Was  it  this  that  induced  distant  counties,  where  the  very  name  -of  South- 
ampton was  strange,  to  arm  and  equip  for  a  struggle  ?  No,  sir,  it  was  the 
mtspicion  -eternally  attached  to  the  sla®e  himself;  tire  suspicion  that  a  Nat. 
Turner  might  be  in  every  family  —  that  the  same  bloody  deed  might  be 
acted  over  at  any  time,  and  in  any  place  —  that  the  materials  for  it  were 
spread  through  the  land,  and  were  always  ready  for  a  like  explosion.  Noth- 
ing but  the  force  of  this  withering  apprehension,  nothing  but  the  para- 
lyzing and  deadening  weight  with  which  it  falls  upon  and  prostrates  the 
heart  of  every  man  who  has  helpless  dependants  to  protect,  nothing  but 
this  could  have  thrown  a  brave  people  into  consternation,  or  could  have 
made  any  portion  of  this  powerful  Commonwealth,  for  a  single  instant,  to 
have  quailed  and  trembled.'1 

In  the  same  year  and  month,  Henry  Berry,  Esq.,  another 
delegate,  thus  spoke :  — ? 

"  Sir,  I  believe  that  no  cancer  on  the  physical  body  was  ever  more  cer- 
tain, steady  and  fatal  in  its  progress,  than  this  cancer  on  the  political  body 
of  Virginia.  It  is  eating  into  her  very  vitals.  And  shall  we  admit  that 
the  evil  is  past  remedy  ?  Shall  we  act  the  part  of  a  puny  patient,  suffer- 
ing under  the  ravages  of  a  fatal  disease,  who  would  say  the  remedy  is  too 
painful  ?     Pass  as  severe  laws  as  you  will  to  keep  these  unfortunate  crea- 


SLAVE    INSURRECTIONS.  33 

tures  in  ignorance,  it  is  in  vain,  unless  you  can  extinguish  that  spark  of 
intellect  which  God  has  given  them.  Sir,  we  have,  as  far  as  possible,  closed 
every  avenue  by  which  light  might  enter  their  minds.  We  have  only  to  go  one 
step  further  —  to  extinguish  the  capacity  to  see  the  light  —  and  our  work 
will  be  completed.  They  would  then  be  reduced  to  the  level  of  the  beasts 
of  the  field,  and  we  should  be  safe ;  and  I  am  not  certain  that  we  would 
not  do  it,  if  we  could  find  out  the  necessary  process,  and  that  under  the 
plea  of  necessity.  But,  sir,  this  is  impossible;  and  can  man  be  in  the 
midst  of  freemen,  and  not  know  what  freedom  is  ?  Can  he  feel  that  he  has 
the  power  to  assert  his  liberty,  and  will  he  not  do  it  ?  Yes,  sir,  with  the  cer- 
tainty of  Time's  current,  he  will  do  it  whenever  he  has  the  power.  The  data  are 
before  us  all,  and  every  man  can  work  out  the  process  fcr  himself.  Sir,  a 
death-struggle  ?nust  come  between  the  two  classes,  *  in  which  one  or  the  other  will 
be  extinguished  forever.  Who  can  contemplate  such  a  catastrophe  as  even 
possible,  and  be  indifferent  ?  " 

In  an  essay  written  by  Judge  St.  George  Tucker,  and  pub- 
lished in  1796,  he  expresses  similar  sentiments,  in  language 
equally  forcible,  and  concludes  by  saying :  — 

"  I  presume  it  is  possible  that  an  effectual  remedy  for  the  evils  of  slavery 
may  at  length  be  discovered.  Whenever  that  happens,  the  golden  age  of  our 
country  will  begin.     Till  then, 

"  Non  hospes  a  hospite  tutus 

Non  Herus  a  Famulis,  fralrum  quoque  gratia  rara." 

"  I  tremble  for  my  country  when  I  reflect  that  God  is  just, 
that  his  justice  cannot  sleep  forever,"  and  "that  the  Almighty 
has  no  attribute  that  can  take  sides  with  us  in  such  a  contest," 
viz.,  "an  exchange  of  situation"  [with  the  slaves,]  are  the 
well-known  words  of  Jefferson. 

In  1832,  a  general  insurrection  of  the  slaves  occurred  in 
Jamaica,  when  between  two  and  three  thousand  slaves  were 
killed,  and  a  large  number  of  whites.  The  loss  occasioned  by 
the  rebellion  was  estimated  at  five  millions  of  dollars,  a  part 
of  which  was  occasioned  by  the  burning  of  one  hundred  and 
fifty  plantations.  Now,  the  British  West  Indies  are  forever 
exempted  from  all  danger  of  insurrection,  while  the  danger  of 
a  servile  war  in  America  will,  until  slavery  is  abolished,  every 
year  increase. 

In  the  month  of  June,  183.9,  a  vessel,  called  the  Amistad, 
Bamon  Ferrer,  Captain,  sailed  from  Havana  for  Principe, 
about  one  hundred  leagues  distant,  with  fifty-four  negroes  and 
two  white  passengers,  (Spaniards,)  viz.,  Pedro  Montez  and 
Jose  Ruiz,  one  of  whom  claimed  to  be  the  owner  of  the  ne- 


*  "Irrepressible  Conflict/' 


34  $LAVE   INSURRECTIONS. 

groes,  who  were  all  natives  of  Africa.  While  on  board,  they 
"  suffered  much  from  hunger  and  thirst."  In  addition  to  this, 
there  was  much  whipping,  and  "the  cook  told  them  that,  when 
they  reached  land,  they  would  all  be  eaten."  This  "  made 
their  hearts  burn."  To  avoid  being  eaten,  and  to  escape  the 
bad  treatment,  they  rose  upon  the  crew  with  the  design  of  re- 
turning to  Africa,  This  was  on  June  27th,  four  days  after 
leaving  Havana.  After  killing  the  captain  and  cook,  and 
permitting  the  crew  to  escape,  they  under  command  of  Cinque, 
who  compelled  Montez  to  steer  the  ship  for  Africa,  which  he 
did  in  the  day  time,  because  the  negroes  could  tell  his  course 
by  the  sun,  but  put  the  vessel  about  in  the  night.  In  this 
manner,  the  vessel  drifted  about  till  August  26th,  when  she 
was  taken  possession  of  by  Capt.  Gedney,  U.  8.  N.  After 
an  interesting  trial  in  Connecticut,  the  negroes  were  set  free, 
and,  under  the  American  Missionary  Association,  were  sent 
to  their  native  country,  Africa,  and  of  whom  many  are  now 
receiving  religious  instruction  by  means  of  missionaries  who 
accompanied  them  to  the  Mendi  country.  It  is  in  relation  to 
these  blacks  that  President  Buchanan,  in  his  late  message, 
thus  speaks :  — "  I  again  recommend  that  an  appropriation 
be  made  to  be  paid  to  the  Spanish  Government  for  the  pur- 
pose of  distribution  among  the  claimants  in  the  Amistad 
case  " !  ! 

On  the  27th  of  October,  1841,  the  Creole  sailed  from 
Richmond  with  one  hundred  and  thirty- five  slaves,  bound  for 
New  Orleans.  On  November  7th5  they  rose  on  the  crew, 
killed  a  passenger  named  Howell,  and  on  November  9th,  ar- 
rived at  Nassau,  New  Providence,  where  they  were  all  set 
free  by  the  British  authorities.  The  leader  in  this  successful 
attempt  to  secure  their  freedom  was  Madison  Washington. 
"  The  sagacity,  bravery  and  humanity  of  this  man,"  says  the 
Hon.  William  Jay,  "  do  honor  to  his  name,  and,  but  for  his 
complexion,  would  exeite  universal  admiration," 

In  1846,  the  slaves  in  Santa  Cruz  rose  in  rebellion  against 
their  masters,  took  possession  of  the  island,  and  thus  obtained 
their  freedom ^  but  did  no  injury  to  any  white  person.  This 
was  remarkable,  as  the  whites  numbered  3,000,  and  the  blacks 
25,000. 

Now,  what  is  the  inference  from  this  list  of  conspiracies 
and  insurrections^  and  scores  of  others  which  could  be  col- 


SLATE   INSURRECTIONS,  85 

lected?  Why,  (1,)  that  all  danger  arises  from  the  continu- 
ance of  slavery,  and  not  from  its  abolition.  And,  (2,)  that 
if  the  Bible  sanctions  slavery,  the  God  of  the  Bible  does  not. 
The  language  of  God's  providence  is  one  and  uniform,  and  too 
explicit  to  be  misunderstood,  It  assures  us?  and  writes  the 
assurance  in  lines  of  blood,  that  the  way  of  the  transgressor 
is  hard,  and  that  though  hand  join  in  handy  the  violators  of 
God's  law  shall  not  go  unpunished.  All  history  y  ancient  and 
modern,  is  full  of  examples  and  warnings  on  this  point,  Shall 
we  slight  these  warnings?  shut  our  eyes  against  the  light,  and 
madly  rush  on  our  own  destruction  ?  Let  us  remember  that 
slavery  is  an  unnatural  state ;  that  Nature?  when  her  eternal 
principles  are  violated,  always  struggles  to  restore  them  to 
hev  true  estate ;  and  that  the  natural  feelings  accord  with  the 
sentiment  of  the  poety 

"I»f  I'm  designed  yon  lordling's  slaye, 
By  Nature's  laws  designed, 
Why  was  an  independent  wish 
E'er  planted  in  my  mind  ? ,r 

"  If  the  Bible/'  says  the  Rev,  Albert  Barnes,  "  could  be 
shown  to  defend  and  countenance  slavery  as  a  good  institution? 
it  would  make  thousands  of  infidels ;  for  there  are  multitudes 
of  minds  that  will  see  more  clearly  that  slavery  is  against  all 
the  laws  which  God  has  written  on  the  human  soul,  than  they 
would  see  that  a  booky  sanctioning  such  a  system?  had  evi- 
dence of  divine  origin," 

Says  Charles  Alcott,  of  Medina?  Ohio?  in  his  very  able  lec- 
tures on  slavery:— "It  is  easy  to  show  that  slavery  has? 
from  first  to  lasty  been  supported  directly  and  solely  by  crimes? 
and  that  the  commission  of  nearly  every  crime  in  the  Bible 
calendar,  and  many  crimes  against  the  common  lawy  are  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  support  it,  and  give  it  full  effect.  It  is  a 
fact  equally  curious  and  truey  that  crime  of  any  kind  can  only 
be  supported  by  crime ;  and  thaty  in  order  to  persevere  in  the 
commission  of  one  crime,  and  prevent  its  detection  and  pun- 
ishment, it  is  necessary  to  commit  still-  further  crimes." 

This  being  true,  it  follows  conclusively  that  immediate  re- 
pentance of  the  sin  of  slavery  is  the  duty  of  every  master? 
and  immediate  emancipation  the  right  of  every  slave.  Says 
Charles  Alcott,  "  A  man  cannot  stir,  or  move,  or  begin  to 
act,  either  in  support  of  slavery,  or  in  opposition  to  its  im» 


30  SLAVE   INSURRECTIONS. 

mediate  abolition,  without  committing  crimes  or  sins  of  some 
sort  or  other."  He  cannot  be  neutral.  Therefore,  gentle 
reader,  in  the  "  irrepressible  conflict "  that  is  now  agitating 
the  country,  and  will  continue  to  agitate  it  till  slavery  is  abol- 
ished, which  side  have  you  chosen,  or  do  you  intend  to  choose  ? 
Will  you  take  the  "  higher  law,"  which  is  in  harmony  with 
God's  providence  and  his  word,  or  act  in  favor  of  the  "lower 
law,"  which  opposes  both  ?  If  slavery  is  right,  sustain,  de- 
fend and  justify  it ;  but  if  it  is  a  crime,  do  all  in  your  power, 
by  moral  means,  to  overthrow  the  execrable  system.  If  you 
are  a  professed  Christian,  remember  the  words  of  Kev.  Albert 
Barnes :  —  "  There  is  not  vital  energy  enough,  there  is  not 
power  of  numbers  and  influence  enough,  out  of  the  Church,  to 
sustain  it.  Let  every  religious  denomination  in  the  land  de- 
tach itself  from  all  connection  with  slavery.  All  that  is 
needful  is,  for  each  Christian  man,  for  every  Christian  church, 
to  stand  up  in  the  sacred  majesty  of  such  a  solemn  testimony, 
and  to  free  themselves  from  all  connection  with  the  evil,  and 
utter  a  calm,  deliberate  voice  to  the  world,  and  the  work  is 
done" 


Published  at  the  Office  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery 
Society,  No.  5  Beekman  Street,  New  York.  Also,  to  be, 
had  at  the  Anti-Slavery  Offices,  No.  21  Comhill,  Boston,  and 
No.  107  North  Fifth  Street,  Philadelphia. 


