Science  HQ  750  .  Al  L7  7 

Pearson,  Karl,  1857-1936. 

The  academic  aspect  of  the 
science  of  national 
eugenics 


^  UNIVERSITY   OF  LONDON 

^  GALTON    LABORATORY  FOR  NATIONAL  EUGENICS 


EUGENICS  LABORATORY  LECTURE  SERIES.  VII 

The  Academic  Aspect 

of  the 

Science  of  National  Eugenics 


A  LECTURE 
DELIVERED  TO  UNDERGRADUATES 

BY 

KARL  PEARSON,   F.R,S. 


LONDON 

DULAU  .^  CO,  Ltd.,  37  SOHO  SQUARE,  W. 

191 1 

Pn'ce  One  Shilling  net 


UNIVERSITY  OF  LONDON 
The  Francis  Galton  Eugenics  Laboratory 

UNIVERSm^  COLLEGE,  GOWER  STREET,  W.C. 

The   Laboratory   is   under    the   supervision   of    Professor    Karl 
Pearson,  F.R.S.,  in  consultation  Avith  Sir,  Francis  Galton,  F.R.S. 
Galton   Research  Fellow :    David  Heron,  D.Sc.     Galton  Research 
■lar;    Ethel    M.    Elderton.      Computer:     Amy   Barrinct.  \ 
rant  for  Pedigree  Drafting:   Kathleen  T.  Ryley. 
,  ationaViEuginics  is  the  study  of  agencies  under  social  control.  . '    ' 
7nay  improve  or  impair  the  racial  qualities  of  future  generaiir 
physically  or  mentally. 

It  is  the  intention  of  the  Founder,  that  the  Laboratory  shall  seiM 
(i)  a"  a  storehouse  of  statistical  material  bearing  on  the  mental  and 
physiwi  conditions  in  man,  and  the  relation  of  these  conditions  to 
inheritance  and  environment;  (ii)  as  a  centre  for  the  publication 
01  .other  form  of  distribution  of  information  concerning  National 
Eugenics ;  (iii)  as  a  school  for  training  and  assisting  research-worker- 
in  the  special  problems  of  Eugenics.  - 

Short  courses  are  provided  for  those  who  are  engaged  in  social,, 
medirnl  ^^  r^nthropometric  work. 


EUGENICS   LABORATORY   LECTURE  SERIES. 

L     The   Scope   and  Importance  to  the  State  of  the  Science  of 
National    Eugenics.      By   Karl   Pearson,   F.R.S,     Ts^ii^rl 
Price   \s.  net. 
II.     The  Groundwork  of  Eugenics.      By  Karl   Pearson,  F.R.S. 
Issued.     Price  is.  net. 

III.  The  Relative  Strength  of  Nurture  and  Nature.     By  Ethel  M. 

Elderton.     Issued.     Price  is.  net. 

IV,  On  the  Marriafre  of  First  Cousins.     By  Ethel  M.  Elderton. 

\_Nearly  ready. 
\.  Tilt  i'rubium  ui  i'liiLLicrti  LugcnicS,  By  ICarl  Pr.rT^^nv.  F.P  ?, 
Issued.     Price  \s.  net. 

\\.  Nature  and  Nurture,  the  Problem  of  the  Future.  By  K  \i  > 
Pearson,  F.R.S.     Issued.     Price  u.  net. 

VII.  The  Academic  Aspect  of  the  Science  of  National  Eugenics.  A 
Lecture  delivered  to  Undergraduates.   Issued.  Price  is.  net. 

Questions  of  the  Day  and  the  Fray.  No.  i .  Supplement  to  the  Memoir 
entitled:  The  Influence  of  Parental  Alcoholism  on  the  Physique 
and  Ability  of  the  Offspring.  By  Karl  Pearson,  F.R.S.  Being 
a  Reply  to  the  Cambridge  Economists.  Issued.    Piice  is,  net^ 


The  Academic  Aspect  of  the 
Science  of  National  Eugenics 


A  LECTURE 
DELIVERED  TO  UNDERGRADUATES 

BY 

KARL  PEARSON,  F.R.S. 


LONDON 

PUBLISHED  BY  DULAU  AND  CO.,  LTD. 

37  SOHO  SQUARE,  LONDON 

1911 


2^.54 


w 


:V 


S<u- 


7 


THE    ACADEMIC    IMPORTANCE   OF 
EUGENICS 

May  Eugenics  grasp  the  obligation  that  springs  from  success,  the 
obligation  to  maintain  the  highest  purpose  of  science,  namely  single- 
minded  pursuit  of  truth,  combined  with  pride  in  wholly  faithful  work 
and  logically  sound  criticism.  Suggested  by  Nils  Finsen's  Aspiration 
for  the  Light-Institute. 

Eugenics  is  the  name  of  a  new  branch  of  science  which 
has  had  so  far  only  a  few  years  of  Hfe  Yet,  as  all  new 
things,  which  have  reality  behind  them  and  are  there- 
fore growing,  it  has  been  quickly  seized  upon  by  innumer- 
able '  cranks  ',  and  used  as  a  banner  to  proclaim  their 
own  special  '  crankeries '  and  push  their  own  pecuhar 
nostrums  for  the  reform  of  society.  In  such  a  state  of 
affairs  it  is  little  wonder  that  Eugenics  appears  in  a 
distorted  form  in  the  Christmas  annuals  ;  it  will  probably 
get  into  the  Christmas  pantomimes  and  ultimately  into 
Punch.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  academic  Eugenics  has  no 
relation  at  all  to  any  idea  of  the  State  as  a  great  matri- 
monial agency.  Eugenics  covers  the  double  idea  involved 
in  the  word  '  well-bred ',  that  is  well-born  and  well- 
nurtured,  and  the  study  of  how  far  good  nurture  can 
replace  bad  birth,  and  bad  nurture  destroy  the  advantages 
of  good  birth.  The  academic  definition  of  Eugenics 
was  provided  on  the  original  foundation  of  the  Galton 
Eugenics  Laboratory.  It  runs  :  '  National  Eugenics  is 
the  study  of  agencies  under  social  control  that  may  im- 
prove or  impair  the  racial  qualities  of  future  generations 
either  physically  or  mentally.' 

Now  you  will  note  that  this  definition  has  not  been 


4  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

drawn  up  without  much  thought  over  the  value  of  each 
word  used.  Look  at  it  carefully.  Note  those  words 
'  under  social  control '  ;  they  surely  imply  that  there  is 
at  least  a  possibility  that  some  agencies  which  impro^'e 
or  impair  racial  qualities  are  not  '  under  social  control '. 
The  use  of  those  words  suggests  how  very  careful  we 
must  be  to  measure  the  hmits  of  '  social  control '  both 
from  the  standpoint  of  scientific  possibility  and  from 
the  standpoint  of  practical  human  politics  and  practical 
human  knowledge.  No.  eugenist  can  include  the  geo- 
graphical position  of  this  country  as  an  agency  under 
social  control ;  every  eugenist  must  accept  the  bulk  of 
his  nation  and  its  permanent  environment  as  he  finds 
them.  Whatever  be  the  characteristics  of  the  Enghsh- 
man,  we  cannot  hope  to  exchange  straight  away,  and  in 
the  mass,  even  if  it  were  desirable,  his  intellectual  habits 
for  the  industry  of  the  German,  the  lucid  expression  of  the 
Frenchman,  or  the  fertile  imagination  of  the  Oriental. 
We  have  to  take  our  own  racial  qualities  as  they  are 
given  to  us,  and  study  how  they  are  being  or  may  be 
improved  or  impaired.  The  moment  you  realize  this, 
you  will  see  that  the  words  'National  Eugenics'  have  been 
rightly  used.  Every  nation  has  in  a  certain  sense  its 
own  study  of  eugenics,  and  what  is  true  of  one  nation 
is  not  necessarily  true  of  a  second.  The  ranges  of 
thought  and  of  habit  are  so  diverse  among  nations  that 
what  might  be  at  once  or  in  a  short  time  under  the  social 
control  of  one  nation,  would  be  practically  impossible  to 
control  in  a  second.  Eugenics  must  from  this  aspect  be 
essentially  national,  and  eugenics  as  a  practical  policy 
will  vary  widely  according  as  you  deal  with  Frenchmen 
or  Japanese,  with  Englishmen  or  Jews. 

Again,   note   how   carefully   the   definition   has   been 


THE    SCIENCE    OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  5 

framed  by  the  use  of  the  word  racial.  What  does  this 
word  signify  and  why  is  it  introduced  ?  We  understand 
by  a  racial  character,  one  which  is  the  product  of  many 
centuries  of  selection,  one  which  passes  from  generation  to 
generation,  and  one  which  is  not  fundamentally  modified  if 
a  child  be  born  to  the  race  in  India,  Canada,  or  AustraHa. 
We  are  looking,  therefore,  at  the  range  of  quahties  fixed 
by  selection  and  transmitted  by  heredity,  and  the  next 
sentence  speaks  of  modification  either  physical  or  mental. 
There  is  not  the  least  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  author 
of  our  definition  was  convinced  that  the  physical  and 
mental  qualities  he  was  speaking  of  were  essentially 
hereditary.  He  felt  that  we  had  already  reached  the 
perfectly  definite  knowledge  that  both  physical  and 
mental  characteristics  were  inherited.  He  knew  that  this 
knowledge  was  so  certain  that  it  might  be  assumed  in 
forming  a  definition  of  National  Eugenics,  and  that  con- 
troversy— especially  newspaper  controversy — with  people 
who  rush  but  do  not  read — was  perfectly  idle. 

Let  me  put  before  you  as  clearly  as  I  can  what  we 
understand  by  heredity.  It  is  not  the  absolute  resemblance 
of  parent  and  child.  There  is  no  meaning  whatever  in 
the  resemblance  of  A  to  B,  unless  it  also  indicates  that 
they  are  both  unlike  somebody  else.  Heredity  is  not  the 
possession  merely  of  the  same  thing  as  one  or  both  of  your 
parents  possess,  it  is  also  the  absence  of  that  sameness 
between  you  and  the  mass  of  persons  who  are  not  your 
parents.  The  mere  possession  of  a  heart  or  fiver  is  no  sign 
of  heredity  in  our  sense  of  the  word ;  you  possess  it  in 
common  not  only  with  your  parents,  but  with  every 
viable  human  being.  Heredity  only  comes  into  place 
when  you  determine  how  far  your  heart  and  liver  are 
fike  those  of  your  stock  and  differ  from  those  of  other 


O  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

people.  Now,  if  you  once  understand  that  heredity 
signifies  nnlikeness  as  well  as  likeness,  you  will  have  no 
difficulty  in  reaHzing  that  environment,  without  selection 
and  solely  by  nurture,  can  modify  characters  and  yet 
these  characters  show  full  hereditary  Ukeness. 

In  the  middle  class  our  daughters  are  taller  than  their 
mothers — the  average  increase  is  more  than  an  inch. 
Our  sons  have  not  that  full  advantage  on  us.  We  be- 
longed also  to  a  generation  that,  as  boys  and  young  men, 
rowed  and  shot  and  played  cricket — nay  we,  perhaps, 
played  football  more  frequently  and  looked  on  at  it  less 
than  the  males  of  the  younger  generation  do.  Our  sons 
are  hardly  on  the  average  taller  than  we  are.  Shall  we 
say  that  they  are  more  like  us  than  their  sisters  are  to 
their  mothers  ?  That  is  to  forget  the  fundamental  fact 
that  likeness  of  individuals  is  only  measurable  relative 
to  the  unhkeness  to  others.  And,  as  we  might  anticipate, 
the  resemblance  of  mother  to  daughter  is  found  to  be 
no  less  than  that  of  father  to  son,  when  we  come  to 
investigate  the  problem  numerically. 

Hence  in  using  the  term  racial^  which  signifies  ultimately 
hereditary  qualities,  we  are  not  a  priori  refusing  to  con- 
sider how  far  nurture  and  environment  affect  physical 
or  mental  characters.  On  the  contrary,  we  assert  that  the 
relative  intensity  of  nature  and  nurture  with  regard  to 
both  physical  and  mental  qualities  is  directly  prescribed 
in  our  definition  as  part  of  the  study  of  eugenics. 

Now  there  are  two  ways  at  least  in  which  this  problem 
of  nature  and  nurture  can  be  approached.  The  one  method 
is  direct.  It  takes  a  number  of  physical  and  mental  charac- 
ters and  measures  the  resemblance  between  relatives  with 
regard  to  these  characters,  and  then  it  takes  the  same 
or  similar  characters  and  investigates  in  precisely  the 


THE    SCIENCE    OF    NATIONAL   EUGENICS  7 

same  way  how  the  variation  of  these  characters  is  related 
to  variation  of  the  environment.  This  has  been  done  now 
for  practically  hundreds  of  series  of  characters,  each  one 
of  these  series  embracing  numbers  running  from  500 
to  several  thousand  individuals.  We  have  questioned  the 
influence  of  parental  habits,  of  parental  employment,  of 
parental  wages,  of  the  nature  of  the  house,  of  the  manner 
of  Hfe  and  occupation  of  the  children  on  their  physical 
and  mental  qualities.  These  are  not  without  influence,  and 
no  statement  to  that  effect  has  been  made  by  the  members 
of  the  Eugenics  Laboratory,  But  their  influence  in  the 
case  of  man  is  of  a  wholly  different  order  from  that  of 
heredity.  We  find  that  the  effect  of  nurture  is  on  the 
average  hardly  one-fifth  to  one-tenth  that  of  heredity. 

The  two  tables  put  up  will  give  you  some  idea  of  the 
relative  value  of  these  agencies  in  improving  or  impairing 
our  mental  or  physical  quaUties.^ 

The  second  method  of  approaching  the  problem  is  an 
indirect  one.  We  investigate  the  resemblance  of  a  long 
series  of  characters,  some  of  which  are  admitted  by  all, 
and  others  denied  by  many,  to  have  hereditary  value. 
Now  no  one  supposes  eye-colour  or  hair-colour  to  be 
sensibly  altered  in  the  living  individual  by  the  environ- 
ment ;  few  would  accept  the  view  that  the  cephalic  index 
of  two  brothers  is  made  like  because  they  are  members 
of  the  same  middle-class  English  household.  We  know 
that  if  we  keep  within  a  moderate  middle-class  range 
the  supply  of  food  is  much  the  same  in  character  and 
sufficiency,  and  we  find  all  types  of  physical  characters 
practically  inherited  at  the  same  rate.  Now  there  are 
a  number  of  persons  who  assert  that  while  fully  admitting 
the  inheritance  of  physical  characters,  the  mental  and 

^  For  such  tables  see  Lecture  VI  of  this  series. 


8  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

moral  characters  are  matters  of  tradition  and  not  of 
heredity.  No  one  supposes  unconscientiousness  or  un- 
truthfulness, crime  or  immorality,  directly  inherited. 
Tuberculosis  is  not  directly  inherited,  but  when  we 
remember  that  80  per  cent  to  90  per  cent  of  the  popula- 
tion show  tuberculous  lesions  by  the  age  of  eighteen, 
we  begin  to  understand  that  it  is  not  the  tubercle  bacillus, 
but  the  tuberculous  diathesis,  the  want  of  constitutional 
power  of  resistance,  which  is  the  danger  and  which  forms 
the  basis  of  heredity  in  the  case  of  tuberculosis.  So  it 
is  with  both  crime  and  immoraUty :  it  is  not  the  infection, 
but  the  power  of  resistance,  the  constitutional  immunity, 
which  is  the  ultimate  factor.  As  a  teacher  of  nearly 
twenty-seven  years'  experience  it  is  a  wonder  to  me  that 
any  one  can  doubt  the  inheritance  of  the  mental  and 
moral  qualities  in  man.  You  see  students  going  through 
the  same  schools  and  the  same  universities,  the  same 
external  environment,  with  wholly  divergent  results, 
mentally  and  morally.  At  once,  when  this  is  asserted, 
you  are  told  it  is  the  home  influence,  the  family  tradition. 
Again,  I  think,  those  people  who  speak  thus  have  never 
been  parents,  or  shall  we  say  observant  parents  ?  They 
have  never  reahzed  how  circumscribed  is  the  moulding 
power  of  the  parent.  The  mental  individuality  of  the 
child  is  not  under  the  parents'  control,  and,  perhaps,  it 
is  much  the  better  for  humanity  that  it  is  not.  But  as  the 
child  passes  from  the  physical  control  of  the  parent, 
who  fancies  that  it  is  mere  plastic  material  ready  to  the 
parent's  moulding  hand,  he  can  watch  those  mental 
features  developed  which  we  have  already  marked  in  this 
or  that  branch  of  the  ancestiy — good  or  bad  as  the  case 
may  be,  and  wholly  beyond  home  influence  or  family 
tradition.     Of    two    boys    brought    up    under    identical 


THE    SCIENCE   OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  9 

home,  school,  and  university  conditions,  one  is  shy  and 
conscientious,  the  other  self-asserting  and  unscrupulous. 
These  things  are  impossible  on  the  basis  of  tradition  as 
the  dominant  factor,  they  are  explicable  on  the  basis  of 
alternate  heredity. 

In  our  second  method  we  can  take  these  two  classes 
of  characters — those  acknowledged  to  be  due  to  the 
hereditary  factor,  and  those  asserted  to  be  due  to 
environment  and  tradition — and  we  can  investigate  how 
close  is  their  resemblance  in  relatives. 

Now  suppose  the  resemblance  between  these  two  types 
of  qualities  shows  no  differentiation,  beyond  the  probable 
errors  of  our  samples,  and  the  observational  errors  of  our 
estimates  ?  What  is  the  natural  inference  to  be  made  ? 
Why,  the  probability  that  the  two  series  are  both  due  to 
heredity,  and  not  one  to  nature  and  one  to  nurture, 
becomes  so  great,  that  we  say  that  the  proof  that  it  is 
nurture  w^hich  is  giving  substantially  the  same  values  as 
nature  in  these  cases  must  fall  on  those  who  assert  that 
nurture  makes  two  brothers  resemble  each  other  in  shyness 
to  the  same  extent  as  nature  makes  these  brothers  resemble 
each  other  in  the  shape  of  their  head  or  the  length  of  their 
forearm  !  We  are  at  liberty  here  to  appeal  to  that  funda- 
mental logical  principle,  so  often  overlooked — the  razor  of 
Occam — which  asserts  that  not  more  or  more  complex 
causes  are  to  be  predicated  than  suffice  to  describe 
phenomena.  Nurture  might  have  produced  more  or  it 
might  have  produced  less  than  nature,  but  that  it  produces 
sensibly  the  same  intensity  of  resemblance  cannot  be  got 
over  by  simply  asserting  that  environmental  influence  has 
not  been  allowed  for.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  over- 
whelming evidence  now  to  show  that  the  direct  effect  of 
nurture  is  very  markedly  less,  so  much  less  that   its 

B 


10  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

influence  on  hereditary  measurements  in  man  within 
practically  one  social  grade  scarcely  exceeds  the  probable 
errors  of  our  results. 

So  far  I  have  been  entirely  occupied  with  what  I  may 
term  the  academic  definition  of  eugenics,  the  one  original^ 
provided  for  us  by  Sir  Francis  Gal  ton,  when  he  founded 
the  laboratory.  Our  attempt,  as  staff  of  that  laboratory, 
has  been  to  create  the  academic  study  as  thus  circum- 
scribed and  defined.  It  is  clear  that  progress  in  this  study 
must  depend  essentially  on  quantitative  appreciations  of 
the  intensity  of  heredity  in  the  case  of  racial  qualities, 
whether  physical  or  mental,  and  of  the  intensity  of 
environmental  influence  on  the  same  qualities.  Such 
investigation  we  have  endeavoured  to  carry  out  with  the 
means  and  the  staff  at  the  disposal  of  the  laboratory. 

Now  it  is  really  at  this  point  that  the  academic  aspect 
of  eugenics  appears.  And  I  want  to  illustrate  it  by 
a  concrete  case.  You  know  that  there  is  a  strong  feeling 
among  many  workmen  that  the  employment  of  women 
is  reducing  their  own  wages,  and  the  restriction  of  the 
employment  of  women  is  likely  to  be  a  plank  in  the  plat- 
form of  trade-union  politicians.  The  restriction  will  be 
advocated  on  the  ground  that  it  is  detrimental  to  infant 
life.  Now  here  is  a  perfectly  definite  statistical  problem  : 
Does  the  employment  of  women  influence  the  mortality 
of  their  offspring  or  the  health  of  the  children  ?  It  is  not 
in  the  least  an  easy  problem  to  answer  ;  it  is  not  a  question, 
as  I  will  soon  show  you,  of  merely  collecting  isolated  data  ; 
it  is  a  most  subtle  and  difficult  problem,  which  requires 
an  immense  range  of  data  and  most  refined  analysis.  Yet 
it  is  a  problem  on  which  dogmatic  opinions  will  be  and 
are  being  expressed  with  a  view  to  social  and  political 
action.    One  side  refused  us  material,  because  if  we  came 


THE    SCIENCE   OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  II 

to  an  unfavourable  opinion  we  should  cripple  the  freedom 
of  women  to  seek  paid  work  ;  the  other  side  are  collect- 
ing data  to  support  a  preconceived  opinion  on  which  a 
definite  line  of  political  action  is  to  be  based.  Now  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  only  place  where  such  a  problem 
can  be  dealt  with  is  the  university  laboratory  ;  it  must 
be  investigated  as  any  biological  or  physical  problem  is 
dealt  with,  without  any  ulterior  motive  or  preconceived 
opinion :  '  There,'  as  we  say  to  a  research  student  in 
biology  or  physics,  '  is  a  good  problem  for  you,  go  and  find 
out  the  truth  about  it.'  But  the  professor  of  biology  or 
physics  who  does  that  subjects  himself  to  no  public  criti- 
cism beyond  that  of  his  colleagues  and  his  co-scientists. 
The  unfortunate  worker  at  eugenics,  on  the  contrary, 
Cannot  express  an  opinion  at  present  on  any  problem  at 
all  without  exciting  an  amount  of  invective  which  we 
can  only  parallel  among  the  rival  scholars  of  the  age  of 
Scaliger,  And  the  reason  for  this  is  very  clear.  With 
regard  to  every  problem  which  concerns  the  improvement 
or  impairment  of  the  racial  qualities  of  the  race,  with 
regard  to  every  question  of  social  reform,  two  and  often 
more  parties  are  already  in  the  field.  They  have  set  up 
their  banners  and  blown  their  trumpets,  and  proclaimed 
their  shibboleths,  and  they  want  nothing,  they  will  have 
nothing,  which  cannot  be  used  for  their  own  purposes. 
You  may  plead  that  the  arguments  by  which  they  support 
their  views  are  not  valid  in  the  court  of  science,  and  that 
you  feel  absolutely  ignorant  as  to  whether  employment 
of  mothers  does  injure  the  unborn  child,  or  whether 
sanatoria  are  curing  the  tuberculous  ;  that  you  want  to 
find  out  the  truth  by  any  means  in  your  power  before 
you  come  to  a  judgement.  They  reply  :  By  all  means,  but 
if  your  judgement  be  not  identical  with  ours,  then  keep 


12  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

it  to  yourself,  or  woe  betide  you  !  '  If  alcoholism  and 
inebriety  do  flow  from  mental  defectiveness,  and  not 
mental  defect  from  alcohol,  you  have  no  business  to  tell 
the  public  so,'  said  a  distinguished  medical  man  the  other 
day.  Why  ?  Because  we  have  been  using  the  argument 
that  mental  defect  is  sure  to  come  both  to  you  and  your 
children,  if  you  use  alcohol,  and  you  are  depriving  us 
of  a  plank  in  our  platform.  Again,  quite  recently  and 
solemnly  assembled  in  conclave,  the  wise  men  of  medicine 
agreed  that  the  constitution  was  an  important  factor  in 
tuberculosis,  but  that  it  was  not  desirable  to  lay  stress 
on  it  at  the  present  time,  for  it  would  check  the  flow  of 
public  money  into  the  fight  against  the  tubercle  bacillus. 
But  what  if  the  tubercle  bacillus  is  actually  committing 
suicide,  or  what  if  immunity  be  surviving  without  the  aid 
of  the  expenditure  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pounds  of 
public  money  ?  Well,  to  say  that,  means  that  you  will 
cut  off  the  present  or  prospective  occupation  of  a  certain 
number  of  gentlemen  who  are  fighting  in  one  special 
manner  the  tubercle  bacillus,  and  therefore,  even  if  true, 
it  must  not  be  rashly  said  in  public. 

Now  I  am  personally  neither  a  believer  nor  disbeliever 
in  any  suggested  form  of  social  or  of  clinical  treatment. 
I  have  no  feeling  at  all  when  the  subjects  of  vaccination,  of 
antitoxin  treatment  of  diphtheria  or  enteric,  or  of  tuber- 
culin are  introduced.  They  are  to  me  nice  academic 
problems  in  statistics  ;  but  if  you  endeavour  to  reach  truth 
with  regard  to  these  subjects  in  a  quite  non-party  rational 
way,  again  woe  betide  you  !  The  fact  is,  nobody  wants 
the  truth  :  the  defence  and  attack  of  this  or  that  party 
view  has  become  so  closely  associated  with  the  special 
interests  of  individual  men  or  classes  of  men,  that  actual 
truth — often  in  agreement  with  the  opinions  of  neither 


THE    SCIENCE    OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  I3 

party — is  the  one  thing  which  both  will  unite  in  belittling. 
You  may,  perhaps,  remember  Socrates'  words  to  Euthry- 
phro  ?  The  Athenians  don't  mind  a  man  being  wise  or 
knowing  the  truth,  but  they  get  very  angry  if  he  endea- 
vours to  impart  his  knowledge  to  others  !  Now  what  is  it, 
then,  that  I  want  to  impress  upon  you  to-night  with 
regard  to  the  academic  nature  of  eugenics  ? 

Why,  not  that  this  or  that  solution  of  a  vital  social 
problem  is  right,  but  that  we  simply  cannot  find  a  solution 
at  all  if  we  start  with  preconceived  and  party  notions. 
I  wonder  if  any  of  us  ever  sit  down  to  think.  I  know  we 
sit  down  to  read  or  to  work  or  to  play — but  I  mean,  sit 
down  to  think  without  a  book  before  us.  I  believe  it  is 
one  of  the  hardest  things  to  do,  because  we  are  so  desper- 
ately ashamed  if  any  one  comes  into  our  room  unex- 
pectedly and  finds  us  '  doing  nothing  '.  We  feel  it  would 
appear  a  perfectly  vain  excuse  to  say  we  were  doing  what 
is  the  hardest  task  in  life,  thinking  ;  and  we  reach  out 
for  a  pen  and  shuffle  about  papers  or  books.  The  result 
of  this  absurd  idea  that  thinking  is  '  doing  nothing  ',  is 
that  no  time  is  allowed  for  it.  We  never  sit  down  for  a 
morning's  thinking.  We  do  our  thinking  in  odd  moments, 
when  we  are  out  walking  or  cycling  ;  in  omnibuses  and 
railway-trains,  and  when  our  mind  is  tired  after  we  go  to 
bed  at  night.  We  think  as  we  shave  and  as  we  do  up  our 
hair,  and  we  have  no  organized  time  and  method  of  thinking. 
We  talk  a  great  deal  to-day  about  education  and  its 
methods,  but  if  we  assert  that  true  education  is  not  a 
process  of  gaining  knowledge,  but  of  training  a  person  to 
think,  we  certainly  provide  little  opportunity  for  practising 
what  we  preach.  The  student  is  driven,  '  from  dewy 
morn  to  noon  and  noon  to  odorous  eve ',  from  lecture- 
room  to  laboratory  and  laboratory  to  lecture-room,  without 


14  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

the  least  opportunity  being  provided  for  a  quiet  hour  or  two 
of  thought.  Every  college  should  have  a  cogitariiim  as  well 
as  a  lahoratorium  and  a  librarium,  and  every  student 
should  remember  that  it  is  infinitely  more  important  to 
have  learnt  during  his  university  career  to  think  than 
to  have  filled  endless  notebooks  with  facts  or  current 
opinions.  In  after  life,  unless  you  are  fortunate  enough 
to  escape  the  need  for  earning  your  own  living,  the  world 
will  give  you  little  time  to  think.  You  will  look  back  on 
your  college  days  as  the  days  when  you  had  a  chance  of 
thinking.  The  successful  barrister,  the  successful  medical 
man,  the  successful  business  man,  never  have  any  time  to 
think,  and  when  they  come  to  the  top  of  the  tree,  and 
have  to  direct  public  opinion  and  guide  social  action,  you 
will  find  that  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  their  opinions  are 
taken  on  faith  from  some  party  organization,  from  their 
customary  newspaper,  or  from  the  traditional  views  of 
their  class  or  profession.  They  have  wholly  lost  the  power 
of  independent  thinking,  because  they  have  been  com- 
pelled to  cease  all  practice  in  thinking  for  so  many  years. 
Now  I  am  not  at  all  certain  that  our  academic  educa- 
tion fully  enough  recognizes  that  its  fundamental  object  is 
to  teach  students  to  think,  and  to  do  this  it  must  practise 
them  in  thinking.  We  professors  are  too  apt  to  fill 
students'  notebooks  with  the  names  of  things,  with  descrip- 
tions of  routine  processes,  and  with  the  current  or  fashion- 
able scientific  hypotheses.  But  do  we  always  equally  well 
impress  upon  the  student  that  these  things  are  only  the 
material,  and  not  the  practice  of  education ;  that  the 
training  produced  by  thinkmg  about  them  is  the  main 
thing,  and  the  knowledge  of  them  worth  very,  very  little 
except  to  the  small  minority  who  propose  to  earn  their 
living  by  again  teaching  them  to  somebody  else  ?     And 


THE    SCIENCE    OF    NATIONAL    EUGENICS  15 

even  then,  how  fluctuating  is  the  whole  body  of  scientific 
knowledge  I  The  names  of  many  things  have  changed 
since  my  college  days  of  thirty-five  years  ago  ;  the 
laboratory  processes  have  changed,  and  as  for  scientific 
hypotheses,  the  whole  foundations  of  science,  physical 
and  biological,  hav^e  been  reconstructed — no,  that  is 
saying  too  much — they  have  been  dug  up,  and  we  hope 
a  strong  logical  mind  will  come  along  some  day  and  recon- 
struct them.  Matter  and  force  have  had  their  day,  the 
atom  as  a  fundamental  unit,  and  mass  as  an  invariable 
constant,  have  had  their  day,  the  nebular  hypothesis  has 
had  its  day  ;  the  electron  is  having  its  day,  and  Mendelism 
is  having  its  day,  and  inoculation  and  the  opsonic  index 
are  having  their  day,  but  who  can  doubt  that  their  day 
will  be  yesterday  as  we  march  along  ?  If  the  student 
comes  out  of  the  lecture-room  untrained  to  doubt,  then  his 
education  is  inefiicient.  The  education  which  does  not 
cause  you  to  question,  to  doubt  at  every  stage,  is  not  doing 
its  duty  by  you.  Please  understand  that  I  have  not  a 
grain  of  sympathy  with  those  who  think  it  fashionable 
to  doubt  every  convention,  whether  in  science  or  in  art  or 
social  conduct.  The  mere  existence  of  a  convention  is 
strong  evidence  that  there  is  something  to  be  said  in 
favour  of  it — that  it  supplies,  or  at  least  has  supplied, 
some  aid  to  conduct,  or  provided  some  economy  of 
thought. 

If  you  come  out  of  the  lecture-room  ready  to  accept 
some  hypothesis  as  effectively  describing  facts  on  the 
authority  of  your  teacher,  then  that  lecture  has  been 
perfectly  idle  from  the  true  academic  standpoint.  It 
would  be  equally  idle  if  you  came  out  with  the  conviction 
that  it  did  not  fit  the  facts.  The  only  healthy  attitude 
is  to  come  out  as  a  doubter,  ready  to  accept  nobody's 


l6  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

opinions  on  authority,  but  very  keen  to  find  out  the  facts 
for  yourself  in  library  and  laboratory — and  then  go  and 
consider  them  in  the  cogitarium,  summing  up  for  and 
against  the  hypothesis.  One  such  hypothesis  balanced 
against  facts  in  the  course  of  a  whole  academic  session  is 
worth  more  than  a  pile  of  notebooks  filled  with  so-called 
scientific  knowledge.  It  has  started  you  to  think  for 
yourself. 

The  great  wonder  is  that  science  has  progressed  as 
rapidly  as  it  has  done,  when  we  consider  how  hypothesis 
has  been  taught  as  dogma  in  textbook  and  lecture-room  to 
generation  after  generation  of  students.  Is  the  fault 
wholly  in  the  teacher  ?  Not  in  the  least :  speak  with 
certitude,  and  scratch,  scratch,  go  the  pens  and  down  go 
the  words  in  the  notebooks.  But  come  to  the  vital  part, 
where  the  criticism  of  current  knowledge  begins,  where 
the  teacher  points  out  assumptions,  and  then  down 
go  the  pens ;  polite  tolerance  is  visible  on  each  face 
till  the  lecturer  reaches  again  material  quotable  for 
examination  purposes. 

Five  hours  a  day,  you  understand, 

And  when  the  clock  strikes,  be  on  hand  ! 

Prepare  beforehand  for  your  part 

With  paragraphs  all  got  by  heart, 

So  you  can  better  watch  and  look 

That  naught  is  said,  but  what  is  in  the  book  : 

Yet  in  thy  writing  as  unwearied  be. 

As  did  the  Holy  Ghost  dictate  to  thee  ! 

I  recognize  to  the  full  all  the  w^eak  points  of  Oxford 
and  Cambridge,  Berlin  and  Heidelberg,  and  our  great 
superiority  here  in  London  !  But  if  I  look  back  on  life, 
I  think  the  chief  advantages  I  have  enjoyed  arose  from 
the  circumstances  which  enabled  me  to  take  five  years  of 
university  training,  never  to  hear  more  lectures  than  three 


THE   SCIENCE   OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  I7 

hours  a  week,  and  for  the  great  bulk  of  the  time  to  possess 
three  rooms,  one  to  sleep  in,  one  to  read  in,  and  one  to 
think  in — with  a  stout  oak  door  to  keep  out  the  world 
when  necessary.  And  the  biggest  advantage  of  all  was 
only  three  hours  of  lectures  per  week,  for  without  this  the 
others  would  have  been  of  small  profit  ! 

At  present  you  may  see  little  relation  between  what 
I  am  now  saying  and  the  topic  of  my  paper,  and  I  will 
therefore  hasten  to  pick  up  my  threads.  They  are  these  : 
As  human  beings,  our  object  is  to  enjoy  life  and  to  make 
life  enjoyable  for  others — the  present  others  and  future 
others.  We  do  not  in  the  bulk  come  to  the  university  to 
learn  about  the  processes  of  cell-division,  the  properties 
of  the  electron,  the  intricacies  of  Old  High  German  metric, 
nor  '  to  settle  Hoti's  business  or  properly  base  Oun  ' ;  we 
come  to  the  university  in  order  to  learn  to  think  for 
ourselves,  and  the  actual  material  on  which  we  learn  this 
doesn't  matter  a  rap — provided  we  do  learn  it.  And  what 
I  mean  by  learning  to  think,  is  the  attainment  to  that  atti- 
tude of  mind  which,  insisting  on  starting  with  doubt,  goes 
a  long  way  further  than  doubt — it  proceeds  to  collect  facts 
and  reason  upon  them  independently  1 1  declines  to  accept 
opinions  because  they  are  authoritative,  or  because  they 
are  those  of  your  family,  your  teacher,  your  party,  or  your 
religious  sect.  If  the  university  does  not  say  to  you  of 
every  question — This  to  you  is  an  open  question  ;  study  it 
without  prejudice  and  form  your  own  judgement — it  is  not 
doing  its  duty  by  you.  When  you  do  learn  to  treat  each 
question  in  this  way,  then  you  have  grasped  what  I  mean 
by  the  academic  spirit.  Many  things  are  not  really  open 
questions,  but  as  learners  you  have  to  study  them  and  form 
your  opinion  on  them  as  if  they  were  open  questions.  And 
if  you  do  this,  you  will  reach  a  method  which  will  soon 

c 


l8  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

reveal  to  you  how  many  other  things  truly  are  open 
questions,  which  have  been  settled  by  authority,  by  party 
or  sect,  and  thrust  as  settled  questions  upon  mankind  at 
large.  Now  the  problems  on  which  turn  not  only  our  own 
enjoyment  of  life,  but  the  enjoyment  of  life  by  others 
(upon  which  our  own  largely  depends),  are  essentially 
family  and  social  problems.  It  is  on  these  family  and 
social  problems  that  the  improving  and  impairing  of  the 
racial  qualities  of  future  generations  mainly  if  not  entirely 
hinge.  A  right  judgement  on  them  is  essential  to  good 
citizenship.  But  these  problems  are  not  problems  light 
and  easy  to  answer.  We  cannot  experiment  on  man  in 
the  laboratory  ;  we  have  laboriously  to  observe  and 
collect  data,  and,  when  they  have  been  collected,  to  reason 
upon  them  by  methods  which  allow  no  place  for  party 
spirit,  for  preconceived  notions,  or  platform  emotions.  All 
biological  problems  are  obscure  and  difficult  enough,  but 
these  eugenic  problems,  because  they  come  so  close  to 
each  one  of  us  personally,  and  because  they  deal  with  man, 
whom  we  cannot  cage  and  dissect,  are  the  hardest  and 
most  obscure  of  all  problems.  The  very  existence  of 
human  society  depends  upon  a  strong  gregarious  instinct 
having  been  evolved  among  men.  Our  highest  human 
product,  sympathy  with  our  fellow  men,  is  as  much  a 
product  of  evolrftion  as  the  gregarious  instinct  of  a  herd 
of  deer,  or  the  combined  action  of  a  pack  of  wolves.  Only 
it  is  more  completely  developed,  and  with  increasing 
knowledge  we  have  lost  more  and  more  touch  with  its 
instinctive  gratification.  The  sympathy  is  there  ready 
to  run  riot  in  a  thousand  ways,  which  sober  reflection  may 
not  show  to  be  for  the  ultimate  advantage  of  the  herd. 
It  is  easy  to  give  a  shilling  to  a  beggar,  to  subscribe  a 
pound  to  a  charity,  or  to  found  stipends  for  the  blind  or 


THE    SCIENCE    OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  IQ 

the  deaf  and  dumb.  Our  owri  strong  instinct  of  sympathy 
with  suffering  has  been  gratified,  but  shall  we  have  really 
contributed  to  the  total  enjoyment  of  the  race  ?  May  be, 
and  may  be  not — the  pedigrees  I  place  before  you  may 
help  you  to  a  judgement.^  Of  one  thing,  however,  I  feel 
sure,  that  no  judgement  will  lead  to  lasting  social  gain 
which  is  reached  by  appeal  to  the  emotions,  which  is  based 
on  inadequate  knowledge  of  facts,  or  which  collects  data 
with  the  view  of  supporting  any  preconceived  opinion. 
In  short,  on  all  these  grounds  we  see  that  what  is  needed 
is  the  academic  judgement.  You  cannot  settle  such 
essential  problems  of  society  as  alcoholism,  tuberculosis, 
mental  defectiveness,  or  the  changing  status  of  women, 
by  oratory  in  the  market-place.  I  claim  that  these  things 
must  be  studied  in  university  laboratories,  where  Oxford 
shall  check  the  results  of  Cambridge,  and  London  correct 
both  of  them,  if  need  be.  You  don't  fancy  that  you  can 
reach  the  truth,  or  even  form  an  approximately  true 
judgement  on  the  laws  of  motion  by  discussing  them  in 
your  debating  societies  ;  but  the  problems  of  society  are 
much  harder  than  the  problems  of  mechanics,  and  yet 
we  all  think  it  possible  to  come  to  conclusions  on  them  by 
debating-society  methods.  The  university  has  provided 
you  with  physical  laboratories  and  biological  laboratories 
because  it  recognizes  that  the  problems  of  inorganic  and 
organic  change  need  not  only  academic  treatment,  but 
are  a  splendid  field  for  training  the  mind  to  think.  Is  the 
field  of  biological  science  as  applied  to  man  a  degree  less 
splendid,  a  shade  less  complex,  or  less  worthy  in  any 
particular  of  our  university  studies  ?  Is  it  not  really  the 
highest  of  all  fields,  the  most  difficult  of  all  studies,  and 

^  The  lecturer  showed  a  number  of  pedigrees  of  general  physical 
and  mental  degeneracy  :   see  for  illustration  Lecture  VI. 


20  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

the  one  with  the  greatest  and  gravest  import  to  mankind  ? 
Nay,  I  believe  that  the  purpose  for  which  we  enter  the 
physical  or  the  biological  laboratories  is  not  to  learn  facts, 
nor  to  collect  hypotheses,  but  to  train  and  develop  our 
minds  so  that  we  may  become  ultimately  good  citizens. 
And  by  '  good  citizens  '  I  mean  those  men  and  women 
who  refuse  to  accept  the  judgement  of  party  or  sect  ;  who 
strive  in  social  problems  to  form  an  independent  judge- 
ment, to  study  the  facts  and  reason  about  them,  and  above 
all  believe  that  profitable  answers  to  these  problems  can 
only  be  found  when  their  real  difficulty  is  grasped  and 
they  are  submitted  to  patient  and  unbiased  research. 
We  never  think  of  taking  the  opinion  of  the  man  in  the 
street  on  the  reasons  why  the  moon  does  not  keep  her 
calculated  times,  we  do  not  ask  his  opinion  on  the  value 
of  the  opsonic  index  ;  we  recognize  that  these  are  prob- 
lems which  require  special  training  and  analysis  wholly 
beyond  his  grasp,  but  we  still  think  he  is  quite  capable 
of  expressing  an  opinion  on  whether  the  employment  of 
woman  is  good  for  her  infants  or  not,  although  he  may  be 
in  possession  of  no  data  on  the  subject,  and  although,  if 
he  were,  he  would  be  quite  incapable  of  interpreting  them. 
The  time  is  at  hand  when  we  shall  realize  that  our  social 
problems  are  the  great  academic  problems — the  chief 
problems  of  science,  which  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  solve 
by  party  methods  or  by  hustings  oratory.  Understand 
that  I  speak  solely  of  finding  solutions  to  these  problems  ; 
the  application  to  human  conduct  must  ever  depend  on 
the  will  or  the  vote  of  individuals.  But  our  power  of 
influencing  the  will  of  individuals  will  become  immensely 
greater  when  we  realize  that  the  true  answers  to  social 
problems  are  only  to  be  reached  by  arduous  study  and 
not  by  the  enumeration  of  untrained  opinions. 


THE   SCIENCE   OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  21 

I  have  more  or  less  asked  you  to  take  these  views  on 
faith,  but  I  should  like  to  revert  as  an  illustration  to  a 
problem  I  have  mentioned  earlier — the  employment  of 
women.  As  I  have  told  you,  the  subject  is  one  in  which 
there  is  strong  feeling  among  certain  trade-unionist  circles, 
and  the  ground  of  any  action  in  the  matter  will  be  the 
supposed  ill  to  the  offspring.  Elaborate  inquiries  have 
recently  been  made  officially,  and  a  certain  association, 
far  less  than  was  anticipated,  has  been  found  between 
infantile  mortality  and  the  employment  of  the  mother. 
The  degree  of  relationship  is  about  -lo — just  one-tenth 
up  the  scale  of  correlation.  It  is  about  the  degree  of 
resemblance  between  a  man  and  one  of  his  great-grand- 
fathers. I  do  not  know  whether  this  association  will 
be  considered  to  justify  legislative  interference  with  the 
employment  of  child-bearing  women,  but  those  of  us  who 
go  a  little  beyond  the  surface  of  such  a  problem  see 
that  it  is  far  more  complex  than  any  mere  observation 
of  increased  mortality  for  the  infant  of  the  employed 
mother.  In  the  first  place,  what  about  the  age  of  the 
mother  ?  Well,  her  age  produces  50  per  cent  more  effect 
than  her  employment  on  the  death-rate  of  her  infant — 
the  correlation  of  mother's  age  and  infantile  mortality 
is  -15.  Shall  we  restrict,  therefore,  the  ages  at  which 
a  woman  shall  be  allowed  to  have  children  ?  Again, 
what  about  the  father's  occupation,  or  want  of  occupa- 
tion ?  The  occupation  of  the  father,  whether  he  is  a 
general  labourer,  a  factory  hand,  a  skilled  labourer,  or 
a  shopkeeper,  has  just  100  per  cent  more  influence  on  the 
mortality  of  the  infant  than  the  employment  of  the 
mother ;  it  is  -20.  Are  you  going  to  legislate  as  to  the 
father's  occupation  ?  What  is  more ,  the  correlation  between 
mother's   employment    and   father's   occupation   is    -35, 


22  THE   ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

or  the  employment  of  the  mother  depends  very  sensibly 
on  the  father's  occupation. 

Again,  what  about  the  mother's  food  ?  The  infantile 
death-rate  is  20  per  cent  more  closely  associated  with 
the  food  in  the  home  than  with  the  mother's  employment. 
Shall  we  legislate  as  to  the  food  the  mother  may  take  ? 
Further,  that  food  is  associated  with  the  drinking  of  the 
mother,  and  her  drinking  with  her  employment  and  with 
the  infantile  death-rate.  It  is  quite  possible  that  legisla- 
tion with  regard  to  the  drinking  of  mothers  might  lower 
the  death-rate  more  than  restricting  their  employment. 

More  important  than  the  mother's  food  is  the  baby's 
food.  The  manner  in  which,  when  the  baby  is  not 
breast-fed,  the  milk  for  the  baby  is  stored  is  90  per  cent 
more  important  (correlation  -19)  than  the  employment 
of  the  mother. 

Now  turn  to  the  nature  of  the  house  in  which  baby  is 
reared.  The  cleanliness  of  the  house  is  20  per  cent 
more  influential  than  the  employment  of  mother,  -12 ; 
the  proper  ventilation  of  the  house,  its  dampness  and  its 
lighting,  are  about  double  as  influential  as  the  employ- 
ment of  the  mother. 

Again,  what  about  the  overcrowding — a  factor  quite 
sensibly  associated  with  the  father's  occupation  and 
wages  ?  Well,  overcrowding  produces  just  130  per  cent 
more  influence  on  the  infantile  death-rate  than  the 
employment  .of  the  mother ;   the  correlation  is  -23. 

As  another  illustration,,  let  me  refer  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  baby  is  fed — bottle  or  breast  feeding ;  this  has 
170  per  cent  more  influence  on  the  infantile  death-rate 
than  the  employment  of  the  mother.  Would  it  not  be 
more  effective  to  legislate  on  how  the  baby  is  to  be  fed  ? 
Nay,  if  we  allow  for  the  manner  in  which  the  baby  is 


THE    SCIENCE    OF    NATIONAL    EUGENICS  23 

fed  we  actually  find  that  the  employment  of  women 
is  associated  with  a  lower  infantile  death-rate,  i,  e.  of 
those  women  who  breast-feed  their  children  the  employed 
women  have  fewer  infants  who  die  than  unemployed 
women. 

Lastly,  let  me  give  one  other  striking  illustration. 
There  is  a  thing  called  a  '  dummy  teat '  or  '  baby-pacifier ' 
— an  india-rubber  tantalizer  and  bacilli-collector  pushed 
between  baby's  lips,  at  which  it  sucks  ineffectually  and 
indefinitely.  Out  of  2,000  Rochdale  babies  1,500  used 
these  dummies.  Well  now,  how  does  a  dummy  teat 
compare  with  an  employed  mother  ?  The  former  is 
no  per  cent  more  closely  related  to  the  infantile  death* 
rate  than  the  latter,  i.  e.  -21  is  the  correlation.  Now  I 
ask  you  how  you  can  possibly  legislate  with  regard  to 
employed  mothers,  who  if  they  breast-feed  their  infants 
show  better  results  when  employed  than  when  not  em- 
ployed, and  neglect  those  baby-pacifiers  ?  If  you  ask  me 
whether  I  really  think  the  baby-pacifier  kills  the  baby, 
I  must  say  that  I  don't  know,  any  more  than  I  know 
whether  the  employment  of  the  mother  is  the  source 
of  a  slightly  higher  infant  death-rate.  I  strongly  suspect 
that  the  baby-pacifier  is  more  often  used  when  the  baby 
is  fractious  and  the  parents  don't  want  to  be  bothered, 
i.  e.  with  weak  children  and  selfish  or  careless  parents. 
But  I  know  that  the  employment  of  the  mother  is  asso- 
ciated with  fewer  rooms,  lower  wages  of  the  father,  and 
lower  class  of  occupation  of  the  father,  and  it  is  further 
associated  with  the  house  rental.  I  know  also  that  the 
infantile  death-rate  is  as  closely  associated  with  the 
total  earnings  of  the  family  as  with  the  employment  of 
mothers.  Hence  it  seems  to  me  that  the  real  source  of 
the  death-rate  is  not  housing,  or  employment  of  mother, 


24  THE    ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

or  dummy  teats,  but  all  these  are  associated  with  a  stock 
having  lower  types  of  employment  and  a  lower  wage,  i.e. 
of  a  stock  which  is  physically  injerior,  and  when  this  is 
directly  tested  by  comparing  the  mother's  health  with 
the  infantile  death-rate  we  find  that  this  health  is 
in  Blackburn  200  per  cent  more  influential  than  the 
mother's  employment,  for  the  correlation  in  this  case  is 
•30.  I  owe  these  results  to  my  colleague  Miss  Elderton, 
of  the  Eugenics  Laboratory ;  they  are  by  no  means  final, 
but  they  will  suffice  to  indicate  how  complex  a  problem 
of  this  kind  is,  and  how  hopeless  it  is  to  try  and  solve  it 
by  the  opinion  of  the  man  in  the  street  as  to  whether  the 
employment  of  women  is  a  good  or  bad  thing. 

There  is  not  a  single  social  problem  which  is  simpler 
than  this  one,  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  we  have 
nothing  like  as  ample  data  upon  which  to  attempt  a 
solution. 

Take  another  instance  of  the  same  sort. 

The  Local  Government  Board  has  just  issued  a  report 
on  '  Back-to-Back  Houses  '  in  which  it  is  shown  that  the 
mortality  rate  is  greater  in  such  houses.  There  is  the 
vaguest  reference  to  the  '  through  houses  '  and  '  back- 
to-back  '  houses  being  chosen  so  that  the  occupants  were 
in  like  economic  conditions.  Yet  what  do  we  find  from 
the  data  in  the  Eugenics  Laboratory  ?  Why  that  the 
w^ages  of  the  occupants  of  such  houses  are  lower,  that  they 
drink  more,  that  their  habits  are  more  irregular  and 
uncleanly,  that  they  pay  lower  rents,  and  crowd  their 
rooms  more  than  in  '  through  houses '.  I  have  httle 
doubt  that  legislation  will  be  brought  in  to  prevent  the 
building  of  back-to-back  houses  in  order  to  lower  a 
mortahty  which  in  the  first  place  is  due  to  the  physically 
and  mentally  feebler  class  which  seeks  the  cheaper  house. 


THE    SCIENCE    OF    NATIONAL    EUGENICS  25 

I  have  little  doubt  that  a  higher  insanity  rate  would  be 
found  associated  with  back -to-back  houses,  as  well  as 
increased  mortality,  but  this  could  hardly  be  attributed 
to  want  of  through  ventilation. 

These  cases  must  suffice  to  illustrate  how  complex 
are  all  the  problems  of  social  reform.  My  object 
to-night  has  not  been  to  put  forward  solutions  or  even  to 
picture  to  you  the  wide  range  of  exciting  problems  that 
await  solution.  My  object  has  been  rather  to  indicate 
that  the  great  social  problems  of  to-day  and  of  to-morrow 
— problems  which  are  of  far  more  vital  importance  to  the 
nation  than  tariff  reforms  or  hereditary  chambers — 
cannot  be  solved  by  debating-society  methods,  still  less 
by  appeal  to  the  passions  of  the  uneducated,  or  to  broad 
instinctive  sympathy.  We  are  told  that  back-to-back 
houses  have  a  higher  death-rate ;  we  do  not  stay  to 
question  whether  it  is  association  or  causation ;  we 
legislate  forbidding  their  construction.  We  hear  in 
glorified  language  of  the  fight  against  tuberculosis ;  we 
do  not  examine  the  death-rate,  but  subscribe  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  pounds  to  provide  ammunition  for  a  sham 
fight — for  the  victory  has  been  won  on  other  grounds 
already.  We  are  told  of  the  woman  toihng  in  the 
factory  consigning  to  death  the  infant  that  is  to  be,  and 
we  are  prepared  to  restrict  her  freedom  by  law,  although 
we  leave  that  dummy  teat  with  twice  the  influence  of  the 
factory  unthought  of  !  My  point  to-night  is  that  these 
social  problems  dealing  with  the  improvement  and 
impairment  of  our  racial  qualities  are  academic  problems — 
problems  that  must  be  solved  in  the  atmosphere  of  the 
laboratory  undisturbed  by  party  factions  and  by  hustings 
methods  ;  that  for  their  solution  you  have  for  the  time 
being  to  put  aside  sympathy  and  prejudice  and  emotion  as 

D 


26  THE    ACADEMIC   ASPECT   OF 

you  must  do  when  you  dissect  a  worm  or  a  frog — you  are 
seeking  for  truth  and  knowledge  solely. 

Of  course,  when  you  have  found  it,  then  you  may 
rightly  throw  all  your  energy  and  your  enthusiasm,  your 
emotions  and  your  sympathy  and  your  fighting  power, 
into  the  task  of  persuading  humanity  that  you  have  the 
right  solution.  But  that  is  a  later  phase — it  is  science 
in  its  practical  apphcation  when  it  passes  from  the 
university  into  human  life.  We  claim  that  the  day  has 
come  when  a  real  study  of  man  has  been  rendered 
possible — that  it  is  now  feasible  to  measure  the  influence 
of  heredity  and  of  every  phase  of  environment ;  that  it 
IS  feasible,  in  short,  to  study  man  as  you  have  studied 
other  organisms,  and  to  measure  the  influence  of  all  sorts 
of  factors  on  his  future.  We  do  not  stand  alone  in  this 
respect ;  the  problems  of  national  eugenics  are  rapidly 
becoming  the  chief  problems  of  many  biological  workers 
both  in  America  and  Germany.  The  twentieth  century 
will  not  only  be  remarkable  as  witnessing  the  full  accep- 
tance of  national  eugenics  as  an  academic  study,  but  it 
will  follow  this  acceptance  by  the  recognition  that  the 
knowledge  reached  in  university  laboratories  is  of  the 
highest  value  to  the  State.  You  will  say  it  is  a  long 
way  from  our  small  beginnings  in  Gower  Street  to 
practically  influencing  legislation.  Yes,  but  sometimes 
prophecy  is  easy.  Twenty  years  ago  ^  I  made  another 
prophecy  :  '  In  the  recent  discovery  of  Hertz  ...  we  have 
a  result  which,  if  of  striking  interest  to  pure  science, 
seems  to  have  no  immediate  practical  apphcation.  But 
that  man  would  indeed  be  a  bold  dogmatist  who  would 
venture  to  assert  that  the  results  which  may  ultimately 
flow  from  this  discovery  of  Hertz's  will  not  in  a  generation 

'  The  Grammar  of  Science,  ist  ed.,  chap.  I,  §  lo. 


THE    SCIENCE   OF   NATIONAL   EUGENICS  27 

or  two  do  more  to  revolutionize  life  than  the  frog's  legs 
of  Galvani  achieved  when  they  led  to  the  perfection  of  the 
electric  telegraph.' 

We  go  faster  nowadays  than  in  the  fifty  years  that 
followed  Galvani's  death.  The  universities  are  in  closer 
ti3uch  with  practical  Hfe.  Well,  my  second  prophecy  is 
that  within  ten  to  fifteen  years  national  eugenics  will  be 
everywhere  a  branch  of  academic  training,  and  that  in 
less  than  twenty  years  legislators  will  accept  the  funda- 
mental results  of  the  science  of  eugenics  as  indisputable 
facts.  What  is  more,  the  nation  that  favours  these 
studies  most  heartily,  and  most  readily  accepts  the 
knowledge  gained  as  a  guide  to  practical  conduct,  is 
destined  to  be  the  predominant  state  of  the  future. 


£uQenics5Laborator^  Ipublications 

DULAU  &  CO..  Ltd,  37  SOHO  SQUARE.  LONDON.  W. 

MEMOIR  SERIL. 

L  The  Inheiitance  of  Ability.  By  Edgar  Schuster,  M.A.,  D.Sc. 
First  Gallon  Research  Fellow,  and  Ethel  M.  Elder io\. 
Gallon  Scholar.     Issued.     Price  4^.  net, 

iL  A  Firbt  Study  of  the  Statistics  of  Insanity  and  the  Inhcr;.j.;iv.c, 
of  the  Insane  Diathesis.  By  David  Heron,  M.A.,  Second 
Gallon  Research  Fellow.  Issued.  Price  ^s.  net. 
in.  The  Promise  of  Youth  and  the  Performance  of  Manhood.  Bj| 
Edgar  Schuster,  M.  A.,  D.Sc,  First  Gallon  Research  Ftellow; 
Issued.     Price  2s.  6d.  net. 

''.  On  the  Measure  of  the  Resemblance  of  First  Cousins.  "By 
Ethel  M.  Elderton,  Gallon  Research  Scholar,  assisted  by 
Karl  Pearson.  F.R.S.     Issued.     Price  3^.  6d.  net. 

V,     A  First  Study  of  the  Inheritance  of  Vision  and  of  the  Relative 

Influence  of  Heredity  and  Environment  on  Sight.    By  Am\ 

Barrington,  Gallon  Laborarory,  and  Karl  Pearson,  F.R.S; 

Issued.     Price  4s.  net. 

VI.     Treasury    of    Human    Inheritance    (Pedigree    of    physical, 

psychical,  and  pathological  Characters  in  Man),    Parts  I  and 

II  (double  part),     (Diabetes  insipidus,  Split-Foot,  Polydac- 

tylism,  Brachydactylism,  Tuberculosis,  Deaf-Mjjtism,  an( 

Legal  Ability.)     Issued,     Price  14s.  net. 

VII.     The  Influence  of  Parental  Occupation  and  Home  Condition! 

on  the  Pliysique  of  the  Oftspring.    By  Ethel  M.  Elderton, 

Gallon  Research  Scholar.     Shorfly. 

Vin.     The    Influence   of    Unfavourable   Home   Environment   anc 

Defective  Physique  on  the  Intelligence  of  School  Children 

By  Damd  Heron,  M.A.,  Second  Gallon  Research  Fellow. 

Issued.     Price  4s.  net. 

IX.     The  Treasury  of  Human  Inheritance  (Pedigrees  of  physical; 

psychical,  and  pathological  Characters  in  Man).     Part  117 

(Angioneurotic  Oedema,  Hermaphroditism,   I)eaf-Mutism, 

Insanity,  Commercial  Ability.)     Issued.     Price  6s.  net. 

X.  The  Influence  of  Parental  Alcoholism  on  the  Physique  and  In 
telligence  of  the  Offspring.  By  Ethel  M.  Elderton,  assistec 
by  Karl  Pearson.  Second  Edition.  Issued.  Price  4s.  net 
XI,  The  Treasury  of  Human  Inheritance  (Pedigrees  of  physicalj 
psychical,  and  pathological  Characters  in  Man).  Part  IV 
(Cleft  Palate,  Hare-Lip,  Deaf-Mutism,  and.  Congenita 
Cataract.)    Issued.     Price  los.  net. 

XII.  The  Treasury  of  Human  Inheritance  (Pedigrees  of  physical) 

psychical,  and  pathological  Characters  in  Man).  Pn-i-  ^^ 
and  VI.     (Haemophilia.)    Issued,     Price  155-.  net. 

XIII.  A  Second  Study  of  the  Influence  of  Parental  Alcoholism  on  ih< 

Physique  and  Ability  of  the  Offspring.  By  Karl  Pearson 
F.R.S.,  and  Ethel  M.  Elderton.  Being  a  Reply  to  certaii 
medical  critics  and  an  examination  of  their  rebutting  evidence 
Issued.     Price  44.  net 

XIV.  A  Preliminary  Study  of  Extreme  Alcoholism  in  Adults.     B^ 

Amy  Barrington  and  Karl  Pearson,  F.R.S.,  assisted  " 
D.win  Heron,  D.Sc.     Isstted.     Price  45-.  net.^^^^ 


Date  Due 

» 

GE   LIBRARY 


^22   1718 


L7    7 


1936. 


of    the 


Library  Bureau  Cat.  No.  1137 


