THE 


PENNSYLVANIA  FREEMEN'S  BULLETIN 

r  -  '.'  AND 

AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 

A.  MONTHLY  JOURNAL 

DEVOTED  TO  THE  PROMOTION  OF 

FREEDOM,  INDUSTRY,  EDUCATION,  AXD  ^  '  \X 

MORALITY  EST  THE  SOUTH. 


JULY,  AUGUST,  SEPTEMBER  AND  OCTOBER. 


"All  men  are  created  equal." — Declaration  of  Independence. 

"  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the 
earth." — Acts  xvii.  26. 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEMAN'S  UNION  COMMISSION. 


§'\$t  of  Mmhw       in  $ttvitt. 


(PENNSYLVANIA  BRANCH  ) 


DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA, 


A.  E 

Miss 


.  Newton,  Supt. 
E.  A.  Chamberlain, 
Phebe  Chamberiain, 
C.  W.  Moore, 
Jennie  Snowden, 
Julia  B.  Ford, 
Abby  C.  Ford, 
Eliza  G.  Randall, 
Dora  A.  Hardy, 


Washington, 


West  Cambr'ge,  Mas. 
Barnestable,  Me. 

Lamberton,  N.  J. 

Morristown,  N.  J. 

Newfield,  " 
Farmington,  Me. 

Total  iu  District  of  Columbia.  9. 


ADOPTED  BY 


Women's  Branch. 
Germantown  F.  R.  A. 


VIRGINIA. 


Jas  M.  Stradling,  Supt. 
Miss  Annie  F.  Whitaker, 
"   Millie  Phelps, 
"  Fannie  Harvey, 
Frank  R.  Forrest, 
Alvin  Varner, 
Chas.  W.  McMahon, 
Miss  Clara  A.  Dean, 
"  Lydia  W.  Stephens, 
"  E.  L.  Hamilton, 
"  Annie  H.  Searing, 


Lynchburg, 


Liberty, 

Appomatox  C.  H. 
Farmviile. 


Ashford,  Conn. 
Auburn,  N  Y. 
Lynchburg,  Va. 
Brandywine,  Manor.Pa 

Plymouth,  Mass.  ' 
Fabius,  N.  Y. 
Norristown,  Pa. 
Conshohocken,  Pa. 
Poplar  Ridge,  N.Y. 


Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity. 

Altoona  F.  R.  A. 

Norristown  and  vicinity. 
Pottstown. 


Total  in  Virginia,  11. 


J.  E.  Buchanan,  Supt. 
Mrs.  Cordelia  N.  Buchanan, 
Miss  Hannah  M.  Streeper, 
'•   Fannie  A.  Couch, 
•    Margaret  R.  Smith, 
"    Annie  M  Aul', 


TENNESSEE. 

Murfreesborough,        Barnet,  Vt 

Pottsville,  Pa. 

Nashville,  Beverly,  Mass. 

"  Newberry,  Pa. 

Total  in  Tennessee,  6. 


Pottsville  F.  R.  A. 


A.  W.  McCullough,  Supt 
Mrs.  A.  W.  McCullough, 


ALABAMA. 

Huntsville,  Spring  Garden,  Pa. 

Total  in  Alabama,  2. 


West  Chester  F.  R.  A. 


MISSISSIPPI. 


Miss  E.  C  Blackman  Supt. 
"    Rachel  La  Rue, 
"    C.  N.  Shackford, 
"    L.  A.  Chamberlin, 


Dr.  J.  E.  Tucker's 
Plantation,  near 
Okolona. 


Montrose,  Pa. 
Philadelphia,  Pa 


|  Montrose, 
Total  in  Mississippi,  4 


I  Church  of  the  Epiphany. 
|  St.  Paul's  Church,  Cheltenham. 
I  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity. 
Through  Mrs.  Dr.  Jos.  Parrish. 


Miss  Annie  Cummings, 


NORTH  CAROLINA, 

|  Roxborough,  | 

Total  in  North  Carolina,  I. 


I  Women's  Branch. 


SOUTH  CAROLINA. 


Miss 


Mrs. 


Laura  M.  Towne,  Supt. 
Ellen  Murray, 
Hannah  Hunn, 
E.  A.  Hunn, 
Annie  Heacock, 
Mani  Heacock, 
Martha  Schofield, 
E  E.  Way, 

Elizabeth  A.  Stephens, 
Adelaide  String, 


St.  Helena  Island, 
Frogmore  St.,  Helena, 

Ct  it 

Port  Royal  Island, 

St  Helena,  " 

Aiken, 
St.  Helena, 


Shoemakertown,  Pa. 
Milton,  Mass. 
Camden,  Del. 

Jeukintown,  Pa 

Darby,  Pa. 
Chatham,  Pa. 
Germantown,  Pa. 
Magnolia  SpriogH,  Fla. 

Total  in  South  Carolina.  10. 


Benezet  Assoc.,  Germantown. 


Williamsport  F  R.  A. 
First  Unit.  Church,  Dr.  Furness. 
Finance  Com.  Women's  Branch. 
Germantown  F.  R.  A. 

Germantown  F.  R.  A. 


THE 


PHILADELPHIA,  OCTOBER,  1867. 


The  Bulletin  is  the  organ  of  the  Pennsylvania  Freedmen's  Relief  Association,  and  will  be  issued  here- 
after in  connection  with  the  American  Freedman. 

OFFICE,  711  SANSOM  STREET,  PHILADELPHIA. 


Readers  of  the  Bulletin  are  doubtless  in- 
terested in  all  that  concerns  our  teachers  among 
the  Freedmen,  and  feel  well  acquainted  with 
many  whose  letters  have  appeared  in  these  pages, 
even  though  their  faces  may  be  entirely  un- 
known. The  trials  and  difficulties  which  were 
borne  and  overcome  when  the  schools  were  first 
planted  among  unfriendly  whites  and  in  a 
country  ravaged  by  war,  knit  your  hearts  to 
these  standard  bearers  in  the  grand  army  of 
Christian  progress,  these  missionaries  in  our 
broad  home  field,  and  made  you  glad  to  look 
upon  them  as  your  representatives  ;  and  since 
then  their  success,  not  only  in  their  great  work 
of  teaching  the  ignorant,  elevating  the  degraded, 
and  ministering  to  the  needy,  but  in  subduing 
prejudice ;  have  enabled  you  to  rejoice  with  them, 
because  their  "  labor  was  not  in  vain  in  the 
Llord." 

We  know  how  very  strongly  some  of  the 
stayers  at  home  have  felt  this  tie  between  the 
teachers  and  themselves,  and  how  earnestly 
these  have  worked  in  their  own  circles  to  keep 
up  and  increase  the  interest  in  this  noble  cause, 
but  we  wish  very  much  that  there  was  more  of 
personal  affection  for  those  who  give  up  home, 
friends  and  comforts  for  the  work  to  which 
they  feel  themselves  called.  This  assuredly 
is  the  case  with  those  whose  privilege  it  is  to 
meet  the  teachers  on  their  return  from  the  South, 
or  when  about  to  set  out  again  for  their  fields  of 
labor.  The  experiences  in  different  localities  are 
so  diverse  that  it  is  always  delightful  to  hear 
them  speak  of  what  they  have  seen  and  heard. 

All  agree  as  to  the  desire  to  learn  evinced  by 
their  pupils,  and  their  susceptibility  to  religious 
impression.  This  "  teaching  niggers,"  as  it  is 
called  by  those  who  do  not  believe  that  God 
"  made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations  of  men," 


is  found  by  refined  and  cultivated  women  a 
precious  work,  and  in  spite  of  the  hardships  that 
attend  it,  they  return  to  it  with  eagerness. 

While  our  own  hearts  were  warmed  with 
enthusiasm,  catching  something  of  the  spirit  of 
those  to  whom  we  listened,  we  have  been 
surprised  by  such  words  as  these.  "  We  think 
you  have  the  hardest  part  of  the  labor  up  here, 
collecting  money  for  our  support," — "unless 
you  were  here,  we  could  not  be  there." 

A  lady,  one  of  our  pioneer  teachers,  whose 
steadfastness  has  been  unshaken  by  years  of 
trial,  expressed  still  more  warmly  her  apprecia- 
tion, and  that  of  her  associates  of  the  work  done 
for  the  cause  in  the  North,  saying  that  in  every 
letter  she  wrote  she  felt  like  telling  of  their 
gratitude.  These  remarks,  it  seemed  to  us,  were 
too  pleasant  and  encouraging  to  keep  from  the 
many  whose  representatives  we  are,  and  only 
that  spoken  words  are  so  much  more  magnetic 
than  those  that  are  written,  we  should  say  we 
hoped  all  who  read,  would  feel  as  did  the  little 
companies  at  these  rooms,  who  heard  these 
expressions  of  gratitude,  and  would  henceforth 
work  for  the  cause  with  greater  enthusiasm 
and  energy,  as  if  it  were  a  personal  matter. 
Remember  it  is  the  education  to  helpfulness, 
to  strict  morality,  to  the  "pure  and  undefiled'* 
faith  taught  in  the  Bible,  that  is  furthered  by 
every  small-  collection  you  may  make,  whether 
of  money,  of  material  for  industrial  schools,  of 
garden  seeds  and  grain  or  books.  And  every 
time  you  cheer  a  teacher's  heart  by  a  letter  or 
other  token  of  kind  personal  remembrance,  you 
give  M  the  cup  of  cold  water  which  shall  in  no 
wise  lose  its  reward." 


Our  schools  at  Washington,  D.  0.,  and  those  at 
Lynchburg,   Farmville,    and    other  places  in 


2 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA 


FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN. 


Virginia  opened  on  the  15th  of  October.  Those 
in  South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Alabama,  and 
Mississippi  will  not  open  before  the  1st  of 
November. 

Norristown  and  West  Chester  have  each 
decided  to  support  two  teachers,  and  have 
subscriptions  sufficient  to  secure  the  required 
amount  monthly,  while  the  towns  of  Bellefonte, 
Lock  Haven,  Williamsport  and  Altoona  have 
each  promised  the  support  of  one  teacher. 

Will  not  our  friends  in  the  many  other  towns 
in  the  State  make  an  effort  to  help  in  this  work? 
It  requires  but  fifty  dollars  per  month,  a  very 
small  amount  compared  to  the  great  amount  of 
good  one  teacher  will  do. 


No  numbers  of  the  Bulletin  have  been  pub- 
lished since  the  month  of  June,  an  economical 
measure,  which  was  deemed  expedient  in  the 
absence  of  many  of  our  subscribers  from  the 
city,  and  in  view  of  the  possible  flitting  of  other 
friends  from  both  city  and  country  homes  during 
the  warm  season.  There  was  also  the  consider- 
ation that  most  of  our  teachers  were  absent  from 
their  posts  for  vacation,  and  as  their  reports  and 
letters  ceased,  there  was  less  interesting  matter 
than  usual  to  lay  before  our  readers.  Selections 
from  letters  in  this  number  will  tell  of  the  con- 
dition of  various  schools  just  before  the  vacation, 
and  the  report  of  the  President  of  the  Women's 
Freedmen's  Relief  Association  for  the  official 
year  just  closed,  will  show  a  satisfactory  record 
of  good  done  "  according  to  opportunity." 

The  ladies  of  this  Society  desire  to  increase 
the  scope  of  their  usefulness,  and  hope  they  may 
find  not  only  the  co-workers  who  aided  them 
last  season  ready  to  "  continue  in  well-doing," 
but  many  more  women  able  and  willing  to  give 
their  help,  so  that  more  good  may  be  accom- 
plished in  the  year  that  is  now  begun. 

With  this  October  number  will  be  found  not 
only  the  American  Freedman  for  the  same  month, 
but  the  numbers  for  July,  August  and  Septem- 
ber. 

We  would  particularly  call  attention  to  an 
article  in  the  October  number  of  the  American 
Freedman,  page  290,  in  which,  under  the  head  of 
co-operation,  certain  resolutions  drawn  up  at  a 
conference  of  various  Freedmen's  Societies,  held 
in  New  York,  September  10,  1867,  are  ably  dis- 
cussed and  supported.  Indeed,  this  whole  num- 
ber appears  to  us  particularly  worthy  of  the 
careful  perusal  of  all  earnest  supporters  and 
friends  of  the  Freedmen's  Commission. 


Yearly  Report  of  the  President  of  the 
Women's  Branch. 

As  the  term  of  office  of  your  chairman  expires 
to-day,  it  is  proper  that  this  report  should  be  a 
review  of  our  work  during  the  year  past. 

We  began,  as  you  will  remember,  under  many 
discouragements.  We  had  given  up  our  rooms 
the  June  preceding,  and  were  without  a  place  to 
call  our  own.  Our  President,  Corrresponding 
Secretary,  Recording  Secretary  and  Treasurer, 
all  most  valued  officers,  and  those  upon  whom 
the  heaviest  burden  of  the  work  lay,  had  resigned. 
There  was  great  difficulty  in  filling  these  respon- 
sible posts.  A  number  of  churches  had  or  were 
in  process  of  organizing  for  separate  denomina- 
tional effort,  and  lastly  there  was  a  want  of  accord 
with  the  General  Commission  in  its  action  in 
joining  the  Union  Commission,  which  seriously 
threatened  the  existence  of  the  Women's  Branch. 
Add  to  this  the  reaction  which  has,  perhaps 
naturally,  set  in  among  the  Aid  Societies  after 
the  long  and  heavy  strain  upon  their  energies 
during  the  war.  Through  all  these  discout  a-c- 
ments  our  Association  has  worked,  cheerfully 
and  energetically,  and  with  God's  help  ami 
blessing,  has  accomplished  much. 

Our  Corresponding  Secretary  supplies  us  with 
the  following  statistics  of  her  work.  She  with 
her  aids,  since  our  reorganization  in  October, 
have  sent  out  1,700  Thanksgiving  Appeals,  3,800 
of  the  General  Circulars,  and  about  6,000  Freed- 
men's Bulletins,  400  letters  have  been  written 
and  126  answers  received.  Thirty-four  Aid  So- 
cieties have  reported  to  us,  many  of  which  were 
the  results  of  the  above  appeals.  The  volunteer 
work  done  in  this  department  cannot  be  too 
highly  commended.  The  corps  of  Aids  consists 
of  eight  members  of  a  corresponding  committee, 
whose  duty  it  is  to  take  charge  of  the  correspon- 
dence within  certain  defined  districts,  as  well  as 
to  write  occasional  articles  for  the  country  and 
city  press,  and  of  fifteen  ladies,  one  or  more  of 
whom  are  present  at  the  Rooms,  711  Sansom 
street,  every  day  of  the  week,  Sunday  excepted,  to 
do  whatever  is  necessary  to  be  done.  From  a 
report  of  Miss  Baldwin,  the  Corresponding  Se- 
cretary, I  quote  the  following  :  "  Too  much  praise 
cannot  be  given  to  the  diligence  of  these  assist- 
ants, who  were  so  punctual  and  sympathizing, 
often  taking  home  their  work  with  them  to 
finish,  when  the  press  was  great." 

Since  the  1st  of  October  the  Rooms  of  the 
Women's  Freedmen's  Relief  Association  have 
been  opened  every  week  day,  from  10  a.m.  to 
3  p.  m.,  except  Christmas,  and  during  the  whole 
time  the  Corresponding  Secretary  has  been 
absent  but  one  day,  during  which  a  substitute 
was  provided.  Besides  her  laborious  corres- 
pondence she  aided  greatly  in  the  editing  of  the 
Freedmen's  Bulletin,  by  choosing  the  correspond- 
ence for  publication,  correcting  proof  and  writing 
short  articles,  as  well  as  being  always  present  to 
receive  all  persons  who  visited  the  Rooms  for 
information,  or  from  good  will. 

From  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on 
Receiving  and  Forwarding  Supplies  we  have 
the  following,  as  nearly  as  the  aggregate  valu- 
ation of  the  goods  received  can  be  reached  :  it  is 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA  FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN 


3 


about  $6,000,  which  only  covers  the  article  of 
clothing;  of  books,  slates,  papers  and  often 
second-hand  garments  there  was  no  attempt  at 
a  valuation  by  the  donors.  So  that  the  sum 
stated  is  very  much  within  the  whole  value  of 
goods  received. 

The  number  of  boxes  or  packages  received  has 
been  110;  the  number  of  boxes  forwarded  51. 
Delaware,  Maryland,  District  of  Columbia,  Vir- 
ginia, North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  the  Sea 
Islands,  Georgia,  Florida,  Alabama,  Mississippi 
and  Tennessee  have  each  in  turn  been  recipients 
of  our  free  gifts.  We  have  been  able,  through 
the  liberality  of  our  Aid  Societies  and  contribu  • 
tors,  to  respond  fully  to  every  well  authenticated 
appeal  for  relief.  None  have  been  sent  away 
disappointed.  ' 

From  our  Treasurer  we  learn  that  there 
has  been  received  into  the  Treasury  of  the 
Women's  Freedmen's  Relief  Association  the  sum 
of  $3,473,  which  has  been  expended  for  the 
most  part  in  the  support  of  teachers.  The 
expenses  of  this  Association  have  been  exceed- 
ingly small.  Room  rent,  packing  boxes,  the 
printing  of  circulars,  postage  stamps  and  writing 
paper,  besides  the  pay  of  a  room  servant  have 
been  our  only  charges.  During  the  dead  of 
winter,  when  the  demand  for  clothing  required 
immediate  attention,  it  was  resolved  to  send  out 
a  messenger  to  canvass  the  city  for  second-hand 
clothing.  During  about  six  weeks  it  continued 
to  repay  us  by  about  four- fold  the  outlay. 

In  the  absence  of  a  report  from  the  Chairman 
on  Education,  I  will  record  as  nearly  as  may 
be  the  result  of  the  work  of  that  Committee. 
The  Women's  Branch  has,  during  this  year,  sup- 
ported six  teachers,  and  through  our  Germantown 
Aid  Society,  three  additional  ones,  viz:  Miss 
Gayner  Heacock,  Port  Royal,  South  Carolina, 
by  the  members  of  the  Finance  Committee;  Miss 
Annie  Heacock,  by  the  1st  Unitarian  Congrega- 
tion;  Miss  Chamberlaine,  Okolona,  Mississippi, 
through  the  effort  of  Mrs.  Dr.  Jos.  Parrish  ;  the 
Misses  Lane,  District  of  Columbia,  and  Miss 
Annie  Cummings,  Roxboro',  Person  County, 
North  Carolina,  by  the  Women's  Branch.  The 
ladies  of  Germantown  have  adopted  Miss  Ste- 
phens, Miss  Ford  and  Miss  Martha  Schofield. 

Besides  the  support  of  the  above  teachers, 
we  have  aided  a  weak  pay  school  in  Virginia, 
taught  by  a  colored  man,  that  was  specially  re- 
commended to  our  consideration,  by  advancing 
ipiuu  for  the  tuition  of  25  pupils  for  four  months, 
at  one  dollar  per  month,  his  usual  charge. 

During  the  winter  the  correspondence  from 
our  teachers  has  been  of  a  very  interesting  na- 
ture, everywhere  telling  of  the  prosperous  con- 
dition of  the  schools  and  tne  still  unabated  thirst 
for  education  among  the  freed  people.  The  Presi- 
dent of  this  Association  mi  the  occasion  of  a 
short  stay  in  Washington,  visited  most  of  the 
schools  supported  by  the  Pek$Q sylvan ia  Branch, 
and  reported  most  favorably  both  of  teachers 
and  pupils. 

The  Women's  Freedmen's  Relief  Association 
desire  greatly  to  extend  their  efforts  in  the  work 
of  education.  To  this  end,  principally,  they  en- 
gaged the  services  of  Rev.  Andrew  Cat  her,  to 
represent  the  cause  during  the  summer  months  I 


in  some  of  our  inland  towns,  hoping  to  induce 
many  communities  to  send  teachers  of  their  own 
into  the  field. 

I  am  happy  to  have  to  announce  the  addition 
of  about  eight  teachers,  through  Mr.  Gathers' 
endeavors.  In  his  report  given  at  our  last  meet- 
ing, he  represented,  with  much  feeling,  the  dis- 
couragements which  met  him  in  his  work,  and 
seemed  to  think  the  results  less  than  we  had  a 
right  to  expect.  But  with  the  support  of  eight 
teachers  ensured,  representing  in  monthly  sub- 
scriptions the  sum  of  $4,800  per  annum,  we 
have  reaped  a  more  than  ten-fold  harvest  upon 
our  outlay,  and  in  nowise  should  be  disappointed. 

I  desire  here  to  call  attention  to  certain  indi- 
vidual effort,  and  urge  the  example  upon 
every  member  of  the  Association.  Mrs.  Dr. 
Joseph  Parrish,  Mrs.  Furness,  and  the  Chairman 
of  the  Committee  on  Finance,  have,  through 
the  liberality  of  their  friends,  been  able,  each, 
during  the  past  year  to  support  a  teacher,  and 
expect  to  continue  the  same  during  the  ensuing 
year.  Nor  may  I  leave  unnoticed  smaller  offer- 
ings, which  tell  of  noble  effort  and  self-sacrifice. 
A  poor  little  colored  child,  Edith  Webb,  collected, 
penny  by  penny,  ten  dollars,  which  she  sent  to  us. 
Also,  a  poor  colored  Sunday-school,  of  Orange, 
N.  J.,  which,  in  monthly  collections,  at  three 
various  times,  have  sent  us  the  sura  of  twenty-one 
dollars.  I  hope  the  example  of  these  things, 
great  and  small,  may  not  be  lost  upon  us. 

I  have  a  sad  duty  to  perform  in  announcing 
to  you  the  death  of  two  valuable  members  of 
this  Association,  Miss  Field,  a  member  of  the 
Committee  on  Education,  as  also  of  that  on 
Receiving  and  Forwarding  Goods,  and  Mrs. 
A.  D.  Jessup,  of  the  Finance  Committee.  Ever 
since  our  first  organization,  two  years  ago,  Miss 
Field  has  been  one  of  our  mo3t  active  members. 
She  united  hearty  sympathy  with  the  cause  to 
great  capacity  and  experience.  It  will  be  diffi- 
cult to  supply  t  he  place  left  vacant  by  so  cultiva- 
ted and  earnest  a  woman.  Mrs.  A.  D.  Jessup. 
from  prolonged  ill  health,  has  not  been  able  to 
work  much  with  us.  She  was  known  to  us 
rather  by  her  never-failing  liberality.  She  had, 
in  great  perfection,  the  grace  of  giving.  When 
deploring  to  me  her  inability  to  work,  she  added  : 
"you  will  do  me  a  pleasure  by  letting  me  know 
when  you  want  anything."  She  was  often  called 
upon — always  responding  liberally.  Of  both  of 
these  excellent  women  it  may  be  said:  "their 
good  works  will  live  after  theui." 

I  cannot  now  say  farewell  without  thanking 
you  for  your  very  great  courtesy  and  kindness  to 
myself  personally.  Your  indulgence  to  me,  and 
the  perfect  harmony  with  which  all  the  members 
of  this  Association  have  worked  together,  will 
always  be  remembered  by  me  with  very  great 
pleasure. 

Mary  Rosb  Smith. 

As  our  friends  in  West  Chester  have  kindly 
undertaken  the  support  of  two  teachers,  we 
have  appropriated  to  them  the  ^ohool  in  Hunts- 
ville,  Alabama,  taught  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  McCul- 
loch,  which  will  henceforth  be  called  the  "  West 
Chester  School." 


4 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA 


FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN. 


We  publish  below  a  letter  from  Mr.  McCul- 
loch,  written  previous  to  the  vacation,  which 
will  aftbrd  the  West  Chester  friends  an  oppor- 
tunity of  knowing  the  condition  of  their  school ; 
and  hereafter  Mr.  McCulloch  will  correspond 
with  the  officers  of  their  Association. 

Huntsville,  Ala.,  May  25,  1867. 
Robt.  R.  Corson, 

Corresponding  Secretary. 

Dear  Sir  : — It  may  be  interesting  to  the  read- 
ers of  the  Bulletin  to  hear  some  facts  relating  to 
the  Freedmen  of  this  place,  and  to  know  what  is 
being  done  towards  educating  the  colored  chil- 
dren. 

The  failure  of  the  crops,  for  the  past  two 
years,  is  severely  felt  and  caused  much  suffering 
and  destitution  last  winter;  though,  I  believe, 
not  to  as  great  an  extent  here  as  in  many  other 
places.  They  struggled  nobly  against  poverty, 
always  willing  to  do  whatever  work  they  could 
obtain,  which,  owing  to  the  pressure  of  the 
times,  was  very  scarce.  When  spring  opened, 
all  readily  found  employment,  with  sufficient 
remuneration  to  supply  present  wants.  Laborers 
receive  from  ten  to  fifteen  dollars  per  month, 
with  food  and  medical  attendance.  The  spring 
has  been  wet  and  cold,  but  the  prospects  of  a 
good  crop  are  fair.  The  Freedmen  have  a  de- 
cided preference  for  renting  farms  or  farming  on 
the  shares  to  hiring  by  the  month.  This  was 
not  to  their  interest  last  year. 

SCHOOLS. 

The  school  buildings,  though  the  best  that 
could  be  obtained  at  the  opening  of  school,  are 
not  such  as  should  be  desired.  If  the  work  is 
continued  here,  I  would  suggest  that  better 
accommodations  be  had  for  advanced  pupils, 
and  that  the  schools  be  properly  graded — a 
primary  and  a  secondary  one. 

The  house  occupied  by  us  belongs  to  the 
Methodist  Church  South,  and  is  controlled  by  a 
Board  of  Trustees.  When  we  arrived  here  last 
September,  we  found  no  building  prepared  for 
our  school.  I  visited  those  trustees  and  laid 
before  them  the  object  and  aims  of  the  commis- 
sion in  sending  teachers  South,  and  the  princi- 
ples governing  us.  The  use  of  the  house  was 
granted.  A  few  days  ago  the  President  of  the 
Board  called  on  me  and  expressed  his  entire 
satisfaction  with  the  management  of  the  school, 
and  said  he  would  be  pleased  to  have  us  con- 
tinue the  work. 

Over  five  hundred  pupils  have  been  receiving 
instruction  in  the  different  schools  this  session, 
with  a  daily  average  of  nearly  four  hundred. 
The  Freedmen  are  straining  every  nerve  to  give 
their  children  an  education.  They  are  fully 
aware  that  the  prosperity  of  the  colored  people 
depends  on  the  enlightenment  of  their  children, 
and  that  slavery  long  since  would  have  ceased 
to  exist  but  for  the  ignorance  in  which  they  were 
kept.  The  children  improve  rapidly,  indeed, 
considering  the  disadvantages  they  labor  under 
at  home  from  w.int  of  books,  illiterate  parents, 
etc.  They  are  studious,  and  a  lively  interest  is 
easily  kept  up.  At  the  beginning  of  the  term 
they  voted  unanimously  against  recess,  prefer- 


ring study  to  play;  this  we  could  not  allow,  but 
of  course  explained  the  necessity  of  physical 
exercise.  The  progress  made  by  the  children  is 
the  subject  of  many  favorable  comments.  I  have 
frequently  been  told  by  the  citizens  (white)  that 
the  colored  children  are  making  greater  advance- 
ment than  the  white  children ;  they  are  more  in 
earnest.  I  hope  the  time  is  not  far  distant  when 
a  system  of  education  will  be  established,  giving 
every  child  in  Alabama  and  throughout  the 
South  the  advantages  of  a  common  school  edu- 
cation, and  in  the  reconstruction  of  these  states, 
on  sound  political  principles,  the  educational 
interests  should  not  be  overlooked.  The  sta- 
bility of  a  republic  depends  on  the  intelligence 
of  its  citizens. 

Yours,    A.  W.  McCullodgh. 

The  following  circular  has  just  been  published 
by  the  Superintendent  of  Education  in  South 
Carolina : 

Charleston,  Oct.  1,  1867. 

As  it  is  desirable  that  reports  from  the  differ- 
ent schools  shall  give  all  the  information  called 
for  on  the  "blanks"  furnished,  the  teachers  are 
respectfully  requested  to  exercise  care  in  making 
up  their  reports  and  to  forward  them  promptly. 

The  Northern  societies  supporting  schools  in 
this  State  desire,  with  the  means  at  their  com- 
mand, to  do  the  most  good  practicable.  They 
feel  that  the  time  has  come  when  the  colored 
people  should  themselves  do  something  toward 
the  support  of  the  schools.  In  order  to  attain 
this  object  with  the  least  trouble,  it  is  suggested 
that  the  teachers  shall  require  from  each  pupil  a 
monthly  contribution  of  not  more  than  fifty 
cents.  There  are  but  few  localities  where  this 
contribution  will  prove  burdensome.  Teachers 
must  of  course  exercise  discretion  in  this  matter, 
and  when  they  find  a  general  disposition  to 
assist  manifested,  will  not  exact  the  amount  in 
exceptional  cases  which  may  occur. 

Teachers  will  please  read  and  explain  this 
circular  to  parents  and  children,  and  make  them 
understand  that  a  failure  to  comply  with  this 
requirement  on  the  part  of  the  people  in  a  given 
locality,  will  lead  to  a  discontinuance  of  the 
schools  and  the  transfer  of  the  teachers  to  places 
where  their  services  will  be  more  appreciated. 
It  is  also  recommended  that  the  following  rule 
be  adopted  and  rigidly  adhered  to:  "  Any  pupil 
who  shall  be  absent  from  school  five  days  in  the 
month,  except  in  case  of  sickness,  shall  lose  his 
place,  and  the  teacher  will  have  the  right  to 
give  the  place  to  another." 

Reuben  Tomlinson, 

Supt.  of  Education. 

The  following  letter  from  Mr.  iStradling,  Super- 
intendent of  Schools  in  Virginia,  shows  that  the 
principle  of  co-operation  is  already  at  work 
among  the  colored  people  of  that  State. 

Lynchburg,  Va.,  Oct.  20,  1867. 

Robt.  R.  Corson, 
Corresponding  Secretary. 

Dear  Sir  : — It  give3  me  pleasure  to  inform 
you  that  the  colored  people  are  beginning  to 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA  FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN. 


5 


work  for  themselves.  On  Saturday  evening,  the 
12th,  they  had  a  large  meeting  at  New  London  to 
consider  school  matters,  and  I  stated  that  if  they 
would  bear  half  of  the  expenses  for  a  teacher, 
the  Association  would  make  every  exertion  to 
furnish  tn'e  other  half.  They  have  pledged 
themselves  to  furnish  all  but  twenty  dollars  per 
month,  and  they  are  very  anxious  and  hope 
that  we  will  pay  that  amount.  This  school 
numbers  about  one  hundred. 

The  colored  people  at  Livingston  will  furnish 
all  but  ten  dollars  per  month,  towards  support- 
ing a  teacher  (colored)  whom  I  sent  out  there 
last  October,  and  she  has  been  teaching  there 
ever  since.  She  has  a  small  school  in  conse- 
quence of  it  being  a  pay  school,  which  deprives 
about  sixty  from  attending.  The  one  at  Hebron 
is  in  the  same  condition  as  the  above. 

Here  are  three  schools,  with  an  aggregate  of 
two  hundred  and  sixty  scholars,  which  we  can 
have  in  operation  by  paying  forty  dollars  per 
month — less  than  the  cost  of  supporting  one 
teacher  from  the  North.  But  this  is  not  all. 
They  are  situated  in  the  rural  districts  where  it 
is  almost  impossible  for  us  to  reach  them  except 
through  this  means;  and  if  there  are  any  be- 
nighted, dark,  heathen  places,  they  are  those  out 
in  the  country  away  from  the  large  cities — the 
centres  of  civilization  in  this  land. 

By  assisting  them  now  we  will  encourage 
them  greatly,  and  stimulate  them  to  make 
greater  exertions  in  the  future.  It  is  very  en- 
couraging to  these  people  when  they  are  making 
every  effort  to  help  themselves  to  receive  assist- 
ance. I  cannot  over-estimate  the  importance, 
both  in  a  moral  and  political  point  of  view,  of 
having  them  enlightened  now. 

A  school  established  in  the  country  becomes 
the  centre  of  the  district,  a  kind  of  headquarters, 
from  which  emanates  religious,  moral,  political 
and  all  kinds  of  instruction.  Hence,  you  cannot 
fail  to  see  the  importance  of  country  schools.  I 
urge  the  adoption  of  the  above  teachers  ;  first,  to 
assist  and  encourage  the  people  ;  second,  it  is 
the  only  possible  means  of  reaching  the  rural 
districts  ;  third,  it  will  result  in  great  good,  and 
stimulate  many  more  to  fit  themselves  for  teach- 
ers. I  hope  that  the  Association  will  favorably 
consider  these  recommendations. 

Mr.  Stradling  writes  of  the  schools  at  an  earlier 
date  : 

*  *  *  I  have  visited  all  the  teachers  this 
month  and  find  them  all  well  satisfied  with  the 
work  which  they  have  done  this  term.  Mr. 
McMahon  at  Appomattox  C.  H.  has  erected  a 
new  house,  which  is  capable  of  holding  some 
four  hundred  people.  It  is  put  up  in  rather  a 
rough  manner,  but  is  substantial  and  will  last 
for  a  long  time.  Mr.  Lloyd  has  received  fifty 
dollars  appropriation  for  his  house  at  Fincastle, 
which  will  finish  it  nicely.  He  is  not  going 
North  this  summer,  being  engaged  on  the  Board 
of  Registration. 

Miss  Annie  Heacock  in  a  letter  from  Clarendon 
Plantation,  Port  Royal  Island,  S.  C,  says  : 

New  school-houses  are  being  erected  in  vari- 
ous places  on  these  Islands.    One  has  just  been 


completed  on  the  Walker  plantation.  *  *  *  We 
hear  that  a  box  intended  for  ua  has  reached 
Charleston,  in  which  we  hope  to  find  sewing 
materials.  Our  sewing  school  is  a  pleasure  to 
us  as  well  as  to  our  scholars,  and  we  would  like 
to  continue  it  until  the  end  of  June.  We  have 
a  large  Sunday-school,  many  of  the  grown  peo- 
ple attending.  *  *  *  It  was  very  kind  in  the  New 
Jersey  school,  spoken  of  by  Mrs.  Smith,  to  donate 
us  ten  dollars.  We  shall  appreciate  whatever  it 
purchases  for  the  Sunday-school.  *  *  *  We 
commence  school  at  half  past  seven  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  find  that  the  children  are  generally 
punctual,  and  seldom  any  sleepy  child  in  school. 


Distribution  of  Clothing. 
Miss  Jenness,  writing  from  Savannah,  Ga. 
says : 

*  *  *  Since  I  last  wrote  you,  the  box  of  cloth- 
ing for  freedmen  sent  on  the  11th  ult.  has  been 
received,  unpacked,  and  a  part  of  its  contents 
distributed.  I  wish  all  the  donors  could  have 
seen  the  picture  of  perfect  happiness  and  delight 
presented  by  a  little  boy,  the  other  day.  The 
little  fellow  is  about  seven  years  old,  and  has 
been  more  distinguished  for  mischief  and  rags 
than  anything  else.  I  gave  him  a  suit  from  the 
box,  including  a  pair  of  boots,  and  when  the 
latter  were  on  his  feet,  he  was  as  thoroughly 
delighted  as  a  boy  could  be.  He  walked  across 
the  floor,  occasionally  stopping  and  looking  at 
them  as  if  to  be  sure  that  they  were  really  boots  ; 
then  rushed  to  the  window,  under  which  the 
school-children  were  enjoying  their  recess,  and, 
putting  out  first  one  foot,  and  then  the  other, 
cried  out  boots!  boots!  But  he  is  not  the  only 
one  who  has  been  made  glad — old  uncles  apd 
aunts  have  rejoiced  in  the  possession  of  good 
and  "  right  smart "  clothing,  and  have  invoked 
u  heaps "  of  blessings  on  k'  de  good  frens  up 
Norf." 

Murfreesborough  School. 
We  take  the  following  extract  from  a  letter 
received  from  one  of  the  lady  teachers  who  lately 
went  to  Murfreesborough,  Tenn. 

When  I  first  came  here,  I  asked  some  of  my 
pupils  if  they  attended  the  Sabbath-school,  and 
as  they  replied  they  did  not,  told  them  I  would 
like  very  much  to  teach  them,  if  they  would 
come.  I  have  now  an  interesting  class.  The 
progress  made  by  the  freedmen  is  to  me  really 
astonishing.  They  possess  a  fine  sense  of  pro- 
priety, and  very  good  ideas,  I  think.  In  one  of 
the  opening  prayers  made  by  the  colored  super- 
intendent of  the  Sabbath-school,  he  said,  "  Look 
down  in  mercy  upon  this  down-trodden  race, 
and  help  us  to  educate  ourselves,  that  we  may 
become  useful  members  of  society,  and  prepare 
us,  not  only  for  this  life,  but  for  that  which  is  to 
come."  I  have  been  much  pleased  with  all  the 
addresses  or  remarks  made  to  the  childreu  at 
the  Sabbath-school,  by  the  colored  teachers,  as 
they  have  always  been  simple  and  practical. 
The  walk  to  school  is  short,  and  I  think  we  have 
reason  to  be  thankful  for  being  so  much  more 


6 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA  FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN. 


comfortably  situated  in  every  way  than  we  ex- 
pected to  be. 


Among  the  original  compositions  sent  for  in- 
spection by  our  teachers,  the  following  was 
thought  worthy  of  publication,  showing  as  it 
does,  such  earnestness  of  feeling  and  purpose 
through  the  medium  of  quaint  expression  : 

"  I  was  just  sating  down  dis  morning,  thinking 
I  would  m;tke  a  big  man  or  bust  my  head  study- 
ing ;  for  no  man  do  not  know  how  bad  I  want  to 
lurn  bur  me  and  God." 


A  Freedman's  Story. 

Many  interesting  and  even  thrilling  narratives 
have  been  written  of  the  adventures  of  Southern 
slaves  in  their  efforts  against  fearful  odds  to  win 
freedom  for  themselves  and  those  they  loved, 
and  then  to  work  their  way  up  to  the  level  of 
the  manhood  of  this  age  and  country.  Some  of 
these  men  have  won  both  name  and  position, 
and  serve  as  beacon  lights  to  cheer  on  their 
ambiiious  brethren,  who  now,  under  more  ad- 
vantageous circumstances,  hope  and  struggle 
for  honorable  distinction.  But  turning  from  these 
brilliant  examples,  I  desire  to  call  attention  to 
the  work  and  history  of  a  young  colored  Baptist 
minister,  who,  a  slave  until  the  Emancipation 
Proclamation  took  effect,  with  the  faith  and 
loving  patience  of  one  who  had  received  gospel 
truths  into  his  heart,  prepared  himself,  by 
diligent  use  of  every  means  in  his  power,  for 
that  work  to  which  he  felt  his  Lord  had  called 
him. 

Robert  P.  Martin,  of  Person  County,  North 
Carolina,  presented  himself  at  the  Rooms  of  the 
Pennsylvania  Branch  about  two  months  ago, 
bringing  as  credentials  a  letter  from  the  Rev. 
Thomas  S.  Malcolm,  of  Philadelphia,  and  one 
from  a  late  slaveholder,  Mr.  William  Thaxton,  of 
his  own  neighborhood;  also  the  minutes  of  an 
association  of  African  Baptist  churches,  which 
organized  in  December  last,  in  Person  County. 
With  this  association  Mr.  Martin  is  connected, 
having  under  his  charge  three  congregations. 
He  came  North  for  the  purpose  of  collecting 
$500,  which,  with  the  same  sum  to  be  raised  by 
his  own  people,  will  enable  them  to  build 
churches  and  school-houses,  wherein  to  worship 
and  gather  their  children  for  education.  The 
land  on  which  these  buildings  are  to  be  erected 
has  been  furnished  by  Mr.  Thaxton.  Mr.  Martin 
also  desired  to  obtain  the  promise  of  support 
for  two  teachers  among  his  people — one  to  be 
located  at  Roxboro',  and  another  at  Hillsboro'. 

to  answer  to  an  appeal  made  by  him  to  the 
Maryland  Association,  a  young  colored  woman 
was  sent  as  teacher ;  but  that  Association  was 
not  able  to  support  her.  She  opened  her  school 
in  February  last,  hoping  that  her  pupils  would 
be  able  to  pay  a  moderate  fee,  and  so  enable  her 
to  live.  But  very  few  could  do  this;  and  al- 
though the  people  were  earnest  in  their  desire  to 
have  their  children  educated,  the  most  they 
could  engage  to  do  was  to  give  the  teacher  her 
board  and  do  her  washing  free  of  charge  ;  this 


last  being  the  special  contribution  of  one  poor 
woman  to  the  cause  of  education  among  her 
people,  surely  an  offering  not  to  be  despised. 

The  rate  of  wages  given  to  the  freedmen  in 
this  neighborhood  is  very  low,  and  being  paid 
in  orders  upon  stores  kept  by  the  planters  them- 
selves, they  do  not  receive  a  just  equivalent  for 
their  wages.  Ground  down  by  this  iniquitous 
system,  and  too  ignorant  and  feeble  as  yet  to 
protect  and  right  themselves,  they  are  further- 
more burdened  with  the  care  of  many  orphan 
children,  thrown  upon  them  by  the  cruel  fortunes 
of  slavery  and  the  war.  Then  too,  a  greater  evil 
than  poverty  now  threatens  this  community,  in 
that  the  store  keepers  entice  the  negroes  to 
drink,  whereas,  in  former  times,  intoxication 
among  slaves  was  punished  with  great  severity. 
Having  thus  sketched  the  condition  of  the  peo- 
ple on  whose  behalf  Mr.  Martin  came  North  to 
plead  for  assistance,  I  will  introduce  their  repre- 
sentative. About  twenty-five  years  of  age,  the 
clearness  of  mind,  and  good  sense  evinced  in  his 
statements,  induced  me  to  ask  some  questions 
respecting  himself,  and  finding  that  though  a 
slave  until  the  close  of  the  war,  he  could  .  read 
and  write,  besides  having  some  knowledge  of 
arithmetic,  I  asked  how  he  had  received  this 
much  education.  In  answering,  he  commenced 
with  the  unexpected  words,  reverently  spoken, 
"  At  the  age  of  sixteen  I  embraced  religion." 

Afterwards  at  a  meeting  of  the  Women's 
Freedmen's  Relief  Association,  he  was  invited  to 
make  his  appeal  for  teachers,  and  to  state  the 
general  condition  of  his  people  and  his  work 
among  them,  of  which  I  have  given  a  summary 
above ;  and  then  being  asked  to  repeat  the  history 
of  his  own  self-education,  he  again  began  with 
what  he  realized  to  be  the  great  event — the  joy 
and  blessing  of  his  life; — u  When  I  was  sixteen 
years  old  I  embraced  religion,"  continuing  as 
far  as  I  can  remember,  as  follows :  "  I  was 
then  a  pretty  wild  fellow.  One  day  I  went 
to  Sunday-school  just  to  laugh  at  the  others. 
There  was  a  protracted  meeting  at  the  time, 
and  the  minister  spoke  seriously  to  the  schol- 
ars and  handed  them  tracts.  When  he  gave 
me  one  I  laughed  to  myself,  for  I  thought  'he 
thinks  I  can  read,  and  I  can't'  He  said  that 
we  were  young,  but  not  too  young  to  be  j 
sinners  and  need  a  Saviour ;  and  that  we  were 
not  too  young  to  pray.  He  said  too  that  we 
could  ask  the  Lord  to  teach  us  to  pray.  These 
thoughts  followed  me  when  I  went  home,  and  I 
did  pray  all  the  time, — '  0  Lord,  teach  me  to 
pray  for  Jesus'  sake,  Amen.'  Then  after  a  while 
I  found  that  I  could  pray  for  other  things  ;  the 
Lord  had  taught  me.  So  I  went  to  church  feel- 
ing that  1  was  a  sinner,  with  a  burden  on  my 
heart;  but  at  last  that  burden  was  taken  away, 
and  I  felt  such  a  love  to  all  men  and  to  the  Lord 
himself  that  I  cried  out  1  glory  to  God !'  and  the 
more  I  praised  the  Lord  the  more  I  wanted  to 
praise  Him.  Soon  after  this  I  felt  a  call  to  the 
ministry,  and  knowing  I  could  not  do  the  Lord's 
work  unless  1  had  some  educution,  I  set  about 
thinking  how  I  could  learn  to  read.  After  think- 
ing and  praying  a  great  deal,  I  got  a  little  white 
boy  to  buy  me  an  elementary  spe!!. ag-book  and 
a  hymn-book.    I  was  then  working  in  a  tobacco 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA 


FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN. 


7 


factory  in  Lynchburg,  Va.,and  an  old  brother  who 
could  read,  taught  me  my  letters  every  day  in  the 
hour  which  was  allowed  us  for  dinner.  After 
he  died,  I  was  able  to  go  on  alone ;  and  when 
I  could  spell  in  five  syllables,  I  gave  the  same 
little  boy  twenty-five  cents  to  buy  me  a  Testa- 
ment, and  commenced  to  read  it  at  the  1st  chap- 
ter of  St.  John's  Gospel.  I  read  on  without 
trouble  until  I  came  to  the  word  *  Nicodemus,' 
which  I  could  not  master.  So  I  prayed  over  it, 
and  after  awhile  I  remembered  that  I  had  once 
heard  that  chapter  explained,  and  then  I  knew 
what  Nicodemus  meant,  and  also  how  to  pro- 
nounce it.  As  I  knew  it  was  against  the  law 
for  a  black  man  to  learn  to  read,  and  even  to  be 
seen  with  a  book,  I  took  means  to  keep  my 
studies  out  of  sight.  But  one  day  having  for- 
gotten to  lock  myself  in,  the  overseer  came 
where  I  sat  with  my  book.  In  my  fright  it  fell 
from  my  hands,  and  he  picked  it  up  and  took  it 
away  with  him,  not  giving  me  the  1  cracking  '  I 
expected,  but  leaving  me  very  down-hearted  ; 
for  I  felt  that  this  would  put  an  end  to  all  my 
hopes  of  learning  to  read.  But  I  prayed  over 
this  trouble  for  a  week — prayed  God  would  soft- 
en this  man's  heart  towards  me,  and  prayed  that 
I  might  be  able  to  love  him.    When  a  week  had 

passed  I  went  to  him  and  said,  'Mr.  ,  haven't 

I  been  a  good  servant  ever  since  I  have  worked 
for  you  ?'  1  Yes,  Robert,'  said  he.  Then  said  I, 
'  Would  you  rather  have  me  spend  my  time  after 
work  like  the  other  boys  do,  playing  marbles 
and  carrying  on,  than  sit  quiet  with  my  book  ? 
You  know  I  am  a  member  of  church,  and  you 
are  a  member  of  church  too.  Now  I  feel  that 
the  Lord  has  a  great  work  for  me  to  do,  and  how 
can  I  be  a  minister  if  I  can't  learn  to  read?' 
Then  I  felt  my  heart  so  softened  that  the  tears 
be^an  to  come,  and  he  began  to  cry  too,  and 
gave  me  my  book  and  never  troubled  me  about 
it  again.  But  I  got  many  a  cracking  about  my 
studies  before  I  was  free.  I  didn't  care  though, 
as  long  as  I  could  go  on.  I  studied  at  night  with 
a  candle  on  the  floor,  and  bent  over  it  so  as  to 
hide  the  light.  I  learned  to  write  by  copying 
the  letters  in  the  spelling  book  on  shingles  with 
pieces  of  burnt  wood  or  cork,  and  as  I  passed 
the  bank  every  day  on  my  way  to  the  factory, 
I  often  saw  waste  paper  that  had  been  thrown  out, 
old  envelopes  with  writing  on  them,  and  I  picked 
these  up  and  used  them.  It  was  the  custom 
when  a  brother  or  sister  died,  for  the  colored 
people  to  spend  the  night  together  praying  and 
exhorting,  with  their  master's  leave.  On  one  of 
these  times,  which  I  can  never  forget,  I  first  ex- 
ercised my  gift,  speaking  from  the  text,  'He 
came  unto  His  own  and  His  own  received  Him 
not ;  but  as  many  as  received  Him  to  them  gave 
He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  as 
many  as  believed  on  His  name." 

When  Robert  became  free  his  master  gave  him 
a  letter  of  recommendation,  and  advised  him  to 
carry  out  his  heart's  desire  to  be  a  minister. 
Having  been  examined  and  ordained,  he,  in  course 
of  time,  went  to  Person  County,  North  Carolina; 
and  finding  there  a  community  of  freed  people 
destitute  of  a  spiritual  teacher,  and  hungering 
for  education  for  themselves  and  their  children, 
he  felt  that  here  was  the  field  in  which  his  Mas- 


ter would  have  him  labor,  and  that  much  as  he 
wished  to  further  his  own  education,  he  must 
first  do  the  Lord's  work  and  teach  those  so  much 
more  ignorant  than  himself. 

He  commenced  his  ministry  in  September  last 
by  holding  prayer  meetings  and  preaching  the 
gospel ;  and  was  able  to  report  to  the  Baptist 
Association  in  December,  that  he  had  baptized 
60  believers  upon  confession  of  their  faith. 

The  Women's  Frcedmen's  Relief  Association 
assumed  the  support  of  the  teacher  already 
established  among  his  people ;  provided  books 
and  slates  for  the  school,  and  gave  him  several 
boxes  of  clothing  to  be  distributed  among 
the  needy.  Although  the  Society  could  not  help 
him  about  his  buildings,  individual  members 
contributed  between  $50  and  $60.  His  col- 
lections in  Philadelphia  altogether  amounted  to 
something  more  than  $200,  and  were  principally 
made  among  his  own  denomination.  Every 
person  who  came  into  contact  with  this  young 
man,  was  won  by  his  simple  hearted  and  earnest 
piety,  and  deep  interest  in  his  work.  Whether 
nature  had  gifted  him  with  peculiar  refinement 
of  feeling,  or  grace  had  so  cultured  him  as  to 
make  the  slave  a  true  gentleman,  I  cannot  de- 
cide ;  but  certain  it  is,  that  with  all  his  desire  to 
obtain  for  his  people  the  blessings  he  came  to 
seek,  his  ready  tact  never  once  allowed  him  to 
say  too  much  or  presume  in  any  way.  The 
faith,  patience  and  courage  which  sustained 
him  through  his  attempts  to  obtain  an  edu- 
cation, make  him  hopeful  and  strong  in  doing 
the  Lord's  work  in  his  present  wide  field  of 
labor.  Taking  no  salary,  and  accepting  from 
his  people  only  board,  lodging  and  necessary 
clothing,  he  yet  looks  forward  to  a  time  when  he 
may  carry  on  his  own  education,  the  importance 
of  which  his  clear,  good  sense  perfectly  recog- 
nizes. But  the  Lord's  work  which  he  is  called 
to  do,  must  first  be  done. 

He  left  Philadelphia  glad  and  thankful  that 
he  had  so  much  to  tell  as  well  as  to  give  his 
people.  They  had  felt  as  if  "  the  friends  in  the 
North"  had  overlooked  them,  but  his  represen- 
tations availed  to  gain  for  them  some  of  the 
help  they  need.  To  himself  he  said  this  visit  to 
the  North  had  been  "  such  an  education."  How- 
ever, with  regard  to  the  money  he  hoped  to 
collect,  his  success  was  not  very  great.  He 
writes  me  that  he  has  already  made  one  payment 
of  $'250.  He  has  yet  to  raise  $150.  Should  any 
person  who  may  read  this  article  feel  a  desire 
to  assist  an  earnest  worker,  they  can  send  their 
contributions  to  Rev.  Robert  Martin,  Roxboro', 
Person  Co.,  N.  C.  ;  or, 

S.  L.  Baldwin, 
Cor.  Sec.  Women's  Freeduien's  Relief  Association. 
April,  1SG7. 

Village  St.  Helena  Island,  S.  C. 
June  7,  1867. 

Robert  R.  Corson, 

Corresponding  Secretary, 
Dear  Sir  : — I  do  not  think  the  average  atten- 
dance in  school  is  so  small  as  iu  former  years, 
and  yet  the  people  are  doiug  more  work  than 
ever  before  since  we  have  been  down  here.  One 
of  the  planters  said  to  me  just  now:  "The  peo- 


8 


THE  PENNSYLVANIA  FREEDMEN'S  BULLETIN. 


pie  are  working  this  year,  as  if  they  were  afraid 
of  starving  next  winter."  The  eagerness  for 
school  does  not  in  the  least  diminish,  but  they 
are  willing  to  do  more  than  ever  of  early  and 
late  work  if  they  can  only  get  the  school  hours 
for  learning. 

We  have  a  good  many  large  boys  or  young 
men,  who,  in  view  of  voting  soon,  are  deter- 
mined to  know  enough  to  sustain  the  dignity. 
In  so  large  a  school  we  cannot  make  distinction, 
and  they  are  obliged  to  sit  on  the  low  benches 
with  the  little  scholars  of  six  or  eight  years — 
obey  the  same  rules  ;  bear  the  same  punishments 
for  infractions  of  those  rules  ;  endure  reproof 
before  youngsters ;  even  endure  to  be  excelled 
by  them — in  short  forego  all  the  dignity  of  very 
young,  manhood  for  the  sake  of  a  little  knowl- 
edge ;  and  they  do  do  it  with  grave  steady  per- 
sistence. Several  of  them  beginning  in  this  way, 
soon  outstripped  the  primary  divisions  and  mine, 
the  intermediate ;  and  now  have  an  unlimited 
scope  in  Miss  Murray's  room. 

One  young  man,  Toby  Aiken  by  name,  about 
twenty  or  twenty-two  years  old,  was  in  the  army, 
and  at  the  battle  of  Olustee.  He  is  now  Lieut. 
Col.  of  the  Home  Guards  (militia,  black).  There 
was  no  room  for  him  when  he  first  applied  for 
admission  to  our  school,  a  year  or  more  ago, 
except  in  the  primary  divisions.  He  had  been 
taught  in  the  regiment  to  read  and  write,  and 
this  was  a  humble  place  for  him  to  take,  but  he 
thankfully  accepted  the  seat,  and  it  looked  some- 
times funny,  sometimes  sad,  and  sometimes  very 
inspiring  to  see  that  broad  six-footer  sitting  with 
the  little  class.  Of  course  he  has  now  reached 
the  upper  classes  in  Miss  Murray's  room  ;  but 
there  is  no  child  more  submissive  under  instruc- 
tions or  restrictions.  All  the  big  boys  are  re- 
spectful and  obedient,  minding  their  own  busi- 
ness of  learning  all  they  can,  and  heedful  not  to 
give  trouble  to  the  teachers,  or  impede  the  in- 
structions of  the  younger  ones.  There  could 
not  be  more  propriety  of  behavior,  than  there  is 
between  the  older  boys  and  girls  in  the  school ; 
indeed,  throughout  the  whole  school,  I  think  it 
is  remarkable  among  so  many  children  to  see  so 
little  rudeness  or  coarseness. 

The  business  of  organizing  the  Republican 
party  here,  is  progressing.  The  black  men  first 
met  and  determined  to  form  such  a  party.  Mr. 
Hunn  was  the  only  white  man  who  joined  them. 
They  knew  nothing  of  the  way  to  do  it ;  nothing, 
even  of  the  way  to  conduct  a  public  meeting, 
so  they  invited  the  co-operation  of  the  white 
planters — all  Northern  men.  These  were  shy  of 
joining  a  party  so  begun,  preferring,  perhaps,  to 
be  the  originators  of  the  party  themselves,  but 
th<  \  iiave  found  it  necessary  to  unite  with  the 
blacks,  and  they  will,  of  course,  soon  be  the  ap- 
parent leaders,  though  they  will  be  obliged  to 
accept  such  men  as  their  officers  as  the  black 
men  will  like.  Two  black  and  two  white  men 
were  appointed  a  committee  of  arrangement  to 
provide  speakers  for  a  grand  mass  meeting  to- 
morrow. These  speakers  are  to  be  both  black 
and  white  men. 

At  the  first  two  meetings  men  and  women 
were  both  present — equally  interested.  Our 
school  being  invited  to  make  the  music,  were 


taught  some  songs,  specially  for  the  occasion, 
and  we  were  all  there  with  Miss  Murray's  Melo- 
deon.  A  favorite  white  planter  being  invited  to 
speak,  declined  standing  on  the  raised  platform. 
The  people  insisted  that  if  he  wouldn't  stand 
on  their  platform  they  were  not  14  satify"  to 
hear  him.  So  he  was  obliged  to  step  up  side  by 
side  with  the  black  conductors  of  the  meeting. 
He  said  :  "What  were  women  and  children  there 
for?  Women  ought  to  stay  at  home,  &c,  this 
was  a  meeting  for  men."  There  was  some  dis- 
may, for  such  an  idea  as,  that  women  had  no 
right  there,  had  not  occurred  to  them.  The  next 
Sunday,  after  church,  Mr.  Hunn  announced  to- 
morrow's meeting.  The  minister  asked  from  the 
pulpit — "  Shall  the  women  come  ?"  "  Come  if 
they  like,"  Mr.  Hunn  answered,  prudently.  The 
minister  hesitated  and  then  said  :  "  De  womens 
will  stay  at  home  and  cut  grass ;"  which  means 
hoe  the  cotton  fields.  The  women  here  have 
hitherto  been  on  an  equality  with  the  men  ;  but 
so  they  are  being  civilized  1  "  Hoe  the  field, 
while  the  braves  palaver,"  seems  the  idea. 

Mrs.  Harper  was  here  Sunday  before  last,  and 
gave  the  people  some  most  excellent  advice, 
which  they  liked  much.  They  were  amazed  at 
her  power  of  expression.  Miss  Murray  desired 
her  scholars  to  write  on  their  slates  the  sub- 
stance of  the  lecture,  or  what  they  could  remem- 
ber of  it,  and  it  was  astonishing  to  see  with  what 
vividness  and  pleasure  they  recalled  what  had 
been  said.  It  was  also  very  creditably  written, 
and  I  was  sorry  the  exercise  had  not  been  writ- 
ten with  ink,  that  some  specimens  could  have 
been  sent  to  you. 

I  am,  very  respectfully, 

Laura  M.  Towne. 


An  annual  meeting  of  the  Women's  Freed- 
men's  Relief  Association,  for  the  election  of 
officers,  was  held  at  these  rooms,  on  the  second 
Monday  of  October,  when  the  following  officers 
were  re-elected : — President,  Mrs.  Aubrey  H. 
Smith  ;  Treasurer,  Mrs.  Dr.  Jno.  L.  Le  Conte ; 
Recording  Secretary,  Mrs.  Richard  P.White;  Cor- 
responding Secretary,  Miss  S.  L.  Baldwin. 

Miss  Lucretia  Towne,  who  filled  the  office  of 
Chairman  of  Committee  on  Education  last  sea- 
son, having  tendered  her  resignation,  Miss  Mary 
E.  Jackson  was  elected  to  this  position.  Miss 
Sarah  Walker  was  also  elected  as  an  additional 
Vice  President. 

The  next  general  meeting  of  this  Association 
will  beheld  on  the  second  Tuesday  of  November, 
when  it  was  expected  that  Mrs.  Harper,  will  be 
present,  and  give  an  account  of  her  late  tour  in 
the  South,  during  which  she  lectured  to  the  freed 
people  in  many  places,  and  had  unusual  oppor- 
tunities of  observing  their  social  condition,  and 
the  working  of  the  various  Associations  for  their 
elevation.  We  cordially  invite  to  this  meeting, 
not  only  our  present  members,  but  any  who  de- 
sire to  unite  with  us,  and  all  friends  of  the  cause. 

Due  notice  of  the  place  of  meeting  will  be 
given  in  the  daily  papers. 


THE 

[Address,  30  Yesey  Street;  or,  P.  O.  Box  5,733.] 


Vol.  II.]  NEW-YORK,  JULY,  1867.  [No.  4. 


The  American  Freedman's  "Onion  Commission, 

30  Yesey  Street,  New-York  City. 

"  The  ebject  of  this  Commission  is  the  relief,  education,  and  elevation  of  the  Freedmen  of  the  United 
States,  and  to  aid  and  co-operate  with  the  people  of  the  South,  without  distinction  of  race  or  color,  in  th%  improve- 
ment of  their  condition  upon  the  basis  of  industry,  education,  freedom,  and  Christian  morality.  No  school  or 
depot  of  supplies  shall  be  maintained  from  the  benefits  of  which  any  shall  be  excluded  because  of  color." — Art. 
EE.  Constitution. 


Chief-Justice  S.  P.  Chase,  President  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  Gen.  Sec,  1 

Rev.  Jos.  P.  Thompson,  D.D.  N.  Y., )  vi  J.  Miller  McKim,  Cor.  Sec.,  1  30  Vesey  St.,  N.  Y. 

William  Lloyd  Garrison,  Boston,  [  pr0airtifn+«  Geo-  Cabot  Ward,  Treas.,  f        P.  O.  Box  5,733. 

Charles  G.  Hammond,  Chicago.       )  * resiaeuis-  Francis  G.  Shaw,  Ch.  Ex.  Com.  J 


EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE. 


New  England  Branch  -  John  Parkman,  Martin  Brimmer,  Wendell  P.  Garrison. 

New  York  Branch  Francis  George  Shaw,  Henry  A.  Dike,  Nathan  Bishop. 

Pennsylvania  Branch  -  Francis  R.  Cope,  Samuel  S.  White. 

Baltimore  Branch  ....       Hugh  L.  Bond,  F.  Israel,  Chas.  W.  Bond. 

North-western  Branch  -  R.  W.  Patterson,  S.  B.  Gookins,  M.  D.  C.  Crawford. 

Michigan  Branch  -  William  Hogarth,  Supply  Chase,  David  Plumb. 

BRANCH  OFFICES: 

New  England   8  Studio  Building,  Boston  Rev.  J.  H.  Chapin,  Secretary. 

New  York    30  Yesey  Street,  New  York  Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy,  Secretary. 

Pennsylvania   711  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia  ...  -   Robert  R.  Corson,  Secretary. 

Maryland   5  and  7  Tyson's  Building,  Baltimore    -  -  Rev.  F.  Israel,  Secretary. 

North-western     ....  25  Lombard  Block,  Chicago     -   -  -  -  -   Rev.  H.  B.  Holmes,  Secretary. 

Michigan   Detroit   Rev.  8.  Chase,  Secretary. 

Pacific  Coast,   San  Francisco,  Cal.,  Rev.  D.  C.  Haynes,  D.  D„  Secretary. 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 

30  Vesey  Street,  N.  Y.  City. 

This  journal  is  published  as  the  central  organ  of  the  Freedmaa's  Union  Commission,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Branches  and  the  information  of  all  who  are  interested  in  the  work  of  education  in  the  South. 

Copies  will  be  furnished  without  charge  to  any  Branch  of  the  Commission  for  distribution  in  connection  with 
their  organs  or  for  such  other  use  as  may  best  subserve  the  interests  of  their  work.  Communications  should  be 
addressed  to  the  General  Secretary,  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  30  Yesey  Street,  New  York  City. 

TEEMS. 

Advertisements,  one  insertion,  at  the  rate  of  $30  per  page  for  ordinary  inside  pages;  but  for  an  insids  page,  op- 
posite general  reading  matter,  or  for  the  outside-last-page  of  this  joitrnal  the  price  is  $40 ;  payable,  in  all  eases. 
a,s  soon  as  the  journal  is  published. 

One  copy  of  THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN,  to  a  regular  subscriber,  one  roar,  twelve  numbers,  one  dollar. 

Any  person  contributing  five  doUars  per  annum  to  the  cause,  to  any  Branch  of  mis  Commission,  is  entitled  te 
receive  one  copy  of  this  journal  free.   Single  copies,  15  cents.   Copies  for  advertisers,  10  cents  each, 


242 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


THE  SITUATION. 


I     Thus  the  two  movements,  the  moral  and 

|  physical,  the  voluntary  and  military,  went 

i  forward,  jwi  2)assu'         *ne  walls  of  the 

_  !  old  edifice  were  battered  down,  and  the 
We  have  reached  the  month  of  July  and  , 
.    ,  _     .  .      /,        destructives  passed 

the  end  of  our  school  year.    Let  us  take  a  ' 


survey  of  the  situation  : 

This  time  five  years  ago  the  Freedmen's 
movement  was  in  embryo.  People  were 
reading  the  official  report  of  Mr.  Pierce, 
government  agent  for  the  Sea  Islands,  and 
a  printed  address  delivered  before  the 
Port  Royal  Relief  Committee  of  Philadel- 
phia. These  two  were  the  only  documents 
at  that  time  before  the  public,  giving 
anything  like  full  and  authentic  informa- 
tion in  regard  to  the  freedmen. 

There  were  at  that  time  no  freedmen's 
schools,  except  the  three  or  four  that  had 
been  started  as  experiments  in  the  desert- 
ed churches  of  Port  Royal  and  St.  Helena, 
one  at  Fortress  Monroe,  and  another  in 
the  City  of  Washington.  The  "  Confeder- 
ate" army  held  in  relentless  grasp  almost 
the  entire  South.  The  four  millions  of 
blacks  were,  with  a  fractional  exception, 
-still  "  chattels  personal  in  the  hands  of 
their  owners,  heirs,  executors  and  assigns, 
to  all  intents,  constructions,  and  purposes 
whatsoever." 

The  North  was  unorganized,  except  in 
the  way  of  anti-slavery  societies  and  re- 
cruiting committees.  The  former  were 
putting  the  last  touches  to  their  thirty 
years  work  of  sapping  and  mining,  and  the 
latter  were  hurrying  into  the  field  new 
levies.  Words  had  done  their  work,  and 
the  slavery  question  had  been  adjourned 
to  the  field.  Demolition  was  the  order  of 
the  day. 

It  was  not  until  Commodore  Dupont  had 
given  to  the  country  the  first  naval  vic- 
tory of  the  war,  that  anything  was  attempted 
in  the  way  of  rebuilding.  The  announce- 
ment that  10,000  slaves  had  been  liberated, 
aroused  into  play  a  new  element  of  activity, 
and  forthwith— the  people  building  bet- 
ter than  they  knew — the  work  of  recon- 
struction began.  Freedmen's  aid  organ- 
izations were  formed  in  the  three  chief 
cities  of  the  Union.  As  our  armies  ad- 
vanced in  the  South,  and  the  area  of  free- 
dom widened,  these  organizations  spread 
in  the  North,  and  increased  their  benefac- 
tions. 


on,  reconstructives 
were  on  hand  to  save  the  material  and 
commence  a  new  erection ;  so  that  when  at 
last  slavery  was  abolished  and  its  citadel 
surrendered,  a  corps  of  rebuilders  were  at 
work,  with  the  primer,  speller,  and  new 
testament  for  their  trowel,  compass,  and 
square,  to  relay  the  foundations. 

And  these  rebuilders  were,  and  are  work- 
men that  need  not  be  ashamed.  They  do 
not  "daub  with  untempered  mortar." 
With  freedom  for  their  corner  stone,  they 
lay  "justice  to  the  line  and  righteousness 
to  the  plummet."  They  work  with  enthusi- 
asm. No  temptation  can  induce  them  to 
leave  the  field.  No  obstacle  daunts  them. 
To  all  the  Sanballats  and  Tobiahs  that  vex 
them,  their  answer  is,  "I  am  doing  a  great 
work,  so  that  I  cannot  come  down. "  ' 1  Who 
art  thou,  O  great  mountain?  Before  Zeru- 
babel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain ;  and  he 
shall  bring  forth  the  headstone  thereof  with 
shoutings,  crying,  grace,  grace  unto  it." 

Does  some  one  say  these  are  figures  of 
speech  ?  Then  we  will  give  figures  of 
arithmetic 

There  are  at  this  moment  among  the 
freedmen  of  the  South,  as  per  reports 
made  to  the  Bureau  at  Washington,  and 
other  sources  of  information,  seventeen 
hundred  and  forty-four  (1,744)  teachers, 
with  pupils  in  attendance  upon  their 
schools  to  the  number  of  ninety-five  thous- 
and nine  hundred  and  eighty-seven 
(95,987). 

To  give  statistics  more  in  detail,  and  to 
illustrate  with  mathematical  accuracy  the 
progress  of  the  pupils  and  the  competence 
of  the  teachers,  we  go  back  six  months  and 
give  the  facts  as  reported  by  the  Bureau  at 
the  beginning  of  this  year. 

On  the  1st  of  January,  as  by  the  official 
semi-annual  statement  of  Mr.  Alvord,  In- 
spector of  schools,  there  were  among 
the  freedmen,  960  day  schools,  and  240 
night  schools.  Of  these  schools,  333  were 
self-supporting,  and  290  were  partly  sup- 
ported by  the  freedmen.  Of  the  teachers, 
458  were  colored,  and  972  white.  The 
number  of  pupils  in  the  schools  at  that 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


time  was  77,998,  of  whom  15,248  paid  for 
their  tuition,  and  470  of  whom  were  white. 
The  number  exceeding  fifteen  years  of  age 
was  10,266. 

The  progress  made  by  these  pupils  is  in- 
dicated by  the  following  table  : 


In  Alphabet   10,126 

Spell  and  read  easy  lessons   30,690 

Advanced  readers   19  256 

Geography   12,970 

Arithmetic   31,692 

Higher  branches.   1,573 

Writing   23,737 

Needlework   1,243 


The  number  of  industrial  schools  report-, 
ing  to  the  Bureau  on  the  1st  of  January, 
was  17,  with  1,279  pupils,  who  are  taught 
sewing,  knitting,  tailoring,  &c,  and  575 
Sunday  schools,  with  52,409  pupils.  There 
were  also  11  normal  schools,  with  581 
pupils. 

These  were  the  official  figures  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  year.  They  have  been 
steadily  increasing  from  that  time  to  this. 
But  these  figures  only  show  the  number  of 
regularly  appointed  teachers  giving  instruc- 
tion directly  to  pupils  in  their  schools .  How 
many  irregular  and  unappointed  teachers 
there  may  be  in  the  South,  and  how  many 
pupils,  not  counted  as  such,  there  may  be, 
who  are  receiving  indirect  instruction,  can 
only  be  conjectured.  It  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  these  newly  liberated  people  are 
greedy  to  learn .  The  fruit  of  ' '  the  tree  of 
knowledge"  was  so  long  forbidden  by 
their  masters,  that  now  nothing  in  com- 
parison with  it  is  in  their  eyes  so  desirable. 
Boys  and  girls,  as  fast  as  they  learn,  be- 
come teachers  to  their  fathers  and  mothers, 
and  older  brothers  and  sisters.  Northern 
people,  settled  in  the  South  to  plant  or 
trade,  often  teach  when  occasion  seems  to 
require.  A  good  many  in  the  army,  offi- 
cers and  privates,  do  the  same ;  so  that 
teaching  and  learning  may  be  said  to  be 
the  order  of  the  day  at  the  South.  Mr. 
Alvord,  in  the  report  above  alluded  to,  es- 
timates that  1 '  Not  less  than  a  million  and 
a  half  of  freedmen  at  the  South  are  now 
studying  the  spelling  book,  reader,  or  New 
Testament." 

These  are  the  facts  arithmetically  stated 
in  regard  to  school-learning  among  the 
blacks.  That  the  progress  of  the  educa- 
tional sentiment  among  the  whites  has 
been  correspondingly  rapid  needs  no  proof. 


Public  sentiment  at  the  South  on  all  the 
great  issues  before  the  country  is  impro- 
ving. The  work  of  political  reconstruc- 
tion is  making  good  progress.  The  rela- 
tions between  the  black  and  white  races 
are  becoming  more  friendly.  The  animos- 
ity of  the  late  rebels  as  toward  the  North 
is  less  unreasonable.  The  Republican 
party,  the  party  of  freedom,  is  organizing 
and  sweeping  into  its  ranks  leading  men 
who  have  been  prominent  in  the  rebellion. 
Distinguished  Confederates,  like  General 
Longstreet,  are  now  among  the  most  radi- 
cal Republican  organizers. 

The  Freedmen's  Bureau  fulfills  the  best 
expectation  of  its  friends.  It  is  more  popu- 
lar, more  powerful,  and  more  useful  at  this 
moment  than  it  has  ever  been  before.  Mr. 
Lincoln  rendered  the  countiy  and  the 
cause  a  good  service  when  he  indicated  to 
Mr.  Stanton,  Major-General  O,  O.  Howard, 
as  the  man  for  Commissioner.  The  place, 
as  things  stood,  needed  a  military  man, 
and  one  of  commanding  prestige  ;  a  gen- 
tleman and  a  Christian  gentleman  ;  a  man 
of  education,  interested  in  the  spread  of 
education  ;  and  it  found  all  these  in  Gen- 
eral Howard. 

"Like  master,  like  man. "  General  How- 
ard has  surrounded  himself  at  Washington, 
and  to  some  extent  reproduced  himself  in 
the  field,  by  men  of  his  own  spirit.  If  some 
of  his  appointments  have  not  proved  alto- 
gether worthy,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  good  men  are  unsuspicious  and  easily 
imposed  upon  ;  and  also,  that  the  General 
had  to  make  most  of  his  appointments 
from  officers  of  the  army.  It  was  not  to 
be  expected,  therefore,  that  his  selections 
would  be  special  models  of  Christian  vir- 
tue. The  army  is  very  useful  in  its  way, 
but  it  is  not  a  training  school  for  works  of 
humanitarian  reform. 

The  Freedmen's  Associations,  which  five 
years  ago  numbered  three,  now  number 
nearer  three  thousand.  That  is  to  say, 
counting  branches,  auxiliaries,  denomina- 
tional societies,  organizations  in  England, 
France,  Germany,  and  Switzerland,  there 
cannot  be  at  this  moment  much  fewer  than 
three  thousand  societies  in  active  existence 
for  the  benefit  of  the  freedmen.  The  New 
York  branch  of  this  Commission  alone  re- 


244 


ports  569  as  the  present  number  of  their 
working  auxiliaries. 

These  are  pregnant  facts.  This  educa- 
tional movement  is  a  great  phenomenon. 
The  world  has  never  seen  anything  like  it. 
It  is  a  spontaneous  "  uprising  "  of  an  en- 
lightened people  to  do  a  great  work  of  jus- 
tice, mercy,  and  political  necessity.  Though 
less  striking,it  will  be  farther  reaching  in  its 
results  than  the  event  which  has  already 
passed  into  history  as  a  proof  of  a  "  great 
people." 


THE   CHIEF  JUSTICE  AND 
"  COLOR.'' 

The  subjoined  is  cut  from  a  daily  paper: 

NO  DISTINCTION  OF  COLOR  IN  JURORS. 

"  The  following  is  the  order  of  Chief  Justice 
Chase  in  reference  to  the  selection  of  jurors  : 

"  It  being  considered  by  the  Court  that  all  per- 
sons born  and  naturalized  in  the  United  States 
aud  residing  in  North  Carolina,  are  citizens,  en- 
titled to  equal  rights  under  the  laws,  and  there- 
fore equally  concerned  in  the  impartial  ad- 
ministration of  justice,  it  is  ordered,  that  hence- 
forth, in  selecting  grand  and  petit  jurors,  the 
Marshal  of  the  United  States  for  the  District  of 
North  Carolina,  make  no  distinction,  on  ac- 
count of  color  or  race,  among  citizens  other- 
wise qualified  to  serve. 

"  Several  colored  citizens  are  now  serving  on 
the  jury  in  the  United  States  Court  at  Raleigh." 

The  Chief  Justice  is  President  of  the 
American  Freedman's  Union  Commission. 
"No  distinction  on  account  of  color"  is 
the  motto  of  that  Commission.    Great  op- 
position was  made  a  little  more  than  a 
year  ago  to  the  adoption  of  this  motto  as 
a  principle  of  action.    Some  new  profes- 
sors of  the  anti-slavery  faith  were  very 
strenuous  agains£  it ;  but  we  fancy  they 
are  convinced  by  this  time  that  an  asso- 
ciation set  for  the  obliteration  of  color 
distinction,  should  itself  make  no  distinc- 
tion,— either  in  favor  of  black  or  white. 
Had  they  carried  their  point,  what  a  figure 
would  the  American  Commission  now  be 
making  with  the  country  a  half  a  century 
in  advance  of  them!     "White  children 
will  never  come  into  your  schools,"  it  was 
said.    "Well,  then,"  was  the  reply,  "let 
them  stay  out ;  if  they  can  stand  it  we  can. 
But  they  will  come  in,  in  due  season.  As 
time  wears  c\;  as  prejudice  gives  way; 
and  as  they  fina  they  have  no  alternative, 
white  children  will  sit  on  the  same  forms; 


and  the  schools  which  this  Commission 
is  establishing,  will  become  in  fact,  as  they 
are  in  theory,  1  common  schools. '  Our 
policy  is,  to  be  right  in  principle."  And 
thus  the  question  was  settled. 



"THEY  WILL  NEVER  MIX." 

This  used  to  be  said  of  the  blacks  and 
whites  in  reference  to  Southern  schools. 
But  that  was  long  ago,  as  long  ago  as 
the  spring  of  1866.  But  now,  in  these 
modern  days,  it  begins  to  be  found  that 
they  will  "mix."  Take  the  following 
example:^ 

Extract  from  a  letter  of  A.  E.  Newton,  Su- 
perintendent of  Schools  at  Washington, 
D.  C. ,  to  Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy,  Cor- 
responding Secretary  New  York  Branch 
Freedman's  Union  Commission. 

"I  may  mention  another  fact  indicative  of 
the  good  work,  educationally,  which  your 
Commission  is  doing  here.  A  lady  of  intelli- 
gence and  refinement  (white)  residing  in  this 
city,  called  at  the  '  Teacher's  Home'  recently 
and  asked  if  it  was  possible  to  obtain  admission 
for  her  children  into  the  highest  department  of 
the  M  Street  School,  saying  that  she  had  visit- 
ed the  school  and  witnessed  the  admirable  and 
thorough  manner  in  which  the  pupils  were 
drilled,— especially  in  arithmetic.  She  was 
willing  to  pay  any  amount  of  tuition  to 
secure  for  her  children  a  training  by  the  same 
methods.     They  were  now  attending  Mrs. 

 ■ — 's  Institute  (naming  a  private  school 

having  the  best  reputation  of  any  educational 
institution  in  the  city),  but  the  system  of  train- 
ing did  not  compare  with  that  in  our  schools. 
Miss  Lord's  room  being  at  that  time  filled  to 
its  utmost  capacity,  we  were  obliged  to  decline 
J  the  application. 

"  '  Can  I  not,  then,'  she  inquired,  '.  engage 
Miss  Lord  to  give  my  children  private  lessons 
out  of  school  hours  Y  Miss  Lord,  being  already 
taxed  to  the  extent  of  her  strength,  was  obliged 
to  decline  this  proposition,  also. 

"'Then,'  she  persisted,  'is  there  not  some 
pupil  of  yours,  who  has  been  thoroughly  train- 
ed in  your  methods,  whom  I  can  employ  to 
teach  my  children  ?' 

"  Miss  Lord  named  one,  who  was  preparing 
to  teach,  and,  whom  she  thought  competent 
for  the  undertaking — provided  she  could  be  in- 
duced to  engage  in  it. 

"  '  Will  you  oblige  me  by  going  with  me  to 
her  residence  and  assisting  me  in  securing  her  ?' 

''Miss  Lord  consented ;  and  the  result  is  that 
this  colored  pupil  from  our  school  is  now  teach- 
ing the  children  of  this  white  family — in  pref- 
erence to  sending  them  to  the  best  educational 
institution  for  whites  which  the  city  affords." 

Take  another  example : 
The  other  day  a  gentleman  not  unknown 
to  the  writer  of  this  paragraph,  visited  the 
Bureau.    He  talked  with  Gen.  Howard  at 


THE  AMERICAN  FKEEDMAN. 


245 


length  upon  the  condition  and  prospects 
of  the  cause,  and  the  two  felicitated  them- 
selves on  the  wonderful  progress  that  had 
been  made,  and  the  glorious  future  that 
was  opening  up  to  the  country.  Not  only 
were  the  chains  of  slavery  broken,  but  the 
fetters  of  prejudice  were  unloosed  and  fast 
falling  off.  The  "caducity  of  prejudice" 
had  been  demonstrated  both  a  priori  and 
a  posteriori,  and  facts  were  quoted  in  proof; 
among  them  the  following  : 

' '  We  have  a  nourishing  Sunday  school," 
said  the  General,  ' '  attached  to  our  church 
here  in  this  city,  but  until  lately  the  chil- 
dren were  all,  or  nearly  all,  white.  I  noticed 
this  and  said  to  some  of  our  friends,  1  We 
are  all  right  in  doctrine  in  regard  to  dis- 
tinctions of  color,  but  our  practice  does 
not  seem  to  bear  us  out.  We  call  upon 
others  to  make  no  distinctions  of  race  or 
complexion,  but  our  own  Sunday  school 
is  all  of  one  color;  how  is  this?'  The  an- 
swer was:  'our  doors  are  open  to  all;  but 
the  colored  people  don't  choose  to  come. 
They  are  backward  and  seem  to  prefer  to 
stay  out. ' 

"  Well,  I  said,  we  are  not  wholly  blame- 
-  less,  in  the  matter.  We  must  go  out  into 
the  highways  and  hedges  and  compel  them 
to  come  in.  So  I  addressed  the  school  on 
the  subject,  and  before  concluding,  offered 
a  reward,  as  I  sometimes  do  in  such  cases, 
(a  present  at  the  end  of  the  year),  to  the 
scholar  who  would  go  into  the  lanes  and 
alleys  and  bring  into  school  the  largest 
number  of  scholars.  At  once  a  spirit  of 
generous  emulation  was  roused,  and  the 
next  Sunday  witnessed  a  large  influx  of 
the  colored  element.  My  little  daughter, 
who  was  no  more  zealous  than  some  of  the 
rest,  hunted  up  all  the  clothes  she  could 
find  suitable  for  the  purpose,  and  putting 
them  in  a  Quarter-master's  wagon,  drove 
round  from  place  to  place,  rigging  up  and 
fitting  out  for  attendance  at  school  all  the 
little  stragglers  she  could  come  across. — 
Others  did  the  same,  and  now  our  school 
is  quite  full,  and  no  longer  of  one  com- 
plexion." 

1 '  And  how  did  the  white  children  bear  | 
it?"  asked  the  General's  visitor. 

' '  All  very  well  except  one,  and  that  was 
a  line  boy  from  whom  better  things  was  to  I 
have  been  expected.    He  was  a  nephew  of  | 


 ,  (naming  a  distinguished  Northern 

anti-slavery  Senator),  and  quite  a  favorite 
of  mine.  But  he  was  bitter  in  his  opposi- 
tion to  black  scholars,  and  loud  in  the  ex- 
pression of  his  feelings.  I  saw  him,  and 
after  hearing  from  him  how  he  felt,  and 
seeing  the  rebellious  spirit  he  was  in,  I 
told  him  he  had  better  leave  the  school; 
that  we  did  not  want  scholars  of  his  spirit, 
and  that  he  had  better  remain  outside  or 
go  to  some  other  school  till  he  was  of  a 
better  mind.  He  was  resentful  for  a  while, 
but  being  rebuked  by  his  father,  and 
reason  and  conscience  getting  the  better 
of  him,  it  was  not  long  till  he  came  back, 
contrite  and  penitent.  WC  have  now  a 
mixed  school,  and  no  trouble.  And  so  it 
will  be  in  due  time  every  where.  Slavery 
has  gone  and  all  that  belongs  to  slavery 
must  go  with  it.  All  that  needs  to  be 
done  is  to  adopt  a  right  principle  and  work 
up  to  it.    Others  will  soon  join  us." 

This  was  the  substance  of  what  the 
General  said.  It  shows  what  the  man  in 
the  best  position  to  know  believes  in  re- 
gard to  the  policy  of  mixing  colors. 


PROGRESS. 

Any  one  who  has  ever  witnessed  a  negro 
festival  at  the  South,  such  as  used  to  be  allow- 
ed them  in  the  more  favored  regions,  on  Easter 
or  Whitsuntide,  will  remember  how  gross  and 
meaningless  and  often  demoralizing  were  their 
enjoyments.  What  a  contrast  is  presented  in 
the  present  state  of  things  as  described  in  the 
following  letter : 

Elizabeth  City,  N.  C,  I 
June  10,  1867.  f 

Mr.  E.  C.  Estes  : 

"  Dear  Friend.—  **  *  The  last  day  of 
May  our  school  children  celebrated  by  a  May 
party,  spoke  pieces  and  crowned  a  queen.  They 
met  at  the  school-house,  formed  a  procession, 
and  marched  to  a  shady  square,  where  they  had 
a  platform  erected  for  the  speakers  and  queen — 
two  large  flags  were  suspended  from  trees  be- 
hind the  stage.  The  speaking  was  good ,  order 
excellent,  all  were  neatly  dressed,  most  of  the 
girls  wore  wreaths  of  flowers.  After  the  exer  - 
cises  were  over,  they  marched  around  several 
streets,  singing  occasionally,  to  a  large  ware- 
house, owned  by  a  .white  lady,  who  allowed 
them  the  use  of  it  for  a  refreshment  table. 
After  marching  and  singing  around  the  hall 
several  times,  and  a  blessing  from  the  minis- 
ter, the  children  were  invited  to  the  table.  It 
was  pleasant  to  see  the  happy  faces  as  they 
were  helped  to  luxuries  they  seldom  or  never 


246 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


saw  ;  it  would  compare  well  with  similar 
gatherings  in  small  places  at  the  North,  for 
order  and  neatness.  They  got  it  up  them- 
selves, except  selecting  pieces  for  speaking. 
Quite  a  number  of  white  persons  were  present. 

"  Judge  Brooks,  one  of  the  leading  men  here, 
spent  several  hours  in  school  recently,  and  ex- 
pressed much  satisfaction  at  the  progress.  He 
has  since  called  with  his  wife  and  a  lady  friend. 
They  have  also  sent  us  fruit  and  vegetables 
from  their  gardens.  It  is  pleasant  to  find  pub- 
lic sentiment  changing  without  any  sacrifice  of 
principle  on  our  part.  We  have  gone  quietly 
about  our  own  duties." 

I  remain,  yours  truly, 

E.  A.  Philbrook. 


WISE  POLICY. 

Much  satisfaction  was  given  to  the  public 
some  time  since  by  the  announcement  that  the 
Trustees  of  thePeabody  Education  Fund  had 
resolved  to  make  the  establishment  of  common 
schools  and  normal  shools  leading  objects  in 
the  discharge  of  the  duty  confided  to  them.  Ad- 
ditional satisfaction  will  be  given  by  the  fur- 
ther statement  contained  in  the  following  let- 
ter from  the  distinguished  gentleman  who  has 
been  selected  by  the  Trustees  to  carry  out 
their  views  and  purposes : 

Providence,  May  22, 1867. 
"  Rev.  C.  Kennedy,  Cor.  Sec,  be— Dear  Sir : 
The  Trustees  do  not  intend  to  support  any 
school  or  teacher,  nor  to  aid  any  school  that 
does  not  aim  to  be  a  public  school.  To  bring 
the  people  to  the  support  of  public  schools  is 
our  chief  object.  We  give  only  with  refer- 
ence to  that  end.  Mere  relief  of  the  poor, 
mere  education,  is  not  our  primary  object." 
Yours,  truly, 

B.  Sears. 

This  is  wise  policy,  and  the  only  safe  policy 
in  the  administration  of  a  public  trust  of  this 
kind. 

In  the  initial  and  experimental  stages  of  the 
freedmen's  movement,  the  associations,  or 
some  of  them,  which  now  constitute  this  Com- 
mission, acted  ex  tempore  and  without  method. 
Their  object  was  relief;  and  to  this  end  they 
responded,  as  far  as  their  ability  went,  to  all 
calls.  They  relieved  suffering,  and  aided  edu- 
cational institutions  wherever  they  found  them. 
Had  a  Baptist  church  in  South  Carolina,  or  a 
Methodist  church  in  Virginia  said :  "  The 
people  thirst  for  knowledge,  and  the  community 
suffers  from  their  ignorance.  We  have  a  com- 
petent teacher  of  our  own  who  is  willing  to 
give  instruction;  but  we  are  poor,  and  cannot 
pay  him  a  salary.  Our  church  in  which  he 
would  teach,  is  out  of  repair,  and  not  fit  for  a 
school  house.  Will  you  help  us?"  "Certainly," 
would  have  been  the  reply  :  "  It  is  a  matter  of 


the  first  necessity  that  the  people  should  be 
educated.  We  don't  ask  nor  care  whether  you 
are  Baptist  or  Methodist,  Epi&copalian  or  Pres- 
byterian. We  will  repair  your  church,  sup- 
port your  teacher,  and  send  you  clothes,  books, 
and  slates  for  the  children." 

This  was  our  policy  in  the  beginning,  and  it 
was  the  true  policy  for  that  stage  of  the 
movement.  But  things  have  changed.  The 
initial  period  of  our  enterprise  has  passed,  and 
we  are  called  upon  to  act  on  fixed  principles,  and 
with  a  settled  policy.  On  this  point  we  are 
happy  to  find  ourselves  in  accord  with  Dr. 
Sears,  Wm.  M.  Evarts,  and  other  advanced 
men,  who  shape  the  policy  of  the  Peabody 
Trust  Committee. 

Another  policy  has  been  recommended  as 
equally  liberal,  religiously,  and  more  product- 
ive of  immediate  results.  It  is  that  of  aiding 
all  schools  already  established  or  ready  to  be 
established,  and  unable  to  go  on  without  aid, 
whether  church  schools,  or  general  schools  ; 
the  only  assurance  required  being  that  the  par- 
ties who  are  to  have  the  money  for  expendi- 
tures are  good  Christian  men,  competent  and 
ready  to  use  it  for  the  best  interests  of  the 
people. 

This  is  very  good  as  a  matter  of  general 
doctrine,  but  hardly  safe  as  a  policy  in  which 
to  administer  a  public  fund.    Let  us  see  : 

Dr.  Sears  is  a  Baptist.  By  supposition,  a 
deputation  of  gentlemen,  well  known  to  him 
by  character,  wait  upon  him,  and  ask  aid  for 
a  school  in  Charleston.  It  is  taught  in  the 
basement  of  their  (Baptist)  church.  For  want 
of  room  the  number  of  scholars  is  at  present 
small.  Were  the  church  rebuilt,  double  the 
number  might  be  accommodated,  and  a  large 
and  flourishing  Sunday  school  established  be- 
sides. These  gentlemen  are  Union  men ;  they 
accept  the  situation  ;  they  believe  in  educating 
the  negroes.  The  case  seems  clear,  and  an  ap- 
propriation is  ordered. 

The  Methodists  get  to  hear  of  it,  and  forth- 
with a  deputation  equally  respectable,  waits 
upon — personally  or  by  letter — Dr.  Sears,  and 
presents  a  case  still  stronger ;  and  another  ap- 
propriation is  ordered.  The  Episcopalians  do 
the  same  with  the  same  result.  The  Catholics 
of  St.  Augustine  follow  suit ;  but  here  comes 
a  hitch.  Dr.  Sears  being  an  impartial  and 
truly  liberal  man,  is  favorably  inclined ;  but 
his  Board,  whom  he  consults,  are  divided  in 
opinion.  One  set  say  consistency  requires  it; 
another,  Christianity  forbids  it !  A  majority, 
however,  hold  that  all  professed  Christian 
churches  should  be  treated  with  rigid  impar- 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


247 


tiality  ;  that  we  have  no  right  to  go  behind  the 
record ;  and  that  our  civil  institutions  counte- 
nance no  such  distinctions  ; — and  accordingly 
Dr.  Sears  makes  an  appropriation  to  the  St. 
Augustine  Catholics.  Heartburning  is  the  re- 
sult in  the  Board  and  out  of  the  Board ;  the 
Peabody  movement  begins  to  lose  its  pres- 
tige, and  Dr.  Sears  some  of  his  iupporters. 

Meanwhile,  as  the   controversy  spreads, 
another  application  is  made.    The  Unitarians, 
under  Dr.  Bellows'  energetic  lead,  have  con- 
cluded— let  us  imagine — to  resuscitate  their 
church  at  Mobile.    They  organize  a  school,  and 
extemporize  a  building  which  serves  the  double 
purpose  of  a  school-room  on  week  days,  and  a 
church  on  Sunday.    A  few  thousand  dollars 
would  give  them  a  comfortable  building  in 
which  they  could  double  the  number  of  their 
day  scholars,  and  quadruple  the  size  of  their 
Sunday  school.  They  apply  to  Dr.  Sears.  Their 
application  is  made  by  some  leading  education- 
ists of  New  England.   Possibly  through  Miss 
Peabody,  the  sister-in-law  of  the  late  Horace 
Mann,  the  great  common  school  educationist 
of  this  country  and  of  this  century ;  pos- 
sibly through  Mrs.  Mann  herself,  Horace 
Mann's    widow.     The    case    is    a  very 
strong    one.    Mobile  needs  reconstruction 
educationally  and  every  other    way  very 
badly.    There  are  half  a  dozen   choice  and 
extra-competent  Massachusetts  teachers  ready 
to  take  hold  of  the  work ;  all  that  is  wanted  is 
an  appropriation  equal  in  amount  to  that  given 
to  the  Catholics  of  St.  Augustine,  to  rebuild  the 
church  for  a  school-house,  and  help  pay  the 
teachers.    Dr.  Sears  consults  his  Board.  They 
are  divided,  and  a  sharp  discussion  follows. 
The  discussion  gets  into  the  newspapers. 
Angry  feeling  is  aroused,  and  good  people  who 
at  first  rejoiced  at  the  donation  of  Mr.  Pea- 
body, begin,  even  before  the  question  is  deci- 
ded, to  query  whether  it  is  not  going  to  do  as 
much  harm  as  good. 

Pending  this  discussion  it  transpires  that 
one  of  the  Methodist  schools,  which  was  very 
promising  while  taught  in  a  basement,  had 
become  of  less  than  secondary  importance, 
now  that  the  new  church  had  been  built. 
There  had  been  protracted  meetings  and  a  re- 
vival of  religion,  and  so  much  good  had  been 
going  on  otherwise,  that  it  had  not  been 
deemed  important  to  give  much  attention  to 
the  school. 

Flying  rumor  bore  similar  testimony  in 
regard  to  a  Baptist  school  which  had  been 
aided  by  an  appropriation.  The  Board  were 
now  convinced  that  there  was  another  and  a 


better  way  of  administering  their  fund ;  and 
that  was  to  ignore  all  denominational  schools, 
and  to  aid  no  school  that  was  not  or  was  not 
intended  to  be,  a  public  schooL 

Happily  for  them  and  the  cause,  the  Pea- 
body Trustees  needed  no  such  experiments  to 
teach  them  what  was  the  best  policy.  They 
were  too  familiar  with  the  early  history  of 
public  education  funds,  to  make  the  blunders 
we  have  here  imagined.  They  have  taken  the 
true  ground  from  the  outstart,  and  by  deter- 
mining to  know  no  church,  have  jumped  at 
once  into  the  confidence  of  all  the  churches. 
 mm- 

LETTER  ON  UNSECTARI AN  COM- 
MON SCHOOL  EDUCATION. 

FROM  REV.  WILLIAM  R.  WTXJilAMS,  D.  D. 

New-York,  16th  May,  1867. 
Having  learned  that  the'Rev.  Crammond 
Kennedy,  the  Secretary  of  the  New- York 
Branch  of  the  American  Freedman's  Union 
Commmission,  proposes  visiting  Chicago  at 
the  time  of  our  denominational  anniversa- 
ries there,  the  subscriber  would  cordially 
commend  the  plans  of  labor,  and  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  American  Freedman's 
Union  Commission,  as  far  as  he  has  had 
the  opportunity  of  observing  them. 

Organized  to  give  unsectarian  Common 
School  education,  but  doing  this  largely  by 
teachers  of  the  various  evangelical  churches, 
it  has  been  faithfully  and  effectively  di- 
rected to  diffuse  that  intelligence  and  moral 
training,  without  which!  political  freedom 
would  prove  to  the  newly  enfranchised  but 
a  snare  and  a  bane. 

-  Our  Home  Mission  has  its  own  appro- 
priate and  definite  field  of  labor  in  the 
planting  of  churches  and  the  sending  and 
sustaining  of  preachers .  Our  Theological 
Institute  addresses  itself  to  the  fuller  train- 
ing of  our  colored  pastorate.  But  these 
bear  directly  and  most  favorably  on  the 
cause  of  general  education,  and  both  move 
toward  the  social  and  moral  elevation  of 
the  colored  race.  Yet  there  is  a  need  which 
neither  of  them  can  (in  the  absence  of 
a  general  normal  school  and  common 
school  system  for  the  several  Southern 
States)  meet  with  any  uniformity  or  com- 
pleteness of  effort.  The  American  Freed- 
man's Union  Commission  goes  into  that 
field,  which  no  one  religious  denomination, 
alone  and  distinctively,  can  till. 


248 


THE  AMERICAN  FREED  MAN 


Should  the  States,  or  the  Nation  gen- 
erally, establish  a  system  of  common 
schools,  these  must  be  unsectarian.  Those 
already  established  by  the  American  Freed- 
man's  Union  Commission  are  on  such  un- 
sectarian basis.  And  these,  at  least,  could, 
on  such  State  or  National  movement  being 
once  inaugurated,  become  at  once,  in  their 
several  points  of  influence,  each  the  nucleus 
of  a  system  of  State  schools  for  the  region 
where  it  is  planted. 

If  continuing  to  be  administered,  as 
heretofore  I  believe  them  to  have  been, 
they  will  occupy  well  the  field  in  the  pres- 
ent transition  period.  And  when  it  shall 
pass  and  give  place  to  a  system  of  local 
education  at  the  expense  of  the  States,  or 
the  United  States,  these  American  Freed- 
man's  Union  Commission  schools  will  be 
found  most^capable  of  immediate  adapta- 
tion into  the  new  scheme  of  Public  In- 
struction. 

The  subscriber  would,  therefore,  most 
cordially  endorse  the  operations  of  the 
American  Freedman's  Union  Commission, 
as  worthy  of  all  support  in  addition  to,  and 
in  supplement  of,  our  denominational, 
work. 

Wm.  R.  Wilt  jams, 
Late  Pastor  Amity  St.  Baptist  Church. 

In  connection  with  the  clear  and  em- 
phatic letter  of  this  eminent  divine,  it 
gives  us  great  pleasure  to  print  the  fol- 
lowing resolution,  which  was  unanimous- 
ly presented  by  a  special  committee  on 
the  Freedmen,  of  which  Rev.  Robert  Turn- 
bull,  D.  D.  was  chairman,  to  the  Annual 
Meeting  of  the  American  Baptist  Home 
Mission  Society  at  the  mammoth  anniver- 
saries in  Chicago. 

Resolved,  That  as  secular  education,  except 
in  special  emergencies  and  transitional  condi- 
tions of  society,  properly  belongs  to  the  State  or 
Commonu^alth,  or  to  such  other  Associations 
as  may  be  organized  for  this  specific  purpose, 
tee  discontinue  every  effort  in  this  direction, 
and  authorize  the  Board  to  transfer  the  day- 
sclwols  for  colored  children  to  the  American 
Freedman's  Union  Commission,  with  such 
instructions  regarding  the  standing  of  the 
teachers,  and  particularly  the  condition  of  the 
pupils,  as  may  be  needed. 

On  Thursday,  June  13th,  the  Board  de- 
cided to  give  up  secular  education,  and 
confine  its  efforts  to  purely  Missionary 


work.  Always  true  to  civil  and  religious 
liberty,  insisting  in  the  darkest  days  of 
persecution  on  the  separation  of  Church 
and  State,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  the 
Baptists  of  these  brighter  times  would 
still  be  faithful  to  their  principles.  We 
shall  have  more  to  say  on  this  noble  ex- 
ample to  other  Churches,  hereafter. 


For  the  latest  official  information  as  to 
the  progress  of  reorganization,  social  and 
political,  in  the  Southern  States,  see  the 
Epitome  made  up  from  Bureau  reports,  on 
the  250th  page. 


THE   HORSE- CAR  QUESTION 
SETTLED. 

The  opponents  of  equal  justice  to  the 
negro,  driven  from  their  old  entrench- 
ments,— pushed  back  from  one  untenable 
position  to  another,  at  last,  as  is  well 
known,  made  a  stand  upon  the  threshold 
of  the  horse-car.  "A  line  must  be  drawn 
somewhere,"  was  their  practical  language, 
"and  we  draw  it  here."  But  it  was  no 
use.  The  march  of  events  and  the  force  of 
logic  were  irresistible;  one  stronghold  after 
another  yielded,  till  at  last  Philadelphia, 
the  very  citadel,  had  to  surrender.  We 
have  before  us  a  printed  report  of  the  com- 
mittee appointed  to  secure  to  colored  peo- 
ple in  Philadelxmia  the  right  to  the  use  of 
the  street-cars.  It  is  an  interesting  and 
well-written  document,  as  the  reader  may 
judge  from  the  following  extracts  : 

"  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  disposition  to  fra* 
ternize,  or  even  to  sympathize,  in  any  true 
sense,  w  ith  colored  people,  had  not,  up  to  the 
passage  of  the  act,  much  increased.  But  there 
had  been  a  great  change  in  one  respect.  The 
conviction  had  come  home  to  nearly  every 
mind  in  the  community  that  prejudice  could 
no  longer  be  allowed  to  reign  supreme  in  direct- 
ing our  conduct  toward  this  large  class  of  our 
population.  We  have  not  failed  to  see  that 
the  late  slaves  must  inevitably  be  admitted 
soon  to  their  full  rights  as  citizens  in  the  South, 
and  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  what 
takes  place  there,  must,  for  a  still  stronger  rea- 
son, take  place  here.  We  therefore  almost 
mechanically  fall  in  with  the  march  of  events, 
and  obey,  without  resistance,  the  great  law  of 
movement.    This  is  our  only  merit 

"  But  while  love  to  the  Lord  and  the  neigh- 
bor has  had  little  to  do  with  this  change,  this 
great,  central,  moving  principle  of  Christianity 
will  gain — is  gaining — new  power  within  us  in 
consequence  of  it. 


24# 


"  The  conduct  of  our  col«red  friends  in  the 
use  of  their  newly  acquired  right  has  been  all 
but  faultless.  With  an  instinctive  sense  of 
propriety,  which,  it  is  feared,  would  be  looked 
for  in  vain  in  any  other  race  under  like  circum- 
stances, they  now  enter  the  cars,  not  with  an 
air  of  exultation,  at  having  gained  a  disputed 
point,  but  as  if  the  point  had  never  been  dis- 
puted. It  is  also  remarked  that  they  resort  to 
the  cars  sparingly,  and  when  not  in  clean 
clothes,  voluntarily  take  their  old  places  on  the 
forward  platform.  The  most  offensive  occu- 
pants of  seats, — the  drunken,  the  profane,  the 
tobacco-chewing,  the  unwashed  and  the  selfish 
— are  still  of  color  other  than  black  or  brown. 

"  On  the  other  hand,  men  who  two  years  ago 
were  violent  in  their  opposition  to  admission, 
now,  with  almost  ostentatious  pertinacity, 
keep  their  places  without  shrinking,  as  if  it 
were  a  point  of  honor,  as  members  of  a  law- 
abiding  community,  for  them  to  do  so,  when 
colored  persons  take  seats  next  them. 

"  By  a  sort  of  tacit  moral  pre-arrangement, 
where  trouble  and  strife  were  with  so  much 
confidence  predicted,  offence  is  neither  given 
nor  taken.  And  even  better  than  this.  Many 
men  and  women  who,  within  the  last  few 
weeks,  have  found  themselves  seated  for  the 
first  time  beside  decent  and  well-behaved 
colored  people,  and  this  without  harm  or  an- 
noyance from  the  so  much  dreaded  contact, 
have  also  found  stirring  within  their  hearts, 
in  consequence,  a  new  influx  of  Christian 
charity. 

"  Thus  now,  as  always,  the  evils  which  men 
fear  they  shall  be  called  on  to  encounter  as  the 
result  of  doing  what  is  just  and  humane,  are 
discovered,  when  they  really  are  encountered, 
not  to  be  evils  at  all,  but  blessings  pure  and 
simple." 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  writer  thinks 
that  ''love  to  the  Lord  and  the  neigh- 
bor has  had  little  to  do  with  this  change;" 
but  that  is  a  matter  about  which,  however 
well  informed,  he  cannot  have  much  ac- 
curate knowledge.  The  motives  which 
govern  the  best  of  us,  are  of  a  mixed 
character.  How  far  "love  to  God  and 
our  neighbor"  constrains  people — whether 
acting  upon  a  committee  or  yielding  to 
the  demands  of  a  committee — is  not  *for 
us  to  determine.  Where  men  do  right 
voluntarily  it  is  allowable  to'  hope  that 
they  do  it,  on  the  whole,  from  a  right 
motive. 



SELF  -  SUPPORT. 

The  subjoined  letter,  like  others  of  the  same 
character  from  different  parts  of  the  South, 
shows  a  disposition  and  a  growing  ability  on 
the  part  of  the  Freedmen  to  support  their  own 
schools,  it  is  expected  that  this  coming  year 
the  people  will  do  more  than  has  ever  been 
done  before  in  this  direction.  The  transitional 


period  of  emancipation  is  almost  passed.. 
The  people  are  no  longer  starving  and  in  rags.. 
Out  of  the  "  burnt  district"  there  is,  compara- 
tively speaking,  not  much  suffering  at  present, 
nor  is  there  likely  to  be  much — in  comparison 
— any  where  in  the  South  next  year.  The 
crops  both  of  cotton  and  corn  promise  well. 
Society  is  re-organized.  Labor  is  compensated , 
The  people,  black  and  white,  will  be  able  to 
help  in  the  work  of  education.  They  must  be 
made  to  help, — for  their  owbj  sake,  as  well  as 
to  diminish  the  burdens  of  the  North.  Self- 
helpfulness  should  be  one  of  the  first  lessons 
of  their  education.  We  trust  that  the  Bureau 
and  the  Commission  will  give  due  heed  to  this 
matter : 

Plymouth,  N.  C,  May  27th,  1867, 
"  I  hope  before  another  school-year  opens,  the 
people  here  will  have  raised  sufficient  money 
to  put  the  school-house  in  comfortable  repair, 
and  then  they  will  be  able  to  do  something  to- 
wards the  support  of  a  teacher,  though  I  fear 
they  cannot  wholly  support  one.  I  broached 
the  subject  to  them  at  one  of  their  monthly 
business  meetings,  and  it  was  quite  favorably 
received.  They  are  raising  now  between  eight 
and  ten  dollars  per  month  ;  but  to  obtain  any 
considerable  sum  towards  the  support  of  a 
teacher,  I  think  they  will  be  obliged  to  charge 
a  small  tuition  fee,  thereby  reaching  many  who 
are  amply  able,  but  do  not  now  pay  anything. 

"The coming  of  the  hot  weather  is  turning 
our  thoughts  northward,  but  we  shall  leave 
the  scene  of  our  labors  here  with  heartfelt  re- 
gret, as  we  are  quite  attached  to  the  people 
and  they  express  great  regard  for  us.  They 
are  anxious  to  know  if  we  shall  return  here 
next  year,  and  say  if  we  do  they  will  pay  the 
rent  of  the  house  we  are  living  in  during  our 
absence. 

"  We  have  received  a  call  from  the  clergy- 
man of  the  town  and  also  from  several  ladies." 
Yours,  ever  truly, 

Letitia  G.  Campbell. 


JEFFERSON,  ST.  LAWRENCE,  AND 
FRANKLIN  COUNTIES. 

We  commend  to  all  our  friends  in 
these  counties,  our  newly-appointed  Agent. 
Rev.  R.  Pierce,  a  gentleman  whose  experi- 
ence is  large,  and  whose  testimonials 
are  of  the  highest  character.  He  will  be 
glad  to  address  ineetings  in  aid  of  those 
auxiliary  societies  in  his  district,  which 
are  responsible  foi>  the  support  of  teach- 
ers, or  wish  to  be  represented  by  them 
from  next  October.  In  those  communi- 
ties where  our  friends  are  laboring  for  no 
special  object,  Mr.  Pierce  will  take  col- 
lections for  our  Normal  School,  in  Rich- 


250 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


mond,  Va.  The  building  which  i»  of  brick, 
and  situated  on  a  lot  adjoining  our  graded 
school  and  teacher's  home,  on  Navy  Hill, 
is  nearly  completed,  and  will  be  ready  for 
occupation — thanks  to  Gen.  Brown  and 
Superintendent  Manly — in  a  few  weeks. 
Next  October,  we  expect  to  have  from 
fifty  to  a  hundred  of  the  most  promising 
pupils  from  the  different  schools  in  that 
city,  who  are  ambitious  to  be  thorough 
teachers,  under  such  instruction  as  will  fit 
them  to  lead  their  people  into  higher  planes 
of  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  living. 
Competent  colored  teachers  are  needed 
through  all  the  South.  Whoever  helps  to 
meet  this  necessity  does  incalculable  good. 
Let  us  rally  round  this  enterprise,  and 
-carry  it  into  successful  operation. 

HEEKIMER  COUNTY. 

Mr.  J.  TV.  Burghduff — who  has  just  re- 
turned with  his  wife  from  hard  work 
among  the  most  unpromising  subjects  on 
the  outskirts  of  the  National  Capital,  where 
the  evil  effects  of  Slavery  in  ignorance  and 
vice,  have  convinced  him,  that  there  is  no 
such  opportunity  and  demand  for  active 
Christian  philanthropy,  as  among  the 
Freedmen — will  appeal  to  our  friends  in 
Herkimer  County,  for  funds  to  supj:>ort 
himself  and  his  better  half,  under  our 
auspices  next  season.  He  i«  highly  recom- 
mended by  Superintendent  Newton  and 
•others.  Help  him  along,  and  the  cause 
he  represents. 


LATEST  OFFICIAL  REPORTS  FROM 
THE  SOUTH. 

From  an  abstract  furnished  us  through 
the  courtesy  of  the  Central  office,  of  the 
latest  official  reports  made  to  the  Bureau 
by  Assistant  Commissioners,  we  are  ena- 
bled to  present  to  our  readers  the  follow- 
ing epitome : 

VIRGINIA. 

General  O.  Brown,  Assistant  Commis- 
sioner for  Virginia,  under  elate  Richmond, 
Va. ,  May  28,  states  that, 

"  Since  the  passage  of  the  Reconstruction  Act 
there  has  been  a  favorable  change  in  the  con- 
dition of  the  freedmen  throughout  the  entire 
State.  Complaints  of  private  outrage  and  of 
injustice  by  the  judicial  tribunals,  are,  at  least, 
fifty  per  cent,  less  than  during  any  month  of 
the  past  year.  This  change  is  undoubtedly 
due,  in  part,  to  a  wholesome  fear  of  military 


commissions  and  in  part  to  the  new  political 
status  given  the  freedmen,  making  their  good 
will  more  desirable  to  their  white  neighbors. 
As  a  rule,  the  freedmen  are  working  well 
throughout  the  State.  Complaints  of  their  in- 
dolence and  shiftlessness  are  becoming  rare. 
Employers  are  paying  better  wages  and  more 
promptly  than  last  year,  but  not  a  full  com- 
pensation for  tp.e  labor  performed. 

"  The  schools  have  been  doing  well.  The 
sentiment  of  the  whites  in  regard  to  the  edu- 
cation of  the  freedmen,  is  undergoing  a  rapid 
change.  There  are  but  few  places  where  any 
opposition  is  now  manifested,  and  very  many 
in  which  there  is  a  readiness  toco-operate  with 
the  Bureau  in  the  establishment  of  schools." 

NORTH  CAROLINA. 

Under  date  Raleigh,  N.  C,  May  16, 
1867,  Brevet  Major-General  Nelson  A. 
Miles,  Assistant  Commissioner,  reports  : 

"  A  very  satisfactory  condition  of  affairs  among 
all  classes;  but  much  destitution  still  prevails. 
There  are  encouraging  prospects  of  its  being 
soon  materially  decreased.  Crops  promise  well. 
The  very  liberal  donations  from  Northern  phil- 
anthropists, in  connection  with  the  facilities 
afforded  by  the  recent  resolutions  of  Congress, 
have  enabled  the  Bureau  to  reach  cases  of  des- 
titution heretofore  unknown,  or  which  the 
Government  was  unable  to  reach  before.  Far- 
mers are  working  to  the  full  extent  of  their 
resources,  and  large  tracts  of  land  covered 
with  forests,  and  which  have  remained  idle  for 
years,  have  been  taken  up  by  energetic  freed- 
men. As  a  general  rule  contracts  are  strictly 
observed  by  both  parties,  and  complaints  of 
wrongs  or  injuries  inflicted  are  seldom  heard. 
The  educational  work  continues  with  unabated 
ardor.  The  results  are  more  gratifying  than 
during  the  corresponding  months  of  last  year. 
There  are  in  the  State  181  schools,  202  teach- 
ers, 12,849  pupils.  The  initiatory  steps  taken 
toward  conferring  on  the  the  freedmen  the  right 
of  representation,  is  exciting  a  favorable  influ- 
ence upon  them.  They  show  no  undue  elation." 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

On  the  20th  of  May,  the  Bureau  was  in 
receipt  of  a  report  of  an  examination  made 
by  Mr.  T .  J.  Mackey,  into  the  educational 
needs  and  the  alleged  destitution  of  the  peo- 
ple of  South  Carolina.  Mr.  Mackey  states  : 

"  That  he  first  proceeded  to  Charleston,  S.  C, 
and  conferred  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Board 
of  Education  of  that  city. 

"  There  are  three  (3)  free  schools  in  Charles- 
ton, with  an  aggregate  of  1,300  pupils.  For 
the  support  of  these  schools,  thirty  per  cent,  in 
the  amount  of  general  property  tax  and  poll 
tax  paid  by  citizens  of  the  district  is  levied.  The 
amount  thus  raised  for  the  present  year 
amounts  to  $41,000  (forty-one  thousand.) 

"  The  population  of  the  city  is  estimated  at 
forty  thousand  (40,000)  souls,  of  whom  it  is 
believed  more  than  one-half  are  colored.  The 
school  tax  thus  averages  more  than  one  dollar 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


251 


per  capita.  The  larger  and  steadily  increasing 
fraction  of  the  school  tax  is  paid  by  persons  of 
color :  yet  these  and  their  children  are  abso- 
lutely excluded  from  all  the  public  schools. 
The  corporation  of  Charleston  also  supports  a 
high  school  or  academy,  which  receives  a  lim- 
ited number  of  beneficiaries. 

"  These  are  the  entire  educational  facilities 
furnished  by  the  State  of  South  Carolina  to  her 
citizens,  with  the  exception  that  the  recently 
created  University  of  South  Carolina,  is  re- 
quired to  receive  and  educate  one  properly  qual- 
ified student  from  each  district,  free  of  charge, 
or  twenty-nine  (29)  beneficiaries  from  the  whole 
State,  for  each  full  University  course  of  four 
years.  There  is  no  State  system  of  public 
schools.  Beyond  the  limits  of  Charleston,  the 
free  school,  that  great  conservator  ot  public 
morals,  and  hand-maid  of  law,  is  unknown  in 
this  State. 

"  Carefully  compiled  statistics,  based  in  part 
upon  the  muster  rolls  of  the  South  Carolina 
troops  in  the  late  Confederate  army,  reveal  the 
fact  that  at  least  thirty  per  cent,  of  the  white 
population  are  unable  to  read  and  write. 

"  Everywhere  in  the  State  the  colored  people 
were  found  diligent  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge 
and  quick  in  its  requirement.  They  have 
already  proved  that  their  emancipation  was 
not  a  moral  or  political  mistake. 

"  Mr.  Mackey  visited  Columbia,  and  had  an 
interview  with  the  Governor  of  the  State,  who 
produced  a  mass  of  documentary  testimony, 
showing  that  a  terrible  famine  now  exists  in 
South  Carolina.  About  two-thirds  of  the  des- 
titute are  white,  and  one-third  colored.  This 
disproportion  in  favor  of  the  freedmeri"  results 
from  the  fact  that  he  is  more  thrifty  and  self- 
reliant  as  a  laborer  than  the  mass  of  the  whites, 
and  is  preferred  therefore  by  the  majority  of 
employers,  to  whom  also  his  habits  of  obe- 
dience to  orders  commends  him.  The  number 
of  destitute  freedmen,  however,  is  rapidly  in- 
creasing, as  planters  are  daily  compelled,  by 
want  of  subsistence,  to  dismiss  their  laborers. 
The  grain  crops  in  this  State  were  never  more 
promising  than  they  are  now;  they  will  be 
ready  for  harvesting  in  four  or  five  weeks,  and 
then  local  charity  may  aid  in  relieving  the  nee- 
dy or  the  needy  may  help  themselves. 

"  An  extra  session  of  the  Legislature  of  South 
Carolina  was  recently  held,  and  that  body  ap- 
propriated fifty  thousand  ($50,000)  for  the  re- 
lief of  the  destitute.  They  then  appropriated 
$70,000  for  the  purchase  of  wooden  arms  and 
legs  for  ex-Confederate  soldiers ;  and  $10,000 
to  promote  immigration  into  the  State  from 
Europe.  It  is  confidently  believed  that  enough 
money  is  annually  expended  in  building  monu- 
ments and  scattering  roses  over  the  graves  of 
the  Confederate  dead,  to  relieve  from  actual 
want  and  starvation  thousands  of  the  *  Con- 
federate' living.  The  appropriation  of  $10,000 
to  establish  a  Bureau  of  immigration,  is  made 
at  a  time  when  thousands  of  able-bodied  and 
reliable  laborers  are  clamoring  throughout  the 
State  for  work  and  bread.  This  erratic  and  tin- 
timely  legislation  can  only  be  explained  on  the 
hypothesis  that  among  the  statesmen  of  South  j 
Carolina  the  art  of  government  is  one  of  the 
4  lost  arts.' 


"In  addition  to  the  report  of  Mr.  Mackey,  the 
Bureau  was  in  receipt,  on  the  23d  of  May,  of  a 
report  from  Assist.  Com.  Bt.  Maj.-Gen.  R.  K. 
Scott,  made  up  of  sub-reports  from  liia  assist- 
ants, from  which  we  condense  the  following : 

EDGEFIELD. 

"  The  feeling  of  the  whites  toward  the  colored 
people  in  this  District  is  improving.  Some 
freedmen  are  renting  plantations  and  paying 
one-fourth  of  the  crop  as  rent.  Few  complaints 
are  made.  Crop  prospects  favorable.  Less 
land  is  cultivated,  but  it  is  cultivated  better. 
Fearful  destitution.  Among  the  blacks  it  is 
confined  to  the  old,  infirm,  and  women  with 
children  but  without  husbands.  Among  the 
whites  it  comprises  the  whole  class  known  as 
'  poor  whites,'  and  the  widows  of  men  who 
fell  in  the  war.  Many  would  have  starved 
had  they  not  received  government  aid. 

ANDERSON. 

"  In  this  District  corn  has  been  distributed 
by  the  agents  of  the  Southern  Relief  Commis- 
sion to  both  whites  and  colored,  affording  great 
relief.  In  Columbia  sub-District,  '  great  des- 
titution' is  reported,  and  due  acknowledgments 
are  made  to  the  Southern  Relief  Commission 
for  assistance.  Crops  promise  well,  and  plant- 
ers and  freedmen  alike  feel  the  necessity  of  ex- 
ertion. 

SUMTEK. 

"  In  this  District,  schools  for  freed  children 
are  prosperous.  Kindly  sentiments  are  gaining 
ground  toward  the  blacks.  The  schools  in 
Columbia  are  extraordinarily  efficient.  Plant- 
ers visit  the  Bureau  to  get  schools  started. 

CHARLESTON  SCB-DISTRICT. 

"  Freed  people  industrious.  Great  destitution  ; 
but  much  alleviated  by  the  generous  assistance 
of  the  Southern  Relief  Commission. 

DARLINGTON  DISTRICT. 

"  The  freedmen  are  working  admirably.  Much 
trouble  experienced  by  freedmen  who  have  not 
yet  received  their  pay  for  last  year.  Many  of 
the  freedmen  seem  to  have  no  regard  for  the 
marriage  relation.  Many  of  them  think  they 
have  a  right  to  whip  their  wives.  The  desti- 
tution is  appalling.  Planters  are  unable  to 
procure  food  for  themselves,  and  their  stock  is 
dying  for  want  of  provender." 

GEORGIA. 

Colonel  C .  C.  Sibley,  Assistant  Commis- 
sioner, under  date  Macon,  Ga..  May  23d, 
reports  : 

"  Accounts  from  every  part  of  the  State 
show  an  improved  condition  in  regard  to  labor. 
The  freedmen  are  better  paid  and  work  better 
than  at  any  time  since  the  war.  They  are  bet- 
ter treated  and  there  is  less  disposition  to  drive 
them,  but  serious  outrages  are  still  frequent, 
no  less  thau  four  murders  of  freedmen  being 
reported  within  the  last  two  weeks. 

"  In  morals  the  colored  people  are  improving 
though  not  so  rapidly  nor  satisfactorily  as  is 
wished. 


252 


"  The  destitution  is  great,  and  increased  by 
the  inability  of  the  planters  to  supply  provis- 
ions for  full  operations.  Cofbniissary  stores 
were  issued  during  the  month  by  the  Bureau. 
The  charitable  associations  of  the  North  have 
responded  nobly  to  the  calls  made  upon  them 
for  the  destitute  of  this  State.  There  have 
been  received  and  distributed,  from  the  New 
York  Southern  Famine  Relief  Commission, 
over  28,000  bushels  corn ;  from  the  Philadel- 
phia Southern  Famine  Relief  Commission,  3,500 
bushels,  and  a  large  amount  from  the  South- 
western Relief  Association  at  Louisville,  and 
the  Baptist  Association,  through  Rev.  Mr. 
Hornady  of  Atlanta. 

"  Number  of  schools  in  operation  206  ;  teach- 
ers 213 ;  pupils  12,954.  There  is  an  increase 
of  60  schools ;  59  teachers,  and  2,691  pupils 
over  the  preceding  month.  The  interest  in  the 
subject  of  schools  is  unabated  and  the  indica- 
tions are  very  promising  for  the  future.  An 
educational  convention  was  held  May  3d,  at 
which  delegates  from  more  than  half  of  the 
counties  were  present.  It  is  believed  this 
meeting  will  result  in  great  good.  The  plan 
of  the  Georgia  Educational  Association  was 
adopted,  and  a  Board  of  Education  appointed, 
composed  of  officers  of  the  Bureau,  agents  of 
Northern  associations,  and  leading  colored  men, 
to  push  the  work  forward  with  renewed  energy. 
The  opposition  to  the  education  of  the  freed- 
men  is  disappearing,  and  the  work  has  not 
been  materially  interfered  with,  except  in  the 
burning  of  the  school  house  of  Jonesboro',  Fay- 
ette County,  by  unknown  incendiaries.'' 

FLORIDA. 

Under  date  Jacksonville,  Fla,,  May 
18th,  by  Colonel  Jno.  T.  Sprague,  Assistant 
Commissioner,  reports : 

"  Idleness  has  decreased.  Higher  wages  are 
paid  than  formerly,  and  the  freedman,  conscious 
of  his  improved  position  among  his  fellow-men, 
and  desirous  to  fulfill  his  obligations,  works 
with  more  zeal. 

"The  dipesitionof  citizens,  and  former  own- 
ers, toward  colored  persons,  is  more  considerate 
and  forbearing  than  it  was  last  year.  Then  it 
was  feared  the  freed  people  would  be  thrown 
upon  the  community  as  vagrants  and  depend- 
ents. They  have  churches  and  schools,  and 
exert  themselves  to  be  useful  members  of  the 
community.  The  right  of  suffrage  they  begin 
to  understand,  and  will,  at  the  approaching 
election,  improve  the  opportunity  to  vote.  The 
most  striking  feature  in  the  reports  of  the  va- 
rious agents  of  the  Bureau  and  of  inspecting 
officers,  is  the  absence  of  complaint  against 
freedmen,  and  their  general  good  conduct." 

LOUISIANA. 

Under  date  New  Orleans,  La.,  June 
6, 1867,  Brevet  Major-General  J.  A.  Mower, 
Assistant  Commissioner,  reports  : 

"  The  condition  of  the  freedmen  in  the  State 
is  gradually  improving,  the  old  prejudices  are 
dying  out,  and  in  all  those  parts  of  the  State 
which  are  thickly  settled,  or  which  are  situated 
on  the  rivers,  or  highways  of  travel,  his  rights 
are  respected  and  justice  rendered  him  by  the 


j  civil  authorities.  In  the  remote  and  sparsely 
|  settled  portions  of  the  State,  the  civil  authori- 
ties are  in  many  cases  afraid  of  the  despera- 
|  does  who  ill-treat  the  freedmen.  The  appoint- 
j  ment  of  Registrars  under  the  Military  Bill  and 
|  the  assignment  of  troops  to  the  different 
parishes  for  their  protection,  will  have  a  very 
j  beneficial  effect  in  checking  crimes  committed 
I  against  the  freedmen. 

"  The  high  stage  of  water  and  the  breaking 
I  of  the  levees  have  caused  the  inundation  of 
j  two-thirds  of  the  alluvial  lands  of  the  State, 
and  will  discourage  the  freedmen  to  a  great 
degree — a  large  proportion  of  the  contracts 
being  made  for  a  share  of  the  crop  raised. 

"  The  educational  department  of  the  Bureau 
will,  in  some  Districts,  suffer  greatly  from  the 
effects  of  the  overflow,  but  under  the  protec- 
tion afforded  by  the  detachments  of  troops 
scattered  through  the  State,  schools  will  be- 
established  in  localities  where  it  has  not  been 
considered  safe  or  prudent  to  establish  them 
heretofore." 

ARKANSAS. 

Under  date  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  May  25th, 
1867,  Brevet  Brigadier  General  C.  H. 
Smith,  Assistant  Commissioner,  reports, 
that 

"  There  are  only  twenty- eight  agents  in  the 
State,  which  contains  fifty- seven  counties. 
Each  agent  has  to  superintend  two  or  more 
counties,  while  the  means  of  communication 
are  more  limited  perhaps  than  in  any  other 
State.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  an  agent  to 
have  a  very  definite  idea  of  what  is  going  on 
in  remote  parts  of  so  large  a  district.  Irregu- 
larities and  abuses  occur  chiefly  in  remote 
places  and  would  be  greatly  decreased,  if  an 
increased  number  of  agents  could  be  employed. 
Many  of  the  agents  are  excellent  men.  A  few, 
however,  do  little  or  no  good. 

"  Arrangements  have  been  made  for  building 
six  school-houses,  one  in  each  of  the  six  larger 
towns  in  the  State.    One  is  nearly  completed, 
two  are  fairly  under  way,  and  all  will  be  ready 
to  open  within  a  few  months.  Plantation 
schools  could  be  established  in  great  numbers 
if  teachers  could  be  had.    Opposition  to  these 
schools  has  disappeared  before  their  zealous 
I  advocates,  and  now  it  is  hardly  met  with  at 
!  all.   Applications  for  teachers  come  from  every 
!  part  of  the  State,  including  nearly  every  county, 
but  there  is  not  a  supply  for  the  demand." 

MISSISSIPPI. 

j     Under  date  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  15th, 
;  1867,  Brevet  Brigadier  General  Gillem, 
I  Assistant  Commissioner,  says : 
j     "The  reports  of  the  various  Sub- Assistant 
j  Commissioners  concur  in  the  statement  that 
i  the  freedmen  are  working  industriously,  and 
]  that  their  general  condition  is  encouraging. 
The  prospects  for  a  crop  are  at  present  very 
flattering.    The  sub-Assistant  Commissioner 
of  Grenada  sub-District  reports  :    1  Some  few 
planters  have  divided  their  lands,  sc  that  each 
family  of  freedmen  work  by  themselves,  each 
having  a  cabin  and  pasturage  assigned,  with 
the  privilege  of  raising  poultry,  pork,  &c,  for 


253 


themselves.  Plough  stock  and  tools  are  loaned 
them  ;  they  are  to  receive  one-half  of  the  crop 
raised ;  and  this  management  will  doubtless 
be  productive  of  industry  and  thrift  among 
them.'  In  Grenada,  Lauderdale,  Natchez, 
Yazoo  and  Pass  Christian  sub-Districts,  many 
complaints  are  made  of  unfairness  on  the  part  of 
planters  in  the  settlements  for  last  year's  labor. 
The  greater  portion  of  the  contracts  made  this 
year  are  reported  to  be  on  equitable  terms,  the 
freedmen  generally  working  for  an  interest  in 
the  crop. 

"  The  Sub- Assistant  Commissioners  for  Gre- 
nada, Natchez  and  Greenville,  report  that  the 
disposition  of  white  toward  colored  citizens  is 
changing  for  the  better,  and  gradually  adapt- 
ing itself  to  the  new  order  of  things. 

"  Schools  are  reported  to  be  in  flourishing 
condition  throughout  the  State.  The  sub- Assist- 
ant Commissioner  for  Grenada  says,  '  In  and 
about  this  place  every  colored  child  one  meets 
has  a  spelling-book  in  his  hands  or  sticking 
out  of  his  pocket,  and  no  children  ever  learned 
faster.' 

"  The  sub-Assistant  Commissioner  for  Gre- 
nada sub-District,  reports  that  considerable 
disregard  of  the  marriage  relation,  and  among 
young  colored  females,  much  immorality,  pre- 
vails. The  Sub-Assistant  Commissioner  for 
Pass  Christian,  says :  '  While  some  comply 
with  the  law,  others  insist  on  having  as  many 
wives  or  husbands  as  they  wish  or  can  get.  I 
know  of  no  case  in  which  the  civil  laws  are 
enforced  to  prevent  this  licentious  practice.' 
In  Natchez  and  Brookhaven  sub-Districts,  the 
freed  people  are  reported  as  improving  in  this 
respect.  In  Greenville  sub-District  the  freed 
people  take  out  licenses  and  are  married  ac- 
cording to  the  law  of  the  State. 

"  Throughout  the  State  the  freed  people  re- 
ceive much  fairer  treatment  before  the  courts 
than  formerly.  The  civil  authorities  generally 
endeavor  to  administer  justice.  In  Yazoo  sub- 
District  thirty-eight  complaints  were  made  by 
freedmen  that  fire-arms  had  been  taken  from 
them  under  the  old  State  laws.  The  arms  have 
been  restored  in  every  instance  but  one,  when 
the  value  in  money  was  returned  instead. 

"In  Yazoo  and  Brookhaven  sub-Districts, 
many  complaints  of  binding  out  the  children 
of  freedmen  without  their  consent,  have  been 
investigated,  and  the  children  in  nearly  every 
instance  restored  to  their  parents." 

TENNESSEE. 

Under  date  Nashville,  Tenn.,  May  16th, 
1867,  Brevet  Major-General  W.  P.  Carlin, 
Assistant  Commissioner,  reports,  that 

"  Colored  schools  are  in  a  flourishing  condi- 
tion throughout  the  State,  especially  in  Nash- 
ville, Memphis  and  other  cities.  But  few  have 
been  established  in  the  country  or  smaller 
towns  and  villages,  as  the  Northern  societies 
cannot  send  enough  teachers  for  the  whole 
population,  and  the  Southern  people  take  no 
interest  in  the  matter. 

"It  was  hoped  that,  after  the  enfranchise- 
ment of  the  colored  people,  the  County  and 
State  authorities  would  establish  freedmen's 


schools,  but  nothing  has  been  done  in  this  di- 
rection, save  mere  legislative  enactment. 

"  During  the  month,  Rev.  Mr.  Burt,  by  di- 
rection of  the  Assistant  Commissioner,  made 
a  tour  through  East  Tennessee,  to  inspect 
schools,  to  procure  by  gift  or  purchase,  sites 
for  school  houses,  to  see  that  titles  were  per- 
fected, and  to  provide  for  the  building  of  at 
least  eight  school  houses.  He  found  the  colored 
people  industrious  and  prosperous,  and  gener- 
ally, a  good  feeling  existing  between  whites 
and  blacks.  There  was  but  little  destitution  ; 
none  that  could  not  be  relieved  by  the  County 
authorities  if  they  were  willing;  but  they 
seem  to  expect  the  Bureau  and  Northern  be- 
nevolence to  provide  for  all  colored  paupers. 

"  Two  outrages  are  reported.  To  avoid  mil- 
itary interference  the  civil  authorities  have 
arrested  the  offenders,  except  a  few  who  fled. 

"  It  is  manifest  that  no  white  man  for  kil- 
ling a  negro  will  be  convicted  of  murder  by  a 
Tennessee  jury.  But  for  beating  or  other 
abuses  of  freedmen,  fines  are  frequently  impo- 
sed on  white  men. 

"  Some  evil  is  found  to  result  from  the  exci- 
ting political  canvass  now  going  on  in  Ten- 
nessee. The  contest  is  accompanied  by  the 
usual  amount  of  calumny,  falsehood  and  dis- 
honesty. 

"  Some  of  the  colored  people  are  even  base 
enough  to  denounce  this  Bureau,  which  has 
been  a  shield  between  them  and  practical  sla- 
very, and  which  has  saved  thousands  of  them 
from  starvation." 

KENTUCKY. 

Brevet  Brigadier  General  S.  Burbank, 
Assistant  Commissioner,  under  date  Louis- 
ville, Ky.,  May  29th,  1867,  forwards  a  re- 
port prepared  by  Brigadier  General  John 
Ely,  Chief  Superintendent,  which  shows 

"  A  favorable  condition  of  the  freedmen  in 
regard  to  industry  and  labor. 

"  The  number  of  contracts  made  and  ap- 
proved during  the  month  was  132.  Number 
of  persons  contracted  with,  140.  The  average 
rate  of  wages  per  month  paid  for  males,  inclu- 
ding quarters  and  rations  $14  17,  for  female?, 
$6  49. 

"  The  number  of  outrages  and  cruelties  re- 
ported during  the  month,  as  committed  by 
whites  upon  colored,  was,  murdered  three  (3), 
shot  (wounded)  three  (3),  otherwise  maltreated, 
13.  Totalis. 

"  The  number  ol  freedmen's  schools  in 
operation  during  the  month,  was  83,  seventy- 
one  (71)  day,  and  twelve  (12)  night  schools. 
The  whole  number  of  pupils  in  attendance, 
was  4,963.  This  is  an  increase  of  nine  (9) 
schools  and  320  scholars  over  the  previous 
month. 

"  Twenty -eight  schools,  with  an  attendance 
of  2,350  scholars,  are  furnished  with  teach- 
ers by  Benevolent  Societies,  but  rent  is  paid 
for  the  colored  church  buildings  in  which  they 
are  held,  the  money  being  applied  toward  the 
tuition  of  the  poorer  children. 

"  The  remaining  43  schools  with  attendance 
of  998  scholars,  are  support od  entirely  by  the 


254 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


freedmen.  The  total  expense  for  the  support 
of  all  these  schools  during  the  month,  was 
$2,465  50.  The  freedmen  paid  $1,101  75  of 
this  amount.  Expense  per  capita  for  the 
scholars  taught,  was  50  cents.  The  freedmen 
continue  to  evince  increased  interest  in  the 
education  of  their  children." 


THE  QUESTION  OF  PAY.' 

The  following  resolution  was  adopted  on 
the  24th  inst. ,  by  the  New  York  Branch  : 

Resolved,  That  in  the  judgment  of  this  As- 
sociation, it  is  important  that  our  schools  should 
be  maintained  as  free  schools ;  and  that  it  is 
also  important  that  some  plan  should  be 
adopted  by  which  the  people  for  whose  bene- 
fit they  are  established  should  bear  a  share  of 
the  pecuniary  burden  of  their  support. 

What  this  "  plan"  should  be  is  a  question 
which  calls  for  settlement.  That  of  charging 
each  pupil  ten  cents  a  week,  has  not,  as  yet, 
been  found  practicable.  It  has  been  proposed 
to  establish  separate  schools  for  those  who  are 
able  and  willing  to  pay ;  but  these  would  not 
be  free  schools. 

After  discussing  the  question  at  some  length, 
the  Association,  in  addition  to  the  resolution 
above,  passed  another,  appointing  a  committee 
to  confer  with  friends  of  the  cause,  who  would 
be  assembled  in  Boston,  on  the  11th  inst ;  that 
being  the  day  appointed  for  a  Festival  to  be  given 
by  the  New  England  Branch,  to  their  Teachers 
coming  home  for  vacation.  It  is  an  important 
question,  and  deserves  immediate  attention. 


HOW  IS  THE   MONEY  USED  ? 

This  is  a  question  that  is  often  asked; 
and  it  is  sometimes  followed  or  preceded 
by  another:  "Does  it  do  any  good?"  The 
following  letter  from  Mrs.  C.  E.  M'Kay, 
distributor  of  supplies  appointed  for  the 
Teachers  Committee  of  the  New  York 
Branch,  will  serve  to  answer  in  part  both 
of  these  queries: 

Petersburg,  Va.,  April  22d,  18G7. 
E.  C.  Estes,  Esq., 

Dear  Sir  : — "  I  have  received  during  the 
months  of  March  and  April  supplies  of  cloth- 
ing to  the  amount  of  $3,533  ;  money  $189  34  ; 
spades  and  hoes,  $282 ;  making  a  total  of 
$4,004  34  ;  which,  added  to  that  for  January 
and  February,  $2,396  86,  makes  a  total  for  the 
winter  of  $6,401  20.  Of  the  clothing,  about 
$1,000  worth  came  from  Bangor,  Me.,  and  a 
very  large  proportion  of  the  remainder  from 
England ;  $1,800  having  been  received  from 
Mr.  Cadbury,  of  Philadelphia.  Of  the  money, 
$50  came  from  the  Freedman's  Aid  Association 
of  Bangor,  and  $84  70  from  the  Central  Church 
Sabbath-school  of  that  city. 

"  The  last-mentioned  donation  was  sent  in 
response  to  an  appeal  I  made  to  the  school  for 


aid  in  carrying  on  a  colored  school  which  I  es- 
tablished in  the  country,  five  miles  from  Peters- 
burg, taught  by  a  colored  teacher. 

"  During  the  month  for  which  it  has  been  in 
operation,  it  has  been  an  entire  success,  having 
about  seventy  in  the  day  school,  from  twelve 
to  fifteen  at  night,  and  one  hundred  in  the 
Sabbath-school. 

"  The  balance  of  the  money  not  required  for 
that  purpose  has  been  mostly  expended  in 
seed-potatoes  and  garden  seeds.  The  supplies 
have  been  divided  as  far  as  it  was  possible  to 
do  so,  among  the  mos.t  needy  of  the  sixteen 
counties  composing  this  district,  for  which 
there  has  been  no  other  gratuitous  distribution 
of  clothing  for  women  and  children. 

"With  many  thanks  for  your  kind  and 
valuable  assistance,  I  remain,  yours  truly." 

C.;E.  M'Kay. 


DELAWARE. 

We  have  good  accounts  from  this  recently 
awakened  State.  Schools  are  increasing  in 
number  and  the  interest  taken  in  them  by  the 
whites  is  widening  in  extent. 

One  of  our  teachers  in  Wilmington,  who 
took  her  school  in  the  early  part  of  April, 
writes  on  the  19th  of  June,  as  follows  : 

"You  will  be  pleased  to  know  that  my 
sholars  are  doing  finely  in  the  matter  of  punc- 
tuality, order,  and  quiet.  It  is  a  real  comfort 
to  see  them  so  orderly.  Imagine  some  half 
dozen  running  across  the  room  to  have  a  fight, 
or  perhaps  stopping  in  the  middle  of  a  lesson 
to  strike,  dispute  and  quarrel  with  some  other 
in  the  class.  Now,  it  is  the  patient,  waiting, 
uplifted  finger  to  catch  the  teachers  eye  for 
permission  to  leave  their  seat,  or  speak  to  her. 
Then  again  the  pleasant  1  Good  morning  ;'  the 
inimitable  bow  must  be  seen  to  be  apprecia- 
ted. I  wonder  sometimes  if  they  can  be  the 
same  beings ;  they  are  so  eager  to  do  me  a 
favor. 

"  I  sometimes  flatter  myself  they  even  love 
me,  at  least  if  bouquets  are  any  indication  of 
affection  on  their  part.  Many  times  I  have 
more  than  I  can  carry  home,  of  the  most  ex- 
quisite flowers  and  roses  I  ever  saw.  I  am 
very  grateful  for  this  bright  spot,  it  is  the  sun- 
shine after  the  storm." 


Alpliabetical  List  of  aU  Employes  in  the  South- 
ern Field  of  tlie  N.  Y.  Branch  Freedman's 
Union  Commission,  between  October  1st,  1866, 
and  July  1st,  1867. 

Name.  Location. 

Adams,  Miss  Lucy  O  Trent  Camp,  N.  C. 

Adams,    "   Sarah  A   "       "  " 

Aldrich,  Mrs.  L.  G  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Allinghani,  Mr.  E  Washington,  D.  C. 

AUingham,  Mrs.  B   '«  " 

Alvord,  Major  H,  E  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Anderson,  Miss  M  Morgan  Creek,  Md. 

Andrews,  Mr.  O.  T  Cleveland,  Tenn. 

Baker,  Miss  M.  N  Richmond,  Va. 

Bacon,   "    H.  E  Beaufort,  8.  C. 

Bachelor,  Mr.  D.  T  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C. 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


255 


Bachelor,  Miss  E.  B  Roanoke  Island,  8.  C. 

Barrett,      "   G.  M  Trent  Camp,  N.  C. 

Baldwin,  Mrs.  E  Kendall  Greene,  D.  C. 

Bennett,  Miss  E.  P  Newberu,  N.  C. 

Bealls,        "   E.  E  Columbia,  8.  C. 

Bent,         "   C.  R  Gainesville,  Fla. 

Belden,  Mrs.  D.  A  Greenville,  S.  C. 

Beebe,  Mr.  J.  A  Edenton,  N.  C. 

Blood,  Miss  CM  Raleigh,  N.  C. 

Blanchard,  Miss  L  C  Alexandria,  Va. 

Booth,  "   L.  A  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Brown,         "   E.  J  Alexandria,  Va. 

Brown,         "   E.  M  Washington,  D.  C. 

Brown,         "   8.  G  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Bigelow,  Mr.  A.  M  Aiken,  S.  C. 

Burghduff,  Mr.  J.  W  Washington,  D.  C. 

Burghduff,  Mrs.  J.  W   "  " 

Burbank,  Mr.  A.  C  Lawrenceville,  Va. 

Burbank,  Mrs.  L.  H   **  " 

Cathan,  Miss  M.  H  Lady's  Island,  S.  C. 

Campbell,  "   A.  M  Trent  Camp,  N.  C. 

Campbell,  "   L.  G  Plymouth,  N.  C. 

Chase,      "   J.  C  Washington,  D.  C. 

Clift,        "   A.  J  Oxford,  N.  C. 

Cooke,      "   M.  A  Richmond,  Va. 

Cooke,      "   M.  J   "  " 

Coolie,      "    T  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Corwin,  Mr.  T  Alexandria,  Va. 

Corwin,  Mrs.  D,  C   "  " 

Coit,  Miss  R.  A  Magnolia,  Fla. 

Crane,  "   J.  E  Columbia,  S.  C. 

Crawford,  Mr.  S  Anderson,  8.  C. 

Crane,  Miss  K.  G  Washington,  D.  C. 

Crockett,  "   H.  M  Woodstock,  Va. 

Cross,  Mr.  8.  G  Townville,  N.  C. 

Dennis,  Miss  S  Alexandria,  Va. 

Dennett,  Mr.N.  C  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Dewey,  Miss  C.  E  Washington,  D.  C. 

Dore,  Mr.  J.  S  Uniontown,  D.  C. 

Dore,  Mrs.  J.  S   "  " 

Doolittle,  Miss  H.  A  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Dodge,        "   H.  A  Wilmington,  Del. 

Eastman,     *'    L  Christiansburgh,  Va. 

Elwell,        "   R.  H  Washington,  D.  C. 

Evans,        •*   H.  J  Greenville,  S.  C. 

Everson,     "   8.  C.  W  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Evans,  Mr.  Charles  Milford,  Del. 

Fales,  Miss  M.  E  Alexandria,  Va. 

Fernald,  "   A.  S  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. 

Ferribow,  Miss  P  Edenton,  N.  C. 

Fisher,  Mrs.  H.  C  Alexandria,  Va. 

Fogg,      "   E.  M  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Fortune,  "   J.  S  Edgerly  Plantation,  S.C 

Fortune,  Miss  G   M  "  " 

Gilchrist,    "   E.  G  Washington,  D.  C. 

Gorman,    "   Agnes  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Greene,      "    J  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Gregg,       '*   F.  E  

Graves,      "   F  Raleigh,  N.  C. 

Harris,       "    H.  L  Pleasant  Retreat,  S.  C. 

Harris,  Mrs.  A  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Haley,  Miss  S.  A  Columbia,  8.  C. 

Hall,       "    A.  C  Still  Pond,  Md. 

Hart,  Mrs.  M.  C  Washington,  D.  C. 

Hawley,  Miss  E.  R  Alexandria,  Va. 

Hamilton,  "   H.  E  Washington,  D.  C. 

Hammond,  Mr.  H.  C  Columbia,  S.  C. 

Henry,  Miss  C.  J  Palatka,  Fla. 

Herbert,  "   A.  B  Trent  Camp,  N.  C. 

Henderson,  Miss  M  Columbia,  8.  C. 


Hill,  Miss  M.  A  Pocahontas,  Va. 

Higgina,  Miss  M  Petersburgh,  " 

Hill,  Mr.  I  Oxford,  N.  C. 

Hicks,  Mrs.  C.  M  Anderson,  S.  C. 

Holden,  Miss  8.  J.  8.;  Greenville,  8.  C. 

Hopkins,  Mr.  C.  T  Greenville,  8.  C. 

Howard,  Miss  A.  T  Quaker  Neck,  Md. 

Hoy,  Miss  M.  L  Burkittsville,  Md. 

Hubbard,  Miss  E  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Hubbard,      "    E.  A  Washington,  D.  C. 

I  sham,  Miss  E.  B  Fernandina,  Fla. 

Jones,  Miss  C  Richmond,  Va. 

Jones,     "   A.  8  Alexandria,  Va. 

Johnson,  Miss  Kate  K  Petersburgh,  Va. 

King,         "   E.  E   «« 

Kent,         "   C.  J  Columbia,  8.  C. 

Knapp,  Miss  8.  A  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Lawton,  Mr.  F.  A  Jones'  Church,  D.  C. 

Lazenby,  "  J.  E...  Emmaus  P.  O.  Va. 

Lord,  Miss  J.  A  Washington,  D.  C. 

Loomis,  "   C.  H  Columbia,  8.  C. 

Lynch,  "   J.  M  Elkton,  Md. 

Lyon,    "    M.  E  Red  House  Plan'n,  S.  C , 

Manly,  Rev.  R.  M  Richmond,  Va. 

Manly,  Mrs.  R.  M  

McKinney,  Miss  J.  A  Columbia,  8.  C. 

McKay,  Mrs.  C.  E  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Merrick,  Miss  C  Magnolia,  Fla. 

Montgomery,  Mr.  J  Charleston,  8.  C. 

Morgan,  Miss  F.  A  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Moaher,     "    M.  L  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Newton,  Mr.  A.  E  Washington,  D.  C. 

Nickens,  Miss  M  Alexandria,  Va. 

O'Donnall,  Mrs.  N   .Columbia,  8.  C. 

Oliver,  Miss  M.  E  Fernandina,  Fla. 

Orton,     "    C.  8  Alexandria,  Va. 

Osgood,   "   L.  E  Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Palmer,   "   J.  E  Uniontown,  D.  C. 

Parsons,  M   E  Columbia,  8.  C. 

Parsons,  "   8.  P  Washington,  D.  C. 

Park,  Mr.  C...\  Abingdon,  Va. 

Park,  Mrs.  E   "  " 

Perkins,  Miss  F.  A  Pleasant  Retreat,  S.  C. 

Perkins,    "    M.  E   "         "  •• 

Peckham,  "   A.  C  Pocahontas,  Va. 

Peduzzi,    "   E.  8  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. 

Philbrook, "   E.  A   "  " 

Pillsbury,  Mr.  G  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Pillsbury,  Mrs.  A.  T   "  " 

Primus,  Miss  R  Royal  Oak,  Md. 

Renne,     "    Z  Richmond,  Va. 

Reford,     ««    A  Micanopy,  Fla. 

Richmond,  Miss  E,  E  Chester,  S.  C. 

Robertson,    "    H  Alexandria,  Va. 

Roper,         "    Ella  Newborn,  N.  C. 

Rosier,         "   H.  B  Gravel  Hill,  Md. 

Rowell,        **    M.  S  Richmond,  Va. 

Rogers,        •*   V..  L  Rippon  Hall,  Va. 

Rogers,  Mr.  J,  Dover,  Del. 

Sasportas,  Miss  M  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Scott,  Miss  C  Columbia,  S.  C. 

Seely,    "   H.  E  Magnolia,  Fla. 

Simpson,  Mr.  J  Pineville,  S.  C. 

Simmons,  Miss  H.  A  Washington,  D.  C. 

Simmons,    "   A.  8   "  " 

Smith,        "    C  St  Augustine,  Fla. 

Smith,        M    J.  B  Newborn,  N.  0. 

Smith,  Mr.  D.  E  Edenton,  N.  C. 

Smith.  Mrs.  D.  E   ■ 

Strattou,  Miss  M.  E  Jacksonville.  Fla. 


256 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


.Stone,    Miss  M.  E  Aiken,  S.  C. 

"Varnum,    "   E.  W  Magnolia,  Fla. 

Wakeinan,  "   M.  E  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Wager,       "   M.  A.  E  Richmond,  Va. 

Walrad,      "   M.  E  Raleigh,  N.  C. 

Waugh,      *'    C.  E  James'  Plantation, 

Walker,  Mrs.. A  Wilmington,  Del. 

Watson,  Mr."W.  L  Baltimore,  Md. 

Waters,  Miss  A  Alexandria,  Va. 

Webster,       M  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Wight,     "   M.  A  Beaufort,  S.  C. 

Winsor,  Mrs.  A.  B  Oxford,  N.  C. 

Williams,  Miss  C.  E  Kendall  Green,  D. 

Williams,  Mrs.  M.  M  St.  Augustine,  Fla. 

Wildes,      "    M.  T  Plymouth,  N.  C. 

Wright,  Dr.  T.  G  Columbia,  S.  C. 

Wright,  Miss  Washington,  D.  C. 

Wright,    "  S  

Wright,  Mr.  E  Columbia,  S.  C. 

Younglove,  Miss  F.  E  Petersburgh,  Va. 

Nineteen  (19)  of  these  Teachees  ake  Colored. 


N.C. 


^Auxiliary  Societies,  JST.  Y.  Branch  Ft 
man's     Union     Commission,  siqipor 
Teachers  between  October  1st,  1866, 
July  1st,  1867. 

Name 

Albany  

Auburn  

Anthon  Memorial  Church,  N.  Y  

Buffalo  

Binghampton  

Belleville,  Woodville,  Mannsville  and  Ellis  Village.. 

Brooklyn,  Church  of  the  Saviour  

.Brooklyn,  Plymouth  Church  

Butler,  Wolcott,  Huron,  Rose,  Savannah,  Sodus, 

and  Fair  Haven  

.-Cohoes  and  Rev.  Geo.  Storrs  

Catskill  

=  Cazenovia  and  New  Woodstock  

Cooperstown  

Corning  ..  

Crown  Point  

Clyde  and  Galen.  

Cortland  Co  

Champlain  

Carmel  and  Oneida  

Claverack  

Clifton  Springs..^   

Cayuga  Co  

Delaware  Co  

Elmira  

East  Boston,  Mass  

Fulton,  N.  Y  

Georgetown,  Mass.,  partially  

Greenwich,  N.  Y.  &  Hatfield,  Mass  

Goshen  and  Vicinity  

Geneva  and  Vicinity  

Hastings  

Hartford,  Conn  

Herkimer  Co.  and  Little  Falls  

Irvington  

Ithaca  

Kingston  k  Rondout  

Lanaingburgh  

Lyons  and  Lockport  


eed- 

iing 
and 

m 


Lewiston,  Suspension  Bridge  and  Niagara  Falls  

Malone  

Middletown,  N.  Y.  (partially)  

Marion,  Ontario,  Walworth  axd  Macedon  

Newburgh  ;  

Nyack  

Nyack,  (Rockland  Destitute)  

North  Shore  

Norwich  

Nanuet  and  vicinity  

Newark  

Newburyport,  Mass  

New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  Vicinity  

North  ville  

Newark,  N.  J  

Oneonta,  Washington  Heights,  &c.  

Orange,  N.  J  

Ogdensburgh  

Oswego  

Penn  Yan  

Palniyra  

Potsdam   ^ 

Plattsburgh  and  Vicinity  

Portland,  Me  

Poughkeepsie  

Portsmouth,  N.  H  

Piermont,  Ramapo  and  Vicinity  

Rome  

Schenectady  

Strykersville  

Sing  Sing  

Syracuse  

Tompkins  Co.  (Northern  Section)  

Tompkins  Co.  (Southern  Section)  

Tomhannock  and  Schaghticoke  

Utica  

Weedsport  

Watertown  

Yonkers. . .   


CONTRIBUTIONS. 

New-York  Bbanch. 
Receipts  by  Edward  F.  Davison,  Acting  Treasurer, 
from  May  29th,  to  June  18th,  1867. 

FROM  AGENTS. 

Rev.  Mr.  Brett,  June  3d,  $25  94. 

Rev.  Mr.  Bradley,  in  N.  J.,  June,  8th,  $563  00. 

Rev.  Mr.  Colton,  in  N.  J.,  June  17th,  $119  81. 

FROM  AUXILIARY  SOCIETIES. 

Plattsburgh,  through  Rev.  Fred.  Widmer,  $32  35  ; 
Vernon,  12  50  ;  Portland,  Me.,  3,430  00  ;  Cortland,  20  53 
Sodus,  80  88;  Newburgh,  91  50;  Marion,  101  14;  Oswego, 
40  00;  Palmyra,  125  00;  Tompkins  Co.,  55  42;  Champlain, 
77  04;  Cazenovia,  100  00;  Catskill,  35  00;  Royalton,  3  00; 
Nanuet,  250  00;  Hubbardstown,  Mass.,  52  50;  Corning, 
N.  Y.,  125  00;  Carmel,  35  00,  Oneida,  7  00. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Geo.  W.  Sholton,  Birmingham,  Conn.,  $40  00;  Rev. 
E.  Furbish,  New  Hartford,  5  00;  3d  R.  D.  Ch.,  Raritan 
N.  J.,  2  00;  Merchandise  sold,  78  28;  Mrs.  Verplanck, 
Fishkill,  5  00;  Mr.  Dike,  for  Rockland,  Co.,  Teachers', 
Fund,  50  00;  C.  C.  Kingsley,  Utica,  250  00;  R.  D.  Ch., 
Mt.  Vernon,  55  73;  MissM.  N.  Stickney  and  sister,  2  00; 
W.  Howard  White,  Staten  Island,  5  00. 


V  i  I  E 


mcrican  Jreedman. 

[Address,  30  Vesey  Street;  or,  P.  O.  Box  5,733.] 


Vol.  II.] 


NEW- YORK,  AUGUST,  1867. 


[No.  5. 


The  American  Freedman's  Union  Commission, 

30  Vesey  Street,  New- York  City. 

"  The  cbjeot  of  this  Commission  is  the  relief,  education,  and  elevation  of  the  Freedmen  of  the  United 
States,  and  to  aid  and  co-operate  with  the  people  of  the  South,  without  distinction  of  race  or  color,  in  the  improve- 
ment of  their  condition  upon  the  basis  of  industry,  education,  freedom,  and  Christian  morality.  No  school  or 
depot  of  supplies  shall  be  maintained  from  the  benefits  of  which  any  shall  be  excluded  because  of  color."— Ab*. 
n.  Constitution. 


Chief-Justice  S.  P.  Chase,  President. 
Rev.  Jos.  P.  Thompson,  D.D.  N.  Y., 
William  Lloyd  Garrison,  Boston, 
Charles  G.  Hammond,  Chicago. 


Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  Gen.  Sec, 
J.  Miller  McKim,  Cor.  Sec., 
Geo.  Cabot  Ward,  Treats., 
Francis  G.  Shaw,  Ch.  Ex.  Com. 


30  Vesey  St.,  N.  Y. 
P.  O.  Box  5,733. 


EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE. 

New  England  Branch      ....  John  Parkman,  Martin  Brimmer,  Wendell  P.  Garrison. 

New  York  Branch   Francis  George  Shaw,  Henry  A.  Dike,  Nathan  Bwhop. 

Pennsylvania  Branch      ....  Francis  R.  Cope,  Samuel  S.  White. 

Baltimore  Branch  ....  Hugh  L.  Bond,  F.  Israel,  Chas.  W.  Bond. 

North-western  Branch     ....  R.  W.  Patterson,  S.  B.  Gookins,  M.  D.  C.  Crawford. 

Michigan  Branch  -      -      -      -  William  Hogarth,  Supply  Chase,  David  Plumb. 

BRANCH  OFFICES: 

New  England   8  Studio  Building,  Boston   Rev.  J.  H.  Chapin,  Secretary. 

New  York    30  Vesey  Street,  New  York   Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy,  Secretary. 

Pennsylvania   711  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia  -   -   -   -  Robert  R.  Corson,  Secretary. 

Maryland   5  and  7  Tyson's  Building,  Baltimore    -   -  Rev.  F.  Israel,  Secretary. 

North-western      ....  25  Lombard  Block,  Chicago     ....   -  Rev.  H.  B.  Holmes,  Secretary. 

Michigan   Detroit    Rev.  S.  Chase,  Secretary. 

Pacific  Coast,   San  Francisco,  Cal.,   Rev.  D.  C,  Haynes,  D.  D„  Secretary. 


THE  AMERICAN  FREED  MAN. 

30  Vesey  Street,  N.  Y.  City. 
This  journal  is  published  as  the  central  organ  of  the  Freedrnaa's  Union  Commission,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Branches  and  the  information  of  all  who  are  interebted  in  the  work  of  education  in  the  South. 

Copies  will  be  furnished  without  charge  to  any  Branch  of  the  Commission  for  distribution  in  connection  with 
their  organs  or  for  such  other  use  »3  may  best  subserve  the  interests  of  their  work.  Communications  should  be 
addressed  to  the  General  Secretary,  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  30  Vesey  Street,  New  York  City. 

TEEMS. 

Advertisements,  one  insertion,  at  the  rate  of  $30  per  page  for  ordinary  inside  pages;  but  for  an  inside  page,  op- 
posite general  reading  matter,  or  fer  the  outside-last-page  of  this  journal  the  pries  is  $40;  payable,  in  all  cases, 
as  soon  as  the  journal  is  published. 

One  copy  of  THS  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN,  to  a  regular  subscriber,  one  yeax,  twelve  numbers,  one  dollar. 

Any  person  contributing  five  dollars  per  annum  to  the  cause,  to  any  Branch  of  this  Commission,  is  entitled  to 
receive  one  copy  ef  «us  journal  free.   Single  copies.  15  cents.   Copies  for  advertisers,  10  cents 


258 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


Wm  %mtmm  £m&mm< 


CO-OPERATION. 

At  the  commencement  of  our  work,  car- 
ried on  as  it  was  in  the  midst  of  war,  it  was 
almost  necessarily  dependent  upon  the  mil- 
itary for  protection,  and  upon  the  North 
alone  for  support.  The  Freedmen  not  yet 
fully  enfranchised,  could  not  support  their 
schools.  The  whites,  not  yet  accustomed 
to  freedmen,  hardly  reconciled  to  emancipa- 
tion, and  utterly  opposed  to  political  equal- 
ity, could  not  be  expected  to  encourage 
them.  Yet  even  in  the  beginning,  the  day 
of  better  things  was  hoped  for,  and  in 
anticipation  of  it  the  Commission  provi- 
ded in  its  constitution  for  co-oj>eration  with 
the  people  of  the  South  in  the  work  of 
Southern  education. 

The  time  for  rendering  this  provision 
practical  has  arrived. 

The  Freedmen  have  proved  their  en- 
thusiastic desire  for  education.  Many  of 
them  have  by  their  industry  acquired  the 
means  sufficient,  if  not  to  provide  self- 
supporting  schools,  at  least  to  co-operate 
in  their  support.  In  the  sums  they  have 
paid  for  school  buildings  and  for  pay 
schools  under  teachers  of  their  own  race, 
they  have  shown  a  laudable  desire  to  be  in- 
dependent in  this  matter  of  education.  The 
whites  increasingly  recognize  that  free 
schools  are  the  necessary  companions  of 
free  labor,  and  are  beginning  to  manifest 
this  recognition  by  applications  for  assist- 
ance in  the  erection  of  school  buildings 
and  the  maintenance  of  schools. 

It  behooves  us  to  recognize  this  change 
in  Southern  sentiment  and  to  adopt  some 
wisely  considered  policy  of  co-operation 
to  foster  and  to  meet  it. 

For  our  object  is  not  to  educate  the 
South.  This  is  not  possible.  It  is  not  de- 
sirable. Education  is  not  a  charity.  It  is 
a  national  necessity.  We  do  not  wish  to 
*end  to  the  South  the  ripened  fruits  of 
Northern  planting.  "We  wish  to  plant  in 
Southern  soil  the  stock  that  shall  give  such 
fruit  to  them.  The  South  must  become 
self-educative.  She  will ;  and  ours  it  is, 
primarily  to  help  her  to  become  so,  only 
secondarily  to  assist  to  provide  her  with  a 
partial  education  meanwhile. 

"  Free  sohooLs"  is  an  equivocal  term.  Our 


schools  are  free  to  the  pupil  but  not  to 
the  community.  The  law  of  compensa- 
tion applies  in  education.  Whatever  is  of 
value  must  be  paid  for.  The  Freed  Peo- 
ple need  to  understand  this.  Education  is 
wrought  out  only  by  labor  and  expense.— 
If  any  have  gained  the  impression  that 
government  will  provide  schools  1  'without 
money  and  without  price,"  they  need 
to  learn  that  government  is  but  another 
name  for  the  people  ;  and  if  they  share  its 
privileges  they  must  also  participate  in  its 
burdens.  If  they  conceive  themselves  the 
recipients  of  a  public  charity,  let  us  unde- 
ceive them.  Let  us  adopt  some  principle 
which  shall  teach  them  that  they  must  pay 
according  to  their  means,  for  their  school 
privileges,  as  we  in  the  North  pay  for  ours. 
And  to  this  end  it  is  time  we  adopted  a 
rule  not  to  establish  schools  except  where 
the  x>Q°ple  are  ready  and  willing,  in  pro- 
portion to  their  ability,  to  co-operate  in 
their  support. 

Another  lesson,  however,  is  not  less  ne- 
cessary. The  South  has  had  free  schools, 
but  not  common  schools — at  least,  not  in 
the  Northern  sense  of  the  word.  Their 
ideas  of  a  "free"  school  are  closely  associ- 
ated with  that  of  a  charity  school.  Hence, 
an  intense  prejudice  in  the  Southern  mind 
against  these  institutions ;  a  prejudice 
which  the  negro  partly  shares.  The 
wealthier  Freedmen  are  now  sending  their 
children  to  inferior  pay  schools  because 
they  are  not  free.  We  must  be  careful  not 
to  foster  this  prejudice.  We  must  draw  no 
lines  between  pay  schools  and  free  schools; 
or  between  pay  scholars  and  free  scholars. 
We  must  ask  them  to  support  these  schools 
by  communities.  We  cannot  compel  by 
taxation,  but  we  may  invite,  by  subscrip- 
tion, all  classes  to  co-opexate  in  sustaining 
free  schools  until  the  reconstructed  States 
shall  be  prepared  to  take  this  matter  of 
education  wholly  into  their  own  hands. — 
Henceforth  our  work  must  be  to  sup- 
plement their  lack. 

This  matter  of  co-operation  was  brought 
up  and  informally  discussed  at  a  meeting 
of  teachers  and  others  held  at  Boston,  at 
the  time  of  the  teacher's  festival.  It  was 
finally  agreed  to  invite  a  conference  of  all 
co-laborers  in  the  Freedmen's  work,  to  be 
held  in  New  York  early  in  September,  to 
consider  the  question,  and  agree,  if  possi- 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


259 


ble,  on  some  general  principles  npon  which 
all  could  in  substance  unite. 

A  word  more.  Let  no  Northern  contrib- 
utor imagine  that  our  hope  of  Southern 
co-operation  reduces  the  necessity  for 
Northern  funds.  Our  work  halts,  our  vic- 
tories are  half  lost  for  want  of  means  for 
a  more  vigorous  and  decisive  effort.  We 
plan  only  to  render  more  useful  the  funds 
received  from  the  North  ;  not  only  by  en- 
deavoring to  add  to  them  from  the  South, 
but  also  by  making  them  the  means  of  ed- 
ucating the  community  without,  as  well  as 
the  children  within  the  schools. 


SHALL  THE  WORK  CO  ON? 

This  question  ought  not  to  be  asked. — 
But  since  it  is,  by  many,  we  essay  to  an- 
swer it.  For,  amid  many  signs  of  encour- 
agement and  hope,  we  find  some  who  are 
weary  in  well  doing .  ' '  Are  you  coming  to 
us"  they  say,  "another  year;  we  thought 
this  work  would  close  with  the  war,  or  at 
least  very  soon  thereafter.  We  were  will- 
ing to  help  the  negro  when  he  was  in  shack- 
les.— But  he  is  free.  He  has  the  suffrage. 
He  is  getting  or  can  get  good  wages,  and 
now  he  must  take  care  of  himself.  The 
Southern  States  must  adopt  their  own  edu- 
cational systems  and  pay  their  own  bills, 
as  we  do  in  the  North.  We  cannot  be  ex- 
pected to  educate  ourselves  and  them  too. " 

It  is  true  our  work  is  temporary.  The 
North  cannot  educate  the  South.  We  only 
bridge  a  chasm.  But  the  chasm  which 
war  and  slavery  have  made  is  wider  than 
most  people  imagine.  Shall  we  leave  the 
bridge  half  done,  insufficient  to  afford  a 
passage  to  freedom  ;  a  monument  only  to 
our  own  folly  ?  It  is  true  the  negro  has 
the  suffrage,  but  he  has  not  yet  commen- 
ced to  exercise  it.  It  is  true  the  States 
must  frame  and  maintain  their  own  educa- 
tional systems ;  but  they  must  first  be 
States,  and  meanwhile  what?  Shall  ig- 
norance grow  rank  as  the  proper  prepara- 
tive to  a  true  Republic  ?  Shall  we  sow 
weeds  now,  to  get  ready  for  a  harvest  of 
wheat  by  and  by  ?  Liberty  is  born  in  the 
South,  but  it  is  yet  in  its  infancy,  and  it 
must  be  nursed  and  nourished  with  pa- 
tience, if  we  would  not  mourn  its  prema- 
ture death.  We  trust  to  see  ere  long  a 
free  school  system  in  every  Southern  State. 
But  first  the  State  mu3t  be  re-constructed, 


a  constitution  framed,  a  legislature  elected, 
other  necessary  laws  enacted,  a  school  sys- 
tem carefully  considered  and  wisely  ad- 
justed, necessary  funds  raised  by  taxation, 
and  the  whole  educational  mechanism  put 
in  operation.  Even  in  these  days  of  rapid 
movements  all  this  can  scarcely  be  accom- 
plished in  less  than  two  years. 

Let  us  not  be  deceived.  Tennessee  has 
indeed  adopted  a  system  of  impartial  edu- 
cation. But  she  has  no  funds  to  put  it  in 
operation.  The  machinery  lies  idle  for 
want  of  fuel.  Florida  has  a  system,  less 
catholic,  but  equally  inoperative — without 
funds  to  pay  even  the  salaries  of  teachers. 
Her  State  Superintendent  is  in  the  North 
seeking  contributions  to  carry  on  the  work. 
In  Georgia  an  educational  association  has 
been  formed  among  the  Freedmen.  But 
it  extends  only  into  a  few  counties,  and  is 
valuable  rather  as  a  sign  of  public  senti- 
ment, than  as  a  practical  provider  of  pub- 
lic education.  We  are  in  sight  of  the 
promised  land,  but  we  have  not  reached 
it.  To  stop  now,  would  be  as  if  Gen. 
Grant  had  been  content  with  the  capture 
of  Richmond  without  the  capitulation  of 
Lee.  To  leave  a  work  half  done  is  not  to 
do  it  at  all. 

We  beg  then,  our  auxiliaries,  contribu- 
tors and  co-workers,  not  to  stay  their  hand. 
Having  put  our  hand  to  the  plough ,  let  us 
not  look  back.  There  never  was  a  time  so 
hopeful,  never  one  more  urgent  than  the 
present.  Never  was  more  need  of  means 
and  laborers  ;  never  a  time  when  every 
blow  told  so  surely,  and  every  dollar  giv- 
en brought  such  quick  and  sure  returns. 
By  God's  blessing  the  work  shall  go  on  un- 
til the  South  is  herself  educated  to  prose- 
cute it  without  our  aid  ;  until  from  her  own 
people  are  reared  her  teachers  ;  until  every 
State  has  its  Normal  School,  and  every 
hamlet  its  primary  and  grammar  school, 
and  every  hill-side  echoes  with  the  blessed 
ringing  of  the  school-house  bell. 

 —  

TEACHERS  FESTIVAL. 

We  had  the  pleasure  of  attending  last 
!  month  the  Teachers  Festival  of  the  New 
England  Branch.  It  has  become  a  fixed  fea- 
ture of  that  Society,  and  an  admirable  one. 

The  Fraternity  Rooms,  on  Washington 
street,  Boston,  were  well  filled  with  teach- 
ers, members  of  the  Society  and  friends — 


260 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


a  large  proportion  ladies.  Col.  Higginson 
presided  admirably,  and  suffered  no  pauses, 
no  breaks,  no  cessation  of  flow  and  sparkle 
of  social  life  ;  ladies  and  gentlemen  par- 
ticipated alike  in  the  proceedings. 

It  was  not  a  public  meeting  :  it  was  a 
family  gathering — brothers  and  sisters 
uniting  after  a  year's  separation — told  each 
other  their  varied  experiences.  For  it  was 
almost  wholly  an  ' ' experience  meeting." 
Flowers  decorated  the  room,  music  en- 
livened the  interval — everything  seemed 
spontaneous.  The  programme,  if  indeed 
there  was  one,  was  kept  out  of  sight. — 
After  an  horn*  or  two  of  social  interchange 
and  brief  narrations  of  teacher's  expe- 
rience, the  body  adjourned — the  teach- 
ers taking  deserved  precedence — to  the 
room  above,  where  ample  refreshments  had 
been  provided.  The  most  attractive  ad- 
dress of  the  day  was  one  from  a  gentleman 
who  announced  the  receipt  of  a  legacy 
which  will  leave  the  New  England  Society 
free  from  debt  for  the  commencement  of  a 
new  year. 

This  Society  has  done  a  noble  work  the 
past  year,  struggling  against  many  dis- 
couragements, and  promises  itself  a  record 
as  honorable  in  the  year  to  come. 


JEWISH  SYMPATHY. 

Prejudice  against  the  Jews  used  to  be 
more  general  in  its  extent,  and  more  cruel 
in  its  proscriptiveness  than  that  which  now 
exists  against  the  negro.  We  are  not  sure 
that,  taking  the  world  at  large,  this  is  not 
still  the  case.  It  is  but  a  short  time  since 
England  made  Israelites  equal  before  the 
law  with  her  other  subjects  ;  and  not  a  much 
longer  time  since  the  Christian  answer  in 
that  country  to  a  plea  for  the  rights  of  the 
Jews  was,  "they  stink." 

These  thoughts  are  suggested  by  a  speech 
delivered  by  a  distinguished  Jew  at  a  late 
meeting  in  Geneva,  Switzerland.  The 
meeting  was  one  called  by  the  Freedmen's 
Aid  Committee  of  Geneva,  and  the  speaker 
was  Grand  Rabbi  Wertheirner.  We  give 
some  extracts,  not  doubting  that  they  will 
be  read  with  interest : 

"I  have  also  thought  that  it  Avas  the  du- 
ty of  all  Israelites,  and  especially  of  the 
Rabbis,  to  take  part  in  every  effort  for  the 
emancipation  and  regeneration  of  the  dis- 
inherited classes  of  humanity.  It  has 
seemed  to  me  that  in  coming  here  to  plead 


the  cause  of  an  unhappy  race,  I  should  be 
defending  my  own  cause  and  that  of  my 
co-religionists . 

"  We,  also,  have  been  persecuted  and  op- 
pressed under  pretext  of  a  sort  of  divine 
reprobation  and  of  an  innate  degradation. 
We,  also,  have  been  exiled  from  all  the  ad- 
vantages and  deprived  of  all  the  guarantees 
of  society,  and  when,  finally  (thanks  to  the 
progress  of  modern  times),  the  hour  of 
freedom  struck  for  us,  we  have  been 
reproached  as  criminals,  for  those  vices 
and  defects  which  are  the  natural  fruits  of 
contempt  and  debasement.  After  we  had 
been  kept,  for  two  thousand  years,  bent 
under  a  yoke  of  iron,  it  has  been  thought 
strange  that  we  could  not  walk  erect ;  and 
after  we  had  been  hunted  like  wild  beasts, 
people  were  astonished  to  find  us  disposed 
to  make  use  of  craft,  which  is  nevertheless 
the  sole  defence  of  the  weak  against  the 
strong. 

1 '  But  since  the  Israelites  have  been  al- 
lowed the  right  to  develop  themselves  free- 
ly, and  to  enter  with  their  Christian  broth- 
ers into  the  different  careers  of  modern 
civilization,  it  has  been  seen  that  they  do 
not  remain  behind  the  other  races  in  the 
march  of  progress,  and  that  they  often 
even  surpass  them.  I  do  not  for  an  in- 
stant doubt  that  the  negroes,  also,  are  ca- 
pable of  raising  themselves  from  their  un- 
happy condition,  and  that  with  the  pecu- 
liar gifts  which  God  has  been  pleased  to 
grant  to  them,  they  will  contribute  their 
full  share  to  the  common  progress  of  hu- 
manity. 

1 1  Let  them  but  have  the  means  of  in- 
struction ;  let  them  receive  a  truly  religious 
education  ;  let  the  rights  of  man  be  grant- 
ed to  them  ;  but  especially,  let  them  be  ele- 
vated in  their  own  opinion,  by  being  es- 
teemed and  treated  as  intelligent  and  mor- 
al beings,  and  they  will  become,  I  am  per- 
suaded, good  citizens  and  useful  men. 

1 '  You  all  remember  that  passage  of  Gen- 
esis, chap,  ix,  v.  26  and  following,  in 
which  Noah,  awaking  from  sleep,  and 
learning  the  insults  cast  upon  him  by  his 
youngest  son  Ham,  the  presumed  ancestor 
of  the  negroes,  curses  him,  and  condemns 
him  to  be  a  slave  to  his  brothers  Shem  and 
Japhet.    Everybody  believes — and  I  hum- 
bly confess  that  I  also,  until  quite  a  short 
time  since,  believed — Ham  to  De  really  in 
the  scripture,  the  object  of  this  terrible 
anathema  ;  but  when,  on  the  occasion  of 
a  question  addressed  to  me  by  a  member 
of  the  British  Parliament,  himself  speci- 
ally interested  in  emancipation,  I  read  this 
celebrated  passage  of  scripture  with  more 
attention,  I  found  that  the  curse  of  Noah 
was  directed  particularly  against  Canaan, 
the  son  of  Ham  ;  and  further  on,  in  chap, 
x,  v.  15  and  following,  I  read  that  the 
sons  of  Canaan  were  the  ancestors  of  the 
tribes  which  peopled  the  Holy  Land  at 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


261 


the  time  of  its  conquest  by  the  Israelites. 
You  are  aware  that  those  tribes  were  all,  in 
fact,  either  exterminated  or  reduced  to 
slavery  by  the  conquerors,  and  will  see, 
therefore,  that  the  curse  of  Noah  was  ac- 
complished to  the  letter,  long  before  men 
ever  thought  of  the  negroes,  and  still  less 
of  America.  Thus  sacrilege  can  no  longer 
be  made  the  pretext  under  which  to  justify 
such  an  atrocity  as  the  slavery  of  the 
negroes." 


THE  ASSOCIATION  OF  FRENCH 
LADIES  IN  AID  OF  AMERICAN 
FREEDMEN. 

We  learn  with  regret  the  dissolution  of 
this  Association,  which,  from  its  formation 
has,  by  material  aid  and  earnest  sympathy, 
contributed  so  largely  to  the  prosecution  of 
our  work. 

From  June,  1865,  until  now,  it  has  trans- 
mitted to  us  in  clothing  and  money,  more 
than  93, 000  francs.  The  clothing  so  sent 
was  distributed  by  us  throughout  the 
South,  but  especially  in  Louisiana,  the 
destitution  in  which  State  we  supposed  to 
appeal  most  strongly  to  the  sympathies  of 
French  contributors,  while  the  money  has 
been  employed  in  our  general  work  of  edu- 
cation. The  sum  above-mentioned  does 
not,  however,  represent  all  that  has  been 
collected  by  the  members  or  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Association,  other  amounts 
having  been  remitted  to  New  Orleans, 
Philadelphia,  and  other  cities. 

In  taking  leave  of  this  Association  of  fel- 
low-workers, we  beg  to  tender  to  the  mem- 
bers and  especially  to  the  active  officers 
of  the  committee,  our  sincere  and  hearty 
thanks  for  their  co-operation,  and  to  assure 
them  that  they  have  aided  in  sowing  good 
seed  which  will  bear  fruit  to  all  genera- 
tions. 

We  append  some  extracts  from  the  final 
report  of  Madame  Coignet,  Secretary  of 
the  Association. 

"  The  National  Freedmen's  Relief  Asso- 
ciation, from  which  Dr.  Haynes  was  a  dele- 
gate, is  essentially  lay  and  undenomina- 
tional. Originating  at  the  appeal  of  such 
men  as  General  Sherman,  Admiral  Dupont 
and  Chief  Justice  Chase,  and  composed  of 
men  of  all  opinions,  it  was  careful  not  only 
to  exclude  every  sectarian  coloring  from 
its  system,  but  also  to  establish  by  its  rules 
that  its  object  was  purely  moral  and  na- 
tional, and  therefore  of  equal  interest  to 
all  who  believed  in  the  justice  of  emanci- 
pation.   All  were  called  to  the  work,  and 


the  Association  pledged  itself  to  take  no 
cognizance  of  differences  in  the  religious 
belief  of  those  for  whose  relief  it  was  insti- 
tuted; we  declared  our  adhesion  to  these 
principles  on  the  formation  of  our  Associa- 
tion, and  published  our  circular  to  that 
effect.  The  clergy,*  seeing  that  we  were 
organized  on  so  broad  a  basis,  united  their 
efforts  to  ours,  and  it  is  to  their  regular 
and  constant  aid  that  we  are  largely  in- 
debted fer  our  success." 

' '  When  our  Association  was  formed  it 
was  agreed  that  each  member  should  make 
collections  among  her  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances. Some  did  more,  addressed  stran- 
gers, visited  merchants  and  manufacturers, 
often  obtaining  cloth  instead  of  money. 
Some  ladies  also  organized  sewing  socie- 
ties. The  cloth  obtained  by  gift  or  pur- 
chase was  cut  into  garments  by  us,  and 
then  distributed  to  persons  who  undertook 
to  have  them  made  up  ;  and  it  is  remark- 
able that  we  never  had  to  pay  anything  for 
so  much  work.  To  increase  our  resources  we 
gave  a  concert,  in  which  the  generous 
aid  of  a  great  artist  availed  us  much.  By 
degrees,  in  the  provincial  cities,  ladies  be- 
came associated  in  our  work,  and  formed 
auxiliaries  which  contributed  greatly. 
Some  newspapers  opened  subscription 
lists  in  their  columns  ;  some  lodges  of 
Free  Masons  sent  contributions.  As  our 
object  was  not  only  to  collect  money  but 
also  to  awaken  sympathy,  we  endeavored 
to  promote  this  by  collections  in  Sunday 
schools,  and  by  opening  ten  centimes,  (two 
cents)  subscription  lis  to  among  the  work- 
men. These  were  rapidly  filled,  and  we 
always  succeeded  in  interesting  a  popular 
audience  when  permitted  to  address  it." 

"But  in  order  to  continue  our  work  and 
to  make  it  more  productive,  it  was  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  quit  the  restricted  cir- 
cle of  private  relations,  and  of  individual 
effort ;  it  was  necessary  to  have  recourse 
to  publicity,  and  to  address  the  masses. 
We  twice  obtained  permission  to  hold  meet- 
ings, the  success  of  which  greatly  en- 
couraged us.  The  first  was  free,  the  sec- 
ond paying  ;  both  were  well  attended. 
We  owe  special  thanks  to  the  orators  who 
supported  us  with  the  authority  of  their 
convictions,  and  the  strength  of  their  tal- 
ent. They  excited  so  much  sympathy  in 
the  audiences,  their  glowing  and  eloquent 
words  were  followed  by  such  general  ap- 
plause that,  for  a  while,  we  entertained  the 
strongest  hopes  for  our  future  work.  These 
meetings  were  held  in  a  small  place,  and 
had  been  insufficiently  advertised.  En- 
couraged by  success,  we  asked  per- 
mission to  hold  a  great  meeting  iu  the 
Cirque  de  rirnperatrice,  whither  we  hoped 
to  attract  a  much  larger  and  more  varied 
audience.  This  was  refused,  and  thus 
failed  our  attempt  to  give  a  truly  national 
and  general  character  to  our  work.  In  the 
WbO  had  already  announced  'heir  intention  to  act. 


292 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


extinction  of  the  hope  of  increasing  our  re- 
sources by  increasing  the  number  of  our 
members,  we  foresaw  the  compulsory  dis- 
continuance of  our  organization,  which 
was,  however,  always  considered  and  an- 
nounced by  us  as  transitory. " 

1 '  The  American  war  is  now  terminated. 
The  soldiers  of  independence,  who  rose  by 
hundreds  of  thousands  to  defend  theUnion, 
have  returned  to  their  homes  and  resumed 
their  peaceful  occupations.  We  have,  there- 
fore, good  ground  for  our  belief  that  social 
life  will  recover  its  equilibrium  in  America, 
and  that  human  rights  will  soon  be  recog- 
nized there  in  fact,  as  they  are  in  law." 

"  We,  who  deeply  and  earnestly  sympa- 
thize, do  not  doubt  that  America  will  issue 
victorious  from  the  present  crisis,  as  from 
all  others.  The  cause  which  she  defends 
is  not  that  of  one  country  or  of  one  people, 
it  is  the  cause  of  humanity,  in  which  the 
least  of  us  is  interested  ;  it  is  the  cause  of 
liberty  and  justice.  There  lies  the  secret 
of  its  power  :  there  also  the  secret  of  our 
confidence. " 

We  are  glad  to  know  that  several  of  the 
ladies  heretofore  connected  with  the  Asso- 
ciation will  continue  personally  active  in 
the  good  work,  and  we  hope  that  several 
teachers  will  be  maintained  among  the 
freed  people  by  the  Protestant  Churches  of 
France. 

 ...  

THE  SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE  SOUTH. 

The  announcement  that  there  is  soon  to 
be  published  a  large  and  tolerably  com- 
plete collection  of  the  Slave-songs  of  the 
South,  will,  we  are  sure,  give  pleasure  to 
all  whose  good  fortune  it  has  been  to  hear 
these  songs  from  the  lips  of  the  freedmen 
themselves,  since  the  prison-house  was 
opened  by  the  strong  arm  of  war.  The 
basis  of  this  new,  and  in  all  probability 
unique  collection,  is  the  united  repertories 
of  three  persons,  all  qualified  for  the  task. 
Prof.  Wm.  F.  Allen,  Mr.  Chas.  P.  Ware, 
and  Mrs.  Lucy  McKim  Garrison,  which 
have  been  greatly  increased  by  contribu- 
tions from  all  parts  of  the  South.  The 
subjoined  prospectus  of  the  contents  will 
show  the  varying  proportions  of  different 
localities,  as  well  as  of  the  ten  classes  of 
Songs,  "  spirituals,"  and  secular.  The 
forty  odd  Songs  printed  in  a  late  Atlantic, 
by  Col.  Higginson,  have  been  kindly  trans- 
ferred by  him  and  Messrs.  Ticknor  &  Fields 
to  the  present  collection,  and  the  music 
has  been  found  for  almost  every  one  of 

°.m.  In  fact,  in  only  a  very  few  instances 
-lie  editors  be  obliged  to  present  the 


I.   "  SPrRTTDAIiS." 

L  The  South-Eastern  States. 

The  Coffin's  Point  collection,  about  50 

Capt.  John  Fripp's  collection,  about  20 

Col.  Higginson's  Regiment,  about  30 

Mrs.  Bowen's  collection,  about  -  -  6 
(Dating  twenty  years  back .) 

Florida,   — 

Miscellaneous,   — 

II.  North-Eastern  States. 

"Virginia,  about   10 

Maryland  and  Delaware  about    -    -  3 
HI.  Western  States. 

Nashville,  about   10 

Mississippi  River,  about   -    -    -    -  2 

II.  Secular  Songs,  about  -    -  - —  10 

III.  Words  without  music. 
We  have  been  permitted  to  read  the  very 

interesting  preface  of  Prof.  Allen,  which, 
besides  a  general  account  of  the  songs, 
contains  a  valuable  monograph  on  the 
Port  Royal  dialect.  Taken  altogether,  the 
volume  will  have  extraordinary  claims  on 
the  public  attention,  and  the  service  it 
performs  for  the  freedmen,  whose  new  du- 
j  ties  and  new  aspirations  compel  them  to 
put  away  the  relics  of  an  unhappy  past,  is 
such  as  will  be  appreciated  most  when  the 
"spirit"  has  vanished  from  the  Sea-Is- 
lands, and  the  old  barbarism  been  entirely 
replaced  by  the  new  civilization.  Abroad 
we  are  certain  that  this  collection  will  be 
eagerly  welcomed,  both  by  the  friends  of 
America  and  of  the  lovers  of  music,  who 
will  delight  in  the  novelty  and  wild,  some- 
times melancholy,  beauty  of  the  Songs  of 
slaves.  Already,  the  bare  announcement 
has  developed  an  interest  in  England 
which  we  hope  can  be  gratified  in  a  very 
few  months. 

The  publishers  are  Messrs.  A.  Simpson 
&  Co.,  60  Duane  st.  New  York,  (Agathynian 
Press,)  who  have  done  some  of  the  finest 
printing  ever  yet  executed  in  this  coun- 
try. They  offer  an  octavo  volume,  suit- 
able for  the  piano-rack  or  the  library  shelf, 
or  the  centre-table,  at  (probably)  the  low 
price  of  $1  75,  which  will  be  reduced  for 
those  ordering  several  copies.  The  par- 
ticulars will  be  given  in  a  circular,  now  in 
course  of  preparation,  containing  speci- 
mens of  the  music  and  words.  Those  who 
are  already  satisfied  that  they  want  the 
book  may  send  in  their  orders  at  any  time. 


4263 


EDUCATION  IN  FRANCE. 

The  following  is  taken  from  the  Paris 
correspondence  of  the  London  Morning 
Star. 

"  M.  Duruy,  Minister  of  Public  Instruction, 
presided  last  Sunday  at  the  distribution  of 
prizes  at  the  Polytechnic  Association.  The 
meeting  was  held  at  the  Cirque  Napoleon, 
which  vast  building  was  crowded  by  foreign 
workmen.  I  give  you  some  extracts  of  the 
speech  delivered  by  his  Excellency  on  this  oc- 
casion. The  eloquence  of  figures  is  undeniable. 
Notwithstanding  the  splendid  results  of  last 
year's  examination,  education  has  made  still 
more  gigantic  strides  within  the  last  twelve 
months :  40,000  teachers,  that  is,  10,000  more 
than  last  year,  have  opened  33,383  gratuitous 
night  schools,  attended  by  823,000  adult  schol- 
ars. Above  one-third  of  these  were  totally  un- 
instructed,  of  whom  but  23,000,  in  spite  of  their 
anxiety  to  learn,  quitted  the  schools  as  igno- 
rant as  they  had  entered ;  whereas  800,000 
have  made  considerable  progress  in  knowledge. 

"  Calculate  the  accession  of  industrial  power 
thus  gained  in  a  few  months,  the  progress  of 
trade  being  always  in  proportion  to  that  of 
general  instruction.  Contrary  to  the  usual 
course  of  events  this  movement  has  begun 
from  the  lower  strata  of  society.  The  people, 
inspired  by  a  few  brief  and  energetic  words  of 
the  Emperor,  have  crowded  to  these  new 
schools.  Thirteen  thousand  teachers  have 
given  their  time  and  energy  gratuitously 
to  these  schools,  nine  thousand  of  whom 
have  spent  235,000  francs  of  their  small  sala- 
ries on  the  good  work ;  ten  thousand  municip- 
al councils  have  made  it  a  point  of  honor  to 
subscribe  a  sum  nearly  amounting  to  two  mil- 
lions (£80,000)  towards  the  necessary  expenses. 

"  To  prove  the  severe  investigations  which 
have  resulted  in  the  above  statistics,  M.  Du- 
ruy  read  an  official  report  of  what  had  taken 
place  in  one  department.  A  competitive  ex- 
amination of  the  adult  classes  took  place  on 
the  5th  of  March,  1865,  the  subject  for  compo- 
sition having  been  enclosed  in  a  sealed  envel- 
ope and  forwarded  to  each  teacher.  The  pres- 
ence of  the  mayors,  curates  and  delegates 
from  surrounding  districts  guaranteed  the  hon- 
esty with  which  the  conditions  imposed  by 
the  board  had  been  fulfilled.  One  thousand 
two  hundred  and  sixty-seven  compositions 
were  sent  injto  the  inspector ;  371  of  these  were 
written  without  a  single  fault.  On  the  11th 
of  February,  1866,  the  number  of  competitors 
was  trebled,  and  numbered  4,880 ;  980  compo- 
sitions were  sent  up  without  a  single  error. 
In  1867,  on  the  27th  of  February,  5,158  adults 
entered  the  lists,  all  either  laborers  or  mechan- 
ics ;  the  result  was  1,409  faultless  compositions 
— the  writing,  spelling  and  moral  sense  of  the 
compositions  being  equally  admirable. 

"  The  most  touching  instances  of  anxiety  for 
instruction  are  recorded.  A  little  girl,  for  in- 
stance, ten  years  of  age,  herself  brought  her 
mother  to  the  night  school,  and  there  taught 
herself  to  read.  A  sick  workman  wrote  the 
exercises  for  the  night  school  while  confined  to 
his  bed,  while  another  paid  a  friend  to  replace 
him  at  his  factory  during  the  school  hour.  In 
the  South,  where  the  passions  are  violent  and 


consequently  where  quarrels  are  more  frequent 
than  in  cooler  northern  districts,  the  moral  ben- 
efit derived  from  these  night  schools  has  been 
so  great  that  in  one  instance,  when  illness  pre- 
vented the  teacher  from  giving  his  lessons,  a 
young  curate  volunteered  to  replace  him — a 
service  which  necessitated  a  fatiguing  journey 
on  foot  across  a  mountain  and  through  a  wood 
of  considerable  extent.  He  never  could  reach 
home  before  half-past  eleven  at  night.  During 
four  months  the  young  priest  was  punctual  to 
his  self-imposed  task,  for  which  he  received  no 
reward  save  the  gratification  of  having  con- 
tinued the  good  work  begun  by  one  as  poor  as 
himself.  At  Creuzot,  drunkenness  and  quar- 
relling are  unknown  in  the  foundries,  where 
ten  thousand  workmen  are  employed — a  result 
attributed  by  the  president  of  the  Corps  Legis- 
latif  to  the  night  schools." 



A  DAYIN  ACOLORED  SCHOOL. 

The  testimony  contained  in  the  follow- 
ing article  is  valuable  as  coming  from  an 
ultra  Conservative  anti-Radical  Journal : 

Perhaps  the  best  specimen  of  a  graded 
free-colored  school  ever  established  is  that 
which  has  been  from  its  establishment  un- 
der the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Newton,  in 
this  city.  This  school,  which  is  now  loca- 
ted on  M.  street,  between  Sixteenth  and 
Seventeenth  streets,  was  first  put  into  op- 
eration in  a  graded  form  in  the  autumn  of 
1865,  though  it  should  be  stated  that  in  an 
unsettled  way  they  had  been  doing  some- 
thing for  the  education  of  the  colored 
children,  with  Mr.  Newton  as  chief  man- 
ager, for  some  more  than  a  year  previous 
to  1865.  The  building  on  the  corner  of 
Fourteenth  and  M  streets,  in  which  they 
entered  in  October,  1865,  was  spacious  and 
answered  well  the  purposes  at  the  time. 
They  were  barrack  structures,  turned  over 
to  the  association  by  the  War  Office,  and 
were  much  the  best  school  room  which  the 
contraband  school  children  had  for  school 
purposes  in  the  District.  The  school,  with 
several  others  were  supported  by  the  New 
York  Freedman's  Aid  Association.  The 
school  was  divided  into  six  grades,  we 
think,  originally,  four  schools  in  one  build- 
ing and  two  in  another.  During  the  year 
of  the  location  of  these  schools  at  this 
place  they  were  under  the  immediate 
charge  of  an  excellent  gentleman,  whose 
name  escapes  our  memory,  but  the  high- 
est school  in  the  system  was  from  the  first 
in  the  hands  of  Miss  Julia  A.  Lord,  of 
North  Yarmouth,  Me.,  a  lady  of  the  very 
highest  qualifications  for  her  arduous  and 
embarrassing  work,  thoroughly  educated, 
self-reliant,  patient,  determined,  full  of  re- 
sources, ambitious  and  absorbed  in  her  la- 
bors. 

In  the  summer  of  1866  the  association 
purchased  a  tine  lot,  and  erected  on  it  a 
large  two-story  building  out  of  the  lumber 
of  the  abandoned  barrack  structures,  and 


264 


last  October,  at  tlie  opening  of  the  new 
year,  the  school  entered  its  new  premises. 
This  school-house  comprises  eight  spa- 
cious and  very  neat  and  convenient  school- 
rooms, four  on  each  story,  besides  a  fine 
basement,  in  which  the  ten  teachers  re- 
side. There  are  two  small  structures,  each 
making  a  single  school-room,  on  the  same 
lot,  and  these  make  up  the  ten  rooms  which 
give  accommodations  for  the  ten  grades  of 
this  school. 

We  took  a  part  of  a  day  to  look  in  upon 
this  school  the  past  week,  as  we  did  an- 
other afternoon  to  see  a  female  white  gram- 
mar school,  that  gave  us  so  much  satisfac- 
tion, as  we  recorded  in  our  columns.  This 
colored  school  was  examined  yesterday, 
and  the  general  superintendent,  Rev.  John 
Kimbal,  with  a  considerable  number  of 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  especially  interested 
in  the  education  of  the  colored  children 
of  the  city  were  present  to  witness  the  inter- 
esting and,  we  may  justly  say,  marvellous 
spectacle  The  average  number  in  attend- 
ance in  this  school  through  the  entire  year 
cannot  have  been  much  less  than  fifty  in 
each  division — in  all  five  hundred  scholars. 

One  of  the  schools  in  the  small  build- 
ing comprises  a  miscellaneous  class  of 
large  boys  and  girls,  men  and  women,  in 
the  lowest  elements,  such  as  are  not  fitted 
in  age  and  acquirements  to  mingle  in  the 
other  grades.  The  other  small  building  is 
occupied  by  the  lowest  division  in  the  reg- 
ular grades  and  is  one  of  the  most  admira- 
bly managed  and  most  interesting  prima- 
ry schools  that  we  have  ever  seen.  Its 
superior  does  not  surely  exist  in  this  Dis- 
trict. It  is  taught  by  Miss  Simmons,  of 
Rhode  Island,  and  the  adult  school  is 
taught  by  her  sister,  both  of  them  admira- 
bly fitted  for  their  work. 

The  judgment  which  we  express  in  re- 
gard to  these  schools  is  not  derived  from 
the  parade  of  an  examination-day,  but 
from  an  observation  personal,  and  extend- 
ing over  the  whole  history  of  its  opera- 
tions. Oar  visit  a  few  days  since,  was  with- 
out notice  to  the  teachers  ;  and  the  school, 
was  seen  in  its  every-day  routine  and  con- 
dition. 

The  Grammar  School,  in  charge  of  Miss 
Lord  had  recently  sent  its  eight  best 
scholars,  two  girls  and  six  boys,  into  the 
preparatory  department  of  Howard  Uni- 
versity, and  she  had  consequently  then  but 
37  names  upon  her  register.  Her  average- 
was  for  the  month  about  35,  every  scholar 
being  present  many  days  of  the  month, 
and  this  has  been  the  character  of  the  at- 
tendance throughout  the  year.  Her 
scholars  range  from  10  to  17  years  in  age. 
The  school  is  divided  into  two  classes  in 
arithmetic,  nsing  Felter's  Primary  and 
Felter's  Analysis.  The  higher  class  had 
completed  the  Primary,  and  advanced  in- 
to Reduction  in  Analysis.  She  put  the 
entire  class  to  the  blackboard,  and  every 


scholar  put  the  question  assigned  in  hand- 
some figures  neatly  upon  the  board,  and 
explained  with  the  utmost  promptness  and 
precision  ;  a  more  satisfactory  recitation 
than  we  have  seen  elsewhere  in  this  branch 
in  this  city.  We  have  before  spoken  of  the 
thorough  manner  in  which  Colburn's  Les- 
sons are  taught  in  this  school.  The  gram- 
mar, reading,  writing,  geography,  and 
spelling  are  all  taught  here  in  the  same 
thorough  manner.  The  scholars  are  clean 
in  their  persons,  well-clad  and  neat  in  their 
dress. 

*  *  *  * 

We  have  no  time  nor  space  for  general 
remarks.  This  group  of  schools,  in  all  its 
grades,  is  under  the  most  remarkable  dis- 
cipline, and  the  average  attendance  for  the 
two  years,  has,  we  think,  hardly  a  parallel 
in  the  history  of  free  schools.  Mr.  Newton 
deserves  the  greatest  credit  f or^the  wisdom 
and  success  which  has  characterized  the 
school  in  its  whole  history.  We  have  said 
enough  to  the  honor  of  the  teachers  in 
naming  their  fine  schools,  and  their  good 
and  successful  work. 

The  hours  which  we  spent  in  these 
schools,  in  our  last  visit,  like  other  pre- 
vious visits,  were  hours  of  exceeding  sat- 
isfaction, full  of  hopeful  inspirations. — 
Washington  National  Intelligencer June  30. 

 «e»  

The  following  complimentary  notice  of 
a  Freedmen's  School,  we  cut  from  the  An- 
derson (S.  C.)  Intelligencer.  The  lady  here 
spoken  of  as  a  "colored  female,"  is  Mrs. 
C.  M.  Hicks,  a  teacher  supported  by  an 
auxiliary  association  in  Albany,  and  sent 
South  by  the  New  York  Branch  Freed- 
man's  Union  Commission  : 

Examination. — "  In  company  with  several 
gentlemen,  and  invited  by  the  School  Com- 
mittee, we  had  the  pleasure  of  witnessing  an 
examination  in  one  of  the  colored  schools  in 
this  place  on  Friday  last.  There  are  near  two 
hundred  pupils,  we  believe,  and  the  best  order 
andjdecorum  is  observed.  ^Thorough  system 
in  teaching  the  young  idea  how  to  shoot, 
seems  to  be  the  main  object,  while  admirable 
control  of  their  conduct  is  also  particularly 
sought  after.  We  were  gratified  at  the  pro- 
ficiency and  success  attained,  and  trust  that 
they  will  persevere  in  their  efforts,  to  make 
better  citizens,  and  become  more  worthy  of 
the  high  privileges  now  guaranteed  to  their 
race.  This  school  is  presided  over  by  a  color- 
ed female,  who  came  from  the  North  several 
months  ago.  She  is  intelligent  and  capable, 
and  devotes  all  her  energies  to  the  school.'" 


Chenango  County,  should  have  been 
credited  with  the  one  teacher  set  down  in 
the  last  number  of  the  Freedman,  to  the 
honor  of  Norwich.  We  are  indebted  for 
this  correction  to  a  lady  of  the  latter  place, 
who  is  unwilling  that  her  town  should  re- 
ceive credit  which  is  not  due. 


265 


MATERIAL  FOR  SEWING  CLASSES. 

We  consider  the  Sewing  Department,  in 
our  schools,  one  of  the  most  important  to 
the  ignorant  women  and  children  of  the 
South,  who  must  be  taught  to  live  before 
they  can  really  profit  by  other  lessons.  But 
the  preparation  of  work,  even  the  teaching 
to  sew,  is  an  additional  burden  upon  our 
conscientious  teachers,  whose  labors  we 
wish  to  lighten  rather  than  increase. 

We  therefore  beg  our  auxiliaries  to  fur- 
nish us  with  a  supply  of  cut  and  basted  gar- 
ments, to  be  ready  for  the  Sewing  Classes 
at  the  opening  of  the  schools  on  the  first 
of  October.  These  should  be  of  new  ma- 
terial only,  and  will  be  the  more  valuable 
if  accompanied  by  the  requisites  for  their 
completion.  We  intend  that  such  gar- 
ments, when  finished,  shall  be  distributed 
as  rewards  for  industry,  and  they  will  thus 
serve  two  important  purposes.  We  can  al- 
ways find  use  for  good  old  clothing,  as  the 
aged  and  sick,  who  can  earn  nothing,  re- 
quire a  constant  supply. 

 »♦-•  

CHEERING  STATISTICS. 

The  consolidated  school  report  of  Mr. 

Alvord,  General  Superintendent  of  the 

Bureau,  for  the  month  of  May,  is  before 

us,  and  though  tabular  in  form,  is  a  most 

eloquent  document.    It  gives  among  many 

other  interesting  statistics,  the  following  : 

No.  of  Schools  reporting  to  the  Bureau,  1,661 

Enrolled  pupils  in  the  same   102,614 

No.  of  White  Teachers   1,214 

"    Colored  Teachers   687 

"    S.  S.  reported  to  the  Bureau. ...  863 

"    enrolled  pupils  in  the  same   75,479 

S.  S.  not  reported  to  the  Bureau   287 

No.  of  pupils  in  non-reporting  Sunday 

Schools   21,290 

White  Teachers  in  the  same   505 

Colored  Teachers   1,105 

Industrial  Schools   23 

Normal  Schools   19 

No.  of  Schools  sustained  by  Freedmen,  512 

"   in  part  by  "  384 
Amount  of  Tuition  paid  by  Freedmen 

during  the  month  *  $16,594 

 «*•  

A  REPORTFORTHE  ANTI-SLAVERY 
CONGRESS. 

Our  readers  are  aware  that  an  Anti-Sla- 
very Congress,  to  be  composed  of  dele- 
gates from  all  parts  of  the  civilized  world, 
is  to  meet  in  Paris  on  the  26th  and  27th 
inst. ,  and  that  this  Commission  is  to  be 
represented  on  the  occasion  by  Wm.  Lloyd 


Garrison,  C.  G.  Hammond  and  Wm.  Cul- 
len  Bryant.  We  have  now  to  state  that  at 
the  meeting  at  which  these  gentlemen 
were  named,  a  committee  was  appointed 
to  draw  up,  for  presentation  to  the  Congress, 
a  report  of  the  results  of  Emancipation  in 
the  United  States.  That  committee  con- 
sisted of  Hon.  S.  P.  Chase,  Major-Gen. 
O .  O.  Howard,  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  Geo. 
Francis  Shaw  and  J.  M.  McKim.  The 
task  confided  to  them  has  been  performed, 
and  their  report  appears,  in  the  shape  of 
an  octavo  pamphlet  of  forty  pages.  It 
comprises — 

I.  A  brief  history  of  Emancipation  as  a 
military  and  political  movement. 

II.  A  statement  of  the  legal  and  social 
condition  in  which  the  negro  was  left  by 
Emancipation. 

IIL  A  description  of  the  instrumentali- 
ties employed  for  the  improvement  of  his 
condition. 

IV.  What  has  been  accomplished  by 
these  instrumentalities,  in  the  way  of — 1 , 
of  providing  for  physical  wants  ;  2,  of  se- 
curing impartial  justice  ;  3,  of  reorgan- 
izing labor,  and  4,  of  providing  educa- 
tion. 

V.  A  brief  summary  of  results  accom- 
plished. 

The  following  notice  of  this  report  ap- 
pears in  the  Nation  : 

"The  results  of  Emancipation  in  the  United 
States  of  America : — By  a  Committee  of  the 
American  Freedman's  Union  Commission. — 
(New  York  ;  July,  1867.)— This  month  there 
meets  at  Paris  an  international  anti-slavery  con- 
ference, whose  projectors  having  solicited  re- 
ports on  (1)  the  anti-slave  trade,  (2)  slavery, 
and  (3)  the  results  of  emancipation,  the  com- 
mission named  above  responds  with  perfect 
propriety,  and  with  an  authority  which  can- 
not be  questioned,  upon  the  third  subject  of 
enquiry.  One  does  not  report  to  a  public  meet- 
ing details  which  would  make  a  volume, 
and  this  pamphlet  has,  accordingly,  nothing 
in  point  of  thoroughness  or  of  bulk  in  common 
with  the  admirable  work  ot  M.  Cochin,  in 
which  it  recalls  by  its  title.  A  few  pages  of 
statistics,  to  be  read  rather  than  recited,  are 
furnished  by  the  committee  to  relieve  the  sim- 
plicity of  their  resume,  which,  for  breadth  of 
view,  methodical  arrangement,  and  accura- 
cy of  statement,  has,  perhaps,  never  been 
equalled  in  the  same  compass  by  any  previous- 
ly attempted  sketch  of  the  transition  from 
slavery  to  the  status  quo  of  civil  equality  and 
educational  development.  It  swiftly  passes  in 
review  the  history  of  emancipation  as  a  mili- 
tary and  political  movement  the  legal  and  social 
condition  in  which  the  negro  was  left  by  enian- 


266 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


cipation,  the  instrumentalities — voluntary  and 
governmental — employed  for  the  improvement 
of  his  condition,  and,  finally,  what  has  been 
achieved  by  them  towards  providing  for  his 
physical  wants,  securing  him  impartial  jus- 
tice, reorganizing  labor,  and  providing  educa- 
tion. 

"  Such  a  document  cannot  fail  to  impress 
deeply  the  minds  of  those  to  whom  it  is  speci- 
ally addressed,  and  does  not  need  the  weight 
which  the  signatures  of  Chief  Justice  Chase 
and  Major-General  Howard  lend  to  it.  The 
Sanitary  Commission  has  justly  taken  a  prize 
at  the  Paris  Exhibition,  and  has  equally  shed 
honor  on  the  United  States  and  light  on  the 
American  character.  Compared  with  the 
Freedman's  Commission,  however,  its  aims 
must  be  confessed  more  restricted,  more  akin 
to  the  common  feeling  of  humanity  and  hu- 
man relationship,  and  therefore  more  naturally 
spontaneous,  while  having  every  attribute  of 
popularity,  and  elevated  beyond  reach  of  party 
odium  or  party  hatred.  The  Sanitary  Com- 
mission naturally  ended  with  the  end  of  blood- 
shed— of  the  warfare  between  army  and  army; 
the  Freedman's  Commission  will  terminate, 
by  self- limitation,  with  the  warfare  of  civiliza- 
tion— whenever  the  only  guaranty  of  republi- 
can government  is  established  unshakably 
where  slavery  flourished.  Its  object  does  not 
appeal  to  enthusiasm,  but  to  reflection ;  it  does 
not  touch  the  family  chord,  nor  rouse  the  sym- 
pathies by  tales  of  physical  suffering ;  it  is  not 
exempt  from  the  disfavor  of  the  fashionable 
and  the  enmity  of  a  numerous  and  yet  power- 
ful party.  The  movement  to  educate  the  freed- 
men  is  really  political,  but  partizan  only  be- 
cause to  be  republican  is,  in  the  United  States, 
to  be  partizan  ;  but  as  it  is  conducted  from  dis- 
interested motives,  by  honorable,  usual,  and 
approved  means,  and  as  it  consults  the  ulti- 
mate welfare  of  the  entire  country,  it  should 
receive  the  support  of  every  citizen  who  to  na- 
tional pride  joins  faith  in  the  institutions  of 
his  country,  and  to  him  we  cordially  commend 
this  pamphlet." 


H  t  W  r |J  0 X  I    §  x  an t  % . 

CORRESPONDENCE. 

Emmatjs  P.  0.,  Bedfobd  Co.,  Va. ) 
June  4th,  1867.  f 

Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy, 

Dear  Sir  : — u  In  submitting  this,  my  last 
Report  for  the  term,  I  would  be  allowed  the 
expression  of  the  heartfelt  satisfaction  which  I 
feel,  in  being  able  to  say,  that  my  labors  have 
been  of  a  most  pleasant  character  to  me,  and 
that  they  are  being  crowned  with  a  success 
commensurate  with  my  most  sanguine  expec- 
tations. Nor  can  I  forego  the  expression  of 
my  sincere  regret  that  the  Executive  Commit- 
tee ehould  have  decided  to  close  all  schco's  da- 
ring vacation,  as  I  learn  from  Mr.  E.  C.  Estes 
by  to-day's  mail.  Yours  in  answer  to  mine 
was  never  received.  I  brought  the  matter  of 
'-^quiry — your  letter  in  reference  to  No.  13  of 
m5  ;nstructions — to  the  attention  of  my  colored 


friends,  at  their  last  meeting,  and  they  request 
me  to  express  to  the  Association  their  most 
profound  gratitude  and  the  lasting  obligation 
under  which  they  are  placed,  by  and  for  the  very 
great  kindness  thus  far  extended  to  them,  and 
to  assure  them  that  it  is  owing  to  the  very 
straightened  circumstances  of  their  present 
condition  and  not  the  lack  of  a  proper  appre- 
ciation of  their  duty,  that  they  have  not  up  to 
this  time,  contributed  anything  in  accordance 
with  the  very  benevolent  and  charitable  spirit 
of  that  order.  They  ask  me  to  say,  further,  to 
the  Association,  that  although  the  needs  of 
their  families  absorb  all  they  can  make,  they 
will  willingly  and  gladly  contribute  a  portion 
of  their  wages  at  the  end  of  the  year,  when  it 
falls  due,  in  order  that  the  school  may  be  con- 
tinued. The  understanding  with  them  was, 
that  they  would  confer  and  determine  among 
themselves  by  their  next  meeting,  what  amount 
they  would  be  able  to  raise  at  the  end  of  the 
year.  I  would  simply  say,  injustice  to  them, 
that  whatever  they  contribute,  will,  in  my 
opinion,  be  akin  to  the  '  widow's  mite.'  At  a 
future  time,  I  will  render  a  detailed  account  of 
the  beginning  and  advancement  of  the  spright- 
liest  of  my  scholars,  which  I  think  will  compare 
well  with  most  schools.  For  the  present  I 
conclude  with  the  hope  that  the  Committee 
may  yet  so  far  reconsider  as  to  allow  the  con- 
tinuance of  my  school,  which  has  been  in  opera- 
tion for  so  limited  a  term,  and  under  very  un- 
favorable circumstances.  Still  I  would  dislike 
to  be  considered  troublesome  or  annoying." 
Very  respectfully, 

J.  E.  Lazenby. 


Raleigh,  N.  C,  July  1st,  1867. 

Rev.  C.  Kennedy,  Car.  S:c'y  : 

"  Some  of  the  scholars  sent  away  from  the 
Primary  Department,  for  want  of  sufficient 
room,  have  returned,  so  that  we  have  had  all 
and  more  than  three  Teachers  could  do  justice 
to  during  the  warm  weather.  Many  of  those 
in  the  highest  department  require  much  more 
time  than  could  be  given,  especially  those  ex- 
pecting to  teach.  I  have  given  a  half  hour 
daily  to  one  man,  who  has  long  been  an  ex- 
horter  in  the  evening  meetings,  and  is  now 
licensed  to  preach.  He  has  gathered  a  small 
Church  of  twenty-one  members,  and  a  Sabbath 
School  of  about  sixty,  a  short  distance  from  the 
city.  He  can  read  and  write  tolerably  well, 
and  is  improving  rapidly  ;  has  never  attended 
any  school  but  ours,  and  has  been  there  in  all 
about  three  months.  The  brethren  in  the 
Church  support  him  in  part,  while  he  is  trying 
to  get  a  little  education.  We  have  two  other 
men  who  have  given  up  business  in  part,  to 
attend  school,  and  a  large  number  of  young 
women. 

"The  closing  exercises  of  the  School  took 
place  on  Friday — were  attended  by  a  large 
number  of  the  parents,  and  a  few  others.  The 
compositions — the  first  attempts  of  the  pupil6, 
read  by  themselves — were  highly  commended 
by  Mr.  Fisher  and  a  gentleman  from  Washing- 
ton, who  was  present,  and  requested  the  priv- 
ilege of  taking  a  few  specimens." 

Fannie  Graves. 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN, 


267 


Flushing,  L.  I.,  July  18,  1867. 

Dear  Sir  : — "  In  case  it  is  not  too  late  for 
publication,  I  enclose  one  of  the  compositions, 
to  which  I  alluded  in  my  June  Report. 

"  It  is  the  first  attempt  of  a  girl  of  fifteen,  of 
nearly  pure  African  blood.  She  chose  her  own 
subject,  and  not  a  word  has  been  corrected  or 
changed.    I  have  many  others  nearly  as  good. 

"  You  inquired  respecting  the  present  tem- 
per of  the  Southern  people  toward  the  teach- 
ers. We  are  inclined  to  think  it  is  improving, 
that  they  do  not  circulate  as  many  malicious 
falsehoods  about  us  as  formerly,  (we  have  heard 
nothing  this  year  about  our  dancing  on  the 
public  square  or  riding  in  the  circus.)  They 
have  ceased  staring  at  us  as  if  we  l>ore  the 
mark  of  Cain  upon  our  foreheads.  They  do 
not  visit  us  or  the  schools,  with  an  occasional 
exception,  but  we  understand  that  they  gen- 
erally confess  that  our  scholars  are  making 
wonderful  progress. 

"But  while  we  are  pleased  to  see  any  im- 
provement, it  is  evident  that  the  moral  recon- 
struction of  the  South  has  scarcely  commenc- 
ed. They  have  never  yielded  a  principle  in 
dispute  between  them  and  the  North. 

"  Nothern  ministers  are  to-day,  by  unani- 
mous resolve,  excluded  from  Southern  pulpits 
on  the  ground  that  they  hold  the  infidel 
notion  that  slavery  is  a  sin.  A  lady  of  intel- 
ligence and  piety  remarked  not  long  since,  that 
she  was  ashamed  to  own  that  she  was  born 
in  Massachusetts.  Magazines  and  newspapers 
are  still  most  eloquent  in  praise  of  the  heroic 
dead  who  took  up  arms  in  defence  of  the  rights 
of  their  country.  They  honestly  believe 
themselves  to  be  a  noble,  chivalrous,  much 
abused  people  ;  the  yankees  a  mean,  money- 
loving,  narrow-minded  set  of  hypocrites,  who 
are  engaged  in  plucking  out  the  mote  in  their 
neighbor's  eye,  while  forgetting  the  beam  in 
their  own. 

"  Nothing  but  the  light  of  education  can  re- 
move these  prejudices.  The  great  need  of  the 
South  is  public  schools,  taught  as  far  as  may  be 
by  Northern  teachers  with  northern  ideas  of 
liberty  and  justice. 

"  I  doubt  if  in  many  places  white  and  black 
can  be  induced  to  attend  the  same  school.  As 
ours  has  been  full  to  over-flowing,  we  have  not 
tried  to  draw  in  white  pupils,  but  I  know  that 
some  teachers  have  made  unsuccesful  attempts 
to  do  so.  They  do  not  object  to  us  as  teach- 
ers, but  to  putting  themselves  on  an  equality 
with  the  colored  race,  while  it  is  plain  if  noth- 
ing is  done  by  others  for  their  elevation,  they 
will  soon  be  far  below  those  whom  they  now 
despise." 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

Fannie  Graves. 

The  composition  referred  to  above  is  as 
follows.  We  give  it  in  punctuation  and 
orthography,  just  as  it  comes  to  us.  The 
hand  writing  is  neat  and  legible  : 

WORK. 

Work  is  a  noble  thing  whether  honored 
or  not.  Ave  know  it  has  been  dishonored 
in  the  South,  because  the  aristocracy  as 
they  are  called,  in  the  South  never  works 


except  in  a  political  harness  or  some- 
thing similar  to  its  character,  they  boast 
of  their  small  hands.  I  think  thats  a  very- 
little  to  boast  of.  in  my  estimation  it  is 
more  to  be  dishonored,  for  Gods  holy 
word  says  every  man  shall  get  his  living 
by  the  sweat  of  his  own  brow  everything 
in  nature  shows  that  a  working  man  is 
much  the  happiest  man  what  seems  hap- 
pier than  a  man  who  have  labored  all  day 
and  goes  home  home  at  night  and  enjoy  his 
labors  with  his  family  in  his  little  cottage, 
that  looks  like  honesty  nobleness  and 
Christianity,  therefore  I  say  work  is  no- 
ble their  is  everything  in  it  to  make  one 
happy,  and  no  one  can  be  happy  without 
it  I  think  God  looks  with  contempt  up- 
on the  idle  and  indolent  man  who  wishes 
to  rob  his  fellow  creatures  of  what  God  has 
intended  to  indulge  his  idleness. 

Kitty  Taylor. 


Uniontown,  D.  C,  June  29th,  1867. 
Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy, 

Secretary  N.  Y.  Branch  F.  U.  Comn. 

Dear  Sir  : — "  I  send  herewith  reports,  in 
ventories,  &c.  Two  of  our  schools  will  close 
next  Tuesday,  2d  July  ;  my  own  school  wiD 
continue  until  the  15th  proximo. 

"  The  school  year  just  closed  has  been  one  of 
very  great  prosperity  with  us.  Indeed  I  can 
scarcely  credit  my  own  senses  when  I  compare 
the  now  with  the  then  of  one  year  ago.  Then 
we  had  no  school  building :  now  we  have  two 
comfortable  buildings  containing  three  rooms. 
Then  your  teachers  had  neither  comfortable 
quarters  nor  board,  now  they  have  a  pleasant 
home. 

"  I  organized  the  first  Sabbath  School  ever 
had  in  this  place  ;  now  we  have  140  pupils — 
300  volumes  in  our  Library,  maps  of  coun- 
tries mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and  a  Melodeon. 

"  I  organized  the  first  night  school.  Of  the 
number  gathered  at  first,  only  7  knew  the  A, 
B,  C's.  I  have  taught  five  nights  each  week 
during  the  year,  and  as  a  result  about  200  have 
learned  to  read.  I  have  two  classes  in  the 
Second  Reader. 

"We have  taught  a  large  number  of  girls 
to  knit  and  sew,  and  some  of  the  women  to 
cut  garments. 

"  In  our  day  schools  we  think  you  will  rare- 
ly find  a  group  of  scholars  that  have  gone  over 
an  equal  amount  and  with  equal  thoroughness. 
Of  course  we  have  a  few  who  are  decidedly 
dull.  On  the  other  hand  we  have  some  who 
have  made  truly  wonderful  progress.  As  ex- 
amples of  the  latter  class,  I  will  only  mention 
the  following:  I  have  one  boy  to  whom  I 
taught  letters  one  year  ago,  now  reading  in 
the  Third  Reader,  has  completed  Montfith'g 
small  Geography,  also  Robinson's  Table  Books, 
(Arithmetic.) 

"  In  April  Mrs.  Dore  sent  to  Miss  Palmer's 
room  a  class  of  /?<y,  who  learned  letters  in  De- 
cember, 1866.  They  will  be  examined  on  the 
whole  of  the  National  First  Reader,  and  one 
half  of  the  Table  Book,  (Arithmetic .) 


268 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


<  Our  schools  have  well  been  filled  during  the  j  ft  New  England  Branch  Commission,)  have 

ii«    onH  a  a  vnii     tui  1 1    i  m  o  m  n  r>    trnm  t  10    tart         -  _   _  S?_      _    _  _  "  . 


year,  and  as  you  will  imagine  from  the  fact 
that  the  Government  farms  foi  sale  to  Freed- 
men  being  located  in  our  immediate  vicinity, 
our  population  must  be  largely  increased  next 
year.  There  should  be  added  to  meet  the  de- 
mand, at  least  one  school  next  year.  As  yet 
our  people  are  poor,  but  in  a  few  years  will  be 
able  to  support  their  own  schools.  Quite  large 


withdrawn  all  of  theirs ;  so,  unless  a  supply  be 
furnished  from  some  other  quarter,  there  will 
be  a  deficiency  of  at  least  twenty-four  from 
last  year. 

u  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  any  Association  North 
favorable  to  the  education  of  the  colored  race, 
and  having  means  to  spare  for  that  purpose, 


numbers  have  bought  land  on  favorable  terms  will  send  to  this  District  the  next  year  as  many 
and  without  doubt  will  make  payment  for  the  !  teachers  as  possible  Hundreds  of  children, 
game  r  '  eager  to  learn,  have  been  denied  the  privilege 

"  In  conversation  with  the  Commissioner  of  I  of,  sc^ools  in  tlie  Pas*>  for.  th*?e*l°n  tbat+.the 
my  District,  he  informed  me  he  would  sup-  \  school-rooms  were  already  filled  to  repletion- 
port  two  schools  next  year,  and  asked  if  our  j  an<* 
Commission  could  help  a  little  longer.    I  told 
him  that  I  would  refer  the  matter  to  you. —  ! 
Our  Commissioners  have  thought  to  tempt  me 
to  leave  my  chosen  work,  by  offering  me  a  Je&T 


more  could  not  be  accommodated.  If 
buildings  and  rooms  could  be  obtained,  one 
hundred  teachers  could  be  profitably  employ- 
ed in  this  District  at  this  time.    After  the  next 


the  Trustees,  by  obtaining  proper  aid 
white  school,  in  town,  with  an  increase  of  $400  i  from  Congress,  expect  to  be  able  to  relieve  all 

I  Northern  Associations  from  the  burden  of 
'  maintaining  teachers  in  the  District  of  Colum- 


to  my  salary." 


Very  truly, 

J.  S.  Dore, 
Teacher  of  Government  Schools. 


bia. 


Truly  yours, 

S.  J.  Bo  WEN, 
Trustee  and  Treasurer  of  Colored  Schools. 


New  York,  July  17,  1867. 
Rev.  C.  Kennedy, 

Got.  Sec.  JST.  T.  Branch  A.F.  U.  Com. 
Dear  Sir  :— "  J ust  before  leaving  Washing- 
ten,  I  received  from  S.  J.  Bo  wen,  Esq.,  Treas- 
urer of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  colored 
schools  for  Washington  and  Georgetown,  a 
communication  relative  to  the  ability  of  that 
Board  to  sustain  an  adequate  number  of 
schools  for  the  colored  children  in  those  cities 
for  the  coming  year — of  which  the  follow- 
ing is  a  copy.  I  respectfully  commend  it  to 
your  careful  consideration,  in  laying  out  the  j  trkt  for  Mav. 
work  for  your  Commission  next  year." 

Truly  yours, 

A  E.  Newton, 
Superintendent,  &c. 


The  following  letter  was  excluded  from 
our  last  number  for  want  of  room.  It  is 
too  good  to  be  omitted  altogether. 

Washington,  D.  C,  June  15, 1867. 


[copy.] 

Washington,  D  C,  July  13,  1867. 
Mr.  A.  E.  Newton, 

Sup't  Colored  Schools. 

Sir  :— "  The  Trustees  of  Colored  Schools  for 
Washington  and  Georgetown  have  voted  to 
employ  thirty  teachers  the  coming  year,  which 
is  all  they  will  be  able  to  do,  and  discharge  the 
obligations  they  are  already  under  for  the  cost 
of  a  school-house  now  building  on  0  street, 
between  Fourth  and  Fifth  streets,  procure  the 
furniture  necessary  for  the  buildings  already 
erected,  and  pay  for  fuel  and  other  indispensa- 
ble articles  during  the  year. 

"There  have  been  over  seventy  teachers 
employed  here  during  the  past  year,  and  there 
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  a  less  number  will 
be  required  the  coming  year.  Of  these  the 
Trustees  will  employ  thirty,  and  it  is  hoped 
that  the  New  York  and  Pennsylvania  Branches 
of  the  Freedman's  Commission  will  furnish  at 
least  eight  each,  making  only  forty-six  in  all. 
I  do  not  know  or  expect  that  any  of  the  indi- 
vidual churches  North  will  continue  their 
teachers.    The  Boston  Association  (meaning 


Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy, 

Cor.  Sec'y  N.  T.  Branch  Commission. 

Dear  Sir  :—"  With  this  I  forward  to  you  the 
monthly  reports  of  the  teachers  in  this  Dis- 
The  number  of  day  schools  is 
19,  evening  1 ;  teachers  20  ;  pupils  enrolled  at 
end  of  mcnth  1072;  in  evening  school  30; 
average  attendance  in  day  schools  903,  even- 
ing 22.  The  evening  school  was  discontinued 
near  the  end  of  the  month. 

"The  number  in  the  day  schools  shows  a  de- 
crease of  only  13  from  the  previous  month, 
218  pupils  having  left,  and  205  new  ones  ad- 
mitted. The  percentage  of  attendance  in  the 
schools  as  a  whole  also  shows  a  slight  falling 
off,  being  84,  instead  of  86,  as  in  April,  while 
the  numbers  always  present  and  always  punc- 
tual considerably  declined,  being  respectively 
224  and  148.  This  was  owing  to  the  unusual- 
ly inclement  weather  which  characterized  the 
month  of  May.  It  is  truly  remarkable  that  so 
many  had  the  courage  and  perseverance  to 
make  their  way  through  the  rain  and  mud— 
Washington  mud,  recollect — on  those  stormy 
days.  Had  we  been  able  to  receive  one  half, 
even,  of  the  new  applicants  who  have  pre- 
sented themselves,  there  would  have  been  no 
falling  off,  but  on  the  contrary  a  large  increase 
of  attendance.  These  applicants,  however, 
have  been  mainly  new  beginners ;  and  as  our 
primary  departments  have  been  full  to  their 
utmost  capacity,  we  have  been  obliged  to  turn 
away  large  numbers. 

"  The  teachers  and  pupils  are  now  earnestly 
engaged  in  preparing  for  the  examinations, 
which  are  to  take  place  during  the  last  two 
weeks  of  June. 


v 


909 


"  The  highest  department  of  the  M  street 
school  (Miss  Lord's,)  has  lost  its  first  class,  as 
has  also  the  adult  department  of  the  same  school 
(Miss  H.  A.  Simmon' s,)  by  transfer  to  the  new 
Howard  University — the  Normal  and  Prepara- 
tory Departments,  of  which  were  opened  early 
in  May.  These  were  classes  of  which  their 
teachers  had  reason  to  be  proud,  and  which 
were  the  admiration  of  all  visitors  to  the 
school.  Their  withdrawal,  so  near  the  end  of 
the  term,  was  a  severe  trial  to  their  teachers 
and  a  serious  loss  to  the  schools  ;  but  it  was 
deemed  best  for  the  pupils  that  they  should 
avail  themselves  of  the  superior  advantages 
offered  at  the  University,  from  its  opening. — 
Several  of  them  have  manifested  good  capaci- 
ties for  becoming  teachers,  and  it  was  thought 
important,  in  view  of  the  great  demand  for 
their  services,  that  they  should  complete  their 
preparations  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Others 
have  entered  for  a  complete  College  course, 
with  every  promise  that  they  will  acquit  them- 
selves with  high  credit.  Our  school  has  thus 
the  honor  of  furnishing  the  first  classes  to  en- 
ter the  University.  Of  their  preparation  for 
this  promotion,  and  the  credit  they  have  re- 
flected upon  their  former  teachers,  you  will  be 
able  to  j  udge  from  the  following  testimonial 
just  received  from  Rev.  Mr.  Williams,  princi- 
pal of  the  Normal  and  Preparatory  Depart- 
ments in  the  University. 


Washington,  D.  C,  June  13, 1867. 
Sup't  Schools  A.  F.  U.  C. 

Dear  Sir: — "It  is  but  justice  to  Miss  Lord — 
one  of  your  teachers — that  I  should  thank  her 
through  you,  for  the  admirable  class  of  students 
which  she  has  sent  to  the  school  under  my 
care.  They  are  not  only  finely  drilled  in  the 
principles  of  the  studies  to  which  they  have 
given  attention,  but,  what  is  more,  they  have 
learned  to  think,  and  to  investigate  for  them- 
selves. Those  only  who  have  taught  in  color- 
ed schools  can  appreciate  the  amount  of  care 
and  labor  which  it  must  have  cost  Miss  Lord 
to  bring  this  class  up  to  its  present  position. — 
This  class  is  an  honor  to  our  Institution,  and 
in  honoring  us,  can  never  cease  to  honor  its 
first  teacher." 

Yours,  very  truly, 
[Signed,]  E.  F.  Williams. 

"  Though  Miss  Lord's  name  alone  is  mention- 
ed in  the  above  testimonial,  I  am  assured  by 
Mr.  Williams  that  equal  thoroughness  of  train- 
ing, as  far  as  they  had  advanced,  was  exhibit- 
ed by  the  class  from  Miss  Simmons'  depart- 
ment. 

"  The  subject  of  temperance  among  the  freed 
people  is  beginning  to  attract  much  attention. 
Hitherto,  so  far  as  my  observation  extends,  the 
colored  people  of  this  city  have  been  remarka- 
bly free  from  the  vice  of  indulgence  in  intoxi- 
cating drinks,  so  prevalent  among  the  whites. 
During  a  residence  of  nearly  four  years,  in 
which  I  have  been  brought  much  in  contact 
with  them,  especially  on  holidays  and  celebra- 
tions, I  have  seen  but  five  colored  persons  in- 
toxicated in  this  city.  To  say  that  I  have  seen 
that  number  of  white  persons  intoxicated,  eve- 


ry week,  on  an  average,  would  probably  be  no 
exaggeration  Nevertheless  it  is  the  general 
impression  that  here,  as  well  as  further  South, 
the  practice  of  using  intoxicating  liquors  is  on 
the  increase  among  the  colored  people,  and 
hence  the  need  of  efficient  measures  being 
taken  to  save  them  from  falling  under  the 
power  of  this  besotting  vice. 

"  The  brief  time  that  remains  before  the  close 
of  the  present  school  term  will  of  course  pre- 
vent a  very  complete  or  thorough  presentation 
of  this  movement,  until  another  season,  but 
it  is  hoped  that  all  laborers  in  this  field  the 
coming  year  will  see  the  need  and  the  value  of 
such  an  effort,  and  vigorously  co-operate  in 
carrying  it  forward  to  a  successful  issue." 
Very  truly  yours, 

A.  E.  Newton, 

Sup  t  for  D.  C. 


CONTRIBUTIONS. 

New- York  Branch. 
Receipts  by  Edward  F.  Davison,  Acting  Trea*uer,  from 
June  18th  to  July  '20th,  1867. 

FROM  AGENTS. 

July  5th,  Rev.  E.  Coltou,  $107  50;  July  8th,  $79  85. 

"     20th,  "    "       "       $184  50. 

"    5th,  Rev.  Mr.  Brett,  $90. 

•«    5th,  Rev.  Mr.  Thomson,  $49  52. 

"    17th,  Rev.  Mr.  Northrup,  at  Havana,  $50;  at 
Horseheads,  $10. 
July  20th,  Rev.  Mr.  Pierce,  at  Moirs,  $150. 

FROM  AUXILIARY  SOCIETIES. 

Hartford,  Conn.  $1,750  ;  Goshen,  N.  Y.  125  ;  Ports- 
mouth, 225  ;  Buffalo,  250  ;  Crown  Point,  100  ;  Weeds- 
port,  110 ;  Schenectady,  84  ;  Ogdensburg,  125  ;  Orango, 
N.  J.  148  ;  Rome,  125  ;  Sing  Sing,  125  ;  Irvington,  125  ; 
Binghampton,  50  ;  North  Shore,  150  ;  Palmyra,  65  ; 
Fair  Haven,  1 ;  Saugerties,  250  ;  Potsdam,  145  ;  Nashua, 
N.  H.  62  ;  Reed's  Corners,  119  05  ;  Fulton,  112  ;  Tomp- 
kins Co.  52  89  ;  Yonkei  s,  625  ;  Cayuga  Co.  50  ;  Ellen  - 
vllle,  17  64  ;  Nyack,  Rockiand  Institute,  125  ;  Pitts- 
burgh, 62  50  ;  Haverstraw,  135  ;  Syracuse,  819  ;  North 
Shore,  400  ;  Pierniont,  17  50  ;  Binghampton,  28  13. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Coll.  Pilgrim  Ch.  Brooklyn,  through  Rev.  Dr.  8tori>\ 
$263  87  ;  Chas.  Cheethani,  England,  68  87  ;  J.  B.  Collins, 
125  ;  Mrs.  Jos.  Sampson,  150  ;  Freedman's  Bureau  tar 
rent  &e.  488  ;  Transportations,  65  ;  "Association  des 
Dames  Frangaises  en  faveur  des  esclaves  affranchis, " 
2,958  25;  A.  B.  Mills,  18  75;  Mr.  Scribner,  Pittsburgh,  3; 
Mr.  Dodd,  Bloomfield,  N.  J.  5  ;  Freedmen's  Bureau 
trans.  45  20  ;  A  Lady,  Pittsburgh,  1  ;  Two  friends,  Lock- 
port,  10  ;  Wm.  M.  Fisk,  Adrian  College,  1. 

Receipts  of  the  American  Freedman's  Union  Commission. 

May  16  Mr.  Shepherd,  to  correct  error  in  his  acct. 

.   with  tho  Am.  Union  Conini  $50  00 

"  18  Nat.  Fr.  Aid  Union,  Great  Britaiu,  £300.  .2012  43 

June  8  A  few  friends,  Fly  Creek,  N.  Y  11  00 

M   19  A  lady,  New  Hamburgh,  N.  Y  3  00 

•«   21  Isaac  Logan,  Nova  Scotia,  $20  gold  25  5* 

July  18  N.  F.  A.  U.  of  Gr.  B.  and  L  £100  6$*  M 

"  22  A  friend,  by  R.  D.  Webb,  Dublin,  £10. . ..  -68  22 

"  23  Rev.  D.  C  Haynes,  Cal  ^^..600  00 

"  25  N.  F.  A.  U.  of  Gr.  B.  and  I.  £50.  .y£>- . • .340  38 


270 


THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


SCHOOL  AND  FAMILY  SERIES  OF 


Willson's  Primary  Speller.    16mo.,  80  pages,  56  Cuts.    15  Cts. 
Willson's  Larger  Speller.    12mo.,  168  pages,  36  Cuts.    35  Cts. 
Willson's  Primer.    12mo.}  48  pages,  107  Cuts.    25  Cts. 
Willson's  First  Header.    12mo.,  84  pages,  132  Cuts.    40  Cts. 
Willson's  Second  Reader.    12mo.,  154  pages,  100  Cuts.    60  Cts. 
A  Third  Reader  :  Intermediate  Series.  12mo.,  216  pp.,  70  Cuts.  80  Cts. 
Willson's  Third  Reader.    12mo.,  264  pages,  142  Cuts.    90  Cts. 
A  Fourth  Reader:  Intermed'e  Series.  12mo.,  312  pp.  65  Cuts.  $1  10. 
Willson's  Fourth  Reader.    12mo.,  360  pages,  164  Cuts.    $1  35. 
Willson's  Fifth  Reader.    12mo.,  540  pages,  208  Cuts.    $1  80. 


Fram  Major-General  O.  O.  Howard,  Commissioner  of  Refugees,  Freedmen  and  Abandoned 

Lands. 

Harper  &  Brothers  :  Messrs. — Your  excellent  Series  has  been  received  and  examined 
with  great  interest.  I  like  the  works  very  much,  and  am  especially  pleased  with  the  Charts 
and  primary  works,  believing  them  unusually  adapted  to  aid  the  child  in  making  a  start. 

Thanking  you  very  kindly  for  the  opportunity  you  have  afforded  me,  I  remain,  very  truly 
yours.  O.  O.  Howard,  Major-General,  Commissioner,  &c.  * 


From  Rev.  John  Kimball,   Washington,  B.  C,  Superintendent  of  Schools,  Bureau  of 

R.  F.  &  A.  L. 

Willson's  Primary  Readers  are  used  in  several  of  our  schools.  I  wish  they  were  used  in 
all  for  the  sake  of  uniformity.  Our  Association  of  Teachers  and  Superintendents  advised  last 
year  the  use  of  another  Series.  I  learned  yesterday  that  the  teachers  of  one  large  school  have 
returned  to  Willson's,  though  obliged  to  purchase  the  books  at  their  own  expense.  The  rea- 
son, as  stated  to  me,  is — there  is  no  sense  in  the  reading  of  the  other  books,  while  Willson's 
fill  the  mind  with  useful  ideas. 

Most  of  our  schools  are  not  advanced  enough  for  the  higher  Readers,  but  I  am  convinced 
from  thorough  personal  examination  that  they  are  the  most  original  and  instructive  School 
Readers  I  have  ever  seen.  I  think  good  teachers  will  have  no  difficulty  in  instructing  intelli- 
gent pupils  in  the  most  scientific  portion  of  the  books. 

John  Kimball,  Supt,  of  Schools,  Bureau  of  R.  F.  &  A.  L. 


Having  full  confidence  in  the  judgment  of  Rev.  John  Kimball,  Bureau  Supt.  of  Education 
for  this  District,  concerning  school  books,  1  have  no  hesitancy  in  endorsing  favorably  Willson's 
Series  as  among  the  best,  if  not  the  best,  yet  offered  to  the  public. 

C.  H.  Howard,  Bvt.  Brig.-Gen.,  Assistant  Commissioner,  D.  C. 


From  W.  M.  Colbt,  General  Superintendent  of  Freedmen 's  Schools  in  Arkansas. 
I  shall  endeavor  to  use  Willson's  Readers  and  Charts  in  my  schools.    Some  years  ago  I  had 
the  pleasure  of  introducing  and  using  in  the  school-room  some  of  the  earlier  numbers  of  the 
Series  of  Readers,  and  I  never  made  better  readers  than  from  those  books.    The  Charts  are  un- 
surpassed by  any. 


From  W.  F.  Mitchell,  Superintendent  of  Freedmen' s  Schools  {in  charge  of  Pa.  Freedmen '« 
Association)  for  Middle  Tennessee  and  Northern  Alabama. 
I  have  examined  Willson's  Intermediate  Third  Reader,  and  consider  it  a  most  excellent 
book.    The  Series  may  now  be  considered  complete,  and  Willson's  Readers  are  unsurpassed  by 
any  in  the  English  language. 


We  will  furnish  these  books  for  introduction,  or  for  examination  with  a  view  to  introduc- 
tion, on  very  liberal  terms. 


HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  Franklin  Square,  MT.  Y. 


THE  AMERICAN  FKEEDMAX.  271 


HABPBB  &c  BROTHERS 

ALSO  PUBLISH  A  SERIES  OF 

SCHOOL  AND  FAMILY  CHARTS, 

TWENTY-TWO  IN  NUMBER 

By  MAKCIUS  WILLSON  AND  N.  A.  CALKINS. 


These  Charts  are  designed,  in  connection  with  the  accompanying  Manual  of  Instruction 
by  Marcius  Willson  (12mo.  $1,50,)  and  the  Primary  Object  Lessons  by  N.  A.  Caulkins  (12mo. 
$1  50,)  to  furnish  the  teacher  with  the  requisite  aids  for  the  practical  application  of  a  true  Byg- 
tern  of  Elementary  Instruction.  In  the  six  Reading  Charts  the  type  is  sufficiently  large  to  be 
easily  read  at  a  distance  of  twenty  feet.  These  Charts  will  be  furnished  either  separately  or 
in  full  sets,  either  mounted  or  in  sheets,  and  also,  for  Family  Use,  in  neat  atlas  form,  at  the  fol- 
lowing prices.  When  mounted,  two  are  on  a  card  of  the  size  of  each  Chart,  about  22  by  30 
inches.    They  are  sent  by  mail,  in  sheets,  at  the  prices  named  : 


READING. 

In  Sheets.  Mounted. 

No.  I.    Elementary:  Sixty  illustrated  Words   35  cente.  $1  25 

No.  II.    Reading  :  First  Lessons   35  cents. 

No.  III.  Reading:  Second  Lessons   35  cents. 

No.  IV.  Reading:  Third  Lessons   35  cents.  " 

No.  V.  Reading  :  Fourth  Lessons   35  cents. 

No.  VI.  Reading :  Fifth  Lessons   35  cents. 

MI8CKLLANIDOI  rs. 

No.  VII.   Elementary  Sounds   35  cents    $1  2o 

No.  VIII.  Phonic  Spelling   35  cents.  " 

No.  IX.     Writing  Chart  '.   35  cents. 

No.  X.     Drawing  and  Perspective...-.   35  cents. 

No.  XI.  Lines  and  Measures   35  cents.  " 

No.  XII.  Forms  and  Solids   85  cents. 

COLORS. 

No,  XIII.  Familiar  Colors,  accompanied  by  a  duplicate  set  of  Hand  Color- 
Cards   $1  50      $3  20 

No.  XIV.  Chromatic  Scale  of  Colors   $120 

ZOOLOGICAL. 

No.  XV.      Animals.    Economical  Uses   60  cents.  £1  S?> 

No.  XVI.    Classification  of  Animals   60  cents.  ' 

No.  XVII.    Birds.    Their  Classification   60  cents. 

No.  XVIII.  Reptiles  and  Fishes   60  cents. 

BOTANICAL. 

No.  XIX.   Botanical  Forms,  &c   GO  cents.      $1  83 

No.  XX.     Classification  of  Plants   60  cents. 

No.  XXI.  Economical  Uses  of  Plants   00  cents. 

No.  XXII.  Economical  Uses,  continued   00  cents. 

Price  of  the  entire  Set,  in  Sheets   $11  70 

"    Mounted   18  00 

"   Atlas  Form   20  00 


There  has  been  nothing  published  in  the  educational  line  for  years  that,  to  our  mind,  is  sueh 

a  means  of  conveying  knowledge  as  these  Charts  and  the  Manual  that  accompanies  them. — 
Iowa  Instructor. 

Wilson's  Manual  is  the  truest  American  expression  of  the  principles  of  Pestalottzzi  that 
has  yet  been  made.  Mr.  Willson  is  legitimately  carrying  out,  in  this  Manual  and  the  a.vom- 
panying  Charts,  the  basis  of  his  admirable  system  of  School  Readers — JT,  T.  Teacher. 


272 


THE  AMERICAN  FREED  MAN. 


FRENCH'S  ARITHMETICS. 


This  series,  when  completed  will  consist  of  Five  Boooks,  viz.  : 
I.  FIEST  LESSONS  IN  NUMBEES,    (Just  published.) 
II.  PRIMARY  ARITHMETIC  FOR  THE  SLATE.    (In  press.) 

III.  MENTAL  ARITHMETIC.    (In  press.) 

IV.  COMMON  SCHOOL  ARITHMETIC.    (In  press.) 

V.  ACADEMIC  ARITHMETIC.    (In  preparation.) 


FIRST  LESSONS  IN  P!iJi¥lBERS, 

In  the  natural  order.  By  John  H.  French,  LL.  D.  Handsomely  Illus- 
trated.   16mo.,  40  Cents. 

This  little  book  is  divided  into  fifteen  sections,  embracing  the  subjects  of  Counting,  Addi- 
tion, Subtraction,  Multiplication  and  Division  ;  the  Fractional  parts  of  Numbers,  Halves, 
Thirds,  and  Fourths ;  Tables  of  the  denominations  of  Money,  Weights,  and  Measures  in  com- 
mon use  ;  the  tables  of  combinations  arranged  upon  a  new  plan ;  and  a  Manual  of  Suggestions 
for  the  use  of  teachers. 

iglT  The  other  Books  of  the  Series  will  contain  many  new  and  valuable  features  thai 
will  especially  commend  them  to  the  practical  wants  of  the  age. 


HARPER'S  WRITING  BOOKS. 

Symmetrical  Penmanship,  with  marginal  Drawing  Lessons.  In  Ten 
Numbers.  We  have  just  published  the  first  four  numbers  of  our  New 
Series  of  Writing  and  Drawing  Books,  for  Schools  and  Families.  Price, 
per  dozen,  wholesale,  $2  00. 

The  idea  of  embracing  in  the  same  series  of  Copy-Books  a  system  of  Practical  Penman- 
ship and  a  course  of  Lessons  in  Drawing,  is  a  new  one.  Teachers  and  parents  are  well  aware 
that 

CHILDREN  ARE  FOND  OF  MAKING  PICTURES, 
and  that  exercises  in  drawing  improve  a  person's  hand- writing,  and  vice  versa.    Drawing  has 
not  been  generally  introduced  into  schools,  because  no  suitable  books  could  be  obtained,  and 
most  teachers  are  not  competent  to  give  instruction  in  the  art  without  a  book. 

This  Series  contains  a  Symmetrical  System  of  Penmanship,  easily  acquired  and  rapidly 
written.  The  "helps'' to  the  acquisition  of  this  system  are  simple  and  valuable,  and  the  sys- 
tem is  what  its  name  indicates,  "symmetrical" — every  letter  being  formed  upon  geometrical 
principles  and  of  unvarying  proportions. 

The  writing  and  the  marginal  drawing-lessons  occupy  the  entire  width  of  each  page.  The 
drawing  lessons  commence  with  straight  lines  of  the  same  slope  as  the  main  lii\es  of  the 
writing,  and  progress,  step  by  step,  through  straight  and  curved  lines,  geometrical  forms,  ar- 
chitecture, foliage,  perspective,  figures  of  animals,  persons,  etc.  Rules  and  directions  are  print- 
ed upon  the  covers  of  each  book,  making  each  Number  complete  iu  itself. 

Every  Primary  School  should  have 

HARPER'S  SCHOOL  AND  FAMILY  SLATE, 

With  accompanying  Cards. 
For  Exercises  in  Writing,  Printing,  Drawing  and  Numbers. 

HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  Publishers. 
New  Ym%  September,  1866. 


THE 

%ntt\tty  Jtfrtman. 

[Address,  30  Vesey  Street;  or,  P.  O.  Box  5733.] 


NEW- YORK,  SEPTEMBER,  1867.  [No.  6. 


The  American  Freedman's  "Union  Commission, 

30  Vesey  Street,  New- York  City. 

"  The  object  of  this  Commission  is  the  relief,  education,  and  elevation  of  the  Freedmen  of  the  United  States,  and  to 
aid  and  cooperate  with  the  people  of  the  South,  without  distinction  of  race  or  color,  in  the  improvement  of  their  condi- 
tion upon  the  basis  of  industry,  education,  freedom,  and  Christian  morality.  No  school  or  depot  of  supplies  shall  be 
maintained  from  the  benefits  of  which  any  shall  be  excluded  because  of  color." — Art.  II.,  Constitution. 


Chief- Just  ice  S.  P.  Chase,  President.  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  Gen.  Sec,  1 

Rev.  Jos.  P.  Thompson,  D.D.,  N.  Y.,  )  J.  Miller  McKim,  Cor.  Sea,       I  30  Vesey  St.,  N.  Y. 

William  Lloyd  Gakrison,  Boston,  v  Vice-Presidents.  Geo.  Cabot  Ward,  Treas.,  |     P.  0.  Box  5733. 

Charles  G.  Hammond,  Chicago,      )  Francis  G.  Shaw,  Ch.  Ex.  Com.,  J 

EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE. 

  John  Parkman,  Martin  Brimmer,  Wendell  P.  Garrison. 

  Francis  George  Shaw,  Henry  A.  Dike,  Nathan  Bishop.j: 

........  Francis  R.  Cope,  Samuel  S.  White. 

  Hugh  L.  Bond,  F.  Israel,  Chas.  W.  Bond. 

  R.  W.  Patterson,  S.  B.  Gookins,  M.  D.  C.  Crawford. 

  William  Hogarth,  Supply  Chase,  David  Plumb. 

BRANCH  OFFICES. 

S  Studio  Building,  Boston,   Rev.  J.  H.  Chapin,  Secretary. 

30  Vesey  Street,  New-York,   Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy,  Secretary. 

711  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,   Robert  R.  Corson,  Secretary. 

5  and  7  Tyson's  Building,  Baltimore,    ....  Rev.  F.  Israel,  Secretary. 

25  Lombard  Block,  Chicago,   Rev.  H.  B.  Holmes,  Secretary. 

Detroit,   Rev.  S.  Chase,  Secretary. 

San  Francisco,  Cal.,   Rev.  D.  C.  Haynes,  D.D.,  Secretary. 


Vol.  II.] 


New-England  Branch, 
New-York  Branch, 
Pennsylvania  Branch, 
Baltimore  Branch,  .  . 
North-Western  Branch, 
Michigan  Branch,  .  . 


New-England,  

New-York,  

Pennsylvania,  

Maryland,  

North- Western,  

Michigan,  

Pacific  Coast,  


30  Vesey  Street,  N.  Y.  City. 

This  journal  is  published  as  the  central  organ  of  the  Freedman's  Union  Commission,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Branches  and  the  information  of  all  who  are  interested  in  the  work  of  education  in  the  South.  • 

Copies  will  be  furnished  without  charge  to  any  Branch  of  the  Commission  for  distribution  in  connection  with 
their  organs,  or  for  such  other  use  as  may  best  subserve  the  interests  of  their  work.  Communications  should  be 
addressed  to  the  General  Secretary,  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  30  Vesey  Street,  New-York  City. 

TERMS. 

Advertisements,  one  insertion,  at  the  rate  of  $30  per  page  for  ordinary  inside  pages  ;  but  for  an  inside  page  oppo- 
site general  reading  matter,  or  for  the  outside  (last)  page  of  this  journal,  the  price  is  $40— payable,  in  all  cases,  as  soon 
as  the  journal  is  published.  \  '- 

One  copy  of  THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN  to  a  regular  subscriber  one  year,  (twelve  numbers,)  one  dollar. 

Any  person  contributing  five  dollars  per  annum  to  the  cause,  to  any  Branch  of  this  Commission,  is  entitled  to 
receive  one  copy  of  this  journal  free.    Single  copies,  15  cents.    Copies  for  advertisers,  10  cents  each. 


274 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


HOW  TO  BUILD. 

This  is  the  question  of  the  day.  To  aid  in 
its  solution,  the  American  Freedman's  Union 
Commission  is  laboring  with  all  its  might. 
"  'What  constitutes  a  state"  we  need  not  be 
told.  Sir  William  Jones  has  answered  that 
question  in  words  that  have  burnt  their  im- 
press upon  every  memory.    It  is  : 

"  Men,  high-minded  men  ; 
Men  who  their  duties  know, 

But  know  their  rights,  and,  knowing,  dare  maintain  ; 
Prevent  the  long-aimed  blow, 
And  crush  the  tyrants  while  they  rend  the  chain — 
These  constitute  a  state." 

But  where  are  we  to  get  these  "  men " — 
these  "  high-minded  men"  ?  There  is  only  one 
answer  to  this  question  :  We  must  make  them. 
Under  God,  we  must  create  them.  How  is  that 
to  be  done?  By  taking  the  raw  material  so 
abundantly  provided  to  our  hand,  and  working 
it  up  by  the  means  which  Heaven  has  appointed 
for  the  purpose. 

The  Puritans  that  landed  on  Plymouth  Rock 
founded  a  state,  and  their  descendants  have 
raised  it  to  unexcelled  honor  and  renown. 
How  have  they  done  it  ?  Let  one  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished of  these  descendants,  the  greatest 
state-builder  of  modern  days,  answer.  Horace 
Mann,  in  his  celebrated  Tenth  Annual  Report, 
speaking  of  the  wealth  and  power  of  Massa- 
chusetts, says : 

"  Whence  come  her  means  to  give,  with  each 
returning  year,  more  than  a  million*  of  dollars 
to  public  education  ;  more  than  another  mil- 
lion to  religion ;  and  more  than  a  third  to 
ameliorate  and  succor  the  afflicted  and  the 
ignorant  at  home,  and  to  bless,  in  distant  lands, 
those  who  sit  in  the  region  and  shadow  of 
death  ?  How  does  she  support  her  poor,  main- 
tain her  public  ways,  and  contribute  such  vast 
sums  for  purposes  of  internal  improvement, 
besides  maintaining  her  immense  commercial 
transactions  with  every  zone  in  the  world  ? 

"  Has  she  a  vast  domain  ?  Her  whole  territory 
would  not  make  a  court-yard  of  respectable 
dimensions  to  stand  in  front  of  many  of  the 
States  and  Territories  belonging  to  ihe  Union. 

"  Does  she  draw  revenues  from  conquered  pro- 
vinces or  subjugated  realms?  She  conquers 
nothing,  she  subdues  nothing,  save  the  great 
elemental  forces  of  nature,  which  God  gives 
freely,  whenever  and  wherever  they  are  asked 
for  in  the  language  of  genius  and  science  ;  and 
in  regard  to  which  no  profusion  or  prodigality 
to  one  can  diminish  the  bounty  always  ready 
for  others. 

"  Does  she  live  by  the  toil  of  a  race  of  serfs 
and  vassals  whom  she  holds  in  personal  and 
hereditary  bondage  —  by  one  comprehensive  I 
and  sovereign  act  of  violence  seizing  upon  both 

*  This  was  written,  it  will  be  remembered,  nearly  twenty 
years  ago. — Ed.  Fkeedman.  I 


body  and  soul  at  once,  and  superseding  the 
thousand  acts  of  plunder  which  make  up  the 
life  of  a  common  robber?  Every  man  who 
treads  her  sacred  soil  is  free ;  all  are  free  alike  ; 
and  within  her  borders,  for  any  purpose  connect- 
ed with  human  slavery,  iron  will  not  be  welded 
into  a  fetter. 

"  Has  she  rich  mines  of  the  precious  metals  ? 
In  all  her  coffers  there  is  not  a  drachm  of  sil- 
ver or  of  gold  which  has  not  been  obtained  by 
the  sweat  of  her  brow  or  the  vigor  of  her 
brain. 

"  Has  she  magazines  of  mineral  wealth  imbed- 
ded in  the  earth,  or  are  her  soil  and  climate  so 
spontaneously  exuberant  that  she  reaps  luxu- 
riant harvests  from  uncultivated  fields  ?  Alas ! 
the  orator  has  barbed  his  satire  by  declaring  her 
only  natural  productions  to  be  granite  and  ice  ! 

"Whence,  then,  I  again  ask,  comes  her  wealth  ? 
— I  do  not  mean  the  gorgeous  wealth  which  is 
displayed  in  the  voluptuous  and  too  often  ener- 
vating residences  of  the  affluent,  but  that  gol- 
den mean  of  property — such  as  Agur  asked  for 
in  his  perfect  prayer — which  carries  blessings 
in  its  train  to  thousands  of  householders  ;  which 
spreads  solid  comfort  and  competence  through 
the  dwellings  of  the  land  ;  which  furnishes  the 
means  of  instruction,  of  social  pleasures  and 
refinement,  to  the  citizens  at  large  ;  which  saves 
from  the  cruel  sufferings  and  the  more  cruel 
temptations  of  penury.  The  families,  scattered 
over  her  hills  and  along  her  valleys,  have  not 
merely  a  shelter  from  the  inclemencies  of  the 
seasons,  but  the  sanctuary  of  a  home.  Not  on- 
ly food,  but  books,  are  spread  upon  their  tables. 
Her  commonest  houses  have  the  means  of  hos- 
pitality ;  they  have  appliances  for  sickness,  and 
resources  laid  up  against  accident  and  the  infir- 
mities of  age.  Whether  in  her  rural  districts 
or  her  populous  towns,  a  wandering,  native-born 
beggar  is  a  prodigy,  and  the  twelve  millions  of 
dollars  deposited  in  her  savings  institutions  do 
not  more  loudly  proclaim  the  frugality  and  pro- 
vidence of  the  past,  than  they  foretell  the  com- 
petence andenjoyments  of  the  future. 

"  One  copious,  exhaustless  fountain  supplies  all 
this  abundance.  It  is  EDUCATION— the  intel- 
lectual, moral,  and  RELIGIOUS  education  of 
the  people.  Having  no  other  mines  to  work, 
Massachusetts  has  mined  into  the  human  intel- 
lect, and,  from  its  limitless  resources,  she  has 
won  more  sustaining  and  enduring  prosperity 
and  happiness  than  if  she  had  been  founded  on 
a  stratification  of  silver  and  gold  reaching 
deeper  down  than  geology  has  yet  penetrated. 
From  her  high  religious  convictions,  she  has 
learned  that  great  lesson — to  set  a  value  upon 
time.  Regarding  the  faculties  as  the  gift  of 
God,  she  has  felt  bound  both  to  use  and  to  im- 
prove them.  Mingling  skill  and  intelligence 
with  the  daily  occupations  of  life,  she  has  made 
labor  honorable ;  and,  as  a  necessary  conse- 
quence, idleness  is  disgraceful.  Knowledge  has 
been  the  ambition  of  her  sons,  and  she  has  re- 
verenced and  venerated  the  purity  and  chastity 
of  her  matrons  and  her  daughters.  At  the 
hearth-stone,  at  the  family  table,  and  at  the 
family  altar — on  all  those  occasions  where  the 
I  structure  of  the  youthful  character  is  buildcdup, 
these  sentiments  of  love  for  knowledge  and  of 
reverence  for  maidenly  virtue  have  been  build- 
I  ed  in ;  and  there  they  stand,  so  wrought  and 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


275 


mingled  with  the  fibres  of  being,  that  none  but 
God  can  tell  which  is  nature  and  which  is  edu- 
cation ;  which  we  owe  primarily  to  the  grace 
of  heaven,  and  which  to  the  cooperating  wis- 
dom of  the  institutions  of  men.  Verily,  verily, 
not  as  we  ought  have  we  obeyed  the  laws  of 
Jehovah,  or  imitated  the  divine  example  of  the 
Saviour  ;  and  yet,  for  such  imperfect  obedience 
and  distant  imitation  as  we  have  rendered,  God 
has  showered  down  manna  from  the  heavens, 
and  opened  a  rock  whence  flow  living  waters  to 
gladden  every  thirsty  place.  He  who  studies 
the  present  or  the  historic  character  of  Massa- 
chusetts will  see — and  he  who  studies  it  most 
profoundly  will  see  most  clearly — that  what- 
ever of  abundance,  of  intelligence,  or  of  integ- 
rity, whatever  of  character  at  home  or  of  re- 
nown abroad  she  may  possess — all  has  been 
evolved  from  the  enlightened  and  at  least  par- 
tially Christianized  mind,  not  of  a  few,  but  of 
the  great  masses  of  her  people.  They  are  not 
the  result  of  outward  riches  or  art  brought 
around  it,  or  laminated  over  it,  but  of  an 
awakened  inward  force,  working  energetically 
outward,  and  fashioning  the  most  intractable 
circumstances  to  the  dominion  of  its  own  de- 
sires and  resolves ;  and  this  force  has  been 
awakened  and  its  unspent  energies  replenished, 
more  than  from  all  things  else,  by  her  Common 
Schools." 

How  are  these  common  schools  established 
and  maintained  ?  By  law,  and  at  the  expense 
of  the  people.    The  law  reads  thus : 

"  In  every  town  in  this  commonwealth  there 
shall  be  kept  in  each  year,  at  the  charge  of  the 
town,  by  a  teacher  or  teachers  of  competent 
ability  and  good  morals,  one  school  for  the  in- 
struction of  children  in  orthography,  reading, 
writing,  English  grammar,  geography,  arith- 
metic, and  good  behavior" — Rev.  Stat.  ch.  56, 
§1- 

How  is  it  that  people  of  all  classes,  all  par- 
ties, and  all  sects  in  Massachusetts  glory  in 
and  joyfully  consent  to  be  taxed  for  the  support 
of  this  common-school  system?  Because  on 
the  question  that  comes  nearest  home  to  every 
bosom,  that  system  is  based  on  a  principle  so 
broad,  so  just,  and  so  beneficent,  that  it  com- 
mends itself  to  the  implicit  confidence  of  men 
of  all  classes,  sects,  and  parties.  That  principle 
is  set  forth  incidentally  in  the  language  of  the 
law  concerning  the  "  moral  qualifications"  of 
teachers : 

"  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  .  .  .  all  preceptors 
and  teachers  of  academies  and  all  other  in- 
structors of  youth  to  exert  their  best  endeavors 
to  impress  on  the  minds  of  children  and  youth 
committed  to  their  care  and  instruction  the 
principles  of  piety,  justice,  and  a  sacred  regard 
to  truth  ;  love  to  their  country,  humanity,  and 
universal  benevolence ;  sobriety,  industry,  and 
frugality ;  chastity,  moderation,  and  tempe- 
rance ;  and  those  other  virtues  which  are  the 
ornament  of  human  society,  and  the  basis  upon 
which  a  republican  constitution  is  founded  ; 
and  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  such  instructors  to 


endeavor  to  lead  their  pupils,  as  their  ages  and 
capacities  will  admit,  into  a  clear  understand- 
ing of  the  tendency  of  the  above-mentioned 
virtues,  to  preserve  and  perfect  a  republican 
constitution,  and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty, 
as  well  as  to  promote  their  future  happiness, 
and  also  to  point  out  to  them  the  evil  of  the 
opposite  vices." — Rev.  Stat.  ch.  23,  §  7. 

This  feature  of  the  law,  more  than  any  other, 
reveals  the  secret  of  the  success  of  the  common- 
school  system  of  Massachusetts,  which  is  sub- 
stantially the  common-school  system  of  all  the 
Northern  States.  It  is  by  means  of  this  system 
that  we  hope  to  rebuild  the  South  and  repair 
the  ravages  made  by  war  and  slavery.  The 
partial  success  attending  our  labors  thus  far 
ensures  complete  triumph  in  the  end. 


COOPERATION. 

In  our  last  number  we  referred  to  an  infor- 
mal meeting  of  teachers  and  others,  held  at 
Boston  in  July  last,  in  which  the  subject  of  co- 
operation with  the  people  of  the  South  was  the 
theme  of  discussion.  For  a  fuller  discussion 
of  this  subject  a  conference  of  representa- 
tives of  all  societies  laboring  among  the 
freedmen  has  been  called,  to  be  held  at  the 
rooms  of  the  Commission,  No.  30  Vesey 
street,  on  Tuesday,  September  10th.  Invita- 
tions have  been  sent  also  to  General  How- 
ard and  Superintendent  Alvord.  To  the  call 
thus  issued  certain  resolutions  were  attached, 
not,  it  will  be  understood,  for  any  other  purpose 
than  to  indicate  the  subject  to  be  brought  be- 
fore the  conference,  and  to  bring  it  before  the 
different  societies  in  such  a  form  that  their  dele- 
gates could  come  advised  in  advance  of  the 
opinion  of  their  constituency. 

The  subject  is  not  only  one  of  importance, 
but  it  is  important  that  there  should  be  some 
general  consent  in  the  principles  to  be  adopted. 
We  hope  every  Society  laboring  among  the 
freed-people  in  the  cause  of  education,  whether 
connected  with  the  Commission  or  not,  will  be 
represented  at  this  meeting. 


EDUCATION   IN  ENGLAND. 

An  English  clergyman  named  Frazer  has 
been  making  a  report  to  the  Educational  Com- 
mission on  the  subject  of  the  common  schools 
of  the  United  States  and  Canada,  in  which  he 
makes  statements  as  likely  to  be  useful  on  this 
side  of  the  water  as  on  the  other.  Among 
them  is  the  following : 

"  I  am  afraid  that  we  in  England,  in  our  zeai 
for  'denominational  education,'  lay  too  much 
stress  upon  the  adjective,  too  little  upon  the 


I 


276 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


substantive ;  we  seem  to  care  more  for  the  con- 
nection of  our  schools  with  particular  religious 
communities  than  for  the  fruit  they  really  pro- 
duce ;  we  are  too  often  content  to  hear  that 
religious  instruction  is  given,  and  don't  pursue 
the  inquiry  far  enough  to  ascertain  whether  it 
is  given  intelligently,  by  competent  teachers. 
I  confess  to  the  conviction  growing  more  and 
more  in  my  own  mind,  strengthened  too  by 
what  I  have  heard  and  seen  in  America,  that 
what  we  need  more  of  in  England  is  intelligent 
education — a  real  quickening  of  the  minds  of 
the  people.  And  I  say  this  quite  as  much  in 
the  interest  of  religion  as  at  the  prospect  of 
political  changes." 

Mr.  Frazer  added  :  "■  The  difficulty  I  find,  as 
a  country  clergyman,  in  teaching  and  preach- 
ing to  an  adult  mixed  congregation  lies  in  the 
slow  and  heavy  intellectual  movement  of  the 
mass  of  my  hearers  ;  their  scanty  vocabulary ; 
their  inability  to  appreciate  an  argument  or 
follow  a  train  of  thought ;  their  want  of  gene- 
ral and  broad  mental  culture.    .    .  . 

"  I  do  not  think  it  can  be  maintained  that 
the  religious  teaching  of  our  schools  has  pro- 
duced religious  intelligence  or  religious  sta- 
bility in  our  people,  at  any  rate,  not  in  that 
class  of  our  people  who,  in  their  school  days, 
had  most  of  such  teaching  ;  for  the  religious 
instruction  given  in  one  of  our  elementary 
schools  is  three  times  larger  in  quantity  and 
time  than  is  received  by  a  boy  at  Eton  or 
Rugby." 

•  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  in  England,  as  else- 
where, the  argument  in  favor  of  denomination 
schools,  on  the  ground  of  the  need  of  religious 
instruction,  is  utterly  without  force,  and,  when 
the  facts  are  understood,  recoil  on  those  who 
urge  it. 


FLORIDA. 

The  aspect  of  affairs  in  this  heretofore  but 
little  cultivated  State  is  promising.  Its  newly- 
appointed  Superintendent  of  Education,  Mr.  C. 
Thurston  Chase,  has  entered  upon  his  work 
with  characteristic  vigor,  and  the  prospect  is, 
that  at  the  end  of  the  year  now  opening  the 
work  of  education  will  have  taken  a  noticeable 
stride  forward.  The  following  letter  speaks 
for  itself  ': 

Bureau  Refugees,  Freedmen,  and^I 
Abandoned  Lands, 
Office  Supt.  of  Education, 
Jacksonville,  Fla.,  August  7,  1867. J 
Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  Gen.  Sec'y,<  etc.  : 

Dear  Sir  :  Your  kind  invitation  to  write  you 
has  not  been  forgotten,  nor  the  interests  of 
your  Commissioners.  I  have  been  but  ten 
months  in  the  work  here.  I  had  nothing  to 
eay  on  "  putting  on  the  armor,"  and  have  not 
worn  it  long  enough  to  say  much  yet. 

I  found  those  schools  of  the  Freedman's 
Union  Commission  which  I  could  visit  in  fine 
condition,  the  teachers  censurable  for  but 
tme  thing — overwork.  Beyond  these  there 
weix!  a  few  fair  schools,  but  things  generally 


were  disorganized.  There  was  not  even  a  sys- 
tem of  reporting  schools.  Our  Bureau  agent 
reports  some  half-dozen  schools  taught  in  "  un- 
known alleys  by  equally  unknown  wizards  and 
vixens."  ...  I  have,  as  you  know,  consider- 
able faith  in  the  capacity  of  the  freedmen  to 
sustain  their  schools  and  help  at  building 
school-houses  ;  so  I  have  made  the  inquiry :  If  a 
benevolent  association  will  send  you  a  teacher 
and  pay  her  salary,  will  you  supply  good  board 
and  room-rent  free?  They  reply  favorably. 
The  Bureau  supplies  the  materials  only  for 
school-houses ;  the  people  do  the  work  of  con- 
struction according  to  plans  furnished  by  this 
office.  We  make  a  thousand  dollars  put  vp 
and  equip  nicely,  with  desks  and  blackboards, 
separate  ante-rooms,  and  a  teacher's  or  recita- 
tion-room, all  complete,  three  school-houses, 
for  fifty  or  sixty  pupils  each,  except  in  the 
larger  towns.  White  and  colored  help  in  the 
matter  of  inaugurating  the  school  work,  and 
propose,  in  some  instances,  to  send  their  child- 
ren to  the  same  school.  Of  course,  the  school- 
house  is  for  the  freedmen  ;  but  we  exhort  them 
to  be  kind  to  the  poor  children  of  the  opposite 
race,  since  it  is  not  their  fault  that  they  are 
white  and  that  their  fathers  were  rebels. 

It  has  been  a  matter  of  regret  with  us  that 
you  have  not  extended  aid  about  a  Normal 
School  for  Florida.  We  could  not  promise  much, 
it  is  true,  but  we  needed  \he  institution.  The 
school  law,  of  which  we  have  heard  so  much 
praise,  is  not  what  it  has  been  represented  to 
be.  It  takes  a  dollar  out  of  every  adult  freed- 
man,  pays  a  percentage  to  tax-collectors,  the 
contributions  of  one  thousand  of  them  go  to  the 
State  Superintendent  of  Colored  Schools,  and 
the  teachers  are  supposed  to  get  the  balance. 
But,  beyond  a  few  in  and  around  Tallahassee, 
very  few  have  received  any  thing.  The  law  is 
directly  at  variance  with  the  Civil  Rights  Bill, 
and  has  in  it  a  section  as  adverse,  when  execu- 
ted by  rebel  hands,  as  the  old  slave  code  itself. 

Florida  is  a  new  State  ;  she  is  poor  ;  she  has 
no  energy  ;  an  immense  patrimony  in  lands 
with  no  inhabitants. 

Mr.  Kennedy  advises  me  that  the  New- York 
Branch  will  return  its  quota  of  teachers  as 
heretofore.  They  will  be  welcomed.  I  think 
at  some  points  the  freedmen  may  arrange  to 
hire  and  pay  their  own  teachers.  Yet  there 
will  be  work  enough  for  all  who  may  come. 

Wishing  you  every  success,  I  am,  very  truly 
yours,  C.  Thurston  Chase, 

Supt.  Education,  Florida. 

The  "  regret  about  a  normal  school  "  ex- 
pressed by  Mr.  Chase,  we  are  happy  to  say,  no 
longer  exists,  all  occasion  for  it  having  been  re- 
moved by  a  vote  of  our  Commission  appropriat- 
ing $2000  toward  the  purchase  and  improve- 
ment of  a  lot  in  Jacksonville  for  the  purpose, 
and  an  order  from  Gen.  Howard  for  the  imme- 
diate erection  of  a  suitable  building.  The 
building  at  present  contemplated  will  cost 
about  $6000.  In  addition  to  this,  General 
Howard  has  set  aside  $5000  from  the  Refugee 
|  and  Freedmen  Fund,  as  an  endowment  of  the 
institution.    A  corps  of  teachers,  with  a  compe- 


THE    AMERICAN    FREEDM  AN. 


277 


shrubbery  must  be  planted  from  time  to  time 
in  and  around  the  school  lot.  Especially  must 
privies  be  provided  in  separate  yards  for  boys 
and  girls,  not  less  than  one  hundred  feet  dis- 
tant from  the  school-house.  Also,  a  well  or 
cistern  on  the  lot,  unless  there  is  good  water 
near  by  to  which  access  may  be  had.  The  abi- 
lity of  the  people  to  support  a  teacher,  wholly 
or  in  part,  and  to  provide  books,  should  be 
stated. 

9.  Applications  should  be  forwarded  through 
the  Sub-Assistant  Commissioners  or  Special 
Agents  of  Districts  to  headquarters. 

C.  Thurston  Chase, 

Supt.  Education. 


tent  principal,  has  been  designated,  and  the 
expectation  is,  that  by  December  the  whole 
thing  will  be  in  active  operation. 


HOW  TO  GET  A  SCHOOL. 

The  following  directions  for  getting  up  a 
school  were  intended  for  Florida,  and  constitute 
one  of  the  circulars  which  Mr.  Chase  is  distrib- 
uting in  that  State  ;  but  they  will  apply  with 
equal  force  to  any  other  part  of  the  South,  and 
we  therefore  give  them  the  publicity  of  our  col- 
umns: 

Office  Supt.  of  Education,  ) 
Jacksonville,  Fla.,  June  30,  1867.  \ 
When  a  school  is  wanted  in  a  village  or 
neighborhood,  let  the  people  organize  them- 
selves into  a  school  society.  They  may  then 
get  a  school-house  as  well  as  a  school  by  tak- 
ing hold  with  energy. 

They  may  go  to  work  in  this  way  : 

1.  Call  a  public  meeting  of  all  persons  in- 
terested, without  distinction  of  race,  color,  or 
former  condition,  and  let  the  notice  be  widely 
circulated  beforehand. 

2.  Secure  good  speakers  so  as  to  have  the 
object  of  the  meeting,  and  the  benefits  to  be 
derived,  ably  set  forth ;  also  what  the  people 
should  do,  and  what  the  Bureau  may  do  to  aid 
them. 

3.  What  will  be  expected  of  the  people  is 
this :  After  organizing  their  society,  they  should 
secure,  by  gift  or  purchase,  the  perfect  title  to 
a  lot  of  land,  of  not  less  than  one  acre,  to  be 
held  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  for  school  pur- 
poses. They  should  next  secure  good  pledges 
of  labor,  and.  money  enough  to  provide  for  all 
the  work  required  in  the  erection  of  the  build- 
ing, fences,  grading  the  lot,  etc. 

4.  The  Bureau  makes  no  pledges  in  advance 
in  any  case.  The  Assistant  Commissioner  has 
some  funds  to  use  in  the  erection  of  school- 
houses,  and  desires  to  spend  the  money  so  as 
to  extend  the  greatest  good  to  the  greatest 
number.  He  will  generally  endeavor  to  sup- 
ply all  the  lumber,  nails,  etc.,  needed  for  the 
construction  of  the  building. 

5.  No  funds  will  be  expended  on  private 
estates,  nor  on  property  of  doubtful  title.  The 
land  must  be  held,  by  the  Trustees,  as  before 
stated,  and  the  title  be  perfect  in  them.  Evi- 
dence of  this  must  accompany  each  application 
to  secure  attention  at  headquarters. 

6.  Every  application  must  stand  upon  its 
own  merits,  and  will  be  acted  upon  according 
to  its  deserts,  and  the  ability  of  the  Bureau  to 
aid  at  the  time. 

7.  The  people  should  understand  distinctly 
that  the  Bureau  is  only  acting  as  a  friend  to 
help  them  make  the  start  in  the  right  direction. 
They  must  rely  upon  themselves  for  every  thing 
they  can.  In  making  the  application,  the  fol- 
lowing terms,  in  addition  to  the  above,  must  be 
complied  with  : 

8.  The  lot  for  a  school-house  should  be  cen- 
trally located,  so  as  to  accommodate  those  who 
should  attend.  It  must  be  in  a  pleasant,  quiet, 
retired,  dry  but  not  dusty,  airy,  and  healthy 
situation.    Shade  and  ornamental  trees  and 


ENCOURAGING  FOR  TEXAS. 

The  Galveston  News  has  an  article  on  the 
obligation  of  the  South  to  the  freedmen,  and 
the  operations  of  the  American  Freedman's 
Union  Commission,  Chief- Justice  Chase  Presi- 
dent, which,  on  the  whole,  is  very  encouraging. 
The  News  says : 

"  We  hear  of  a  good  deal  being  done  for  the 
education  of  the  freedmen  at  various  places  by 
the  people  of  the  South  ;  yet  we  have  no  doubt 
that  the  unsettled  condition  of  affairs  and  the 
general  poverty  prevent  the  South  from  giving 
this  subject  a  sufficient  share  of  attention. 
This  being  the  case,  perhaps  there  would  be  " 
no  impropriety  in  accepting  the  offer  of  aid 
from  the  society  above  named,  solely  for  the 
purpose  of  establishing  and  carrying  on  schools 
for  the  freedmen.  We  have  no  doubt  that  any 
community  which  desires  a  school  for  freed- 
men could  contribute  something  to  that  end, 
furnishing  a  house  and  teachers,  if  nothing 
more,  and  that  representations  to  that  effect 
would  secure  the  additional  aid  that  might 
be  needed.  There  should  be  no  backward- 
ness in  this  matter,  because  we  all  admit 
that  the  freedmen  must  be  educated,  that  the 
South  should  contribute  as  much  as  possible  to 
that  object,  and  that  there  is  no  reason  why 
the  benevolent  in  all  parts  of  this  country  and 
of  Europe  should  not  unite  in  the  work.  Union 
in  matters  of  this  kind,  which  should  have 
nothing  to  do  with  politics,  might  do  much  to 
break  down  prejudice,  to  make  the  people  of 
all  sections  better  acquainted,  and  to  bring  the 
blessings  of  peace  and  prosperity  upon  the  land. 

"  The  South  has  nothing  to  lose  by  pm'suing 
a  conciliatory  and  high-minded  course  on  all 
matters  connected  with  the  interests  of  the 
freedmen.  It  is  universally  admitted  that  they 
served  quite  as  well  as  could  have  been  expect- 
ed during  their  slavery ;  that  their  conduct 
during  the  wrar  was  not  only  unexceptionable, 
but  highly  praiseworthy  ;  and  that  their  bear- 
ing since  then,  considering  all  the  circumstan- 
ces, has  not  been  unworthy  of  their  past  record. 
True,  political  excitement  has  injured  them, 
but  not  yet  to  the  extent  that  might  have  been 
expected,  and  the  heinous  crimes  recently  com- 
mitted by  some  of  the  more  depraved  should// 
not  be  permitted  to  injure  our  estimation  of  the 
race.  But  we  need  not  write  on  this  subject  as 
though  there  were  any  necessity  for  exhortation 
or  argument  so  far  as  the  welfare  of  the  colored 


278 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


people  is  concerned.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
whatever  that  the  white  people  of  the  South 
are  true  friends  of  the  freedmen.  Nothing  has 
happened  to  destroy  the  affection  for  them 
which  was  produced  by  the  domestic  relations 
of  the  past,  and  .we  believe  there  is  nothing 
which  our  people  would  not  do  to  help  the 
freedmen  in  the  proper  discharge  of  the  duties 
of  their  new  situation.  If  any  thing  be  lacking, 
it  is  wholly  the  result  of  circumstances ;  and 
this  is  our  only  reason  for  suggesting  the  co- 
operation to  which  we  have  referred. 

"It  is  generally  believed,  we  know,  that  the 
people  of  the  North  and  South  cannot  '  get 
along'  together  in  the  education  of  the  freed- 
men, and  that  the  Southern  people  would  do 
better  in  that  matter  if  the  Northern  people 
were  to  leave  it  alone.  This,  however,  is  not 
to  be  expected.  The  North  will  concern  itself 
on  the  subject  whether  we  do  or  not,  and  we 
therefore  submit  that  it  might  be  sound  policy 
for  us,  both  with  reference  to  our  relations  to 
the  freedmen  and  to  the  other  sections  of  the 
Union,  to  take  the  ground  that  the  cooperative 
is  the  right  method  of  doing  the  work.  The 
North  is  perfectly  able  to  contribute  ;  it  is  alike 
her  duty  and  her  pleasure  to  do  so  ;  and  even 
if  some  unpleasant  results  were  to  arise  in  some 
instances  from  our  cooperation,  it  is  altogether 
likely  that  these  would  be  as  nothing  compared 
with  the  better  effects  which  may  reasonably 
be  expected  to  follow.  This  is  the  age  of  as- 
sociated effort,  and  it  is  only  in  proportion  as 
men  overcome  apathy  and  prejudice  in  favor 
of  this  policy  that  they  need  expect  to  prevent 
the  most  serious  evils.  Nothing  can  be  effect- 
ed by  aloofness,  or  standing  on  dignity ;  but 
almost  every  thing  may  be  accomplished  by 
the  benevolent  energy  which  fulfils  its  desire 
of  doing  good  to  others  by  seizing  for  that 
purpose  every  help  that  may  be  offered. 

"  We  are  strongly  impressed  with  the  belief 
that,  by  waking  up  fully  on  all  subjects  of  this 
kind,  the  South  might,  without  any  sacrifice 
of  principle,  do  a  great  deal  to  prevent  threaten- 
ing evils  and  effect  corresponding  good.  Thus 
the  asperities  and  passions  of  politics  would  be 
smoothed  down,  misconceptions  and  prejudices, 
antagonism  of  race  and  section,  full  of  bad 
portent,  would  be  removed,  and  all  the  bless- 
ings of  peace  and  order  secured  in  the  place  of 
agitation,  anarchy,  and  destruction." 


TriE  correspondent  of  the  New- York  Times, 
giving  an  account  of  the  Republican  State  Con- 
vention at  Columbia,  S.  C,  of  which  but  a  small 
fraction  of  the  members  were  white,  says  of  the 
general  ability  of  the  management : 

"  The  convention  has  throughout  been  domi 
nated  by  the  colored  men,  and  I  must  say  that 
the  leaders  have  shown  a  marked  degree  of 
ability.  It  is  rare  that  you  ever  see  in  delibe- 
rate bodies  men  of  more  skill  and  tact  and  force 
than  Whipper,  and  De  Large,  and  Langley,  and 
Randolph,  and  Wright,  who  far  outshone  in 
intellect  any  of  the  white  members.  But  these 
were  the  exceptions.  The  great  body  of  the 
black  delegates  bring  with  them  little  but  the 
'•gnorance  of  plantation  hands,  and  throughout  1 


the  proceedings  seemed  to  be  in  a  kind  of  fine 
religious  '  bress  de  Lord '  frenzy.  Their  hearts 
are  right,  but  as  for  their  intellects,  there  is 
room  for  improvement." 


Office  Supt.  of  Education,  ) 
Charleston,  July  1,  1867.  j 
Brevet  Major-Gen'l  R.  K.  Scott,  Assistant 
Commissioner : 

General  :  I  have  the  honor  to  submit  for 
your  information  the  following  statement  of 
school  operations  in  this  State  during  the  term 
of  nine  months,  beginning  October  1st,  1866, 
and  ending  J une  30th,  1867.  The  accompanying 
tabular  statement  will  show  the  number*  and 
condition  of  schools  reported  each  month.  The 
following  is  a  summary  of  the  statement : 


Average  number  of  schools  open  during  the  term.   73 

"         "         Teachers  "      "    139 

"         "         White  Teachers      "      "    95 

"         Colored      "         "      "    44 

Pupils  enrolled      "      "    81 7T 

"         "         Boys         "  "      "    3S16 

"         "         Girls         «  "      »    4361 

"         "         Attendance  "      "    6193 

"         Always  present      "      "    3749 

"      punctual     "      "    3S47 

"         "         of  pupils  over  16  years  of  age  dur- 
ing the  time,   880 

"         "         in  Alphabet,   1S95 

Reading  and  spelling  easy  lessons,  2964 

"  "   in  advanced  readers,   3317 

"         "         in  Geography,   1637 

"         in  Arithmetic,   4S39 

"         "         in  higher  branches,   319 

"         "         in  Writing,   4616 

"         in  Needle-work,   194 

"         "         of  Sunday-schools  reported  during 

the  term,   44 

M         "         of  attendance,..    3320 

On  the  1st  of  June  the  enrolled  attendance  reported 

was   9650 


Of  the  38  schools  reported  for  October,  1866, 
twenty-five  have  reported  regularly  since  that 
time.  The 


Average  number  of  pupils  in  these  schools  during 

the  term  was   4503 

In  Oct.  the  No.  of  pupils  in  the  Alphabet  was   1110 

"            "   in  Reading  in  easy  lessons, . .  1926 

"         "            "         "       in  adv'd  Readers,  2186 

"         41            "    in  Geography,   991 

"         "            "   in  Arithmetic,   2780 

"            "   in  Writing,   20S8 

For  the  month  of  June  the  same  schools  re- 
port the 

Number  of  pupils  in  the  Alphabet,   640 

"            "      Reading  easy  lessons,   1904 

"            "      in  advanced  Readers,   2765 

"            "      in  Geography,   1122 

"            "      in  Arithmetic,   3733 

"            "      in  Writing,   3426 

These  schools  lost  during  the  term  2902  and 
gained  3834  pupils. 

The  number  of  pupils  enrolled  in  these  twenty-five 

schools  for  the  month  of  October,  was   5222 

Of  these  there  were  in  the  Alphabet,   1110 

"            "        "       1st  Reader,   1926 

"            "        "       2d  Reader,   1052 

"            "        "       3d  Reader,   857 

"           "       "       4th  Reader,   250 

"            "        M       5th  Reader,   27 

The  same  schools  for  the  month  of  June  re- 
ported the 

Number  of  enrolled  pupils  at   MOO 

"      in  the  Alphabet,   640 

"      in  1st  Reader,   1620 

"      in  2d  Reader,   1396 

"      in  3d  Reader,   1076 

"      in  4th  Reader,   426 

"      in  5th  Reader,   142 


\ 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAX. 


279 


It  will  be  seen  from  this  statement  that,  not- 
withstanding the  great  changes  in  the  schools 
indicated  by  the  loss  and  gain  referred  to  above, 
there  has  been  a  steady  and  very  commendable 
progress  on  the  part  of  the  pupils.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  irregularity  of  the  reports  from 
other  schools,  I  am  unable  to  furnish,  with  re- 
gard to  them,  a  statement  so  conclusive  as  that 
just  made ;  but  I  hazard  nothing  when  I  say 
that,  in  all  schools  in  this  State,  kept  regularly 
and  taught  faithfully,  the  pupils  have  advanced 
with  wonderful  rapidity. 

As  showing  what  has  been  accomplished  in 
schools  kept  with  system,  I  quote  from  the 
statements  of  the  principals  of  two  of  the  large 
schools  in  this  city,  as  follows : 

Mr.  T.  L.  Cordoza,  Principal  of  the  Saxton 
School,  makes  the  following  report : 


ATTENDANCE. 

Whole  number  of  pupils  enrolled  during  the  term,. . .  1000 

"      »'            "      at  the  close  of  the  term,   800 

Largest   "            "      at  any  one  time,   848 

Smallest  "            "      at  any  one  time   800 

Largest   "            "      present  at  any  one  time,.. .  .  790 

"   percentage  of  attendance  during  any  month,  85 

Smallest         "              "            "      "        "  71 

Average  register  for  the  term,   820 

Percentage  of  attendance  for  the  term,   77 

11      u            "             "      preceding  term, ...  80 


COLOR  AND  FORMER  CONDITION. 

About  one  half  the  pupils  are  pure  African. 
One  half  are  free-born.  I  find  no  difference  in 
the  capacity  of  freemen  and  freedmen  ;  indeed, 
the  difference  between  them  would  not  be 
known  if  it  were  not  for  the  more  advanced 
condition  of  the  former  on  account  of  previous 
advantages. 

READING. 

We  selected  thirty  of  our  best  readers  at  the 
beginning  of  this  term  and  put  them  in  the 
Fifth  Reader,  out  of  the  Fourth ;  before  the 
close  of  the  term  we  were  enabled  to  increase 
their  number  to  fifty.  There  were  seventy-five 
pupils  in  the  Fourth  Reader  at  the  beginning 
of  the  term ;  the  number  increased  during  the 
term  to  100.  At  the  commencement  of  the 
term  there  were  250  pupils  in  the  Third  Reader, 
and  at  the  close  there  were  300,  thus  showing 
an  apparent  increase  of  fifty,  though  the  in- 
crease was  really  seventy-five,  as  twenty-five 
Third  Reader  pupils  left  during  the  term.  There 
were  about  100  pupils  advanced  from  the  First 
to  the  Second  Reader  during  the  term,  and  as 
many  from  the  Primer  to  the  First  Reader. 

ARITHMETIC. 

The  most  satisfactory  progress  has  been  made 
in  this  difficult  branch.  The  first  class  of  boys 
who  began  common  fractions  at  the  beginning 
of  the  term  have  thoroughly  mastered  it,  and 
advanced  to  compound  proportion.  We  have 
scholars  studying  at  all  stages,  from  notation 
and  numeration  up  to  proportion. 

We  have  2  boys  in  compound  proportion. 
"       10     "   and  10  girls  in  denominate  fractions. 
"       ^  15    "     "         M  numbers. 

20  80   "    "      common  fractions. 

There  are  about  400  pupils  in  notation,  nume 
ration,  and  the  elementary  rules. 

WRITING. 

We  have  400  pupils  writing  in  books  ;  about 
200  of  them  began  this  term  ;  their  progress 
has  been  encouraging ;  200  have  advanced  from 


the  first  to  the  third  of  the  series,  and  200  from 
the  third  to  the  sixth. 

GEOGRAPHY. 

Through  the  want  of  maps  and  globes  we 
have  been  retarded  somewhat  in  this  study. 
Still,  every  map,  that  of  Europe,  Asia,  Africa, 
North  and  South-America,  has  been  thorough 
ly  mastered  by  different  classes.  We  have  ten 
pupils  in  the  largest  geography  of  Monteith's 
series,  and  290  in  the  next  largest,  and  200  in 
the  second  of  the  series. 

GRAMMAR. 

Some  attention  has  been  given  to  the  elemen- 
tary parts  of  Grammar.  About  fifty  pupils 
understand  the  parts  of  speech  and  the  compo- 
nent parts  of  a  simple  sentence.  The  progress 
in  this  difficult  study  has  been  slow,  as  might 
have  been  expected,  though  indicative  of  final 
success. 

Mr.  Cordoza's  school  is  supported  by  the 
American  Missionary  Association,  and  numbers 
among  its  pupils  children  of  the  most  intelli- 
gent and  cultivated  colored  parents  in  this 
State.  It  has  been  kept  during  the  past  term 
under  very  great  disadvantages,  the  building 
in  which  it  was  held  being  entirely  unsuited  to 
the  purpose.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  school 
has  been  an  excellent  one,  reflecting  great 
credit  upon  all  parties  connected  with  it.  It 
may  be  said  that  there  is  such  a  large  propor- 
tion of  free-born  children  of  mixed  blood  in 
this  school  that  it  does  not  show  what  the  ig- 
norant children  of  slaves  are  capable  of  doing. 
If  any  such  doubts  exist,  I  think  the  following 
statement,  taken  from  the  report  of  Mr.  A.  Sum- 
ner, principal  of  the  Morris  Street  School,  in  this 
city,  will  remove  them.  From  his  report  I  take 
the  following  with  regard  to 

ATTENDANCE. 

Whole  number  of  names  enrolled  during  the  terra,. . .  1150 

"      "      "   members  at  the  close  of  the  term,  745 

Largest   "      "         "       "   any  one  time,   S44 

Smallest  "      "         "       *     "     "      "   745 

Largest   "      "   pupils  present  any  one  day,    729 

"      percentage  of  attendance  any  one  month,  85 

Smallest   ".."««              "              "  71 

Average  register  for  the  term,   800 

"     attendance,   626 

Percentage  of  attendance  for  the  term,   73 

"                      "            "     preceding  term,...  70 

The  decrease  in  the  number  of  the  pupils  at 
the  close  of  the  term  is  accounted  for  by  the 
fact  that  in  the  last  three  months  I  have  refused 
most  of  the  applications  of  primary  scholars, 
and  the  children  of  this  grade  are  so  apt  to  re- 
main but  a  short  time  in  the  school,  that  it  is 
necessary  to  have  reenforcements  every  week 
in  order  to  keep  the  classes  full.  Of  the  745 
pupils  of  all  grades  who  were  members  at  the 
end  of  the  term,  550  entered  in  September. 
Thus  it  appears  that  400  have  left  during  the 
term  ;  and  of  the  entire  number  enrolled,  (1150.) 
less  than  one  half  have  been  with  me  the  whole 
ten  months.  The  loss  is  chiefly  in  the  lower 
classes :  as  the  scholars  advance,  they  become 
more  interested  in  their  studies,  and  therefore 
more  permanent  and  regular  in  their  attend- 
ance. If  I  had  better  teachers  in  the  primary 
classes,  there  would  not  be  so  much  of  this  dis- 
astrous change.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that 
one  of  the  primary  teachers  (a  Northern  lady) 
has  lost  only  four  out  of  fifty-two  pupils  since 


280 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN.* 


she  took  charge  of  the  class  on  the  1st  of  Jan- 
uary. Her  percentage  of  attendance  is  almost 
as  good  as  that  of  any  of  the  most  advanced 
classes.  !j 

COLOR  .AND  FORMER  CONDITION. 

About  one  half  of  the  pupils  are  of  unmixed 
African  blood.  One  tenth  are  free-born.  In  the 
highest  classes  the  proportion  of  free-born  is 
one  fifth,  and  it  is  an  interesting  fact  that, 
among  the  most  distinguished  scholars  in  these 
classes,  those  who  were  formerly  slaves  rank 
equally  well  with  those  who  were  free  and  had 
received  some  instructions  before  and  during 
the  war.  The  jewel  and  pride  of  the  school  is 
a  perfectly  black  girl,  sixteen  years  of  age. 

PROGRESS   IN  READING. 

Of  the  seventy-one  pupils  now  in  the  National 
Fourth  Reader,  eight  were  in  that  book  before 
the  beginning  of  the  term ;  thirty  had  been 
through  the  Third  Reader  before  the  beginning 
of  the  term ;  twenty  began  the  Third  Reader 
at  the  beginning  of  the  term ;  four  were  pro- 
moted from  the  Second  Reader  during  the  term. 

When  the  schools  were  opened  in  March, 
1865,  twenty-two  of  these  Fourth  Reader  child- 
ren knew  nothing,  twenty-five  were  in  the 
Primer,  sixteen  in  the  First  Reader,  six  in  the 
Second  Reader.  One  little  girl,  nine  years  old, 
who  was  in  the  Primer  a  year  ago  last  Febru- 
ary, can  read  at  first  sight,  with  very  few  mis- 
takes, any  piece  in  the  Fourth  Reader. 

Of  the  172  pupils  in  the  Third  Reader,  thir- 
teen commenced  the  book  at  the  beginning  of 
the  term,  and  have  been  through  it  several 
times ;  159  were  in  the  Second  Reader — some, 
on  the  first  page,  while  others  had  been  through 
it  more  than  once ;  seventy-three  of  the  Third 
Readers  have  been  twice  through  the  book ; 
five  of  those  who  began  the  Second  Reader  in 
September  might  now  be  in  the  Fourth.  Of 
those  now  in  the  Second  Reader,  there  were, 
when  they  first  entered  in  the  present  term, 
forty-two  who  were  in  the  Second  Reader  ;  sev- 
enteen of  these  are  now  ready  for  the  Third  ; 
118  were  in  the  First ;  of  these  thirty-four  were 
at  the  beginning  of  the  First,  and  are  now 
ready  for  the  Third ;  twenty-nine  were  in  the 
Primer ;  one  of  them,  a  girl  of  eight  years,  is 
ready  for  the  Third  Reader  ;  twenty-eight  were 
in  the  Alphabet,  and  are  now  in  the  last  part  of 
the  book  ;  a  large  number  of  the  Second  Reader 
scholars  -have  been  through  the  book  twice. 
This  grade  of  classes  contains  a  great  many 
very  young  children,  some  of  whom,  only  eight 
or  nine  years  old,  have,  within  two  years,  pre- 
pared themselves  to  go  into  a  Third  Reader 
class. 

Of  those  now  reading  in  the  First  Reader, 
thirteen  were  in  the  Primer  when  they  first  en- 
tered this  term ;  they  are  now  ready  for  the 
Second  Reader.  Six  who  entered  in  March  did 
not  know  their  letters  ;  forty-three  who  were  in 
the  Alphabet  when  they  entered  have  gone 
twice  through  the  book.  Sixty-seven  who  en- 
tered in  March  have  passed  from  the  Alphabet 
nearly  to  the  end  of  the  book.  Of  the  seventy- 
two  now  in  the  Primer,  almost  all  have  been 
in  the  school  but  a  few  months,  and  did  not  at 
first  know  their  letters.  There  are  thirteen 
still  in  the  Alphabet ;  most  of  them  have  been 


three  months  in  school,  but  are  either  dull  or 
irregular  in  their  attendance. 

ARITHMETIC. 

The  pupils  who  have  joined  this  school  during 
the  past  two  years  have  been,  with  hardly  an 
exception,  totally  ignorant  of  arithmetic.  The 
attainments  of  even  the  most  advanced  classes 
were  quite  insignificant  at  the  commencement 
of  the  present  term.  Those  who  had  belonged 
to  the  higher  classes  during  the  preceding  term 
had  received  good  instruction,  and  had  made 
very  creditable  progress,  but  they  had  not  been 
trained  long  enough  to  fix  their  acquirements 
firmly  in  their  memory,  so  that  with  most  of 
them  the  work  began  this  year  db  initio.  They 
have  been  carried  so  far  now  that  it  is  impos- 
sible that  this  should  happen  again,  although  a 
three  months'  vacation  will  do  damage  to  their 
skill. 

In  the  two  advanced  classes  already  spoken 
of,  all  but  a  very  few  of  the  scholars  can  per- 
form with  quickness  and  accuracy  the  most 
difficult  examples  that  can  be  put  upon  the 
board  in  addition,  multiplication,  and  subtrac- 
tion, and  the  greater  number  the  same  in 
long  division.  They  all  understand  the  prin- 
ciples, and  most  of  them  can  give  a  clear, 
mathematical  explanation  of  such  examples. 
One  of  these  two  classes  has  made  astonishing 
progress  in  mental  arithmetic.  The  scholars 
follow  oral  combinations  of  double  or  single 
columns  in  addition  or  subtraction,  inter- 
spersed with  multiplication  and  division,  given 
out  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  and  their  an- 
swers are  immediate  and  sure.  The  other  class 
is  not  so  brilliant  in  mental  arithmetic,  but  is 
equal  to  it  in  accurate  and  rapid  ciphering.  I 
Avill  not  attempt  to  give  a  detailed  account  of 
the  progress  of  the  other  classes ;  I  may  say, 
however,  that  the  greater  number  of  those  in 
the  Second  and  Third  Reader  classes  can  per- 
form on  the  board  examples  in  addition,  sub- 
traction, and  multiplication.  Great  attention 
has  been  paid  to  Mental  Arithmetic,  and  in  all 
except  the  lowest  classes,  the  scholars  can  per- 
form without  figures  easy  examples  in  the  rudi- 
mentary principles.  In  the  Fourth  and  more  ad- 
vanced Third  Reader  classes,  the  scholars'  train- 
ing bas  been  such  as  to  be  of  immediate  prac- 
tical use  to  them. 

WRITING. 

230  scholars  are  writing  on  slates,  439  in 
copy-books ;  of  those  now  in  the  school,  there 
are  328  who  were  writing  in  copy-books  when 
they  entered  this  term.  About  138  pupils  can 
read  and  write  notes  or  letters,  many  of  them 
very  prettily.  About  100,  more  or  less  of  whom 
are  now  using  slates,  can  write  words  and  their 
own  names  clearly  and  handsomely. 

GEOGRAPHY. 

There  are  about  118  scholars  studying  geo- 
graphy ;  of  these,  fifty-eight  began  about  two 
months  ago,  and  of  course  have  not  gone  far. 
Of  the  remainder,  about  one  half  knew  little  or 
nothing  ;  for  I  had  not  considered  it  advisable 
last  term  to  pay  much  attention  to  the  subject. 
Of  the  sixty  in  the  two  advanced  classes  who 
are  now  studying  geography,  there  are  twenty 
who  have  passed  a  very  close  and  critical  exam- 
ination in  the  topography  and  physical  features 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


281 


dren,  under  the  control  of  the  Protestant  Episco- 
pal Church. 

For  the  support  of  teachers,  there  has  been 
expended  since  the  1st  of  July,  18G6  : 

By  the  New-England  Branch  Freedman's  Union 

Commission,  $23,454  57 

By  the  New-York  Branch  Freedman's  Union  Com- 
mission, (estimated,)   12,000  00 

By  the  Pennsylvania  Branch  Freedman's  Union 

Commission,  (estimated,).   3,G^0  00 

By  the  American  Missionary  Ass'n,  (estimated.)  11,957  44 
By  the  Old  School  Presbytery,  (Pittsburg,  Pa.).'.     5,995  00 

By  the  Friends'  Association,  Philadelphia,   2,000  00 

By  the  U.  S.  Tax  Commissioners,  (estimated,)          5,000  00 

By  other  persons,     1,000  00 

Total,  $65,087  01 

I  estimate  that  the  colored  people  have  con- 
tributed toward  the  support  of  teachers  in 
schools  of  all  kinds,  $12,200 ;  this,  added  to 
$5000  given  by  them  toward  the  erection  of 
school-buildings,  will  make  the  sum  of  $17,200 
contributed  by  them  for  school  purposes  during 
the  past  year.  There  has  been  expended  for 
the  support  of  schools  in  this  State  since  July 
1st,  18G6 : 


of  America  and  Europe,  and  especially  of  the 
United  States. 

Dr.  Sumner's  school  is  supported  mainly  by 
the  New-England  Branch  Freedman's  Union 
Commission,  and  has  been  kept  in  one  of  the 
public-school  buildings  of  this  city.  I  think  it 
is  safe  to  say,  considering  the  point  from  which 
these  children  started,  that  this  school  will  com- 
pare favorably  with  any  Northern  public  school,  j 

The  table  I  have  submitted  showing  the 
condition  of  the  schools  during  the  past  term, 
of  course  only  represents  those  schools  which 
have  reported  from  time  to  time.  There  have 
been  besides  these  a  large  number  of  schools 
supported  by  the  freedmen  themselves,  which, 
though  not  very  efficient,  serve  as  an  indica- 
tion of  the  desire  for  education  among  the  peo- 
ple, and  also  tend  to  keep  alive  and  strengthen 
that  interest.  I  estimate  that  there  has  been 
from  month  to  month  an  attendance  in  this 
class  of  schools  of  6000  pupils.  I  also  estimate 
that  there  has  been  an  attendance  in  unreported 
Sunday-schools  of  7000  pupils. 

There  are  twenty-three  school-houses  in  the 
State  which  have  been  built  by  the  colored 
people,  with  the  aid  of  Northern  societies  and 
this  Bureau,  located  as  follows : 


One  on  St.  Helena  Island, 
Three  on  Port  Royal  Island, 
One  on  John's  Island, 
One  at  Summerville, 
One  at  Orangeburg, 
One  at  Lewisville, 
One  at  Greenville, 
One  at  Sumpter, 
One  at  Lynchburg, 
One  at  Timmonsville, 
One  at  Florence, 


One  at  Kingstree, 
One  at  Darlington, 
One  at  Society  Hill, 
One  at  Snow  Hill, 
One  at  Bennetsville, 
One  at  Marion, 
One  at  Springville, 
One  at  Cheraw, 
Two  on  plantations  near  Cam- 
den. 


By  Northern  societies,  etc. 

By  the  Bureau,  

By  the  colored  people,  

Total,  


$65,087  01 
24,510  72 
17,200  00 


$106,797  73 


I  know  how  inadequately  the  statistics  which 
I  have  been  able  to  collect  show  the  educational 
progress  made  in  this  State  since  the  close  of 
the  war.  After  we  have  stated  that  so  many 
children  have  learned  to  read  and  write,  and 
that  so  many  school-houses  have  been  built,  we 
have  not  yet  half  told  the  story.  These  are 
great  things  in  themselves,  and  still  greater  as 
evidences  of  what  may  be  accomplished  in  the 
future,  with  larger  experience  and  more  extend- 
ed means.  But  there  are  other  evidences  of 
progress  which  figures  cannot  represent,  but 
which  are  no  less  important  than  the  facts  al- 
ready referred  to.  In  1865,  I  found  but  one 
white  man  of  social  position  in  South-Carolina 
who  admitted  either  the  possibility  or  desirabil- 
ity of  educating  the  colored  children.  To-day, 
I  question  whether  a  man  can  be  found  in  the 
State  who,  whatever  his  private  convictions  may 
be,  is  not  publicly  in  favor  of  educating  them. 
The  applications  which  come  from  all  parts  of 
the  State,  and  from  all  classes  of  the  commun- 
ity, for  aid  in  establishing  schools  for  the  freed 
children,  are  conclusive  on  this  point.  If  there 
was  the  same  desire  to  maintain  schools  for  all 
classes  of  the  community  alike,  without  regard 
to  color,  it  would  seem  more  satisfactory.  As  it 
is,  there  is  great  reason  for  believing  that  much 
of  the  interest  now  manifested  in  the  education 
of  the  colored  children  grows  out  of  a  desire  to 
control  that  class  of  the  population  for  political 
purposes.  For  while  it  is  true  that  schools  for 
colored  children  are  growing  in  favor,  it  is  also 
true  that  there  is  no  corresponding  decrease  of 
hatred  for  "  Yankee  "  teachers  and  for  "  North- 
ern influence,"  as  it  is  called.  I  know  of  one  or 
two  instances  in  the  country  towns  where  the 
offer  has  been  made  on  the  part  of  the  white 
citizens  to  the  colored  people,  to  help  them  to 
support  their  schools,  if  the}*  would  accept  such 
teachers  as  they  might  select,  and  leave  the 
schools  taught  by  Northern  teachers.  It  is  ad- 
mitted by  them  that  their  schools  will  proba- 


A  large  school-house,  capable  of  accommodat- 
ing 800  pupils,  is  now  in  course  of  construc- 
tion at  Columbia,  and  will  be  ready  for  opening 
on  the  1st  of  October.  A  building  for  a  nor- 
mal school  is  just  about  to  be  commenced  in 
this  city.  This  building  is  to  accommodate  400 
pupils,  and  it  is  expected  that  it  will  be  ready 
early  in  the  fall.  It  is  also  hoped  that  one  large 
common-school  building  may  be  built  in  this 
city  during  the  coming  season.  All  these  build- 
ings are  on  land  which  is  secured  for  school 
purposes,  and  which  is  in  most  cases  held  by 
colored  trustees.  The  buildings  above  referred 
to  will  accommodate  an  average  of  4000  pupils, 
and  the  colored  people  have  contributed  about 
$5000  of  their  cost. 

The  total  amount  expended  by  the  Bureau  on 
schools  directly  under  its  control,  during  the 
fiscal  year  beginning  July  1st,  1866,  and  ending 
June  30th,  1867,  not  including  transportation 
of  teachers,  has  been  $20,510.72.  About  $5000 
of  this  amount  has  been  paid  for  rent  of  school 
buildings.  We  paid  to  the  School  Commission- 
ers of  this  city  $2000  for  the  use  of  one  of  the 
public-school  buildings  for  six  months,  begin- 
ning January  1st  and  ending  June  30th,  1867. 
The  colored  people  of  this  city  have  been  during 
all  this  time  taxed  for  the  support  of  the  public 
schools. 

The  remainder  has  been  spent  in  repairing 
and  furnishing  school-houses.  In  addition  to 
the  amount  spent  upon  schools  under  the  con- 
trol of  this  Bureau,  $4000  have  been  appropri- 
ated to  repair  and  furnish  a  building  in  this  city, 
in  which  is  to  be  kept  a  school  for  colored  chil- 


282 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


bly  not  be  so  efficient  as  those  under  tlie  control 
of  Northern  teachers,  but  as  an  offset  to  this  is 
urged  the  great  advantage  of  getting  rid  of 
"  foreigners."  The  principal  reason  assigned  in 
justification  of  this  wish  to  get  rid  of  Northern 
teachers  is,  that  politics  is  taught  in  their 
schools. 

I  believe  that  all  of  our  teachers  who  are 
competent  to  do  so  do  teach  politics,  in  the  high- 
est sense  of  that  term.  And  in  the  present 
state  of  society  in  the  South,  any  tuition  which 
does  not  include  some  information  upon  the 
character  and  condition  of  our  whole  country, 
will  fail  of  producing  what  is  most  needed — an 
intelligent  and  loyal  population.  The  very 
fact  that  in  all  the  country  districts  of  this 
State  you  will  hear  the  people  of  the  North 
and  West  constantly  spoken  of  as  "foreign- 
ers," and  the  United  States  Government  as  con- 
stantly called  the  "Yankee  Government,"  is 
proof  sufficient  that  no  national  feeling  exists 
here,  as  a  general  rule  ;  and  that  the  basis  of 
this  feeling  must  be  laid  in  the  school-room. 
But  the  statement  that  politics,  in  a  partisan 
sense,  is  taught  in  the  schools  is  without  found- 
ation in  fact.  It  is  perfectly  natural  that  the 
Southern  white  people,  with  their  convictions, 
should  object  to  what  they  consider  dangerous 
influences,  and  I  have  no  complaint  to  make  be- 
cause they  do  so.  But  it  is  important  that  we 
should  recognize  the  fact  that  these  are  their 
convictions,  and  in  a  legitimate  way  place  our 
own  in  opposition  to  theirs,  leaving  it  to  time 
and  intelligence  to  decide  which  shall  prevail. 
It  is  not  wise  to  recognize  as  genuine  conver- 
sion and  change  of  opinion  that  which  is  sim- 
ply an  acquiescence  in  the  inevitable. 

I  will  not  be  misunderstood  in  this  criticism  of 
what  I  conceive  to  be  the  state  of  feeling  in  this 
State  on  the  subject  of  education.  What  I  have 
said  is  of  general  application,  and  does  not  touch 
many  individuals  who,  I  have  no  doubt,  are 
sincerely  desirous  of  doing  their  duty,  accord- 
ing to  their  ability,  toward  the  colored  people 
and  the  country.  There  is  a  prevailing  feeling 
that  the  present  mental  activity  among  the  col- 
ored people  is  the  result  simply  of  a  temporary 
excitement,  and  that  it  will  cease  as  this  excite- 
ment passes  away.  Any  movement  of  this  kind 
must  necessarily  be  attended  with  a  great  deal 
that  is  artificial,  and  on  the  surface  merely ; 
but  admitting  this  to  be  true,  still  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  there  is  a  deep  and  earnest  convic- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  colored  people,  that  the 
most  important  thing  to  be  obtained  by  them 
at  the  present  time  is  education  for  themselves 
and  their  children.  This  conviction,  properly 
fostered  and  directed,  must  result  in  great  good 
to  themselves  and  to  the  country. 

With  the  present  prospect  of  good  "crops,"  I 
have  no  doubt  that  under  the  advice  and  di- 
rection of  this  Bureau  the  colored  people  will 
be  able  to  establish,  during  the  coming  year, 
many  schools ;  and  that  these  schools  can  be 
made  very  efficient  without  becoming  a  tax  upon 
the  funds  of  the  Bureau  or  upon  the  benevo- 
lence of  the  North. 

I  suppose  there  are  twenty-five  thousand  col- 
ored men  and  women  in  South-Carolina  to-day 
who  can  read  a  newspaper  with  a  fair  under- 
standing of  its  contents,  who  two  years  ago  did 
not  know  the  alphabet.    It  is  natural  to  ex- 


aggerate the  importance  of  a  work  in  which  we 
are  personally  interested,  and  I  would  therefore 
speak  guardedly  as  to  the  influence  upon  socie- 
ty of  the  educational  work  done  under  the  pat- 
ronage of  the  Bureau.  But  I  know  of  no  lan- 
guage too  strong  to  use  in  expressing  the  ex- 
tent and  power  of  the  influence  for  good  which 
flows  out  from  these  schools.  In  every  place 
where  we  attempted  to  start  schools  six  months 
or  a  year  ago,  we  met  with  determined  opposi- 
tion. The  white  residents  of  those  localities 
would  now  be  unwilling  to  see  the  schools  dis- 
continued, although  they  would  probably  be 
glad  to  see  them  in  different  hands.  The  effect 
upon  the  children,  upon  the  parents  of  the  chil- 
dren, and  upon  the  community  generally,  has 
been  such  as  to  make  the  blindest  see  that  edu- 
cation, while  blessing  the  colored  people  them- 
selves, will  bless  the  whole  community  also. 
It  seems  like  a  waste  of  time  to  state  facts  in 
proof  of  the  blessings  of  general  education,  but 
it  must  be  remembered  that  we  are  reporting 
the  progress  of  schools  in  a  community  which 
has  hitherto  denied  that  education  was  good 
for  the  "  common  people."  There  are  thousands 
of  white  people  in  this  State  who  are,  in  intelli- 
gence, below  the  most  ignorant  colored  people. 
The  necessities  of  slavery  could  not  have  been 
the  excuse  for  keeping  them  in  ignorance,  al- 
though it  was  doubtless  the  cause.  I  know  of 
nothing  more  melancholy  than  the  condition  of 
this  class  of  people.  The  miserable  prej  udices  by 
which  they  have  been  surrounded  keep  them 
out  of  our  schools,  and  as  yet  little  or  nothing 
has  been  done  on  the  part  of  the  community  to 
provide  schools  for  them. 

The  cause  of  education  is  full  of  promise.  If 
the  means  were  at  hand,  I  think  the  people  of 
this  State  would  be  ready  to  accept  a  general 
system  of  education.  But,  pressed  down  by 
poverty,  they  are  unable  to  see  their  way  toward 
the  adoption  of  a  system  which  would*  unques- 
tionably entail  great  expense.  Nor  will  they 
be  able  to  do  so  for  many  years  to  come.  Hence, 
help  must  continue  to  come  from  other  sources. 
It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  Northern  peo- 
ple, by  voluntary  contributions,  will  be  able  to 
carry  on  the  work  for  any  great  length  of  time 
as  extensively  as  has  been  done  for  the  past 
three  years.  Nor,  wonderful  as  have  been  the 
efforts  of  these  Educational  Associations,  and 
great  as  have  been  their  achievements,  is  this  all 
that  the  situation  demands.  We  have  been 
able  thus  far  to  reach  but  a  comparatively  small 
portion  of  the  uneducated  class  of  the  South.  •  I 
am  therefore  glad  to  believe  that  there  is  a 
growing  conviction  among  the  people  favorable 
to  the  adoption  by  the  United  States  Govern- 
ment of  a  general  system  of  education  for  the 
States  lately  in  rebellion.  Without  this,  all 
efforts  for  the  reconstruction  of  society  here 
must  necessarily  to  a  great  extent  prove  futile. 
It  was  the  ignorance  of  the  great  mass  of  the 
Southern  whites,  produced  by  the  existence  of 
a  privileged  class  of  slaveholders,  which  enabled 
the  leaders  to  carry  the  South  into  rebellion 
in  behalf  of  slavery.  That  same  ignorance 
stands  to-day  as  the  most  serious  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  a  complete  and  righteous  reconstruction 
of  "the  Southern  States.  And  unless  the  coun- 
teracting influence  of  intelligence,  and  the 
independent  spirit  which  grows  out  of  intelli- 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


283 


gence,  are  cultivated  among  the  laboring  classes 
of  the  South,  there  can  be  no  security  for  the 
future.  I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

Reuben  Tomlinson, 

Superintendent  of  Education. 


PLEDGES  WANTED  NOW. 

It  is  of  the  first  importance,  in  preparing  for 
the  work  of  the  coming  season,  that  those  auxi- 
liary societies,  churches,  and  individuals  that 
intend  to  be  represented  by  teachers,  should 
notify  us  as  soon  as  possible.  Applications, 
both  for  reappointment  and  commissions  for 
the  first  time,  are  pouring  in  upon  us.  Before 
we  can  answer  applicants  of  the  former  class, 
we  must  know  what  their  patrons  of  last  year 
will  try  to  do  the  next.  Do  not  keep  us  in 
doubt.  Venture  something — much — on  the  fu- 
ture. Renewed  effort  will  be  rewarded  with 
renewed  interest  and  continued  support.  The 
work  in  the  South  prospers.  Cooperation,  on 
the  part  of  the  freedmen  and  the  whites,  will 
enable  us  to  do  more  than  ever  with  your  con- 
tributions in  extending  the  blessings  of  educa- 
tion. With  $500,  paid  in  quarterly  instalments, 
between  October  1st,  1867,  and  July  1st,  1868,  we 
shall  be  able  not  only  to  sustain  a  teacher  and 
her  school,  but  also,  in  most  cases,  to  secure  a 
fund  from  the  people  who  are  benefited  for  the 
extension  of  our  work  elsewhere. 

In  the  evidences  of  independence  and  self- 
help  which  the  freedman  has  shown,  and  in  the 
normal  schools  which  this  Commission  and 
other  associations  are  establishing  and  conduct- 
ing, in  cooperation  with  the  Bureau,  for  the 
preparation  of  colored  teachers,  we  can  see  an 
honorable  way — the  way  of  duty  and  success — 
out  of  giving  and  doing  for  the  South.  But  we 
must  not  yet  relax  our  efforts.  What  we  have 
accomplished  will  be  permanent,  and  much 
more  good  will  be  secured,  if  we  persevere. 
Ignorance  and  liberty  are  incompatible.  Igno- 
rant masses  are  a  dangerous  cargo  for  our  ship 
of  state.  According  to  the  number  of  these, 
the  Republic  sinks  or  swims.  Who  promotes 
intelligence  is  a  national  benefactor.  Nowhere 
has  enlightened  patriotism  such  a  field  of  action 
as  in  the  South ;  for  there  the  few  that  were 
educated  have  opposed  the  education  of  the 
many.  They  loved  darkness  rather  than  light 
because  their  deeds  were  evil.  Interest  seemed 
then  to  side  with  ignorance,  but  the  triumph 
of  freedom  has  brought  this  potent  influence  to 
be  an  evident  ally  of  education.    What  the 


South  needs  is  a  fair  start,  a  right  beginning 
from  this  new  era.  The  common  school  sys- 
tem is  demanded.  The  people — all  the  peo- 
ple— sects,  and  parties  uniting  in  this  national 
enterprise,  should  prepare  the  way  by  establish, 
ing  and,  for  a  while,  sustaining  the  models 
during  this  emergency. 

The  statement  which  our  Corresponding  Sec- 
retary made  on  his  return,  late  last  spring, 
from  an  extensive  tour  in  the  South,  is  a  timely 
appeal  to  our  Auxiliary  Societies  and  all  our 
other  friends  to-day.  We  reproduce  it  from 
our  last  Annual  Report : 

"The  Corresponding  Secretary,  having  re- 
turned from  an  extended  tour  in  the  South, 
wishes  to  say  to  the  Auxiliary  Societies  and 
friends  of  this  Commission  : 

"(1.)  That  their  representatives  are  doing 
nobly,  and  have  shown  what  good  judgment 
has  been  exercised  in  their  selection,  and  of 
what  advantage  such  assistance  is  to  the  parent 
Society.  Among  so  many  who  excel,  it  is  hard 
to  decide,  and  dangerous  to  specify,  who  are 
the  most  excellent.  Suffice  it  .to  say,  that  those 
who  are  best  acquainted  with  the  work  affirm 
that  the  general  character  of  our  teachers  for 
ability,  diligence,  and^ perseverance  in  school, 
for  Christian  zeal  in  promoting  all  the  interests 
of  the  freed  people,  and  for  the  devotion  and 
patience  which  are  necessary  to  endure  and 
overcome  local  prejudices  and  opposition,  has 
never  been  so  high  before,  and  is  unsurpassed. 

"  (2.)  That  proofs  of  determination  to  be  self- 
supporting  are  exhibited  by  our  beneficiaries, 
even  under  the  most  adverse  circumstances. 
In  many  cases  small  sums  are  paid  weekly  or 
monthly  for  tuition  by  parents  for  their  child- 
ren, and  by  adults  for  themselves.  In  his  report 
for  February,  Mr.  Reuben  Tomlinson,  Super- 
intendent of  Education  jbr  South-Carolina,  says 
that  $1500  was  contributed  by  freedmen  in  that 
State  during  that  month  for  schooling,  '  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  which  was  paid  in  cash, 
and  the  rest  in  the  shape  of  fuel,  labor,  and  pro- 
visions.' Everywhere,  carpenters,  bricklayers, 
painters,  and  whitewashers  make  gifts  of  their 
services  in  building  school-houses,  and  the  few 
churches  and  individuals  that  have  land  some- 
times give  that,  highly  as  they  prize  it ;  while 
out  of  their  poverty,  which  is  still  the  rule,  and 
a  hard  one,  they  are  consecrating,  as  has  been 
shown,  their  hard-earned  dimes  and  dollars. 
Rev.  R.  M.  Manly,  Superintendent  of  Education 
for. Virginia,  informs  us,  under  date  of  Rich- 
mond, May  8th,  that  '  in  more  than  a  score  of 
places  the  colored  people  have  erected  school- 
houses  with  their  own  hands,  and  employed 
either  some  poor  white  person,  or  some  one  of 
their  own  people,  who  has  some  small  attain- 
ments, as  teacher.  -  They  lack  books,'  he  con- 
tinues, '  and  have  not  a  penny  of  money,  their 
wages  on  the  farm  being  received  in  the  form 
of  food  and  clothing.  So  you  see  that  all  that 
is  necessary,  in  many  instances,  to  bring  twenty, 
thirty,  or  fifty  children  under  tuition,  is  twenty, 
thirty,  or  fifty  primers,  at  a  cost  of  from  four  to 
ten  dollars.' 

"  This  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  we  can 


284 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


use  unappropriated  funds  to  almost  any  extent. 
As  every  dollar  helps,  no  individual  or  society 
can  be  excused  for  doing  nothing  because  so 
much  is  needed,  or  because  more  is  required 
than  can  be  done. 

"  (3.)  That  our  cooperation,  both  in  the  con- 
duct and  support  of  freedmen  s  schools,  is  still 
essential.  In  some  localities,  as  in  the  District 
of  Columbia,  the  educational- tax  furnishes  a 
considerable  fund  ;  but  this  is  still  exceptional,  ■ 
and,  even  if  it  were  not  so,  our  help  would  be 
necessary ;  for,  in  the  nature  of  things,  an  un- 
educated and  but  recently  emancipated  people 
are  wanting  in  the  experience  which  is  requisite 
for  the  proper  management  of  schools,  as  well 
as  in  the  means  for  their  support. 

"  (4.)  That  from  next  October  there  will  be 
more  openings,  with  better  facilities  for  teachers 
than  ever  before  ;  for  the  Bureau,  with  com- 
mendable forethought  and  energy,  is  turning 
its  funds  into  school-houses.  We  therefore  call 
upon  the  friends  of  humanity  and  our  country, 
of  order,  industry,  intelligence,  and  virtue,  and 
especially  on  all  who  bear  the  name,  and  pro- 
fess to  have  the  spirit  of  Christ,  to  unite  with 
us  in  sustaining  His  followers,  black  and  white, 
Northern  and  Southern,  who  in  these  buildings 
will  impart  to  the  emancipated  children  the 
knowledge  for  which  they  are  thirsting,  and 
which  is  at  once  the  boon  and  safeguard  of 
freedom." 


Lisbon,  New-York,  is  the  home  of  one  of  our 
most  successful  teachers,  whose  father,  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Eastman,  has  labored  there  for  about  twenty 
years.  It  is  a  small  village  in  a  farming  com- 
munity, near  Ogdensburg  and  the  St.  Lawrence, 
but  as  earnest  in  reconstructing  the  South 
by  education  as  it  was  in  sending  volunteers 
to  suppress  the  rebellion.  We  are  glad  to  hear 
through  our  agent,  Rev.  R.  Pierce,  who  has  fol- 
lowed up  our  effort,  that  our  friends  have  resolved 
to  raise  $500  to  sustain  a  teacher  and  school  of 
their  own.  With  such  an  example,  the  county 
should  raise  at  least  $3000.  Our  Ogdensburg 
auxiliary,  with  its  energetic  and  accomplished 
officers,  and  the  cooperation  of  the  ministers, 
who  supported  us  at  our  meeting  and  showed 
us  such  kindness,  is  good  for  $1000  itself.  The 
last  item  of  good  news  from  that  quarter  is 
the  acceptance  by  Mrs.  Colonel  Judson  of  the 
position  of  associate  member,  which  was  tender- 
ed to  her  by  our  ladies'  committee. 


SUMMER  WORK   IN   THE  SOUTH. 

Our  work  in  the  South  has  not  been  al- 
together suspended  by  vacation.  Miss  J.  M 
Lynch,  one  of  the  seven  colored  teachers  that 
we  sustained  last  season  in  Maryland — all  edu- 
cated in  the  North — remained  to  look  after  the 
new  school-house  that  the  Bureau  is  building 
for  her  at  Elkton.  She  will  represent  the  bene- 
ficence of  our  friend,  Mr.  Evan  Jones,  next  year. 


Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burbank,  whose  interesting  ac- 
count of  their  work  we  print  in  this  issue,  are 
busy  at  Lawrenceville ;  so  is  Mr.  James  E.  La- 
zenby  at  Emmaus  P.  0. ;  while  Mrs.  H.  C.  Fisher, 
Mrs.  D.  C.  Corwin,  and  Miss  Carrie  Orton  have 
been  attending  to  advanced  pupils,  and  prepar- 
ing for  the  autumn,  at  Alexandria,  Virginia. 
Mrs.  Rachel  Thomas,  a  competent  self-educat- 
ed freedwoman,  has  about  a  hundred  pupils 
across  the  river  from  New-Berne  ;  Mr.  Isam  Hill, 
one  of  our  last  year's  pupils,  is  teaching  success- 
fully at  Oxford  ;  and  Mr.  Samuel  Cross,  another 
colored  teacher,  has  a  large  and  well-conducted 
school — the  "Kennedy  Institute" — at  Towns- 
ville,  North-Carolina.  The  commissions  of  Rev. 
Joseph  Beebe  and  Miss  Penny  Ferribow,  both 
colored  teachers  at  Edenton,  were  extended  un- 
til August  1st,  as  they  were  residents.  Mr.  H. 
C.  Hammond  has  been  arranging  our  affairs  in 
Columbia,  where  the  large  new  school-house 
goes  up  apace ;  Mr.  A.  C.  Elder,  a  South-Caro- 
linian, receives  our  help,  and  does  a  great  work 
at  Blackstock  ;  Rev.  Charles  T.  Hopkins,  an 
earnest,  intelligent  colored  minister,  keeps  the 
primary  department  running  at  Greenville ; 
and  Miss  E.  E.  Richmond  is  teaching  on  73raw- 
ley  plantation,  near  Chester,  South-Carolina. 
Miss  F.  A.  Morgan  is  making  a  good  new 
school  near  Jacksonville,  and  Miss  H.  E.  Seely  is 
taking  care  of  the  orphans  in  Florida. 


We  call  the  special  attention  of  applicants 
for  appointment  as  teachers,  and  of  those  so- 
cieties and  friends  who  are  choosing  represent- 
atives, to  the  Supplementary  Circular  which 
concludes  this  number  of  our  journal. 


The  following  is  from  one  of  the  colored 
teachers  whose  labors  continue  through  vaca- 
tion : 

"  Trent  River  Settlement,  near  ) 
New-Berne,  N.  C.  August  22,  1867.  f 

"  I  received  your  letter,  also  the  blanks  and 
check,  for  all  of  which  I  am  very  thankful.  I 
do  not  know  how  to  thank  God  enough  for 
all  my  blessings.  I  am  getting  along  very 
well  indeed  with  my  school,  and  hope  the  next 
time  I  send  you  a  report  it  will  be  better. 

"  Now,  I  take  it  on  myself  to  tell  you  that 
there  are  a  great  many  of  Miss  Campbell's  pu- 
pils who  desire  to  let  you  know,  that,  if  the 
Commission  intend  to  send  teachers  down 
here  this  fall,  they  would  feel  grateful  to  the 
Commission  if  they  would  send  Miss  Camp- 
bell back  again  to  them,  and  I  do  think  she 
will  do  a  great  deal  of  good  here  among  her 
former  scholars,  who  all  want  her  to  come 
back.    Very  respectfully, 

"  Your  obd't  servant, 

"Raciiel  Thomas." 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


285 


Let  those  that  wish  to  know  something  of 
the  work  that  is  done,  and  the  influence  that  is 
exerted,  by  an  earnest  Christian  woman  outside 
of  her  school,  read  the  subjoined,  which  is  ad- 
dressed to  one  of  the  ladies  of  our  committee 
on  correspondence  and  organization. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burbank,  who  are  teaching 
among  the  mountains  of  Western  Virginia, 
represent  part  of  the  fund  that  was  raised  by 
Plymouth  Church  last  spring,  in  response  to 
Mr.  Beecher's  masterly  argument  for  universal 
education.  The  contributors  may  well  rejoice 
in  the  result  of  their  benefactions,  which  pauses 
*  not,  like  most  revivals,  in  summer  heat.  To 
check  the  social  immoralities  which  slavery 
bred,  and  which  fester  in  the  lives  of  even  appar- 
ently the  most  devout,  no  preaching  can  excel 
the  example  and  precept  of  such  teachers  as 
the  lady  to  whose  letter  we  thus  call  attention. 

"  Lawrenceville,  Va.,  August  24,  1867. 
"  I  write  you  at  this  time  to  acknowledge 
the  reception  of  the  bundle  of  print,  patchwork, 
thread,  buttons,  knives,  etc., which  you  so  kindly 
forwarded,  and  for  which  I  am  greatly  obliged. 
I  will  try  and  make  a  good  use  of  its  contents. 
This  is  the  third  week  of  our  vacation.  I  hardly 
know  whether  to  call  it  vacation,  for  I  have 
been  as  busy  thus  far  as  when  in  school.  I 
have  been  twice  interrupted  since  I  sat  down 
to  address  you.  One  caller  was  a  very  poor 
woman  with  five  small  children,  who  were 
almost  naked,  and  she  can  with  difficulty 
procure  enough  corn  to  keep  them  from 
starving  ;  her  case  is  only  one  of  hundreds, 
yes,  thousands.  I  should  be  completely  dis- 
couraged for  them,  if  I  did  not  expect  that 
another  year  would  bring  a  better  state  of 
things  for  these  poor  unfortunate  ones.  The 
freedmen  are  the  most  numerous  in  the  State. 
They  can  have  a  voice  in  choosing  their  officers, 
and  can  place  such  in  office  as  will  provide  for 
the  poor.  I  really  wish  that  those  North,  who 
urge  as  an  excuse  the  plea  of  making  paupers 
of  those  for  whom  they  should  send  aid,  could 
for  a  few  weeks  be  here,  and  see  what  we  see 
of  their  wants.  Some  are  ambitious,  and  are 
laying  up  a  few  dollars  a  year  in  order  to  se- 
cure a  small  homestead,  but  most  are  discou- 
raged. They  only  try  to  live,  and  some  hardly 
that.  One  great  difficulty  is  their  ignorance. 
A  short  time  since  Mr.  Burbank  went  into  the 
country,  fifteen  or  twenty  miles,  and  found  a 
'  Yankee  'peddler,'  I  think,  selling  canes  for  six 
dollars  apiece,  telling  the  freedmen  that,  if 
they  would  take  one  of  them  and  place  it  in 
any  place  that  they  wished  for  a  homestead,  it 
would  certainly  be  theirs.  They  are  naturally 
superstitious,  and  some  believed  him  and  pur- 
chased. Mr.  B.  told  them  that  it  was  a  hoax 
to  get  their  money.  He  is  going  to  lecture  to 
them  upon  the  subject  of  temperance  as  soon 
as  the  evenings  are  a  little  longer.  There  is 
need  of  such  lectures  among  those  who  are 
styled  the  F.  F.  V.'s  as  well  as  the  freedmen. 
Nearly  all  drink — many  so  as  to  be  intoxicated. 
They  would  ask  Mr.  B.  to  drink  whenever  he 


was  out,  or  rather  when  he  had  occasion  to 
call  at  their  shops  when  he  first  came,  and 
were  almost  affronted  because  he  refused.  The 
ladies  here  do  not  call  upon  me.  I  did  not  ex- 
pect they  would.  They  dislike  the  '  Yankees,' 
and  regard  us  as  the  cause  of  all  the  trouble  dur- 
ing the  war ;  and  that  is  not  all — I  am  a  teacher 
in  the  freedmen 's  school,  and  the  scholars  are 
called  '  ragamuffins'  in  derision.  They  can  do 
this  warm  weather  with  their  rags  better  than 
when  it  comes  cold.  I  do  hope  that  there  will 
be  so  much  sent  in  that  you  can  send  us 
several  barrels  more  before  winter.  We  need 
women's  and  children's  clothing  more  than 
men's.  We  have  fitted  out  with  a  whole  suit 
some  aged  men  who  cannot  work,  and  must  be 
almost  naked  without  such  aid. 

"  I  try  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  the  young 
girls  the  great  importance  of  a  virtuous  life. 
It  is  awful  to  see  such  a  loose  state  of  society. 
'Tis  but  little  that  I  can  do,  but  I  will  try  and 
do  that  little  faithfully.  My  heart  is  in  the 
work,  but  I  get  almost  discouraged  that  I  can 
do  no  more.  I  hope  that  there  can  be  a  school 
established  in  Greenville  county,  and  that  there 
may  be  in  every  county.  We  are  all  very  well, 
but  we  find  it  uncomfortably  warm  a  part  of  the 
day,  and  shall  not  think  of  opening  the  school 
again  until  it  is  a  little  cooler,  which  will  be  in 
September.  I  think  it  very  favorable  to  the 
interests  of  our  school  that  it  was  so  cool  a 
season.  I  have  heard  it  spoken  of  by  those  who 
have  long  resided  here  as  the  coldest  they  had 
ever  seen.  We  wish  that  you  could  all  come 
and  share  of  our  fruit,  peaches,  apples,  and  me- 
lons ;  hundreds  of  bushels  of  peaches  are  wast- 
ing. I  find  something  to  do  besides  to  advise 
and  suggest;  have  been  down  into  the  cook- 
room,  and  made  some  toast  and  tea  for  a  colored 
woman  who  has  the  diphtheria.  They  do  not 
have  any  thing  but  corn-bread  baked  in  the 
ashes.  Our  cook  does  not  like  to  be  troubled 
with  doing  for  any  besides  the  household.  I 
have  been  told  by  Lieut.  K.,  who  understands 
them  well,  that  very  many  die  for  want  of  care 
when  sick.  They  have  not  got  money  to  em- 
ploy a  physician,  and  soon  get  tired  of  doing 
for  a  sick  person.  I  have  a  slight  knowledge  of 
medicine,  and  have  given  out  some  when  they 
can  do  no  better.  I  shall  commence  next  week 
to  prepare  patchwork,  that  I  may  have  a  good 
supply  when  we  reopen  our  school :  and  there 
was  some  yarn  in  the  bundle,  that  I  shall  use  to 
teach  them  to  knit.  I  had  some  thimbles  given 
me  by  Mr.  Estes  when  we  called  there  on  our 
way,  but  I  have  given  most  of  them  to  the 
children's  .mothers.  If  you  should  find  an  op- 
portunity, which  I  hope  you  will,  in  another  box, 
I  would  like  some  more  thimbles  and  needles, 
and  fine-tooth  combs.  I  feel  reluctant  to  call 
upon  you  so  often.  Please  tell  Miss  Gibbons 
that  I  thank  her  most  sincerely  for  her  interest 
in  our  work,  and  the  substantial  evidence  she 
has  given  in  the  pretty  patchwork  in  the  bundle. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"It.  H.  BURBAJNK." 


For  a  specimen  of  the  slave-songs  spoken  of 
in  our  last  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  publish- 
ers' advertisement  in  this  number. 


286 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


SUPPLEMENTARY  CIRCULAR  TO 
TEACHERS, 

In  handing  the  enclosed  "'Instructions"  to  candidates 
for  appointment,  or  teachers  receiving  commission,  we  deem 
it  proper  to  say  that  our  dependence  for  fidelity  on  the  part 
of  those  entering  our  service  rests  upon  something  higher 
than  prescribed  rules.  These  are  very  good  as  far  as  they 
go.  They  indicate  in  a  general  way  the  duties  to  be  per- 
formed, and,  in  some  particulars,  the  manner  of  their  per- 
formance. Their  acceptance  on  the  part  of  a  candidate  is  a 
pledge  of  faithfulness,  and  an  assurance  that  the  work  un- 
dertaken is  not  misunderstood. 

But  there  is  something  superior  to  written  rules,  on  which 
the  Commission  places  its  reliance  for  fidelity  and  effective- 
ness. It  is  character  ;  single-eyed  devotion  to  the  work ;  a 
sensitive  and  enlightened  conscience  ;  a  heart-felt  sense  of 
religious  duty. 

For  it  should  not  be  assumed,  because  the  Commission  is 
not  professedly  a  religious  body,  that  it  is  uncontrolled  by 
religious  principle ;  that  because  its  work  is  not  put  forward 
in  terms  as  a  missionary  work,  it  is  therefore  purely  secular 
in  the  ordinary  sense  of  that  word.  On  the  former  point 
we  have  nothing  to  say  ;  "if  we  bear  witness  of  ourselves, 
our  witness  is  not  true."  But  of  the  nature  of  our  enter- 
prise we  are  free  to  speak,  and  we  hesitate  not  to  say,  that 
it  is  one  of  the  highest  and  noblest  that  man  could  under- 
take. It  is  to  lift  up  the  degraded  ;  to  enlighten  the  igno- 
rant ;  to  purify  the  debased ;  to  impart  just  conceptions  of 
moral  obligation  ;  to  promote  the  best  interests  of  our  com- 
mon country,  and  advance  the  cause  of  Christian  civiliza- 
tion. 

And  for  this  work  are  required,  in  some  good  degree,  the 
qualifications  demanded  for  a  more  solemn  office.  "If  a 
man  desire  the  office  of  a  teacher,  he  desireth  a  good  work." 
But  "  he  must  be  apt  to  teach ;  gentle  unto  all ;  patient" — 
not  trusting  to  a  "  form  of  godliness  "  while  practically  "  de- 
nying the  power  ;"  "  instant  in  season  ;"  "  a  workman  that 
needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,"  and  of  whom  the  Commission 
need  not  "  be  ashamed." 

We  have  no  outward  test  by  which  to  determine  a  candi- 
date's fitness,  such  as  a  signature  to  a  creed,  or  a  formal  and 
technical  profession  of  religion.  These  may  have  their  uses, 
but  as  evidences  of  character  they  are  not  to  be  trusted. 
All,  therefore,  that  we  essay  to  do  in  the  matter  is,  to  set 
forth  the  nature  of  the  work  undertaken,  and  qualities  of 
character  needed  for  its  performance.  This  done,  when  can- 
didates present  themselves,  we  judge  as  best  we  may  of  their 
fitness,  from  the  testimonials  and  other  proofs  they  may 
submit  to  us. 

Thus  far  we  have  been,  on  the  whole,  very  successful  in 
obtaining  good  teachers.  But  circumstances  have  changed 
in  regard  to  our  work  at  the  South,  and  we  must  see  to  it 
that  the  character  of  our  teachers  does  not  change  with 
them.  The  Southern  country  has  become  more  settled  ;  the 
position  of  a  teacher  is  now  one  of  little  or  no  danger,  and 
attended  with  little  or  no  odium.  The  service,  therefore, 
offers  some  temptation  to  the  self-seeking  and  worldly,  to 
the  frivolous  and  morally  incompetent.  But  such  we  do 
not  want,  and  such,  when  they  disclose  themselves,  we  will 
not  keep.  A  teacher  cannot  be  long  in  the  field  without 
proving  her  fitness,  or  unfitness,  for  her  duties.  The  de- 
tails of  the  work  will  make  the  matter  plain. 

For  instance,  though  we  have  no  rule  requiring  our  em- 
ployees to  teach  Sunday-school  or  take  part  in  evening 
schools,  yet  where  a  teacher  is  known  to  prefer  her  own 
ease  to  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  former,  or  to  choose 
the  recreations  and  festivities  of  society  in  preference  to  a 
share  in  the  duties  of  the  latter,  she  thereby  proves  herself 
unfit  for  her  place,  and  warrants  the  Commission  in  giving 
her  office  to  another.  And  though  we  have  no  specific  rules 


by  which  to  regulate  the  personal  behavior  of  persons  in 
our  service,  nevertheless,  if  any  one  should,  by  disregard 
of  useful  and  decorous  forms,  whether  of  religion  or  society, 
or  by  uulady-like  deportment  in  any  respect,  bring  herself 
or  her  work  into  public  disrepute,  she  would  thereby  make 
it  obligatory  on  the  Commission  to  put  another  in  her  place, 
of  more  dignity  of  character,  and  of  a  juster  sense  of  pro- 
priety. 

And  yet  we  would  not  be  exacting.  We  know  what  is  due 
to  human  nature.  We  are  not  ascetics  ourselves,  and  ask 
no  asceticism  from  others.  We  want  our  teachers  to  be  as 
cheerful  and  happy  as  possible.  We  desire  them  to  have 
all  the  pleasure  legitimately  within  their  reach.  But  we  ex- 
pect them  to  seek  their  chief  happiness  in  the  work  they 
have  undertaken,  and  to  find  their  highest  pleasure  in  evi- 
dences of  its  successful  accomplishment. 

We  are  thus  explicit,  that  there  may  be  a  good  mutual  - 
understanding  at  the  outset ;  that  the  relation  entered  into 
between  the  teacher  and  the  Commission  may  be  one  of  har- 
mony and  mutual  help,  and  that  the  joint  efforts  of  both 
may  accomplish  something  appreciable  in  the  great  work 
in  which  it  is  our  privilege  to  take  part.  We  are  not  un- 
aware that  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day  fall  largely  on 
those  in  the  field,  but  we  trust  that  they  also  are  not  un- 
aware that  our  sympathies  are  ever  with  them,  and  that  we 
always  hold  ourselves  bound  to  the  extent  of  our  ability  to 
aid  them  in  their  work,  and  sustain  them  in  their  trials. 

J.  M.  McKIM, 

Chairman  Committee  on  Teachers. 

ELLEN  COLLINS, 

Chairman  Committee  on  Correspond- 
ence and  Organisation. 
New- York,  Aug.  1,  1867. 


Receipts  by  Edward  F.  Davison,  Acting  Treasurer, 
from  July  20th  to  August  21th,  1867. 

FROM  AGENTS. 


Rev.  W.  R.  Long,  August  1  $136  15 

"      "       "  "     9   156  85 

"       "  "   23   177  94 

Rev.  Mr.  Brett,  "     1   100  00 

"       "  41     9   81  00 

Rev.  E.  Colton,  "     1   65  81 

"        "  "    12   246  01 

"        "  "    14   59  02 

Rev.  Mr.  Pierce,  "    12   67  61 


FROM  AUXILIARY  SOCIETIES. 

Syracuse,  $126 ;  Niagara,  156.15;  Reed's  Corners,  2.50; 
Great  Valley,  5.75;  Macedon,  13;  East-Boston,  120;  Port 
Byron,  7.50  ;  Watertown,  38.50;  Marion,  16.90 ;  Wolcott, 
3S.50;  East-Wal worth,  31.90;  Cazenovia,  100;  Woodville, 
50. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Edward  Tweedy,  Lenox,  Mass.,  $50  ;  Miss  Clemencellag- 
gerty,  100 ;  Arthur  Searle,  Newport,  10 ;  Addison  County 
Baptist  Association,  Vt.,  2;  Francis  Pidgeon,  Saugerties, 
150 ;  Sylvester  Dana,  Concord,  N.  H.,  13.17  ;  a  friend,  Nan- 
uet,  N.  Y.,  10. 


The  report  of  Mr.  Tomlinson  to  General 
Scott,  which  we  publish  in  this  number,  is 
full  of  interest,  and  well  worth  reading  from 
beginning  to  end. 


THE    AMERICAN    FREED  MAX. 


287 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE  ONITED  STATES. 

The  following  are  specimens  of  the  collection  having  the  above  title,  and  now  in  press 


POOK  ROSY. 


!  g  »    .    »  1  ■  J"1    11  J-  e 

sy,    poor  gal ;  poor  Ro  -  sy,    poor  gal ;  Ro  -  sy  break  my  poor  heart  * 


Poor  Ro 


Heaven  shall-a  be  my  home. 


can-not  stay  in  hell  one  day,  Heaven  shall-a  be  my 


home,    I'll  sing  and   pray  my  soul    a-way,  Heaven  shall-a  be    my  home. 

1  *  Poor  Rosy,  poor  gal ;  poor  Rosy,  poor  gal ; 
Rosy  break  my  poor  heart, 

Heaven  shall-a  be  my  home. 

2  Got  hard  trial  on  my  way,  (ter)j 
Heaven  shall-a  be  my  home. 

[The  remaining  verses  are  omitted  here,  for  want  of  room.] 

*  Poor  Csesar,  poor  boy. 


I'M  GWINE  TO  ALABAMY.  (Mississippi  Eiver  Boat  Song,) 
_  ^  __ 


EE 


1.  I'm  gwine  to 

b=d — H — b 


A  -  la  -  ba  -  my, 


Oh. 


£3 

For     to     see      my    mam  -  my, 


AhT  TTT 


1  I'm  gwine  to  Alabamy, — Oh-h-h. 
For  to  see  my  mammy, — Ah-h-h. 

2  She  went  from  Ole  Yirginny, — Oh. 
And  I'm  her  pickaninny, — Ah. 

3  She  lives  on  the  Tombigbee, — Oh. 
I  wish  I  had  her  wid  me, — Ah. 

4  Now  I'm  a  good  big  nigger, — Oh. 
Reckon  I  won't  be  bigger, — Ah. 

5  But  I'd  like  to  see  my  mammy, — Oh. 
Who  lives  in  Alabamy, — Ah. 


— 


z 
o 

a. 


« 

E* 

w 

t-?  S3 

3l 

a  o 
o  > 


d  ° 


^  S 

©    OQ  g 

©  .S3 


•r  o 


"S  °  * 


[A  very  good  specimen,  so  far  as  notes  can  give  one,  of  the  strange  bar-  -§  e 
baric  songs  that  one  hears  upon  the  Western  steamboats.] 


H  Z  o 


A.  SIMPSON  &  CO.,  Publishers, 

60  Duane  Street,  New- York. 


288 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAX. 


These  songs  have  been  gathered  from  South-Carolina,  (chiefly,)  Georgia,  Florida,  Alabama, 
Tennessee,  North-Carolina,  Virginia,  Maryland,  Delaware,  Arkansas,  Missouri,  and  the  Missis- 
sippi River,  and  are  now  collected  and  printed  for  the  first  time. 


4  bC 


LITTLE  CHILDREN,  THEN  WON'T  YOU  BE  GLAD  ?  (Arkansas.) 
:iu — ~~ft~~\|"T — K —  * — kr~i  : — -      — *  *  0- 


-Jtj— 


1.  Lit-tle  children,  then  won't  you  be  glad,   Lit  -  tie  children,  then  won't  you  be 


'glad.   That  you  have  been  to  heaven,  an'  you're  gwine  to  go     a  -  gain,  For  to 


try  on  the  long  white  robe,  Chil-dren,  for  to     try  on  the  long  white  robe 


'<=:< 

c  ■  . 

o 


-  5 


1  Little  children,  then  won't  you  be  glad,  (bis), 

That  you  have  been  to  heaven,  an'  you're  gwine-  to  go  again, 
For  to  try  on  the  long  white  robe. 

2  King  Jesus,  he  was  so  strong  (ier),  my  Lord, 

That  he  jarred  down  the  walls  of  hell. 

'  3  Don't  you  hear  what  de  chariot  say  ?  ( bis), 
De  fore  wheels  run  by  de  grace  ob  G-od, 
An'  de  hind  wheels  dey  run  by  faith. 

4  Don't  you  'member  what  you  promise  de  Lord?  (bis), 
You  promise  de  Lord  that  you  would  feed  his  sheep, 
An'  gather  his  lambs  so  well. 


[Often  sung  in  the  colored  schools  at  Helena,  Arkansas.] 
BELL  DA  RING. 


s  s 


3— ± 

•  fjr 


^  to 

'"d  5i 

S  ~  ® 

C  C3 


C   X  ct 

%  a  s 

-  f  = 


a 

^    —  5C 

53  fcJO 


,-2  OQ 


-3- 


E 


=t=t 


1.  Want  to  goto  meet-ing,  Bell  da  ring,  "Want  to  go  to  meet -ing,  Bell  da  ri 


2.  (Say,)  Road  so  storm-  y,  Bell  da  ring,  (Say,)  Road  so  storm-y,  Bell  da  ring. 

Tntrod. — I  know  member,  know  Lord, 

I  know  I  yedde  de  bell  da  ring. 

1  Want  to  go  to  meetin'  ('ciety,  lecter,  praise-house) 
(Base)  Bell  da  ring. 

[The  remaining  verses  omitted,  for  want  of  room.] 

A.  SBMPSON  &  CO.,  Publishers, 

60  Duane  Street,  New-York. 


THE 

American  Jtceftntan. 

[Address,  30  Vesey  Street ;  or,  P.  O.  Box  5733.] 


Vol.  II.]  NEW-YORK,  OCTOBER,  18G7.  [No.  7. 


The  American  Freedman's  Union  Commission, 

30  Vesey  Street,  New- York  City. 

"  The  object  of  this  Commission  is  the  relief,  education,  and  elevation  of  the  Freedmen  of  the  United  States,  and  to 
aid  and  coSperate  with  the  people  of  the  South,  without  distinction  of  race  or  color,  in  the  improvement  of  their  condi- 
tion upon  the  basis  of  industry,  education,  freedom,  and  Christian  morality.  No  school  or  depot  of  supplies  shall  be 
maintained  from  the  benefits  of  which  any  shall  be  excluded  because  of  color." — Art.  II.,  Constitution. 


Chief-Justice  S.  P.  Chase,  President.  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  Gen.  Sec,  "| 

Rev.  Jos.  P.  Thompson,  D.D.,  N.  Y.,  )  J.  Mi£ler  McKim,  Cor.  Sec,       1  30  Vesey  St.,  N.  Y. 

William  Lloyd  Garrison,  Boston,  V  Vice-Presidents.  Geo.  Cabot  Ward,  Treas.,  [    P.  0.  Box  5733. 

Charles  G.  Hammond,  Chicago,     )  Francis  G.  Shaw,  Ch.  Ex.  Com.,  J 


EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE. 


New-England  Branch,   John  Parkman,  Martin  Brimmbb,  Wendell  P.  Garrison. 

New-York  Branch,   Francis  George  Shaw,  Henry  A.  Dike,  Nathan  Bishop. 

Pennsylvania  Branch,   Francis  R.  Cope,  Samuel  S.  White. 

Maryland  Branch,   Hugh  L.  Bond,  F.  Israel,  Chas.  W.  Bond. 

North-Western  Branch,   R.  W.  Patterson,  S.  B.  Gookins,  M.  D.  C.  Crawford. 

Michigan  Branch,  .   William  Hogarth,  Supply  Chase,  David  Plumb. 


BRANCH  OFFICES. 

New-England,   8  Studio  Building,  Boston,   Rev.  J.  H.  Chapin,  Secretary. 

New-York,   30  Vesey  Street,  New-York,   Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy,  Secretary. 

Pennsylvania,   711  Sanso'm  Street,  Philadelphia,   Robert  R.  Corson,  Secretary. 

Delaware,   Wilmington,  DeL,   Rev.  John  G.  Furey,  Secretary. 

Maryland,   5  and  7  Tyson's  Building,  Baltimore,    ....  Rev.  F.  Israel,  Secretary. 

North-Western,   25  Lombard  Block,  Chicago,   Rev.  H.  B.  Holmes,  Secretary. 

Michigan,   Detroit,   Rev.  S.  Chase,  Secretary. 

Pacific  Coast,   San  Francisco,  Cal.,   Rev.  D.  C.  Haynes,  D.D.,  Secretary. 

30  Vesey  Street,  N.  Y.  City. 

This  journal  is  published  as  the  central  organ  of  the  Freedman's  Union  Commission,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
\      hes  and  he  i  nformation  of  all  who  are  interested  in  the  work  of  education  in  the  South.* 

Copies  will  be  furnished  without  cliarge  to  any  Branch  of  the  Commission  for  distribution  in  connection  with 
their  organs,  or  for  such  other  use  as  may  best  subserve  the  interests  of  their  work.  Communications  should  be 
addressed  to  the  General  Secretary,  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  30  Vesey  Street,  New-York  City. 

TERMS. 

Advertisements,  one  insertion,  at  the  rate  of  $30  per  page  for  ordinary  inside  pages  ;  but  for  an  inside  page  oppo  - 
Bite  general  reading  matter,  or  for  the  outside  (last)  page  of  this  journal,  the  price  is  $40— payable,  in  all  cases,,  as  soon 
as  the  journal  is  published. 

One  copy  of  THE  AMERICAN  FREEDMAN  to  a  regular  subscriber  one  year,  (twelve  numbers,)  fifty  cents. 

Any  person  contributing  five  dollars  to  the  cause,  to  any  Branch  of  this  Commission,  is  entitled  to  receive  one 
copy  of  this  journal  free  for  a  year. 


290 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


THE  WEST. 

Our  Corresponding  Secretary,  Mr.  J.  M.  Mc- 
Kim,  has  already  started  for  the  West,  at  the 
earnest  request  of  the  Board,  to  consult  with 
leading  gentlemen  there  in  respect  to  the  prog- 
ress of  the  work  in  that  section.    The  charac- 
ter of  the  movement  and  the  nature  of  its 
claims  have  changed,  hut  its  importance  has 
not  altered ;  or  rather,  it  has  increased.  It  com- 
menced as  a  philanthropic  movement.    It  has 
grown  into  one  of  national  necessity.    It  was 
at  first  a  response  to  the  claims  of  humanity. 
It  is  now  a  response  to  the  claims  of  the  nation. 
So  long  as  there  was  doubt  whether  the  freed- 
man  was  to  have  the  suffrage,  so  long  the  ne- 
cessity for  his  education,  in  a  political  point  of 
view,  was  not  less  real  certainly,  hut  less  evi- 
dent.   Now  that  he  is  invested  with  the  bal- 
lot, the  law  of  self-preservation  requires  his 
education.    No  nation  can  afford  to  leave  three 
or  four  millions  of  its  subjects  in  ignorance. 
Much  less  can  a  republic  afford  to  leave  three 
<or  four  millions  of  its  citizen  rulers  in  igno- 
rance.    England  perceives  that  suffrage  neces- 
sitates the  school-house.  Whig  and  Tory  unite 
in  recognizing  this  necessity.    To  the  Scotch 
advocate  of  the  philosophy  of  absolutism,  this 
assumption  that  the  masses  can  be  educated 
seems  an  absurdity.    To  the  lover  of  man  and 
of  liberty,  the  fact  that  the  ballot-box  compels 
the  State  to  educate  its  poorer  classes  is  the 
grandest  argument  for  universal  suffrage.  We 
are  sure  this  necessity  none  will  be  quicker  to 
perceive  than  our  fellow-citizens  of  the  West. 
We  are  sure  that  none  sooner  than  they  will 
recognize  the  fact  that  the  grand  instrument 
for  this  work  is  the  common-school.    We  are 
sure  that,  wherever  he  goes,  Mr.  McKim,  as  the 
representative  of  this  idea  —  a  common-school 
education  for  the  Southern  masses  —  will  be 
warmly  welcomed  by  all  intelligent  and  far- 
seeing  patriots.    And  everywhere  he  will  find, 
in  the  cause  he  advocates,  an  introduction 
which  will  render  hardly  necessary  these  reso- 
lutions passed  just  before  he  left : 


At  an  informal  meeting  of  the  Executive  Committee  of 
the  American  Freedman's  Union  Commission,  held  in  New- 
York  September  23d,  1867,  the  following  resolution!  were 
unanimously  passed  : 

1.  Resolved,  That  our  thanks  are  due  in  advance  to  our 
Corresponding  Secretary,  J.  M.  McKim,  Esq.,  for  his  kind 
consent  to  undertake  the  tour  to  the  West,  so  earnestly  da- 
sired  by  our  fellow-laborers  in  Chicago,  and  which  we  think 
of  such  importance  to  the  cause  at  this  time;  and  that 
while  we  would  not  burden  him  with  any  additional  duties, 
the  Commission  would  be  greatly  obliged  if,  on  his  way  to 
the  West  and  while  there,  he  would  avail  himself  of  such 
opportunities  as  may  offer,  to  see,  personally,  leading  and 
influential  men,  with  a  view  to  awakening  them,  and 
through  them  the  community,  to  a  more  lively  and  intelli- 
gent interest  in  this  great  work  of  popular  education  now 
■o  imperatively  demanded  in  the  Southern  States. 

2.  Jtteolved,  That  while  we  would  be  far  from  imposing 
upon  our  friend  the  office  of  a  collecting  agent,  we  would 
venture  to  remind  him  of  the  inadequacy  of  our  pecuniary 
means  to  the  work  we  have  in  hand,  and  to  say  that  he  will 
be  rendering  an  additional  service  to  the  cause  if  he  will 
afford  the  gentlemen  whom  he  may  have  occasion  to  see,  an 
opportunity  of  subscribing  to  our  funds.  The  pressing 
necessities  of  the  work,  which  compel  us  to  take  this  liberty 
with  him,  will  be  his  equal  warrant  for  taking  a  like  litwty 
with  ethers.  Francis  G.  Shaw, 

Chairman  Executive  Committee. 

Ltvah  Abbott, 
General  Secretary  A.  F.  U.  0. 


COOPERATION. 

We  publish  in  another  column  a  report  of 
a  conference  of  freedman's  societies,  held  Sep- 
tember 10th,  1867,  at  the  rooms  of  the  Commis- 
sion, 30  Vesey  street.  The  object  of  this  meet- 
ing was  to  consider  what  practical  measure 
could  be  taken  to  secure,  in  this  educational 
movement,  the  cooperation  of  the  Southern 
communities.  Representatives  from  different 
Branches  of  the  Commission,  the  American  Mis- 
sionary Association,  and  the  Friends'  Freed- 
man's Association  of  Philadelphia,together  with 
the  Bureau  Superintendent  of  Education  for 
Western  Virginia,  constituted  the  meeting. 
We  have  since  received  from  the  Baptist  Home 
Mission  Society  the  assurance  that  the  resolu- 
tions adopted  accord  with  their  views  and  re- 
ceive their  "  full  sympathy."  Thus  it  may  be 
said,  without  invidious  comparison  and  without 
question,  that  the  leading  societies  have  united 
in  the  action  of  this  conference,  whose  delibera- 
tions were  marked  with  great  unanimity  of 
spirit,  and  whose  final  action  was  entirely 
unanimous.  This  action  will  be  hailed  by  all 
the  friends  of  this  movement,  we  are  sure,  not 
only  because  it  looks  to  practically  securing 
the  much-needed  cooperation  of  the  freedmen, 
and  thus  the  greater  permanency  of  the  schools, 
but  also  because  it  is  a  significant  public  indi- 
cation of  that  entire  harmony  in  general  aims 
which  underlies  differences  of  opinion  and  of 


THE    AMERICAN.  FREEDMAN. 


291 


methods,  which,  though  not  wholly  unimpor- 
tant, are  assuredly  of  secondary  importance. 

A  brief  explanatory  gtatement  of  the  discus- 
sion which  accompanied  these  resolutions  will 
help  to  place  their  meaning  more  clearly  before 
the  reader : 

1.  Resolved,  That  the  best  interests  of  the  freed  people 
require  the  permanent  establishment  of  free  schools  in  the 
South  ;  that,  as  in  the  Northern  free-school  system,  the  peo- 
ple should  cooperate  in  their  support,  and,  therefore,  that 
no  new  schools  should  be  established,  except  where  coope- 
ration exists. 

It  was  stated  to  the  conference  that  already 
the  efficient  industry  of  the  freed  people  was 
reaping  its  harvest.  Already  the  South, 
although  its  industries  are  still  hampered  and 
its  1ife  paralyzed  by  the  uncertainties  in  which 
its  political  reconstruction  is  involved,  is  begin- 
ning to  feel  the  beneficial  effects  of  free  labor. 
The  merchants  are  purchasing  for  the  freed- 
men.  Additions  are  being  made  to  their  stores 
in  some  places  to  accommodate  their  trade. 
And  in  Baltimore  the  character  of  the  market 
is  materially  affected,  many  Southern  buyers 
bearing  testimony  that  the  freed  people  are 
their  best  customers. 

At  the  same  time  much  of  their  money — too 
much,  by  far — goes  in  articles' of  dress,  jewelry, 
and  useless  finery.  An  impression  is  allowed 
to  gain  ground  that  the  schools  are  to  be  free 
schools,  by  which  the  colored  people  erroneous- 
ly understand  that  they  are  to  be  supported 
wholly  without  expense  to  them.  Where 
thrown  upon  their  own  resources,  they  have 
shown  their  ability  to  do  something  in  the  edu- 
cational work  by  their  support  of  pay-schools 
and  by  their  maintenance  of  their  churches. 
In  Maryland,  the  colored  preachers  in  the  coun- 
try are  often  better  supported  than  their  white 
brethren ;  and,  in  one  instance  recently,  a  clergy- 
man who  was  obliged  to  give  up  his  white  pa- 
rish for  want  of  support,  found,  in  a  neighbor- 
ing colored  church,  sufficient  means  to  justify 
his  acceptance  of  their  call. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  abundantly  evident 
that  they  cannot  be  left  to  carry  on  the  work 
unaided.  In  few  sections  have  they  the  means  ; 
in  many  they  can  really  do  but  little;  while 
in  none  are  they  yet  educated  up  to  a  point 
where  they  can  assume  the  entire  direction  and 
charge  of  the  work  themselves.  No  people 
can  be  expected  to  understand  the  value  of 
education  until  they  have  tasted  its  benefits. 
And  the  colored  people,  with  all  their  ardent 
desire  for  education,  are  far  more  ready  to  sup- 
port their  churches  than  their  schools.  The 
first  are  old  friends ;  the  second  are  welcome 


innovations.  The  first  are,  in  their  view,  in- 
dispensable ;  the  second  desirable. 

We  do  not  call  in  question  their  judgment. 
We  simply  state  the  indubitable  fact,  that  they 
need  the  stimulus  of  help  far  more  in  the  edu- 
cational than  in  the  missionary  work. 

No  action  in  the  resolution  was  taken  on  the 
amount  of  support  to  be  secured.  This  is  neces- 
sarily determined  by  circumstances.  Old  and 
established  schools  may  also  continue  to  be  car- 
ried on  without  local  cooperation  in  some 
special  cases.  But  it  may  be  regarded  as  the 
fixed  policy  of  the  various  societies  to  establish 
no  new  schools  except  where  in  some  form  and  to 
some  degree  the  people  to  be  benefited  contribute 
to  their  support. 

.2.  Resolved,  That  our  teachers  and  agents  in  the  South 
should  organize  the  people  into  associations  to  raise  means 
to  aid  in  the  establishment  and  support  of  their  schools. 

How  to  secure  this  cooperation  was  a  problem 
which  evolved  considerable  discussion.  Fortu- 
nately the  conference  was  not  left  to  theories, 
but  had  a  practical  experiment  to  guide  them 
in  their  deliberations.  This  is  afforded  by  the 
practice  which  has  been  pursued  by  the  Balti- 
more Association  in  Maryland. 

In  the  city  of  Baltimore  the  schools  have 
been  in  part  supported  by  a  per  capita  tax. 
Each  pupil  has  paid  ten  cents  per  week.  They 
have  paid  cheerfully  and  easily.  In  some  cases 
where  several  children  have  attended  from  one 
family,  and  in  one  or  two  instances  of  extreme 
poverty,  the  sum  has  been  reduced  or  remitted, 
the  amount  being  raised  outside  by  special  con- 
tributions. The  plan  has  worked  well.  The 
Association  has  been  able  to  carry  on  a  much 
larger  and  more  successful  work  than  they 
could  otherwise  have  done.  And  the  poorest 
have  been,  by  special  arrangement,  provided  for. 

A  similar  course  has  been  pursued  in  Charles- 
ton ;  the  sum  being  paid,  however,  at  first 
monthly,  and  then  quarterly,  instead  of  by  the 
week.  We  give  in  another  column  an  amusing 
extract  from  the  Freednien's  Record,  showing 
one  of  the  methods  of  securing^prompt  pay- 
ment. 

In  Baltimore  now,  however,  the  schools  are 
assumed  by  the  city  government,  and  will  be 
hereafter  carried  on  as  public  schools. 

In  the  State  at  large  a  different  method  was 
pursued.  Some  members  of  the  Baltimore  So- 
ciety, generally  Judge  Bond,  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  go  out  from  time  to  time  into  the  coun- 
ties where  schools  were  needed  A  meeting  of 
the  colored  people  was  called.  The  importance 
of  education  was  set  before  them.  The  whole 
community  was  aroused  by  one  of  those^  stir- 


292 


tTHE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


ring  appeals  in  which  no  one  excels  the  Judge, 
whom  all  the  colored  people  of  Maryland  count 
as  friend,  and  who  will  carry  to  all  time  no 
prouder  title  than  the  well-earned  cognomen  of 
Friend  of  the  Oppressed.  Then  the  question 
was  put :  "  What  can  you  do  ?  What  icill  you 
do  ?"  And  the  offer  was  made,  "  The  Bureau 
will  furnish  lumber ;  the  Association  will  fur- 
nish the  salary  of  a  teacher ;  if  you  will  furnish 
the  labor  to  put  up  the  school-house,  and  the 
board  and  lodging  for  the  teacher,  and  provide 
your  own  books,  you  can  have  a  school."  The 
plan  worked  admirably.  The  Freedmen  who 
had  not  money  had  industry  and  homes.  They 
were  willing  and  able  to  pay  in  kind.  Un- 
der this  system  school-houses  have  sprung  up 
all  over  the  State,  in  the  establishment  and 
support  of  all  of  which  the  Freedmen  have 
proved  themselves  enthusiastic  and  efficient  co- 
laborers. 

This  plan  gave  form  to  the  second  resolution. 
We  have  no  Judge  Bond  to  send  through  the 
South.  No  paid  agent  could  do  the  work  which 
his  disinterested  enthusiasm  has  accomplished. 
But  in  every  locality  the  teachers  and  superin- 
tendents can  do  much  toward  organizing,  in 
their  respective  localities,  associations  which 
may  do  not  a  little  toward  supporting  the 
schools,  and  will  do  much  toward  giving  them 
that  moral  support,  and  that  confidence  of  the 
community,  and  that  sense  of  their  being  their 
schools,  which  will  go  far  toward  insuring  their 
perpetuity. 

As  our  readers  know,  a  similar  system  has 
been  attempted  in  Georgia,  though  not  as  yet 
with  any  considerable  pecuniary  results. 

S.^Hesolved,  That,  in  the  opinion  of  this  meeting,  all 
books  should  be  sold  at  a  price  to  be  fixed  by  the  Teachers' 
Committee  ;  and  that  none  should  be  given  away  except  by 
special  permission  of  the  Committee. 

This  resolution  is  indicative  not  of  any 
change  in  the  policy  of  the  societies,  but  rather 
a  reaffirmation  of  an  already  long-established 
policy.  At  the  same  time  our  teachers  may 
understand  from  it  a  new  and  strong  expres- 
sion of  the  purpose  to  give  away  no  school 
books  except  under  very  special  circumstances. 


Let  not  our  contributors  relax  their  efforts 
because  of  this  effort  on  our  part  to  secure  a 
more  universal  cooperation  in  the  South.  We 
are  assured,  beyond  all  question,  that  we  shall 
have  more  than  we  can  do  to  provide  those 
communities  with  schools  which  are  mo6t 
ready  and  anxious  to  help  themselves.  Peti- 
tions pour  in  upon  us  from  every  quarter,  some 


samples  of  which  this  paper  affords  ;  petitions 
which  only  our  want  of  a  fuller  treasury  pre- 
vents us  from  granting. 


THE  DELAWARE  ASSOCIATION. 

The  following  letter  speaks  for  itself,  and  is 
another  indication  of  the  growing  inclination 
to  unity  in  this  work  : 

Philadelphia,  Sept.  6, 1867. 
J.  Miller  McKim,  Cor.  Sec. : 

Dear  Sir  :  I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  report  to 
you  that,  at  a  public  meeting  of  the  Delaware 
Association  for  the  Moral  Improvement  and 
Education  of  the  Colored  People,  a  resolution 
was  adopted  last  evening  authorizing  our  board 
of  managers  to  adopt  the  Constitution  of  the 
American  Freedman's  Union  Commission,  and 
to  place  ourselves  in  the  same  relations  toward 
that  Association .  as  the  Baltimore  Association 
occupies. 

This  will  be  done  at  our  next  meeting  on 
Saturday,  if  we  can  get  a  copy  of  the  Consti- 
tution in  time  for  the  managers'  meeting.  I 
have  telegraphed  for  it,  and  hope  it  will  arrive  ; 
but  you  can  consider  the  matter  accomplished. 
I  observe  by  the  Baltimore  pamphlet  that  their 
organization,  after  the  merging,  appears  to  be 
maintained,  save  that  the  agent,  Richard  Jan- 
ney,  was  appointed  by  you.  Rev.  John  G. 
Furey,  our  agent,  we  recommend  to  you  as  a 
conscientious  man,  well  acquainted  with  the 
needs  of  the  State,  and  ask  his  appointment. 

Please  send  me  a  statement  of  the  precise  re- 
lations this  new  arrangement  will  establish 
between  us,  and  what  we  are  expected  to  do. 

Yours  truly, 

Thomas  Kimber. 

We  need  hardly  say  that  we  extend  to  our 
Delaware  friends  a  very  cordial  welcome.  Wo 
took  no  little  encouragement  from  the  organi- 
zation of  this  Society  when  it  was  first  estab- 
lished, and  we  doubly  hail  it  now  as  a  brother, 
before  united  to  us  by  sympathy,  henceforth  in 
organization. 

But  it  is  our  earnest  desire  to  extend  to  them 
other  than  a  wordy  welcome,  to  show  our  good 
wishes  by  our  good  works.  The  Delaware  Asso- 
ciation cannot  raise  much  money.  It  can  secure 
the  cooperation  of  the  colored  people.  It  can 
obtain  school-houses  and  board ;  but  it  looks  to 
us  to  help  them  to  teachers.  Already  trusting 
to  the  beneficence  which  has  never  failed  them, 
the  New-York  Branch,  complying  with  their 
earnest  appeals,  have  promised  this  Association 
six  teachers  for  the  coming  year.  We  want 
to  double  the  number.  Delaware  will  provide 
them  with  places  and  with  board.  The  colored 
pooplo  are  clamorous  for  instruction.  The  soil 
is  virgin.    Shall  we  sow  the  seed  ? 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


293 


Sixce  writing  tlie  above,  we  have  received 
from  our  Delaware  friends,  official  notice  of  their 
final  adoption  of  the  Constitution,  with  a  full 
report  of  the  public  meeting  referred  to  by  Mr. 
Kimber,  which  we  give  in  another  column. 
The  letter  received  from  Mr.  Furey,  which  we 
publish  in  another  part  of  our  journal,  ex- 
hibits the  energy  of  this  infant  association, 
what  it  has  done,  and  what  help  it  needs.  We 
urge  our  friends  to  read  this  appeal,  and  not  to 
suffer  it  to  remain  without  an  answer.  Already, 
partly  on  faith,  the  New- York  Branch  has  com- 
missioned a  hundred  and  nineteen  teachers,  four 
times  as  many  as  were  under  appointment  a 
year  ago.  But  we  only  lack  the  funds  to  ren- 
der gladly  the  additional  help  which  our  cour- 
ageous and  valued  friends  in  Delaware  need  so 
much.  They  have  heard  the  voice  of  God  say- 
ing to  them  in  his  Providence,  "  Go  forward." 
They  have  obeyed,  believing  Northern  patri- 
otism and  beneficence  will  sustain  them.  Shall 
they  be  disappointed  ? 


MARYVILLE  COLLEGE,  EAST-TEN- 
NESSEE. 

This  college  is  located  at  Maryville,  sixteen 
miles  by  rail  south  of  Knoxville.  It  has  been 
in  existence  for  forty  years.  During  all  this 
time  it  has  been  a  courageous  witness  for  free- 
dom, by  whose  friends  it  was  estabh'shed.  For 
many  years,  indeed,  if  we  mistake  not,  until 
after  emancipation,  it  was  the  only  anti-slavery 
college  in  the  South.  An  endeavor  is  now 
being  made  to  at  once  permanently  endow  this 
institution  and  to  enlarge  its  scope.  It  is  to 
be  conducted  on  what  is  known  as  the  Oberlin 
plan,  that  is,  it  will  recognize  no  distinction 
either  of  sex  or  class.  Male  and  female,  white 
and  colored,  will  be  admitted  to  its  privileges 
on  the  same  terms.  That  such  institutions  are 
springing  up  in  the  South  is  an  encouraging 
sign  of  the  times.  Such,  we  understand,  to  be 
in  substance  the  basis  of  a  new  institution 
about  to  be  established  in  Louisiana.  The 
Howard  University,  in  Washington,  affords 
another  striking  illustration  of  the  progress  of 
impartial  education.  Rev.  Samuel  Sawyer  has 
been  appointed  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  to 
raise  the  desired  endowment — $100,000.  He 
acts  under  the  direction  and  with  the  indorse- 
ment of  the  New  School  Presbyterian  Church, 
under  whose  auspices  the  college  is  sustained. 
Some  paragraphs  from  an  appeal  of  his  we 
append : 

"  East-Tennessee,  according  to  Baron  Humboldt,  is  one 
of  the  healthiest  regions  on  the  globe:  In  I860,  its  popu- 
lation embraced  800,000  whites  and  30,000  blacks.   It  has 


over  2000  square  miles  more  than  the  entire  State  of  Massa- 
chusetts. 

"  Maryville  College,  located  in  the  centre  of  East-Ten- 
nesse,  was  founded  in  1819,  by  Rev.  Isaac  Anderson,  D.D., 
and  from  its  foundation  it  was  anti-slavery  in  character,  and 
its  influence  was  in  the  direction  of  liberty.  Rev.  George  Ers- 
kine,  the  first  colored  man  who  received  a  liberal  education 
in  Tennessee,  obtained  his  culture  within  its  walls.  Its 
friends  labored  zealously  in  the  cause  of  freedom ;  manu- 
mission societies  were  formed  in  every  county ;  many 
slaves  were  set  at  liberty,  and  petitions  for  the  abolition  of 
slavery  were  openly  circulated  and  signed  by  thousands. 

"  The  first  anti-slavery  paper  published  in  the  United 
States,  was  published  by  Benjamin  Lundy,  1826,  In  Eaet- 
Tennessee. 

"  One  hundred  and  thirty  graduates  of  Maryville  College 
found  their  way  into  the  ministry,  and  hundreds  more  into 
other  professions  and  callings,  whose  influence  was  widely 
felt  against  oppression  and  wrong,  and  in  the  interest  of 
liberty.  It  was  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  people 
of  East-Tennessee  voted  nearly  five  to  one  against  seces- 
sion ;  that  their  quota  was  always  more  than  twice  full ; 
and  that  no  drafted  man  or  hired  substitute  belonged  to 
their  regiments. 

"  Rev.  Dr.  Anderson,  President  of  the  College  for  nearly 
forty  years,  always  taught  that  slavery  '  was  a  great  moral, 
social,  and  political  evil,'  and  when  referring  to  the  traffic 
in  slaves,  he  declared  from  his  pulpit :  '  Any  man  who  will 
thus  chain  together  his  fellow-men,  and  drive  them  like 
cattle  to  market,  would  sell  the  Lord  of  Glory  for  filthy 
lucre,  and  kidnap  the  angels  of  heaven.1 

"When  some  were  whispering  secession,  he  wrote  to  a 
friend  in  Kentucky : '  The  Union  is  the  only  safeguard  these 
States  have  against  anarchy  and  civil  discord,  with  all 
their  horrors.  The  Union  is  the  hope  of  the  world,  and, 
under  God,  promises  to  break  down  civil  and  religious 
tyranny.  I  used  to  say,  as  far  back  as  1832,  "  The  man  who 
silently  thought  of  dissolving  the  Union  ought  to  be  hung, 
and  if  he  spoke  it,  deserved  some  severer  fate  !"  The 
Union  one  and  indivisible  ought  to  be  the  motto  of  every 
American  and  every  philanthropist.' 

"  The  people  were  familiar  with  these  sentiments.  They 
found  an  echo  in  their  own  hearts.  They  were  repeated 
and  emphasized  at  almost  every  fireside,  in  almost  every 
family.  With  an  average  of  fifty  citizens  in  every  county 
assassinated  or  brutally  murdered,  with  nine  hundred 
starved  in  rebel  prisons,  devotion  to  the  Union  but  in- 
creased, until,  assembled  in  State  Convention  at  Nashville, 
January,  1865,  they  voluntarily  abolished  slavery,  the  oc- 
casion, if  not  the  cause  of  their  woes. 

"  Fifty-five  loyal  churches  in  East-Tennessee,  five  of  them 
colored,  the  constituency  in  part  of  Maryville  College, 
pushed  on  the  column  of  liberty.  By  their  help  the  colored 
man  was  admitted  as  a  witness  before  the  courts,  as  a  voter 
at  the  ballot-box,  and  as  a  participant  in  all  the  benefits  of 
our  common  schools.  They  have  put  the  college  into  opera- 
tion again,  with  about  fifty  students  in  attendance  ;  have 
projected  a  normal  department  to  qualify  teachers  for  their 
work,  and  have  sent  forth  the  undersigned  to  secure  an 
endowment  for  four  professorships.  With  such  an  endow- 
ment, 200  students  can  readily  be  rallied  to  enjoy  its  ad- 
vantages. The  necessary  annual  expenses  will  be  less  than 
$125,  including  board  and  tuition. 

"  The  buildings,  used  as  barracks  by  both  armies  during 
the  war,  were  seriously  injured,  and  the  library,  of  over 
4000  volumes,  destroyed.  The  buildings  are  undergoing 
repair,  and  the  main  college  edifice  is  now  ready  to  accom- 
modate a  hundred  students. 

"  With  such  a  history,  backed  by  such  a  constituency,  in 
so  commanding  a  position,  so  thoroughly  loyal  and  true  to 
liberty,  with  its  doors  open  to  students  Irrespective  of 


294 


THE   AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


color,  ought  not— will  not  Mary ville  College  be  mstained  ? 
Without  it,  how  can  a  faithful  home  ministry  and  qualified 
educators  be  raised  up  for  all  that  region,  to  fill  our  vacant 
pulpits,  and,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  to  repair  our  desola- 
tions? Will  not  one  professorship,  at  least,  be  founded  in 
New-England,  and  three  in  other  parts  of  the  country,  to 
help  make  the  institution  an  intellectual  West-Point,  whence 
we  may  send  out  our  moral  heroes  toward  Yicksburg  and 
the  sea  ? 

"  At  a  time  when  the  champions  of  the  Lost  Cause  install, 
with  so  much  parade,  General  Lee,  Admiral  Semmes,  and 
their  like,  as  educators  of  the  young,  will  not  the  friends  of 
liberty  and  truth  make  all  necessary  sacrifices  to  lay  broad 
and  deep  the  foundations  of  many  generations?  Give  us 
facilities  to  educate  the  educators,  and  all  that  beautiful 
region  can  be  held  in  the  interest  of  genuine  loyalty  to 
country  and  to  God." 

An  application  has  been  made  to  the  Com- 
mission to  open  at  Maryville  a  school,  to 
serve  both  as  a  primary  or  preparatory  depart- 
ment to  the  college,  and  a  normal  school  for 
that  section  of  the  State.  For  this  purpose, 
Mr.  Sawyer  pledges  us  the  use  of  adequate 
rooms,  furniture,  etc.  It  will  be  necessary  for 
us  to  provide  a  first-class  male  teacher,  able  to 
organize  and  conduct  such  an  institution.  The 
school,  like  the  college,  would  be  open  to  all 
classes.  While  in  full  sympathy  with  the  in- 
stitution, it  would  be  independent  of  it,  so  far 
as  control  is  concerned.  We  are  desirous  to 
accept  the  proffer  thus  made  to  us.  East-Ten- 
nessee needs  such  a  university.  It  needs  such 
a  normal  school.  We  look  to  our  Western 
friends  to  give  us  the  needed  means.  Fifteen 
hundred  dollars  will  enable  us  to  start  the 
school  at  once.  And  it  is  desirable  that  the 
teacher  should  be  upon  the  ground  even  now. 
Will  not  the  Chicago  churches  authorize  us  to 
go  on  with  this  corner-stone  of  a  new  education 
in  East-Tennessee  ? 


MILITARY  DESPOTISM. 

"  Tim  American  people  are  at  length  accustomed  to  a  state 
of  affairs  from  which  they  would  formerly  have  turned  with 
indignation — to  the  existence  on  their  continent  of  a  purely 
military  government  over  ten  millions  of  their  fellow-citi- 
zens, whose  representative  men  are  put  under  a  ban,  who 
are  not  only  excluded  from  the  Federal  Legislature  and 
Federal  offices,  but  are  deprived  of  all  voice  in  the  govern- 
ment of  their  several  States." — London  Times. 

We  clip  from  the  London  limes'  namesake, 
the  New- York  Times,  an  account  of  an  incident 
which  we  wish  our  English  friends  may  note 
as  an  illustration  of  the  sort  of  interference  of 
which  our  military  despotism  is  guilty,  and  the 
sort  of  "  representative  men  "  who  are  "  put 
under  a  ban  "  by  its  action,  and  "  deprived  of 
all  voice  in  the  government  of  their  several 
States."  Let  the  reader  note  that  the  violence 
described  in  the  paragraphs  below  was  all  com- 
mitted with  the  forms  of  law.    A  eourt  is 


organized  ;  a  magistrate  is  invited  in  ;  the 
unfortunate  negress  is  compelled  to  apprentice 
herself  to  a  mistress  whose  countenance  of  the 
subsequent  cruel  outrage  is  a  sufficient  defence 
in  the  eye  of  South-Carolina  law  for  its  perpe- 
tration. And  when  General  Sickles  interferes, 
repudiates  this  form  of  law,  a  transparent  cover 
of  an  outrageous  piece  of  lawless  violence,  and 
condemns  all  who  shared  in  it,  magistrate  in- 
cluded, to  fine  and  imprisonment,  the  land 
rings  with  charges  of  "  interference  with  the 
civil  courts,"  "  constitutional  prerogatives  of  an 
independent  judiciary,"  etc.  etc.,  until  it  reach- 
es the  other  side  of  the  water,  and  is  echoed 
back  in  such  a  paragraph  as  that  which  heads 
this  article.  We  all  deprecate  the  existence  of  a 
military  government.  But  we  deprecate  much 
more  the  distempered  public  state,  the  hot  pre- 
judice, and  the  cruel  violence  which  necessi- 
tates it.  And  it  is  for  such  interferences  as  this 
that  the  American  people  are  condemned,  both 
at  home  and  abroad,  for  maintaining  a  "  mili- 
tary despotism." 

From  The  Xew-Tork  Times.  4 

"  A  copy  of  Major-General  Sickles's  order  No.  75,  dated 
Charleston,  August  17th,  has  just  been  received  in  Wash- 
ington, by  which  it  appears  that  certain  parties,  citizens  of 
North-Carolina,  were  tried  before  the  Post  Court  of  Ply- 
mouth, in  that  State,  on  the  charge,  first,  of  riotous  con- 
duct; second,  of  assault  and  battery.  The  following  is  a 
copy  of  the  specification,  common  in  substance  to  all  the 
cases,  except  that  of  Saunders.  1  In  this,  that  the  said  de- 
fendants did,  in  accordance  with  the  decision  of  an  unlaw- 
ful assemblage  of  persons  at  or  near  Harmon's  Cross 
Roads,  take  one  Phillis  Ruffin,  colored,  from  a  school-house 
to  some  woods  near  by,  where  one  hundred  and  forty-six 
lashes,  more  or  less,  were  inflicted  upon  her  person,  and 
that  said  defendants  did  inflict  a  portion  of  said  blows  or 
lashes.' 

"  The  defendant  Saunders  was  found  guilty  of  assault  and 
battery,  and  sentenced  to  be  confined  at  hard  labor  for  one 
month,  and  pay  a  fine  of  twenty  dollars.  The  remaining 
accused  were  found  guilty  by  the  Court,  and  sentenced 
respectively  as  follows :  Abraham  Jenkins,  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  guilty  of  aiding  and  abetting  the  assault  and  battery, 
was  sentenced  to  be  removed  from  his  office  as  magistrate, 
confined  at  hard  labor  for  one  month,  and  pay  a  fine  of 
twenty-five  dollars.  Six  other  parties  concerned  in  the 
same  transaction  were  severally  sentenced  to  one  or  three 
monthi1  confinement  at  hard  labor,  and  pay  a  fine  of  fifteen 
or  twenty-five  dollars.  General  Sickles's  order  concludes  as 
follows : 

"  1  The  evidence  in  the  foregoing  cases  discloses  a  deed  of 
lawlessness  and  inhuman  violence.  It  appears  that  a  daugh- 
ter of  one  of  the  prisoners,  having  attempted  to  beat  a  young 
colored  girl,  met  with  resistance,  which  became  successful, 
and  resulted  in  the  chastisement  of  the  white  by  the  black. 
This  unlooked  for  reversal  of  a  long-accustomed  relation 
filled  the  neighborhood  with  consternation  and  rage.  Cou- 
riers passed  to  and  fro  from  farm  to  farm,  inflaming  the  tem- 
per of  the  people,  and  concerting  measures  to  produce  a 
terror  among  the  negroes.  A  meeting  of  citizens  wai  con- 
vened at  a  school-house,  near  the  residence  of  the  partiei ; 
the  accused  was  among  those  assembled.   The  magistrate, 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


295 


Jenkins,  was  invited  to  lend  the  sanction  of  his  presence, 
and  did  so.  Phillis,  the  young  freedwoman,  was  sent  for, 
and  dragged  before  this  self-constituted  conclave  of  angry 
men,  whom  she  had  been  accustomed  from  infancy  to  call 
masters,  some  of  whom  she  now  heard  urging  her  incarce- 
ration, whilst  one  swore  she  should  be  hung,  and  all  agreed 
that  she  must  be  imprisoned  or  whipped.  The  frightened 
girl  exclaimed  that  she  would  sooner  be  whipped  than  go  to 
jail.  This  was  taken  for  the  expression  of  assent  which 
they  desired.  Some  sort  of  writing  was  drawn  up,  called 
an  indenture,  by  which,  Phillis  having  signed  it,  she  was 
made  to  bind  herself  as  an  apprentice  to  one  Mrs.  Harmon, 
who  thereupon  consented  that  her  so-called  ward  should  be 
flogged.  Quite  enough  was  thought  to  have  been  thus  con- 
ceded to  the  mockery  of  legal  formalities,  and  the  impa- 
tient assemblage,  consisting  of  all  the  prisoners  who  have 
been  convicted,  except  the  magistrate,  hastened  to  execute 
the  penalty  awarded.  Phillis  was  conducted  into  an  adja- 
cent wood,  where,  at  a  spot  some  sixty  yards  remote  from 
any  road,  she  was  halted  and  told  to  take  down  her  dress  ; 
she  not  obeying  with  alacrity,  one  of  the  prisoners  snatched 
it  from  her  shoulders.  Stripped  to  her  waist,  except  of  her 
chemise,  she  was  then  whipped  by  five  of  these  men  in  suc- 
cession, by  whom,  according  to  the  testimony  of  one  of 
them,  one  hundred  and  twenty-six  lashes  were  inflicted 
upon  her  half-naked  body,  with  rods  three  feet  long  and  one 
half  to  three  eighths  of  an  inch  thick.  Her  garment  was  cut 
through  and  through  ;  blood  ran  from  the  wales  raised  on 
her  lacerated  back.  One  gash  in  her  flesh  three  days  after 
showed  four  inches  in  length.  The  heavy  blows  fell  upon 
her  person  at  random ;  she  was  pushed,  she  was  pulled ; 
she  was  kicked  in  the  abdomen,  till  at  last  it  seems  that  one 
of  the  accused,  an  applauding  bystander,  not  utterly  insen- 
sible to  the  sufferings  and  sex  of  the  wretched  victim,  was 
so  far  touched  by  the  spectacle  of  her  torture  that  the  cry 
was  wrung  from  him,  '  Boys,  don't  hurt  her  breast !'  Hav- 
ing satisfied  their  savage  vengeance,  her  tormentors,  fa- 
tigued by  their  exertions,  withdrew,  not,  however,  without 
considering  the  proposal  of  one  of  their  number,  to  return 
and  give  her  ten  more  lashes  each  to  stop  her  screaming. 
Finally,  the  poor  child,  wounded  and  groaning,  was  permit- 
ted to  make  her  way  to  the  house  of  her  mistress,  where  for 
days  she  suffered,  scarcely  able  to  crawl  to  her  unremitted 
task,  or  even  to  wear  her  clothes  without  pain. 

" '  In  the  revolting  crime  thus  briefly  outlined,  all  of  the 
prisoners  are  shown  to  have  been  eager  participants.  In 
the  interest  of  outraged  justice,  it  is  to  be  deplored  that  the 
perpetrators  have  been  adjudged  to  undergo  punishment 
so  inadequate  to  the  enormity  of  their  offence.'  " 

The  sentences  were  approved  and  executed. 

While  upon  General  Sickles's  administration, 
we  may  add  the  following  item,  also  clipped 
from  the  same  paper,  as  indicative  of  an  effort 
on  the  part  of  certain  classes  in  the  South  to 
resist  the  doctrine  of  Equal  Rights  ;  and  the 
determination  on  the  part  of  the  nation,  fairly 
and  truthfully  represented  by  General  Sickles 
in  this  matter,  to  maintain  them  : 

"  Headquarters  Second  Military  Division,  } 
Charleston,  S.  C,  August  17,  1867.  j 
"  General  Ordbrs  No.  1.— Before  a  Post  Court  convened 
at  the  Citadel,  Charleston,  S.  C,  July  30th,  1S67,  pursuant  to 
authority  from  these  headquarters,  and  of  which  Brevet 
Brigadier-General  A.  B.  Clitz  is  President,  was  arraigned 
and  tried  W.  F.  McNelty,  Captain  of  the  steamer  Pilot 
Boy.  Charge:  Violation  of  paragraph  eight,  General  Or- 
ders No.  32.  Specification  :  In  this,  that  W.  F.  McNelty, 
captain  of  the  steamer  Pilot  Boy,  did  refuse  to  graat  a  firsl- 


class  ticket  and  passage  to  Miss  Francis  Rollin,  from 
Charleston  to  Beaufort,  S.  C,  on  his  steamer,  because  of 
caste  or  color. 

"  All  this  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  Monday,  July  22d,  1S«T. 

"  Plea,  Not  guilty  j  finding,  Guilty. 

"  Sentence :  To  pay  a  fine  of  $250. 

M  The  evidence  in  this  case  shows  that,  on  the  22d  of  July, 
1867,  the  complainant,  a  respectable  female,  was,  because 
of  her  color,  refused  a  cabin  passage  by  the  accused,  who  is 
the  captain  of  the  steamer  Pilot  Boy,  a  boat  plying  as  a 
common  carrier  between  ports  in  this  military  district. 

"  It  was  conceded  on  the  trial  that  a  general  rule,  enforcing 
this  discrimination,  had  been  maintained  on  board  the  boat 
commanded  by  the  accused. 

"  The  guilt  of  the  offender  in  thus  wilfully  disregarding 
the  provisions  of  paragraph  eight  of  General  Orders  No.  32, 
prohibiting  such  unlawful  distinctions,  is  confessed  and 
proved. 

"So  long  as  the  laws  imposed  civil  and  political  disabili- 
ties because  of  servitude  or  color,  common  carriers  were 
permitted  to  enforce  the  same  discrimination  among  passen- 
gers. 

"  Such  disabilities  and  usages  have  ceased,  with  slavery, 
to  have  any  legal  sanction  whatever. 

"  Whatever  belongs  of  common  right  to  citizens  they 
must  be  protected  in,  and,  as  necessarily  follows  the  recog- 
nition of  the  blacks  as  citizens,  they  must  be  protected  in 
whatever  of  common  right  belongs  to  them. 

"  The  obligation  of  a  common  carrier  is  defined  by  jurist 
authority  as  follows  : 

"  '  If  he  carry  passengers,  he  must  receive  all  who  offer, 
and  treat  all  alike,  unless  there  be  actual  and  sufficient 
reason  for  the  distinction,  as  in  the  filthy  appearance,  dan- 
gerous condition,  or  misconduct  of  a  passenger.'  (Parsons 
on  Mercantile  Affairs,  page  207.) 

"  The  observance  of  this  rule  has  been  enjoined  by  orders 
from  these  headquarters,  duly  published  for  the  information 
and  guidance  of  all  concerned  ;  and  violations  of  the  regu- 
lations thus  established  must  be  appropriately  punished. 

"  The  proceedings,  finding,  and  sentence  are  approved. 
"  By  command  of  Major-General 

"DANIEL  E.  SICKLES. 

"  (Official.)  J.  W.  Clous,  Captain  Thirty-eighth  U.  S.  In- 
fantry, A.  D.  C.  and  A.  A.  G." 


CAPABILITY  OF  THE  COLORED 
RACE. 

We  clip  from  a  late  number  of  the  London 
Times  a  brief  report  of  a  recent  discussion  be- 
fore the  "  British  Association  for  the  Advance- 
ment of  Science,"  concerning  the  capabilities  of 
the  colored  man.  While  scientific  men  are  dis- 
cussing his  capabilities,  he  is  proving  them. 
We  have  no  theory  of  equality  or  disparity  of 
races  to  maintain.  This  only  is  our  funda- 
mental assertion,  that  no  man's  place  in  society 
is  to  be  determined  by  theory  and  he  fitted  for 
it ;  but  all  men  are  to  have  the  utmost  freedom 
of  development,  and,  as  far  as  society  goes,  an 
equal  chance,  and  then  make  what  they  can. 
You  have  no  right  to  load  a  gymnast  with 
chains  because  you  presume  he  will  not  run 
well,  and  then  taunt  him  because  he  does  not  . 
Give  the  colored  man  a  good  boat,  a  free  oar, 
and  clear  water ;  then,  if  he  does  not  keep  up,  he 
i  must  fall  behind.    God  has  a  place  and  &  work 


296 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAK 


for  the  negro.  What  it  is  we  do  not  pretend  to 
say.  Give  liim,  however,  a  free  chance,  and  let 
him  find  it  for  himself. 

"Dr.  John  Davy,  the  Inspector-General  of  Hospitals, 
contributed  a  paper  1  On  the  Character  of  the  Negro,  chief- 
ly in  relation  to  industrial  habits.'  Dr.  Davy  stated  that 
his  object  was  to  vindicate  the  negro  from  the  reproach  of 
being  a  sluggard  or  idler,  and  to  show  that  he  was,  under 
continued  education,  in  favorable  circumstances,  and  unen 
slaved,  capable  of  being  civilized,  and  of  making  progress 
in  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences. 

"  A  discussion  took  place  on  the  subject  of  the  paper.  Mr. 
Crawfurd  remarked  that  the  island  of  Barbadoes,  from 
which  the  most  of  Dr.  Davy's  examples  were  taken,  was  in 
an  exceptional  condition  as  regarded  the  negro  race,  it  being 
so  densely  populated  that  the  negro  must  either  work  or 
perish." 

Most  people  work  because  they  must.  Ease 
generally  brings  sloth.  Tropic  regions  seldom 
breed  industry.  Mr.  Crawfurd's  interpretation 
of  the  cause  of  the  colored  man's  industry  in 
the  island  of  Barbadoes  has  no  application  to 
America,  whose  Southern  States  are  generally 
sparsely  populated  enough.  And  the  testimony 
is  almost  unanimous  that,  where  the  freedman 
is  fairly  treated,  he  works  and  works  well. 

"  Dr.  Hunt  said  that,  as  far  as  regarded  bodily  strength 
and  the  power  of  resisting  heat,  the  negro  was  the  best 
adapted  of  all  the  dark  races  for  labor  in  a  hot  climate,  and 
he  really  did  not  understand  why  he  should  be  so  unwilling 
to  work.  He  hoped  some  day  we  might  be  able  to  remove 
the  objection  the  negro  entertained  to  free  labor.  Speaking 
of  the  condition  of  the  freed  Americans,  he  quoted  testi- 
mony to  show  that  the  freedmen  were  in  a  most  distressing 
condition  in  some  parts  of  the  States." 

The  negro  object  to  free  labor  !  Unwilling 
to  work  !  Verily  lies  not  only  travel  round  the 
world  while  the  truth  is  putting  its  boots  on, 
but  also  more  truly  may  it  be  said  of  falsehood 
than  of  truth,  that  it,  though  "  crushed  to 
earth  will  rise  again."  Dr.  Hunt  may  have 
whatever  testimony  he  likes,  Southern  or 
Northern,  white  or  colored,  American  or  foreign, 
military  or  civil,  in  such  quantities  as  shall  be 
amply  sufficient,  that,  while  he  is  perplexing 
himself  how  "to  remove  the  objection  the 
negro  entertains  to  free  labor,"  the  negro  is 
working  under  the  free  labor  system,  far  bet- 
ter, always  more  healthily,  generally  more  pro- 
ductively than  he  ever  did  under  the  lash. 
"  Where" — says  General  Howard,  and  no  one  in 
America  knows  so  well  as  he — "  where  they 
have  been  assured  of  justice,  they  have  evinced 
not  only  a  readiness  but  an  eagerness  to  engage 
in  labor."  As  to  distress,  doubtless  in  some 
sections  where  crops  have  been  short,  or  yel- 
low fever  has  prevailed,  or  for  any  reason  so- 
ciety has  not  become  settled,  there  is  distress. 
But  the  grand  need  of  the  freed  people  is  edu- 
cation and  political  freedom.     The  second  is 


already  assured  them,  and  the  first,  God  help- 
ing us,  they  shall  have. 

"  Mr.  Brewin,  Cirencester,  maintained,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  the  negro  was  as  willing  to  work,  if  fairly  treated  and 
regularly  paid,  as  any  colored  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Having  gone  to  Jamaica  to  inquire  for  the  Society  of  Frienda 
as  regards  the  disturbed  state  of  the  island,  he  made  a  state- 
ment highly  favorable  to  the  diligence  and  energy  of  the  ne- 
gro. Mr.  Davis  said  that  Mr.  Brewin's  description  was  quite 
contrary  to  scientific  facts  as  regarded  the  negro,  and  he  had 
quite  failed  to  take  into  account  the  percentage  of  white 
blood  in  the  negroes  of  Jamaica.  It  was  that  infusion  alone 
which  made  the  Jamaica  negro  what  he  was  ;  otherwise  he 
was  quite  incapable  of  that  continuous  labor  on  which  the 
prosperity  of  every  community  was  based." 

How  a  u  scientific  fact"  may  differ  from  any 
other  kind  we  do  not  know.  But  it  is  a  com- 
mon fact  that  the  full-blooded  negroes  are 
quite  as  industrious  and  more  hardy,  though 
perhaps  less  ambitious  and  aspiring  than  those 
of  mixed  bloods. 

"  Dr.  Davy  replied,  mentioning  the  names  of  many  ne- 
groes possessing  great  intellectual  powers ;  and  Mr.  Craw- 
furd closed  the  discussion  with  some  remarks  to  the  effect 
that  it  was  only  when  in  contact  with  the  white  man,  and 
through  the  infusion  of  white  blood,  that  the  negro  had  ever 
risen  out  of  savagery.  He  rejoiced  that  the  negroes  had 
been  freed,  but  he  thought  the  slaveholders'  property  in 
negroes  should,  as  in  the  case  of  our  West-Indies,  have  been 
1  compensated,  not  confiscated." 

The  Roman  captain  said  to  Paul :  "  With  a 
great  sum  obtained  I  this  freedom."  And  with  a 
great  sum  obtained  we  this  freedom.  To-day,  in 
taxes  hard  to  be  borne,  but  cheerfully  submitted 
to,  are  we  paying  for  it.  We  have  paid  for  it 
in  our  noblest  sons,  whose  corpses  enrich  the 
Southern  soil,  and  whose  record,  that  shall  nev- 
er henceforth  fade,  enriches  our  history.  And 
if  the  Southern  slaveholder  would  not  take  the 
proffered  price  into  his  hand,  would  have  no 
other  price  than  that  of  blood  and  fearful  strife, 
his  is  the  blame,  not  ours.  We  have  made 
compensation  as  no  other  nation  ever  did  to  de- 
clare freedom  to  the  oppressed,  and  the  break- 
ing of  chains  to  them  that  were  bound. 


A  WORD  FROM  AUSTRIA. 

In  Austria,  the  teachers  in  a  public  assem- 
blage have  unanimously  passed  resolutions, 
urging  the  separation  of  the  schools  from  the 
church,  and  the  establishment  of  education  on 
the  common-school  basis,  dissociated  from  ec- 
clesiastical tests  and  ecclesiastical  control.  So 
much  the  Atlantic  cable  tells  us.  At  this 
writing  we  have  no  more.  So  Austria  be- 
comes an  advocate  of  that  free-school  system 
without  which  no  country  ever  yet  secured  a 
full,  large,  comprehensive,  and  permanent  pop- 
ular education.  We  beg  those  who  are  con- 
sidering the  advisability  of  prosecuting  this 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


297 


work  as  a  missionary  work,  ecclesiastically, 
and  so  necessarily  more  or  less  denomination- 
ally, we  beseech  them  to  consider  whether  this 
be  the  time  for  us  to  turn  back  from  our  his- 
toric precedents ;  whether  it  be  wise  for  us  to 
apply  tests  for  Southern  schools  which  we 
would  not  consent  a  moment  to  employ  in  the 
Northern  States,  and  which  even  Austria  is 
abandoning  ;  whether  for  present  possible  ad- 
vantage it  is  worth  while  to  plant  a  wrong 
root  in  Southern  soil,  in  hope  to  rectify  the 
mistake  by  grafting  on  another  stock  by  and  by. 


MINUTES 

OP  A 

CONFERENCE  OP  FREEDMAN'S  SOCIETIES,  HELD  IN 
NEW-YORK  CITY,- SEPTEMBER  10,  1867. 

On  the  10th  day  of  September,  1867,  at  the 
call  of  the  American  Freedman's  Union  Com- 
mission, a  conference  of  Freedman's  Societies 
was  held  at  No.  30  Vesey  Street,  New- York 
City,  at  which  the  following  societies  were  re- 
presented : 

Th«  American  Freedman's  S  Rev.  Lyman  Abbott, 
Union  Commission,        \  J.  Miller  McKiin,  Esq. 

Me  Baltimore  Bran*.,  \  Bond' 
The  Pennsylvania  Branch,  Robert  R.  Corson,  Esq. 
The  New-England  Branch,  Rev.  J.  H.  Chapin. 
The  New-  York  Branch,  Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy. 
The  American  Missionary  )  Rev.  George  Whipple, 

Association,  J  Rev.  S.  S.  Jocelyn. 

The  Friends'  Freedman's 
Association  of  Phila., 


Yardly  Warner. 


Messrs.  John  Kimball,  Superintendent  of  Schools  for  the 
District  of  Columbia,  and  A.  E.  Newton,  Superintendent 

of  School  at  Washington,  D.  C,  were  also  present,  and 

participated  in  the  Conference. 

Hon.  Hugh  L.  Bond  was  elected  Chairman,  and  Rev.  J.  H. 
Chapin,  Secretary. 

Rev.  Lyman  Abbott,  General  Secretary  of  the 
A.  F.  U.  C,  stated  the  object  of  the  meeting  to 
be  to  devise  a  plan  for  securing  the  cooperation 
of  the  freed  people  with  the  Northern  societies 
in  the  support  of  the  schools.  He  laid  before 
the  Conference  for  their  consideration  certain 
resolutions  on  the  subject  which  had  been  pro. 
posed  by  an  informal  meeting  of  teachers  and 
others,  held  in  Boston,  July  12th,  1867. 

Communications  on  the  subject  were  read 
from  Miss  Laura  Towne,  a  teacher  and  Super- 
intendent of  schools  on  the  Sea  Islands,  and 
from  Philip  C.  Garrett,  of  the  Friends'  Freed- 
man's Association  of  Philadelphia. 

The  different  delegates  gave  accounts  of  the 
methods  of  their  respective  societies. 

The  resolutions  proposed  were  then  taken 
up  seriatim,  and,  after  a  full  and  free  discus- 
sion, were  modified  and  passed  in  the  following 
form: 


I.  Resolved,  That  the  best  interests  of  the  freed  people 
require  the  permanent  establishment  of  free  schools  in  the 
South;  that,  as  in  the  Northern  free-school  system,  the 
people  should  cooperate  in  their  support;  and,  therefore, 
that  no  new  schools  should  be  established,  except  where 
cooperation  can  be  secured. 

II.  Resolved,  That  our  teachers  and  agents  in  the  South 
should  organize  the  people  into  associations  to  raise  means 
to  aid  in  the  establishment  and  support  of  their  schools. 

III.  Resolved,  That,  in  the  opinion  of  this  meeting,  all 
books  should  be  sold  at  a  price  to  be  fixed  by  the  Teachers* 
Committee ;  and  that  none  should  be  given  away  except  by 
special  permission  of  the  Committee. 

IV.  Resolved,  That  the  General  Secretary  of  the  Ameri- 
can Freedman's  Union  Commission  be  requested  to  forward 
to  the  Societies  here  represented  a  copy  of  these  resolutions. 

On  motion,  the  Conference  adjourned  sine  die. 
Lyman  Abbott, 

Gen.  Sec.  A.  F.  JJ.  C. 
New-York  City,  Sept.  10,  1867. 


PUBLIC  MEETING   OF  THE  DELA- 
WARE ASSOCIATION. 

A  meeting  of  the  Delaware  Association  for 
the  moral  improvement  and  education  of  the 
colored  people  was  held  in  the  Lecture  Room  of 
the  Wilmington  Institute,  on  the  evening  of 
September  5th,  1867,  in  accordance  with  the 
published  notice. 

The  President,  Mr.  Kimber,  stated  that  the 
purpose  in  view,  in  thus  calling  together  for- 
mally the  members  of  the  Delaware  Association, 
is,  in  the  first  place,  briefly  to  lay  before  you  the 
results  of  the  labors  of  the  managers  of  the  past 
few  months,  together  with  a  plain  statement 
of  the  difficulties  we  have  encountered  in  the 
work,  and  of  our  present  position  and  prospects 
in  regard  to  future  operations. 

We  also  desire,  in  view  of  those  difficulties, 
and  of  the  vast  field  of  duty  that  lies  open  be- 
fore us,  to  confer  with  the  members  of  the  As- 
sociation on  the  important  question  of  a  closer 
affiliation  and  union  with  kindred  societies  in 
other  States,  and  more  especially  with  that 
great  Central  Agent,  the  American  Freedman's 
Commission,  which  has  established  its  branches 
in  almost  every  State  but  ours,  and  has  extend- 
ed its  friendly  and  powerful  aid  and  influence 
even  amongst  us.  In  fact,  without  the  timely  ex- 
tension of  that  assistance,  we  should  have  had 
a  far  less  satisfactory  report  to  make  to  you  this 
evening. 

Four  of  the  most  important  of  our  schools 
have  been  maintained  almost  entirely  by  the 
New- York  Branch  of  that  Commission,  and  the 
indirect  benefit  of  their  support  and  sympathy 
has  been  felt  in  all  our  operations. 

We  commenced  our  effort,  as  you  are  aware, 
<to  establish  schools  for  the  colored  people  in 
Delaware,  about  the  first  of  the  present  year. 
There  was  little  to  encourage  us  in  the  tone  of 
feeling  throughout  the  State,  even  among  many 
worthy  and  good  people,  on  this  subject.  It 
seemed  as  though  there  was  an  ear  to  hear 
and  a  heart  to  respond  to  every  other  appeal 
than  this.  Men  and  women  who  recognised 
every  other  claim  of  humanity,  and  were  prompt 
to  discharge  every  other  duty  to  their  fellow- 
men,  seemed  to  fail  utterly  here  to  acknowledge 


298 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


any  claim,  or  to  perceive  any  obligation  of  duty 
whatsoever. 

Yet  we  found  some  who  thought  and  felt  as 
we  did,  that  a  very  plain  obligation  existed  in 
this  direction,  and  that  a  very  solemn  account- 
ability attended  its  fulfilment  or  the  failure  to 
discharge  it. 
•  With  aid  that  these  gave  us,  and  with  such 
assistance  as  we  could  obtain  elsewhere,  we 
have  endeavored  to  carry  out  the  work  entrust- 
ed to  us.  We  have  established  fourteen  schools 
over  the  State,  and  have  one  or  two  more  in 
supervisory  care  ;  with  a  view  to  their  being 
assumed  by  our  Association  on  the  opening  of 
the  winter  term, 

Two  of  these  schools  are  in  Wilmington,  one 
at  New-Castle,  one  at  Dover,  one  at  Milford, 
others  at  Smyrna,  Odessa,  Seaford,  Milton, 
Georgetown,  Laurel,  Newark,  Christiana,  and 
Delaware  City. 

In  addition  to  these  elementary  schools,  (all 
of  which  are  supplied  with  the  best  modern 
books  and  methods  of  teaching  adapted  to  the 
grade  of  the  pupils  attending  them,)  the  Board 
of  Managers  have  accepted  the  liberal  proposi- 
tion of  the  African  School  Society  of  Wilming- 
ton to  place  in  charge  of  the  Delaware  Associa- 
tion all  their  property  on  Orange  street,  and 
the  use  of  the  income  of  their  funds,  for  the 
purpose  of  establishing  a  Normal  School  for 
colored  teachers  in  this  city,  who  shall  go  forth, 
when  thus  trained,  to  educate  and  elevate  their 
race  not  only  in  Delaware  but  also  throughout 
the  entire  Southern  States. 

Such  is  the  field  of  usefulness  opening  before 
us  at  this  time — and  now  we  find  ourselves  ar- 
rested at  the  outset  of  the  season  by  the  entire 
want  of  funds  to  carry  on  the  work. 

After  a  full  discussion  of  the  subject  of  affilia- 
tion with  the  American  Freedman's  Union  Com- 
mission, the  following  resolution  was  moved  by 
Samuel  Hilles,  and  unanimously  adopted : 

Resolved,  That  the  Board  of  Managers  be  and 
they  are  hereby  authorized  to  adopt  the  Consti- 
tution of  the  American  Freedman's  Union  Com- 
mission, and  to  establish  with  that  Association 
relations  similar  to  those  now  existing  be- 
tween it  and  the  Baltimore  Association. 

In  reference  to  the  action  of  the  African 
School  Society  of  Wilmington,  Samuel  M. 
Harrington  moved  the  following,  which  was 
unanimously  adopted : 

Resolved,  That  this  Association  has  learned 
with  pleasure  of  the  liberal  action  of  the  Afri- 
can School  Society  of  this  city  in  placing  its 
buildings  and  funds  at  the  disposal  of  the  Exe- 
cutive Committee  for  the  purpose  of  establish- 
ing a  normal  school  for  colored  teachers  ;  and 
that  we  hereby  tender  our  grateful  acknowledg- 
ments  to  that  Society,  and  also  to  the  Freed- 
man's Bureau,  for  the  assistance  tliat  has  enabled 
us  to  repair  and  improve  the  Normal  School- 
house.  We  also  cordially  endorse  the  action  of 
the  Executive  Committee  in  accepting  these 
opportunities,  and  in  their  efforts  to  inaugurate 
a  movement  so  important  and  useful. 

Resolved,  That  this  resolution  be  published 
in  the  papers,  and  that  copies  of  it  be  furnished 
to  the  Secretary  of  the  African  School  Society, 
and  to  Major-Gen.  Gregory  of  the  Freedman's 
Bureau. 

The  necessity  of  raising  funds  at  home  for 


the  maintenance  of  what  has  been  already  ac- 
complished, as  well  as  for  the  extension  of  the 
operations  of  the  Association,  claimed  the  ear- 
nest consideration  of  the  meeting.  The  import- 
ance of  direct  personal  appeal  to  those  who, 
with  the  Association,  feel  the  necessity  of  rescu- 
ing as  far  as  possible  a  large  portion  of  our  pop- 
ulation from  ignorance  and  its  attendant  vice, 
was  strongly  felt  ;  and  the  fact  that  the  small 
amount  of  sixteen  dollars  would  pay  the  salary 
of  a  teacher  and  educate  from  thirty  to  sixty 
children  for  a  month,  was  regarded  as  a  con- 
sideration which  ought  justly  to  appeal  to  the 
hearts  of  those  whom  Providence  has  blessed, 
with  the  good  things  of  this  life.  It  is  quite 
common  in  other  States  for  an  individual  to  un- 
dertake the  support  of  a  school,  under  the  care 
of  an  Association,  by  paying  the  teacher's  salary. 
This  gives  a  direct  personal  interest  in  the 
school,  copies  of  the  monthly  report  of  which 
are  forwarded  to  its  patron. 

On  motion  of  S.  M.  Harrington  the  folio  win 
was  unanimously  adopted : 

Resolved,  That  every  member  of  this  Associa- 
tion be  earnestly  requested  to  appeal  to  his  ac- 
quaintances for  aid  in  carrying  on  the  work  of 
educating  the  colored  people  ;  and  we  especially 
ask  benevolent  and  religious  organizations  to 
agree  to  pay  the  compensation  of  one  or  more 
teachers  employed  by  this  Association. 

On  motion,  S.  M.  Harrington,  Rev.  Mr.  Cun- 
ningham, and  Lea  Pusey  were  appointed  a  com- 
mittee to  present  the  above  resolution  to  the 
various  religious  organizations  of  the  city  for 
the  purpose  of  including  this  object  in  their 
general  missionary  work. 


From  The  Freedmen's  Record,  September,  1867.  ■ 

A  SCENE  IN  THE  MORRIS  STREET 
SCHOOL. 

The  following  dialogue  was  enacted  by  some 
of  the  pupils  of  the  Morris  Street  School,  in 
Charleston,  on  the  occasion  of  a  public  exam- 
ination, in  June  last.  It  is  inserted  here  not 
merely  for  the  merits  of  the  piece,  but  because 
it  contains  specimens  of  genuine  plantation 
dialect. 

PERSONS  REPRESENTED. 

Mr.  Cardozo,  Principal  of  the  Wentworth  Street  School.  : 

Mr.  Sumner,  Principal  of  the  Morris  Street  School. 

Janitor  of  the  Morris  Street  School. 

A  Boy,  a  pupil  of  the  Morris  Street  School. 

A  Girl,  an  applicant  for  admission  to  ditto. 

A  Woman,  mother  of  the  girl. 

(Mr.  Sumner,  sitting,  solus.    Enter  Janitor.) 

Jan.  Mornin',  sir.  An  ole  woman  out  here, 
sir  ;  fetch  her  chile  to  school.  Mus'  bring  her 
in,  sir? 

S.  Yes,  Scott,  show  her  in.  (Janitor  retires, 
and  comes  back  leading  a  woman  and  girl.) 

Woman.  (Making  a  plantation  courtesy.) 
Good  mornin',  Maws'  Sumpter.  How  you  do 
dis  mornin'  ? 

S.  Pretty  well,  I  thank  you  ;  how  is  your 
health  to-day  ? 

W.  Tankful  for  life,  mawsa  ;  ony  so-so.  Me 
head  hart  me  so  bad. 

S.  Well,  what  can  I  do  for  you  to-day  ? 

W.  I  come  to  ax  you,  sir,  ef  yer'll  be  so 
good,  sir,  as  to  take  dis  lee  gal  in  yo  school. 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


290 


He  de  ony  one  I  got,  sir ;  an'  I  want  to  gi  um 
a  little  larnin'  fo'  I  dead.  Here,  stan'  up,  you 
gal,  an'  telly  gen'lman  howdy.  (Girl  drops  a 
courtesy.) 

S.  How  old  is  your  child  ? 

W.  Don't  rightly  know,  mawsa  ;  spec  he 
'bout  five. 

S.  Can  she  read  ? 

W.  No,  sir ;  kin  spell,  a  little. 

S.  Come  here,  babe  ;  look  on  this  book. 
Now,  what's  that  ? 

W.  Talk  hard,  gal. 

Girl.  D — o — g,  cat ! 

S.  That's  pretty  well.    Now  spell  cat. 

Girl.  Can't  spell  cat.    Kin  spell  dog. 

S.  You've  been  to  a  pay-school,  haven't  you  ? 

Giel.  Yes,  sir  ;  more'n  three  mont. 

S.  I  thought  so.  What  else  did  you  learn 
besides  dog  ? 

Girl.  Lam  histry,  rifmetic,  French,  'n  Latin. 

S.  You  know  a  great  deal,  don't  you  ? 

Girl.  Yes,  sir. 

S.  How  much  are  two  and  two  ?;j 

Girl.  (Quickly.)  Fifteen,  sir. 

S.  What's  your  name  ? 

Girl.  Name  Sack,  sir. 

S.  What  f 

Girl.  Yes,  sir. 

S.  Is  it  Psyche  or  Sack  f 

Girl.  Yes,  sir. 

Woman.  All  two  one  ting,  sir.  De  Yankee 
lady,  sir,  tell  we  mus'  call  the  gal  Psyche,  sir. 

S.  Well,  child,  you  may  go  down.  I'll  put 
you  into  a  class  where  you'll  learn  to  spell  cat, 
and  dog  too. 

Girl.  I  goin'  in  a  fourf  reader  class,  an't  I, 
sir? 

S.  Be  still,  you  monkey.  I  suppose  you 
know,  ma'am,  that  we  require  a  tax  of  twenty- 
five  cents  a  month  for  each  scholar,  to  help  pay 
expenses,  don't  you  ? 

W.  I  heary  so,  sir  ;  but  my  humban'  be  out 
o'  work  now,  sir,  'n  I  can't  git  no  money  fo' 
tax. 

S.  But  your  child  seems  pretty  well  dressed. 
What  has  she  got  in  that  paper  ?  My  stars ! 
here  is  more  than  twenty-five  cents'  worth  of 
gunjies*  and  apples  ! 

W.  I  Meege  to  gi'  de  gal  a  little  o'  dese  yere 
ting  ;  all  de  chilum  care  um  to  school. 

S.  (Indignantly.)  I  know  they  do.  And  the 
good  people  at  the  North  are  scraping  together 
every  dollar  they  can  get  to  keep  your  children 
at  school,  while  you  spend  your  money  for 
sweetmeats  and  picnics.  Next  year,  it  will  be 
different.  The  Northern  people  are  getting 
tired  of  this  ;  and  next  term,  if  you  want  your 
children  to  go  to  school,  you  will  have  to  help 
pay  for  it.    Good-morning,  ma'am. 

W.  Good  niornin',  mawsa.  Please,  sir,  do  be 
so  good,  sir,  ef  dis  chile  don't  larn,  lash  um 
hard,  sir.  Here  you  gal  (shaking  her)  mine 
yer  lesson  now ;  an'  come  home  soon.  {Exit.) 

{Enter  Janitor.) 

Jan.  A  heap  o'  chilun  outside.  Dey's  one, 
Bir,  I  think  might  be  let  in. 

S.  Let  him  in.    (Janitor  goes  out,  and  comes 


in  with  a  boy,  leading  him  by  the  collar,  and 
twitching  him  angrily.) 

Jan.  (To  boy.)  What  make  ye  tag  out  in  de 
street  ?  Yer'll  nebber  larn  nufn,  les'n  yer 
come  to  school  soon  in  the  mornin'.  {Exit.) 

S.  Well,  my  boy,  what  makes  you  come  so 
late  to  school  ? 

Boy.  Couldn't  come  soon,  sir.  Stay  out  to 
git  a  job  o'  work  for  pay  my  tax,  sir.  I'm  a 
mudderless  boy,  sir ;  'n  my  pa,  he  got  a  swell 
han' ;  an'  Tiddy,  she  'flicted — 

S.  What  do  you  mean  by  "  Tiddy"  ?  And 
what's  the  matter  ? 

Boy.  Tiddy,  my  sister,  sir ;  him  cripple,  sir. 
Bubber,  ony  a  lee  boy. 

S.  What's  become  of  the  rest  of  your  bro- 
thers and  sisters  V 

Boy.  All  dead,  excuse  me  one.  But  I  got  my 
tax  ;  shuni*  here,  sir  ? 

S.  Ah !  that's  the  right  spirit !  You're  a  fine 
boy !  {Exit  bay.) 

{Enter  Mr.  Cardozo) 

S.  Good-morning,  Mr.  Cardozo  ;  how  do  you 
do  ?  Take  a  chair  :  take  mine — that's  the  only 
one  there  is.    How  is  your  school  getting  on  ? 

C.  Very  well,  indeed.    How  is  yours  ? 

S.  Nicely.  The  children  behave  very  well, 
with  few  exceptions.  Those  who  come  regu- 
larly are  making  great  progress.  It  is  very 
gratifying  to  see  the  interest  which  the  parents 
take  in  the  school.  But  there's  one  thing  trou- 
bles me  very  much. 

C.  Indeed  !    Let  me  know  it. 

S.  (In  a  hollow  voice.)  Taxes  ! 

C.  O  dear  !  You  ought  to  have  a  picnic.  I 
gave  my  scholars  a  picnic  over  at  Mount  Plea- 
sant, the  other  day ;  and  I  luckily  thought  of 
those  same  taxes.  So  I  told  the  children  they 
should  not  one  of  them  come  unless  they  had 
paid  their  monthly  tax.  The  result  was,  that 
I  got  just  about  three  times  as  much  money  as 
I  should  otherwise  have  received. 

S.  Good  !  So  it  seems  (addressing  the  audi- 
ence) you  can  pay  your  taxes  when  you  want 
to. 

C.  Most  of  them  can.  But  I  came  in  to-day 
to  hear  some  of  your  classes  recite. 

S.  In  good  time.    I  was  just  going  to  call  up 

a  class.    Miss  L  ,  please  send  your  class  to 

the  platform.  Mr.  Cardozo,  suppose  we  step 
down,  where  we  can  see  the  class.  {Exeunt.) 

{Miss  L  's  class  here  file  out  for  examina- 
tion.) 

EDUCATION   IN  GEORGIA. 

The  following  appeal  from  the  Bureau  Su- 
perintendent of  Georgia  affords  an  illustration 
of  the  demands  perpetually  made  upon  us.  A 
people  willing  to  provide  board  and  incidental 
expenses,  the  Bureau  ready  to  provide  build- 
ings, the  freedmen  hungering  and  thirsting  for 
education,  and  yet  whole  counties,  rich  and 
with  a  large  voting  population,  without  a 
school : 


*  Gunjies,  plural  of  gunjy,  a  ginger-cake  much  esteem- 
ed by  the  dark  infants  of  the  South,  and  also  by  their 
Northern  teachers. 


*  Shum,  a  corrupted  contraction  of  ee*  him,  (her,  th»m, 
or  it.) 


300 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


Bureau  Refugees,  Freedmen,  and"! 
Abandoned  Lands,  Office  Assistant  I 
Commissioner,  State  of  Georgia, 

Atlanta,  Ga.,  Sept.  13,  1867. J' 
J.  Miller  McKim,  Scc'y  A.  F.  U.  C,  Box 
5733,  New-York: 

Dear  Sir  :  As  Superintendent  of  Schools 
under  the  Bureau  for  Georgia,  I  am  very  anx- 
ious to  secure  all  the  teachers  possible  for  the 
coming  school  year.  The  demand  is  very 
great — almost  unlimited.  The  Bureau  has  no 
money  for  the  payment  of  teachers,  and  there- 
fore we  are  obliged  to  depend  on  the  various 
aid  societies.  The  American  Missionary  Asso- 
ciation, the  Freedman's  Aid  Society  of  the  M. 
E.  Church,  and  the  N.  E.  Branch  F.  U.  C.  sup- 
ported schools  in  the  State  last  year.  They 
will  enlarge  their  work  this  year,  but  will  not 
be  able  to  meet  the  demand.  We  could  well 
employ  five  hundred  teachers  next  month  if 
we  *mly  had  them.  The  people  are  hungering 
and  thirsting  for  education,  and,  if  we  hope  to 
save  our  country,  we  must  give  it  to  them. 
The  people  this  year  are  generally  boarding 
the  teacher  and  paying  the  contingent  expenses 
of  the  school,  so  that  all  that  is  required  of  the 
Society  is  the  salary  of  the  teacher.  There  are 
still  in  the  State  very  important  districts  which 
have  not  come  under  the  influence  of  schools. 

Since  I  have  been  writing,  a  man  has  come  in 
from  the  lower  part  of  the  State,  saying  that  in 
the  two  counties  under  his  charge  there  are  no 
schools  worthy  of  the  name,  one  or  two  little 
pay-schools  under  the  charge  of  very  incompe- 
tent native  teachers,  (some  white,  some  black.) 
These  counties  are  among  the  richest  in  the 
State,  and  have  a  very  large  colored  population, 
now  a  'Doting  population.  Will  you  not,  then, 
send  us  a  large  number  of  teachers  for  next 
year  ?  Hoping  to  hear  from  you  soon, 
I  am  yours  respectfully, 

E.  A.  Ware. 
State  Supt.  Ed.  Bureau,  etc. 


OBITUARY. 

JOSEPH   B.  COLLINS. 

At  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Executive 
Committee  of  the  New- York  Branch  Freed- 
man's Union  Commission,  held  at  No.  30  Vesey 
■treet,  September  16th,  it  was  announced  that 
Joseph  B.  Collins,  Treasurer  of  the  Association, 
had  died  that  morning,  and  profound  sorrow 
was  expressed  by  all  present.  Strong  testimony 
was  borne  to  the  personal  worth  and  public 
usefulness  of  the  deceased,  and  by  vote  it  was 
ordered  that  a  minuto  be  prepared  and  entered 
upon  the  record,  expressing  the  sentiment  of 
the  Committee  on  the  subject.  The  following 
was  unanimously  adopted : 


"In  the  death  of  our  friend  and  coadjutor, 
Joseph  B.  Collins,  the  Freedman's  cause  has 
lost  an  earnest  advocate,  and  this  Association 
one  of  its  most  valuable  members.  He  was  in 
the  movement  from  the  beginning,  and  under- 
stood well  its  significance.  Other  charities  en- 
listed his  sympathies  and  engaged  his  efforts, 
but  this  lay  especially  near  to  his  heart.  It 
was  to  him  more  than  a  charity  ;  it  was  an  im- 
perative national  necessity ;  and  as  such  he  la- 
bored for  it. 

"  We  shall  sadly  miss  him  from  our  councils. 
His  hopeful  spirit  and  courteous  manner  made 
his  presence  always  cheering,  and  gave  added 
weight  to  the  wisdom  of  his  counsel.  Person- 
ally, and  as  a  member  of  the  Society,  he  was 
held  in  the  highest  esteem,  and  his  departure 
makes  a  gap  in  our  ranks  which  cannot  be 
well  filled. 

"  When  such  a  man  dies,  the  chief  compensa- 
tion for  his  loss  is  to  be  found  in  the  example 
he  leaves  behind  him.  To  this  Association  this 
example  remains  as  a  stimulant  and  an  encou- 
ragement. To  his  bereaved  family,  with  whom 
we  deeply  sympathize,  there  will  be  memories 
full  of  consolation  and  comfort.  His  upright- 
ness and  integrity  of  character,  his  humble, 
religious  trust  and  faithful  obedience  to  duty, 
will  be  recollections  which  cannot  fail  to  be  a 
solace  to  his  widow  and  a  rich  inheritance  to 
his  children." 

We  may  be  permitted  to  add  that  Mr.  Col- 
lins combined  in  a  rare  measure  qualities  which 
are  infrequently  united.  He  possessed  that 
caution,  that  forecast,  and  appreciation  of 
difficulties  which  is  so  essential  to  a  wise 
counsellor  in  the  direction  of  a  great  public 
movement — especially  of  one  encompassed  by 
difficulties  so  great  as  those  which  have  at- 
tended the  Freedman's  movement  from  the 
beginning.  In  no  ordinary  sense  of  the  term 
could  he  be  called  an  enthusiast.  His  impulses 
never  ran  away  with  his  judgment.  At  the 
same  time  he  was,  in  the  truest  sense  of  the 
word,  a  Radical.  He  had  faith  in  humanity, 
faith  in  progress,  faith  in  God.  In  the  darkest 
hours  his  courage  never  faltered.  And  we 
doubt  if  there  has  ever  been  a  time  when  his 
vote  and  voice  were  not  earnest  for  extending 
the  work  according  to  the  needs,  with  a  full 
assurance  that  it  would  not  bo  suffered  to  fail ; 
an  assurance  which  time  never  failed  to  juitify. 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAK 


301 


APPOINTMENTS  FOR  1867-68. 

DELAWARE. 

McFadden,  Amelia,  Prin  Wilmington  Normal  School. 

Bickford,  Eva  J   "  "  " 

Rogers,  Joseph,  (col.)  Dover. 

Evans,  Charles,  (col.)  Milford. 

Jones,  Almira  Newcastle. 

Peckham,  Abbie  Newark. 

MARYLAND. 

Anderson,  Matilda,  (col.)  Morgan  Creek. 

Hall,  Alice,  (col.)  Still  Pond. 

Howard,  Adeline,  (col.)  

Hoy,  Martha  L  

Primus,  Rebecca,  (col.)  Royal  Oak. 

Rosier,  H.  B.,  (col.)  

One  to  be  appointed  by  Balti- 
more Branch. 

DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA. 

Bacon,  n.  E  Washington. 

Brown,  Sarah  G.,  Prin   " 

Crane,  K.  G   " 

Hart,  M.  C,  Mrs   " 

Lord,  Julia   "  j 

Newton,  A.  E.,  Supt   " 

Parsons,  Sophia   " 

Simmons,  A.  S   " 

Simmons,  H.  A   " 

Wright,  Savira   " 

Dore,  J.  S.,  Mr.,  Prin  Uniontown. 

Dore,  Leah,  Mrs   " 

VIRGINIA. 

Bond,  S.  A.,  Mr3  Alexandria. 

Cooke,  Martha  A  

Corwin,  D.  C,  Mrs.,  Matron.. . .  " 

Corwin,  Thomas   " 

Fish,  Sophia,  Mrs   " 

Fisher,  Helen  C,  Mrs.,  Supt.. . .  " 

Leonard,  Ella   " 

Lynch,  Annette   " 

Or  ton,  Carrie   " 

Orton,  May   " 

Aldiich,  L.  J.,  Mrs  Richmond. 

Birge,  Mattie   " 

Canedy,  Bessie,  Prin   " 

Chase,  Nellie   " 

Hancock,  Annie,  Prin   " 

Howe,  Mary,  Assoc.  Prin   " 

Jones,  Cornelia   " 

Lynch,  J.  M.,  (col.)   " 

Manly,  R.  M.,  Rev.,  Supt   " 

Manly,  R.  M.,  Mrs.,  Matron. ...  «« 

Parsons,  Elizabeth   " 

Renne,  Zelma   " 

Doolittle,  H.  A  Petersburg. 

Douglass,  Henrietta   " 

Johnson,  Kate  K   " 

Fortune,  J.  S.,  Mrs.,  Matron   " 

Fortune,  Gertrude   " 

King,  E.  E   " 

Norm,  Emma   " 

Webster,  Maggie   " 

Hill,  M.  A.,  Prin  Pocahontas. 

Spalding,  Fanny   " 


Park,  Chauncey,  Prin  Abingdon. 

Park,  E.,  Mrs   " 

Park,  Julia,  Mrs   " 

Lazenby,  James  E  ."  Emmaus  P.  0. 

Eastman,  Lucy  Christiansburg. 

Burbank,  A.  C,  Mr.t  Prin  Lawrenceville. 

Burbank,  L.  H.,  Mrs   " 


NORTH-CAROLINA. 

Blood,  Carrie  Raleigh. 

Graves,  Fannie,  Principal   M 

Walrad,  Maggie   " 

Adams,  Sarah  New-Berne. 

Dennis,  Susan   41 

Hall,  L.  A   " 

Roper,  Ella,  Supt   " 

Williams,  Esther,  Matron   " 

Williams,  Celia   " 

Williams   " 

Bachelor,  D.  T.,  Mrs.,  Prin  Edenton. 

Bachelor,  Ella   " 

Winsor,  Abbie  B.,  Mrs.,  Prin. .. Oxford. 

Linsley,  Laura,  (col.)   " 

Hill,  Isam,  (col.)   " 

Cross,  Samuel  G.,  (col.)  Townsville. 

Campbell,  L.  G  Plymouth. 

Wildes,  Mary  T.,  Mrs.,  Prin   " 

Waugh,  Carrie  Washington. 


TENNESSEE. 
Andrews,  0.  T.,  Mr.,  Prin  Cleaveland. 


SOUTH-CAROLINA. 

Beeman,  E.  M  Columbia. 

Haley,  S.  A.,  Prin   " 

Isham,  E.  B   " 

Merrick,  Chloe,  Matron   " 

Loomis,  C.  H   " 

Scott,  Maggie   " 

Scott,  Cornelia   " 

Kent,  C.  J  Chester. 

Richmond,  E.  E.,  Prin   " 

Hicks,  C.  M.,  Mrs.,  (col.)  Anderson  Court-House. 

Belden,  Diana,  Mrs.,  Supt  Greenville. 

Bennett,  E.  P   " 

Gregg,  F.  E   " 

Hopkins,  Chas.,  Rev.,  (col.)   M 

Wakeman,  M.  S  

Stone,  Martha  E  Aiken. 


FLORIDA. 

Greely,  Carrie/Prin  Jacksonville. 

Knapp,  S.  A   •  " 

Morgan,  F.  A   " 

Osgood,  L.  E   " 

Stratton,  M.  E   u 

Coit,  Rosetta  Fernandina. 

Smith,  Juliet  B.,  Prin   " 

Henry,  C.  J  Pilatka. 

Bent,  Catherine  Gainesville. 

Williams,  M.  M.,  Mrs  


802 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


OUR    WORK  AND   OUR  SUPERIN- 
TENDENT AT  ALEXANDRIA,  VA. 

The  following  unsolicited  letters,  both,  by 
the  way,  from  Virginians,  one  an  eminent  judge 
who  opposed  secession,  and  the  other  a  clergy- 
man who  favored  it,  show  in  what  high  esti- 
mation our  schools,  their  superintendent,  and 
teachers  are  held  by  representative  men  after  a 
fair  trial.  Not  only  will  Mrs.  Fisher  return, 
but  also  with  more  assistants.  The  New- York 
Branch  will  occupy  the  large  new  school-house 
that  the  Bureau  is  building  at  Alexandria,  and 
by  the  time  of  its  completion  expects  to  have 
sixteen  teachers  in  that  city.  With  such  a 
president,  the  Alexandria  Freedman's  Relief 
Association  should  be  effective  in  its  coopera- 
tion with  this  Commission ;  and  we  know  by 
the  efforts  which  the  colored  people  have  made 
to  buy  the  land  for  the  new  school-house,  that 
they  will  help  to  bear  the  expense  of  our  work, 
notwithstanding  their  poverty. 

U.  S.  District  Court,  ) 
Alexandria,  Va.,  Sept.  2,  1867.  f 

It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  state  that, 
during  the  last  year,  the  colored  schools  of  this 
city,  under  the  superintendence  of  Mrs.  Fisher, 
have  reached  a  point  of  order  and  efficiency 
hitherto  unknown,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  con- 
gratulation with  the  friends  of  education  that 
there  is  a  prospect  of  her  continuance  in  her 
present  position  for  another  year. 

Indeed,  a  change  in  the  management  of  our 
educational  affairs,  with  the  very  limited  means 
at  our  command,  could  not  be  for  the  better, 
for  it  would  be  extravagant  to  expect  greater 
fidelity,  zeal,  and  intelligence  than  Mrs.  Fisher 
has  displayed  in  the  discharge  of  her  important 
duties. 

John  C  Underwood, 
Prest.  Freedman's  Belief  Ass'n,  Alexandria. 

M.  E.  Parsonage,  ) 
Alexandria,  Va.,  August  31,  1867. ) 

Mrs.  H.  C.  Fisher  :  I  feel  that  you  are  justly 
entitled  to  an  expression  of  my  deep  satisfaction 
in  the  result  of  your  work  here  last  year  among 
the  colored  people. 

I  visited  the  schools  under  your  manage- 
ment, from  time  to  time,  during" the  year,  and 
was  prepared  to  expect  a  good  examination  at 
the  close  of  the  session  ;  but  I  am  free  to  declare 
that  the  examination  far  exceeded  not  only  my 
highest  expectations,  but  any  thing  I  have  ever 
witnessed  in  any  school  or  college  in  this 
State. 

I  have  said  many  times  since  that,  unless  the 
present  system  of  teaching  the  white  children 
in  Virginia  is  altered,  the  colored  children  in 
your  schools  will  be  the  better  educated  of  the 
two  races. 

I  would  do  you  injustice  if  I  did  not  express 
the  great  pleasure  I  felt  at  the  fact  that  the 
moral  and  religious  training  had  been  as  tho- 
rough as  the  mental.  You  are  doing  a  work 
here  in  my  native  State  for  which,  as  a  Virgi- 


nian and  a  Christian,  I  am  profoundly  grateful ; 
and  I  trust  you  will  be  continued  by  your  bene- 
volent patrons  in  this  field,  which  is  so  entirely 
neglected  by  those  who  live  here.  May  God 
bless  you. 

Very  respectfully  yours, 

Joseph  R.  Wheeler, 
Pastor  M.  E.  Church. 


YELLOW    FEVER    IN  LOUISIANA. 
AN   APPEAL  FOR  HELP. 

Franklin,  St.  Mary's,  La.,  ) 
September  6,  1867.  j" 

My  Dear  Brother  :  Your  kind  offices  last 
year  were  of  considerable  value  in  obtaining 
for  my  poor  freedmen  some  clothing.  Can  you 
put  me  in  the  way  of  being  again  supplied  ? 
The  failure  of  crops  and  sickness  which  has 
prevailed  throughout  my  district  cause  great 
poverty ;  and  especially  do  the  poor  children 
suffer.  Women  and  children's  garments  and 
under-clothing  are  much  needed.  The  cold 
and  rainy  season  is  approaching,  and  very  few 
are  prepared  for  it.  I  am  trying  to  gather  the 
young  people  into  our  day  and  Sunday-schools, 
am  forming  youth's  temperance  societies,  and 
trying  in  every  way  to  elevate  and  encourage 
our  people.  Their  poverty  is  a  great  hinderance. 
Will  you  please  let  me  know  what  the  N.  F.  A. 
is  doing,  or  what  may  be  done  through  other 
agencies  ?  Send  me  some  paper  or  circular,  or 
write  if  time  or  other  duties  allow. 

We  are  enjoying  health  in  the  midst  of  the 
ravages  of  yellow  fever.  All  around  us  cases 
and  deaths  are  reported.  Our  friends  fall  on 
the  right  and  left ;  but  God  so  far  has  shielded 
us.    We  try  to  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done." 

You  will  be  glad  to  learn  that  a  few  miles 
from  this  place  a  plantation  has  been  bought 
as  a  location  for  such  an  institution  as  Oberlin. 
Also  one  adjoining  for  an  orphan  asylum  irre- 
spective of  color  ;  both  well  endowed. 

Political  affairs  rather  cloudy,  but  we  have 
faith  in  God.  The  great  work  will  go  on  !  and 
our  country  become  the  praise  of  the  whole 
earth,  a  land  of  freedom  and  righteousness. 
Mrs.  D.  joins  in  regards  to  you  and  your  family. 
Very  truly,  etc., 

R.  K.  Diossy. 


SUFFERING   IN  VIRGINIA. 

Lawrenceville,  Brunswick  Co.,  Va.,) 
August  31,  1867.  j 
Rev.  Mr.  Kennedy,  Cor.  Sec'y,  etc.  etc.  : 

Dear  Sir:  I  herewith  transmit  my  school 
report  for  the  month  of  August,  or  such  part 
thereof  as  the  school  was  in  session.  In  accor- 
dance with  previous  understanding,  permission 
being  granted  by  Miss  Collins  in  your  absence, 
I  closed  my  school  the  first  week  in  August  for 
a  vacation,  on  account  of  the  extremely  warm 
weather.  I  am  to  commence  again  one  week 
from  Monday,  September  9th. 

The  interim  has  been  passed  in  visiting  the 
different  portions  of  the  county,  to  inform  my- 
self, by  personal  observation,  of  the  condition 
and  prospects  of  the  freedmen.  My  immediate 
object  has  been  to  seek  out  some  of  the  most 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAN. 


303 


destitute,  and  supply  them  as  far  forth  as  I 
have  been  able  with  clothing.  It  is  absolutely 
needed,  as  I  have  found,  to  cover  positive  and 
almost  complete  nakedness,  some  of  which  I 
have  supplied,  others  not,  for  want  of  means. 
Those  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Lawrence- 
ville  are  very  favorably  situated  in  respect  to 
these  matters  of  necessity,  clothing,  food,  etc. 
I  have  as  yet  collected  but  five  dollars  and 
thirty  cents  for  tuition,  and  this  from  those 
most  able  to  pay,  which  you  will  charge  to  my 
account.  Last  month  I  collected,  as  you  will 
remember,  seven  dollars  and  fifty-five  cents 
for  books.  As  soon  as  they  obtain  a  division 
of  crops,  I  am  promised  more.  All  goes  well  to 
this  date.    Very  respectfully, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  C.  BlIRBANK. 


AN  APPEAL  FROM  DELAWARE. 

Delaware  Association  for  the  ) 
Moral  Improvement  and  Education  of  V 
the  Colored  People.  ) 

Wilmington,  Sept.  24, 1867. 
Rev.  Crammond  Kennedy: 

Dear  Sif*  :  I  am  directed  by  the  Executive 
Committee  of  this  Association  to  write  to  you, 
and  state  that  we  have  appointed  five  (5)  addi- 
tional teachers  for  as  many  places  in  Delaware, 
whom  we  hereby  offer  to  the  American  Freed- 
man's  Union  Commission,  to  fill  up  the  number 
which  we  are  led  to  hope  you  will  adopt  and 
furnish  the  means  for  sustaining,  as  in  the  case 
of  those  already  sent  or  promised.  We  are 
earnestly  desirous  to  reopen  all  our  schools  at 
once,  and  to  add  two  to  the  present  number, 
making  in  all  twenty,  (20,)  in  the  following- 
named  places,  namely,  Wilmington,  4 ;  Dover, 
1 ;  Seaford,  1 ;  Smyrna,  1 ;  Christiana,  1  ;  Odes- 
sa, 1 ;  Milford,  1 ;  Laurel,  1 ;  Georgetown,  1  ; 
New-Castle,  1 ;  Milton,  1 ;  Newark,  1 ;  Dela- 
ware City,  1 ;  Newport,  1 ;  Camden,  1 ;  Wil- 
liamsville,  1 ;  Lewes,  1 — 20. 

Of  these,  ten  (10)  are  in  Newcastle  county, 
five  (5)  in  Kent  county,  and  five  (5)  in  Sussex 
county.  The  names  of  the  teachers  proposed 
are,  Godfrey  Dupuy,  (white,)  for  Lewes ;  Mary 
T.  Douglass,  (colored,)  for  Christiana ;  Elizabeth 
M.  Hughes,  (colored,)  for  Odessa ;  Celestine  D. 
Wilson,  (colored,)  for  Laurel ;  and  Sarah  A. 
Usher,  (colored,)  for  Seaford.  These  teachers 
are  all  to  commence  on  October  1st.  We  send 
them  forth,  trusting  to  Providence  and  our 
friends  for  the  means  to  support  them,  yet 
strongly  hoping  that  your  Commission  will,  in 
its  generosity,  adopt  them,  leaving  us  then 
only  eight  (8)  to  provide  for  from  our  own 
funds,  which  are  at  present  low,  and  in  pros- 
pect not  very  large. 

We  understood  from  Mr.  McKim,  some 
time  ago,  that  there  was  a  disposition  among 
the  members  and  officers  of  your  Society  "  to 
take  little  Delaware  under  your  wing,"  and 
thus  see  to  it  that  the  "Blue  Hen's"  dark- 
colored  "  Chickens"  were  duly  provided  for  as 
to  their  mental  nurture  and  training. 

If  you  can  and  will  do  as  herein  desired,  we 
promise  on  our  part  to  see  that  they  are  proper- 
ly fed  and  cared  for,  and  will  give  you  the 


credit  and  thanks  for  the  means  provided  by 
you  to  this  end. 

Hoping,  sir,  that  I  have  quoted  the  words 
and  sentiments  of  our  good  friend  Mr.  McKim 
correctly  herein,  and  that  your  Society  will 
make  them  good,  I  am,  sir,  very  truly  and  re- 
spectfully yours, 

John  G.  Fubey, 

Agent  and  Cor  Sec. 


ACCOUNT  OF  ONE  OF  OUR  BEAU- 
FORT SCHOOLS. 

The  postscript  which  concludes  the  interest- 
ing letter  which  is  subjoined,  expresses  the  de- 
sire of  nearly  all  the  teachers  whom  we  em- 
ployed last  season.  What  our  answer  and 
their  work  shall  be  depend  upon  our  friends. 

Baldwinsyille,  New-York,  ) 
August  19,  1867.  [ 
You  wish  to  know  how  the  High  School 
of  Beaufort,  South-Carolina,  has  prospered  for 
the  past  year.  When  the  school  was  organ- 
ized, or  who  did  it,  I  do  not  know.  But  my 
predecessor,  Miss  Gilchrist,  left  it  well  graded 
and  classed.  The  scholars  showed  emphati- 
cally that  a  thorough  worker  had  been  among 
them.  What  they  had  learned  was  well 
learned.  The  school  is  not  so  far  advanced 
as  people  generally  suppose,  owing  to  the  con- 
stant change  of  pupils.  For  the  past  year  it 
has  not  been  changing  as  much  as  before ; 
the  colored  people  are  becoming  more  per- 
manently settled,  consequently  take  more  in- 
terest in  their  schools.  This  school  has  im- 
proved very  much  in  appearance ;  the  pupils 
look  as  clean  and  nice  as  in  some  of  our  North- 
ern institutions.  That  is  very  encouraging  to 
teachers  who  know  how  they  looked  when  they 
first  went  to  school. 

The  school  consisted  of  three  departments. 
The  primary,  taught  by  Miss  Wakeman,  (who, 
by  the  way,  was  a  splendid  disciplinarian,)  was 
a  sight  worth  seeing,  fifty  or  sixty  little  curly 
heads  sitting  straight  with  arms  folded,  either 
reciting  some  general  exercise,  or  a  class  on  the 
floor  reading,  with  the  room  so  quiet  you  could 
hear  the  ticking  of  a  watch.  That  room  was 
the  greatest  novelty  to  visitors. 

The  intermediate,  taught  by  Miss  Booth,  all 
reading  in  Second  Reader,  was  a  nice  class,  and 
some  splendid  readers  were  graduated  to  the 
higher  department.  But  the  most  rapid  prog- 
ress was  made  in  writing  and  arithmetic,  men- 
tal of  course.  They  commenced  with  addi- 
tion, and  at  the  close  of  the  school  they  could 
not  be  puzzled  easily  in  any  of  the  fundamental 
rules.    That  room  numbered  about  thirty-five. 

The  first  class  were  scholars  varying  in  age 
from  ten  to  twenty,  a  few  older  ones  during 
the  winter.  When  school  commenced,  they 
were  nearly  alVreading  in  Second  Reader ;  when 
it  closed,  nearly  all  in  Third,  and  a  class  of 
about  fifteen  were  ready  for  Fourth.  They 
were  a  class  with  which  I  had  taken  special 
pains,  preparing  them  for  teachers. 

Four  of  them  are  now  teaching.  Since  the 
schools  closed,  they  have  got  up  select  schools, 
and,  when  I  came  away,  were  in  a  fair  way  to  do 


304 


THE    AMERICAN  FREEDMAK 


well.  It  was  a  little  amusing  to  see  the  dignity 
they  thought  it  necessary  to  put  on  in  the 
school- room.  In  this  room  the  specialties  were 
reading  and  geography.  Every  lesson  in  geo- 
graphy was  made  practical.  We  used  Mon- 
tieth's  Series  when  school  closed ;  it  was  in 
two  classes,  one  in  No.  2,  and  one  in  No. 
3.  It  was  a  pleasure  to  teach  them,  they 
learned  their  lessons  so  well.  Ask  them  of  al- 
most any  country,  they  would  readily  tell  you 
of  the  surface,  soil,  and  climate.  In  fact,  I  never 
saw  a  class  of  white  children' do  any  better 
during  an  examination.  I  was  proud  of  t.b.qm, 
and  they  took  pride  themselves  in  being 
prompt  and  correct.  Concert-reading  tifey 
were  very  fond  of.  Usually  it  is  not  best  to 
teach  much  that  way,  as  it  is  apt  to  spoil  tbeir 
independence  when  reading  alone,  but  this  w;as 
an  exception  ;  they  would  take  their  books  out 
at  recess  to  study  and  practice  together,  so  the 
pauses  and  inflections  would  be  right. 

I  hope  nothing  will  happen  to  mar^the  pro- 
gressbf  the  school  another  year  ;  it^Lias*  been 
remarkably  pleasant  the  year  past. 

The  Sabbath-schools  belonged  to  the  differ- 
ent churches,  and  the  teachers  taught  where 
they  were  most  needed,  regardless  of  sectarian 
principles,  which  is  the  right  way. 

Respectfully  and  truly  yours, 

Jennie  Greene. 

P.  S. — I  want  to  be  back  ready  to  commence 
school  the  first  of  October. 


OUR  AGENTS  AND  THE  MINISTRY. 

Rev.  William  Bradley,  who  collects  for 
us  in  New-Jersey  as  his  leisure  and  his  strength 
permit,  intends  to  call  soon  upon  our  friends  in 
nis  district  for  the  support  of  two  teachers 
whom  we  have  appointed,  like  many  others,  on 
faith.  We  need  not  commend  him  to  the  con- 
fidence of  his  brother  ministers,  for  he  has  that 
already  ;  nor  to  the  people,  for  they  know  well 
who  he  is  and  what  he  wants. 

Rev.  W.  R.  Long,  our  indefatigable  canvas- 
ser, after  collecting  $492.33  in  Saratoga  Springs, 
for  which  we  hereby  return  our  hearty  thanks 
in  the  name  of  the  work  we  are  prosecuting 
and  the  millions  it  is  blessing,  has  gone  to 
Buffalo,  and  will  help  our  auxiliary  in  that  city 
to  more  than  double  the  number  of  its  teachers. 
Wherever  he  goes,  he  obtains  substantial  proofs 
of  the  confidence  which  the  people  have,  not 
only  in  him,  but  also  in  the  principles  and  con- 
duct of  our  enterprise. 

Rev.  Erastus  Colton  has  gone  to  Sing  Sing, 
but  we  hope  he  will  not  need  to  remain  more 
than  a  week,  for  that  is  time  enough  to  spend 
in  collecting  $250  for  our  new  and  much  need- 
ed work  in  Delaware.  Afterward  he  will  prob- 
ably help  our  ladies  in  Yonkers,  who  are  pre- 
paring for  a  fair,  to  obtain  subscriptions  before 
it  opens,  so  that  at  least  five  teachers  shall  re- 
present our  "  banner  town  "  of  the  last  season. 

Rev.  Robert  Pierce  is  doing  bravely  in  St. 
Lawrence  county.  De  Kalb,  a  spirited  little 
village,  pledges  itself  for  the  support  of  a 
teacher.  Lisbon's  representative  will  soon  be 
in  the  field,  and  Ogdensburg  already  has  paid 
the  first  quarterly  instalment  of  Miss  Eastman's 
support. 


These  jottings,  as  their  heading  indicate,  are 
not  complete  without  something  about  the 
ministry.  We  have  no  faults  to  find,  no  criti- 
cisms to  make,  and  no  greater  favors  to  ask 
than  we  are  constantly  receiving.  All  that  we 
want  for  our  agents,  or  they  for  themselves,  is 
a  fair  hearing,  and  that  is  afforded  by  the  pas- 
tors of  all  sorts  of  churches.  It  is  too  near  the 
noon  of  the  world's  day  for  a  great  organization 
of  earnest  Christian  men,  actively  engaged  in 
opening  the  South  for  the  permanent  establish- 
ment of  the  common-school  system,  to  be  long 
embarrassed,  far  less  cornered  or  suppressed, 
by  a  reiterated  cry  that  it  is  not  a  missionary 
society,  and,  therefore,  that  is  secular  or  pro- 
fane. Eminent  ministers  of  all  denominations 
maintain  that  the  first  part  of  the  charge  is  a 
positive  recommendation,  when  the  nature  of 
our  work  and  our  government  is  considered, 
and  that  the  second,  which  is  an  inference,  is 
false.  Our  schools  and  our  teachers  show  that  „ 
freedom's  work  may  safely  be  trusted  to  the 
Christianity  and  patriotism  of  the  nation,  and 
that  the  society  which  conducts  it  needs  neither 
to  be  ecclesiastical  nor.  missionary,  to  be  either 
essentially  Christian  or  eminently  successful. 

Many  ministers  in  denominations  that  have  j 
denominational  societies  for  the  education  of 
the  freedmen,  prefer  to  work  with  us  on  the 
unsectarian  plan  ;  and  the  number  of  these 
men  is  rapidly  increasing.  So  much  the  better 
for  them  and  the  work.  We  thank  them  andK 
all  the  rest  for  their  confidence,  their  courtesy, 
and  their  invaluable  assistance. 


Messrs.  Aaron  Benedict  and  David  Clark,  of 
Connecticut,  are  supporting  a  first-class  teacher 
each,  under  our  auspices.  The  latter  did  the 
same  last  season.  Evan  Jones,  Esq.,  of  Plain- 
field,  sustains  a  colored  teacher  in  Richmond, 
Va.  We  want  twenty  men  to  give  $250  each 
for  the  support  of  twenty  competent  colored 
teachers  in  Delaware  and  Maryland. 


Edward  F.  Davison,  Esq.,  who  has  performed 
the  duties  of  treasurer  for  over  a  year,  was 
unanimously  called  to  that  position  by  our 
Board  of  Trustees,  at  its  meeting  on  Monday, 
September  30th. 


The  list  of  teachers  presented  to  the  Board 
of  Trustees  at  its  last  meeting,  showed  one 
hundred  and  nineteen  (119)  appointments. 
There  are  scarcely  so  many  in  the  printed  list, 
because  a  few  of  the  appointees  are  not  yet  as- 
signed to  their  schools  in  the  South. 

Receipts  by  Edicard  F.  Davison,   Treasurer,  from 
August  21th  to  September  25th,  lbG7. 

FROM  AGENTS. 

Rev.  E.  Colton,  September  20th,  $136.60  f  65.01 ;  114.52. 
Rev.  R.  Pierce,        41  "  1G5.34. 

Rev.  W.  R.  Long,    "  "  800. 

Rev.  E.  Brett,         "  "44. 

J  FROM  AUXILIARY  SOCIETIES. 

North-Sh'  ,  $200;  Oswego,  90  ;  Malone,  54.87 ;  Ballston 
Spa,  230 ;  tt*sdain,  56.27 ;  New- Woodstock,  40.25 ;  Ithaca, 
20.90. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Balance  of  A.  B.  Corliss's  collection  in  Mercer  and  Somer- 
set counties,  N.  J.,  in  1866,  $17-69  ;  Franklin  L.  Wilcox, 
25c.  ;  George  C.  Ward,  N.  Y.,  300 ;  Mrs.  Wanjen,  Poplar 
Ridge,  2  ;  Freedman'i  Bureau,  for  rent,  275. 


enn'a  branch  American  Jrcrbmen  s  Inion  Commission, 

No.  1\\  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia. 


OFFICERS  AND 


c  o  m  >r  i     t  e  t  :  . 


Recording  Secretary- 


President — STEPHEN  COLWELL. 
Vice-President— FRANCIS  R.  COPE. 


James  E  Rhoads,  M.  D. 
Jain^s  A.  Wright, 
Benjamin  Coates, 
Philip  P.  Randolph, 
Samuel  S.  White, 
Joseph  Parrish,  M.D., 
Rev.  R.  Newton,  D.D., 
Rev  J.  W.  Smith,  D.D. 
Charles  Rhoads, 
Montgomery  Bond. 


ELLIS  YARNALL.  Corresponding  Secretary— ROBERT  R.  CORSON. 

Treasprer-E.  W.  CLARK,  33  South  Third  Street. 


Wistar  Morris, 
Atherto  i  Blight, 
Thomas  Mott, 
Rev.  Phillips  Brooks 
R.  N.  Rathbun, 
John  W.  Field, 
Rev.  R  J  Parvin, 
J  Miller  McKim, 
Horace  H  Furness, 
Rev  a.  Gather. 


Marmaduke  C.  Cope, 
Philip  C.  Ganett, 
Wm.  Evans,  Jr., 
Horatio  C.  Wood , 
Jacob  P.  Jones, 
Charles  Wheeler, 
A.  H.  Franciscus 
Henry  Winsor, 
Wilham  Sellers, 


James  W.  White, 
Bishop  Matthew  Simpson, 
Edward  S.  Buckley, 
Rev.  Theo.  Stork. 
Dr.  J.  Marshall  Paul, 
Louis  Wagner, 
N.  B.  Browne, 
S.  V.  Merrick, 
Israel  Morris. 


WOMEN'S  BRANCH. 

OFFICERS    AND  COMMITTEES, 

Phksident— MRS.  AUBREY  H.  SMITH 


Mrs.  John  F  Frazer, 
Mrs.  Judge  Strong, 
Mrs  Dr.  Joseph  Parrish, 


VICE-PRESIDENTS. 


Mrs.  E.  W  Clark, 
Mrs.  Robert  Pettit 
Mrs.  Celia  Mayer, 


Mrs.  Edward  Hopper, 
Mrs.  Geo.  D.  Boardman, 
Mrs.  Dr.  Claridge, 


Mrs.  William  Douglass, 
Miss  Beulah  Coates, 
Miss  Sarah  Walker. 


Treasl-rer- 


RECORDING  8ECRETARY. 

VKS.  RICHARD  P  WHITE 


IRS  JOHN  L.  LE  CONTE. 

CORRESPONDING  SECRETARY. 

MISS  S.  L  BALDWIN. 


Miss  Mary  Jackson, 
Mrs.  M.  Carey  Lea, 


Corresponding  Committee. 

K85?K2u  as^ar*  KJSLb-°»-* 


Committee  on  Receiving  and  Forwarding  Supplies. 
Miss  Beulah -Pro.  t»e  ™       Mrs.  William  H.  Furness,  Chairman. 

Miss  Yarnail  Miss  tSwJ"^  Mr8'  Elizabeth  B'  Chase> 

Miss  Aikin. 


Mrs  William  R.  Lejee, 
Mrs  Jos.  Harrison,  Jr., 
Mrs.  J.  W  Forney, 
Mrs.  Wm.  K.  M'Clees 


Committee  on  Finance 
Mrs.  Dr.  John  L.  Le  Conte,  Chairman 


Mrs.  Charles  J.  Stille 
Mrs.  Jay  Cooke, 
Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Scott, 
Mrs.  Wm.  H.  Ashhurst 


Mrs.  J  Gillingham  Fell 
Mrs.  Ward  B.  Hazeltine,' 
Mrs.  Thomas  Sparks. 
Mrs.  Seth  Comly, 


Mrs.  George  Trott, 
Mrs.  H.  K.  Birkenbine, 
Mrs.  Samuel  S.  White, 


Mrs.  Charles  S  Wood 
Mrs.  Edward  Parrish 


Committee  on  Purchasing. 

Mrs.  E  P.  Wilson,  Chairman. 


Miss  Lucretia  Towne 
Mrs.  James  Niell, 
Mrs.  E.  P.  Wilson, 


Committee  on  Education. 
Miss  Mary  E.  Jackson,  Chairman. 
Mrs.  Robt.  R.  Corson, 
Mrs.  James  Long, 
Mrs  Passmore  Williamson 
Mrs.  Geo.  Whitmer, 


Mrs.  Margaret  Griscom, 
Miss  Annie  Wain. 


Miss  S.  L  Baldwin, 
Miss  E.  L.  Stevenson, 
Miss  Mary  B.  Cummingt 


Miss  Nettie  Jat^on*0  ^clZT^T^  °*  A-ooUticm 

Miss  E.  L.  Stevenson,         Mrs  cZ»  h*/  ?arna11' 

Mrs  Horatio  G.  Jones, 
Martha  Kimber, 
Debby  J.  Ellis, 
Sarah  Pennock, 
Elizabeth  Pennoc  c 
Mrs.  E.  J  Lea, 
Miss  Josephine  Loughead 


Miss  Mary  T.  Ellicott, 
Mrs.  Thomas  Mott, 
Mrs.  George  W.  Harris 
Mrs.  Wm.  H.  Abbott,  ' 
Miss  Amy  E  Yarnall 
Mrs.  M.  B  Goddard, 
Mrs.  Emily  F.  Bacon, 
Mrs.  Passmore  Williamson, 


Miss  Francis  Lea, 
Miss  Cecelia  Baldwin 
Miss  Eliza  Fell, 
Miss  Ellen  Simpson, 
Miss  Agnes  Harrison, 
Mrs.  S.  H.  Dana, 
Mrs.  E.  J.  Sharpless, 
Mrs  Elizabeth  H.  Farnum 
Mrs.  John  Rush, 


Mrs.  Samuel  Parrish, 
Mrs.  Robert  R.  Corson, 
Mrs.  H.  E.  Hoyt, 
Mrs.  M.  Russell  Thayer, 
Miss  Maria  Hopper, 
Martha  G.  Richardson, 
Anna  Williams, 
L.  P.  Danforth, 
Mrs.  Ogilvie, 


Mi-  Hannah  HSweney,  Miss  Isabel  Townsend 


