Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2012  with  funding  from 
Wellesley  College  Library 


http://archive.org/details/africaredeemedor1851lond 


S.  G.  and  E.  L.  ELBERT 


Interview  of  Governor  Roberts  with  King  Yando. 


AFRICA  REDEEMED: 


OR,    THE 


MEANS  OF  HER  RELIEF 


ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  GROWTH  AND  PROSPECTS  OF 


LIBERIA. 


LONDON: 

JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.,  BERNERS  STREET. 

1851. 


RICHARDS,    PRINTER, 
100  ST.  martin's  LANE, 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preface            v 

Chap.   I.  The  Little  Seed          -                 -  1 

II.  A  Voyage       -  13 

III.  Sight-seeing  in  Africa       -  28 

IV.  A  Night  of  Toil       -                                  -  43 
V.  Foe  and  Fight             ...  qs 

VI.  Lott  Gary                      -  107 

VII.  The  Gap  Filled  Up             -        -  110 

VIII.  Mechlin's  Administration      -  114 

IX.  Struggles  and  Experiments  126 

X.  The  New  Era 164 

XI.  Governor  Roberts              -        -        -  205 

XII.  The  New  Republic                  -        -  247 

Appendix -  263 


PREFACE 


Less  than  a  year  since,  the  First  Edition  of 
this  interesting  narrative  was  given  to  the 
American  public  under  the  title  of  "  The  New 
Republic."  It  is  now  presented  to  the  Eng- 
lish reader  in  its  original  form,  as  a  valua- 
ble history  of  the  infancy  of  Liberia.  Such, 
however,  has  been  her  subsequent  growth  in 
numbers,  territory,  and  importance,  that  justice 
cannot  be  done  to  a  subject  so  pregnant  with 
good  to  Africa,  without  giving  to  the  British 
reader  a  fuller  view  of  her  present  condition, 
and  of  the  bright  prospect  that  she  will  be- 
come signally  instrumental  in  the  moral  rege- 
neration of  that  long  oppressed  land.  Hence 
the  change  in  the  title  of  the  work,  to  one 
more  in  accordance  with  these  happy  antici- 
pations. 

Within  that  brief  period  her  territory  has 
been  extended  northward  to  the  Shebar  river, 

b 


VI  PEEFACE. 

which,  separates  Sherbro'  Island  from  the  Afri- 
can continent,  100  miles  S.E.  of  Sierra  Leone, 
in  lat.  7°  23'  N.,  and  long.  12°  31'  W. :  while 
on  the  S.E.  (including  her  younger  sister, 
"  Maryland  in  Liberia"  at  Cape  P  almas),  her 
boundary  extends  to  the  San  Pedro  river  in 
lat.  4°  44'  N.,  long.  6°  38'  W.,  a  coast  line  of 
about  500  miles.  As  Liberia  is  now  an  object 
of  joint  affection  to  Britain  and  America,  it  is 
a  pleasing  fact  to  record,  that  the  valour  of 
Captains  Hon.  Joseph  Dennian,  and  H.  Dun- 
lop,  R.N.,  paved  the  way  for  the  purchase  of 
the  Gallinas  territory.  In  the  signal  punish- 
ment they  so  justly  inflicted  on  the  cruel 
slavers  at  the  Gallinas  river,  factories,  barra- 
coons,  and  slave-goods,  to  the  estimated  value 
of  £300,000,  were  destroyed :  Capt.  Denman 
liberated  1300  slaves  within  a  single  fortnight, 
and  Capt.  H.  Dunlop  no  less  than  1200  more. 
This  induced  the  native  chiefs  to  listen  favour- 
ably to  the  overtures  of  President  Roberts  for 
the  incorporation  of  their  territories  with  Libe- 
ria; and  it  is  equally  gratifying  that  Samuel 
Gurney,  Esq.  liberally  assisted  the  infant  state 


PREFACE.  Til 

in  conjunction  with  Charles  M'Micken,  Esq. 

of  Cincinnati;  with  funds  for  effecting  the  pur- 
chase. Associated  with  such  names,  is  that  of 
Capt.  H.  D.  Trotter,  R.N.,  who  received  the 
thanks  of  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
for  his  important  services  in  rescuing  an  Ame- 
rican vessel  and  crew  from  the  slavers,  and 
bringing  the  latter,  by  the  aid  of  Capt.  Matson, 
R,.N.,  to  punishment.  By  these  new  accessions, 
the  population,  estimated  at  only  100,000  in 
the  first  edition,  is  now  about  250,000,  of 
whom  about  6  or  7000  are  of  American  origin; 
and  the  remainder  include  the  various  tribes, 
who  sit  under  their  own  vines  and  their  own 
fig-trees,  with  none  to  molest  or  make  them 
afraid.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  extent  of 
the  positive  good  already  achieved.  In  many 
cases  their  wish,  expressed  in  broken  English, 
"  for  hab  white  man'  fash,"  is  only  the  first 
step  to  better  things.  Many  of  these  objects 
of  the  slaver's  relentless  cruelty  are  now  en- 
joying the  privileges  of  secular  and  Sabbath 
schools,  and  many  have  become  consistent 
members    of  the    Christian  church,   while   in 


Vlll  PREFACE. 

Appendix  A  will  be  found  triumphant  evidence 
of  the  attainments  of  a  Native  Missionary,  not 
long  since  ignorant  of  the  rudiments  of  our 
language.  The  appeal  of  Bishop  Smith  in  their 
behalf*  cannot  be  read  without  a  sense  of  deep 
responsibility  for  our  former  sins  against  that 
unhappy  Continent.  May  God  incline  our 
hearts  to  hasten  the  day  when  our  loud  cry  for 
light  and  knowledge  shall  be  responded  to  ! 

But  there  are  many  incentives  to  action, 
addressing  themselves  to  the  mere  merchant 
and  to  the  philanthropist,  which,  though  of  a 
less  elevating  character,  are  eminently  calcula- 
ted to  awake  the  British  people  to  promote 
this  noble  enterprise.  Much  has  been  advanced 
in  favour  of  the  products  of  free  labour.  In 
Liberia,  slavery  and  the  accursed  slave-trade 
are  alike  denounced  by  her  laws  and  constitu- 
tion. How  gratifying  the  consciousness  that 
in  the  consumption  of  her  rich  staples,  none  of 
them  are  stained  with  the  blood  or  the  tears  of 
the  slave.  Coffee,  Cotton,  Sugar,  Rice,  Oils, 
Dyes,    and   many    other    important   products 

*  Appendix  B. 


PREFA.CE.  IX 

enter  into  her  present  exports.  Give  or  lend 
her  enterprising  citizens  the  means  for  extend- 
ing their  culture,  and  above  all,  steam  and 
machinery  for  their  more  economical  prepara- 
tion, and  there  is  scarcely  a  limit  to  their 
expansion. 

This  has  been  so  forcibly  stated  by  Mr. 
Coppinger,  of  the  Pennsylvanian  Colonization 
Society,  that  we  subjoin  a  copious  extract  on 
this  important  topic: 

"To  commercial  men  of  every  country,  Liberia 
presents  itself  as  a  theatre  of  extensive  and 
lucrative  business  operations.  To  substantiate 
this  position,  let  us  look  at  the  number  and 
value  of  articles  embraced  in  the  present  trade 
of  Western  Africa,  and  which  may  be  called 
the  natural  productions  of  that  immense  con- 
tinent, in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term,  as 
nature  supplies  them  ready  for  the  market, 
almost  without  the  aid  of  man. 

"1.  Palm  Oil  is  produced  by  the  nut  of  the 
palm-tree,  which  grows  in  the  greatest  abund- 
ance throughout  that  coast.  The  demand  for 
it,  both  in  Europe  and  America,  is  daily  increa- 


z,  and  will  ere  1 

irtiele  \de. 

rpool  of  palm-oil, 

n  past,  has  bee. 

tons  -~  .      Ame- 

■  ■ .  .it. 

I     Cam-wood,    Rtd-wx  .nd 

:>.  _  ities 

-   t] 

miles  east  of  Bassa  C  mmencement 

cnown  extent,  where  ^carcelv 

I  I  -  This 

wealth  ached, 

ads 

ind  the 

z  king 

oper  -  i  mea.-  ;1  to 

themse.  ~  un  the 

::...:.-.     .:    vi;.;--     .:    '/.  :  —     \\ :.:::.  .  ".:;-;-    tG 

ery 

rpocl  house  imported  60T  n  a 

ring  \  wort.  .rs. 

jcarah . 


11 


of  all  ska 


:.--.-.--     -  :'_.;  i~rn:i  ::' 
■ 

open  smitcs  of  nbmked  waJ&k.     Im  1 

:r.i    ;To::'    ;:    .-;.!  lis:   il;~i  ~;_i    i*:V     O. 


y«:yy-::     «--,■.:     itt^  -:•:•:: 


XII  PREFACE. 

ground  nuts,  copper,  oak,  mahogany,  teak,  and 
Gambia- wood.  When  we  reflect  that  these  are 
merely  the  materials  spontaneously  furnished 
by  nature,  which  may  be  increased  indefinitely 
by  the  application  of  industry  and  science,  we 
cannot  but  wonder  at  the  extent  and  yariety  of 
that  rich  and  beautiful  country. 

"The  amazing  fertility  of  the  soil  affords  faci- 
lities  for  supplying  some  of  the  most  important 
commercial  wants,  amongst  which  may  be 
enumerated  the  following  : — 

"  1.  Cotton,  of  a  yery  beautiful  staple,  yielding 
two  crops  a-year,  is  indigenous,  and  thrives  for 
twelve  or  fourteen  years  in  succession,  without 
renewal  of  the  plant.  A  cotton  farm  of  60 
acres  has  been  opened  with  every  prospect  of 
success,  by  Dayid  Moore,  of  Mesurado  County, 
for  an  English  association.  A  great  impulse 
has  been  giyen  to  the  culture  of  cotton,  coffee, 
sugar  and  oil,  by  the  judicious  liberality  of 
Mr.  Cresson,  at  whose  expense  the  Franklin 
Institute,  of  Philadelphia,  has  offered  yaluable 
medals  for  the  largest  crop  of  each  of  those 
staples  produced  in  1851.  We  since  learn  that 
the  English  company  are  so  sanguine  of  sue- 


PEEEACE.  Xlll 

cess,  as  to  have  resolved  to  double  their  capital, 
increase  the  number  of  their  vessels,  and  en- 
large their  cotton  farms. 

"2.  Coffee,  of  a  quality  equal  to  Java  or  Mocha, 
is  raised  in  Liberia,  and  can  be  cultivated  with 
great  ease  to  any  extent.  It  bears  fruit  from 
thirty  to  forty  years,  and  yields  from  four  to 
ten  pounds  to  the  tree  yearly.  A  single  tree 
in  the  garden  of  Colonel  Hicks  (colonist),  at 
Monrovia,  is  said  to  have  yielded  thirty-one 
pounds  at  one  gathering.  Two  citizens  of 
Bassa  Cove,  Dr.  Moore  and  Hon.  S.  A.  Benson, 
each  have  coffee  groves  of  8000  trees,  promis- 
ing an  early  and  rich  return  for  their  energy 
and  enterprise. 

"3.  Sugar-cane  grows  in  unrivalled  luxuriance, 
and,  as  there  are  no  frosts  to  be  dreaded,  can 
be  brought  to  much  greater  perfection  than  in 
the  Southern  States. 

"  4.  Indigo,  Caoutchouc,  Cocoa,  Pineapples, 
Cocoa  Nuts,  Castor  Nuts,  Yams,  Plantains, 
Bananas,  Figs,  Potatoes,  Olives,  Tamarinds, 
Limes,  Oranges,  Lemons,  and  many  other  arti- 
cles which  are  brought  from  tropical  countries 
to  this,  might  be  added  to  the  list.     Indeed, 


XIV  PREFACE. 

there  is  nothing  in  the  fertile  countries  of  the 
East  or  West  Indies  which  may  not  be  pro- 
duced in  Western  Africa. 

"Here  are  the  elements  of  wealth,  the  mate- 
rials of  an  extensive  and  tempting  commerce. 
Enterprise  and  capital,  with  proper  protection 
from  our  Government,  are  alone  necessary  to 
develop  and  make  them  available  and  pro- 
fitable. 

"And  what  a  market  is  thus  opened  for  the 
exchange  and  sale  of  the  innumerable  products 
of  the  skill  and  manufactures  of  Europe  and 
America.  Africa  is  estimated  to  contain 
160,000,000  of  inhabitants.  These  are  not 
only  willing,  but  anxious  to  obtain  the  various 
articles  of  civilized  nations  :  yea,  it  is  to  satisfy 
their  thirst  for  these  commodities,  that  impel 
them  to  procure  victims  for  the  accursed  slave- 
trade. 

"  The  favourable  geographical  position  of  Li- 
beria, the  elevating  influence  of  her  free  and 
Christian  institutions,  the  industry,  integrity, 
and  intelligence  of  her  children,  with  constitu- 
tions adapted  to  that  climate,  and  a  similarity 
of  colour  with  the    natives,    will   enable  the 


PREFACE.  XV 

Liberian  to  penetrate  the  interior  with  safety, 
and  prosecute  his  trade  in  the  bays  and  rivers 
of  the  coast,  without  suffering  from  the  diseases 
which  are  so  fatal  to  white  men. 

"  Liberia  is  the  gate  of  Africa,  and  we  believe 
is  not  only  destined  to  develop  the  agricultural 
and  commercial  resources  of  that  mighty  con- 
tinent, but  be  the  means  of  regenerating  her 
benighted  millions,  and  amply  repaying  to  our 
land  the  expense  she  has  already  incurred,  or 
may  incur,  in  building  up  and  sustaining,  di- 
rectly or  indirectly,  the  Republic  of  Liberia." 

Even  among  articles  apparently  of  little 
value,  may  be  found  some  destined  ere  long  to 
hold  an  important  place  among  the  exports  of 
Africa.  Thus  from  Gambia,  in  1848,  we  learn 
thatpeaor  ground-nuts  to  the  value  of  £103,778 
were  shipped.  Give  them  the  machinery  for 
expressing  the  oil,  and  we  shall  obtain  at  a  fair 
price  the  article  now  prepared  from  them  in 
France,  and  sold  to  us  as  pure  Lucca  or 
Florence.  That  from  the  pea-nut  is,  perhaps, 
more  delicate  and  sweet  than  the  real  olive  oil. 
Twenty  thousand  tons  of  British  shipping  an- 
nually visit  the  Bonny  River  for  oil,  &c,  where 


XVI  PREFACE. 

but  recently  the  sole  export  was  that  of  human 
flesh! 

Even  now,  while  portions  of  that  long- 
oppressed  continent  are  devastated  by  the 
slave-trade,  the  declared  value  of  British  ship- 
ments to  Africa  was  no  less  than  £1,790,300 
in  1847,  and  £1,758,506  in  1848.  The  returns 
were  probably  larger,  as  many  fortunes  have 
been  made  in  that  trade.  The  commerce  of 
the  United  States  with  Africa,  though  con- 
siderably less,  is  rapidly  augmenting ;  and  the 
able  lectures  of  Professor  Christy  before  the 
Legislature  of  Ohio,  are  so  replete  with  a  pro- 
found and  statesmanlike  grasp  of  the  whole 
subject,  that  we  transfer  (Appendix  C)  his 
concluding  propositions  nearly  entire.  Com- 
mercial results  so  cheering,  and  arguments  so 
conclusive,  cannot  be  thrown  away  on  the 
British  patriot  and  philanthropist. 

The  slave-trade  now  stands  alone  in  their 
way:  but  the  letter  of  Rev.  J.  Leighton  TTilson, 
issued  by  the  African  Civilization  Society,  so 
irresistibly  shows  the  necessity  of  repressing 
that  odious  traffic  by  the  presence  of  a  squad- 
ron, that  we  deeply  regret   to    exclude  it  for 


PREFACE.  XV11 

want  of  room.  Mr.  Wilson  is  an  American 
clergyman,  who  after  liberating  all  his  slaves 
accompanied  them  to  Liberia;  and  has,  for  the 
last  twenty  years,  as  a  faithful  and  devoted  mis- 
sionary on  the  coast  at  various  points,  enjoyed 
unusual  facilities  for  arriving  at  sound  practical 
views  on  this  momentous  subject.  Britain  and 
America — the  sister  countries — have  so  long 
been  associated  with  her  woes,  that  to  them 
belong  the  duty  and  privilege  of  binding  up  her 
wounds,  and  elevating  her  to  an  honourable 
position  among  the  nations  of  the  world — re- 
deemed, regenerated,  and  disenthralled. 

Rarely  has  it  pleased  God  to  crown  any  be- 
nevolent enterprise  with  a  success  so  signal,  as 
that  of  the  American  Colonization  Society.  The 
wise  and  good  men  who  founded  it — and  they 
comprise  in  their  number  many  of  the  most 
pious  and  distinguished  men  in  the  Sister 
Country — have,  in  a  space  incredibly  brief  in 
the  history  of  nations,  witnessed  the  birth  of  a 
new  State,  planted  by  their  hands,  and  a  happy 
realization  of  their  other  benign  objects.  Our 
little  volume  has  proved  that  the  first  of  these, 
a  comfortable  asylum  for  their  free  coloured 


XV1U  PEEFACE. 

population,  has  been  eminently  successful.  The 
important  fact  that  5000  of  the  present  immi- 
grants were  slaves,  most  of  whom  were  emanci- 
pated for  the  purpose  by  conscientious  planters, 
is  a  satisfactory  proof  that  her  founders  did  not 
overrate  the  value  of  Liberia  in  promoting 
voluntary  emancipation.  The  noble  examples 
of  Daniel  Murray,  Margaret  Mercer,  Mrs.  Page, 
Bishop  Meade,  John  McDonogh,  and  others 
equally  humane,  are  now  operating  on  many 
Southern  minds  \  and  as  a  consequence,  thou- 
sands of  slaves  are  preparing  for  a  similar 
change.  All  must  rejoice  in  the  equally  im- 
portant result  achieved  in  the  extirpation  of  the 
Slave-trade,  heathen  sacrifice,  and  trial  by  sassa- 
wood  poison,  either  through  the  example,  or  by 
the  stringent  laws  of  Liberia.  "We  wish  not  to 
exaggerate  the  merits  of  her  people,  nor  to 
withhold  censure  where  justly  due ;  yet,  con- 
vinced that  the  accusation  brought  by  Com- 
mander Forbes  in  his  "  Dahomey  and  the 
Dahonians,"  quoted  in  the  Athenaeum  of  March 
1st, — a  gentleman  who  has  never  visited  Mon- 
rovia,— charging  them  with  buying  and  selling 
slaves,  is  unjust  and  unfounded,  we  are  happy 


PREFACE.  XIX 

to  have  the  testimony  of  Capt.  Dunlop,  R.N., 
who  had  many  opportunities  of  becoming  ac- 
quainted with  Liberia,  in  1848,  49,  and  50. 
In  a  letter  in  which  he  eulogises  the  New 
Republic  and  her  President,  he  says  ; — 

"  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that  no  such  thing  as 
domestic  slavery  exists  in  any  shape  among  the  citi- 
zens of  the  Republic  ;  and  their  laws  most  strictly 
prohibit  slave-dealing  and  slavery  in  all  its  phases." 

To  the  same  effect  Capt.  the  Hon.  Joseph 
Denman,  R.N.,  says,  in  a  letter  in  relation  to 
the  statement  alluded  to, 

"When  I  was  myself  in  Liberia,  in  1835,  and 
subsequently  in  1840,  and  41,  I  very  frequently 
visited  the  then  Colony,  and  at  those  periods  no 
foundation  existed  for  such  charges." 

In  1847,  Sir  C.  Hotham  confirms  these  views, 
and  recommends  Liberia  to  the  confidence  of 
the  British  government.  (See  evidence  before 
select  committee  on  the  African  Slave-trade.) 
With  such  evidence,  and  more  could  be  ad- 
duced, we  may  safely  commend  Liberia  to  the 
sympathy  of  British  philanthropists  and  Chris- 
tians, fortified  by  the  Rev.  R.  R.  G  urley's  report, 
just  made  to  the  American  Government.  After 
an  investigation   of  her   actual  condition   for 


XX  PREFACE. 

some  months,  and  visiting  all  her  settlements, 

lie  says : — 

"  Engaged  in  a  work  of  unsurpassed  dignity  and 
importance,  the  inhabitants  of  this  small  Republic 
are  accomplishing  more  good,  as  I  must  believe, 
than  any  equal  number  of  human  beings  on  the  face 
of  the  globe.  ]\Iore,  perhaps,  than  to  the  united 
endeavours  of  all  Christian  nations,  vrith  their  treaties 
and  armed  squadrons  against  the  Slave-trade,  is 
humanity  indebted  for  its  suppression  along  many 
hundred  miles  of  the  African  coast,  to  the  people  of 
Liberia." 

It  has  thus  pleased  a  kind  Providence  to  set 
the  seal  of  approbation  on  the  pious  labours  of 
the  Colonization  Society.  Unaided  by  govern- 
ment, and  throughout  its  entire  corpse  assailed 
by  the  fierce  opposition  of  men  of  all  shades  of 
extreme  opinion — united  only  in  this  opposi- 
tion—  it  has,  vrith  means  incredibly  small, 
planted  a  thriving  young  nation,  and  eradicated 
slavery  and  the  slave-trade  from  its  extensive 
territory.  Although  England  —  may  we  not 
say  Europe? — has  done  little  to  help  Liberia, 
there  is  at  least  ground  to  hope  that  ere  long 
she  will  lend  more  liberally  her  powerful  aid, 
to  disseminate  among  the  millions  of  Africa 
the  seeds  of  civilization  raid  Christianity. 

London,  April  7,  1851. 


AFRICA    REDEEMED. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE    LITTLE    SEED. 

"  Is  he  not  mom,  though  knowledge  never  shed 
Her  quickening  beams  on  his  neglected  head  ? 
Is  he  not  man,  by  sin  and  suffering  tried  ? 
Is  he  not  man,  for  whom  the  Saviour  died  ? 
Belie  the  negro's  powers  : — in  headlong  will, 
Christian  !  thy  brother,  thou  shalt  prove  him  still : 
Belie  his  virtues  :  since  his  wrongs  began 
His  follies  and  his  crimes  have  stampt  him  man." 

Montgomery. 

A  Presidential  campaign  had  just  closed,  in 
which  party  strife  and  political  intrigue  were  for  the 
time  merged  in  a  general  vote  ;  the  national  councils 
were  relieved  from  the  burden  of  an  expensive  war 
with  England ;  business,  long  cramped,  began  to  fall 
back  into  its  old  channels,  or  force  itself  into  new 
ones  ;  new  enterprises  and  bright  hopes  quickened  the 
energies  and  warmed  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and 
the  winter  at  Washington,  in  1816,  opened  with  gay 
promises  and  a  hopeful  future. 

On  the  evening  of  the  30th  of  December,  a  gentle- 

B 


2  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

man  of  that  city,  Elias  B.  Caldwell,  sits  alone  and 
expectant  in  his  parlour.  Friend  after  friend  drops 
in  with  quiet  step  and  a  thoughtful  greeting.  As 
you  look  into  each  face,  you  feel  that  it  is  no  ordinary 
object  or  common  occasion,  which  has  drawn  them 
hither.  It  is  not  the  secret  session  of  a  political 
party,  or  a  club  for  literary  debate,  or  a  meeting  for 
old  friends  to  renew  broken  friendships  and  severed 
ties  at  the  festive  board.     It  is  none  of  these. 

It  is  an  hour  for  prayer.  Here  are  gathered  men 
of  large  hearts  and  lofty  purposes,  moved  by  the  same 
mighty  motives,  and  stirred  by  the  same  powerful 
interests.  They  have  turned  aside  from  the  busy 
interests  of  life,  to  pray  for  the  African  within  our 
borders. 

A  public  meeting  was  to  be  holden  the  next  day  at 
the  Hall  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  to  discuss 
measures  and  to  concert  plans  for  the  present  relief 
and  future  benefit  of  the  negro  race. 

It  was  a  subject  of  the  profounclest  interest,  and  of 
almost  overwhelming  magnitude,  and  hedged  about 
with  a  great  wall  of  difficulties. 

"  We  must  ask  help  of  Almighty  God,"  said  they, 
who  understood  that  it  was  the  God  of  Israel  "  who 
giveth  strength  and  power  to  his  people,"  and  who 
brino'eth  out  those  who  are  bound  in  chains  ;  and  this 
meeting  for  prayer  on  the  30th  of  December  pre- 
ceded the  great  public  assembly  on  the  31st,  1816. 


THE  LITTLE  SEED.  O 

An  interest  for  Africans  was  no  new  and  strange 
thing  at  this  time.  The  hearts  of  Christians  all 
over  the  country  had  long  been  burdened  by  their 
sufferings  and  their  wrongs.  Often  had  they  in 
secret  sighed,  and  in  public  exclaimed,  "  What  can 
be  done  ?  Whence  cometh  relief,  and  where  is  the 
place  of  his  rest  ?  " 

When  was  negro  slavery  introduced  into  North 
America  ? 

In  the  year  1620,  two  vessels  ploughed  their 
watery  way  to  the  Western  shores  of  the  Atlantic. 
Each  bore  a  human  freight.  One  anchored  on  New 
England's  stern  and  rock-bound  coast,  and  landed  a 
rich  cargo  of  bold,  brave,  Christian  freemen.  Flee- 
ing from  British  oppression,  amid  snow  and  sleet, 
they  leaped  upon  Plymouth  rock,  and  thanked  God 
that  they  were  free  ;  in  the  depths  of  a  rigorous  win- 
ter, through  cold  and  hunger,  nakedness  and  peril, 
they  laid  upon  this  virgin  soil  the  corner-stone  of 
those  liberal  and  enlightened  institutions  which  have 
made  our  Republic  the  model  Republic  of  the  world. 

In  1620  also,  a  Dutch  man-of-war  entered  James 
River,  and  cast  anchor  at  Jamestown,  Virginia.  Be- 
neath its  dark  hatches  was  slavery.  Twenty  negroes 
were  landed  and  sold.  Thus  was  slavery  begun  in 
our  country ;  at  first  like  a  little  cloud,  no  bigger 
than  a  man's  hand,  it  has  gradually  risen  and  spread 
over  the  whole  horizon. 


4  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

Though  in  time  it  was  forced  upon  all  the  colonies, 
its  progress  was  watched  with  alarm.     It  was  met 
with    remonstrance.      It  grappled   with  a   fearless 
opposition   both   from   the    South   and   the   North. 
When  James   Smith  and  Thomas  Keyson,  as  early 
as  1645,  brought  the  first  slaves  into  Massachusetts, 
they  were  immediately  denounced  as  malefactors  and 
murderers.      The    magistrate,   Eichard    Saltonstal, 
declared  the  act  of  stealing  negroes  expressly  con- 
trary to  the  laws  of  God  and  the  country ;  the  men 
were  found  guilty  of  man- stealing,  while  the  negroes 
were  ordered  to  be  restored  to  their  own  country, 
with  letters  expressing  the  indignation  of  the  court 
at  their   wrongs.      Virginia,   the    annals   of  whose 
history  are  strewn  with  an  intelligent  and  manly 
opposition  to  the  slave  trade,  as  early  as  1699,  passed 
an  act  imposing    duties  upon  imported  slaves,  the 
design  of  which  was  not  revenue,  but  to  prevent  im- 
portation.    This  was  at  first  five  per  cent. :  it  was 
with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  the  sanction  of  the 
British  crown  could  be  obtained  for  these  acts  ;   and 
when,  owing  to  the  interfering  interest  of  the  African 
Company,  this  law  was  repealed,   the  royal  assent 
could  never  be  again  obtained  for  a  renewal  of  the 
duty,  although  the  utmost  efforts  were  used  by  al- 
most every  assembly  under  the  colonial  government. 
Their  earnest  language  is,  "we  implore  your  Majesty's 
paternal  assistance  in  averting  a  calamity  of  a  most 


THE  LITTLE  SEED.  5 

alarming  nature.  The  importation  of  slaves  into  the 
colonies  from  the  coast  of  Africa  has  long  been  con- 
sidered as  a  trade  of  great  inhumanity ;  and  under 
its  present  encouragement,  we  have  too  much  reason 
to  fear  will  endanger  the  very  existence  of  your 
Majesty's  American  dominions." 

Their  petitions  were  thrown  aside ;  and  the  inde- 
pendent constitution  of  that  state  cites  the  conduct  of 
the  English  crown  in  this  matter,  as  one  of  the  rea- 
sons for  a  separation  from  the  mother  country. 

Nor  was  South  Carolina  less  urgent  in  her  remon- 
strances ;  but  they  proved  unavailing,  and  her  gover- 
nors were  directed  by  British  authority  not  to  attempt 
any  restrictions  on  the  slave  trade  on  pain  of  re- 
moval. 

"  My  friends  and  I,"  wrote  Oglethorpe,  "  settled 
Georgia,  and  by  charter  were  established  trustees. 
We  determined  not  to  suffer  slavery  there ;  but  the 
slave  merchants  and  their  adherents  not  only  occa- 
sioned us  much  trouble,  but  at  last  got  the  govern, 
ment  to  sanction  them." 

The  policy  of  England  towards  her  American  colo- 
nies is  unmistakeably  expressed  by  the  Earl  of  Dart- 
mouth, in  his  instructions  to  a  colonial  agent:  "  We 
cannot  allow  the  colonies  to  check  or  discourage  in 
any  degree  a  traffic  so  beneficial  to  the  nation."  In 
a  political  tract  entitled,  "  The  African  slave-trade, 
the  great  pillar  and  support  of  the  British  Plantation 


O  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Trade  in  America."  published  in  1745,  we  find  these 
words:  "  Negro  labour  will  keep  our  British  colonies 
in  a  due  subser  to  the  interest  of  their  mother 

country ;  for,  while  our  plantations  depend  only  on 
planting  by  negroes,  our  colonic-  can  never  prove 
injurious  to  British  manufactures,  never  become  inde- 
pendent of  their  kingdom.''     In  this  course,  England 

oiitted  no  change. 

At  the  North,  where,  owing  to  a  variety  of  circum- 
stances, slaves  were  never  numerous,  measures  were 
early  taken  for  the  entire  removal  of  the  evil.  From 
the  first,  Massachusetts  made  an  unrelenting  opposi- 
tion to  the  introduction  of  slaves  from  abroad ;  and 
si  r  1  ack  as  1701,  the  town  of  Boston  instructed  its 
representatives  "  to  put  a  period  to  negroes  being 
slav  3.  '  Statutes  were  passed  in  the  Connecticut 
Legislature  of  1783  and  17  97.  having  for  their  ob- 
ject the  gradual  extinction  of  slavery.  Xew  Je: 
took  up  the  subject  in  1784.  Pennsylvania  in  17  : 
It  was  not  until  1817,  that  the  Legislature  of  Xew 
York  passed  a  law,  declaring  that  every  subject  of  the 
State,  from  and  after  the  4th  of  July.  1 S Q  7 .  should 
be  free.  In  all  cases  our  fathers  seem  to  have  re- 
garded the  subject  of  emancipation  as  one  requiring 
wise,  cautious,  and  deliberate  action. 

Christian  philanthropy  had  long  contemplated  the 
condition  of  the  African  within  our  borders,  with  a 
profound  and   sorrowful  interest,  and  the  time  had 


THE  LITTLE  SEED.  7 

now  arrived,  -when  it  was  felt  that  a  beginning  must 
be  made,  a  movement  must  be  originated,  having  for 
its  direct  object  the  social  and  moral  elevation  of  the 
African  race  in  our  country. 

It  could  number  no  truer,  warmer,  braver  friends 
than  those  who  assembled  in  Mr.  Caldwell's  parlour, 
on  that  night  of  the  30th  of  December,  1816. 

There  sat  Robert  Finley,  whose  ardent  mind  had 
long  been  grappling  with  the  subject.  "  We  must 
plant  a  colony  of  free  blacks  on  their  own  home  soil, 
on  Africa,  where  they  can  be  true  men,  unoppressecl 
by  the  prejudice  and  the  unrighteous  legislation  of 
the  whites,"  he  had  declared  long  before  to  his  friends 
in  New  Jersey. 

"  Very  well,"  they  had  answered,  "  very  good, — 
there  is  only  one  objection  :  it  cant  be  done." 

"  But  we  must  try  it."  Maturing  and  publishing 
his  plans  in  spite  of  the  doubts  of  some,  and  the 
opposition  of  many,  he  had  now  gathered  together  a 
few  others  of  like  sentiments  for  a  careful  deliberation 
of  the  subject,  and  for  seeking  wisdom  from  on  High. 

There  was  Samuel  J.  Mills,  in  whose  calm,  far- 
seeing  benevolence,  the  neglected  cause  of  his  "  poor 
African  brethren,"  as  he  used  to  call  them,  lay  cradled 
in  tender  concern.  "  Something  must  be  done,"  was 
the  silent  yet  stern  resolve  of  one  who  never  wavered 
at  difficulties,  nor  was  ever  daunted  by  trials.  He 
had  collected  facts,  consulted  wise  men,  commended 


&  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

the  subject  in  prayer  to  a  just  God,  and  he  felt  that 
it  was  a  cause  which  admitted  of  no  delay. 

Francis  S.  Key  was  there,  whose  clear,  judicious 
mind  is  fastened  upon  the  subject  with  a  keen  and 
anxious  interest. 

Xo  record  remains  of  the  doings  of  that  evening ; 
we  know  not  what  was  said,  we  heard  not  the  suppli- 
cations, neither  are  the  names  known  of  all  who 
assembled  there.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know,  that 
the  subject  was  presented  before  the  Almighty  Dis- 
poser of  events ;  that  his  merciful  aid  and  righteous 
interposition  were  invoked  by  men  who  knew  the  ex- 
cellency of  his  power. 

Thus  was  planted  a  little  seed  of  good  for  poor 
Africa.     It  was  sown  in  tears,  shall  it  not  be  reaped 


m 


joy 


9 


The  next  day  the  capitol  in  Washington  was 
thronged  by  numbers,  met  to  listen,  to  inquire  into, 
and  to  discuss  a  subject  of  a  far  different  nature  from 
those  which  usually  awakened  the  interest  of  politi- 
cians, or  engaged  the  attention  of  statesmen.  The 
Hon.  Henry  Clay  presided  over  the  meeting.  He, 
with  John  Randolph,  Robert  Wright,  and  Elias  B. 
Caldwell,  made  eloquent  and  able  addresses  upon  the 
subject  which  had  drawn  them  together;  and  at  its 
close  Mr.  Caldwell  offered  a  resolution,  that  a  society 
be  formed  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  information, 


THE  LITTLE  SEED.  9 

and  assisting  in  the  formation  or  execution  of  a  plan 
for  the  colonization  of  free  people  of  colour,  with 
their  consent,  in  Africa  or  elsewhere,  as  may  be 
thought  most  advisable ;  and  a  committee  of  gentle- 
men be  appointed  to  prepare  a  constitution  and  rules 
for  such  a  society.  The  resolution  was  adopted,  and 
the  meeting  adjourned  until  the  following  Saturday. 
On  the  appointed  day  it  re-assembled  in  the  same 
place.  The  Committee  presented  their  report,  and 
a  constitution,  two  articles  of  which  were  as  follows : 

Article  1.  "A  society  shall  be  formed,  and  called 
the  American  Colonization  Society  for  colonizing  the 
free  people  of  colour  of  the  United  States." 

Article  2.  "  The  object  to  which  its  attention 
shall  be  exclusively  directed,  is,  to  promote  and  exe- 
cute a  plan  for  colonizing,  with  their  consent,  the 
free  people  of  colour,  residing  in  our  country,  in 
Africa,  or  such  other  place  as  Congress  shall  see  fit. 
And  the  Society  shall  act  to  effect  this  object  in  co- 
operation with  the  general  government,  and  such  of  . 
the  states  as  may  adopt  regulations  upon  the  subject." 

The  constitution  was  unanimously  adopted ;  Hon. 
Bushrod  Washington  was  chosen  its  first  president ; 
we  find  the  names  of  Robert  Finley,  Charles  Fenton 
Mercer,  and  Francis  S.  Key  among  its  long  list  of 
vice-presidents,  and  Elias  B.  Caldwell  is  secretary. 

The  cause  of  the  poor  African  was  now  fully  before 
the  public.     Something  must  be  done  for  him  is  the 


10  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

great  idea,  and  it  was  embodied  in  a  society  connected 
with  some  of  the  best  and  most  prominent  men  from 

all  parts  of  the  land. 

"  The  blacks  are  not  capable  of  taking  care  of 
themselves, — they  can  never  acquire  the  art  of  self- 
government, — they  occupy  a  lower  position  in  the 
scale  of  creation,— they  are  destined  to  be  hewers  of 
wood  and  drawers  of  water;"  so  reasoned  some,  and 
coldlv  turned  awav  from  the  new  movement. 

"  \Ye  do  not  believe  what  you  say."*  replied  the 
friends  of  the  African  ;  "  no.  no, — they  are  immortal 
beings, —  they  have  a  common  birthright  with  us. — 
we  owe  them  a  just  debt,  which  must  be  paid.  There 
are  facts  enough  to  show  that  under  the  most  disad- 
vantageous circumstances,  thev  are  capable  of  both 
moral  and  social  advancement.  Look  at  Lott  Gary, 
a  man,  in  spite  of  his  condition !  Only  give  them  a 
fair  chance,  and  negroes  are  as  capable  of  exercising 
all  the  rights  and  discharging  ail  the  duties  of  free- 
men,  as  you  and  I  are."  And  a  fair  chance  their 
friends  did  mean  to  give  them. 

The  little  seed  is  beginning  to  take  root,  and 
nobody  was  watching  it  with  deeper  interest  than 
Lott  Gary. 

Who  is  Lott  Cary? 

Lott  Cary  was  born  a  slave,  near  Richmond,  Vir- 
ginia, in  17 SO.  His  parents,  truly  excellent  and 
pious  people,  endeavoured  to  train  up  Lott,  their  only 


THE  LITTLE  SEED.  11 

child,  to  be  a  useful,  industrious,  God-fearing  boy. 
As  he  grew  older,  he  fell  in  with  profane  and  intem- 
perate companions,  who  led  him  into  vicious  habits. 
At  the  age  of  twenty-four,  he  was  sent  to  Richmond, 
and  employed  as  a  labourer,  in  a  large  tobacco  ware- 
house. For  two  or  three  years,  he  grew  worse  and 
worse,  until  his  attention  became  suddenly  arrested 
by  the  powerful  appeals  of  a  Baptist  exhorter.  Lott 
paused  in  his  career  of  vice.  Overwhelmed  by  a 
sense  of  his  sins,  in  bitter  repentance,  he  resolutely 
forsook  them,  and  resolved,  henceforth,  to  devote 
himself  to  the  service  of  God.  In  1807  he  joined 
the  church.  It  proved  no  half-way  work  with  Lott. 
He  immediately  began  to  study  the  alphabet,  and 
it  was  not  long  before  he  could  both  read  and  write. 
His  thirst  for  knowledge  rapidly  increasing,  he  read 
a  large  number  of  valuable  books,  and  soon  began  to 
preach  to  his  brethren  around  him.  In  these  efforts 
he  was  greatly  blest.  Lott  now  wished  to  become  a 
free  man.  Being  a  most  useful  man  at  the  ware- 
house, winning  both  the  confidence  and  respect  of  the 
merchants,  small  sums  of  money  were  often  given 
him  for  his  fidelity  and  promptness.  By  carefully 
investing  these,  he  was  at  length  able  to  pay  down 
eight  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  for  the  redemption  of 
himself  and  his  two  sons.  He  afterwards  received 
at  the  warehouse  a  salary  of  eight  hundred  dollars  a 
year  for  his  services.     As  early  as  1815,  Lott  felt  a 


12  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

lively  interest  for  Africa,  and  aided  in  the  formation 
of  a  society  which  raised  one  hundred  and  fifty  dol- 
lars a-year  for  the  support  of  iVfrican  missions.  When 
the  plans  of  the  Colonization  Society  became  known, 
he  at  once  turned  to  it  with  the  deepest  interest,  and 
looked  forward  to  its  movements  with  the  greatest 
anxiety  and  solicitude. 


CHAPTER  II. 

A    VOYAGE. 

"  From  Nubian  hills,  that  hail  the  dawning  day, 

To  Guinea's  coast,  where  evening  fades  away  ; 

Regions  immense,  unsearchable,  unknown, 

Bask  in  the  splendours  of  the  solar  zone  ; 

A  world  of  wonders — where  creation  seems 

No  more  the  works  of  Nature,  but  her  dreams  ; 

Great,  wild  and  beautiful,  beyond  control, 

She  reigns  in  all  the  freedom  of  her  soul ; 

Where  none  can  check  her  bounty,  when  she  showers 

O'er  the  gay  wilderness  her  fruits  and  flowers." 

"  Who  will  go  for  us  ?  Who  will  explore  the  Afri- 
can coast,  to  find  a  suitable  spot  for  the  location  of  a 
colony?  Who  has  the  judgment  and  perseverance 
necessary  for  an  undertaking  like  this?" 

Samuel  J.  Mills  was  pronounced  to  be  the  man. 

"  I  will  go,"  responded  Mills  with  quiet  energy, 
"  God  willing,  God  helping  me,  I  will  go." 

"  But  not  alone,  a  fitting  man  shall  accompany  you, 
— choose  some  one,"  said  the  Society. 

Mr.  Mills  cast  his  eyes  around  the  circle  of  his 
acquaintance.  "  Who  so  loves  the  cause  of  Africa  as 
to  undertake  it?"  questioned  he.  They  rested  on 
Mr.  Ebenezer  Burgess,  now  Dr.  Burgess  of  Dedham, 


14  AFRICA  EEDEEilED. 

Massachusetts.  Mr.  Mills  sat  down  and  wrote  his 
friend,  saving, — "  I  have  been  appointed  by  the  board 
of  the  Colonization  Society  as  their  agent  in  this 
noble  expedition,  and  I  am  requested  by  them,  if 
possible,  to  find  a  person  who  will  engage  in  this 
mission  with  me.  Will  you  go,  brother  Burgess? 
My  brother,  can  we  engage  in  a  nobler  effort  ?  We 
go  to  make  freemen  of  slaves.  \Ye  go  to  lay 
the  foundation  of  a  free  and  independent  empire, 
on  the  coast  of  poor  degraded  Africa!"  Mark  that ! 
there  lay  the  new  republic, — a  great  idea  cradled 
in  the  far-reaching  mind  of  Mills ;  and  he  knew  it 
would  not  remain  there  and  die  out,  a  mere  idea. 
He  does  not  say,  "I  wish,"  "  I  hope."  He  does 
not  speak  discouragingly,  or  doubtfully,  or  fear- 
fully. Xo  !  he  says,  "We  go  to  lay  the  foundation 
of  a  free  and  independent  empire,  on  the  coast  of  poor 
degraded  Africa."  Already  it  loomed  up  in  his  mind 's 
eye,  and  he  beheld  in  the  far-off  future,  as  with  pro- 
phetic vision,  the  schools  and  churches,  and  coffee 
fields,  and  Christian  homes,  and  happy  hearts  of  the 
black  men  in  that  new  Republic,  planted  on  Africa's 
soil,  by  the  efforts  of  his  own  countrymen.  The 
agency  seemed  so  responsible,  that  Mr.  Burgess  at 
first  thought  to  decline  it ;  but  bleeding  Africa  ap- 
pealed to  his  Christian  sympathies,  and  he  dared  not 
turn  his  back  upon  the  proposal.  He  decided  to  go. 
Wherever  these  young  men  went,  they  strove  to 


A  VOYAGE.  15 

stir  up  and  to  deepen  an  interest  in  their  mission.    At 
home,  abroad,  and  by  the  way,  they  pleaded  the  cause 
of  Africa.     Funds  were  needed  to  commence  their 
work,  but  the  money  slowly  came ;  while  multitudes 
said,  "  Oh  yes  !  it  is  an  excellent,  a  glorious  object," 
but  they  failed  to  give  undoubted  evidence  of  the 
sincerity  of  their  declarations,  by  helping  it  on,  by 
giving  of  their  substance  as  they  had  opportunity. 
Sometimes  things  wore  a  discouraging  aspect,  but 
Mr.  Mills  never  faltered.     "  I  think  the  necessary 
funds  will  he  provided,"  was  his  ever  ready  reply, — 
and  provided  they  were.      Sums  of  money  at  last 
began  to  flow  in  from  various  channels,  until  the 
amount  became  large  enough  to  cover  the  expenses  of 
their  journey.     The  Missionaries  longed  to  be  on 
their  way.     The  Society  instructed  them  to  proceed 
to  London,  there  to  gather  all  the  information  that 
could  be  obtained  about  the  West  Coast  of  Africa, 
and  procure  letters  of  introduction  to  the  Governor 
of  the  English  colony  of  blacks  at  Sierra  Leone ; 
from  London,  to  take  ship  to  Sierra  Leone,  and  make 
that  colony  their  head-quarters,  while  they  should 
explore  the  coast,  consult  with  the  natives,  and  see  if 
a  good  spot  could  be  bought  at  a  fair  price  for  the 
purposes  of  the  colony. 

Nov.  16, 1817,  they  went  on  board  the  ship  Electra, 
at  Philadelphia,  bound  for  London.  By  the  5th  of 
December,  the  shores  of  merry  England  met  their 


16  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

gaze.  The  perils  of  the  ocean  passed,  they  rejoiced 
in  the  speedy  termination  of  their  voyage.  It  was 
Sabbath  evening.  Hark  !  how  fearfully  the  wind 
howls  among  the  cordage  !  The  captain  stands  on 
the  quarter-deck,  anxiously  surveying  the  stormy 
sky.  The  tempest  increases.  Through  the  long, 
dark  night,  every  sailor  is  on  duty.  Daylight  breaks, 
but  the  storm  abates  none  of  its  violence.  "Cut 
away  the  masts!"  "  Clear  the  decks!1'  "  Let  the 
wind  have  a  clear  sweep  !  "  shouts  the  captain.  The 
crew  work  like  men  who  feel  that  life  hangs  on  the 
issue.  The  ship  eased,  the  captain  went  below  to 
change  his  clothes,  drenched  and  frozen  by  the  icy 
waters. 

"  Breakers  ahead !  "  roared  the  mate.  The  cap- 
tain rushed  on  deck  to  behold  his  ship  rapidly  drift- 
ing towards  a  ledge  of  rocks,  over  which  the  waters 
were  breaking  with  fearful  violence. 

"  We  are  gone  for  this  world ! !'  he  cried  in  agony. 
Seizing  his  two  sons,  and  jumping  into  the  stern- 
boat,  he  ordered  the  stoutest  sailor  to  follow.  The 
boat  swung  off,  rose  on  the  top  of  an  angry  wave, 
then  sank  to  rise  no  more.  Where  were  the  agents 
at  this  terrible  moment  ?  Was  this  the  end  of  their 
mission  ?  Were  the  first,  feeble  attempts  for  Africa 
thus  to  die?  Were  the  pioneers  in  that  new  re- 
public to  perish  in  the  great  battle  of  the  waters  ? 
Cries  of  despair  arose  above  the  wailings  of  the  storm. 


A  VOYAGE.  17 

On  the  tempest-tost  deck  stood  Mr.  Burgess,  com- 
mending to  the  mercy  of  God  the  trembling  crew, 
who  crowded  around  him,  "  their  souls  melted  be- 
cause of  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  his  wonders  in 
the  deep."  Mr.  Mills  was  in  the  cabin,  with  his  fel- 
low-passengers, calling  in  importunate  prayer  upon 
Him  "  who  holdeth  the  sea  in  the  hollow  of  his 
hands,  and  the  winds  in  his  fist."  A  terrible  doom 
awaited  them.  Swift  destruction  seemed  fast  coming 
upon  them,  when,  in  a  moment,  a  strong  under-cur- 
rent bore  the  ship  into  deeper  waters,  to  the  right  of 
the  ledge. 

"  Helm  starboard  !"  shouted  the  mate.  The  ship 
wore  away  from  the  rocks,  and  was  safe. 

"It  is  the  work  of  God ! "  they  all  exclaimed. 
Yes,  it  was  the  work  of  Gocl.  He  can  save,  and  He 
can  destroy.  The  next  day  they  found  themselves 
on  the  coast  of  France.  At  twelve  o  clock  on  Tues- 
day they  made  the  port  of  St.  Malo. 

After  remaining  there  six  days,  the  missionaries 
took  passage  in  a  regular  packet  for  England;  and  in 
thirty-six  hours  reached  London.  As  soon  as  their 
object  was  made  known,  they  received  a  cordial  wel- 
come. The  excellent  Mr.  Wilberforce,  who  loved 
the  cause  of  Africa  with  no  common  love,  expressed 
the  deepest  sympathy  for  their  object,  and  introduced 
them  to  William  Dillwyn,  Dr.  Hodgkin,  and  a  num- 
ber of  other  gentlemen,  who  readily  aided  them  in 

c 


18  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

the  furtherance  of  their  designs.  This  visit  to 
England  greatlv  encouraged  and  strengthened  their 
hearts.  On  the  3d  of  February,  1818,  they  set  sail 
for  Sierra  Leone.  A  pleasant  passage  took  them  to 
the  coast  of  Africa  by  the  12th  of  March. 

"  At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,"  writes  Mr. 
Mills,  "  we  exulted  at  the  sight  of  Africa,  and  began 
to  draw  imperfect  sketches  of  the  coast,  the  emi- 
nences, the  trees,  and  every  thing  we  could  see." 

And  now,  before  we  follow  the  travellers  farther, 
we  must  say  a  few  things  of  Africa,  speaking  chiefly 
of  the  Western  coast.     There  seem  to  be  three  races 
of  people  occupying  this  coast,  the  Moors,  the  Arabs. 
and  the  Negroes,  which  are  far  the  greater  number. 
Their  villages  are  usually  built  in  by-places,  with  the 
huts  so  huddled  together,  that  if  one  takes  fire,  the 
remainder  are  rapidly  consumed.     This  is  done  in 
hope  of  affording  some  protection  against  kidnappers. 
Pace  is  the   chief  food,  with  yams,   plantains,   and 
sweet  potatoes.     The  rice  is  merely  thrown  on  the 
ground,  and  scratched  in  with  a  kind  of  rude  hoe. 
The   most  delicious    oranges,   pine    apples,    guavas. 
grapes,  and  other  tropical  fruit  grow  upon  the  coast ; 
but  the  people  take  no  pains  to  cultivate  them.     The 
palm  is  their  most  valuable  tree.     It  is  said  to  be 
applied  to  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  uses.     Huts 
are  thatched  with  palm  leaves:  its  fibres  are  used  for 
fisliing  tackle ;  a  rough  cloth  is  made  from  the  inner 


A    VOYAGE.  19 

bark,  while  mats  and  baskets  are  manufactured  from 
the  outer ;  the  fruit  is  roasted,  and  is  excellent ;  the 
oil  serves  for  butter,  and  the  palm  wine  is  a  favourite 
drink.  A  large  worm  which  thrives  on  this  tree  is  a 
species  of  animal  food  of  which  the  natives  are  very 
fond.  Vegetation  is  extremely  luxuriant;  and  so 
rapid  is  its  growth,  one  can  almost  see  it  grow.  The 
trees  never  lose  their  verdure  in  this  region  of  per- 
petual summer.  There  are  two  seasons,  the  wet  and 
dry;  drenching  rains,  violent  gusts  of  wind,  and  dread- 
ful thunder  and  lightning, 'indicate  the  approach  of 
the  rainy  season,  which  is  very  unhealthy,  and,  with- 
out extreme  precaution,  often  proves  fatal  to  fo- 
reigners. 

The  Western  coast  of  Africa  is  visited  and  deso- 
lated by  one  of  the  most  dreadful  scourges  which  ever 
afflicted  any  portion  of  the  human  family,  the  slave- 
trade.  It  has  killed  its  thousands,  and  tortured  its 
tens  of  thousands ;  it  is  a  traffic  literally  dyed  in 
human  blood.  The  Spanish  and  Portuguese  have 
been  principally  engaged  in  it ;  though  with  pain  be 
it  added,  that  England  and  the  United  States  have 
also  shared  in  its  emoluments  and  disgrace.  Near 
the  close  of  the  last  century,  Clarkson,  Wilberforce, 
Sharpe,  and  Thornton,  with  resistless  importunity  and 
unflagging  efforts,  regenerated  public  sentiment  by 
spreading  the  iniquities  of  the  traffic  before  the  world. 
Their  views  and  measures  met  with  a  lively  sympathy 


20  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

in  this  country,  where  efforts  had  been  so  long  made 
to  resist  the  introduction  of  slaves.     Massachusetts 
abolished  the  slave-trade  in  1 774.  Virginia  passed  acts 
against  all  foreign  slave-trade  in  1778;  while  Penn- 
sylvania, Connecticut,  and  Rhode  Island  prohibited  it 
to  any  of  their  citizens,  in  whatever  form  or  degree, 
and  under  the  severest  penalties,  in  1780,  1787,  and 
1788.     The  American  Continental  Congress  passed 
a  resolution  against  the  importation  of  slaves  from 
Africa,  and  published  an  exhortation  to  the  Colonies 
to  abandon  the  trade  altogether.    After  the  formation 
of  the  Federal  government,  the  third  Congress,  in 
1794,  prohibited  the  carrying  on  of  the  slave-trade 
between  foreign  countries  from  our  ports,  under  penal- 
ties of  fines  and  imprisonments.     England  abolished 
it  in  1807.     In  the  United  States  government,  the 
laws  upon  this  subject  became  more  and  more  strin- 
gent, until  1819,  when,  for  the  first  time,  the  Afri" 
can    slave-trade   was   declared    piracy,   and   partici- 
pation in  it  was  made  punishable  with  death.     It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  Charles  Fenton  Mercer,  of  Vir- 
ginia, proposed  this  measure,  and  urged  it  forward 
with  all  the  energies  of  his  strong  mind,  until  at 
length  it  became  the  law  of  this  land,  and  has  since 
been  adopted  by  most  of  the  civilized  nations  of  the 
world. 

Slave  markets  are  established  all  along  the  coast 
of  Africa  ;  and  native  kings  are  induced  to  engage  in 


A    VOYAGE.  21 

it,  on  account  of  its  enormous  profits.  The  follow- 
ing is  not  an  unusual  mode  of  supplying  its  de- 
mands : — 

Boatswain,  an  African  prince  of  great  note,  whose 
name  will  frequently  appear  in  these  pages,  received 
a  quantity  of  goods  from  a  French  slaver,  to  be  paid 
for  in  slaves.  As  the  time  of  payment  approached, 
the  stipulated  cargo  was  not  in  readiness.  The  king 
looked  around  the  country  for  supplies.  His  eye  at 
last  lighted  upon  a  small,  peaceable  tribe,  the  Queahs, 
into  whose  jungles  he  speedily  and  secretly  despatched 
a  body  of  his  boldest  warriors,  with  orders  to  fall 
upon  the  sleeping  and  unoffending  people  at  mid- 
night, and  capture  all  the  young  of  both  sexes. 
Every  hut  was  burned ;  the  aged  and  the  little  ones 
were  inhumanly  butchered,  while  the  youth  were 
hunted  down,  caught,  chained  together,  and  driven 
down  to  the  coast,  where  they  were  secured  like  wild 
beasts,  until  the  arrival  of  the  slaver. 

Would  you  visit  a  slave  factory?  It  will  be 
painful,  but  it  may  awaken  your  sympathies  for  this 
dark  land,  and  lead  you  to  inquire  "  What  can  I  do 
for  the  redemption  of  poor  Africa  ?"  Let  us  go  with 
one  who  has  been  an  eye-witness  of  the  scenes  which 
are  described.  The  barracoon,  or  slave-pen,  is  an 
inclosure  of  an  acre  or  more,  one  side  of  which  is 
formed  by  a  substantial  bamboo  house,  two  hundred 
feet  long,  and  eighty    wide,    which  serves  as    the 


22  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

sleeping  apartment  of  the  slaves.  The  adjoining 
side  is  formed  by  a  shade  of  similar  dimensions,  the 
two  ends  and  inner  side  of  which  are  open.  This 
serves  as  a  place  of  rendezvous  during  the  day.  The 
remaining  two  sides  are  formed  by  a  double  palisade, 
which  might  be  easily  forced  by  the  occupants,  if 
they  were  not  fettered  and  guarded  day  and  night. 
On  our  arrival  at  the  gate,  the  slaves  were  all  talking 
and  making  a  loud  and  confused  noise,  not  unlike 
that  which  is  heard  on  entering  a  large  menagerie. 
But  when  we  opened  the  gate  and  entered,  there  was 
a  most  profound  silence.  Every  eye  was  fixed  upon 
us.  What  were  their  thoughts  or  feelings,  can  only 
be  told  by  the  expression  of  their  countenances. 
Many  of  them  had  never  seen  a  white  man  before, 
except  the  one  who  had  bought  them,  and  some  had 
not  even  seen  him.  Most  of  them  had  imagined 
they  were  to  be  devoured  by  the  whites.  They  sup- 
pose whatever  kindness  is  shown  them  at  the  barra- 
coon  is  prompted  by  the  same  feeling  which  fattens 
the  ox  for  slaughter.  When  we  entered,  many  may 
have  thought  a  victim  was  to  be  selected,  or  the  time 
of  their  sailing  was  at  hand,  and  in  that  very  moment 
may  have  given  up  the  last  lingering  hope  of  being 
restored  to  their  kindred  and  their  homes.  Among 
the  slaves  were  persons  of  both  sexes,  from  five  to 
forty  years  of  age.  Not  one  of  the  number,  of  what- 
ever age  or   sex,  had  any  covering.     A  few  of  them 


A    VOYAGE.  23 

appeared  to  be  light-hearted  and  frivolous  in  spite 
of  their  chains  ;  the  countenances  of  others  showed 
they  were  almost  sunk  to  a  state  of  idiocy;  hut 
most  of  them  appeared  thoughtful,  pensive,  and 
melancholy. 

With  the  exception  of  twenty  or  thirty  invalids, 
all  were  seated  on  logs  laid  lengthwise,  and  about 
three  feet  apart,  under  the  shade.     The  men  were 
fastened  two  and  two,  one  ankle  of  each  being  fet- 
tered.    In  moving  about,  which  was  apparently  done 
with  pain  and  difficulty,  each  rested  one  arm  on  the 
shoulder  of  the  other.     The  women,  girls,  and  half- 
grown  boys  were  made  secure  by  a  brass  ring  encir- 
cling the  neck,  through  which  a  chain  passed,  group- 
ing them  together  in  companies  of  forty  or  fifty. 
There  was  one  company  which  particularly  appealed 
to   the  heart.     It  was  a  group  of  mothers,  recently 
bereft  of  their  children.     Their  countenances  indica- 
ted an  intensity  of  anguish,  which  cannot  be  described. 
Though  heathen  mothers,  a  flame  had  been  kindled 
in  their  hearts  which  no  calamity  could  extinguish. 
When  infants  are  born  in  the  barracoon,  or  when 
they  are  brought  there  with  their  mothers,  because 
it  is  inconvenient  to  keep  them  in  the  factory,  and 
almost  impossible  to  carry  them  across  the  ocean, 
they  are  subjected  to  a  premature  and  violent  death. 
This  is  a  common  incident  in  the  operations  of  the 
slave-trade. 


24 


AFRICA  REDEEMED. 


On  one  occasion,  two  or  three  hundred  slaves  broke 
their  chains,  and  escaped  from  the  barracoon.  Most 
of  them  were  afterwards  retaken.  The  owner, 
having  discovered  the  two  leaders,  determined  to 
punish  them  in  a  manner  calculated  to  frighten  others 
from  a  similar  attempt.  As  soon  as  they  had  been 
fastened,  with  their  hands  behind  them,  to  two  of  the 
front  posts  of  the  shade,  the  rest  were  assembled  to 
behold  the  bloody  spectacle.  The  Spaniard,  in  the 
presence  of  his  victims,  put  a  double  charge  into  his 
gun,  and  then  placing  it  within  two  feet  of  one  of 
them,  discharged  the  contents  into  his  heart.  The 
head  of  the  poor  creature  dropped,  the  blood  gushed 
forth  in  a  torrent,  and  so  he  died.  This,  one  would 
have  thought,  was  sufficient  to  glut  the  vengeance  of 
a  fiend  ;  but  it  was  not  enough  to  satisfy  the  merci- 
less Spaniard.  He  reloaded  and  discharged  his  gun 
several  times  into  the  bleeding  corpse,  before  he 
began  his  work  of  death  upon  the  other,  whom  he  at 
length  despatched  in  the  same  way.  The  bodies 
hung  on  the  posts  during  the  day,  a  ghastly  spectacle 
to  palsy  all  future  efforts  of  a  similar  character- 
This  also  is  but  the  beginning  of  sorrows. 

The  horrors  of  a  long  passage  across  the  Atlantic 
scarcely  admit  of  description.  Four  hundred  human 
beings  are  sometimes  crammed  into  a  hold  twelve 
yards  in  length,  seven  in  breadth,  and  three  and  a 
half  feet  high;  hot,   parched,   suffocating,  wallowing 


A    VOYAGE.  25 

ip  their  own  filth,  kicked  and  beaten  at  the  voice  of 
wailing  or  complaint ;  so  insufficiently  supplied  with 
water  and  food,  that  when  on  deck  they  greedily 
catch  the  drippings  from  the  sails  after  a  shower, 
apply  their  lips  to  the  wet  masts,  lick  the  decks 
when  washed  with  salt  water,  and  crawl  to  the  coops 
to  share  the  supply  placed  there  for  the  fowls.  And 
even  then  scores  of  crushed  and  mangled  corpses  are 
often  death's  allowance  in  the  hold  of  a  slaver.  And 
the  end  is  not  yet — the  wretched  captive  is  sold  in 
Christian  lands,  to  wear  out  his  life  in  hopeless 
bondage,  in  weary,  wasting,  and  unceasing  toil. 

Are  these  things  now  so?  is  anxiously  asked. 
Yes,  the  slave-trade  is  prosecuted  with  greater  vigour 
and  to  a  greater  extent  than  at  any  previous  period. 
Where  fifty  thousand  slaves  were  annually  exported, 
there  are  now  two  hundred  thousand.  Brazil,  Cuba, 
and  other  of  the  West  India  Islands  are  deeply  in- 
volved in  it.  And  it  is  calculated  that  at  least  one 
third  of  all  the  negroes  taken  on  board  perish  before 
reaching  the  coast  of  America. 

The  laws  passed  against  it  by  the  different  Chris- 
tian governments,  and  the  measures  adopted  to 
enforce  their  authority,  by  increasing  the  chances  of 
detection,  have  multiplied  its  horrors,  without  in  any 
degree  diminishing  the  evil  itself. 

"  But,"  it  may  again  be  asked,  "  Can  nothing  be 
done  to  put  a  stop  to  this  traffic  in  human  misery  '? 


26  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Shall  Christians  look  tamely  on  and  suffer  such 
things  to  be  so,  in  these  later  days  of  the  world's 
civilization  ?" 

What  can  be  clone?     Truly,  it  is  one  of  the  great 
questions  of  the  clay,  involving  the  rights  and  happi- 
ness and  immortal  destinies  of  millions  of  human 
beings.     English  and  American   ships  of  war  have 
been  sent  to  cruise  all  along  the  African  waters,  with 
orders  to   seize   every  vessel   engaged  in  the  trade. 
While  they  may  have  accomplished  something,  it  is 
at  the  same  time  true,  that  they  cannot  be  at  the 
entrance  of  every  harbour,  cove,   and  river's  mouth. 
Slavers,   being    usually   fast-sailing  craft,   built    or 
altered  for  the  purpose,  and  "  possessing"  says  one, 
"  the   same  cunning  as  men-of-war-men,   watch  an 
armed  vessel  as  closely  as  they  can  possibly  watch 
him,  and  taking  advantage  of  every  movement,  no 
sooner  is  it  out  of  sight,  than  they  cram  their  human 
cargo  into  the  hold,  and  commit  their  safety  to  the 
agility  of  the  vessel,  which  is  almost  always  superior ; 
and  frequently  escape,  even  though  pursued."  There 
is  one  thing  more  to  try.     Wise  men  regard  it  as  the 
only  safe  thing  which  can  be   done,  and  which,   if 
done,  in  the  end  must  annihilate  the  slave-trade ;    a 
glorious  result,  worthy  of  patient  hope,   of  earnest 
endeavour,  of  slow,  unceasing,  unwearied  effort.    It  is 
to  plant  Christian  civilization,  to  lay  the  foundation 
of  Christian  institutions  all  along  the  coast  of  Africa, 


A    VOYAGE.  27 

"  like  sunlight  on  the  edge  of  a  dark  cloud,  giving 
promise  that  the  shadow  shall  pass  away."  Is  not 
this  the  "more  excellent  way  "?  If  school-houses,  and 
churches,  and  Bihle  truth  could  protect  her  shores, 
and  pour  their  united  blessings  upon  her  suffering 
and  benighted  people,  the  slave-trade  must  be  dried 
at  its  fountains,  giving  place  to  new  sources  of 
revenue,  and  new  spheres  of  activity,  drawn  from  her 
exhaustless  vegetation  and  her  luxuriant  forests.  Is 
there  anything  but  the  power  of  Christian  truth, 
oftentimes  slow  and  almost  unperceived  in  its  effects, 
yet  sure  and  powerful  in  the  end,  that  can  break  the 
bands  of  oppression,  and  let  the  oppressed  go  free ; 
that  will  cause  the  sighing  of  the  captive  to  cease, 
and  restore  to  him  those  unalienable  rights,  granted 
to  him  by  his  Maker,  of  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit 
of  happiness  ? 

What  then  seems  to  be  needed  in  Africa  is  Chris- 
tian institutions.  The  friends  of  colonization  saw 
this  years  ago.  At  any  rate  with  unwearied  zeal 
they  have  laboured  for  this  great  end.  England 
took  the  lead,  and  planted  Sierra  Leone ;  American 
colonization  followed  on,  and  the  course  of  this 
history  will  develope  its  measures  and  results. 

Where  are  our  travellers  ?  We  left  them  standing 
on  the  deck  of  the  ship  Mary,  rejoicing  to  behold 
Africa. 


CHAPTER  III. 

SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFRICA. 

"  To  heaven  the  Christian  negro  sent  his  sighs. 
In  morning  vows  and  evening  sacrifice." 

On  March  2w2d,  1818,  Sabbath  morning,  we  find 
Mills  and  Burgess  sailing  up  the  river  of  Sierra  Leone. 
What  was  the  first  distinct  object  which  met  their 
eager  gaze  in  dark,  degraded,  slave-making  Africa? 
A  slaver  sweeping  swiftly  by  them  ?  A  barracoon 
of  captives  ?  A  savage  war-dance  ?  Groves  of  the 
lordly  palm  dotting  the  coast  ?  No — none  of  these. 
It  was  a  beautiful  church,  with  its  sky-pointing  spire, 
built  on  an  elevated  position,  and  commanding  a 
view  of  the  neighbouring  country.  They  beheld,  as 
it  were,  "  Ethiopia  stretching  forth  hands  unto  God." 
It  gladdened  their  hearts,  and  gave  a  deep  and  pecu- 
liar interest  to  this,  their  first  Sabbath  in  Africa. 
"  There  are  signs  of  promise  for  poor  Africa,"  they 
exclaimed  gratefully.  "  She  shall  yet  shake  herself 
from  the  dust,  and  loose  the  bands  from  her  neck — 
she  has  sold  herself  for  nought — she  shall  be  re- 
deemed without  money." 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFRICA.  *>9 

They  landed  at  Freetown,  the  chief  place  in  the 
colony.  Sierra  Leone,  as  you  know,  is  an  English 
colony  of  free  blacks;  it  was  planted  in  1787; 
after  straggling  through  many  and  severe  difficulties, 
it  has  become  a  happy  and  flourishing  settlement. 
On  presenting  their  English  letters  the  next  day, 
they  found  the  Governor  absent,  but  the  other  officers 
and  the  principal  colonists  kindly  received  them,  and 
proffered  every  assistance  in  their  power. 

How  much  that  was  deeply  interesting,  had  our 
travellers  to  see  and  hear  in  this  new  country  !  As 
they  went  over  the  farms  and  visited  the  workshops, 
the  industry  and  thrift  of  the  colonists  surprised  and 
gratified  them,  while  their  examination  of  the  schools 
gave  them  the  greatest  delight.  They  were  first  in- 
troduced to  the  boys'  school,  where  two  hundred 
black  boys  were  as  orderly,  as  studious,  as  intelligent- 
looking,  as  two  hundred  white  boys  at  any  time. 
Classes  in  reading,  spelling,  and  arithmetic  were 
called  out,  and  Mr.  Mills  declared  he  never  heard 
better  recitations  in  any  school  in  the  United  States. 
The  girls'  department  numbered  one  hundred ;  they 
were  neatly  dressed,  and  the  same  obedience  and 
good  order  everywhere  prevailed.  Not  a  white  child 
was  among  them. 

One  evening,  they  were  invited  to  meet  several 
coloured  gentlemen  at  the  house  of  one  of  the 
colonists. 


30  AFPJCA  REDEEMED. 

"  We  should  like  to  hear  something  of  your  plans," 
said  Mr.  John  Kizell,  who  seemed  to  he  a  prominent 
man  among  them.  "  The  object  pleases  us  very 
much — perhaps  we  can  help  you — I  have  been  in 
America,  and  I  feel  interested  in  Christian  people 
there."  They  were  surprised  at  Mr.  KizelFs  decla- 
ration, and  asked  concerning  his  history.  He  then 
stated,  that  when  a  little  boy,  while  on  a  visit  to  an 
uncle  at  the  sea-coast,  a  gang  of  wretches  rushed 
upon  the  sleeping  villagers,  to  secure  a  cargo  of 
slaves.  The  natives  fought  for  their  lives  ;  many 
were  butchered,  many  fled ;  almost  all  his  uncle's 
family  were  killed,  while  a  number  of  the  youth 
were  seized,  chained,  and  hurried  off  to  a  slave-ship, 
bound  for  Charleston,  South  Carolina.  It  was  a 
dreadful  passage  over  the  Atlantic.  Torn  from  their 
country  and  homes,  under  the  lash  of  a  cruel  master, 
the  poor  captives  were  as  wretched  as  could  be.  One 
heart-broken  mother,  refusing  to  be  comforted,  pined 
away  in  sorrow.  The  savage  captain  ordered  her  to 
be  tied  to  the  mast  and  flogged  to  death,  as  a  warning 
to  others,  not  to  suffer  their  grief  to  prey  upon  their 
spirits  and  make  them  sick,  sick  negroes  command- 
ing no  price  in  the  market.  Soon  after  reaching 
America,  he  joined  the  English  army,  who  offered 
freedom  to  every  slave  who  would  desert  the  enemy's 
ranks.  In  1792,  he  found  his  way  back  to  Africa. 
The  story  deeply  affected  our  travellers.     They  made 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFRICA.  31 

known  their  plans,  asked  the  best  way  of  exploring 
the  coast  and  of  holding  intercourse  with  the  natives. 

"  Our  instructions  are  to  visit  the  Island  of  Sher- 
bro,"  they  went  on  to  say. 

"  It  is  where  I  live,"  said  Kizell ;  "  the  Governor 
sent  me  to  Sherbro  to  use  what  influence  I  could,  in 
breaking  up  the  slave-trade  in  those  regions.  Go 
with  me,  and  I  will  aid  you.1' 

It  proved  an  interesting  evening  to  Messrs.  Mills 
and  Burgess.  Before  the  company  parted,  they 
knelt  in  prayer,  to  thank  God  for  his  mercies,  and  to 
entreat  his  blessing  upon  benighted  Africa.  Kizell's 
appearance  made  a  most  favourable  impression  upon 
them ;  he  seemed  like  a  true-hearted,  Christian  man, 
having  the  best  welfare  of  his  country  deeply  at  heart. 
Being  anxious  to  secure  the  object  of  their  mission 
before  the  hot  weather  came  on,  a  week  at  Sierra 
Leone  was  all  that  could  be  spared.  On  Monday, 
the  30th  of  March,  behold  them  sailing  down  the 
river  in  a  small  sloop  of  ten  tons,  which  they  had 
hired  with  its  captain  and  crew  for  six  dollars  a-day, 
Kizell  and  one  other  negro  accompanied  them.  The 
weather  was  serene,  and  keeping  near  the  coast,  they 
had  fine  views  of  the  country.  By  the  first  of  April, 
Sherbro  Island  was  in  sight.  This  island,  distant 
about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  Sierra 
Leone,  is  about  twenty-five  miles  long  and  from 
fifteen  to  twenty  wide,  and  was  the  home  of  several 


32  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

chiefs.  As  the  sloop  hove  in  sight  of  Bendou,  King 
Saniona  sent  out  a  canoe,  to  ascertain  who  was  on 
board,  and  what  they  were  in  quest  of. 

"  Tell  the  king,  two  gentlemen  from  America  have 
come  to  see  him,"  said  Kizell  to  the  messenger.  At 
ten  o'clock,  they  went  on  shore,  conducted  by  Kizell, 
who  was  well  acquainted  with  all  the  chiefs  and  head 
men  far  and  near.  They  proceeded  directly  to  the 
palaver-house,  where  the  king  was  waiting  to  receive 
them.  A  palaver-house  is  an  African  town-hall, 
consisting  usually  of  a  roof  supported  by  posts. 
Kizell  sat  down  by  the  king,  while  the  white  men 
took  their  seats  in  front  of  him.  Samona  made 
quite  a  respectable  appearance  in  a  gown  and  panta- 
loons, hat  and  shoes.  Presently  another  chief  en- 
tered, who  was  visiting  Samona.  He  was  gaily 
attired  in  a  silver-laced  coat,  a  large  three-cornered 
hat,  and  a  long,  rich  mantle  about  his  neck,  with 
bare  legs  and  feet.  Kizell  then  introduced  the 
parties  to  each  other.  Their  majesties  declared  there 
could  be  no  business,  until  presents  had  been 
given  them.  Kizell  hastened  to  the  sloop  and 
brought  back  a  piece  of  cloth,  a  keg  of  powder,  and 
some  tobacco.  These  were  laid  at  their  feet,  but 
very  ungraciously  looked  upon  by  the  kings.  Their 
countenances  wore  a  sullen  and  dissatisfied  look. 
"  We  cannot  hold  a  palaver  without  rum,"  they  de- 
clared at  last.     This  was  a  mournful   sound  to  the 


Mr.    Kizell  introduced  by   Couber  to  bis   father  King  Sherbro. 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFEICA.  33 

agents,  although  the  temperance  movement  had  not 
yet  begun,  and  conscientious  scruples  regarding  the 
use  of  ardent  spirits,  either  as  an  article  of  traffic  or 
as  an  interchange  of  courtesies,  had  as  yet  scarcely 
existed. 

".We  will  not  hold  palaver  without  rum."  With 
this  flat  refusal  the  proceeding  seemed  about  to  end, 
or  rather  never  to  begin,  when  a  jar  was  reluctantly 
set  before  them. 

"  There  are  two  kings,  and  there  must  be  two 
jars ; "  nor  would  they  speak  farther  until  their  de- 
mands were  complied  with.  A  second  jar  was  pro- 
duced, and  the  palaver  went  on. 

Kizell  arose  and  said :  "  These  gentlemen  come 
from  America — from  Washington,  the  capital  of  the 
United  States.  Wise  and  good  men  want  to  help 
the  black  people,  who  wish  to  come  back  to  their 
country.  It  is  good — good  for  black  people,  both  in 
America  and  Africa.  If  you  will  sell  them  lands, 
people  will  come  and  till  the  soil,  and  buy  what  you 
want  to  sell,  and  sell  what  you  want  to  buy." 

"Have  they  got  a  book?  "  asked  Safah,  meaning 
their  instructions.  They  showed  him  the  papers, 
while  Kizell  read  aloud  that  article  which  directed 
them  to  go  to  Sherbro. 

"  We  be  younger  brothers  to  King  Sherbro — we 
wait  his  answer — we  thank  you  for  the  presents — if 
the  people  come,  they  must  bring  us  more,"  said 


34  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

the  kings.  One  wanted  a  large  hat  and  shoes,  the 
other  a  silver-headed  cane  and  a  black  horse-tail !  a 
black  horse-tail  being  a  badge  of  distinction  in  Africa. 
After  the  palaver  was  over,  rurn  was  handed  freely 
around  among  the  people,  which  soon  produced  a  noisy 
mirth  far  from  agreeable  to  the  ears  of  our  travellers, 
and  from  which  they  were  glad  to  escape  by  a  speedy 
return  to  the  sloop. 

The  next  day,  with  a  favourable  wind  and  tide, 
they  crossed  over  to  Yonie,  the  residence  of  King 
Sherbro.  Kizell  went  on  shore  to  give  notice  of  their 
coming.  On  the  beach  he  was  met  by  Prince  Kong 
Couber,  King  Sherbro  s  eldest  son,  who  shook  him 
by  the  hand  and  begged  him  to  visit  his  hut. 

"  Two  gentlemen  are  out  in  the  vessel  yonder," 
said  Kizell,  pointing  to  the  sloop.  "  They  come 
from  the  head  men  in  America — from  Washington." 

"  Hem  !  hem  !"  answered  the  prince. 

"  They  are  sent  to  King  Sherbro,  to  get  a  place 
for  some  black  people  who  are  free  in  that  land,  to 
come  and  sit  down  by  Sherbro,  if  he  will  give  them 
land,"  proceeded  Kizell. 

"  Hem  !  hem  !"  answered  the  prince. 

"  The  offer  is  made  to  Sherbro.  If  he  don't  want 
them,  they  find  some  other  spot — spots  plenty." 

-Hem!  hem!" 

"  If  they  come,  a  great  thing  to  Sherbro  and  his 
people ;  they  bring  schools  and  teach  the  children, 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFEICA.  35 

and  tell  the  big  ones  how  to  till  the  land.  We  die 
soon,  but  the  children  will  learn,  and  know  more 
than  their  fathers." 

"Hem  !  hem  !"  was  the  still  cautious  reply  of  the 
prince. 

"These  people  will  make  things  cheaper  and 
plentier — they  come  quiet — no  war — no  fight — if 
our  people  do  bad,  no  muskets  fired,  but  a  regular 
palaver — if  you  don't  believe  it,  send  some  head 
man  to  Washington,  and  see,"  persisted  Kizell. 

"  Hem  !  hem  !"  still  responded  the  non-committal 
prince,  who  maintained  his  reserve  until  after  dinner, 
when  he  said,  "  It's  good  what  you  talk — good,  we 
must  see  the  king,  I  am  only  a  boy  to  him.  The 
kings  and  head  men  own  the  country — they  must 
say — palaver  to-morrow,  all  come — then  answer." 

Kizell  went  back  to  the  vessel,  with  a  more 
favourable  message  than  might  have  at  first  been 
expected.  The  next  morning,  laden  with  presents, 
they  went  on  shore.  Couber  watched  them  from  his 
hut,  and  ran  down  to  the  beach  to  meet  them.  His 
manners  were  very  friendly,  and  immediately  he  led 
them  to  his  father's  hut,  where  the  old  king  sat, 
dressed  in  a  calico  robe,  a  three-cornered  hat  on  his 
head,  with  a  silver-headed  cane  in  his  left  hand,  and 
a  black  horse-tail  in  the  right.  Sherbro  received 
them  kindly,  and  motioned  to  them  to  sit  down 
under  the  cooling  shade  of  a  spreading  tree.     Some 


36  AFRICA  REEEEMED. 

eighty  head  men  arranged  themselves  in  a  circle 
around  their  chief,  while  scores  of  women  and  chil- 
dren stood  afar  off,  peeping  at  the  white  strangers 
with  wonder  and  curiosity.  Kizell  then  made  known 
their  object  in  coming  to  Africa.  "  See,"  added  he, 
' '  no  arms  in  their  hands,  wish  no  war — they  bring 
school — they  bring  the  book  of  God,  and  when  you 
understand  it,  it  will  make  you  more  happy  while 
you  live,  more  happy  when  you  die.  What  word  will 
King  Sherbro  send  back  to  America  ?" 

Prince  Couber  answered  for  his  father,  saying, 
"  All  you  say  is  well,  very  well ;  but  no  answer  till 
Safah  and  Samona  come." 

Many  questions  were  asked,  and  no  small  degree 
of  interest  was  manifested  in  their  plans.  The 
palaver  lasted  some  hours,  and  ended  with  a  pleasing 
impression  on  both  sides. 

The  next  day  was  the  Sabbath.  No  church-bell 
echoed  along  the  shore,  no  house  of  prayer  attracted 
the  pious  heart,  no  morning  and  evening  incense  was 
offered  to  the  Living  God  upon  this  pagan  soil.  Our 
travellers  sorrowed  for  the  darkness  and  degradation 
of  Africa ;  they  longed  to  preach  to  the  poor  natives 
the  gospel  of  peace,  to  offer  them  the  bread  of  life, 
and  direct  their  steps  to  the  wells  of  salvation. 
In  company  with  Kizell,  they  went  to  Prince  Cou- 
ber's  hut. 

"  This  is   called  the    Sabbath   day  in  Christian 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFEICA.  37 

lands,"  said  Kizell,  "  when  the  great  God's  book  is 
read  to  all  the  people." 

u  Our  people  be  glad  to  hear  the  great  God's 
book,  the  best  book  it  is — God's  palaver  is  the  old 
and  good  palaver,"  answered  Couber  seriously. 

Then  Mr.  Mills  in  plain  and  simple  language 
narrated  to  him  the  story  of  creation  and  of  redemp- 
tion ;  he  dwelt  upon  the  goodness  of  God  in  sending 
his  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ  into  the  world  to 
become  the  Friend  and  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  how 
worthy  was  he  of  our  love  and  worship,  and  he  alone 
above  all  other  gocls. 

'"Yes,"  added  Kizell,  "devils,  that  Africans 
worship,  tell  lies.  Leopards  come  down  and  drive 
us  away,  alligator  catches  a  boy  and  eats  him — 
negroes  say,  witch  kill  him,  then  we  go  and  sell  a 
whole  family  to  be  slaves,  to  please  witch.  This  is 
all  devil's  lies." 

Couber  looked  very  sober,  and  listened  with  great 
attention,  "  Good  words — good  words — good  for  me 
and  my  people."  Poor  Couber  never  heard  words 
like  those  which  now  fell  upon  his  ear.  He  felt  that 
these  white  men  were  far  different  people  from  the 
slave-dealers,  and  he  longed  for  the  blessings  which 
they  could  bring  into  his  dark  land. 

Messengers  had  been  despatched  to  the  other 
chiefs,  summoning  them  to  a  general  palaver.  It 
was  several  days  before  Safah  and  Samona  arrived. 


88  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

One  morning,  they  were  awakened  by  fearful 
bowlings  from  the  land. 

"  Somebody  in  the  king's  family  is  dead,"  said 
Kizell,  in  answer  to  their  anxious  inquiries ;  "  this 
is  African  custom."  It  proved  to  be  one  of  Couber's 
wives.  Mr.  Burgess  immediately  went  on  shore  to 
offer  him  their  sympathy  and  consolation. 

"May  the  Lord  bless  you,"  said  the  afflicted,  but 
grateful  prince  ;  "  as  you  come  to  this  country  with 
good  wishes,  may  you  find  good  things." 

Meanwhile  the  kings  arrived,  but  the  palaver 
could  not  go  on  until  after  the  burial  of  the  princess. 
Kizell  spent  most  of  his  time  with  the  chiefs,  urging 
the  importance  of  selling  their  land  to  these  distant 
brethren,  and  expatiating  upon  the  advantages  which 
would  flow  to  them  from  their  re-settlement  in 
Africa.  "  Yes,"  he  often  used  to  declare,  "  Africa 
is  the  land  of  the  blacks,  and  to  Africa  they  must 
and  will  come.  As  to  the  land,  it  belongs  as  much 
to  the  Africans  abroad  as  to  those  in  the  country. 
The  good  people  in  America  have  only  to  help  them 
out,  and  get  them  fairly  started,  then  they  will  find 
no  difficulty  in  helping  themselves." 

At  last,  on  Friday,  at  ten  o'clock,  word  was  sent  to 
the  sloop,  that  the  kings  were  in  readiness  for  busi- 
ness. They  hastened  on  shore,  and  were  soon  assem- 
bled under  the  friendly  shade  of  the  spreading  palm. 
There  sat  old  Sherbro,  grave  and  dignified,  Safah  on 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFEICA.  39 

one  side  and  Samona  on  the  other,  each  holding  in 
the  right  hand  a  black  horse-tail,  the  insignia  of 
royalty.  Couber  squatted  on  a  mat  before  his  father. 
Kizell  and  the  missionaries  sat  opposite,  facing  the 
kings. 

"  We  are  come,"  said  Kizell,  breaking  the  silence. 

"  We  see  you,"  replied  Couber,  who  seemed  to  be 
spokesman ;  "we  are  glad — we  love  you — we  do 
not  hate  you — we  love  your  country — we  are  friends 
— we  love  peace — war  is  not  good — but  when  you 
did  come  from  the  head  men  of  your  country  to 
Sherbro,  where  is  the  letter  you  did  bring  to 
Sherbro  ?  " 

The  missionaries  told  him,  their  instructions  were 
to  visit  the  island  of  Sherbro  and  consult  with  the 
kings,  but  as  King  Sherbro  in  particular  was 
unknown,  no  letter  was  directed  to  him. 

The  palaver  lasted  many  hours.  Mr.  Mills  at 
last  asked,  "What  answer  shall  we  carry  back  to  our 
people?     Will  King  Sherbro  receive  his  children?" 

"  Yes,"  answered  the  king,  "  yes — we  cannot 
hate  them— we  receive  them." 

"  Are  the  presents  you  gave  us  to  pay  for  the 
land  ?  "  asked  Safah. 

"No,  we  will  pay  you  a  fair  price  for  your  land," 
replied  Mills  ;  "  these  are  gifts." 

A  general  agreement  was  then  entered  into,  the 


40  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

definite  terms  of  which  were  to  be  settled  upon  the 
arrival  of  the  colonists.  It  was  written  in  two 
hooks,  one  for  King  Sherbro  and  the  other  for  Mr. 
Mills.  Xo  one  seemed  more  deeply  interested  in 
these  proceedings  than  Couber  :  he  keenly  felt  the 
degradation  and  ignorance  of  his  countrymen,  and 
had  long  in  secret  desired  that  something  might 
happen  to  bless  and  benefit  his  poor,  unhappy 
country.  He  wanted  to  send  two  of  his  sons  to 
America  for  an  education;  and  whenever  he  looked 
at  Kizell,  he  wished  that  he  too  had  been  made  a 
captive,  if  through  slavery  he  could  but  learn  the 
manners,  customs,  and  knowledge  of  other  nations. 
Alas  !  few  slaves  have  found  the  happy  redemption 
which  John  Kizell  had. 

At  parting  with  Couber  on  the  beach,  he  gave 
the  missionaries  two  mats  for  their  fathers,  and  a 
goat  for  their  men.  "  May  God  bless  you,  and  give 
you  a  good  voyage  to  your  country  ! "  he  exclaimed, 
grasping  them  by  the  hand  with  deep  emotion. 
When  the  vessel  weighed  anchor,  he  sank  down 
beneath  an  orange  tree,  watching  her,  with  anxious 
and  sorrowful  eyes,  as  she  bore  away  over  the  dark 
blue  waters.  It  was  the  last  they  ever  saw  of  poor 
Couber. 

After  making  some  further  examination  of  the 
coast,  they  returned  to  Sierra  Leone,  highly  gratified 
with  the  result  of  their  survey. 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFRICA.  41 

On  the  22d  of  May,  they  went  on  board  the  brig 
"  Success,"  and  set  sail  for  the  United  States. 

"  We  may  now,"  said  Mills  to  his  friend,  as  they 
stood  upon  the  quarter-deck,  taking  their  last,  long 
look  at  poor,  unhappy  Africa,  "  we  may  now  be 
thankful  to  God,  and  congratulate  each  other  that 
the  dangers  and  labours  of  our  mission  are  over ; 
the  prospects  are  fair,  that  we  shall  once  more 
return  to  our  dear  native  land,  and  see  the  faces  of 
our  beloved  parents  and  friends." 

Never  did  the  privileges  of  a  Christian  land,  and 
the  blessings,  of  a  Christian  home,  seem  so  inexpres- 
sibly dear  to  them,  as  they  did  then,  in  contrast  with 
the  vacant  and  dreary  ignorance  of  native  life  in  a 
heathen  land. 

Our  travellers  are  on  an  untroubled  sea,  and 
prosperous  winds  are  bearing  them  onward,  "but 
one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left;"  one  was 
nearing  his  last  home ;  one  was  rapidly  drifting  to 
the  Port  of  Peace.  Just  thirty  days  after  leaving 
Sierra  Leone,  Mr.  Mills  was  no  more.  He  had 
taken  a  severe  cold,  and  every  remedy  was  fruitless : 
death  was  approaching,  but  it  had  no  terrors  for 
him.  A  heavenly  smile  rested  on  his  face,  and  his 
hands  were  clasped  in  prayer,  when  the  sainted 
spirit  returned  to  God  who  gave  it.  The  next 
evening  his  body  was  committed  to  the  great  deep, 
and  Mr.  Burgess  was  left  sorrowing  and  alone. 


40  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

definite  terms  of  which  were  to  be  settled  upon  the 
arrival  of  the  colonists.  It  was  written  in  two 
hooks,  one  for  King  Sherbro  and  the  other  for  Mr. 
Mills.  No  one  seemed  more  deeply  interested  in 
these  proceedings  than  Couber :  he  keenly  felt  the 
degradation  and  ignorance  of  his  countrymen,  and 
had  long  in  secret  desired  that  something  might 
happen  to  bless  and  benefit  his  poor,  unhappy 
country.  He  wanted  to  send  two  of  his  sons  to 
America  for  an  education ;  and  whenever  he  looked 
at  Kizell,  he  wished  that  he  too  had  been  made  a 
captive,  if  through  slavery  he  could  but  leam  the 
manners,  customs,  and  knowledge  of  other  nations. 
Alas  !  few  slaves  have  found  the  happy  redemption 
which  John  Kizell  had. 

At  parting  with  Couber  on  the  beach,  he  gave 
the  missionaries  two  mats  for  their  fathers,  and  a 
goat  for  their  men.  "  May  God  bless  you,  and  give 
you  a  good  voyage  to  your  country  ! "  he  exclaimed, 
grasping  them  by  the  hand  with  deep  emotion. 
When  the  vessel  weighed  anchor,  he  sank  down 
beneath  an  orange  tree,  watching  her,  with  anxious 
and  sorrowful  eyes,  as  she  bore  away  over  the  dark 
blue  waters.  It  was  the  last  they  ever  saw  of  poor 
Couber. 

After  making  some  further  examination  of  the 
coast,  they  returned  to  Sierra  Leone,  highly  gratified 
with  the  result  of  their  survey. 


SIGHT-SEEING  IN  AFRICA.  41 

On  the  22d  of  May,  they  went  on  board  the  brig 
"  Success,"  and  set  sail  for  the  United  States. 

"  We  may  now,"  said  Mills  to  his  friend,  as  they 
stood  upon  the  quarter-deck,  taking  their  last,  long 
look  at  poor,  unhappy  Africa,  "  we  may  nowT  be 
thankful  to  God,  and  congratulate  each  other  that 
the  dangers  and  labours  of  our  mission  are  over ; 
the  prospects  are  fair,  that  we  shall  once  more 
return  to  our  dear  native  land,  and  see  the  faces  of 
our  beloved  parents  and  friends." 

Never  did  the  privileges  of  a  Christian  land,  and 
the  blessings,  of  a  Christian  home,  seem  so  inexpres- 
sibly dear  to  them,  as  they  did  then,  in  contrast  with 
the  vacant  and  dreary  ignorance  of  native  life  in  a 
heathen  land. 

Our  travellers  are  on  an  untroubled  sea,  and 
prosperous  winds  are  bearing  them  onward,  "but 
one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left;"  one  was 
nearing  his  last  home ;  one  was  rapidly  drifting  to 
the  Port  of  Peace.  Just  thirty  days  after  leaving 
Sierra  Leone,  Mr.  Mills  was  no  more.  He  had 
taken  a  severe  cold,  and  every  remedy  was  fruitless : 
death  was  approaching,  but  it  had  no  terrors  for 
him.  A  heavenly  smile  rested  on  his  face,  and  his 
hands  were  clasped  in  prayer,  when  the  sainted 
spirit  returned  to  God  who  gave  it.  The  next 
evening  his  body  was  committed  to  the  great  deep, 
and  Mr.  Burgess  was  left  sorrowing  and  alone. 


42  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Thus  fell  by  the  way  the  first  workman  in  the 
New  Republic.  Brave,  great-hearted,  holy  man,  we 
honour  thy  work,  and  thy  memory  is  precious ! 
Farewell ! 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    NIGHT    OE   TOIL. 

"  Confidence  is  conqueror  of  men ;   victorious  both  over 

them  and  in  them  ; 
The  iron  will  of  one  stout  heart  shall  make  a  thousand 

quail." — Tupper. 

The  news  of  Mr.  Burgess's  return  spread  joy  and 
sorrow  through  the  country;  joy  to  behold  his  face 
again,  and  for  the  good  report  which  he  made  of  the 
land ;  sorrow  that  he  came  alone,  and  that  one  so 
eminently  fitted  for  usefulness  in  the  church  and  the 
world  had  been  cut  down  in  the  prime  of  his  life ;  but 
he  had  entered  into  that  rest  which  remaineth  for  the 
people  of  God,  and  his  friends  wept  not  as  those  with- 
out hope.  The  favourable  account  which  Mr.  Bur 
gess  gave  of  their  mission  to  the  African  coast,  greatly 
encouraged  the  friends  of  colonization,  and  added 
many  new  allies  to  its  ranks.  They  now  prepared  for 
definite  action,  which  was  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a 
colony. 

Perhaps  on  no  mind  did  their  journal  make  a 
deeper  impression,  or  awaken  a  more  stirring  interest 
than  on  Lott  Cary's,  and  on  that  of  his  friend  Colin 


44  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Teague.  Colin  lived  in  Richmond,  and  had  raised 
1300  dollars  for  the  redemption  of  himself,  a  son  and 
a  daughter.  Their  purposes  were  soon  formed.  X 
desire  to  go  and  carry  the  blessed  gospel  to  that  be- 
nighted region  "  was  like  fire  in  their  bones."  Lotts 
friends  gathered  around  him,  beseeching  him  to  pause 
and  consider.  How  could  he  leave  his  snug  farm,  his 
handsome  salary,  and  his  thousand  opportunities  for 
usefulness,  to  encounter  the  dangers  of  an  African 
climate,  and  risk  every  thing  to  plant  a  colony  on  a 
distant  shore  ?  "  I  am  an  African/'  he  replied  firmly, 
"  and  in  this  country,  however  meritorious  my  conduct 
and  respectable  in  my  character,  I  cannot  receive  the 
credit  due  to  either.  I  wish  to  go  to  a  country  where 
I  shall  be  estimated  by  my  merits,  not  by  my  com- 
plexion ;  and  I  feel  bound  to  labour  for  my  suffering 
race." 

When  his  employers  learned  his  decision,  they 
raised  his  salary  to  a  thousand  dollars  ;  but  dollars 
could  not  buy  him  off,  or  tempt  him  from  his  pur- 
pose. 

"  I  long  to  preach  to  the  poor  Africans  the  way  of 
salvation,"  he  exclaimed.  "I  do  not  know  what  may 
befall  me — whether  I  may  find  a  grave  in  the  ocean, 
or  among  savage  men,  or  more  savage  wild  beasts ; 
nor  am  I  anxious  what  may  become  of  me.  I  know 
my  duty,  and  I  am  resolved  to  do  it."  Though  he 
was  not  able  to  Qfo  out  with' the  first  colonists,  he 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  45 

soon  followed,  to  face  their  foes  and  to  share  their 
toils. 

Congress,  in  1819,  passed  an  act  authorising  the 
President  to  send  out  an  agency  to  Africa,  for  the 
purpose  of  providing  an  asylum  for  recaptured 
negroes.  The  Society  determined  to  plant  their 
colony  beside  the  government  station. 

"  And  now,  who  are  willing  to  move  in  this  enter- 
prise ?  Who  is  ready  to  meet  the  hardships  which  the 
first  settlers  on  any  soil  must  encounter?" 

There  was  no  lack  of  labourers.  A  large  number 
of  blacks  offered  to  go. 

u  We  will  go  back  to  the  land  of  our  fathers,"  said 
they. 

"We  go  to  be  men — no  longer  to  be  crushed 
by  superiority,  by  scorn,  by  poverty." 

"  We  go  to  show  what  the  black  man  is  capable  of 
being — reasonable,  industrious,  persevering,  reflect- 
ing freemen." 

«  We  go  to  plant  Bible  institutions  and  Christian 
civilization  on  the  soil  of  Africa. " 

"  We  shall  be  exiles,  self-banished  from  our  homes, 
to  starve,  to  die,  on  foreign  shores,"  said  others,  more 
timid  and  less  hopeful  for  the  future.  Thinking,  in- 
telligent Africans  were  decidedly  in  favour  of  the 
movement.  Thirty  families,  numbering  eighty-nine 
persons,  were  accepted  by  the  Society,  and  began  to 
prepare  for  their  departure.      The  government  con- 


46  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

eluded  to  send  out  two  vessels,  one  a  sloop-of-war  and 
the  other  a  merchantman,  to  cany  out  workmen  and 
tools  necessary  for  beginning  a  settlement.  Emigrants 
were  offered  a  passage  on  board  the  Elizabeth.    Rev. 
Samuel  Bacon  and  Mr.  John  P.  Bankson  were  the 
government  agents.  Dr.  Samuel  Crozer  acted  for  the 
Colonization  Society.    The  whole  party  assembled  at 
New  York,  and  Monday,  21st  of  January,  1820,  was 
the  day  of  embarkation.    Religious  services  were  per- 
formed in  the  African  church  of  that  city,  where  a 
large  number   assembled  at  an  early  hour.      The 
greatest   interest  was  awakened ;  indeed,  amid  the 
sadness  of  the  departing,  the  opposition  of  the  fearful, 
the  anticipation  of  untried  dangers,  the  difficulties 
consequent  upon  every  new  movement,  the  excite- 
ment increased  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  emigrants 
went  secretly  on  board,  before  the  multitude  could 
assemble  on  the  wharfs  to  witness  their  embarkation. 
The  Elizabeth  then  weighed  anchor  and  fell  down 
the  stream.     An  intense  cold  came  on  in  the  night, 
and  she  became  ice-bound  in  the  harbour,  nor  was  she 
released  from  her  fetters  for  more  than  a  week.    The 
farewell  spoken,  it  was  painful  for  the  emigrants  to 
linger  within  sight  of  those  shores  which  they  never 
again  expected  to  behold,  and  almost  within  sound  of 
those  scenes,  now  doubly  dear  to  their  hearts,  in  which 
they  could  never  again  mingle.     Ships  in  those  clays 
had  fewer   comforts  than   ships   in  our   time,  and 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  47 

already  the  passengers  began  to  have  a  foretaste  of 
those  inconveniences  and  sufferings  which  every  one 
must  expect  to  experience  in  reaching  and  rearing 
new  and  distant  homes.  Some  grew  faint-hearted, 
and  murmured,  "  Wherefore  are  we  brought  here, 
with  our  wives  and  our  little  ones,  to  be  a  prey  ?" 
Those  who  had  counted  the  cost,  and  made  up  their 
minds  to  look  every  difficulty  in  the  face  with  a  steady 
eye  and  a  brave  heart,  stood  firm  and  unmoved,  re- 
joicing even  that  they  were  accounted  worthy  to  be 
pioneers  in  an  enterprise,  whose  far-off  yet  glorious 
results  already  seem  to  gild  the  dark  mountain-tops 
of  Africa  with  the  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness. 

Once  fairly  at  sea,  after  a  short  passage,  the  Eliza- 
beth entered  the  harbour  of  Sierra  Leone.  The 
Governor  received  them  cordially,  and  offered  to  ex- 
pedite their  plans  by  all  the  means  in  his  power. 
What  was  first  to  be  done  ?  Must  they  wait  for  the 
sloop-of-war,  which  had  not  yet  arrived  ?  Could  the 
Elizabeth  navigate  the  Sherbro  waters  ?  It  was  feared 
not,  and  John  Kizell  was  not  there  to  benefit  them 
by  his  advice.  Mr.  Bacon  bought  a  small  schooner, 
and  putting  some  of  the  cargo  on  board,  both  vessels 
sailed  towards  Sherbro  Sound,  about  120  miles  dis- 
tant. Arriving  at  the  Sound,  the  waters  were  found 
to  be  too  shoal  for  the  Elizabeth,  and  she  cast  anchor 
several  miles  from  the  shore. 


48  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

The  colonists  now  needed  the  presence  of  Kizell ; 
they  longed  to  behold  one  whose  prudent  and  urgent 
counsels  had  been  of  such  essential  service  to  the  ex- 
ploring agents,  and  whose  warm  heart  they  were  as- 
sured would  welcome  them  with  a  brother's  love. 

"  John  Kizell  we  must  find,"  said  Mr.  Bacon,  and 
he  determined  to  explore  the  country  in  quest  of  his 
settlement.  Mr.  Bacon  coasted  along  the  shore,  oc- 
casionally landing  and  making  inquiries  of  the  na- 
tives, until  he  came  off  Campelar,  the  place  of  his 
residence.  Here  he  landed  and  made  himself  known. 
Kizell  wept  for  joy  at  beholding  him. 

"  I  am  glad  you  have  come — glad  to  see  your 
people  ! "  he  exclaimed,  and  thanked  God  for  the 
good  day.  He  begged  them  to  make  no  delay  in  land- 
ing, promising  speedily  to  provide  both  huts  and 
food.  That  evening  the  voice  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving ascended  from  this  little  band  of  African  Chris- 
tians in  the  palm-groves  of  their  father-land,  with  a 
savour  sweeter  than  spices,  and  a  token  of  the  plant- 
ing of  that  tree  whose  leaves  shall  be  for  the  healing 
of  the  nations.  Their  naked  countrymen,  wild,  dirty, 
and  savage,  came  lounging  through  the  thickets,  with 
curiosity  and  wonder,  trying  to  hold  intercourse  with 
them  through  the  medium  of  the  few  English  words 
already  familiar  to  their  ear.  Alas !  those  English 
words  were  little  more  than  oaths  and  curses,  learned 
from  the  slaver's  crew.     How  striking  was  the  con- 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  49 

trast  between  them  and  the  new  comers,  clean,  or- 
derly, well  dressed,  sober,  Christian  men  and  women. 
It  was  a  happy  evening.  Kizell's  friendliness  gave 
favourable  indications  for  the  future  ;  Mr.  Bacon  was 
full  of  hope ;  the  emigrants  began  to  conclude  that- 
after  all,  it  was  not  so  bad  to  live  in  Africa,  with 
plenty  of  goats  and  fish  for  food,  and  with  an  abun- 
dance of  oranges,  cocoas,  and  every  delicious  fruit 
hanging  over  their  heads. 

Meanwhile,  the  sloop-of-war  Cyane  reached  Sierra 
Leone,  and  a  messenger  was  sent  to  Mr.  Bacon,  in- 
forming him  of  its  arrival.  He  immediately  returned 
to  Sierra  Leone,  where  it  was  agreed  that  some  of 
the  Cyane 's  crew  should  man  the  Augusta,  the  little 
sloop  which  Mr.  Bacon  had  bought,  and  return  with 
him  to  visit  Sherbro.  Lieutenant  Townsend  took 
the  command.  On  reaching  the  island,  the  men  were 
busily  employed  in  removing  the  stores  from  the 
vessels  to  the  shore,  while  Mr.  Bacon  visited  the 
chiefs,  to  know  what  land  they  were  willing  to  sell, 
and  on  what  terms  it  could  be  bought.  He  was 
coolly  received  by  the  Sherbro  kings.  On  urging 
the  claims  of  their  agreement  made  with  the  former 
agents,  they  sometimes  promised  an  immediate  atten- 
tion to  the  business,  sometimes  refused  to  sell  with- 
out consulting  others  in  the  interior,  and  sometimes 
declared  they  did  not  want  to  hold  palaver  with  him 
at  all. 


5 '2  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Bacon  lived,  the  seeming  misunderstanding  might 
have  been  cleared  up,  and  the  cloud  which  now  rests 
upon  his  conduct  might  have  passed  away.   Mr.  Bacon 
sank  beneath  his  multiplied  cares,  Dr.  Crozer  died, 
Mr.  Bankson  soon  followed,  Lieutenant  Townsend 
and  all  the  boat's  crew  sleep  their  last  sleep  on  the 
African  coast.     Contending  with  toils  and  discourage, 
ments  of  no  ordinary  kind ;  grappling  with  a  fever 
of  no  common  malignancy,  these  brave  men  stood  at 
their  posts  of  duty,  cheering  each  other  on,  encourag- 
ing the  dismayed,  sympathizing  with  the  suffering, 
nursing  the  sick,  until  they  sank  to  rise  no  more. 
Twenty  emigrants  shared  the  same  fate.    What  a  pall 
hung  upon   the  prospects  of  the  feeble   remnant ! 
Their  leaders  fallen ;  without  a  guide  or  counsel  or 
protection,  they  were  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd 
in  the  howling  wilderness ;   but  He   "  who  led  his 
people  like  a  flock  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron/' 
gave  power  "  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  had  no 
might  he  increased  strength."     Before  his  death,  Dr. 
Crozer  committed  his  agency  into  the  hands  of  one  of 
the  leading  emigrants,  Eev.  Daniel  Coker,  a  coloured 
clergyman  of  the  Episcopal  Church.     Finding  him- 
self at  the  head  of  affairs  in  a  most  perilous  crisis, 
and  feeling  the  need  of  advice,  he  deterarined  upon 
going  to  Sierra  Leone,  as  soon  as  the  condition  of  the 
sick  would  allow.     At  that  hour,  with  the  sick,  the 
dving,  and  the  dead  about  him,  entrusted  with  new 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  53 

responsibilities  connected  with  the  welfare  of  a  large 
body  of  people  and  the  preservation  of  a  large  amount 
of  property,  with  no  one  to  counsel  or  befriend  him, 
how  does  this  new  workman  on  the  foundations  of  the 
new  republic  stand  out  to  light?  Does  he  flag,  or 
flinch,  or  fear  ?  Alone  he  stands,  with  a  dark  present 
and  a  darker  future ;  but  does  he  draw  fearfully  and 
timidly  back  ?  His  language,  on  that  night  of  toil,  is 
truly  sublime. 

"  We  have  met  with  trials  ;  we  are  but  a  handful ; 
our  provisions  are  running  low ;  we  are  in  a  strange 
and  heathen  land ;  we  have  not  heard  from  America, 
and  know  not  whether  more  provisions  or  people  will 
be  sent  out;  yet,  thank  the  Lord,  my  confidence  is 
strong  in  the  veracity  of  his  promises.  Tell  my 
brethren  to  come — fear  not — this  land  is  good  ;  it 
only  wants  men  to  possess  it.  I  have  opened  a  little 
Sabbath  school  for  native  children.  O,  it  would  do 
your  hearts  good  to  see  the  little  naked  sons  of  Africa 
around  me.  Tell  the  coloured  people  to  come  up  to 
the  help  of  the  Lord.  Let  nothing  discourage  the 
Society  or  the  coloured  people."  Herein  do  we  not 
read  the  words  of  a  stout-hearted  Christian  hero? 
He  daunted  !  he  fearful !  he  dismayed  !  No  !  The 
work  must  be  done,  though  hundreds  fall  in  the  out- 
set. He  sees  that  Africa  must  be  Christianized  and 
civilized,  and  stands  boldly  relying  upon  the  promises 


54  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

of  God  that  it  will  be  done.  "  Come  up  to  the  lielp 
of  the  Lord ;  let  nothing  discourage  the  Society  or  the 
coloured  people." 

When  the  news  of  these  disasters  reached  this 
country,  the  faint-hearted  exclaimed,  "  Our  effort 
must  he  abandoned — no  one  can  live  on  the  African 
coast.  We  cannot  row  against  wind  and  tide  ;  it 
costs  too  great  a  sacrifice."  Abandon  it !  No  true- 
hearted  man  for  a  moment  thought  of  abandoning  it. 
Was  North  Carolina  abandoned  because  the  whole 
colony  at  Roanoke  was  swept  from  existence  ?  Was 
Jamestown  abandoned,  when  one-half  of  her  people 
perished  before  autumn  ?  Did  the  Pilgrims  abandon 
Plymouth  in  that  distressing  season,  when  they  were 
but  seven  men  able  to  render  assistance,  and  seven 
kernels  of  parched  corn  for  each  one's  daily  ration  ? 
Did  the  border  settlers  abandon  their  villages  because 
the  forest  was  skirted  by  a  savage  foe  ? 

The  baptism  of  suffering  is  sprinkled  upon  every 
lofty  enterprise,  and  he  is  unworthy  to  engage  in  it, 
who  timidly  shrinks  from  bearing  his  part ! 

As  the  shadows  of  disease  and  discouragement  be- 
gan to  pass  away,  it  was  found  that  only  twenty  out 
of  the  eighty-eight  emigrants  died  of  fever ;  the  re- 
mainder recovered  without  the  aid  even  of  medicine 
or  nursing.  The  African  climate  still  proves  danger- 
ous to  the  white  man,  though  it  seems  well  adapted 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  55 

to  the  constitution  of  the  negro.     After  the  first  ac 
climating  sickness,  he  enjoys  good  health,  with  the 
prospect  of  long  life. 

Brave  spirits  were  soon  ready  to  start  and  occupy 
the  posts  of  the  fallen  leaders.  Rev.  E.  Bacon,  a 
brother  of  the  deceased,  and  Mr.  Winn,  were  ap- 
pointed government  agents ;  Rev.  Joseph  Andrus  and 
Mr.  Wiltberger,  agents  for  the  Society.  With  all 
possible  dispatch  they  were  fitted  out,  and  reached 
Sierra  Leone  in  safety,  where  they  found  Mr.  Coker 
anxiously  awaiting  an  arrival  from  America. 

After  much  inquiry  and  consultation,  it  was  con- 
cluded to  abandon  the  Sherbro  country,  and  seek  a 
more  healthy  location.  The  Governor  of  Sierra 
Leone  kindly  offered  the  emigrants  a  home  at 
Fourra  Bay,  within  the  limits  of  the  English  colony, 
until  a  better  and  more  permanent  situation  could 
be  provided  for  them.  For  this  purpose,  a  new 
exploration  of  the  coast  was  necessary,  and  Messrs. 
Andrus  and  Bacon  prepared  for  the  voyage.  Coasting 
along  for  some  300  miles  in  a  south-easterly  direction, 
they  hove  in  sight  of  a  high  bluff  of  land,  whose 
healthy  position  and  safe  anchorage  had  long  made 
it  one  of  the  most  commanding  and  desirable  points 
on  the  coast.  It  was  called  Cape  Mesurado.  For 
a  hundred  years,  the  principal  powers  of  Europe 
had  in  vain  tried  to  gain  possession  of  it.  France 
and  England  had  made  repeated  offers  to  the  head 


•56  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

chiefs  occupying  the  territory,  who  steadily  and 
invariably  refused  to  part  with  even  an  acre.  Indeed 
the  kings  were  known  to  be  extremely  hostile  to 
the  whites,  always  rejecting  their  most  advantageous 
proposals.  The  schooner  cast  anchor,  and  Mr. 
Andrus  went  on  shore  to  look  about.  King  Peter 
held  dominion  over  the  land ;  a  warlike  and  power- 
ful prince,  deeply  engaged  in  the  slave-trade.  A 
head  man  came  forward,  and  begged  to  know  the 
object  of  his  visit.  An  interview  with  the  king  was 
requested,  and  messengers  were  immediately  sent  to 
his  majesty,  who  peremptorily  declined  seeing  the 
strangers.  A  present  was  despatched  to  conciliate 
him,  but  his  majesty  was  not  to  be  conciliated;  the 
present  was  returned.  x\fter  so  unpromisiug  a  be- 
ginning, all  further  attempts  towards  a  negociation 
seemed  hopeless,  and  the  agents  reluctantly  went 
back  to  their  boat.  On  their  way,  they  beheld  large 
droves  of  Africans,  penned  like  wild  beasts,  and  a 
French  schooner  lying  off,  waiting  an  opportunity  of 
running  in  and  carrying  away  a  cargo  of  slaves. 
"Weighing  anchor,  they  proceeded  60  miles  along 
the  coast,  when  the  schooner  became  becalmed  at 
the  mouth  of  a  river,  at  a  place  called  the  Great 
Bassa.  Ten  or  fifteen  canoes  put  off  from  the 
shore,  filled  with  natives,  bringing  out  a  plentiful 
supply  of  yams,  plantains,  pine-apples,  palm  oil, 
and  palm  wine.      Fowls  were  sold  for  one  leaf  of 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  57 

tobacco,  and  a  hundred  oysters  for  half  a  pound. 
A  friendly  invitation  to  come  on  shore  was  given, 
which  the  agents  readily  accepted,  and  a  jolly  old 
Krooman,  by  the  name  of  Bottle  Beer,  offered  to 
conduct  them  around  the  country.  Coming  to  the 
left  bank  of  the  Grand  Bassa  river,  and  no  canoe 
being  in  sight,  they  were  at  a  loss  to  know  how  to 
reach  the  villages  on  the  opposite  side. 

"  Me  carry  you  over,"  proposed  Bottle  Beer ; 
"  hoist  your  legs  over  my  shoulders."  Thus  re- 
lieved of  their  perplexities,  Mr.  Andrus  was  soon 
safely  landed  on  the  other  side. 

"  I  am  so  fat,  Bottle  Beer,  you  cannot  carry  me," 
said  Mr.  Bacon. 

"Me  strong;  me  carry  you,  Daddy,"  persisted 
the  accommodating  Bottle  Beer,  and  Mr.  Bacon  was 
speedily  mounted.  They  proceeded  to  Bottle  Beer's 
town,  where  they  were  kindly  welcomed  by  the 
natives,  who  flocked  around  them  with  curiosity 
and  interest.  Several  other  villages  were  visited, 
and  the  same  friendly  disposition  was  everywhere 
manifested. 

The  appearance  of  the  country  made  a  favourable 
impression  upon  the  travellers ;  and,  upon  more 
extended  observations,  it  was  thought  to  be  a  suit- 
able spot  for  the  location  of  a  colony.  They  signi- 
fied their  wish  to  hold  a  palaver  with  the  chiefs, 
and   to  further  this  object,   various  presents  were 


58  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

despatched  into  the  interior.  This  is  called  "  pay 
service,*'  and  is  necessary  to  secure  the  good-will  of 
the  lords  of  the  soil.  A  meeting  -was  appointed  at 
the  palaver-house  of  Jumbo-town,  and  King  .Jack 
Ben  of  Grand  Bassa  presided  over  its  councils. 
When  Mr.  Bacon  laid  some  gifts  at  his  feet,  he 
said  in  broken  English,  "  Me  tanke  you — me  tanke 
you — now  what  you  vrant? — tell."  They  clearly 
stated  their  objects — "  to  get  land  for  the  black  men 
in  America  to  come  and  sit  down  upon.  They 
would  make  a  great  town,  where  ships  would  come 
and  trade  with  cloth,  beads,  knives,  tobacco,  pipes, 
and  in  return  take  ivory,  palm-oil,  and  every  thing 
that  grows  in  their  fields.  Then  they  need  no  more 
to  sell  their  own  people,  but  carry  on  good  and 
lawful  trade/' 

The  chiefs  listened  with  profound  attention,  and 
the  object  seemed  to  make  a  favourable  impression 
upon  their  minds.  "  Palaver  to-morrow — palaver 
to-morrow,"  they  said,  and  therewith  ended  the 
business  of  the  day.  The  result  was,  that  King 
Jack  Ben  agreed  to  sell  them  a  tract  of  land  for  the 
colony,  the  terms  of  which  were  written  in  "book," 
as  every  written  agreement  was  called  by  the  natives. 
His  majesty  seemed  highly  delighted  at  beholding 
the  young  prince  dressed  in  a  pair  of  trowsers 
given  him  by  the  agents,  while  the  people  joyfully 
exclaimed,   "  He  gentleman,  all  one  white  man !" 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  59 

Indeed  they  succeeded  in  inspiring  Jack  Ben  with 
so  much  confidence  in  their  character  and  intentions, 
that  he  was  desirous  of  intrusting  his  son  to  their 
care,  to  be  taken  to  Sierra  Leone  to  "learn  read." 

The  natives  of  this  region  were  found  to  be  in  the 
grossest  heathenism,  the  devil  being  literally  wor- 
shipped, by  the  name  of  the  "  Dibbly  man."  They 
believe  in  a  good  and  evil  deity,  but  the  latter,  to 
whose  malign  influence  all  the  ills  of  life  are  attri- 
buted, obtains  by  far  the  largest  share  of  their 
worship  and  sacrifices.  Every  village  has  its  own 
devil,  who  is  represented  by  a  man  covered  with 
dry  rushes,  with  two  or  [three  handkerchiefs  tied  in 
a  fantastic  manner  about  his  face,  a  row  of  coarse 
shells  around  his  eyes,  while  his  head  is  surmounted 
by  a  flaming  red  cap  four  or  five  feet  high.  The 
creature  goes  about  uttering  hideous  yells  and 
making  frightful  grimaces:  his  senseless  chatterings 
are  regarded  as  divine  oracles,  and  the  fate  of  many 
a  hapless  victim  is  dependent  upon  his  will.  How 
pure,  how  reasonable,  how  exalted  are  the  require- 
ments of  Christianity,  compared  with  the  tyranny 
and  ignorance  of  pagan  superstitions  ! 

After  an  absence  of  nearly  seven  weeks,  the 
schooner  made  the  port  of  Sierra  Leone.  The  agents 
returned  from  their  voyage  in  good  health,  and  in- 
creasingly interested  in  every  thing  pertaining  to  the 
enterprise.      The    desolations    and    degradation  of 


60  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

heathenism  deeply  affected  the  mind  of  Mr.  Andrus. 
His  Christian  sympathies  became  strongly  enlisted  in 
behalf  of  the  poor  Africans.  "  I  must  preach  to  them 
the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus,"  he  exclaimed ;  "I  will 
stay  and  devote  my  whole  life  to  missionary  labour  in 
this  dark  land."  But  the  Heavenly  Master  had  a 
wider  sphere  and  a  nobler  work  for  this  devoted  ser- 
vant. A  few  weeks  more,  and  Mr.  Andrus  left  the 
scene  of  his  earthly  duties,  to  enter  upon  the  joyful 
realities  of  the  heavenly  world.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Winn 
soon  followed,  while  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bacon,  weakened 
by  fever  and  brought  to  the  verge  of  the  grave,  were 
put  on  board  a  vessel  bound  to  America,  where  they 
safely  arrived,  greatly  benefited  by  the  voyage. 

Again  the  leaders  are  prostrate  !  the  front  ranks  are 
cut  down!  Dark  is  the  night  of  toil.  Mr.  Wiltberger, 
one  of  the  colonization  agents,  is  left  alone,  unaided 
by  the  wise  counsels  and  unsustained  by  the  cheerful 
courage  of  his  fellow-labourers.  He  is  sorrowful  and 
weary,  but  not  faint-hearted.  God  sustains  him. 
Stretching  his  hands  towards  America,  he  exclaims, 
"  Who  will  stand  in  the  breach  ?  Who  will  come  over 
and  help  us  ?  Who  will  work  for  Africa  ?" 

Already  another  brave  heart  is  enlisted  in  the 
cause . 

"  Here  am  I — I  will  go !"  responded  Dr.  Eli  Ayres, 
of  Philadelphia,  and  immediately  offered  himself  to 
the  Colonization  Society. 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  61 

Soon  after  his  arrival  at  Sierra  Leone,  Captain 
Stockton,  of  the  war-ship  Alligator,  came  on  the 
coast,  bearing  instructions  from  the  American  Govern- 
ment to  co-operate  with  the  agents  of  the  Coloniza- 
tion Society  in  securing  a  suitable  territory  for  the 
settlement  of  the  emigrants. 

Leaving  the  negroes  in  charge  of  Mr.  Wiltberger, 
Dr.  Ayres  accompanied  Captain  Stockton  on  an  ex- 
ploring agency  along  the  coast.  On  the  11th  of 
"December,  they  came  to  anchor  in  Mesurado  Bay. 

"  That  is  the  spot  we  ought  to  have,"  said  Captain 
Stockton,  pointing  to  the  high  bluffof  Cape  Mesurado, 
as  they  stood  together  on  the  quarter-deck,  "  that 
should  be  the  site  of  our  colony — no  finer  spot  on  all 
the  coast." 

"  Then  we  must  have  it"  answered  Dr.  Ayres,  with 
Saxon  energy.  Did  they  know  all  the  obstacles  in 
the  way  of  a  measure  so  bold  ?  England  and  France 
had  been  trying  for  it  for  one  hundred  years  without 
success;  the  interview  with  Messrs.  Andrus  and 
Bacon  six  months  before  was  positively  refused,  and 
even  their  gifts  were  sent  scornfully  back  by  King 
Peter.  Though  well  aware  of  the  ill  success  of  every 
previous  attempt  at  a  negotiation,  and  the  uncompro- 
mising hostility  of  the  natives  to  any  thing  bearing 
the  semblance  of  a  white  settlement,  they  did  not 
mean  to  sail  tamely  or  timidly  by,  without  making 
an  effort,  or  at  least  inquiry ;  and  every  new  aspect 


-62  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

of  the  coast  only  strengthened  their  desire  to  ohtain 
possession  of  it.  They  determined  to  land.  Some 
head  men  met  them  on  the  shore,  to  whom  they  gave 
suitable  presents,  and  upon  entering  into  friendly 
conversation,  it  was  soon  clear  that  a  favourable  im- 
pression had  been  made  upon  their  minds.  They 
expressed  a  desire  to  see  King  Peter.  Messenger 
after  messenger  was  sent  to  beg  a  palaver  with  his 
majesty  ;  but  it  was  not  until  he  had  disappointed 
and  deceived  them  again  and  again,  that  he  consented 
to  an  interview,  and  then  only  upon  the  condition  that 
they  should  dare  meet  him  in  his  own  capital,  far  into 
the  interior.  To  accomplish  this,  they  must  leave  the 
coast,  wade  through  water,  wallow  through  mud,  cut 
through  dismal  jungles,  and  in  an  enemy's  country, 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  savages,  whose  fiercest 
passions  had  been  nursed  by  the  slave-trade,  and  who 
cared  not  a  straw  for  human  life.  They  must  go 
armed  to  the  teeth,  and  even  then  expect  at  any 
moment  robbery  and  death. 

Could  they  dare  visit  King  Peter  at  such  hazards  ? 
Could  they  brave  the  lion  in  his  den  ?  Yes,  they  could 
dare  any  thing  in  the  prosecution  of  a  great  and 
worthy  enterprise. 

"  We  will  go  !"  was  the  resolute  answer.  In  order 
to  convince  the  natives  that  their  object  was  a  peace- 
ful one,  they  determined  to  go  unarmed,  with  the 
exception  of  a   small  pair  of  pocket-pistols,  which 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  63 

Captain  Stockton  usually  wore  in  his  coat.  Wild 
beasts,  and  savages  armed  with  muskets,  roamed 
through  the  forests,  but  they  reached  the  capital  in 
safety,  where  groups  of  naked  barbarians  came  out  to 
meet  them,  gaping  with  wonder.  Having  been  con- 
ducted to  the  palaver  hall,  which  was  spread  with 
mats  for  their  reception,  a  head  man  came  forward 
and  shook  them  by  the  hands,  announcing  the  arrival 
of  his  majesty.  When  the  king  entered,  he  took  no 
notice  of  the  strangers,  but  went  to  the  farthest 
corner  of  the  hut,  where  he  sat  down,  with  an  angry 
frown  upon  his  brow,  and  a  glance  of  defiance  in  his 
eye. 

On  being  introduced  by  one  of  the  chiefs,  he  asked, 
in  a  surly  tone,  what  they  wanted,  and  what  business 
they  had  in  his  dominions.  The  plan  of  the  colonists 
was  carefully  and  minutely  explained,  all  about  which 
he  well  knew,  having  been  informed  of  the  object  of 
Mr.  Andrus's  visit  several  months  before,  and  more 
recently,  through  his  head  men,  of  its  contemplated 
renewal  by  Captain  Stockton  and  Dr.  Ayres.  Mean- 
while large  bodies  of  the  natives  began  to  darken 
around  them;  but  everything  wore  a  peaceable  aspect, 
until,  on  the  entrance  of  a  fresh  band,  an  unusual 
excitement  began  to  agitate  the  crowd.  Affairs 
looked  dark  and  threatening.  Captain  Stockton 
arose  and  took  his  seat  near  the  king.     Presently  a 


64  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

mulatto  rushed  forward,  and  doubling  up  his  fist, 
charged  Captain  Stockton  with  capturing  slave-ves- 
sels. "  This  is  a  man  trying  to  ruin  the  slave-trade!" 
he  cried,  in  a  loud  and  angry  tone. 

"  These  are  the  people  who  are  quarrelling  at 
Sherbro  !"  shouted  another. 

A  horrid  war-yell  broke  from  the  multitude  ;  every 
one  sprang  upon  his  feet,  scowling  vengeance  upon 
the  agents.  Captain  Stockton,  fully  conscious  of  the 
extreme  peril  of  their  position,  instantly  arose,  and 
drawing  out  one  of  his  pistols,  pointed  it  at  the  head 
of  the  king,  while,  raising  his  other  hand  to  heaven, 
he  solemnly  appealed  to  the  God  of  heaven  for  pro- 
tection in  this  fearful  crisis.  King  Peter  flinched 
before  the  calm  courage  of  the  white  man,  and  the 
barbarians  fell  flat  on  their  faces  at  the  apparent 
danger  of  their  chief.  The  Captain  then  withdrew 
his  pistol ;  their  savage  rage  was  hushed  ;  awed  and 
subdued  by  the  fearless  energy  of  their  visitors,  some 
crept  away,  while  their  chiefs  began  to  listen  with 
respect  to  the  advances  and  proposals  now  made  to 
them. 

And  what  was  the  result  ?  Success  crowned  their 
efforts.  After  two  or  three  palavers,  the  kings  con- 
sented to  sell  a  tract  of  land  to  the  colonists.  A 
copy  of  the  contract  entered  into  upon  this  occasion 
may  not  be  uninteresting  to  our  readers. 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  65 

"  Know  all  men,  that  this  contract,  made  on  the 
15th  day  of  December,    1821,  between  King  Peter, 
King  George,   King  Zoda,   King  Long  Peter,  their 
princes  and  head  men,  on  the  one  part,  and  Captain 
Robert  F.  Stockton  and  Dr.  Eli  Ayres  on  the  other, 
witnesseth :  that  whereas  certain  persons,    citizens 
of  the  United   States  of  America,   are  desirous  of 
establishing   themselves    on   the   western    coast    of 
Africa,  and  have  invested  Capt.  Robt.  F.  Stockton  and 
Eli  Ayres  with  full  powers  to  treat  with,  and  purchase 
from  us,"  (here  follows  a  description  of  the  land), 
"  we  being  fully  convinced  of  the  pacific  and  just 
views  of  said  citizens,  and  being  desirous  to  recipro- 
cate their  friendship,  do  hereby,  in  consideration  of 
so  much  paid  in  hand,  namely — 6  muskets,  1  box  of 
beads,  2  hogsheads  of  tobacco,  1  cask  of  gunpowder, 
6  bars  of  iron,  10  iron  pots,  1  doz.  knives  and  forks. 
1  doz.  spoons,  6  pieces  of  blue  baft,  4  hats,  8  coats, 
3  pairs  of  shoes,  1  box  pipes,  1  keg  nails,  3  looking 
glasses,  3   pieces   of  kerchiefs,  3  pieces  of  calico,  3 
canes,  4  umbrellas,  1  box  soap,  1  barrel  rum,  and  to 
be  paid  the  following  :  6  bars  of  iron,  1  box  beads, 
50  knives,  20  looking  glasses,  10  iron  pots,  12  guns, 
3  barrels  of  gunpowder,  1  doz.  plates,   1  doz.  knives 
and  forks,  20  hats,  5  casks  of  beef,  5  barrels  of  pork, 
10  barrels  of  biscuit,  12  decanters,  12  glass  tumblers, 
and    50    shoes — for    ever   cede    and  relinquish  the 
above  described  lands  to  Robert  F.  Stockton  and  Eli 


66  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

Ayres,  to  have  and  to  hold  said  premises  for  the  use 
of  said  citizens  of  America." 

King  Peter  X  his  mark. 

King  George  X  his  mark. 

King  Zoda  X  his  mark, 

King  Long  Peter  X  his  mark.   Capt.  R.  F.  Stockton. 

King  Governor  X  his  mark.    Eli  Ayres,  M.D. 

King  Jimmy  X  his  mark. 

At  last,  after  many  unsuccessful  endeavours  and 
severe  disappointments,  an  agreement  is  entered 
into,  signed  and  sealed,  granting  to  the  Colonization 
Society,  a  tract  of  land,  suitable  for  their  new  colony. 
One  decided  and  most  important  point  is  now  gained, 
a  healthy  spot  to  build  upon. 

In  due  time,  the  poor  colonists,  once  at  Sherbro 
Island,  and  now  at  Fourra  Bay,  are  transported  to 
their  new  and  permanent  home.  Dangers  at  first 
threatened  them,  difficulties  were  strown  at  every 
step  in  their  way,  but  by  courage  and  perseverance 
these  were  conquered,  so  that  on  the  25th  of  April, 
1822,  the  American  flag  was  hoisted  on  Cape  Mesu- 
rado 

Three  cheers  for  the  American  flag  ! 

Three  cheers  for  the  little  band,  who  have  planted 
themselves  beside  it,  to  lay  the  corner  stone,  they 
hardly  knew  of  what — for  the  great  result  of  their 
efforts  was  far  in  the  untrodden  future — but  stand- 


THE  NIGHT  OF  TOIL.  67 

ing  where  we  now  stand,  we  behold  them  laying  the 
foundations  of  that  new  Republic,  which  is  to  bless 
and  benefit  Africa,  with  the  light  of  its  Christianized 
civilization. 

Three  cheers  for  the  little  band,  who  have  stood 
undaunted  on  a  savage  coast,  and  who,  while  their 
leaders  are  falling  around  them,  can  exclaim,  with 
Christian  confidence,  "  Let  nothing  discourage  the 
Society  or  the  coloured  people.  Thank  God,  our 
confidence  is  strong  in  the  veracity  of  his  promises." 


CHAPTER  V. 

FOE    AND    FIGHT. 

"  Faith,  commerce,  knowledge,  law,  these  will  be  springing, 
"Where'er  thy  standard  flies." 

Behold  the  American  flag  waving  for  the  first  time 
on  the  shores  of  Africa.  See  it  towering  above  the 
lofty  forests  of  Cape  Mesurado,  a  herald  of  freedom! 
Hark!  what  new  sounds  break  the  stern  silence  of 
that  bold  peninsula?  The  axe  and  the  saw,  the 
spade  and  the  plough  are  there,  instruments  of  peace- 
ful industry,  unused  and  unknown  by  the  savage 
tribes  which  for  ages  have  desolated  those  fertile 
shores,  A  colony  of  Christian  men  and  women  are 
there,  few  in  number,  but  fearless  in  heart,  rearing 
Christian  homes  in  the  very  centre  of  barbarism  and 
slavery.  Cape  Mesurado  is  elevated  about  250  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  is  a  bold  tongue  of 
land,  bounded  on  the  south-west  by  the  ocean,  and 
on  the  north-east  by  the  Mesurado  river.  The  Veys 
occupied  the  land  northward  of  the  Cape,  and  be- 
tween Cape  Mount  and  the  Gallians ;  an  active,  war- 
like and  haughty  tribe,  whose  principal  employment 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  69 

was  the  slave  trade.  The  Deys  inhabited  the  coast 
at  and  around  Mesurado,  treacherous,  profligate,  and 
cruel  in  their  character;  while  different  divisions  of 
the  Bassas  lived  on  the  coast  southward.  The 
Queahs  ranged  back  of  the  Deys ;  and  farther  in  the 
interior  the  land  was  ruled  by  a  powerful  and  warlike 
tribe  called  the  Condoes. 

The  spot  chosen  by  the  colonists  was  about  two 
miles  from  the  extremity  of  the  cape,  and  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  yards  from  the  river  on  the  north-east, 
down  which  there  was  a  steep  and  abrupt  descent. 
It  was  covered  by  a  thick  forest,  interwoven  with 
vines  and  underbrush. 

After  doing  every  thing  which  the  circumstances 
of  the  case  admitted,  for  the  comfort  and  safety  of 
this  little  band,  ninety  in  number,  both  agents,  Dr. 
Ayres  and  Mr.  Wiltberger,  prepared  to  return  to  the 
United  States.  Leaving  their  affairs  to  the  care  of 
Elijah  Johnson,  they  sailed  on  the  4th  of  June,  1822. 

The  emigrants  are  alone  amid  the  wild  luxuriance 
of  this  eastern  wilderness,  a  little  one  among  a  thou- 
sand; no  city  of  refuge  extends  its  strong  protecting 
arm ;  no  friendly  aid  is  near  to  cheer  with  its  warm 
sympathies  the  desponding  heart, — and  yet  they  are 
not  quite  alone.  The  Almighty  One  is  with  them. 
Morning  and  evening  from  the  stately  palm  groves 
arose  the  voice  of  prayer  to  Him  "  who  guided  his 
own  people  in  the  wilderness  like  a  flock,  and  who 


70  AFRICA     REDEEMED. 

was  their  chief  strength  in  the  tabernacles  of  Ham." 
A  little  church,  formed  some  time  previous  in  the 
city  of  Richmond,  composed  of  Lott  Cary,  Colin 
Teage,  and  five  or  six  others,  is  now  transferred 
hither,  and  Mr.  Cary  is  its  pastor.  The  Bible,  the 
Sabbath,  and  the  Church  have  begun  to  distil  their 
soft  mercies,  and  the  "  solitary  place  shall  be  glad 
for  them,  the  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the 
rose." 

Two  months  passed  away,  and  the  lonely  clearing 
was  cheered  by  the  sight  of  a  brig  standing  in  for  the 
cape ;  it  bore  Mr.  Jehudi  Ashmun,  thirty-five  addi- 
tional emigrants,  and  various  stores.  Before  landing, 
a  terrific  storm  broke  over  the  bay,  which  swept  the 
little  craft  from  her  moorings,  and  for  thirty-six  hours 
put  her  in  the  greatest  peril.  The  passengers  at 
last  were  safely  on  shore ;  but  owing  to  the  loss  of 
her  principal  boat  during  the  hurricane,  and  the 
heavy  swellings  of  the  surf,  her  cargo  was  landed 
with  the  greatest  difficulty. 

How  did  Mr.  Ashmun  find  the  little  colony?  What 
progress  had  it  made  in  its  two  months's  existence? 
With  severe  labour  a  small  spot  had  been  cleared, 
on  which  a  storehouse  and  thirty  huts  had  been 
erected;  but  there  were  no  preparations  for  the  ac- 
commodation of  new  settlers,  and  no  means  of  de- 
fence in  case  of  hostile  attack  from  the  natives. 

Mr.  Ashmun  was  accompanied  by  his  young  wife, 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  71 

who  came  ready  to  suffer  the  privations  and  share 
the  labours  of  his  new  home  in  the  wilderness.  After 
providing  a  cabin  corner  to  shelter  her  from  the 
drenching  rains,  which  had  now  set  in,  he  cast  his 
eyes  over  the  new-born  settlement  to  learn  what  was 
most  needful  for  its  interests.  A  vast  work  was  be- 
fore him.  Orders  were  immediately  given  to  pro- 
vide huts  for  the  newly  arrived  emigrants,  and  to 
begin  a  large  storehouse  for  the  fresh  supply  of  pro- 
visions. Meanwhile  startling  intimations  of  danger 
reached  his  ears.  The  chiefs  and  head  men  of  the 
country  had  by  no  means  relished  King  Peter's  sale 
of  the  land,  and  they  began  in  various  ways  to 
threaten  the  new  comers  with  hostilities.  He  saw 
that  the  matter  must  be  quickly  attended  to,  or  very 
serious  disasters  might  ensue.  He  accordingly  made 
a  visit  at  the  capitals  of  two  of  the  most  powerful 
sovereigns,  King  Peter  and  King  Brister,  and  tried 
to  bring  them  to  friendly  terms  by  offers  of  trade, 
and  proposals  to  instruct  their  sons  in  the  English 
language.  These  courteous  advances  were  coldly  re- 
ceived. In  company  with  Mr.  James  and  Elijah 
Johnson,  whose  name  will  hold  a  distinguished  place 
in  these  records,  he  then  met  the  chiefs  in  a  regular 
palaver,  but  no  offers  or  professions  which  they  could 
make,  seemed  to  appease  the  angry  natives.  Anxious 
to  prevent  any  open  outbreak,  for  which  the  unde- 
fended colonists  were  so  poorly  prepared,  Ashmun 


7*2  AFE1CA  KEDEEMED.. 

and  James  proposed  to  buy  a  peace  for  two  or  three 
hundred  bars ;  a  bar  being  valued  at  about  seventy- 
five  cents.  From  this  Mr.  Johnson  dissented,  con- 
stantly declaring  that  the  sum  would  be  thrown 
away;  for  he  had  already  learned  enough  of  the 
native  character  to  convince  him  that  nothing  but  a 
fight  would  settle  the  difficulty.  The  bargain,  how- 
ever, was  concluded,  the  amount  paid,  and  the  depu- 
tation returned  to  the  little  settlement. 

After  a  few  days  the  correctness  of  Mr.  Johnson's 
observations  became  alarmingly  corroborated.  In- 
telligence was  received  that  the  natives  were  muster- 
ing their  forces  in  every  direction,  and  preparing  for 
a  united  attack  upon  the  colony.  Preparations  for 
defence  were  instantly  set  on  foot,  leaving  no  time 
for  regrets  over  the  past,  or  fears  for  the  future. 
The  whole  number  of  colonists  was  about  one  hun- 
dred and  thirty,  of  whom  only  thirty-five  were  capable 
of  bearing  arms-  Thirteen,  most  of  whom  had  never 
loaded  a  musket,  were  enrolled  in  a  lieutenant's  corps, 
and  daily  exercised  in  the  use  of  arms  ;  a  quantity  of 
ammunition  was  made  up,  and  a  plan  drafted  for  the 
erection  of  a  tower.  Forty  muskets,  and  five  iron 
cannon  and  one  of  brass  were  all  the  colony  could 
boast  of,  and  four  of  the  cannon  were  on  the  shore, 
almost  buried  in  mud.  With  incredible  labour  these 
were  brought  up  a  steep  bank,  mounted  on  rude  car- 
riages, and  in  the  end  did  no  mean  service.     The 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  73 

thickets  which  surrounded  the  little  clearing,  afforded 
the  savages  an  opportunity  of  prowling  around  theii 
dwellings  without  being  discovered.  Mr.  Ashmun 
directed  these  to  be  cleared  away  as  speedily  as  pos- 
sible, and  the  felled  trees  to  be  piled  up  for  a  wall  of 
defence. 

Warnings  were  from  time  to  time  received  through 
friendly  natives,  that  the  danger  was  advancing ;  but 
how  great  or  how  near,  it  was  difficult,  with  any  degree 
of  certainty,  to  find  out.  In  addition  to  all  their 
other  labours,  twenty  men  were  now  drafted  to  stand 
watch  during  the  night. 

All  this  time  heavy  rains  were  falling,  and  sickness 
began  to  break  out  among  the  new  emigrants,  Mrs. 
Ashniun  became  seriously  ill,  and  her  husband  expe- 
rienced a  slight  attack  of  the  prevailing  disease  ;  but 
he  never  suffered  himself  to  flag  until  the  fortifica- 
tions were  nearly  completed.  Often  after  a  night  of 
delirium  and  distress,  he  would  arise  at  early  dawn, 
fling  his  cloak  around  him,  and  spend  the  whole  morn- 
ing in  superintending  the  public  works.  Mr.  Ashmun 
received  great  assistance  from  the  good  sense  and 
sound  judgment  of  Lott  Gary,  and  of  Mr.  Johnson 
and  others,  who  had  served  in  our  last  war  with  Eng- 
land. Mr.  Gary  was  one  of  those  who  could  adapt 
himself  to  any  circumstances,  and  do  any  thing  which 
he  undertook.  Besides  preaching,  he  could  fell  trees, 
build  cabins,  and  what  was  still  better,  now  that  they 


74  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

were  deprived  of  the  sendees  of  a  regular  physician, 
he  turned  doctor,  and  his  prescriptions  were  crowned 
with  remarkable  success. 

Five  heavy  cannon  were  stationed  at  different 
points  around  the  settlement,  protected  by  a  musket- 
proof  stockade,  while  the  brass  cannon  and  two  swivels 
were  mounted  on  carriages  in  the  centre,  ready  to 
assist  the  post  most  hotly  attacked.  All  the  posts 
were  then  connected  by  a  picket  fence.  The  works 
were  urged  on  with  the  utmost  diligence. 

In  the  midst  of  these  cares  and  labours,  Mr.  Ash- 
mun  had  the  grief  to  see  his  wife  sinking  at  his  side. 
Her  constitution  gave  way  before  the  violence  of  an 
African  fever,  unrelieved  and  unsoothed  by  any  of 
the  comforts  of  refined  life.  Behold  her  in  the 
corner  of  a  wretched  hut,  beneath  a  thatch  dripping 
with  rain,  lying  on  a  mat  drenched  with  water.  Fear, 
anxiety,  fatigue,  and  want,  are  her  attendants,  yet 
God  strengthens  and  comforts  her  soul.  On  Sabbath 
morning,  the  15th  of  September,  her  spirit  entered 
upon  its  eternal  rest,  and  Mr.  Ashmun  is  left  alone. 
Sinking  beneath  the  three-fold  pressure  of  care,  sor- 
row and  sickness,  for  six  weeks  he  lies  prostrate 
upon  his  mat,  unconscious  of  any  thing  around  him. 

In  this  perilous  crisis,  shall  he  too  fall  at  his  post  ? 
As  the  rains  subsided,  his  strength  began  to  return, 
and  by  the  first  of  November  he  was  again  able  to 
attend  to  public  affairs. 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  75 

Meanwhile  the  savages  have  been  active,  and,  from 
time  to  time,  intelligence  has  reached  the  settlement 
of  the  plans  and  debates  of  their  war  councils.  On 
the  7th  the  agent  is  secretly  warned  to  prepare  for 
an  assault  within  four  days.  We  can  readily  imagine 
what  days  of  suspense  and  anxiety  they  must  have 
been,  to  a  handful  of  men  in  hourly  expectation  of 
an  attack  from  the  combined  warriors  of  every  savage 
tribe  in  the  region. 

Mr.  Ashmun,  after  taking  a  turn  around  the  works, 
and  reviewing  his  little  force  in  the  evening,  thus 
addressed  them  with  all  the  solemnity  and  impres- 
siveness  which  their  circumstances  were  calculated 
to  inspire.  "  War  is  now  inevitable,"  he  said.  "  The 
safety  of  our  property,  our  settlement,  our  families, 
our  lives,  depends  under  Gocl  upon  your  courage  and 
firmness.  Let  every  post  and  every  individnal  be 
able  to  confide  in  the  firm  support  of  every  other. 
Let  every  man  act  as  if  the  whole  defence  depended 
upon  his  own  single  arm.  May  no  coward  disgrace  our 
ranks.  The  cause  is  God's  and  our  country's,  and 
we  may  rely  upon  the  blessing  of  Almighty  God  to 
succeed  in  our  efforts.  We  are  weak,  He  is  strong. 
Trust  in  Him."  A  stern  silence  pervaded  the  little 
band ;  the  men  were  marched  to  their  posts,  where 
they  lay  on  their  arms,  with  matches  lighted,  during 
the  long  watches  of  that  anxious  night.  It  wore 
away  and  no  enemy  appeared. 


TG  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

The  next  morning  Mr.  Ashmun  aroused  himself 
from  the  langour  of  sickness  to  make  a  more  thorough 
inspection  of  the  fortifications.  It  was  with  deep 
anxiety,  as  well  as  regret,  that  he  perceived  the 
western  quarter  of  the  settlement  could  he  easily 
approached  by  a  narrow  pathway,  where  was  only  a 
nine  pounder,  arid  no  stockade  to  defend  it  from 
assault.  The  eastern  quarter  was  also  exposed,  but 
the  station  was  well  guarded,  and  a  steep  ledge  of 
rocks  made  the  approach  both  difficult  and  dangerous. 
From  bed  Mr.  Ashmun  issued  his  orders  with  thought- 
ful vigilance.  He  commanded  all  the  houses  in  the 
outskirts  to  be  abandoned,  and  every  family  to  sleep 
in  the  centre  of  the  village.  Guards  of  four  men 
were  posted  one  hundred  yards  in  advance  of  each 
station  during  the  night,  and  no  man  was  to  leave 
his  post  until  sunrise.  Another  night  passed,  and 
another  day  arose  on  the  anxious  few.  It  was  the 
Sabbath.  A  few  hours'  sleep  were  hastily  snatched 
by  the  weary  men,  while  earnest  prayers  went  up 
from  many  a  brave  heart  to  the  God  of  all  mercy  for 
his  protecting  providence.  Divine  service  was  holden 
at  noon,  and  Lott  Gary  addressed  his  little  church 
under  the  most  tender  and  affecting  circumstances. 
Perhaps  it  was  their  last  Sabbath  on  earth ;  death, 
in  its  most  cruel  form  was  hovering  around  them : 
another  Sabbath's  sun  might  witness  their  little 
colony  given  over  to  butchery  and  plunder,  and  every 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  i  i 

vestige  of  industry  and  Christianity  for  ever  blotted 
out. 

At  this  moment  one  of  the  scouts  came  running  in, 
with  the  news  that  the  hostile  army  were  crossing  the 
Mesurado  river,  only  a  few  miles  above  the  settlement. 
By  evening,  the  whole  body  had  encamped  to  the 
west,  little  less  than  half  a  mile  distant.     Silently 
and  sternly  did  each  man  march  to  his  post,  and  you 
could  read  on  every  face,  "  Give  me  victory,  or  give 
me  death."     Another  night  went  by,  and  no  war  yell 
broke  the  stillness  of  the  forest.     The  day  dawns. 
The  western  guard,  owing  to  misapprehension  or  in- 
advertence, or  neglect  of  duty,  left  their  posts  at  day- 
dawning,  instead  of  sun-rising,  as  the  order  ran,  and 
consequently  before  the  fresh  guards  were  in  readiness 
to  take  their  places.     At  this  unguarded  moment  the 
savages,  who  had  stolen  with  silent  step  to  the  very 
verge  of  the  clearing,  and  were  watching  with  fiendish 
anxiety  every  movement  of  the  little  band,  wrere  now 
stirring  for  action.    An  immense  body  suddenly  issued 
from  the  forest,  fired,  and  then  rushed  forward  with 
horrid  yells  upon  the  post.     Taken  by  surprise,  seve- 
ral of  the  men  were  killed,  while  the  rest,  driven 
from  their  cannon,  without  time  to  discharge  it,  fell 
back  in  haste  and  confusion.     It  is  a  fearful  moment ! 
If  the  savages  press  on,  there  is  no  time  to  rally,  and 
all  is  lost !  Instead  of  following  up  their  advantages, 
they  pause,  and  surround  some  houses  in  that  direc- 


78  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

tion,  to  plunder  and  destroy.  Several  women  and 
children,  who,  in  spite  of  orders  to  leave,  remained 
in  their  houses,  are  now  shrieking  in  the  hands  of  a 
savage  foe.  Mr.  Ashmun  rushed  to  the  scene  of 
action,  and  assisted  by  the  determined  boldness  of 
Lott  Caiy,  rallied  the  broken  forces  of  the  settlers. 
Two  cannons  were  instantly  brought  into  action, 
double  shotted  with  ball  and  grape.  They  did  a 
rapid  and  fearful  execution.  The  enemy  began  to 
recoil.  Fear  seized  their  ranks.  The  settlers,  seeing 
their  advantage,  pushed  forward  and  regained  the  lost 
post.  Directing  their  cannon  to  rake  the  whole 
enemy's  line,  every  shot  took  effect ;  while  Elijah 
Johnson,  at  the  head  of  a  few  musketeers,  passed 
around  the  enemy's  flank  and  increased  their  con- 
sternation. A  savage  yell  echoed  through  the  forest, 
filling  every  soul  with  horror.  As  it  died  away,  the 
horde  fell  back,  and  rapidly  disappeared  among  the 
gloomy  wilds.  In  thirty  minutes  the  day  is  won ! 
God  be  praised !  At  nine  o'clock  orders  were  issued 
to  contract  the  lines,  leaving  out  a  fourth  part  of  the 
houses,  and  surrounding  the  rest  by  a  musket-proof 
stockade.  As  there  was  no  safety  until  it  was  com- 
pleted, the  work  was  urged  on  with  the  utmost  rapi- 
dity ;  for  no  one  could  tell  when  or  where  another 
attack  might  be  made,  and  it  was  not  until  the  next 
day  that  an  hour  could  be  spared  for  the  burial  of  the 
dead. 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  7^ 

On   the   part  of  the    settlers,  it  was    soon  dis- 
covered that  considerable  injury  had  been  sustained. 
One  of  the  women  in  the  outskirts,  Mrs.  Ann  Haw- 
kins, had  received  thirteen  wounds,  and  was  laid 
aside  as  dead;  but  after  incredible  sufferings  she 
finally  recovered.     Another,  Minty  Draper,  received 
a  wound  in  the  head  with  a  cutlass,  while  flying  from 
her  house,  and  was  robbed  of  both  her  children.     A 
young  woman,  with  a  mother  and  her  five  children, 
finding  their  home  surrounded  by  savages,  barricaded 
the  door  in  hope  of  safety.     The  doors  were  quickly 
forced,  one  of  the  defenders  was  instantly  stabbed  to 
the  heart,  while  the  mother  rushed  through  a  small 
window  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  house  and  escaped 
to  the  lines  unhurt,  between  two  heavy  fires.     The 
children  were  made  captives.     Stephen  Kiah,  one  of 
the  most  aged  of  the  colonists,  having  passed  the  age 
of  three-score  years  and  ten,  and  who  had  come  out 
to  aid  the  enterprise  by  his  example,  suffered  the 
greatest  bereavement.     Two  of  his  grandchildren  fell 
before  his  eyes ;  five  were  carried  into  captivity ;  and 
then  his  son-in-law,  his  principal  earthly  prop,  was 
disabled  for  life  by  a  severe  wound  in  the  shoulder ; 
but  the  old  man's  spirit  was  unbroken,  for  he  had 
counted  the  cost.     "  If  these  things  must  needs  be," 
said  he,  "I  am  willing  to  bear  my  portion,  so  God 
Almighty  help  me."      The  numerical  force  of  the 
settlers  amounted  to  thirty-five  persons,  including  six 


SO  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

native  youth,  not  sixteen  years  old.     Of  this  number 
about  one  half  were  engaged. 

In  this  trying  hour  they  were  comforted  by  a  pre- 
sent and  offers  of  friendship  from  Prince  Tom  of  the 
Bassa  country  ;  but  on  a  calm  survey  of  their  circum- 
stances, their  situation  seemed  extremely  perilous. 
There  were  not  provisions  in  the  store-house  to  last 
fifteen  days,  while  the  men  could  not  long  bear  up 
under  extra  fatigue  on  stinted  allowances  ;  and  what 
was  still  more  appalling,  there  was  not  ammunition 
enough  to  stand  a  single  hour's  attack.  Seven  chil- 
dren were  in  the  hands  of  a  cruel  enemy,  and  that 
enemy  not  conquered,  but  routed,  as  they  had  every 
reason  to  fear,  only  to  marshal  a  more  powerful  host. 

When  aid  would  come,  or  where,  none  could  tell. 
Worn  down  with  no  common  fatigues,  suffering  from 
wounds  and  disease,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by 
enemies  bent  upon  their  destruction,  can  we  wonder 
if  the  faith  of  some  wavered,  and  desponding  thoughts 
arose  in  many  a  bosom  '? 

But  the  dangers  which  multiplied  around  them, 
only  nerved  Mr.  Ashman  to  fresh  exertions.  By 
night  and  by  day  he  stood  side  by  side  and  shoulder 
to  shoulder  with  the  men  at  their  work,  urging  and 
encouraging  them  on  by  the  strength  of  his  own 
strong,  earnest  spirit.  He  faltered  not.  Every 
effort  was  made  by  the  settlers  to  make  a  peace 
but    every   offer   was    scornfully   rejected,    and   the 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  81 

savages  were  making  active  preparations  for  another 
onset. 

The  23d  of  November  was  set  apart  by  the 
colonists  as  a  day  of  humiliation,  thanksgiving  and 
prayer  :  thanksgiving  for  past  mercies,  and  prayer  for 
Divine  help  in  the  hour  of  need.  They  cast  them- 
selves upon  the  protection  of  Almighty  God,  and  He 
did  not  abandon  them,  With  what  delight  and 
gratitude  did  they  look  toward  a  large  ship  in  sight, 
to  which  they  immediately  sent  a  boat,  with  the  story 
of  their  distresses.  It  was  Captain  Brassey,  of 
Liverpool,  who  soon  showed  a  generous  interest  in 
their  behalf.  He  brought  ashore  all  the  stores  that 
could  be  spared  from  his  vessel,  and  did  every  thing 
in  his  power  to  relieve  the  sick  and  wounded.  What 
was  more,  he  went  into  the  interior,  visited  some  of 
the  principal  chiefs,  and  tried  by  every  means  to 
conciliate  their  goodwill,  and  induce  them  to  listen 
to  offers  of  peace.  Though  well  known  along  the 
coast,  and  exerting  no  inconsiderable  influence  over 
the  tribes,  his  efforts  were  now  in  vain.  War  and 
plunder  they  were  determined  upon,  and  war  and 
plunder  they  would  have.  The  kind  Captain  took 
sorrowful  leave  of  the  little  band.  Dark  was  the 
day  he  left,  darker  the  future. 

"  We  must  make  God  our  trust,"  cried  Mr.  Ash- 
mun.  "  We  have  only  to  wait  his  deliverance,  or  to 
lay  our  bones  on  Cape  Mesurado." 


82  AFEICA  REDEEMED, 

The  enemy  were  all  along  prowling  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. 

At  half  past  four  on  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of 
December,  just  as  he  had  sank  down  to  catch  a  few 
moments'  sleep,  after  days  and  nights  of  wakeful 
vigilance  and  unresting  toil,  the  savages  opened  a 
brisk  and  sudden  fire  upon  the  western  post.  It  was 
promptly  returned  from  the  cannon,  and  the  assail- 
ants for  an  instant  fell  back.  In  a  few  moments  they 
rallied  and  forced  their  way  higher  up  the  bank. 
Again  they  were  driven  back.  A  third  attempt  was 
stoutly  made  to  seize  the  post,  but  they  were  boldly 
met  and  routed.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  settle- 
ment the  battle  was  furiously  raging.  A  large  body 
cf  natives  crept  under  a  ledge  of  rocks,  until  within 
a  few  feet  of  the  east  guard,  when  they  suddenly  rose 
up,  fired,  and  rushed  forward  like  tigers.  The  two 
gun  battery  was  set  to  work,  with  its  sure  and  rapid 
fire.  Four  times  they  attacked,  and  four  times  were 
they  driven  back  over  their  dead  and  dying  comrades. 
Each  man  of  that  little  band  stood  firm  and  cool  like 
a  veteran  soldier,  at  his  dangerous  post.  One  hour 
and  a  half  of  hard  and  obstinate  fighting,  and  the 
settlers  were  again  victorious  !  Again  a  yell  of  de- 
feat and  of  flight  sounded  on  the  morning  air,  and 
the  savage  warriors  fled  to  their  dark  retreats,  panic- 
struck  at  the  power  which  conquered  them.  It  is 
said  that  nearly  a  thousand  savages  had  been  en- 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  80 

gaged,  and  their  loss,  though  very  great,  could  never 
be  exactly  estimated.  In  the  last  encounter  only 
one  colonist  was  killed,  and  several  wounded. 

They  had  now  bravely  battled  the  outward  foe ; 
but  there  was  a  foe  stealing  into  their  ranks  which 
they  could  not  hope  to  brave.  It  was  famine.  For 
six  weeks  had  they  been  on  an  allowance  of  bread  and 
meat,  and  this  was  running  lower  and  lower.  The 
groans  and  sufferings  of  the  dying  and  wounded  rung 
on  their  ears,  and  no  surgical  instruments  were  to  be 
had,  to  afford  relief.  Add,  to  all  this,  there  were 
no  tthree  rounds  of  shot  for  their  guns  in  case  of 
another  attack,  and  no  one  could  tell  but  the  angry 
savages  might  again  make  a  last  and  more  desperate 
assault. 

"  We  again  cried  to  God  for  aid,"  says  Mr.  Ashmun. 

During  the  night,  a  rustling  in  the  thickets  alarmed 
one  of  the  outposts;  a  cannon  was  fired,  and  several 
men  made  random  shots.  It  proved  a  false  alarm, 
and  the  poor  emigrants  could  only  bitterly  regret  a 
waste  of  amunition,  when  amunition  was  so  valuable, 

But  that  midnight  cannon,  booming  along  the 
shore,  startled  the  night  watch  of  a  solitary  vessel  as 
she  ploughed  her  watery  way  around  the  Cape. 

' *  It  is  the  roar  of  cannon  !  What  means  it — what 
is  it?  cried  the  astonished  officers,  gathering  on 
deck.  "  What  is  doing  on  this  savage  coast  ?  Is  it 
a  signal  of  distress  ?  Stand  to  !  Down  with  the 
long-boat !     Pull  to  the  shore  !  "     A  strange  and  un- 


84  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

1  scene  burst  upon  the  bout's  crow,  as  at  the 
breaking  of  day,  they  approached  the  coast.     Behold 

a  little  band  of  bravo  men,  contending  for  life 
amid  privations,  poverty,  sickness,  and  death,  stir- 
rounded  by  barbarous  tribes,  thirsting  for  their 
blood.  The  generous  sailors  grasped  the  hands  of 
the  settlers,  and  bade  them  take  courage.  The  vessel 
proved  to  be  a  British  Schooner,  laden  with  supplies 
for    Cape    Coast    Castle,  and  having  on  board  Major 

g,  the  distinguished  African  traveller.  Theoffi 
oi  the  schooner  proved  noble  and  disinterested  friends, 
granting  them  every  aid  in  their  power,  while  Major 
l.aing  immediately  offered  to  use  his  influence  with 
hostile  chiefs,  to  secure  a  treaty  o(  peace.  Hum- 
bled and  awe  struck  by  the  superiority  ol  the  handful 
of  settlers  over  their  large  and  undisciplined  hosts, 
the  kings  lent  a  willing  car,  and  the  foundation  oi  a 
firm  and  lasting  peace  were  then  laid  between  the 
natives  and  the  colonists.  Intelligence  of  their 
and  success  spread  far  and  wide  along  the 
.-;  and  deep  into  the  interior,  inspiring  fear  and 
respect  in  every  savage  breast.  Midshipman  Cordon 
and  twelve  British  sailors  signified  their  wish  t 
main  at  the  Cape,  in  order  to  witness  the  sincerity 
of  their  new  professions,  and  help  the  settlers  to 
repair  their  buildings.  Alas  !  their  generous  self- 
devotion  proved  their  death.  Through  toil  and  ex- 
posure, they  were  speedily  attacked  with  fever,  and 
in  a  few  weeks,  amid  the  tears       1  grief  of  their  new- 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  Hl> 

made  friends  Gordon  and  eight  of  his  men  were  borne 
to  their  last  home. 

Mr.  Ashmun's  health,  which  had  greatly  suffered 
by  his  arduous  labours,  now  began  to  recruit,  and  he 
sat  about  to  restore  industry  and  good  order,  and  the 
more  peaceful  habits  of  civil  life.  In  process  of 
time,  the  sick  and  wounded  recovered.  Repairs  went 
on  well,  new  houses  for  new  emigrants  were  built, 
and  a  trade  opened  with  a  rich  tribe  in  the  interior, 
who  supplied  them  with  plenty  of  bullocks.  Bet- 
ter than  all,  the  children  who  had  been  captured  by 
the  savages,  were  freely  sent  back  to  the  Colony,  and 
thankfully  welcomed  by  their  parents. 

In  the  spring,  May,  1823,  Dr.  Ayres  returned 
to  the  Colony,  from  the  United  States,  bringing  fresh 
supplies. 

The  Doctor  found  many  improvements  in  the  set- 
tlement, notwithstanding  the  people  had  been  com 
pelled  so  long  to  leave  their  farms  for  the  drill  and 
the  musket.  When  he  left,  they  had  hardly  begun  to 
clear  up  the  underbrush ;  and  now  fifty  good  houses, 
three  excellent  store-houses,  a  substantial  stone 
tower  mounting  six  cannon,  industry,  good  order  and 
regularity,  met  his  eyes  on  every  side,  besides  one 
hundred  and  fifty  emigrants,  strong,  courageous,  and 
in  excellent  health.  He  was  exceedingly  gratified 
with  the  energy  and  resolution  which  seemed  to  per- 
vade the  settlers,  nerving  them  to  bear  with  cheerful 


86  AFEICA  EEDEEMED. 

courage,  with  patience  and  gratitude,  the  trials  and 
hardships  consequent  upon  a  new  settlement. 

"  There  never  has  been  an  hour  or  a  minute,  said 
Lott  Cary  with  great  emphasis,  "no,  not  even  when 
the  balls  were  flying  around  my  head,  when  I  could 
wish  myself  back  to  America  again.'"' 

Mr.  Ashmun's  connection  with  the  Colonization 
Society  in  America,  at  this  time,  was  not  as  harmo- 
nious as  could  have  been  wished.  In  sending  home 
his  reports,  the  Managers  thought  his  expenses  far 
too  large,  and  some  of  his  contracts  they  refused  to 
fulfill.  This  was  very  painful  to  Mr.  Ashmun,  acting 
as  he  did  according  to  the  best  of  his  judgment, 
under  the  most  embarrassing  circumstances,  and 
knowing  far  better  what  those  circumstances  required, 
than  the  Managers  could  do,  five  thousand  miles  off. 
Feeling  himself  unjustly  blamed,  yet  supported  under 
the  trial  by  his  own  conscious  integrity,  he  deter- 
mined never  to  abandon  the  Colony,  while  his  ser- 
vices could  benefit  her,  and  after  Dr.  Ayres'  arrival 
he  withdrew,  in  a  great  measure,  from  active  duty, 
in  the  hope  of  firmly  re-establishing  his  health ;  but 
the  respite  did  not  last  long.  The  Doctor  was  soon 
taken  sick,  and  seeing  no  hope  of  recovery  in  Africa, 
especially  during  the  rainy  season,  in  a  few  weeks  he 
again  took  leave,  and  sailed  for  America,  leaving  the 
Colony  without  the  services  of  any  regular  physician. 
The  responsibility  of  managing  affairs  fell  once  more 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  87 

on  Mr.   Ashmun,  who  thus  far  had  shown  himself 
equal  to  the  task. 

On  the  13th  of  February,  1824,  the  ship  Cyrus 
arrived,  bringing  1 05  emigrants  from  Virginia.  They 
were  industrious  and  intelligent,  and  many  of  them 
possessed  property.  Lots  were  assigned  to  them,  and 
with  cheerful  alacrity  they  set  about  supplying  the 
wants  of  their  new  homes.  Fresh  difficulties  began 
to  arise,  and  new  dangers  to  threaten  the  welfare  of 
the  Colony.  Dissatisfaction  with  the  Board  of  the 
Colonization  Society  arose  in  the  minds  of  many  of 
the  settlers,  regarding  the  tenure  of  their  lands  ;  it 
gradually  spread,  embittering  their  feelings  and 
rendering  them  hostile  to  its  government.  Many 
abandoned  their  labours,  and  refused  to  work  until 
their  grievances  were  settled.  To  Mr.  Ashmun 's 
great  grief,  Lott  Cary  was  among  the  number. 
He  strove  in  vain  to  quell  the  disturbance.  It  in- 
creased to  an  alarming  degree,  defying  all  restraints, 
and  endangering  the  welfare  of  the  settlement.  At 
last,  the  Agent  collected  the  insurgents  together, 
and  addressed  them  in  a  most  solemn  and  affecting 
manner,  reminding  them  of  the  oaths  by  which  they 
had  bound  themselves  to  the  Society,  and  the  duties 
which  they  had  sworn  to  perform.  "  Your  neglect  of 
duty,"  said  he,  with  great  emphasis,  his  eye  glowing 
with  intense  emotion,  "  will  bring  on  you  and  your 
families,  the  severest  sufferings.     Had  you  obeyed 


88  AFBICA  REDEEMED. 

the  government,  which  you  are  bound  to  support, 
every  man  of  you  would  begin  to  see  the  comforts  of 
life  pour  in  upon  your  families — but  now  you  have 
nothing  in  possession — nothing  growing  in  your 
fields — you  have  nothing — no,  not  a  week's  supply 
of  vegetables  in  prospect.  You  feel  the  pinching 
hand  of  want  to-day ;  it  will  be  worse  to-morrow. 
Continue  to  neglect  your  duty,  and  it  will  either 
disperse  you  up  and  down  the  land,  or  destroy  you 
by  starvation.  The  authority  of  the  United  States 
and  the  Colonization  Society  must  be  re-established 
in  all  its  perfection  on  this  Cape,  or  you  must  scatter 
and  perish.  United,  we  stand,  divided,  we  fall.  I 
ask  you  to  take  no  new  oaths,  but  here,  this  hour,  in 
the  presence  of  that  God  who  has  recorded  your  vows 
in  heaven,  to  recognize  those  which  you  have  already 
taken,  and  pledge  yourselves  in  future  to  obey  them. 
Either  sustain  the  authority  of  the  Society,  or,  mark 
it  well,  the  Society  will  never  uphold  you  in  a  course, 
which  leads  you  to  ruin,  and  themselves  to  disgrace 
and  disappointment ;  I  require  every  true  man  to 
give  me  the  pledge  I  ask.  Then  will  I  devise  a 
plan  of  industry,  which  shall  cany  us  safely  through 
the  season ;  but,  mark,  it  all  depends  on  you." 

The  address  produced  a  happy  effect.  Mr.  Cary 
then  clearly  saw  the  evils  which  their  course  of  insub- 
ordination must  inevitably  produce  upon  the  Colony  : 
he  came  frankly  forward  :   "  I  give  the  pledge,  sir — 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  89 

I  acknowledge  my  error,  and  cheerfully  submit  to  the 
laws  of  the  Society.  Henceforth  I  stand  by  her  side, 
so  help  me  God!"  And  Mr.  Gary  is  again  in  his 
place,  on  the  side  of  good  order  and  obedience  to 
authority.  Most  of  the  insurgents  followed  his  ex- 
ample, while  others,  ashamed  of  their  conduct,  went 
away  silenced,  if  not  altogether  subdued.  The  wel- 
fare of  the  little  colony  was  dear  to  Mr.  Ashmun's 
heart.  He  had  fought,  struggled,  prayed,  suffered 
the  loss  of  all  things  for  its  sake ;  through  evil  and 
through  good  report,  he  had  cherished  its  interests, 
and  devoted  all  his  energies  to  its  improvement ;  but 
as  yet  the  Society  at  home  had  failed  to  acknowledge 
his  self-devotion,  or  recompense  his  invaluable  ser 
vices. 

When  Mr.  Ashmun  left  the  United  States,  he  was 
in  debt.  Conscientious,  educated,  and  truly  pious, 
his  spirits  had  been  greatly  depressed  at  failing  to 
realise  a  sufficient  profit  from  a  literary  work  in  which 
he  had  been  engaged,  to  cover  its  expenses.  When 
he  first  thought  of  coming  to  Africa,  it  was  in  the 
hope  of  doing  something  to  discharge  these  engage- 
ments. On  reaching  Cape  Mesurado,  he  complied 
with  the  wishes  of  the  Colonization  Society  to  take 
charge  of  its  affairs,  in  case  of  the  absence  of  its 
Agents.  How  unreservedly  he  devoted  himself  to 
his  charge,  has  already  been  recorded. 

Borne  down  by  sickness  and  poverty,  by  care  and 


90  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

anxiety,  he  now  felt  he  must  withdraw  from  duties 
both  so  arduous  and  so  ill-requited.  A  sea  voyage 
offering  the  only  prospect  of  relief,  he  delivered  up 
the  papers  and  property  of  the  Colony  into  the  hands 
of  Elijah  Johnson,  and  gathering  up  the  few  articles 
wiiich  he  could  call  his  own,  set  sail  for  the  Cape  de 
Verd  Islands.  As  the  vessel  bore  him  away  from 
Mesurado,  painfully  and  sadly  did  he  take  a  last  fare- 
well of  the  infant  settlement,  wThich  owed  its  exist- 
ence, as  well  as  its  improvements,  to  his  watchful 
care.  He  had  nourished  and  brought  it  up ;  it  had 
rebelled  against  him,  yet  he  loved  it  with  a  father's 
love — and  now,  as  he  beheld  it,  a  mere  speck  in  the 
distant  horizon,  his  heart  bled  for  the  love  he  bore  it, 
and  he  wept  in  believing  he  should  behold  it  no  more 
for  ever. 

No  sooner  had  he  departed,  than  the  savages  again 
began  to  wear  a  threatening  aspect.  Mr.  Johnson 
managed  his  little  resources  with  admirable  ability ; 
but  poorly  supplied  as  they  were  with  arms  and  am- 
munition, the  sight  of  a  British  man-of-wrar  entering 
the  harbour  was  hailed  with  delight.  He  lost  no 
time  in  making  his  situation  known.  The  Com- 
mander generously  supplied  his  wants,  and  offered 
his  men  for  action,  on  condition  that  he  would  grant 
and  deed  to  England  a  piece  of  land  only  large  enough 
to  plant  her  flag-staff  upon,  as  British  troops  could 
only  be  called  upon  to  defend  the  flag  and  soil  of  their 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  91 

own  country.  "  No  !  no!"  answered  Johnson,  "  no 
— no ;  we  don't  want  any  flag  raised  here  that  will 
cost  us  more  trouble  to  pull  down,  than  to  flog  the 
natives."  The  spirit  which  prompted  the  reply, 
proved  equal  to  the  emergency;  the  natives  were 
quelled,  and  the  little  settlement  saved  from  even  the 
shadow  of  British  authority. 

In  July,  Mr.  Ashmun  reached  Port  Praya,  on  the 
Cape  Verdes.  Not  long  after  his  arrival,  the  Ameri- 
can sloop-of-war  Porpoise  entered  the  harbour.  With 
a  beating  heart,  he  bent  his  solitary  way  to  the  wharf, 
and  as  soon  as  she  cast  anchor,  hastened  on  board. 
On  the  deck,  stood  Eev.  R.  R.  Gurley,  sent  out  by 
the  Colonization  Society,  with  full  powers  to  settle 
grievances  and  to  regulate  the  Society's  affairs  at  the 
Cape.  The  meeting  was  as  delightful  as  it  was  unex- 
pected. There  was  something  in  Ashmun 's  earnest 
and  impressive  manner,  which  deeply  interested  Mr. 
Gurley,  and  he  soon  felt  that  he  was  in  the  presence 
of  no  ordinary  man.  After  some  persuasion,  Mr. 
Ashmun  consented  to  return  to  the  colony  with  him, 
and  on  the  13th  of  August,  the  sloop  hove  in  sight  of 
Cape  Mesurado.  Among  other  important  articles  on 
board  the  Porpoise,  was  a  name  for  the  new  colony- 
At  a  meeting  of  the  Colonization  Society,  in  Decem- 
ber, 1823,  at  the  Senate  Chamber  in  Washington, 
Robert  Goodloe  Harper,  of  Baltimore,  Maryland,  pro- 
posed the  name,  Liberia,  the  home  of  the  free,  which 


92  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

met  with  universal  acceptance.  Its  first  settlement 
"was  called  Monrovia,  in  honour  of  President  Mon- 
roe, who  took  a  deep  interest  in  its  growth  and  wel- 
fare. 

Mr.  Gurley's  stay  in  Africa  was  short,  yet  long 
enough  to  convince  him  that  the  affairs  of  the  colony, 
under  trying  and  embarrassing  circumstances,  had 
been  conducted  with  no  common  ability.  Together, 
they  remodeled  the  laws,  and  settled  the  old  difficul- 
ties, which  had  proved  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  rock  of 
offence  to  the  best  and  most  intelligent  of  the  settlers. 
In  the  new  constitution,  made  at  that  period,  the 
colonists  were  for  the  first  time  admitted  to  a  share 
in  the  government.  One  hundred  of  them  assembled 
beneath  the  thatched  roof  of  their  little  church,  and, 
having  heard  it  read  and  explained,  they  gave  it  their 
cordial  approbation,  and  pledged  fidelity  to  the  sacred 
trust  committed  to  their  hands.  Mr.  Ashmun,  at 
first,  seems  to  have  doubted  the  expediency  of  yield- 
ing to  the  colonists  so  large  a  share  in  its  political 
arrangements  ;  but  his  fears  proved  groundless,  and 
he  declared  a  year  afterwards,  in  relation  to  the 
annual  election  of  officers,  "that  it  was  distinguished 
by  an  intelligent  selection  of  the  most  suitable  men, 
which  afforded  the  best  pledge  of  the  kind  yet  given, 
of  the  increasing  competency  of  the  people  for  self- 
government." 

Peace  having  been  now  established  within  as  well 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  93 

as  without  their  borders,  the  settlers  began  to  turn 
their  attention  more  directly  towards  agriculture. 
Harris  Clarke,  a  farmer  from  the  vicinity  of  Peters- 
burg, Virginia,  raised  the  first  garden  vegetables  in 
the  colony.  His  first  crop  was  eaten  up  by  insects, 
and  his  second  was  destroyed  by  a  flood ;  but  he 
made  a  good  use  of  his  ill  luck,  and  at  last  succeeded 
in  furnishing  earlier,  better,  and  a  greater  abundance 
of  American  vegetables  than  any  other  settler  for 
many  years.  Mr.  C.  M.  Waring,  an  enterprising 
colonist,  at  a  great  expense,  cleared  up  ten  acres  of 
land,  and  planted  it  with  cassada,  rice,  and  other 
grains.  It  promised  a  plentiful  harvest,  when  the 
rice  was  invaded  by  millions  of  ants,  which  ate  it  to 
the  ground.  Soon  the  cassada  shared  a  similar  fate 
from  vermin,  swarming  from  the  neighbouring  wilds, 
and  the  whole  plantation  miscarried.  Deer,  porcu- 
pines, monkies,  and  a  small  species  of  gazelle,  came 
in  troops  to  the  farms,  and  sometimes  laid  acres 
waste  in  a  single  night.  In  this  way  many  of  the 
earliest  settlers  lost  their  all.  Every  one  will  allow 
this  to  have  been  discouraging,  and  it  was  probably 
the  reason  why,  for  so  many  years,  the  Liberians 
were  adverse  to  tillage,  preferring  the  speedier, 
surer  returns  of  trade ;  but  as  the  woods  were  cut 
down,  improved  sytems  of  sgriculture  were  intro 
duced,  and  the  proper  season  for  planting  African 
crops  began  to   be   better  understood,   these   evils 


94  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

gradually  disappeared,  and  the  husbandman  was 
as  amply  rewarded  for  his  toils  in  Africa  as  in 
America. 

The  first  female  in  whose  name  title  deeds  for 
land  in  Liberia  were  executed,  was  Sarah  Draper,  a 
free  coloured  woman  from  Philadelphia,  who,  without 
property  or  friends,  distinguished  herself  by  her 
steady  and  well-direcred  industry.  She  improved 
her  land,  built  a  house,  and  brought  up  two  African 
children  put  in  her  charge  by  the  United  States' 
agency. 

The  United  States'  agency,  as  is  known,  resulted 
from  an  Act  passed  the  3d  of  March,  1819,  "whereby 
the  President  was  authorized  to  make  such  regula- 
tions and  arrangements  as  he  might  deem  expedient, 
for  the  safe  keeping,  support,  and  removal  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  United  States,  of  all  negroes,  mu- 
lattoes,  and  persons  of  colour,  delivered  from  on 
board  vessels  seized  in  the  prosecution  of  the  slave 
trade,  by  commanders  of  United  States  armed 
vessels,  and  to  appoint  a  proper  person  or  persons, 
residing  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  as  agent  or  agents 
for  receiving  such."  The  necessity  of  such  an  act 
by  the  general  government  had  been  long  felt,  by 
the  occurrence  of  cases  like  the  following :  an 
United  States'  ship  captured  a  slaver,  with  thirty- 
eight  negroes,  and  brought  her  into  Georgia.  The 
negroes   were  advertised   for  sale  at  Milledgeville, 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  95 

according  to  an  act  passed  in  1817,  by  the  legislature 
of  Georgia,  whereby  "  all  negroes,  rnulattoes,  and 
persons  of  colour,  brought  in  by  United  States 
armed  vessels,  were  to  be  sold  on  account  of  the 
state,  after  sixty  days'  notice ;"  the  Governor,  how- 
ever, being  authorized  to  deliver  them  to  the  Colo- 
nization Society,  on  the  payment  of  all  expenses. 
The  Eev.  William  Meade,  now  the  excellent  Bishop 
Meade,  of  Virginia,  visited  Georgia  as  the  Society's 
agent,  and  obtained  their  release.  They  were  among 
the  earliest  emigrants  to  Cape  Mesurado.  A  spot 
of  land  was  assigned  them  on  Stockton  creek,  a  few 
miles  from  the  Cape,  to  which  was  given  the  name 
New  Georgia,  a  settlement  which  has  done  credit  to 
African  industry,  and  has  amply  repaid  the  benevo- 
lent exertion  made  in  its  behalf. 

An  appeal,  written  by  Mr.  Ashmun,  for  an  in- 
crease of  pious  labourers  at  the  colony,  re-crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  some  of  the  publications  of  the  day, 
and  fell  under  the  eye  of  the  Kev.  Dr.  Blumhardt, 
one  of  the  Directors  of  the  Basle  Evangelical  Society 
in  Switzerland.  He  immediately  wrote  to  Mr. 
Evarts,  Secretary  of  the  American  Board  for  Foreign 
Missions,  enclosing  letters  to  Mr.  Gurley,  the  Ame- 
rican Colonization  agent,  and  also  to  Mr.  Ashmun, 
in  Liberia.  To  the  latter,  among  other  things,  he 
thus  writes  :  "I  had  much  weighed  in  my  mind,  in 
what  manner  we  might  find  entrance  into  the  negro 


96  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

land,  and,  when  I  read  your  appeal  to  missionary 
societies,  I  really  felt  that  I  had  received  an  answer 
to  inquiries,  which  I  could  not  see  to  whom  to 
direct.  May  I  ask  your  advice  upon  the  following 
points  ? 

"  By  what  kind  of  individuals  do  you  think  the 
first  missionary  attempts  should  he  made  among  the 
Africans  ?  By  such  as  are  exclusively  fitted  for 
teachers,  or  those  who  at  the  same  time  possess  a 
competent  knowledge  of  mechanics  or  agriculture  ? 

81  Are  there  any  preparatory  labours  made  to  facil- 
tate  the  teaching  department  ? 

88  Can  you  form  any  idea  of  the  possible  expense 
of  the  first  establishment  of  a  mission  on  a  small 
scale?" 

To  this  letter,  at  once  so  encouraging  and  auspi- 
cious, Mr.  Ashmun  wrote  an  immediate  reply.  As 
there  are  some  who  may  feel  interested  in  his 
answers  to  the  several  inquiries,  we  briefly  state, 
that  to  the  first  he  expressed  an  opinion  that  a  mis- 
sionary establishment  in  Africa  neither  required,  nor 
ought  to  comprehend,  any  farmers  or  mechanics  who 
are  not  also  well  qualified  teachers,  inasmuch  as 
those  arts  will  advance  as  fast  as  Christianity  ad- 
vances among  the  people.  The  possession,  however, 
of  tools  and  agricultural  implements,  and  a  knowledge 
sufficient  to  enable  them  to  build  their  own  huts  and 
cultivate  their  own  vegetables,  might  be  of  great  use 
to  them. 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  97 

lit  answer  to  the  second,  he  wrote,  that  no  prepa- 
ratory labour  had  been  done,  unless  it  was  that  many 
of  the  tribes  spoke  a  strange  corruption  of  the 
English  language.  In  his  reply  to  the  third  inquiry, 
Mr.  Ashmun  says,  '  •  A  mission  family  will  need  six 
houses,  for  a  place  of  worship,  store  house,  and  resi- 
dences for  a  number  of  native  labourers  and  children. 
These,  in  the  best  native  style,  will  not  cost  more 
than  twenty-five  dollars  each,  and  so  built  will  need 
no  repairs ;  but,  owing  to  the  inroads  of  insects,  new 
houses  must  be  built  every  five  years.  For  the  next 
year,  including  the  buildings,  the  farm,  and  garden, 
and  the  subsistence  of  ten  or  twelve  native  labourers 
and  pupils,  a  mission  family  of  five  persons  need  not 
expend  more  than  fifteen  hundred  dollars." 

As  new  emigrants  arrived,  their  borders  were  en- 
larged by  the  purchase  of  a  fine  tract  of  land  on  the 
St.  Paul's  river,  and  a  new  town  was  laid  out,  called 
Caldwell,  in  honour  of  Elias  B.  Caldwell.  The  land 
was  exceedingly  fertile,  and  the  air  clear  and  whole- 
some The  houses  of  the  settlers  began  to  wear  a 
neat  and  pretty  aspect  without,  while  everything 
within  bespoke  cleanliness  and  comfort.  Labourers 
and  mechanics  found  ample  employment,  and  good 
pay.  In  time,  two  new  chapels  were  built.  Sab- 
bath schools  were  in  successful  operation,  while  four 
day  schools  were  open  during  the  week.  The  boys' 
school  at  Monrovia  was  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Steward, 

H 


98  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

who  received  twenty-five  dollars  a  month  for  his  ser- 
vices; the  rate  of  tuition  for  each  scholar  being 
seventy-five  cents  a  month.  A  school  committee  of 
three  was  chosen  by  a  general  vote  of  the  settlers, 
one  of  whom  weekly  visited  the  schools.  Miss  Jack- 
son, who  had  charge  of  the  girls'  school,  was  paid 
twelve  dollars  a  month.  Every  parent  was  required 
to  educate  his  children.  In  case  of  neglect,  the 
causes  were  speedily  inquired  into,  and  if  poverty 
prevented,  aid  was  rendered  from  the  public  treasury. 
Through  the  labours  of  Eev.  Lott  Caiy  and  Mr. 
Lewis,  a  missionary  school  of  native  children  was 
gathered  and  taught,  which  received  handsome  dona- 
tions of  clothing,  books  and  stationery  from  several 
benevolent  individuals  in  the  United  States,  while 
its  chief  support  was  derived  from  the  Baptist  mis- 
sionary society  of  Richmond,  by  whom  Messrs.  Cary 
and  Lewis  were  in  part  supported.  Good  order, 
good  morals  and  quiet  industry  everywhere  bore  their 
happy  fruits.  The  closing  year  of  1825  beheld  Li- 
beria, long  struggling  with  difficulties,  standing  up 
with  strong  limbs  and  a  smiling  countenance. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  next  year,  two  ships  ar- 
rived with  supplies,  one  of  which  was  the  brig  Vine, 
from  Boston,  having  on  board  sixty  emigrants. 
Eighteen  of  these,  previous  to  their  sailing,  were 
formed  into  a  church,  and  at  the  monthly  concert 
on  the  2nd  of  January,  1826,  services  of  a  deeply 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  99 

interesting  nature  were  holden  in  behalf  of  the 
African  race  at  Park  Street  Church,  Boston.  The 
importance  of  a  printing  press  having  been  spoken 
of,  one  was  given  by  Charles  Tappan,  Esq.,  and 
Samuel  T.  Amstrong  gave  a  fount  of  types.  The 
apparatus  necessary  to  a  printing  establishment  was 
thus  furnished,  and  a  printer,  Mr.  Charles  Force, 
engaged  to  go ;  to  whom  a  salary  of  416  dollars  was 
guaranteed.  The  ship  was  filled  with  agricultural 
implements,  nails,  a  bell  for  the  Lancasterian  school, 
a  pair  of  globes,  and  divers  other  things,  useful  to 
new  settlers.  Rev.  Calvin  Holton,  a  missionary  and 
teacher,  Dr.  Flint,  a  physician,  and  Rev.  Horace 
Sessions,  the  agent  of  the  Massachussets  Colonization 
Society  also  embarked,  the  latter  intending  to  return 
in  the  brig. 

One  aged  black  was  among  the  number,  who 
seemed  to  be  filled  with  almost  youthful  enthusiasm 
for  the  cause.  "  I  go,"  he  exclaimed,  "  to  set  an 
example  to  the  youth  of  my  race.  I  go  to  encourage 
the  young.  They  can  never  be  elevated  here.  I 
have  tried  it  sixty  years, — it  is  in  vain.  Could  I, 
by  my  example,  lead  them  to  set  sail,  and  I  die  the 
next  day,  I  should  be  satisfied." 

They  arrived  safely  in  February,  and  were  hailed 
with  great  joy  by  the  Monro vians.  Suddenly  trans- 
ferred from  a  northern  winter  to  the  summer  heats 
of  the  African  coast,  the  New  England  emigrants 


100  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

suffered  severely  from  the  change.  In  a  short  time, 
two  faithful  and  devoted  friends  to  the  negro  race, 
Messrs.  Sessions  and  Force,  fell  victims  of  the  fever. 
Mr.  Holton  recovered,  and  was  enabled  to  commence 
his  professional  duties.  To  the  subject  of  education 
he  diligently  applied  himself,  but  death  early  closed 
his  much  needed  and  highly  useful  efforts,  to  the 
great  grief  of  his  new  found  friends.  His  place  as 
teacher  was  supplied  by  Mr.  John  McGill,  of  Balti- 
more. 

Meanwhile  Dr.  Blumharclt,  having  received  Mr. 
Ashmun's  letter,  laid  it  before  the  directory  of  the 
Society,  at  Basle.  Five  young  men  were  immedi- 
ately directed  to  prepare  for  missionary  labours 
among  the  native  Africans  in  Liberia.  The  Swiss 
mission  arrived  in  1827,  and  commenced  their  efforts 
by  teaching  a  number  of  young  men,  and  such  of  the 
natives  as  lived  about  the  settlement.  They  re- 
mained some  years  in  the  colony,  until  part  of  their 
number  having  died,  and  others  having  left  on  ac- 
count of  ill  health,  Mr.  Sessing  at  last  removed  to 
Sierra  Leone,  assigning,  as  his  reason,  "  that  the 
door  to  the  natives  was  not  yet  quite  opened,  and 
many  obstacles  are  in  the  way,  which  must  first  be 
removed." 

Their  talents  and  piety  were  universally  esteemed, 
and  the  young  men  whom  they  taught  are  now 
among  the  most  enterprising  and  well  informed 
citizens  of  Liberia. 


FOE  AND  FJGHT.  101 

Emigration  was  rapidly  on  the  increase ;  another 
tract  of  land  was  bought,  and  Millsburg  was  laid  out. 
The  new  Colony  was  advancing  slowly,  yet  surely, 
towards  what  Mills  beheld  it  with  his  large,  pro- 
phetic eye,  before  the  coast  of  Africa  ever  met  his 
gaze.  Tribes  all  along  the  coast  were  anxious  to  be 
on  friendly  and  commercial  terms  with  neighbours 
at  once  so  powerful  and  so  peaceable.  The  Dey 
Chiefs  made  grievous  complaints,  because  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Colony  began  to  injure  the  slave  trade  ; 
for  it  soon  became  evident  that  wherever  its  influence 
extended,  a  more  healthy  and  peaceful  trade  sprang 
up  in  its  stead. 

But  why  not  let  the  settlers  speak  for  themselves  ? 
Owing  to  some  misrepresentations  circulated  in 
America  againt  Liberia,  the  citizens  of  Monrovia 
called  a  meeting  on  the  27th  of  August,  1827,  and 
united  in  an  address  to  the  coloured  people  there, 
in  order  to  correct  their  false  notions,  and  make  a 
plain  statement  of  their  condition.  The  feelings  of 
the  settlers  are  expressed  in  some  of  the  extracts 
here  recorded.  "  The  first  thing  which  caused  our 
voluntary  removal  to  this  country,  and  which  we  still 
regard  with  the  deepest  concern  is  liberty ;  liberty 
in  the  sober,  simple,  but  complete  sense  of  the  word  ; 
that  liberty  of  speech,  action,  and  conscience,  which 
distinguishes  the  free,  enfranchised  citizens  of  a  free 
state,   and  that  liberty  which  was  denied  to  us  in 


102  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

America ;  and  now  we  truly  declare  to  you,  that  our 
hopes  and  expectations  in  this  respoct  have  been 
realized.  Our  constitution  secures  to  us,  as  far  as 
our  condition  allows,  "  all  the  rights  and  privileges 
enjoyed  by  the  citizens  of  the  United  States,'  and 
these  rights  and  privileges  are  ours.  We  are  pro- 
prietors of  the  soil  we  live  on,  and  possess  the  rights 
of  free-holders.  Our  suffrages,  and  what  is  of  more 
importance,  our  sentiments  and  our  opinions,  have 
their  due  weight  in  the  government  wTe  live  under, 
Our  laws'are  our  own,  framed  for  our  exclusive  benefit, 
and  administered  either  by  officers  of  our  own  ap- 
pointment, or  such  as  possess  our  confidence.  We 
have  a  judiciary,  chosen  from  among  ourselves.  We 
serve  as  jurors  in  the  trial  of  others,  and  are  liable 
to  be  tried  ourselves  only  by  juries  of  our  fellow- 
citizens.  We  have  all  that  is  meant  by  liberty  of 
conscience. 

ct  Forming  a  community  of  our  own,  in  the  land 
of  our  forefathers,  having  the  commerce,  soil  and 
resources  of  the  country  at  our  disposal,  we  know 
nothing  of  that  debasing  inferiority  with  which  our 
very  colour  stamped  us  in  America.  There  is 
nothing  here  to  create  the  feeling  on  our  part ; 
nothing  to  cherish  the  feelings  of  superiority  in  the 
minds  of  foreigners  who  visit  us.  It  is  this  moral 
emancipation,  —  this  liberation  of  the  mind  from 
ivorse  than  iron  fetters,  that  repays  us  ten  thousand 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  103 

times  over  for  all  that  it  has  cost  us,  and  makes  us 
grateful  to  God  and  our  American  patrons,  for  the 
happy  change  which  has  taken  place  in  our  situation. 

"  The  true  character  of  the  African  climate  is  not 
well  understood  in  other  countries.  Its  inhahitants 
are  as  robust,  as  healthy,  as  long-lived  to  say  the 
least,  as  those  in  any  other  country.  Nothing  like 
an  epidemic  has  ever  appeared  in  this  colony ;  nor 
can  we  learn  from  the  natives  that  a  sweeping  sick- 
ness has  ever  yet  .visited  this  part  of  the  continent, 
But  the  change  from  a  temperate  to  a  tropical 
climate  is  a  great  one — too  great  not  to  affect  the 
health  more  or  less,  and  in  cases  of  old  people  and 
very  young  children,  often  causes  death.  In  the 
early  years  of  the  colony,  want  of  good  houses,  the 
great  fatigues  and  dangers  of  the  settlers,  their  irre- 
gular mode  of  living,  and  the  hardships  and  discou- 
ragements they  met  with,  greatly  helped  the  other 
causes  of  sickness,  and  were  attended  with  great 
mortality.  But  we  look  back  to  those  times  as  to  a 
season  of  trial,  long  past  and  nearly  forgotten. 

"  People  now  arriving  have  comfortable  houses  to 
receive  them ;  will  enjoy  the  regular  attendance  of  a 
physician ;  will  be  surrounded  and  attended  by  a 
healthy,  happy  people,  who  have  borne  the  effects  of 
the  climate,  who  will  encourage  and  fortify  them 
against  that  despondency,  which  alone  has  carried 
off  several  in  the  first  years  of  the  -colony.     A  more 


1  04  AFRICA  REDEEMED 

fertile  soil  and  productive  country,  so  far  as  it  is 
cultivated,  there  is  not,  we  believe,  on  the  face  ot  the 
earth.  Its  hills  and  plains  are  covered  with  a  ver- 
dure which  never  fades. 

"  Cattle,  swine,  fowls,  ducks,  goats  and  sheep, 
thrive  without  feeding,  and  require  no  other  care 
than  to  keep  them  from  straying.  Cotton,  coffee, 
indigo  and  sugar,  may  be  cultivated  at  pleasure,  to 
any  extent.  The  same  may  be  said  of  rice,  Indian 
com,  millet  and  fruits,  and  vegetables  too  numerous 
to  be  mentioned, 

';  Our  trade  is  already  valuable,  and  fast  increa- 
sing. It  is  carried  on  in  the  productions  of  the 
country,  consisting  of  rice,  palm  oil,  ivory,  tortoise- 
shell,  dye-woods,  gold,  hides,  wax,  and  brings  us  in 
return  the  products  and  manufactures  of  the  four 
quarters  of  the  world.  Seldom,  indeed,  is  our  har- 
bour free  from  European  and  American  shipping. 

;i  Not  a  child  or  youth  but  is  provided  with  an 
appropriate  school.  We  have  a  large  public  library 
court-house,  meeting-houses,  school-houses,  and  for- 
tifications. 

"  Our  houses  are  built  of  the  same  materials,  and 
furnished  in  the  same  stvle,  as  in  the  towns  of 
America.  "We  have  an  abundance  of  good  building- 
stone,  shells  for  lime,  and  clay  for  brick. 

"  The  cheerful  abodes  of  civilization  and  happi- 
ness which  are  scattered  over  this  verdant  mountain, 


FOE  AND  FIGHT.  105 

the  flourishing  settlements  which  are  spreading 
around  it ;  the  sounds  of  Christian  instruction,  and 
scenes  of  Christian  worship,  which  are  heard  and 
seen  in  this  scene  of  pagan  darkness ;  a  thousand 
contented  freemen  united  in  founding  a  new  Chris- 
tian Empire,  happy  themselves,  and  the  instruments 
of  happiness  to  others  ;  conclusively  testifies  to  the 
wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  plan  of  Colonization." 

Have  not  these  men  clear  heads  and  true  hearts  ? 
Do  they  not  prove  themselves  worthy  of  laying  the 
foundations  of  this  new  republic  ? 

Mr.  Ashmun,  whose  soul-stirring  energies  were 
all  at  work  for  the  improvement  and  welfare  of  this 
infant  settlement,  at  last  sank  under  the  weight  of 
his  burdens.  He  was  told  that  nothing  probably 
could  save  him,  but  a  voyage  to  the  United  States, 
wrhere  his  services  began  to  be  highly  estimated  by 
all  the  friends  of  Liberia.  In  March,  1828,  he  went 
on  board  the  brig  Doris,  escorted  by  the  military, 
and  accompanied  by  a  large  body  of  the  settlers. 
Men,  women  and  children  flocked  around  him  on 
the  wharf,  weeping  and  sorrowful,  and  willing  only 
to  part  from  him  in  the  hope  of  a  speedy  return, 
with  recovered  strength.  It  was  a  sad  day  at  Mon- 
rovia. "  He  is  so  dear  to  us !"  they  exclaimed. 
"Oh,  it  will  be  a  joyful  day  when  we  are  permitted 
to  see  him  again!"  That  day  never  came.  Mr. 
Ashmun  left  Africa  for  ever.     He  died  a  few  days 


106  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

after  his  arrival,  and  was  buried  at  New  Haven, 
where  his  monument,  erected  by  the  Colonization 
Society,  may  be  visited.  Liberia  lost  a  master  work- 
man. Ardent,  yet  steady,  brave,  yet  prudent;  of 
inflexible  faithfulness  and  unwearied  energies,  he 
was  a  man  equal  to  his  day.  And  that  day  was  one 
of  danger,  perplexity  and  toil.  Before  leaving,  he 
entrusted  his  agency  to  the  vice-agent  Lott  Gary. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

LOTT    CAEY. 

"  So  thou  didst  reap  the  meed 
Most  grateful  to  thy  heart ;  the  glorious  view 

Of  ignorance  dispelled  ; 

The  arts  improved,  and  0  most  blessed  thought ! 
That  faith  which  trampled  slavery  underfoot, 
And  led  captivity  in  captive  chains, 
Embraced  by  men  in  superstition  sunk." 

Gkahame. 

No  one  is  sorry  to  see  Lott  Gary  at  this  respon- 
sible post,  for  he  can  sustain  himself  with  dignity 
and  wisdom.     After  Mr.   Ashman's    departure,  he 
called  all  the  officers  of  the  colony  together,  and 
read  to  them  the  instructions  left  in  his  hands. 

"I  trust,"  he  said,  "through  the  great  blessing 
of  the  Euler  of  events,  we  may  be  able  to  realize 
the  expectations  of  Mr.  Ashmun,  and  render  entire 
satisfaction  to  the  board  of  managers." 

About  the  last  of  June,  the  colonists  were  thrown 
into  some  alarm  by  three  suspicious  looking  vessels 
which  appeared  to  be  hovering  around  the  coast.  At 
length,  one  of  them  ran  up  Spanish  colours,  and 
stood  in  for  the  harbour.     Gary  suspected  them  to 


108  AFRICA  REDEEMED, 

be  slavers,  and  ordered  a  cannon  to  be  fired  from 
the  fort.  At  this  she  speedily  sent  a  boat  ashore, 
saying,  she  was  no  slaver,  but  being  chassd  by  a 
brig,  had  put  in  there  for  protection.  "  Besides,  we 
want  to  wood  and  water,"  they  added. 

"  I  don't  believe  a  word  of  it,"  stoutly  answered 
Cary.  "  I  know  a  slaver  any  time  by  the  cut  of  her 
jib.  Tell  her  captain  she  can  neither  wood  or  water 
at  Liberia.  We  wash  our  hands  entirely  clear  of  any 
part  or  lot  in  the  slave  trade.  In  one  hour,  if  she 
is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  our  guns,  we  shall  fire." 

The  spirited  answer  caused  the  Spanish  captain  to 
weigh  anchor  with  all  dispatch,  and  she  was  soon  out 
of  the  waters. 

Amid  ail  the  cares  of  business,  he  never  lost  sight 
of  the  great  object  which  brought  him  to  Africa,  to 
make  known  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  He 
preached  acceptably,  not  only  to  his  own  church,  at 
Monrovia,  but  made  frequent  missionary  tours  among 
the  native  tribes,  where  some  marked  and  hopeful 
conversions  were  the  result  of  his  labours.  He 
greatly  felt  the  importance  of  having  good  schools 
throughout  the  settlements,  and  seized  every  oppor- 
tunity of  laying  his   views  before  his  countrymen. 

In  everything  Lott  Cary  acted  upon  the  liberal 
and  comprehensive  views  of  his  predecessor,  and  the 
colony  was  thriving  under  his  administration,  when 
King  Brister,   a  neighbouring  chief,  suddenlv   one 


LOTT  GARY.  109 

night,  attacked  and  robbed  a  factory  owned  by  the 
colony,  a  few  miles  north  of  Monrovia,  and  put  it 
into  the  hands  of  a  slave-trader.  Gary  instantly 
sent  to  the  chief  to  ask  what  such  a  proceeding 
meant,  and  to  get  satisfaction  for  the  stolen  goods. 
No  answer  was  returned.  He  sent  a  letter  to  the 
trader.  The  letter  was  seized  by  some  native  senti- 
nels, and  torn  up.  Finding  gentle  measures  made 
no  impressions  upon  the  savages,  he  called  out  the 
military,  and  began  to  prepare  for  stronger  ones. 
In  the  evening,  while  several  men  were  in  an  out- 
building manufacturing  cartridges  for  the  next  day's 
service,  one  of  the  workmen  accidentally  overturned 
a  candle ;  it  fell  in  some  powder,  which  instantly 
exploding,  blew  up  the  building,  and  killed  eight  of 
their  number,  one  of  wThom  was  Lott  Gary.  The 
mournful  tidings  ran  from  settlement  to  settlement, 
producing  sorrow  and  alarm  in  every  bosom.  Cut 
off  in  the  midst  of  great  usefulness,  the  event  was 
solemn  and  afflicting  to  his  brethren  and  to  the 
whole  colony,  But  "  the  Lord  knoweth  the  end 
from  the  beginning."  "  He  cutteth  down,  and  He 
maketh  alive.  Unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and 
his  ways  are  past  finding  out."  Lott  Gary  stands 
forth  a  noble  specimen  of  what  the  negro  is  capable 
of  being ;  a  thinking,  intelligent,  sagacious,  Chris- 
tian freeman. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE    GAP    FILLED    UP. 

"  Youth's  buoyant  spirit  languished  in  his  frame. 
He  turned  from  pleasure  and  grew  cold  to  fame  ; 
But  not  in  moody  loneliness  he  pined 
For  fortunes  treacherous^  or  for  foes  unkind. 
Oh  !  warmed  by  charity — the  angel  guest, 
Of  all  man's  heavenly  ministrants  the  best  ; 
By  her,  inspired  to  take  the  suppliant's  place 
To  live  unblessed  for  Afric's  injured  race." 

Mr.  Ashmuns  death  gave  to  the  managers  of  the 
Colonization  Society  a  great  shock.  They  had  seen 
how  the  Colony  prospered  under  his  management, 
and  were  ready  to  acknowledge  his  distinguished 
merits.  Where  now  shall  they  look  for  a  successor 
to  such  a  man  ?  Who  will  go  ?  One  there  was 
among  that  Board  of  Managers,  who,  having  traced 
Ashmuns  career  at  first  with  suspicion  and  distrust, 
and  afterwards  with  respect  and  admiration,  seemed 
affected  in  no  ordinary  degree.  It  was  a  young 
physician,  intensely  interested  in  the  cause  of  Colo- 
nization— Dr.  Eichard  Eandall,  a  man  of  science, 
ability,  and  of  great  kindness  of  heart,  already  in 
extensive    practice  at  the  city  of  Washington,  and 


THE  GAP  FILLED  UP.  Ill 

Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Columbian  College. 
A  deep  seriousness  overspread  his  mind ;  his  voice 
was  scarcely  heard  among  the  councils  of  the  Board. 
It  was  evident  something  weighed  heavily  upon  his 
spirit,  At  last  he  exclaimed,  "I  offer  myself  to 
Liberia — here  am  I — send  me  !"  As  soon  as  it  was 
known,  his  friends  gathered  around,  beseeching  him 
to  consider  the  dangers  of  such  an  enterprise. 
"  Think  of  the  exposure  !"  they  cried ;  "the  hazards 
of  a  life  in  Africa — think  of  the  society,  the  business, 
the  reputation,  which  you  abandon — think  of  your 
career  at  Washington,  already  so  brilliant!" 

"In  doing  what  seems  to  be  my  duty,"  he 
answered  calmly,  but  firmly,  "  I  disregard  life. 
With  my  present  purposes  and  feelings,  I  can 
readily  give  up  the  endearing  intercourse  of  rela- 
tions, the  delights  of  refined  society,  the  promised 
success  of  professional  exertion,  for  the  humble  duty 
of  promotiny  the  happiness  of  the  poor  negroes  in 
Africa,  and  be  happy  in  so  doing  "  Another  instance 
of  that  spirit  of  self-sacrifice,  that  heroic  devotion, 
which  so  emphatically  distinguished  the  leaders  of 
this  noble  enterprise.  He  arrived  at  Monrovia  about 
six  weeks  after  Lott  Gary's  death,  December  22, 
1828,  in  company  with  Dr.  Mechlin,  a  young  gentle- 
man who  went  out  as  physician  of  the  Colony.  Dr. 
Randall  had  longed  to  behold  Liberia,  nor  were  his 
most    ardent    hopes    disappointed.      The    location 


112  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

seemed  to  him  commanding  and  beautiful,  and  the 
climate  delightful.     One  of  his  earliest  duties  was 
to  locate  some  re-captured  negroes,  which  he  did  on 
a  tract  of  land  purchased  by  Mr.   Cary;  and   the 
settlement  was  named,  in  memory  of  him  Carytown. 
The  difficulty  with  King  Brister,  in  which  Cary 
lost  his  life,  was  finally  settled,  and  the  slave  factory 
broken  up.     Being  anxious  to  explore  the  interior, 
and  learn  more  of  the  resources  of  the  back  country, 
with  three  of  the  colonist  traders,  Dr.  Randall  visited 
King    Boatswain    at   his    capital,   some    fifty   miles 
inland,  the  traders  carrying  tobacco,  pipes,  muskets 
and  powder,  to  receive  in  return,  bullocks,  ivory  and 
gold.     Their  way  led  through  huge  forests,  filled 
with  elephants  and  all  manner  of  wild  beasts,  and 
they  met  no  one  but  the  elephant  hunters,  who  on 
every   occasion   treated   them    with    great   civility. 
King  Boatswain,  it  is  remembered,  was  a  powerful 
king,  always  at  war  with  his  neighbours,  to  supply 
the   demand   of  the  slave-trade,  in   which  he    was 
deeply  engaged.     Three  thousand  warriors   formed 
his  body  guard.     The  colonists  were  hospitably  en- 
tertained, for   King  Boatswain,  with  all  his  power, 
feared  the  Liberians.     In  February,  the  Doctor  had 
the  African  fever,  which  he  did  not  regard  half  so 
dangerous  as  an  Alabama  fever,  and  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible,  was  up,  pushing  his  discoveries  towards  the 
sources    of  the    St.    Pauls   river.     Here,    through 


THE  GAP  PILLED  CJP.  I  J :» 

fatigue  and  exposure,  he  took  a  severe  cold,  and  on 
the  10th  of  April,  1830,  he  died,  lamented  by  all 
who   knew   him.     His  early  death  blighted  bright 

promises  of  future  usefulness. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

mechlin's  administration. 

"  My  notion  is,  that  no  missionaryzing  is  half  so  good,  a^ 
to  try  to  pour  sound  and  healthy  blood  into  a  young,  civi- 
lized society ;  to  make  our  colony,  if  possible,  like  the  ancient 
colonies  or  like  New  England — a  living  sucker  from  the  mother 
country,  bearing  the  same  blossoms  and  the  same  fruits  ;  not 
a  reproduction  of  its  vilest  excrescences,  its  ignorance  and  its 
wickedness,  while  all  the  good  elements  are  left  behind  in  the 
process." — Dr.  Arnold. 

Dr.  Mechlin,  the  young  man  who  accompanied 
Mr.  Kandall  as  physician  to  the  Colony,  after  his  death 
succeeded  him  in  the  government.  Emigrants  con- 
tinued to  arrive  in  Liberia  in  such  large  numbers, 
that  it  was  feared  by  many,  the  means  of  education 
and  Christian  improvement  might  not  keep  pace 
with  her  numerous  accessions.  Accordingly,  a  brig 
was  chartered  at  Philadelphia,  to  bring  out  two  Swiss 
missionaries  from  the  Missionary  Society  at  Basle,  Dr. 
Anderson,  a  physician,  and  fifty  negroes.  Mr.  Joseph 
Sheppard,  a  highly  successful  coloured  teacher  from 
Richmond,  soon  followed,  to  open  a  high  school  at 
Monrovia,  and  Rev.  George  Erskine,  a  coloured  Pres- 
byterian clergyman  from  Tennessee.     No  sooner  did 


mechlin's  administration.  115 

he  reach  the  shores  of  Africa,  than  he  wrote :  "I 
am  thankful  to  the  Great  Parent  in  Heaven,  that  I 
may  preach  the  gospel  in  Africa.  He  has  brought 
me  into  this  harvest-field,  which  is  indeed  white  for 
labour.  I  long  to  be  engaged  heart  and  hand  in  this 
glorious  work."  The  hopes  of  the  good  man  realized 
but  in  part.  After  some  months  he  was,  through 
great  imprudence,  seized  with  the  fever  ;  feeling  the 
approach  of  death,  he  called  his  son-in-law,  Zion 
Harris,  to  his  bedside,  and  laying  his  hand  impres- 
sively upon  him,  prayed  that  he  might  one  day  return 
to  Tennessee,  and  bring  to  Liberia  the  children  and 
grandchildren  whom  he  had  left  behind.  Mr.  Harris 
promised  obedience  to  these  his  last  wishes,  and  the 
old  man  laid  himself  peacefully  down  to  die. 

About  this  time  also  arrived  Mr.  J.  B.  Russwurm, 
a  coloured  gentleman  educated  at  Bowdoin  College, 
who,  not  long  after,  established  a  paper,  called  the 
"  Liberia  Herald,"  the  first  number  of  whieh  excited 
no  small  degree  of  interest  in  the  United  States,  as 
an  evidence  of  the  growth  and  demands  of  the  Colony. 
We  find  one  notice  of  an  exceedingly  interesting,  as 
well  as  important,  nature,  as  showing  something  of  the 
tone  of  public  opinion  upon  the  subject  of  Temper- 
ance, as  early  as  1829.     It  is  thus  : — 

"  Organized,  on  the  15th  instant,  the  second 
Trading  Company  of  Liberia,  on  the  basis  of  uniform 


116  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

prices  and  equitable  trade,  both  with  the  different 
tribes  and  foreign  nations.  Any  traffic  in  human 
blood  or  spirituous  liquors  with  the  natives  is  a 
violation  of  the  constitution,  and  incurs  heavy 
penalties." 

Here  is  another  notice  which  may  interest: 

"Wanted  immediately  —  the  following  articles, 
namely:  boards,  planks,  shingles,  window  glass, 
nails,  crockery,  all  kinds  of  hard- ware,  household 
furniture,  tobacco,  pipes,  pound  beads,  American 
cottons,  ginghams,  calicoes,  shoes,  hose,  cambrics, 
muslins,  buttons,  thread,  combs,  butter,  lard  and 
hams.  In  exchange  of  which,  may  be  had  camwood, 
ivory,  turtle-shell,  gold  dust,  deer,  leopard,  and  tiger 
skins,  goats,  sheep,  and  fruits." 

Liberia  now  received  a  visit  from  two  coloured 
gentlemen,  Rev.  Gloster  Simpson,  and  Mr.  Archy 
Moore,  members  of  the  Methodist  Church  of  Mis- 
sisssippi,  sent  out  by  the  free  coloured  people  of 
Natchez,  to  see  the  colony  and  make  a  faithful 
report  of  every  thing  which  fell  beneath  their  notice. 
They  were  warmly  welcomed,  and  hospitably  enter- 
tained at  Monrovia.  Soon  after  their  arrival,  the 
Methodist  Quarterly  Meeting  was  holden,  whose 
exercises  filled  their  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness. 


mechlin's  administration.  117 

"I  seem  to  be  born  a  second  time,"  exclaimed  Mr. 
Simpson ;  "the  heavens  appear  to  open  over  our  heads 
— every  thing  looks  kindly  around  us — this  is  indeed 
the  home  of  the  coloured  man !"  On  walking 
around,  and  being  shown  the  graves  of  the  mission- 
aries, ivhite  men,  who  had  come  to  preach  to  poor, 
benighted  Africa,  but  who,  in  rapid  succession,  had 
fallen  martyrs  to  the  cause,  he  cried  with  deep 
solemnity ;  "  Oh,  Lord !  and  shall  there  not  come 
from  our  own  ranks  men  to  take  their  places,  and 
preach  to  our  benighted  brethren,  the  gospel  of 
Christ  ?  For  one,  I  am  willing  and  determined  to 
come."  Receiving  an  invitation  to  dine  with  Mr. 
Devany,  the  high  sheriff  of  Liberia,  they  were  intro- 
duced into  a  parlour,  handsomely  furnished  with 
carpets,  mirrors,  and  two  elegant  sofas.  Presently 
the  folding-doors  opened,  and  they  were  conducted 
to  a  table  spread  with  everything  that  could  tempt 
the  appetite.  The  style  of  living,  farming,  trading  ; 
the  climate,  soil,  and  means  of  improvement,  went 
far  beyond  their  expectations.  After  a  stay  of  three 
weeks,  they  left  in  the  ship  Jupiter,  and  on  arriving 
at  New  York  city,  published  the  following  Card : 

"  During  a  residence  of  nearly  three  weeks  at 
Liberia,  we  visited  the  four  principal  settlements,  in 
all  which  we  found  the  settlers  healthy,  well  pleased 
with  their   situation,    and  improving    their  circum- 


1  1  8  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

stances  very  rapidly.  A  uniform  expression  of  gra- 
tification, that  they  had  found  a  place  of  freedom 
and  comfort  in  Africa,  was  uttered  without  exception. 
Such  was  the  impression  made  on  our  minds,  of  the 
advantages  of  emigration  to  this  Colony,  that  we  are 
determined  to  report  favourably  of  the  object,  to 
those  who  sent  us  — and  as  the  best  testimony  of  our 
full  persuasion  of  its  great  advantages,  have  deter- 
mined to  settle  our  business,  and  remove  thence,  the 
first  opportunity.  We  see  our  brethren  there,  free- 
men, and  advanced  to  the  full  privilege  of  unre- 
strained enterprise  and  Christian  liberty.'' 

Gloster  Simpson, 
Archy  Moore. 

As  emigration  flowed  in,  an  extension  of  territory 
became  necessary.  The  Colonial  Agent  made  a 
journey  to  the  Bassa  country,  sixty- five  miles  down 
the  coast,  and  bought  a  tract  of  land  at  the  mouth 
of  St.  John's  river.  Mr.  Ashmun  had  always  con- 
sidered this  an  important  point,  and  had  negotiated 
with  the  kings  to  settle  there,  but  owing  to  a  dis- 
trust of  the  savages  in  that  quarter,  and  a  want  of 
proper  means  to  defend  it,  no  settlement  had  ever 
been  made,  except  the  erection  of  a  store-house,  to 
buy  palm-oil,  camwood,  ivory  and  rice.  Mr.  Mech- 
lin now  determined  to  beat  up  volunteers,  offering  a 
bounty   to   every    settler,    besides   his    farm    lands. 


mechlin's  administkation.  119 

Thirty- three  stout  men  offered  themselves  as  pio- 
neers, and  with  their  tools  and  stores  were  sent  down 
in  a  sloop.  They  set  ahout  clearing  up  the  thick 
forest  with  great  diligence.  Soon  a  little  spot  began 
to  open  to  the  light,  rude  huts  to  arise,  with  a 
strong,  high  fence  around  them,  as  a  wall  of  defence 
against  wild  beasts  and  savages.  The  natives  in  this 
quarter,  had,  on  several  occasions,  proved  faithless 
to  their  promises,  which  caused  the  settlers  to  be 
suspicious  of  their  professions.  A  fast  friend  was 
soon  found  in  Bob  Grey,  an  active  and  powerful 
chief,  who  came  generously  forward,  and  stood  by 
them  through  several  dangers.  He  saw  clearly  all 
the  advantages  which  the  settlers  enjoyed  over  the 
native  tribes,  and  was  very  anxious  to  have  a  school 
in  his  own  town,  "  one  them  good  head-men,  dat 
talks  good  things  to  people."  The  pioneers  in  due 
time  sent  for  their  families,  and  others  quickly  fol- 
lowed. The  name  Edina  was  given  to  this  settle- 
ment, in  honour  of  some  Christian  friends  in  Edin- 
burgh, Scotland,  who  assisted  them  in  various  w?ays. 
At  Edina  was  a  famous  tree,  called  the  Devil's 
Bush,  where  many  a  wretched  victim  had  been  sacri- 
ficed. If  any  calamity  befall  the  natives,  it  is  attri- 
buted to  witchcraft.  In  such  a  case,  they  go  to  the 
Grand  Devil9  and  pray  him  to  point  out  the  witch  ; 
the  Grand  Devil  points  out  any  one  he  pleases,  as 
the  suspected  person.     He  is  immediately  seized,  to 


120  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

be  put  on  trial;  the  people  form  around  him.  and 
he  is  forced  by  the  Grand  Devil,  in  full  dress,  to 
drink  a  two-gallon  pot  of  poison,  steeped  from  the 
sassy  wood,  a  very  poisonous  tree.  If  the  victim 
survives,  he  is  regarded  innocent — and  this  is  pos- 
sible, if  in  a  short  time  he  can  freely  vomit.  But  if 
the  poison  remains  long  on  the  stomach,  the  subject 
dies  in  great  agony:  and  what  adds  to  his  misery, 
on  drinking  the  fatal  bowl,  a  guard  of  soldiers  ap- 
proach, chasing  him  around  on  the  hot  sand,  with 
sticks  and  knives,  allowing  him  no  rest  until  he 
siuks  exhausted  and  dying  before  his  persecutors. 
The  settlers  built  a  neat  Baptist  church  beneath  the 
long  spreading  branches  of  the  Devil's  Bush,  at 
Edina,  that  the  habitations  of  cruelty  might  echo 
with  the  praises  of  the  living  God. 

Another  important  site,  Cape  Mount,  long  de- 
sired by  Mr.  Ashmun,  was  negotiated  for  by  the 
Agent.  It  is  a  fine  height  of  land,  forty-eight  miles 
northwest  of  Cape  Mesurado  :  it  had  long  been  an 
important  trading  post,  affording,  as  it  did,  good 
anchorage  and  a  safe  landing  for  vessels,  with  a 
command  of  the  mouth  of  the  Pissou,  which  extends 
one  hundred  miles  into  the  interior.  Formerly  this 
place  had  been  an  extensive  slave  market.  The 
English  had  in  vain  tried  to  buy  it,  and  Mr.  Ash- 
mun made  various  offers  for  purchase,  which  the 
Cape  Mount  Chiefs  steadily  declined,  although  they 


MECHLIN  S  ADMINISTRATION .  121 

suffered  him  to  erect  a  warehouse  for  the  purposes 
of  trade.  Mr.  Mechlin  made  a  treaty,  securing  the 
land  to  the  Colony,  whenever  it  should  he  sold, 
and  stipulating  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave- 
trade. 

The  native  chiefs  kept  a  sharp  look-out  upon  every 
thing  passing  around  them,  and  they  could  not  fail 
to  see  what  advantages  the  new-comers  had  over 
their  own  people.  King  Long  Peter  undertook  to 
reason  on  the  subject.  "Yes,  here  am  I  and  my 
tribe,  always  afraid  lest  the  bigger  kings  get  mad,  or 
get  poor,  or  want  goods— -then  they  come  pounce  on 
us,  steal  us,  handcuff  us,  whip  us,  sell  us  slaves  over 
the  seas.  New  settlers  no  such  fear.  Here  I,  my 
tribe,  Devil  King  made  us  drink  sassy  water  we 
die — we  don't  want  to  die — we — die — settlers  don't 
drink  sassy  water — I'll  be  settlers — I'll  be" — and 
away  he  sent  a  deputation  to  Governor  Mechlin, 
begging  to  place  himself  and  his  men  under  the  pro- 
tection of  Liberia.  The  governor  and  council  said, 
"  Yes,  if  3^ou  will  be  no  more  called  king,  if  you  will 
mind  our  laws,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
neighbouring  tribes."  When  the  answer  was  brought 
to  the  king,  he  and  his  poor  people  were  so  glad 
they  did  not  know  what  to  do  ;  they  wanted  to  rush 
in  a  body  to  Monrovia  to  express  their  thanks. 
"Yes,  yes,"  they  shouted,  clapping  their  hands; 
"yes,  yes,  we'll  mind  the  laws— we  be  like  you — we 


1  22  AFRICA  REDEEMED, 

be  Liberians.'1  Not  long  after,  Far  Gay,  Prince 
Will,  and  King  Torn,  wished  to  follow  Long  Peter's 
example,  "  We  'fraid  King  Boatswain— he  terrible 
slave-dealer — his  bloody  warriors — snatch  us  off  any 

night — we  be  Liberians,  then  we  be  no  slaves we 

no  fear." 

Some  of  the  kings  began  to  grow  jealous  of  the 
increasing  influence  of  the  Colony,  and  longed  for 
an  opportunity  of  commencing  hostilities  against  it. 
x\t  last  they  seized  upon  some  of  the  border  settlers, 
and  robbed  their  houses.  A  messenger  was  quickly 
dispatched  to  demand  their  release.  "  Tell  your 
Governor  we  shall  not  give  them  up — no  !  no  ! — but 
we  mean  to  seize  and  imprison  every  colonist  we  can 
fall  in  with.  We  are  for  war,  war,  war !  they 
said  scornfully:  "we  'fraid  of  war?  no!  go  back, 
tell  him;"  and  the  next  day  a  large  body  of  savages 
appeared  on  the  bank  of  St.  Paul's  river,  opposite 
Caldwell,  blowing  their  war-horns,  firing  their  mus- 
kets, and  with  loud  and  angry  yells  daring  everybody 
to  a  fight.  A  small  force  was  sent  over  the  river,  to 
King  Willy's  town,  where  they  were  driven  back  by 
the  superiority  of  numbers.  The  savages  were  highly 
delighted  by  this  seeming  success.  They  sent  to 
the  colonists  "  Come,  meet  us  again  for  fight— come, 
or  we  fall  on  Caldwell,  on  Millsburgh,  we  burn  'em, 
we  plunder,  we  kill !" 

Dr.  Mechlin  immediately  resorted  to  more  decided 


mechlin's  administration.  123 

measures.  A  force  of  270  men  were  collected  under 
the  command  of  our  old  friend,  Elijah  Johnson,  who 
crossed  the  river,  and  on  the  first  day  captured  King 
Brumley's  capital,  without  even  a  show  of  opposition. 
The  next  day,  they  took  up  their  line  of  march  for 
King  Willy's  town,  where  a  large  body  of  savages 
were  firmly  encamped.  Though  the  distance  was 
but  ten  miles,  they  were  seven  hours  on  the  route, 
in  many  places  being  obliged  to  force  their  way 
through  large  trees  and  thick  underbrush,  cut  down 
and  piled  up  to  stop  their  passage.  Issuing  at  last 
from  the  narrow  path,  they  suddenly  found  them- 
selves in  front  of  the  enemy's  barricade,  a  huge  pile 
of  logs,  filled  with  loop-holes,  through  which  their 
guns  were  pointed.  A  cannon  was  so  placed  as  to 
do  great  execution  in  the  narrow  path,  which  the 
settlers  crowded.  Besides  this  a  force  was  placed  in 
ambuscade,  to  attack  the  little  army  on  the  flank. 
Captain  Johnson  instantly  saw  it,  and  word  was  im- 
mediately given  to  fire  on  the  ambuscade.  At  the 
same  moment  a  Dey  chief,  the  principal  mover  of 
the  war,  was  shot  down  while  setting  fire  to  his 
cannon.  At  these  unexpected  disasters,  the  savages 
fell  into  confusion  and  fled.  Capt.  Johnson  pressed 
forward,  captured  the  field-piece,  and  found  that  it 
was  loaded  to  the  muzzle  with  pieces  of  iron  bolts, 
pot  metal,  and  balls,  which  must  have  proved  dread- 
fully destructive  to  their  ranks,  huddled  together  as 


T24  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

they  were  in  so  narrow  a  space.  It  was  not  long 
before  some  of  the  confederate  kings  sent  messengers 
to  sue  for  peace.  The  Agent  sent  word,  they  must 
come  themselves,  and  see  upon  what  terms  peace 
could  be  agreed  to.  In  a  short  time,  King  Blister, 
Willy,  Sitma,  Short  Peter,  and  King  Jemmy,  ap- 
peared at  Monrovia,  extremely  humbled  by  their 
late  defeats.  They  readily  consented  to  the  terms, 
and  a  treaty  was  speedily  signed;  for  the  energy 
and  courage  of  the  Liberians,  in  bringing  their 
artillery  through  the  thick  forests,  and  attacking  a 
town  which  thev  had  hitherto  considered  one  of  their 
strongest  holds,  filled  them  with  the  profoundest 
alarm.  "War  no  with  them  agin — war  no — peace, 
good  peace,"  they  said,  and  very  wisely. 

Two  promising  missionaries  left  America  to  come 
to  Liberia  at  this  time  :  Mr,  Cox,  sent  out  by  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  Mr.  Pinney,  from 
the  Presbyterian.  They  seemed  to  understand  their 
field,  and  with  the  largest  plans  of  usefulness  began 
their  labours,  with  cheerful  courage  and  ardent 
hopes.  The  career  of  Cox  was  short.  With  his 
armour  just  buckled  on,  he  fell  in  the  conflict.  In 
the  spirit  of  a  true  hero,  his  last  words  were, 
"  Write  on  my  monument  "  Let  thousands  fall 
before  Africa  be  abandoned:'  "Let  thousands  fall 
before  Africa  be  abandoned  !"  The  glorious  message 
echoed  over  the  broad  Atlantic,  and  kindled  in  other 


mechlin's  administration.  125 

hearts  the  fires  of  a  lofty  purpose  and  a  heavenly 
zeal.  Two  missionaries,  with  their  young  wives, 
resolved  to  give  themselves  to  Africa,  and  as  soon  as 
possible  set  sail  to  occupy  the  post  of  the  lamented 
Cox,  and  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  those  who  sat  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death.  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are 
the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  pub- 
lisheth  peace,  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  good, 
that  publisheth  salvation,  that  saith  unto  the  nations, 
Thy  God  reigneth." 

After  a  time,  the  health  of  Dr.  Mechlin  having 
failed,  he  resigned  his  situation,  and  returned  to  the 
United  States. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS. 

' '  All  beginnings  must  be  small :  it  is  only  by  slowly  and 
heavily  piling  one  stone  on  another,  that  foundations  are  ever 
made.  Discouraging  as  such  beginnings  are,  it  is  evident  on 
looking  back  on  every  such  enterprise,  that  their  hopelessness 
at  first  has  been  their  greatest  blessing,  calling  out  patient 
hope,  inspiring  successive  as  well  as  strong  endeavours,  and 
giving  the  new  element  time  to  ripen  into  consistency  and 
hardness,  to  bear  the  weight  that  shall  afterwards  come." 

North  American  Review. 

On  the  resignation  of  Dr.  Mechlin,  the  temporary 
sendees  of  the  Rev.  John  B.  Pinney,  who  had  re- 
turned to  the  United  States  on  account  of  his  health, 
were  secured  for  the  Colonial  Agency.  He  returned 
to  Liberia  on  the  1st  of  January,  1834,  and  was 
received  hy  the  Monrovian  authorities  with  all  the 
respect  due  to  his  distinguished  position.  Already 
familiar  with  the  moral  and  social  wants  of  the 
people,  among  whom  he  was  greatly  "beloved,  he 
made  himself  speedily  acquainted  with  the  duties  of 
his  new  office,  and  set  ahout  discharging  them  with 
great  energy  and  judgment.  The  government  build- 
ings were  refitted.     A  beautiful  craft  of  100  tons, 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  127 

which  had  been  built  and  equipped,  at  a  cost  of 
nearly  4000  dols.,  by  the  Pennsylvania  Colonization 
Society,  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  which  had  been 
laid  up  for  want  of  tackling,  was  put  in  thorough 
repair,  and  sent  down  the  coast  upon  a  trading  expe- 
dition. This  schooner  was  called  Margaret  Mercer, 
in  commemoration  of  the  virtues  and  sacrifices  of 
that  noble-hearted  woman  in  behalf  of  the  cause  of 
emancipation.  For  the  use  of  the  sick,  a  large  hos- 
pital was  planned,  to  be  built  upon  a  high  and 
healthy  bluff  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  There 
were,  at  this  time,  many  floating  and  disputed  land 
titles  in  the  colony,  occasioning  much  jarring  and 
discord.  To  examine  and  settle  these,  the  new 
agent  applied  himself  with  the  greatest  assiduity. 

In  the  month  of  June,  interesting  and  important 
accessions  were  made  to  the  colony.  Among  these, 
were  Dr.  Ezekial  Skinner,  a  missionary  and  physi- 
cian of  the  Baptist  persuasion  in  Connecticut ;  Mr. 
McDowell,  a  coloured  physician,  educated  at  Edin- 
burgh, and  Mr.  Webb,  a  coloured  student ;  also  Mr. 
Josiah  Finley,  a  son  of  Eobert  Finley,  one  of  the 
founders  of  the  Colonization  Society,  and  Mr.  Israel 
Searle,  sent  out  as  teachers.  Eev.  John  Seys,  a 
clergyman  from  the  Methodist  church,  was  also 
among  them.  They  were  all  warmly  received.  On 
the  day  of  their  arrival,  divine  service  was  held  in 
the  agency-house,  of  a  deeply  impressive  and  inte- 


128  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

resting  nature.  The  warm  heart  of  Mr.  Seys 
kindled  with  delight,  as  he  visited  the  different  set- 
tlements, and  beheld  on  every  side  tokens  of  present 
comfort  and  future  success.  In  relation  to  Millsburg, 
where  he  thought  of  locating  himself,  he  exclaims  : 

o  o  - 

"If  I  am  pleased  with  Monrovia  and  Caldwell,  I 
know  not  how  to  express  myself  in  reference  to  this 
beautiful  spot.  Surely,  nature's  God  has  been  lavish 
in  his  bestowment  of  blesssings  on  this  favoured  part 
of  Liberia.  The  soil  is  extremely  productive.  Here 
may  be  seen  cultivated,  with  a  little  pains  and  certain 
success,  plantains,  cassada,  sweet  potatoes,  yams, 
papaws,  sugar-cane,  arrow-root,  cotton,  pine-apples. 
and  a  great  variety  of  beans,  peas,  and  fruit,  all  of 
which  grow  to  an  astonishing  height,  and  well  repay 
the  labour  of  the  agriculturist.  The :  colonists  are 
industrious,  and  suffer  much  less  from  ill  health  than 
those  who  reside  at  Monrovia.  Indeed,  those  who, 
on  their  arrival  from  America,  went  up  the  river 
immediately,  either  did  not  take  the  fever  at  all,  or 
had  it  very  lightly.  The  next  morning  after  our 
arrival,  I  called  together  our  little  society  of  nineteen 
members,  and  preached  to  them.  They  had  a  meet- 
ing-house, which  is  very  small,  but  would  answer 
very  well  for  a  Sabbath  school-house,  could  we  erect 
a  larger  one.  Millsburg  is  twenty-one  miles  from 
Monrovia,  and  is  thus  much  on  the  way  to  King 
Boatswain's  territorv,  which  I  intend  to  visit  the  first 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  129 

favourable  opportunity,  should  the  Lord,  in  his 
mercy,  see  fit  to  spare  my  life." 

Almost  all  the  territory  skirting  Liberia,  and  far 
into  the  interior,  was  the  theatre  of  destructive  wars, 
waged  among  the  different  tribes  of  savages.  Inland 
trade  was  almost  entirely  broken  up,  and  a  continua- 
tion of  hostilities  threatened  serious  injury  to  the 
colony,  by  depriving  them  of  supplies  of  food,  and 
drying  up  the  springs  of  their  commercial  interests. 
Mr.  Pinney,  with  the  advice  of  the  colonial  authori- 
ties, despatched  commissioners  into  the  interior,  in 
order  to  negociate  with  the  chiefs,  and  to  select  a 
suitable  spot  for  an  inland  settlement. 

The  embassy  consisted  of  Messrs.  Whitehurst, 
Williams,  and  McGill,  accompanied  by  a  missionary, 
Mr.  Matthews.  •  They  left  Monrovia  on  the  19th  of 
November,  1834,  with  twelve  Kroomen.  After  a 
short  absence,  Mr.  Pinney  recalled  them,  owing  to 
the  distracted  state  of  the  country;  but  a  strong 
escort  arriving  from  King  Boatswain,  soliciting  an 
immediate  renewal  of  the  embassy,  and  giving  the 
most  earnest  assurance  on  his  part,  that  every  thing 
should  be  done  to  secure  the  object  of  the  mission, 
the  colonial  agent  reappointed  the  same  commis- 
sioners, associating  with  them  Josiah  Finley. 

Their  journey  was  both  dangerous  and  interesting ; 
they  passed  over  rugged  paths  and  through  dense 
forests,  sometimes  climbing  over  almost  perpendicular 

K 


130  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

heights  by  the  help  of  the  projecting  roots,  sometimes 
wading  through  stagnant  ponds,  or  leaping  from  rock 
to  rock,  over  rapid  currents,  until,  after  many  stops 
and  detentions,  they  reached  Bo  Poro,  the  royal 
residence  of  the  mighty  Boatswain.  The  white  por- 
tion of  the  delegation  produced  a  most  alarming 
effect  upon  the  children,  who  ran  in  all  directions, 
shrieking  with  fright.  On  their  entrance  into  the 
town,  they  found  it  densely  peopled,  with  habitations 
Very  compact,  and  thatched  with  palm  and  other 
leaves  of  various  figures  and  sizes.  The  market 
presented  a  most  busy  spectacle,  where  five  hundred 
women,  and  about  half  the  number  of  men,  from  all 
the  tribes  far  and  near,  were  bargaining  with  all  the 
zeal  and  shrewdness  of  more  enlightened  traders. 
From  an  abundant  display  of  plantains,  pumpkins, 
pepper,  pea-nuts,  pine-apples,  as  well  as  monkeys, 
rats,  and  grubs  (which  latter  are  well  suited  to  the 
dainty  appetites  of  the  town's  folk),  our  hungry  tra- 
vellers selected  a  tempting  breakfast  of  pine-apples, 
bananas,  and  cassada,  for  which  they  paid  a  leaf  and 
a  half  of  tobacco.  Tobacco,  salt,  powder,  and  flints, 
form  the  medium  of  exchange,  of  which  salt  is  the 
most  valuable,  and  can  buy  their  most  valuable  com- 
modities, slaves,  ivory,  and  gold.  Salt  is  manu- 
factured on  the  coast,  and  is  packed  in  sticks  of 
bamboo,  three  feet  in  length  and  about  three  inches 
in  diameter  :  it  is  closely  wound  around  with  leaves, 


STBUGGLE8  A.en  EXPERl  13  I 

to  preserve  it  from  the  rain*  and  in  this  way  it  is 
ent  far  into  the  interior,  an  able-bodied  man  b< 
able  to  carry  from  sixteen  to  twenty  of  these  stiu  I 
At.  noon,  they  held  an  interview  with  the  1  b 

whose  massive  frame  bad  been  greatly  shattered  bj 
intemperance.  He  was  reclining  upon  a  bamboo 
couch,  behind  which  sat  fifteen  slaves,  chained  bythe 

neck.     On   presenting  lb oir  gifts,  which  consisted  of 

50  pounds  of  tobacco,  a  piece  of  cotton  cloth,  2  pairs 
'■i  Madras  handkerchiefs,  J  piece  of  (atin  stripe,  3 
red  caps,  J  yard  of  scarlet,  SS  pipes,  I  pound  of 
thread,  U  papers  of  needles,  I  Turkish  cap,  J  Arabic 
Bible,  he  bade  them  welcome,  in  good  English,  and 
courteously  accepted  their  offering 

The  commissioners  remained  at  Bo  Poro  a  fort- 
night, which  <<ave  them  a  good  opportunity  of  observ- 
ing the  home-life  of  the  savages.  \\<:v(;  they  wit- 
ed  the  trial  by  fire,  if  is  majesty  having  mi  : 
orne  alt,  suspected  throe  of  his  boys,  who,  denying 
the  charge,  were  delivered  over  to  a  grce-groe  man  for 
detection.  This  officer,  having  placed  a  small  piece 
of  iron  in  the  bottom  of  an  earthen  vessel,  heated  it  to 
a  white  heat,  and  then  filled  it.  with  palm-oil.  The 
offenders  were  brought  forward,  and  their  bands  rub- 
bed with,  a  jelly-like  substance,  which  renders  them 
less  susceptible  of*  the  heat.  Those  who  succeeded 
in.  taking  oi.it  the  piece  of  iron,  were  accounted  inno- 
cent.    Two  did  this  ;   one  failed,  and  his  failure  est  a- 


132  AFRICA  BEDEEMED. 

Wishing  his  guilt,  he  was  taken  away  for  punish- 
ment. 

A  letter  from  Mr.  Williams,  the  coloured  mis- 
sionary, who  accompanied  the  commissioners,  thus 
speaks  of  his  reception  ; — 

"  King  Boatswain  was  much  pleased  at  the  pro- 
posed location  of  a  school  among  them,  and  readily 
assigned  land  for  that  purpose,  which  was  soon 
cleared,  and  the  limits  of  the  huilding  marked  off. 
The  school-house  is  forty  feet  front,  by  eighteen  in 
depth,  and  will  accommodate  as  many  pupils  as  can 
occupy  my  attention.  During  the  protract* •<  I  resi- 
dence of  the  commissioners  at  court,  I  employed  my 
leisure  time  in  teaching  a  school  of  fourteen  persons, 
from  the  ages  of  seven  to  fifty  years.  Their  profici- 
ency was  truly  astonishing,  and  in  the  space  of  six- 
weeks,  hoys  who  had  never  seen  a  book,  nor  could 
speak  a  word  of  English,  were  in  words  of  five  sylla- 
bles. Their  attention  was  most  regular,  and  their 
deportment  correct.  The  eldest  pupil  was  a  Man> 
dingo,  who,  when  he  found  it  difficult  to  retain  the 
English  sound,  would  write  it  in  the  Arabic  charac- 
j,  and  by  that  means  was  enabled  to  pronounce  it 
accurately.  The  explanation  of  words  through  an 
interpreter  afforded  him  great  pleasure;  and  his 
ambition  was  very  much  stimulated,  when  he  was  in- 
formed that  by  a  little  labour  he  would  he  enabled  to 


STEUGGLES  ASD  EXPEEIMENTS.  133 

read  about  the  Saviour.  The  country  still  continues 
agitated  by  war,  but  -we  have  every  reason  to  believe 
it  will  soon  terminate  by  the  conquest  of  the  Golahs. 
Humanity  shudders  at  the  barbarity  incident  to  their 
conflicts.  Death,  and  that  with  the  most  refined 
cruelty,  is  the  lot  of  the  captured.  It  will  be  neces- 
sary to  have  light  clothing  for  the  school.  I  shall 
write  more  fully  before  I  leave,  which  will  be  as  soon 
as  the  caravan  returns. 

The  Commissioners  returned  to  Monrovia,  after 
an  absence  of  three  months,  without  having  accom- 
plished all  which  the  Liberian  government  desired 
and  hoped  for ;  but  the  journey  had  enabled  them 
to  obtain  a  better  knowledge  of  the  manners  and 
habits  of  the  interior  tribes,  than  any  opportunity 
had  as  yet  afforded,  and  to  learn  something  of  the 
hatred,  violence,  and  desolations  which  mark  their 
warfare.  Their  health  was  good,  except  a  few  ulcers 
and  sores  on  the  feet,  occasioned  by  the  rough  roads, 
and  the  poisonous  grass  of  the  country.  A  caravan 
from  Boatswain  accompanied  them  on  their  return, 
consisting  of  more  than  three  hundred  persons,  by 
far  the  largest  company  which  ever  came  to  the 
Colony  before,  bringing  ivory,  camwood  and  cloths. 

Beverly  K.  Wilson,  a  very  respectable  free  man 
of  colour,  uniting  the  offices  of  clergyman  and  car- 
penter, living  in  Norfolk,  Virginia,  arrived  in  Liberia 
at  this  time,  for  the  special  purpose  of  examining 


134  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

the  Colony.  He  remained  here  a  year.  On  his 
return,  he  made  an  address  to  the  Free  People  of 
Colour  in  the  United  States,  a  few  extracts  of  which 
cannot  fail  to  interest  the  reader. 

"  After  more  than  a  year's  residence  in  Liberia,  I 
have  returned  to  the  United  States.  I  went  to 
satisfy  myself;  I  sought  every  opportunity  of  in- 
forming my  mind.  Some  of  the  things  already  said 
about  the  Colony,  are  a  fair  and  candid  expose  of 
things  as  they  exist ;  other  persons  are  too  favour- 
able in  their  estimates ;  while  a  third  class,  with 
hearts  bleeding  for  the  loss  of  friends,  or  angry  at 
the  loss  of  property,  have  wielded  their  pens  to 
bring  the  whole  scheme  into  disrepute.  I  hope  to 
correct  these  statements,  The  facilities  held  out  by 
Liberia  are  rarely  equalled.  Industry  and  economy 
meet  with  a  sure  reward.  For  proof,  look  at  a  Wil- 
liams, a  Pioberts,  a  Barbour,  and  others,  who  a  few 
years  ago  possessed  limited  means,  but  who  now  can 
live  like  the  wealthy  merchant  of  Virginia. 

"  The  morals  of  Liberia  I  regard  as  superior.  A 
drunkard  is  a  rare  spectacle.  "To  the  praise  of 
Liberia  to  be  spoken,  I  did  not  hear  during  my  resi- 
dence in  it,  a  solitary  oath  uttered  by  a  settler.  The 
Sabbath  is  rigidly  observed  and  respected. 

"  If  the  coloured  man  desires  liberty,  Liberia 
holds  out  great  and  distinguished  inducements. 
Here,  you  can  never  be  free. 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  185 

e<  Liberia  !  happy  land  !  thy  shore 

Entices  with  a  thousand  charms  ; 
And  calls — his  wonted  thraldom  o'er — 

Her  ancient  exile  to  her  arms. 

"  Come  hither,  son  of  Afric,  come  ! 

And  o'er  the  wide  and  weltering  sea, 
Beheld  thy  lost,  yet  lovely  home, 

That  fondly  waits  to  welcome  thee. 

"  In  one  or  two  months  I  go  to  Liberia." 

Beverly  B.  Wilson. 
June  5,  1835. 

Mr.  Searle  was  charged  to  act  with  Mr.  Pinny  in 
locating  a  colony,  to  be  sent  out  by  the  Pennsylvania 
Young  Men's  Colonization  Society.  Bassa  Cove  had 
been  previously  selected  by  Mr.  Cresson,  the  founder 
of  this  Society,  as  the  site  for  the  new  Colony,  and 
the  purchase  had  been  entrusted  to  Bev.  Colin  Teage 
and  Dr.  McDowell.  The  spot  chosen  was  opposite 
Edina,  on  the  St.  Johns,  a  fine  river,  commanding  a 
trade  with  the  interior,  of  camwood,  rice,  and  palm 
oil.  Besides  the  natural  advantages  of  the  situation, 
the  hope  of  ultimately  breaking  up  a  slave  factory  in 
the  vicinity  entered  largely  into  the  views  of  the 
agents.  A  few  days  after  the  bargain  was  concluded, 
the  owner  of  the  barracoons  asked,  with  great 
anxiety  depicted  upon  his  face,  how  the  affair  was 
going  on  ? 

"  The  purchase  is  completed,"  was  the  reply. 

"  Then  it  is  high  time  for  me  to  quit,"  cried  he. 


$ 

136  AFRICA  REEEEMED. 

This  Society,  though  acting  as  auxiliary  to  the 
Parent  Board,  wished,  in  the  formation  and  govern- 
ment of  its  colony,  to  carry  into  practice  certain 
principles  of  moral  action  more  thoroughly  and  en- 
tirely than  had  yet  been  attempted.  "  This  will  be 
done,"  they  say,  "by  fostering  with  more  care  the 
agricultural  interest,  checking  the  deteriorating  in- 
fluence of  petty  and  itinerant  traders,  maintaining 
the  virtue  of  sobriety,  the  nurse  and  parent  of  so 
many  other  virtues,  by  obtaining  from  the  colonists 
a  pledge  of  abstinence  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits, 
and  by  witholding  all  the  common  temptations  and 
means  for  carrying  on  war,  or  for  engaging  in  any 
aggressive  steps  with  the  native  population  of  Africa." 

Three  conditions  were  proposed  to  every  one  who 
offered  to  embark  in  their  enterprise,  which,  could 
they  have  been  carried  out,  must  have  exerted  a 
sound  and  healful  snfluence  over  their  little  com- 
munity, but  which  perhaps  we  might  hardly  dare 
to  hope  for,  surrounded  as  it  was  by  savages, 
whose  notions  of  self-interest  were  as  bad  as  their 
principles. 

1st.  Entire  abstinence  from  ardent  spirits  in 
every  colonist. 

2nd.  Total  abstinence  from  trade  in  ardent  spirits 
and  the  arts  of  war. 

3rd.  An  immediate  Christian  influence  and  opera- 
tion upon  the  surrounding  heathen. 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  137 

The  colony  consisted  of  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
six  persons,  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  shoe-makers, 
weavers,  tailors,  spinners,  brick-layers,  stone-masons, 
all  well  acquainted  with  their  respective  trades,  of 
excellent  characters,  and  of  whom  many  could  read 
and  write.  A  large  number  were  manumitted  slaves 
from  the  estate  of  Dr.  Hawes,  in  Virginia,  who  left 
twenty  dollars  a  head  to  defray  their  expenses.  Just 
before  sailing,  a  Temperance  Society  was  formed,  to 
which  each  man  freely  gave  his  pledge.  Perhaps  a 
more  promising  company  never  left  this  country  for 
the  African  coast.  The  following  verses,  composed 
by  the  Rev.  George  W.  Bethune,  express  more 
forcibly  than  we  can  do  the  blended  prayers  and 
hopes  which  followed  the  Ninus  as  she  left  our 
shores. 

Oh,  Thou  who  built  Jerusalem 

For  Israel's  wandering  race, 
And  yet  in  love  will  gather  them 

Back  to  their  dwelling  place  ; 

Who  captive  Joseph  like  a  flock 

Led  forth  with  prowess  high, 
And  gave  them  water  from  the  rocky 

And  manna  from  the  sky  ; 

Smile  on  our  efforts — -who  would  fain 

Redeem  each  outcast  slave  ; 
And  waft  them  to  that  land  again, 

Thou  to  their  fathers  gave. 

"  They  seek  a  better  country/7  where 
Their  toils  and  tears  shall  cease. 


138  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Build  thou  their  city — grant  them  there 
A  heritage  of  peace. 

Thy  name,  0  Christ,  and  thine  alone, 

Is  all  their  hope  and  trust. 
Be  Thou  their  precious  "  corner-stone/' 

To  raise  their  walls  from -dust. 

Thy  Spirit's  sword,  unto  them  lent, 

Thy  cross,  their  banner  free  ; 
Thy  Word,  their  only  battlement, 

And  faith  their  victory. 

Their  watchmen  shall  lift  up  their  voice, 

Together  shall  they  sing ; 
And  in  the  guardian  care  rejoice 

Of  Israel's  sleepless  King. 

The  little  one — men's  scoff  and  scorn, 

A  mighty  realm  shall  be  ; 
And  generations  yet  unborn, 

Shall  give  the  praise  to  Thee. 

After  a  prosperous  passage  they  reached  Liberia, 
where  they  were  warmly  received,  and  every  aid 
was  offered  them  in  preparing  for  their  new  homes. 
On  arriving  at  Bassa  Cove,  the  men  entered  upon 
their  respective  labours  with  patience  and  energy. 
Little  or  no  sickness  visited  their  families,  and  the 
beginning  of  things  in  this  new  colony  of  Port 
Cresson  was  more  than  ordinarily  auspicious.  By 
the  1st  of  June,  seven  months  after  its  first  estab- 
lishment, it  could  be  said  that  the  emigrants  were  all 
comfortably  located  in  eighteen  houses,  with  lots 
presenting  the  prospect  of  an  excellent  harvest.  A 
government  house,   twenty  feet   by   fifty,  and  two 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPEEIMENTS.  139 

stories  high  was  built,  with  a  garden  of  two  acres, 
well  stocked  and  enclosed;  forty  acres  of  cleared 
land,  a  smith's  shop  with  a  pit  of  coal  were  nearly 
ready  for  use  ;  a  kiln  of  lime  was  burnt,  and  six  head 
of  native  cattle  were  almost  broken  to  the  yoke,  and 
ten  additional  houses  were  completed  for  new  emi- 
grants. 

It  was  not  long  before  a  coolness  began  to  mani- 
fest itself  on  the  part  of  the  natives,  which  was 
hardly  noticed  by  the  industrious  and  hard-working 
settlers,  until  it  began  to  wear  a  threatening  aspect. 
Such  was  their  peaceable  character  that  there  were 
no  difficulties  to  settle,  for  none  had  arisen.  Thev 
became  alarmed,  and  begged  for  some  mode  of  pro- 
tection and  defence.  This  was  refused  by  the  too 
trusting  superintendent,  Mr.  Hankinson.  The  hos- 
tile intentions  of  the  savages  becoming  too  evident 
to  be  mistaken,  the  colonists  applied  to  Edina. 
Thirty  volunteers  crossed  the  river  to  their  aid,  but 
Mr.  Hankinson  promptly  declined  it.  They  conse- 
quently went  back,  and  the  defenceless  emigrants 
were  left  alone  to  the  work  of  blood,  which 
commenced  that  night  at  twilight.  The  savages 
issued  from  their  wilds,  rushed  upon  the  huts,  and 
butchered  men,  women  and  children  to  the  number 
of  twenty,  while  the  remainder  fled  to  the  forest  and 
to  Edina,  or  wounded,  robbed,  hungry,  and  panic- 
struck,  skulked  to  the  glens  and  swamps,  or  to  what- 


140     .  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

ever  could  afford  them  shelter.  Delighted  with  so 
easy  a  victory,  the  savages  were  for  falling  upon 
Edina,  but  the  timely  appearance  of  Bob  Grey,  wTho 
more  than  on  one  occasion  had  proved  the  settlers's 
friend,  disconcerted  their  plans,  and  they  escaped 
with  their  booty  to  the  woods.  Mr.  Weaver,  the 
superintendent  of  Edina,  immediately  sent  an  ex- 
press to  Monrovia,  with  the  following  dispatch. 

To  the  vice-agent,  Nathaniel  Brander,  Esq. 

Edina,  June  11,  1835. 

Dear  Sir, — I  am  sorry  to  inform  you  of  the 
dreadful  circumstance  which  took  place  on  the  night 
of  the  10th.  Kin^  Joe  Harris  has  taken  an  armed 
force  over  to  Port  Cresson,  and  killed  and  wounded 
about  eighteen  persons.  We  are  at  present  in  a  state 
of  war.  If  you  can  get  any  volunteers  to  come  down, 
you  will  confer  a  great  favour  on  an  unprotected  peo- 
ple. We,  on  this  side  of  the  river,  are  in  a  state  of 
defence,  enough  to  defend  ourselves  in  a  small  way ; 
but  we  have  only  one  barrel  of  powder  on  hand  at 
present. 

No  more,  but  remain  yours  respectfully, 

Wm.  L.  Weaver. 

Immediately  on  receiving  this  communication,  in 
the  absence  of  the  agent,  Mr.  Brander  convened  the 
inhabitants  of  Monrovia,  and  dispatched  orders  to 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  141 

the  other  towns  for  men  to  proceed  to  the  defence  of 
Edina  One  hundred  and  twenty  volunteers  were 
soon  ready,  and  on  their  way,  accompanied  by  three 
commissioners,  Major  Barber,  and  John  Day,  Esq., 
of  Monrovia,  with  John  Hanson,  Esq.,  of  Edina, 
charged  with  instructions  to  inquire  into  the  causes 
of  the  attack ;  to  demand  of  King  Joe  a  reparation 
of  the  outrages  done  to  the  persons  and  property 
of  the  settlers,  and  secure  a  guarantee  for  the 
future  peace  of  the  colony.  The  king  refused  to 
give  any  reason  for  his  conduct,  and  repulsed  every 
overture  to  a  peaceable  settlement  of  affairs.  He 
was  then  attacked  and  put  to  flight,  and  his  town 
and  defences  demolished,  without  the  loss  of  a  single 
Liberian. 

It  has  been  ascertained  that  some  time  before  the 
catastrophe,  a  slave  trader,  an  old  acquaintance  of 
his  Majesty,  anchored  at  the  Cove,  and   finding  a 
Liberian  settlement,  he  declared  "that  he   should 
not  think  of  buying  slaves  so  close  to  the  Ameri- 
cans, and  he  meant  to  go  and  establish  his  factory 
at  the  river  Bras."     The  king  was  angry,  and  pro- 
mised to  drive  the  Liberians  away  ;  but  it  is  thought 
the  attempt  would  never  have  been  made,  had  he 
witnessed  suitable  means  of  defence.     The  defence- 
less condition  of  the  inhabitants  probably  stimulated 
his  passions,  and  he  felt  that  the  prey  was  too  easy 
not  to  be  secured.     It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that 
the  houses  and  the  persons  of  only  two  of  the  emi- 


142  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

grants  were  unmolested,  one  who  had  a  gun,  and  the 
other,  who  sometimes  ventured  to  use  one.  "  It  does 
not  seem  to  be  enough,"  remarked  one,  in  reference 
to  this  event,  "  to  withhold,  as  was  done  by  the  colo- 
nists and  temporary  agent  at  Bassa  Cove,  the  incen- 
tives to  quarrel  and  the  means  of  destruction,  namely, 
ardent  spirits  and  the  ministers  of  war.  It  is  not 
enough  to  distinctly  avow  and  sedulously  act  upon  the 
principles  of  justice  and  equity  in  the  purchase  of 
land.  Something  more  than  all  this  is  required  for 
the  protection  of  an  infant  colony  in  the  vicinity  of 
savages  and  heathens,  who  are  too  often  insensible  to 
generous  appeals,  and  forgetful  of  all  promises.  The 
law  of  self-defence  points  out  the  absolute  necessity 
of  new  settlers,  thus  situated,  placing  themselves  in 
an  attitude  which,  whilst  it  shall  enable  them  to  repel 
attacks,  will  be  one  of  the  surest  means  of  preventing 
them,  and  thus  of  securing  peace,  by  depriving  the 
savages  of  the  motives  to  war, — hope  of  success,  and 
the  prospect  of  plunder." 

Meanwhile  boats  were  sent  down  the  coast  to  seek 
out  the  suffering  fugitives,  and  bring  them  to  Monro- 
via, where  they  arrived  from  time  to  time  in  a  state 
of  extreme  destitution.  Generous  provision  was  made 
for  their  comfort  by  the  authorities,  not  only  at  Mon- 
rovia, but  at  all  the  other  settlements.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hankinson  owed  their  lives  to  a  trusty  Kroo- 
man,  who  contrived  their  escape  to  his  own  village. 
When  the  news  reached  America  it  excited  the  deep- 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  143 

est  interest  and  compassion.     Through  the  untiring 
energy  of  their  fast  friend,  Elliott  Cresson,  Esq., 
abundant  supplies  were  immediately  provided    and 
sent  out  under  the  charge  of  Mr.  Thomas  Buchanan, 
the  agent  of  the  New  York  and  Pennsylvania  so- 
cieties, with  instructions  to  revive  the  settlement  as 
soon   as   circumstances   should  make   it  safe.     On 
reaching  Monrovia,  January  1,  1836,  he  found  many 
of  the  emigrants  had  already  re-established  them- 
selves at  Bassa  Cove,  at  the  earnest  desire  of  King 
Joe  himself,  who  found  that  he  had  in  no  way  im- 
proved his  situation  by  making  war  on  the  colonists. 
Heartily  repenting  of  his  folly,  he  sent  Prince  John 
of  Grand  Bassa,  as  his  ambassador  to  beg  an  inter- 
view with  the  agent,  and  to  declare  his  willingness 
to  make  any  satisfaction  for  the  damages  done  to 
Port  Cresson,  offering  to  the  settlers  any  part  of  his 
country,  if  they  would  only  come  and  give  "  God's 
book,"  and  "  'Merica  trade "  to  his  people  again* 
Such  was  the  industry  and  enterprise  manifested  by 
these  people,  that  six  months  after  the  disaster,  Mr. 
Buchanan  could  write  thus  to  his  friends  in  America : 

"  Bassa  Cove,  June  28,  1836. 
"  Our  affairs  are  generally  in  a  flattering  condition. 
The  people  are  industrious,  healthy,  and  contented. 
The  village  has  a  beautiful  and  thrifty  appearance, 
exceeding  any  thing  of  the  kind,  considering  its  in- 
infancy,  which  I  ever  saw.     The  streets  are  clean, 


144  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

and  finely  shaded  with  palm  trees  ;  the  lots  are  all 
well  cleared,  and  teeming  with  luxuriant  vegetation. 
This  people  have  for  some  time  past  been  supplying 
their  tables  with  the  fruits  of  their  industry,  drawn 
from  a  soil  which,  five  months  since,  was  covered  with 
a  thick  wilderness.  Among  our  public  improvements, 
we  have  a  commodious  Baptist  meeting-house,  just 
finished.  On  the  10th  instant  we  had  Divine  ser- 
vice in  commemoration  of  the  melancholy  disaster 
which  broke  up  our  first  settlement.  The  scene  was 
solemn  and  impreseive.  Bob  Grey,  the  native  ally, 
who  stood  our  friend  in  that  time  of  peril,  was  present 
by  imitation,  together  with  a  number  of  the  neigh- 
bouring kings  and  head  men.  In  the  evening  a 
prayer-meeting  was  held,  and  a  good  and,  I  trust,  a 
lasting  effect  was  the  result.  So  far  this  little  Jeru- 
salem has  been  signally  blessed  by  a  merciful  Provi- 
dence. Not  a  death  has  yet  occurred  since  the  set- 
tlement was  re-established  in  December  last. 

"  I  have  been  labouring  by  every  means  to  incul- 
cate and  cherish  the  spirit  of  your  resolution  in  rela- 
tion to  agriculture  since  my  first  arrival,  and  it  will, 
I  have  no  doubt,  be  warmly  seconded  by  the  people, 
as  soon  as  the  means,  are  put  into  their  hands.  I 
have  just  broken  a  pair  of  wild  bullocks  to  the  yoke, 
and  they  work  well.  This  is  a  beginning.  We  have 
lately  got  a  weekly  mail  established  between  this 
place  and  Monrovia,  which  promises  great  advantages 
to  the  whole  colony. 


Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  en  earth  peace  and  goodwill  to  men." 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  145 

"  Though  we  have  got  a  large  quantity  of  land 
cleared  for  the  use  of  the  next  expedition,  the  work  of 
building  houses  proceeds  very  slowly  during  the  wet 
weather,  which  had  fairly  set  in  before  we  could  com- 
mence." 

The  colony  re-established  itself,  for  greater  security 
from  the  slavers,  two  miles  northward  of  its  former 
site,  Port  Cresson,  and  took  the  name  of  Bassa 
Cove.* 

Another  voice  comes  over  the  waters.  It  is  from 
Mr.  Beverly  B.  Wilson.  What  does  he  say  ?  "I 
am  happy  to  inform  you  that  we  arrived  here  well, 

*  We  are  glad  to  learn  that  this  noble  harbour — perhaps 
the  best  on  the  West  coast — is  again  occupied,  and  promises 
to  become  a  place  of  great  importance.  The  port  is  capacious 
and  safe  ;  the  people  industrious  and  honest :  and  the  Nau- 
tical Magazine  recommends  it  strongly  as  a  desirable  place 
for  vessels  to  obtain  supplies  ;  naming  Messrs.  Benson,  Moore, 
Davis  and  Chuseman  as  persons  of  integrity.  By  the  last  ad- 
vices Judge  Benson  was  erecting  twenty  houses  at  Cresson, 
for  the  reception  of  new  immigrants.  Several  substantial 
warehouses  had  been  built  for  the  accommodation  of  its  ra- 
pidly increasing  commerce  ;  and  another,  of  iron,  was  soon  to 
follow.  The  Episcopal  Church,  long  projected,  will  render  it 
a  welcome  haven  for  the  mariner,  none  other  existing  between 
Sierra  Leone  and  Cape  Palmas,  a  distance  of  500  miles.  It 
was  long  a  favourite  place  of  resort  for  the  slaver,  who  from 
time  immemorial  made  it  his  chief  watering  place.  Hence 
the  hostility  to  the  first  settlers  ;  but  happily,  since  its  pur- 
chase in  1834,  the  slave  trade  has  ceased  ■  and  a  Christian 
temple  now  occupies  the  site  of  the  "  Devil's  Bush,"  so  re- 
cently the  scene  of  human  sacrifice. 


146  AFRICA  REDEEMED . 

and  to  say  that  I  am  more  in  favour  of  the  colony  of 
Liberia  than  when  I  left  it  on  my  return  home.  No, 
there  is  no  place  like  this  for  the  coloured  race  to  be 
found  in  their  reach,  where  they  can  enjoy  the  same 
privileges  as  here.  To  fly  to  the  north  or  south  is 
all  folly ;  to  go  to  Canada  or  Hayti  is  nonsense  ;  for 
in  either  theTe  are  obstacles  as  high  as  mountains. 
Here  is  our  home.     Farming  is  going  on  well." 

The  failing  health  of  Mr.  Pinney  did  not  enable 
him  to  carry  out  his  proposed  plans  of  colonial  im- 
provement, or  longer  to  retain  his  office.  His  ad- 
ministration, though  short,  was  vigorous,  provident, 
and  discreet,  In  a  few  weeks  after  the  arrival  of  Dr. 
Skinner,  the  duties  of  the  agency  in  a  great  measure 
devolved  upon  him,  and  at  Mr.  Pinney *s  formal  resig- 
nation, the  Board  of  the  Colonization  Society  ap- 
pointed him  his  successor. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  two  coloured  gentle- 
men, Rev.  Gloster  Simpson  and  Archy  Moore,  had 
been  sent  out  to  Liberia,  in  1832,  as  exploring  agents, 
by  their  brethren  in  Mississippi,  to  make  a  report  of 
the  land,  and  see  if  it  was  a  safe  and  suitable  spot  for 
emigration.  Their  report  being  satisfactory,  seventy- 
five  began  to  make  preparations  for  their  departure 
hither,  the  exploring  agents  with  their  families 
among  the  number.  Mr.  Simpson  was  a  regularly 
ordained  minister  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church, 
and  a  man  of  great  respectability.    He  owned  a  well- 


STKUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  147 

stocked  farm  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  acres,  valued 
at  two  thousand  dollars.  On  signifying  his  intention 
of  removing  to  Liberia,  Mr.  Robert  Cochrane,  who 
owned  his  wife  and  children,  generously  gave  him  a 
bill  of  sale  for  them,  estimated  at  four  thousand  dol- 
lars. Soon  after,  dying,  he  left  in  his  will  the  sum 
of  one  hundred  dollars  to  each  of  Glosters  children. 
Through  the  liberality  of  the  citizens  of  Natchez,  the 
family  of  Archy  Moore  was  purchased  for  two  thou- 
sand dollars.  He  was  pious  and  intelligent,  and  the 
possessor  of  a  small  estate.  David  Moore,  a  brother 
of  Archy,  who  accompanied  them,  had  been  emanci- 
pated nine  years  before,  on  account  of  his  excellent 
conduct,  and  was  both  a  planter  and  shoemaker.  He 
took  with  him  a  cotton  gin,  one  thousand  dollars' 
worth  of  agricultural  implements  and  mechanics' 
tools  ;  one  thousand  dollars'  worth  of  provisions  and 
trade  goods,  and  three  thousand  in  specie.  Twent}r- 
six  more  slaves,  emancipated  by  the  will  of  James 
Green,  and  furnished  with  an  outfit  of  one  thousand 
dollars,  and  money  to  pay  their  passage,  and  five 
thousand  more  to  promote  their  comfortable  settle- 
ment in  the  colony.  The  whole  company  possessed 
'property  to  the  amount  of  fifteen  thousand  dollars. 
After  reaching  New  Orleans,  many  interesting  meet- 
ings were  holder],  previous  to  their  embarkation,  in 
the  Methodist  chapel,  before  a  large  audience  of  emi- 
grants, free  blacks,  and  slaves.     Mr.  Simpson  thus 


148  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

addressed  the  people  relative  to  the  motives  which 
led  him  to  leave  America : — 

"  For  a  long  time,"  said  he,  "  I  have  desired  to 
find  a  place  of  refuge,  where  I  might  enjoy  liberty, 
and  such  advantages  as  I  could  not  here.  Not  that 
I  have  been  treated  unkindly  in  Mississippi.  I  have 
many  dear  friends  there.  But  it  is  not  possible  for 
coloured  people  to  enjoy  among  white  men  all  the 
privileges  and  advantages  of  liberty.  I  heard  a  good 
deal  about  Liberia,  and  read  a  good  deal.  Good 
people  told  me  a  heap  about  it,  and  I  wanted  to  see 
it ;  so  did  some  of  my  friends.  One  said  to  another, 
!  Will  you  go  and  see  it  for  us  ?  '  But  all  were  too 
busy.  They  sent  to  me  to  know  if  I  would  go.  I 
said  '  yes  ; '  so  did  Archy  Moore.  We  started.  First 
we  came  to  New  Orleans,  but  the  vessel  we  expected 
to  go  in  had  sailed.  Then  we  had  to  go  to  an 
eastern  port.  We  started  for  Washington  City.  We 
met  with  many  discouragements.  In  Fredericktown 
a  lady  said  to  me,  'Where  are  you  going?'  To 
Africa.'  '  Where  V  ■  To  Africa.'  What !  are  you 
such  a  fool  as  to  go  there  ?  Don't  you  know  that 
the  niggers  will  kill  and  eat  you  V  So  other  persons 
tried  to  dissuade  and  dishearten  us  from  going,  till 
we  found  Mr.  Gurley.  He  received  us  in  a  friendly 
manner,  encouraged  us  to  go  on,  and  provided  us  a 
passage  from  Norfolk.  Our  voyage  was  much  pleas- 
anter  than   I  expected.     We  found  many  Christian 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  149 

friends  among  the  emigrants  of  the  ship.  We 
arrived  at  Monrovia  the  last  day  of  June.  I  went 
ashore.  It  looked  like  the  home  for  the  coloured 
man.  Mr.  Moore  and  I  went  all  about,  and  exami- 
ned the  country.  We  saw  an  abundance  of  every 
thing  growing.  The  people  looked  as  healthy  as 
they  do  here.  Old  Teage,  of  Virginia,  said  he  had 
been  prejudiced  against  the  colony ;  he  had  tried 
Canada,  and  wanted  to  go  to  Hayti ;  but  he  blessed 
God  his  lot  had  been  finally  cast  in  Liberia.  He 
told  me  not  to  try  to  get  others  to  come,  but  perse- 
vere and  come  myself,  and  they  will  then  see  what 
you  think  of  it.  There  will  be  enough  to  come.  I 
have  persevered  so  far,  and  expect  soon  to  embark 
for  Liberia.  I  hope  to  do  something  for  my  blessed 
Master's  cause  there,  if  He  spares  my  life.  If  death 
be  my  early  lot,  I  hope  to  be  as  ready  and  willing 
to  meet  it  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  as  on  the  shores  of 
the  Mississippi.     Brethren,  pray  for  us." 

A  Temperance  Society  was  formed  among  the 
emigrants,  in  which  they  pledged  themselves  to  ab- 
stain from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits,  either  as  a  drink 
or  an  article  of  merchandise.  The  company  embarked 
on  board  the  brig  Kover ;  and,  after  a  pleasant  pas- 
sage of  fifty-four  days,  reached  Monrovia.  During 
the  passage,  Mr.  Simpson  led  in  morning  and  eve- 
ning worship,  and  held  the  usual  services  on  the 
Sabbath.      The  greater  part   of  them  went  up  to 


150  AFEICA  EEDEEMED. 

Millsburg,  under  the  charge  of  Josiah  Finley,  to 
remain  until  the  end  of  the  rainy  season.  Mr.  Simp- 
son and  David  Moore  remained  at  Monrovia.  The 
town  seems  to  have  favourably  impressed  Captain 
Outerbridge  of  the  Eover,  who  declared,  "  I  heard 
not  a  word  of  ill  fame,  while  I  was  at  Monrovia, 
among  the  Americans  ;  for  it  appeared  to  me  they 
had  left  off  that  practice,  as  well  as  drinking.  You 
will  see  them  all  going  to  church  on  Sunday,  three 
times  a  day,  and  appear  very  strict  in  their  devotions. 
You  cannot  get  a  man  to  work  on  Sunday,  for  love 
or  money c"  A  rare  and  most  extraordinary  testi- 
mony for  any  ship-master  to  be  able  to  give  of  any 
sea-port;  perhaps  the  only  one  of  the  kind  on  record. 
A  year  after  the  departure  of  this  interesting 
colony,  David  Moore  gives  us  his  experience  and 
prospects  in  an  interesting  letter,  as  follows : 

"  According  to  promise,  I  sit  down  to  write  from 
my  long  wished  for  Africa.  I  am  glad  to  inform 
you  that  myself  and  family  are  well,  and  have  gene- 
rally enjoyed  as  good  health,  if  not  better,  than  in 
the  United  States.  Indeed,  our  expedition  has  suf- 
fered very  little  with  the  fever  of  the  climate.  I 
have  been  very  busy  since  we  arrived,  in  building 
and  in  settling  my  farm,  and  I  think  I  shall  be  well 
repaid  for  my  labours.  I  do  truly  thank  God  and 
my  kind  friends  who  direcred  my  feet  to  this  land  of 
liberty.     We  have,  although  a  few  privations  to  un- 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  151 

dergo,  many  of  nature's  blessings,  and  I  do  expect 
in  a  few  years  to  be  able  to  say  that  we  live  in  a  land 
of  unrivalled  plenty  and  luxury,  and  what  is  most 
cheering,  we  enjoy  so  many  religious  privileges. 
We  have  truly  a  goodly  heritage.  All  we  want  here 
is  proper  men  with  a  little  beginning,  Although 
we  have  not  as  yet  work  animals,  yet  I  have  eight 
acres  of  corn.  Some  sugar  cane  we  planted.  We 
want  some  of  your  good  seed-corn,  cow-peas,  &c. 
Please  send  some.  Gloster  Simpson  and  family  are 
quite  well ;  his  daughter  Ehoda  is  just  married ;  he 
has  a  thriving  farm  adjoining  mine.  Our  children 
are  all  going  to  school.  The  thermometer  ranges 
from  73°  to  87°." 

A  light-house,  the  want  of  which  had  heen  seri- 
ously felt  by  vessels  on  the  coast,  was  erected  on  the 
Cape,  thirty  feet  high,  which  added  to  the  extreme 
height  of  the  Cape,  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet,  made 
the  light  two  hundred  and  eighty  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  sea. 

A  mutual  labour  school  was  established  at  Mills- 
burg,  by  the  Methodists,  called  the  White  Plains 
Manual  Labour  School,  in  honour  of  several  indi- 
viduals of  White  Plains,  New  York,  who  generously 
aided  it.  Orphan  children  were  here  to  be  appren- 
ticed until  the  age  of  twenty-one,  educated  and 
trained  to  some  useful  occupation.  The  plan  was 
given  to  Mr.  Beverly  R.  Wilson,  who  superintended 


/\ 


152  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

the  erection  of  the  buildings,  and  at  the  same  time 
became  pastor  of  a  small  church  of  nine  members. 
His  labours  were  greatly  blessed,  and  it  soon  in- 
creased to  seventy. 

Bassa  Cove  and  Monrovia  had  public  Libraries, 
the  former  numbering  some  fifteen  hundred  volumes, 
while  many  of  the  colonists  possessed  small  though 
valuable  private  libraries.  In  that  of  Mr.  Samuel 
Benedict,  a  highly  respectable  coloured  gentle- 
man from  Georgia,  were  to  be  found  works  upon 
divinity,  medicine,  and  law :  Blackstone's  Com- 
mentaries, Rollins'  Ancient  History,  Henry  and 
Clark's  Commentaries,  Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical 
History,  and  books  of  a  similar  character.  Mr.  Bene- 
dict, both  a  scholar  and  a  man  of  sterling  sense, 
could  not  but  command  a  high  position  wherever  he 
lived.  What  does  he  say  regarding  his  adopted 
country?  for  his  opinions  are  entitled  to  respect. 
"  I  would  not  return  to  live  in  the  United  States  for 
five  thousand  dollars.  There  is  scarcely  a  thinking 
person  here,  but  would  feel  insulted,  if  you  should 
talk  to  him  about  returning.  The  people  are  now 
turning  their  attention  to  agriculture,  and  are  be- 
ginning to  live  within  their  own  means.  I  believe 
that  a  more  moral  community  is  no  where  to  be 
be  found  than  in  Liberia;  and  I  never  saw  more 
religious  enjoyment  in  my  life.  I  hope  that  God 
will  send  us  some  good  inhabitants — men  of  piety, 


STKUGGLES  AND  EXPEEIMENTS.  153 

intelligence  and  pecuniary  means.     That  is  all  we 
want  to  render  us  a  happy  republic." 

In  Monrovia  are  the  Liberian  Lyceum,  and 
"Female  Benevolent  Society;"  "  A  Union  Sisters 
of  Charity  Society,"  and  a  Moral  Friendship  Society, 
whose  anniversaries  are  celebrated  by  addresses,  and 
appropriate  religious  exercises,  and  oftentimes  closed 
with  a  social  gathering.  The  1st  of  December,  the 
anniversary  of  Ashmun's  celebrated  victory  over  the 
savages,  and  of  their  very  existence  as  a  people,  is 
honoured  with  peculiar  honours.  We  find  the  order 
of  the  day  similar  to  our  observance  of  the  fourth  of 
July.  All  foreign  as  well  a  colonial  vessels  that  are 
in  the  harbour,  are  requested  to  display  their  flags 
on  that  day.  Each  warehouse  and  grocery  to  be 
closed,  and  every  mercantile  operation  is  suspended. 
One  gun  from  Central  Fort  announces  the  dawn  of 
day ;  at  sun-rise  another  gun  from  Central  Fort,  at 
which  time  the  flag  of  the  Colony  is  displayed.  The 
forenoon  is  occupied  by  an  oration,  and  other  exer- 
cises, and  at  twelve  o'clock  a  national  salute  is  fired. 

A  hymn,  composed  by  Mr.  Hilary  Teage  for  the 
1st  of  December,  and  sung  on  one  of  these  occasions, 
is  a  specimen  of  the  poetic  art  on  Liberian  Soil. 

Land  of  the  Mighty  dead  ! 
Here  science  once  displayed, 

And  art,  their  charms  ; 
Here  awful  Pharaoh  sway'd 
Great  nations,  who  obeyed ; 


154  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Here  distant  moiiarchs  laid 
Their  vanquish'd  arras. 

They  hold  us  in  surrey — 
They  cheer  us  on  our  way — 

They  loud  proclaim, 
From  pyramidal  hall  — 
From  Carnac's  sculptured  wall — 
From  Thebes  they  loudly  call — 

'  •'  Retake  your  fame  !  " 

"  All  hail,  Liberia  !— hail ! 
Arise  and  now  prevail 

O'er  all  thy  foes  ; 
In  truth  and  righteousness — 
In  all  the  arts  of  peace — 
Advance,  and  still  increase, 

Though  hosts  oppose." 

At  the  loud  call  we  rise, 
And  press  towards  the  prize, 

In  glory's  race ; 
All  redolent  of  fame, 
The  land  to  which  we  came, 
We'll  breathe  the  inspiring  flame- 

And  onward  press. 

Here  Liberty  shall  dwell, 
Here  Justice  shall  prevail, 

Religion  here ; 
To  this  fair  virtue's  dome 
Meek  innocence  may  come, 
And  find  a  peaceful  home, 

And  know  no  fear. 

Oppression's  cursed  yoke, 
By  freemen  shall  be  broke — 

In  dust  be  laid. 
The  soul  erect  and  free, 
Here  evermore  shall  be. 


STEUGGLES  AND  EXPEKIMENTS.  155 

To  none  we'll  bend  the  knee 
But  nature's  God. 

Commerce  shall  lift  her  head, 
To  auspicious  gales  shall  spread 

Expanded  wing ; 
From  India's  spicy  land, 
From  Europe's  rock-bound  strand, 
From  Peru's  golden  sand. 

Her  tribute  bring. 

O  Lord  !  we  look  to  Thee — 
To  Thee  for  help  we  flee  ; 

Lord,  hear  our  prayer  : 
In  righteousness  arise, 
Scatter  our  enemies, 
Their  hellish  plots  surprise, 

And  drive  them  far. 

Oh  happy  people  they, 
Who  Israel's  God  obey, 

Whose  Lord  is  God  ! 
They  shall  be  blest  indeed, 
From  anxious  cares  be  freed, 
And  for  them  is  decreed 

A  large  reward." 

Dr  Skinner,  whose  indefatigable  labours,  both  as 
a  physician  and  an  agent,  had  seriously  undermined 
his  health,  was  obliged  to  leave  Africa  and  try  the 
benefit  of  a  sea-voyage.  The  agency  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  vice  agent,  Mr.  Anthony  D.  Williams, 
a  coloured  gentleman  of  great  worth.  Liberia  met 
with  some  severe  losses  also  at  this  time,  in  the 
death  of  Mr.  Searle,  Dr.  Webb,  Rev.  Mr.  Laird  and 


156  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

wife,  and  Mr.  Cloud,  missionaries  of  the  Presbyterian 
church. 

On  presenting  his  report  before  the  Colonization 
Society,  at  his  return  to  the  United  States,  in  1837, 
Dr.  Skinner,  says  :  "  Much  can  be  done  to  render 
the  settlements  more  healthy  than  they  are  at  pre- 
sent, without  incurring  any  great  expense.  Mon- 
rovia, for  example,  is  capable  of  great  improvement 
in  this  respect.  The  draining  of  two  swamps,  which 
might  be  done  for  two  hundred  dollars,  would  greatly 
improve  the  healthiness  of  the  town."  He  thinks  with 
proper  exercise,  diet,  cleanliness  and  nursing,  many 
of  the  emigrants  might  escape  the  sickness  altogether, 
or  have  it  in  a  light  and  greatly  mitigated  form. 

The  mortality,  however,  has  been  less  than  it  has 
been  generally  estimated,  and  greatly  less  than  took 
place  at  the  Colonization  of  this  country. 

With  one  of  the  finest  soils  in  the  world,  agricul- 
ture had  not  received  that  attention  from  the  settlers 
which  it  should  have  done.  Captain  Nicholson,  of 
the  United  States'  ship  Potomac,  in  visiting  Liberia 
in  1837,  says  :  "  The  slave  trade  within  the  last 
three  years  has  seriously  injured  the  colony.  Not 
only  has  it  diverted  the  industry  of  the  natives  in 
the  vicinity  from  agriculture  and  trade,  but  it  has 
effectually  cut  off  the  communication  with  the  inte- 
rior ;  the  war  parties  being  in  the  habit  of  plundering 
and  kidnapping  for  slaves  all  whom  they  meet,  whe- 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  157 

ther  parties  to  the  war  or  not.  If  the  slavers  were 
kept  from  the  coast,  which  I  am  informed  could  be 
effected  if  the  colony  could  possess  an  armed  vessel, 
to  be  manned  by  their  own  people,  four-fifths  of  the 
wars  would  be  removed,  and  the  natives  would  return 
to  their  peaceful  pursuits.  It  is  complained  that 
many  of  the  emigrants  are  forced  to  expend  what 
little  they  have  in  erecting  their  buildings,  &c,  and 
to  resort  to  petty  traffic  for  immediate  subsistence, 
to  the  neglect  of  the  slower  returns  of  agriculture. 
It  is  said  Monrovia  is  not  so  prosperous  looking  as 
formerly,  which  I  ascribe  to  a  neglect  of  agriculture. 
It  is  important  that  a  greater  proportion  of  farmers 
be  sent  among  them,  for  on  the  produce  of  the  soil, 
by  their  own  labour,  must  the  settlers  mainly  depend" 
Visiting  New  Georgia,  four  miles  from  Monrovia, 
on  the  Stockton  river,  which,  it  may  be  remembered, 
was  then  a  settlement  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  re- 
captured Africans,  the  officers  declared  the  village  to 
be  far  in  advance  of  all  others  in  agriculture ;  they 
were  patient,  painstaking  labourers,  and  the  soil 
amply  rewarded  their  labours.  The  Liberia  Herald 
contained  an  article  so  full  of  good  sense,  that  we 
wish  everybody  to  have  the  advantage  of  it,  and  we 
doubt  not  there  is  a  large  class  of  people  in  this 
country,  who  need  the  advice  as  much  as  the  Libe- 
rians  did.     After  speaking  of  the  necessity  of  indi- 


158  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

vidual  exertion,  and  the  folly  of  expecting  too  much 
from  America,  the  writer  says — 

"  The  extent  of  the  Society's  promise  of  direct 
personal  assistance,  as  far  as  we  are  acquainted  with 
it,  has  been  always  limited  to  a  passage  to  the  Colony, 
and  subsistence  for  a  short  period  after  arriving  here. 
And  considering  its  nature,  circumstances,  and  the 
precariousness  of  the  sources  whence  its  funds  are 
derived,  it  is  exceedingly  strange  that  more  should 
be  expected.  We  ought  to  withdraw  our  attention 
from  every  uncertain  source,  and  direct  our  energies 
immediate]y  to  that  quarter  whence  a  sure  and  inde- 
pendent subsistence  can  be  derived.  For  us  to  be 
grievously  complaining  that  the  Society  does  not 
afford  us  the  means  of  support,  would  be  degrading 
to  us  as  a  people,  and  go  far  towards  justifying  the 
slander,  so  often  thrown  upon  us  by  our  enemies. 
;  that  we  are  ineapahle  of  improvement.'  The  great 
practical  error  of  all,  consists  in  fixing  an  unavailing 
and  covetous  desire  on  distant  objects,  without  beings 
willing  to  encounter  the  difrlctilties  of  the  way  which 
leads  to  them.  Advert  to  the  prosperity  of  the 
Colony,  its  independence  and  stability,  and  all  are 
ready  with  the  general  concession,  that  agriculture 
would  secure  these  blessings.  They  will  say  farther. 
that  with  proper  means,  agriculture  can  be  carried  to 
any  extent.     Urge  people  to  act  according  to  these 


STEUGGLES  AND  EXPEBIMENTS.  159 

concessions,  and  you  are  immediately  confronted  with, 
'  But  what  can  I.  do  with  my  limited  means  ?' 

"  If  the  objections  which  are  so  continually  brought 
up  against  farming  were  analyzed  to  the  bottom,  we 
have  no  hesitation  in  saying  beforehand,  they  would 
be  found  to  consist  of  pride  and  ignorance,  and  per- 
haps a  small  portion  of  laziness.  All  are  willing  to 
work,  if  it  can  be  done  on  a  large  scale,  and  in  a 
respectable  manner ;  if  there  is  a  probability,  not 
only  of  making  a  living,  but  a  fortune  in  a  short 
time:  which  being  interpreted,  is,  all  are  willing  to 
work,  if  they  can  get  others  to  do  the  work,  while 
they  stand  idly,  and  merely  give  directions.  Tell  it 
not  in  Liberia,  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of  Mon- 
rovia, lest  these  natives  laugh,  that  there  are  those 
in  Liberia,  who  are  ashamed  of  honest  labour.  It  is 
exceedingly  strange  that  it  has  not  long  since  occurred 
to  our  people,  that  everything  must  have  a  beginning 
— that  agriculture  in  every  country  is  progressive 
until  it  reaches  its  acme  of  improvement.  The 
North  American  Colonies,  during  the  first  years  of 
their  agricultural  experiments,  raised  little  more  than 
enough  for  their  own  use.  But  the  produce  of  pre- 
ceding years  enabled  them  to  enlarge  their  operations 
the  succeeding  years,  and  soon  they  had  a  surplus, 
after  supplying  their  own  wants,  to  give  in  exchange 
for  the  productions  cf  other  countries.  They  had, 
during  that  time,  to  content  themselves  with  such 


160  AFEICA  BEDEEMED. 

coarse  fare  and  home-made  dress  as  their  own  indus- 
try and  ingenuity  could  furnish  them,  and  this  con- 
formitv  to  their  circumstances  was  the  main  cause  of 
their  future  prosperity  and  independence.  Could  we 
subdue  our  pride,  and  content  ourselves  a  few  years 
with  such  articles  of  clothing  and  provisions  as  our 
own  soil  and  a  little  industry  could  abundantly  sup- 
ply us,  we  should  soon  reap  the  benefits  in  ample 
resources,  increasing  with  every  returning  year." 

James  Brown,  an  observing  and  intelligent  emi- 
grant, gave  much  of  his  attention  to  the  agricultural 
interests  of  the  Colony.  An  association  was  entered 
into,  to  advance  this  great  object,  called  "  The  Liberia 
Agricultural  Society,"  the  principal  object  of  which 
was  to  enter  vigorously  into  growing  the  sugar-cane 
and  the  manufacture  of  sugar.  Some  ears  of  com, 
carried  out  by  Mr.  Simpson,  on  being  planted,  came 
to  maturity  in  two  months,  of  a  finer  and  better 
quality  than  the  original.  If  peas  and  beans  are  fit 
for  the  table  in  four  weeks,  fresh  vegetables  could  be 
grown  in  every  month  in  nine  out  of  the  year,  while 
half  an  acre  of  cotton  trees  would  clothe  a  whole 
family,  it  would  seem  that  ample  means  of  living 
were  in  the  hands  of  every  one,  who  is  willing  to  set 
himself  patiently  and  industriously  to  work ;  and  he 
who  is  not,  can  be  poor  and  complaining  on  the  best 
soil  and  in  the  finest  countrv  in  the  world. 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  161 

The  Mississippi  Colonization  Society  took  mea- 
sures to  plant  a  colony  under  its  own  superin- 
tendence, to  be  called  "  Mississippi  in  Africa."  Ter- 
ritory was  purchased  in  the  Sinou  country,  one 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  below  Monrovia,  and  a  town 
laid  out,  called  Greenville,  in  honour  of  Mr.  James 
Green,  of  whom  mention  has  been  already  made, 
and  who,  in  addition  to  freeing  a  number  of  his  own 
slaves,  and  defraying  their  expenses  to  Liberia,  left 
twenty-five  thousand  dollars  to  be  used  for  coloni- 
zation purposes.  Josiah  Finley  wras  appointed 
Governor.  He  wrote,  long  after  its  establishment, 
that  the  three  most  pressing  wants  of  the  colony 
were,  wheaten  flour,  soap,  and  most  important  of  all, 
emigrants.  For  the  first,  they  could  substitute  rice 
flour  and  corn  meal;  second,  they  could  find  no 
equivalent;  and  for  the  third,  they  were  looking 
with  longing  anxiety,  inasmuch  as  the  labour  of 
native  Africans  could  never  make  up  the  labour  of 
civilized  men.  Eev.  Gloster  Simpson  removed  from 
Monrovia  to  this  settlement. 

In  view  of  their  condition  and  prospects,  and 
under  a  deep  sense  of  their  obligation  to  the  means 
and  measures  which  had  enabled  them  to  come  to 
come  to  Africa,  the  inhabitants  of  Monrovia  held  a 
meeting  about  this  time,  to  give  a  public  expression 
of  their  opinions  upon  the  results  of  their  great 
work.     Speeches  were  made  and  resolutions  passed, 

M 


:r 


a  ;- 


. ...    ...  . 


lien  r>.::j 
•  WKM  "     I         I:  ill«-  -    Hr-'l.    v  n  rn    v  •  luiaf 

.■-•::•- 


STRUGGLES  AND  EXPERIMENTS.  163 

Every  wise  and  reasonable  man  will  give  but  one 
answer. 

A  new  settlement,  six  miles  up  the  St.  John's 
river,  was  surveyed  and  commenced  by  Louis  Sheri- 
dan, an  enterprising  emigrant  from  North  Carolina. 
It  was  named  Bexley,  in  honour  of  Lord  Bexley,* 
President  of  the  British  African  Colonization  Society, 
who  subscribed  five  hundred  dollars  towards  its 
foundation.  Another  had  been  commenced  on  the 
Junk  river,  called  Marshall,  for  Chief  Justice  Mar- 
shall, a  distinguished  friend  of  the  African  cause. 

If  it  be  true  that  little  things  are  often  the  best 
indications  of  the  true  state  of  society,  another  quota- 
tion from  the  Liberia  Herald  may  occupy  an  apt  posi- 
tion on  our  pages. 

"  African  Improvement. — In  conversation  the  other 
day,  it  was  said  that  some  people  abroad  thought  our 
colony  going  back.  Happening  to  be  passing  up 
street,  we  noticed  an  iron  railing  with  brass  knobs 
being  put  up  in  front  of  the  house  of  Mr.  Elijah 
Johnson." 

*  Since  the  above  was  written  it  has  pleased  God  to  take 
to  himself  this  excellent  nobleman.  To  the  close  of  his  valu- 
able life  Lord  Bexley  exhibited  a  warm  interest  in  the  well- 
being  of  Liberia  ;  and  we  cannot  refrain  the  expression  of  our 
regret,  that  at  the  time  of  his  lordship's  benevolent  proposition, 
the  public  mind  was  not  prepared  to  carry  out  his  munificent 
offer  to  contribute  largely  to  the  endowment,  at  Bassa  Cove,  of 
an  Episcopal  mission,  church,  schools,  and  theological  semi- 
nary. We  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  its  early  commencement 
by  our  American  brethren. 


CHAPTER  X. 

A  NEW  ERA. 

"  But  still  imperfect  is  the  work  of  love. 

Ye  generous  band,  united  in  the  cause 

Of  liberty  to  Africa  restored, 

Oh,  may  your  hands  be  strong  and  hearts  be  firm 

In  that  great  cause  !" — Gkahame. 

As  the  settlements,  planted  by  the  different  State 
Colonization  Societies,  and  in  some  measure  under 
their  control,  sometimes  conflicted  with  and  embar- 
rassed each  other's  proceedings,  it  was  thought  expe- 
dient to  unite  them,  by  one  constitution,  under  one 
efficient  government,  granting  to  the  settlers  a  greater 
degree  of  power  than  they  had  hitherto  exercised, 
and  accustoming  them  to  the  responsible  duties  of 
sovereignty.  For  the  purpose  of  drafting  a  consti- 
tution, a  committee  was  appointed  by  the  Coloniza- 
tion Society,  consisting  of  Charles  F.  Mercer,  Samuel 
L.  Southard,  Matthew  St.  Clair  Clark,  and  Elisha 
Whittlesey.  After  various  meetings,  Mr.  Mercer, 
who  was  chairman,  presented  a  paper  upon  which 
the  constitution  was  drawn.  To  the  clause,  declaring 
the  right  of  white  missionaries,  officers,  and  agents  to 


A  NEW  ERA.  1G5 

hold  in  the  colony  a  fee  of  land  to  a  limited  quan- 
tity, Mr.  Whittlesey  made  objections,  and  moved 
that  no  white  man  should  become  landholder  in 
Liberia.  After  much  discussion,  the  committee 
unanimously  sustained  the  motion,  and  the  consti- 
tution was  accepted  by  the  Society.  The  following 
are  some  of  its  most  important  Articles. 

"  Article  1st.  The  Legislative  powers  herein 
granted  shall  be  vested  in  a  Governor  and  Council 
of  Liberia ;  but  all  laws  enacted  by  them,  shall  be 
subject  to  the  revocation  of  the  Colonization  Society. 

"  Article  %nd.  The  Council  shall  consist  of  repre- 
sentatives, elected  by  the  people  of  the  different  set- 
tlements, and  shall  be  apportioned  among  them 
according  to  a  just  ratio  of  representation.  The 
Commonwealth  shall  be  divided  into  two  Counties. 
Monrovia,  Caldwell,  Millsburg  and  New  Georgia 
shall  constitute  one  County,  called  the  County  of 
Mesurado,  and  shall  be  entitled  to  send  six  repre- 
sentatives. Bassa  Cove,  Marshall,  Bexley  and  Edina 
shall  constitute  another,  under  the  name  of  the 
County  of  Bassa,  and  shall  send  four  representatives. 

"Article  l&ih.  The  Judicial  power  of  the  Com- 
monwealth of  Liberia  shall  be  vested  in  one  Supreme 
Court,  and  in  such  inferior  Courts  as  the  Governor 
and  Council  may  from  time  to  time  ordain  and  esta- 


166  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

blish.     The  Governor  shall  be,  ex  officio,  Chief  Jus- 
tice of  Liberia. 

"  Article  20th.  There  shall  be  no  Slavery  in  the 
Commonwealth. 

"  Article  %lst.  There  shall  be  no  dealing  in 
slaves,  by  any  citizen  of  the  Commonwealth,  either 
within  or  without  the  bounds  of  the  same. 

"  Article  2 3 re?.  The  right  of  trial  by  jury  and 
the  right  of  petition  shall  be  inviolate. 

"  Article  %bth.  Every  male  citizen  of  the  age  of 
twenty-one  shall  have  the  right  of  suffrage. 

"  Article  26tfi.     All  elections  shall  be  by  ballot." 

The  new  Constitution  and  the  new  Governor,  Mr. 
Thomas  Buchanan,  already  known  to  our  readers, 
were  both  shipped  in  the  Saluda;  a  ship  owned  by  the 
Colonization  Society.  It  came  to  anchor  at  Mesurado 
Bay  on  the  1st  of  April,  1839.  A  boat  was  sent 
ashore,  announcing  the  arrival  of  his  Excellency, 
when  a  salute  was  gallantly  fired  from  the  Fort, 
which  was  answered  from  the  ship.  The  military 
was  soon  seen  filing  down  to  the  wharf,  to  receive 
and  escort  the  new  Magistrate  to  the  government 
house. 

As  soon  as  practicable,  an  assembly  of  the  citizens 
was  convened,  to  whom  was  read  and  explained  the 


A  NEW  ERA.  167 

new  Constitution.  Some  demurred  at  the  veto  power 
of  the  Governor,  but  in  every  other  respect,  it  met 
with  general  approbation.  "It  is  wise  and  liberal," 
they  said,  "  and  a  good  stepping-stone  to  indepen- 
dent sovereignty."  The  inhabitants  of  Monrovia  took 
the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  their  example  was  speedily 
followed  by  the  other  towns.  It  bound  the  interests 
of  the  settlers  more  strongly  together,  and  in  that 
union,  they  felt  there  was  strength. 

The  new  Legislature  held  its  first  session  at  Mon- 
rovia, in  September.  A  brief  notice  of  some  of  its 
earliest  proceedings  may  not  be  uninteresting  to 
our  readers. 

A  post  office  department  was  established,  and  the 
Colonial  Secretary  was  elected  Postmaster- General. 

An  act  was  passed  regulating  the  employment  and 
oversight  of  the  poor  of  the  commonwealth  of 
Liberia,  and  another  concerning  schools.  They  pro- 
vided as  follows  :  — 

Be  it  enacted  and  ordained  by  the  Governor  and 
Legislature  of  Liberia,  in  Council  assembled,  That 
the  support  and  maintenance  of  aged  widows,  desti- 
tute orphans,  poor  persons  and  invalids,  shall  be 
borne  by  the  Commonwealth,  out  of  any  moneys  in 
the  Treasury,  not  otherwise  appropriated. 

Be  it  further  enacted,  That  a  number  of  good 
cards,  wheels,  looms,  knitting  and  sewing  needles, 


168  AFRICA  EEDEEMED. 

shall  be  provided  for  the  use  of  all  females  who 
reside  in  the  asylum,  so  that  they  may  he  employed 
in  carding,  spinning,  weaving,  knitting  and  sewing  ; 
and  to  the  end  that  there  shall  he  no  idlers  about 
this  institution,  the  requisite  quantity  of  wool,  cotton, 
flax,  hemp,  and  such  other  materials  as  may  be  manu- 
factured into  useful  articles  for  the  convenience  of 
the  community  shall  be  kept  constantly  on  hand. 

"  Be  it  further  enacted,  That  there  shall  be  a 
regular  teacher  employed  to  take  charge  of  a  school 
attached  to  the  asylum,  whose  business  shall  be  to 
instruct  the  youth  belonging  to  the  institution  in  all 
the  branches  of  a  common  English  education. 

"Be  it  further  enacted,  That  for  the  improvement 
of  the  youth  of  this  institution,  carpenters,  rope- 
makers,  blacksmiths,  and  such  other  mechanics  as  the 
improving  state  of  the  colony  may  demand,  shall  be 
employed  in  and  about  the  establishment,  for  the 
purpose  of  instructing  the  youth  in  their  several 
branches. 

"  Be  it  further  enacted,  That  in  each  of  the  coun- 
ties of  this  commonwealth,  there  shall  be  one  or  more 
asylums  established  on  the  plan  suggested,  and  to 
which  paupers,  whether  natives  or  colonists,  shall  be 
admitted,  where  they  shall  be  fed,  clothed,  educated, 


A  NEW  ERA.  169 

and  instructed    in   agriculture,  or   in   some  useful 
branch  of  mechanic  art,  if  they  are  of  a  proper  age. 

"  Be  it  enacted  by  the  Governor  and  Council  of  the 
Commonwealth  of  Liberia,  in  Legislature  assembled^ 
That  there  shall  be  established  in  each  settlement 
and  township  that  is,  or  hereafter  may  be,  formed  in 
this  commonwealth,  one  common  school,  the  same  to 
be  under  the  supervision  or  control  of  a  School  Com- 
mittee, to  be  created  for  that  purpose  by  the  Gover- 
nor and  Council." 

"  How  large  was  Liberia  at  this  time  ?"  you  may 
want  to  ask.  It  contained  nine  towns,  and  owned 
five  hundred  thousand  acres  of  rich  land,  where  the 
finest  vegetables  and  the  most  delicious  fruits  could 
be  cultivated  to  any  extent.  It  had  four  printing 
presses,  and  two  newspapers — the  Liberia  Herald, 
already  mentioned,  and  the  African  Luminary,  a  re- 
ligious paper.  What  is  the  best  token  of  good  in 
the  world,  it  numbered  twenty-one  churches,  thirty 
ministers,  ten  day  schools,  and  many  Sabbath  schools. 
Few  new  settlements  could  compare  with  it,  in  its 
supply  of  the  means  of  Christian  improvement.  In 
this  respect,  it  looks  like  the  Puritan  colonies  of 
New  England.  The  monthly  concert  for  prayer,  so 
dear  to  the  hearts  of  American  Christians,  was  early 
established  at  Liberia,  in  which  the  Baptists,  Presby- 
terians, and  Methodists  united.     A  deep  interest  in 


170  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

missions  was  generally  felt,  and  surrounded  as  they 
were  by  heathen  in  every  jungle,  their  hearts  often 
gushed  out  in  most  powerful  appeals  to  Christians  in 
America. 

Behold  Mr.  Seys  on  one  of  his  missionary  tours. 
He  is  at  King  Doongy's  town ;  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren are  squatting  around  him,  beneath  the  spread- 
ing thatch  of  a  rude  cabin ;  an  old  wooden  mortar, 
turned  upside  down,  is  his  pulpit,  large  enough  for  a 
light  and  a  book.  He  has  lifted  up  Iris  heart  to  God 
in  prayer,  and  now,  through  an  interpreter,  he  at- 
tempts to  teach  the  naked  savages  the  way  of  eternal 
life.  So  interested  did  the  interpreter  become,  that 
he  suddenly  stopped  ;  "  Me  no  tell  fast  enough — 
come  here,  you  boy,  who  'peak  English — come  help  ! 
dat  no  word  be  lost — no  single  good  word."  With 
one  on  each  side  of  him,  explaining  his  words  to  the 
listening  audience,  he  again  went  on.  Again  the 
interpreter  stopped,  and  turning  around,  asked 
hastily,  "  Suppose  poor  African  man  do  good  fash, 
no  do  bad — but  he  never  hear  'bout  God,  'bout  God's 
love,  'bout  new  heart — so  he  dead — he  go  up  top  ? 
will  God  take  him  ?"  Ah  !  we  cannot  answer  the  poor 
African's  question.  We  fear  few  heathen  men  "  do 
good  fash — no  do  bad ;"  and  for  such  who  do,  we  can 
safely  trust  them  to  the  tender  mercies  of  an  all-wise 
and  all-compassionate  Creator:  but  there  is  one 
thing  we  do  know,  and  that  is,  our  duty  towards  the 


A  NEW  ERA.  171 

heathen.     "  Go  ye  unto  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel " — and,  to  leave  us  no  room  for  doubt,  it  is 
added  and  reiterated,   "preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature.''"     The  gospel  they  must  have,  and  mainly 
through  our   instrumentality.      Let   us   hear  what 
another  good  minister,  Mr.  Brown,  says  of  a  new 
station,  just  beginning  to  bud  in  the  wilderness  :  "I 
am  on  my  post  at  Hedington.     It  is  one  of  the  plea- 
santest  situations  in  the  world,  although  the  town 
has  but  just  commenced  building ;    and,  under  God, 
I  have  charge  of  one  of  the  most  interesting  little 
flocks  in  the  world.     This  flock  consists  of  fifty-nine 
natives.     Oh,  the  power  of  the  gospel !  See  the  old 
man  dethrone  his  idol,  in  whom  he  trusted  till  his 
head  was  grey ;    but  now  he  casts  the  dumb  thing 
into  the  fire,  looks  up  and  prays  the  Eternal  God  to 
curse  the  smoke  thereof.     See  the  savage  warrior  lay 
his  spear  and  sword  upon  the  ground,  and  see  him 
kneel  and  look  up,  and  pray  to  God,  that  if  he  ever 
takes  them  up  again  to  war,  they  may  be  immediate 
instruments  of  his  death.     Oh,  sir,  could  you  hear  a 
little  two-pound  bell  ring  in  this  dark  forest,  and  see 
the  natives  flock  to  the  mission-house,  like  sheep  to 
the  shepherd  in  time  of  drought,  singing, 

"  Blow  ye  the  trumpet,  blow, 
The  gladly  solemn  sound  ; " 
or, 

1 '  Oh,  for  a  thousand  tongues  to  sing 
My  great  Redeemer's  praise  !  " 


172  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

and  bear  them  thanking  God  in  prayer  for  the  bene- 
fits and  spread  of  the  gospel,  and  hear  the  loud 
amens ;  and  add  to  this,  their  regular  attendance  at 
family  devotions,  their  sound  reasonings  in  meetings 
of  business,  and  constant  applications  to  the  mis- 
sionary, to  know  what  God  says  about  it ;  why,  sir, 
you  would  be  tempted  to  lay  down  your  fear,  and 
come  over  to  Africa  at  once.  Oh,  Christians ! 
pray  that  God  may  sustain  us  in  this  glorious 
work!5' 

Does  not  your  heart  yearn  over  little  Hedington  ? 
Can  you  not  almost  hear  the  tinkling  of  its  little  two- 
pound  bell,  echoing  in  the  almost  unbroken  wilder- 
ness? Should  you  not  rejoice  to  see  those  dark 
savages,  no  longer  savages,  but  gospel-freed  men, 
kneeling  in  grateful  prayer  at  the  mission  altar  ?  The 
little  settlement  of  Hedington  was  about  twenty-five 
miles  north-east  of  Monrovia.  Xear  the  spot  where 
the  mission-house  was  built,  the  paths  of  the  negroes, 
from  the  Pessah,  Gissah,  Queah,  and  Golah  tribes, 
leading  to  Monrovia,  Millsburg,  Caldwell,  New 
Georgia,  intersected,  so  that  frequent  opportunities 
occurred  of  communicating  with  the  surrounding 
natives.  Oh  !  that  these  little  paths,  so  often  trod 
by  the  treacherous  savages,  might  become  "  a  way  of 
holiness,1'  highways  to  speed  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
gospel  of  peace ! 

Shall  we  take  a  peep  at  Mr.  Ivory  Clarke,  another 


A  NEW  ERA.  173 

excellent  missionary,  of  the  Baptist  denomination  ? 
King  Joe  Harris  had  long  wanted  a  man  to  come 
and  teach  his  people  "  book."  He  offered  to  build 
a  house  for  any  body  who  would  come.  At  last,  Mr. 
Clarke  made  a  journey  to  his  town,  where  he  preached 
upon  the  creation.  Joe  and  his  people  listened  very 
attentively.  After  Mr.  Clarke  had  finished,  the  king 
wanted  to  tell  what  he  had  always  thought  about  it. 
"  God  made,  first  time,"  said  he,  "  white  man,  den 
white  woman — den  black  man,  den  black  woman. 
God  den  held  out  his  hands,  book  in  one,  rice  and 
palm-oil  in  other — choose  which,  you  both  ?  White 
man  choose  book,  black  man  choose  rice  and  palm- 
oil.  Book  tell  white  man  how  get  every  thing  else  ; 
black  man  never  get  nothing  but  rice  and  palm-oil. 
I  want  you  come  teach  book  to  me,  my  people,  then 
we  get  more."  Mr.  Clarke  explained  to  him  the 
treasures  of  salvation  which  the  book  unfolded  to  him 
and  to  them.  The  poor  creatures  seemed  touched 
by  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus.  "  Preach  more — more 
book,"  they  cried.  Several  missionaries  were  sent 
over  to  Liberia  by  the  Presbyterian  Board,  to  "  preach 
more — more  book." 

But  there  were  shadows  mingling  with  these 
lights  of  Liberian  life.  There  are  darker  tints  to 
this  pleasant  picture,  to  which  we  must  now  sadly 
and  painfully  turn  our  eyes.  The  slave-trade,  as 
you  well  know,  was  the  secret  of  all  the  wars,  the 


174  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

kidnapping,    and    the    bloodshed,    which    prevailed 

among  the  native  tribes,  and  of  the  difficulties  which, 
from  time  to  time,  broke  out  between  the  Liberians 
and  the  savages.  It  was  the  main  desire  of  the 
government  of  Liberia  to  break  up  this  traffic  in  all 
the  territory  over  which  they  claimed  any  jurisdiction, 
and  as  far  as  possible  among  all  the  neighbouring 
tribes,  to  turn  the  trade  of  the  country  into  different 
channels.  Towards  this  object,  the  settlers  laboured 
with  firmness  and  courage.  No  sooner  had  Governor 
Buchanan  taken  the  oaths  of  office,  than  his  attention 
was  directed  towards  some  suspicious  movements  at 
Bassa. 

VThat  were  they  ?  Two  traders  had  come  to  the 
coast,  erected  a  factory,  offered  great  bargains  to  the 
natives,  and  made  every  preparation  for  carrying  on 
the  slave-trade.  "  It  must  not,  and  it  shall  not 
be!  "  exclaimed  Governor  Buchanan.  "  Fire,  famine, 
blood,  and  chains,  are  the  necessary  elements  of  the 
slave-trade  !  What  multiplied  miseries  is  this 
devilish  traffic  inflicting  upon  this  unhappy  country  ! 
It  must  be  stopped."  He  immediately  sent  an  order 
to  the  traders  to  leave  the  coast  instantly,  or  run 
the  risk  of  having  their  property  ruined,  and  their 
factories  destroyed. 

The  order  was  treated  with  great  contempt. 
"  Leave  !  no  !  Tell  Governor  Buchanan  we  shall 
stay  as  long  as  we  please,  and  trade  in  just  what 


A  NEW  ERA.  175 

suits  us  best,"  cried  Lang;  and  forthwith  he  set 
about  to  add  to  his  stores,  enlarge  his  barracoons, 
and  to  make  every  preparation  for  a  permanent  set- 
tlement. The  Governor  again  sent  to  him,  threat- 
ening hostilities  if  his  orders  were  not  obeyed.  The 
message  was  treated  as  before.  The  Governor 
resolved  to  let  no  time  be  lost  in  executing  his 
threats.  The  military  of  Monrovia  were  immediately 
assembled ;  he  presented  the  facts  before  them,  and 
asked  for  forty  volunteers  to  come  forward,  and  sup- 
port the  government.  Forty  men  grasped  their 
muskets,  and  with  one  voice  declared,  "  We  will  go." 
He  then  sent  to  New  Georgia  for  thirty-five  more, 
and  the  call  was  instantly  responded  to.  These 
were  put  under  the  command  of  Col.  Elijah  Johnson, 
the  old  hero  of  Ashmun's  time,  and  took  up  their 
line  of  march  towards  Little  Bassa.  Three  schooners, 
filled  with  a  supply  of  ammunition,  put  to  sea,  to  aid 
and  co-operate  with  the  land  force  at  the  scene  of 
action.  The  whole  amounted  to  one  hundred  men, 
under  the  direction  of  the  Marshal  of  Liberia,  Mr. 
Lewis,  all  animated  by  the  same  heroic  determination 
to  expel  the  slavers,  or  die  in  the  attempt. 

Three  days  passed  away,  and  the  inhabitants  of 
Monrovia  were  anxiously  awaiting  the  result,  when 
Governor  Buchanan  was  thrown  into  the  greatest 
alarm  by  beholding  the  return  of  his  little  fleet,  after 
struggling  against  a  strong  head  wind,  and  a  heavy 


176  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

current,  in  a  vain  attempt  to  double  the  Cape. 
"  What  has  become  of  the  land  force,  deprived  of 
the  assistance  of  the  schooners  ?"  he  exclaimed,  filled 
with  fearful  forebodings  of  their  fate.  It  was  a 
moment  of  intense  anxiety  and  gloom.  Just  then 
an  English  man-of-war  arrived  in  the  harbour,  with 
a  fine,  snug,  fast-sailing  slaver,  which  had  been  re- 
cently captured,  and  which,  on  learning  the  critical 
state  of  things,  the  commander  put  into  Governor 
Buchanan's  possession.  In  an  incredibly  short  time, 
her  captain  and  crew  were  landed,  and  the  Governor 
was  on  board  with  men,  arms,  ammunition,  and 
provisions.  By  daylight  on  Friday  morning,  a  little 
more  than  thirty-six  hours  after  her  departure,  the 
slave-schooner  Euphrates  anchored  off  Little  Bassa. 
At  that  early  hour,  nothing  could  be  distinctly  seen 
on  shore,  and  a  canoe  was  instantly  despatched  to 
learn  the  state  of  affairs  around  the  barracoons.  As 
the  day  opened,  a  scene  of  fearful  interest  burst 
upon  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  Governor  and  his 
crew.  About  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  from  the 
beach,  in  a  little  clearing  amid  the  forest,  rose  the 
barracoons,  and  a  few  native  huts,  from  the  walls  of 
which  now  gleamed,  in  hot  and  quick  succession,  the 
fire  and  steel  of  musketry ;  the  woods  muttered  a 
thrilling  and  angry  answer ;  the  roar  and  blaze  of 
guns  burst  forth  upon  the  barracoon,  on  every  side. 
Stem  and  fearful  was  the  contest.     Who  were  the 


A  NEW  EBA.  177 

besieged  ?  Who  the  besiegers  ?  Were  there  friends 
or  foes  in  the  forest  ?  Were  there  friends  or  foes 
behind  the  palisades  ?  None  could  tell ;  none  could 
even  guess.  Breathless  and  anxious  stood  the  men 
on  deck,  watching  the  varying  struggle.  The  return 
of  the  canoe  was  waited  for  with  the  utmost  solici- 
tude. "  Dem  live  for  fight  dere  now  !  'Merica  men 
had  barracoon ;  countrymen  in  woods  all  round  S 
Fishmen  stay  back.  'Pose  you  go  shore  ;  you  catch 
plenty  balls/'  shouted  the  Krooman,  as  soon  as  he 
was  in  hailing  distance.  "  'Merica  men  in  the  barra- 
coons !  " 

The  little  force  of  the  Liberians  then  was  sur- 
rounded, and  hotly,  closely  besieged  by  a  savage  and 
angry  enemy,  of  tenfold  numbers,  thirsting  for  their 
blood.  Their  ammunition  must  soon  be  exhausted, 
and  they  must  fight  for  every  inch  of  life.  A  new 
difficulty  and  danger  sprang  up.  The  Governor  was 
on  board  a  well  known  slaver  ;  the  settlers,  mistaking 
them  for  Spaniards,  coming  up  to  reinforce  the 
enemy,  might  fire  upon  them,  or  seeing  no  way  of 
safety  but  in  retreat,  abandon  their  barracoons,  and 
attempt  to  cut  their  way  into  the  forest. 

What  was  to  be  done  ?  We  must  communicate 
with  the  barracoons.  We  must  convey  information 
to  our  friends  with  all  possible  dispatch.  "Who 
will  go  on  this  perilous  enterprise  ?"  asked  the 
Governor,  looking  around  upon  his  men. 

N 


178  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

"  I  will  go,  sir,"  cried  a  young  American  sailor, 
stepping  forth  from  the  crew,  with  fire  in  his  eye,  and 
an  unflinching  courage  stamped  upon  every  feature 
in  his  face. 

"  It  may  cost  your  life,"  said  the  Governor,  fixing 
his  keen  eye  upon  the  man. 

"  Never  mind,  I  will  go  !"  was  the  hold  reply. 
With  a  hastily  penned  note  to  Colonel  Johnson  hid 
in  his  bosom,  he  put  off  upon  Iris  dangerous  errand. 

The  brave  Liberians  in  the  barracoon  were  all  this 
while  anxious  watchers  of  the  schooner.  When  her 
masts  and  spars  became  first  visible  in  the  morning 
light,  they  hailed  her  as  the  promised  aid.  "Aid! 
aid!"  they  shouted,  one  to  another,  joyfully  and 
gratefully.  "  Thank  God,  aid  is  near  !"  How  must 
their  hopes  have  been  dashed  on  discovering  her  to 
be  the  slaver  Euphrates  !  Already  weary,  and  worn, 
with  an  increasing  foe  and  failing  ammunition,  how 
desponding  their  spirits,  how  appalling  their  pros- 
pects !  The  second  canoe  pushed  from  the  vessel's 
side.  It  was  seen  by  Johnson.  "  There  goes  the 
slaver  to  concert  measures  with  the  natives,  for  a 
combined  attack  !  If  he  reaches  them,  we  are  lost ! 
He  must  be  cut  off!"  and  at  the  head  of  a  handful 
of  men,  Johnson  rushed  out  to  attack  him,  as  the 
surf  threw  the  canoe  upon  the  beach.  The  brave 
sailor  found  himself  beset  with  foes  on  every  side. 
No  sooner  had  he  landed,  than  a  party  of  the  natives. 


A  NEW  ERA.  179 

concealed  in  the  bushes*  seized  the  poor  fellow,  and 
discovering  him  to  be  "  'Merica  man,"  were  about  to 
despatch  him  with  their  knives,  when  Johnson's  party, 
who  saw  in  the  movement  something  auspicious  to 
themselves*  made  a  furious  onset.  The  savage  who 
held  his  knife  at  the  sailors  throat  was  instantly 
shot  down. 

Meanwhile  the  governor  and  his  men  were  already 
under  way.  A  party  of  savages  stood  ready  to  cut 
them  off  as  they  leaped  upon  the  shore.  Before  it 
could  be  done*  a  sudden  and  heavy  fire  from  the  boat 
reached  their  ranks,  and  scattered  them  into  the 
forests.  What  a  joyful  Welcome  did  the  governor 
receive  as  he  crossed  the  threshold  of  the  barracoon  ! 
For  an  instant  the  rattling  showier  of  balls  was  for- 
gotten, while  the  men  threw  up  their  caps,  shouting 
"  Hurra,  hurra,  for  Governor  Buchanan  !"  Prompt 
measures  were  immediately  resorted  to.  Some 
houses  without  the  palisades,  which  had  afforded 
shelter  to  the  savages,  were  quickly  destroyed.  A 
sally  Was  made  into  the  nearest  thicket,  where  a 
large  body  of  the  natives  had  intrenched  themselves. 
They  were  speedily  routed,  and  a  party  of  axe-men 
soon  levelled  it  to  the  ground.  The  property  saved 
by  the  marshal  began  to  be  shipped*  and  the  whole 
day  was  passed  in  industriously  working*  and  as 
manfully  fighting.  It  was  a  clay  of  toil,  vigilant, 
-severe,  unresting  toil.     The  next  day,  it  being  re^ 


180  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

ported  that  Lang  had  determined  to  reinforce  him- 
self with  other  native  princes,  and  continue  the 
combat,  the  schooner  was  despatched  to  Monrovia,  for 
more  volunteers,  two  field-pieces,  fourteen  thousand 
hall  cartridges,  and  other  articles  necessary  to  their 
position.  On  her  return,  the  Governor  sent  a  mes- 
sage to  the  native  kings,  demanding  an  instant  sur- 
render of  the  slaves  in  their  possession,  and  desiring 
of  them  to  make  a  treaty  of  peace  within  twenty-four 
hours.  The  messenger  came  hack  in  the  evening, 
bringing  word  that  the  kings  would  appear  the  next 
day  on  the  beach.  The  next  morning,  a  white  flag 
was  borne  towards  the  barracoon.  Bah  Gay  was  said 
to  be  upon  the  beach,  fearful  of  approaching  nearer. 
Governor  Buchanan,  with  an  escort  of  Td  men,  then 
marched  up  to  meet  him.  It  was  some  time  before 
Bah  Gay  consented  to  issue  from  the  bushes,  and 
when  he  did,  he  shook  with  fear,  though  enclosed 
by  a  body-guard  of  300  warriors.  Before  saying  a 
word,  he  gave  up  the  slaves  in  his  possession,  and 
piteously  bewailed  his  folly  in  making  war  on  the 
Mericans.  The  terms  of  peace  were  readily  agreed 
to,  written  and  signed  on  a  drum-head,  the  principal 
articles  of  which  were,  that  he,  Bah  Gay,  would 
never  deal  in  slaves  again,  or  enter  in  any  way  into 
the  slave-trade.  The  next  morning,  their  encamp- 
ment was  broken  up,  and  both  land  and  sea  forces 
returned  to  Monrovia  with  the  loss  of  one  Krooniam 


A  NEW  EKA.  181 

Six  or  eight  of  the  Liberians  were  wounded,  some 
severely  but  not  seriously,  among  whom  was  Colonel 
Johnson,  The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  declared  to  be 
10  killed,  but  it  was  thought  greatly  to  exceed  that 
number.     The  spot  is  now  called  Fort  Victory. 

Few  things  grieved  Governor  Buchanan  more,  or 
filled  him  with  deeper  shame,  than  to  see  his  own 
countrymen  engaged  in  the  slave-trade.  He  was 
anxious  to  have  clear  and  distinct  instructions  upon 
the  kind  and  amount  of  testimony  required  to  con- 
demn a  slaver  in  an  American  court.  "  I  cannot 
bear,"  said  he,  "to  see  these  pirates  escape  when 
brought  in  my  power ;  but  it  perplexes  me  often  be- 
yond measure  to  know  how  to  act. 

Her  Britannic  Majesty's  brig  Saracen  brought  into 
the  harbour  of  Monrovia  an  American  slave  schooner, 
Campbell,  captured  just  after  having  anchored  at 
Gallinas,  one  of  the  most  extensive  slave-markets  on 
the  coast  The  governor  went  on  board,  and  over- 
hauled her  cargo,  was  fully  satisfied  in  his  own  mind 
that  it  was  intended  for  the  slave-trade,  but  the 
evidence,  he  feared,  was  not  sufficiently  strong  to 
condemn  her  at  court.  The  captain  swore  she  was 
no  slaver;  and  begged  permission  to  remain  and 
make  some  necessary  repairs,  without  which  it  was 
not  safe  to  re-cross  the  Atlantic.  Permission  was 
granted.  On  learning  that  an  American  cruiser  was 
daily  expected,  he   seemed  exceedingly  uneasy,  and 


182  AFEICA  EEBEEMED. 

at  last  determined  to  sell  both  cargo  and  vessel.  No 
sooner  was  the  sale  advertised,  than  one  of  the  mates 
came  forward,  and  under  oath,  declared  that  both 
vessel  and  cargo  were  owned  by  Don  Pedro  Blanco, 
one  of  the  principal  slave-traders  at  Gallinas,  that 
she  was  a  regular  slaver,  and  came  on  the  coast  solely 
for  that  purpose.  The  sailors  confirmed  his  testi- 
mony. Governor  Buchanan  immediately  ordered 
a  writ  to  be  served ;  the  property  was  seized,  while 
the  captain  disappeared  in  the  night,  and  made  his 
way  back  again  to  his  employer. 

Have  you  heard  of  the  sturdy  bravery  of  those 
British  seamen,  who  shipped  on  board  a  vessel  en- 
gaged in  the  African  trade,  and  on  arriving  at 
Gallinas,  learned  for  the  first  time,  that  they  were 
to  take  a  cargo  of  slaves  ?  Disgusted  with  a  traffic 
condemned  by  every  Christian  nation,  and  indignant 
at  being  deceived  into  it,  they  resolved  to  bear  no 
part  or  lot  in  the  matter,  One  day,  while  the  captain 
was  absent  on  shore,  the  crew  weighed  anchor  and 
put  to  sea,  They  carried  her  to  Sierra  Leone,  and 
gave  her  up  to  the  authorities  of  that  colony. 

Frequent  mention  has  been  made  of  King  Boat- 
swain, a  powerful  chief,  and  one  of  the  greatest 
slave-dealers  in  the  region.  He  was  a  most  extra- 
ordinary African.  When  young,  he  visited  England, 
and  served  for  a  time  in  a  British  man-of-war. 
Afterwards  returning  to  his  own  country,  he  plunged 


A  NEW  ERA,  1 83 

into  the  interior,  50  miles  from  Cape  Mesurado,  and 
set  up  his  standard.  Of  giant  stature  and  uncon- 
querable energy,  he  soon  drew  about  him  all  the 
high  bloods  of  the  country.  War  was  his  business  ; 
his  generals  became  the  most  noted  warriors  of  the 
age  ;  few  tribes  could  long  withstand  their  artifices 
or  attacks.  But  King  Boatswain,  with  an  almost 
instinctive  reverence  for  civilization,  had  always  been 
a  faithful  friend  to  the  Liberians.  In  fact,  he  was 
their  most  powerful  ally,  whose  protection  had  been 
of  service  to  them,  more  than  once  in  overawing  the 
turbulent  spirits  of  some  of  their  nearer  neighbours. 

His  death  proved  the  occasion  of  serious  troubles. 
Gatumba,  a  bold  and  bloody  chief,  succeeded  to  the 
kingdom,  while  Goterah,  a  noted  warrior,  became 
commander  of  his  forces. 

The  tribes  around  soon  felt  the  weight  of  their 
power ;  they  waged  war  in  eveiy  direction,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  captives,  to  supply  the  demands 
of  the  slave-trade ;  and  at  length  they  had  entered 
the  Dey  country,  a  region  bordering  on  Liberia. 
Thousands  of  unhappy  Deys  were  butchered,  or 
carried  away  and  sold  into  hopeless  slavery,  when  a 
poor,  miserable  remnant  of  the  tribe,  about  20  in 
number,  came  to  the  people  of  Millsburg,  begging 
the  protection  of  the  Liberian  government,  and  per- 
mission to  settle  quietly  down  among  the  colonists. 
They  were  kindly  received.     The  people  set  about 


184  AFRICA  REDEEMED, 

to  instruct  them  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life,  and  for 
the  first  time  in   their  lives,  they  began  to  enjoy 
peaceable  and  pleasant  homes.     The  poor  Deys  were 
as  happy  as  could  be.     No  fear  of  captivity  haunted 
them,  nor  did  the  chains  of  slavery  clank  in  their 
ears,  for  they  now  considered  themselves  beyond  the 
power  of  their  blood-thirsty  pursuers.     Alas  !   they 
knew  not  how  relentless  are  the   demands  of  the 
slave-trade.     Suddenly,  on  the  night  of  the  16th  of 
November,    1840,    a   savage   yell   awoke   the    quiet 
sleepers  at  Millsburg;  Gatumba  was  on  their  track. 
The  people  of  Millsburg  rushed  to  the  rescue  of  the 
Deys,  but  not  before  the  savage  chief  had  killed  four, 
captured  twelve,    and   dreadfully   wounded   the   re- 
mainder.    The  poor  sufferers  were  taken  to  the  hos- 
pitable  homes    of  the    colonists,    nursed   with    the 
tenderest   care,    and    finally   recovered    from  their 
wounds.     An  express  was  instantly  sent  to  Governor 
Buchanan  with  news  of  the  outrage.     Gatumba  was 
found  to  be  hanging  on  the  outskirts  of  Liberia,  and 
no  one  could  predict  where  his  daring  spirit  would 
next  direct  hostilities.     The  Govei'nor  sent  arms  and 
ammunition  to  Millsburg  with  orders  to  keep  the 
strictest  watch  by  night  and  by  day.     He  also  de- 
spatched messengers  to  the  chief,  demanding  a  release 
of  the  captives  and  reparation  for  the  wrong  to  the 
Colony.     Gatumba  sent  back  word  that  he  had  a  war 
to  fight*  and  he  would  not  for  an  instant  suffer  the 


Gatumba  drives  the  captive  Deys  from  Millsburgh. 


A  NEW  ERA.  185 

Americans  to  interfere  with  him.  He  declared  that 
he  had  a  right  to  every  runaway  slave,  and  that 
there  were  runaway  slaves  at  Heclington  which 
belonged  to  him.  Arms  and  ammunition  were  im- 
mediately sent  to  Hedington,  with  orders  to  keep  a 
sharp  look-out,  at  any  appearance  of  hostilities. 
Meanwhile  a  council  of  war  was  holden,  in  which,  as 
the  Liberians  always  preferred  peace  to  war,  they 
resolved  to  seek  a  peaceable  adjustment  of  diffi- 
culties, before  taking  more  decided  measures.  Two 
young  men,  Peale  and  Wilson,  a  son  of  Mr.  Beverl}T 
R.  Wilson,  undertook  a  mission  to  the  chief.  With 
the  flag  of  peace  in  their  hands,  they  fearlessly  left 
their  friends  and  plunged  into  the  forest.  On  ap- 
proaching the  enemy's  camp,  alone,  unarmed,  and 
undefended,  the  cowardly  natives  fell  upon  the  two 
trusting  deputies,  and  murdered  them  without  mercy. 
An  act,  at  once  so  atrocious  and  so  unprovoked,  sent 
a  thrill  of  horror  through  the  Colony.  The  Liberians 
felt  that  they  had  to  grapple  with  an  unscrupulous 
and  deadly  foe.  Their  spies  were  cut  off  in  every 
direction,  and  it  was  difficult,  if  not  almost  impossi- 
ble, to  learn  the  movements  of  the  savages. 

Time  passed  away  in  a  state  of  great  suspense  and 
anxiety,  until  the  16th  of  March,  when  a  fearful 
onset  was  made  upon  little  unoffending  Hedington, 
by  between  three  and  four  hundred  warriors,  Con- 
cloos,   Veys,    Manboes,    headed   by    four   chiefs,    of 


186  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

whom  Goterah  was  the  principal.  So  sure  were  they 
of  victory,  that  Goterah  had  brought  a  pot  for  the 
purpose  of  cooking  Mr.  Brown,  the  missionary,  for 
his  breakfast.  The  mission-house  was  on  one  side 
of  the  settlement,  behind  a  large  field  of  cassadas. 
At  this  time  there  were  two  carpenters  from  Cald- 
well, living  at  the  mission-house,  Zion  Harris  and 
D emery,  who  had  come  for  the  purpore  of  building 
a  church  and  school-house  for  the  mission.  At  day- 
light, a  report  of  guns  was  heard,  and  immediately  a 
voice  shouting  "  War  !  war  !  war,  is  come  !,J  while  a 
horde  of  savages  came  rushing  through  the  cassada 
field,  sending  the  most  horrid  yells.  Harris  and 
Demery,  seizing  their  muskets  and  cartridges,  rushed 
out  and  took  their  stand  behind  the  picket  fence, 
which  surrounded  the  house,  as  the  enemy,  like 
furious  tigers,  pressed  madly  forward.  Their  course 
was  suddenly  checked  by  a  deadly  discharge  from 
Harris  and  Demery.  which  stretched  several  leading 
warriors  on  the  ground.  Before  recovering  from 
their  surprise,  Brown  opened  a  heavy  discharge  upon 
them  from  the  upper  window. 

It  was  now  just  light  enough  to  behold  the  work 
of  death.  The  two  below  were  soon  out  of  ammuni- 
tion. They  ran  to  the  house  for  more,  and  quickly 
returned  to  the  stockade.  A  brisk  fire  was  kept 
incessantly  up  for  some  time,  when  some  of  the 
savages,  led  on  by  Goterah,  tore  off  the  palings  of 


A  NEW  ERA.  187 

the  fence,  and  leaping  over  the  railings,  made  towards 
the  house.     The  little  party  within  were  almost  ex- 
hausted.    Harris  stood  in  the  door  at  the  moment, 
when  a  poor  Christian  native  came  in,  crying  out, 
♦'Look,  daddy,  I  shot,"  and  crawled   away,   leaving 
his  gun,  loaded  with  a  heavy  charge  of  slugs  and 
balls.     Goterah  came  on,  brandishing  his  war-knife, 
and  calling  on  his  men  to  follow.     "  On !  on  !  the 
town   is  ours!"     The   danger  was   imminent.     All 
seemed  lost,  when  Harris,  reaching  behind  him  for 
an  axe,  resolved  to  sell  his  life  as  dearly  as  possible, 
seized  the  gun,  which  the  wounded  native  had  left 
behind  him.     He  clutched  it  like  a  dying  man,  took 
aim,  and  poured  its  contents  into  Goterah 's  body. 
The   chief  instantly  fell,  a   mangled   and   hideous 
corpse.     Several  of  his  men  ran  up  to  catch  the  body 
of  their  prostrate  leader,   shrieking  out,    "  War  is 
done !  The  head  man  is  dead  ! "     Others,  growling 
with  rage,  rushed  in  to  fill  up  the  gap.    D emery  and 
Brown  were  no  where  in  sight.     Harris,  fearing  for 
the  fate  of  his  companions,  still  kept  at  his  post, 
while  the  slugs  and  shot  rattled  around  the  building 
in  all  directions.    Every  thing  looked  desperate,  and 
as  a  last  hope,  he  levelled  his  gun  at  a  second  chief, 
who  fell  to  rise  no  more.    The  assailants  now  faltered 
and   fell   back.     Harris  blew  a  large  bugle,  which 
greatly  frightened  the  savages.     Supposing  it  to  pro- 
ceed from  an  approaching  reinforcement,  they  made 


188  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

a  rapid  retreat,  carrying  off  their  dead  into  the  neigh- 
bouring forest. 

Some  of  the  natives,  gathering  around  Harris, 
began  to  lick  his  feet,  exclaiming,  "  You  got  gree- 
gree — you  got  gree-gree — give  me  some."  "  I  have 
none  but  what  Almighty  God  gives  me,"  answered 
he.  Gree-grees  are  charms  worn  by  the  natives,  to 
protect  them  from  danger.  Harris's  remarkable 
preservation,  in  the  midst  of  perils  so  great,  led 
them  to  suppose  that  he  possessed  one  of  more  than 
common  power  and  value.  Ah,  no  !  the  well-being, 
nay,  the  very  existence  of  this  interesting  village,  just 
converted  from  heathenism  to  Christianity,  seemed 
for  the  time,  to  hang  on  his  own  bold  arm ;  defence- 
less homes  were  about  him,  his  own  life  was  at  stake, 
either  the  band  of  savage  cannibals  must  be  driven 
back,  or  they  must  all  fall  victims  to  their  rage.  The 
God  who  led  the  armies  of  Israel,  and  who  gave 
Gideon  the  victory,  gave  victory  to  this  poor  carpen- 
ter of  Liberia  in  that  fearful  struggle.  The  death  of 
Goterah  gave  great  joy  to  the  natives  far  and  near. 
Some  came  from  long  distances  to  see  the  man  who 
had  slain  the  tyrant,  exclaiming,  "  'Merica  man's  God 
is  God  for  true." 

As  soon  as  the  news  reached  Monrovia,  Colonel 
Johnson  was  sent  down  with  orders  to  fortify  the 
town.  It  was  reported  that  Gatumba  was  determined 
to   revenge   Goterah 's    death  at  Hedington,   by  an 


A  NEW  ERA.  189 

attack  on  Millsburg.     The  colonists  were  in  great 
alarm.  It  was  feared  that  a  general  conspiracy  might 
unite  the  interior  tribes  against  Liberia,  and  attempts 
be  made  to  blot  it  from  the  coast.     At  this  moment 
of  uncertainty  and  fear,  Governor  Buchanan  deter- 
mined  to  carry  war  into  the  very  heart  of  the  enemy's 
country,  and  strike  a  blow  that  would  settle  the  mat- 
ter at  once  and  for  ever.      General   Roberts   was 
ordered  to  prepare  for  a  sudden  march  to  Gatumba's 
strong-hold,  twenty  miles  from  Millsburg,  with  300 
men,  one  piece  of  artillery,  and  60  Kroomen  to  carry 
the  baggage.     On  Friday  morning,  they  took  up  the 
line  of  their  dangerous  march  from  Millsburg.     It 
was  an  hour  of  deep  and  thrilling  interest,  as  the 
little  band  filed  away  beyond  the  pale  of  civilization 
and  protection,  into  a  pathless  forest,  beset  by  foes, 
to  meet  an  enemy  of  more  than  common  ferocity, 
maddened  by  a  late  defeat.     There  were  sorrowful 
partings  between  husbands  and  wives,  brothers  and 
asters,  friend  and  friend.    The  natives  ruefully  shook 
their  heads,  saying,  "  no   come  back  from  de  long 
bush,"    "no  come    back   from  there."      But  brave 
hearts  bade  them  God-speed,  and  Christian  hearts 
pled  their  cause  in  deep  and  fervent  prayer  before 
the  Sovereign  Disposer  of  events. 

Fearlessly  they  went  forth,  not  only  to  be  a  shield 
to  their  own  countrymen,  but  to  maintain  their  right 
to  furnish  a  shelter  and  a  home  to  the  defenceless 


190  AFKICA  REDEEMED . 

natives,  who  fled  to  them  for  protection  from  slavery 
and  death,  liable  to  be  inflicted  upon  them,  at  any 
moment,  by  their  own  ruthless  chiefs  :  a  cause  worthy 
a  noble  defence  !   God  be  with  them  ! 

It  was  a  painful,  as  well  as  perilous  march.  After 
dragging  their  cannon  over  streams  and  through 
swamps,  the  labour  of  which  was  found  to  be  rapidly 
wearing  down  the  men,  it  was  concluded  to  draw  it 
aside  and  leave  it,  concealed  in  the  underbrush.  The 
little  company  proceeded  on,  in  spite  of  a  drenching 
rain,  until  two  o'clock,  when  they  reached  an  old, 
deserted  town  of  Gatumba's,  where  they  encamped 
for  the  night.  Bv  daylight  the  next  morning  thev 
were  on  their  way.  The  path  was  often  so  narrow 
that  they  were  obliged  to  march  in  single  file.  At 
other  places,  the  rains  had  so  swollen  the  streams  and 
swamps,  that  the  mud  was  often  knee-deep,  while 
the  water  arose  to  their  arm-pits.  As  yet,  the  enemy 
had  scarcely  disturbed  them.  On  ascending  a  hill, 
from  a  deep,  wet,  muddy  ravine,  almost  exhausted 
with  fatigue,  a  sudden  attack  was  made  from  the  sur- 
rounding forest,  which  brought  the  brave  Captain 
Snetter,  of  the  Rifle  Corps,  to  the  ground,  mortally 
wounded.  His  men  rushed  forward  and  drove  away 
the  savages,  without  disturbing  the  line  of  march. 
As  there  was  no  longer  any  hope  of  concealing  their 
approach,  the  music,  which  had  hitherto  been  silent, 
now  broke  in  enlivening  strains  upon  the  ear,  inspir- 


A  NEW  EKA,  191. 

ing  the  flagging  spirits  of  the  men,  and  urging  thern 
onward  with  a  rapid  and  animating  step.  The  next 
six  miles  was  one  of  painful  exposure.  All  along  they 
were  subject  to  the  fire  of  an  enemy,  concealed  in 
every  jungle,  and  behind  every  tree.  Though  ex- 
tremely disheartened,  no  murmur  escaped  their  lips ; 
no  man  recoiled  from  his  post  of  duty.  It  was  for- 
ward or  death !  Delay  was  certain  destruction.  At 
last,  a  tremendous  roar  of  musketry  announced  their 
near  approach  to  the  fortress.  The  salute  was  rough 
and  ready.  A  heavy  fire  was  opened  upon  them  with 
muskets  and  swivels  from  every  port-hole  in  the  wall. 
It  was  a  fearful  crisis.  General  Eoberts  quickly 
arranged  his  men  for  a  desperate  attack.  So  skilful 
were  his  manoeuvres,  so  determined  his  assault,  that 
on  the  first  onset,  before  a  hope  of  victory  had  ani- 
mated their  hearts,  the  enemy  became  panic-struck, 
and  hastily  fled  to  the  w7oods.  General  Roberts  in- 
stantly forced  his  way  into  the  town,  planted  their 
standard  on  the  walls,  and  a  proclamation  was  issued, 
declaring  the  battle  fought  and  won.  The  sudden- 
ness of  the  event  was  astonishing  even  to  themselves* 
They  could  scarcely  believe  the  lion  had  been  bearded 
in  his  den.  The  town  was  found  in  a  fine  state  of 
defence,  and  pots  of  cassadas  were  boiling  over  the 
fire  for  supper,  which  proved  very  acceptable  to  the 
tired  and  hungry  Liberians.  Among  the  spoils  were 
found  the  bones  of  Goterah's  brother,  covered  with 


192  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

leopard  skins,  which  was  considered  a  most  powerful 
gree-gree,  and  which,  while  they  possessed,  they  sup- 
posed no  harm  could  befall  them ;  but  it  failed  them 
before  Liberian  heroism.  With  their  wants  well 
supplied,  General  Eoberts  remained  in  quiet  posses- 
sion of  the  town  over  the  Sabbath.  On  Monday,  they 
marched  out,  set  it  on  fire,  and  took  their  homeward 
route.  The  natives  were  astonished  to  see  them 
return,  as  it  was  very  generally  supposed  they  could 
never  penetrate  into  the  "long  bush."  The  valour 
of  the  settlers  won  the  admiration  and  respect  of  the 
whole  region  round  about.  Thenceforth  Governor 
Buchanan,  who  accompanied  the  expedition,  was 
known  as  Governor  Big  Cannon.  Thus  the  expedi- 
tion ended,  with  the  loss  of  only  two  men,  the  release 
of  the  captives,  the  defeat  of  Gatumba,  and  a  growing 
confidence  in  the  strength  and  power  of  their  govern- 
ment. This  proved  the  last  battle  with  the  natives, 
in  fulfilment  of  the  governor's  hopes,  when  he  de- 
clared, "  We  must  strike  a  blow  that  will  settle  the 
matter  at  once  and  for  ever.5' 

Six  or  seven  kings,  who  had  stood  ready  to  join 
the  strongest  party,  now  hastened  to  Monrovia,  with 
presents  and  protestations  of  friendship  ;  while  from 
the  interior  tribes,  messengers  were  despatched  to 
beg  an  alliance  with  Liberia.  One  article  in  everv 
treaty,  always  insisted  upon  by  the  Governor,  was — 
never  in  any  way  to  be  engaged  in  the  slave-trade ; 


A  NEW  ERA.  193 

so  keenly  alive  was  he  to  the  horrors  and  outrages 
of  this  unnatural  traffic.  Every  man  seemed  glad 
to  be  freed  from  the  attacks  of  the  dreadful  Gatumba, 
who,  driven  from  his  town,  and  shunned  by  the 
neighbouring  kings,  was  forced  to  skulk  in  the  woods, 
without  a  hut  for  shelter,  and  nothing  but  wild  yams 
for  food.  Henceforth  he  became  an  outcast  and 
vagabond,  in  regions  once  ruled  by  the  terror  of  his 
name.  The  feeling  began  extensively  to  prevail,  that 
in  Liberia,  and  in  Liberia  alone,  were  they  secure 
from  the  liability  of  being  seized  and  sold  into  slavery. 
The  idea  cannot  be  more  touchingly  expressed  than 
in  the  reply  of  a  poor  fellow,  from  the  river  Congo, 
on  being  asked  if  he  did  not  wish  to  return  to  his 
own  country  :  "  No,  no,"  said  he,  "if  I  go  back  to 
my  country,  they  make  me  slave.  I  am  here  free  ; 
no  one  dare  trouble  me.  I  got  my  wife — my  lands 
— my  children  learn  book — all  free — I  am  here  a 
white  man— me  no  go  back." 

The  aptness  of  the  native  youth  to  learn  is  encou- 
ragingly spoken  of  by  Mr.  Wilson,  the  teacher  at 
White  Plains. 

"  In  reference  to  my  own  affairs,  since  I  have 
been  in  Africa,  up  to  the  first  of  December  last,  I 
can  truly  say  I  have  enjoyed  almost  uninterrupted 
pleasure  ;  but  O,  since  that  time,  I  have  had  sorrow. 
My  eldest  son  was  sent  by  the  Governor  to  a  hostile 
native  prince  with  the  terms  of  peace,  and  this  fellow7 

o 


194  AFRICA  REDEEMED . 

would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  ambassadors,  but 
drove  them  from  his  town,  and  they  were  followed 
by  a  merciless  mob,  and  my  son,  with  Mr.  Peale,  a 
very  worthy  man,  was  slain  on  the  second  day  of 
December  last.  I  would  give  you  a  detail  of  the 
whole  affair,  but  it  will  be  seen  in  the  Luminary. 
This  has  caused  much  grief,  but  I  hope  the  Lord 
will  give  us  grace.     Pray  for  us. 

"  Here,  at  White  Plains,  we  are  doing  well.     We 
have  been  greatly  blessed  in  our  own  labours.      Our 
native    boys    and    girls    make    rapid   improvement. 
They   read    and   write.      Many   of   them    promise 
great  usefulness,  and  to  be  future  blessings  to  their 
generation ;  for  many  of  them  have  already  embraced 
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.    We  have  a  considerable 
farm  under  cultivation,  and  we  intend  to  connect  a 
sugar  plantation  and  a  saw-mill  to  this  institution. 
Our   workshops    are  doing  well.     We    are   making 
wheels,  bedsteads,  tables,  and  other  articles,  such  as 
are  useful  in  the  colony.     The  native  boys  are  re- 
markably ingenious.    Indeed,  sir,  there  is  a  glorious 
reformation    going    on    in  this  vicinity,  and  as   we 
believe  the  present  wars  are  very  near  at  an  end, 
we   look   forward  to  a  more  glorious    day.     But  I 
must  say  that  a  great  deal  depends  upon  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  colony ;  for  we  plainly  see,  as  she 
grows  and  strengthens,  in  the  same  proportion  do 
the  heathen  superstitions  yield  to  her  influence,  and 


A  NEW  EKA.  195 

thus  the  way  is  open  for  the  Gospel.  This  we  have 
sufficiently  proved.  Our  first  object  was  to  extend 
our  labours  as  far  as  possible  into  the  interior,  even 
beyond  the  general  influence  of  the  colony,  but  we 
soon  found  that  our  labour  was  lost.  Then  we 
changed  our  labours  to  the  natives  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  colony,  and  we  find  that  every  thing 
goes  on  well.  My  opinion  is,  that  the  only  thing 
now  wanting  is  men  and  means,  and  the  barren  land 
will  soon  become  a  fruitful  field.  Time  will  not 
permit  me  to  give  you  all  my  views  on  this  subject/' 
As  has  already  been  said,  one  grand  source  of  all 
these  wars  was  to  be  found  in  the  two  great  slave- 
marts,  New  Sesters  and  Gallinas.  New  Sesters  is 
about  70  miles  south-east,  on  the  coast  from  Mon- 
rovia, in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bassa  Cove  ;  Gallinas 
is  about  75  miles  north-west  of  Monrovia.  The  slave- 
trade  is  principally  in  the  hands  of  the  Spanish  and 
Portuguese.  Traders  go  on  the  coast,  and  make 
some  pretensions  to  place  themselves  under  a  negro 
king,  whom  they  supply  plentifully  with  arms  and 
ammunition,  in  order  to  obtain  captives  either  by  war 
or  robbery,  or  by  any  other  means,  either  more  or  less 
iniquitous.  Theodore  Canot,  a  Florentine  by  birth, 
and  once  a  resident  of  the  United  States,  was  at  the 
head  of  the  establishment  at  New  Sesters.  Don 
Pedro  Blanco,  principal  in  an  extensive  firm  at  Ha- 
vana, Cuba,   resided   at    Gallinas,   where  he  had  a 


196  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

princely  mansion,  six  native  wives,  and  numerous 
children.  Their  factories  and  barracoons  (eight  in 
number)  were  extensive  and  strongly  defended ; 
slaves  were  bought  with  goods,  amounting  to  about 
20  dollars,  and  sold  at  Cuba  for  350.  To  give  some 
idea  of  the  immense  profit  arising  from  this  traffic,  a 
slaver  took  a  cargo  of  900  slaves  at  Gallinas,  landed 
800  at  Cuba,  and  cleared  200,000  dollars,  free  of  all 
expenses. 

Sometimes  5000  captives  are  waiting  to  be  ship- 
ped. These  are  often  delayed  by  the  vigilance  of 
British  and  American  cruisers.  When  the  Grampus 
and  Dolphin  were  cruising  on  the  African  coast,  the 
slave-trade  was  exceedingly  dull,  and  multitudes  of 
the  poor  creatures  died  from  the  close  confinement 
and  filthiness  of  the  barracoons.  It  is  said  if  one 
vessel  in  three  eludes  the  vigilance  of  the  cruisers, 
the  business  is  still  profitable.  For  twenty  years, 
Pedro  Blanco  had  been  engaged  in  the  business. 
He  argued  in  favour  of  it,  declaring  that  the  condi- 
tion of  the  natives  is  greatly  improved  by  a  removal 
to  Christian  countries,  and  that  he  was  effecting 
more  good  than  all  the  missionaries  in  Africa,  inas- 
much as  they  convert  comparatively  few  to  Christian- 
ity, while  lie  sent  thousands  yearly  where  the  sound 
of  the  gospel  could  reach  them,  and  the  influence  of 
Christian  institutions  could  mould  their  characters 
and  affect  their  hearts.     The  vicinity  of  these  slave- 


A  NEW  EKA.  197 

marts  was  highly  injurious  to  the  interests  of  the 
colony;  "  and  no  truth  is  more  certain,"  said  Go- 
vernor Buchanan,  in  one  of  his  dispatches,  "  than 
that,  sooner  or  later,  we  must  fight  the  slavers,  or 
surrender  the  high  principles  upon  which  we  have 
planted  ourselves.  As  long  as  they  remain  in  the 
neighbourhood,  they  will  annoy  and  injure  us, 
through  the  medium  of  the  savages.  For  my  part, 
I  care  not  how  soon  the  collision  may  come.  It 
would  be  much  less  hazardous,  and  infinitely  more 
agreeable,  to  fight  them,  than  to  be  exposed  to  these 
repeated  conflicts  in  the  outskirts  of  the  colony  with 
the  natives." 

The  Governor's  wishes  were  in  some  measure  ful- 
filled sooner  than  he  expected ;  for  not  long  after, 
Captain  Denman,  of  the  British  Navy,  landed  at 
New  Sesters,  with  200  men,  and  attacked  the  barra- 
coons.  Canot  and  his  men  fled  to  the  woods,  taking 
two  or  three  thousand  slaves  with  them.  All  their 
own  property,  which  was  not  inconsiderable,  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  captors,  and  was  destroyed.*     Pre- 

*  Captain  the  Hon.  Joseph  Denman,  the  British  officer  in 
command  on  this  district,  adopted  the  system  of  keeping  a 
constant  watch  of  the  slave  factories,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
embarkation  of  slaves  ;  and  never  losing  sight  of  the  place, 
even  to  chase  slave  vessels  in  the  offing,  without  leaving  his 
boats  to  prevent  mischief  in  his  absence.  The  good  effect  of 
tbis  system  was  proved  by  the  fact  that  from  this  place,  which 
had  heretofore  shipped  12,000  slaves  a-year,  only  two  slave 


198  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

vious  to  the  settlement  of  Liberia,  the  mouths  of 
the  rivers  Mesurado,  St.  Paul,  and  St.  John  were  the 
greatest  marts  for  slaves  on  the  windward  coast. 
Thousands  came  annually  down  those  streams  for 
transportation.     Now  those  rivers  are  used  by  the 

ships  carried  off  cargoes  in  1840  ;  a  great  number  of  vessels 
were  obliged  to  leave  the  coast  without  cargoes. 

Towards  the  end  of  1840  Captain  Denman  discovered  that 
some  British  subjects,  from  Sierra  Leone,  were  the  victims  of 
the  slave-dealers,  upon  which  he  demanded  redress  from  the 
native  chiefs  ;  and  under  a  treaty  concluded  in  the  name  of 
his  Government,  all  these  great  establishments  were  de- 
stroyed, the  slaves  in  the  barracoons,  near  1000  in  number, 
were  delivered  up,  and  the  white  slave-dealers  expelled. 

This  tremendous  blow  was  soon  followed  up  at  New  Sesters, 
where  the  same  system  of  prevention  had  been  carried  out  by 
Lieut.  Seagram  of  the  Termagant,  under  instructions  from 
Captain  Denman.  Here  the  slave-dealer,  Canot,  abandoned 
his  factory ;  the  slave-trade  was  entirely  put  an  end  to,  and 
a  treaty  was  entered  into  with  the  chiefs  in  the  name  of  the 
Queen  of  England,  by  which  the  former  engaged  to  abolish 
the  traffic  for  ever. 

In  the  destruction  of  these  strongholds  of  the  slave-trade, 
not  one  single  article  was  carried  off  by  the  English  force,  and 
some  provisions  they  were  compelled  to  use  at  Gallinas 
(where  they  remained  on  shore  a  week)  at  a  time  the  bar  was 
impassable,  were  scrupulously  paid  for  to  the  slave- dealers, 
though  everything  else  was  destroyed  or  carried  off  by  the 
natives. 

The  Grampus  and  Dolphin,  American  cruisers,  were  com- 
manded by  most  able  officers,  but  their  powers  did  not,  by  virtue 
of  treaty,  extend  beyond  vessels  under  their  own  flag — but  the 
former  vessel  was  the  means  by  which  the  Wanderer,  Captain 
Denman's  ship,  was  on  oneoccasion  enabled  to  capture  a  Spanish 
slave  vessel ;  and  it  was  deeply  to  be  lamented  that  owing  to 


A  NEW  ERA.  199 

husbandmen  to  bring  their  produce  to  Monrovia, 
Grand  Bassa,  and  Edina,  and  the  negro  paddles  his 
light  canoe  in  safety,  protected  by  the  stout  arm,  the 
free,  strong  heart  of  this  Christian  Colony.  But  he 
whose  wisdom  had  guided  its  councils,  and  whose 
energy  had  lengthened  its  cords,  and  strengthened 
its  stakes,  he  who  had  wrought  for  it  what  no  other 
man  had  done  since  the  days  of  Ashmun,  was  soon 
to  sink,  to  rise  no  more.  The  sudden  death  of 
Governor  Buchanan  plunged  Liberia  into  the  deepest 
mourning.  While  on  his  way  to  some  of  the  eastern 
settlements,  he  was  attacked  with  fever,  which  con- 
tinued at  intervals  for  several  days.  On  reaching 
Bassa  Cove,  he  partially  recovered,  and  immediately 
gave  his  attention  to  the  duties  which  had  called 
him  thither.  They  were  too  much  for  his  already 
broken  constitution,  his  strength  gave  way,  and  after 
a  few  suffering  days,  his  eyes  closed  upon  the  scene 
of  his  earthly  conflicts.     He  was  buried  with  military 

the  absurd  state  of  the  public  law,  by  which  slavers  are  not  dealt 
with  as  pirates,  although  in  all  cases  slave  vessels  must  now 
violate  their  own  national  laws  in  destroying  life,  and  holding 
men  in  chains  on  the  high  seas,  yet  the  power  to  arrest  them  is 
still  made  contingent  upon  exceptional  stipulations  with  par- 
ticular states.  Let  the  United  States  declare  her  determi- 
nation to  deal  with  slave  vessels  as  pirates,  England  would 
echo  the  declaration  ;  and  such  a  cause  would  be  only  worthy 
and  consistent  with  her  position  as  a  free  and  enlightened 
republic,  with  such  claims  to  take  the  lead  in  civilization. 


200  AFRICA  REDEEMED, 

honours  at  Bassa  Cove.     The  following  was  the  order 
of  procession. 

1.  Military  escort  commanded  by  Colonel  W.  L. 
Weaver. 

2.  Militia. 

3.  Sheriffs,  Physicians,  and  Clergy. 

4.  Bearers,  Corpse,  Pall-bearers. 

5.  Heads  of  Departments. 

6.  Citizens. 

Half-hour  guns  to  be  fired  from  sunrise  to  sunset. 

"  All  that  remains  of  our  much  loved  and  re- 
spected Governor, "  writes  one  from  Liberia,  "  except 
the  glory  of  his  benevolent  and  devoted  career,  lies 
entombed  in  the  government  grounds  at  Bassa,  be- 
neath some  stately  trees  shading  the  house  built  by 
him  some  five  or  six  years  ago.  While  the  green 
turf  flourishes,  and  the  south  sea-breezes  spread  the 
perfumes  of  flowers,  planted  on  the  spot,  sacred  to 
his  ashes,  may  his  memory  abide  in  the  heart  of 
eveiy  Liberian,  and  his  praises  diffuse  a  sacred  love 
for  his  name  in  the  bosom  of  every  coloured  man,  to 
whose  cause  he  was  wholly  and  ardently  devoted." 

Bound  as  he  was  to  his  mother-land,  by  ties  that 
bind  a  son  to  a  much-loved  and  widowed  mother  and 
half- orphan  sisters  and  brothers,  he  thought  not  the 
sacrifice  too  great  to  forsake  all  for  the  love  of  the 
cause  in  which  he  was  engaged. 


A  NEW  ERA.  201 

What  his  self-devotion  was  to  the  glorious  cause  of 
fostering  the  work  of  Africa's  redemption,  we  learn 
from  a  scrap  found  in  his  journal,  penned  on  his  first 
voyage  to  this  country,  in  Dec.  1835.  "  The  Lord, 
who  tempers  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb,  can  also 
temper  the  rays  of  a  tropical  sun  to  a  northern  con- 
stitution. But  though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in 
Him.  The  work  is  his,  in  which  I  go,  and  is  worthy 
of  all  sacrifice.'''' 

With  nothing  are  we  so  forcibly  struck  in  Liberian 
history,  as  the  spirit  of  self-consecration,  the  generous 
and  exalted  principles,  which  inspired  and  animated 
the  leaders  of  this  noble  enterprise.  Death  and 
dangers,  public  and  pecuniary  interests,  the  endear- 
ments of  friends,  and  the  delightful  privileges  of  a 
Christian  country,  are  alike  unheeded,  alike  cheer- 
fully sacrificed,  to  the  supplicating  cry  of  injured 
Africa,  and  the  hope  of  enlightening  her  "  habita- 
tions of  cruelty"  with  the  light  of  civil  freedom  and 
Christian  institutions. 

The  following  extract  from  a  sermon  delivered  by 
Elder  Teage,  upon  the  death  of  his  Excellency,  may 
not  be  amiss,  illustrating  as  it  does  a  strong  point  in 
Governor  Buchanan's  character,  and  furnishing  an  in- 
teresting specimen  of  Negro  eloquence.  "  Not  unfre- 
quently  to  be  met  with  in  the  history  of  nations,  is 
the  fact  of  some  individual's  name,  from  a  concur- 
rence of  circumstances,  carrying  terror  wherever  it 


202  AFBICA  REDEEMED. 

is  heard,  among  his  or  his  country's  foes.     The  bril- 
liant and  continuous  chain  of  success  "which  crowned 
the  campaigns  of  Napoleon  is  to  he  accounted  for  as 
much  from  this  fact,  as  from  his  universally  admitted 
skill  in  their  science  and  courage  on  the   field  of 
combat.     Victory  was  supposed  to  hover   over  their 
march,  and  in  the  field  to  perch  upon  their  sword. 
Thus  their  enemies,  palsied  with  terror,  were  pre- 
pared at  the  first  onset  to  yield  an  easy  victory,  or 
seek  safety  in  an  ignominious  flight,  or  unconditional 
surrender.     From  similar  coincidences,  united  with 
the  strict  integrity  and  good  faith  which  marked  all 
Gov.  Buchanan's  intercourse  with  the  natives — read- 
ily conceding  to  them  all  their  rights,  and  inflexibly 
demanding  his — the  like  impressions  pervaded  their 
minds.     The  bare  encounter  with  him  in  the  hall  of 
palaver,  or  in  the  field  of  fight,  was  regarded  by  them 
as  an  earnest  of  defeat.     Never  was  a  man  more 
feared  and  respected  by  the  natives,  than  Governor 
Buchanan ;  nor  is  there  a  man  in  all  the  colonies, 
the  influence  of  whose  presence  can  so  effectually 
check  or  hold  in  abeyance  their  blustering  passions, 
as    did    the   presence   of  our   lamented    Governor. 
Frank  and  open,   he  was  a  stranger  to   duplicity. 
He  possessed  largely  that  charity  which  thinketh  no 
evil,  and  acknowledgeth  readily  whatever  was  com- 
mendable in  the  character  of  his  enemies.     He  pre- 
sented a  harmonious  union  of  dignity  and  gentleness. 


A  NEW  ERA.  203 

To  sum  up  his  character,  he  was  a  Christian  and  a 
gentleman." 

At  his  death,  the  official  duties  of  his  station  de- 
volved upon  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  Gen.  Joseph 
J.  Koberts,  until  the  appointment  of  a  successor  by 
the  Colonization  Society  in  America. 

The  following  note,  calling  him  to  these  new  re- 
sponsibilities, is  not  devoid  of  interest : — 

"  Agency  House,  Bassa  Cove, 
Sept.  3,  1841. 

"  To  General  Roberts,  Monrovia. 

"  Sir, — The  afflictive  and  mournful  dispensation  by 
which  we  have  been  bereaved  of  our  late  chief  magis- 
trate, places  you  in  such  a  position  to  us  and  the 
Commonwealth  of  Liberia,  as  to  compel  us  to  throw 
all  our  weight  of  public  cares  upon  you. 

"  As  under  the  guidance  and  teaching  of  your 
illustrious  predecessor,  we  have  had  inculcated  upon 
us  lessons  of  political  economy  and  principles  of 
republican  liberty,  permit  us  to  hope  that,  being 
favoured  with  the  blessing  of  Heaven,  you  will  be 
governed  by  the  same  imperishable  principles,  and  to 
a  similar  end.  How  deeply  we  condole  with  you, 
in  the  almost  irreparable  loss  we  have  sustained, 
need  not  here  be  stated ;  but  be  assured  of  our  co- 
operation in  every  emergency,  of  our  prayers  for  the 


204  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

success  of  all  our  undertakings,  and  that  our  public 
affliction  may  be  sanctified  to  the  public  good. 

"  Wm.  L.  Weaver. 
Nathaniel  Harris. 
John  Day. 
Louis  Sheridan." 


CHAPTER  XI. 

GOVERNOR  ROBERTS. 

"  Dim  through  the  night  of  these  tempestuous  years, 

A  Sabbath  dawn  o'er  Africa  appears. 

Then  shall  her  neck  from  Europe's  yoke  be  freed, 

And  healing  arts  to  hideous  arms  succeed  : 

At  home  the  bonds  of  peace  her  tribes  shall  bind, 

Commerce  abroad  espouse  them  with  mankind, 

While  pure  Religion's  hand  shall  build  and  bless 

The  church  of  God  amidst  the  wilderness." — Montgomery, 

At  the  death  of  Governor  Buchanan,  Lieutenant- 
Governor  Roberts  was  appointed  to  succeed  him. 
Joseph  J.  Eoberts,  a  coloured  youth  from  Virginia, 
came  to  the  colony  many  years  before,  and  had  grown 
up  under  her  institutions.  By  a  diligent  application 
to  business,  he  had  become  a  wealthy  merchant,  and 
had  filled  with  ability  numerous  offices  under  the 
colonial  government.  In  acknowledging  the  honour 
conferred  upon  him,  he  said,  "  There  are  few  men 
who  have  the  requisites  which  characterised  Governor 
Buchanan.  I  am  sure  I  have  not,  neither  should  you 
expect  so  much  from  me  ;  but  thus  far  I  pledge  my- 


206  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

self,  that  as  long  as  I  am  intrusted  with  the  affairs  of 
this  commonwealth,  I  will  do  my  best." 

Peace  being  again  re-established  among  the  tribes, 
a  renewed  desire  was  manifested  on  the  part  of  the 
natives  to  receive  Christian  instruction.  Great  num- 
bers of  native  children  were  sent  to  Liberia  to  attend 
school,  even  from  places  as  remote  as  Bo  Poro.  "  I 
sen  you  my  piccaninnie.  I  want  you  for  keep  him, 
larn  him  white  man  fash,  s'pose  he  no  larn,  flog  him." 
Mr.  Elijah  Johnson,  in  extending  his  missionary 
tours,  found  the  people  everywhere  begging,  "  When 
you  go,  bring  that  God-palaver  to  my  town."  In 
some  cases,  the  head  men  did  not  reciprocate  the 
wishes  of  their  people,  lest  God's  palaver  might  en- 
tirely destroy  the  influence  of  the  Devil's  Bush, 
which  they  considered  necessary  in  order  to  keep 
their  wives  in  proper  subjection.  The  women,  with 
the  quick  perceptions  of  their  sex,  beheld  all  the  ad- 
vantages which  God's  palaver  had  in  store  for  them, 
and  only  pled  for  it  more  earnestly.  A  new  Metho- 
dist mission  was  established  not  far  from  Hedington, 
called  Roberts ville. 

Difficulties  began  to  arise  in  relation  to  the  rights 
of  British  traders  on  the  coast  owned  by  the  colony. 
A  large  part  of  the  African  trade  was  in  the  hands  of 
the  English.  During  the  legal  existence  of  the  slave- 
trade,  English  merchants,  being  actively  engaged  in 
it,  gained  access  to  a  vast  line  of  coast,  at  various 


GOVEENOE  EOBEETS.  207 

points  of  which  fortifications  were  erected  for  its 
protection.  When  it  was  abolished,  all  the  means 
and  facilities  for  prosecuting  a  lawful  trade  were 
already  in  their  possession.  In  addition  to  this, 
English  armed  ships  frequently  visited  the  leading 
stations,  aided  in  making  treaties  of  commerce  with 
the  native  chiefs,  and  by  their  presence  securing  their 
fulfilment.  Thus  the  English  influence  was  strong 
on  the  African  coast ;  nor  did  the  English  traders 
seem  disposed  to  relinqui  shany  of  their  advantages, 
even  over  the  land  which  had  passed  under  the  con- 
trol of  Liberia.  In  violation  of  her  express  laws,  a 
British  trader  attempted  to  land  and  traffic  with  the 
natives  of  Bassa  Cove.  On  a  remonstrance  being 
sent  to  him,  he  declared,  at  one  time,  that  it  had 
been  always  done  from  time  immemorial ;  on  another, 
that  the  right  of  trading  had  been  purchased  by  a 
British  subject.  As  the  evidence  of  such  a  purchase 
could  not  be  produced,  and  a  refusal  to  pay  the  colo- 
nial duties  was  still  persisted  in,  the  collector  of 
Bassa  Cove  seized  goods  to  an  amount  sufficient  to  in- 
demnify the  port.  This,  it  was  feared,  might  be  the 
beginning  of  aggressions,  highly  injurious  to  the  com- 
mercial interests  of  the  colony.  On  a  representation 
being  made  of  the  subject  to  Mr.  Webster,  the  Secre- 
tary of  State,  he  suggested  to  Mr.  Everett,  the 
American  Minister  to  England,  that  an  inquiry  be 
instituted  relative  to  the  facts,  and  that  measures  be 


208  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

adopted  for  the  prevention  of  any  infraction  of  the 
rights  of  the  colonists,  or  any  improper  interference 
on  the  part  of  her  Majesty's  subjects  on  the  coast  of 
Africa,  with  the  interests  of  the  colonial  settlements 
at  Liberia.  Captain  Denman,  of  her  Majesty's  sloop 
"Wanderer,  in  his  despatches,  also  presented  the  sub- 
ject before  his  government. 

Zion  Harris,  the  hero  of  Hedington,  visited  the 
United  States  at  this  time,  in  fulfilment  of  a  promise 
made  to  his  dying  parent,  Rev.  Mr.  Erskine,  to  assist 
his  remaining  children  and  grand-children  in  remov- 
ing to  Liberia.  Thirteen  of  his  descendants  prepared 
to  emigrate,  in  company  with  many  others,  among 
whom  was  the  venerable  George  WTight,  a  coloured 
clergyman  of  Alabama,  who,  with  his  wife,  had  been 
freed  by  their  owner,  several  years  before,  on  account 
of  their  long-tried  and  faithful  services.  He  paid 
down  seven  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  dollars, 
for  five  of  his  children,  while  several  others  were 
compelled  to  be  left  behind,  until  the  means  could  be 
acquired  for  their  release.  Seventy-nine  of  this  com- 
pany were  from  the  estate  of  Mr.  John  M'Donough,  of 
New  Orleans,  who,  by  a  long  course  of  faithful  train- 
ing, had  prepared  his  slaves  for  a  wise  use  of  their 
liberty.  From  distant  points  others  arrived  to  join 
the  expedition,  some  on  foot,  some  alone,  some  having 
parted  with  their  all  to  purchase  the  means  of  going. 
The  whole  number,  234,  embarked  at  New  Orleans 


GOVERNOR  EOBERTS.  209 

in  the  Mariposa,  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Harris  and 
Dr.  James  Brown,  another  Liberian  of  great  worth 
and  respectability.  Directions  were  transmitted  to 
Governor  Roberts  to  buy  land  at  Blue  Barre,  opposite 
Greenville,  in  the  Sinou  country,  to  be  called  Loui- 
siana in  Liberia.  Owing  to  some  difficulties,  then 
springing  up  among  the  head  men  of  that  region,  the 
negotiation  was  deferred,  and  the  emigrants  were 
located  on  a  fine  tract  of  land  on  the  St.  Paul's,  four 
miles  below  Millsburg.  Attended  by  the  colonial 
physician,  Dr.  Day,  and  a  coloured  physician,  they 
passed  through  the  acclimating  sickness  with  little 
suffering  and  few  deaths. 

At  the  session  of  the  Liberian  council  in  1843, 
a  large  number  of  chiefs  and  head  men,  having  been 
assembled  at  King  Bromley's  town  on  the  St.  Paul's 
for  the  settlement  of  differences  and  the  adoption  of 
laws  for  their  future  welfare,  sent  a  deputation, 
begging  the  Governor  and  his  associates  to  come  and 
assist  them  in  their  deliberations.  At  the  same  time, 
a  despatch  was  received  from  the  war  chief  of  the 
Golahs,  Ballasada,  asking  permission  of  the  Governor 
to  wage  war  against  Gogomina,  king  of  Bo  Poro,  for 
capturing  six  boys  belonging  to  his  tribe.  A  few- 
years  before,  both  of  these  chiefs  had  entered  into 
treaties  with  the  Colony,  to  give  up  the  slave-trade, 
and  refer  their  quarrels  to  the  Liberian  authorities. 
Orders  were  immediately  sent  to  the  Golah   king, 

p 


210  AFRICA  REDEEMED  .- 

requiring  him  to  refrain  from  any  warlike  manifes- 
tations until  some  effort  had  been  made  to  settle  the 
matter  on  easier  and  quieter  terms  ;  at  the  same  time 
messengers  were  sent  to  Bo  Poro,  to  make  inquiry 
into  the  w7rongs  complained  of,  and  to  demand  a 
speedy  reparation,  for  the  injustice  done.  The  result 
was  that  Gogomina  lost  no  time  in  restoring  the  cap- 
tive boys  to  their  friends,  and  thus  was  the  country 
saved  from  a  war,  whose  devastations  nobody  could 
estimate. 

After  the  session  of  the  Council,  the  Governor, 
accompanied  by  Gloster  Moore,  Beverly  Pi.  Wilson, 
and  others,  made  a  visit  to  several  tribes,  far  in  the 
interior.  On  reaching  the  residence  of  Yando,  head 
king  of  the  Golahs,  his  majesty,  having  been  in- 
formed of  their  approach,  received  them  on  a  sofa  of 
raised  earth,  with  the  utmost  cordiality.  Shaking 
Governor  Roberts  heartily  by  the  hand,  he  exclaimed  : 
i4 1  heard  your  news  long  time,  but  now  I  see  you, 
and  I  glad  you  take  the  trouble  to  come  and  see  my 
town.  My  people,  this  country  be  your  country. 
\\y  this  people  be  your  people.  Country  no  fit 
'Merica  man,  so  you  be  king  for  all  countrymen. 
Me  be  king  no  more.  You  be  first  king,  cause  you 
pass  all  king  for  country  side."  The  Governor  in- 
formed him  on  what  conditions  the  Liberians  were 
willing  to  enter  into  alliance  with  them,  which  were, 
to  abandon  the  slave-trade,  to  give  up  the  trial  by 


GOVERNOR  EGBERTS.  231 

sassy-wood,  to  refer  all  their  disputes  to  the  Colonial 
authorities,  and  to  engage  in  no  wars  without  their 
sanction.  The  next  day,  at  a  general  assembly  of 
kings  and  head  men,  the  subject  was  debated  at  great 
length,  and  in  the  afternoon  an  answer  wras  given. 
"  We  have  all  agreed,  and  are  willing  to  sign  a  treaty 
embracing  these  subjects."  A  treaty  was  then  made, 
signed  and  witnessed,  a  copy  of  which  may  not  be 
uninteresting  to  many  of  our  readers. 

"  Treaty  of  amity  and  alliance,  entered  into  22nd 
of  February,  1843,  between  Joseph  J.  Roberts, 
Governor  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Liberia,  and 
Yando,  Head  King  of  the  Golah  country,  with  others, 
kings  and  head  men  of  the  same  country. 

"  Whereas  it  is  of  great  importance  to  the  welfare 
and  interest  of  the  citizens  of  the  Commonwealth  of 
Liberia  and  the  natives  of  the  country  represented 
by  their  kings  and  head  men  in  this  treaty,  that  there 
should  be  a  mutual  good  understanding,  and  that  the 
relations  between  them  be  friendly,  tending  thereby 
to  establish  peace  among  the  several  communities  of 
the  Golahs,  and  between  them  and  the  surrounding 
tribes  : — 

"  It  is  therefore  agreed*  this  22nd  day  of  February, 
1843,  by  and  between  the  parties  above  named,  that 
all  matters  of  dispute  between  Liberians  and  Golahs 


212  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

shall  be  referred  to  the  Governor  of  the  Common- 
wealth, for  adjustment ;  and  all  matters  between  the 
natives  that  cannot  be  settled  amicably  by  the  king 
and  his  head  men  shall  be  also  referred  to  the 
Governor,  and  all  disputes  arising  between  the  Golah 
kings  and  other  tribes,  that  cannot  be  peaceably  set- 
tled by  them  shall  be  referred  to  the  Governor,  who 
shall  summon  the  parties  before  him,  to  settle  the  mat- 
ters in  difference;  and  should  the  adverse  party  not 
appear,  or  admit  the  arbitration  of  the  Governor,  then 
the  Governor  shall  give  aid  to  the  party  so  referring 
to  him.  And  it  is  understood,  that  the  paths  shall 
be  open  for  trade  and  travel  both  ways :  that  the 
natives  in  the  interior  shall  not  be  let  or  hindered 
from  carrying  their  trade  through  the  Golah  country, 
to  the  Colony,  and  citizens  of  the  Colony  shall  not  be 
molested  in  their  peaceable  journeyings  through  the 
same  country. 

"  The  party  second  to  this  instrument  agree  to 
banish  for  ever  the  slave-trade  from  their  country. 
The  penalty  for  selling  slaves  shall  be  the  same 
fixed  by  the  laws  of  the  Colony. 

"  The  party  second  to  this  instrument  also  agree 
to  banish  for  ever,  the  trial  or  test  by  sassy-wood,  or 
any  other  poisonous  matters ;  the  penalty  for  this 
offence  being  the  same  fixed  by  the  laws  of  the 
Colony  for  murder  and  manslaughter. 

J.  J.  Roberts. 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  213 

his 
In  presence  of  Yando  X  King, 

S.  Chase,  mark 

J.  L.  Day,  Bauh  X  Bauh, 

B.  B.  Wilson.  Ballasada  X  his  mark." 

The  next  day,  at  Ballasada 's  desire,  they  visited 
his  town,  consisting  of  about  three  hundred  persons. 
Here  he  confessed  that  though  a  powerful  chief,  he 
was  constantly  subject  to  fears ;  war,  captivity,  and 
death  were  always  tracking  his  path,  and  he  proposed 
to  leave  his  own  country  and  settle  down  with  his 
people  to  more  peaceful  occupations,  within  the 
limits  of  the  Colony.  To  this,  the  Governor  was 
not  prepared  to  give  a  definite  reply,  and  begged  to 
refer  it  to  some  future  occasion.  Treaties  like  the 
one  above  had  been  formed  from  time  to  time  with 
different  tribes,  nearer  the  Colony,  always  producing 
the  most  beneficial  results.  There  seemed  to  be  an 
increasing  conviction,  that  its  restraints  over  them 
were  for  their  good.  They  saw  that  there  were  ad- 
vantages in  Christian  civilization,  greatly  superior  to 
any  thing  which  they  possessed,  accompanied  by  a 
power  which  it  was  not  wise  to  withstand.  Under 
its  shield,  they  could  find  peace  and  safety.  Beyond 
it  were  dangers,  perils,  and  fears,  which  seemed  more 
insupportable  in  contrast  with  the  peaceful  security 
of  Liberian  citizenship. 


214  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

Iii  December,  1843,  three  vessels  of  the  United 
States  squadron  visited  Monrovia,  on  their  way  down 
the  coast  to  inquire  into  certain  acts  of  violence  done 
by  the  natives  to  American  traders.  At  the  request 
of  Commodore  Perry,  Governor  Koberts  embarked  on 
board  the  frigate  Macedonian,  and  accompanied  the 
expedition.  After  stopping  at  various  places,  they 
anchored  off  the  Kroo  country,  where  Commodore 
Perry  met  the  kings  of  the  Fishmen.  to  demand 
satisfaction  for  an  outrage  committed  on  a  New  York 
vessel  some  time  before.  The  matter  having  been 
satisfactorily  settled,  Governor  Roberts  proposed  to 
the  assembled  head  men,  to  buy  a  portion  of  their 
territory.  After  no  small  amount  of  palavering,  they 
declined  selling,  but  expressed  their  wishes  to  enter 
into  a  treaty  of  amity  and  commerce  with  the  colony. 
An  agreement  was  entered  into,  similar  to  the  one 
already  recorded,  with  the  additional  article,  that  no 
foreign  officer,  agent,  or  subject,  except  of  the  colony 
of  Liberia,  or  of  the  American  Colonization  Society, 
shall  purchase,  have,  or  in  any  way  by  sale,  lease,  or 
gift,  obtain  any  right  or  claim  to  the  Kroo  country. 
This  was  considered  an  important  step,  not  only 
because  it  afforded  a  larger  trade  in  camwood  and 
oil,  than  any  other  point  on  the  coast,  but  as,  on 
account  of  its  vicinity  to  the  colony,  the  presence  of 
any  foreign  trader  might  prove  a  constant  source  of 
disquietude. 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  215 

The  Kroomen  are,  in  many  respects,  a  very  re- 
markable people.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  seamen  and 
pilots  of  the  coast,  and  are  found  all  along  it,  for 
fifteen  hundred  miles.  The  Kroo  country,  the  resi- 
dence of  their  families,  comprising  a  population  of 
some  thirty  or  forty  thousand  people,  extends  from 
Sinou,  some  thirty  miles  towards  Cape  Palmas.  They 
are  faithful  to  their  employers,  industrious,  and  ac- 
customed to  the  hardest  labour,  which  they  readily 
perform  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness.  In  the  lad- 
ing and  unlading  of  ships,  their  services  are  indis- 
pensable. Though  they  are  never  direct  participators 
h  the  slave-trade,  slave- vessels  could  not  do  without 
t\eir  aid.  They  are  great  economists,  indulging  in 
nc  luxury  but  tobacco.  A  young  Kroo  leaves  home, 
lalours  a  year  or  two  abroad,  and  then  returns  with 
his  earnings,  a  part  of  which  he  gives  to  the  head 
mai,  something  to  each  one  of  his  relations,  even  if 
it  fa  only  a  leaf  of  tobacco,  and  with  the  rest  he  buys 
a  wie.  The  Krooman's  riches  are  estimated  bv  the 
maimer  of  his  wives. 

A  Presbyterian  mission  had  been  established  at 
Settr,  Kroo,  a  few  years  before,  by  Mr.  CanfieM, 
assisted  by  Abraham  Miller,  a  Christian  native,  who 
had  sjent  a  year  at  school  in  the  United  States.  Mr. 
and  M-s.  Sawyer  occupied  the  station,  when  visited 
by  Governor  Roberts,  Mrs.  Sawyer,  in  one  of  her 
letters  lome,  gives  an  affecting  picture  of  the  ardu- 


216  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

cms  labours  of  a  solitary  mission  family  in  a  distant 
African  tribe.  She  thus  writes:  —  "We  number 
about  ten  in  the  family,  four  of  our  own,  and  six 
work-people.  Thirty  boys  in  school  look  up  to  us  for 
their  daily  bread.  To  manage  the  affairs  of  the 
family,  attend  to  the  work  of  the  mission,  to  teach 
the  school,  and  perform  the  whole  without  a  friend  to 
aid  in  counsel  or  labour,  is  not  a  small  matter.  Mr. 
S.  is  building  a  new  kitchen,  the  upper  part  of  which 
is  designed  for  a  rice  room.  Of  this  article  we  must 
have  a  large  quantity,  and  it  can  only  be  preserved 
by  smoking.  This  keeps  out  the  insects,  of  whicl 
there  are  a  great  abundance.  The  only  injury  w3 
sustain  from  the  natives  is  theft.  They  are  apt  to 
pillage  all  small  things,  such  as  fowls,  knives, 
basins,  &c." 

While  the  squadron  was  at  anchor  off  Settra  Kz>o, 
intelligence  was  received  of  the  sudden  death  of  ]h\ 
Sawyer.  Governor  Roberts  and  some  of  his  offbers 
immediately  made  a  visit  to  the  afflicted  wife,  and 
offers  were  made  to  remove  her  to  her  native  couitry, 
or  any  part  of  the  coast  she  might  desire ;  bit  she 
could  not  think  of  deserting  her  missionary  field, 
feeling  it  her  duty  to  remain,  and  do  what  shecould 
for  the  perishing  pagans  around  her.  If  we  would 
witness  sacrifice  and  self-denial  for  the  great  I\jaster's 
cause,  visit  the  lonely  mission  of  a  savage  trite.  In 
the  midst  of  the  greatest  social  privations,  eft  loose 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  217 

from  all  excitements  of  intellectual  life,  we  find  edu- 
cated, refined  woman,  engaged  often  in  laborious  and 
difficult  occupations,  to  which  she  had  hitherto  been 
unaccustomed,  sustained  and  cheered  by  the  simple 
hope  of  doing  good,  in  simple  obedience  to  the  Be- 
deemer's  last  command. 

In  Commodore  Perry's  dispatches  to  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy,  he  says  : — "  Governor  Koberts,  of  Libe- 
ria, and  Eusswurm  of  Cape  Palmas,  are  intelligent 
and  estimable  men,  executing  their  responsible  func- 
tions with  wisdom  and  dignity ;  and  we  have,  in  the 
example  of  these  gentlemen,  irrefragable  proof  of 
the  capability  of  coloured  people  to  govern  them- 
selves. 

"  As  far  as  the  influence  of  the  colonists  has  ex- 
tended, it  has  been  exerted  to  suppress  the  slave- 
trade  ;  and  their  endeavours  in  this  respect  have 
been  eminently  successful.  And  it  is  by  planting 
these  settlements  (whether  American  or  European) 
along  the  whole  extent  of  coast  from  Cape  Verde  to 
Benguela,  that  the  exportation  of  slaves  will  be  most 
effectually  prevented." 

Prince  cle  Joinville,  in  a  French  frigate,  also  visited 
Monrovia.  After  walking  about  and  making  nume- 
rous inquiries,  he  expressed  himself  greatly  pleased 
with  the  settlement,  and  desired  to  exchange  salutes. 
The  colonial  authorities  declined  the  courtesy,  it  being 
the  Sabbath  day. 


218  AFRICA  REDEEMED, 

In  1844,  Governor  Roberts,  requiring  some  relaxa- 
tion from  his  arduous  duties,  visited  this  country,  in 
company  with  his  wife  and  family.  After  a  few 
months'  travel,  they  returned  to  Liberia  with  re- 
cruited health  and  spirits. 

Dr.  Day,  the  colonial  physician,  wishing  to  return 
home,  Dr.  J.  W.  Lugenbeel,  of  Washington  city,  was 
sent  out  to  supply  his  place,  and  he  was  also  ap- 
pointed United  States  agent  for  recaptured  Africans. 
The  doctor  was  directed  to  make  some  arrangement 
towards  establishing  a  medical  school  in  Liberia,  if 
suitable  young  men  could  be  found  desirous  of  pur- 
suing the  study  of  medicine.  He  soon  took  under 
his  charge  James  Smith,  and  H.  J.  Eoberts,  a 
younger  brother  of  the  governor,  two  very  worthy 
and  promising  young  mem  From  a  letter,  dated 
April  11,  1844,  we  learn  the  following  particulars  : — 
"  The  colony  never  perhaps  was  in  a  more  flourishing 
condition  thau  at  this  time.  Indeed  Monrovia  is 
becoming  a  considerable  commercial  depot.  Vessels 
of  the  various  European  nations,  engaged  in  trading 
on  the  coast,  as  well  as  American  merchantmen, 
almost  always  stop  at  this  place,  and  frequently  con- 
sign large  portions  of  their  cargoes  to  our  commission 
merchants,  and  in  return  receive  camwood,  palm-oil, 
ivory,  &c.  The  exportations  from  this  port  last  year, 
amounted  to  upwards  of  100,000  dollars.  About  two 
months  ago,  a  neat  and  substantial  cutter  of  about 


G0VERN0B  ROBERTS.  219 

twenty  tons  was  launched  in  our  harbour,  and  another 
of  about  the  same  size  is  now  on  the  stocks.  There 
are  in  all  about  twelve  vessels,  one  of  ninety  tons, 
owned  by  different  persons  in  the  colony,  and  en- 
gaged in  trading  along  the  coast. 

"  In  regard  to  agricultural  pursuits,  however,  there 
seems  to  be  a  want  of  energy  on  the  part  of  the 
colonists.  Many  forget  that  the  soil  is  the  true 
source  of  wealth  and  comfort,  and  that  in  order  to 
maintain  themselves  as  a  free  people,  and  to  have  a 
permanent  home,  they  must  cultivate  it.  In  making 
sugar  the  colonists  have  not  as  yet  been  very  success- 
ful, owing  to  the  want  of  necessary  apparatus.  Horses 
do  not  live  well  in  Liberia,  and  the  sugar  mill  has  to 
be  turned  by  manual  force.  The  employment  of  so 
many  hands  is  necessarily  very  expensive ;  conse- 
quently the  sugar  costs  more  than  it  can  be  bought 
for  from  merchant  vessels.  Until  they  can  obtain 
a  good  steam  engine  (which  I  hope  they  will  soon), 
they  cannot  make  sugar  as  cheaply  as  it  can  be 
bought. 

"  The  Legislature  of  Liberia  adjourned  on  the 
20th,  after  a  session  of  fourteen  days.  There  were 
ten  members.  No  unprejudiced  person  could  have 
attended  the  meetings  of  this  body  and  listened  to 
their  deliberations,  without  being  convinced  that  the 
citizens  of  Liberia  are  capable  of  self-government." 
In  1846  the  receipts  into  the  public  treasury  were 


220  AFE1CA  REDEEMED. 

8,525  dollars:  disbursements,  7,536  dollars;  leaving 
a  balance  in  the  treasury  of  989  dollars. 

The  people  manifested  an  increasing  interest  in 
intellectual  improvement.  Two  flourishing  Lyceums 
meet  weekly  at  Monrovia,  whose  debates  are  sustained 
with  no  small  degree  of  ability  and  skill.  Among 
the  questions  proposed  for  discussion,  we  find,  "  Has 
the  discovery  of  America  proved  beneficial  to  the 
coloured  race?"  It  was  decided  in  the  affirmative. 
Another  was,  "Would  the  natives  of  this  part  of 
Africa  be  more  speedily  civilized  and  christianized, 
by  the  unaided  and  unprotected  efforts  of  mission- 
aries sent  among  them,  than  from  the  influence  and 
efforts  of  the  colonists,  apart  from  any  missionary 
aid  ?"  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  the  opinion  of 
intelligent  colonists  upon  this  subject, 

Bah  Gay,  one  of  the  Bassa  chiefs,  long  known  to 
the  colonists,  now  signified  his  wish  and  the  wishes 
of  his  people  to  subscribe  to  the  laws  and  constitu- 
tion of  the  commonwealth,  and  become  citizens  of 
Liberia.  He  had  suffered  much  disquietude  from 
Prince  Salt  Water,  who,  with  a  few  other  restless 
spirits  of  the  tribe,  was  urgent  again  to  engage  in  the 
slave-trade.  This  was  manfully  opposed  by  a  great 
majority,  who  with  one  voice  preferred  to  become 
Liberians  rather  than  return  to  the  bloody  customs 
of  their  fathers.  In  the  midst  of  their  palaver  on  this 
important  movement,  Governor  Roberts  arrived  un- 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  221 

expectedly  among  them,  for  the  purpose  of  buying 
land.  He  found  the  old  king  busily  making  prepa- 
rations to  visit  Monrovia.  The  Governor  received  a 
hearty  welcome,  and  his  majesty  lost  no  time  in  lay- 
ing before  him  the  petition  of  his  subjects.  Mutual 
agreements  were  soon  entered  into,  whereby  a  new 
portion  of  territory  was  ceded  to  Liberia,  and  another 
tribe  came  under  the  beneficial  influence  of  Christian 
laws. 

The  following  proclamation  was  then  issued  by  the 
Governor : — 

"  To  all  to  whom  these  presents  may  come. 

"  Know  ye,  That  this  day  King  Bah  Gay,  rightful 
sovereign  of  the  Little  Bassa  country,  until  relin- 
quished to  the  commonwealth  of  Liberia,  as  per  deed, 
dated  at  Marshall,  Junk,  15th  of  February,  1845, 
has  this  day  subscribed  to  the  constitution  and  laws 
of  this  commonwealth,  thereby  incorporating  himself 
and  his  people  with  the  people  of  these  colonies, 
and  entitled  to  the  care  and  protection  of  this  govern- 
ment. 

"Be  it  therefore  understood,  that  any  improper 
interference,  either  by  colonists  or  natives,  calculated 
to  disturb  the  peace  or  quiet  of  Bah  Gay  and  his  peo- 
ple, will  be  promptly  noticed,  and  punished  by  this 
government. 

Given  at  Monrovia,  this  5th  day  of  April,  1845, '? 


%%%  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

As  emigration  flowed  in,  new  territory  was  bought 
from  time  to  time.  Governor  Roberts  was  anxious  to 
secure  an  uninterrupted  line  of  sea-coast  from  Cape 
Mount  to  Cape  Palmas,  comprehending  Trade  Town 
and  New  S esters.  The  last  was  a  great  slave  mart, 
which,  though  frequently  crippled  and  curtailed  and 
even  broken  up  by  English  and  American  ships,  al- 
ways seemed  to  renew  its  operations  with  fresh  vigour 
after  every  defeat.  Frequent  offers  had  been  made 
to  the  natives  of  New  S esters  for  the  purchase  of 
their  territory,  which,  through  the  influence  of  the 
slave-merchants,  were  always  refused. 

The  want  of  regular  and  stated  intercourse  be- 
tween this  country  and  Liberia  was  deeply  felt  even 
in  Mr.  Ashmun's  time,  and  much  more  so,  as  the 
ties  which  bound  the  two  countries  yearly  multiplied. 
Attempts  had  been  made  from  time  to  time,  to  run  a 
regular  packet  to  the  Colony.  The  Saluda,  pur- 
chased by  Judge  Wilkinson  for  this  purpose  and 
owned  by  the  Society,  made  several  trips,  but  from 
her  unfitness  for  this  peculiar  service,  it  became  a 
heavy  expense  to  the  Society,  and  was  finally  sold. 
Through  the  energetic  efforts  of  Dr.  James  Hall, 
agent  of  the  Maryland  Colonization  Society,  a  joint 
stock  company,  composed  of  coloured  people  in  this 
country  and  Liberia,  was  formed,  whose  object  was  to 
build  a  vessel  to  run  regularly  between  Monrovia 
and   the    Chesapeake,  to    be    manned   by    coloured 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  223 

officers  and  seamen.  The  American  and  Maryland 
Colonization  Societies  each  agreed  to  furnish  annual 
freight  and  emigrants  to  the  amount  of  2,000  dollars. 
A  liberal  charter  was  obtained  from  the  Maryland 
Legislature,  under  the  title  of  the  "  Chesapeake  and 
Liberia  Trading  Company,"  allowing  it  to  extend  its 
capital  to  100,000  dollars.  The  Liberians  came 
forward  with  liberal  subscriptions,  which  not  being 
followed  up  with  the  same  generous  interest  by 
their  coloured  friends  in  this  country,  several 
white  capitalists  came  to  their  aid,  among  whom 
Dr.  Hall  stands  prominent.  Her  first  trip  com- 
menced on  the  3rd  of  December,  1846,  carrying  out 
twenty-seven  emigrants  to  Monrovia  and  fourteen  to 
Cape  Palmas.  She  is  called  the  Liberia  Packet, 
and  is  a  barque  of  331  tons.* 

The  Methodist  Mission  was  reinforced  at  this  time 
by  the  arrival  of  Rev.  J.  Benham,  superinteudant  of 
the  Liberian  mission,  and  immediate  successor  of 
the  Rev.  Squier  Chase,  who  died  shortly  after 
his  arrival  in  Africa.  In  company  with  Mr.  Ben- 
ham,  were  Rev.  B.  Hoyt  and  wife,  and  Rev.  W.  B. 
Williams,  Principal  of  the  Monrovia  Seminary,  with 
his  wife.  Their  joyful  welcome  was  scarcely  over, 
when  other  and  sadder  scenes  passed  mournfully 
before  them.     In   all   the    efforts   of  the  colonists 

*  She  is  now  (Jan,  1851)  on  her  ninth  voyage,  as  a  regular 
packet,  between  the  United  States  and  Liberia. 


2 '24  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

towards  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade,  the 
horrors  of  that  trade  were  never  pictured  in  blacker 
colour's,  than  as  they  beheld  them,  lining  the  decks 
and  darkening  the  hold  of  the  slaver  Pons,  captured 
by  the  United  States  ship  Yorktown,  Commodore 
Bell,  and  brought  into  Monrovia  in  December.  1845. 
The  Pons,  built  in  Philadelphia,  and  sold  at  Eio 
Janeiro  for  a  trader,  was  sent  to  the  African  coast 
for  slaves  under  American  colours.  On  reaching 
Cabinda,  a  noted  slave-mart,  three  degrees  south  of 
the  equator,  she  lay  at  anchor  three  weeks,  before 
taking  in  her  cargo,  being  closely  watched  by  the 
Cygnet,  a  British  man-of-war  When  the  Cygnet 
left  the  coast,  Oapt.  Berry — with  shame  be  it 
said,  an  American  Captain — immediately  gave  her 
into  the  hands  of  Gallano,  an  Italian,  who  had  been 
in  the  slave-trade  twenty-one  years,  and  who,  though 
six  times  taken  by  English  cruisers,  had  contrived  to 
make  many  profitable  voyages.  Gallano  made  the 
most  of  his  time,  and  before  evening  took  in  nine 
hundred  and  three  slaves.  When  the  Yorktown 
espied  her,  she  had  hoisted  American  colours,  under 
the  impression  that  the  vessel  in  chase  was  an 
English  cruiser.  Discovering  her  mistake  she  im- 
mediately raised  the  Portuguese  flag,  but  it  was  too 
late.  On  boarding  and  taking  possession  of  her, 
eight  hundred  and  fifty  males  were  found  between 
the  ages  of  twelve  and  thirty,  piled  almost  in  bulk 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  225 

upon  the  water  casks  in  the  hold,  with  the  thermo- 
meter ranging  from  100  to  120°,  while  the  remainder, 
females,  were  in  the  round  house  above.  Eighteen 
died  that  night,  and  one  hundred  and  forty  during  the 
passage  to  Monrovia,  when  756  were  landed  and  put 
in  charge  of  Dr.  Lugenbeel,  the  United  States  Agent. 
As  soon  as  her  arrival  was  known,  the  Governor, 
Judge  Benedict,  Dr.  Lugenbeel,  and  others  hastened 
to  the  ship.  Such  was  the  stench,  they  could  remain 
but  a  short  time  on  board,  and  the  scene,  Mr.  Ben- 
ham  declared,  beggared  all  description.  Almost 
every  one  was  naked,  and  many  were  so  emaciated 
that  the  skin  literally  cleaved  to  their  bones ;  others 
had  worn  the  skin  through,  producing  putrid  ulcers, 
which  fed  swarms  of  flies ;  some  were  in  the  last 
agonies  of  death,  and  on  every  countenance  were 
traced  lines  of  unutterable  anguish.  Thirty  died 
soon  after  landing. 

With  most  praiseworthy  promptness,  Mr.  Benham 
immediately  called  together  a  special  meeting  of  the 
Liberia  Conference,  to  consider  what  their  mission 
ought  to  do  for  the  multitudes  of  hapless  youth,  thus 
suddenly  cast  upon  them.  Beverly  B.  Wilson  was 
called  to  the  chair.  It  was  recommended  to  take 
one  hundred  of  them  under  the  patronage  of  their 
mission,  and  to  open  a  subscription  upon  the  spot, 
to  defray  this  new  demand  upon  its  treasury.  We 
find   Mr.    Wilsons   name   for   20    dollars ;    A.    D. 

Q 


226  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

Williams.  20  dollars;  Elijah  Johnson,  20  dollars; 
and  others  to  the  amount  of  135  dollars. 

The  remaining  Africans,  more  than  six  hundred, 
Dr.  Lugenbeel  committed  to  the  charge  of  respon- 
sible persons  in  the  Colony,  requiring  from  each  one 
into  whose  care  they  were  consigned,  a  written  ob- 
ligation for  kind  treatment  and  suitable  clothing. 
Mr.  Benham  wrote  to  the  United  States,  laying  be- 
fore his  church  the  course  he  had  taken,  and  making 
a  powerful  appeal  to  the  Christian  public  for  assist- 
ance. It  was  calculated  that  thirty  dollars  a  year 
would  support  and  educate  a  child,  if  farming  utensils 
could  be  supplied,  axes,  hoes,  bush-hooks;  and  cook- 
ing utensils,  pots,  kettles,  frying-pans,  &c. 

It  may  be  asked,  who  was  at  the  expense  for  the 
remainder?  For  a  long  time,  the  law  of  1819,  re- 
garding recaptured  Africans,  mentioned  in  a  former 
chapter,  was  understood  to  make  suitable  provision 
for  their  support,  after  having  been  landed  at  Liberia, 
until  they  could  take  care  of  themselves.  President 
Monroe  so  construed  it.  But  later  administrations 
have  denied  the  power,  and  while  they  have  appro- 
priated hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  to  maintain 
a  squadron  on  the  African  Coast,  for  the  purpose  of 
capturing  slavers  and  stopping  the  trade,  with  won- 
derful inconsistency  they  allow  no  provision  to  be 
made  for  maintaining  the  released  captives,  leaving 
them  again   to  the  cold    charities   of  their   savage 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  227 

brethren,  or  flinging  them  upon  the  hospitalities  of 
those,  who  struggling  with  all  the  disadvantages  of  a 
new  settlement,  can  ill  afford  this  fresh  demand 
upon  their  resources.  Through  a  strong  representa- 
tion made  in  1843,  Government  appropriated  five 
thousand  dollars  to  the  African  agency.  Two  thou- 
sand of  this  was  sent  out  in  the  ship  Renown,  for 
the  purpose  of  preparing  houses  for  their  reception 
and  providing  them  with  employment.  The  Renown 
was  wrecked  on  her  passage,  and  the  money  was  lost. 
The  remainder  was  then  sent  to  Dr.  Lugenbeel,  two 
thousand  to  be  appropriated  as  before  directed,  and 
the  rest  to  remain  in  his  hands,  to  be  used  as  circum- 
stances seemed  to  demand.  One  thousand  dollars, 
then,  the  agent  had  in  his  possession  when  the  Pons 
arrived,  which,  as  will  be  readily  seen,  was  a  very 
small  sum  for  the  support  of  six  or  seven  hundred 
men.  But  the  colonists  came  generously  forward, 
and  with  ready  hands  and  open  hearts  contributed  to 
their  immediate  wants,  and  made  every  provision  in 
their  power  for  their  future  welfare. 

"  Had  they  not  been  bondmen ;  and  had  they  not 
been  redeemed  from  the  house  of  bondmen ;  and  had 
they  not  come  to  a  land  to  possess  it,  a  land  of  hills 
and  valleys,  which  drinketh  water  of  rain  from 
heaven,  where  they  dwell  in  peaceable  habitations, 
and  in  sure  dwellings,  and  in  quiet  resting  places?" 
So,  "  when  this  people,  which  had  been  robbed  and 


2%8  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

spoiled,  which  had  been  snared  in  holes  and  hid  in 
prison  houses,  which  had  been  for  a  prey  and  a  spoil,5' 
when  these  came  among  them,  they  said,  "  Fear  not, 
nor  be  dismayed.  We  will  uphold  thee.  Then  they 
helped  every  one  his  neighbour,  and  every  one  said  to 
his  brother,  be  of  good  courage." 

"  Shall  not  Liberia  comfort  the  waste  places  of 
Africa,  and  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden?  " 

As  soon  as  these  events  became  known  in  the 
United  States,  supplies  were  immediately  got  in  readi- 
ness and  sent  out  in  the  bark  Chatham ;  but  they  did 
not  arrive  before  scarcity  and  distress,  in  some  cases, 
defeated  the  benevolent  plans  of  the  colonists  to- 
wards their  ill-fated  brethren. 

Two  years  after,  Dr.  Lugenbeel  could  thus  write  : 
"  The  change  which  has  been  effected  in  the  con- 
dition of  the  captives  by  the  Pons,  since  they  were 
landed  in  this  place,  on  the  16th  of  December,  1845, 
is  truly  gratifying.  When  I  received  these  poor, 
naked,  degraded,  and  starving  creatures  from  on 
board  the  slave-ship,  I  must  confess  I  had  some  fears 
respecting  the  future  comfort  and  welfare  of  so  large  a 
number  of  grossly  ignorant  and  deeply  degraded  human 
beings,  thus  suddenly  thrown  into  this  community. 
Little  did  I  think  that  in  less  than  two  years,  so 
great  a  change  could  be  produced  in  their  social,  in- 
tellectual, and  moral  condition.  Little  did  I  think, 
that  most  of  them  would  be  able  to  understand  and 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  229 

appreciate  the  transcendent  blessings  of  the  Gospel 
of  Christ,  and  many  of  them  be  earnestly  engaged  in 
seeking  the  pearl  of  great  price."  Five  in  the 
Governor's  family  gave  evidence  of  becoming  sincere 
Christians.  One  of  them,  in  his  attempts  to  describe 
the  consciousness  of  his  sins,  -affectingly  says  ;  "  All 
time  before,  my  heart  be  wah-wah  (bad)  plenty.  It 
make  me  tief,  tell  lie,  and  do  plenty  bad  ting.  I 
pray  God  for  give  me  good  heart.  Last  night  I  lay 
down  for  sleep,  I  no  sleep  ;  my  heart  be  too  wah-wah. 
I  pray,  pray,  pray  ;  then  God  hear  me  and  make 
my  heart  fine.  He  take  away  all  wah-wah  ting  in 
my  heart  and  make  me  feel  no  more  trouble,  but 
make  my  heart  fine."  No  sooner  had  the  poor  fellow 
experienced  the  renewing  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  his  own  soul,  than  he  commenced  his 
labours  of  love  among  his  companions,  and  it  is 
hoped  his  influence  may  be  great  and  abounding,  in 
winning  over  many  others  to  the  like  precious  faith. 
So  that  "  herein  is  revealed  the  mystery  of  good- 
ness, blessing  through  permitted  wroe,  and  teaching 
through  the  mystery  of  sin." 

It  was  not  long  after  Captain  Denham,  of  the 
African  squadron,  laid  his  dispatches  before  the 
British  Government,  (related  on  a  previous  page,) 
before  Judge  Upshur,  the  Secretary  of  State,  re- 
ceived a  communication  from  Mr.  Fox,  the  English 
minister  at  Washington,  requesting  to  be  accurately 


230  AFEICA  EEDEE^IED. 

informed  what  degree  of  official  patronage  and  pro- 
tection, if  any.  was  extended  towards  the  Colony  of 
Liberia,  and  how  far  it  was  recognised  as  a  national 
establishment,  the  American  government  holding 
itself  responsible  towards  foreign  nations  for  the 
acts  of  her  authorities. 

Mr.  Upshur  replied  that  it  was  an  enterprise 
not  established  under  the  authority  of  our  govern- 
ment, or  recognised  as  subject  to  our  laws  or  juris- 
diction ;  and  that  while  the  settlers  were  responsible 
for  their  own  acts,  being  nearly  powerless,  they  must- 
rely  for  the  protection  of  their  rights  upon  the  jus- 
tice and  sympathy  of  other  powers. 

A  few  months  after  this  correspondence,  Governor 
Roberts  received  a  letter  from  Captain  Jones,  of 
the  British  Squadron  on  the  African  coast,  inform- 
ing him,  that  his  government  could  not  allow  any 
association  of  private  individuals,  however  respect- 
able, to  delegate  an  authority  which  they  did  not 
possess  themselves,  and  that  property  could  not  con- 
fer sovereign  rights  upon  a  private  association,  or 
justify  the  imposition  of  state  duties,  or  the  exclusion 
of  British  commerce  from  its  accustomed  resorts. 

In  accordance  with  these  views,  the  ''Little  Ben," 
Captain  Davidson,  of  Sierra  Leone,  soon  after 
entered  Bassa  Cove,  and,  refusing  to  pay  anchorage, 
declared  that  Commodore  Jones  ordered  him  no 
longer  to  regard  the  commercial  regulations  of  the 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  231 

colony.  The  collector  of  the  port  promptly  seized  a 
sufficient  amount  of  the  "  Little  Ben's"  goods  to  pay 
the  harbour  dues,  leaving  her  to  make  sail  in  no  very 
good  humour.  The  next  afternoon,  an  English  man- 
of-war  entered  the  harbour  and  seized  a  colonial 
schooner,  the  "  John  Seys,"  just  filled  with  a  fine 
cargo  of  English  and  American  goods  for  the  lee- 
ward trade,  and  owned  by  Major  Benson  of  Bassa 
Cove,  an  excellent  and  enterprising  colonist.  It  was 
carried  to  Sierra  Leone  and  entered  upon  the  court 
of  Admiralty  on  charge  of  being  engaged  in  the  slave- 
trade.  There  being  not  a  shadow  of  proof  against 
her,  she  was,  after  a  long  and  ruinous  detention,  dis- 
charged, and  Major  Benson  was  informed  that  he 
could  have  his  vessel  by  paying  the  costs,  amounting 
to  twelve  hundred  dollars.  This  he  declined  doing. 
So  great  an  outrage  upon  Liberian  property,  and  so 
pitiful  a  show  of  justice  at  the  Court  of  Admiralty, 
threw  the  colonists  into  the  greatest  agitation.  They 
felt  themselves  in  the  hands  of  a  new  foe,  a  prey  to 
the  suspicions  and  hostility  of  one  of  the  most  power- 
ful governments  of  Europe.  It  seemed  that  the 
English  government,  previous  to  the  correspondence 
between  Mr.  Fox  and  Judge  Upshur,  had  supposed 
Liberia  under  the  especial  protection  of  the  United 
States  ;  Mr.  Buchanan  in  his  dispatches  to  our  go- 
vernment having  always  styled  it,  "  The  United 
States  Agency."     This  protection  being  disclaimed, 


232  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

the  English  felt  at  liberty  to  regard  it  in  what  light 
they  pleased ;  and  interfering  as  it  might  do  with  the 
rich  profits  of  some  of  her  traders,  the  strong  arm  of 
the  English  government  was  immediately  laid  upon 
its  advancing  power. 

There  being  nothing  in  any  way  to  implicate  the 
"  John  Seys"  in  the  slave-trade,  it  seems  difficult  to 
account  for  her  seizure,  except  as  an  unauthorised 
act  of  reprisal,  for  the  harbour  dues  of  the  "Little 
Ben."  Governor  Roberts  sent  dispatches  to  Eng- 
land, containing  a  petition  from  Major  Benson,  set- 
ting forth  all  the  facts  connected  with  the  seizure  of 
his  vessel,  and  praying  indemnification  for  the  heavy 
losses  he  must  otherwise  sustain. 

Immediately  on  the  seizure  of  the  "  John  Seys," 
the  Liberian  government  enacted,  that  henceforth  no 
British  subject  should  be  permitted  to  land  goods  at 
any  Liberian  port,  unless  all  duties  and  port  charges 
were  paid  in  advance.  To  this  bold  position,  British 
traders  submitted;  and  their  government  informed 
the  Liberian  authorities,  that  though  their  sove- 
reignty was  not  acknowledged,  they  might  receive 
harbour  dues  and  duties,  in  compensation  for  improv- 
ing some  of  the  harbours  and  for  maintaining  a  light- 
house on  the  coast. 

In  conversation  from  time  to  time  with  British 
commanders  on  the  coast,  the  governor  was  given  to 
understand  that,  so  long   as   the   colonv  remained 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  233 

dependent  on  or  subject  to  the  Colonization  Society, 
their  government  would  not  relinquish  their  right  to 
one  foot  of  the  ground  assumed  by  Commodore  Jones. 
Letters  were  at  the  same  time  received  by  the  Colo- 
nization Society  in  the  United  States,  from  distin- 
guished friends  of  the  cause  in  England,  urging  the 
importance  of  having  Liberia  declared  an  independent 
nation.  The  constitution  of  the  colony  made  no 
provision  for  making  treaties,  except  with  the  native 
tribes  of  Africa.  A  crisis  had  come,  in  which  there 
must  be  a  negotiation  with  the  British  government, 
and  there  was  not,  and  could  not  be,  under  its  present 
constitution,  any  officer  authorised  to  act  in  it.  A 
change  was  therefore  necessary,  and  such  a  change 
as  would  enable  the  Liberian  government  to  make 
treaties  with  foreign  powers.  Her  present  position 
was  like  that  of  a  half-breed,  neither  a  recognised 
colony  of  the  United  States,  nor  an  independent  and 
recognised  state.  Difficulties  and  disputes  were  liable 
constantly  to  arise  between  them  and  foreign  traders, 
which  it  would  be  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  settle, 
for  the  want  of  precise  ground,  well  understood  and 
clearly  acknowledged,  to  stand  upon. 

Here  then  was  a  new  issue  for  this  little  people. 
Shall  it,  still  in  the  feebleness  of  youth,  cut  loose 
from  its  parent  stem  ?  *  Shall  it  undo  the  tie  which 
binds  it  to  the  counsels  and  authority  of  its  friend 
and  guardian  ?    Can  it  stand  alone,  in  wisdom  and 


234  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

strength,  on  a  pagan  shore  ?  Is  the  germ  so  deeply 
rooted  that  it  shall  grow  up  and  bear  fruit,  and  shall 
its  leaves  be  for  the  healing  of  the  nations  ?  Had  the 
time  indeed  come,  when  Liberia  could  take  the  en- 
tire responsibility  of  her  own  government  into  her 
own  hands,  and  stand  one  among  the  nations  of  the 
world  ?  The  majority  of  her  citizens  thought  the  time 
had  come. 

In  the  next  session  of  her  legislature  the  subject 
came  before  the  house,  and  after  much  discussion,  it 
was  resolved  to  present  their  case  before  the  Coloni- 
zation Society,  and  to  solicit  their  co-operation  in  the 
important  crisis.  A  committee  of  four  were  appointed 
for  this  purpose. 

It  need  hardly  be  said,  that  the  Society  promptly 
responded  to  their  views.  At  its  annual  meeting  in 
1846,  it  was  resolved,  that  the  time  had  come,  when 
it  was  expedient  for  the  people  of  the  commonwealth 
of  Liberia  to  take  into  their  own  hands  the  entire 
work  of  self-government,  and  that  they  be  recom- 
mended to  publish  to  the  world,  a  declaration  of 
their  true  character,  as  a  sovereign  and  independent 
state. 

It  was  felt  that  in  the  discretion  and  ability  with 
which  Governor  Roberts  had  discharged  his  duties, 
in  the  economy  and  skill  with  which  the  financial 
affairs  of  the  colony  had  been  managed  by  their 
several  officers,  in  the  peace  and  advancing  pros- 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  235 

perity  of  the  settlements,  were  signs  of  improvement 
and  tokens  of  success,  deeply  gratifying  to  every 
friend  of  the  African,  and  hopeful  earnests  of  what 
the  republic  shall  yet  do  for  Christian  civilization  on 
the  African  soil. 

Upon  receiving  dispatches  from  the  United  States 
favourable  to  their  views,  the  Governor  issued  a  pro- 
clamation to  convene  the  legislative  council,  in  order 
to  take  measures  for  bringing  the  subject  before  the 
people  at  large.  It  held  a  session  of  three  days  ; 
and  its  discussions,  it  is  said  by  a  white  ear-witness, 
were  calm,  dispassionate,  and  full  of  good  sense. 
Every  man  seemed  to  feel  the  solemn  responsibility 
of  the  new  movement,  and  that  nothing  should  be 
done  without  mature  deliberation.  As  a  result  of  the 
session,  the  Governor  was  instructed  to  assemble  the 
people  together  in  their  respective  towns  on  a  speci- 
fied clay,  to  express,  by  vote,  their  decision,  whether 
their  State  should  indeed  declare  itself  free,  sovereign, 
and  independent. 

This  was  done  on  the  27th  of  October,  1846. 

The  official  returns  were  not  so  full  as  were  ex- 
pected, especially  from  the  Bassa  county,  owing  to 
some  unforeseen  misapprehension  of  the  movement ; 
but  the  majority  was  clearly  on  the  side  of  indepen- 
dence. 

A  convention  was  then  called,  and  holden  at  Mon- 
rovia in  July,  1847,  to  adopt  a  constitution  for  the 


236  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

new  state,  and  to  make  a  public  declaration  of  its 
new  position.  The  Governor  issued  a  proclamation 
for  a  day  of  public  thanksgiving,  to  be  holden  on  the 
8th  of  July,  calling  upon  all  ministers  and  people  of 
the  commonwealth  to  meet  for  religious  worship. 
After  enumerating  the  many  mercies  for  which  they 
should  be  unfeignedly  thankful  as  a  people,  he  called 
upon  them  to  offer  up  fervent  prayers  to  Almighty 
God,  that  "  he  would  give  to  the  delegates  assembled 
in  convention  to  form  a  constitution  for  the  govern- 
ment of  these  colonies,  wisdom  to  guide  them  in  their 
deliberation,  and  to  inspire  them  with  counsels,  which 
Infinite  Wisdom  alone  can  suggest,  that  their  action 
may  be  honourable  to  themselves  and  right  in  the 
sight  of  God." 

Could  they  not  indeed  exclaim,  "  Our  soul  is 
escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers.  The 
snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  escaped.  Our  help  is  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  made  the  heaven  and  the 
earth." 

After  a  laborious  session  of  three  weeks,  the  con- 
vention completed  and  signed  the  new  constitution 
and  the  declaration  of  national  independence.  The 
prominent  features  of  this  important  instrument  can- 
not but  be  deeply  interesting  to  our  readers.  It  is 
at  once  manly  and  comprehensive. 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  237 

DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE. 

"  We,  the  representatives  of  the  people  of  the 
commonwealth  of  Liberia,  in  convention  assembled, 
invested  with  authority  to  form  a  new  government, 
relying  upon  the  aid  and  protection  of  the  Great 
Arbiter  of  human  events,  do  hereby,  in  the  name 
and  on  behalf  of  the  people  of  this  commonwealth, 
publish  and  declare  the  said  commonwealth  a  Free, 
Sovereign,  and  Independent  State,  by  the  name  and 
title  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia. 

"We,  the  people  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia,  were 
originally  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  of 
North  America. 

"  In  some  parts  of  that  country,  we  were  debarred 
by  law  from  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  men — in 
other  parts,  public  sentiment,  more  powerful  than 
law,  frowned  us  down. 

"  We  were  everywhere  shut  out  from  all  civil 
office. 

"  We  were  excluded  from  all  participation  in  the 
government. 

"  We  were  taxed  without  our  consent. 

"  We  were  compelled  to  contribute  to  the  resources 
of  a  country  which  gave  us  no  protection. 

"  We  were  made  a  separate  and  distinct  class,  and 
against  us  every  avenue  of  improvement  was  effec- 


238  AFEICA  REDEEMED. 

tually  closed.     Strangers  from  all  lands,  of  a  colour 
different  from  ours,  were  preferred  before  us. 

"We  uttered  our  complaints;  but  they  were  un- 
attended to,  or  only  met  by  alleging  the  peculiar 
institutions  of  the  country. 

"  All  hope  of  a  favourable  change  in  our  country 
was  thus  wholly  extinguished  in  our  bosoms,  and  we 
looked  abroad  for  some  asylum  from  the  deep  degra- 
dation. 

"  The  western  coast  of  Africa  was  the  place 
selected  by  American  benevolence  and  philanthropy 
for  our  future  home.  Removed  beyond  influences 
which  depressed  us,  it  was  hoped  we  would  be 
enabled  to  enjoy  those  rights  and  privileges,  and 
exercise  and  improve  those  faculties,  which  the  God 
of  nature  has  given  us  in  common  with  the  rest  of 
mankind." 

After  making  grateful  and  honourable  mention  of 
the  work  of  the  Colonization  Society,  it  adds  :  — 

"  Liberia  is  already  the  happy  home  of  thou- 
sands, who  were  once  the  doomed  victims  of  oppres- 
sion, and  thus  far  our  highest  hopes  have  been 
realised. 

"  Our  courts  of  justice  are  open  equally  to  the 
stranger  and  the  citizen  for  the  redress  of  grievances, 
for  the  remedy  of  injuries,  and  for  the  punishment  of 
crime. 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  239 

"  Our  numerous  and  well  attended  schools  attest 
our  efforts  and  our  desire  for  the  improvement  of 
our  children. 

"Our  churches  for  the  worship  of  our  Creator, 
everywhere  to  be  seen,  bear  testimony  to  our  piety, 
and  to  our  acknowledgment  of  his  Providence. 

"The  native  African,  bowing  down  with  us  before 
the  altar  of  the  living  God,  declares  that  from  us, 
feeble  as  we  are,  the  light  of  Christianity  has  gone 
forth ;  w7hile  upon  that  curse  of  curses,  the  slave- 
trade,  a  deadly  blight  has  fallen  as  far  as  our  influ- 
ence extends. 

"  Therefore,  in  the  name  of  humanity,  virtue,  and 
religion— in  the  name  of  the  Great  God,  our  common 
Creator  and  our  common  Judge,  we  appeal  to  the 
nations  of  Christendom,  and  earnestly  and  respect- 
fully ask  of  them,  that  they  will  regard  us  with  the 
sympathy  and  friendly  consideration  to  which  the 
peculiarities  of  our  condition  entitle  us,  and  to 
extend  to  us  that  comity  which  marks  the  friendly 
intercourse  of  civilized  and  independent  commu- 
nities." 

Then  follows  the  constitution,  beginning  with  a 
declaration  of  civil  rights  and  restrictions  similar  to 
our  own.  On  one  point,  we  find  the  New  Republic 
standing  on  far  higher  moral  ground  than  their  parent 
model.     Section  4th  declares  "  That  there  shall  be 


240  AFEICA  EEDEEMED. 

no  slavery  within  this  Republic;  nor  shall  any  citizen 
or  any  person  resident  therein  deal  in  slaves,  either 
within  or  without  its  bounds,  either  directly  or  in- 
directly." 

Its  legislative  powers  are  vested  in  a  legislature, 
consisting  of  two  separate  branches — a  Senate  and 
House  of  Representatives.  The  representatives  are 
apportioned  according  to  the  number  of  inhabitants. 
Two  years'  residence  in  the  county  which  elects  him, 
real  estate  to  the  value  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
dollars,  and  the  age  of  twenty-three,  constitute  eligi- 
bility to  the  office  of  representative. 

The  Senate  consists  of  two  members  from  each 
county.  No  person  can  be  elected  to  this  office,  who 
has  not  resided  three  years  in  the  Republic  previous 
to  his  election,  who  does  not  own  real  estate  to  the 
value  of  two  hundred  dollars,  and  who  shall  not  have 
attained  the  age  of  twenty-five. 

The  supreme  executive  power  resides  in  a  Presi- 
dent elected  by  the  people,  and  holding  his  office  for 
two  years.  Xo  person  can  be  eligible,  who  has  not 
been  a  resident  of  the  Republic  five  years,  who  shall 
not  have  attained  the  age  of  twenty-five,  and  who 
shall  not  be  possessed  of  real  estate  to  the  value  of 
six  hundred  dollars.  The  duties  of  these  several 
officers  and  bodies  are  similar  to  those  in  our  own 
country. 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS. 


241 


The  Judicial  power  is  vested  in  one  Supreme  Judi- 
cial Court  and  such  subordinate  courts  as  the  legis- 
lature from  time  to  time  may  establish. 

The  instrument,  a  brief  outline  of  which  has  been 
given,  does  credit  to  its  authors.     It  is  signed  by 


S.  Benedict, 

J.  N.  Lewis, 

H.  Teage, 

Beverly  R  Wilson, 

Elijah  Johnson, 

J.  B.  Gripon. 

John  Day, 
A.  W.  Gardner, 
Amos  Herring, 
Ephraim  Titler. 

K.  E.  Murray. 


President. 


-Mesurado  County. 


Grand  Bassa  County. 


County  of  Sinou. 


The  insignia  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia  was  also 
adopted  by  the  convention.  Its  flag  consists  of  six 
red  stripes,  with  five  white  ones,  alternately  dis- 
played longitudinally.  In  the  upper  angle  of  the 
flag,  next  to  the  spear,  is  a  square  blue  ground, 
covering  in  depth  five  stripes,  in  the  centre  of  which 
is  one  lone  white  star. 

The  imprint  of  its  Seal  is  a  dove  on  the  wing,  with 
an  open  scroll  in  its  claws ;  a  view  of  the  ocean,  with 
a  ship  under  sail ;  the  sun  just  emerging  from  the 

R 


242  AFKICA  REDEEMED. 

waters;  a  palm  tree,  and  at  its  base  a  plough  and 
spade.  Beneath  the  einbleras  are  the  words,  Republic 
of  Liberia  ;  and  above  the  national  motto,  The  Love 
of  Liberty  brought  us  here. 

The  twenty-fourth  day  of  August,  1847,  was  the 
day  appointed  for  raising  the  Flag  of  the  New  Re- 
public, and  its  happy  dawn  was  announced  by  the 
thunder  of  cannon.  At  an  early  hour  were  seen 
groups  of  citizens  gathered  here  and  there,  with  a 
joyful  smile  lighting  up  every  countenance.  Old 
men  seemed  to  have  renewed  their  youth,  and 
youth  itself  moved  with  a  more  buoyant  and  elastic 
step.  At  nine  o  clock,  the  Governor  and  his  staff, 
with  the  military,  assembled  at  the  court-house. 
At  the  same  time,  people  from  all  quarters  were 
pouring  toward  the  Government  Square.  At  eleven, 
his  Excellency  was  escorted  opposite  to  the  Govern- 
ment house,  where  he  was  met  by  a  band  of  ladies, 
bearing  the  flag  of  their  country.  On  receiving  it 
from  Mrs.  Lewis,  accompanied  with  a  short  speech, 
he  unfurled  it  amid  the  cheers  and  hurrahs  of  the 
assembled  multitude.  The  troops  then  marched  up 
to  the  Central  Fort.  At  twelve  the  first  gun  of  the 
national  salute  pealed  over  the  waters,  when  the  flag 
was  seen  majestically  arising,  and  from  its  lofty 
height  soon  floated  on  the  breeze,  the  herald  of  a 
brighter  clay  for  poor  benighted  Africa.  At  the  same 
moment,  a  responsive  gun  was   heard  from  Signal 


GOVEKNOK  KOBEKTS.  243 

Hill,  as  if  the  mountains  echoed  the  jubilant  shout 
of  freedom.  A  salute  of  twenty-one  guns  followed  ; 
when  the  procession  marched  to  the  Methodist  church, 
where  were  holden  exercises  appropriate  to  the 
occasion.  The  flag  of  the  Republic  was  reared  on 
one  side  of  the  altar,  near  Colonel  Elijah  Johnson, 
the  Marshal  of  the  day,  while  the  left  was  occupied 
by  the  flag  and  banner  of  the  high  School :  National 
Freedom,  National  Education,  and  the  Ministry  of 
Christ,  the  triple  alliance,  which  shall  give  strength, 
permanency,  and  beauty  to  the  New  Republic. 

We  cannot  but  contemplate  the  Marshal  of  the 
occasion,  a  little,  old,  grey-headed  man,  with  feelings 
of  no  ordinary  interest.  How  little  could  he  have 
anticipated  beholding  a  day  like  this,  when  he  first 
leaped  upon  the  African  shore,  and  built  his  little 
hut  in  the  forests  of  Mesuraclo  !  Less  too,  when  he 
headed  his  feeble  forces,  in  their  solitary  fortress, 
surrounded  by  hordes  of  savage  foes  just  ready  to 
overwhelm  them !  And  least,  perhaps,  as  he  saw 
friend  and  companion  falling  at  his  side  in  the  hot 
embrace  of  the  African  fever.  But  he  had  survived 
that  dark  night  of  toil.  He  fought  his  way  through 
discouragements,  disease,  and  death,  With  unshaken 
constancy,  he  had  met  the  cowardice  of  some,  the 
treachery  of  others,  the  doubts  and  the  fears  which  clog 
the  wheels  of  every  new  and  untried  movement ; 
and  with  a  courage  and  fidelity  which  never  flagged, 


244  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

worked  on,  and  worked  on — doing  with  all  his  might 
whatsoever  his  hand  found  to  do,  counselling  with  his 
wisdom,  encouraging,  by  his  cheerfulness,  and  in- 
spiring by  his  faith  every  one  around  him.  He  felt 
that  he  had  work  to  do,  and  he  meant  to  do  it.  In 
the  providence  of  God,  he  was  permitted  to  see  it 
done,  the  establishment  of  a,  free,  independent,  Chris- 
tian state  on  the  shore  of  his  fatherland,  where  he, 
his  brethren,  and  their  children,  and  children's  chil- 
dren might  secure  a  birthright, — in  common  with 
the  citizens  of  other  free  Christian  states, — life, 
liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness.  With  him  of 
old  time,  he  might  then  have  said,  "  Lord,  now 
lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation,  which  thou  hast  pre- 
pared before  the  face  of  all,  a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles,  and  a  covert  for  a  stricken  people." 

A  large  number  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  assembled 
at  an  evening  entertainment,  composed  of  the  rich 
products  of  their  own  luxuriant  soil,  where  patriotic 
toasts  and  gallant  sentiments  were  drank  in  the  very 
purest  water  which  Monrovia  afforded. 

We  cannot  conclude  this  chapter  better  than  with 
the  spirited  hymn  composed  by  Mr.  Hilary  Teage, 
and  sung  at  the  forenoon  exercises,  preceding  the 
oration,  delivered  by  Rev.  J.  S.  Payne. 


••  Wake  every  tuneful  string, 
To  God  loud  praises  bring, 


GOVERNOR  ROBERTS.  245 

Wake  heart  and  tongue. 
In  strains  of  melody, 
And  choral  harmony, 
Sing — for  the  oppressed  are  free — 

Wake  cheerful  song. 

See  Mesurado's  height, 
Illumed  with  new-born  light  ! 

Lo  !  the  lone  star  ! 
Now  it  ascends  the  skies  ; 
Lo  !  the  deep  darkness  flies, 
While  new-born  glories  rise 
And  shine  afar. 

Shine,  life-creating  ray — 
Proclaim  approaching  day ; 

Throw  wide  thy  blaze — 
Lo ;  Savage  Hottentot — 
Bosjesman  from  his  cot — 
And  nations  long  forgot 

Astonished  gaze. 

Shout  the  loud  jubilee, 
Afric  once  more  is  free — 

Break  forth  with  joy. 
Let  Nilus'  fettered  tongue, 
Let  Niger  join  the  song, 
And  Congo  loud  and  long 

Glad  strains  employ. 

Star  in  the  East,  shine  forth  ! 
Proclaim  a  nation's  birth. 

Ye  nations  hear — 
This  is  our  natal  day, 
And  we  our  homage  pay  : 
To  Thee,  oh  Lord — we  pray — 

Lord,  hear  our  prayer. 


'246  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

All  hail,  Liberia  !  hail ! 
Favoured  of  God,  all  hail ! — 

Hail !  happy  land  ! 
From  virtue  ne'er  remove — 
By  peace  and  truth  and  love, 
And  wisdom  from  above, 

So  shalt  thou  stand." 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THE    NEW    REPUBLIC. 

"  Muse  !  take  the  harp  of  prophecy  :  Behold  ! 
The  glories  of  a  brighter  age  unfold  : 
Friends  of  the  outcast !  view  the  accomplished  plan, 
The  Negro  towering  to  the  height  of  man." 

MONTGOMEEY. 

"I  am  inclined  to  think  that  greater  good  might 
be  done  by  joining  a  young  settlement,  than  by  mis- 
sionary work  among  the  heathen.  Every  good  man 
going  to  New  Zealand,  or  Van  Dieman's  Land  [or 
Liberia]  not  for  the  sake  of  making  money,  is  an 
invaluable  element  in  those  societies  ;  and  remember, 
after  all,  they  must  be,  by-and-by,  the  great  mis- 
sionaries for  the  heathen  world,  either  for  God  or 
the  Devil." — Dr.  Arnold. 

The  new  constitution  of  the  Republic  was  accepted 
by  the  people  on  the  27th  of  September,  and  on  the 
5th  of  October  the  first  election  of  officers  took  place. 
Joseph  J.  Roberts  was  elected  President  for  two 
years,   and  Nathaniel  Brander,  Vice-President.     A 


248  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

few  weeks  after,  the  American  Squadron  on  the 
African  coast,  and  Captain  Murray,  in  a  sloop-of-war 
of  Her  Majesty's  service,  learning  the  new  political 
era  of  the  settlement,  gave  a  salute  of  twenty  guns  in 
honour  of  her  new-born  sovereignty. 

The  first  Legislature  held  its  session  in  January, 
1848,  when  the  President  delivered  his  inaugural 
address,  and  was  duly  sworn  to  the  duties  of  his  high 
and  responsible  station. 

President  Roberts  soon  after  made  preparations 
to  visit  England  and  America  in  behalf  of  the 
interests  of  his  country.  He  arrived  at  Boston,  in 
May,  1848,  accompanied  by  two  commissioners  from 
the  new  Republic,  Beverly  R.  Wilson,  and  James  S. 
Payne,  who  were  sent  out  to  confer  with  the  Coloni- 
zation Society  and  settle  on  articles  of  agreement.  The 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Society  met  the  Commis- 
sioners at  New  York,  where,  after  a  full  and  minute 
examination  of  the  subject,  arrangements  were  made, 
which  gave  satisfaction  to  all  parties.  The  Society 
agreed  to  cede  all  its  lands  to  the  Republic,  reserving 
only  such  rights  in  them  as  are  necessary  for  the 
performance  of  its  duty  to  future  emigrants,  and  an 
appropriation  of  ten  per  cent.,  on  the  proceeds  of  the 
sale  of  public  lands,  for  all  time  to  come,  for  purposes 
of  education.  Recaptured  Africans  were  to  be  ad- 
mitted as  heretofore,  the  United  States  government 
making  provision  for  their  support. 


THE  NEW  BEPUBLIC.  249 

President  Roberts'  arrival  in  this  country  excited  a 
lively  interest  among  all  the  friends  of  the  African. 
He  was  received  with  flattering  attention  by  the  city 
authorities  both  of  Boston  and  New  York,  and  the 
impression  everywhere  made  by  these  distinguished 
citizens  of  the  New  Republic  was  highly  honourable 
to  themselves  and  auspicious  for  their  country. 
Although  the  American  government  did  not  formally 
acknowledge  its  sovereignty,  Mr.  Roberts  was  able 
to  make  some  commercial  arrangements  of  great 
importance  to  the  finances  of  Liberia. 

He  then  set  sail  for  England,  where  he  was 
warmly  welcomed  by  Lord  Palmerston,  Lord  Bexley, 
Dr.  Hodgkin,  Samuel  Gurney,  and  others,  who 
showed  a  strong  interest  in  the  object  of  his  mission. 
Before  his  negotiations  were  completed  with  the 
British  government,  he  proceeded  to  France,  and 
found  an  efficient  friend  and  advocate  in  George 
Washington  Lafayette,  who  rendered  him  every  as- 
sistance in  his  power  in  the  prosecution  of  his  plans. 
The  French  government  speedily  gave  a  full  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  independence  and  sovereignty 
of  Liberia,  and  orders  were  issued  to  its  naval  com- 
manders on  the  coast  of  Africa,  to  place  at  President 
Roberts'  disposal  two  or  three  ships  of  war,  whenever 
he  should  want  them  for  the  purpose  of  putting  down 
the  slave-trade,  or  otherwise  protecting  the  rights 
of  humanity  in  that  region. 


250  AFKICA  EEDEEMED. 

The  acknowledgment  of  Liberian  independence  by 
England  soon  followed,  and  other  European  govern- 
ments are  prepared  to  imitate  her  example.  A  very 
liberal  treaty  of  commerce  was  entered  into  with 
England,  based  upon  the  perfect  equality  of  the  two 
nations. 

On  the  President's  representations  respecting  the 
movements  and  haunts  of  the  slave-trade  and  the 
necessity  of  buying  up  the  land  to  secure  its  destruc- 
tion, Samuel  Gurney,  a  distinguished  philanthro- 
pist, pledged  £'1000  to  aid  in  purchasing  the 
Gallinas ;  and  encouraging  intimations  were  given, 
that  the  necessary  sum,  of  ten  thousand  dollars, 
would  be  seasonably  provided.  The  English  govern- 
ment presented  a  beautiful  cutter  of  four  guns  to 
Liberia,  and  authorised  the  President  to  use  her 
ships  of  war  on  the  African  coast  whenever  it  was 
necessary  for  breaking  up  the  inhuman  traffic  in 
slaves. 

Mr.  Eoberts  visited  Belgium,  and  was  present  at 
the  Peace  Congress,  held  in  the  city  of  Brussels. 
Everywhere,  he  was  received  with  the  respect  due 
to  his  official  station  and  personal  worth.  After 
having  completed  his  important  business  in  Europe, 
he  and  his  family  set  sail  for  Liberia,  in  her  Majesty's 
ship  Amazon,  courteously  tendered  to  him  on  this 
occasion. 

Behold,  then,  Liberia !  a  free,  independent,  recog- 


THE  NEW  EEPUBLIC.  251 

nised  sovereignty  among  the  civilized  nations  of  the 
world. 


This  new  movement  has  given  a  surprising  spring 
to  every  class  of  business  in  the  new  Republic. 
Everywhere  the  subject  of  agriculture  is  occupying  the 
attention  of  the  people.  Gardens  and  plantations 
heretofore  neglected,  or  receiving  comparatively 
little  hearty  labour,  are  now  improved  with  great 
industry  and  careful  attention.  Every  man  seems  to 
bear  about  him  a  renewed  sense  of  responsibility. 
The  dignity  of  free  citizenship  is  upon  him.  And  if 
this  people  have  wrought  well  thus  far  in  their  feeble 
and  imperfect  beginnings,  shall  we  not  bid  them  God 
speed  in  the  great  and  glorious  work,  which  lies 
before  them  for  the  redemption  of  Africa  ? 

To  the  ardent  and  enthusiastic,  wTe  would  say, 
pause,  and  remember  two  things.  First,  remember, 
that  Liberia  is  a  nation  of  negroes  under  a  tropical 
sky,  many  of  them  emancipated  slaves,  brought  up 
without  any  of  those  stimulants  to  moral  and  social 
position,  which  bear  upon  most  men  from  their  earliest 
youth.  From  such  we  must  not  expect  too  much.  Nor 
would  we  speak  either  discouragingly  or  disparag- 
ingly in  saying  this.  Suffering  from  centuries  of 
social  depression,  entitled  to  the  exercise  of  no  rights 
and  privileges  which  they  could  really  call  their  own, 


252  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

possessing  few  or  no  means  of  improvement,  with 
few  motives  to  think  and  fewer  to  feel,  we  cannot 
know  all  the  capabilities  of  the  negro  character,  ex- 
cept indeed  from  the  few  splendid  specimens  which 
have  occasionally  broken  away  from  their  spiritual 
fetters,  and  in  spite  of  every  clog  have  become  men. 
The  idle,  thriftless,  ignorant  negroes,  who  frequently 
skirt  our  northern  towns,  and  who  so  often  occasion 
the  sneering  question,  "  Look  at  your  free  blacks, 
what  are  they?"  ought  no  more  to  be  taken  as  proper 
examples  of  the  race,  than  should  St.  Giles  of  London 
or  Five  Points  of  New  York.  In  fact,  they  are  not 
free.  Public  opinion  still  fetters  and  degrades  them. 
It  sanctions  laws  and  imposes  restraints,  which 
essentially  hinders  their  social  improvement  and 
moral  elevation. 

In  many  of  the  free  states  they  are  excluded  by 
law  from  important  privileges  which  white  citizens 
enjoy,  and  are  subjected  to  peculiar  hardships.  In 
some,  they  can  hold  no  office,  their  testimony  is  not 
received  in  court,  and  their  vote  is  refused  at  elec- 
tions. A  free  black  man  from  Illinois  writes  : — "  We 
are  in  as  bad  or  worse  condition  than  the  slaves, 
being  compelled  to  leave  the  state  or  give  security,  as 
those  of  the  whites  who  would  befriend  us,  are  pre- 
vented, by  the  fear  of  public  opinion.  Such  is  our 
situation,  and  we  deem  it  worse  than  slavery." 

They  are  free   now  here  in  the  United  States. 


THE  NEW  EEPUBLIC.  253 

Clogged  and  restrained  as  they  have  ever  been,  we 
cannot  be  surprised  if  they  do  not  immediately  arise 
to  the  full  and  matured  proportions  of  Christian  free- 
men ;  so  that  if  the  warm  and  ardent  friend  of  the 
African  is  sometimes  disposed  to  be  disappointed  at 
what  he  may  imagine  the  slow  progress  of  Liberian 
improvements,  he  must  not  be  discouraged.     If  the 
African  is  planting  his  fields  and  rearing  his  home 
and  building  his  schools  under  a  serener  sky  and  in  a 
more  fertile  land  than  did  the  New  England  colonists, 
remember  also,  that  he  does  not  come  to  his  work 
taught  and  trained  from  his  youth  upward  in  the 
duties  and  employments,  the  motives  and  the  hopes 
of  intelligent  Christian    freemen.       The  immense 
power  which  these    possess   in  directing   industry, 
stimulating  effort,  arousing  the  faculties  and  enlarg- 
ing the  views,  they  have  just  begun  to  feel.    We  must 
give  them  time  enough  to  feel  their  full  force ;  for 
results,  to  be  permanent,  must  be  gradual.     They 
have  gone  forth,  weeping,  bearing   precious    seed, 
which  their  children  and  children's  children  shall 
reap  in  joy,  bringing  their  sheaves  with  them. 

Remember,  too,  that  Liberia  is  not  a  missionary 
station,  properly  as  such.  It  is  composed  of  political, 
trading,  farming  communities,  whose  business  rela- 
tions are  subject  to  the  same  faults,  fluctuations,  and 
irregularities,  and  will  be  apt  to  bear  the  same  cha- 
racters as  they  do  in  this  country, — hard  bargains  on 


254  AFEICA  EEDEEMED. 

one  side,  suspicions  of  honesty  on  the  other,  with  here 
and  there  a  sprinkling  of  insolvent  debtors.  Perhaps 
we  cannot  expect  the  servant  to  he  much  above  the 
master.  If  the  standard  of  character  is  not  alwavs 
and  in  all  respects  as  elevated  as  we  could  wish ;  if 
things  do  not  always  move  on  in  that  harmonious 
development  which  we  expected;  if,  in  fact,  affairs 
are  no  better  there  than  they  are  here ;  while  it  is  a 
matter  perhaps  greatly  to  regret,  it  is  no  reason  for 
withdrawing  our  sympathies  and  our  confidence,  or 
giving  ourselves  up  to  doubts  and  fears  lest  Liberia 
shall  prove  unworthy  of  herself.  Even  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  the  most  prominent  and  promising  mission 
ground,  have  not  been  without  their  cavillers  and 
fault-finders. 

Well  then,  what  is  Liberia?  It  is  a  place  of  civil, 
social,  and  political  freedom  for  the  negro  race.  We 
know  what  their  situation  is  in  America,  what  in 
their  native  wilds.  In  Hayti,  the  means  of  improve- 
ment are  no  ways  commensurate  with  the  wants  of 
the  people.  In  France  and  England,  they  are  few 
in  number,  possessing  neither  influence  nor  position. 
In  Liberia  are  the  foundations  laid  for  a  christian 
nationality.  Here  they  have  their  own  laws  and 
legislators,  their  own  houses  and  lands,  their  own 
wives  and  children,  their  own  schools  and  churches, 
with  none  to  molest  or  to  make  them  afraid.  They 
are  in   their   father-land,  on  their  own  soil,  where 


THE  NEW  BEPUBLIC.  255 

they  have  a  chartered  birthright,  with  all  the  means 
and  appliances  of  becoming  a  great  and  powerful 
nation.  In  this  aspect,  how  can  Liberia  be  other- 
wise than  a  place  of  deep  and  abiding  interest  to 
every  black  man  ?  Shall  not  they,  who  are  afar  off, 
turn  to  this  stronghold,  and  say,  "  Lo,  I  come,  and  I 
will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee  "? 

Again,  Liberia  is  a  radiating  point  for  the  spread 
of  Christian  civilization  in  Africa.  Already  do  we 
see  her  beneficial  influence  upon  the  surrounding 
tribes.  Hitherto  has  the  English  tongue  taught 
bitter  lessons  to  poor  Africa.  Now  it  falls  from  the 
lips  of  her  own  returning  people  with  the  mission  of 
peace,  of  good  will,  of  Christian  hopes.  The  little 
leaven  is  beginning  to  work.  The  good  news  runs 
from  village  to  village,  from  people  to  people :  "  God's 
palaver  is  the  good  and  true  palaver.  Bring  us  God's 
palaver."  White  men  can  never  Christianize  Africa. 
They  fall  upon  her  shores  like  untimely  fruit.  The 
work  must  be  done  by  her  own  people  ;  and  by  Li- 
beria it  has  been  commenced,  and  can  go  on  under 
more  advantageous  circumstances  than  any  other 
mission  in  the  world.  Christian  Africa  is  knocking 
at  the  very  door  of  Pagan  Africa,  with  a  good  govern- 
ment, with  good  schools,  and  the  word  of  God  in  her 
hand,  begging  an  entrance,  and  pleading  her  cause, 
saying,  "  Happy  he  is  that  hath  the  Lord  God  his 
help,  whose  hope  is  in  him.  The  Lord  taketh  pleasure 


'256  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

in  them  that  do  his  commandments."  "  We  ^vill 
make  peace  in  thy  borders,  and  will  fill  thee  with 
the  finest  of  wheat.  Cast  in  thy  lot  with  us,  and  ye 
shall  be  quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil.*' 

Liberia  is  the  child  of  our  own  institutions,  bearing 
our  likeness,  breathing  our  spirit,  and  bestowing  our 
privileges.  Can  we  do  otherwise  than  bid  her  God 
speed?  She  may  sometimes  lag,  sometimes  lack, 
sometimes  be  evil  spoken  of ;  but  shall  we  not  love 
her  still  ?  Oh  yes,  let  us  rejoice  that  there  is  one 
bright  spot  on  Africa.  As  Christian  citizens,  let  us 
strengthen  her  feeble  bands,  uphold  her,  encourage 
her,  and  pray  for  her  ;  and  may  this  American  Re- 
public stretch  out  its  own  strong  arm,  and,  with  honest 
pride,  and  fearless  independence,  give  her  a  just  and 
honourable  recognition  among  the  sovereignties  of 
the  world. 


NOTE. 

Farming,  in  Liberia,  is  more  like  gardening,  than 
like  farming  in  this  country.  A  small  piece  of  fertile 
land,  well  cultivated,  some  of  it  yielding  two  crops  in 
a  year,  and  some  of  it  yielding  food  all  the  time 
through  the  year,  and  for  several  years  in  succession, 
produces  the  necessaries  of  life  for  a  family.  In 
some  of  the  farming  settlements,  the  acres  cultivated 
are  fewer  than  the  persons  who  live  comfortably  on 
their  produce.  In  four  different  settlements,  322 
persons,  belonging  to  53  families,  live  on  the  produce 
of  408  acres,  which  is  but  little  more  than  an  acre 
and  a  quarter  to  a  person.  All  these  families  but 
four  own  more  land  than  they  cultivate.  They  have 
all  the  necessaries  of  life;  most  of  them  enjoy  many 
luxuries,  and  some  are  growing  rich.  At  Millsburg, 
C.  Willis,  with  a  family  of  eleven,  cultivates  35 
acres ;  while  his  neighbour,  R.  Mitchell,  supports  a 
family  of  nine  from  five  acres.  There  is  good  land 
enough  in  Liberia,  to  give  two  acres  to  every  coloured 
person  in  the  United  States. 

The  Liberians  have  a  profitable  trade  with  the 

s 


*258  AFEICA  KEDEEMED. 

natives,  whom  they  supply  with  various  products  of 
America  and  Europe,  and  receive  in  return  rice  and 
other  articles  of  food  for  their  own  use,  and  ivory, 
palm-oil,  dye-woods,  and  other  African  products  for 
exportation. 

Mechanics,  of  all  kinds  needed  by  a  new  settlement 
in  a  tropical  country,  find  abundant  employment  and 
high  wages. 

In  1843,  when  the  last  census  was  taken,  there 
were  in  Liberia  sixteen  schools,  having  56*2  scholars. 
They  now  exceed  2000  in  number!  Of  these,  192 
were  children  of  native  African  parents;  and  there 
were  some  of  them  in  every  school  except  two. 

There  were  then  twenty-three  churches,  with  1,474 
communicants,  of  whom  1,104  were  emigrants  from 
America  and  their  children,  and  469  were  native 
Africans,  who  had  been  converted  from  heathenism. 
Of  the  latter,  116  were  of  those  who  had  been 
rescued  from  slave-traders,  and  353  were  natives  of 
that  region.  Twenty  of  the  churches  had  members 
who  had  been  converted  from  heathenism. 

Since  that  time  some  of  the  recent  converts  from 
heathenism  have  fallen  away,  but  others  have  been 
added,  and  there  have  been  large  accessions  to  the 
communicants  of  the  other  classes  ;  so  that  the  whole 
number  is  much  larger  than  it  was  then.  Some  of 
the  schools  have  also  been  discontinued,  and  others 


NOTE.  259 

commenced.  Among  the  new  schools  are  two  or 
three  of  a  higher  order,  which  promise  to  be  perma- 
nent. The  means  of  education  need  improving; 
yet  they  have  been  such  in  times  past  as  sufficed  for 
the  education  of  the  President,  the  Secretary  of  State, 
and  others  who  fill  high  offices  with  credit  to  them- 
selves and  advantage  to  their  country. 

There  are  now  about  thirty  places  of  worship  and 
as  many  Sabbath  and  day  schools  in  operation ;  yet 
the  means  of  education  and  religious  instruction  fall 
short  of  the  wants  of  the  citizens,  and  very  far  below 
those  of  the  natives,  who  exhibit  an  ardent  desire  to 
participate  in  these  blessings.  The  printer  of  the 
"  Liberia  Herald,"  now  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  its 
publication,  is  J.  C.  Minor,  a  native  African. 
"Africa's  Luminary"  is  another  of  their  papers; 
and  the  Rev.  J.  Rambo,  one  of  the  episcopal  mission- 
aries at  Cape  Palmas,  having  been  a  printer  in  early 
life,  has  a  press,  and  issues  Primers,  Gospels,  Voca- 
bularies, &c.  in  the  native  languages. 

Emigrants,  on  their  arrival,  are  at  once  admitted 
to  all  the  rights  of  citizenship.  Each  receives,  gratis, 
a  town  lot,  or  five  acres  of  land  suitable  for  farming, 
and  if  he  has  a  family,  a  larger  quantity,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  number  dependent  on  him.  If  he  wishes 
for  more  land,  or  land  in  a  different  location,  he  can 
buy  where  he  pleases  for  a  dollar  an  acre.     If  he  is 


260  AFRICA  REDEEMED. 

without  property  and  needs  help,  his  passage,  and  the 
necessary  house  room,  food,  medicine,  and  medical 
attendance  for  six  months,  are  given  him.  During 
that  time  he  can  build  a  house,  and  raise  a  crop  of 
all  necessary  provisions  on  his  own  land. 


NEW  AFRICAN  PORT  OF  BASSA. 

[Since  going  to  press,  the  subjoined  article  in  the  " Nauti- 
cal Magazine"  gives  pleasing  evidence  that  the  growing  com- 
mercial importance  of  Liberia  begins  to  be  justly  appreciated.] 

It  is  only  quite  recently  that  the  importance  of 
Liberia  to  our  commerce,  our  manufactures,  and  to 
promoting  the  comfort  of  our  officers  and  crews,  has 
begun  to  be  appreciated. 

The  exports  of  that  new  state,  in  exchange  for 
our  merchandise  of  various  kinds,  cotton,  woollens, 
glass,  iron,  steel,  &c.  are  only  now  beginning  to 
excite  attention.  Palm  oil,  ivory,  gold,  clyewood, 
pepper,  ginger,  coffee,  and  other  tropical  staples,  are 
now  exchanged  by  the  industrious  citizens  of  Liberia 
with  our  merchants ;  and  a  new  element  of  vast 
importance  to  England  is  justly  attracting  deep 
interest.  After  much  investigation,  the  cotton  plant 
is  found  to  thrive  admirably ;  and  an  association  of 
capitalists  intend  to  extend  their  experiment  in 
cultivating  that  right  arm  of  national  industry.    But 


NEW  PORT  OF  BASSA.  261 

of  the  topography  of  that  interesting  region  little  is 
known. 

Our  readers  will  therefore  learn  with  much  interest, 
that  immediately  below  the  mouth  of  the  St.  John's, 
a  noble  river  nearly  a  mile  in  width,  and  extending 
far  inland,  but  obstructed  by  a  bar,  is  a  beautiful 
cove  ;  long  a  favourite  resort  of  the  slavers  for  wood, 
water,  and  provisions.  Although  a  good  Admiralty 
chart  of  Bassa  Cove  exists,  it  is  but  just  now  that 
the  development  of  its  rich  resources,  through  the 
industry  of  the  colonists  planted  there  by  the  philan- 
thropists of  Pennsylvania,  has  rendered  it  at  all 
known  to  our  naval  men.  It  now  ought  to  be  uni- 
versally known;  for,  in  addition  to  the  towns  of 
Bexley  and  Edina,  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  St. 
John's,  a  new  town,  to  which  the  grateful  citizens 
have  given  the  name  of  Cresson,  in  remembrance  of 
their  obligations  to  that  gentleman,  has  quite  recently 
sprung  up  within  the  Cove.  Free  from  the  dangers 
of  the  bar,  and  protected  by  the  "  Point  of  Bocks,'' 
forming  its  south-east  boundary,  it  is  at  all  times 
one  of  the  very  best  harbours  on  that  long  line  of 
coast.  Its  citizens,  among  whom  stand  prominently 
Hon.  S.  A.  Benson,  Messrs.  A.  P.  Davis,  Cheeseman, 
Hanson,  Weaver,  Washington,  and  Dr.  Moore,  as 
men  of  integrity  and  enterprise,  not  only  trade  in 
the  staples  above  enumerated,  but  desire  to  attract 
to  their  noble  ports  vessels  needing  supplies.     The 


2 6 '2  AFE1CA  REDEEMED. 

water  of  Bassa  has  long  been  celebrated  for  its  ex- 
cellence, and,  until  colonization  excluded  the  slavers, 
they  came  long  distances  to  fill  up  their  tanks  and 
casks.  These  industrious  people,  especially  Mr. 
Benson,  intend  keeping  on  hand  salt  and  fresh 
provisions,  bread,  biscuits,  flour,  poultry,  &c.  Of 
their  fruits  and  vegetables,  the  variety  and  excellence 
have  long  been  noted;  and  although  the  settlement 
is  quite  recent,  Messrs.  Moore  and  Benson  have 
already  coffee  plantations  of  8  to  10,000  trees  each. 
The  duties  on  foreign  imports  are  very  moderate, 
generally  not  exceeding  6  per  cent,  ad  valorem;  port 
charges,  if  any,  extremely  light ;  and  the  sendees  of 
Kroomen  and  Bassas  readily  obtained.  The  individuals 
named,  we  believe  to  be  worthy  of  entire  reliance. 
To  officers  of  our  navy  and  our  commercial  marine, 
we  recommend  this  new  port  with  confidence ;  and 
we  trust  that  ere  long  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Cresson  to 
build  up  an  episcopal  church  there,  will  afford  an 
additional  attraction  to  our  officers  and  men. 


APPENDIX 


(A.) 


We  could  not  give  a  more  touching  evidence  of  the 
blessings  conferred  on  heathen  Africa  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  Christian  education,  than  in  the  subjoined 
letter  of  Musu.  It  is  but  a  few  years  since  this  consistent 
Christian  was  an  ignorant  pagan.  After  acquiring  a  par- 
tial knowledge  of  the  English  language,  he  was  admitted 
into  the  Missionary  School  of  Cape  Palmas.  This  letter 
is  a  fine  specimen  of  the  happy  change  he  has  experienced 
— his  walk  and  conversation  being  in  beautiful  conform- 
ity with  his  Christian  profession,  and  rendering  him  a 
most  useful  auxiliary  to  the  devoted  men  whose  lives  are 
dedicated  to  the  regeneration  of  that  dark  continent. 

"  All  spiritual  blessings  be  on  my  dear  friend,  whatever 
the  tender  heart  or  the  almighty  arm  of  the  loving  Jesus 
has  to  bestow,  may  it  be  all  yours  !    What  glad  news  you 

wrote  to  me  about  Mrs. !  did  you  see  her  ]     Yes, 

glad  and  joy  speak  to  my  heart,  and  laugh  come  to  my 
mouth,  I  believe  that  you  have  seen  her,  you  told  me 
that  you  saw  her,  and  that  she  wants  very  much  to  return 
to  Africa  as  a  missionary.  I  have  got  a  letter  from  her, 
and  my  believing  and  wishes  are  one,  my  gladness  and 
happiness  follow  after.  0  my  happiness  is  very  great ; 
.and  good  happy  Christian  who  is  fixed  to  a  point,  go 


*264  APPENDIX. 

where  he  will,  one  object  is  his  all.  The  crucified  Saviour 
is  his  happiness,  and  this  heaven  he  carries  about  with 
him.  No  time,  no  place,  no  circumstances,  make  any 
change.  He  has  one  Lord,  one  faith,  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever.  Come  pain,  sickness,  death, — the 
Saviour's  love  and  power  bears  him  up.  Come  tempta- 
tions of  all  kinds,  I  will  be  with  thee  in  the  hour  of  temp- 
tation, says  Lord  God.  Where  he  is,  nothing  need  be 
feared,  because  nothing  can  hurt.,  0  my  dear  friend,  the 
true  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  is  certainly  a  cure  for  all 
the  miseries  which  come  upon  the  world  by  sin.  There 
is  no  evil  of  mind  or  body,  temporal  or  eternal,  but  our 
precious  dear  Lord  is  by  office  engaged  to  remove.  And 
shall  not  you  and  I  and  our  friends  value  and  love  him  ? 
What  we  set  our  hearts  upon  ?  What  can  bid  so  high  for 
them  as  this  adorable  Saviour  ? 

"Dear  Mr.  Rambo,  I  wish  very  much  to  see  you  ;  how 
glad  and  happy  I  should  be  when  I  meet  you  and  Doctor 
May,  and  Mr.  Hoffman,  and  then — then  my  heart  will 
talk  to  my  mouth,  and  my  tongue  will  speak  all  what  I 
have  done  or  seen. 

tc  I  am  your  affectionate  friend, 

"John  Musu  iSTeapo." 


(B.) 


The  Bassas,  a  peaceful,  industrious  tribe  of  about  50,000 
souls,  evince  much  anxiety  to  share  in  the  blessings  en- 
joyed by  their  Christian  neighbours.  It  is  at  Bassa  Cove 
and  among  this  interesting  people  that  the  proposed 
institutions  are  to  be  established.  Their  language  has 
been  acquired  and  reduced  to   system  by  Rev.  Messrs. 


APPENDIX.  265 

Mylne  and  Crocker,  who  have  issued  several  primary 
books  ;— but  means  to  mature  the  good  work  so  happily 
commenced,  are  yet  needed.  The  spot  selected  is  ad- 
mirably suited  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  citizens  and 
vessels  visiting  their  beautiful  harbour,  while  the  noble 
St.  John's  river  affords  direct  access  to  the  Bassas  and 
other  tribes,  and  being  about  midway  between  Sierra 
Leone  and  Cape  Coast,  it  is  hoped  that  it  niay  become  the 
means  of  supplying  Africa  with  a  native  clergy. 


ENGLAND. 

"  Theological  Seminary,  Lexington,  Kentucky. 
(c  Fathers  and  Brethren  in  Christ ! — My  position  and 
sacred  duties  have  long  brought  me  into  close  relation  to 
many  of  the  unfortunate  sons  of  Africa  sojourning  in 
these  United  States,  and  inspired  me  with  a  lively  interest 
in  whatever  concerns  their  unhappy  race  or  their  be- 
nighted country.  The  philanthropic  efforts  of  my  fast 
friend,  Elliott  Cresson,  Esq.,  in  their  behalf,  have  long 
since  commanded  my  cordial  admiration.  Into  none  of 
these  have  I  entered  with  livelier  enthusiasm,  than  into 
his  wishes  with  regard  to  the  establishment  of  a  Literary 
and  Theological  Institution  of  a  high  order,  at  Bassa, 
on  the  coast  of  Africa,  for  the  purpose  of  training  her 
own  sable  sons  to  fill  with  usefulness  and  distinction  the 
various  learned  professions  and  eminent  stations  which 
are  fast  opening  amongst  her  prosperous  colonies.  I 
have  long  rather  wished  than  hoped  that  it  might  be  in 
the  power  of  Episcopalians  in  this  country,  cordially  to 
respond  to  the  noble  proposal  of  your  own  illustrious 
statesman,  Lord  Bexley,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  such  an 
institution.    Nor  will  I  affect  to  deny  that  the  numbers 


•20(3  APPENDIX. 

and  wealth  of  Episcopalians  in  the  United  States  are 
such,  that  they  certainly  could,  without  detriment  to  any 
other  good  work,  carry  this  enterprise  to  a  successful 
issue.  But  then  it  is  equally  true  that  their  surplus 
wealth  is  not  great,  and  that  the  calls  upon  them  for 
nearer  and  more  pressing  objects,  are  exceedingly  numer- 
ous and  urgent.  And  it  is  respectfully  submitted  to  your 
benevolence,  whether  the  most  noble  and  worthy  motives 
may  not  animate  us,  whilst  we  reverently  refer  this  great 
enterprise  back  again  to  the  generous  sympathies  and 
abounding  beneficence  of  those  who  first  gave  it  a  favour- 
able ear. 

"  And  of  this  are  we  well  assured,  that  we  have 
only  to  satisfy  you  of  the  practicability  of  the  project, 
and  of  the  benign  results  which  must  flow  to  injured 
Africa,  in  order  to  secure  in  its  behalf  the  most  ample 
endowments  ;  since  we  are  at  a  loss  which  most  to  ad- 
mire, the  beneficent  providence  which  has  constituted 
the  small  island  of  Great  Britain  the  golden  treasury  of 
the  earth,  or  the  abounding  grace  which  of  late  has  dis- 
posed so  many  Christian  hearts  to  inscribe  '  Holiness  to 
the  Lord5  upon  their  vast  possessions. 

"  The  success  of  the  coloured  American  colonies  upon 
the  western  coast  of  Africa,  is  no  longer  matter  of  con- 
jecture. Agriculture  and  commerce  are  so  far  established 
that  a  retrograde  movement  is  little  to  be  feared.  If  not, 
the  onward  progress  must  be  in  a  ratio  of  incalculable 
progression.  Already,  interest  begins  to  sustain  this 
benevolent  movement,  and  the  establishment  of  a  line  of 
regular  packets,  manned  by  coloured  people,  opens  the 
door  for  that  voluntary  and  thrifty  emigration,  without 
which  a  colony  never  yet  became  a  great  nation. 

"  At  this  point,  the  foundation  of  institutions  to  bless 
future,  unborn,  unnumbered  thousands,  is  loudly  called 


APPENDIX.  267 

for,  and  every  year's  delay  is  fruitful  of  difficulties. 
These  colonies  already  have  their  common  and  grammar 
schools.  In  a  very  few  years  they  will  need  their 
colleges.  The  sentiment  would  be  nearly  universal,  that 
in  no  hands  would  it  be  more  sure  of  popularity  and 
success,  than  in  the  hands  of  Episcopalians.  For  the 
remark  of  your  own  most  Reverend  Archbishop  Seeker, 
nearly  an  hundred  years  ago,  i  that  all  the  various  de- 
nominations like  the  Episcopal  Church  next  best  to  their 
own,'  is  as  emphatically  true,  now,  in  America  and 
Africa,  as  it  could  possibly  have  been  in  England  when 
first  uttered. 

"  In  a  word,  the  hopes  of  Africa  and  the  prospects  of 
the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  would  brighten  in  that  day 
which  saw  the  hearts  of  Christians  in  Great  Britain 
kindling  with  holy  fervour  for  the  establishment  of  a 
literary  and  theological  institution  in  Liberia,  worthy  of 
the  patronage  of  her  own  illustrious  sons, 

"  B.  B.  SMITH, 

"Bishop  of  the  Episcopal  Church  in  the  state  of 
Kentucky,  and  Superintendent  of  Public  In- 
struction for  that  Commonwealth." 


(C.) 


Professor  Christy,  of  Ohio,  summed  up  his  able 
Lectures  before  the  Convention  of  that  State  in  October 
1850,  with  three  propositions  : — 

I.  That  Africa  is  the  principal  field  where  free  labour  can 
be  made  to  compete  successfully  with  slave  labour,  in 
the  production  of  exportable  tropical  commodities. 


'268  APPENDIX. 

To  demonstrate  the  truth  of  this  proposition  it  is  de- 
manded :  first;  that  it  he  shown  that  the  soil  and  climate 
of  Africa  are  well  adapted  to  the  production  of  sugar, 
coffee,  and  cotton;  and,  second,  that  the  natives  can  be 
successfully  employed  in  their  cultivation. 

In  relation  to  the  first  point,  there  is  no  longer  any 
doubt  among  intelligent  men.  Coffee,  equal,  if  not  su- 
perior, to  that  of  Java  or  Mocha,  is  raised  in  Liberia, 
and  can  be  easily  cultivated  to  any  extent.  The  shrub 
bears  fruit  thirty  or  forty  years,  each  producing  ten 
pounds  annually.  Cotton,  of  a  superior  quality,  yield- 
ing two  crops  a-year,  is  indigenous,  and  thrives  twelve 
or  fourteen  years  without  renewing  the  plant.  Sugar- 
cane grows  in  unrivalled  luxuriance,  and,  as  there  are 
no  frosts  to  be  dreaded,  can  be  brought  to  much  greater 
perfection  than  in  our  southern  states. 

On  the  second  point  much  information  has  been  col- 
lected, and  it  is  no  longer  doubted  in  Liberia,  that  the 
labour  of  natives  can  be  made  available.  The  Republic 
numbers  about  250,000  souls.  Many  of  these  natives 
are  becoming  industrious  by  the  example  of  the  colo- 
nists, and  the  desire  to  possess  the  comforts  of  civilized 
life.  Some  are  partially  educated,  and  one,  a  few  years 
ago,  occupied  a  seat  in  the  Legislature.  Many  of  them 
have  married  persons  bom  in  the  United  States,  and 
thereby  become  more  identified  with  the  citizens  of  the 
Republic.  The  colonists  of  ability  can  secure,  from  the 
natives,  all  the  labour  necessary,  at  very  low  wages. 
This  is  now  so  well  understood  as  to  discourage  those 
emigrants  from  the  United  States,  who  desire  to  go  as 
day  labourers. 

Mr.  E.  J.  Roye,  a  merchant  of  Monrovia,  fully  con- 
firms this  statement,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  W.  H.  Burnham, 
of  Zanesville,  Ohio.     He  mentions  it  as  the  chief  discou- 


APPENDIX.  269 

ragement  to  emigrants  dependent  upon  labour  for  a  sub- 
sistence, but  adds,  that  many  of  the  poor  Americans  in 
the  colony  c<  are  already  turning  their  attention  to  farm- 
ing, which  pays  well."  "  To  men  of  character,  educa- 
tion, wealth,  and  enterprise,  nothing  can  be  considered 
beyond  their  reach,  and  no  station,  in  the  Republic,  too 
high  to  be  attained." 

At  first  view  this  seems  disheartening  to  the  poor 
coloured  man ;  but  to  discerning  men,  Liberia  presents 
stronger  claims  on  this  account.  Mr.  Roye's  statement 
proves  two  things  important  to  Europe  and  America. 
1.  That  native  labour  can  be  had  cheap.  2.  That  those 
emigrants  who  engage  in  agriculture  can  do  well. 

What  is  most  important  to  elevate  and  ennoble  the 
poor  emigrant,  is,  to  forget  the  days  of  his  bondage, 
stand  erect  as  a  freeman,  and  depend  alone  upon  the 
strength  of  his  own  arm,  and  the  blessing  of  God. 
Cringing  to  others  unmans  him.  To  place  him  in  cir- 
cumstances which  will  force  him  to  agricultural  or 
mechanical  pursuits,  is  best  calculated  to  create  in  his 
breast  a  feeling  of  manly  independence.  And,  God  will- 
ing, this  is  what  Colonizationists  are  determined  to  do 
for  the  free  coloured  people  of  the  United  States. 

The  desire  to  possess  the  commodities  supplied  by  the 
commerce  of  civilized  nations  is  evidently  much  stronger 
in  the  people  of  Africa,  even  where  the  influence  of  the 
Republic  is  but  little  felt,  than  in  those  of  any  other 
barbarous  country.  This  desire  has  been  generated  by 
the  slave-trade,  and  is  the  principal  obstacle  to  its  sup- 
pression. Having  no  fruits  of  agricultural  labour  to 
offer  for  the  articles  they  desire,  slave-hunts  are  made 
the  means  of  procuring  slaves  to  give  in  exchange.  And 
such  is  the  strength  with  which  this  desire  for  traffic 
with  foreigners  operates,  and  such  their  unwillingness  to 


2X0  APPENDIX. 

be  deprived  of  it,  that  in  the  late  purchase  of  Gallinas, 
when  the  chiefs  sold  their  territory  to  President  Roberts, 
they  expressly  stipulated  for  the  establishment  of  com- 
merce upon  a  permanent  basis.  They  knew  very  well 
that  the  slave-trade  was  to  cease  from  that  moment,  and, 
as  an  equivalent,  demanded,  not  only  a  large  sum  of 
money,  but  that  commissioners  should  be  immediately 
appointed  "  to  settle  the  wars  in  the  country,  (because 
wars  will  now  no  longer  be  useful  when  the  captives 
taken  cannot  be  sold,)  and  open  the  trades  in  camwood, 
ivory,  and  palm  oil,  with  the  interior  tribes;  and  also  to 
settle  among  them,  as  soon  as  convenient,  persons  capable 
of  instructing  them  in  the  arts  of  husbandry." 

But  can  the  native  labour  of  Africa  be  made  to  com- 
pete with  the  slave-labour  of  other  tropical  countries, 
and  supply  the  Christian  world  with  that  immense 
amount  of  coffee,  sugar,  and  cotton,  it  now  consumes  ? 
This  is  the  great  question.  If  the  native  be  left,  without 
the  aid  of  foreign  intelligence,  to  develop  his  intellectual 
and  moral  powers,  he  must  remain  fitted  only  for  a  life 
of  slavery  abroad,  or  of  savage  indolence  at  home.  But 
if  the  Republic  of  Liberia  be  supplied  with  a  sufficient 
number  of  industrious,  intelligent,  and  moral  emigrants, 
to  enable  it  to  extend  its  settlements  and  its  laws  around 
the  coast,  and  into  the  interior,  a  few  years  only  will 
elapse  before  the  natives,  coming  under  the  influence  of 
civilization,  will  experience  such  an  increase  of  wants  as 
can  be  supplied  only  by  industry.  What  has  already 
occurred  in  the  present  settlements  of  Liberia  will  follow 
in  all  new  ones,  and  a  spirit  of  industry  be  awakened  as 
far  and  as  rapidly  as  the  colonization  of  the  country  shall 
be  accomplished. 

We  have  previously  shown  that  the  stereotyped  cha- 
racter of  the  Pagan  nations  of  Eastern  Asia  renders  it 


APPENDIX.  271 

difficult  to  stimulate  the  inhabitants  to  a  much  greater 
degree  of  industry  than  already  exists,  and  that  such  free 
labour  cannot  compete  with  slave-labour.  Why,  then, 
should  we  expect  that  the  native  labour  of  heathen 
Africa  should  be  more  available,  and  made  to  compete 
with  slave-labour  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  is  obvi- 
ous. Without  the  introduction  of  Christian  civilization, 
neither  of  them  can  progress.  But  the  humble  African 
yields  more  readily  to  the  instruction  of  the  Christian 
missionary  than  the  proud  Asiatic.  The  hope  of  Africa's 
earlier  civilization  is,  therefore,  daily  brightening,  and 
the  probability  of  exciting  its  inhabitants  to  industry 
becoming  more  certain. 

We  close  this  part  of  the  inquiry  by  a  quotation  from 
the  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Missionary  Associa- 
tion, for  1849,  which  not  only  affords  an  explanation  of 
the  causes  that  make  Asia  less  accessible  to  the  Gospel 
than  Africa,  but  supplies  additional  testimony  in  regard 
to  the  adaptation  of  the  soil  of  Africa  to  the  production 
of  sugar  and  cotton.  This  mission  had  its  origin  in  the 
liberation,  and  return  to  Africa,  of  the  Amistad  slaves. 
It  is  located  at  Kaw-Mendi,  on  the  western  coast  of 
Africa,  some  distance  from  the  sea,  and  lies  between 
Sierra  Leone  and  Liberia.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Thompson, 
once  imprisoned  in  the  Penitentiary  of  the  State  of  Mis- 
souri, for  aiding  slaves  to  escape  from  their  masters,  is 
now  at  the  head  of  this  mission.  This  testimony  is 
valuable,  coming,  as  it  does,  from  Abolitionists,  from 
whom  colonization  in  Africa  has  received  but  little  coun- 
tenance.    The  report  says  : — 

"  The  sugar-cane  and  cotton  grow  well  in  that  country, 
and  if  American  Christians  would  send  out  business  men, 
who  could  teach  natives  the  manufacture  of  sugar,  and 
the  best  method  of  raising  cotton,  it  would  contribute 


'27*2  APPENDIX. 

much  to  the  overthrow  of  slavery,  and  facilitate  the  pro- 
gress of  the  gospel.  The  mission  makes  earnest  appeals 
for  such  assistance."  The  Report  also  says,  that  "  Africa 
presents  some  peculiar  advantages  for  missionary  work, 
and  some  strong  claims  upon  American  Christians  for 
help.5'     It  sums  them  up  as  follows  : — 

"  1.  That  country  is  nearer  to  us  than  any  other 
foreign  missionary  field. 

"  The  country  is  apparently  open  to  us,  and  its  govern- 
ments will  offer  no  serious  opposition  to  our  entering  any 
part  of  it. 

"  The  people  see  and  appreciate  the  superiority  of  men 
in  civilized  life,  and  desire  the  cultivation  which  will 
raise  them  to  the  same  grade. 

"  4.  There  is  there,  no  hoary  or  venerated  system  of 
superstition,  inwrought  into  the  forms  of  society,  and 
presenting  at  every  point  opposition  to  change. 

"  A  reason  more  powerful,  perhaps,  than  any  other,  to 
induce  us  to  engage  in  this  work,  is  the  deep  degradation 
of  Africa,  superinduced  by  the  slave-trade,  in  which 
Americans  have  taken  so  prominent  a  part." 

Much  additional  testimony  on  this  subject  might  be 
presented,  but  time  will  not  permit.  We  shall,  therefore, 
close  our  discussion  of  this  proposition  with  a  brief  state- 
ment of  the  main  facts  by  which  its  truth  is  sustained. 

Could  England  and  the  United  States  be  induced  to 
engage  energetically,  to  promote  the  growth  of  coffee, 
sugar,  and  cotton,  in  Africa,  they  would  gain  an  immense 
advantage  over  the  planters  of  Cuba  and  Brazil,  and  be 
able  to  strike  an  efficient  blow  at  the  slave-trade  and 
slavery.     What  are  the  facts  ? 

For  every  300  men  made  available,  by  the  slave-trade, 
to  the  Cuban  and  Brazilian  planters,  Africa  loses  1,000  ; 
or  the  proportion  may  be  stated  as  three  to  ten.     In  the 


APPENDIX.  273 

transfer  of  the  three  to  Cuba  and  Brazil,  their  constitu- 
tions are  impaired  by  the  "  middle  passage/'  and  in 
seven  years  they  sink  beneath  the  oppressive  labour  to 
which  they  are  subjected.  Their  places  must  be  sup- 
plied, at  least  every  seven  years,  by  three  others  from 
Africa,  subjecting  her  to  the  loss  of  another  ten.  At 
every  point  in  Africa,  occupied  by  a  colony,  the  slave-trade 
is  at  once  excluded,  and  its  agents  are  driven  to  other 
points  to  secure  their  victims.  This  will  leave,  at  the 
places  occupied,  the  whole  ten  men  who  had  formerly 
been  sacrificed  to  supply  three  to  the  Cuban  planters. 

Now,  though  the  industry  of  the  native  African  should 
fall  far  below  the  standard  of  the  ever-active  and  enter- 
prising Anglo-Saxon,  yet  a  little  consideration  will 
enable  us  to  perceive  that,  under  the  circumstances,  the 
native  population  in  Africa  will  be  able,  not  only  to 
compete  with  the  slaves  of  Cuba  and  Brazil,  but  will 
constitute  the  only  reliable  force  for  the  suppression  of 
the  slave-trade. 

The  maximum  of  labour  required  of  the  three  slaves 
in  Cuba  is  eighteen  hours  a-day.  By  preventing  the 
transfer  of  these  three  men,  we  shall  have  ten  to  employ 
in  Africa.  If  these  ten  men  can  be  induced  to  labour 
only  five  hours  and  a  half  per  day,  the  product  will  more 
than  equal  that  of  the  three  in  Cuba.  The  case  would 
stand  thus : 
3  slaves  in  Cuba,  labouring  18  hours  per  day =54  hours 
10  freemen  in  Africa     „  5\  „  =55     „ 

The  ten  men  in  Africa  labouring  but  five  hours  and  a 
half  per  day  would,  therefore,  be  able  to  compete  with 
the  three  in  Cuba  or  Brazil. 

The  reason  that  Jamaica,  or  any  of  the  other  free- 
labour  colonies,  cannot  compete  with  Cuba,  Brazil,  &c, 
is,  that  the  freemen  of  the  former,  either  from  indolent 

T 


274         ,  APPENDIX. 

habits,  or  from  attention  to  cultivating  their  own  small 
tracts  of  land,  or  from  being  engaged  in  other  pursuits, 
do  not  choose  to  labour  for  the  sugar-planters  more  than 
from  five  to  seven  hours  a-day,  and  from  three  to  four 
days  in  the  week,  It  is  not  asserted,  that  while  engaged 
the  free  labourer  does  not  perform  as  much  work  as  a 
slave.  The  difficulty  in  Jamaica  is  that  the  planters, 
out  of  the  free  population,  cannot  find  men  enough  to 
put  in  as  many  hours'  labour,  as  those  of  Cuba,  by  a  free 
use  of  the  whip,  are  able  to  obtain  from  their  slaves. 
Labouring  so  irregularly,  even  were  their  numbers  equal, 
it  would  be  impossible  for  the  1,657,000  coloured  free- 
men of  the  Western  hemisphere  to  compete  with  the 
7,657,000  slaves  which  it  includes.  The  difficulty  in 
inakino;  the  free  labour  of  the  British  and  French  TVest 
Indies  compete  with  the  slave-labour  of  Cuba  and  Brazil 
arises,  therefore,  from  the  want  of  an  equal  number  of 
hands  willing  to  perform  an  equal  amount  of  labour  at 
an  equal  cost.  The  American  Colonization  Society  has 
discovered  that  this  discrepancy  can  be  remedied  by  a 
direct  attention  to  Africa,  which  shall  call  into  activity, 
as  free  labourers,  its  160,000,000  of  people,  as  rivals,  in 
tropical  cultivation,  to  the  before-mentioned  7,657,000 
slaves.  But  to  obtain  a  clear  conception  of  the  eco- 
nomical advantages  of  employing  the  people  of  Africa 
upon  their  own  soil,  over  that  of  transporting  them  to 
Cuba  and  Brazil,  it  must  be  recollected,  that  as  soon  as 
the  ten  men  in  Africa  could  be  persuaded  to  labour  ten 
hours  a-day,  they  would  double  the  products  of  the  three 
in  Cuba..  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  the  ten,  re- 
maining in  their  native  climate  and  belonging  to  a  race 
of  the  greatest  longevity  known,  could  be  relied  upon  as 
regular  labourers  for  a  much  longer  period  than  the 
three  enfeebled  and  overworked  slaves  of  Cuba,     This 


APPENDIX.  275 

remark  applies  equally  to  the  whole  African  population. 
Under  these  circumstances  it  is  certain  that  the  free 
labour  of  Africa,  under  proper  regulations  and  stimu- 
lants, can  be  made  to  compete  with  the  slave -labour  of 
Brazil  and  the  Spanish  colonies. 

But  there  is  another  fact  of  much  importance  to  be 
considered,  The  slave  population  of  Brazil  and  the 
Spanish  colonies,  numbering  4,100,000,  or  more  than  one 
half  of  the  whole  number  in  the  Western  hemisphere,  is 
maintained  alone  by  the  slave-trade.  Destroy  this  trade, 
and  their  plantations  would  dwindle  into  insignificance, 
or  become  extinct.  From  the  rapid  mortality  of  the  im- 
ported slaves,  these  plantations  require  re-stocking  from 
Africa  every  seven  years.  Cut  off  this  supply,  and  Cuba 
and  Brazil  would  at  once  be  rendered  incapable  of  flood- 
ing the  markets  with  cheap  slave-labour  products,  to  the 
exclusion  of  free-labour  commodities. 

We  have  seen  that  the  exports  from  the  British  West 
Indies  began  to  decline  from  the  prohibition  of  the  slave- 
trade  in  1808,  and  reached  their  minimum  since  the 
emancipation  in  1838.  The  diminution  of  the  exports  of 
coffee  and  sugar  from  the  British  and  French  West 
Indies,  from  the  periods  above  stated,  tended  to  increase 
slavery  and  encourage  the  slave-trade.  The  constantly 
increasing  demand  for  these  products  must  be  supplied. 
Cuba  and  Brazil  endeavoured,  by  increasing  their  num- 
ber of  slaves,  to  supply  the  deficiency.  Interrupt  the 
kidnapping  of  slaves  from  Africa,  and  no  new  field  can 
be  found  to  supply  the  market.  Hence  to  destroy  the 
slave-trade  would  directly  diminish  the  exports  of  sugar 
and  coffee  from  Cuba  and  Brazil. 

But,  if  these  prolific  fountains  are  dried  up,  how  is  the 
continually  increasing  demand  for  these  products  to  be 
supplied  ?     How  are  the  United  States,  England,  and  the 


276  APPENDIX. 

Continent  of  Europe  to  be  furnished  with  these  indis- 
pensable articles  1  Africa  seems  to  furnish  the  only 
hope.  Let  England,  France,  and  the  United  States, 
make  a  united  effort  to  extend  the  benefits  of  Christian 
civilization,  not  only  around  the  coast,  but  into  the  heart 
of  this  hitherto  benighted  portion  of  the  earth,  and  the 
most  cheering  results  might  be  anticipated.  Let  accu- 
mulated wealth  pour  her  exhaustless  treasures  in  the  lap 
of  the  Colonization  Society,  enabling  it  to  send  out  to 
Africa  multitudes  of  civilized  and  enlightened  men,  to 
diffuse  intelligence  and  freedom  along  the  shores  of  its 
rivers,  and  over  its  mountains  and  plains.  Let  England, 
with  her  commerce,  her  wealth,  her  public  spirit,  and  her 
Christianity,  exert  her  powerful  influences  in  extending 
her  commerce,  her  enterprise,  and  her  civilization,  among 
the  natives  of  this  extensive  continent.  Let  France 
unite  her  energies  in  these  important  efforts,  and  soon 
Africa,  free  and  prosperous,  might  almost  supply  the 
world  with  the  products  to  which  we  have  referred. 

From  the  facts  before  stated,  it  is  evident  that  the  free 
lxbour  of  the  West  Indies  is  powerless  for  the  suppres- 
sion of  the  slave-trade.  It  furnishes  but  a  limited  sup- 
ply bf  coffee  and  sugar,  and  cannot  lessen  the  immense 
demand  for  these  products,  which  gives  to  that  trade  its 
profitable  character.  These  products  are  of  prime  neces- 
sity and  importance  to  the  Christian  world;  and,  while 
such  a  large  proportion  of  them  are  produced  by  Cuba 
and  Brazil,  we  are  compelled  to  uphold  slavery  and  the 
slave-trade  by  their  consumption.  But  establish  their 
cultivation  and  supply  by  free  labour  upon  a  permanent 
basis,  and  we  shall  ere  long  be  released  from  this  dire 
necessity.  Africa  presents  the  principal,  if  not  the  only 
field,  where  all  the  means  of  thus  extensively  cultivating 
sugar,  coffee,  and  cotton,  by  free  labour,  can  be  com- 


APPENDIX.  '217 

mandecl,  and  from  which  the  great  markets  of  the  world 
can  be  successfully  supplied.  The  reasons  for  this 
opinion  may  be  thus  stated  : 

If  the  products  of  free  labour  can  be  increased,  they 
will  displace  an  equal  amount  of  the  products  of  slave- 
labour.  This  will  diminish  the  demand  for  slaves,  and, 
consequently,  lessen  the  extent  of  the  slave-trade.  But 
the  hands  now  employed  in  free  labour  cannot,  to  any 
great  degree,  increase  their  products,  even  at  the  present 
cost,  and  things  must  remain  as  they  now  are  until  addi- 
tional free  labour  is  elsewhere  employed.  These  additional 
labourers,  willing  to  work  for  low  wages,  can  only  be  found 
in  sufficient  numbers  among  the  teeming  population  of 
Africa. 

Africa,  then,  is  the  field,  and  its  160,000,000  of  men 
must  supply  the  labourers  necessary  to  accomplish  this 
great  work.  The  increasing  demand  for  sugar  and  coffee 
has  placed  the  wants  and  interests  of  Christendom  in 
opposition  to  the  destruction  of  the  slave-trade.  Cuba 
and  Brazil  furnish  these  great  staples  for  the  market,  by 
slaves,  as  we  have  seen,  brought  from  Africa.  Hence,  the 
Christian  world,  by  consuming  these  products,  have  in- 
directly sustained  both  slavery  and  this  abominable 
traffic.  But  let  ample  plantations  be  opened  and  culti- 
vated in  Africa,  sufficient  to  supply  the  market,  and  you 
have  removed  the  grand  obstacle  to  the  entire  destruction 
of  this  trade  in  blood. 

To  accomplish  an  object  so  desirable,  more  extensive 
plans  must  be  devised;  the  Colonization  Society  must 
enlarge  the  sphere  of  its  operations,  the  number  and 
character  of  emigrants  must  be  increased,  and  a  universal 
effort  put  forth,  commensurate  with  the  great  object  to 
be  accomplished. 


•278  APPENDIX. 

The  slave-trade  may  be  circumscribed,  diminished,  and 
partially  suppressed,  but  it  must  depend,  for  its  final 
destruction^  upon  the  political  regeneration,  together  with 
the  intellectual  elevation  and  moral  redemption  of  the 
entire  Continent. 

The  alternative  seems  already  forced  upon  Christen- 
dom, either  to  encourage  slavery  and  the  slave-trade,  by 
continuing  to  consume  the  produce  of  Brazil  and  Cuba, 
or  to  set  about  speedily  accomplishing  the  civilization  of 
Africa. 

The  great  theatre,  then,  upon  which  the  battle  between 
free  labour  and  slave-labour  is  to  be  fought,  is  in  Africa; 
and  colonization  is  the  all-potent  agent  which  is  to  mar- 
shal the  free-labour  forces,  and  lead  them  on  to  victory. 
But  this  warfare,  unlike  all  preceding  contests,  is  one 
literally  demanding  that  every  sword  shall  be  beaten  into 
a  ploughshare,  and  every  spear  into  a  pruning-hook.  In 
this  campaign,  tilling  the  soil,  and  not  slaying  men,  is  the 
duty  required :  and  the  advantages  are  so  decidedly  with 
free  labour,  that  ultimate  success  is  certain.  Each  indus- 
trious emigrant  to  an  African  colony  will  more  than 
equal  a  dozen  slaves  labouring  elsewhere.  His  example 
and  his  influence,  acting  upon  the  native  population,  will 
excite  to  industry  a  dozen,  or  twenty,  or  a  hundred  more ; 
and  these,  again,  will  exert  an  influence  upon  others,  and 
so  on  indefinitely. 

Who  can  doubt,  under  such  circumstances,  that  Africa, 
with  its  multitudinous  population,  is  the  field  where  free 
labour  may  be  made  successfully  to  compete  with  slave- 
labour,  in  the  productions  to  which  we  have  so  often  re- 
ferred, and  that  the  Colonization  Society  is  the  medium 
through  which,  in  the  Providence  of  God,  the  slave-trade 
is  to  be  finally  destroyed  ? 


APPEND  [X.  279 

II.  That  there  are  moral  forces  and  commercial  con- 
siderations now  in  operation,  which  will,  necessarily, 
impel  Christian  governments  to  exert  their  influence 
for  the  civilization  of  Africa,  and  the  promotion  of  the 
prosperity  of  Liberia,  as  the  principal  agency  in  this 
great  work,  and  that  in  these  facts  lies  our  encourage- 
ment to  persevere  in  our  colonization  efforts. 

This  proposition  opens  up  a  wide  field  of  discussion, 
but  in  its  consideration  we  must  be  brief. 

There  have  been  moral  forces  acting  upon  England  and 
the  United  States,  for  many  years  past,  to  such  an  extent 
that  these  governments  have  been  driven  to  the  adoption 
of  energetic  measures  for  ameliorating  the  condition  of 
the  people  of  Africa.  Much  has  been  done  in  these  efforts, 
and  much  more  remains  to  be  done.  In  the  United 
States,  500,000  coloured  people  have  obtained  their  free- 
dom, and  in  the  English  colonies  nearly  700,000  rejoice 
in  being  released  from  bondage.  The  slave-trade  has 
been  prohibited,  declared  piracy,  and  costly  efforts  for  its 
suppression  long  prosecuted.  But  though  the  measures 
devised,  for  the  relief  of  the  African  race,  by  these  govern- 
ments, have  failed  in  the  accomplishment  of  all  the  good 
anticipated,  and  in  some  respects  most  sadly  failed ;  yet 
these  moral  forces  have  lost  none  of  their  power,  but  are 
still  propelling  the  two  nations  onward  to  the  final  ac- 
complishment of  the  great  work  of  Africa's  redemption 
from  barbarism.  During  the  course  of  these  efforts  much 
light  has  been  thrown  on  this  subject,  and  it  is  believed 
that,  through  the  agency  of  the  Colonization  Society,  the 
proper  principles  have  been  developed  by  which  the  sup- 
pression of  the  slave-trade  and  the  civilization  of  Africa 
may  be  effected. 

In  making  this  declaration,  we  do  not  intend  to  claim 


280  APPENDIX. 

more  of  wisdom  and  philanthropy  for  the  United  States 
than  for  England.  The  difference  in  the  character  of  the 
measures  adopted,  and  the  difference  in  the  results  at- 
tained, have  been  caused  by  the  difference  in  the  circum- 
stances of  the  people  of  the  two  countries.  Fifty  years 
ago  the  English  people  looked  to  the  Crown  and  Parlia- 
ment, to  execute  almost  every  enterprise  of  a  religious  or 
benevolent  character.  That  government,  like  all  others, 
in  all  its  movements,  has  to  consider  well  the  promotion 
of  its  own  interests.  To  adopt  any  other  rule  of  action,  is 
deliberately  to  aim  at  self-destruction.  The  danger,  then, 
with  nations,  as  with  individuals,  when  suffering  humanity 
makes  its  appeal,  is  that  the  measures  adopted  for  relief 
may  include  more  of  the  selfish  than  of  the  benevolent 
principle,  and  failure,  or  only  partial  success,  attend  the 
efforts  made. 

When  the  moral  forces  directed  against  the  slave-trade 
and  slavery,  by  the  people  of  England,  reached  the  go- 
vernment in  sufficient  power  to  compel  it  to  action,  that 
great  leading  interest  of  the  British  nation,  the  commer- 
cial element,  became  too  closely  blended  with  the  bene- 
volent, and  the  policy  adopted  proved  to  be  too  narrow  to 
remove  the  evils  sought  to  be  destroyed. 

In  the  United  States,  the  moral  forces  commenced  their 
operations  at  a  very  early  period,  and  our  independence 
had  scarcely  been  attained,  when  the  government  enacted 
its  laws  for  prohibiting  the  slave-trade,  and  declared  it 
piracy.  Since  that  period,  they  have  acted  with  less 
force  upon  the  government,  and  nearly  all  subsequent 
efforts  have  either  been  by  a  few  of  the  States  separately, 
or  by  the  people.  This  course  of  action  seems  more  in 
accordance  with,  and  necessarily  to  grow  out  of,  the  spirit 
of  our  free  institutions.  While  the  government  suppresses 
great  public  evils,  and  oversees  the  civil  and  military 


APPENDIX.  281 

affairs  of  the  nation,  it  only  protects  citizens  in  all  their 
benevolent  enterprises  and  religious  interests,  but  never 
undertakes  to  conduct  or  control  these  movements  for  the 
people.  The  people,  therefore,  do  not  depend  upon  the 
government  to  conduct  such  affairs,  but  execute,  freely, 
their  own  purposes,  in  accordance  with  their  own  peculiar 
views.  The  efforts  of  our  people  in  behalf  of  the  African 
race  have  been  conducted  by  associations  of  individuals, 
and,  consequently,  the  schemes  adopted  have  borne  the 
impress  of  the  minds  that  conceived  and  conducted  them. 
This  has  been  emphatically  true  of  the  American  Coloni- 
zation Society.  Individual  or  governmental  interests 
being  in  no  way  involved  in  this  enterprise,  and  it  being, 
in  its  origin,  chiefly  under  the  control  of  Christian  men, 
it  took  the  broadest  possible  ground  that  Christian  phi- 
lanthropy dictated,  and  thus  a  scheme  was  devised  broad 
enough  to  accomplish  the  destruction  of  the  slave-trade, 
and  the  work  of  Africa's  redemption.  The  religious  ele- 
ment predominated  in  its  organization,  and  the  commer- 
cial was  excluded. 

Had  this  work  been  undertaken  by  our  government,  it 
would,  no  doubt,  have  adopted  the  policy  of  England,  and 
made  the  colony  in  Africa  subservient  to  the  interests  of 
the  parent  country.  Such,  it  must  be  expected,  would 
have  been  the  action  of  all  governments  in  like  cases. 
But  the  Colonization  Society,  originating  solely  in  Christ- 
ian benevolence,  has  only  sought  the  welfare  of  the  Afri- 
can people,  and  aimed  at  creating  for  them  an  indepen- 
dent government,  to  be  conducted  wholly  by  themselves. 
In  this  it  has  succeeded ;  and  not  in  this  only,  but  it  has 
developed  a  practical  plan  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave- 
trade,  in  the  success  of  which  all  the  nations  are  equally 
interested,  and  all  may  equally  co-operate. 


282  APPENDIX. 

This  view  of  the  tendency  of  colonization  in  Africa  is 
now  generally  entertained.  Besides  many  other  authori- 
ties of  the  highest  order,  it  is  very  fully  admitted  by  a 
committee  of  the  British  Parliament,  in  a  recent  report 
on  the  slave-trade.  The  committee  first  show  that  Eng- 
land's long-cherished  plan  of  an  armed  repression  of  the 
slave-trade  had  cost  her  one  hundred  and  forty  millions 
of  dollars,  and  hundreds  of  the  lives  of  her  subjects,  and 
then  close  with  the  following  testimony  to  the  system  of 
colonization,  as  the  most  effective  mode  of  destroying  that 
traffic : — 

"  Your  committee  entertain  the  hope,  that  the  internal 
improvement  and  civilization  of  Africa  will  be  one  of  the 
most  effective  means  of  checking  the  slave-trade ;  and  for 
this  purpose,  that  the  instruction  of  the  natives  by  mis- 
sionary labours,  by  education,  and  by  all  other  practical 
efforts,  and  the  extension  of  legitimate  commerce,  ought 
to  be  encouraged  wherever  the  influence  of  England  can 
be  directed,  and  especially  where  it  has  already  been  be- 
neficially exerted." 

This,  then,  is  the  position  in  reference  to  the  African 
question,  into  which  we  have  been  conducted  by  the  ope- 
ration of  the  moral  forces  upon  England  and  the  United 
States.  Our  scheme  of  colonization  being  wholly  inde- 
pendent of  national  interests,  except  what  are  common  to 
all,  and  including  within  itself  all  the  elements  necessary 
to  secure  the  civilization  of  Africa  and  the  destruction  of 
the  slave-trade,  now  receives  the  approbation  of  the 
philanthropists  of  both  countries,  and  secures  to  the 
Republic  of  Liberia,  from  the  government  of  England, 
that  countenance  and  aid  which  is  the  surest  guarantee 
of  its  rising  importance  in  the  benevolent  work  of  African 
regeneration.    If,  therefore,  colonization  can  receive  suffi- 


APPENDIX.  283 

cient  aid  to  develop,  fully,  the  elements  of  its  organiza- 
tion, a  speedy  consummation  of  the  great  work  it  has  in 
view  may  be  anticipated. 

From  whence,  then,  are  the  additional  aids  to  come, 
which,  added  to  the  moral  forces  in  operation,  shall  propel, 
with  sufficient  rapidity,  this  great  work  of  African  civili- 
zation, and  free  the  world  from  the  reproach  and  the  curse 
of  the  slave-trade  1  They  exist  principally,  it  is  believed, 
in  the  commercial  considerations  which  begin  to  demand, 
most  imperiously,  that  the  rich  lands  of  tropical  Africa 
shall  be  brought  under  cultivation,  and  made  to  yield  to 
commerce  those  articles  which  free  labour  and  slave- 
labour,  both  combined,  are  now  incapable  of  furnishing, 
in  adequate  quantities,  from  the  fields  at  present  culti- 
vated. 

The  moral  forces,  though  acting  with  much  energy,  and 
in  other  respects  doing  much  good,  have  been  unable  to 
destroy  the  slave-trade,  because  of  the  counteracting  in- 
fluence of  the  commercial  considerations  enlisted  in  its 
behalf.  But  the  wants  of  commerce  are  beginning  to 
demand  the  execution  of  the  plans  which  the  moral  forces 
alone  could  not  perform.  Then,  as  the  two  great  elements 
of  success  now  coincide,  it  seems  that  their  influence  must 
be  irresistible,  and  the  effect  certain.  The  moral  forces 
must  continue  to  exert  their  full  effect,  because  they  can- 
not become  quiescent,  while  the  Christian  world  is  de- 
pendent upon  slave  labour  annually — 

For  cotton,  to  the  amount  of  .     .   1,101,330,800  lbs. 

For  coffee,  to  the  amount  of   .     .      338,240,000    „ 

For  sugar,  at  least     .....   1,220,000,000    „ 
and  largely  for  many  other  articles  of  prime  necessity. 
That  commercial  considerations  are  beginning  to  act,  in 
the  direction  of  African  amelioration,  with  much  urgency? 
is  easily  shown.     The  increased  production  of  coffee  and 


284  APPENDIX. 

cotton,  throughout  the  world,  is  by  no  means  keeping 
pace  with  their  increased  consumption.  In  former  years, 
there  was  often  a  large  stock  of  coffee  remaining  on  hand 
at  the  close  of  each  year.  But,  latterly,  the  increased 
consumption  has  been  so  rapid  that  it  has  gained  on 
the  production,  and  left  a  greatly  diminished  stock  at 
the  year's  end.  The  deficit  of  coffee  in  the  markets  for 
1849  advanced  the  price  very  largely,  and  the  supply  for 
the  present  year,  as  estimated  by  the  most  competent 
authorities,  will  be  70,000,000  pounds  below  the  present 
known  consumption  of  Europe  and  the  United  States. 

The  extensive  range  of  statistics  which  have  been  pre- 
sented, in  relation  to  the  production  of  cotton,  have  been 
mostly  taken  from  the  "London  Economist,"  for  January, 
1850;  and  we  must  allow  its  able  editor  to  sum  up  the 
results  of  his  elaborate  investigations.     He  says  : 

u  Now,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  figures  in  the  above 
tables  are,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  ascertained  facts, 
and  not  estimates,  let  us  sum  the  conclusions  to  which 
they  have  conducted  us ;  conclusions  sufficient,  if  not  to 
alarm  us,  yet  certainly  to  create  much  uneasiness,  and  to 
suggest  great  caution  on  the  part  of  all  concerned,  di- 
rectly or  indirectly,  in  the  great  manufacture  of  England. 

'•  1.  That  our  supply  of  cotton  from  all  quarters  (ex- 
cluding the  United  States)  has  for  many  years  been  de- 
cidedly, though  irregularly,  decreasing. 

i(  2.  That  our  supply  of  cotton  from  all  quarters  (in- 
cluding the  United  States),  available  for  home  consump- 
tion, has  of  late  years  been  falling  off  at  the  rate  of 
400,000  pounds  a -week,  while  our  consumption  has  been 
increasing  during  the  same  period  at  the  rate  of  144,000 
pounds  a-week. 

"  3.  That  the  United  States  is  the  only  country  where 
the  growth  of  cotton  is  on  the  increase ;  and  that  there 


APPENDIX.  285 

even  the  increase  does  not  on  an  average  exceed  3  per  cent., 
or  32,000,000  pounds  annually,  which  is  barely  sufficient 
to  supply  the  increasing  demand  for  its  own  consumption, 
and  for  the  continent  of  Europe. 

"  4.  That  no  stimulus  of  price  can  materially  augment 
this  annual  increase,  as  the  planters  always  grow  as  much 
cotton  as  the  negro  population  can  pick. 

"  5.  That,  consequently,  if  the  cotton  manufacture  of 
Great  Britain  is  to  increase  at  all — on  its  present  footing 
— it  can  only  be  enabled  to  do  so  by  applying  a  great 
stimulus  to  the  growth  of  cotton  in  other  countries  adapted 
for  the  culture." 

Truly,  her  cotton  manufacture  is  the  right  arm  of 
England,  because  it  is  the  principal  element  in  sustain- 
ing her  commerce.  This  great  leading  interest,  then,  she 
will  never  consent  to  sacrifice.  But  it  is  now  threatened 
with  an  insufficient  supply  of  the  raw  material.  The 
efforts  for  introducing  it  into  the  heart  of  Africa,  by 
the  agency  of  white  men,  at  the  time  of  the  Niger  expe- 
dition, proved  disastrous ;  and  the  British  government  is 
now  anxiously  looking  abroad  for  the  means  of  placing 
its  cotton  manufactures  in  a  condition  of  greater  security. 
The  diminishing  production  in  all  other  countries  but 
ours  is  alarming  to  her,  when  she  considers  that  the  in- 
creased production  in  the  United  States  has  been,  and 
will  probably  continue  to  be,  only  equal  to  the  increase 
of  the  slave  population — viz.,  3  per  cent,  per  annum — and 
that  this  increased  production  is  all  required  by  the  in- 
creased demand  consequent  upon  the  multiplication  of 
spindles  and  looms  in  the  United  States  and  on  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe.  It  must  also  be  noticed,  that  the 
demand  for  cotton  fabrics  is  increasing  in  proportion  to 
the  increase  of  wealth  and  the  extension  of  civilization. 
Without  an  increased  supply  of  the  raw  material,  Great 


286  APPENDIX. 

Britain,  therefore,  cannot  participate  in  the  advantages 
of  this  increasing  demand,  and  must  suffer  loss.  This  is 
a  position  she  will  not  long  occupy — that  she  does  not 
need  to  occupy — because  she  can  release  herself  from  it. 

But  in  the  efforts  hitherto  made  by  England,  and 
seconded  by  other  Christian  nations,  she  has  been  driven 
from  measure  to  measure,  each  seeming  to  promise  success, 
and  each,  in  succession,  partially  or  totally  failing — until 
this  moment,  when  commercial  considerations  are  pressing, 
with  their  strongest  force,  for  the  extension  of  cotton 
cultivation  to  other  countries  than  those  now  engaged  in 
its  production.  Now,  the  most  remarkable  feature  in  the 
partial  successes  of  the  national  schemes  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  slave-trade,  and  kindred  evils,  is  the  evidence 
they  afford  of  a  superintending  Providence,  overruling 
in  the  affairs  of  men  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own 
purposes  through  the  agency  of  individuals  or  nations. 
It  now  begins  to  appear,  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday, 
that  all  these  combinations  of  events,  succeeding  as  they 
have  done,  each  other,  have  tended  to  one  grand  result, 
worthy  of  the  wisdom  of  Deity;  and  that  result  the  in- 
volving of  the  principal  nations  of  Christendom  in  such 
difficulties  and  perplexities,  all  seeming  to  be  the  natural 
fruits  of  their  former  connection  with  African  oppression, 
as  must  impel  them  forward,  from  necessity,  moral  and 
commercial,  to  the  civilization  of  Africa. 

The  London  Economist,  in  the  article  before  quoted, 
after  having  shown  that  Brazil,  Egypt,  and  the  East 
Indies,  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  meet  the  wants  of  the 
English  manufacturers,  says : 

-'Our  hopes  lie  in  a  very  different  direction;  we  look 
to  our  "West  Indian,  African,  and  Australian  colonies,  as 
the  quarters  from  which,  would  government  only  afford 
every  possible  facility,  we  might,  ere  long,  draw  such  a 


APPENDIX.  287 

supply  of  cotton,  as  would,  to  say  the  least,  make  the 
fluctuations  of  the  American  crop,  and  the  varying  pro- 
portions of  it  which  fall  to  our  share,  of  far  less  conse- 
quence to  our  prosperity  than  they  now  are." 

But  we  must  hasten  to  a  conclusion.  Commercial 
considerations,  of  overwhelming  force,  are  impelling 
England  to  powerful  efforts  to  secure  to  herself  a  certain 
and  adequate  supply  of  cotton.  This  she  cannot  obtain 
but  in  promoting  its  growth  in  other  countries  than  those 
now  producing  it.  The  West  Indies,  in  their  present 
circumstances,  nor  until  the  missionaries  now  labouring 
there  succeed  in  elevating  the  people,  and  more  equal 
laws  prevail,  cannot  supply  this  demand,  nor  even  then 
without  an  increase  of  population.  There  will,  therefore, 
be  only  two  fields  remaining,  Australia  and  Africa.  Of 
the  two,  without  entering  into  detail,  we  must  insist  that 
Africa  is  the  more  promising,  and  success  in  it  the  more 
certain ;  not  only  from  the  character  and  abundance  of  its 
population,  but  because  the  moral  forces  will  be  exerted 
in  behalf  of  Africa  more  fully  than  for  Australia.  The 
reason  is  obvious  :  though  Australia  may  be  adapted  to 
cotton,  its  cultivation  there,  and  the  civilization  of  its 
natives,  cannot  be  made  to  act  so  directly  and  eificiently 
upon  the  slave-trade,  as  the  promotion  of  its  growth  wil 
do  in  Africa.  And,  besides  this  important  consideration, 
the  population  of  Australia,  including  emigrants  and 
convicts  transported  thence,  is  only  300,000,  a  number 
too  insignificant  to  accomplish  much  in  cotton  cultivation 
after  producing  necessary  articles  of  subsistence.  In  the 
native  population  of  Australia,  "  human  nature  wears  its 
rudest  form,"  and  they  are  declared  to  be,  both  physically 
and  intellectually,  the  most  degraded  of  any  savage 
ribes.  Their  numbers  have  been  estimated  at  100,000, 
and  it  may  safely  be  said,  that  it  is  useless  to  take  them 


288  APPENDIX. 

into  the  account  in  estimating  free-labour  agencies  for 
tropical  cultivation.  It  must  be  apparent,  therefore,  that 
both  the  moral  forces  and  commercial  considerations, 
operating  in  England  in  behalf  of  an  extended  cotton 
cultivation,  must  be  directed  to  Africa  almost  exclu- 
sively, and,  in  turning  to  Africa,  must,  necessarily,  be 
concentrated  upon  Liberia  as  the  great  centre  of  action. 

Thus  stands  the  cotton  question  in  England.  Her 
supply  of  that  article  fron  the  United  States  has  reached 
its  maximum,  and  from  all  other  quarters  has  been 
steadily  diminishing,  placing  her  under  the  necessity  of 
securing,  from  Liberia,  the  demands  of  her  increasing 
consumption.  In  the  production  of  sugar  and  coffee  in 
Africa,  Great  Britain  is  not  so  deeply  interested,  her  chief 
supplies  of  these  articles  being  obtained  from  her  colonies. 
But  from  moral  and  commercial  considerations  she  would 
prefer  to  substitute  146,000,000  lbs.  of  Liberia  sugar  for 
that  amount  of  slave-labour  product  now  consumed  by 
her  ;  because  she  desires  to  discountenance  slavery,  and 
because  freemen  in  Liberia  will  need  more  of  her  fabrics, 
in  exchange,  than  the  Brazilian  planters  will  purchase  for 
their  half-naked  slaves.  We  may,  therefore,  rely  upon 
England  as  the  fast  friend  of  Liberia  and  of  African 
civilization. 

In  the  United  States  the  moral  forces  have  long  been 
operating  with  great  efficiency  for  African  civilization. 
The  commercial  considerations  are  now  also  beginning  to 
be  felt  with  a  good  degree  of  power.  On  this  subject, 
however,  we  cannot  at  present  enlarge,  but  must  be  con- 
tent with  calling  special  attention  to  one  point. 

The  great  element  in  the  United  States,  for  the  pro- 
motion of  African  civilization,  consists  in  our  industri- 
ous and  intelligent  free  coloured  population.  The  facts 
presented  in  the  present  Lecture,  with  the  inducements 


APPENDIX.  289 

previously  existing,  should  incline  them  to  flock  to 
Africa.  In  Liberia,  the  coloured  man  has  secured  to 
him  all  the  privileges  of  a  freeman.  There  he  can  have 
schools  and  colleges  for  the  education  of  his  children, 
and  enjoy  civil  and  religious  liberty.  He  can  assist  in 
the  great  work  of  African  civilization,  and  aid  in  destroy- 
ing the  slave-trade.  He  has  there  a  fair  field  for  the 
acquisition  of  wealth,  and  the  enjoyments  it  secures. 
That  these  promises  are  not  illusive,  but  will  be  fulfilled, 
is  easily  proved.  Our  investigations  show,  that  the 
demand  for  an  increased  amount  of  cotton  affords  a 
guarantee  that  the  labour  of  the  Liberians  would  pay,  if 
directed  to  its  production.  The  increasing  demand  for 
coffee  cannot  be  supplied  but  by  its  cultivation  in 
Liberia,  or  by  an  increase  of  slaves  in  Brazil,  and  a  cor- 
responding increase  of  the  slave-trade.  The  consumption 
of  this  article  has  increased  in  a  ratio  of  five  per  cent, 
per  annum.  The  demand  for  1850  is  estimated  at 
630,000,000  lbs.  The  production  of  1849  was  only 
426,000,000  lbs.,  and  the  stock  of  old  coffee  on  hand  but 
113,000,000  lbs.,  leaving  a  deficit  for  the  present  year 
1850,  of  70,000,000  lbs.  Brazil  now  supplies  over  two- 
fifths  of  the  whole  amount  of  coffee  consumed,  and  cul- 
tivates it  at  a  cost  one  third  less  than  other  countries. 
But  she  cannot  extend  her  cultivation  at  present,  for 
want  of  slaves,  and  should  Great  Britain  compel  her  to 
suspend  the  slave-trade,  which  is  probable,  there  must 
be  a  diminution  of  her  production.  Its  cultivation  in 
other  countries,  where  it  has  been  declining,  cannot  be 
revived  for  many  years.  It  is  almost  certain,  therefore, 
that  the  production  of  Coffee  within  the  present  limits 
of  its  cultivation,  can  do  no  more  than  make  up  the 
deficiency  now  existing,  and  keep  up  the  supply  to  the 
present  demand  of  630,000,000  lbs.  annually  ;  and  it  is 

u 


290  APPENDIX. 

more  than  probable  that  even  this  cannot  be  effected, 
because,  if  the  crop  of  1850  only  equals  that  of  1849,  the 
deficit  for  1851  will  be  200.000,000  lbs.,  being  nearly 
equal  to  one-third  of  the  consumption.  This,  then,  will 
leave  at  least  the  increasing  demand  of  five  per  cent,  per 
annum  to  be  supplied  by  Liberia  ;  and,  behold,  what  a 
vast  source  of  wealth  even  this  one  article  opens  up  to 
the  citizens  of  that  Republic  ! 

The  annual  ratio  of  increase,  aside  from  the  large 
deficit  in  the  supply  of  coffee,  is  at  this  moment  worth 
nearly  two  millions  of  dollars,  and  that  in  fifteen  years 
it  will  be  worth  over  forty  millions  !  !  The  increased 
demand  for  cotton  will  be  of  nearly  equal  importance. 
To  this  must  be  added  her  sugar,  indigo,  dye-woods, 
palm-oil,  ivory,  &c.  &c;,  and  the  new  Republic  assumes 
an  importance,  in  the  commercial  world,  only  surpassed 
by  the  moral  influence  she  is  destined  to  exert  over  the 
whole  continent.  Indeed  her  commercial  progress  has 
been  already  astonishing.  Five  or  six  years  ago,  her  ex- 
ports were  about  100,000  dollars,  but  now  they  are  500,000 
dollars,  and  rapidly  increasing.  Liberians  comprehend 
the  advantageous  position  they  have  secured,  and  are 
eager  to  develop  the  resources  of  their  country.  Their 
greatest  want  is  men.  They  appeal  to  us  for  industrious, 
intelligent,  enterprising,  upright  emigrants,  to  aid  them 
in  unfolding  to  the  world  the  long-hidden  treasures  of 
Africa,  and  to  participate  in  the  advantages  that  her 
riches  will  bestow.  Are  not  coloured  men,  in  this  coun- 
try, able  to  comprehend  the  value  of  these  resources  1 
Must  we  conclude  that  they  will  remain  indifferent,  and 
reject  the  rich  inheritance  offered  in  Liberia,  and  tell  the 
world  that  they  have  less  foresight,  energy,  and  enter- 
prise, than  other  races  of  men?  We  cannot  believe 
this. 


APPENDIX.  291 

But  the  discussion  of  this  proposition  must  be  closed. 
Our  Republic  occupies  a  very  peculiar  and  important 
position.  We  have  the  agents  necessary  to  effect  the 
moral  regeneration  of  Africa  ;  and  if  they  be  treated  as 
men,  and  liberal  provision  be  made  for  emigration,  by 
the  States  and  the  general  Government,  our  intelligent 
coloured  men  will  not  shrink  from  duty. 

A  crisis  has  arrived  in  the  commercial  world,  in  which 
there  is  an  inadequate  supply  of  two  of  the  leading 
staples  upon  which  slave-labour  is  employed.  Free  and 
slave  labour  combined  have  failed  to  supply  the  consump- 
tion, and  an  increase  of  price  has  occurred  sufficient  to 
give  a  stimulus  to  their  production.  This  increased 
production  must  occur  either  in  Brazil  and  Cuba,  or  free 
labour  must  be  sufficiently  stimulated  to  meet  the  de- 
mand. But  where  and  how  is  this  to  be  accomplished  '? 
There  is  little  hope  of  its  soon  occurring  in  the  East 
or  West  Indies.  Already  at  one  point  in  Liberia, 
30,000  coffee  trees  are  maturing,  and  will  soon  afford 
300,000  lbs.  a-year  for  export.  There  might,  and  would 
have  been,  had  the  people  of  the  United  States  performed 
their  duty,  700  such  plantations  in  Liberia  at  this  mo- 
ment, ready  to  supply  200,000,000  lbs.  of  coffee  annually. 
Had  the  growth  of  Liberia  not  been  retarded  by  the 
narrow  policy  that  opposed  colonization,  it  requires  little 
discernment  to  perceive,  that  this  increasing  demand 
might  have  been  supplied  by  the  labour  of  the  freemen 
of  the  African  Republic,  instead  of  being  left  as  a  tempt- 
ing prize,  to  be  siezed  by  the  Brazilian  planter  and  the 
African  slave-trader.  The  crisis  now  existing,  therefore, 
demands  the  united  exertions  of  all  the  friends  of 
humanity,  both  at  the  North  and  the  South,  to  push 
forward,  with  the  utmost  energy,  the  work  of  Coloniza- 
tion, as  the  only  means  of  checking  the  extension  of 


29  "2  APPENDIX. 

slavery  and  the  slave-trade.  The  wants  of  commerce 
demand,  and  must  receive,  an  adequate  supply  of  coffee 
and  cotton,  and  we  must  either  secure  that  supply  from 
Liberia,  or  submit  to  see  an  increase  of  cruelty  and 
oppression  in  Cuba  and  Brazil. 

We  might  greatly  enlarge  upon  the  extent  to  which 
moral  forces  and  commercial  considerations  are  pressing 
the  English  and  American  people  to  promote  African 
civilization,  through  the  agency  of  Liberia,  but  what  has 
been  said  must  suffice. 

III.  That  all  these  agencies  and  influences  being  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  civilization  of  Africa,  from  the  nature 
of  her  soil,  climate,  products,  and  population,  we  are 
forced  to  believe  that  a  mighty  people  will  ultimately 
rise  upon  that  continent,  taking  rank  with  the  most 
powerful  nations  of  the  earth,  and  vindicate  the  charac- 
ter of  the  African  race  before  the  world. 

We  cannot,  at  present,  enter  upon  the  discussion  of 
this  proposition.  It  includes  a  field  of  great  interest, 
which  would  be  amply  broad  for  a  whole  discourse.  But 
we  must  leave  it  as  an  expression  of  our  anticipation 
of  the  ultimate  destiny  of  Africa,  and  close  with  a  few 
remarks. 

It  has  been  fashionable  to  charge  upon  the  slave-holder 
equal  criminality  with  the  African  kidnapper  and  slave- 
trader,  because  the  forefathers  of  the  slaves  held  in 
bondage  were  originally  brought  from  Africa.  As  our 
diploma  does  not  bear  date  from  Mount  Ebal,  and  we  are 
not  trained  to  cursing,  we  shall  be  excused  for  speaking 
more  calmly  upon  this  point,  and  taking  a  more  compre- 
hensive view  of  its  relations.  Let  the  criminality  of  the 
slave-holder  be  what  it  may,  it  will  be  proper  to  examine 
the  facts,  and  ascertain  whether  others  are  not  equally 


APPENDIX.  293 

implicated  in  the  guilt.  Slave-holders  are  now  producing 
annually,  more  than  eleven  hundred  millions  of  pounds 
of  cotton,  and  more  than  twelve  hundred  and  twenty 
millions  of  pounds  of  sugar,  and  nearly  three  hundred 
and  forty  millions  of  pounds  of  coffee.  Do  they  consume 
these  articles  themselves?  Are  these  products  so  pollu- 
ted that  the  world  will  neither  touch,  taste,  nor  handle 
them  1  Not  at  all.  The  great  struggle  everywhere  is 
as  to  who  shall  obtain  the  greatest  quantity  of  them,  who 
make  the  greatest  profit,  and  who  derive  most  comfort 
from  their  consumption.  This  is  especially  true  of 
London,  Liverpool,  Edinburgh,  Glasgow,  Paris,  Vienna, 
Berlin,  Brussels,  Hamburgh,  Stockholm,  Amsterdam,  and 
St.  Petersburg,  as  well  as  of  Philadelphia,  New  York, 
Boston,  Pittsburgh,  and  Cincinnati.  The  early  aboli- 
tionists endeavoured  to  prove,  that  the  slave  holder  was 
equally  guilty  with  the  slave-trader  and  kidnapper, 
because  the  former  received  his  slaves  from  the  hands  of 
the  latter;  and  that  those  who  now  hold  in  bondage  the 
descendants  of  the  stolen  slaves,  are  equally  guilty  with 
the  original  kidnapper.  According  to  this  logic,  that 
"  the  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes  and  the  children's 
teeth  are  set  on  edge,"  is  a  true  proverb — and  the  men 
of  the  seventh  generation,  involved  in  an  evil  without 
their  consent,  by  the  actions  of  their  forefathers,  are 
equally  guilty  with  its  originators.  If  this  be  sound 
logic,  then  the  manufacturer  who  buys  slave-grown  cot- 
ton, and  makes  it  into  cloth,  is  equally  guilty  with  the 
slave-holder  himself  who  produces  it.  But  the  implication 
in  guilt,  if  guilt  there  be,  does  not  stop  here.  He  who 
purchases  and  wears  the  goods  manufactured  from  slave- 
grown  cotton,  is  also  implicated ;  and  as  there  is  annually 
consumed  over  eleven  hundred  millions  of  pounds  of 
slave-grown  cotton,  and  barely    seventy-eight  millions 


294  APPENDIX. 

of  free-labour  growth,  it  follows  that  all  Christendom  is 
involved  in  the  same  condemnation.  These  facts  serve 
to  illustrate  one  of  our  positions — that  the  Christian 
world  cannot  avoid  consuming  the  products  of  slave- 
labour,  and  thereby  encourage  slavery  and  the  slave-trade, 
but  by  civilizing  Africa. 

There  is  one  plan  to  avoid  this  great  evil,  and  in  an 
hour  free  ourselves  from  it,  and  that  is  to  burn  down  all 
the  cotton  factories  in  Europe  and  America,  and  suffer 
none  to  be  erected  in  their  stead.  But  what  would  the 
world  gain  by  the  sacrifice  1  or  rather,  what  would  it 
lose  1  Commerce,  the  great  agent  in  the  world's  civili- 
zation, would  be  destroyed.  A  check  upon  commerce  is 
a  check  upon  civilization.  Human  progress  and  human 
happiness  materially  depend  upon  commerce.  But  it  is 
not  practicable,  even  were  it  desirable,  to  destroy  these 
factories  to  eradicate  slavery,  It  is  impossible  to  destroy 
them.  The  pecuniary  considerations  involved  are  more 
powerful  than  the  moral.  The  owners  of  these  factories 
will  continue  to  manufacture  slave-grown  cotton ;  com- 
merce will  continue  to  transmit  the  products  of  the  looms 
to  every  corner  of  the  world  ;  and  the  earth's  population 
will  continue  to  wear  these  fabrics.  The  slave-grown 
sugar  and  coffee  will  also  be  consumed  ;  because  a  sup- 
ply from  free  labour  cannot  be  obtained.  As  it  is  im- 
practicable, then,  to  prevent  the  consumption  of  slave- 
grown  coffee,  sugar  and  cotton,  on  account  of  the  pecu- 
niary profit  and  personal  comfort  they  afford  to  mankind, 
so  it  is  alike  impossible  to  abolish  slavery  while  the  world 
continues  to  consume  the  products  of  its  labour.  Our 
own  view,  as  expressed  in  the  outset,  is,  that  the  whole 
Christian  world  is  involved  in  this  evil.  Is  there  any 
more  criminality  in  superintending  the  production  of 
slave-grown  cotton,  than  in  overseeing  its  manufacture, 


APPENDIX.  295 

or  in  being  clothed  with  the  fabrics  into  which  it  has 
been  transformed  1  Is  the  Louisiana  or  Cuban  planter 
more  criminal  in  raising,  and  sending  to  market,  his  crop 
of  sugar,  than  the  abolitionist  of  London  or  Boston  is 
for  sweetening  his  coffee,  his  tea,  or  his  poundcake  with 
the  same  article  1  Is  the  Brazilian  slave-holder  more 
guilty  for  furnishing  coffee,  by  the  labour  of  his  slaves, 
than  the  merchant  is  for  purchasing  and  selling  it  to  all 
the  anti-slavery  men  in  Ohio  1  Are  they  innocent  for 
greedily  drinking  it,  knowing  it  to  be  procured  by  the 
lash  of  the  task-master  ?  If  coffee  were  not  consumed, 
none  would  be  raised.  If  sugar  were  not  used,  none 
would  be  made.  If  cotton  were  not  manufactured  and 
worn,  none  would  be  grown.  Hence  slavery  would  be 
abolished !  Who  then  supports  slavery  and  the  slave- 
trade,  but  the  one  who  consumes  its  products  1  We 
leave  these  questions  to  every  man's  conscience.  In  the 
present  crisis  we  would  approach  our  southern  brethren 
in  the  language  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  and  say  :  "  We  are 
verily  guilty  concerning  our  brother,  in  that  we  saw  the 
anguish  of  his  soul,  when  he  besought  us,  and  we  would 
not  hear  ;  therefore  is  this  distress  come  upon  us  ;"  and 
in  the  spirit  of  Christian  liberality,  propose  some  plan 
that  would  equalize  the  burden  of  relieving  the  country 
from  the  distracting  evils  of  slavery.  Capitalists  at  the 
south  buy  negroes  because  the  investment  is  profitable, 
and  they  can  no  more  be  expected  to  emancipate  their 
slaves  while  their  labour  is  profitable,  than  northern 
men  be  expected  to  burn  their  factories  or  banks  with 
all  their  valuable  contents. 

But  what  is  there  to  prevent  a  change  in  this  condition 
of  things  ?  Must  it  remain  for  ever  1  Must  slavery, 
acknowledged  on  all  hands,  except  by  a  very  few,  to  be 
an  evil,  continue  as  a  perpetual  source  of  discord,  endan- 


•296  APPENDIX. 

gering  the  safety  of  the  Union,  or  affording  a  fruitful 
theme  of  excitement  for  fanatics  and  demagogues  '?  Men 
may  transfer  their  property,  at  pleasure,  into  cash, 
whether  it  be  in  lands,  manufactories,  or  slaves.  They 
are  governed  only  by  interest  and  inclination  in  such 
matters.  Convince  the  slave-holder  that  he  can  do  better 
than  to  invest  his  money  in  slaves,  and  he  will  not  buy 
them.  But  when  the  investment  is  made,  and  you  ask 
him  to  emancipate  without  compensation,  he  considers 
it  an  unreasonable  demand.  Emancipation  in  the  West 
Indies,  he  knows,  has  resulted  in  pecuniary  ruin  to  the 
master,  and  has  increased  slavery  in  the  aggregate,  in- 
stead of  diminishing  it.  It  is  of  the  first  importance, 
therefore,  in  the  adoption  of  any  emancipation  schemes, 
that  an  adequate  number  of  efficient  free  labourers  should 
be  secured  to  supply  the  place  of  the  slaves.  Unless 
this  can  be  done  with  safety  to  the  planter,  he  will  not 
risk  the  change ;  and  unless  the  plan  be  such  an  one  as 
will  not  create  a  fresh  demand  for  slaves  elsewhere,  and 
produce  an  increase  of  the  slave-trade,  humanity  would 
forbid  its  adoption.  Then  devise  a  plan  by  which  a  pro- 
ductive free  labour  can  be  substituted  for  slave-labour, 
and  the  master  receive  compensation  for  his  slaves,  and 
he  would,  no  doubt,  gladly  free  himself  from  the  incon- 
veniences and  want  of  safety  of  his  position. 

England  and  France,  when  freeing  the  slaves  in  their 
colonies,  found  no  such  tide  of  intelligent  foreigners  as  we 
are  receiving,  flowing  into  them,  to  take  the  place  of  their 
slaves,  and  prevent  a  decrease  of  agricultural  products. 
We  can  do  what  no  other  nation  would  be  capable  of 
doing.  It  is  in  our  power  not  only  to  free  ourselves  from 
the  evil  of  slavery,  and  the  whole  world  from  the  necessity 
of  consuming  slave-grown  products ;  but,  in  the  execu- 
tion of  this  great  work,  to  hasten  the  redemption  of  Africa 


APPENDIX.  297 

from  barbarism ;  and,  in  doing  this,  to  crush  the  slave- 
trade  and  slavery  everywhere.  No  one,  we  think,  can 
calmly  examine  the  present  relations  of  free  labour  to 
slave-labour,  in  tropical  and  semi-tropical  countries,  as 
embodied  in  the  mass  of  facts  we  have  collated,  and  not 
be  convinced  that  emancipation  in  the  United  States,  and 
the  colonization  of  the  coloured  people  in  Liberia,  to  de- 
velop its  resources  and  civilise  its  inhabitants,  would 
give  a  death-blow  to  the  slavery  of  Cuba  and  Brazil,  and 
to  African  oppression  throughout  the  world.  And  who 
would  not  be  delighted  to  aid  in  such  a  glorious  work  1 
Who  would  not  be  overjoyed  to  witness  such  a  sublime 
achievement  of  principle  1  Who  would  not  devoutly  adore 
that  Divine  wisdom  which  had  wrought  out  such  deliver- 
ance for  Africa. 


Few  of  our  own  countrymen  have  taken  a  more  lively 
interest  in  this  union  of  Christian  effort  for  Africa  than 
Martin  Farquhar  Tupper,  now  in  the  United  States  on  a 
mission  of  international  kindness ;  and  we  cannot,  per- 
haps, more  fitly  close  our  labours  than  by  calling  attention 
to  his  just  views  and  sound  poetic  advice : — 

"  I  cannot  but  apprehend,  from  a  careful  examination 
of  the  true  merits  of  the  case,  that  Liberia  possesses 
higher  claims  upon  us,  as  an  efficient  protector  of  abori- 
ginal rights,  than  she  has  hitherto  had  credit  for.  Her 
first  war  with  the  natives  arose  solely  out  of  the  noble 
effort  of  the  colonists  to  rescue  from  their  grasp  a  cargo 
of  re-captured  slaves,  and  an  English  prize  crew.  The 
subsequent  and  infrequent  hostilities  with  them  have  re- 
sulted from  similar  causes,  or  from  the  intrusion  of  foreign 
slavers  within  her  territories,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying 
on  their  cruel  traffic,  in  defiance  of  the  laws  and  heroic 


298  APPENDIX. 

efforts  of  the  new  republic.  So  well  do  the  natives  appre- 
ciate the  stern  hostility  of  Liberia  to  this  iniquitous  trade, 
that  many  of  the  tribes  in  the  vicinity  have  sought  safety 
under  her  wing.  On  one  occasion,  several  chiefs  from 
Cape  Palnias,  dreading  the  threatened  occupancy  of  their 
territory  by  the  French,  solicited  that  they  might  be 
admitted  to  the  privileges  of  Liberian  citizenship ;  and  on 
another,  a  king,  whose  subjects  had  been  again  and  again 
decimated  by  the  savage  incursions  of  their  neighbours, 
removed  his  entire  population  to  the  banks  of  the  St. 
Paul's  river,  and  they  became  citizens  of  Liberia.  Pre- 
sident Roberts  has  furnished  many  pleasing  instances  of 
the  confidence  reposed  in  them  by  even  distant  tribes, 
who  have  submitted  their  disputes  to  the  arbitration  of 
their  new  friends ;  and  it  is  gratifying  to  observe,  in  the 
late  message  of  the  president,  that  his  fellow-citizens  are 
extensively  engaged  in  instructing  the  natives.  When 
we  recollect  how  these  poor  people  had  become  degraded 
and  oppressed  by  the  long  continuance  of  the  slave-trade, 
and  take  into  account  the  difficulty  of  elevating  them  in 
morals  and  religion  through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
white  man,  who  so  rarely  escapes  the  effects  of  the  African 
climate,  Liberia  cannot  but  be  regarded  as  a  most  impor- 
tant auxiliary;  tending  to  the  self-development  of  the 
native  people  who  come  within  the  influence  of  their 
Christian  example. 

"  Now  that  Liberia  has  become  a  free,  sovereign,  and 
independent  state,  having  a  territory  extending  from  the 
Sherbro  to  the  San  Pedro,  a  distance  of  500  miles,  it  is 
only  simple  justice  to  acknowledge  her  co-operation,  and  to 
hold  out  to  her,  as  fitting  opportunities  occur,  the  right- 
hand  of  fellowship.  This  is  the  more  needful,  as  liber- 
ated slaves  form  the  bulk  of  her  population,  and  they  have 
left  their  former  masters  without  the  means  necessary  for 


APPENDIX.  299 

establishing  the  Churches  and  Chapels,  and  the  Bay  and 
Sabbath  Schools  solicited  by  the  natives,  or  of  erecting  the 
requisite  machinery  for  preparing  their  rich  and  varied 
staples  for  export.  Deeming  the  success  of  this  interest- 
ing people  important,  in  promoting  the  cheap  production 
of  free-labour  cotton,  coffee,  sugar,  and  other  tropical 
growths,  I  am  impelled  to  offer  these  hints,  in  hope  that 
attention  may  be  drawn  to  the  capabilities  of  the  country 
in  this  respect,  not  less  than  to  those  of  the  emigrant 
population  from  America,  to  turn  them  to  profitable  ac- 
count. This  is  a  feature  in  the  New  Republic  deserving 
the  attention  of  every  sincere  friend  of  Africa. 


BRITAIN  TO  COLUMBIA. 

Sister  Empress,  daughter  dear, 
Throned  on  yonder  hemisphere, 
With  a  grand  career  to  run 
Glorious  as  thy  western  sun, 
Sister,  daughter — we  are  one ! 

One,  in  stories  of  the  past, 
One,  in  glories,  still  to  last, 
One  in  speech,  and  one  in  face, 
One  in  honest  pride  of  race, 
One  in  faith,  and  hope,  and  grace ! 

Sister,  we  have  sinn'd  of  old, 
Both  of  us,  through  lust  of  gold ; 
We,  for  centuries — you,  for  years, 
Undismayed  by  judgment  fears, 
Throve  on — human  woes  and  tears  ! 

Verily  our  brother's  blood 
Whelm'd  us  in  its  crimson  flood, 
Yet,  at  last,  we  turn'd  and  gave, 
As  a  ransom  from  the  grave, 
Royal  freedom  to  the  slave! 


300  APPENDIX. 

Britain's  penitential  zeal 
Let  it  work  Columbia's  weal ; 
Wisely  hasten,  as  thou  wilt, 
Soon  to  wash  away  this  guilt 
Man  enchain'd,  and  life-blood  spilt ! 

We  are  mute,  we  may  not  chide ; 
Only  pray  thee,  put  aside 
That  which  must  be  bane  to  thee, 
If,  as  Christian,  strong  and  free, 
Thou  endure  it  still  to  be ! 

Yet,  in  frankness,  we  confess 
We  made  too  much  haste  to  bless ; 
Not  at  once,  be  well  assured, 
But  with  gradual  health  allured, 
Can  this  chronic  plague  be  cured. 

Through  the  wisdom  of  to-day 
We  have  learnt  a  better  way ; 
Sister,  it  is  thine  own  plan ! 
Take  the  poor  degraded  man, 
Teach  him  kindly  all  you  can ; 

Then,  with  liberal  hand,  restore 
To  his  own  Liberian  shore 
This  poor  son  of  wrong  and  night, 
Newly  blest  with  hope  and  light, 
And  the  patriot  freemen's  right ! 

So  shall  Africa  blockade 

Bloodlessly  that  dreadful  trade ; 

And  Liberia's  c:  open  door," 

School,  and  church,  and  merchaut-store, 

Bless  her  children  evermore! 

Martin  F.  Tupper, 

Albury,  Nov.  20. 


RICHARDS,  100  ST.  MARTIN  S  LANE, 


JAMES   NISBET   AND   CO, 


The  Four  Witnesses ;  or,  the  Gospel  harmonized  on  a 
New  Principle.  By  Isaac  Da  Costa,  LL.D.,  Amster- 
dam.    8vo.     12s.  cloth. 

Lectures  to  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Associ- 
ation, at  Exeter  Hall,  during  the  Winter  of  1850-51. 
Foolscap.     3s.  6d.  cloth. 

Lectures  for  1851,  delivered  before  the  Church  of 
England  Young  Men's  Society,  at  Freemason's  Hall. 
Foolscap.     2s.  6d.  cloth. 

Words  to  Win  Souls;  being  Sermons  Preached  A. D. 
1650,  by  Eminent  Divines  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Revised  and  Abridged  by  the  Rev.  T.  S.  Millington. 
Crown  8vo.     6s.  cloth. 

Africa  Eedeemed,  and  the  Means  of  her  Relief  illus- 
trated by  the  Growth  and  Prospects  of  the  Common- 
wealth of  Liberia.     Foolscap.     3s.  6d.  cloth. 

Ellen  Mordaunt;  or,  the  effects  of  True  Religion. 
Foolscap.     5s.  cloth. 

The  Serpent  in  the  Wilderness.  By  the  Rev.  William 

Tate,  Author  of   "  Exposition  of   St.  Paul's  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews."     18mo.     2s.  cloth. 

The  Crystal  Palace:  a  Little  Book  for  Little  Boys. 
18mo.     Is. 

A  Sevenfold  Aspect  Of  Popery.  By  the  Rev.  George 
Fisk,  Author  of  u  A  Pastor's  Memorial."  Foolscap. 
4s.  cloth. 

The  Morning  Of  Joy;  A  Sequel  to  "The  Night  of 
Weeping."  By  the  Rev.  Horatius  Bonar.  Fifteenth 
Thousand.     18mo.     2s.  cloth. 


WORKS    RECENTLY    PUBLISHED    BY 


Heavenly  Thoughts  for  Morning  Hours.    Selec- 
tions in  Prose  and  Verse,  with  Passages  from  Scripture 
With  a   short    Introduction,    by   Lady   Catharine 
Long.     32mo.     4s.  6d.  silk. 

A  Memoir  of  Lady  Colquhoun,  of  Luss.    By  the 

Rev.  James  Hamilton,  D.D.  Third  Edition,  8vo. 
7s.  6d.  cloth. 

Du  Bourg;  or,  the  Mercuriale:   an  Episode  from 

History  on  the  Points  at  Issue  between  the  Reforma- 
tion and  the  Papacy.  By  M.  A.  S.  Barber.  Fools- 
cap.    3s.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Saved  Soul's  Work  described  in  Three  Discourses. 
By  the  Rev.  David  C.  A.  Agnew.  18mo.  Is.  cloth 
limp. 

An  Examination  of  the  Doctrine  of  Scripture  con- 
cerning the  Resurrection,  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ, 
and  the  Millennium.  By  the  Rev.  Walter  Wood, 
A.M.,  Elie.     Post  8vo.     7s.  6d.  cloth. 

God  ill  Disease ;  or,  Proofs  of  Design  manifested  in 
Morbid  Phenomena.  By  James  F.  Duncan,  M.D., 
Dublin.     Foolscap.     3s.  6d.  cloth. 

PenciHingS  in  Palestine;  being  Scenes  descriptive  of 
the  Holy  Land  and  other  Countries  in  the  East,  writ- 
ten during  a  Visit  in  1850.  By  the  Rev.  John 
Anderson,  Helensburgh.  Crown  8vo.    3s.  6d.  cloth. 

A  Memoir  of  the  Rev.  Spencer  Thornton,  A.M. 

late  Vicar  of  Wendover,  Bucks.  By  the  Rev.  W.  R. 
Fremantle.  Crown  8vo.  Second  Edition,  enlarged. 
5s.  cloth. 

The  Night  Lamp.  A  Narrative  of  the  Means  by  which 
Spiritual  Darkness  was  dispelled  from  the  Death-bed 
of  Agnes  Maxwell  Macfarlane.  By  the  Rev.  John 
Macfarlane,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
5s.  cloth. 

The  Apocalypse  interpreted  in  the  Light  of  the 

Day  of  the  Lord.  By  the  Rev.  James  Kelly. 
Vols.  T.  and  II.     12mo.     6s.  each,  cloth. 


JAMES    NISBET    AND    CO. 


The  Church  of  Christ  Portrayed.  As  to  the  pecu- 
liar Character  of  its  Unity,  Ordinances,  Visibility,  and 
Spirituality.  By  the  Rev.  C.  I.  Yorke,  M.A.,  Rec- 
tor of  Shenfield.     Foolscap  8vo.    4s.  cloth. 

Ears  of  the  Spiritual  Harvest;  or,  Narratives  of 

Christian  Life.  Edited  by  Charlotte  D.  Greville, 
Foolscap  8vo.     3s.  6d.  cloth. 

Tales  and  Sketches  of  Christian  Life  in  different 

Lands  and  Ages.     Foolscap.     5s.  cloth. 

The  Expository  Preacher ;  or,  St.  Matthew's  Gospel 

Practically  Expounded.  By  the  Rev.  Charles  Over- 
ton. In  Two  Vols.  Vol.  I.  Crown  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
cloth. 

Norman  Leslie :  a  Scottish  Tale  of  the  Sixteenth  Cen- 
tury. By  the  Author  of  "  Amy  Harrington/'  &c. 
Foolscap  8vo.    6s.  cloth. 

The  Flower  Of  Spring ;  a  Call  to  the  Young  from  the 
Early  Grave  of  his  Eldest  Daughter.  By  John  Pem- 
berton  Plumtre,  Esq.,  M.P.  Foolscap.  2s.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Retrospect ;  or,  a  Review  of  Providential  Mercies, 
with  Anecdotes  of  Various  Characters,  and  an  Address 
to  Naval  Officers.  By  the  Rev.  Richard  Marks, 
Twenty-first  Edition.     12mo.    5s.  cloth. 

Baskets  Of  Fragments ;  or,  Notes  from  Sermons 
preached  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Jones,  of  Creaton. 
Edited  by  Miss  Plumtre,  Seventh  Edition,  12mo. 
6s.  6d.  cloth. 

Life  in  Earnest.  Six  Lectures  on  Christian  Activity 
and  Ardour.  By  the  Rev.  James  Hamilton,  D.D. 
Sixtieth  Thousand.     18mo.     Is.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Children  Of  the  Manse.  By  the  Author  of  "  Me- 
moirs of  Mrs.  Mary  Lundie  Duncan."  Foolscap  8vo. 
6s.  cloth. 

The  Night  Of  Weeping ;  or,  Words  for  the  Suffering 
Family   of  God.     By  the  Rev.   Horatius  Bonar, 

Thirtieth  Thousand,     18 mo.    2s.  cloth, 


WORKS    RECENTLY    PUBLISHED    EY 


The  MoHIlt  of  Olives.  By  the  Rev.  James  Hamilton 
D.D.     Fifty-fifth  Thousand.     18mo.     Is.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Believer's  Guide  to  the  Holy  Communion. 

Translated  from  the  French  of  M.  Grandpierre,  by 
the  Countess  of  Ellesmere.  18mo.  2s.  6d.  cloth, 
gilt  edges. 

A  New  and  Simple  Analysis  of  the  Book  of  Eeve- 

lation.  With  Expository  Notes.  By  Delta.  Fcap. 
8vo.    5s.  cloth. 

Letters,  selected  from  the  Correspondence  of  Miss 

Helen  Plumptre,  Author  of  "  Scripture  Stories."  Se- 
cond Edition.     12mo.     6s.  cloth. 

The  Word  of  G-od,  its  Importance  and  Power.    By 

the  Hon.  and  Rev.  H.  Montagu  Villiers,  M.A. 
12mo.     6s.  cloth. 

A  Narrative  of  Iniquities  and  Barbarities  practised 

at  Rome  in  the  Nineteenth  Century.  By  Raffaelle 
Ciocci.     Fifth  Edition.     18mo.    2s.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Faithful  Friend;  or,  Two  Conversations  on 
Worldly  Intercourse  and  Family  Duties.  By  John 
P.  Plumptre,  Esq.,  M.P.  Fifth  Edition.  18mo. 
2s.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Scripture  Eeader's  Guide  to  the  Devotional.  Use 

of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  By  Caroline  Fry.  Four- 
teenth Edition.     18 mo.    2s.  cloth. 

The  Early  Days  of  Faith  and  Love;  or,  the  Soul 

arising  to  Newness  of  Life.  By  M.  A.  S.  Barber, 
author  of  (i  Redemption  in  Israel."  &c.  18mo.  2s. 
6d.  cloth. 

The  Family  Of  Bethany;  or,  Meditations  on  the 
Eleventh  Chapter  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  John. 
By  L.  Bonnet.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  Hugh 
White,  Dublin.  Twelfth  Edition.  Foolscap  8vo. 
5s.  cloth. 

Sermons  preached  at  the  Chapels  Royal  of  St. 

James's  and  Whitehall.  By  the  Hon.  and  Rev. 
Baptist  W.  Noel,  M.A.     12mo.    5s.  cloth. 


JAMES    NISBET    AND    CO. 


Ashton  Cottage;  or,  the  True  Faith.   A  Sunday  Tale, 

18mo.,  with  illustrations.     Is.  6d.  cloth. 

Prophetical  Landmarks.  Containing  Data  for  helping 
to  determine  the  Question  of  Christ's  Premillennial 
Advent.  By  the  Rev.  Horatius  Bonar,  Kelso. 
Second  Edition.     Foolscap  8vo.     5s.  cloth. 

The  Dwellings  Of  Jacob ;  or,  Household  Ministrations 
for  every .  Sabbath-day  in  the  Year.  By  the  Rev. 
Joseph  Brown,  Dalkeith.  Foolscap  8vo.  4s.  6d. 
cloth. 

Deny  :  a  Tale  of  the  Revolution.  By  Charlotte 
Elizabeth.  Eleventh  Edition.  Foolscap  8vo.  5s. 
cloth. 

A  Volume  Of  Lectures.  By  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Low- 
ther  Barrington.     12mo.    4s.  cloth. 


In  three  vols,  im- 


PooFs  Annotations  on  the  BiMe. 

perial  8vo.     £3  3s.  cloth. 

Incomplete  Conversions;  or,  "  One  Thing  Thou  Lack- 

est."  By  a  Protestant  French  Magistrate. 
Translated  from  the  Original.     18mo.     Is.  6d.  cloth. 

Memoir  of  Elizabeth  Lindsay.    By  Charlotte  d, 

Greville.  With  a  Recommendatory  Preface  by  the 
Rev.  James  Hamilton,  F.L.S.  Second  Edition. 
18mo.     Is.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Sailor's  Hope  for  Himself  and  the  Nation. 

By  a  Naval  Officer.     Foolscap  8vo.     5s.  cloth. 

Amy  Harrington;  or,  a  Sister's  Love.  By  the  Author 
of  "  The  Curate  of  Linwood."  Foolscap  8vo.  6s. 
cloth. 

Israel  and  the  Gentiles.  Contributions  to  the  History 
of  the  Jews  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Present 
Day.  By  Dr.  Isaac  Da  Costa,  of  Amsterdam. 
Post  8vo.     7s.  6d.  cloth. 

Redemption  Drawing  Elgh :  a  Defence  of  the  Pre- 
millennial Advent.  By  the  Rev.  Andrew  A.  Bonar^ 
of  Collace.     Foolscap  8vo.     5s.  cloth. 


WORKS    RECENTLY    PUBLISHED    BY 


The  Mountains  Of  the  Bible  :  their  Scenes  and  their 
Lessons,     By  the  Rev.  John  M'Farlane,  LL.D. 

Second  Edition.     Post  8vo.     6s.  cloth. 

The  Mystery  of  Providence ;  or,  the  Prophetic  His- 
tory of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire. 
By  the  Rev.  T.  R.  Rirks,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Kelshall, 
Herts.     Foolscap.     6s.  cloth. 

Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  E.  C.  Whalley,  D.D.,  late  Rector 

of  Chelwood.  Illustrated  by  Select  Letters  and  Ser- 
mons. By  John  S.  Harford,  Esq.,  D.C.L.  Fools- 
cap 8vo.     5s. 

A  Commentary  On  Leviticus,  Expository  and  Prac- 
tical. With  Critical  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  Andrew 
Bonar.  Second  Edition.  Post  8vo.,  with  Illustra- 
tions.    8s.  6d.  cloth. 

The  Young  Professor ;  being  the  Substance  of  Eight 
Lectures  delivered  to  the  Candidates  for  Confirmation, 
at  St.  George's  Church,  Bloomsbury,  1846.  By  the 
Hon.  and  Rev.  H.  Montagu  Villiers,  M.A.  18mo. 
2s.  cloth. 

Sorrow  and  Consolation;  or,  the  Gospel  preached 
under  the  Cross.  From  the  French  of  J.  H.  Grand- 
pierre,  D.D.     12mo.     5s.  cloth. 

A  Volume  of  Plain  and  Practical  Sermons.    By 

the  Rev.  T.  Howard,  Rector  of  Ballaugh,  Isle  of 
Man.     12mo.     5s.  cloth. 

The  Blessedness  of  the  Righteous.  By  John  Howe, 

M.A.     A  New  Edition,  Revised.     12mo.     4s.  cloth. 

Aids  to   Prophetic  Inquiry.    By  B.  w.  Newton. 

12mo.  First  Series,  3s.  6d. ;  Second  Series,  2s.  6d., 
cloth  limp  ;  Third  Series,  4s.  cloth. 

The  Hill  Of  Zion ;  or,  the  First  and  Last  Things  illus- 
trative of  the  present  Dispensation.  By  the  Rev. 
Thomas  Watson,  M.A.  Foolscap  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
cloth. 

The  Song  Of  Solomon,  compared  with  other  parts  of 
Scripture.     Foolscap  8vo.     3s.  6d.  cloth. 


JAMES    NISBET    AND    CO. 


The  Lord's  Supper  Explained  and  Applied.    By 

the  Rev.  Capel  Molyneux.  Foolscap  8vo.  Is.  6d. 
cloth  limp. 

Gospel  Seeds  ;  or,  a  Collection  of  Unpublished  Pieces 
on  the  Revealed  Truths  of  the  Word  of  God.  By  Dr. 
(Lesar  Malan.    12mo.    5s.  cloth. 

The  Infant  Brothers  :  Notices  of  the  Lives  and  Death- 
beds of  Abner  and  David  Brown,  two  Infant  Brothers, 
who  were  laid  in  one  grave  on  the  18th  January,  1834. 
Eighth  Thousand,   18mo,  3s. 

Innisfail;  or,  the  Irish  Scripture-reader.  A  Narrative 
of  Facts.     18mo.     2s.  6d.  half-bound. 

A  Discourse  on  the  Evil  Character  of  these  our 

Times ;  proving  them  to  be  the  ff  Perilous  Times"  of 
the  "  Last  Days."  By  the  late  Rev.  Edw.  Irving, 
A.M.  A  New  Edition.  With  a  Preface  by  the  Rev. 
Horatius  Bonar.     Post  8vo.    7s.  6d.  cloth. 

Twenty-tW0  Sermons,  with  an  accompanying  Prayer 
to  each,  intended  for  Reading  in  Families  and  Sick 
Rooms.  By  the  Rev.  Richard  Marks.  12mo. 
5s.  cloth. 

Une  Nuit  dans  les  LarmeS  :  Consolations  adressees 
aux  Enfans  de  Dieu  affliges.  Traduit  de  Y Anglais  du 
Reverend  Horatius  Bonar.     18mo.     2s.  6d.  cloth. 

Aunt  AlUie's  History  Of  England  on  Christian  Prin- 
ciples; for  the  Young.  16mo.,  with  Illustrations. 
5s.  cloth  gilt. 

The  Decision  Of  Euth;  an  Example  to  the  Young, 
especially  tp  those  who  come  forward  as  Candidates 
for  Confirmation.  By  the  Rev.  George  Cole. 
18mo.     Is. 

The  Physiognomy  of  Diseases.  By  George  Corfe, 

M.D.,  Resident  Medical  Officer  of  the  Middlesex 
Hospital.     4to.     10s.  6d.  cloth. 

Twelve  Sermons  on  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church 

of  England ;  Plain,  Practical,  and  Experimental.  By 
the  Rev.  Edward  Walwyn  Foley,  M.A.  Second 
Edition.     12mo.     4s.  6d.  cloth. 


WORKS    PUBLISHED    BY    J.    NISBET    AND    CO. 


The  Coming  of  the  Lord  to  Judge  the  Earth, 

Doctrinaliy  and  Practically  Considered.  By  the  Rev. 
Edward  Gillson,  B.A.,  Bath.  Second  Edition. 
Foolscap  8vo.     2s.  6d.  cloth. 

Protestant  Thoughts  in  Rhyine.    By  the  Hon.  and 

Rev.  Baptist  W.  Noel,  M.A.  Royal  16mo.  Se- 
cond Edition.     3s.  6d.  fancy  boards. 

The  Restitution  of  ail  Things.    By  the  Rev.  w.  w. 

Pym,  M.A.     12mo.     5s.  cloth. 

The  Scripture  Readers'  Guide  to  the  Devotional 

Use  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  By  Caroline  Fry. 
Sixteenth  Edition.     18mo.    2s.  cloth. 

Popular  Objections  to  the  Pre-Millennial  Advent 

and  to  the  Study  of  Prophetic  Scriptures  Considered. 
By  George  Ogilvy,  Esq.,  of  Cove.  Second  Edition. 
Foolscap  8vo.     4s.  cloth. 

Sermons  by  the  Rev.  Edward  Lillixgstox,  M.A., 
Incumbent  of  St.  George's,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham. 
12mo.     3s.  cloth. 

The  Cottager's  Guide  to  the  New  Testament ;  that 

is,  the  Life  and  Doctrine  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
plainly  set  forth.  In  six  vols.,  12mo.  Cloth,  3s. 
6d.  each. 

Church  of  England  Village  Dialogues;  containing 

Remarks  upon  the  Foundation,  Order,  Usages,  Ser- 
vices, and  Liturgy  of  the  Church.  By  the  Rev.  A. 
Crowd y,  A.M.,  Rector  of  Winnai,  Winchester. 
Fourteenth  Thousand.     12mo.     Is.  6d.  cloth. 

A  Volume  of  Sacred  Poetry.    By  James  Edmbston, 

Author  of  rt  Hymns  for  the  Chamber  of  Sickness." 
Foolscap  8vo.     5s.  cloth. 

The  Village  Eectory ;  or,  Truth  in  Fiction.  By  the 
Rev.  R.  Vv.  Dibdin,  M.A.  Foolscap  8vo.  With 
Illustrations,  5s. 

Twenty-tW0  Sermons,  with  an  accompanying  Prayer 
to  each,  intended  for  Reading  in  Families  and  Sick 
Rooms.  By  the  Rev.  Richard  Marks.  12mo. 
5s.  cloth. 


WILTON    AND   MITCHELL,   V.  ARDOUR   STREET,  OXFORD  STREET. 


