ADDRESSES 

DELIVERED  BY 


Hon.  William  Howard  Taft 


BEFORE  AND  AFTER  HIS  ELECTION  TO  THE 
PRESIDENCY  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES, 
TOUCHING  THE  NEGRO  PROBLEM  J. 


PREFACE. 


In  compiling  the  speeches  of  Hon.  William  Howard  Taft,  touching  the 
Negro  problem,  the  aim  is  to  place  these  speeches  in  consecutive  form  for 
preservation  by  those  who  are  deeply  interested  in  and  affected  by  his 
utterances.  That  they  are  uplifting  in  their  tone  and  aim,  and  that  his  whole 
career — his  words  and  deeds — are  in  harmony  with  his  utterances,  no  Negro 
who  reads,  and  digests  that  which  he  reads,  can  dispute. 

This  compilation  is  not  an  attempt  to  establish  his  friendship  for  or 
emphasize  his  interest  in  the  race.  His  friendship  he  inherited,  and  his 
interest  has  been  emphasized  by  the  consistent  course  he  has  pursued  in 
recognizing  ability,  character  and  merit  without  reference  to  race  or  color 
of  skin.  The  compilation,  as  before  stated,  is  simply  to  place  in  consecutive 
form  his  helpful  and  uplifting  utterances  touching  upon  a  subject  of  vital 
importance  to  the  ten  million  of  people  in  these  United  States  who  are 
collated  as  Negroes.  RALPH  W.  TYLER. 

Washington,  D.  C,  February  25,  1909. 


Extract  From  Address  of  Wm.  H.  Taft,  Delivered  at  Greens- 


Republicans  of  North  Carolina:  When  your  committee  did  me  the 
honor  to  ask  me  to  address  the  Republican  Convention  of  North  Carolina, 
they  advised  me  that  the  political  situation  was  such  that  if  a  proper 
effort  were  made  at  the  coming  election  it  would  he  possible  to  carry  the 
State  for  the  Republican  party,  and  that  in  that  effort  they  felt  they  were 
entitled '  to  the  sympathy  and .  assistance  of  Republicans  throughout  the 
country.  The  appeal  had  convincing  weight  with  me,  for  I  believe  that 
nothing  that  could  happen  in  the  politics  of  this  country  would  work  greater 
advantage  to  the  country  at  large,  and  to  the  South  in  particular,  than  the 
breaking  up  of  what  has  been  properly  known  as  the  "Solid  South."  I  say 
this  in  no  partisan  spirit,  for  I  am  not  one  of  those  who  think  that  this 
result  would  necessarily  increase  the  probability  of  the  continuance  in 
power  of  the  Republican  party.  The  solidity  of  the  South,  while  it  has 
assured  to  the  Democratic  party  a  certain  number  of  Congressmen  and  a 
certain  number  of  electoral  votes,  has  in  a  measure  furnished  its  own  anti- 
dote by  restraining  many  voters  in  the  North  who  might  have  left  the 
Republican  party  but  for  what  they  regard  as  the  injustice  and  danger  of 
Southern  political  conditions. 

The  South  has  been  kept  solid  by  the  spectre  of  Negro  domination,  and 
by  stirring  up  racial  prejudices  and  arousing  unfounded  alarm  over  an 
impossible  return  of  reconstruction  days.  After  a  long  struggle,  the  his- 
tory of  which  I  shall  not  repeat,  the  Negro's  vote. was  made  to  count  for 
nothing  in  the  Southern  States.  Then  the  political  leaders  of  the  dominant 
party  came  to  realize  the  dreadful  demoralization  of  all  society  that  followed 
in  a  government  if  law  was  flouted,  and  fraud  was  to  constitute  its  basis. 
They  cast  about  to  make  the  law  square  with  the  existing  condition  by  prop- 
erty and  educational  qualifications  which  should  exclude  the  Negro.  They 
adopted  amendments  to  State  constitutions,  with  the  so-called  "grandfather 
clauses,'  intended  to  apply  the  new  qualifications  to  the  Negro,  and  not  to 
apply  them  to  the  whites.  It  is  impossible  to  frame  a  law  establishing  an 
educational  qualification  for  suffrage  which  will  stand  the  test  of  the  Fif- 
teenth Amendment,  and  which  will  not  ultimately  operate,  no  matter  what 
the  qualification  or  present  effect,  to  exclude  impartially  the  Negroes  and 
whites  from  the  ballot  who  lack  educational  acquirement.  Government  is 
established  to  secure  the  greatest  good  for  the  greatest  number.  A  popular 
government  attains  this  end,  because  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  in  the 


4 


long  run  the  rights  and  happiness  of  every  person  and  every  class  are 
much  more  likely  to  be  secured  and  safely  guarded  by  the  laws  of  the 
country  and  enforced  by  the  Executive,  if  the  voice  of  every  person  or  class 
is  given  an  opportunity  to  be  heard  in  the  adoption  of  the  laws  or  the 
selection  of  the  Executive.  This  view,  however,  is  predicated  on  the  premise 
that  the  person  or  class  of  persons  whose  rights  are  to  be  protected  by 
their  own  vote  have  sufficient  information  and  power  of  intellectual  decision 
to  enable  them  to  learn  and  decide  what  their  rights  and  real  interest  are, 
and  how  they  ought  to  be  protected.  When  a  class  of  persons  is  so  ignorant 
and  so  subject  to  oppression  and  misleading  that  they  are  merely  political 
children,  not  having  the  mental  stature  of  manhood,  then  their  voice  in 
the  government  secures  no  benefit  to  them.  A  policy,  therefore,  in  the 
South,  which  excludes  from  the  ballot  impartially  both  the  black  and  white, 
when  ignorant  and  irresponsible,  caunot  be  criticised.  Conceding  that  the 
laws  now  in  force  in  this  State  and  other  parts  of  the  South  were  intended, 
either  by  their  terms  or  by  their  mode  of  execution,  to  exclude  the  ignorant 
colored  voter  from  the  franchises  with  rigor;  and  to  allow  the  ignorant 
white  voter,  though  equally  unfitted  for  the  franchise,  to  exercise  it,  I  do 
not  think  that  this  makes  a  hopeless  situation  for  the  colored  man  or  the 
political  power  that  he  may,  in  the  future,  exercise.  If  he  continues  to  in- 
crease in  intelligence,  as  under  the  public  educational  institutions  he  is  likely 
to  do,  and  if  industrially  he  becomes  a  power,  as  his  progress  thus  far  jus- 
tifies us  in  believing  that  he  will,  the  men  of  the  race  who  are  eligible  to 
vote  in  accordance  with  law  will  increase,  and  their  common  sense  and 
judgment  and  position  in  the  community  will  add  weight  to  the  vote  they 
cast,  and  will  secure  more  real  influence  for  the  benefit  of  their  race  than 
when  the  right  of  suffrage  of  the  Negroes  was  wholly  unrestricted. 

The  white  people  of  the  South  are  a  homogeneous  people,  much  more 
likley  to  cherish  traditions  and  retain  customs  and  opinions  of  the.  past 
than  the  people  of  the  North  of  more  mixed  descent.  Hence  it  takes  a  long 
time  to  convince  the  white  people  of  the  South,  intelligent,  clear-headed 
and  energetic  as  they  are,  that  the  cry  of  Negro  domination,  so  often  raised 
by  politicians  among  them,  is  merely  for  the  purpose  of  solidifying  their 
vote  on  the  Democratic  side  and  has  no  real  justification  in  fact.  As  long, 
as  in  the  years  immediately  following  the  war,  their  agriculture  languished, 
their  mines  remained  unopened,  their  factories  were  few  in  number,  and  the 
prosperity  of  the  country  seemed  confined  to  that  part  of  it  lying  north  of 
Mason  and  Dixon's  line,  it  was  easy,  by  appeals  to  recollections  of  the 
Civil  War  and  the  unfortunate  sequence  of  reconstruction,  to  fill  the  ranks 
of  the  Democratic  army  and  maintain  the  solidity  of  the  South.  But  now, 
during  the  last  decade,  an  unprecedented  period  of  prosperity  has  come  for 
the  fair  Southern  States.  Their  great  cotton  crop  has  vastly  increased,  and 
the  prices  at  which  it  has  been  sold  have  been  high  enough  to  fill  the  pockets 
of  the  farmer  with  well-earned  gold.  The  iron  and  the  coal  mines  have 
been  opened  and  have  brought  forth  a  wealth  hardly  dreamed  of  a  quarter 
of  a  century  ago.  Manufactures  have  sprung  up  in  every  State,  and  the 
primacy  of  New  England  as  the  headquarters  for  making  cotton  goods  has 


5 


been  threatened.  In  the  prosperity  which  has  deservedly  attended  the  en- 
terprise, industry  and  energy  of  the  South,  the  bitterness  of  old  recol- 
lections has  passed  into  oblivion,  and  with  the  patriotic  feeling  inspired  by 
the  sentiments  evoked  during  the  Spanish  War,  we  have  become  again  a 
thoroughly  united  country.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  not  to  be 
expected  that  the  sensible,  clear-headed  business  men  of  the  South  do  not 
perceive  the  tremendous  disadvantage  under  which  the  Southern  States 
labor  in  having  only  one  party  with  any  voice  in  their  State  governments, 
and  In  being  herded  together  always  as  the  hidebound  support  of  the  Demo- 
cratic party  of  the  country,  no  matter  what  wild  fallacies  it  may  adopt  in 
its  platform  nor  what  candidate  it  may  put  before  the  country  to  invite  the 
suffrages  of  the  people.  Time  was  when  the  sole  source  of  wealth  in  the 
South  was  the  cultivation  of  cotton,  and  when  the  argument  that  the  system 
of  protection  as  one  from  which  the  North  only  derived  a  benefit,  could  be 
made  with  much  apparent  force  and  eloquence,  but  now  that  Southern 
mining  and  Southern  manufacturing  interests  have  increased  as  they  have, 
the  Democratic  cry  that  the  tariff  is  a  robbery  merely  evokes  a  smile  from 
the  thousands,  laborers,  skilled  and  unskilled,  and  employers,  great  and 
small,  whose  welfare  is  bound  up  in  the  success  of  Southern  manufactures. 

The  effect  of  the  change  of  industrial  conditions  in  eliminating  the  cry 
of  Negro  domination  from  the  politics  of  the  former  slave-owning  States  has 
manifested  itself  first  in  the  border  States.  West  Virginia  has  become  per- 
manently Republican,  and  Maryland  and  Missouri  put  themselves  in  the 
Republican  column  in  the  last  Presidential  election,  while  Kentucky  nearly 
brought  forth  works  meet  for  repentance  in  the  first  McKinley  campaign. 
The  Democracy  of  the  States  farther  south,  however,  continues  unbroken 
in  national  elections. 

The  question  which  should  address  itself  to  the  great  business  interests 
of  the  South  is  how  much  longer  the  spectre  of  things  past  is  to  hold  them 
to  a  political  allegiance  that  does  them  no  good  in  national  politics  and  de- 
prives their  communities  of  the  inestimable  benefit  of  the  presence  in  local 
politics  of  two  parties,  each  of  which,  if  it  does  wrong,  has  a  real  chance 
of  being  punished  for  its  misconduct.  The  possibility  of  a  change  of  party 
control  for  such  a  cause  is  the  best  security  of  good  government. 


-  *  .  m 

Address  Delivered  at  Plymouth  Churcht  Brooklyn,  Monday, 
March  16,  1908,  Under  the  Auspices  of  the  Arm- 
strong Association  in  the  Interest  of 
Hampton  Institute, 


I  feel  that  I  owe  an  explanation  to  the  audience  why  I  assume  to  speak 
upon  the  topic  of  the  evening.  As  far  back  as  I  can  remember,  which  car- 
ries me  into  the  middle  of  the  Civil  War,  my  ideal  of  patriotic  feeling — 
derived  from  the  political  attitude  of  my  father  and  mother  as  I  understood 
it — was  closely  associated  with  the  hatred  of  slavery  and  sympathy  with  the 
Negro  race. 

Subsequently,  under  Republican  tutelage,  that  sympathy  diffused  itself 
into 'a  strong  political  bias  in  favor  of  the  maintenance  of  the  political  rights 
of  the  Negro  in  the  South,  intensified  perhaps  rather  by  a  desire  for  Repub- 
lican victory  than  for  specific  benefit  to  the  Negro  race. 

Then  I  can  well  remember  the  last  stand  that  was  made  in  General 
Grant's  administration,  in  an  attempt  directly  to  enforce  the  Fifteenth 
Amendment,  in  which  my  father,  as  Attorney  General,  took  a  prominent  part, 
when  all  the  national  powers  were  invoked  to  protect  the  Negro  against  the 
infringement  of  his  constitutional  rights. 

Then  came  the  compromise  following  the  election  of  1876  and  the  re- 
striction in  the  army  bill  of  1878,  which  still  remains  the  law,  forbidding 
summoning  of  the  army  in  any  way  as  a  posse  comitatus,  and  so  preventing 
its  use  as  an  instrument  to  protect  the  suffrage  and  civil  rights  of  the  Negro. 

Negative  Policy  Tried. 

The  Republican  party  and  the  North  yielded  to  the  negative  policy  of 
allowing  the  South  to  work  out  the  problems  which  presented  themselves 
with  respect  to  the  Negro  race,  deploring  but  not  condoning  the  fraud  and 
violence  which  were  used  to  defeat  the  purpose  of  the  Fifteenth  Amendment. 
Instead  of  strengthening  the  national  control  and  power  of  interposition  in 
respect  to  Congressional  elections  the  Federal  election  laws  were  repealed. 

It  fell  to  my  lot  thereafter  to  exercise  judicial  jurisdiction  in  two  States 
of  the  South,  and  to  come  more  or  less  intimately  face  to  face  with  the 
social  and  political  problems  then  presented  and  to  learn  more  and  to  under- 
stand better  than  ever  I  did  before  the  real  attitude  of  both  sides  upon  the 
race  issue  in  the  Southern  States.  This  quickened  my  interest  in  the  whole 
question  and  gave  me  new  light  upon  it. 

Then  1  was  culled  to  the  far  distant  field  of  the  Philippines,  and  was 
there  charged  with  responsibility,  more  or  less  personal,  in  meeting  a  situa- 


7 


tion  differing,  of  course,  in  many  respects  from  the  race  problem  in  this 
country,  but  which  in  its  chief  aspect  has  a  close  resemblance.  The  problem 
was,  and  is,  the  work  of  bringing  a  Christian  race,  originally  tropical  and 
affected  by  its  tropical  origin,  from  a  state  of  dense  ignorance — general 
and  political — and  of  industrial  dependence  to  one  of  general  and  political 
intelligence  and  industrial  independence. 

No  lessons  of  experience  and  actual  trial  have  been  more  valuable  to  us 
in  working  out  our  problem  in  the  Philippines  than  those  of  General  William 
Armstrong  and  Booker  Washington  in  the  uplifting  of  the  Negro  race  in  the 
United  States.  Hence  it  is  that  when  invited,  as  I  have  been  here  to-night, 
to  take  part  in  honoring  Hampton  Institute,  gratitude  and  admiration  impel 
me  to  add  the  small  weight  of  my  voice  in  emphatic  praise  of  all  that  is 
represented  by  that  great  school  for  the  industrial  education  of  the  Negro. 

Hampton  Marked  an  Epoch. 

The  founding  of  Hampton  Institute  constituted  truly  and  historically  an 
epoch  in  the  development  of  the  whole  Negro  race.  Seldom  can  such  a 
thing  be  truly  said  of  the  founding  of  any  educational  institution.  To  know 
the  national  and  historical  importance  of  Hampton  one  must  keep  in  touch 
with  the  educational  movements  through  the  South  and  be  able  to  distinguish 
between  those  which  are  in  the  line  of  real  progress  and  those  which  are 
merely  adjuncts  and  ancillary. 

In  discussing  the  history  of  the  development  and  progress  of  the  Negro 
in  this  country,  I  think  there  is  no  division  of  the  topic  so  logical  from  the 
standpoint  of  true  political  science  as  that  which  is  made  by  the  three  great 
war  amendments  to  the  Constitution.  Under  the  heads  of  these  we  can 
consider  the  steps  in  the  progress  of  the  Negro  towards  his  position  in 
society  and  the  state  which  he  and  his  well-wishers  would  have  him  fill. 

Of  course,  it  is  well  known  that  when  the  North  entered  upon  the  war 
for  the  Union  it  disavowed  any  intention  to  abolish  slavery  or  to  do  other 
than  restrict  it  to  the  territory  in  which  it  was  then  lawful.  But  Lincoln 
had  said  in  an  earlier  day  that  the  nation  could  not  live  half  free  and  half 
slave.  And  in  1862  John  Stuart  Mill,  in  replying  to  those  British  critics  at 
the  North  who  contended  that  it  was  not  fighting  to  remove  slavery  but  only 
to  oppress  the  South,  made  an  unanswerable  argument  to  show  that  the 
inevitable  result  of  the  conflict  was  the  abolition  of  the  hateful  institution. 

It  needed  but  a  year  more  of  the  war  and  the  issue  of  the  emancipation 
proclamation  to  vindicate  this  prophecy  and  to  prove  that  the  tremendous 
conflict  of  arms  and  the  awful  internecine  strife  was  but  a  capital  operation 
for  the  excision  of  a  social  cancer.  And  so  in  due  course  after  the  war 
the  Thirteenth  Amendment  forbidding  slavery  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
United  States  became  part  of  the  fundamental  law  of  the  nation. 

Effect  of  Slavery  Uprooting. 

No  institution — however  evil  its  ultimate  tendency — made  part  of  the  web 
and  woof  of  society  in  a  large  community  for  a  century  or  more  can  be  cut 
out  without  great  inconvenience,  social  disturbance  and  suffering  more  or 
less  continued.  Therefore  the  taking  away  from  the  Southern  slave-owners  the 


8 


5,000,000  Negroes  who  had  been  under  the  Constitution  their  property,  and 
the  making  of  them  freemen  as  they  were,  without  preparation  for  the  re- 
sponsibilities of  freedom,  was  a  change  so  radical  and  a  social  wrench  so  vio- 
lent that  it  must  have  been  accompanied  by  temporary  evils  which  for  a  time 
clouded  the  great  beneficence  of  the  change. 

In  the  first  place  the  five  million  freed  men  who  but  lately  had  been 
chattels  were  95  per  cent  of  them  entirely  illiterate.  They  had  never  been 
trained  to  self-support  or  self-help.  They  were  dependent  on  others  for 
what  they  wore,  for  what  they  ate,  for  what  they  did.  They  were  living  in  a 
country  which  had  been  devastated  by  war  and  in  which  their  former  mas- 
ters were  themselves  in  a  state  of  destitution  and  hopelessness,  naturally 
embittered  by  the  awful  sufferings  and  trials  of  a  four  years'  war  and  the 
humiliation  of  defeat. 

Under  such  circumstances  the  future  of  the  Negro,  though  he  had  at- 
tained the  inestimable  boon  of  freedom,  seemed  dark  indeed.  It  was  true 
that  in  the  trials  of  the  Civil  War  there  had  been  made  clear  qualities  in 
the  race  which  gave  promise  for  the  future.  Under  the  influence  of  their 
surroundings  as  slaves  they  had  long  embraced  the  Christian  religion,  and 
though  illiterate  they  could  not  but  feel  the  influence  of  the  civilization 
In  which  they  lived. 

Fidelity  of  Negroes  in  Wartime. 

In  the  history  of  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth  there  is  no  more  uniform 
story  of  absolute  fidelity  to  trust  than  that  which  was  exhibited  by  the 
Negroes  of  the  South  towards  the  families  of  their  masters  when  the  men 
were  gone  to  the  war  and  none  but  the  women  and  children  were  left  at 
home.  Though  these  black  trustees  of  the  hearth  and  home  were,  of  course, 
moved  deeply  in  sympathy  with  the  enemies  of  their  masters  engaged  in  a 
death  struggle  for  their  freedom,  they  never  for  a  momnt  faltered  in  their 
duty  of  guardianship  and  protection. 

So,  too,  on  the  other  side,  the  Negroes  who  were  enlisted  in  the  war 
for  the  Union  and  the  abolition  of  slavery  manifested  a  courageous  and  "war- 
like spirit  and  a  willingness  to  die  for  their  country  and  their  flag  which 
entitled  them  to  share  in  the  benefits  of  a  common  citizenship.  It  is  neces- 
sary to  mention  these  circumstances  and  race  traits  in  order  to  explain  the 
marvelous  progress  that  has  been  made  out  of  the  gloom,  darkness  and  con- 
fusion that  prevailed  at  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  Thirteenth  Amend- 
ment. 

The  national  government,  appreciating  in  some  degree  the  hopelessness 
of  the  Southern  Negroes  after  the  war,  organized  the  Freedman's  Bureau,  in 
order  that  a  primary  education  might  be  given  to  these  illiterate  people  in 
starting  them  on  the  way  to  meet  the  responsibilities  of  freedom. 

In  the  course  of  five  years  upwards  of  4.000  schools,  with  9,000  teachers 
and  250,000  pupils,  were  organized.  In  the  life  of  this  bureau  a  million  black 
children  were  taught  to  read  and  write,  and  the  general  movement  expended 
$0,500,000.  In  looking  hark  one  ventures  to  think  that  the  general  govern- 
ment did  in    appn  chite  as  highh  as  it  might  have  done  the  Importance  of 


9 


appropriating  more  money  and  more  energy  to  the  education  of  the  Negro, 
The  general  government  had  itself  become  responsible  for  bis  emancipa- 
tion, and  it  would  seem  that  by  direct  expenditure  of  money  and  means  it 
should  have  attended  to  the  removal  of  those  obstacles  which  stood  in  the 
way  of  the  progress  of  the  Negro  race,  as  a  national  matter.  Ultimately,  the 
education  of  the  Negro  was  left  to  State  initiation  and  to  private  generosity. 

Credit  Due  to  South. 

Whatever  may  be  said  of  the  reconstruction  governments  of  the  South 
it  is  to  their  credit  that  laws  were  enacted  instituting  systems  of  education 
for  the  Negro.  Still  more  noteworthy  is  the  fact  that  since  1880  and  the 
passing  of  the  political  influence  of  the  Negro  in  the  South,  in  the  face  of  the 
bitter  feeling  against  him  which  at  times  seems  on  the  surface  to  have  swept 
across  that  section,  there  has  been  spent  by  the  Southern  "States  in  support 
of  Negro  schools  a  sum  exceeding  $105,000,000. 

In  the  year  1900  one  million'  colored  youths  attended  public  schools,  and 
in  the  thirty-five  years  between  1865  and  1900  the  illiteracy,  which  had  been 
95  per  cent,  was  reduced  to  47-  per  cent,  and  to-day  it  is  not  much  more 
than  40  per  cent  of  the  total  Negro  population  of  school  age.  Of  course, 
this  leaves  a  very  large  percentage  of  illiteracy  still  in  the  colored  race  and 
is  an  indication  that  much  remains  to  be  done  in  the  matter  of  general 
education  among  them;  but  when  we  consider  the  hostile  elements  that 
there  were  in  the  South  for  years  after  the  war,  when  we  consider  the  desti- 
tution of  the  South  itself  and  the  difficulties  that  it  had  in  business  and 
industrial  progress,  we  must  admit  that  the  achievements  in  the  education 
of  the  Negro  reflects  credit  both  upon  the  Southern  white  man  and  the  South- 
ern Negro. 

It  shows  on  the  one  hand  the  intense  desire  of  the  Negro  for  education, 
a  yearning  that  manifests  itself  in  a  thousand  different  ways  and  is  pathetic 
in  every  manifestation;  and  on  the  other  the  appreciation  of  the  white  man 
that  the  Negro  is  a  necessary  part  of  Southern  civilization,  and  that  the  one 
method  of  relieving  his  community  from  the  burden  of  ignorance  and  crime 
and  social  retrogression  is  the  institution  of  thorough  systems  of  education 
for  the  black  man  and  his  children. 

Much  Remains  to  Be  Done. 

But  while  great  progress  has  been  made  in  the  reduction  of  the  illiteracy 
of  the  Negro  race,  much  remains  to  be  done.  The  Southern  Negro  schools 
in  the  country  are  by  no  means  what  they  ought  to  be  in  many  States,  and 
the  Negro  children  are  denied  in  many  rural  communities  more  than  one  or 
two  or  three  months'  education  during  the  year. 

This,  it  is  hoped,  will  improve  as  the  revenues  of  the  Southern  States, 
in  their  present  prosperity,  permit  larger  appropriations  to  benefit  the 
schools,  and  there  is  room  here,  too,  for  the  adding  to  the  many  generous 
funds — the  Slater,  the  Peabody,  and  the  Jeanes  funds,  for  the  promotion 
of  general  education  in  the  South. 

The  removal  of  illiteracy — that  is,  the  primary  education — is  indispensable 
in  the  uplift  of  any  race.    Secondary  and  university  education  are  not  so 


IO 

indispensable,  but  they  are  of  the  highest  advantage  in  the  instruction  of  the 
leaders  of  the  race  and  of  that  small  proportion  of  professional  men  that  the 
general  education  and  industrial  progress  of  the  race  make  useful. 

But  the  real  advancement  of  an  illiterate  people  is  not  shown  by  the  pres- 
ence of  a  few  universities  among  them,  for  there  are  many  countries — and 
the  Philippines  are  one — in  which  the  universities  are  older  than  our  own,  but 
in  which  the  density  of  the  ignorance  of  the  common  people  is  so  great  as 
to  discourage  all  but  the  most  courageous  friends  of  that  people. 

The  Fourteenth  Amendment  secured  the  Negro  against  any  State  legis- 
lation or  State  action  which  might  deprive  him  of  his  right  to  life,  liberty 
and  property — that  is,  of  his  right  to  pursue  happiness.  It  gave  him  protec- 
tion against  any  effort  on  the  part  of  the  States  to  deprive  him  of  equality  of 
opportunity  in  improving  his  condition  by  self-help,  and  it  is  under  this 
amendment  and  the  Fifteenth  Amendment,  affecting  his  political  rights,  that 
one  should  properly  consider  the  far-reaching  influence  of  the  education 
initiated  by  General  Armstrong  in  the  experiment  of  Hampton  Institute. 

Birth  of  Industrial  Education. 

Industrial  education  as  such,  by  which  I  mean  the  teaching  of  trades  and 
occupations  in  schools,  public  or  private,  is  said  to  have  had  its  inception 
in  France,  but  it  had  great  progress,  apparently,  in  Germany,  where  there 
were  industrial  schools  of  various  kinds  in  the  eighteenth  century  and  in  the 
nineteenth  century. 

The  great  impetus,  however,  to  industrial  education,  which  has  affected 
the  whole  of  Germany's  industrial  progress  and  given  it  such  an  enormous 
advantage  in  its  business  competition  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  came  after 
the  Franco-Prussian  War  and  the  organization  of  the  German  Empire. 

The  controversy,  in  which  the  system  of  industrial  schools  was  trium- 
phant, as  between  the  learning  of  trades  and  vocations  in  the  schools  and 
the  learning  of  a  trade  by  the  son  at  the  bench  of  the  father.  The  con- 
servative view  was  that  the  home  teaching,  and  the  learning  to  do  by  doing 
under  the  influence  of  the  parent,  was  better  than  the  teaching  in  large 
classes  at  an  industrial  school. 

Such  a  controversy,  however,  could  not  arise  with  reference  to  the  indus- 
trial education  of  the  Negro  race,  for  while  among  the  slaves  there  had  been 
some  industrial  training,  and  there  were  good  carpenters  and  blacksmiths, 
and  other  tradesmen,  the  number  of  craftsmen  in  proportion  to  the  number 
of  slaves  was  so  small  that  the  prospect  of  the  training  of  the  children  of 
these  artisans  at  the  benches  of  their  fathers  was  not  encouraging  in  respect 
to  the  whole  race. 

Hence,  the  only  system  of  leading  the  Negro  into  an  industrial  exist- 
ence was  through  schools  established  for  the  purpose,  and  this  was  begun 
by  General  Armstrong  in  18G8 — even  before  the  impetus  which  industrial 
education  had  received  in  Germany  after  the  French  war. 

Praise  for  School  Founders. 

It  is  not  for  me  to  dwell  upon  the  details  and  general  advantages  of 
iinlM  !ri;il  education — certainly  not  in  a  city  which,  like  Brooklyn,  possesses 


1 1 

the  Pratt  Institute,  where  industrial  education  is  given  in  its  most  useful 
and  (  ffective  forms — but  I  may  call  attention  to  the  wisdom  of  General  Arm- 
strong and  of  his  great  disciple,  Booker  Washington,  in  adapting  their  edu- 
cational processes  to  lead  the  Xegro  along  the  path  which  natural  taste  and 
early  environment  marked  out  for  him  by  assigning  the  greatest  importance 
to  teaching  in  a  practical  way  agricultural  and  kindred  pursuits  rather  than 
those  of  an  urban  community. 

This  taking  advantage  of  the  natural  tendency  of  the  Negro,  received 
from  the  days  of  his  slavery  environment,  was  only  one  manifestation  of 
that  common  sense  which  has  distinguished  the  management  of  the  Hamp- 
ton Institute  under  General  Armstrong  and  Dr.  Frissell,  and  this  leading 
toward  agricultural  pursuits  has  even  been  emphasized  in  that  great  insti- 
tution at  Tuskegee  founded  by  Dr.  Washington. 

Hampton  Institute  has  been,  followed  by  the  organization  of  twenty-five 
or  thirty  schools  for  the  industrial  education  of  the  Negro,  and  the  influence 
of  the  graduates  of  these  institutions  throughout  those  communities  in  the 
South  where  the  Negroes  are  in  'great  number  has  been  distinctly  helpful,  to 
the  knowledge  of  every  one  who  has  given  the  matter  the  slightest  con- 
sideration. 

In  the  Philippines  we  have  been  confronted,  in  founding  industrial  schools, 
by  the  social  prejudice  cultivated  in  a  previous  regime,  that  manual  labor  is 
a  mark  of  slavery.  Many  young  men  who  have  been  invited  to  take  up  the 
trades  of  the  printer,  of  the  machinist,  of  the  carpenter,  of  the  electrician, 
objected  and  have  asked  to  be  allowed  to  prepare  themselves  as  clerks, 
although  they  are  told  that  the  compensation  of  the  former  is  $50  and  $60 
and  $70  a  month,  and  that  of  the  clerk  but  $20.  They  have  said  they  pre- 
ferred to  be  classed  as  gentlemen.    This  is  now  wearing  off. 

Opposition  to  Labor. 

In  a  different  way  there  was  a  similar  feeling  against  manual  labor  among 
the  enfranchised  Negroes.  They  had  somehow  got  it  into  their  heads  that 
freedom  brought  freedom  from  the  necessity  of  labor  and  that  work  was  an 
accompaniment  of  bondage. 

Hampton  and  Tuskegee  teach  the  dignity  of  labor,  the  value  of  skill,  the 
use  of  the  mind  and  the  application  of  the  hand,  and  the  lesson  that  without 
attention  and  without  taking  pains,  without  self-restraint,  no  progress  can 
be  made  by  either  a  man,  a  race  or  a  nation. 

The  founders  of  Hampton  and  Tuskegee  saw  that  the  colored  people  need- 
ed training  in  the  branches  of  human  endeavor  in  which  there  was  hope 
of  real  and  immediate  success  and  made  their  schools  accordingly.  They 
would  not  decry  the  advantages  of  higher  education  for  some  of  the  race,  and 
would  not  shut  the  door  of  opportunity  to  the  Negro  in  any  vocation,  pro- 
fessional or  manual.  But  in  these  schools  they  determined  to  train  the  race 
in  the  work  plainly  open  to  the  whole  race  and  which  in  the  end  must  most 
certainly  add  to  the  economic  power  and  influence  of  the  Negro  for  his  up- 
lifting. 

That  the  policy  has  been  abundantly  justified  by  the  event  the  statistics 
of  the  Negro  race  bear  indisputable  evidence. 


]  2 


In  Virginia  in  1898  the  Negroes  owned  978,000  acres  of  land.  In  the 
five  years  next  following  they  had  gained  326,000  acres.  The  total  business 
capital  of  Negroes  in  Virginia  in  1889  was  $5,700,000;  in  1899  this  had 
increased  to  $8,800,000,  and  79  per  cent  of  the  Negroes  had  less  than  $2,500 
each,  showing  that  the  wealth  was  quite  evenly  distributed  among  them. 

In  Georgia,  which  is  one  of  the  most  prosperous  of  the  Southern  States, 
in  1900  the  Negroes  owned  one  million  acres,  worth  upwards  of  $4,000,000, 
and  the  asset  value  of  all  property  owned  by  them  in  that  State  was  tax 
value,  $15,000,000,  or  double  that  for  actual  value,  $30,000,000. 

Record  of  Progress. 

In  1865  the  Negroes  were  almost  without  homes  of  their  own,  and  in 
1900,  thirty-five  years  later,  there  were  in  all  the  Southern  States  372,000 
owners  of  homes,  and  of  these  225,000  were  free  from  incumbrance. 

The  number  of  farms  operated  by  Negroes  in  the  United  States  in  1900 
was  746,000,  and  of  these  287,000  were  in  the  South  Atlantic  States,  and 
444,000  in  the  South  Central  States.  Of  the  Southern  farms  187,000  or  25 
per  cent  of  all,  were  owned  by  the  Negroes  who  farmed  them;  271,000  were 
operated  by  Negroes  who  were  cash  tenants,  and  279,000  were  operated 
by  Negroes  who  were  share  tenants. 

Of  the  Negroes  in  the  South  there  were  1,344,000  agricultural  laborers 
and  757,000  farmers,  planters  and  overseers. 

The  agricultural  wealth  of  the  Negroes  of  the  South  was  estimated  at 
$300,000,000  in  1908.  Between  1890  and  1900  the  number  of  Negro  farmers 
increased  37  per  cent,  and  the  number  of  farm  owners  increased  57  per 
cent.  The  Negroes  as  owners  or  tenants  cultivate  one-half  of  all  the  cotton 
farms,  one-third  of  all  the  rice  farms,  one-seventh  of  all  the  sugar  farms  and 
two-elevenths  of  all  the  tobacco  farms  in  the  United  States,  although  they 
form  but  one-eighth  of  the  total  population.  Two-fifths  of  the  cotton  crop 
is  raised  on  farms  owned  or  managed  by  Negroes.  The  Negro  population  in 
the  South  is  about  double  since  the  close  of  the  war,  a  strong  indication 
that,  while  their  death  rate  might  be  higher  than  the  whites,  their  condi- 
tions of  bodily  health  and  comfort  are  certainly  greatly  improving. 

Increase  in  Schools  and  Churches. 

The  increase  in  schools  and  churches  among  the  Negroes  of  the  South 
demonstrates  the  intellectual,  moral  and  religfous  progress  of  the  race  since 

freedom  came. 

Of  course  there  is  much  to  discourage  in  the  bewildered  and  helpless 
condition  of  so  many  ignorant  Negroes,  who,  knowing  no  useful  trade  but 
agriculture,  are  attracted  to  the  Southern  cities  and  find  there  no  occupa- 
tion for  which  they  are  adapted. 

Nor  is  it  pleasant  for  the  well-wisher  of  the  Negro  race  to  hear  from 
railroad  constructors  and  other  employers  of  labor  that  many  Negroes  in  the 
South  will  work  as  day  laborers  for  two  or  three  days  in  the  week,  earning 
thereby  enougn  to  keep  them  for  the  rest  of  the  week,  and  then  will  remain 
,dp.  until  tluir  money  is  exhausted.     This    however,  cannot  he  true  gen- 


'3 


erally  of  Negro  labor,  for  the  testimony  in  reference  to  its  efficiency  in  many 
cases  is  a  favorable  one.  It  must  apply  to  a  wandering  and  irresponsible 
class  and  not  to  the  majority. 

Equally  discouraging  in  another  way  is  the  state  of  a  bright  young  col- 
ored man  who  finds  himself  with  merely  a  literary  education,  with  no  pro- 
fessional opportunity  and  with  an  inability  to  overcome  his  repugnance  to 
what  he  allows  himself  to  believe  is  the  humiliation  of  manual  labor. 

These  things  show  that  the  work  of  uplifting  the  race  must  be  slow  and 
toilsome,  but  they  do  not  make  it  hopeless.  The  spread  of  industrial  educa- 
tion has  done  wonders,  and  with  the  bright  and  shining  examples  of  Hampton 
and  Tuskegee  we  must  look  to  the  establishment  of  such  institutions  in 
every  State  and  every  community,  and,  what  is  even  more  important,  to 
the  inculcating  in  the  present  and  rising  generation  of  Negroes  the  same 
and  profoundly  wise  gospel  preached  every  day  by  the  masters  of  these  homes 
of  practical  instruction. 

A  Hiopeful  Outlook. 

It  is  said  that  only  the  picked  ones  of  the  race  are  educated  in  Hampton 
and  Tuskegee,  and  therefore  we  may  not  infer  from  their  character  as 
developed  by  these  institutions  and  their  qualifications  for  success  in  life 
what  will  be  the  result  of  the  extension  of  industrial  education  to  those  of 
their  race  who  are  less  qualified  than  they  were  to  receive  the  benefit  of  such 
education. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  a  most  pessimistic  view  to  take.  Nothing 
can  be  more  inspiring  and  full  of  hope  than  the  earnest  yearning  of  those 
who  go  to  Hampton  and  who  come  to  Tuskegee  to  fit  themselves  to  meet 
the  problems  of  their  life  and  to  carry  to  the  lowly  of  their  race  the  lessons 
they  have  learned  from  the  lips  of  their  great  teachers.  Fortunate  indeed 
is  a  race  which  has  developed  the  man  who  could  write  the  forceful  truths 
full  of  saving  common  sense  and  loving  candor  with  which  Booker  Washing- 
ton has  spoken  to  his  people  in  the  chapters  of  "The  Future  of  the  Negro." 

The  impressive  weight  of  the  statistics  which  I  have  given  above  cannot 
be  minimized  by  a  partial  or  prejudiced  view  of  those  who  do  take  a  broad, 
comprehensive  view  of  the  situation.  There  are  many  noble  white  men  in 
the  South  (and  the  number  is  increasing)  actively  interested  in  the  spread 
of  primary  and  industrial  education  among  the  Negroes,  from  whom  indi- 
vidual instances  of  the  development  of  progressive  farming  and  business 
communities  among  the  Negroes  can  be  learned,  and  who,  as  a  result  of 
their  experience  and  observation,  believe  in  the  ultimate  success  of  this  prac- 
tical educational  experiment  with  the  race. 

The  Political  Phase. 

I  come  now  to  the  political  phase  of  the  Negro  problem  and  the  effect 
of  the  Fifteenth  Amendment  to  the  Constitution.  The  immediate  effect  of 
the  Fifteenth  Amendment,  with  the  exclusion  from  the  franchise  of  those 
who  had  been  engaged  in  the  Confederacy,  was  to  throw  large  political 
power  into  the  hands  of  an  electorate  that  had  not  the  education  properly  to 
conduct  a  government. 


4 


And  this  led  to  the  abuses  which  have  been  held  up  to  execration  by 
the  lurid  pictures  of  the  reconstruction  days.  How  far  those  pictures  have 
been  colored  beyond  the  truth  by  partisan  and  race  prejudice  it  is  not  neces- 
sary for  us  to  discuss,  because  one  of  the  things  which  every  lover  of  his 
country  ought  to  refrain  from  doing  is  to  say  the  things  which  are  likely  to 
stir  up  again  the  dying  embers  of  race  and  sectional  hatred. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  do  so.  E\en  the  truth  under  such  circumstances 
is  an  offense.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  following  reconstrutcion  days  the 
votes  of  the  Negroes,  which  under  State  and  national  laws  they  are  entitled 
to  cast,  were  by  fraud  and  violence  made  to  count  for  nothing,  and  since 
1880  the  Fifteenth  Amendment  in  a  number  of  Southern  States  has  been 
treated  largely  as  a  dead  letter. 

Of  recent  years,  however,  the  leaders  of  the  South  have  felt  deeply  the 
demoralization  sure  to  follow  the  flouting  of  the  law  and  the  maintenance  of 
a  government  on  fraud  and  violence.  They  haVe  seen  that  it  was  impossible 
to  confine  that  lawlessness  which  they  justified  to  rid  them- 
selves of  what  they  called  Negro  domination  to  the  one  purpose,, 
and  they  have  felt  its  degrading  influence  in  the  whole  political  atmosphere 
of  the  South.  Hence  they  have  attempted  to  make  the  laws  of  the  South 
square  with  the  exclusion  of  the  Negro  from  the  ballot.  They  have  sought 
to  do  this  by  acts  which  were  in  their  inception  an  evasion  of  the  Fifteenth 
Amendment  by  the  use  of  the  so-called  "grandfather"  clauses  and  in  other 
ways. 

But  ultimately  after  these  "grandfather"  clauses  had  ceased  to  operate 
the  laws  upon  which  they  have  depended  were  laws  creating  educational 
and  property  qualifications  for  electors.  It  is  charged,  and  doubtless  with 
truth,  that  such  laws  were  not  intended  to  be  enforced  against  the  whites, 
but  only  against  the  blacks,  and  that  in  this  way  they  have  continued  to 
annul  the  Fifteenth  Amendment. 

Qualified  Voting  Favored. 

In  a  population  where  illiteracy  is  proportionately  very  large,  no  one  can 
object,  certainly  under  the  Federal  Constitution,  to  the  establishment  of  elec- 
toral educational  or  property  qualifications.  And  I  do  not  understand  that 
the  intelligent  colored  men  of  the  country  object  to  the  passage  and  en- 
forcement of  such  a  law,  but  they  do  object,  and  have  a  right  to  object,  to  the 
partial  enforcement  of  such  a  law  in  such  a  way  as  to  exclude  the  ineligible 
black  men  and  allow  to  vote  the  white  men  who  are  equally  ignorant  and 
ineligible. 

But,  my  friends,  I  am  an  optimist,  and  as  I  have  already  said,  I  regard 
the  signs  in  the  South,  changing  in  one  method  in  respect  to  elections  to 
another,  as  an  indication  that  in  the  near  future  there  will  be  a  steady 
improvement  toward  a  more  and  more  equal  and  impartial  enforcement  of 
th<  sc  doctoral  laws.  I  think  so  because  it  is  the  part  of  political  and  eco- 
nomic wisdom.  The  property  and  educational  qualifications  make  utterly 
Impossible  a  return  to  the  abuses  which  many  Southerners  profess  to  fear. 
Th<-  so-called  Negro  domination  is  nothing  but  a  dream  and  a  nightmare  of  the 


'5 


past.  The  Fifteenth  Amendment,  while  in  the  past  it  may  not  have  accom- 
plished all  that  its  author  intended  it  should,  has  in  it  this  inestimable  bene- 
fit to  the  Negro  race  that  it  fixes  a  restriction  upon  State  electoral  laws 
that  may  be  temporarily  violated,  but  can  never  be  removed. 

However  the  opponent  of  equal  political  rights  to  the  Negro  may  turn 
and  twist,  whatever  devices  he  may  invent  to  give  a  specious  appearance  of 
legality  to  laws  intended  to  exclude  the  Negro  because  of  his  race  or  color, 
he  will  find  his  purpose  thwarted  by  the  broad  and  generous  scope  of  the 
language  of  the  amendment. 

The  amendment  is  the  measure  of  lawfulness  toward  which  all  good  move- 
ments and  all  progress  in  the  South  must  necessarily  tend.  What  the  Negro 
and  his  friends  demand  is  equality  of  enforcement  of  the  law  .under  the  Con- 
stitution, and  toward  that  end  I  feel  convinced  that  all  the  influence  of 
industrial  progress  in  the  South  and  the  closer  union  between  the  sections 
necessarily  are  making. 

Education  and  Politics. 

Now,  what  power  has  the  industrial  education  at  Hampton  and  Tuskegee 
and  the  other  institutions  upon  this  political  phase  of  the  Negro  problem? 
It  has  the  most  direct  effect  in  this,  that  the  true  basis  of  political  influence 
in  any  community  is  industrial  independence.  This  I  understand  to  be 
the  shibboleth  of  those  who  hearken  to  the  teachings  of  Hampton  and  Tus- 
kegee. If  the  Negro  will  make  himself  indispensable  to  the  business  pros- 
perity of  the  South  his  political  infleunce  will  take  care  of  itself. 

By  education  and  the  acquisition  of  property  he  will  become  a  member 
of  the  community  whose  political  influence,  instead  of  being  unlawfully 
destroyed,  will  be  welcomed  and  encouraged.  As  the  colored  man  becomes 
eligible  under  the  laws  imposing  educational  and  property  qualifications,  his 
standing  in  the  community  will  give  weight  to  the  vote  he  casts,  and  it  is 
inevitable  that  in  the  end  industrial  success  will  bring  him  full  political 
rights. 

But  few  maintain  that  the  Negro  to-day  has  not  in  the  South  an  equal 
chance  of  bettering  his  condition  by  industry  and  education.  The  demand 
for  labor  with  the  increased  prosperity  of  the  South  makes  him  more  and 
more  valuable  to  that  section,  and  if  by  industrial  education  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  greatest  of  these  great  industrial  institutions  his  usefulness 
as  a  member  of  the  community  is  increased,  race  prejudice  will  fade  before 
business  necessity,  and  we  shall  have  a  rapidly  growing  Negro  electorate 
in  the  South  whose  political  influence  will  be  recognized  in  the  States  of  the 
South  as  worthy  of  respect  and  as  one  to  be  reckoned  with. 

Thus  we  find  that  the  principles  inculcated  at  Hampton  are  those  which 
make  the  Thirteenth,  Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  Amendments  to  the  Con- 
stitution of  value  to  the  Negro  race.  I  know  it  is  the  habit  of  many  con- 
templating the  condition  of  the  two  races  in  the  Southern  States  to  shake 
their  heads  and  say  that  the  Negro  problem  is  far  from  solution,  and  that 
the  future  in  this  respect  is  dark.  Plans  have  been  suggested  for  a  migra- 
tion of  the  Negroes  to  some  other  country  where  they  would  live  by  them- 


I 


16 

selves  and  grow  up  by  themselves  and  have  a  society  by  themselves  and 
create  a  nation  by  themselves. 

Deportation  Chimerical. 

Such  a  suggestion  is  chimerical.  The  Negro  has  no  desire  to  go,  and 
the  people  of  the  South  would  seriously  object  to  his  going.  He  was  brought 
here  originally  against  his  will,  and  he  was  kept  here  until  be  has  become  an 
American.  He  is  in  this  country  as  a  part  of  our  people,  and  is  bound  to 
continue  to  be  so.  He  is  entitled  to  unceasing  effort  on  the  part  of  the  whole 
people  in  his  struggle  for  better  things,  both  because  it  is  our  duty  and  to  our 
interest  to  secure  him  equal  opportunity.  Whenever  called  upon  the  Negro 
has  never  failed  to  make  sacrifices  for  this  the  only  country  he  has  and  the 
only  flag  he  loves. 

All  he  can  ask  is  equal  opportunity  and  equal  enforcement  of  the  laws 
in  respect  to  his  race  and  in  respect  to  the  white  race.  When  he  has  vio- 
lated the  laws  he  must  expect  the  same  punishment  as  the  white  man. 
It  is  entirely  natural,  because  he  has  been  subjected  so  often  to  injustice 
and  contumely  and  insult  because  of  his  color  and  his  race,  that  he  should 
be  suspicious  whenever  members  of  his  race  are  brought  to  punishment 
that  the  presumption  in  favor  of  their  innocence  is  not  as  strong  as  it  would 
be  in  favor  of  white  men  similarly  accused. 

It  is  also  natural  that  his  racial  prejudice  and  sympathies  can  be  more 
easily  aroused  in  behalf  of  some  one  of  his  own  number  than  are  the  race 
prejudices  of  the  more  numerous  and  more  fortunate  white  race.  But  such 
tendencies  are  to  be  expected,  and  should  no  more  turn  aside  the  deep  sym- 
pathy of  the  well-wishers  of  the  race  than  any  other  tendency  directly  trace- 
able to  the  long  history  of  suffering  and  misfortune  to  which  they  have 
been  in  the  past  subjected. 

The  statistics  which  may  show  a  large  criminal  class  among  the  Negroes 
in  the  South  ought  to  frighten  no  one.  This  is  to  be  expected  where  there 
is  much  ignorance  and  illiteracy.  Among  the  graduates  of  Hampton  and 
Tuskegee  and  like  institutions  you  will  find  a  clean  record  of  God-fearing 
men  and  women  struggling  onward  and  upward  in  the  interest  of  their  race. 

Industrial  independence,  the  aim  of  Hampton  and  Tuskegee,  is  the  basis 
for  all  real  progress  of  the  Negro  race,  as  it  is  of  the  Filipino  people.  Ad- 
vancement along  that  path  opens  up  to  both  the  possibility,  indeed  the  cer- 
tainty, of  attaining  all  other  ideals,  intellectual,  political  and  moral. 


Extract  From  Speech  Delivered  at  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  July  28, 
J  908,  Accepting  the  Republican  Nomination  for  the 
Office  of  President  of  the  United  States. 


The  Republican  platform  refers  to  the  amendments  to  the  Constitution 
that  were  passed  by  the  Republican  party  for  the  protection  of  the  Negro. 
The  Negro,  in  the  forty  years  since  he  was  freed  from  slavery,  has  made 
remarkable  progress.  He  is  becoming  a  more  and  more  valuable  member 
of  the  communities  in  which  he  lives.  The  education  of  the  Negro  is  being 
expanded  and  improved  in  every  way.  The  best  men  of  both  races,  at  the 
North  as  well  as  at  the  South,  ought  to  rejoice  to  see  growing  up  among 
the  Southern  people  an  influential  element  disposed  to  encourage  the  Negro 
in  his  hard  struggle  for  industrial  independence  and  assured  political  status. 
The  Republican  platform  adopted  at  Chicago  explicitly  demands  justice 
for  all  men  without  regard  to  race  or  color,  and  just  as  explicitly  declares 
for  the  enforcement,  and  without  reservation,  in  letter  andt  spirit,  of  the 
Thirteenth,  Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  Amendments  to  the  Constitution.  It  is 
needless  to  state  that  I  stand  with  my  party  squarely  on  that  plank  in  the 
platform,  and  believe  that  equal  justice  to  all  men  and  the  fair  and  impar- 
tial enforcement  of  these  amendments  are  in  keeping  with  the  real  American 
spirit  of  fair  play. 


Address  of  Hon.  Wm.  H.  Taft  at  Big  Bethel  Church,  At- 
■  lanta,  Ga.,  January  16,  1909. 


Bishop  Gaines,  Professor  Matthews,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  am  very 
glad  to  be  here  in  this  presence.  Had  circumstances  prevented  me  from 
having  an  opportunity  of  meeting  my  colored  fellow  citizens  in  my  visit  to 
Georgia,  I  should  have  thought  it  a  great  misfortune  for  me.  I  should 
have  regarded  my  visit  to  Georgia  as  not  complete  in  failing  to  meet  a  part 
of  the  citizenship  of  this  section  in  whose  development,  in  whose  progress, 
in  whose  prosperity  I  have  the  profoundest  interest,  and  with  whose  efforts 
to  uplift  themselves  I  have  the  deepest  sympathy.  It  is  true  that  in  your 
history  and  in  the  consideration  of  what  has  happened  in  the  past,  and 
possibly  what  will  happen  in  the  future,  it  is  difficult  to  exclude  political 
conditions  and  to  avoid  in  discussing  your  present  and  your  future  political 
issues.  But  you  will  understand  me  I  am  sure  when  I  say  to  you  that  here, 
as  the  coming  President,  should  the  Lord  permit  me  to  live  until  the  4th 


i8 


of  March,  I  must  stand  as  the  representative  of  all  the  people  and  avoid  in 
every  way  partisan  and  political  discussions,  but  I  can  conceive  that  the 
President  of  the  United  States  can  have  no  more  sacred  function  than  to 
offer  words  of  encouragement,  of  suggestion  and  of  hope  to  those  to  whom 
fate  in  the  past  has  not  been  kind  and  with  respect  to  whom  the  whole 
American  people  has  the  highest  obligation  of  trusteeship  and  guardianship. 
Now  we  know  a  great  deal  more  to-day  than  we  knew  thirty  years  ago.  All 
of  us,  whether  on  one  side  or  the  other.  We  know  that  we  were  not  always 
right  in  every  particular  ourselves,  and  that  the  other  side  who  differed  from 
us  was  not  always  wrong  in  every  particular,  and  we  can  afford  in  the 
progress  that  has  been  made  to  rejoice  that  that  progress  makes  assurance 
of  further  progress  and  further  prosperity  for  all  of  us.  One  of  the  things 
that  the  past  teaches  us,  one  of  the  things  that  it  impresses  on  every  man 
who  gives  earnest  consideration  to  the  working  out  of  the  providence  of  God, 
is  that  in  the  man  himself  must  he  find  the  seeds  of  his  progress.  I  say 
to  you  colored  men  and  colored  women  of  this  country  that,  hard  as  your  lot 
has  been,  and  hard  as  the  road  is  likely  to  be  onward  and  upward,  if  you 
will  abide  by  the  judgment  of  your  conscience,  by  those  very  ideals  that  lead 
to  self-restraint,  to  honest  effort,  to  providence,  you  will  attain 
a  condition  in  the  future  that  you  hardly  dream  of  to-day.  Look  back 
to  what  you  were  forty  years  ago.  Your  people  were  not  5  per  cent  of  them 
able  to  read  and  write,  and  to-day  you  have  reached  nearly  the  figure  of 
50  per  cent  of  literacy  among  you,  and  yon  must  consider  the  con- 
ditions and  the  hard  conditions  under  which  that  improvement  has  been 
made.  Brought  here  against  your  will,  put  here  in  a  condition  of  slavery 
for  years  and  years,  and  then  made  the  subject  of  a  bloody  war,  this  country 
to  which  your  fortunes  must  always  be  attached,  was  reduced  to  a  condi- 
tion of  poverty  and  straitened  circumstances  that  it  was  almost  impossible 
for  the  white  owners  of  property  to  live,  much  less  those  who  had  no 
property  and  no  education,  and  yet  under  these  circumstances  have  gone  on 
so  that  to-day  a  large  part  of  the  farming — I  could  give  you  the  statistics — 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  colored  people  of  the  South,  and  dotted  over  the  South 
are  model  places  which  show  to  you  what  can  be  done  when  you  approach 
your  problems  with  common  sense  and  a  determination  to  recognize  the  facts 
that  stand  before  you  and  to  meet  those  facts  with  courage  and  bravery. 
T  don't  intend  to  discuss  race  feeling  and  race  prejudice,  because  the  discus- 
sion of  it  and  the  argument  of  it  never  did  anybody  any  good.  You  must 
recognize  facts  and  in  the  face  of  those  facts,  because  they  cannot  keep  you 
down,  you  can  go  down  to  a  brighter  and  brighter  future.  Everyone  of  you 
knows  in  his  heart,  because  everyone  knows  noble,  earnest,  sympathetic 
white  men  in  the  South,  that  your  greatest  aid  and  your  greatest  hope  is  in 
the  sympathy  and  the  help  of  these  white  men,  who  are  your  neighbors, 
and  T  thnnk  God  that  in  the  South  there  is  developing  fast  evidence  of  a 
stronger  and  stronger  sympathy  with  the  effort  to  uplift  the  race  among 
the  white  men  of  the  South,  who  fool  themselves  responsible  for  the  whole 
Southern  civilization.  Your  people  have  faults  that  grow  out  of  your  history 
and  your  training,  but  the  first  step  and  indication  in  an  improvement  of 


19 


faults  is  the  knowledge  that  you  have  them,  and  when  you  read  in  the  ser- 
mons of  your  own  people,  in  the  lectures  of  your  own  people,  the  cold — 
I  want  to  call  it  cold,  because  it  is  not  cold — but  the  sympathetic  truth  in 
respect  to  yourselves  and  the  necessities  that  present  themselves  to  you  in 
your  path  upward,  one  of  the  greatest  steps  possible  has  been  achieved. 
You  have  among  you  men  who  do  credit  to  the  entire  American  manhood. 
Without  being  invidious,  no  one  can  read  the  life  of  Booker  Washington  and 
know  what  he  has  done  without  being  proud  that  our  country  has  produced 
such  a  man,  and  I  say  it  without  invidious  distinction,  because  there  are 
doubtless  others  that  deserve  similar  tribute,  but  it  has  come  to  me  person- 
ally to  know  him  and  to  be  associated  with  him  and  to  understand  the  mar- 
velous perception  that  he  has  into  the  future  of  your  race  and  the  neces- 
sities that  are  presented  to  you  in  winning  higher  place  in  life.  Of  course 
the  first  thing  is  education.  The  first  thing  is  to  give  every  man  who  is  to 
enjoy  civil  rights  knowledge  enough  to  know  what  those  rights  are  and  how 
he  can  protect  himself  in  them.  Of  course  it  is  a  great  mistake  either 
among  white  men  or  colored  men  to  think  that  because  a  man  gets  a  uni- 
versity education  therefore  he  is  better  than  other  people  or  in  a  better 
condition.  Whether  the  university  education  does  him  good  or  not  depends 
upon  the  foundation  of  character  that  he  has.  You  need  among  you,  as  the 
white  men  need  among  them,  university  education  for  your  leaders,  your 
ministers,  who  control  so  much  of  your  public  opinion;  your  physicians,  and 
there  ought  to  be  a  great  many  more  of  them  well  educated,  in  order  to 
teach  the  race  the  rules  of  hygiene  that  in  the  country  are  so  often  widely 
departed  from.  And  you  need  in  all  branches  of  the  profession,  because  you 
must  have  leaders  among  them,  the  opportunity  for  giving  them  the  best 
education  that  the  world  affords,  but  that  is  a  comparatively  small  number. 
The  great  body  of  the  race  are  those  who  are  to  be  the  workers,  the  manual 
workers,  and  what  is  needed  for  the  great  body  of  your  race  is  primary  and 
industrial  education,  so  that  you  shall  commend  yourselves  to  the  commu- 
nity in  which  you  live  as  absolutely  indispensable  to  its  proper  and  future 
growth  and  prosperity,  that  when  you  have  carpenters  they  shall  be  honest 
carpenters  who  know  their  craft;  that  your  blacksmiths,  your  machinists, 
and  all  those  who  engage  in  manual  labor,  skilled  or  unskilled,  shall  have 
the  intelligence  and  the  knowledge  to  make  them  as  good  as  possible  in 
rendering  the  service  for  which  they  are  to  receive  a  just  compensation. 

Now,  my  friends,  I  did  not  come  here  prepared  to  make  a  speech.  And, 
I  always  come  before  an  audience  of  your  race  with  a  great  deal  of  hesita- 
tion, because  your  race  is  a  musical  race  and  it  is  an  oratorical  race,  and  I 
am  neither  musical  nor  oratorical.  But  I  did  want  to  come  here  because  I 
know  the  hardships  in  your  road;  I  know  every  once  in  a  while  that  you  fall 
on  your  knees  and  pray  to  God  to  relieve  you  from  the  burdens  that  you 
have,  and  I  believe  that  the  expression  of  sympathy  is  one  that  helps  people 
along;  it  helps  me  along,  but  in  that  expression  of  sympathy  I  would  not 
have  you  for  a  moment  abate  the  thought  of  the  duty  that  is  imposed  on 
everyone  of  you  of  making  as  much  of  the  talent  that  the  Lord  gives  you 
as  you  can. 


Address  of  Hon.  Wm.  H.  Taft,  at  the  Colored  Tabernacle 
Baptist  Church,  at  Augusta,  Ga.t  January  17,  1909. 


My  Fellow  Citizens:  I  am  glad  to  be  here.  I  should  have  been  better 
satisfied  if  I  could  have  sat  for  an  hour  and  heard  the  eloquence  of  your 
Dr.  Walker,  whose  reputation  as  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  and  as  a  man 
who  speaks  not  only  eloquence  but  sense  has  reached  into  the  far  North. 

I  always  come  before  an  audience  like  this  with  a  great  deal  of  hesita- 
tion, because  you  know  what  eloquence  is,  and  I  haven't  any  to  give  you. 
I  know  the  wide  influence  for  good  that  Dr.  Walker  exercises  in  this  com- 
munity. I  was  glad  to  hear  him  speak  of  the  good  feeling  that  exists 
between  the  white  and  the  colored  races  in  this  community,  and  I  doubt  not 
that  his  words,  his  leadership  and  his  common  sense  have  greatly  con- 
tributed to  that  end  so  devoutly  to  be  wished. 

This  is  a  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  meeting.  I  find  myself  here 
under  circumstances  that  require  an  explanation  why  I  am  here.  Until  I 
went  to  the  Philippines  I  knew  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association 
generally,  knew  something  of  its  work,  but  had  no  close  association  with 
it  and  no  personal  knowledge  of  its  excellent  operation  and  work.  When  I 
came  back  from  the  Philippines,  fortunately  or  unfortunately,  perhaps  you 
will  think  unfortunately  before  I  get  through,  I  was  invited  by  chance  to 
make  an  address  on  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  in  Dayton,  O. 
Now,  there  are  lines  of  wireless  telegraphy  between  all  Young  Men's 
Christian  Association  in  the  world,  I  think,  because  I  never  have  stopped 
over  Sunday  in  any  place  on  the  globe  that  I  haven't  been  invited  to  deliver 
an  address  on  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  and  so  it  has  fallen 
to  my  lot  to  speak  to  that  association  in  Omaha,  in  Seattle,  in  Springfield, 
Mass.,  in  Minneapolis,  in  Manila,  in  Shanghai,  in  Hong  Kong,  and  I  don't 
know  how  many  other  places. 

The  object  of  the  Association,  as  I  understand  it,  is  to  be  an  adjunct  to  all 
the  churches,  for  it  knows  no  difference  between  them  in  filling  the  leisure 
time  of  young  men  with  rational  amusement  and  offering  to  them  the  means 
of  spending  that  time  so  that  they  need  not  yield  to  the  temptations  of 
vice  and  depart  from  the  path  of  virtue.  That  is  the  object  of  the  Asso- 
ciation. It  has  many  others,  but  that  is  the  principal  object,  to  occupy  the 
leisure  of  the  young  men  in  a  city  where  his  steps  are  beset  by  temptations 
to  waste  his  money,  if  nothing  worse — but  generally  to  spend  his  money  in 
drinking,  gambling  and  other  vices  that  finally  lead  him  to  the  gutter.  You 
will  find  that  the  men  who  have  built  up  the  city  are  the  men 
who    have    come    to    it    as    boys    from    the    country.      They  come 


21 


to  the  city  and  their  time,  much  of  it,  is  their  own.  If  they  are 
lawyers,  from  personal  experience  I  can  say  their  days  are  laregly  their 
own  for  several  years.  And  so  it  is  with  doctors,  not  of  course  with 
ministers,  because  they  don't  need  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association, 
but  the  clerks,  the  men  who  are  striving  to  earn  a  living,  have  many  hours 
of  leisure  which  if  they  can  put  in  a  Christian  club  where  all  the  influ- 
ences surrounding  them  are  such  as  to  make  them  think  of  better  things, 
and  certainly  not  of  worse  things — the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association 
is  of  a  value  to  them  which  cannot  be  overestimated — it  is  the  best  material 
we  have  to  build  up  our  citizenship,  and  that  thing  is  as  true  of  the 
colored  people  as  it  is  of  the  white  people.  One  thing  about  the  Young 
Men's  Christian  Association  that  has  always  commended  itself  to  me  is 
the  very  business-like  method  that  the  Association  pursues.  There  is  in 
Springfield  a  school  for  the  education  of  Young  Men's  Christian  Association 
secretaries,  and  it  is  about  the  secretary  that  everything  in  the  Associa- 
tion moves.  Ke  spends  the  money  as  he  ought  to  spend  it.  He  arranges 
the  entertainments;  he  buys  the  "periodicals;  he  sees  to  the  various  games 
that  are  permitted  to  be  played.  In  other  words,  he  applies  to  that  very 
necessary  thing  the  common  sense  that  he  has  and  the  experience  that  has 
come  down  to  him  from  years  of  trial  as  to  what  it  is  that  is  most  likely  to  oc- 
cupy the  attention  of  young  men  under  those  circumstances  and  do  them  the 
most  good  and  claim  their  closest  attention.  Trained  as  these  secretaries 
are,  you  can  be  very  sure  that  that  money  goes  as  far  as  it  can  go  eco- 
nomically to  accomplish  the  purpose.  It  furnishes  therefore  a  great  oppor- 
tunity to  those  men  who  have  more  money  than  they  know  what  to  do  with 
it  to  spend  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  do  good  for  their  fellowmen.  It  furnishes 
opportunity  to  them  to  put  the  money  where  it  will  do  the  most  good.  I 
don't  know  how  it  strikes  you.  I  presume  you  never  had  a  million  dollars 
to  give  to  somebody  else  or  to  do  good  with.  I  never  had  it — but  if  you 
could  put  yourselves  in  the  place  of  a  man  who  had  a  million  dollars  to 
spend  for  the  good  of  his  fellowmen,  I  think  you  would  find  that  it  is  about 
as  difficult  to  spend  that  money  so  that  it  will  reach  the  result  that  you 
desire  and  really  help  your  fellowmen  as  it  was  for  the  man  in  the  first 
place  to  make  it.  Therefore,  when  we  have  an  opportunity — that  is  when 
you  and  I  become  millionaires,  when  we  have  an  opportunity,  and  those  who 
now  have  that  opportunity  ought  to  realize  it,  to  spend  the  money  for  the 
benefit  of  one's  fellowmen,  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  offers 
as  good  a  place  to  put  as  much  money  in  as  can  be  put  in  the  way  of  doing 
good  to  our  fellowman  at  a  time  in  the  lives  of  our  young  fellowmen  when 
it  is  most  important. 

Then  there  is  another  thing  about  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association 
that  I  greatly  admire.  It  recognizes  no  race,  color  or  creed,  but  it  takes 
everybody  to  assist  them.  It  has  introduced  into  this  country  more  tol- 
erance between  religious  denominations  than  any  other  institution  that  we 
have  had.  Now,  I  want  to  give  you  an  example  of  the  tolerance  that  we 
have  reached.  Well,  I  think  it  is  a  pretty  good  example  that  I  am  elected 
President  of  the  United  States,  but  I  had  another  thing  in  mind,  and  that 


2  2 


is  this:  When  we  went  to  the  Philippines  we  found  there  a  government 
that  for  three  hundred  years  under  the  Spanish  regime  had  been  so  united 
with  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  separate  the 
two.  Their  interests  were  so  inextricably  mixed  up  that  it  was  most  difficult 
to  tell  what  was  the  church's  function  and  what  was  the  civil  function  of 
the  government.  Now.  under  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  all  that  which  really 
belonged  to  the  Crown  of  Spain  in  a  civil  sense  passed  to  the  Government 
of  the  United  States,  but  that  which  belonged  to  the  Roman  Catholic  Church 
in  that  union  remained  with  the  church,  and  there  were  presented  a  great 
many  difficulties  of  the  nicest  character  that  required  all  the  acumen  of  the 
civilian  and  the  canonical  lawyers  to  solve  the  question  where  in  that  separa- 
tion this  particular  interest  was  to  fall  and  that  particular  interest  was  to 
fall.  Then  in  the  history  of  that  country  the  so-called  "friars,"  the  monastic 
orders,  who  had  three  hundred  years  before  made  it  a  Christian  country,  for 
they  arrived  just  about  two  or  three  years  before  the  Mohammedans — if 
they  had  not  the  islands  would  have  been  Mohammedan.  As  it  was,  they 
found  Mohammedan  tracts  there  when  they  went  there  three  hundred  years 
ago,  but  they  found  people  in  such  condition  that  they  readily  accepted 
the  Christian  faith  and  Christianity  spread  over  these  islands,  so  that 
there  are  now  seven  million  Christians  there  and  they  are  laregly — almost 
wholly — Christians  through  the  efforts  of  those  monastic  orders;  and  when 
1  say  that  I  want  to  emphasize  it  by  pointing  out  more  than  that,  that  the 
Filipinos  are  the  only  people  in  the  Orient  who  as  a  people  are  Christians. 
Hence  the  obligation  we  are  all  under  to  those  monastic  orders  for  what 
was  done.  They  went  ahead  and  educated  the  people  in  simple  arts  of 
agriculture  and  they  exercised  over  them  a  guardianship  that  kept  them  as 
Christians  for  three  hundred  years,  until  today.  But  in  the  last  one  hun- 
dred years  when  the  Spaniards  came  in  more  freely  in  the  islands  through 
the  Suez  Canal,  and  even  before  that,  when  the  natives  themselves  began  to 
have  ambitions  to  become  priests,  when  the  question  who  was  to  get  the 
best  parishes  had  to  be  decided,  and  then  when  the  seeds  of  Republicanism  or 
a  more  liberal  government  than  the  Spaniards  offered  came  on,  the  power 
that  these  monks  in  their  parishes  exerted  was  used  by  the  Spanish  Gov- 
ernment as  a  sort  of  police  instrumentality  for  suppressing  what  they  re- 
garded as  seditious  movements  among  the  people,  and  that  brought  about 
a  condition  of  hatred  on  the  part  of  the  people  of  these  Spanish  monastic 
orders  whose  predecessors  for  centuries  had  been  close  friends  and  almost 
lathers  of  the  people.  In  the  course  of  these  two  or  three  hundred  years  the 
Spanish  orders  had  accumulated  by  purchase  and  otherwise,  chiefly  by  pur- 
chase, upwards  of  400,000  acres  of  the  best  lands  in  the  islands,  and  250,000 
of  those  acres  were  distributed  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  Manila 
in  the  neighboring  provinces  where  it  was  easy  to  carry  the  products  of  the 
lands  into  the  markets  in  Manila.  Those  lands  were  occupied  by  tenants 
numbering  witli  their  families  perhaps  60,000  or  more.  When  Aguinaldo  car- 
ried on  a  government  for  a  month  or  two  in  the  islands  they  called  a  so-called 
constitutional  convention,  and  one  of  the  things  they  did  was  to  nationalize 
these  lands.  That  sounds  well,  but  what  it  means  is  that  they  confiscated 
them  and  appropriated  them  to  the  so-called  Filipino  Government  without 


23 


paying  anything  for  them.  They  were  the  lands  the  title  to  which  was  the 
least  disputed  in  the  islands.  When  we  went  in  there  and  took  posses- 
sion and  organized  a  government  and  finally  brought  about  tranquillity  and 
established  courts  with  partly  native  and  partly  American  judges,  these 
monastic  orders  under  the  pledge  and  covenant  of  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  if  for 
no  other  reason,  were  able  to  go  into  our  courts  and  say,  "Here,  we  own 
these  lands;  for  six  years  we  have  had  no  rental  for  them,  and  we  ask  that 
these  tenants  be  made  to  pay  this  rent  or  get  out."  We  had  the  courts  there. 
If  courts  were  to  be  courts  they  were  entitled  to  their  rights,  and  yet 
it  meant  60,000  eviction  suits.  I  don't  need  to  tell  you  my  friends  what 
that  meant.  These  lands  were  situated  in  the  Tagalog  provinces  generally, 
where  most  of  the  sedition  had  crept  in  in  the  Spanish  times,  and  where  the 
resistance  to  our  government  between  1900  and  1902  was  most  bitter,  and  it 
meant  for  us  if  we  allowed  this  thing  to  so  on.  to  have  these  courts  issno 
the  orders  of  eviction  which  must  be  issued  under  the  titles  that  they  had: 
it  meant  another  revolution.  It  meant  another  insurrection.  It  meant 
that  we  should  lose  of  our  soldiers  thousands  of  lives  and  expend  millions 
and  millions  of  dollars  in  suppressing  another  insurrection.  Something  had 
to  be  done.  They  recognized  the  title  of  the  Pilinino  remiblic  under  this 
nationalization  as  they  called  it.  They  would  not  nay  to  the  friars  but 
they  were  logically  driven  to  a  recognition  of  the  governmental  ownershin 
of  the  land,  so  the  question  was  therefore  whether  if  we  bought  the  land  for 
our  government  and  then  made  easy  terms  with  them  we  could  not  brins 
about  a  peaceful  result.  Now  in  order  to  do  that  we  could  not  deal  with 
anybody  in  the  islands.  The  friars  and  the  heads  of  the  friars  were  very 
much  prejudiced  on  the  subject,  and  then  they  said  they  did  not  have  the 
authority — that  the  authority  was  with  the  Pope  at  Rome.  The  question 
was,  "What  were  we  to  do?"  The  ordinary,  plain  method,  the  American 
way  of  doing  things  would  be  to  go  to  the  head  of  the  church.  But  the 
trouble  was  that  he  was  the  head  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  and  it  was 
contrary  to  our  traditions  to  recognize  him  as  a  world  power,  and  all  the 
other  denominations  might  naturally  object  to  introducing  diplomatic  rela- 
tions between  the  United  States  and  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  at  Rome. 
So  what  was  done?  Mr.  Roosevelt  and  Mr.  Root  sent  for  all  the  leading 
preacher?  of  all  denominations,  and  they  submitted,  not  in  one  conference  but 
from  time  to  time,  these  questions  to  those  ministers,  and  said,  "Now  what 
would  you  do?  We  don't  want  to  defeat  our  administration  by  doing  something 
that  shall  shock  the  sense  of  the  Protestant  denominations  of  this  country, 
but  we  believe  that  if  the  thing  is  explained  to  them  they  will  understand  that 
this  is  the  only  thing  to  do  and  that  it  does  not  involve  dinlomatic  relations 
with  a  church,  but  that  it  is  only  a  plain,  common  sense  settlement  of  an 
ordinary,  real  estate  transaction  with  such  accompaniments  as  the  peculiar 
circumstances  require.  The  result  of  those  conferences  was  that  these 
ministers  said,  "Go  ahead,  we  will  stand  by  you,  that  is  the  plain,  business 
way  to  do  things,"  and  we  went  ahead.  I  went  to  Rome,  representing  the 
irovernment,  and  had  conferences  with  the  Pope,  with  the  Cardinals  having 
the  authority  to  deal  with  this  subject,  and  then  they  sent  an  Apostolic 


24 


delegate  to  the  islands,  and  for  more  than  a  year  we  were  conducting 
negotiations  and  finally  we  bought  those  lands  for  $7,000,000,  paid  for  in  the 
bonds  of  the  Philippine  Government,  and  we  held  off  the  law- 
suits until  that  was  done,  and  we  avoided  a  revolution  and  all  the  dis- 
asters which  would  have  followed  a  series  of  60,000  evictions.  What  I  say 
is  this,  that  forty  years  ago  in  this  country  that  would  have  been  impossible, 
that  there  would  have  arisen  among  the  denominations  an  objection  to  it 
on  the  ground  that  it  was  a  recognition  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  which 
was  contrary  to  our  traditions.  But  today,  under  the  growing  influence  of 
toleration,  it  was  smoothly  carried  through,  and  we  took  a  long  step  toward 
permanent  tranquility  in  the  Philippines.  I  only  instance  that  to  say  how 
something  has  been  at  work  to  bring  about  tolerance  between  the  denomi- 
nations, to  promote  the  fatherhood  of  God  and  the  common  brotherhood  of 
man,  and  I  believe  that  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  has  been  as 
strong  an  influence  in  that  direction  as  any  that  I  know.  It  is  perhaps  un- 
wise to  refer  to  the  material  and  business  advantage  that  arises  from 
the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  and  yet  it  is  a  lesson  that  I  think 
we  ought  to  keep  before  us.  Every  well  regulated  railroad  in  this  country 
has  a  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  connected  with  it.  Now  do  you 
think  that  that  arises  because  of  the  overflowing  Christian  sprit  of  that 
corporation?  I  don't  mean  to  deny  to  the  various  directors  a  charitable 
disposition.  Doubtless  each  one  of  them  has  it,  but  when  they  meet  to- 
gether in  a  board  of  directors,  with  an  anxiety  for  dividends,  and  with  a 
sense  of  responsibility  to  their  stockholders,  that  charity  disappears.  It  is 
a  little  bit  like  that  story  that  doubtless  you  have  heard  of  the  man  who 
wanted  to  borrow  some  money  at  the  bank.  He  went  in  and  saw  the  presi- 
dent, and  the  president  said,  "Well,  I  might  let  you  have  it."  Then  he 
saw  the  cashier,  and  the  cashier  hesitated  a  little  bit.  He  finally  said,  "Well, 
I  think  you  might  have  it,  but  I  would  like  to  speak  to  the  directors."  Then 
the  proposed  borrower  went  and  saw  each  director,  and  each  director 
thought  he  might  have  it.  Then  he  went  back  to  the  bank  and  he  was  pre- 
sented with  a  resolution  from  the  whole  directorate  refusing  his  application 
for  a  loan.  He  turned  to  them  and  said,  "I  have  no  criticism  to  make.  1 
believe  each  one  of  you  is  a  truthful  man,  but  united  together  you  are  the 
worst  set  of  liars  I  have  ever  met."  A  railroad  corporation,  therefore,  is 
not  going  to  spend  its  money  in  establishing  a  Young  Men's  Christian  Asso- 
ciation if  it  does  not  inure  to  the  benefit  of  the  railroad;  and  it  does,  it  in- 
ures in  a  business  way,  because  it  offers  to  the  railway  employe  a  ineans 
of  spending  his  leisure  time  in  elevating,  moral  amusements,  in  recreation, 
in  study,  and  it  makes  him  a  bettor  railway  employe,  and  enables  him  to 
render  better  and  more  thorough  and  more  patient  and  more  faithful  service 
to  the  company,  you  could  not  have  a  stronger  illustration  of  the  benefit 
of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  from  a  material  and  business 
r-tan<lpoint  than  that  action  of  the  railroads  all  over  the  country.  And  so 
too,  Congress  does  not  appropriate  money  merely  for  charitable  purposes.  Tt 
Is  carrying  on  a  groat  govornemnt.  and  when  it  runs  an  army  it  does  the  best 
it  can  to  make  that  army  efficient.    Congress  has  provided  that  the  Young 


2  5 


Men's  Christian  Association  shall  be  permtited  to  have  today  what  they  call 
the  "post  exchanges"  in  every  post  in  the  army.  But  my  attention  to  the 
association  was  called  most  emphatically  in  the  tropics  and  in  our  colonies. 
Dr.  Walker  said  that  some  of  you  had  been  in  Cuba  and  some  of  you  in  the 
Philippines.  If  so,  you  will  bear  me  out  in  this  statement,  that  you  get  up 
in  the  morning  after  a  good  night's  rest,  and  you  work  hard 
during  the  day,  and  you  think,  "Well,  this  climate  is  not  any 
worse  than  at  home;  my  surroundings  are  all  right,  and  my  appe- 
tite is  good,  and  you  seem  to  be  able  to  do  as  much  work  as  in  a  colder 
country.  But  after  you  get  through  your  day's  work  there  comes  a  time 
when  the  vitality  seems  to  lower,  when  you  feel  as  if  you  needed  some  sort 
of  stimulant,  and  that  is  the  time  when  the  great  remedy  of  the  tropics  and 
the  Orient  is  produced  in  the  shape  of  a  bottle,  and  you  are  invited  to  take 
a  little  Scotch  and  soda.  Now  you  take  it  and  it  has  the  desired  effect. 
The  evening  is  long  and  there  is  nothing  else  to  do,  and  one  good  turn 
deserves  another,  and  there  is  a  strong  temptation  to  take  a  second.  Many 
a  man,  and  I  have  seen  it,  I  know  what  I  am  talking  about,  many  a  man  who 
at  home  would  have  passed  through  those  moments  of  temptation  without 
the  slightest  yielding,  there,  ten  thousand  miles  away  from  home,  with  a 
sense  of  distance,  and  a  kind  of  depression  and  a  freedom  from  the  obser- 
vation and  supervision  of  his  neighbors  and  a  sort  of  lack  of  responsibility, 
is  led  on,  and  if  he  yields,  as  he  too  frequently  does,  he  embraces  all 
the  vices  of  the  Orient,  and  lands  in  the  gutter  either  to  be  a  helpless 
invalid  or  to  die.  There  more  than  at  home,  more  than  in  any  American 
city,  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  offers  a  means  of  resisting  that 
temptation.  The  good  effect  of  it  cannot  be  exaggerated.  We  have  now 
in  Manila  erecting  and  nearly  completed  a  Young  Men's  Christian  Associa- 
tion, through  the  generosity  of  some  one  who  contributed,  I  think,  $120,000 
if  $60,000  or  $70,000  was  raised  among  the  merchants  of  Manila.  The  Ameri- 
can merchants  are  not  a  large  body  there,  and  they  have  had  a  pretty  poor 
picking  in  the  way  of  business,  too,  but  they  were  able  to  raise  that 
amount,  and  they  raised  it  in  ten  days,  because  they  knew  that  that 
institution  would  contribute  more  directly  to  the  uplifting  and  the  main- 
tenance of  the  good  character  of  the  men  whom  they  had  in  their  employ 
and  possibly  even  of  themselves  than  any  other  instrumentality  they 
could  have  in  that  community.  So,  too,  on  the  Isthmus,  where  the  weather 
and  the  circumstances  are  not  unlike  those  in  the  Philippines.  There  is  the 
same  temptation,  much  stronger  than  it  is  here.  They  have  the  disease 
which  is  called  "nostalgia,"  which  liberally  interpreted  means  "homesick- 
ness." It  is  something  more.  It  is  a  feeling,  "I  must  get  out  of  this — these 
beautiful  sunsets,  these  long,  warm  days,  this  lazy  feeling,  this  faraway  from 
home,  I  cannot  stand  it.  My  nerves  are  giving  way  and  I  must  have  some 
means  of  meeting  this."  You  long  for  anything.  You  long  for  a  strap  in  a 
street  car  just  to  hold  yourself  up,  to  make  yourself  feel  that  you  are  in 
somebody  else's  way,  or  that  somebody  else  is  in  your  way.  In  that  kind 
of  desperation  you  feel  so  far  away  from  home.  There  is  nothing  like  the 
infleunce  of  the  Young  M'en's  Christian  Association  in  giving  you  the  means 


26 


of  exercise,  tennis  courts,  billiard  tables,  bowling  alleys,  periodicals  full  of 
uplifting  articles,  bathing  facilities  and  everything  that  goes  to  make  up 
a  decent  Christian  life  under  decent  Christian  auspices.  Now, 
on  the  Isthmus  we  have  established  four  great  clubs,  having  all 
these  facilities  that, I  have  described,  and  we  have  paid  for  them  out  of 
the  funds  for  the  construction  of  the  canal.  We  have  done  it  not  that  we 
have  special  authority  to  do  so,  but  we  have  done  it  because  we  believed 
we  could  not  take  a  step  more  effective  in  giving  us  good  workmen,  in  keep- 
ing our  workmen  in  a  condition  where  their  work  would  be  worth  while,  than 
by  assuring  them  that  during  their  hours  of  leisure  the  time  would  be 
passed  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  interfere  with  their  effectiveness  in  working 
the  next  day.  We  pay  the  salaries  of  the  Secretaries  that  we  have  drawn 
from  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  of  this  country,  because  they 
are  experts  in  carrying  on  such  institutions  and  we  are  going  to  found  two 
or  three  more.  We  pay  the  ministers  on  the  Isthmus.  I  think  there  are 
some  ten  or  a  dozen  in  our  pay,  and  we  keep  churches  going.  It  is  possible 
that  we  will  be  charged  with  having  filched  that  money  from  the  public 
treasury,  but  if  we  have  we  have  accomplished  good  work,  and  I  think  it 
can  be  defended  on  strictly  legal  grounds  that  where  you  enter  a  country 
like  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  introduce  into  it  50,000  souls,  some  10,000 
or  12,000  whites,  some  30,000  or  40,000  colored  men  and  women,  unless  you 
take  especial  pains  to  have  their  morality  looked  after,  unless  you  furnish 
ministers  and  churches  and  Christian  clubs,  you  are  going  to  have  such  a 
saturnalia  of  vice,  such  demoralization  that  you  will  never  build  your  canal. 
Hence  if  we  are  to  be  impeached  for  spending  that  money  it  will  be  in  a 
good  cause. 

Now,  my  friends,  I  have  gone  over  this  general  discussion  of  the  Young 
Men's  Christian  Association  and  come  now  to  its  application  to  this  audience, 
and  to  the  colored  people  of  the  South.'  I  am  delighted  to  know  that  it  has 
taken  root  here,  and  I  don't  know  any  particular  place  where  that  millionaire 
that  you  and  I  spoke  of  some  time  ago  might  put  his  million  any  better  than 
in  colored  Christian  Associations  in  the  South.  I  have  the  honor  to  be  a 
member  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  in  the  distribution  of  the  income  of  the 
Jeanes  fund  for  the  improvemenut  of  rural  colored  schools  in  the  South,  and 
that  is  a  great  work.  The  schools  are  not  what  they  ought  to  be.  Doubt- 
less in  the  cities  I  am  glad  to  know  from  what  you  say  that  they  are  effec- 
tive, but  in  the  country  the  terms  of  instruction,  both  white  and  black,  are 
too  short.  The  salaries  paid  the  teachers  are  not  enough.  You  have  been, 
and  so  the  South  has  been,  through  a  tremendous  trial.  After  the  war  there, 
was  not  money  enough  to  furnish  schools  for  anybody.  The  taxable  property 
was  not  sufficient.  Now  you  are  getting  rich  in  the  South,  and  it  seems  to 
me  that  you  are  getting  more  generous  in  your  appropriations  for  educa- 
tional purposes,  but  there  is  room  for  great  improvement,  and  anybody  that 
does  not  want  to  give  money  to  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association 
might  add  to  that  Jeanes  fund.  That  is  another  means  of  distributing 
wealth  in  a  place  where  it  will  do  good.  I  am  deeply  sympathetic  with  the 
struggle  of  your  race  to  uplift  themselves.    I  listened  with  a  great  deal  of 


27 


interest  to  what  Dr.  Walker  said  with  respect  to  the  progress  that  you  have 
made  in  Georgia.  1  had  occasion  to  address  the  colored  people  at  Bethel 
Church  in  Atlanta  yesterday,  and  I  ventured  to  say  to  them,  as  I  do  to  you 
here,  that  you  have  your  own  destiny  to  carve  out.  I  don't  mean  to  say  that 
you  haven't  obstacles  before  you,  and  I  deeply  sympathize  with  your  feel- 
ing with  reference  to  the  injustices  that  arise  from  race  prejudice  and  race 
feeling  from  thoughtless  and  wicked  men.  I  know  how  it  cuts  to  the  quick, 
but  on  the  other  hand  you  know  in  your  hearts,  as  indeed  Dr.  Walker  has 
said  from  this  pulpit  that  there  are  in  the  South  many  noble  white  men  that 
believe  that  the  uplifting  of  the  South  is  largely  in  the  uplifting  of  the 
negro,  and  he  is  the  chief  instrument  himself  to  bring  that  about.  When 
you  make  yourselves  indispensable  to  a  community  from  a  material  stand- 
point, there  is  likely  to  be  a  •modification  of  unjust  prejudice.  The 
idea  that  the  South  can  afford  to  have  the  negroes  transplanted  to  some 
other  country  to  me  always  sounded  like  a  joke.  They  tried  down  here  in 
Mississippi  and  they  were  only  going  to  move  them  not  out  of  the  country 
to  Africa,  but  they  were  going  to  move  them  across  the  river,  and  they  had 
a  riot.  So,  of  course,  that  is  absurd.  But  if  the  negro  would  be  respected 
he  must  make  himself  worthy  of  respect.  He  must  cultivate  those  virtues 
of  Providence,  of  industry,  of  thrift,  which  will  make  him  respected  as  a 
laborer,  as  a  farmer,  as  a  skilled  mechanic,  as  a  man  contriubting  to  the 
wealth  of  the  community  in  which  he  lives  and  without  whose  aid  the  accu- 
mulation of  that  wealth  is  impossible. 

Now,  my  friends,  I  have  said  all  I  ought  to  say.  I  only  want  to  add  what 
J  always  want  to  add  before  a  colored  audience,  that  you  are  Americans. 
The  idea  of  transplanting  you  is  utterly  absurd.  The  only  flag  you  know 
is  the  flag  of  the  Stars  and  Stripes,  and  you  are  of  a  race  which  has  given 
up  their  lives  and  moistened  the  ground  with  their  blood  in 
defense  of  that  flag  and  will  continue  to  do  so,  and,  therefore,  as  their 
President  of  the  United  States  to-be,  if  the  Lord  spares  me  until  the  4th 
of  March,  I  must  feel  I  had  not  discharged  my  duty  in  coming  into  this 
country  if  I  spoke  at  all  without  speaking  to  the  colored  people  as  an  im- 
portant part  of  the  South,  and  as  Americans  entitled  to  the  same  earnest 
concern  that  I  hope  the  Lord  may  give  me  to  manifest  with  respect  to  a 
whole  united  people. 


Address  ot  Hon.  William  H.  Taft  at  the  Haines  Normal 
and  Industrial  School,  Augusta,  Ga. ,  January  19,  1909. 


Bishop  Williams,  Colonel  Lyons,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  You  have  me  at 
a  great  disadvantage.  I  have  had  to  talk  on  the  same  subject  in  a  good 
many  different  places,  and  a  man,  if  he  tells  the  truth,  cannot  vary  a  great 
deal  in  what  he  says.  One  of  the  very  encouraging  and  delightful,  for  I 
mean  it  in  the  strongest  sense,  sign  or  fact  that  I  find  here  is  the  good 
mutual  feeling  between  the  white  and  black  races  in  this  community.  I 
heard  it  from  the  lips  of  Dr.  Walker  on  Sunday,  and  I  see  evidences  of  it 
everywhere,  and  especially  in  conversations  with  leading  white  citizens  with 
whom  it  has  been  my  pleasure  to  talk. 

Now  the  thing  that  impresses  me  in  this  meeting  is  the  illustration  that 
it  gives  of  that  maxim,  which  is  as  true  today  as  it  ever  was,  that  "The  Lord 
helps  them  that  help  themselves."  That  a  colored  woman  could  have  con- 
structed this  great  institution  of  learning  and  brought  it  to  the  point  of  use- 
fulness that  it  has  today,  speaks  volumes  for  the  capacity  of  the  colored 
race.  You  and  I  don't  have  to  be  told  or  have  a  history  of  what  she  has 
gone  through  in  the  last  twenty-five  years.  We  know  the  hard  obstacles  she 
has  had  to  overcome.  Of  course,  we  know  that  from  time  to  time  good  peo- 
ple lent  their  aid  and  gave  generously,  but  the  construction  of  a  great  insti- 
tution like  this  is  not  done  in  a  day  and  is  not  overcome  by  one  act  of  gen« 
erosity,  but  it  means  a  continuous  life  of  hard  work,  of  disinterested  un- 
selfishness, of  tact,  of  patience,  of  willingness  to  submit  at  times  to  humili- 
ating failure,  and  of  confidence  in  the  aid  of  God  in  the  ultimate  result;  and, 
therefore,  I  shall  go  out  of  this  meeting,  and  in  spite  of  the  distinguished 
presence  of  a  great  many  people  here,  the  Bishop  of  Georgia,  Dr.  Walker, 
the  great  preacher  of  your  city,  Robert  C.  Ogden,  who  has  done  more  in 
the  cause  of  Southern  education  than  any  one  man,  and  others  I  shall 
carry  in  my  memory  only  the  figure  of  that  woman  who  has  been  able  to 
create  all  of  this.  She  must,  even  in  her  moments  of  trial  and  tribulation, 
derive  immense  joy  from  looking  back  over  the  history  of  her  triumph, 
what  she  has  overcome  and  what  she  has  accomplished,  and  when  she  meets 
those  whom  she  has  sent  forth  to  do  the  missionary  work  that  they  are 
taught  to  do,  she  has  the  intense  satisfaction  of  receiving  in  her  heart  and 
conscience  the  verdict  to  herself  of  "Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful 
servant." 

I  don't  come  into  a  presence  like  this  without  a  bursting  desire  to  tell 
those  who  hear  me  of  my  intense  sympathy  with  a  race  that  is  struggling 
against  many  obstacles  to  uplift  itself  onto  a  higher  level,  to  educate  its 
memberi  Wd  achieve  a  higher  standard  of  morality  and  living.    I  suppose 


29 


that  comes  to  me  more  strongly  because  of  the  responsibilities  that  I  had 
in  the  Philippine  Islands  for  the  four  years  that  I  was  there  and  the  four 
years  that  I  subsequently  exercised  some  authority  over  those  islands,  in 
aiding  another  race  in  the  far-distant  Philippines,  to  lift  themselves  to  a 
higher  standard  than  that  which  they  had  then  attained,  and  to  make  them- 
selves ultimately  worthy  of  complete  self-government.  In  that  expression 
of  sympathy  that  I  wish  to  give  here,  I  don't  feel  it  inappropriate  to  refer 
to  some  of  the  expressions  that  fall  from  the  lips  of  men  prominent  in  politi- 
cal life  that  are  utterly  lacking  in  any  sympathy  of  that  kind,  and  that  are 
cruel  and  abrupt  in  their  meaning,  if  they  really  are  to  be  given  the  mean- 
ing that  the  words  naturally  bear.  I  refer,  for  instance,  to  those  gentlemen 
who  deem  it  necessary  to  affirm  that  in  the  interest  of  this  country  the 
negro  race  should  have  no  education.  I  am  glad  to  know  and  believe  that 
even  those  men  in  their  hearts  don't  believe  that;  that  it  comes  rather  from 
a  striking  desire  to  say  something  that  shall  have  a  sensational  effect  than 
it  does  from  a  real  spirit  of — I  had  almost  said — creulty  toward  a  race  that 
deserves  from  those  of  us  that  are  white  all  the  aid  and  all  the  assistance 
and  all  the  sympathy  that  we  can  possibly  give  them,  considering  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  they  came  here.  And  I  know  and  you  know  that 
those  expressions  do  not  represent  the  feeling  of  the  great  intelligent  body 
of  white  men  in  the  South.  Now  I  don't  for  one  minute  mean  to  say  that 
education  is  everything;  that  a  dishonest  man  who  has  no  character  is  not 
more  dangerous  with  a  university  education  than  if  he  did  not  have  it.  You 
have  got  to  have  a  foundation  of  character  in  order  to  make  education  use- 
ful. Nor  do  I  mean  to  say  that  speaking  generally  university  education  ought 
to  be  given  to  everybody.  The  State  could  not  stand  it.  There  is  not  money 
enough  to  bring  it  about,  and  if  it  were  so,  there  would  be  a  tendency,  which 
frequently  breaks  up  companies,  of  a  desire  for  everybody  to  be  a  General. 
The  great  body  of  the  negro  race  must  always  look  forward,  as,  indeed,  the 
great  majority  of  the  white  race  must  always  look  forward,  to  hard  manual 
labor  as  the  means  of  livelihood,  and  I  don't  look  upon  that  as  a  hard  task 
to  look  forward  too,  either.  When  you  work  every  day  with  your  hands,  you 
usually  have  a  fair  inside  to  digest  your  dinner.  That  suggestion  may  not 
strike  you  as  very  important,  but  if  you  had  to  eat  at  as  many  banquets  as 
I  do  you  would  appreciate  it.  Happiness  is  not  in  the  luxuries  of  life  after 
all.  Real  happiness  is  in  the  consciousness  of  having  done  the  best  you 
could  with  the  material  that  the  Lord  has  furnished  you  to  work  with;  with 
having  brought  up  your  families  in  the  best  way  you  could;  with  having  in- 
stilled in  your  children  principles  of  morality,  and  with  going  down  to  your 
death  with  a  reputation  and  a  character  that  your  families  are  proud  of. 
Therefore,  when  one  says  that  a  majority  of  the  negro  race  and  a  majority 
of  the  white  race  are  destined  to  earn  their  livelihood  in  the  sweat  of  their 
brow,  one  doesn't  say  that  happiness  is  to  be  unevenly  distributed.  I  guesa 
if  we  had  two  or  three  millions  of  dollars  and  had  the  burden  of  taking  care 
of  it,  and  knowing  where  to  give  it  in  order  that  it  might  do  good,  we  would 
conclude  that  there  are  some  responsibilities  that  seem  light  to  us,  now  that 
we  don't  have  them,  that  might  not  be  so  easy  if  we  had  to  discharge  them. 


30 

Perhaps  the  office  of  President  of  the  United  States  might  not  seem  quite 
so  pleasant  to  you  if  I  could  take  you  aside  and  tell  you  some  of  the  bur* 
dens  connected  with  it.  In  other  words,  happiness  is  relative.  It*  is  com* 
parative,  and  each  man  generally — I  don't  mean  to  say  that  there  are  not 
instances  of  sorrow,  of  illness  and  of  unhappiness  that  seem  to  be  thrust 
on  men  that  make  an  exception,  b*ut  generally  the  happiness  of  a  man  is 
largely  in  himself  in  his  adopting  proper  methods  of  life  and  in  his  follow- 
ing the  philosophy  and  the  rules  that  his  conscience  teach  him.  In  other 
words,  we  come  back  to  the  proposition  that  the  Lord  helps  them  that  help 
themselves. 

Of  course,  the  education  which  you  most  need  in  this  country,  as,  indeed, 
we  need  it  in  the  North,  is  thorough  primary  and  industrial  education  for 
everybody.  I  know  enough  about  statistics  to  know  that  figures  do  lie;  that 
it  is  easy  to  make  a  showing  with  respect  to  educational  institutions  and  the 
spread  of  education  that  when  one  investigates  the  facts  are  not  found 
justified.  All  through  the  Southern  States,  and,  indeed,  the  Northern  States 
— more  in  the  South  perhaps  than  in  the  North,  because  of  the  great  poverty 
that  visited  the  South  immediately  after  the  war,  there  is  room  for  tre- 
mendous improvement  in  the  system  of  education,  especially  in  the  rural 
districts.  We  have  had  occasion  to  look  into  the  matter  as  trustees  of  the 
Jeanes  fund  of  a  million  dollars,  and  I  hope  considerably  more  than  that, 
the  income  of  which  is  to  be  used  to  increase  the  salaries  and  the  character 
of  the  teaching,  and  to  increase  the  length  of  the  time  of  the  colored  rural 
public  schools  in  the  South.  We  don't  expect  that  that  million  dollars  is 
going  to  aid  a  great  number  of  little  negroes,  but  what  we  hope  to  do  is  to 
make  such  investigations,  to  make  such  reports  and  to  make  such  progress 
where  we  do  spend  the  money  as  to  furnish  an  opportunity  for  public 
authorities  who  are  anxious  to  help  on  in  the  cause  of  education,  to  ascer- 
tain the  defects  in  the  present  system  and  the  places  where  money  can 
be  spent  to  elevate  and  make  that  system  better. 

Such  a  school  as  this  is  an  inspiration.  This  school,  Hampton  School, 
and  the  school  at  Tuskegee,  are  all  instances  of  what  one  man  or  one 
woman  can  effect;  that  at  Hampton,  General  Armstrong,  a  white  man;  that 
at  Tuskegee,  Booker  Washington,  a  colored  man;  here  Miss  Laney,  a  col' 
ored  woman.  Of  course,  public  education  must  ultimately  depend  upon  taxa- 
tion. There  are  school  funds,  on  a  private  foundation,  many  of  them,  and 
amounting  to  many  millions  of  dollars,  but  ultimately  a  system  of  education 
to  be  generally  effective  must  rest  on  taxation,  and,  therefore,  you  must 
depend  on  what  your  State  and  local  governments  ultimately  shall  give  you. 
Now  I  verily  believe  that  among  those  who  are  exercising  authority  in  all 
the  Southern  States,  there  has  been  an  agitation  and  a  stirring  up  of  the 
question  of  better  education  in  such  a  way  as  to  work  for  the  benefit  of  the 
colored  man  and  the  white  man.  The  truth  is  that  there  is  a  great  im- 
provement possible  in  the  education  of  the  white  children  of  the  South. 
The  colored  people  are  not  the  only  ones  who  are  suffering  from  insufficient 
education  in  that  way;  and  perhaps  the  white  people  of  the  South  have 
some  reason  to  complain  that  those  of  us  of  the  North  devote  especial  atten- 
tion to  the  colored  children;  but  in  the  end  we  are  all  working  for  the  same 


31 


purpose;  that  is,  we  are  working  to  make  and  create  better  individual  char- 
acter. You  cannot  improve  a  race  en  masse.  You  cannot  take  25,000 
negroes  and  make  them  better  by  a  decree,  or  by  shoving  them  through 
some  sort  of  a  mold.  You  have  got  to  make  them  better  by  training  each 
individual  mind  and  soul  in  that  25,000.  Those  of  us  who  have  had  political 
responsibilities  sometimes  feel  and  realize  that.  The  advance  of  the  colored 
race  depends  upon  the  development  of  the  individual,  and  the  great  encour- 
agement that  one  finds  here  in  this  meeting  today  and  in  similar  meetings  in 
similar  institutions  is  that  we  find  the  shining  and  needed  example  in  the 
very  person  whose  work  this  instittuion  is. 


Address  of  Wm.  H.  Taft  Delivered  at  New  York  on  Tues- 
day, February  23,  1909,  in  the  Interest  of 
Hampton  Institute. 


Mr.  Chairman,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen: 

We  have  ten  millions  of  Negroes  in  the  United  States,  and  of  that  ten 
millions  I  suppose  nine  millions  live  in  the  Southern  States.  Now,  if  you 
read  the  Congressional  Record — I  remember  one  distinguished  Senator 
wanted  to  compel  the  public  to  read  it — but  there  is  a  great  deal  that  is 
very  useful  and  instructive  in  it.  There  is  a  great  deal  that  you  can  sympa- 
:hize  with  in  it,  a  great  deal  of  truth  and  a  great  deal  of  humor.  That  is, 
it  awakens  your  humor,  sometimes  in  sympathy  and  sometimes  at  it. 

Xow,  if  you  study  the  Congressional  Record,  you  will  see  that  there  are 
some  statesmen  that  say  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  Negro  and  the  white 
races  to  live  together.  That  the  solution  is  beyond  the  hope  of  human  effort. 
Well,  the  ten  millions  are  here,  and  what  are  you  going  to  do  about  it? 
There  are  some  who  propose  that  we  should  move  them  bodily  out  of  the 
country;  they  do  not  say  where,  they  do  not  say  how,  and  they  do  not  say 
when,  but  out  of  the  country  they  are  to  go.  And  when  there  is  an  attempt 
to  move  five  hundred  of  them  out  of  the  State  in  which  is  said  their  relations 
to  the  whites  are  most  inharmonious,  you  have  a  riot  the  minute  you 
propose  to  move  them,  on  the  part  of  and  by  the  very  men  with  whom  they 
cannot  live. 

It  seems  to  me  that  that  is  the  reducie  ad  absurdum  with  reference  to  a 
suggestion  that  expatriation  is  a  ^solution  of  this  question.  The  solemn, 
scientific  statement  of  a  man  that  the  races  cannot  live  together,  even 
though  it  appear  in  the  Congressional  Record,  ought  not  to  occupy  our 
minds  for  a  moment,  because  they  are  living  together,  and  they  have  lived 
together  for  over  a  hundred  years.  Now,  the  question  is  whether  we  or 
they  or  all  of  us  together  can  make  that  living  together  better  for  both 
races.  It  is  a  problem  that  is  set  before  us,  and  it  does  not  help  us  to  say 
that  we  cannot  work  it  out,  because  we  have  got  to  work  it  out. 

A  race  feeling,  a  race  prejudice,  is  a  fact.  And  the  man  who  does  not 
recognize  it  is  just  exactly  as  illogical  as  the  man  who  says  that  ten  millions 
of  people  now  in  the  country  cannot  live  with  the  other  seventy  millions 
that  are  here  when  they  are  living  there.  It  is  a  race  feeling,  and  you 
cannot  dispose  of  it  by  saying  that  it  ought  not  to  exist.  It  does  exist 
and  that  is  part  of  the  problem.  Now,  how  are  you  going  to  wipe  it  out 
to  the  extent  of  making  it  so  that  it  shall  not  produce  injustice  and  a  lack 
of  harmony  between  the  races?  Well,  I  think  you  are  going  to  work  it  out. 
I  believe  in  my  heart  that  you  are  going  to  work  it  out  by  making  it  to  the 


33 


advantage  and  profit  of  both  races  to  see  that  it  i*  not  to  the  advantage  of 
either  to  allow  that  race  feeling  to  continue  between  them  to  the  extent 
of  making  it  difficult  for  them  to  live  together. 

The  Negro  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  development  of  the  South.  His 
labor  the  South  needs,  and  the  more  you  instruct  that  labor  the  more  valua- 
ble it  becomes  to  the  South.  Hence  it  is  that  the  work  of  the  Hampton 
Institute  has  its  intrinsic  importance.  It  is  the  solution  of  the  race  ques- 
tion. I  do  not  believe,  and  I  do  not  think  most  men  believe,  in  too  many 
crutches  for  people  that  are  trying  to  learn  to  walk,  but  if  you  furnish  them 
just  enough  education  to  know  how  to  use  their  minds  and  their  hands  and 
their  legs  in  productive  occupations,  and  you  give  them  the  instrument  by 
which  they  can  help  themselves,  and  then  if  they  are  a  race  that  has  the 
spirit  to  help  themselves,  the  future  is  before  them  and  the  opportunity 
is  theirs.  'Now,  I  do  not  profess  to  know  as  much  about  the  Negro  ques- 
tion— of  course  not — as  these  gentlemen  who  have  spoken  before  me,  but 
I  have  given  a  great  deal  of  attention  to  the  matter.  I  have  studied  the 
statistics  of  the  growth  of  the  race.  I  have,  studied  the  amount  of  property 
that  the  race  has  accumulated,  the  reduction  in  the  percentage  of  illiteracy, 
the  amount  of  the  products  brought  forth  under  the  hand  of  the  Negro 
laborer  and  the  Negro  farmer  in  the  South,  and  I  say  that  no  unprejudiced 
person  can  read  those  statistics  without  marveling  that  the  Negro  race  has 
made  the  progress  that  it  has  made  in  the  last  fifty  years,  under  the 
burdens  and  obstacles  that  it  has  had  to  meet. 

They  show  self-initiation;  they  show  self-help.  Why,  a  race  that  pro- 
duces a  Booker  T.  Washington  in  a  century  ought  to  feel  confident  that 
it  can  do  miracles  in  time. 

I  have  been  South  recently.  If  you  credit  Brother  Washington's  story 
you  will  think  I  have  made  some  sort  of  an  impression  there.  I  do  not 
remember  that  particular  aunty,  but  I  know  they  have  aunties  in  that 
country  who  know  how  to  attract  one  to  regular  meals. 

Now,  there  were  a  number  of  things  that  were  brought  home  to  me  with 
much  more  emphasis -on  account  of  my  visit  than  they  ever  had  been  before. 
One  afternoon  I  drove  out  with  a  Southern  lady  and  gentleman,  who  said 
that  they  wanted  to  show  me  the  inside  of  what  I  had  seen  in  riding  about 
the  country,  the  Shiloh  Orphanage,  printed  in  letters  that  indicated  that  the 
man  who  had  handled  the  brush  was  not  an  artist,  and  we  went  in  there  and 
we  found  a  colored  man,  I  should  think  about  sixty  years  of  age,  the  perfect 
image  of  Uncle  Tom  in  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,"  and  he  and  his  wife  had 
taken  an  old  farm  with  a  lot  of  out-buildings  on  it  and  had  gathered  in  there 
all  the  little  Negro  waifs  of  the  town  of  Augusta,  and  he  was  teaching  them 
useful  trades,  trusting  from  week  to  week  to  get  enough  to  feed  those 
children  and  to  clothe  them.  He  took  us  into  a  room  that  would  not  have 
met  the  requirements  of  the  modern  school  superintendent  with  reference 
to  cubic  feet  of  air  or  ventilation,  but  there  he  gathered  his  thirty  or  forty 
nondescript  (Negro  children,  boys  and  girls  of  different  ages,  and  he  had 
them  repeat  the  twenty-third  Psalm,  then  to  recite,  and  then  he  told  them, 
"Get  up  and  be  polite,"  and  they  got  up  and  they  all  bowed  to  us  and  said 


34 


they  were  glad  to  see  us,  in  unison.  And  I  asked  him  how  he  got  along. 
Well,  he  said  it  was  pretty  hard  work  sometimes,  but  they  raised  their  own 
chickens  and  they  had  some  cows,  and  they  sold  milk  and  they  sold  some 
eggs  and  they  did  what  they  could,  and  the  neighbors  helped  some.  It  was 
really  a  most  pathetic  scene.  I  tried  to  be  as  dignified  as  I  could,  but  I  did 
need  my  handkerchief  before  I  got  through. 

Now,  some  of  those  who  were  there  sent  small  checks  to  help  the  old 
man  along,  and  the  old  man — he  thought  I  was  little  more  useful  than 
merely  for  three  meals  a  day,  and  he  circulated  the  report  that  we  had  con- 
tributed something  to  his  aid,  and  I  just  got  a  telegram  today  saying  that 
he  had  raised  on  the  faith  of  that  publication  some  three  thousand  dollars 
to  pay  off  the  mortgage  on  the  old  place,  and  he  was  going  on  with  his 
useful  work  of  saving  those  waifs.  I  instance  that  to  show  the  spirit  of 
initiation,  the  spirit  of  anxiety  to  do  something  for  themselves  that  I  saw 
among  the  Negroes  in  the  South. 

Then  another  time  I  had  the  privilege  of  going  in  an  institution  founded 
by  Miss  Lucy  Laney,  a  Negro  woman,  I  should  say  now,  of  some  forty-five 
years.  She  has,  I  think,  five'  or  six  hundred  students.  They  began 
with  the  wrong  idea  as  to  education,  but  now  they  have  come  to  adopt  the 
Hampton  and  the  Tuskegee  system  and  are  teaching  girls  who  are  there 
useful  knowledge.  I  found  myself  on  the  platform  with  Mr.  Robert  C.  Ogden, 
and  then  I  knew  I  was  in  the  right  place.  Now,  that  woman  had  this  great 
work  she  is  carrying  on,  deriving  money  from  some  generous  sup- 
porters in  the  North,  but  there  is  an  instance  of  initiation  and  self-help  in 
the  race  which  indicates  that  they  are  in  favor  of  doing  something  them 
selves,  and  they  are  not  waiting  to  be  helped  along  with  crutches. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  rejoice  to  find  that  that  work  had  the  sympathy 
of  the  Southern  people  of  education,  of  refinement  and  common  sense.  It  is 
very  difficult — it  is  very  difficult  to  speak  in  parliamentary  language  of  the 
advocacy  of  the  doctrine  that  we  ought  to  keep  the  Negroes  in  ignorance.  I 
think  the  statement  refutes  itself — and  it  does  not  awaken  the  sympathy  of 
the  intelligent  South.  One  of  the  difficulties  in  the  South  is  that  it  is  not 
the  Negroes  only  that  need  education — and  I  mean  that  literally.  The 
number  of  ignorant  among  the  white  is  enough  to  call  properly  for  the 
attention  of  all  citizens  to  reduce  the  illiteracy  and  increase,  by  industrial 
and  other  education,  their  ability  to  be  good  citizens  in  the  community. 

Now,  we  sometimes  get  information  and  aid  from  sources  that  we  would 
hardly  expect.  I  think  the  history  of  the  improvement  of  the  civil  service 
of  England  is  that  it  came  by  way  of  India,  and  the  history  of  the  improve- 
ment in  practical  education  in  this  country,  in  industrial  education,  is  that  it 
came  through  Hampton,  through  General  Armstrong,  in  teaching  the  colored 
students  and  the  Indians,  and  that  now  we  all  over  the  North  and  the 
South  are  profiting  by  the  lessons  that  he  taught  in  that  institute. 

General  Armstrong  was  a  great  man,  and  the  generation  will  rise  and 
call  him  blessed.  He  taught  the  secret  that  will  solve  the  race  question  in 
the  South.  The  truth  is  that  the  success  of  Hampton  and  of  Tuskegee  is 
doing  great  good  for  the  ignorant  Southern  white  children.  1  remember 
Dr.  Dillard,  at  the  North  Carolina  dinner,  told  this  story:    He  said  they 


35 


were  introducing  some  Italians  into  the  South,  and  an  old  colored  man 
inquired  who  those  immigrants  were,  and  they  said  they  were  Italians  that 
were  coming  there,  and  he  shook  his  head  and  said:  "Well,  I  don't  know 
how  that  will  be.  We  Niggers  has  hard  enough  times  to  support  the  whites 
that  are  here." 

Now,  I  don't  agree  with  that  authority.  I  think  that  it  will  help  the  South 
to  have  immigration.  I  believe  in  competition  in  labor  as  in  everything  else, 
and  we  have  found  on  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  that  our  West  Indian  Negroes 
work  a  great  deal  better  and  do  a  great  deal  more  satisfactory  work  now 
that  we  have  introduced  Gallapagoneans,  Spaniards,  Italians  and  Greeks. 
And  I  do  not  think  it  would  hurt  at  all.  There  is  room  enough  in  the  South 
for  all  of  them.  The  resources  of  the  South  are  only  scratched,  and  if  they  go 
there  it  will  help  the  Negro. 

I  think  it  is  pretty  hard  to  appeal  always  to  a  New  York  audience  and  a 
Boston  audience  for  charitable  contributions.  I  think  the  West  ought  to 
pay  for  part  of  this  work  that  is  done  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  country, 
and  I  hope  that  meetings  of  this  kind  may  be  held  in  Cincinnati  and  Chicago 
and  other  places,  and  that  such  pictures  as  we  have  had  tonight  may  be 
presented  to  those  audiences  in  order  to  make  them  be  generous  and  just 

It  is  true  that  the  ancestors  of  the  Negroes  of  today  were  brought  here 
against  their  will.  They  are  Americans,  and  they  are  entitled  to  our  aid 
and  sympathy.  This  is  the  only  country  and  the  only  home  they  know. 
Ours  is  the  only  flag  they  can  live  under,  and  it  is  a  flag  they  have  shown 
themselves  willing  to  die  for. 

I  should  feel  very  much  discouraged  if  I  did  not  believe  that  the  Negro 
was  going  to  work  out  his  own  salvation.  I  believe  it  from  what  I  have 
already  said,  and  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  addressing  a  number  of  Negro 
audiences  in  the  South.  I  remember  one  audience,  a  Young  Men's  Christian 
Association  audience,  where  the  Rev.  Dr.  Walker,  one  of  the  most  eloquent 
men,  black  or  white,  testified  to  the  harmony  that  existed  between  the  two 
races.  He  said:  "We  are  happy  here.  This  is  the  only  place  we  want  to  live 
in  until  we  go  to  glory,"  and,  said  he,  "we  propose  to  stay  here  until  we  do 
go  to  glory." 

Now,  the  great  aid — the  man  who  is  able  to  assist  more  than  we  can, 
even  though  we  contribute  our  money — is  the  Southern  white  man,  and  it  is 
to  his  profit,  and  as  he  grows  more  intelligent  to  see  what  the  good  of  the 
country  is,  he  will  certainly  see  that  it  is  to  his  advantage  to  have  the 
Negro  increase  in  intelligence,  in  providence  and  in  industry.  I  don't  see 
why  we  may  not  reasonably  take  courage  and  believe  that  the  elements  are 
there  in  the  South  together,  to  work  out  this  problem  and  to  uplift  this  race 
to  a  material  and  to  a  spiritual  plane  that  will  insure  its  happiness. 

Now,  I  know,  and  no  man  can  think  of  the  humiliation  and  the  agony  of 
spirit  that  the  Negroes  have  to  suffer  in  their  struggle  upward,  when  they 
encountered  the  race  feeling  and  the  injustice  to  which  it  leads,  but  it  may 
help  them — I  hope  it  will — to  give  them  stronger  character,  and  there  is  a 
future  before  them  that,  if  they  overcome  these  obstacles,  is  well  worth  the 
effort.  Personally,  I  think  it  is  one  of  the  great  problems  that  we  have  before 
us  in  this  country.    I  believe  in  the  ultimate  justice  of  all  the  American 


36 


people.  I  believe  also  in  their  good  sense,  and  when  a  policy  involves  justice 
and  good  sense  I  think  the  American  people  can  be  trusted  to  urge  that 
policy  and  to  carry  it  on  to  its  ultimate  conclusion. 

Now,  one  of  the  things  that  a  man  who  hasn't  any  money  is  able  to  do  is 
to  advise  the  man  who  has  what  to  do  with  it.  I  know  that,  changing 
the  situation  somewhat,  a  man  who  has  not  to  appoint  a  Cabinet  certainly 
knows  how  to  appoint  it,  for  I  have  had  a  great  deal  of  advice  on  that 
subject.  I  do  think  that  there  is  nothing  that  offers  such  an  opportunity  for 
the  wealthy  men  of  this  country  who  have  money  and  do  not  know  what 
to  do  with  it,  as  the  cause  of  Negro  industrial  education  in  the  South,  and  I 
agree  with  the  last  speaker  that  it  does  not  speak  well  for  the  intelligence 
of  those  who  have  money  to  distribute,  that  Hampton  is  now  seeking  two 
million  dollars  as  an  endowment,  and  that  Tuskegee  needs  as  much  more, 
when  both  institutions  have  demonstrated  their  usefulness,  and  have  shown 
that  they  offer  the  only  remedy  for  the  solution  of  one  of  the  greatest  ques- 
tions that  has  ever  presented  itself  to  the  American  people.   I  thank  you. 


Extract  From  President  Wm.  H.  Taft's  Inaugural  Address, 
Delivered  at  Washington,  March  4,  1909. 


I  look  forward  with  hope  to  increasing  the  already  good  feeling  between 
the  South  and  the  other  sections  of  the  country.  My  chief  purpose  is  not  to 
effect  a  change  in  the  electoral  vote  of  the  Southern  States.  That  is  a 
secondary  consideration.  What  I  look  forward  to  is  an  increase  in  the 
tolerance  of  political  views  of  all  kinds  and  their  advocacy  throughout  the 
South,  and  the  existence  of  a  respectable  political  opposition  in  every  State; 
even  more  than  this,  to  an  increased  feeling  on  the  part  of  all  the  people 
in  the  South  that  this  Government  is  their  Government,  and  that  its  officers 
in  their  States  are  their  officers. 

The  consideration  of  this  question  cannot,  however,  be  complete  and 
full  without  reference  to  the  Negro  race,  its  progress  and  its  present  con- 
dition. The  Thirteenth  Amendment  secured  them  freedom;  the  Fourteenth 
Amendment  due  process  of  law,  protection  of  property  and  the  pursuit  of 
happiness,  and  the  Fifteenth  Amendment  attempted  to  secure  the  Negro 
against  any  deprivation  of  the  privilege  to  vote,  because  he  was  a  Negro.  The 
Thirteenth  and  Fourteenth  Amendments  have  been  generally  enforced  and 
have  secured  the  objects  for  which  they  were  intended.  While  the  Fifteenth 
Amendment  has  not  been  generally  observed  in  the  past,  it  ought  to  be 
observed,  and  the  tendency  of  Southern  legislation  today  is  toward  the 
enactment  of  electoral  qualifications  which  shall  square  with  that  amendment. 

Of  course  the  mere  adoption  of  a  constitutional  law  is  only  one  step  in 
the  right  direction.  It  must  be  fairly  and  justly  enforced  as  well.  In  time 
both  will  come.  Hence,  it  is  clear  to  all  that  the  domination  of  an  ignorant, 
irresponsible  element' can  be  prevented  by  constitutional  laws  which  shall 
exclude  from  voting  both  Negroes  and  whites  not  having  education  or  other 
qualifications  thought  to  be  necessary  for  a  proper  electorate. 

The  danger  of  the  control  of  an  ignorant  electorate  has  therefore  passed. 
With  this  change,  the  interest  which  many  of  the  "Southern  white  citizens 
take  in  the  welfare  of  the  Negroes  has  increased.  The  colored  men  must 
base  their  hope  on  the  results  of  their  own  industry,  self-restraint,  thrift  and 
business  success,  as  well  as  upon  the  aid  and  comfort  and  sympathy  which 
they  may  receive  from  their  white  neighbors  of  the  South.  There  was  a  time 
when  Northerners  who  sympathized  with  the  Negro  in  his  necessary  struggle 
for  better  conditions  sought  to  give  to  him  the  suffrage  as  a  protection,  and 
to  enforce  its  exercise  against  the  prevailing  sentiment  of  the  South.  The 
movement  proved  to  be  a  failure.  What  remains  is  the  Fifteenth  Amendment 
to  the  Constitution  and  the  right  to  have  statutes  of  States  specifying 
qualification  for  electors  subjected  to  the  test  of  compliance  with  that 
amendment. 


38 


Fifteenth  Amendment — Will  Stand  Always. 

This  is  a  great  protection  to  the  Negro.  It  never  will  be  repealed,  and  it 
never  ought  to  be  repealed.  If  it  had  not  passed,  it  might  be  difficult 
now  to  adopt  it;  but  with  it  in  our  fundamental  law,  the  policy  of  Southern 
legislation  must  and  will  tend  to  obey  it,  and  so  long  as  the  statutes  of  the 
States  meet  the  test  of  this  amendment  and  are  not  otherwise  in  conflict  with 
the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States,  it  is  not  the  disposition  or 
within  the  province  of  the  Federal  Government  to  interfere  with  the  regula- 
tion by  Southern  States  of  their  domestic  affairs.  There  is  in  the  South  a 
stronger  feeling  than  ever  among  the  intelligent,  well-to-do  and  influential 
element  in  favor  of  the  industrial  education  of  the  Negro  and  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  race  to  make  themselves  useful  members  of  the  community. 

The  progress  which  the  Negro  has  made  in  the  last  fifty  years  from 
slavery,  when  its  statistics  are  revealed,  is  marvelous,  and  it  furnishes 
every  reason  to  hope  that  in  the  next  twenty-five  years  a  still  greater  im- 
provement in  his  condition  as  a  productive  member  of  society,  on  the  farm, 
and  in  the  shop  and  in  other  occupations,  may  come.  The  Negroes  are  now 
Americans.  Their  ancestors  came  here  years  ago  against  their  will,  and  this 
is  their  only  country  and  their  only  flag.  They  have  shown  themselves 
anxious  to  live  for  it  and  to  die  for  it.  Encountering  the  race  feeling  against 
them,  subjected  at  times  to  cruel  injustice  growing  out  of  it,  they  may 
well  have  our  profound  sympathy  and  aid  in  the  struggle  they  are  making. 
We  are  charged  with  the  sacred  duty  of  making  their  path  as  smooth  and 
easy  as  we  can.  Any  recognition  of  their  distinguished  men,  any  appoint- 
ment to  office  from  among  their  number,  is  properly  taken  as  an  encourage- 
ment and  an  appreciation  of  their  progress. 

And  this  just  policy  should  be  pursued  when  suitable  occasion  offers. 

Negro  Appointments  Call  for  Discretion. 

But  it  may  well  admit  of  doubt  whether  in  the  case  of  any  race  an  ap- 
pointment of  one  of  their  number  to  a  local  office  in  a  community  in  which 
the  race  feeling  is  so  widespread  and  acute  as  to  interfere  with  the  ease  and 
facility  with  which  the  local  government  business  can  be  done  by  the 
appointee,  is  of  sufficient  benefit  by  way  of  encouragement  to  the  race  to 
outweigh  the  recurrence  and  increase  of  race  feeling  which  such  an  appoint- 
ment is  likely  to  engender.  Therefore,  the  Executive,  in  recognizing  the 
Negro  race  by  appointments,  must  exercise  a  careful  discretion  not  thereby 
to  do  it  more  harm  than  good. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  encourage  the  mere  pre- 
tense of  race  feeling  manufactured  in  the  interest  of  individual  political 
ambition. 

Has  Not  the  Slightest  Prejudice. 

Personally  I  have  not  the  slightest  race  prejudice  or  feeling,  and  recog- 
nition of  its  existence  only  awakens  in  my  heart  a  deeper  sympathy  for  those 
who  have  to  bear  it  or  suffer  from  it,  and  I  question  the  wisdom  of  a  policy 
which  is  likely  to  increase  it.  Meantime,  if  nothing  is  done  to  prevent  it,  a 
better  feeling  between  the  Negroes  an'1  <he  whites  in  the  South  will  con- 


39 


tin ue  to  grow,  and  more  and  more  of  the  white  people  will  come  to  realize 
that  the  future  of  the  South  is  to  be  much  benefited  by  the  industrial  and 
intellectual  progress  of  the  Negro.  The  exercise  of  political  franchises  by 
those  of  his  race  who  are  intelligent  and  well-to-do  will  be  acquiesced  in,  and 
the  right  to  vote  will  be  withheld  only  from  the  ignorant  and  irresponsible 
of  both  races. 


