THE  PULPIT  AND  ROSTRUM, 

AN  ELEGANT  PAMPHLET  SERIAL, 

©©ITOHNIS  REPORTS  @P  TM1  ©1ST 

SERMONS,  LECTURES,  ORATIONS,  Etc. 


ANDREW  J.  ftRAIIAlf  and  f!HARLFK  R.  fftlJLAR.  RAniiPtArc. 


Twel 

The  s; 
thoughts  c 
personality 
successive 
out  of  the 


S.  6.  &  E.  L.  ELBERT 


LO  cents. 

form  the  best 
r  fresnnoss  and 
s  certain.  The 
can  be  found  : 


No.  1 
Sermon 

No.  2. 
and  Hor 

No.  a. 

No.  4. 
H.  Mili 

No.  5. 

No.  6. 
Thompso 

No.  % 

No.  8. 
ation  of 

No.  9, 
Adams, 

No.  H 
Everett 

No.  1 
Inaugur 
22d,  186 

No.  l: 

Lecture 

No.  h 
Rev.  H: 

MlTCHEI 

'  No.  1 
Boston, 

Nos. .'. 
States  S 

Carolina  in  loas. 

Nos.  17  &  18.— (Two  in  one,  20  cents.)  WEBSTER'S  REPLY  TO  HAYNE. 

No.  19. — LAFAYETTE,  Oration  by  Hon.  Charles  Sumner,  delivered  in  New 
York  and  Philadelphia,  Dec,  1860. 
Back  or  current  numbers  are  promptly  mailed  from  the  office,  on  receipt  of  the  price. 

H.  H.  LLOYD  &  CO.,  Publishers, 

25  HOWARD  ST.,  NEW  YORK. 


1USEMENT, 

W.  Beecher 

Mitchell. 
by  Rev.  Wm. 

[NGMAN  NOTT. 

oft,  Rev.  Dr. 

D.  D.,  M.  D. 
the  Inaugur- 

>y  Rev.  Wm. 

[on.  Edward 

cock,  at  the 
on,  February 

FIREMENTS, 

(VRD  Beecher, 
Prof.  0.  M. 

>  Everett,  in 

the  United 
ON  to  South 


Cthnrnr  uf 


m 


|1 ITOtttkil  Inj       ELLA  SMITH J5I3ER£  _  LSS_ 

Jl«  JUnmuiam 

 „ 


KATHARINE  E.  COMAN 


THE 


AMERICAN  QUESTION 

IN  ITS 

NATIONAL  ASPECT. 

BEING  ALSO 

AN  INCIDENTAL  REPLY  TO  MR,  H.  R.  HELPER'S  "  COMPENDIUM  OF 
THE  IMPENDING  CRISIS  OF  THE  SOUTH.'' 


BY 

ELI  A  S  PEISSNER, 

PROFESSOR  IN  UNION  COLLEGE. 


NEW  YORK: 
H.   H.   LLOYD   &   CO.,  PUBLISHERS, 

25  HOWARD  STREET. 
1861. 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1861,  by 

ELIAS  PEISSNER, 

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  Southern 
District  of  New  York. 


Davies  &  Kent, 
8tereotypers  and  electrotypers, 
113  Nassau  Street,  HT.  Y. 


PREFACE. 


Slavery,  irrespective  of  its  being  right  or  wrong,  is  a  historical 
fact,  and  depends  as  such,  in  its  rise,  growth,  and  decay,  on  the 
various  circumstances  of  time  and  place  which  surround  it,  and 
have  surrounded  it,  in  different  nations  and  periods.  The  soil, 
the  climate,  the  geological  and  geographical  congeniality  with  the 
most  thickly  settled  countries  of  Europe,  the  large  immigration 
consequent  thereupon,  the  character  of  the  settlers, — in  short,  land 
and  people,  production  and  population,  made  emancipation  easier  in 
our  Northern  States  than  in  most  of  the  Southern. 

Therefore,  we  must  censure  those  who  wantonly  throw  ail  blame 
and  all  curses  on  the  slaveholder  as  such ;  but  we  must  also  con- 
demn the  Slave-Politician  who,  on  the  natural  circumstances  unfavor- 
able to  speedy  emancipation  in  the  South,  raised  a  play-ground  for 
his  political  ambition  and  cast  new  obstacles  in  the  way  of  freedom. 

The  imprudent  abolitionist  and  the  selfish  politician  exert  a  like 
influence  upon  the  nation,  though  it  be  of  different  intensity.  They 
rouse  enmity  and  hatred  between  two  sections  of  the  same  country ; 
they,  intentionally  or  unawares,  render  the  Union  less  desirable  and 
less  honorable ;  they  create  fears,  and  threats,  and  experiments  of 
dissolution. 

For  this  their  influence  on  Union  and  Nationality  have  we  under- 
taken to  review  the  course  of  the  deadly  antagonists.  Within  the 
Union,  then,  alone  the  question  of  Slavery  can  be  solved  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  bring  permanently  the  greatest  benefit  to  all  par- 
ties concerned.  This  is,  indeed,  the  American  question,  and  it  will 
haunt  us  whether  there  be  a  temporary  dissolution  of  the  Union 
or  not.    Slavery,  far  from  being  a  sufficient  reason  for  breaking 


iv 


PREFACE . 


the  Union,  adds  new  cause,  new  interest,  new  ties  to  draw  us  still 
more  closely  together. 

To  prove  this  is  the  object  of  the  present  treatise.  Consequently, 
we  have  ventured  to  present  in  their  proper  light  the  two  most 
famous  arguments  of  the  present  day — the  one  taken  from  Political 
Economy,  the  other  weeded  out  from  history — and  have  endeavored 
to  prove  that  they  nowhere  teach  unrelenting  hatred  and  disunion. 
Mr.  H.  R.  Helper's  collection  of  figures  and  testimonies  having  be- 
come more  popular  than  any  other,  we  have  taken  his  production 
as  a  basis  for  our  First  Two  Books.  The  seriousness  of  the  subject 
seemed  at  first  to  exclude  all  humor ;  but  Mr.  Helper's  passion  and 
folly  would,  in  some  instances,  have  made  any  other  treatment 
unfair  and  altogether  unpalatable  to  the  general  reader. 

In  our  Third  Book  we  give  Slavery  its  logical  place  in  the  pro- 
gressive history  of  the  world,  and  trace  its  social  development  within 
our  own  country,  while  in  the  Fourth  Book  we  show  its  relation 
to  the  Union  as  a  political  body. 

Union  College,  Jan.  8th,  1861. 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  I. 

THE  NUMBERS. 

(IN  REPLY  TO  CHAPTERS  I.,  IX.,  X.,  XI.,  AND  XII.  OF  MR.  HELPER'S  COM- 
PENDIUM.) 

I.  The  Science  of  Statistics. — II.  False  Impressions  from  True  Num- 
bers.— III.  False  Reasoning  from  True  Numbers. — IV.  New  York 
and  Norfolk. — V.  New  York  and  New  Orleans. — VI.  Louisiana  and 
Massachusetts,  New  Orleans  and  Boston,  Alabama  and  Maine. — VII. 
New  York  buys  Virginia. — VIII.  Imports  and  Exports  combined  of 
all  the  Principal  Ports. — IX.  Helper  mistaking  Years. — X.  Helper 
ignoring  Paupers  and  Criminals. — XI.  Helper  on  Hay. — XII.  Ex- 
haustion of  Lands  and  Hands. — XIII.  The  First  Cause  and  Last 
Effect  omitted  by  Helper  in  all  his  Arithmetical  Reasonings. — XIV. 
Population,  the  Fundamental  Cause  of  Production. — XV.  Ratio  of 
Increase  of  Population  in  Different  Countries. — XVI.  Ratio  of  the 
Natural  and  the  Artificial  Increase  of  the  Population  of  the  United 
States. — XVII.  Ratio  of  Immigration  in  the  Different  States  of  the 
Union.— XVIII.  Cause  of  the  Difference.— XIX.  Effect  of  Immi- 
gration on  the  Show-Tables  of  the  South  and  the  North. — XX.  The 
Ultimate  Effect  of  Production  on  Population. — XXI.  The  Negro 
Multiplying — his  Show-Tables  all  Right. — XXII.  Everybody  Living 
Longer  there  where  the  "Niggers"  are. — XXIII.  The  Posterior 
Part  of  Helper's  Statistical  Body. — XXIV.  Conclusion  page  9 

BOOK  II. 

THE  TESTIMONIES. 

(IN  REPLY  TO  CHAPTERS  III.,  IV.,  V.,  VI.,  VII.,  AND  VIII.  OF  MR.  HELPER'S 
COMPENDIUM. 

I.  Single  Testimonies.— II.  The  Chapters  HI.  to  IX.  of  Mr.  Helper's 
Compendium.— III.  The  Testimony  of  the  Union.— IV.  The  Testi- 
mony of  England.— V.  The  Testimony  of  France.— VI.  The  Testi- 


vi 


CONTENTS. 


mony  of  Germany. — VII.  The  Testimony  of  Russia. — VIII.  The 
Testimony  of  Greece  and  Rome. — IX.  The  Testimony  of  the 
Churches  and  of  the  Bible. — X.  The  Testimony  of  Living  Wit- 
nesses.—  XI.  General  Remarks  on  the  Testimonies. — XII.  Mr. 
Helper's  Bloody  Plan   59 

BOOK  III. 

THE  DEVELOPMENT. 

I.  Slavery  in  History. — II.  Negro  Slavery  in  History. — III.  Continu- 
ance of  Negro  Slavery  in  the  Southern  States. — IV.  The  Plea  of  the 
Curse.— V.  The  Plea  of  Race  Inferiority. —VI.  The  Plea  of  Philan- 
thropy.—VII.  The  Plea  of  Necessity.— VIII.  The  Plea  of  Self-in- 
terest.— IX.  The  Plea  of  the  Constitution. — X.  Requisites  for  a 
Truly  Philanthropic  Emancipation  :  1.  Delicacy;  2.  Political  Non- 
interference with  the  South  ;  3.  Prudence. — XL  Actual  Work  al- 
ready Accomplished  in  our  Land  :  1.  Prohibition  of  the  Slave-Trade  ; 
2.  Abolition  of  Slavery  ;  3.  Spreading  of  the  White  Population  ;  4. 
Amalgamation  ;  5.  Colonization. — XII.  Conclusion   81 

BOOK  IV. 

THE  CRISIS. 

I.  Balance  of  Power. — II.  Secession. — III.  Our  Policy. — IV.  Integrity 
of  the  Union  ;  the  National  Property,  Fortifications,  Custom-Houses, 
etc. ;  the  Separate  States  :  Texas  ;  California  ;  Louisiana  ;  the  Border 
Slave  States ;  Tennessee  and  Arkansas ;  the  two  Carolinas,  and  the 
Western  Gulf  States. — V.  Prognostic  of  a  Southern  Hexarchy. — 
VI.  A  Proposal  for  a  new  Compromise. — Conclusion   131 


BOOK  I. 


THE  NUMBERS. 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


BOOK  I. 

THE  NUMBERS. 

IN  REPLY  TO   CHAPTERS   I.,  IX.,  X.,  XI.,  AND   XII.  OF  MR. 

HELPER'S  COMPENDIUM. 


I. — THE  SCIENCE  OF  STATISTICS. 

We  have  taken  as  a  basis  of  this  first  part  of  our  treatise 
Mr.  Helper's  famous  Numbers,  by  the  aid  of  which  he 
attempts  to  draw  a  new  dividing  fine  between  two  sec- 
tions of  the  same  country.  These  Numbers  have  become 
a  sort  of  ground-work  for  popular  reasoning  on  Union  and 
Disunion.  And  this  bearing  alon>3  is  the  cause  of  our 
attack.  But  before  entering  upon  a  special  review  of 
them,  we  will  make  a  few  general  remarks. 

The  science  of  statistics  is  yet  in  its  swaddling-clothes. 
Statistical  accounts  were  kept  in  ancient  times,  but  they 
referred  principally  to  the  government,  and  not  to  the 
nation  at  large.  In  the  middle  ages  such  accounts  were 
entirely  neglected  ;  and  what  there  were  at  any  time  had 
neither  system  nor  order.  In  most  modern  times  this 
science  has  grown,  and  especially  during  the  present 
century ;  though  even  now  the  world  and  its  philosophers 
are  not  agreed  in  respect  to  its  limits  or  its  definition. 

1*  • 


IQ  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

A  regular  census  of  the  population,  to  be  repeated  at 
fixed  intervals,  was  first  instituted  by  the  United  States, 
in  the  first  year  of  its  existence,  and  only  since  the  begin- 
ning of  this  century  have  England  and  France  followed 
our  example.  But  what  confusion  reigns  in  these  census 
tables,  even  in  our  modern  times,  may  easily  be  seen  from 
a  few  glances  at  their  headings  and  diagrams,  not  to  men- 
tion the  single  blunders  which  so  frequently  incur  the  cen- 
sure of  the  common  daily  press. 

F.  B.  Hough,  the  superintendent  of  the  New  York 
census  in  1855,  confesses  in  despair,  "that  it  is,  especially 
as  it  regards  the  wealth  and  production  of  the  State,  a 
labyrinth  which  we  can  not  hope  to  be  able  to  survey, 
unless  a  change  is  made  in  the  whole  system.5'  What 
names  shall  we  give  to  the  censuses  of  other  States,  if 
that  of  New  York  is  already  seen  to  be  "  a  labyrinth  ?" 
But  into  such  labyrinths  Mr.  Hinton  Rowan  Helper 
went  groping  for  his  numbers.  No  wonder  he  was  lost, 
for  Ariadne's  thread  seems  not  to  have  fallen  to  his  lot. 

H.  F.  Brachelli  (one  of  those  untiring  German  savans 
whose  patient  toiling  remains  ever  a  wonder  to  us  Yankees 
as  a  class),  in  a  recent  statistical  work  on  Germany,  names 
several  hundred  volumes  as  his  authorities,  and  adds,  then, 
humbly  :  "  I,  of  course,  could  only  give  approximate  state- 
ments, and  had  to  omit  many  things  from  want  of  sufficient 
data." 

There  is,  indeed,  no  writer  of  any  note,  nor  "  any  thor- 
ough scholar  or  profound  thinker,"  who  is  not  aware  of 
the  imperfect  state  of  this  science.  Improvements  are 
being  made  continually ;  but,  ae  yet,  sufficient  care  is  not 
taken  in  collecting  the  statistics,  nor  is  there  system  in  it, 
nor  has  any  system  been  applied  during  periods  sufficiently 


THE   NUMBERS.  j| 

long  to  warrant  all  imaginable  deductions  and  generaliza- 
tions. 

But  all  sciences,  in  their  infancy,  are  somewhat  presump- 
tuous. And  this  is  the  case  with  the  newly-invented  sci- 
ence of  statistics.  Everything  must  now  be  reduced  to 
numbers.  Virtue,  vice,  morality,  education,  misery,  hap- 
piness, slavery,  freedom,  love — all  these  vague  and  un- 
mathematical  quantities — must  now  be  expressed  in  math- 
ematical formulas.  For  there  is  no  more  quality :  every- 
thing is  quantity !  This  cant  has,  for  a  long  time,  been 
ringing  in  our  ears,  and  Mr.  Hinton  Rowan  Helper  seems 
to  be  one  of  its  modern  trumpeters,  though  of  the  lower 
order. 

Yet  we  must  take  men  as  they  are,  and,  therefore,  we 
will  now  view  Mr.  Helper  in  his  character  as  number- 
dealer. 

II. — FALSE  IMPRESSIONS  FROM  TRUE  NUMBERS. 

We  must  take  men  as  they  are,  and  we  must  also  take 
numbers  as  they  are.  We  will  now  suppose  that  the  num- 
bers which  Mr.  Helper  extracts  from  official  reports,  and 
those  which  we  ourselves  will  draw  from  similar  sources, 
are  all  true  and  correct.  They  are  all — let  us  suppose — 
exact  numerical  expressions  of  real  facts.  Now  let  us 
give  a  few  examples,  to  see  what  the  impressions  are  which 
these  true  numbers  may  make  on  our  minds.  We  take 
them  from  the  Official  Census  of  the  United  States,  1850. 

TABLE  I.  THE  DEAF  AND  DUMB,  BLIND,  LAME,  INSANE,  AND 

IDIOTIC  PERSONS  IN  NEW  YORK  AND  VIRGINIA. 

State  of  New  York   6,630 

State  of  Virginia   3,675 

This  is  a  very  nice  statistical  table,  and  quite  character- 


12  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

istic  of  the  science  of  statistics.  "  The  deaf  and  dumb, 
blind,  insane,  and  idiotic  persons,"  like  the  Living  Wit- 
nesses, are  all  huddled  together  in  one  company.  A  happy- 
family,  indeed ! 

After  we  had  recovered  somewhat  from  the  shock  the 
presence  of  such  a  variety  of  cripples  naturally  caused,  we 
looked  again  at  the  figures,  all  told  and  positive.  At  first 
sight — and  this  is  the  only  sight  men  often  take — New 
York  seems  to  have  almost  twice  as  many  "  deaf  and  dumb, 
blind,  insane,  and  idiotic  persons"  as  Virginia.  And  we 
did,  indeed,  set  ourselves  at  work  to  bewail  the  glorious 
Empire  State,  which,  in  spite  of  its  freedom,  was  getting 
so  distressingly  blind  and  insane,  and  deaf,  and  idiotic,  and 
dumb,  while  darkened  Virginia  saw  and  heard,  and  thought 
and  spoke  in  a  ratio  so  much  greater. 

Now,  there  is  nothing  so  very  unfair  in  this  example. 
We  get  about  the  same  impression  from  many  of  Mr. 
Helper's  tables,  and  his  bewailings  are  often  not  based 
on  firmer  ground.  But  let  us  look  at  one  of  his  exam- 
ples : 

TABLE  II.  THE  EXPORTS   OF  NEW  YORK  AND  VIRGINIA. 

Mr.  Helper  states  that  the  exports  in  1852  amounted 

(in  round  numbers  for  popular  use), 

In  New  York  to  $87,434,000 

In  Virginia  to   2,505,000 

A  common  man  compares  these  two  numbers  and  ex- 
claims :  "  Alas !  Virginia  has  forty  times  less  exports  than 
New  York !"  Now  let  us  but  add  the  comparative  popula- 
tion of  the  two  States : 

New  York,  1850  ,  3,097,000 

Virginia,  1850  1,421,000 

And,  without  going  into  any  further  reasoning,  but  by 


THE  NUMBERS. 


13 


only  finding  the  proportions  of  the  exports  to  the  number 
of  inhabitants,  our  wonder  and  surprise  would  be  reduced 
at  least  fifty  per  cent.  We  will  soon  give  more  examples ; 
but  we  have  first  another  observation  to  make,  intimately 
connected  with  all  these  numerical  parades. 

III. — FALSE  REASONING  FROM  TRUE  NUMBERS. 

No  one  doubts  that  there  must  be  a  cause  for  these 
special  facts  and  their  representative  numbers,  and  indeed 
a  cause  for  just  what  they  are.  We  mean,  they  must  be 
the  result  of  some  agent,  or  the  consequence  of  some  prior 
principle ;  and  we  must  see,  too,  that  the  numbers  may  all 
be  correct,  singly  and  added,  but  still  we  may  mistake 
their  cause  or  causes,  mistake  the  relations  of  several  such 
numerical  tables,  mistake  their  consequences,  and  at  last 
their  effect  on  man.  For  man  is,  after  all,  the  end 
of  the  whole  song  of  numbers  and  notes.  There  seem, 
then,  to  be  some  difficulties  in  the  way  of  using  and 
explaining  numbers;  but  Mr.  Helper  does  not  think 
so.  He  has  an  improved  camera  obscura,  a  kind  of 
a  dark-lantern  or  "  nigger"  glass,  which,  showing  every- 
thing in  the  same  swarthy  hue,  gives  at  once  the 
cause  for  everything,  seen  or  unseen ;  and  that  is,  by- 
the-by,  the  only  glass  he  ever  uses.  While  thus  we 
others,  poor  mortals,  must  break  our  heads,  and  think, 
and  compare,  and  study,  and  observe,  he  simply  looks 
through  his  mysterious  glass  and  exclaims:  "Slavery!" 
and  all  difficulties  vanish  at  once.  We  envy  the  man  for 
his  time-and-labor-saving  machine,  but  can  not  refrain  from 
giving  our  curious  readers  a  few  examples,  to  show  in  what 
a  peculiar  way  it  works.  We  are  tempted  to  believe  that 
its  balance-wheel  is  a  little  out  of  order. 


14 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


IY. — NEW  YORK  AKD  NORFOLK. 

The  wise  Governor  of  Virginia  extols,  as  Mr.  Helper 
quotes,  the  bygone  trophies  of  the  harbor  of  Norfolk,  and 
laments  its  present  miserable  condition,  numbers  ever  being 
added  to  demonstrate  and  to  prove.  Now,  there  is  many 
a  harbor  on  the  long  coast  of  the  Atlantic  which  has 
met  with  a  similar  fortune,  both  South  and  North.  It  was 
prophesied  that  New  York  would  become  "  the  center 
of  trade  and  great  emporium  of  North  America,"  and 
even  of  the  whole  Western  world,  long,  long  ago — long 
before  Governor  Wise  bewailed  his  country — at  a  period, 
indeed,  when  the  enslaved  children  of  innocent  darkness 
were  still  gracing  the  shores  and  streets  of  New  Amster- 
dam. The  James  River  is  no  Hudson,  and  the  Alleghanies 
are  no  Palisades.  The  lakes  of  the  North,  too,  have  some 
little  influence  on  commerce.  We  might  as  well  compare 
London  with  Norwich.  But  still  Mr.  Helper  uses  his  dark 
machine,  looks  through  the  glass,  and  answers :  "  Slavery!" 
Now,  does  Mr.  Hinton  Rowan  Helper  really  think 
that,  if  Virginia  had  emancipated  her  slaves  as  soon  as 
New  York,  the  proportion  between  the  commerce  of 
Norfolk  and  that  of  New  York  would  have  still  been  the 
same  in  1850  as  it  was  in  1790?  Or,  that  "the  direct 
foreign  trade  of  Norfolk  would  still  exceed  that  of  the  city 
of  New  York  ?"  Or,  that  Virginia  would  still  "  stand  pre- 
eminently the  first  commercial  State  of  the  Union  ?"  Or, 
"  that  her  commerce  would  still  exceed  in  amount  that  of 
all  the  New  England  States  combined  ?"  No,  we  can  not 
think  him  lacking  thus  much  in  judgment.  But  still,  his  sta- 
tistical exhibitions  would  lead  to  such  conclusions,  and  he 
himself  must  have  had  similar  impressions  when  he  turned 


THE  NUMBERS. 


15 


away  from  the  picture  he  had  drawn  of  the  two  States, 
"  with  feelings  mingled  with  indignation  and  disgust." 

y._^EW  YORK  AND  NEW  ORLEANS. 
But  why  did  Mr.  Helper  not  take  the  statistics  of 
New  Orleans  and  compare  them  with  those  of  New  York  ? 
This  would  have  been,  in  every  respect,  a  fairer  compari- 
son than  New  York  and  Norfolk.  New  Orleans  is  the 
great  outlet  of  the  Mississippi,  the  principal  point  of  attrac- 
tion for  the  South  and  West ;  New  York  a  similar  magnet 
for  the  North,  East,  and  Northwest.  Now  let  us  see  the 
exports  of  the  one  and  of  the  other,  not  forgetting,  how- 
ever, that  New  York  now  rules,  and  will  probably  rule 
for  many  years  to  come,  over  the  largest  productive  area 
of  the  United  States. 

TABLE  III.  EXPORTS  AND  IMPORTS. 

[From  the  "  Annnaire  de  VEconomie  Politique  et  de  la  Staiistique,"  Paris,  1859.] 
[The  table  refers  to  the  year  1857 — at  least  we  think  so,  from  compar- 
ing some  of  its  general  items  with  the  report  of  the  Secretary  of  the 


Treasury  of  the  United  States  for  that  year.] 

Total  exports  of  the  United  States   $338,985,000 

Total  exports  of  New  York   111,029,000 

Total  exports  of  New  Orleans   91,536,000 

Total  exports  of  Boston  and  Charlestown. .  24,894,000 

Total  exports  of  Mobile   20,575,000 


This  is  the  order  of  the  cities  in  amount  of  goods  ex- 
ported. In  this  table  New  Orleans  is  the  second,  and, 
indeed,  comes  very  near  to  New  York.  Would  not  this 
give  a  fairer  and  more  respectable  picture  than  New  York 
and  Norfolk  ?  Or,  let  us  take  the  inrports,  according  to 
the  same  document : 


Total  imports  of  the  United  States  $360,890,000 

Total  imports  of  New  York   222,550.000 

Total  imports  of  31  States  (exc.  New  York)  148,340^000 
Total  imports  of  Boston  and  Charlestown. .  44,840,000 

Total  imports  of  New  Orleans   24,891,000 

Total  imports  of  Philadelphia   17,850,000 


IQ  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

We  see  from  this  table  that  New  York  takes  two  thirds 
of  all  the  imports  of  the  United  States,  and  New  Orleans 
comes  immediately  after  Boston,  and  before  Philadelphia. 
At  any  rate,  this  would  again  have  been  a  fairer  compari- 
son than  New  York  and  Virginia,  South  Carolina  and 
Pennsylvania,  North  Carolina  and  Massachusetts. 

But  let  us  imitate  Mr.  Helper. 

VI.  —  LOUISIANA   AND    MASSACHUSETTS  —  NEW  OR- 
LEANS AND  BOSTON— ALABAMA  AND  MAINE. 

TABLE  IV.  VALUE  OF  EXPORTS  FROM  1856  TO  1857. 

{From  the  official  report  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States. .] 


Exports  of  Louisiana  (Slave  State)  $91,894,000 

Exports  of  Massachusetts  (Free  State)   30,146,000 

Exports  of  New  Orleans  (Slave)   91,536,000 

Exports  of  Boston  and  Charlestown  (Free) . .  24,894,000 

Exports  of  Alabama  (Slave)   20,576,000 

Exports  of  Maine  (Free)   3,716,000 


There  is  that  negro-loving  Massachusetts,  of  good  old 
Puritan  stock,  with  its  manufacturing  palaces  and  its 
spacious  port!  There  is  Northern  Maine,  with  its  im- 
measurable natural  wealth  and  its  magnificent  harbor ! 
And  still  the  poor  Slave  States  are  ahead  of  them !  Neither 
the  elevation  of  modern  Athens  nor  the  depth  of  Portland 
can  stifle  "  our  indignation  and  disgust !"  But  the  picture 
would  become  still  more  alarming  if  we  added  some  items 
of  population.  We  have  not  the  populations  of  1857  at 
hand,  and  therefore  we  must  be  content  to  give  those  of 
1850.  The  numbers  would  now  be  different,  but  the  ratios 
would  not  vary  much. 

Population  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  517,000 

Population  of  the  State  of  Massachusetts   994,000 

Louisiana  had  already  three  times  as  many  dollars  of 

exports  as  Massachusetts;  but  the  comparison  of  their 

populations  would  double  the  ratio. 


THE  NUMBERS. 


17 


Oh,  thou  unfortunate  Massachusetts !  twice  three  times 
below  thy  Slave  sister  on  the  Mississippi !  Thou  sunkest 
so  low  probably  because,  in  days  of  yore,  thou  burnedst 
with  Puritan  zeal  those  four  innocent  Quakers,  in  rashness 
the  prototypes  of  thy  Abolitionists ! 

And  thou,  thrice  unhappy  Boston,  Charlestown  included, 
free  white  and  free  colored,  and  still  $70,000,000  behind  the 
Slave  city  of  New  Orleans !  Why  didst  thou  emancipate 
Mum  Bet  ?  That  first  free  "  nigger"  girl  of  the  North  is 
the  cause  of  all  thy  shortcoming ! 

But  this  would  be  Helper's  logic  and  Hioton  Rowan's 
rhetoric,  and  we  abstain  from  indulging  longer  in  those 
articles. 

Let  us  open  his  own  show-tables  again ! 

VIL— IsTEW  YORK  BUYS  VIRGINIA. 

Mr.  Helper  had  probably  his  numerical  hosts  continu- 
ally before  his  eyes,  and  sometimes  accidentally  combined 
one  item  with  another,  and  then  made  a  comparison  without 
"jumping  exactly  at  conclusions."  Thus  he  saw  the  num- 
bers which  express  the  real  and  personal  wealth  of  the  city 
of  New  York,  and  somewhere  in  their  vicinity  the  num- 
bers of  Virginia.  "  Well,"  says  he,  "  what  do  you  think  of 
that  ?  The  city  of  New  York  could  buy  the  whole  State 
of  Virginia!"  Now,  what  is  Mr.  Helper's  purpose? 
Why  his  surprise  ?  Is  that  all  due  to  Slavery  ?  Are  there 
no  other  rich  cities  in  the  world  ?  The  wealth  of  a  whole 
nation  often  concentrates  in  a  city.  There  is  no  Negro 
Slavery  in  England ;  but  they  say  London  could  easily  buy 
one  or  two  provinces  of  its  own — New  York  and  a  few 
European  kingdoms  included. 


18 


THE  AMEEICAN 


QUESTION. 


VIII.-— IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS  COMBINED  OF  ALL  THE 
PRINCIPAL  PORTS. 

Fighting,  with  numbers  as  arms,  seems,  after  all,  a  pleas- 
ant exercise.  It  fastens  the  interest,  and  while  it  amuses, 
it  strengthens  the  Constitution.  "We  must  continue  this 
prelude  a  little  longer. 

TABLE  V.  TOTAL  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

[From  the  11  Annuaire"  {quoted  above).] 


Of  the  United  States  $723,850,000 

New  York   346,939,000 

New  Orleans   116,784,000 

Boston  and  Charlestown   73,167,000 

Charleston,  S.  C   30,023,000 

Philadelphia   24,985,000 

Baltimore   24,287,000 

San  Francisco   23,566,000 

Mobile   21,485,000 

Oswego,  Champlain,  and  Lakes   18,123,000 

Savannah   11,450,000 

Bichmond   6,600,000 


There,  Mr.  Helper,  are  the  principal  ports  of  all  our 
States,  Free  and  Slave.  They  stand  there,  all  in  order,  ac- 
cording to  their  merits — old  grandmother  "New  York  at 
the  head.  But  do  you  not  see  that  her  children  follow  her 
peaceably,  one  after  the  other — first  a  black  one  and  then 
a  white  one  ?  Do  you  not  see,  too,  that  New  Orleans  has 
indeed  grown  to  be  rather  a  big  boy,  though  raised  down 
South,  where  the  "  niggers"  are  ?  Why  will  you  come 
and  disturb  this  order  and  harmony  between  children  of 
the  same  mother,  who  walk  along  dressed  in  numbers 
more  harmonious  than  the  planets  even  ? 

But  Mr.  Helper  has  somewhat  the  nature  of  a  comet, 
and  hence  his  disturbing  influence.  Before  we  lose  sight 
of  him  entirely,  we  may  point  out  a  few  more  of  his 
eccentricities. 


THE  NUMBERS. 


19 


IX. — HELPER  MISTAKING  YEARS* 
Mr.  Helper,  in  his  first  comparisons,  which  were  to  pre- 
pare the  way  for  all  "indignation  and  disgust,"  chose  not 
only  three  Free  States  which  are  generally  considered  as 
the  most  wealthy  and  populous  of  the  whole  Union,  and 
compared  them  with  three  Slave  States  which  show,  ac- 
cording to  the  United  States  census,  the  least  growth; 
but,  in  order  to  make  the  "disparities"  still  more  "de- 
grading," he  selected  just  those  years  which  best  suited 
his  "  patriotic  purpose."  Thus,  in  his  comparison  of  the 
imports  and  exports  of  New  York  and  Virginia,  he  saw 
fit  to  give  the  exports  of  1852  instead  of  1853 — Virginia's 
tables  showing,  in  the  former  year,  $1,000,000  less  than  in 
the  latter,  and  New  York  $21,000,000  more.  Immediately 
afterward,  in  the  table  of  imports,  he  changed  again  to 
1853,  New  York  having  imported  in  that  year  $46,000,000 
more  than  in  1852,  and  Virginia  $336,854  less.  He  draws 
quite  liberally  on  the  uneven  treasures  of  1852,  1853,  1854, 
and  1855.  Sometimes,  too,  he  mistakes  States  for  Cities, 
and  vice  versa.  Thus,  he  does  not  compare  the  exports  of 
Pennsylvania  and  South  Carolina,  as  he  does  of  New 
York,  Virginia,  Massachusetts,  and  North  Carolina ;  but 
he  takes  Charleston  and  Philadelphia.  The  States,  how- 
ever, would  give  the  following  results : 

Pennsylvania.  South  Carolina. 

Imports  in  1791  $3,436,000  $2,693,000 

Imports  in  1853   6,255,000  15,400,000 

The  strongest  Pro-Slavery  State  would  compare  too  well  in 
that  respect. 

9  Several  tables  and  estimates  were  thankfully  received  by  the 
author  from  S.  Barstow,  a  student  in  Union  College.  The  numbers 
9,  10,  11  are  based  upon  a  selection  of  them. 


20  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

But  why  did  the  impartial  "patriot"  not  compare 
Maine  and  Georgia,  Michigan  and  Missouri,  Connecticut 
and  Kentucky,  which  would  have  given  much  fairer  re- 
sults ?  They  would  have  been  altogether  fairer  States  to 
be  compared  with  each  other,  in  regard  to  extent,  natural 
advantages,  and  history.  The  educational  statistics,  espe- 
cially, would  have  confounded  Mr.  Helper's  universal 
argument. 

X. — HELPER  IGNORING  PAUPERS  AND  CRIMINALS. 

But  to  his  six  States  Mr.  Helper  might  well  have  added 
some  statistics  about  pauperism  and  criminality,  things 
which  are  regarded  by  some  to  be  as  sure  an  index  of  the 
state  of  society  as  the  amount  of  hay  and  hemp  produced. 
"We  may  supply  here  that  little  oversight. 

TABLE  VI.  WHOLE  NUMBER  OF  PAUPERS   SUPPORTED  AND 

CRIMINALS  CONVICTED  WITHIN  THE  YEAR  1850. 
PAUPERS. 

States.  Population.         Paupers.  Proportion. 

New  York  3,097,000  89,835. . ....  .1  in  50 

Virginia  1,421,000   5,118  1  in  200 

Massachusetts   904,000  15,777  1  in  60 

North  Carolina  ....    869,000   1,931  1  in  400 

Pennsylvania   2,311,000  11,550  1  in  200 

South  Carolina  ....    668,000   1,642  1  in  400 

CRIMINALS. 

States.  Population.         Criminals.  Proportion. 

New  York  3,097,000  10,279. . .  1  in  300 

Virginia  1,421,000   107. ..  1  in  13,000 

Massachusetts   990,000   7,250. ..  1  in  1,200 

North  Carolina  ....    869,000   647 ...  1  in   1 ,300 

Pennsylvania   2,311,000   858. . .  1  in  3,000 

South  Carolina  ....   668,000   46. . .  1  in  14,000 

But  we  know  well  that  the  result  of  such  comparisons 
would  destroy  the  symmetry  of  the  artistico-statistical 
work  of  the  patriot,  and  on  that  ground  he  may  be  par- 
doned by  an  art-loving  community. 


THE  NUMBERS. 


21 


XI. — HELPER  ON  HAY. 
11  We  can  now  prove,"  Mr.  H.  says,  "  and  we  shall  now 
proceed  to  prove,  that  the  annual  hay  crop  of  the  Free 
States  is  worth  considerable  more,  in  dollars  and  cents, 
than  all  the  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  hay,  hemp,  and  cane- 
sugar  annually  produced  in  the  fifteen  Slave  States."  He 
quite  liberally  gives  $11  as  the  average  value  of  a  ton  of 
hay,  and  produces  the  following  recapitulation : 

Hay  crop  of  Free  States  $142,138,998 

Sundry  products  of  Slave  States   138,605,723 

Balance  in  favor  of  Free  States.   $3,533,275 

Now,  the  tables  and  estimates  of  Prof.  De  Bow,  "  the 
able  and  courteous  Superintendent,"  are  quite  different. 
According  to  his  Compendium  of  the  Census  of  1850,  we 
find  the  average  price  of  hay  to  be  seven  dollars,  and  that 
of  the  other  products  differing  in  a  similar  way  from 
Helper's  "  impartial"  estimates.  (See  tables  CLXXXVX. 
and  CXX.  of  the  United  States  Census.)  Our  recapitula- 
tion would  then  present  the  following  figures  : 

Hay  crop  of  Free  States   $88,836,874 

Sundry  products  of  Slave  States   141,100,081 

Balance  in  favor  of  the  South    $52,263,807 

The  value  of  the  cotton  crop  of  1850  alone  exceeded, 
according  to  Prof.  De  Bow's  tables,  the  hay  crop  of  the 
North  by  $2,000,000.  In  a  similar  way  might  other  tables 
be  modified.  Bushel  Measure  Products  would  appear  as 
follows : 


Free  States  $276,839,041 

Slave  States   244,770,070 


Balance  in  favor  of  the  North   $32,069,041 

Instead  of  Mr.  Helper's   44,782,636 


22 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


And  the  Pound  Measure  Products  would  present  the  fol- 
lowing table  : 


Instead  of  Helper's  in  favor  of  the  North. .  59,199,108 

Besides,  the  agricultural  home  manufactures  show,  ac« 
cording  to  Prof.  De  Bow,  a  balance  in  favor  of  the  South 
by  more  than  $8,000,000,  which  might  be  added  to  the 
bushels  or  pounds  of  the  South.  The  District  of  Colum- 
bia, too,  is  mentioned  there  as  of  some  little  value,  while 
in  the  eyes  of  the  tabulating  Mr.  Helper  it  is  a  perfect 
nonentity.    But  we  must  abstain  from  further  particulars. 

XII. — EXHAUSTION  OF  LANDS  AND  HANDS. 

We  have  pointed  out  some  of  the  modifications  of 
which  Mr.  Helper's  numbers  are  susceptible,  though  we 
consider  them  one  by  one.  These  were,  however,  but  a 
few  skirmishes  among  the  outposts,  of  little  advantage 
to  either  side.  We  now  begin  to  make  more  wholesale 
work  of  them,  though  the  main  battle  is  not  yet  on  hand. 

Mr.  Helper  speaks  of  the  exhaustion  of  the  South ; 
but  his  words  and  conclusions  might  just  as  well  be  ap- 
plied to  the  whole  Union.  We  all — Slave  States  and  Free 
States,  North  and  South — are  exhausting  our  lands  and 
our  hands,  our  soil  and  our  labor,  our  agriculture  and  our 
general  industry.  We  take  all  the  different  branches  of 
industry  together,  because  they  are  as  intimately  and 
naturally  connected  as  the  members  of  our  physical  bodies. 
An  injury  done  to  one  is  an  injury  done  to  all.  The  time 
is  gradually  passing  away  in  which  party  politicians  can 
further  arouse  and  excite  the  producer  against  the  manu- 


Free  States  . 
Slave  States. 


$151,260,408 
155,048,222 


Balance  in  favor  of  the  South 


$4,387,814 


THE  NUMBERS. 


23 


facturer,  or  the  merchant  against  either.  We  begin  to 
understand  that  their  interests  are  the  same.  Long  before 
Bastiat  published  his  Harmonies  Economiques,  this  prin- 
ciple was  anticipated.  The  systematic  exposition  of  it  by 
modern  economists  can  leave  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the 
impartial  student  as  to  its  merits.  Let  us  be  glad  that 
the  dark  times  of  industrial  enmity  are  coming  to  an  end ! 
There  is  no  truth  in  the  old  saying,  "  What  one  gains, 
another  must  lose  !"  Our  earth  is  not  a  pandemonium. 
Only  as  long  as  men  are  ignorant  of  their  true  self-interest, 
is  there  a  "  helium  omnium  adversus  omnes" — a  war  of 
everybody  against  everybody.  As  society  advances  and 
civilization  grows,  the  great  principle  of  harmony  is  per- 
ceived to  reign  over  all  that  concerns  matter  or  man. 

Let  us  now  refer  to  our  own  H.  C.  Carey,  and  see 
some  of  the  applications  of  this  principle  to  the  United 
States.  We  can  not  do  better  than  to  use  his  own  lan- 
guage, for  he  is  the  acknowledged  apostle  of  this  "  har- 
mony of  interests."  He  has  directed  all  the  powers  of 
his  mind  toward  that  one  great  principle,  and  has  ex- 
pounded it  with  an  energy  almost  bordering  on  mono- 
mania. We  have  so  much  the  more  a  right  to  quote  him, 
as  he,  too,  has  written  statistical  works,  and  also  a  volume 
on  Slavery.  In  his  Letter  X.  to  President  Buchanan, 
he  says  : 

"  Throughout  the  larger  portion  of  the  Union  the  market  is  distant 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  miles,  and  the  consequences  are  seen  in 
the  fact  that  the  soil  is  becoming  almost  everywhere  exhausted — ■ 
wealth  thus  diminishing  when  it  should  increase. 

' '  How  it  diminishes  has  recently  been  shown  by  an  eminent  agri- 
culturist, from  whom  we  learn  : 

* 1  That  the  potash  and  phosphoric  acid  annually  taken  from  the 
land  is  worth,  at  the  usual  market-price  of  these  commodities,  nearly 
$20,000.000 — scarcely  any  of  which  is  ever  returned. 


24 


THE  AMEBIC  AN  QUESTION. 


"  That  the  ashes  of  600,000,000  bushels  of  corn  are  annually  taken 
from  the  soil — scarcely  any  of  which  are  ever  returned. 

* '  That  the  total  annual  waste  of  the  mineral  constituents  of  food  is 
'equal  to  1,500,000,000  bushels  of  corn/ 

"'To  suppose,'  says  the  author  of  these  estimates — 'to  suppose  that 
this  state  of  things  can  continue,  and  we,  as  a  nation,  remain  pros- 
perous, is  simply  ridiculous.  We  have  as  yet  much  virgin  soil,  but 
it  will  not  be  long  ere  we  reap  the  reward  of  our  present  improvidence. 
It  is  merely  a  question  of  time,  and  time  will  solve  the  problem  in  a 
most  unmistakable  manner.  What  with  our  earth-butchery  and  prod- 
igality, we  are  each  year  losing  the  intrinsic  essence  of  our  vitality. 

1 4  '  Our  country  has  not  yet  grown  feeble  from  this  loss  of  its  life- 
blood,  but  the  hour  is  fixed  when,  if  our  present  system  continue,  the  last  throb 
of  the  nation's  heart  will  have  ceased,  and  when  America,  Greece,  and  Rome  will 
stand  together  among  the  ruins  of  the  past. 

1 '  '  The  question  of  economy  should  be,  not,  How  much  do  we  an- 
nually produce,  but,  How  much  of  our  annual  productions  is  saved  to 
the  soil  ?  Labor  employed  in  robbing  the  earth  of  its  capital  stock 
of  fertilizing  matter,  is  worse  than  labor  thrown  away.  In  the  latter 
case,  it  is  a  loss  to  the  present  generation  ;  in  the  former,  it  becomes 
an  inheritance  of  poverty  for  our  successors.  Man  is  but  a  tenant  of 
the  soil,  and  he  is  guilty  of  a  crime  when  he  reduces  its  value  for  other 
tenants  who  are  to  come  after  him.' 

''Waste,  such  as  is  here  described,  Mr.  President,  is  a  crime,  and  it 
finds  its  punishment  in  the  natural,  moral,  and  political  decline,  to 
which  your  attention  has  now  been  called.  Look  almost  where  the 
traveler  may,  he  is  struck  with  the  wretched  condition  of  that  which, 
in  this  country,  is  called  agriculture,  but  which,  in  the  civilized  coun- 
tries of  Europe,  would  be  denominated  pure  and  simple  robbery  of  the 
great  bank  given  by  the  Creator  for  the  use  of  man.  Its  effects  are 
shown  in  the  facts  that,  in  New  York,  where  eighty  years  since  twenty- 
five  to  thirty  bushels  of  wheat  were  an  ordinary  crop,  the  average  is 
now  only  fourteen,  while  that  of  Indian  corn  is  but  twenty-five.  In 
Ohio,  a  State  that  but  half  a  century  since  was  a  wilderness,  the  aver- 
age of  wheat  is  less  than  twelve ;  and  it  diminishes  when  it  should  in- 
crease. Throughout  the  West  the  process  of  exhaustion  is  everywhere 
going  on ;  the  large  crops  of  the  early  period  of  a  settlement  being 
followed  invariably  by  smaller  ones  in  later  years." 

You  may  call  this  a  dark  picture,  or  a  gloomy  prophecy. 
But  it  is  the  same  that  Liebig  but  lately  pointed  to,  from 
his  far-famed  laboratory.  It  is  the  same  that  Fr.  List  has 
deduced  from  history.  It  is  the  same  that  Proudhon  reads 


THE  NUMBERS. 


25 


in  Socialism,  when  he  says  :  "  Of  what  account  can  all  con- 
solidations of  property  and  artificial  manurings  be  against 
such  a  radical  exhaustion !"  It  is  the  result  of  that  suici- 
dal policy  "  which  first  exports  food  and  then  men" — that 
drives  the  son  from  his  home  and  sends  him  to  seek  his 
fortune  in  distant  lands — that  scatters  a  population  over  ex- 
tensive wastes  of  land  and  makes  it  descend  in  the  scale 
of  civilization — that  disregards  the  value  of  productive 
power,  and  looks  only  at  momentary  production  and  gain 
— a  policy  which  is  ever  doomed  to  pant  and  to  reach  after 
more  lands,  though  the  old  homesteads  might  harbor  a 
hundred  millions  more.  It  is,  indeed,  excusable  if  our 
countrymen,  ashamed  of  their  nation's  decay,  lose  their 
patience,  and  write  from  abroad :  "  A  nation  that  can  not 
make  its  own  clothing,  its  bunting  for  its  flags,  and  carry 
its  own  letters,  deserves  to  be  placed  where  foreigners 
place  us — between  the  Russians  and  Negroes  in  point  of 
civilization."  And  in  the  face  of  ail  this  living  testimony 
of  all  nations,  Mr.  Helper  indifferently  takes  up  his  dark- 
lantern,  and,  negrofied  all  over,  exclaims :  u  Slavery ! 
Slavery!"  And  our  poor  laborers,  still  suffering  from  the 
dreadful  crisis  and  general  insecurity,  listen  with  mingled 
feelings  of  hope  and  fear  to  the  false  prophet. 

National  independence,  diversity  of  employment,  work 
for  every  talent,  consolidation  of  our  settlements,  human- 
ity to  our  laborers,  humanity  to  the  laborers  of  the  world, 
real,  solid,  undisturbed,  steady  progress ;  all  point  us  to  a 
home  market,  to  home  industry,  to  a  home  policy,  to  home 
protection,  recommended  by  all  our  statesmen,  from 
Washington,  Jefferson,  and  Madison,  to  Jackson, 
Clay,  and  Webster,  while  the  party  tricksters  and  mis- 
taken philanthropists  have,  these  long  years,  mystified  the 

2 


26 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


different  interests  of  the  people  with  the  question  of 
Slavery,  as  if  it  were  the  sole  point  wherein  the  nation 
was  sore  and  suffering. 

It  is  not  our  present  purpose  to  adduce  extensive  facts 
and  reasonings  on  the  subject  of  the  harmony  of  the  dif- 
ferent interests.  We  only  ask  our  countrymen  whether 
we  might  not,  with  equal  propriety,  use,  at  least  to  a  con- 
siderable extent,  Mr.  Helper's  language  about  the  South, 
in  reference  to  our  whole  Union.  Substituting  "  Europe" 
for  "  the  North,"  who  can  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  adapt- 
edness  of  his  language  to  our  whole  common  country — to 
the  Slave  States  and  to  the  Free  States  ? 

"  Europe  is  the  Mecca  of  our  merchants,  and  to  it  they  must,  and 
do,  make  two  pilgrimages  per  annum — one  in  the  spring  and  one  in 
the  fall.  In  one  way  or  another,  we  are  more  or  less  subservient  to 
Europe  every  day  of  our  lives.  In  infancy  we  are  swaddled  in  European 
muslin ;  in  childhood  we  are  humored  with  European  gewgaws  ;  in  youth 
we  are  instructed  out  of  Northern  books  [by  teachers  who  have  learned 
from  European  volumes,  we  may  add]  ;  at  the  age  of  maturity  we 
sow  our  '  wild  oats'  on  European  soil ;  in  middle  life  we  exhaust  our 
wealth,  energies,  and  talents  in  the  dishonorable  vocation  of  entailing 
our  dependence  on  our  children,  and  on  our  children's  children,  and  to 
the  neglect  of  our  own  interests  and  the  interests  of  those  around  us, 
in  giving  aid  and  succor  to  every  department  of  European  power ;  in 
the  decline  of  life  we  remedy  our  eyesight  with  European  spectacles, 
and  support  our  inlirmities  with  European  canes ;  in  old  age  we  are 
drugged  with  Northern  physic  [that  may  be  so  to  some  extent]  ;  and 
finally,  when  we  die,  our  inanimate  bodies,  shrouded  in  Northern  cam- 
bric [or  rather  in  European  broadcloth],  are  stretched  upon  a  bier, 
borne  to  the  grave  in  a  Northern  carriage,  entombed  with  a  Northern 
spade  [by  an  Irish  grave-digger],  and  memorized  with  a  European 
slab!" 

So  we  go !  There  is  bathos  for  you !  This  is  what 
somebody  calls  an  inverted  climax,  or  the  art  of  sink- 
ing !  Mr.  Helper  followed  his  man  up,  or  rather  down, 
to  the  very  grave,  than  which  there  is  nothing  lower! 
As  we  are  sadly  deficient  in  that  sort  of  genius,  his  lan- 


THE  NUMBERS.  27 

guage  came  to  us  much  a  propos.  A  peroration  charac- 
teristic of  this  subject  of  exhaustion! 

XIII.— THE  FIRST  CAUSE  AND  LAST  EFFECT. 

In  all  his  hosts  of  numbers  and  numerical  deductions, 
Mr.  Hinton  Rowan  Helper  has  forgotten  one  great 
agent ;  namely,  Population  —  the  very  beginning  from 
which  every  number  and  show-table  comes,  and  the  very 
end  in  which  they*  all  must  concentrate  again — the  very 
original  cause  and  the  very  ultimate  effect — the  funda- 
mental basis  and  the  crowning  top  of  the  whole  industrial 
edifice,  with  all  its  manifold  figures,  Arabic  and  Roman. 

We  will  start  with  a  few  facts  or  principles,  the  most 
of  which  are  self-evident.  Whenever  there  is  any  explana- 
tion needed,  we  will  give  it,  still  as  concisely  as  possible  in 
order  not  to  interrupt  the  general  train  of  our  argument. 

XIV.— POPULATION  THE   FUNDAMENTAL  CAUSE  OF 
PRODUCTION. 

Production  depends  upon  Population.  Where  there  is 
not  the  latter,  the  former  can  not  be.  The  larger  the 
population  is,  the  more  extensive  must  be  production,  at 
least  in  our  civilized  communities.  Generally  one  hundred 
men  can  produce  more  than  fifty  can.  And,  indeed,  pro- 
duction not  only  keeps  pace  with  population,  but  even 
goes  ahead  of  it. 

This  question  is  of  too  great  importance  to  be  lightly 
passed  over.  For  there  were  those,  and  probably  are  still 
some,  who  believe  that  a  curse  rests  upon  all  increase  of 
population.  Men  came  to  this  belief  especially  from  the 
fact  that  certain  nations  of  modern  ages  could  no  longer 
support  their  inhabitants,  who  therefore  were  forced  to 


28  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

leave  their  homes  and  to  seek  subsistence  in  countries  as 
yet  more  thinly  settled.  Philosophers  have  been  very 
busy  trying  to  find  a  cause  and  a  law  for  this  phenomenon. 
The  English  economist,  Malthus,  at  last  thought  he  had 
found  them.  " Population,"  he  says,  "tends  to  outgrow 
the  production  of  food ;  Population  increases  in  a  geomet- 
rical progression,  while  Production  increases  only  in  an 
arithmetical  one."  This  theory  is  in  immediate  connection 
with  that  of  Ricardo  in  regard  to  the  course  of  cultiva- 
tion, namely,  "that  society  begins  with  cultivating  the 
most  fertile  soils,  and,  as  population  increases,  must  take 
possession  of  the  poorer  and  less  productive  ones."  Ac- 
cording to  this  compound  theory,  Production  grows  more 
slowly  than  Population.  A  nation  must  thus  continually 
expect  smaller  returns  for  the  labor  of  its  inhabitants  ; 
they  have  less  to  consume,  less  to  live  upon,  and  poverty 
and  misery  must  be  the  end.  Sismondi,  one  of  this  school 
of  economists,  uses,  in  this  respect,  the  following  precious 
words :  "  As  soon  as  population  has  increased  to  too  large 
an  extent,  that  is,  as  soon  as  over-population  takes  place, 
the  surplus  must  yield  to  a  dire  necessity.  The  earth 
must  swallow  again  the  children  she  can  not  nourish." 
Providence  must  thus  take  refuge  in  pestilence  and  war, 
and  thus  decimate  human  society  at  proper  times;  else 
over-population  will  take  place,  with  all  its  horrors  of 
poverty  and  starvation.  According  to  this  theory,  the  hu- 
man race  has  the  great  privilege  of  choosing  between  two 
evils — war  and  murder,  or  famine  and  starvation,  with  some 
slight  variation  of  pestilence,  or  expatriation  to  a  country 
where  the  doom,  however,  is  only  delayed  for  a  while. 

Let  us  cast  away  this  direful  irony  on  Nature  and 
Providence!    These  learned  commentators  on  the  plans 


THE  NUMBERS. 


20 


of  God  have  misinterpreted  the  story  of  Pandora's  box. 
Hope  is  still  left  to  man,  and  left  to  him  until  64  he  enters 
hell."  Nature  is  not  so  gloomy  as  their  theory,  and  poor 
Providence,  too  indulgent,  must  not  too  often  bear  the 
complaint  of  friend  and  foe.  Ricaedo's  hypothesis,  on 
which,  to  a  great  extent,  the  whole  bloody  theory  is  based, 
has  been  found  entirely  false.  Men  have  everywhere,  as 
H.  C.  Carey  has  proved,  begun  with  the  cultivation  of  the 
higher  and  less  productive  soils,  and  descended  gradually 
to  the  lower  and  more  fertile  ones,  to  cultivate  which  the 
first  settlers  had  not  the  requisite  capital.  But  even  with- 
out this,  knowledge,  and  capital,  and  production  must 
necessarily  increase  with  the  increase  of  population.  We 
will  not  further  discuss  this  point,  but  add  some  statistical 
proofs  from  the  "  Testimony  of  the  Nations." 

McCulloch  says  about  England:  "The  population  of 
England,  since  the  eighteenth  century,  has  doubled ;  the 
production  certainly  tripled  or  quadrupled." 

Peuchet,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  statisticians  of 
Europe,  says :  "  The  peasant  in  France,  who  formerly  had 
known  but  very  gross  food  and  unhealthy  beverage,  has 
now  meat,  wine,  bread,  and  beer.  If  we  turn  to  Germany, 
the  change  for  the  better  is  still  more  striking  than  in 
France;  and  thus,  while  the  numbers  of  the  population 
are  continually  increasing,  their  comforts  and  enjoyments 
are  increasing  still  more  rapidly." 

A  writer  in  one  of  the  agricultural  journals  of  Bavaria, 
after  a  most  careful  examination  and  statistical  comparison, 
says :  "  The  present  emigration  from  Europe  is  not  com- 
manded by  necessity.  Europe  itself  is  an  agricultural  con- 
tinent. The  present  population  is  263,000,000.  If  order 
and  quiet  would  reign,  400,000,000  of  people  might  easily 


30 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


be  supported."  The  southeastern  part  of  Russia  might 
alone  feed  a  whole  continent. 

Production  increases,  then,  faster  than  population.  That 
this  is  the  case  with  the  United  States,  too,  writers  of 
every  description  have  proved,  by  filling  their  volumes 
with  pleasing  tables  concerning  the  great  increase  of  our 
material  happiness. 

We  do  not  wish  to  be  misunderstood  in  this.  We  said, 
that  it  is  population  which  causes  the  production  and  origi- 
nates thus  the  statistical  show-tables  of  exports  and  imports, 
of  agriculture  and  commerce,  and  of  every  item  of  national 
wealth  and  happiness  which  can  be  expressed  by  numbers. 
We  went  further,  even,  and  showed  that  a  hundred  persons 
produce  not  only  twice  as  much  as  fifty,  but  even  more ; 
perhaps  three  or  four  times  as  much — for  different  reasons 
to  state  which  we  will  not  interrupt  our  general  argument. 
And  this  is  the  opening  of  our  labyrinth !  But  we  will  go 
slowly,  and  may,  at  our  pleasure,  safely  retrace  our  steps. 

XV. — RATIO  OF  INCREASE  OF  POPULATION  IN  DIF- 
FERENT COUNTRIES. 

We  know  now,  on  the  whole,  the  effect  of  population 
on  production.  Now  let  us  compare  the  statistics  of  our 
own  country  with  those  of  other  leading  nations  of  mod- 
ern civilization,  and  see  at  what  rate  nations  generally 
increase  in  population  !  Let  us  find  out  whether  we,  the 
United  States  of  America,  are  above  or  below  the  com- 
mon rate.  We  wdll  not  now  ask  why  or  wherefore,  but 
only  see  and  compare  the  statistical  facts.  Their  con- 
nected thread  will  gradually  lead  us  to  causes  and  influ- 
ences which  worked  upon  Mr.  H.'s  show-tables  of  the 
South  and  of  the  North. 


THE  NUMBERS. 


31 


TABLE  VII.  RATIO  OF  NATURAL  INCREASE  OF  POPULATION 

OF  DIFFERENT  COUNTRIES  COMPARED  WITH  THE  U.  S. 


\From  the  Census  of  the  U.  &9  1850.] 


States.  Year.  Population. 

Great  Britain, .  .1800  15,800,000 

England  1801   8,850,000 

Ireland  1805   5,395,000 

Scotland  1801   1,008,000 

France  1801  27,349,000 

Prussia  1816  10,349,000 


Year.  Population. 
1851...  27, 475,000 
1851...  16,921, 000 
.  6,515,000 
.  2,888,000 
.35,783,000 
.16,331,000 


1851.. 
1851 . . 
1851.. 
1849.. 


United  States..  1800 


Whites..  4,304,000] 
Fr.  CoFd.  108,000  | 
Slaves...   893,000  H851 


19,553,000 
434,000 
3,204,000 


Total.. 5, 305,000 J         I  23,191,000 
We  will  add  here  the  table  which  shows  the  increase  of 
the  population  of  the  United  States  from  decennium  to 
decennium. 

TABLE  VIII.  RATIO  OE  THE  INCREASE  OF  THE  POPULATION 

OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  FROM  DECADE  TO  DECADE. 

Years.  Whites.         Free  Colored.       Slaves.  Total. 

1790          3,172,000          59,000. ...  ,697,000  3,929,000 

1800          4,304,000  108,000  893,000  5,305,000 

1810          5,862,000  186,000...  1,191,000  7,239,000 

1820          7,861,000  238,000...  1,538,000  9,638,000 

1830. . . .  10,537,000  319,000. . .  2,009,000. . .  .12,866,000 

1840....  14,195,000  386,000...  2,487,000. ...  17,069,000 

1850. . . .  19,553,000  434,000. . .  3,204,000. . .  .23,191,000 

We  see  from  these  tables  that  Great  Britain  has  not 
quite  doubled  its  population  in  fifty  years.  England,  sep- 
arately or  with  Scotland,  has  a  little  more  than  doubled  in 
the  same  number  of  years.  France  has,  during  that  same 
half  century,  increased  its  numbers  by  only  a'  little  more 
than  one  half,  and  Prussia  has,  during  that  time,  increased 
at  about  the  same  rate  as  England.  To  double  the  popu- 
lation in  about  fifty  years,  has  been  the  highest  ratio  ob- 
tained by  any  of  these  modern  nations,  though  some  sta- 
tisticians state  that  England  doubled  its  population  in  forty- 
five  years.  Or,  as  the  Census  says  :  "  The  annual  increase 
of  the  United  States  has  been  nearly  three  times  as  great 


82 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


as  that  of  Prussia,  notwithstanding  the  large  population 
that  was  added  to  her  by  the  partition  of  Poland ;  more  than 
four  times  as  much  as  Russia ;  six  times  as  much  as  Great 
Britain ;  nine  times  as  much  as  Austria ;  ten  times  as  much 
as  France." 

But  how  does  it  come  that  the  United  States  is  so  much 
ahead  of  any  other  nation  ?  During  the  same  fifty  years 
it  has  increased  its  population  to  almost  five  times  its  origi- 
nal number.  It  has  not  doubled  in  fifty  years,  but  in 
twenty-five,  nay,  almost  in  twenty,  if  we  compare  only  the 
white  tables. 

Everybody  will,  of  course,  give  immigration  as  the 
reason  of  this  extraordinary  increase.  But  let  us  see  how 
much  this  faster  increase  of  our  population  is  due  to  immi- 
gration. 

XVI. — RATIO  OF  THE  NATURAL  AND  ARTIFICIAL 
INCREASE  OF  THE  POPULATION  OF  THE  UNITED 
STATES. 

Should  we  proud  Republicans,  modern  Israelites,  and 
modern  Romans — as  we  are  often  called — measure  our- 
selves and  our  natural  productiveness  by  the  standard  of 
other  nations,  such  as  England,  France,  or  Prussia — called 
the  most  enlightened  nations  of  old  Europe — our  numbers 
would,  at  best,  have  doubled  in  fifty  years ;  that  is,  our 
population  would  have  been,  in  1850,  10,610,000,  instead 
of  23,191,000.  There  would  remain  an  increase  of  12,581,- 
000  which  could  not  be  accounted  for  otherwise  than  by 
immigration.  Or,  if  we  take  only  the  white  population, 
there  would  have  been,  in  1850,  8,608,000,  instead  of 
19,553,000,  and  the  immigrants  and  their  descendants 
would  then  be  10,945,000. 

Let  us  see  another  account.    An  able  statistical  writer, 


THE  NUMBERS. 


33 


from  Washington,  who  took  great  pains  in  his  calculations, 
arrived,  after  having  carefully  counted  each  year's  in- 
crease, at  the  following  conclusions  : 

TABLE  IX.  THE  NATIVE  WHITE  POPULATION. 

{From.  Bunt's  Merchant**  Magazine,  No.  OXCVL] 


The  native  white  population  of  the  United  States,  in  1850, 

would  have  been,  without  immigration  since  1800   8,995,000 

"  '                   "              "    1810   10,710,000 

"    1820   12,318,000 

'                      "              "    1830   14,330,000 

"                "                      "              "    1840   10,771,000 

And  the  immigrants  and  their  descendants  number,  in  1850, 

since  1840   3,265,000 

"    1830   5,656,000 

"    1820   8,669,000 

"    1810   9,277,000 

"    1800   11,032,000 


One  account  ascribes  thus  to  immigration,  since  1800, 
12,581,000;  the  other,  10,945,000  ;  and  the  third  account 
gives  11,032,000. 

What  right  have  we,  now,  to  reject  one  of  these  accounts  or 
an  approximate  number  ?  Do  we  procreate  more  children 
than  other  nations?  Is  our  ratio  of  annual  births  over 
deaths  more  favorable?  Do  we  live  longer?  And  if 
some  statisticians  wish  to  have  it  so,  have  they  ever  given 
full  weight  to  the  effects  of  immigration  on  the  tables  of 
population  ?  If  they  give  the  ratio  of  our  natural  increase 
as  being  0.13  or  0.30  per  cent,  in  our  favor,  may  they  not 
have  been  slightly  mistaken  in  their  difficult  calculations  ? 
Did  they  know,  and  if  so,  did  they  make  due  allowances 
for  the  fact,  that  children  of  foreign  parents,  though  born 
but  one  day  after  their  mother's  arrival  on  this  soil,  are  all 
classed  among  the  natives  ?  But  though  the  result  of  our 
numerical  and  ethnological  comparisons  and  deductions 
can  hardly  be  doubted,  still  we  will  fortify  it  by  another 
consideration :  namely — the  fact  that  the  immigrants  in- 

2* 


34 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


crease  naturally  faster  than  the  natives,  and,  therefore, 
help  proportionately  more  than  the  natives  to  fill  the  tables 
of  population.  We  quote  from  a  speech  of  the  author, 
delivered  some  years  ago  at  Albany : 

"  This  fact,"  he  says,  "  has  but  lately  attracted  public  attention.  In 
the  Massachusetts  census  of  1855,  the  reporter,  summing  up  his 
statistics,  finds  that  the  native  population  of  that  State  is  about  three 
and  a  half  times  larger  than  the  foreign  one,  but  that  the  births  are 
almost  equal,  48  per  cent,  native,  and  46  per  cent,  foreign,  the  rest 
unknown.  He  looks  with  wonderment  at  those  numbers,  and  comes 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  immigrants  must  propagate  themselves 
quicker  than  the  natives.  Foreign  women,  he  calculates,  must  produce 
children  three  times  faster  than  American  ladies.  Yet  this  greater 
fecundity  of  foreign  women  is  not  confirmed,  certainly  not  to  that 
extent.  Newspapers  came,  then,  to  the  aid  of  the  perplexed  reporter, 
and  stated  that  there  were  more  foreign  females  in  Massachusetts  than 
males ;  but  this  also  did  not  explain  the  proportion  of  the  increase. 
The  reporter  remains  puzzled,  and  he  guesses,  at  last,  that  if  that 
increase  goes  on  at  the  same  ratio,  the  foreigners  will  yet  swallow  the 
natives. 

1  'Now,  this  mystery  is  fully  explained  by  our  above  observation, 
namely,  the  great  proportion  of  grown-up  persons  among  the  immigrants. 
This  is  the  fundamental  cause  of  the  faster  increase.  Take  on  an 
average  an  equal  number  of  foreigners  and  natives,  and  there  will  be 
more  grown-up  persons  among  the  foreigners,  and  therefore  more 
marriages,  and  then  more  children.  Many  foreigners  in  that  number 
will  be  ready  to  enter  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  and  extend  the 
empire  of  human  flesh,  while  as  many  natives  are  yet  lying  in  their 
nurses'  arms,  with  hardly  flesh  enough  for  their  own  tender  limbs." 

But  let  us  see  the  proportion  of  grown  persons  among 
the  immigrants.  We  refer  to  the  table  of  Mr.  Edmund 
Flagg,  the  efficient  Superintendent  of  the  Statistical 
Bureau  of  the  State  Department.  It  is  for  the  year  1855, 
but  may  well  be  taken  as  a  standard  for  former  years, 
for  the  proportion  of  grown  persons  must  in  those  times 
have  been  still  larger,  as  it  is  but  lately  that  immigrants 
have  had  the  confidence  to  come,  with  their  whole  families, 
to  this  "far-off  land." 


THE  NUMBEE8. 


35 


TABLE  X.  THE  AGE  OF  IMMIGRANTS. 

[From  tlie  Report  of  the  Superintendent  of  tJie  Statistical  Bureau  of  the  State 
Department,  1855.] 

Age.                           Males.       Females.  Total. 

Under  5  years  of  age            8,000. . . .  8,000. . . .  10,000 

7,000....  6,000....  14,000 

..  6,000....  5,000....  11,000 

..  8,000....  16,000....  34,000 

..24,000....  16,000....  40,000 

..22,000....  10,000....  32,000 

..13,000....  5,000....  19,000 

..  9,000....  4,000....  12,000 

..12,000....  7,000....  19,000 

..11,000....  8,000....  19,000 


Between  5  and  10  years 
10  "  15  " 
"  15  "  20  " 
"  20  "  25  m 
"  25  "  30  " 
"  30  "  35  " 
"      35   "  40  " 

Forty  years  and  upward. 

Age  not  stated  


Total  135,000. . .  .89,000. . .  .224,000 

This  table  shows  that  three  fourths  of  the  immigrants 
may  be  taken  as  persons  between  the  ages  of  fifteen  and 
forty-five.  Now,  set  these  two  classes  of  new-comers  in  our 
nation  at  work — on  one  hand  you  have  the  products  of 
natural  increase  by  birth,  on  the  other  the  products 
of  artificial  increase  by  immigration ; — the  former  nothing 
but  frail  little  children,  to  be  petted  and  nursed  for  years 
to  come ;  75  per  cent,  of  the  latter  commonly  stout  and 
healthy,  and  at  once  ready  to  work  and  produce ; — the 
former  yet  exposed  to  all  those  decimations  by  the  diseases 
and  dangers  of  the  young ;  the  others,  already  tried  and 
decimated  on  land  and  sea,  and  only  those  of  them  counted 
who  had  stood  the  trial !  Now,  let  this  process  go  on 
year  after  year,  which  will  increase  proportionately  faster  ? 

But  we  will  be  liberal  toward  ourselves !  We  will  not 
take  the  twelve  millions,  or  the  eleven  millions.  We  will, 
on  account  of  the  somewhat  greater  mortality  of  foreign 
children,  go  still  a  million  or  so  lower,  and  say  that  about 
one  half  of  the  white  population  of  the  United  States  in 
1850  is  due  to  the  immigrants  and  their  descendants  since 
the  year  1800. 


36 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


[According  to  the  well-known  statistician,  F.  H.  Bra- 
chelli,  the  number  of  inhabitants  of  German  origin,  in  1856, 
was  5,250,000,  viz.,  about  the  fifth  of  the  then  population 
of  the  United  States.  If  we  now  add  to  this  number  of 
Germans  the  large  Irish  immigration,  and  then  that  of  the 
other  nations  of  Europe,  our  own  account  will  be  found 
rather  too  low  than  too  high.] 

And  if,  then,  it  is  true  that  about  one  half  of  the  white  pop- 
ulation of  the  United  States  is  due  to  the  immigrants  and 
their  descendants  since  1800,  would  it  not  be  a  fair  con- 
clusion, too,  that  the  statistical  show-tables  of  "  material" 
products — and  such  are  most  of  those  expressed  by  num- 
bers— owe  at  least  half  their  swellings  to  the  immigrants  ? 
Which  class  of  inhabitants  are  chiefly  engaged  in  "  mate- 
rial" production?  We  may  be  allowed  to  quote  once 
again  from  an  address  of  the  author  : 

'  i  Certainly,  this  Union  might  have  reached  its  present  power — I  do 
not  say  without  immigration  at  all  (for  we  are  all  immigrants),  but 
without  immigration  since  1800 — but  not  so  soon,  not  so  fast ;  it  would 
have  had  to  toil  and  to  grow  yet  many  years  to  come.  There  would 
now  be  less  capital  here,  less  cultivated  land,  less  commerce  ;  there 
would  be  fewer  engines,  fewer  shops,  fewer  roads,  fewer  vessels,  fewer 
houses  and  palaces,  fewer  comforts,  and  fewer  luxuries.  Your  mon-of- 
war,  your  fortifications,  your  public  buildings,  your  power  at  home, 
your  power  abroad  throughout  the  world,  your  private  and  public 
treasuries  would  dwindle,  and  many  of  the  natives  who  are  now  man- 
agers, and  conductors,  and  directors,  and  merchants,  and  speculators, 
and  officers,  and  reverends,  and  doctors,  and  judges,  and«senators,  most 
honorable  Senators,  many  of  them,  would  now  be  common  day-labor- 
ers, mechanics,  instructors,  or  canal  diggers  -professions  which  are 
most  graciously  left  to  the  foreigner — professions  of  less  honor,  of  less 
pay,  but  of  more  labor. ' ' 

The  same  language  may  be  observed  in  the  columns  of 

the  New  York  Tribune  (March  11,  1859) : 

"  Our  able  and  ambitious  youth  are  attracted  to  trade,  to  the  profes- 
sions, to  filibustering  of  some  sort — rarely  to  any  form  of  productive 


VTHE   NUMBEKS.  3f 

industry.  Advertise  to-day  for  a  man  to  manage  a  farm,  and  three 
fourths  of  the  responses  will  come  from  men  of  European  birth.  Ad- 
vertise for  a  boy  in  a  lawyer's  office,  a  clerk  in  a  store,  a  partner  in  a 
venture  to  Pike's  Peak,  and  two  thirds  of  the  responses  will  come  from 
native  Ameiicans.  We  are,  as  a  people,  intent  on  getting  suddenly  rich 
by  some  kind  of  speculation,  rather  than  on  slowly  acquiring  a  com- 
petence by  industry." 

Thus,  should  the  above  number  of  the  foreigners  and 
their  descendants  be  found  even  somewhat  too  large,  there 
would  be  no  doubt  about  our  final  conclusion,  that  at  least 
one  half  of  the  common  production  of  the  country  is  due 
to  them. 

XVII. — RATIO  OF  IMMIGRATION  IN  THE  DIFFERENT 
STATES  OF  THE  UNION". 

We  have  thus  seen  how  much  of  the  population  and 
how  much  of  its  more  rapid  increase,  how  much  of  the 
production  and  how  much  of  its  larger  tables,  must  be  due 
to  immigration.  We  now  will  ascertain  what  portion  of 
this  immigration  fell  to  the  part  of  the  South,  and  how 
much  to  the  part  of  the  North,  and  then  we  will  try  to 
find  the  causes  of  the  difference. 

We  take  again  the  Census  of  the  United  States  f6r 
1850.  There  we  will  see  the  proportion  of  foreigners — 
"not  born  here" — to  the  natives,  "born  here,  whether 
from  native  or  foreign  parents."  For  the  official  census  is 
liberal  toward  the  children  created  abroad  but  born  here ; 
they  are  all  called  "  natives."  Our  tables,  however,  do  not 
suffer  in  this  case,  since  all  States  are  treated  alike  liberally. 

[We  expressly  give  our  statistical  tables  in  round  num- 
bers, in  order  to  impress  more  strongly  their  general 
character,  and  the  proportion  of  their  difference  when 
compared  with  one  another.] 


38 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


TABLE  XI.  THE  RATIO  OF  FOREIGNERS  IN  THE  FREE  STATES. 

[From  the  Official  Census  of  the  United  States,  1850.] 

Free  States.  Total  Inhabitants.  Foreigners. 

California   92,000    21,000 

Connecticut   370,000    38,000 

Illinois   851,000    111,000 

Indiana   988,000    55,000 

Iowa   192,000    20,000 

Maine    583,000    31,000 

Massachusetts   994,000    163,000 

Michigan   397,000    54,000 

New  Hampshire   317,000    14,000 

New  Jersey   489,000    59,000 

New  York   3,092,000    655,000 

Ohio   1,980,000    218,000 

Pennsylvania   2,311,000    303,000 

Rhode  Island   147,000    23,000 

Vermont   314,000    33,000 

Wisconsin   305,000    110,000 


Total   13,434,000  1,908,000 

THE  RATIO  OF  FOREIGNERS  IN  THE  SLAVE  STATES. 

Slave  States.  Total  Inhabitants.  Foreigners. 

Alabama   771,000    7,000 

Arkansas   209,000    1,000 

Delaware   92,000    5,000 

Florida   87,000    2,000 

Georgia   906,000    6,000 

Kentucky   982,000    31,000 

Louisiana   517,000    67,000 

Maryland   583,000    51,000 

Mississippi   606,000    4,000 

Missouri   682,000    76,000 

North  Carolina   869,000    2,000 

South  Carolina   668,000    8,000 

Tennessee   1,002,000    5,000 

Texas   212,000    17,000 

Virginia   1,421,000  ......  22,000 


Total   9,612,000  304,000 

XVIII. — CAUSE  OF  THE  DIFFERENCE  IN  THE  PROPOR- 
TIOIST  OF  IMMIGRANTS  IN  THE  DIFFERENT  STATES 
OF  THE  UNION. 

During  our  whole  argument  we  heard  frequent  whispers 
of :  "  Slavery  !  all  due  to  Slavery !"  We  will  now  make 
some  "  excerpts"  from  the  above  statistical  tables,  in  order 
to  see  whether  those  whispers  were  oraculous. 


THE  NTJMBEKS. 


30 


TABLE   XII.  DIFFERENCE   IN    THE   PROPORTION    OF  IMMI- 
GRANTS IN  FREE  STATES. 
States.  Square  Miles.  Foreigners. 

New  York   47,000    665,000 

Pennsylvania   46,000    303,000 

Massachusetts   7,000    163,000 

Vermont   8,000    33,000 

New  Hampshire   8,000    14,000 

Wisconsin   53,000    110,000 

Michigan   56,000    54,000 

TABLE  XIII.  DIFFERENCE    IN  THE    PROPORTION   OF  IMMI- 
GRANTS IN  SLAVE  STATES. 
States.  Square  Miles.  Foreigners. 

South  Carolina   28,000    8,000 

Georgia   58,000    6,000 

Kentucky   37,000    31,000 

Louisiana   41,000    67,000 

Tennessee   44,000    5,000 

Florida   59,000    2,000 

Alabama   50,000    7,000 

TABLE  XIV.  DIFFERENCE    IN   THE    PROPORTION    OF  IMMI- 
GRANTS IN  SLAVE  AND  FREE  STATES  COMPARED. 
States.  Square  Miles.  Foreigners. 

Maryland  (Slave)   11,000    51,000 

Maine  (Free)   35,000    31,000 

Louisiana  (Slave)   41,000    67,000 

Iowa  (Free)   50,000    20,000 

California  (Free)   188,000    21,000 

Missouri  (Slave)   65,000    76,000 

Michigan  (Free)   56,000    54,000 

TABLE  XV.  SOME  ADDITIONAL  DIFFERENCES  IRRESPECTIVE 

^  OF  SQUARE  MILES. 


Free  States. 
States.  Foreigners. 

Connecticut   38,000 

Rhode  Island   23,000 

Massachusetts   163,000 

Illinois    111,000 

New  Jersey   59,000 

Wisconsin   710,000 

Indiana   55,000 


Free  and  Slave  States. 
States.  Foreigners. 

Mississippi  (Slave)   76,000 

Iowa  (Free)   20,000 

Maryland  (Slave)   51,000 

Vermont  (Free)   33,000 

New  Hampshire  (Free)  . . .  14,000 

Kentucky  (Slave)   31,000 

Maine  (Free)   31,000 


There  are  four  tables  as  simple  as  the  multiplication 
table.  In  the  first  of  them  there  are  seven  Free  St  ates.  In 
none  of  these  is  there  any  Negro  Slavery.  Why,  then,  is 
there  such  a  difference  in  their  share  of  immigrants  ?  New 
York  and  Pennsylvania  have  about  the  same  number  of 


40  THE   AMEBIC  AN  QUESTION. 

square  miles  ;  but  the  former  has  about  twice  as  many  im- 
migrants. Vermont  and  New  Hampshire,  too,  have  about 
the  same  area ;  but  the  former,  again,  has  over  one  half 
more  foreigners  than  the  latter.  Massachusetts,  with 
about  1,000  square  miles  less  than  either,  has  still  more 
than  ten  times  as  many  foreigners  as  the  one,  and  five 
times  as  many  as  the  other.  Wisconsin,  with  about  the 
same  number  of  square  miles  as  Michigan,  has  more  than 
twice  as  many  foreigners.  Has  Southern  Negro  Slavery  ex- 
erted its  whimsical  influence  even  on  the  Northern  States  ? 

But  look  at  the  second  table.  There,  again,  are  seven 
States.  All  Slave  States !  And  still,  South  Carolina,  with 
an  area  half  that  of  Georgia,  has  one  fourth  more  immi- 
grants. Louisiana  has  only  one  seventh  more  square  miles 
than  Kentucky,  and  still  has  more  than  double  the  num- 
ber of  immigrants.  It  has  fewer  square  miles  than  Ten- 
nessee, but  twelve  times  as  many  foreigners.  Florida  and 
Alabama  have  about  the  same  area,  but  the  latter  has  two 
thirds  more  foreigners.  What  is  the  reason  of  this  differ- 
ence ?  Negro  Slavery  again  ?  Is  Negro  Slavery  blacker 
in  Florida  than  in  Alabama  ?  Is  the  Negro  less  a  Negro 
in  Louisiana  than  in  Tennessee  ? 

Let  us  pass  on  to  the  third  table.  Another  seven  States, 
some  Free,  some  Slave.  There  is  Maryland  with  its  Slavery, 
and  Maine  with  its  Freedom.  And  still  Maryland,  with 
only  one  third  of  the  area  of  Maine,  has  20,000  more  immi- 
grants. Louisiana  has  one  fifth  less  square  miles  than 
Iowa,  and  still  the  Slave  State  has  three  times  as  many 
foreign  inhabitants  as  the  Free.  California,  with  more 
than  four  times  as  many  square  miles  as  Louisiana,  has 
three  times  less,  foreigners.  Missouri,  with  one  seventh 
more  square  miles  than  Michigan,  has  two  sevenths  more 


THE  NUMBERS. 


41 


foreigners.  Has,  in  these  cases,  Negro  Slavery  been  an 
attractive  force  ? 

Or,  let  us  take  Northern  and  Southern  States  without 
reference  to  square  miles,  as  in  the  fourth  table ;  for  there 
is,  both  South  and  North,  plenty  of  room  for  a  hundred 
times  more  immigrants.  Has  Negro  Slavery  caused  Con- 
necticut to  have  more  foreign  inhabitants  than  Rhode 
Island  ?  Massachusetts  more  than  Illinois  or  New  Jersey  ? 
Wisconsin  more  than  Indiana?  Mississippi  more  than 
Iowa  ?  Maryland  more  than  Vermont  or  New  Hampshire  ? 
Kentucky  the  same  number  as  Maine  ? 

Or,  compare  the  number  of  foreigners  in  each  State  with 
its  native  population ;  or  the  number  of  foreigners  to  the 
square  mile  with  all  the  inhabitants  to  the  square  mile ; 
the  different  States  will  most  stubbornly  resist  a  common 
rule  or  law,  but  especially  will  they  object  to  such  quack 
barometers  as  the  deus  ex  machina  invented  by  Mr.  Hisr- 
ton  Rowan  Helper. 

From  the  facts  and  numbers  presented  by  us,  any  im- 
partial reader  must  see  that  there  were  other  causes  at 
work  besides  Slavery  to  direct  the  waves  of  emigration, 
and  to  produce  such  a  difference  in  the  numbers  of  foreign- 
ers in  the  different  States.  From  the  earliest  period  of  our 
Union,  the  emigrants  have  chosen  certain  ports,  which  were 
not  pointed  out  to  them  by  the  white  or  black  color  of  some 
of  the  inhabitants,  but  by  the  great  order  of  Nature.  Places 
like  Boston,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  or  New 
Orleans  were  the  great  and  tried  harbors  to  receive  the 
emigrants.  They  were  the  great  starting-points  selected 
by  Nature  as  the  principal  thoroughfares  of  the  Western 
Continent.  Many  of  the  emigrants,  then,  when  once  ar- 
rived on  the  shores  of  their  "Promised  Land,"  would 


42 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


not,  could  not,  wander  far  into  the  interior,  and  only  a 
small  minority  went  out  of  the  regular  course  to  States 
and  places  on  the  left  or  on  the  right. 

As  the  inland  routes  were  gradually  opened,  they  moved 
in  larger  numbers  farther  to  the  West.  This  was  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  country's  policy,  which,  on  the  whole, 
was  to  scatter  the  population  over  an  area  as  large  as  pos- 
sible, to  form  new  Territories  and  new  States,  to  get  new 
agricultural  products  to  exchange  for  foreign  fabrics,  in- 
stead of  building  up  the  home  market,  and  consolidating 
and  developing  the  old  lands  and  States.  But  when  the 
emigrants  saw  their  plans  thwarted  in  the  East,  and  new 
hopes  and  "free  homesteads"  held  out  in  more  distant 
regions,  whither  should  they  move  ?  Neither  was  cotton  the 
article  of  growth  which  they  were  acquainted  with,  nor  had 
the  South  the  climate  which  they  were  accustomed  to 
in  the  countries  from  which  most  of  them  came.  They, 
therefore,  went  North  and  West!  Says  the  celebrated 
statistician,  G.  F.  Kolb  :  "  It  is  the  climate  similar  to  that 
of  Central  Europe  which  attracts  the  emigrants  to  the 
North  and  West  of  the  United  States,  in  preference  to 
any  other  land."  We  add  here  a  table  which  shows  which 
climate  sends  the  most  emigrants,  and  which  might  thus 
expect  the  most : 

TABLE  XVI.  PLACES  OF  BIRTH  OF  THE  FOREIGN  POPULA- 
TION OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 
[From  the  Census  of  the  United  States,  1850.] 


States.  Number. 

England   278,000 

Ireland   961,000 

Scotland   70,000 

Wales   29,000 

Germany   573,000 

Belgium   1,000 

Holland   9,000 

Switzerland   13,000 


States.  Number. 

Austria   900 

Russia..-   1,000 

Norway   12,000 

Denmark   1,000 

Sweden   3,000 

Prussia  ,   10,000 

British  America   147,000 


Total   2,116,000 


THE  NUMBEKS 


43 


2,116,200  emigrants  come  from  the  Northern  and  Middle 
States  of  Europe,  and  the  total  number  is  only  2,212,000  ! 
How  many  remain  to  be  counted  to  the  southern  parts  of 
the  world  ?  France,  Italy,  Spain,  Greece,  Mexico,  and  the 
whole  of  Asia,  have  only  about  90,000  to  be  divided  among 
them. 

There  is,  then,  the  climate,  the  geographical  position, 
the  river-beds,  the  bays  and  the  harbors,  the  lakes,  the 
mountains  and  valleys,  the  soils  and  the  zones,  and  many 
other  natural  facts,  which  determined  the  future  of  this 
whole  continent  and  of  the  different  States  long  before  the 
first  foot  of  civilized  man  touched  this  soil.  The  Tiber  and 
the  Thames,  the  Nile  and  the  Rhine,  had  their  histories  - 
predicted  by  the  Book  of  Nature  long  before  a  Rome  or  a 
London,  before  pyramids  or  castles,  were  dreamt  of.  And 
so  the  St.  Lawrences,  the  Hudsons,  and  the  Mississippis 
of  this  continent  had  their  future  marked  out  long  before 
Mr.  Helper  came,  trying  to  negrofy  our  understandings. 

XIX. — EFFECT  OF  IMMIGRATION"  ON  THE  SHOW-TABLES 
OF  THE  SOUTH  AND  OF  THE  NORTH. 

Let  us  now  sum  up  this  whole  matter  of  immigration. 
We  have  stated  and  proved  that  population  is  the  funda- 
mental cause  of  all  production  ; 

That  if  the  population  increases,  the  production  must 
increase  at  a  still  higher  ratio ;  or  that,  if  there  are  twice 
as  many  persons  at  work,  they  will  "  manufacture"  thrice 
or  four  times  as  large. and  as  plentiful  show-tables  of  every 
sort  and  material ; 

That  population  in  our  land  increases  at  a  most  enor- 
mous rate,  and  that  neither  England  nor  France  can  keep 
up  with  it ; 


44 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


That  this  extra  glory  is,  however,  not  due  to  any  natu- 
ral privilege,  but  to  the  immigrants,  of  whom  seventy-five 
per  cent,  are,  like  Melchisedek,  already  grown  up  when 
they  are  born  ;  or — what  is  the  same  for  all  practical  con- 
siderations— when  they  are  borne  to  this  country  ; 

That  at  least  one  half  of  the  population  of  the  United 
States  in  1850  is  due  to  the  immigrants  and  their  descend- 
ants since  1800  ; 

That  the  different  States,  whether  Free  or  Slave,  had 
different  proportions  of  these  immigrants  ; 

That  this  difference  can  not  be  explained  alone  by  Mr. 
Helper's  universal  cause  of  everything  under  creation: 
namely,  Negro  Slavery ; 

That  nature  has  marked  out  the  course  of  empires,  and 
that  Providence  does  not  first  make  cities  and  then  rivers 
to  flow  by  them,  and  at  last  shores  and  banks  to  keep  them 
in  proper  limits. 

And  now,  if  we  take  another  look  at  the  tables  we 
have  presented,  we  see  that  the  whole  number  of  foreign- 
ers— foreign-born  inhabitants — in  these  United  States  is 
2,212,000,  of  which  the  Free  States  take  about  six  sevenths, 
and  the  Slave  States  only  one  seventh. 

If,  now,  we  take  this  as  a  general  ratio — and  we  may, 
according  to  other  tables,  fairly  do  so — of  the  whole  im- 
migration and  descendants  since  1800,  and  call  this  whole 
immigration  only  10,000,000,  we  find  that  8,500,000  of 
these  artificial  helps  were  allotted  to  the  North,  while  the 
South  received  only  1,500,000. 

Now,  set  two  countries,  or  two  sections  of  a  country,  at 
work,  the  one  receiving  annually  a  fresh  supply  of  men 
and  women  at  the  rate  of  7,000  to  every  1,000  of  the 
other — continue  this  process  for  a  period  of  fifty  years, 


THE   NUMBEKS.  45 

these  foreign  men  and  women  continually  digging  and 
toiling,  producing  matter  and  men  Avith  eagerness,  in- 
creasing in  numbers  at  rates  so  astonishing,  cultivating 
lands,  working  day,  and  even  night,  in  the  sweat  of  their 
faces,  with  bodies  stout  and  hands  accustomed  to  labor, 
bringing  millions  of  dollars  into  the  country,  saving  old 
and  laying  up  new  stock,  increasing  and  thriving  lustily 
on  a  fresh  and  grateful  soil,  in  a  free  land,  in  the  very 
midst  of  industrial  progress,  in  an  era  to  which  none  pre- 
vious in  history  can  be  compared  as  to  swiftness  of  pro- 
duction and  effective  means  and  instruments  to  assist  the 
hand  of  man — let  these  proportions  (seven  to  one),  under 
such  most  favorable  circumstances,  and  under  influences 
never  dreamed  of  before,  work  on  for  a  period  of  fifty 
years — add  then  to  this,  if  you  please,  the  difference  be- 
tween the  Northern  and  the  Southern  laborer — take  the 
Negro  as  he  is,  wholly  barbarous,  half  barbarous,  or  half 
civilized,  unskillful  at  least,  for  many  years,  causing  for  a 
long  period  a  heavy  draft  on  Southern  treasure  for  the 
purchase-money  (mostly  paid  to  Northern  traders) — a 
slave,  too,  and,  as  such,  ready  and  willing  to  work  only 
because  and  when  he  must — a  slave  now,  to  be  a  slave 
forever,  as  far  as  he  knows,  without  hope  of  position  or 
of  gain ;  while  the  immigrant  brings,  at  least,  traces  of 
the  civilization  of  the  world  with  him,  is  a  free  man, 
works  for  himself,  appropriates  whatever  wages  he  may 
make  and  whatever  his  wife  and  children  may  earn — the 
master  of  his  hands,  of  his  family,  of  his  property,  with 
considerable  chances  for  honor  and  position  even — let  the 
two  sections  under  such  different  influences  work  on  for 
a  period  of  fifty  years,  and  at  the  end  of  this  period  com- 
pare the  numbers  and  figures,  the  statistical  tables  of 


46 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


wealth  and  of  products,  of  commerce,  agriculture,  and 
manufactures  of  the  one  section  and  the  other,  aside  from 
all  the  various  natural  causes  favorable  to  the  one  and 
disadvantageous  to  the  other — will  you  be  surprised  to 
find  the  tables  of  the  one  much  lower  than  those  of  the 
other  ? 

We  are  not  surprised  that  the  statistical  tables  of  the 
North  are  so  much  larger  than  those  of  the  South,  but 
we  are  surprised  that  they  are  as  large  in  the  South  as 
they  are.  The  South  has  done  more  than  we  should  have 
expected,  under  existing  circumstances. 

But,  let  none  imagine  that  should  the  South  at  once 
liberate  all  its  slaves,  there  would  be  such  a  rush  of  immi- 
grants as  Mr.  Helper  would  like  to  see,  by  the  aid  of  his 
dark-lantern.  It  will  take  many  generations  to  accustom 
the  Northern-born  native,  or  foreigner,  to  more  Southern 
climes,  and  only  a  slow  and  steady  advance  will,  or  can, 
give  the  South  the  artificial  aid  which  will  enable  it 
to  increase  more  rapidly  in  numbers  and  men.  And  this 
slow  and  steady  advance,  as  far  as  destined  by  Nature, 
has  been  going  on  this  long  time,  in  spite  of  Negro 
Slavery,  which,  to  be  sure,  has  lessened  the  pressure,  but 
could  not  stem  the  flood.  But  that  rush  of  foreign- 
ers can  not,  even  in  the  North,  always  remain  the 
same.  It  has  probably  reached  its  crisis.  It  will,  and 
d,oes  sink,  and  in  the  same  manner  the  Northern  show- 
tables  will  and  do  sink,  while  the  South,  less  accustomed 
to  artificial  aid,  will  feel  less  the  growing  want.  There  is 
not  total  darkness  in  the  future  of  the  South !  Let 
it  manage  its  powers  well!  Let  it  give  a  willing  ear 
to  the  teachings  of  history !  Perhaps  De  Soto's  dreams 
about  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi  may  yet  be  realized, 


THE  NUMBERS. 

and  in  that  great  central  empire  of  the  continent  of  North 
America,  the  South  "  will  not  be  the  least  among  the 
children  of  Israel." 

XX. — THE  ULTIMATE  EFFECT  OF  PRODUCTION  ON 
POPULATION. 

It  is  a  question,  after  all,  whether  the  greater  amount  of 
production  in  a  country  is  a  sure  index  of  a  corresponding 
degree  of  happiness  and  welfare  among  its  people.  Al- 
ready the  Italian  economist,  Fuoco,  said:  "Not  produc- 
tion, but  distribution,  is  the  first  and  principal  question  in 
economy." 

And  Blanqui,  in  his  "  History  of  Political  Economy," 
called  this  same  idea  "  the  great  motto  of  the  social  science 
of  the  nineteenth  century." 

One  nation  may,  indeed,  produce  a  vast  amount  of  ma- 
terial products,  and  still  keep  the  producers,  especially 
the  laborers,  in  a  miserable  condition,  by  giving  them  but 
a  small  share  in  the  common  produce.  Another  nation 
with  a  smaller  amount  of  products  may  distribute  this 
amount  more  equally  and  proportionately,  and  thereby 
procure  a  greater  amount  of  common  happiness.  Just  as 
in  the  case  of  families.  One  father  may  gain  twice '  the 
amount  that  another  does,  but  use  proportionately  six  times 
as  much  to  gratify  his  own  selfish  appetites.  The  family 
of  the  latter  will  be  the  better  off;  there  will  be  a  greater 
amount  of  happiness  caused  by  a  smaller  amount  of 
means.  In  a  nation,  the  fathers  with  the  depraved  appe- 
tites are  the  rich  and  privileged  squanderers.  The  whole 
principle  may  be  stated  thus :  A  nation  is  well  off,  not  in 
proportion  to  the  amount,  but  to  the  equal  distribution 


48  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

and  the  rational  use  of  its  wealth  and  products — a  field  as 
yet  little  explored  by  the  science  of  statistics ! 

Without  now  going  further  into  an  elaborate  discussion 
and  explanation  of  this  question,  however  important  it 
may  be,  we  will  merely  state  that  the  natural  increase  of  a 
people,  their  quality  remaining  unimpaired,  is  generally 
taken  as  an  index  of  the  degree  of  their  happiness.  But 
we  repeat,  this  increase  shows  less  the  amount  of  the 
production  of  wealth,  than  the  proportion  of  its  distribu- 
tion. The  principle  itself,  however,  is  unassailable  in  its 
general  bearing. 

We  now  apply  this  to  the  population  of  the  South. 

XXI — THE  KEGKO  MULTIPLYING — HIS  SHOW-TABLES 
ALL  EIGHT. 

We  will  compare  the  Negroes  under  different  masters. 
H.  C.  Carey,  in  his  work,  "  The  Slave  Trade,  Domestic 
and  Foreign,"  Chapter  EL,  shows  that  in  all  the  British 
Islands  where  there  was  Negro  Slavery,  the  Slaves 
universally  decreased  in  number.  He  first  takes  up  Jamai- 
ca, and  shows  that  the  number  of  Negroes  imported  into 
that  island  can  not  have  been  less  than  700,000.  "If 
to  these,"  he  continues,  "  we  were  to  add  the  children 
that  must  have  been  born  on  that  island  in  the  long  period 
of  178  years,  and  then  to  reflect  that  all  who  remained  for 
emancipation  amounted  to  only  311,000,  we  should  find 
ourselves  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  Slavery  was  here 
attended  with  a  destruction  of  life  without  a  parallel  in  the 
history  of  any  civilzed  nation."  In  St.  Vincent,  the 
births  steadily  diminished  in  number.  In  British  Guiana, 
there  was  a  decrease  of  12,000  from  77,000  in  fifteen 
years  !   and  a  similar  decrease  in  other  colonial  posses- 


THE  NUMBERS. 


49 


sions.  The  number  emancipated  in  the  West  Indies 
was  660,000,  while  the  number  imported  and  retained  for 
home  consumption  had  certainly  amounted  to  1,700,000. 

Had  Mr.  Helper  known  this,  or  spoken  of  it,  how  "  the 
chevaliers  of  the  lash,  and  the  robbers  and  the  murderers," 
would  have  again  flown  from  his  lips!  But  let  us  see 
what  the  statesman  and  economist  Carey  says,  who 
has  certainly  as  much  philanthropy  as  the  showman, 
Helper  : 

"  While  thus  exhibiting  the  terrific  waste  of  life  in  the  British 
Colonies,  it  is  not  intended  either  to  assert  or  deny  any  voluntary 
severity  on  the  part  of  the  land-holders.  They  were,  themselves,  as 
will  hereafter  be  shown,  to  a  great  extent,  the  slaves  of  circumstances  t 
over  which  they  had  no  control,  and  it  can  not  be  doubted  that  much,  very 
much,  of  the  responsibility  must  rest  on  other  shoulders  I" 

This  is  the  same  H.  C.  Carey  whom  Mr.  Helper  brings 
up  among  his  Testimonies  of  Living  Witnesses !  Might  there 
not,  in  the  South  of  our  country,  too,  some  such  extenu- 
ating circumstances  have  been  found  which  should  have 
tempered  somewhat  Mr.  H.'s  wrath  and  bridled  his  bloody 
tongue  ?    We  will  see  ! 

Mr.  Carey  passes  on  to  Negro  Slavery  in  the  Union,  and 
after  a  most  careful  examination  and  comparison  of  statis- 
tical tables,  gives  us  what  he  calls  "  a  tolerable  approxi- 
mation to  the  number  of  Slaves  imported  into  the  territory 
now  constituting  the  Union,  namely,  on  the  whole, 
333,500." 

"  The  number,"  he  says,  "  now  in  the  Union  exceeds 
3,800,000  ;  and  even  if  we  estimate  the  import  as  high  as 
380,000,  we  then  have  more  than  ten  for  one;  whereas  in 
the  British  Islands  we  can  find  not  more  than  two  for  five, 
and  perhaps  even  not  more  than  one  for  three.  Had  the 
Slaves  of  the  latter  been  as  well  fed,  clothed,  lodged,  and 

3 


50  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

otherwise  cared  for,  as  were  those  of  these  Provinces  and 
States,  their  numbers  would  have  reached  seventeen  or 
twenty  millions.  Had  the  blacks  among  the  people  of 
these  States  experienced  the  same  treatment  as  did  their 
fellows  of  the  islands,  we  should  now  have  among  us  less 
than  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  Slaves  !" 

Has  not  Mr.  Helper  been  "  too  hasty  in  making  up  his 
mind  on  the  subject,"  though  he  says  the  contrary  ?  Has 
he  not  " jumped  at  conclusions,"  though  he  denies  it? 
Has  he  acted  with  "  perfect  calmness  and  deliberation,"  as 
he  so  naively  asserts  ?  He  says,  that  "  the  non-slavehold- 
ing  w^hite  of  the  second  degree  of  Slavery  is  treated  by 
the  slaveholders  as  if  he  wrere  a  loathsome  beast."  How 
must  the  Negro  of  the  first  degree  of  Slavery  have  been 
treated  ?  Who  or  what  stands  a  degree  lower  than  "  a 
loathsome  beast?"  Mr.  Helper's  dictionary  of  Vile 
Words  not  being  at  hand,  the  question  must  remain  un- 
answered for  the  present. 

And  still,  the  Negro  lived,  his  cheeks  grew  fat,  his  body 
plump,  he  multiplied  and  replenished  the  earth,  and  we 
have  seen  as  jolly  a  crowd  of  darkies  down  in  Richmond, 
as  ever  on  Boston  Common  or  in  the  Wilds  of  Africa ! 

Now,  who  tells  a  falsehood,  Mr.  Helper  or  his  Num- 
bers ?  It  is  the  old  story  again !  The  Numbers  are  all 
well.    But  Mr.  H.  sees  "  through  a  glass  darkly." 

XXII. — EVERYBODY  LIVING  LONGER  THERE  WHERE 
THE  "NIGGERS"  ARE. 

Those  Southerners,  in  spite  of  their  Negro  Slavery, 
have  still  produced  something.  They  have,  as  Mr.  Hel- 
per indirectly  proves,  some  agriculture,  some  manufacture, 
some  cotton,  some  banks,  some  railroads  ;  they  write,  or 


THE  NUMBEE8. 


51 


at  least  send,  through  the  post-office  some  letters,  found  some 
schools  and  libraries,  publish  some  newspapers,  give  some 
votes,  build  some  churches,  get  out  some  patents,  some  Bibles 
and  some  tracts,  harbor  some  foreigners,  send  out  some  mis- 
sionaries, and  do  something  for  colonization  and  civilization. 
But  not  only  this :  we  find  at  the  end  that  these  people 
"  down  South"  do,  after  all,  not  suffer  a  great  deal  from 
their  producing  only  some  rye,  and  some  wheat,  and  some 
newspapers,  and  some  lot  cabbage,  for :  TJiey  do  not  only 
not  die  faster  than  the  Northern  people,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
they  are  healthier  and  live  longer.  We  add  a  table  to 
prove : 

TABLE  XVII.  RATIO  OF  DEATHS  TO  LIVING  POPULATION. 

[From  the  Official  Compendium  of  Mr.  Helper's  Crisis.] 
Motto  of  his  Title-page.— "  The  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things,  and  by 
liberal  things  shall  he  stand." — Isaiah. 

States.  Percentage. 

Southern  States  (Slave)   1  in  74.60 

Northern  States  (Free)   1  in  72.39 

TABLE  XVIII.  AMERICAN  LONGEVITY. 

[From  a  recent  edition  of  Blake's  Biographical  Dictionary.'] 

States.  Number  of  Deceased  Centenarians. 

Southern  States  (Slave)   68 

Northern  States  (Free)   59 

The  reason  for  this  greater  Mortality  and  shorter  Lon- 
gevity in  the  Northern  States  must  lie  somewhere  hidden 
among  "  the  Potatoes,  the  Clover-Seeds,  the  Brood  Mares, 
the  Beans  and  Peas,  the  Stall-fed  Beef,  and  other  Produce," 
from  which  Mr.  Helper  so  scientifically  draws  his  argu- 
ments. 

Now,  which  is  the  better  of  the  two?  To  produce 
fast  and  die  fast,  or  to  produce  slower  and  live  longer? 
Of  what  use  is  all  our  digging  out,  and  heaping  up,  and 
gathering  in,  when  during  all  the  trouble  necessary  in  this 


52  THE  AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

process  of  production  and  reproduction,  our  heads  grow 
light,  our  hearts  gloomy,  and  our  bodies  lank,  and  at  the 
end  of  the  whole  affair  when  at  last  the  time  for  enjoy- 
ment should  have  arrived,  Pale  Death  comes  to  give  us 
kindly  the  last  stroke,  that  sends  us  beyond  the  reach  of 
the  dunghills  of  our  material  wealth  ? 

While  the  reader  is  left  for  a  moment  to  himself  to  de- 
cide which  part  to  choose,  we  will  gather  up  whatever  is 
left  of  Mr.  H.'s  statistical  existence. 

XXIII. — THE  POSTERIOR  PART  OF  MR.  HELPER'S  STA- 
TISTICAL BODY. 

The  main  body  of  Mr.  H.'s  statistics  is  contained  in 
that  part  of  his  Compendium  which  precedes  the  Dead 
and  Living  Testimony.  "We  are  through  with  that.  There 
remains  now  nothing  but  the  Appendix,  which,  by-the-by, 
has  all  the  characteristics  of  appendixes  in  general.  It  is 
protracted,  unmeaning,  and  winds  up  in  a  curl. 

There  is  a  whole  sea  of  mysterious  numbers,  all  care- 
fully labeled  with  "  Negro  Slavery,"  and  any  amount  of 
Northern  gewgaws,  strewn  around  like  Yankee  notions, 
interspersed  with  sundry  rhetorical  flourishes  "  excerped" 
and  repeated  from  the  Body  of  his  Statistics.  It  is  a  kind 
of  deluge  after  the  Testimony  of  the  "  Wiser  and  Better" 
men. 

But,  unconsciously  or  with  his  wonted  impartiality,  Mr. 
Helper  puts,  at  times,  some  seasoning  in,  which  makes 
the  surface  a  little  more  palatable.  Such  is  his  innocent 
slur  on  the  number-filled  North.  To  be  sure,  he  does  not 
spare  the  Southern  "  breeder,  buyer,  and  seller  of  bipedal 
black  cattle,  who  withal  professes  to  be  a  Christian,"  but 
he  speaks  also  of  "  Northern  quacks,  Northern  lashes  for 


THE  NUMBERS.  53 

Southern  slaves,  Northern  gimcracks  and  haberdashery." 
This  is  quite  a  relief.  But  the  Northern  pianos,  Northern 
knives,  and  Northern  apparel  are  carefully  repeated.  We 
at  first  thought,  in  seeing  these  old  faces  again :  "  Here 
beginneth  the  second"  edition  of  the  same  book ! 

But  the  most  attractive  part  in  this  appendix  of  several 
chapters,  is  the  grand  display  of  Mr.  Helper's  logic,  un- 
assisted by  the  dark-lantern.  For  it  must  not  be  ex- 
pected that  he  again  brings  forth  but  one  reason — namely, 
his  old  cherished  Negro  Slavery.  Not  at  all !  The  ap- 
pendix hangs  rather  loose  from  the  body  and  plays  its 
capers  with  wanton  individuality. 

We  will  now  give  the  curious  reader  a  few  examples 
of  that  caudal  logic : 

He  says  that  the  South  has  contributed  but  little 
to  the  cause  of  Negro  Slavery  in  Kansas,  and  the  reason 
of  it  is,  not  Negro  Slavery  this  time,  but  the  poverty 
and  the  niggardliness  of  the  Southerners.  This  exceptio 
in  principiis  would  be  admissible  were  it  not  for  the  deli- 
cacy of  its  terminology. 

In  his  chapter  on  offices,  he  proves  that  the  Southern- 
ers have,  in  most  cases,  the  majority,  all  on  account  of 
Negro  Slavery ;  but  when  he  accidentally  finds  an  office 
where  the  Northerners  happen  to  have  the  majority,  he 
does  not  give  Negro  Slavery  as  the  reason,  but  superior 
or  special  talent  which  can  only  be  grown  up  North.  (Mr. 
Helper  is  from  North  Carolina.) 

He  shows,  then,  the  comparative  literary  character  of 
the  North  and  of  the  South,  by  giving  the  number  of 
newspapers,  and  especially  the  circulation  of  the  New 
York  Tribune  and  the  New  York  Herald  in  the  Free  and 
Slave  States.    We  think,  of  course,  highly  of  the  news- 


54  THE   AMEBIC  AN  QUESTION. 

paper,  but  that  would  be  stretching  its  influence  ultra 
modum  et  decorum. 

He  also  measured  the  physical  and  mental  activity  of 
the  members  of  the  United  States  Senate,  by  the  number 
of  public  documents  they  frank.  According  to  this  calcu- 
lation, Chandler,  of  Michigan,  has  over  twenty  times  as 
much  of  that  article  as  Crittenden,  from  Kentucky.  And 
Douglas,  of  Illinois,  has  three  hundred  times  as  much  as 
Sumner,  of  Massachusetts.  "  This  shows,  also,"  Mr.  H. 
says,  "  that  the  people  of  the  South  are  not  a  reading 
people;  but  tobacco,  politics,  and  especially  fine-looking 
wenches,  constitute  the  warp  and  woof  of  their  conversa- 
tion." Mr.  Douglas  sent  345,000  documents,  that  is,  more 
than  all  the  Free  States  Senators  together  (Mr.  Chandler 
excepted).  He  is  not  one  of  "the  lazy  pro-slavery  offi- 
cials," we  suppose,  "  who  perpetuate  the  ignorance  and 
degradation  of  their  constituents." 

He  complains  that  he  was  not  able  to  publish  his  book 
in  the  South,  when  he  had  just  given  extracts  from  the 
Charleston  Standard^  which  in  strong  terms  criticised  the 
condition  of  the  South.  This  is  called  by  logicians  a  con- 
tradictio  in  adjecto. 

He  thinks,  too,  that  the  city  which  publishes  the  most 
books  and  papers  must,  eo  ipso,  be  also  the  most  literary. 
Poor  "  country  folks,"  like  Mr.  Helper  and  his  reviewer, 
must  renounce  their  fame  to  the  glory  of  New  York,  Bos- 
ton, or  Philadelphia.  And  then  he  adds,  that  the  execu- 
tors and  agents  of  Calhoun,  Benton,  Simms,  and  other 
Southern  writers,  send  their  works  to  be  published  in  New 
York.  The  reason  for  this  strange  phenomenon  is  Negro 
Slavery,  and,  therefore,  all  right ! 

These  examples  are  all  nicely  set  up  in  copious  num- 


THE   NUMBERS.  55 

bers,  and  surrounded  with  occasional  winnings,  such  as 
about  the  poor  women  working  in  the  field,  whom  he 
would  like  to  advance  into  the  frying-pans  of  factories. 

But  at  last  he  proves  that  the  non-slaveholding  whites 
are  very  illiterate,  and  thus,  we  humbly  think,  that  they 
can  not  read,  much  less  understand,  his  book !  Now,  this 
crowns  the  whole !  Poor  Mr.  Helper  can  neither  reach 
his  subject  nor  his  object.  He  is  no  agitator !  He  only 
addresses  the  non-slaveholding  whites,  and  for  them  he 
wrote  his  book !  and,  now,  on  the  very  last  pages  of  his 
volume,  he  proves  that  his  clients  can  not  read!  Why 
did  he  not  first  write  a  "Webster's  Spelling-Book"  for 
the  non-slaveholding  whites  of  the  South  ? 

And  thus  he  winds  himself  through,  until,  on  the  last 
page,  in  "  indignation  and  disgust"  over  what  he  wrote, 
he  curls  up  in  the  following  graceful  style : 

"  Southern  Literature  is  a  travesty  on  the  profession  of 
letters"  and  " Southern  Religion  is  a  stench  in  the  nostrils 
of  Christendom" 


Negro-nursed  Washington !  first  son  of-  the  South  and 
of  the  Union!  ward  off  the  heartless  curses  of  a  per- 
verted man,  whose  motive  may  be  good,  but  whose 
tongue  runs  loose  and  wild.  There  is  now  a  dearth  of 
great  men,  North  and  South !  Send  us  whole-souled  men, 
no  matter  what  zone  or  section  may  produce  them !  We 
do  not  need,  as  yet,  "American  Platos,  Homers,  Shak- 
speares,  and  Humboldts,"  but  send  us  a  few  more  States- 
men, who,  dispassionate  but  unflinching  in  their  princi- 
ples, are  able  to  lead  our  great  empire  safely  through  the 
storms  that  overhang  it ! 


56 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


XXIY. — CONCLUSION. 
We  think  we  have  thus  proved,  in  this  Book,  that  the 
famous  Numbers,  or,  in  other  words,  the  Statistical  Dispari- 
ties between  the  Free  and  the  Slave  States,  do  not  justify 
our  resorting  to  violent  words  and  violent  measures, 
whereby  we  increase  the  enmity  between  the  two  sec- 
tions, and  make  the  Union  appear  less  desirable  and  less 
honorable. 

They  give  us  no  reason  why  we  should  be  ashamed  of 
the  South,  and  throw  heartless  curses  on  its  land  and 
people. 

But  we  must  here  abstain  from  any  general  remarks  on 
the  great  question.  In  this  first  Book  we  have  strictly 
confined  ourselves  to  the  Numbers ;  in  the  second,  we  will 
treat,  in  a  similar  way,  the  Testimonies.  After  having, 
then,  overthrown  these  two  separate  arguments,  we  will 
face  the  whole  question. 


BOOK  II. 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


book:  ii- 
THE  TESTIMONIES. 

IN  REPLY  TO  CHAPTERS  II.,  III.,  IV.,  V.,  VI.,  VII.,  AND  VIII. 
OF  MR.  HELPER'S  COMPENDIUM. 


I.— SINGLE  TESTIMONIES. 

We  will  now  show  that  the  Testimonies  of  single  men 
and  nations,  taken  from  their  historical  connections,  have 
no  better  claim  than  the  Numbers. 

Were  we  to  follow  separate  testimonies,  we  would  for- 
ever be  tossed  around  as  on  a  stormy  sea,  knowing  not 
whither  to  go.  But  there  is  a  steady  progress  of  human- 
ity— a  progress  which  gradually  corrects  or  overrides  all 
individual  fancies  and  theories,  and  teaches  us,  in  the 
plastic  forms  of  real  events,  the  ways  and  measures  for 
our  future  course. 

But  before  we  lay  before  the  reader  the  mark-stones  of 
this  progress,  and  give  Slavery  its  relative  place  therein, 
we  will  first  pass  in  review  the  Testimonies  as  they  are 
presented  by  Mr.  Helper.  We  take  him  again,  because 
he  has  classified  them  better  than  any  one  before  him. 
We  may  seemingly  aid  Mr.  O'Conor,  but  we  do  this 
only  in  order  to  overthrow,  once  for  all,  that  double-faced 
sophistry  which  draws  its  arguments  from  single  and  dis- 
connected Testimonies. 


60 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


II. — THE   CHAPTERS  III.   TO  IX.  OF  MR.  HELPER'S 
COMPENDIUM. 

At  the  beginning  of  Chapter  m.,  Mr.  Helper  advises 
the  people  "  to  forget  for  a  moment  what  he  has  written 
on  the  subject  of  Slavery,  and  to  ignore  all  that  he  may 
write  hereafter."  Though  it  be  difficult  for  us  to  forget  or 
to  ignore  what  he  has  not  yet  said,  the  object  of  the  advice 
is  highly  commendable.  For,  after  having  given  his  own 
opinion,  he  now  appeals  to  the  "sayings  of  wiser  and 
better  men,"  to  collect  which  has  cost  him  "much  time, 
labor,  and  money."  Our  indebted  country  has  probably, 
by  this  time,  repaid  him  amply  for  his  trouble.  Trouble 
it  must,  indeed,  have  been  to  collect  such  an  array  of 
opinions,  and  all  of  them  well  assorted,  in  Mr.  Helper's 
style — first  Southern  Testimony,  then  Northern,  afterward 
the  Testimony  of  the  Nations,  then  that  of  the  Churches, 
three  pages  of  Bible  Testimony,  and,  at  last,  thirty  pages 
of  Living  Witnesses  to  bring  up  the  rear !  A  formidable 
array,  forsooth !  But  though  his  course  differs  sadly  from 
that  which  he  promises  in  his  introductory  chapter,  where 
he  says,  "  It  is  not  our  purpose  to  draw  a  broad  line  of 
distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  to  point  out  the 
propriety  of  morality  and  its  advantages  over  immorality, 
nor  to  waste  time  in  pressing  a  universally-admitted  truism, 
that  virtue  is  preferable  to  vice,"  still  we  take  his  issue, 
and  put  these  abstract  opinions  in  their  proper  light. 
Should  we,  perhaps,  at  times,  throw  too  much  shadow 
upon  the  picture,  we  must  be  excused ;  for  Mr.  Helper, 
has  certainly  been  too  light,  and  airy,  and  spiritual  in  this 
part  of  the  work.  Wherever  his  heavy  and  dark  brush 
appears,  we  will  not  fail  to  supply  the  necessary  light. 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


61 


III.— THE  TESTIMONY  OF  THE  UNION. 

Mr.  Helper  seems,  at  first,  to  know  the  way  we  ought 
to  follow.  But  when  we  think  ourselves  near  the  longed- 
for  aim,  we  perceive  that  he,  like  an  ignis  fatuus,  has  led 
us  astray.  We  seem,  indeed,  to  be  in  duty  bound,  in 
these  moments  of  danger,  to  wander  religiously  to  the 
graves  of  our  noble  forefathers  who  have  made  us  one  and 
united,  and  to  seek  at  their  shrine  light  and  knowlege  for 
our  fear-beset  ways.  But  when,  with  Helper's  help,  we 
are  at  the  sacred  spot  hallowed  by  the  memories  of  com- 
mon struggles  and  the  time-honored  compact  of  our  Union, 
what  does  Mr.  H.  show  us  ?  Naught  but  mangled  bones, 
torn  with  sacrilegious  hand  from  venerable  bodies !  For 
such  are  his  "  excerpts"  and  "  extracts." 

"We  can  not  and  we  will  not  deny  the  noble  sentiments 
of  the  founders  of  our  republic.  We  know  that  Freedom, 
in  the  abstract,  finds  more  sympathizers  among  the  great 
and  noble  of  this  world,  than  Tyranny  and  Slavery.  We 
know  that  our  forefathers,  almost  to  a  man,  thought  our 
Slavery  to  be  an  evil,  and  we  honor  them  for  it.  But  did 
they  ever  use  such  language  as  Mr.  Helper  ?  Did  they 
ever  propose  such  schemes  and  measures  ?  He  has  shown 
in  what  respect  our  common  forefathers  agreed  with 
his  own  sentiments,  why  did  he  not  show,  too,  in  what 
they  disagreed  with  him  ?  Washington,  "  the  father  of 
our  country,"  an  example  to  us  in  all  that  is  really  good  and 
great — though  he  had  such  ardent  wishes  for  the  gradual 
abolition  of  Slavery,  what  measures  did  he  propose  ? 
What  plans  did  he  favor  ?  Or,  was  Lafayette's  scheme, 
in  form  or  spirit,  anything  like  that  of  our  modern  philan- 
thropist ?    Or,  was  Franklin's  Society  for  Promoting  the 


62  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

Abolition  of  Slavery  anything  like  that  corporation  of 
Non-Conformists  which  he  proposes  among  the  non-slave- 
holding  whites  of  the  South  ?  Or,  where  are  the  rebel- 
lious harangues  of  Jefferson,  who  yet  called  the  Slaves 
"  citizens  and  brethren  ?"  Where  the  great  stratagems  and 
proposals  of  Madison,  who  yet  opposed  the  introduction 
of  the  term  "  Slave"  or  "Slavery"  into  the  Constitution? 
Or,  has  Mr.  Helper  more  greatness  of  soul  than  Washing- 
ton, more  stern  republicanism  than  Jefferson,  more  wis- 
dom than  Franklin,  or  more  virtue  then  Madison  ?-  Or, 
take  the  representative  men  of  a  second  generation !  Are 
the  Websters,  the  Clays,  knaves  and  fools  compared 
with  him  ?  Has  it  not  been,  heretofore,  a  well-understood 
principle  among  all  the  statesmen  of  our  republic,  to  look 
upon  Slavery  as  upon  an  undeniable  historical  fact,  what- 
ever our  abstract  opinions  may  be  about  its  right  or 
wrong  ?  And,  is  this  course  of  action  of  our  noble 
ancestors  not  as  certain,  not  as  frank,  not  as  important  as 
their  abstract  opinions  ?  Was  it  not  always  their  policy, 
instead  of  putting  forth,  their  opinions  about  Slavery, 
rather  to  think  of  means  and  ways  to  get  along  with  it, 
and  to  harmonize,  as  far  as  it  was  possible,  Union  and 
Reform?  In  all  their  endeavors  to  abolish  Slavery,  did 
they  not  always  carefully  appeal  to  the  slaveholders  them- 
selves, and  this,  indeed,  privately,  and  not  through  the 
organs  of  an  excited  populace  ?  And  did  all  those  great 
men  of  other  times — our  foremost  pride,  our  greatest  honor 
in  the  eyes  of  the  world — did  they,  by  suppressing  over 
and  over  again  the  temptings  of  their  "  abstract  opinions," 
and  by  continually  contriving  new  ways  of  peaceful  reform, 
did  they,  the  noblest  men  of  our  entire  history,  by  yield- 
ing thus,  defame  their  character  or  pollute  their  manhood  ? 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


63 


There  never  fell  from  their  unstained  lips,  words  like 
these : 

"  Peevish,— Sulky, — Mean,— Boors  of  V  and  alio  hearts  and  minds/ 
— Irreverent  Distorters  of  the  Truth,— Savage,  Barbarous  Kid- 
nappers,—Chevaliers  of  the  Lash  and  Lords  of  the  Shackle  !" 

Are  these,  words  of  a  friend  and  brother  ?  Are  they 
words  of  an  enemy,  even  ?  Are  they  words  of  a  man  ? 
Or,  have  the  insulted  shades  of  our  common  forefathers 
already  smitten  the  intemperate  one  with  insanity  ?  These 
are  not  words  to  soothe !  These  are  not  the  means 
to  heal !    This  is  not  the  language  of  Peace  and  Union ! 

IV.— THE  TESTIMONY  OF  ENGLAND. 

Mr.  Helper  is  an  unrelenting  foe.  His  collective  indus- 
try is  inexhaustible.  He  is  not  content  with  appealing 
to  our  own  noble  ancestors.  After  having  "  excerped" 
testimony  in  favor  of  his  opinion  from  the  wise  men  of  the 
South  and  of  the  North  of  his  own  land,  he  introduces,  or 
uses  in  a  similar  way,  the  Testimony  of  the  Nations.  He 
begins  with  England.  Now,  we  do  not  think  that  Locke, 
Fox,  Pitt,  and  Burke  would  have  acted  more  nobly,  more 
liberally,  and  more  prudently  than  Washington*,  Frank- 
lin, Hamilton,  and  Webster,  if  they  had  been  placed  in 
similar  circumstances.  But  still,  we  can  not  and  will 
not  question  England's  philanthropy. 

To  be  sure,  the  condition  of  depopulated  Ireland  is  still 
pitiful  to  behold.  Says  a  recent  writer  on  Ireland :  "  An 
Irishman  has  nothing  national  about  him  except  his  rags." 
Or  another :  "  Let  an  Englishman  exchange  his  bread  and 
beer,  and  beef  and  mutton,  for  no  breakfast,  for  a  luke- 
warm lumper  at  dinner,  and  no  supper.    With  such  diet, 


64  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

how  much  better  is  he  than  an  Irishman? — a  Celt,  as 
he  calls  him.  No,  the  truth  is,  that  the  misery  of  Ireland 
is  not  from  the  human  nature  that  grows  there — it  is  from 
England's  perverse  legislation,  past  and  present."  Or,  let 
us  look  at  our  own  shores !  How  often  we  find  the  brave 
and  warlike  Celt  of  former  days,  crippled  and  degraded 
by  ages  of  tyranny  and  oppression!  But,  England  is 
philanthropic,  and  the  Irish  are  not  Negroes,  nor  are  they 
Slaves ! 

Or,  let  us  turn  our  eyes  away  from  Ireland  across  the 
ocean,  toward  that  happy  land  of  emancipation.  Says  a 
recent  writer :  "  A  short  term  and  cupidity  strain  the 
lash  over  the  poor  Coolie,  and  he  dies ;  is  secreted  if  he 
lives,  and  advantage  taken  of  his  ignorance  for  extended 
time  when  once  merged  in  plantation-service,  where  inves- 
tigation can  be  avoided."  But  again,  the  Coolies  are  no 
Slaves ;  they  are  but  hired  servants,  and  England's  philan- 
thropy is  safe ! 

We  are  not  yet  through  with  the  Testimony  of  En- 
gland, who  is  always  loudest  in  condemning  our  Slavery. 
We  will  give  her  a  fair  hearing.  How  closely  she  watches 
those  poor  Hindoos !  How  effectually  she  keeps  them  down, 
whenever  they  express  any  dissatisfaction  with  the  happi- 
ness she  forces  upon  them!  She  has  instituted  among 
those  u  half-naked  barbarians"  an  awful  solidarity,  by  which 
the  province  is  responsible  for  the  labor  of  all  its  men  and 
women.  But  still,  England  is  philanthropic!  She  has 
carried  rails  and  Bibles,  free-schools  and  steamboats,  tele- 
graphs and  libraries  to  India,  all  for  the  benefit  of  those 
half-naked  barbarians  !  And  should  telegraphs  and  Bibles 
not  have  the  requisite  effect  of  happifying,  opium  will  be 
administered  to  them,  and  to  "  all  the  world,  and  to  the 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


65 


rest  of  mankind."  She  will  no  longer  permit  those  savage 
Hindoos  to  roast  as  witches  wrinkled  old  women,  for  she 
knows  too  well,  from  her  own  experience,  the  unfairness 
of  such  proceedings ;  nor  does  she,  in  these  days,  allow  any- 
where the  Hand  of  Justice  to  cut  the  ears  of  those  who  speak 
against  State  or  Church.  Now,  this  is  decided  progress ! 
England  is  the  civilizer  and  Christianizer  of  the  world! 
To  be  sure,  there  is  still  robbing  and  flogging,  murdering 
and  starving  enough  in  the  "  dominions  of  the  Gracious 
Queen,  where  the  sun  never  setteth but  England,  never- 
theless, dislikes  Slavery  in  general,  and  Negro  Slavery  in 
the  United  States  in  particular,  and  her  lords  and  ladies 
are  ever  ready  to  eat  and  drink  with  the  poor  common- 
ers of  the  West,  eager  of  philanthropic  royalty !  There 
are  similar  laurels  waiting  for  Mr.  Helper,  and  we  are 
glad,  for  his  sake  and  our  own,  that  he  has  appealed  to  the 
Testimony  of  our  Cousins ! 

But  England  emancipated  her  slaves  in  the  West  India 
Islands!  She  expended  .£20,000,000,  we  suppose,  from 
sheer  philanthropy,  and  may  we  ask:  Whom  did  her 
philanthropic  measure  benefit?  Jamaica,  that  brilliant 
island,  saw  her  land  and  people  degenerate,  says  H.  C. 
Carey  ;  the  planter  sold  cheaply  and  left,  the  slave  did 
not  work.  Such  must  be  the  effect  of  all  revolutionary  or 
sudden  abolition ;  and,  though  the  emancipated  lands  may 
gradually  recover  from  the  ill-devised  blow,  they  can  only 
do  so  with  loss  of  much  property  and  at  the  cost  of  much 
human  misery. 

V. — THE  TESTIMONY  OF  FRANCE. 
After  England  comes  France,  as  usual.    But  this  Testi- 
mony comes  at  rather  a  peculiar  time.    Not  many  years,  or 


qq  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION 

even  months,  ago,  France  was  concerting  a  plan  to  intro- 
duce "  voluntary  Negro  labor"  into  her  tropical  colonies, 
the  demand  for  whose  products  was  so  rapidly  increasing 
everywhere.  It  was  said  that  England  herself,  at  first,  had 
favored  the  plan,  but  after  having  looked  somewhat  deeper 
into  the  scheme,  her  philanthropy,  or  some  other  hidden  vir- 
tue, got  frightened,  and  she  dissuaded  her  noble  ally  from 
accomplishing  the  voluntary  Slave-trade.  For,  what  was  it 
but  a  second  edition  of  the  Slave-trade,  perhaps  in  some 
improved  style,  a  la  Fran$aise  or  a  la  Coolie  ? 

But  Mr.  Helper  speaks  of  Rousseau  and  Montes- 
quieu! Does  he  think  that  the  "constitutional"  Mon- 
tesquieu would  have  acted  differently  from  our  "con- 
stitutional" Madison?  Or,  did  Lafayette  act  differ- 
ently from  Jefferson,  the  renowned  pupil  of  Rous- 
seau and  Voltaire?  But,  then,  has  Mr.  H.  any  idea 
of  the  gloomy  age  in  which  those  philosophers  lived 
and  wrote?  There  were  in  that  century  thirty-seven 
famines,  more  or  less  severe,  in  France.  Rousseau 
wrote  his  Contrat  Social  to  starving  millions,  and  Mon- 
tesquieu's Esprit  des  JLois  was  but  a  futile  remedy  for  a 
dying  generation.  Alas!  what  misery  was  brooding  at 
that  time,  unheeded,  by  the  side  of  reckless  extravagance ! 
France  was  approaching  her  revolutionary  crisis !  But 
the  blood  of  a  hundred  thousand,  slain  on  the  altar  of 
Liberty,  could  not  wash  away  her  tyranny!  And  the 
blood  of  other  hundreds  of  thousands,  slain  to  the  idol 
of  Glory,  could  not  wash  away  her  crimes !  And  in  the 
face  of  this  self-condemnation,  Mr.  Helper  brings  up  the 
Testimony  of  France !  Let  France  sweep  at  her  own 
doors!  There  is,  as  yet,  as  much  dust  and  dirt  in  her 
precincts,  as  there  was  in  the  twelve  stables  of  Augias  ! 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


67 


VI.— THE  TESTIMONY  OF  GEKMANY. 

Germany,  thou  famous  land  of  thought  and  theory! 
Where  are  thy  radical  statesmen,  to  teach  us  systems  like 
those  of  Mr.  Helper?  Thou  land  of  slow  movements, 
thou  land  of  forty  tyrants  ex  officio,  and  forty  hundred  times 
forty  hundred  assistant  masters  with  pens  and  lashes,  with 
anathemas  and  jails  !  Oh,  unfortunate  collector  !  More 
unfortunate  still  in  your  individual  citations  ! 

We  pass  by  the  aristocratic  Goethe,  who,  in  his  love  of 
humanity,  had  scarcely  time  to  think  a  moment  of  his 
country's  weal  or  woe,  and  venture  a  few  remarks  on 
Luther,  better  known  in  this  land. 

We  must  be  aware  that  the  people  of  Luther's  time, 
like  our  own  "  good  folks,"  were  not  eager  after  reforms 
in  matters  of  religion  only.  In  their  articles  of  demands, 
the  religious  and  worldly  elements  were  always  mixed  and 
blended  with  each  other.  "  Priests  chosen  by  the  com- 
munity," they  asked  for,  and  "  No  more  Serfdom ;"  "  Free- 
dom of  Belief — and  Abolition  of  unjust  Taxes."  The  spir- 
itual and  temporal  always  went  together.  And  they  had 
reason  enough  to  think  of  this  world  also ;  for,  "  they 
were  badly  clothed,  dwelt  in  houses  without  floors  or 
pavements,  slept  on  straw,  lived  on  1  black'  bread,  apples, 
and  water,  saw  meat  but  rarely,  and  many  never  at  all,  and 
had  often  no  bread,  even." 

The  conservative  Niebuhr,  even,  had  to  confess  that  the 
right  was,  at  first,  on  the  side  of  the  poor  people.  But 
how  did  Luther  feel  and  act  toward  the  despairing 
wretches?  When  he  heard  about  their  rebellion,  he 
wrote :  "  Let  the  balls  fly  among  them  ;  else  they  do  still 
worse  things.    There  is  no  need  of  pity.    Obey  they 


6§  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

must!  God,  surely,  will  save  the  innocent,  as  He  did 
Jeremiah  and  Lot.  If  He  does  not,  they  surely  are  not 
innocent !"  Rather  harsh  language  !  Or,  in  his  letter  to 
Baron  Einsiedeln,  who  had  asked  him  whether  he  should 
liberate  his  slaves:  "The  common  man,"  he  answered, 
"must  be  loaded  with  burdens,  else  he  will  grow  too 
wanton."  And  loaded  and  burdened  he  was !  The  revenge 
taken  on  those  poor  peasants  was  horrible.  Those  who 
had  saved  their  lives  and  fled  home  to  their  families  were 
hunted  out  and  cruelly  murdered  or  blinded,  mutilated,  and 
disgraced.  Barefooted  were  they  forced  to  beg  forgiveness 
from  the  hand  of  their  oppressors,  and  fines  were  laid  upon 
them,  to  pay  which  it  took  generations  and  generations. 
Luther,  even,  was  at  last  moved  to  pity ;  for,  "  cruelty 
seemed  to  have  gone  too  far." 

But  this  would  lead  us  beyond  the  limits  of  our  present 
undertaking.  We  only  think  that  Mr.  Helper  could 
hardly  have  made  good  Abolitionists  of  Luther  and 
Goethe. 

VII. — THE  TESTIMONY  OF  RUSSIA. 

Mr.  Hinton  Rowan  Helper  does  not  know  much  of 
the  political  condition  of  the  Russian  people,  we  suspect. 
The  privileged  noblemen  themselves  are  not  very  free. 
Says  a  Russian :  "  Their  privileges  are,  to  take  office  if 
they  can  get  any;  to  leave  it  when  they  are  dismissed;  to 
go  abroad  if  they  get  passports ;  and  to  buy  real  estate  if 
they  have  money."  And  these  are  the  "upper-ten"  of 
Russia.  There  are,  then,  some  twenty  or  thirty  classes  of 
other  subjects,  partly  slaves  and  partly  free,  and  wholly 
unfree  and  completely  slaves,  amounting  to  an  indefinite 
number  of  millions.    Among  them,  there  is  a  continuous 


THE  TESTIMONIES.  (59 

emancipation,  in  the  Russian  sense  of  the  word,  and  the 
most  modern  coup  d^etat  of  Alexander  III.  is  not  without 
precedents  among  the  former  Alexanders.  It  is  a  difficult 
thing  to  emancipate  those  people  of  thirty  or  forty  differ- 
ent races  and  of  as  many  different  customs,  duties,  and 
languages ;  and  a  wholesale  emancipation,  though  sounded 
with  the  roaring  voice  of  the  Northern  Bear,  is  a  sheer 
impossibility.  Nor  does  the  present  emperor  mean  it  so, 
though  Mr.  Helper  may  have  read  his  ukas  so.  More- 
over, if  the  emancipation  is  to  be  intrusted  to  the  same 
worthy  officials  who  had  the  supervision  of  oppression  and 
taxation,  then  woe  to  the  new-made  Russian  freeman ! 
He  will  have  to  pay  dearly  for  what  they  call  liberty.  So 
much  for  the  Home  Department.  Now  a  word  about 
Foreign  Affairs. 

We  do  not  generally  take  Russia  as  a  model  of  freedom, 
nor  do  we  expect  much  from  her  in  this  line.  Nor  does 
she  herself  much  believe  in  the  liberty  of  the  races.  She 
has  helped  Austria  in  subduing  Hungary,  and  has  just 
finished  a  hundred  years'  war  against  Circassia.  The  last 
Will  of  Peter  the  Great  is  her  Bible,  and  her  Czar  is  her 
God.  Freedom  can  be  hoped  for  only  as  far  as  it  does  not 
conflict  with  the  one  or  the  other.  The  prospects  of  lib- 
erty are,  then,  not  very  fair,  and  we  think  even  a  Russian 
edition  of  the  "  Compendium  of  the  Crisis"  would  change 
matters  but  little. 

VIII. — THE  TESTIMONY  OF  GREECE  AND  ROME. 

This  Testimony  is  simply  absurd ;  for  one  needs  not  to 
be  a  scholar  to  know  the  theories  and  practices  of  Greece 
and  Rome  in  regard  to  Slavery.  Slavery  was  a  fixed  and 
acknowledged  institution  among  all  the  states  of  antiquity. 


70  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

They  went  still  further.  Xenophon  calls  all  manual  occu- 
pations dishonorable  and  unworthy  of  a  citizen.  Plato 
says  that  such  occupations  degrade  those  who  exercise 
them.  Solon,  the  oil-merchant,  made  some  allowances 
for  the  trader  only,  probably  from  an  esprit  de  corps. 
Aristotle  calls  the  slave  a  part  of  the  family  property. 
That  good  old  philosopher  has  some  ugly  passages,  which 
do  not  savor  much  of  Abolitionism.  "Nature  herself," 
says  he,  "  has  made  Slavery,"  and  he  reasons  thus  on  it : 
"  The  animals  (man  included)  are  divided  into  male  and 
female.  The  male  is  more  perfect,  and  therefore  com- 
mands. The  female  is  less  perfect,  and  thus  obeys!" 
(Aristotle  does  not  seem  to  be  very  sound  on  the 
Punctum  Xanthippicum,  or  Women's  Rights  question.) 
"  But,  well,"  continues  the  philosopher,  "  there  are  among 
men  those  who  stand  as  much  below  others  as  the  body 
below  the  soul,  or  the  beast  below  man.  And  these  indi- 
viduals, fit  for  physical  labor  only  and  incapable  of  doing 
anything  more  perfect,  are  destined  by  Nature  for  Slavery, 
because  there  is  nothing  better  for  them  than  to  obey. 
But  what  great  difference  is  there,  after  all,  between  a 
slave  and  a  beast  ?"    Singular  Abolition  doctrines  these ! 

Yet  one  glance  at  Rome.  Juvenal  says :  "  The  Romans 
consume  the  nations  to  their  very  bones."  They  had 
temples  erected  to  Jupiter,  the  Plunderer,  and  disliked 
commerce,  "  because  it  has  made  others  their  slaves." 
But  why  should  we  waste  time  about  something  which 
schoolboys  can  teach  ?  Mr.  Helper,  the  Blunderer,  alone 
can  quote  such  examples  from  History !  The  domain  of 
antiquity  and  classical  antiquarianism  belongs  entirely  to 
Mynheer  Van  Dyke  and  to  your  Honor  Mr.  O'Conor. 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


71 


IX.— THE  TESTIMONY  OF  THE  CHUKCHES  AND  OF  THE 

BIBLE. 

Mr.  Helper  writes  two  chapters  on  this  subject.  But 
we  think  the  Churches — or,  rather,  Mr.  H.'s  clergymen — 
may  just  as  well  be  omitted.  For  they  either  teach  the 
Bible,  on  which  all  churches  are  more  or  less  based — in 
which  case  they  are  superfluous — or  they  do  not  teach 
what  the  Bible  does,  and  then  Mr.  H.  must  have  already 
included  them  under  his  "  wiser  and  better  men"  of  each 
nation  and  section. 

But  our  collector  has  again  stepped  on  dangerous  ground. 
We  will  quote  for  him  a  few  verses  from  the  Old  and  a 
few  from  the  New  Laws.  He  must  try  to  get  along  with 
them  the  best  he  can. 

We  read  in  Leviticus  xxv.  44,  45,  46  :  "  Both  thy  bond- 
men, and  thy  bondmaids,  which  thou  shalt  have,  shall  be 
of  the  heathen  that  are  round  about  you ;  of  them  shall 
ye  buy  bondmen  and  bondmaids.  Moreover,  of  the  chil- 
dren of  the  strangers  that  do  sojourn  among  you,  of  them 
shall  ye  buy,  and  of  their  families  that  are  with  you,  which 
they  begat  in  your  land ;  and  they  shall  be  your  possession. 
And  ye  shall  take  them  as  an  inheritance  for  your  children 
after  you,  to  inherit  them  for  a  possession ;  they  shall  be 
your  bondmen  forever:  but  over  your  brethren  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel,  ye  shall  not  rule  one  over  another  witk 
rigor." 

In  1  Timothy  vi.  1,  2  we  read:  "Let  as  many  servants 
as  are  under  the  yoke  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of 
all  honor,  that  the  name  of  God  and  his  doctrine  be  not 
blasphemed." 

The  venerable  Thomas  Scott  adds,  in  his  "  Comment- 


72  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

aries  on  the  Holy  Bible,"  in  the  one  case :  "  The  Israelites 
were  thus  permitted  to  keep  slaves  of  other  nations." 
And  in  the  other  case :  "  This  shows  that  Christian  mas- 
ters were  not  required  to  set  their  slaves  at  liberty." 

Now,  we  are  generally  called  a  Christian  nation,  and  are 
often  compared  to  the  Israelites  of  old.  But  neither  in 
the  one  character  nor  in  the  other  are  we  forbidden  to 
keep  slaves,  nor  could  we  as  a  Joint  Stock  Company  of 
Christian  Israelites  derive,  in  any  way,  such  a  prohibition. 

But  why  refer  to  a  book — and  especially  now — which 
has  been  used,  and  turned,  and  interpreted,  and  falsified 
in  so  many  different  ways,  to  serve  any  sect,  or  party,  or 
fancy,  or  ambition  in  the  history  of  social  tyranny  and 
freedom  ?  Why  refer  to  a  book  whose  "  Kingdom  is  not 
of  this  earth,  but  of  the  Life  to  come  ?" 

Let  us  never  mention  it  in  settling  or  discussing  our 
Slavery  question !  There  is  inflammatory  matter  enough 
between  us!  We  do  not  want  to  call  still  more  the 
odium  theologicum^  that  most  odious  of  church-feelings, 
to  our  aid !  We  are  a  progressing  humanity !  Our 
heavenly  wants  may,  in  all  these  phases  of  development, 
remain  the  same!  The  forms  of  worship,  even,  may  be 
unchanged !  But  our  worldly  wants  certainly  do  change, 
and  with  them  the  forms  of  social  and  political  life. 
Therefore,  let  the  Bible  no  more  interfere,  lest  we  put  the 
Good  Book  into  a  false  position. 

X. — THE  TESTIMONY  OF  LIVING  "WITNESSES. 

We  are  now,  happily,  over  the  opinions  of  the  "  wiser 
and  better  men,"  and  are  prepared  to  judge  upon  the 
Testimony  of  the  Living  Witnesses.  Thirty  long  pages 
of  Living  Witnesses  !    A  formidable  phalanx,  which  Mr. 


THE  TESTIMONIES.  73 

Helper  might — as  he  says — increase  ad  infinitum.  Now, 
we  do  not  undervalue  the  testimonies  he  has  thus  col- 
lected, nor  even  those  which  he  might  have  collected, 
or  may  yet  collect  in  times  to  come.  Nor  yet  do,  or  can 
we  refute  them  as  they  are.  They  are  all  very  good  in 
their  proper  places.  But  one  thing  pleased  us  considera- 
bly, namely,  the  fact  of  such  a  motley  crowd  of  Living 
Witnesses  all  being  thrown  pell-mell  on  one  and  the  same 
platform.  Seward  and  Snodgrass,  Sumner  and  Phil- 
lips, Gerrit  Smith  and  Burling ame,  Carey  and  Par- 
ker, Greeley  and  Raymond,  Beecher  and  Bellows, 
Chase  and  Tappan,  and  forty  or  fifty  others,  all  huddled 
together  in  one  common  group  !  Has  any  human  mortal 
ever  seen  such  a  number  of  so  different  characters  brought 
together  so  peacefully  on  any  previous  thirty  pages  of 
cotemporary  history  ?  No,  not  in  a  directory,  even ! 
They  all  have  nearly  the  same  opinions  about  Slavery  in  the 
abstract,  but  how  different  are  their  actions !  Some  of 
them  act  just  as  Washington  or  Jefferson  did.  But 
there  are  others  whose  consciences  require,  in  addition,  the 
establishment  of  Underground  Railroads ;  others,  again, 
may  be  called  practical  men,  they  use  the  abstractions  as 
party  capital ;  there  is  a  class,  too,  who,  being  of  the 
catholic  cast,  think — "  Faith  without  works  is  dead!" 
and  therefore  furnish  pikes  and  money  for  others  to  battle 
and  to  die  in  the  cause  of  human  liberty ;  there  is,  indeed, 
a  small  number — abstract  opinions  always  being  equal — 
who  really  fight,  and  fear  neither  death  nor  the  gallows ; 
there  is  also  quite  a  number  who  think  most  bravely,  but 
"  take  it  out"  in  talking,  and  some  few  go  even  further 
than  the  rest,  and  try  to  induce  the  Negroes  to  rise  in 
rebellion  against  their  masters,  and  achieve,  with  blood 

4 


74  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

and  murder,  their  inborn  African  liberties !  And  all  these 
different  characters  stand  on  Mr.  Helper's  pages  firmly- 
knit  together !  Must  these  Living  Witnesses  not  be  sur- 
prised at  the  company  they  are  forced  to  keep  ?  At  any 
natural  occasion  of  contact,  they  would  fly  to  the  four 
winds  on  discovering  such  neighbors  as  Mr.  H.  gives 
them  !  But  what  humanity  and  patriotism  could  not  do, 
Mr.  Helper's  jugglery  has  accomplished.  They  are  all  in 
apparent  harmony.  This  is  certainly  a  "  curiosity  in 
literature." 

XL— GENERAL  REMARKS  OIST  THE  TESTIMONIES. 

These  are  the  Testimonies.  We  did  not  add  to  each 
class  of  them  their  counterparts,  which  might  easily  have 
been  found  in  the  History  of  Opinions,  or  might  have 
been  gleaned,  without  much  trouble,  from  the  writings 
of  the  Pro-Slavery  apostles,  but  we  confined  ourselves  to 
a  few  illustrations.  What  is  true  of  them,  is  true  with 
respect  to  all  others  which  the  Helpers  and  the  O'Conors 
may,  jointly  or  separately,  with  limited  or  unlimited  re- 
sponsibility, hereafter  collect  and  classify.  By  reasoning 
from  single  opinions,  or  even  from  single  facts,  we  may 
at  our  pleasure  successfully  prove  or  disprove  the  same 
thing. 

We  are,  in  this  connection,  spontaneously  reminded  of 
the  famous  dialecticians  of  old  Greece.  They  were  mas- 
ters in  casuistry,  and  they  knew  that  they  were  when  they 
went  to  Rome  to  display  their  power.  There  they  dis- 
proved, before  astonished  crowds,  in  the  afternoon,  what 
they  had  proved  in  the  morning,  and  carried  conviction 
at  both  times.  The  Roman  people  were  at  that  time  but 
little  skilled  in  rhetorical  tactics,  and  they  applauded  alto- 


THE  TESTIMONIES. 


75 


gether  too  liberally.  Such  is  the  popular  heart,  often 
yielding  too  generously  to  momentary  impressions.  Tout 
comme  chez  nous !  Such  arguments  are,  therefore,  very 
useful  on  occasions  when  momentary  excitement  is  all  that 
is  aimed  for.  But  they  are  valueless  when  we  want  a 
sound  and  solid  basis  for  our  course  of  action. 

But  before  taking  leave  entirely  of  Mr.  Helper,  we  will 
yet  look  a  moment  at  the  bloody  Plan  with  which  Num- 
bers and  Testimonies,  collectively,  have  inspired  him.  It 
is  a  proposal  for  a  wondrous  coup  detect,  which  would  at 
once  rid  us  of  all  our  difficulties. 

XII. — MR.  HELPER'S  BLOODY  PLAN". 

Long  before  Mr.  H.'s  great  chapter  on  Abolition  ar- 
rives, its  approach  is  perceived  by  the  more  intemperate 
rhetoric.  The  beginning  of  the  chapter  itself  is,  however, 
in  quite  a  humorous  and  pleasant  strain.  It  is  like  the 
deceitful  smile  of  sunshine  while  the  thunder-clouds  are 
already  towering  over  the  hills  that  gird  the  horizon.  So 
we  take  it,  at  least.  "The  non-slaveholding  whites," 
says  Mr.  H.,  "  ought  to  demand  from  the  slaveholders 
any  number  of  millions  of  dollars  for  the  decrease  in 
value  of  their  (the  non-slaveholders)  lands,  during  the 
dark  period  of  Slavery  in  the  South."  Well,  these  non- 
slaveholding  whites  might  just  as  well  protest  against  their 
having  been  born,  and  sue  their  parents  for  the  damages 
sustained  thereby.  For,  their  fathers  or  grandfathers,  or 
somebody  higher  up  in  that  transcendental  line  that  leads  to 
Adam,  must  be  responsible  for  those  brawny  "  members 
from  Africa,"  who  are  the  cause  of  all  the  mischief.  But 
Mr.  H.  must  intend  this  whole  compensation  matter 
merely  for  fun;  else  he  would  not,  shortly  after,  have 


76 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


adduced  testimony  to  prove  "  that  the  non-slaveholders 
possess  the  poorest  lands,  and  the  slaveholders  own  the 
most  fertile  soils."  We  let  it,  therefore,  pass  as  a  little 
fun,  and  will  look  again  into  the  angry  face  of  the  threat- 
ening storm-cloud. 

Like  distant  thunder,  the  famous  Plan  for  Abolishing 
Slavery  gradually  draws  nearer.  It  has  an  ugly  look  at 
the  outset,  and  seems  to  promise  hard  weather.  Some 
excuses,  pressed  out  by  an  overburdened  conscience,  fall 
like  rain-drops  through  the  sky.  But  the  thunder-cloud  is 
unrelenting.  Nearer  and  nearer  it  draws,  until  at  last  it 
stands,  mad  and  roaring,  over  our  heads,  and,  raging,  un- 
furls its  blood-red  banner  of  Destruction  and  Desolation. 

"  1st.  Thorough  Organization  and  Independent  Political 
Action  on  the  part  of  the  Non-Slav eholding  Whites. 

"  2d.  Ineligibility  of  Pro-Slavery  Politicians — Never  any 
other  Vote  to  any  one  who  Advocates  the  Retention  and 
Perpetuation  of  Human  Slavery. 

"  3d.  No  Co-operation  with  Pro-Slavery  Politicians — No 
Fellowship  with  them  in  Religion — No  Affiliation  with 
them  in  Society. 

"4th.  No  Patronage  to  Pro-Slavery  Merchants — No 
Guestship  in  Slave-waiting  Hotels — No  Fees  to  Pro-Slav- 
ery Lawyers — No  Employment  of  Pro-Slavery  Physicians 
— No  Audience  to  Pro-Slavery  Parsons. 

"  5th.  No  more  Hiring  of  Slaves  by  Non-Slaveholders. 

"6th.  Abrupt  Discontinuance  of  Subscription  to  Pro- 
Slavery  Newspapers. 

"  7th.  The  Greatest  Possible  Encouragement  to  Free 
White  Labor." 

A  few  rain-drops,  sprinkling  excuses  on  the  Bottsbs 
and  Stanleys,  Browns  and  Blairs,  proved  that  the 


THE   TESTIMONIES.  77 

storm  had  passed  away.  Some  more  little  thundering  in 
the  distance,  and  all  was  over.  The  sky  was  clear,  the 
sun  shone  bright,  and  nobody  wxas  hurt,  "  frankly,  fairly, 
squarely." 

But,  earnestly,  has  anybody  ever  seen  more  moonshine 
and  madness  put  into  the  sacred  Number  VII.  ?  What  a 
horrible  and  ridiculous  heptade !  what  an  awful  slaughter- 
house platform  !  what  a  septuple  nonsense  !  And  all  this 
language  Mr.  H.  addresses  to  the  non-slaveholding  whites, 
"  who  are,"  as  he  says,  "  cajoled  into  the  notion  that  they 
are  the  freest,  happiest,  and  most  intelligent  people  in  the 
world,  and  believe  what  the  slaveholder  tells  them."  Mr. 
Helper  addresses  this  murderous  heptalogue  to  these 
"  illiterate"  non-slaveholding  whites,  "  who  are  but  one 
step  in  advance  of  the  Indians  of  the  forest,  who  are  de- 
plorably ignorant,  three  fourths  of  the  adults  not  being 
able  to  read  or  to  w^rite  their  own  names"  [the  other 
fourth  being  probably  comprised  in  the  flattering  term 
"  white  sycophants  who  have  negroes  around"].  Now, 
add  to  this  such  language  as — "  Haughty  cavaliers  of 
shackles  and  handcuffs,  and  lords  of  the  lash,"  while  the 
Northerners  are  the  "  liberty-loving  patriots,"  then  you 
have  all  the  elementary  ingredients,  not  of  a  common 
Abolitionist  of  old  Noah's  or  Webster's  stamp,  but  of 
the  Helper  caste,  "  whose  line  of  duty  is  clearly  defined, 
and  whose  intention  it  is  to  follow  it  faithfully  or  die  in 
the  attempt." 

Now,  we  humbly  think  that  in  Kansas,  at  Harper's 
Ferry,  and  in  Charleston,  there  have  been  shooting  and 
murdering,  hanging  and  dying,  enough.  We  do  not 
exactly  mean  by  this  to  dissuade  Mr.  Helper  altogether 
from  dying,  if  he  thinks  he  would  help  the  cause  more 


78  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

by  his  death ;  but  still  we  believe  that  for  "  common 
folks,"  and  for  the  great  majority  of  people  in  general, 
it  would  be  better  "  to  do  one's  duty  faithfully"  and  live 
in  the  attempt.  But  in  order  to  work  and  live,  a  different 
plan  is  needed  from  that  of  Mr.  Helper.  His  is,  indeed, 
a  dying  effort,  scented  with  the  cold  air  of  the  grave  and 
the  unfriendly  fragrance  of  corpses. 

We  attempt  to  oppose  to  this  war,  blood,  and  death 
scheme,  a  Living  Plan — a  work  of  friendship  and  peace,  a 
proposal  of  union  and  harmony,  not  drawn  from  the  heated 
crucible  of  our  own  individual  fancies,  hopes,  and  passions, 
but  from  the  great  workshop  of  nature,  which  lies  open 
to  all  faithful  students  of  history.  It  may  not  be  covered 
with  the  smiles  of  sunshine  and  the  pleasing  light  of  flat- 
tered prejudices,  but  it  leads  not  to  perpetual  war  and 
final  destruction. 


BOOK  nr. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


book:  hi. 
THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


I. — SLAVERY  IN  HISTORY. 

Let  us  smother  for  a  moment  the  angry  feelings  which 
long  disputes  have  aroused  within  us ;  let  us  lay  aside  all 
artificial  issues  to  which  enmity  and  exasperation  have 
forced  us ;  let  us  ignore  all  arguments  and  theories  which 
ambition,  self-interest,  and  pride  have  created;  let  us  for- 
get all  hostile  acts,  on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  to  which 
our  blind  passions  and  false  issues  and  arguments  have  car- 
ried us ;  let  us  then  look  at  Slavery  as  it  appears  in  History, 
not  from  the  narrow  platform  of  American  party  politics, 
but  from  the  broad  family  circle  of  humanity,  of  which 
our  nation  is  a  member.  Let  us  cast  away  all  polemical 
spirit  and  look  at  Slavery  objectively  as  a  historical  fact, 
and  trace  it  back  in  the  different  periods  of  the  Story 
of  Man,  so  that  we  may  see  its  development  and  divine 
from  the  Past  the  prospects  of  the  Future ;  for  this  is 
the  spirit  in  which  we  must  study  History. 

We  will,  however,  not  give  a  learned  treatise,  but  only 
sketch  its  course,  until  we  arrive  at  our  own  doors,  and 
see  our  own  Slavery  and  the  circumstances  which  sur- 
round it. 

Though  the  generous  minds  of  the  whole  civilized  world 

4* 


82 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


may  deem  it  inhuman  in  principle  for  a  man  to  own  his 
fellow-man,  still  History,  on  all  its  pages,  declares  itself 
decidedly  in  favor  of  the  fact.  From  the  remotest  ages, 
man  has  been  owned  and  Slavery  has  existed,  though 
names  and  forms  may  have  differed.  War  seems  to  have 
been  everywhere  the  origin  of  it — at  least,  in  the  earlier 
stages  of  human  society — just  as  war  was  then  the  sum 
total  of  all  international  intercourse.  If,  in  civilized  ages, 
war  is  the  exception — or,  at  least,  ought  to  be — and  peace 
the  rule,  so,  in  barbarous  periods,  war  is  the  rule  and 
peace  the  exception.  In  these  struggles  of  barbarous 
tribes,  the  prisoners  of  war  were  considered  the  property 
of  the  victors,  who  held  this  property  by  no  common  law, 
but  by  force.  The  victors  held  unlimited  authority  over 
their  prisoners ;  they  could  destroy  or  keep  them,  just  as 
any  other  kind  of  property  which  had  in  some  way  become 
their  own.  In  times  or  cases  in  which  these  live  prisoners 
were  of  no  use,  they  were  killed ;  and  they  were  not  killed 
only  when  they  could  serve  the  victors  to  some  purpose, 
in  which  latter  case  they  became  slaves.  This  is  the 
origin  of  Slavery  in  the  times  of  barbarism  of  any  nation 
or  tribe — in  the  primitive  phases  of  human  society,  where 
"Might  is  Right."  The  slave  himself  had  his  right  to 
become  free  whenever  there  was  not  enough  might  or 
force  to  keep  him  longer  in  subjection. 

The  word  "  slave"  is  of  modern  origin,  as  it  first  ap- 
peared in  the  long  struggles  between  the  Slavonic  tribes 
of  the  East  and  the  Western  Europeans  of  Germanic 
origin,  in  which  the  former  were  generally  overcome  and 
subdued. 

Let  us  now  see  how  it  has  been  with  Slavery  in  the  na- 
tions and  ages  which  have  heretofore  claimed  some  right 


THE   DEVELOPMENT.  33 

to  the  title  of  civilization.  There  have,  as  yet,  been  but 
three  great  civilizations  in  the  world  :  the  old  Asiatic,  in 
its  manifold  branches,  the  Greco-Roman,  and  the  Modern 
European,  in  which  latter,  also,  this  continent,  as  a  great 
European  colony,  must  be  reckoned.  In  the  two  former 
civilizations,  that  is,  among  the  so-called  ancient  nations, 
Slavery  was  a  conditio  sine  qua  non — the  fundamental 
condition  of  their  system  of  social  economy.  It  was  the 
great  characteristic  of  all  ancient  national  compacts,  and 
wherever  we  cast  our  eyes  we  find  it.  It  came  to  them 
from  the  times  of  their  barbarism,  and  was  sustained  and 
increased  by  many  accidental  causes  in  their  history.  It 
was  a  punishment  for  crime  at  one  time,  a  payment  for 
debt  at  another.  It  was  the  last  disgrace  to  which  the 
gambler  was  to  submit  among  some  nations ;  it  was  the 
last  means  to  shield  the  poor  and  weak  from  hunger  and 
danger  among  others. 

But  as  these  nations  advanced  in  culture  and  civilization, 
the  condition  of  the  slaves  became  modified.  They  were 
still  the  principal  laborers  in  all  the  branches  of  rising  in- 
dustry (for  "  man"  seemed  not  to  have  been  made  for 
labor,  but  only  for  war  and  the  chase,  and  labor  was  only 
worthy  of  a  slave,  of  a  low-bred  man,  or,  in  some  nations, 
of  woman) ;  but  they  were  treated  more  gently,  and  ob- 
tained some  rights  and  privileges.  Though  these  nations 
never  abolished  Slavery  entirely,  still  we  know  the  friendly 
intercourse  between  master  and  slave,  especially  among 
the  Greeks  and  the  Romans.  Thus,  could  the  slave,  among 
the  Athenians,  sue  his  master  for  cruel  treatment.  Beating 
a  slave  or  killing  him  was  reserved  to  the  public  authorities. 
A  slave  was  allowed  to  gain  and  to  own  property,  and  to 
buy  his  liberty.    Similar  was  the  condition  of  the  slave  in 


34  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

the  Roman  Empire.  Though  the  Justinian  Code  still 
granted  to  the  master  the  vitce  necisque  potestas — the 
right  to  pummel  and  to  slay — still  the  whole  tenet  had 
become  obsolete  in  practice.  The  master  was  often  satis- 
fied with  a  certain  tithe  or  daily  payment,  as  is  the  case 
in  our  own  Southern  cities,  and  he  frequently  promised  his 
slave  entire  freedom  as  soon  as  he  (the  slave)  had  gathered 
a  certain  amount  of  property.  There  were  many  manu- 
missions for  various  other  causes,  such  as  extraordinary 
fidelity,  or  self-sacrificing  services  of  any  kind.  Slavery 
must,  indeed,  have  changed  considerably  in  character, 
since  even  most  skillful  artists  and  men  of  superior  edu- 
cation and  refinement  were  found  in  its  ranks,  and  great 
poets,  generals,  and  statesmen  were  born  in  Slavery,  or  of 
slave  parents. 

Modern  civilization  may  be  said  to  have  begun  with  the 
appearance  of  the  Germanic  nations  upon  the  theater  of 
Europe,  especially  since  the  time  of  the  overthrow  of  the 
Western  Roman  Empire.  As  long  as  they  were  in  a 
barbarous  or  semi-civilized  state,  they  obtained  and  held 
slaves  in  the  same  manner  as  other  tribes  and  nations. 
During  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  centuries,  even,  there 
were,  according  to  the  best  authorities,  as  many  slaves  in 
Germany  as  there  w^ere  free  men.  Among  the  Anglo- 
Saxons,  the  per-centage  of  slaves  was  even  still  greater. 
But  in  the  Slavery  of  the  different  modern  nations 
that  rose  on  the  ruins  of  the  old  Roman  Empire,  similar 
changes  took  place,  as  in  Grt  oce  and  Rome.  The  sale  of 
slaves  to  a  foreign  land  was  forbidden  at  an  early  time, 
and  their  general  condition,  mostly  by  reason  of  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Christian  Church,  was  gradually  so  much 
improved  that  it  deserved  even  another  name.  The  slave, 


THE  DEVELOPMENT.  g5 

during  the  so-called  period  of  chivalry  and  feudalism,  be- 
came a  "  serf,"  and  Slavery  became  serfdom,  not  unlike 
the  Roman  colonate  in  the  latter  times  of  the  empire. 
The  serf  was  less  owned  as  to  his  life  than  as  to  his  serv- 
ice. Serfdom  may  thus  be  regarded  as  the  great  stepping- 
stone  to  freedom,  just  as,  vice  versa,  the  poor  free  man,  in 
those  feudal  times,  often  sank  to  the  state  of  serfdom. 
We  do  not  mean  by  this  that  Slavery  was  changed  into 
serfdom  by  a  positive  law.  But  that  intermediate  and 
mitigated  condition  of  the  Slave  was  none  the  less  a  real- 
ity. Thus,  in  England,  "  Villany"  originally  meant  Slav- 
ery ;  but  it  was  a  different  thing  in  the  middle  ages. 

This,  again,  was  similar  in  Rome  and  modern  Europe. 
But  there  the  Romans  stopped.  This  milder  form  of 
Slavery  continued  as  long  as  the  empire  itself,  and  even 
survived  its  fall.  This  was  not  so  with  the  modern  na- 
tions. There  arose,  in  spite  of  old  systems  and  old  theo- 
ries, a  new  element,  a  new  principle,  with  the  advance  of 
industry.  It  was  "  Honor  to  Labor,"  the  characteristic 
element  of  the  triumphant  civilization  of  the  modern 
nations.  It  is  this  principle  which  prolongs  the  lives  of 
modern  empires,  and  will  finally  bring  about  the  civiliza- 
tion of  the  world.  It  is  the  want  of  this  principle  which 
brought  decay  upon  the  ancient  nations  before  the  foot  of 
the  barbarian  had  even  yet  trodden  upon  their  soil.  It  is 
"  Honor  to  Labor"  which  brought  the  man  of  labor  at  last 
to  honor  and  freedom.  Gradually  his  burdens  grew  less. 
Instead  of  all  the  labor  of  his  whole  day,  the  serf  owed 
only  part  of  his  labor  to  his  master,  and  then  only  certain 
services  at  certain  seasons  or  in  certain  contingencies. 
What  formerly  was  unrewarded  service,  gratuitously  de- 
manded and  offered,  received  some  remuneration,  though 


86 


THE  AMEE I  CAN  QUESTION. 


small  it  may  have  been.  Such  remunerations  became,  with 
the  increased  productiveness  of  labor  and  the  increased 
value  of  the  laborer  himself,  more  adequate,  until  forced 
service  became  voluntary  service,  since  the  lord  held  up 
as  high  rewards  or  wages  for  labor  as  any  other  person. 
These  are  some  of  the  ways  in  which  serfdom  passed 
away,  though  the  extinction  of  its  last  forms  required 
some  legislative  enactment.  Such  enactments  were  made 
in  most  nations  of  Europe  during  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries  ;  and  after  many  ages  of  struggles, 
the  enslaved  man  became  at  last  free. 

II. — KEGKO  SLAYEEY  IN  HISTORY. 

Negro  Slavery  is  as  old  as  any  other  Slavery,  and  its 
origin  is  war,  as  among  any  other  tribes,  nations,  or  races, 
be  they  white,  yellow,  or  red.  Prisoners  of  war  were  slain 
or  made  slaves,  in  the  continent  of  Africa,  long  before 
European  and  American  slave-traders  appeared  on  its 
shores — long  before  Barth,  the  learned  traveler,  saw 
black  slaves  owned  by  black  masters — long  before  the 
interests  of  African  industry  "  tied  the  Negroes  to  the 
plows  and  drove  them  like  oxen." 

Among  modern  nations,  the  Spaniards  were  the  first 
who  made  and  owned  African  slaves.  It  was  during 
their  long  wars  with  the  Moors  or  Arabs,  who,  in  their 
western  stream,  had  spread  over  the  whole  northern  part 
of  Africa,  even  to  the  Pyrenean  Peninsula,  and  had  taken, 
for  many  centuries,  a  firm  footing  on  Spanish  soil,  at  the 
very  dawn  of  modern  European  civilization.  During  these 
struggles  and  wars  with  the  Mohammedan  intruders  of 
Asia,  who  once  threatened  to  subdue  all  Europe,  the  Span- 
iards at  last  drove  them  away  to  Africa,  and  followed  them 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 

in  their  turn  to  that  continent.  The  wars  continued  there, 
and  the  so-called  "Black  Moors,"  the  real  Africans  by  birth 
and  race,  had  often  to  expiate  for  the  wrongs  committed 
by  the  "  Arabian  Moors." 

But  after  the  discovery  of  America,  when  the  Industrial 
Period  of  Modern  Civilization  began,  this  kind  of  Slavery, 
namely,  Negro  Slavery,  changed  radically  its  character. 
While  among  all  nations,  in  China  even,  and  on  all  con- 
tinents, Slavery  became  milder,  and  was  slowly  passing 
from  every  country  where  there  were  but  the  faintest  rays 
of  civilization,  Negro  Slavery  took  a  new  and  powerful 
start.  Let  us  view,  a  moment,  the  relative  position  of  this 
fact  in  the  history  of  the  world's  progress. 

The  continent  of  Africa,  the  land  of  the  Negro — if  we 
take  Negro  as  the  general  term  for  those  manifold  tribes 
that  inhabit  Africa — was  the  last  which  appeared  on  the 
great  theater  of  the  civilization  of  the  world. 

Asia  had  its  time  the  first  of  all  the  continents.  It  was 
the  cradle  of  human  progress.  It  had  grown,  lived,  and 
decayed,  before  our  present  nations  and  their  civilization, 
their  lands  and  continents  even,  were  dreamed  of.  Their 
social  life  was,  indeed,  confined  to  one  continent,  and  on 
this  continent,  again,  the  Chinese  were  separated  by  insur- 
mountable barriers  from  the  land  and  civilization  of  the 
Hindoos,  and  these  again  from  the  civilization  of  Western 
Asia,  which  itself  stretched  only  to  the  Mediterranean  and 
its  shores.  Egypt  was  but  a  small  part  of  Africa,  and 
may  as  well  be  counted  to  Asia,  and  the  Phenicians  and 
Carthagenians  pierced  but  little  into  the  continent  of 
Africa.  The  great  Sahara  was  the  Western  and  Southern 
limit  of  their  empires.  Thus  the  Asiatic  colonies  on  the 
one  side,  and  the  young  rising  kingdoms  of  Media  and 


88 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


Persia  on  the  other,  extended  but  little  the  area  of  this 
civilization,  which  remained  truly  Asiatic  in  origin,  form, 
and  character. 

Then  came  the  Greco-Roman  civilization.  This,  too, 
stretched,  in  spite  of  its  extensive  wars  and  glorious 
achievements,  over  only  a  comparatively  small  area,  in 
which  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and  the  adjacent 
lands  were,  and  played  the  principal  parts.  We  know, 
indeed,  that  the  great  empire  of  Rome,  in  its  period  of 
highest  splendor,  stretched  over  the  totits  orbis  terrarum — 
over  the  whole  world  ;  but  we  know,  too,  how  large  this 
"  whole  world"  was — with  no  America,  with  almost  no 
Africa,  with  little  of  Asia,  and  but  the  Southern  part  and 
some  of  the  Northern  territory  of  Europe ;  in  all,  about 
one  half  the  territory  of  the  United  States. 

But  now  came  the  Modern  European  civilization.  Its 
area  was  at  first-  Europe.  The  new  nations  of  Italy, 
Spain,  France,  Germany,  and  England  arose  and  stretched 
their  influence  farther  and  farther  over  the  then  known 
countries.  The  "  Straits  of  Gibraltar"  were  no  longer 
honored  as  the  termini  mundi — the  ends  of  the  world. 
The  seats  of  ancient  civilization  were  sought  again.  The 
new  world  of  America  was  discovered,  conquered,  and 
colonized.  The  islands  of  the  South  Sea  became  known. 
The  sea  route  to  India  was  found,  and  expedition  followed 
expedition,  until  at  last  the  whole  earth  was  known,  and 
the  ancient  seats  of  glory,  as  well  as  the  heretofore  un- 
known and  untrodden  soils,  were  drawn  into  this  general 
and  cosmopolitan  life  of  the  human  family.  Civilization 
was  no  longer  confined  to  the  shores  of  the  Midland  sea, 
but  it  was  girded  by  all  the  shores  of  all  the  seas.  What 
were  formerly  the  branches  of  the  Midland  sea  became 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


89 


now  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  oceans,  and  those  island 
kingdoms  of  former  times  became  empires  of  whole  con- 
tinents.   Such  is  Modern  European  civilization. 

The  last  continent  that  joined  this  universal  cycle,  and  the 
last  race  that  took  active  part  in  this  universal  life,  were 
Africa  and  the  African.  The  Northern  shores  of  that 
continent,  as  we  have  seen,  were  but  small  belts  of  land, 
colonized  by  foreign  races.  The  Arabs,  even,  knew  com- 
paratively but  little  of  the  great  heart  of  Africa.  It  was 
left  to  the  most  modern  missionaries  of  Selfishness  and 
Civilization,  of  Trade  and  Religion,  of  Curiosity  and 
Science,  to  open  some  insight  into  the  life  of  the  main- 
land. Untouched  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires  and 
civilizations,  it  had  followed  an  isolated  life.  But  unlike 
the  Australians,  the  Africans  had  preserved  a  physical 
strength,  which  caused  surprise  to  civilized  man ;  and  un- 
like the  Indians  of  America,  they  had  learned  some  agri- 
culture and  some  industry,  had  some  state  life,  and  had 
reached  some  degree  of  culture,  the  most,  even,  in  those 
parts  which  were  least  exposed  to  the  inroads  of  the 
modern  colonizer  and  trader.  And  this  is  the  land — this 
is  the  race  which  was  to  furnish  the  modern  slaves.  While 
the  Chinese  were  lingering  along  a  half-civilized  life,  and 
the  Hindoos  were  degenerating  from  their  early  culture ; 
while  Western  Asia  decked  her  soils  with  the  broken 
ruins  of  former  glory,  and  the  Greek,  even,  grew  in  body 
and  mind  unworthy  of  their  noble  forefathers  ;  while 
Western  Europe,  under  the  influence  of  the  Germanic 
race,  was  rising  to  be  the  lawgiver  of  the  world,  and  sent 
its  colonists  to  all  the  distant  lands  on  a  mission  of  regen- 
eration ;  while  the  Red  Man  of  the  New  World  was  bat- 
tled with  until  "  he  had  to  go  toward  the  setting  sun," 


90  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

Africa  was  destined  to  furnish  the  Slave  of  the  day,  the 
Slave  of  modern  nations,  the  Slave  par  excellence,  the 
Slave  of  the  new,  industrial,  cosmopolitan,  and  Christian 
civilization ! 

This  modern  Negro  Slavery  is,  therefore,  indeed,  a 
"  peculiar  institution."  It  arose  not  in  times  of  barbarism, 
nor  through  accidental  warfare  of  fighting  tribes.  It  was, 
in  this  respect,  unique,  isolated,  one  by  itself  in  time, 
place,  and  circumstances.  When  Slavery  was  everywhere 
passing  away,  this  peculiar  modern  Negro  Slavery  first 
began.  The  slave  was  no  longer  the  accidental  captive  in 
fierce  battles,  waged  for  glory,  power,  and  fame,  the 
delights  of  the  ambitious  barbarian.  But  in  place  of 
"  glorious"  wars,  there  came  inglorious  slave-hunts,  for  no 
other  object  than  to  make  captives,  to  sell  these  captives 
as  slaves  to  the  civilized  man  of  modern  times,  who  was  to 
take  these  slaves  to  distant  lands  and  continents,  to  sell 
them  again  to  others,  where  they,  with  all  their  descend- 
ants, are  bound  to  labor  and  to  toil  during  their  lives. 
Slavery  thus  became  industrial,  like  the  whole  world  and 
its  civilization,  and  lost  all  its  romantic  features  of  old. 
The  continent  last  discovered  was  to  serve  as  the  principal 
theater  for  this  Slavery,  and  the  race  last  found  was  to  be 
the  Slave  race. 

The  Spaniards  introduced  this  Slavery  very  soon  after 
the  discovery  of  this  Western  World,  whose  virgin  soil 
needed  the  labor  of  whole  races.  Hayti,  the  first  free  black 
land,  was  also  the  first  slave  land.  Four  months  before 
the  Mayflower  arrived,  slaves  were  already  in  Virginia, 
through  the  kind  aid  of  Dutch  sailors.  Since  that  time, 
the  merchants  of  the  North  and  of  the  South,  of  the  East 
and  of  the  West,  of  this  and  of  other  lands  and  conti- 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


91 


nents,  have  been  zealously  competing  with  each  other  in 
this  once  honored  traffic  in  human  flesh,  and  whatever 
stain  and  curse  are  connected  with  it  rest  alike  on  this 
whole  land  and  on  the  whole  modern  world.  White  men 
soon  accustomed  themselves  to  own  black  men.  The 
Spaniards,  French,  Dutch,  English,  Americans,  all  and 
everybody,  owned  Negroes,  and  sold  and  bought  them, 
and  used  them  as  their  slaves.  Laws  of  discipline,  and 
systems  to  regulate  the  relations  of  master  and  slave,  soon 
engaged  the  statesmen  of  all  nations,  and  filled  volumes  of 
their  codes. 

III.— NEGRO  SLAVERY  IN  THE  SOUTHERN  STATES. 

Though  modern  Negro  Slavery  has  some  peculiarities, 
it  is  still  Slavery  in  all  its  cardinal  points.  Some  may  say 
that,  in  our  days,  a  distinct  race  is  set  aside  to  be  slaves ; 
but  this,  even,  can  be  found  in  other  periods.  The  Greeks 
regarded  the  Scythian  race  as  born  for  Slavery.  Similar 
were  the  ideas  of  the  old  Germans  in  respect  to  the 
Sclavonians,  and  "barbarous"  and  "slave"  were  almost 
synonymous  terms  among  the  "  civilized"  nations  of  an- 
tiquity. These  civilized  nations,  however,  were  sadly 
undeceived  in  after-times.  If  we  thus  would  judge  from 
the  history  of  other  kinds  of  Slavery  to  the  future  of  our 
own,  we  should  be  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  Negro 
Slavery,  too,  must  have  its  growth,  its  modifications,  and 
its  end.  The  peculiar  features  which  distinguish  our 
Slavery  from  others,  such  as  its  mercenary  origin,  its 
industrial  character,  its  growth  in  a  period  of  great 
achievements  in  science  and  politics,  which  seemed  to 
promise  hope,  and  freedom,  and  happiness  to  the  whole 
human  race,  these  peculiar  features  would  speak  more  in 


92  THE   AMEEIOAN  QUESTION. 

favor  of  modifications  and  a  gradual  abolition  than  in 
favor  of  a  perpetual  continuance.  But  why  should  we 
longer  urge  the  argument  of  history  ?  The  whole  ques- 
tion has  already  been  decided  in  principle,  and  to  a  great 
extent  in  fact,  too.  For  all  civilized  nations — whatever 
their  other  sore  spots  may  be — and  half  of  our  States 
have  emancipated  the  former  Negro  Slaves — the  whole 
modern  civilized  world  has  long  acknowledged  that  it  is 
unjust  and  inhuman  to  receive,  with  chains  and  fetters  in 
our  hands,  a  new  race,  neglected  and  isolated.  To  re- 
open the  slave-trade,  and  put  again  a  degrading  stamp 
upon  all  Africa,  to  doom  the  whole  race  and  continent  to 
be  a  perpetual  and  entire  Slave  race  and  Slave  continent, 
none  but  a  rash,  thoughtless,  and  misguided  politician  can 
think  or  hope.  The  people  of  the  whole  civilized  world 
stand  ready  with  the  weapons  of  the  world  to  repel  any 
further  outrage  on  a  shamefully  treated  continent.  The 
question  is,  therefore,  not  whether  Africa  shall  be  a  slave 
continent,  and  the  African  a  slave  per  se,  nor  even  that  all 
the  Negroes  transported  into  our  land  shall  be  slaves  for- 
ever, but  the  issue  is  only  whether  those  Negroes  who 

ARE  STILL  OWNED  AS  SLAVES  BY  THE  SOUTHERN  STATES  OF 

our  Union  shall  be  slaves  forever,  or  pass  gradually  into 
freedom,  as  it  happened  in  ninety-nine  other  parts  of  the 
civilized  world  where  Slavery  had  formerly  existed.  The 
question  as  to  the  continuance  of  Negro  Slavery  is,  there- 
fore, strictly  an  American — and,  indeed,  a  Southern — 
question  only. 

Without  solely  relying,  however,  on  our  general  argu- 
ment, Ave  will  now  shortly  review  the  different  special 
pleas  which  are  here  raised  in  favor  of  the  continuance  of 
Negro  Slavery  in  the  South. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


93 


IV. — THE  PLEA  OF  THE  CUKSE. 

God,  or  rather  Noah,  cursed  the  descendants  of  Ham, 
the  father  of  Canaan.  We  read  in  Genesis  ix.  25 :  "  And  he 
said :  Cursed  be  Canaan  ;  a  servant  of  servants  shall  he  be 
unto  his  brethren."  There  are  a  great  many  hermeneuti- 
cal  difficulties  connected  with  this  text.  "  Noah  drank  of 
wine  and  was  drunken.    *    *    *  N0AH  awoke  from 

his  wine,  and  knew  what  his  younger  son  had  done  unto 
him."  And  then  he  cursed  him.  Now,  this  is  quite  natu- 
ral ;  but  it  shows,  as  the  venerable  Thomas  Scott  says, 
"  human  imperfection  in  Noah"  to  drink  wine ;  and  espe- 
cially, we  may  add,  to  drink  too  much  of  it,  so  as  to  get 
drunk.  But,  then — in  all  due  reverence  be  it  said — it 
would  be  quite  natural,  too,  that  Noah,  awakening  in  or 
from  his  drunkenness,  should  use  "  imperfect"  and  intem- 
perate language. 

But,  be  this  as  it  may,  Ham  showed  a  vile  character  in 
doing  what,  he  did,  and  he  deserved  strong  punishment. 
Yet,  why  not  only  Ham,  but  also  his  young  and  thought- 
less son,  should  be  cursed,  and  not  only  he,  but  all  the 
descendants  of  Ham — after  the  whole  human  race  having 
been  once  most  radically  cursed  in  Adam — this  remains  a 
mystery. 

Nor  is  it  certain  that  God  heard  Noah's  curse.  To 
conclude  a  posteriori,  from  the  misery  and  oppression  of 
Africa,  that  God  did  hear  this  curse,  such  an  argument  we 
may  object  to  in  many  ways.  The  African  is  by  no  means 
the  most  cursed  of  this  earth.  There  is  the  history  of  the 
Aztecs,  of  the  Australians,  of  the  Fejeeans,  and  of  many 
isolated  tribes  and  races  toward  the  North  and  South 
poles,  with  whom  the  African  can  fairly  be  compared  to 


94 


THE  AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 


his  advantage.  With  the  exception  of  modern  Negro 
Slavery,  he  has  surely  endured  less  misery  than  millions 
of  Chinese  and  Pariahs.  His  numbers  compare  well  with 
most  of  the  half-civilized  races,  especially  if  quality  is  not 
overlooked.  The  men  in  the  interior  of  Africa  are  intel- 
ligent, too,  and  mild,  says  Livingstone  ;  and  their  peculi- 
arly modern  curse  has  been  passing  away  this  long  time. 

There  are,  too,  some  ethnological  difficulties  in  this 
question.  Some  say  the  curse  does  not  refer  to  the  Afri- 
can Negroes  at  all.  The  Egyptians,  the  Phenicians,  and 
the  Carthaginians  certainly  were  not  of  one  and  the  same 
race  with  the  Negroes.  If  Egypt  is  meant,  there  is  cer- 
tainly as  much  misery  on  the  Nile  as  in  the  Soudan,  or  on 
the  Mountains  of  the  Moon. 

But  why  should  we  endeavor  to  deduce  our  principles 
of  social  and  physical  action  from  the  Book  of  the  Soul- 
Life.  The  Good  Book,  we  must  repeat,  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  outward  forms  of  this  life.  And  did  it  even 
curse  the  Negro,  who  among  us  Christians  is  ready  to 
serve  as  the  executor  of  this  curse  ?  But,  especially  we, 
the  great  Republicans  and  Free  men  of  the  modern  world 
— shall  we  be  the  hangmen  of  Liberty  ?  There  is  nowhere 
in  the  Good  Book  an  express  order  given  to  us  for  that 
purpose,  and  there  are  but  few  who,  on  their  own  respon- 
sibility, would  undertake  the  work  on  the  ground  of 
"  drunken"  Noah's  curse ! 

Y. — THE  PLEA  OF  EACE  INFERIOKITY. 

There  is,  at  least,  no  longer  any  dispute  among  the 
lovers  of  Southern  Negro  Slavery,  whether  the  Negro  is  a 
man  or  a  monkey ;  and  the  comparison  of  the  Negro  slaves 
to  horses  and  alligators,  or  to  any  domestic  or  wild  cattle, 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


95 


has  become  insipid,  though  it  may  come  from  the  hps  of 
clowns  and  punsters.  The  Negro  is  now  generally  re- 
garded as  a  man,  though  an  inferior  man ;  and  nobody  will 
doubt  that  he  is  an  inferior  man  if  w^e  compare  him  with 
the  favored  Caucasian  of  the  present  day.  We  will  now 
examine  somewhat  the  causes  of  this  inferiority  of  races. 

When  we  look  attentively  into  the  history  of  mankind, 
our  eyes  meet  three  great  facts — we  may  call  them  Facts 
of  Difference.  There  is  first,  at  all  periods,  in  all  places, 
and  at  all  stages  of  human  culture,  a  Difference  among 
Individuals,  though  they  may  belong  to  the  same  race,  or 
nation,  or  family,  even.  It  is  a  physical  and  moral  differ- 
ence as  distinct  as  that  of  our  faces.  This  is  one  of  the 
great  obstacles  to  those  theories  of  communistic  equality. 
No  Spartan  law  of  education,  no  Free-School  system,  no 
Forced  education,  no  Democracy,  no  Religion,  no  Philan- 
thropy has  ever  yet  succeeded  to  make  men  equal,  be  it 
physically,  morally,  or  socially. 

This  same  difference  appears  when  different  individuals 
are  connected  and  formed  into  associations,  be  they  fami- 
lies, tribes,  nations,  or  races.  And  this  is  the  second  fact. 
Just  as  the  development  of  an  individual  depends  upon 
his  genetic  structure,  and  upon  the  circumstances  in  which 
he  is  placed — or,  in  Comte's  language,  upon  the  character 
of  the  organism  and  of  the  medium  which  surrounds  it — 
so  do,  also,  associations  of  any  kind  depend  upon  their 
inward  genetic  power  and  upon  the  outward  influences. 
Among  these  outward  influences  are  the  geographical  and 
physical  condition  of  the  respective  lands,  the  degree  of 
isolation  from  other  tribes  and  nations,  or  of  communica- 
tion with  them,  the  state  of  culture  of  these  tribes  at  the 
time  of  contact,  and  the  interest  the  more  advanced  soci- 


96 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


eties  take  in  lower  and  less  advanced  organisms.  Should 
even  the  inward  endowments  of  two  tribes  be  the  same, 
the  difference  of  the  circumstances  that  surround  them 
might  change  their  whole  character. 

The  third  fact  is,  that  associations,  like  individuals,  are 
born,  grow,  decay,  and  die  at  different  periods  and  have 
different  durations  of  life.  This  fact  depends  directly 
upon  the  second. 

The  workings  of  these  three  great  facts  have  ever  made 
the  picture  of  the  human  world-life  greatly  variegated. 
Now  nations  arose,  then  they  fell.  One  race  was  still 
lying  in  barbarism,  while  another  was  in  the  very  zenith 
of  its  civilization.  This  same  civilized  race  became  weak 
and  decrepit,  while  the  barbarous  one  rose  to  strength  and 
power.  One  people  grew  to  the  greatest  perfection ;  an- 
other was  arrested  in  the  midst  of  its  course.  In  the 
great  history  of  the  races  and  nations,  we  see,  indeed, 
the  same  phenomena  continually  repeating  themselves  as 
in  the  history  of  the  individuals  of  one  and  the  same 
nation.  But  this  is  the  necessary  principle  of  all  human 
development.  Difference,  indeed,  is  the  element  of  all 
harmony.  There  have  been,  and  there  will  ever  be,  dif- 
ferent individuals  in  the  same  nation  destined  to  fulfill 
different  tasks  and  duties.  Some  will  grow  earlier,  faster, 
and  higher ;  others  will  ever  remain  in  the  lower  walks 
of  life.  And  exactly  thus  it  is  with  the  tribes,  nations, 
and  races  of  the  whole  human  family.  Different  nations 
and  different  ages  have  different  tasks  to  perform.  Some 
will  rise  to  magnificent  dimensions,  as  their  literature  and 
art  will  bear  witness  in  all  generations  to  come.  Such 
were  the  Greeks.  Others  will  grow,  too,  but  some  gro- 
tesque temples  and  broken  idols  will  be  all  that  remains  to 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


07 


speak  of  their  former  glory.  Such  were  the  old  Mexicans. 
Some  will  remain  barbarous  during  long  periods,  and  be 
subjected  and  subdued  at  one  time,  but  at  length  will 
gradually  rise  and  set  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of  their 
former  victors.  Such  is  the  story  of  the  Germans  and 
the  Romans.  Some  races  will  be  interrupted  in  their 
long  childhood  ;  a  more  civilized  race  will  fall  upon  them, 
and  whatever  germ  there  may  have  been  in  them,  the 
more  powerful  race  will  destroy  it.  Such  we  learn  from 
the  history  of  the  conquest  of  America  and  the  "  sinking 
away"  of  the  Indians.  Some  will  be  entirely  neglected  and 
isolated,  until  they  are  so  degenerate  that  they  are  forever 
lost,  like  the  Australians.  Others,  again,  have  once  had 
some  civilization,  but  have  sunk  gradually  to  a  lower  level 
until  they  were  aided  by  more  advanced  nations  to  rise 
again  to  higher  life,  though  this  be  often  a  cruel  process. 
Such  is  the  story  of  the  Hindoos  and  the  English.  There 
have  been  tribes,  and  even  cultivated  ones,  of  whom  now 
the  names  even  have  passed  away.  Such  are  the  Goths. 
There  are  others  whose  countries  were  decked  with  pal- 
aces of  unheard-of  luxury  and  splendor,  which  now  are 
deserts  and  wastes  for  "  wolves  to  howl  in."  Look  to 
Asia  for  examples  !  Where  are  the  proud  Assyrians  ? 
The  Northern  temperate  zone,  the  largest  habitable  land, 
must  naturally  remain  the  principal  theater  or  the  central 
part  of  all  human  culture.  But  has  this  favored  zone  ever 
saved  from  decay  the  tribes  and  nations  that  poured  in 
upon  it  ?  No ;  the  principle  of  degeneracy  depends  upon 
no  clime  or  sun !  It  gnaws  in  the  heart  of  the  privileged 
Caucasian,  who  dwells  near  the  center,  as  well  as  in  the 
Patagonian's  breast,  who  is  hurled  far  off  to  the  outer  end 
of  the  radius. 

5 


98  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

Such  has  been,  heretofore,  the  strange  history  of  the 
world — a  continuous  up  and  down,  and  still  a  progress. 
And  is  history  now  to  stop  ?  Are  there  no  more  tribes, 
and  nations,  and  races  to  come  ?  Do  not  Asia,  Northern 
Europe,  and  Africa  yet  harbor  millions  who  seem  to  be 
waiting  for  their  time  to  play  some  more  conspicuous  part 
m  the  world's  history?  Or,  are  we  blind  to  the  new 
comers  who,  from  year  to  year,  vindicate  with  greater 
emphasis  their  right  to  be  among  the  nations  ? 

In  the  face  of  these  historical  facts,  what  place  can  we 
ascribe  to  the  African  ?  He  is  among  the  latest  comers. 
What  prospect  has  he  in  this  turmoil  of  human  progress  ? 
The  people  of  Africa  seem  certainly  not  lost  beyond 
the  hope  of  recovery.  They  do  not  look  like  a  decrepit, 
wasted,  and  ruined  race.  Nobody  can  look  at  the  mus- 
cular strength  of  the  Negro,  and  call  him  the  offspring 
of  a  dying  race.  Let  us  view  him  in  Africa !  They  say 
he  is  inferior  to  us.  Well ;  but  is  it  impossible  to  raise 
him  to  any  higher  degree  of  culture  ?  Who  can  affirm 
that,  in  the  face  of  the  most  modern  developments  of  our 
heroic  travelers,  Vogel,  Barth,  and  Livingstone?  There 
seems  to  be  a  difference  in  tribes  among  them^  just  as  any- 
where else.  But,  on  the  whole,  they  are  not  a  people  of 
the  lowest  character.  Though  they  were  isolated  so  many 
centuries,  they  did  not  remain  mere  hunters.  They 
reached,  by  themselves,  some  agriculture,  some  manufac- 
ture, some  commerce,  some  civilization.  Or,  if  we  view 
them  in  their  contact  with  more  civilized  nations,  they  cer- 
tainly are  not  void  of  the  power  of  imitating.  In  Africa 
itself  they  have  manufactures  of  iron  slave-chains — the 
best  that  are  made,  they  say.  And  here,  our  own  experi- 
ence does  certainly  not  show  that  the  Negro,  North  or 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


99 


South,  is  incapable  of  progress.  But  how  can  we  expect 
much  from  him  in  this  our  land  ?  In  the  South  he  is  a  slave, 
all  direct  means  of  progress  being  withheld  from  him.  In 
the  North  he  was  emancipated  rashly,  cast  upon  a  world 
whose  ways  he  did  not  know,  generally  unaccustomed  to 
managing  his  own  business  or  owning  property ;  in  a  word, 
untaught  in  the  lessons  of  liberty.  Besides,  he  was  thrown 
among  a  crowd  of  Yankees,  Dutchmen,  Irishmen,  and 
Germans,  all  of  them  descendants  of  a  race  long  civil- 
zed,  all  eager  after  gain,  and  all  skillful  in  obtaining  it. 
How  disadvantageous  was  the  Negro's  position  here! 
How  long,  indeed,  will  and  must  it  take  him  to  rise  to  a 
level  with  us,  who  have  the  start  of  him  by  centuries  of 
culture  ?  Perhaps  he  will  never  reach  us.  But,  that  he 
is  capable  of  some  degree  of  civilization,  who  can  deny, 
whether  he  may  look  upon  the  toils  and  feasts  of  the  planta- 
tion, or  upon  the  schools  and  huts  of  the  North?  And 
are  there  not  many  Negroes  who  have  reached  a  higher 
intellectual  standing  in  our  community  than  ever  can  be 
reached  by  many  of  our  own  native  or  foreign  population 
of  Caucasian  blood  ?  No  impartial  man  can  look  at  the 
Negro  here,  and  declare  him  incapable  by  nature  of  any 
progress.  The  Negro  is  a  progressive  being — a  man,  and 
not  a  brute. 

But,  suppose  he  can  never  reach  the  degree  of  the  civil- 
ization of  the  Caucasian !  Suppose  he  will  ever  remain  as 
inferior  to  him  as  he  now  is !  How  can  we  arrive,  from 
the  fact  of  relative  inferiority,  at  the  necessity  of  Slavery  ? 
By  what  train  of  logic  can  we  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
inferior  races  must  be  made  slaves,  and  not  only  this — for 
Slavery  may  at  first  be  best  for  them  if  we  abstract  from  the 
manner  of  their  coming  here — but  that  they  must  be  kept 


100  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

slaves  in  perpetuum  ?  Must,  then,  all  inferior  races,  and 
nations,  and  tribes  be  likewise  made  slaves  ?  Well,  then, 
we  have  plenty  on  our  hands,  and  fillibustering  will  not 
cease  until  all  Mexico,  all  China,  all  the  Indies,  all  Pata- 
gonia, all  Africa,  all  Asia,  and  a  good  part  of  Europe  is 
enslaved !  For  such  inferior  tribes  and  nations  are  found 
everywhere — a  little  higher,  a  little  lower.  Where  is  the 
line  beyond  which  there  is  no  more  freedom,  but  only  eter- 
nal Slavery  ? 

No,  we  Americans,  a  small  portion  of  the  civilized  people 
of  this  world,  and  a  portion  of  this  small  portion  again, 
all  lovers  of  liberty,  we,  the  nation  of  the  "  happy  and  the 
free"  above  others,  we  can  not  oppose  effectually  the  ways 
of  the  world,  the  voice  of  civilization,  the  lessons  of  His- 
tory. The  Negro  is  inferior,  at  least  now ;  he  may  ever 
be  so ;  but  he  is  not  therefore  necessarily  to  be  a  slave,  or, 
rather,  the  slave  of  the  American  cotton-field,  forever,  and 
with  all  his  descendants ! 

VI.— THE  PLEA  OF  PHILANTHKOPY. 

No  man  will  ever  plead  philanthropy  for  the  slave-trade. 
A  heartless  trader  in  human  flesh  presents  himself,  with 
an  appropriate  vessel,  on  the  coast  of  Africa.  There  he 
meets  a  misled,  barbarous  chief.  Excitement  for  gain 
prompts  them  both — the  trader  and  the  chief — to  make  a 
bargain.  The  trader  lays  down  a  heap  of  the  good  things 
of  this  world,  which  flatters  the  senses  of  the  savage. 
The  savage  chief,  in  his  turn,  arranges  a  man-hunt,  catches 
as  many  descendants  of  his  race  as  he  can  get,  and  gives 
those  who  are  alive  and  well  to  the  trader  in  fulfillment  of 
his  bargain.  The  trader  packs  them,  like  so  many  beasts, 
into  the  infected  hull  of  the  slave-ship,  carries  them  to  a 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


101 


foreign  land,  and  there  again  are  sold  as  many  as  are 
alive  after  this  second  process.  The  man,  who  first  was 
free,  is  then  a  slave,  owned  by  another  race,  in  another 
land,  forever.  Is  that  philanthropy  ?  Is  that  love  of 
mankind  ? 

But  let  us  abstract  from  the  dark  origin  of  Negro 
Slavery.  Let  us  forget  the  millions  who  were  transported 
before  the  foundation  of  our  Free  Republic  and  after  it ! 
Let  us  forget  the  demoralization  which  civilized  man  has 
thus  thrown  upon  the  newest  comer  among  the  races! 
Let  us  forget  the  demoralization  which  he  has,  to  some 
degree,  unconsciously  loaded  upon  himself!  Let  us  forget 
Humanity!  Let  us  take  Slavery  as  it  is  in  our  own 
Southern  States  !  Suppose  even  the  slave-ship,  with  all  its 
horrors,  is  the  messenger  of  philanthropy ;  suppose  it  was 
and  is  philanthropy  to  fetch  the  Negro  from  his  native 
land,  and  make  him  a  slave — is  it  philanthropy  to  keep 
him  a  slave  after  he  has  once  quitted  the  ship,  entered  our 
land,  unlearned  his  barbarism,  taken  upon  himself  the 
work  of  civilized  man,  and  imitated  his  ways  ?  Is  it 
philanthropy  to  keep  him  down,  or  to  destroy  any  little 
ray  of  progress  that  may  indirectly  strike  the  poor  wretch  ? 
No,  Philanthropy,  above  all,  would  teach  us — after  such 
great  wrongs  on  our  side  and  such  favorable  experiences 
on  the  other — to  help  the  poor  man,  to  give  him  the 
means  of  culture,  to  teach  him  the  rudiments  of  civilized 
life,  and  to  try,  at  least,  like  all  nations  heretofore,  to 
make  him  an  intelligent  slave,  whether  this  process  may 
lead  him  to  freedom  or  whether  it  may  never  break  the 
chains  of  bondage.  To  treat  him  as  a  man,  as  an  anthro- 
pos.  Philanthropy  certainly  must  demand  of  a  man. 


102 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


VII. — THE  PLEA  OF  NECESSITY. 

But  who  will  work  our  cotton-fields  ?  We  now  abstract 
from  all  philanthropy  or  humanity !  Who  will  work  under 
our  burning  sun  ?  Agassiz  says  the  white  man  can  as  well 
as  the  black  man,  or  he  may,  we  think,  at  least  accustom 
himself  to  it.  And  Livingstone  writes  from  Africa  even : 
"  I  have  never  had  a  day  of  illness  since  my  return.  We 
find,  too,  that,  so  far  from  Europeans  being  unable  to 
work  in  a  hot  climate,  it  is  the  want  of  work  that  kills 
them.  The  Portuguese  all  know  that  as  long  as  they  are 
moving  about,  they  enjoy  good  health ;  but  let  them  settle 
down  and  smoke  all  day,  and  drink  brandy,  then — not  a 
word  about  brandy  in  the  fever  that  follows — the  blame  is 
all  put  on  the  climate."  The  Germans,  too,  seem  to  get 
along,  in  every  kind  of  thrift,  very  comfortably  in  Texas. 

But  suppose,  even,  that  we  need  the  Negro — and  we, 
too,  think  we  do — would  we  lose  him  by  raising  him  to 
liberty  ?  Not  at  all.  If  we  teach  him  the  ways  of  self- 
reliance  and  freedom,  and  treat  him  as  other  laborers,  he 
will  never  leave  what  has  become  to  him  his  native  coun- 
try. He  will  not  come  North,  for  he  will  prefer  the 
warmer  sun  of  the  South,  better  adapted  to  his  nature, 
and  prefer  the  soil  where  he  has  learned  to  be  free.  He  will 
prefer  the  work  which  he  has  learned  to  do,  and  the 
society  which  surrounded  and  aided  him  during  his  re- 
generation. For,  that  he  can  be  grateful  and  is  capable 
of  patriotism  the  war  of  the  Revolution  bears  ample  tes- 
timony. Nor  could  he  long  to  go  back  to  Africa,  which, 
indeed,  has  become  to  him  a  strange  land.  As  little  would 
he  leave  as  the  descendant  of  the  European  leaves  his 
adopted  fatherland  to  recross  the  ocean  and  settle  in  the 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


103 


old  world,  which  now  is  as  new  to  him  as  the  Western 
world  was  to  his  ancestors.  If  the  Negro  were  free,  he 
would  voluntarily  stay  here,  where  often  force  alone  now 
keeps  him.  He  would  perform  the  lower  duties  of  social 
life  for  generations  to  come,  and  in  these  lower  walks  he 
would  remain,  should  he  be  incapable  of  ever  competing 
with  the  old  Caucasians.  Surely,  we  want  the  Negro, 
and  we  shall  have  him,  whether  Free  or  Slave. 

VIII.— THE  PLEA  OF  SELF-INTEKEST. 

We  find  that  everywhere  in  history  where  emancipation 
was  gradually  prepared  and  finally  accomplished,  the 
estates  of  the  masters  became  many  times  more  valuable 
than  before.  Examples  are  frequently  given  by  the  many 
writers  on  Slave  and  Free  labor.  The  Count  of  Beens- 
torff  is  said  to  have  lost  one  hundred  thousand  dollars  by 
emancipation ;  but  his  annual  income  from  his  estates  rose 
from  three  thousand  to  twenty-seven  thousand  dollars. 

The  Slave,  as  long  as  he  works  for  his  master,  will  gen- 
erally be  as  lazy  as  the  circumstances  and  the  lash  will 
permit.  From  this  principle  there  arose  those  manifold 
computations  of  the  economists  and  the  various  estimates 
of  the  comparative  cost  of  Free  and  of  Slave  labor.  But 
on  the  whole,  they  all  agree  that  Slave  labor  is  the  more 
expensive  of  the  two.  And  this  is  just  what  the  South 
needs.  Make  the  Negro  more  intelligent  and  skillful,  and 
give  him  the  hope  of  his  future  emancipation,  then  will  his 
ambition  soon  tell  upon  the  estates  of  the  master.  During 
this  gradual  process  of  emancipation,  the  master  can  only 
be  the  gainer. 

Tucker  thinks  that  Nature  seems  to  demand  a  certain 
ratio  of  the  population  of  a  country  to  its  square  miles 


104 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


before  a  master  can  emancipate  his  slaves  with  gain  to 
himself.  To  apply  the  rule  of  an  arithmetical  means  to  a 
dozen  examples  of  emancipation  is  rather  venturesome. 
The  principal  and  decisive  condition  of  the  master's  pre- 
serving his  self-interest  in  emancipation,  is  that  it  be 
gradual.  In  such  a  case  it  has  never  brought  loss  on  any 
master  in  any  example  from  history,  whatever  the  above- 
mentioned  ratio  may  have  been. 

IX. — THE  PLEA  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION". 

We  have  here  the  last  of  the  pleas  generally  heard  in 
favor  of  the  continuance  of  Negro  Slavery  in  our  Southern 
States.  The  plea  of  the  Constitution !  And,  indeed,  the 
Constitution  alone  can  and  does,  in  our  eyes,  recognize 
Slavery !  .  But  there  it  stands,  that  noble  instrument,  with 
the  name  "  slave"  carefully  avoided.  There  stands  at  its 
side  another  cherished  document — the  Declaration  of  In- 
dependence— with  its  startling  principle  :  "  That  all  men 
are  created  equal ;  that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator 
with  certain  inalienable  rights  ;  and  that  among  these  are 
life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness."  Neither  of 
these,  our  Primitive  Laws,  stamp  the  Negro  to  be  a  lower 
being  than  a  man.  This  man  may  be  your  property^  slave- 
holder !  >  But — aside  from  any  humanity — you  still  do  not 
own  him  as  you  do  "  your  horse  or  your  ass."  You  know 
that  you  indirectly  vote  for  him ;  you  know  that  you  can 
not  kill  him  when  he  gets  old,  as  you  do  "  your  horse  or 
your  ass  !"  You  know  that  there  is  some  little  difference 
between  owning  him  and  owning  "  any  other  cattle !" 
You  can  not  make  him  out  a  beast  or  a  brute :  not  from 
the  Constitution,  not  from  any  law  of  man,  be  it  written 
or  only  secretly  engraved  in  the  human  breast.  You  know 


THE   DEVELOPMENT.  1Q5 

that  the  Negro  is  a  man !  for  this  is,  after  all,  the  ques- 
tion. Man  or  Beast — this  is  the  final  issue  !  But  our  noble 
Constitution,  in  letter  and  spirit,  abhors  an  interpretation 
which  ambitious  politicians  would  like  to  force  upon  it. 
Not  "  beast,"  or  "  brute,"  or  "  cattle,"  not  even  "  slave," 
is  the  term  given  to  the  Negro  !  "  Bound  to  service"  is 
all  that  expresses  the  relation  of  slave  and  master. 

Wherever  provisions  are  made  respecting  slaves,  they 
are  so  worded  as  not  to  stigmatize  them  as  even  a  distinct 
caste  or  class.  In  Art.  I.,  Sec.  2,  persons  "  bound  to  serv- 
ice for  a  term  of  years"  are  classed  with  the  free  persons  ; 
and  "  all  other  persons" — meaning,  in  the  language  of  the 
Constitution,  "persons  bound  to  service"  without  any 
qualification  of  time,  or,  in  common  language,  slaves — are 
put  on  the  same  footing  as  the  "  Indians  not  taxed."  Art. 
IV.,  Sec.  2,  from  which  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law  is  derived, 
is  a  provision  against  "  persons  held  to  service  or  labor  in 
one  State,  under  the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into  another," 
and  comprises  obviously  all  persons,  black  or  white,  held 
to  service  for  any  period  of  time,  however  short  or  long. 
This  provision  includes  slaves,  but  it  is  not  made  for  them 
alone.  The  Constitution  recognizes  Slavery,  to  be  sure, 
but  not  as  a  general,  national,  and  hereditary  institution, 
authorized  by  the  laws  of  the  United  States  as  such,  but 
as  a  local  relation,  between  master  and  slave,  calling  it 
expressly  "  service  or  labor  in  one  State,  under  the  laws 
thereof P 

But  let  us  not  with  conscious  willfulness  misunderstand 
and  distort  the  suggestions,  hopes,  wishes,  and  intentions 
of  those  "noble  men  who  framed  our  Constitution  and 
founded  our  Union,"  lest  their  desecrated  memory  pervert 
and  crush  us. 


106 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


X.— EEQUISITES  FOE  A  TRULY  PHILANTHROPIC 
EMANCIPATION. 

Though  our  minds  may  now  have  given  up  all  prejudices, 
and  we  may  look  with  impartial  eyes  upon  the  fact  of  our 
Negro  Slavery  and  its  gradual  emancipation  as  taught  by 
history,  still  there  are  yet  heavy  obstacles  in  our  way. 
May  we  be  allowed  to  state  what,  in  our  opinion,  are  the 
primary  requisites  of  a  peaceful  solution  of  this  difficult 
question  ? 

i. — DELICACY. 

Negro  Slavery  exists  only  in  some  of  our  States.  No 
earthly  power  can  force  it  again  on  the  Free  States  or  on 
the  world.  Its  local  character  is  therefore  a  reality.  But 
just  on  account  of  this  local  character  of  Slavery,  the 
greater  delicacy  is  needed.  If  Negro  Slavery  still  ex- 
isted in  all  our  States,  and  under  similar  circumstances,  no 
party  or  section  could  be  charged  with  ignorance  of  facts 
or  intentional  distortions  and  selfish  interests.  It  would 
then  be  regarded  as  a  common  good,  or  as  a  common  evil, 
or  as  a  common  necessity,  and  be  discussed  freely,  like  any 
other  question,  independent  of  locality.  It  would  not 
rouse  a  whole  section  against  another,  and  divide  our 
country  geographically  as  it  does  politically.  It  would  be 
an  easier  work  to  get  rid  of  a  common  enemy,  and  would 
need  less  care  and  delicacy  in  words  and  actions. 

England  was  in  a  very  different  position  from  what 
we  are.  Slavery  existed  in  one  of  her  distant  colonies  or 
dependencies,  which  was  but  a  small  part  of  her  empire. 
But  our  Slavery  exists  in  our  very  midst ;  in  sixteen 
co-equal  States  of  our  confederate  republic.  It  is  thus 
cherished  in  a  considerable  portion   of  our  land,  and 


THE   DEVELOPMENT.  jq^ 

it  therefore  needs  great  delicacy  of  treatment,  unless 
we  give  up  the  idea  of  regarding  ourselves  as  equal  mem- 
bers of  the  same  Union,  and  citizens  of  the  same  nation. 

II.  POLITICAL  NON-INTERFERENCE  WITH  THE  SOUTH. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  present  Slave  States  once 
knew  what  a  dubious  guest  they  harbored  in  the  Negro 
Slave.  They  had  men  as  liberal,  as  wise,  as  noble,  and  as 
energetic  as  the  men  of  the  North,  in  whose  words  and 
teachings  the  policy  best  for  their  country  was  expressed, 
distinctly  and  unmistakably.  Again  and  again  did  they 
publicly  denounce  Slavery,  in  language  strong  and  de- 
cided :  but  the  spirit  of  which  could  not  be  misinterpreted 
or  suspected.  They  even  contrived  ways  and  means  to 
gradually  get  rid  of  Slavery,  and  they  had  associations  for 
that  purpose. 

The  Southern  States  were  fairly  on  their  way  toward  a 
final  abolition,  just  as  the  Northern.  The  latter  were, 
however,  their  predecessors  in  this  work  from  many  other 
reasons  than  mere  philanthropy.  Climate,  the  character  of 
their  products,  and  immigration,  made,  from  the  very 
beginning,  the  negro  slave  less  desirable  and  less  neces- 
sary there  than  in  the  South.  Still,  the  Southern  States, 
too,  thought  of  emancipation,  though  they  were  naturally 
to  come  last,  and  their  work  was  to  be  slower,  in  the  same 
degree  that  their  peculiar  geographical  position,  and  their 
climate,  soil,  and  production  had  allotted  to  them  a  larger 
number  of  slaves. 

We  will  quote  here  some  well-known  passages  from 
Southern  writers,  to  see  what  the  state  of  feeling  on  this 
subject  was  as  late  as  1832.  Said  the  elder  Ritchie,  in 
the  Richmond  Enquirer:  "Means  sure  but  gradual,  sys- 


108 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


tematic  but  discreet,  ought  to  be  adopted  for  reducing  the 
mass  of  evil  which,  is  pressing  upon  the  South,  and  will 
still  more  press  upon  her,  the  longer  it  is  put  off."  He 
was  referring  to  Negro  Slavery.  Faulkner,  too,  said,  at 
that  time,  in  the  Virginia  House  of  Delegates :  "  Sir,  I  am 
gratified  to  perceive  that  no  gentleman  has  yet  risen  in 
this  Hall,  the  avowed  advocate  of  Slavery.  The  day  has 
gone  by  when  such  a  voice  could  be  listened  to  with 
patience,  or  even  with  forbearance."  This  was  in  1832. 
Why  did  all  these  free  words  about  "withering  and 
blasting  effects  of  Slavery"  stop  soon  afterward  ?  It  can 
be  proved  with  almost  mathematical  certainty  what  share 
the  rash  interference  of  Abolitionism  had  in  delaying  the 
work  of  the  Free  labor  movement  in  the  South.  Let  us 
here  quote  a  memorable  passage  from  Daniel  Webster, 
whose  clear-sightedness  none  will  question.  Referring  to 
that  same  matter,  he  said: 

4 '  Let  any  gentleman  who  doubts  of  that  recur  to  the  debates  in  the 
Virginia  House  of  Delegates,  in  1832,  and  he  will  see  with  what  free- 
dom a  proposition  made  by  Mr.  Eandolph  for  the  gradual  abolition  of 
Slavery  was  discussed  in  that  body.  Every  one  spoke  of  Slavery  as  he 
thought ;  very  ignominious  and  disparaging  names  and  epithets  were 
applied  to  it,  The  debates  in  the  House  of  Delegates  on  that  occasion, 
I  believe,  were  all  published.  They  were  read  by  every  colored  man 
who  could  read,  and  to  those  who  could  not  read,  those  debates  were 
read  by  others.  At  that  time  Virginia  was  not  unwilling  nor  afraid 
to  discuss  this  question,  and  to  let  that  part  of  her  population  know 
as  much  of  the  discussion  as  they  could  learn.  That  was  in  1832.  As 
has  been  said  by  the  honorable  member  from  South  Carolina,  these 
Abolition  societies  commenced  their  course  of  action  in  1835.  It  is 
said— I  do  not  know  how  true  it  may  be — that  they  sont  incendiary 
publications  into  the  Slave  States  ;  at  any  event,  they  attempted  to 
arouse,  and  did  arouse,  a  very  strong  feeling  ;  in  other  words,  they 
created  great  agitation  in  the  North  against  Southern  Slavery.  Well, 
what  was  the  result  ?  The  bonds  of  the  slaves  were  bound  more 
firmly  than  before  ;  their  rivets  were  more  strongly  fastened.  Public 
opinion,  which  in  Virginia  had  begun  to  be  exhibited  against  Slavery, 


THE  DEVELOPMENT.  109 

and  was  opening  out  for  the  discussion  of  the  question,  drew  back  and 
shut  itself  up  in  its  castle.  I  wish  to  know  whether  anybody  in  Vir- 
ginia can  now  talk  as  Mr.  Bandolph,  Governor  McDowell,  and  others 
talked,  openly,  and  sent  their  remarks  to  the  press,  in  1832  ?  We  all 
know  the  fact,  and  we  all  know  the  cause  ;  and  everything  that  this 
agitating  people  have  done  has  been,  not  to  enlarge,  but  to  restrain, 
not  to  set  free,  but  to  bind  faster  the  slave  population  of  the  South." 

There  can  not  be  any  doubt  that  Northern  Abolitionism 
was  one  of  the  causes  of  the  change  of  feeling  in  the 
South. 

Abolition  of  Slavery  can  never  be  effected  by  a  hostile 
political  party  in  States  in  which  there  is  no  Slavery.  For 
the  South  will  never,  can  never,  be  forced  into  abolition. 
We  abolished  our  Slavery  in  the  North  without  any  inter- 
ference on  the  part  of  the  South  or  the  West,  and  the 
same  privileges  must  be  granted  to  the  other  States. 
Abolition  of  Slavery  was  heretofore  effected  by  the  action 
of  separate  States,  and  they  consulted  neither  in  regard  to 
time  nor  manner  with  any  other  State.  Each  State  acted 
by  itself,  and  excluded  all  interference  of  others.  They 
may  have  been  influenced  by  the  example  of  other  States 
or  nations,  still  they  surely  excluded  all  political  interfer- 
ence either  from  the  Federal  Government  or  from  single 
States.  And  such — State  by  State — will  be  the  course 
of  emancipation  until  the  whole  work  is  accomplished. 
The  question  of  abolition  ought,  therefore,  never  to 
enter  the  mind  of  any  Northern  man  as  far  as  he  is  a 
member  of  a  political  party.  In  the  abstract,  everybody 
has  a  right  to  his  opinion,  but  a  political  party  is  no  agent 
for  abstract  schemes  and  wishes,  but  for  such  measures  as 
are  best  fitted  for  immediate  political  action.  In  belong- 
ing to  a  party,  a  man  does  not  thereby  become  a  traitor  to 
his  opinion;  he  only  subscribes  to  the  rationality  and 


HQ  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

justice  of  certain  political  measures  proposed.  But  abo- 
lition of  Slavery  can  never  appear  as  such  a  measure  on 
the  programme  of  any  political  party  in  the  North. 

Besides  the  impracticability  of  such  an  undertaking,  it 
is  against  the  Constitution,  to  which  a  political  party,  as  a 
medium  of  political  action,  owes  strict  adherence.  If  we 
are  dissatisfied  with  the  Constitution,  we  ought  not  to 
cover  our  intention  with  false  issues,  but  we  ought  openly 
to  confess  our  plans,  and  employ  all  means  prescribed  for 
changes  or  amendments  in  that  instrument. 

Abolition  of  Slavery,  as  a  political  measure,  belongs 
chiefly  to  the  South.  There  are  still,  as  in  former  times, 
fearless  champions  of  freedom  there  to  start  the  work 
again,  and  the  initiative  comes  with  better  grace  from 
their  own  men.  The  South  will  recover  from  its  excite- 
ment. This  very  process  of  secession  will  be  the  means 
of  opening  its  eyes  again  to  the  righteous  claims  of  Free- 
dom. There  are  now,  in  several  Slave  States,  parties 
which  dare  to  attack  Slavery  in  some  shape  or  other,  and 
in  some  States  their  final  object,  abolition,  is  openly 
avowed.  There,  agitation  is  proper.  It  may  have  been 
silenced  in  these  days  of  over-excitement.  But  this  state 
can  not  last  long.  Times  of  prudence  and  peace  will  re- 
turn, and  the  former  work,  though  now  interrupted,  will 
be  taken  up  again  with  renewed  vigor. 

Thus  delicacy,  reason,  and  the  Constitution  oppose  alike 
all  political  interference  of  the  North  with  the  question  of 
abolition  in  the  South. 

III. — PEUDEJSTCE. 

English  emancipation,  as  we  have  above  stated,  can  not 
serve  as  a  model  for  us.    But  we  have  a  warning  example 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


Ill 


nearer  at  hand,  in  the  abolition  of  Slavery  in  our  own 
Northern  States. 

Though  the  lands,  in  the  care  of  a  numerous  crowd  of 
skillful  and  energetic  colonists,  did  not  suffer  so  much  as 
in  the  West  Indies,  still  the  small  minority  of  colored 
people  found  themselves  in  a  condition  very  similar  to 
that  of  the  Negroes  of  the  English  colonies.  Suddenly 
they  passed  from  Slavery  to  a  state  in  which  they  had  to 
unlearn,  or  learn  otherwise,  what  as  slaves  they  had  learned. 
They  were  like  helpless  children.  They  wandered  around 
uncared  for  and  homeless ;  they  struggled  with  dis- 
eases, and  lived,  and  still  live,  in  poverty,  being  often 
in  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  Liberty  was,  to  many, 
a  curse.  It  will  take  much  more  time,  and  cost  many 
more  sacrifices,  before  they  are  in  a  condition  to  profit  by 
the  advantages  of  freedom.  Thence  arose  those  facts 
which  Calhoun  used  in  his  Defense  of  North  American 
Slavery,  addressed  to  Lord  Aberdeen,  though  he  mistook 
entirely  the  cause,  for  it  is  the  manner  of  emancipation 
only  which  did  the  injury. 

The  only  beneficial  and  satisfactory  way  of  emancipation 
is  the  slow  and  gradual  change  and  reform  of  the  condition 
of  the  slave.  We  must  instruct  him  in  the  elements  of 
common  and  practical  knowledge.  This  is  the  fundamental 
reform.  Then  we  must,  in  the  language  of  Mr.  Carey, 
accustom  him  "  to  possess  and  manage  property" — reforms 
already  partially  introduced  into  some  of  our  Slave  States. 
The  slave  may  be  hired  out  by  the  master,  as  in  some  of 
our  Southern  cities.  The  field-slave  may  be  allowed  to 
cultivate,  under  the  master's  control,  some  acres  of  land 
for  himself.  As  in  Rome,  the  slave  may  be  allowed  to 
buy  his  liberty — reforms  already  applied  to  some  extent. 


H2  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

Other  aids  in  this  slow  work  of  emancipation  might  be 
suggested  in  different  places ;  for  true  and  beneficial 
emancipation  can  only  be  partial,  local,  individual, 
and  gradual.  We  can  not  do  it  by  one  stroke !  It  is 
a  complicated  work,  to  which  we  all  may  lend  our  feeble 
hands.  Some  slaves  would  thus  soon  be  made  free ;  others 
would  have  to  serve  a  longer  apprenticeship  for  liberty. 
The  Abolitionists  and  philanthropic  men  of  all  creeds  and 
platforms  may  hasten  on  this  work  of  love.  They  are 
liberal ;  let  them,  therefore,,  send  their  money  to  procure 
liberty  for  those  who  are  deemed  to  deserve  it.  Let  them 
then  take  care  of  them,  and  supply  whatever  the  new-born 
freeman  may  afterward  need.  Let  the  Colonization  So- 
ciety, too,  be  aided  in  its  work.  Help  to  send  to  Africa 
those  civilized  Negroes  who  wish  to  aid  their  race  in  its 
progress  !  Let  all  who  know  new  remedies  and  plans  of 
peace  be  listened  to,  and  all  who  can  materially  help,  send 
their  portions;  while  the  slaveholding  States  themselves 
concert  and  advise  and  reform,  until  at  last,  this  voluntary 
emancipation  being  nearly  completed,  State  after  State 
may  seal,  by  a  legal  enactment,  the  fact  of  the  Negro's 
freedom ! 

Should,  then,  any  financial  consideration  delay  the  work 
of  Humanity,  or  in  any  way  thwart  its  purposes,  there 
will  be  millions  in  the  Union  who  will  readily  adopt  our 
reading  of  Webster's  language  when  he  says : 

u  There  have  been  received  into  the  treasury  of  the 
United  States  eighty  millions  of  dollars,  the  proceeds  of  the 
sales  of  the  public  lands  ceded  by  Virginia.  If  the  residue 
should  be  sold  at  the  same  rate,  the  whole  aggregate  will 
exceed  two  hundred  millions  of  dollars.  If  Virginia  and 
the  South  see  fit  to  adopt  any  proposition  to  relieve  them- 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


113 


•  selves  from  c  Slavery, '  they  have  my  free  consent  that  the 
government  shall  pay  them  any  sum  of  money  out  of  its 
proceeds  which  may  be  adequate  to  the  purpose." 

XI. — ACTUAL  WORK  ALREADY  ACCOMPLISHED  IN  OUR 
OWN"  LAND. 

On  reading  the  wholesale  denunciations  which  are  so 
liberally  thrown  upon  our  republic,  both  by  foreign  and 
native  writers  and  orators,  it  would,  at  first,  seem  as  if  our 
land  and  people  had  not  yet  done  anything  at  all  toward 
"gradual"  abolition  of  Slavery. 

Says  G.  F.  Kolb,  in  his  new  work,  "  The  Statistics  of 
the  World:"  "There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  accuse 
the  American  republic  for  the  existence  of  Slavery;  for 
Negro  Slavery  is  a  relic  from  the  time  when  the  land  was 
under  a  monarchical  government.  But  still,  the  guilt  of 
not  having  limited  that  baneful  institution,  which  is  a  dis- 
grace to  humanity,  and  of  not  having  worked  toward  its 
gradual  abolition,  rests  heavily  on  the  modern  republicans 
of  America." 

"  Done  nothing  toward  gradual  abolition  of  Slavery !" 
We  are  accustomed  to  such  language  from  the  lips  of 
high-souled  theorizers,  but  Ave  hardly  expected  to  find  it 
on  the  scientific  pages  of  the  "  cool  and  calculating"  sta- 
tistician. Still,  such  seems  to  be  the  general  language  of 
the  present  day,  to  be  mechanically  repeated  by  each  new 
self-appointed  judge  in  the  High  Court  of  Universal 
Justice. 

Has  our  national  development  really  been  so  exceptional 
as  to  deserve  the  maledictions  of  the  whole  civilized 
world  ?  Have  we,  indeed,  not  progressed  at  all  toward 
greater  freedom  ?    Have  we  been  steadily  descending  in 


114 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


the  scale  of  civilization  ?  Are  we  an  anomaly  in  the  his- 
tory of  modern  nations?  Or,  can  we  show  the  same 
slow  and  gradual  work  of  emancipation  as  they?  We 
confess  that  our  country  might  have  done  more  if  it  had 
been  more  prudent  and  less  selfish.  But  we  have  done 
something,  and  this  something  is  worthy  of  the  consid- 
eration of  the  world,  before  our  final  judgment  is  pro- 
nounced. 

Let  us  look  into  our  actual  history  ! 

I.  PROHIBITION  OF  THE  SLAVE-TRADE. 

The  United  States  was  the  first  nation  to  abolish  the 

slave-trade.    We  take  from  the  learned  charge  of  Judge 

James  M.  Wayne  the  following  data : 

"The  first  act  was  passed  on  the  22d  of  March,  1794,  when  General 
Washington  was  President.  It  was  intended  to  prevent  any  citizen  or 
resident  of  the  United  States  from  equipping  vessels  within  the  United 
States,  to  carry  on  trade  or  traffic  in  slaves,  to  any  foreign  country. 
(Brig  Triphenia  vs.  Harrison,  W.  C.  C,  522.)  That  is,  though  slaves 
might  be  brought  into  the  United  States  until  the  year  1808,  in  vessels 
fitted  out  in  our  ports  for  that  purpose,  they  could  not  be  carried  by 
our  citizens  or  residents  in  the  United  States  in  such  vessels,  into  any 
foreign  country. 

"  The  next  act  of  Congress  was  passed  on  the  2d  March,  1807,  when 
Mr.  Jefferson  was  President.  The  act  of  1807  begins  by  subjecting 
any  vessel  to  forfeiture  which  shall  be  found  in  any  river,  bay,  or  har- 
bor, or  on  the  high  seas,  within  the  jurisdictional  limits  of  the  United 
States,  or  which  may  be  hovering  on  the  coast,  having  on  board  any 
negro,  mulatto,  or  person  of  color,  for  the  purpose  of  selling  them  as 
slaves,  or  with  the  intent  to  land  them  in  any  port  or  place  within  the 
United  States. 

"The  act  of  1818  prohibits  the  importation  of  negroes  altogether 
into  the  United  States,  from  any  foreign  kingdom,  place,  or  country, 
without  excluding  the  return  to  it  of  such  slaves  as  might  leave  the 
United  States  as  servants  of  their  owners,  comprehending  such  as  have 
been  employed  as  seamen  on  a  foreign  voyage. 

"The  act  of  1819  authorizes  the  President,  in  a  more  particular 
manner  than  had  been  done  before,  to  use  the  naval  force  for  the 
prevention  of  the  slave-trade,  points  out  the  circumstances  and  the 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


115 


localities  in  which  seizures  of  vessels  may  be  made,  directs  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  proceeds  of  them  after  condemnation,  requires  that 
negroes  found  on  board  of  them  shall  be  delivered  to  the  marshal, 
what  that  officer's  duty  then  is,  and  again  commands  that  the 
officer  making  the  seizure  shall  take  into  his  custody  every  person 
found  on  board,  being  of  the  crew  or  officers  of  the  vessels  seized, 
and  that  they  are  to  be  turned  over  to  the  civil  authority  for  prosecu- 
tion. 

"  This  brings  us  to  the  last  act  upon  the  subject,  that  of  the  15th 
May,  1820.  It  denounces  any  citizen  of  the  United  States  as  a 
pirate,  and  that  he  shall  suffer  death,  who  shall  become  one  of  the 
crew  or  ship's  company  of  any  foreign  [slave]  ship  ;  and  that  any  per- 
son whatever  becomes  a  pirate,  and  shall  suffer  death,  who  shall  be- 
come one  of  the  crew  or  ship's  company  of  any  vessel  owned,  in  the 
whole  or  in  part,  or  which  shall  be  navigated  for  or  in  behalf  of 
any  citizen  of  the  United  States,  or  who  shall  land  from  such  ves- 
sel on  any  foreign  shore,  and  shall  seize  any  negro  or  mulatto  not 
held  to  service  or  labor  by  the  laws  of  either  of  the  States  or  Terri- 
tories of  the  United  States,  with  intent  to  make  such  negro  or  mulatto 
a  slave,  or  who  shall  decoy,  or  forcibly  bring  or  carry,  or  who  shall 
receive  on  board  of  such  ship,  any  negro  or  mulatto  with  intent  to 
make  them  slaves. 

"In  the  year  1823,  the  House  of  Eepresentatives  of  Congress 
adopted  a  resolution  to  request  the  President  to  prosecute,  from  time 
to  time,  negotiations  with  the  several  maritime  powers  of  Europe  and 
of  America,  for  the  effectual  abolition  of  the  African  slave-trade,  and  its 
ultimate  denunciation  as  piracy  under  the  laws  of  nations,  by  the  con- 
sent of  the  civilized  world. 

"All  the  nations  of  Europe,  as  well  as  of  America,  have  followed 
in  the  same  legislation,  and  the  object  of  the  resolution  of  1823  seems 
to  be  near  its  accomplishment. 

"Upon  three  occasions  since  1824,  the  subject  has  been  under  the 
consideration  of  Congress,  and  at  each  time  has  a  determination  been 
fully  expressed  to  maintain  the  principles  that  have  been  incorporated 
into  the  legislation  of  the  country. 

There  were  several  occasions,  before  and  after  these 
legal  enactments,  when  the  Congress  of  the  United  States 
expressed  their  abhorrence  of  the  slave-trade.  And  this 
was  and  is  a  sentiment  common  to  the  great  majority  of 
people  both  North  and  South. 


116 


THE  AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 


II.  ABOLITION  OF  SLAVERY. 

At  the  beginning  of  our  existence  as  an  independent 
nation,  in  1776,  there  were  slaves  in  each  of  the  thirteen 
original  States. 

TABLE  XIX.  NUMBER  OF  SLAVES  IN  1776. 

[Census  Report  of  1850.] 
States.  Number  of  Slaves. 

Massachusetts. .    3,500 

Bhode  Island   4,373 

Connecticut   6,000 

New  Hampshire   629 

New  York   15,000 

New  Jersey   7,600 

Pennsylvania   10,000 

Delaware   9,000 

Maryland   80,000 

Virginia   165,000 

North  Carolina   75,000 

South  Carolina.   110,000 

Georgia   16,000 


Total   502,132 

Other  accounts  give  the  number  at  479,000. 

Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  New  Hampshire,  New 
York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  all,  at  an  early  date, 
abolished  Slavery  within  their  jurisdiction. 

Then,  out  of  territory  ceded  to  the  United  States  by 
Virginia — the  State  which  had  at  that  time  by  far  the 
greatest  number  of  slaves,  about  one  third  of  the  total 
slave  population  of  the  Union, — we  have  formed  the  fol- 
lowing States : 


Kentucky   1792  (Slave) 

Ohio   1802  (Free) 

Indiana   1816  (  "  ) 

Illinois   1818  (  "  ) 


Michigan   1837  (Free) 

And  from  Michigan — 

Iowa   1846  ( '  "  ) 

Wisconsin   1848  \  " ) 


Thus,  six  of  the  thirteen  original  States  have  abolished 
Slavery  within  their  territories,  and  six  new  Free  States 
were  formed  from  the  territory  of  the  Slave  State  of 
Virginia. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


117 


Vermont,  too,  was  formed  from  New  York  in  1791,  and 
Maine  from  Massachusetts  in  1820.  California,  Minnesota, 
Oregon,  and  Kansas  are  new  Free  States. 

To  be  sure,  seven  of  the  original  thirteen  States  have 
not  yet  abolished  Slavery,  and  nine  new  Slave  States  have 
been  added. 

But  nobody  can  deny  that  we  have  done  something 
"toward  the  gradual  abolition  of  Slavery."  For  in  1776 
we  had  nothing  but  Slave  States,  and  now  the  majority  of 
the  States  are  Free. 

Or,  let  us  take  the  oldest  and  the  newest  Census  of  the 
United  States,  and  compare  the  increase  of  the  Free  with 
that  of  the  Slave. 

Year.  Free.  Slaves. 

1790    3,231,900    697,800 

1850    19,987,500    3,204,300 

The  increase  of  the  Free  is  thus  518  per  cent.,  while 
that  of  the  Slave  is  only  359  per  cent.  Freedom  has  thus 
increased  at  a  greater  ratio  than  Slavery,  should  we  even 
take  the  above  number  unconditionally. 

"  But,"  says  Mr.  Kolb,  "  the  proportion  is  reverse  in  the 
South ;  the  slaveholders  have  succeeded  there  in  bringing 
about  an  enormous  increase  of  these  unfortunates."  To 
this  we  must  decidedly  object.  The  increase  of  the  slave 
population  is  the  greatest  argument  for  the  South.  For 
it  proves,  on  the  whole,  the  good  treatment  of  the  slaves 
by  their  Southern  masters.  It  shows,  indeed — as  we  have 
had  occasion  to  remark— the  greater  humanity  of  the 
Southerners  when  compared  with  other  masters.  But, 
however  that  may  be,  this  can  never  be  used  as  an  argu- 
ment against  the  South. 

The  work  of  emancipation,  or  gradual  abolition,  has 


118 


THE  AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 


been  steadily  going  on  since  the  very  beginning  of  our 
national  existence.  It  commenced  East  and  North,  and 
gradually  pressed  farther  toward  the  South  and  West.  Nor 
did  it  halt  at  the  boundaries  of  the  present  Slave  States. 
It  has  already  entered  them,  and  is  progressing  there  in  spite 
of  political  and  financial  interruptions  and  disturbances. 

III.  THE  SPREADING  OF  THE  WHITE  POPULATION". 

The  present  border  Slave  States  are  now  the  principal 
theater  of  action  in  this  work  of  Freedom.  We  will  first 
give  a  few  tables  showing  the  relation  of  the  White  to  the 
Slave  Population,  and  the  increase  of  the  former  over  the 
latter. 

TABLE  XX.  POPULATION  OF  THE  BORDER  STATES  IN  1850. 

[From  the  United  States  Census.] 


States.  Whites.  Free  Col'd.   Slaves.  Total  Col'd.  Total  Pop. 

Delaware   71,100  18,000      2,200  20,200  91,500 

Maryland   417,900  74,700     90,300  165,000  583,000 

Virginia   894,800  54,300   472,500  526,800  1,421,600 

Kentucky   761,413  10,000   210,900  220,900  982,400 

Missouri   592,004  2,600     87,400  90,000  682,000 


2,737,217    159,600   863,300    1,022,900  3,260,500 

table  xxi.  proportion  of  white  to  total  population 

in  1850.    (in  per  cents.) 

States.  1790.  1800.      1810.  1820.  1830.  1840.  1850. 

Delaware   78.36  77.56   76.18  75.99  75.05  75.00  77.75 

Maryland   65.26  63.34   61.78  63.88  65.12  67.70  71.68 

Virginia   59.08  58.43    56.59  56.61  57.31  59.76  62.94 

Kentucky   83.66  81.41  '79.76  77.02  75.27  75.69  77.50 

Missouri                   —  —     82.64  84.08  81.73  84.41  86.79 

TABLE   XXII.  PROPORTION    OF    FREE    COLORED    TO  TOTAL 

POPULATION.     (IN  PER  CENTS.) 

States.  1790.  1800.  1810.  1820.  1830.  1840.  1850. 

Delaware   6.60  12.86  18.08  17.81  20.66  21.66  19.75 

Maryland   2.51  5.73  8.92  9.75  11.84  13.21  12.82 

Virginia.....   1.71  2.29  3.14  3.48  3.91  4.02  3.82 

Kentucky   0.15  0.33  0.42  0.52  0.71  0.92  1.02 

Missouri   —  —  2.91  0.56  0.41  0.41  0.38 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


119 


TABLE  XXIII.  MANUMITTED  AND  FUGITIVE  SLAVES  IN  1850. 

BORDER  STATES. 

States.  Slaves.         Manumitted.  Fugitives. 

Delaware                          2,200    277    20 

Maryland                        90,300    493    279 

Virginia                        472,500    218    83 

Kentucky                      210,900    152    96 

Missouri                         87,000    50    60 

863,300  1,190  544 

These  four  tables  are  intimately  connected  with  each 
other. 

The  proportion  of  the  White  population  had  in  1850 
risen,  in  per  cent.,  in — 

Delaware.        Maryland.         Virginia.         Kentucky.  Missouri. 
Since  1820.        Since  1810.       Since  1810.       Since  1830.       Since  1810. 
1.74  9.90  6.45  2.23  4.15 

The  proportion  of  Free  Colored  persons  had  in  1850 
risen,  in  per  cent.,  in — 

Delaware.         Maryland.        Virginia.        Kentucky.  Missouri. 
13.15  10.31  2.11  0.87  2.53  (dec.) 

Thus,  the  proportion  of  the  White  and  Free  Colored  pop- 
ulation was  steadily  increasing  in  the  Border  States ;  or, 
in  other  words,  the  Border  Slave  States  are  thus  slowly  and 
peacefully  being  transformed  into  Free  States,  and  in  some 
of  them  the  work  of  Freedom  is  almost  completed.  The 
relative  decrease  of  the  proportion  of  the  Free  Colored 
population  of  Missouri  is  but  a  seeming  exception.  It 
was  the  effect  of  the  extraordinary  immigration  of  whites. 
Missouri  rose  in  forty  years,  from  the  22d  to  the  13th  place 
among  the  States,  Slave  and  Free. 

The  more  extreme  Southern  States  have  as  yet  been  less 
affected  by  the  invigorating  breath  of  Freedom  which 
blows  from  the  North.  But,  still,  Tennessee  seems  to 
follow  somewhat  in  the  track  of  Kentucky,  and  North 
Carolina  in  that  of  Virginia,  while  Louisiana,  by  reason  of 


120 


THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 


its  geographical  position,  its  river,  and  its  intimate  con- 
nection with  the  Northwest,  presents  about  the  same 
features  as  the  border  Slave  States. 

POPULATION  OF  LOUISIANA  IN  1850. 
Whites.     Free  Colored.      Slaves.      Total  Colored.    Total  Pop. 
255,400        17,400       244,800       262,200  517,700 

PROPORTION  OF  WHITE  TO  TOTAL  POPULATION.  (iN  PER  CENTS.) 
1810.  1820.  1830.  1840.  1850. 

44.82  47.83  41.46  44.96  49.35 

PROPORTION  OF  FREE  COLORED  TO  TOTAL  POPULATION. 

1810.  1820.  1830.  1840.  1850. 

9.91  7.15  7.74  7.24  3.37 

MAUMITTED  AND  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 
Slaves.  Manumitted.  Fugitives. 

244,800  159  90 

Thus  the  proportion  of  the  white  population  in  Louisi- 
ana increased  7.89  per  cent.  The  cause  of  the  decrease  in 
the  proportion  of  the  colored  population  is,  as  in  the  case 
of  Missouri,  due  to  the  extraordinary  immigration  of 
whites.  Missouri  and  Louisiana  are  the  two  Slave 
States  which  receive  the  greatest  share  of  foreign  and 
native  immigrants.  The-  five  Border  States  and  Louisiana 
together  receive  about  80  per  cent,  of  the  immigration  to 
the  whole  South. 

TABLE   XXIV.  NATIVES    OF   THE   FREE    STATES  AND  IMMI 

GRANTS  IN  THE  SLAVE  STATES.  1850. 

THE  BORDER  SLAVE  STATES. 

Natives  of  Free  States.         Foreign  Immigrants. 

Delaware   6  900   5,600 

Maryland   23,800   51,300 

Virginia   29,000   22,500 

Kentucky   31,300   31,800 

Missouri   55,600   76,200 

THE  WESTERN  GULF  STATES  AND  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Louisiana                        14,567   67,200 

Texas                              9,900   7,400 

Tennessee                         6,500   5,300 

Arkansas                          7,900   1,300 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


121 


THE  CABOLINAS  AND  THE  EASTERN  GULF  STATES. 

v  Natives  of  Free  States.         Foreign  Immigrants. 

North  Carolina                   2,100   2,500 

South  Carolina                   2,400   8,200 

Georgia                            4,200   6,500 

Florida                              1,700   2,600 

Alabama                           4,900   7,400 

Mississippi                        4,500   4,300 

The  flesh  and  spirit  of  the  free  white  population  of  the 
North  and  of  Europe  seem  thus  to  act  as  leaven  in  the 
work  of  emancipation  in  the  Border  States.  The  forma- 
tion of  a  solid  middle  class  of  laborers,  who  neither  are 
slaves  nor  keep  slaves— the  increase  of  the  free  colored 
population — the  greater  number  of  manumissions  there 
than  in  other  Slave  States,  in  spite  of  the  greater  losses 
from  fugitives — are  facts  intimately  interwoven  with  each 
other.  These  States  have  thereby  undergone  such  a 
change,  and  present  such  peculiar  features,  that  it  would 
be  unfair  to  class  them  with  the  other  Southern  States. 
They  are  in  a  state  of  transition  which  makes  them  a 
class  by  themselves. 

IV.  AMALGAMATION. 

There  is  another  force  at  work  in  the  cause  of  Freedom. 
It  is  a  physical  force,  but  it  acts  as  unconsciously  as  the 
social  one  we  have  just  mentioned.  It  is  the  amalgama- 
tion of  the  white  and  the  black  races.  The  African  and  the 
Caucasian  have  never  been  connected  so  intimately  as 
here.  This  country  is  in  reality  cosmopolite.  Not  only 
do  the  different  branches  of  the  same  race — the  Indo-Ger- 
manic — freely  mingle  with  one  another,  but  even  two 
distinct  races,  in  different  stages  of  civilization,  are  here 
violently  thrown  into  mutual  embrace. 

We  will  not  now  examine  into  the  ethnological  or  the 
moral  merits  of  such  a  mixture,  but  only  state  the  influence 

6 


122  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

it  has  on  the  social  condition  of  the  black  race.  And 
here  one  great  fact  stares  us  in  the  face,  and  that  is :  Amalga- 
mation breeds  freedom.  It  is  as  if  the  drop  of  blood 
from  the  ruling  Caucasian,  in  the  veins  of  the  mongrel  off- 
spring, would  never  rest  until  the  creature  is  as  free  as  the 
creator.  Let  us  see  the  general  statistics  referring  to  this 
matter ! 

There  were,  in  1775,  about  479,000  slaves  in  this  coun- 
try. We  were  not  able  to  find  anywhere  how  many  of 
them  were  Mulattoes.  Still,  according  to  the  statistics  of 
other  years,  they  must  hav e  been  proportionately  but  a 
small  number. 

Things  have  greatly  changed  since  1775.  The  Negroes 
must  have  freely  mixed  with  the  white  population. 

NUMBER  OF  BLACKS  AND  MULATTOES. 

Year.  Blacks.  Mulattoes.  Total. 

1775          479,100 

1850   3,233,000    405,700    3,638,700 

There  were,  thus,  about  as  many  Mulattoes  in  1850  as 
there  were  slaves  in  1775  ;  and  eleven  per  cent,  of  the  col- 
ored population  have  a  tincture  of  white  blood, 

NUMBER  OF  FREE  BLACKS  AND  FREE  MULATTOES.  1850. 

Total.  Slaves.  Free. 

Blacks   3,233,000    2,957,600    275,400 

Mulattoes  ....     405,700    246.600    159,100 

As,  in  the  Northy  both  Blacks  and  Mulattoes  are  free, 
we  add  a  table  of  the  Slave  States  only. 

TABLE  XXV.  NUMBER  OF  FREE  BLACKS  AND  FREE  MULAT- 
TOES IN  THE  SLAVE  STATES.  1850. 

THE  BORDER  STATES. 


States. 
Delaware 
Maryland . 
Virginia  . 
Kentucky 
Missouri. . 


Total  Blacks. 

18,600... 
143,800... 
447,000... 
188,600... 

75,800... 


Free  Blacks. 
.  16,400... 
.  61,100... 
.  18,800... 
.  7,300... 
.  1,600... 


Total  Mulattoes. 
..  1,700.... 
..  21,500.... 

79,700.... 
..  32,300.... 
..  14,100.... 


F.  Mulattoes. 
.  .  1,600 
.  .  13,600 
.  .  13,400 
. .  2,600 
931 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


123 


THE  CAROLINAS  AND  THE  EASTERN  GULF  STATES. 

States.          Total  Blacks.      Free  Blacks.    Total  Mulattoes.   F.  Mulattoes. 

North  Carolina.  281,900            10,200            34,000   17,200 

South  Carolina.  377,000              4,500            16,800   4,300 

Georgia             360,400              1,400            24,100   1,500 

Florida               36,500                229              3,700   703 

Alabama            321,800                567            23,300   1,700 

Mississippi....  290,400                295            20,300   600 

THE  OTHER  SLAVE  STATES. 

Louisiana          228,300                200            33,900   14,000 

Texas                 50,600             2,600             7,900   257 

Tennessee          221,700             3,300            24,100   3,700 

Arkansas             40,900                140             6,700   400 

Still  it  is  difficult  to  give  each  State  its  proper  share  in 
this  kind  of  Freedom's  working,  because  there  are  no  sta- 
tistics respecting  the  emigration  of  Mulattoes  to  other 
States.  We  give,  therefore,  the  general  ratio  only,  which 
is  sufficient  for  our  present  purpose.  Nine  per  cent,  of  the 
Blacks — hut  sixty-four  per  cent,  of  the  Mulattoes,  are 
free.  It  matters  little  how  and  through  whose  agency  so 
many  Mulattoes  became  free,  though  there  is  1  Mulatto  to 
every  234  white  inhabitants  of  the  North,  while  there  is 
1  to  every  18  of  the  South;  but  64  per  cent,  of  the  Mulat- 
toes are  free. 

Thus  amalgamation  breeds  freedom.  There  is  no  mis- 
take in  those  simple  figures.  The  black  color,  too,  of 
the  Negro  bids  fair  gradually  to  pass  away,  and  in 
some  hundred  years  a  genuine  Negro  will  be  a  curiosity 
in  this  land  of  ours,  especially  a  Negro  slave.  Still,  as 
the  Mulatto  is  more  attractive  than  the  Negro,  amalga- 
mation with  the  latter  might  stop.  But  nature  has  well 
provided  in  this  regard.  The  Mulatto,  as  we  have  proved 
above,  becomes  free,  and  leaves  his  place  to  the  Negro. 

V.  COLONIZATION. 

This  is  another  agency  in  the  cause  of  Freedom.  The 
first  American  Colonization  Society  was  organized  Janu- 
ary 1st,  1817 — nine  years  after  the  abolition  of  the  slave- 


124 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


trade.  Since  that  time  similar  societies  have  been  founded 
in  many  States.  They  all  have  the  same  purpose  in  view, 
and  act  with  each  other  in  harmonious  concert.  Some 
statistical  tables  will  show  how  much  has  been  done  by 
colonization  toward  the  "  gradual  abolition"  of  Slavery. 

In  order  to  get  a  little  insight  into  the  details  of  its 
working,  we  take  the  following  table  from  the  "Annual 
Report  of  the  American  Colonization  Society,"  1858. 

FIRST  VOYAGE,  DECEMBER,  1856. 


State. 

Massachusetts  . 
Pennsylvania . . 

Maryland  

Virginia  

Do  

Do  

Do  

Do  

Do  

Do  

North  Carolina 
Do  

Georgia  

Do  

Do  

Alabama  

Mississippi  

Kentucky  

Tennessee  

Do  

Do  

California  

Total  


Born 
free. 


Slave. 


11 

68 

6 

5 
4 
8 
1 

12 
1 
1 
1 

54 

3 
1 

19 

4 

2 
7 

208 


By  whom  Emancipated. 


Emancipated  by  will  of  T.  Shearman, 

of  Fauquier  County. 
Emancipated  by  will  of  James  H. 

Terrell,  of  Albemarle  County. 
Purchased  by  the  executors  of  J.  H. 

Tyrrell. 
Given  by  their  owners. 
Purchased  their  freedom. 
Emancipated  by  persons  in  Kentucky. 
Emancipated  by  S.  E.  Houston,  of 

Union,  Va. 
Emancipated  by  will  of  Mrs.  M.  L. 

Gordon,  of  Hartford. 
Emancipated  by  Miss  Charity  Jones, 

Bladen  County. 
Emancipated  by  Mrs.  M.  A.  Williams, 

Savannah. 
Emancipated  by  will  of  J.  B.  Tafts, 

of  Savannah. 
Emancipated  by  Richard  Hoff,  of  Eg- 
bert County. 
Purchased  their  freedom. 
Emancipated  by  C.  C.  West,  of  Wood- 

ville. 

Emancipated  by  Harvey  Berry,  of 

Bath  County. 
Emancipated  by  will  of  Elizabeth  Van- 

derson,  of  McMinnville. 
Emancipated  by  John  Jipson,  Sparta. 
Do.         by  Peter   and  Nancy 

Burum,  of  White  County. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT. 


125 


From  the  same  Report  we  made  the  following  general 
table : 

TABLE  XXVI.  NUMBER  OF  EMIGRANTS  SENT  TO  LIBERIA  BY 

THE  AMERICAN  COLONIZATION  SOCIETY  AND  ITS  AUXILI- 
ARIES, FROM  1820  TO   1857,  INCLUSIVE. 


Year. 
1820. 
1821. 
1822. 
1823. 
1824. 
1825. 
1826. 
1827. 
1828. 
1829. 
1830. 
1831. 
1832. 


No. 

Year. 

86 

1833 

33 

1834 

37 

1835 

65 

1836 

103 

1837 

66 

1838 

182 

1839 

222 

1840 

163 

1841 

205 

1842 

259 

1843 

83 

1844 

1,131 

1845 

No. 

Year. 

270 

1846 

127 

1847 

146 

1848 

243 

1849 

138 

1850 

109 

1851 

47 

1852 

115 

1853.. 

85 

1854 

248 

1855 

85 

1856 

140 

1857 

187 

No. 
89 
51 
441 
422 
500 
675 
640 
783 
553 
207 
538 
370 


TABLE   XXVII.  NUMBER  OF 

FROM  EACH  STATE,  FROM 


Massachusetts   34 

Rhode  Island   36 

Connecticut   46 

New  York   205 

New  Jersey   35 

Pennsylvania   179 

Delaware   5 

Maryland   543 

District  of  Columbia   104 

Virginia   3,442 

North  Carolina   1,283 

South  Carolina   415 

Georgia   1,030 

Alabama   105 

Mississippi   536 

Louisiana   261 

Tennessee   697 

Kentucky   637 

Ohio   55 


EMIGRANTS  SENT  TO  LIBERIA, 
1820  TO  1857,  INCLUSIVE. 

Indiana   78 

Illinois   34 

Missouri   83 

Michigan   1 

Iowa   3 

Texas   16 

Choctaw  Nation   7 

Cherokee  Nation   1 

California   1 


Total  number   9,872 

Number  born  free   3,730 

Number    purchased  their 

freedom   332 

Number  emancipated  in 
view  of  emigrating  to  Li- 
beria   5,810 


The  above  does  not  include  the  number  (about  1,000)  that  have  been 
sent  by  the  Maryland  Colonization  Society  to  the  Colony  of  ' '  Maryland 
in  Liberia." 

This  is  a  work  in  which  all  States  are  co-operators,  and 
all  individuals  may  lend  their  assistance.  It  is  wonderful 
what  this  American  Colonization  Society  has  accomplished 


126 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


with  comparatively  small  means.  It  would  only  need 
greater  liberality  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  the 
States,  and  individuals  to  prosper  the  noble  work  still 
more,  and  make  the  little  Republic  of  Liberia  "  one  of  the 
brightest  hopes"  of  modern  philanthropy. 

The  forty-third  Annual  Report  of  the  American  Colon- 
ization Society  for  1860  refers  to  the  "pressure  of  the 
monetary  difficulties  of  the  country,"  which  the  Society 
has  felt  considerably.  But  there  is  a  little  paragraph 
showing  the  effect  of  our  political  difficulties  on  the  work 
of  colonization,  which  we  can  not  help  giving  in  full : 

"  Emigration  of  Free  colored  persons  has,  from  several 
causes,  been  retarded ;  but  in  the  Northern  and  Middle 
States,  during  the  last  year,  their  thoughts  have  been 
directed  to  Africa,  and  they  have  sought  knowledge  of  its 
advantages  for  their  future  home.  In  the  South,  this 
class,  in  consequence  of  agitations  on  the  Slavery  question, 
are  exposed  to  new  trials  ;  in  some  cases  compelled  to 
leave  the  places  of  their  residence,  and  we  trust  Divine 
Providence  will  direct  their  way  to  Liberia,  where  alone, 
at  present,  their  highest  interests  can  most  certainly  be 
secured  and  perpetuated.  And  surely  common  humanity 
(to  say  nothing  of  the  spirit  of  the  religion  of  Christ)  de- 
mands, while  these  people  are  expelled  from  some  districts 
of  the  South  to  seek  in  vain  for  comfortable  homes  at  the 
North,  that  their  friends  should  encourage  and  assist  them 
to  take  possession  of  the  great  inheritance  prepared  for 
them  by  Providence  in  the  land  of  their  fathers." 

CONCLUSION. 
We  have  now  passed  over  the  whole  ground  of  the 
social  development  of  our  question  in  all  its  principal 


THE   DEVELOPMENT.  127 

phases,  down  to  the  present  day.  The  general  progress 
of  humanity — the  spirit  of  modern  religion — the  common 
origin  of  man  descending  from  the  same  ancestral  parents, 
and  made  after  a  common  type — philanthropy,  love  of  man 
in  a  narrower  sense  of  the  word,  or  love  of  everything 
created — the  physical  and  the  moral  interests  of  the  slave- 
holder— the  spirit  of  the  Constitution,  and  the  incontro- 
vertible "  logic  of  facts"  in  our  own  history — all  point 
toward  protection  and  assistance  of  our  brethren  in  bond- 
age, toward  a  mitigation  of  their  condition,  and  a  gradual 
abolition.  History  has  not  spoken  in  vain  for  us,  and 
Humanity  is  not  an  empty  sound.  We  are  no  exception, 
no  anomaly  in  modern  progress.  We  have  prohibited  the 
slave-trade ;  wre  have  directly  abolished  Slavery  in  some 
States ;  we  have  sent  our  missionaries  of  wThite  flesh  and 
free  spirit  all  over  our  land ;  we  have  condescended  to  a 
generous  amalgamation  with  the  black  man ;  we  have 
civilized  and  colonized.  These  are  certainly  unmistakable 
symptoms  of  our  passing,  like  other  modern  nations,  on- 
ward toward  greater  freedom  and  gradual  abolition. 

Thus,  everything  points  toward  the  gradual  abolition  of 
Slavery,  and  Slavery  must  and  will  vanish  from  our  soil, 
except  the  infamous  slave-trade  be  re-opened,  or  a  new  race 
be  enslaved.  But  neither  part  of  this  alternative  can  be 
realized.  We  can  not,  in  the  face  of  almost  unanimous 
resolutions  in  Congress,  passed  from  the  earliest  beginning 
of  our  nation  down  to  the  present  time,  re-establish  that 
world-desired  traffic  in  human  flesh.  We  can  not  so  much 
despair  in  our  present  era  as  to  believe  that  a  gang  of  wily 
politicians  might  be  found  who  would  dare  to  undo,  in 
a  disgraceful  moment,  what  a  hundred  noble  years  have 
done.    No !  no  new  slave  will  ever  be  imported  by  the 


128  THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

consent  of  the  United  States,  nor  will  ever  a  new  slave  be 
made,  be  he  of  African  or  other  blood,  through  war  or 
conquest.  The  time  "for  the  repeal  of  the  laws  in  the 
way  of  importation  of  bond-servants  from  Africa,  and  for 
the  passage  of  proper  laws  to  protect  the  same,"  will 
never  come !  That  unsophisticated  merchant  who,  from 
his  retirement  in  Tivoli  or  Paphos,  sent  forth  such  words 
as  the  above  to  an  "ignorant"  North,  will  never  be  able 
to  ship  or  see  shipped  a  cargo  of  African  flesh  into  the 
United  States,  nor  will  his  children  or  children's  children 
ever  have  that  innocent  pleasure. 

But  why  is  there  now,  in  the  face  of  all  this  irrefutable 
testimony  of  progressive  history,  so  much  struggling  and 
battling  on  the  part  of  some  of  us  against  this  work  of 
Freedom  ?  Why  is  there  such  a  violent  stemming  against 
Liberty,  that  most  precious  gift  to  man,  so  tenderly  cher- 
ished by  everything  living  ?  Is  Freedom  a  curse,  and 
Slavery  bliss  ?    Is  Freedom  weakness,  and  Slavery  power? 

And  has  not  all  this  work  been  done  ivithin  the  Union? 
Why  are  there  now  cries  and  Ordinances  of  disunion  and 
secession  ?  What  is  the  disturbing  element  which  troubles 
the  waters  of  peace  and  interrupts  the  work  of  Freedom  ? 

But  this  will  lead  us  to  the  political  aspect  of  the  ques- 
tion, which  requires,  indeed,  our  special  and  separate 
attention. 


BOOK  IV. 


E  CRISIS. 


book:  rv. 
THE  CRISIS- 


I.— THE  BALANCE  OF  POWER. 

The  new  product  of  cotton,  "which  in  1794  was 
scarcely  an  item  of  export,"  gradually  increased  and  made 
the  slave  more  valuable  to  the  South.  This  increase  of 
cotton  created  a  new  interest,  not  known  to  the  North,  and 
even  unimagined  by  the  framers  of  the  Constitution ;  and 
on  it  a  new  political  machinery  was  founded ;  it  was  the 
so-called  Balance  of  Power,  into  which  all  the  Slave  States 
were  gradually  drawn. 

Whenever  this  force  or  interest  appears  in  one  and  the 
same  nation,  the  term  "  Union"  has  almost  lost  its  power, 
and  "  Harmony"  alone  can  take  its  place.  Balance  of 
Power  is  the  sign  of  the  existence  of  a  "  diremptive"  or 
centrifugal  force  somewhere.  Common  attraction  has 
ceased,  and  Balance  of  Power  is  only  the  artificial  glue  to 
keep  together  heterogeneous  elements.  But  this  struggle 
for  Balance  of  Power  became  a  definite  historical  fact  in 
the  same  measure  that  the  geographical  sections  became 
more  distinct  and  separated.  The  South  required  now  for 
every  new  Free  State  a  new  Slave  State,  and  the  old  Con- 
stitution was  "  squeezed,"  and  bent,  and  interpreted  to  suit 
the  new  wants.    The  noble  founders  of  pur  Union,  and 


132 


THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 


the  framers  of  our  Constitution,  did  not  foresee  such,  a 
state  of  things.  They  did  not  suspect  the  so  speedy  ar- 
rival of  King  Cotton  and  Queen  Balance  with  their  re- 
spective suites.  But  these  royal  guests  have  arrived ! 
They  have  been  here  a  long  time,  managing  and  develop- 
ing their  forces !  They  are  of  a  grasping  stock,  too ! 
They  have  a  Manifest  Destiny  to  help  them  along.  They 
hold  a  brilliant  court,  and  their  followers  and  armies  are 
well  fed  and  well  rewarded  with  offices  and  honors !  They 
have  the  Spread-Eagle  for  their  colors,  though,  in  their 
enlarged  patriotism,  they  never  forget  themselves  entirely. 
They  have  procured  Texas  "  for  the  Union."  They  have 
obliterated  that  awkward  line  drawn  across  "  a  common 
country."  They  have  endeavored  to  carry  their  ideas  into 
all  the  new  States  and  Territories.  They  are  liberal 
enough  to  carry  their  "  property"  there,  too,  in  all  its 
different  shapes,  and  work  it  for  the  more  rapid  progress 
of  those  new  lands.  They  see,  themselves,  the  wrong  of 
Balance  of  Power  in  a  Union,  and  therefore  do  their  best 
to  make  this  vast  empire  one,  united,  and  common  in 
everything ;  in  hearts,  in  hands,  and  in  all  sorts  of  prop- 
erty, landed  and  personal,  immovable  and  movable,  black 
and  white.  That  they  are  earnest  in  their  purposes, 
they  have  lately  shown  in  Kansas,  though  they  may  have, 
at  times,  met  with  failures.  That  they  have  pluck  and  do 
things  thoroughly,  they  have  most  recently  proved  by  hang- 
ing all  they  could  procure,  or  keep  alive,  of  the  Harper's 
Ferrymen.  But,  these  are  not  things  that  grow  over-night, 
or  reach  to  such  dimensions  by  inward  strength  only. 
They  needed  the  care  of  outsiders,  and  they  had  it, 
indeed,  most  effectually.  The  North,  with  hot-house  ten- 
derness, kindly  kept  off  all  the  cold  blasts,  and  thus  aided 


THE  CKISIS. 


133 


the  growth  of  the  Political  Power  of  the  South.  "The  North, 
for  some  reason,"  says  Daniel  Webster,  "  never  exercised 
their  majority  efficiently  five  times  in  the  history  of  the  gov- 
ernment, when  a  division  or  trial  of  strength  arose."  Among 
the  courtiers  around  the  new-born  throne,  we  saw,  there- 
fore, representatives  of  all  the  States  of  the  Union,  South 
and  North,  East  and  West,  and  the  royal  couple  never 
rejected  outlandish  applicants.  It  gave  the  court  a  more 
cosmopolitan  air  when  all  the  climates  of  this  Western 
World,  those  where  the  "  colored  people"  dwell,  and  those 
where  the  "  Niggers"  grow,  sent  their  pale  sons  to  join  in 
doing  homage. 

But  the  whole  court  has  for  some  time  been  growing 
old  and  feeble.  Its  usurpation  in  obliterating  the  political 
compromise  line  of  Freedom  and  Slavery  was  the  culmi- 
nating point  of  its  power.  It  violated  the  humble  Magna 
Charta  of  Freedom,  and  then  commenced  the  days  of 
trouble  and  dissension,  as  was  prophesied  even  by  South- 
ern Statesmen. 

The  feeling  of  indignation  soon  gave  itself  vent  in  bit- 
ter words.  The  halls  of  our  legislatures  resounded  with 
the  most  passionate  language.  At  last  it  came  to  bloody 
acts.  The  most  cowardly  assaults  were  hailed  as  deeds 
of  valor.  Threats  of  disunion  were  soon  everywhere  ut- 
tered, as  indifferently  as  if  there  was  no  such  word  as 
Treason  in  the  laws  of  our  land.  Northerners  were  driven 
from  the  South,  and  Southern  youths  were  eager  to  flee 
from  the  "  pestilential  air  of  Northern  Abolitionism."  The 
frontiers  of  the  two  sections  were  strewn  with  the  bones 
of  murdered  citizens,  slain  by  brother-hand.  The  gallows 
of  John  Brown  was  gloomily  towering  over  the  once 
sacred  Mason  and  Dixon's  line ;  and  now,  shooting,  lynch- 


134  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

ing,  and  hanging  are  the  regular  order  of  the  day.  But 
Kansas  is  free,  and  the  party  raised  on  account  of  Southern 
usurpation  has  at  last  gained  the  victory. 

"  One  evil  never  comes  alone."  King  Cotton  lost,  at 
the  same  time,  his  monarchical  privileges  all  over  the 
world.  There  are  now  many  lands  rising  which  dare 
to  compete  with  his  universal  power.  Thus,  disappointed 
in  his  hopes  and  thwarted  in  his  plans,  King  Cotton 
lost  his  temper,  began  a  family  quarrel,  dismissed  his 
cherished  old  queen,  Lady  Balance,  and  allied*  himself  to 
Dame  Secession,  young  and  sprightly  in  appearance,  but 
treacherous  and  rotten  at  the  core.  In  anger  he  leaves 
his  old  mother  Union,  builds  a  new  home,  a  new  capital, 
and  a  new  throne,  where  he  can,  undisturbed  by  the 
groans  of  Freedom,  feast  alone  and  forsaken  on  the  halle- 
lujahs of  Slavery. 

In  order  to  reach  his  object  and  satisfy  his  ruling  ten- 
dency, he  is  ready  to  nullify,  to  secede,  to  separate,  to 
break  the  Union ;  to  fight,  and  slay,  and  be  slain — all  for 
the  sake  of  Power  and  Rule.  He  wants  to  draw  into  his 
modern  hexarchy  all  cis-Masonic  States,  from  which  even 
the  Albino  courtiers  of  the  North  shall  henceforth  be  ex- 
cluded. 

But  let  us  dismiss  all  personifications  and  figures,  and 
face  the  present  trouble  in  all  its  gravity. 

The  American  question  has  gradually  become  one  of 
nationality.  The  establishment  of  the  Missouri  line,  drawn 
through  the  midst  of  a  common  country,  was  one  of  the 
first  great  political  onslaughts  against  our  nationality.  It 
was,  indeed,  the  first  step  toward  denationalization.  Un- 
der the  protection  of  that  line,  that  unnatural  element  of 
Balance  of  Power  grew  until  it  was  forced  to  turn  either 


THE   CKISIS.  135 

into  Supremacy  or  Secession.  Thwarted  in  the  former, 
the  South  had  only  the  latter  to  rely  upon.  Had  it  not 
been  for  that  political  interference,  the  American  question 
would  never  have  assumed  the  present  character. 

II.— SECESSION. 

Since  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  contains  no 
special  provision  for  the  case  of  a  State  wishing  to  secede 
from  the  Union,  the  inference  might  be  fair  that  States 
have  no  constitutional  right  of  secession.  The  Constitution 
seems  even  positively  to  prohibit  secession.  We  read  in 
Art.  II.,  Sec.  10 :  "No  State  shall,  without  the  consent  of 
Congress,  lay  any  duty  of  tonnage,  keep  troops,  or  ships 
of  war,  in  time  of  peace,  enter  into  any  agreement  or 
compact  with  another  State,  or  with  a  foreign  power." 
Even  the  preparatory  steps  necessary  for  secession  seem 
thus  to  be  forbidden  by  the  Constitution.  But  should  the 
South  seek  to  evade  the  letter  of  the  Constitution  by  a 
separate  secession,  it  would  undoubtedly  violate  its  spirit. 
Madison's  words  :  "  The  Constitution  requires  an  adoption 
in  toto  and  forever!"  are  generally  acknowledged  to  be  the 
fair  interpretation  of  that  instrument. 

But  we  will  leave  the  question  of  the  constitutionality 
of  secession  undecided.  We  will  even  suppose  that  the 
Constitution  does  not  prohibit  secession.  In  such  a  case 
we  must  have  recourse  to  general  political  reasoning  and  to 
arguments  from  history.  We  will  take  the  popular  view 
of  "  State,"  for  otherwise  the  question  would  be  decided 
in  a  moment. 

If  this  Union  is  a  mere  compact  for  an  indefinite  number 
of  years,  its  end,  as  its  beginning,  must  depend  upon  some 
act  of  mutual  agreement  between  the  parties  concerned. 


136  THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

In  making  the  original  compact,  certain  conditions  were  en- 
tered into  by  the  parties,  and  certain  duties  were  im- 
posed upon  them,  expressly  or  by  the  very  nature  of  the 
compact.  Should  even  all  these  duties  and  conditions  have 
been  complied  with  on  the  side  of  the  party  wishing  to 
secede,  an  unceremonious  withdrawal  would  be  illegal  and 
cause  a  total  forfeiture  of  all  claims  on  the  common  prop- 
erty. In  any  case,  then,  a  consultation  with  the  different 
members  of  the  compact  seems  to  be  necessary,  previously 
to  a  positive  act  of  open  secession. 

Such  cases  are  nothing  novel  in  the  history  of  states, 
and  they  were  long  since  formalized  by  writers  on  Public 
Law.  Grotius,  thus,  agreeably  to  the  above  reasoning, 
sums  up  the  whole  matter  by  saying :  "  A  state  which  had 
been  one,  may  be  divided,  either  consensu  mutuo^  or  vi 
hellica"  "  Mutual  Consent"  or  "  Force  of  War"  is  thus  the 
alternative  given  by  the  "  Father  of  the  Law  of  Nations," 
the  first  authority  in  Public  Law,  even  to  the  present  day. 
"  Mutual  Consent"  is,  however,  the  first  clause  of  that 
alternative,  and  "  Force  of  War"  is  consequent  only  upon 
a  failure  of  the  first. 

Almost  all  cases  of  a  similar  nature  in  modern  history 
verify  the  above  alternative  and  the  order  of  its  succession. 
The  way  by  "  Mutual  Consent"  was  first  tried,  and  only 
when  all  peaceable  means  were  found  futile,  was  "  Force 
of  War"  resorted  to. 

Such  is  the  history  of  the  Netherlander,  of  world-wide 
fame.  For  many  years  they  had  endured  the  blighting 
breath  of  the  Spanish  tyrant.  They  had  felt  each  new 
wrong,  each  new  insult,  each  new  disgrace  thrown  upon 
them  by  a  fiendish  power.  They  protested,  they  peti- 
tioned, they  prayed  for  justice,  they  remonstrated,  they 


THE   CRISIS.  13^ 

sent  delegates  to  the  King,  they  opened  negotiations,  they 
sued  for  redress;  and  only  when  petitions  and  remon- 
strances, conventions  and  negotiations,  brought  about  no 
definite  result,  they  raised  their  arms  to  fight  for  their 
rights,  they  seceded  and  declared  their  independence  of  an 
unfriendly  government. 

Such,  too,  was  the  history  of  our  own  United  States  two 
hundred  years  later.  We  were  similarly  circumstanced 
and  acted  similarly.  We,  too,  petitioned  and  protested, 
convened  and  negotiated,  and  only  when  remonstrances 
and  threats  proved  futile,  was  war  declared  and  independ- 
ence achieved. 

These  are  the  two  most  brilliant  examples  of  secession 
in  modern  history.  There  are  others,  memorable,  too,  but 
less  successful.  Poland  could  not  recover  its  independence. 
Hungary  was  ruthlessly  delivered  to  Austria.  In  others  still, 
secession  was  less  bloody,  as  in  the  separation  of  Belgium 
from  Holland ;  and  Neufchatel,  the  Swiss  canton,  wentf  in- 
deed, quite  peaceably  out  of  the  guardianship  of  Prussia. 

But  there  is  an  example  of  secessionary  character  in 
a  country  which  bears  great  resemblance  to  our  own. 
It  is  in  Switzerland,  a  republican  confederacy  like  ours, 
only  growing  less  slowly  into  a  united  nationality.  In 
1846,  several  cantons  or  states  resolved  upon  setting  up  a 
"  Sonder-bund,"  a  separate  league.  But  the  federal  au- 
thorities, backed  by  the  patriotic  masses  of  the  other  can- 
tons, tarried  not  long  in  deciding  which  policy  to  choose — 
that  of  coercion  or  that  of  " laissez  faire"  A  federal 
army  was  sent  against  the  rebels,  and  in  spite  of  Austrian 
arms  and  Catholic  money,  the  secessionists  were  conquered, 
and  Jesuitism,  the  bone  of  contest  in  that  case,  was  hurled 
from  the  territory  of  united  Switzerland.   What  Jesuitism 


138 


THE   AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 


was  there,  Slavery  is  here.  We  will  examine  whether  such 
a  "  Jacksonian"  policy  would  suit  the  present  circumstances. 

III. — OUR  POLICY. 

Which  policy  will  now  be  expected  on  one  side  and  on 
the  other?  What  will  the  South  do,  and  what  the  United 
States  ? 

These  Southern  States  which  are  eager  after  revolution- 
ary fame,  might  undoubtedly  profit  by  the  two  great  mod- 
els we  cited.  We  can  not  expect  so  much  humility  as  in 
the  early  days  of  the  Netherland  struggles,  nor  so  much 
patience  as  in  our  own  American  revolution.  But  the 
chivalric  Southerners  ought  not  to  be  behind  the  sturdy 
Dutchmen,  or  the  valiant  Americans  of  old,  in  the  ways 
of  gallantry  and  manliness.  They  ought,  certainly,  to 
show  as  much  frankness  and  forbearance  toward  a  free 
republic  as  those  early  heroes  showed  toward  despotic 
kings.  They  ought  first  to  endeavor  to  obtain  retrievance 
for  their  injuries,  real  or  imaginary ;  and  eyen  in  the  case 
of  a  temporary  refusal  of  their  requests,  they  ought,  as 
freemen  and  republicans  of  the  nineteenth  century,  try 
again  all  peaceable  means  to  avoid  a  violent  disrupture  of 
the  once  cherished  empire.  It  can  only  be  lamented  that 
some  of  the  Southern  States  have  taken  a  different  course, 
a  course  unwise  and  fatal  to  their  best  interests. 

And  what  might  we  reasonably  expect  from  the  central 
power  of  the  United  States,  from  the  Union  as  such  ? 
She  would  listen  to  the  grievances  which  are  given  as 
cause  for  secession;  she  would  endeavor  to  remove  this 
cause,  should  those  grievances  be  found  to  rest  on  real 
injustice  done  to  the  respective  parties  by  the  republic ; 
she  would  construe  and  interpret  the  Constitution,  the 


THE  CEISIS. 


139 


principal  and  fundamental  bond  of  our  Union,  in  the 
liberal  spirit  of  this  enlightened  age ;  and  should  those 
grievances  be  found  to  be  mere  fancies,  she  would  try  to 
convince  the  rebellious  States  of  their  unjust  and  injurious 
policy ;  and,  lastly,  if  negotiations  and  persuasions  should 
be  of  no  avail,  she  would  be  tempted,  from  love  of  peace, 
rather  to  let  a  State  go  than  to  incur  the  responsibility  of 
the  horrors  of  a  civil  war. 

And  still  such  a  yielding  policy  would  awaken  some  fear 
for  the  future  of  the  empire  even  in  the  most  peace-loving 
breast.  Where  and  when  would  secession  then  stop  ?  If 
the  "  sovereign"  States  have  a  right  to  secede,  what  would 
hinder  us  from  breaking  into  thirty-four  separate  and  in- 
dependent republics  ?  Further  still,  we,  the  "  sovereign" 
people  of  these  United  States,  have  established  this  Con- 
stitution !  Would  not  the-  "  sovereigns"  of  each  State, 
then,  have  the  same  right  of  breaking  it  as  the  States,  or 
even  more  than  they  ?  What  would  hinder  the  city  of 
New  York  from  seceding  ?  What,  other  cities,  and  coun- 
ties, and  islands,  and  townships  ?  Whither  would  this 
" separatism,"  "this  disorganizing  individualism,"  lead  ns? 
"  Would  not,"  in  the  words  of  Tayler  Lewis,  "  a  polit- 
ical death  come  over  what  before  was  full  of  social  life, 
and  society  be  decomposed  in  its  individual  elements,  and 
no  longer  be  a  Body,  but  a  Mas$ — a  mass  of  putrescent 
and  fermenting  atoms  ?" 

We  are  not  yet  near  such  a  stage  of  perfect  disorganiza- 
tion. But  it  is  clear  that  a  yielding  policy  would  not  save 
ns  from  that  danger. 

This  consideration  will  be  weighed  in  the  minds  of 
patriotic  statesmen  North  and  South,  and  will  influence 
their  action. 


140 


THE  AMEBIC  AN  QUESTION. 


It  would  have  been  much  easier  to  secede  in  the 
earliest  days  of  the  republic  and  of  the  new  Constitution. 
There  were,  at  that  time,  thirteen  little  colonies  scattered 
over  a  large  surface.  Each  little  colony  formed  a  prov- 
ince or  State  by  itself.  Each  had  a  small  population, 
and  was  often  separated  from  the  others  by  large 
wastes  and  impassable  woods,  or  alienating  prejudices. 
A  single  glance  into  the  history  of  those  thirteen  different 
settlements,  a  mere  look  at  a  geographical  map  of  that 
time,  must  disclose  the  secret.  They  were  as  yet  but 
loosely  connected,  and  their  principal  bond  of  Union 
was  at  first  merely  a  common  opposition  to  a  common 
enemy. 

But  what  a  different  aspect  the  country  has  now,  after  a 
united  growth  of  nearly  a  century !  The  frontiers  between 
the  different  States  are  obliterated.  The  enlightened  pop- 
ulation increased  and  spread  over  woods  and  wastes.  The 
once  separated  States  blended  and  grew  into  each  other,  and 
had  we  now  to  form  a  new  Confederacy,  a  new  Constitution, 
a  new  State,  a  new  Nation,  would  it  ever  enter  our  minds 
now  to  make  a  dividing  line  between  Connecticut  and 
Rhode  Island,  between  New  Hampshire  and  Massachu- 
setts, between  Delaware  and  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  ? 
What  need  would  there  be  of  such  a  number  of  Governors 
and  Capitals  and  separate  Legislatures  and  other  political 
machinery  in  the  New  England  States  ?  And  we  might 
multiply  our  examples.  But  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present 
purpose  to  point  out  the  undeniable  fact  that  we  have  all,  land 
and  people,  grown  more  and  more  into  a  better,  united,  and 
more  compact  body,  whose  period  of  epiphysis  is  almost 
over,  and  has  thus  caused  such  an  intimate  connection  that 
any  separation  of  its  members  would  leave  an  open,  if  not  a 


THE  CRISIS. 


141 


fatal  wound.  Several  Southern  States,  carried  away  by 
the  first  excitement,  and  aided  by  a  wavering  policy  of 
the  federal  government,  may  make  secession  a  fait  ac- 
compli on  paper.  It  seems  highly  probable  that  this  will 
be  the  face  the  matter  will  take.  But  this  very  non- 
opposition  will  allay  the  passion  of  the  seceders,  and  they 
will  soon  awake  to  a  consciousness  of  the  fearful  posi- 
tion in  which  they  have  placed  themselves ;  for  the  people 
can  not,  for  any  long  period  of  time,  remain  blind  to 
the  immeasurable  advantages  of  a  common  Union,  and 
the  unavoidable  injuries  and  calamities  arising  from  Dis- 
union. 

This  growing  together,  this  united  national  life,  is  even 
the  very  distinguishing  characteristic  of  our  present  won- 
derful civilization.  Germany  is  panting  for  unity,  and  has 
made  the  preparatory  steps  for  its  accomplishment.  Italy 
has  inaugurated  a  more  poetical  and  radical  method  of 
reaching  the  same  end.  The  republics  of  Central  America 
are  laboring  under  the  same  process,  and  South  America 
aj)preciates  slowly  the  merits  of  union. 

History  clearly  shows  that  Disunion  of  parts  that  prop- 
erly belong  together,  is  fatal  in  the  end.  There  is  Holland, 
formerly  so  powerful,  and  Belgium,  and  the  Hanse  towns, 
and  the  Italian  republics.  "  Individuals,"  says  the  famous 
Fr.  List,  "  owe  the  greatest  part  of  their  productive 
power  to  the  political  organization  and  to  the  power 
of  the  country  in  which  they  reside.  A  considerable 
population,  and  a  vast  territory,  with  varied  resources, 
are  essential  elements  of  normal  nationality,  fundamental 
conditions  of  moral  culture,  as  well  as  of  material  develop- 
ment of  political  power." 

There  is  among  a  united  people  less  fear  and  insecurity, 


142 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


and,  consequently,  less  waste  of  labor ;  a  more  steady  in- 
dustry, and  a  more  reliable  market.  The  policy  of  even 
friendly  foreign  states  changes  often  unawares,  and  causes 
disappointment  and  loss  beyond  their  own  limits.  There 
are  no  fortresses  needed  to  protect  the  many  boundaries, 
no  troops  or  vessels  to  watch  possible  encroachments,  no 
turnpikes  or  custom-houses  to  guard  against  foreign  com- 
petition. There  is  free  communication,  free  commerce, 
free  trade,  in  the  largest  and  most  essential  acceptation  of 
the  word ;  unfettered  exchange  of  products,  unfettered  in- 
tercourse of  men.  This  is  the  free  trade  for  which  the 
greatest  statesmen  and  economists  were  laboring  through 
so  many  centuries  against  that  self-splitting  system  of  feudal 
seclusiveness  and  dismemberment.  Those  heroes  are  now 
ignorantly  thrown  m  the  category  of  the  narrow-minded 
modern  free-traders,  who,  in  their  eagerness  after  foreign 
trade,  forget  the  labor,  freedom,  and  consolidation  of  their 
own  country.  Free  trade  is,  indeed,  a  vital  principle  of  a 
nation's  life,  if  it  means  free  commerce  of  men  and  pro- 
duce, not  on  principles  of  privileges  inherited  or  newly 
granted,  but  on  principles  of  the  equal  interests  of  all 
individual  members  and  states,  of  common  sympathy,  of  a 
common  policy,  and  a  common  destiny.  Free  trade  in  this 
sense  creates  fresh  stimulus,  new  thrift  and  enjoyment, 
security  and  reliance,  peace  and  power,  an  accumulated  and 
multiplied  force,  and  leads  a  nation,  as  a  compact  body, 
toward  one  common  object. 

This  is  what  is  meant  by  Union ;  this  is  what  is  meant 
by  Nationality ;  and  these  advantages  are  either  already 
at  our  command,  or  they  are  growing  upon  us  so  much 
the  more  exuberantly  as  we  diligently  watch  our  Union, 
ward  off  its  dangers,  reform  its  abuses,  regulate  its  gov- 


THE  CRISIS. 


143 


ernment,  and  understand  our  mission.  We  have,  indeed, 
already  become  one  of  the  Great  Powers  of  the  world, 
with  the  duties  and  privileges  incumbent  upon  such  a 
glorious  rank.  We,  the  people,  have  labored  together 
this  long  time  for  a  common  destiny,  in  spite  of  political 
disturbances.  The  world  has  learned  to  know  American 
industry,  American  commerce,  American  art,  American 
civilization.  We  have  perceived  more  clearly  from  day 
to  day  that  we  have  a  common  destiny,  a  common  mission 
to  ourselves,  to  America,  and  to  the  world.  And  such 
a  united  growth  has,  in  spite  of  the  invectives  and  mis- 
representations of  political  parties,  laid  the  foundation  for 
a  solid  Love  of  the  Union,  which  needs  but  a  moment  of 
unbiased  self-consciousness  to  rouse  it  to  unheard-of  deeds 
of  patriotic  valor. 

Now,  such  thoughts  will  bear  upon  the  minds  of  the 
people  in  all  parts  of  our  common  land,  and  forebode  a  bet- 
ter future.  But,  in  view  of  these  undeniable  facts,  the 
country  will  also  wake  up  to  a  true  sense  of  its  responsibili- 
ties. For  we  may,  in  the  end,  reach  our  common  object, 
pointed  out  to  us  by  Nature ;  but  wavering  counsels  and 
lack  of  decision  may  make  us  pass  through  years  of  unne- 
cessary suffering  and  misfortune.  It  is  the  best  policy  to 
face  at  once  the  whole  danger.  There  is  more  at  stake 
than  the  welfare  of  the  Negro  Slave.  A  nationality,  a 
republic,  a  Great  Power  of  the  world,  American  civiliza- 
tion, the  progress  of  the  whole  world,  are  in  question,  and 
the  United  States  can  not  allow  herself  to  be  split  or  give 
up  any  part  of  her  territory  which  is  positively  necessary 
for  the  accomplishment  of  her  fundamental  plan  and  the 
realization  of  the  original  idea  which  called  her  into 
being. 


144 


THE   AMEKICAN  QUESTION. 


IV.— INTEGRITY  OF  THE  UNION". 

There  are  certain  parts  of  a  nation's  territory  which  are 
positively  necessary  for  the  nation's  existence.  These  may 
be  called  its  integral  parts.  Other  districts,  provinces,  or 
states  may  be  less  necessary,  and  the  nation's  destiny  may 
be  reached  without  them.  Now,  no  integral  part  can  be 
allowed  to  secede  if  the  nation  is  true  to  itself,  to  its 
original  plan,  and  to  its  mission.  No  failure,  be  it  from 
lack  of  patriotism  or  from  downright  treason,  can  ever 
alter  this  political  axiom. 

The  only  question  will,  then,  be  :  What  are  to  be  regard- 
ed as  integral  parts  of  the  United  States  ?  Under  this 
name  we  must  first  comprise  all  national  property — viz., 
property  held  by  the  United  States  for  the  purpose  of 
protecting  and  defending  itself  against  any  encroachments, 
political  or  commercial.  Such  are  all  national  "forts, 
magazines,  arsenals,  dock-yards,  and  other  needful  build- 
ings," thus  specified  in  the  Constitution.  They  are  neces- 
sary for  two  purposes — namely,  for  repelling  the  attacks 
of  a  hostile  power,  and  for  collecting  the  revenue.  And 
they  will  remain  to  be  necessary,  whatever  the  policy  of 
the  United  States  may  be  during  the  long  internal  process 
of  secession.  We  say  "  long,"  because  actual  and  total 
secession  is  not  the  work  of  an  Ordinance  ;  it  would  take 
a  State  months,  and  probably  years,  to  break  entirely 
loose  from  the  Union  and  reconstruct  a  separate  and  in- 
dependent government. 

Especially  must  those  forts  and  buildings  and  magazines 
be  kept  (during  that  whole  process)  which  'protect  the 
United  States  boundaries.  For  if  certain  States  should 
even  be  allowed  to  secede,  and  should  actually  secede,  the 


THE   CRISIS.  145 

United  States  would,  by  such  separation,  receive  a  new 
boundary  line,  and  this  boundary  line  would  be  entirely 
exposed.  In  case  of  war,  she  would  be  entirely  unguard- 
ed on  that  whole  line,  and  be  open  there  to  any  surprise ; 
and  even  in  peace  she  could  not  protect  her  commercial 
policy  against  smuggling  and  other  foreign  encroachments. 
There  could  thus,  even  in  case  of  a  yielding  policy,  not  be 
the  faintest  doubt  about  the  right  and  duty  and  present 
policy  of  the  United  States  in  regard  to  her  national  prop- 
erty. She  would  be  obliged  to  keep  her  old  forts  and  posts 
of  revenue,  whatever  her  final  policy  in  regard  to  secession 
might  be,  until  a  new  cordon  of  fortifications  and  custom- 
houses could  be  established  along  the  new  boundary,  and 
all  other  national  works,  made  necessary  by  a  separation 
of  States,  could  be  completed.  She  must  keep  them,  de- 
fend them,  and  in  case  of  treason  or  defeat,  retake  them. 
Anything  short  of  this  would  be  cowardice  and  treason, 
and  would  bring  the  curses  of  the  nation  and  of  the  world 
on  the  head  of  the  Executive. 


Let  us  now  examine  the  character  of  the  States  them- 
selves that  think  of  secession,  or  have  passed  secession 
ordinances.    We  begin  with  Texas. 

Without  entering  into  the  political  history  of  that  State, 
it  will  need  no  argument  to  prove  that  its  annexation  was 
entirely  unnecessary  for  the  preservation,  or  growth,  or 
position,  or  power  of  the  United  States.  Its  conquest 
may  have  been  a  necessity  by  reason  of  Balance  of  Power, 
but  neither  its  climate  nor  its  soil,  neither  its  geograph- 
ical position  nor  its  people,  made  its  annexation  a  neces- 
sity for  the  Union  as  such.  To  be  sure,  it  cost  us  heavy 
sacrifices  of  blood  and  money.    But  Texas  would  not  be 

1 


146 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


worth  a  civil  war,  for  the  Union  can  and  would  stand 
without  it.  Texas  may,  therefore,  be  allowed  to  "  slide 
off"  South,  East,  or  West,  and  become  an  independent 
State  or  a  joint  member  of  others. 

We  must,  once  for  all,  dismiss  the  common  popular 
belief  that  we  can  prosper  only  by  spreading  over  a  larger 
area.  We  have  enough  territory,  or  rather  more  than  is 
needed  for  centuries  to  come.  We  have  no  superfluous 
force  to  send  off  into  foreign  states  or  lands.  We  have 
plenty  to  do  in  what  is  already  ours.  There  is  yet  an 
immense  amount  of  our  own  land  to  be  settled,  cultivated, 
and  watched  over.  We  have  not  now,  nor  had  we  ever 
need  of  any  part  of  Mexico,  foreign  to  us  in  everything. 
We  have  no  force  to  spare  for  its  colonization.  What  we 
did  in  that  regard,  we  did  at  the  cost  of  our  own  peace 
and  prosperity,  without  any  benefit  to  us.  As  a  Nation, 
we  have  no  need  of  Mexico.  As  a  Great  Power  of  the 
world,  the  duty  of  guarding  her  does  not  devolve  upon 
us  alone.  An  American  policy,  strictly  American,  with 
the  United  States  as  Supreme  Judge  over  all  matters  con- 
cerning the  continent  of  America,  is  an  anachronism  and 
an  absurdity.  The  world  is  no  longer  disconnected  or 
inaccessible  in  its  different  parts.  There  are  Great  Powers 
of  the  world  to  whose  surveillance  no  quarter  of  the 
globe  is  a  stranger.  And  they  have  as  much  right  here  as 
anywhere  else,  and  we  have  as  much  right  anywhere  else 
as  here,  or  would  have,  if  our  narrow  foreign  policy 
allowed  us  to  see  our  true  position  in  the  world.* 

To  California  the  same  reasoning  would  apply  as  to 

•  This  will  be  the  subject  of  a  work  by  the  author,  now  in  course 
of  preparation.  Title:  1  'The  Five  Great  Powers  of  Europe  and  the 
United  States  of  America." 


THE  CEISIS.  2.47 

Texas,  were  it  not  for  its  gold.  But  this  exception  is,  after 
all,  but  imaginary.  We  needed  California  just  as  little  as 
we  needed  Texas.  The  same  amount  of  labor  and  capital 
invested  in  any  one  of  our  older  States  or  Territories 
would  have  done  much  more  to  increase  the  wealth  and  to 
consolidate  the  power  of  the  United  States.  We  were 
spreading  over  our  older  lands  with  a  speed  greater  than 
was  beneficial  to  us  individually  or  as  a  nation,  and  terri- 
ble were,  and  are  still,  the  sufferings  of  those  thrown  to 
the  outskirts  of  the  inhabited  and  civilized  part  of  our 
empire.  They  pass  through  years  of  misery  and  famine 
before  they  attain  the  most  necessary  comforts  of  a  civil- 
ized life.  Imaginary  cities  and  paper  railroads  allure  the 
weary  laborer,  eager  to  obtain  a  free  homestead.  The  com- 
mercial policy  of  the  nation  and  political  speculations  con- 
spire with  each  other  to  send  new  crowds  of  emigrants  to 
the  West.  And,  indeed,  the  sparse  lands  of  the  first  pio- 
neers could  be  aided  in  no  other  way  than  by  sending  out 
new  men  and  new  money :  otherwise  they  would  have  per- 
ished. The  only  difficulty  was,  and  is  yet,  that,  though 
Europe  sends  annually  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  thousands 
to  aid  the  spreading  of  cultivation  and  the  extending  of  our 
area  of  active  power,  still  the  flood  is  too  feeble,  the  num- 
ber of  immigrants  too  small ;  for  speculation  is  ever  paving 
a  new  West,  whose  end  seems  never  to  be  reached. 

While,  then,  this  process  of  wasting  dispersion  was 
going  on  in  the  older  part  of  our  empire,  a  dispersion 
which  only  the  superhuman  exertion  of  the  emigrants  from 
the  East  and  from  Europe  could  keep  from  becoming  an 
entire  dissolution,  California,  on  the  extremest  point  of  our 
national  surface,  was,  with  golden  cords,  violently  drawn 
into  the  same  system  of  diverging.    Still  more  distant, 


148  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

and  less  connected  with  the  older  part  of  the  nation,  it 
required  new  waste  of  labor  and  capital  to  keep  up  a  com- 
mercial and  political  connection.  It  once  retarded  a  finan- 
cial crisis,  but  it  could  not  prevent  it.  We  imported  from 
Europe,  at  a  fabulous  rate,  the  fabrics  of  foreign  labor ; 
we  paid  with  the  agricultural  products  of  the  South  and  of 
the  West ;  we  spread  over  new  lands  to  wrest  from  our  vir- 
gin soil  new  products  for  foreign  exports  ;  we  sent  stocks 
of  every  description  and  name,  public  and  private,  to  our 
creditors  beyond  the  ocean ;  but  all  our  exertions  to  keep 
up  some  show  of  balance  were  in  vain ;  we  needed  the 
costly  erection  of  a  far-off  workshop  in  the  mines  of  Cali- 
fornia, to  delay  the  final  crash.  The  chance  of  gaining 
wealth  with  little  labor,  to  be  sure,  gave  an  extraordinary 
impulse  to  human  adventure ;  and  life,  labor,  and  capital 
were  recklessly  thrown  away  to  feed  the  Golden  Calf. 
But,  had  we  kept  our  hands  and  capital  at  home,  had  we 
built  up  our  own  industry,  melted  our  own  iron  ore,  and 
fabricated  our  cloth,  we  would  now  be  less  dependent 
upon  our  own  and  foreign  merchant  princes ;  we  would  be 
richer,  anci  stronger,  and  happier,  and  more  civilized, 
though  we  had  never  known  of  the  gold  mountains  of 
California.  Gold  is  a  product  like  others.  It  can  not  be 
obtained  without  labor.  Labor  is  the  measure  of  its  value 
as  it  is  the  measure  of  the  value  of  any  other  product. 
Nor  is  it  a  more  necessary  article  of  wealth  than  cloth  or 
iron.  There  is  no  need  of  gold  as  a  circulating  medium. 
The  world  could  at  least  have  done  without  California  or 
Australia.  Then,  as  an  article  of  manufacture,  it  is  a 
luxury,  and  has  its  substitutes. 

Still  we  have  California,  and  w^e  must  do  our  duty 
toward  her.    The  Pacific  coast  would  naturally  have  been 


THE   CRISIS.  !49 

the  last  of  all  the  lands  of  the  United  States  to  be  drawn 
into  a  common  national  life.  The  commerce  with  Asia 
would  scarcely  have  necessitated  an  exceptional  course. 
A  Pacific  Railroad,  to  have  benefited  at  once  the  whole 
empire,  must  have  led  through  a  chain  of  settled  lands. 
But  the  extraordinary  history  of  California  requires  ex- 
traordinary measures,  and  therefore  the  Road  is  a  na- 
tional necessity.  However,  should  California  wish  to  se- 
cede, the  nation  would  save  new  expenses,  and  probably 
new  struggles,  and  soon  recover  from  a  momentary  dis- 
turbance of  its  commercial  and  industrial  life.  But  the 
Gold  State  knows  its  advantages  too  well  to  desire 
secession. 

Our  relations  with  Louisiana  are  far  different.  The 
whole  old  territory  of  Louisiana  was  bought  from  France. 
It  was  bought  by  the  United  States,  not  by  one  particular 
State,  or  for  one  State,  but  by  the  whole  and  for  the 
whole — for  a  common  national  purpose.  It  was  bought, 
not  for  its  people  alone,  but  especially  for  its  land  and  its 
river.  In  the  earliest  days  of  our  republic,  the  Missis- 
sippi, down  to  its  very  mouth,  was  considered  as  neces- 
sary for  the  development  of  our  Western  Territories.  The 
Western  people,  even  in  those  early  times,  saw  plainly  that 
they  could  not  do  without  a  permanent  and  undisturbed 
right  of  freely  navigating  the  Mississippi.  Such  a  right, 
however,  could  be  "  undisturbed  and  permanent"  only 
when  the  whole  river  was  in  their  possession.  They  knew 
this;  it  was  a  general  Western  thought — nay,  more,  a 
common  national  thought,  shared  by  all  people  and  all 
statesmen.  The  Western  people,  therefore,  laid  plans  for 
seizing  New  Orleans,  even  while  it  was  yet  Spanish.  No 
wonder,  indeed,  that  Jefferson  used  such  decided  language 


150 


THE   AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


about  its  acquisition,  and  that  Bonaparte,  from  whom  it 
was  at  last  purchased,  said :  "  This  accession  of  territory 
strengthens  forever  the  power  of  the  United  States." 

The  Mississippi  Valley,  drained  by  the  Mississippi  and 
its  tributaries,  contains  an  area  of  over  a  million  square 
miles.  It  is  nearly  as  large  as  the  slopes  of  the  Pacific 
and  the  Atlantic  together,  and  one  third  larger  than  the 
whole  domain  of  the  republic  upon  the  adoption  of  the 
present  Constitution.  (Census,  1850.)  In  future  centuries 
it  may  be  a  great  republic  by  itself — the  Great  Republic 
of  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi,  a  friendly  sister  of  a 
Great  Pacific  and  of  a  Great  Atlantic  Republic.  Rut  at 
present,  and  probably  for  some  centuries  to  come,  such 
a  separation  will  not  be  necessitated  by  any  demands 
of  self-interest,  of  executive  expediency,  or  of  economy. 

Now,  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  is  to  the  West,  and 
thus  to  the  United  States,  the  same  as  the  mouth  of  the 
Thames  is  to  England,  or  that  of  the  Rhone  to  France,  or 
that  of  the  Volga  to  Russia,  and  it  will  be  claimed  as  a 
national  river,  and  be  defended  as  such. 

Therefore,  we  must  expect  many  and  earnest  efforts  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States  to  keep  the  extensive  terri- 
tory of  old  Louisiana  and  the  present  State  in  harmonious 
connection  with  the  main  body.  It  is,  beyond  the  faintest 
doubt,  an  integral  part  of  the  Union,  and  will  regard  itself 
as  such,  and  be  so  regarded.  Patriotic  counsels  and  com- 
mon interests  will  tend  to  suppress  undue  excitement  and 
re-establish  peace  and  harmony. 

We  now  come  to  the  Border  Slave  States.  Looking 
at  their  position  between  the  number-filled  North  and  the 
more  thinly-settled  South,  we  might  conclude  a  priori 
that  their  greatest  attraction  lies  Northward.    The  force 


THE  CRISIS. 


151 


of  attraction  is  in  proportion  to  the  force  of  production, 
and  this  again  is  so  much  the  greater  as  the  population  is 
the  larger. 

This  theory  is  proved  by  practice.  The  principal  ex- 
changes of  the  Border  States  are  with  the  States  north  of 
them.  Moreover,  the  chief  product  of  their  Southern 
neighbors  is  not  carried  to  them  directly.  It  is  taken  to 
the  far-off  seaports,  and  then  it  is  shipped  to  Europe,  and 
thence  again  to  their  Northern  neighbors,  until  at  last, 
after  a  long  and  costly  circumambulation,  it  arrives  at 
their  homes  from  the  side  exactly  opposite  the  one  from 
which  it  started.  (And  this  is  probably  the  way  which 
cotton  is  to  go  for  a  long  period  of  years,  whether  there 
be  secession  or  not.)  Thus  this  very  Southern  staple  rivets 
still  closer  the  Border  States  to  their  Northern  friends. 

Their  population,  too,  and  their  whole  progress  show,  in 
spite  of  Slavery,  unmistakable  signs  of  sympathy  with  the 
North.    (See  Tables  on  page  118.) 

Under  the  segis  of  a  common  nationality,  the  white 
population  gradually  pressed  down  into  the  Border  Slave 
States,  which  were  thus — we  repeat — slowly  and  peace- 
ably being  transformed  into  Free  States.  Had  it  not  been 
for  political  disturbances,  this  process  would  have  gone  on 
still  more  rapidly.  It  is  the  way  prescribed  by  nature  for 
freeing  States,  and  the  work  is  done  unconsciously  on  the 
part  of  the  immigrants  from  Europe  and  the  North,  but  it 
is  none  the  less  surely  done.  There  was  thus  a  living 
and  lasting  tie  forming  between  the  Border  Slave  States 
and  the  Free  North,  and  all  boundary  lines  were  vanishing. 

And  this  was  undoubtedly  the  cause  of  the  steady  in- 
crease of  free  colored  persons  in  those  States.  In  1850, 
one  seventh  of  their  total  colored  population  was  free. 


152  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

This  peaceable  progress  of  Freedom  may  also  be  seen 
in  the  number  of  manumissions.  The  Border  States  suffer 
the  most  from  the  loss  of  fugitive  slaves ;  still,  in  them 
the  number  of  manumissions  is  far  larger  than  the  number 
of  fugitives. 

The  Border  States  seem  thus  to  be  very  intimately  con- 
nected with  their  Northern  neighbors.  Their  commerce, 
their  population,  their  history,  their  geographical  position, 
and  their  whole  progress  point  to  the  North  and  to  Union. 
Ambitious  politicians  may,  perhaps,  for  a  while  misguide 
the  people  of  some  of  those  States,  but  they  can  not  blind 
them,  for  any  considerable  time,  to  their  real  interests. 
They  know,  too,  that  should  they  remain  in  the  Union, 
the  greatest  delicacy  would  be  shown  to  them.  As  Slave 
States  they  would  then  be  in  a  small  minority ;  but  this 
very  fact  would  obliterate  Slavery  as  a  basis  of  party  dis- 
tinction. There  would  be  one  common  country,  and  all 
its  parts  would  faithfully  do  their  duty  toward  one  another, 
in  strict  conformance  to  the  dictates  of  the  Constitution. 

There  are  then  the  States  of  Tennessee  and  Arkansas. 
They  show  in  everything  their  close  connection  with 
Kentucky  and  Missouri,  and  with  the  great  Valley  of 
the  Mississippi,  whose  fate  they  must  share.  The  free 
West  and  two  flourishing  Border  States  on  their  North, 
Louisiana,  with  its  increasing  white  population,  on  their 
South,  and  the  unbroken  Mississippi,  will,  we  hope,  be 
fetters  strong  enough  to  keep  those  two  States  also  from 
violently  leaving  the  Union. 

And  now  there  are  six  States  left,  the  two  Carolinas 
and  the  Eastern  Gulf  States  !  Why  should  they  wish 
to  secede  ?  Are  there  not  in  their  history  additional 
reasons  which  should  make  them  both  wise  and  grateful? 


THE   CRISIS.  153 

Has  it  not  been  demonstrated  over  and  over  again  that 
the  South,  both  in  peace  and  in  war,  has  ever  derived  the 
greatest  material  advantages  from  being  in  the  Union  ? 
What  is  the  injury  which  they  have  now  received  at  the 
hands  of  the  North  ?  The  election  of  a  Republican  Presi- 
dent ?  No ;  this  accidental  occasion,  selected  for  seces- 
sion, can  not  be  called  even  the  near  cause.  It  •  is  of  im- 
portance only  insomuch  as  it  fixes  the  date  of  the  event. 
The  President-elect  has  repeatedly  declared  himself  in 
favor  of  a  strict  adherence  to  a  constitutional  Fugitive 
Slave  Law.  He  has  gone  still  further,  and  frankly  ex- 
pressed his  opinion  to  be  that  the  United  States,  as  such, 
has  nothing  to  do  with  Slavery  where  it  exists.  He,  then, 
stands  on  a  platform  which  contains  not  the  faintest  whis- 
per of  Abolition  sentiments.  He  is  the  standard-bearer 
of  a  party  which — in  order  to  show  the  South  that  they 
were  no  Abolitionists — committed  the  indelicacy  of  drag- 
ging John  Brown,  who  had  duly  been  caught,  tried, 
sentenced,  hung,  and  buried,  from  an  "  honorable"  soli- 
tude into  a  public  platform.  The  only  crime  of  the  Presi- 
dent-elect is  that  he  does  not  subscribe  to  a  policy  which 
would  perpetuate  civil  war  on  the  outskirts  of  our  empire, 
and  drench  every  new  inch  of  ground,  gained  for  civiliza- 
tion, with  the  blood  of  murdered  citizens.  And  as  for  his 
party,  it  has  not  the  ascendancy  in  Congress,  nor  in  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.  What  hurt  could 
it  do,  even  if  it  wished  to  do  hurt  ?  Or  has  it  not  as  much 
right  to  extend  Freedom  as  other  parties  have  to  extend 
Slavery  ?  But  is  it  not  ready  to  submit  to  all  the  demands 
of  the  Constitution  ?  Or  if  this  displeasure  with  the  Re- 
publican party  is  a  mere  pretext,  is  the  South  angry  be- 
cause she  can  no  longer  keep  up  the  abnormal  balance  be- 


154 


THE  AMEBIC  AN  QUESTION. 


tween  Slavery  and  Freedom  ?  What  power  can  check  the 
natural  and  constitutional  growth  of  the  latter  ?  Are  the 
Border  States  worse  off  on  account  of  the  increase  of  their 
free  population  ?  No ;  this  whole  question  of  Freedom 
and  Slavery  has  its  warlike  features  only  through  political 
interference.  Let  the  policy  of  the  United  States  in  re- 
spect to  it  be  once  firmly  settled,  then  an  enlightened  and 
dispassionate  South  will  no  more  growl  because  of  the 
fruits  of  Freedom.  It  will  understand  that  the  very  power 
of  the  United  States  which  it  now  tries  to  overthrow,  is 
the  guardian  of  its  peaceable  development. 

V.—  PROGNOSTIC  OF  A  SOUTHERN  HEXARCHY. 

To  secede  and  to  recede  are  the  self-same  thing. 
Slavery  can  no  longer  continue  the  struggle  against  Free- 
dom. It  leaves  the  battle-field,  and  its  arms  are  hence- 
forth turned  no  more  against  the  North,  but  against  its 
own  self.  For  secession  is  a  suicidal  policy.  Where 
is  the  wealth,  where  the  labor,  to  build  up  a  separate 
Confederacy  ?  Where  are  their  bread  and  their  clothes  ? 
Who  will  work  in  their  manufactories?  Who  will  be 
their  sailors?  White  laborers  will  shun  their  land.  The 
free  colored  people  will  flee  from  fear  of  being  enslaved. 
And  what  an  industrial  independence  that  would  be ! 
They  have  cotton  and  some  minor  products  to  exchange ; 
but  woe  to  a  nation  that  raises  but  one  principal  product ! 
It  will  be  Free  in  nothing,  and  Slave  in  everything.  Still, 
these  things  might  gradually  be  changed ;  but  where  and 
who  are  the  men  who  will  make  this  change  under  a  sep- 
arate empire  ? 

We  will  add  a  few  tables. 


THE  CEISIS. 


155 


TABLE  XXVIII.  POPULATION  OF  THE  TWO  CAROLINAS  AND 

OF  THE  EASTERN  GULF  STATES  IN  1850. 

States.  Whites.     Free  Colored.  Slaves.  Total  Colored.  Total. 

N.  Carolina . .  553,000  27,400  288,500  315,90a  869,000 

S.Carolina...  274,500  8,900  384,900  393,800  668,500 

Georgia   521,500  2,900  381,600  384,500  906,100 

Florida   47,200            900  39,300  40,200  87,400 

Alabama....  426,500  2,200  342,800  345,000  771,600 

Mississippi...  295,700            900  309,800  410,700  606,300 

Total         2,118,600        43,200    1,746,900    1,790,100  3,908,000 


TABLE  XXIX.  PROPORTION   OF   WHITE  TO   TOTAL  POPULA- 
TION,     (in  PER  CENTS.) 

States.                    1790.      1800.      1810.      1320.      1830.  1840.  1S50. 

North  Carolina....  73.19    70.65    67.76    65.62    64.07  64.36  63.64 

South  Carolina....  56.28    56.79    51.60    47.33    44.37  43.59  41.07 

Georgia                  64.07    62.73    57.60    55.59    57.43  58.97  57.56 

Florida                     _       _       _       _      52.93  51.29  53.98 

Alabama                   —       —       —      66.81    61.52  56.74  55.27 

Mississippi                —      58.52   57.06    55.90   51.56  47.67  48.76 

TABLE    XXX.  PROPORTION    OF    FREE    COLORED  TO  TOTAL 


States.  1790. 

North  Carolina  ..  1.26 

South  Carolina...  0.72 

Georgia   0.48 

Florida   — 

Alabama   — 

Mississippi   — 

TABLE  XXXI.  MANUMITTED  AND  FUGITVE  SLAVES  IN  1850. 


POPULATION 

1800. 

1810. 

1820. 

1830. 

1S40. 

1850. 

1.47 

1.85 

2.29 

2.65 

3.01 

3.16 

0.92 

1.10 

1.36 

1.36 

1.39 

1.34 

0.63 

0.71 

0.51 

0  48 

0.40 

0.32 

2.43 

1.50 

1.07 

0.45 

0.51 

0.34 

0.29 

2.06 

0.59 

0.61 

0.38 

0.36 

0.15 

States.  Slaves.  Manumitted. 

North  Carolina   288,500    2  .... 

South  Carolina   384,400    2  . . . . 

Georgia   381,600    19 

Florida   39,300    22  .... 

Alabama   342,800    29  .... 

Mississippi....   309,800    6  .... 


Fugitives. 
..  64 
..  16 


1,746,900 


67 


.  18 
.  16 
.  41 

257 


These  tables  show  that  the  six  States  together  had,  in 
1850,  a  population  about  equal  in  number  to  that  of  the 
United  States  when  they  were  first  founded.  The  inge- 
nious Superintendent  of  the  Census  of  1850  makes  the 
whole  Gulf  States  a  rather  dubious  compliment  when  he 


156 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


says,  "  that  while  the  Atlantic  States  have  increased  more 
than  threefold  since  1790,  the  Gulf  States,  which  had  then 
scarcely  any  existence,  have  now  a  population  of  nearly 
one  half  as  great  as  the  population  of  all  the  States  together 
at  that  time."  But  that  "  whole  population  of  all  the  States 
at  that  time"  was  indeed  very  small,  and  one  half  of  that 
is  scarcely  large  enough  to  build  up  a  separate  nation. 

The  rate  of  increase,  too,  is  not  so  very  favorable.  The 
Gulf,  east  of  the  Mississippi,  increased,  on  the  whole,  only 
6.1  per  cent.,  while  the  Atlantic  Slope  increased  54.8 
per  cent.,  and  the  Mississippi  Valley  37.2  per  cent.  If 
we  add  to  the  Gulf  States,  east  of  the  Mississippi,  the  two 
Carolinas,  the  proportions  will  change  but  little.  For  the 
ratio  of  the  decennial  increase  steadily  and  rapidly  dimin- 
ished in  North  Carolina  from  21.42  per  cent,  in  1800  to 
15.35  in  1850 ;  and  in  South  Carolina,  from  38.75  per  cent, 
in  1800  to  12.47  in  1850.  Now,  should  those  six  States 
even  grow  at  the  same  ratio  as  they  have  done  heretofore, 
and  the  colored  people  be  counted  as  regular  population, 
it  would  take  them  at  least  six  times  as  long  as  it  did  the 
Valley  of  the  Mississippi  and  the  Atlantic  Slope  to  grow 
to  their  number  and  strength.  They  would  thus  reach,  in 
about  300  or  400  years,  the  present  power  of  the  United 
States,  of  which  they  are  now  already  a  part,  and  whose 
influence,  and  glory,  and  position  in  the  world  they  now 
share  as  coequal  members.  To  say  the  least,  secession  on 
their  part  is  exceedingly  impolitic.  They  would  at  once 
sink  from  being  a  great  power  in  the  world  to  a  fourth- 
rate  little  State,  with  no  voice  or  influence  in  the  life  of 
nations. 

But  there  is  another  aspect  to  these  tables.  It  appears 
that  the  proportion  of  the  white  population  in  these  States 


THE  CRISIS. 


157 


is  continually  growing  smaller,  a  phenomenon  very  differ- 
ent from  what  was  seen  in  the  Border  States. 

From  the  first  year  of  computation  to  1850  that  propor- 
tion decreased  in 

N.  Carolina.  S.  Carolina.  Georgia.  Florida.  Alabama.  Mississippi. 
9.55  per  cent.      15.21        6.51       (incr.)  1.05      11.54.  9.76 

The  mean  decrease  of  the  proportion  of  white  to  total 
population  in  the  six  States  together  is  thus  8.43  per  cent. 
The  proportion  of  free  colored  persons  to  total  population 
is  also  steadily  decreasing,  except  in  North  Carolina ;  nor 
are  there  any  manumissions  worth  mentioning.  The  slaves 
will  thus  be  in  a  majority  long  before  the  Confederacy 
reaches  any  considerable  power  in  the  world.  And  what 
will  be  the  result  of  such  an  increase  ? 

The  news  of  a  separation  from  the  original  republic  of 
the  United  States  can  not  even  now  be  kept  a  secret  from 
the  slave  population.  It  has  reached  them  through  the 
patriotic  speeches  of  indignant  Southerners,  through  the 
misrepresentations  of  an  enraged  party  press,  through  the 
whispers  of  their  free  colored  brethren.  Though  they  are 
at  present  but  partially  informed,  they  would  soon  better 
appreciate  their  position.  The  United  States  would  be  to 
them  a  second  England.  No  fugitive  slave  law  would 
help  the  slaveholder  of  a  Southern  republic  to  obtain  his 
runaway  Negroes  from  the  then  foreign  soil  of  the  United 
States.  Nor  would  the  loss  of  Negroes  be  their  only 
disadvantage.  The  slaves  would  soon  awaken  to  a  con- 
sciousness of  their  power,  and  break  out  in  open  rebellion. 
No  United  States  would  then  be  the  guardian  of  the  slave 
power.  No  United  States  posse  would  be  found  to  subdue 
the  insurrection. 

And  should  this  be  false  prophecy,  and  the  Negroes 


158 


THE   AMEKICAN  QUESTION. 


remain  peaceable,  and  increase  in  number,  what  will  the 
South  do  with  that  increased  number  ?  There  would  be 
no  more  new  territory  for  the  slave  power  to  conquer  and 
colonize.  The  United  States,  England,  and  France  would 
then  go  hand  in  hand,  and  no  Walker  would  ever  again 
dare  to  think  of  putting  Slavery  where  formerly  Freedom 
was.  The  world  has  hitherto  appreciated  the  difficult 
position  of  the  United  States,  and  its  committal  to  Slavery. 
The  world  has  been  forced  to  respect  the  United  States  as 
a  Great  Power,  and  has  feared  its  strength.  The  world  en- 
dured much  from  it,  in  order  to  avoid  collisions  detri- 
mental to  all.  But  things  would  look  differently  in  case 
of  a  permanent  secession.  The  Great  Powers  of  the 
world,  and  especially  England  and  the  United  States, 
would  then  be  united,  and  jointly  watch  over  the  fortunes 
of  races  and  nations. 

But  a  Southern  Confederacy  would  not  so  long  exist, 
even  should  it  be  joined  by  several  more  or  by  all  the 
Slave  States.  Fk.  List's  words  would  soon  be  applicable  to 
them :  "  The  debt  which  so  greatly  oppresses  them  is  the 
result  of  a  series  of  excessive  exertions  to  maintain  their 
independence,  and  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things  that  the 
evil  should  reach  a  point  where  it  may  be  intolerable, 
and  when  their  incorporation  into  a  greater  nationality 
would  appear  as  acceptable  as  it  will  be  necessary." 
Troubles  from  within  and  troubles  from  without  would 
soon  prove  to  them  the  fatality  of  secession.  The  poeti- 
cal excitement  of  the  first  days  would  soon  pass  away, 
and  prosy  misery  take  its  place.  Long  before  a  dreaded 
slave  insurrection  would  strike  horror  into  the  breast 
of  the  South  and  of  the  whole  world — long  be/ore  the 
Southern  republic  would  wage  war  against  a  world  in 


THE  CRISIS. 


159 


arms — parties  would  arise  within  their  own  precincts,  and 
the  cry  of  Union,  no  more  fearing  to  be  choked  as  treason, 
would  be  again  heard  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  the 
borders  of  Old  Virginia,  from  the  Mississippi  to  the 
mighty  oceans ;  and  the  glorious  Republic  of  the  United 
States  of  America  would  be  one  again  and  forever. 

VI.— A  NEW  PROPOSAL  FOR  A  COMPROMISE. 

Experiments  of  Disunion  with  their  different  contin- 
gencies are  costly  and  unfortunate.  They  bring  distress 
on  all  sections.  It  would  take  years  to  recover  from  such 
a  violent  disrupture  of  a  country — of  its  industry,  of  its 
commerce,  and  of  its  government.  But  still,  in  the  end, 
the  South  would  lose  the  most ;  for  there  is,  even  in  the 
worst  case  of  secession — a  secession  of  all  the  Slave  States 
— more  wealth  and  more  productive  labor,  more  strength 
and  more  power  to  rely  upon  in  the  North  than  in  the 
South. 

TABLE  XXXII.  PROGRESS  OF  POPULATION. 


SLAVE  STATES. 

1790  1,271,500 

1800  1,703,000 

1810  2,208,800 

1820  2,831,600 

1830  3,662,600 

1840  4,634,500 

1850  6,222,400 


FREE  STATES. 

1790  1,901,000 

1800  2,601,500 

1810  3,653,200 

1820  5,030,400 

1830  6,874,800 

1840  9,561,200 

1850  13,330,600 


The  difference  between  the  numbers  of  whites  in  the 
Slave  and  in  the  Free  States  was  thus  about  700,000  in 
1790.  The  difference  in  1850  was  about  7,000,000,  and 
it  must  be  still  greater  in  1860;  for  the  rate  of  increase 
of  the  Slave  States  was  in  the  last  decade  34.26  per  cent. ; 
of  the  Free  States  39.42.  Thus  the  whites  in  the  South 
will  number,  in  1860,  about  8,338,000,  and  those  in  the 


150  THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 

North  about  18,529,500.  Moreover,  in  ease  of  Disunion,  that 
gradual  and  peaceable  pressing  down  into  the  Southern 
States  would  cease ;  the  North  would  keep  its  full  num- 
bers and  spread  on  its  own  soil,  and  thus  increase  at  a  still 
higher  ratio,  while  all  emancipation  would  at  once  stop, 
and  be  replaced  by  violent  insurrection. 

We  confined  ourselves  in  our  last  reasonings,  about  pop- 
ulation to  white  men ;  for  in  case  of  Disunion  there  would 
but  little  reliance  be  placed  on  the  colored  persons,  be  it  in 
peace  or  in  war. 

But  we  think  so  highly  of  the  Union,  we  are  so  well 
aware  of  the  advantages  accruing  from  it  to  the  whole 
country  and  to  the  world,  we  feel  so  keenly  the  evils 
from  Disunion  (though  it  be  but  partial  and  momentary), 
that,  should  our  old  Constitution  not  suffice,  we  would  be 
willing,  at  any  time,  to  submit  to  a  new  compromise. 
Nay,  further,  we  would  be  ready,  for  the  sake  of  union 
and  peace,  to  yield  our  whole  point  respecting  Slavery,  and 
to  look  henceforth  at  the  slave,  23olitically,  or  rather  inter- 
nationally, as  a  mere  beast  or  other  property,  such  as  an 
ass  or  horse  is.  But,  in  subscribing  thus  to  the  opinions 
of  the  South,  we  would  ask  in  return  for  a  rigid  adherence 
to  this  Southern  principle  in  all  its  logical  consequences. 
We  would  therefore  propose  the  following  amendment  to 
the  Constitution,  short,  simple,  and  radical : 

Whereas,  The  present  provisions  in  the  Constitution,  as 
far  as  they  refer  to  slaves,  viz.,  "  persons  bound  to  serv- 
ice," have,  during  an  experience  of  seventy  years,  proved 
to  be  inadequate  for  preventing  dissension  and  violence 
consequent  on  the  question  of  Slavery  in  these  United 
States ; 

Whereas,  Those  provisions  even  now  prove  insufficient 


THE  CRISIS. 


161 


longer  to  satisfy  the  North  and  the  South  in  such  manner 
as  that  they  may  remain  united  ; 

Resolved,  That,  in  Art.  L,  Sec.  2,  %  3,  beginning  thus  : 
"  Representatives  and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned 
among  the  several  States  which  may  be  included  within 
this  Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers,"  the 
following  words  be  stricken  out,  namely :  "  which  shall 
be  determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  number  of  free 
persons,  including  those  bound  to  service  for  a  term  of 
years,  and  excluding  Indians  not  taxed,  three  fifths  of  all 
other  persons." 

Resolved,  That,  Art.  IV.,  Sec.  2,  *H  3,  reading  thus : 
"  No  person  held  to  service  or  labor  in  one  State,  under 
the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into  another,  shall,  in  conse- 
quence of  any  law  or  regulation  therein,  be  discharged 
from  such  service  or  labor,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on 
claim  of  the  party  to  whom  such  service  or  labor  may  be 
due,"  be  likewise  stricken  out. 

Resolved,  That  in  lieu  of  the  last-named  paragraph 
(namely,  Art.  IV.,  Sec.  2,  |  3),  the  following  be  substi- 
tuted : 

"  %  3.  Whatever  is  regarded  as  property  under  the  laws 
of  one  State,  shall  also  be  regarded  as  such  in  all  the 
other  States." 

This  would  be  in  perfect  accordance  wit(*  Mr.  Davis' 
resolutions  in  the  Senate  Committee  of  Thirteen. 

"Mr.  Davis  offered  the  following  resolution,  which  lies  over  with 
the  others  : 

11  That  it  shall  be  declared  by  amendment  of  the  Constitution  that 
property  in  slaves,  recognized  as  such  by  the  local  law  of  any  of  the 
States  of  the  Union,  shall  stand  upon  the  same  footing  in  all  consti- 
tutional and  federal  relations  as  any  other  species  of  property  so 
recognized ;  and,  like  other  property,  shall  not  be  subject  to  be 


162  THE  AMEEICAN  QUESTION. 

divested  or  impaired  by  the  local  law  of  any  other  State  either  in 
escape  thereto,  or  by  the  transit  or  sojourn  of  the  owner  therein. 
And  in  no  case  whatever  shall  such  property  be  subject  to  be  divested 
or  impaired  by  any  legislative  act  of  the  United  States,  or  any  of  the 
territories  thereof." 

The  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  which  is  based  on  Art.  IV., 
Sec.  2,  %  3,  would  then  be  invalid.  The  North  would  no 
more  be  called  upon  to  fulfill  the  unpleasant  duty  of  catch- 
ing fugitive  slaves.  The  owner  alone  would  be  responsible 
for  all  possible  losses  of  horses,  asses,  or  slaves. 

The  Southerner,  on  the  other  side,  might  henceforth, 
undisturbed  by  any  Personal  Liberty  Bill  or  "  erroneous" 
interpretation  of  the  Constitution,  go  with  his  property — 
ass,  horse,  or  slave — wherever  he  chose — to  any  State  or 
Territory,  settled  or  unsettled.  But  he  himself  must  hence- 
forth take  care  of  his  property.  If  it  be  stolen  or  injured, 
he  can  apply  to  the  proper  authorities ;  but  if  it  runs  away, 
from  its  own  free  wish  and  will,  he  himself  must  run  after 
it,  and  catch  it,  and  drive  it  home  again.  His  neighbors 
may  lend  him  kind  assistance  if  they  choose,  but  they  will 
not  legally  or  constitutionally  be  bound  to  do  it. 

The  number  of  Southern  representatives  to  Congress 
would  also  be  somewhat  diminished  by  carrying  out  the 
Southern  doctrine  in  all  its  logical  consequences.  This 
would  be  unpleasant ;  but  there  would  be  no  help  for  it. 
Other  deductions  might  be  made  from  the  same  principle ; 
but  as  they  would  chiefly  refer  to  the  internal  affairs  of 
each  State,  they  are  omitted  in  this  general  compromise. 

Nor  would  it  be  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  Negro  slave ; 
for  the  chances  of  freedom  would  be,  by  far,  greater  for 
him  in  the  Free  States  than  in  the  Slave  States.  This  po- 
litical nationalization  of  Slavery  would  even  hasten  the 
work  of  emancipation ;  for  the  influence  of  the  free  white 


THE   CRISIS.  153 

population  would  thereby  become  more  direct.  Suppose 
the  State  of  New  York  should  in  such  a  way  receive  some 
10,000  slaves.  They  would  certainly  be  prepared  for 
freedom  and  become  free  in  a  shorter  time  here  than  if 
they  had  remained  in  South  Carolina. 

ISTor  would  this  dispersion  of  slaves  over  the  whole 
national  territory  add  anything  to  our  disgrace,  if  such  it 
be  to  own  slaves.  We  have  the  same  responsibility,  and 
deserve  the  same  epithets,  whether  our  Slavery  is  in  six- 
teen States  only  or  in  thirty-four :  for  we  are  one  common 
nation.  The  question  is  only,  how  we  can  best  secure  its 
gradual  abolition. 

CONCLUSION. 

So  much  for  compromises.  But  until  it  is  decided 
whether  the  original  Constitution  or  the  amended  one 
shall  henceforth  be  the  Supreme  Law  of  the  land,  the 
proper  policy  of  the  United  States  Government  is  as 
clear  and  distinct  as  its  right  and  duty. 

Whatever  the  future  may  bring,  peace  or  war,  the 
United  States  must — 

1.  Keep,  defend,  and  in  case  of  treason  or  defeat,  retake, 
at  any  cost,  all  national  fortifications  necessary  for  the  pro- 
tection of  all  her  old  boundaries,  and  for  common  national 
safety. 

2.  She  must  keep,  defend,  and,  in  case  of  necessity,  retake, 
at  any  cost,  the  Mississippi  from  its  source  to  its  mouth. 

3.  She  must,  in  all  other  respects,  leave  the  States  un- 
disturbed in  their  internal  process  of  secession,  unless  they 
attack  national  property. 

4.  She  must  give  the  secessionary  States  time  to  recover 
from  their  excitement,  and  leave  to  them  the  same  initiatory 


164 


THE  AMERICAN  QUESTION. 


step  in  returning  to  the  Union  that  they  assumed  in 
seceding  from  it. 

This  must  be  the  present  course  of  action  on  the  part 
of  the  United  States.  It  follows  from  the  constitutional 
principle  of  Protection  to  National  Interest  and  Non- 
interference with  Local  Matters,  and  will  probably  cover 
all  future  contingencies. 

Should,  however,  the  present  force  of  the  United  States 
army,  from  any  reason,  be  inadequate  to  the  above  task, 
there  would  be  enough  patriotism  left  in  the  land  to  call, 
at  the  shortest  notice,  a  million  of  men  to  arms,  who, 
without  distinction  of  party,  would  be  ready  to  fight  for 
this  common  country,  and  rout  the  rebels,  from  whatever 
section  they  might  come. 


THE  END. 


