;;ir.s 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PURCHASED  FROM 

BUNTING  FUND 


ALBAN   BERG 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

Boston  Library  Consortium  IVIember  Libraries 


http://www.archive.org/details/albanbergmanhismOOredl 


Alban  Berg  and  his  wife,  c.  1925 


ALBAN   BERG 

The  Man  and  his  Music 

by 

H.  F.  REDLICH,  Ph.D. 

LECTURER  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  MUSIC 
UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH 


Al  S 


ABELARD-SCHUMAN  LIMITED 

NEW  YORK 


COPYRIGHT  1957  BY  ABELARD-SCHUMAN  LTD 
LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS  CATALOG  CARD  NUMBER  57-5315 


MUSIC  LIBRARY 


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN  FOR  THE  PUBLISHERS 
ABELARD-SCHUMAN  LIMITED,  404  FOURTH  AVENUE,  NEW  YORK  16, 
BY  THE  DITCHLING  PRESS,  HASSOCKS,  SUSSEX 


CONTENTS 

Preface 

PART  I 

Introduction 

Chapter  page 

1  THE  SECOND  VIENNESE  SCHOOL         ...  ...  ...  ...  13 

2  THE  PROBLEM  OF  TONALITY  ...  ...  ...  ...  19 


PART     II 

The  music  ofAlhan  Berg 

3  EARLY  WORKS     ...                 ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  35 

4  WOZZECK             ...                 ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  74 

5  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE  ...  ...  ...  112 

6  DER  WEIN            ...                 ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  155 

7  LULU                      ...                 ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  163 

8  THE  VIOUN  CONCERTO      ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  20J 


PART  III 

THE  LIFE  OF  ALBAN  BERG...  ...  ...  ...  ...  217 


PART    IV 

Appendices 
Appendix 

1  ARNOLD  SCHOENBERG  ON  ALBAN  BERG  [1949]  ...  ...                 245 

2  FACSIMILE  OF  BERG's  VARIATIONS  FOR  PIANO  ON  A  THEME  OF  HIS 

OWN  (1908)                  ...                 ...                 ...  ...  ...                 247 

3  berg's  LECTURE  ON  WOZZECK  [1929]                ...  ...  ...                 a6l 

4  catalogue  of  works    ...           ...           ...  ...  ...           287 

5  discography  ...           ...           ...           ...  ...  ...           299 

6  bibuography  ...            ...            ...            ...  •..  ...            305 

7  INDEX  AND  ERRATA             ...                 ...                 ...  ...  ...                 313 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


PUBLISHED 
BY  ARRANGEMENT    WITH 

UNIVERSAL  EDITION 

LONDON  AND  VIENNA 


The  music  examples  mentioned  below  have  been  reproduced 
by  courtesy  of  the  following  publishers : 

Messrs  Birnbach,  BerHn.(from  Schoenberg's  Opus  7). 
Messrs  Boosey  &  Hawkes,  London  (from  Richard  Strauss's 

Salome  and  Rosenkavalier). 
Messrs  Bote  &  Bock,  Berlin  (from  Mahler's  7th  Symphony). 
Messrs   Hinrichsen  Edition  Ltd,  London  (from   Richard 

Strauss's  Tod  und  Verkldrung). 
Messrs  Kahnt,  Berlin  (from  Mahler's  6th  Symphony). 
Messrs  Leuckart,  Munich  (from  Richard  Strauss's  Helden- 

leben). 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Alban  Berg  and  Helene  Berg  Frontispiece 

(in  Berlin,  circa  1925) 
Photograph  by  W.  v.  Debschiitz-Kunowsky 
By  courtesy  of  Fran  Annemarie  von  Klenau 


facing  page 


Alban  Berg  and  Anton  Webern  in  Austria  circa  1912 

By  courtesy  ofFrau  Helene  Berg  128 

Facsimile  of  a  letter  by  Alban  Berg  to  Ruzena  Herlinger,  the 
first  singer  of 'Der  Wein'  (June  193O) 
By  courtesy  of  Mrs  Ruzena  Herlinger  160 

Facsimile  of  a  Concert  Prograivime  issued  for  a  concert  in  which 
Anton  Webern  conducted  the  first  performance  in  Vienna 
of  Berg's  Concert  Aria  'Der  Wein'  (1932).  The  programme 
contains  words  of  praise  in  Berg's  hand  who  signs  humoris- 
tically  as  'The  Butler' 
By  courtesy  of  Mrs  Ruzena  Herlinger  161 

Lulu  and  the  Painter — caught  in  flagranti. 
Dr  Goll  dies  of  an  apoplectic  stroke. 
(Lulu,  Act  I,  Scene  I) 
Photograph  by  courtesy  of  Hans  Buschhausen  192 

VnxA  Nahowski,  Trahutten,  Styrla. 

{From  a  picture  postcard,  after  a  photograph) 

By  courtesy  ofFrau  Helene  Berg  224 

Alban  Berg  and  Helene  Berg 

(Photograph  Photomaton,  Essen,  circa  1925) 

By  courtesy  ofFrau  Annemarie  von  Klenau  224 

Alban  Berg's  father,  Konrad  Berg,  as  a  young  man 

(Photograph  by  J.  Eberhardt,  Nuremberg,  taken  in  the  1860s)  225 

Alban  Berg's  mother,  Johanna  Berg,  nee  Braun 

(Photograph  by  F.  Luckhardt,  Vienna,  about  1870  or  later) 

By  courtesy  ofFrau  Helene  Berg  225 

Alban  Berg's  paternal  grandfather 

(Photograph  by  J.  Eberhardt,  Nuremberg,  about  i860) 

By  courtesy  ofFrau  Helene  Berg  225 


PREFACE 

This  book  was  written  in  1955.  It  is  a  transcription  and  a  con- 
densation rather  than  a  Hteral  translation  of  my  somewhat 
earHer  book  Alban  Berg — Versuch  einer  Wurdigung,  written  in 
German  and  pubHshed  by  Universal  Edition,  Vienna.  The  later 
book  keeps  close  to  the  structural  plan  of  the  German  pubHca- 
tion.  Although  the  analytical  sections  have  been  shortened  and 
the  number  of  music  examples  reduced,  it  retains  all  major 
points  of  biographical  and  scholarly  interest.  In  addition  it  also 
contains  short  biographical  essays  on  Georg  Biichner  and  Frank 
Wedekind,  expressly  written  and  inserted  for  the  information 
of  the  Enghsh  reader. 

Special  thanks  are  due  to  all  who  have  made  accessible  to  me 
Berg's  unpublished  music,  letters,  articles,  personal  documents 
and  photographs  and  permitted  their  use  or  their  entire  pub- 
Hcation  in  this  book.  They  are:  Mrs  Helene  Berg,  Vienna,  for 
Piano  Variations  on  an  Original  Theme,  1908,  original  photo- 
graphs of  Berg's  parents  and  of  himself,  letters,  documents  and 
comprehensive  personal  information;  Mrs  Gertrud  Schoen- 
berg,  Los  Angeles,  U.S.A.,  for  Berg's  letters  to  Schoenberg, 
Schoenberg's  article  on  Berg,  1949,  and  personal  information; 
Dr  Werner  Riemerschmid,  Vienna,  and  Mrs  Helene  Berg  for 
Berg's  letters  to  Webern;  Mr  Richard  S.  Hill,  Music  Division 
Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.,  for  invaluable 
help  in  the  selection  of  Berg's  letters  to  Schoenberg,  now 
deposited  in  the  Library  of  Congress,  and  much  personal  infor- 
mation; Universal  Edition,  Vienna,  and  Mrs  Helene  Berg  for 
permission  to  study  autographs  and  copies  wit]i  autograph  cor- 
rections of  Berg's  music,  articles  and  lectures,  including  the 


unpublished  sketches  to  Lulu,  Act  III,  the  sketches  to  the  full 
scores  of  Lied  4  and  5  of  the  Altenberg  Lieder  (op.  4),  now  de- 
posited at  the  Bodleian  Library,  Oxford,  the  autograph  of  the 
'Trio'  version  of  the  Chamber  Concerto  (Mvt.  2),  the  Wozzeck 
Lecture  of  1929  (pubhshed  here  for  the  first  time  in  an  Enghsh 
translation),  press-cuttings  relating  to  the  first  performances  of 
Wozzeck  and  Lulu\  Mrs  Ruzena  Herlinger,  Canada,  Mrs 
Annemarie  v.  Klenau,  Sollhuben-Rosenheim,  Bavaria,  and 
Dr  A.  Kalmus,  London,  for  photographs,  letters  and  docu- 
ments. 

I  am  also  grateful  to  Dr  Egon  Wellcsz,  Oxford,  and  to  Dr 
Joseph  Polnauer,  Mr  H.  E.  Apostel,  Mr  Harms  JeHnek  and  Mr 
Oktavian  Spitzmliller,  all  of  Vienna,  for  valuable  information. 

I  feel  much  indebted  to  Mr  Frank  Walker  and  to  Mr  John 
Calder.  Both  read  the  book  in  manuscript  and  in  proof,  and 
suggested  numerous  improvements  in  style  and  presentation. 
I  am  equally  grateful  to  Mr  Neil  Aspinall  and  to  Messrs  Clough 
and  Cuming  for  their  unremitting  help  in  the  compilation  of 
the  Discography. 

Hans  F.  Redlich 

University  of  Edinburgh 

1956  Faculty  of  Music 


PART  I:  INTRODUCTION 


CHAPTER  I 
The  Second  Viennese  School 

IT  is  the  prerogative  of  the  enthusiast  to  over-simpUfy 
historical  phenomena.  But  it  is  the  duty  of  the  con- 
scientious chronicler  to  describe  things  as  they  are,  or  were, 
in  all  their  complexity.  The  triumvirate  of  the  so-called  *  Second 
Viennese  School',  1  Arnold  Schoenberg,  AlbanBerg,  and  Anton 
Webern,  has  been  so  sedulously  presented  by  proselytizing 
apologists  such  as  Rene  Leibowitz  and  Joseph  Rufer  as  an 
artistic  unity,  vnth  an  indivisible  community  of  aims  and  ten- 
dencies, that  what  are  in  fact  strong  contrasts  between  the 
musical  natures,  talents  and  achievements  of  these  three  artists 
are  in  danger  of  being  overlooked.  The  following  survey  en- 
deavours to  supply  correctives,  necessary  for  a  deeper  historical 
appreciation,  especially  at  those  points  where  the  picture  drawn 
by  zealous  apostles  threatens  to  dissolve  in  the  mists  of  uncritical 
admiration. 
The  creative  activity  of  Schoenberg' s  school  covered  a  period 

^In  this  reckoning,  the  first  Viennese  School  is  considered  to  have  come  to  an  end 
with  the  death  of  Schubert.  The  'Second  Viennese  School'  refers  here  exclusively  to 
Schoenberg,  his  two  disciples  and  their  direct  followers.  The  term  has  gained  currency 
among  continental  writers  on  music,  and  is  not  unfitting,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the 
generation  of  Viennese  musicians  preceding  Schoenberg,  culminating  in  Brahms, 
Bruckner,  Wolf  and  Mahler,  has  continued  to  exercise  influence  only  through  isolated 
pupils.  None  of  these  great  composers,  flourishing  in  the  Vienna  of  the  late  nineteenth 
century,  ever  founded  a  school  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  The  younger  generation 
of  Schoenberg's  followers  includes  Hanns  Eisler,  H.  E.  Apostel,  Hans  Jelinek,  and 
Joseph  Rufer. 

13 


ALBAN  BERG 


of  fifty  years.  It  began  around  1900  with  Schoenberg's  own 
earliest  songs  and  chamber  music,  followed  by  Berg's  first  essays 
in  composition.  It  reached  its  apogee  in  the  1920's,  when 
Schoenberg's  first  compositions  in  twelve-note  technique. 
Berg's  Lyric  Suite  and  Wozzeck,  and  Webern's  most  ambi- 
tiously planned  work  up  to  that  time,  the  Symphony  Op.  21, 
were  written.  The  glory  of  that  unique  creative  community 
and  spiritual  brotherhood  between  teacher  and  disciples  was  on 
the  wane  by  1933.  In  that  year  the  changed  political  chmate  of 
Germany  caused  Schoenberg,  a  baptised  Jew,  to  return  to  his 
ancestral  faith,  and  eventually  he  was  driven  into  exile  in 
America,  while  his  two  disciples — not  subject  to  Hitler's  dis- 
criminatory racial  legislation — stayed  in  Austria  but  took  part 
in  what  was  called  the  'internal  emigration'  of  that  time.  The 
earthly  bonds  hnking  the  members  of  this  triumvirate  were  cut 
by  the  premature  death  of  Berg  in  1935  and  the  tragic  end  of 
Webern  ten  years  later.  Schoenberg  outhved  both  his  followers. 
His  own  death  on  July  14th,  195 1,  closed  an  epoch  that  had 
begun  at  the  turn  of  the  century,  in  the  shade  of  the  newly- 
made  graves  of  Brahms  and  Bruckner. 

The  common  German-Austrian  inheritance  of  all  these 
composers  contrasts  with  the  almost  irreconcilable  diver- 
sities of  their  characters.  Schoenberg  sprang  from  the 
Jewish  petite-bourgeoisie  of  Vienna,  and  was  chiefly  self- 
taught.  His  genius  revealed  an  ambivalent  character  in 
the  fifty-four  years  of  its  creative  development.  Like  C.  P.  E. 
Bach  at  the  epochal  turning  point  of  1750,  Schoenberg 
expressed  himself,  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  with 
similar  originahty  as  ruminating  theorist  and  experiment- 
ing composer.  He  turned  periodically  from  speculative  theory 
to  original  composition,  from  performance  to  the  creative  re- 
valuation of  the  past.  His  long  hfe  divided  clearly  into  two 
sections,  each  of  two  distinct  periods,  separated  by  a  longer 

14 


THE   SECOND  VIENNESE  SCHOOL 

interlude  of  apparent  fallowness  (1915-23).  The  two  great  style- 
periods  discernible  within  the  first  section,  the  over-ripe  roman- 
ticism of  the  gigantic  conceptions  of  1 899-1907,  and  the 
aphoristic  miniature  work  of  1908-15,  correspond  to  the  two 
creative  periods,  after  the  fallow  interlude,  dedicated  in  turn  to 
the  consoHdation  of  the  twelve-note  system  (1923-33)  and  to 
the  late  compositions  of  the  years  of  American  exile  (1934-51). 
In  this  last  period  dodecaphonic  and  tonal  composition  join 
hands,  with  his  resumption  of  work  on  older,  uncompleted 
projects  in  a  final  creative  effort,  deprived  of  final  fulfilment 
by  death.  The  truly  astounding  variety  of  Schoenberg's 
achievement  cannot  erase  the  general  impression  that  only  a 
fraction  of  his  work  has  so  far  sunk  into  the  consciousness  of  his 
age.  The  success  of  Schoenberg,  the  revolutionizing  theorist 
and  teacher,  in  two  continents,  is  not  matched  by  a  similar 
success  of  the  composer.  Only  a  few  works,  like  Verkldrte 
Nacht,  the  Gurrelieder,  and  the  sensational  tour  de  force  Pierrot 
Lunaire,  have  achieved  lasting  success  and  repeated  perform- 
ance. Schoenberg's  most  ambitious  conceptions,  the  oratorio 
Die  Jakobsleiter,  and  the  opera  Moses  und  Aron,  were  left  un- 
finished and  remain,  so  far,  unpublished.  His  operas  in  general 
are  neglected,  except  for  an  occasional  performance  of  the 
monodrama  Erwartung.  In  spite  of  all  this,  the  emanation  and 
'mystique'  of  his  personality  are  so  great  that  the  first  half  of 
the  century  could  fittingly  be  called  'the  Schoenberg  epoch'. 

To  the  perturbing,  explosive  personaHty  of  Schoenberg, 
Anton  Webem  forms  a  curious  contrast,  with  his  attitude  of 
introspective  shyness  and  the  anonymous  character  of  his 
strangely  noiseless  creative  effort.  Webern  shares  Schoenberg's 
fate,  remaining  unrecognized  by  the  multitude,  even  after 
death,  and  with  an  integral  part  of  his  work  unknown  and 
inaccessible.  A  much  shorter  creative  hfe  of  approximately 

15 


ALBAN  BERG 

thirty-seven  years  was  allotted  him,  beginning  with  the  sur- 
prisingly mature  Passacaglia  Op.  i,  of  1908,  after  which  for  two 
decades  he  was  imprisoned  in  the  cul-de-sac  of  extreme  diminu- 
tion of  sound  and  duration.  The  miniatures  of  expression, 
characteristic  of  Schoenberg's  second  period,  are  subjected  in 
Webern's  Opp.  3-17  to  a  process  of  dynamic  reduction  and 
colouristic  note-differentiation  in  which  the  original  musical 
impulse  seems  fdtered  away  almost  to  physical  inaudibiHty.  The 
integration  of  this  strange  sound-world  with  the  twelve-note 
system,  and  the  development  of  more  generously  planned 
musical  organisms  (commencing  so  surprisingly  with  Op.  21) 
gave  Webern  a  late  phase  of  development  which  was  shared 
neither  by  Berg,  in  his  premature  grave,  nor  by  Schoenberg  in 
distant  America.  The  style  of  fairly  late  works,  such  as  the 
Piano  Variations,  Op.  27,  has  only  recently  found  in  Rene 
Leibowitz  an  enthusiastic  and  competent  analyst.  The  sphinx- 
like canonic  severity  and  the  mysteriously  corresponding  pat- 
terns of  sound  in  the  last  works  remain  an  enigma  to  many 
people,  including  some  of  the  composer's  admirers.  In  contrast 
to  his  mentor,  Webern  was  a  distinguished  academically- 
trained  musicologist  and  an  experienced  professional  conductor. 
But  he  rarely  contributed  to  musical  theory,  or  indulged  in 
musical  polemics.  And  Webern  the  editor,  arranger,  lecturer 
and  writer  has  been  effectively  silenced  by  the  continuous 
pianissimo  of  his  creative  work. 

Berg,  dying  in  1935  before  the  completion  of  his 
fifty-first  year,  never  witnessed  the  extreme  developments 
of  his  teacher  or  his  friend.  He  was  neither  a  speculative 
theorist  like  Schoenberg  nor  a  musical  scholar  and  pro- 
fessional conductor  like  Webern.  As  musical  journalist 
with  a  strong  polemic  bias,  however,  and  as  a  musical  analyst 
of  philological  conscientiousness,  he    easily  surpassed  them 

16 


THE  SECOND  VIENNESE  SCHOOL 

both.  Berg's  analyses  of  Schoenberg's  compositions,  his 
articles  on  the  music  of  his  teacher  and  on  his  own  Wozzeck, 
are  among  the  classics  of  modern  musical  Hterature.  He 
was  neither  a  concert  pianist  nor  a  conductor,  but  as  a 
teacher  of  composition  he  raised  a  new  generation  of  pupils, 
comparable  with  those  of  Schoenberg  himself  in  the  1920's.  As 
a  creative  artist  Berg  stands  nearer  to  Schoenberg  than  to  his 
own  contemporary  Webern.  Most  of  his  work  has  its  roots  in 
late  Romanticism  and,  not  unlike  his  master,  Berg  attempted 
in  his  mature  works  to  reconcile  dodecaphonic  technique  with 
a  feehng  for  traditional  tonality.  Like  Schoenberg  himself, 
Berg  wrote  in  lyrical,  symphonic,  concertante  and  musico- 
dramatic  forms  and  styles.  But  where  Schoenberg  as  musical 
dramatist,  after  his  first  attempt  Erwartung,  became  entangled 
in  experimental  dodecaphony  [Von  Heute  auf  Morgen)  or 
experimental  symbolism  {Die  gluckliche  Hand),  Berg  achieved 
with  Wozzeck  the  first  great  success  of  an  opera,  inspired  by 
social  consciousness,  and  conceived  in  radically  modern  terms. 
Berg's  early  songs,  his  mature  chamber  music  and  late  con- 
certante works  have  all  estabhshed  themselves  in  the  modern 
concert  repertoire.  The  greater  part  of  his  work,  like  the  greater 
part  of  Webern's,  is  not  conceived  in  the  twelve-note  idiom.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  strict  logical  consistency  of  the  Altenberg- 
Lieder,  Op.  4,  and  of  parts  of  the  String  Quartet,  Op.  3,  and 
Wozzeck,  contrasts  strikingly  with  the  free  tonaUty  of  certain 
contemporary  works  by  Schoenberg  and  Webern.  It  seems  un- 
profitable to  speculate  on  the  extent  to  which  Berg,  had  he 
Hved,  might  have  identified  himself  with  Webern's  late  works 
or  those  of  Schoenberg's  American  compositions  in  which 
dodecaphony  is  temporarily  abandoned.  He  had  in  fact  antici- 
pated some  elements  of  both  phenomena  in  his  own  develop- 
ment, but  he  never  abandoned  his  psychological  roots  in  the 

B  17 


ALBAN   BERG 


revolutionary  stratum  of  the  nineteenth  century.  His  position  as 
mediator  at  this  historical  turning-point  gives  Berg  and  his 
music  special  powers  of  persuasion,  which  have  only  become 
fully  evident  to  a  later  generation. 


i8 


CHAPTER  II 


The  Problem  of  Tonality 

ONE  of  the  tasks  of  this  book  will  be  to  determine  Berg's 
place  in  the  history  of  the  musical  revolution  which 
began  with  the  Viennese  Classics.  Paradoxically,  the 
feeling  for  tonahty  and  for  the  logic  of  the  cadence  was  seriously 
weakened  for  the  first  time  in  the  works  of  just  those  classic 
composers  who  are  usually  considered  the  high  priests  of  the 
concept  of  diatonic  tonaHty.  The  innovations  of  Schoenberg 
and  his  disciples  have  their  origin,  in  point  of  fact,  in  the  late 
works  of  Haydn  and  Mozart. 

In  1790,  in  the  Trio  of  the  third  movement  of  his  String 
Quartet  in  B  flat,  K.  589,  Mozart  wrote  the  following  modu- 
latory transition: 

Nzapol.b! 


Example  i 

Bars  1-3  contain  a  cadence  to  D  flat:  Vy-VI-IIf-I.  Bar  4  gives  the 
impression  of  intending  to  supply  the  delayed  cadence  IV-V-I. 
But  what  happens?  I  (D  flat)  fails  to  materialize;  it  is  replaced  by 

♦Fictitious  resolution 

19 


ALBAN   BERG 

the  rest  bar  5.  The  music  recommences  in  bar  6  with  the  |  of  G 
major,  treated  at  once  as  the  dominant  of  C  major:  V-If-V.  What 
has  happened  to  the  carefully  prepared  tonic  on  D  flat?  It  is  meant 
to  be  only  imagined,  not  heard,  and  must  be  suppHed  mentally 
during  the  rest  bar  5.  The  ancillary  function  of  that  chord  of  D 
flat  as  supertonic  of  C  and  as  its  SD  deputy  becomes  clear  in  bar  6, 
the  modulation  of  which  uses  the  imagined  D  flat  chord  as  a  kind 
of  harmonic  swing-door,  interpreting  it  a  posteriori  as  the  Neapoli- 
tan sixth  of  C  major. 

Mozart  here  presents  an  early  example  of  elliptic  modulation 
and  of  a  selective  sequence  of  harmonic  events;  both  are  typical 
features  of  the  modulatory  processes  of  the  'Second  Vienna 
School'  of  the  early  twentieth  century. 

Mozart  calls  here  (as  in  many  similar  cases)  for  the  active  par- 
ticipation of  the  Hstener's  musical  imagination,  to  supply  the 
additional  harmonies  which  implement  the  modulatory  pro- 
cess. Exactly  the  same  participation  is  called  for  in  the  following 
examples  from  Berg's  Lyric  Suite: 

[fiktive  * 
Auflosuugl 


Movement  2 


(fikt'ive 
Aufir»«Jiingj 


Movement  3 
♦Fictitious  resolution 


Examples  2  and  3 


20 


THE  PROBLEM   OF  TONALITY 

111  these  cases  the  inner  ear  suppHes  the  imphcit,  tacitly  accepted, 
yet  never  sounded,  tonic  of  F  major,  which  is  used  as  a  sort  of 
harmonic  converging-point  in  this  particular  work. 

In  the  same  String  Quartet,  K.  589,  Mozart  goes  a  step 
further.  In  the  Finale  he  writes : 


tlXUXJ  HI 


Example  4 


Here  the  process  of  silent  implementation  in  the  rest  bar  2  is 
more  compHcated.  Chord  *x'  is  the  dominant  seventh  of  the 
tonic  B  flat.  This  tonic  is  suppressed,  as  the  D  flat  tonic  had 
l)een  in  example  i.  How  can  Mozart  justify  the  dissonant  false 
relations  in  the  seemingly  incoherent  sequence  E  flat — E  natural 
in  bars  i  and  3  ?  Only  if  the  listener  can  be  persuaded  to  under- 
stand the  A  minor  tonic  of  bar  3  as  the  ultimate  goal  of  the 
modulation  which  had  started  in  bar  i.  And  this  is  only  pos- 
sible if  the  inner  ear  implements  the  elliptic  modulations  by  an 
interpolated  Neapohtan  cadence  in  which  the  tonic  of  B  flat  is 
used  as  'Neapolitan  Sixth'  of  the  real  tonic  A  minor: 


$ 


^^ 


X 


^ 


t^TT      bo        b« 


Example  5 

The  E  flat  at  "*■  and  its  harmonic  basis  could  also  be  interpreted  as 
an  enharmonic  *swing-door'.  In  that  case  E  flat  becomes  D  sharp, 

21 


ALBAN   BERG 

which  ill  tuni  becomes  the  leading  note  to  A  minor.  The  first 
chord  becomes  then  a  posteriori  an  augmented  |  chord  on  F  (the 
lower  Mediant  of  A  minor). 

From  Mozart's  imaginary  Neapolitan  cadence  it  is  only  a  step 
to  the  subtle  technique  of  deliberate  elision  used  in  Wagner's 
Parsifal: 


Hcil. 


Example  6a 


Example  6b  * 

Kundry's  famous  passage  *0  ewiger  Schlaf '  (11/ 1)  can  be  easily 
understood  as  a  chain  of  suppressed  Neapohtan  Zwischenkaden- 
zen  (intermittent  cadences),  conceived  in  exactly  the  same  way 
as  Mozart's  examples  of  1790.  The  difference  is  only  quantita- 
tive :  Mozart  uses  harmonic  ehsion  once,  whereas  Wagner  uses 
it  a  number  of  times  within  a  few  bars.  The  time  given  for  the 
inner  adjustment  and  mental  implementation  (already  severely 
curtailed  in  Parsifal)  is  reduced  to  a  mere  flash  in  the  following 
examples,  from  Schoenberg's  early  song,  SchenU  mir  einen 
gold'nen  Kamm,  Op.  2,  No.  2.  This,  too,  contains  an  eUiptic 
cadence  which  materiahzes  with  the  aid  of  a  chord  of  the 
Neapolitan  sixth.  Here  the  first  chord  becomes  a  posteriori 
(i.e.  in  the  hght  of  that  Neapohtan  sixth)  the  fifth  step  of  a  B 


*C  flat  -  B 


22 


THE  PROBLEM   OF  TONALITY 

minor  tonic  which  is  replaced  by  its  own  diminished  seventh: 


Example  7 

The  revolution  begun  in  Mozart's  day  reached  its  culmination 
in  the  works  of  Schoenberg,  whose  technique  of  allusive  har- 
mony and  elliptical,  modulation  became  Berg's  point  of  depar- 
ture. 

The  Basic  Elements  of  Berg's  Music 

In  the  course  of  nearly  forty  years  Berg's  music  progressed  from 
the  over-ripe  Romanticism  of  1900  to  the  etherealized  dodeca- 
phony  of  Lulu  and  the  Violin  Concerto  of  1934/5.  Despite  all 
the  changes  of  style  which  this  imphes,  certain  elements  of  his 
musical  idiom  remain  constant  and  immutable.  They  make  it 
possible  to  visuahze  clearly  the  characteristic  silhouette  of  Berg's 
musical  personality. 

These  constant  elements  are: 

1  The  interval  of  the  fourth,  as  decisive  factor  in  melodic 
shapes  and  chordal  structures. 

2  The  interval  of  the  seventh,  as  the  source  of  continual 
impHcit  tension,  in  melody  and  harmony. 
Schoenberg's  principle  of  perpetual  variation. 
A  deliberate  neglect  of  cychc  sonata-form,  except  in 
telescopic  abbreviation  and  condensation. 
A  predilection  for  aphoristic  brevity. 
A  dehberate  weakening  of  the  tonal  effect  of  cadences, 
leading  up  to  the  phenomenon  of  the  elliptical  cadence. 
A  continual  endeavour  to  compensate  for  the  weakened 

23 


ALBAN  BERG 

feeling  for  tonality,  resulting  from  the  above  six  ele- 
ments in  his  music,  by  establishing  associations  with  his- 
toric musical  forms  and  techniques. 

8  A  partiality  for  musical  anagrams. 

9  A  partiality  for  allusive  musical  quotation. 

10  The  use  of  preconceived  schemes  of  tonal  organization 
(serial  technique). 

The  use  of  the  interval  of  the  fourth  as  constructive  element 
can  be  studied  to  advantage  in  the  following  three  examples, 
from  compositions  written  at  different  stages  of  Berg's  career: 


Examph 


A        A^rr^i^     4      * 

__ 

.               

a 

^a  vHT 

UUMI 

"" 

^-  u  J    -f^r^ 

B_ 

-hr-ka^fi^lr^ 



*^:m" 

^ 

W — r 

-i—W-A-P- 

1 

-m4jA^^-^^^ 

44f-4- 

Ccllo  pizz.     L-. 

Lj 

[2j  U   ~^*^       ■  ■"^* 

Example  9 


Miiiiel^VsWsfQngstDuJetzt  an ? Hast  ein  kicin  Kind  und  kein  Mann '. 


THE  PROBLEM  OF  TONALITY 


The  fourths,  introduced  in  Example  8  (Piano  Sonata,  Op. 
i)  into  the  sphere  of  romantic  chromaticism,  act  Hke  acid  in  a 
chemical  solution.  They  considerably  weaken  the  cadential 
potentialities  of  the  triplet  melody  in  the  treble.  These  bars  and 
their  continuation  at  the  end  of  the  telescoped  recapitulation, 
despite  their  episodic  character,  form  a  turning  point  in  the 
processes  of  harmonic  thinking. 

The  connection  between  Example  9  {Lyric  Suite)  and  the 
principal  motive  of  Schoenberg's  Chamber  Symphony,  Op.  9, 
seems  self-evident.  Berg's  version  is  bolder  than  Schoenberg's; 
it  traverses  a  greater  octave  span,  with  the  help  of  inverted 
fourths. 

Perhaps  the  most  convincing  use  of  the  interval  of  the  fourth 
is  to  be  found  in  Marie's  Lullaby  in  Wozzeck  (Example  10). 

These  cases  of  the  constructive  use  of  the  fourth  in  the  music 
of  Schoenberg  and  Berg  could  easily  be  supplemented  by 
examples  from  Mahler,  Scriabin  and  other  composers  of  the 
early  twentieth  century.  ^  The  phenomenon  as  such  is,  how- 
ever, not  confined  to  the  last  fifty  years.  Schoenberg^  has  re- 
peatedly drawn  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  revolutionary  use 
of  the  fourth  really  starts  in  certain  experimental  works  of 
Beethoven  {Pastoral  Symphony)  and  Wagner  [Tristan),  where  a 
pre-impressionistic  use  of  the  fourth  may  be  found.  Another 
such  example  is  found  in  the  so-called  'Sirens'  Chord'  in 
Wagner's  Tannhauser  Bacchanale  (Dresden  version  of  1845), 
which  could  be  called  the  archetype  of  all  later  combinations  of 
the  interval  of  the  fourth,  as  discussed  in  this  chapter: 


^Cf.  the  chapter  'Quartenakkorde'  in  Schoenberg's  Harmonielehre,  p.  446  ff.  Accord- 
ing to  this  Schoenberg  first  used  chords  of  the  fourth  in  1902  in  Pelleas  und  Melisande.. 
Cf.  also  Zofja  Lissa,  'GeschichtHche  Vorform  der  Zwolftontechnik',  in  Acta  Musico- 
logica,  VII/i,  1935;  cf.  also  Mahler's  seventh  symphony  (first  movement),  with  its 
perpetual  use  of  fourths,  especially  in  chordal  combinations. 

^Harmonielehre,  pp.  447-49. 

25 


ALBAN   BERG 


Example  ii 

The  interval  of  the  perfect  fourth  is  here  still  used  as  a  dissonant 
suspension,  deUberately  delaying  the  resolution  in  a  chord  of 
the  diminished  seventh  {x).  However,  in  the  following  ex- 
amples, taken  from  Liszt's  Mephisto  Waltz  (1863)  and  from 
Wagner's  Die  Meister singer,  the  chordal  qualities  of  the  fourth 
are  for  the  first  time  savoured  in  full: 


Liszt    Mephisto     Walzer  1    ( 186:^) 


Deii  Tag  seh' ich  er  -  schei-nen,der  mir  wolil-ge-falla      tut 
Example  13  a  and  b 

These  examples  were  suggested  by  the  order  of  the  strings  on, 
respectively,  the  viohn  and  the  lute.  They  also  illustrate  drama- 
tic situations  (the  fiddhng  Mepliistopheles,  and  Beckmesser 
serenading  with  the  help  of  his  lute).  However,  in  the  following 

26 


THE  PROBLEM   OF  TONALITY 

Example  14,  taken  from  a  piano  quartet  by  Brahms,  the  con- 
trapuntal and,  as  it  were,  dialectic  value  of  the  interval  of  the 
fourth  is  already  used  in  a  manner  clearly  anticipatory  of 
Schoenberg  and  Berg.  In  fact,  Example  14,  with  its  tendency 
to  avoid  the  traditional  diatonicism  of  the  third,  in  favour  of  a 
modulatory  system  of  fourths,  must  be  regarded  as  the  model 
for  certain  processes  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  9  and  Berg's  Op.  i 
and  Lyric  Suite.  These  bars  are  taken  from  the  Finale  of  the 
Piano  Quartet  in  A  major,  Op.  26,  composed  in  1856  and  pub- 
lished in  1863  :  ^ 

f¥,ffr 


Example  14* 

Serial  Technique  before  Berg  and  Schoenberg 

The  fact  that  Berg  adopted  Schoenberg's  twelve-note  tech- 
nique with  alacrity  in  1925 — after  having  divined  its  advent 
and  consequences  in  some  early  works — ^proves  that  serial  tech- 
nique was  part  of  his  musical  heritage.  For  him,  it  contained  no 
element  of  surprise,  as  for  so  many  of  his  contemporaries. 
Actually,  experiments  in  something  like  serial  technique  date 
back  to  Beethoven.  In  the  late  String  Quartet  Op.  132  a  four- 
note  motive  determines  the  whole  first  movement. 

*[  Sketch] 

27 


Example  15 
The  Allegro  motive  'a;'  derives  from  it,  as  may  be  seen  in  the 
following  sketch  of  bars  10-15: 


T13 


Tl% 


Example  16 

Schoenberg's  principle  of  allocating  parts  of  a  serial  motive  to 
different  instruments,  playing  in  different  octaves,  is  fore- 
shadowed in  the  following  bars,  taken  from  the  Coda  of  the 
first  movement: 


Vln.l 


Example  17 
28 


THE   PROBLEM   OF  TONALITY 

The  four  notes  linked  by  arrows  are  parts  of  a  row: 


Example  i8 

which,  of  course,  is  only  a  variation  of  the  'Basic  Set'  i  (cf. 
Example  15)  in  its  fourth  permutation.  Beethoven's  'rows'  are 
usually  short  (mostly  only  four  notes).  Liszt,  however,  the 
great  experimenter  of  the  Romantic  movement,  produced  a 
veritable  twelve-note  theme  in  the  chief  subject  of  his  Faust 
Symphony  (1854).  Its  tendency  to  arrange  its  intervals  in 
chordal  formation  and  to  avoid  note-repetition  points  towards 
Schoenberg's  later  principles  of  dodecaphony : 


Example  19 

The  'Faust'  theme  easily  yields  the  following  dodecaphonic 
'Basic  Set': 


^^ 


"jij 


^^ 


:5o: 


^ 


11        1 

Example  20 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Liszt  invented  this  serial  theme  to 
express  Faust's  speculative,  philosophical  disposition.  Similarly, 
Richard  Strauss  in  Thus  spake  Zarathustra  (1896)  invents  an 
'impure'  twelve-note  theme  for  the  section  'Von  der  Wissen- 
schaft',  probably  taking  his  cue  from  Liszt's  work. 

Dodecaphonic  experiments  are  also  to  be  found  in  certain 
early  works  of  the  triumvirate  of  the  'Second  Viennese  School'. 

29 


10     11     12 


ALBAN  BERG 


An  eight-note  row  forms  the  basis  of  Webern's  Passacaglidy 
Op.  I  (1908).  The  Variation  theme  of  Schoenberg's  Serenade 
Op.  24  (a  work  which  is  strictly  dodecaphonic  only  in  parts) 
shows  eleven  notes  with  three  note-repetitions.  In  Berg's  early 
works  tendencies  towards  serial  techniques  are  noticeable — 
quite  apart  from  the  outstanding  case  of  Op.  4,  No.  5,  which 
will  be  dealt  with  in  a  later  chapter.  In  the  early  song  Nacht 
(1907)  the  basic  thematic  cell  contains  seven  notes: 


Example  21 
which  correspond  to  their  imphcit  harmonies : 


Example  22 

These,  in  turn,  represent  a  sequence  of  augmented  chords  in 
parallel  movement  at  the  interval  of  a  whole-tone  step. 

A  six-note  series  can  be  recognized  in  the  early  String  Quar- 
tet Op.  3,  if  one  reduces  the  chief  subject  of  part  I  and  its 
riposte : 


a)  Berg:  op. 3 


etc. 


THE  PROBLEM   OF  TONALITY 

to  its  serial  foundation: 

3C 


Example  24 

This  can  easily  be  reduced  to  a  six-note  row  and  its  transposi- 
tion into  the  lower  sixth.  The  whole-tone  step  'x'  determines 
the  whole  movement;  the  interval  of  the  major  third  at  'y',  and 
that  of  the  minor  third  at  'z\  form  part  of  the  thematic  sub- 
stance of  the  piece.  They  are  treated  as  the  constitutional  inter- 
vals of  a  series.  The  Basic  Shapes  of  the  dodecaphonic  series  on 
which  Berg's  latest  works,  Der  Wein  and  the  Violin  Concerto, 
are  based,  derive  clearly  from  ancestral  archetypes  mentioned 
earher  in  this  chapter.  The  fact  that  they  are  so  firmly  rooted 
in  historic  phenomena  explains  their  indisputable  tonal  impH- 
cations.  Thus  Berg,  for  all  the  apparent  novelty  of  his  materials 
and  methods  of  construction,  is  seen  to  be  the  heir  to  a  vener- 
able music  tradition. 


31 


PART  II:  THE  MUSIC  OF  ALB  AN  BERG 


CHAPTER  III 

Early  Works 

\  RNOLD  ScHOENBERG,  whose  influence  on  Berg's  musi- 
AA  cal  development  was  decisive  from  the  year  1905  on- 
■^  -^ wards,  was  a  born  lyrical  composer.  The  twenty-three 
compositions  which  he  completed  before  his  fortieth  year  in- 
clude no  less  than  thirteen  song-cycles — among  them  the  Gurre- 
lieder,  which  were  originally  conceived  on  a  small  scale  as  a 
romantic  Liederspiel  with  piano  accompaniment,  only  to  de- 
velop, during  their  long  gestation  period,  into  a  score  of  truly 
monstrous  dimensions.  Schoenberg's  peculiar  gift  for  finding 
the  perfect  musical  equivalent  of  the  most  evanescent  poetical 
moods,  and  his  predilection  for  the  song-cycle,  were  shared  by 
his  pupil  Webem.  Webern,  right  from  the  start,  inclined  to- 
wards the  aphoristic  miniature,  and  he,  too,  composed  thirteen 
song-cycles,  out  of  a  total  of  thirty-one  opus  numbers. 

Berg  differed  from  his  mentor  and  his  fellow-pupil  in  that 
he  was  never  a  song-writer  by  incHnation.  His  period  of  song- 
writing  is  confined  to  the  preparatory  years  of  adolescence 
(1900-1909).  The  eighty-two  songs  and  duets  he  wrote  during 
that  time  represent  an  emergency  solution  of  the  problems  of 
an  apprentice-composer  rather  than  a  genuine  lyrical  outburst. 
These  eighty-two  songs  (of  which  fourteen  are  accessible  in 
print  to  date)  might  be  called  Veiled  operas'  with  as  much 
justification  as  the  early  Piano  Sonatas  of  Brahms  had  been 
called  'veiled  symphonies'  in  Schumann's  famous  article.  The 

35 


ALBAN   BERG 

parallel  with  Brahms  is  confirmed  by  the  course  of  Berg's  sub- 
sequent development:  the  mature  Brahms  never  returned  to 
the  piano  sonata,  and  the  mature  Berg  never  returned  to  the 
Lied.  The  songs  written  before  1909  attempt  to  re-organize  the 
relationship  between  voice  and  instrument.  In  Op.  2  (composed 
in  1909  and,  except  for  the  second  setting  of  Schliesse  mir  die 
Augen  beidey  the  last  of  Berg's  songs  with  piano  accompaniment) 
the  romantic  Lied,  with  its  symmetrical  periodization,  becomes 
finally  transformed,  in  the  third  Mombert  song,  into  'dissolved 
prose*.  This  song  forms  a  natural  link  with  the  Altenberg  songs, 
Op.  4,  themselves  precursors  of  Wozzeck  and  employing  ex- 
perimentally serial  technique.  After  the  Altenberg  songs,  writ- 
ten in  1912,  Berg  only  twice  returned  to  lyrical  composition. 
However,  neither  the  second  Storm  song  of  1925  nor  the  Con- 
cert Aria  Der  Wein  of  1930  can  be  discussed  in  terms  of  tradi- 
tional song-composition.  Both  were  prehminary  studies  in  a 
novel  idiom,  the  forerunners  of  greater  works:  the  Lyric  Suite 
and  Lulu.  Both,  moreover,  share  a  rigorous  formal  discipHne. 
Berg's  early  song-style  reaches  its  apex  in  the  beautiful  lyrical 
enclaves  of  Marie's  part  in  Wozzeck  [e.g.  the  Lullaby,  I/3).  The 
preparatory  nature  of  his  early  songs,  as  well  as  their  implicit 
operatic  qualities,  were  recognized  and  revealed  in  retrospect, 
as  it  were,  by  Berg  himself,  when  in  1928  he  prepared  the 
orchestral  version  of  the  Seven  Early  Songs. 

Once  caught  up  in  the  maelstrom  of  operatic  composition. 
Berg  abandoned  song-writing  altogether.  Similarly  brief  was 
his  excursion  into  the  realm  of  the  musical  miniature.  Only  the 
four  pieces  for  clarinet  and  piano.  Op.  5,  bear  wimess  to  the 
temporary  attraction  of  Schoenberg's  experimental  piano 
pieces.  Op.  11  and  Op.  19,  and  of  Webern's  early  cychc  com- 
positions. 


36 


EARLY    WORKS 

The  eighty-two  early  songs  and  duets  comprise: 

(a)  The  first  setting  of  Storm's  Schliesse  mir  die  Augen  beide, 
written  in  1900,  the  earhest  composition  of  Berg's  that 
has  survived.! 

(b)  Seventy  songs  and  duets  composed  between  1900  and 
1908. 

(c)  The  Seven  Early  Songs  of  1905-08,  pubhshed  in  1928,  in 
an  edition  with  piano  accompaniment  and  in  an  orches- 
tral version. 

{d)    The  four  songs,  Op.  2,  composed  in  1909. 

Berg's  earliest  song  is  deliberately  irregular  in  metre.  It  skil- 
fully avoids  the  obviousness  of  traditional  four-bar  periodiza- 
tion  by  means  of  interstitial  joins  {x)  and  5/4  rhythm  (Example 
25): 


®    (D    © 


®    (D 


Example  25 

This  first  Storm  song  shows  the  influence  of  Schumann;  the 
absence  of  the  chromatic  style  of  Hugo  Wolf,  fashionable  at  the 
time  of  its  composition,  is  noteworthy. 

All  but  one  of  the  early  songs  in  group  {b)  have  remained 
unpublished  so  far.  2  They  include  a  number  of  settings  of 
poems  by  Alfred  Mombert  and  Peter  Altenberg,  to  whom 
Berg  was  to  return  in  his  Opp.  2  and  4.  Most  of  the  songs  in 
group  {b)  were  composed  before  1905,  the  year  in  which  Berg 
became  Schoenberg's  pupil,  but  some  of  them,  including  An 
Leukon,  which  has  been  published,  were  evidently  written  in 
1908,  the  year  of  the  piano  Variations  and  the  Piano  Sonata. 

^Published  together  with  the  second  setting  in  1930.  See  p.  130. 
^A  complete  list  of  the  titles  is  given  in  Appendix  4.  Berg's  widow  is  unwilling  to 
pubhsh  these  songs. 

37 


ALBAN   BERG 

The  printed  title-page  of  the  Seven  Early  Songs  bears  the  date 
1907,  but  this  is  misleading.  The  first  song  to  be  composed,  Im 
Z/mmer  (words  by  Johannes  Schlaf),  dates  from  1905,  while  the 
remaining  six  songs  were  written  between  the  summer  of  1906 
and  the  spring  of  1908.  The  choice  of  poets,  from  the  Roman- 
tics Storm  and  Lenau  to  the  modernists  Schlaf,  Rilke  and 
Hartleben,  reveals  the  same  divided  loyalty  as  group  [h)  had 
shown.  The  music  shows  similar  traits.  Im  Zimmer  and  Die 
Nachtigall  still  betray  the  influence  of  Schumann  and  Brahms, 
while  Traumgekront  (words  by  Rilke)  is  already  fashioned  as  an 
impeccable  sonata-form  movement.  Its  chromaticism,  as  well 
as  the  emotional  impetus  of  Sommertage,  disclose  the  extent  to 
which  the  young  Berg  abandoned  himself  to  the  idiom  of  early 
Schoenberg,  under  the  impact  of  his  teacher's  overpowering 
personality.  The  most  progressive  song  of  the  whole  group  is 
undoubtedly  Nacht.  It  opens  the  whole  cycle  in  the  published 
version  of  1928,  but  was  actually  the  last  to  be  composed 
(Spring,  1908).  It  is  remarkable  for  the  degree  to  which  Berg 
had  already  integrated  Debussy's  technique  of  the  whole-tone 
scale  with  his  own  post-romantic  idiom.  All  the  melodic  par- 
ticles and  all  the  harmonies  of  this  song  grow  quite  naturally 
out  of  the  subject  given  out  by  the  singer  in  bar  i : 


b 

Example  26 

'a  and  'F  in  vertical  form  become  the  chords  'x'  and  'y'.  The 
latter  in  turn  represent  a  row  of  augmented  triads,  in  the  order 
of  a  descending  whole-tone  scale.  They  are  identical  with  the 
chordal  crystallization  of  the  chief  thematic  subject  of  Liszt's 
Faust  Symphony,  'x'  and  'y\  made  to  oscillate  regularly,  are 

38 


EARLY    WORKS 


converted  into  an  accompanying  figure  which  clearly  fore- 
shadows the  cadential  chords  of  Wozzeck: 


Example  27 

The  structural  logic  of  this  song  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact 
that  the  instrumental  phrase : 


Example  28 

represents  nothing  but  a  telescoped  diminution  of  'a   plus  'V 
of  Example  26. 

The  orchestral  version  of  1928  provides  different  sonorities 
for  each  song.  Nacht,  Liebesode  and  Sommertage  are  scored  for  a 
large  orchestra  with  double  woodwind,  four  horns  and  much 
percussion,  while  Die  Nachtigall  is  set  for  divided  strings  only. 
Im  Zimmer,  on  the  other  hand,  dispenses  with  string  tone 
throughout,  relying  exclusively  on  woodwind,  horns,  harp  and 
percussion.  Berg's  economical  use  of  a  rich  orchestral  palette, 
as  seen  later  in  Wozzeck,  is  already  apparent  in  the  orchestral 
version  of  this  early  song-cycle.  The  first  performance  of  the 
Seven  Early  Songs  took  place  in  Vienna  on  November  6,  1928. 
Schoenberg  attended  the  first  performance  in  Berlin  in  the 
following  spring  and  sent  Berg  a  congratulatory  wire.  Berg 
replied  enthusiastically  on  May  7,  1929: 

*.  .  .  Your  telegram  delighted  me,  as  also  the  mere  fact  that  you 
attended  the  concert.  These  songs  have  for  me  greater  value  than 
they  really  possess  because  of  their  close  association  with  my  years 

39 


ALBAN  BERG 

of  Study  with  you.  And  the  fact  that  I  succeeded  in  orchestratiag 
these  songs  so  that  they  impressed  you  as  sounding  well,  brings 
this  past  still  nearer  to  me.  .  .  .' 

The  song  An  Leukon  (words  by  Gleim,  an  eighteenth-century 
poet)  was  written  in  the  spring  of  1908,  together  with  the  last 
three  of  the  'Seven  Early  Songs'.  It  culminates  in  the  cry 
*Fluchtig  ist  die  Zeit' — Vita  fugax.  This  re-echoes  through 
several  octaves  of  tempestuous  piano  accompaniment.  The 
words  have  an  ominous  ring,  in  retrospect.  They  clearly 
express  an  ardent  desire  for  creative  fulfdment,  welling  up  from 
the  subconscious  in  Berg's  adolescence,  instinctively  sensing 
the  brevity  of  the  life-span  the  Gods  were  willing  to  grant  him. 


Of  the  four  songs  Op.  2,  composed  early  in  1909,  only  the 
first  (words  by  Hebbel)  belongs  to  the  romantic  type  of  Lied, 
such  as  Wolf  and  Maliler  were  writing  at  or  just  before  the 
turn  of  the  century.  In  the  three  following  songs  (words  by  the 
remarkable  pre-expressionist  poet  Alfred  Mombert,  taken  from 
the  volume  Der  Gluhende),  Berg  abandons  the  tradition  of  the 
romantic  Lied  more  decisively  than  Schoenberg  did  in  his  early 
song-cycles.  Mombert's  poems  are  mystical  visions  in  free 
metre.  They  renounce  the  traditional  means  of  rhyme  and 
rhetoric.  On  the  other  hand,  they  contain  enclaves  of  realistic 
impressions,  strung  together  like  photographs  on  a  film-strip. 
Their  brand  of  pre-surrealistic  poetry  approximates  already  to 
the  peculiar  type  of 'prose-poem'  cultivated  by  Peter  Altenberg. 
Both  types  of  allusive  poetry  call  for  a  musical  complement 
utterly  different  from  the  symmetries  of  rhyme  and  stanza  in 
the  romantic  Lied  of  the  past.  Berg's  discovery  of  Mombert 
and  Altenberg,  at  a  time  when  Schoenberg  and  Webern  were 

40 


EARLY    WORKS 


Strongly  addicted  to  the  German  'Parnassian'  Stefan  George, 
shows  him  instinctively  heading  for  the  dramatic  psychology 
of  a  new  type  of  opera.  It  has  often  been  remarked  that  Berg's 
Op.  2  is  a  work  of  crisis  and  stylistic  transition,  typographically 
apparent  in  the  fact  that  only  the  first  three  songs  have  key  sig- 
natures, whereas  the  fourth  dispenses  with  them  for  the  first 
time.  More  revealing,  however,  than  these  easily  recognizable 
signs  of  change  is  the  fact  that  all  four  songs  are  derived  from  a 
single  chord.  This  is  the  chord  of  fourths  which  concludes  the 
fourth  song,  but  also  plays  a  determining  part  in  the  other 
songs,  and  notably  in  the  Hebbel  song.  This  common  basic 
harmony  for  all  four  songs  is  a  strange  phenomenon  in  a  com- 
position of  pre-dodecaphonic  days.  The  chord  as  such  attracted 
Schoenberg  so  much  that  he  quoted  it  in  his  Harmonielehre  of 
1911,1  without  clearly  indicating  the  work  from  which  it  was 
taken.  He  must  have  been  under  the  impression  that  the  chord 
had  been  used  for  the  first  time  in  Berg's  Op.  2.  Schoenberg 
himself  used  it  in  his  Opp.  11  and  16,  composed  in  1908-09. 
Moreover,  Leibowitz  has  discovered  that  the  chord  occurs 
already  in  Schoenberg's  own  early  song,  Erwartung  (Op.  2,  No. 
i).  The  reason  why  Schoenberg  apparently  failed  to  recognize 
his  own  harmony  of  1900  in  Berg's  work  of  1909  lies  perhaps 
in  the  fact  that  the  chord  is  treated  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  2  as 
'Alterationsharmonie  of  the  chord  of  the  diminished  seventh 
on  E  flat.  This  is  proved  by  its  immediate  diatonic  resolution : 


^Cf.  p.  469,  Example  346. 


41 


ALBAN   BERG 


h)  Berg's  song  the  same  chord,  however,  is  used  in  complete 
isolation,  bereft  of  any  modulatory  logistics.  It  is  the  juxta- 
position of  this  chord  {x)  and  the  following  one  (y)  which  may 
have  opened  Schoenberg's  eyes  to  its  future  constructional  pos- 
sibihties : 


llJ^^i 

■^ — 

'     etc. 

t=: 

? 


Example  30 

It  was  the  constructive  element  of  the  fourth,  and  the  inte- 
gration of  altered  parallel  sevenths  into  a  sequence  of  chords  of 
the  fourth,  which  paved  the  way  for  a  new  concept  of  harmony. 
That  Berg  himself  was  aware  of  these  constructive  imphcations 
can  be  seen  from  the  identical  sequences  of  harmony  for  which 
this  chord  gives  the  signal  in  both  No.  4  and  No.  2  of  Op.  2;! 


Example  31 

^The  final    bars   are  identical   with   Schoenberg's    quotation,  as    reproduced   in 
Example  30. 

42 


EARLY    WORKS 


8 

II^ 

L '■"'''  ^ 

• 

.  ffl 

^■1 

— 1^ 

^^ 

t- 

Bullr 

^Wp 

1c 

r'K 1     t    .    w 

2o 

So 

L 

5a 

6a 

V- l,ll.i^|,ri      I  =^ 

l..i        ^  ^ 

^        1     1 

l.'S 

r    M 

1. 

t^ 

e^c. 


Example  32 

The  same  chord  becomes  the  pivot  'of  m.odulation  in  No.  i 
(bars  5  and  7),  at  the  words  'sleep'  and  'awake'. 

Is  this  chord  'x'  really  only  a  derivative  of  the  chromatic 
scale,  as  Schoenberg  argued  in  191 1?  A  close  investigation 
reveals  Example  3 1  as  a  sequence  of  harmonies  based  on  a  chain 
of  consecutive  fourths.  (Cf.  the  bass  'z  in  Example  31,  which 
is  identical  with  the  piling  fourths  in  the  introductory  bars  of 
Schoenberg's  Chamber  Symphony,  No.  i.  Op.  9.)  But  this 
sequence  is,  in  turn,  only  the  basis  for  a  chain  of  chords  of  the 
dominant  in  chromatic  alteration : 


Example  3  3 


By  alternative  augmentation  and  diminution  of  these  chords 
Berg  avoids  the  parallels  of  the  tritone  (cf  Example  3  3  at  'a)  and 
achieves  through  a  re-arrangement  of  intervals  the  parallel 
fourths  of  Example  31  (at  'y').  There  the  'latent'  fourths  in  'y' 
correspond  to  the  succession  of  intervals  in  'z  .  The  harmonic 


43 


ALBAN   BERG 

events  of  these  bars  are  reflected  in  the  vertical,  chordal  use  of 
the  bass  'z  .  Berg  had  thus  discovered,  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
four,  one  of  the  principles  of  the  future  twelve-note  technique. 
The  chordal  sequence  of  Example  3 1  is  also  used  as  if  it  were 
the  formula  of  a  preconceived  series.  This  may  be  observed  in 
No.  2,  bars  1-4  (in  the  piano  part),  bars  9-10  (in  a  telescoped 
version  in  the  vocal  part)  and  bars  15-16  (in  extremely  con- 
densed form  in  the  piano  part).  The  curious  thematic  inter- 
dependence of  voice  and*  instrument,  seen  in  these  bars,  may 
owe  something  to  Schoenberg's  remarkable  song  In  diesen 
Wintertagen,  Op.  14,  No.  2,  composed  in  1907. 

In  the  hght  of  these  brave  exploits  in  the  'uncharted  sea'  of 
the  harmony  of  the  fourth,  occasional  reminiscences  in  these 
songs  of  Schoenberg's  Gurrelieder  and  Wagner's  Tristan  become 
almost  irrelevant.  1 


Berg's  early  instrumental  music  is  conceived  in  the  spirit  of 
Vienna's  classical  tradition.  It  derives  ultimately  from  the  forms 
of  variation  and  sonata-form  cultivated  especially  by  Brahms. 
But  its  ultimate  aim  is  the  conception  of  a  new  telescoped 
sonata-form,  achieved  in  the  one-movement  Piano  Sonata  Op. 
I  and  the  two-movement  String  Quartet  Op.  3 .  The  ambivalent 
process  of  shrinking  and  condensation  of  content,  noticeable  in 
both  works,  was  in  time  to  prohibit  altogether  any  large-scale 

^The  quasi-orchestral  effect  of  the  violent  glissatido  for  the  piano  in  No.  4  antici- 
pated the  numerous glissandi  in  Berg's  first  orchestral  score:  the  Altenberg  songs  Op.  4. 
It  also  underHnes  the  fact  that  the  composition  of  songs  always  retained,  for  Berg,  the 
character  of  a  solution  pro  tempore  only.  The  later  orchestral  version  of  the  Seven 
Early  Songs  of  1928  may  in  turn  have  prompted  Rene  Leibowitz  to  provide  his 
orchestral  version  of  Op.  2,  known  through  a  gramophone  recording.  The  translation 
of  the  music  into  Berg's  orchestral  idiom  is  very  skilfully  done,  except  for  the  gUssando 
of  No.  4,  which  unaccountably  falls  back  on  Berg's  own  pianistic  emergency  solution. 

44 


EARLY    WORKS 

composition  on  these  lines.  1  It  was  to  lead  to  a  condition  in 
which  the  thematic  material  tended  to  pile  up  vertically  instead 
of  unfolding  horizontally  in  time.  In  the  short  run  that  develop- 
ment led  to  temporary  congestion,  expressed  in  the  aphoristic 
miniatures  of  Op.  5 ;  in  the  long  run  it  resulted  in  a  style  of 
thematic  integration  of  unparalleled  severity,  culminating  in 
Wozzeck  and  Lulu. 

Berg's  earliest  extant  instrumental  composition,  the  Varia- 
tions for  piano  on  an  original  theme,  had  a  single  pubHc  per- 
formance in  Vienna  on  November  8, 1908.  The  work  remained 
in  manuscript,  and  is  pubhshed  for  the  first  time  in  the  appendix 
to  this  book.  It  is  rather  doubtful  whether  1908  (the  year  in 
which  the  Piano  Sonata  was  completed)  can  be  accepted  as  the 
year  of  the  actual  composition  of  the  Variations.  However,  it 
is  possible  that  both  works — the  Variations  as  schoolwork  in 
connection  with  his  studies  with  Schoenberg,  the  Sonata  as  free 
composition  in  his  leisure  hours — progressed,  as  it  were,  on 
parallel  hnes.  In  a  letter  written  in  late  July,  1907,  ^  Berg  refers 
to  his  study  of  counterpoint,  mentioning  in  that  connection 
choral  pieces  and  a  fugue  with  three  subjects,  adding  as  a  kind 
of  postscript:  1  am  working  for  my  own  pleasure  on  a  Piano 
Sonata'. 

Berg's  Variations  are  evidently  modelled  rather  on  Brahms's 
Piano  Variations  Op.  9  and  Op.  21,  with  their  emphasis  on 
canonic  experiments,  than  on  the  more  brilliant  Handel  Varia- 
tions Op.  24.  Berg's  theme  creates  at  once  a  Brahmsian  mood, 
with  its  ponderous  parallel  sixths  and  clogging  octave-arpeg- 
gios in  the  left  hand.  The  theme  is  dualistic,  exactly  as  is  the 
theme  of  Brahms's  Op.  21  and  the  'cobbler's  patch'  of  Beet- 


^The  instrumental  works  of  Berg's  maturity  are  based  on  entirely  different  struc- 
tural principles. 

*Cf.  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.  p.  7. 

45 


ALBAN   BERG 


hoven's  'Diabelli'  Variations.  The  sequence  of  harmony  to 
which  the  theme's  incipit  'a  is  subjected,  points  back  to  Beet- 
hoven's similar  procedure  in  the  case  of  the  'DiabeUi'  theme: 


Exufuplc  34 


$ 


^ 


m 


Wf^f 


n 


etc. 


^ 


M 


P 


Example  35* 
The  twelve  variations  are  full  of  conventionahties.  However, 
in  some  of  them  anticipations  of  features  of  Berg's  future 
creative  personahty  are  found.  The  mature  composer's  dehght 
in  contrapuntal  complexities  is  foreshadowed  in  the  skilful 
handling  of  two-part  and  'infmite'  canon  in  variations  3,  4  and 
5.  Schumann  and  Brahms,  the  former  in  the  concertante  episode 
of  Variations  11 -12,  the  latter  in  the  magyar  melancholy  of 
variation  7,  remain  Berg's  styHstic  models  for  a  great  part  of  the 
work.  However,  Variation  12,  with  its  tendency  towards  irreg- 
ular metre,  its  Reger-hke  harmonies  and  the  startling  double 
intrusion  of  the  whole-tone  scale  in  bar  8  and  again  eight  bars 
before  the  end,  suddenly  reveals  a  secret  link  with  the  progres- 
sive song  Nacht.  This  passage  proves  that  the  latent  tension  in 

♦[Sketch] 

46 


EARLY    WORKS 


Berg's  music  could  not  long  remain  suppressed.  Its  creative 
release  in  a  work  remarkable  for  originality  of  method  and  the 
individual  character  of  its  idiom  was  close  at  hand. 


Berg's  Piano  Sonata  Op.  i  was  written  in  the  summer 
months  of  1907  and  1908.  It  was  completed  in  the  latter  year 
on  the  family  estate  of  'Berghof '  in  Carinthia.  It  was  published 
(together  with  the  songs  Op.  2)  in  19101  and  first  performed 
(together  with  the  String  Quartet  Op.  3)  on  April  24,  191 1,  in 
Vienna,  with  little  apparent  success.  This  Sonata  consists  of  a 
single  movement,  in  classical  first-movement  sonata-form, 
with  repeated  exposition,  expanded  development,  varied  re- 
capitulation and  a  short  coda,  growing  out  of  certain  residual 
elements  of  the  exposition.  The  fact  that  Berg's  Op.  i  is  a  one- 
movement  work  might  lead  to  comparison  with  Liszt's  and 
Strauss's  type  of  symphonic  poem  in  one  movement,  or  with 
Schoenberg's  early  instrumental  music,  where  the  traditional 
four  movements  of  the  classical  symphony  are  telescoped  into 
one  {Verkldrte  Nacht,  String  Quartet  Op.  7,  Pelleas  und  Meli- 
sande,  Chamber  Symphony  Op.  9).  However,  Berg's  work  was 
actually  planned  as  a  Sonata  in  three  movements,  with  slow 
movement  and  finale  to  follow  the  traditional  first  movement 
in  sonata-form.  When  Berg  complained  to  Schoenberg  that 
inspiration  for  these  later  movements  was  slow  in  coming,  the 
latter  concluded  that  Berg  had  said  all  there  was  to  say  and  per- 
suaded him  to  let  the  completed  first  movement  stand  for  the 
whole  sonata.  A  family-likeness  between  theme-fragments  in 
its  first  and  thirty-first  bars  and  motives  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  9 
has  ehcited  frequent  comment.  The  common  thematic  link  is, 

^Revised  versions  of  Op.  i  appeared  twice  during  the  composer's  lifetime,  in  1920 
and  1927. 

47 


ALBAN  BERG 


of  course,  the  interval  of  the  fourth.  However,  while  Schoen- 
berg  treats  the  fourth  as  thematic  raw  material,  Berg  presents 
already  in  the  very  first  bars  a  highly  organized  combination  of 
motives,  the  thematic  possibilities  of  which  determine  the  plan 
of  the  whole  sonata : 


\f  continued 


Example  36 

The  pecuHar  quaUty  of  motive  'a  depends  only  to  a  lesser 
degree  on  its  division  into  two  intervals  of  ascending  fourths. 
Its  character  is  chiefly  determined  by  the  interval  of  the  aug- 
mented seventh,  which  becomes  the  incipit  of  the  second  theme 
of  the  expository  group  A : 

AH 

1 


Example  37 

The  ubiquitous  interval  of  the  seventh  can  be  recognized  in  the 
cantabile  group  B  I  (bar  30  ff )  as  well  as  in  B  II  (bar  39  ff)  and  in 
the  concluding  group  C  (bar  50  ff),  where  it  gives  the  impres- 
sion of  being  a  deliberate  quotation  from  A  I : 


EARLY    WORKS 


Berg's  endeavour  to  achieve  structural  integration  despite  the- 
matic complexity  is  brilliantly  successful.  The  numerous  variants 
cropping  up  in  the  course  of  the  expanded  development  section 
can  easily  be  traced  back  to  their  origin  in  the  exposition.  Some- 
times these  variants  appear  as  fascinating  retrospective  self- 
revelations  (and  as  such  they  are  typical  products  of  Berg's 
introspective  nature  1).  One  such  case  is  the  transformation  of 
A  T  a-h  at  the  beginning  of  the  development  section: 


Example  39 

Finally,  attention  should  be  drawn  to  Berg's  emphatic  way  of 
confirming  the  Sonata's  inherent  B  minor  tonahty.  A  tonal 
cadence  occurs  already  in  bars  3-4  and  a  repeated  plagal  cadence 
rounds  off  the  work  (bars  176-177)  without  a  trace  of  tonal 
ambiguity.  Berg's  predilection  for  tonal  cadences,  even  towards 
the  end  of  compositions  with  considerably  diminished  tonal 
impHcations,  became  in  time  an  unmistakable  feature  of  his 
personal  idiom. 


Berg's  first  String  Quartet  Op.  3  was  written  in  the  earUer 
part  of  1910.  Already  on  May  30  of  that  year  the  first  move- 
ment was  put  into  rehearsal;  by  the  early  summer  the  whole 
work  was  being  rehearsed  in  private.  After  the  soHtary  per- 
formance in  April  191 1  the  Quartet  seemed  to  sHp  back  into 

1  Cf.  the  late  disclosure  of  the  full  possibilities  of  the  Seuen  Early  Songs  in  the 
orchestral  version  of  1928. 

D  49 


ALBAN  BERG 

oblivion,  until  in  1920  Webern  planned  to  rehearse  and  per- 
form it  in  public.  Stimulated  by  this  renewed  interest  in  his 
early  work,  Berg  decided  to  revise  and  pubHsh  it,  together  with 
the  pieces  for  clarinet  and  piano,!  and  thus  Op.  3  and  Op.  5 
(together  with  revised  editions  of  Op.  i  and  Op.  2)  were  issued 
in  the  autumn  of  1920.  The  Quartet  was  again  revised  in  1924 
and  this  fmal  version  was  subsequently  published  by  Universal 
Edition  in  miniature  score. 

The  Quartet  is  the  last  'free'  composition  written  by  Berg 
while  studying  with  Schoenberg.  In  it  his  musical  individuahty 
asserts  itself  with  explosive  vehemence.  It  includes  all  the 
features  of  his  mature  style.  What  it  lacks  in  lyrical  tenderness 
— so  characteristic  of  the  Berg  of  Wozzeck  and  the  VioHn  Con- 
certo— it  makes  up  for  in  dramatic  directness  of  appeal.  The 
most  unusual  feature  of  this  work  is  the  fact  that  it  is  written  in 
two  movements  only.  A  closer  analysis  reveals  that  the  relation- 
ship of  these  movements  is  that  of  a  development  section  to  its 
exposition.  The  thematic  interdependence  of  the  two  move- 
ments clearly  suggests  their  stylistic  models.  They  are  to  be 
found,  outside  the  world  of  Schoenberg's  one-movement 
works,  Opp.  7  and  9,  and  Webern's  early  cycUcal  'Five  Move- 
ments' for  string  quartet,  in  Mahler's  later  symphonies,  which 
made  a  deep  and  lasting  impression  on  Berg  in  his  years  of  early 
manhood.  Mahler's  Fifth  Symphony  (in  five  movements)  be- 
gins with  two  movements  (a  Funeral  March  followed  by  a 
tempestuous  Allegro)  based  on  the  same  thematic  material  and 
complementary  to  each  other.  Similarly,  Mahler's  Eighth  Sym- 
phony consists  of  only  two  movements,  whose  thematic  and 
spiritual  interrelationship  becomes  clear  in  the  following  juxta- 
position of  the  fiery  '  Accende  lumen'  motive  of  Part  I  and  its 

^  Letter  to  Webern  of  April  14,  1920.  In  a  previous  letter,  on  March  16,  1920,  Berg 
had  confessed  to  an  inexplicable  partiality  for  the  Quartet. 

50 


EARLY    WORKS 


mystical  transformation  into  the  symbol  in  sound  of  the  Mount 
of  Anchorites  of  Part  II : 


Ac  cen      de ^  ac  ■  zende     lu  -  men  fens! -bus 


Example  40 

If  the  basic  structure  of  Berg's  Quartet  owes  something  to  these 
thematicaUy  interdependent  works  of  Mahler,  the  thematic 
material  itself,  and  its  motivic  proliferations,  seem  equally  in- 
debted to  certain  processes  in  works  by  Strauss  and  Schoenberg. 
This  becomes  particularly  evident  if  the  main  subject  of  Berg's 
first  movement  is  confronted  with  its  ancestors :  Schoenberg's 
own  Quartet  Op.  7,  and  Strauss's  Death  and  Transfiguration: 

l)A   Ber^  :  Op. 3  (I) 


Example  41 
Similarly,  a  blood-relationship  is  apparent  between  the  chief 

51 


ALBAN   BERG 


subject  of  Berg's  second  movement  and  certain  historic  the- 
matic types  in  works  by  Wagner,  Strauss  and  Schoenberg.  A  a, 
in  Example  41,  is  clearly  apparent  behind  B  a  in.  Example  42 
below.  Motive  b  spawns  new  elements  and  begets  a  motive  c, 
which  functions  as  an  appendix-like  growth  ^  c  in  Example  41 : 


Berg:  op -3(11) 


(iTxtnapoMd  to 
'    low«r  octa«) 


Wagner:  "Tn3t«n"0859)  H,  HI.  port.  p.  856 


R.  Strauss:  "Heldrnleben"  (1898)  Z.95 


Schonbrrq:   Str.-Qut.  op.?  (l9oS)   2. 10 


Example  42 
Apart  from  these  models,  certain  characteristics  of  Schoenberg's 
second  String  Quartet,  Op.  10,  may  have  affected  the  work  of 
his  disciple.  However,  Schoenberg's  emphasis  on  tonality  in 
that  work  (F  sharp  minor  in  the  first  movement,  D  minor  in 
the  second,  E  flat  minor  in  the  third  and  a  return  to  F  sharp 
minor  in  the  coda  of  the  fourth  movement)  is  contradicted  by 
the  younger  composer's  equally  emphatic  insistence  on  tonal 
ambiguity.  Although  Berg's  Quartet  seems  rooted  in  the 
polarized  conflict  between  the  tonal  centres  of  F  and  D,  their 
natural  affinities  are  neglected  or  deliberately  ignored.  Although, 
for  instance,  the  coda  of  Berg's  first  movement  (after  bar  160) 

52 


EARLY    WORKS 


develops  in  the  direction  of  a  clear  F  major,  with  all  its  domin- 
ant implications  (bars  165-168),  the  movement  ends  with  an 
unresolved  dissonance : 


ftetiflous 
resolution 


Example  43 
To  be  sure,  this  harmonic  ellipsis  clearly  arouses  the  desire  and 
expectation  of  an  F  major  resolution.  The  denial  of  this  resolu- 
tion is  one  of  Berg's  most  typical  stylistic  features.  1  It  was  later 
to  play  an  integral  part  in  the  deliberate  tonal  ambiguity  of 
sectional  closes  in  the  Lyric  Suite,  Wozzeck  and  Lulu.  The  most 
startling  appHcation  of  this  new  device  occurs  in  the  last  bar  of 
the  first  movement  of  this  Quartet.  The  bar  contains  the  basic 
chord  of  D  minor,  a  Neapolitan  sixth,  and  an  octave-leap  into, 
as  it  were,  indeterminate  pitch  on  the  last  semiquaver.  The  col- 
lapse of  the  tonal  structure  of  the  music  on  this  last  note  antici- 
pates the  effects  of  sheer  noise  of  modern  'bruitisme'.  This  last 
bar  has  its  place  among  the  critical  turning-points  in  the  musical 
development  of  this  century : 


d  'moll 

Example  44 
^  It  became  later  one  of  the  most  hackneyed  effects  in  modern  harmony,  and  plays 


a  considerable  role  in  modern  jazz  music. 


53 


ALBAN   BERG 

Berg's  bold  experiment  may  have  been  suggested  by  certain 
contemporary  works  by  Webern,  in  which  similar  elliptic  final 
cadences  occur.  Webern's  Opp.  3  and  5,  both  composed  in 
1909,  about  a  year  before  Berg's  Quartet,  provide  examples. 
Schoenberg  quoted  in  his  Harmonielehre^  bar  5  of  the  first 
movement  of  Webern's  Op.  5.  This  quotation  contains  inter 
alia  a  chord  which  had  been  played  already  in  the  previous  bar 
as  a  pizzicato  conclusion  of  a  certain  phrase.  Played  'arco'  on  its 
repetition,  it  can  be  understood  as  a  synchronized  sound  of 
blurred  root  triads  of  A  flat  and  B  flat.  The  blurring  is  created 
by  the  deliberately  'missed'  octaves  of  their  tonics : 

Tohic  of  D  minor 


th  impure  octave 


Example  45 

Another  phenomenon  important  for  Berg's  future  develop- 
ment remains  to  be  discussed — the  anticipatory  occurrence  of 
serial  technique  in  this  early  Quartet.  It  becomes  evident  when 
the  chief  subject  of  the  first  movement  (cf.  Example  41  [i])  is 
analysed  in  accordance  with  the  later  serial  concepts.  This  main 
subject  appears  in  the  second  violin  in  bars  1-4  and  continues, 
in  a  transposition  a  sixth  downwards,  in  the  viola  (bars  5-9).  It 
could  be  traced  back  to  this  'imaginary'  Basic  Shape: 


lone  9co\z 


ip.  468  ff. 


Example  4.6 


54 


EARLY     WORKS 

The  most  important  feature  is  the  whole-tone  character  of  'a', 
which  is  kept  intact  through  all  thematic  transformations.  On 
the  basis  of  Example  46  it  is  possible  to  understand  melodic 
ideas  such  as  those  in  the  first  movement,  bar  7,  ist  violin,  or 
the  second  movement,  bar  25,  as  serial  derivatives  from  this 
source. 


The  four  pieces  for  clarinet  and  piano  were  written  in  the 
summer  of  191 3.  They  were  first  performed  on  October  17, 
1919,  at  one  of  the  concerts  of  Schoenberg's  'Society  for  Private 
Performances'  in  Vienna,  and  published  in  the  following  year. 
They  were  the  first  of  a  group  of  works  which  Berg  dedicated 
to  Schoenberg  after  he  had  ceased  to  be  his  pupil.  These  re- 
peated dedications  are  expressive  of  Berg's  strong  personal 
attachment  to  his  friend  and  mentor,  but  they  also  hint  at  the 
continued  active  interest  taken  by  Schoenberg  in  the  develop- 
ment of  his  former  pupil.  Each  one  of  the  compositions  dedi- 
cated to  Schoenberg  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  creative 
period  for  Berg.l  The  pieces  for  clarinet  are  deliberately 
modelled  on  the  musical  miniatures  produced  by  Schoenberg 
and  Webern  in  1908  and  19 12  as  a  kind  of  implied  protest 
against  the  mammoth-scores  of  the  new  century's  first  decade. 
It  seems  worth  while  recording  that  this  reaction  began  to 
manifest  itself  exactly  at  the  time  when  Mahler,  Scriabin  and 
Schoenberg  himself  completed  their  outsize  'symphonies  of  the 
thousand'.  The  work  of  Schoenberg  and  Webern  on  a  minia- 
ture scale  was,  of  course,  no  isolated  musical  phenomenon. 
Contemporary  works  of  an  aphoristic  nature,  such  as  Busoni's 

^Other  works  dedicated  to  Schoenberg  were  the  Three  Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  6,  the 
Chamber  Concerto  and  Luhi. 

55 


ALBAN   BERG 

Elegies  for  piano  and  his  Piano  Sonatinas  of  1910/12,  Bartok's 
Bagatelles  Op.  6  and  easy  Piano  Pieces  of  1908  (one  of  which  is 
quoted  in  Schoenberg's  Harmonielehre)  show  a  similar  outlook. 
However,  more  interesting  than  the  parallels  between  the 
Vienna  school  and  other  progressive  European  composers  are 
the  intrinsic  differences  which  exist  in  the  work  of  the  Vienna 
school  itself,  between  the  musical  miniatures  of  Schoenberg  and 
Webern  and  those  of  Berg.  They  become  especially  noticeable 
if  one  confronts  one  of  Berg's  clarinet  pieces  with  its  obvious 
stylistic  model.  Comparison  of  the  second  piece  with  Schoen- 
berg's  piano  piece.  Op.  19,  No.  2,  reveals  that  whereas  the  latter 
rehes  entirely  on  the  motoric  motive  of  the  continuously  re- 
peated third,  the  'espressivo'  motive  of  bars  2-3  being  treated  as 
a  passing  phase  without  thematic  consequence,  in  Berg's  piece 
a  thematic  conflict  ensues  already  in  bar  2,  through  the  com- 
bination of  the  reiterated  piano  chords  and  the  melody  in  the 
clarinet.  That  conflict  leads  ultimately  to  an  alteration  in  pitch 
of  the  'constant'  third  D-F  sharp,  which  at  the  end  of  bar  5  has 
become  D  flat — F  natural.  The  status  quo  is  only  restored 
through  the  tail-end  of  the  phrase  of  the  clarinet,  bar'  7.  But 
that  phrase  is  set  against  the  now  diminished  'constant'  third  on 
the  piano  which,  according  to  the  composer's  expression  marks, 
must  be  clearly  audible  so  as  to  underline  the  condition  of  per- 
manent conflict  of  harmony.  In  Schoenberg's  piece  the  'con- 
stant' third  really  is  constant,  from  the  first  to  the  last  bar. 

Like  the  middle  numbers  of  the  Altenberg  songs  of  1912,  the 
clarinet  pieces  impress  the  student  of  today,  in  retrospect,  as 
pointers  towards  the  future  style  of  Wozzeck.  The  'Invention 
on  a  six-note  chord'  ( Wozzeck,  III/4),  with  its  ghostly  harmonic 
pedal,  expressive  of  the  enveloping  mists  of  the  pond  scene, 
seems  foreshadowed  in  the  rigid  immutability  of  the  chromatic 
suspension  chord  on  the  basis  of  C  (Op.  5,  No.  4,  bar  17  ff), 

56 


EARLY    WORKS 

whose  resolution  merges  with  the  unreal  whisper  of  a  weird 
effect  of  harmonics  on  the  piano.  The  syncopated  rhythm 


im 


of  this  fourth  clarinet  piece  recalls  the  rhythm  of  the 
first  movement  of  Mahler's  Ninth  Symphony,  but  it  also 
points  forward  to  the  sinister  rhythmic  symbols  in  Wozzeck, 
Lulu  and  the  Chamber  Concerto.  The  overpowering  explosion 
at  the  end  of  this  piece  is  comparable  with  the  glissando  in  the 
third  Mombert  song  (Op.  2,  No.  4)  and  the  percussive  crescendo 
after  Marie's  death  [Wozzeck  III/2).  The  ghostly  effect  of  upper 
partials  produced  on  the  piano  may  have  been  suggested  by  the 
aeoHan  harp  effect  in  Schoenberg's  Piano  Piece,  Op.  11,  No.  i. 
However,  while  that  effect  remains  an  episodic  impressionistic 
gesture  in  Schoenberg's  piece,  in  Berg's  composition  it  clearly 
expresses  with  dramatic  finality  an  ultimate  catastrophe.  The 
miniatures  of  Berg's  Op.  5  clearly  reveal  the  latent  musical 
dramatist,  waiting  impatiently  in  the  wings  for  the  decisive  cue. 
Something  might  be  said,  in  addition,  about  the  part  played 
by  mere  note-repetition  in  these  pieces.  This  can  be  observed 
especially  in  the  clarinet  part,  where  the  main  motives  congeal, 
as  it  were,  out  of  a  welter  of  trills,  *flutter-tonguing'  effects, 
tremolandi  and  irregular  note-repetitions.  Although  Berg  is 
anxious  to  avoid  the  structural  devices  of  sonata-form,  and 
especially  recapitulation,  yet  even  these  musical  miniatures  re- 
veal to  the  analyst  the  bony  structure  of  the  archetypal  sonata 
pattern.  No.  4  represents  a  telescoped  sonata-movement  with 
eUiptic  reprise  and  dramatic  coda.  The  content  of  this  final 
piece  goes  far  beyond  the  static  impressionism  of  Schoenberg's 
and  Webern's  contemporary  compositions.  It  heralds,  in  fact, 

57 


ALBAN   BERG 


future  Stresses  and  tensions  which  will  manifest  themelves  fully 
in  a  new  musical  drama. 


Berg's  first  opera  was  preceded  by  two  previous  works  em- 
ploying the  orchestra:  the  Altenberg  songs,  Op.  4,  and  the 
Three  Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  6.  Two  problems  of  paramount 
importance  for  the  future  composer  of  Wozzeck  were  the  es- 
tablishment of  an  orchestra,  capable  at  once  of  miniaturistic 
differentiation  and  of  sound-climaxes  of  shattering  intensity, 
and  the  estabhshment  of  a  new  relationship  between  the  singing 
voice  and  its  instrumental  accompaniment.  Both  problems  are 
posed  and  solved  with  remarkable  originality  in  Berg's  Op.  4. 

When  he  started  work  on  the  Altenberg  songs  in  19 12  Berg 
could  benefit  by  the  revolutionary  experiments  in  orchestral 
sonorities  and  vocal  expression  already  undertaken  by  Schoen- 
berg  and  Webem.  The  latter' s  surprisingly  mature  Passacaglia 
for  orchestra,  Op.  i  (1908)  already  made  use  of  the  rudiments 
of  a  new  serial  technique;  his  Six  Pieces  for  Orchestra,  Op.  6 
(1910),  followed  by  the  Five  Pieces  for  Orchestra,  Op.  10  (191 3), 
reduced  the  musical  picture  to  a  pointillistic  flash-light  snap- 
shot. In  Webern's  Op.  10,  No.  i,  sonority,  structure,  thematic 
evolution  and  all  the  paraphernalia  of  traditional  symphonic 
rhetoric  have  been  filtered  away,  leaving  a  residue  of  barely 
twelve  bars.  At  the  same  time  Berg  was  subjected  to  the  full 
impact  of  Schoenberg's  Five  Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  16,  and  the 
two  early  operas  Erwartung  and  Die  glUckliche  Hand  (composed 
roughly  between  1909  and  191 3).  It  is  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  16 
that  the  struggle  for  a  new  conception  of  orchestral  sonorities 
becomes  manifest.  It  is  here  that  the  antithesis  between  an  enor- 
mous orchestra  and  its  application  to  the  exclusive  expression  of 
minute  and  evanescent  sound  effects  creates  the  basis  of  a  new 

58 


EARLY     WORKS 

Style.  There  is,  undeniably,  a  paradoxical  discrepancy  between 
the  assembling  of  a  huge  orchestra  and  its  employment  in  pieces 
of  aphoristic  brevity.  Schoenberg's  increasing  desire  to  find 
exact  musical  equivalents  for  the  most  involved  psychological 
experiences  led  to  the  discovery  of  new  devices  such  as  the 
'flutter-tonguing'  effect  on  the  trombones  in  Op.  i6,  No.  5,  the 
unique  vocal  style  oiEnvartung  and  the  introduction  of 'Sprech- 
stimme'  into  the  chorus-parts  o£ Die  gluckliche  Hand.  It  led  also, 
in  Erwartung,  to  the  use  of  a  deliberately  asymmetrical  music  as 
accompaniment  to  a  psycho-analytical  text,  devoid  of  rhyme 
and  rhythmic  scansion.  The  sum  total  of  Schoenberg's  achieve- 
ments in  this  direction  constitutes  Berg's  point  of  departure  in 
his  approach  to  the  problem  'Singer  versus  orchestra'.  With  the 
unerring  instinct  of  genius  he  chose  for  his  own  experiments  the 
one  medium  neglected  at  that  time  by  both  Schoenberg  and 
Webern :  the  song  with  orchestral  accompaniment.  The  choice 
was  almost  inevitable  after  the  quasi-orchestral  ebullience  of  the 
last  Mombert  song.  There  Berg  had  already  taken  steps  leading 
away  from  traditional  post-Romantic  lyricism.  And  after  the 
free  rhythms  of  Mombert's  asymmetrical  prose,  it  seemed  a 
perfectly  logical  further  step  for  Berg  to  discover  Peter  Alten- 
berg,l  the  eccentric  Viennese  poet  and  'Socrates  of  the  Coffee- 
house', who  befriended  his  fiancee  Helene  Nahowski,  and  de- 
Hghted  in  inventing  sHghtly  scandalous  texts  to  picture  post- 
cards, in  an  embarrassing  mixture  of  obscenity  and  tenderness. 
Opus  4  was  composed  in  191 2,  the  first  work  of  Berg's 
creative  freedom,  after  the  termination  of  his  studies  with 
Schoenberg.  But  there  is  good  reason  to  beheve  that  Schoen- 
berg was  repeatedly  consulted  about  this  work  while  it  was 

^His  real  name  was  Pachard  Englander.  His  book  Neues  Altes,  of  1911,  includes 
pieces  dedicated  to  Helene  Nahowski.  Altenberg  died  in  Vienna,  half-forgotten,  in 
1919.  Berg  valued  his  books  highly,  and  put  them  on  a  separate  shelf  of  his  Ubrary, 
next  to  Strindberg's. 

59 


ALBAN  BERG 

Still  in  the  preparatory  stage.  After  its  completion  in  the  autumn 
of  1912  Schoenberg  accepted  it  for  inclusion  in  the  programme 
of  an  orchestral  concert  under  his  direction,  given  on  March  3 1, 
191 3,  in  the  Grosse  Musikvereinssaal,  Vienna.  Besides  Schoen- 
berg's  Chamber  Symphony,  Op.  9,  Webern's  orchestral  pieces 
Op.  6  and  Berg's  Altenberg  songs,  the  programme  was  to  have 
included  also  songs  by  Mahler  and  Zemlinsky  with  orchestral 
accompaniment.  But  owing  to  a  carefully-planned  riot  by  one 
section  of  the  audience  the  concert  had  to  be  abandoned  during 
the  performance  of  Berg's  songs,  which  seem  to  have  been 
drowned  in  the  ensuing  general  uproar.  A  free  fight  between 
members  of  opposing  musical  factions  led  to  a  somewhat  anti- 
cHmactic  epilogue  in  the  poUce  court.  The  disaster  of  that  first 
performance  sealed  the  fate  of  Berg's  Op.  4.  It  remained  unper- 
formed, unpublished,!  and  almost  totally  forgotten. 2  Finally, 
in  1953,  Jascha  Horenstein  resurrected  the  score  for  a  BBC 
broadcast  programme  and  after  that  the  cycle  was  at  last  pub- 
Ushed,  in  piano  arrangement. 

The  conceptual  basis  of  these  songs  is  the  contradictory  con- 
flict between  the  vocal  part,  often  reduced  to  a  mere  whisper, 
and  an  outsize  orchestra,  exceUing  in  different  colouristic  com- 
binations and  groupings.  The  orchestra  consists  of:  three  flutes, 
three  oboes,  three  clarinets,  bass  clarinet,  three  bassoons,  three 
trumpets,  four  horns,  four  trombones,  bass  tuba,  glockenspiel, 


^Except  for  the  fifth  song  Hier  ist  Friede.  This  was  published  as  an  appendix  to  a 
periodical  Menschen  (Dresden,  1921).  It  was  recently  reprinted  to  illustrate  an  article 
on  Op.  4  by  Rene  Leibowitz  {Mt4sical  Quarterly,  1948). 

^A  first  orchestral  draft  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  songs  found  its  way  to  Lhicoln 
College,  Oxford,  and  is  now  deposited  on  permanent  loan  at  the  Bodleian  Library. 
The  story  of  that  autograph  has  been  told  by  Egon  Wellesz  in  his  article:  'An  Alban 
Berg  manuscript  at  Oxford'  (Tempo,  1946,  No.  5).  It  is  possible  that  sheet  14  of  this 
autograph  includes  a  short  vocal  phrase  (from  the  second  song,  bar  5)  in  Schoenberg's 
hand.  If  this  could  be  clearly  identified  as  Schoenberg's  hand  it  would  provide  definite 
proof  of  his  active  interest  and  even  collaboration  in  Berg's  work,  long  after  the  latter 
had  ceased  to  be  his  pupil. 

60 


EARLY    WORKS 

xylophone,  cymbals,  gong,  tympani,  drums,  celesta,  harp,  piano 
and  strings.  However,  this  tremendous  array  of  players  is 
hardly  ever  used  in  a  symphonic  *tutti'.  Instead,  the  composer 
makes  every  effort  to  reduce  the  sonority  of  each  instrument. 
He  uses  cunning  devices  for  cushioning  the  sound  impact  by 
fieqvient  glissandi,  trills,  flutter-tonguing,  harmonics  and  mutes, 
even  for  instruments  of  a  vigorous  nature  such  as  trombones 
and  tympani.  Berg's  new  devices  aim  to  express  the  faintest 
stirrings  of  the  soul  in  tonal  symbols  of  wraith-like  evanescence. 
Characteristic  examples  are: 

The  *mute'  glissando  of  harmonics  on  the  violin's  E  string, 
whose  graphic  symbol  almost  looks  Hke  a  wind-swept  leaf: 


the  weird  device  of  bowing  at  the  string-holes  on  the  'bridge' 
(No.  I,  bar  38)  is  nearly  ecHpsed  by  the  fantastic  tympani  glis- 
sando in  the  final  bars  of  the  last  song.  These  devices  find  their 
vocal  implementation  in  the  unique  gradations  of  tone,  in 
which  the  very  act  of  singing  pierces  finally  the  hard  crust  of 
painful  silence: 


iete. 

%)' xk)   Sec    •  «« 

Example  48 

Berg's  explanatory  foomotes  to  this  quotation  should  be  added: 
X  Note  sung  with  Ughtly  closed  lips  (ppp). 
XX  Note  sung  with  half-open  mouth  (pp). 
Both  footnotes  are  bracketed  with  the  remark:  'To  start  and 
finish  with  a  mere  breath'.  The  behaviour  of  the  first  audience 

61 


ALBAN    BERG 

successfully  prevented   this   hesitant  world   of  sound   from 
materiaHzing  at  all. 

The  first  song,  from  which  Example  48  above  is  taken,  is 
also  remarkable  for  its  iridescent  orchestral  prelude.  This  is 
based  on  a  self-repetitive  series  of  five  notes,  and  its  sonorous 
mosaic  of  dovetailing  motive-particles  results  in  an  almost 
oriental  tissue  of  sound,  reminiscent  of  the  Javan  Gamelan 
orchestras.  The  purple  colours  of  this  first  song  give  way  to  a 
chamber  music  style  of  eUiptic  abbreviations  in  the  second.  The 
eleven  bars  of  this  song  revolve  round  the  descending  fourths  of 
bar  2,  a  motive  later  to  be  exploited  in  Wozzeck  and  Lulu. 
Voice  and  violoncello  end  the  song  in  strict  canon  at  the  octave, 
a  curious  anticipation  of  future  serial  severity.  The  third  song 
starts  and  ends  with  a  veritable  twelve-note  chord.  It  contains, 
like  all  the  pivotal  harmonies  of  Op.  4,  the  interval  of  the 
tritone  at  the  brackets. 


Example  49 


During  bars  1-7  this  static  chord  is  'spotHghted*  by  different  and 
rapidly  changing  combinations  of  instruments,  with  an  effect 
like  a  musical  impression  of  an  unruffled  but  iridescent  pond. 
The  same  effect  is  found  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  16,  No.  3.  It  is 
repeated  in  Berg's  fourth  song,  in  which  certain  basic  features 
of  serial  technique  appear.  The  chief  melody,  as  presented  in 
bars  19-21,  determines  also  the  two  static  chords  (bars  8  and 
22)  which  are  subjected  to  similar  changed  'spotlighting'.  This 

62 


EARLY    WORKS 


can  be  studied  by  comparing  the  melody  itself  with  its  resultant 
harmony  and  the  two  static  chords : 


Example  50 


[bar 22] 

Example  51 


[bars] 

Example  5: 


The  last  and  longest  song,  No.  5,  is  an  amazing  anticipation  of 
future  musical  developments.  It  is  a  Passacaglia,  based  on  a  five- 
note  motive  in  the  bass.  But  it  is  also  a  piece  of  strict  dodeca- 
phonic music,  composed  long  before  the  official  estabhshment 
of  twelve-note  technique.  The  use  of  archaic  forms  like  the 
Passacaglia  precedes  their  re-introduction  in  Schoenberg's 
Pierrot  Lunaire  by  a  few  months.  The  impeccable  twelve-note 
row,  however,  which  enters  in  the  woodwind  at  bar  5,  ante- 
dates Schoenberg's  first  serial  compositions  by  more  than  ten 
years.  The  song  is  strictly  organized  by  the  three  thematic  ele- 
ments, entering  in  close  succession  before  cue  2 : 

{a)    the  five-note  Passacagha  bass  (c). 

{h)    the  twelve-note  row  in  the  treble  (R). 

(<:)  a  theme  of  ascending  fourths,  evidently  developed  from 
the  motive  of  No.  3  [c  i). 

63 


ALBAN  BERG 


Key  J      R  "    *2  note  sen'e* 

C  =    Passocagiia  theme 
Cl  =    Continuotioo  of  C 
"b    »    Countersubject  of  C 

Example  53 

The  three  basic  elements  are  artfully  intertwined,  with  the  ele- 
ment {h)  meandering  through  the  whole  fabric  of  the  song 
almost  like  a  Chaconne  theme,  more  and  more  out-distancing 
the  Passacaglia  bass  {a).  The  emphasis  on  rigid  adherence  to  pre- 
conceived principles  of  form,  the  firm  rehance  on  strict  con- 
trapuntal devices  and  the  fact  that  these  devices  are  employed 
in  the  service  of  a  subtle  and  fleeting  emotional  experience  of 
wistful  longing,  hnk  this  song  with  the  world  of  Wozzeck  and 
even  with  the  systematic  dodecaphony  of  Der  Wein  and  Lulu. 
Hier  ist  Friede  remains  Berg's  most  important  technical  achieve- 
ment before  Wozzeck. 


Berg's  second  work  for  orchestra  before  Wozzeck^  the  Three 
Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  6,  probably  owes  its  pecuhar  form  to  the 
tendency  of  Schoenberg  and  Webern,  before  19 14,  to  replace 

64 


EARLY    WORKS 

the  traditional  cyclic  symphonic  forms  by  short  self-contained 
movements  with  a  certain  programmatic  bias.  The  sub-head- 
ings of  Berg's  Op.  6 — Prelude,  Round,  March — are  similar  to 
those  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  i6  and  Webern's  Op.  lo.l  A  further 
sign  of  the  impact  of  Schoenberg's  Five  Orchestral  Pieces  can  be 
found  in  Berg's  adoption  of  the  new  structural  guides  'H'  and 
'N'  ('Hauptstimme'  and  'Nebenstimme'),  first  employed  in 
Schoenberg's  Op.  i6,  No.  5.  In  addition,  the  considerable 
numerical  increase  in  Berg's  orchestra,  even  beyond  that  used 
in  the  Altenberg  songs,  may  have  been  prompted  by  the  im- 
posing sonorities  of  Schoenberg's  Op.  16.  However,  despite 
these  affinities,  Berg's  Op.  6  is  farther  removed  than  any  other 
work  of  his  from  Schoenberg's  orbit.  It  represents,  rather,  his 
creative  approach  to  Mahler's  conception  of  the  symphony. 
The  influence  of  Mahler,  as  man  and  artist,  now  competes  with 
that  of  Schoenberg  in  a  protracted  struggle  for  Berg's  allegiance. 
This  struggle  led  to  a  crisis  in  191 3,  when  Berg  discarded  a 
planned  symphony,  saving  only  a  fragment  which  was  later 
incorporated  in  the  last  orchestral  interlude  of  Wozzeck  ('Inven- 
tion on  a  key').  This  fragment,  with  its  decidedly  Mahlerian 
flavour,  bears  witness  to  the  impression  made  on  Berg  by  the 
slow  movements  of  the  last  symphonies  of  the  older  composer. 
The  discarded  symphony,  however,  was  inspired  by  Balzac's 
mystical  novel  5er^p/z/^^,  which,  at  the  very  same  time,  Schoen- 
berg himself  planned  to  utilize  for  an  opera  libretto.  Webern 
told  Berg  that  Schoenberg  was  planning  an  operatic  trilogy 
based  on  Balzac's  novel.  In  his  reply,  on  July  29,  1912,  Berg 
mentions  his  own  projected  work: 

\  .  .Just  fancy:  this  winter  I  intended  to  compose  a  big  symphonic 
movement  and  I  had  planned  to  let  it  end  with  a  boy's  voice 

^The  original  sub-headings  were  eliminated  in  the  published  scores  of  both  works. 
For  details  consult  the  German  edition  of  this  book. 

E  65 


ALBAN  BERG 

singing  (from  the  gallery)  words  from — "Seraphita" !  Of  course 
it  remained  a  mere  project — as  so  often  happens  in  my  case  .  .  / 

The  idea  of  ending  a  symphony  with  a  vocal  solo  derives,  of 
course,  from  Mahler.  Berg's  dream  of  a  programmatically- 
based  Mahlerian  symphony  never  materialized  because  he  found 
the  solution  of  his  problems  in  his  own  new  conception  of 
opera.  After  Wozzeck  he  could  not  return  to  the  symphony. 
His  later  instrumental  works  are  either  concertante  music  (Cham- 
ber Concerto,  Violin  Concerto)  or  lyrico-dramatic  (Lyric  Suite, 
Der  Wein).  None  of  them  is  really  symphonic  in  character.  This 
is  regrettable,  because  Berg  could  easily  have  become  heir  to 
Mahler's  symphonic  tradition — a  tradition  which  now  Uves  on 
only  in  scattered  movements  by  Zemlinsky  and  Karl  Horwitz, 
and,  in  recent  time,  in  the  remarkable  symphonies  of  Egon 
Wellesz.l  No  work  written  during  the  first  half  of  this  century 
reveals  a  deeper  affinity  with  Mahler  than  Berg's  Op.  6.2 

The  psychological  roots  of  the  Three  Orchestral  Pieces  can  be 
traced  back  to  a  personal  crisis  in  Berg's  life,  during  which  his 
relations  even  with  his  beloved  teacher  Schoenberg  became 
strained.  A  letter  dated  June  14,  191 3,  written  shortly  after  he 
had  visited  Schoenberg  in  Berlin,  reflects  the  mental  conflict 
and  distress  brought  about  by  stern  discussions  with  his  mentor 
and  heralds  a  future  creative  experience  of  heart-searching 
intensity : 

*.  .  .  You  will  surely  understand  that,  together  with  the  loveliest 
memories  of  unspoiled  enjoyment,  there  also  iatrudes  the  memory 

^Wellesz,  born  in  Vienna  in  1885  and  an  early  pupil  of  Schoenberg's,  like  Berg 
himself,  only  began  to  write  symphonies  at  the  age  of  sixty.  His  five  symphonies, 
composed  in  England  between  1945  and  1956,  are  the  only  convincing  attempt  so  far 
to  continue  the  symphonic  tradition  of  Bruckner  and  Mahler  in  the  second  half  of  the 
century. 

^In  marked  contrast  to  Schoenberg  and  Webern,  whose  music  is  surprisingly  free 
from  Mahler's  influence.  An  exception  is  Webern's  Marcia  funebre,  Op.  6  (1910). 
Cf  T.  W.  Adorno  (W.  Reich,  op.  cit.,  p.  46). 

66 


EARLY    WORKS 

of  the  last  afternoon,  with  its  depressing  home-truths.  However, 
I  have  to  thank  you  for  your  reproof,  as  much  as  for  everything 
else  I  have  received  from  you,  convinced  as  I  am  that  it  was  all 
said  for  my  ov^m  good.  ...  I  don't  need  to  tell  you  that  the  deep 
pain  it  has  caused  me  is  proof  of  that  fact  that  I  have  heeded  your 
reproof.  ...  I  hope  to  show  you  by  deeds  what  I  am  unable  to 
express  in  words.  As  soon  as  I  am  in  the  country  I  will  begin  the 
Suite.  Perhaps  one  day  I  shall  be  able  to  compose  something 
serene.  .  .  .' 

A  year  later,  by  the  middle  of  1914,  the  plan  for  a  'Suite'  had 
resulted  in  the  first  draft  of  the  Three  Orchestral  Pieces.  Berg 
intended  to  dedicate  them  to  Schoenberg  on  the  occasion  of 
the  latter's  fortieth  birthday  (Sept.  13,  1914),  but  on  July  18  ex- 
pressed anxiety,  in  a  letter  to  Webern,  about  his  ability  to  com- 
plete the  score  in  time.  The  tension  of  the  'last  afternoon'  in 
Berhn  is  recalled  still,  in  this  as  in  other  letters  of  the  period. 
Berg  suffered  greatly  from  lack  of  news  from  Schoenberg. 
Writing  to  him  on  July  20  he  referred  to  this  'prolonged 
silence'  as  part  of  the  great  punishment  he  had  endured  then  for 
two  months.  In  that  letter  he  expressed  concern  about  the  fate 
of  the  'orchestral  pieces',  adding  with  moving  sincerity: 

'.  .  .  To  be  sure,  I  have  to  ask  myself,  again  and  again,  if  what  I 
express  in  them,  and  what  compels  me  to  brood  over  certain  bars 
for  days  on  end,  is  any  better  than  my  last  compositions.  .  .  .' 

Berg  retired  to  Trahiitten,  his  parents-in-law's  country  estate 
in  Styria,  but  the  outbreak  of  war  interrupted  work  on  the  full 
score.  On  September  8,  1914,  he  wrote  to  Schoenberg: 

'.  .  .  I  am  sending  you  by  the  same  post  a  registered  parcel:  the 
orchestral  pieces,  dedicated  to  you  on  the  occasion  of  your  birth- 
day. .  .  .  For  years  it  has  been  my  secret  but  persistent  wish  to 
dedicate  something  to  you.  The  works  composed  under  your 

67 


ALBAN   BERG 

supervision,  the  Sonata,  songs  and  Quartet,!  do  not  count  for 
that  purpose,  having  been  received  directly  from  you.  My  hopes 
of  writing  something  more  independent  and  yet  as  good  as  these 
first  compositions  (something  I  could  confidently  dedicate  to  you 
without  incurring  your  displeasure)  have  been  repeatedly  disap- 
pointed. Your  kind  suggestion  of  last  spring  (during  the  journey 
from  Amsterdam  to  Berlin)  gave  me  the  courage  to  attempt  a 
composition  which  I  could  dedicate  to  you  without  blushing.  I 
cannot  tell  today  if  I  have  succeeded  or  if  the  attempt  has  failed. 
Should  the  latter  be  the  case,  then,  in  your  fatherly  benevolence, 
you  will  have  to  accept  the  good  intention  in  place  of  the  deed 
itself  I  really  have  tried  to  give  of  my  best  and  to  follow  your 
advice.  In  this  endeavour  the  unforgettable  experience  of  the 
Amsterdam  rehearsals  2  and  the  close  study  of  your  orchestral 
pieces  was  an  enormous  help  and  has  intensified  miy  self-criticism 
more  and  more.  This  is  why  I  have  not  been  able  to  complete  the 
second  of  the  three  pieces,  "Reigen",  in  time,  and  why  I  have  had 
to  leave  it  until  later,  when  I  shall  probably  succeed  in  altering 
what  is  wrong  in  it,  about  which  I  am  not  yet  certain.  Another 
reason  is  that  the  unavoidable  commotion  of  the  last  weeks  caused 
slower  progress  with  my  work  than  I  had  hoped  for  before  the 
outbreak  of  war.  Please  do  not  take  amiss  my  boldness  in  dedi- 
cating to  you  something  incomplete.  I  hope  to  finish  the  missing 
second  piece  soon  (it  is  a  piece  of  dance-character,  about  lOO  bars 
long,  i.e.  longer  than  the  Prelude,  shorter  than  the  March)  and  to 
add  the  score  to  the  two  pieces  I  am  sending  you  now.  ...  I  am 
still  working  at  the  piano  arrangement  of  the  Chamber  Sym- 
phony.^ For  this  reason  I  am  remaining  here  for  a  time  and  I 
believe  I  can  curb  my  impatience  and  restlessness  in  comiection 
with  the  war  better  here  than  in  Vienna.  The  urge  "to  be  in  it", 
the  feeling  of  helplessness  at  being  unable  to  serve  my  country, 
prevented  any  concentration  on  work  there.  .  .  .' 

Reigen  was  not  completed  until  the  summer  of  191 5  and  the 

^Opp.  I,  2  and  3. 

^For  the  first  performance  of  Schoenbcrg's  Five  Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  i6,  late  in 
J912. 

^This  arrangement  is  lost. 

68 


EARLY    WORKS 

fair  copy  was  sent  to  Schoenberg  in  early  August  of  that  year.  1 
Interest  in  Op.  6  was  only  shown  after  the  publication  of  the 
vocal  score  of  Wozzech  (1922-23).  Berg's  autograph  score  was 
then  published  in  facsimile  by  Universal  Edition,  in  1923.  The 
first  two  pieces  were  performed  in  Berlin  on  June  5,  1923, 
under  Webern.  The  complete  work  was  first  performed  in 
1930  at  Oldenburg,  under  Johannes  Schiiler.  Berg  revised  the 
score  for  Schiiler,  and  for  Scherchen,2  who  performed  the 
whole  work  at  Winterthur  in  the  following  year. 


An  unmistakable  family  likeness  exists  between  the  motives 
and  thematic  processes  of  Berg's  Op.  6  and  those  of  some  of 
Mahler's  symphonies.  The  m.odels  for  the  second  and  third 
pieces  are  to  be  found  in  Mahler's  symphonic  march-move- 
ments and  his  rustic  'Landler'-like  Waltz-Scherzos.  Berg's 
movements  are  very  much  shorter,  of  course,  and  it  must  be 
added  that  he  presents  them  as  self-contained  entities  and  not, 
as  Mahler  invariably  did,  as  sub-sections  of  one  great  symphonic 
concept.  3  But  the  relationship  between  Berg's  Op.  6  and 
Mahler's  musical  world  goes  deeper  than  this.  It  becomes  mani- 
fest in  Berg's  re-employment  of  Mahler's  hammer  in  the  third 
piece,  the  fatalistic  tonal  symbol  for  the  hammer-blows  of  fate, 
which  fell  the  hero  of  the  sixth  symphony  in  its  tragic  finale. 
Preoccupation  with  sonorities  and  rhythmic  devices  typical  of 
Mahler  led  to  the  anticipation  of  the  'Leitrhythmus'  used  in 

^Letters  to  Webern  of  July  13  and  August  5,  191 5. 

2  This  revised  version  was  published  in  1954  (Universal  Edition,  Vienna).  It  reveals 
some  changes  in  expression  marks  and  certain  improvements  in  the  difficult  part  for 
the  first  trombone.  The  substance  of  the  music  is  unchanged. 

^  In  1929  Berg  ruled  that  separate  performances  of  these  pieces  were  permissible. 
But  the  fact  that  the  last  bars  of  No.  i  anticipate  bars  3-6  of  No.  2,  and  the  fact  that 
No.  3  is  evidently  planned  as  a  kind  of  development  section  to  No.  i,  seems  to  con- 
tradict the  idea  that  the  pieces  are  easily  separable. 

69 


ALBAN   BERG 


Wozzeck,  Lulu  and  the  Chamber  Concerto,  as  may  be  seen  in 
the  following  juxtaposition  of  passages  from  the  two  com- 
posers. Mahler's  rhythm  of  death  from  the  first  movement  of 
the  Ninth  Symphony,  bar  i,  corresponds  to  Berg's  *Haupt- 
rhythmus'  in  the  Prelude  of  Op.  6: 


(Ve/.,Hn.) 

Example  54 


pp    (Trombone  ^  Tamtam  j 

Example  55 

Again,  Mahler's  thrice-repeated  fate  motive  in  his  sixth  sym- 
phony (corresponding  with  the  three  hammer-blows  of  the 
fmale),  with  its  tonal  inexorabihty  and  the  lugubrious  thud  of 
its  drum-taps,  anticipates  Berg's  'catastrophic  rhythm'  at  the 
very  climax  of  his  third  piece : 


rfr^T^^=i 

-^ 

^'Vf^ 

— W-^I 

r?p 

h'^/JV-;^i:5J 

^l,..J^),^>^ 

ff. 


(Timpani) 


(a.  Drum) 


Example  56 


(Hammer) 


Example  57 
70 


EARLY    WORKS 

The  uncanny  'bruitisme'  of  the  exclusively  percussive  begin- 
ning and  end  of  the  'Prelude'  foreshadow  the  experiments  of 
*La  musique  concrete'  and  the  percussive  extravaganzas  of 
Milhaud  and  Varese,  as  much  as  they  point  back  to  Mahler's 
enclaves  of  organized  noise  in  the  march-sections  of  the  first 
movement  of  his  third  symphony. 

The  role  played  by  Mahler's  music  as  model  can  also  be  seen 
in  certain  melodic  progressions  of  Op.  6.  The  lyrical  contrasting 
subject  of  the  first  piece  (bars  15-20)  seems  indebted  to  lyrical 
passages  of  the  first  movements  of  Mahler's  sixth  and  ninth 
symphonies.  And  the  following  bar  from  Berg's  Reigen,  which 
anticipates  the  Landler  music  of  Wozzeck  (11/4),  was  clearly 
suggested  by  the  scherzo-grotesqueries  of  Mahler's  seventh 
symphony  (Example  59) : 


/ 

[it 

.^=^^=1 

\p== 

!^. 

^ 

,     U^^'^f 

A — 

I — 

1^ 

rV+J^ 

( 

£^"[lJ^     ^     1  R    i= 

^^^^3 

Example  58 


Example  59 


On  the  other  hand,  Op.  6  also  contains  many  felicitous  touches 
of  indisputable  originality.  These  include  the  six-note  chord 
of  fourths  in  No.  i  (bar  9),  wliich  constitutes  a  link  with  No.  2 
(cf.  No.  I,  bar  43).  The  introduction  to  the  Reigen  is  based 
exclusively  on  two  tonal  root-harmonies  (F  minor,  D  major) : 

71 


ALBAN   BERG 


Example  60 

the  harmonic  impurities  of  which  recall  similar  processes  of 
harmonic-blurring  in  the  Altenberg  songs.  The  structure  of 
Nos.  I  and  2  is  based  on  the  principle  of  perpetual  variation. 
Their  architectonic  contours  are  therefore  simple,  especially  in 
comparison  with  the  ambitiously-planned  March,  The  latter 
consists  of  Introduction,  Exposition,  Recapitulation  and  Coda, 
and  can  compare  even  in  dimensions  with  a  symphony  move- 
ment by  Mahler.  The  key  to  the  understanding  of  the  involved 
harmonies  of  No.  3  is  to  be  found  in  its  very  last  bar,  based  on 
the  bare  tritone:  E  natural — B  flat.  The  tritone  can  be  under- 
stood as  the  sum  total  of  three  whole-tone  steps.  It  stands  for  the 
principle  of  the  whole-tone  scale,  which  is  combined  with  the 
chromatic  scale  at  the  psychological  climax  of  the  'March* 
(Coda,  bar  149  ff).  The  use  of  the  chromatic  scale  here  antici- 
pates Berg's  future  serial  technique,  which  seems  to  be  some- 
how in  the  air,  especially  in  the  octave  transpositions  and  the 
resulting  interval-camouflage  of  chromatic  semitonal  steps  at 
bar  149  ff: 


Example  61 

The  little  fanfare  at  the  end  of  No.  2,  based  on  a  progression  of 
mediants,  plays  an  integral  part  in  No.  3 .  The  same  little  motive 
had  occurred  at  the  word  'schoner'  in  the  second  Altenberg 
song  (bar  5).  It  prepares  for  the  harmonic  climate  of  Wozzech, 
where  in  turn  it  will  re-appear  in  the  visionary  second  scene  of 
the  first  act.  Similarly,  the  murder  scene  of  Wozzeck  seems  to 

72 


EARLY    WORKS 

be  foreshadowed  in  the  chromatic  dissolution  of  No.  3,  bar 
161  fF.  The  Hnk  between  Berg's  Op.  6  and  his  opera  becomes 
manifest  even  to  the  casual  observer  in  the  case  of  the  trombone 
motive  of  No.  3  (bar  80  ff),  which  re-appears,  shghtly  varied 
rhythmically,  in  Wozzeck  (I/2,  bar  275  ff),  where  it  accom- 
panies Wozzeck's  sinister  words:  *  Something  wanders  with  us 
deep  down  there.  .  .  .' 


73 


I 


CHAPTER  IV 

'  Wozzeck' 
The  Opera  of  Protest  and  Compassion 

N  a  hitherto  unpubHshed  essay  on  Berg,l  Schoenberg 
wrote : 

*I  was  greatly  surprised  when  this  soft-hearted,  timid  young  man 
had  the  courage  to  engage  in  a  venture  which  seemed  to  invite 
misfortune:  to  set  "Wozzeck",  a  drama  of  such  extraordinary 
tragic  power  that  it  seemed  forbidding  to  music.  And,  further- 
more, it  contained  scenes  of  every-day  hfe  at  variance  with  the 
concept  of  opera,  which  still  depended  on  stylized  costumes  and 
conventionahzed  characters . .  .' 

Schoenberg's  insight  thus  recognized  the  feature  by  w^hich 
Wozzeck  may  be  distinguished  from  its  forerunners  and  models 
— Wagnerian  music-drama  and  contemporary  operas  such  as 
Debussy's  Pelleas^  Strauss's  Salome  and  Elektra,  Schoenberg's 
own  Erwartung  and  Die  gluckliche  Hand,  and  Franz  Schreker's 
early  opera  Derferne  Klang.  What  was  new  in  Berg's  opera  was 
determined  by  his  choice  of  subject.  A  superficial  survey  of 
operas  roughly  contemporary  with  Wozzeck  might  easily  per- 
suade one  to  attach  too  much  importance  to  one  feature  they 
have  in  common:  the  librettos  of  Debussy's  opera  and  the  two 

^See  Appendix   i,  where  the  essay  is  printed  throughout  in  Schoenberg's  own 
pecuhar  variety  of  EngHsh.  The  passage  here  quoted  has  been  sHghtly  revised. 

74 


WOZZECK 

works  by  Strauss  named  above  are  based,  like  that  of  Wozzeck^ 
on  existing  stage  plays.  This  phenomenon,  remarkable  in  itself, 
was  the  result  of  a  general  tendency  of  the  time  to  avoid  the 
symmetrical  periods  of  Viennese  classical  music,  to  turn  away 
from  the  use  of  regularly  corresponding  phrases  (largely  deter- 
mined by  the  fact  that  the  old  libretto  was  usually  in  rhymed 
verse)  towards  a  free,  asymmetrical,  musical  'prose'  style.  The 
composer  of  the  new  century  preferred  the  realistic  dialogue  of 
straight  plays  to  the  metrical  versification  of  the  older  libretto. 
It  is  surely  more  than  coincidience  that  Maeterlinck's  PelUas, 
Wilde's  Salome  and  Hofmannsthal's  Elektra  had  all  enjoyed  suc- 
cessful runs  on  the  stage  before  practically  renouncing  their 
purely  literary  existence  in  symbiosis  with  music  of  overpower- 
ing vitahty.  At  first  glance  it  might  seem  reasonable  enough  to 
link  Berg's  Wozzeck  with  these  works,  although  Biichner's 
fragment — left  unfinished  at  the  time  of  the  poet's  death  in  1837 
and  published  posthumously  as  late  as  1879 — can  hardly  be 
classified  as  a  contemporary  play.  The  principal  difference  be- 
tween Wozzeck  and  these  plays  lies  in  its  subject  matter. 
Biichner's  fragment  presents  a  social  problem  in  dramatic  form, 
whereas  the  plays  of  Maeterlinck,  Wilde  and  Hofmannsthal, 
despite  their  prose  dialogue  and  realistic  tendencies,  are  still  not 
far  removed,  in  essentials,  from  the  sphere  of  romantic  music- 
drama. 

Debussy's  Pelleas,  although  deliberately  conceived  as  'Anti- 
Tristan'  and  differing  from  Wagner's  opera  also  in  its  much 
lower  emotional  temperature,  yet  presents  another  variation 
of  the  tragic  triangle  Tristan-Isolde-Mark.  The  emotional  agent 
o£Pelleas  is  identical  with  that  of  Tristan  and  draws  the  charac- 
ters as  inevitably  to  their  'Liebestod'.  Salome's  obscene  love- 
death',  too,  and  Elektra' s  sterile  hysteria,  result  from  the  same 
primordial  force  of  frustrated  eroticism.  Despite  certain  realistic 

75 


ALBAN   BERG 

scenes,  like  that  of  Golaud  dragging  Melisande  by  her  hair,  or 
Elektra  digging  up  the  hatchet,  the  action  of  these  operas  takes 
place  in  an  atmosphere  of  legendary  remoteness.  Although 
based  on  modern  plays  in  prose,  with  none  of  the  traditional 
operatic  choruses,  ensembles,  arias  and  duets,  they  still  derive 
from  Wagner's  romantic  mystery-play  of  redemption. 

Even  the  immediate  forerunners  of  Wozzeck — Schoenberg's 
Erwartung  (1909)  and  Die  gluckliche  Hand  (191 3),  and  Schreker's 
Derferne  Klang  (completed  in  1909;  first  performed  in  1912) — 
differ  considerably  from  it,  although  they  certainly  powerfully 
influenced  Berg.  1  The  primitive  conflict  of  the  sexes  lies  behind 
both  early  operas  of  Schoenberg,  which  can  still  be  assessed  as 
emanations  of  the  Tristan  legend.  Schreker's  opera  comes  much 
nearer  to  a  truly  realistic  conception  of  music-drama.  Derferne 
Klang  is  based  on  a  libretto,  written  by  the  composer  himself,  of 
which  the  contemporary  plot  and  characters  anticipate  the 
Zeitoper  of  the  1920's.  The  story  of  the  modern  composer, 
Fritz,  who,  chasing  a  phantom  sound,  abandons  his  sweetheart 
and  drives  her  to  prostitution,  only  to  re-encounter  the  dis- 
honoured girl  at  the  very  moment  of  his  despair  in  his  creative 
faculties,  represents  an  early  attempt  to  depict  social  environ- 
ment as  the  determinant  of  personal  tragedy.  2  Schreker's  Fritz 
and  Gretel  are  seen  from  the  vie^vpoint  of  the  'Milieu'  theory 
of  the  1890's.  Unfortunately,  Gretel's  emotional  debauch 
usurps  too  much  of  the  hmelight,  and  Schreker,  in  his  naively 
realistic  libretto,  fails  to  achieve  a  well-balanced  presentation  of 
the  social  implications  of  his  subject.  An  artist  of  more  profound 

^  Berg's  preface  to  Wozzeck  points  out  the  determining  influence  of  Schoenberg's 
'Sprechstimme'  technique,  especially  as  used  in  Die  gliickliche  Hand.  The  importance 
of  Erwartting  in  this  connection  will  become  manifest  in  the  course  of  this  book. 
Schreker's  influence  was  probably  wholly  subconscious. 

2  Some  of  Janacek's  operas  also  call  for  mention  here.  Jam/a  was  begun  as  far  back 
as  1896.  Janacek  is  reported  to  have  recognized  Wozzeck  as  the  expression  of  a  kindred 
spirit  when  he  attended  the  first  performances  of  the  opera  in  Prague  in  1926. 

76 


WOZZECK 


feeling  and  a  musician  endowed  with  the  gift  of  structural  inte- 
gration was  needed  for  the  creation  of  a  new  archetypal  species 
of  opera :  the  opera  of  social  protest  and  compassion.  Only  in 
the  spiritual  and  creative  symbiosis  of  Biichner  and  Berg  could 
this  new  kind  of  opera  come  into  being. 


It  is  clear  from  Schoenberg's  essay  on  Berg,  already  quoted, 
that  he  thought  the  stark  realism  and  unrelieved  gloom  of 
Biichner's  play  made  it  unsuitable  for  musical  treatment,  at  any 
rate  on  anything  approaching  traditional  operatic  lines.  Karl 
Rankl  reports,  even,  that  Schoenberg  at  first  disapproved  of 
Berg's  choice  of  subject,  declaring  that  the  concern  of  music 
should  be  angels,  rather  than  batmen.  1  However,  what  seemed 
superficially  a  commonplace  crime-report  ('Soldier  murders 
girl  in  jealous  fit')  became  the  basis  of  a  social  drama  of  remark- 
able penetration.  According  to  more  recent  research,  Biichner 
seems  to  have  planned,  as  culmination  of  his  play,  a  final  scene 
in  which  Wozzeck  was  to  have  addressed  a  criminal  court,  and 
in  which  the  accused  was  to  have  become  the  accuser,  deliver- 
ing a  shattering  sentence  of  death  on  the  court  of  law  and  on  the 
State  itself.  If  Biichner's  fragment  (used  by  Berg  in  the  textually 
unreliable  version  published  by  Emil  Franzos  in  1879)  had 
represented  nothing  more  than  the  dramatization  of  a  police 
report,  then  Schoenberg's  initial  scepticism  would  have  been 
justified.  But  W^ozzeck  is  much  more:  it  is  the  gospel  of  a  con- 
vinced revolutionary  and  socialist,  who  succeeds  in  presenting 
his  murderer  as  the  hapless  victim  of  a  system  of  political 
tyranny. 

^  Cf.  The  Score,  May  1952. 

77 


ALBAN   BERG 

Georg  Biichner  was  born  on  October  17,  1 813,  at  Goddelau, 
near  Darmstadt  (Hesse),  the  son  of  a  doctor.  He  belongs,  with 
Richard  Wagner,  to  the  generation  destined  to  prepare  and  to 
unleash  the  'liberal  revolution'  of  1848  in  Germany  and  Aus- 
tria. A  precocious  child,  a  brilliant  scholar,  a  scientist  of  dis- 
tinction, a  philosopher  of  great  promise,  he  became  involved  in 
pohtical  strife  with  the  authorities  of  Hesse  while  studying  at 
Giessen  University.  Buchner's  youth  coincided  with  a  period 
of  unreheved  reactionary  oppression  in  Central  Europe,  in- 
creasingly hostile  to  the  liberal  movements  among  students  and 
university  teachers.  Biichner  eventually  went  to  near-by  Stras- 
bourg, where  he  completed  his  studies  with  a  brilliant  paper, 
*Sur  le  systeme  nerveaux  du  barbeau'.  This  essay  was  accepted 
as  a  thesis  by  Zurich  University,  where  in  due  course  Biichner 
received  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy.  In  October  1835 
he  arrived  at  Zurich  and  was  appointed  Lecturer  in  Anatomy. 
The  political  persecution  to  which  he  and  some  of  his  friends 
were  subjected  in  Hesse,  the  frustration  of  exile  in  Alsace  and 
Switzerland,  continuous  over-work  during  his  student-days, 
and  the  stress  and  strain  of  his  creative  activities  undermined  his 
delicate  health.  He  became  ill  early  in  1836  and  died  in  his 
twenty-fourth  year,  on  February  19, 1837.  A  poHtical  pamphlet, 
'Der  Hessische  Landbote',  which  circulated  clandestinely  in 
1834-35,  stamped  Biichner  as  a  forerunner  of  Marx  and 
Bakunin.  The  play,  Dantons  Death,  characteristically  inspired 
by  a  great  revolutionary  subject,  was  published  in  1835  and 
hailed  by  Carl  Gutzkow  as  a  work  of  genius.  Two  more  plays, 
the  comedy  Leonce  and  Lena  and  the  fragmentary  Woyzeck  (this 
was  the  original  and  correct  spelling),  were  discovered  after  his 
death  among  his  papers.  Biichner's  poetical  works,  letters  and 
pamphlets,  continued  to  exercise  a  profound  influence  on  his 
generation — an  influence  easily  traceable  in  the  dramatic  works 

78 


WOZZECK 

of  Gutzkow,  his  discoverer,  as  in  those  of  Friedrich  Hebbel 
(i 8 1 3-1 863),  his  later  admirer.  It  was  left  to  Emil  Franzos,! 
editor  of  the  first  collected  edition  of  Biichner's  works,  to 
decipher  the  almost  illegible  manuscript  of  Wozzeck  and  to 
pubHsh  this  great  dramatic  prelude  to  the  revolution  of  1848-49 
for  the  benefit  of  a  later  generation,  in  1879. 

Wozzeck  is  the  tragedy  of  the  enslaved  victims  of  Metter- 
nich's  'Vormdrz\  the  dreary  epoch  that  went  before  the  March 
revolution  of  1848.  The  *Holy  AlHance'  during  this  epoch  de- 
prived the  generation  of  Schubert  and  Grillparzer  of  freedom 
of  thought  and  poHtical  independence,  and  thus  forced  them  to 
withdraw  from  unpleasant  reality  into  literary  clubs  and 
romantic  make-believe.  Wozzeck  is  the  spokesman  of  the  'tiers 
etat',  which,  in  belated  succession  to  the  storming  of  the  Bastille 
in  1789,  was  at  length  in  1848  to  succeed  in  abolishing  at  any 
rate  the  worst  features  of  that  feudal  tyranny.  In  Biichner's 
drama  the  sufferings  of  the  humble  and  the  almost  dumb  find 
painful  articulation  in  elliptic,  ejaculatory  sentences  and  frag- 
mentary exclamations :  'Folk  Hke  us  are  always  unfortunate  . . . 
in  this  world  and  in  any  other  world.'  'If  we  should  arise  to 
heaven  we'd  be  employed  there  in  helping  to  make  the 
thunder  .  .  .'  'All  our  days  are  spent  in  endless  toiUng  .  .  . 
sweating  even  in  sleep  .  .  .  poor,  wretched  folk.'  The 
importance  given  in  Berg's  opera  to  these  sudden,  lightning- 
like illuminations  of  the  darkness  in  Wozzeck' s  mind  shows 
the  measure  of  the  influence  exercised  by  Biichner's 
social  and  political  ideas  of  1836  on  the  young  Austrian 
composer  of  1914,  whose  subsequent  war-time  experiences 
must  have  made  him  particularly  sensitive   to   the  ordeals 

^Franzos  was  bom  on  October  25,  1848,  at  Czarkow,  in  Galicia,  a  part  of  Poland 
which  then  formed  part  of  the  Habsburg  Empire.  He  was  a  Polish  Jew,  and  wrote 
novels  concerned  with  Polish  or  Ruthenian  Jews  living  precariously  on  the  fringes  of 
Germany  and  Austria-Hungary.  He  died  in  Berlin  on  January  31,  1904. 

79 


ALBAN   BERG 

of  Wozzeck  at  the  hands  of  his  ruthless  superiors.  1  The 
tragedy  of  the  poor  Prussian  infantryman  of  Pohsh  extraction, 
harassed  to  death  in  the  stuffy  atmosphere  of  a  Prussian  garrison- 
town,  held  special  significance  for  the  young  Berg,  called  up 
for  the  Austro-Hungarian  army,  which  consisted  in  good 
measure  of  enslaved  soldiers  of  Wozzeck's  Slavonic  type.  'The 
Bohemian-German  Job  of  the  Fourth  Estate',  as  Arnold  Zweig 
called  him,  2  became  in  the  end  the  symbol  of  the  Austrian 
Slav,  gagged  and  silenced,  in  an  army  led  by  German-speaking 
officers. 

Buchner's  fragment  was  probably  written  between  the  Spring 
of  1836  and  October  of  the  same  year.  To  set  it  to  music  be- 
tween 1 9 14  and  1 92 1  was  an  act  of  supreme  artistic  awareness 
and  political  conscientiousness.  B^rg  chose  to  treat  this  subject 
at  the  fateful  moment  when,  to  use  again  the  terms  of  Schoen- 
berg,  the  batman  changed  into  the  avenging  angel  of  enslaved 
humanity. 


The  revolutionary  novelty  of  the  subject  of  Berg's  opera  is 
matched  by  the  entirely  new  relationship  between  words  and 
music  which  he  established  in  it.  We  must  now  try  to  discover 
the  principles  that  guided  the  composer  in  setting  to  music  a 
drama  that  even  Schoenberg  at  first  believed  unfit  for  such 
treatment. 

The  first  stage  was  the  construction  of  the  libretto  by  con- 
densing and  unifying  Buchner's  loose  sequence  of  short  scenes. 
These  were  transformed  into  a  closely  knit,  coherent  structure 
in  three  acts,  each  of  five  scenes.  The  table  of  concordances 

,/Cf.  Kurt  Blaukopf,  'Autobiographische  Elemente  in  Alban  Berg's  "Wozzeck"  *, 
{Osterreichische  Mttsikzeitschrift,  May  IS)54). 

^In  his  Complete  Edition  of  Buchner's  works,  Munich,  1923. 

80 


WOZZECK 

between  play  and  libretto  (printed  overleaf)  shows  how  this 
was  done.  Berg  set  to  music  fifteen  out  of  a  total  of  twenty- 
seven  preserved  scenes  of  the  fragmentary  drama.  He  admitted 
later  that  he  had  used  for  his  opera  only  the  older  and  unreliable 
edition  pubUshed  by  Franzos,  which  included  only  twenty-three 
scenes.  Among  those  missing  was  the  very  effective  one,  *The 
idiot,  the  child,  Wozzeck'  (No.  23  in  Zweig's  complete  edition 
of  1923).  On  the  other  hand,  Scene  19  ('Junk-shop:  the  Jew  and 
Wozzeck')  had  been  included  in  Franzos's  edition,  but  was 
eUminated  by  Berg;  he  is  reported  to  have  regretted  this  in 
later  years.  More  than  once  Berg  telescoped  several  scenes  of 
the  play  for  reasons  of  dramatic  economy  and  concentration. 
Buchner's  scenes  10,  16  and  17  were  fused  together  to  form 
Act  2,  Scene  5,  of  Berg's  libretto;  Buchner's  scene  18  and  part 
of  scene  20  became  Act  3,  Scene  i ;  another  part  of  scene  20  and 
scene  26  became  Act  3,  Scene  5,  of  the  libretto.  Similarly,  the 
number  of  characters  was  reduced.  The  figure  of  Margaret 
(Act  3,  Scene  3)  stands  for  Biichner's  Kathe  as  well  as  for  the 
innkeeper's  wife.  In  Act  3,  Scene  4,  the  Captain  and  the  Doctor 
have  also  absorbed  the  parts  of  Buchner's  'First  and  Second 
Citizens'.  In  Act  2,  Scene  4,  Andres  takes  over  the  words  of  the 
'other  young  men'  and  those  of  the  un-named  'soldier'. 

Table  of  Concordances 

between 

bijchner's  play  and  berg's  libretto 

(Zweig's  edition) 

1  A  room  (Captain,  Wozzeck)        I/i 

2  Countryside 

(Wozzeck,  Andres)  I/2 


ALBAN  BERG 

3 

The  town  (Marie,  Wozzeck) 

1/3 

4 

The  Doctor's  study 

1/4 

5 

Open  square 

(People,  Wozzeck,  Marie) 



6 

Inside  a  booth  (Crier,  Marie) 



7 

A  street  (Marie,  Drum-Major) 

1/5 

8 

The  Doctor's  operating  theatre 

(Doctor,  Wozzeck,  students) 



9 

A  small  room  (Marie,  child) 

II/i 

10 

A  tavern 

(Wozzeck,  Drum-Major) 

— (but   cf.    Biichner's 
No.  17  and  Berg's 

11/5) 

11 

Street  (Captain,  Doctor, 

Wozzeck) 

n/a 

12 

Marie's  room  (Wozzeck, 

Marie) 

n/3 

13 

Guardroom 

(Wozzeck,  Andres) 

— 

^4 

Country  inn  (Dance, 

wandering  artisans) 

11/4 

J5 

Open  country 

— 

16  Barracks  (Andres,  Wozzeck) 

17  Inner  yard  in  the  barracks 

(Drum-Major,  Wozzeck) 

18  Marie's  room 

(Bible-reading  scene) 

19  Junk  shop  (The  Jew, 

Wozzeck) 
^o     Street  (Grandmother's  story) 


82 


,    \  combined  with 

'     I  elements  of 

.     j  Biichner's  Nos. 

'^  J  10,  16,  17. 


III/i 


(But   cf.    III/i    and 

ni/5) 


WOZZECK 

21  Barracks  (Wozzeck,  Andres)  — 

22  Path  between  trees  near  the 

pond  (Wozzeck,  Marie)  III/2 

23  Outside  the  gate  of  Marie's 

house.  Evening.  (The  idiot, 

the  child,  Wozzeck)  — 

24  The  Tavern  (Wozzeck, 

Kathe,  others)  III/3 

25  Path  between  trees  near  the 

pond  (Wozzeck,  first  and 
second  citizens)  III/4 

26  Early  morning.  Outside  the 

gate  of  Marie's  house. 
(Children)  III/5 

27  Dissecting  theatre  (Surgeon, 

Doctor,  Judges)  — 

Berg  added  many  stage-directions.  On  the  other  hand  he  ex- 
punged, or  considerably  softened,  many  coarse  expressions  in 
the  original  text.  If  he  had  set  Wozzeck  in  later  years  he  might 
have  been  less  puritanical,  since  he  did  not  hesitate  to  set  to 
music  lines  of  a  much  more  risque  character  in  Lulu.  Here  and 
there  the  composer  improved  Buchner's  text,  as  in  the  fourth 
scene  of  the  first  act,  where  his  replacement  of  *  Wozzeck,  let 
me  feel  your  pulse'  by'  Wozzeck,  show  me  your  tongue' 
leads  to  a  'curtain'  of  grotesque,  daemonic  effectiveness.  The 
addition  of  the  out-of-tune  upright  piano,  on  which  a  fast  polka 
is  played,  to  the  lurid  tavern-scene  (Act  3,  Scene  3)  is  another 
happy  innovation. 

In  Wozzeck  Berg  employed  a  style  of  singing  and  of  decla- 
mation totally  different  from  the  traditional  styles  of  German 
opera,  although  foreshadowed  in  certain  passages  of  the  operas 

83 


ALBAN  BERG 

of  Strauss  and  Schoenberg.  Berg  expounded  his  views  pn  this 
subject  in  his  lecture  on  Wozzeck  of  1929 1 : 

With  regard  to  the  treatment  of  the  singing  voice  in  this  opera, 
it  has  often  been  observed  that  it  is  not  exactly  a  Bel  Canto  opera. 
However,  there  is  no  real  reason  why  much  of  what  is  conceived 
in  terms  of  cantahile  singing  should  not  be  mastered  with  the  aid 
of  the  art  of  'beautiful  singing'.  I  have  not  even  forgone  the  possi- 
bilities of  ornamental  singing.  There  are,  to  be  sure,  almost  no 
recitatives  in  my  opera.  But  I  beheve  I  have  hberaUy  compensated 
for  this  omission  with  the  so-called  'rhythmic  declamation'  intro- 
duced by  Schoenberg  nearly  twenty  years  ago  in  the  declamatory 
choruses  of 'Die  gliickHche  Hand'  and  in  the  'melodramas'  of  his 
'Pierrot',  which  I  was  the  first  and  for  a  long  time  the  only  person 
to  use  on  a  large  scale  in  opera.  The  apphcation  of  this  technique 
to  opera  has  shown  that  this  kind  of  melodramatic  treatment  of 
the  voice  (while  fully  utilizing  all  its  purely  musical  possibihties, 
which  in  recitative  are  abandoned),  this  kind  of  melodicaUy, 
rhythmically  and  dynamically  controlled  speech,  represents  not 
only  one  of  the  best  means  of  conveying  the  sense  of  the  words 
(which  must  at  times  be  the  task  of  language,  even  in  opera),  but 
that  by  it  opera  has  been  enriched  by  a  valuable  new  musical  re- 
source (ranging  from  the  whispered  word  off-pitch  to  the  'bel 
parlare'  of  its  widely  ranging  'speech'  melodies),  at  once  a  wel- 
come complement  and  an  attractive  contrast  to  the  fully  sung  word. 
The  other  result  of  my  present  investigations  is  the  way  in 
which  I  dealt  with  the  necessity  of  introducing  passages  in  the 
style  of  popular  song,  and  thus  of  establishing  in  my  opera  a  re- 
lationship between  art-music  and  popular-music — something  that 
is  a  mere  matter  of  course  in  tonal  music.  It  was  not  easy  to  make 
these  different  planes  clear  within  this  so-called  atonal  harmonic 
system.  I  believe  I  succeeded  by  giving  to  everything  diat, 
musically,  fell  within  the  popular  sphere,  an  easily  perceptible 
primitive  character,  practicable  even  within  the  atonal  harmonic 
system.  The  means  available  for  this  are:  a  preference  for  sym- 
metrically shaped  periods;  the  use  of  harmonies  in  thirds  and, 

1  For  a  first  full  publication,  Cf.  Appendix  3,  page  26 iff. 

84 


WOZZECK 

especially,  in  fourths ;  melodies  based,  largely  on  the  whole-tone- 
scale  and  the  perfect  fourth,  in  contrast  to  the  diminished  and 
augmented  intervals  used  in  the  atonal  music  of  the  'Vienna 
School'.  So-called  'Polytonahty'  is  also  another  such  means  of 
creating  harmonically  primitive  music. 

Avoiding  both  Bel  Canto  and  dramatic  recitative,  in  order  to 
explore  and  exploit  the  possibilities  of  the  realistic  expression  of 
his  text,  Berg  employs  in  turn  different  techniques  of  musical 
declamation.  They  range  from  emotional  'Sprechgesang*  in  the 
manner  of  Wagner  (Wozzeck's  expressive  main  motive:  'Wir 
arme  Leut'  ') 


Wir  ar-  mg    Ltut^ 

Example  62 

and  the  style  of  popular  song  (the  songs  of  Marie  and  Andres), 
to  the  'normal  speaking  intonation'  of  words  spoken  to  syn- 
chronized music  (Act  I,  Scene  3,  dialogue  between  Marie  and 
Margaret),  this  last  being  identical  with  the  'melodrame'  of 
classical  opera  (e.g.  Beethoven's  Fidelio,  Act  2,  No.  12). 

Midway  between  these  two  extremes  of  vocal  expression  are 
the  transitional  types  of  'Sprechstimme'  and  'rhythmic  decla- 
mation', used  in  Schoenberg's  Opp.  18  and  21  and  expressly 
mentioned  in  Berg's  lecture.  In  the  preface  to  the  vocal  score  of 
Wozzeck  Berg  reprints  parts  of  Schoenberg's  explanatory  note 
to  his  Pierrot  Lunaire,  He  also  refers  to  a  similar  commentary 
provided  in  the  full-score  o£  Die  gluckliche  Hand.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  that  Berg  abstains  from  any  reference  to  the  earlier 
*melodrame'  in  the  Gurrelieder  ('Des  Sommerwindes  wilde 
Jagd'),  although  this  piece  is  surely  the  earliest  example  of 
Schoenberg's  brand  of 'speaking  voice';  it  may  well  have  been 
put  on  paper  as  early  as  1901.  The  subtle  differences  between 

85 


ALBAN  BERG 

the  'melodrame'  in  the  Gurrelieder  and  the  *Sprechstimme*  in 
Die gliickliche  Hand  2ind  Pierrot  Lunaire  2ive  revealed  in  a  letter  of 
Schoenberg's  published  in  Berg's  guide  to  the  Gurrelieder.  The 
problem  of  actual  pitch  and  of  clear  differentiation  of  intervals 
is  evidently  a  more  serious  one  in  the  two  later  works.  The 
contrast  becomes  graphically  evident  in  the  transition  from  the 
'white  notation'  of  the  Gurrelieder  'melodrame'  (  ^  )  to  the 
'black  notation'  of  Opp.  1 8  and  21  (  i  ).  The  latter  method  of 
strict  indication  of  pitch  and  interval  was  adopted  by  Berg  in 
many  parts  of  Wozzeck  (1/2,  11/ 3 -4,  111/ 1  and  111/4).  However, 
subtle  gradations  can  be  found  even  within  the  narrow  Umits 
of 'rhythmic  declamation'.  Whereas  Wozzeck's  spoken  phrase 


(spok.sn) 


I>u^     dtr      PJatx  /St    ver-fhicht! 

Example  63 

represents  only  an  ordinary  speaking  'melodrame'  with  extra 
emotional  emphasis,  Marie's  reading  from  the  Bible 


unci  ffnie  -fe  hin   zu    ih  ■  rcn      Fus 

Example  64 

re-approaches  again  the  plane  of  cantabile  singing.  (Observe  in 
the  foregoing  examples  Berg's  endeavour  to  distinguish  graph- 
ically between  the  two  vocal  techniques.) 

The  extreme  contrast  to  Example  63  is  represented  by  the 
popular  'Lied'  style  of  Wozzeck,  especially  apparent  in  the 
songs  of  Marie  and  Andres.  In  the  'Quasi  Trio'  section  of  the 
Military  March  (Act  i,  Scene  3),  Marie  hums  in  the  manner  of 
a  folksong  in  symmetrical  eight-bar  periods.  The  result  is  a 
melody  that  might  have  been  invented  by  the  Mahler  of  the 

86 


WOZZECK 


*Wunderhorn'  songs.  This  passage  seems  indeed  to  have  been 
consciously  associated  by  Berg  with  Mahler's  Revelge,  from  the 
*Wunderhorn'  songs: 


Ach  ^       Bri/ -  der^  och    Briider^  ihr  geht  Ja  -  rn'ir  vor-  u   -  ber 

Example  65 

In  his  treatment  of  the  voice  parts  Berg  undoubtedly  paid 
special  attention  to  the  question  of 'Intonation'.  1  This  becomes 
particularly  noticeable  in  the  rare  cantahile  sections.  In  striving 
for  truly  realistic  expression  and  in  his  dislike  of  the  clear  con- 
tours of  the  traditional  Bel  Canto  vocal  line,  Berg  deliberately 
blurs  the  outline  of  liis  melodies  in  folk-style  by  the  intrusion 
of  the  atmospheric  orchestral  background-music : 


Andres 


'c^^ 


Example  66 

The  'atonal'  deviation  in  Andres's  song  (it  is  hummed,  rather 
than  sung)  at  'x'  is  as  legitimate  an  artistic  device  for  the  creation 

^  The  use  of  intervals  based  on  the  inflections  of  the  voice  in  ordinary  idiomatic 
speech,  as,  for  example,  by  Janacek  in  his  Czech  operas. 

87 


ALBAN  BERG 

of  a  realistic  sound-atmosphere  as  are  the  'tonally'  correspond- 
ing echoes  ^t'a.  The  latter  incorporate  the  involuntary  devia- 
tion from  pitch,  customary  in  unaccompanied  singing.  This 
calculated  impurity  of  pitch  saves  these  popular  melodies  from 
obviousness  and  all  vestiges  of  sentimentality.  Even  more  con- 
vincing is  the  shaping  of  the  folk-song  for  chorus  *Ein  Jager 
aus  der  Pfalz'  (Act  2,  Scene  4).  Here  the  naive  diatonicism  of 
the  tune  is  countered  by  the  erroneous  A  flat  in  the  refrain 
*HaUi,  Hallo'  and  by  the  burden-like  choral  parts,  clogging  and 
hampering  the  nimbly  ascending  scale-passage  in  C  major: 


einst  durch  ei-nem  ffriinen   lA/a/d!  Haf-ti  !    Hah  hi 
Example.  67 

It  should  not  be  overlooked,  however,  that  certain  extrava- 
gances of  Berg's  vocal  style,  such  as  the  grotesque  squeak  of  the 
apoplectic  Captain: 

Jff 


Pok      '        '     for/ 
Example  68 

have  their  roots  in  certain  border-line  cases  of  dramatic  expres- 
sion in  Wagner  and  Strauss,  approaching  near  to  the  realistic 
shout.  Wagner,  in  his  autobiography,  describes  Wilhelmine 
Schroder-Devrient's  transference  of  the  'cris  du  fureur'  of  the 
French  revolutionary  opera  to  Beethoven's  Fidelio,  Act  2 : 

88 


m'erstsein  Wetb!  — 
Example  69 

The  realistic  interpretation  of  this  passage  in  Fidelio  probably 
paved  the  way  for  things  like  these  bars  from  Parsifal  and 
Salome: 


Upd        lach-te 
Example  70 


Mon   to      -    tf  dieses    We'/b 
Example  71 


which  in  turn  may  have  influenced  certain  vocal  climaxes  in 
Berg's  opera.  . 


Wozzeck  is  scored  for  an  outstandingly  large  orchestra, 
offering  marked  possibilities  of  differentiation  of  tone-colour : 


4  FLUTES 

4  OBOES 

4  CLARINETS 

BASS  CLARINET 

3  BASSOONS 

DOUBLE  BASSOON 


4  HORNS 
4  TRUMPETS 
4  TROMBONES 


TYMPANI 

CYMBALS,   BASS  DRUM, 

BROOM,  SIDE  DRUMS, 


CONTRABASS  TUBA     2  TAMTAMS,  TRIANGLE, 
XYLOPHONE,  CELESTA, 
HARP,  STRINGS. 

89 


ALBAN  BERG 

A  cursory  glance  at  the  massive  array  of  wood-wind  and  brass 
might  suggest  a  work  rather  in  hne  with  the  mammoth  scores 
of  Pdchard  Strauss  and  early  Schoenberg.  However,  that  im- 
pression would  not  outlast  the  very  first  page  of  the  first  scene 
of  the  opera,  where  Wozzeck,  shaving  the  Captain,  is  accom- 
panied by  a  mere  'obbHgato'  of  five  solo  woodwind  instru- 
ments, harp,  muted  strings  and  an  occasional  touch  of  percus- 
sion. The  whole  first  scene,  the  structure  of  which  closely 
corresponds  with  that  of  the  old  harpsichord  suite  (comprising 
Praeludium,  Pavane,  Cadenza,  Gigue,  Gavotte  and  Double),  is 
played  throughout  to  the  above  accompaniment  of  chamber- 
music-like  dimensions.  The  first  orchestral  tutti,  of  only  9  bars, 
occurs  in  the  following  orchestral  Interlude.  This  relationship 
between  scene  and  interlude  is  found  throughout  the  whole 
score.  The  orchestral  style  of  Wozzeck  differs  from  that  of 
Wagner  and  Strauss  chiefly  by  the  fact  that  its  'fortissimo' 
effects  are  almost  exclusively  confined  to  the  interludes  between 
the  scenes,  while  the  scenes  themselves  are  accompanied  by 
smaller,  selected  groups  of  instruments.  Berg  thus  reflects  the 
change  of  style  in  writing  for  the  orchestra  which  took  place 
with  Schoenberg's  and  Schreker's  Kammer-Sinfonien  of  1906- 
08,  Mahler's  last  vocal  compositions  and  Strauss's  Ariadne 
(1912).  The  solution  of  the  orchestral  problems  of  Wozzeck 
was  fmally  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  libretto,  which 
compelled  the  composer  to  provide  no  less  than  fourteen 
orchestral  interludes,  the  basic  function  of  which  was  to  ensure 
the  musical  cohesion  of  the  acts  as  wholes,  in  spite  of  the 
numerous  changes  of  scene.  Berg  discussed  this  problem  in  his 
lecture  on  Wozzeck: 

A  further  compelling  necessity  for  musical  variety  arose  with  the 
comparatively  large  number  of  orchestral  interludes,  resulting 
from  the  fact  that  each  act  demanded  three  changes  of  scene.  To 

90 


WOZZECK 

have  written  here  symphonic  transitions  or  intermezzi  throughout 
(such  as  I  was  to  observe  later  in  another  contemporary  opera  with 
many  changes  of  scene  i)  would  have  been  at  variance  with  my 
own  conception  of  musical  drama.  So  I  was  compelled  to  aim  at 
contrast  and  variety  by  making  these  interludes  partly  transitional 
bridge-passages,  and  partly  giving  them  the  forms  of  coda  to  the 
preceding  scene,  or  prelude  to  the  following  scene,  or  even  both 
at  once. 

Generally  speaking,  these  orchestral  interludes  are  related  to  the 
scenes  they  connect  in  a  v^ay  that  recalls  the  relationship  be- 
tween the  development  section  of  a  movement  of  a  symphony 
and  its  exposition  and  recapitulation.  This  organic  quality  in 
the  Wozzeck  interludes  distinguishes  them,  much  to  their  ad- 
vantage, from  the  orchestral  interludes,  say,  in  Debussy's 
Pelleas,  v^hich  often  tend  to  smother  the  delicate,  athematical 
lyricism  of  the  preceding  scene  with  their  heavy  climaxes  of,  as 
it  were,  extraneous  orchestral  sonorities. 

Berg's  art  of  orchestral  differentiation  is  seen  at  its  subtlest  in 
Scenes  3  and  4  of  Act  2.  Here  the  orchestral  tutti  is  split  up  into 
three  self-contained  and  independently  organized  groups  of 
instruments : 

[a]  A  chamber  orchestra  of  fifteen  instruments  (deliberately 
modelled  on  Schoenberg's  Chamber  Symphony  No.  i. 
Op.  9)  consisting  of: 

Flute  (Piccolo),  Oboe,  Cor  Anglais,  Clarinet  in  E  flat. 
Clarinet  in  A,  Bass  Clarinet,  Bassoon,  Double  Bas- 
soon, two  Horns  and  five  solo  strings; 

(b)  A  band  of  players  in  the  village  inn,  on  the  stage,  con- 
sisting of: 

'Fiddles'  (i.e.  violins  with  'scordatura',  tuned  a  tone 

^  Probably  Debussy's  PelUas  et  Melisande  is  meant. 

91 


ALBAN   BERG 

higher  than  normally,  like  the  solo  violin  in  the 
Scherzo  of  Mahler's  Fourth  Symphony),  Clarinet  in 
C,  Accordion,  Guitars  and  Bombardon  in  F; 
(c)     A  residuary  orchestral  'tutti'. 
In  the  third  scene  the  spoken  dialogue  between  Marie  and 
Wozzeck  is  accompanied  by  group  (a);  group  (c),  however, 
comes  into  action  as  soon  as  the  figure  of  the  Drum  Major 
begins  to  dominate  their  exchanges,  and  brings  in  all  the 
motives  associated  with  that  character  (Rondo  theme.  Trio  of 
the  MiHtary  March  of  Act  i.  Scene  2).  This  results  in  a  very- 
original  relationship  between  concertino  and  tutti.  In  the  fourth 
scene  group  {a)  is  replaced  by  group  (b)  which — like  the  three 
ballroom  orchestras  in  Mozart's  Don  Giovanni — enters  with  a 
cadential  figure  (in  Berg's  opera  on  the  Bombardon).  There  is 
even  a  thematic  allusion  to  Mozart  at  bar  439: 


(Berg) 


$^ 


Example  72 


For  a  long  time  group  (b)  dominates  the  scene,  with  its  music 
based  on  Waltz  and  Landler  rhythms,  while  group  (c)  is  con- 
fined to  occasional  interjections.  This  relationship  between  an 
orchestra  on  the  stage  and  the  orchestra  in  the  pit  recalls  that  in 
Der  Rosenkavalier,  Act  3  (the  waltz  in  E,  cue  loi).  The  music 


92 


WOZZECK 

of  Berg's  stage-orchestra  is,  perhaps  deliberately,  reminiscent  of 
this  Rosenkavalier  waltz,  and  o£theLdndler-  Waltz  from  Weber's 
Der  Freischiitz,  Act  i. 

Very  different  is  the  role  allotted  to  the  orchestra  in  Act  3  of 
Wozzeck.  This  is  organized  as  a  sequence  of 'Inventions',  begin- 
ning with  a  Fugue  on  a  six-note  theme : 


Example  73 

accompanying  Marie's  reading  from  the  Bible.  Here  the  orches- 
tra is  again  transformed  into  an  ensemble  of  soloists.  In  sharp 
contrast  is  the  treatment  of  the  orchestral  interlude  ('Invention 
on  one  note')  following  the  second  scene  of  this  act,  which  cul- 
minates in  the  famous  thirteen  bars  on  the  note  B  (i.e.,  the 
persistent  pedal  point  of  the  preceding  murder-scene)  ending 
with  a  tremendous  'fff\  after  the  'fatal  rhythm'  (the  structural 
backbone  of  the  following  scene)  has  been  given  out  by  the 
hass  drum  in  isolated  savagery : 

{jimp) 


ff 


>     >  >    > 


Example  74 


Example  74  is  the  basis  of  the  brutal  'Quick  Polka'  strummed 
out  on  the  out-of-tune  upright  piano  at  the  beginning  of  the 
third  scene.  Here  the  instrumental  accompaniment  is  again  of 
a  duaHstic  nature.  The  piano  vamps  accompaniments  to  the 
ballad-like  song  of  Margaret,  the  barmaid,  while  the  tutti 
orchestra  contributes  the  sinister  stammer  accompanying 
Wozzeck' s  distracted  exclamations. 

93 


ALBAN  BERG 

In  the  final  interlude  ('Invention  on  a  key'),  linking  the  fourth 
and  fifth  scenes  of  this  act,  the  full  power  of  the  orchestra  comes 
at  last  into  play,  epitomizing  the  dramatic  content  of  the  whole 
work  in  the  manner  of  a  symphonic  epilogue.  This  is  the  longest 
piece  of  sustained  orchestral  music  in  the  opera.  Its  roots  go 
back  to  a  discarded  symphonic  project  of  19 12,  as  already  men- 
tioned, and  the  almost  anachronistic  recurrence  here  to  the 
opulent  manner  of  Mahler  or  early  Schoenberg  throws  the 
subtleties  of  the  chamber-music-like  texture  of  the  Wozzeck 
score  in  general  into  bold  relief. 

Another  passage  of  Berg's  lecture  of  1929  discusses  the  prob- 
lem of  musical  form  presented  by  Wozzeck : 

When  I  decided  to  compose  a  full-length  opera  I  was  confronted 
with  a  new  problem,  at  least  in  the  harmonic  sphere.  How  could 
I  hope  to  achieve,  without  the  well-tried  resources  of  tonality  and 
its  possibilities  of  formal  organization,  the  same  compelling  musi- 
cal unity?  Unity,  not  only  in  the  short  scenes,  but  in  the  formal 
design  of  whole  acts,  and,  indeed,  in  the  general  structure  of  the 
entire  opera? 

The  solution  of  this  problem  is  to  be  found  in  the  unique  formal 
organization  of  Wozzeck,  which  has  ehcited  so  many  commen- 
taries, ever  since  its  publication.  In  the  three  main  sections  of 
the  work,  each  of  five  scenes.  Berg  himself  recognized  a  pos- 
teriori 'the  good  old  ternary  form  A-B-A\  The  following  table 
of  corresponding  relationships  between  stage-scenes  and  musi- 
cal forms,  originally  drafted  by  the  composer,  is  familiar  to 
every  student  of  the  opera.  It  emphasizes  remarkably  the  ternary 
structure  of  the  work. 


94 


WOZZECK 


Formal  Organization  of  WOZZECK 


MUSIC 


Act  I 


Exposition:  Wozzeck  in  relation  to  his 

environment. 
Scene  i :  Wozzeck  and  the  Captain. 
Scene  2 :  Wozzeck  and  Andres. 
Scene  3 :  Marie  and  Wozzeck. 

Scene  4:  Wozzeck  and  the  Doctor. 

Scene  5 :  Marie  and  the  Drum  Major. 


Musical  form:  5  character  pieces. 

Scene  i:  Suite  (in  11  sections). 
Scene  2 :  Rhapsody  on  3  chords. 
Scene  3 :  Military  March — LuUaby — 

Scena. 
Scene  4:  Passacaglia    (Theme    and    21 

variations). 
Scene  5:  Andante  afFettuoso  (quasi 

Rondo). 


Act  2 


Dramatic  development:  Wozzeck  be- 
comes more  and  more  convinced  of 
Marie's  unfaithfulness. 

Scene  i:  Marie  and  the  child;  Wozzeck 

(Wozzeck' s  first  suspicions) 
Scene  2 :  Captain,  Doctor,  Wozzeck 

(Wozzeck  derided) 
Scene  3 :  Marie  andWozzeck 

(Wozzeck  accuses  Marie  of  be- 
ing unfaithful  to  him) 
Scene  4:  Garden  of  a  country  inn 

(Marie  dances  with  the  Drum 

Major) 
Scene  5 :  Guardroom  in  the  barracks 

(Soldiers,    Andres.    The   Drum 

Major  manhandles  Wozzeck) 


Musical  form:  Symphony  in  5  move- 
ments. 


Scene  i :  Sonata  movement. 

Scene  2 :  Invention  and  Fugue. 

Scene  3 :  Largo  for  chamber  orchestra. 


Scene  4:  Scherzo    with    3    Trios    and 
recapitulation  (2  orchestras). 

Scene  5 :  Introduction  and  Rondo  mar- 
ziale. 


Act  3 


Catastrophe    and    epilogue:     Wozzeck 
murders  Marie  and  atones  by  suicide. 
Scene  i :  Marie  and  the  child 

(her  remorse). 
Scene  2 :  Marie  and  Wozzeck  at  the  pond. 

(Marie's  death) 
Scene  3 :  Tavern.  Wozzeck  seeks  forget- 

fulness  in  drink. 
Scene  4:  Wozzeck's  death  in  the  pond. 

Orchestral  interlude  (Epilogue) 
Scene  5 :  Children  playing,  among  them 
Marie's  child. 


Musical  form:  6  Inventions. 
Scene  i :  Invention  on  a  theme. 
Scene  2:  Invention  on  one  note. 
Scene  3 :  Invention  on  a  rhythm. 

Scene  4:  Invention  on  a  chord  of  six 

notes. 

Invention  on  a  key  (D  minor) 
Scene  5:  Invention    on    a    continuous 

quaver-movement. 


95 


ALBAN  BERG 

Some  commentators  have  hailed  the  use  in  opera  of  the 
older  musical  forms  (Suite,  Passacagha,  Fugue,  Rondo,  etc.)  as 
a  revolutionary  imiovation.  Berg  himself  disposed  of  that  idea, 
in  an  article  published  in  1928. 1  Actually,  the  use  of  the  forms 
of 'absolute  music'  in  opera  was  much  less  of  a  novelty  than  he 
and  his  first  critics,  thirty  years  ago,  imagined.  However,  the 
structural  organization  of  Wozzeck  is  by  no  means  fully  illus- 
trated by  the  above  tables.  Although  Berg  discarded  the  possi- 
bilities of  formal  organization  through  tonality,  he  continued 
to  use  Leitmotive,  in  Wagner's  manner.  He  also  used  scales 
(including  the  diatonic  scale)  and  serial  rows  at  certain  pivotal 
points  of  the  drama.  An  assessment  of  the  musical  structure  of 
Wozzeck  must  distinguish  three  basic  techniques : 

(i)  The  use  of  diatonic  and  non-diatonic  scales  and  serial 
rows  as  unifying  elements; 

(2)  The  use  of  characteristic  motives  [Leitmotiv e),  establish- 
ing close  affinities  between  character,  situation,  action 
and  music; 

(3)  The  use  of  the  forms  of  absolute  m.usic. 

But  does  the  emphasis  on  formal  organization  in  Wozzeck 
really  represent  something  new  in  opera?  Surely  not.  All  three 
basic  techniques  have  been  used  in  opera  again  and  again,  from 
Monteverdi  and  Gluck  to  Mehul,  Weber  and  Wagner.  Leit- 
motive  play  an  integral  part  already  in  Monteverdi's  Favola 
d'Orfeo  (1607)  as  in  Mehul's  Ariodant  (1799)  and  Weber's  Frei- 
schUtz  (1821).  The  forms  of  absolute  music  are  likewise  no 
strangers  to  opera.  2 

When  Berg  conceived  the  five  scenes  of  his  second  act  as  the 
movements  of  a  symphony  he  only  turned  a  fundamental,  if 

1 'Das  Opernproblem'  {Neue  Mi-isikzeitung,  Stuttgsirt,  Jahrgang  49,  No.  9,  1928). 
^  Cf.  the  fugues  in  Wagner's  Meister singer  (Act  2)  and  in  Verdi's  Fahtaff,  the  canon 
in  Beethoven's  Fidelio,  the  chorale  prekidc  in  Mozart's  Magic  Flute. 

96 


WOZZECK 

hypothetical,  claim  of  Wagner  at  last  into  artistic  reality.  In  his 
essay  'Uber  die  Anwendung  der  Musik  auf  das  Drama'  ('On 
the  application  of  music  to  the  drama'),  of  1879,  Wagner  had 
traced  the  conception  of  his  new  Musikdrama  back  to  the 
Viennese  classical  symphony:  'Nevertheless,  the  new  form  of 
dramatic  music  must  have  the  unity  of  a  symphony-movement, 
to  become  a  musical  work  of  art.  This  unity  is  given  by  a  tissue 
of  basic  motives  permeating  the  whole  composition.  These 
motives  act  upon  one  another,  linking  up,  separating,  com- 
plementing, like  motives  in  a  symphony-movement.' 

Berg's  Wozzeck  is  neither  atonal  nor  dodecaphonic.  Both 
terms  are  misleading  and  inappropriate,  although  their  use 
could  be  justified  by  certain  features  of  the  score.  The  opera  is 
described  by  Berg  himself  as  'a  work  in  atonal  style',  yet  it  is 
not  strictly  atonal  in  the  sense,  say,  of  Schoenberg's  Erwartung: 
for  there  are  many  passages  of  tonally  organized  music  in  which 
definite  keys  are  employed. 

Traditional  major  and  minor  scales  are  frequently  used  ta 
express  certain  moods.  For  instance:  Marie's  hummed  folk- 
tune'Soldaten  sindschoneBurschen'  (I/2,  cf.  p.  87,  Example  65) 
in  A  flat;  the  frequently  misinterpreted  chord  of  C  major 
accompanying  Wozzeck's  'Da  ist  wieder  Geld,  Marie,  die 
Lohnung  .  .  .'  (II/i);!  or  the  section  in  F  minor  (III/i,  Var.  5, 
2  bars  before  cue  3  5)  when  Marie  tells  the  fairy-tale  about  the 
lonely  child. 

The  final  cadential  chords  of  the  opera,  to  which  Berg  attri- 
butes integral  importance,  also  derive  from  traditional  har- 
mony. These  chords,  which  recur  at  the  end  of  each  act,  and 
function  there  'like  a  tonic',  are  formed,  according  to  the  com- 


^  A  hand- written  interpolation  in  the  typescript  of  Berg's  lecture  of  1929  refers  to 
this  passage:  'How  could  the  detached  objectivity  (Sachlichkeit)  of  money  be  better 
expressed?' 

G  97 


ALBAN  BERG 


poser  himself,  of  the  same  notes.  Yet  they  appear  each  time  in 
different  form.  Closer  investigation  shows  that  their  origin  may- 
be traced  to  a  certain  serial  scale-organization.  The  sequence  of 
chords  at  the  ends  of  Acts  i  and  3  can  be  presented  in  the  fol- 
lowing reduced  form: 


Whole  tone  stcf! 


(ideal  reso- 
.  -lurion) 
enharmonic     . 
e>chanqe     y 


(    idcoi  re$o- 
'lutioo) 

i 


Example  75 

Both  chords,  {a)  and  {h),  oscillate  above  the  faburden-fifths  (c), 
i.e.  they  are  rooted  in  diatonic  harmony.  Separately  assessed, 
both  {a)  and  {b)  are  chords  of  the  seventh,  capable  of  tonic 
resolution  into  E  major  or  F  sharp  major.  To  these  obvious  re- 
lationships of  (a)  and  (&)  to  diatonic  harmony  should  be  added 
the  melodic  movements,  from  C  flat  to  D  flat,  and  from  A  to 
B  natural,  in  the  liighest  and  lowest  parts.  These  melodic  move- 
ments are  steps  of  whole  tones.  This  means  that  the  chord 
sequence  {a)-{b)  is  related  to  the  whole-tone  scale  (melodically) 
as  well  as  to  the  diatonic  scale  (as  far  as  modulation  and  the 
possibilities  of  enharmonic  change  are  concerned). 

If  the  variant  of  the  sequence  {a)-{b)  in  Act  3,  bar  390,  at  the 
entry  of  the  fab ur den  fifths  (c),  is  presented  as  a  cadential 
formula : 


Example  76 

98 


WOZZECK 


and  is  then  strung  out  serially,  in  the  sense  of  later  dodecaphonic 
practice,  the  result  is  the  'Grundgestalt'  (Basic  Shape)  of  a  G 
major  scale  with  interstitial  whole-tone  steps : 

^^nH""'"'^"*""  "'''^■'^■-1 "ii  "-^ 

Example  jj 

Its  inversion  presents  a  perfect  whole-tone  sequence.  Kinship 
exists,  undoubtedly,  between  the  chord  sequence  {a)'{b)  and  the 
chordal  pendulum  of  the  introduction  to  the  song  Nacht  {Seven 
Early  Songs,  1907) : 


Example  78 

That  kinship  is  seen  in  the  variable  sequence  of  chords  of  the 
ninth,  as  well  as  in  their  immutable  hard  core:  the  inner 
sequence  of  two  whole-tone  steps : 


Example  79 

This  relationship  between  Wozzeck  and  the  harmonic  process 
of  the  early  song  proves  anew  the  organic  character  of  Berg's 
whole  creative  development.  Those  sections  of  Wozzeck  based 
on  scale-like  serial  formations  of  atonal  character  are  further 
removed  from  the  logistics  of  the  diatonic  scale.  They  disclose 
(hke  the  fifth  of  the  Altenberg  Lieder,  Op.  4)  a  surprisingly 
close  approximation  to  the  processes  of  twelve-note  music, 
which  was  still  in  statu  pupillari  at  the  time  when  Wozzeck  was 
completed.  This  is  seen  most  forcibly  in  the  Passacaglia  subject 

99 


ALBAN   BERG 


(1/4),  called  'Chaconne'  by  Berg  himself,  the  basis  of  the  twenty- 
one  variations  which  express,  as  the  composer  says,  'the  Doctor's 
idee  fixe  with  purely  musical  means'.  The  theme  itself  is  dodeca- 
phonic (as  Berg  himself  discovered  later),  as  is  the  passacagha- 
subject  of  the  fifth  Altenberg  song.  Op.  4,  which  might  have 
been  a  preliminary  study  for  it.  This  passacagha-theme  is  first 
presented  on  the  clarinet  as  an  'expressionless'  symbol : 


1*54      5        fc789 

Example  80 


In  Variations  6  and  7  this  subject  is  not  treated  in  the  traditional 
manner  of  the  passacagha.  It  is  not  used  as  a  thematic  ground- 
bass,  but  appears  as  a  vertical  chord-condensation.  This  is  a 
typical  process  of  Dodecaphony,  which  admits  the  possibiHty 
of  transposition  of  every  member  of  the  Basic  Shape  into  dif- 
ferent octaves.  Significantly  enough,  a  condensation  of  this 
twelve-note  series  (cf.  Example  80)  accompanies  (at  the  very 
end  of  Variation  6)  Wozzeck's  words  '  Wenn  was  is  und  doch 
nicht  is.  .  . .'  ('Ah,  when  it's  there,  and  is  not  there. . . .')  boldly 
anticipating  Variation  7.  The  vertical  presentation  of  the  series 
telescopes  the  intervals  into  simultaneously-sounding  har- 
monies, thus: 


WOZZECK 

Variation  7  repeats  the  process  and  completes  it  by  including 
the  retrograde  version  of  the  series.  In  Variation  7  the  series  is 
subjected  to  a  selective  process  based  on  the  principles  of  per- 
mutation, which  anticipates  the  serial  technique  o£  Lulu.  The 
selective  sequence  of  notes  may  be  presented  in  tabulated  form, 
thus: 

(a)     2  4  6  8  12  8  6  4 

(^)     I  3   5  7  II  7  5  3 

The  omitted  notes  'a  and  '/'  (9  and  10  of  the  series)  are  pre- 
sented by  the  stationary  faburden-fifths  [c). 

The  passage  here  analysed  contains  the  principles  of  Schoen- 
berg's  later  twelve-note  technique  in  a  nutshell — proof  at  once 
of  the  historical  inevitability  of  the  development  of  this  tech- 
nique at  this  time,  and  of  the  creative  independence  of  Berg's 
exploring  mind. 

Polytonality  also  has  a  part  to  play  among  the  expressive 
devices  of  the  opera.  Berg  effectively  blurs  the  contours  of 
harmony  by  simultaneously  sounding  two  chords  of  the 
seventh,  which  in  turn  are  related  to  one-  another  as  tonic  and 
dominant.  This  overclouding  of  the  harmony  takes  place  at 
Marie's  words  'Du  siehst  so  verstort'  ('You  look  so  distraught'), 
which  re-echo  Wozzeck's  visionary  imaginings  (I/3).  Violins, 
col  legno,  play  the  following  passage,  based  on  a  chord  of  A  flat 
minor,  given  out  by  the  trombones : 


r  r^ 

Ra== 

SP 

Tr 

3^1. 

■ —          1  \yn 

resolution 

,«:''/'-rf:j-^iJbJn 

=^itJs^ 

H=^=^s#=**=^= 

cl 

bj       ttsT 

tL>~ 

' 

_ 

^fx 

i 

-^ 

V. 

^ 

resolution 

(Trombones) 


Examples  82  and  83 
lOI 


ALBAN  BERG 

The  note  sequences  {a)  and  [h)  can  be  presented  in  vertical  chord 
formation,  thus  (cf.  No.  83).  Their  simultaneous  sounding, 
intensified  by  the  alien  'A  flat'  (a  Hnk  with  the  chord  of  the 
trombones),  results  in  a  nine-note  chord: 


Example  84 


Although  Wozzeck  dispenses  with  tonahty  for  long  stretches, 
its  music  remains  strictly  organized  down  to  its  last  details, 
largely  owing  to  the  judicious  employment  of  serial  techniques- 
Referring  to  the  bare  fifths  in  the  orchestra  which  accom- 
pany Marie's  'absent-mindedness'  (first  occurring  in  Act  i,  cue 


Example  85 

Berg,  in  his  lecture  of  1929,  said:  'These  fifths  are  closely 
associated  with  the  figure  of  Marie  .  .  .  their  harmonic  im- 
mobility expresses,  as  it  were,  her  aimless  waiting,  which  is 
only  terminated  with  her  death.  Tliis  passage  is  used  several 
times,  almost  in  the  manner  of  a  Leitmotiv  J  Actually  Berg's  use 
of  such  motives  of  dramatic  characterization  is  strikingly  akin 
to  Wagner's  use  of  Leitmotive.  The  web  of  motives  is  much 
denser  in  Wozzeck  than  in  Strauss's  Salome  and  Elektra,  both 
based  on  a  comparatively  small  group  of  characteristic  themes, 
and   compared  with  other   contemporary  operas  of  looser 

102 


WOZZECK 

texture  Berg's  work  represents,  in  this  respect,  almost  a  return 
to  Wagnerian  orthodoxy.  Among  the  numerous  motives  of 
Wozzeck  may  be  singled  out  the  group  of  'motives  of  fear' 
associated  with  Wozzeck  himself,  the  hunted  and  miserable  vic- 
tim of  his  social  inferiority.  These  motives  recur  also  in  the 
music  associated  with  Marie  and  her  child.  They  express  the 
permanent  psychological  oppression  exerted  on  them  by 
Wozzeck,  even  in  his  absence.  Their  common  structural  link 
is  the  whole-tone  scale : 


(gehetzt) 


and  its  inversion : 


Example  86 


Example  87 


From  Marie's  threatening  gesture  'Go  to  sleep,  boy'  (II/i,  cue 
30)  the  motive  of 'the  child's  fear'  is  developed: 


Example  88 


Example  89 

This  is  condensed  into  a  hasty  sequence  of  which  the  across-the- 
bar  rhythm  and  tendency  to  descend  by  whole-tone  steps  sug- 
gest a  feeling  of  breathlessness : 

103 


ALBAN   BERG 


Example  90 

The  same  motive  returns  in  slow,  dragging  tempo  when 
Wozzeck  suddenly  appears  and  surprises  Marie  putting  on  the 
compromising  ear-rings.  The  breathless  fear  of  Example  90 
has  now  become  the  tragedy  of  the  everyday  treadmill  of  the 
poor,  expressed  in  the  sinister  lethargy  of  the  canon  on  muted 
trombones : 


Example  91 

In  this  canon  there  occurs  again  the  sequence  of  descending 
whole-tone  steps : 


Example  92 

A  new  variant  of  this  motive  is  heard  in  Act  2,  Scene  2,  when 
Wozzeck  is  pulled  up  by  the  doctor  with  the  words:  'Why 
hurry  so  fast  and  pass  us  by?'  At  this  point  the  muted  trombones 
express  compellingly  the  tragic  discrepancy  between  Wozzeck's 
inner  heaviness  and  his  apparent  haste : 


Example  93 

Bereft  of  its  heavy  harmonies,  Example  93  becomes  at  bar  313 
the  third  subject  of  the  'Invention  and  Fugue  on  three  subjects', 

104 


WOZZECK 

in  the  trio  between  the  Captain,  the  Doctor  and  Wozzeck,  the 
cUmax  of  which  comes  with  Wozzeck's  cry  of  despair  (based 
on  the  famihar  whole-tone  steps) : 


Dann        wliss  te     man  woron    man   istj 

Example  94 

The  role  of  the  descending  whole-tone  scale  in  the  musical 
characterization  of  Wozzeck  is  played  by  the  interval  of  the 
fourth  in  the  popular'  parts  of  the  score.  All  motives  in  'popu- 
lar' style  can  be  traced  back  to  the  basic  cell  of  an  ascending 
fourth : 


Das        i&t      di'e    scho-  ne        Jd  ge       rei 

Example  95 

This  motive  develops  in  the  second  stanza  of  Andres's  song 
into: 


Example  96 

where  the  particle  x'  can  be  recognized  as  the  basic  motive  of 
Marie's  lullaby : 


Mb -del, was    fongat  du  jetzt-        an? — 

Example  97 

105 


ALBAN  BERG 
In  the  final  orchestral  interlude  in  D  minor  ('Invention  on  a 
key')  particle  'x'  represents  once  more  the  central  core  of  the 
musical  idea: 


Xf  inverted  J 


1|^ 

Example  98 

Berg  was  anxious  to  explain  the  use  of  the  older  musical 
forms  in  his  opera.  In  his  lecture  he  said: 

My  aim  was  musical  variety  and  the  avoidance  of  Wagner's 
method  of  'through-composing'  every  single  one  of  these  many 
scenes.  Therefore  I  had  to  give  to  every  scene  a  different  structural 
basis.  On  the  other  hand,  the  dramatic  unity  of  these  scenes  de- 
manded a  similar  unity  in  the  music.  This  could  best  be  achieved 
by  the  employment  of  closed  musical  forms. 

Berg  goes  on  to  emphasize  that  the  choice  of  these  forms  was 
determined  by  the  character  of  each  scene  and  that  he  employed 
not  only  archaic  forms,  such  as  Passacagha  and  Fugue,  but  new 
designs,  such  as  the  'Inventions'  based  on  one  note,  one 
rhythm,  or  one  chord.  The  use  of  Passacagha  and  Fugue,  for 
musico-dramatic  purposes,  deserves  closer  scrutiny.  There  is 
nothing  casual  about  the  choice  of  these  forms  for  use  in 
Wozzeck. 

Berg  based  his  dehberations  on  Hugo  Pdemann's  etymologic- 
ally  dubious  but  interesting  association  of  the  term  'Folia' 
(ostinato)  with  the  Berliozian  term  'idee  fixe'.  In  the  passacagha 
theme  (I/4,  Cf.  Example  80,)  the  doctor's  mania,  as  well 
as  Wozzeck' s  maniacal  philosophizings,  find  their  appropriate 
musical  equivalent.  The  obstinate  repetition  of  one  single  musi- 
cal idea  under  changing  melodic  and  harmonic  progressions  is 

106 


WOZZECK 

surely  the  only  possible  way  of  representing  in  notes  the  omni- 
presence of  the  'idee  fixe'.  Biichner's  characters  all  have  their 
dominating  'fixed  idea'  (Wozzeck's  visions,  the  Doctor's  theory 
of  nutrition,  the  'moral'  philosophy  of  the  Captain,  Marie's 
unbridled  sensuality).  They  almost  inevitably  suggest  the  use 
of  musical  ostinato  forms.  1 

In  this  context  Schoenberg's  use  of  the  passacaglia  for  'Nacht' 
in  his  Pierrot  Lunaire  (Part  II,  No.  8)  should  not  be  overlooked. 
Berg  freely  admitted  the  influence  of  Pierrot  on  the  music  of 
Wozzeck.^  This  influence  becomes  evident  if  Berg's  passacaglia 
theme  (Example  80)  is  compared  with  Schoenberg's 
theme,  the  latter  being  the  final  result  of  an  initial  canonic 
stretto  of  its  first  link  'a  : 


Example  99 

However,  whereas  Schoenberg's  Pierrot  passacagHa,  rooted  in 
the  four-note  motive : 


Example  100 

remains  a  musical  miniature  of  only  twenty-six  bars.  Berg's 
Wozzeck  passacaglia  with  its  twenty-one  variations,  based  on 


^  Manfred  Gurlitt's  opera  Wozzeck,  composed  shortly  after  Berg's  own,  also  makes 
systematic  use  of  ostinato  and  passacaglia. 
2  In  a  letter  to  Webern  of  August  19,  191 8,  first  published  by  WilU  Reich  in  1953. 

107 


ALBAN   BERG 

a  veritable  twelve-note  series,  is  an  impressive  structure,  in 
which  Schoenberg's  own  methods  of  composition  of  the  1920's 
are  clearly  anticipated.  It  is  hkely  that  Webern's  passacaglia, 
Op.  I  (1908),  also  contributed  something  to  Berg's  work.  Its 
eight-note  theme  contains  intervals  with  striking  possibiHties  of 
subsequent  vertical,  chordal  treatment.  In  the  final  variation  of 
Berg's  passacagha  (Variation  21,  vocal  score,  two  bars  before 
cue  640)  the  full  melodic  series  (Example  80)  is  presented  in  full 
twelve-note  harmony  also — a  solution  probably  suggested  by 
Webern's  example. 

The  use  of  fugal  technique  for  purposes  of  dramatic  charac- 
terization is  seen  in  the  Invention  and  Fugue  on  three  subjects' 
(Act  2,  Scene  2).  The  Invention',  accompanying  the  dialogue 
between  the  Doctor  (B)  and  the  Captain  (A),  (Act  2,  bar  172), 
presents  its  two  subjects  in  the  manner  of  a  two-part  Invention 
by  Bach,  with  all  the  imphcations  of  double  counterpoint: 


( Qug merited  ) 


{ diminished  } 


Example  loi 


From  bar  286  onwards  the  music  becomes  strictly  fugal,  with 
subjects  A  and  B  presented  in  a  double  exposition  and  subject 
C  (Example  93)  entering  at  bar  313,  to  Wozzeck's  sombre 
threat:  'But  why  do  you  ask  that  question,  good  doctor?  .  .  .' 
From  her  onwards  A  and  B  are  kept  to  the  level  of  counter- 
subjects  to  C,  until  bar  345,  when  the  tortured  Wozzeck  rushes 
away.  With  the  doctor's  baffled  remark :  'How  he  runs  off,  and 
his  shadow  runs  behind  .  .  .'is  heard  a  ghostly  reminiscence  of 

108 


*wozzeck' 


the  'idee  fixe',  the  passacagha  theme,  from  the  scene  between 
Wozzeck  and  the  doctor  in  the  previous  act. 

Berg  first  decided  to  set  Biichner's  play  to  music  in  May 
19 14. 1  However,  work  on  the  Three  Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  6, 
occupied  him  until  the  end  of  that  year.  Meanwhile  the  first 
World  War  had  broken  out,  and  in  August  191 5  Berg  was 
called  up  for  the  army.  By  the  summer  of  191 7  he 
had  completed  the  draft  of  the  libretto  and  had  started  on 
the  music.  He  began  with  the  Invention  and  Fugue  (Act  2, 
Scene  2),  but  by  August  191 8  only  two  scenes  had  been  set  to 
music.  The  greater  part  of  the  opera  was  written  between  the 
autumn  of  191 8  and  the  autumn  of  1920,  a  period  of  perpetual 
pohtical  crisis  in  Austria,  resulting  in  much  economic  hardship, 
especially  for  the  intellectual  stratum  of  society.  Financial  em- 
barrassment and  the  mounting  problems  of  a  hand-to-mouth 
existence  compelled  Berg  to  look  for  a  job,  and  for  a  time  he 
planned  to  become  general  editor  of  the  musical  periodical  Der 
Anbruch;  nothing  came  of  this,  in  the  end.  By  April  192 1  the 
orchestration  of  Wozzeck  was  complete,  after  about  eight 
months'  work.  In  the  winter  of  1922-23  Berg  invited  subscrip- 
tions towards  the  publication  of  the  vocal  score  of  his  opera  and, 
with  the  financial  support  of  Mahler's  widow,  Wozzeck  was 
first  pubhshed  in  this  way  in  1923.  In  the  following  year  it  was 
acquired  by  Universal  Edition,  Vienna.  Following  the  advice  of 
Hermann  Scherchen,  Berg  chose  three  extracts  from  his  score 
for  separate  performance  and  these  'Fragments  of  Wozzeck"^ 
were  first  heard,  under  Scherchen,  at  Frankfurt  in  June  1924, 
with  Beatrice  Sutter-Kottlar  singing  the  part  of  Marie.  This 

^According  to  a  letter  from  Berg  to  Webern  of  August  19,  191 8. 

2  They  comprise:  (i)  the  orchestral  interlude  between  scenes  2  and  3  of  Act  i,  with 
the  third  scene,  including  Marie's  Lullaby  up  to  Wozzeck's  entry;  (2)  Scene  i  of  Act 
3,  with  Marie's  reading  from  the  Bible;  and  (3),  from  Scenes  2,  4  and  5  of  Act  3,  a 
condensation  of  the  two  scenes  at  the  pond,  the  last  orchestral  interlude  and  the  final 
scene  of  the  opera. 

109 


ALBAN  BERG 


first  performance  of  any  of  the  music  of  Wozzeck  met  with 
remarkable  success  and  the  opera  was  soon  accepted  for  produc- 
tion at  the  Berhn  State  Opera.  The  first  stage  performance  fol- 
lowed after  a  prolonged  interval,  during  which  frantic  rehearsals 
were  accompanied  by  the  dissonant  noises  of  polemical  pro's 
and  con's  in  the  German  press.  The  premiere  on  December  14, 
1925,  in  the  presence  of  the  composer,  was  preceded  by  137 
rehearsals  and  ended  in  a  complete  triumph  for  Erich  Kleiber, 
the  courageous  conductor,  who  had  risked  his  position  in  cham- 
pioning the  cause  of  this  controversial  work.  Berg  was  also 
lucky  in  his  principal  singers,  Leo  Schlitzendorf  and  Marie 
Johannsson.  Despite  a  slanderous  press  campaign  against  com- 
poser and  opera,  Wozzeck  succeeded  brilliantly.  It  totally 
eclipsed  Gurlitt's  opera  on  the  same  subject,  and  was  twice 
revived  in  Berlin  under  Kleiber,  in  1927  and  1928.  Meanwhile 
it  had  been  performed  with  great  success  outside  the  German 
cultural  orbit — in  Leningrad  and  Prague,  among  other  places. 
It  was  heard  in  New  York  in  193 1  and  in  London,  in  a  concert 
performance,  in  1934.  All  told,  there  were  166  performances  up 
to  the  end  of  1936,  and  the  opera  was  translated  into  EngHsh, 
French,  Russian  and  Czech.  In  1934  the  Library  of  Congress 
purchased  the  autograph  score  from  the  composer.  A  produc- 
tion at  Oldenburg  in  1929  had  initiated  a  new  series  of  spec- 
tacularly successful  performances  in  Germany,  which  stopped 
abruptly  when  Hitler  came  to  power  on  January  30, 1933.  After 
the  downfall  of  Nazism  the  ban  on  Wozzeck  was  gradually 
lifted.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  despite  heavy  protests  from 
Hitler's  government  the  opera  had  been  performed  for  the 
first  time  in  Rome  in  1942,  under  Tullio  Serafm,  at  the  height 
of  the  *total  war'.  Since  the  war,  notable  performances  have 
been  given  at  Naples,  Berne,  New  York,  Buenos  Aires,  Ham- 
burg, Kjel  and  many  other  places  in  Western  Germany.  It  was 


no 


WOZZECK 


given  at  the  Salzburg  Festival  of  195 1,  and  at  Covent  Garden  in 
January  1952,  the  first  stage  performance  in  London,  under  its 
first  conductor,  Erich  Kleiber.  Recently,  complete  recordings 
for  the  gramophone  have  further  increased  the  wide  apprecia- 
tion and  mounting  popularity  of  this  great  opera. 


Ill 


CHAPTER  V 

Development  of  Serial  Technique 

I.  THE  CHAMBER  CONCERTO 

IN  the  chamber  Concerto,  Berg's  personal  idiom  asserts 
itself  vigorously,  with  all  the  idiosyncratic  features  of  his 
mature  musical  style.  Elements  of  that  style  v^hich  had 
appeared  in  Wozzeck  now  become  permanent,  foremost  among 
them  a  predilection  for  strict  canon  and  an  ever  increasing 
emphasis  on  serial  technique.  To  these  should  be  added  an  extra- 
ordinary inchnation  for  allusive  quotations  and  musical  ana- 
grams, most  forcibly  expressed  in  the  motto  theme  of  the 
Concerto,  which  makes  play  with  the  full  names  of  Schoenberg, 
Webern  and  Berg,  in  so  far  as  they  are  expressible  in  musical 
equivalents : 


Longsom  Motto:   AMcr guteo  Ding* 


*      -/ 


S   C    H     B    E        G 

Schbnberg    ]  [Anton Webemj[AI- 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL   TECHNIQUE 

Such  liiiks  between  the  letters  of  names  and  their  corresponding 
tonal  symbols  had  played  their  part  in  Flemish  polyphony,  in 
Bach's  Musical  Offering  and  Art  of  Fugue,  in  Schumann's  Carnival 
2indAhegg  Variations,  and  in  some  of  Brahms'  chamber  works.  1 
The  revival  of  this  practice  by  Berg  in  his  mature  compositions, 
coupled  with  his  mania  for  allusive  quotations  from  works  of 
other  composers,  has  parallels  in  modern  literature.  2  Berg's  use 
of  these  devices  had  its  roots  in  the  depth  of  his  subconscious. 
He  evidently  tried  to  establish,  with  the  help  of  allusions  and 
quotations,  a  spiritual  link  with  the  past,  mitigating  the  sense  of 
isolation  from  which  he  increasingly  suffered.  There  was  inher- 
ent in  him  a  spiritual  escapism  which  at  times  craved  for  sus- 
pension of  the  present  and  for  the  magic  reversal  of  time.  Berg's 
deep-seated  fear  of  the  evanescence  of  life  found  a  kind  of 
safety-valve  in  the  return  of  the  end  of  a  musical  structure  to  its 
very  source  by,  as  it  were,  musical  black  magic,  by  the  use  of 
mirror-reflection,  inversion  and  retrograde  motion. 

These  devices  play  an  integral  part  in  all  Berg's  works  from 
now  on.  How  seriously  Berg  took  these  repeated  excursions 
into  the  musical  equivalent  of  a  topsy-turvy,  Lewis-Carroll 
world  is  seen  from  the  mystical  mood  which  precedes  each  one 
of  them.  The  twelve  mysterious  chimes  of  low  C  sharp,  given 
out  by  the  piano  and  the  double  bassoon,  which  ring  in  the  hour 
of  musical  ghosts  in  the  middle  movement  of  the  Chamber 
Concerto  (bars  358-363),  find  their  later  parallel  in  Lulu,  Act  II, 
bar  687  ff,  where  Lulu's  motive  of  descending  fourths,  coupled 
with  an  improvisational  turn  of  the  piano,  announces  the  begin- 
ning of  the  musical  reversal  which  accompanies  the  filmstrip  of 
her  trial  and  release.  Similar  retrogressive  movements  take 

^The  'F-A-E'  Sonata  of  1853/54,  the  String  Quartet  in  A  minor,  using  the  same 
tonal  symbols,  and  the  second  String  Sextet,  Op.  36,  with  its  'Agathe'  symbol. 

^Ezra  Pound's  Cantos  and  T.  S.  EHot's  poems,  with  their  copious  and  polyglot 
quotations  from  and  allusion  to  other  literary  works  in  poetry  and  prose. 

H  113 


ALBAN   BERG 

place  in  the  Scherzo  of  the  Lyric  Suite  (bar  93  fF.)  and  in  Der 
We  in  (middle  section,  bars  1 41-172). 

Another  important  feature  is  the  use  of 'constructive  rhythm' 
(Berg's  own  term),  as  first  introduced  in  Wozzeck,  Act  III.  It 
appears,  with  its  graphic  symbol  'RH'  ('Hauptrhythmus'),  in 
the  Rondo  Finale  of  the  Chamber  Concerto.  In  Lulu  it  was 
afterwards  to  play  an  integral  part  (as  'Monoritmica').! 

The  concertante  element  in  the  Concerto  had  been  fore- 
shadowed in  many  episodes  of  Wozzeck,  The  use  of  a  single 
instrument  in  this  way,  and  of  different  combinations  of  instru- 
ments in  'concertino'  style,  represents  the  very  antithesis  of 
traditional  symphonic  processes,  and  helps  Berg  finally  to 
abandon  the  outsize  orchestras  and  complicated  sonorities  of 
his  Opp.  4  and  6.  The  concertante  element  also  allows  a  certain 
latitude  in  expansion,  without  necessarily  involving  a  dense 
symphonic  texture,  and  by  this  Berg's  mature  instrumental 
music  differs  from  the  symphonic  miniature  style  of  Schoen- 
berg  and  Webern.  The  character  of  the  Chamber  Concerto 
certainly  derives  partly  from  the  conception  of  the  chamber 
orchestra  manifested  in  Schoenberg's  Op.  9.  But  Wozzeck  had 
already  revealed  new  possibilities,  new  devices  and  sound  com- 
binations. Henceforth  the  concertante  element  determines  the 
nature  of  Berg's  instrumental  works,  2  and  keeps  them  clear  of 
the  danger-zone  of  symphonic  autobiography  where  Mahler 
and  Zemlinsky  ventured. 

The  Chamber  Concerto  is  the  first  of  Berg's  compositions  in 
v^^hich  serial  technique,  albeit  of  a  pre-dodecaphonic  type,  is 


^A  similar  phenomenon  in  the  Finale  of  Schoenberg's  Quintet  for  wind  instruments, 
Op.  26,  composed  at  the  same  time,  was  mentioned  by  Felix  Greissle  in  Anbruch, 
February  1925.  Berg  expressly  refers  to  these  parallel  findings  in  his  'Open  Letter'. 

"The  Lyric  Suite  is  in  concertante  style,  in  so  far  as  it  eschews  sonata  forms  and  patterns; 
Der  Wein  is  a  concert  aria ;  the  Violin  Concerto,  in  spite  of  its  tone-poetical  leanings, 
pays  tribute  to  the  concertante  principle  in  its  polyphonic  cadenza. 

114 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL   TECHNIQUE 

systematically  used.l  Twelve-note  technique  v^as  to  be  first 
used  in  the  second  Storm  song,  in  late  summer  1925,  very  shortly 
after  the  completion  of  the  Concerto. 

Like  the  clarinet  pieces  Op.  5  and  the  orchestral  pieces  Op.  6, 
the  Chamber  Concerto  bears  a  dedication  to  Schoenberg.  Berg 
planned  to  present  his  mentor  with  the  full  score  on  his  fiftieth 
birthday  (September  13,  1924),  but,  as  in  the  case  of  his  Op.  6, 
he  was  unable  to  keep  to  his  timetable.  The  work,  begun  in  the 
summer  of  1923,  was  completed  in  short  score  on  February  9, 
1925  (Berg's  own  fortieth  birthday)  and  in  full  score  on  July  23 
of  the  same  year.  The  manifold  psychological  comphcations 
which  bedevilled  Berg's  attempts  at  new  creative  work  after 
the  completion  of  Wozzeck  are  vividly  reflected  in  his  letters  to 
Schoenberg  and  Webern.  The  plan  of  the  Chamber  Concerto 
is  discussed  for  the  first  time  in  detail  in  a  letter  to  Schoenberg, 
dated  from  Trahiitten,  July  12,  1923  : 

...  I  have  now  been  here  more  than  a  week,  well  again,  and  at 
long  last  again  at  work,  which  however  does  not  flow  easily. 
After  all,  I've  composed  almost  nothing  in  the  past  twenty 
months; 2  now  it  seems  as  if  something  will  come  of  it.  Out  of 
many  plans  .  .  .  the  following  has  crystallized:  a  Concerto  for 
Piano  and  Violin,  with  accompaniment  of  ten  wind  instruments 
(woodwind  and  brass)  3.  .  .  .  The  old  idea  of  a  Piano  Concerto 
(incidentally  suggested  by  yourself),  and  then  the  idea  of  a 
Double,  Triple,  and  even  Quadruple  Concerto  (forgive  my  incur- 
able elephantiasis !)  has  kept  me  in  thrall.  When  the  idea  of  using 
wind  instruments  occurred  to  me,  I  tried  to  accommodate  the 
idea  of  the  Piano  Concerto  to  it  by  combining  the  two.  However, 
as  you  know,  that  didn't  work.  Finally  I  hit  on  the  solution  men- 
tioned at  the  beginning  of  this  letter,  to  which  I  hope  to  adhere, 
and  which  at  once  banishes  all  the  seemingly  unsoluble  problems 

^Apart  from  the  exceptional  cases  of  the  fifth  Altenberg  song  and  the  PassacagHa  in 
Wozzeck. 
^i.e.  since  the  completion  of  the  full  score  of  Wozzeck. 
^They  became  thirteen  in  the  completed  score. 


ALBAN   BERG 

of  an  accompanying  chamber  orchestra.  These  problems  are: 
(i)  What  is  the  relationship  of  the  piano  in  the  chamber  orchestra 
to  the  concertante  piano?  (2)  What  is  the  relationship  of  the  concer- 
tante  violin  to  the  solo  strings  (first  and  second  violin)  of  the 
chamber  orchestra?  (3)  How  can  the  harmonium  be  used  as  an 
instrument  of  the  orchestra  in  this  special  case — and  can  it  be 
used  at  alll  I  admit  that  these  problems  can  be  solved.  However, 
as  you  so  convincingly  said  to  me :  Why  choose  beforehand  a  diffi- 
cult combination  of  instruments?  In  the  combination  I  have  now 
arrived  at,  with  ten  wind  instruments,  apart  from  the  fact  that 
Tm  much  attracted  by  it,  such  difficulties  are,  as  it  were,  blotted 
out.  And  if  work  progresses  only  slowly  just  now  (I've  only  got 
about  fifty  bars  on  paper,  and  I  am  planning  to  write  a  big  sym- 
phonic movement  in  three  sections,  extending  to  perhaps  five 
hundred  bars)  that  is  not  the  result  of  the  combination  of  instru- 
ments, but — as  I've  told  you — of  my  heavy  hand.  .  .  . 

Six  days  later  Berg  revealed  to  Webem  the  structure  of  the 
"whole  Chamber  Concerto : 

...  I  am  also  at  work,  industriously,  but  struggUng  with  difficul- 
ties: a  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Violin,  with  accompaniment  of 
ten  wind  instruments :  a  big  symphonic  movement  in  three  parts, 
Scherzo  variations,  Adagio  and  an  opening  sonata  movement . . .'  i 

By  September  i  only  the  first  movement  v^as  completed.  In  a 
letter  to  Webern  of  that  date  Berg  commented  ruefully  on  his 
slow  progress  and  added : 

The  second  movement  is  an  Adagio.  The  third,  a  combination  of 
the  two  preceding  ones,  a  sonata  movement.  .  .  .  But  when  shall 
I  get  that  far?  .  .  .  If  only  it  were  July  i  today,  instead  of  Septem- 
ber I.  .  . . 

After  that,  composition  came  to  a  complete  standstill  and  was 
only  resumed  on  August  11, 1924.  The  work  was  completed,  as 
we  have  seen,  on  July  23,  1925.  Full  score  and  piano  reduction 

^It  was  eventually  turned  into  a  rondo. 

116 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

were  published  in  facsimile  in  the  year  of  their  completion. 
Berg  also  published  an  analysis  of  the  Concerto  in  the  form  of 
an  open  letter  addressed  to  Schoenberg,  dated  February  9, 
1925.1  The  Chamber  Concerto  was  first  performed  on  March 
20,  1927,  in  Berlin,  under  Hermann  Scherchen.  The  published 
score  included  special  full  closes  for  the  first  two  movements, 
making  possible  their  separate  performance.  In  February  1935 
Berg  (whose  predilection  for  making  arrangements  of  his  own 
works  became  more  pronounced  as  the  years  went  by)  com- 
pleted a  version  of  the  slow  middle  movement  as  a  Trio  for 
violin,  clarinet  and  piano.  It  was  performed  in  Vienna  shortly 
after  his  death.  2 

Berg's  'Open  Letter  to  Arnold  Schoenberg'  includes  a  de- 
tailed analysis  of  the  structure  of  the  Chamber  Concerto,  illus- 
trated by  a  Tabular  Synopsis  in  graphic  form  (reproduced  on 
pp.  124-125).  Both  the  chart  and  the  textual  commentary  em- 
phasize the  ternary  principle  which  forms  the  basis  of  the  whole 
composition.  The  number  '3'  is  something  of  a  common  de- 
nominator in  all  the  structural  features  of  the  work.  The  Motto 
Theme  (Example  102)  unites  the  names  of  Schoenberg,  Webern 
and  Berg.  There  are  three  movements,  and  the  instruments 
divide  easily  into  three  categories :  keyboard,  strings  and  wind. 
The  movements : 

I.  Thema  scherzoso  con  variazioni  (piano  and  wind  instru- 
ments) 
II.  Adagio  (violin  and  wind  instruments) 
III.  Rondo  ritmico  con  Introduzione  (piano,  violin  and  wind 
instruments). 


^Published  in  Pult  und  Taktstock  (Vienna),  in  1925.  Reprinted  by  Reich,  op.  cit. 
p.  86  ff. 

^It  was  published  in  1955  by  Universal  Edition.  The  Trio  version  includes  a 
cut  of  seventeen  bars  (bars  435-452).  The  bulk  of  the  wind-parts  has  been  deftly  cued 
into  the  piano-part. 

117 


ALBAN   BERG 

are  tripartite  entities  in  themselves.  The  third  movement  is  one 
huge  recapitulation  of  the  first  two  movements,  the  whole 
forming  an  organic  unit  of  three  interrelated  sections.  The 
tripartite  basis  can  also  be  traced  in  the  thirty  bars  of  the  the- 
matic exposition  of  I,  the  ternary  form  of  II  and  its  retrograde 
mirror-reflection,  and,  finally,  in  the  three  basic  rhythms  of 
III.l 

Berg  himself  acknowledged  the  relationship  between  his 
Chamber  Concerto  and  Schoenberg's  Chamber  Symphony, 
Op.  9,  stressing  the  fact  that  both  works  were  scored  for  the 
same  number  (fifteen)  of  players.  A  close  scrutiny  of  the  Cham- 
ber Concerto,  however,  reveals  the  novelty  and  originality  of 
its  orchestral  design  and  reduces  the  parallel  with  Schoenberg 
to  the  wind  section  only.  Schoenberg's  orchestrally  subdivided 
strings  are  replaced  by  the  two  soloists :  violin  and  piano.  The 
wind  section  moreover  is  supplemented  by  trumpet  and  trom- 
bone. Schoenberg's  orchestra  is,  by  and  large,  a  pocket  edition 
of  the  late  romantic  orchestra,  reduced  in  numbers  but  not  in 
basic  types,  and  turned  into  a  medium  for  refined  polyphony, 
not  unlike  the  orchestra  in  Wagner's  Siegfried  Idyll.  Berg's 
orchestra,  however,  is  a  complete  wind  band,  to  which  two 
solo  stringed  instruments  are  juxtaposed.  The  concertante,  yet 
intimate,  character  of  Berg's  composition  contrasts  funda- 
mentally with  the  tutti  character  of  Schoenberg's  Op.  9,  which 
is  still  conceived  in  the  tradition  of  the  post- Wagnerian  era.  2 

In  his  'Open  Letter'  Berg  observed  that  the  tripartite  prin- 
ciple even  determined  the  harmony  of  the  concerto.  He  dis- 


^They  may  have  been  influenced  by  similar  features  in  Schoenberg's  Serenade  Op. 
24  (1924),  but  not  by  the  wind  quintet  Op.  26,  which  was  tinktiown  to  Berg  when  he 
composed  his  Chamber  Concerto. 

^Berg  adopted,  however,  certain  features  of  Schoenberg's  notation,  such  as  the 
untransposed  writing  for  transposing  wind  instruments  and  the  distinction  of  'Haupt- 
und  Nebenstimme'  (main  and  ancillary  theme)  by  use  of  the  symbols  'H'  and  'N'. 

118 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

tinguished  tonal,  atonal  and,  in  certain  section,  harmony  'sub- 
ject to  the  laws  of  twelve-note  technique'.  This  is  the  very  first 
time  Schoenberg's  new  method  of  composition  is  mentioned 
by  Berg  who,  in  the  same  document,  frequently  refers  to  his 
master's  Opp.  24  and  26  and  their  revolutionizing  style.  1 

Berg  is,  however,  very  reticent  about  the  serial  aspect  of  the 
work,  beyond  an  initial  remark  drawing  attention  to  the  role 
played  by  the  three  names  of  the  Motto  theme  and  those  of 
their  letters  for  which  equivalents  in  musical  terminology  exist. 
The  thematic  subjects  built  from  these  letter-associations  are 
not  yet  dodecaphonic,  to  be  sure,  but  they  are  certainly  related 
to  the  type  of  future  'Basic  Sets'.  Their  serial  character  can  be 
studied  if  they  are  written  out  in  the  manner  of  a  dodecaphonic 
graph: 


S  rone  row 


b  fonerviv         Al      B  An       B         Er     G 

Example  103 

The  three  Christian  names  (and  their  corresponding  thematic 
subjects)  begin  with  'A'  (Arnold,  Anton,  Alban),  by  which  a 
kind  of  tonal  centre  is  established.  The  three  themes  have  cer- 
tain harmonic  potentialities  in  common,  as  may  be  seen  from 
bar  3  of  the  'Motto  theme'.  The  chord  on  the  sixth  beat  has 
three  notes  common  to  all  three  thematic  subjects: 

^Together  with  the  piano  works   Opp.  23  and  25,  they  represent  Schoenberg's 
earhest  avowed  dodecaphonic  compositions. 

119 


^w 


ALBAN  BERG 

[6]  [3]  [2(4)] 

8  6 

7  [2(4)]  5 

III 

I  II  III 

Example  104 

Apart  from  this,  I  and  III  have  the  first  and  the  two  last  notes  in 
common,  and  I,  II  and  III  the  last  or  the  last-but-one  note  in 
common.  Finally,  all  the  notes  of  II  (Webern)  and  III  (Berg) 
are  contained  in  I  (Schoenberg).  On  the  basis  of  these  facts  an 
imaginary  'Basic  Shape'  of  eight  notes  could  be  distilled  in  the 
sense  of  strict  serial  technique.  The  intimate  bonds  of  friendship 
Unking  the  three  leading  composers  of  the  'Second  Viennese 
School'  are  hereby  subtly  and  secretly  expressed. 

The  harmonic  trend  in  the  Chamber  Concerto  is  chiefly  de- 
termined by  the  intervallic  features  of  I,  II  and  III.  The  deter- 
mining intervals  are  the  ascending  fourth  {a),  the  augmented 
fourth  (tritone)  {b)  and  the  seventh  (cf.  Example  103). 

We  have  had  opportunities  in  earlier  chapters  of  this  book  to 
observe  the  integral  role  allotted  to  the  fourth  and  the  seventh 
in  Berg's  music.  These  intervals  act  as  dissolving  elements  of 
tonality,  which  rests  normally  on  structures  of  thirds.  Never- 
theless, it  is  the  fourth  and  the  seventh  in  their  harmonic  imph- 
cations  which  become  responsible  for  certain  tonal  enclaves  in 
the  work,  referred  to  in  Berg's  analysis.  They  occur  frequently 
in  elliptic  cadences,  as  if  aiming  at  an  imaginary  tonic,  and  as 
if  intent  to  establish  a  kind  of  aural  '  Archimedes's  point'  in  a 
confusion  of  conflicting  tonalities.  Such  episodes  show  how 
Berg's  most  exploratory  music  is  deeply  rooted  in  Viennese 
classic  traditions.  Here  is  the  sequence  of  fourths  which  occurs 
as  a  regular  interstitial  cadence  in  the  Chamber  Concerto : 


120 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


Example  105 

This  combination  of  vertical  and  horizontal  sequences  of  fourths 
is  not  only  to  be  found  in  Schoenberg's  Chamber  Symphony, 
Op.  9,  whose  main  subject  (horn,  bars  5-7)  is  closely  related  to 
the  bass  of  Example  105.  It  can  be  identified  in  a  hteral  anticipa- 
tion in  the  Finale  of  Brahms'  fourth  symphony.  There  it  is  used 
as  cadential  enclave  between  two  variational  sub-sections  of  the 
Passacagha,  whose  bass  theme  represents,  as  it  were,  a  Basic 
Shape  of  strictly  serial  character : 


a  i|burth 


Example  106 


The  bass-line  of  Example  106  can  be  understood  as  a  sequence 
of  ascending  fourths,  if  the  intervals  are  transposed  into  higher 
octaves.  In  both  examples  the  chromatic  bias  of  the  top  part, 
combined  with  the  chain  of  ascending  fourths  in  the  bass,  re- 
sults in  parallel  sevenths  in  the  middle  parts,  here  indicated  by 
arrows. 

Characteristic  of  Berg's  later  music  is  the  demoniacal  sultri- 
ness of  these  parallel  sevenths  at  the  beginning  of  the  Adagio  of 


121 


ALBAN  BERG 

the  Concerto,  which  distinctly  foreshadow  the  harmonic  aura 
of  Lulu: 


Wind 


Example  107 

Movement  I — Tema  scherzoso  con  variazioni — consists  of  a 
tripartite  theme,  thirty  bars  long  (more  a  thematic  group  in  the 
sense  of  Bruckner's  and  Mahler's  symphonies,  than  a  theme  in 
the  strictly  classical  sense  of  the  word)  and  five  variations.  In  his 
*Open  Letter'  Berg  emphasizes  the  Scherzo  character  of  the  six 
sub-divisions  of  this  movement.  He  all  but  fails  to  draw  atten- 
tion to  the  concertante  character  of  large  parts  of  it.  In  particular, 
Variation  I  represents,  by  and  large,  a  concertante  interpretation 
of  the  thematic  exposition,  given  out  con  bravura  by  the  piano. 

The  'Tema'  itself,  played  by  the  entire  wind  band,  consists 
again  of  three  sections  in  different  tempi : 

(i)  Leicht  bewegt  (Tempo  I) 

(2)  Schwungvoll     (Tempo  II) 

(3)  Meno  allegro     (Tempo  III). 

The  derivation  of  (i)  from  the  tripartite  Basic  Shape  I-II-III  (c£ 

122 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

Example  103)  clearly  reveals  the  prominent  part  played  by 
serial  technique  in  this,  strictly  speaking,  pre-dodecaphonic 
work.  Here  are  the  first  bars  of  the  thematic  outline  of  (i) 
(Tempo  I),  of  which  bars  1-4  can  also  be  understood  as  a  twelve- 
note  theme  based  on  the  Basic  Shape  of  the  naturally  dodeca- 
phonic chromatic  scale  1: 


I  (Schpcnbengj 


2  (12)         3         0      2     3)     ■<)  (1      2    3      4)        5 


6        7    8    9     10   11   12    ll(Websrn)  iii(Berg) 

Example  108 

Variation  2  brings  the  melodic  outHne  (but  not  the  actual  notes) 
of  the  'Tema'  in  inversion.  Its  character  differs  noticeably  from 
the  pianistic  solo  of  Variation  i.  It  is  a  slow  Waltz,  in  which 
piano  and  wind  instruments  are  combined  for  the  first  time. 
Variation  3  and  4  use  the  'melodic'  notes  of  the  theme  in  inver- 
sion and  in  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  inversion.  Variation  4 
represents  the  development  section  and  the  main  axis  of  the 
whole  movement.  It  bristles  with  canonic  imitation,  like  the 
preceding  variation,  and  yet  manages  to  remain  diaphanous. 
How  ingeniously  the  cancrizans  motion  of  the  thematic  inver- 
sion is  made  to  grow  out  of  the  very  tail-end  of  Variation  3^ 
can  be  seen  in  the  graph  on  pages  124  and  125. 


*Cf.  R.  Leibowitz:  'Introduction  . . .'  (cf.  Bibl.).  Leibowitz's  numerical  organization 
has  been  utilized  for  Example  io8. 

123 


CHAMBER    CONCERTO 


1 
Tern  a  con 
Vaj-iazioni 


II 
Adacio 


III 

(-  r  -  ID 

Rondo  ritmico 
con  Introduzione 


Theme 


Var.l 


in  its  basic  shape 


(Exposition) 


Number  of  bars: 
30 


{1st  reca-- 
pitulaiH.on) 


30 


Var.ll 

in  retrograde 
motion- 


(Develop- 


60 


AJ 


Tripartite 
B 


12 


36 


Introduction 

(Cadenza  for 

violin  and 

pia-no) 


bars' 

54 


Exposition 


(da 


96 


repeat: 


This  tabulated  survey  is  taken  from  Alban  Berg's  analysis  of  the   Chamber  Concerto,    containe<3 
in  an  'Open  Letter'  to  Arnold  Schoenberg,  and  published  for  the  first  time  in  the  music  periodical 


TABULATED     SURVEY 


Var.  Ill 

in 
inversion 


Var.  IV 

retrograde 

nnotion  of  the 

in  version 


ment  section) 


3  0 


30 


Var.  V 

basic 
shape 


(2nd  reca- 
pitulation) 


number  of    bars: 


60 


240 


A2 


Its  retrograde  nnotion 


(mirror  reflection 
of  the  preceding  B) 


Al 


30 


12 


36 


12 


Development 


capo) 


79 


^75 


30 


2nd    reca- 
pitulation 
resp.    coda 


76 


>.480  ^ 


240 


305 


175 


L    480 


960 


PULT  UND  TAKTSTOCK,  Universal  Edition,  Vienna,  1925.  An  English  translation  has  been  prepared  by 
the  author  of  this  volume. 


ALBAN   BERG 

Variation  5  goes  back  to  the  thematic  exposition,  in  the  manner 
of  a  sonata  recapitulation.  The  treatment  of  the  theme  itself 
evolves  a  technique  of  detaching  thematic  splinters  and  sub- 
dividing such  motives  into  'peak-notes'  and  'ancillary  notes' — 
a  process  of  thematic  atom-spHtting  developed  to  a  high  degree 
of  virtuosity  in  Lulu  and  the  Violin  Concerto. 

The  thematic  subject  of  Movement  II — Adagio — is  given  out 
by  the  solo  violin.  It  is  sixteen  bars  long  and  shows  pre-dodeca- 
phonic  features  similar  to  those  in  the  'Tema  con  variazioni' : 


12,  1  z         3  ''<  5       b    T     8        9    10         «1  ie 


Example  109 

The  above  example  follows  the  analysis  of  Leibowitz,  1  who 
points  out  a  deviation  from  strict  dodecaphony  at  NB.  From 
this  subject  a  twelve-note  series  can  be  deduced  a  posteriori: 


Example  no 

which  is  nothing  else  than  a  thematically  pre-organized  series 
of  the  dodecaphonic  Basic  Shape  derived  from  the  chromatic 
scale : 


^Cf.  Op.  cit.  p.  78  fF. 


126 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


^^f,^ . : ■■--u,-'          ^_  k,,  t^ota..    h»  rrr-i^-h-. 

-^ 

OPO  tjO — sa^ 

5      6      n      3 

»"     -  #^  •' ' 

7       a       8       -4       12       1 

Example  11 1 

9 

10 

(5) 

This  second  movement  forms  a  telling  contrast  to  the  first.  It  is 
an  extended  Cantabile-Adagio  lasting  fifteen  minutes,  from 
which  the  piano  is  rigidly  excluded  (except  for  the  twelve  mys- 
terious chimes  at  bars  358-63),  just  as  the  violin  had  been  ex- 
cluded from  the  first  movement.  It  is  full  of  magical  sonorities, 
with  distant  echoes  from  Tristan  and  Pelleas.  The  sweltering 
vagueness  of  its  cadential  sequences  of  chords  of  the  ninth 
already  anticipates  the  erotic  morbidity  o£  Lulu  (cf.  Example 
107).  The  treatment  of  the  solo  violin  contributes  markedly  to 
the  opalescent  coloration  of  the  movement,  the  player  being 
asked  to  use  a  glissando  intonation,  as  if  deliberately  to  blur  his 
own  melodic  contours.  Berg  even  attempts  to  fix  in  notation 
the  Zwischentone,  between  the  intervals  of  the  tempered  scale, 
akin  to  Haba's  quarter  tones.  These  he  indicates  by  the  sign 


z  : 


Example  112 

It  is  in  this  second  movement  that  Berg's  'constructive  rhythm' 
(indicated  by  the  sign  *R.H.')  is  introduced  for  the  first  time 
(cf.  p.  68  of  the  full  score) : 


ALBAN   BERG 

It  grows  out  of  an  accompanying  figure  in  the  brass : 


mi  11 


and  breaks  out  dramatically  in  the  cancrizans  part  of  the  move- 
ment with  the  formula : 

As  already  mentioned,  the  twelve  mysterious  chimes  in  the 
piano  lead  to  the  fascinating  reversal  of  the  whole  exposition  of 
the  Adagio. 

Berg  himself  characterized  Movement  III — Rondo  ritmico  con 
Introduzione — as  a  combination  of  Movements  I  and  II  (Cf. 
pp.  124-125).  He  distinguished  three  important  types  of  thematic 
treatment: 

(i)  A  free  juxtaposition  of  sub-divisions  of  these  movements 
which  correspond  thematically  to  one  another; 

(2)  The  juxtaposition  of  single  phrases  in  literal  quotation 
almost  in  the  manner  of  a  duet; 

(3)  The  hnking  together  of  whole  sections  of  Movements  I 
and  II. 

The  special  character  of  this  movement  is  to  be  found  in  its 
emphasis  on  rhythm  and  in  its  reUance  on  the  three  rhythmic 
Basic  Shapes.  It  also  differs  markedly  from  the  two  earUer 
movements  in  its  varied  metre.  Its  thematic  material  is  as  de- 
pendent on  that  of  the  preceding  movements  as  the  music  of 
Gdtterddmmerung  is  dependent  on  the  themes  of  the  preceding 
parts  of  the  Ring.  Although  Berg  calls  the  movement  a 
'Rondo',  the  rondo-character  is  not  determined  by  a  recurring 
theme,  but  by  the  recurring  utiHzation  of  the  'constructive 

128 


Alban  Berg  and  Anton  Webern 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

rhythm',  in  support  of  themes  of  differing  character.  1  The 
movement  could  with  equal  justification  be  classified  as  a 
Sonata  movement,  preceded  by  a  long  introduction  in  the 
manner  of  the  Cadenza,  hi  this  Cadenza,  which  anticipates  cer- 
tain styhstic  features  of  the  much  later  Violin  Concerto  and  its 
polyphonic  Cadenza,  the  concertanti  viohn  and  piano  are  brought 
together  for  the  first  time — an  effect  deliberately  saved  up  for 
this  late  stage  of  the  work.  The  'Rondo'  itself  is  built  up  as  an 
ensemble  of  the  wind  band  in  combination  with  the  two  solo- 
ists. It  is  full  of  fehcitous  touches  in  its  diaphanous  texture  and 
novel  concertante  style. 

The  Chamber  Concerto  characteristically  ends  on  a  chord  of 
the  tritone: 


Example  114 

The  chord  is  presented  in  expanding  sonorities  by  use  of  the 
piano  pedals  and  a  RQcting pizzicato  arpeggio  on  the  solo  violin: 


Example  115 

This  bar,  with  its  wistful  romantic  undertones,  is  like  a  pre- 
monition of  the  last  bar  of  the  Viohn  Concerto.  The  very  last 
chord  (bars  780/85,  cf.  Example  114)  contains  the  tritone,  which 
is  imphcit  in  all  three  Basic  Shapes  of  the  Chamber  Concerto, 
as  well  as  the  pivotal  'A'  with  which  all  three  Basic  Shapes 
begin.  The  chord  itself  in  its  dreamy  vagueness  seems  to  long 
for  a  resolution  in  the  haven  of  an  imaginary  C  major  tonic. 

^This  technique  had  its  origin  in  Schoenberg's  Serenade,  Op.  24. 
J  129 


ALBAN  BERG 

The  feeling  of  suspense  created  by  the  denial  of  this  resolution 
is  one  of  the  unmistakable  characteristics  of  Berg's  personal 
idiom — an  idiom  convincingly  employed  in  every  bar  of  this 
Chamber  Concerto. 


2.  'SCHLIESSE  MIR  DIE  AUGEN  BEIDe' 

Two  Songs;  1900  and  1925 

The  two  settings  of  Theodor  Storm's  poem  'Schhesse  mir  die 
Augen  beide'  were  published  as  a  musical  supplement  to  an 
article  by  Willi  Reich,  in  Die  Musik  for  February,  1930.  Reich's 
article,  mainly  biographical  in  content,  referred  only  briefly  to 
the  songs,  but  in  this  first  pubHcation  they  were  prefaced  by  a 
commentary  by  Berg  himself; 

The  twenty-five  years  of  Universal  Edition's  existence  have 
coiQcided  with  music's  enormous  development  from  tonal  com- 
position to  the  'method  of  composing  with  twelve  notes  related 
only  with  one  another',  and  from  the  C  major  triad  to  the  so- 
called  'Mother-chord'  (the  twelve-note  chord,  containing  also  all 
twelve  intervals,  discovered  by  F.  H.  Klein).  It  is  the  imperishable 
achievement  of  Emil  Hertzka,  the  pubhsher,  to  have  followed 
that  development  from  its  very  beginnings.  To  him  the  two  songs 
printed  overleaf,  settings  of  the  same  poem  by  Theodor  Storm, 
are  dedicated.  They  are  intended  to  exemplify  that  musical  trans- 
formation and  are  here  published  for  the  first  time.  One  of  them 
was  composed  at  the  beginning,  the  other  at  the  end  of  the  first 
quarter  of  the  century  (1900-1925). 

Alban  Berg 

Some  confusion  has  been  caused  by  the  fact  that  the  dates  of 
composition  of  both  songs  are  given  wrongly  in  Reich's  book 

130 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

of  1937.  Berg  refers  to  his  contribution  to  the  silver  jubilee  of 
Universal  Edition  in  a  letter  to  Webern,  dated  October  12, 

1925,  and  written  at  Trahiitten: 

I,  too,  sent  a  (love)  song,  the  words  of  which  have  no  connection 
whatsoever  with  the  jubilee,  or  rather,  I  sent  two  songs,  on  the 
same  poem,  a  very  old  song,  and  a  brand-new  one.  The  latter  I 
composed  up  here — my  first  attempt  at  strict  twelve-note  com- 
position. However,  in  that  art  I  am  unfortunately  not  as  far 
advanced  as  you. 

The  second  setting  was  thus  written  shortly  before  Berg 
started  to  compose  the  Lyric  Suite,  which  the  song  anticipates 
thematically.  The  Lyric  Suite  was  completed  in  the  summer  of 

1926.  The  relationship  between  the  second  Storm  song,  in 
which  an  entirely  new  mode  of  musical  expression  was  first 
explored,  and  the  Lyric  Suite  resembles  that  between  Wagner's 
two  Wesendonk  songs  Im  Treibhaus  and  Trdume,  of  1857,  and 
the  score  of  Tristan  completed  in  1859. 

The  stylistic  antithesis  of  the  two  songs  demonstrates  con- 
vincingly the  fundamental  dialectic  tension  inherent  in  Berg's 
musical  idiom,  which  ranges  from  the  late  romanticism  of 
Schumann  and  Wagner  to  the  constructivism  of  Schoenberg's 
twelve-note  system.  Both  songs  are  interesting  for  what  they 
foreshadow.  The  first  successfully  blurs  the  outline  of  Schu- 
mann's lyrical  four-bar  periods  by  extended  5/4  bars,  and  so 
anticipates  the  rhythmic  flexibility  found  in  Berg's  first  opus 
numbers  of  1908.  The  relationship  between  the  second  song 
and  the  Lyric  Suite  is  of  fundamental  importance  for  the  under- 
standing of  Berg's  mature  style.  The  song,  the  composer's  first 
attempt  to  employ  the  twelve-note  system,  as  the  letter  quoted 
above  estabhshes,  is  based  on  the  same  Basic  Set  as  the  Lyric 
Suite. 

131 


ALBAN  BERG 

Here  is  the  Basic  Set  common  to  both  works,  in  its  Basic 
Shape  1 : 


Example  ii6 

Its  intervaUic  analogies,  as  well  as  its  harmonic  imphcations, 
become  evident  in  the  notation  suggested  by  Hanns  Jehnek:^ 


a     »o<  transposed    b^  small  fifth.    It  Is  the  r«trogTx»de  motion  of  A' 
'^   z  j3   transposed    by   imoll  fifth.    It   is    Hie  rclrogpodc  motion    of* 

Example  117 

If  the  Basic  Set,  in  its  Basic  Shape  A,  is  consistently  unfolded 
in  one  direction,  it  stands  revealed  (as  Berg  pointed  out  in  his 
analysis  of  the  Lyric  Suite)  as  Klein's  *twelve-note  row,  con- 
taining all  twelve  intervals' : 


ItougmO 


Example  ii 


^Schoenberg's  own  English  terms  are  'Basic  Set'  (Grund-Reihe)  and  'Basic  Shape' 
(Grundgestalt).  The  less  preferable  term  'series'  is  occasionally  used  in  this  book  in 
deference  to  Berg's  own  terminology. 

^Cf.  H.  Jelinek,  Anleitung  zur  Zwdlftonkomposition,  Vienna,  1952,  p.  14  ff. 

132 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

Klein  had  discussed  this  discovery  of  his  in  the  preface  to  his 
Variations,  Op.  14,  pubUshed  in  1924. 

Basic  Shaped  represents  the  dodecaphonic  base  for  the  first 
bars  of  the  vocal  part  of  the  song  and  for  bars  2-4  of  the  first 
movement  of  the  Lyric  Suite: 


Schlics-st   mlr  die     Au  -  gen     bride  mlf    den    Ai 


ben  {Hand en  zu) 


Example  119 

This  juxtaposition  of  the  initial  bars  of  both  compositions  makes 
apparent  their  melodic  and  atmospheric  kinship.  Obviously 
both  are  based  on  the  same  thematic  organism,  subjected  only 
to  certain  changes  of  phrasing  and  rhythmic  scansion.  It  is 
highly  interesting  to  observe  the  different  processes  of  composi- 
tion, by  which  widely  divergent  results  are  obtained.  The  vocal 
part  of  the  song  consists  of  several  permutations  of  the  intervals 
of  Basic  Shaped: 


133 


ALBAN   BERG 

9.  10       11 


Schliesse  mir  die    Au  •  gen    beiae  Mit   den    he  ben  Handen'zu  — 


1  rr 


well'  um   ^Vel- le   sehlafen     le-get^      Wie    der   Ictz  •  te    SchTo^ ^    Sich   re    ■  get 
V(=  1) 


fUI  ■   lest     Du   mein  gan    ■    zcs      herz. 

Example  120 

Of  the  five  sections  into  which  the  whole  song  may  be  divided, 
the  first  and  fifth  sections  are  identical,  while  the  second,  third 
and  fourth  form  the  links  of  a  chain  of  variations.  These  five 
permutations  of  the  intervals  of^  involve  no  transposition,  nor 
do  they  show  any  deviation  from  the  basic  order  of  the  twelve 
notes  within  the  Basic  Set.  The  song  thus  shows  a  comparatively 
primitive  application  of  twelve-note  technique.  The  Lyr/c  Suitey 
on  the  other  hand,  as  early  as  bars  7-8  of  the  first  movement,  by 
anticipatory  use  of  the  last  four  notes  of  the  set  and  by  free 
transpositions  into  other  octaves,  achieves  an  impressive  variant 
of^: 


134 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


Example  121 

Similarly  a  variant  of  ^  may  be  traced  in  the  piano  part,  bars 
9-1 1,  the  second  half  of  which  {x)  is  constructed  in  the  sense  of 
Example  117; 


Thereby  it  anticipates  the  'Mother-chord'  of  the  last  bar,  which 
may  be  presented  in  a  horizontal  chain  of  intervals : 


^  ^^  it-  ^ 


Example  123 

While  the  song  in  its  last  bar  brings  the  intervals  of  the  basic 
set  to  rest  in  the  'Mother-chord',  the  first  movement  of  the 
Lyric  Suite  develops  out  of  the  disorder  of  intervals  in  its  first 
bar,  the  notes  of  which,  strung  out  horizontally,  present  the 
complete  chromatic  scale,  and  from  this  in  the  second  and 
following  bars,  grows  the  Basic  Set  in  its  thematic  shape : 


135 


ALBAN  BERG 


6      12       t        S      (J) 


Example  124 

The  function  of  the  first  bar  of  the  Lyric  Suite,  to  serve  as  source 
for  the  dodecaphonic  development  of  the  rest  of  the  movement, 
becomes  evident  here,  as  does  the  startUng  fmahty  of  the 
^Mother-chord'  in  the  last  bar  of  the  song,  in  which  the  last 
note  added,  the  low  F,  estabhshes,  as  it  were,  a  tonal  relationship 
with  the  note  F  with  which  the  vocal  part  of  the  song  began. 
This  subtly-suggested,  immanent  'F'  tonahty  in  the  second 
Storm  song  may  be  considered  to  bear  a  ghostly  relationsliip  to 
the  C  major  tonahty  of  the  first  song,  whose  subdominant  F  is 
already  decidedly  touched-on  on  the  fourth  beat  of  the  first  bar. 
And  on  the  fourth  and  fifth  beats  of  that  bar  the  vocal  part  of 
this  earlier  song  gives  out  the  motive : 


f 


^. 


m 


^ 


which  consists  of  integral  elements  of  ^. 

The  ingenious  canonic  dove-tailing  of  the  Basic  Set  between 
vocal  part  and  piano  part  in  the  second  song,  bars  4-10,  and  the 
eUiptical  series  (commencing  with  the  fourth  note)  in  the  piano 
part,  bars  8-9,  may  also  be  mentioned.  Finally,  the  fact  should 
not  be  overlooked  that  even  quasi-impressionistic  harmonies 
such  as : 

136 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


^ 


in  the  second  song,  bar  ii,  represent  strictly  functional  chord 
clusters,  derived  from  the  Basic  Shape  A,  or  from  certain  sec- 
tions of  it. 

Berg's  masterly  employment,  at  his  first  attempt,  of  a  tech- 
nique of  composition  then  still  in  its  infancy  is  convincingly 
seen  in  the  second  song.  The  inner  relationship  of  the  two  songs, 
of  1900  and  1925,  symbolizes  the  gradual  integration  of  late 
Romantic  methods  of  composition  with  a  style  of  musical 
expression  based  on  entirely  novel  principles. 


3.  THE  LYRIC  SUITE 

The  Lyric  Suite  for  string  quartet  was  composed  in  1925-26, 
almost  immediately  after  the  completion  of  the  Chamber  Con- 
certo. The  stages  of  its  genesis  are  vividly  reflected  in  a  spate  of 
letters  to  Webern  between  September  18,  1925  (the  approxi- 
mate date  of  the  first  sketch),  and  October  8,  1926,  when  Berg 
wrote:  'My  Quartet  is  finished;  now  I'm  getting  on  with  the 
fair  copy,  to  which  the  last  poHsh  will  be  applied  and  all  traces 
of  the  workshop  eliminated'.  But  that  post-creative  process 
dragged  on  into  the  later  autumn.  The  same  letter  mentions 
casually:  'I  was  very  ill  and  am  evidently  far  from  recovered, 
which  is  very  embarrassing  at  the  present  moment'.  Actually, 

137 


ALBAN  BERG 

the  composition  of  this  profoundly  inspired  work  took  place 
during  a  period  of  grave  physical  suffering,  culminating  in 
attacks  of  asthma,  which  laid  the  composer  low  for  several 
weeks. 

The  Lyric  Suite  is  dedicated  to  Alexander  v.  Zemlinsky, 
whose  Lyric  Symphony  had  influenced  the  choice  of  title  and  the 
formal  organization  of  Berg's  work.  The  successful  first  per- 
formance, by  the  Kolisch  Quartet,  took  place  on  January  8, 
1927,  in  Vienna.  When  the  same  players  performed  the  work 
at  the  Baden-Baden  Festival  on  July  16,  1927,  it  had  to  be 
repeated.  Several  prominent  quartet  teams  incorporated  the 
Lyric  Suite  in  their  repertory  and  assured  its  spectacular  success 
everywhere.  The  miniature  score  issued  by  Universal  Edition 
in  1927  was  followed  in  1928  by  an  arrangement  of  the  three 
middle  movements  for  string  orchestra,  which  Berg  had  under- 
taken at  his  pubhsher's  request.  This  arrangement  was  first  per- 
formed under  Jascha  Horenstein  on  January  31, 1929,  in  Berlin. 
It  became  a  favourite  in  Erich  Kleiber's  programmes  in  the 
U.S.A.  from  1930  on. 

The  return  to  lyricism  in  the  Suite  is  perhaps  best  understood 
as  a  reaction  following  the  tremendous  cerebral  effort  entailed 
in  the  creation  of  Wozzeck  and  the  Chamber  Concerto.  It  is  a 
typical  Bergian  paradox  that  this  temporary  return  to  the 
lyrical  haunts  of  his  adolescence  should  also  be  the  point  of 
departure  for  new  adventures,  in  dodecaphonic  fields.  The 
second  Storm  song,  which  preceded  the  first  draft  of  the  Lyric 
Suite  by  only  a  few  weeks,  is  the  first  composition  of  Berg 
using  twelve-note  technique,  and  the  Lyric  Suite  itself  adopts  it, 
not  exclusively,  but  quite  determinedly.  The  very  title  indicates 
the  a-symphonic  character  of  this  work.  Earlier  analyists  have 
stressed  its  lyrico-dramatic  mood  and  even  called  it  a  'veiled 
opera'.  Such  a  view  finds  corroboration  in  the  sub-titles  of  the 

138 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

six  movements  of  the  Suite,  which  evidently  outHne  a  psycho- 
logical experience  of  great  intensity: 

I.      ALLEGRO  GIOVIALE 
II.      ANDANTE  AMOROSO 

III.  ALLEGRO  MISTERIOSO 
TRIO  ESTATICO 

IV.  ADAGIO  APPASSIONATO 
V.      PRESTO  DELIRANDO 

TENEBROSO 
VI.      LARGO  DESOLATO. 

The  fact  that  Berg  deliberately  avoided  sonata-form  and  its 
implications  of  corresponding  tonalities,  1  and  gave  his  work 
more  than  four  movements,  should  not  blind  us  to  its  classic- 
romantic  derivation.  The  number  of  movements  can  find  justi- 
fication in  Mahler's  symphonies  and  Beethoven's  late  string 
quartets.  Both  these  types  of  cyclic  composition  tend  to  spread 
out  fan-wise,  in  order  to  reflect  a  psychological,  largely  auto- 
biographical experience  in  a  multitude  of  phases,  in  up  to  seven 
movements.  The  parallel  betv/een  Berg's  Lyric  Suite  and  Beet- 
hoven's late  quartets  is  surely  more  than  fortuitous.  A  predilec- 
tion for  serial  technique,  for  fugal  processes  and  contrapuntal 
rondo-patterns,  is  common  to  both  composers.  Even  such  a 
pecuHarly  Bergian  phenomenon  as  his  tripartite  Scherzo-Trio 
type  (on  which  Movements  II,  III  and  V  of  the  Suite  are  based) 
is  anticipated  in  Beethoven's  Opp.  130  and  132  (second  and 
fourth  movements  of  both  quartets).  Even  Berg's  penchant  for 
cancrizans  motion  (cf.  Movement  III,  bar  93  ff.)  can  be  detected 
in  Beethoven's  Op.  132.  Similarly  his  mania  for  self-quotation 
is  foreshadowed  in  Beethoven's  Opp.  130,  131,  132  and  133, 
which  are  all  based  on  a  common  four-note  series.  Finally,  the 

^Herein  undoubtedly  prompted  by  the  dodecaphonic  bias  of  the  whole  work. 


ALBAN  BERG 

semi-Operatic  passages  of  the  Lyric  Suite  can  claim  a  parallel  in 
the  Recitativo-episode  of  Beethoven's  Op.  132  (Introduction 
to  the  Finale),  and  in  the  similar  bridge  passage,  the  'schwer 
gefasste  Entschluss',  of  Op.  135.  No  less  numerous  are  the 
parallels  between  the  Lyric  Suite  and  typical  features  of  Mahler's 
last  symphonies.  The  emphatic  'Largo'  character  of  Berg's 
music,  its  dehberate  slowing  down  and  the  utter  despair  of  its 
last  movement,  fading  out  in  the  melancholy  whisper  of  a 
quaver-motion  on  the  viola,  recall  Mahler's  Lied  von  der  Erde 
in  general  and  its  heart-searing  'Farewell'  section  in  particular. 
Berg's  middle  movements,  based  on  violent  antithesis  of  mood 
and  character,  may  have  taken  their  cue  from  the  ambivalent 
and  demoniac  Scherzo  type  evolved  in  Mahler's  last  three  sym- 
phonies. However,  the  Mahlerian  affinities  of  the  work  are 
rooted  deeper,  in  the  artistic  subconscious.  Mahler's  Lied  von  der 
Erde  and  Berg's  Lyric  Suite  share  a  deception  inherent  in  their 
title-pages.  Mahler's  'Lied'  is  as  Httle  a  classical  symphony  (as 
its  sub-title  expressly  claims)  as  the  Lyric  Suite  is  a  'Suite'  in  the 
pre-classical  sense  of  the  term.  Both  works  camouflage  their 
lyrical  or  dramatic  nature  by  a  titular  claim  to  a  formal  pattern, 
in  open  conflict  with  their  actual  musical  content.  Mahler's 
'Lied'  is  emphatically  not  'a  symphony  for  Tenor  and  Alto 
voices  and  orchestra',  simply  because  such  a  formal  hybrid  does 
not  exist  and  because  the  work  does  not  show  a  single  biological 
feature  of  the  accepted  symphony-type.  It  is  rather  a  cycle  of 
orchestrally  accompanied  songs,  the  action  of  which  takes  place 
between  its  sub-sections,  exactly  as  in  Schubert's  song-cycles. 
Likewise,  Berg's  Lyric  Suite  is  emphatically  not  a  Suite  in  the 
older  sense,  but  a  cycle  of  instrumental  movements,  the  tone- 
poetical  content  of  which  is  conveyed  in  quotations,  thematic 
allusions  and  programmatic  hints. 

Berg's  six  movements  correspond  in  many  ways  to  the  six 

140 


DEVELOPMENT  OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

movements  of  Mahler's  Lied  von  derErde.  The  three  Scherzos  of 
the  Lyric  Suite  (Movements  II,  III,  V)  correspond  to  the  three 
gay  middle  sections  of  the  'Lied',  just  as  the  two  slow  move- 
ments (IV  and  VI)  correspond  closely  to  the  structural  position 
and  general  mood  of  Mahler's  Solitary  in  Autumn  and  Farewell. 
That  Das  Lied  von  der  Erde  is  the  real  archetype  of  Berg's  Lyric 
Suite  can  also  be  deduced  indirectly  from  the  fact  of  its  close 
and  freely  admitted  association  with  Zemlinsky's  Lyric  Sym- 
phony, Op.  1 8.  The  latter  work,  composed  in  1923  and  pub- 
Ushed  in  1926,  shows  a  family-likeness  to  Mahler's  'Lied'  (first 
performed  in  1911)  which  is  anything  but  casual. 

The  Lyric  Symphony  is  based  on  a  cycle  of  oriental  poems 
which  are  sung  alternately  by  male  and  female  singers  to  a 
richly  coloured  orchestral  accompaniment — exactly  Hke  Mah- 
ler's *Lied'.  Zemlinsky's  beautiful  but  neglected  work  exudes 
the  same  mood  of  wistful  farewell,  the  same  melancholia  and 
nostalgia  for  escape  from  the  world,  the  same  self-tormenting 
longing  for  death  and  annihilation.  The  fourth  movement  1  of 
Zemlinsky's  symphony  is  especially  remarkable  as  a  synthesis  of 
Wagner's  ecstatic  Tristan  style  and  the  strange  oriental  tran- 
quiUities  of  Mahler's  'Farewell'  section.  The  two  quotations 
which  occur  in  Berg's  Movement  IV  (bars  32/33  and  46/50) 
refer  to  the  third  section  of  ZemHnsky's  symphony.  They  were 
evidently  modelled  on  the  following  phrase,  sung  there  by  the 
baritone : 


Du bist  mein    £i       gen,mein     £i  -  gen 

Example  125 

^Zemlinsky's  work  only  differs  from  those  of  Mahler  and  Berg  in  that  he  bridges 
his  sub-sections  with  orchestral  interludes  which  give  the  whole  the  deceptive  aspect 
of  a  single  movement. 

141 


ALBAN  BERG 


Berg  bi— -i    ^M     ^i     [,  JP   ^  hJ 


(  CffZ/oJ 


Example  126 


Rabindranath  Tagore's  poem,  the  refrain  of  which  is  twice 
quoted  in  Berg's  Lyric  Suite,  exhales  a  Tristanesque  nostalgia 
for  love-fulfilment  and  death.  It  attempts  to  express  the  un- 
attainable goal  of  love's  deepest  desire  and  the  incompatibility 
of  love's  fondest  dreams  with  the  hard  reality  of  Wagner's 
*oder  Tag'.  Zemlinsky's  lovely  melodies  contrive  to  combine 
Wagner's  chromaticism  with  the  whole-tone  flavour  of 
Debussy  and  the  pentatonic  orientalism  of  Mahler's  'Lied'. 
Their  harmonic  atmosphere  is  closely  related  to  that  of  Berg's 
early  songs,  of  which  the  second  Storm  song  was  a  belated 
echo.  In  its  turn  this  song  expresses  the  same  kind  of  longing 
for  a  love-union  in  death  that  permeates  the  libretto  of  Tristan 
and  the  poems  underlying  Zemlinsky's  symphony.  The  con- 
cealed vocality  of  Berg's  Lyric  Suite  is  seen  in  the  exclusively 
vocal  character  of  its  avowed  models  of  style  [Tristan,  Mahler's 
*Lied'  and  ZemUnsky's  symphony)  and  by  the  vocal  character 
of  its  quotations.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  second  pivotal  quo- 
tation in  the  Lyric  Suite,  the  initial  bars  of  Wagner's  Tristan 
prelude,  which  occur  in  Movement  IV,  bars  26I2J.  F.  Bouquet  I 
has  traced  the  quotation  back  to  a  segment  of  the  viola 
passage : 


iCf.  Mehs,  Aug.-Sept.,  1948. 


142 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


Example  127 

which  is  nothing  but  a  retrograde  version  of  the  Basic  Shape  of 
the  Lyric  Suite  (cf.  infra).  However,  the  tone-poetical  and 
philosophical  connotations  of  that  famous  motive  are  closely 
related  to  the  oriental  poetry  of  Mahler's  and  Zemlinsky's  com- 
positions. This  seems  underlined  by  Wagner's  own  comment 
on  the  Tristan  motive:  'However,  Nirvana  changes  for  me 
quickly  into  Tristan.  You  know  the  Buddhistic  theory  of 
genesis?  A  breath  blurs  the  clarity  of  the  heavens: 


Example  128 

It  grows,  condenses  and  solidifies,  until  fmally  the  whole 
world  confronts  me  again  in  all  its  impenetrable  bulk.'l  These 
words  could  stand  as  poetic  motto  of  Berg's  Lyric  Suite.  They 
paraphrase  the  ecstasy  and  despair  of  the  last  twenty  bars  (which 
follow  directly  after  the  quotation  from  Tristan,  in  the  last 
movement)  more  convincingly  than  do  the  words  from  Stefan 
George's  poem  Litanei:  'Take  love  from  me,  but  give  me  your 
happiness',  set  to  music  in  the  third  movement  of  Schoenberg's 
String  Quartet  with  soprano  solo.  Op.  10,  which  T.  W. 
Adorno  has  applied  also  to  Berg's  Lyric  Suite.  Schoenberg's 
Quartet,  with  its  programmatic  undertones,  may  well  have 
influenced  Berg,  subconsciously,  in  the  designing  of  his  Suite. 
But  the  music  of  Schoenberg's  early  work,  with  its  strong 
emphasis  on  tonahty  and  its  fmal  transfiguration  in  an  Isolde- 
like hymn  of  ecstasy,  is  miles  removed  from  Berg's  inconsolable 

^Letter  of  March  3,  i860,  to  Mathilde  Wesendonk. 


ALBAN  BERG 


despair,  so  eloquently  expressed  in  the  viola's  soliloquy,  as 
forlorn  as  the  triplets  of  the  harp  in  Mahler's  Lied  von  der  Erde: 


Mahler 


Bera 


b) 


fndo) 


Example  129 
The  close  relationship  between  the  second  Storm  song  and 
the  Lyric  Suite  has  been  described  in  an  earlier  chapter.  Both  are 
based  on  the  same  pecuHar  twelve-note  series,  the  so-called '  All- 
Intervallreihe'.  The  specific  quahty  of  its  Basic  Shape  A  (cf. 
Example  116)  is  that  its  second  half  (notes  7-12)  is  identical  with 
a  transposition  of  the  retrograde  motion  of  its  first  half  (notes 
1-6).  This  inherent  tendency  of  the  series  to  mirror-reflection 
becomes  evident  in  the  notation  suggested  by  Hanns  Jelinek : 


n  =  I  (K) 

(  f'ransposed ) 


1IU=  I(K)UK 
(transposed) 


Explanation  of  Symbols 
R     —  Reihe  —  series. 

K     —  Krebs  —  retrograde  motion  (cancrizans). 
U     —  Umkehrung  —  Inversion. 

UK  —  Umkehrung  des  Krebses  —  Inversion  of  retrograde  motion. 
Example  130 

144 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

The  harmonic  possibiUties  of  this  series  suggest  themselves  at 
once,  when  the  notes  of  the  series  are  combined  in  chordal 
form: 


Example  131 

Not  all  the  movements  of  the  Lyric  Suite  are  rigorously- 
dodecaphonic.  Some  of  them  are  based  on  thematic  reminis- 
cences, or  dependent  on  the  common  Basic  Shape  without 
adhering  closely  to  strict  dodecaphony.  The  following  sections 
of  the  work  are  strictly  twelve-tone  music: 

Movements  I  and  VI  (in  their  entirety) ; 

Movement  III  (only  the  exposition  and  recapitulation) ; 

Movement  V  (the  'tenebroso'  middle  section). 
In  a  freer  style  are : 

Movements  III  and  IV  (throughout); 

Movement  III  (the  'Trio  estatico') ; 

Movement  Vl  (the  'presto  delirando'). 
Series  (^4)  (c£  Example  116),  on  which  the  dodecaphonic 
parts  of  the  work  are  based,  is  subject  to  certain  modifications, 
as  previous  analysts  have  pointed  out.  These  variants  of  the 
Basic  Shape  are  chiefly  responsible  for  certain  features  of  the- 
matic variation. 

Series  {A)  is  a  re-arrangement  of  the  primordial  series  (X) 
which  is  the  basis  of  the  'chaotic'  bar  i  (cf.  Example  124  a).  (X), 
re-arranged  as  a  scale,  results  in  (Y),  the  perfect  twelve-note 
row  of  the  chromatic  scale,  which  in  turn  represents  the  source 
from  which  all  dodecaphonic  'matter'  is  drawn.  It  is  also  the 
thematic  source,  as  it  were,  of  bar  i.  From  that  point  of  view 

^However,  these  two  movements  are  very  closely  related  to  the  processes  of  twelve- 
note  technique,  as  will  be  shown  later. 

K  145 


ALBAN  BERG 


(A)  appears  as  a  special  selective  variant  of  (Y).  It  is  turned  into 
a  manageable  thematic  subject  for  Movement  I  by  octave- 
transposition  of  its  notes  5,  7  and  12  (cf.  Example  119,  b). 
However,  already  in  bars  7-8  Berg  makes  use  of  the  possibiH- 
ties  of  exchange,  within  the  framework  of  the  series,  by  allot- 
ting the  function  of 'alpha'  to  'beta'  (cf.  Example  121).  Bar  13 
already  uses  a  chordal  organization  of  (^)  and  bars  18/19  utilize 
in  the  first  violin  part  the  inversion  of  (^)  =  c  (Example  130, 
{U)  ).  Although  Movements  II  and  III  are  less  rigorously  sub- 
jected to  serial  discipline,  they  too  are  fertiHzed  by  the  inter- 
vallic  determinants  of  (^4).  In  fact,  they  are  based  on  a  variant  of 
it  {A  i),  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  graph: 


Ai 


Q  trunsposcd 


Example  132 


The  same  apphes  to  the  insect-like  thematic  growth  of  the 
m.ysterious  Movement  III,  whose  ant-like  microcosm  rests 
thematically  on  the  retrograde  motion  of  {A  i),  transposed 
down  a  semitone : 


■12    11     i»9      8765     10     3  Z      ^ 


Example  133 


{A)  yields  another  variant  in  Movements  V  ('tenebroso'  section) 
and  VI.  The  strictly  serial  chords  of  the  'tenebroso'  are  deriva- 
tives of  the  following  variant  of  (^  i) : 

146 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


97S3  SCO 6 

Example  134 


11  t2 


The  chief  subject  of  Movement  VI  ('Largo  desolato'),  given  out 
by  the  cello  in  bars  1-2,  is  nothing  but  a  transposition  of  the 
retrograde  motion  of  the  inversion  of  ^  (cf.  Example  130). 

Apart  from  these  close  serial  relationships  between  the  six 
movements  of  the  Lyric  Suite,  a  number  of  self-quotations  and 
reminiscences  should  be  mentioned,  which  act  as  a  kind  of  psy- 
chological link  between  them.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  of 
these  are:  (i)  the  (non-dodecaphonic)  'Trio  estatico',  which 
recurs  again  in  Movement  IV  (bars  12-13) ;  (2)  the  chief  melody 
of  the  (non-dodecaphonic)  'Andante  amoroso',  which  also  re- 
appears in  Movement  IV  (bars  30-31) ;  (3)  the  scale-like  passage 
of  chromatic  chords  of  the  sixth,  moving  either  up  or  down, 
but  always  with  a  quasi-cadential  function. 

The  inner  cohesion  of  the  work  does  not  depend  only  on  the 
fact  that  its  thematic  material  is  derived  from  a  common 
dodecaphonic  source.  This  pre-conceived  and  co-ordinated 
thematic  material  begets  individual  motives  and  thematic 
characters,  which  are  called  upon  to  function  as  actors  in  a  play,, 
entering  the  stage  at  a  given  cue,  vanishing  again  out  of  sight, 
or  submitting  occasionally  even  to  the  minor  roles  of  walkers- 
on.  This  concealed  dramatic  tendency  of  the  motives  affects 
also  the  construction  of  the  Suite.  If  Movement  I  is  preludial  (it 
is  a  sonata  movement  without  a  development  section),  Move- 
ments II,  III  and  V  could  be  considered  as  Scherzos,  with  ex- 
tended Trio-episodes.  The  'Andante  amoroso'  (II)  has  been 

147 


ALBAN  BERG 

called  a  Rondo  with  two  contrasting  episodes  (Tempos  II  and 
ni),  but  this  movement,  with  its  Landler-vhythin  in  episode  I 
and  the  nightmarish  chiaroscuro  of  its  second  episode,  is  strongly- 
reminiscent  of  the  Mahlerian  scherzo-type  referred  to  earlier. 
The  psychological  climax  of  the  whole  work  is  surely  Move- 
ment IV  ('Adagio  appassionato').  It  is  loosely  constructed,  com- 
posed in  a  style  free  from  the  rigours  of  dodecaphony,  is 
strongly  reliant  on  the  effect  of  thematic  reminiscence,  and 
culminates  in  the  double  quotation  from  Zemlinsky's  Lyric 
Syt7tphony.  It  ends  (Hke  its  forerunner,  the  non-serial  Movement 
II)  on  a  suspension-chord  with  a  distinct  cadential  flavour  which 
might  be  classified  as  a  dominant  preparation  for  the  tonic  of 
F  major.  In  Movement  V,  which  also  belongs  temperamentally 
and  thematically  to  the  Mahlerian  Scherzo-type,  the  Suite's 
hidden  drama  comes  to  its  catastrophic  crisis.  A  wistful  epilogue 
is  finally  intoned  by  the  rhapsodizing  free  strains  of  the  con- 
cluding 'Largo  desolato'. 

In  the  preludial  Movement  I  ('Allegretto  gioviale'),  the 
dodecaphonic  aspect  of  which  has  already  been  discussed,  a 
technical  feature  is  found  which  becomes  increasingly  charac- 
teristic of  Berg's  later  music:  the  spHtting  of  the  serial  subject 
{A)  into  two  or  more  independent  motives : 


\    ^4         6 

Example  135 
The  same  kind  of  split,  resulting  in  a  dialogue-like  Alternativo 

148 


DEVELOPMENT   OF   SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

between  two  complementary  parts,  leads  in  Movement  III  to 
the  genesis  of  a  four-note  motive  which  re-appears  in  Move- 
ment VI  as  a  reminiscence  of  Tristan. 

The  last  bar  of  Movement  I  contains,  like  its  first  bar,  all  the 
twelve  notes  of  the  chromatic  scale.  In  contrast  to  their  delib- 
erately 'chaotic'  presentation  in  the  initial  bar,  they  exude  an 
almost  cadential  flavour  in  this  last  bar,  an  effect  which  is  more 
enhanced  than  disturbed  by  the  chromatic  blur  on  the  final 
chord  of  B  major.  For  the  A  sharp  of  that  chord  can  be  under- 
stood as  a  kind  of 'border-sound',  comparable  to  the  Neapolitan 
imphcations  which  blur  the  inlierent  diatonicism  of  the  penulti- 
mate chord  in  D  minor  at  the  very  end  of  the  String  Quartet, 
Op.  3: 


Example  136 


The  Scherzo  Rondo  of  Movement  II  ('Andante  amoroso') 
changes  the  sanguine  mood  of  Movement  I  to  elegiac  wistful- 
ness,  although  it  suffers  two  interruptions  in  the  rustic  Ldndler- 
episode  (Tempo  II)  and  the  threatening  knocking  (viola)  of 
Tempo  III.  As  has  been  mentioned,  the  melody  of  this  non- 
dodecaphonic  movement  is  really  a  proper  twelve-note  growth, 
based  not  on  (A),  but  on  its  ancestral  form  (Y),  i.e.  the  chromatic 
scale.  Thereby  it  seems  closely  Hnked  with  the  very  close  of 

149 


ALBAN  BERG 


Movement  I,  which  is  really  nothing  but  a  different  presenta- 
tion of  the  serial  properties  of  the  chromatic  scale.  This  move- 
ment also  ends  in  a  cadence  aiming  at  an  imaginary  tonic  (F 
major)  which  never  materializes  in  actual  sound.  1  Here  is  the 
final  chord  and  its  fictitious  cadential  interpretation : 

(ficiihous  resolution) 


^^Ti 


Example  137 


The  mysterious  whisper  of  the  artfully  intertwined  canonic 
imitations  of  Movement  III  (* Allegro  misterioso')  recalls  the 
instrumental  introduction  to  the  vocal  fmale  of  Schoenberg's 
String  Quartet,  Op.  10.  Berg's  movement,  too,  seems  to  sug- 
gest 'air  from  another  planet'. 

The  first  part  is  repeated  in  exact  retrograde  motion  from 
bar  93  on.  Between  exposition  and  its  cancrizans  recapitulation 
occurs  the  explosion  of  the  'Trio  estatico',  of  which  the  ferocious 
intervallic  leaps  form  a  shattering  contrast  to  the  ghostly  flank- 
ing sections. 

Movement  IV  ('Adagio  appassionato')  is  conspicuous  for  its 
passionate  character  and  forms  the  climactic  centre  of  the  whole 
work.  Serial  technique  is  here  replaced  by  strong  reliance  on 
canonic  imitation  (cf  bars  1-4)  and  by  a  subtle  system  of 
reminiscences  and  quotations.  The  'Trio  estatico'  from  Move- 
ment III  interrupts  the  exposition  already  at  bar  12,  but  its 
thematic  incipit : 

^Like  the  A  minor  tonic  (by  implication  but  not  in  actual  sound)  in  the  prelude  to 
Tristan. 


150 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 


is  identical  with  an  integral  link  of  the  movement's  chief  the- 
matic character: 


Example  138 

A  quotation  from  the  languorous  chief  melody  of  the  'Andante 
amoroso'  (Movement  II)  at  bar  30  is  followed  by  the  first  quo- 
tation of  Zemlinsky's  cry  of  passionate  desire,  'Du  bist  mein 
Eigen',  at  bar  32  ff  The  Tristanesque  parallel  chords  of  the 
tritone  (bar  36)  prepare  for  the  romantic  nostalgia  of  the  solo 
viola  ('Molto  tranquiUo',  bar  45),  which  in  turn  leads  to  the 
second  quotation  from  Zemlinsky's  Symphony  (bars  46-50). 
This  movement  too  ends  its  Coda  (full  of  post- Wagnerian 
chords  of  the  seventh  and  ninth)  on  a  chromatically  augmented 
chord  of  the  dominant  which  seems  to  cry  out  for  a  resolution 
in  the  tonic  of  F  major.  The  constant  denial  of  this  craving 
gives  the  music  here  a  positively  morbid  tint: 


151 


Example  139 

The  spidery  flexibility  of  Movement  V  ('Presto  delirando') 
is  offset  by  the  sphinx-hke  chordal  symbols  of  its  *Tenebroso' 
episodes.  They  recall  in  some  ways  the  unearthly  mood  of  the 
*  Allegro  misterioso'  of  Movement  III.  Theflautando  harmonics 
of  these  episodes,  drawn  like  an  inverted  pedalpoint  through 
the  obscurities  of  this  amorphous  musical  landscape,  are  among 
Berg's  boldest  experiments  in  rarified  sonorities.  Leibowitz  has 
rightly  drawn  attention  to  the  metrical  irregularity  of  the 
movement's  chief  subject,  of  which  the  periodical  structure  in 
3  -[-4-f  5  beats  is  mainly  responsible  for  the  polyrhy  thmical  variety 
of  the  Coda  (from  bar  44  on).  The  chief  thematic  subject  is 
dodecaphonic  and  an  obvious  offspring  of  (A) : 


Example  140 

This  movement  also  includes  reminiscences  from  previous 
movements  (cf.  the  return  of  the  threatening  knocking  at  bar 
15,  a  reminiscence  of  the  viola  motive  of  Movement  II,  bar  56). 
A  truly  extraordinary  example  of  Berg's  skilful  integration  of 
tonal  elements  into  his  new  dodecaphonic  orbit  is  the  Coda  of 
this  movement  which  steers  into  the  clear  waters  of  a  I-V-II 
(IV)-V-I  tonal  cadence  (cf.  cello  part  from  bar  446  on).  The 
Coda  begins  at  bar  441  ('A  tempo')  in  clear  F  minor,  with  a 

152 


DEVELOPMENT   OF  SERIAL  TECHNIQUE 

return  to  the  chief  subject  in  the  upper  strings  (c£  Example  140). 
The  cello  accompanies  this  canonically  intertwined  'stretto* 
with  the  knocking  motive  (cf.  Movement  II) : 


presenting  it  as  a  projection  of  all  the  notes  of  [A)  and 
simultaneously  as  a  tonal  cadence  in  C  major.  The 
rhapsodic  style  and  hopeless  nostalgia  of  the  *Largo 
desolato*  (Movement  VI)  recall  in  mood,  if  not  in  thematic 
subject-matter,  the  'suicidal'  'Lento-Finale'  of  Bartok's  second 
String  Quartet,  Op.  17,  and  also  the  tired  *dying  out'  of  Mah- 
ler's late  Adagios.  The  movement  is  dodecaphonic,  but  by  no 
means  exclusively  so.  Like  Movement  IV,  to  which  it  forms  an 
epilogue,  it  rehes  chiefly  on  reminiscences  and  self-quotations. 
Shortly  before  the  last  convulsive  climax  starts,  the  initial  bar 
of  the  prelude  to  Tristan  appears,  floating  on  the  surface,  as  it 
were,  of  a  tempestuous  sea  of  conflicting  motivic  and  dodeca- 
phonic allusions  (bars  26-28).  The  climax  collapses  on  the 
romantic  f  chord  at  bar  34,  only  to  shde  into  the  Coda,  in 
which  a  round-dance  of  thematic  ghosts  gradually  fades  away 
into  shadow.  Nothing  is  more  moving  in  this  wistful  retrospect 
than  the  final  gesture  of  farewell,  with  the  gradual  sinking  into 
silence  of  the  four  instruments.  At  last  only  the  monotonous 
murmur  of  the  viola's  persistently  reiterated  'D  flat-F'  remains, 
*all  passion  spent'. 

The  Lyric  Suite  is,  then,  a  work  of  farewell.  A  farewell  to 
love,  perhaps,  and  certainly  a  farewell  to  youth,  whose  sonor- 
ous symbols  are  called  up  here  from  Lethe,  in  dream-like  incan- 
tation. The  work  says  'farewell'  to  Berg's  early  lyricism,  for 

153 


ALBAN  BERG 


which,  ill  the  work  of  his  remaining  years,  there  will  be  Httle 
or  no  more  room.  The  deep-seated  afFmity  between  the  Lyric 
Suite  and  Mahler's  last  symphonies  is  nowhere  more  poignantly 
apparent  than  in  its  epilogue,  the  pages  of  which  seem  inscribed 
with  the  despairing  words  found  on  the  manuscript  of  Mahler's 
unfmished  tenth  symphony:  'Farewell,  my  lyre.  .  .  .' 


154 


CHAPTER  VI 
Der  Wein:  lyrical  prologue  to  Lulu 

THE  composition  of  the  Concert  Aria  with  orchestra  Der 
Wein  was  suggested  by  Frau  Ruzena  HerHnger,  a  Vien- 
nese soprano  well-known  for  her  advanced  views  and 
musical  sympathies.  Berg  accepted  her  commission  in  the  spring 
of  1929,  after  he  had  decided  to  compose  Lulu  and  while  he  was 
already  working  on  its  libretto.  His  correspondence  with 
Schoenberg  and  Webern  shows  that  the  first  sketches  of  Der 
Wein  were  set  down  at  Trahiitten  in  the  latter  part  of  May,  1929. 
The  work  was  finished  in  full  score  by  August  23 — less  than 
three  months  later.  Evidently  Frau  Herhnger's  suggestion  was 
put  forward  at  a  favourable  moment.  Berg  was  still  enveloped 
in  the  lyrical  mood  which  had  prompted  the  orchestral  version 
of  the  Seven  Early  Songs  (first  performed  in  November  1928) 
and  his  interest  in  the  special  problems  of  the  song  with 
orchestra  had  been  further  stimulated  by  the  problems  presented 
by  his  future  opera,  involving  a  reorganization  of  the  relations 
between  voice  and  orchestra. 

Der  Wein  is  a  setting  of  poems  by  Baudelaire,  in  the  free 
German  translation  by  Stefan  George.  It  was  first  performed  at 
Konigsberg  at  the  annual  festival  of  the  AUgemeine  Deutsche 
Musikverein  on  June  4,  1930,  under  Hermann  Scherchen  and 
with  Ruzena  HerHnger  as  soloist.  The  success  of  this  first  per- 
formance and  its  heartening  effect  on  Berg  are  reflected  in  a 

155 


ALBAN  BERG 


letter  to  the  singer,  reproduced  in  facsimile  facing  page  i6o.Two 
years  later  the  work  was  given  its  first  performance  in  Vienna 
at  a  symphony  concert  conducted  by  Webem,  on  June  21, 
1932.  This  performance  must  have  particularly  pleased  the 
composer,  judging  by  his  humorous  marginal  notes  in  a  copy 
of  the  programme,  reproduced  in  facsimile  facing  page  161 .  Frau 
Herlinger,  who  had  handsomely  paid  for  an  option  on  the  per- 
formance of  Der  Wein  for  the  first  two  years  of  its  existence, 
sang  the  work  repeatedly  under  Scherchen's  direction,  and 
notably  at  the  music  festivals  at  Venice  (1934)  and  Brussels 
(1936).  The  Nazis  tried  to  prevent  its  inclusion  in  the  Venice 
festival,  their  intrigues  being  brought  to  nothing  at  the  last 
moment  by  the  intervention  of  Casella  and  Malipiero. 

Berg's  modest  remark,  in  his  letter  of  appreciation  to  Frau 
Herlinger,  that  he  had  composed  Der  Wein  with  special  regard 
to  her  vocal  qualities,  represents  the  truth,  but  not  the  whole 
truth.  The  work,  conceived  at  the  crucial  moment  of  prepara- 
tion for  Lulu,  was  rather  a  preliminary  experiment  in  the  vocal 
style  to  be  adopted  in  the  opera,  the  heroine  of  which  would  be 
played  by  a  coloratura  soprano  of  Frau  Herlinger' s  type.  Thus 
Der  Wein  was  the  stylistic  forerunner  of  Lulu,  as,  in  a  more 
modest  way,  the  second  Storm  song  had  been  the  forerunner 
of  the  Lyric  Suite,  That  this  kinship  with  Lulu  is  more  than  a 
conjectural  assumption  a  posteriori  is  shown  by  the  choice  of  the 
text  of  the  Aria,  by  its  basic  organization  and  by  its  colour  and 
scoring. 

The  choice  of  Baudelaire's  cycle  of  poems,  Le  Vin,  was  a  logi- 
cal step  for  a  composer  intent  on  submerging  himself  in  the 
depths  of  Wedekind's  satanic  satire.  These  poems  are  an  expres- 
sion of  social  revolt,  akin  to  Wedekind's.  They  are  linked,  too, 
by  their  dates  of  composition,  with  the  smouldering  'Vormarz' 
period  of  Buchner's  Wozzeck.  For  these  five  poems  constituting 

156 


DER  WEIN 

Le  Vin,  published  in  the  Fleurs  du  Mai  of  1857,  only  to  be  pro- 
scribed and  suppressed  immediately  by  the  French  public  prose- 
cutor, had  actually  been  written  far  back  in  the  early  1840's. 
Two  of  them,  'Le  vin  du  assassin'  and  X'ame  du  vin',  had 
already  been  published  separately  in  French  periodicals  in  1848 
and  1850.  Moreover,  a  line  of  the  latter  poem  had  been  used  as 
a  motto  by  Theodore  de  Banville  in  1844,  for  his  own  poem 
*Le  chanson  de  vin'  (Les  Stalactites).  Although  'Le  vin  du  assas- 
sin' was  specially  attacked  by  the  public  prosecutor  in  1857, 
neither  it  nor  any  of  the  other  poems  of  the  cycle  were  among 
those  subsequently  expunged  from  the  edition  of  Les  Fleurs  du 
Malo£i%6i. 

Baudelaire,  the  Parnassian  emerging  from  the  orbit  of  Ban- 
ville and  Laprade,  the  enthusiast  for  Wagner's  Tannhauser 
Bacchanale,  the  'frondeur'  by  habit  and  inclination,  wrote  these 
poems  in  a  spirit  of  revolt,  aimed  at  the  complacent  philistinism 
of  his  epoch,  and  anticipating  Wedekind's  later  indictment  of 
the  bourgeoisie  of  the  'fm  de  siecle'.  The  dionysiac  powers  of 
the  grape  are  reflected  in  the  soul  of  the  'Disinherited',  in  the 
intoxication  of  the  rag-and-bone  man  and  the  triumph  of  the 
common  murderer,  in  the  pleasures  of  the  solitary  and  the 
ecstasies  of  young  lovers.  Berg  omitted  the  poems  about  the 
rag-and-bone  man  and  the  murderer,  choosing  only  to  set 
*L'ame  du  vin',  'Le  vin  du  solitaire'  and  'Le  vin  des  amants', 
which  gave  him  a  tripartite  musical  structure. 

It  is  a  pity  that  Berg,  whose  knowledge  of  French  seems  to 
have  been  only  elementary,  became  acquainted  with  Baude- 
laire's poems  in  Stefan  George's  translations,  in  which  the 
poetical  chmate  is  radically  changed.  Baudelaire's  elegant 
obscenities  are  often  transposed  to  a  lower  key  of  severe 
solemnity,  and  some  of  the  lines  deliberately  inaccurately  ren- 
dered. By  changing  the  original  positions  of  Baudelaire's  fourth 

157 


ALBAN  BERG 

and  fifth  poem,  *Le  vin  du  solitaire'  and  'Le  vin  des  amants*. 
Berg  was  able  to  make  the  former,  with  its  allusion  to  the 
temptations  of  'wine,  women  and  dice*,  a  logical  and  reahstic 
reprise  of  the  first  poem  X'ame  du  vin*.  Between  these  two 
poems  the  hghtweight  doggerel  of  'Le  vin  des  amants'  makes 
an  admirable  Scherzo.  So  great  is  the  discrepancy  between 
Baudelaire's  original  and  George's  translations  that  Berg's  work 
is  *one  big  Ossia,  to  quote  a  caustic  remark  by  T.  W.  Adomo.l 
The  pubhshed  vocal  score  is  bilingual  throughout  and  has  two 
separate  staves  for  the  vocal  part,  adjusted  to  the  scansion  of  the 
French  original  and  the  German  translation.  However,  it  is 
unquestionable  that  Berg  received  the  decisive  stimulus  from 
George's  free  adaptation  rather  than  from  the  original.  2 

Der  Wein  is  strictly  dodecaphonic,  like  two  works  that  were 
to  follow  it.  Lulu  and  the  Violin  Concerto.  It  shares  with  the 
Concerto  a  distinctive  feature  of  its  Basic  Set,  which  admits 
also  of  a  tonal  interpretation.  It  shares,  too,  with  the  twelve- 
note  series  of  the  Concerto  the  scale-like  rising  tendency  of  its 
row: 


Example  142 

If  note  7  is  enharmonicaUy  changed  to  C  sharp,  section  {a) 
represents  the  complete  'harmonic'  scale  of  D  minor,  whereas 
section  (h)  becomes  the  G  flat  {=z  F  sharp),  scale  if  the  positions 
of  notes  6-12  are  suitably  rearranged: 

iCf.  W.  Reich,  Op.  cit.,  p.  io6. 

^This  becomes  specially  evident  in  bars  189  fF.,  where  the  entry  of  the  solo  violin 
was  surely  prompted  by  George's  totally  inaccurate  verses,  and  unfortunately  not  by 
Baudelaire's  original.  Baudelaire  nowhere  refers  to  a  violin,  but  speaks  instead  of  'Les 
sons  d'une  musique  enervante  et  caHne.  .  .  .' 

158 


DER  WEIN 


12        (3)        (8) 


Example  143 

The  tonal  implications  in  a  chordal  re-arrangement  of  the  notes 
of  this  series  are  evident.  Here,  as  in  the  Viohn  Concerto,  Berg's 
tendency  to  integrate  tonal  elements  into  his  dodecaphonic 
world  leads  to  the  construction  of  a  tonally  impregnated  series.  1 
The  mediant  relationship  D — F  sharp,  noticeable  in  Examples 
142  and  143,  acted  as  an  even  stronger  catalytic  agent  for  Berg's 
creative  imagination  than  the  fictitious  F  major  tonahty  in  the 
Lyric  Suite.  The  chordal  and  melodic  consequences  of  the 
intervaUic  arrangements  of  Examples  142  and  143  determine 
already  the  very  first  bar  of  the  Aria.  Berg  makes  this  intro- 
ductory bar  the  sum  total  of  all  the  serial  notes,  in  chordal  and 
melodic  simultaneity: 


Example  144 

The  Basic  Shape  of  the  row  appears  already  in  the  orchestral 
prelude  (bars  8-10)  and  again  in  the  initial  bars  of  the  voice  part 
(bars  16  ff).  The  structure  of  the  Aria  is  strictly  ternary  (i.e. 
A-B-Ai),  in  conformity  with  the  poetic  triptych  of  the  text. 
Again,  as  in  the  Chamber  Concerto  and  the  Lyric  Suite,  the  re- 
capitulation and  its  reminiscences  and  self-quotations,  as  well 
as  the  sectional  repetition  in  retrograde  motion,  are  integral 


iCf.  J.  Rufer  (cf.  Bibl.),  p.  97  ff- 


159 


ALBAN  BERG 

Structural  devices.  Again,  as  in  the  Lyric  Suite,  it  is  the  middle 
movement  (section  II)  which  is  turned  back,  crab-fashion, 
thereby  preparing  for  the  inevitable  return  of  section  1. 1  Again, 
as  in  the  Rondo  of  the  Chamber  Concerto  and  the  'Largo  deso- 
lato'  of  the  Lyric  Suite,  extensive  passages  of  section  I  recur  in 
the  fmal  section  in  Uteral  quotation.  Most  important  for  the 
deeper  understanding  of  the  v^ork  is  the  main  part  of  section  I 
(bars  1-87),  which  has  been  called  a  complete  Sonata-exposi- 
tion, with  an  orchestral  prelude  based  on  a  Basso  Ostinato  on 
the  serial  notes  i,  2,  3,  12  (bars  1-7). 2  The  implications  of  the 
Basic  Set  are  chiefly  responsible  for  the  often  impressionistic 
hues  of  its  harmonies. 

A  surprising  novelty  is  the  use  of  Jazz  instruments  and  Ja^ 
rhythms,  for  the  first  time  in  Berg's  work.  It  is  remarkable 
enough  that  Jazz  elements  could  be  integrated  at  all  into  Berg's 
mature  idiom.  According  to  Adorno,3  Berg  only  became 
acquainted  with  Jazz  in  or  about  1925  and  took  to  it  reluctantly. 
However,  Berg's  widow  asserts  that  he  deHghted  in  Hstening 
to  Jazz  bands  on  his  wireless  set.  The  latter  assertion  is  sup- 
ported by  the  important  part  allotted  to  Jazz  music  in  Lulu  and 
by  the  use  of  the  saxophone  even  in  the  Violin  Concerto. 
Berg's  penchant  for  Jazz  is  all  the  more  remarkable  in  that 
neither  Schoenberg  nor  Webern  paid  more  than  casual  atten- 
tion to  it. 4  Jazz  is  used  in  Der  Wein,  as  later  on  in  Lulu,  as  a 
sound  symbol  of  moral  decay  and  depravity.  It  remains  here 
and  later  a  medium  for  the  characterization  of  special  social 
conditions.  Berg,  like  Stravinsky  in  The  Soldier's  Tale,  uses  only 
the  older,  obsolescent  types  of  Tango,  Ragtime  and  EngHsh 

^Section  II  consists  of:  Scherzo,  bars  88-96;  Trio,  bars  97-122;  Scherzo  reprise, 
bars  123-141;  retrograde  motion,  bars  142-172;  Scherzo  reprise,  bars  140-112. 

2Cf.  R.  Leibowitz  (cf.  Bibl.),  pp.  161-62. 

^Cf.  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.,  p.  102  ff. 

"* Apart  from  the  contemporaneous  use  of  jazz  instruments  in  Schoenberg's  Von 
Heute  auf  Morgen  (1930)  and  in  Webern's  Quartet  Op.  22  (1930). 

160 


Alfe*aB*rg.WieftXnt,l  {7*^      ||'>5 


^  ...      „ 


Facsimile  of  a  Letter  by  Alban  Berg  to  Ruzena  Herlinger,  the  first 
singer  of  'Der  Wein'  (June  1930) 

(By  courtesy  of  Mrs  Ruzena  Herlinger) 


27.  jAHR     ARBEITER-^SINFQNIE^KQNZERTE       1931/32 

CHenstag,  21.  Joni  1932. 19.30  Uhr 
Im  Gn)§€n  Musikvereins-Saal 

ZU  EH  REN  DES  2EHNTEN  IHTERNATIONALEN  MUSIKFESTES 

ORCHESTER'^KONZERT 


SCHONBERG  .    ....    .  a)  FriedeaufErden  (Gedidit  von  CE  Meyer) 

b)  Bcglcitmusik  zu  emer  Ltditsptelszene  ' 

BERG    .........  Der  Wem  (Gedlicht  von  Baudelaire)  fer  Sopransob 

ufid  gro6es  OAestcr  (EjsftlAaiQiMWSf  In  Wien)q^Vjr  j;ti^ 

MAHLER      .....    .    .  Zweite  Slnfonie     duUcU^X^^^^ 

Ausftihfende:  £/ 

Rulena  Herlinger{Sopran|/£nid  Szantho.  Staaisoper  Wieri  (Alt)/Frei€  Typo- 
graphia/Der  Singverein  der  Kunststelle/ Das  Wiener  Sinfonieorchester 


Difigent:  ANTON  WEBERN 


PREIS    DIESES    PROGRAMMES    4  0    GROSCHEN 


Facsimile  of  a  Concert  Programme  issued  for  a  Concert  in  which 
Anton  Webem  conducted  the  first  performance   in   Vienna  of 

Berg's  Concert  Aria  'Der  Wein'  (1932) 

The  Programme  contains  words  of  praise  in   Berg's  hand  who 

signs  humoristically  as  'The  Butler' 

(By  courtesy  of  Mrs  Ruzena  Herlinger) 


DER  WEIN 

Waltz,  ignoring  the  more  modem  Charleston  and  Blues,  which 
had  only  recently  inspired  Ernst  Krenek's  Jazz  opera  Johnny 
spielt  auf  (1927),  The  thematic  relationship  of  the  Jazz  enclaves 
in  Der  Wein  with  the  Jazz  music  in  Lulu  is  based  as  much  on 
skilful  use  of  cross  bar  rhythms  as  on  the  constitutional  element 
of  the  interval  of  the  fourth.  The  latter  is  here  used  (as  earUer 
in  Wozzeck)  as  a  symbol  of  the  musically  primitive: 

"Der  wein" 


nH-rf] 

«^ 

-=^=\ 

(Pfte.l 

U — J— J 

1- 

n 

Example  145 

Compare  this  with  the  following  extract  from  the  EngHsh 
Waltz  from  Lulu : 


Example  146 

Example  145  is  confmed  to  the  piano  which,  together  with 
alto  saxophone,  muted  trumpet  and  banjo-like  pizzicato  strings, 
forms  a  kind  of  imaginary  Jazz  band,  foreshadowing  the  very 
aura  of  sound  emanating  from  the  Jazz  band  employed  in  Lulu 
(Act  i).  This  Jazz  music,  which  illustrates  in  section  I  *le  refrain 
des  dimanches',  returns  in  recapitulatory  fashion  in  section  III 
(transposed  down  a  third)  at  the  words  'Un  baiser  Hbertin  de  la 
maigre  AdeHne'. 

L  161 


ALBAN   BERG 

In  sharp  contrast  to  the  angular  rhythms  of  the  Jazz  sections 
is  the  ecstatic  scintillation  of  the  Scherzo,  with  its  unique  com- 
bination of  high-pitched  sounds  (high  coloratura  soprano, 
backed  by  flutter-tonguing  flutes  and  high-pitched  violins).  It 
is  especially  this  dream-like  vision  of  the  Scherzo  (section  II) 
v^hich  anticipates  in  an  almost  somnambulistic  manner  the 
future  musical  atmosphere  of  L«/w  and  its  heroine's  erotic  fas- 
cination. 


162 


CHAPTER  VII 

LULU 

The  Opera  of  Social  Protest  and  Compassion — II 

I.  THE  LIBRETTO 

BERG  was  a  son  of  Darkest  Austria,  and  his  creative 
achievements  have  their  roots  in  his  basic  opposition  to 
the  decaying  empire  in  which  his  youth  was  spent.  The 
subjects  of  his  two  great  operas  are  centred  in  two  symboHc 
figures,  indicative  of  the  sufferings  of  the  socially  down-trod- 
den in  his  home-country.  The  enslavement  and  humihation  of 
poor  Wozzeck,  the  inarticulate  infantryman,  are  matched  by 
the  death-dance  of  social  machinery  in  which  Lulu,  the  prosti- 
tute, is  slowly  atomized. 

Two  theatrical  performances  provided  the  igniting  spark 
that  set  Berg's  imagination  burning  and  led  eventually  to  the 
creation  of  these  operas.  The  performance  of  Wedekind's 
Pandora  s  Box  at  the  Trianontheater  on  May  29,  1905,  and  the 
exhumation  of  Buchner's  Woyzeck  2it  the  Wiener  Kammerspiele 
in  May  1914  were  events  on  the  fringe  of  Vienna's  artistic  Hfe. 
They  were  intended  to  be  protests  against  a  fictitious  social  and 
artistic  world,  and  against  the  fermenting  erotic  cynicism  of  its 
Tin  de  siecle'  literature.  1  The  revolutionary  social  criticism 
impHed  in  both  plays  profoundly  affected  Berg  and  his  concep- 
tion of  the  opera  of  social  protest  and  compassion,  which  he 

^e.g.  Arthur  Schnitzler's  frivolous  dramatic  dialogues  Anatol  and  Reigen. 

163 


ALBAN   BERG 


was  to  create  in  the  very  hour  of  Imperial  Austria's  doom. 

Both  operas  are  Hnked  with  the  poHtical  catastrophe  of  Aus- 
tria by  virtue  of  a  truly  remarkable  coincidence  of  dates.  Berg 
decided  to  set  Buchner's  Woyzeck  to  music  on  the  eve  of  the 
assassination  of  the  Archduke  Franz  Ferdinand  at  Sarajevo.  The 
opera  was  planned,  written  and  published  during  the  years  of 
the  first  World  War  and  its  revolutionary  aftermath,  which  led 
to  the  birth  of  'Httle'  Republican  Austria.  Lulu  was  conceived 
and  composed  in  the  twihght  years  of  post-war  Austria's  inde- 
pendence. During  the  months  of  fratricidal  struggle  between 
Sociahsts  and  Heimwehr,  culminating  in  the  rising  of  February 
1934,  the  last  bars  of  the  short  score  of  Lulu  were  written. 
Berg  died  less  than  two  years  later,  in  a  Vienna  increasingly 
faithless  to  his  ideals,  leaving  to  posterity  the  unfinished  full 
score  of  his  opera.  Meanwhile  the  poHtical  decomposition  of 
Austria  had  progressed  so  rapidly  that  the  two  completed  acts 
of  Lw/w  could  only  be  performed  in  free  Switzerland  (at  Zurich, 
June  2/,  1937).  Nine  months  later,  in  Hitler's  Austria  of  March 
1938,  the  very  name  of  Alban  Berg  was  proscribed. 

In  the  Hterary  work  of  Frank  Wedekind  the  struggle  of  the 
sexes  is  the  dominating  theme,  as  it  is  in  the  writings  of  August 
Strindberg,  whose  mixture  of  erotic  satanism  and  pungent 
social  satire  seems  reflected  in  the  Hfe  story  and  creative  bias  of 
his  younger  German  contemporary.  Wedekind's  favourite  sub- 
ject, the  demoniacal  hubris  of  the  female  element,  inspiring  but 
also  destroying  men,  is  most  convincingly  presented  in  two 
plays  of  which  Lulu  is  the  central  character:  Earth  Spirit  (1893) 
and  Pandora  s  Box  (190 1).  They  had  been  preceded  by  Friihlings 
Erwachen  (1891),  a  tragedy  of  premature  sex-fulfilment  among 
schoolchildren.  This  play,  a  dream-like  succession  of  short 
scenes,  admittedly  modelled  on  Buchner's  Woyzeck,  was  for 
fourteen  years  banished  from  the  German  stage,  a  fate  that  was 

164 


LULU 

to  befall  the  two  'Lulu'  plays  as  well.  They  were  condemned  in 
three  courts  of  law  as  immoral  and  inartistic  and  copies  were 
destroyed  by  order  of  the  pohce. 

The  man  who  aroused  this  storm  of  protest  and  conflicting 
reactions  in  law,  police  and  public  was  born  in  Hanover  on 
July  24,  1864.  His  father,  a  doctor,  had  married  in  San  Fran- 
cisco, late  in  hfe,  a  German  actress  much  younger  than  himself, 
while  on  a  tour  round  the  world.  The  family  seems  to  have 
been  notorious  for  eccentric  behaviour  and  internal  feuds.  Some 
critics  believe  that  their  quarrels  are  reflected  in  Gerhart 
Hauptmann's  early  play  Das  Friedensfest.  Wedekind  was  a  tragic 
figure  from  the  very  outset  of  his  career.  One  of  his  brothers 
committed  suicide  and  he  himself  seems  to  have  suffered  from 
the  malady  of  the  Romantics  and  their  spiritual  heirs :  a  Faustian 
ambivalence.  His  Hfe  and  work  move,  as  it  were,  in  an  incessant 
spiral  of  antitheses.  He  was  lame  from  birth,  yet  became  a  re- 
markable actor.  Despite,  or  perhaps  because  of,  this  physical 
handicap,  he  was  attracted  by  the  circus  and  especially  by  men 
of  athletic  build.  He  tried  his  hand  desultorily  at  various 
occupations:  journalism,  circus  work  in  Switzerland,  and  work 
for  the  modern  German  realistic  stage.  With  Bierbaum, 
Wolzogen  and  others  he  joined  the  first  German  literary 
cabaret,  'Die  elf  Scharfrichter',  and  on  its  miniature  stage  at 
Munich  made  his  dehiU  as  chansonnier,  accompanying  on  the  lute 
his  cynical  httle  ballads,  set  to  melodies  of  his  own.  One  of  these 
Lautenlieder  was  afterwards  employed  by  Berg  in  the  third  act 
o£  Lulu.  As  poet  and  cabaret-singer  Wedekind  became  a  hit 
and  soon  he  also  won  his  spurs  as  an  actor  in  straight  plays.  In 
later  years  he  acted  chiefly  in  his  own  plays,  opposite  his  gifted 
wife,  Tilly  Newes,  an  actress  of  great  beauty  and  charm,  i 

^In  later  years  Wedekind  repeatedly  acted  in  Earth  Spirit  and  Pandora  s  Box,  playing 
in  turn  the  parts  of  Dr  Schon,  Jack,  and  the  Lion-tamer  who  recites  the  'prologue'. 

165 


ALBAN   BERG 

In  the  majority  of  Wedekind's  plays  the  characters  are  drawn 
from  the  bohemian  world  of  the  circus,  the  theatre  and  demi- 
monde {Der  Kammersdnger,  1897;  Der  Marquis  von  Keith,  1901; 
Hidalla,  1904;  Musik,  1906).  However,  the  plays  embodying 
the  quintessence  of  his  post-Nietzschian  philosophy  of  human 
renewal  through  the  purgatory  of  untrammelled  sexuality, 
chiefly  concentrate  on  the  perverse  aberrations  of  love,  on 
prostitution,  and  on  procurers  and  nymphomaniacs  {TotentanZy 
1906,  Franziska,  191 1).  It  is  in  Totentanz  (a  play  that  has  more 
than  just  the  title  in  common  with  Strindberg)  that  the  heart- 
less procurer  Casti-Piani,  Lulu's  evil  genius,  returns  to  the  stage 
and,  in  the  end,  commits  suicide.  Wedekind  never  surpassed 
the  succes  de  scandale  o£  Earth  Spirit  and  its  sequel,  and  died, 
prematurely  aged  and  already  eclipsed  as  a  writer  by  the  van- 
guard of  German  expressionism,  in  Munich  on  March  8,  191 8. 

Wedekind  conceived  the  two  parts  of  his  'Lulu'  drama  as  a 
feminine  parallel,  as  it  were,  to  Goethe's  Faust.  Like  Goethe's 
hero.  Lulu  runs  through  the  whole  gamut  of  passion.  She 
chmbs  the  social  ladder,  only  to  topple  over  from  its  dizzy 
heights  into  the  abyss  of  prostitution,  illness  and  crime.  Her 
companion  is  the  Countess  Geschwitz  who,  with  her  sterile 
Lesbian  infatuation  with  Lulu,  represents  something  akin  to 
Mephistopheles's  principle  of  negation  ('Der  Geist,  der  stets 
verneint').  Wedekind  underlined  the  parallel  with  Goethe's 
play  by  opening  'Pandora's  Box'  v/ith  a  'Prologue  in  the  book- 
shop', closely  modelled  on  Goethe's  'Prologue  on  the  stage' 
down  to  the  doggerel  rhymes  a  la  Hans  Sachs.  Some  element 
of  the  poetic  programme  underlying  the  tremendous  adventure 
of  Goethe's  Faust  is  embodied  in  the  famous  fniai  lines  of  the 
'Prologue  on  the  stage' : 

Und  v/andelt  mit  bedachtiger  Schiielle 
Vom  Himmel  durch  die  Welt  zur  Hollc ! 

166 


lulu' 


This  is  re-echoed  in  the  impertinent  stanzas  of  the  Httle  poem 
'Earth  Spirit',  found  among  Wedekind's  lyric  poems  but  not 
mckided  in  the  'Lulu'  plays : 

Greife  wacker  nach  der  Siinde, 
Aus  der  Siinde  wachst  Genuss. 
Ach,  du  gleichest  einem  Kinde, 
Dem  man  alles  zeigen  muss. 

Meide  nicht  die  ird'schen  Schatze: 
Wo  sie  Hegen,  nimm  sie  mit. 
Hat  die  Welt  doch  nur  Gesetze, 
Dass  man  sie  mit  Fiissen  tritt. 

Gliicklich,  wer  geschickt  und  heiter 
Uber  frische  Graber  hopst. 
Tanzend  auf  der  Galgenleiter 
Hat  sich  keiner  noch  gemopst. 

The  parallel  with  Goethe's  Faust  culminates  in  the  dramatic 
function  of  the  Countess  Geschwitz  who,  telescoping,  as  it 
were,  the  roles  of  the  cheated  Mephistopheles  and  Una  poeniten- 
rium  (alias  Gretchen),  intercedes  for  the  sinner  Lulu  in  the  face 
of  death.  Wedekind  himself  encouraged  an  interpretation  on 
these  lines  by  his  own  assessment  of  his  chief  characters  1: 

Lulu  .  .  .  plays  in  all  three  acts  a  purely  passive  role ;  the  Countess 
Geschwitz,  however,  offers  proof  in  the  first  act  of  a  superhuman 
degree  of  self-sacrifice.  Nevertheless,  the  curse  of  perversity  alone 
would  not  have  induced  me  to  treat  this  problem  in  dramatic 
form.  I  did  so  because  I  found  that  this  fatal  destiny  had  never  yet 
been  made  the  subject  of  a  tragedy. 

The  refinement  in  the  drawing  of  the  Countess's  character  in 
Berg's  libretto  is  in  line  with  Wedekind's  own  self-interpreta- 
tion. 

Hn  his  preface  to  Patidoras  Box,  1906. 

167 


ALBAN  BERG 

Wedekind's  'Lulu'  reaches  its  poetical  apex  in  the  ecstatic 
glorification  of  the  'Eternal  Feminine'  ('Das  Ewig-WeibHche' 
of  Goethe's  final  Chorus  Mysticus),  symbolized  in  the  figure 
of  the  naive  she-demon,  the  incarnation  of  amorality  and  un- 
limited sensuality.  It  is  this  note  of  hedonism  which  distin- 
guishes Ltdu  from  the  contemporary  plays  of  the  pessimistic 
anti-feminist  Strindberg.  The  philosophical  and,  indeed,  ethical 
ground-bass  of  Wedekind's  'Lulu'  plays  evidently  passed  un- 
noticed when  the  public  prosecutor  hurled  his  indictment 
against  their  author.  A  rehabilitation  of  Wedekind,  as  morahst, 
preacher  and  playwright,  occurred  only  in  1905,  when  Pandoras 
Box  received  its  first  performance  in  Vienna,  with  Wedekind 
himself  and  his  wife  in  the  parts,  respectively,  of  Jack  the 
Ripper  and  Lulu.  Karl  Kraus  gave  an  introductory  lecture  and 
appeared  as  the  sinister  negro  chieftain  Kungu  Poti.  As  we 
know,  the  twenty-year-old  Alban  Berg  attended  this  perform- 
ance. He  decided  to  set  the  two  'Lulu'  plays  to  music  only  after 
prolonged  hesitation,  and  after  setting  aside  various  other  pro- 
jects, including  an  operatic  version  of  Hauptmann's  Und  Pippa 
tanzt.  The  following  pages  give,  in  tabulated  form,  the  history 
o£ Lulu  before  and  after  the  composer's  death: 

May  29,  1905  First  performance  of  Pandora's  Box  in 

Vienna. 

Spring  1928  Berg  decides  to  set  Wedekind's  'Lulu' 

plays  to  music. 

Spring  1929  Completion  of  the  libretto.  Composi- 

tion  begun,    but   temporarily   inter- 
rupted by  work  on  Der  Wein. 

August  1929  Agreement    with    Wedekind's    heirs 

signed. 

June  4,  1930  First  performance  of  Der  Wein. 

168 


LULU 


December  1933 

April  1934 
Late  April  1934 


August  28,  1934 

Summer  1934 
November  30,  1934 
Winter  1934-35 
Spring  1935 


End  of  August  1935 
December  11,  1935 


'Das  Lied  der  Lulu'  (Act  2),  dedicated 
to  Webern  on  his  fiftieth  birthday. 
Lulu  completed  in  short  score. 
Dedicatory  letter  and  passage  in  vocal 
score  'Eine  Seele,  die  sich  im  Jenseits 
den  Schlaf  aus  den  Augen  reibt.  .  .  .' 
{Lulu,  II/i,  bars  317  ff.)  sent  to  Karl 
Kraus  on  his  sixtieth  birthday.  This 
same  passage  had  played  an  important 
part  in  Kraus' s  introductory  lecture  to 
Pandora  s  Box  in  1905. 1 
Autograph  of  the  'Prologue'  to  Lulu 
sent  to  Schoenberg,  and  the  opera 
dedicated  to  him,  for  his  sixtieth  birth- 
day on  September  13. 
Compilation  of  the  so-called  'Lulu- 
symphony'  (published  early  in  1935). 
First  performance  in  Berlin  of  the 
'Lulu-symphony'  under  Erich  Kleiber. 
Work  continued  on  the  orchestration 
o{Lulu. 

Orchestration  o£  Lulu  interrupted  by 
the  composition  of  the  Violin  Con- 
certo (completed  on  or  about  August 

II,  1935)- 

Orchestration  o£Lulu  resumed. 
First  performance  of  the  'Lulu-sym- 
phony' in  Vienna,  in  the  presence  of 
the  composer.  Berg,  mortally  ill,  hears 
for  the  first  and  last  time  fragments 
from  his  opera. 


^Cf.  Karl  Kraus,  Literatur  undLiige  (Vienna,  1929). 

169 


ALBAN  BERG 

December  24,  1935     Death  of  Berg  in  Vienna. 

April  19,  1936  First  performance  of  the  Violin  Con- 

certo, in  Barcelona. 

June  2,  1937  Premiere  o£  Lulu  at  the  Stadttheater, 

Zurich. 

The  Symphonic  Fragments  from  Lulu  ('Lulu-symphony*) 
were  published  in  full  score  by  Universal  Edition,  Vienna,  in 
1935.  A  vocal  score  of  the  first  two  acts  of  the  opera,  piano- 
reduction  by  Erwin  Stein,  was  pubhshed  by  Universal  Edition 
in  1936.  The  Ubretto  of  the  first  two  acts  was  pubhshed  in  1937. 
The  vocal  score  and  the  libretto  include  a  brief  synopsis  of  the 
third  act. 

Before  Wedekind's  plays  could  be  set  to  music,  Berg  had  to 
subject  their  texts  to  a  literary  and  dramaturgical  'streamlining*, 
much  more  drastic  than  that  to  which  Wozzeck  had  been  sub- 
jected. He  reduced  the  seven  acts  and  two  prologues  of  the  two 
semi-independent  plays  to  three  acts  (seven  scenes),  and  one 
prologue.  This  process  of  concentration  entailed  the  excision  of 
numerous  scenes  and  several  episodic  characters.  The  scenes  cut 
include  the  Faustian  'Prologue  in  the  bookshop'  to  Pandora  s 
Box  and  the  expository  scenes  i  and  2  of  the  first  act  o{  Earth 
Spirits  The  characters  omitted  include  the  reporter,  the  maid 
and  Dr  Hilti,  the  grotesque  Swiss  University  lecturer,  one  of 
Lulu's  last  customers.  Other  figures  of  special  importance  for  the 
demonstration  of  Lulu's  social  rise,  Medizinalrat  Dr  Goll,  her 
first  husband,  and  Prince  Ecserny,  the  African  explorer,  were 
turned  into  shadowy  characters,  losing  much  of  their  indi- 
viduaHty,  together  with  their  surnames.  Dramatic  attention 
was  focussed  on  the  painter,  Dr  Schon,  Aiwa  and  Schigolch, 

^It  is  interesting  to  note  that  there  exists  an  authorized  edition  of  Wedekind's  plays 
condensed  into  one,  under  the  title  'Lulu'. 

170 


LULU 

among  the  male  characters  of  the  two  plays.  The  structure  of 
Berg's  libretto  emphasizes  the  decisive  phases  of  Lulu's  develop- 
ment much  better  than  the  caesuras  of  Wedekind's  many  acts. 
The  fnial  curtain  of  Berg's  Act  i  underlines  Lulu's  triumph  over 
Dr  Schon.  His  Act  2  is  played  without  change  of  scenery  in 
Dr  Schon's  house,  and  amalgamates  Act  4  of 'Earth  Spirit'  with 
Act  I  o£  Pandora  s  Box.  By  this  fusion  it  abolishes  the  overlong 
caesura  between  Wedekind's  two  plays.  The  two  scenes  of  this 
act  are  linked  by  means  of  a  musical  interlude  which,  synchro- 
nized with  the  track  of  a  silent  film,  narrates  Lulu's  turbulent 
adventures  between  the  killing  of  Dr  Schon  and  her  escape 
from  prison.  The  main  episodes  of  the  film  are :  Lulu's  arrest, 
remand  for  trial,  legal  proceedings,  ending  in  her  being  sen- 
tenced to  imprisonment;  prison;  escape,  through  the  devotion 
of  the  Countess  Geschwitz,  who  smuggles  Lulu  into  an  isola- 
tion-hospital for  cholera  cases ;  illness  (cholera) ;  escape  from  the 
hospital.  These  episodes  represent  in  flash-like  abbreviations  the 
gist  of  the  ponderous  dialogue  of  the  first  hslf  of  Pandora' s  Box, 
Act  I .  They  are  accompanied  by  music,  the  retrograde  motion 
of  which  underlines  Lulu's  triumphant  return  to  her  former 
haunts.  Responsible  for  the  deaths  of  three  husbands.  Lulu  re- 
appears, phoenix-like  and  as  seductive  as  ever,  before  her  next 
victim,  Aiwa.  Unchanged  by  trial,  prison  and  cholera,  1  she  has 
now  reached  the  apex  of  her  victorious  feminity.  This  is 
exultantly  expressed  by  her  union  with  Aiwa  at  the  end  of 
Act  2.  The  big  caesura  between  Acts  2  and  3  of  Berg's  libretto 
indicates  the  end  of  an  episode  in  Lulu's  life  more  forcibly  than 
the  less  significant  hiatus  between  Acts  i  and  2  of  Wedekind's 
Pandora.  Between  Berg's  Acts  i  and  2  the  marriage  of  Lulu  and 
Dr  Schon  takes  place.  Similarly,  between  Acts  2  and  3  Lulu's 

^According  to  a  remark  by  Rodrigo  in  Pandora  s  Box,  Act  i,  p.  137,  Lulu  is  still 
only  in  her  twentieth  year. 

171 


ALBAN  BERG 

love  affair  with  his  son  Aiwa  is  more  or  less  legalized,  resulting 
in  their  joint  escape  from  Germany  and.  their  subsequent  new 
life  in  a  shady  Vmsmn  demi-monde  environment.  Lulu,  from  now 
on,  is  for  ever  excluded  from  bourgeois  respectability.  Berg's 
caesura  between  Acts  2  and  3  also  underscores  the  ageing  of 
Lulu,  who  reappears  in  the  first  scene  of  Act  3  as  a  woman  of 
about  thirty,  having  led  the  life  of  a  Parisian  'Grande  Cocotte' 
for  about  ten  years.  Lulu  and  Alwa's  flight  from  the  German 
poUce  at  the  end  of  Act  2  and  their  escape  from  Paris  at  the  end 
of  the  first  scene  of  Act  3,  when  the  blackmailer  Casti-Piani 
threatens  to  expose  them  to  the  poHce,  form  a  conclusive 
parallel.  Finally,  Berg's  second  scene  of  Act  3  presents  Lulu 
ageing,  sick  and  debauched,  in  her  ultimate  disguise  as  a  Lon- 
don prostitute. 

The  structural  economy  of  the  libretto  is  matched  by  its 
verbal  condensation,  by  which  all  the  polemical  longeurs  of 
Wedekind,  the  sermonizing  satanist,  are  shed.l  Ho\yever,  the 
composer's  encroachment  on  the  poet's  preserve  does  not  end 
here.  Berg  also  boldly  transferred  the  action  from  the  'fm  de 
siecle'  atmosphere  of  the  1890's  to  the  1920's.  This  moderniza- 
tion of  Wedekind  can  only  be  understood  as  an  act  of  self- 
identification,  deep  down  in  Berg's  subconscious,  with  the 
character  Aiwa.  Dr  Schon's  gifted  son,  the  poet  o£ Earth  Spirit ^ 
author  of  a  play  in  which  Lulu  appears  as  a  dancer,  who  intends, 
too,  to  write  an  interesting  play  on  Lulu  herself  (Earth  Spirit, 
III/2),  is  transformed  in  the  hbretto  into  a  poet-composer  of  a 
'gruesome  opera'  {Lulu  II/2,  p.  84).  He  is  scornfully  apostro- 
phized as  'your  composer'  by  Casti-Piani  (Lw/w,  III/i,  Chorale 
Variation  No.  5).  Berg  finally  unmasks  his  relation  to  Aiwa 
completely  in  musical  self-quotation,  when  the  initial  bar  of 

^A  more  detailed  account  of  Berg's  revision  of  Wedekind's  dialogue  is  given  in  the 
German  edition  of  this  book. 

172 


LULU 


Wozzeck  accompanies  Alwa's  words:  'tjber  die  liesse  sich 
freilich  eine  interessante  Oper  schreiben' :  1 


Recit 


AIwq:  ijber   di«  liesse  s'ldiftHich  e'ine    in- te-re  son  ■  fr      O  -per  sehrei-bcn 

Example  147 

As  in  the  case  of  Wozzeck^  Berg  was  here  confronted  time 
and  again  with  sections  of  text  difficult  or  impossible  to  set  to 
music — a  predicament  familiar  to  aU  composers  who,  like 
Strauss  and  Puccini,  have  decided  to  turn  straight  plays  into 
operas.  In  1m\u  these  residual  dialogue  sections  are  more  fre- 
quent than  in  Wozzeck.  In  the  later  work  they  occasionally 
tend  to  bring  the  music  to  a  complete  standstill.  2  However, 
Berg  was  unendingly  resourceful  in  turning  casual  phrases  of 
Wedekind's  dialogue  into  musicogenic  material.  3  The  number 
of  different  vocal  devices  used  in  Lw/w  is  prodigious.  A  passage 
such  as  the  following  (III/i,  cue  477),  with  its  clear  distinction 
of  four  vocal  techniques :  (a)  speaking  on  pitch,  (Ij)  recitative, 
(c)  parlando-singing,  (J)  bel  canto : 


e)  Athlet: 


(Re^) 


C)    Lulu  :  (paHando)  d)   Lulu  :    (contabile) 


Sie  le'iht  mir  zwmzytausend  Afork 


Du  ntochst     ei 


nen  _  Menschen 


Example  148 
recalls  the  multitude  of  recitative  and  arioso-types  prevalent  in 

^'To  be  sure,  she  could  become  the  subject  of  an  interesting  opera*  (Lulu,  1/3,  cue 

1095)- 
^Cf.  Lulu,  1/2.  cue  407,  II/2,  cue  1021  b,  III/i,  cue  55. 
^Cf.  the  words  to  the  vocal  ensembles  of  III/ 1. 


ALBAN   BERG 

early  opera.  The  sections  in  Lulu  produced  by  ' Sprechstimme\ve 
indicated  in  the  notation  {  and  take  their  cue  from  Schoen- 
berg's  early  'melodrames'.l  Berg's  imagination  was  undoubt- 
edly stimulated  by  the  fact  that  he  conceived  the  part  of  Lulu 
for  a  coloratura  soprano.  The  effects  demanded  range  from  a 
whispered  shriek  to  the  passionate  whisthng  sound  of  hysteria. 
This  can  best  be  studied  in  the  scene  of  Lulu's  clash  with  the 
Countess  Geschwitz  (III/i).  Lulu's  rage  and  frustration  are  re- 
flected in  the  almost  unproducible  pitch  of  the  following  bars : 


Weiss.  Gottnein' Aber   wenndukommstaogc  -      he      id) 

Example  149 

The  numerous  minor  changes  in  Wedekind's  plays  include 
the  less  antisemitic  presentation  of  the  banker  in  III/i  and  the 
less  provocative  'male  dress'  of  the  Lesbian  Countess.  The  re- 
arrangement of  the  fmal  scene  of  Lulu's  assassination  should  be 
specially  mentioned.  While  Berg  is  evidently  intent  on  repro- 
ducing in  III/2  the  gruesome  atmosphere  of  Grand-Guignol 
which  permeates  the  fmal  scene  of  Pandora  s  Box,  he  lets  the 
actual  murder  take  place  behind  the  scenes,  in  contrast  to 
Wedekind.  Lulu's  death,  in  the  opera,  is  only  indicated  by  her 
frightful  shriek  at  cue  1268.  The  savage  struggle  with  Jack  the 
Ripper  is  here  mercifully  curtailed  and  attention  focussed  on 
the  Countess  Geschwitz  who,  mortally  stabbed  by  Jack  on  his 
way  out,  dies  alone  under  Lulu's  portrait  and  with  Lulu's  name 
on  her  lips. 

The  opinion  expressed  above,  that  the  libretto  ofLulu  repre- 
sents an  even  greater  literary  achievement  than  the  libretto  of 
Wozzeck,  is  supported  by  a  passage  from  a  letter  of  Berg's  to 

^Cf.  the  chapter  on  Wozzeck  in  this  book,  p.  74  ft". 


LULU 


Schoenberg,  dated  August  7,  1930,1  where  he  describes  the 
difficulties  of  transforming  Wedekind's  text  into  the  substance 
of  an  opera : 

.  .  .  Of  my  new  opera  I  can  only  report  that  I  am  still  in  the  first 
Act.  Apart  from  the  composition,  the  twelve-note  style  of  which 
does  not  yet  permit  me  to  work  quickly,  it  is  the  libretto  that 
holds  me  up  so  much.  Its  formation  progresses  alongside  the 
composition.  As  I  have  to  cut  out  four-fifths  of  Wedekind's 
original,  the  selection  of  the  remaining  one-fifth  is  enough  of  a 
torture.  2  And  what  further  torture  when  I  try  to  adapt  that  selec- 
tion to  the  larger  and  smaller  musical  structures  and  to  avoid  des- 
troying Wedekind's  idiomatic  characteristics  in  the  process! 
Hence  I  could  only  send  you  the  'text'  of  the  parts  already  com- 
posed ;  however,  I  prefer  to  wait  until  the  whole  text  is  settled. 

Despite  this  clinging  to  detail,  the  libretto  as  a  whole  has,  of 
course,  been  quite  clear  to  me  for  a  long  while.  That  applies  to  the 
musical  proportions  as  well  as  to  the  dramatic  structure.  The 
scenario  can  be  briefly  presented  thus: 

The  opera 


The  two  plays 
fAct  I :  Studio  of  the  painter,  in  which  Dr  GoU, 
Lulu's  husband,  dies  of  an  apoplectic  stroke. 

Act  II:  The  flat  of  Lulu  and  her  second  husband, 

/  the  painter,  who  commits  suicide. 
Act  III:  The  dressing-room  in  a  theatre,  of  Lulu, 
the  dancer,  to  whomDr  Schon  proposes  marriage.^ 
Act  IV:  Schon's  flat,  where  he  is  killed  by  Lulu.> 

VShe  is  arrested  by  the  poHce. 

After  10  years  in  prison^  Lulu  is  released  by  Aiwa 
(Schon's  son)  and  Geschwitz.  She  returns  .  ,  . 

''.  .  .  in  Act  I  to  Schon's  flat  (scene  as  before).  She 
becomes  Alwa's  mistress. 


H  < 


Act  II:  Gambling-den  in  Paris.  Lulu  has  to  flee. 


Act  r     3  scenes 


Act  II  Scene  i 
separated  from 
scene  2  by  a  long 
interlude. 


Act  III.     2  scenes. 


Act  ni:  In  an  attic  in  London. 

^First  published  by  R.  S.  Hill  {Musical  Quarterly,  J^n.  1953,  p.  134  fF.). 

^Compare  this  with  Willi  Reich's  astonishing  assertion  (Melos,  1952,  No.  12)  that 
Berg  set  Wedekind's  text  'without  altering  a  word'. 

^The  'ten  years  in  prison'  were  altered  to  'one  year  in  prison'  in  the  final  form  of 
the  libretto. 


ALBAN  BERG 

The  brackets  (right  and  left)  indicate  how  scenes  are  dehberately 
combined  in  my  text  which  were  separated  in  Wedekind's  plays, 
which,  after  all,  are  two  plays.  The  interlude  which  bridges  the 
gap  between  the  last  act  of  'Earth  Spirit'  and  the  first  act  of 
'Pandora'  is  also  the  focal  point  of  the  whole  tragedy.  In  it  begins, 
after  the  ascent  of  the  preceding  acts  or  scenes,  the  descent  of  the 
following  scenes,  the  inversion.  (By  the  way:  the  four  men  who 
visit  Lulu  in  her  attic  have  to  be  represented  in  the  opera  by 
those  singers  who  have  represented  the  men  who  become  Lulu's 
victims  in  the  first  half  of  the  opera — in  inverted  order  of 
appearance,  to  be  sure  .  .  .)  ^ 


2.  THE  MUSIC 

Berg's  two  operas  are  set  apart  from  almost  all  other  contem- 
porary works  by  their  pitiless  realism.  The  hero  of  Wozzeck 
and  the  heroine  oi  Lulu  are  both  murderers,  in  the  common 
sense  of  the  word.  But  in  both  operas  the  murderer  is  clearly 
presented  as  a  victim  of  environment  and  social  conditions. 

The  music  in  both  works  is  subject  to  a  rigid  formal  discip- 
line, in  strong  contrast  to  the  loose  texture  of  post- Wagnerian 
opera  in  general.  In  Berg's  works  the  music  retains  an  inde- 
pendent life  of  its  own.  This  is  emphasized  in  the  vocal  scores 
of  Wozzeck  and  Lulu  by  sub-titles  which  draw  attention  to  the 
use  of  the  forms  of 'absolute'  music,  as  often  as  not  of  an  archaic 
nature:  Passacaglia,  Canon,  Chorale- Variation,  Sonata,  etc. 
The  episodic  character  and  puppet-like  atmosphere  of  Wozzeck 
made  it  difficult  to  establish  a  system  of  characteristic  leitmotive. 
But  in  the  case  o£  Lulu  the  almost  continuous  presence  of  no 
less  than  seven  chief  characters  seemed  to  call  for  a  much  more 

^These  dramatic  correlations  correspond  in  turn  with  musical  reminiscences  extend- 
ing over  III/2.  See  page  igiff. 

176 


LULU 

systematic  employment  of  these  devices.  To  be  sure,  the 
characteristic  motives  ofLulu  are  very  different  from  Wagner- 
ian leitmotive.  They  frequently  present  themselves  only  in  the 
form  of  a  sonorous  aura,  indicative  of  a  certain  dramatic  mood. 
Thus  the  banging  of  chord-clusters  on  the  piano  is  associated 
with  the  athlete,  the  solo  vioHn  with  Casti-Piani,  the  chamber 
orchestra  with  Schigolch,  and  pentatonic  harmonic  progressions 
with  the  Countess  Geschwitz.  Similarly,  the  atmosphere  of  the 
theatre  (I/3)  is  indicated  by  the  sound  of  Jazz  music  and  that  of 
the  London  slums  by  the  strains  of  a  barrel-organ  grinding  out 
the  melody  of  Wedekind's  Lautenlied  (ni/2).  A  'leit-rhythm' 
[sit  venia  verho)  plays  an  integral  role  in  Lulu,  as  in  Wozzeck.  1 
The  motives  and  sound  combinations  associated  with  certain 
characters  in  Lulu  are  more  closely  related  than  are  the  motives 
in  Wagner's  operas,  where  basic  relationships  are  often  estab- 
lished by  the  use  of  certain  determinant  keys.  The  motives  in 
Lulu  are  all  derived  from  a  single  twelve-note  series,  except  for 
such  extraneous  matter  as  Wedekind's  ballad  tune  in  Act  3. 
Whereas  Wozzeck  achieved  rigid  formal  control,  in  the  sense 
of  strict  serial  composition,  only  in  isolated  episodes  (I/4: 
Passacagha;  III/i :  Fugue),  Lulu  applies  dodecaphonic  technique 
consistently,  if  not  exclusively.  Berg  employs  here  a  mature 
technique  which  permits  the  estabhshment  of  a  system  of  subtle 
thematic  correspondences,  such  as  had  been  increasingly 
characteristic  of  his  music  since  the  Chamber  Concerto.  But 
even  more  than  in  that  work  and  its  successors,  the  music  of 
Lulu  is  constructed  on  the  principle  of  symphonic  recapitula- 
tions and  correspondences,  involving  whole  scenes  in  that  pro- 
cess of  repetition  and  self-quotation.  In  that  sense  Act  3  o£Lulu 


^Indicated  by  'RH'  ('Hauptrhythmus')  in  the  score.  Even  the  smallest  rhythmic 
'events' — ^for  instance,  Lulu's  stamping  her  feet  (I/i)  or  the  knock  on  the  door  when 
the  Negro,  Kungu  Poti,  enters  (III/2) — are  subject  to  its  organizing  control. 

M  177 


ALBAN   BERG 

can  be  understood  as  a  symphonic  recapitulation  of  Acts  i  and 
2,  with  long  sections  of  I/i  returning  in  III/2  in  literal  quotation. 
Berg's  increasing  inchnation  towards  self-quotation  and  subtle 
allusion  becomes  more  noticeable  than  ever  before.  These 
musical  correspondences  may  refer  to  whole  movements  (the 
Canzonetta  of  I/i,  which  returns  as  the  Arietta  of  II/2)  or  to 
musico-poetical  purple  patches  (c£  Alwa's  passage:  'A  soul 
rubbing  sleep  from  its  eyes  in  Heaven',  in  11/ 1,  bar  317  ff,  which 
returns  in  hteral  quotation  at  Lulu's  sentence :  *If  only  your 
great  infant  eyes  did  not  exist',  in  II/2,  bar  1000). 

This  comphcated  system  of  motivic  allusion,  of  self-quota- 
tion and  self-revelation  by  purely  musical  means  is  made  pos- 
sible by  the  fact  that  the  entire  thematic  substance  is  derived 
from  one  basic  serial  row.  The  characteristics  of  the  twelve- 
note  row  determine  the  choice  of  intervals,  such  as  the  fourth, 
fifth  and  ninth,  used  for  the  purpose  of  dramatic  characteriza- 
tion. In  particular,  sequences  of  fourths,  developed  from  certain 
permutations  of  the  Basic  Shape  of  the  series,  give  the  whole 
opera  its  hall-mark.  They  underlie  the  passionate  episodes  as 
much  as  the  interludes  of  jaunty  Jazz  music.  Sequences  of  chords 
of  the  seventh  and  ninth  (almost  in  the  luscious  manner  of 
Scriabin)  express  the  magic  of  sensuality.  Berg's  predilection 
for  formal  correspondences  is  also  responsible  for  the  frequent 
use  of  retrograde  inversions,  as  well  suited  to  the  accompani- 
m.ent  of  the  bizarre  film  as  to  the  dialectical  antinomies  of  the 
text  (as  in  Lulu's  song,  11/ 1,  where  every  line  contains  also  its 
dialectical  antithesis). 

The  possibilities  of  the  technique  used  by  Berg  in  the  com- 
position of  his  twelve-note  opera  had  been  explored  and  tested 
some  years  earlier  by  Schoenberg.  His  little  opera  Von  Heute  auf 
Morgen,  on  a  text  by  Max  Blonda,  was  composed  in  1928/29 
and  first  performed  at  Frankfurt-on-Main  on  February  i,  1930. 

178 


LULU 


It  was  published  early  in  1930  in  a  facsimile  reproduction  of  the 
autograph  score,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  influenced  Berg 
very  much.  1  Features  of  Lm/m  anticipated  in  Schoenberg's  opera 
include  the  use  of  archaic  forms,  such  as  Canon,  Duet,  Quartet, 
Recitative  and  Arioso,  the  parodistic  employment  of  Jazz 
instruments,  especially  the  saxophone,  and  the  systematic  appli- 
cation of  dodecaphonic  technique.  Schoenberg's  music  is  con- 
trolled by  the  formal  demands  of  each  respective  'set  piece'  and 
by  the  imposed  thematic  derivation  from  the  basic  series.  Every 
bar  of  this  little  domestic  comedy^  is  determined  by  these 
fundamental  principles  of  musical  organization,  which  were 
taken  over  fully  (if  not  perhaps  wholly  consciously)  by  Berg 
for  use  in  Lulu.  The  structural  pattern  o(Lulu  having  been  ex- 
pounded in  great  detail  by  earher  commentators,  3  the  follow- 
ing explanation  can  do  little  more  than  epitomize  their  findings. 
Here  is  the  Basic  Set  R,  which  yields  the  musical  symbols 
related  to  the  opera's  heroine : 


If  the  notes  of  R  are  re-organized  vertically  the  result  is  a  short 
chordal  sequence : 


^Cf.  the  little  Canon  composed  by  Berg  on  the  occasion  of  the  fiftieth  anniversary 
of  the  Frankfurt  Opera  House,  jointly  commemorating  the  first  performance  of 
Schoenberg's  opera  there.  It  is  based  on  the  twelve-note  series  used  by  Schoenberg  and 
alludes  to  the  title  of  the  opera  in  its  text.  It  w^as  pubHshed  in  the  appendix  to  Willi 
Reich's  book  of  1937,  p.  16.  Berg  sent  the  autograph  of  the  Canon  to  Schoenberg, 
together  with  a  letter  in  which  he  apologized  for  the  incorrect  use  of  the  twelve-note 
series  of  Schoenberg's  opera  in  his  own  opusculum. 

-The  insipidity  of  the  libretto  is  probably  responsible  for  the  obHvion  which  has 
oveitaken  the  opera. 

^Cf.  W.  Reich,  Op.  cit.,  also  Musical  Quarterly,  XXII/4,  1936  and  Grove's  Dic- 
tionary, Supplementary  volume,  1940.  Cf  also  R.  Leibowitz,  Op.  cit. 

179 


ALBAN   BERG 


Example  151 

These  chords  ('Bildharmonien')  present  the  essence,  as  it  were, 
of  Lulu's  character.  They  are  associated  with  the  painted  por- 
trait of  her  that  plays  a  symbolical  role  in  the  opera,  reminiscent 
of  that  of  the  portrait  in  Wilde's  Dorian  Gray.  A  scale  motive 
is  produced  if  the  three  Voices'  of  the  ^portrait  harmonies'  are 
strung  out  horizontally : 


5      5     8      10      J       ^       7     11       Z       t       9       )2 

Example  152 

In  a  rhythmic  variant  the  above  example  is  transformed  into  a 
dance-like  motive,  expressive  of  Lulu,  the  demoniac  ballerina, 
pirouetting  over  social  prejudices,  death,  love  and  hate  with 
equal  grace  and  fascination: 


Example  153 

If  R  is  continuously  repeated,  with  every  seventh  note  singled 
out  for  a  special  accent,  the  graph  of  the  sequence  of  accented 
notes  yields  a  new  theme : 


a     T    i«.   S    10    3      8 


Example  154 
180 


'lulu' 

This  derivative  of  JR.  is  eventually  turned  into  the  Aiwa  motive, 
with  its  characteristic  feature,  the  interval  of  the  minor  third: 

Andante 


If  an  accepted  rhythmical  series  of  five  notes  each  is  superim- 
posed on  R  the  result  is : 


6   12     7   2    9   4   11  6 


Example  156 


The  principle  of  pentatonic  organization  used  here  (which  had 
already  been  employed  in  Schoenberg's  earliest,  serial  com- 
position, the  piano  pieces  Op.  23)  can  be  associated  with  the 
pentatonic  system  of  Ancient  Greece,  and  thus  with  Greek 
tendencies  to  homosexual  love  (Lesbos).  Motives  derived  from 
Example  156,  such  as: 


Example  157 

become  the  musical  symbol  of  the  unnatural  tendencies  of  the 
Lesbian  Countess  Geschwitz. 

Another  mode  of  permutation  applied  to  R  yields  the  series: 


3  3  2 

Example  158 
181 


ALBAN  BERG 

out  of  which  the  energetic  Sonata-theme  of  Dr  Schon  is 
developed : 

Ailagro  cnergico 


Example  159 

Even  the  *Leit-rhythm'  (RH)  can  be  understood  as  a  variant  of 
R.  This  RH  (which  as  'Monoritmica'  plays  a  big  part  in  the 
scene  of  the  painter's  death,  I/2,  and  again  in  the  final  scene, 
III/2)  may  be  reduced  to  the  formula :  1 


^Aim 


This  rhythmic  scheme  is  distilled  out  of  certain  variants  of  the 
Basic  Set,  as  is  shown  here : 


9       1Q     II       12 


'  '~>  ^^  >  >- 

Example  160 

RH  determines  also,  as  rhythmical  backbone,  the  structure  of 
the  fataUstic  motive  which  recurs  at  all  the  turning-points  of 
Lulu's  erotic  career: 


(rhythmic  5      J.       J.       ^   J. 


J.  'j.    ;^j.:j.  J. 

Example  161 


^J.      -.J    efc 


iThe  formula  is  closely  related  to  the  RH  in  Wozzeck  (III/3),  as  also  to  the  RH  in 
the  Chamber  Concerto  (last  movement).  Their  common  source  is,  of  course,  in  the 
RH  of  Mahler's  ninth  symphony  (first  movement). 

182 


LULU 


By  a  similar  process  of  thematic  'atom-splitting'  Berg  obtains 
the  chromatic  mosaic  of  motive-particles  from  which  Schi- 
golch's  creeping  figures  are  constructed : 


Example  162 

Certain  characteristic  intervals  are  derived  from  the  Basic  Set 
and  its  variants.  For  instance,  the  intervals  of  the  seventh  and 
ninth  in  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  the  portrait-harmonies 
(Example  151),  and  the  heaped-up  intervals  of  the  fourth  which 
result  from  the  following  process  of  permutation  and  elimina- 
tion on  the  basis  of  jR.: 


tZtSipVytif^^ 


Example  163 


These  fourths  are  easily  recognizable  as  the  Earth  Spirit  fourths, 
symbohzing  the  primordial  urge  of  the  Faustian  Lulu  in  all  her 
guises. 

The  peculiarities  of  the  Lulu  orchestra  had  been  foreshadowed 
in  Der  Wein.  Berg's  last  opera  shares  with  its  immediate  pre- 
cursor, as  with  Schoenberg's  Von  Heute  aujMorgen,  the  incor- 
poration of  Jazz  instruments  into  the  normal  orchestra.  1  With 
the  exception  of  particularly  vulgar  types,  such  as  Flexaton  and 
Swannee  Whistle,  all  the  favourite  Jazz  instruments  of  1930  are 
represented.  They  include :  alto  saxophone  in  E  flat  (an  impor- 
tant melodic  instrument  in  Lm/m,  linking  oboes  and  clarinets), 

^Some  of  these  instruments  are  meant  to  play  only  in  the  Jazz  band,  behind  the 
scenes  (I/3).  However,  for  smaller  theatres  they  are  cued  into  the  respective  parts  of 
the  main  orchestra. 

183 


ALBAN   BERG 

tenor  saxophone,  Jazz  trumpets  and  trombones  (with  mutes)  > 
sousaphone  (alternating  v/ith  tuba  and  bass-saxhorn),  vioHns 
with  'Jazz  funnels',  double-basses  treated  percussively,  banjo, 
pianoforte  and  a  large  percussion  group,  amalgamating  the 
Jazz  types  with  the  more  conventional  instruments. 

In  rhythmic  style  and  orchestration  the  Jazz  episodes  o£Lulu 
correspond  to  the  obsolescent  types  of  'Ragtime'  and  'Enghsh 
Waltz'.  By  excluding  any  allusion  to  the  more  modern  species 
of  'Blues',  which  had  become  universally  popular  by  1930, 
they  seem  deliberately  to  renounce  cheap  topicality  of  effect. 
Alto  saxophone,  percussively  treated  pianoforte  and  vibra- 
phone (none  of  which  are  employed  in  Wozzeck)  are  given 
significant  dramatic  functions  in  this  score.  The  vibraphone 
regularly  establishes  the  musical  atmosphere  heralding  the 
appearance  of  Lulu  (Cf  Prologue,  i  bar  before  cue  15).  Chord- 
clusters  and  acrobatic  effects  on  the  pianoforte  announce  the 
athlete  Rodrigo.  The  alto  saxophone  becomes  the  medium  of 
voluptuous  passion  (II/2,  Hymn,  2  bars  before  cue  no). 

Another  feature  of  the  score  is  the  deliberate  overclouding  of 
root  triads,  achieved  through  a  kind  of  orchestral  pedal-effect 
of  blurring  character  and  through  subtle  infiltration  of 'foreign' 
notes  into  the  orbit  of  clearly  defmed  tonalities.  This  is  seen  in 
the  penultimate  bar  of  Act  i,  where  the  tonic  D  flat  is  threat- 
ened in  its  harmonic  existence  by  the  intrusion  of  a  D  natural 
and  the  effect  of  the  echo  of  the  piano  pedal,  mixing  with  the 
trem.olo  of  the  vibraphone  and  a  'flautando'  cantilena  in 
clarinet  and  saxophone: 


(  P//»no  conpt.-!.,  (  Clarinets , 


Example  164 
184 


LULU 

The  part  of  Lulu  is  written  for  a  high  coloratura  soprano.  It 
calls  for  extensive  passages  of  bel  canto  singing,  as  do  the  parts 
of  Dr  Schon  and  Aiwa,  in  strong  contrast  to  the  vocal  style  of 
Wozzeck  in  general.  The  sensual  atmosphere  ofLulu  determined 
this  radical  change  in  the  treatment  of  the  voice.  1  On  the  other 
hand,  the  long  stretches  of  bare  dialogue  tax  the  ability  of  the 
average  opera-singer  to  assume  the  role  of  a  straight  actor.  The 
ensembles  in  Lulu  (Duet-canon,  I/i  Trio-canon,  11/ 1,  Choral 
ensemble,  III/i)  surpass  similar  passages  in  Wozzeck  by  their 
increased  polyphonic  subtlety. 

T«r  •  • 

The  three  scenes  of  the  first  act  of  Berg's  opera  correspond 
with  the  action  of  the  first  three  acts  of  Wedekind's  Earth  Spirit. 
The  composer's  infallible  feeling  for  dramatic  effect  is  seen  in 
this  elimination  of  the  opening  scenes  of  the  play  and  plunge 
into  the  demoniacal  vortex  of  Lulu's  erotic  adventures.  The 
painter  (Schwarz)  falls  madly  in  love  with  Lulu  while  painting 
her  portrait  in  fancy  dress,  as  Pierrette.  Lulu's  husband,  Dr  Goll, 
gate-crashes  into  a  turbulent  love-scene.  Rage  and  excitement 
bring  about  an  apoplectic  stroke  and  he  dies  on  the  spot,  Lulu 
thus  becoming  a  wealthy  young  widow  who  almost  auto- 
matically marries  the  bewildered  painter.  2  Schwarz  proves  un- 
equal to  his  allotted  role  of  accommodating  husband.  Once  he 
has  certain  proof  that  Lulu  has  deceived  him,  and  that  she  has 
been  the  mistress  of  her  so-called  'Father'  Schigolch,  as  well  as 
of  her  fatherly  protector  Dr  Schon,  he  cuts  his  throat  (I/2), 
bequeathing  his  matrimonial  burden  to  Dr  Schon,  the  most 
forceful  male  character  in  the  opera.  Schon  tries  to  rid  himself 
of  Lulu  by  becoming  engaged  to  a  respectable  young  lady.  But 

^Realistic  effects  in  the  style  of  Wozzeck  are  occasionally  admitted.  They  re-appear 
in  the  scene  where  Dr  Goll  dies  of  an  apoplectic  stroke.  They  accompany  also 
Schigolch's  asthmatic  panting  and  the  athlete's  noisy  bravado. 

^Cf.  plate  opposite  page  192. 

185 


ALBAN   BERG 


Lulu  is  intent  on  having  her  cake  and  eating  it.  She  plans  to 
become  Schon's  lawfully  wedded  wife  herself.  By  simulating 
a  fainting  fit  during  a  theatrical  show  at  which  she  appears  as  a 
dancer,  she  lures  Schon  into  her  dressing  room,  where  he 
fmally  becomes  so  compromised  that  he  weakly  submits  to 
Lulu's  demand  that  he  should  break  off  his  engagement.  At  the 
end  of  the  first  act  Schon,  tricked  into  submission,  writes  a 
farewell  letter  to  his  fiancee  under  Lulu's  dictation.  He  actually 
marries  Lulu  soon  after  the  curtain  falls. 

This  first  act  is  preceded  by  a  Prologue,  spoken  and  sung  in 
turn  by  the  Lion-tamer.  In  it  all  the  motives  and  characters  of 
the  play  are  introduced.  This  Prologue  presents  Wedekind's 
erotic  philosophy  in  a  nutshell.  The  part  of  the  Lion-tamer  is 
taken  by  the  singer  who  is  to  appear  later  as  Rodrigo,  the 
athlete.  Berg's  music  to  this  Prologue  offers  a  fascinating  cross- 
section  of  the  music  of  the  whole  opera.  The  chief  characters 
are  described  (and  in  Lulu's  case  visually  presented)  as  exhibits 
in  a  menagerie.  It  is  here  that  their  *animaHstic'  characteristics 
(Lulu  the  snake,  Dr  Schon  the  tiger,  etc.)  are  made  to  corres- 
pond to  certain  intervals.  The  part  of  the  Lion-tamer  makes  use 
of  every  device  from  straight  speaking  voice  to  shouting  and 
bel  canto  singing.  Nearly  all  the  leading  motives  of  the  opera 
appear  in  the  Prologue — incidentally,  the  last  part  of  the  score 
to  be  composed.  The  opera  begins  with  the  'Earth  Spirit' 
fourths  in  progressively  rising  pitch  1 : 

a  (fronsposed) 


a  (transposed) 

?'  ^  - 

Example  165 
^Cf.  page  183  where  its  association  with  the  Basic  Series  R  is  explained. 

186 


LULU 


The  Lion-tamer  is  immediately  identified  by  the  sequence  of 
chord  clusters  on  the  piano  which  are  to  accompany  Rodrigo 
throughout  the  opera : 


Example  i66 

The  Prologue's  allusion  to  the  'tiger's  leap'  is  based  on  Dr 
Schon's  motive,  with  its  characteristic  upward  leap  of  a  tenth: 


Example  167 

Finally  the  Lion-tamer  asks  for  the  Boa  constrictor  to  be 
brought  on  the  stage.  Lulu  is  carried  in  by  a  stage-hand,  in 
seductive  tights,  in  fancy  dress,  as  Pierrette,  as  she  will  appear 
subsequently  in  the  first  scene  of  the  first  act.  She  is  cynically 
apostrophized  by  the  Lion-tamer  as  'sweet  innocence'  while 
the  orchestra  intones  her  hymn-like  motive : 


Example  168 

187 


ALBAN   BERG 

The  music  of  the  first  scene  of  the  first  act  includes  the 
'melodrame'  of  Dr  GoU's  death  from  apoplexy,  which  is 
mainly  based  on  the  Leit-rhythm  RH.l  Already  in  this  pre- 
Hminary  scene  of  the  opera  sharply  defined  formal  musical 
patterns  are  employed,  such  as  'Canon'  and  'Canzonetta'.  The 
scene  is  hnked  with  the  following  one  by  an  orchestral  inter- 
lude (bar  257  ff.)  in  the  manner  of  the  development  section  of 
a  symphonic  movement.  Its  thematic  relationship  to  the  pre- 
ceding scene  is  reminiscent  of  similar  relationships  between 
scene  and  interlude  in  Wozzeck. 

The  second  scene,  in  the  elegant  flat  of  the  painter,  may  be 
divided  musically  into  three  distinct  sub-sections : 

1.  Duettino:  Lulu  and  the  painter; 

2.  Chamber  music  (a  Nonet  for  woodwind):  Lulu  and 
Schigolch; 

3.  Sonata:  Dr  Schon's  entry.  In  this  is  interpolated  the  so- 
called  'Monoritmica'  section,  connected  with  the  painter's 
suicide. 

The  coda  of  the  'Sonata'  is  resumed  at  the  fall  of  the  curtain 
[Grave,  bar  957)  and  continued  in  a  symphonic  interlude,  of 
which  the  last  bars,  in  turn,  are  invaded  by  the  sound  of  the 
'Ragtime'  played  by  the  Jazz  band  off-stage.  The  deliberately 
primitive  musical  character  of  the  'Ragtime'  is  based  on  the 
interval  of  the  major  fourth,  and  its  chief  motive  is  clearly  a 
derivative  from  the  jazzy'  section  of  Der  Wein: 


^Cf.  page  161  and  Example  i6o. 


Example  169 


188 


LULU 

The  third  scene  includes  the  'Enghsh  Waltz',  played  by  the 
Jazz  band,  the  recurrent  'portrait  harmonies'  and  a  set  of  highly 
original  'Chorale  Variations'  (CH),  which  accompany  the 
dialogue  between  Prince  Ecserny  and  Aiwa.  The  cHmax  of  the 
music  of  this  scene  is  reached  during  the  great  show-down 
between  Dr  Schon  and  Lulu,  musically  expressed  in  terms  of  a 
development  section  within  Schon's  'Sonata'.  When  Schon 
signs  his  farewell  letter  (and  with  it  his  own  death  warrant)  the 
music  intones  the  sinister  RH  rhythm,  floating  indeterminately 
over  the  vague  chord  of  the  added  sixth,  ending  the  act,  as  it 
were,  with  a  huge  question  mark. 

The  second  act  represents  the  peripeteia  of  Lulu's  existence. 
She  has  become  Schon's  lawfully-wedded  wife  and  has  climbed 
to  the  top  rung  of  the  ladder  of  social  success.  But  she  is  already 
in  love  with  Schon's  son  Aiwa  and  this  new  love-affair  can 
only  prosper  after  Schon's  forcible  removal.  Scene  i  of  Act  2 
is  identical  with  the  last  act  of  Wedekind's  Earth  Spirit.  From 
now  on  Lulu's  dizzy  ascent  changes  to  a  catastrophic  decline. 
The  approaching  crisis  is  heralded  by  the  introduction  of  the 
play's  tragic  figure  par  excellence,  the  Countess  Geschwitz,  who 
entertains  feelings  of  unnatural  passion  for  Lulu.  The  hopeless- 
ness of  her  position  links  her  with  the  triumvirate  of  Lulu's 
unsuccessful  admirers,  the  athlete,  the  school-boy  and  the 
butler.  Lulu,  now  at  the  very  pinnacle  of  her  success,  flirts 
unashamedly  with  her  admirers  under  Schon's  very  eyes.  She 
also  makes  the  preliminary  moves  of  a  future  grand  love-affair 
with  Aiwa.  Schon  who,  torn  by  jealous  despair,  lies  in  ambush 
for  Lulu's  admirers  and  who,  in  the  course  of  the  act,  discovers 
the  Countess  in  her  ridiculous  hide-out  behind  the  fire-screen, 
eventually  draws  a  pistol.  The  pistol  comes  into  Lulu's  hands 
and  she  fires  it  five  times  at  her  husband.  The  dying  Schon, 
with  the  clairvoyance  of  the  moribund,  whispers  to  his  son : 

189 


ALBAN  BERG 


*Don't  let  her  make  a  get-away;  you  are  her  next  victim  .  .  .' 
At  the  end  of  this  first  scene  Lulu  is  arrested  by  the  police,  in 
the  presence  of  the  outraged  Aiwa  and  despite  the  vociferous 
protests  of  her  four  admirers.  Lulu's  arrest,  apparently  approved 
by  Aiwa,  seals  her  fate.  Here  begins  the  dechne,  and  the  slow 
and  subtle  process  of  physical  disintegration.  The  silent  fdm, 
leading  to  the  second  scene,  presents  the  retrograde  motion  of 
Lulu's  hfe  from  her  arrest  onwards — ^imprisonment,  isolation- 
hospital,  cholera — to  her  escape  and  return  to  Alwa's  house,  the 
scene  of  her  former  triumphs  and  misdeeds.  This  film-strip  is 
accompanied  by  corresponding  music  in  retrograde  motion.  ^ 

Scene  2  of  Act  2  corresponds  to  Act  i  of  Wedekind's 
Pandora  s  Box.  The  plot  to  contrive  Lulu's  escape  is  about  to 
succeed,  chiefly  owing  to  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  Countess 
Geschwitz,  who,  risking  cholera,  changes  places  with  Lulu  in 
the  isolation-hospital.  Rodrigo  wants  to  marry  Lulu,  only  to 
renounce  his  claim  when  confronted  with  her  after  her  release. 
She  bamboozles  him  into  the  belief  that  she  has  lost  her  good 
looks  by  play-acting  the  ravaged  cholera  victim.  As  soon  as  she 
has  rid  herself  of  him  and  the  Countess,  and  faces  Aiwa  alone, 
she  throws  off  the  mask  of  sickness  and  radiates  beauty,  health 
and  youth  again.  In  a  passionate  love-scene,  culminating  in 
Alwa's  hymn.  Lulu  becomes  his  mistress  on  the  very  settee  on 
which  his  father  had  breathed  his  last.  This  signifies  the  grue- 
some finale  of  Lulu's  mock-respectability.  Soon  they  are  to  flee 
across  the  German  frontier,  with  the  police  hot  on  their  trail. 

The  music  of  the  second  act  can  be  assessed  as  a  big  sym- 
phonic recapitulation  of  the  music  of  the  first  act,  with  little  new 
thematic  material.  Only  the  newly-introduced  figure  of  the  Les- 
bian Countess  claims  a  musical  motive  of  her  own,  constructed 
of  parallel  pentatonic  fifths  of  a  deliberately  'foreign'  character : 

iCf.  p.  171. 

190 


LULU 


Example  170 

The  musical  'numbers'  of  this  act  underHne  its  reprise-like 
character.  Schon's  'Arioso'  and  Lulu's  'Ostinato'  quote  extens- 
ively from  sections  of  I/i  and  I/2.  The  climax  of  their  second 
and  final  show-down  is  marked  by  'Lulu's  song'.  It  is  the  first 
'set  piece'  in  the  opera  to  utilize  the  Basic  Shape  of  the  twelve- 
note  series  R,  which  is  here  transposed  a  tone  higher,  beginning 
thus  with  c: 

cll    ^he  series  ,  transposed  for  Lulu's  song. 


t        234567      8       9 
b)    The  series  in  Us  originol  pitch. 


G)    LuIu*»  song  (Actll) 
Lulu 


7,89    AO      «    \Z 


7    8   9  to  ti    12 


Example  171 

The  music  to  the  silent  film  (orchestral  interlude  No.  3)  is  a 
large-scale  ostinato  movement,  progressing  dynamically  on  the 
hnes  of  this  figure : 


Its  serial  technique  of  retrograde  motion  links  it  with  the 
Adagio  of  the  Chamber  Concerto  and  with  the  ghostly  third 

191 


ALBAN  BERG 

movement  of  the  Lyric  Suite,  with  the  distinction,  however, 
that  the  cancrizans  motion  is  here  clearly  dictated  by  the  *flash- 
back'  nature  of  the  fdm-strip. 

The  music  to  the  second  scene  emphasizes,  even  more  than 
that  to  the  first  scene,  the  recapitulatory,  reminiscent  nature  of 
this  act.  The  whole  scene  hovers,  as  it  were,  uneasily  in  the  *no 
man's  land'  between  unfulfdled  past  and  indeterminate  future. 
It  lacks  all  sense  of  present  time,  and  its  ghosthness  is  wonder- 
fully expressed  by  the  veiled  character  of  the  music.  It  chiefly 
alludes  to  the  music  of  earher  scenes,  quoting  them  sleepily  in 
a  kind  of  'slow-motion'  manner  (Schigolch's  entry,  Largo,  II/2, 
bar  788).  Alwa's  ecstatic  hymn  (bar  1097  if.)  concludes  Act  2, 
ending  with  the  same  indeterminate  chord  of  the  added  sixth 
and  the  same  fatal  knocking  of  RH  as  had  been  heard  at  the 
end  of  Act  i. 

The  thematic  content  and  structure  of  Act  3  correspond  to 
those  of  the  two  preceding  acts  in  the  way  that  the  recapitula- 
tion of  a  classical  symphony  movement  corresponds  to  the 
exposition.  This  becomes  especially  evident  in  the  numerous 
reminiscences  of,  and  thematic  allusions  to,  Acts  i  and  2.  The 
chief  thematic  addition  in  Act  3  is  Wedekind's  'Lautenhed'  No. 
10,  chosen  by  Berg  to  symbohze  Lulu's  decHne.  It  crops  up  for 
the  first  time  in  Casti-Piani's  'Procurer's  song'  (III/i,  cue  103, 
i.e.  after  Chorale  Variation  3) : 

So'.oVIn  .  (througi-Ksnt  on  G  siring) 


etc. 


Lulu  and  the  Painter 

Dr  Goll  Dies  of  a  Stroke 

[Lulu,  Act  l/i) 


ALBAN   BERG 

music  and  the  Lute  song  are  subjected  to  variation  and  frighten- 
ing distortion,  in  the  'Grand  GuignoF  musical  atmosphere  of 
this  act.  This  atmosphere,  totally  different  from  that  of  the  two 
preceding  acts,  results  largely  from  the  prominence  given  to 
certain  instruments.  Vibraphone  and  saxophone  represent  the 
'society'  stratum  of  the  Parisian  'Demi-monde',  violin  and 
pianoforte  reflect  the  eel-like  flexibility  of  the  loathsome  Casti- 
Piani  and  the  bulging  muscles  of  Rodrigo.  The  barrel-organ 
at  the  beginning  of  the  second  scene  becomes  the  symbol  in 
sound  of  the  poverty-stricken,  whore-infested  London  slums. 
The  Jazz  drum,  finally,  sombrely  beats  out  the  'fate'  rhythm  of 
RH: 


J  022 

Drum 


in  the  nightmarish  scene  of  the  Negro,  Kungu  Poti,  who  kills 
Aiwa  with  the  callous  indifference  of  a  drunk. 

The  two  final  stages  of  Lulu's  decline  are  associated  with  the 
two  international  centres  of  Paris  and  London.  Ill  i  shows 
Lulu,  now  an  over-ripe  'Grande  Cocotte'  of  about  thirty,  bask- 
ing for  the  last  time  in  wealthy  surroundings.  She  is  officially 
still  living  with  Aiwa,  who  by  now  has  sunk  to  the  level  of  a 
pimp.  But  she  has  also  fallen  into  the  clutches  of  the  sinister 
Casti-Piani,  the  bogus  Marquis  who  dominates  her  to  the 
extent  of  making  her  his  mistress,  infecting  her  with  his  venereal 
disease  and  successfully  tricking  her  out  of  the  rest  of  her  money 
and  social  standing.  Three  tortuously  involved  dialogue-epi- 
sodes with  Casti-Piani,  Rodrigo  and  Schigolch  reveal  Lulu  as 

194 


LULU 

the  hunted  prey  of  her  former  lovers,  who  try  in  turn  to  black- 
mail her  into  parting  with  her  last  possessions.  She  loses  the  rest 
of  her  money  as  the  result  of  a  disastrous  fall  in  the  value  of  her 
shares  in  the  'Jungfrau  railway'.  Lulu's  struggle  with  the  black- 
mailing ghosts  of  her  past  is  seen  against  a  background  of  tur- 
bulent society-scenes,  peopled  with  stockjobbers,  tuft-hunting 
demi-mondaines,  cocottes  and  pimps.  At  the  end  of  the  first 
scene  Lulu  is  bankrupt  and  threatened  with  exposure  and  arrest 
at  the  instigation  of  the  villainous  Casti-Piani,  who  wants  to 
sell  her  against  her  will  to  an  Egyptian  brothel.  She  flees  for  her 
life  to  London,  repeating  on  a  lower  level  the  flight  from  Ger- 
many to  Paris  at  the  end  of  Act  2.  She  escapes  in  the  clothes  of 
her  youthful  groom,  the  last  servant  to  fall  in  love  with  her. 
But  she  is  unable  to  shake  off  all  the  spectres  of  her  past:  Aiwa, 
Schigolch  and,  last  but  not  least,  the  faithful  Countess  Gesch- 
witz  follow  her  to  London.  The  Countess  had  consented  to 
become  Rodrigo's  mistress  for  a  night,  in  order  to  distract 
temporarily  his  blackmailing  attentions  from  the  frantic  Lulu. 
The  music  of  this  scene  III/i  shows  extraordinary  variety  of 
form  and  structural  resourcefulness.  Its  climax  is  undoubtedly 
the  cycle  of  Chorale  Variations  accompanying  the  struggle  be- 
tween Lulu  and  Casti-Piani.  Deeply  moving  is  the  musical 
expression  of  Lulu's  imminent  fall  into  the  abyss,  achieved 
with  the  simple  means  of  a  chain  of  chords  of  the  ninth, 
linked  to  one  another  by  virtue  of  their  function  as  dominants. 
These  intimate  passages  are  offset  by  the  noise  and  bustle  of  two 
i2-part  ensembles,  reflecting  the  shallow  excitement  of  the 
gambling  tables  and  the  stock  exchange.  The  third  ensemble, 
based  on  the  words  'The  whole  world  loses',  signifies  Lulu's 
impending  doom.  She  escapes  in  male  disguise  on  the  fluttering 
wings  of  her  descending  scale-motive: 


195 


ALBAN   BERG 


Example  175 

The  police  are  only  able  to  arrest  her  groom,  grinning  sheep- 
ishly in  Lulu's  frock.  It  is  her  last  victory  over  the  *pillars  of 
society*.  The  big  orchestral  interlude  which  links  III/i  and  III/2 
takes  the  form  of  a  set  of  variations,  based  on  the  *Lute  song' 
(Example  172).  The  theme  appears  afresh  in  every  variation,  in 
a  different  key  and  given  out  by  a  different  group  of  instru- 
ments. At  the  very  end — ^i.e.  when  the  curtain  is  about  to  rise 
on  III/2 — Example  172  is  heard  once  more,  this  time  in  a  realis- 
tic imitation  of  a  wheezy  barrel-organ  (bar  715  ff.)l  evoking 
the  monotonous  hopelessness  of  a  rainy  day  in  the  London 
slums. 

The  filthy  attic  of  a  London  street-walker  supphes  the  sombre 
background  for  Lulu's  end.  Its  shabbiness  follows  teUingly  on 
the  bogus  elegance  of  the  Parisian  'Salon'  of  the  first  scene.  The 
bundles  of  shares  and  bank-notes,  the  gaudy  jewellery,  clat- 
tering gambling  chips  and  sparkhng  champagne  are  replaced 
by  a  monotonous  prospect  of  petrol  lamp  and  brandy  bottle, 
the  professional  tools  of  a  debutante  of  vice.  Lulu's  first  and 
last  day  as  a  London  prostitute  passes  in  the  endless  rotation  of 
her  chents.  They  appear  and  disappear  in  a  kind  of  round, 
interrupted  by  the  disillusioned  gossip  of  Schigolch  and  Aiwa 
— two  stranded  pimps,  banking  in  vain  on  Lulu's  faded  charms. 

The  music  is  admirably  contrived  to  illustrate  this  macabre 
scene.  It  takes  the  form  of  a  kind  of  extended  Rondo,  in  which 

^The  orchestration,  for  piccolo,  flute,  clarinet,  bass-clarinet  and  double  bassoon, 
clearly  harks  back  to  the  barrel-organ  device  in  Stravinsky's  Petrushka. 

196 


LULU 

Example  172  acts  as  the  eternally  recurring  theme,  interrupted 
by  episodes  bringing  various  thematic  reminiscences  from  Acts 
I  and  2.  The  psychological  climax  of  the  scene  occurs  with  the 
surprising  reappearance  of  the  Countess  Geschwitz,  who  brings 
her  most  cherished  treasure,  Lulu's  famous  portrait  of  I/i,  into 
the  dismal  attic.  Lulu  finds  the  contrast  between  the  picture  and 
her  own  present  condition  unbearable.  The  whole  scene  was 
evidently  planned  as  a  vocal  quartet,  as  the  surviving  short 
score  shows.  Lulu's  three  clients — the  Professor,  the  negro  and 
Jack  the  Ripper — form  a  macabre  parallel  to  the  three  black- 
mailers of  III/ 1.  Lulu  fails  to  obtain  even  financial  satisfaction 
from  them.  Kungu  Poti,  the  negro,  smashes  Alwa's  skull  when 
he  attempts  to  interfere.  An  object  lesson  in  *AristoteHan  irony' 
is  the  use  of  hauntingly  beautiful  reminiscences  of  the  music 
which  previously  accompanied  Lulu's  love  scenes  with  Aiwa 
during  the  scenes  between  her  and  her  murderer.  He  enters  the 
stage  at  bar  1162,  fulfilling  Lulu's  childhood  dream  that  she 
would  become  the  victim  of  a  sexual  maniac.  The  whole  scene 
is  dominated  by  the  tango  rhythm : 


Tin  Till 


of  the  Cavatina  of  Act  2  (bar  61)  and,  with  tragic  mockery, 
Lulu's  luscious  suspension-chords  now  accompany  hollow 
phrases  of  professional  prostitution.  The  music  of  Lulu's  death, 
culminating  in  her  dreadful  shriek  (bar  1268),  is  identical  with 
the  'Finale'  of  the  Lulu  Symphony,  which  Berg  had  completed 
in  full  score  in  1934.  The  Countess  Geschwitz,  who  dies  by  the 
hands  of  Jack  the  Ripper  in  a  last  attempt  to  save  Lulu, 
epitomizes  her  love  in  a  melodic  phrase  borrowed  from  Marie 
in  Wozzeck  and  sung  to  the  earlier  opera's  Leitmotive  of 
compassion: 

197 


ALBAN   BERG 


Ich  bindir   nah 
Example  176 

The  opera  ends  with  the  Countess's  pentatonic  fifths,  with 
Example  176  in  the  horns  and  with  Marie's  tritone  triplets 
on  the  harp.  However,  the  fatal  rhythm  has  the  very  last 
word  and  the  opera  ends  with  it  and  the  indeterminate 
vagueness  of  an  unresolved  Tristanesque  %  chord. 


As  in  the  case  of  Wozzech,  Berg  decided  to  put  together  some 
symphonic  extracts  from  his  opera  which  could  be  performed 
in  the  concert-hall,  and  which  might  arouse  interest  in  the 
whole  work.  These  extracts  were  completed  in  the  summer  of 
1934  and  pubHshed  early  in  1935.  The  full  score  of  this  Lulu 
Symphony  (a  title  not  of  Berg's  choice,  but  accepted  by  him 
later  on)  was  dedicated  to  Schoenberg,  as  well  the  opera  as  a 
whole.  WiUi  Reich  has  praised  the  organic  nature  of  this  Lulu 
Symphony,  which  he  likens  to  a  late  symphony  by  Mahler.  He 
beUeves  that  the  love  of  Lulu  and  Aiwa  is  here  elevated  to  a 
sphere  of  poetic  isolation,  in  the  way  that  the  tragedy  of  Marie 
is  presented  in  condensed  form  in  the  symphonic  fragments 
from  Wozzeck.  However,  the  parallel  does  not  quite  tally  with 
the  facts.  The  Wozzeck  fragments  are,  save  for  a  few  bars  at  the 
beginning  and  end  of  scenes,  completely  identical  with  the 
music  of  the  opera.  But  the  music  oiLulu  was  thoroughly  re- 
vised and  modified  for  incorporation  in  the  Lulu  Symphony. 
Collation  of  the  Rondo  of  the  Symphony  (Andante  and 
Hymn),  itself  a  compound  of  fragments  of  the  music  from 

198 


LULU 

scenes  i  and  2  of  the  second  act,  with  the  corresponding  sections 
of  the  opera,  shows  how  much  the  music  has  been  simplified 
and  freed  from  the  interruptions  of  dialogue  and  action.  The 
music  of  the  Lulu  Symphony  has  a  value  of  its  own;  it  can  be 
assessed  as  a  separate  creative  achievement,  but  it  is  hardly  com- 
parable with  the  colossal  canvas  of  a  symphony  by  Mahler. 

The  symphony  consists  of  five  sections : 

1.  RONDO  (Andante  and  Hymn) 

2.  OSTINATO  (Allegro) 

3.  lulu's  song 

4.  VARIATIONS 

5.  ADAGIO 

The  third  and  fifth  sections  include  vocal  parts. 

Section  i  is  a  condensation  of  two  scenes  between  Lulu  and 
Aiwa  in  Act  2,  with  an  introduction  of  its  own. 
Section  2  is  the  interlude  between  11/ 1  and  II/2,  accompany- 
ing the  film,  unchanged. 

Section  3  is  Lulu's  song  (II/i,  bar  491  ff.),  unchanged  except 
for  the  highly  characteristic  entry  on  the  vibraphone,  which 
re-appears  in  inversion  as  the  conclusion  of  the  song.  It  in- 
cludes the  harmonic  inversion  of  the  'Earth  Spirit'  fourths : 


(Vibmphonc)  CVibroptwnc) 

Example  177 

Section  4  is  identical  with  the  orchestral  interlude  between 
III/i  and  III/2.  It  is  introduced  by  the  dodecaphonic  Chorale 
tune  of  III/ 1  (cf.  Example  173).  The  movement  is  rounded 

199 


ALBAN  BERG 

off  by  a  Coda  of  nine  bars,  with  a  re-statement  of  the  CH 
series.  Section  5  represents  a  symphonic  telescoping  of  the  last 
scene  of  the  opera.  Its  conclusion,  with  the  last  words  of  the 
dying  Countess  actually  sung,  is  completely  identical  with 
the  actual  end  of  the  opera,  as  found  in  Berg's  sketch  in  short 
score. 


The  Premiere  of  Lw/m,  after  several  postponements,  took 
place  on  June  2,  1937,  at  the  Stadttheater,  Zurich,  where 
Hindemith's  Mathis  der  Maler,  another  opera  proscribed  in 
Germany,  was  to  be  heard  a  year  later.  The  Swiss,  des- 
pite their  pohtical  independence,  were  subjected  to  a  continuous 
blast  of  'cultural'  propaganda  from  the  Reich.  Their  feelings 
were  expressed  by  K.  H.  David,  former  editor  of  the  Schweizer- 
ische  Musikzeitung,  who  wrote :  'It  is  a  sign  of  the  times  that  this 
work  could  be  brought  to  performance  only  in  Zurich.  Yet  it 
is  in  no  way  politically  dangerous ;  it  is  a  purely  artistically  ex- 
ceptional work,  to  be  hailed  or  condemned  as  such.'  Despite  its 
great  success  at  the  first  performance,  reflected  in  the  enthusias- 
tic reports  of  connoisseurs  like  Ernest  Krenek,  Darius  Milhaud 
and  others,  the  opera's  fate  was  sealed.  It  remained  proscribed 
in  Germany  and  Austria  for  the  duration  of  Hitler's  reign. 

Unlike  Busoni's  Doktor  Faust  and  Puccini's  Turandot,  which 
were  completed  by  disciples  and  subsequently  published  in 
complete  form,  Lulu  was  made  known  as  a  'Fragment'.!  After 
the  end  of  the  second  act,  at  the  Zurich  performance,  the  pro- 
ducer appeared  on  the  stage  and  gave  a  synopsis  of  the  third 
act.  Only  those  parts  of  the  Lulu  Symphony  related  to  this 
third  act  were  played  by  the  orchestra  and  the  final  murder 

^The  vocal  score,  published  in  1937,  promised  in  a  prefatory  note  the  publication 
of  the  opera  in  complete  form  at  a  later  date. 

200 


*LULU' 


scene  was  then  sung  and  acted  against  a  backdrop  depicting 
Lulu's  attic. 

The  revival  o{Lulu  after  the  second  world  war  had  to  wait 
until  March  7,  1953,  when  a  performance  of  great  merit  was 
given  at  Essen.  1  On  that  occasion  an  attempt  was  made  to 
perform  more  of  Wedekind's  action  of  III/2,  accompanied  by 
those  sections  of  the  music  which  Berg  had  scored  for  use  in 
the  'symphony'.  H.  H.  Stuckenschmidt's  critical  report  in  Die 
Neue  Zeitung  for  March  9,  1953,  makes  clear  that  this  solution 
was  found  unsatisfactory  and  detrimental  to  Berg's  artistic 
intentions.  Many  of  Berg's  admirers  have  never  ceased  to  ask 
why  the  opera  should  be  presented  always  as  a  fragment,  when 
Willi  Reich,  Berg's  first  biographer,  had  written: 2  'The  opera 
is  nearly  complete  in  short  score.  The  vocal  parts  are  written 
out  fully,  except  for  an  ensemble  in  Act  3.' 

Is  Act  3  performable?  The  question  was  raised  and  answered 
in  the  affirmative  by  Willi  Reich  himself,  back  in  1936.  Yet 
although  Schoenberg,  Webern  and  Erwin  Stein  were  ap- 
proached in  turn  by  Berg's  widow,  they  could  not  make  up 
their  minds  how  to  complete  the  score.  In  my  own  opinion 
(shared  by  a  good  msirrf  cognoscenti)  the  task  of  orchestrating  the 
rest  of  Act  3  on  the  basis  of  the  surviving  sketch  in  short  score 
is  not  beyond  the  capacity  of  a  musician  thoroughly  familiar 
with  Berg's  style  and  methods  of  composition. 

The  musical  sketches  and  fragments  of  Act  3  consist  of: 

(A)  A  complete  draft  in  short  score,  in  Berg's  hand. 

(B)  The  fragmentary  full  score,  43  pages,  breaking  off  at  bar 
268  of  scene  i. 

(C)  The  complete  libretto,  in  Berg's  hand. 


^Fragmentary  performances    and    a   complete    radio    performance   (which   was 
recorded)  had  already  taken  place  in  1949  and  earUer  in  1953. 
^Melos,  December  1952. 

201 


ALBAN  BERG 


(D)  Those  parts  of  the  Lulu  Symphony  which  incorporate 
parts  of  the  music  of  Act  3  (i.e.  sections  4  and  5  of  the 
symphony). 
Only  (D)  has  been  pubhshed,  so  far.  Sixty  pages  of  Erwin 
Stein's  piano  arrangement  of  (A)  were  engraved,  but  they  have 
remained  unpubhshed.  Stein's  arrangement  includes  Berg's 
own  indications  of  his  intended  orchestration.  It  would  be  pos- 
sible to  score  the  later  part  of  Act  3  (i.e.  bars  1209-1300,  down 
to  the  Adagio  of  the  Lulu  Symphony)  because  it  includes  a 
number  of  recapitulations  and  transpositions  of  episodes  from 
1/2  and  III/ 1,  which  could  easily  be  used  as  styhstic  and  struc- 
tural models.  1  A  much  more  difficult  task  awaits  the  future 
editor  in  the  vocal  quartet  beginning  with  the  re-appearance  of 
the  Countess  Geschwitz  (III/2,  after  bar  861).  But  even  in  that 
section  the  continuity  of  the  sketch  in  short  score  is  unbroken. 
The  passages  for  which  no  corresponding  models  are  to  be 
found  in  the  music  of  the  previous  acts  are  in  a  minority  com- 
pared with  those  which  are  clearly  based  on  reminiscences.  The 
completion  of  Act  3  is  therefore  a  distinct  possibihty,  a  task 
which  will  have  to  be  undertaken  before  Berg's  finest  and  most 
mature  work  can  become  part  of  the  international  repertory  of 
operatic  masterpieces. 


^The  third  ensemble  of  III/i,  for  instance,  (bar  542  ff.),  is  a  complete  replica  of  the 
second  ensemble,  which  exists  in  full  score  in  the  composer's  hand  (cf.  (B).).  Similarly, 
the  sketch  of  Lulu's  scenes  with  her  three  clients  is  for  the  most  part  based  on  literal 
quotations  from  the  music  of  Acts  i  and  2. 

202 


CHAPTER  VIII 
The  Violin  Concerto :  postludium  in  excelsis 

Berg's  last  work,  the  Violin  Concerto,  was  commissioned 
by  the  American  violinist  Louis  Krasner  specially  for 
himself.  The  suggestion  may  have  elicited  in  the  com- 
poser a  sympathetic  response  because  of  the  earlier  stimulating 
experience  of  writing  concertante  music  for  the  voice  in  Der 
Wein.  The  Concert  Aria  had  passed  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
original  commission  and  become  the  prelude  to  Berg's  last 
opera.  Similarly  the  Violin  Concerto  went  far  beyond  the 
original  stipulations  of  the  contracting  parties.  It  became  the 
composer's  most  poignant  self-revelation  in  the  face  of  im- 
pending death.  It  was  the  news  of  the  death,  from  poliomyelitis, 
of  Manon  Gropius,  the  beautiful  eighteen-year-old  daughter  of 
Alma  Mahler,  that  provided,  in  April  1935,  the  igniting  spark 
that  set  Berg's  creative  imagination  aflame.  I  The  Concerto, 
undertaken  for  Louis  Krasner,  became  a  'Requiem  for  Manon', 
a  moving  dirge,  inspired  by  'the  memory  of  an  Angel' — hence 
the  double  dedication  on  the  title-page  of  the  full  score. 

Berg  stopped  work  on  the  orchestration  of  the  third  act  of 
Lulu  when  he  started  to  compose  the  Concerto  in  April  1935 
in  the  solitude  of  his  'Waldhaus'.  The  short  score  was   all 

^Manon  had  been  struck  down  by  the  disease  in  the  spring  of  1934  while  staying  at 
Venice.  Her  fate  hung  in  the  balance  for  some  time.  Berg's  letters  to  Webern  reflect 
the  measure  of  his  affection  for  the  girl  and  his  concern  for  her  mother. 

203 


ALBAN   BERG 

but  finished  on  July  12. 1  In  a  letter  to  Webern  of  August  7, 
Berg  says :  'At  present  I  am  writing  like  a  madman  at  my  full 
score,  in  order  to  complete  it  by  the  middle  of  August'.  Accord- 
ing to  WiUi  Reich,  2  who  paid  Berg  a  visit  at  that  time,  the  full 
score  was  completed  on  August  11.  A  letter  to  Schoenberg 
of  August  28 3  says:  'The  Concerto  was  already  completely 
fmished  a  fortnight  ago.'  The  same  letter  mentions  the  insect 
sting  which  caused  the  carbuncle  on  his  back  and  goes  on  to 
say  that  the  carbuncle  had  been  tormenting  him  for  the  past 
fortnight.  It  is  therefore  possible  to  assume  that  the  actual  com- 
pletion of  the  Concerto  and  the  fatal  sting  all  but  coincided, 
between  August  11  and  14.  The  Concerto  was  fmished  in 
record  time  and  in  a  fmal  and  feverish  marshalling  of  all  his 
creative  energies.  The  carbuncle  and  the  ensuing  blood-poison- 
ing found  Berg  drained  of  strength  and  without  recuperative 
powers.  4  His  hope,  expressed  in  a  letter  to  Schoenberg,  of 
completing  the  orchestration  o{  Lulu  in  the  following  two  or 
three  months  remained  unfulfilled.  When  he  returned  to  Vienna 
in  the  middle  of  November  his  condition  was  already  grave. 
The  last  letter  to  Schoenberg,  dated  November  28,5  was  written 
in  bed.  Despite  his  ever  increasing  suffering  he  attended  the 
first  performance  in  Vienna  of  the  Lulu  Symphony  on  December 
II  and  even  corrected  the  copy  of  Rita  Kurzmann's  piano 
arrangement  of  the  Violin  Concerto  on  December  14.  Ten 
days  later,  on  December  24,  Berg  passed  away,  without  having 
heard  a   note   of  his  last  work,  which  was  pubHshed   and 

^ A  letter  to  Webern  of  July  1 5  makes  clear  that  the  sketch  was  completed  on  the 
day  on  which  Webern's  transcription  of  Bach's  'Ricercare'  from  the  Musical  Offering 
was  broadcast.  That  day  was  July  12.  Incorrect  dates,  in  connection  with  the  history 
of  the  Concerto,  are  given  by  W.  Reich. 

^Op.  cit.  p.  17. 

^Published  in  facsimile  by  J.  Rufer  in  Melos,  Feb.  1955. 

*Berg  had  complained  already  in  early  June  of  being  'deadly  tired,  nervous  and 
asthmatic'. 

^Cf.  previous  footnote  ^. 

204 


THE  VIOLIN   CONCERTO 

performed  posthumously  in  the  following  year.  The  first  per- 
formance, with  Krasner  as  soloist,  took  place  on  April  19, 1936, 
at  the  I.S.C.M.  festival  in  Barcelona.  Webern  was  to  have  con- 
ducted, but  resigned  during  the  rehearsals  owing  to  increas- 
ingly strained  relations  between  him  and  the  orchestral  players. 
Almost  hterally  at  the  last  moment  Hermann  Scherchen  took 
over  and,  with  his  intimate  knowledge  of  Berg's  style,  secured 
for  tliis  opus  ultimum  the  resounding  success  which  has  never 
since  deserted  it. 

The  Violin  Concerto — ^like  the  Chamber  Concerto  and  the 
Lyric  Suite— ^;£dw%  out  of  the  thematic  cells  of  certain  quota- 
tions from  existing  melodies^  wMdithus_  become  structural 
determinantS-of  the  whole  composition.  As  in  the  earlier  works, 
a  system  of  subtle  thematic  associations  and  correspondences 
enables  the  student  to  interpret  the  music's  tone-poetical  mean- 
ing. TheJs/o^ctraneous  melodic  elements  are  a  church  chorale 
and  a  traditional  folktune,  diametrically  opposed  to  one 
another.  They  appear  separately,  but  in  the  end  their  apparent 
incompatibihties  are  fused  in  the  mystical  coincidentia  opposi- 
torum  of  the  Coda  of  the  Concerto.  In  view  of  the  inherent 
duahsm  of  Berg's  work  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Bach's 
church  cantata  O  Ewigkeit,  du  Donnerwort,  from  which  the 
chorale  is  taken,!  bears  the  sub-heading  'Dialogue  between 
Fear  and  Hope'.  The  struggle  of  conflicting  emotions  on  the 
very  threshold  of  death  fmds  resolution  in  the  words  of  the 
Holy  Spirit:  'Blessed  are  those  who  die  in  the  Lord'.  It  is  this 

^The  chorale  *Es  ist  genug'  is  not  by  Bach,  as  repeatedly  stated  in  writings  about  the 
Violin  Concerto,  but  by  Johann  Rudolph  Able  (1626-1673).  The  words  are  by  Franz 
Joseph  Burmeister.  Poem  and  tune  date  from  1662;  Bach's  Cantata,  No.  60,  dates 
from  1732.  Bach  harmonized  Abie's  lovely  melody  with  the  heart-searing  poignancy 
he  had  earlier  given  to  another  borrowed  melody,  transformed  into  the  Passion  chorale 
'O  Haupt  voU  Blut  und  Wunden'.  Bach's  earher  cantata,  No.  20,  'O  Ewigkeit  ,  .  .', 
composed  before  1727,  does  not  make  use  of  Abie's  melody  at  all.  This  explanation 
seems  necessary  in  view  of  the  fact  that  references  to  Bach's  Cantata  create  the  mis- 
leading impression  that  only  one  cantata  of  this  title  exists. 

205 


ALBAN  BERG 


blissful  acceptance  of  the  inevitable  that  is  given  expression  in 
the  final  chorale:  It  is  enough.'  The  Violin  Concerto  depends 
thematically  and  psychologically  on  this  chorale,  the  funereal 
imphcations  of  which  underline  the  Requiem-like  character  of 
Berg's  last  work. 

The  thematic  elements  of  the  Concerto  are: 

(A)  The  Basic  Shape  of  its  dodecaphonic  series ; 

(B)  The  Carinthian  folk-tune; 

(C)  The  Bach-Ahle  chorale  melody. 

They  are  presented  below  in  tabulated  form  and  thematic  sub- 
jects derived  from  them  are  labelled  accordingly  Ai,  Bi,  Ci, 


etc. 


Whole  tone  steps 


R(i) 


(S)  K 


(3)U 


WUK 


,53*       5      *     7     »      9     »o     n     12 
Denvotivc  ofE^^}  thro^  transpofifion  '"^  ^^^'^J^'^^ 


■'Corinthian  Folkfun€ 


THE  VIOLIN   CONCERTO 

A)  X  ^      t^        ( fol3e  relation )  ^      .     (Trilone) 


Is     ist  ge  -    rjuQ 


mem         Je  -sus  Icomml 


n'^       ^'"^ 

rcioCtons) 
i/-    1      Is    i 

1 

J    1     1 

! 

|=flW'r4^:^      1!     .W^"     ■'     «!  .   1 

J 

il  H             m             k 

1... 
V 

>  -  J   n 

.1 

Nrj  r  r T- 

k  ^r  r  1"— 1  ><vr  r^fpt^ 

^^f— 

! 1 1 1 ?. 

1 — " — 

H     y   ^ 

1 1 M 

Example  178 

The  Basic  Shape  (A)  belongs,  Hke  the  series  on  which  Der  Wein 
is  based,  to  those  'tonally  coloured'  sequences  of  notes  which 
Schoenberg  deliberately  avoided,  in  the  early  days  of  his 
dodecaphonic  period,  because  of  their  diatonic  implications.  1 
(A)  shares  with  the  series  of  Der  Wein  a  scale-like  arrange- 
ment of  rising  notes.  It  is  a  sequence  of  rising  thirds  with  an 
^appendix'  (x)  of  whole-tone  steps.  The  chain  of  thirds  implies 
chordal  progressions  of  major  and  minor  triads.  Their  har- 
monic possibilities  (G-minor,  D-major,  A-minor,  E-major), 
but  also  dissonant  chordal  combinations  such  as : 


Example  179 

can  be  easily  extracted  from  (A)  (c£  Example  178).  The  tonics 
of  the  four  above-mentioned  root-chords  are  identical  with  the 

^He  used  them  occasionally  in  his  latest  works  (for  instance,  in  the  Ode  to  Napoleon 
Op.  41)  and  he  had  used  them  as  far  back  as  1912  in  his  pre-dodecaphonic  Op.  16, 
No.  I.  There  T.  W.  Adorno  discovered  the  six-note  row:  which,  if  transposed  to  'a', 
is  identical  with  (A)  (cf.  Example  178), 

207 


ALBAN  BERG 

notes  of  the  open  strings  of  the  viohn.  This  arrangement  of  the 
series  permits  the  free  use  of  the  open  strings  and  also  the  choice 
of  vioHnistic  'positions'  (serial  notes  2,  4,  6  are  in  the  'first 
position').  The  whole-tone  segment  \x'  appears  like  an  ahen 
body  in  its  diatonic  surroundings.  Its  structural  importance 
becomes  evident  when  its  relations  with  (C)  are  understood. 
Nos  2,  3  and  4  in  Example  178  add  to  the  Basic  Shape  (A)  the 
retrograde  form  K  (=  'Krebs'),  the  inversion  U  (=  'Umkeh- 
rung')  and  the  inversion  of  K.  It  transpires  that  notes  1-9  of  K 
and  the  same  notes  of  U  are  identical,  as  transposed  variants  of 
the  series.  I 

The  Carinthian  folk-tune  (B)  appears  for  the  first  time  in  G 
flat  major  (bar  213),  the  first  instance  of  the  use  of  a  key  sig- 
nature by  Berg  since  the  far-off  days  of  his  Op.  2.  When  trans- 
posed to  D  major  it  can  easily  be  understood  as  a  serial  offspring 
of  (A).  This  relationship  is  possibly  quite  fortuitous  and  prob- 
ably as  accidental  as  the  amazing  identity  of  the  appendix  'x' 
with  the  incipit  of  the  chorale  (C)^).  That  the  latter  connection 
was  in  fact  accidental  is  proved  by  Berg's  letter,  quoted  earlier, 
of  August  28,  1935.  There  he  expressly  called  Schoenberg's 
attention  to  the  'quite  accidental  character'  of  this  identity.  The 
identity  is  again,  as  in  the  previous  case  of  K  and  U,  an  identity 
of  variants,  brought  about  through  transposition.  Bach's  ver- 
sion of  Ahle's  melody  is  in  A  major,  while  Berg's  quotation  of 
it  is  a  semi-tone  above  (B  flat). 2  Quite  apart  from  the  melody's 
affinity  to  Berg's  series,  Bach's  harmonization  of  the  chorale 
contains  false  relations,  dissonances  caused  by  the  frequent  use 
of  the  tritone,  and  gliding  chromaticisms  which  are  quite  at 
home  when  transplanted  into  Berg's  own  musical  landscape 

^(A)  is  frequently  transposed  to  D,  C  sharp,  etc.,  in  the  course  of  the  work. 

^Cf.  part  II,  Adagio,  bar  136,  with  the  added  traditional  key-signatures,  inserted  in 
order  to  adjust  the  music  better  to  the  general  tonal  character,  v/hich  oscillates  chiefly 
between  G  minor  and  B  flat  major. 

208 


THE  VIOLIN   CONCERTO 

(C£  Example  178  C).  To  the  Chorale-incipit's  identity  with  *x* 
(A)  corresponds  the  identity  of  its  tail-end  'x  with  the  whole- 
tone  appendix  'x'  in  the  serial  variant  (U)  (cf.  Example  178, 
figure  3). 

The  introduction  of  a  chorale  in  Berg's  Concerto  was  not 
itself  surprising  since,  as  has  been  shown,  the  chorale  and 
chorale-variation  play  their  part  in  Acts  II  and  III  of  Lulu, 
Chorale-like  themes  were  frequently  used  by  Bruckner  and 
Mahler  at  cHmaxes  of  their  symphonies,  and  the  psychological 
function  of  the  chorale  in  Berg's  Concerto  seems  also  fore- 
shadowed by  the  role  allotted  to  Klopstock's  hymn  'Aufer- 
steh'n'  in  the  finale  of  Mahler's  second  symphony. 


Berg  described  the  structure  of  the  Violin  Concerto  in  the 
quoted  letter  of  August  28,  1935,  thus: 

It  is  in  two  parts :  each  part  containing  two  movements : 
I  [a)  Andante  (Preludium) 
[h)  Allegretto  (Scherzo) 
n  {a)  Allegro  (Cadenza) 

{h)  Adagio  (Chorale  variations). 

One  might  bracket  the  two  sub-divisions  of  I  together,  as  being 
in  the  nature  of  a  musical  portrait  of  Manon  Gropius.  If  that 
interpretation  is  accepted,  then  II  represents  the  catastrophe  of 
death  and  the  transfiguration  in  heaven.  As  in  Wozzeck  and 
Lulu,  a  dotted  Leitrhythmus  RH  symboUzes  the  catastrophic 
chmax  of  the  Concerto  (II,  cue  125): 


UUTJ" 


o  209 


ALBAN   BERG 


Part  I  consists  of  a  tripartite  Andante,  preceded  by  an  intro- 
duction and  followed  by  a  Scherzo  (Allegretto)  with  two  Trios 
and  a  reprise  of  Trio  I — a  scheme  reminiscent  of  certain  middle 
movements  by  Mahler.  The  tender  reverie  of  the  introduction 
shows  Berg's  skill  in  utilizing  the  characteristic  intervals  of  his 
series  for  specifically  violinistic  arpeggio-affects.  The  diatonic 
intervals  of  (A)  make  possible  a  dodecaphonic  exposition  in 
almost  orthodox  G-minor,  cunningly  based  on  a  chordal 
presentation  of  the  series: 


Example  i8o 

Its  melodic  form  follows  with  the  entry  of  the  solo  violin  at 
bar  15.  There  the  series  is  presented  in  the  guise  of  a  scale-like 
ascending  subject,  whose  curious  skips  over  more  than  two 
octaves  at  the  very  tail-end  ('x')  may  be  called  a  fingerprint  of 
the  'Second  Viennese  School'.  It  is  juxtaposed  to  its  ultimate 
transformation  at  the  end  of  the  Concerto  in  the  following 
example : 


a) 


^^It 


ft  R  'y  = 

rirl  I.J^J^-'n^  r^=¥ 

^ 

^ 

* 

m 

1 

>jji-  '^  - ' 

'^'w 

25           *j£*7            «9 

10 

n    12 

=Il  h*-f  L^Sr^^^- 

L- 

I?" 

""♦'^ 

""♦' 

JtiEJgly  i^^p^g^ 

«« 

42 

Ml 

(Series 

•     S34.5          478      9«0 
A    transposed) 

Example  181 

210 

THE  VIOLIN   CONCERTO 

The  Scherzo-Allegretto  (I  b)  consists  of  three  contrasting  the- 
matic Landler-motives,  labelled  by  the  composer  respectively 
'scherzando',  'wienerisch'  and  'rustico'.  Their  rhythms  and 
melodies  prepare  the  way  for  the  appearance  of  the  folk-tune, 
which  breaks  into  the  magic  circle  of  dodecaphonically  deter- 
mined theme-combinations  with  the  diatonic  bluntoess  of  its 
G  flat  major  tonahty  ('Come  una  pastorale',  bar  213  ff).  That 
all  three  Ldndler-motives  are  transposed  derivations  of  (A)  can 
be  easily  seen  from  the  following  quotation  and  its  serial 
associations : 


Senes 


1   «    3    4    5   «  7    «    9   10  M    I? 

Example  182 


The  'Viennese'  motive: 


(Mahler) 


Example  183 


may  derive  from  the  mournful  sigh  of  falling  thirds  in  the  first 
movement  of  Mahler's  ninth  symphony,  which  was  a  hfe-long 
favourite  of  Berg's. 


211 


ALBAN   BERG 

Trios  I  and  II  are  chiefly  concerned  with  the  same  thematic 
material  (acting  like  development  sections  in  a  sonata  move- 
ment), until,  during  the  recapitulation  of  Trio  I  (beginning  at 
'Quasi  Tempo  I',  bar  173)  the  Carinthian  folk-tune  (B)  (first 
noticeable  in  the  horn  at  bar  213)  joins  in,  restoring  the  original 
L(jnJ/er-character  of  the  movement  after  the  tempestuous 
aberrations  of  the  Trio-sections.  Part  I  ends  on  a  diminuendo 
chord  of  velvety  dissonance.  1 

Part  II  {a)  is  directed  to  be  played  'with  improvisatory  free- 
dom, Hke  a  cadenza'.  Its  explosive  opening  reminds  one  of  the 
beginning  of  the  'Rondo  ritmico'  of  the  Chamber  Concerto, 
but  also  of  the  stormy  Finale  of  Mahler's  first  symphony.  The 
Cadenza  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first  section  is  chiefly 
determined  by  RH  (cf.  page  209).  The  tripartite  Solo  Cadenza 
(section  2,  beginning  at  bar  43)  already  intones  in  passing  the 
Chorale-incipit  Es  ist  genug.  Sundry  reminiscences  from  part  I 
occur.  The  third  section  is  shaped  as  a  kind  of  recapitulation  of 
the  first  section  (Tempo  I,  bar  96),  which,  propelled  by  the 
inexorable  RH,  reaches  its  climax  at  bar  125.  The  catastrophic 
collapse  of  the  music  detaches  the  serial  notes  11,  12,  10  from 
the  rest,  crystalhzing  them  into  an  agonized  call  for  help  (*Zu 
Hilfe'),  reiterated  by  the  fuU  orchestra  with  rapidly  dwindling 
strength : 


Example  184 


^It  is  the  first  serial  chord  combination,  as  given  in  Example  179. 

212 


THE  VIOLIN   CONCERTO 

The  transition  from  the  Inferno  of  this  'Allegro'  to  the  vision- 
ary final  'Chorale  variations'  is  made  with  consummate  mastery 
by  a  gradual  increase  of  melody-notes  of  the  Chorale  tune  in 
the  solo  violin,  and  a  simultaneous  dropping  away  of  RH  and 
of  the  chordal  combinations  of  (A). 

The  second  section  of  II  (Adagio)  presents  the  unique  case  of 
a  set  of  Chorale  variations,  evidently  inspired  by  certain  organ 
preludes  by  J.  S.  Bach,  yet  strictly  subjected  to  dodecaphonic 
discipline.  The  section  can  be  divided  into  five  sub-sections : 

(i)  Chorale  (bar  134  ff.,  containing  Abie's  melody  with 
Bach's  harmonies,  given  out  by  the  woodwind  in 
magical  imitation  of  an  organ  stop) 

(2)  Variation  I   (bar  158  ff.) 

(3)  Variation  II  (bar  178  ff.) 

(4)  Reminiscences  from  Part  I  (Carinthian  folk-tune  at  bar 

198) 

(5)  Coda  (bar  214  ff.). 

The  numerous  felicities  of  Berg's  polyphony,  especially  dis- 
played in  canonic  imitations  in  Variations  I  and  II,  could  and 
should  be  made  the  subject  of  detailed  analysis,  which,  how- 
ever, is  outside  the  scope  of  this  chapter.  Mention  must  be  made 
of  the  dramatic  highhght  of  the  movement,  heralded  by  the 
return  of  the  folk-tune,  which  grows  out  of  the  incipit  of  the 
Chorale  melody.  The  symbiosis  of  these  apparently  incom- 
patible themes  is  the  composer's  final  achievement: 


ere. 


(Cdpinihian  Foiktune) 

Example  185 


The  Concerto  dissolves  in  an  aura  of  visionary  transfiguration. 
The  violin  gives  out  once  more  the  chief  serial  melody  (Cf. 


213 


ALBAN  BERG 

Example  i8i  b),  based  on  the  conciliatory  vagueness  of  the  f 
chord  in  B  flat  major,  which  has  here  an  effect  of  touching 
inconclusiveness  like  that  of  its  first  cousin  in  the  fmal  bars  of 
Mahler's  Lied  von  derErde.  An  atmosphere  of  unearthly  serenity 
is  created  by  the  accompanying  orchestra  of  this  extraordinary 
work,  which  in  its  truly  autumnal  beauty  rounds  off,  all  too 
soon.  Berg's  creative  career.  A  multitude  of  plans  for  the  future  1 
faded  into  limbo  with  his  death. 


^Mentioned  by  Willi  Reich  {op.  cit.,  p.  17  fF.)  to  whom  Berg  apparently  spoke  of 
these  plans. 

214 


PART  III:  BIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER  IX 
The  Life  of  Alban  Berg 

IT  would  be  unrealistic  to  attempt  an  exhaustive  biography 
of  Alban  Berg  today,  less  than  twenty  years  after  his  death. 
Before  that  can  be  done,  several  decades  must  pass.  The 
future  biographer  will  have  to  go  far  beyond  the  brief  sketch 
contained  in  the  following  pages.  He  will  have  to  trace  the 
enigmatic  undercurrents  of  Berg's  Hfe,  and  try  to  imravel  the 
fascinating  contradictions  of  the  composer's  personality,  on 
the  basis  of  the  documentary  evidence,  unrestricted  use  of 
which  will  be  open  to  him.  His  fmal  task  will  be  to  solve 
certain  psychological  problems,  the  posing  of  which  might  be 
considered  presumptuous  today.  Apparent  enigmas  will  find 
their  solution  in  Berg's  correspondence — in  his  letters  to 
Schoenberg  and  Webern,  in  those  addressed  to  his  fiance  and 
wife,  and  to  intimate  friends  such  as  Hermann  Watznauer, 
Joseph  Polnauer,  Erwin  Stein,  Alma  Mahler- Werfel  and 
others.  1  As  long  as  these  documents,  and  the  replies  they 
evoked,   cannot  be  placed   unreservedly  at   the   disposal  of 

^Berg's  letters  to  Schoenberg  are  today  in  the  possession  of  the  Music  Division  of 
the  Library  of  Congress,  WashLigton,  in  accordance  with  instructions  in  Schoenberg's 
will.  The  collection  comprises  145  letters,  40  postcards,  4  telegrams,  and  a  number  of 
other  autographed  documents,  covering  a  span  of  23  years,  1912-1935.  Some  extracts 
from  these  letters  are  pubhshed  in  this  book  for  the  first  time.  I  was  able  to  study 
this  correspondence  through  the  kind  assistance  of  Richard  S.  HiU,  of  the  Music 
Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress,  who  also  generously  placed  at  my  disposal  the 
results  of  his  own  Berg  research,  (cf.  Richard  S.  Hill's  article  on  Schoenberg,  in  the 

217 


ALBAN   BERG 

scholars,  any  biography  of  Berg  must  necessarily  be  fragment- 
ary and  provisional. 

With  Raphael,  Shelley,  Chopin,  and  Oscar  Wilde  (whom 
he  curiously  resembled  in  the  dionysiac  femininity  of  his 
features),  Alban  Berg  shares  the  secret  of  perpetual  youth.  A 
photograph  of  Berg  at  the  age  of  fifty  shows  a  face  lined  by 
physical  suffering  and  spiritual  upheavals,  but  revealing  still, 
fundamentally  unchanged,  the  features  of  the  platonic  ephebe 
of  early  portraits.  This  physical  beauty,  the  aristocratic  re- 
finement of  which  was  further  emphasised  by  his  tall,  gaunt 
figure,  was  inherited  from  his  father.  Comparison  of  photo- 
graphs of  Konrad  and  Alban  Berg  in  their  'teens  reveals  a 
degree  of  resemblance  rarely  found,  even  between  father  and 
son.  The  romantic  good  looks  of  Berg's  Franconian  father 
found  a  match  in  the  Viennese  charm  of  his  mother,  and  their 
union  resulted  in  Alban's  'late-coming'  type,  so  characteristic  of 
the. culturally  over-ripe,  autumnal  Austria  of  the  late  nineteenth 
century.  In  this  Austria  Alban  Berg's  whole  existence  was 
rooted.  The  hesitant  bloom  and  youthful  charm  of  this  patrician 
artist  suggest  the  silhouette  of  the  poet  Hofmannsthal,  who  to 
our  retrospective  glance  appears  as  the  quintessence  of  that 
entire  epoch  of  Austrian  culture.  It  was  Berg's  destiny,  as 
it  was  Hofmannsthal' s,  to  live  in  perpetual  danger.  The  facade 
of  his  good  looks  and  Austrian  charm  concealed  a  constitutional 
frailty  which  often  proved  unequal  to  the  demands  of  the 
hour  and  the  prevaiUng  tension  of  its  inhabiting  spirit.  Berg 

'Quarterly  Journal  of  Current  Acquisitions,  Library  of  Congress',  for  November  1952, 
p.  43  ff.).  Berg's  letters  to  Webern,  covering  the  years  1910-1935,  were  saved  from 
destruction  in  1945  by  Dr  Werner  Riemerschmid,  of  Modling,  near  Vienna,  one  of 
Webern's  personal  friends.  Dr  Riemerschmid' s  typescript  copy  of  these  letters  was 
discussed  and  quoted  in  extracts  by  Willi  Reich  in  1953,  in  the  'Schweizerische 
Musikzeitung'.  Numerous  additional  passages  from  these  letters  are  published  here 
for  the  first  time.  It  is  still  too  early  for  the  complete  pubHcation  of  Berg's  correspond- 
ence with  Schoenberg  and  Webern. 

218 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

was  a  life-long  invalid,  forcing  a  recalcitrant  body  to 
supply  him  with  enough  stamina  for  artistic  creation.  This  end- 
less struggle  with  physical  weakness  gives  the  measure  of  the 
composer's  achievement,  of  the  man's  fibre,  and  of  the 
indomitable  spirit's  victory  over  the  flesh. 

Berg's  precarious  health  partly  explains  the  peculiarities  of 
his  artistic  career ;  it  affected  his  relations  with  his  fellow  men, 
and  also  determined  the  limitations  of  his  creative  work. 
Physical  frailty  was  solely  responsible  for  the  restricted 
range  of  his  musical  activities.  Berg  never  conducted  an 
orchestra,  he  never  appeared — as  Schoenberg  and  Webern 
did — on  a  concert  platform  either  as  soloist  or  accompanist. 
Always  he  had  to  conserve  his  strength.  This  constant  disabiHty 
proved  too  much  for  him  in  the  critical  year  of  1903,  when 
he  attempted  to  commit  suicide  after  having  failed  his 
matriculation,  and  experienced  at  the  same  time  the  pangs  of 
first  love. 

His  debihty  became  manifest  in  two  forms;  a  tendency  to 
develop  abscesses,  and  an  inclination  to  tidal  waves  of  asthma. 
Both  are  described  with  uncanny  self-observation  in  two 
letters  to  Webern,  dating  from  the  years  1911-1912.  These 
letters  establish  a  clinical  picture  of  Berg,  which  reappears  at 
regular  intervals  right  up  to  the  fatal  autumn  of  1935 : 

'.  .  .  Apart  from  the  fact  that  I  am  quite  generally  a  bad  traveller, 
I  would  run  the  risk  of  ruining  the  whole  day  following  a  night 
in  which  I  had  slept  badly.  At  the  same  time,  if  I  tried  to  stimulate 
myself  artificially  (a  thing  I  could  do  very  well  with  tea),  I'd  risk 
completely  spoiling  the  next  few  days.  I  just  have  to  take  my 
rotten  health  always  into  account.  I  am,  too,  far  from  well  at 
present.  I  am  suffering  from  styes,  four  on  one  eyehd.  The  word 
"suffering"  is  no  exaggeration,  for  this  ridiculous  and  idiotic 
complaint  causes  a  very  painful  inflammation  of  the  eye  and  the 
whole  left  part  of  my  face.  .  .  .' 

219 


ALBAN   BERG 

*I  am  very  ill.  It's  not  only  the  asthma,  to  which  I  have  become 
almost  accustomed.  Now  I've  got  jaundice  again.  At  least  I  sup- 
pose so,  as  some  of  the  symptoms  fit  into  the  picture.  It  is  Hke  a 
poisoning  of  the  whole  system.  I  have  hardly  the  strength  to  lift 
my  arm.  I've  got  racking  pains  in  my  glands  and  muscles,  and — 
worst  of  all — a  constant  splitting  headache.  I  have  tried  to  over- 
come this  enigmatic  illness  by  staying  up,  but  liigh  temperature 
and  shivering  have  compelled  me  to  remain  in  bed,  whence  I  am 
writing  to  you  now.  .  .  .' 

In  the  second  quotation  the  sentence :  'It  is  like  a  poisoning 
of  the  whole  system  .  .  .'  has  an  ominous  ring.  It  sounds  as  if 
the  twenty-seven-year-old  Berg  had  a  premonition  of  his  end, 
which  was  to  come  about,  catastrophically,  through  blood- 
poisoning. 

MiUtary  service  in  the  years  191 5-1 8  proved  detrimental  to 
Berg's  health,  as  is  shown  by  letters  from  that  period.  His 
general  condition  deteriorated  markedly  in  the  oppressive 
atmosphere  of  the  Austrian  revolution  and  the  aftermath  of 
war.  On  June  19,  1919,  he  wrote  to  Webern: 

...  I'd  hke  to  get  well  again  to  the  extent  of  regaining  physical 
and  spiritual  efficiency.  I  have  ruined  my  health  so  much  since  my 
call-up  in  191 5;  that  makes  a  total  of  four  years,  and  demands  a 
few  months  of  recuperation.  .  .  . 

And  in  a  letter  to  Webern,  dated  August  7,  1921,  he  bursts  out 
with  the  desperate  complaint:  'This  never-to-be-quite-well- 
again  is  terribly  depressing.  .  .  .' 

On  the  other  hand.  Berg  tried  again  and  again  to  master  his 
illness  by  sheer  will-power,  especially  under  Schoenberg's  virile 
influence.  Characteristic  in  its  reahstic  fortitude  is  a  letter  to 
Webern,  dated  August  9,  191 3,  re-echoing  talks  in  whiich 
Schoenberg  seems  to  have  criticised  Berg's  attitude  to  liis 
health: 

220 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

...  I  am  most  curious  to  know  what  Schoenberg  has  written.  I 
beheve  he  thinks  it  not  unlikely  that  in  such  illnesses  the  imagina- 
tion, or,  to  put  it  better,  auto-suggestion  plays  a  large  part.  At 
least,  he  has  always  voiced  that  opinion  when  I  have  spoken  of  my 
asthma,  which  is  certainly  of  a  basically  nervous  nature.  I  would 
not,  and  could  not,  admit  that,  as  this  asthma  has  also  appeared  on 
occasions  when  I  had  no  premonition,  no  reason  to  desire  to  be  ill, 
at  moments  when  I  longed  for  nothing  so  much  as  to  be  well. .  . . 

At  the  time  of  the  completion  of  Wozzeck  Berg's  asthma 
was  made  much  worse  by  hay-fever  and  he  was  often  com- 
pelled 'to  sit  the  whole  night  on  the  edge  of  the  bed,  struggling 
for  breath.  .  .  .'  In  the  middle  1920's  a  certain  improvement 
took  place;  however  in  1927,  after  the  completion  of  the  Lyric 
Suite,  he  was  Very  ill,  unable  to  work. . .'.  The  instability  of  his 
physical  condition  in  the  last  years  of  his  life  is  reflected  in  a 
passage  from  a  letter  written  while  he  was  working  on  the 
Violin  Concerto,  in  which  he  says  that  he  is '. .  .  feeling  unwell 
all  the  time.  .  .  .  Asthmatic,  with  nervous  heart  trouble,  and 
tired  to  death.  .  .  .' 

Very  soon  after  occurred  the  fatal  sting,  which  brought  on 
the  carbuncle  which  in  turn  precipitated  the  fmal  blood- 
poisoning.  This  insect  bite,  reported  in  a  letter  dated  August 
27,  1935,  had  had  sinister  precursors  in  twenty  or  thirty  stings, 
the  result  of  an  attack  of  a  swarm  of  wasps,  shortly  before 
August  9,  1932.  Who  can  say  whether  or  not  the  condition  of 
his  blood  attracted  such  a  furious  attack  by  these  insects? 

Berg's  chnical  history  over  twenty-five  years  of  adult  life 
reveals  the  silent  heroism  of  his  character.  His  fortitude  in  his 
perpetual  struggle  with  ill-health  shows  one  aspect  of  his 
nature,  of  which  the  other  main  attributes  were  enthusiasm, 
fanatical  loyalty,  fervent  attachment  to  the  chosen  ideal  and  a 
child-like  creative  optimism.  These  found  their  fullest  ex- 
pression in  his  relationships  to  his  teacher,  Schoenberg,  to  his 

221 


ALBAN  BERG 

friend  Webern,  and  to  his  wife.  Berg's  loving  attachment  to 
these  three  human  beings  determined  his  Hfe  and  its  simple 
contours.  This  trinity  of  creative  love  formed  the  main  centre 
of  gravity  of  his  earthly  curriculum  vitae,  to  which  the  following 
pages  are  chiefly  dedicated. 

Berg's  Hfe  may  be  divided  into  four  sections  of  unequal 
length: 

1.  Childhood  and  adolescence  in  his  parental  home,  1885- 
1904. 

2.  Studies  with  Schoenberg,  1904-1910. 

3.  First  independent  compositions;  marriage,  mihtary  ser- 
vice; planning  Wozzeck,  1911-1919. 

4.  EstabHshment  in  Vienna  as  a  teacher  of  composition  and 
Schoenberg's  principal  lieutenant;  creative  maturity, 
1919-1935. 

The  first  world  war  was  a  critical  turning  point  for  Berg,  as 
it  was  for  most  of  his  generation.  The  grave  political  and 
social  changes  to  which  his  native  country  was  subjected  from 
November  191 8  onwards  deeply  affected  his  mode  of  Hfe.  They 
caused  a  short  period  of  hectic  re-adjustment,  191 8-1920,  but 
fmally  led  to  his  estabHshing  himself  in  Vienna  as  a  composer, 
free  and  independent.  The  underlying  rhythm  of  Berg's  life 
seems  to  have  been  determined  by  the  alternating  attractions  of 
town  and  country.  He  developed  the  typical  city-dweller's 
longing  for  the  cool  purity  of  alpine  heights,  despite  the  fact 
that  these  heights  were  sometimes  more  harmful  in  their  effect 
on  his  strained  nerves  and  asthmatic  condition  than  the  much- 
maligned  metropolis. 

An  undated  letter  to  Webern,  presumably  written  after  1920, 
indicates  Berg's  ideological  antagonism  to  the  idea  of  the 
modern  state,  and  proves  that  he  was  at  heart  a  political  rebels 

222 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

despite  his  bourgeois  upbringing.  The  letter  sets  out  a  charac- 
teristic formula  for  the  typical  Viennese  malaise  of  his  genera- 
tion. 

...  I  therefore  repeat :  I  am  far  from  asserting  that  the  institution 
of  the  State  appears  to  me  as  something  'obsolete,  traditional  and 
absurd',  and  that  I  therefore  have  to  reject  it  a  priori  as  being 
'unmodern'.  My  whole  grudge  is  aimed  at  the  manner  in  which 
the  State  (or  whatever  assumes  that  name)  asserts  itself  ^o^^zy.  Like- 
wise you  should  not  imagine  that  when  I  complain  about  Vienna 
it  is  because  it's  the  fashion  today  to  grouse  about  Vienna.  When 

I  thus  complain I  am  always  aware  of  the  fact  that  I'd  be  much 

unhappier  in  any  other  city  and  that  I'd  long  for  Vienna.  Only  at 
present  the  idea  of  the  modem  city  is  so  repugnant  to  me  that  I'd 
rail  at  any  metropolis,  wherever  I  might  happen  to  be.  On  the 
other  hand,  I'd  expect  of  it  the  very  last  perfection!  If  a  metro- 
polis, then  a  real  metropohs !  If  it  is  to  be  my  bad  luck  to  rely  on 
other  means  of  transport  than  my  own  legs  (which  I  much  prefer 
and  with  which  I'd  live  quite  contentedly  if  I  could  live  in  the 
country  instead  of  the  city)  then  these  means  of  transport  should 
be  the  best  imaginable.  If  I  am  denied  the  good  fortune  of  living 
in  a  little  house  built  by  myself  and  enjoying  my  own  fireside, 
and  if  I  am  condemned  to  live  in  a  flat,  then  this  should  be  easily 
heated,  whereas  with  the  stove  I  have  now  I  am  unable  to  get  my 
study  warm.  If  there  is  to  be  comfort,  then  I  should  not  have  to 
feel  it  to  be  an  inconvenience.  After  all,  comfort  has  been  achieved 
by  the  sweat  of  humanity's  brow.  The  trouble  is,  however,  that 
in  Vienna  only  the  upper  classes  enjoy  the  fruits  of  comfort.  .  .  . 
I  am  nowhere  happier  than  where  comfort  does  not  exist — in  the 
country;  but  to  live  as  a  country-dweller  in  the  city  I  fmd  very 
difficult.  .  . . 

Whenever  Berg  was  in  the  country  and  was  called  away  again 
for  business  reasons  he  became  depressed.  This  tug-of-war 
between  city  and  country  caused  the  rhythmic  oscillation  of  his 
hfe,  between  his  flat  in  the  Trauttmannsdorfgasse,  Vienna, 
the  family  estate,  'Berghof ',  on  the  Ossiachersee  in  Carinthia 

223 


ALBAN   BERG 


(later  replaced  by  'Waldhaus',  at  Aueii  near  Velden  on  the 
Worthersee)  and  the  estate  of  the  Nahowski  family,  his  wife's 
parents,  at  Trahiitten,  near  Deutsch-Landsberg,  in  south- 
western Styria.  This  regular  exchange  of  famihar  scenery  was 
increasingly  interrupted  in  later  years  by  professional  journeys, 
in  connection  with  performances  of  Wozzeck,  or  the  attendance 
of  music  festivals.  These  journeys  led  him  as  far  south  as  Venice, 
as  far  west  as  Cambridge,  and  even  as  far  east  as  Leningrad.  The 
more  conventional  tourist  centres  in  Italy,  Switzerland,  the 
French  Riviera,  and  Tyrol  had  no  attractions  for  Berg.  His 
predilection,  all  his  hfe,  was  for  the  south-eastern  fringe  of  the 
Alps,  whose  famous  peak,  the  Koralpe,  he  chmbed  despite  his 
asthmatic  condition  in  the  early  193  o's.  Even  his  beloved  motor- 
car, acquired  in  August,  1930,  was  used  first  and  foremost  as  a 
means  to  connect  him  with  the  districts  of  the  Semmering,  the 
Carinthian  lakes,  and  the  south-eastern  corner  of  Styria.  Berg's 
attachment  to  the  Eastern  Alps  of  his  homeland,  expressed  re- 
peatedly in  his  letters  to  Webern,  who  was  his  companion  and 
guide  on  many  mountaineering  trips  before  1914,  is  deeply 
characteristic;  he  was  firmly  rooted  in  Austrian  soil.  This 
attachment  hnks  Berg  with  Schubert,  Brahms  and  Mahler,  all 
of  whom  drew  inspiration  from  the  lakes  and  mountains 
of  Styria  and  Carinthia. 

Alban  Berg  was  the  offspring  of  a  union  in  which  Bavarian- 
Franconian  and  Austrian  racial  pecuHarities  combined  in  an 
attractive  new  blend.  Konrad,  his  father,  descendant  of  a  family 
of  Bavarian  civil  servants  and  soldiers  of  high  rank,  was  born 
at  Nuremberg  on  August  31,  1846.  He  emigrated  to  Austria  as 
early  as  1867,  estabhshed  himself  in  Vienna  as  an  export 
merchant  and  bookseller,  and  married  into  the  Viennese  haute 
bourgeoisie.  His  wife  Johanna,  daughter  of  the  Court  jeweller 
Franz  Xaver  Melchior  Braun,  was  born  in  Vienna  on  February 

224 


i*--^  -i^*trT 


Villa  Nahowski,  Trahiitten 


Alban  Berg  and  Helene  Berg 


Alban  Berg's  Father 


Alban  Berg's  Mother 


Alban  Berg's  Paternal  Grandfather 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

28,  1 85 1.  Johanna  shared,  her  husband's  artistic  leanings,  and 
was,  in  fact,  a  talented  painter  and  musician.  There  were  four 
children  of  this  marriage:  Charley,  b.  1881,  d.  1952,  Hermann, 
b.  1882,  d.  1 92 1,  Alban,  born  in  Vienna  on  February  9,  1885, 
and  Smaragda,  b.  i886/d.  1954.  The  fact  that  Smaragda 
played  the  piano,  and  Charley  sang  well,  probably  explains 
the  existence  of  numerous  songs  dating  from  the  year  1900  or 
thereabouts.  Memories  of  that  chaotic  gestation  period,  in 
which  these  earhest  compositions  were  produced,  long  before 
Berg  had  decided  to  become  a  professional  musician,  are  to  be 
found  in  a  letter  to  Webern  dated  July  18,  19 14: 

.  .  .  What  you  say  about  the  mine  interests  me  enormously.  Tell 
me  more  about  it.  Is  it  something  big,  where  one  can  walk  about 
in  intertwining  galleries  under  the  earth  for  hours  on  end?  I  was 
once  in  the  mine  at  Bleiburg;  that  impressed  me  so  much  that  I 
wrote  a  whole  play  about  it.  As  a  youngster,  of  course,  under  the 
influence  of  Ibsen's  plays !  Nice,  don't  you  think?  Before  I  started 
to  compose  I  wanted  to  become  a  poet.  And  I  remember  whole 
epics,  inspired  by  the  literature  we  studied  at  school.  And,  further 
back  still,  as  a  child  I  used  to  paint  and  draw,  prompted  by  a  cer- 
tain manual  skill  which  I  mistook  for  talent.  .  .  . 

'Before  I  started  to  compose  I  wanted  to  become  a  poet.'  The 
faculty  of  poetic  vision  did  not  desert  the  maturing  artist,  as  a 
passage  such  as  this,  in  a  letter  to  Webern,  about  the  year  191 1, 
clearly  shows : 

. . .  my  longing  for  an  ideal  aeroplane  (the  aeroplanes  of  today  are 
mere  toys  and  certainly  far  from  a  solution  of  the  problem)  so  as 
to  be  able  to  fly,  is,  although  surprising  successes  have  been 
attained  already,  not  a  desire  for  mere  technical  achievement  .  .  . 
but  a  longing  for  the  'Above*.  Only  imagine:  to  be  able  to  float 
above  the  highest  mountain  peak !  Where  no  terrestrial  sounds  can 
reach  one — not  even  cowbells — ^wonderful — wonderful ! 

P  225 


ALBAN  BERG 

From  that  early  period  of  poetic  aspirations  Berg  derived  a 
sensitive  feeling  for  literary  values;  in  later  life  his  favourite 
authors  included  Balzac,  Strindberg,  Dostoievsky,  Karl  Kraus 
and  Peter  Altenberg.  His  re-discovery  of  Georg  Biichner's 
Wozzeck,  and  his  creation  of  the  Lulu  hbretto  by  conflation  of 
two  plays  by  Frank  Wedekind,  are  hterary  achievements  of  a 
high  order.  His  own  original  writings  on  music  reveal  a  real 
mastery  of  German  prose. 

Berg  grew  up  in  a  Roman  CathoHc  household.  His  father,  in 
his  later  years,  owned  a  shop  near  St  Stephen's  Cathedral  for  the 
sale  of  saints'  pictures  and  Catholic  church  furnishings.  This 
business  was  carried  on  by  his  widow  after  Konrad's  early 
death  on  March  20,  1900.  It  seems  necessary  to  point  out  this 
Cathohc  component  in  Berg's  spiritual  heritage,  especially  in 
view  of  the  fact  that  he  has  repeatedly  been  claimed  for  Pro- 
testantism by  certain  writers.  1 

His  inclination  to  mysticism,  which  increased  with  advancing 
years,  his  predilection  for  Balzac's  mystic  novel  Seraphita,  for 
the  works  of  Swedenborg,  and  the  ceremonial  of  the  Roman 
ritual,  are  explained  by  it,  and  the  incorporation  of  a  Lutheran 
chorale  into  the  texture  of  his  last  composition  is  certainly  no 
proof  to  the  contrary.  2 

Berg's  rehgious  faith  fmds  expression  in  a  card  to  \m  fiancee, 
Helene  Nahowski: 

'Adieu,  A  Dieu,  dear  Helene.  He  will  not  abandon  us,  even  if  the 
"all  too  human"  beings,  the  too  little  godlike-ones,  may  have 
done  so.' 

In  his  ability  to  make  friends  for  hfe  Berg  resembled  Schubert 
and  Hugo  Wolf.  In  early  years  his  elder  brother  Charley  and 

^By  Mosco  Carner  among  others. 

^It  is  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection  that  Max  Reger,  a  Roman  Catholic,  was 
the  most  famous  composer  of  Lutheran  church  music  of  his  day. 

226 


THE  LIFE   OP  ALBAN  BERG 

his  sister  Smaragda  were  nearest  to  him.  It  was  Charley  who 
drew  Alban's  attention  to  a  newspaper  advertisement  of 
Schoenberg  as  a  teacher  of  composition.  It  was  he  who  aroused 
Schoenberg's  interest  by  secretly  showing  him  some  of  Alban's 
early  manuscripts.  These  so  attracted  Schoenberg  that  he  in- 
vited Berg  in  the  autumn  of  1904  to  become  his  private  pupil 
(without  payment  until  1906)  and  attend  his  courses  of  com- 
position. Other  friends  of  Berg's  early  years  were  Hermann 
Watznauer  (ten  years  older  than  Alban),  and  Paul  Hohenberg, 
many  of  whose  poems  he  set  to  music.  Through  Schoenberg 
he  met  Anton  Webern,  a  fellow-pupil,  only  a  little  older  than 
Berg  himself,  who  soon  became  his  most  intimate  and  cherished 
friend.  Throughout  his  life,  Berg  never  felt  a  deeper  regard  for 
anybody.  No  other  friend  ever  meant  as  much  to  him  as  the 
precociously  mature,  singularly  reserved  and  severe  Webern; 
he  became  Alban's  model  of  a  fanatical  and  uncompromising 
artist  devoted  to  his  exalted  ideals.  The  influence  of  Webern  on 
Berg,  especially  in  the  formative  decade  of  1910-1920,  is  of 
incalculable  importance.  Other  events  of  these  early  years 
remain  to  be  told.  Berg's  musical  inclinations  had  first  become 
noticeable  about  1899,  but  the  death  of  his  father,  in  the 
folio v/ing  year,  destroyed  his  hopes  of  successfully  developing 
his  talents  in  fmancial  security.  In  the  year  of  his  father's  death, 
1900,  the  fifteen  year  old  boy  had  his  first  attack  of  asthma.  In 
the  years  1901-1903,  Berg's  friendship  with  Watznauer  deep- 
ened, and  he  wrote  about  seventy  songs  and  duets.  Ibsen  was 
studied,  and  school  work  neglected,  so  it  is  not  surprising 
that  in  the  summer  of  1903,  Berg  failed  his  matriculation 
examination. 

As  already  mentioned,  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  he 
attempted  to  commit  suicide,  having  been  frustrated  in  some 
youthful  passion.  However,  in  the  summer  of  1904,  he  passed 

227 


ALBAN   BERG 

his  examination,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  was  still  com- 
posing songs,  and  enthusing  over  Ibsen's  plays  and  Mahler's 
symphonies.  In  the  following  October,  he  took  an  unpaid  post 
as  a  probationer-accountant  at  the  Lower  Austrian  Statthalterei, 
thereby  shouldering  a  burden  that  many  other  poets  and 
composers  of  the  past  have  had  to  carry — the  yoke  of 
Civil  Service  in  Imperial  Austria.  At  the  same  time,  he 
somehow  managed  to  surmount  this  handicap,  for  a  most 
important  event  took  place ;  he  began  his  studies  in  composition 
with  Arnold  Schoenberg  in  October,  1904.  i 

The  years  of  study  with  Schoenberg  laid  the  foundations  for 
Berg's  own  creative  activities.  His  compositions,  at  first 
largely  determined  in  character  and  scope  by  his  teacher's 
friendly  advice,  gradually  became  more  ambitious  and 
individual.  New  music  which,  during  this  period,  made  a 
deep  impression  on  him,  included  Strauss's  Salome,  Mahler's 
second  and  sixth  symphonies,  and  the  cross-section  of  Schoen- 
berg's  work  up  to  the  Kammersymphonie,  Op.  9,  presented  at 
the  three  famous  Schoenberg  concerts  in  1907.  Berg  also 
attended  the  first  performance  of  Wedekind's  play.  Die 
Buck  der  Pandora  in  1905,  and  Mahler's  farewell  performance 
oiFidelio  at  the  Vienna  Opera  House  in  October,  1907.  He  also 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Oscar  Kokoschka  and  Peter  Alten- 
berg. 

In  1906,  Berg  inherited  enough  money  to  enable  him  to  leave 
the  Civil  Service  and  devote  himself  exclusively  to  music. 

Berg's  musical  activities  during  these  years  of  development 
were  surprisingly  varied;  once  at  a  private  concert  he  appeared 
as  his  sister's  accompanist,  and  he  even  joined  Schoenberg's 
choral  society.  Besides  'school  work',  such  as  the  double  fugue 

^Cf.  Schoenberg's  Commemorative  article  on  Berg,  first  published  in  this  book 
(Cf.  page  280). 

228 


THE   LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

for  String  quartet  and  piano,  six-  and  eight-part  choruses  and  the 
variations  for  piano  (pubHshed  in  the  appendix  to  this  volume), 
his  first  really  original  compositions,  the  Seven  Early  Songs, 
and  the  Piano  Sonata,  Op.  i,  were  written. 

The  first  public  performance  of  Berg's  compositions  took 
place  at  two  pupils'  concerts  organized  by  Schoenberg,  on 
November  7,  1907,  and  November  4,  1908.  Works  heard  at 
these  concerts  included  three  of  the  Seven  Early  Songs,  the 
double  fugue,  and  the  variations. 

About  this  time,  Berg  met  Helene  Nahowski  and  fell  in  love 
with  her  immediately.  During  the  years  1908-1910,  his 
friendship  with  Webern  developed  and  became  very  close. 
Webem's  PassacagHa  for  orchestra,  Op.  i,  was  first  per- 
formed together  with  Berg's  variations  for  piano  at  the 
concert  of  November  4,  1908.  During  Berg's  final  years 
of  study,  years  that  were  transfigured  and  enhanced  by  his 
deepening  love  for  Helene  Nahowski,  enduring  impressions 
were  made  on  him  by  the  music  of  Paul  Dukas,  Alexander  von 
ZemHnsky's  comic  opera,  Kleider  machen  Leute,  the  early  plays 
of  Wedekind,  the  paintings  of  Kokoschka,  and  Schoenberg's 
String  Quartet  Op.  10  (which  was  received  with  'cat-calls'  at 
its  first  performance). 

The  songs  on  poems  by  Hebbel  and  Mombert,  Op.  2,  were 
composed  in  1909,  and  it  is  significant  that  the  last  song  of  this 
group  anticipates  the  mature  style  of  Berg's  String  Quartet, 
Op.  3,  written  in  1910,  when  his  studies  with  Schoenberg  came 
to  an  end.  About  this  time,  he  became  formally  engaged  to 
Helene  Nahowski. 

On  April  24,  191 1,  Berg's  Piano  Sonata,  Op.  i,  and  String 
Quartet,  Op.  3,  were  performed  in  public  for  the  first  time  in 
Vienna.  On  May  3,  191 1,  Berg  and  Helene  Nahowski  were 
married.  Two  weeks  later,  on  May  18,  Mahler  died  in  Vienna. 

px  229 


ALBAN   BERG 

Although  circumstances  had  not  permitted  any  very  close  per- 
sonal friendship  with  Mahler,  and  although  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  older  composer  ever  heard  any  of  Berg's  music,  at 
the  same  time  Mahler  remained  an  enduring  influence  and 
inspiration,  and  in  1910,  Berg  was  able  to  study  the  full  score 
of  Mahler's  stiU  unpubHshed  ninth  symphony;  in  a  letter  Berg 
wrote  to  Helene,  he  gives  a  precise  account  of  its  style  and 
psychological  premises.  1 

Later  on,  Mahler's  widow  became  a  faithful  and  ever  helpful 
friend  of  both  Berg  and  his  wife. 

Earher  in  this  book,  mention  has  been  made  of  a  certain 
degree  of  influence  exercised  by  Schreker's  interesting  but 
artistically  unequal  first  opera,  Derferne  Klang,  for  which  Berg 
prepared  the  vocal  score  for  Universal  Edition  in  191 1.  Sub- 
sequent letters  show  that  he  did  not  always  approve  of 
Schreker's  later  development,  though  he  retained  sympathy 
for  the  man  right  up  to  his  tragic  end.  Schoenberg  himself 
admired  Derferne  Klang,  and  it  is  not  without  significance  that 
Schreker  had  employed  a  chamber  orchestra  in  his  ballet,  *The 
Birthday  of  the  Infanta',  at  approximately  the  same  time  that 
Schoenberg  composed  his  first  Kammersymphonie,  Op.  9.  The 
reahstic  modern  'miUeu'  of  Schreker's  first  opera,  and  its 
treatment  in  musical  terms,  make  him  a  precursor  of  Berg  in 
the  history  of  the  opera  of  social  consciousness. 

This  is  perhaps  the  most  fitting  place  to  discuss  Berg's  Hfelong 
enthusiasm  for  Schoenberg  and  his  music.  This  enthusiasm 
found  practical  expression  in  arrangements,  analyses  and  critical 
essays,  and  was  never  more  intense  than  in  the  years  shortly 
before  and  after  the  first  world  war.  Berg's  association  with 
Schoenberg  as  disciple  and  amanuensis  found  a  kind  of  official 

^Quoced  extensively  in  the  German  edition  of  this  book.  Parts  of  this  letter  are 
pubhshed  in  my  book,  Bruckner  and  Mahler,  London,  1955,  on  pp.  220/21. 

230 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

recognition  in  his  appointment  as  'Vortragsmeister'  of  the 
Society  for  Private  Performances,  founded  in  Vienna  by  the 
older  composer  in  November,  191 8.  This  connection  lasted  for 
several  years,  on  a  salaried  basis,  and  for  Berg,  as  composer,  this 
occupation  with  Schoenberg's  orchestral  scores  developed  into 
a  ^master  course'  post  festum.  It  gave  him  technical  assur- 
ance and  unrivalled  insight  into  his  master's  ideas  and  the  prob- 
lems of  their  realization  in  performance. 

During  those  years  of  loyal  enthusiasm,  when  partisanship 
for  Schoenberg  was  often  rewarded  by  pubhc  ostracism.  Berg 
fought  tirelessly  for  his  recognition  and  understanding.  He  was 
responsible  for  the  vocal  score  of  the  Gurrelieder,  and  for  an 
arrangement  for  voice  and  piano  of  the  two  vocal  movements 
— 'Litanei'  and  'Entriickung' — of  Schoenberg's  second  String 
Quartet,  Op.  10;  he  wrote  thematic  analyses  and  guides  to  the 
Gurrelieder,  Pelleasund  Melisande,  and  the  Kammersymphonie,  Op. 
9.  He  also  contributed  to  the  collective  volume  Arnold  Schoen- 
berg, pubHshed  at  Munich  in  19 12,  and,  as  his  correspondence 
with  Webem  proves,  gave  the  initial  impetus  to  the  compila- 
tion of  the  special  number  o£Anhruch  for  Schoenberg's  fiftieth 
birthday  and  the  Festschrift  for  his  sixtieth  birthday.  In  addition, 
he  pubhshed  numerous  articles,  polemical,  enthusiastic  and 
analytical  by  turns,  and  he  delivered  a  cycle  of  lectures  in 
Vienna  in  the  winter  of  1932-3  3  which  were  entirely  devoted  to 
Schoenberg's  music. 

Berg's  letters  reveal  a  worshipping  adept's  joy,  uncertainty, 
despair  and  enthusiasm,  but  bear  witness  to  his  self-denying 
modesty,  his  self-effacing  love  for  Schoenberg.  As  early  as 
1 910,  Berg  had  expressed  his  feelings  for  his  master  in  a  letter 
written  to  Webern: 

.  .  .  How  despondent  you  must  be  again,  far  away  from  all  those 
divine  experiences,  having  to  forgo  the  walks  with  Schoenberg 

231 


ALBAN   BERG 

and  miss  the  purport,  gestures  and  cadences  of  his  talk.  .  .  .  Twice 
a  week  I  wait  for  him  at  the  Karlsplatz,  before  teaching  at  the 
Conservatoire  begins,  and  for  the  fifteen  to  thirty  minutes  walk  in 
the  midst  of  the  noise  of  the  city,  which  is  made  inaudible  by  the 
'roar'  of  his  words. . . .  Then  twice  a  week  outside  the  city  in  Ober 
St  Veit  at  his  house,  when  to  each  lesson  I  bring  the  continuation 
of  the  Gurrelieder,  see  his  new  paintings  and  look  at  songs  by 
Mahler.  .  .  .  But  to  tell  you  about  all  this  is  only  to  increase  your 
suffering  and  sense  of  privation.  .  .  . 

This  letter  refers  to  the  preparation  of  the  vocal  score  of  the 
Gurrelieder.  A  letter  written  to  Schoenberg,  dated  July  5, 1912,1 
shows  Berg  wrestling  fiercely  with  the  problems  posed  by  the 
transcription  of  the  vocal  movement  of  the  String  Quartet. 
These  problems  were  successfully  overcome.  But  when  he  was 
confronted  with  the  necessity  of  inventing  new  closing-sections 
and  fmal  clausulae  for  the  separate  pubHcation  of  certain  lyrical 
'purple  patches'  of  the  Gurrelieder,  Berg  felt  such  a  task  to  be 
psychologically  and  technically  impossible,  at  any  rate  for  him. 
A  letter  to  Schoenberg  dated  December  3,  191 3,  reveals  his 
fundamental  sincerity  and  courageous  self-criticism,  his  inordin- 
ate modesty  and  unbounded  enthusiasm.  Although  the  vocal 
score  as  well  as  the  thematic  guide  to  the  Gurrelieder  had  already 
been  published,  he  declared  himself  incapable  of  committing 
the  'surgical'  atrocities  necessary  to  round  off  satisfactorily  the 
various  'song'-extracts  considered  suitable  for  separate  pubHca- 
tion. 

The  same  letter  refers  to  an  arrangement  of  the  Kammersym- 
phonie  Op.  9  for  piano  duet;  this  was  not  published,  in  fact  it 
was  probably  never  completed. 

How  soul-stirring  the  first  impact  of  Schoenberg's  Pierrot 
Lunaire  and  George-Lieder,  Op.  15,  was  on  Berg's  impression- 

^These  letters  to  Schoenberg  are  quoted  in  extenso  in  the  German  edition  of  this 
book. 

232 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

able  mind  can  be  judged  by  the  following  letter,  written  on 
July  20,  1914: 

...  at  long  last  a  great  joy  has  been  allotted  me;  the  George  songs. 
It  was — for  me  at  least — high  time  they  were  published,  for  I  have 
been  longing  for  them  for  years,  more  than  for  anything.  Now 
at  last  I  can  steep  myself  in  their  immeasurable  splendour  and  the 
prospect  of  doing  so  beautifies  my  hohdays.  Perhaps  in  time  I 
shall  become  riper  for  Pierrot.  By  'riper'  I  mean  that  I  feel  now 
that  I  am  very  far  from  understanding  the  work  as  I'd  like  to,  well 
knowing  that  when  the  moment  comes  for  me  to  say:  'Now  at 
last  I  fully  understand  it',  I  shall  be  utterly  mistaken,  for  I  shall 
reahze  a  year  later,  when  I  again  closely  study  the  work  (since 
the  'Fiihrer'i  I  cannot  abstain  from  analysis),  that  I  hadn't  under- 
stood it  before  at  all.  However,  at  present  I  haven't  got  that  far: 
I  only  know  that  on  the  two  occasions  when  I  heard  Pierrot  I  was 
conscious  of  the  deepest  impression  ever  made  on  me  by  a  work 
of  art,  and  that  the  enigmatic  power  of  these  pieces  has  left 
indelible  traces  on  my  mind.  But  when  I  look  into  the  score  the 
music  still  appears  to  me  quite  enigmatic  and  mysterious,  and  I 
cannot  imagine  that  with  my  small  technical  ability  (and  my  great 
shortcomings)  I  shall  ever  be  able  to  approach  this  work  of  art, 
which  seems  to  me  like  a  miracle  of  nature.  .  .  .  Here  I  miss,  too, 
the  help  of  a  piano  arrangement,  which  would  enable  me  to 
present  the  music  to  myself  connectedly.  Such  help  has  enabled 
me  to  become  comparatively  familiar  with  the  'Monodrama'.2 
That  latter  experience  is  among  my  most  treasured  memories: 
when  I  studied  the  piano  arrangement  slowly  at  home  and  then 
was  permitted  to  play  from  it  at  each  'lesson',  and  you  explained 
so  much  of  it  to  me  that  in  the  end  the  thing  came  half  to  life  at 
the  piano.  And  so  I  live  more  in  memories  of  the  past  than  in  the 
present,  .  .  .  and  more  with  you  than  with  myself,  and  that  helps 
me,  perhaps,  to  endure  in  this  horrible  age.  ... 

This  letter  was  written  on  the  very  eve  of  the  first  world  war, 
which  was  to  bring  a  long  and  painful  interruption  of  Berg's 

^Berg's  guide  to  the  Gurrelieder. 
^Erwartung. 

233 


ALBAN  BERG 

fervent  propaganda  on  behalf  of  Schoenberg  and  his  music. 
Meanwhile  he  had  completed  the  Altenberg  songs,  Op.  4,  the 
Clarinet  pieces  Op.  5,  and  the  three  Orchestral  pieces,  Op.  6. 
The  first  performance  of  some  of  the  Altenberg  songs  in  191 3 
had  led  to  scandalous  scenes  in  the  concert  hall.  In  June  of  the 
same  year  Berg  had  gone  to  Berlin  to  see  Schoenberg,  and 
during  this  visit  there  had  ensued  a  grave  exchange  of  opinions 
between  master  and  pupil,  which  led  to  a  temporary  spiritual 
crisis.  This  is  echoed  in  a  moving  letter,  dated  June  14,  191 3, 
written  directly  after  his  return  from  Berlin.  The  resulting 
tension  overshadowed  the  first  half  of  1914,  when  Berg  was 
working  on  the  three  orchestral  pieces,  which  had  pushed  into 
the  background  earher  plans  for  a  'Seraphita'  symphony  (see 
p.  65).  He  intended  to  dedicate  the  orchestral  pieces  to  his 
beloved  teacher  on  the  fortieth  anniversary  of  his  birthday 
(September  13, 1914),  but  was  unable  to  complete  them  in  time 
and  work  dragged  on  until  the  end  of  the  year.  A  little  earher, 
after  seeing  several  performances  of  Biichner's  Wozzeck  at  the 
Wiener  Kammerspiele,  he  had  resolved  to  make  it  the  subject 
of  an  opera. 

Berg's  war-fever  flaring-up  in  a  letter  to  Schoenberg,  dated 
November  16, 19 14,  did  not  last  very  long :  the  same  letter  1  also 
describes  his  work  on  the  piano  arrangement  of  the  Kammer- 
symphonie : 

...  I  know  only  too  well  that  today  the  study  of  maps  is  preferred 
to  the  study  of  musical  scores,  and  that  it  costs  enormous  effort  to 
occupy  oneself  with  music  (or  with  something  at  all  unrelated  to 
the  war).  .  .  .  Sometimes  I  find  it  downright  wicked  to  think  of 
anything  else  but  war.  If  despite  all  this  I  was  able  to  persuade 
myself  first  to  complete  my  own  score,  which  I  sent  you,  and 
then  to  continue  work  on  the  Kammersymphonie-SLrrangenient, 

^The  second  part  of  this  letter,  about  Berg's  own  Orchestral  Pieces,  Op.  6,  has 
already  been  quoted  in  a  previous  chapter  (see  page  67). 

234 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

with  the  firm  intention  not  to  desist  until  it  is  finished,  that  hap- 
pened and  continues  to  happen  as  a  result  of  my  concentrated 
will-power  and  decision  (inspired  by  your  admonishments  of  last 
spring)  to  tackle  the  job,  once  undertaken,  under  all  circumstances 
and  not  to  allow  anything  at  all  to  deflect  me  from  my  purpose. 

Something  like  war-weariness  was  revealed  in  a  letter  to 
Webern,  dated  May  19,  191 5: 

. .  .  Let  us  hope  that  Italy  does  not  enter  the  war,  that  Schoenberg 
will  not  be  retained  at  tomorrow's  medical  examination  ...  let 
us  hope  that  it  may  at  last  start  raining,  so  that  the  harvest  may 
not  turn  out  badly,  but,  more  than  all  this,  let  us  hope  that  at  last, 
at  long  last,  peace  may  come.  .  .  . 

A  few  months  later,  he  was  himself  called-up.  After  having 
been  trained  for  active  service,  he  was  declared  unfit,  and 
transferred  to  the  War  Ministry  in  Vienna.  Just  how  much  his 
health  suffered  under  the  impact  of  miUtary  service,  how  deeply 
he  enjoyed  his  first  leave — spent  in  the  pastoral  soHtude  of 
Trahiitten,  which  he  experienced  as  a  kind  of  salvation — is 
expressed  in  a  letter  to  Schoenberg,  dated  August  13,  1917.  In 
this  same  letter,  he  makes  his  first  reference  to  the  composition 
of  Wozzeck : 

.  .  .  iVe  been  here  now  for  ten  days.  In  the  first  week  I  was  still 
suffering  from  the  after-effects  of  years  of  slavery;  attacks  of 
asthma  of  such  virulence  that  I  beheved,  hterally,  that  I  could  not 
last  the  night.  But  now  things  have  much  improved  and  there 
begins  to  stir  in  me  the  urge  to  work  again,  as  in  previous  summer 
hohdays.  The  musical  setting,  planned  more  than  three  years  ago, 
of  Biichner's  play  Wozzeck  occupies  me  again.  However,  the 
coherent  writing-down  of  a  major  section  is  beyond  me;  in 
another  week  my  freedom  is  over  and  the  slavery  in  Vienna 
recommences  and  may  last  for  years.  ... 


235 


ALBAN   BERG 


Willi  Reich  tells  us  that  after  the  final  collapse  of  Austria,  on 
November  ii,  191 8,  which  abruptly  terminated  Berg's 
mihtary  service  he  was  compelled,  by  inflation,  to  work  for  his 
hving,  which  he  did  by  running  the  family  estate  'Berghof '  on 
the  Ossiachersee  in  Carinthia.  However,  he  soon  gave  up  un- 
congenial farm  work  in  order  to  settle  permanently  in  Vienna 
in  the  spring  of  19 19.  Apart  from  giving  lessons  in  composition, 
he  was  principally  occupied  with  work  in  connection  with 
Schoenberg's  'Society  for  Private  Performances',  his  own 
Clarinet  pieces.  Op.  5,  receiving  their  first  performance  at  a 
meeting  of  this  organization  on  October  17,  1919. 

Berg's  fmancial  situation  had  reached  a  critical  phase;  that 
happened  to  many  Austrians  of  his  generation,  who,  having 
always  had  private  means  at  their  disposal,  had  never  even 
thought  about  earning  their  own  livelihood.  'Berghof 
had  to  be  sold  in  the  spring  of  that  year  and  Berg  had 
nothing  more  to  expect  from  his  family  in  the  way  of 
financial  support.  'I  must  concentrate  more  than  ever  on 
earning  a  living',  is  a  recurrent  phrase  in  his  letters  of 
this  time.  Economic  considerations  were  mainly  responsible  for 
the  gradual  loosening  of  his  connections  with  the  Society  for 
Private  Performances,  which  involved  him  in  exhausting  work 
but  could  not  guarantee  him  the  living  wage  he  needed  more 
and  more  because  of  his  indifferent  health.  Letters  to  Webern 
tell  of  his  hopes  and  doubts  about  the  prospect  of  becoming 
Editor  of  Musikhldtter  des  Anhruch.  He  planned  a  propagandist 
explanatory  pamphlet  on  Webern  and  his  music,  besides 
numerous  articles  for  Anhruch.  In  1920  there  was  published  in 
this  periodical  one  of  his  most  dashing  polemics,  aimed  at  the 
ever-pugnacious  Pfitzner,  who  had  become  embroiled  in  a  per- 
petual feud  with  Busoni  and  Paul  Bekker.  Pfitzner  had  pub- 
lished the  pamphlets,  'Die  neue  Aesthetik  der  musikaHschen 

236 


THE  LIFE  OF  ALBAN  BERG 

Impotenz'  and  *Futuristengefahr*,  and  Berg  replied  with  *Die 
musikalische  Impotenz  der  neuen  Aesthetik  Hans  Pfitzners'. 

The  plan  to  become  Editor  of  Anbruch  came  to  nothing, 
and  Berg  never  again  attempted  to  find  another  such  position. 
Office  routine  would  have  been  quite  alien  to  his  tempera- 
ment and  dangerous  to  his  health.  The  completion  of  the 
full  score  of  Wozzeck  and,  later  on,  the  preparation  of  the 
vocal  score  of  the  opera  occupied  all  his  time  in  the  next  few 
years,  and  as  he  became  increasingly  absorbed  in  the  planning 
and  composition  of  new  works,  teaching  became  more  and 
more  irksome.  But  despite  his  aversion  to  such  mundane  tasks, 
Berg  as  a  teacher  achieved  magnificent  results  and  worthily 
continued  Schoenberg's  educational  tradition  in  forming  a 
group  of  composers  faithful  to  precepts  of  the  second 
Viennese  School'.  The  number  of  his  pupils  who  gained  dis- 
tinction testify  to  his  powers  as  a  teacher,  and  many  of  these 
pupils  are  ahve  and  still  active;  they  include  Joseph  Rufer, 
author  of  a  treatise  on  twelve-note  composition;  the  composers 
H.  E.  Apostel  and  Harms  JeHnek;  Joseph  Polnauer;  the  con- 
ductors and  musical  educationists  Hans  Trauneck,  J.  Schmied, 
Fritz  Mahler,  S.  Kassowitz,  Bruno  Seidlhofer  and  Otto  Jokl; 
WiUi  Reich,  who  became  Berg's  first  biographer;  the 
theoreticians  T.  W.  Adomo  and  F.  H.  Klein;  Marko 
Rothmiiller,  the  fmest  exponent  of  Wozzeck,  Schoenberg's 
son-in-law  FeHx  Greissle,  and  many  others. 

After  the  publication  of  Wozzeck,  Berg's  hfe,  merged  in  his 
creative  work,  belongs  to  the  main  stream  of  post-war  Euro- 
pean cultural  history.  The  last  fifteen  years  represent  the  cHmax 
of  his  activity. 

Biographical  data  concerning  Wozzeck,  Lulu  and  later  instru- 
mental works  have  been  presented  and  discussed  in  earher  chap- 
ters. Some  details  of  Berg's  hfe  still  remain  to  be  told.  The 

237 


ALBAN   BERG 

vocal  score  of  Wozzeck  had  originally  been  published  by  Berg, 
with  the  financial  support  of  Mahler's  widow,  to  whom  the 
work  was  dedicated.  In  the  spring  of  1923,  the  opera  was  taken 
over  by  Universal  Edition,  Vienna,  and  from  that  time,  rela- 
tions with  this  pubhshing  house  were  very  cordial.  In  May  1927 
a  general  agreement  was  signed,  whereby  the  copyright  in  all 
his  future  compositions  was  assigned  to  Universal  Edition,  and 
Berg's  financial  position  was  thereby  stabiUzed. 

A  few  months  before  this  great  turning-point  in  Berg's  Ufe, 
his  mother  had  died  at  the  age  of  seventy-five;  she  had 
followed  the  changing  fortunes  of  Wozzeck  with  the  keenest 
interest,  from  its  furst  performances  during  1925  and  1926. 

Among  the  few  official  honours  accorded  to  Berg  by  his 
reluctant  contemporaries,  probably  as  a  result  of  the  ever 
increasing  success  of  Wozzeck  in  Germany,  was  his  nomination 
as  a  member  of  the  Prussian  Academy  of  Arts,  on  January  30, 
1930 — exactly  three  years  before  Hitler's  appointment  as 
Reichs-ChanceUor  automatically  erased  Berg's  name  and 
banished  his  works  from  the  German  musical  world.  In  a  letter 
to  Webem,  dated  February  10,  1930,  Berg  humorously  com- 
mented on  his  nomination,  but  not  without  an  undertone  of 
bitterness  and  an  obHque  glance  towards  the  apathetic  attitude 
of  his  Austrian  homeland: 

.  .  .  Thanks  for  your  congratulations  to  the  *  Academician'.  How 
it  came  about  I  don't  myself  know.  I  read  it  first  in  a  newspaper, 
or  rather,  I  heard  about  it  from  Paul  Stefan,  who  had  read  it  in  a 
paper.  No  actual  appoiutment  is  involved.  But  nevertheless  it 
pleased  me  very  much,  especially  on  accomit  of  Vienna,  i.e.  of 
Austria,  which,  as  is  well  known,  has  virtually  overloaded  us  for 
years  with  honours  and  appointments.  .  .  . 

An  invitation  to  become  Professor  of  Composition  at  the 

238 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

Berlin  Conservatoire  (at  that  time  under  the  direction  of 
Schreker)  was  dechned  in  the  spring  of  the  same  year. 

In  the  summer  of  1930,  Berg  passed  his  driving  test  and 
bought  an  Enghsh  car,  a  Ford,  the  driving  of  which  gave  him 
the  greatest  enjoyment.  As  a  member  of  the  jury  of  the 
*Allgemeine  Deutsche  Musikverein',  and  later,  as  represent- 
ative of  the  Vienna  section  of  the  International  Society  for 
Contemporary  Music,  he  was  obliged  to  undertake  numerous 
journeys  during  the  remaining  five  years  of  his  life.  The  actual 
causes  of  these  journeys,  jury-meetings  and  examinations  of 
scores,  for  the  most  part  fdled  him  with  disappointment  and 
depression. 

His  purchase  of  a  country  house,  *  Waldhaus',  at  Auen  near 
Velden  on  the  Worthersee,  was  one  of  the  last  pleasures  he  was 
destined  to  enjoy.  At  *Waldhaus',  Berg  composed  Lulu  and 
the  VioHn  Concerto,  despite  increasing  mental  anguish  caused 
by  the  growing  terror  of  Hitlerism,  and  concern  about  his  own 
and  his  wife's  existence,  threatened  as  this  was  at  its  found- 
ations by  the  universal  ban  on  his  works  throughout  Germany 
since  1933.  A  curious  twilight  mood  of  happy  domesticity, 
intertwined  with  a  deep  concern  about  the  deteriorating 
poUtical  situation,  is  reflected  in  a  letter  Berg  wrote  to  Webem, 
on  June  29,  1933,  of  which  a  sentence  may  be  quoted. 

.  .  .  AU  this,  and  probably  also  my  utter  depression  over  these 
times,  have  for  a  long  time  now  impaired  my  ability  to  work. 
Only  now  are  thiags  begianing  to  improve.  For  the  rest,  we  are 
of  the  opinion  that  by  the  purchase  of '  Waldhaus',  we  have  done 
the  right  thing.  .  .  . 

Schoenberg's  fate  under  the  'Third  Reich'  deeply  moved 
Berg.  On  July  6,  1933,  he  wrote  to  Webern  about  it; 

...  I  enclose  Schoenberg's  letter,  which  I  avidly  devoured.  Yes, 

239 


ALBAN  BERG 

it  is  terrible,  to  be  sure.  What  a  fate !  Now  at  the  age  of  nearly 
sixty,  expelled  from  the  country  where  he  could  speak  his 
mother  tongue,  homeless  and  uncertain  where,  and  on  what,  to  Hve, 
in  a  hotel  room.  .  .  . 

In  October,  1933,  Schoenberg  emigrated  to  the  U.S.A.;  he 
never  saw  either  Berg  or  Webern  again.  This  senseless  separa- 
tion, imposed  by  poHtical  terror,  hurt  Berg  more  deeply  than 
anything  else,  especially  as  his  own  continued  residence  in  an 
Austria  increasingly  infected  with  the  Nazi  virus  was  not  easily 
understandable  to  the  homeless  emigrant.  Few  of  the  enforced 
refugees  of  1933  could  appreciate  that  there  also  existed  a  kind 
of  'mental  emigration'  for  those  who  chose  to  remain  behind ; 
such  a  withdrawal  was  the  pre-ordained  fate  of  a  man  like 
Berg.  A  passage  from  a  letter  he  wrote  to  Webern  on  January 
28,  1934,  reveals  something  of  Berg's  mental  struggle  in  con- 
nection with  his  relationship  to  Schoenberg,  and  his  intense 
suffering  over  Germany's  disastrous  poHtical  course; 

...  I  was  tremendously  moved  by  your  news  of  Schoenberg's 
long  and  detailed  letter.  . .  .  Meanwhile  I  had  written  to  him  very 
fully,  and  I  hope  I  was  able  to  dispel  his  doubts.  He  wrote  to  me 
on  September  21,  from  Boston:  'You  have  owed  me  an  answer 
for  so  long  that  I  began  to  fear  .  .  .  no,  seriously  I've  never  feared 
it . . .  but  in  jest  I  may  perhaps  say  it.'  I  understood  this  mysterious 
sentence  quite  correctly ,  then  [you  confirm  this  now  to  me),  and 
so  it  was,  I  beheve,  right  of  me  to  reply  jokingly  that  lam  not, 
in  fact,  'composing  variations  on  the  theme  of  the  Horst  Wessel 
song'. 

Profound  sadness  permeates  the  next  letter,  written  on  Feb- 
ruary 15,  in  which  he  thanks  Webern  for  a  copy  of  the  German 
version  of  Esther  Meynell's  Little  Chronicle  of  Anna  Magdalena 
Bach,  adding  a  few  sentences  of  such  wistful  beauty  as  are 
given  only   to   those  who   have    been  'expelled  from  the 

240 


THE  LIFE   OF  ALBAN  BERG 

Garden  of  Eden' :   a  letter  dated  May  8,  1934,  continues  the 
melancholy  story; 

.  .  .  Add  to  all  this  financial  worries,  and  the  necessity  of  reaching 
before  long  a  decisive  turning-point.  This  is  of  course  closely 
linked  with  the  problem  of  the  first  performance  of  'Lulu'.  In  the 
second  half  of  May  I  shall  have  rephes  to  my  letters  to  Furt- 
wangler  and  Tietjen.  They  will  in  any  case  have  to  show  their 
colours.  This  silent  exclusion  of  all  our  music  from  German  con- 
cert programmes  will  either  have  to  be  rescinded  or  they  will  have 
to  prove  to  me  that  our  music  is  *un-German'. 

At  that  time,  he  still  half-beheved  in  the  possibility  of  the 
performance  o£Lulu  at  a  German  opera  house.  But  only  a  few 
weeks  later  he  clearly  understood  that  his  music  had  no  pros- 
pects whatever  in  Hitler's  Germany:  'A  performance  cannot 
be  thought  of  for  the  time  being.'  A  ray  of  hope  was  kindled 
by  Erich  Kleiber's  courageous  first  performance  of  the  Lulu- 
Symphonie  in  Berlin  on  November  30. 

On  February  9,  1935,  Berg  celebrated  his  fiftieth  birthday, 
and  this  last  year  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  hectic  work,  on 
the  Viohn  Concerto  and  on  the  orchestration  of  the  third  act 
o£LuIu — exertions  which  clearly  depleted  his  waning  physical 
strength  at  an  alarming  rate. 

The  last  illness  developing  from  an  insect  sting  which  brought 
on  a  carbuncle,  had  already  begun  by  the  end  of  August. 

In  spite  of  a  temporary  improvement,  Berg  felt  unable 
to  attend  the  Prague  Festival  of  the  International  Society  for 
Contemporary  Music  in  September.  On  November  12,  he 
returned  to  Vienna  from  'Waldhaus',  exhausted  and  ailing, 
and  took  part  in  the  preparation  for  the  first  performance  in 
Vienna  of  the  Lulu  Symphony,  which  he  eventually  attended, 
although  gravely  ill. 

Berg's  last  days  and  hours  have  been  movingly  described  by 

241 


ALBAN   BERG 


Willi  Reich,  who  was  then  much  in  his  company.  After  a  blood 
transfusion,  the  donor  being  a  simple  young  Viennese,  Berg 
jestingly  expressed  the  fear  that  he  would  in  consequence  be 
turned  into  a  composer  of  light-hearted  Viennese  operettas. 

But  the  transfusion  only  delayed  his  end,  and  on  Sfeptember 
24,  just  after  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  Berg  died  in  the  arms 
of  his  wife,  from  the  effects  of  pernicious  blood-poisoning. 

The  circumstances  of  his  death  strangely  resemble  those  of 
the  death  of  Mahler,  who  had  also  died  from  blood-poisoning, 
and  at  precisely  the  same  age,  the  lives  of  both  composers  being 
cut  short  exactly  seven  weeks  before  their  respective  fifty-first 
birthdays. 


242 


PART  IV:  APPENDICES 


ARNOLD  SCHOENBERG   ON  ALBAN  BERG 
(1949) 

This  article  is  here  published  for  the  first  time,  by  kind  permission  of  Mrs  Gertrud 
Schoenberg.  It  was  written  in  1949,  two  years  before  Schoenberg's  death,  and  it  was 
mentioned  in  the  Schoenberg-Bibliography  of  Josef  Rufer's  book  'Die  Komposition  mit 
zwolf  Tonen',  Berlin,  1952,  Engl,  version,  London,  1955.  The  article  was  originally 
written  in  Schoenberg's  peculiar  English  which  is  here  faithfully  reproduced. 

H.F.R. 

WHEN  Alban  Berg  came  to  me  in  1904,  he  was  a  very  tall 
youngster  and  extremely  timid.  But  when  I  saw  the  com- 
positions he  showed  me — songs  in  a  style  between  Hugo  Wolf 
and  Brahms — I  recognized  at  once  that  he  had  real  talent. 
Consequently  I  accepted  him  as  pupil,  though  at  this  time  he 
was  unable  to  pay  my  fee.  Later  his  mother  inherited  a  great 
fortune  and  told  Alban,  as  they  have  now  money,  he  could 
enter  the  conservatory.  I  was  told  that  Alban  was  so  upset  by 
this  assumption  that  he  started  weeping  and  could  not  stop 
weeping  before  his  mother  had  allowed  him  to  continue  with 
me. 

He  was  always  faithful  to  me  and  has  remained  so  during  all 
of  his  short  Hfe.  Why  did  I  tell  this  story?  Because  I  was  greatly 
surprised  when  this  soft-hearted,  timid  young  man  had  the 
courage  to  engage  in  a  venture  which  seemed  to  invite  misfor- 
tune: to  compose  Wozzeck,  a  drama  of  such  extraordinary 
tragic  (sic),  that  seemed  forbidding  to  music.  And  even  more: 
it  contained  scenes  of  every-day  Hfe  which  were  contrary  to 
the  concept  of  the  opera  which  still  Hved  on  styHzed  costumes 

245 


ALBAN    BERG 

and  conventionalized  characters.  He  succeeded.  Wozzeck  was 
one  of  the  greatest  successes  of  opera. 

And  why?  Because  Berg,  this  timid  man,  was  a  strong 
character  who  was  faithful  to  his  ideas,  just  as  he  was  faithful 
to  me  when  he  was  almost  forced  to  discontinue  studying  with 
me. 

He  succeeded  with  the  opera  as  he  succeeded  in  his  insistence 
to  study  with  me. 

Making  the  behef  in  ideas  one's  own  destiny  is  the  quahty 
which  makes  the  great  man. 

ARNOLD  SCHOENBERG 


246 


Facsimile  of  Berg's 

Variations  for  Piano 

on  a  theme  of  his  own 

(1908) 


BERG   S    VARIATIONS    FOR   PIANO 


~  ~^t'~-  '*%l^p"-^^;~^~ ' 


'S'  K 


:  i 


■■^'■■'1^- 


^  "~',~^" 


^^ 


6r:i 


I 


lu: 


^   r^*      %    ,^ 


-*S      ^ 


249 


ALBAN  BERG 


250 


BERG   S    VARIATIONS    FOR    PIANO 


Wmf^^^ 


^       ^      f 

1^       P  i 


251 


ALBAN   BERG 


CT*-  '-^'   "x^ 


'  t 


pr^f  »^^     ^     #      ^  _f  ^  kLLf  -^    ^^^*^-  ^U^^. 


/*  sM.ini^ 


^-^^if,i 


^:M 


:^^-__iJt:_f-:^;  ^ 


,_„„,y_-^ 


V. 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^r^^z--j^^^      ^*^^ 


252 


BERG   S    VARIATIONS    FOR    PIANO 


K*^****/"^      et*« 


253 


254 


BERG    S    VARIATIONS    FOR    PIANO 


^  /_f  _       S.'y^ 


255 


ALBAN   BERG 


fe^I"^^i^i:^^2Si^^---:^g^^^j 


256 


BERG    S    VARIATIONS    FOR    PIANO 


^^^^^^^^^1^ 


257 


ALBAN   BERG 


^.^f.^ 


lESI^^F^EE 


^Ef^^ 


^r^^ 


3^"If!if:»;-^-^^^^ 


258 


BERG    S    VARIATIONS    FOR    PIANO 


j-tv^J<v-  .A^/Se^**^*' 


-i4  .^ 


259 


BERG'S  LECTURE  ON  'WOZZECK'  (1929) 


Thh  lecture  is  published  here  for  the  first  time  in  its  entirety.  It  has  been  translated 
by  the  writer  of  this  book,  whose  intention  was  to  keep  as  close  as  possible  to  Berg's 
text.  The  lecture  was  originally  intended  to  precede  a  performance  in  Oldenburg 
{March  1939).  Later  on,  however,  it  was  used  by  Berg  in  connection  with  other  per- 
formances of  his  opera  in  Germany.  A  copy  of  the  lecture  was  utilized  by  W.  Reich 
{Cf.  op.  cit.,  p.  64,  Note  i).  The  present  complete  publication  of  the  Lecture  is  based 
on  a  revised  copy  of  the  typescript.  This  contains  numerous  corrections  and  insertions 
from  Berg's  own  hand  which  sometimes  amount  to  a  complete  change  of  opinion.  In 
fact,  this  revised  copy  may  be  said  to  represent  an  improved  version  of  the  whole 
lecture.  Notable  among  these  changes  is  Berg's  emphatic  aloofness  from  the  doctrines 
of  French  musical  Impressionism. 


WHEN  I  decided  some  fifteen  years  ago  to  compose 
*Wozzeck'  a  peculiar  situation  in  music  existed.  We 
of  the  Viemia  school  (under  its  leader  Arnold 
Schoenberg)  had  just  outgrown  the  infancy  of  that  move- 
ment which  was — quite  erroneously — classified  as  the 
movement  of  Atonality.  Composition  in  that  style  was 
primarily  confined  to  the  creation  of  musical  miniatures 
— such  as  songs,  pieces  for  the  piano  and  for  orchestra — 
or  (in  the  case  of  more  extensively  planned  works  like 
Schoenberg's  'Pierrot'  melodrames  or  his  two  one-act 
operas)  concentrating  on  a  formal  species  which  received  its 
shape  exclusively  from  its  text  and  dramatic  action.  Until  then 
works  of  bold  dimensions — such  as  four-movement  sym- 
phonies, oratorios  and  large-scale  operas — were  missing  in  the 
sphere  of  atonal  composition.  The  reason  for  this  deficiency? 
That  style  renounced  TonaHty  and  thereby  gave  up  one  of  the 

s  261 


ALBAN   BERG 

most  effective  means  of  building  either  small  or  large  musical 
structures. 

On  deciding  at  that  juncture  to  compose  a  full-length  opera 
I  was  confronted  by  a  new  problem,  at  least  from  the  angle  of 
harmony :  How  to  achieve  the  same  degree  of  cohesion  and  of 
structural  unification  without  the  use  of  the  hitherto  accepted 
medium  of  Tonahty  and  of  its  creative  potentiahties  ? — 
cohesion,  moreover,  not  only  in  the  smaller  forms  of  dramatic 
sections  (of  which  more  anon)  but  also  the  more  difficult  uni- 
fication in  the  bigger  formal  units  of  a  whole  act  and  in  the 
structure  of  the  whole  opera. 

Libretto  and  dramatisation  alone  could  not  guarantee  that 
unifying  principle;  least  of  all  in  the  case  of  a  work  like 
Biichner's  'Woyzeck',  consisting  of  many  (twenty-three) 
loosely  connected  fragmentary  scenes,  i 

Even  a  structural  plan  in  three  acts  in  which  exposition, 
chmax  and  catastrophe  were  clearly  separated  in  three  sections 
of  5  scenes  each — achieving,  as  it  were,  structural  unity  and 
dramatic  cohesion  by  force — did  not  necessarily  guarantee 
musical  unity  and  cohesion  as  well.  Li  the  course  of  my 
investigation  we  will  notice  the  means  used  to  achieve  the 
latter.  First  of  all  I'd  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  a 
phenomenon  of  Harmony,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  closing 
harmonies  of  each  Act. 

The  point  where  in  a  tonally  conceived  composition  the 
return  and  confirmation  of  the  main  key  becomes  distinctly 
evident  even  for  the  layman,  should  also  be  the  place  where  in 
an  atonal  work  the  circle  of  harmony  comes  to  a  full  close. 
Such  a  confirmation  has  been  achieved  primarily  through  the 
fact  that  every  Act  of  my  opera  closes  into  the  same  quasi- 
cadential  chord,  only  to  rest  on  it  as  on  a  Tonic.  This  is  the 

^Actually  Biichner's  fragment  consists  of  twenty-seven  scenes.  (H.F.R.) 

262 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

final  chord  at  the  close  of  Act  I:  (Vocal  score,  p.  81,  bar  715 
until  the  close  of  the  Act.) 

This  is  the  chord  at  the  close  of  Act  II:  v.  sc.  p.  180,  bar  809 
until  end. 

And  this  is  the  chord  at  the  end  of  Act  III:  v.  sc.  p.  231,  bar 
389  until  end. 

You  will  have  noticed  (and  you  will  notice  it  even  more 
clearly  when  you  hear  it  in  the  orchestra)  that  these  final  chords 
appear  each  time  in  a  different  shape  although  each  time  built 
up  from  the  same  notes.  These  changes  in  their  sonority  derive 
not  only  from  the  changed  dramatic  situation,  but  from  some- 
thing else  as  well.  For  the  urge  for  musical  unification  and 
musical  integration — as  Schoenberg  calls  it — is  equalled  by  the 
urge  for  musical  diversion  and  variety  of  shape. 

While  Act  I  and  II  end  with  the  simultaneity  of  these  chords 
— I  repeat:  Act  I:  v.  sc.  p.  81,  last  bar;  Act  II:  v.  sc.  p.  312,  last 
bar — at  the  end  of  Act  II  this  chord  disintegrates  more  and  more, 
v.  sc.  p.  180,  bar  809  until  end,  leaving  as  its  final  residue  the 
low  *B'  behind. 

By  way  of  anticipation  I'd  like  to  add  here  that  the  *B' 
in  the  bass  (which  accompanies  the  prophetic  last  words  of 
Act  II  'He  is  bleeding  .  .  .  One  after  the  other  .  .  .')  becomes 
decisively  important  not  only  dramatically  but  also  structur- 
ally for  one  of  the  most  important  among  the  later  scenes  of 
the  opera. 

To  demonstrate  more  clearly  how  this  musical  integration 
as  well  as  this  musical  variety  becomes  evident,  I  wiU  now 
ask  the  orchestra  to  play  the  last  scene  of  each  act.  I  will  then 
be  able  to  add  a  word  about  the  structurally  important  har- 
monies of  the  introductory  bars  of  the  acts,  following  these 
harmonies. 

The  action  of  the  last  scene  of  Act  I  is  concerned  with 

263 


ALBAN   BERG 

Marie's  seduction  by  the  Drum-Major.  The  music  to  this  scene 
is  a  rondo-like  Andante  afFettuoso:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  73,  from  bar 
656  to  the  end. 

The  very  short  orchestral  introduction  to  the  following  Act 
II  takes  this  fmal  chord  as  its  point  of  departure,  playing  it  while 
the  curtain  is  down:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  82,  bars  1-6  (without  the 
last  quaver).  Then  the  curtain  rises  for  Act  II. 

The  fmal  scene  of  Act  II  presents  the  clash  between  the 
jealous  Wozzeck  and  the  Drum-Major,  ending  in  the  former's 
defeat.  By  the  way :  The  struggle  between  the  two  men  in  this 
scene  is  musically  identical  with  the  struggle  between  Marie 
and  the  Drum-Major  at  the  end  of  Act  I,  which  ends  in  her 
seduction.  Again  a  device  to  estabhsh  musical  cohesion ! 

These  (as  well  as  other)  parallels  between  the  two  closing 
scenes  result — even  if  quite  unconsciously — in  a  piece  of  musi- 
cal parallehsm.  However,  whereas  in  the  former  passionate 
Andante  only  a  suggestion  of  the  Rondo  form  could  be 
detected,  the  latter  scene  presents  a  strictly  organized  Rondo, 
shaped  by  the  experiences  of  military  routine,  a  veritable 
*Rondo  marziale':  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  173,  bar  761  until  end. 

Finally,  the  last  scene  of  Act  III  and  of  the  whole  opera  is  a 
perpetuum  mobile-like  movement  in  running  quaver-triplets, 
reflecting  the  play  of  poor  children,  with  the  wholly  un- 
suspecting child  of  Marie  and  Wozzeck  among  them — a  child 
that  has  just  become  a  poor  orphan:  v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  229, 
bar  273 ,  including  the  preceding  upbeat,  to  the  end. 

With  it  the  opera  comes  to  an  end.  However,  although  the 
music  steers  again  into  the  cadential  haven  of  the  fmal  chord, 
it  almost  looks  as  if  it  was  to  go  on.  And  it  really  does  go  on ! 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  initial  bars  of  the  opera  could  easily  Hnk 
up  with  these  fmal  bars  and  thereby  close  the  circle:  v.  sc. 
Act  III,  p.  231,  last  bar,  and  Act  I,  p.  9,  bars  1-3. 

264 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

That  happened  quite  unintentionally.  Much  of  what  I  tell 
you  here  has  only  now,  after  ten  and  more  years,  become  clear 
to  me  in  its  relation  to  musical  theory.  For  instance,  regarding 
these  two  initial  bars:  they  contain — before  the  drama  begins 
to  unfold — two  short  introductory  string-chords.  In  order  to 
underhne  the  crescendo  leading  from  the  first  to  the  second 
chord,  a  soft,  but  gradually  increasing,  roll  on  the  side-drum 
bridges  the  two  bars.  This  was  a  purely  instrumental  affair  of 
musical  sonorities.  When  I  heard  it  for  the  first  time,  I  noticed 
to  my  great  surprise,  that  the  general  mihtary  atmosphere  of 
the  opera  could  hardly  have  been  hinted  at  more  poignantly 
and  succinctly  than  by  means  of  that  little  drum-roll. 

Reverting  once  again  to  the  tendency  of  my  opera  to  be 
both  integrated  and  diversified:  you  will  have  observed,  when 
Hstening  to  the  different  beginnings  and  endings  of  the  three 
Acts,  that  they  differ  considerably  from  one  another,  quite 
apart  from  the  chordal  variant  mentioned  above. 

The  curtain  in  Scene  i  is  raised  immediately  after  the  first 
bar  of  the  orchestra;  it  is  lowered  simultaneously  with  the 
closing  bars  at  the  end  of  Act  I. 

The  curtain  at  the  opening  of  Act  II  is  only  raised  after  the 
short  orchestral  prelude  has  finished  which  was  played  during 
this  lecture  a  short  while  ago.  When  the  music  of  Act  II 
has  finished,  the  scene  remains  open  for  a  moment;  only  then 
the  fmal  curtain  falls.  Correspondingly  (and  with  the 
intention  of  establishing  dramatic  cohesion),  the  curtain  at  the 
opening  of  Act  III  is  raised  in  silence.  The  music  only  begins 
after  a  brief  pause.  The  fmal  curtain  however  is  lowered 
before  the  music  has  fmished;  but  its  fall  does  not  coincide 
with  the  diminishing  fmal  chord — as  in  Act  I.  Here  it  precedes 
the  chord,  which  enters  pianissimo  and  trails  off. 

Finally  a  word  may  be  added  about  the  general  structure  of 

265 


ALBAN  BERG 


the  Opera  and  about  my  intention  of  achieving  close  formal  in- 
tegration. The  manner  in  which  I  built  up  each  single  act  could 
be  understood  as  resulting  from  the  venerable  tripartite  formal 
pattern  a-b-a.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  Act  I  and  III 
show  certain  parallels  (even  if  the  latter  act  does  not  contain 
musical  recapitulations  of  the  first).  Both  flanking  acts  embrace, 
as  it  were,  the  much  larger  and  weightier  middle  act 
symmetrically,  by  virtue  of  their  shorter  duration.  While 
Act  II  (as  we  shall  see)  presents  from  the  first  to  the  last  bar  a 
musically  coherent  form,  the  structure  of  the  two  flanking  acts 
is  much  more  loose.  It  consists  of  five  loosely  linked  music 
sections  which  correspond  with  the  loosely  connected  scenes 
of  the  libretto.  One  could  call  the  five  scenes  of  Act  I  'five 
musical  character  pieces',  each  characterizing — in  accordance 
with  the  action — one  chief  character  of  the  play  in  his  relations 
with  the  hero  of  the  opera,  i.e. :  the  Captain,  his  superior  officer; 
his  friend  and  comrade  Andres ;  his  mistress  Marie,  the  Doctor 
and  the  Drum-Major. 

The  five  scenes  of  Act  III  correspond  with  five  musical  forms 
the  cohesion  of  which  is  achieved  through  some  or  other  uni- 
fying principle:  be  it  the  unifying  function  of  a  musical  theme, 
subjected  to  variational  treatment;  be  it  a  *note',  a  'chord',  a 
'rhythm'  or  an  'equalized  motion'  of  notes. 

The  two  flanking  acts  whose  sequence  of  scenes  is  determined 
by  a  unifying  idea  (i.e.  the  five  character-pieces  of  Act  I,  the 
five  unifying  principles  of  Act  III)  furnish  the  framework  for 
the  middle  Act,  like  the  element  'a'  in  the  scheme  of  the 
tripartite  'Lied-form'.  This  Act  II  is  musically  much  more 
closely  integrated,  its  five  scenes  being  inseparably  Hnked  like 
the  movements  of  a  symphony.  They  present  a  vivacious  first 
Sonata-movement,  followed  by  a  Fantasia  and  Fugue  based  on 
three    subjects:    a    slow    movement    (Largo),    a    Scherzo; 

266 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

and  finally  the — already  mentioned — 'Rondo  Marziale  con 
Introduzione'.  In  this  way  the  middle  act  could  be  likened  to 
element  'b'  in  the  tripartite  form-scheme,  differing  from  the 
two  flanking  acts  (with  their  general  parallehsm  of  structure) 
by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  represents  emphatically  the  character 
of  a  middle  section. 

My  discussion  of  the  aspects  of  Harmony  and  Form  in  this 
opera  will  have  informed  you  sufficiently  about  the  formal 
cohesion  of  its  music  in  general — a  cohesion  which,  as  has  been 
stated  earUer,  had  to  be  achieved  without  the  medium  of 
Tonality  and  without  the  latter's  structural  possibiHties. 

That  structural  cohesion  was  likewise  necessary  in  the  detail 
of  the  opera's  musical  fabric.  In  that  connection  the  following 
simple  trend  of  reasoning  may  have  led  to  the  frequently  dis- 
cussed employment  of  certain  'old  forms'  which  has  done 
more  to  disseminate  widespread  knowledge  of  this  opera  than 
its  performances  up  to  date.  As  I  tried  to  achieve  variety  of 
musical  means  by  avoiding  the  Wagnerian  recipe  of 'through- 
composing'  each  scene  in  similar  manner,  nothing  else  was  left 
to  me  than  to  give  a  different  shape  to  each  of  the  opera's  fifteen 
scenes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  formal  integration  of  these 
scenes  demanded  an  equal  cohesion  of  their  music.  This  again 
brought  the  necessity  to  secure  for  its  varied  shapes  formal 
hnks,  i.e.  to  fmd  independent  musical  patterns  for  them. 

The  appHcation  of  these  patterns  to  the  dramatic  canvas 
emerged  as  naturally  from  this  as  the  selection  of  special 
patterns  for  the  purposes  of  dramatic  characterization. 

No  antiquarian  leanings  prompted  me  therefore  when  I  em- 
ployed in  this  opera  Variations,  or  even  Passacaglias  and  Fugues. 
Even  less  correct  would  it  be  to  connect  this  employment  of 
old  forms  with  the  atavistic  movement  'Back  to  .  .  .',  which 
incidentally  started  much  later.  Indeed,  I  have  not  confined 

267 


ALBAN  BERG 


myself  to  these  more  or  less  archaic  form-types  but  I  had  to 
resort  also  to  new  forms,  based  on  novel  principles  (as  pointed 
out  before),  for  instance,  to  principles  based  on  a  fundamental 
'tone',  rhythm  or  chord.  Another  circumstance,  conducive  to 
variety  and  multiphcity  of  shapes,  was  the  comparatively 
high  number  of  orchestral  interludes,  accompanying  a 
change  of  scene,  resulting  from  the  threefold  change  of  scene 
within  each  of  the  three  acts.  To  compose  for  that  purpose 
throughout  symphonic  transitions  or  Interludes  (as  I  saw  it  done 
later  on  in  the  case  of  another  contemporary  opera  involving 
frequent  changes  of  scenery)  would  have  run  counter  to  my 
idea  of  musical  drama  and  its  legitimate  claims,  which  I  had 
retained  as  a  composer  for  the  theatre  despite  my  admiration 
for  absolute  music.  Also  in  this  case  I  felt  constrained  to  achieve 
variety  of  contrasts  by  composing  these  musical  accompani- 
ments to  a  change  of  scene,  sometimes  as  transitions,  sometimes 
as  Coda  of  the  preceding  music  or  as  introduction  to  the 
following  scene,  or  fmally  by  combining  both  functions.  I 
achieved  this  aim  in  the  end  also  by  estabhsliing  inconspicuous 
links  between  the  discrepant  sections  of  the  particular  musical 
form  or  by  favouring  an  often  quite  abrupt  juxtaposition  of 
contrasting  elements.  (We  will  later  on  listen  to  several 
musical  examples,  elucidating  these  points.) 

I  will  now  discuss  each  scene,  not  so  much  with  the  intention 
of  enumerating  all  their  musical  forms  (a  task  discharged  for 
quite  a  time  now  by  all  daily  papers  and  by  those  musical 
periodicals  which  have  taken  note  of  this  opera),  but  in  order 
to  explain  occasionally  some  feature  which  is  less  obvious  than 
its  conceptual  shape. 

The  reason  for  the  music  of  scene  i  being  based  on  the 
form  of  a  Suite  may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  dialogue 
of  this    scene   (in   which   nothing    really   happens)    consists 

268 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

likewise  only  of  loosely  connected  topics  of  discussion.  It 
was  a  near  guess  to  find  for  each  topic  a  small  formal  type  and 
to  combine  several  of  these  types  into  a  Suite.  That  this  process 
resulted  in  a  Suite  of  more  or  less  styHzed  archaic  dance-forms 
(such  as  Prelude,  Pavane,  Cadenza,  Gigue,  Gavotte  with  double- 
refrain)  was  no  mere  chance,  although  it  happened  quite  uncon- 
sciously. Scene  i  receives  through  this  Suite — albeit  uninten- 
tionally— its  proper  and,  as  it  were,  historic  colour,  a  considera- 
tion which  weighed  but  little  with  me  in  other  parts  of  this 
timeless  dramatic  subject.  Listen,  for  instance,  to  the  Gigue  and 
to  the  cadenza-hke  Double  Bassoon  Solo,  connecting  it  with 
the  following  Gavotte:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  15-19,  bars  65-120  (first 
beat). 

The  formal  end  of  the  Suite  is  achieved — among  other  things 
by  the  fact  that  the  introductory  Prelude  returns  refrain- 
hke  at  the  tail-end  of  the  Scene,  however  this  time  in  retrograde 
motion.  This  means  that  it  presents  the  notes  literally  from 
back  to  front  and  with  that  it  reflects  musically  the  dramatic 
pecuHarity  of  the  scene,  the  dialogue  of  which  also  returns  in 
the  end  to  its  original  starting-point.  The  following  postlude  is 
only  a  development-section,  utilizing  the  chief  thematic  ideas 
of  each  section  of  the  Suite. 

If  Scene  i  is  based  on  an  admittedly  ancient  form-type. 
Scene  2  is  based  on  something  totally  diflerent.  The  unifying 
principle  of  that  scene  is  of  an  harmonic  nature :  these  chords 
represent  the  harmonic  vertebra  of  the  scene:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  30, 
bars  203-204. 

That  a  principle  of  that  nature  may  become  a  form-genera- 
ting element  will  be  easily  appreciated  if  Tonality  itself  is 
understood  as  a  form-begetting  device  and  if,  in  consequence 
thereof,  these  three  chords  are  hkened  to  the  functions  of 
Tonic,  Dominant  and  Subdominant  respectively.  Of  course, 

269 


ALBAN   BERG 

the  manner  in  which  these  chords  or  harmonic  sequences  are 
presented  is  throughout  variational  and  multiple.  For  instance: 
V.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  30,  bars  201-207,  or  Act  I,  p.  32,  bars  225  (or 

227)-234. 

Of  course  I  did  not  miss  any  opportunity  to  write  singable  and 
song-like  music,  as  suggested  by  the  more  operatic  caesurae  of 
a  play.  In  fact,  there  are  two  songs  to  be  found  in  this  and 
the  following  scene.  The  first  one,  used  as  an  interpolation 
within  the  more  rhapsodic  organization  of  the  three-chord- 
section  is  Andres'  Coloratura-song  with  its  three  stanzas;  and 
the  second  in  the  next  scene  is  the  mihtary  march  and  Marie's 
Lullaby. 

In  this  connection  I  should  Hke  to  disclose  the  results  of  two 
observations. 

The  first  concerning  the  treatment  of  the  singing  voice 
in  this  opera.  It  has  frequently  been  pointed  out  that  it 
is  not  a  Bel  Canto  opera.  However,  there  is  no  reason 
why  much  of  what  is  purely  vocally  conceived  should  not  be 
expressed  by  means  of  *Bel  cantare'.  I  have  never  renounced 
the  possibihties  of  coloratura  singing.  To  be  sure,  in  my  opera 
hardly  any  Recitative  can  be  found.  I  beheve  to  have  com- 
pensated fully  for  this  deficiency  by  having  abundantly  utiUzed 
for  the  first  time  in  an  opera  Schoenberg's  so-called  ^rhythmic 
declamation',  introduced  by  him  nearly  twenty  years  ago  in  the 
declamatory  choruses  of  Die  Gluckliche  Hand  and  in  the  melo- 
drames  of  his  Pierrot  Lunaire. 

These  made  evident  that  this  'melodramatic'  treatment  ^ 
of  the  voice,  while  acknowledging  all  formal  potentialities 
of  absolute  music  which  play  no  part  in  Recitative, 
with  its  fixation  of  melody,  rhythm  and  dynamics  within 
the  framework  of  scanned  declamation,  represents  one  of  the 

1  Not  used  here  in  the  customary  sense  of  the  Enghsh  term  'melodrama'.  (H.F.R.) 

270 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck    [1929] 

most  effective  means  of  com.m.unication — a  function  occasion- 
ally allotted  to  speech  even  in  opera.  More :  by  embracing  the 
whole  gamut  of  expression  from  the  off-pitch  whisper  to  the 
veritable  *bel  parlare'  of  its  widely  arched  Sprechmelodien,  it 
has  undoubtedly  enriched  operatic  music  with  an  expressive 
device  of  high  value  and  pure  musical  ancestry  which  forms  a 
welcome  and  attractive  sonorous  contrast  to  straight  bel  canto 
singing. 

The  other  result  of  my  investigation  refers  to  the  man- 
ner in  which  I  have  coped  with  the  necessity  of  including  music 
of  a  Tolky'  and  singable  character,  i.e.  with  the  necessity  to 
establish  an  appreciable  relationship  between  art-music  and  folk- 
music  in  this  opera — a  matter  of  course  in  a  tonally  conceived 
work.  It  was  by  no  means  easy  to  express  their  differentiation 
of  levels  in  so-called  atonal  harmony.  I  believe  I  have  succeeded 
by  composing  all  sections  requiring  the  atmosphere  of  Volks- 
tiimlichkeit  in  a  primitive  manner  which  applies  equally  to  the 
style  of  Atonality.  That  particular  manner  favours  a  sym- 
metrical arrangement  of  periods  and  sections,  it  utilizes  har- 
monies in  thirds  and  especially  in  fourths  and  a  type  of  melody 
in  which  whole-tone  scale  and  perfect  fourths  play  an  integral 
part,  in  contrast  with  the  diminished  and  augmented  intervals 
which  usually  dominate  the  atonal  music  of  the  'Vienna 
School'.  1  Also  the  so-called  poly  tonality  may  be  counted 
among  the  devices  of  a  more  primitive  brand  of  harmony.  We 
find  a  popular  element  in  them  in  the  Military  March  (with  its 
intentionally  'wrong  basses')  and  in  Marie's  Lullaby  (with  its 
harmonies  in  fourths) — pieces  which'  the  orchestra  will  now 
play.  During  the  performance  I  beg  you  to  take  note  of  the 
link  between  the  two  scenes  to  which  I  referred  earUer. 

I  demonstrated  to  you  the  structural  principle  of  the  three 

1  Second  Vienna  School.  (H.F.R.) 

271 


ALBAN  BERG 

chords  in  scene  2:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  38,  bar  286  (left  hand  more 
marked).  The  three  thirds  on  which  these  chords  are  based  are: 
V.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  38,  bar  286  (the  first  two  beats). 

From  these  a  more  motive-Hke  growth  emerges  in  the 
description  of  the  eerie  sunset:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  38,  bars  286-293 
(first  beat). 

At  another  point  the  three  chords  become  the  basic  harmony 
of  a  melody  of  wide  span:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  39,  bars  303-310  (or 
312),  which  in  turn,  leading  to  the  close  of  the  second,  rhap- 
sodically  constructed  scene,  becomes  transformed  into  music 
accompanying  the  change  of  scene,  into  which  the  march  of 
the  approaching  band  infiltrates — the  latter  interrupted  by 
Marie's  song  which  follows  now:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  38-48,  bars 
286-426. 

I  have  let  you  hear  the  music  up  to  this  point  only.  I  am  inter- 
rupting it  now  in  order  to  mention  another  device  of  dramatic 
composition  the  purpose  of  which  is  none  other  than  to  guar- 
antee musical  unity  of  design.  These  fifths:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  48, 
bars  425-426 — together  with  other  recurrent  motives  and 
musical  patterns — belong  to  the  figure  of  Marie  (one  could  say, 
this  particular  quietus  of  Harmony  expresses  her  aimless  and 
indefmable  attitude  of  waiting,  an  attitude  that  fmds  its  final 
solution  only  in  death).  This  musical  idea  is  used  several  times, 
as  it  were,  in  the  manner  of  a  Leitmotif.  Repetitions  of  this  sort 
occur  also  in  the  case  of  other  motifs,  attached  to  different  per- 
sons or  to  different  situations.  Thereby  I  only  want  to  point  out 
the  fact  that  I  have  availed  myself  of  this  opportunity  to 
estabhsh  cohesion  and  formal  correspondences  (and  thereby  to 
achieve  again  unity  of  design)  by  utilizing  these  Leitmotifs,  or 
better,  these  musical  reminiscences. 

Such  is  the  case,  for  instance,  in  the  frequently  mentioned 
chordal  sequence  of  Scene  2:  inanimate  nature  horrifying 

272 


I 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

Wozzeck;  then,  in  the  final  scene  of  Act  II:  the  reaHstic  sound 
of  snoring,  coming  from  the  soldiers  sleeping  in  their  barracks 
— here  in  the  orchestra,  there  in  the  manner  of  a  choral 
enunciation  with  closed  lips  intermingUng  with  Wozzeck's 
groaning  in  his  sleep:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  169,  bars  737-743. 

The  Passacaglia,  or  Chaconne,  of  scene  4  (Act  I)  is  based  on  a 
dodecaphonic  subject:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  55,  bars  486-487. 

It  is  really  superfluous  to  mention  that  the  variational  treat- 
ment of  this  subject  does  not  follow  mechanical,  or  even  abso- 
lute, musical  concepts.  Rather  is  it  intimately  connected  with 
the  action  of  the  opera.  Already  the  presentation  of  the  twelve- 
note  series  (see  above)  is  transmuted  into  musical  drama  in 
that  it  accompanies  the  first  words  of  the  scene.  In  its  first 
appearance  it  is  nearly  absorbed  by  the  words  of  the  Doctor 
and  nearly  totally  concealed  by  the  excited  Rubato  of  a  CeUo- 
Recitative.  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  55-56,  bars  488-495. 

This  is  followed  by  21  variation-forms:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  57-72, 
bars  496-642. 

The  use  of  the  expression  Variation'  is  quite  legitimate:  for 
the  one  and  only  subject  on  which  these  sections  are  based 
represents  the  Doctor's  obsessional  *idee  fixe'.  It  is  also  re- 
echoed in  the  words  of  Wozzeck,  the  tortured  victim  of  the 
Doctor's  obsession.  Cf.  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  61  (with  upbeat),  bars 
525-531  (first  half). 

When  fmally — in  the  last  variation — the  Doctor  voci- 
ferously pleads  for  immortahty  (the  most  sublime  of  his  many 
obsessions)  the  variational  theme  in  the  bass  (which  had  been 
partially  concealed  throughout  the  development  of  the  Passa- 
cagHa)  now  returns  with  emphasized  distinctness  in  chorale- 
like harmonies.  It  winds  up  the  whole  section  in  the  manner  of 
a  Stretto:  v.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  72,  bars  638-656. 

It  is  closely  followed  by  the  'Andante  affettuoso' — already 

273 


ALBAN  BERG 

played  earlier  during  this  lecture  (v.  sc.  p.  73  fF.).  Its  initial  bars 
open  up  the  final  scene  of  Act  i. 

Act  II,  beginning  with  the  little  introduction  (which  has  also 
been  played  a  short  while  ago — cf.  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  82)  contains 
a  Sonata-movement  as  the  first  of  its  musical  forms.  It  is  perhaps 
more  than  mere  chance  that  the  three  characters  of  this  scene — 
Marie,  her  child  and  Wozzeck — correspond  with  the  three 
thematic  groups  of  an  orthodox  sonata-exposition.  This  cir- 
cumstance permits  on  principle  the  subsequent  use  of  strict 
Sonata-form.  The  whole  dramatic  deployment  of  this  trinket 
scene,  the  twofold  recurrence  of  certain  situations,  and  fmally, 
the  head-on  clash  of  the  principal  characters,  are  responsible  for 
the  continuing  strict  musical  structure,  which  consists  of  a  first 
recapitulation  after  the  exposition,  of  a  development  section 
and  fmally  of  a  second  recapitulation.  The  following  table  will 
make  this  clear: 

The  principal  subject v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  83,  bar  7  (with 

upbeat)-!  4; 

The  bridge-passage v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  84,  bars  29-36; 

The  cantabile-group v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  85,  bars  43-46; 

The  conclusion-group v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  86,  bars  55-59. 

And  with  it  the  whole  exposition  (Cf  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  83/84, 
bar  7  with  upbeat-59,  except  for  the  last  beat). 

Then  follows  the  first  recapitulation,  repeating  the  exposition 
distinctly,  even  if  in  a  variational  and  telescoped  manner  (Cf. 
V.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  87,  bars  60  with  upbeat-96,  first  beat). 

The  development  section,  i.e.  the  particular  part  of  the  scene 
in  which  the  characters  and  their  musical  equivalents  come  to 
a  head-on  collision,  leads  up  to  the  climax  of  the  Sonata,  i.e. 
to  the  musical  reminiscence  *Wir  arme  Leut','l  quoted  earlier 

1  Cf.  Music  example  No.  62.  (H.F.R.) 

274 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

in  this  Lecture,  a  motif  which  permeates  the  entire  opera  (Cf. 
V.  sc.  Act  I,  p.  22,  bar  135). 

The  remaining  music  of  this  scene,  as  of  the  following  change 
of  scene  (which  belongs  to  the  preceding  scene  on  musical 
grounds  and  functions  as  its  Coda),  demonstrates  how  the  last 
reprise  of  the  Sonata  can  be  reached  and  the  Sonata  concluded 
by  way  of  the  sustained  chord  of  C-major  which  you  have  just 
heard.  (How  could  the  objectivity  of  money  be  more  rele- 
vantly expressed  than  by  this  chord !)  1 

That  this  music  of  scenic  transformation  can  boast  of  an 
independent  musical  life  and  therefore  be  classified  as  a  small 
musical  unit  while  simultaneously  trying  to  coalesce  with  its 
succeeding  section,  may  be  the  result  of  the  following  device: 
when  the  transition-music  begins,  a  Ghssando  on  the  harp  indi- 
cates its  commencement;  the  same  effect  returns  when  the 
transition  is  ended,  only  the  first  time  in  a  descending^,  the 
second  time  as  an  ascending  pp.  Please  watch  this,  when 
the  orchestra  plays  now  the  Sonata-recapitulation  which 
grows  out  of  that  C-major  chord:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  93-96,  bars 
122-170. 

The  following  scene  also  depends  on  three  dramatic 
characters  which — to  be  sure — are  less  intimately  inter-con- 
nected than  the  three  figures  of  the  preceding  scene,  linked 
together  by  ties  of  blood-relationship.  While  the  former  scene 
therefore  engenders  a  musical  form  in  which  the  limbs  were 
linked  together  hke  members  of  a  family,  that  is  to  say, 
Sonata-form,  the  latter  scene  demands  a  more  artificial  pattern 
consisting  of  more  disparate  elements,  namely,  an  Invention 
and  a  Fugue  with  three  subjects.  The  motival  limitation  of 

^  The  bracketed  sentence  contains  an  important  correction  by  Berg,  pencilled  into 
his  typescript.  The  sentence,  now  referring  to  the  'SachUchkeit'  (objectivity)  of 
money,  ran  originally  thus:  '.  .  .  How  could  the  "Niichternheit"  (prosiness)  of 
money  be  more  relevantly  expressed  .  .  .'  etc.  (H.R.F.). 

275 


ALBAN  BERG 

these  three  subjects,  in  contradistinction  to  the  tendency  for  a 
more  melodic  transition  in  the  preceding  Sonata-movement, 
calls  for  this  strictly  fugal  form.  Its  severity,  to  be  sure,  is  eased 
by  the  fact  that  the  motifs  are  already  well  known.  They  are : 
the  motif  of  the  Captain,  dominating  already  the  very  begin- 
ning of  the  first  scene  of  the  opera:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  97,  bars  171- 
172  (right  hand);  then  the  motif  of  the  Doctor,  from  Act  I, 
scene  3 :  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  97,  bars  1 71-174;  and,  fmally,  one  of 
Wozzeck's  motifs;  the  one  which  had  been  foreshadowed — 
without  Hteral  quotation — ^in  the  preceding  Sonata-movement: 
v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  108,  bars  273-274. 

The  slow  movement  of  this  symphony-hke  Act  II  is  a 
'Largo'.  Apart  from  the  obvious  thematic  connections  of  its 
sectional  and  independent  structure  it  contains  one  other 
peculiar  feature :  it  is  scored  for  a  'chamber  orchestra'  which  is 
modelled  on  the  Chamber  Symphony  No.  i  of  Arnold 
Schoenberg.  Incidentally,  I  intended  thereby  to  pay  homage  to 
my  teacher  and  master  at  this  pivotal  point  of  the  opera. 

On  this  occasion  I'd  Hke  to  mention  that  it  has  been  my 
endeavour,  here  as  in  other  sections  of  the  opera,  to  satisfy 
my  desire  for  imity  and  integration,  as  well  as  for  variety  and 
multiphcity  of  form,  by  utilizing  the  possibilities  of 
orchestration  and  of  instrumental  combination.  You  will  fmd 
not  infrequently  in  this  opera  sections  or  even  whole  scenes 
(hke  this  one)  to  which  a  specific  sonorous  body  remains 
attached.  In  this  way  a  small  instrumental  group — in  the 
manner  of  an  'obbligato' — is  attached  to  the  little  Suite- 
movement  of  scene  i,  Act  I,  for  instance:  five  woodwinds  and 
three  kettledrums  and  harp,  or  three  flutes,  or  four  brass  instru- 
ments only,  or  the  quartet  of  strings.  One  self-contained  section 
of  scene  2,  Act  I,  is  entirely  concerned  with  the  sonority  of 
muted  brass  and  strings  playing  col  legno;  a  fugal  episode  of 

276 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

scene  i,  Act  III  is  limited  to  the  sound  of  five  solo  strings  only. 
Finally  the  orchestration  of  the  very  last  scene  of  the  opera 
might  be  mentioned,  the  scene  of  the  playing  children,  from 
which  oboes,  bassoons,  trombones  and  doublebasses  are  totally 
excluded. 

To  return  once  more  to  that  *Largo' :  the  manner  of  its  intro- 
duction and  of  its  trailing-off  could  be  called  an  example  of 
the  way  to  achieve  a  kind  of  musical  cohesion  by  other 
means  that  the  usual  one  of  a  return  to  the  Tonic.  The  clarinet 
figurations  which  seem  to  emerge  from  the  fugal  subject- 
matter  of  the  preceding  scene — only  to  fade  off^estabHsh  a 
link  with  this  'Largo'  at  the  point  where  the  figuration  seems 
to  congeal:  chord:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  124,  bar  367;  representing 
the  first  harmony-basis  of  the  Largo  theme:  v.  sc.  Act  II, 
p.  124,  bar  364-368. 

The  end  of  that  'Largo'  closes  into  the  same  harmony  which 
— transmuted  again  into  movement — crystalHzes  retrogres- 
sively  into  the  same  clarinet-figuration  from  which  that  chord 
had  emerged  previously:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  134,  bars  406  (with 
upbeat)-4ii. 

These  figures  of  the  clarinets  form  also  a  bridge  to  the 
succeeding  music  of  transition:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  135-136. 

I  intend  now  to  exemplify  the  symmetrical  structure 
of  this  musical  frame  for  a  musico-dramatic  scene  from  the 
angle  of  orchestral  sonorities.  I  will  do  so  by  letting  the 
orchestra  first  play  the  Introduction  with  the  first  Largo-idea 
and  by  adding  afterwards  its  musical  mirror-reflection  with 
which  this  scene  fades  out,  only  to  merge  imperceptibly  into 
the  transition-music  which  in  turn  introduces  the  next  scene 
v/ith  a  slow  Landler-movement. 

In  this  *Landler'  and  in  the  rest  of  the  dance-music  you  may 
find  sections  which  will  strike  you  as  being  dissonant  in  a 

T  277 


ALBAN  BERG 


different  way  than  that  of  strictly  atonal  music :  dissonant,  in  the 
sense  of  the  simultaneous  sound  of  several  pieces  in  different 
keys,  as  you  may  be  used  to  hearing  them  at  a  fun-fair.  This 
obvious  dissonance  which  emerges  from  primitive  polytonaUty 
is  of  course  deliberate,  but  used  not  without  judicious  selection: 
for  it  not  only  derives  from  the  dramatic  situation,  but  is 
also  the  result  of  musical  logistics. 

An  example:  the  antecedent  of  a  Landler  in  G  minor — 
according  to  the  rules  of  formal  construction — either  leads  to 
the  Dominant  (D  major)  or  back  to  the  Tonic.  The  fact  that 
both  things  happen  simultaneously  (who  could  blame  the 
bhnd-fold  rhapsodizings  of  an  alcoholic  band  of  beer  fiddlers  ?) 
leads  to  musical  chaos:  cf.  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  136,  bars  424-425. 

This  chaos  is  prolonged  when  the  section  of  the  beer  fiddlers 
which  had  reached  the  Dominant  returns  to  the  Tonic  of  G 
minor  according  to  rule,  whereas  another  section — with  equal 
justification  by  the  laws  of  modulation — turns  into  the  mediant 
of  E  flat  major:  cf.  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  126,  bar  429. 

It  is  a  miracle  that  they  manage  to  come  together  at  the  end 
of  the  Landler !  Listen  to  that  now,  please.  The  orchestra — as 
pointed  out  before — will  play  first  the  introduction  to  the 
Largo:  Cf.  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  123,  bar  360  (with  upbeat)  until  bar 
372,  and  then  the  retrograde  Coda  with  the  succeeding 
Landler:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  p.  134,  bar  403  (with  long  upbeat)  until 
bar  442  (excluding  the  country-inn-music;  cf.  also  p.  137,  until 
bar  447  inch). 

I've  already  mentioned  that  the  following  scene  represents 
the  Scherzo  within  the  framework  of  that  dramatic  symphony 
with  which  this  Act  II  may  be  compared.  The  Landler  which 
you  have  just  now  heard  is  the  first  subject  of  this  Scherzo.  A 
song  by  the  first  of  the  two  tramps  would  correspond  with  a 
*first  Trio',  a  Waltz  played  by  the  village-inn-band  with  a 

278 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

second  Scherzo,  the  hunting  chorus  of  the  village  lads  would 
— as  being  the  central  portion  of  that  whole  section — represent 
a  ^second  Trio'  in  that  connection.  Now  follows — in  agreement 
with  the  strict  construction  of  such  Scherzo  movements  (think 
of  those  in  Schumann's  symphonies) — the  repeat  of  the  first 
tripartite  Scherzo-group.  To  be  sure,  the  repeat  of  the  three 
little  sections  (Landler,  Lied,  Waltz)  is  not  a  literal  one,  but  as 
much  as  possible  variational,  in  accordance  with  the  progress 
of  the  play.  Thus  the  Landler  is  placed  into  quite  new  musical 
surroundings  although  its  repeat  is  literal.  Thus  the  'first  Trio' 
represented  by  the  tramp's  song  is  repeated  in  so  outspoken  a 
variation  that  its  basic  harmonies  are  unfolded,  resulting  in  a 
Chorale-melody  in  sustained  notes  which — in  its  presentation 
by  the  Bombardon — forms  the  basis  for  a  'melodrame'.  This 
melodrame,  the  harmless  parody  of  a  religious  sermon,  is 
therefore  on  the  one  hand  the  repeat  of  the  'first  Trio',  on  the 
other  hand  a  Chorale- Variation  (albeit  of  a  parodistical  bent) 
and  in  five  parts. 

Finally,  the  repeat  of  the  Waltz,  played  by  the  village  band, 
reappears  still  in  the  form  of  a  waltz;  however,  as  it  also  func- 
tions as  transition-music  to  the  following  scene  its  presenta- 
tion conforms  to  the  augmented  form  of  a  symphonic  develop- 
ment-section played  by  the  entire  orchestra. 

When  that  music  breaks  off  suddenly,  the  snoring-chorus  of 
the  sleeping  soldiers  in  the  barracks  is  heard  through  the 
lowered  curtain.  With  that  section  the  Rondo  Marziale  (men- 
tioned before)  is  introduced,  which  in  turn  concludes  this  Act 
with  that  very  scene  laid  in  the  soldiers'  barracks. 

I  have  already  discussed  the  different  patterns  of  Act  III  and 
their  form-generating  principles.  The  principle  of  scene  i  is  a 
theme,  subjected  to  variational  treatment.  The  strictness  of 

279 


ALBAN  BERG 

architecture  (I  use  this  term  dehberately)  is  responsible  for  the 
fact  that  this  dual  theme,  with  its  antecedent  and  consequent, 
consists  of  seven  bars,  that  it  returns  in  sevenfold  variation,  and 
that  the  double  fugue,  consisting  of  two  subjects  in  accordance 
with  the  duaUsm  inherent  in  the  original  theme,  is  based  on  a 
theme  consisting  of  seven  notes.  The  mathematical  character 
of  this  form  might  easily  be  scoffed  at.  That  is  what  actually 
happened  at  the  occasion  of  the  first  concert  performance  of 
this  piece.  It  occurred  in  a  review  of  a  performance  of  this  so 
called  Bible-scene  which  never  took  place.  Although  not  a 
single  note  of  the  music  of  that  particular  scene  had  actually 
been  performed,  the  hyper-sensitive  music  critic  was  able  to 
notice  and  duly  to  report  to  liis  readers  the  utter  inefficiency  of 
such  an  absurdly  mathematical  structure:  Cf.  v.  sc.  Act  III, 
pp.  181-189,  bars  1-12. 

The  low  *B'  in  the  doublebasses  which  is  here  added  to 
the  final  chord  of  this  Fugue  (we  have  become  acquainted 
with  it  as  being  the  last  note  of  the  significant  concluding 
cadence  of  Act  II),  now  becomes  a  unifying  element  and, 
indeed,  the  cohesive  principle  of  the  following  scene  of 
murder.  It  appears,  of  course,  here  also  in  manifold  guises; 
as  a  pedal  point,  as  sustained  middle  or  treble  part,  doubled 
in  one  or  more  octaves,  in  short,  in  all  possible  positions  and 
sonorous  combinations.  When  fmally  the  murder  of  Marie 
is  committed  to  the  sound  of  the  ff  drum  beats  on  'B',  aU 
motives  connected  with  her  are  sounded  precipitately,  as  may 
well  happen  in  the  very  moment  of  death.  They  pass  through 
her  consciousness  with  lightning  speed  and  in  a  macabre 
grimace,  like  the  real  characters  which  had  permeated  her  life : 
The  Lullaby  from  scene  i  (cf.  v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  kg6,  bar  104) ; 
suggestions  of  the  trinket-scene  of  Act  II  (v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  196, 
bar  104) ;  the  drum  major  liimself  (see  the  same  bar) ;  the  motif 

280 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

of  Marie  bemoaning  her  wretched  Hfe  (bar  105)  which  finally 
fades  away  in  the  moment  of  her  last  breath  with  the  motif  of 
the  dreamy  fifths  (previously  discussed),  the  motive  of  waiting 
in  vain.  .  .  .  Cf  v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  197,  bars  106-107. 

The  short  music  of  transition  enunciates  that  *B'  once 
more  and  this  time  unisono  in  the  higher  octave,  as  the  only 
note  of  the  entire  scale  which  belongs  to  all  instruments  of 
the  orchestra  (c£  v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  197,  bars  117-121).  Now  it 
starts  in  the  softest  pianissimo  possible  in  the  muted  horn  and 
increases  its  sonority  through  gradually  louder  orchestral  entries 
(without  percussion)  up  to  the  most  powerful  outburst.  Re- 
garding these  entries  it  may  be  observed  that  they  do  not  occur 
at  regular  intervals  but  assert  themselves  according  to  a  peculiar 
law  of  rhythm.  Entries  of  the  winds  as  vv^ell  as  of  the  strings 
combined  result  in  a  kind  of  basic  rhythmic  pattern.  There- 
by both  groups  of  these  rhythmically  ordered  entries 
follow  each  other — canonically,  as  it  were — in  the  time-span 
of  a  mere  crotchet  beat.  This  process  produces  the  impression 
as  if  the  resulting  ostensible  irregularity  (which  reaches  the 
level  of  consciousness  in  the  listener  as  little  as  does  the  logical 
order  of  the  entries)  imparted  to  that  crescendo  note  on  *B' 
a  special  breath  of  life.  It  is  a  fact  that  this  crescendo 
produces  an  even  greater  dynamic  effect  and  intensity  than 
does  the  repetition  of  that  crescendo  on  *B'  on  different  levels 
of  the  scale,  supported  by  the  entire  percussion-group. 

The  rhythm  just  mentioned,  is,  of  course,  not  a  matter  of 
mere  chance,  but  of  thematic  importance,  like  the  chord 
arrived  at  by  way  of  the  crescendo-climax.  This  is  the  rhythmic 
pattern  on  which  the  following  scene  is  based  (v.  sc.  Act  III, 
p.  198,  b.  122-129),  and  which  establishes  cohesion  and  unity, 
as  will  become  evident  from  every  single  bar.  To  be  sure,  that 
rhythm  has  not  been  superimposed  on  this  scene,  but  is  used  in 

281 


ALBAN  BERG 


a  manner  permitting  the  highest  degree  of  rhythmical  and  even 
metrical  variability  within  the  limits  of  this  rhythmical 
monotony.  This  is  achieved  by  using  melodies  entirely  based 
on  this  rhythm,  for  instance  the  quick  Polka  of  the  carousing 
young  men  and  women  with  which  these  scene  begins  (cf. 
V.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  198,  bars  122-129),  ov  by  underpinning  the 
accompaniment  by  this  very  rhythm  (cf.  v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  199, 
bars  145-152),  or,  by  augmenting  or  diminishing  this  rhythm 
or  by  shifting  its  accent,  for  instance:  v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  lie,  bars 
152-159,  or,  fmally,  by  superimposing  another  metre  on  this 
rhythm,  by  subdividing  it  into  triplets  or  by  presenting  it  in 
two  or  more  dovetailed  canonic  entries. 

A  similar  example  of  such  utihzation  of  musical  substance 
which  had  proved  its  worth  earlier  in  the  case  of  a  single  note, 
a  similar  example  of  that  form  of  objectivity  {Sachlichkeit) 
(which  is  older  than  its  modern  connotations)  can  be  found 
in  the  following  scene,  based  on  only  one  chord,  or  better,  on 
a  group  of  six  simultaneous  notes  only  (v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  210, 
bar  220).  Also  this  six-note  chord  has  been  announced  (as  has 
been  mentioned  before)  in  that  earlier  short  transition-music 
with  its  great  chmax  on  'B'.  That  chord,  however,  completes 
also  harmonically  the  Coda  of  the  preceding  scene,  resp. 
the  change  of  scene  (v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  210,  bars  219-220). 
Despite  the  fact  that  this  scene  is  closely  tied  to  this  six-note 
group,  it  achieves  variety  and  formal  multiplicity  through  the 
fact  that  this  six-note  chord  is  subjected  to  all  imaginable 
variations,  i.e.  divisions,  inversions,  regroupings  and  changes 
of  position  with  regard  to  all  its  notes,  exactly  as  the  single  note 
or  rhythm  earlier  on  had  been  subjected  to  it:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  i 
p.  213,  bar  247,  or  p.  217,  bar  27.  Even  melodic  divisions,  i.e. 
re-interpretations  of  its  notes  into  new  melodies  occur:  v.  sc. 
Act   III,    p.    217,    bars   278-283.    On   the   other   hand,    the 

282 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

formal  structure  in  this  piece  is  achieved  by  the  old  sym- 
metrical three  part-division  of  ancient  merit.  Thus  this  six-note 
chord  appears  in  the  flanking  parts  of  each  scene  based  only  on 
one  specific  degree  of  the  scale  (but  of  course  in  all  its  variants), 
while  in  the  middle  section  seeking  also  basic  support  from  all 
other  degrees  of  the  chromatic  scale.  When  this  chord  finally 
returns  to  its  original  position  and,  as  it  were,  to  its  tonal  centre, 
it  functions  simultaneously  as  a  harmonic  bridge  to  the  follow- 
ing episode,  the  D  minor  tonality  of  which  signifies  almost  the 
dissolution  of  that  six-note  chord:  v.  sc.  Act  II,  pp.  223-4,  with 
upbeat  to  D  minor. 

More  of  this  anon.  Here  only  a  more  general  remark.  It  is 
obvious  that  music  such  as  the  foregoing,  entirely  based  on 
harmony  and  on  the  simultaneity  of  chords,  must  needs  reveal 
a  strong  impressionistic  influence,  despite  all  melodic  variants. 
This  is,  of  course,  the  natural  result  in  the  case  of  a  dramatic 
action  which  comes  so  near  to  the  elemental  happenings  of 
nature  itself.  For  instance,  the  waves  of  the  pond  submerging 
the  drowning  Wozzeck,  the  croaking  of  toads :  v.  sc.  Act  III, 
p.  222,  bars  297-305;  the  rising  moon:  v.  sc.  Act  III, 
p.  222,  bars  306-308,  etc.  Despite  all  this,  no  attempt  has 
been  made  anywhere  in  this  opera  to  estabhsh  a  musical 
style  which  some  listeners  might  be  inclined  to  trace 
back  to  the  French,  perhaps  to  Debussy.  For  that  ostensible 
Impressionism  (using  here  again  a  famous  artistic  term 
of  recent  decades)  which  is  allegedly  to  be  detected  here 
and  there  in  my  opera,  can  be  found  already  in  the  works 
of  the  Classics  and  the  Romantics  of  music,  quite  apart  from 
Wagner's  imperishable  musical  reflections  of  Nature.  In  fact, 
all  that  could  here  be  called  ^impressionistic'  in  the  sense 
of  the  aforesaid  term  is  miles  removed  from  the  vague  and 
bottomless  sonorities  of  that  particular  style.  On  the  contrary: 

283 


ALBAN   BERG 


all  is  here  based  on  a  strict  musical  principle,  as  I  have 
explained  earlier  in  tliis  lecture.  Here  it  is  based  on  a  thematic 
six-note  group  and  in  Act  I,  scene  2 — discussed  earlier — on  an 
Ostinato  of  a  progression  of  three  chords.  Also  the  fmal  scene 
of  this  Act  III  (the  scene  of  the  playing  children  which  you  have 
just  heard)  with  its  continuous  quaver-movement  (I  was 
able  and,  I  beHeve,  justified  in  calHng  it  a  'perpetuum  mobile' 
in  accordance  with  the  old  traditions  of  form)  thus  obeys  one 
of  these  laws  of  form  which  I  had  to  promulgate  myself  first 
of  all,  in  order  to  submit  to  it  later  on. 

The  final  Scene  (which  we  have  heard  already)  is  preceded 
by  a  somewhat  longer  orchestral  piece.  Tliis  should  be  under- 
stood from  the  dramatist's  point  of  view  as  the  Epilogue  which 
follows  Wozzeck's  suicide;  it  should  also  be  appreciated  as  the 
composer's  confession,  breaking  through  the  framework  of 
the  dramatic  plot  and,  likewise,  even  as  an  appeal  to  the  audi- 
ence, which  is  here  meant  to  represent  Humanity  itself.  From 
the  musician's  point  of  view  this  last  orchestral  interlude  repre- 
sents a  thematic  development-section,  utilizing  all  the  im- 
portant musical  characters  related  to  Wozzeck.  Its  shape  is 
tripartite  and  its  unifying  principle  is — an  exception  to 
the  rule  of  diis  opera — Tonahty.  Tliis  D  minor  key,  the  har- 
monically disintegrating  function  of  which  I  have  already 
previously  mentioned,  is,  to  be  sure,  extended  to  so  vast  an 
extent  that  it  has  become  possible  to  reach  the  ultimate  conse- 
quences of  its  augmented  compass.  This  was  achieved  in  the 
middle  section  of  the  piece,  at  its  very  climax,  i.e.  at  the  point 
where  its  developmental  entries  tighten  up  to  a  veritable 
*Stretto'.  This  resulted  in  a  sound-combination  which — 
although  it  contained  all  the  twelve  notes  of  the  chromatic 
scale — created  in  that  particular  context  only  the  effect  of  a 
Dominant,  leading  naturally  and  inevitably  back  to  the  D 

284 


berg's  lecture  on  'wozzeck'  [1929] 

minor  of  the  recapitulation  (v.  sc.  Act  III,  p.  228,  bars  364-365). 
Extending  my  heartfelt  thanks  to  the  orchestra,  its  conductor 
and  the  supporting  singers  of  the  Opera  House  in  .  .  .  for 
their  collaboration,  I  beg  the  former  now  kindly  to  play  this 
Epilogue  as  a  conclusion  to  my  lecture  (v.  sc.  Act  III,  pp.  224- 
228,  exclusive  of  the  last  beat).  But  before  that  I  would  Hke  to 
express  a  request,  addressed  to  the  audience  itself.  Ladies  and 
gentlemen — I  beg  you  to  forget  all  theory  and  musical  aes- 
thetics which  have  served  my  explanation,  before  you  attend 
the  Tuesday  performance — or  a  later  one — of  the  opera 
*Wozzeck',  staged  at  this  opera  house ! 


285 


CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS 

ORIGINAL   COMPOSITIONS 

I  'Schliesse  mir  die  A.ugen  heide\  i  (Voice  and  Piano)  1900 

(Storm).  Published:  Berlin,  1930,  'Die  Musik'  ,XXIl/5. 
1955  Universal  Edition.  Vienna  (ed.  Redlich).  Auto- 
graph: lost.  Note:  dedicated  to  Emil  Hertzka 
together  with  XV. 

II  Early  Songs  (Voice  and  Piano),  i,  'Heihge  Himmer,  op. 

I,  (F.  Evers);  2,  'Herbstgefiihl'  (Siegfried  Fleischer); 

3,  'Unter  der  Linden'  (Walther  v.d.  Vogelweide); 

4,  'Spielleute'  (Ibsen);  5,  'Wo  der  Goldregen  steht' 
(Lorenz);  6,  'Lied  des  SchifFermadels'  (O.  J.  Bier- 
baum);  7,  'Abschied'  (Monsterberg) ;  8,  'Liebeslied' 
(Dolorosa);  9,  'Uber  meinen  Nachten'  (Dolorosa); 
10,  'Sehnsucht',  I  (Hohenberg);  11,  'SternenfalF 
(Wilhelm) ;  12,  'Er  klagt,  dass  der  Friihling  so  kortz 
bliiht'  (Arno  Holz);  13,  'Ich  und  du'  (Busse); 
14,  'Uber  Nacht'  (Rognetti);  15,  'Verlassen'  (Bo- 
hemian folksong);  16,  'Traurigkeit'  (Peter  Alten- 
berg);  17,  'Hoffnung'  (Peter  Altenberg);  18,  'Floten- 
spielerin'  (Peter  Altenberg);  19,  'Spaziergang'  (Mom- 
bert);  20,  'Soldatenbraut'  (Morike);  21,  'So  regnet  es 
sich  langsam  ein'  (Caesar  Flaischlen);  22,  'Grenzen  der 
Menschheit'  (Goethe);  23,  'Ballade  des  ausseren 
Lebens'  (Hofmannsthal) ;  24,  'Im  Walde'  (Bjornson); 
25,  'Viel  Traume'  (Amerling);  26,  'Tiefe  Sehnsucht* 

287 


ALBAN  BERG 

(Liliencron) ;  27,  *Uber  den  Berg'  (Busse);  28,  *Am 
Strande'  (G.  Scherer) ;  29,  ^Reiselied'  (Hofmannsthal) ; 
30,  'Spuk'  (Hebbel);  31,  'Aus  Pfingsten'  (Evers); 
32,  *  Winter'  (J.  Schlaf);  33,  *0  war'  mein  Lieb  ein 
Roslein  rot'  (Bums);  34,  'Sehnsucht',  II  (Hohen- 
berg);  35,  'Ich  Hebe  dich'  (Grabbe);  36,  'Feme  Lieder' 
(Riickert);  37,  'Ich  will  die  Fluren  meiden'  (Riic- 
kert);  38,  'Geliebte  Schone'  (Heine);  39,  'Schatten- 
leben'  (Graf);  40,  'Am  Abend'  (Geibel);  41,  'Wenn 
Gespenster  auferstehn'  (Felix  Dormann);  42,  'Vom 
Ende'  (Marie  Madeleine);  43,  'Voriiber'  (Wies- 
bacher);  44,  'Scheidelied'  (Baumbach) ;  45,  'Eure 
Weisheit'  (Fischer) ;  46, '  SchlummerloseNacht'  (Greif ) ; 
47,  'Nachtgesang'  (O.  J.  Bierbaum);  48,  'Es  wandelt, 
was  wir  schauen'  (EichendorfF) ;  49,  'Liebe'  (Pilke); 
50,  'Wandert,  ihr  Wolken'  (Avenarius);  51,  'Ini 
Morgengrauen'  (Stieler) ;  52,  'Grabschrift'  (Jakobow- 
ski);  53,  'Traum'  (Semmler);  54,  'Furcht'  (Palma); 
55,  'AugenbHcke'  (Hamerling) ;  56,  'Trinklied' 
(Riickl);  57,  'Fromm'  (Gustav  Falke);  58,  'Leben' 
(Evers);  59,  'Naherin'  (Rilke);  60,  'Erster  Verlust' 
(Goethe);  61,  'Siiss  sind  mir  die  Schollen  des  Tales' 
(Knodt) ;  62,  'Der  milde  Herbst  anno  45'  (Max  Mell) ; 
63,  'Menschenherz'  (delle  Grazie);  64,  'Holophan' 
(Wallpach);  65,  'Mignon'  (Goethe);  66,  'Lauterung' 
(Hohenberg);  67,  'Die  Sorglichen'  (Falke);  68,  'Das 
stille  Konigreich'  (Busse);  69,  'Trinklied'  (Henckell); 
70,  'An  Leukon'  (Gleim).  Dates  of  composition:  Nos. 
I  and  3:  1900.  Nos.  2-25,  and  27-34:  circa  1902.  No. 
26:  1904  or  1905.  Nos.  35-69:  Summer  1904/5.  No. 
70:  1908.  Autographs:  in  Helene  Berg's  possession. 
PubHshed:   No.  70  (c.f  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.,   1937, 

288 


CATALOGUE   OF    WORKS 

Appendix  p.  14).  Note:  No.  8  probably  two  songs; 
Nos.  23,  25  and  26  are  duets.  Autograph:  Helene 
Berg. 

III  Seven  Early  Songs  (Voice  and  Piano),  i,  *Im  Zimmer' 

(Johannes  Schlaf);  2,  *Die  Nachtigall'  (Th.  Storm); 
3,  'Liebesode'  (O.  E.  Hartleben);  4,  *Traumgekront' 
(R.  M.  PJlke);  5,  *Sommertage'  (P.  Hohenberg); 
6,  *Nacht'  (Karl  Hauptmann);  7,  *Schilflied'  (Lenau). 
Dates  of  composition :  No.  i:  Summer  1905;  No.  2: 
Winter  1905/06;  No.  3 :  Summer  1906;  No.  4:  Sum- 
mer 1907;  Nos.  5-7:  Spring  1908.  Autographs: 
Helene  Berg  (except  No.  7,  which  is  at  the  Gesellschaft 
der  Musikfreunde,  Wien).  Publications:  The  re- 
vised Piano  version  was  published  1928  by  Universal 
Edition,  Vienna.  The  version  for  orchestra  was 
acquired  by  the  same  firm,  but  has  remained  unpub- 
lished so  far.  First  performances :  Nos.  2,  3  and  4  were 
first  performed  in  Vienna  on  November  7,  1907,  in 
a  Concert  by  Schoenberg's  pupils.  The  first  per- 
formance of  the  orchestral  version  took  place  in 
Vienna  on  November  6,  1928.  Note:  The  songs  are 
dedicated  to  Helene  Berg. 

IV  Fugue  (with  three  subjects)  for  String  Quintet  and  Piano. 

Composed:  Summer  1907.  Autograph:  lost.  First 
performance:  Vienna,  November  7,  1907. 

V  Compositions  for  6-8  part  Chorus.  Composed:  Summer 

1907.  Autograph:  lost. 

VI  Twelve  Variations  for  the  Piano  on  an  original  theme. 

Date  of  composition:  presumably  begun  in  1907, 
completed  1908.  Autograph:  Helene  Berg.  Publica- 
tion: Cf.  Appendix  i.  First  performance:  November 
8,  1908,  Vienna,  in  a  Concert  by  Schoenberg's  pupils. 

289 


ALBAN  BERG 

VII  Sonata  for  Pianoforte,  op.  i.  Date  of  composition :  Sum- 

mer 1907  to  Summer  1908.  Autograph:  lost. 
Published:  1910,  Berlin,  Robert  Lienau;  1920, 
Vienna,  C.  Haslinger  in  a  revised  edition;  1927, 
Vienna,  Universal  Edition.  First  performance:  April 
24,  191 1,  Vienna. 

VIII  Four  Songs  for  Voice  and  Piano,  op.  2,  on  poems  by  Hebbel 

and  Mombert.  No.  i :  'Schlafen,  schlafen'  (from 
Hebbel's  poem  'Dem  Schmerz  sein  Recht').  No.  2: 
Schlafend  tragt  man  mich.  .  .  .  No.  3 :  Nun  ich  der 
Riesen  Starksten.  .  .  .  No.  4:  Warm  die  Liifte.  .  .  . 
Note:  Nos.  2,  3  and  4  are  taken  from  Mombert's 
cycle  of  poems  *Der  Gliihende'.  Date  of  composi- 
tion: Begun  early  in  1909,  completed  spring  1910. 
Autograph:  lost.  PubUcations:  1910,  Berlin,  Robert 
Lienau;  1920,  Vienna,  C.  Haslinger  in  a  revised 
edition;  1927,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition.  Note: 
Orchestral  version  by  R.  Leibowitz  (only  avail- 
able on  L.P.  record,  cf.  Appendix  5). 

IX  String  Quartet,  op.  3.  Composed:  Spring  to  early  Sum- 

mer 1910.  Autograph:  lost.  Publications:  1920, 
Vienna,  C.  Haslinger;  1924,  Vienna,  Universal 
Edition,  in  a  second  revised  edition.  First  perform- 
ance: April  24,  191 1,  Vienna.  Note:  Dedicated  to 
Helene  Berg. 

X  Five  songs  on  picture-postcard  texts  by  Peter  Alten- 

berg,  for  voice  and  orchestra,  op.  4.  No.  i :  Seele  wie 
bist  du  schoner.  .  .  .  No.  2:  Sahst  du  nach  dem 
Gewitterregen.  .  .  .  No.  3 :  Uber  die  Grenzen  des 
All. . . .  No.  4:  Nichts  ist  gekommen. . . .  No.  5 :  Hier 
ist  Friede.  Composed:  Full  score  completed  in  the 
autumn    of   1912.    Autograph:    Helene    Berg    and 

290 


CATALOGUE    OF    WORKS 

Bodleian  Library,  Oxford  (original  drafts  of  Nos. 
4  and  5).  Publications:  1953,  Vienna,  Universal 
Edition  (edition  for  voice  and  Pianoforte,  ed.  H.  E. 
Apostel).  No.  5  first  published  in  the  magazine 
*Menschen',  No.  5,  1921,  Dresden.  It  was  reprinted 
in  *Musical  Quarterly',  October  issue,  1948,  New 
York,  G.  Schirmer,  ed.  R.  Leibowitz.  The  full  score 
has  remained  unpublished  so  far.  First  performance: 
March  31,  191 3,  Vienna.  It  was  prematurely  broken 
off.  First  complete  performances,  conducted  by  Jasha 
Horenstein,  in  Rome  and  Paris,  during  the  winter 

1952/53. 

XI  Four  pieces  for  Clarinet  and  Piano,  op.  5.  Composed: 

Summer  191 3.  Autograph:  Gottfried  Kassowitz, 
Vienna.  Publications:  1920,  Vienna;  C.  Haslinger, 
1924,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition.  First  Performance: 
October  17,  1919,  Vienna  in  Schoenberg's  'Verein 
fiir  musikahsche  PrivatauffUhrungen'.  Note:  Dedi- 
cated to  Arnold  Schoenberg. 

XII  Three  pieces  for  big  orchestra,  op.  6.  Praeludium,  Reigen, 

Marsch.  Composed:  1914.  Full  score  of 'Praeludium' 
and  'Marsch'  completed  on  September  8,  1914;  full 
score  of  'Reigen'  completed  in  August  191 5.  Auto- 
graph: Universal  Edition,  Vienna  (of  the  revision 
1929/30).  Pubhcations:  1923,  Vienna,  Universal 
Edition,  facsimile-reproduction  of  the  autograph; 
1930,  revision  undertaken  which  was  published  in 
1954,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition.  Performances: 
First  performance  of  'Praeludium'  and  'Reigen' 
on  June  5,  1923,  Berlin,  conducted  by  Webern; 
first  performance  of  all  three  pieces  in  Oldenburg, 
1930,  conducted  by  Johannes  Schiiler.  Note:  Dedicated 

291 


ALBAN   BERG 


to  Arnold  Schoenberg,  on  the  occasion  of  his  40th 
birthday  (September  14,  1914). 

XIII  WOZZECK,  op.  7.  Opera  in  three  acts,  based  on  the 

dramatic  fragment  by  Georg  BUchner.  Dates  of 
composition:  decision  to  set  Biichner's  frag- 
ment: May  1914;  Hbretto  completed:  Summer  1917; 
composition  started:  late  Summer  191 7;  short  score 
completed:  end  of  1920;  orchestration  completed: 
April  1 92 1.  Autograph:  Library  of  Congress,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  U.S.  (full  score),  Alma  Mahler- 
Werfel  (U.S.A.)  (short  score).  Publications:  1922, 
vocal  score  (arr.  F.  H.  Klein),  by  the  composer  him- 
self; 1923,  taken  over  by  Universal  Edition,  Vienna. 
1926,  reprint  of  vocal  score  and  publication  of  full 
score.  Universal  Edition,  Vienna.  1923,  hbretto  pub- 
hshed  (Universal  Edition).  1924,  the  'Three  fragments 
for  voice  and  orchestra'  pubhshed,  Universal  Edition, 
Vienna  (full  score  and  vocal  score).  1956  pubhcation 
of  pocket  score,  Universal  Edition,  Vienna-Zurich- 
London.  First  performance:  December  14,  1925, 
Berlin;  conductor:  Erich  Kleiber.  First  performances 
of  the  'Three  fragments',  June  1924,  Frankfurt/Main, 
conductor:  Hermann  Scherchen.  Note:  Dedicated  to 
Alma  Maria  Mahler. 

XIV  Chamber  Concerto  for  Piano,  Viohn  and  thirteen  wind 

players.  Dates  of  composition:  Sketch:  Summer  1923 
to  February  9,  1925;  orchestration  completed:  July 
23,  1925.  The  second  Movement  'Adagio'  was 
arranged  as  Trio  for  Violin,  Clarinet  and  Piano  in 
1935  by  the  composer.  Autograph:  Full  score: 
Helene  Berg;  Trio — arr. :  Universal  Edition.  Pubhca- 
tions:  1925,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition,  facsimile  of 

292 


CATALOGUE   OF   WORKS 

the  autograph;  1955,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition, 
Trio — arr.  1956:  pocket  score  (reprint),  Universal 
Edition,  Vienna.  First  performance:  March  27,  1927, 
Berlin,  conductor;  Scherchen.  First  performance  of 
the  Trio — arr.  of  mov.  2,  Vienna,  1936.  Note:  Dedi- 
cated to  Arnold  Schoenberg,  on  the  occasion  of  his 
50th  birthday  (September  14,  1924). 

XV  Schliesse  mir  die  Augen  heide  (Storm)  II  (cf.  No.  I).  Com- 

posed: late  Summer  1925.  Autograph:  Emil  Hertzka's 
heirs.  Pubhcations:  together  with  I,Berlin,  1930,  Die 
Musik,  XXII,  February  issue,  1930;  Vienna,  1955, 
Universal  Edition  (ed.  Redlich).  Note:  C£  Note  to 
No.  I. 

XVI  Lyric  Suite  for  String  Quartet.  Dates  of  composition: 

October  1925  to  October  1926;  arrangement  of  the 
three  middle  movements  2,  3  and  4  for  String 
Orchestra  in  1928.  Autographs:  Full  score:  heirs  of 
Alexander  v.  Zemlinsky;  Arr.  for  str.  orch.: 
Universal  Edition,  Vienna.  Pubhcations:  Pocket 
score;  1927,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition  arr.  for  str. 
orch.:  1928,  Vienna,  Universal  Edition.  First  per- 
formances: January  8,  1927,  Vienna  (Kohsch-Quar- 
tet).  Arr.  for  str.  orch.:  January  31,  1929,  Berlin 
(conductor:  Horenstein).  Note:  Dedicated  to  Alex- 
ander V.  Zemlinsky. 

XVII  Le  VinJDer  Wein.  Concert  Aria  with  orchestra,  a  setting 

of  Baudelaire's  poem,  in  the  German  translation  by 
Stefan  George.  Composed:  May  to  July  23,  1929; 
full  score  completed:  August  23,  1929.  Autograph: 
Ruzena  Herlinger.  Pubhcations:  1930,  Vienna,  Uni- 
versal Edition  (vocal  score,  arr.  by  E.  Stein).  Full  score 

u  293 


ALBAN  BERG 

unpublished  so  far.  First  performances :  June  4,  1930, 
Konigsberg  (Prussia),  conductor:  Scherchen,  singer: 
Herlinger. 

XVIII  Four-part  Canon  'Alban  Berg  an  das  Frankfurter  Opern- 

haus'  (words  by  the  composer).  Composed:  Summer 
1930.  Autograph:  Library  of  Congress,  U.S.  pub- 
lication: 1937,  cf.  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.  Appendix,  p.  16. 
First  performance :  February  i,  1930,  Frankfurt/Main. 
Note:  Composed  for  the  celebration  of  the  50th 
anniversary  of  the  opera  house  in  Frankfurt/Main.  It 
contains  in  text  and  music  allusions  to  Schoenberg's 
Opera  'Von  Heute  auf  Morgen',  first  performed  in 
Frankfurt/Main  in  February  1930. 

XIX  LULU.  Opera  in  3  acts,  based  on  Frank  Wedekind's 

plays  'Earth  Spirit'  and  'Pandora's  Box'.  Dates  of 
composition:  Decision  taken:  Spring  1928;  libretto 
complete:  Spring  1929;  agreement  with  Wedekind's 
heirs:  August  1929;  composition  begun :  Spring  1929; 
short  score  completed:  April  1934;  'Lulu-Symphony' 
arranged:  Summer  1934;  orchestration  of  opera 
begun:  Autumn  1934;  interrupted  until  late  August 
1935,  then  resumed  and  carried  on  until  the  com- 
poser's death  (December  24,  1935).  The  orchestration 
of  Act  III  remains  incomplete.  Autograph:  Helene 
Berg.  Publications:  1936,  Viemia,  Universal  Edition, 
vocal  score  (arr.  E.  Stein)  of  Acts  I  and  II  only.  Act  III 
unpublished.  Full  score  also  unpublished.  Lulu-Sym- 
phony (containing  Rondo,  Ostinato,  Lied  der  Lulu, 
Variations,  Adagio),  Vienna,  1935,  Universal  Edition 
(full  score).  Libretto  published:  1937,  Vienna,  Uni- 
versal Edition  (Acts  I  and  II  only).  First  performance 
of  Lulu-Symphony:  November  30,  1934,  conductor: 

294 


CATALOGUE    OF    WORKS 

Kleiber.  First  performance  of  the  opera-fragmen 
(Acts  I  and  II  and  end  of  Act  II  only) :  June  2,  1937, 
Stadtheater  Zurich  (conductor:  Denzler).  Note:  'Das 
Lied  der  Lulu'  is  dedicated  to  Anton  Webern,  on  the 
occasion  of  his  50th  birthday  (December  3,  1933);  the 
the  whole  opera  is  dedicated  to  Arnold  Schoenberg, 
on  the  occasion  of  his  60th  birthday  (September  14, 

1934). 
XX  The  Violin  Concerto.  'To  the  Memory  of  an  Angel.' 
Composed:  Short  score:  April  to  July  12,  1935: 
orchestration  completed:  August  11,  1935.  Auto- 
graph: Louis  Krasner,  U.S.A.  Publications:  1936, 
Vienna,  Universal  Edition  (full  score);  1938,  Vienna, 
Universal  Edition,  piano  arr.  (R.  Kurzmann),  revised 
by  Berg  shortly  before  his  death.  First  performance: 
April  19,  1936,  Barcelona,  conductor:  Scherchen, 
soloist:  Louis  Krasner.  Note:  Dedicated  to  Louis 
Krasner. 


ARRANGEMENTS  OF  COMPOSITIONS  BY  OTHERS 

FRANZ  schreker:  Der  feme  Klang,  vocal  score  with  text  1911, 
Vienna,  Universal  Edition. 

ARNOLD  SCHOENBERG:  Gurreliedcr,  vocal  score  with  text,  1912, 
Vienna,  Universal  Edition. 

'Litanei'  and  'Entriickung'  (middle  movements  of  the  String 
Quartet,  op.  10),  arr.  for  voice  and  Piano  (completed  in  1912, 
published  in  1921),  Vienna,  Universal  Edition. 
Chamber  Symphony  op.  9,  arr.  for  Piano  Duet  191 3/1 5,  lost. 


295 


ALBAN   BERG 
LONGER  ARTICLES  AND  LECTURES 

ARNOLD  schoenberg:  'Gurrelicder'.  Thematic  analysis  and 
Guide,  by  Alban  Berg.  Published:  Vienna,  1913,  Universal 
Edition,  No.  3695,  also  in  a  shortened  edition,  U.  E.  No.  52, 

577. 

Chamber  Symphony,  op.  9.  Thematic  analysis  by  Alban 
Berg.  Pubhshed:  191 3,  Universal  Edition,  No.  6140. 
Pelleas  und  Mehsande,  op.  5.  Short  thematic  analysis  by 
Alban  Berg.  Pubhshed:  Universal  Edition, No.  6268.  A  more 
detailed  analysis  was  planned  and  perhaps  sketched  in  1920 
and  later.  It  is  lost. 

Lecture  on  WOZZECK.  First  given  in  1929  in  numerous 
German  cities.  First  complete  pubhcation:  Cf.  Appendix  2. 

'Was  ist  atonal?':  Radio-Dialogue,  spoken  in  the  RAVAG, 
Vienna,  on  April  23,  1930.  First  published  in  the  magazine 
*23',  Vienna  (ed.  W.  Reich),  Nos.  26/27,  June  1936.*). 

Cycle  of  Lectures  on  Schoenberg's  Music,  delivered  in  Vienna 
in  the  winter  1932/33.  Manuscript  lost. 


SHORTER  ARTICLES  (as  far  as  pubhshed) 

N.B.:  R     —  Reprint  by  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.  1937. 

RO  =  Reprint  in  ital.  transl.  L.  Rognoni,  op. 
cit.,  1954. 

Dem  Lehrer.  Symposium  'Arnold  Schoenberg',  Munich,  Piper 
&  Co.,  1912.  (R) 

*  English  transL  publ.  in  N.  Slonimsky's  'Music  since  1900',  3rd  ed.,  1949  and  in 
'Music  Today',  ed.  R.  H.  Myers,  London,  1949.  Italian  transl.  publ.  in  L.  Rognoni's 
'Espressionismo  e  dodecafonia',  Einaudi  editori,  Saggi  173,  1954.  Condensed 
r6sum6  publ.  under  the  same  title  in  H.  Scherchen's  'Musica  Viva',  Brussels,  1936,  II. 

296 


CATALOGUE    OF    WORKS 

Der  Verein  fiir  musikalische  Privatauffuhrungen  in  Wien.   From 

the  Society's  leaflet,  Feb.  191 9.  (R) 
Erziehung  des  Zeitungslesers  tut  not.  Fragment  of  an  unpublished 

article  written  in  Summer  1920,  publ.  W.  Reich,  'Melos', 

July/ August  issue  1953,  p.  219. 
Warum   ist    Schoenbergs  Musik  so  schwer  verstandlich?  Special 

issue  of  the  'Anbruch'  at  the  occasion  of  Schoenberg's  50th 

birthday,  Vl/ August-Sept,  issue,  1924.  (R),  Engl,  edition 

under:  *Why  is  Schoenberg's  Music  so  hard  to  imderstand?', 

transl.  by  Anton  Swarowsky  and  Joseph  H.  Lederer,  publ. 

in  'The  Music  Review',  Cambridge,  XIII/3,  August  1952. 
Verbindliche  Antwort  aufeine  unverbindliche  Rundfrage.  From  *2$ 

Jahre  Neue  Musik',  Jahrbuch  1926  der  UE,  Wien.  (R) 
A  Word  About  'Wozzeck\  Modern  Music,  U.S.A.,  V/i,  Nov. 

1927. 
Credo.  'Die  Musik',  XXIV/ 5,  January  1930.  (R) 
Vgl.  Wozzeck — Bemerkungen  von  Alban  Berg  (1930),  UE,  Wien. 

Except  for  a  new  introduction  paragraph,  identical  with  the 

*Pro  Domo'  section  of 'Das  Opemproblem',  1928. 
Zum  60.  Geburtstag.  'Festschrift  fiir  Arnold  Schoenberg',  UE, 

Wien,  1934.  (R) 
Die  Stimme  in  der  Oper.  'Gesang',  Jahrbuch  1929  der  UE,  Wien. 

(R),  (RO) 
Praktische  Anweisungen  zur  Einstudierung  des  'Wozzeck'  (1930). 

First  publ.  by  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.  1937,  p.  166  ff. 
Operntheater.  Anbruch,  Wien,  X/8,  October  1928.  (R)  (RO) 
Das  'Opemproblem'.  'Neue  Musik-Zeitung',  Stuttgart,  1928. 

(R) 

Die  musikalischen  Formen  in  meiner  Oper '  Wozzeck'.  'Die  Musik', 

Berhn,  XVI/5,  Feb.  1924.  (R) 
Open  Letter  to  Arnold  Schoenberg.  (Thematic  analysis  of  Berg's 

Chamber  Concerto,  by  the  composer).  Vienna  1925,  Uni- 

ux  297 


ALBAN  BERG 


versal  Edition.  ('Pult  undTaktstock'),  February  issue,  1925. (R) 
Die  Musikalische  Impotenz  der  'neuen  AsthetiU  Hans  Pjitzners. 

Anbruch,  Wien,  Il/No.  11-12,  June  1920.  (R) 
Handel  und  Bach.  '23',  No.  20-21,  March  1935.  (R) 
Zu  Franz  Schuberts  100  Todestag.  *Unterhaltungsblatt'  der  Vos- 

sischen  Zeitung,  Berlin,  18  Nov.  1928.  (R) 
Vorstellung  Ernst  Kreneks.  Ansprache,   3  January  1928.  First 

publ.  by  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.  1937. 
Gedenkrede  auf  Emil  Hertzka.  Ansprache,  20  June,  1932.  First 

publ.  by  W.  Reich,  op.  cit.,  1937. 
An  Adolf  Loos.  'Festschrift  zum  60.  Geburtstag  von  Adolf  Loos 

am  10  December  1930',  Wien,  Verlag  der  Buchhandlung 

Pichard  Lanyi,  Wien.  (R) 
An  Karl  Kraus.  'Stimmen  iiber  Karl  Kraus',  zum  60.  Geburt- 
stag, 28  April,   1934,  Verlag  der  Buchhandlung  Richard 

Lanyi,  Wien.  (R) 


298 


DISCOGRAPHY 


The  following  list  is  intended  to  be  exhaustive.  Inclusion  of  a  catalogue  number  is  no 
indication  of  present  auaiJability  for  which  manufacturer's  up-to-date  catalogues  should  be 
consulted.  Under  each  composition  are  listed  the  various  recorded  performances  with  the 
countries  of  issue,  manufacturer  and  catalogue  numbers. 

All  records  are  33  J  r.p.m.  microgroove  except  those  marked  "^^  which  are  78  r.p.m.  coarse 
groove. 

This  Discography,  compiled  by  W.  N.  Aspinall,  is  based,  by  permission,  on  the  '  World's 
Encyclopaedia  of  Recorded  Music'  by  F.  F.  Clough  and  J.  G.  Cuming  {Sidgwick  and  Jackson, 
London,  1952),  the  first  and  second  supplements  thereto,  and  unpublished  material  for  the 
forthcoming  third  supplement  supplied  by  the  Authors. 

The  works  are  in  chronological  order  of  composition 


THEODOR     STORM-SONG 

(1900  Version) 

B.  Beardslee  (Sop.) 
J.  L.  Monod  (Piano) 

SEVEN  EARLY  SONGS  (1907) 

C.  Rowe  (Sop.) 
B.  Tupas  (Piano) 
B.  Beardsley  (Sop.) 
J.  L.  Monod  (Piano) 

SEVEN  EARLY  SONGS  (Orches- 
trated) 

K.  Harvey  (Sop.)  Zurich 
Radio  Orchestra 
W.  Goehr. 

*AN  LEUKOn' — SONG  (1908) 

B.  Beardslee  (Sop.) 
J.  L.  Monod  (Piano) 


America,  Dial,  Dial  15 
France,  Classic,  C6174 


America,  Lyrichord,  LL13 

France,  Eurochord,  LPG628 
America,  Dial,  Dial  15 
France  Classic,  C6174 
America    Concert   Hall   G12 


America,  Dial,  Dial  15 
France,  Classic,  C6174 


299 


ALBAN  BERG 
PIANO  SONATA  OP.  I  (ipoS) 

B.  Tupas  (Piano) 
T.  Ury  (Piano) 


A.  Schier-Tiessen  (Piano) 


Z.  Skolowsky  (Piano) 


G.  Gould  (Piano) 

J.  Manchon-Thies  (Piano) 


FOUR  SONGS  OP.  2  (1908/9) 

C.  Rowe  (Sop.) 
B.  Tupas  (Piano) 


America,  Lyrichord  LL13 
France,  Eurochord  LPG.  628 
Great  Britain,  Argo  ATM1006 
(Existence  doubtful) 

France,  Poly  dor,  5032.* 
Germany,    Deutsche    Gram- 

mophon  Gesellschaft, 

72140.* 

America,  Columbia  ML  4871 

Great  Britain,  Phillips 
NBL  5025 

International,  Phillips 
NO2131L 

Canada,  Hallmark,  RS3 

France,  Ducretet-Thomson, 
LAP  1059 

Great  Britain,  Ducretet- 
Thomson,  MEL  94008 

Germany,  Telefunken 
TW30031 

America,  Lyrichord,  LL13 
France,  Eurochord,  LPG  628 


FOUR   SONGS   OP.   2   (Orches- 
trated— Rene  Leibowitz) 
L  Joachim  (Sop.)  Chamber    America,  Dial,  Dial  15  (L.P.) 


Orchestra — R.  Leibowitz 


France,  Classic  C2084* 
France,  Classic  C6174 
Great  Britain,  Esquire 
TW4-001* 

300 


DISCOGRAPHY 


STRING  QUARTET  OP.  3  (1910) 

New  Music  Quartet 
Juilliard  Quartet 


FOUR  PIECES  FOR  CLARINET  AND 
PIANO  OP.  5  (191 3) 

S.  Forrest  (Clarinet) 
B.  Tupas  (Piano) 
E.  Thomas  (Clarinet) 
J.  L.  Monod  (Piano) 
H.  Tichmann  (Clarinet) 
R.  Budnevich  (Piano) 

THEODOR  STORM — SONG  (1925 

Version) 

B.  Beardslee  (Sop.) 

J.  L.  Monod  (Piano) 

VozzECK  (1925) 

E.  Farrell  (Marie) 
M.  Harell  (Wozzeck) 

F.  Jagel  (Tambour-major) 
R.  Herbert  (Doctor) 
Chorus  of  the  Schola  Can- 
torum,  Philharmonic  Sym- 
phony Orchestra  of  New 
York  conducted  by  D.  Mit- 
ropoulos 


America,   Bartok  Recording 
Soc,   BRS906 
(old  no.  BRS006) 

America,  Columbia,  ML4737 

(in  set  SL  188) 
International,  Phillips 

AO1178L 

America,  Lyrichord  LL.13 
France,    Eurochord    LPG628 


America,  Dial,  Dial  15 
France,  Classic  C6174 
America,  Concert  Hall  G.12 


America,  Dial,  Dial  15. 
France,  Classic,  C.7164 


America,  Columbia,  SLii8(2) 
France,  Columbia,  FCX157/8 


301 


ALBAN  BERG 


three  excerpts  from 
*wozzeck' 
G.  Ribla  (Sop.) 
Philadelphia  Orchestra- 
E.  Ormandy 


America,  Columbia, 

Set  MX347* 
America,  Columbia,  ML2140 
Great  Britain,  Columbia, 

LX1158/9* 


C.  Borner  (Sop.)  Jansen  America,    Artist    1301/2* 

Sym.  Orch.  of  Los  Angeles        (SetJ.S.12)* 

— W.  Jansen  America,  Artist  500 


Unknown  soloist  and 
orchestra  conducted  by 
Berendt 


America,   Allegro-Elite   3144 


CHAMBER  CONCERTO  (1925) 

R.  Charmy  (Violin), 
J.  L.  Monod  (Piano) 
Paris  Chamber  Orchestra 
— R.  Leibowitz 

I.  GitHs  (VioHn) 
G.  Zelka  (Piano) 
Pro  Musica  Wind  Inst. 
Group — Byrns 


America,  Dial,  Dial  9 
France,  Classic,  C2107/12* 
France,  Classic,  C609/8 
Great  Britain,  Esquire, 

TW4-004/9* 
Great  Britain,  Felsted,  L89004 

America,  Vox  PL8660 
Great  Britain,  Vox  PL  8660 


LYRIC  SUITE  FOR  STRING 
QUARTET  (1927) 

The  (New)  Pro-Arte 
Quartet 


America,  Dial,  Dial  5 
Sweden,  Metronome, 

CL5003/5*  (Set  CL3)* 
Sweden,  Metronome 

CLP5003 


302 


Gaiiniir  Quartet 


Jtiiliard  Quartet 


DISCOGRAPHY 

America,  Vox,  Set  i8i* 
France,  Poly  dor,    595133/38* 

(Old  Nos.  516659/62)* 
Great    Britain,    Decca,    CA 

8244/47* 
America,  Columbia,  Set  MM 

957* 
America,  Columbia,  ML2148 


LYRIC  SUITE — ORCHESTRATED 

Recording  exists — no  details  known. 

*DER  WEIn' — CONCERT  ARIA 
(1928) 

R,  Herlinger  (Sop.) — orchestra  conducted  by  H.  Scherchen 

Manufacturer  and  Catalogue  Number  unknown 

C.  Boerner  (Sop.) — Janssen     America,  Capitol  L8150 
Sym.  Orch.  of  Los  Angeles    Great  Britain,  Capitol 
— W.  Janssen  CCL75 1 5 


*LULU  (1928-34) 

I.  Steingruber  (Lulu) 
W.  Kmentt  (Artist) 
O.  Wiener  (Dr  Schon) 
Vienna  Symphony  Orches- 
tra conducted — H.  HafEier 


America,  Columbia, 
Set  SLi2i(3) 


VIOLIN  CONCERTO  (1934) 

L.  Krasner  (Violin) 
Cleveland  Orchestra— 
A.  Rodzinsky 


America,  Columbia 

ii589/iD*(SetM465)* 
America,  Columbia  ML  4857 
AustraHa,  Columbia  LOX 
594/6* 


303 


ALBAN  BERG 

A.  Gertler  (Violin)  America,  Angel  35091 

Philharmonia  Orchestra —  France,   Columbia  FCX  297 

P.  Kletzki  Great  Britain,  Columbia 

33C1030 

I.  Gitlis  (Violin)  America,  Vox  PL  8660 

Pro  Musica  Symphony —  Great  Britain,  Vox  PL  8660 
W.  Strickland 

S.  Goldberg  (Violin)  America,  Pittsburgh   Festival 
Pittsburgh  Sym.  Orch.—  CB181 

W.  Steinberg. 


304 


BIBLIOGRAPHY* 

Musikblatter  des  anbruch:  Alban  Berg's  'Wozzeck'  und  die 
Musikkritik  (Musik  der  Gegenwart,  Eine  Flugblatterfolge, 

No.  9,  UE,  1925)* 

Kurt  Blaukopf:  Autobiographische  Elemente  in  Alban  Berg's 

'Wozzeck',  Vienna,    1954,   Osterr.   Musikzeitschrift  (May 

issue) 

Fritz  Bouquet:  Alban  Berg's  'Lyriscbe  Suite'.  Eine  Studie  liber 

Gestalt,  Klang  und  Ausdruck.  (Melos,  August-Sept.  1948, 

Mainz) 

Mosco  Carrier:  Alban  Berg;  Violin  Concerto  (in  Ralph  Hill's 

'The  Concerto',  London,  1952,  pp.  362-379.) 

Study  of  20th  Century  Harmony,  2nd  ed.  London,  1944. 

P.  Collaer—J.  Weterings:  Une  nouvelle  oeuvre  d' Alban  Berg: 

Loulou.  (Revue  Musicale,  Paris,  1935) 

K.  H.  David:  'Lulu'  von  Alban  Berg  (Schwz.  Musikztg.  77.  Jg. 

No.  13,  I  July,  1937,  p.  397  fF.) 

also:  Vorbericht  (Schwz.  Musikztg.  77.  Jg.  No.  12,  p.  385). 

M.  Deutsch:  Le  Concerto  de  Chambre  d' Alban  Berg  (Schwz. 

Musikztg.  1949,  No.  9). 
H.   Eimert:  Alban  Berg  (Blatter  der   Stadt.  BUhnen  Essen, 

Spielzeit  1952/53,  Heft  13). 
Roberto  Gerhard:  Berg's  'Wozzeck'  (Foyer,  No.  2,  Staples  Press, 

London,  1951/52). 

Felix  Greissle:  Die  formalen  Grundlagen  des  Blaserquintetts 

von  Arnold  Schoenberg  (Anbruch,  1925/2). 

♦pamphlets  and  booklets  have  one  asterisk,  books  have  two. 

305 


ALBAN   BERG 

D.J.  Grout:  A  short  History  of  Opera  2  Bd.,  U.S.A.,  1947, 

pp.  5323/5.** 
R.    S.    Hill:    Report    on    the    Berg-Schoenberg    Corres- 
pondence 
(Quarterly  Journal  of  Current  Acquisitions,  Library  of  Con- 
gress, Washington  D.C.,  November  1952). 
A  Note  on  Schoenberg's  Tone-Rows  and  the  tonal  system  of 
the  future  (Musical  Quarterly,  January,  1936). 
Berg:  Lulu  (review  of  LP  record  Columbia  SL-121).  (Mus. 

Qu.,  January,  1953,  pp.  134  ff.) 

P.  Hindemith:  Unterweisung  im  Tonsatz  (Mainz,  1937).** 

Hans  Hollaender:  Alban  Berg      (Mus.  Q.  XXII/4,  Oct.  1936.) 

Herbert  Hiibner:  Alban  Berg  (in  *Musik  in  Geschichte  u.  Gegen- 

wart',  ed.  F.  Blume,  Kassel,  1947  ff.,  Sp.  1681  ff.). 

Hanns  Jelinek:  Versuch  iiber  den  Sirm  der  Verwendung  von 

Zwolftonreihen  (Melos,  Sept.  Heft  195 1,  Mainz). 

Anleitung  zur  Zwolftonkomposition*    (UE,  Wien,  1952). 

F.  H.  Klein:  Uber  den  'Mutterakkord'  (Die  Musik,  Berlin, 

January,  1925). 

Variationen  iiber    ein  *Modell-Typ   If,  das   aus    12  ver- 

schiedenen  Tonen  und  zugleich  aus  1 1  verschiedenen  Inter- 

vallen  besteht  (mit  Vorwort  und  Analyse)  Linz,  1924. 

Pierre  Jean  Jouve  and  Michel  Fano :  Wozzeck  ou  le  nouvel  opera. 

(Paris,  1953.)** 
P.  ].  Jouve:  Matiere  musicale  de  Wozzeck  (Preuves,  No.  special, 

May  1952,  pp.  2  ff.). 
*  Wozzeck'  d' Alban  Berg  (Acte  III,  Sc.  4),  pp.  87-98  (off- 
print of  a  chapter  from  the  publication  of  1952).  (La  Revue 

Musicale,  April  1952,  No.  212.) 
Hans  Keller:  The  eclecticism  of  Wozzeck  (Music  Review, 
Cambridge,  XII/4,  XIII/2,  3);  XIV/i,  pp.  55-59. 

306 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Correspondence  with  H.  F.  Redlich  on  'Alban  Berg  and 

the  C  major  triad'  XIII/4,  p.  332. 
*Lulu  (Holland  Festival  193 1,  XIV/4,  p.  302  fF.). 

Ernst  Krenek :  'Fiinf  Orchesterlieder  nach  Ansichtskartentexten 
von  Peter  Altenberg  op.  4'  (in  W.  Reich's  *Alban  Berg', 

Wien,  1937),  p.  43  ff. 
tlber  neue  Musik  (Wein,  1937).* 
Zwolfton-Kontrapunktstudien,  Schott,  Mainz,  1952. 
*New  developments  of  the  Twelve-Tone  Technique.'  (The 

Music  Review,  IV/q.,  May,  1943). 

Rene  Leihowitz:  Schoenberg  et  son  ecole.  (Paris,  1947),  Ed. 

Janin.** 
Innovation  and  Tradition  in  contemporary  music  III :  Alban 
Berg:  or  the  seduction  to  Truth  (Horizon,  London,  Heft  8, 

1947). 

Alban   Berg's  five  orchestra  songs  op.  4  (with  reprint  of 

op.  4/N0.  5)  (Mus.  Qu.,  October,  1948). 

Qu'est-ce  que  la  Musique  de  douze  sons?  (Ed.  Dynamo, 

Liege,  1948).* 
Schoenberg   and  his   school,   U.S.A.,    1949   (transl.   Dika 

Newlin).** 
Introduction  a  la  Musique  de  douze  sons  (Paris,  L'Arche, 

1949)** 

Gian  Francesco  Malipiero :  L' Opera  di  Gian  Francesco  MaHpiero, 
con  ima  introduzione  di  G.  M.  Gatti,  Edizione  di  Treviso, 
1952.  (It  contains  two  letters  by  Berg  to  Malipiero,  dated 
July  17  and  September  19,  1934,  in  Ital.  transl.) 

Zqffa    Lissa:    GeschichtHche  Vorform  der  Zwolftontechnik 

(Acta  Musicologica,  Vol.  VII,  1935). 

D.  Mitchell :  The  Emancipation  of  the  Dissonance.  A  selected 
Bibhography  of  the  writings  of  Composers,  Theorists,  and 

307 


ALBAN  BERG 

Critics  (The  Music  Book,  Vol.  VII  of  Hinrichsen's  Year 

Book,  London,  1952,  pp.  141  fF.) 
Dika  Newlin:  Bruckner,  Mahler,   Schoenberg  (New  York, 

1947).** 
Desire  Pacque:  L'Atonalite  ou  mode  chromatique  unique  (La 

Revue  Musicale,  Jg.  11,  1930,  Paris). 
Emit  Petschnig:  Atonales  OpernschafFen  ('Die  Musik',  Berlin, 

XVI,  Febr.,  1924). 

G.  Perle:  Evolution  of  the  Tone  Row:  The  Twelve-Tone 

Modal    System    (The    Music    Review,    II/4,    Nov.    1941, 

pp.  280  ff.). 
Twelve-Tone   Tonahty   (The   Monthly   Musical   Record, 

October,  1943). 
Schoenberg's  late  style  (The  Music  Review,  XIII/4,  Nov. 

1952,  pp.  274  ff). 
Hans  Pjitzner:  Die  neue  Asthetik  der  musikahschen  Impotenz. 
Ein  Verwesungssymptom  ?  (Miinchen,  1920). 
Futuristengefahr,  Miinchen,  191 7. 
K.  Rankl:  Arnold  Schoenberg  (The  Score,  No.  6,  May  1952, 

pp.  40  ff.). 
H.  F.  Redlich :  Gustav  Mahler — eine  Erkenntnis  (Nuremberg, 

1919).* 
Die  Welt  der  V.,  VI  und  VII.  Symphonic  (Anbruch,  II/7-8, 

Sonderheft  *Gustav  Mahler'). 
Schoenberg's  TonaUtat. 

Zu  Schoenberg's  Instrumentierung  zweier  Bachscher  Choral- 
vorspiele  ('Pult  &  Taktstock',  IV/March- April  1927,  Sonder- 
heft, 'Schoenberg  u.  seine  Orchesterwerke'.) 
Schoenberg's   'Erwartung'   in  Wiesbaden  (Anbruch,   X/2 

February  1928). 

Schoenberg's  neue  Oper  ('Von  Heute  auf  Morgen').  (Blatter 

der  Frankfurter  Oper,  Heft  3/4  Febr.  1930.) 

308 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

'Von  Heute  auf  Morgen   (Hamburgischer  Correspondent, 

4  Febr.  1930). 
Mahler's  Wirkung  in  Zeit  und  Raum.  (Anbruch,  XII/3, 

April  1930). 
Alban  Berg  und  der  Schoenberg-Kreis  (Lecture  at  the 
Volkshochschule  Mannheim,  23  May  1932). 
Arnold  Schoenberg.  (The  Music  Review,  XII/4,  Nov.  195 1). 
Alban  Berg  and  the  C  major  Triad.  (Correspondence,  The 
Music  Review,  XIII/3,  August  1952.) 
*Der  Symphoniker  Alban  Berg'  (history  of  the  genesis  of 
op.  6),  Vienna,  1954,  Osterr.  Musikzeitschrift,  May  issue. 
*Alle  guten  Dinge'.  .  .  (with  letters  by  Berg  on  the  genesis 
of  the  Chamber  Concerto),  Mainz,  1955,  Melos  (Schott), 

Febr.  issue,  1955. 
*Bruckner  and  Mahler'  (Master  Musicians,  London,  1955, 

Dent's).** 

Willi  Reich:  'Wozzeck' — a  guide  to  the  words  and  music  of 

the  Opera  by  Alban  Berg  (Modem  Music,  No.  2  of  a  series 

of  Monographs,  U.S.A.,  193 1).* 
Reprint  (together  with  Berg's  'A  word  about  Wozzeck'), 
Modern  Music,  V/i,  Nov.  1927)  in  Mus.  Q.  XXXVIIl/i, 

Jan.  1952. 
Alban  Berg  (Die  Musik,  BerHn,  XXII/5,  Febr.  1930)  together 
with  the  two  Storm-Lieder 'Schhesse  mir  die  Augen  beide'. 
*Lulu' — the  text  and  music  (Modern  Music,  U.S.A.,  XII/3, 

April  1935). 
Alban  Berg's  *Lulu'  (Mus.  Q.  XII/4,  Oct.  1936). 
Alban  Berg  (mit  Bergs  eigenen  Schriften  und  Beitragen  von 
Theodor  Wiesengrund-Adorno  und  Ernst  Krenek),  Wien, 

1937.** 
Article  *Alban  Berg'  in  Grove's  Diet,  of  Music  and  Musicians, 

Suppl.  1940,  pp.  38  ff. 

309 


ALBAN   BERG 

Article  'Twelve  Note  Music'  (Grove's  Diet.  Suppl.  1940, 

pp.  635  fF.). 

Alban  Berg's  'Lulu'  (Zur  Ziircher  UraufFiihrung  der  Oper 

(Schweiz.    Musikztg.    77.    Jg.    No.    11,    June    i,     1937), 

Programme  Stadtttieater  Zurich,  June  1937. 

Alban  Berg's   *Lulu-Symphonie'  (Neue  Ziircher  Zeitung, 

March  1936). 
Alban  Berg's  Opera  'Lulu'  (Melos,  Heft  12,  Dec.  1952). 
Zur  deutschen  ErstaufFiihrung  von  Alban  Berg's  'Lulu* 
(Blatter  der  Essener  Stadt.  Biihnen,  Spielzeit  1952/53,  Heft 

Versuch  einer  Geschichte  der  Zwolftonmusik  (In  *Alte  und 
neue  Musik',  Das  Basler  Kammerorchester,  Atlantis  Verlag, 

Zurich,  1952,  p.  106  if.). 

Aus  unbekannten  Briefen  von  Alban  Berg  an  Anton  Webern 

(Schweiz.  Musikztg.  93,  Jg.  No.  2,  February  1953). 

Alban  Berg — Number  of  '23',    eine   Wiener  Musikzeit- 

schrift  (ed.  W.  Reich),  Nos.  24/25,  February  1936. 

*Aus    Alban    Berg's  Jugendzeit',    Mainz,    1955.    'Melos', 

Febr.  issue,  1955. 

Luigi  Rognoni :  Expressionismo  e  dodecaphonia  (Giuho  Einaudi, 

1954),  especially  Chapters  V  and  VL 

H.  Rottweiler:  Zur  Lulu-Symphonie — Erinnerungen  an  den 
Lebenden  ('23',  Berg-Number,  Nos.  24-26,  1936). 

Josef  Rufer:    Die  Komposition   mit    zwolf  Tonen    (Berlin, 

1952).** 

(Engl,  edition,  London,  1955,  Rockliff ). 

Dokumente  einer  Freundschaft  (Berg's  letters  to  Schoenberg, 

written  in  1935),  Mainz,  1955,  'Melos'. 

JR..  Schaefke:  Alban  Berg's  Opera  'Wozzeck'  ('Melos',  1926). 

Arnold  Schoenberg:  Harmonielehre,  Vienna,  191 1. 

310 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Brief  an  N.  Slonimsky  (in  Slonimsky,  'Music  since  1900 

New  York,  1937) 
Style  and  Idea  (New  York,  1950) 

Alban  Berg  (Programmbuch  der  Diisseldorfer  Oper,  1930, 
reprint  in  W.  Reich  op.  cit.,  p.  204,  1937) 
Alban  Berg  (1949)  (Cf.  Appendix  III). 
Zu  meinem  50.  Geburtstag  (Anbruch,  Sonderheft  'Arnold 

Schoenberg',  VI,  Aug.-Sept.  1924). 
Walter  Schrenk:  Manfred  Gurlitt's  'Wozzeck'  (Anbruch,  VIII/5, 

1926). 
Humphrey  Searle:  Alban  Berg's  Early  Works  (The  Listener, 

London). 
Schoenberg  and  the  Future  (The  Music  Book,  Hinrichsen, 

Yearbook  VII,  1952,  pp.  134  ff.). 

20th  Century  Counterpoint,  London,  1955,  RockhfF. 

Maty  as  Seiber:  Composing  with  Twelve  Notes  (Music  Survey 

IV/3,June  1952). 
G.  Sharp:   'Wozzeck'  (The  Music  Review,  XIIl/i,  p.   52). 
Erwin    Stein:    Neue    Formprinzipien   (Anbruch,    Sonderheft 
'Arnold  Schoenberg',  VI,   Aug.-Sept.   Heft,    1924).   (Re- 
printed frequently.) 
Einige     Bemerkungen     zu    Schoenbergs    Zwolftonreihen 

(Anbruch,  June-July  issue,  1926). 
Analyse  der  'Lyrischen  Suite'  (Philharmonia  score.  No.  173, 

UE,  Wien,  1927). 
Alban  Berg  u.  Anton  Webern  (Chesterian,  No.  10,  1922). 
'Orpheus  in  New  Guises',  London  1953,  RocklifF.** 
'Stimmen':  Sonderheft,  zum  75.  Geburtstag  Arnold  Schoen- 
berg's,  Berlin,  1954,  Stimmen,  No.  16. 
H.  H.  Stuckenschmidt:  Neue  Musik  (Berhn,  195 1).** 

Arnold  Schoenberg  (Ziirich,  195 1).* 
O.  Thompson:  Obituary  (Musical  America,  Jan.  10,  1936). 

311 


ALBAN  BERG 

Ernst  Viebig:  Berg's  'Wozzeck'  (Die  Musik,  Berlin,  XV/7, 

April  1923). 
Egon  Wellesz:  Arnold  Schoenberg  (Vienna-Leipzig,  1921).* 

Die  neue  Instrumentation  (2  vols.)  Berlin,  1928/29. 

An  Alban  Berg  MS.  at  Oxford  (Tempo,  No.  6,  London, 

1946). 
K.  Westphal:  A.  Schoenberg's  Weg  zur  Zwolftonmusik  (Die 

Musik,  Berlin,  XXI/7,  1929,  p.  491). 
Th.  Wiesengrund-Adorno^ :  Alban  Berg:  zur  UraufFiihrung  des 

Wozzeck  (Anbruch,  VII/12,  1925). 
Zur  Zwolftontechnik  (Anbruch  Xl/7-8,  1929). 
8  Analyses  in  W.  Reich's  *A.B.',   1937  (Cf.  infra). 
Philosophic  der  neuen  Musik  (Tubingen,  1949).** 
Versuch  iiber  Wagner  (Berlin,  1952).** 
Orchesterstiicke    op.    16    (Pult    &   Taktstock    Sonderheft 

^Schoenberg',  March- April  1927). 
K,  H.  Worner:  Article  'Expressionismus'  (Musik  in  Gesch.  & 

Gegenwart,  1947  ff.) 
Musik  der  Gegenwart  (Mainz,  1949.)** 

*Neue  Musik  in  der  Entscheidung',  Mainz,  1954.** 


1  Since  1945  he  publishes  under  the  name  T.  W.  Adomo.  This  is  the  spelling  adopted 
in  this  book. 

312 


INDEX 


Note:  Numbers   refer  to   pages;  numbers  in  parentheses,  printed  next  to  a  page 
number,  refer  to  footnotes  on  that  page. 


Adorno,  T,  W.,  143,  158,  160,  207(1), 

237 
Ahle,  Johann  Rudolf,  205(1),  213 
Altenberg,  Peter,  37,  4ofF,  59(1),  226,  228 
Apostel,  Hans  Erich,  13(1),  237 

Bach,  C.  P.  E.,  14 
Bach,  Johann  Sebastian,  113,  204(1) 
Chorale  *Es  ist  genug',  2o6ff,  2i2ff,  213 
Cantata    'O    Ewigkeit,    du    Donner- 
wort',  205,  205(1) 
Balzac,  Honore  de,  65fF,  226 
Banville,  Theodore  de,  i57fF 
Bartok,  Bela,  56,  153 
Baudelaire,  Charles,  i55fF 
Beethoven,  Ludwig  van,  i38fF 
Symphony  VI,  op.  68,  25 
Fidelio,  op.  72,  85,  88fF 
String  Quartet  in  A  minor,  op.  132, 

27ff,  i38fr 
DiabeUi-Variations,  op.  121,  27ff 
Leanings  towards  serial  composition, 
27ff 
Berg,  Alban: 

Storm-Lied  I,  37,  13  off 

An  Leukon,  37,  40 

Seven  Early  Songs,  30,  36,  37ff,  46,  99, 

229 
(version  for  orchestra)  44(1),  155 
12  Variations  for  the  Piano,  45ff,  229, 

247ff  (Facsimile) 
Piano  Sonata,  op.  i,  24fF,  44ff,  47ff 
Four  songs,  op.  2,  36,  37ff,  4ofF,  44(1), 

57,  229 
String  Quartet,  op.  3,  3 off,  44,  49ff, 

229 
Altenberg-songs  for  voice  and  orch. 

op.  4,  36,  44(1),  56,  58ff,  72,  99 
Four  pieces  for  Clarinet  and  Piano, 
op.  5,  36,  45,  55ff,  236 


Three  Orchestral  Pieces,  op.  6,  58, 64ff, 

109,  234 
Wozzeck,  17,  25,  36,  39,  56,  65,  69, 

7iff,  74ff,    170,  I76ff,  I97ff,  235ff, 

238 
Three     Fragments     from    Wozzeck, 

109,  109(2),  I98ff 
Chamber  Concerto,  ii2ff,  I59ff,  191, 

212 
Lyric  Suite,  19,  25ff,  13 iff,  I37ff,  I59ff 
Storm-Lied  II,  36,  115,  i3off 
Der  Wein,  31,  36,  i55ff,  188,  207 
Lulu,  ii3ff,  122,  127,  127,  156,  i6iff, 

i63ff,  203  ff,  209 
Lulu-symphony,  169,  I97ff,  214(1) 
Violin  Concerto,  31,  203  ff 
Canon    to    Von    Heute   auf  Morgen, 

179(1) 
Lecture  on  Wozzeck,  84ff,  94,  97(2), 

106,  26lff 
'25  years  of  Universal  Edition',  130 
Plan  to  a  Symphony  ('Seraphita'),  65ff, 

226,  234 

Arrangements 
(Schoenberg) : 

Gurrelieder,  23 ff 

Chamber  Symphony,  op.  9,  23  iff, 
234ff 

String  Quartet,  op.  10,  231 
Letters  to : 

Helene  Berg,  226 

Ruzena  Herlinger,  156  (cf.  Plates) 

Arnold    Schoenberg,     67ff,     ii5ff. 

i75ff,  204,  208,  217,  217(1),  232, 

233,  234ff 
Anton   Webern,    66 ff,    ii6ff,    131 

I37ff,    204,    204(1),    217,    218(1) 

2i9ff,  222ff,  225,  231,  235ff,  238, 

239,  24off 


313 


INDEX 


Berg,  Konrad  (father),  218,  224ff,  226 

Berg,  Johanna  (mother),  218,  224ff 

Berg,  Helene  (wife),  229fF 

Bouquet,  Fritz,  I42ff 

Brahms,  Johannes,  13(1),  14,  35ff,  45ff, 

113,  113(1) 

Piano  Quartet  in  A  major,  op.  20,  27 

Symphony  IV,  op.  98,  121 
Bruckner,  Anton,  13(1),  14,  66(1),  209 
Buchner,  Georg,  75ff,  ySff,  156,  i63ff, 

226 
Burmeister,  Franz  Joachim,  205(1) 
Busoni,  Ferruccio,  55fF,  200,  236 

Garner,  Mosco,  226(1) 
GarroU  Lewis,  113 
Gasella  Alfredo,  156 
Ghopin,  Frederic,  218 

David,  Karl  Heinrich,  200 
Debussy,  Glaude,  38 

Pelleas  et  Melisande,  74ff,  91 
Dostoievsky,  Fedor,  226 
Dukas,  Paul,  229 

Eisler,  Hanns,  13(1) 
Eliot,  T.  S.,  113(2) 

Franzos,  Emil,  yyff,  79(1) 

George,  Stefan,  41,  143,  I55ff 
Gluck,  Ghristoph  Wilhbald,  96 
Goethe,  J.  W.  von,  i66ff 
Greissle,  Fehx,  114(1),  237 
Gropius,  Manon,  203  fF,  203(1),  209 
Gurlitt,  Manfred,  107(1) 

Hauptmann,  Gerhart,  idffF,  i68fF 
Haydn,  Joseph,  19 
Hebbel,  Friedrich,  79 
Herlinger,  Ruzena,  iSsfF 
HHl,  R.  S.  217(1) 
Hindemith,  Paul,  200 
Hofmannsthal,  Hugo  von,  75ff,  218 
Hohenberg,  Paul,  227 
Horenstein,  Jasha,  60,  138 
Horwitz,  Karl,  66 


Kassowitz,  Gottfried,  237 
Kleiber,  Erich,  11  off,  138,  169,  241 
Klein,  F.  H.,  13 off,  237 
Kokoschka,  Oskar,  228,  229 
KoHsch  Quartet,  138 
Krasner,  Louis,  203  ff 
Kraus,  Karl,  i68ff,  226 
Krenek,  Ernest,  161,  200 
Kurzmann,  Rata,  204flf 

Leibowitz,  Rene,  i3fF,  4iff,  44(1),  60(1), 

123(1),  126,  152,  179(3) 
Lissa,  Zofja,  25(1) 
Liszt,  Franz, 

Mephisto  Waltz,  26 

Faust-symphony,  29,  38 

Maeterlinck,  Maurice,  75ff 

Mahler- Werfel,  Alma,  I09ff,  203  ff,  217, 

229,  238 
Mahler,  Fritz,  237 
Mahler,    Gustav,    13(1),    55ff,    60,    65ff, 

66(1),  69,  86fr,  I38ff,  153,  i98ff,  209 

210,  228,  229ff,  242 

Symphony  I,  212 

II,  209,  226 

III,  71 

V,  50 

VI,  7off,  226 

VII,  25(1),  71 
Vm,  5off 

EK,  57,  7ofr,  182(1),  211 

X,  154 

Lied  von  der  Erde,  i4off,  214 

Wunderhorn-songs,  87 
Mahpiero,  Gian  Francesco,  156 
Mehul,  Etienne  Nicolas,  96 
Milhaud,  Darius,  71,  200 
Monteverdi,  Glaudio,  96 
Mombert,  Alfred,  37,  4off 
Mozart,  Wolfgang  Amadeus,  I9ff 

String  Quartet  in  B  flat  major,  KV, 
589,  I9fr 

Don  Giovanni,  gzft 

Pfitzner,  Hans,  236fF 
Polnauer,  Josef,  217,  237 
Pound,  Ezra,  113(2) 
Puccini,  Giacomo,  200 


Janacek,  Leos,  76(2),  87(1) 
JeUnek,  Hanns  13(1),  132,  144,  237 
Jockl,  Otto,  237 


Raphael,  Sanzio,  218 
Rankl,  Karl,  77 
Reger,  Max,  226(2) 


314 


INDEX 


Reich,  Willi,  isoff,  175(2),  179(1),  (s), 
I98ff,  201,  204,  214(1),  218(1),  236, 
237,  242,  255 

Rothmueller,  Marco,  237 

Rufer,  Josef,  13,  I59(i),  204(3),  237,  280 

Seidlhofer,  Bruno,  237 

Scriabin,  Anatole,  55,  178 

Scherchen,  Hermann,  69,  109,  117,  I55ff, 

205 
Schmied,  Josef,  237 
Schoenberg,  Arnold,  13  13(1),  I4ff,  igfF, 

35ff,   55ff,   60(2),   9off,   132(1),    i69ff, 

207ff,  22lff,  227ff,  230fF,  239ff 

Four  Songs  op.  2,  22fF,  4iff 
Verkldrte  Nacht,  op.  4,  15 
Gurrelieder,  15,  35,  85 
Pelleas  und  Melisande,  op.  5,  25(1) 
String  Quartet  in  D  minor  op.  7,  5off 
String  Quartet  in  F  sharp  minor,  op. 

10,  52,  143,  150,  229 
Chamber   Symphony  No.   i,  op.   9, 

25fF,  43,  47,  50,  9ofF,  ii4flf,  ii8ff, 

230 
Three  Piano  Pieces  op.  11,  z^,  4ifF,  51 
Two  Songs  op.  14,  44 
Fifteen  Poems    from   'Das  buch   der 

hangenden  garten'    for  Voice  and 

Piano,  op.  15,  232ff 
Five  Orchestral  Pieces  op.  16,  41,  58ff, 

62,  65fF,  207(1) 
Erwartung,  op.  17,  15,  58fF,  74fF,  97 
Die  gluckliche  Hand,  op.  18,  58ff,  74,fF 

85ff 
Six  small  Piano  Pieces  op.  19,  36,  56 
Pierrot  Lunaire,   op.  21,    15,  63,  85ff, 

I07ff,  232ff 

Five  Piano  Pieces,  op.  23,  181 
Serenade,  op.  24,  30,  118(1),  129(1) 
Quintet    for    wind,    op.    26,    114(1), 

118(1) 
Opera  Von  Heute  auf  Morgen,  op.  32, 

160(4),  i78fF,  183 
Opera  Moses  und  Aron,  15 
Ode  to  Napoleon,  op.  41,  207(1) 
Harmonielehre,  25(2),  4iff,  54 
On  Alban  Berg  {Wozzeck),  245ff 

Schreker,  Franz,  76ff,  239 
Der  Feme  Klang,  74fF,  230 
Chamber  Symphony,  90 

Schubert,  Franz,  13(1),  140,  226 

Schiller,  Johannes,  69 

Schumann,  Robert,  46,  113,  131 


Stein,  Erwin,  170,  201  fF,  217 
Strauss,  Richard,  9off 

Death  and  Transfiguration,  op.  24,  5 iff 

Thus  Spake  Zarathustra,  op.  30,  29 

A  Hero's  Life,  op.  40,  52 

Salome,  op.  54,  74ff,  89,  228 

Elektra,  op.  68,  74ff 

Rosenkaualier,  op,  59,  92ff 

Ariadne,  op.  60,  90 
Stravinsky,  Igor,  160,  196(1) 
Strindberg,  August,  i66fF,  226 
Stuckenschmidt,  H.  H.,  201 

Tagore,  Rabindranath,  142 
Travmeck,  Hans,  237 

Wagner,  Richard,  96ff,  i02fF 

Tannhduser,  25fF,  157 

Siegfried  Idyll,  118 

Gdtterddmmerung,  128 

Wesendonk — songs,  13  iff 

Tristan,  25,  52,  75,  131,  i4ifF 

Meister singer,  26 

Parsifal,  22,  29 
Watznauer,  Hermann,  217,  227 
Weber,  Carl  Maria  von,  93,  96 
Webern,  Anton,  13,  i4fF,  35fF,  156,  i69fF, 

201,  204,  227 

PassacagHa,  op.  i,  16,  30,  58,  108,  229 

Five  Songs,  op.  3,  54 

Fiinf  Satze  f.  Streichquartett  op.  5,  50, 
54 

Six  Orchestral  Pieces,  op.  6,  58,  66(1) 

Five  Pieces  for  Orchestra,  op.  10,  58, 
65fr 

Symphony,  op.  21,  14 

String  Quartet,  op.  22,  160(4) 

Piano  Variations,  op.  27,  16 

Arrangement   of  J.    S.   Bach's   *Fuga 
Ricercata',  204(1) 
Wedekind,  Frank,  156,  i63fF,  i77fF,  226, 
229 

Earth  Spirit,  164^,  i85fF 

Pandora's  Box,  i63ff,  190 
Wellesz,  Egon,  60(2),  66,  66(1) 
Wilde,  Oscar,  75fr,  180,  218 
Wolf,  Hugo,  13(1),  37,  226 

Zemlinsky,  Alexander  von,  60,  66,  I38ff, 

229 

Lyric  Symphony,  i38fF 
Zweig,  Arnold,  80,  80(2) 


315 


ERRATA 

[in  the  music  examples] 
Example 

9  the  last  note  is  a  crotchet. 

27  add  repeat  sign. 

75  initial  bar,  left-hand  stave,  add:  (C). 

80  bar  2 :  the  penultimate  rest  is  a  semiquaver  rest. 

96  add  ties  between  notes  3,  4  and  5. 

97  first  note :  dotted  quaver. 

106  bars  3-4,  middle  part:  tie  between  notes  7  and  8. 

107  first  bar:  add  ties  to  first  notes  on  staves  i  and  2;  delete  slur  above 

upper  stave  in  bars  i  and  2. 
138       add  tie  between  last  note  of  bar  4  and  first  note  of  bar  5. 
149      bar  2 :  add  triplet  sign  above  first  two  notes. 
157      final  quintuplet;  first  note  is  'E  flat'. 
175       bar  2:  last  note  is  'E'. 
185       last  note  is  'D'. 


316 


Date  Due 

OCT    2  2 

1964 

3AH  "^ 

T965 

Yhj^-^ 

f 

DEC  IS -67 

M.rL  1  Z  j; 

9.9. . 

«l  21 

1873 

JAM  29 

1974 

APR  1  3  i( 

?P 

MAY  3  0   fS 

.• 

jA  r.)  r^i   -#    r> 

^  -.'.  ---/v 

FEB  2  8 

M 

MAY  1  1 

1989 

r .     , 

- 

Library  Bureai 

Cat.  No.  1137 

ISIC 


I    R.d.H^M  ^99^  00334  7668 

I       Redhch,  Hans  Ferdinand  ^^^^ 

Alban  Berg,  the  man  and  his  music. 


ML   410   B47   R35 

Redlich,    H.F. 

Alban  Berg    :    the  man  and  his 
Music 


