lil-qf-Stulril  hvf  ELLA  SMITE  ELBERT  '88 
jST?  ^   .  KATHAR  TNE- JI^  -COMAN  


CATALOGUE 

OF  BOOKS,  PAMPHLETS.  TRACTS,  &c..  PUBLISHED  AND  FOR  SALE 


ANTI-SLAVERY  DEPOSITORY, 

48  BEEKMAN  STREET, 

XEW-YOPvK. 


it  O  U  A  1»   ^  O  L  L  M  E  ^  . 

Postage.  Price. 

Of)   A.  E.  Gnmke's  Letters  to  Catharine  Beecher    38 

14   Autographs  for  Freedom   75 

14         Do.               Do.    Gilt   1  25 

40   A  Tribute  for  the  Negro.    By  W.  Amistad    2  00 

06  A  View  of  the  Slave  Question.    By  E.  P.  Barrows   25 

16   Barnes,  Albert,  on  Slavery   75 

14   Bacon,  Dr.,  on  Slavery . .   75 

07  Brisbane,  W.  H.,  on  Slavery   50 

12   Beauties  of  Philanthropy.  "  By  a  Philanthropist   50 

34    Clarkson  on  the  Slave  Trade.   2  00 

05    Congregationalism  and  Church  Action.     By  Rev.  J.  Keep   25 

07    Channing  on  Slavery  1   38 

14   Cabinet  of  Freedom.'    By  Thomas  Clarkson ... ^   75 

14   Facts  for  Baptist  Churches.    By  A.  T.  Foss  and  E.  Matthews.  75 

10   Grosvonor's  Review  of  the  Fuller  and  W ayland  Correspondence.  50 

07  Do.              Do.                 Do.                      Paper   25 

16   Green's  Miscellanies   50 

30   Heaven,  "  I  am  the  way.''    Superbly  Illustrated  and  Gilt   5  00 

16   Hill's  Poems   75 

12   Law  and  Government.    Bv  H.  Kingsburv   50 

08  Letters  from  the  West  Indies.    Bv  S.  Hovey   32 

16   Leavitt's  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Readers    75 

00   Letters  and  Addresses.    Bv  George  Thompson   25 

12    Memoir  of  Rev.  E.  P.  Lovejoy...'.  '  3s 

05    Memoir  of  Mrs.  Chloe  Spear                                             '  "'  25 

20   Memoir  o^'  T.  Fowell  Buxton  *'....  1  00 

08   Miss  Beecher  on  the  Slave  Question                                      .  *  25 

14    Mrs.  A.  Bagley,  A  Pilgrim  of  Ninetv  Years  .'.  .*.*.'.'.  .*.*."  50  to  75 

12    Prison  Bard.    By  George  Thompson                                   "  50 

12   Phelps'  Letters  \  5^ 

16   Review  of  the  Mexican  War.    Bv.  Hon .  William  Jay . . . ."  .* 75 

12    Six  Years  in  a  Georgia  Prison.    Bv  L.  W.  Paine   50 

12   Scripture  Manual.     By  Charles  Simmons               50 

32   Slavery  and  Anti-slavery,  Historv  of    By  William  Goodell  100 

16    Thompson  in  Africa   75 

14   The  Young  Man.   By  Wm.  Patton   go 

25    The  White  Slave    1  00 

The  Democracy  of  Christianitv,  2  vols.    By  Wiliiam  Goodell  1  50 

12   The  Chaplet  '  3g 

Uncle  Tom"s  Cabin,  10  per  cent,  additional  for  postage,* .38 

XT              .       ,  T^      ,                         *       '-^       3  50,  and  'j  00 

Narrative  of  Fred.  Douglass   333^- 

JUST  PUBLISHEB  AXD  IX  PRESS. 

16   Voyage  to  West  Coast  of  Africa.    By  .1.  A  Carnes   75 

20  (           ^Jncle  Tom's  Cabin.  Pa|»er,  r,0  cents  ;  Clotli.  75 


2  CATALOG DF. 

Postage.                          '  Price, 

12   White  Slavery  in  the  I3arbary  States.     By  Charles  Sumner. .  50 

16    American  Slave  Code.    By  Wm.  Goodell   75 

15  Manuel  Pereira,  Paper,  50  cents  ;  Muslin,  75 

10    Documents  for  the  People   25 

28    Giddings'  Speeches   1  00 

30   Jay's  Writings  on  Slavery   1  00 

03    A  splendid  Portrait  of  Mrs.  H.  B.  Stowe,  Author  of  Uncle 

Tom  «   50 

16  A  Thrilling  Narrative  of  Slavery  ;  The  Life  of  Samuel  Northrop, 
Twelve  Years  a  Slave.    Illustrated.    Now  in  Press   100 

20    Carey  on  the  Slave  Trade  ,   1  00 

20    Trial  by  Jury   1  25 

03    Beecher  on  the  Spirit-Rappings  ^   25 

10   Bible  Servitude.     By  E.  Smith    50 

UNBOUND  VOLUMES,  PAMPHLETS,  TRACTS,  A€. 

NARRATIVES  AND  TALES. 

01    Amanda  ;  a  Tale  for  the  Times   10 

01    Flora  ;  A  Tale  for  Children   10 

03   The  Fanatic  ;  or  Perils  of  Peter  the  Pliant   12 

01    The  Experience  of  Tom  Jones   10 

03    Narrative  of  Fred.  Douglass   25 

LETTERS. 

01   Amos  Phelps  to  Drs.  Stowe  and  Bacon   10 

01   Hancock  to  Hon.  Samuel  Elliot,  in  reply  to  his  Apology  for 

voting  for  the  Fugitive  Slave  Bill   12>^ 

01   Hon.  Wm.  Jay  to  Hon.  Theo.  Frelinghuysen,  on  his  Nomination 

for  Vice-President   03 

01    Hon.  Wm.  .lay  to  Rev.  L.  S.  Ives   06 

01   Hon.  Wm.  Jay  to  Hon.  Wm.  Nelson,  on  Webster's  great  Speech 

in  the  Senate,  ^■S50   06 

01  Letters  respecting  Book  dropped  from  the  Catalogue  of  the  Sun- 
day-school Union  at  the  bidding  of  the  Slave  Power   03 

01  Samuel  Graham  to  Webster,  on  the  Compromises  of  the  Consti- 
tution   06 

LEGAL,  rOLITICAL,  <feC. 

05  A  History  of  the  Mexican  War.    By  L.  Moody   25 

03   Argument  before  the  Supreme  Court  of  New-Jersey.    Bv  A. 

Stewart  '   18^ 

01    A  History  of  the  Trial  of  Caster  Hanway   06 

01    Campaign  of '48  Free-Soil  Songs  ,   10 

01    Facts  in  the  Life  of  General  Taylor   06 

01    Resolutions  of  the  Wisconsin  Legislature  on  Slaver}-   03 

01    Sneethen's  Black  Code  in  the  District  of  Columbia   25 

01   History  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Bill,  and  Seizure  of  James  Hamlet 

tkereunder   03 

01  South  Bend  Fugitive  Slave  Case   05 

06  The  Unconstitutionality  of  Slavery.    L.  Spooner  25  &  50 

02  The  Great  Issue  between  Presidential  Candidates  in '48   10 

02   The  Constitution  Expounded.   By  L.  Bonnefoux   18% 

RELIGIOUS. 

01  A  Review  of  Stuart's  Conscience  and  the  Constitution   12 

02  A  Reproof  of  the  American  Church.    By  the  Bishop  of  Oxford..  10 

02   A  Condensed  Bible  Argument.    By  a  Citizen  of  Virginia   10 

01    A  Scriptural  Argument    for  withdrawing  Fellowship  from 

Churches  holding  Slaves.   By  S.  McKee   06 


CATALOGUE.  3 

Postage,  Price. 

01    Christianity  Essential  to  Liberty.  A  Sermon  in  aid  of  Hungary,  06 

03   The  Discussion  between  Parker  and  Rood   ISX 

01    Non-fellowship  with  Slaveholders  the  Duty  of  Christians.' 

By  J.  G.  Fee   06 

^01    Politics  and  the  Pulpit   10 

01  Positions  and  Duties  of  the  North.     By  A.  P.  Peabody   06 

02  Slavery  Examined  in  the  Light  of  the  Bible.    By  Brisbane   18K 

01  Shall  we  give  Bibles  to  Three  Million  Slaves  ?   03 

02  The  Legacy   18% 

01   The  Law-abiding  and  Higher  Law  Conscience   10 

01    The  Judgments  of  God   10 

01    The  Christian  Martyrs    10 

03  The  Christian's  Business   15 

01    The  Three  Chief  Safeguards  of  Society   10 

01   The  Boston  Kidnapping   10 

^1   The  Duty  of  Disobedience  to  wicked  Laws  i   00 


ADDRES&ES,  SPEECHES,  LECTURES,  AC. 

01  A  Lecture  on  Bible  Politics   06 

03  Address  to  New-Mexico  and  California   12)^ 

01  Address  to  Non-r-laveholders  of  the  South   06 

01  An  Eulogium  on  Hon.  Thomas  Morris   06 

01  A  Discourse  on  the  Landing  of  the  Pilgrims.    By  Deloss  Love,  10 

01  Human  Government  subordinate  to  Divine   10 

01  Our  Position.    By  Albert  Barnes   10 

01  Slavery  a  Curse  and  a  Sin   06 

0 1  The  Chief  Sins  of  the  People   10 

01  The  War  System  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Nations   10 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


03    An  Appeal  for  Bondwomen   iS')^ 

05  American  Slavery  as  it  is  ;  Testimony  of  One  Thousand  Wit- 
nesses  38 

01    Catechism  of  the  Mexican  War   03 

01    Calumny  Refuted   06 

03    Despotism  in  America   25 

01    History  of  the  Erection  of  the  Monument  to  Holley   06 

01    Higher  Law  tried  by  Reason  and  Authority   10 

01   Tobacco  Tracts.    Three  Prize  Essays  on  Tobacco,  each   05 


Engravings,  Tracts,  Medals,  Thermometers,  &c.,  &c., 

CONSTANTLY  OX  HAND  AT  LOW  PRICES. 

Books  of  all  kinds  procured  on  order,  at  the  shortest  notice. 
A  liberal  discount  made  to  the  Trade. 

Orders  for  books,  per  mail,  should  enclose  the  price  and  postage. 
All  orders  must  be  accompanied  with  the  cash. 

Subscriptions  to  Anti-slavery,  Religious,  and  Standard  Newspapers  and 
Magazines,  received  and  forwarded,  to  accommodate  our  friends. 

Sabbath-schools,  Public  Libraries  and  Institutions  supplied  at  the  very  lowest 
rates. 

Catalogues  sent  free  to  any  address,  if  desired. 

Subscriptions  to  the  various  Religious  and  Benevolent  Institutions,  at  home 
and  abroad,  will  be  taken  charge  of  when  desired. 
Address,  post-paid  y 

'  L.  J.  BATES,  ^ere?(f, 

48  Beekrrai  street. 


4 


JUST  rUBLlSHEP. 

LIFE    OF    SAMUEL  NORTHRUP, 

TWELVE  YEARS  A  SLAVE. 
A     THRILLING    NARRATIVE     OF     S  L  A  \  E  R  Y  . 

The  history  of  a  citizen  of  New-York,  who  was  kidnapped  and  sold  into 
slavery  in  Washington  City,  in  1841,  and  rescued  in  1853  from  a  cotton  planta- 
Tion  near  the  Red  river  in  Louisiana :  with  six  Illustrations ^  representing— 

1.  Portrait  of  Solomon  in  his  plantation  suit. 

2.  Scene  in  the  slave-pen  at  W^ashington. 

3.  Night  scene  in  the  Tucondie  Swamp  ;  pursued  by  hounds. 

4.  The  staking  out  and  flogging  of  the  girl  Patsey. 

5.  Scene  of  the  rescue  in  the  cotton  field. 

6.  Arrival  home,  and  first  meeting  with  his  wife  and  children. 

The  public  mmd,  at  last  aroused  to  some  of  the  evils  of  our  "peculiar  insti- 
tution," cannot  do  better  in  its  search  for  the  truth  than  to  take  scenes  from 
real  life  and  authenticated  narrative  as  a  basis  for  opinion.  There  is  that  in 
the  direct  testimony  of  a  livings  witness  of  what  he  has  heard,  seen,  and  felt, 
in  his  own  person,  which  cannot  be  refuted  by  sophistry,  or  subverted  by  ridi- 
cule. 

In  the  work  before  us,  there  are  no  highly- wrought  passages  to  be  "hawked 
at"  as  romance  by  our  owl-like  critics;  no  arguments  to  be  attacked,  and  not 
a  single  instance  of  exaggeration  behind  which  to  retreat  ;  but  facts — plain,  un- 
varnished facts,  sworn  and  subscribed  to  by  a  reliable  witness,  whose  testimony 
can  only  be  met  by  facts.  Show  us  your  document%\  Messrs.  Doughfaces,  if 
you  intend  to  set  up  the  plea  of  "fanaticism,"  "all  moonshine,"  &c. 

The  above  work  contains  upwards  of  300  pages,  in  one  12mo  volume,  and 
sold  at  the  price  of  $1.  A  large  portion  of  the  net  proceeds  is  secured  to 
Solomon. 

Orders  from  the  Trade  solicited. 

For  sale  by  L.  J.  BATES,  Agmt, 

4S  Beekman  street.  New- York. 


MANUEL  PEREIRA; 

OR, 

THE  SOVEREIGN  RULE  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 

With  Views  of  Southern  Laws,  Life,  and  Hospitality.    By  F.  C.  Adams. 
Written  in  Charleston,  S.  C. 

The  story  is  one  of  thrilling  and  absorbing  interest,  founded  upon  that  infa- 


'ATALOGUE. 


5 


iiious  statute  of  South  CLiroliria  by  which  her  citizens  claim  the  right  to  imprisott 
colored  seamen  of  all  nations,  even  when  cast  upon  their  shores  in  distress. 

The  work  is  replete  with  incidents  of  Southern  life  and  character,  pointing 
Southerners  to  things  which  call  for  correction  at  their  hands,  with  a  force  that 
cannot  be  mistaken.  It  is  written  by  a  gentleman  who  has  taken  a  prominent 
part  in  the  affairs  of  the  South,  and  will  interest  alike  the  general  reader,  phil- 
anthropist, politician,  and  Christian,  presenting  a  view  of  the  secessionist  move- 
ment, as  well  as  the  ultimate  danger  of  collision  with  foreign  powers,  through 
the  operation  of  a  statute  trampling  upon  every  received  principle  of  interna- 
tional law  and  good  faith  as  secured  by  treaty,  with  a  distinctness  that  cannot 
fail  to  startle  the  attentive  reader.  The  descwlptions  of  scenery  and  delineation 
of  character  are  exceedingly  graphic  and  lifelike,  and  the  peculiar  despotism 
and  absolute  tyranny  of  Southern  sentiment,  so  galling  to  every  freeman,  sub- 
verting all  freedom  of  speech  and  liberty  of  conscience,  in  itself  the  clearest 
and  most  convincing  proof  and  admission  of  deliberate  wrong,  is  admirably 
portrayed. 

Price,  $1.    Orders  may  be  addressed,  pre-paid,  to 

L.  J.  BATES,  Agenty 
48  Beekman  street,  New- York. 


SiMlTH  ON  ANCIENT  AND  BIBLE  SERVITUDE. 

An  Inquiry  into  Scriptural  and  Ancient  Servitude,  in  which  it  is  shown  thai 
neither  was  Chattel  Slavery.  With  the  remedy  for  American  Slavery.  By 
E.  Smith,  Minister  of  the  Gospel,  Mansfield,  Ohio.  Published  by  the  Author, 
at  the  Western  Branch  Book  Concern  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Connection 
of  America.    1852.   Pp.  244,  r2mo.    Price,  50  cents. 

Mr.  Smith  is  a  Southerner ;  has  lived  thirty-two  years  in  the  slave  States, 
and  has  preached  to  slaves  and  slaveholders  hundreds  of  times."  Such  a 
writer  cannot  be  taunted  with  knowing  nothing  about  slaver\-.  In  the  great 
West  and  South-west  Mr.  Smith  is  extensively  known  as  a  vigorous  writer,  and 
a  very  effective  lecturer  and  preacher.  This  work,  it  may  be  expected,  "wiU 
make  him  extensively  known  likewise  at  the  East.  He  is  one  of  those  hardy, 
active  Western  men,  self-taught,  instinct  with  masculine  common  sense,  and 
gifted  with  tact  and  genius,  who  irill  succeed  in  making  their  mark  on  the  com- 
munity, and  putting  to  the  blush  the  higher  pretensions  of  a  class  of  gentlemen 
whose  literary  leisure  and  acquirements  have  nevertheless  failed  to  preserve 
them  from  falling  behind  the  age.  Some  of  Mr.  Smith's  historical  affirmations 
will  be  found  new  and  startling,  even  to  Abolitionists  themselves.  But  he  cites 
his  authorities,  and  challenges  scrutiny.  Such  a  book  must  needs  be  read  and 
examined.    His  main  positions  will  not  easily  be  shaken. 

For  sale  bv  L.  J.  BATES,  Agent, 

48  Beekman  street.  New- York. 


6 


CATALOGUE. 


JUDGE  JAY'S  WIUTINGS  ON  SLAVERY. 


MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS  ON  SLAVERY. 
By  William  Jay.    With  a  Portrait.    Boston  :  Published  by  John  P.  Jewett 
&  Co.  Cleveland,  Ohio  :  Jewett,  Proctor  &  Worthington.  London  :  Sampson 


Low,  Son  &  Co.    1S53.    One  volume,  pp.  670,  12mo.    Price,  $1. 

CONTENTS. 

Inquiry  into  the  Character  and  Tendency  of  the  American  Colonization 
and  American  Anti-slaver>'  Societies   7 

A  view  of  the  Action  of  the  Federal  Government  in  behalf  of  Slavery   207 

On  the  Condition  of  the  Free  People  of  Color  in  the  United  States   371 

Address  to  the  Friends  of  Constitutional  Liberty,  on  the  Violation  by  the  - 
United  States  House  of  Representatives  of  the  Right  of  Petition.. ..'  397 

Introductory  Remarks  to  the  Reproof  of  the  American  Church  contained  in 
the  recent  "  History  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  America,"  by 
the  Bishop  of  Oxford   409 

A  Letter  to  the  Right  Rev.  L.  Silliman  Ives,  Bishop  of  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  in  the  State  of  North  Carolina   453 

Address  to  the  Inhabitants  of  New-Mexico  and  California,  on  the  omission 
by  Congress  to  provide  them  with  Territorial  Governments,  and  on  the 
Social  and  Political  Evils  of  Slavery   491 

Letter  to  Hon.  William  Nelson,  M.  C,  on  Mr.  Clay's  Compromise   553 

A  Letter  to  the  Hon.  Samuel  A.  Eliot,  Representative  in  Congress  from  the 
city  of  Boston,  in  reply  to  his  Apology  for  Voting  for  the  Fugitive  Slave 
Bill   571 

An  Address  to  the  Anti-slavery  Christians  of  the  United  States.  Signed 
by  a  number  of  Clergymen  and  others   621 

Letter  to  Rev.  R.  S.  Cook,  Corresponding  Secretarv  of  the  American  Tract 
Society  *   641 

Letter  to  Lewis  Tappan,  Esq.,  Treasurer  of  the  American  Missionary  Asso- 
ciation  661 


There  can  be  no  occasion  to  seek  certificates  to  the  high  character  of  Judge 
Jay's  Avritings,  and  particularly  his  writings  on  Slavery,  which,  by  common 
consent,  are  allowed  to  be  among  the  very  best  contributions  to  the  anti- 
slavery  literature  of  the  country.  His  statistics  and  facts  may  be  safely  relied 
upon,  as  of  the  highest  authority.  No  one  desiring  to  understand  the  subject 
should  be  without  them.  Hitherto,  they  have  been  scattered  in  small  books, 
pamphlets.  Arc.  The  present  collection  into  one  compact  volume  is  a  timely  one. 
For  sale  bv 

L.  J.  BATES,  Agent, 
  48  Beekman  street. 

JLST  PLBLIiSHED 

von   THE  LITTLE  FOLKS: 

PICTURES  AND  STORIES  FROM  UNCLE  TOM'S  CABIN. 

Desigxkd  to  adapt  Mrs.  Stowe's  narrative  to  the  understandings  of  the  youngest 
readers.  Printed  in  large,  bold  type,  in  prose  and  verse,  beautifully  illustrated, 
containing  Whittier's  beautiful  song  of  Little  Eva,"  set  to  chaste  and  simple 
music  ;  altogether  the  best  and  most  beautiful  gift-book  for  the  young  people  pub- 
lished this  season. 


CATALOGUE. 


7 


THE  WHITE  SLAVE: 

OK, 

MEMOIRS  OF  A  FUGrlTlVE, 

From  tlie  many  notices  of  the  work  we  cull  the  foll®wing  :— 
It  is  written  with  great  vigor,  combining  a  Defoe-like  gravity  of  statement 
with  a  vein  of  pungent  satire,  from  which  several  living  dignitaries  in  Church 
and  State  are  made  to  smart.  As  an  expressive  illustration  of  the  influence  oi 
slavery,  it  compares  favorably  with  the  most  popular  works  on  the  subject,  and 
is  bound  to  receive  a  hearty  welcome  from  the  friends  of  freedom. — New-YorT: 
Tribune. 

This  is  a  very  interesting  history  of  the  life  of  a  whije  slave,  the  son  of  a 
Virginia  planter — "The  son  of  a-'freeman,  yet  born  a  slave."  It  faithfulh 
delineates  his  experience  in  the  trials  and  sufferings  of  slavery,  both  in  their 
mildest  and  most  severe  forms.  After  enduring  years  of  hardship  and  misery 
to  which  the  slave  is  heir,  he  finally  makes  his  escape  to  England ;  and  the 
latte  "  part  of  his  life  clearly  shows  that  the  slave  is  capable  of  becoming  a  noble 
man,  a  worthy  member  o/,  and  an  ornament  to,  society. — Christian  Freeman. 

It  is  full  of  incident,  and  we  doubt  not  the  history  of  slavery  must  confirm 
the  atrocities  detailed.  The  vivid  picture  of  the  effects  of  slavery  upon  the 
morals  of  the  community,  and  the  blight  which  curses  the  soil,  is  not,  probably, 
overdrawn. — Keene  Sentinel. 

It  is  the  story  of  a  slave;  and  it  is  the  slave  in  middle  life,  educated,  refined^ 
wealthy,  and  free,  who  tells  it.  With  him,  life  has  been  grave  and  earnest . 
and  such  is  his  narrative.  It  has  the  stern  and  stately  movement  of  the  old 
Greek  tragedy.  As  a  picture  of  slavery,  in  its  moral,  social,  and  political  bear- 
ing upon  the  North  as  well  as  the  South,  it  furnishes  hints  and  facts  which  are 
overlooked  in  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.  The  high  reputation  the  author  has  received* 
in  another  department  of  literature  will  not  suffer  by  his  present  production^ 
which  deserves  and  will  have  a  wide  circulation.— JYa^iO/iaZ  Era. 

The  book  does  not  possess  that  absorbing,  dramatic  interest  that  charac- 
terizes "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,''  still  there  is  in  every  word  a  terrible  satire  upon 
the  giant  wrong  of  slavery— a  pathos  that  preaches  almost  sublimity;  and  in 
its  exposure  of  the  wickedness  of  the  slave  system,  and  the  closeness  of  its 
analysis,  it  is  even  superior  to  Mrs.  Stowe's  celebrated  book. — New-Bedford 
Standard. 

It  is  an  honest  book  !  Here  and  there  is  noted  a  passage  of  thrilling  interest — 
it  should  seem  that  any  thing  deeply  affecting  human  freedom  must  be  thrill- 
ing— while,  in  one  way  and  another,  the  miserable  sophistries  of  the  apologist 
are  for  the  thousandth  time  again  exposed  ;  indeed,  no  argument  for  slavery  is 
remembered  that  is  not  herein  faithfully  met. — Norwich  Tribune. 

This  work  is  a  vivid  and  graphic  delineation  of  life  at  the  South,  in  all  its 
phases.  It  details  the  history  of  a  white  slave,  the  son  of  a  Virginia  planter, 
who,  after  passing  through  his  experience  of  bondage  in  its  mildest  as  well  as 
its  most  rigorous  forms,  and  after  many  adventures  and  hair-breadth  escapes. 


8 


(CATALOGUE. 


reaches  the  shores  ol  England,  where  he  obtains  not  only  his  freedom,  but  also 
a  position  of  high  respectability  and  importance. — American  Union. 

The  above  is  the  title  of  a  recently-published  book,  which  will  deeply  interest 
dU  readers  who  would  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  practical  workings  of 
the  ''special  institution"  of  the  Southern  States. — Bangor  Jeff'ersonian. 

This  book  is  intensely  interesting  throughout,  and  will  serve  as  an  excellent 
companion  to  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."'  One  cannot  read  without  indignation 
the  history  of  Archy  and  Cassy — their  loves,  their  trials,  their  escapes,  and 
their  union  at  last,  the  whole  being  interspersed  with  strange  and  ofttimes 
hideous  and  gloomy  pictures  of  Southern  social  and  slave-trading  life.  If  one 
desires  to  see  what  things  slavery  naturally  begets,  let  him  read  the  45th 
chapter,  and  if  he  be  not  a  "born  Abolitionist,"  he  will  certainly  be  made  one 
by  sudden  conversion. — Essex  Freeman. 

Those  who  have  read  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin"  \\\\\  understand  us  when  we 
tell  them  that  this  work  does  not,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  fall  an  iota  behind 
that,  in  its  adaptation  to  interest  and  profit  the  reader.— TVrmo???  Christian 
Messenger. 

The  style  is  simple  and  pathetic,  yet  nervous  and  forcible  ;  the  characters 
are  drawn  with  power  and  beauty,  and  their  interest  retained  until  their  final 
disposition.  The  work  is  written  by  one  most  intimate  with  the  enormities  of 
slavery,  and  sketches  in  a  thrilling  manner  the  painiul  history  of  one  whose 
sufferings  at  the  hands  of  cruel  and  impious  men  must  win  the  tear  of  pity  and 
the  curse  of  justice.  Ail  who  have  perused  the  career  of  "  Uncle  Tom"  will  be 
sure  to  give  the  same  attention  to  "The  White  Slave." — Buffalo  Express. 

One  can  hardly  venture  upon  a  book  of  light  reading  that  cannot  be  discussed 
md  dismissed  in  a  few  hours.  But  this  is^not  a  boo£  to  be  dismissed  in  a  few* 
hours.  It  is  a  fearful  picture  of  slave  life,  and  to  those  who  have  courage  to  go 
through  its  horrors,  it  will  be  very  absorbing.— JVeu'-Eeff/orrf  Mercury. 

The  "  White  Slave"  was  the  son  of  an  aristocratic  Virginian,  and  the  mother 
was  of  aristocratic  blood  too,  but  tinged  with  the  African  :  of  course  she  was  a 
slave,  and  her  rank  and  condition  determined  that  of  her  offspring.  The  me- 
moirs of  course  detail  the  life  and  adventures  of  such  a  slave :  they  are  given 
after  a  thrilling  fashion,  and  the  book  is  one  of  the  severest  and  most  sarcastic 
ever  produced  on  the  subject  of  American  slavery. — Vermont  Watchman. 

We  think  the  work  is  destined  to  have  a  run  second  only  to  that  of  "  Uncle 
Tom's  Cabin,"  a  work  by  no  means  its  superior,  whether  we  regard  its  spirit  or 
its  lessons.  The  reading  of  these  books,  at  all  events,  is  a  species  of  "  agita- 
tion" which  "Baltimore  Platforms'' will  find  it  hard  to  suppress.— £rtsf;?orf 

Sentinel. 

Price  $1.00,  with  eight  elegant  Illustrations  ;  and  to  Pcstmasters  and  others, 
who  may  order  ten  copies,  $7.50. 
Address  L.  J.  BATES,  Agent, 

48  Beekman  street,  New-York. 


CATALOGUE. 


9 


An  Anti-slavery  Manual; 

Or,  the  Wrongs  of  Amkrica.n  Slavery  exposed  by  the  Light  ov  the 
Bible  and  of  Facts  ;  with  a  Remedy  for  the  Evil.  By  Rev.  John 
G.  Fee,  of  Kentucky.  New- York:  Published  by  the  American  and  Foreign 
Xmi-Slavery  Society.  Pp.  180,  12mo.  Price,  $1.50  per  doz. ;  single  copy,  20 
cents.  L.  J.  BATES,  Agent, 

48  Beekman  street.  New-York. 


JLST  PL'BLISHEI). 

The  Slave-catcher  caught  in  the  Meshes  of  Eternal  Law. 

BY  ASA  RAND. 
/ 

This  book  contains  an  inquirj'^  into  the  relations  of  the  Federal  Government  to 
Slaveholding  and  Slave-catching  in  the  free  States.  The  writer  aims  to  expose  the 
unconstitutional  and  atrocious  character  of  the  "  Fugitive  Slave  Act,"  so  called, 
together  with  those  judicial  decisions  and  interpretations  of  the  Constitution  which 
are  adduced  in  its  support. 

Price  25  cont-s.    All  orders  must  he  addressed  to 

i.  J.  BATES,  .igent, 
  4S  Beekman  street.  New- York. 

Autographs  for  Freedom ; 

Containing  fac-similes  of  the  signatures  of  all  the  great  champions  in  the  Anti- 
slavery  cause,  with  short  but  interesting  sketches  from  each.  Elegantly  illustrated, 
pp.  263.    Price  75  cents  :  gilt,  $1  2."). 

Orders  may  be  addressed  to  L.  .T.  BATES,  ^gent, 

 48  Beekman  street,  New-York. 


Thompson  in  Africa. 

An  account  of  the  missionary  labors,  sufferings,  travels,  and  observations  of  Geo. 
Thompson  in  Western  Africa,  at  the  Mendi  Mission. 

From  the  many  notices  of  the  wflrk  by  eminent  men,  wo  cull  the  following : 

I  hope  that  the  work  will  be  widely  circulated ;  and  that  it  will  have  the  effect 
to  increase  the  interest  and  efforts  of  Christians  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men. 

Thomas  C.  Upham. 

I  have  read  George  Thompson's  Book  on  Africa.  It  is  the  simple,  unambitious 
narrative  of  a  truthful,  pious  man.  I  hope  it  may  have  an  extensive  circulation, 
for  I  believe  it  will  do  good  wherever  it  is  read.    *  Gfrrit  Smith. 

Price  75  cent^,  or  *r,  per  d<./»  ii.    Orders  may  be  addressed  to 

L.  .J.  BATES, 
  48  Beekman  street,  New-York. 

Law  and  Government. 

The  Origin,  Nature,  Extent,  and  Necessity  of  Divine  and  Human  Government, 
and  of  Religious  Liberty.    By  Harmon  Kixgsbi-ry,    Pj).  236.   Price  50  cents. 

A  very  readable  and  interesting  book,  written  in  a  lucid  and  forcible  style.  All 
orders  may  be  addressed  to 

L.  J.  BATES,  .^gmt, 
48  Be«kman  street,  New- York. 


10 


C'ATAiiOGuK. 


Slaveholding  examined  in  the  Light  of  the  Holy  Bible. 

BY  WILLIAM  HENRY  BRISBANE. 

Pp.  222.   Price  50  cents. 

From  the  many  l  ecommendations  of  this  able  work,  we  cull  the  following : 

Dr.  Brisbane's  Bible  argument  is,  to  me,  more  readable  and  more  satisfactory 
than  any  other  I  have  met  with.  The  subject  is  discussed  with  a  candor,  clearness 
and  force  equally  rare  in  this  controversy.  Wm.  Elder. 

Its  spirit  is  admirable.  It  brevity,  clearness,  compact  logic — its  easy,  natural 
flow  of  common  sense,  independent  thought,  and  critical  acumen,  combined  with 
its  rare  candor,  calmness,  and  coiu-tesy,  entitle  it  to  a  wide  dissemination. 

Theo.  D.  Weld. 

I  have  perused  "Slaveholding  examined  in  the  Light  of  the  Bible"  with  Uiifeigned 
interest.  D.  S.  Parmelee. 


JUST  PrBLISHED. 


THE  HIGHER  LAW, 


In  its  relations  to  Civil  Government  ;  with  particular  reference  to  Slavery  "and 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Law.    By  W>t,  IIosmer.    12mo,  pp.  204.    Price,  50  cents. 


10. 


Introduction. 

The  Higher  Law. 

Civil  Government. 

Limitations  of  Civil  Government. 

The  Powers  of  Civil  Government. 

Obedience  to  Civil  Government. 

Improvements  in  Civil  Government. 

Slavery. 

EfiFects  of  Slavery. 
Slavery  a  Crime. 


Apologies  for  Slavery. 

Government  and  Religion  subver- 
sive of  Slavery. 

Capacity  of  Slaves  for  Civil  Go- 
vernment. 

The  Fugitive  Slave  Law. 

Constitutions  and  Compromises. 

Effects  of  Slavery  on  the  Free  States. 

Possible  Results. 

The  Conclusion. 


This  is  a  timely  and  able  work.  The  style  of  the  writer  is  remarkably  lucid, 
compact,  and  forcible.  He  comes  directly  to  his  subject,  and  handles  it  in  a  man- 
ner that  shows  his  perfect  acquaintance  with  it,  and  with  the  sophistries  he  un- 
dertakes to  expose.  Whoever  has  any  remaining  reverence  either  for  conscience 
or  Scripture,  will  perceive  the  pertinency  and  feel  the  force  of  his  arguments.  On 
some  points  relating  to  the  Federal  Constitution,  his  expositions  will  be  questioned 
hy  some  of  the  friends  of  freedom ;  but  all  who  love  liberty  and  true  religion  will 
find  themselves  refreshed  by  a  perusal  of  the  work,  and  will  doubtless  be  thankful 
for  an  opportunity  to  assist  in  promoting  its  wide  circulation. 

All  orders  must  be  addressed  to 

L.  J.  BATES,  Agent, 
4S  Beekman  street,  New-York. 


THE  BEST  FAMILY   AND  AXTI  SLAVERY  NEWSPAl'ER   OF  THE  DAY. 

The  National  Era. 

Mrs.  Stowe's  great  work,  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,"  was  first  published  in  this  paper. 
Other  tales  of  great  interest,  by  talented  authors,  continually  grace  its  columns. 
The  editorial  department,  under  charge  of  DR.  BAILEY,  has  long  been  noted  for 
its  clearness,  ability,  aBd  courtesy.  The  paper  has  already  a  very  large  subscrip- 
tion list  throughout  the  United  States  and  Canada. 

Published  at  Washington,  D.  C.  Terms  $2  per  annum.  Subscriptions  received 
by  L.  J,  BATES,  Agent, 

45  Bee4onan  street,  New-York. 


ADVERTISEMENT  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION. 


The  call  for  the  American  Slave  Code  has  so  far  exceeded  the  anticipations 
of  the  publishers— exhausting  two  editions  already — that  many  orders  could  not 
be  as  promptly  answered  as  was  desired,  a  difficulty  which  it  is  hoped  will  be 
avoided  in  future. 

Highly  commendatory  notices  of  the  work  have  appeared  in  a  large  number 
of  papers  throughout  the  country,  embracing,  with  others,  the  New-York 
Tribune  ;  New- York  Evangelist ;  Independent,  New-York  ;  Advocate  &  Guardian 
New-York  ;  National  Era,  Washington  ;  Commonwealth,  Boston  ;  Congregation- 
alist,  Boston  ;  Christian  Register,  Boston  •  Christian  Watchman,  Boston  ;  Zion's 
Herald,  Boston  ;  Pennsylvania  Freeman  ;  Christian  Press,  Cincinnati ;  Christian 
Advocate,  Auburn  :  Saturday  Visitor,  [Mrs.  Swisshelm,]  Pittsburgh  ;  Portland 
Inquirer  ;  Commercial,  Cleveland  :  Christian  Statesman,  Mansfield,  Ohio  ;  Reli- 
gious Telegraph,  Circleville,  Ohio  ;  Ovid  (N.  Y.,)  Bee  ;  Phoenix  (N.  Y.,)  Bee  ; 
Bluffton  [Ind.,)  Bee;  Pawtucket  (R.  I.,)  Echo,  &c.,  &c.,  and  the  free  papers 
generally. 

A  London  edition  has  been  issued  by  a  prominent  publishing-house,  and  the 
sales  in  England  have  already  been  quite  extensive,  reflecting,  in  some  degree, 
the  popularity  it  has  attained  in  thi.s  coim'ry. 

New-Yvrk,  1853. 


THIRD   EDITION   WITHIN  SIX  MONTHS! 


THE 

AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE 

m  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE: 
ITS 

DISTINCTIVE  FEATURES 

SHOWN  BY 

ITS  STATUTES,  JUDICIAL  DECISIONS, 

AND 

ILLUSTRATIVE  FACTS. 

"Truth  is  stranger  than  Fiction." — (Modern  Maxim.) 

M  Statutes  agaiost  Fundamental  Morality  are  void.^*— (Judge  M' Lean,  U.  S.  Supreme  Court.) 
BY 

WILLIAM  GOODELL, 

Author  of  the  "  Demccracy  of  Christianity,''  and  "History  of  Slavery  and  Anti  S  arBif 


NEW-YORK : 

AMERICAN  AND   FOREIGN  ANTI-SLAVERY  SOCIETY, 

4  8    B  E  E  K  M  A  N     S  T  11  E  E  T  . 


1  8  5  3. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1853,  by 

WILLIAM  GOODELL, 

Iti  the  Clerk's  Offic-  c*  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  tb« 

Son.  hern  District  of  New-York. 


.1  0  n  N   A  .  G  R  A  V  . 
95  &  97  Cliff,  cor.  Frankfort  fetreot. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preliminary  Chapter,   15 


PART  I. 
The  Relation  of  Master  and  Slave,   21 

CHAPTER  1. 

SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 

Fun'laniental  idefi  of  modern  Slaveholdin^,  n  imely,  the  assumed  principle  of 
Huinrui  Chaitelhood,  or  Property  in  Man,  constituting  the  relation  of  Owner 
aud  Property,  of  Master  and  Slave,   23 

CHAPTER  II. 

SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 

Sale— Purchase  —  Barter— Mortgage— A»iction—Coffle-gang  —  Shipments— as 
absolutely  as  in  the  case  of  any  other  Property,  and  by  the  same  teuure,  . .  44 

CHAPTER  HI. 

SEIZURE  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY  FOR  DEBT. 

As  Property,  Slaves  rany  be  seized  and  sold  to  pay  the  debts  of  their  Owners, 
while  living,  or  for  the  Settlement  of  their  Estates  after  their  Decease,   63 

CHAPTER  IV. 

INHERITANCE  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY. 

Slaves,  as  Property,  are  trnnsmitted  by  Inheritance,  or  by  Will,  to  heirs  at  law 
or  legatees.  In  the  distribution  of  Estates  they  are  distribnted  like  other 
Property,   69 


iv 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 


USES    OF    SLAVE  PROPERTY. 


Slaves,  as  Property,  may  be  used,  absolutely,  by  their  Owners,  for  their  own 
profit  or  pleasure,  


CHAPTER  VI. 

SLAVES  CAN  POSSESS  NOTHING. 
Being  Property  themselves,  they  can  own  no  property,  nor  make  any  contract,  89 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

SLAVES   CANNOT  MARRY. 

Being  held  as  Property,  and  incapable  of  making  any  Contract,  they  cannot 
contract  Marriage  recognized  by  law,   105 


CHAPTER  Vm. 

SLAVES  CANNOT  CONSTITUTE  FAMILIES. 

Being  Property,—''  Goods  and  Chattels  Personal,  to  all  intents,  constructions, 
and  purposes  whatsoever,"— they  have  no  claim  on  each  other ;  no  security 
from  separation  ;  no  Marital  Rights ;  no  Parental  Rights ;  no  Family  Gov- 
ernment; no  Family  Education ;  no  Family  Protection,   113 


CHAPTER  IX. 

UNLIMITED  POWER  OF  SLAVEHOLDERS. 

The  Power  of  the  Master  or  Owner  is  -vartually  unlimited ;  the  submission 
required  of  the  Slave  is  unbounded ;  the  Slave,  being  Property,  can  have 
no  Protection  against  the  Master,  and  has  no  redress  for  injuries  inflicted  by 


CHAPTER  X. 

LABOR  OF  SLAVES. 


The  Slave,  being  a  Chattel,  may  be  worked  at  the  discretion  of  his  Owner,  as 
jther  working  Chattels  are,   128 


CO^' TENTS. 


V 


CHAPTER  XI. 

FOOD,  CLOTHING,  AND  DWELLINGS  OF  SLAVES. 

The  Slave,  as  a  Chattel,  is  fed  or  famished,  covered  or  uncovered,  sheltered  or 
unsheltered,  at  the  discretion  or  convenience  of  his  Owner,  like  other  work- 
ing animals,   13J 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

COERCED  LABOR  WITHOUT  WAGES. 

The  ''legal  relation  of  Master  and  Slave,"  being  the  relation  of  an  Owner  to 
a  Chattel,  is  incompatible  with  the  natural  and  Heaven-sanctioned  "  relation" 


of  Labor  and  Wages,   If^ 

CHAPTER  Xm. 

PUNISHMENTS  OF  SLAVES  BY  THE  OWNER  AND  HIRER. 

Being  the  absolute  Property  of  the  Owner,  the  Slave  is  wholly  in  his  power, 
without  any  effectual  restraint,   15i 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

OF  LAWS  CONCERNING  THE  MURDER  AND  KILLING  OF  SLAVES. 

The  structure  of  the  Laws  and  the  condition  of  the  Slaves  render  adequate 
Protection  impossible,   177 

CHAPTER  XV. 

OF  THE  DELEGATED  POWER  OF  OVERSEERS. 

An  the  power  of  the  Owner  over  his  Slave  is  held  and  exercised  also  by  Over- 
seers and  Agents,   19" 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

OF  THE  PROTECTION  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY  FROM  DAMAGE  BY 

ASSAULTS  FROM  OTHER  PERSONS  THAN  THEIR  OWNERS. 
Slaves  are  better  protected  as  Property  than  they  are  as  Sentient  Beings^   201 


vi 


CO^'TENTS. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

FACTS  ILLUSTRATING  THE  KIND  AND  DEGREE  OF  PROTECTION 
EXTENDED  TO  SLAVES.  ' 

riie  Extent,  the  Atrocity,  the  Frequency,  and  the  Impunity  of  barbarous  Out- 
rajies  u^,on  Sluves,  show  that  the  laws  atford  them  lillle  or  uo  Protection,  209 


CHAPTER  XVHL 

FUGITIVES   FROM  SLAVERY. 

Ti  e  Slave,  being  Property,  may  be  hampered  and  cotiti;ied  to  prevent  his  es- 
c;ipe;  m.iy  be  pursued  and  reclaimed;  must  not  be  Jiidetl  or  concealed 
inun  his  M:ister ;  aud  wiien  too  wild  or  relractory  to  be  uned  by  his  Owner, 
may  be  killed  by  him  willi  impuuily,   225 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE   SLAVE   CANNOT  SUE   HIS  MASTER. 
Slave  Property  cannot  litigate  with  its  Owner,   239 

CHAPTER  XX. 

NO  POWER  OF  SELF-REDEMPTION  OR  CHANGE  OF  MASTERS. 

The  Slave,  being  a  Chattel,  has  no  power  of  Self-redemption,  nor  of  an  ex- 
change of  Owners,   245 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

THE   RELATION   HEREDITARY    AND   PERPET,' aL. 

Slave?,  being  held  as  Property,  like  other  Domestic  Animals,  their  Offspring 
are  lield  as  Property  lu  the  same  manner,   248 


CHAPTER  XXH. 

RIGHT    TO    EDUCATION  RELIGIOUS    LIBERTY  RIGHTS  OF 

CONSCIENCE. 

The  ?lnve,  being  held  as  a  Chattel,  is  held  by  a  tenure  which  excludes  any  legal 
recogniiiou  of  his  rights  as  a  thinking  and  religious  being,   251 


CONTENTS. 


vil 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

ORIGIN   OF  THE  RELATION  AND   ITS  SUBJECTS. 

The  so-calU-d  "legal  relation"  of  Slave  Ownership  of  Negroes  originated  in 
that  Alricuii  Slave-Trade  which  oar  laws  now  punish  as  piracy  ;  but  Slavery 
is,  in  general,  extended  over  all  classes  whom  the  Slaveholders  have  been 
able  to  seize  ii])on  and  retain — over  Indians,  free  persons  of  Color,  and 
Whites,  258 


P  A  E  T  II. 

Relation  of  the  Slave  to  Society  and  to  Civil  Govern- 
ment, 287 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  GROUND  AND  NATURE  OF  THE  SLAVe's  CIVIL  CONDITION. 

The  Civil  Condition  of  the  Slave  grows  out  of  his  relation  to  his  Muster,  as 
Proptrty^  and  is  determined  and  defined  by  it,   289 


CHAPTER  II. 

NO  ACCESS  TO  THE  JUDICIARY,  AND  NO  HONEST  PROVISION  FOR 
TESTING  THE  CLAIMS  OF  THE  ENSLAVED  TO  FREEDOM. 

**  A  Slave  cannot  be  a  Party  to  a  Civil  Suit."   (Stroud.)   295 


CHAPTER  III. 

REJECTION   OF  TESTIMONY   OF  SLAVES   AND    FREE  COLORED 
PERSONS. 

Slavery  is  upheld  by  suppressing  the  testimony  of  its  victims,   SCO 


YUl 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

SUBJECTION  TO    ALL   WHITE  PERSONS. 

Submission  is  required  of  the  Slave,  not  only  to  the  will  of  his  Master,  but 
to  the  will  of  all  oilier  White  Persons  / "   305 


CHAPTER  y. 

PENAL  LAWS  AGAINST  SLAVES. 

The  Laws  are  unequal;  their  administration  despotic:  their  execution  barbar- 
ous.  Even  this  is  exceeded  by  "  Lynch  Law,"  30S 

CHAPTER  VI. 

EDUCATION  PROHIBITED. 

The  Slave,  not  being  regarded  as  a  Member  of  Society,  nor  as  a  Human  Be- 
ing, the  Government,  instead  of  providing  for  his  Education,  takes  care  to 
forbid  it,  as  being  inconsistent  with  the  condition  of  Cattelhood,   319 


CHAPTER  VIL 

FREE  SOCIAL  WORSHIP  AND  RELIGIOUS  INSTRUCTION  PROHIB- 
ITED. 

The  Government  not  only  allows  the  Master  to  forbid  the  Free  Social  Wor- 
ship and  Instruction  of  his  Slaves,  but  it  also  steps  in  with  direct  prohibi- 
tions of  its  own,  which  even  the  Master  himself  may  not  relax  or  abrogate,  326 

CHAPTER  VIH. 

LEGISLATIVE,  JUDICIAL,  AND  CONSTITUTIONAL  OBSTRUCTIONS 
TO  EMANCIPATION. 

The  Statutes  of  the  Slave  States  not  only  make  no  provision  for  a  general 
Emancipation,  but  they  obstruct  and  prevent  Emancipations  by  the  Master. 
And  the  Constitutions  of  some  of  the  States  forbid  the  Legislatures  to  abol- 
ish Slavery,  33* 


CONTENTS.  IX 

P  A  R  T      I  I  I  . 

Relation  of  the  Slave  Code  to  the  Liberties  of  the 
Free,   353 

CHAPTER  I. 

LIBERTIES  OF  THE  FREE  PEOPLE   OF  COLOR. 

The  free  People  of  Color,  though  not  in  a  condition  of  Chattelhood,  are  con- 
stantly exposed  to  it,  and,  at  best,  enjoy  only  a  portion  of  their  rights, ....  355 


CHAPTER  H. 

LIBERTIES    OF   THE   WHITE   PEOPLE    OF  THE  SLAVEHOLDING 
STATES. 

The  White  People  of  the  Slaveholding  States,  whether  Slaveholders  or  Non- 
Slaveholders,  are  deprived,  by  the  Slave  Code,  of  some  of  their  essential 
Rights,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  people  in  possession  of  Civil,  Religious 
and  Political  Freedom,   372 


CHAPTER  HI. 

LIBERTIES  OF  THE  WHITE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  NON-SLAVEHOLDING 
STATES. 

The  Rights  of  the  White  People  of  the  Non-Slaveholding  States  are  directly 
and  indirectly  invaded  by  the  Slave  Code  of  the  Slave  States ;  their  Liber- 
ties, to  a  great  extent,  have  already  fallen  a  sacrifice,  and  can  never  be 
secure  while  Slaveholding  continues,   389 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 

Summarj'  Review  of  the  Slave  Code ;  its  Character  and  Effects— Inquiries 
concerning  the  Duty  of  Christians,  Churches,  and  Mini-sters— The  Respon- 
sibilities of  Citizens,  of  Society,  of  Civil  Government,  of  Legislators,  of 
Magistrates— Scrutiny  of  the  Legality  of  American  Slavery— The  Heaven- 
prescribed  Remedy— The  Worthlessness  of  Temporizing  Expedients— Clos- 
ing Appeal,   394 


1* 


imn  FROM  HON.  WILLIAM  JAY  TO  THE  AUTHOR. 


Xew-Yoek,  25th  January,  1853. 

Rev.  axd  Dear  Sm : 

On  returning  the  MSS.  of  your  "American  Slave  Code,  in  TJteory 
and  Practice"  I  must  ask  you  to  accept  my  thanks  for  writing  it, 
as  well  as  for  favoring  me  with  its  early  perusal.  Surely,  never 
before  has  mischief  been  framed  by  law,  with  more  diabolical  inge- 
nuity, than  in  this  infernal  code.  Your  analysis  of  the  slave  laws 
is  very  able,  and  your  exhibition  of  their  practical  application  by 
the  Southern  Courts,  evinces  great  and  carefiil  research. 

It  is  more  easy  to  make  than  to  refute  a  charge  of  exaggeration 
against  a  work  of  fiction  like  Mrs.  Stowe's ;  but  your  book  is  as 
impregnable  against  such  a  charge  as  is  Euclid's  Geometr}',  since, 
like  that,  it  consists  of  propositions  and  demonstrations.  The 
book  is  not  only  true,  but  it  is  ujiqueationably  true.  You  show  us 
the  rack  constructed  "  according  to  law ;"  we  examine,  at  oar  lei- 
sure, the  cruel  but  skilful  contrivance  of  its  machinery  ;  we  see  the 
ministers  of  the  law  bind  the  victim  on  the  instrument  of  torture; 
we  see  one  feature  of  humanity  after  another  crushed  and  obliter- 
ated, till  at  last  an  immortal  man,  made  a  little  lower  than  the 
angels,  and  for  whose  redemption  the  Son  of  God  shed  his  blood  on 
the  cross,  is  converted  into  a  beast  of  burden — a  vendible  animal, 
scourged  at  the  will  of  its  owner,  and  offered  for  sale  in  the  market 
with  horses  and  oxen. 

Your  book  will  take  from  our  Northern  dough-faces  and  slave- 
x-atehers  the  flatteiing  unction  they  are  laying  to  their  souls  that 


LETTER  TO  THE  AUTHOR. 


*  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  "  is  a  gross  exaggeration ;  that,  of  course,  sla- 
very is,  after  all,  not  so  very  bad  ;  and  that  they,  in  doing  its  bid- 
dings, are  not  as  base  as  they  seem  to  be.  You  show  them  that 
the  most  educated  and  refined  among  the  slaveholders  have,  for 
the  past  century,  as  legislators,  been  deliberately  enacting  the  most 
fiendish  of  laws,  in  utter  defiance  of  the  moral  sense  of  mankind, 
and  the  precepts  of  the  blessed  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  that 
their  grave  and  learned  judges  have  enforced  these  accursed  stat- 
utes, in  all  their  execrable  rigor,  thus  giving  a  solemn  sanction  to 
the  atrocities  portrayed  by  Mrs.  Stowe,  and  others  without  num- 
ber, still  more  aggravated  by  investing  them  with  legal  impunity. 

May  God  make  your  book  a  means  of  awakening  the  consciences 
of  our  cotton  divines  to  the  deep  sin  of  upholding,  in  the  name  of 
the  blessed  and  adorable  Redeemer,  a  system  so  damnable  as  Ame- 
rican Slavery !  These  reverend  pro-slavery  champions  of  Chris- 
tianity resemble  the  priests  of  Juggernaut,  recommending  the  wor- 
ship of  their  god  by  pointing  to  the  wretches  writhing,  and  shriek- 
ing, and  expiring  beneath  the  wheels  of  his  car. 

That  the  blessing  of  God  may  rest  on  your  labors  for  his  glory 
and  the  good  of  our  suffering  and  oppressed  brethren,  is  the  fer- 
vent prayer  of 

Your  friend  and  servant, 

WILLLiM  JAY. 

Rev.  "Wiiliam  Goodell. 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


PEELIMINARY  CHAPTER. 

OCCASIONS   AND   USES   FOR   THIS  VOLUME. 

The  practical  importance  of  an  exact  knowledge 
of  the  Slave  Code  and  of  its  legitimate  workings, 
will  be  manifest  from  the  considerations  that  follow. 

It  is  often  maintained  that  the  "legal  relation  of 
master  and  slave"  is  not  a  criminal  one,  and  that 
there  is  no  sin,  or  moral  wrong,  in  the  mere  fact  of 
sustaining  that  relation.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
held  that  the  relation  is  wrong  in  itself,  and  cannot 
be  innocently  sustained. 

Such  a  question  cannot,  intelligently,  be  settled 
without  a  correct  understanding  of  that  "legal  rela- 
tion," and  of  the  particulars  in  which  it  consists. 
And  it  is  only  by  the  Slave  Code  of  the  country  that 
"  the  legal  relation"  can  be  ascertained.  By  this,  and 
by  this  only,  is  it  to  be  defined.  "  The  legal  relation 
of  master  and  slave"  is  what  the  Slave  Code  declares 
it  to  be.    And  it  is  nothing  else. 

It  is  worse  than  mere  trifling,  it  is  evasion  and 
sophistry,  to  ransack  the  archives  of  some  other  age 


16  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

and  nation  for  the  laws  and  usages  which  then  con- 
stituted  slavery,  or  which  we  may  now  choose  to 
call  slavery ;  and  then,  on  the  assumed  (or  even  the 
ascertained)  innocency  or  divine  sanction  or  tolerance 
of  those  icsageSj  to  argue  the  innocency  of  the  exist- 
ing relation  of  master  and  slave"  in  this  country. 
Sincere  and  honest  inquirers  are  bound  to  ascertain 
"  the  legal  relation  of  master  and  slave"  as  it  now 
exists  in  America,  in  virtue  of  the  code  that  author- 
izes and  defines  it.  They  are  bound  to  bring  the 
legal  relation,"  as  thus  defined  and  ascertained,  to  the 
standard  of  the  Divine  will,  and  say  to  whether  or  no 
it  corresponds  with  that  standard.  The  question 
whether  it  is  right  or  wrong  to  sanction  such  a  "  legal 
relation"  by  sustaining"  it,  will  then  be  easily  set- 
tled. 

No  man,  in  America,  can  hold  a  slave  by  any  other 
tenure,  or  in  any  other  "relation,"  than  that  which 
the  American  Slave  Code  describes.  He  cannot 
hold  a  slave  under  the  code  of  Moses,  (if  it  ever  could 
have  been  done,)  nor  under  the  usages  of  Abraham's 
day,  for  no  such  code  or  usages  now  exist.  If  he 
rehnquishes  the  hold  on  his  slave  that  the  American 
Slave  Code  gives  him,  he  manumits  him,  at  once  and 
entirely.  Let  him  do  this,  or  let  that  code  be  blotted 
out,  and  he  cannot  forcibly  retain  a  man  in  bondage 
a  single  day,  without  becoming  a  felon  in  the  eye  of 
the  law.  So  that  in  "sustaining  the  legal  relation," 
he  sustains  and  sanctions  the  code,  and  its  character 
becomes  Ms.  The  more  unsullied  his  reputation  may 
be  in  other  respects,  the  more  effectually  does  his 


PRELIMINARY  CHAPTER. 


17 


example  of  slaveholding  sanction  the  system,  and 
rivet  ttie  chains  of  the  slave. 

It  must  be  futile  and  absurd  to  decry  the  code,  and 
yet  attempt  to  justify  him  who  holds  a  slave  undei' 
it.  The  code  would  harm  no  one,  if  no  one  ever 
made  use  of  it.  The  worst  that  can  properly  be  said 
of  the  code  is,  that  it  enables  men  who  are  thus  dis- 
posed to  hold  the  relation"  described  ])j  it.  For, 
the  very  men  for  whose  consideration  we  make  this 
remark  are  forward  to  tell  us  that  the  system  (in 
other  words,  the  code)  is  not  to  be  held  responsible 
for  the  mere  abuses  committed  under  it.  It  must, 
then,  be  responsible  for  the  relation^  and  those  who 
sustain  the  relation  must  be  responsible  for  it. 

We  propose,  then,  by  an  exhibition  of  the  American 
Slave  Code,  to  test  the  moral  character  of  American  slave- 
holding.  The  practice  (in  the  absence  of  mere  abuses) 
cannot  be  better  than  the  code,  or  rule  of  conduct, 
that  gives  it  license  and  sanction. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  usages  under  any  code  are 
seldom  or  never  better  than  the  code  itself.  Com- 
munities are  not  forward  to  proclaim  themselves 
worse  than  they  are,  by  giving  public  license  to  evil 
practices  not  prevalent  among  them,  and  which  they 
do  not  intend  to  practise  and  sustain.  No  people," 
says  a  learned  writer  and  profound  thinker,"^  "  were 
ever  yet  found  who  were  better  than  their  laws, 
though  many  have  been  known  to  be  worse." 

The  only  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  where  bad  laws 


*  Dr.  Priestley. 


18 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


are  forced  upon  a  commiinity  without  their  consent ; 
or  where,  from  their  odiousness,  or  by  the  progress 
of  civilization  since  their  enactment,  they  have  be- 
come obsolete.  In  our  own  country,  the  people  (ex- 
cept the  victims  of  the  Slave  Code)  enact  their  own 
statutes.  And  in  the  present  investigation  it  will  be 
made  apparent  that  the  Slave  Code  has  not  become 
obsolete. 

The  present  contest  for  the  abolition  of  American 
slavery  has  encountered  a  species  of  opposition  which 
it  has  been  difficult  to  meet.  If  existing  practices 
are  arraigned,  we  are  told  that  these  are  only  abuses 
of  the  system,  which  argue  nothing  against  the  inno- 
cent '-legal  relation."  Thus  all  efforts  for  the  aboli- 
tion of  that  innocent  relation  are  discountenanced 
and  disparaged.  At  the  same  time,  all  adequate, 
trustworthy,  and  truthful  representations  of  the 
cruelties  habitually  and  extensively  practised  upon 
slaves,  are  scouted  as  incredible  or  exaggerated. 
Attempts  are  made  to  offset  them  by  the  cool  remark 
that  parents  are  sometimes  cruel  to  their  children, 
mechanics  to  their  apprentices,  and  capitalists  to 
operatives  in  their  employ.  To  this  it  is  often  added 
that,  on  the  whole,  slaves  are  as  well  off  as  other 
laboring  people,  and  better  off  than  they  would  be 
if  set  free.  In  this  way,  the  sympathies  of  the  people 
of  the  North  are  withdrawn  from  the  slaves.  And 
whether  we  arraign  "the  legal  relation,"  or  the  so- 
called  "abuses,"  we  find  our  attacks  warded  off  by 
the  arts  of  sophistry  and  evasion.  Even  ministers  of 
religion  and  ecclesiastical  bodies  have  been  proficients 


PRELIMINARY  CHAPTER. 


in  these  arts,  and  tlie  friends  of  liberty  themselves 
have  thereby  been  led,  in  some  instances,  to  make 
unwise  and  unfortunate  concessions. 

In  this  book  we  shall  endeavor  to  show  what  "the 
legal  relation"  is;  what  the  usages  of  slaveholders 
generally  are;  and  the  natural  and  necessary  cor- 
respondence and  connection  between  them.  In 
describing  the  "legal  relation,"  we  shall  use  the 
testimony  of  slaveholders  themselves,  in  their  own 
language,  set  forth  in  the  most  solemn  and  authen- 
ticated form,  the  public  testimony  of  their  legislative 
acts  and  judicial  decisions,  made  for  the  very  purpose 
of  defining  and  enforcing  that  relation.  If  such  tes- 
timony cannot  be  received,  there  is  an  end  to  all 
rational  discussion.  Our  account  of  the  usages  and 
practices  current  among  slaveholders  will  be  found 
sufficiently  authenticated  by  their  own  testimony, 
and  by  other  unimpeachable  witnesses.  More  than 
all  this :  The  intelligent  and  reflecting  reader  will 
be  compelled,  if  we  mistake  not,  to  perceive  that  the 
connection  between  "  the  kgal  relation"  and  the  most 
frightful  "  abuses"  is  that  of  cause  and  effect,  or  more 
properly,  of  a  whole  with  its  constituent  and  essen- 
tial PARTS,  insomuch  that  the  presence  of  the  one 
implies  and  certifies  the  presence  of  the  other. 

In  speaking  (as  Ave  are  compelled  by  the  prevail- 
ing use  of  language  to  do)  of  "the  legal  relation," 
of  the  "  laws"  of  slavery  and  of  slave  "  owners,"  we 
must  not  be  understood  to  concede  the  "legality"  of 
such  a  relation,  or  the  validity  of  such  "laws/'  or 
the  reality  of  such  "  ownership,"  in  the  proper  mean- 


20 


THE  AMERICAN   SLAVE  CODE. 


ing  of  those  terms.  The  ''law  of  sin  and  death"  is 
not  obligatory  law.  "Mischief  framed  by  a  law" 
binds  men  to  nothing  but  to  the  repudiation  and  con- 
tempt o^  it.  "If  it  be  found,"  says  Lord  Littleton, 
"that  a  former  decision  is  manifestly  absurd  and 
unjust,  it  is  declared,  not  that  such  a  sentence  was 
lad  law,  but  that  it  was  not  law."  "It  is  generally 
laid  down  that  acts  of  Parliament  contrary  to  reason 
are  void."  Of  the  character  and  validity  of  the  Slave 
Code  the  reader  of  this  volume  will  have  an  oppor- 
tunity to  judge,  when  he  shall  have  carefully  ex- 
amined and  considered  it. 


K  B. — It  is  sometimes  alleged  that  the  severe  laws  against  the 
education  and  free  religious  worship  of  slaves  were  occasioned  by 
the  impertinent  interference  of  abolitionists.  But  it  will  be  found, 
on  an  examination  of  their  dates,  that,  with  few  exceptions,  they 
were  enacted  long  before  any  of  the  Abolition  Societies  were  formed, 
and  even  before  the  American  Revolution. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  sometimes  said  that  these  and  other 
severe  enactments  are  antiquated  and  obsolete.  It  is  marvellous 
to  see  with  how  much  confidence  these  self-confuting  statements 
are  made  by  the  same  persons.  The  careful  reader  of  the  follow- 
ing pages  will  find  ample  evidence  that  both  these  pleas  are  with- 
out a  shadow  of  foundation. 


P  AET  I. 

THE  RELATI0:N^  of  iMASTER  AND  SLAVE 


CHAPTER  I. 


SLAVE    O  W  K  E  R  S  H I  P  . 

Fundamental  Tdoa  of  modern  Slaveholding  ;  namely,  the  ass^imed  principle  of 
Human  Chattelliooc ,  or  Property  in  Man  ;  constituting  the  relation  of  Owner 
and  Property — of  Mister  and  Slave. 

SoLTTH  Carolin'a. — "Slaves  shall  be  deemed, 
sold,  taken,  reputed  and  adjudged  in  law  to  be  chat- 
tels personal^  in  the  hands  of  their  owners  and  posses- 
sors, and  thei]"  executors,  administrators  and  assigns, 
to  all  intents,  constructions^  and  'puvposesicliatsoeverr  (2 
Brevard's  Digest,  229  ;  Prince's  Digest,  446,  &c.,  &c.) 

Louisiana. — "  A  slave  is  one  who  is  in  the  power 
of  a  master  to  whom  he  belongs.  The  master  may 
sell  him,  dispose  of  his  2^(^^son^  his  industry  and  his 
labor.  He  can  do  nothing,  possess  nothing,  nor  acquire 
any  thing,  but  what  must  belong  to  his  master." 
(Civil  Code,  Art.  35.) 

"  The  slave  is  entirely  subject  to  the  will  of  his  master, 
who  may  correct  and  chastise  him,  though  not  with 
unusual  rigor,  or  so  as  to  maim  and  mutilate  him,  or 
expose  him  to  the  danger  of  loss  of  life,  or  to  cause 
his  death."    (Art.  173.) 

It  will  l)e  found,  as  we  proceed,  that  this  attempted 


24 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


or  pretended  limitation  of  power  has  no  real  exist- 
ence, and  affords  no  protection  to  the  sjave. 

An  exception,  in  Louisiana,  to  the  general  tenure 
of   chattels  personal,"  is  expressed  as  follows: 

''Slaves,  though  movable  by  their  nature,  are 
considered  as  immovable  by  the  operation  of  law." 
(Civil  Code,  Art.  461.) 

"  Slaves  shall  always  be  reputed  and  considered 
real  estate ;  shall,  as  such,  be  subject  to  be  mortgaged, 
according  to  the  rules  prescribed  by  law,  and  they 
shall  be  seized  and  sold  as  real  estate^  (Statute  of 
June  7,  1806 ;  1  Martin's  Digest,  612.) 

This  provision,  if  literally  carried  into  effect,  would 
prevent  the  sale  of  slaves  from  off  the  plantations 
of  their  masters.     More  of  this  in  its  proper  place. 

Kentucky. — By  the  law  of  descents^  slaves  are  con 
sidered  real  estate,  and  pass  in  consequence  to  heirs^ 
and  not  to  executors.  (2  Littell  &  Swigert's  Digest, 
1155.) 

From  the  following  it  appears,  however,  that  spe- 
cial care  was  taken  in  Kentucky,  that  the  slaves 
should  derive  no  benefit  from  the  distinction  between 
real  estate  and  chattels  personal : 

They  are,  however,  liable,  as  cliattels^  to  be  sold  by 
the  master  at  his  pleasure,  and  may  be  taken  in  exe- 
cution for  the  payment  of  his  debts.  (lb  ;  see  also 
1247.) 

Virginia. — In  1705  a  law  similar  to  that  of  Ken- 
tucky was  enacted,  but  was  soon  after  repealed. 
(Note  to  Eevised  Code,  432.)  Slaves  are  therefore 
held  as  chattels  personal  in  Yirginia,  as  in  most  of  the 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


25 


slave  States,  where,  in  the  absence  of  entire  written 
codes,  or  such  general  enunciations  as  those  of  South 
Carohna  and  Louisiana,  the  chattel  principle  has, 
nevertheless,  been  afl&rmed  and  maintained  by  the 
courts,  and  involved  in  legislative  acts.  A  specimen 
of  the  latter  description  we  have  in  the  following : 

Maryland. — ^'In  case  the  personal  property  of  a 
ward  sh  all  consist  of  specific  articles,  such  as  slaves, 
WORKING  beasts,  ANIMALS  of  any  kind,  stock,  fur- 
niture, plate,  books,  and  so  forth,  the  Court,  if  it 
shall  deem  it  advantageous  to  the  ward,  may,  at  any 
time,  pass  an  order  for  the  sale  thereof''  ko,.,  &c.  (Act 
of  1798,  chap.  CI.  No.  12.) 

Without  further  citation  (as  might  be  made)  of 
particular  enactments  in  this  place,  it  may  be  suflS.- 
cient  to  state  that  the  Eoman  civil  law,"  as  existing 
at  an  early  period,  before  its  modification  under  pro- 
fessedly Christian  Emperors,  is  generally  referred  to 
in  our  slave  States,  as  containing  the  principles  of 
their  "  peculiar  institution."  Where  other  usages  or 
statutes,  in  any  of  the  States,  fail  of  furnishing  the 
requisite  definition  of  the  "legal  relation,"  recourse 
is  generally  had  to  the  "Roman  civil  law."  Those 
also  who  defend  the  "legal  relation"  as  an  innocent 
one,  and  who  claim  that  Christ  and  his  apostles  did 
not  disapprove  it,  but  gave  it  their  sanction,  are  for- 
ward to  remind  us  that  it  existed  in  the  Eoman  Em- 
pire at  that  period.  It  seems  desirable,  therefore,  in 
more  aspects  than  one,  to  ascertain  precisely  what 
that  relation  was.  We  find  that  information  in  Dr. 
Taylor's  Elements  of  the  Civil  Law. 
2 


26 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Slaves  were  held  pro  nullis:  pro  mortuis,  pro  qua 
driipedihus ;  tliey  had  no  head  in  the  State ;  no  name, 
title  or  register ;  they  were  not  capable  of  being  injured^ 
nor  could  they  take  by  purchase  or  descent;  they  had 
no  heirs,  and  could  therefore  make  no  will ;  exclu- 
sive of  what  was  called  their  peculium^  whatever  they 
acquired  was  their  master's ;  they  could  not  plead  or 
be  pleaded  for,  but  were  excluded  from  all  civil  con- 
cerns whatever.  They  could  not  claim  the  indul 
gence  of  absence  reipublicce  causa:  they  were  not  en- 
titled to  the  rights  and  considerations  of  matrimony ^  and 
therefore  had  no  relief  in  case  of  adultery ;  nor  were 
they  proper  objects  of  cognation  and  affinity,  but  of 
quasi'Cognation  only :  they  could  be  sold,  transferred, 
or  pawned  as  goods  or  personal  estate,  for  goods  they 
.were,  and  as  such  they  were  esteemed ;  they  might 
be  tortured  for  evidence,  punished  at  the  discretion  of 
their  lord,  or  even  put  to  death  by  his  authority y  (Tay- 
lor's Elements,  p.  429.) 

Such  was  the  ^' legal  relation"  said  to  have  been 
sanctioned  by  Christ  and  his  apostles  as  innocent,  or 
(as  others  express  it)  not  condemned,  disapproved 
or  censured  by  them.  Such  was  the  heathen  ''insti- 
tution" now  held  to  have  been  adopted  as  Christian. 
It  must  be  added  that  the  ancient  heathen  ''relation" 
of  owner  and  property  has  been  more  rigidly  enforced 
in  Christian  America  than  it  ever  was  in  Pagan  Eome. 
Oar  slavery  allows  no  peculium  or  exempted  prop- 
erty to  be  held  by  the  slave.  It  denies  education  and 
literatare  to  its  human  brutes.  It  ignores  their  reli- 
gious nature,  and  bars  the  door  of  redemption  wsl 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


27 


release.  But  we  anticipate  topics  of  future  exami- 
nation. 

The  testimony  already  presented  is  corroborated 
by  jurists  who  have  examined  the  subject.  Judge 
Stroud,  in  his  "  Sketch  of  the  Laws  relating  to  Slav- 
ery," has  fully  expressed  his  views  on  this  point. 
Having  explained  the  maxim  of  the  civil  law,  "par- 
tus sequitur  ventrem,"  by  which  the  condition  of  the 
slave  mother  is  for  ever  entailed  on  all  her  remotest 
posterity,  he  remarks  as  follows : 

"This  maxim  of  the  civil  law,  the  genuine  and 
degrading  principle  of  slavery,  inasmuch  as  it  places 
the  slave  upon  a  level  with  hrute  animals,  prevails 
universally  in  the  slaveholding  States."  (Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  11.) 

The  same  writer  also  says  : 

"It  is  plain  that  the  dominion  of  the  master  is  as 
unlimited  as  that  which  is  tolerated  by  the  laws  of 
any  civilized  country  in  relation  to  brute  animals — 
to  quadrvveds^  to  use  the  words  of  the  civil  law." 
(Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  24.) 

"  The  cardinal  principle  of  slavery — ^that  the  slave 
is  not  to  be  ranked  among  sentient  beings,  but  among 
things^  as  an  article  of  property,  a  chattel  personal — 
obtains  as  undoubted  law,  in  all  these  (the  slave- 
holding)  States."    (lb.  pp.  22,  23.) 

This,  then,  is  the  definition  of  the  terms.  Slavery, 
Slave,  and  Slaveholding,  as  furnished  by  slavehold- 
ing communities,  and  as  understood  by  jurists  who 
have  studied  their  legislation  and  jurisprudence. 
This  is  the  theory  of  American  Slavery.    This  is  its 


28 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


fundamental  Law,  if  it  has  any.  This  is  the  legal 
relation  of  master  and  slave,"  if  there  be  any  such 
relation. 

The  next  point  of  inquiry  is.  Whether  these  defi- 
nitions correspond  with  existing  realities,  or  facts  ? 
Whether  this  theory  is  an  empty  abstraction;  or 
whether  it  is  carried  out  into  actual  practice? 
Whether  this  law  is  merely  a  nominal  one,  (as  is 
Bometimes  alleged,)  antiquated  and  obsolete;  or 
whether  it  furnishes  the  rule  of  action  to  the  slave- 
holder, the  rule  of  condition  to  the  slave  ? 

From  statutory  enactments  and  recognized  codes, 
we  now  turn  to  the  courts.  Their  reported  deci- 
sions, in  the  hands  of  the  lawyers,  and  in  daily  use 
in  the  decision  of  new  causes,  will  tell  us  whether  or 
no  the  Code  of  Slavery  is  obsolete,  and  the  statute 
book  of  the  slave  states  a  dead  letter. 

Chief  Justice  Kinsey,  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
New-Jersey,  in  1797,  said : 

^'They"  (Indians)  ^^have  so  long  been  recognized 
as  slaves  in  our  law,  that  it  would  be  as  great  a  vio- 
lation of  the  rights  of  property  to  estabHsh  a  contrary 
doctrine  at  the  present  day,  as  it  would  in  the  case 
of  Africans,  and  as  useless  to  investigate  the  manner 
in  which  they  originally  lost  their  freedom."  (The 
State  vs.  Wagoner,  1  Halstead's  Eeports,  374  to  378.) 

To  be  a  slave  then,  even  in  New-Jersey,  is  to  be 
property^  upon  the  same  tenure  upon  which  other 
property  is  held.  This  is  "  the  legal  relation  of  mas- 
ter and  slave"  there^  if  the  courts  understand  it  cor- 
rectly. 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


29 


We  will  now  travel  farther  soutli,  and  look  into 
the  courts  for  information.  As  our  guide  we  will 
take  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,''  a  regular  law- 
book, made  for  the  use  of  slaveholders."^  Slave 
property,  hke  other  property,  is  the  subject  of  fre- 
quent litigation  between  the  different  owners  or 
claimants  of  it,  or  with  their  neighbors.  From  these 
suits  chiefly,  and  for  use  in  future  suits,,  the  volume 
of  Mr.  Wheeler  is  compiled.  The  incidental  testi- 
mony of  such  a  work  to  the  nature  and  incidents  of 
slavery  is  the  strongest  and  the  most  unobjectionable 
that  can  be  conceived.  We  shall  refer  to  it  frequent- 
ly in  this  volume.  On  the  property  tenure  and 
chattelhood  by  which  slaves  are  held,  its  testimo- 
ny is  clear  and  explicit.  The  idea  is  involved  and 
implied  throughout  the  entire  volume.  A  few  di- 
rect statements  of  the  doctrine  will  be  sufficient. 
Let  it;  be  understood  that  our  quotations  are  the 
decisions  of  Courts,  stated  in  the  language  of  the 
Judges. 

"  Slaves,  from  their  nature,  are  CHATTELS,  and  were 
put  in  the  hands  of  executors,  before  the  act  of  1792 


*  "  A  Practical  Treatise  of  the  Law  of  Slavery,  being  a  Compila 
lion  of  all  the  Decisions  made  on  that  subject,  in  the  several  Courts 
of  the  United  States,  and  State  Courts ;  with  copious  notes  and 
references  to  the  Statutes  and  other  authorities,  systematically 
arranged.  By  Jacob  D.  Wheeler,  Esq.,  Counsellor  at  Law.  New- 
York  :  Allan  Pollock,  Jr.  New  Orleans:  Benjamin  Levy.  1837." 
476  pages,  octavo.  This  work  is  recommended  by  Hon.  Judge  H. 
Hichcock,  of  Alabama,  and  by  the  New-York  Mercantile  Advertiser. 
and  New- York  Star. 


30  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


declaring  them  to  be  personal  estate."  (Wheeler's 
Law  of  Slavery,  p.  2.) 

The  phrase  ^personal  estate^  in  wills  and  contracts, 
should  be  understood  as  embracing  slaves."  (lb.) 

Slaves  were  declared  by  law  to  be  real  estate^  and 
descend  to  the  heir  at  law.  They  are  considered 
real  estate  in  case  of  descents."  (lb.) 

Although  for  some  purposes  slaves  are  declared 
by  statute  to  be  real  estate,  they  are  nevertheless, 
intrinsically  personal,  and  are  therefore  to  be  con- 
sidered as  included  in  every  statute  or  contract  in 
relation  to  chattels  which  does  not,  in  terms,  exclude 
them.  They  are  liable,  as  chattels,  to  the  payment 
of  debts,"  &c.    (lb.  p.  87.) 

In  the  case  of  Harris  vs,  Clarissa  and  others, 
March  Term,  1834,  (6  Yerger's  Tenn.  Rep.,  227 ; 
Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  319-26,)  the  Chief 
Justice,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  found 
occasion  (p.  325)  to  say : 

*'In  Maryland,  the  issue'^  (^.  e.,  of  female  slaves) 
is  considered  not  an  accessory,  but  as  a  part  of  the 
use,  like  that  of  other  female  animals.  (1  Har.  & 
McHen.  Eep.,  160,  352;  1  Har.  &  John's  Rep.,  526; 
I  Hay w.  Rep.,  335.)  Suppose  a  brood  mare  be  hired 
for  five  years,  the  foals  belong  to  him  who  has  a  part 
of  the  use  of  the  dam.  (2  Black.  Com.,  290 ;  1 
Hayw.  Rep.,  335.)  The  slave,  in  Maryland,  in  this 
respect,  is  placed  on  no  higher  or  different  ground^ 

Mr.  Gholson,  of  the  Virginia  Legislature,  by  the 
use  of  similar  language,  (as  will  hereafter  be  quoted,) 
oJBFended  the  dehcacy  of  some,  who  supposed  him  to 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


31 


be  peculiarly  brutish  and  gross;  but  we  here  find  it 
to  be  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  language  of 
the  courts  of  law ! 

About  forty-five  pages  of  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery"  are  occupied  with  judicial  decisions  con- 
cerning the  '^warranty  of. slaves"  sold,  in  respect  to 
their  soundness,  health,  freedom  from  all  redhibi- 
tory vices,  diseases,"  &c.  It  is  impossible  to  look 
over  the  revolting  details,  and  to  notice  the  cold- 
hearted  insensibility  with  which  the  rules  and  deci- 
sions of  the  Courts  are  laid  down  and  recorded, 
without  being  deeply  impressed  with  the  unhuman- 
izing  effects  of  the  process,  particularly  in  the  sj^s 
tematic  forgetfalness  that  the  slave  is  any  thing  more 
than  a  brute  animal.  The  section  concerning  the 
warranty  of  moral  qualities^''  may  be  claimed  as  an 
exception,  and  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  remarka- 
ble pieces  of  law  literature  extant : 

The  2500th  article  of  the  Code  of  Louisiana 
divides  the  defects  of  slaves  into  two  classes :  vices 
of  hody^  and  vices  of  characterT  "  But  with  regard 
to  those  of  character^  the  next  article  expressly 
declares  that  they  are  confined  to  cases  where  the 
slave  has  committed  a  capital  crime,  where  he  is  con- 
victed of  thefts  and  where  he  is  in  the  habit  of  running 
awayy    (p.  133.) 

Drunkenness  is  a  mental,  not  a  physical  defect, 
and  is  not  ground  of  redhibition."  (lb.)  ^^But  a 
fraudulent  concealment  of  it  will  be  a  ground  for 
rescinding  the  contract."    (lb.,  p.  134.) 

In  South  Carolina  there  is  no  implied  warranty 


32 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


of  the  moral  qualities  of  the  slave as  where  a 
slave  was  sold  who  had  committed  burglary,  the 
fact  being  unknown  to  both  the  seller  and  pur- 
chaser."   (lb.,  p.  136.) 

These  quotations  are  made  to  prove  the  bona  fide, 
matter-of-fact  chattelhood  of  the  slave,  or  his  being 
degraded  to  the  condition  of  mere  property^  either 
real  or  personal.  And  they  show  that  the  condition 
adheres  not  merely  to  the  hody^  but  to  the  soul ;  to 
the  moral  qualities  that  distinguish  a  man  from  a 
brute  !  It  is  an  honest  servant  that  the  vender  sells. 
If  the  article  is  proved  to  have  been  dishonesty  the 
sale  is  vitiated.  The  honesty  of  the  man,  then,  is  a 
commodity  in  the  market ! 

"  Craziness  or  idiocy  is  an  absolute  vice ;  and, 
where  not  apparent,  will  annul  the  sale."  (lb.,  p.  139.) 

The  God-like  intellect  of  the  human  chattel  is, 
therefore,  the  commodity  sold  and  warranted !  On 
the  same  page,  a  case  is  cited — "  Icar  vs.  Suars,  Jan. 
Term,  1835.  7  Louisiana  Eeports,  517" — in  which 
Judge  Bullard,  after  stating  the  law  and  the  facts, 
gave  judgment  for  the  plaintiff,  saying,  We  are 
satisfied  that  the  slave  in  question  was  wholly,  and 
perhaps  worse  than  useless." 

In  the  case  of  the  State  vs,  Mann,  the  defendant 
was  indicted  for  an  assault  and  battery  on  a  hired 
slave,  named  Lydia.  Judgment  was  rendered  for 
the  State  ;  but,  on  an  appeal,  the  judgment  was  re- 
versed. In  giving  his  decision.  Judge  Euffin  thus 
disposes  of  the  plea  that  the  relation  of  master  and 
slave  resembles  other  domestic  relations : 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


31 


"  This  has  indeed  been  assimilated,  at  the  bar, 
to*  the  other  domestic  relations ;  and  argument? 
drawn  from  the  well-established  principles  which 
confer  and  restrain  the  authority  of  the  parent  ovei 
the  child,  the  tutor  over  the  pupil,  the  master  ovei 
the  apprentice,  have  been  pressed  upon  us.  Tht 
Court  does  not  recognize  their  application.  There  is  no 
likeness  between  the  copses.  They  are  in  opposition  to 
each  other^  and  there  is  an  impassable  gulf  between  tJiem. 
The  difference  is  that  which  exists  between  freedom 
and  slavery,  and  a  greater  cannot  be  imagined.  In 
the  one,  the  end  in  view  is  the  happiness  of  the 
youth,  born  to  equal  rights  with  that  governor  on 
whom  the  duty  devolves  of  training  the  youth  to 
usefulness,  in  a  station  which  he  is  afterwards  to 
assume  among  freemen.  To  such  an  end,  and  with 
such  a  subject,  moral  and  intellectual  instruction 
seem  the  natural  means ;  and,  for  the  most  part, 
they  are  found  to  sufi&ce.  Moderate  force  is  super- 
added, to  make  the  others  effectual.  If  that  fail,  it 
is  better  to  leave  the  party  to  his  own  headstrong 
passions,  and  the  ultimate  correction  of  the  law,  than 
to  allow  it  to  be  immoderately  inflicted  by  a  private 
person.  With  slavery  it  is  far  otherwise.  The  end  is 
the  profit  of  the  master^  his  security,  and  the  public 
safety.  The  subject  is  doomed,  in  his  own  person 
and  his  posterity,  to  live  without  knowledge,  and 
without  capacity  to  make  any  thing  his  own,  and  to 
toil  that  others  may  reap  the  fruits ^  kc. 

From  such  premises  the  Judge  infers  the  necessity 
of  absolute  power  in  the  master  over  the  slave,  and 
2* 


84 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


the  impossibility  of  any  legal  protection  to  tlie  slave 
from  that  power,  while  the  slave  system  continues. 
We  shall  cite  his  words,  to  this  effect,  in  another 
3onnection. 

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  appropriate  quota- 
tions from  the  courts,  but  we  reserve  them  for  a 
still  more  appropriate  use,  in  treating  of  the  various 
features  of  slavery,  all  of  which  spring  out  of  the 
principle  of  property  in  maUj  and  attest  its  existence 
and  activity. 

Let  us  next  see  how  this  matter  is  understood 
among  slaveholders  themselves.  Hear  the  testimony 
of  their  statesmen. 

Thomas  Jefferson,  in  his  letter  to  Governor 
Coles,  of  Illinois,  dated  August  25th,  1814,  asserts 
that  slaveholders  regard  their  slaves  as  property  and 
as  brutes,  in  the  paragraph  that  follows : 

Nursed  and  educated  in  the  daily  habit  of  seeing 
fche  degraded  condition,  both  bodily  and  mental,  of 
these  unfortunate  beings,  few  minds  have  yet 

DOUBTED  THAT  THEY  WERE  AS  LEGITIMATE  SUB- 
JECTS OF  PROPERTY  AS  THEIR  HORSES  OR  CATTLE." 

(Am.  Slavery  as  it  is,  pp.  110-11.) 

Henry  Clay,  in  his  celebrated  speech  in  the 
U.  S.  Senate,  in  1839,  based  his  argument  against 
the  abolition  of  slavery  on  the  value  of  the  slaves, 
A.S  PROPERTY.    This  was  his  language  : 

^'  The  third  impediment  to  immediate  abolition  is 
to  be  found  in  the  immense  amount  of  capital  which 
is  invested  in  slave  property^  The  total  value  of 
slave  property  then,  by  estimate,  is  twelve  hundred 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


85 


millions  of  dollars.  And  now  it  is  rashly  proposed, 
by  a  single  fiat  of  legislation,  to  annihilate  this  im- 
mense amount  of  property  !  To  annihilate  it  with- 
out indemnity,  and  without  compensation  to  THE 
OWNERS."  ^'  I  know  that  there  is  a  visionary  dogma 
which  holds  that  negro  slaves  cannot  be  the  subject 
of  property.  I  shall  not  dwell  on  the  speculative 
abstraction.  That  is  property  lohich  the'  law  declares 
TO  BE  property.  Two  hundred  years  of  legislation 
have  sanctified  and  sanctioned  negro  slaves  as  prop- 
erty."^ 

This  argument  identifies  slaveholdin^  with  human 
chattelhood,  and  the  relinquishment  of  this  claim  of 
property  with  abolition.  Tt  bases  the  practice  upon 
the  theory,  and  rests  the  justification  of  its  perpe- 
tuity upon  the  practical  efficacy  of  the  law,  as  being 
neither  a  dead  letter  nor  obsolete.  In  this  argument 
the  slaveholders  confide,  the  nation  consents,  and 
therefore  slavery  exists,  with  all  the  evils  it  brings 
in  its  train. 

By  claiming  their  slaves  as  '^property,"  the 
"owners"  of  this  property  are  naturally  led  to  for- 
get and  even  to  deny  that  they  are  human  beings. 
For  proof  of  this  we  cite  the  speech  of  Mr.  Summers 
of  Virginia,  in  the  Legislature  of  that  State,  January 
26,  1832,  as  published  in  the  Richmond  Whig: 

"When  in  the  sublime  lessons  of  Christianity,  he 
(the  slaveholder)  is  taught  to  ^  do  unto  others  as  he 
would  have  others  do  unto  him,'  he  never  dreams  that 
the  degraded  negro  is  within  the  pale  of  that  holy 
canon." 


36  THE  AMEEICAN  SLAVE  COIE. 

We  learn  from  this  that  the  Southern  pulpit  has 
failed  to  teach  the  community  a  contrary  lesson.  The 
innocent  "legal  relation"  has  been  suffered  to  cir- 
cumscribe the  jurisdiction  of  the  golden  rule. 

Col.  Dayto^s^,  formerly  member  of  Congress  from 
South-Carolina,  in  a  work  entitled,  "The  South  vin- 
dicated from  the  Treason  and  Fanaticism  of  Northern 
Abolitionists,"  holds  the  following  language : 

"The  Northerner  looks  upon  a  band  of  negroes  as 
so  many  men^  but  the  planter  or  Southerner  views 
them  in  very  different  light.'''' 

Mr.  Gholson,  of  Virginia,  in  his  speech  in  the 
Legislature  of  that  State,  Jan.  18, 1831,  as  published 
in  the  Richmond  Whig,  (in  reply  to  some  members 
who  had  proposed  abohtion,)  said : 

"Why,  I  really  have  been  under  the  impression 
that  I  owned  my  slaves.  I  lately  purchased  four 
women  and  ten  children,  in  whom  I  thought  I  ob- 
tained a  great  bargain,  for  I  really  supposed  they 
were  my  property,  as  were  my  brood  mares.'''' 

Mr.  Wise,  in  the  United  States  House  of  Eepre- 
sentatives,  said: 

"The  right  of  petition  belongs  to  the  people  of 
the  United  States.  Slaves  are  not  people  in  the  eye 
of  the  law.    They  have  no  legal  personality ^ 

Another  gentleman  (as  quoted  by  Mr.  Yanderpool, 
of  New- York)  said:  "Slaves  had  no  more  right  to 
be  heard  than  horses  and  dogs." 

Mr.  Yanderpool,  of  New- York,  himself  said: 
"He  should  be  ashamed  of  himself,  if  he  ever  could 
have  supposed  that  slaves  had  a  right  to  petition 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


37 


this  or  any  other  body  where  slavery  exists." — "Had 
any  one^  before  to-day,  ever  dreamed  that  the  appel- 
lation of  THE  PEOPLE  embraced  slaves?  Sir!  (said 
he,)  I  hesitate  not  to  say,  that  were  I  a  Southern  man, 
I  would  not  submit  to  the  doctrine  that  slaves  have 
a  right  to  petition,  if  Congress  were  ever  mad  enough 
to  sanction  it.  Nay,  I  go  farther,  and  say,  that  as  a 
Northern  man  I  would  not  submit  to  it."  ^ 
Mr.  Pickens,  of  South  Carolina,  said : 
"The  offense  of  Mr.  Adams  consisted  in  his 
announcing,  that  he  had  a  petition  from  the  slaves, 

THUS  DESTROYING  THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  MASTER 

AND  SLAVE,  and  denying  the  doctrine  that  the  slave 

can  BE  HEARD  ONLY  THROUGH  HIS  MASTER." 

The  doctrine,  thus  explained  and  advocated,  was 
deliberately  and  solemnly  sanctioned  by  the  House 
of  Eepresentatives  of  the  United  States,  in  a  resolu- 
tion adopted  Feb.  11,  1837 — yeas  162,  nays  18,  as 
follows : 

'-^ Resolved^  that  SLAVES  do  not  possess  the  right  of 
petition  secured  to  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
by  the  Constitution." 

Thus  was  the  national  sanction  given  to  the  defi 
nition  of  "the  legal  relation  between  master  and 
slave,"  which  denies  that  "the  relation"  can  consist 
with  the  recognition  of  personality  and  humanity  in 
the  slave. 

Ecclesiastical  bodies  have  been  equally  explicit  in 
their  definition  of  the  relation. 

The  Charleston  Baptist  Association  addressed  a 
memorial  to  the  Legislature  of  South  Carolina,  main- 


58 


THE,  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


taining  that  'Hhe  Divine  Author  of  our  holy  religion" 
adopted  this  institution  '^as  one  of  the  alloT\'ed  rela- 
tions of  society,"  and  they  further  say : 

Neither  society  nor  individuals  have  any  more 
authority  to  demand  a  relinquishment,  without  an 
equivalent,  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other,"  (that 
is,  their  right  to)  "  the  money  and  lands  inherited  from 
ancestors,  or  derived  from  industry."  We  would 
resist  to  the  utmost  every  invasion  of  this  right^  come 
from  what  quarter  and  under  what  pretence  it  may." 

In  the  settlement  of  the  estate  of  Rev.  Dr.  Furman, 
of  the  same  sect,  in  the  same  State,  his  legal  repre 
s(mtatives  exercised  this  ''right,"  in  an  advertise- 
ment of  a  public  sale  of  his  property  at  auction,  as 
follows : 

''  A  plantation  or  tract  of  land  on  and  in  Wateree 
swamp,  a  tract  of  the  first  quality  of  fine  land  on  the 
waters  of  Black  River ;  a  lot  of  land  in  the  town  of 
Camden;  a  library  of  a  miscellaneous  character, 
chiefly  theological ;  twenty-seven  negroes,  some  of 
them  very  prime ;  two  mules ;  one  horse ;  and  an  old 
wagon." 

''  Slaves  are  neither  considered  nor  treated  as  human 
beings."^  This  is  the  testimony  of  Mr.  L.  Turner, 
a  regular  and  respectable  member  of  the  Second 


*  Nothing  else  than  the  prevalence  of  this  feeling  can  account 
for  the  preposterous  effort  to  discredit  the  unity  of  the  negro  race 
witli  the  rest  of  mankind !  It  is  very  remarkable  that  Mr.  Jefferson, 
who  wrote  so  eloquently  against  slavery,  and  whose  kindness  to 
his  own  mulatto  slave  children  was  so  commendable,  should  have 
published  to  the  world  such  crude  speculations  of  this  character— 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


39 


Presbyterian  church  in  Springfield,  Illinois;  who  was 
brought  up  in  Caroline  County,  Virginia.  And  the 
testimony  was  approvingly  communicated  by  Eev. 
William  T.  Allan,  of  Chatham,  Illinois,  pastor  of  a 
Presbyterian  church  in  that  place.  Mr.  Allan  is  son 
of  Rev.  Dr.  Allan,  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church 
in  Huntsville,  Alabama.  (Weld's  "  Slavery  as  it  is," 
p.  46.) 

Slaveholders  regard  their  slaves  a-s  property,  the 
mere  instruments  of  their  convenience  and  pleasure. 
One  who  is  a  slaveholder  at  heart,  never  recognizes  a 
human  being  in  a  slaved  This  is  the  testimony  of 
Angelina  Grimke  Weld,  daughter  of  the  late  Judge 
Grimke  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  South  Carolina, 
and  sister  of  the  late  Hon.  Thomas  S.  Grimke  of 
Charleston.    (lb.,  57.) 

When  a  slave  is  accidentally  killed,  the  Southern 
newspapers  speak  of  it  merely  as  a  loss  of  property  to 
the  owner.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  bereaved  widow, 
children,  or  parents  of  the  deceased.  It  would  be 
easy  to  present  numerous  instances  in  proof 

The  Natchez  (Miss.)  Free  Trader  of  February  12, 
1838,  contained  the  following  advertisement : 

"  Found. — A  negro's  head  was  picked  up  on  the 
railroad,  yesterday,  which  the  owner  can  have  by 
calling  at  this  office  and  paying  for  this  advertise- 
ment."   (lb.,  169.) 


not  less  imphilosophical  than  iinscriptural.  It  is  still  more  remark 
able  that  professed  believers  in  the  Bible  should  express  doubts  on 
the  subject! 


40  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


The  idea  of  the  advertiser  probably  was,  that  the 
head  would  be  of  use  to  the  owner  in  establishing  his 
claim  on  the  Railroad  Company,  or  some  one,  for 
damages  in  the  destruction  of  his  property. 

The  Vicksburg  (Miss.)  Register^  December  27, 1838, 
contains  the  following  item  of  news  for  the  amuse- 
ment of  its  readers : 

''Ardor  in  Betting. — Two  gentlemen  at  a  tavern 
having  summoned  the  waiter,  the  poor  fellow  had 
scarcely  entered  when  he  fell  down  in  a  fit  of  apo- 
plexy. 'He's  dead!'  exclaimed  one.  'He'll  come 
to,'  replied  the  other.  'Dead  for  five  hundred!' 
'  Done  !'  retorted  the  second.  The  noise  of  the  fall, 
and  the  confusion  which  followed,  brought  up  the 
landlord,  who  called  out  to  fetch  a  doctor.  '  No,  no ! 
we  must  have  no  interference — there's  a  bet  depend- 
ing!' 'But,  sir,  I  shall  lose  a  valuable  servant!' 
'  Never  mind,  you  can  put  him  down  in  the  bill !' " 

This  is  shocking :  but,  aside  from  the  moral  wrong 
of  betting,  the  ^rma^fe  involved  differs  nothing  from 
that  avowed  by  the  Charleston  Baptist  Association 
already  quoted,  so  far  as  the  matter  of  human  chattel- 
hood  is  concerned.  Admit  the  doctrine,  as  held  by 
the  Association,  and  as  defended  by  Mr.  Clay,  and 
the  life  of  the  negro  was  no  more  sacred  than  the  life 
of  a  horse.  "  The  innocent  legal  relation"  "  sanc- 
tifies and  sanctions"  the  whole. 

The  same  principle  finds  daily  expression  in  the 
ordinary  vocabulary  of  slaveholders.  Their  slaves, 
like  their  other  domestic  animals,  are  called  "stock." 
The  children  of  slaves  are  spoken  of,  prospectively, 


SLAVE  OWNEESHIP. 


even  before  they  are  born,  as  anticipated  ^4ncrease." 
Female  slaves  that  are  mothers  are  called  breeders," 
till  past  child-bearing.  Those  who  compel  the  labor 
of  slaves  are  called  drivers."  Like  horses  they  are 
warranted,  when  sold,  to  be  "sound,"  and  are  re- 
turned by  the  purchaser  when  "unsound." 

The  same  principle  is  recognized  by  the  free  citi- 
zens and  professed  Christians  of  the  North,  whenever 
they  speak  of  the  slaveholder's  "rights  of  property," 
or  entertain  the  idea  of  "  compensation"  to  them,  in 
case  of  a  general  abolition  of  slavery,  or  of  the  re- 
demption of  particular  slaves,  in  any  such  sense  as 
implies  that  such  appropriation  or  purchase  money 
would  be  equitably  due. 

It  remains  to  be  observed  that  this  claim  of  prop- 
erty in  slaves,  both  in  theory  and  practice,  as  defined 
by  legislation  and  jurisprudence,  as  defended  by 
theologians  and  as  sanctioned  by  ecclesiastical  bodies, 
as  carried  out  into  every-day  practice  by  the  pious 
and  by  the  profane,  is  manifestly  and  notoriously  a 
claim,  not  only  to  the  bodies  and  the  physical  energies 
of  the  slave,  but  also  to  his  immortal  soul,  his  human 
intelligence,  his  moral  powers,  and  even  (in  the  case 
of  a  pious  slave)  to  his  Christian  graces  and  virtues. 

This  is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  the  body  of  the 
slave  without  his  soul  would  be  a  dead  carcass  of  no 
value.  Or,  if  it  be  objected  that  the  same  distinction 
obtains  between  a  dead  horse  and  a  living  one,  our 
proposition  is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  if  the  slave 
had  only  the  intellectual  powers  of  a  horse,  his  in- 
feriority to  a  horse  in  physical  strength  would  sink 


42 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


liim  below  the  pecuniary  value  of  a  horse,  instead 
of  his  commanding,  as  he  now  does,  the  price  of  a 
number  of  horses. 

In  advertisements  of  slaves  to  be  sold  or  to  be 
hired  out,  their  intelligence,  their  skill,  their  honesty, 
their  sobriety,  their  benevolent  dispositions  are  spe- 
cified and  insisted  on,  as  items  of  primary  importance 
in  estimating  their  value.  Their  piety  is  not  unfre- 
quently  mentioned  in  the  inventory,  and  they  are 
recommended  as  being  worthy  members  of  Metho- 
dist, Baptist,  or  Presbyterian  churches.  And  church 
members  of  the  same  sects  both  buy  and  sell  them 
on  the  basis  of  these  recommendations. 

This,  in  the  United  States  of  America,  in  this  nine- 
teenth century,  is  ^'the  legal  relation  of  master  and 
slave" — a  relation  that  challenges  as     goods"  and 

chattels  personal,  to  all  intents,  constructions,  and 
purposes  whatsoever,"  the  immortal  soul  of  man,  the 
image  of  the  invisible  Creator,  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  purchase  of  a  Kedeemer's  blood.  The 
statement  is  no  rhetorical  flourish.  It  is  no  mere 
logical  inference.  It  is  no  metaphysical  subtlety.  It 
is  no  empty  abstraction.  It  is  no  obsolete  or  inoper- 
ative fiction  of  the  law.  It  is  veritable  matter-of-fact 
reality,  acted  out  every  day  wherever  and  whenever 
a  negro  or  any  one  else  is  claimed  as  an  American 
slave.  If  any  slaveholder  denies  it,  let  him  be  chal- 
lenged to  put  the  denial  in  writing,  duly  attested,  and 
in  such  a  shape  that  the  courts  of  law  can  take  cog- 
nizance of  it.  "Whenever  he  does  this,  and  puts  the 
paper  in  the  hands  of  his  slave  or  trusty  friend,  his 


SLAVE  OWNERSHIP. 


43 


slave  is  set  free.  Every  intelligent  slaveholder  knows 
this. 

The  evidence  already  presented  is  sufl&cient,  but 
there  is  much  more  in  reserve.  In  the  chapters  that 
follow,  the  various  features  of  the  slave  system  will 
be  presented,  as  defined  by  the  Slave  Code  and  as 
exhibited  in  daily  practice.  And  each  one  of  these 
features  will  be  seen  to  grow  out  of  the  foundation 
principle  of  American  Slavery — to  wit,  Human  chat- 
telhood,  as  exhibited  in  this  chapter,  thus  proving 
the  presence  and  the  vitality  of  that  principle  by  its 
practical  operations  and  bearings.  The  whole  system 
may  be  educed  from  this  parent  stock,  as  any  science, 
in  detail,  is  educed  from  its  fundamental  axioms.  Let 
any  reflecting  person  assume  that  human  chattelhood, 
or  property  in  man,  is  the  foundation  of  the  system ; 
then  let  him  follow  out,  in  his  own  mind,  the  natural 
and  necessary  workings  of  such  a  principle  reduced 
to  practice^  and  he  will  be  able  to  anticipate  before- 
hand almost  the  entire  code  of  slavery,  and  the  prac- 
tices existing  under  it. 


CHAPTER  II. 


SLAVE  TKAFFIC. 

Sale— Purchase— Barter— Mortgage— Auction— Coffle-gang— Shipments— As  ab- 
solutely as  in  the  case  of  any  other  Property,  and  by  the  same  Tenure. 

This  feature  must  result,  of  necessity,  from  ^'the 
legal  relation"  of  ownership  exhibited  in  the  first 
chapter.  The  quotations  there  made  cover  explicitly 
this  ground. 

*'The  master  may  sell  him."  '^Slaves  shall  be 
sold."  Sold,  transferred,  or  pawned  as  goods,  or 
personal  estate,  for  goods  they  were,  and  as  such  they 
were  esteemed." 

Any  modification  of  this  feature  must  evidently 
relax  the  application  of  the  principle  of  ownership, 
and  limit  its  operation.  In  the  Spanish,  Portuguese, 
and  French  colonies,  such  modifications,  neverthe- 
less, obtained.  The  Code  Noir^  art.  47,  prohibits  the 
selling  of  the  husband  without  the  wife,  the  parents 
without  the  children,  or  vice  versa.  In  cases  of  vol- 
untary sales,  made  contrary  to  this  regulation,  the 
wife  or  husband,  the  children  or  parents,  though  ex- 
pressly retained  by  the  seller,  pass,  by  the  same  con- 
veyance, to  the  purchaser,  and  may  be  claimed  by 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


45 


him  without  any  additional  price.  (See  Stephen's 
Slavery,  69  f  Stroud's  Sketch,  51.) 

What  bearing  this  humane  regulation  would  have 
upon  our  internal  slave-trade,  if  it  were  established 
in  this  country,  the  reader  will  see  by  the  following 
account  of  its  operation. 

Says  the  compiler  of  the  Annals  of  the  Sovereign 
Council  of  Martinique : 

"  This  law  has  always  been  rigidly  executed,  when- 
ever a  claim  has  been  set  up  on  the  part  of  the  pur- 
chaser,  I  have  known  slaves  who  bave  been  sent  to 
Guadaloupe  or  St.  Domingo  to  be  expatriated  and 
sold,  to  reclaim  their  children  remaining  in  our  colony, 
with  success,  through  the  action  of  the  purchasers  in 
the  colonies  to  which  they  were  sent."  (See  Stephen's 
Slavery,  69  and  70,  citing  Annals  de  la  Martinique, 
tome  i.,  p.  285.    Vide  Stroud,  p.  51.) 

It  would  not,  probably,  be  quite  as  easy  for  slave 
children  to  recover  their  aged  parents^  or  for  husbands 
to  reclaim  their  feeble  and  sickly  wives ^  by  this  ^'action 
of  the  purchasers."  Humanity,  nevertheless,  would 
gain  much.  The  principle  of  human  chattelhood 
would  be  weakened.  Perhaps  it  was  partly  through 
the  influence  of  this  and  similar  relaxations  of  the 
principle  that  the  entire  system  was  swept  away  in 
Mexico  and  the  South  American  Republics.  By  this 
feature  of  the  Code  Noir^  the  bondage  under  its  ju- 

*  This  remarkable  provision  arises,  doubtless,  from  the  fact  that 
the  laws  respecting  slavery  in  those  colonies  are  framed  in  the 
mother  country,  and  not  (as  in  the  British  colonies)  by  colonial 
legislatures,  composed  of  slaveholders. 


46 


THE  'AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


risdiction  was  made  to  resemble,  in  this  aspect,  the 
feudalism  or  serfdom  of  northern  Europe,  where  the 
villein  is  attached  to  the  soil,  rather  than  the  chattel 
slavery  of  the  American  slave  States. 

In  Pennsylvania,  in  New-York,  perhaps  in  other 
American  States,  when  measures  were  taken  for  the 
prospective  abohtion  of  slavery,  the  sale  of  slaves 
to  be  sent  out  of  the  State  was  prohibited  by  express 
statute.  Except  in  these  instances,  we  know  of  no 
departure,  in  the  matter  of  sale  and  transfer,  in  our 
American  slave  States,  from  the  principle  of  unre- 
stricted and  absolute  human  chattelhood,  unless  the 
anomaly  be  found  in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  as  hinted 
in  our  first  chapter,  where  it  was  stated  that  slaves 
are  held  in  Louisiana  as  real  estate.  In  the  slave- 
holding  States,"  (says  Judge  Stroud,)  except  in  Louis- 
iana^ no  law  exists  to  prevent  the  violent  separation 
of  parents  from  their  children,  or  even  from  each 
other."  (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  50.)  Again,  after 
dwelling  upon  these  cruelties  of  the  domestic  slave- 
trade,  as  being  peculiar  to  ^'the  republican  States  of 
North  America,"  the  same  writer  adds  in  a  note, 
(p.  52,)  ^'  From  the  generality  of  this  remark,  the 
State  of  Louisiana  must  be  excepted."  The  slaves 
are  declared  to  be  real  estate,  to  be  ranked  among 
immovable  property.  When,  therefore,  the  owner  of 
slaves  is,  as  I  presume  is  most  commonly  the  case, 
possessed  of  landj  the  slave  cannot  be  separated  from 
it  by  process  of  law.  Besides  this  humane  regula- 
tion, there  are  several  others  which  deserve  to  be 
signalized,  viz. :  '  If,  at  a  public  sale  of  slaves,  th^re 


SLAVE  TPvAFFIC. 


47 


happen  to  be  some  who  are  disabled  through,  old  age 
or  otherwise,  and  who  have  children,  such  slaves 
shall  not  be  sold  but  with  his  or  her  children,  whom 
he  or  she  may  think  proper  to  go  with.'  "  (1  Mar- 
tin's Digest,  612 ;  Act  of  July  7,  1806 ;  Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  52-3.) 

How  far  these  provisions  are,  at  this  late  day, 
available  for  the  benefit  of  the  slaves  of  Louisiana, 
we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  Louisiana  has  been 
a  purchasing,  rather  than  a  slave- exporting  State. 
The  striking  contrast  between  these  enactments  and 
the  known  usages  and  scenes  of  other  States,  mark 
their  anomalous  character,  as  exceptions  which  prove 
and  illustrate  the  general  rule  of  unrestricted  chattel- 
hood  in  our  slaveholding  States. 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  these  refreshing  anomalies 
are  witnessed  in  only  one  of  the  slave  States :  a  State 
coming  within  our  jurisdiction  from  under  that  of 
France,  and  receiving  its  earlier  features  of  polity 
under  the  laws  of  Spain.  Louisianian  slavery  took 
its  type  from  the  Code  Noir^  and  from  the  usages 
growing  up  under  what  our  citizens  are  pleased  to 
denominate  Spanish  despotism  and  superstition. 
Anglo-Saxon  civilization  and  religion,  with  all  their 
"republican"  and  "Protestant"  boastings,  have  not 
yet  reached  the  same  point  of  progress ;  nor  do  we 
learn  that  in  Florida,  acquired  from  Spain,  the  mild 
features  of  Spanish  slavery  have  survived  the  trans- 
fer. The  reason  may  be,  that  too  many  Northern 
citizens  (the  most  merciless  of  all  slaveholders)  have 
planted  themselves  there.    Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is 


48 


THE-  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


certain  that  the  ^' legal  relation  of  master  and  slave," 
as  commonly  understood,  practised,  vindicated,  and 
protected,  in  these  United  States,  differs  widely,  in 
the  feature  now  under  consideration,  from  that  de- 
fined by  the  Code  Noir,  We  may  venture  to  affirm 
that  the  commonly  received  exposition,  as  it  exists 
in  theory  and  practice,  in  the  Church  and  the  State, 
has  been  truthfully  set  forth  by  one  of  our  most  prom- 
inent and  popular  statesmen,  the  late  Henry  Clay, 
in  his  speech  in  the  U.  S.  Senate,  Feb.  7,  1839,  in 
which  he  said : 

"  The  moment  that  the  incontestable  fact  is  admit- 
ted, that  the  slaves  are  property^  the  law  of  movable 
property  irresistibly  attaches  itself  to  them,  and 
secures  the  right  of  carrying  them  from  one  State  to 
another.""^ 


*  It  may  be  said  that  there  is  an  exception  to  this  statement  of 
Mr.  Clay,  in  the  laws  of  some  of  the  slave  States,  prohibiting  the 
importation  of  slaves  from  other  States ;  also,  in  the  restrictions 
recently  imposed,  on  motion  of  Mr.  Clay  himself,  upon  the  prose- 
cution of  the  slave-trade  from  the  Federal  District. 

Those  State  regulations  were,  for  reasons  of  policy  or  supposed 
interest,  to  encourage  slave-breeding  at  home,  instead  of  receiving 
supplies  from  abroad.  Whether  consistent  or  inconsistent  with 
the  rights  of  property,  they  have  their  precedent  in  the  prohibi- 
tions of  importations  of  other  kinds  of  property,  by  different  na- 
tions and  States.  But,  under  our  Federal  Constitution,  the  power 
of  regulating  commerce  between  the  several  States  is  committed  to 
Congress,  not  to  the  States;  and  hence,  in  Mississippi,  notwith 
standing  the  prohibitory  enactment,  the  slave-dealers  in  1 836-7 
brought  into  that  State  and  sold  slaves  to  the  value  of  ninety  mil- 
lions of  dollars !  It  is  true  that  when  they  undertook  the  collection 
of  their  debts,  the  purchasers  pleaded  the  illegality  of  the  sales ;  the 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


49 


This  definition,  which  is  acted  upon  every  day, 
identifies  ^'the  legal  relation"  and  the  slave  system 
with  the  domestic  slave-trade,  and  its  constant  and 
violent  disruption  of  the  most  sacred  and  tender  ties 
of  consanguinity  and  affection.  If  the  ^4egal  rela- 
tion" does  not  produce  this  effect  in  respect  to  each 
slave,  it  does^  in  each  instance,  uphold  and  sanction 
the  principle  of  chattelhood  upon  which  ^lone  the 
traffic  in  slaves  rests.  It  recognizes  the  rightfulness 
of  the  traffic  by  recognizing  the  rightfulness  of  slave 
ownership,  which  includes  the  right  of  purchase  and 
sale.  This  is  what  Mr.  Clay  affirmed,  and,  thus  far, 
he  spoke  truthfully.  The  moment  the  right  of  prop- 
erty in  man  is  admitted,  (and  here  lies  the  core  of 
the  relation,")  that  nX)ment  the  right  of  purchase 
and  sale  is  virtually  conceded  likewise.  It  was  a 
triumph  of  human  sympathy  over  legal  congruity 
and  logical  consistency,  that  enacted  the  Code  Noir. 

The  exposition  of  Mr.  Clay  reduces  slaves  to  a 
level  with  poultry  and  swine ;  it  denies  to  them  per- 
sonality and  the  attributes  of  human  beings.  It 
does  this  not  merely  in  theory,  but  on  a  point  of  the 
most  pressing  practical  importance.  It  certifies  us 
that  the  chattel  principle  is  neither  a  dead  letter  nor 
an  unmeaning  abstraction.  It  exhibits  the  practical 
statesmanship,  not  of  Henry  Clay  only,  but  of  all 

State  courts  sustained  them,  and  thus  they  obtained  the  greater 
part  of  the  importation  without  payment ! 

The  restriction  in  the  Federal  District  prevents  dealers  from  bring- 
ing in  supplies  from  the  States,  for  sale  and  shipment  abroad,  but 
does  not  prevent  purchases  and  sales  among  the  citizens. 
3 


50 


TRE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


who  admit  the  validity  of  the  so-called  legal  rela- 
tion." 

A  similar  exposition  we  have  from  Eev.  James 
Smylie,  of  the  Amite  Presbytery,  Mississippi,  in  a 
pamphlet  written  in  defense  of  slaveholding.  Allud- 
ing to  the  charges  of  abolitionists,  he  admits  the  facts 
adduced  by  them,  but  denies  their  criminality.  And 
he  says : 

*^If  slavery  be  a  sin,  and  advertising  and  appre- 
hending slaves  with  a  view  to  restore  them  to  their 
masters,  is  a  direct  violation  of  the  divine  law,  and  if 
the  BUYING,  SELLING,  and  holding  a  slave,  for 
THE  SAKE  OF  GAIN,  is  a  heinous  sin  and  scandal, 
then  verily,  three  fourths  of  all  the  Episcopalians, 
Methodists,  Baptists,  and  Presbyterians,  in  eleven 
States  of  this  Union,  are  of  the  devil.  They  hold, 
if  they  do  not  buy  and  sell  slaves,  and  (with  few 
exceptions)  they  hesitate  not  to  apprehend  and  re- 
store runaway  slaves,  when  in  their  power." 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  holding^  the  luying^  and 
the  selling  of  a  slave  are  here  put  together,  as  being 
essentially  of  the  same  character.  And  common 
sense  as  well  as  ^'the  law'''  of  the  peculiar  "relation," 
as  expounded  by  Henry  Clay,  attests  the  same  thing. 

A  large  portion  of  ''Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery"  is 
occupied  with  legal  decisions  connected,  directly  or 
indirectly,  with  cases  growing  out  of  the  transfer  of 
slaves.  One  division,  or  chapter  of  the  work,  treats 
"  Of  the  Increase  of  Slaves — to  whom  the  increase  be- 
longs— of  the  grant  or  devise  of  the  increase."  Another 
topic  is,  "Of  the  Title  to  Slaves;"  another,  "Of  War- 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


51 


ranty;"  another,  ''Of  Hiring  of  Slaves;"  another, 
"Of  Mortgage  of  Slaves;"  another,  ''Of  Dower  of 
Slaves;"  another,  "Of  the  Division  of  Slaves;" 
another,  "Of  the  Eemainder  in  Slaves."  Upwards 
of  one  hundred  and  fifty  pages  of  the  book  (nearly 
one  third  of  the  entire  work)  are  occnpied  with  these 
topics.  From  the  extent  and  variety  of  litigation 
coming  before  the  courts  and  demanding  these  com- 
plicated legal  rules  and  decisions,  it  would  seem  that 
a  very  large  part  of  the  business  transactions  of  the 
people  must  consist  in  the  reception  or  transfer,  in 
some  form,  of  this  species  of  property.  And,  at 
every  step,  it  appears  that  transfers  of  slave  property 
are  made  upon  the  same  principles  that  govern  the 
transfer  of  other  property,  that  it  is  held  and  con- 
veyed under  the  same  tenure,  and  with  as  little  sense 
of  the  impropriety  of  the  transaction ;  thus  placing, 
in  praciicey  a  human  being  upon  a  level  with  a  mere 
thing.  Thus,  when  the  judge,  the  lawyer,  or  the  law 
compiler  or  author  would  lay  down  the  legal  rule  by 
which  the  decision  should  be  made  in  a  litigated  case, 
in  a  matter  of  sale,  dehvery,  possession,  warranty,  &c., 
he  looks  up  the  precedents  and  rules  originally  occur- 
rkig  or  laid  down  in  respect  to  "a  ^nare"  or  "a  colt," 
and  then,  with  the  utmost  coolness  and  gravity,  ap- 
plies it,  as  valid  law,  to  the  sale,  dehvery,  or  w^arranty 
of  "a  girir  An  instance  of  this  occurs  in  "Whee- 
ler's Law  of  Slavery,"  pp.  119,  120,  in  a  note  on  the 
case  of  Smith  vs.  Eowzee,  Spring  Term  1821 ;  a  case 
in  which  "the  girl"  purchased  was  unable  to  travel 
home  with  her  new  master,  eight  miles  distant,  and 


52 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


soon  died.  A  lawsuit  followed,  and  the  law  con- 
cerning other  live  stock  determined  the  case ! 

In  one  instance  (p.  68)  we  find  ^'a  negro  woman 
slave  named  Peg,"  sold  for  $300,  with  leave  to  return 
her  in  three  weeks,  if  the  purchaser  did  not  like  her. 
With  her  new  master  she  became  frost-hitten^  which 
rendered  her  ^'^  of  little  valued  Hence  a  suit  between 
the  parties,  judgment  given,  an  appeal  taken,  judg- 
ment reversed — just  as  in  the  case  of  a  horse  or  an  ox. 

On  page  79  we  learn  that  '^five  years'  peaceable 
possession  gives  a  title  to  a  slave,  and  which,  if  lost, 
may  be  regained."  We  infer  that  if  possession,  as 
between  contending  claimants  of  slave  property,  be 
thus  potent,  it  would  be  at  least  equally  powerful,  as 
between  the  possessor  and  the  slave's  legal  right  to 
freedom. 

Of  the  extent  of  the  slave  traffic  between  the  slave- 
growing  and  planting  States  (of  which  we  shall 
speak  presently)  some  tolerably  reliable  approxima- 
tion towards  the  true  statistics  may  be  gathered.  But 
of  the  extent  of  local  and  neighborhood  transfers, 
with  which  Wheeler's  reported  cases  seem  mostly 
occupied,  very  little  can  be  accurately  known.  We 
can  only  say  that  a  perusal  of  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery"  has  very  greatly  swelled  our  own  estimate 
or  apprehension  of  that  extent.  It  can  hardly  be 
supposed  that  more  than  a  tithe  of  such  transfers 
would  occasion  lawsuits.  But  we  seem  to  see  the 
courts  crowded  with  them,  and  a  compilation  of  the 
reported  cases  swelling  a  law  volume.  It  must  be 
folly  to  pretend  that  the  slave  traffic  occupies  only 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


53 


the  vulgar  portion  of  Southern  society,  when  it 
figures  so  largely  in  the  courts. 

"Slaves  may  be  sold  and  transferred  from  one  to 
another,  without  any  statutory  restriction  or  limitation^ 
as  to  the  separation  of  parents  and  children,  c&c,  except 
in  Louisiana."    (Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p.  41.) 

It  can  hardly  be  necessary  to  cite  witnesses  to 
prove  that  this  feature  of  the  Slave  Code,  which 
licenses  the  slave-trade  and  the  separation  of  families, 
is  not  a  dead  letter.  But  it  might  be  useful  to  im- 
press upon  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  magnitude 
and  the  atrocity  of  this  traffic.  This  would  open  a 
wide  field.  We  might  refer  the  inquirer  to  Weld's 
•  Slavery  as  it  is,"  to  Jay's  "Inquiry,"  and  to  Good- 
ell's  "History  of  Slavery  and  Anti-Slavery,"  for 
collections  of  facts  and  testimonies  on  this  subject, 
upon  which  we  cannot  enlarge  here. 

The  extent  of  the  slave-trade  in  America  may  be 
conceived,  from  the  testimony  of  the  Presbyterian 
Synod  of  Kentucky,  that  "these  scenes"  (i.  e.  coffle- 
gangs)  are  daily  occurring  in  the  midst  of  us;"  that 
"there  is  not  a  neighborhood  where  these  heart-rend- 
ing scenes  are  not  displayed;"  that  "there  is  not  a 
village  or  road  that  does  not  behold  the  sad  procession 
of  manacled  outcasts,  whose  chains  and  mournful 
countenances  tell  that  they  are  exiled  by  force  from 
all  that  their  hearts  hold  dear." 

Its  general  prosecution  may  be  seen  by  the  numer- 
ous advertisements  of  both  purchasers  and  venders, 
in  the  most  respectable  newspapers  in  the  slave 
States,  as,  for  example,  the  following: 


54 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


^'Negroes  for  Sale. — A  negro  woman,  24  years 
of  age,  and  her  two  children,  one  eight  and  the  other 
three  years  old.  Said  negroes  will  be  sold  sepa- 
rately or  together,  05  desired.  The  woman  is  a  good 
seamstress.  She  will  be  sold  low  for  cash,  or  ex- 
changed FOR  groceries.  For  terms,  apply  to  / 
"Matthew  Bliss  &  Co.,  1  Front  Levee." 

[New-  Orleans  Bee, 

will  give  the  highest  cash  price  for  likely  Ne- 
groes, from  10  to  25  years  of  age. 

"George  Kephart." 

[Alexandria  (D,  C.)  Gazette, 

"Fifty  Negroes  wanted  immediately. — The 
subscriber  will  give  a  good  market  price  for  fifty 
likely  negroes,  from  10  to  30  years  of  age. 

"Henry  Davis." 

[Petersburg  {Va.)  Constellation, 

Having  obtained  their  supplies  and  driven  or 
shipped  them  South,  the  dealers  offer  them  for  sale, 
in  advertisements  like  the  following,  which  appeared 
in  the  papers  of  Charleston,  S.  C. : 

"One  Hundred  and  Twenty  Negroes  for 
Sale.— The  subscriber  hsLsjiist  arrived from  Petershurg, 
Virginia^  with  one  hundred  and  twenty  likely  young  ne-  > 
groes  of  both  sexes  and  every  description,  which  he 
offers  for  sale  on  the  most  reasonable  terms.  The  lot 
now  on  hand  consists  of  plough-boys,  several  likely 
and  well-qualified  house  servants  of  both  sexes, 
several  women  with  children^  small  girls  suitable  for 
nurses,  and  several  small  boys  without  their 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


55 


MOTHERS.  Planters  and  traders  are  earnestly  re- 
quested to  give  the  subscriber  a  call  previously  to 
making  purchases  elsewhere^  as  he  is  enabled  to  sell 
as  cheap  or  cheaper  than  can  be  sold  by  any  other 
person  in  the  trade.  Benjamin  Davis. 

''Hamburg,  S.      September  28,  1838." 

The  respectability  and  profitableness,  of  the  traffic 
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  some  of  the  largest 
shipping  merchants  are  slave  merchants,  that  they 
own,  and  charter,  and  freight  numerous  vessels  to 
transport  their  slaves  coastwise,  and  invest  princely 
fortunes  as  capital  in  the  business. 

The  importance  of  this  branch  of  commerce  will 
be  apparent  from  the  speeches  of  leading  statesmen, 
and  the  paragraphs  of  prominent  editors. 

Henry  Clay,  in  his  speech  before  the  Coloniza- 
tion Society,  in  1829,  said: 

*^It  is  beheved  that  no  where,  in  the  farming  por- 
tion of  the  United  States,  would  slave  labor  be  gen- 
erally employed,  if  the  proprietor  were  not  tempted 
to  RAISE  slaves,  by  the  high  price  of  the  Southern 
MARKET  which  kccps  it  up  in  his  own." 

Mr.  Gholson,  of  Virginia,  in  the  same  speech  in 
the  State  Legislature  before  quoted,  after  claiming 
his  negro  women  as  his  property,  like  his  "brood 
mares,"  expatiated  upon  the  profitableness  and  the 
rightfulness  of  the  investment.  "  The  owner  of  land 
had  a  reasonable  right  to  its  annual  products,  the 
owner  of  brood  mares  to  their  product,  and  the  owner 
of  female  slaves  to  their  increase."    "The  value  of 


56 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


the  property  justifies  the  expense;  and  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say  that  in  it  consists  much  of  our  wealth^ 

The  Editor  of  the  Virginia  Times^  in  1836,  made 
a  calculation  that  120,000  slaves  went  out  of  that 
State  during  the  year,  that  80,000  of  them  went  with 
their  owners  who  removed,  leaving  40,000  who  were 
SOLD,  at  an  average  price  of  $600;  amounting  to 
twenty-four  millions  of  dollars. 

Similar  estimates  and  testimonies  might  be  added. 

The  annexation  of  Texas  and  the  conquest  of 
Mexico  were  openly  advocated,  and  notoriously  pro- 
secuted, for  the  object  of  extending  the  area  of 
slavery,  and  thereby  opening  a  new  slave  market 
for  the  breeders  of  slaves.  And  the  coastwise  slave- 
trade  has  been  protected  by  the  National  Govern- 
ment, and  its  diplomacy  prostituted  to  this  purpose. 
The  particulars  may  be  found  in  Jay's  Yiew  of  the 
Action  of  the  Federal  Government  in  behalf  of 
Slavery,"  and  Jay's  '^Eeview  of  the  Mexican  War;" 
also  (briefly)  in  GoodelFs  "History  of  Slavery  and 
Anti-Slavery." 

Of  the  character  of  this  traffic  little  more  need  be 
said.  By  our  own  National  Government  the  African 
slave-trade  is  branded  "piracy."  But  Thomas  Jef- 
ferson Randolph,  in  the  Virginia  Legislature,  in 
1832,  declared  the  domestic  slave-trade  to  be  "mz/c/i 
worse 

About  1100  citizens  of  the  Federal  District,  in- 
cluding Judge  Cranch  and  the  principal  clergy  of 
the  District,  petitioned  Congress  against  it,  (as  there 
existing ;)  and,  comparing  it  with  the  African  slave- 


SLAVE  TKAFFIC. 


57 


trade,  they  said  that  it  is  scarcely  less  disgraceful 
in  its  character,  and  even  more  demoralizing  in  its 
influence."  This  was  in  1828.  The  Grand  Jury  of 
the  District  had,  many  years  before,  (1802,)  presented 
it  as  a  nuisance.^  Its  character  there,  at  that  time, 
differs  nothing  from  its  character  in  the  different 
States,  at  present. 

The  New-Orleans  Courier^  February  15th,  1839, 
says:  "The  United  States  law"  (prohibiting  the 
African  slave-trade)  *'may,  and  probably  does  put 
MILLIONS  into  the  pockets  of  the  people  living  be- 
tween the  Eoanoke  and  Mason  and  Dixon's  line; 
still  we  think  it  would  require  some  casuistry  to 
show  that  the  present  slave-trade  from  that  quarter  is 
a  whit  better  than  the  one  from  Africa^ 

It  may  be  asked,  wlno  are  ihey^  at  the  South,  that 
prosecute  this  domestic  slave-trade  ?  The  Presby- 
terian Synod  of  Kentucky,  describing  its  extent,  its 
common  occurrence  and  its  barbarities,  inform  us,  in 
the  same  paragraph,  that  "professors  of  the  religion 
of  mercy,"  "who  hold  to  our  communion,"  have 
"torn  the  mother  from  the  children,  and  sent  them 
into  returnless  exile.  Yet  acts  of  discipline  have 
rarely"  [neverf]  "followed  such  conduct."  In  the 
Presbyterian  General  Assembly  of  1835,  it  was  stated 


*  By  the  Act  of  Congress  of  1850,  the  slave  dealers  are  prohibited 
from  making  the  Federal  District  a  deposit  for  slaves.  But  this 
does  not  prevent  any  citizen  of  the  District  from  selling  his  slav^ 
or  purchasing  a  slave  from  abroad, 

f  James  G.  Birney,  long  resident  in  Kentucky,  and  a  Presby- 
terian, says  never." 

3* 


58 


THE-  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


by  an  elder,  Mr.  Stewart,  of  Illinois,  and  without 
contradiction,  that  ^^even  ministers  of  the  gospel 
and  Doctors  of  Divinity  may  engage  in  this  unholy 
traffic,  and  yet  sustain  their  high  and  holy  calling." 
^'Elders,"  said  he,  ministers  and  Doctors  of  Divi- 
nity, are,  with  both  hands,  engaged  in  the  practice." 
Yet  nothing  was  done  or  said  by  the  Assembly  in 
condemnation  of  it.  The  testimony  of  Eev.  James 
Smylie,  already  cited  for  another  purpose,  implicates 
three  fourths"  of  four  leading  religious  sects  in  the 
practice. 

If  a  distinction  be  set  up  between  the  Virginian 
breeders  and  Mississippi  purchasers,  gentlemen  plant- 
ers, on  the  one  hand,  and  the  human  drovers,  com- 
monly called  "soul-drivers,"  on  the  other,  who  ply 
between  the  two,  disposing  at  the  far  South  of  their 
"stock"  purchased  at  the  North,  we  maintain  that 
there  is  no  legal  or  moral  distinction  between  them. 
"The  legal  relation"  is  as  innocent  and  as  criminal 
in  the  one  as  in  the  other.  The  "growers,"  the  ''con 
sumers"  and  "dealers"  so  necessary  to  them,  stand 
on  the  same  level. 

Besides,  the  "dealers"  are  sometimes  esteemed  as 
respectable  and  as  pious  as  the  "  growers"  and  "  con- 
sumers." A  number  of  authentic  narratives  assure 
us  that  itinerant  preachers,  in  more  sects  than  one, 
carry  on  the  double  avocation  of  converting  souls,  and 
buying  up  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men,  women  and 
children,  for  sale.  An  instance,  in  "  the  fine  old  Me- 
thodist preacher  who  dealt  in  slaves,"  maybe  found 
in  Weld's  "  Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  180.    In  the  higher 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


59 


circles  of  society  at  the  South,  this  would  be  thought 
low  and  vulgar — equally  so  with  buying  up  horses 
and  swine.  But  slave-trading  on  a  sufficiently  large 
scale  is  considered  a  reputable  employment,  just  as 
the  large  importers  and  distillers  of  rum  are  respect- 
ed among  us,  while  the  dealer  of  drams  is  despised. 
The  items  that  follow  are  from  the  work  of  Mr.  Weld, 
just  mentioned,  and  which,  for  thirteen  years  past, 
has  had  an  extensive  circulation  and  eager  perusal 
in  our  widely  extended  country,  without  having  had 
one  of  its  vast  collection  of  facts  disproved  or  even 
questioned,  to  our  knowledge. 

That  they"  (the  smaller  dealers)  are  not  de- 
spised because  it  is  their  business  to  trade  in  human 
beings  and  bring  them  to  market,  is  plain  from  the 
fact  that  when  some  *  gentleman  of  property  and 
standing,'  and  of  a  *  good  family,'  embarks  in  a  negro 
speculation,  and  employs  a  dozen  *  soul-drivers '  to 
traverse  the  upper  country  and  drive  to  the  South 
coffles  of  slaves,  expending  hundreds  of  thousands  in 
his  wholesale  purchases,  he  does  not  lose  caste. 

It  is  known  in  Alabama  that  Mr.  Erwin,  son-in- 
law  of  Henry  Clay,  and  brother  of  J.  P.  Erwin, 
formerly  postmaster  and  late  Mayor  of  the  city  of 
Nashville,  laid  the  foundation  of  a  princely  fortune 
in  the  slave-trade  carried  on  from  the  Northern  slave 
States  to  the  planting  South ;  that  Hon.  H.  Hitch- 
cock, brother-in-law  of  Mr.  E.,  and  since  one  of  the 
Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Alabama,  was  in- 
terested with  him  in  the  traffic  ;  and  that  a  late  mem- 
ber of  the  Kentucky  Senate,  (Col.  Wall,)  not  only 


60  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


carried  on  the  same  business  a  few  years  ago,  but 
accompanied  his  droves  in  person  down  the  Missis- 
sippi. Not  as  the  driver^  for  that  would  be  vulgar 
drudgery,  beneath  a  gentleman,  but  as  a  nabob  in 
state,  ordering  his  understrappers. 

''It  is  also  well  known  that  President  Jackson 
was  a  '  soul-driver,'  and  that  even  so  late  as  the  year 
before  the  last  war,  he  bought  up  a  coflfle  of  slaves 
and  drove  them  down  to  Louisiana  for  sale. 

''Thomas  N.  Gadsden,  Esq.,  the  principal  slave 
auctioneer  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  is  of  one  of  the  first 
families,  and  moves  in  the  very  highest  class  of  so- 
ciety there.  He  is  a  descendant  of  the  distinguished 
General  Gadsden,  of  revolutionary  memory,"  and 
"member  of  the  Continental  Congress,"  "after- 
wards Governor  of  the  State."  "  The  Eev.  Dr.  Gads- 
den, rector  of  St.  Philip's  Church,  Charleston,  and 
Rev.  Phihp  Gadsden,"  and  "  Col.  James  Gadsden,  of 
the  U.  States'  Army,  are  his  brothers."  "  Under  his 
hammer,  men,  women  and  children  go  off  by  thou- 
sands ;  its  stroke  probably  sunders,  daily ^  husbands 
and  wives,  parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters, 
perhaps  to  see  each  other's  faces  no  more.  Now, 
who  supply  the  auction  table  of  this  Thomas  Gads- 
den, Esq.,  with  its  loads  of  human  merchandise? 
These  same  '  detested  soul-drivers,'  forsooth,  (as  they 
are  sometimes  called,  even  at  the  South.)  They  prowl 
through  the  country,  buy,  catch,  and  fetter  them,  and 
drive  their  chained  coffles  to  his  stand,  where  Thomas 
Gadsden,  Esq.,  knocks  them  off  to  the  highest  bidder, 
to  Ex-Gov.  Butler,  perhaps,  or  to  Ex-Gov.  Hayne, 


SLAVE  TRAFFIC. 


61 


or  to  Hon.  Eobert  Barnwell  Ehett,"  (M.  C.,)  or  (it 
may  be)  to  his  own  Eeverend  brother,  Dr.  Gadsden." 
(Weld's    Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  174.) 

One  illustration  more  must  suffice.  During  the 
great  negTo  speculation  of  1836,  when  all  the  negro- 
consuming  States  were  insanely  eager  to  purchase 
at  high  prices,  and  all  the  negro-breeding  States 
were  enriching  themselves  with  the  sales,  the  '  soul- 
drivers,'  now  multiplied  beyond  all  former  precedent, 
were  separating  wives  and  husbands,  parents  and 
children,  with  unwonted  celerity,  and  driving  them 
in  chained  coffles,  or  droves,  as  speedily  as  possible 
to  the  market.  The  whole  South  was  feverish  and 
in  motion.  Money  for  the  operation  was  in  brisk 
demand.  The  banks  extended  their  loans,  and  were 
drained.  Capitalists  demanded  high  rates  of  interest. 
Through  the  banks  they  made  loans  to  the  specu- 
lators. Then  it  was  that  the  Trustees  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  lured  by 
these  high  rates  of  interest,  though  well  knowing, 
as  every  body  did,  the  purposes  for  which  their  cap- 
ital was  wanted,  withdrew  their  funds,  to  the  amount 
of  $94,692.88,  from  a  Northern  institution  where 
they  were  drawing  the  usual  interest,  and  invested 
them  in  the  Southwestern  banks,  where  they  would 
be  loaned  to  the  speculators  in  the  bodies  and  souls 
of  men,  women,  and  children.  In  the  re-action  and 
general  bankruptcy  that  followed,  the  Presbyterian 
Church  lost  $68,893.88  of  their  funds.  Had  the 
General  Assembly  and  its  Trustees  understood  and 
felt,  as  they  should  have  done,  the  sinfulness  of  the 


62 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


legal  relation  of  master  and  slave,"  they  would  have 
understood  and  felt  the  sinfulness  of  this  abominable 
slave-trade  which  the  relation  involves,  and  the 
consequent  sinfulness  of  loaning  money  to  carry  it 
on.  But  they  deemed  it  ''ultra"  and  "fanatical"  to 
recognize  these  self-evident  truths.  And  therefore 
they  lost  the  greater  part  of  their  funds. 

We  dismiss  this  feature  of  the  Slave  Code,  presum- 
ing that  its  paternity,  its  character,  its  vitality,  and 
its  practical  workings  have  now  been  made  sufl&- 
ciently  clear.  In  this  feature  of  the  system,  its  Slave 
Traffic^  the  people  have  been  found  no  better  than 
their  laws,  and  the  Church  no  better  than  the  people. 


CHAPTEE  III. 


SEIZUEE  OF  SLAVE  PKOPERTY  FOR  DEBT. 

As  Property,  Slaves  may  be  seized  and  sold  to  pay  the  Debts  of  their  Owners, 
while  living,  or  for  the  settlement  of  their  Estates,  after  their  decease. 

This  is  evident  from  tlie  very  nature  of  property, 
especially  of  chattels  personal,  as  well  as  from  the 
fact  that  slaves  may  be  bought  and  sold,  and  pawned 
or  mortgaged  for  the  security  of  debts.  A  pawn  or 
mortgage  is  of  the  nature  of  barter.  If  not  redeemed, 
it  becomes  a  barter  in  the  end.  And  barter  is  only 
one  form  of  purchase  and  sale.  Whatever  may  be 
bought  and  sold  may  be  bartered,  consequently 
mortgaged;  and,  if  unredeemed,  seized,  taken  pos- 
session of. 

The  very  definition  of  slave  property,  as  cited  in 
Chapter  I.,  specifies  this  incident.  They  ^^may  be 
sold,  transferred,  and  pawned,''''  They  are  "chattels 
personal,  to  all  intents^  constructions  and  purposes 
whatsoever." 

"The  slave,  being  a  personal  chattel^  is  at  all  times 
liable  to  be  sold  absolutely,  or  mortgaged,  or  leased, 
at  the  will  of  his  master.  He  may  also  be  sold  hy 
process  of  law  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  debts  of  a 


64 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


living,  or  the  debts  and  bequests  of  a  deceased  mas- 
ter, at  tlie  suit  of  creditors  or  legatees."  (Stroud's 
Sketch,  pp.  25,  51.) 

^'If  a  slave  sold^  remains  with  the  vender,  he  is 
liable  to  be  seized  for  his  dehtsy  (Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  p.  54.) 

Slaves  are  considered  property^  and  in  most  of 
the  States  they  are  considered  as  chattels  personal. 
They  are  therefore  subject  to  those  rules  and  regu- 
lations which  society  has  established  for  the  purchase 
and  sale,  and  transmission  from  one  to  another,  of 
that  species  of  property.  They  therefore  may  he  mort- 
gaged as  personal  property^  or  are  the  subjects  of  a 
qualified  or  conditional  sale,  to  suit  the  wants  of  the 
owner  or  purchaser  of  them.  They  are  declared  to 
be  personal  estate  by  the  Eevised  Code  of  Mississippi, 
379  ;  Eevised  Code  of  Virginia,  vol.  I,  pp.  431-47. 
Indeed,  they  are  considered  the  subjects  of  mortgage  in  all 
the  States  by  custom^  and  which  exists  in  many  of  the 
States  by  express  statutory  provisions."  By  the 
Black  Code  of  Louisiana,  vol.  I.,  Dig.,  p.  102,  sect. 
10,  it  is  declared  that  slaves  shall  be  reputed  and 
considered  real  estate ;  shall  be,  as  such,  subject  to  be 
mortgaged,  according  to  the  rules  prescribed  by  law, 
and  they  shall  be  seized  and  sold  as  real  estate.  (lb., 
Note,  pp.  164-5.) 

Slaves  may  be  sold  by  creditors  for  debts  of  their 
owners,  in  all  the  States  but  Louisiana,  where  they 
cannot  be  separated  from  the  land."  (1  Martin's  Dig., 
612,  Act  of  July,  1806  ;  cited  in  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  p.  41.) 


SALE  OF  SLAVES  FOR  DEBT. 


65 


"  The  children  of  a  female  slave  mortgaged,  born 
after  the  execution  of  the  mortgage,  are  as  much 
liable  to  the  demand  of  the  mortgagee  as  the  slave 
herself."    (lb.,  p.  167.) 

In  contrast  with  the  preceding,  we  present  the 
following: 

"Plantation  slaves,  not  only  in  the  Spanish  and 
Portuguese,  but  in  the  French  colonies  also,  are  real 
estate,  and  attached  to  the  soil  they  cultivate,  par- 
taking therewith  all  the  restraints  upon  voluntary 
alienation  to  which  the  possessor  of  the  land  is  there 
liable,  and  they  cannot  be  seized  or  sold  by  creditors 
for  the  satisfaction  of  the  debts  of  the  owner.  It  has 
already  been  stated  that  by  the  Code  Noir^  art.  47, 
the  husband  cannot  be  sold  without  the  wife,  nor  the 
parents  without  the  children.  Sales  made  contrary 
to  this  regulation,  by  process  of  law,  under  seizure 
for  debts,  are  declared  void.  (See  Stephens'  Slavery, 
68-9 ;  Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  53.) 

It  is  evident  that  this  feature  of  liability  to  seizure 
for  the  master's  debt  is,  in  many  cases,  more  terrific 
to  the  slave  than  that  which  subjects  hitn  to  the 
master's  voluntary  sale.  The  slave  may  be  satisfied 
that  his  master  is  not  willing  to  sell  him — that  it  is  not 
for  his  interest  or  convenience  to  do  so.  He  may  be 
conscious  that  he  is,  in  a  manner,  necessary  to  his 
master  or  mistress,  or  that,  being  a  favorite  and  tried 
servant,  they  would  not  sell  him  at  any  price.  He 
may  even  confide  in  their  Christian  benevolence  and 
moral  principle,  or  promise  that  they  would  not  sell 
him,  especially  that  they  would  not  thus  separate 


66 


THE  AMEKICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


him  from  his  wife  and  children.  But  all  this  affords 
him  no  security  or  ground  of  assurance  that  his  mas- 
ter's creditor  will  not  seize  him,  or  his  wife  or  his 
children,  against  even  his  master's  entreaties.  Such 
occurrences  are  too  common  to  be  unnoticed,  or  out 
of  mind. 

Advertisement  in  the  Georgia  Journal  of  January  2d,  1838. 

^^WiLL  be  sold,  the  following  pkoperty,  to  wit: 
one  CHILD,  by  the  name  of  James,  levied  on  as  the 
property  of  Gabriel  Grunn." 


"Will  be  sold,  in  La  Grange,  Troup  County,  one 
negro  girl,  by  the  name  of  Charity,  aged  about  ten 
or  twelve  years,  as  the  property  of  Littleton  L.  Burk, 
to  satisfy  a  mortgage  fi.  fa.  from  Troup  Inferior 
Court,  in  favor  of  Daniel  S.  Eobertson  vs,  said 
Burk." 

Neither  the  Court,  the  sheriff,  the  plaintiff,  the 
defendant,  nor  the  negro  girl,  appear  to  have  been 
instructed  in  the  literature  which  assures  willing 
dupes  that  the  Slave  Code  is  obsolete — a  dead  letter. 

From  the  Milledgeville  Journal  Dec.  26,  1837. 

"Executors'  Sale. — -Agreeable  to  an  order  of  the 
Court  of  Wilkinson  County,  will  be  sold  on  the  first 
Tuesday  of  April  next,  before  the  Court-House  door 
in  the  town  of  Irwington,  one  NEGRO  GIRL,  about 
two  years  old,  named  Eachel,  belonging  to  the  estate 
of  William  Chambers,  deceased.  Sold  for  the  benefit 
of  the  heirs  and  CREDITOES  of  said  estate. 


From  the  Smiiliej-n  Whig^  March  2,  1838. 


SALE  OF  SLAVES  FOR  DEBT.  67 


Here,  again,  the  "chattel  principle"  appears  not 
to  have  been  regarded  as  "a  mere  metaphysical, 
speculative  abstraction,"  as  some  would  persuade  us 
^.o  believe  it  is. 

From  the  Natchez  Courier,  April  2,  1838. 

"Notice  is  hereby  given  that  the  undersigned, 
pursuant  to  a  certain  Deed  of  Trust,  ^^iU,  on  Thurs- 
day, the  12th  day  of  April  next,  expose  to  sale  at 
the  Court-House,  to  the  highest  bidder,  for  cash,  the 
following  negro  slaves,  to  wit :  Fanny,  aged  about 
twenty-eight  years ;  Mary,  aged  about  seven  years ; 
Amanda,  aged  ahout  three  months;  Wilson,  aged 
about  nine  months.  Said  slaves  to  be  sold  for  the 
satisfaction  of  the  debt  secured  in  said  Deed  of  Trust 

"W.  J.  Minor." 

The  "  legal  relation"  was  here  defined  and  exem- 
plified, as  likewise  in  the  following  : 

Extract  of  a  letter  to  a  member  of  Congress  from  a  friend  in  Mis- 
sissippi, published  in  the  Washington  Globe,  June,  1837. 

"  The  times  are  truly  alarming  here.  Many  plan- 
tations are  entirely  stripped  of  their  negroes  and  horses^ 
by  the  marshal  or  sherifi".  Suits  are  multiplying," 
&c. 

Truly  alarming  times,  indeed,  for  slave  mothers 
and  their  babes — for  slave  wives  and  their  husbands. 
But  of  their  alarms  the  writer,  the  publisher,  and  the 
readers  generally,  it  may  be  presumed,  thought  no 
more  than  they  did  of  the  alarms  of  the  "horses" 
associated  and  seized  with  them. 

In  all  this  we  have  only  the  natural  workings  of 


68 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


the  *4egal  relation;"  the  legality  of  which  was 
understood  and  enforced  by  the  sheriff.  It  were  idle 
to  talk  of  his  act  or  of  the  act  of  the  creditors  as  an 
abuse  of  the  relation.  The  relation  is  that  of  owner 
and  chattels,  and  nothing  else.  It  would  be  absurd 
(not  to  say  dishonest)  for  the  law  to  sanction  such  a 
relation,  and  then  leave  the  rights  unprotected  which 
the  relation  implies.  Were  it  true  that  such  a  relation 
existed,  and  that  it  was  truly  legal  and  valid,  there 
would  be  manifest  injustice  to  the  attaching  creditor, 
as  well  as  to  the  voluntary  slave  vender,  in  the  Code 
Noir,  The  truth  is,  no  such  *4egal  relation"  can  be 
valid;  and  to  this  fact,  the  Code  Noir  gives  its  attesta- 
tion, by  its  veto  upon  the  exercise  of  its  involved 
rights. 

We  dismiss  also  this  feature  of  the  Slave  Code, 
with  the  remark  that,  in  respect  to  it,  we  find  the 
people  to  be  no  better  than  their  laws,  and  their 
usages  no  worse  than  ^Hhe  legal  relation"  that  gives 
sanction  to  them. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


INHERITANCE  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY. 

Slaves,  as  Property,  are  transmitted  by  Inheritance  or  by  Will  to  Heirs  at  law 
or  to  Legatees. — In  the  distribution  of  Estates,  they  are  distributed  like  other 
Property. 

This  feature  of  the  slave  system,  like  all  its  other 
features,  is  derived  from  its  cardinal  principle  of 
PROPERTY  in  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.  Without 
this  principle,  the  whole  edifice  falls  to  the  ground. 
With  it,  the  entire  system,  in  all  its  parts,  and  entire, 
is  sustained. 

We  have  already  stated  the  law  on  this  subject. 
The  slave  '^may  be  sold"  ^*at  the  suit  of  creditors 

OR  LEGATEES."     (StrOud,  p.  51.) 

A  more  specific  recognition  of  this  feature  is  found 
in  a  law  of  North  Carolina,  substantially  copied  by 
other  States,  in  which,  after  prohibiting,  in  a  great 
measure,  the  further  introduction  of  slaves  into  their 
!imits,^  a  proviso  is  added  that  '^nothing  in  this  act 

*  It  has  already  been  seen  that  these  prohibitions  have  not  pre- 
sented an  immense  slave  traffic  between  the  States.  In  some  of 
HXQ  States^  taies^  iJrohibitionB  have  been  repealed. 


70 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


shall  prohibit  any  citizen  of  this  State  who  may  ob- 
tain slaves,  &c.,  by  marriage^  gift^  legacy^  devise^  or 
descent^''  *'from  bringing  the  slaves,  &c.,  into  this 
State  by  land  or  water."  (Hayward's  Manual,  533-4. 
Act  of  1794,  chap.  2,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.  Vide  Stroud,  p.  55.) 

This  indicates  what  is  the  known  fact,  that  slaves 
had  previously  been  inherited  in  the  several  States. 

The  inheritance  of  slave  property  appears  to  have 
occasioned  much  litigation  in  the  courts,  and  accord- 
ingly the  topic  occupies  no  little  space  in  the  reported 
decisions  collected  together  in  ^'Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery." 

In  the  case  of  Beatley  vs,  Judy,  &c.,  in  Kentucky, 
it  was  determined  that  the  phrase  personal  estate" 
in  wilh  and  contracts  should  be  construed  as  embra- 
cing slaves.  (2  Wash.  Eep.,  1-8.)  The  same  in  the 
case  of  Plumpton  vs.  Cook.  (2  Marshall's  Ky.  Eep., 
450 ;  copied  by  Wheeler,  p.  2.*) 

In  the  case  of  Banks,  Admr.,  vs,  Marksbury,  it 
was  decided  that  ''the  owner  of  a  female  slave  may 
give  her  to  one  of  his  children,  and  the  future  increase^ 
(that  is,  unborn  children!)  to  another^  (Wheeler, 
p.  28.)  [The  case  is  reported  at  length.  We  give 
here,  as  in  many  other  instances,  the  brief  marginal 
statement  of  the  compiler.] 

*  In  our  quotations  from  Wheeler,  we  often  (to  save  room)  omit 
his  statements  of  the  names  of  the  litigants,  the  judges,  and  the 
"  Reports"  from  which  he  has  copied.  We  preserve  these,  in  some 
instances,  that  the  reader  may  be  impressed  with  the  matter-of-fact 
nature  of  the  record,  and  not  fancy  himself  reading  "  legal  fictionj* 
Whatever  may  be  said  of  statutes,  the  daily  decisions  of  courts  are 
not  "obsolete,"  nor  are  they  " theoretical  abstraction^."  . 


INHERITANCE  OF  SLAVES. 


71 


Tn  the  case  of  Carroll  et  al.  vs.  Connet,  (in  Ken 
lucky,)  Robinson  Ch.  J.,  it  was  held  that  The  ad- 
ministrator is  liable  for  failure  to  distribute  slaves. 
Although  for  some  purposes  slaves  are  declared  by 
statute  to  be  real  estate,  they  are  nevertheless  intrin- 
sically personal,  and  therefore  are  to  be  considered 
as  included  in  every  statute  or  contract  in  relation 
to  chattels  which  does  not,  in  terms,  exclude  them. 
They  are  liable,  as  chattels,  to  the  payment  of  debts. 
They  may  be  attached  as  chattels,  and  they  have 
invariahly  heen  treated  as  chattels,  in  both  Virginia 
and  Kentucky,  so  far  as  the  rights  and  duties  of 
administrators  are  concerned^  (Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  pp.  37-8.) 

And  yet  Kentucky  is  one  of  the  only  two  States 
in  which  the  statutes  have  declared  slaves  to  be  real 
estate,  a  tenure  which,  if  adhered  to^  would  attach  the 
slave  to  the  soil,  and  prevent  the  separation  of 
families.  The  practice^  as  sanctioned  by  custom  and 
the  courts,  is  in  this  case  found  to  be  less  favorable 
to  the  slaves  than  the  words  of  the  statute,  in  their 
plain  import.  The  people  have  been  worse  than 
their  statutes,  and  the  judges  have  conformed  to  the 
people. 

Enlaws  vs.  Enlaws,  Spring  Term,  1821 ;  3  Mar- 
shairs  Ky.  Rep.,  228.  The  Court  held  that  the 
slaves  of  a  female,  immediately  on  the  marriage, 
vest  in  the  husband,  and  although  she  may  survive 
him,  her  right  to  the  slaves  is  not  revived." 
(Wheeler,  p.  39.) 

"A  wife's  estate  in  dower  of  slaves,  by  a  formei 


72 


THE  AMEKICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


husband,  on  her  marriage  vests  in  her  husband ;  and 
her  right  to  manumit  them  is  gone^    (lb.,  p.  182.) 

"Slaves  are  subject  to  dower,  in  all  the  States. 
Not  only  are  they  subject  to  dower,  but  the  widow's 
interest  in  them  is  protected  by  statutory  provisions. 
If  the  husband  manumits  his  slaves,  whereby  cred- 
itors and  the  dower  are  affected,  the  manumission  is 
so  far  ineffectual,  that  the  manumitted  slaves  may  be 
sold  for  a  period,  and  the  proceeds  applied  to  the 
creditors  of  the  former  owner  and  his  widow." 
(Wheeler,  p.  181.) 

"  Slaves  are  devisable,  like  any  other  cjiattel.  -A 
distinction,  however,  exists,  where  slaves  are  con 
sidered  as  real  property.  In  these  cases  they  pass 
immediately  to  the  legatee,  and  not  to  the  executor 
as  personal  estate."    (Wheeler,  p.  57.) 

"  If  a  father,  at  the  time  of  his  daughter's  mar- 
riage, puts  a  negro  or  other  chattel  into  the  possession 
of  his  son-in-law,  it  is,  in  law,  a  gift,  unless  the  con- 
trary can  be  proven."    (lb.,  p.  62.) 

"The  mcrease"  (^.  e,  the  children)  "of  slaves  born 
during  the  life  of  a  legatee  for  life,  belong  to  the 
ulterior  legatee,  who  is  the  absolute  owner."  (lb., 
p.  23.) 

"By  the  Eevised  Code  of  Mississippi,  p.  50,  slaves 
descending  from  an  intestate  may  he  sold  by  order  of 
the  Orphan's  Court,  where  equal  division  cannot  be 
made ;  and  persons  holding  life  estate  in  slaves,  or 
guardians  for  infants,  are  required  to  deliver  a  list  of 
slaves  to  the  register  of  the  Orphan's  Court,  and  also 
the  increase^  p.  51.  And  similar  proimions  exist  in  the 


INHEKITAXCE  OF  SLAVES. 


73 


othei^  States  for  the  division  of  slaves."  (lb:,  p. 
183.) 

On  the  same  page  appears,  however,  the  follow* 
ing,  which  seems  less  inflexible.  It  appears,  from 
the  "Table  of  Cases,"  that  the  court  was  held  in 
Virginia : 

"Held,  by  the  Court,  that  an  equal  division  of 
slaves  in  number  and  value  is  not  always  possible, 
and  sometimes  improper,  when  it  cannot  be  exactly 
done  without  separating  infant  children  from  their 
mothers,  which  humanity  forbids,  and  will  not  be 
countenanced  in  a  court  of  equity ;  so  that  a  com- 
pensation for  excess  must,  in  such  cases,  be  made  and 
received  in  money."  (lb.) 

Here,  the  humanity  of  the  judge  appears  to  have 
modified  the  statute. 

Every  one  is  familiar  with  the  phrases  "  inherited 
or  "  entailed  slave  property."  Such  an  one  is  said 
to  have  been  "  born  to  a  slave  inheritance,"  or  "  born 
a  slaveholder."  These  phrases  occur  in  almost  every 
plea  for  the  blamelessness  of  the  slaveholder,  and 
for  the  "innocency  of  the  legal  relation."  "The 
man  was  born  into  it,  and  how  can  he  be  blamed  for 
it  ?"  This  plea  is  never  more  confidently  urged  than 
by  a  class  of  clergymen  who  are  forward  to  teach 
that  all  men  are  born  sinners  and  shapen  in  iniquity ; 
but  who  would,  nevertheless,  be  shocked  at  the 
impiety  of  the  reprobate  who  should  urge  his  "  birth" 
in  sin,  his  "inherited"  or  "entailed"  depravity,  in 
excuse  of  his  obstinate  and  voluntary  transgression. 
Perhaps  it  never  occurs  to  them  that  "  inherited  "  and 
4 


74 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


entailed"  slaveholding,  like  other  ^^nlierited"  and 
*  entailed"  transgressions,  incur  guilt  when  they  are 
voluntarily  adopted  and  cherished.  In  the  case  of 
any  other  inherited"  sin,  they  would  readily  make 
the  requisite  explanation. 

This  feature  of  the  "  legal  relation,"  deemed  so 
"  innocent,"  so  capable  of  white- washing  with  the 
supererogation  of  its  meritorious  innocency  the 
crimes  of  successive  generations  and  whole  nations 
of  slave-breeders  and  slave-venders,  with  their  ap- 
proving Senates  and  Synods,  will  be  found,  on  a 
close  scrutiny,  to  embody  one  of  the  most  foul  and 
damning  features  of  the  whole  system — the  feature 
of  self-perpetuity — of  self-transmission  to  the  future ; 
the  quality  of  seducing  and  cursing  posterity — se- 
curing the  sin  and  the  shame,  the  wretchedness  and 
the  hopelessness  of  the  unborn.  It  is  an  innocent 
relation,"  forsooth  !  because  it  embodies,  and  because 
(as  is  claimed)  it  even  necessitates  these  results. 

No  feature  of  the  slave  system  is  more  terrific  to 
the  poor  slave  than  this.  The  hazards  of  a  volun- 
tary sale,  by  his  master,  he  and  his  loved  ones  may 
escape.  The  dreaded  mortgage,  and  creditor,  and 
sheriff,  may  pass  them  by  untouched.  But  there  is  a 
mortgage  hanging  over  them,  that  all  the  gold  of 
California  cannot  lift.  There  is  a  creditor  whose  debt 
against  the  master  must  be  cancelled,  but  seldom 
without  touching  some  of  them.  There  is  a  sheriff, 
whose  warrant  is  already  out,  who  may  seize  at  any 
day,  and  will  soon  seize,  but  probably  not  without 
touching  tliem^  if  alive  !    The  death  of  the  master  is 


INHEKITANCE  OF  SLAVES. 


75 


the  close  of  their  respite.  They  are  liable  to  be  "  dis- 
tributed," like  other  "property,"  among  the  "heirs," 
whoever  and  wherever  they  may  be,  "  for  goods  they 
are,  and  as  goods  they  are  esteemed," — "  chattels  per- 
sonal, in  the  hands  of  their  owners  and  possessors, 

THEIR  EXECUTORS,  ADMINISTRATORS  AND  ASSIGNS,  to 

all  intents,  constructions,  and  purposes  whatsoever." 
This  is  the  very  definition  of  an  American  slave,  and 
there  is  no  escape  from  the  condition  it  describes, 
but  by  the  "  fanaticism  of  abolition."  This  is  the 
"  legal  relation"  too  innocent  to  be  questioned,  claim- 
ing relationship  with  Abraham  and  Moses,  the  sanc- 
tion of  Jesus  and  Paul ! 

From  the  Georgia  Journal, 

**To  BE  Sold. — One  negro  girl,  about  eighteen 
months  old,  belonging  to  the  estate  of  William  Cham- 
bers, deceased.    Sold  for  the  purpose  of  distribution, 

"  Jethro  Dean,  [  ^  ^ 
"  Samuel  Beall,  f 

Here,  again,  the  practice  corresponds  with  the 
theory,  and  the  people  are  in  harmony  with  their 
laws. 

How  the  distribution  of  slave  property  among 
heirs  and  legatees  is  effected  under  the  Code  Noir,  or 
where  slaves  are  held  as  real  estate,  as  in  Louisiana, 
we  are  not  minutely  informed.  If  the  soil  and  the 
slaves  must  remain  together,  a  distribution  would 
seem  to  require  the  whole  to  be  sold,  and  to  one 
purchaser.  We  doubt  whether  such  a  restriction 
obtains,  at  present,  in  that  State.    Under  the  old 


76 


THE-  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


feudal  system,  tlie  estate,  consisting  of  soil  and  serfs, 
was  kept  together  by  the  law  of  primogeniture, 
entailing  it  to  the  eldest  son,  in  perpetuity.  The 
repeal  of  that  law  has  been  justly  regarded  as  a  step 
in  the  march  of  human  progress  ;  but  if  the  "pecu- 
liar institution"  of  slavery  is  to  remain,  humanity 
might,  perhaps,  invoke  its  re-enactment,  as  it  might 
prevent  the  separation  of  slave  families,  or  rather, 
permit  their  existence. 


CHAPTER  V. 

USES  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY. 

Slaves,  as  Property,  may  be  used^  absolutely  by  their  owners  at  will,  for 
their  own  profit  or  pleasure. 

Property  is  that  whicli  may  be  used  by  the  owner. 
*'The  slave  is  one  who  is  in  the  power -of  a  master, 
to  wJiom  he  helongsr  Goods  they  are,  and  as  goods 
they  are  esteemed."    This  is  the  law  of  the  relation. 

As  goods,"  therefore,  they  may  be  used^  while,  like 
other  goods,  they  '^perish  with  the  using."  ^Have 
I  not  a  right  to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own?'  is  a 
question  affirming  a  prerogative  universally  claimed. 
Admit  the  validity  of  the  ownership,  and  the  right 
of  use  follows  of  course.  If  the  "legal  relation"  be 
an  innocent  one,  the  right  of  use  and  the  exercise  of 
that  right  are  innocent  likewise,  provided  the  use  be 
a  legitimate  one.  We  shall  see  what  uses  are  deemed 
legitimate  by  those  who  have  shaped,  defined,  and 
administered  "the  relation." 

It  is  true  that  the  use  of  property  by  the  owner 
is  hmited  by  the  rights  of  other  persons.  But  slaves 
are  not  persons  in  the  view  of  the  law,  for  any  pur- 


78 


THE  'AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


posew  of  benefit  to  them ;  as  will  hereafter  be  more 
fully  shown.  The  rights  of  a  slave  are  not  recog- 
nized, and  no  limitation  of  the  master's  use  of  him 
can  come  from  that  quarter.  ^'The  slave"  (says 
the  law)  "is  entirely  subject  to  the  will  of  his  mas- 
ter." Nothing,  therefore,  can  prevent  the  master  from 
putting  him  to  any  use  he  pleases. 

It  is  also  true,  that  the  use  of  property  by  the 
owner  is  limited  by  the  nature  of  that  property. 
Thus,  a  living  horse,  or  other  domestic  animal,  may 
not  lawfully  be  hacked  and  hewed  to  pieces,  as  a 
block  of  wood  may  be.  The  barbarity  may  be 
punished.  The  most  that  can  be  claimed  for  the 
Slave  Code,  on  this  point,  is,  that  by  placing  slaves 
upon  a  level  with  other  live  cattle,  it  entitles  them  to 
the  same  kind  and  degree  of  protection.  Beyond  this, 
the  Slave  Code,  so  far  as  we  know,  never  attempts 
or  pretends  to  protect  them.  It  knows  them  only 
as  mere  animals.  Their  rational  and  moral  natures, 
not  being  recognized  by  the  laws,  can  claim  no  legal 
protection.  Sufficient  evidence  of  this  has  already 
been  adduced,  but  it  will  accumulate  as  we  proceed. 
And  it  will  be  seen  that  as  a  mere  animal,  the  slave 
has  not  equal  protection,  in  some  respects,  with  other 
animals. 

We  will  specify  some  of  the  uses  of  slave  property. 

1.  A  prominent  use  of  slave  property  is  unrequited 
slave  labor.  The  hired  laborer  is  employed.  The 
slave  laborer  is  used  as  a  horse  or  an  ox  is  used. 
His  labor  is  held  to  be  the  property  of  his  owner. 
At  this  point  he  is  degraded  to  the  level  of  a  brute, 


USES  OF  SLAVE  PROPEETY. 


79 


whether  moderately  or  excessively  worked.  The 
use  of  a  slave  as  a  brute  laborer  is  an  injury  and  an 
insult.  It  is  a  denial  of  his  nature  as  a  man,  and  of 
his  rights  as  a  free  moral  agent. 

"The  end  of  slavery/'  said  Judge  Euffin,  "is  the 
profit  of  the  master ^  The  slave  "is  doomed  to  toil^ 
that  others  may  reap  the  fruitsP  State  vs.  Mann. 
(N.  Carolina  Eeports,  p.  263.  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  p.  246.) 

This  honest  judicial  decision  should  shame  the 
pretense  that  slaves  are  held  for  their  own  benefit. 

In  a  separate  chapter,  we  shall  look  more  directly 
into  the  particulars  of  slave  lahor^  and  in  another, 
shall  consider  the  withholding  of  wages.  Additional 
light  will  then  be  thrown  upon  this  use  of  slave 
property.  In  the  mean  time,  it  will  be  easy  to  show 
that  in  this  use  of  slave  property,  in  some  of  the 
slave  States,  it  is  systematically  and  deliberately  so 
used  as  to  be  used  wp^  and  destroyed  in  a  manner  that 
would  be  shameful  and  wicked,  even  if  brute  beasts 
were  the  victims. 

Dr.  Deming,  a  gentleman  of  high  respectability, 
residing  in  Ashland,  Richland  county,  Ohio,  stated 
to  Prof.  Wright,  at  New- York  city: 

"That  during  a  recent  tour  at  the  South,  while 
ascending  the  Ohio  river  on  the  steamboat  Fame,  he 
had  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with  a  Mr.  Dickin- 
son, a  resident  of  Pittsburg,  in  company  with  a 
number  of  cotton-planters  and  slave-dealers  from 
Louisiana,  Alabama,  and  Mississippi.  Mr.  Dickinson 
stated  as  a  fact,  that  the  sugar-planters  upon  the 


80 


THE>MERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


sugar  coast  in  Louisiana  had  ascertained  that,  as  it 
was  usually  necessary  to  employ  about  tivice  the 
amount  of  labor  during  the  boiling  season  that  was 
required  during  the  season  of  raising,  they  could  by 
excessive  driving^  day  and  night,  during  the  boiling 
season,  accomplish  the  whole  labor  with  one  set  of 
hands.  By  pursuing  this  plan  they  could  afford  to 
sacrifice  one  set  of  hands  once  in  seven  years!  He 
further  stated,  that  this  horrible  system  was  now 
practised  to  a  considerable  extent.  The  correctness 
of  this  statement  was  substantially  admitted  by  the 
slaveholders  then  on  board."  (Weld's  Slavery  as  i1 
is,"  p.  39.) 

''The  late  Mr.  Samuel  Blackwell,  a  highly  re 
spected  citizen  of  Jersey  City,  opposite  the  city 
of  New- York,  and  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  visited  many  of  the  sugar  plantations  in 
Louisiana,  and  says:  "That  the  planters  generally 
declared  to  him  that  they  were  obliged  so  to  over- 
work their  slaves,  during  the  sugar-making  season, 
(from  eight  to  ten  weeks,)  as  to  USE  THEM  UP  in 
seven  or  eight  years.  For,  said  they,  after  the  process 
is  commenced,  it  must  be  pushed  without  cessation, 
night  and  day,  and  we  cannot  afford  to  keep  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  slaves  to  do  the  extra  work  at  the 
time  of  sugar-making,  as  we  could  not  profitably  em- 
ploy them  the  rest  of  the  year."  (lb.) 

Eev.  Dr.  Eeed,  of  London,  who  went  through 
Kentucky,  Virginia,  and  Maryland,  in  the  summer 
of  1834,  gives  the  following  testimony: 

"  T  was  told,  confidently,  from  excellent  authority^ 


USES  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY. 


81 


that  recen  Jy,  at  a  meeting  of  planters  in  South  Caro- 
lina, the  question  was  seriously  discussed  whether  the 
slave  is  more  profitable  to  the  owner,  if  well  fed,  well 
clothed,  and  worked  lightly;  or,  if  made  the  most  of 
at  once^  and  exhausted  in  some  eight  years.  The 
decision  was  in  favor  of  the  last  alternative.  That 
decision  will,  perhaps,  make  many  shudder.  But  to 
my  mind,  this  is  not  the  chief  evil.  The  greater  and 
principal  evil  is  considering  the  slave  as  property. 
If  he  is  only  property,  and  my  property,  then  I  seem 
to  have  some  right  to  ask  how  I  may  make  that 
ipro^QTij  most  available^''  ("Visit  to  the  American 
Churches,"  by  Drs.  Eeed  and  Mattheson,  vol.  IL, 
p.  173.) 

Other  testimony  might  be  added.  Southern  news- 
papers have  pubhshed  the  proceedings  of  Agricul- 
tural Societies,  in  which,  after  discussion,  it  had  been 
agreed  that  the  more  profitable  method  was  to  use 
up^'^  a  gang  of  negroes  once  in  seven  or  eight  years, 
and  then  purchase  a  fresh  supply  of  the  dealers. 

A  terrible  sacrifice  of  life  arises  from  a  change  of  cli- 
mate. A  writer  in  the  New-Orleans  Argus,  of  1830, 
says:  "The  loss  by  death,  in  bringing  slaves  from  a 
northern  climate,  which  our  planters  are  under  the 
necessity  of  doing,  is  not  less  than  twenty-five  pe^^ 
centy  Advertisements  like  the  following  are  not 
uncommon : 

"I  offer  my  plantation  for  sale.  Also  twenty  fine 
acclimated  negroes.  0.  B.  CoBB."  {Vichshnrg  Reg,, 
Dec.  27th,  1838.) 

will  sell  my  Old  Eiver  Plantation,  near  Colum- 
4* 


82 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


bia,  in  Arkansas ;  also  one  hundred  and  thirty  accli- 
mated negroes,  Beiq'.  Hughes. — Port  Gibson,  14th 
Jan." 

Probate  Sale. — "Will  be  offered  for  sale,  at 
public  auction,  to  the  highest  bidder,  one  hundred 
and  thirty  acclimated  slaves,  G.  W.  Keeton,  Judge 
of  the  Parish  of  Concordia,  La.,  March  22d,  1837." 

General  Felix  Houston  advertises  in  the  Natchez 
Courier^  April  6th,  1838,  "  Thirty  very  fine  accli- 
mated negroes^    (See  Jay's  View,  pp.  98,  99.) 

Dr.  Eeed  was  correct  in  charging  the  murderous 
use  of  slave  property  to  the  principle  or  law  of  slave 
ownership^  which  constitutes  what  is  called  'Hhe  legal 
relation."  Such  treatment  may  be  called  an  ''abuse," 
but  is  a  result  which  will  be  almost  certain  to  follow, 
where  laborers  can  be  owned  and  used^  instead  of 
being  bargained  with  and  hired.  Even  on  the  low 
ground  of  "consequences,"  such  a  "relation"  is  to  be 
condemned. 

2.  Another  prominent  use  of  slave  property,  in 
the  case  of  females  capable  of  being  mothers,  is  that 
of  breeders  of  slaves.  And  if  the  tenure  of  slave 
property  be  legitimate,  and  the  ownership  valid,  by 
what  rule  of  law  or  of  logic  shall  this  use  of  slave 
property  be  condemned?  The  argument  of  Mr. 
Gholson,  of  Virginia,  on  that  assumption,  holds  good. 
(See  Chapter  II.)  If  the  owners  of  lands,  of  orchards, 
and  of  brood  mares  had  a  right  to  their  products, 
why  had  he  not  a  right  tg  the  products  of  the  slave 
women  he  had  purchased?  Had  not  the  Slave  Code, 
the  legislatures  and  the  courts  secured  to  him  his 


USES  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY. 


83 


claim  upon  them  as  chattels  personal,  to  all  intents^ 
constructions  and  purposes  whatsoever?"  Might  he 
not,  with  other  grea-t  statesmen,*  affirm  that  "  that 
is  property  which  the  law  declares  to  he  property," 
and  that  ^'  two  hundred  years  of  legislation  have 
sanctified  and  sanctioned  negro  slaves  as  property"  ? 
Did  he  not  sustain  to  those  women  the  relation  of 
owner?  And  had  not  Doctors  of  Divinity,  Northern 
and  Southern,  attested  the  lawfulness  and  the  inno- 
cency  of  sustaining  the  relation  ?  And  how  could 
there  be  a  relation  without  its  implied  rights?  Thus 
fortified,  was  not  his  inference  warranted  by  his  prem- 
ises, when  he  spoke  as  follows?  (we  quote  again  from 
his  speech  :) 

The  legal  maxim  of  ^Partus  sequitur  ventrem''  is 
coeval  with  the  existence  of  the  rights  of  property, 
and  is  founded  in  wisdom  and  justice.  It  is  on  the 
justice  and  inviolability  of  this  maxim  that  the  mas- 
ter foregoes  the  service  of  his  female  slave  ;  has  her 
nursed  and  tended  during  the  period  of  her  gestation, 
and  raises  the  helpless  and  infant  offspring.  The 
value  of  the  property  justifies  the  expense,  and  I  do 
not  hesitate  to  say  that  in  its  increase  consists  much 
of  our  wealth."    (Speech  in  Leg.  of  Va.) 

The  closing  sentence  indicates  the  extent  and  im- 
portance of  this  use  of  slave  property.  According  to 
the  estimate  of  Henry  Clay  as  before  cited,  (Chap.  II.,) 
this  use  (to  raise  slaves"  for  the  Southern  market") 
is  of  more  pecuniary  value  to     the  farming  portion 


*  HcDry  Clay.    Speech  in  U.  S.  Senate,  1839. 


84 


THE, AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


of  the  slave  States'^  than  all  their  agricultural  opera- 
tions ! 

The  value,  indeed,  cannot  fall  short  of  the  receipts 
for  exports  of  surplus  slaves  to  the  South.  Professor 
Dew,  afterwards  President  of  William  and  Mary 
University,  (Va.,)  speaking  of  the  slave-trade  from 
Virginia,  said:  ^'It  furnishes  every  inducement  to 
the  master  to  attend  to  his  negroes,  to  encourage 
BREEDING,  and  to  cause  the  greatest  number  of  slaves 
to  be  raised,"  &c.  '^Virginia  is,  indeed,  a  negro- 
raising  State  for  other  States."  To  which  may  be 
added  the  far-famed  announcement — "  The  noblest 
blood  of  Virginia  runs  in  the  veins  of  slaves." 

In  the  Charleston  Mercury^  the  leading  political 
paper  of  South  Carolina,  appeared  the  following  ad 
vertisement : 

^'  Negroes  for  Sale. — A  girl,  about  20  years  of 
age,  (raised  in  Virginia,)  and  her  two  female  chil- 
dren, one  four,  and  the  other  two  years  old — is  re- 
markably strong  and  healthy — never  having  had  a 
day's  sickness,  with  the  exception  of  the  small-pox, 
in  her  life.  The  children  are  fine  and  healthy.  She 
is  very  prolific  in  her  generating  qualities,  and  af- 
fords a  rare  opportunity  to  any  person  who  wishes 
to  raise  a  family  of  healthy  servants  for  their  own 
use.  Any  person  wishing  to  purchase  will  please 
leave  their  address  at  the  Mercury  ofiice." 

The  coarseness  of  this  language  disgusts  us,  and  so 
does  the  language  of  Mr.  Grholson.  But  the  facts  in- 
volved differ  nothing  from  the  statements  of  Henry 
Clay,  as  quoted  in  our  chapter  on  the  Traffic  in  Slaves. 


OF  BLAVE  PROPERTY. 


85 


Aad  whoever  will  take  up  and  study  the  judicial 
decisions  cited  in  "Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery"  con- 
cerning 'Hhe  increase  of  slaves,"  will  find  that  the 
newspaper  advertisements  of  which  we  have  fur- 
nished a  specimen,  are  merely  descriptive  of  a  busi- 
ness recognized  and  protected  as  respectable,  in 
courts  of  justice.  And  this  remark  will  be  found  to 
apply  not  merely  to  the  supply  raised  for  the  inter- 
State  slave-trade.  The  litigation  reported  in  Mr. 
Wheeler's  book  under  the  head  of  "  Increase  of 
Slaves,"  is  mainly  that  which  grew  out  of  neighbor- 
hood transactions  and  the  inheritance  of  slave  prop- 
erty. 

And  we  have  already,  in  discussing  the  nature  of 
slave  ownership,  (Chap.  I.,)  taken  occasion  to  quote 
from  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery  (p.  825)  the  express 
language  of  the  judges,  placing  the  issue  of  female 
slaves,  when  hired  out  for  five  years,  upon  the  same 
footing,  and  to  be  awarded  upon  the  same  rules,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  increase  of  "  hrood  mares''''  or  other 
female  animals,'''' 

3.  Another  use  of  slave  property  (sometimes, 
probably,  connected  with  the  preceding)  is  indi- 
cated by  advertisements  of  beautiful  young  mulatto 
girls  for  sale  ;  and  by  the  fact  that  these  commonly 
command  higher  prices  than  the  ablest  male  labor- 
ers, or  any  other  description  of  slaves.  A  reputed 
daughter  of  Thomas  Jefferson  was  said  to  have  been 
sold  at  auction  in  New-Orleans  for  one  thousand 
dollars.  Many  have  been  sold  for  $2,000.  One  young 
woman  was  sold  at  public  auction  to  a  rich  young 


86  THE  A-MERIOAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


planter  for  $7,500.  It  must  be  an  able  field  hand 
that  commands  $800. 

Forced  marriages  of  slaves  with  slaves,  including 
second  and  third  marriages  after  separations  from 
former  companions  by  sale,  constitute  a  class  of  well 
attested  facts.  The  Savannah  River  Baptist  Asso- 
ciation decided  that  in  case  of  such  separation  of 
Baptist  slave  husbands  and  wives,  it  was  lawful  for 
them,  without  church  censure,  to  form  such  new 
connections,  ^'m  obedience  to  their  master s^''^  Avhose 
right  to  enforce  such  arrangements  was  thus  tacitly 
acknowledged. 

Forced  concubinage  of  slave  women  with  their 
masters  and  overseers,  often  coerced  by  the  lash, 
constitutes  another  class  of  facts,  equally  undeniable. 
Vide  Weld's  "  Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  15.  Rape  com- 
mitted on  a  female  slave  is  an  offense  not  recognized 
by  law."    (MSS.  by  Judge  Jay.) 

Such  facts,  in  their  almost  interminable  varieties, 
corroborate  the  preceding,  and  illustrate  the  almost 
innumerable  uses  of  slave  property  ! 

4.  Another  use  of  slave  property,  and  a  very  re- 
markable one,  assures  us  that  the  Southern  owners" 
of  this  peculiar"  kind  of  property  have  ways  of 
turning  it  to  account  that  even  Northern  ingenuity 
could  scarcely  have  devised,  unless,  indeed,  it  he  a 
Yankee's  invention.  Assortments  of  diseased,  dam- 
aged^ and  disabled  negroes,  deemed  incurable  and 
otherwise  worthless,  are  bought  up^  it  seems,  (cheap, 
no  doubt,  like  old  iron,)  by  medical  institutions,  to 
be  experimented  and  operated  upon,  for  purposes 


USES  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY. 


87 


of  ^'medical  education"  and  the  interests  of '^med- 
ical science!"  The  Charleston  (S.  C.)  Mercury,  Oct. 
12,  1838,  contained  an  advertisement,  by  Dr.  T. 
Stillnian,  on  behalf  of  the  ''Medical  Infirmary,"  set- 
ting forth  its  objects,  and  closing  as  follows : 

''  To  Planters  and  Others. — Wanted,  fifty  ne- 
groes. Any  person,  having  sick  negroes,  considered 
incurable  by  their  respective  physicians,  and  wishing 
to  dispose  of  them,  Dr.  S.  will  pay  cash  for  negroes 
affected  with  scrofula,  or  king's  evil,  confirmed  hy- 
pochondriasm,  apoplexy,  diseases  of  the  liver,  kid- 
neys, spleen,  stomach  and  intestines,  bladder  and  its 
appendages,  diarrhoea,  dysentery,  &c.  The  highest 
cash  price  will  be  paid,  on  application  as  above,"  (viz., 
''  Medical  Infirmary,  No.  110  Church  street,  Charles- 
ton.") 

5.  It  seems  indeed  difficult  to  foresee  or  imagine 
all  the  mes  to  which  slave  property  may  be  put  by 
the  owner.  "The  slave  is  entirely  subject  to  the 
will  of  his  master."  He  is  supposed  to  have  no  con- 
science and  no  rights.  What  his  "  owner"  commands 
him  to  do  he  must  do.  What  he  requires  him  to  be 
he  must  be.  What  he  chooses  to  inflict  upon  him 
he  must  suffer.  He  must  never  lift  a  hand  in  self- 
defense.  He  must  utter  no  word  of  remonstrance. 
He  has  no  protection  and  no  redress.  This  will  more 
fully  be  show^n  as  wx  proceed. 

The  slave,  however  pious,  and  whatever  his  scru- 
ples, must  do  the  work  allotted  to  him — it  may  be 
the  drudgery  of  a  tippling  shop,  a  gambling  house, 
a  brothel,  or  a  den  of  counterfeiters  or  shop-lifters. 


88 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


And  lie  must  Avitness  in  silence  whatever  he  sees 
there,  if  it  be  murder.  He  cannot  testify  against  a 
white  man.    He  is  merely  property  TO  BE  USED ! 

6.  A  class  of  murders  of  slaves  by  slave  master.^ 
may  as  Avell  be  put  down  in  this  category. 

The  monster,  Lillburn  Lewis,  nephew  of  Thomas 
Jefferson,  who  chopped  in  pieces  a  living  article  of 
slave  property,  in  presence  of  his  other  slaves,  onl;y 
USED  UP  that  article  to  awe  the  others  into  subjec 
tion,  as  he  told  them. 

But  this  was  ^'an  abuse"  of  the  relation,  a  viola 
tion  of  the  law !   Perhaps  it  was.   In  icorcls^  the  law 
prohibits  the  murder  of  slaves.  How  much  it  intends 
or  effects^  will  be  seen  in  another  chapter. 

A  slaveholder  flogged  a  little  slave  girl,  and  put 
her  feet  in  the  stocks.  She  was  found  dead.  A 
prominent  lawyer,  of  a  respectable  family,  was  asked 
"  whether  the  murderer  of  this  little  helpless  child 
could  not  be  indicted."  He  coolly  replied  that the 
slave  was  Mr.  P.'s  property^  and  if  he  chose  to  suffer 
the  loss^  no  one  else  had  any  thing  to  do  with  it." 
(Vide  Weld's  ^'  Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  54.) 

The  slave  child  was  ^'property,"  and  had  only 
been  used  !  "It  is  believed  that  no  record  exists  of  a 
white  man  having  been  executed  in  the  United  States, 
simply  for  the  murderof  a  slaved  (MSS.  by  Judge  Jay.) 

In  another  chapter  this  point  will  be  examined. 

Again  we  find  the  people  to  be  no  better  than 
their  laws.  If  these  practices  are  to  be  considered 
unauthorized  "abuses,"  the  people  are  ivorse  than 
their  laws,  for  they  are  practised  with  impunity. 


t 


CHAPTEE  YI. 

SLAVES  CAN  POSSESS  NOTHING. 
Being  Property  themselves,  they  can  own  no  Property,  nor  make  any  Contract. 

Man  was  created  proprietor  of  the  earth,  with 
dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the  field.  The  human- 
ity of  the  slave  is  denied,  by  denying  to  him  any 
share  in  this  original  right  of  human  nature  or  capa- 
bility of  its  exercise.  He  is  '^not  ranked  among 
sentient  beings,  but  among  things."  A  chattel  cannot 
be  the  owner  of  a  chattel.  The  slave  can  possess 
nothing  nor  acquire  any  thing  but  what  must  belong 
to  his  master."  (Civil  Code,  Art.  35.)  They  ^'  cannot 
take  by  purchase  or  descent." 

^'Slaves  have  no  legal  rights  in  things,  real  or 
personal ;  but  whatever  they  may  acquire,  belongs, 
in  point. of  law  ^  to  their  masters."   (Stroud,  pp.  25,  45.) 
Slaves  can  make  no  contract."    (lb.,  25,  61.) 
Slaves  are  incapable  of  inheriting  or  transmitting 
property."    (Civil  Code,  Art.  945.) 

By  the  Eoman  law,  the  slave  might  possess  what 
was  called  his  peculium^  or  what  his  master  might, 
by  stipulation,  accord  to  him,  and  which,  having 


90 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


tliTis  stipulated,  lie  could  not  afterwards  take  from 
him.  By  this  law,  slaves  acquired  property,  some- 
times embarked  in  commerce,  redeemed  themselves 
and  amassed  fortunes ;  or,  in  other  cases,  without  an 
absolute  purchase  of  themselves,  paid  their  masters 
an  annuity,  as  the  price  of  their  services,  and 
attended  to  their  own  affairs.  Not  so  in  republican 
and  Christian  America !  The  ^' legal  relation"  here 
is  another  thing.  The  only  exception,  approxima- 
ting the  Eoman  code  in  this  particular,  so  far  as  we 
know,  is  found  in  the  Civil  Code  of  Louisiana,  as 
follows  : 

''AH  that  a  slave  possesses  belongs  to  his  master, 
he  possesses  nothing  of  his  own  except  his  pecuUum^ 
that  is  to  say,  the  sum  of  money  or  movable  estate, 
which  his  master  chooses  he  should  possess.'^''  (Art.  175  ; 
see  1  Martin's  Digest,  616.) 

Yet,  in  the  same  Code  stands  the  following : 
''  Slaves  cannot  dispose  of  or  receive  by  donation, 
inter  vivos  or  mortis  causa,  unless  they  have  been  pre- 
viously and  expressly  enfranchised  conformably  to 
law,  or  unless  they  are  expressly  enfranchised  by 
the  act  by  which  the  donation  is  made  to  them." 
(Art.  1462.) 

*'  The  earnings  of  slaves  and  the  price  of  their 
service  belong  to  their  owners,  who  have  their  action 
to  recover  the  amount  of  those  who  have  employed 
them."    (Louisiana  Code  of  Practice,  Art.  103.) 

Except  in  the  permission  of  a  peculium,  the  laws 
of  the  other  States  on  this  subject  are  similar  to  those 
of  Louisiana. 


I^LAVES  CAK  OWN  NOTHING. 


91 


South  Carolina. — "  Slaves  cannot  take  by  de- 
scent or* purchase."  (4  Desaussure's  Chancery  Ee- 
ports,  266,  Bynum  vs.  Bostwick.) 

North  Carolina. — "  Slaves  cannot  take  by  sale, 
or  devise,  or  descent."  A  devise  of  land  to  be  rented 
out,  for  the  maintenance  of  a  slave,  was  adjudged  to 
be  void."  (1  Cameron  and  Norwood's  Eeports,  353  ; 
same  decision,  1  Taylor's  Eeports,  209.) 

Maryland. — A  gift,  bequest,  or  devise,  made  to 
a  slave,  by  any  one  not  his  owner,  would  be  void, 
(see  Dulany's  opinion,  1  Maryland  Eeports,  561,) 
though  such  a  devise  of  real  or  personal  estate,  made 
by  the  owner  of  a  slave,  has  been  held  to  entitle  him  to 
freedom^  as  the  implied  intention  of  the  owner.  (Hall 
vs.  Mullin,  5  Harris  and  Johnson's  Eeports,  190.) 

In  ''Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery"  may  be  found 
ample  evidence  that  this  feature  of  the  Slave  Code 
(the  incapacity  of  the  slave  to  possess  property)  is 
not  a  dead  letter,  but  recognized  by  the  courts,  and 
enforced  whenever  there  is  occasion,  not  only  to  the 
letter  of  the  statute,  but  by  an  application  of  the 
principle  and  spirit  of  the  enactment,  in  a  contin- 
gency which  legislative  sagacity  did  not,  probably, 
foresee. 

A  slave,  for  instance,  accidentally  found  a  sum  of 
money,  in  bank  bills,  which  some  one  took  from  him 
and  carried  to  the  bank.  The  owner  of  the  slave  boy 
brought  an  action  of  trover  against  the  bank  for  the 
sum,  and  recovered  it  by  judgment  of  court. 

Judge  Saflford  said : 

"  Our  slaves  can  do  nothing  in  their  own  right, 


92 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


can  hold,  no  property,  can  neither  buy,  sell,  barter, 
nor  dispose  of  any  thing,  without  express  permission 
from  the  master  or  overseer  ;  so  that  every  thing  they 
can  possess  or  do  is,  in  legal  contemplation,  on 
authority  of  the  master." 

Judge  Crenshaw  said : 
A  slave  is  in  absolute  bondage  ;  he  has  no  civil 
right,  and  can  hold  no  property,  except  at  the  will 
and  pleasure  of  his  master.  A  slave  is  a  rational 
being,  and  endowed  with  understanding  and  volition, 
like  the  rest  of  mankind  ;  and  whatever  he  lawfully 
acquires,  and  gains  possession  of,  ly  finding  or  other- 
wise, is  the  acquirement  and  possession  of  the  mas- 
ter. A  slave  cannot  take  property  by  descent  oi 
purchase."  (Brandon  et  al.  vs.  Merchants'  and 
Planters'  Bank  of  Huntsville,  1  Stewart's  Ala.  Ee 
port,  320 ;  S.  P.  Bynum  vs,  Bostwick,  4  Desaussure, 
266 ;  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  6,  7.) 

In  the  preceding  decision,  the  manhood,  the  reason, 
the  understanding,  the  volition  of  the  slave  are  dis- 
tinctly recognized,  and  for  the  express  purpose  of 
claiming  all  the  acquirements  of  such  a  being  as  the 
property  of  his  master — equivalent  to  the  claim  of 
absolute  proprietorship  in  the  human  soul  itself! 
The  theory  and  the  practice  of  slavery  are  here  found 
to  be  in  harmony,  and  the  courts  enforce  the  enact- 
ments of  the  legislatures. 

In  a  note  to  the  preceding  decision,  Mr.  Wheeler  says, 
(p.  7 :)  These  principles  prevail  in  all  the  States,  and 
are  taken  from  the  civil  law,  and  were  adopted  in  all, 
except  Connecticut,  and  perhaps  Massachusetts." 


SLAVES  CAN  OWN  NOTHING. 


93 


"  Hall  vs.  MuUin,  5  Har.  and  Jolm's  Md.  Eeport, 
190.  The  Court  held  that  no  legal  contract,  whatever, 
could  be  made  with  a  slave,  without  the  consent  of 
his  master."    (lb.,  p.  7.) 

^'In  Jackson  ex.  dem.  the  People  vs.  Lervey,  5 
Cowen's  Eep.,  397,  the  Court  held  that  a  slave  at 
common  law  could  not  contract  matrimony,  nor 
could  the  child  of  a  slave  take  by  descent  or  inheri- 
tance."   (lb.,  p.  7.) 

^^Free  Lucy  and  Frank,  Fall  Term,  1826,  4  Mon- 
roe's Eep.,  167 ;  Emmerson  vs.  Howland,  1  Mason's 
Eep.,  45.  The  Court  held  that  contracts  made  by 
negroes  while  in  slavery,  do  not  bind  them  when 
liberated ;  and  consequently  a  plea  by  a  free  negro, 
that  a  writing  sued  on  was  delivered  when  he  was  a 
slave,  is  good."   (lb.,  p.  190.) 

In  a  note  on  this  topic,  Mr.  Wheeler  says :  One 
general  principle  prevails  in  all  the  States,  and  in 
the  British,  Spanish,  and  Portuguese  West  Indies, 
and  that  is,  that  a  slave  cannot  make  a  contract^  not 
even  the  contract  of  matrimony ^  And  he  cites  numer- 
ous authorities  for  the  statement.    (lb.,  p.  190.) 

The  slave  is  thus  taught  that  his  promises  and 
agreements  are  of  no  binding  force  !  Even  the  free 
negro,  as  has  been  seen,  is  taught  the  same  lesson  in 
respect  to  his  former  condition !  Yet  those  by  whom 
these  lessons  are  taught  affect  to  marvel  at  the  moral 
obtuseness  of  the  negroes,  and  consider  themselves 
as  occupying  a  high  moral  eminence  above  them. 

A  warrant  for  one  thousand  acres  of  land,  issued 
to  a  slave  in  Tennessee,  for  military  services  as  a 


94 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


musician  during  tlie  revolutionary  war,  was  adjudged 
to  be  the  property  of  his  owner,  in  1834.  This  de- 
cision was  made  against  the  claims  of  an  heir  of  his 
former  owner.  Col.  Patton,  a  revolutionary  officer, 
who  caused  his  slave  to  be  enlisted.  No  claim  ap- 
pears to  have  been  set  up  on  behalf  of  the  slave. 
(See  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p.  229.) 

Though  a  slave  can  make  no  contract "  on  his 
own  account,  yet  his  master  may  constitute  a  slave 
his  agent  for  the  most  important  pecuniary  transac- 
tions. We  once  knew  of  a  prominent  public  man, 
whose  personal  credit  in  his  market  town  was  so  low 
that  his  written  order  on  his  merchant  for  fifty  dol- 
lars' worth  of  goods  was  rejected;  but  when  his 
managing  slave  stepped  forward  and  promised  that 
the  next  loads  of  produce  should  be  delivered  in 
payment,  the  answer  was :  ^'  Very  well,  Cufffee,  if 
you  say  so,  I'll  deliver  ten  times  the  amount  of 
goods." 

Chastain  vs.  Bowman  et  al.,  May  Term,  1833, 
1  Hill's  S.  0.  Eeports,  276.  The  Court  charged  the 
jury  that  a  slave  might  be  the  agent  of  his  master, 
and  if  his  agency  was  established,  the  master  was 
bound.  Verdict  for  the  plaintiff*,  and  motion  for  a 
new  trial. 

Per  Cur,^  Johnson  J. — It  is  not  questioned  that 
a  master  may  constitute  his  slave  his  agent,  and  I 
cannot  conceive  of  any  distinction  between  the  cir- 
cumstances which  constitute  a  slave  and  a  freeman 
an  agent.  They  are  both  the  creatures  of  the  prin- 
cipal, and  act  upon  his  authority.    There  is  no  con- 


SLAVES  CAN  OWN  NOTHING. 


95 


dition,  however  degraded,  which  deprives  one  of  the 
right  to  act  as  a  private  agent.  Motion  dismissed." 
(Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p.  228.) 

It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  a  man  should  have 
.  a  right"  to  act  as  an  agent  for  another  who  can  have 
no  right  to  act  for  himself.  Equally  remarkable  is 
the  plea  that  slaves  cannot  take  care  of ,  themselves 
and  must  be  benevolently  superintended  for  their 
benefit,  while  they  conduct  the  business  of  their 
masters.  The  slave  is  adjudged  to  be  a  mere  thing, 
except  where  his  master's  interests  or  convenience 
require  that  he  should  be  regarded  a  man. 

Another  curiosity  of  slave  jurisprudence  deserves 
notice  here.  Although  it  is  adjudged  an  offense 
against  the  State  for  a  free  white  citizen  to  hold 
honest  commerce  with  a  slave,  for  the  beneficial 
and  useful  purposes  of  life,  to  employ  a  slave  to 
labor  and  to  pay  him  just  wages — an  offense,  like- 
wise, for  the  master  of  a  slave  to  permit  and  author- 
ize such  transactions,  (as  will  be  shown  presently,) 
yet,  according  to  Wheeler,  ^^It  is  not  an  offense, 
either  at  common  law  or  by  statute,  to  gamble  with 
slaves."  This  statement  is  his  marginal  title  to  the 
law  case  of  The  State  vs,  Pemberton  and  Smith, 
Dec.  Term,  1829,  2  Devereaux's  N.  Carolina  Eep., 
281,"  in  which,  "  after  verdict  for  the  State,  his  Honor 
Judge  Strange  arrested  the  judgment,  being  of  opin- 
ion" as  before  stated.  ^^From  this  judgment  the 
solicitor  for  the  State  appealed,"  but  the  judgment 
of  the  Court  below  was  afl&rmed.  (Wheeler's  Law 
of  Slavery,  p.  441.) 


96 


THE' AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Witli  exception  of  Louisiana,  as  already  men- 
tioned, our  American  slave  States  have  signalized 
themselves  by  special  enactments  to  prohibit  the  pos- 
session of  the  smallest  amoimt  of  property  by  the 
slave,  even  with  the  consent  of  the  master!  The 
Greeks,  the  Eomans,  the  ancient  Germans,  the  Poles, 
with  the  Portuguese,  the  Spanish  and  the  French  of 
our  own  times,  had  provided,  both  by  law  and  by 
custom,  for  the  possession  of  property  by  the  slave, 
which  could  not  be  seized  by  his  master.  In  the 
British  West  Indies,  though  no  written  law  had 
sanctioned  the  custom,  a  public  sentiment  had  in 
dulged  the  slave  in  the  enjoyment  of  some  petty 
possessions,  and  had  forbidden  the  master  to  inter 
fere  with  them. 

But  this  lenity  was  manifestly  inconsistent  with 
the  absolute  and  unlimited  chattelhood  of  the  slave. 
A  principle  was  seen  to  be  involved,  which,  if  toler- 
ated in  an  o^e  of  inquiry^  would  undermine  the 
whole  system.  If  the  slave  could  possess  property, 
he  could  dispose  of  it ;  he  could  make  contracts  ;  he 
might  contract  marriage ;  he  might  become  a  man, 
and,  becoming  such,  cease  to  be  a  slave.  The  safety 
of  the  entire  fabric  required  that  not  one  stone  in 
the  edifice  should  be  missing.  And  besides,  the 
idea  that  a  slave  can  possess  property^  however  trifling 
the  amount,  is  the  idea  that  the  slave  has  rights^  an 
idea  that  must  by  no  means  be  permitted  to  enter 
the  mind  of  the  slave,  or  be  entertained  by  the  com 
munity  around  him.  Especially  must  this  not  be 
done  in  a  land  wherein  human  rights  have  been 


SLAVES  CAN  OWN  NOTHING. 


97 


discussed  and  proclaimed.  The  jealousy,  the  vigi- 
lance, the  sagacity,  the  appliances  of  a  grim  des- 
potism are  never  so  severely  tasked  as  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  spirit  and  the  doctrines  of  freedom. 
This_  single  thought  solves  the  enigma,  and  repels 
the  opprobrium,  of  an  unprecedented  tyranny  in  a 
land  wherein  are  taught  the  principles ,  of  liberty. 
A  despotism,  in  such  a  country,  must  be  doubly 
despotic  or  die  instantly.  The  reader  has,  in  these 
suggestions,  our  philosophy  of  the  remarkable  enact- 
ments that  follow. 

South  Carolina. — ^'  It  shall  not  be  lawful  for 
any  slave  to  buy,  sell,  trade,  &c.,  for  any  goods,  &c., 
without  a  license  from  the  owner,  &c.  Nor  shall 
any  slave  be  permitted  to  keep  any  boat,  periauger, 
or  canoe,  or  raise  and  breed  for  the  benefit  of  such 
slave  any  horses,  mares,  cattle,  sheep,  or  hogs,  under 
pain  of  forfeiting  all  the  goods,  &c.,  and  all  the  boats, 
periaugers  or  canoes,  horses,  mares,  cattle,  sheep,  or 
hogs.  And  it  shall  be  lawful  for  any  person  whatso- 
ever to  seize  and  take  away  from  any  slave,  all  such 
goods,  &c.,  boats,  &c.,  &c.,  and  to  deliver  the  same 
into  the  hands  of  any  justice  of  the  peace,  nearest  to 
the  place  where  the  seizure  shall  be  made,  and  such 
justice  shall  take  the  oath  of  the  person  making  such 
seizure,  concerning  the  manner  thereof ;  and  if  the 
said  justice  shall  be  satisfied  that  such  seizure  has 
been  made  according  to  law,  he  shall  pronounce  and 
declare  the  goods  so  seized  to  be  forfeited,  and  order 
.  the  same  to  be  sold  at  public  outcry ;  one  half  of 
the  moneys  arising  from  such  sale  to  go  to  the  State, 
5 


98 


THE- AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  the  other  half  to  him  or  them  that  sue  for  the  same^ 
(James's  Digest,  885-6  ;  Act  of  1740.) 

Georgia. — The  statute  is  nearly  the  same  as  in 
South  Carolina,  with  this  additional  prohibition: 
Lest  the  master  should  sometimes  permit  the  slave 
to  hire  himself  to  another  for  his  own  benefit,  the 
State  imposes  a  penalty  of  thirty  dollars  for  every 
weekly  offense  on  the  part  of  the  master,  unless  the 
labor  be  done  on  his  own  premises."  (Prince's 
Digest,  453,  457.) 

Kentucky. — The  same,  with  a  slight  modifica- 
tion.   (2  Litt.  &  Sui.  Digest,  1159-60.) 

Tennessee. — Similar.  (Act  of  October  23,  1813, 
chap.  135.) 

Virginia. — If  the  master  shall  permit  his  slave 
to  hire  himself  out,  it  is  made  lawful  for  any  person^ 
and  the  duty  of  the  Sheriff,  &c.,  to  apprehend  such 
slave,  &c.,  and  the  master  shall  be  fined  not  less  than 
ten  dollars,  nor  more  than  twenty,  &c.  (1  Revised 
Code,  A.  D.  1819,  374-5.) 

Mississippi. — Same  as  in  Georgia  and  Kentucky, 
before  stated.    {Revised  Code,  375.) 

A  slave,  in  Mississippi,  is  forbidden  to  raise  cotton 
for  his  own  use  ;  and  should  the  master  permit  him 
to  do  so,  he  incurs  a  fine  of  fifty  dollars.  {Revised 
Code,  379.) 

Further  :  If  any  master,  &c.,  of  a  slave,  license 
such  slave  to  go  at  large  and  trade  as  a  freeman,  he 
shall  forfeit  the  sum  of  fifty  dollars  for  each  and 
every  offense."  {Revised  Code,  374.  See  also  North 
Carolina.) 


SLAVES  CAN  OWN  NOTHING. 


99 


An  equal  fine  is  imposed  upon  any  master  con- 
victed of  permitting  his  slave  to  keep  "  stock  of  any 
description.''''  (Act  of  Jan.  29,  1825  ;  Pamph.  Laws 
of  Mississippi,  of  1825.) 

Missouri. — Same  as  Virginia,  before  stated.  (2 
Missouri  Laws,  743 ;  Hayward's  Manual,  534.) 
Also,  same  as  Mississippi,  third  specification,  just 
stated.    (2  Missouri  Laws,  743.) 

North  Carolina. — Act  of  1779:  "All  horses, 
cattle,  hogs,  or  sheep,  that,  one  month  after  the  pas- 
sage of  this  act,  shall  belong  to  any  slave,  or  be  of 
any  slave's  mark,  in  this  State,  shall  be  seized  and 
sold  by  the  County  Wardens,  and  applied,  one  half 
to  the  support  of  the  poor  of  the  county^  and  the  other 
half  to  the  informer  T  (Hayward's  Manual,  526.) 
Same  or  similar  law  also  in  Mississippi.  {Revised 
Code,  378.)  Same  also  in  Maryland.  (Act  of  1723, 
chap.  15,  sect.  6  ;  Kilty's  Laws  of  Maryland.) 

And  so  the  white  poor  are  to  be  fed  by  plundering 
the  colored  poor ! 

Maryland. — See  last  preceding  item.  Also  Mis- 
sissippi, third  item  there  stated.  See  Kilty's  Laws 
of  Maryland,  Act  of  April,  1787,  chap.  33. 

By  act  of  April  sessions,  1787,  any  person  who 
shall  permit  and  authorize  any  slave  belonging  to 
him  or  herself,  &c.,  to  go  at  large  himself  or  herself 
within  this  State,  shall  incur  the  penalty  of  five 
pounds  ($13.33)  current  money  per  months  except 
ten  days  at  harvest.  The  penalty  was  increased  to 
twenty  dollars,  excepting,  however,  an  additional  ten 
days  in  harvest.    (Act  of  December  Sessions,  1817. 


100 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


chap.  104,  sect.  1.)  By  both  acts,  a  slave  being  a 
pilot  is  not  included  in  the  prohibition. 

Nq  person  shall  trade,  barter,  commerce,  or  in 
any  way  deal  with  any  servant  or  slave,  &c.,  &c., 
without  leave  or  license  first  had  from  such  servant 
or  slave's  master,  dame,  or  overseer,  for  his  or  her 
so  doing,  under  penalty  of  two  thousand  pounds  of 
tobacco,"  &c.  (Laws  of  Maryland,  1715,  chap.  44, 
sect.  11,  12,  13.) 

District  of  Columbia. — Under  exclusive  juris- 
diction of  Congress."    Same  as  in  Maryland. 

It  may  easily  be  conceived  that  this  law  would 
be  inconvenient  and  disadvantageous  to  many  own- 
ers of  slaves  in  or  near  maritime  towns,  where  job 
labor,  or  labor  by  the  day  or  the  hour,  might  be 
picked  up  by  the  laborers  themselves,  better  than  by 
their  owners.  In  such  locahties  the  strict  letter  of 
the  law  could  not  always  be  rigidly  enforced.  The 
public  convenience,  the  wants  of  every  body  who 
must  needs  employ  transient  laborers,  would  inter- 
pose obstacles.  It  is  known  that  in  Wilmington, 
N.  C,  a  port  from  which  much  lumber  used  to  be 
shipped,  which  needed  much  cooper's  labor  in  the 
preparing,  the  work  was  often  or  commonly  carried 
on  by  slaves,  who  paid  a  large  monthly  stipend  to 
their  owners.  Stevedores,  (who  stow  away  cargoes,) 
caulkers,  riggers,  and  perhaps  ship-blacksmiths,  and 
even  sail-makers,  being  slaves,  were  allowed  the 
same  privilege.  The  custom  had  an  elevating  effect 
on  the  slaves,  and  was  therefore  looked  upon  with 
jealousy  by  masters  not  interested  in  such  arrange- 


SLAVES  CAN  OWN  NOTHING. 


101 


ments.  This  was  thirty  years  ago.  The  present  usages 
are  unknown  to  the  writer,  who  gladly  presents  this 
one  brighter  spot  in  the  picture.  But  it  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  all  the  earnings  of  these  slaves, 

if  any^  over  and  above  their  support,  (after  having 
paid  ten  or  fifteen  dollars  monthly  to  their  masters 
for  their  time,)  is  nevertheless,  in  the  eye  df  the  law,  the 
property  of  their  masters,  and  they  can  take  away, 
if  they  please,  whatever  they  find  in  their  possession. 

The  convenience  and  interest  of  the  planter  might 
permit  or  even  direct  the  slaves  to  cultivate  small 
patches  of  vegetables  near  their  cabins,  for  food,  by 
Sunday  labor,  for  the  most  part.  In  Spanish  Florida 
this  was  a  custom.  It  may  obtain  to  a  small  extent 
in  other  States,  without  serious  violation  of  the  letter 
or  spirit  of  the  statutes  quoted.  Such  small  and 
transient  supplies  would  hardly  be  accounted  posses- 
sions or  property. 

That  the  statutes  quoted  are  not  commonly  re- 
garded a  dead  letter,  may  be  seen  by  reports  of 
judicial  decisions,  as  compiled  by  Mr.  Wheeler,  who 
expressly  refers  to  the  statutes  as  the  ground  of  the 
decisions.  And  in  a  note  he  adverts  to  some  of 
their  provisions  which  we  have  not  yet  mentioned : 

''By  the  Eevised  Code  of  Virginia,  (A.  D.  1819,) 
vol.  I.,  p.  442,  sect.  81,  it  is  declared  that  a  slave  going 
at  large,  or  hiring  himself  out,  may  be  committed  by 
a  magistrate,  who  may  fine  the  owner,  and  may  order 
the  slave  to  be  soldJ''  "  Also,  by  the  Revised  Code  of 
Mississippi,  374,  sect.  25" — "in  certain  cases,  the 
slave  may  he  sold.    And  by  sect  20,  any  citizen  may 


102 


THE  'AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


seize  a  slave  offering  articles  for  sale,  and  take  him 
before  a  justice  of  the  peace,  and  the  justice  shall 
order  the  slave  to  be  whipped^  and  forfeit  the  article  TO 
THE  PERSON  APPREHENDING  THE  SLAVE"!  (Wheel- 
er's Law  of  Slavery,  p.  153.) 

It  is  preposterous  to  suppose  that  such  modern 
enactments,  holding  out  such  inducements  to  inform- 
ers and  prosecutors,  should  remain  a  dead  letter. 
Mr.  Wheeler  adds: 

Similar  provisions  are  to  be  found  in  the  statute 
books  of  those  States  where  this  species  of  property  is 
recognized."  (lb.) 

In  the  same  note  he  had  before  said : 
The  statutes  of  the  States  contain  a  prohibition 
with  a  penalty  against  the  slave  going  at  large,  or 
hiring  himself  out."    (p.  152.) 

He  cites  the  law  of  Alabama,  in  particular ;  and 
Judge  Hitchcock,  of  Alabama,  says  of  his  book : 
I  have  no  doubt  it  will  be  a  valuable  work  for  the 
use  of  the  members  particularly  of  the  Southern  bar 
of  the  United  States."  He  understands,  of  course, 
that  these  laws  are  to  be  enforced,  as  in  the  following 
instance  recorded  in  the  same  "valuable"  auxihary 
of  "the  Southern  bar"  : 

"  Jarrett  vs.  Higbee,  5  Monroe's  Ky.  Eeport,  546. 
Jarrett  brought  trespass  against  Higbee  for  taking 
and  imprisoning  his  slave."  "  Defendant  admitted 
that  when  he  took  the  slave  up  he  produced  a  pass 
from  his  master"  which  gave  him  permission  "to 
bargain  and  trade  for  himself  until  the  first  day  of 
May  next ;  and  also  for  to  pass  and  repass  from  Liv- 


SLAVES  CAN  OWN  NOTHING. 


103 


ingston  county,  Kentucky,  to  Monongahela  county, 
State  of  Virginia,"  &c.,  dated  26tli  Sept.,  1822.  The 
following  is  from  the  judicial  decision  : 

"  Per  Cur,,  Bibb  Ch.  J.  That  the  master  shall 
not  let  loose  his  slave,  with  a  permit  for  him  to  vio- 
late the  established  order  and  economy  prescribed  by  law 
in  relation  to  slaves,  is  due  to  society  J''  "  Without  abridg- 
ing the  lawful  powers  of  the  master  to  use  his  prop- 
erty in  the  slave,  it  may  safely  be  declared  that  this 
paper,  given  by  the  master  in  (to)  the  slave,  violated 
that  duty  which  he,  as  owner,  owed  to  the  laws  of 
society."  "  These  permissions,  and  such  acts  of  the 
slave,  are  violations  by  master  and  slave  of  the  pol- 
icy, spirit,  and  letter  of  the  statute  of  16th  Dec, 
1802,  against  permitting  the  slaves  to  go  at  large 
and  hire  themselves."  "  Such  licenses  would  tend 
to  beget  idle  and  dissolute  habits  in  the  particular 
slaves  so  indulged,  as  well  as  in  others,  and  to  lead 
to  depredations  upon  the  property  of  others,  and  to 
crimes  and  insubordination.  To  such  licenses  and 
indulgences  society  are  not  bound  to  submit;  the 
master  has  no  right  to  give  such."  It  was  not  a 
lawful  pass  or  permit.  It  was  a  species  of  temporary 
and  unlawful  manumission,^^  &;c.  (Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  pp.  269-70.) 

In  other  language,  the  statute  and  its  enforcement 
are  deemed  necessary  to  the  security  and  the  per- 
petuity of  slavery. 

It  deserves  especial  notice  that  this  decision  was 
made  in  Kentucky,  where  slavery  is  said  to  be  ex- 
hibited in  its  mildest  form,  and  where  the  privileges 


104 


THE'AMERICAK  SLAVE  CODE. 


of  slaves  are  greater  than  in  most  of  tlie  other 
States. 

It  is  not  known  that  in  any  other  nation,  ancient 
or  modern,  the  robbery  of  the  poor  has  been  carried, 
by  system,  to  such  a  pitch  as  to  prohibit  the  mass 
of  the  laboring  people  from  holding  the  smallest 
article  of  property  as  their  own,  or  from  making  any 
bargain  or  contract. 

And  it  ought  to  be  noticed  and  remembered  that 
this  condition  of  things  has  resulted  from  an  ex- 
treme solicitude  to  protect  from  danger  the  so-called 
"  legal  relation"  of  owner  and  owned,  of  master  and 
slave. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


SLAVES  CANNOT  MAEKY. 

Being  held  as  Property,  and  incapable  of  making  any  Contract,  they  cannot 
contract  Marriage  recognized  by  Law. 

Men  may  forget  or  disregard  the  rules  of  logic  in 
their  reasonings  about  slavery,  but  the  genius  that 
presides  over  American  slavery  never  forgets  or 
disregards  them.  From  its  well-defined  principle  of 
human  chattelhood  it  never  departs,  for  a  single  mo- 
ment. If  any  thing  founded  on  falsehood  might  be 
called  a  science,  we  might  add  the  system  of  Ameri- 
can slavery  to  the  list  of  the  strict  sciences.  From 
a  single  fundamental  axiom,  all  the  parts  of  the  sys- 
tem are  logically  and  scientifically  educed.  And  no 
man  fully  understands  the  system,  who  does  not 
study  it  in  the  light  of  that  axiom. 

The  slave  has  no  rights.  Of  course  he,  or  she, 
cannot  have  the  rights  of  a  husband,  a  wife.  Tha 
slave  is  a  chattel,  and  chattels  do  not  marry,  The 
slave  is  not  ranked  among  sentient  beings,  but  among 
things,"  and  things  are  not  married. 

"Slaves  are  not  people,  in  the  eye  of  the  law. 

5* 


106  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Tlicy  have  no  legal  personality."  So  said  Mr.  Wise. 
So,  by  their  votes,  said  the  Federal  Congress.  But 
none  except    people"  and  ^'persons"  ever  marry. 

^'  The  slave  is  one  who  is  in  the  power  of  a  master 
to  whom  he  'belongs,''''  How,  then,  can  the  slave  marry? 

^'The  legal  relation  of  master  and  slave,"  with  all 
the  vestal  robes  of  its  spotless  innocency,  and  saintly 
Biblical  paternity,  has  never ,  in  this  country^  been  held 
to  be  compatible  with  marriage.  So  early  as  in  colo- 
nial times,  when  parish  ministers,  all  over  New-Eng- 
land, owned  slaves,  it  was  held  by  learned  civilians, 
in  good  old  Connecticut,  that  when  a  slave  master, 
though  inadvertently,  gave  verbal  license  to  a  female 
slave  to  marry ^  the  license  made  her  free.  Being  mar- 
ried, she  was  not  a  slave,  and  the  husband  bore  off 
his  prize  in  triumph,  before  her  master ! 

The  same  doctrine  has  always  been  held  (though 
differently  enunciated)  at  the  South.  Slave  mothers 
are  there  licensed  by  their  masters  to  be  '^breeders," 
not  wives,  and  thus  they  are  retained  as  slaves. 

slave  cannot  even  contract  matrimony,  the 
association  which  takes  place  among  slaves,  and  is 
called  marriage,  being  properly  designated  by  the 
word  contuhernium^  a  relation  which  has  no  sanctity, 
and  to  which  no  civil  rights  are  attached."  (Stroud's 
^'Sketch  of  the  Slave  Laws,"  p.  61.)' 

slave  has  never  maintained  an  action  against 
the  violator  of  his  bed.  A  slave  is  not  admonished 
for  incontinence,  or  punished  for  fornication  or  adul- 
tery ;  never  prosecuted  for  bigamy,  or  petty  treason 
for  killing  a  husband  being  a  slave,  any  more  than 


SLAVES  CANNOT  MAERY. 


107 


admitted  to  an  appeal  for  murder."  (Opinion  of  Dan- 
iel Dalaney,  Esq.,  Attorney  General -of  Maryland. 
1  Maryland  Eeports,  pp.  561,  563.) 

"Slaves  were  not  entitled  to  the  conditions  of 
matrimony,  and  therefore  they  had  no  relief  in  cases 
of  adultery;  nor  were  they  the  proper  objects  of 
cognation  or  affinity,  but  of  quasi-cognation  only." 
(Dr.  TayWs  "Elements  of  the  Civil  Law,"  p.  429.) 

"It  is  clear  that  slaves  have  no  legal  capacity  to 
assent  to  any  contract.  With  the  consent  of  their 
master  they  may  marry,  and  their  moral  power  to 
agree  to  such  a  contract  or  connection  cannot  be 
doubted;  hut  while  in  a  state  of  slavery  it  cannot  pro- 
duce any  civil  effect^  because  slaves  are  deprived  of 
all  civil  rights.  Emancipation  gives  to  the  slave  his 
civil  rights,  and  a  contract  of  marriage,  legal  and 
valid  by  the  consent  of  the  master,  and  moral  assent 
of  the  slave,  from  the  moment  of  freedom^  ALTHOUGH 
DORMANT  DURING  SLAVERY,  produces  all  the  effects 
which  result  from  such  contract  among  free  persons." 
(Opinion  of  Judge  Matthews,  case  of  Grirod  vs.  Lewis, 
May  Term,  1819 ;  6  Martin's  "Louisiana  Eeports,"  p. 
559.    Wheeler's  "Law  of  Slavery,"  p.  199.) 

The  most  favorable  inference  from  this  ingenious 
decision  is,  that  the  joint  action  of  master  and  slave 
can  legalize  a  slave's  marriage  when  he  ceases  to  be  a 
slave  ! 

The  obligations  of  marriage  are  evidently  incon- 
sistent with  the  conditions  of  slavery,  and  cannot  be 
performed  by  a  slave.  The  husband  promises  to 
protect  his  wife  and  provide  for  her.  The  wife  prom- 


108  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


ises  to  be  the  help-meet  of  her  husband.  They  mu- 
tually promise  to  live  with  and  cherish  each  other, 
till  parted  by  death.  But  what  can  such  promises 
by  slaves  mean?  The  "legal  relation  of  master  and 
slave"  renders  them  void !  It  forbids  the  slave  to 
protect  even  himself.  It  clothes  his  master  with  au- 
thority to  bid  him  inflict  deadly  blows  on  the  woman 
he  has  sworn  to  protect.  It  prohibits  his  possession 
of  any  property  wherewith  to  sustain  her.  His  labor 
and  his  hands  it  takes  from  him.  It  bids  the  woman 
assist,  not  her  husband,  but  her  owner!  Nay!  it 
gives  him  unlimited  control  and  full  possession  of 
her  own  person,  and  forbids  her,  on  pain  of  death, 
(as  will  be  shown,)  to  resist  him,  if  he  drags  her  to 
his  bed !  It  severs  the  phghted  pair,  at  the  will  of 
their  masters,  occasionally,  or  for  ever !  The  inno- 
cent "legal  relation"  of  slave-ownership  does  or  per- 
mits all  this,  and  without  forfeiting  clerical  favor,  or 
a  high  seat  in  the  Church,  or  in  the  Senate,  or  Presi- 
dential chair.  What,  then,  can  the  marriage  vows 
of  slaves  mean  ? 

The  laws  annulling  slave  marriage  are  explicit,  as 
has  been  seen.  The  corresponding  position  of  the 
judiciary,  as  attested  by  the  Maryland  Eeports,  has 
been  adduced.  Will  any  one  inquire  whether  or 
no,  in  this  particular,  the  Code  be  a  "  dead  letter"  ? 
or  whether  the  institution  of  marriage  among  slaves 
may  not  have  survived  the  annulling  action  of  the 
legislatures  and  the  courts?  As  a  recognized  "le- 
gal relation,"  most  assuredly  the  marriage  relation 
among  slaves  does  not  and  cannot  exist.   The  petted 


SLAVES  CANNOT  MARRY. 


109 


"  legal  relation"  of  owner  and  slaves  crowds  it  off 
from  the  platform  of  human  society.  The  iivo  legal 
relations"  cannot  coexist.  A  choice  must  be  made 
between  the  two.  And  those  who  will  still  persist 
in  afl&rming  the  innocency  and  the  validity  of  the 
"  relation"  of  slave  owner,  are  bound,  if  sincere  and 
truthful  men,  to  repudiate  the  "relation"  of  slave 
marriage.  The  Savannah  Eiver  Baptist  Association 
had  the  nerve  and  the  consistency  to  do  this. 

"  In  1835,  the  following  query  relating  to  slaves 
was  propounded  to  the  Savannah  Eiver  Baptist 
Association  of  ministers:  Whether,  in  case  of  in- 
voluntary separation  of  such  a  character  as  to  pre- 
clude all  future  intercourse,  the  parties  may  be 
allowed  to  marry  again?" 

Answer. — That  such  separation,  among  persons 
situated  as  our  slaves  are,  is,  civilly,  a  separation  by 
death,  and  they  believe  that,  in  the  sight  of  God,  it 
would  be  so  viewed.  To  forbid  second  marriages  in 
such  cases,  would  be  to  expose  the  parties  not  only 
to  greater  hardships  and  stroliger  temptations,  but 
to  church  censure  for  acting  in  obedience  to  their  masters^ 
who  cannot  be  expected  to  acquiesce  in  a  regulation 
at  variance  with  justice  to  the  slaves,  and  to  the 
spirit  of  that  command  which  regulates  marriage 
between  Christians.  The  slaves  are  not  free  agents^  and 
a  dissolution  by  death  is  not  more  entirely  without 
their  consent  and  beyond  their  control  than  by  such 
separation." 

The  Church  is  here  seen  submitting,  with  com- 
placency, to  that  feature  of  the  Slave  Code  that 


110  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


annuls  marriage !  What  tlie  Southern  Baptists  have 
avowed,  the  other  religious  sects  there  practise. 

Some  of  the  facts  stated  concerning  the  uses  of 
slave property'^^  illustrate  the  absence  of  slave  marriage. 
And  so  do  the  statistics  of  the  domestic  slave-trade. 
The  restored  institution  and  sanctity  of  marriage 
would  cut  off  the  supplies  that  gorge  the  slave 
markets. 

The  Presbyterian  Synod  of  Kentucky,  in  their 
address,  have  given  us  their  testimony  to  the  general 
fact  and  its  effects.    They  say : 

The  system  "produces  general  hcentiousness  among 
the  slaves.  Marriage,  as  a  civil  ordinance,  they  can- 
not enjoy.  Our  laws  do  not  recognize  this  relation 
as  existing  among  them,  and,  of  course,  do  not  en- 
force, by  any  sanction,  the  observance  of  its  duties. 
Indeed,  until  slavery  waxeth  old,  and  tendeth  to 
decay,  there  cannot  be  any  legal  recognition  of  the 
marriage  rite,  or  the  enforcement  of  its  consequent 
duties.  For^  all  the  regulations  on  this  subject  loould 
limit  the  master's  absolute  right  of  PROPERTY  in  the 
slaves.  In  his  disposal  of  them  he  could  no  longer 
be  at  liberty  to  consult  merely  his  own  interest.  He 
could  no  longer  separate  the  wife  and  the  husband 
to  suit  the  convenience  or  interest  of  the  purchaser, 
no  matter  how  advantageous  might  be  the  terms 
offered."  "  Hence,  all  the  marriages  that  could  ever 
be  allowed  them,  would  be  a  mere  contract,  violable 
at  the  master's  pleasure.  Their  present  quasi  mar- 
riages are  continually  thus  voided.  They  are,  in 
this  way,  brought  to  consider  their  matrimonial 


SLAVES  CANNOT  MARRY. 


Ill 


alliances  as  a  thing  not  binding,  and  th  ey  act  accord- 
ingly. We  are  then  assured  by  the  most  unquestion- 
able testimony  that  licentiousness  is  the  necessary 
result  of  our  system."    (Address,  pp.  15,  16.) 

^'Chastity  is  no  virtue  among  them;  its  violation 
neither  injures  female  character  in  their  own  estima- 
tion, nor  in  that  of  their  master  or  mistress.  No 
instruction  is  ever  given — no  censure  pronounced.  I 
speak  not  of  the  world.  /  speak  of  Christian  families 
generally.''''    (Lexington,  Ky.,  Luminary.) 

Even  in  Puritan  New-England,  seventy  years  ago, 
female  slaves,  in  ministers'  and  magistrates'  families, 
bore  children,  black  or  yellow,  without  marriage. 
No  one  inquired  who  their  fathers  were,  and  nothing 
more  was  thought  of  it  than  of  the  breeding  of  sheep 
or  swine.  We  had  the  facts  from  those  who  well 
remembered  them. 

The  universal  testimony  concerning  slave  quar- 
ters" connected  with  plantations  is,  that  '*the  sexes 
are  herded  together,  promiscuously,  like  beasts." 

Said  a  sister  of  President  Madison  to  the  late  Eev. 
George  Bourne,  then  a  Presbyterian  minister  in 
Virginia:  "We  Southern  ladies  are  complimented 
with  the  name  of  wives ;  but  we  are  only  the  mis- 
tresses of  seraglios." 

The  report  of  the  Presbyterian  Synod  of  Georgia, 
December,  1833,  sustains,  on  this  general  subject, 
the  testimony  of  the  Synod  of  Kentucky. 

We  have  seen  a  well-authenticated  account  of  a 
respectable  Christian  lady  at  the  South,  who  kept  a 
handsome  mulatto  female  for  the  use  of  her  genteel 


112  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


son,  as  a  metliod  of  deterring  tiim,  as  she  said,  from 
more  indiscriminate  and  vulgar  indulgences.  Un- 
doubtedly lie  passed  current  in  tlie  first  circles  of 
respectable  young  ladies.  In  our  chapter  on  the  uses 
of  slave  property,  this  item  would  have  been  in 
place. 

The  rapid  and  constant  bleaching  of  colors,  at  the 
South,  assures  us  that  there  is  no  exaggeration  in 
these  pictures.  And  if  the  Synod  of  Kentucky  were 
not  mistaken,  the  innocent  legal  relation"  of  slave 
ownership  is  to  be  held  responsible  for  it  all.  Where 
the  laws  annul  marriage,  we  may  be  certain  that 
"  the  people  are  not  better  than  their  laws." 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


SLAVES  CAXNOT  CONSTITUTE  FAMILIES. 

Being  Property,  "Goods"  and  "  Chattels  Personal,"  to  all  intents,  construc- 
tions and  purposes  whatsoever,  they  have  no  claim  on  each  other — no  security 
from  Separation — no  Marital  Rights — no  Parental  Rights — no  Family  Govern- 
ment— no  Family  Education — no  Family  Protection. 

The  family  relation  originates  in  the  institution  of 
marriage,  and  exists  not  without  it.  We  have 
already  proved  that  slaves  cannot  have  families  or 
be  members  of  families,  by  proving  that  they  cannot 
be  married.  To  this  latter  point,  in  its  connection 
with  the  former,  we  cite  the  words  of  Judge  Jay : 

"A  necessary  consequence  of  slavery  is  the  absence 
of  the  marriage  relation.  No  slave  can  commit 
bigamy,  because  the  law  knows  no  more  of  the  mar- 
riage of  slaves  than  of  the  marriage  of  brutes.  A 
slave  may,  indeed,  be  formally  married,  but  so  far  as 
legal  rights  and  obligations  are  concerned,  it  is  an 
idle  ceremony."  "  Of  course^  these  laws  do  not 
recognize  the  parental  relation,  as  belonging  to 
slaves.  A  slave  has  no  more  legal  authority  over 
his  child  than  a  cow  has  over  her  calf"  (Jay's  In- 
quiry, p.  132.) 


114  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


The  fact  that  the  slave,  as  a  chattel  personal,  may 
be  bought,  sold,  transported  from  one  place  to 
another,  mortgaged,  attached,  leased,  inherited,  and 
distributed"  in  the  settlement  of  estates,  shows 
plainly  that  slaves  cannot  constitute  families. 

In  the  slaveholding  States,  except  in  Louisiana, 
no  law  exists  to  prevent  the  violent  separation  of 
parents  from  their  children,  or  even  from  each 
other."    (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  50.) 

Slaves  may  be  sold  and  transferred  from  one  to 
another  without  any  statutory  restriction  or  limita- 
tion, as  to  the  separation  of  parents  and  children, 
&c.,  except  in  the  State  of  Louisiana."  (Wheeler's 
Law  of  Slavery,  p.  41.) 

This  has  been  the  condition  of  American  slaves 
in  every  period  of  our  history,  since  their  first  intro- 
duction among  us.  John  Woolman^  the  philanthro- 
pist, a  minister  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  residing 
in  New- Jersey,  bears  the  following  testimony  con- 
cerning the  slaveholders  of  his  times,  (A.  D.  1757 :) 

They  often  part  men  from  their  wives  by  selling 
them  far  asunder,  which  is  common  when  estates  are 
sold  by  executors  at  vendue."  (Journal  of  the  Life 
of  John  Woolman,  London  edition,  p.  74.) 

At  a  later  period  than  this,  according  to  a  well- 
authenticated  tradition  in  the  neighborhood,  a  Con  • 
gregational  minister  at  Hampton,  Conn.,  (Eev.  Mr. 
Moseley,)  separated  by  sale  a  husband  and  wife  who 
were  both  of  them  members  of  his  own  church,  and 
who  had  been,  by  his  own  officiating  act  as  a  minis- 
ter, united  in  marriage.    Yet  no  legal  or  ecclesiasti- 


NO  FAMILY  EIGHTS. 


115 


cal  proceedings  grew  out  of  the  transaction.  Some 
thought  it  a  hard  case,  but  the  sufferers  were  only 
negroes  and  slaves. 

It  is  the  common  understanding  at  the  South, 
that  slaves  do  not  constitute  families.  It  is  the  com- 
mon understanding  of  the  country  at  large.  The 
American  Bible  Society,  many  years  ago,  proposed 
to  supply  each  family  in  the  United  States  with  a 
Bible.  After  a  long  effort,  it  was  announced  by  the 
Society  that  the  great  work  was  completed.  It  was 
afterwards  ascertained  that  no  part  of  the  supply 
went  to  the  then  two  and  a  half  millions  of  slaves. 
The  Society  made  no  apology  for  its  mistake,  nor 
acknowledged  that  it  had  committed  any.  Public 
sentiment  in  general  (with  exception  of  abolition- 
ists) attributed  to  them  no  error.  The  nation  knew 
nothing  about  families  of  slaves  ! 

The  practice  corresponds  with  the  theory.  The 
statement  that  follows  is  from  Sarah  M.  Grrimke, 
daughter  of  the  late  Judge  Grrimke,  of  Charleston, 
S.  C: 

A  slave  who  had  been  separated  from  his  wife, 
because  it  best  suited  the  convenience  of  his  owner, 
ran  away.  He  was  taken  up  on  the  plantation 
where  his  wife,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly  attached, 
then  lived.  His  only  object  in  running  away  was 
to  return  to  her ;  no  other  fault  was  attributed  to 
him.  For  this  offense  he  was  confined  in  the  stocks 
six  weeks^  in  a  miserable  hovel,  not  weather-tight. 
He  received  fifty  lashes  weekly  during  that  time,  was 
allowed  food  barely  sufficient  to  sustain  him,  and 


116  THE  AMEKICAK  SLAVE  CODE. 


when  released  from  confinement,  was  not  permitted 
to  return  to  his  wife.  His  master,  although  himself 
a  husband  and  a  father,  was  unmoved  by  the 
touching  appeals  of  the  slave,  who  entreated  that  he 
might  only  remain  with  his  wife,  promised  to  dis- 
charge his  duties  faithfully;  his  master  continued 
inexorable,  and  he  was  torn  from  his  wife  and 
family.  The  owner  of  this  slave  was  a  professing 
Christian,  in  full  membership  with  the  church,  and 
this  circumstance  occurred  while  he  was  in  his 
chamber,  during  his  last  illness."  (Weld's  Slavery 
as  it  is,"  p.  23.) 

The  following  is  from  Mrs.  Angelina  Grimke 
Weld,  sister  of  the  preceding  witness  : 

"Chambermaids  and  seamstresses  often  sleep  in 
their  mistresses'  apartments,  but  with  no  bedding  at 
all.  I  know  of  an  instance  of  a  woman  who  has 
been  married  eleven  years^  and  yet  ha^  never  been 
allowed  to  sleep  out  of  her  mistresses  chamber.  This  is 
a  great  hardship  to  slaves.  When  we  consider  that 
house  slaves  are  rarely  allowed  social  intercourse 
during  the  day^  as  their  work  generally  separates 
them,  the  barbarity  of  such  an  arrangement  is  obvi- 
ous. It  is  peculiarly  a  hardship  in  the  above  case, 
as  the  husband  of  the  woman  does  not  ^  belong '  to 
her  ^  owner,'  and  because  he  is  subject  to  dreadful 
attacks  of  illness,  and  he  can  have  but  little  atten- 
tion from  his  wife  in  the  day.  And  yet  her  mistress, 
who  is  an  old  lady,  gives  her  the  highest  character 
as  a  faithful  ser  vant,  and  told  a  friend  of  mine  that  she 
was  entirely  dependent  on  her  for  all  her  comforts; 


NO  FAMILY  RIGHTS. 


117 


she  dressed  and  undressed  her,  gave  her  all  her  food, 
and  was  so  necessary  to  her  that  she  could  not  do 
without  her.  I  may  add  that  this  couple  are  ten- 
derly attached  to  each  other." 

I  know  an  instance  in  which  the  husband  was  a 
slave,  and  the  wife  was  free.  During  the  illness  of 
the  former,  the  latter  was  allowed  to  come  and  nurse 
him ;  she  was  obliged  to  leave  the  work  by  which 
she  made  a  living,  and  come  to  stay  with  her  hus- 
band, and  thus  lose  weeks  of  her  time,  or  he  would 
have  suffered  for  want  of  proper  attention  ;  and  yet 
this  ^  owner '  made  her  no  compensation  for  her  ser- 
vices. He  had  long  been  a  faithful  and  a  favorite 
slave,  and  his  owner  was  a  woman  very  benevolent 
to  the  poor  whites."  She,  no  doubt,  only  thought 
how  kind  she  was  to  allow  her  to  come  and  stay  so 
long  in  her  yard."    (lb.,  p.  56.) 

Persons  who  own  plantations  and  yet  live  in  the 
cities  often  take  their  children  from  them  as  soon  as 
they  are  weaned,  and  send  them  into  the  country ; 
because  they  do  not  want  the  time  of  the  mother 
taken  up  with  attendance  upon  her  oion  children^  it 
being  too  valuable  to  the  mistress.  As  a  favor  she 
is  sometimes  permitted  to  go  to  see  them  once  a  year. 
So,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  field  slaves  happen  to 
have  children  of  an  age  suitable  to  the  convenience 
of  the  master,  they  are  tS-ken  from  their  parents  and 
brought  to  the  city.  Parents  are  almost  never  consult- 
ed as  to  the  disposition  to  he  raade  of  their  children^  and 
iJiey  have  as  little  control  over  them  as  have  domestic  ani- 
mah  over  the  disposal  of  their  young.    Every  natural 


il8  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

and  social  feeling  and  affection  are  violated  with  indif- 
ference. Slaves  are  treated  as  though  they  did  not 
possess  them."    (lb.,  pp.  56-7.) 

If  such  be  the  condition  of  domestic  or  house  ser- 
vants, in  the  best  and  most  refined  famihes  of  the 
South,  what  must  be  the  condition  of  field  slaves, 
under  the  direction  of  overseers,  on  the  plantations? 

^' Among  the  gangs  there  are  often  young  women, 
who  bring  their  children  to  the  fields,  and  lay  them 
in  a  fence  corner  while  they  are  at  work,  only  being 
permitted  to  nurse  them  at  the  option  of  the  over- 
seer. When  a  child  is  three  weeks  old,  a  woman  is 
considered  in  working  order.  I  have  seen  a  woman, 
with  her  young  child  strapped  to  her  back,  laboring 
the  whole  day  beside  a  man,  perhaps  the  father  of  the 
child,  and  he  not  permitted  to  give  her  any  assist- 
ance, himself  being  under  the  whip."  (Testimony  of 
L.  Sapington,  a  native  of  Maryland.    lb.,  p.  49.) 

On  page  157  of  the  same  book  may  be  found  the 
particulars  of  the  public  execution  of  a  negTo  in  a 
barbarous  manner,  by  burning  and  beheading,  after 
which  his  head  was  stuck  up  on  a  pole.  His  crime 
was  the  killing  of  a  white  man.  The  provocation 
was,  that  the  white  man  "  owned  his  wife,  and  was  in 
the  habit  of  sleeping  with  her.  The  negro  said  he 
killed  him,  and  he  believed  he  should  be  rewarded 
in  heaven  for  it." 

The  bearinsf  of  ^'the  legal  relation"  of  slave  own- 
ership upon  the  family^''  relation  may  be  seen  by 
such  advertisements  as  the  following,  which  abound 
in  the  Southern  papers.    They  are  selected  from 


NO  FAMILY  RIGHTS. 


119 


about  ^AzV^y.  similar  ones  in  Weld's  Slavery  as  it 
is,"  pp.  164-166 : 

From  the  Rickinond  Enquirer ^  Feb.  20,  1838. 

"$50  Eewaed. — Ean  away  from  the  subscriber, 
his  negro  man  Pauladore,  commonly  called  Paul.  I 
understand  Gen.  E.  Y.  Hayne^  has  purchdsed  his 
wife  and  children  from  H.  L.  PiNCKNEY,  Esq.,-!*  and 
lias  them  now  on  bis  plantation  at  Goose-creek, 
where,  no  doubt,  the  fellow  is  frequently  lurking, 

"T.  Davis." 

"  $25  Eeward. — Ean  away  from  the  subscriber,  a 
negro  woman  named  Matilda.  It  is  thought  she 
may  be  somewhere  up  James  Eiver,  as  she  was 
claimed  as  a  wife  by  some  boatman  in  Goochland. 

J.  Alvis." 

"$10  Eeward  for  a  negro  woman  named  Sally,  40 
years  old.  We  have  reason  to  believe  said  negro  to 
be  lurking  on  the  James  Eiver  Canal,  or  the  Green 
Spring  neighborhood,  where,  we  are  informed,  her 
husband  resides.  Polly  C.  Shields. 

''Mount  Elba,  Feb,  19,  1838." 

From  the  Savannah  Georgian,  July  8,  1837. 

''  Ean  away  from  the  subscriber,  his  man  J oe.  He 
visits  the  city  occasionally,  where  he  has  been  har 
bored  by  his  mother  and  sister.  I  will  give  one  hun- 
dred dollars  for  proof  sufficient  to  convict  his  harborers. 

^^E.  P.  T.  MoNGiisr." 


*  Ex-Governor  of  South  Carolina,  and  U.  S.  Senator, 
f  Member  of  Congress  from  South  Carolina. 


120  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


We  add  anotter,  on  page  156 : 

From  the  Wilmington  (K  C.)  Advertiser  of  July  13,  1838. 

Ean  away,  my  negro  man  Eichard.  A  reward 
of  $25  will  be  paid  for  his  apprehension,  DEAD  or 
ALIVE.  Satisfactory  proof  only  will  be  required 
of  his  being  KILLED.  He  has  with  him,  in  all 
probability,  HIS  WIFE  ELIZA,  who  ran  away  from 
Col,  Thompson^  now  a  resident  of  Alabama,  about 
the  time  he  commenced  his  journey  to  that  State. 

DURANT  H.  EhODES." 

We  have  some  reason  to  believe  that  this  Ehodes 
was  originally  from  New-England.  When  he  visits 
the  North  he  will  probably  tell  his  friends  that  he 
has  never  known  any  cruel  treatment  of  slaves. 
Should  he  dine  with  the  parish  pastor,  the  result 
would  perhaps  be  a  sermon  on  "  the  innocent  legal 
relation!" 

The  hair-splitters  in  logic  will  nevertheless  per- 
sist in  admonishing  us  to  distinguish  between  the 

relation"  and  its  abuse."  But  what,  we  demand, 
must  be  the  nature  of  a  "  relation"  that  is  constantly 
producing  such  fruits  ? 

Undoubtedly  there  are  slaveholders  who  would 
not  thas  advertise  slaves.  But  if,  in  refraining,  they 
are  governed  by  any  moral  principle^  it  must  be  a 
principle  at  variance  with  the  ^4egal  relation"  of 
slave-ownership  which  authorizes  such  acts  and  in- 
terposes no  check  or  disapprobation  of  them.  The 
very  idea  of  slsLYe-ownersMp  naturally  suggests  the 
right  of  doing  such  things.    And  when  slave-owner- 


NO  FAMILY  EIGHTS. 


121 


ship  is  held  to  be  legalized,  and  is  dignified  with  the 
name  of  a  "legal  relation" — and  when  these  results 
(which  some  call  "abuses")  are  neither  forbidden 
nor  discountenanced  by  the  authorities  that  establish 
the  said  "legal  relation,"  it  is  sheer  sophistry  to 
attempt  discriminating  between  them  $o  as  to  ap- 
prove the  one  and  condemn  the  other. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

UNLIMITED  POWER  OF  SLAVEHOLDERS. 

I'he  Power  of  the  Master  or  "Owner"  is  virtually  unlimited — The  submission 
required  of  the  Slave  is  unbounded — The  Slave  being  *'  Property"  can  have  no 
protection  against  the  Master,  and  has  no  remedy  or  redress  for  injunes  in- 
flicted by  him. 

This  proposition  is  substantially  involved  in  the 
legal  definition  of  slavery,  as  presented  in  our  first 
cliapter.  The  proof  and  illustration  of  it  has  been 
gradually  evolving  as  we  have  proceeded  thus  far. 
It  will  continue  to  accumulate  as  we  shall  in  future 
chapters  examine  the  topics  of  slave  labor,  slave 
sustenance  and  clothing,  slave  punishments,  and  the 
intellectual  and  religious  condition  of  slaves.  At 
every  step,  the  slave  will  have  been  found  wholly 
subject  to  his  master,  dependent  upon  him,  and  de- 
fenseless. In  this  chapter  we  shall  aim  only  to  pre- 
sent, in  a  condensed  form,  the  precise  doctrine  of  the 
Slave  Code  on  this  subject. 

If  the  slave  be  the  absolute  property  of  his  master 
— entirely  subject  to  his  will " — "  incapable  of  being^ 
injured" — "  chattels  personal,  to  all  intents,  construc- 
tions, and  purposes  whatsoever"  —  ''not  ranked 


POWER  OF  THE  MASTER. 


123 


among  sentient  beings,  but  among  things  " — the  sub- 
jects of  absolute  purchase  and  sale — of  seizure  for 
debt — of  inheritance  and  distribution — incapable  of 
possessing  property' — "  not  entitled  to  the  conditions 
of  matrimony" — "not  capable  of  constituting  fami- 
lies " — (and  all  this  has  been  shown) — then  the  mas- 
ter is  indeed  absolute,  and  the  slave  defenseless,  of 
course.  And  any  attempt  by  the  Legislature  or  by 
the  Courts  to  afford  him  protection,  would  be,  in 
effect,  an  attempt  to  subvert  "  the  legal  relation  of 
master  and  slave,"  and  overturn  the  tenure  of  slave- 
ownership  entirely. 

The  question  before  us  is,  whether  any  such  at- 
tempts have  been  made,  and  if  so,  how  much,  in  a  way 
of  limitation  and  protection,  has  been  accomplished. 

We  repeat,  here,  a  quotation  before  made  from 
Judge  Stroud:  "It  is  plain  that  the  dominion  of 
the  master  is  as  unlimited  as  that  which  is  tolerated 
by  the  laws  of  any  civilized  country  in  relation  to 
brute  animals — to  quadrupeds^  to  use  the  words  of 
the  civil  law."    (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  24.) 

We  quote  further  and  still  more  specific  state- 
ments of  the  law,  from  the  same  writer : 

"The  master  may  determine  the  kind,  and  degree, 
and  time  of  labor  to  which  the  slave  shall  be  sub- 
jected. 

"  The  master  may  supply  the  slave  with  such  food 
and  clothing  only,  both  as  to  quantity  and  quality, 
as  he  may  think  proper  or  find  convenient. 

"  The  master  may,  at  his  discretion,  inflict  any 
punishment  upon  the  person  of  his  slave. 


124 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


^' All  the  power  of  the  master  over  his  slave  may 
be  exercised  not  by  himself  only  in  person,  but  by 
any  one  whom  he  may  depute  as  his  agent. 

A  slave  cannot  be  a  party  before  a  judicial  tri- 
bunal, in  any  species  of  action,  against  his  master, 
no  matter  how  atrocious  may  have  been  the  injury 
received  from  him. 

^'  Slaves  cannot  redeem  themselves,  nor  obtain  a 
change  of  masters,  though  cruel  treatment  may  have 
rendered  such  change  necessary  for  their  personal 
safety." 

Slaves  being  objects  of  property^  if  injured  by 
others,  their  owners  may  bring  suit,  and  recover 
damage  for  the  injury."    (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  25.) 
To  this  we  will  add : 

The  master  may  wholly  forbid  and  prevent  the 
education,  the  moral  and  religious  instruction  of  his 
slaves — their  attendance  on  religious  meetings  and 
religious  worship,  either  among  themselves  or  at 
meetings  conducted  by  white  persons. 

There  is  not  a  slave  in  the  United  States  that  can 
claim  these  benefits  as  legal  rights,  or  that  can  enjoy 
these  privileges,  in  any  degree,  except  with  the  leave 
of  their    owners''^  or  their  agents. 

There  is  not  a  slave-owner  in  the  United  States, 
however  ignorant,  vulgar,  degraded,  immoral,  and 
irreligious,  that  does  not  hold  this  authority  over 
each  and  all  of  his  slaves,  however  pious  or  intelli- 
gent they  may  be.  And  this  authority,  involved  in 
slave-ownership,  is  part  and  parcel  of  ''the  legal 
relation  of  master  and  slave." 


POWER  OF  THE  MASTER. 


125 


There  is  not  a  slave  State,  or  slave  Territory  or 
District  under  tlie  Federal  jurisdiction,  that  does  not, 
by  its  Slave  Code,  extend  its  sanction  audits  guaranty 
to  this  power  of  the  slave-owner. 

We  speak  here  only  of  the  power  of  the  individual 
who  holds  slaves.  The  laius  forbidding  education  and 
the  free  exercise  of  religion  will  be  cdnsidered  in 
another  connection. 

^'A  statu  liber  (a  slave  minor,  entitled  to  freedom 
at  the  age  of  twenty-one)  has  (in  the  mean  time) 
"  no  action  at  law  for  ill  treatment^  Dorothee  vs. 
Coquillon  et  al.,  Jan.  Term,  1829.  (19  Martin's 
Louisiana  Eep.,  350.  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery, 
pp.  108-9.) 

No  resistance  must  be  made  by  a  slave  to  his 
master. 

^'  While  the  institution  of  slavery  exists,  every  thing 
like  resistance  to  the  master's  lawful  authority  should 
be  decisively  checked.  Strict  subordination  must  be 
exacted  from  the  slave,  or  bloodshed  and  murders 
will  unavoidably  ensue.  The  laws  of  the  slave- 
holding  States  demand,  however,  a  much  larger 
concession  of  power  to  the  master  than  is  here 
granted :  t?iey  demand  that  THE  LIFE  of  the  slave 
shall  be  in  the  MASTEE'S  KEEPING— that  the 
slave,  having  the  physical  ability  to  avoid  the  inflic- 
tion of  a  barbarous  and  vindictive  punishment  by  his 
master,  shall  not  be  permitted  to  do  so."  (Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  97.) 

We  reserve  a  quotation  from  Prince's  Digest  and 
from  several  statutes,  until,  in  treating  of  the  civil 


126 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


relations  of  the  slave,  we  shall  use  them  to  prove 
more  than  our  present  argument  requires,  viz. :  that 
the  same  absolute  submission  of  the  slave  is  required 
by  the  laws,  not  merely  towards  the    owner"  and  * 
his  agent,  but  towards    all  white  persons  P'' 

Judge  Euffin,  of  North  Carolina,  in  the  case  of 
State  vs,  Mann,  decided  as  follows :  "  The  power  of 
the  master  must  be  absolute^  to  render  the  submission 
of  the  slave  perfect  It  would  not  do  to  allow  the 
rights  of  the  master  to  be  brought  into  discussion  in 
the  courts  of  justice.  The  slave,  to  EEMAIN  a  slave, 
must  be  sensible  that  there  is  NO  APPEAL  from 
his  master."  (2  Devereaux's  N.  Carolina  Eep., 
263.) 

This  justifies  our  statement  that  the  legal  rela- 
tion of  master  and  slave  "  is  responsible  for  all  this 
despotic  power. 

In  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  244-8,  there  is 
a  full  report  of  the  opinion  of  Judge  Euffin,  from 
which  we  have  taken  the  preceding  extract.  We 
shall  *revert  to  it  again,  and  make  further  extracts, 
when,  in  another  chapter,  we  come  to  treat  of 

Punishments  of  Slaves  by  the  owners  and  hirers." 
An  examination  of  that  topic  will  more  fully  illus- 
trate the  general  proposition  at  the  head  of  this 
chapter,  for  the  correctness  of  which  we  here  cite  a 
few  personal  testimonies. 

The  whole  commerce  between  master  and  slave 
is  a  perpetual  exercise  of  the  most  boisterous  pas- 
sions, the  most  unremitting  despotism  on  the  one 
part,  and  degrading  submission  on  the  other." 


POWER  OF  THE  MASTER. 


127 


Thus  nursed,  educated,  and  daily  exercised  in  tyr- 
anny,'^ &c.  (Jefferson.) 

"I  knew  a  gentleman  of  great  benevolence  and 
generosity  of  character,"  ^'  speak  of  breaking  down 
the  spirit  of  a  slave,  under  the  lash,  as  perfectly 
right."  (Angelina  Grimke  Weld,  ^'  Slavery  as  it 
is,"  p.  54.) 

There  was  no  law  for  the  negro,  but  that  of  the 
overseer's  whip."    (L.  Sapinglon,  lb.,  p.  49.) 

The  Savannah  Eiver  Baptist  Association  ap- 
provingly recognized  the  unlimited  authority  of  the 
master,  when  they  maintained  his  authority  to  annul 
slave  marriages,  and  to  compel  new  sexual  connec- 
tions between  Baptist  husbands  and  wives  whom  he 
had  forcibly  severed !  The  people  are  here  found 
to  be  no  better  than  their  laws,  and  the  Church  no 
better  than  the  people.  Hence  they  consider  the 
*4egal  relation  an  innocent  one."  It  stands  precisely 
on  their  own  moral  level. 

This  chapter  may  serve  as  a  key  to  a  number  ot 
the  chapters  that  follow,  as  it  contains  the  principle 
upon  which  their  specifications  are  based,  the  absolute 
authority  of  the  master.  Those  chapters,  in  their  turn, 
will  furnish  illustrations  and  evidences  of  the  truth 
of  this. 


CHAPTER  X. 


LABOR     OF  SLAVES. 

The  Slave,  being  a  Chattel,  may  be  worked  at  the  discretion  of  his  Owner,  as 
other  working  Chattels  are. 

If  the  Legislature  of  one  of  our  Northern  States 
should  enact  a  law  restricting  farmers  to  a  specified 
number  of  hours  per  day,  in  which  their  oxen  and 
horses  should  be  worked ;  and  if  the  Act  should  be 
prefaced  with  a  preamble,  stating  that  many  farmers 
were  in  the  habit  of  over-working  their  cattle,  it 
would  be  thought  a  severe  reflection  upon  the  farm- 
ers. A  stranger  would  conclude  that  they  were  an 
inhuman  as  well  as  a  short-sighted  class  of  people, 
to  treat  their  working  beasts  in  that  manner.  They 
would  eagerly  read  the  Act,  to  see  how  many  hours 
were  allowed  as  a  relief  to  the  poor  beasts.  And 
they  would  necessarily  infer  that  the  practice  had 
been  to  work  the  cattle  a  longer  time  than  that  pre- 
scribed by  the  law. 

Let  us  now  look  at  some  of  the  laws  of  the  slave 
States. 

South  Carolina,  (Act  of  1740.) — Whereas, 
many  owners  of  slaves,  and  others  who  have  the 


LABOR  OF  SLAVES. 


129 


care,  management,  and  overseeing  of  slaves,  do  con- 
fine them  so  closely  to  hard  labor  tJiat  they  have  not  suf- 
fixdent  time  for  natural  rest^  Be  it  therefore  enacted. 
That  if  any  owner  of  slaves,  or  other  persons,  who 
shall  have  the  care,  management,  or  overseeing  of 
slaves,  shall  work  or  put  any  such  slave  or  slaves  to 
labor  more  than  fifteen  hours  in  twenty-four  hours, 
from  the  25th  day  of  March  to  the  25th  day  of  Sep- 
tember; or  more  than  fourteen  hours  in  twenty-four 
hours,  from  the  25th  day  of  September  to  the  25th 
day  of  March,  every  such  person  shall  forfeit  any 
sum  not  exceeding  twenty  pounds  nor  under  five 
pounds  current  money,  for  every  time  he,  she,  or 
they  shall  offend  herein,  at  the  discretion  of  the  jus- 
tice before  whom  the  complaint  shall  be  made."  (2 
Brevard's  Digest,  243.) 

How  much  longer  than  fourteen  or  fifteen  hours  per 
day,  in  winter  and  summer,  the  South  Carolina  plant- 
ers had  been  in  the  habit  of  working  their  slaves,  we 
are  left  to  conjecture  !  But  we  know  that  the  laws 
of  Maryland,  Virginia,  and  Georgia  forbid  that  the 
criminals  in  their  penitentiaries  shall  be  compelled  to 
labor  more  than  ten  hours  a  day,"  (Jay's  Inquiry, 
p.  130 ;)  and  not  exceeding  nine  hours  in  some  por- 
tions of  the  year,  and  eight  during  the  three  other 
months,  (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  29.)  In  Jamaica,  (before 
emancipation,)  "besides  many  holidays  which  are 
by  law  accorded  to  the  slave,  ten  hours  a  day  is  the 
extent  of  the  time  which  the  slave  is  compelled, 
ordinarily^  to  work."  (2  Edwards'  W.  Indies,  book 
iv.,  chap.  5,  &c.) 

6* 


130  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Georgia,  (Act  of  1817.) — '^Any  owner  of  a  slave 
or  slaves,  who  shall  cruelly  treat  such  slave  or  slaves 
by  unnecessary  or  excessive  whipping,  by  withhold- 
ing proper  food  and  nourishment,  by  requiring  greater 
labor  from  such  slave  or  slaves  than  he  or  she  or  they 
may  be  able  to  perform,  by  not  affording  proper 
clothing,  whereby  the  health  of  such  slave  or  slaves 
may  be  injured  or  impaired^  every  such  owner  or  own- 
ers of  slaves  shall,  upon  sufficient  information  being 
laid  before  the  grand  jury,  be  by  said  grand  jury  pre- 
sented, whereupon  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  attor- 
ney or  solicitor  general  to  prosecute  said  owner  or 
owners,  who,  on  conviction,  shall  be  sentenced  to 
pay  a  fine,  or  be  imprisoned,  at  the  discretion  of  th.e 
Court."    (Prince's  Digest,  376.) 

In  this  act,  the  "  owner''''  only  is  specified,  and  not 
the  overseer,  or  agent. 

Louisiana,  (Act  of  July,  1806.) — "As  for  the 
hours  of  work  and  rest  which  are  to  be  assigned  to 
slaves  in  summer,  the  old  usages  of  the  territory 
shall  be  adhered  to,  to  wit :  The  slaves  shall  be  al- 
lowed half  an  hour  for  breakfast  during  the  whole 
year ;  from  the  first  day  of  May  to  the  first  day  of 
November  they  shall  be  allowed  two  hours  for  din- 
ner ;  and  from  the  first  day  of  November  to  the  first 
day  of  May,  one  hour  and  a  half  for  dinner  Pro- 
vided^ however,  that  the  owners  who  will  themselves 
take  the  trouble  of  causing  to  be  prepared  the  meals 
of  their  slaves,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  authorized 
to  abridge,  by  half  an  hour  per  day,  the  time  fixed 
for  their  rest."  (1  Martin's  Digest,  610-12.) 
5 


LABOR  OF  SLAVES. 


131 


This  relic  of  ^^tlie  old  usages"  under  the  Spanish 
and  French  laws  may  be  considered,  like  the  Louisi- 
ana laws  before  quoted,  an  exception  to  the  general 
code  of  American  Slavery.  Yet  even  here  the  hours 
of  beginning  and  ending  the  day's  labor  are  not  spe- 
cified, and  consequently,  the  hours  of  labor,  per  day, 
are  not  limited  nor  ascertained.  The  khown  custom 
of  night- work  in  boiling  sugar  is  not  touched  by  this 
statute. 

In  Georgia  and  in  Mississippi,  there  are  laws  for- 
bidding the  unnecessary  labor  of  slaves  on  the  Sab- 
bath.— This  is  all  the  information  before  us.  In 
most  of  the  slave  States,  there  are  no  laws  limiting 
slave  labor.    (See  Stroud,  p.  26.) 

One  single  consideration  is  sufficient  to  show  that 
the  limitations  just  quoted  are  of  no  practical  value. 

No  SLAVE  AND  NO  FREE  COLORED  PERSON,  IN  THE 

SLAVE  States,  can  be  a  witness  against  a  white 
PERSON.  (lb.,  27.)  Slaveholders  would  not  be  for- 
ward to  prosecute  each  other  for  ill  treatment  of 
slaves.  And  many  of  the  non-slaveholding  whites, 
at  the  South,  are  a  servile  and  degraded  class,  not 
daring  to  offend  the  slaveholders. 

The  celebrated  George  Whitefield,  in  a  "Letter  to 
the  Inhabitants  of  Maryland,  Virginia,  North  and 
South  Carolina,"  in  1739,  (after  having  travelled 
among  them,)  says:  "Your  slaves,  I  believe,  work 
as  hard,  if  not  harder,  than  the  horses  whereon  you 
ride.  These^  after  their  work  is  done,  are  fed,  and 
taken  proper  care  of,  but  many  negroes,  when 
wearied  with  labor  in  your  plantations,  have  been 


132  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


obliged  to  grind  their  own  corn,  after  their  return 
home." 

John  Woolman,  in  his  Journal,  under  date  of  1757, 
speaks  of  the  labor  of  slaves  as  "heavy,  being  fol- 
lowed at  their  business  in  the  field  by  a  man  with  a 
whip,  hired  for  that  purpose."  (Life  of  Woolman, 
p.  74.) 

The  following  are  specimens  of  a  great  amount  of 
similar  testimony  recorded  in  Weld's  Slavery  as  it 
is,"  p.  35  and  onward: 

"  So  laborioics  is  the  task  of  raising,  beating,  and 
cleaning  rice,  that  had  it  been  possible  to  obtain 
European  servants  in  sufficient  numbers,  thousands 
and  tens  of  thousands  of  them  must  have  perished." 
(History  of  Carolina,  vol.  I.  p.  30.) 

Hon.  Alexander  Smythe,  of  Va.,  in  a  speech  in 
Congress  on  the  Missouri  question,  January  28, 1820, 
argued,  on  the  ground  of  humanity,  in  favor  of  ex- 
tending slavery  into  Missouri,  that  the  slaves  would 
be  moix  comfortable  there  than  in  the  older  States, 
where  they  are  "forced  to  incessant  toil,"  "hard- 
worked,"  &c.  If  you  "hem  them  in  where  they  are," 
you  "  doom  them  to  hard  labor."  It  would  be  ex- 
treme cruelty  to  the  blacks." 

Henry  Clay,  in  1834,  in  a  conversation  with  James 
G.  Birney,  expressed  a  belief  (contrary  to  his  former 
impressions)  that  at  the  far  South,  the  births  among 
the  slaves  were  not  equal  to  the  deaths.  He  related 
what  he  had  heard  and  believed,  that  an  overseer  in 
Louisiana  "  worked  his  hands  so  closely,  that  one  of 
the  women  brought  forth  a  child  while  engaged  in 


LABOR  OF  SLAVES. 


133 


tLe  labors  of  the  field."  He  was  also  told  of  a  plan- 
tation containing  from  ^  twenty  to  thirty  young 
women  in  the  prime  of  life,"  and  the  proprietor  told 
him  there  had  not  been  a  child  born  among  them  for 
the  last  two  or  three  years,  although  they  all  had 
husbands. 

We  have  before  us  much  more  testimony  to  the 
same  point ;  also,  to  the  fact,  that  the  slaves  are  com- 
monly obhged  to  work  from  daylight  till  dark,  or 
as  long  as  they  can  see." 

^'Everybody  here  (Natchez,  Miss.)  knows  over- 
driving to  be  one  of  the  most  common  occurrences. 
The  planters  do  not  deny  it,  except,  perhaps,  to 
Northerners."    (A.  A.  Stone,  Theological  Student.) 

In  our  Chapter  V.  on  the  "  Uses  of  Slave  Property," 
it  was  shown  how  coolly  and  deliberately  gangs  of 
slaves  are  used  wp  on  the  sugar  plantations  of  Louis- 
iana, once  in  seven  or  eight  years.  In  Mr.  Weld^s 
book,  before  us,  we  have  many  testimonies  that  cor- 
roborate the  general  fact.  We  spare  room  for  only 
one,  which  comes  on  the  authority  of  Eev.  John  O. 
Choules,  Baptist  minister,  once  of  NcAV-Bedford, 
Mass.,  afterwards  of  Buffalo,  New- York.  While 
attending  the  Baptist  Triennial  Convention  at  Eich- 
mond,  Va.,  in  1835,"  says  Mr.  C,  ^^I  had  a  conver- 
sation with  an  officer  of  the  Baptist  church  in  that 
city,  at  whose  house  I  was  a  guest.  I  asked  him  if 
he  did  not  apprehend  that  the  slaves  would  eventually 
rise  and  exterminate  their  masters?  'Why,'  said 
the  gentleman,  'I  did  use  to  apprehend  such  a  catas- 
trophe, but  God  has  made  a  providential  opening,  a 


134  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

merciful  safety  valve^  and  now  I  do  not  feel  alarmed, 
in  the  prospect  of  what  is  coming.'  *  What  do  yon 
mean,'  said  Mr.  Choules,  'by  Providence  opening  a 
merciful  safety  valve?'  'Why,'  said  the  gentle- 
man, '  I  will  tell  you.  The  slave-traders  come  from 
the  cotton  and  sugar  plantations  of  the  South,  and 
are  willing  to  buy  up  more  slaves  than  we  can  part 
with.  We  must  keep  a  stock  for  the  purpose  of  Tear- 
ing slaves,  but  we  part  with  the  most  valuable,  and 
at  the  same  time  the  most  dangerous;  and  the  demand 
is  very  constant,  and  is  likely  to  be  so,  for  when  they 
go  to  those  Southern  States,  the  average  existence  is 
ONLY  FIVE  YEARS!" 

The  people,  including  church  members,  are  not 
better  than  their  laws. 


CHAPTEK  XI. 


FOOD,  CLOTHING,  AND  DWELLINGS  OF  SLAVES. 

The  Slave,  as  a  Chattel,  is  fed  or  famished,  covered  or  uncovered,  sheltered 
or  unsheltered,  at  the  discretion  or  convenience  of  his  Owner,  like  other 
working  Animals. 

Louisiana. — Every  owner  shall  be  lield  to  give 
his  slaves  the  quantity  of  provisions  hereinafter  spe- 
cified, to  wit,  one  barrel  of  Indian  corn,^  or,  the  equi- 
valent thereof  in  rice,  beans,  or  other  grain^  and  a 
pint  of  salt,  and  to  deliver  the  same  to  the  slaves,  in 
kind,  every  month,  and  never  in  money,  under 
penalty  of  a  fine  of  ten  dollars  for  every  offense." 
(1  Martin's  Digest,  p.  610.    Act  of  July  7,  1806.) 

The  slave  who  shall  not  have,  on  the  property 
of  his  owner,  a  lot  of  ground  to  cultivate  on  his 
own  account,  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  from  said 
owner  one  linen  shirt  and  pantaloons  for  the  sum- 
mer, and  a  linen  shirt  and  woollen  greatcoat  and 
pantaloons  for  the  winter."  (1  Martin's  Digest,  610.) 
Neither  the  quantity  nor  the  quality  of  the  '4ot  of 


*  Meaning  a  flour  barrel  full  of  Indian  corn  in  the  ear,  equal  to 
about  li  bushels  of  shelled  corn. 


136  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


ground  "  is  specified,  nor  the  amount  of  time  to  be 
allowed  for  tilling  it. 

North  Carolina. — '^In  case  any  slave  or  slaves, 
wlio  shall  not  appear  to  have  been  fed  and  clothed 
according  to  the  intent  and  meaning  of  this  Act,  that 
is  to  say,  to  have  been  sufficiently  clothed,  and  to 
have  constantly  received  for  the  preceding  year  an 
allowance  of  not  less  than  a  quart  of  corn^  per  day, 
shall  be  convicted  of  stealing  any  corn,  cattle,  &c.,  &c., 
from  any  person  not  the  owner  of  said  slave  or 
slaves,  such  injured  person  shall  and  may  maintain 
an  action  of  trespass  against  the  master,  owner,  or 
possessor  of  such  slave,  &c.,  and  shall  recover  his  or 
her  damages."    (Hayward's  Manual,  524-5.) 

Georgia. — ^The  Act  of  1817  (as  quoted  in  the  last 
previous  Chapter  on  Labor)  provides  for  the  punish- 
ment of  owners"  of  slaves  who  *'by  excessive  whip- 
ping, hy  withholding  proper  food  and  sustenance^  by 
requiring  greater  labor,"  &c.,  shall  ^'cruelly  treat" 
such  slaves,  "whereby  the  health  of  such  slave,  &c., 
may  be  injured  or  impair ed^ 

Another  Act,  of  Dec.  12,  1815,  is  as  follows: 

"Sect.  1.  From  and  after  the  passing  of  this  Act,  it 
shall  be  the  duty  of  the  inferior  courts  of  the  several 
counties  in  this  State,  on  receiving  information,  on 
oath,  of  any  infirm  slave  or  slaves  in  a  suffering  con- 
dition, from  the  neglect  of  the  owner  or  owners  of 
said  slave  or  slaves,  to  make  particular  inquiries  into 


*  It  will  be  observed  that  in  neither  of  these  legal  rations  of 
food  is  any  mention  made  of  meat. 


FOOD — CLOTHING  SHELTER. 


137 


the  situation  of  such  slave  or  slaves,  and  render  such 
relief  as  they  in  their  discretion  shall  think  proper. 

"Sect.  2.  The  said  courts  may  and  are  hereby 
authorized  to  sue  for  and  recover  from  the  owner  or 
owners  of  such  slave  or  slaves,  the  amount  that  may 
be  appropriated  for  the  rehef  of  such  slave  or  slaves, 
in  any  court  having  jurisdiction  of  the  same ;  any 
law,  usage,  or  custom,  to  the  contrary  notwithstand- 
ing."   (Prince's  Digest,  460.) 

South  Carolina. — ^^In  case  any  person,  &c.,  who 
shall  be  owner,  or  who  shall  have  the  care,  govern- 
ment, or  charge  of  any  slave  or  slaves,  shall  deny, 
neglect,  or  refuse  to  allow  such  slave  or  slaves,  under 
his  or  her  charge,  suflS.cient  clothing,  covering,  or 
food,  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful  for  any  person  or 
persons,  on  behalf  of  said  slave  or  slaves,  to  make 
complaint  to  the  next  neighboring  justice  in  the  pa- 
rish where  such  slave  or  slaves  live,  or  are  usually 
employed,  and  the  said  justice  shall  summon  the 
party  against  whom  such  complaint  shall  be  made, 
and  shall  inquire  of,  hear,  and  determine  the  same; 
and  if  the  said  justice  shall  find  the  said  complaint  to 
be  true,  or  that  such  person  will  not  exculpate  or  clear 
himself  from  the  charge  hy  his  or  her  own  oath,  which 
such  person  shall  be  at  liberty  to  do,  in  all  cases 
where  positive  proof  is  not  given  of  the  offense,  such 
justice  shall  and  may  make  such  orders  upon  the 
same,  for  the  relief  of  such  slave  or  slaves,  as  he  in 
his  discretion  shall  think  fit ;  and  shall  and  m  ay  set 
and  impose  a  fine  or  penalty  on  any  person  who  may 
offend  in  the  premises,  in  any  sum  not  exceeding 


138  THE 'AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


twenty  pounds,  current  money,  for  each,  offense,  to 
be  levied  by  warrant  of  distress  and  sale  of  the  offend- 
er's goods,"  &c.  &c.     (2  Brevard's  Digest,  p.  241. 
Similar  in  Louisiana,  1  Martin's  Digest,  638-40.) 
On  these  enactments  we  remark : 

1.  They  embrace  the  legislation  of  only  four  States. 
The  other  slaveholding  States,  so  far  as  we  are  in- 
formed, have  never  pretended  to  prescribe  to  the  slave 
owner  the  kind  or  amount  of  food  he  must  furnish 
his  slaves.  He  can  starve  them  if  he  pleases  to  do 
so,  and  there  is  no  law  to  prevent  it. 

2.  Considering  that  the  slave  can  bring  no  suit 
against  his  master ;  that  he  is  unprovided  with  a  pro- 
tector, and  that  neither  the  slave  nor  any  other  colored 
person  can  testify  against  a  white  man ;  and  that,  in 
case  of  any  interference  in  his  behalf,  whether  success- 
ful or  otherwise,  the  slave  still  remains  entirely  sub- 
ject to  the  will  of  a  master  to  whom  he  belongs,"  and 
who  can  avenge  himself  upon  him  with  impunity  in 
secret,  the  very  next  day,  it  is  quite  certain  that  such 
enactments  can  avail  little  or  nothing  for  his  benefit, 
while  he  remains  a  slave. 

3.  Aside  from  all  this,  the  law  of  North  Carolina 
was  evidently  designed  for  the  benefit,  not  of  the 
slave,  but  of  the  persons"  from  whom  a  hungry 
slave  might  steal"  a  subsistence.  It  prescribes  no 
relief  to  the  slave,  and  no  punishment  to  his  master, 
but  only  subjects  him  to  the  payment  of  ^'damages" 
for  the  food  his  slave  has  eaten !  Just  as  in  the  case 
of  an  unruly  horse  or  ox  that  should  break  into  a 
neighbor's  crib  !    It  does  not  even  provide  for  the 


FOOD — CLOTHING — SHELTER. 


139 


huLiigry  slave's  exemption  from  punisliment  by  his 
master  or  by  the  magistrate,  for  his  ''stealing"  to 
appease  hunger.  There  is  no  humanity  in  this  law. 
It  is  a  monument  of  the  barbarity  of  its  framers  and 
of  the  slaveholders. 

4.  The  Greorgia  Act  of  1817,  strictly  construed, 
imposes  no  punishment  on  a  master  who  shall 
''cruelly  treat"  his  slave  by  "excessive  whipping," 
or  by  withholding  proper  food,  or  by  "requiring 
greater  labor,"  &c.  All  these  acts  of  "cruelty"  must 
be  combined  in  each  instance,  or  the  statute  fails  to 
apply  to  the  case.  Even  then,  it  is  not  reached, 
unless  "the  health"  of  the  slave  be  "injured  or 
impaired."  There  may  be  "cruelty"  by  "excessive 
whipping,"  by  hunger,  and  by  excessive  labor,  but  if 
the  subject  of  all  this  "cruelty"  retains  his  "  health," 
the  "cruelty"  is  not  to  be  punished. 

5.  The  Georgia  Act  of  1815  applies  only  to  the 
case  of  "  infirm  slaves."  Other  slaves  "  in  a  suffering 
condition  from  the  neglect  of  the  owner"  are  not 
provided  for.  It  requires  "information  on  oath^'''' 
(which  no  colored  person  can  give,)  before  a  legal 
inquiry  can  be  commenced  !  The  facts  must  be  first 
proved  before  the  process  can  begin,  and  proved, 
too,  without  the  testimony  of  the  sufferer !  It  shall 
be  "  the  duty'''  of  the  courts  to  render  such  relief  as 
they  think  proper.  From  whence  the  supply  is  to 
be  obtained,  unless  from  the  pockets  of  the  judges, 
does  not  appear.  (We  have  copied  the  entire  act.) 
They  are  not  authorized  to  order  an  execution 
against  the  delinquent  "owner"  on  their  judgment. 


140  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

Instead  of  this,  the  judges  are  authorized  (not  di 
reeted)  to  become  suitors  themselves,  as  a  ^' court," 
in  ANOTHER  court,  to  collect  of  the  owner  the 
amount  of  the  appropriation,  if  they  can ;  and  if 
not,  put  up  with  the  loss  as  they  can,  costs  and  all ! 
Where  shall  we  find  a  parallel  to  this  farce  ? 

6.  The  South  Carolina  Act  must  also  be  useless  for 
the  want  of  positive  proof,"  (as  the  slave  cannot 
testify,)  in  the  absence  of  which  the  defendant  is 
cleared  by  his  own  oath, 

7.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  these  laws,  on  the 
whole,  are  no  better  than  none.  We  should  not 
anticipate,  from  their  operation,  any  better  provision 
for  the  clothing  and  sustenance  of  slaves,  in  these 
four  States,  than  in  the  other  slave  States,  where  no 
laws  exist.  We  are  not  aware  that  there  is  any  per- 
ceptible difference  in  fact.  And  we  may  extend  the 
remark  to  the  laws  of  the  four  States  mentioned  in 
the  previous  chapter,  on  the  subject  of  slav^  labor. 
The  principle  of  slave-ownership^  viz,^  human  chat- 
telhood^  is  not  impaired  or  infringed  by  them.  The 
master  has  the  power  in  his  own  hands.  He  may  do 
what  he  wills  with  his  own.    Such,  at  every  point,  is 

"THE  LEGAL  RELATION  OF  MASTER  AND  SLAVE." 

From  the  law,  we  now  turn  to  the  prevailing 
practice.  From  the  former  we  may  anticipate  the 
latter.  In  the  work  to  which  we  have  so  often 
referred  (Weld's  "  Slavery  as  it  is")  may  be  found 
a  great  amount  of  authentic  testimony  of  highly 
respectable  witnesses,  of  former  and  later  times,  for 


FOOD — CLOTHING  SHELTER. 


141 


which  we  cannot  spare  room,  but  the  substance  is 
as  follows : 

Hunger. — Slaves  in  Virginia  (1820)  are  ^411  fed." 
They  are  doomed  to  scarcity  and  hunger."  (Alex. 
Smythe,  M.  0.)  In  1739,  they  ^^had  not  sufficient 
food  to  eat ;  they  were  scarcely  permitted  to  pick  up 
the  crumbs  that  fell  from  their  masters'  tables." 
(Eev.  Geo.  Whitefield.) — They  are  ^'deprived  of  need 
ful subsistence."  (Eev.  Geo.  Bourne.) — In  1791  ''they 
were  supplied  with  barely  enough  to  keep  them  from 
starving."  (Dr.  Jonathan  Edwards,  of  Connecticut.) — 
In  Georgia  "their  allowance  is  often  not  adequate  to 
the  support  of  a  laboring  man."  (Thomas  Clay,  Esq., 
a  slaveholder.) — In  Tennessee  "thousands  are  pressed 
with  the  gnawings  of  hunger."  (Rev.  John  Rankin.) — 
In  North  Carolina,  1826,  "the  greater  part  of  them 
go  half  starved,  much  of  the  time."  (Moses  and 
Wm.  Swain.) — In  Louisiana,  1835,  "  there  is  a  good 
deal  of  suffering  from  hunger" — "  utter  famishment, 
during  a  great  portion  of  the  year."  (A.  A.  Stone.) — 
In  Mississippi,  "  half  starved."    (Tobias  Boudinot.) 

Kinds  of  Food. — The  general  testimony  is,  that 
slaves  are  allowed  meat  only  as  an  occasional  "in- 
dulgence or  favor" — "at  Christmas,"  &c.  &c.  Expe- 
riments have  been  made  with  cotton  seed,  as  a  sub- 
stitute in  part  for  corn.  Gen.  Wade  Hampton  is  said 
to  have  tried  the  experiment,  till,  as  he  himself  de- 
clared with  an  oath,  his  slaves  "died  like  rotten 
sheep."  This  statement  was  furnished  by  "a  lady 
of  high  respectability  and  great  moral  worth,"  to  "a 
clergyman  in  the  West,  extensively  known  both  as 


142 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


a  preacher  and  a  writer.  His  name  is  with  the 
Executive  Committee  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery 
Society."  (Weld's  ''American  Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  29.) 

Quantity. — "The  quantity  allowed  by  custom 
is  a  peck  of  corn  a  week."  (Thos.  Clay,  Esq.,  Geor- 
gia, 1833.)  Same  testimony  by  W.  C.  Gildersleeve, 
now  of  Wilkesbarre,  Pa. ;  and  Eev.  Horace  Moulton, 
of  Marlboro,  Mass. — ^both  once  resident  in  Georgia. 

Maryland:  Same  quantity,  1788.  (Baltimore  J. c?i;er-  ' 
tiser.) — Florida :  A  quart  of  corn  a  day,  to  a  fall  task 
hand,  with  a  modicum  of  salt.  Kind  masters  allowed 
a  peck  of  corn  a  week.  Some  masters  allowed  no 
salt."  (Wm.  Ladd,  once  a  Florida  slaveholder,  since 
of  Minot,  Me.)  —  North  Carolina:  Seven  quarts  of 
meal^  or  eight  quarts  of  small  rice,  for  one  week.' 
(Nehemiah  Caulkins,  Waterford,  Ct. ;  resident  in 
North  Carolina  eleven  winters.) — ^Virginia :  A  pint 
of  corn  meal  and  a  salt  herring  is  the  allowance,  (for 
one  meal,)  or,  in  lieu  of  the  herring,  a  'dab'  of  fat 
meat  of  about  the  same  value.  I  have  known  the 
sour  milk  and  clauber  to  be  served  out  to  the  hands, 
when  there  was  an  abundance  of  milk  on  the  plan- 
tation. This  is  a  luxury,  not  often  afforded."  (Eev. 
C.  S.  Renshaw,  a  native  Virginian.) 

John  Woolman,  in  his  Journal,  (1757,)  makes  the 
general  statement,  that  "they  have  in  common  little 
else  allowed  but  one  'peek  of  Indian  corn  and  some 
salt,  for  one  week,  with  a  few  potatoes;  the  potatoes 
they  commonly  raise  by  their  labor  on  the  first  day 
of  the  weehy  (Life  of  Woolman,  p.  74.) 

Quality  of  Food. — "  There  is  often  a  defect  here." 


FOOD — CLOTHING  SHELTER. 


143 


(Thos.  Clay,  Esq.,  Greorgia.) — ''The  feed  of  slaves  is 
generally  of  the  poorest  kind."  (Rev.  Horace  Moul- 
ton.) — ^In  Kentucky,  ''They  live  on  a  coarse,  crude, 
unwholesome  diet."  {Weslern  Medical  Reformer.) — 
"Large  numbers  of  hadly  fed  negroes  were  swept  off 
by  a  prevailing  epidemic." — "The  best  remedy  for 
that  horrid  malady,  '  Cachexia  Africana^'^  is  to  feed 
the  negroes  with  nutritious  food."  (Prof.  A.  Gr.  Smith, 
of  New- York  Medical  College,  once  physician  in 
Louisville,  Ky.) 

Number  and  times  of  meals,  each  day. — "The 
slaves  eat  twice  during  the  day."  (Dr.  Jonathan  Ed- 
wards, Connecticut,  1791.) 

Florida:  "The  slaves  go  to  the  field  in  the  morn- 
ing; they  carry  with  them  meal,  wet  with  water, 
and  at  noon  build  a  fire  on  the  ground,  and  bake  it 
in  the  ashes.  After  the  labors  of  the  day  are  over, 
they  take  their  second  meal  of  ashcake.  (Philemon 
Bliss,  Esq.,  Elyria,  Ohio ;  resident  in  Florida,  1834-5.) 

Mississippi,  1837 :  "  The  slaves  received  two  meals 
during  the  day.  Breakfast  about  11  o'clock;  the 
other  meal  after  night."  (Eleazer  Powell,  now  of  Chip- 
pewa, Pa.) 

North  Carolina :  "  The  breakfast  of  the  slaves  was 
generally  about  10  or  11  o'clock  A.  M."  (Nehemiah 
Caulkins.) 

Virginia:  "Two  meals  a  day.  Breakfast  from  10 
to  11  o'clock  A.  M.  Supper  from  6  to  9  or  10  at 
night,  as  the  season  and  crops  may  be."  (Rev.  C.  S. 
Eenshaw.) — "Meals  generally  taken  without  knife, 
dish,  or  spoon."  (Wm.  Leftwitch,  a  Virginian.) 


144  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Greorgia:  "The  corn  is  ground  in  a  hand  mill,  by 
the  slave,  after  his  task  is  done.  Generally  there  is 
but  one  miU  on  a  plantation,  and  as  but  one  can 
grind  at  a  time,  the  mill  is  going  sometimes  very  late 
at  night."  (W.  0.  Gildersleeve,  Esq.,  a  native  Geor- 
gian.)   Similar  testimony  from  other  States. 

South  Carolina:  "Only  two  meals  a  day  are 
allowed  to  the  house  slaves;  the  first  at  12  o'clock.  If 
they  eat  before  this  time  it  is  by  stealth,  and  I  am 
sure  there  must  be  a  good  deal  of  suffering  among 
them  from  hunger^  particularly  by  children.  Besides 
this,  they  are  often  kept  from  their  meals  by  way  of 
punishment.  J^o  table  is  provided  for  them  to  eat 
from.  They  know  nothing  of  the  comfort  and  plea- 
sure of  gathering  round  the  social  board ;  each  takes 
his  plate  or  tin  pan,  and  holds  it  in  the  hand  or  on 
the  lap.  I  never  saw  slaves  seated  round  a  tahle^  to 
partake  of  any  meal."    (Angelina  Grimke  Weld.) 

"  Stealing  food  is  a  crime,  punished  by  flogging.  A 
woman  was  punished  for  stealing  four  potatoes." 
(P.  Bliss,  Esq.) 

"Cooks,  waiters,  chambermaids,  &c.,  generally  get 
some  meat  every  day — ^the  remaining  bits  and  bones 
of  their  masters'  tables."    (Weld,  p.  31.) 

The  law  of  Louisiana  of  1806,  (Chap.  X.,)  pre- 
scribing the  time  allotted  to  meals,  by  its  mention  of 
breakfast  and  dinner,  seems  to  indicate  a  third  meal, 
though  it  is  not  directly  mentioned. 

The  fare  of  slaves  is  doubtless  better  in  the  slave- 
growing  than  in  the  slsiYe-consuming  States.  And 


FOOD — CLOTHING — SHELTER. 


145 


there  are  exceptions  to  the  general  picture  we  have 
presented. 

Clothing-. — Mr.  Weld  has  shown  by  abundant 
and  unimpeachable  testimony,  that  ^'the  clothing  of 
slaves  by  day,  and  their  covering  by  night,  is  not 
adequate  either  for  comfort  or  decency."  (p.  40, 
&c.) 

Virginia:  Hon.  T.  T.  Bouldin,  a  slaveholder,  in  a 
speech  in  Congress,  Feb.  16,  1835,  said:  ''He  knew 
that  many  negroes  had  died  from  exposure  to 
weather,"  and  added,  "They  are  clad  in  a  flimsy 
fabric  that  will  turn  neither  wind  nor  water." 

Maryland:  ''The  slaves,  naked  and  starved,  often 
fall  victims  to  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather." 
(Geo.  Buchanan,  M.D.,  of  Baltimore,  1791.) 

Georgia,  &c. :    "We   rode  through   many  rice 
swamps,  Avhere  the  blacks  were  very  numerous" — 
"working  up  to  the  middle  in  water,  men  and  women  ' 
nearly  nakedP  (Wm.  Savery,  of  Philadelphia,  Minis- 
ter Friends'  Soc,  1791.) 

Tennessee,  &c. :  "In  every  slaveholding  State  many 
slaves  suffer  extremely,  both  while  they  labor  and 
when  they  sleep,  for  ivant  of  clothing  to  keep  them 
warm."    (Eev.  John  Eankin.) 

The  South  generally:  "Men  and  women  have 
many  times  scarce  clothes  enough  to  hide  their  naked- 
ness, and  boys  and  girls,  ten  and  twelve  years  old, 
are  often  quite  naked  among  their  masters'  children." 
(John  Woolman,  1757.    Journal,  &c.,  p.  150.) 

"Both  male  and  female  go  without  clothing  at  the 
age  of  8  or  10  years."   (John  Parrish,  Minister  Soc.  ^ 


146 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Friends,  1804.)  Same  testimony  from  many  others 
more  recently. 

Alabama,  1819:  "Hardly  a  rag  of  clothing  on 
them." — "Grenerally  the  only  bedding  was  a  blan- 
ket." (S.  E.  Maltby.) 

Virginia:  "Two  old  blankets."  (Wm.  Leftwich.) 
Advertisements  of  fugitives  every  year  often  describe 
them  as  "ragged"  or  "nearly  naked." 

Florida:  "They  were  allowed  two  suits  of  clothes 
a  year;  viz:  one  pair  of  trowsers  with  a  shirt  or 
frock  of  osnaburgh,  for  summer ;  and  for  winter,  one 
pair  of  trowsers  and  a  jacket  of  negro-cloth,  with  a 
baize  shirt  and  a  pair  of  shoes.  Some  allowed  hats, 
and  some  did  not ;  and  they  were  generally,  I  believe, 
allowed  one  blanket  in  two  years.  Garments  of 
similar  materials  were  allowed  the  women."  (Wm 
Ladd,  late  of  Minot,  Me.) 

"The  slaves  are  generally  without  beds  or  bed- 
steads."— "I  have  seen  men  and  women  at  work  in 
the  fields,  more  than  half  naked."  (Testimony  fur- 
nished by  Eev.  C.  S.  Eenshaw,  from  his  friend.) 

"In  Lower  Tennessee,  Mississippi  and  Louisiana, 
clothing  made  of  cotton  bagging"  —  "no  shoes." 
(G.  W.  Westgate.) 

"Will"  of  the  celebrated  John  Eandolph  of 
Roanoke,  Ya.,  distinguished  as  a  "kind  master": 
"To  my  old  and  faithful  servants  Essex  and  his 
wife  Hetty,  I  give  and  bequeath  a  pair  of  strong 
shoes,  a  suit  of  clothes,  and  a  blanket  each,  to  be 
paid  them  annually;  also  an  annual  hat  to  Essex." 
No  socks,  stockings,  bonnets,  cloaks,  handkerchiefs, 


FOOD — CLOTHING — SHFLTER. 


147 


or  towels — no  change  either  of  outside  or  inner  gar- 
ments! And  a  solemn  "Last  Will  and  Testament" 
was  deemed  necessary  to  secure  to  them  even  the 
articles  specified ! 

Family  servants,  waiters,  &c.,  and  hotel  attendants, 
must  needs  appear  decently  clad.  An(J  kept  mis- 
tresses of  gentlemen  are  often  arrayed  extravagantly. 
Superficial  observers  and  shallow  thinkers,  seeing 
this,  report  the  happy  condition  of  slaves  in  general, 
having  never  seen  the  "negro  quarters"  on  the  plan- 
tations. 

Dwellings. — These  "generally  contain  but  one 
apartment,  and  that  without  a  floor;" — "no  parti- 
tion to  separate  the  sexes;" — ^nothing  that  a  Northern 
laborer  "would  call  a  bed"; — sometimes  "built  by 
themselves  of  stakes  and  poles,  and  thatched  with 
palmetto  leaf ;  sometimes  of  clay;" — "  no  window  glass 
or  sashes;" — "not  sufficient  to  keep  off  the  inclem- 
ency of  the  weather ; — sometimes  built  of  logs ;  on 
old  plantations  sometimes  of  frame  and  clapboards, 
size,  8  feet  by  10,  or  10 by  12,  and  but  8  feet  high  ;"— 
"without  any  chimney — a  hole  at  top  to  let  the 
smoke  out ;" — generally  put  up  (in  Georgia)  without  a 
nailf'—''  ill  ventilated;' —"surround:  d  with  filth  ;"— 
"with  neither  chairs,  table,  nor  bedstead;" — "on  the 
cold  ground  they  must  lie  without  covering,  and 
shiver  while  they  slumber."  Such  is  the  picture 
attested  by  competent  witnesses.  (Weld's  "Slavery 
as  it  is,"  p.  43,  &c.) 

Treatment  of  the  sick,  the  infirm,  and  the 
AGED. — On  this  topic  we  have  not  room  here  to  enter. 


148  THE  AMEEICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

In  Mr.  Weld's  work,  pp.  44,  45,  may  be  found  state- 
ments from  the  late  Eev.  Dr.  Channing,  of  Boston, 
once  resident  in  Virginia,  (extracted  from  his  work 
on  Slavery;)  from  Miss  Sarah  M.  Grimke,  formerly 
of  Charleston,  S.  C. ;  from  Geo.  A.  Avery,  merchant, 
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  once  living  in  Virginia;  from  Rev. 
Wm.  T.  Allan,  once  of  Alabama ;  the  late  Rev.  Elias 
Cornelius,  (p.  161;)^  and  several  others,  all  showing 
that  great  barbarity  characterizes  the  slaveholders, 
generally,  in  their  ill  treatment  or  neglect  of  these 
unfortunate  beings,  held  dependent  upon  them,  and 
defenceless,  as  slaves. 

Into  all  the  particulars  which  go  to  make  up  the 
dreadful  condition  of  the  slave,  the  plan  and  limits 
of  the  present  treatise  do  not  permit  us  to  go.  We 
select  mainly  such  facts  as  illustrate  the  slave  laivs, 
and  the  consequent  ^' legal  relation"  of  master  and 
slave.  At  every  step  we  find  it  a  relation  identified 
with  wretchedness  and  wrong. 

From  Wheeler's  '^Law  of  Slavery"  it  would  seem 
that  slaveholders  are  in  the  habit  of  refusing  to  pay 
physicians  for  medical  attendance  on  their  slaves, 
and  that  suits  at  law  are  the  consequence,  which  are 
variously  decided,  the  decisions  of  a  lower  court 
being  sometimes  reversed  by  a  higher.  The  follow- 
ing points  are  put  down  by  Mr.  Wheeler  in  his 
marginal  titles : 

Dunbar  vs,  Williams.  10  John's  New- York  Rep. 
249:    ^'No  action  lies  by  a  physician  agaiDst  the 


*  See  Edwards'  Life  of  Rev.  Elias  Cornelius,  pp.  101-3. 


FOOD — CLOTHING  SHELTEK.  149 


master  for  attendance  upon  liis  slave  without  his 
knowledge,  unless  it  be  a  case  of  extrenie  necessity." 
(Wheeler,  p.  225.) 

Wells  vs,  Kennerly,  4  McCord's  S.  C.  Eep.  123 : 
*'The  owner  is  not  liable  for  medical  attendance  upon 
a  hired  slave,  given  at  the  request  of  the  hirer^ 
(lb.,  p.  226.) 

It  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  temporary 
hirer  of  a  slave  would  be  forward  to  incur  the  ex- 
pense of  much  medical  attendance. 

In  the  case  of  Johnson  et  al.  vs,  Barrett,  Judge 
Johnson,  South  Carolina,  said:  ^' If  a  slave  be  in 
peril  in  the  absence  of  his  master,  the  interest  of  the 
owner  is  most  effectually  subserved  by  rendering 
assistance  to  the  slave,  and  in  good  conscience  the 
oiujier  is  bound  to  make  satisfaction."  (lb.) 

The  legal  rule  then  is,  to  give  medical  aid  when 
the  interest  of  tlie  owner  demands  it  I 


CHAPTER  XII. 


COEECED  LABOR,  WITHOUT  WAGES. 

The  "  legal  relation  of  Master  and  Slave" — being  the  relation  of  an  Owner  to  a 
Chattel,  is  a  relation  incompatible  with  the  natural  and  heaven-sanctioned 
"  relation"  of  Labor  and  Wages. 

Christianity  is  "a  swift  witness  against  those 
that  oppress"  even  "the  hireling  IN  his  wages."  It 
also  proclaims :  "  Woe  unto  him  that  nseth  his  neigh- 
bor's service  without  wages,  and  giveth  him  not  for 
his  work." 

To  "oppress  the  hireling  IN  his  wages,"  is  to  pay 
him  inadequate  wages,  or  to  withhold  a  part  of  his 
earnings.  To  use  a  neighbor's  service  without 
wages,  is  to  pay  him  no  wages  at  all.  This  latter  is 
the  definition  of  slave  labor,  and  that  labor  is  extorted 
by  brute  force.  The  slave  is  not  a  "hireling."  He 
is  not  hired  at  all,  any  more  than  a  working  horse 
or  ox  is  hired.  In  saying  this,  we  only  state  the  legal 
and  the  inevitable  fact  of  the  case.  More  particularly : 

1.  Wages  is  "  that  which  is  stipulated  to  be  paid 
for  services."  There  is,  in  this,  of  necessity,  the  con- 
current action  of  two  parties  who  stipulate,  namely : 
the  employer  and  the  employed ;  the  payer  and  him 


SERVICE  WITHOUT  WAGES. 


151 


that  receives  pay.  The  wages  are  determined  by  a 
mutual  stipulation,  agreement,  or  contract  between 
the  parties. 

2.  Wages,  to  be  legitimate,  must  be  equitable,  or 
equal.  There  must  be,  by  both  the  parties,  an 
eqmvalent  given  and  received.  The  labor  must  be 
equal  in  value  to  the  wages,  and  the  wages  must  be 
equal  in  value  to  the  labor. 

3.  Wages  is  that  which,  when  received  by  the 
laborer,  becomes  his  own^  his  property.  The  very 
ideas  of  property  and  of  the  rights  of  property  have 
their  origin  here.  He  who  receives  wages,  possesses, 
appropriates,  and  disposes  of  his  wages ;  and  no  one, 
without  an  equivalent,  or  without  his  leave,  can  take 
them  from  him. 

4.  Wages  for  the  faithful  services  of  an  able-bodied 
man,  during  the  proper  working  hours  of  the  day, 
in  order  to  be  adequate  and  equitable  wages,  must 
more  than  suffice  for  his  comfortable  sustenance  as  a 
mere  animal.  They  must  enable  him  to  support  a 
family,  to  supply  his  own  and  their  social  wants  as 
intellectual  and  moral  beings,  to  discharge  his  re- 
sponsibilities as  a  member  of  society,  and  lay  up  a 
surplus  for  the  ordinary  exigences  of  the  future. 

5.  The  wages  of  the  successful  producer  of  the 
fruits  of  the  earth,  to  be  equitable,  must  secure  to 
him,  as  his  possession,  a  large  proportion  of  those 
fruits.  On  a  plantation,  or  in  a  parish,  township,  or 
province,  in  which  the  men  whose  labor  has  built 
comfortable  houses  may  not  live  in  comfortable 
houses ;  whose  labor  has  procured  ample  supplies  of 


152  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


food,  clothing,  and  family  comforts,  but  may  not 
share  in  and  enjoy  those  supplies  and  comforts, 
(unless  squandered  by  improvidence,)  there  could  not 
have  been  an  equitable  receipt  of  wages,  by  the 
laborer. 

By  each  and  all  of  these  definitions  and  tests  of 
wages,  the  slave  system,  the  slaveholding  ^'relation," 
both  in  theory  and  practice,  stand  condemned.  They 
do  not  and  they  cannot  accord  wages  to  the 

LABORER. 

For,  in  the  first  place,  ^Hhe  slave  can  make  no 
contract,"  and  hence  he  cannot  stipulate  for  wages. 

2.  ^'  The  slave  can  possess  nothing,''  and  hence  he 
cannot  receive  (because  he  cannot  possess,  appropri- 
ate, or  use)  wages. 

3.  The  slave  is  "goods  and  chattels,"  and  these 
cannot  earn  wages.  The  sustenance  of  the  horse  and 
ox  are  not  wages.  The  needful  repairs  of  a  machine 
are  not  wages.  Were  all  the  slaves  as  "fat  and 
sleek"  as  Henry  Clay's,  their  comfortable  fare  would 
not  be  wages.    Besides : 

4.  The  cost  of  sustenance  for  the  slave  (were  it 
matter  of  mutual  stipulation)  is  too  trivial  to  be  dig- 
nified with  the  name  of  wages!  Look  over  the  pre- 
ceding chapters.  Estimate  the  labor.  Look  at  its 
products — ^houses,  equipages,  wardrobes,  wines,  feasts, 
exports,  returns,  revenues,  banks,  cities,  navies ! 
Lnagine  an  exodus  of  the  slaves,  like  that  of  the 
Hebrews  out  of  Egypt,  and  let  the  wand  of  their 
Moses  sweep  along  with  them  all  the  products  of 
their  labor  !   What  would  be  left  after  them  ?  Then 


SERVICE  WITHOUT  WAGES.  153 

inquire  after  the  compensation  tliat  has  been  paid  for 
this  labor.  "A  peck  of  corn  a  week,  with  a  modicum 
of  salt."  Say  12^  bushels  of  corn  a  year,  at  50  cents, 
is  $6.25 — the  salt,  25  cents,  makes  $6.50  for  a  year's 
board.    Then  add  the  wardrobe  of  John  Eandolph's 

faithful  servant  Essex" — possibly  $10  more.  The 
house-rent,  at  what  the  "owner"  thinks  it  worth! 
Then  foot  up  the  sum  total — or,  take  the  estimate  of 
slaveholders  themselves,  in  Eeports  of  Committees 
of  Agricultural  Societies,  published  to  the  world, 
viz.,  $15  to  $20  per  annum,  along  with  the  confes- 
sion of  Thomas  Clay,  Esq.,  of  Georgia :  "  The  present 
economy  of  the  slave  system  is,  to  get  all  you  can 
from  the  slave,  and  give  him  AS  little  as  will  sup- 
port him  in  a  working  condition."  It  is  no  counter- 
proof  or  palliation,  that  the  system  is  unprofitable. 
To  "use  a  neighbor's  service  without  wages"  has 
always  been  profitless,  because  always  wrong,  and 
heaven-abhorred. 

The  balance  between  the  slave's  earnings  (possessed 
or  squandered  by  his  "owner,")  and  the  cost  of  the 
slave's  support^  may  tell  us  whether  the  slave  could 
"take  care  of  himself"  if  suffered  to  receive  honest 
wages. 

Again,  we  say,  look  at  the  wealth  earned  by  the 

slave;  then  look  at  the  slave,  half  famished,  half 

naked,  without  a  bed,  shivering,  sleeping  on  the  bare 

ground  with  an  old  blanket  around  him,  or  turned 

off,  perhaps,  in  decrepid  old  age,  by  his  "  owner," 

"  a  gentleman  [reputedly]  of  great  benevolence  and 

generosity  of  character,"  to  beg  in  the  streets  of 
7* 


154  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

Charleston,  (S.  C.,)  because  too  old  to  work,  and 
therefore  his  allowance  was  stopped then  learn  how 
"the  innocent  legal  relation"  enforces  labor  with- 
out WAGES. 

AVhen  we  say  it  is  "  the  legal  relation"  that  does 
this,  we  have  the  testimony  of  Southern  judicial  de- 
cision to  sustain  us. 

In  the  case  of  the  State  vs,  Mann,  before  cited, 
Judge  Kuffin  said : 

The  slave  is  "  doomed,  in  his  own  person  and  his 
posterity,  to  live  without  knowledge,  and  without 
capacity  to  make  any  thing  his  own^  and  to  toil  that  others 
may  reap  the  fruitsP  (Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p. 
246,  copied  from  2  Devereaux's  North  Carolina 
Eep.,  263.) 


*  See  Weld's  "Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  54.  Testimony  of  the  daugh- 
ter of  Judge  Griinke,  of  Charleston,  (S.  C.) 


CHAPTER  Xm. 


PUNISHMENTS  OF  SLAVES  BY  THE  OWNER  AND  HIRER. 

Being  the  absolute  property  of  the  Owner,  the  Slave  is  wholly  in  his  power, 
without  any  effectual  restraint. 

We  have  seen  that  "the  legal  relation"  of  slave 
ownership,  being  the  relation  of  an  owner  to  his 
property,  invests  him  with  unlimited  power.  We 
have  traced  the  exercise  of  that  power  in  a  number 
of  directions,  and  have  witnessed  at  every  step,  thus 
far,  the  express  sanction  or  the  silent  acquiescence 
of  the  slave  laws.  Or,  if  limitations  to  his  power 
have,  at  some  points,  and  in  some  of  the  States,  ap- 
peared to  be  interposed,  it  has  been  found,  on  a  close 
scrutiny,  to  be  only  an  appearance,  and  not  a  reality. 
In  the  vitally  important  matters  of  absolute  purchase, 
sale,  seizure  for  debt,  inheritance,  distribution,  mar- 
riage, (or  rather,  no  marriage,)  annihilation  of  family 
sanctities,  incapacity  to  possess  property,  to  make  a 
contract,  or  to  receive  wages  in  the  appointment  of 
labor,  supply  of  food,  clothing,  and  habitations,  we 
have  seen  the  power  of  the  master  every  thing^  the 
rights,  the  protection,  the  defense,  the  redress,  and 
the  power  of  the  slave,  nothing  !    We  come  now  to 


156  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


inquire  whether,  in  the  item  of  slaYe  punishments  by 
the  master,  there  are  any  available  limitations  or  re- 
strictions of  his  power.  In  other  words,  whether,  in 
*'the  legal  relation"  of  slave  owner  and  slave,  the 

owner"  be,  in  reality,  at  this  vital  point,  amenable 
to  law;  or  whether  here,  as  at  all  the  preceding 
points,  he  rises  above  law,  making  it  the  instrument 
of  his  will,  but  not  subjecting  himself  to  its  authority. 

If  there  be  any  such  limitation,  it  must  be,  thus  far, 
an  inroad  upon  the  principle  of  human  chattelhood, 
denying  its  claims,  and  thwarting  the  exercise  of  the 

rights  of  property"  involved  in  it.  The  rights  of 
property  in  brute  animals  might  be  limited  at  this 
point,  without  danger  to  the  tenure  of  such  property. 
The  brute  could  take  no  advantage  of  such  lenity,  to 
throw  off  the  yoke  of  dominion  and  outgrow  its 
chattelhood.  Not  so  with  chattels  endued  with 
thought  and  reason.  To  be  held  and  used  as  chat- 
tels at  all,  they  must  be  taught  (as  before  quoted 
from  Prince's  Digest,  450)  that  'Hhe  life  of  the  slave 
must  be  in  his  master's  keeping,"  or,  as  Judge  Eufl&n 
expressed  it,  ^^the  slave  must  be  sensible  that  there 
is  no  appeal  from  his  master."  The  old  Eomans  un- 
derstood this  necessity,  when  they  engrafted  the  same 
maxims  into  their  civil  code :  the  slaves  "  are  not 
capable  of  being  injured" — ^they  may  be  punished 
at  the  discretion  of  their  lord,  or  even  put  to  death 
by  his  authority."  The  people  of  the  South,  their 
courts,  and  their  jurists,  understand  this,  when  they 

generally  refer"  (as  Stroud  says  they  do)  to  the 
Roman  civil  code,  *^as  containing:  the  true  principles 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTEKS. 


157 


of  their  institution,"  except  where  modified  by 
statutes,  or  by  usages  which  have  acquired  the  force 
of  law."  Those  statutes  and  usages  (on  this  point) 
we  are  now  to  inquire  after.  If  it  be  found  that 
Judge  Ruffin,  and  that  Mr.  Prince,  in  his  Digest, 
have  rightly  represented  them,  the  apolqgists  of  the 
^  innocent  legal  relation"  must  not  too  severely  or 
too  exclusively  arraign  their  barbarism  for  expound 
ing  (not  enacting)  the  law  of  the  "relation." 

It  could  hardly  be  supposed  that,  in  any  civilized 
country,  the  Legislature  would,  by  express  statute, 
authorize  the  master  to  commit  cruel  outrages  upon 
the  persons  of  his  slaves,  or  murder  them ;  nor  that, 
in  the  present  age  of  the  world,  a  civil  government 
would  openly  proclaim  impunit^  to  any  persons 
beforehand,  in  the  commission  of  such  crimes.  If  it 
were  desired  and  intended  by  the  Legislature  to  pro- 
duce such  a  result,  the  more  feasible  and  effectual 
means  of  doing  this  (especially  in  an  elective  govern- 
ment) would  be  to  make  a  show  of  prohibiting  and 
punishing  the  crimes,  but  under  circumstances  and 
arrangements  so  contrived  as  to  render  the  execution 
of  the  law  or  the  conviction  of  the  offenders  im- 
practicable. 

Laws  and  courts  of  justice  are  chiefly  needed  for 
the  protection  of  the  weak  and  the  defenseless.  That 
class  in  any  community  that,  from  these  causes,  is 
most  exposed  to  violence  and  outrage,  is  the  class  in 
respect  to  which  the  Legislature,  if  it  intends  to  protect 
them  at  all,  will  most  solicitously  seek  methods  of 
doing  it  effectually.    If  any  distinctions  are  made 


158  THE 'AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


between  the  subjects  of  the  government,  it  will  be 
made  in  their  favor.    Whenever  an  opposite  policy  is 
witnessed,  especially  when  this  is  carried  so  far  that 
the  exposed  class  are  not  allowed  to  bring  a  complaint 
against  one  of  the  class  to  whose  aggressions  they  are 
most  exposed,  or  even  to  bear  testimony  against  them, 
we  may  be  certain  that  no  protection  of  them  was 
intended ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  powerful 
party  was  intended  to  be  countenanced  in  their  in- 
jurious aggressions.     And  this  would  be  doubly 
confirmed,  if  none  but  the  same  powerful  party  ad- 
ministered the  law,  or  had  any  share  in  the  govern- 
ment, or  participation  in  the  immunities  or  privileges 
enjoyed  under  it.    Let  such  be  the  case  between 
Catholics  and  Protestants,  Normans  and  Anglo- 
Saxons,  or  Turks  and  Greeks,  and  no  reader  of 
history  would  hesitate  in  making  such  a  decision. 
This  is  the  precise  fact  in  respect  to  American  slave- 
holders and  slaves.    No  principle  in  the  slave  code 
is  more  firmly  established  than  this:  that  a  slave 
can  bring  no  suit  against  his  master,  unless  it  be  a 
suit  for  his  freedom.    Even  the  rninor  female  slave 
who  is  to  be  free  at  the  age  of  twenty-one  can  have 
no  suit  brought  by  a  free  patent  for  her  relief  from 
ill  treatment.    Such  was  the  decision  (before  alluded 
to)  of  Judge  Martin,  in  the  case  of  Dorothee  vs. 
Coquillon  et  al.,  Jan.  Term,  1829.    (19  Martin's 
Louisiana  Eeports,  350.   Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery, 
p.  198.) 

It  must  be  idle  to  pretend  that  any  statutes  for  the 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS.  159 


protection  of  the  slave  can  be  of  any  avail  in  the 
presence  of  such  rules,  and  the  following  : 

^'/^  is  an  iJiflexihle  and  universal  rule  of  slave  law, 
founded  in  one  or  two  States  upon  usage^  in  others 
sanctioned  by  express  legislation^  THAT  THE  testi- 
mony OF  A  COLORED  PERSON,  WHETHER  BOND  OR 
FREE,  CANNOT  BE  RECEIVED  AGAINST  A,  WHITE  PER- 
SON."   (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  27.) 

To  this  feature  of  slave  law  we  have  alluded  be- 
fore, and  shall  devote  to  its  details  a  distinct  chapter, 
when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  civil  relations  of  the 
slaves.  In  the  mean  time,  it  is  a  feature  of  sufficient 
notoriety  to  be  assumed  in  this  chapter,  having  been, 
at  one  time,  enacted  in  the  free  State  of  Ohio,  and 
also  incorporated  into  the  ecclesiastical  polity  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  as  administered  in  those 
States  where  it  obtains  as  civil  law. 

In  the  presence  of  such  a  regulation,  very  clearly, 
there  can  be  no  adequate  protection  of  the  slave 
under  any  laws  framed  for  his  benefit,  however  well 
constructed  in  other  respects.  Nevertheless,  we  will 
examine  them,  and  notice  their  spirit,  and  the  kind 
and  degree  of  protection  they  appear  to  contemplate. 

South  Carolina. — Act  of  1740:  ''In  case  any 
person  shall  wilfully  cut  out  the  tongue,  put  out  the 
eye,  castrate,  or  cruelly  scald,  burn,  or  deprive  any 
slave  of  any  limb  or  member,  or  shall  inflict  any 
other  cruA  punishment,  OTHER  THAN  by  whipping, 
or  beating  with  a  horsewhip,  cowskin,  switch,  or 
small  stick,  or  by  putting  irons  on,  or  confining  or 


160  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


imprisoning  sucli  slave,  every  snch.  person  shall,  for 
every  such  offense,  forfeit  the  sum  of  one  hundred 
pounds,  current  money."   (2  Brevard's  Digest,  241.) 

This  law,  it  is  believed,  is  still  on  the  statute  book. 
We  have  said,  it  could  hardly  be  supposed  that  any 
legislature,  in  a  civilized  country,  would,  by  express 
statute,  authorize  the  master  to  commit  cruel  out- 
rages upon  the  persons  of  his  slaves.  But  this  is 
done  in  the  statute  just  quoted.    The  expression 

other  ihan^^''  in  its  connection,  does  expressly  author- 
ize cruel  punishment."  And  it  authorizes  ''cruel 
punishment"  in  a  number  of  forms  specified,  viz  • 
''by  whipping  or  beating  with  a  horsewhip,  cowskin, 
switch,  or  small  stick,  or  by  putting  irons  on,  or  con- 
fining or  imprisoning."  "Cruel  punishment,"  if  in- 
flicted in  either  of  these  ways,  is  expressly  excepted 
from  the  "cruel  punishments"  forbidden.  And  on 
inspection  it  will  be  found,  that  the  methods  of 
"cruel  punishment"  forbidden  are  such,  and  such 
only,  as  diminish  the  pecuniary  value  of  the  slave. 
The  "legal  relation"  which  contemplates  the  slave 
only  as  a  chattel,  was  evidently  the  presiding  genius 
of  this  enactment. 

The  specific  prohibitions  assure  us  that  certain 
"persons"  (whether  owners,  overseers,  or  others)  had 
committed  outrages  of  that  character,  or  such  particu- 
lar specifications  would  not  have  been  thought  of. 
Such  wanton  destruction  of  "property"  was  not  to 
be  suffered.  The  heavy  pecuniary  fine  would  afford 
some  security  to  slave  "  owners"  against  passionate 
"overseers"  and  others.    The  defenselessness  of  the 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTEKS. 


161 


slave,  and  the  brutality  of  those  around  him,  are 
frightfully  depicted  in  this  statute,  the  like  of  which 
was  never  needed  for  the  security  of  domestic  beasts. 
Yet  no  compensation  or  damages  are  awarded  to  the 
sufferers.  The  "owner"  might  be  the  aggressor,  but 
the  slave  was  not  allowed  "to  go  free  for  his  eye's 
sake,"  like  the  Hebrew  servant,  whose  inaster  had 
thus  injured  him.  (Exodus  xxi.  26,  27.)  The 
"cruelty"  authorized  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  the 
Legislature  had  little  or  no  regard  to  the  suffering 
or  pain  endured  by  the  slave,  provided  the  article 
of  "property"  were  not  essentially  damaged. 

Louisiana. — "The  slave  is  eniirely  subject  to  the 
will  of  his  master,  who  may  correct  and  chastise  him, 
though  not  with  unusual  rigor,  nor  so  as  to  maim  or 
mutilate  him,  or  to  expose  him  to  the  danger  of  loss 
of  life,  or  so  as  to  cause  his  death."  (Civil  Code  of 
Louisiana,  Art.  173.) 

Here,  again,  the  protection  of  slsive  property^  rather 
than  the  prevention  of  suffering  by  the  slave,  appears 
to  be  the  leading  object  in  view.  The  slave  may  not 
be  maimed,  he  may  not  be  mutilated,  he  may  not  be 
killed.  Beyond  this,  there  is  nothing  in  the  way  of 
prohibition  that  is  tangible  or  definite.  Permission 
to  the  master  is  far  more  distinct  and  prominent. 
The  "  master  may  chastise,"  and  he  may  chastise 
"with  rigor (severity;  without  abatement,  relaxa- 
tion or  mitigation.  Vide  Webster,)  but  "not  with 
unusual  rigor."  There  is  something  in  this  singular 
phraseology  that  requires  study.  Such  a  law,  instead 
of  correcting  prevailing  usages,  receives  its  definition 


162 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


from  them.  That  which  is  usuaV  is  authorized^ 
whatever  it  may  be,  short  of  maiming  mutilation, 
and  murder.  And  the  more  rigorous,  severe,  and 
cruel  may  be  the  prevailing  usages  of  a  community, 
the  more  rigorous,  severe,  and  cruel  they  are  ex- 
pressly authorized  to  be.  The  individual  is  referred, 
as  a  standard  of  lawful  action,  to  the  common  prac- 
tices of  his  neighbors  around  him.  What  is  "  usuaV 
among  them  is  lawful  for  Mm.  If  it  is  ^^usiiaV^  to 
chastise"  a  slave  by  inflicting  on  him  a  hundred 
lashes,  it  is  lawful  to  do  so.  If  it  is  ''^usuaV  to 
add  five  hundred  lashes  more,  it  is  equally  lawful! 
In  short,  the  current  usages  of  the  fraternity  of 
slaveholders  (with  the  exceptions  specified)  are  pro- 
claimed, by  the  Civil  Code  of  Louisiana,  to  con- 
stitute the  law.  This  approximates  closely  to  the 
abrogation  of  law,  so  far  as  slaveholders  are  con- 
cerned, or  the  abdication  of  supremacy  by  the  civil 
government  in  their  favor.  The  condition  of  this 
great  nation  of  twenty  millions  of  people,  controlled 
by  a  little  more  than  one  hundred  thousand  slave- 
holders, seem  but  an  expansion  of  this  idea. 

^''Unusual  rigor"  must  be  defined  in  the  light  of 
what  is  usual.  And  we  may  learn  something  of  what 
was  then  considered  usual  rigor  in  Louisiana,  by  the 
fact  that  the  provisions  of  the  law  of  South  Carolina, 
before  cited,  with  eocception  of  its  prohibition  of  mutila- 
tion,  had  been  substantially  in  force  there,  up  to  the 
time  this  new  Civil  Code  was  adopted.  We  may 
infer,  therefore,  that  ''.cruel  punishment"  by  "whip- 
ping or  beating  with  a  horsewhip,  cowskin,  switch, 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS.  163 


or  small  stick,  or  by  putting  irons  on,  or  confining 
or  imprisoning,"  was  not  "unusual,"  and  consequent- 
ly not  forbidden,  by  the  new  Civil  Code. 

In  1819,  the  Legislature  of  Louisiana  recognized 
the  lawfulness  of  putting  iron  chains  and  collars 
upon  slaves,  to  prevent  them  from  running  away,  as 
follows : 

"  If  any  person  or  persons,  &c.,  shall  cut  or  break 
any  iron  collar  which  any  master  of  slaves  shall 
have  used  in  order  to  prevent  the  running  away  or 
escape  of  any  such  slave  or  slaves,  such  persons  so 
offending  shall,  on  conviction,  be  fined  not  less  than 
two  hundred  dollars,  nor  exceeding  one  thousand 
dollars ;  and  suffer  imprisonment  for  a  term  not  ex- 
ceeding two  years,  nor  less  than  six  months."  (Act 
of  Assembly  of  March  6,  1819.    Pamphlet,  p.  64.) 

Compare  this  penalty  with  that  imposed  by  the 
Legislature  of  the  same  State  for  cruelties  committed 
on  slaves,  viz :  "  not  more  than  five  hundred  dollars 
nor  less  than  two  hundred,"  (1  Martin's  Digest,  654,) 
and  it  will  appear  that  the  releasing  of  a  slave  from 
the  " usual"  punishment  of  the  "iron  chain  or  collar  " 
is  regarded  a  more  aggravated  crime  than  inflicting 
upon  him  the  "unusual  punishment,"  whatever  it 
may  be,  prohibited  by  law !  For  the  act  of  mercy, 
the  offender  may  be  fined  $1000  and  imprisoned  two 
years ;  for  the  act  of  atrocious  cruelt}^,  he  may  be 
fined  $500,  but  without  imprisonment.  Thus  it  is 
that  the  Legislature  of  Louisiana  discountenances 
cruelty. 

Mississippi. — The  Constitution  empowers  the  Le- 


164 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


gislature  to  make  laws  to  oblige  the  owners  of  slaves 
to  treat  them  with  hmnanity — to  abstain  from  all 
injuries  to  them  extending  to  life  and  limh^  and  in 
case  of  their  refusal  or  neglect  to  comply  with  the 
directions  of  such  laws,  to  have  such  slave  or  slaves 
sold,  for  the  benefit  of  the  owner  or  owners.  (Const. 
Mississippi,  title  slaves,  Sect.  1.     Eev.  Code,  554.) 

The  Legislature,  so  far  as  appears,  have  taken  no 
action  under  the  powers  granted  in  this  last  clause 
for  the  sale  of  maltreated  slaves.^  Under  the  former 
clause  the  action  of  the  Legislature  is  as  follows  : 

"  No  cruel  or  unusual  punishment  shall  be  inflicted 
on  any  slave  in  this  State.  And  any  master  or 
other  person  entitled  to  the  service  of  any  slave,  who 
shall  inflict  such  cruel  or  unusual  punishment,  or 
shall  authorize  or  permit  the  same  to  be  inflicted, 
shall,  on  conviction,  &c.,  be  fined  according  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  offense,  at  the  discretion  of  the 


*  ISTo  such  provision  appears  to  exist  in  any  of  the  States,  except, 
perhaps,  in  Louisiana ;  and  this  constitutes  another  harsh  feature 
of  modern  American  slavery,  as  contrasted  with  the  ancient. 
Isothing  can  be  more  manifest  than  that  no  laws  against  the 
cruelty  of  masters  and  overseers  can  be  of  much  benefit  to  the  slave, 
if  he  is  still  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  a  master  whose  tyranny  had 
already  demanded  legal  interference,  and  who  would,  in  most  cases, 
be  exasperated  against  the  slave  on  whose  behalf  the  interference 
had  been  made.  Judge  Ruffin,  if  we  rightly  understand  him,  in  the 
case  of  "  the  State  vs.  Mann,"  adduces  this  as  a  reason  why  the  mas- 
ter must  not  be  indictable  for  a  battery  on  his  slave.  It  would 
only  prompt  him  to  "  bloody  vengeance,  generally  practised  with 
impunity,  by  reason  of  its  privacy."  (Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery, 
p.  247.) 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS. 


165 


Court,  in  any  sum  not  exceeding  five  hundred  dol- 
lars," &c.    (Eev.  Code,  379  ;  Act  of  June  18,  1822.) 

Here,  again,  no  satisfaction  or  remuneration  is 
awarded  to  the  slave^foT  "  a  slave  is  not  capable  of 
being  injured;"  he  is  a  ^'chattel" — a  thing" — not 
a  person.  And  it  is  only  an  unusuaV  punishment 
that  is  forbidden  !  The  masters  and  'overseers  have 
only  to  repeat  their  excessive  punishments  so  fre- 
quently that  they  become  "wsz/aZ,"  and  the  statute 
does  not  apply  to  them  !  In  this  view  it  holds  out 
an  inducement  to  render  the  most  cruel  inflictions 
usual.  Besides  all  this,  the  slave  can  bring  no  suit. 
He  can  enter  no  complaint.  He  can  bear  no  testi- 
mony. No  other  slave  or  free  colored  person  can 
bear  testimony  against  a  white  person ;  and  the  law 
is  administered  by  slaveholders.  It  is  incredible  that 
owners  and  overseers  should  be  much  restrained  by 
the  provisions  of  this  act. 

Alabama — has  a  statute  similar  to  that  of  Missis- 
sippi, except  that  the  fine  imposed  is  only  one  hun- 
dred dollars,  instead  of  five  hundred.  (Toulman's 
Digest,  631.) 

Missouri. — The  Constitution  not  only  empowers 
the  Legislature  to  oblige  the  owners  of  slaves  to 
treat  them  with  humanity,  and  to  abstain  from  all 
injuries  to  them  extending  to  life  or  limh^^  (Art.  3, 
Sec.  26,  last  clause,  1  Missouri  Laws,  48,)  but  it  is  also 
made  its  duty  to  pass  such  laws  as  may  be  necessary 
for  this  purpose. 

Here,  as  before,  the  "life  and  limb" — ^the  pecuni- 
ary value  of  the  "property" — appears  the  prominent 


166 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


idea.  Owners  of  property  may  not  wantonly  destroy 
it,  to  the  public  detriment,  at  the  risk  of  their  fami- 
lies and  creditors.  Owners  of  this  refractory  species 
of  property,  being  "  nursed  and  daily  exercised  in 
tyranny,"  are  under  special  temptations.  "To  treat 
them  [the  slaves]  with  humanity "  is  an  indefinite 
expression.  Eightly  construed,  it  would  restore  to 
them  the  right  of  testimony — the  rights  of  human 
beings.  But  this  was  not  the  design,  nor  is  it  the 
practical  construction  of  the  instrument.  So  far  as 
is  known,  (or  previously  to  1827,  the  latest  dates  in 
our  possession,)  "no  law  has  been  enacted  on  the 
authority  of  this  article  in  the  Constitution."  (Vide 
Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  43.) 

The  following,  however,  is  found  on  the  statute 
book : 

"  If  any  slave  resist  his  or  her  master,  mistress, 
overseer,  or  employer,  or  refuse  to  obey  his  or  her 
lawful  commands,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  such  master, 
&c.,  to  commit  such  slave  to  the  common  jail  of  the 
county,  there  to  remain  at  the  pleasure  of  the  master, 
&c. ;  and  the  sheriff  shall  receive  such  slave  and  keep 
him,  &c.,  in  confinement,  at  the  expense  of  the  per- 
son committing  him  or  her."    (1  Missouri  Laws,  309.) 

''^Laivfal  commands'''' — But  what  if  the  commands 
are  not  lawful  ?  And  who  is  to  decide,  and  by  what 
testimony  ?  The  slave  can  bear  no  testimony — can 
enter  no  complaint — can  set  up  no  plea  in  arrest  of 
proceedings.  The  "innocent  legal  relation,"  being 
a  mere  relation  of  owner  and  property,  would  not 
permit  this.    A  legal  process  between  owner  and 


PUBLISHMENT  BY  MASTERS. 


167 


chattel  would  be  an  absurdity,  and  the  statute, 
accordingly,  prescribes  none.     The  maskr  simply 

commits"  his  slave  to  the  "sheriff,"  and  it  is  the 
business  of  that  public  functionary  to  "  receive"  him. 
The  insertion  of  the  word  "lawful"  was  a  mere 
farce.  It  might  be  the  "command"  of  the  "owner" 
to  a  slave  wife  or  virgin  to  submit  to  his  embraces. 
Worse  punishments  than  imprisonment  are  known 
to  be  in  use  in  such  cases,  and  are  believed  to  be 
not  unusuaV  This  law  has  its  counterpart  or 
emendation  in  the  municipal  regulations  of  slave 
cities,  where  house  servants  (in  the  absence  of  any 
plantation  overseer)  are  summarily  sent  to  a  public 
oflBcer  to  be  whipped  a  specified  number  of  lashes, 
without  any  mention  of  the  offense. 

So  far  from  any  limitation  of  the  "  owner's"  author- 
ity and  power,  we  here  find  it  enlarged.  The  public 
arm,  instead  of  protecting  the  slave  against  the  mas 
ter,  assists  the  master  in  the  exercise  of  his  irrespon- 
sible despotism  over  the  slave. 

And  in  doing  this  the  slave  owner  is  invested  with 
a  dignity  not  conferred  on  any  other  class  of  citi- 
zens. He  becomes  ex  officio^  in  virtue  of  his  being 
a  slaveholder,  a  judicial  functionary  himself,  with 
the  powers  of  a  court  of  justice  to  award  sentence, 
and  order  a  public  ofl&cer  to  put  it  in  execution — a 
court  in  which  the  prosecutor  is  judge,  and  without 
even  the  forms  of  trial,  or  permitting  the  adverse 
party  a  hearing,  gives  verdict  and  sentence  in  his 
own  case ! 

This  feature  of  the  Southern  Slave  Code  was  ex- 


168  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


tended  over  all  the  United  States  by  the  decision  of 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  Prigg  vs.  Pennsylvania, 
in  which  it  was  laid  down  that  the  slave  owner  him- 
self has  authority  to  arrest  his  alleged  fugitive  with- 
out a  warrant  from  a  magistrate.  The  same  principle 
is  also  contained  in  the  Fugitive  Slave  Bill,  enacted 
by  the  Federal  Congress  in  1852. 

From  the  acts  of  the  Legislatures  we  now  turn  to 
the  decisions  of  the  Courts,  to  learn  the  practical 
value  of  the  protection  provided  by  the  statutes  for 
the  slave. 

The  State  vs.  Maner,  2  Hiirs  S.  C.  Eep.  453. 

S.  P.  Hilton  vs.  Caston,  2  Bay's  Eep.  98. 

White  vs.  Chambers,  2  Bay's  Eep.  70. 

State  vs.  Cheatwood,  Hill's  Eep.  459. 

**Pe7'  Cur.,  O'Neill^  J. — The  criminal  offense  of 
assault  and  battery  cannot^  at  common  law,  he  com- 
mitied  on  the  person  of  a  slave.  For,  notwithstanding 
for  some  purposes  a  slave  is  regarded  in  law  as  a 
person,  yet  generally  he  is  a  mere  chattel  personal, 
and  his  right  of  personal  protection  belongs  to  his 
master^  who  can  maintain  an  action  of  trespass  for 
the  battery  of  his  slave. 

There  can  therefore  he  no  offense  against  the  State 
for  a  mere  heating  of  a  slave,  unaccompanied  by  any 
circumstances  of  cruelty,  or  an  attempt  to  kill  and 
murder.  The  peace  of  the  State  is  not  thereby  hrohen^ 
for  a  slave  is  not  generally  regarded  as  legally  capa- 
ble of  being  within  the  peace  of  the  State.  He  is 
to  not  a  citizen,  and  is  not,  in  that  character,  entitled 
her  protection."  (Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p.  243.) 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS. 


169 


It  may  be  thought  that  this  case  is  not  in  point, 
in  discussing,  as  we  here  do,  the  liabilities  of  masters 
for  maltreating  their  slaves,  as  this  was  not  the  case 
of  a  slave  master.  Our  argument  is  this :  If  the 
Courts  decide  that  white  persons,  not  the  owners  of 
the  slave  thus  abused,  cannot  be  punished  for  assault 
and  battery,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  owners  can- 
not be. 

And  this  is  distinctly  laid  down  in  the  case  that 
next  follows,  where,  although  the  defendant  was 
only  the  hirer  and  not  the  oiuuer,  the  Court  laid  down 
the  rule  of  law  for  an  owner,  and  then  applied  it  to 
the  hirer,  which  (with  the  preceding)  covers  the 
whole  ground,  and  shows  that  the  slave  has  no  legal 
remedy  or  protection  in  the  Criminal  Code  against 
assault  and  battery,  from  any  person  whatever  /  The 
right  of  the  mastei^  to  maintain  an  action  against  the 
assailant  of  his  slave  property  for  pecuniary  dam- 
ages, is  altogether  another  question. 

The  master  is  not  liable  to  an  indictment  for  a  bat- 
tery committed  UPON  his  slaved  (Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  p.  244.) 

This  statement  is  the  Eeporter's  (or  Mr.  Wheeler's) 
marginal  title  to  the  case  of  The  State  vs,  Mann, 
Dec.  7,  1829.  2  Devereaux's  North  Carolina  Kep. 
263." 

The  defendant  was  indicted  for  an  assault  and 
battery  upon  Lydia,  the  servant  of  one  Elizabeth 
Jones,  On  the  trial  it  appeared  that  the  defendant 
had  hired  the  slave  for  a  year ;  that  during  the  term 
the  slave  had  committed  some  small  offense,  for 


170  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


which  the  defendant  nndertook  to  chastise  her;  that 
while  in  the  act  of  so  doing,  the  slave  ran  off,  where- 
upon the  defendant  called  upon  her  to  stop,  which 
being  refused,  he  shot  at  and  wounded  her.  The 
Judge  in  the  Court  below  charged  the  jury  that  if 
they  believed  the  punishment  inflicted  by  the  defend- 
ant was  cruel  and  unwarrantable,  and  dispioportion- 
ate  to  the  offense  committed  by  the  slave,  that  in  law 
the  defendant  was  guilty,  as  he  had  only  a  special 
property  in  the  slave,  A  verdict  was  returned  for  the 
State,  and  the  defendant  appealed. 

^''Per  Cur,^  Ruffin^  J, — A  Judge  cannot  but  lament, 
when  such  cases  as  the  present  are  brought  into  judg- 
ment. It  is  impossible  that  the  reasons  on  which 
they  go  can  be  appreciated  but  where  institutions 
similar  to  our  own  exist,  and  are  thoroughly  under- 
stood. The  struggle,  too,  in  the  Judge's  own  breast 
between  the  feelings  of  the  man  and  the  duty  of  the 
magistrate,  is  a  severe  one,  presenting  strong  tempt- 
ation to  put  aside  such  questions,  if  it  be  possible. 
It  is  useless,  however,  to  complain  of  things  in  our 
political  state.  And  it  is  criminal  in  a  Court  to  avoid 
any  responsibility  which  the  laws  impose.  With 
whatever  reluctance,  therefore,  it  is  done,  the  Court 
is  compelled  to  express  an  opinion  upon  the  extent 
of  the  dominion  of  the  master  over  the  slave  in  North. 
Carolina.''  ^^The  inquiry  here  is^  whether  a  cruel  and 
unreasonable  battery  upon  a  slave^  by  the  hirer ^  is  indict- 
able. The  Judge  below  instructed  the  jury  that  it 
is.  He  seems  to  have  put  it  upon  the  ground  that 
the  defendant  had  but  a  special  property.    Our  laws 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS.  171 


uniformly  treat  the  master  or  other  person  having 
the  possession  and  command  of  the  slave,  as  entitled 
to  the  same  extent  of  authority.  The  object  is  the 
same — the  service  of  the  slave ;  and  the  same  powers 
must  be  confided.  In  a  criminal  proceeding,  and 
indeed  in  reference  to  all  other  persons  but  the  gen- 
eral owner,  the  hirer  and  possessor  of '  the  slave,  in 
relation  to  both  rights  and  duties,  is,  for  the  time 
being,  the  owner.  This  opinion  would,  perhaps, 
dispose  of  this  particular  case,  because  the  indict- 
ment which  charges  a  battery  upon  the  slave  of 
Elizabeth  Jones  is  not  supported  by  proof  of  a  bat- 
tery upon  defendant's  own  slave  ;  since  different  jus- 
tifications may  be  applicable  to  the  two  cases.  But 
upon  the  general  question  whether  the  owner  is  an- 
swerable, criminalter,  for  a  battery  upon  his  own 
slave,  or  other  exercise  of  authority  or  force,  not  for- 
bidden by  statute,  the  Court  entertains  but  little 
doubt.  That  he  IS  so  liable  has  never  been  decided,  nor, 
as  far  as  is  known,  been  hitherto  contended.  THERE 
HAS  [have]  BEEN  NO  PEOSECUTIONS  OP 
THE  SORT.^  THE  ESTABLISHED  AND  UNI- 
FORM PRACTICE  OF  THE  COUNTRY  in  this 


*  This  testimony  tells  us  how  much  those  statutes  are  worth 
that  pretend  to  limit  the  amount  of  punishment  that  an  owner 
may  inflict  on  his  slave.  It  may  indeed  be  said  that  although  a 
master  is  not  indictable  in  general  terms  for  an  assault  and  battery, 
yet  he  may  be  indicted  for  violations  of  specific  provisions  of  a 
statute.  But  if  this  be  so,  why  was  not  the  defendant,  in  this  case, 
indicted  for  the  shooting  of  Lydia,  if  there  existed  any  statute  for- 
bidding such  an  outrage  ?    And  if  noty  where  is  the  protection  ? 


172 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


respect  is  the  best  evidence  of  the  portion  of  poiver  DEEM- 
ED BY  THE  WHOLE  COMMUNITY  EEQUI- 
SITE  TO  THE  PRESEKVATION  OF  THE  MAS- 
TER'S DOMINION.  If  we  thought  differently,  we 
could  not  set  our  notions  in  array  against  the  judg- 
ment of  every  lody  else^  and  say  that  this  or  that 
authority  may  be  safely  lopped  off.  This  has  indeed 
been  assimilated,  at  the  bar,  to  the  other  domestic 
relations,"  &c.,  Ac."^ 

Having  answered  this  plea  by  showing  the  con- 
trast between  such  domestic  relations  and  those 
between  master  and  slave,  and  the  consequent  degra- 
dation of    the  subject,"  his  Honor  proceeds : 

"What  MORAL  considerations  shall  be  addressed  to 
such  a  being,  to  convince  him,  what  it  is  impossible 
but  that  the  most  stupid  must  feel  and  know  can 
never  be  true^  that  he  is  thus  to  labor  upon  a  princi- 
ple of  natural  duty,  or  for  the  sake  of  his  own  per- 
sonal happiness  ?  Such  services  can  only  be  expected 
from  one  who  has  no  will  of  his  own ;  who  surren- 
ders his  will  in  implicit  obedience  to  that  of  another. 
Such  obedience  is  the  consequence  only  of  uncon- 
trolled authority  over  the  body.  There  is  nothing  else 
which  can  operate  to  produce  the  effect.  Tlie  power 
of  the  master  must  be  absolute^  to  render  the  submission 
of  the  slave  perfect  I  most  freely  confess  my  sense 
of  the  harshness  of  the  proposition.     I  feel  it  as 


*  The  answer  of  Judge  Ruffia  to  this  plea,  we  have  already 
copied,  in  our  definition  of  Slavery  in  Chapter  I.,  and  need  not 
repeat  it  here. 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS. 


173 


deeply  as  any  man  can.  And,  as  a  principle  of  moral 
right ^  every  person  in  his  retirement  must  repudiate 
it.  But  in  the  actual  condition  of  things  it  must  be 
so.  There  is  no  remedy.  This  discipline  belongs  to  tlie 
state  of  slavery.  They  cannot  he  disunited^  without  abro- 
gating at  once  the  rights  of  the  master^  and  absolving  the 
slave  from  his  subjection.  It  constitutes  the  curse  of 
slavery  to  both  the  bond  and  the  free  portions  of  our 
population.  BUT  IT  IS  INHERENT  IN  THE 
RELATION  OF  MASTER  AND  SLAVE.  That 
there  may  be  particular  instances  of  cruelty  and 
deliberate  barbarity  where  in  conscience  the  law 
might  properly  interfere,  is  most  probable. 

The  difficulty  is  to  determine  where  a  Court  may 
properly  begin.  Merely  in  the  abstract,  it  may  well 
be  asked,  which  power  of  the  master  accords  with 
RIGHT  ?  The  answer  will  probably  sweep  away  all  of 
them.  But  we  cannot  look  at  the  matter  in  that  light. 
The  truth  is,  that  we  are  forbidden  to  enter  upon  a 
train  of  general  reasoning  on  the  subject.  We  can- 
not allow  the  right  of  the  master  to  be  brought  into  dis- 
cussion in  the  Courts  of  justice.  The  slave^  to  remain  a 
slave^  must  be  made  sensible  that  there  is  no  appeal  from 
his  master;  that  his  person  is  in  no  instance  v^urpedj 
but  is  conferred  by  the  laws  of  man  at  least,  if  not 
by  the  law  of  God.  The  danger  would  be  great 
indeed,  if  the  tribunals  of  justice  should  be  called  on 
to  graduate  the  punishment  appropriate  to  every 
temper  and  every  dereliction  of  menial  duty.  No 
man  can  anticipate  the  many  and  aggravated  provo- 
cations of  the  master,  which  the  slave  would  be 


174  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


constantly  stimulated,  by  his  own  passions  or  the 
instigations  of  others,  to  give ;  or  the  consequent 
wrath  of  the  master,  prompting  him  to  bloody  ven- 
geance upon  the  turbulent  traitor;  A  vengeance 

GENERALLY  PRACTISED  WITH  IMPUNITY,  BY  REASON 

OF  ITS  PRIVACY.  The  Court,  therefore,  disclaims  the 
power  of  CHANGING  THE  RELATION  in  which  these 
parts  of  our  people  stand  to  each  other."  I  repeat 
that  I  would  gladly  have  avoided  this  ungrateful  ques- 
tion ;  but  being  brought  to  it,  the  Court  is  compelled 
to  declare,  that  while  slavery  exists  among  us  in  its  pre- 
sent state^  or  until  it  shall  seem  fit  to  the  Legislature  to 
interpose  express  enactments  to  the  contrary,  it  will 
be  the  imperative  duty  of  the  Judges  to  recognize 
the  full  dominion  of  the  owner  over  the  slave,  except 
where  the  exercise  of  it  is  forbidden  by  the  statute 
And  this  we  do  on  the  ground,  that  this  dominion  is 
essential  to  the  value  of  slaves  as  property^  to  the  secu- 
rity of  the  master,  and  the  public  tranquillity,  greatly 
dependent  upon  their  subordination ;  and,  in  fine,  as 
most  effectually  securing  the  general  protection  and 
comfort  of  the  slaves  themselves.  Judgment  below 
reversed,  and  judgment  entered  for  the  defendant." 
(Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  244-8.") 

Here  is  a  document  that  will  repay  profound 
study.  The  moral  wrong  of  slavery  is  distinctly  and 
repeatedly  admitted,  along  with  the  most  resolute 
determination  to  support  it,  by  not  allowing  the  rights 
of  the  master  to  come  under  judicial  investigation^  be- 
traying a  consciousness  that  they  would  not  abide 
the  test  of  the  first  principles  of  legal  science.  The 


PUNISHMENT  BY  MASTERS. 


175 


Struggle  between  the  man  and  the  magistrate^  imply- 
ing that  slavery  requires  of  its  magistrates  to  trample 
upon  their  own  manhood ;  the  cool  and  deliberate 
decision  to  do  this,  and  to  elevate  the  law  of  slavery 
above  the  law  of  nature  and  of  nature's  God,  are 
painful  but  instructive  features  of  the  exhibition. 
And  so  is  the  incidental  testimony  to  the  frequency 
of  bloody  outrages,  "  generally  practised  with  impu- 
nity, by  reason  of  their  privacy." 

But,  in  this  chapter,  we  are  chiefly  concerned  with 
this  judicial  decision  that  a  cruel  and  unreasonable 
battery  on  a  slave  by  a  hirer  is  not  indictable,"  be- 
cause such  battery  by  an  owner  would  not  be;  the 
testimony  that  the  opposite  doctrine  has  never 
been  held  by  the  Courts;  *Hhat  he  [the  master]  is 
so  liable  has  never  been  decided,  nor,  so  far  as  known, 
contended  for  ;"  that  there  has  been  no  prose^butions 
of  the  sort  that  ^^the  established  habits  and  uni- 
form practice  of  the  country"  prove  that  the  whole 
community  deem  this  power  of  the  master  ^^requi- 
site to  the  preservation  of  his  dominion,"  and  that 
this  must  be  so,  while  the  slave  system  continues. 
The  arguments  of  Judge  Rufl&n  in  proof  of  this,  we 
deem  impregnable.  And  it  deserves  notice  that  this 
decision,  made  in  1829,  before  there  was  any  excite- 
ment raised  on  the  slave  question,  was  virtually 
endorsed  in  the  midst  of  the  anti-slavery  agitation,  in 
1837,  by  Judge  Hitchcock  of  Alabama,  (through  his 
recommendation  of  the  volume  for  the  use  of  the 

Southern  bar,")  as  containing  the  true  Southern 
doctrine. 


176 


THE-  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


All  this  should  be  borne  in  mind,  in  the  discussions 
of  the  next  chapter.  In  order  to  understand,  cor- 
rectly and  fully,  any  one  phase  or  feature  of  the 
slave  system,  it  must  be  studied  in  its  natural  and 
necessary  connection  with  the  other  features  of  the 
system  most  nearly  related  to  it,  and,  indeed,  with  all 
its  features ;  for  they  are  all  mutually  dependent  upon 
and  defined  by  each  other. 


CHAPTER  XIY. 


OF  LAWS  CONCERNING  THE  MURDER  AND  KILLING 
OF  SLAVES. 

The  structure  of  the  Laws,  and  the  condition  of  the  Slaves,  render  adequate 
protection  impossible. 

We  come  now  to  consider  the  laws  purporting  to 
restrain  and  punish  the  murderers  of  slaves. 

The  revelations  of  the  last  chapter  establish  clearly 
the  principle  and  the  fact  that  the  authority  of  the 
master  is  unlimited,  and  that  he  is  not  indictable,  and 
never  has  been  indicted  and  punished  for  the  cruel 
and  unreasonable  battery  of  his  slave."  It  seems 
difficult  to  conceive  how,  in  such  a  condition  of  the 
statute  book,  the  judiciary,  and  the  community,  there 
could  be  any  effectual  restraints  upon  the  murderers 
of  slaves,  or  how  they  could  be  convicted  and 
punished,  at  least  where  the  offenders  were  owners 
or  hirers  of  the  slaves  they  had  murdered.  If  a  man 
is  not  protected  from  cruel  and  unreasonable  battery 
at  the  pleasure  of  his  assailant,  how  can  he  be  pro- 
tected from  the  liability  to  be  killed  by  such  battery  ? 
And  if  the  law  permits  the  optional  battery  of  a 
8* 


178  THE  america:^^  slave  code. 


man,  what  power  can  it  retain  to  pnnisli  him  for  the 
natural  effects  of  such  battery  ?  Will  the  law  allow 
one  man  to  beat  another  as  much  as  he  pleases,  or 
shoot  him,  (as  in  the  case  last  cited,)  and  then  punish 
him  because  the  man  is  thus  killed  ? 

In  former  times,  the  murder  of  a  slave  in  most,  if 
not  all  the  slaveholding  regions  of  this  country,  was, 
by  law,  punishable  by  a  pecuniary  fine  only.  At 
present,  the  wilful,  malicious,  and  deliberate  murder 
of  a  slave,  by  whomsoever  perpetrated,  is  declared  to 
be  punishable  with  death,  in  every  State.  (See 
Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  36.)  The  exclusion  of  all  testi- 
mony of  colored  persons,  bond  or  free,  is  a  feature 
sufficient,  of  itself,  to  render  these  laws  nugatory. 
The  "  owner"  or  overseer"  may  command  the  slave 
to  attend  him  to  any  secret  spot,  and  there  murder 
him  with  impunity.  Or  he  may  do  it  openly,  (it  has 
often  been  done,)  in  the  sight  of  many  colored  per- 
sons, with  equal  impunity.  But  let  us  examine  some 
of  these  laws. 

South  Carolina,  1740. — The  Act,  in  its  pre- 
amble, sets  forth  that  cruelty  is  not  only  highly 
unbecoming  those  who  profess  themselves  Christians, 
but  is  odious  in  the  sight  of  all  men  who  have  any 
sense  of  virtue  or  humanity."  [Therefore  :]  "  To 
restrain  and  prevent  barbarity  being  exercised  to- 
wards slaves,  Be  it  enacted,  that  if  any  person  shall 
wilfully  murder  his  own  slave,  or  the  slaves  of  any 
other  person,  every  such  person  [i.  e.,  the  offender] 
shall,  upon  conviction  thereof,  forfeit  and  pay  the 
sum  of  seven  hundred  pounds,  current  money,  and 


\ 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


179 


shall  be  rendered  for  ever  incapable  of  holding,  ex- 
ercising, &c.,  any  office,  &c.  And  in  case  any  such 
person  shall  not  be  able  to  pay  the  penalty  and  for- 
feiture hereby  inflicted  and  imposed,  every  such 
person  shall  be  sent  to  any  of  the  frontier  garrisons 
of  the  Province,  or  committed  to  the  ,workhouse  in 
Charleston  for  the  space  of  seven  years,  &c.,  &c.,  at 
hard  labor."    (2  Brevard's  Digest,  241.) 

Another  provision  of  the  same  Act  is  as  follows : 
If  any  person  shall,  on  a  sudden  heat  or  passion, 
OR  by  undue  correction^  kill  HIS  OWN  SLAVE,  or  the 
slave  of  any  other  person,  he  shall  forfeit  the  sum 
of  three  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  current  money." 
(lb.,  241.) 

For  this  latter  offense  there  seems  to  have  been  no 
incapacity  to  hold  office. 

The  greater  part  of  cases,  especially  in  the  absence 
of  colored  testimony,  would  come  under  this  latter 
provision.  To  shoot  down  a  slave  deliberately  would 
incur  the  heavier  fine,  and  the  civil  disability.  To 
beat  out  his  brains  with  a  club,  or  whip  him  to  death, 
would  cost  £350  ;  that  is,  if  any  free  white  person 
should  witness  the  act,  and  see  fit  to  institute  pro- 
ceedings. 

This  Act  continued  in  force  till  1821,  when  the 
wilful  murder  of  a  slave  was  made  punishable  with 
death,  without  benefit  of  clergy ;  while  the  penalty 
for  killing  in  sudden  heat,"  or  undue  correction," 
was  reduced  to  five  hundred  dollars^  but  authorizing  an 
imprisonment  for  six  months.  This  latter  sum,  there* 
lore,  in  South  Carolina,  may  be  considered  the  price 


180  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


at  which  a  slave  owner  is  licensed  to  kill  a  slave,  in 
the  prescribed  manner,  as  above ;  with  some  hazard, 
perhaps,  of  six  months'  confinement-- both  contingent 
npon  the  testimony  of  a  free  white  person ! 

North  Carolina.  —  Act  of  1798,  section  3: 
Whereas,  by  Act  of  another  Assembly,  passed  in 
the  year  1774,  the  killing  of  a  slave,  however  wanton, 
cruel,  and  deliberate,  is  only  punishable,  in  the  first 
instance,  by  imprisonment,  and  paying  the  value 
thereof  to  the  OWNER,  which  distinction  of  criminality 
between  the  murder  of  a  white  person  and  one  who 
is  equally  a  humail  creature,  but  merely  of  a  difierent 
complexion,  is  disgraceful  to  humanity,  and  de- 
grading in  the  highest  degree  to  the  laws  and  prin- 
ciples of  a  free,  Christian,  and  enlightened  country ; 
Be  it  enacted,  &c.,  that  if  any  person  hereafter  be 
guilty  of  maliciously  kilUng  a  slave,  such  offender 
shall,  on  the  first  conviction  thereof,  be  adjudged 
guilty  of  murder,  and  shall  suffer  the  same  punish- 
ment as  if  he  had  killed  a  free  man :  Provided  always, 
this  act  shall  not  extend  to  any  person  killing  a  slave 
outlawed  by  virtue  of  any  Act  of  Assembly  of  this 
State,  or  to  any  slave  in  the  act  of  resistance  to  his 
lawful  owner  or  master,  or  to  any  slave  DYING  under 
MODERATE  CORRECTION !"  (Hayward's  Manual,  530.) 

What  a  contrast  between  the  preamble  and  the 
details  of  the  Act !  Disgraceful  to  make  a  distinction 
between  white  and  colored  persons,  yet  still  keeping 
up  the  disgraceful  distinction.  The  wilful  and 
malicious  murder"  of  the  slave  to  be  punished, 
^'-provided''''  said  ^'wilful  and  malicious  murder"  be 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


181 


not  thus  and  thus  committed,  &c. ;  implying  impu- 
nity to  other  forms  of  such  murder. 

Notice  the  exceptions  provided  against. 

1.  ''Wilful  and  malicious  killing  a  slave"  is  to  be 
punished,  provided''''  it  be  not  ''the  killing  of  a  slave 
outlawed^''''  &c. 

The  meaning  of  this  appears  in  the  fact,  that  a 
proclamation  of  outlawry  against  a  slave  is  author- 
ized by  statute,  whenever  he  runs  away  from  his 
master,  conceals  himself  in  some  obscure  retreat,  and, 
to  sustain  life^  "kills  a  hog,  or  some  animal  of  the 
cattle  kind.''  (See  Hayward's  Manual,  521.  Act.  of 
1741,  ch.  24,  sect.  45.    Stroud,  p.  38.) 

2.  Another  exception  is  the  case  of  "  any  slave  in 
the  act  of  resistance  tOj  his  lawful  owner  or  master.'' 
The  Courts  have  determined  that  this  proviso  renders 
it  lawful  to  kill  a  slave  "  resisting  or  offering  to  resist 
his  master  by  force."   (2  Hayward's  Eeports,  p.  54.) 

No  matter  what  the  occasion  or  the  necessity  of 
resistance  may  be — whether  to  ward  off  murderous 
attacks,  or  (in  the  case  of  females)  outrages  worse 
than  murder,  the  first  motion  or  preparation  for  self- 
defense  is  the  signal  for  lawful  slaughter,  on  the 
spot,  according  to  statute/  This,  in  an  Act  ostensibly 
for  the  slave's  protection.  Bearing  in  mind  that  the 
master's  account^  of  the  matter  (in  the  absence  of 

*  At  Alexandria,  (D.  C.,)  in  1823,  a  slave  owner  chased  his  female 
slave,  whip  in  hand,  in  open  daylight,  before  multitudes,  to  the 
end  of  a  wharf,  where  she  jumped  in  and  was  drowned.  Verdict 
of  the  coroner's  inquest:  "Death  by  suicide  to  escape  deserved 
punishment."  The  term  "deserved"  being  inserted  by  testimony  of 
the  "  owner,"  without  even  a  statement  of  the  offense. 


182  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


white  witnesses)  cannot  be  questioned  in  Court,  we 
have  the  doctrine  of  Judge  Euffin  and  of  Prince's 
Digest  sustained.  "  The  slave  must  be  taught  that 
there  is  no  appeal  from  his  master."  "  His  life  must 
be  in  his  master's  keeping." 

3.  The  third  exception  is  the  case  of  a  slave  dying 
under  moderate  correction! ! I  This  gives  us  a  legis- 
lative definition  of  "  moderate  correction."  It  is  such 
as  may  be  apprehended  or  supposed  to  endanger  and 
even  take  away  the  life  of  the  slave.  In  the  light  of 
this,  we  may  understand  also  the  prohibition  of  ^''un- 
usual punishment."  It  does  not  always  reach  the  case 
of  those  who  die  under  the  lash,  for  even  this  may 
be  ''moderate  correction,"  and  consequently  not 
unusual." 

The  sum  of  the  matter  is,  then,  this:  In  North 
Carolina,  the  wilful  and  malicious  killing  of  a  slave," 
if  proved  by  white  witnesses,  is  to  be  punished  by 
death,  ^^provided^^  the  said  slave,  being  ''in  pursuit 
of"  "  liberty  and  happiness,"  does  not  hold  his  "right 
to  life"  more  sacred  than  the  life  of  "a  hog,  or  some 
animal  of  the  cattle  kind!"  Provided,  also,  that,  in 
self-defense,  she  or  he  never  offers  to  lift  a  finger  to 
avert  rape  or  murder;  and  provided,  finally,  that  he 
is  not  killed  "under  moderate  correction !" 

Tennessee.— Act  of  October  23,  1799;  similar  to 
the  Act  of  North  Carolina,  and  with  a  like  proviso. 
(Laws  of  Tennessee.) 

The  outlawry  of  slaves  is  a  very  common  occur- 
rence in  the  slave  States. 

Georgia. — Constitution,  art.  4,  sect.  12:  "Any 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


183 


person  who  shall  maliciously  dismemher  or  deprive  a 
slave  of  life^  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  would 
be  inflicted  in  case  the  like  offense  had  been  com- 
mitted upon  a  free  white  person,  and  on  like  proof,* 
except  in  case  of  insurrection  of  said  slave,  and  unless 

SUCH  DEATH  SHOULD  HAPPEN  BY  ACCIDENT,  IN  GIVING 
SUCH  SLAVE  MODERATE  CORRECTION."  '  (PrinCc's  Di- 
gest, 559.) 

One  question  presents  itself  in  a  review  of  such 
enactments.  What  definite  objects  were  intended  to 
he  reached  hy  them  ?  A  decent  respect  for  the  intel- 
lects and  the  common  sense  of  Southern  legislators 
forbids  the  supposition  that  they  could  have  been 
seriously  intended  for  the  protection  of  the  slave. 
The  uniform  exclusion  of  colored  witnesses  is  con- 
clusive of  this.  When,  in  a  distinct  chapter,  we 
shall  consider  that  feature  of  the  Slave  Code,  this 
conclusion  will,  perhaps,  be  more  deeply  impressed. 
The  preambles  quoted  from  the  Acts  of  North  and 
South  Carolina  betray  a  consciousness  that  the  sterner 
features  of  the  Slave  Code  are  "odious,"  "disgrace- 
ful," and  "degrading"  to  a  "free.  Christian,  and  en- 
lightened country."  Philanthropic  men  at  the  South, 
more  or  less  distinctly  dissatisfied  with  the  Slave  Code, 
might  be  also  appeased  by  some  apparent  relaxations. 
Attempts  by  some  members  of  the  Legislatures  to 

*  It  must  not  be  inferred  that  this  provision  restores  the  testi- 
mony of  colored  witnesses.  It  only  reminds  us  that  such  witnesses 
cannot  be  summoned  to  attest  the  murder  of  one  white  person  by 
another,  thus  weakening  the  arm  of  civil  protection  in  general, 
throughout  the  entire  South. 


184 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


introduce  reforms  would  be  likely  to  be  marred  and 
rendered  abortive  by  incongruous  provisos,  engrafted 
by  the  majority  upon  bills  proposed  by  them.  In 
these  ways,  we  may  readily  account  for  the  absurd 
and  confused  legislation  recorded  in  this  and  the  pre- 
ceding chapters. 

We  turn  next  to  the  reported  cases  in  Wheeler's 
Law  of  Slavery,  for  any  additional  light  on  the  sub- 
ject of  this  chapter,  and  of  the  preceding  one.  One 
division  of  his  book,  numbered  XIV.,  on  page  200, 
is  headed  thus :  "  Masters'  and  others'  liabilities 
FOR  MALTREATING  THEIR  SLAVES."  If  any  materials 
are  to  be  found  in  all  the  decisions  made  on  that 
subject  [of  Slavery]  in  the  several  Courts  of  the 
United  States  and  State  Courts,"  of  which  Mr. 
Wheeler's  work  is  ^'  a  compilation,"  which  could  show 
that  adequate  legal  protection  against  outrage  and 
murder  is  extended  to  the  slave,  we  have  certainly 
a  right  to  look  for  it  under  this  appropriate  head. 
Especially  might  it  be  reasonably  expected,  after 
such  a  note  by  the  author  or  compiler  as  the  fol- 
lowing, which  is  appended  to  the  title  of  this  same 
division  or  chapter,  at  the  foot  of  page  200,  viz : 

'*It  is  stated  in  Stroud's  Sketch  of  the  Laws  re- 
lating to  Slavery,  p.  35,  '  that  the  master  may^  at  his 
pleasure^  inflict  any  species  of  punishment  upon  the  per- 
son of  his  slaveJ  This  proposition,  so  repugnant  to 
humanity,  is  equally  opposed  to  the  fact,  and  also  to 
the  law.    In  those  States  where  there  are  no  enact- 


^  See  title-page  of  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery. 


MUEDER  OF  SLAVES. 


185 


ments  upon  the  subject,  the  common  law  would  be 
efficient  to  protect  the  slave.  Our  books  are  full  of 
criminal  prosecutions  for  cruelty  to  horses  and  other 
animals.  And  the  common  law  remedy  is  considered 
effective  without  any  statutory  enactment.  And  if 
the  slave  be  considered  an  animal^  still  he  is  under 
the  protection  of  the  law,  and  acts  of  inhumanity  and 
cruelty  to  him  is  a  public  misdemeanor,  and  the  per- 
son guilty  may  be  indicted  and  punished." 
On  this  note  of  Mr.  Wheeler  we  remark : 

1.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  common  law,  if 
applied  to  the  slave,  would  amply  protect  him  from 
outrage  and  murder.  It  would  also  protect  him  in 
his  right  to  his  earnings  and  to  the  disposal  of  the 
products  of  his  industry,  to  exemption  from  seizure 
and  sale :  in  a  word,  the  common  law,  if  applied  to 
the  slave,  would  emancipate  him;  for  every  body 
knows,  and  the  Louisiana  and  Kentucky  Courts  have 
decided,  that  the  slave  becomes  free  the  moment  he 
comes  under  the  jurisdiction  of  common  law,  by 
being  carried  by  consent  of  his  master  out  of  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  municipal  law  which  alone  binds 
him.  There  is  no  such  municipal  law  against  "  horses 
and  other  animals,"  removing  them  from  the  protec- 
tion of  the  common  law.  Mr.  Wheeler  does  not 
appeal  to  the  municipal  law,  as  existing  either  in 
statutes  or  in  the  judicial  decisions  with  which  he  is 
so  conversant,  to  prove  that  the  slave  enjoys  effective 
protection.  It  is  this  municipal  law,  and  not  the 
common  law,  that  defines  the  condition  of  the  slave 

2.  Judge  Stroud  had  explained  and  vindicated  hia 


186  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


statement  by  the  following  explanation,  of  whicli 
Mr.  Wheeler  takes  no  notice : 

"  From  the  laws  which  I  shall  now  cite,  it  will 
fiiUy  appear  that,  so  far  as  regards  the  pages  of  the 
statute  booky  the  life,  at  least,  of  the  slave  is  safe  from 
the  authorized  violence  of  the  master.  The  evil  is 
not  that  laws  are  wanting,  but  that  they  cannot  be 
enforced ;  not  that  they  sanction  crime,  but  that  they 
do  not  punish  it.  And  this  arises  chiefly,  if  not 
solely,  from  the  cause  that  has  been  more  than  once 
mentioned — the  exclusion  of  the  testimony,  on  the 
trial  of  a  white  person,  of  all  who  are  not  white." 

If  the  reader  will  examine  the  laws  against  the 
murder  of  slaves  which  we  have  already  quoted,  he 
will  probably  agree  with  us  that  Judge  Stroud  has 
conceded  quite  enough  in  their  favor. 

3.  On  a  candid  review  of  all  the  slave  laws  we 
shall  have  collected  in  this  book,  with  the  judicial 
decisions  we  shall  have  quoted  from  Wheeler's  Law 
of  Slavery,  let  the  reader  judge  what  benefit  the 
slave  derives  from  the  existence  either  of  common 
law,  or  of  statutes,  or  of  decisions  of  Courts. 

4.  "Our  books,"  says  Mr.  Wheeler,  "are  fall  of 
criminal  prosecutions  for  cruelty  to  horses  and  other 
animals!''^  This  is  undoubtedly  true.  But  this  is 
not  pertinent  to  the  question  at  issue.  Mr.  Wheeler, 
in  order  to  have  met  the  statement  of  Judge  Stroud, 
should  have  been  able  to  say,  "  Our  books  abound 
in  criminal  prosecutions  for  cruelty  to  slaves^  But 
this  he  has  not  said. 

5.  And  this  brings  us  back  to  the  observation 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


187 


before  made,  that  if  tlie  Courts  have  extended  to  the 
slave  effective  protection  against  outrages  and  mur- 
ders, especially  by  their  owners,  we  have  a  right  to 
expect  the  reported  cases  and  instances^  in  this  division 
of  Wheeler's  compilation  of  all  the  decisions,"  &c., 
&c.,  which  is  headed,  Masters'  and  others'  lia- 
bilities FOR  MALTREATING  THEIR  SLAVES." 

Let  us,  then,  see  what  this  division  of  the  work 
contains,  and  notice  whether  it  ^4s  full  of  criminal 
prosecutions  for  cruelty  to"  slaves,  and  notice,  too, 
the  amount  of  protection  thus  afforded  to  them. 

The  reported  cases  under  this  head  occupy  less 
than  five  pages,  and  are  only  seven  in  number  Two 
only  of  these  were  ^''criminal  prosecutions'''^  in  the 
name  of  **the  State."  The  remaining  five  are 
suits  at  law  between  one  white  citizen  and  another, 
respecting  this  peculiar  kind  of  property. 

1.  "  Markham  vs.  Close,  Sept.  1831.  2  Louisiana 
Eep.,  581. — Held  by  the  Court,  Porter^  J".,  that  the 
infliction  of  cruel  punishment  on  a  slave  by  his 
master  is  a  criminal  offense,  and  must  be  punished 
by  a  criminal  prosecution,  and  not  before  a  civil  tri- 
bunal. And  after  conviction,  the  fine  is  to  be  levied 
on  the  offender  by  the  Court  before  whom  the  con- 
viction takes  place."  (Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p. 
200.) 

The  decision  seems  at  variance  with  that  of  Judge 
Euffin  before  quoted,  but  the  real  object  and  the 
effects  of  the  decision  do  not  clearly  appear.  If,  as 
seems  implied,  the  defendant  was  the  owner  of  the 
slave  he  abused,  the  right  of  the  plaintiff  to  bring  a 


188  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


suit  against  him  is  not  apparent.  And  the  decision 
would  seem  to  have  dismissed  the  proceedings  on  the 
ground  that  there  was  no  foundation  for  a  private 
litigation.  Whether  any  criminal  prosecution" 
was  ever  brought  against  the  offender,  we  do  not 
learn.  Very  probably  the  effect  of  the  decision  was 
to  quash  the  proceedings  and  hush  up  the  matter  en- 
tirely, while  the  marginal  title  reads,  Master  may  he 
convicted  and  fined  for  maltreating  his  slave."  We 
get  no  evidence  that  he  was  thus  convicted  and  fined. 

2.  ^^AUan  vs.  Young,  Jan.  T.,  1821.  9  Martin's 
Louisiana  Eep.,  221.- — Matthews^  J, :  "This  is  a  case 
in  which  the  plaintiff  seeks  to  recover  damages  to  the 
value  of  a  slave,  alleged  to  have  been  killed  by  the 
defendant."  The  decision  is  thus  stated  in  the  mar- 
gin: '*If  a  slave  of  a  bad  character  is  pursued  on 
suspicion  of  felony,  attempt  to  seize  a  gun,  flies  and 
is  killed  in  the  pursuit,  the  Supreme  Court  will  not 
disturb  a  verdict  for  the  defendant  who  killed  /im." 

Of  ivhat  felony  the  slave  was  susjoected^^^  or  in 
what  respects  he  sustained  "  a  bad  character,"  we  are 
not  informed.  He  may  have  ventured  to  take  a 
tithe  of  his  own  earnings — ^he  may  have  harbored  a 
fugitive  slave — ^he  may  have  attempted  to  escape, 
himself,  into  freedom — ^he  may  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  absenting  himself  to  visit  his  wife — ^he  may 
have  attempted  to  teach  or  to  learn  the  alphabet. 
Or  he  may  have  been  suspectcd^^  of  some  of  these 
crimes ! 

3.  "Jennings  vs,  Furderburg,  Jan.  T.,  1827.  4 
McCord's  S.  C.  Rep.,  161. — Trespass  for  killing  the 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


189 


plaintiff's  slave.  The  defendant,  with  others,  being 
in  search  of  runaway  negroes,  surprised  them  in 
their  camp,  and  fired  his  gun  towards  them  as  they 
were  running  away,  to  induce  them  to  stop.  One  of 
the  negroes  was,  however,  killed  by  a  random  shot. 
Decision  :  "  The  firing  of  the  defendant  in  the  man- 
ner stated  was  rash"  and  incautious."  Hence  the  rule, 
as  in  the  margin  :  ^'  To  excuse  a  trespass  for  killing  a 
slave,  on  the  ground  of  accident,  it  must  appear  to 
have  been  done  without  the  least  fault  on  the  part 
of  the  person  killing."    (lb.,  p.  201.) 

4.  "Eichardson  vs.  Dukes,  Jan.  T.,  1827.  4  Mc- 
Cord's  S.  C.  Eep.,  156. — Trespass  for  killing  the 
plaintiff's  slave.  It  appeared  that  the  slave  was 
stealing  potatoes  from  a  bank  near  the  defendant's 
house.  The  defendant  fired  on  him  with  a  gun 
loaded  with  buck-shot,  and  killed  him.  The  jury 
found  a  verdict  for  plaintiff  for  one  dollar.  Motion 
for  a  new  trial — which  was  granted.  The  point  of 
law  established,  as  stated  in  the  margin,  was  this : 
The  proper  rule  of  damages  for  hilling  a  slave^  is  the 
value  of  (he  slave  to  the  master  at  the  time  of  his  death,"*^ 
(lb.,  p.  202.) 

5.  Westell  vs.  Earnest  and  Parker,  Jan.  T.,  1818. 
1  Nott  and  McCord's  S.  C.  Eep.,  182."  This  was 
another  suit  for  damages  in  killing  a  runaway  slave 
by  shooting  him,  as  he  ran  towards  a  swamp.  Ver- 
dict for  the  defendants.  Motion  to  set  it  aside, 
which  motion  prevailed.  Judge  Colcock  said  :  ^'K 
the  slave  assaults  a  'white  person,  he  may  be  killed ; 
but  a  slave  merely  flying  away  cannot  be  killed;" 


190  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


to  which  it  is  added  in  the  margin,  *'and  if  he  be, 
the  owner  may  recovefr  compensation  for  the  loss.^^ 
(Wheeler,  202-3.) 

6.  The  State  vs.  B.  Smith  and  E.  Smith,  Nov.  T., 
1817.  1  Nott  and  McCord's  S.  C.  Eep.,  13.— The 
defendants  were  convicted  of  killing  a  negro,  under 
the  Act  of  1740."  Sentence  was  pronounced  by 
the  Judge  upon  the  defendants,  that  they  pay  three 
hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  old  currency."  They  paid 
the  sum  and  took  the  Clerk's  receipt.  Afterwards 
the  sentence  was  amended  by  fining  each  of  the  de- 
fendants £350.  On  an  appeal,  before  J udge  Colcock, 
the  emendation  was  sustained.    (Wheeler,  p.  203.) 

7.  "  The  State  vs.  Eaines,  May  T.,  1826.  3  Mc- 
Cord's  S.  C.  Eep.,  533. — The  prisoner  was  indicted 
for  murder."  Verdict,  guilty  of  manslaughter,  and 
motion  in  arrest  of  judgment."  The  motion  pre- 
vailed, on  the  ground  that  the  charges  in  the  indict- 
ment were  not  sufficiently  specific.    (lb.,  pp.  203^.) 

Whether  the  defect  was  intentional  cannot  be 
known,  but  such  arts  are  not  uncommon  when  the 
guilty  are  to  be  shielded. 

The  reader  has  now  before  him  all  the  evidences 
of  protection  to  the  slave,  whether  by  common  law" 
or  otherwise,  which  Mr.  Wheeler  has  presented  under 
his  appropriate  division,  headed,  "  Masters'  and  others'' 
liabilities  for  maltreating  their  slaves  " — although,  as 
he  says,  **Our  books  are  full  of  prosecutions  for 
cruelty  to  horses  and  other  ammals.^^ 

Of  the  seven  cases  adduced,  not  one  of  them  ap- 
pears to  have  resulted  in  the  punishment,  in  any 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


191 


way,  of  a  master  for  maltreating  his  own  slave.  Ex- 
cept, perhaps,  in  the  first  case,  where  no  conviction 
was  reached,  it  does  not  appear  that  either  of  the 
defendants  were  the  owners  of  the  slaves  maltreated 
or  killed.  And  four  of  the  seven  cases  were  clearly 
the  prosecutions  of  slave  owners  against  others  for 
the  destruction  of  their  property  ! 

In  the  division  of  the  book  headed,  Of  the  trial 
and  punishment  of  slaves,^^  there  is  a  case  (that  of 
State  vs,  Eeed,  June  Term,  1823,  2  Hawk's  N.  C. 
Kep.,  454)  which,  if  it  had  appeared  in  the  division 
of  Masters'  and  others'  liabilities,"  would  have 
seemed  a  case  in  point  for  citation  in  this  discussion. 
It  is  possible  that  it  was  placed,  by  mistake,  under 
the  wrong  head,  though  nothing  conclusive  appears 
to  show  that  the  prisoner  was  not  a  slave.  He  was 
indicted  for  the  murder  of  a  slave,  was  found  guilty, 
and  a  motion  for  arrest  of  judgment  because  of 
the  insufficiency  of  the  indictment  was  overruled. 
(Wheeler,  p.  210.) 

Another  case  occurs  in  the  division  of  the  book 
headed,  ^^Liabilities  of  others  to  masters  for  abusing 
their  slaveSj^^  which  seems  not  to  have  been  classified 
under  the  appropriate  head.  It  is  not  a  suit  of  the 
owner  for  damages,  but  a  criminal  prosecution  by  the 
State  for  the  murder  of  a  slave,"  under  the  Act  of 
1821,  viz:  State Cheatwood,  2  Hill's  S.  0.  Keports. 
The  defendant  was  convicted,  and  moved  in  arrest  of 
judgment,  on  the  ground  that  the  indictment  did  not 
charge  the  crime  in  the  words  of  the  statute.  The 
motion  was  overruled.    The  Eeport  does  not  state 


192 


THTE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


whether  the  prisoner  was  a  slave,  a  free  colored 
man,  or  a  white  man.    (Wheeler,  p.  250.) 

A  similar  instance  appears  in  the  case  of  "  State 
of  Mississippi  vs,  Jones,  June  Term,  1820,  Walker's 
Eep.,  83.)  ^'The  question  in  this  case,"  said  Judge 
Clarke,  arising  in  arrest  of  judgment,  transferred  on 
doubts  from  Adams  Superior  Court^  is^  whether^  in  this 
State,  murder  can  be  committed  on  a  slaved  His  Honor 
proceeded  to  argue  that  it  could,  and  decided  accord- 
ingly. The  color  and  condition  of  the  prisoner  does 
not  appear  from  the  Eeport. 

In  the  same  division  is  found  the  case  of  the  State 
vs.  Hale,  December  Term,  1823,  2  Hawk's  N.  C.  Eep., 
582,  in  which  it  was  decided  by  Judge  Taylor,  as 
stated  in  the  marginal  note  of  the  Eeporter,  that  ^^a 
battery  committed  on  a  slave,  no  justijlcation  or  cir- 
cumstances attending  it  being  shown,  is  an  indict- 
able offense."  (Wheeler,  pp.  239-40.)  But  this  could 
not  have  been  intended  to  apply  to  the  case  of  a  slave 
master  abusing  his  own  slave,  as  the  case  stands 
under  the  heading  of  "Liabilities  of  others  to  the 
master  for  abusing  his  slave."  And  in  giving  his 
opinion,  Judge  Taylor  said:  '^If  such  offenses  may 
be  committed  with  impunity,  the  public  peace  will 
not  only  be  rendered  extremely  insecure,  but  the 

VALUE  OF  SLAVE  PROPERTY  MUST  BE  MUCH  IM- 
PAIRED, for  the  offenders''^  [previously  described  as  a 
low  class  of  persons]  can  seldom  make  any  reparation 
m  DAMAGES."  *'It  cannot  be  disputed  that  a  slave 
is  rendered  less  capable  of  performing  his  master'^s 
service,  when  he  finds  himself  exposed  by  the  law 


MUKDER  OF  SLAVES. 


193 


to  the  violence  of  every  turbulent  man  in  the  com- 
munity." 

We  seem  to  have,  here,  a  revelation  of  the  exist- 
ing state  of  things  in  that  community,  which  com- 
pelled the  Courts,  with  the  ready  assent  of  the  slave- 
holders, to  make  use  of  the  criminal  code  to  protect 
slave  property !  And  this  perhaps  explains,  further, 
why  it  is  that  we  find,  in  "Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery, 
under  the  head  of  Liabilities  of  others  to  the  mas- 
ter for  abuse  of  his  slave,"  a  number  of  Reports  of 
criminal  prosecutions,  in  the  name  of  the  State^  for 
battery  and  even  for  the  murder  of  slaves !  What 
had  seemed  to  us  an  inappropriate  classification,  is 
now^  perhaps,  explained.  Irresponsible  rowdies,  ''of 
dissolute  habits,"  unable  to  pay  "damages"  to  the 
owner''''  of  the  slaves  whom  they  may  maim  and 
murder,  must  be  restrained  and  punished  by  the 
criminal  code! 

"Hall,  J. :  I  concur  in  the  opinion  given.  I  think 
it  would  be  highly  improper  that  EVERY  assault  and 
battery  on  a  slave  should  be  considered  an  indictable 
offense,"  &c.  "Much  depends  on  the  circumstances 
of  the  case,  when  it  happens,"  &c. 

Anomalies  and  self-contradictions  may  be  expect- 
ed in  slave  jurisprudence,  for  slavery  is  an  anoma- 
lous thing.  The  chattel  principle  is,  however,  the  key 
to  its  mysteries.  An  "  attempt  to  kill  and  murder" 
a  slave  is  a  blow  at  slave  property.  Even  if  an  owner 
kills  his  slave,  it  familiarizes  murder,  and  incites 
others  to  similar  acts. 

In  the  case  of  State  vs.  Maner,  it  was  decided  that 
9 


194  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


**an  assault  with  intent  to  murder  a  slave  is  indicta- 
ble."   (Wheeler,  p.  244.) 

"Commonwealth  vs.  Carver,  June  T.,  1827.  5 
Eand's  Va.  Eeports,  600. — The  prisoner  was  indicted 
for  feloniously,  maliciously,  and  unlawfully  shoot- 
ing, with  intent  to  maim,  disfigure,  disable,  and  kill 
a  negro  man  slave,  of  the  name  of  Armistead,  the 
PROPERTY  of  Andrew  Houten^  under  the  Act  of  9th 
of  February,  1819.  The  Judge  doubted  whether, 
a  negro  slave  is  the  subject  or  person  on  which  the 
offense  created  and  the  penalties  prescribed  by  the 
Act  can  be  committed  or  incurred,  and  adjourned  the 
case  to  the  General  Court. 

'-'The  Court — Breckenhrough^  — after  referring  to 
Dolly  Chappie's  case,  1  Virg.  Cas.  184,  declared  that 
the  slave  luas  a  person  on  whom  the  offense  of  stab- 
bing and  shooting  might  be  committed ;  and  that  the 
Act  was  intended  to  protect  slaves  as  well  as  free 
persons  from  such  outrages.  It  may  further  be  re- 
marked that  there  appears  no  reason,  arising  from 
the  relation  of  master  and  slave,  why  a  free  person 
should  not  be  punished  as  a  felon  for  maiming  a 
slave.  Whatever  power  our  laws  may  give  to  the  MAS- 
TER over  his  slave,  IT  is  as  IMPORTANT  FOR  the 
INTEREST  OF  THE  FORMER  as  for  the  protection  of 
the  latter,  that  A  stranger  should  not  be  permitted 
to  exercise  an  unrestrained  authority  over  him. 
The  opinion  of  the  Court  is,  that  judgment  ought 
not  to  be  arrested."    (Wheeler,  p.  254.) 

The  plain  implication  here  is,  that  the  power 
of  the  MASTER  IS  as  u.nrestrained  as  was  repre- 


MURDER  OF  SLAVES. 


195 


sented  and  decided  by  Judge  Euffin,  as  before 
cited. 

And  in  this  case,  again,  we  see  the  criminal  law  of 
^'the  State"  wielded  as  a  mere  implement  for  enforc- 
ing ^'  the  liabilities  of  others  to  the.  master,  for  abusing 
his  slave,"  to  the  injury  of  his  'interests." 

In  the  case  of  Fields  vs.  the  State  of  Tennessee, 
(Jan.  T.,  1829,  1  Virger's  Eeports,  156,)  on  writ  of 
error  to  arrest  judgment  against  said  Fields,  on  a 
verdict  against  him  for  manslaughter,  it  was  decided 
that  ^Hhe  felonious  slaying  of  a  slave  without  malice 
is  manslaughter."    Judgment  afl&rmed. 

We  close  our  examination  of  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery  on  the  topics  involved  in  our  present  chap- 
ter, without  having  been  Wble  to  ascertain  a  single 
instance  in  which  a  slave  oioner  has  been  convicted 
or  even  prosecuted  for  the  murder  of  his  own  slave; 
nor  have  we  found  an  exception  to  the  statement  of 
Judge  Eufhn,  before  cited,  that  a  cruel  and  unrea- 
sonable battery  on  a  slave"  by  his  owner^  or  hirer^  is 
not  an  indictable  offense,  and  that  ''''there  have  been 
no  prosecutions  of  this  sort.''''  Thus  far,  therefore,  the 
statement  of  Judge  Stroud,  that  "  the  master  may, 
at  his  pleasure,  inflict  any  species  of  punishment  on 
the  person  of  his  slave,"  though  contradicted  by  Mr. 
Wheeler,  stands  unimpeached,  so  far  as  we  can  dis- 
cover, by  any  cases  he  has  recorded  in  his  compila- 
tion of  Reports.  Not  even  the  case  of  Markham  vs. 
Close  furnishes  any  such  instance,  so  far  as  appears 
from  his  Report  of  it. 

If  it  be  said  that  a  motive  of  self-interest  in  the 


IW  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

mr'Ster  would  prevent  his  inflicting  outrages  upon 
hin  slave,  we  answer,  (1.)  That  this  restraint  operates 
only  in  those  cases  where  the  injury  would  destroy 
his  property  in  the  slave,  or  impair  his  power  to 
labor :  it  would  be  no  protection  against  the  infliction 
of  any  sufferings  and  indignities  which  fall  short  of 
this.  (2.)  Abundant  evidence  is  at  hand  to  prove 
that  this  motive  is  not^  in  numerous  instances,  suf- 
ficient to  restrain  the  passions  of  the  masters,  and 
prevent  the  maiming  and  killing  of  their  own  slaves, 
as  will  be  shown  in  another  chapter.  (3.)  Were  it 
otherwise,  the  fact  remains  that  the  law  does  no^  protect 
the  slave  against  his  master.  (4.)  Anger  and  malice 
often  act  in  opposition  to  self-interest.  How  comes 
it  that  ^'our  books  are  full  of  criminal  prosecutions 
for  cruelty  to  horses  and  other  animals,"  if  the  inter- 
est of  the  owner  is  itself  a  security  against  his  abuse 
of  his  own  property  ?  The  mahgnant  passions  of 
the  master  are  far  more  likely  to  be  excited  against 
his  slave,  who  by  a  word  or  a  looh  may  dispute  his 
authority,  defy  his  power,  or  withhold  the  respect  he 
claims,  than  by  a  dumb  animal,  governed  only  by 
natural  instinct. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


OF  THE  DELEGATED  POWER  OF  OVERSEERS. 

All  the  Power  of  the  Owner  over  his  Slave  is  held  and  exercised  also  by  Over- 
seers and  Agents. 

We  have,  tlius  far,  considered  chiefly  the  power 
of  the  slave  owner.  It  has  been  seen,  likewise,  that 
essentially  the  same  power  is  lodged  in  the  hirer  of 
a  slave.  Incidentally,  the  power  of  overseers  and 
agents  has  been  alluded  to.  But  we  must  now  take 
a  more  distinct  view  of  this  feature  of  slavery.  It 
has  been  expressed  thus  : 

^''All  the  power  of  the  master  over  the  slave  may  he 
exercised^  not  hy  himself  only^  in  person^  hut  hy  any  one 
whom  he  may  depute  as  his  agent    (Stroud's  Sketch, 

Considering  the  judicial  authority  vested  in  the 
slave  owner,  whoever  he  may  be,  (drunk  or  sober,) 
and  the  duty  of  the  "sheriffs"  and  public  negro 
whippers  to  execute  his  decisions,  (as  already  no- 
ticed,) this  additional  power  of  delegating  his  magis- 
terial dignity  and  authority  to  whomsoever  (drunk 
or  sober)  he  may  think  proper,  becomes  a  very  re- 


198  THE  AMEEICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


markable  one.  Irresponsible  himself,  and  absolute, 
he  commits  the  same  authority  over  the  slave  to  a 
subordinate  despot,  responsible  solely  to  himself. 
Louisiana,  by  express  statute,  enacts  as  follows  : 
The  condition  of  a  slave  BEING  MEKELY  A  passive 
ONE,  his  subordination  to  his  master,  and  all  who 
represent  him,  is  not  susceptible  of  any  modification 
or  restriction^  (except  in  what  can  excite  the  slave  to 
the  commission  of  crime,)  in  such  manner  that  he 
owes  to  his  master  and  to  all  his  family  a  respect 
without  bounds  and  an  absolute  obedience,  and 
he  is  consequently  to  execute  all  the  orders  which 
he  receives  from  him  or  from  them."  (1  Martin's 
Digest,  616.) 

Thus  does  ''the  innocent  legal  relation"  of  slave 
ownership  confer  on  every  slave  owner  a  power 
which  no  magistrate  or  government  holds  over  him^ 
or  over  any  subject  or  citizen  ;  and,  not  content  with 
this,  it  clothes  him  mth  the  prerogative  of  transfer- 
ring this  authority,  not  only  hy  the  sale  of  the  slave, 
but  by  verbal  commission  while  he  yet  owns  him. 
His  wife,  his  housekeeper,  his  overseer,  and  even 
his  young  children  share  his  unlimited  power  and 
authority  over  the  slave,  though  at  the  age  of  three- 
score !  Instead  of  controlling  his  own  children,  the 
slave  is  controlled  by  the  children  of  his  master,  and 
by  hired  overseers. 

The  exception^  in  the  statute  just  cited,  informs  us 
that  when  the  slave  is  "incited  to  crime"  by  the 
commands  of  his  tyrant,  whom  he  may  not  resist, 
lie  may  nevertheless  be  held  responsible  for  the 


POWER  OF  OVERSEERS. 


199 


crime !  In  its  practical  bearings,  the  law  can  effect 
nothing  else,  unless  it  be  the  martyrdom  of  the  slave. 
Whatever  crime  he  may  be  commanded  to  commit, 
he  can  lodge  no  information  against  his  master,  he 
can  bear  no  testimony  against  him.  If  he  persists 
in  refusing  to  assist  in  the  commission  of  the  crime, 
his  master  may  lawfully  "chastise"  him  with  the 
"  moderate  correction"  that  may  cause  his  death,  and 
then,  if  he  "offers"  resistance,  he  may  be  lawfully 
killed! 

Louisiana  is  said  to  be  the  only  State  with  an  ex- 
press statute  on  the  topic  of  the  master's  delegated 
authority,  but  the  usage,  recognized  by  the  Courts 
as  law,  universally  exists.  "In  the  other  slave 
States,"  says  Stroud,  (p.  44,)  "the  subjoined  extract 
from  Mr.  Stephen's  delineation  of  Slavery  in  the 
West  Indies  will,  it  is  believed,  accurately  express 
the  law  and  the  practice  : 

"  *  The  slave  is  liable  to  be  coerced  or  punished  by 
the  whip,  and  to  he  tormented  hy  every  species  of  per- 
soncd  ill-treatment^  subject  only  to  the  exceptions 
already  mentioned,  (i.  e.,  the  deprivation  of  life  and 
limb,)  by  the  attorney^  manager^  overseer^  driver^  and 
every  other  person  to  whose  government  and  control  the 
owner  may  choose  to  subject  him,  as  fully  as  by  the 
owner  himself.  Nor  is  any  special  mandate  or  ex- 
press general  power  necessary  for  this  purpose ;  it  is 
enough  that  the  inflictor  of  the  violence  is  set  over  the 
slave  for  the  moment,  or  hy  the  oiuner  or  hy  any  of  his 
delegates  or  sub-delegates^  of  whatever  rank  or  character^ 
(Stephen's  Slavery,  p.  46.) 


200  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


"  This  power  of  deputation  by  the  master  is  one 
of  the  degrading  and  distinguishing  features  of  negro 
slavery.  It  was  not  permitted  by  the  laws  of  vil- 
leinage." (Stroud,  p.  45.  See  9  Coke's  Eeports,  76 
A,  &c.    See  Stephen,  supra.) 

The  following  description  of  ^'•overseers''''  is  from 
William  Wirt's  Life  of  Patrick  Henry:  "Last  and 
lowest,  (i.  e.,  of  the  different  classes  of  society  in  Vir- 
ginia,) a  feculum  of  beings  called  overseers  ;  the  most 
abject,  degraded,  unprincipled  race,  always  cap  in 
hand  to  the  Dons  who  employed  them,  and  furnish- 
ing materials  for  the  exercise  of  their  pride,  inso- 
lence, and  spirit  of  domination." 

The  great  majority  of  slaves,  male  and  female, 
labor  on  plantations,  under  the  charge  of  these 
"  overseers."  The  "  house  servants,"  as  already  seen 
by  the  statute  of  Louisiana,  are  under  absolute  sub- 
jection to  every  member  of  the  family.  Slaves  hired 
out,  waiters  at  hotels,  &c.,  are,  in  this  particular,  in 
no  better  condition.  Almost  every  where,  they  are 
controlled  by  others,  in  addition  to  the  direct  control 
of  their  owners. 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 


OF  THE  PKOTECTION  OF  SLAVE  PEOPEKTY  FROM 
DAMAGE  BY  ASSAULTS  FROM  OTHER  PERSONS  THAK 
THEIR  OWNERS. 

Slaves  are  better  protected  as  Property,  than  they  are  as  Sentient  Beings. 

It  has  been  represented  that  the  slaves  are  suffi- 
ciently protected  from  outrage  and  murder  on  the 
part  of  those  who  are  not  their  owners,  by  the  fact 
that  slave  property  is,  of  course,  protected  by  law 
from  such  depredations,  and  that  the  interest  of  the 
master  affiDrds  a  guaranty  for  the  enforcement  of 
such  laws. 

In  our  researches  after  the  legal  protection  of 
slaves,  in  the  preceding  chapters,  a  large  portion  of 
fill  the  legal  proceedings  that  have  come  before  us 
have  been  found  to  be  of  this  character.  Under  the 
head  of  Masters^  and  others'  liabilities  for  maltreating 
their  slaves,"  we  have  met,  chiefly^  with  suits  of  mas- 
ters against  the  depredators  upon  their  'property! 
And  what  purported  to  be  criminal  prosecutions^  we 
have  found,  on  inspection,  to  be  State  actions  to  pre- 
vent "damage"  to  the  slaveholder.  But  we  come 
9* 


202 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


now  to  consider,  directly,  the  laws  avowedly  framed 
for  that  object. 

Slaves,  being  objects  of  property,  if  injured  by 
third  persons,  their  owners  may  bring  suit  and  re- 
cover damages  for  the  injury.  This  is  a  maxim  of 
the  common  law,  in  respect  to  property  in  general, 
and  it  may  therefore  be  assumed  to  be  the  law  of  all 
the  slaveholding  States,  in  regard  to  slaves  also." 
(Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  59.) 

Maryland. — -Decision  of  Supreme  Court :  "  There 
must  be  a  loss  of  service^  or  at  least  a  diminution  of 
the  faculty  to  labor,  to  warrant  an  action'  by  the 
master."  (1  Harris  &  Johnson's  Eeports,  4;  Corn- 
fute  vs.  Dale.    Stroud,  p.  59.    Wheeler,  p.  239.) 

South  Carolinta. — Act  of  1740:  ''If  any  negro 
or  other  slave  who  shall  be  employed  in  the  lawful 
business  of  his  master,  owner,  overseer,  &c.,  shall  be 
beaten,  &c.,  by  any  person  or  persons  not  having 
sufl&cient  cause  or  authority  for  so  doing,  and  shall 
be  modmed^  or  disabled  by  such  beating  from  perform- 
ing his  or  her  work,  such  person  or  persons,  so  offend- 
ing^ shall  forfeit  and  pay  to  the  owner  or  owners  of 
such  slaves,  the  sum  of  fifteen  shillings  current  money 
per  diem,  for  every  day  of  his  lost  time^  and  also  the 
charge  of  the  cure  of  such  slave."  (2  Brevard's  Di- 
gest, 231-2.) 

The  workings  of  this  law  will  appear  in  the  fol- 
lowing : 

Constitutional  Court  of  Appeals,  South  Carolina, 
1796.  Sims  White  vs,  James  Chambers. — "Special 
action  in  the  case  for  beating  the  plaintiff's  negro 


DAMAGES  DONE  TO  SLAVES. 


203 


man."  The  negro  was  charged  by  his  master  with 
the  care  of  a  fishing-canoe,  with  strict  orders  not  to 
let  any  one  have  it.  The  defendant  persisted  in 
taking  it  away,  and  the  negro  persisted  in  forbidding 
him,  ^'whereupon,  defendant  struck  him  a  blow  with 
his  fist,  then  took  a  paddle^  knocked  him  down^  and 
afterwards  beat  him  severely^  which  laid  him  up  for 
several  days,  before  he  was  able  to  go  about  his  business 
againy  Verdict  for  the  plaintiff.  Damages  £5,  and 
costs.  (2  Bay's  Eeports,  70.) 
A  similar  law  exists  in — 

Louisiana. — (Statute.)  "If  the  slave  {maimed^ 
&c.)  be  for  ever  rendered  unable  to  luork^  the  offender 
shall  be  compelled  to  pay  the  value  of  said  slave,  ac^ 
cording  to  the  appraisement  made  by  two  freeholders, 
appointed  by  each  of  the  parties ;  and  the  slave  thus 
disabled  shall  for  ever  be  maintained  at  the  expense 
of  the  person  who  shall  have  thus  disabled  him, 
which  person  shall  be  compelled  to  maintain  and 
feed  him,  agreeably  to  the  duties  of  masters  anc] 
slaves,  as  ordered  by  this  Act."  (1  Martin's  Digest, 
630-2.) 

North  Carolina. — It  has  been  held  that  patrols 
are  not  liable  to  the  master  for  inflicting  punishment 
on  the  slave,  unless  their  conduct  clearly  demon- 
strates MALICE  AGAINST  THE  MASTER."  (1  Hawks' 
Eeports,  418,  Tate  vs.  O'Neal.) 

Virginia. — Supreme  Court  of  Appeals.  May  vs. 
Brown  and  Boisseau.  Action  of  trespass,  &c.,  for 
breaking  into  his  close,  and  beating  several  of  his  slaves, 
so  that  he  was  deprived  of  their  services  for  a  long  time. 


204  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

The  defense  in  mitigation  of  damages  was,  that ^Zam- 
tiffhad  given  a  general  permission  to  Brown  (thongh 
not  in  his  employ  as  overseer)  to  VISIT  his  negro  quar- 
ters^ and  chastise  any  of  his  slaves  who  might  he  found 
acting  improperly!  This  defense  failed,  because 
BoisSEAU,  who  had  inflicted  the  beating,  had  re- 
ceived no  such  permission  from  the  plaintiff*.  (1 
Munford's  Eeports,  288.  Stroud's  Sketch,  pp.  59-60. 
Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p.  248.) 

The  workings  of  the  principle  of  delegated  au- 
thority are  signally  exemplified  in  this  last  case. 

In  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  the  division  or 
chapter  entitled,  Of  the  liability  of  others  to  the  master 
for  abusing  his  slave^''  occupies  about  27  pages.  Some 
of  the  cases  we  have  cited  already.  Under  this 
head  are  classed  several  State  prosecutions  for  crime; 
viz :  State  vs.  Hale,  State  vs,  Maner,  State  vs,  Mann, 
(before  Judge  Euffin,)  State  vs,  Cheatwood,  State  of 
Mississippi  vs.  Jones,  and  Commonwealth  of  Virginia 
vs.  Carver,  which  we  have  before  cited  in  our  13th 
and  14th  Chapters.  Under  this  same  classification, 
we  found  and  cited  also  a  number  of  civil  prosecu- 
tions for  hilling  slaves,  some  of  whom  were  runa- 
ways. 

We  will  here  glance  hastily  at  a  few  other  deci- 
sions of  the  same  class. 

Smith  vs.  Hancock,  4  Bibb's  Ky.  Eep.,  222.— 
"  Held  by  the  Court  that  in  an  action  of  trespass 
for  beating  a  slave,  the  property  of  the  plaintiff, 
whereby  he  died^  the  defendant  may  justify  by  showing 
that  the  slave  was  at  an  unlaioful  assembly^  combining 


DAMAGES  DONE  TO  SLAVES. 


205 


to  rebel,  and  that  he  refused  to  surrender,  and 
resisted  by  force."    (Wheeler,  p.  239.) 

Meetings  of  slaves  for  religious  worship  or  mental 
instruction  are  "  unlawful  assemblies^''''  as  will  be 
shown  in  the  proper  place. 

In  the  case  of  Skidmore  vs.  Smith,  the  harboring  of 
slaves  was  the  ground  of  complaint.  (Wheeler,  p. 
248.)  It  will  not  be  claimed  that  there  is  any 
valuable  protection  to  the  slave  in  this. 

Crawford  vs,  Cheney,  A.  D.  1824,  15  Martin's 
Louisiana  Rep.,  142,  was  '^an  action  brought  to 
recover  the  price  of  a  negro  whom  the  plaintiff 
charges  the  defendant  with  having  shot  and  killed." 
The  testimony,  it  was  argued,  was  weak.  Judge  Por- 
ter said:  act  charqed  here  is  one  rarely  committed 
in  the  presence  of  witnesses;''''  (owing,  he  might  have 
added,  to  the  law  excluding  colored  witnesses.)  He 
therefore  allowed  "  presumptive  evidence  to  support 
the  verdict."    (Weeeler,  p.  249.) 

Jourdan  vs.  Patten,  1818  ;  5  Martin's  Louisiana 
Rep.,  615. — A  suit  for  damages  by  injuring  a  slave, 
who  was  made  blind  by  the  assault.  The  defendant 
was  adjudged  to  pay  the  price  of  the  slave,  and  to 
take  possession  of  him,  as  his  property.  Marginal 
note,  (as  a  rule  of  law  established:)  If,  on  an  injury 
to  his  slave,  the  plaintiff  recovers  his  full  vakre,  the 
property  is  transferred  to  the  defendant^  on  payment  of 
the  judgment."  (Wheeler,  p.  249.)  And  so  the 
disabled  slave  is  'transferred"  from  perhaps  a  kind 
master  or  mistress,  and  from  the  presence  of  his 
wife  and  children,  and  the  scenes  of  his  childhood, 


206 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  turned  over  to  the  tender  mercies  of  his  perse- 
cutor, rendered  the  more  bitter  against  him  for  the 
losses  sustained  in  the  transaction,  and  the  prospect 
of  receiving  no  valuable  service  from  him !  And 
this  is  the  protection  (in  this  exigency)  afforded  to  the 
slave  by  his  master's  right  of  prosecuting  his  as- 
sailant ! 

The  Court,  it  seems,  were  not  unaware  of  the 
effects  of  this  decision.  In  making  it,  Judge  Mat- 
thews said:  "The  principle  of  humanity^  which 
would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  mistress,  whom 
he  had  so  long  served,  would  treat  her  miserable 
blind  slave  with  more  kindness  than  the  defendant, 
to  whom  the  judgment  ought  to  transfer  him,  cannot 
he  taken  into  consideration^  in  deciding  the  case."  And 
so  the  judgment  of  the  "Parish  Court"  (which  had 
decreed  the  payment  of  the  price  of  the  slave,  with 
an  additional  annuity  for  his  sustenance,  and  to  re- 
main loith  the  plaintiff-)  was  reversed.  (lb.) 

The  benefit  to  the  slave  of  this  protection  of  slave 
property  is  sufficiently  apparent.  It  is  the  master 
that  is  protected  in  his  property^  not  the  slave  in  his 
right  to  security.  The  award  is  to  his  master^  not  to 
him.  It  is  for  the  "loss  of  service"  or  "capacity  to 
labor,"  not  for  indignities  and  sufferings  endured; 
it  is  for  the  injury  of  a  working  heast^  not  of  a  man  ;  \ 
for  in  this  the  maxim  of  the  civil  law  holds  good — 
"  the  slave  is  not  capable  of  being  injured!"  Pro- 
perty damaged,  or  "malice  against  the  master^''  con- 
stitute the  offense — compensation  to  the  master  is  the 
redress!    The  "legal  relation"  of  owner  and  pro- 


DAMAGES  DONE  TO  SLAVES. 


207 


perty  is  wortliily  honored  and  expressed  in  all  this. 
Incidentally  and  remotely,  the  slave,  it  may  be,  in 
some  instances,  is  protected  by  this  from  injuries 
that  would  otherwise  cripple  or  kill  him.  The 
dread  of  the  bill  of  "damages"  may  be  some  re- 
straint. Slender  as  it  is,  it  is  the  best^  if  not  the  onbj 
protection  afforded  to  him  by  the  law. 

In  one  important  and  comprehensive  view,  this 
incidental  and  dubious  protection,  if  it  be  such,  is  an 
injury  to  the  slave  in  the  long  run,  and  on  the  whole. 
It  not  only  certifies  and  sanctions  his  degradation  to 
the  condition  of  a  brute,  but,  in  so  doing,  it  stands  in 
the  way  of  any  suitable  legislative  and  judicial  pro- 
tection. It  is  regarded  as  a  substitute  or  equivalent 
for  it.  It  not  only  prevents  proper  enactments  and 
processes,  but  it  vitiates  those  in  existence  and  in 
use.  We  have  seen  how  it  confounds  the  criminal 
with  the  civil  prosecutions  for  maltreating  slaves, 
classifies  indictments  for  murder  under  the  head  of 
"  liabilities  of  others  to  the  master  for  abusing  his 
slave  makes  the  penal  code  the  instrument  of  the 
slave  owner,  and  seduces  even  the  better  portion  of 
the  judges,  as  in  the  case  of  "the  State  vs.  Hale," 
(Wheeler,  pp.  239-43,)  while  making  the  most  fa- 
vorable and  merciful  decisions  known  to  slave  juris- 
prudence, into  the  lamentable  expedient  of  grounding 
their  decisions  upon  "  the  interests^''  of  the  owner,  and 
"^Ae  value  of  slave  property,''''  instead  of  the  majesty 
of  violated  law,  and  the  sacredness  of  human  life  ; 
or,  perhaps,  commingling  incongruously  the  two 
classes  of  considerations! 


208  THE  AMERICAlSr  SLAVE  CODE. 

As  a  matter-of-fact  result  of  all  this,  we  may  well 
be  assured  that  a  judiciary  and  a  community  accus- 
tomed to  award  ^''damages'''  to  a  slave  owner  for  the 
maiming  and  killing  of  his  slave,  will  not  long  con- 
tinue to  prosecute  with  efficiency  any  other — any 
criminal  processes  for  the  same  acts.  One  punish- 
ment for  one  misdemeanor  will  be  accounted  suffi- 
cient. If  the  one  is  inflicted,  the  other  will,  as  a 
general  if  not  a  universal  fact,  be  withheld  or 
evaded.  On  the  first  announcement  of  a  barbarous 
or  murderous  outrage  upon  a  slave,  human  nature 
even  among  slaveholders  will  gush  forth,  in  demands 
for  justice  upon  the  perpetrator.  An  indictment  for 
murder  may  be  talked  of,  or  even  resorted  to.  In 
the  mean  time  comes  the  ''^  owner''''  with  his  suit  for 
damages  for  loss  of  property  !  All  eyes  are  directed 
to  watch  the  result.  The  high  tone  of  moral  indig- 
nation gives  place  to  an  anxiety  for  the  pending 
issue  of  dollars  and  cents  !  If  the  defendant  loses  his 
case  and  pays  the  equivalent,  the  public  feeling  is 
appeased  or  modified.  Perhaps  a  sympathy  is  got 
up  in  the  defendant's  favor.  The  indictment  for 
murder  slumbers,  or  results  in  an  acquittal  or  a  par- 
don. The  man  is  not  to  he  fined  five  hundred  dollars 
and  then  hanged!  And  in  a  community  wherein 
slaveholders  administer  the  law,  the  prosecution  for 
damages  will  be  deemed  of  paramount  importance. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


FACTS  ILLUSTKATING  THE  KIND  AND  DEGREE  OP 
PROTECTION  EXTENDED  TO  SLAVES. 

The  extent,  the  atrocity,  the  frequency,  and  the  impunity  of  barbarous  outrages 
upon  Slaves,  show  that  the  Laws  afford  them  little  or  no  protection. 

We  have  occupied  so  mucli  space  witli  the  laws 
on  the  subject  of  the  protection  of  slaves,  that  we  can 
spare  little  room  for  the  abundant  facts  which  cor- 
respond with  and  illustrate  them. 

In  respect  to  the  murdering  of  slaves  by  white 
men,  with  general  impunity,  two  propositions,  if  sus- 
tained, will  settle  the  question.  First^  the  murdering 
of  slaves  by  white  men  has  all  along  been,  and  still 
is,  notoriously  frequent.  Not  a  few  of  these  mur- 
dered their  own  slaves.  Second^  upon  the  most  dili- 
gent inquiry  and  public  challenge,  for  fifteen  or 
twenty  years  'past,  not  one  single  case  has  yet  been 
ascertained"^  in  which,  either  during  that  time  or  pre- 


*  We  say  "  ascertained."  We  have  already  alluded  to  some  few 
cases  in  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  which  may  have  been  of  that 
character,  though  the  result  does  not  appear  clearly,  which  is  the 
more  remarkable,  as  the  compiler  had  called  in  question  the  state- 


210  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


viously,  a  master  killing  his  slave,  or  indeed  any 
other  white  man,  has  suffered  the  penalty  of  death 
for  the  murder  of  a  slave.  These  two  general  facts, 
if  they  are  facts,  tell  the  whole  story,  so  far  as  the 
protection  of  the  lives  of  slaves  is  concerned. 

At  a  time  of  much  general  excitement  on  this  very 
question,  during  the  period  just  now  mentioned, 
(1839,)  a  case  occurred  which,  it  was  generally  sup- 
posed on  all  hands  at  the  North,  would  prove  an 
exception.  A  Court  in  South  Carolina  convicted  a 
white  man  of  having  murdered  a  slave,  and  sentenced 
him  to  death.  Governor  Butler  declined  to  comply 
with  an  application  for  his  pardon,  assigning,  as  a 
reason,  that  the  eyes  of  the  civilized  world  were 
upon  them,  and  that  the  reputation  of  the  State  was 
at  stake.  This  appeal,  it  was  supposed,  would  be 
sufficient,  but  it  only  added  fuel  to  the  general  ex- 
citement occasioned  by  the  unusual  if  not  unprece- 
dented sentence  of  the  Court.  The  whole  State  was 
in  a  ferment.  The  Court  and  the  Governor  were 
denounced.  The  press  fulminated  its  anathemas ; 
and  before  the  day  of  execution  arrived,  the  commu- 
nity were  quieted  with  the  announcement  that  the 
prisoner  had  escaped!  Whether  the  locks  were 
opened  with  keys,  or  the  bolts  broken  ;  whether  the 
walls  were  pierced  or  the  windows  opened ;  or 
whether  the  higher  or  lower  authorities  connived, 
the  great  public  never  heard !   The  Southern  papers 

ment  of  Stroud.  There  may  have  been  convictions,  and  sentences 
of  death  may  have  been  passed,  and  the  criminals  permitted  to 
escape,  or  pardoned. 


PRACTICAL  PROTECTION. 


211 


were  watched  for  announcements  of  executive  oflfers 
of  reward  for  the  prisoner's  apprehension,  but  none 
ever  appeared.  The  fugitive  was  not  a  fugitive 
slave.  He  might  come  to  the  North,  if  he  pleased, 
without  danger  that  the  arm  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment would  molest  him !  He  was  not  guilty  of  re- 
belling against  a  slave  owner's  authority.  He  had 
only  murdered  a  slave  ! 

The  frequency  of  such  murders  in  South  Carolina, 
so  long  ago  as  1791,  was  publicly  announced  in  her 
Courts  of  law,  no  one  contradicting  it.  In  the  case 
of  the  State  vs.  McGee,  Messrs.  Pinkney  and  Ford, 
Counsel  for  the  State,  said:  The  frequency  of  the 
offense  {wilful  murder  of  a  slave)  was  OAving  to  the 
nature  of  the  punishment^''''  &c.,  (i.  e.,  a  pecuniary  fine.) 
(1  Bay's  Reports,  164.    Vide  Stroud,  p.  39.) 

''In  1791,  the  Grand  Jury  for  the  District  of 
Cheraw,  (South  Carolina,)  made  a  presentment  on 
the  same  subject,  expressing  their  confidence  that 
the  Legislature  would  provide  some  other  more 
effectual  measures  to  prevent  the  frequency  of 
crimes  of  this  nature."  (Matthew  Carey's  American 
Museum  for  February,  1791,  Appendix,  p.  10.  Weld's 
Slavery,  &c.,  p.  155.)  Yet  thirty  more  years  elapsed 
before  the  penalty  was  chaDged,  and  still  the  law 
seems  as  powerless  as  ever.  It  is  paralyzed  by  "  the 
innocent  legal  relation"  between  an  owner  and  his 
human  chattel ! 

If  any  one  doubts  the  frequency  and  the  impunity 
of  such  murders,  let  him  con  over  the  attested  facts 
in  the  book  to  which  we  have  so  frequently  referred, 


212  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

Weld's  Slavery  as  it  is."  Take  a  few  specimens. 
On  page  47  are  four  cases,  related  by  Eev.  William 
T.  Allan,  son  of  a  slaveholding  D.D.  in  Alabama. 

(1.)  ''A  man  near  Courtland,  Ala.,  of  the  name 
of  Thompson,  recently  shot  a  negro  -woman  through 
the  head,  and  put  the  pistol  so  close  that  her  hair 
was  singed.  He  did  it  in  consequence  of  some  diffi- 
culty in  his  dealings  with  her  as  a  concubine.  He 
buried  her  in  a  log  heap  ;  she  was  discovered  by  the 
buzzards  gathering  around  it."  (2.)  ^'Two  men,  of 
the  name  of  Wilson,  found  a  fine-looking  negro  man 
at  Dandridge's  Quarter,  without  a  pass,  and  flogged 
him  so  that  he  died  in  a  short  time.  They  were  not 
punished."  (3.)  ^'  Col.  Blocker's  overseer  attempted 
to  flog  a  negro.  He  refused  to  be  flogged,  where- 
upon the  overseer  seized  an  axe,  and  cleft  his  skull. 
The  Colonel  justified  it."  (4.)  One  Jones  whipped 
a  woman  to  death  for  grabbing  a  potatoe  hill." 

Compare  these  four  cases  with  the  slave  laws  al- 
ready cited.  The  second  and  fourth,  being  deaths 
by  whipping,  would  pass,  probably,  as  cases  of 
"  death  under  moderate  correction."  The  third,  Col. 
Blocker's  overseer,  would  be  justified  by  a  Court  of 
law  as  readily  as  by  the  Colonel.  The  slave  was 
resisting"  or  "oftering  to  resist"  the  overseer,  and 
was  therefore  an  outlaw.  The  first  case  is  not  quite 
as  clear.  If  the  concubine  resisted"  or  "  offered  to 
resist"  Mr.  Thompson's  advances,  whether  revenge- 
ful or  lustful,  she  came,  plainly,  into  the  same  legal 
predicament,  and  was  lawfully  killed!  For  ^Hhe 
legal  relation  "  must  be  maintained !    But  were  not 


PRACTICAL  PROTECTION. 


213 


chese  flagrant  cases  of  murder  ?  Take  some  other 
facts,  furnished  also  by  Mr.  Allan  on  the  page  pre- 
vious, (46.) 

(1.)  Mr.  Turner  stated  that  one  of  his  uncles,  in 
Caroline  county,  Virginia,  had  killed  a  woman — 
broke  her  skull  with  an  axe-helve :  she  had  insulted 
her  mistress !  No  notice  was  takeri  of  the  affair. 
(2.)  Mr.  T.  ^aid  that  slaves  ^^qtq  frequently  murdered. 
(3.)  In  Mississippi  a  slave  chanced  to  come  forward 
hastily  from  eating,  to  hear  the  '  orders,'  with  a  knife 
in  his  hand.  The  overseer,  alarmed,  raised  his  gun 
and  shot  him  dead.  He  afterwards  saw  and  con- 
fessed his  mistake.  But  ''no  notice  was  taken"  of 
the  killing. 

On  page  50  will  be  found,  by  the  testimony  of 
Mrs.  Nancy  Lowry,  a  native  of  Kentucky,  three 
cases  of  "premature  deaths" — " generally  beheved 
by  the  neighbors  that  extreme  whipping  was  the 
cause."  Mr.  Long,  the  inflictor  and  owner,  was  "a 
strict  professor  of  the  Christian  religion,"  and 
"  thought  to  be  a  very  humane  master."  The  victims, 
"John,  Ned,  and  James,  had  wives."  They  were  flog- 
ged frequently  and  "  severely."  "  The  cause  of  their 
flogging  was,  commonly,  staying^  a  little  over  the  time, 
with  their  wives  P'' 

On  page  97,  in  the  testimony  of  Eev.  Francis  Haw- 
ley,  there  is  a  characteristic  case.  A  son  of  a  slave- 
holder "took,"  as  was  believed,  "the  wife  of  one 
of  the  negro  men.  The  poor  slave  felt  himself 
greatly  injured,  and  expostulated  with  him.  The 
wretch  took  his  gun  and  deliberately  shot  him. 


214 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Providentially  he  only  wounded  him  badly."  This 
shows,  however,  the  cause  of  many  murders  of  slaves. 

In  South  Carolina,  a  physician  whipped  his  slave 
to  death,    was  tried  and  acquitted^  and  the  next  year 

ELECTED  TO  THE  LEGISLATURE!"     (lb.,  p.  173.) 

^'I  know  a  local  Methodist  minister,  a  man  cf 
talents,  and  popular  as  a  preacher,  who  took  his 
negro  girl  into  the  barn  to  whip  her,  and  she  was 
brought  out  a  corjpse^  (p.  173.)  This  is  the  testimony 
of  Mr.  Geo.  A.  Avery,  of  Eochester,  N.  Y.,  who 
states  further  that  the  friends  of  the  minister  seemed 
to  think  it  of  ^4ittle  importance  to  his  ministerial 
standiyig^  Of  course  he  was  not  indicted!  This 
was  in  Virginia. 

A  minister  in  South  Carolina,  a  native  of  the 
North,  had  a  stated  Sabbath  appointment  to  preach, 
about  eight  miles  from  his  residence.  He  was  in  the 
habit  of  riding  thither  in  his  gig  or  sulkey,  after  a 
very  swift  trotting  horse,  which  he  always  drove 
briskly.  Behind  him  ran  his  negro  slave  on  foot, 
who  was  required  to  be  at  the  place  of  appointment 
as  soon  as  his  master,  to  take  care  of  his  horse. 
Sometimes  he  fell  behind,  and  kept  his  master  wait- 
ing for  him  a  few  minutes,  for  which  he  always 
received  a  reprimand,  and  was  sometimes  punished. 
On  one  occasion  of  this  kind,  after  sermon,  the 
master  told  the  slave  that  he  would  take  care  to  have 
him  keep  up  with  him,  going  home.  So  he  tied  him 
by  the  wrists,  with  a  halter,  to  his  gig  behind,  and 
drove  rapidly  home.  The  result  was  that,  about  two 
or  three  miles  from  home,  the  poor  fellow's  feet  and 


PRACTICAL  PR0TECTI0:N. 


215 


legs  failed  him,  and  he  was  dragged  on  the  ground 
all  the  rest  of  the  way,  by  the  wrists !  Whether  the 
master  knew  it  or  not  till  he  reached  home,  is  not 
certain ;  but  on  alighting  and  looking  round,  he 
exclaimed,  "Well!  I  thought  you  would  keep  up 
with  me  this  time  !"  so  saying,  he  coolly  walked 
into  the  house.  The  servants  came  out  and  took  up 
the  poor  sufferer  for  dead.  After  a  time  he  revived 
a  little,  lingered  for  a  day  or  two,  and  died !  The 
facts  Avere  known  all  over  the  neighborhood,  but 
nothing  was  done  about  it !  The  minister  continued 
preaching  as  before  ;  and  another  slave  of  his,  una- 
ble to  labor  or  walk,  A^as  seen  laid  under  a  shed, 
near  the  house,  where  he  would  have  starved,  but 
for  the  food  thrown  over  the  fence  to  him  by  some 
mechanics  working  near  by,  and  which  he  devoured 
ravenously.  He  was  sent  off  to  the  plantation,  and 
soon  after  died.  When  that  minister  comes  up  to 
our  General  Assemblies,  Annual  Conferences,  or 
May  Anniversaries,  he  can  doubtless  tell  us  all  about 
the  "  innocent  legal  relation"  of  slave  owner,  and  how 
kindly  the  slaves  are  treated  by  their  masters !  We 
should  not  publish  this  narrative,  which  has  never 
before  appeared  in  print,  had  it  not  been  told  to  us 
by  an  eye-witness,  with  whom  we  are  well  ac- 
quainted, and  in  whose  statements  we  can  implicitly 
confide :  Mr.  John  W.  Hill,  Green  Point,  near  New- 
York  city.  He  saw  the  gig  when  it  came  up,  with 
the  slave  dragging  behind,  and  saw  the  minister 
alight  and  go  in. 

knew  a  young  man"  (in  Virginia — says  Mr. 


216 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Geo.  A.  Avery,  of  Eocliester,  N.  Y.)  who  hadbeeis 
out  hunting,  and  returning,  with  some  of  his  friends, 
seeing  a  negro  man  in  the  road,  at  a  httle  distance, 
dehberately  drew  up  his  rifle,  and  shot  him  dead. 
This  was  done  without  the  slightest  provocation,  or 
a  word  passing.  This  young  man  passed  through 
the  form  of  a  trial ;  and  although  it  was  not  evcB 
pretended  by  his  counsel  that  he  was  not  guilty  of 
the  act,  deliberately  and  wantonly  perpetrated,  he 
was  acquitted.  It  was  urged  by  his  counsel  that  he 
was  a  young  man,  (about  twenty  years  of  age,)  had* 
no  malicious  intention,  his  mother  was  a  widow,  &c., 
&c."    (Weld's  '^Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  172.) 

The  young  man  or  his  mother  probably  paid  the 
"owner"  the  value  of  the  chattel,  (if  he  was  a  slave,) 
and  he  would  perhaps  be  cautious  in  indulging  his 
propensities  as  a  sportsman,  in  shooting  such  expen- 
sive game,  in  future.  In  a  civil  suit  of  the  owner" 
for  damages,"  a  jury  of  slaveholders  would  be  less 
lenient.  It  would,  however,  be  too  much  to  expect 
of  them  that,  for  the  same  act,  they  would  first  oblige 
the  unfortunate  young  gentleman  to  pay  the  market 
value  of  the  commodity^  and  then  hang  him  for  the 
murder  of  the  man — especially  where  it  is  gravely 
maintained  that  satisfaction  to  the  master  is  a  suffi- 
cient protection  to  the  slave/  The  FACTS,  as  thits 
stated,  (the  most  charitable  version  that  could  be 
made,)  present  the  most  favorable  illustration  of  the 
LAW.  It  would  appear  still  worse  if  there  was  not 
even  the  pecuniary  forfeiture.  The  facts  and  the  law 
combined  are  the  legitimate  and  natural  results  of 


PRACTICAL  PROTECTION. 


217 


*'the  legal  relation  of  owner  and  slave."  If  the  jjr in- 
ciple  and  the  relation  are  right^  it  might  be  difficult 
to  show  the  practice  to  be  wrong.  Communities  edu- 
cated in  the  former  will  be  sure  to  become  involved 
in  the  latter. 

Will  it  be  said  that  these  statements  are  only  the 
fictions  or  exaggerations  of  Northerners  ?  Or  that 
they  describe  only  a  few  isolated  cases?  Or  that  they 
apply  only  to  the  lower  circles  of  society  at  the  South  ? 
Listen,  then,  to  a  Virginian  slaveholder,  moving  in 
the  very  highest  circles  of  Southern  society — the 
Hon.  John  Eandolph,  of  Eoanoke: 

^'Avarice  alone  can  drive,  as  it  does  drive,  this  in- 
fernal traffic,  and  the  wretched  victims  of  it,  like  so 
many  post-horses,  whipped  to  death  in  a  mail- 
coach.  Ambition  has  its  cover-sluts  in  the  pride, 
pomp,  and  circumstance  of  glorious  war ;  but  where 
are  the  trophies  of  avarice  ?  The  handcuffs  the  man- 
acle^ the  hlood'Stained  cowhide  !  What  majst  is  worse 
received  in  society  for  being  a  hard  master  ? 
Who  denies  the  hand  of  a  sister  or  daughter 
TO  SUCH  MONSTERS?"    (Speech  in  Congress.) 

Study  this  picture.  Wholesale  murder — ^barbar- 
ism— cruelty.  The  general  prevalence  of  these  in 
the  highest  circles,  and  no  one  regarding  the  perpe- 
trators the  worse  for  it,  or  shrinking  back  from  the 
closest  family  affinity  with  *Hhe  monsters!" 

What  Northern  pencil  has  drawn  a  more  frightful 
picture  of  the  slave  States  than  this  ?  Old  Virginia 
sat  for  the  likeness,  drawn  by  one  of  her  most  gifted 
sons  !  Was  John  Eandolph  a  slanderer,  a  fanatic  ? 
10 


218 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Hear  the  testimony,  then,  of  another  honored  son  of 
Virginia,  the  sage  of  Monticello. 

''When  the  measure  of  their  tears  is  full ;  when 
their  GEOANS  have  involved  heaven  itself  in 
DARKNESS,  doubtless  a  God  of  justice  will  listen  to 
their  DISTEESS."    (Jefferson's  Correspondence.) 

Eecall  to  mind  the  wholesale  murders  of  Gen.  Wade 
Hampton,  recorded  in  another  connection,  (Chap.  XI.) 
Eemember  the  still  more  extensive  and  systematic 
murders  of  the  Louisiana  sugar  planters,  (Chap.  V.,) 
complacently  regarded  and  connived  at  by  pious 
slave-breeders  in  Virginia,  (Chap.  X.,)  cold-blooded, 
calculating,  diabolic,  like  that  of  pirates;  then  say 
whether  it  be  credible  that  such  laws  as  have  been 
reviewed  in  this  chapter  could  protect  the  lives  of 
slaves !  Say,  rather,  what  possible  enactments  could 
avail  for  them,  while  the  ^' legal  relation"  of  slave 
ownership  continues  ? 

If  any  further  light  is  wanted  on  that  feature  of 
the  Slave  Code  that  insultingly  proffers  to  the  slave 
its  protection  from  "^/Tii/swaZ"  punishments,  the  in- 
quirer might  see  what  punishments  are  '''' usuaV  by 
looking  over  the  advertisements  and  paragraphs  of 
a  dozen  leading  Southern  journals,  from  as  many 
different  States,  for  twelve » months.  Cut  out,  ar- 
ranged, and  pasted  in  a  scrap-book,  with  an  index, 
they  would  furnish  him  with  a  copious  and  authentic 
commentary  on  the  slave  laws.  Every  successive 
year,  if  he  chose  to  repeat  the  process,  would  fur- 
nish a  new  volume.  If  he  would  save  the  labor,  and 
avail  himself  of  a  faithfully  collated  scrap-book,  made 


PRACTICAL  PROTECTION. 


219 


up  to  his  liand,  we  refer  him  to  Weld's  Slavery  as 
it  is,"  large  portions  of  which  he  will  find  to  have 
been  gathered  by  this  process. 

He  will  there  find  numerous  advertisements  of 
runaway  slaves,  and  of  jailers'  notices  of  apprehen- 
sions and  commitments  of  them,  in  whict^  the  descrip- 
tions specify  scars  from  whipping,  from  iron  collars, 
from  gun-shots,  from  brandings,  &c.,  &c.  Many  are 
described  as  having  on  handcuffs,  chains,  and  iron 
collars.  One  is  ''much  marked  with  the  whip" — 
another  "  severely  bruised" — another,  "a  great  many 
scars  from  the  lash" — another,  "several  large  scars  on 
his  back  from  severe  whipping  in  early  life  f — an- 
other "had  a  collar  on,  with  one  prong  turned 
down" — another  "had  on  a  drawing-chain,  fastened 
around  his  ankle  with  a  house-lock" — another  was 
"much  marked  with  irons" — another  (negress  Fanny) 
"had  an  iron  band  about  her  neck,"  &c.,  &c.  All 
this,  as  the  reader  now  knows,  is  authorized  by  law — 
not  prohibited  as  ''^unusuaV 

Then  comes  anoth<sr  class,  which,  if  not  expressly 
authorized,  are  found  by  their  frequency  to  be  outside 
of  the  prohibited  pale  of  "  unusual^  "Mary  has  a  scar 
on  her  back  and  right  arm,  caused  by  a  rifle  halV^ — 
another  branded  on  the  left  jaw" — "Arthur  has  a 
scar  across  his  breast  and  each  arm,  made  by  a 
knife ;  loves  to  talk  much  of  the  goodness  of  God" — 
"George  has  a  sword-cut,  lately  received  in  his  left 
arm" — "Mary  has  a  small  scar  over  her  eye,  a  good 
many  teeth  missing,  the  letter  A  branded  on  her 
cheek  and  forehead."  Many  others  "scarred  with 
the  bite  of  a  dog." 


220 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


**Ran  away,  a  negro  woman  and  two  children. 
A  few  days  before  she  went  off,  1  burnt  her  with  a  hot 
iron  on  the  left  side  of  her  face.  /  tried  to  make  the 
letter  M." 

Another  class  are  described  by  mutilations  which, 
though  nominally  prohibited  by  law,  appear  to  be 
far  from  being  unusual  and  neither  fear  of  law 
nor  of  public  odium  prevent  the  public  advertise- 
ment of  them. 

One  '^has  only  one  eye;"  another,  Rachel,  has 
lost  all  her  toes  except  the  large  one."  Joshua,  his 
thumb  is  off,  on  the  left  hand."  Another,  his  right 
leg  broken."  John,  left  ear  cro^otf  another  "has 
lost  one  of  his  ears." 

Many  pages  might  be  occupied  with  similar  ad- 
vertisements, which  appear  in  the  most  respectable 
Southern  journals,  with  the  names  of  the  advertisers, 
many  of  them  prominent  citizens,  and  sometimes 
respectable  ladies ! 

One  case,  on  page  15  of  Mr.  Weld's  book,  is 
doubtless  a  specimen  of  tens,  if  not  h-undreds  of 
thousands ;  assuredly  it  does  not  come  under  the 
condemnation  of  being  ^^unusuaV  The  "owner" 
of  a  female  slave,  who  was  a  Methodist,  proposed  a 
criminal  intercourse  with  her:  she  refused.  He 
sent  her  to  the  "  overseer"  to  be  flogged.  Again  he 
made  advances — again  she  refused,  and  again  she 
was  flogged !  Afterwards  she  yielded  to  his  adul- 
terous wishes !  And  now,  the  attentive  reader  of 
the  preceding  pages  will  have  learned  that  all  this 
was  strictly  within  the  protection  of  the  law !  Its 


PRACTICAL  PROTECTIOxV. 


221 


limitations  this  monster  had  not  overstepped.  At 
least,  there  is  no  adequate  law  for  his  punishment — 
nay,  so  far  as  appears,  there  have  been  no  legislative 
attempts  or  even  pretensions  to  provide  protection 
against  such  outrages ! 

But  details  of  this  kind,  on  this  subject,  are  always 
set  down  as  exceptions.  We  turn,  then,  again  to  a 
specimen  of  general  testimonies. 

Eev.  George  Whitefield,  in  his  letter  to  the 
slaveholders  of  Maryland,  Virginia,  the  two  Caro- 
linas  and  Georgia,  after  admitting  particular  excep- 
tionSj^^  charges  them,  in  general,  with  treating  their 
slaves  worse  than  if  they  were  brutes."  He  adds, 
^*The  BLOOD  of  them,  SPILT  for  these  many 
years  in  your  respective  provinces,  will  ascend  up 
to  heaven  against  you." 

William  Pinckney,  of  Maryland,  (1789,)  calls 
Maryland  "the  foster-mother  of  petty  despots,  the 
patron  of  ivanton  oppression  !  " 

Dr.  Jonathan  Edwards,  of  Connecticut,  (1791,) 
says,  The  smack  of  the  whip  is  all  day  long  in  the 
ears  of  those  who  are  on  the  plantation,  or  in  the 
vicinity;  and  it  is  used  with  such  dexterity  and 
severity  as  not  only  to  lacerate  the  skin,  but  to  tear 
out  small  portions  of  the  flesh  at  almost  every  stroke. 
This  is  THE  GENERAL  TREATMENT  of  the  slaves.  But 
many  individuals  suffer  still  more  severely.  Many 
are  knocked  down;  some  have  their  eyes  beaten  out; 
some  have  an  arm  or  a  leg  broken^  OR  chopped  OFF ; 
and  many,  for  a  very  small  or  for  no  crime  at  all, 
have  been  beaten  to  death,"  &c. 


222 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


John  Woolman,  of  New-Jersey,  (1758:)  "Their 
punishment  is  often  severe,  and  sometimes  des- 
perate."   (Journal,  &c.,  p.  74.) 

George  Buchanan,  M.  D.,  of  Baltimore,  (-ith  of 
July  Oration,  1791 :)    "  Their  situation"  [the  slaves'] 

IS  insupportable :  misery  inhabits  their  cabins,  and 
pursues  them  in  the  field.  Inhumanly  beaten,  they 
OFTEN  fall  sacrifices  to  the  turbulent  tempers  of 
their  masters.  Who  is  there,  unless  inured  to 
savage  cruelties,  that  can  bear  to  hear  of  the  inhu- 
man PUNISHMENTS  DAILY  INFLICTED  upon  the  Un- 
fortunate blacks,  and  not  feel  for  them?  Can  a 
man,  who  calls  himself  a  Christian,  coolly  and  de- 
liberately tie  up,  tliumh-^crew^  torture  with  pincers^ 
and  beat  unmercifully,  a  poor  slave,  for,  perhaps, 
a  trifling  neglect  of  duty  ?" 

American  Colonization  Society  :  We  have 
never  heard  of  slavery  in  any  country,  ancient  or 
modern,  Pagan,  Mohammedan,  or  Christian,  so  ter- 
rible in  its  character^  as  the  slavery  which  exists  in  these 
United  States.''    (Seventh  Eeport,  1824.) 

The  Presbyterian  Synod  of  Kentucky  (1834) 
said,  ^''Brutal  stripes^  and  all  the  varied  kinds  of  per- 
sonal indignities,  are  not  the  only  species  of  cruelty 
which  slavery  licenses." 

^'They  [the  slaves]  suffer  all  that  can  be  inflicted 
by  wanton  caprice,  by  grasping  avarice,  by  brutal 
lust,  by  malignant  spite,  and  by  insane  anger.  Their 
happiness  is  the  sport  of  every  whim,  the  prey  of 
every  passion  that  may  occasionally  or  habitually 
infest  the  master's  bosom." 


PKACTICAL  PROTECTION. 


223 


Eev.  James  A.  Thome,  now  of  Ohio  City,  a  na- 
tive of  Kentucky,  and  son  of  a  slaveholder,  says, 
^'  Slavery  is  the  parent  of  more  suffering  than  has 
flowed  from  any  one  source  since  the  date  of  its 
existence.  Such  sufferings  too !  Sufferings  incon- 
ceivable and  innumerable ;  unmingled  wretchedness 
from  the  ties  of  nature  rudely  broken  and  destroyed ; 
the  acutesi  hodily  tortures^  groans,  tears  and  blood; 
lying  for  ever  in  weariness  and  painfulness,  in 
watchings,  in  hunger  and  in  thirst,  in  cold  and  in 
nakedness." 

We  forbear  citing  further  witnesses.  It  is  manifest 
that  human  chattels  must  be  worse  treated  than 
brutes,  in  order  to  be  kept  in  chattelhood.  Other 
working  animals  are  not  punished  as  examples  to 
their  fellows.  They  are  not  the  objects  of  suspicion, 
jealousy,  lust,  or  revenge.  They  are  not  hated. 
They  are  not  threatened.  They  are  not  conversed 
and  quarrelled  with.  They  cannot  be  regarded 
guilty,  or  proper  subjects  of  censure  or  punishment. 
They  have  no  aspirations  above  their  condition. 
They  have  no  keen  sense  of  being  injured  by  being 
imbruted.  They  can  utter  no  provoking  language, 
nor  retort,  nor  retaliate.  All  these  items  are  bul- 
warks of  defense  to  the  hrute^  but  inlets  and  avenues 
of  attack  upon  the  slave.  The  individuals  and  the 
classes  of  men  most  wronged^  are  proverbially  most 
hated  by  the  wrong-cZoer.  This  is  the  dreadful  doom 
of  the  poor  negro,  and  he  is  completely  under  the 
power  of  his  tyrant.  As  the  exercise  of  despotic 
power  over  the  defenseless  makes  men  hardhearted 


224 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  cruel,  it  is  evident  that  the  more  absolute  any 
despotism  becomes,  the  more  cruel  will  the  persons 
become  who  administer  it.  And  the  most  absolute 
form  of  despotism  known  among  men,  is  that  of 
human  chattelhood  in  the  United  States  of  America, 
as  its  code  proves. 

The  unnatural  and  monstrous  legal  relation"  of 
slave  ownership,  unhumanizing  human  beings,  in- 
sures cruelties  that  human  language  cannot  describe, 
nor  human  imagination  conceive !  No  pencil  can 
portray  them ;  no  statistics  exhibit  the  sum  total. 
The  slave  code  is  sufficiently  horrible,  but  every 
syllable  of  it  can  be  written,  printed,  and  measured 
by  pages.  The  practical  illustration  has  no  limits ; 
its  horrors  swell  into  infinity ! 

No  people  were  ever  yet  found  who  were  better 
than  their"  [living  and  recognized]  '^aws,  though 
many  have  been  known  to  be  worse." 


CHAPTEE  XVin. 

FUGITIVES  FKOM  SLAVERY. 

The  Slave,  being  Property,  may  be  hampered  or  confined  to  prevent  his  escape- 
may  be  pursued  and  reclaimed — must  not  be  aided,  or  concealed  from  his 
Owner — and  when  too  wild  or  refractory  to  be  used  by  his  Owner,  may  be 
KILLED  by  him  with  impunity. 

This  topic  is  closely  connected  witli  those  of 
several  of  the  preceding  chapters,  and  is,  in  some  of 
its  aspects,  a  branch  of  them.  The  laws  on  this  sub- 
ject are  too  verbose  and  various  to  be  transcribed  at 
large,  which  would  swell  the  volume  and  weary  the 
reader.  We  shall  present  only  an  abstract  of  what 
is  characteristic  and  most  important,  connected  with 
the  usages  under  them.  One  design  of  these  laws 
and  usages  is  to  prevent  escapes ;  another,  to  facili- 
tate recaptures ;  another,  to  punish  the  fugitives  and 
deter  others ;  another,  to  punish  slaves,  free  colored 
people,  or  whites  who  may  entice  or  aid  the  fugi- 
tives. 

Prevention  of  escapes  is  sometimes  sought  by  the 
use  of  iron  collars,  chains,  handcuffs,  locks,  &c.,  as 
before  mentioned,  whenever  the  "owner"  or  his 
agent  thinks  proper;  and  the  law,  as  has  already 
10^ 


226  THE-  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


been  seen,  authorizes  this,  and  punishes  any  one  who 
may  cut  or  break  them. 

Another  frequent  precaution  is  the  locking  up  of 
the  slaves  at  night,  and  this,  too,  is  within  the  law- 
ful power  of  the  master,  at  his  own  discretion. 

In  cities,  corporate  towns,  &c.,  there  are  regulations 
forbidding  the  slaves  or  free  people  of  color  to  be  in 
the  streets  after  a  specified  hour  in  the  evening.  At 
Wilmington,  (N.  C.,)  we  knew  a  case  (1821)  in  which 
the  holding  of  a  Methodist  meeting  (under  charge 
of  white  persons)  a  few  minutes  too  late,  occasioned 
the  locking  up  of  one  half  the  worshipping  assembly 
in  the  watch-house,  men,  women,  and  children,  till 
eight  or  nine  o'clock  the  next  morning,  church 
members  and  all,  when  the  legal  forms  were  gone 
through  with,  to  effect  their  release;  in  which  it 
appeared  that  a  "class-leader"  at  the  meeting  had 
taken  up"  five  members  of  his  own  "  class,"  and  all 
in  obedience  to  "the  law!" 

A  general  rule  on  plantations  is,  that  slaves  must 
not  be  absent  from  "quarters"  in  the  evening,  nor 
leave  the  plantation  at  any  time  without  a  written 
"pass."  In  at  least  soine  of  the  States,  there  are  laws 
strictly  enforcing  this  rule.  Then,  there  are  "  patrols" 
established  in  city  and  country,  regulated  by  law, 
and  clothed  with  ample  powers  to  arrest  whom  they 
please,  and  see  that  the  existing  laws  and  usages  are 
enforced. 

An  Act  of  Maryland,  (1715,)  chap.  44,  sect.  6,  "for 
the  better  discovery  of  runaways,  &c.,  requires  that 
"  any  person  or  perso7is  whatsoever travelling  beyond 


FUGITIVf:  SLAVES. 


227 


the  limits  of  the  county  wherein  they  reside,  shall 
have  pass  under  the  seal  of  said  county;"  other- 
wise, ''4f  apprehended,  not  being  sufficiently  known, 
nor  able  to  give  a  good  account  of  themselves,"  the 
magistrate,  at  his  discretion,  may  deal  with  them  as 
with  runaways.  (Stroud,  p.  83.)  This  is  particularly 
remarkable  as  being  without  distinction  of  color^  and 
so  applicable  to  the  class  of  low  whites.  These,  how- 
ever, were  to  be  released  after  six  months,  in  dis- 
tinction from    negroes  and  mulattoes." 

To  facilitate  recaptures,  sect.  7  of  the  same  Act — 
*^for  the  better  encouragement  of  all  persons  to  seize 
and  take  up  all  runaways  travelling  without  pa^s^  as 
aforesaid" — provides  a  bounty,  in  tobacco,  (commuted 
for  six  dollars.)  'Ho  be  paid  by  the  owner"  of  said 
runaway ;  ''  and  if  such  suspected  runaways  be  not  ser- 
vants, and  refuse  to  pay  the  same^  he,  she,  or  they 

shall  MAKE  SATISFACTION  BY  SERVITUDE  OR  OTHER- 
WISE, &;c."  In  1719,  an  additional  provision  author- 
ized the  sheriff,  in  case  of  nonpayment  of  costs,  &c., 
by  these  wronged  and  innocent  free  negroes  and 
mulattoes,  to  sell  them  to  the  highest  bidder!!! 
This  monstrous  provision  was  afterwards  expunged 
from  the  Code  of  Maryland,  but  not  till  after  the 
cession  of  the  Federal  District,  which  therefore  re- 
mains under  the  old  law.  And  this  furnishes  the 
foundation  of  those  laws  of  the  Corporation  of  Wash- 
ington City  by  which,  at  the  present  day,  free 
NEGROES  or  MULATTOES  arrested  as  fugitive  slaves, 
and  not  being  claimed  by  any  one,  are  held  liable 
for  their  jail  fees,  and,  in  default  of  payment,  sold 


228  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


into  slavery.  (Vide  Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  154 ;  and  Jay 'b 
V^iew,  p.  33,  &c.,  where  it  is  shown  that  such  cases 
frequently  occur.) 

It  is  made  the  official  duty  of  sheriffs  and  con- 
stables to  arrest  suspected  fugitives,  and  of  jailers  to 
commit  them  to  prison.  By  law  of  Maryland,  (1723,) 
ch.  15,  sect.  2,  &c.,  it  is  made  the  duty  of  the  con- 
stables to  repair  monthly  to  all  suspected  places,  and 
whip  every  negro  he  finds  there  without  a  license!^ 
Owners  of  plantations,  by  the  same  Act,  are  required 
to  send  home  to  their  masters  any  strange  negroes" 
on  their  premises ;  they  are  authorized  to  whip  them, 
&c. ;  and  forbidden  to  harbor  or  encourage  them,  on 
penalty  of  fine,  &c.  Same  law  in  Federal  District. 
(Snethen's  Dist.  Col.,  p.  13.) 

In  Georgia,  any  person  may  inflict  twenty  lashes 
on  the  bare  back  of  a  slave  found  without  license  on 
the  plantation,  or  without  the  limits  of  the  town  to 
which  he  belongs.  So  also  in  Mississippi,  Virginia, 
and  Kentucky,  at  the  discretion  of  the  justice." 
(Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  134.) 

**In  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  any  person  find- 
ing more  than  seven  slaves  together  in  the  highway 
without  a  white  person,  may  give  each  one  twenty 


*  In  this  aspect,  the  slave  is  neither  treated  as  a  man  nor  as  a 
brute^  but  worse  than  either  man  or  beast  is  treated !  A  man  has 
the  right  of  locomotion  and  social  intercourse.  And  when  a  brute 
animal  leaps  his  fence  in  quest  of  food  or  company,  or  to  roam  at 
large,  no  one  thinks  of  treating  liim  as  a  criminal,  of  subjecting 
him  to  punishment.  The  power  of  the  State  is  not  in  requisition, 
to  send  sheriffs  and  constables  after  him. 


FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


229 


lashes/'"  (lb.)  Similar  in  Delaware:  '^more  tlian  six 
slaves."    (Delaware  Laws,  104.    Stroud,  p.  102.) 

This  law  has  also  been  introduced  into  Florida, 
since  its  cession  to  the  United  States,  contrary  to  the 
milder  code  of  Spanish  slavery.  Many  of  the  Indian 
slaves  in  East  Florida,  with  most  of  the  free  people 
of  color  near  St.  Augustine,  transported  themselves 
to  Havanna,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  the  approach 
of  the  American  authorities.    (Stroud,  p.  101.) 

In  Kentucky,  Virginia,  and  Missouri,  a  slave, 
for  keeping  a  gun,  powder,  shot,  a  club,  or  other 
weapon  whatever,  offensive  or  defensive,  may  be 
whipped  thirty-nine  lashes,  by  order  of  a  justice."  (lb.) 

"In  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee,  a  slave  travel- 
hng  without  a  pass,  or  being  found  in  another  per- 
son's negro  quarters  or  kitchen^  may  be  whipped  foi^ty 
lashes^  and  every  slave  in  whose  company  the  visitor 
is  found,  tioenty  lashes  P''  (lb.)  The  visits  of  parents 
and  children,  husbands  and  wives,  may  be  thus 
punished. 

"  In  Louisiana,  a  slave,  for  being  on  horseback^ 
without  the  written  permission  of  his  master,  incurs 
twenty-five  lashes ;  for  heeping  a  dog^  a  like  punish- 
ment." (lb.)  Horses  and  dogs,  as  well  as  weapons, 
might  assist  their  escape. 

'*By  the  law  of  Maryland,  for  ^rambling,  riding, 
or  going  abroad  in  the  night,  or  riding  horses  in  the 
daytime  without  leave,  a  slave  may  be  wMpt^ 
cropped^  or  branded  on  the  cheek  with  the  letter  R, 
or  otherwise  punished,  not  extending  to  life,  o/  so  as 
to  unfit  Mm  for  labor ^  "  (lb.) 


230 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


In  Greorgia  and  South  Carolina,  "  If  any  slave  shall 
be  out  of  the  house,  &c.,  or  off  the  plantation,  &c., 
of  his  master,  &c.,  and  shall  refuse  to  submit  to  an 
examination  by  any  white  person^  &c.,  such  white 
person  may  apprehend  and  moderately  correct  him ; 
and  if  he  shall  assault  or  strike  such  white  person, 
he  may  be  lawfully  hilled.'^''  (2  Brevard's  Digest,  231. 
Prince's  Digest,  447.  Sect.  5  of  Act  of  1770,  and 
page  348,  No.  43;  title.  Penal  Laws.  Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  101.)  The  reader  will  recollect  here  that 
"moderate  correction,"  as  legally  defined,  is  such  as 
may  cause  death !  And  the  slave  not  submitting 
quietly  to  this  may  be  lawfully  killed !" 

"If  any  slave  shall  presume  to  come  upon  the 
plantation  without  leave  in  writing  from  his  master, 
employer,  &c.,  not  being  sent  on  lawful  business,  the 
owner  of  the  plantation  may  inflict  ten  lashes  for 
every  such  offense."  (1  Virg.  Eev.  Code  of  1819, 
422-3.  Mississippi  Rev.  Code,  371.  2  Littel  and 
Suigert's  Digest,  1150.  2  Missouri  Laws,  741,  sect. 
3.  Maryland  Laws,  Act  of  1723,  chap.  15,  sects.  1 
and  5.) 

North  Carolina. — Any  person  may  lawfully  kill  a 
slave  who  has  been  outlawed  for  running  away  and 
lurking  in  swamps,"  &c.  (Act  of  1741.  Hay- 
wood's Manual,  521-2.  Stroud,  103.)  Similar  in 
Tennessee. 

In  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia,  "  If  any 
negro  or  other  slaves,  absenting  themselves  from 
their  master's  service,  running  out  into  the  woods 
and  there  remaining,  killing  and  destroying  hogs 


FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


231 


and  cattle  belonging  to  the  people  of  this  province, 
shall  refuse  to  surrender  themselves,  and  make 
resistance  against  such  persons  as  pursue  to  appre- 
hend and  take  them  up,  being  thereunto  legally 
empowered,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  such  pursuers, 
when  such  resistance  is  made,  to  shoot,  kill,  and 
destroy  such  negroes  or  other  slaves."  (Laws  of 
Maryland,  1723,  chap.  15,  sect.  7.  Snethen's  Dist. 
Col.) 

In  North  Carolina,  (as  cited  in  the  chapter  pre- 
vious,) a  proclamation  of  outlawry  against  a  slave  is 
authorized  whenever  he  runs  away  from  his  master, 
conceals  himself  in  some  obscure  retreat,  and,  to 
sustain  life,  "  kills  a  hog,  or  some  animal  of  the  cattle 
kind."  (See  Haywood's  Manual,  521.  Act  of  1711, 
chap.  24,  sect.  45.  Stroud,  p.  38.)  The  same  or 
similar  in  Tennessee. 

In  Virginia,  '4n  1705,  two  justices  of  the  peace 
were  authorized,  by  proclamation,  to  outlaw  run- 
aways^ who  might  thereafter  be  killed  and  destroyed 
by  any  person  whatsoever,  hy  sucJi  luays  and  means 
05  he  may  think  fit^  without  accusation  or  impeach- 
ment of  any  crime  for  so  doing."  (Stroud's  Sketch,  p. 
103.)  This  Act  was,  however,  repealed  in  1792.  (lb.) 

From  an  article  in  the  Norfolk  (Va.)  Herald  of 
Feb.,  1837,  it  however  appears  that  a  case  of  slave 
hunting  and  shooting  had  just  occurred  ^^near  New 
Point  Comfort."  ^'It  was  not  until  a  musket  was 
fired  at  them,  [the  slaves,]  and  one  of  them  slightly 
wounded,  that  i\iQy  surrendered."  (Weld's  "  Slavery 
as  it  is,"  p.  160.) 


232 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


The  customary  usages  of  the  South  in  general,  on 
this  subject,  are  such  as  to  supersede  the  necessity 
of  any  formal  proclamation  of  outlawry  by  the  ma- 
gistrates. The  more  general  laws,  as  in  South  Caro- 
lina, Greorgia,  Maryland,  and  District  of  Columbia, 
just  now  cited,  sufficiently  answer  the  same  purpose. 

In  South  Carolina,  "  a  slave  endeavoring  to  entice 
another  slave  to  run  away,  if  provisions,  &c.,  be  pre- 
pared, for  the  purpose  of  aiding  such  running  away, 
shall  be  punished  with  death."  (2  Brevard's  Dig., 
233,  244.)  '^And  a  slave  who  shall  aid  and  abet  the 
slave  so  endeavoring  to  entice  another  slave  to  run 
away  shall  also  suffer  death."  (Ibid.)  An  equivocal 
and  unimportant  modification  of  this  Act  was  after- 
wards made.  (Stroud,  p.  104.)  The  owner"  of 
slaves  sentenced  to  death  is  probably  remunerated 
out  of  the  public  treasury.  This  is  the  law  of  Mary- 
land. (Laws  of  Maryland  of  1737,  chap.  2,  and  of 
1751,  chap.  14.    Vide  Snethen's  Dist.  Col.,  p.  16.) 

''Ka  slave  harbor,  conceal,  or  entertain  another 
slave,  being  a  runaway,  in  South  Carolina  and  Geor- 
gia, he  is  subjected  to  corporal  punishment  to  any 
extent,  not  affecting  life  and  limb."  (2  Brevard's 
Digest,  237.  Prince's  Digest,  452.)  In  Maryland, 
thirty-nine  stripes  is  the  penalty  for  harboring  one 
hour,    (Act  of  1748,  chap.  19,  sect.  4.) 

In  South  Carolina,  '4f  a  free  negro  harbor,  conceal, 
or  entertain  a  runaway  slave,"  he  is  fined  ten  pounds 
for  the  first  day,  and  twenty  shillings  for  every  suc- 
ceeding day ;  and  if  unable  to  pay  the  fines  and 
charges,  he  may  be  sold  at  public  outcry,  and 


FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


233 


'the  overplus,  if  any,  paid  into  tlie  hands  of  the 
public  Treasurer."    (2  Brevard's  Dig.,  Act  of  1740.) 

In  Augast,  1827,  the  Charleston  Court  passed  sen- 
tence, according  to  this  law,  against  Hannah  Elliott, 
a  free  black  woman,  her  daughter  Judy,  and  her 
sons  Simon  and  Sam,  and  they  were  sold  into 
slavery.  (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  17.)  Yet  Judge 
Stroud  is  of  opinion  that  that  section  of  the  Act  of 
1740  had  been  repealed.  (lb.)  The  law  of  1821 
provides  ''corporal  punishment,  not  extending  to 
life  or  limb."  (lb.) 

White  as  well  as  colored  persons  are  forbidden, 
under  heavy  penalties,  to  entice,  transport,  or  secretly 
carry  away  slaves.  (Laws  of  Maryland  of  1715, 
chap.  19,  sect.  4.  Snethen's  Dist.  Col.,  p.  12.)  Also, 
forbidden  to  entertain  slaves  unlawfully  absent. 
(Laws  of  Maryland,  1748,  chap.  19,  sect.  2,  &c. 
Snethen,  p.  17.)  Also,  masters  of  vessels  to  con- 
ceal slaves  on  board.  (Laws  of  Maryland,  1753, 
chap.  9,  sect.  3.    Snethen,  p.  19.) 

"  By  Aiken's  Alabama  Digest,  p.  109,  it  is  declared 
that  '  any  person  or  persons,  being  comdcted  of  har- 
boring or  concealing  any  negro  or  negroes  belonging 
to  any  other  person  or  persons  whatsoever,  or  suffer- 
ing the  same  to  be  done  with  his  consent  or  know- 
ledge, shall  be  fined  in  a  sum  not  exceeding  seven 
hundred  dollars,  and  shall  be  imprisoned  not  less  than 
one  calendar  month,  nor  exceeding  six  calendar 
months;  and  shall  be  liable  in  damages  to  the  party 
injured,  to  be  recovered  by  action  on  the  case  before 
any  tribunal  having  competent  jurisdiction.'  And 


234  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


similar  enactments  are  to  be  found  in  the  statute 
books  of  the  other  States."  (Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  note,  pp.  264-5.) 

Giving  passes  to  slaves  is  prohibited  in  Maryland 
by  Act  of  1796,  chap.  67,  sect.  20.  (Snethen,  p.  29.) 

And  ''free  negroes  or  mulattoes"  who  may  sell  or 
give  away  their  ''certificates  of  freedom,"  maybe 
fined  $300,  which,  if  not  paid,  may  be  raised  by  the 
sale  of  such  free  persons  into  slavery  !  (Laws  of 
Maryland,  1796,  chap.  67,  sect.  18.  Snethen,  pp. 
28-9.) 

By  Act  of  Congress  of  1852,  heavy  penalties  are 
imposed  upon  all  persons  who  knowingly  entertain 
or  aid  fugitive  slaves;  and  it  is  made  the  duty  of 
United  States  Commissioners,  Marshals,  and  "all 
good  citizens,"  to  assist  in  returning  them. 

In  our  examination  "of  the  laws  concerning  the 
murder  and  killing  of  slaves,"  (Chap.  XIV.,)  we  had 
occasion  to  cite  some  cases  from  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  by  which  it  would  appear  that  the  Courts 
are  quite  familiar  with  such  occurrences  as  the  shoot- 
ing and  killing  of  fugitive  slaves,  since  the  owners 
often  bring  suits  against  the  "hunters"  for  damages 
in  killing  them !  And  these  suits  are  as  coolly  argued 
and  disposed  of  as  if  it  were  a  question  of  the  shoot- 
ing of  a  mad  biiU.  Sometimes,  where  the  shooting 
appeared  to  have  been  needless,  "rash,  and  incau- 
tious," the  plaintiff  recovered  damages.  Other  cases 
conclude  with  "judgment  for  the  defendant." 

The  subject  of  "Eunaway  or  fugitive  slaves"  oc- 
o.upies  a  distinct  division  or  chapter,  of  above  a  dozen 


FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


235 


pages,  in  Mr.  Wheeler's  Compilation  of  Eeported 
Cases.  The  decisions  of  the  Courts  are  in  harmony 
with  the  statutes  already  cited,  and  show  that  they 
are  not  a  dead  letter.  We  refer  to  a  few  cases.  The 
first  case  introduces  us  to  Slave  Law  as  expounded  in 
the  State  of  New-York : 

Glen  vs.  Hodges,  Jan.  T.,  1812 ;  John's  New-York 
Eeports,  67.  Trespass  for  taking  the  plaintiff's  slave. 
The  fugitive  had  been  seized  by  his  master  in  Ver- 
mont. The  defendant,  who  had  a  claim  on  the  negro 
for  debt,  pursued  him,  and,  with  a  writ  of  attach- 
ment, took  him  from  the  plaintiff's  possession,  and 
imprisoned  him  for  debt.  It  was  decided  that  the 
contract  with  a  slave  was  void,  and  therefore  the 
defendant  had  no  right  to  take  him.  (Wheeler,  pp. 
266-7.) 

Hutchins  vs.  Lee,  Dec.  T.,  1827;  Walker's  Miss. 
Eeports,  293.  In  this  case  it  was  decided  that  in  the 
sale  of  a  fugitive  slave  by  a  sheriff,  "if  the  slave  sell 
for  less  money  because  of  any  neglect  in  the  sheriff 
to  perform  his  duty,  the  remedy  is  by  an .  action 
against  the  sheriff  for  damages."    (lb.,  p.  270.) 

Labranche  vs,  Watkins,  June  T.,  1816  ;  4  Martin's 
Louisiana  Reports,  391.  This  was  a  litigation  be- 
tween a  slave  owner  and  the  sheriff,  who  had  had 
him  in  custody  as  a  runaway.  The  sheriff  sold  the 
slave,  then  bought  him  back  of  the  purchaser.  The 
Court  decided  the  act  of  the  sheriff  to  be  fraudu- 
lent, and  that  "a  runaway  slave  cannot  be  sold  by 
the  sheriff  till  he  had  been  advertised  two  years." 
(Wheeler,  pp.  275-6.) 


236  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Under  tlie  head  of  "harboring  slaves,"  in  Wheel- 
er's Law  of  Slavery,  a  number  of  cases  are  -put  down, 
e.g.: 

Scidmore  vs.  Smith.  The  Court  decided  that  "the 
penalty  for  harboring  slaves  is  cumulative,  and  does 
not  destroy  the  common  law  remedy."  (p.  442.)  That 
is,  the  penalty  for  the  criminal  act  is  in  addition  to 
the  damages  that  may  be  claimed  by  the  master  in  a 
civil  suit. 

We  need  occupy  little  space  with  proofs  that  the 
part  of  the  Slave  Code  contained  in  this  chapter, 
frightful  as  it  is,  is  not  a  dead  letter !  Slave  hunts, 
with  muskets  and  bloodhounds,  are  too  horribly 
frequent,  by  the  testimony  of  the  Southern  journals, 
to  admit  of  any  doubt  on  this  subject.  And  so  are 
advertisements  of  runaway  slaves  by  their  owners, 
with  offers  of  reward  for  them,  ''''dead  or  alive^\f  or 
"for  killing  them,"  or  for  "evidence  of  their  being 
killed!"  Of  such  slave  hunts  the  inquirer  may  find 
ample  details  in  Weld's  "Slavery  as  it  is,"  pp.  21, 
97,  102;  108,  155,  160.  Specimens  of  such  adver- 
tisements may  be  found  on  page  156  of  that  book, 
together  with  a  proclamation  of  outlawry,  and  an 
announcement  of  the  consequent  "killing"  of  a 
negro. 

The  following  advertisement  is  from  the  Ouachita 
Register^  a  newspaper  dated  "Monroe,  La.,  Tuesday 
evening,  June  1,  1852" : 

"NEGRO  DOGS. 
"  The  undersigned  would  respectfully  inform  the 
citizens  of  Ouachita  and  adjacent  parishes,  that  he 


FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


237 


has  located  about  2^  miles  east  of  John  White's, 
on  the  road  leading  from  Monroe  to  Bastrop,  and 
that  tie  has  a  fine  pack  of  Dogs  for  catching  negroes. 
Persons  wishing  negroes  caught  will  do  well  to  give 
him  a  call.  He  can  always  be  found  at  his  stand 
Avhen  not  engaged  in  hunting,  and  eVen  then  infor- 
mation of  his  whereabouts  can  always  be  had  of  some 
one  on  the  premises. 

Terms, — Five  dollars  per  day  and  found,  when 
there  is  no  track  pointed  out.  When  the  track  is 
shown,  twenty -five  dollars  will  be  charged  for  catch- 
ing the  negro. 

Monroe,  Feb,  17,  1852.  M.  C.  GoFF." 

With  a  full  knowledge  of  these  laws  and  of  these 
facts,  nay,  under  the  hardening  effects  of  familiarity 
with  them,  our  leading  statesmen  and  religious  teach- 
ers will  affect  to  believe  that  the  slaves  are  contented 
and  happy  in  their  present  condition.  In  almost  the 
same  breath  they  will  exhort  us  to  the  patriotic  and 
Christian  duty  of  enforcing  the  infamous  Fugitive 
Slave  Bill ;  g^uote  the  Bible  and  the  Constitution  to 
sustain  their  exhortations ;  and  then  complain  of 
being  slandered,  if  accounted  pro-slavery ! 

**No  people  were  ever  yet  found  who  were  better 
than  their  [recognized  and  living]  laws,  though  many 
have  been  known  to  be  worse." 

Judge  Tucker,  Professor  of  Law  in  the  University 
of  William  and  Mary,  Virginia,  speaking  of  this  law 
of  "outlawry"  of  runaways,  and  others  of  a  similar 
nature,  said:  '^Such  are  the  cruelties  to  which 
^IjAN^'RY  gives  hirih;  such  the  horrors  to  which  the 


238 


THE  AMERICAN  ^LAVE  CODE. 


human  mind  is  capable  of  being  reconciled  by  its 
adoption^    (Stroud,  p.  103.) 

The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit.  The  laws  on  this 
subject,  State  and  national,  are  but  the  natural  pro- 
geny, as  they  are  also  the  indispensable  defenses  of 
^Hhe  innocent  legal  relation."  Kepeal  them,  and 
slave  property"  takes  to  itself  legs,  and  runs  away. 
To  recognize  the  right  of  "property"  is  to  recognize 
the  right  of  reclaiming  it,  and  the  duty  of  its  restor- 
ation. But  it  is  likewise  to  reverse  the  divine  law: 
*^Thou  shalt  not  deliver  unto  his  master  the  servant 
which  is  escaped  from  his  master  unto  thee :  He  shall 
dwell  with  thee,  even  among  you,  in  that  place  which 
he  shall  choose,  in  one  of  thy  gates,  where  it  liketh 
him  best:  thou  shalt  not  oppress  him."  (Deut.  xxiii. 
15,  16.) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


THE  SLAVE  CANNOT  SUE  HIS  MASTER. 
Slave  Property  cannot  litigate  with  its  Owner  ! 

The  slave  is  a  "chattel his  master  is  his  "owner." 
This  "  legal  relation"  precludes  the  idea  of  a  suit  at 
law  between  them,  especially  a  suit  in  which  the 
chattel  should  be  plaintiff!  As  a  horse  or  an  ox 
cannot  sue  his  owner,  so  neither  can  a  slave ;  for 
"slaves  shall  be  deemed,  sold,  taken,  reputed  and 
adjudged  in  law  to  be  chattels  personal,  &c.,  &c.,  to 
all  intents^  constructions^  and  purposes  whatsoever ^  "  A 
slave  is  one  who  is  in  the  power  of  his  master,  to 
whom  he  belongs,''^  These  all-comprehensive  defi- 
nitions are  not  a  dead  letter,  and  they  accordingly 
settle,  at  every  step,  every  question  that  can  be  raised 
concerning  the  condition  of  the  slave.  This  is  "the 
legal  relation,"  and  the  whole  of  it.  If  this  be 
tolerated,  all  the  rest  of  the  system,  in  all  its  parts, 
and  in  all  its  legitimate  and  natural  workings  and 
results,  may  be  tolerated  likewise.  The  parts,  sever- 
ally, cannot  be  worse  than  the  whole. 

"A  slave  cannot  be  a  party  before  a  judicial  tri- 


240 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


bunal,  in  any  species  of  action  against  his  master, 
no  matter  how  atrocious  may  have  been  the  injury 
which  he  has  received  from  him."  (Stroud's  Sketch, 
p.  57.) 

We  cited  this  paragraph  in  our  Chapter  IX.,  in 
proof  of  the  master's  unhmited  power."  In  the 
chapters  succeeding  it  has  been  shown  that  the  laws 
ostensibly  framed  for  the  protection  and  redress  of 
the  slave  are  of  no  value  to  him.  And  no  where  have 
we  found  any  provision  for  a  suit  at  law  hy  the  slave 
against  his  master.  If  the  master  assaults  his  life,  if 
he  inflicts  torture,  if  he  takes  away  his  wife  by  force, 
or  ravishes  her  before  his  eyes,  neither  he  nor  his 
wife  can  bring  him  to  trial,  nor  enter  complaint  or 
bear  testimony  against  him.  If  any  instance  has  oc- 
curred, amid  the  outrages  of  the  last  two  hundred 
years,  let  it  be  produced. 

The  law  is  unquestionably  as  stated  above,  with- 
out any  exception  or  limitation."  (Stroud's  Sketch, 
p.  57.)  ^ 

The  proposition  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,  that 
a  slave  cannot  sue  his  master^''  is  involved,  of  ne- 
cessity, in  the  still  more  comprehensive  one  (which 
will  be  established  when  we  come  to  treat  of  **the 
civil  condition  of  the  slave")  that  a  slave  cannot  he 
a  party  in  any  civil  suit  whatsoever.  It  would  be 
absurd  to  suppose  that  he  could  maintain  a  suit 

*  The  case  of  an  alleged  slave  bringing  a  suit  for  his  freedom 
(which  will  be  considered  in  its  place)  is  not  an  exception  to  the 
above  proposition,  because  the  question  wJietlier  the  plaintiff  be  a 
slave  is  still  to  be  settled,  and  is  not  to  be  taken  for  granted. 


OWNEK  CAXNOT  BE  SUED. 


241 


against  his  owner ^  when  he  could  maintain  a  suit 
against  no  body  else.  And  it  would  be  equally  absurd 
to  suppose  that  he  who  could  possess  nothing,  if  he 
should  gain  a  suit,  could  have  any  power  to  hring  a 
suit  before  the  Courts  for  so  idle  a  purpose.  The 
testimony  of  Mr.  Wheeler  to  this  point,  in  his  "  LaAV 
of  Slavery,"  p.  197,  we  reserve  for  its 'more  appro- 
priate place  hereafter,  but  refer  to  it  here,  for  the 
convenience  of  the  inquiring  reader. 

The  following  cases,  extracted  from  the  same  au- 
thor, will,  however,  be  as  appropriately  inserted  here 
as  elsewhere,  though  they  prove  more  than  the  mere 
proposition  now  before  us : 

Berard  vs.  Berard  et  aL,  Feb.  Term,  1836 ;  9  Loui- 
siana Kep.,  156. 

^'-Per  Gur.^  Martin^  J. :  The  plaintiff  is  a  person, 
and  SUES  her  aunt,  Marie  Louise  Berard,  for  the 
purpose  of  establishing  her  and  her  children's  claim 
to  their  freedom.  The  defendant  disavowed  any  title 
to  the  plaintiff,  but  averred  that  she  belonged  to  her 
late  sister,  Marie  Jeane  Berard,  and  that  she  descended 
to  her  sister's  natural  children  and  legal  heirs^  Celina 
and  Antoine  Garidel.  These  heirs  intervened,  and 
claimed  the  plaintiff  and  her  children  as  their  pro- 
perty, in  the  right  of  their  deceased  mother.  The 
case  was  tried  by  a  jury,  who  found  a  judgment  for 
the  intervening  party,  and  the  plaintiff  appealed. 

"The  Court  instructed  the  jury  that  the  inter- 
veners were  not  hound  to  show  their  title.  The  plaintiff 
excepted. 

"  On  a  full  consideration  of  the  case,  this  Court  is 
11 


242  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

of  opinion  that  the  instruction  given  to  the  jnry  by 
the  District  Judge  was  correct.  A  slave  cannot 
stand  in  judgment  for  any  other  purpose  than  to 
assert  his  freedom.  He  is  not  even  allowed  to  con- 
test the  title  of  the  person  holding  him  as  a  slave." 
(Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  197-8.) 

This  decision  covers  the  entire  ground  of  the  in- 
capacity of  the  slave  to  sue  his  master,  or  any  other 
person.  And  it  lifts  the  curtain  from  the  scenery  of 
society  in  a  slaveholding  community.  It  shows  us  a 
niece,  suing  her  aunt  for  her  freedom — the  aunt 
claiming  her  niece  as  a  slave,  not  for  herself,  but  on 
behalf  of  two  other  nieces — those  nieces  coming  for- 
ward to  claim  their  cousin  and  her  children  as  their 
slave — the  Court  and  Jury  sustaining  the  claim  with- 
out calling  upon  the  claimants  to  show  their  title — 
the  Supreme  Court,  "on  a  full  consideration  of  the 
case,"  confirming  the  decision,  and  all  as  coolly  as  if 
the  claim  were  for  a  horse  !  yet  upon  a  principle  by 
which  no  horse  could  be  held,  without  showing  a 
title !  This  is  slavery  in  the  concrete,  as  actually 
existing,  sanctioned  by  the  Courts,  and  not  merely 
an  abstraction. 

The  case  that  follows  has  been  twice  alluded  to 
already,  and  may  be  referred  to  again.  We  give  it 
in  full  here : 

"  Dorothee  vs.  Coquillon  et  al.,  Jan.  T.,  1829  ;  19 
Martin's  Louisiana  Rep.,  350. 

'Appeal  from  the  Parish  Court  of  the  parish  and 
city  of  New-Orleans. 

''Per  Cwr.^  Martin^  J. :  The  plaintiff,  a  free  woman 


OWNER  CANNOT  BE  SUED. 


2-13 


of  color,  complained  that  her  child  Avas  directed  to 
be  emancipated  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  by  the  will 
of  her  mistress,  who  bequeathed  her  services,  in  the 
meanwhile,  to  defendant's  daughter,  who  is  still  a 
minor ;  that  the  will  requires  the  child  to  be  edu- 
cated in  such  a  manner  as  may  enable  h-er  to  earn  her 
livelihood  when  free ;  that  no  care  of  her  education  is 
taken,  and  she  is  treated  cruelly.  The  prayer  of  the 
petition  is,  that  the  child  be  declared  free  at  twenty- 
one,  and  in  the  meantime  hired  out  by  the  sheriff. 
The  answer  denies  the  plaintiff^  s  capacity  to  sue  ;  that 
she  has  any  cause  of  action  ;  and  the  general  issue  is 
pleaded.  The  petition  luas  dismissed,  and  the  plaintiff 
appealed.  The  plaintiff  cannot  sue  for  her  minor 
daughter,  in  a  case  in  which  the  latter  could  not  sue 
were  she  of  age.  The  daughter  is  a  statu  liber,  and 
as  such,  a  slave  till  she  reaches  her  twenty-first  year. 
Clef  des  loix  romaines  verbi  statu  liber.  As  a  slave,  she 
can  have  no  action  except  to  claim  or  prove  her 
liberty.  (Civil  Code,  177.)  Her  right  to  her  free- 
dom will  not  begin  till  she  is  twenty-one ;  if  in  the 
meantime  the  legatee  fails  to  perform  the  conditions 
of  the  bequest,  and  the  heirs  of  the  testatrix  have 
the  legacy  annulled  therefor,  the  statu  liber  must  con- 
tinue a  slave  in  the  meanwhile,  and  her  services 
enjoyed  by  her  heir ;  so  that  the  object  of  the  suit, 
so  far  as  concerns  her,  is  relief  from  ill  treatment, 
which  a  SLAVE  cannot  sue  for.  The  plaintiff  is  with- 
out any  right  of  action.  Judgment  affirmed,  with 
costs."  (WheeMr's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  198-9.) 
And  so  the  poor  free  colored  woman  loses  her 


244 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


case  in  behalf  of  her  slave  daughter,  who  is  to  he  free 
at  twenty-one,  and  is  saddled  with  the  costs  of  two 
Courts,  because  she  did  not  know  better  than  to 
suppose  that  a  slave  might  sustain  an  action  against 
her  master  for  ill-treatment,  and  that  the  conditions 
of  the  Will  would  be  enforced  by  the  Courts  1 


\ 


CHAPTER  XX. 


NO   POWER   OF   SELF-REDEMPTION,  OR   CHANGE  OP 
MASTERS. 

The  Slave,  being  a  Chattel,  has  no  power  of  Self-redemption,  nor  of  an  exchange 
of  Owners. 

An  OX  cannot  buy  himself  of  his  owner,  nor 
transfer  himself  to  the  ownership  of  another.  Here 
again,  "  to  all  intents,  constructions,  and  purposes 
whatsoever,"  the  slave  is  on  a  level  with  other  work- 
ing chattels  !  This  must  be  his  predicament  in  the 
very  nature  of  the  case,  if  the  principle  of  chattelhood 
is  to  be  consistently  maintained. 

Slaves  cannot  redeem  themselves,  nor  obtain  a 
change  of  masters,  though  cruel  treatment  may  have 
rendered  such  a  change  necessary  for  their  personal 
safety."    (Stroud  s  Sketch,  pp.  57-8.) 

it  is  of  American  slavery  in  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury of  the  Christian  era,  and  among  a  people 
boasting  their  pure  religion  and  their  free  institu- 
tions, that  this  is  affirmed.  Among  ancient  heathen 
nations  were  found  laws  providing  that  slaves  abused 
by  their  masters  might  apply  to  the  magistrates 
who  would  order  them  to  be  sold  to  a  new  master. 


246  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


In  Mississippi,  as  before  noticed,  the  Constitation 
lias  empowered  the  Legislature  to  enact  such  a  law, 
but  the  Legislature  have  not  seen  fit  to  exercise  the 
power. 

In  Louisiana,  the  new  Civil  Code  contains  a  regu- 
lation looking  apparently  in  that  direction,  but  diffi- 
cult, if  not  impossible,  to  be  made  effective.  It  is 
as  follows : 

No  master  shall  be  compelled  to  sell  his  slave, 
but  in  one  of  two  cases,  to  wit :  the  first,  when,  being 
only  co-proprietor  of  the  slave,  his  co-proprietor  de- 
mands the  sale,  in  order  to  make  a  partition  of  the 
property ;  second^  when  the  master  shall  be  CON- 
VICTED of  cruel  treatment  of  his  slave,  and  the  Judge 
shall  deem  it  proper  to  pronounce,  besides  the  penalty 
established  for  such  cases,  that  the  slave  shall  be  sold 
at  public  auction,  in  order  to  place  him  out  of  the 
reach  of  the  power  which  his  master  has  abused." 
(Art.  192.) 

It  is  to  be  noticed  here,  that  the  J udge  is  only 
empowered^  not  directed^  to  make  such  a  decree.  He 
may  apply  merely  the  other  penalties  alluded  to,  and 
which  have  already  been  examined,  (Chap.  XIII.) 
The  master  must  be  CONVICTED  of  cruelty  by 
white"  testimony,  by  a  Court  and  jury  of  slave- 
holders, and  amid  legal  rules  and  usages  that  express- 
ly authorize  chastisement  with  rigor,  provided  it  be 
not  unusual^''''  nor  "so  as  to  maim  or  mutilate,"  or 
endanger  life.  (Civil  Code  of  Louisiana,  before  cited, 
Chap.  XIIL) 

It  is  not  known  that  this  law  of  Louisiana  has 


NO  RIGHT  OF  REDEMPTION. 


247 


ever  been  enforced,  and  no  other  slave  State  in  the 
Union,  so  far  as  we  know,  has  any  similar  provision, 
though  they  are  careful  to  provide,  in  this  particular, 
for  the  security  of  indented  apprentices.  Without  a 
change  of  masters^  it  is  evident  that  no  other  laws 
against  cruelty  would  be  of  any  value.  To  punish 
an  owner  or  overseer  for  abusing  a  slave,  (even  if  it 
ever  were  done,)  and  then  send  the  slave  back  again 
to  be  under  the  power  of  the  same  tyrant,  (enraged, 
as  he  would  be,  at  his  punishment,)  would  only  be  to 
secure  fresh  injuries  in  secret. 

As  to  the  slave's  power  of  self-redemption,  there 
is  no  legal  provision  for  it  in  any  of  our  American 
slave  States.  Under  the  Spanish  laws — as,  for  ex- 
ample, in  Cuba — a  slave  may  apply  to  the  proper 
magistrates  and  be  appraised.  If,  within  a  specified 
period,  by  the  assistance  of  friends,  or  by  a  custom- 
ary if  not  prescribed  arrangement  with  the  master, 
and  by  his  own  extra  exertions,  the  amount  of  the 
appraisal  can  be  raised,  he  becomes  free.  In  this 
way  many  emancipations  take  place,  as  was  also  the 
fact  among  the  ancient  heathen.  Our  Christian  and 
Protestant  slavery  knows  no  relaxation  of  the  kind  ! 
The  late  U.  S.  Senator,  James  D'Wolfe,  of  Ehode 
Island,  who  owned  a  slave  plantation  in  Cuba,  and 
who  was,  in  early  life,  a  captain  or  supercargo  of  a 
sla\^er  to  Africa,  was  wont  to  dwell  with  satisfaction 
on  this  feature  of  Cuban  slavery,  and  to  congratulate 
himself  that  he  was  not  a  slaveholder  under  our 
A'fnerican  Code,  which  allowed  no  opportunity  to  an 
industrious  and  enterprising  slave  to  become  free. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


THE  RELATION  HEREDITARY  AND  PERPETUAL. 

Slaves  being  held  as  Property,  like  other  domestic  animals,  their  Offspring  ar« 
held  as  Property,  in  perpetuity,  in  the  same  manner. 

The  law  of  South  Carolina  says  of  slaves,  ^AU 
their  issue  and  their  offspring,  born  or  to  he  born,  shall 
be,  and  are  hereby  declared  to  be,  and  remain  for 
ever  hereapter,  absolute  slaves,  and  shall  follow 
the  condition  of  the  mother.''''  (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  129. 
See  Act  of  1740.    2  Brevard's  Digest,  229.) 

In  Maryland,  "All  negroes  and  other  slaves,  al- 
ready imported  or  hereafter  to  be  imported  into  this 
province,  and  all  children^  now  horn  or  hereafter  to  he 
horn  of  such  negroes  and  slaves^  shall  he  slaves  during 
their  natural  lives:''  (Act  of  1715,  chap.  44,  sect. 
22.    Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  11.) 

Similar  in  Georgia.  (Prince's  Dig.,  446.  Act  of 
1770.)  And  in  Mississippi.  (Revised  Code  of  1823, 
p.  369.)  And  in  Virginia.  (Revised  Code  of  1819, 
p.  421.)  And  in  Kentuck3^  (Littell  and  Swigert's 
Digest,  1149-50.)  And  in  Louisiana.  (Civil  Code, 
art.  183.)  In  all  these  laws  it  is  laid  down  that  the 
child  follows  the  condition  of  the  niothe)\  whoever 


SLAVERY  HEREDITARY — PERPETUAL.  249 


the  father  may  be  !  The  same  usage,  whether  with 
or  without  written  law,  prevails  in  all  our  slave 
States;  and  under  its  sanction,  the  slave  owner" 
very  frequently  holds  and  sells  his  own  children  as 
property,"  though  sometimes  as  white  as  himself. 
That  IS  property  which  the  law  declares  to  be 
property.  Two  hundred  years  of  legislation  have 
sanctified  and  sanctioned  negro  slaves  as  property." 
(Henry  Clay;  Speech,  U.  S.  Senate,  1839.) 

So  also  Mr.  Grholson,  in  the  Legi^ature  of  Vir- 
ginia :  "  The  ovvner  of  land  has  a  reasonable  right 
to  its  annual  produce,  the  owner  of  brood  mares  to 
their  products,  and  the  owner  of  female  slaves  to 
their  increase." 

Thus  the  perpetuity  of  slavery  gTOws  out  of  its 
hereditary  transmission,  and  this  again  comes  from 
its  tenure  of  chattelhood.  If  the  ^' legal  relation" 
be  valid  and  innocent,  there  can  be  no  argument 
admitted  against  the  right  of  its  perpetuity;  and 
slave  property  may  be  held  so  long  as  other  property 
is  held.  The  duty  of  a  future  liberation  would 
imply  the  unlawfulness  of  present  possession.  In- 
telligent slaveholder^,  perceiving  this,  are  careful  to 
fortify  their  present  claims  upon  human  chattels,  by 
enactments  seeking  the  perpetuity  of  the  system. 

In  Jamaica,  before  emancipation,  the  mixed  breed, 
at  the  fourth  degree  of  distance  from  the  negro  an- 
cestor, were  liberated  by  express  law.  In  the  other 
British  West  India  Islands,  a  similar  custom  pre- 
vailed. (See  Stephen's  West  India  Slavery,  p.  27,  and 
Edwards'  West  Indies,  book  4,  chap.  1.)  In  the 
11'^ 


250 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Spanish  and  Portuguese  colonies,  (probably,  also,  in 
tlie  French,)  a  similar  usage  is  believed  to  prevail. 
{Vide  Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  14.)  Not  so  in  our  North 
American  slave  States,  where  biblical  defenses  of 
slavery,  on  the  pretended  foundation  of  Hebrew 
servitude,  forget  to  define  it  by  the  Hebrew  usages, 
and  are  resorted  to  in  defense  against  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  Hebrew  Jubilee  !  By  this  process,  and 
by  defenses  of  or  apologies  for  the  legal  relation  " 
of  slave  ownership,  the  idea  of  '^rights  of  property" 
is  sustained,  which  includes  the  right  of  perpetuity, 
of  course,  and  makes  it  a  work  of  supererogation  to 
emancipate.  Eefusing  to  do  so,  the  citizen  remains 
as  good  as  the  laws;  and  the  Christian  (so  he  is 
taught)  as  good  as  the  apostles  and  Moses,  so  far  as 
the  slave  question  is  concerned.  With  "fanatics" 
he  leaves  it  to  attempt  being  better.  Hence,  the 
people  (with  few  exceptions)  are  ''no  better  than 
their  laws"  in  this  matter. 


CHAPTER  XXII.' 

RIGHT  TO   EDUCATION" — RELIGIOUS  LIBERTY — 
RIGHTS  OF  CONSCIENCE. 

The  Slave,  bein^  held  as  a  Chattel,  is  held  by  a  tenure  which  excludes  any 
legal  recognition  of  his  rights  as  a  thinking  and  religious  being. 

We  are  not  now  speaking  of  laws  or  of  usages  that 
directly  infringe  such  rights  and  prohibit  their  exer- 
cise. There  are  such  laws^  and  we  shall  give  some 
specimens  of  them,  when  we  come  to  inquire  after 
rne  condition  of  the  slave  in  relation  to  civil  society 
At  present,  we  are  only  unfolding  to  view  ^''the  legal 
relation  of  master  and  slave.''''  We  affirm  that  a  recog- 
nition of  the  validity  or  lawfulness  of  that  relation 
is  equivalent  to  a  denial  of  the  literary  and  religious 
rights  of  the  slave.  And  if  that  relation  be  an 
innocent  one,  then  the  denial  and  the  withholding  n 
of  those  rights,  AS  rights,  are  innocent  likewise. 
The  mere  bestowal  of  privileges^  with  the  permission 
to  enjoy  them,  is  not  the  recognition  of  rights  ;  it  is 
rather  an  implied  denial  of  their  existence.  Men 
do  not  grant  permission  nor  confer  privileges  where 


♦Chapters  VL  and  Vil.  Part  II. 


252 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


they  recognize  rights.  The  power  to  permit  and  to 
confer^  carries  with  it  the  power  to  refuse  and  to 
withhold.  Both  the  master  and  the  slave  understand 
this,  where  permissions  are  most  frequently  given. 
It  is  injurious  to  confer,  as  it  is  degrading  to  accept 
as  a  boon,  what  belongs  to  every  man  as  man,  by 
absolute  and  inherent  RIGHT.  The  rights  of  inves- 
tigation, of  free  speech,  of  mental  culture,  of  religious 
liberty,  and  of  conscience,  are  of  this  class.  Man 
may  no  more  affect  to  confer  them  or  permit  their 
exercise,  than  he  may  presume  to  take  them  away. 

The  statement,  then,  is  not  that  slave  masters  do 
not  educate  nor  permit  the  education  of  their  slaves, 
nor  allow  nor  furnish  them  the  benefits  of  religious 
instruction  and  social  worship.  As  a  general  state- 
ment, with  particular  and  local  exceptions,  it  might 
be  made  and  sustained,  as  will  appear  in  its  allotted 
place.  But  we  waive  and  pass  by  all  this,  for  the 
present,  to  affirm  distinctly  that  "  the  legal  relation" 
of  slave  ownership,  in  America,  as  defined  by  the 
code  that  upholds  it,  is  a  relation  that  cannot  and 
does  not  consist  with  the  recognition  (either  in 
theory  or  practice)  of  the  intellectual  and  religious 
EIGHTS  of  the  slave. 

The  slave  "is  a  chattel."  But  chattels  have  no 
literary  or  religious  rights.  He  is  a  chattel  "  to  all 
intents,  constructions,  and  purposes  Avhatsoever." 
He  is  "in  the  power  of  a  master,  to  whom  he  be- 
longs " — "  entirely  subject  to  the  will  of  his  master  " 
— "not  ranked  among  sentieyit  beings^  but  among 
things.''''    It  would  be  an  absurditv  for  svch  a  code  to 


SPIKlTirAL  DESPOTISM. 


253 


recognize  the  slave  as  possessing  religious  rights.  It 
is  free  from  any  such  absurdity. 

Except  the  provisions,  in  some  of  the  States,  for 
the  baptism^''  of  slaves,  and  for  their  '^spiritual 
assistance  when  szcA;,"  (see  Chap.  VII.,  Part  II.,)  we 
have  found  no  recognition  of  their  religious  wants, 
their  religious  natures,  or  immortal  destinies.  Even 
here  they  seem  to  be  considered  passive  beings,  whose 
salvation  is  to  be  bestowed  by  their  masters.  The 
American  Slave  Code,  from  beginning  to  end,  knows 
no  rights  of  conscience  in  its  subjects.  The  master 
is  to  be  implicitly  obeyed.  His  will  is  to  be  law. 
The  slave  is  allowed  no  self-direction,  no  sacred 
marriage,  no  family  relation,  no  marital  rights — none 
that  may  not  be  taken  away  by  his  master. 

Eeligion  and  its  duties  are  based  on  human  re- 
lations, including  family  relations.  These  relations, 
the  "relation  of  slave  ownership"  and  chattelhood 
abrogates.  Religion  requires  and  cherishes  self-con- 
trol ;  but  the  "  owner's  *'  authority  supersedes  and 
prohibits  self-control.  Religion  implies  free  agency ; 
but  "the  slave  is  not  a  free  agent."  His  "condition 
is  merely  a  passive  one."  So  says  the  Slave  Code, 
and  so  says  ecclesiastical  law,  and  therefore  releases 
him  from  the  obligations  of  the  seventh  command- 
ment. Witness  the  decision  of  the  Savannah  River 
Baptist  Association,  while  allowing  its  slave  mem- 
bers, without  censure,  to  take  second  or  third  com- 
panions, in  obedience  to  their  masters,  by  whom 
their  original  connections  had  been  severed ! 

Rights  of  conscience  require,  and  therefore  ait- 


254 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


thorize  a  man  to  clioose  his  own  place  of  worship, 
and  not  "forsake  the  assembling  together;"  nay,  to 
choose  and  follow  the  avocation,  and  select  the  resi- 
dence and  the  associates  where,  in  his  own  judgment^ 
he  can  best  serve  Grod,  fit  his  own  soul  for  heaven, 
and  lead  his  fellow-men  to  the  Saviour.  It  com- 
mands and  authorizes  him  to  "search  the  Scrip- 
tures," and  train  up  his  family  "in  the  nurture  and 
admonition  of  the  Lord."  The  master  emancipates 
his  slave,  and  ceases  to  be  his  "  owner"  when  he 
fully  accords  to  him,  in  practice  and  in  theory,  these 
Heaven-conferred  eights.  It  is  useless  to  attempt 
evading  this,  by  adducing  the  case  of  children  and 
minors.  The  slave,  at  maturity,  is  entitled  to  the 
rights  and  responsibilities  of  a  man,  and  without 
them  he  is  despoiled  of  his  religious  rights. 

The  slave  master  may  withhold  education  and  the 
Bible ;  he  may  forbid  religious  instruction,  and  access 
to  public  worship.  He  may  enforce  upon  the  slave 
and  his  family  a  religious  worship  and  a  religious 
teaching  which  he  disapproves.  In  all  this,  as  com- 
pletely as  in  secular  matters,  he  is  "entirely  subject 
to  the  will  of  a  master,  to  ivhom  he  belong The 
claim  of  chattelhood  extends  to  the  soul  as  well  as 
to  the  body,  for  the  body  cannot  be  otherwise  held 
and  controlled. 

There  is  no  other  religious  despotism  on  the  face 
of  the  earth  so  absolute,  so  irresponsible,  so  soul- 
crashing  as  this.  It  is  not  subjection  to  an  eccle- 
siastical body  or  functionary  of  any  description ;  a 
presbytery,  a  conference,  a  bishop,  a  prelate,  a  pope. 


SPIRITUAL  DESPOTISM. 


255 


who  maj  be  supposed  to  be  sensible,  in  some  sort, 
of  their  sacred  and  responsible  charge !  The  free 
lohiie  American  exults  in  his  exemption  from  the 
jurisdiction  of  these,  except  during  his  own  free  con- 
sent. He  would  freely  part  with  his  life's  blood,  in 
martyrdom  or  in  war,  rather  than  relinquish  or  com- 
promise this  right !  But  he  thinks  it  a  light  matter 
(if  he  thinks  of  it  at  all)  that  three  millions  of  his 
countrymen  are  in  a  worse  spiritual  thraldom  than 
this,  under  bishops  that  regard  and  treat  them  as 
"chattels  personal !"  a  bishopric  entailed  by  descent, 
or  conferred  by  the  hammer  of  the  auctioneer,  the 
writ  of  the  sheriff,  or  the  chances  of  the  billiard- 
table,  and  transferable  in  the  same  manner!  nay, 
exercised  by  deputation  every  day,  by  the  brutal 
overseer,  the  ignorant  housekeeper,  the  spoiled 
child ;  a  bishopric.  Christian  or  infidel,  drunken  or 
sober,  chaste  or  lewd,  as  the  chances  may  happen ! 
Who  thinks  of  it^  that  the  religious  rights  of  immor- 
tal  men  are  thus  trampled  in  the  dust  in  this  country; 
that  their  reYigiOMS  privileges  are  in  such  keeping? 
How  is  it  that  Christian  ministers,  ''sons  of  the 
Pilgrims,"  can  overlook  all  this,  as  they  do,  when 
they  speak  of  the  '4nnocent  legal  relation"  that 
involves,  of  necessity,  dl  this  ?  The  absolute  power 
of  the  Pope,  though  conferred,  as  it  once  was,  by 
the  almost  unanimous  consent  of  all  Christendom, 
they  can  denounce  as  "the  Antichrist,"  forgetful 
of  the  more  absolute  power  of  every  "  owner"  of  an 
American  slave!  The  doom  of  the  former  they 
read  in  the  Apocalypse ;  the  latter  they  deem  Heaven 


256 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


sanctioned  and  approved,  blaming  only  its  abuse! 
Why  may  not  Papal  power  have  the  benefit  of  the 
same  apology  ?  Whence  comes  it  that  the  absolute 
religious  despotism  (for  such  it  is)  of  the  slave  owner 
is  so  much  more  sacred  and  unapproachable  than 
that  of  the  Protestant  or  Catholic  Church  ? 

A  single  incident — we  hope  it  is  an  uncommon 
one — will  illustrate  this  absolute  power  of  the  slave- 
holder. At  a  planter's  dinner-table,  one  day,  (per- 
haps over  the  wine,)  a  guest  remarked  upon  the 
hypocrisy  of  all  religious  slaves.  The  planter  dis- 
sented. He  was  the  owner  of  one  who  would  rathe/ 
die  than  deny  his  Redeemer.  This  was  ridiculed 
The  slave  was  brought  and  put  to  the  test.  He  wa^» 
ordered  to  deny  his  belief  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
He  refused ;  was  terribly  whipped ;  retained  his  in 
tegrity;  the  whipping  was  repeated,  and  ''he  died 
in  consequence  of  this  severe  infliction."  This  wa? 
in  South  Carolina.  The  facts  were  related  to  Miss- 
Sarah  M.  Grimke,  daughter  of  Judge  Grimke,  of 
Charleston,  by  an  intimate  friend,  the  wife  of  a  slave 
holder.  The  particulars,  over  the  signature  of  Mis^ 
Grimke,  are  inserted  in  Weld's  "Slavery  as  it  is,' 
p.  24. 

There  is  no  adequate  leg aX  protection  against  such 
outrages,  nor  can  there  be,  consistently  with  the 
''legal  relation"  of  slave  ownership.  There  was 
probably  no  legal  investigation  of  this  case.  If 
there  had  been,  and  if  "white"  witnesses  had  at- 
tested the  fact,  the  verdict,  in  conformity  with  the 
laws  of  the  State,  would  probably  have  been,  ''death 


SPIRITUAL  DESPOTISM. 


257 


hy  moderate  correction  /"    Into  the  causes  or  reasons 
of  chastisement,  the  Slave  Code  does  not  inquire ! 
It  is  sufl&cient  that  the  slave  disobeys  his  owner/' 
^overseer,  or  agent!" 

We  have  made  no  quotations  from  the  statutes  or 
judicial  decisions  of  the  slave  States,  on  the  subject 
of  this  chapter  directly,  because  we  have  found  none! 
Neither  Stroud  nor  Wheeler,  nor  any  other  compiler 
of  slave  laws  and  decisions  that  we  know  of,  appear 
to  have  discovered  any  provisions  for  the  education 
and  religious  liberties  of  slaves !  The  eloquent 
silence  of  these  significant  blanks  in  the  statute 
book  and  judicial  reports  of  the  slave  States,  is 
sufficient  to  certify  the  facts  of  the  case.  Whoever 
has  read  the  preceding  enactments  and  decisions 
well  knows  how  to  interpret  such  silence. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


ORIGIN  OF  THE  /'RELATION,"  AND  ITS  SUBJECTS. 

The  so-called  "  legal  relation  "  of  slave  ownership  of  Negroes  originated  in  that 
African  Slave-Trade  which  our  laws  now  punish  as  piracy  ;  but  Slavery  is, 
in  general,  extended  over  all  classes  whom  the  slaveholders  have  been  able  to 
seize  upon  and  retain  ;  over  Indians,  free  persons  of  color,  and  whites. 

Sir  John  Hawkins  obtained  leave  of  Queen 
Elizabeth,  in  the  year  1562,  to  transport  Africans 
into  the  American  Colonies  with  their  own  free  con- 
fientj  a  condition  with  which  he  promised  to  comply  . 
But  he  forfeited  his  word,  and  forced  them  on  board 
his  ships  by  acts  of  devastation  and  slaughter.  For 
this  he  was  denominated  a  murderer  and  a  robber, 
even  by  the  historian  Edwards,  an  advocate  of  the 
slave-trade.  (Vide  Clarkson's  History,  p.  30 ;  and 
Edwards'  Hist.  W.  Indies,  vol.  2,  pp.  43-4.)  This 
was  the  beginning  of  the  slave-trade  by  Englishmen. 

By  Act  of  23  George  IL,  the  ''trade  to  Africa" 
was  "  regulated,"  including  a  strict  prohibition,  under 
penalties,  of  the  taking  on  board  or  carrying  away 
any  African  '^by  force^  fraud,  or  violeiweJ''  (Vide 
Clarkson,  p.  314.  See  also  Spooner's  Unconstitu- 
tionality of  Slavery.) 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


259 


Under  no  other  legal  sanction  than  ihis^  the  forcible 
and  fraudulent  seizure  and  transportation  of  slaves 
from  Africa  to  the  British-American  Colonies  was 
carried  on  till  the  West  India  and  North  American 
Colonies  were  stocked  with  slaves,  and  many  were 
introduced  into  England,  held  as  slaves  there,  and 
the  tenure  accounted  legal! 

But  in  1772  it  was  decided  by  Lord  Mansfield,  in 
the  case  of  James  Somerset,  a  slave,  that  the  whole 
process  and  tenure  were  illegal ;  that  there  was  not, 
and  never  had  heen^  any  legal  slavery  in  England. 
This  decision  was  understood  by  Granville  Sharpe, 
the  chief  agent  in  procuring  it,  to  be  applicable  to 
the  British  Colonies^  as  well  as  to  the  mother-country, 
and  undoubtedly  it  was  so.  The  United  States  were 
then  Colonies  of  Grreat  Britain.  But  the  slaves  in 
the  Colonies  had  no  Granville  Sharpe  to  bring  their 
cause  into  the  Courts,  and  the  Courts  were  composed 
of  slaveholders. 

In  the  great  struggle,  afterwards,  in  the  British 
Parliament  for  abolishing  the  African  slave-trade, 
William  Pitt  cited  the  Act  of  23  George  II.,  (which 
we  have  already  mentioned,)  and  declared  that  in- 
stead of  authorizing  the  slave-trade,  as  was  pre- 
tended, it  was  a  direct  prohibition  of  the  whole 
process,  as  it  had  actually  been  carried  on  by  fraud, 
force,  and  violence.  An  elaborate  investigation  by 
Parliament  sustained  the  statement;  and,  after  a 
long  struggle,  the  doctrine  prevailed,  and  the  traffic 
was  expressly  and  solemnly  abolished,  though  it  has 
been  secretly  carried  on  to  the  present  day,  and  is 


260  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

prosecuted  still.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that 
great  numbers  are  still  smuggled  annuall)^  into  the 
United  States,  as  it  is  known  that  numerous  plan- 
tations in  the  States  bordering  on  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico  are  stocked  with  slaves,  evidently  African, 
and  unable  to  speak  English."^  The  whole  process  is^ 
and  has  been^  illegal^  from  beginning  to  end. 

The  first  introduction  of  slaves  into  Georgia  was 
in  direct  violation  of  express  statutes  of  the  Colony 
itself,  until  slaveholders  gained  the  ascendency  and 
repealed  the  laws.  Into  the  other  Colonies  slaves 
were  introduced  a  long  time  before  there  were  any 
colonial  enactments  authorizing  it,  and  consequently 
without  any  show  of  legal  sanction.  When  statutes 
ivere  enacted,  they  did  not  pretend  to  create  or  ori- 
ginate the  relation.  Nor  did  they  define,  with  ex- 
actness, who  were  slaves  and  who  were  not  slaves. 
They  only  assumed  or  took  for  granted  the  existence 

^  See  Weld's  Slavery  as  it  is,  (p.  139,  <fec.,)  for  important  facts  on 
this  subject,  among  which  are  the  following :  The  President's  Mes- 
sage, in  1837,  stated  that  a  naval  force  had  been  employed  in  pre- 
venting the  importation  of  slaves.  Mr.  Middleton,  of  South  Carolina, 
in  1819,  declared,  in  a  speech  in  Congress,  that  "  thirteen  thousand 
Africans  are  annually  smuggled  into  the  Southern  States."  Mr. 
Mercer,  of  Virginia,  in  a  speech  in  Congress,  declared  that  "car 
goes "  of  African  slaves  were  smuggled  into  the  South,  to  a  de 
plorable  extent.  Mr.  Wright,  of  Maryland,  in  a  speech  in  Congress, 
estimated  the  "  number  imported  annually  at  fifteen  thousand." 
Particulars  are  also  given  of  the  importation  of  a  cargo  of  five  hun- 
dred from  Guinea  and  Congo,  into  Savannah,  the  capture,  the  sham 
trial  of  the  importers,  their  acquittal,  and  the  distribution  of  the 
slaves  among  the  planters  I  New-Orleans  papers,  in  1839,  recorded 
he  fact  of  frequent  and  extensive  smuggling. 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS.  261 


of  slave  property,  and  made  laws  for  its  security  and 
regulation.  The  consequence  is,  that  no  slaveholder 
can  now  prove  that  the  particular  slaves  claimed  by 
him  were  ever  made  slaves  according  to  law^  or  that 
their  ancestors  were  thus  enslaved !  And  there  are  no 
statute  laws  in  either  of  the  States,  by  which  it  can 
be  legally  proved  by  the  common  rules  and  usages 
of  Courts,  as  applied  to  other  subjects,  that  slavery 
legally  exists  there.  This  was  avowed  by  Mr.  Mason, 
of  Virginia,  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  when 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Bill  was  pending.  He  objected  to 
the  proposed  ^'  trial  by  jury  "  that  it  would  bring  up 
the  question  of  the  legality  of  slavery  in  the  States, 
which,  said  he,  it  would  he  impossible  to  prove,  Mr. 
Bayly,  member  of  Congress  from  Virginia,  took  the 
same  ground.  So  Congress  struck  out  the  jury  trial, 
because  slaveholders  avowed  their  inability  to  prove 
the  legality  of  slavery  in  a  Court  of  law ! 

It  may  be  proper  to  explain,  that  while  these  gen- 
tlemen admit  that  there  are  no  express  statutes  of 
the  States  that  are  adequate  to  the  legalization  of 
slavery,  they  nevertheless  affect  to  believe  that  it  is 
legalized  by  the  common  law!  It  is  not  strange  that 
they  are  unwilling  to  go  with  that  plea  into  the 
Courts!  The  Courts  of  Louisiana^  Mississippi^  and 
Kentucky  have  already  set  it  aside.  (See  the  case  of 
Marie  Louise  vs,  Mariott  et  al..  May  Term,  1836 ;  8 
Louisiana  Keports,  475.  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery, 
348-9.  Also,  same  principle  in  Eankin  vs,  Lydia, 
Fall  Term,  1820  ;  2  Marshall's  Kentucky  Rep.,  467. 
Wheeler,  p.  339.    Also  in  Lunsford  vs.  Coquillon, 


262 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


May  Term,  1824 ;  14  Martin's  Louisiana  Eep.,  401. 
Wlieeler,  p.  335.  See  also  Harvy  and  others  ^5. 
Decker  and  Hopkins,  June  Term,  1818 ;  Walker's 
Miss.  Eep.,  36.  Wheeler,  pp.  340-6.  See  also  Com 
monwealth  of  Massachusetts  vs,  Thomas  Aves,  Aug., 
1836.  Wheeler,  p.  368,  and  Story's  Conflict  of 
Laws,  92-97.)^ 

All  these  affirm  that  slavery,  being  without  foun 
dation  in  nature,  is  the  creature  of  municipal  law, 
and  exists  only  under  its  jurisdiction.  In  the  case 
first  mentioned,  (Marie  Louise  vs.  Mariott  et  al.,) 
in  which  the  slave  had  been  taken  to  France  by 
her  master,  and  brought  back  to  Louisiana,  Judge 
Matthews  said :  Being  free  for  one  moment  in 
France^  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  her  former  owner  to 
reduce  her  again  to  slavery^    (Wheeler,  p.  349.) 

The  absence,  therefore,  of  municipal  law,  is  fatal 
to  the  legality  of  the  claims  of  the  slaveholder,  even 
by  the  Slave  Code.  In  the  case  of  Lunsford  vs. 
Coquillon,  above  mentioned.  Judge  Martin  said : 
''''The  relation  of  owner  and  slave  is,  in  the  States  of 
this  Union  in  which  it  has  a  LEGAL  existence,  the  creature 
of  municipal  law.^^    (Wheeler,  p.  335.) 

In  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  8-11,  there  is  a 
brief  account  of  the  origin  of  slavery,  which  in  no 
essential  particular  conflicts  with  the  account  we 
have  here  given  of  it,  and  in  some  of  the  most  im- 

*  "Wliile  these  statements  were  in  the  hands  of  the  printer,  a 
gentleman  of  the  city  of  New- York,  who,  for  several  years,  was 
a  practising  lawyer  in  Georgia,  informed  the  author  that  there 
had  been  similar  judicial  decisions  in  that  State. 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


263 


portant  particulars  is  coincident  with  it.  The;  same 
remarks  will  apply  to  the  statements  cited  from 
Judge  Matthews,  of  Louisiana,  pp.  15,  16. 

''It  is  an  admitted  principle,  that  slavery  has  been 
permitted  and  tolerated  in  all  the  colonies  established 
in  America  by  the  mother-country.  Not  only  of 
Africans,  but  also  of  Indians.    No  legislative  act 

OF  THE  COLONIES  CAN  BE  FOUND  IN  EELATION  TO 

IT."    (Wheeler,  pp.  8,  9.) 

In  other  words,  the  practice  had  no  municipal  law 
to  sanction  it.  It  was  barely  "  tolerated that  is,  it 
was  not  suppressed.  This  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  saying  that  it  was  legal,  which  could  not  be 
without  local  enactment,  even  according  to  the 
lowest  definition  of  legality.  No  lawyer  ever  speaks 
of  the  holding  of  property  in  horses  (which  is  a 
natural  right)  as  being  "  tolerated  T  Again, 

Hudgins  vs,  Wright,  Nov.  T.,  1806 ;  1  Hen.  and 
Munf.,  Ya.  Eep.,  139. 

''  Per  Cur.:  The  slavery  of  the  African  negro  has 
existed  from  the  time  of  bringing  them  into  the 
Colony.  In  many  of  the  States  express  enactments 
have  been  made  declaring  them  slaves,  and  in  others 
they  are  slaves  hy  CUSTOM."    (Wheeler,  p.  12.) 

It  would  have  been  interesting  to  have  learned 
from  the  Court  in  which  of  the  colonies,  and  ivhen 
and  how  express  enactments"  were  made.  It  would 
then  have  confirmed  fully  the  statement  before 
quoted,  that  "no  legislative  enactments"  originating 
slavery  can  be  found.  Again, 

In  the  case  of  Seville  vs,  Chretien,  Sept.  T.,  1817 ; 


264  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


5  Martin's  Louisiana  Eeports,  275,  Judge  Matthews 
admits,  and  labors  to  account  for,  ^''the  absence  of  any 
legislative  act  of  European  powers  for  the  introduction  of 
slavery  into  their  American  dominions, ''^  (Wheeler,  p.  15.) 

So  that  American  slavery  owes  its  origin  neither 
to  American  nor  European  legislation.  The  Courts, 
indeed,  whenever  they  approach  the  subject,  appear 
to  be  perplexed  with  the  problem  of  its  legal  origin. 
As  for  example, 

Hall  vs,  Mullen,  June  T.,  1821 ;  5  Har.  and  John's 
Md.  Eep.,  190. — Judge  Johnson  said :  But  the  con- 
dition and  rigbts  of  slaves  in  this  State  depend  not 
exclusively  either  on  the  civil  or  feudal  law,  but 
msijj  perhaps,  rest  in  part  on  both;  subject,  never- 
theless, to  such  changes  in  their  condition,"  &c.,  "  as 
the  laws  of  the  State  may  prescribe.'^  (Wheeler,  pp. 
10,  11.) 

By  what  authority,  when,  and  bow,  the  feudal  law 
or  the  Eoman  civil  law  became  established  in  the 
American  States,  we  are  not  informed ;  nor  is  it  very 
important,  since  tbe  Courts  at  the  South,  will  be  care- 
ful not  to  allow  the  feudal  law  to  define  slavery,  as 
indeed  appears  by  the  preceding. 

Whence,  then,  is  the  original  of  slavery?  And 
how  does  it  appear  to  have  been  or  to  be  legalized? 
In  the  case  of 

Harvey  and  others  vs.  Decker  and  Hopkins,  June 
T.,  Walker's  Miss.  Eep.,  36,  the  Court  said :  Slavery 
is  condemned  by  reason  and  the  laws  of  nature.  It  ex- 
ists, and  can  ONLY  exist,  through  municipal  regula- 
tions:'   (Wheeler,  pp.  340-6.) 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


265 


But  the  municipal  regulations"  (so  far  as  origin- 
ating the  '4egal  relation"  is  concerned)  appear,  as 
has  been  seen,  to  be  missing!  They  "cannot  be 
found"  on  the  statute  book! 

The  New-Jersey  Judge  who  frankly  confessed  that 
he  could  not  tell  and  did  not  care  how  the  legal  right 
to  enslave  the  Indians  originated,  took  the  most 
prudent  course,  and  should  be  imitated  by  all  pro- 
slavery  Judges  who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  stumble 
upon  "the  delicate  question"  of  the  origin  of  legal- 
ized negro  slavery. 

"  The  State  vs.  Waggoner,  April  T.,  1797 ;  1  Hal- 
stead's  N.  J.  Eep.,  374-476. 

"  They"  [Indians]  "  have  so  long  been  recognized 
as  slaves  in  our  law,  that  it  would  be  as  great  a  vio 
lation  of  the  rights  of  property  to  establish  a  contrary 
decision  at  the  present  day,  as  it  would  in  the  case 
of  the  Africans,  and  as  useless  to  investigate  the 
manner  in  which  they  originally  lost  their  freedom." 
(Wheeler,  p.  18.) 

And  yet,  in  Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  we  find 
cases  in  which  even  Southern  Judges  (to  their  honor 
be  it  recorded)  have  awarded  freedom  to  persons 
enslaved,  upon  the  opposite  principle,  that  "prescrip- 
tion is  never  pleadable  to  a  claim  of  freedom."  This 
is  the  marginal  note  to  the  case  of 

"  Delphene  vs.  Devise,  14  Martin's  Louisiana  Kep. 
650: 

"Per  Car,,  Porter,  J. :  The  plaintiff  urges  she  is  de- 
scended from  one  Marie  Catherene,  a  negro  woman 
now  deceased,  who  was  the  slave  of  a  certain  Marie 
12 


266 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Durse,  and  that  the  said  Marie  emancipated  and  set 
free  Catherene  and  her  children,  Florence,  Luce,  and 
Catherene,  the  mother  of  the  petitioner."  The  de- 
fendant pleaded  the  general  issue,  and  prescription. 
We  shall,  before  entering  upon  the  merits,  dispose 
of  the  exception  which  forms  the  second  ground  of 
defense  in  the  defendant's  answer.  We  do  so 
referring  to  the  third  partida,  title  twenty-nine,  law 
twenty-four,  in  which  we  find  it  provided  that,  if  a 
man  be  FREE,  no  matter  how  long  he  may  have  been  HELD 
by  another  AS  a  slave,  his  state  or  condition  cannot 
he  thereby  changed,,  nor  can  he  be  reduced  to  slavery  in 
any  manner  vohatever,,  on  account  of  THE  TIME  he  may 
have  been  held  in  servitudeJ^  The  plaintiff  is  entitled 
to  her  freedom."    (Wheeler,  p.  101.) 

Same  principle  in  case  of  Metayer  vs.  Metayer, 
Jan.  T.,  1819  ;  6  Martin's  Louisiana  Eep.  16.  (Wheel- 
er,  p.  103.)  Also  in  Vaughan  vs,  Phebe,  Jan.  T., 
1827  ;  Martin  and  Yerger's  Tenn.  Rep.  1.  (Wheeler, 
pp.  395-404.)  Judge  Crabb  said:  ^^The  act  of  limit- 
ations loould  be  no  barT    (p.  399.) 

Neither  by  statute.^  therefore,  nor  by  the  common 
laiv^  nor  yet  by  prescription,,  are  the  negroes  in  Ame- 
rica LEGALLY  held  in  bondage. 

But  it  is  time  now,  in  further  confirmation  of  this, 
to  cite  more  fully  the  language  held  by  Judge 
Matthews,  of  Louisiana,  in  the  case  of  Seville  vs, 
Chretien,  before  mentioned. 

Having  alluded  to  the  absence  of  any  legislative  act 
of  the  European  poioers  for  the  introduction  of  slavery 
into  their  American  dominions.  Judge  Matthews  adds  * 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS.  267 


"7/^  the  record  of  any  sucK  act  exists^  we  have  not  heen 
able  to  find  any  trace  of  it.  It  is  true  that  Charles  the 
Fifth,  in  the  first  part  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
granted  a  patent  to  one  of  his  Flemish  subjects  for 
the  privilege  of  importing  four  thousand  negroes 
into  America,  which  was  purchased  by  some  Genoese 
merchants,  who  were  the  first  who  brought  into  any 
regular  form  the  commerce  for  slaves  between  Africa 
and  America.  A  few  years  before,  a  small  number 
of  negroes  had  been  introduced  by  order  of  Ferdi- 
nand. But  the  privilege  granted  by  the  Emperor,  so 
far  from  being  the  first  introduction  of  slavery  into 
the  New  World,  was  intended  as  a  means  of  enabling 
the  planters  to  dispense  with  the  slavery  of  the  Indians 
by  their  European  conquerors.  A  full  account  of 
these  transactions  may  be  seen  in  Eobertson's  His- 
tory of  America."    (Wheeler,  p.  15.) 

It  will  not,  probably,  be  contended  that  the  en- 
slavement of  the  Indians,  here  mentioned,  was  under 
sanction  of  law.  But  let  us  hear  Judge  Matthews 
further : 

On  turning  our  attention  to  the  first  settlement 
of  the  British  Colonies  in  America,  we  find  that  the 
introduction  of  nes^ro  slaves  into  one  of  the  most 
important,  was  accidental.  In  the  year  1616,  as 
stated  by  Eobertson,  and  1620  by  Judge  Marshall, 
in  his  Life  of  Washington,  a  Dutch  ship  from  the 
coast  of  Guinea  sold  a  part  of  her  cargo  of  negroes  to 
the  planters  on  James  River.  This  is  the  first  origin 
of  the  slavery  of  the  blacks  in  the  British- American 
provinces.    About  twenty  years  after^  slaves  icere  intra- 


268 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


duced  into  New-England^  and  it  is  believed  that  Indiaub 
ivere  at  the  same  time^  or  before^  held  in  bondage.  The 
ABSENCE  OF  ANY  ACT  OR  INSTRUMENT  OF  GOVERN- 
MENT UNDER  WHICH  THEIR  SLAVERY  ORIGINATED  IS 
NOT  A  MATTER  OF  GREATER  SJ.u'.MSE  THAN  THAT 
THERE     SHOULD     HAVE     BEEN     NONE  FOUND 

AUTHOKIZING  THE  SLAVERY  OF  THE 
BLACKS.  The  first  Act  of  the  Legislature  of  the  Pro- 
vince of  Virginia  on  the  subject  of  the  slavery  of  the  In 
dians  was  passed  in  1670,  and  one  of  its  provisions, 
according  to  Judge  Tucker,  protiibits  free  or  manu 
mitted  Indians  from  purchasing  Christian  servants. 
The  words  free  or  manumitted  are  useless  and  absurd, 
if  there  did  not  exist  Indians  who  had  been  slaves 
and  had  been  manumitted,  before  and  at  the  time 
this  Act  was  passed."    (Wheeler,  pp.  15,  16.) 

Thus  full  and  explicit  is  the  testimony  of  Judge 
Matthews,  of  Louisiana,  (and  in  the  very  act  of  mak- 
ing a  decision  against  the  claims  of  an  Indian  "  to 
recover  his  liberty,")  to  the  fact  that  both  Indians 
and  negroes  were  originally  enslaved  in  this  country, 
in  the  absence  of  either  European  or  colonial  legisla- 
tion to  sanction  or  create  the  relation  of  owner  and 
slave. 

Put  this  by  the  side  of  the  Southern  decisions,  be- 
fore cited,  that  slavery  can  have  no  legal  existence 
in  the  absence  of  municipal  law,  and  we  have  the 
result  that  slavery  in  this  country  had  no  legal  origin^ 
and  has  continued  to  exist  tvithout  law ;  since  (by 
the  same  testimony)  "  no  legislative  act  of  the  Colo- 
nies can  be  found  in  relation  to  it." 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


269 


The  reader  may  be  curious  to  know  on  ivhat 
ground  Judge  Matthews,  of  Louisiana,  in  the  case 
already  cited,  could  maintain  the  legality  of  Ameri- 
can slavery.    It  is  this : 

^'  However,  we  are  of  opinion  that  it  may  he  laid 
down  as  a  legal  axiom,  that  in  all  governments  in 
which  the  municipal  regulations  are  not  absolutely 
opposed  to  slavery,  persons  already  reduced  to  that 
state  may  be  held  in  it ;  and  we  also  assume  it  as  a 
first  principle  that  slavery  has  been  permitted  and 
tolerated  in  all  the  colonies  established  in  America  by 
European  powers,  most  clearly  as  relates  to  the 
blacks  and  Africans,  and  also  in  relation  to  Indians, 
in  the  first  periods  of  conquest  and  colonization." 
(Wheeler,  p.  15.) 

According  to  this  "legal  axiom,"  any  person  in  a 
State  where  there  are  no  express  statutes  forbidding 
slavery,  (as  perhaps  in  Massachusetts  and  Maine,) 
may  seize  any  other  person  and  enslave  him !  And 
having  done  this,  he  may  continue  to  "hold"  him 
legally^  because  the  laws  have  not  forbidden  it !  By 
the  same  or  a  similar  "legal  axiom,"  it  would  follow 
that  in  a  State  where  no  express  statutes  had  been 
enacted  against  such  minor  injuries  as  assault,  bat- 
tery, and  maiming,  such  practices  might  be  consid- 
ered legal!  Thus  the  "axiom"  ignores  the  existence 
of  natural  law  or  common  law ! 

Another  important  circumstance  is,  that  the 
colonial  charters,  Avhich  were  their  constitutions  of 
government,  expressly  provided  that  the  Colonies 
should  enact  no  laws  contrary  to  the  common  law, 


270 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE 


the  Constitution  and  the  fundamental  laws  of  Great 
Britain.  But  these  (as  decided  by  Lord  Mansfield, 
and  as  attested  by  Coke,  Fortescue,  and  Blackstone) 
are  incompatible  with  the  existence  of  slavery. 

Another  fact  is,  that  the  thirteen  United  States,  on 
the  fourth  of  July,  1776,  declared  that  "  all  men  are 
created  equal,  and  are  endowed  by  their  Creator  with 
certain  inalienable  rights,  among  which  are  life^ 
liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness."  Similar 
declarations  were  incorporated  into  the  original 
Constitutions  of  the  several  States,  and  the  Courts  in 
Massachusetts  decided  that  this  was  equivalent  to  an 
act  abolishing  slavery.* 

Such  was  the  origin^  and  such  are  the  legal  founda- 
tions of  the  legal  relation  of  master  and  slave"  in 
this  country;  just  as  *4egal"  now,  and  no  more  so — 


*  The  historical  facts  hastily  hinted  at  in  this  chapter,  are  de- 
tailed at  length  in  Good  ell's  "History  of  Slavery  and  Anti-slavery." 
Since  that  work  was  issued,  and  since  this  book  has  been  in  the 
hands  of  the  printer,  the  author  has  received  additional  informa- 
tion from  John  Scoble,  late  Secretary  of  the  British  and  Foreign 
Anti-slavery  Society,  London.  In  consequence  of  atrocities  com- 
mitted by  a  West  India  slaveholder  of  eminence,  a  legal  investiga- 
tion took  place,  which  resulted  in  the  discovery  and  announcement 
that  there  was  no  legalized  slavery  in  the  British  Cc  lonies.  This 
was  made  public  in  England  previous  to  the  Act  of  Parliament 
terminating  the  practice  of  slaveholding.  The  Act,  accordingly, 
does  not  repeal  or  assume  to  repeal  any  existing  laws,  either 
colonial  or  British.  It  only  provides  for  the  suppression  of  an 
unlawful  custom  or  practice.  Intelligent  Englishmen  do  not  now 
speak  of  British  West  Indian  slavery  as  having  ever  been  legal. 
This  accords  with  the  maxim  of  James  Madison  and  of  Lord 
Brougham  that  man  cannot  hold  property  in  man. 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


271 


just  as  ''innocent"  now,  and  no  more  so,  than  in 
the  person  of  John  Hawkins,  when  he  first  forced  a 
band  of  naked  Africans  on  board  his  slave-ship,  on 
the  coast  of  Africa,  or  when  he  first  offered  them  for 
sale  in  the  Colonies ;  quite  as  cruel,  Heaven-defjing, 
and  murderous  now  as  it  was  then^  and  involving  its 
present  perpetrators  in  the  same  condemnation  with 
John  Hawkins,  at  the  bar  of  an  impartial  posterity, 
and  at  the  bar  of  God.  Where  the  foundation  is 
weak,"  says  the  common  law,  "  the  structure  falls." 
^'What  is  invalid  from  the  beginning^  cannot  be 
made  valid  by  length  of  time."  (Noyes'  Maxims.) 
**He  that  stealeth  a  man  and  selleth  him,"  says 
Moses,  ^'or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  he  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death."  "  The  law  was  made  for 
men-stealers,"  says  Paul.  ^'  Stealers  of  men,"  said 
the  Presbyterian  General  Assembly  of  1794,  "  are 
those  who  bring  off*  slaves  or  freemen,  and  keep^  sell, 
or  buy  them."  "Those  are  man-stealers,"  says  Gro- 
tius,  "who  abduct,  heep^  sell,  or  buy  slaves  or  free- 
men." "To  hold  a  man  in  a  state  of  slavery,"  said 
Dr.  Jonathan  Edwards,  "is  to  be,  every  day^  guilty 
of  robbing  him  of  his  liberty,  or  of  man-stealingy 
"  Men-buyers,"  said  John  Wesley,  "  are  exactly  on  a 
level  with  men=-stealers."  We  might  quote  similar 
language  from  Dr.  Porteus,  Bishop  of  London,  Bishop 
Warburton,  Macknight,  Abraham  Booth,  and  other 
eminent  writers. 

This  is  the  pretended  "legal  relation"  of  mastei 
and  slave  in  America.  Let  ug  now  see  who  are  its 
subjects. 


272  THE  ^AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


1.  The  descendants  of  all  who  were  stolen  by  John 
Hawkins  and  others  on  the  coast  of  Africa  !  The 
law  of  hereditary  slavery,  as  defended  by  Henry 
Clay  and  Mr.  Grholson,  and  as  practised  by  the  entire 
community  of  slaveholders,  identifies  their  slavehold- 
ing  with  the  slaveholding  of  John  Hawkins^  and 
bases  their  claim  of  property  upon  his  !  If  this  is 
not  so,  then  they  are  guilty  of  commencing  the 
process  de  novo^  and  of  kidnapping  the  innocent, 
helpless  infant  ''upon  their  own  hook!"  This  is 
called  being  ''born  to  a  slave  inheritance  !"  This  is 
the  "innocent  legal  relation!"  The  slave  law 
enables  the  heir  to  seize  npon  the  slaves  of  his 
father  or  their  offspring ;  and  he  is  under  the  un- 
fortunate necessity  of  seizing  upon  all  within  his 
grasp — not  unfrequently  his  own  father^ s  daughters 
and  sons  I  Were  they  his  own  mother'' s  daughters 
and  sons  too,  and  if  he  had  the  power,  it  would  be 
the  same  thing  !  Equally  "  legal  " — equally  "  inno- 
cent!" 

And  here  is  the  evidence  : 

Hudgins  vs,  Wrights,  Nov.  T.,  1806;  1  Hen.  and 
Munf ,  Va.  Kep.,  134.  Per  Cur.,  Tucker,  J. :  ''  From 
the  first  settlement  of  the  colony  of  Virginia  to  the 
year  1788,  October  Session,  all  negroes,  Moors,  and 
mulattoes,  except  Turks  and  Moors  in  amity  with 
Great  Britain,  brought  into  this  country,  by  sea  or 
land,  were  slaves ;  and,  by  the  uniform  declaration 
of  our  laws,  the  descendants  of  females  remain  slaves 
to  this  day,  unless  they  can  prove  a  right  to  freedom 
by  actual  emancipation,  or  bv  descent  in  maternal 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  &(JBJECTS. 


273 


nal  line  from  an  emancipated  slave."  (Wheeler, 
p.  3.) 

Iludgins  vs,  Wrights,  (same  case.)  "  Held  by  the 
Court,  Green,  e/".,  that,  to  solve  all  doubts,  the  Act 
of  1662  was  passed,  which  declared  that  all  children 
born  in  this  country  shall  be  bond  or  free,  according 
to  the  condition  of  the  mother.  It  is  the  rule  of  the 
civil  law.  By  that  law  the  state  'of  the  child  was 
determined  by  that  of  the  mother  at  the  time  of  its 
birth."  (lb.,  p.  3.)  The  rule  is  universally  fol- 
lowed."   (lb.,  p.  34.) 

"The  code  of  the  civil  law  prevails  in  all  the 
States,"  (says  Mr.  Wheeler,  in  a  note  on  the  preced- 
ing,) and  in  many  of  them,  statutes  have  been 
enacted  on  the  subject."  (lb.  See  also  Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  11.) 

By  Act  of  Maryland,  1663,  chap.  30,  we  are  m 
formed  (in  the  preamble)  that  divers  free-born 
English  women,"  &c.,  "do  intermarry  with  negro 
slaves,  by  which  also  divers  suits  may  arise  touching 
the  issue  of  such  women,"  &c.;  whereupon  it  was 
enacted  that,  in  such  cases,  the  woman  shall  also 
serve  the  master  of  her  husband  during  his  life,  and 
their  children  "shall  be  slaves,  as  their  FATHERS  were,^^ 
But  in  1770  this  law  was  repealed,  and  it  was  enacted 
that  the  child  should  follow  the  condition  of  the 
mother  instead  of  the  father.  (Stroud's  Sketch,  pp. 
8-10.) 

As  mulattoes,  with  few  exceptions,  were  the  off- 
spring of  white  fathers  by  slave  mothers,  this  law, 
as  was  intended,  secured  to  the  father  the  right  of 
12'^ 


274  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

ownership  over  his  own  children — a  very  common 
and  extensive  manifestation  of  ^'  the  innocent  legal 
relation."  As  this  law  obtains  in  all  the  slave  States, 
a  large  and  increasing  jDroportion  of  the  slaves  are 
held  in  slavery  under  its  operation.  If  the  child 
followed  the  condition  of  the  father^  the  system 
would  rapidly  run  itself  out. 

2.  Free  people  of  color  may  he  and  continually  are 
brought  in*to  slavery,  in  this  country,  in  a  variety  of 
ways.  Some  of  these  ways  have  been  already  spe- 
cified, incidentally,  while  treating  of  other  topics. 
Some  will  be  specified  hereafter.  And  they  will  be 
clustered  together  and  adverted  to  again,  in  a  chapter 
on  "  The  Liberties  of  the  Free  People  of  Color."  In 
the  mean  time,  the  topic  demands  attention  here,  in 
our  inquiry  concerning  the  subjects  of  slavery^  and  we 
shall  cite  some  particulars  which  need  not  be  repeated 
again. 

The  general  fad  of  the  enslavement  of  the  free 
colored  people,  of  the  facility  with  which  it  is  done, 
and  of  the  indifference,  not  to  say  the  connivance^  of 
the  Southern  Courts,  Avill  appear  from  the  following: 

Davis  vs,  Sandford,  Spring  Term,  1815  ;  6  Littell's 
Ky.  Eep.,  206. 

''The  appellant  sold  to  the  appellee  a  slave. 
The  deed  of  bargain  and  warranty  certified  that  the 
negro  was  born  a  slave.  It  appeared  that  the  negro 
had  been  in  Ohio,  and  had,  by  the  Courts  of  that 
State,  been  declared  frea,  lohich  fact  was  knoion  to 
both  parties — ^the  seller  alleging  that  the  judgment 
declaring  the  slave  free  had  no  force  or  effect  upon 


ITS  OKIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


275 


bis  rights,  as  he  was  not  made  a  party.  The  Court, 
Ch.  J.  Boyk^  held  that  the  warranty  was  not  broken, 
it  not  being  alleged  or  proved  that  the  negro  was  not 
born  a  slave ;  and  the  justice  of  the  case  was  with 
the  seller — the  buyer  purchasing  with  a  knowledge 
of  all  the  facts,  which  was  properly  shown  by  parol 
evidence."    (Wheeler,  p.  121.) 

But  we  must  proceed  to  classify  some  of  the  prin- 
cipal methods  of  reducing  free  people  of  color  to 
slavery. 

{a)  Slaves  made  free  by  the  voluntary  act  of  their 
masters  may  be  re-enslaved  in  various  ways.  A 
failure  of  conformity,  in  every  minute  particular,  to 
the  enactments  regulating  emancipations,  (however 
vexatious  and  unreasonable,)  will  work  the  forfeiture 
of  liberty  to  the  emancipated. 

In  cases  where  infant  children  of  slaves  were  made 
free  by  the  will  of  their  owners,"  but  inadvertently 
the  precise  time  of  their  becoming  free  failed  to  be 
specified,  such  ''shall  be  esteemed  slaves  for  lifer 
(Maryland  Laws,  Act  of  1809,  chap.  71.  Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  151.  See  chapter  on  Legislative  and  Ju- 
dicial Obstructions  to  Emancipation.) 

ih)  A  full  and  exact  compliance  with  the  legal 
regulations,  in  emancipating  slaves,  does  not  always 
secure  their  freedom.  The  Legislature  of  North 
Carolina  set  aside  the  decisions  of  the  Courts,  and 
re-enslaved  large  numbers  who  had  been  legally  set 
free.    (See  chapter  just  mentioned.) 

In  Virginia,  '^  if  any  emancipated  slave  (infants 
excepted)  shall  remain  in  the  State   more  than 


276 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


twelve  montlis  after  his  or  her  right  to  freedom 
shall  have  accrued,  he  or  she  shall  forfeit  all  such 
right,  and  may  be  apprehended  and  sold  by  the  over- 
seers of  the  poor,  &c.,  for  the  benefit  of  the  Literary 
Fund ! ! !"    (1  Eevised  Code  of  1819,  436.) 

President  Jefferson,  in  his  will,  having  emanci- 
pated five  of  his  slaves,  adds:  ^'  I  humbly  and  earn- 
estly request  of  the  Legislature  of  Virginia  a  confirm- 
ation of  the  bequests  to  these  servants,  with  leave  to 
remain  in  the  State,  where  their  families  and  con- 
nections are,"  &c. 

(c)  Colored  persons  who  cannot  prove  their  free- 
dom may  be  enslaved.  In  Mississippi,  every  negro 
or  mulatto  found  within  the  State,  and  not  having  the 
ability  to  show  himself  entitled  to  freedom,  may  be 
sold,  by  order  of  the  Court,  as  a  slave."  (Mississippi 
Eevised  Code,  389.)  And  no  negro  or  mulatto  can 
be  a  witness  to  prove  his  freedom ! 

In  North  Carolina,  by  decision  of  the  Courts,  this 
rule  is  limited  to  negroes^  and  the  mixed  race  is  ex- 
empted. It  is  by  this  unrighteous  presumption  against 
color  that  suspected  fugitives,  though  unclaimed,  are 
sold  for  the  payment  of  their  jail  fees  in  Washington 
City.  In  South  Carolina,  by  Act  of  1740,  the  doc- 
trine is  afiirmed,  both  in  respect  to  negroes  and  the 
mixed  races.  The  same  in  Georgia  by  Act  of  1770. 
Also  in  Mississippi,  Revised  Code,  389.  In  Virginia, 
there  is  no  statute,  but  the  Courts  have  affirmed  the 
doctrine,  except  where  Indians  or  ivhite  persons  are 
.-laimed  as  slaves.  (See  Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  19;  also, 
>p.  76-88,  including  Notes.) 


ITS  OKIGIX  AND  SUBJECTS. 


277 


''''Every  negro  is  presumed  to  be  a  slaved'—''''  This  is 
the  general  doctrine  in  all  the  States,  and  the  appli- 
cation of  a  different  rule  is  only  in  cases  where  the 
person  is  a  mulatto,  or  some  other  grade  approx- 
imating to  a  white  person."    (Wheeler,  p.  5.) 

Or  person  of  color ^ — "(7oforand  long  possession 
are  such  presumptive  evidence  of  slavery  as  to  throw 
the  burden  of  proof  on  the  party  claiming  his  free- 
dom.'' (lb.,  pp.  5,  6  ;  case  of  Davis,  a  man  of  color, 
vs.  Curry,  Fall  T.,  1810 ;  2  Bibb's  Ky.  Eep.,  238.) 

And  who  ^5  a  ^'person  of  color?" 
When  there  is  a  distinct  and  visible  admixture 
of  African  blood,  the  person  is  to  be  denominated  a 
mulatto,  or  person  of  color."  (State  vs,  Davis  and 
Hanna,  Dec.  T.,  1831 ;  2  Bailey's  S.  C.  Eep.,  558. 
Wheeler,  p.  4.) 

And  the  fact  of  color  may  be  known  by  inspec- 
tion."   (Wheeler,  p.  5  ;  also  p.  22.) 

{d)  Free  negroes  may  be  enslaved  for  entertain- 
ing" a  runaway  slave,  and  for  nonpayment  of  the 
fine  thus  incurred  !  (See  law  of  South  Carolina  be- 
fore cited,  and  the  consequent  sentence  of  the  Court 
of  Charleston  in  the  case  of  "Hannah  Elliott,  a  free 
black  woman,  with  her  daughter  Judy,  and  sons 
Simon  and  Sam."    Stroud's  Sketch,  pp.  16,  17.) 

(e)  Also,  for  selling  or  giving  away  to  a  slave  their 
certificates  of  freedom,  as  before  mentioned.  (Laws 
of  Maryland,  1796,  chap.  67,  sect.  18.  Snethen's 
Dist.  Col.,  pp.  28-9.) 

(/)  Also,  free  negroes  and  mulattoes,  arrested  on 
suspicion  of  being  fugitives,  but  not  claimed  by  any 


278  THE  AMEKICAX  SLAVE  CODE. 

one,  and  unable  to  pay  their  jail  fees^  are  sold  by  the 
sheriff !  (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  154,  and  Jay's  View,  p. 
33,  &c.) 

{g)  "  Where  a  lohite  woman  intermarries  with  a 
slave,  the  issue  are  slaves;  though  the  Act  subjecting 
such  issue  to  slavery  was  repealed,  if  the  marriage 
took  place  before  the  repeal  of  the  Act."  (Butler 
vs,  Boardman,  Sept.  T.,  1770 ;  1  Har.  and  M'Hen. 
Md.  Rep.,  371.    Wheeler,  p.  21.) 

ill)  ^*  The  issue  of  slaves  entitled  to  liberty  at  a 
future  day,  if  born  before  the  day,  are  slaves."  (Maria 
vs.  Surbaugh,  Feb.  T.,  182-1 ;  2  Eand's  Va.  Rep.,  and 
other  cases.    Wheeler,  p.  32.) 

(i)  "  Children  born  during  a  qualified  manumission 
3f  their  mothers,  are  born  slaves."  (McCutchen  et  al. 
vs,  Marshall  et  al.,  Jan.  T. ;  8  Peters'  U.  S.  Rep., 
220,  and  another  case.    Wheeler,  p.  35.) 

{j)  Intermarriages  with  whites  are  punished  by 
enslavement.  (Maryland,  Act  of  1717,  chap.  13, 
sect.  5.)  "  If  any  free  negro  or  mulatto  intermarry 
with  any  white  woman  ;  or  if  any  white  man  shall  in- 
termarry with  any  negro  or  mulatto  woman,  such 
negro  or  mulatto  shall  become  a  slave  during  life^ 
except  mulattoes  born  of  white  women,  &c.,  who 
shall  become  servants  for  seven  years."  (Stroud,  p. 
19.)  For  "a  white  man"  to  live  in  adulterous  con- 
cubinage with  his  slave  woman,  incurs  no  penalty 
at  ail.  Adulterers  are  entitled  Honorable,  but  mar- 
riage is  punished  by  the  Judge  ! 

{h)  Innumerable  free  persons  of  color  are  kidnap- 
ped and  sold  by  the  operation  of  the  laws  excluding 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


279 


colored  witnesses,  and  forbidding  colored  persons  to 
resist  white  persons.  In  Philadelphia,  within  two  years^ 
more  than  thirty  persons^  mostly  children^  hnovm  to  he 
free^  were  kidnapped  and  carried  away,  and  only 
five  of  them,  with  great  difficulty  and  expense,  were 
reclaimed.    (Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  74.) 

This  process  of  kidnapping  is  facilitated  by  the 
fact  that  such  vast  numbers  of  slaves  are  carried 
from  State  to  State,  not  only  by  the  removal  of 

owners,"  but  by  the  inter-State  slave-trade.  The 
kidnapper  of  free  colored  persons  readily  passes  for 
a  removing  owner,  or  for  a  dealer  in  slaves ;  and,  in 
fact,  many  of  the  dealers  are  themselves  kidnappers 
of  free  negroes  and  mulattoes.  Persons  ostensibly 
or  in  reality  employed  to  arrest  fugitives  are  known 
frequently  to  practise  the  same  villany  even  in  the 
free  States,  and  under  this  cover  they  are  generally 
secure.  The  colored  person  seized  cannot  testify  in 
a  slave  State,  and  no  colored  person  can  testify  for 
him.  At  the  South,  very  few  white  persons  would 
pay  the  least  attention  to  their  protestations  of  being 
free.  It  would  seldom  or  never  embarrass  the  auc- 
tioneer, or  diminish  the  number  and  amount  of  the 
bids.  This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  hundreds 
of  advertisements  in  the  Southern  papers"  of  sales 
of  negroes  at  auction,  and  of  runaways,  describe  them 
as  claiming  to  he  free!  See  Weld's  "  Slavery  as  it 
is,"  pp.  162-3,  where  specimens  of  such  advertise- 
ments may  be  found,  one  of  them  describing  a  negro 
^^who  was  originally  from  New-Yorh^ 

il)  Free  people  of  color,  by  passing  out  of  a  free 


280 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


State  into  a  slave  State,  (where  by  the  Federal  Con- 
stitution they  are  entitled  to  all  the  rights  of  free 
citizens,)  incur  penalties  of  fines  for  so  doing,  which, 
if  unable  to  pay,  they  may  be  enslaved!  (Jay's  In- 
quiry, p.  24.  See  chapter  on  ^'Liberties  of  Free 
People  of  Color.") 

(m)  Negroes  unlawfully  imported  from  Africa  are 
enslaved,  not  only  when  clandestinely  smuggled, 
(which  is  done  to  a  great  extent,)  but,  strange  to 
tell,  when  brought  into  port  by  capture  of  naval 
officers !  A  case  occurring  at  Savannah,  and  before 
alluded  to,  is  narrated  circumstantially  in  Weld's 
^'  Slavery  as  it  is,"  pp.  139-40.  So  openly  and  sys- 
tematically has  this  been  done,  that  the  States  of 
Louisiana,  Georgia,  and  Alabama,  have  enacted  sta- 
tutes for  the  express  purpose  of  having  the  slaves 
sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  State  Treasury !  A  law 
of  Congress,  conferring  power  on  the  State  Legisla- 
tures to  dispose  of  the  slaves  illegally  imported,  was 
not  repealed  until  1819.  And  the  law  of  Alabama 
(of  1823)  is  still  more  recent,  and  in  open  defiance 
of  the  laws  of  the  United  States  abolishing  the  Afri- 
can slave-trade!  (See  Stroud's  Sketch,  pp.  158- 
164.) 

And  the  Courts  have  accordingly  laid  down  the 
principle,  that  a  slave  does  not  become  free  on  his 
being  illegally  imported  into  the  State."  Such  is 
the  marginal  note  to  the  case  of  "Gomez  vs.  Bon- 
neval,  June  T.,  1819 ;  6  Martin's  Lou.  Eep.  656. — 
Per  Cur.^  Derhigny^  J. :  The  petitioner  is  a  negro  in 
actual  state  of  slavery :  he  claims  his  freedom,  and 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


281 


is  hound  to  prove  it  In  his  attempt,  however,  to 
prove  that  he  was  free  before  he  was  introduced 
into  this  country,  he  has  failed,  so  that  his  claim  now 
rests  entirely  on  the  laws  prohibiting  the  introduc- 
tion of  slaves  in  the  United  States.  That  the  plain- 
tiff was  imported  since  that  prohibition  does  exist, 
is  a  fact  sufficiently  established  by  the  evidence. 
What  right  he  has  acquired  under  the  laws  prohib- 
iting such  importation  is  the  only  question  which 
we  have  to  examine.  Formerly,  while  the  Act  divid- 
ing Louisiana  into  two  Territories  was  in  force  in 
this  country,  slaves  introduced  here  in  contravention 
of  it  were  freed  by  the  operation  of  that  law ;  but 
that  Act  was  merged  in  the  legislative  provisions 
which  were  subsequently  enacted  on  the  subject  of 
the  importation  of  slaves  into  the  United  States 
generally.  Under  the  now  existing  laws^  the  indi- 
viduals thus  imported  acquire  no  personal  rights. 
They  are  mere  passive  beings,  who  are  disposed  of 
according  to  the  will  of  the  different  Legislatures. 
In  this  country  they  are  to  remain  slaves^  and  to  be  sold 
for  the  benefit  of  the  State,  The  plaintiff,  therefore, 
has  nothing  to  claim  as  a  freeman ;  and  as  to  a  mere 
change  of  master,  should  such  be  his  wish,  he  can- 
not be  listened  to  in  a  Court  of  justice."  (Wlieeler, 
pp.  380 -L) 

2.  But  the  descendants  of  Africans  are  not  the 
only  subjects  of  American  slavery.  The  native 
Indians  have  also  been  enslaved,  and  their  descend- 
ants are  still  in  slavery.  In  South  Carolina,  by  Act 
of  1740,  "All  negroes,  Indians^  (free  Indians  in 


282 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


amity  with  this  Grovernment,  and  negroes,  mulattoes, 
and  mestizoes  who  are  now  free,  excepted,)  mulattoes 
and  mestizoes  who  now  are  or  shall  hereafter  be  in 
this  province,  and  all  their  issue  and  offspring  born 
or  to  be  born,  shall  be  and  are  hereby  declared  to 
be  and  to  remain  for  ever  hereafter,  absolute 
slaves,  and  shall  follow  the  condition  of  the  mother^ 
(2  Brevard's  Digest,  229.)  Similar  in  Georgia. 
(Prince's  Dig.,  446,  Act  of  1770.)  And  in  Mis- 
sissippi. (Rev.  Code  Miss,  of  1823,  p.  369.)  And 
in  Virginia.  (1  Eev.  Code  of  1819.)  And  in  Ken- 
tucky. (2  Littell  and  Swigert's  Dig.,  1149-50.)  And 
in  Louisiana.  (Civil  Code  Lou.,  art.  183.  Stroud's 
Sketch,  pp.  11,  12-15.)  Some  in  New-Jersey^  by  de- 
cision of  Supreme  Court,  1797.  (Stroud,  p.  16.) 
And  finally, 

3.  Whites  are  enslaved.  Several  known  instances 
have  occurred  already  of  the  successful  kidnapping 
of  free  whites,  without  a  drop  of  negro  or  Indian 
blood  in  their  veins !  And  the  process  of  intermix- 
ture of  the  races  is  now  so  far  advanced,  and  is  so 
rapidly  going  forward,  that  a  ^'perfectly  white  com- 
plexion, light  blue  eyes,  and  flaxen  hair,"  are  scarcely 
a  presumptive  evidence  of  freedom.  Persons  thus 
described  are  advertised  as  runaway  slaves;  are 
liable  to  be  pursued  with  muskets  and  bloodhounds, 
shot,  maimed,  captured,  brought  before  United  States 
Marshals,  sworn  to  be  slaves,  given  up  and  sent  to 
the  rice  and  cotton  and  sugar  plantations  of  the 
South,  without  trial  hy  jury^  and  by  a  "summary" " 
process  that  precludes  any  thing  deserving  the 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS, 


283 


name  of  an  investigation.  Sometimes,  under  a 
peremptory  refusal  to  wait  a  few  hours  for  wit- 
nesses. Yet  the  people  imagine  themselves  free, 
and  their  liberties  secure  under  this  enactment, 
(the  Fugitive  Slave  Bill  of  1850,)  which,  ivhile  it 
makes  no  distinction  of  coloy\  forbids  them,  under 
pains  and  penalties,  to  "harbor"  and  entertain" 
each  other  when  thus  pursued !  By  the  estimate  of 
Henry  Clay,  (speech  in  Senate,  1839,)  one  hundred 
and  fifty  years  will  obliterate  the  distinctions  of  race 
and  color  in  this  country,  but  without  abolishing 
slavery !  Reposing,  as  it  does,  by  his  showing,  upon 
the  "rights  of  property,"  and  "sanctified  and  sanc- 
tioned" already  "by  two  centuries  of  legislation," 
its  conservators  look  for  its  perpetuity,  as  they  do 
for  the  perpetuity  of  property  in  "brood  mares  and 
their  increase."  For  "that  is  property  which  the 
law  declares  to  he  property."  The  blacks  will  not  be 
the  slaves  of  the  whites,  but  the  poorer  will  be  the 
slaves  of  the  wealthier ;  and  the  most  they  can  hope 
for  is  that,  perhaps^  they  will  be  kept  "fat  and 
sleek!"  Their  idolized  statesmen,  their  venerated 
religious  teachers,  can  promise  them  nothing  better. 
Nor  do  they  seem  to  desire  it!  The  "innocent 
legal  relation"  of  slave  ownership  conducts  us  to 
this  result,  and  it  leaves  us  here. 

In  our  chapter  concerning  "Fugitives  from 
Slavery,"  it  was  shown  that  the  State  of  Maryland, 
at  an  early  date,  (1715,)  enacted  laws  by  which  all 
persons,  irrespective  of  color ^  were  forbidden  to  travel 
out  of  their  own  county  without  an  official  pass ; 


284 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  "  if  apprehended,  not  being  sufficiently  known, 
nor  able  to  give  a  good  account  of  themselves,"  the 
magistrates  might  deal  with  them  as  with  runaways, 
and  sell  them  temporarily,  to  pay  their  fines.  Our 
Fugitive  Slave  Bill  of  1850,  in  like  manner,  knows 
nothing  of  color ;  and  its  provisions  are  more  strin- 
gent and  humiliating  than  the  old  law  of  Maryland! 

The  reader  is  referred  to  Jay's  View,  pp.  83-87,  - 
for  a  number  of  advertisements  of  runaway  slaves, 
in  which  they  are  described  as  being  white. 

As  for  example — 

*^$100  Eeward. — The  above  reward  will  be  paid 
for  the  apprehension  of  my  man  William.  He  is  a 
very  bright  mulatto,  straight  yellowish  hair.  I  have 
no  doubt  he  will  change  his  name,  and  try  to  pass 
himself  for  a  white  man,  which  he  may  be  able  to 
do,  unless  to  a  close  observer. — T.  S.  Pitchaed." 

*^$100  Eeward. — Ean  away  from  James  Hyhart, 
Paris,  Ky.,  &c.,  the  mulatto  boy  Norton,  &c.  Would 
be  taken  for  a  white  boy,  if  not  closely  examined. 
His  hair  is  black  and  straight,  &c." — New- Orleans 
Free  American^  11th  Aug.  1836. 

Anderson  Bowles  advertises,  in  the  Richmond 
Whig,  6th  Jan.  1836,  his  negro  r  who  has  straight 
hair,"  and  is  '^nearly  white;"  so  that  ^' a  stranger" 
would  suppose  there  was  no  African  blood  in  him.^^ 
^'He  was  with  my  boy  Dick  a  short  time  since  at 
Norfolk,  and  offered  to  sell  him,  but  escaped,  under 
pretense  of  being  a  white  man." 

In  the  Newbern  Spectator,  13th  March,  1837,  John 
T.  Lane  advertises    William,  about  19  years  old, 


ITS  ORIGIN  AND  SUBJECTS. 


285 


quite  white^  and  would  not  readily  be  taken  for  a 
slave." 

.  Edwin  Peck,  Mobile,  April  22,  1837,  offers  $100 
reward  for  a  slave  named  Sam,  light  somdy  hair, 
blue  eyes,  ruddy  complexion  ;  is  so  ivhite  as  very  easily 
to  pass  for  a  luhite  many 

In  the  New- Orleans  Bee  of  June  22,  1831,  P.  Balie 
advertises  as  a  runaway,  "  Maria,  ivith  a  clear  white 
complexion^ 

*'Mr.  Paxton,  a  Virginia  writer,  tells  us  in  his 
work  on  Slavery,  that  '  the  best  blood  of  Virginia 
runs  in  the  veins  of  slaves.'"    (Jay's  View,  p.  85.) 

Dr.  Torrey,  in  his  work  on  Domestic  Slavery  in 
the  United  States,  p.  14,"  relates,  that  "  not  far  from 
Fredericktown  there  was  a  slave  estate,  on  which 
there  were  several  white  females,  of  as  fair  and  ele- 
gant appearance  as  white  ladies  in  general,  held  in 
legal  bondage  as  slaves."    (lb.,  pp.  85-6.) 

^' White  lady  fugitives"  have  been  hunted  in  the 
State  of  New- York,  and  have  taken  refuge  in  Can- 
ada. (Vide  Utica  ^''Friend  of  Man^^  and  the  Syra- 
cuse papers.) 

"A  Missouri  paper,  reporting  the  trial  of  a  slave 
boy,  says,  'All  the  physiological  marks  of  distinction 
which  characterize  the  African  descent  had  disap- 
peared.' "    (Jay's  View,  p,  86.) 

Mr.  Niles,  in  his  Kegister,  tells  us  that  John  C. 
Calhoun  related  a  similar  instance.    (lb.,  pp.86-7.) 

'' Mary  Gillmore,  of  Philadelphia,  claimed  as  a 
runaway  slave  in  1835,  was  proved  to  be  the  chikl 
of  Irish  parents,  and  had  not  a  single  drop  of  Afri- 
can blood  in  her  veins."    (lb.,  p.  86.) 


PART  II. 


RELATION  OF  THE  SLAVE  TO  SOCIETY  AND  TO 
CIVIL  GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTER  1. 

OF  THE  GROUND  AND  NATURE  OF  THE  SLAVE'S  CIYIL 
CONDITION 

The  Civil  Condition  of  the  Slave  grows  out  of  his  relat  on  to  his  Master  as 
"property,"  and  is  determined  and  defined  by  it 

If  slaves  were  ''deemed,  reputed,  and  adjudged 
in  law"  to  be  ''sentient  beings,"  and  not  "things," 
then  their  relation  to  society  and  to  civil  govern 
ment  would  be  the  relation  of  human  beings.  But 
this  is  directly  the  opposite  of  the  fact.  "  Slaves" 
are  "  deemed,  sold^  taken,  and  adjudged  in  law  to  be 
chattels  personal,  in  the  hands  of  their  owners  and 
possessors,  their  administrators  and  assigns,  to  all  in- 
tents^ constructions^  and  purposes  whatsoever,''''  Their 
relation  to  society  and  to  civil  government  is,  ac- 
cordingly, the  relation  of  brutes. 

The  only  real  exception  to  this,  or  modification  of 
it,  is  where  the  interests  of  the  "  owner,"  the  wants 
of  society,  or  the  exigences  of  the  Government  re- 
quire an  anomalous  departure  from  the  principle  of 
slave  chattelhood,  by  the  temporary  and  partial  re- 
cognition of  their  humanity.  Such  exceptions  and 
13 


290 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


modifications  are  never  made  for  the  benefit  of  the 
slave.  They  enable  the  Government  to  punish^  as  a 
human  being,  the  poor  creature  whom,  in  no  other 
respect,  it  recognizes  as  such !  The  slave  is  subjected 
to  the  control  of  the  Government,  but  is  not  con- 
sidered entitled  to  its  protection. 

The  slave  cannot  be  considered  by  the  Govern- 
ment as  entitled  to  its  protection  while  he  is  not  re- 
garded by  it  as  having  any  rights  to  be  protected. 
And  the  Government  that  recognizes  and  protects 
slave  chattelhood  has  already,  in  that  very  act,  de- 
nied to  the  slave  the  possession  of  any  rights  by 
denying  to  him  the  right  of  self -ownership^  which  is 
the  foundation  and  parent  stock  of  all  other  rights, 
and  without  which  they  cannot  exist. 

Having  no  right  to  himself,  to  his  bones,  muscles, 
and  intellect,  (being  all  of  them  the  property  of  his 
"  owner,")  he  has  no  right  to  his  own  industry,  to 
its  wages  or  its  products ;  no  right  to  property  or 
capability  of  possessing  it,  as  already  shown.  Of 
course  he  has  no  rights  of  property  to  be  protected  by 
the  Government,  and  none  of  the  rights  that  grow 
out  of  them. 

Having  no  recognized  right  of  making  any  con- 
tract, he  has  no  contracts  with  others  to  be  enforced 
by  the  Government,  and  no  one  has  any  legal  pecu- 
niary claims  upon  him  to  be  enforced.  He  can 
neither  sue  nor  be  sued.  This  is  no  arbitrary  rule. 
It  is  the  inevitable  result  of  his  chattelhood. 

Unable  to  contract  marriage,  as  already  seen,  he 
can  bring  no  action  at  law  against  the  violator  of  his 


slave's  civil  condition. 


291 


bed.  Having  no  marital  or  parental  rights,  he  has 
none  for  the  Government  to  protect. 

Not  being  accounted  a  person,  but  a  thing,  he  can 
have  no  personal  rights  to  be  protected — no  rights 
of  reputation  or  character — no  right  to  education — 
no  rights  of  conscience — ^no  rights  of  personal  secu- 
rity— no  social  rights — no  political  capabilities  or 
rights — not  even  the  right  of  petition,  as  the  Federal 
Congress  (very  consistently  with  its  recognition  of 
legal  human  chattelhood)  have  af35rmed.  It  would 
be  an  anomaly  to  receive  the  testimony  of  such  an 
one  in  a  Court  of  law ! 

It  is  futile,  it  is  absurd,  it  is  self-contradictory,  it 
is  short-sighted  and  foolish  (to  say  nothing  more 
severe)  for  any  persons  to  find  fault  with  any  of  these 
things  while  they  recognize  as  innocent  and  valid 

the  legal  relation  of  master  and  dave^''  the  relation  of 
slave  ownership^  which  includes,  implies,  and  necessi- 
tates it  all.  Such  persons  should  ask  themselves 
seriously  what  they  would  have? 

Would  they  have  the  Government  stultify  itself, 
and  add  mockery  to  injustice  by  pretending  to  at- 
tempt known  impossibilities  in  the  enactment  of 
contradictions  ?  by  making  a  show  of  civil  protection 
where  none  is  intended,  or  where  they  have  rendered 
it  impossible?  What  protection  can  they  bestow  so 
long  as,  by  sustaining  or  even  permitting  or  tolerating 
human  chattelhood,  or  failing  to  suppress  it  as  a  criine^ 
they  leave  not  the  slave  the  possession  of  one  single 
right  of  humanity  to  he  protected  ? 

Or,  suppose  the  Government  to  be  honest  and 


292  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


successful  in  its  attempts  to  confer  upon  the  slave 
civil  rights^  to  recognize  and  treat  him  as  a  member 
and  component  element  of  civil  society.  Suppose  it 
to  protect^  instead  of  denying  these  rights — rights  of 
conscience— rights  of  security— rights  of  reputation- 
right  to  education — free  speech — parental  rights — 
marital  rights — ^right  of  testimony — right  to  sue  and 
be  sued — right  to  make  contracts — rights  of  pro- 
perty— right  to  his  earnings  and  products.  What 
would  become  of  the  right  of  slave  ownership,  the 
legal  relation  of  master  and  slave?"  Would  it  not 
vanish  and  disappear  ?    Assuredly  it  would. 

These  thoughts  open  a  wide  field  for  reflection 
and  remark,  if  we  could  spare  room. 

The  Hebrew  servitude,  so  often  cited  as  a  prece- 
dent for  modern  slavery,  was  wanting  in  its  essential 
element,  human  chattelhood.  Its  abundant  recog- 
nition and  guaranty  of  the  civil  rights  of  servants 
affords  demonstrative  proof  of  this. 

In  the  Spanish,  Portuguese,  French,  and  even  the 
(recent)  British  West  India  types  of  slavery,  we  see 
the  principle  of  human  chattelhood  less  perfectly 
developed  than  in  our  own,  less  consistently  en- 
forced. They  exhibit  faint  recognitions  of  civil 
rights  in  the  enslaved.  They  are  less  inveterate, 
and  hence  (under  the  same  appliances)  less  diflBcult 
to  be  overthrown.  In  our  country,  where  so  much 
is  said  and  known  of  human  rights,  the  slave  power 
has  been  compelled  to  fortify  and  entrench  itself 
in  the  most  unlimited  and  unmitigated  system  of 
despotism  ever  known  or  conceived. 


slave's  civil  condition. 


293 


In  dealing  with  such  a  type  of  slavery,  it  is  espe- 
cially important  to  remember  that  nothing  is  to  be 
accomplished  without  striking  directly  at  the  root. 
Attempts  at  ameliorations,  restrictions,  limitations, 
and  gradual  removal,  are  signally  out  of  place  here. 
Such  a  despotism,  under  such  a  form  of  government, 
and  in  such  a  state  of  society  as  ours,  and  at  such  a 
crisis  as  that  which  is  now  reached,  must  be  over- 
whelmed and  uprooted-speedily,  or  it  will  overwhelm 
and  uproot  all  that  does  not  harmonize  with  and  up- 
hold it.    But  we  must  not  enlarge. 

The  statements  made  in  this  chapter,  hke  those 
made  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  former  series,  will 
be  found  to  contain  the  key  to  the  chapters  that 
follow.  And  the  present  series  is  the  sequel  to  the 
former  one. 

The  single  idea  of  human  chattelhood,  or  of  slave 
ownership,  carried  out  in  all  possible  directions, 
gives  us  the  details  of  the  entire  code  of  slavery. 
Take  away  tliat  and  they  all  vanish.  Eetain  it,  and 
they  all  stand  firmly.  The  Courts  in  the  slave 
States  understand  this. 

^'A  slave  is  in  absolute  bondage.  He  has  no  civil 
rights.''''  So  said  Judge  Crenshaw,  in  Brandon  et  al. 
vs.  Planters'  and  Merchants'  Bank  of  Huntsville, 
Jan.  T.,  1838 ;  1  Stewart's  Ala.  Eep.,  320.  Same 
principle  in  Bynum  vs.  Bostwick,  4  Desauss.,  266. 
Wheeler,  p.  6. 

Slaves  are  deprived  of  all  civil  rights ^^Hmanci- 
pation  gives  to  the  slave  his  civil  rights. (Judge 
Matthews,  in  Girod  vs.  Lewis,  May  T.,  1819;  6 


294  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

Martin's  Lou.  Eep.,  559.  Wheeler,  p.  199.)  If  tLis 
be  true  in  Louisiana,  with  its  relics  of  the  Code  Noir^ 
we  may  be  well  assured  that  it  is  true  of  the  codes 
of  the  other  States, 


CHAPTER  II. 


NO  ACCESS  OF  SLAVES  TO  THE  JUDICIARY,  AND  NO 
HONEST  PROVISION  FOR  TESTING  THE  CLAIMS  OF 
THE  ENSLAVED  TO  FREEDOM. 

**  A  Slave  cannot  be  a  party  to  a  eivil  suit."    (Stroud'a  Sketch,  p.  76.) 

SLAVE  cannot  be  a  party  to  a  suit,  except  in  the 
single  case  where  a  negro  is  held  as  a  slave  and  he 
claims  to  be  free."  [We  omit  the  references  to 
authorities  here  cited.]  ^^It  would  be  an  idle  form 
and  ceremony  to  make  a  slave  a  party  to  a  suit,  by 
the  instrumentality  of  Avhich  he  could  recover  no- 
thing ;  or,  if  a  recovery  could  be  had,  the  instant  it 
was  recovered,  would  belong  to  the  master.  A  slave 
can  possess  nothing.  He  can  hold  nothing.  He  is 
therefore  not  a  competent  party  to  a  suit.  And  the 
same  rule  prevails  wherever  slavery  is  tolerated, 
whether  there  be  legislative  enactments  upon  the 
subject  or  not."  (Note  to  p.  197,  in  Wheeler's  Law 
of  Slavery.   Case  of  Berard  vs.  Berard,  before  cited.) 

We  proceed  to  examine  the  condition  of  the  slave 
in  reference  to  suits  for  freedom. 

In  all  cases  where  the  slave  alleges  to  be  free,  he 


296 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


is  of  course  a  party.  He  may  have  a  habeas  corpus^ 
and  if  there  be  a  false  return,  may  sue  upon  it.  Or 
he  may  bring  a  trespass  for  assault  and  battery,  and 
false  imprisonment,  in  which  action,  the  defendant, 
to  justify  himself  must  plead  that  he  is  his  slave.  In 
many  States  he  may  proceed  by  petitions  for  free- 
dom."   (Note  in  Wheeler,  p.  197.) 

In  inquiring  after  '^the  origin  of  the  relation  and  _ 
its  subjects,"  (Chapter  XXIII.  of  the  former  series,) 
it  was  ascertained  that  colored  persons  who  cannot 
prove  their  freedom  may  be  enslaved ;  that  colored 
persons,  whether  negroes  or  mulattoes,  whether  bond 
or  free,  cannot  be  admitted  as  witnesses  to  prove 
their  freedom,  (a  free  colored  mother  not  being  per- 
mitted to  come  into  Court  to  identify,  under  oath, 
her  own  kidnapped  free  child,  torn  from  her  arms 
the  day  previous,  nor  give  testimony  to  the  fact,  nor 
identify  the  kidnapper!)  it  was  ascertained,  further, 
that  color  was  held  to  be  presumptive  evidence  of 
the  condition  of  slavery.  The  bearing  of  all  this 
upon  law-suits  for  the  recovery  of  freedom  will  be 
readily  appreciated.  (Hudgins  vs.  Wrights,  1  Hen. 
and  Munf.  Va.  Eep.,  134.)  Judge  Roane  said:  "  In 
the  case  of  a  person  visibly  appearing  to  be  a  negro, 
the  presumption  is,  in  this  country,  that  he  is  a  slave, 
and  it  is  incumbent  on  him  to  make  out  his  right  to 
freedom ;  but  in  the  case  of  a  person  visibly  appear- 
ing to  be  a  ivhite  man,  or  an  Indian^  the  presumption 
is  that  he  is  free,  and  it  is  necessary  for  his  adver- 
sary to  show  that  he  is  a  slave."  (Wheeler,  p. 
394.) 


NO  ACCESS  TO  JUDICIARY. 


297 


The  same  principle  appears  in  other  cases,  and 
seems  to  be  the  general  rule. 

South  Carolina. — The  act  of  1740  provides  that 
"  if  any  negro,  Indian,  mulatto,  or  mestizo,  claim 
his  or  her  freedom,  it  shall  be  lawful"  for  such  per- 
son '^to  apply  to  the  Judges,"  &c.,  who  are  empow- 
ered to  appoint  for  the  applicant  a  guardian,  to 
prosecute  in  his  or  her  behalf,  &c.,  &c.  "And  if 
judgment  shall  be  given  for  the  plaintiff',  a  special 
entry  shall  be  made,  declaring  that  the  ward  of  the 
plaintiff  is  free,  and  the  jury  shall  assess  damages, 
with  full  costs  of  suit/ — hut  in  case  judgment  shall  he 
given  for  the  defendant^  the  said  Court  is  herehy  fully  em- 
powered to  inflict  SUCH  CORPORAL  PUNISHMENT,  NOT 
EXTENDING  TO  LIFE  OR  LIMB,  on  the  loard  of  the  plain- 
tiffs as  they^  in  their  discretion^  shall  think  fit.  Provided 
that,  in  any  action  or  suit  to  be  brought  in  pursuance 
of  the  direction  in  this  Act,  the  burthen  of  the 

PROOF  SHALL  LAY  ON  THE  WARD  OF  THE  PLAINTIFF, 
and  it  shall  always  he  PRESUMED  that  every  negro^  In- 
dian^  mulatto  and  mestizo  is  a  slave^  unless  the  contrary 
be  made  to  appear ;  (the  Indians  in  amity  with  the 
Government  excepted,  in  which  case  the  burthen  of 
proof  shall  be  on  the  defendant.)"  (2  Brevard's 
Digest,  229-30.) 

In  Georgia,  the  Act  of  May  10,  1770,  is  almost 
literally  a  copy  of  the  preceding.  (Prince's  Digest, 
446.) 

The  slave,  it  seems,  must  first  find  a  white  friend 
willing  to  incur  the  expense  and  trouble  of  conduct- 
ing the  suit,  liable,  in  case  of  failure,  to  lose  the  costs. 
18-^ 


298  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Then  lie  must  find  lohite  witnesses  to  prove  his  free- 
dom, instead  of  demanding  that  the  pretended 

owner"  (as  in  the  case  of  other  property)  prove 
his  right  to  ownership.  And  then,  for  the  crime  of 
losing  his  case  in  Court,  (the  fault,  perhaps,  of  Judge 
and  jury,  even  by  their  own  laws,)  he  may  be  sub- 
jected, by  the  same  Court,  to  corporal  punishment, 
resulting  perhaps,  in  death  iy  moderate  correction  I ! 
But  this  is  not  all. 

In  South  Carolina,  by  Act  of  1802,  (by  way  of  pro- 
gress in  sixty-two  years!)  ''''the  guardian''''  (in  a  trial 
for  freedom)  ^'of  a  slave  "  (who  may  have  been  ille- 
gally imported  into  the  State,  and  is,  on  that  account, 
by  the  same  law,  declared  to  be  free)  claiming  his 
freedom  shall  be  liable  to  double  costs  of  suit,  if  his 
action  shall  be  adjudged  groundless;  and  shall  be 
liable  to  pay  to  the  bona  fide  owner  of  such  slave, 
all  such  damages  as  shall  be  assessed  by  a  jury,  and 
adjudged  by  any  Court  of  Common  Pleas."  (2  Bre- 
vard's Digest,  260.) 

In  Maryland,  the  attorney,  in  a  trial  for  freedom, 
must  pay  all  the  costs,  unless  the  Court  shall  be  of 
opinion  that  there  was  probable  cause  for  supposing 
that  the  petitioner  had  a  right  to  freedom."  (Act  of 
1796,  chap.  67,  sect.  25.)  And  on  such  a  trial,  the 
master  (the  defendant)  is  allowed  twelve  peremptory 
challenges  as  to  the  jurors.    (lb.,  sect.  24.) 

In  Virginia,  ^'  for  aiding  and  abetting  a  slave,  in  a 
trial  for  freedom,  if  the  claimant  fail  in  his  suit,  a 
fine  of  one  hundred  dollars  is  imposed."  And  this 
is  by  the  "Eevised  Code"  (of  1819),  482. 


NO  ACCESS  TO  JUDICIARY. 


299 


Missouri  mercifully  allows  the  slave,  on  permis- 
sion of  Court,  to  "sue  as  a  poor  person."  So  far, 
the  law  appears  praiseworthy.  Yet  "  it  is  made  to 
depend  upon  the  arbitrament  of  the  Court,  or  even 
of  a  single  Judge,  whether  the  petitioner  shall  be 
heard  by  a  jury  at  all."    (Stroud,  p.  78.) 

In  Alabama,  the  objectionable  parts  of  the  Missouri 
law  are  retained^  and  the  beneficial  provisions  omit- 
ted!   (lb.    Toulmin's  Digest,  632.) 

It  is  evident  that  very  few  of  the  thousands  of 
free  colored  persons  kidnapped  into  slavery,  or 
otherwise  held,  contrary  to  even  the  Southern  laws, 
will  ever  be  able  to  institute  a  suit  at  law  for  their 
freedom  ;  and  it  is  equally  evident  that  very  few  of 
those  who  may  get  their  cases  into  Court  will  ever 
derive  any  benefit  from  the  process,  but  only  secure 
to  themselves  a  terrible  punishment  in  the  first  in- 
stance, and  worse  treatment  from  their  masters  after- 
wards. The  spirit  of  these  laws  warrants  us  to  say 
this. 


CHAPTEE  III. 


KEJECTION    OF  TESTIMONY   OF    SLAVES  AND  FREE 
COLOBED  PERSONS. 

Slavery  is  upheld  by  suppressing  the  testimony  of  its  Victims 

SLAVE  cannot  be  a  witness  against  a  white  per- 
son, either  in  a  civil  or  criminal  cause."  (Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  65.) 

*^It  is  an  inflexible  and  universal  rule  of  slave 
law,  founded  in  one  or  two  States  upon  usage^  in 
others  sanctioned  by  express  legislation^  THAT  THE 

TESTIMONY  OF  A  COLORED  PERSON,  WHETHER  BOND 
OR  FREE,  CANNOT  BE  RECEIVED  AGAINST  A  WHITE 

PERSON.  (lb.,  p.  27.  Same  in  Wheeler's  Law  of 
Slavery,  193-5.) 

In  Virginia,  the  Act  of  Assembly  is  as  follows: 
*^Any  negro  or  mulatto,  bond  or  free,  shall  be  a  good 
witness  in  pleas  of  the  Commonwealth,  for  or 
against  negroes  or  mulattoes,  bond  or  free,  or  in 
civil  pleas  where  free  negroes  or  mulattoes  shall 
alone  be  parties,  and  in  no  other  cases  whatevery  (1 
Eevised  Code,  422.) 

Similar  in  Missouri.    (Missouri  Laws,  600.)  And 


NO  COLORED  WITNESSES. 


801  • 


in  Mississippi.  (Revised  Code,  372.)  And  in  Ken- 
tucky. (2  Littell  and  Swigert's  Digest,  1150.)  And 
in  Alabama.  (Toulmin's  Dig.,  627.)  And  in  Mary- 
land. (Maryland  Laws,  Act  of  1717,  chap.  13,  sects. 
2,  3;  and  Act  of  1751,  chap.  14,  sect.  4.)  And  in 
North  Carolina  and  Tennessee.  (Aot  of  1777,  chap. 
2,  sect.  42.)  And  in  the  free  State  of  Ohio.  (Act 
of  January  25,  1807.) 

In  South  Carolina  and  in  Louisiana  there  are 
enactments  which,  in  direct  allusion  to  this  feature 
of  their  laws,  and  reciting  in  a  preamble,  that 
Whereas  many  cruelties  may  he  committed  on  slaves 
because  no  white  person  may  he  present  to  give  evidence 
of  the  same^  unless  some  method  he  provided  for  the  hettei 
discovery  of  the  offense^''''  &c.,  &c..  Be  it  enacted^  &c.,  &c. : 
The  only  remedy  provided  is,  that  "when  no  white 
person  shall  be  present,"  or,  being  present,  shall  re- 
fuse to  testify,  "the  owner  or  other  person  having 
charge  of  such  slave  [who  shall  have  "suffered  in 
life,  limb,  member,"  &c.]  shall  be  deemed  gnilty  and 
punished,"  unless  such  owner  or  other  person, 
&c.,  can  make  the  contrary  appear  by  good  and 
sufficient  evidence,  ok  shall,  by  his  own  oath, 
clear  and  exculpate  himself  f  and  the  Court  may  ad- 
minister the  oath  and  acquit  the  offender^  if  clear 
proof  of  the  offense  be  not  made  by  two  witnesses 
at  least."    (2  Brevard's  Dig.,  242.) 

Judge  Stroud  (in  his  Sketch,  &c.,  p.  76)  considers 
this  "  a  modification  of  the  former  law,  not  for  the 
protection  of  the  slave,  but  for  the  especial 

BENEFIT  of  A  CRUEL  MASTER  OR  OVERSEER." 


02  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

la  most  of  the  slaveholding  States,  the  owners  of 
slaves  are  required  by  law  to  keep  at  least  one 
white  person  on  each  plantation  to  which  a  certain 
number  of  slaves  is  attached."  (Stroud,  p.  67.) 
This  indicates  the  previous  absence  of  white  persons, 
and  the  consequent  lack  of  white  witnesses.  Whe- 
ther the  law  was  ostensibly  for  the  remedy  of  that 
defect,  or  whether  it  was  for  the  greater  security - 
against  the  slaves,  does  not  appear.  It  is  hardly 
credible  that  a  white  person  is  employed  for  the 
former  object.  And  as  most  of  the  present  overseers 
are  whites,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  design  was  to 
discountenance  the  employment  of  slaves  or  other 
colored  persons  as  overseers.  Be  this  as  it  may,  a 
white  overseer  answers  the  requisitions  of  the  law, 
and  he  could  hardly  be  a  witness  o.gainst  himself, 
though  specially  authorized  to  eocculjpate  himself  by 
his  own  oath ! 

Chief  Justice  Ottley,  of  St.  Vincent's,  in  answer 
to  Parliamentary  inquiries  proposed  to  him  in  1791, 
said : 

*^The  only  instances  in  which  their  [the  slaves'] 
persons  appear  to  be  protected  by  the  letter  of  the 
law,  are  in  cases  of  murder,  dismemberment,  and 
mutilation ;  and  in  these  cases,  as  the  evidence  of 
slaves  is  never  admitted  against  a  white  man,  the 
difficulty  of  establishing  the  facts  is  so  great,  that 
white  men  are^  in  a  manner^  put  heyond  the  reach  of  the 
law:' 

Sir  William  Young,  Governor  of  Tobago  in  1811, 
and  an  advocate  of  slavery,  said  :  ^''I  think  the  slaves 


-NO  COLORED  WITNESSES. 


803 


have  no  protection.  In  this,  as  I  doubt  not  in  every 
other  island,  tliere  are  laws  for  the  protection  of  the 
slaves,  and  good  ones^  but  circumstances  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  whatever  law,  render  it  a  dead  letter. 
When  the  intervention  of  the  law  is  most  required,  it 
will  have  the  least  effect ;  as,  in  most'  cases,  where  a 
viodictive  and  cruel  master  has  care  to  commit  the 
most  atrocious  cruelties,  even  to  murder  his  slave, 

NO  FREE  PERSON  BEING  PRESENT  TO  WITNESS  THE 
ACT,"  &C.,  &C. 

Many  others,  holding  official  stations  in  the  British 
West  Indies  during  the  existence  of  slavery,  have 
testified  to  the  same  general  fact,  the  insufficiency 
of  all  laws  for  the  protection  of  slaves,  in  consequence 
of  rejecting  slave  testimony.  (Vide  Stephen's  West 
Indian  Slavery,  pp.  168-9.) 

The  case  is  too  plain  to  require  either  testimony 
or  argument.  A  community  or  a  Government  that 
could  tolerate  such  rejection  of  testimony — the  tes- 
timony of  the  defenseless  against  those  holding  and 
daily  exercising  despotic  power  over  them — ^must  be 
resolutely  bent  on  oppressing  instead  of  protecting 
them. 

Yet  the  reasonableness  of  the  rule  is  beyond  ques 
tion,  if  the  innocent  legal  relation"  is  to  be  pre 
served.  It  would  be  an  absurdity  for  chattels  to 
come  into  Court  and  bear  testimony  against  their 
owners  !  They  could  not  he  chattels,  to  all  intents, 
constructions,  and  purposes  whatsoever."  They  could 
not  remain  chattels  at  all.  The  powder  to  testify 
against  their  owners  and  overseers  would  imply  the 


304  THE  AMEKICAIs^  SLAVE  CODE. 


right  of  protection  from  assaults  by  them.  The 
slave,  to  KEMAiJsr  a  slave,"  said  Judge  Euffin,  must 
be  sensible  that  there  is  NO  appeal  from  his  master." 
Allow  slaves  to  testify,  and  the  hitherto  unimagined 
secrets  of  the  Bastile  would  explode  like  an  earth- 
quake. Universal  humanity  would  unite  in  one 
general  crusade,  and  break  down  the  whole  fabric. 


CHAPTEE  lY. 


SUBJECTION  TO  ALL  WHITE  PERSONS. 

"  Submission  is  required  of  the  Slave,  not  to  the  will  of  the  Master  only,  hut 
to  the  will  of  all  other  White  Persons."    (Stroud's  Sketch,  pp.  96-7.) 

In  Georgia  it  is  enacted,  that  If  any  slave  shall 
presume  to  strike  any  white  person^  such  slave,  upon 
trial  and  conviction  before  the  Justice  or  Justices, 
according  to  the  directions  of  this  Act,  shall,  for  the 
first  offense,  suffer  such  punishment  as  the  said  Jus- 
tice or  Justices  shall,  in  his  or  their  discretion,  think 
fit,  not  extending  to  life  or  limb  ;  and  for  the  second 
offense,  suffer  DEATH."  Provided  always,  that 
such  striking,  &c.,  be  not  done  by  the  command 
and  in  the  defense  of  the  owner  or  other  person 
having  the  care  and  government  of  such  slave,  in 
which  case  the  slave  shall  be  wholly  excused,  and 
the  owner  or  other  person,  &c.,  shall  be  answerable, 
as  if  the  act  had  been  committed  by  himself."  (Prince's 
Digest,  450.) 

South  Carolina  has  an  Act  in  the  same  words,  ex- 
cept that  death  is  the  penalty  of  the  third  offense, 
instead  of  the  second,    (2  Brevard's  Digest,  235.) 


306  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


In  Maryland,  for  this  offense,  the  offender's  ears 
may  be  cropped,  though  he  be  a  free  black.  (Act 
of  1723,  chap.  15,  sect.  4.) 

In  Kentucky  there  is  the  same  prohibition ;  and, 
as  in  Maryland,  free  colored  persons  are  included. 
Penalty,  "thirty  lashes  on  his  or  Aerbare  back,  well 
laid  on."    (Littell  and  Swigert's  Digest,  1153.) 

In  Virginia,  the  same  as  in  Kentucky,  from  1680 
till  1792,  when  the  following  exception  was  added : 

Except  in  those  cases  where  it  shall  appear  to  said 
Justice  that  such  negro  or  mulatto  was  wantonly 
assaulted^  and  lifted  his  or  her  hand  in  his  or  her  self- 
defense."    (1  Eev.  Code,  426-7.) 

In  Maryland,  "  If  any  slave  shall  happen  to  be 
slain  for  refusing  to  surrender  him  or  herself,  con- 
trary to  law,  or  in  unlawful  resisting  any  oiS&cer,  or 
other  person^  who  shall  endeavor  to  apprehend  such 
slave  or  slaves,  &c.,  such  officer  or  other  person  so 
hilling  such  slave,  as  aforesaid,  making  resistance,  shall 
be  and  is  by  this  Act  indemnified  from  any  prosecu- 
tion for  such  killing  aforesaid,"  &c.  (Maryland  Laws, 
Act  of  1751,  chap.  14,  sect.  9.)  This  is  cited  by  Judge 
Stroud  as  a  specimen  of  the  laws  of  several  States, 
(pp.  98-9.) 

South  Carolina. — Act  of  1740:  If  any  slave  who 
shall  be  out  of  the  house  or  plantation  where  such 
slave  shall  live  or  shall  be  usually  employed,  or 
without  some  white  person  in  company  with  such 
slave,  shall  refuse  to  submit  to  undergo  the  examina- 
tion of  any  white  person,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  any 
such  white  person  to  pursue,  apprehend,  and  mode- 


SUBJECTION  OF  COLOR. 


307 


rately  correct  such  slave ;  and  if  such  slave  shall 
assault  and  strike  such  white  person,  such  slave  may 
be  lawfally  killed''!!!    (2  Brevard's. Digest,  231.) 

It  does  not  appear  that  any  of  these  laws  recognize 
or  contemplate  any  self-defense  by  the  slave,  male 
or  female,  from  the  most  villanous  assaults  of  any 
white  person,  except  the  Act  of  Virginia.  And  as  the 
''negro  or  mulatto,"  whether  bond  or  free,  cannot 
lodge  a  complaint,  or  even  testify,  it  is  not  easy  to 
see  how  the  exception  can  be  made  available  for  his 
or  her  benefit.  Such  laws  illustrate  the  general  po- 
sition already  laid  down,  that  the  Government  can- 
not secure  to  the  master  his  assumed  right  of  slave 
ownership,  and  yet  extend  to  the  slave  civil  protec- 
tion. If  the  negro  be  a  chattel^  he  must  needs  be 
restrained  from  straying ;  he  must  be  held  subject, 
like  other  domestic  animals,  to  the  superior  race 
holding  dominion  over  him.  It  would  be  prepos- 
terous for  the  Legislature  to  attempt  doing  this  by 
a  process  which  should  at  the  same  time  provide  for 
his  protection  as  a  man !  It  would  be  abusive  to 
demand  this  at  their  hands,  if  the  "relation"  of  human 
chattelhood  is  to  be  held  legal  and  innocent ! 

Yet  the  existence  of  such  laws  renders  more  than 
probable,  and  even  certain,  the  common  prevalence 
of  the  worst  outrages  that  could  be  imagined.  The 
best  laws  cannot  fully  protect  the  weaker  portion  of 
a  community  against  the  stronger.  The  weak  must 
be  left  utterly  defenseless  when  all  protecting  laws 
are  only  repealed.  But  the  climax  is  reached  when, 
hy  express  statute^  each  member  of  the  weaker  class 


308  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

is  placed  under  the  absolute  control  of  any  one  of 
the  dominant  class ;  when  resistance  is  forbidden 
on  penalty  of  stripes  and  cropping  by  the  public 
authorities,  with  the  liability  of  being  ^'lawfully 
killed"  by  the  assailant !  If  civil  government  were 
designed  for  human  demoralization  and  torture,  it  is 
not  easy  to  see  how  its  ends  could  be  more  effectually 
reached. 


CHAPTER  V. 

PENAL  LAWS  AGAINST  SLAVES. 

The  Laws  are  unequal — their  administration  despotic— their  execution  bar- 
barous.  Even  this  is  exceeded  by  "  Lynch  Law." 

The  slave,  who  is  but  ''a  chatteV  on  all  other 
occasions,  with  not  one  solitary  attribute  of  person- 
ality accorded  to  him,  becomes  a  person'^  whenever 
he  is  to  be  punished  /  He  is  the  only  being  in  the 
universe  to  whom  is  denied  all  self-direction  and  free 
agency,  but  who  is,  nevertheless,  held  responsible 
for  his  conduct,  and  amenable  to  law.  Forbidden 
to  read  th*e  law,  and  kept  as  ignorant  and  as  unen- 
lightened as  possible,  he  is  nevertheless  accounted 
criminal  for  acts  which  are  deemed  innocent  in 
others,  and  punished  with  a  severity  from  which  all 
others  are  exempted.  He  is  under  the  control  of 
law,  though  unprotected  hy  law,  and  can  know  law 
only  as  an  enemy,  and  not  as  a  friend. 

The  following  statement  is  evidently  as  favorable 
a  one  as  could  be  made,  yet  it  attests  the  main  facts 
of  the  case ;  and  what  seems  to  have  been  intended 
as  a  palliation  is  the  strongest  condemnation  of  the 
slave  system,  especially  of  this  feature  of  it. 


310  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Much  has  been  said  of  the  disparity  of  punish- 
ment between  the  white  inhabitants  and  the  slaves 
and  negroes  of  the  same  State ;  that  slaves  are  pun- 
ished with  much  more  severity,  for  the  commission 
of  similar  crimes  by  white  persons,  than  the  latter. 
The  charge  is  undoubtedly  true  to  a  considerable 
extent.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  primary 
object  of  the  enactment  of  penal  laws  is  the  protec-^ 
tion  and  security  of  those  who  make  them.^  The 
SLAVE  HAS  NO  AGENCY  IN  MAKING  THEM.     He  is 

indeed  one  cause  of  the  apprehended  evils  to  the 
other  class,  which  those  laws  are  expected  to  remedy. 
That  he  should  be  held  amenable  for  the  violation 
of  those  rules  established  for  the  security  of  the 
other,  is  the  natural  result  of  the  state  in  which  he  is 
placed.  And  the  severity  of  those  rules  will  always 
bear  a  relation  to  that  danger,  real  or  ideal,  of  the 
other  class.f  It  has  been  so  among  all  nations,  and 
will  ever  continue  to  he  so^  while  the  disparity  between 
bond  and  free  remains'.  In  a  practical  treatise  it 
would  probably  be  considered  out  of  place  to  col- 
lect the  various  statutes  in  relation  to  whipping  and 
other  punishment  of  slaves,  to  be  found  in  the  sta- 
tute hooks  of  the  various  States.''  (Note  in  Wheeler's 
Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  222-3.) 


*  The  "  primary"  and  only  object  of  all  honest  legislation  is  the 
protection  of  the  equal  rights  of  all. 

f  From  whence  comes  that  "  danger,  real  or  ideal,"  that  calls 
for  such  severe  laws  ?  What  but  injustice,  and  a  consciousness  of 
that  injustice,  could  make  the  governing  party  thus  apprehensive 
of  "  danger  ?" 


LAWS  AGAINST  SLAVES. 


311 


THe  punishment  of  slaves  by  their  owners  has 
already  been  examined.  Their  punishment  by  civil 
government,  or  by  society,  is  the  topic  now  under 
review.  Not  a  few  specimens  have  fallen  under  our 
notice  already,  as  connected  with  other  points  of 
inquiry.  We  must  briefly  recall  these,  and  connect 
them  with  others  of  a  like  character. 

We  have  seen  how  the  cruel  punishments"  in- 
flicted by  the  master  are  expressly  sanctioned  by 
the  Legislatures,  and  how  the  public  arm,  with  its 
sheriffs  and  prisons,  is  at  the  beck  of  the  slave- 
holder, as  his  agents  and  instruments,  whenever  he 
wishes  his  slaves  punished !  We  have  seen,  too, 
some  few  specimens  of  direct  penal  infliction  upon 
the  slave  by  the  Grovernment.  For  the  crime  of 
earning  property  and  making  bargains,  we  have 
seen  his  property  seized  and  confiscated  for  the 
benefit  of  the  whites,  who  pretended  to  doubt 
whether  he  could  take  care  of  himself!  For  the 
misdemeanor  of  hiring  himself  out,"  even  with 
the  consent  of  his  master,  we  have  seen  him 
"apprehended"  as  a  felon.  For  seeking  liberty,  and 
the  protection  of  law,  we  have  seen  him  proclaimed 
an  outlaw,  and  "lawfully  killed!"  For  attending  a 
religious  meeting  in  the  evening,  conducted  by 
whites^  and  staying  till  the  close  of  the  meeting,  we 
have  seen  him,  with  his  wife  and  children,  locked 
up  in  the  watch-house  till  morning,  with  no  bed  but 
the  floor.  For  keeping  a  weapon  or  club,  we  have 
seen  him  subjected,  by  a  cowardly  code,  to  public 
whipping !    For.  being  absent  without  a  "  pass,"  to 


312 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


visit  a  wife  or  child,  we  have  seen  him  under  the 
same  sentence !  For  riding  on  horseback,  whipped 
or  branded.  For  losing  a  cause  at  Court,  when  sue- 
ing  for  freedom,  any  corporal  punishment,  not 
extending  to  life  or  limb,"  with  the  hazard  of 
"  death  by  moderate  correction." 

Free  negroes,  for  entertaining  or  assisting  fugitive 
slaves,  or  giving  or  selling  certificates  of  freedom^ 
we  have  seen  subjected  to  heavy  fines;  and,  in 
default  of  payment,  sale  into  slavery.  For  being 
arrested  on  suspicion  of  being  slaves,  we  have  seen 
them  fined  and  enslaved.  For  presuming  to  strike 
a  white  person,"  punished  with  whipping  or  crop- 
ping !  In  the  case  of  slaves^  for  the  second  or  third 
offense,  death! 

All  these  are  but  specimens  of  similar  legislation. 
For  taking  away  or  loosing  a  boat,  a  slave  in  South 
Carolina  is  to  receive  thirty-nine  lashes ;  for  the 
second  offense,  shall  forfeit  and  have  cut  off  from  his 
head  ONE  EAR."  (2  Brev.  Dig.,  228.)  So,  as  to  the 
first  offense,  in  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee.  (Hay- 
wood's Manual,  78.) 

For  having  any  article  of  property  [in  Kentucky] 
without  a  ticket  of  permission  from  his  master, 
paHicularly  specifying  the  same,  and  authorizing  it 
to  be  sold  by  the  slave,  ten  lashes,  by  order  of  the 
captain  of  the  patroUers;"  and  *4f  the  slave  be 
taken  before  a  magistrate,  thirty-nine  lashes  may  be 
ordered."  (Littell  and  Swigert's  Dig.,  11.)  Also  in 
North  Carolina  and  Tennessee.  (Haywood's  Manual, 
529.)    And  in  Mississippi.    (Rev.  Code,  390.) 


LAWS  AGAINST  SLAVES. 


313 


A  slave  in  Kentucky,  being  at  an  imlawful  assem- 
bl2/j^  the  captain  of  patrollers  may  inflict  ten  lashes 
upon  him.  (Littell  and  Swigert's  Dig.,  981 ;  also 
2  Missouri  Laws,  741,  sect.  2;  and  ibid.,  614.)  If 
taken  before  a  magistrate,  he  may  direct  thirty -nine 
lashes. 

To  beat  the  Patuxent  river,  (to  catch  fish,)  ten 
lashes.  (Maryland  Laws,  1796,  chap.  32,  sect.  3, 
&c.,  &c.) 

In  North  Carolina,  a  ''slave,  hunting  with  dogs  in 
the  woods  even  of  his  master,  is  subjected  to  a  whip- 
ping of  thirty  lashes.''  (Haywood's  Manual,  524, 
Act  of  1753.) 

We  reserve  for  their  appropriate  chapters,  the 
penal  laws  against  mental  instruction,  and  assembling 
together  for  religious  worship,  except  with  white 
persons. 

The  reader  will  have  noticed  that  a  large  portion 
of  the  offenses  thus  punished  are  not  considered 
offenses  when  committed  by  white  persons !  Another 
feature  deserves  notice. 

''  In  Virginia,  by  the  Revised  Code  (of  1819,)  there 
are  seventy-one  offenses  for  which  the  penalty  is 
DEATH  when  committed  by  slaves,  and  imprisonment 
when  committed  by  whites."   (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  134.) 

In  Mississippi  there  are  seventeen  offenses  pun- 
ishable with  DEATH  when  committed  by  slaves, 
which,  if  committed  by  white  persons,  are  either 

*  Meetings  for  "mental  instruction"  and  "religious  worship'' 
are  among  the  "  unlawful  assemblies "  forbidden,  as  will  be  seen  in 
another  chapter. 

14 


314  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

punished  by  fines  or  imprisonment,  or  punishment 
"not  provided  for  by  statute,"'  or  at  "common  law." 
(Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  110-11.) 

"  Where  human  life  is  so  cheap,  and  human  suf- 
fering so  little  regarded,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that 
the  dispensers  of  slave  justice  will  submit  to  be 
troubled  with  all  those  forms  and  ceremonies  which 
the  common  law  has  devised  for  the  protection  of 
innocence.  We  have  seen  that,  in  many  instances, 
any  luhite. person  may,  instanter,  discharge  the  func- 
tions of  judge,  jury,  and  executioner.  In  innumer- 
able instances,  all  these  functions  are  united  in  a 
single  justice  of  the  peace;  and  in  South  Carolina, 
Virginia,  and  Louisiana,  life  may  be  taken,  accord- 
ing to  law,  without  intervention  of  grand  or  petit 
jurors.  In  other  States  a  trial  by  jury  is  granted  in 
capital  cases  ;  but  in  no  one  State,  it  is  believed,  is 
it  thought  worth  while  to  trouble  a  grand  jury  with 
presenting  a  slave.  In  most  of  the  slave  States,  the 
ordinary  tribunal  for  slaves  charged  with  offenses 
not  capital,  is  composed  of  justices  and  freeholders, 
or  of  j  ustices  only.  A  white  man  cannot  be  convict- 
ed of  misdemeanor,  except  by  the  unanimous  verdict 
of  twelve  of  his  peers.  In  Louisiana,  if  the  Court  is 
equally  divided  as  to  the  guilt  of  a  slave,  judgment 
is  rendered  against  him  !"    (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  135.) 

The  proper  idea  of  trial  by  jury  includes  a  trial  by 
the  "^eer^"  or  EQUALS  of  the  accused.  There  is  no 
such  jury  trial  for  the  slave!  Trial  by  jury  of  slaves 
would  soon  upset  the  "legal  relation"  of  slave 
owner! 


LAWS  AGAINST  SLAVES. 


315 


In  Tennessee,  tlie  sheriff  is  empowered  to  make 
selection  of  three  justices  to  preside  on  the  trial^  and 
twelve  housekeepers  being  SLAVEHOLDEES  to  serve 
as  ajurif  !  !  !  (  Tennessee  Laws  of  1819^  chap.  35.) 
By  a  modification  of  this  law  in  1831,  ^^House- 
holders may  serve  as  jurors,  if  slaveholders  cannot  be 
had''!    (Child's  Appeal,  p.  70.) 

^^In  1832,  thirty-ftve  slaves  were  executed  in 
Charleston,  in  pursuance  of  the  sentence  of  a  Court 
consisting  of  two  justices  and  five  freeholders,  on 
charge  of  an  intended  insurrection.  No  indictments, 
no  summoning  of  jurors,  no  challenges  for  cause  or 
favor,  no  seclusion  of  the  triers  from  intercourse 
with  those  who  might  bias  their  judgment,  preceded 
this  unparalleled  destruction  of  human  life."  (Jay's 
Inquiry,  p.  135.) 

Though  no  colored  person,  bond  or  free,  can  testify 
in  any  case  where  any  white  person  is  concerned,  yet 
the  evidence  of  all  free  Indians  without  oath^  and  of 
any  slave  without  oath^''  may  be  taken  for  or  against  a 
slave!  And  among  the  ^^meritorious  services''  for 
which  freedom  is  conferred,  the  most  important  is 
information  of  crimes  committed  by  a  slave,"  What 
a  temptation  for  one  slave  to  bear  false  testimony 
against  another !  See  Stroud's  Sketch,  p.  126,  where 
the  authorities  arc  cited  for  several  States  where 
this  law  prevails,  viz :  South  Carolina,  Virginia, 
North  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  and  Missis- 
sippi ;  with  conditions,  in  Georgia  and  Louisiana. 

The  law  of  South  Carolina  provides  expressly, 
that  slave  trials  shall  proceed  "m  the  most  summary 


816  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  expeditious  manner '^^  and  also  that,  in  case  of 
conviction,  the  "Justice  shall  award  such  manner  of 
c?ea^A"  as  will  "  be  most  effectual  to  deter  others," 
&c.  (James's  Dig.,  392-3.)  This  authorized  "the 
burning  of  a  negro  woman  to  death,  as  may  be  found 
in  the  daily  prints  of  1820."  (Stroud,  p.  124.)  Any 
other  tortures  might  be  inflicted. 

"  The  last  authorized  edition  of  the  laws  of  Mary- 
land" (said  Judge  Stroud,  in  1827)  authorizes  "to 
have  the  right  hand  cut  off^  to  be  hanged  in  the  usual 
manner,  the  head  severed  from  the  hody^  the  hody  divided 
into  four  quarters^  and  the  head  and  quarters  set  up  in 
the  most  public  places  of  the  county  where  such  fact  was 
committed^    (Stroud,  p.  117.) 

The  burning  to  death  a  free  colored  man  near  St. 
Louis,  the  frequent  infliction  of  murderous  outrages 
by  irresponsible  "Lynch  Committees"  all  over  the 
South,  by  the  testimony  of  their  own  journals,  may 
assure  us  that,  in  the  public  administration  of  slave 
punishments,  "the  people  are  no  better  than  their 
laws,"  but  much  "  worse !" 

Communities  tolerating  such  laws  must  become 
lawless ;  must  lose  the  conception  and  the  proper 
definition  of  law,  in  its  just  sense.  They  must  be 
at  once  in  a  condition  of  despotism  and  of  anarchy. 
And  such  is  the  known  state  of  society  at  the 
South. 

And  yet,  no  practical  business  man,  who  looks 
over,  carefully,  the  whole  ground,  and  knows  human 
nature,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  times,  will  be 
likely  to  conclude  that  any  better  or  milder  code,  or 


LAWS  AGAINST  SLAVES. 


317 


mettiod  of  administration,  could  preserve  "  the  inno- 
cent legal  relation  of  slave  ownership  !"  If  that 
is  to  be  tolerated,  all  the  rest  is  to  be  left  where  it  is ! 
Indeed,  the  Note  of  Mr.  Wheeler,  already  quoted, 
(Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  222-3,)  very  nearly 
expresses  this  idea;  and  in  looking  over  his  few  re- 
ported cases  on  this  subject,  we  find  nothing  to  dis- 
parage the  conclusion. 

We  notice  the  following  items,  as  the  most  im- 
portant : 

^'J.  slave  tried  for  a  capital  crime  may  be  con- 
victed on  testimony  of  a  slave^  though  uncorroborated 
by  pregnant  circumstances."  (Wheeler,  p.  204. 
Case  of  the  State  vs,  Ben,  Dec.  T.,  1821 ;  1  Hawks' 
N.  C.  Eep.,  434.  Opinion  of  Judge  Badger,  Judge 
Hall  dissenting.) 

^'A  slave  on  trial  for  a  capital  felony  is  entitled  to 
a  jury  of  slave  owners."  (Wheeler,  p.  212.  Case 
of  the  State  vs.  Jim,  Dec.  T.,  1826 ;  1  Devereaux's 
N.  C.  Rep.,  142.) 

"  On  an  indictment  of  a  slave  for  a  capital  offense, 
the  master  cannot  be  compelled  to  testify."  (The 
State  vs.  Charity,  Dec.  T.,  1830 ;  2  Devereaux's  K 
C.  Rep.,  214.)  In  delivering  his  opinion,  Judge 
Rafl&n  said:  ''The  privilege  not  to  testify,  on  the 
ground  of  interest,  is  that  of  the  master^  not  of  the 
slave.  It  may  consequently  be  waived  by  the  for- 
mer. He  may  himself  prosecute,  and  give  evidence 
against  his  slave."  "Could  I  separate  her  [the 
slave's]  rights  from  those  of  the  witness,  [her  mas- 
ter,] I  would  do  so,  and  let  the  verdict  stand,  [a  ver- 


318 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


diet  of  conviction  for  murder.]  But  they  are  so 
connected,  that  justice  cannot  be  done  to  the  master 
without  giving  to  the  slave  the  benefit  of  it.  We 
cannot  restore  Mm  his  property,  without  vieldino- 
her  another  trial  for  her  life;  nor  reverse  the  judg- 
ment for  the  costs  without  reversing  it  altogether. 
I  therefore  conclude,  though  with  great  hesitation, 
that,  as  the  master  did  object  to  *be  sworn,  there 
must  be  a  new  trial."    (Wheeler,  pp.  214-15.) 

AYe  see  here  the  sacred  rights  of  public  justice 
on  the  one  hand,  (where  the  prisoner  was  charged 
Avith  the  murder  of  her  own  child,)  and  the  sacred 
rights  of  the  accused  to  an  impartial  trial  for  her  life, 
BOTH  treated  as  inferior  and  minor  interests,  which 
must  bend  to  the  slave  master's  right  of  property  in 
the  accused  !  If  she  was  acquitted,  as  she  probably 
was,  at  the  new  trial,  it  was  not  as  a  matter  of  justice 
or  of  mercy  towards  the  accused  or  the  murdered, 
but  as  an  act  of  protection  to  slave  property  ! 

'^Free  persons  of  color  are  entitled  to  trial  by 
jury."  (Wheeler,  p.  222.  Bore  vs.  Bush,  18  Mar- 
tin's Lou.  Eep.,  1.)  A  jury,  doubtless,  of  white  men, 
NOT  "  a  jury  of  their  peers"  or  equals  !  This  is  no 
'Hrial  by  jury"  deserving  the  name. 


CHAPTER  VL 


EDUCATION"  PROHIBITED. 

The  Slave  not  being  regarded  as  a  member  of  Society,  nor  as  a  human  being, 
the  Government,  instead  of  providing  for  his  education,  takes  care  to  forbid 
It,  as  being  inconsistent  with  the  condition  of  chattelhood. 

Chattels  are  not  educated  !  And  if  human  be  - 
ings are  to  be  held  in  chattelhood,  education  must 
be  withheld  from  them. 

South  Carolina. — Act  of  1740:  ^'Whereas,  the 
having  slaves  taught  to  write,  or'suffering  them  to 
be  employed  in  writing,  may  be  attended  with  gnat 
incoiweniences  ;  Be  it  enacted,  that  all  and  every  per- 
son and  persons  whatsoever,  who  shall  hereafter 
teach  or  cause  any  slave  or  slaves  to  be  taught  to 
write,  or  shall  use  or  employ  any  slave  as  a  scribe, 
in  any  manner  of  writing  whatsoever,  hereafter 
taught  to  write,  every  such  person  or  persons  shall, 
for  every  such  offense,  forfeit  the  sum  of  one  hundred 
pounds,  current  money."   (2  BrevardV  "Higest,  248  ) 

Georgia,  similar;  penalty,  twenty  pounds.  (Prince's 
Dig.,  445.) 

South  Carolina.— Another  Act  in  1800:  "That 
assemblies  of  slaves,  free  negroes,  mulattoes  and 


320 


THE  AMERICAX  SLAVE  CODE. 


mestizoes,  wliether  composed  of  all  or  of  any  of  such 
description  of  persons,  or  of  all  or  any  of  the  same, 
and  of  a  portion  of  white  persons  met  together  for  the 
purpose  of  MENTAL  INSTRUCTION",  in  a  confined  or 
secret  place,  &c.,  &c.,  are  declared  to  be  an  unlawful 
meeting;  and  magistrates,  &c.,  &c.,  are  hereby  re- 
quired, &c.,  to  enter  such  confined  places,  &c.,  &c., 
and  break  doors,  if  resisted,  and  to  disperse  such 
slaves,  free  negroes,  &c.,  &c. ;  and  the  officers  dis- 
persing such  unlawful  assemblage  mmj  inflict  such 
corporal  punishment^  not  exceeding  twenty  lashes^  upon 
such  slaves^  free  negroes^  &c.,  as  they  may  judge  neces- 
sary for  DETERRING  THEM  FROM  SUCH  UNLAWFUL 
ASSEMBLAGE  IN  FUTURE."  "That  it  shall  not  be 
lawful  for  any  number  of  slaves,  free  negroes,  mu 
lattoes,  or  mestizoes,  even  in  company  loith  white  per- 
sons,  to  meet  together  for  the  purpose  of  MENTAL 
INSTRUCTION,  either  before  the  rising  of  the  sun,  or 
after  the  going  down  of  the  same.'^  (2  Brevard's 
Dig.,  254-5.) 

Virginia. — Revised  Code  of  1819:  "That  all  meet- 
ings or  assemblages  of  slaves,  or  free  negroes  oi 
mulattoes  mixing  and  associating  with  such  slaves 
at  any  meeting-house  or  houses,  &c.,  in  the  night ;  or 
at  any  SCHOOL  or  schools  for  teaching  them  reading 
OR  WRITJNG,  either  in  the  day  or  nighty  under  whatso- 
ever pretext,  shall  be  deemed  and  considered  an 
UNLAWFUL  ASSEMBLY ;  and  any  justice  of  a  county, 
&c.,  wherein  such  assemblage  shall  be,  either  from 
hitf  own  knowledge  or  the  information  of  others,  of 
such  unlawful  assemblage,  &c.,  may  issue  his  war-  , 


XEARNING  FORBIDDEN. 


321 


rant,  directed  to  any  sworn  officer  or  officers,  au- 
thorizing him  or  them  to  enter  the  house  or  houses 
where  such  unlawful  assemblages,  &c.,  may  be,  for 
the  purpose  of  apprehending  or  dispersing  such  slaves, 
and  to  inflict  corporal  punishment  on  the  offender  or 
offenders^  at  the  discretion  of  any  justice  of  the  peace, 
not  exceeding  twenty  lashesP    (1  Rev.  Code,  424-5.) 

Besides  the  State  laws,  the  corporate  towns  and 
cities  frequently  have  ordinances  on  the  subject. 
As  for  example,  in  Savannah,  in  1818,  the  public 
journals  announced  as  follows: 

The  City  has  passed  an  ordinance  by  Avhich  an}' 
person  that  teaches  any  person  of  color ^  slave  or  free^  to 
read  or  lorite^  or  causes  such  persons  to  be  so  taught, 
is  subjected  to  a  fine  of  thirty  dollars  for  each  of- 
fense ;  and  every  person  of  color  who  shall  keep  a 
school  to  teach  reading  or  writing  is  subject  to  a  fine 
of  thirty  dollars,  or  to  be  imprisoned  ten  days,  and 
whipped  thirty-nine  lashes  T 

''In  North  Carolina,  to  teach  a  slave  to  read  or 
write^  or  sell  or  give  him  any  book  [Bible  not  ex- 
cepted] or  pamphlet,  is  punished  with  thirty-nine 
lashes^  or  imprisonment,  if  the  offender  be  a  free 
negro ;  but  if  a  white,  then  with  a  fine  of  $200. 
The  reason  for  this  law,  assigned  in  its  preamble,  is, 
that  '  teaching  slaves  to  read  and  write  tends  to  dis- 
satisfaction in  their  minds,  and  to  produce  insurrec- 
tion and  rebellion.'"  (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  136.)  This 
was  enacted  in  1831.    (Vide  Child's  Appeal.) 

"  In  Georgia,  if  a  white  teach  a/ree  negro  or  slave 
to  write,  he  is  fined  $500,  and  imprisoned  at  the  dis- 
14^ 


322  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


cretion  of  the  Court ;  if  the  offender  be  a  colored 
man,  bond  or  free,  he  may  be  fined  or  whipped,  at 
the  discretion  of  the  Court.  Of  course,  a  father 
may  be  flogged  for  teaching  his  own  child.  This 
barbarous  law  was  enacted  in  1829."  (lb.) 

In  Louisiana,  the  penalty  for  teaching  slaves  to 
read  and  write  is  one  year's  imprisonment."  (lb.) 

The  following  statement  will  be  regarded  with- 
interest,  as  being  from  one  of  the  highest  legal  au- 
thorities : 

*'In  Georgia,  by  Act  of  1829,  no  person  is  per 
mitted  to  teach  a  slave,  negro,  or  free  person  of 
color  to  read  or  write.  So  in  Virginia,  by  statute, 
in  1830,  meetings  of  free  negroes  to  learn  reading 
and  writing  are  unlawful,  and  subject  them  to  cor 
poral  punishment ;  and  it  is  unlawful  for  white  per 
sons  to  assemble  with  free  negroes  or  slaves,  to  teach 
them  to  read  or  write.  The  prohibitory  Act  \)f  the 
Legislature  of  Alabama,  passed  in  the  session  of 
1831-2,  relative  to  instruction  to  be  given  to  tliQ 
slave  or  free  colored  population,  or  exhortation  or 
preaching  to  them,  or  any  mischievous  influenco 
attempted  to  be  exerted  over  them,  is  sufficiently 
penal.  Laws  of  similar  import  are  presumed  to 
exist  in  the  other  slaveholding  States ;  but  in  Louis- 
iana, the  law  is  armed  with  tenfold  severity.  It  not 
only  forbids  any  person  teaching  slaves  to  read  or 
write,  but  it  declares,  that  any  person  using  language 
in  any  public  discourse,  from  the  bar,  bench,  stage, 
or  pulpit,  or  in  any  other  place,  or  in  any  private 
conversation,  or  making  use  of  any  signs  or  actions 


LEARNING  FORBIDDEJS . 


323 


having  a  tendency  to  produce  discontent  among  the 
free  colored  population,  or  insubordination  among 
the  slaves,  or  who  shall  be  knowingly  instrumental 
in  bringing  into  the  State  any  paper,  book,  or 
pamphlet,  having  the  like  tendency,  shall,  on  con- 
viction, be  punished  with  imprisonment  or  death,  at 
the  discretion  of  the  Court,"  (Kent's  Commentaries, 
vol.  ii.,  part  iv.,  p.  268,  note.) 

Bible  Societies  do  not  distribute  the  Bible  among 
slaves,  because  it  is  prohibited,  and  because  the 
slaves  are  unable  to  read. 

John  Woolman,  of  New- Jersey,  (1757,)  said:- 
^^Some  of  our  Society,"  (Friends,)  ^^and  soine  of  the 
Society  called  New  Lights,  use  some  endeavors  to 
instruct  those  [slaves]  they  have,  in  reading ;  but  in 
common  this  is  not  only  neglected,  but  disapproved." 
(Journal  of  Life,  &c.,  of  Woolman,  p.  74.) 

In  the  House  of  Delegates  of  Virginia,  in  1832, 
Mr.  Berry  said :  We  have,  as  far  as  possible^  closed 
every  avenue  by  which  light  might  enter  their  [the 
slaves']  minds.  If  we  could  extinguish  the  capacity 
to  see  the  light,  our  work  would  be  completed;  they 
would  then  be  on  a  level  with  the  beasts  of  the 
field,  and  we  should  be  safe !  I  am  not  certain  that 
we  would  not  do  it,  if  we  could  find  out  the  pro- 
cess, and  that  on  the  plea  of  necessity." 

Kentucky  is  one  of  the  few  slave  States  (perhaps 
the  only  one  except  Maryland)  in  which  slave  edu- 
cation is  not  ex[)ressly  prohibited ;  but  the  condition 
of  the  slave  there  was  thus  described  by  the  Pres- 
byterian Synod  of  Kentucky,  in  1834.  Slavery 


324 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


dooms  thousands  of  human  beings  to  hopeless  igno- 
rancer  ''If  slaves  are  educated,  it  must  involve 
some  outlay  on  the  part  of  the  master."  "It  is 
inconsistent  with  our  knowledge  of  human  nature 
to  suppose  that  he  will  do  this  for  them.  The  pres- 
ent state  of  instruction  among  this  race  answers 
exactly  to  what  we  might  thus  naturally  antici- 
pate. Througliout  the  lohole  land^  so  far  as  we  can 
learn,  there  is  but  one  school  in  which,  during  the 
week,  slaves  can  be  taught.  The  light  of  three  or 
four  Sabbath-schools  is  seen  glimmering  through  the 
darkness  that  covers  the  black  population  of  a 
whole  State.  Here  and  there,  a  family  is  found  where 
humanity  and  religion  impel  the  master,  mistress,  or 
children  to  the  laborious  task  of  private  instruc- 
tion." "Nor  is  it  to  be  expected  that  this  state  of 
things  will  become  better,  unless  it  is  determined  that 
slavery  shall  ceased    (Address,  &c.,  p.  8.) 

In  North  Carolina,  the  "patrols"  were  ordered  to 
"search  every  negro  house  for  books  or  prints  of 
any  kind.  Bibles  and  hymn  books  were  particularly 
mentioned."    (Weld's  "Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  51.) 

The  appeals  and  statements  made  by  clergymen, 
missionaries  and  others,  concerning  the  religious  in- 
struction of  slaves,  are  usually  guarded  from  misap- 
prehension by  the  use  of  the  phrase  "  oral  instruc- 
tion^^'' indicating  that  books  are  not  to  be  put  into 
their  hands!  "A  Sabbath-school"  for  colored  chil- 
dren at  the  South,  commonly  includes  nothing  more. 
Forgetful  of  their  anathemas  of  the  Church  or  Pope 
of  Rome  for  withholding  the  Scriptures,  most  Pro- 


LEARNING  FORBIDDEN. 


325 


testant  ministers  at  the  South,  and  some  at  the 
North,  insist  that  mere  ''oral  instruction"  will  an- 
swer very  well  for  the  negroes !  And  this  introduces 
to  us  the  subject  of  our  next  chapter. 


CHAPTER  VIL 


FREE  SOCIAL  WORSHIP  AXD  RELIGIOUS  INSTRUCTION 
PROHIBITED. 

The  Government  not  only  permits  the  Master  to  forbid  the  free  Social  Worship 
and  Religious  Instruction  of  his  Slaves,  at  his  pleasure,  but  it  also  steps 
in  with  direct  prohibitions  of  its  own,  which  even  the  Master  himself  may 
not  relax  or  abrogate. 

It  is  quite  remarkable,  that  all  tlie  real  practical 
restraints  whicli  the  Slave  Codes  of  the  South  throw 
around  the  slave  master,  are  obviously  for  the  pur- 
pose of  withholding  him  from  some  exercise  of  hu- 
manit}^  or  of  justice  towards  the  slave;  not  one  of 
them  is  for  the  purpose  of  restraining  him  from  in- 
humanity and  injustice ! 

From  no  act  of  barbarity,  cruelty,  or  even  mui 
der,  is  he  in  reality  restrained.  The  enactments 
professing  to  have  that  object,  we  have  found  to  be 
ineffectual,  impossible  to  execute,  deceptive,  self: 
contradictory,  and,  in  fact,  sheer  pretense  !  We  have 
found  no  laws  that  even  professed  to  guard  the 
highest  interests  of  slaves  as  human  beings,  family 
sanctities,  female  chastity,  education,  religious  de- 


RELIGION  PROSCRIBEiy. 


327 


velopment.  No  restraints  upon  the  violation  and 
destruction  of  these  are  attempted  to  be  thrown 
around  the  slave  master.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  is  restrained,  as  has  been  shown,  from  allowing 
to  his  slave  (for  the  mutual  benefit  of  both  parties) 
a  peculium  of  property  from  a  tithe  of  his  own 
earnings,  with  the  benefits  of  ^'hiring  out"  for  that 
purpose !  He  is  restrained,  as  we  have  seen,  from 
bestowing  upon  his  slave  an  education  that  would 
increase  his  usefulness,  or  of  employing  him  to  do 
any  kind  of  writing!  The  slave  maybe  *'used" 
so  as  to  be  ^'  used  up'''  in  seven  years ;  may  be  used  as 
a  "5ree&r,"  as  a  prostitute,  as  a  concubine,  as  a 
pimp,  as  a  tapster,  as  an  attendant  at  the  gaming- 
table, as  a  subject  of  medical  and  surgical  experi- 
ments for  the  benefit  of  science,  and  the  Legislature 
makes  no  objections  against  it!  But  he  may  not  be 
ased  as  a  clerk!  In  all  tliis^  the  master's  absolute 
right  of  ownership  is  restrained !  It  is  restrained 
too,  as  we  shall  see,  by  not  permitting  even  the 
master  to  allow  his  slave  the  privileges  of  free  social 
worship  and  religious  instruction,  well  calculated  as 
these  privileges  may  be  to  increase  in  him  those 
Christian  virtues  for  which  he  is  sometimes  com- 
mended in  advertisements,  to  enhance  his  value  in 
the  market !  The  master's  right  we  shall  also  find 
restrained  by  the  laws  forbidding  him  freely,  and  at 
self  discretion,  to  emancipate !  The  great  solicitude 
of  the  law  seems  to  be,  to  prevent  the  master  from 
being  too  kind  to  kis  slave ! 

The  philosophy  of  this  is  readily  seen.  A  minority 


328 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


of  slave  owners  are  deemed  exposed  to  the  weakness 
of  exercising  some  humanity  and  justice,  of  manifest- 
ing some  feeling  of  responsibility  to  God  in  their 
treatment  of  their  fellow-men!  The  majority  of 
slaveholders,  who  make  the  laws,  will  not  tolerate 
this!  They  enter,  fully  and  understandingly,  into 
the  spirit  of  slave  ownership.  That  "legal  relation" 
must  be  preserved  at  all  hazards  ;  and  they  know  it 
is  endangered  by  humanity,  by  justice,  by  education, 
and  by  religion.  They  know  that  if  others  eman- 
cipate, their  own  tenure  will  be  weakened.  The  rise 
'  of  an  oppressive  oligarchy  of  slave  owners  begins 
here.  And  religious  liberty  is  the  very  last  thing 
to  be  tolerated  by  it.  Eeligious  liberty  is  the  pre- 
cursor of  civil  and  political  liberty  and  enfranchise- 
ment, and  must  be  suppressed.  The  gospel  would 
indeed  abolish  American  slavery,  (as  is  often  said,) 
if  it  could  only  be  introduced  among  the  slaves  so 
far  as  to  confer  upon  them  religious  liberty.  This 
our  American  slaveholders  understand,  as  will  now 
be  shown. 

In  Georgia,  by  an  Act  of  Dec.  13,  1792,  with  the 
title,  "  To  PROTECT  religious  societies  in  the  exercise 
of  their  religious  duties,"  it  is  required  of  every  jus- 
tice of  the  peace,  &c.,  to  take  into  custody  any  person 
who  shall  interrupt  or  disturb  a  congregation  of 
WHITE  PERSONS,  &c.,  assembled  at  any  church,  &c., 
and  to  impose  a  fine  on  the  offender ;  and  in  default  of 
payment  he  may  be  imprisoned,  &c.,  &c.  Yet  the  same 
law  concludes  with  these  words:  "No  congregation 
or  company  of  negroes  shall,  under  pretense  of  divine 


RELIGION  PROSCRIBED. 


329 


worship^  assemble  themselves,  contrary  to  the  Act 
regulating  patrols."    (Prince's  Digest,  342.) 

This  Act  regulating  patrols  is  understood  to  be 
the  Act  of  May  10,  1770,  "for  ordering  and  govern- 
ing slaves,"  wherein  slaves  are  forbidden  to  assemble 
"on  pretense  of  feasting,"  &c.,  and  "ajiy  constable," 
on  direction  of  a  justice,  is  commanded  to  disperse 
ANY  assembly  or  meeting  of  slaves  which  may  disturb 
the  peace  or  endanger  the  safety  of  his  Majesty's 
subjects;  and  every  slave  which  may  be  found  at 
such  meeting,  as  aforesaid,  shall  and  may,  by  order 
of  such  justice,  immediately  he  corrected^  WITHOUT 
TRIAL,  hy  receiving  on  the  hare  hack  twenty -five  stripes 
ivith  a  whip^  switch,  or  cows'kin^'^  &c.  (Prince's  Di- 
gest, 447.)  From  the  general  terms  of  this  Act, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  applicable  to 
religious  meetings  before  the  Act  of  1792  occasioned 
its  reiteration  with  more  distinct  specifications. 

In  South  Carolina,  in  the  same  Act  of  1800,  al- 
ready cited  as  forbidding  "  slaves,  free  negroes,  mu- 
lattoes,  and  mestizoes"  to  assemble  for  "mental 
instruction,"  there  is  the  following  additional  section : 

"It  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any  number  of  slaves, 
free  negroes,  mulattoes,  or  mestizoes,  even  in  company 
with  luhite  persons^  to  meet  together  and  assemble  for 
the  purpose  of  mental  instruction  or  religious  wor- 
ship^ either  before  the  rising  of  the  sun  or  after  the 
going  down  of  the  same.  And  all  magistrates, 
sheriffs,  militia  officers^  kc,  &c.,  are  hereby  vested 
with  power,  &c.,  for  dispersing  such  assemblies^  (2 
Brevard's  Digest,  254-5.)     Three  years  afterwards, 


S30  THE  ATHERICAJSr  SLAVE  CODE. 

apon  petition,  as  the  Act  recites,  of  certain  religious 
societies,  the  rigor  of  the  Act  of  1800  was  slightly 
abated,  by  a  modification  which  forbids  any  person, 
before  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  "to  break  into  a 
place  of  meeting  wherein  shall  be  assembled  the 
members  of  any  religious  society  in  this  State,  ^;ro- 
vided  a  majority  of  them  shall  he  white  persons^  or 
otherwise  to  disturb  their  devotion,  unless  such  per- 
son, &c.,  so  entering  said  place  [of  worship]  shall 
first  have  obtained  from  some  magistrate,  &c.,  a  war- 
ranty &c.,  in  case  a  magistrate  shall  be  then  actually 
within  a  distance  of  three  miles  from  such  place  of 
meeting ;  otherwise  the  provisions,  &c.,  [of  the  Act 
of  1800,]  to  remain  in  full  force."  (Brevard's  Di- 
gest, 261.    Stroud's  Sketch,  pp.  93-4.) 

So  that,  in  order  to  attend  a  religious  meeting 
securely,  the  slave  must  know  heforehand  (1st)  that 
there  will  be  present  "a  majority  of  white  persons; 
(2d,)  that  there  will  be  no  person  there  with  "a  war- 
rant'*'' from  a  justice  to  apprehend  him;  and  (3d) 
that  a  justice  will  not  '^fe  then''''  within  three  miles' 
distance !  For  a  mistake  in  either  of  these  particu- 
lars, he  (or  she)  is  subjected  to  the  penalty  of 
twenty -five  lashes  with  the  cowskin  on  the  bare 
back,  well  laid  on  !" 

"  In  Virginia,  all  evening  meetings  of  slaves  at 
any  meeting-house  are  unequivocally  forbidden." 
(Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  137.  See  Stroud,  p.  94.  See 
also  1  Revised  Code  (of  1819),  424-5,  already  cited 
(Chap.  VI.)  as  prohibiting  meetings  for  promoting 
education.)  The  first  clause  will  be  found  to  prohibit 


RELIGION  PROSCRIBED. 


331 


meetings"  of  slaves,  &c.,  in  tlie  evening,  ''Slaves 
may,  however,  attend  at  church  on  any  day  of  public 
worship."    (Stroud,  p.  94.) 

Mississippi — same  as  Virginia,  with  a  proviso  that 
a  master  may  permit  his  slave  to  attend  the  preach- 
ing of  a  ivliite  minister,  regularly  ordained  and  li- 
censed, or  where  at  least  two  discreet  and  respectable 
wliite  persons,  appointed  by  some  regular  church, 
shall  attend.  (Mississippi  Rev.  Code,  390.  Stroud's 
Sketch,  p.  94.    Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  137.) 

Religious  liberty  secures  the  right  of  the  worship- 
pers to  choose  and  arrange  their  oivn  modes  and  forms 
of  religious  worship,  and  to  select  their  own  teachers; 
not  the  privilege  of  being  permitted  to  worship  when, 
where,  and  how  the  Government  or  a  slaveholder 
may  appoint,  and  under  such  religious  teachers  as 
they  may  select.  The  essence  of  spiritual  despotism 
and  of  religious  persecution  lies  in  the  enforcement 
of  such  claims.  It  is  no  discredit  to  the  slaves  that 
they  have  little  or  no  desire  to  hear  religious  ha- 
rangues from  their  oppressors,  or  that  they  loathe 
the  instructions  of  ministers  Avho  preach  the  right- 
fulness of  slaveholding. 

The  Southampton  slave  insurrection  of  Nat.  Turner 
(once  a  preacher)  may  have  furnished  a  pretext  for 
the  following: 

"The  Legislature  of  Virginia  passed  a  law  in 
1831,  by  which  any  free  colored  person  who  under- 
takes to  preach  or  conduct  a  religious  meeting  by 
day  or  night  may  be  whipped,  not  exceeding  thirty- 
nine  lashes,  at  the  discretion  of  any  justice  of  the 


33? 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


peace ;  and  any  body  may  apprehend  any  sucli  free 
colored  person  without  a  loarrant.  The  same  penalty, 
adjudged  and  executed  in  the  same  way,  falls  on  any 
slave  or  free  colored  person  who  attends  such  preach- 
ing ;  and  any  slave  who  listens  to  any  white  preacher 
in  the  night-time  receives  the  same  punishment.  The 
same  law  prevails  in  Georgia  and  Mississippi.  A 
master  may  permit  a  slave  to  preach  on  his  planta- 
tion, to  none  but  his  slaves."   (Child's  Appeal,  p.  67.) 

An  early  law  of  Maryland,  (Act  of  1715,  chap.  44, 
sec.  23,)  and  a  similar  one  in  South  Carolina,  (in 
1711,)  permits  the  baptism  of  slaves,  but  carefully 
provides  that  "  such  baptism  shall  not  be  construed 
to  effect  the  emuncipation  of  any  slave."  This  arose 
from  a  contrary  apprehension  growing  out  of  ancient 
usages  in  England,  and  the  opinion  of  some  jurists 
that  Christians  could  not  be  lawfully  enslaved. 

In  Louisiana  the  Legislature  enacted :  It  shall 
be  the  duty  of  every  owner  to  procure  his  sich  slaves 
all  kinds  of  temporal  and  spiritual  assistance  which 
their  situation  may  require."   (1  Martin's  Dig.,  610.) 

These  Maryland  and  Louisiana  privileges  of  bap- 
tism at  birth,  and  of  extreme  unction  on  a  death- 
bed, apparently  of  Eoman  Catholic  origin,  were 
undoubtedly  considered  great  kindnesses;  and  they 
constitute,  to  this  day,  almost,  if  not  entirely,  the 
sum  total  of  the  legal  provision  for  the  slave  as  a 
religious  being. 

The  prohibitions  recorded  in  this  chapter  have 
found  their  defense  or  apology  in  the  alleged  dangers 
of  insurrection  and  insubordination  !    The  plea  is 


RELIGION  PROSCRIBED. 


333 


strongly  condemnatory  of  the  system,  its  apologists, 
and  its  administrators !  Of  no  system  but  an  ini- 
quitous one  could  it  be  true  that  religious  liberty 
would  array  and  arm  its  subjects  against  its  funda- 
mental law !  No  right-minded  person,  who  was  at 
heart  neither  a  slave  nor  a  tyrant,  would  ever  urge 
such  a  plea.  And  if  the  slaveholders  treated  their 
servants  justly  and  kindly,  the  danger  of  insurrection 
would  cease.  The  plea,  if  false,  should  itself  be 
execrated.  If  founded  on  a  real  danger,  it  reveals 
the  inherent  and  inexpressible  wickedness  of  slave- 
holding,  and  of  the  so-called  "legal  relation"  thai 
sustains  it,  and  that  is  itself  maintained  at  such  a 
sacrifice!  The  "necessity"  of  such  laws,  rightly  in- 
terpreted, resolves  itself  into  the  necessity  of  "  imme- 
diate and  unconditional  abolition." 

The  general  condition  of  the  slaves  is  not  better 
than  is  indicated  by  these  enactments.  We  have  not 
room  to  present  a  full  specimen  of  Southern  testi- 
mony on  this  subject. 

The  Presbyterian  Synod  of  Kentucky,  in  1834, 
said:  "  Slavery  deprives  its  subjects,  in  a  great  mea- 
sure, of  the  privileges  of  the  gospel."  "  The  law, 
as  it  is  liere.^  does  not  prevent  free  access  to  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  but  ignorance,  the  natural  result  of  their  con- 
dition, does.  The  Bible  is  before  them.  But  it  is, 
to  them,  a  sealed  book.  Very  few  of  them  enjoy  the 
advantages  of  a  regular  gospel  ministry." 

The  Address  of  the  Synod  proceeds  to  say  that 
xsome  have  proposed  missionaries  among  slaves,  but 
adds  that  the  '-^ coramunity  ^  will  never  sustain  this 


334 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


measure  -aritil  they  are  ripe  for  measures  for  emanci- 
patioii^  They  add :  "  It  is  evident  that,  as  a  body, 
our  slaves  do  not  enjoy  tlie  public  ordinances  of  re- 
ligion. Domestic  means  of  grace  are  still  more  rare 
among  tliem." 

From  a  sermon  of  Bishop  Meade,  it  may  be  in- 
ferred that  the  religious  condition  of  slaves  is  not 
better  in  Virginia. 

The  Presbyterian  Synod  of  South  CaTolina  and 
Georgia,  in  1833,  published  a  statement  in  which 
they  said  of  the  slaves  :  There  are  over  two  mil- 
lions of  human  beings  in  the  condition  of  heathen, 
and  some  of  them  in  a  worse  condition."  They 
may  justly  be  considered  the  heathen  of  this  coun- 
try, and  will  bear  a  comparison  with  heathen  in  any 
country  in  the  world.  The  negroes  are  destitute  of  the 
gospel,  and  ever  WILL  BE  under  the  present  state  of 
tilings.  In  the  vast  field  *  extending  from  an  entire 
State  beyond  the  Potomac  [i.  e.,  Maryland]  to  the 
Sabine  Eiver,  [at  that  time  our  South-western  boun- 
dary,] and  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Ohio,  there  are, 
to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  not  twelve  men  exclu- 
sively devoted  to  the  religious  instruction  of  the 
negroes.  In  the  present  state  of  feeling  in  the 
South,  a  ministry  of  their  own  color  could  neither  be 
obtained  NOR  tolerated.  But  do  not  the  negroes 
have  access  to  the  gospel  through  the  stated  ministry 
of  the  whites  ?  We  answer,  TsTo.  The  negroes  have 
no  regular  and  efficient  ministry:  as  a  matter  of 
course,  no  churches ;  neither  is  there  sufficient  room 
in  the  white  churches  for  their  accommodation. 


RELIGION  PROSCRIBED. 


335 


We  know  of  but  five  churches  in  the  slaveholdmg 
States,  built  expressly  for  their  use.  These  arc  all 
in  the  State  of  Georgia.  AYe  may  now  inquire  whe- 
ther they  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  gospel  in  their 
own  houses,  and  on  our  plantations?  Again  we  re- 
turn a  negative  answer.  They  have  no  Bibles  to  read 
by  their  own  "firesides.  They  have  no  family  altars ; 
and  when  in  affliction,  sickness,  or  death,  they  have 
no  minister  to  address  to  them  the  consolations  of 
the  gospel,  nor  to  bury  them  with  appropriate  ser- 
vices." 

Again,  in  1834,  the  same  Synod  said : 
The  gospel,  as  things  now  are^  can  never  be 
preached  to  the  two  classes  [whites  and  blacks]  suc- 
cessfully in  conjunction."  *'The  galleries  or  back 
seats  on  the  lower  floor  of  white  churches  are  gene- 
rally appropriated  to  the  negroes,  when  it  can  be 
done  without  inconvenience  to  the  whites.  When 
it  cannot  be  done  conveniently,  the  negroes  must 
catch  the  gospel  as  it  escapes  through  the  doors  and 
windows."  ^^If  the  master  is  pious,  the  house  servants 
alone  attend  family  worship,  and  frequently  few  or 
none  of  themP  So  far  as  masters  are  engaged  in 
the  work,  [of  religious  instruction  of  slaves,]  an  al- 
most unbroken  silence  reigns  on  this  vast  field." 

The  Charleston  (S.  C.)  Observer^  and  the  Western 
Luminary^  Lexington,  (Ky.,)  fully  corroborate  these 
statements.  So  also  does  Rev.  C.  C.  Jones,  of  Georgia, 
who  says  further:  We  cannot  cry  out  against  the 
Papists  for  withholding  the  Scriptures  from  the  com- 
mon people,  and  keeping  them  in  ignorance  of  the 


336  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

way  of  life,  for  we  withhold  the  Bible  from  our  ser- 
vants, and  keep  them  in  ignorance  of  it,  while  we  will 
not  use  the  means  to  have  it  read  and  explained  to 
them.'' 

The  North  Carolina  Baptist  Convention  adopted 
a  Eeport  concerning  the  religious  instruction  of  the 
colored  people,  with  a  series  of  Eesolutions,  con- 
cluding as  follows:  '''•Resolved^  That  by  religious  in- 
struction be  understood  VEEBAL  communications 
on  religious  subjects !" 

But  not  even  verbal  instructions,  it  seems,  could 
be  tolerated  in  South  Carolina.  In  1838,  the  Method- 
ist Conference  of  South  Carolina  appointed  a  mis- 
sionary, Eev.  Mr.  Turpin,  to  labor  among  the  colored 
people,  but  it  was  soon  suppressed  by  the  principal 
citizens.  The  Oreenville  (S.  C.)  Mountaineer  of  Nov. 
2,  1838,  contained  the  particulars.  A  Committee 
was  appointed,  who  addressed  a  note  to  Mr.  Turpin, 
requesting  him  to  desist.  This  was  backed  up  by  a 
Eemonstrance  to  the  same  effect,  signed  by  James  S. 
Pope  and  352  others.  The  document  is  before  us. 
It  argues  at  length  the  incompatibility  of  slavery 
with  the  mental  improvement  and  religious  instruc- 
tion" of  slaves.  "Verbal  instruction,"  say  they,  wiU 
increase  the  desire  of  the  black  population  to  learn. 
We  know  of  upwards  of  a  dozen  negroes  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Cambridge  who  can  now  read,  some 
of  whom  are  members  of  your  societies  at  Mouut 
Lebanon  and  New-Salem.  Of  course,  when  they  see 
themselves  encouraged,  they  will  supply  themselves 
with  Bibles^  hymn  books ^  and  Catechisms''^  "Open 


RELIGIOX  PKOSCRIBED. 


337 


the  missionary  sluice,  and  the  current  will  swell  in 
its  gradual  onward  advance.  We  thus  expect  that 
a  progressive  system  of  improvement  ivill  he  introduced^ 
or  will  follow,  from  the  nature  and  force  of  circum- 
stances, and,  if  not  checked,  (though  they  may  bo 
shrouded  in  sophistry  and  disguise,)  will  ultimately 
revolutionize  our  civil  institutions,''''  ^'  We  consider  the 
common  adage  that  'Knowledge  is  power,'  and  as 
the  colored  man  is  enlightened,  his  condition  will 
be  rendered  more  unhappy  and  intolerable.  Intelli- 
gence and  slavery  have  no  a  ffinity  with  each  other P  The 
document  refers  to  the  laws  of  the  State,  and  hopes 
that  ''South  Carolina  is  yet  true  to  her  vital  interests," 
&c.,  &c. 

The  missionary  enterprise  was  thus  suppressed,  or 
was  relinquished.    The  Editor  of  the  Mountaineer 
said :  "  The  opposition  to  the  late  Home  Mission 
among  us  comprised  the  great  body  of  the  people." 
No  people  are  found  to  he  hetter  than  their  lavosT 

"The  legal  relation"  of  slave  ownership,  as  under- 
stood at  the  South,  requires  all  this.  And  the  Church 
and  ministry  there  either  acquiesce  or  succumb  ! 

At  every  point  we  have  found  an  utter  repugnance 
and  opposition  between  the  Slave  Code  and  the 
Christian  religion.  And  the  Slave  Code  is  nothing 
more  nor  less  than  the  truthful  exponent  and  the 
vigilant  guardian  of  the  so-called  "  legal  relation  of 
master  and  slave."  While  the  one  remains,  the  other 
remains,  with  all  the  practical  results  that  naturally  / 
grow  out  of  them. 

15 


CHAPTEE  Vin. 


LEGISLATIVE,  JUDICIAL,  AND  COXSTITUTIONAL 
OirSTRUCTIONS  TO  EMANCIPATION. 

The  Statutes  of  the  Slave  States  not  only  make  no  provision  for  a  general 
Emancipation,  but  they  obstruct  and  prevent  Emancipations  by  the  Master. 
And  the  Constitutions  of  some  of  the  States  forbid  the  Legislatures  to  abolish 
Slavery. 

We  have  seen  that  slavery  is  hereditary  and  per- 
petual in  the  nature  of  its  tenure,  and  that  the  code 
by  which  it  is  defined  contemplates  no  period  of  its 
termination,  and  points  out  no  conditions  upon  which 
the  slave  or  his  posterity  can  escape  from  it.  (See 
Chap.  XXI.  of  the  former  series.)  One  avenue  of 
hope  only  remains  for  him.  The  slave  master  may 
himself  emancipate.  In  very  many  instances,  slave 
masters  have  done  so.  The  hope  has  been  thus  in- 
spired  of  such  an  increase  of  manumissions  as  should 
weaken  and  ultimately  terminate  the  whole  system. 

The  hopes  of  humanity,  in  this  direction,  have  not 
outrun  the  fears  of  the  majority  of  slaveholders,  who 
control  the  legislation  of  the  slave  States.  The 
laws  accordingly  interpose  obstacles  t)  emancipation. 

The  reasons  urged  at  the  South  for  legislative  and 


LAWS  VS,  MANUMISSION. 


339 


judicial  restrictions  upon  emancipation  cannot,  per- 
haps, be  more  favorably  or  more  forcibly  stated  than 
in  the  following  extract  from  a  note  by  Mr.  Wheeler, 
at  the  close  of  his  chapter  of  reported  cases  concern- 
ing "the  emancipation  of  slaves:" 

"  It  will  be  seen  by  this  chapter  that  the  owner  of 
slaves  may  emancipate  them  by  deed,  w^ll,  or  contract 
executed.  But  to  this  benevolence  of  the  owner  there 
are^  in  most  of  the  States,  restraints  uj^on  the  exercise 
of  this  power  hy  the  owner.  Slaves  are  recognized, 
wherever  this  system  is  tolerated,  as  property,  and  are 
subject  to  all  the  rules  in  the  acquisition,  possession, 
and  transmission  of  property.  It  would  seem,  there- 
fore, upon  a  first  view  of  the  case,  that  the  owner  should 
do  with  his  property  luhatever  he  pleased,  and  should 
have  the  privilege  of  renouncing  his  right  to  it  when- 
ever he  pleased,  and  without  being  qualified  by  any 
public  laws  or  regulations  on  the  subject.  Such, 
however,  is  not  the  fact;  restraints  upon  this  right 
exist  in  nearly  all  the  States." 

After  citing  some  of  the  laws  on  the  subject,  in 
eluding  those  of  Tennessee  and  Alabama,  w^hich  we 
shall  copy,  Mr.  Wheeler  proceeds  : 

"  When  it  is  considered  that  slaves  are  a  peculiar 
species  of  property,  it  will  not  excite  surprise  that 
laws  are  necessary  for  their  regulation,  and  to  protect 
society  from  even  the  benevolence  of  slave  oivners,  in 
throwing  upon  the  community  a  great  number  of 
stupid,  ignorant,  and  vicious  persons,  to  disturb  its 
peace  and  endanger  its  permanency. 

"The  right  of  society  to  regalate  and  control  the 


840  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

ownership  and  control  of  this  kind  of  property  may 
be  justified  on  the  same  grounds  as  some  other 
species  of  property.  No  one  can  doubt  the  right 
of  individuals  to  acquire,  possess,  and  sell  gun- 
powder. But  if  the  possessor  chooses  to  take  it  to 
his  house  or  store,  in  a  city  or  populous  town,  the 
public  become  interested,  and  will  restrain  him  within 
reasonable  and  proper  limits."^  ^'And  the  consti- 
tutionality of  such  laws  cannot  be  doubted.  So  of 
slaves.  The  owner  may  keep  as  many  as  he  pleases, 
but  if  he  emancipates  them,  and  turns  them  loose 
upon  society,  they  have  a  right  to  protect  themselves 
against  his  improvidence,  or  even  against  his  bene- 
volence and  generosity.  They  have  a  right  to 
declare  the  act  illegal,  or  restrain  it  within  such 
bounds  as  shall  secure  their  safety."  (Wheeler's 
Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  386-8.) 

In  Mr.  Wheeler's  book  we  have  met  with  no  men- 
tion of  the  laws  forbidding  the  education  of  slaves  and 
free  colored  people^  and  their  free  access  to  the  means 
of  religious  and  moral  instruction.  By  the  side  of 
such  laws,  the  plea  for  laws  restraining  emancipation 
on  the  ground  of  the  ignorance  and  vice  of  the 
colored  people,  would  have  seemed  incongruous. 
It  is  the  intelligence  and  virtue  of  the  colored  race 


*  To  have  made  the  cases  parallel,  the  writer  should  have 
adduced  laws  restraining  owners  of  slaves  from  having  too  many 
of  them  in  one  place,  or  else  he  should  have  cited  laws  restraining 
owners  of  gunpowder  from  pouring  water  upon  it,  or  from  trans- 
muting it  into  articles  that  could  endanger  no  body  !  It  is  slavery, 
and  not  liberty,  that  is  dangerous." 


LAWS  VS,  MANUMISSION. 


341 


that  constitute  the  ^'danger"  to  be  guarded  against 
in  this  feature  of  slave  legislation  and  jurisprudence. 
And  the  honesty  and  conscientious  misgivings  of  re- 
penting slaveholders  (quite  as  truly  as  their  be- 
nevolence and  generosity")  constitute  another  danger 
against  which  a  society"  of  slaveholders  thus  pro- 
tects itself. 

This  principle  of  restriction  obtains  in  the  code  of 
nearly  every  one  of  the  slave  States,  though  an  ex- 
press enactment  cannot  always  be  cited  for  it. 

In  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  and  Ala- 
bama, the  Legislature  only,  by  express  enactments, 
have  authority  to  emancipate  slaves.  (Vide  author- 
ities cited  by  Stroud,  p.  147.) 

In  North  Carolina,  a  slave  cannot  be  emancipated 
except  for  meritorious  services^  to  be  adjudged  and 
allowed  of  by  the  Court.  (Haywood's  Manual,  537, 
Act  of  1796.) 

A  general  principle,  pervading  the  legislation  and 
jurisprudence  of  the  several  States,  is,  that  the  owner 
may  not  emancipate  without  the  consent  of  his 
creditors.  Thus,  "in  Virginia  and  Mississippi,  an 
emancipated  slave  may  be  taken  in  execution  to 
satisfy  any  debt  contracted  by  the  person  emancipat- 
ing him,  previous  to  such  emancipation."  (1  Eev. 
Code  of  Virginia,  434.    Mississippi  Eev.  Code,  386.) 

In  Kentucky,  the  emancipating  papers  must  con- 
tain a  saving  of  the  rights  of  creditors.  (2  Litt.  and 
Swi.,  1155.) 

In  Louisiana,  "any  enfranchisement  made  in  fraud 
of  creditors  is  void."    (New  Civil  Code,  art.  190.) 


34:2  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE 

In  Virginia,  Mississippi,  and  Kentucky,  tJae  widou 
of  a  deceased  slaveholder,  who  may  have  emanci- 
pated a  slave,  may  claim  her  third''''  to  which  the 
widow  is  entitled.  (1  Eev.  Code  of  Virginia,  435. 
Mississippi  Rev.  Code,  386.  2  Litt.  and  Swi.,  1246.) 
And  when  one  third  part  of  an  emancipated  slave  is 
thus  reenslaved,  the  problem  of  preserving  the  re- 
maining two  thirds  of  him  in  a  state  of  freedom  would 
perhaps  puzzle  his  best  legal  advisers ! 

In  Georgia,  ^^the  attempt^''  to  set  free  a  slave,  other- 
wise than  by  application  to  the  Legislature,  is  pun- 
ished as  an  "  offense^'' — a  fine  of  two  hundred  dollars, 
one  half  to  the  informer  and  the  other  half  to  the 
county  ;  and  the  manumitted  slave  is  retained  in 
slavery.  (Prince's  Digest,  457.)  And,  as  if  this 
were  not  sufficient,  an  additional  Act,  in  1818,  de- 
clares that  every  last  will  and  testament  by  which 
slaves  shall  be  set  free,  or  any  such  will  or  other 
^'instrument  in  writing,  or  by  parol,"  by  which 
slaves  shall  be  allowed  the  privilege  of  working  for 
themselves,  "to  be  utterly  null  and  void."  And 
the  person  executing  such  writing,  or  "attempting 
to  give  it  effect,"  or  "accepting  a  trust"  under  it, 
may  be  fined  "not  exceeding  one  thousand  dollars;" 
and  every  slave  "on  whose  behalf"  such  instrument 
shall  be  written,  "  being  thereof  convicted^  {?!)  shall  be 
sold  at  public  outcry,  and  the  proceeds  appropriated," 
&c.    (Prince's  Digest,  466.) 

In  Tennessee,  the  Courts,  on  petition  of  the  owner^ 
and  for  sufficient  reasons  therein  set  forth,  may  eman- 
cipate a  slave !  (Tenn.  Laws ;  Act  of  1801,  chap.  27.)  j 

I 

! 


LAWS  VS,  MANUMISSION. 


343 


"  Emancipation  is  guarded  in  Tennessee  by  a  pro- 
vision (statute  of  1777)  that  the  State  must  assent^  or 
the  act  of  manumission  by  deed  or  will  is  ineffectual ; 
and  (as  appears  in  Fisher  vs,  Dabbs,  6  Yerger's  Eep., 
119,)  the  emancipated  slave  must  be  immediately 
removed  beyond  the  limits  of  the  United  States." 
(Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  p.  387.) 

^'By  statute  of  Alabama,  Allan's  Dig.,  647,  slaves 
may  be  emancipated  by  the  master,  on  application 
to  the  County  Court,  aiid  on  proof  of  meritorious  ser- 
vices^ but  the  slave  must  remove  out  of  the  limits 
of  the  State."  (lb.) 

Mississippi  has  combined  all  the  obstacles  in  the 
laws  of  all  the  other  States.    (Stroud,  p.  149.) 

Kentucky,  Missouri,  Virginia,  and  Maryland,  afford 
greater  facilities  for  emancipation.  (lb.)  In  Ken- 
tucky and  Missouri  the  master  may  emancipate, 
"  saving  the  rights  of  creditors,"  and  by  giving  bonds 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  aged  and  infirm. 

In  Virginia  the  law  is  similar,  only  that  if  the 
emancipated  slave  be  over  twenty-one  years  of  age, 
he  must  leave  the  State  in  one  year,  or  be  reen- 
slaved !    (Revised  Code,  436.) 

Maryland  has  a  proviso  that  the  emancipated  slave 
shall  be  '^of  healthy  constitution,"  &c.,  "capable  of 
labor,"  and  "not  exceeding  forty-five  years  of  age." 
(Laws  of  1796,  chap.  67.) 

In  Louisiana,  "no  one  can  emancipate  his  slave, 
unless  the  slave  has  attained  the  age  of  thirty  years, 
and  has  behaved  well  for  at  least  four  years  preced- 
ing his  emancipation."   But  "a slave  who  has  saved 


344  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


the  life  of  his  master,  his  master's  wife,  or  one  of  his 
children,  may  be  emancipated  at  any  age."  (Art. 
185, 186.)  Also,  the  child  of  a  deceased  slave  mother 
who  had  acquired  the  right  to  freedom  at  a  future 
time,  becomes  free  at  that  time.  (Art.  196.)  And  a 
slave  entitled  to  a  future  release  is  capable  of  receiv 
ing  property  by  testament  or  donation.  (Art.  193.) 
For  these  remnants  of  justice  and  mercy,  humanity 
is  indebted,  perhaps,  to  the  former  usages  of  the 
French  and  Spaniards,  nnder  the  Code  Noir, 

From  the  legislators  we  now  turn  to  the  judges 
and  reporters  of  judicial  decisions. 

''With  respect  to  emancipation,  it  may  be  stated 
as  a  principle  without  an  exception,  that,  as  slaves 
are  considered  property  upon  which  creditors  have  a 
right  to  look  for  the  payment  of  their  debts  due  by 
the  owner  of  slaves,  regard  must  be  had  to  the  rights 
of  the  creditor ;  and  no  act  of  emancipation  is  valid 
when  these  are  violated."  (Note,  in  Wheeler's  Law 
of  Slavery,  p.  310.) 

So  then  the  slave,  by  extraordinary  exertions  and 
by  agreement  with  his  master,  may  have  obtained 
emancipation  for  himself  and  family,  and  may  have 
removed  with  them  to  a  free  State.  Yet  the  master's 
creditor  may  take  out  an  execution,  and  reenslave 
them,  by  the  help  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Act  of  Con- 
gress. The  money  paid  by  the  slave  does  not  con- 
stitute him  a  creditor,  in  the  eye  of  the  law ;  for  it 
belonged,  in  lazv^  to  the  master,  before  it  was  paid  to 
him ! 

Slaves  manumitted  by  Will,  where  the  personal 


LAWS  VS,  MANUMISSION. 


345 


estate  is  not  sufficient  to  pay  tlie  debts  of  the  testator, 
are  not  entitled  to  freedom.''  This  is  the  marginal 
note  to  the  case  of  Negro  George  et  al.  vs.  Corse, 
Adm'r. ;  June  T.,  1827.  (2  Harris  and  Gill's  Md. 
Eep.,  1.) 

The  Will  of  James  Corse,  manumitting  the  slaves, 
contained  the  following :  ^^And  it  is  hereby  provided 
that  if  my  personal  estate^  EXCLUSIVE  OF  NEGROES, 
should  not  be  sufficient  to  discharge  all  my  just 
debts,  then  my  will  is  that  my  executor  or  ad- 
ministrator, as  the  case  may  be,  may  sell  so  much  of 
my  real  estate  as  will  pay  my  debtSj  so  as  to  have  my 
negroes  free,  as  before  stated." 

It  was  admitted  that  the  personal  estate  of  the 
testator,  either  including  or  excluding  the  negroes, 
was  not,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  or  at  any  time 
since,  sufficient  to  pay  his  debts;  but  that  his  real 
estate,  including  his  personal  property,  and  exclud- 
ing the  negroes,  were,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and 
still  are,  sufficient  to  pay  his  debts.  Verdict  for  de- 
fendants, and  petitioners  appealed.  After  argument, 
the  Court,  Dorsey^  Archer^  and  Ear\^  Judges,  affirmed 
the  judgment,  and  that  the  creditors  had  a  right  to 
their  demands  out  of  the  personal  estate."  (Wheeler, 
pp.  327-8.) 

Thus  the  Court  annulled  the  express  provisions 
of  the  Will,  whether  with  or  without  authority  from 
the  statute,  does  not  appear.  And  the  principle 
established  would,  in  the  same  manner,  set  aside  a 
similar  Will  of  a  testator  who  might  leave  millions 
in  real  estate,  if  his  personal  estate,  exclusive  of 
15* 


346  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


negroes,  should  fall  short  of  paying  his  debts.  The 
object  and  spirit  of  such  decisions  cannot  be  hid. 
The  rights  of  the  free  as  well  as  of  the  enslaved  are 
outrageously  infringed  by  such  proceedings,  in  which 
the  death-bed  promptings  of  conscience,  repentance, 
justice,  and  mercy,  are  profanely  spurned  and  tram- 
pled in  the  dust. 

Slaves  are  subject  to  dower  in  all  the  States.  Not 
only  are  they  subject  to  dower,  but  the  widow^s  in- 
terest in  them  is  protected  by  statutory  provisions. 
If  the  husband  manumits  his  slaves,  whereby  cre- 
ditors and  the  dower  of  the  widow  are  affected,  the 
manumission  is  so  far  ineffectual  that  the  manumitted 
slaves  may  be  sold  for  a  period^  and  the  proceeds  of 
the  sale  applied  to  the  creditors  of  the  former  owner 
and  his  widow."  [Numerous  authorities  cited.] 
(Wheeler,  note  to  p.  181.) 

In  other  circumstances  the  courts  are  less  regardful 
of  the  rights  of  woman. 

wife's  estate  in  dower  of  slaves,  by  a  former 
husband,  on  her  second  marriage,  rests  in  her  hus- 
band." ^''And  her  right  to  manumit  them  is  gone^ 
(Wheeler,  p.  182.) 

On  the  subject  of  the  validity  of  contracts  and 
promises  of  masters  to  manumit,  there  seems  some 
slight  diversity  among  the  judges,  as  will  be  seen 
from  the  following,  in  which  the  general  doctrine  is 
apparent : 

''A  written  agreement  by  a  master  with  his  slave 
to  manumit  him  is  obligatory ;  it  rests  in  benevolence^ 
not  in  contract^   (Marginal  Note.)  The  Judge  said : 


LAWS  VS.  MANUMISSION. 


347 


"  The  mamimission  of  a  slave  does  not  rest  upon  the 
principle  of  a  contract^  depending  upon  a  considera- 
tion ;  but  it  is  an  act  of  benevolence  sanctioned  by  the 
statute,  and  made  obligatory,  if  in  loriiingr  (Kettletas 
vs.  Fleet,  Feb.  T.,  1811;  7  John's  New-York  Eep., 
324.    Wheeler,  p.  232.) 

Chancery  cannot  enforce  a  contract  between  mas- 
ter and  slave,  though  the  slave  perform  his  part.'' 
(Stevenson  vs.  Singleton,  Feb.  T.,  1829 ;  1  Leigh's 
Va.  Rep.,  72.    Wheeler,  p.  233.) 

Same  decision  in  Sawney  vs.  Carter,  March  Term, 
1828 ;  6  Randolph's  Va.  Rep.,  173.  Wheeler,  p.  237. 
Cited  in  Leigh's  Rep.  I.  72,  Virg.,  1829,  as  follows: 

^'Application  to  enforce  a  contract  between  master 
and  slave. — Per  Cur.:  In  the  case  of  Sawney  vs.  Car- 
ter, the  Court  refused,  on  great  consideration,  to  en- 
force a  promise  by  a  master  to  emancipate  his  slave 
where  the  conditions  of  the  promise  had  been  partly 
complied  with  by  the  slave.  The  Court  proceeded 
on  the  principle  that  it  is  not  competent  to  a  Court 
of  Chancery  to  enforce  a  contract  between  master 
and  slave,  even  although  the  contract  should  he  fully 
complied  with  on  the  part  of  the  slaveJ^ 

Fugitive  slaves,  on  arriving  at  the  IsTorth,  have 
sometimes  exhibited  the  written  agreements  of  their 
masters  to  emancipate  them,  on  condition  of  their 
payment  of  a  certain  specified  amount  of  money, 
payable  in  instalments.  Along  with  these,  they  have 
exhibited  the  receipts  of  their  masters  for  the  several 
instalments  in  full.  And  yet  they  have  been  com- 
pelled to  run  away  to  obtain  their  hard-earned  free- 


348 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


dom,  with  all  the  hazards  of  being  hunted  and  re- 
captured !  The  writer  has  seen  and  examined  such 
documents. 

*'If  an  informal  emancipation  takes  place,  the 
master  promising  to  comply  with  the  legal  formali- 
ties, his  rights  are  not  thereby  affected  before  the 
formalities  be  observed."  (Bazzy  vs,  Eose  and 
child,  May  T.,  1820;  8  Martin's  Louisiana  Kep., 
149.  Wheeler,  p.  307.)  In  this  case,  the  promise, 
in  loriting^  was  produced.  On  a  habeas  corpus^  the 
slaves  (Rose  and  child)  had  been  discharged,  as  free 
persons.  But  the  claimant,  Bazzi,  brought  this  suit 
against  them,  and  the  Court,  Martin^  J".,  decreed  them 
to  be  slaves  of  the  plaintiff! 

"A  contract  to  manumit  is  obligatory."  (Case  of 
Negro  Tom,  Feb.  T.,  1810 ;  5  John's  New-  York  Rep., 
365.    Wheeler,  p.  309.) 

*'iVb  declaration  or  promise  made  to  a  slave  can 
be  enforced  in  a  Court  of  law."    (Marginal  note.) 

Beall  vs.  Joseph.  Trespass  to  try  Joseph's  right 
to  freedom.  He  had  been  a  slave  to  one  Woods, 
who  agreed  to  let  Edwards  have  him  for  four  years, 
after  which  he  was  to  he  free.  Both  Woods  and 
Edwards  made  parol  declarations  to  this  effect.  But 
Edwards  sold  him  a  slave  to  Beall.  The  Judge 
said,  ^*It  is  clear  that  no  declaration  or  promise 
made  to  the  slave  in  this  State,  (Kentucky,)  or  for 
his  benefit,  by  the  owner  or  any  other  person,  can 
be  enforced  in  a  Court  of  law  or  equity.  And  see 
Will  vs,  Thompson,  in  a  note  at  the  end  of  the  case, 
where  it  was  held,  that  where  a  purchaser  in  writ- 


LAWS  VS.  MANUMISSION. 


849 


ing  contracted  with  the  SELLER  to  manumit  the  slave  at 
a  specified  time^  it  is  not  a  ground  for  a  suit  at  common 
laWj  hut  equity  will  enforce  the  contract^  and  give 
DAMAGES  for  the  detention  of  the  negro^  (Harden's 
Ky.  Kep.,  51.    "Wheeler,  p.  331.) 

A  contrary  decision  appears  in  Negro  Cato  vs. 
Howard.  (June  T.,  1808 ;  2  Ear.  and  John's  Md. 
Rep.,  323.    Wheeler,  p.  323.) 

Parol  evidence  of  an  agreement  for  the  freedom 
of  a  slave  is  inadmissible."  (Victoire  vs,  Dussuau, 
March  T.,  1816;  4  Martin's  Louisiana  Eep.,  212. 
Wheeler,  p.  334.) 

"An  infant  cannot  be  emancipated,"  "nor  can  a 
slave  be  set  free  who  is  not  both  under  the  age  of 
forty-five  years,  and  able  to  worh^  and  gain  a  suffi- 
cient maintenance  and  livelihood,  at  the  time  the 
freedom  is  intended  to  commence."  (Hamilton  vs, 
Crag^,  June  T.,  1823 ;  6  Har.  and  John's  Md.  Rep., 
16.  Also  Hall  vs.  MuUin,  5  Har.  and  John's  Md. 
Rep.,  190.    Wheeler,  p.  311.) 

"A  bequest  of  liberty  to  slaves,  in  contravention 
of  the  law,  is  void."  (Mary  vs,  Morris  et  al.,  Aug. 
T.,  1834;  7  Lou.  Rep.,  135.    Wheeler,  p.  311.) 

"A  deed  of  emancipation  not  recorded  in  the 
proper  com%  but  in  some  other,  gives  no  title  to  free- 
dom until  properly  recordedP  (Sawney  vs.  Carter, 
[before  cited.]  Also  Givens  vs,  Mann,  6  Munf.,  Va. 
Rep.,  191.  Also  Lewis  vs.  FuUerton,  1  Randolph's 
Va.  Rep.,  15.    Wheeler,  p.  238.) 

*^  Whether  a  slave,  who  is  directed  to  be  set  free 
by  the  last  will  and  testament  of  hisi  xaaster,  can 


850  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


have  the  intervention  of  a  magistrate  to  prevent  his 
removal  out  of  the  State,  quereP  (Marginal  note 
to  Moosa  vs.  AUain,  16  Martin's  Lou.  Eep.,  99. 
Wheeler,  p.  317.)  The  testator,  Julien  Poydras,  di- 
rected in  his  will,  that  his  slaves  on  his  several 
plantations  should  each  be  considered  inseparable 
from  the  respective  plantation  on  which  they  were, 
and  that  they  should,  at  the  end  of  twenty-five 
years,  be  free.  The  plaintiff  was  however  sold,  and 
taken  to  another  plantation,  against  his  will  and 
consent,  and,  as  he  believed,  with  an  intention  of 
carrying  him  out  of  the  State.  He  petitioned  for  a 
recession  of  the  sale,  and  to  be  restored  to  the  plan- 
tation where  he  belonged.  There  was  judgment  for 
the  defendant,  and  the  plaintiff  appealed.  Jadgment 
affirmed  ! 

^^A  slave  cannot  be  emancipated  by  a  nuncupative 
[verbal,  declaratory]  will,  nor  by  an  executory  or 
conditional  instrument  in  writing."  (Cooke  [col- 
ored] vs.  Cooke ;  3  Littell's  Ky.  Eep.,  236.  Wheeler, 
p.  328.) 

Besides  these  legislative  obstructions  to  emanci- 
pation by  the  masters,  there  are,  in  several  of  the 
States,  constitutional  provisions  restraining  the  State 
Legislatures  from  abolishing  slavery  by  statute.  As 
the  State  will  not  intrust  the  planters  with  the 
power  of  manumission,  so  neither  will  the  planters 
allow  the  State  to  hold  the  power  of  abolition. 

The  laws  forbidding  or  obstructing  emancipation 
have  been  pleaded  on  behalf  of  the  slaveholders,  as 
an  excuse  for  not  emancipating  their  slaves.  But 


LAWS  VS.  MANUMISSION. 


351 


they  can  be  of  no  avail,  except  to  such  as  oppose 
those  laws.  Slaveholders,  moreover,  might  give 
their  slaves  ''a  pass"  to  the  borders  of  the  free 
States,  or  accompany  them  thither.  The  fact  that 
others  will  reenslave  those  whom  they  may  emanci- 
pate cannot  excuse  them.  They  haye  no  right  to 
continue  a  wicked  practice,  because  others  would 
take  it  up  if  they  relinquished  it ! 

Concerning  the  law  of  Virginia  reenslaving  the 
emancipated  negro,  the  Powhatan  Colonization  So- 
ciety (addressing  the  Virginia  Legislature)  said : 
"  The  law  was  doubtless  dictated  by  sound  policy^ 
and  its  repeal  would  be  regarded  by  none  iciih  more 
unfeigned  regret  than  by  the  friends  of  African  coloniza 
Hon,  It  has  restrained  many  masters  from  giving  free 
dx)m  to  their  slaves^  and  has  thereby  contributed  to 
check  the  growth  of  an  already  TOO  great  and 
GROWING  evil!"    (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  108.) 

It  ill  befits  those  who  hold  and  who  patronize  this 
language,  to  cite  the  laws  impeding  emancipation, 
to  justify  slaveholders  in  refusing  to  emancipate ! 
But  this  incongruity  is  constantly  witnessed  !  The 
popularity,  at  the  South  and  at  the  North,  of  those 
Societies  and  statesmen  and  ministers  of  religion 
who  hold  such  language  and  occupy  such  a  position, 
may  assist  to  throw  light  on  the  inquiry,  whether, 
in  this  particular,  the  people  are  better  than  their 
laws. 

And  let  it  be  remembered  that,  in  the  judgment 
of  those  who  ought  to  know,  and  who  are  directly 
interested  in  the  matter,  it  is  only  by  such  laws  that 


852  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


^' the  innocent  legal  relation"  of  slave  ownership  can 
be  sustained. 

In  Weld's  ^'  Slavery  as  it  is,"  p.  164,  maybe  found 
the  particulars  of  the  reenslavement  of  one  hundred 
and  thirty-four  slaves  in  North  Carolina,  who  had 
been  liberated  by  the  Quakers  in  1776.  The  old 
law  of  1741  could  not  prevent  it.  In  1777,  after 
the  manumissions  had  taken  place,  a  new  law  was 
made  prohibiting  such  procedure,  and  the  County 
Courts,  under  this  Act,  ordered  the  emancipated 
slaves  to  be  sold  into  slavery !  The  Superior  Court, 
in  1778,  reversed  the  decision,  and  the  negroes  were, 
a  second  time,  set  at  liberty.  But  the  Legislature, 
in  1779,  confirmed  the  title  of  the  purchasers  by  a 
special  Act,  and  they  were  taken  up,  and  a  second 
time  reduced  to  slavery !  A  fair  illustration  of  the 
legality  of  the  "peculiar  relation!" 

Such  are  the  relations  of  the  slave  to  civil  govern- 
ment and  to  society ;  such  the  protection  he  receives 
from  them. 


PART  III. 


RELATION  OF  THE  SLAVE  CODE  TO  THE  LIBERTIES 
OF  THE  FREE. 


CHAPTER  I. 


LIBERTIES  OF  THE  FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 

The  Free  People  of  Color,  th-jugh  not  in  a  con  Jitioii  of  Chattelhood,  are  con 
stantly  exposed  to  it,  and  at  best  enjoy  only  a  portion  of  their  rights. 

We  have  already  seen  liow,  in  many  ways,  a  free 
colored  person  may  be  enslaved.  He  may  be  enslaved 
for  assisting  a  slave,  however  nearly  related  to  him, 
to  escape  into  freedom.  He  may  be  enslaved  for  being 
suspected  of  being  himself  a  runaway  slave  ;  for  being 
thus  imprisoned,  and  unable  to  pay  his  jail  fees.  He 
may  be  reenslaved,  after  having  been  emancipated, 
if  the  process  were  not  in  exact  accordance  with 
unreasonable  and  vexatious  regulations  ;  or  if,  how  - 
ever regularly  emancipated,  he  presumes  to  remain 
among  his  friends,  and  amid  the  scenes  of  his  child- 
hood. He  may  be  enslaved  for  incurring  fines  which 
he  is  unable  to  pay,  under  iinjust  and  unequal  enact- 
ments. He  may  be  enslaved  for  not  being  able,  by 
white  witnesses,  to  prove  himself  free  !  Though  a 
Northern  man,  and  always  before  free,  he  may  be 
enslaved  by  entering  a  slave  State,  (Georgia  or  Ma- 
ryland,) and  thus  incurring  a  fine  and  being  unable 


356  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


to  pay  it.  (Jay's  Inquiry,  24.  Child's  Appeal,  p.  64.) 
He  may  be  enslaved,  with  his  children  after  him,  for 
being  married  to  a  slave.  He  may  be  enslaved  by 
being  unlawfully  and  piratically  imported  into  a 
slave  State,  even  though  the  kidnapper  may  be  ar- 
rested and  punished !  And  in  none  of  the  free  States 
can  any  free  native  colored  citizen  be  safe  from 
the  operation  of  the  Federal  Fugitive  Slave  Bill  of 
1850,  and  from  the  clutches  of  United  States  Mar- 
shals and  Commissioners !  The  law  presumes  him  to 
be  a  slave  unless  he  can  prove  himself  free.  (Wheel- 
er's Law  of  Slavery,  pp.  5,  6.)  ''In  South  Carolina, 
if  a  free  negro  cross  the  line  of  the  State,  he  can 
never  return."    (Child's  Appeal,  p.  68.) 

"Mississippi,  in  1831,  passed  a  law  to  expel  all 
[free]  colored  persons  under  sixty  and  over  sixteen 
years  of  age,  within  ninety  days,  unless  they  could 
prove  good  characters,  and  obtain  from  the  Court  a 
certificate  of  the  same,  for  which  they  paid  three 
dollars :  these  certificates  might  be  revoked  at  the 
discretion  of  the  County  Courts.  If  such  persons  do 
not  quit  the  State  within  the  time  specified,  or  if 
they  return  to  it,  they  may  be  sold  for  a  term  not 
exceeding  five  years."  (lb.,  p.  68.)  And  persons  sold 
for  a  term  of  years  seldom  regain  their  freedom,  as 
has  been  ascertained  in  the  District  of  Columbia. 

In  Tennessee,  emancipated  slaves  must  leave  the 
State  forthwith.    (lb.,  p.  68.) 

While  tracing,  in  the  preceding  chapters,  the  legal 
condition  of  the  slave^  we  have  found  the  "/ree  negro, 
mulatto,  or  mestizo,"  associated  with  him  in  some  of 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


357 


the  most  painfully  humiliating  incidents  of  his  de- 
gradation. Like  the  slave^  the  free  colored  person 
is  held  incompetent  to  testify  against  a  white  man ! 
Like  the  slave,  he  is  debarred,  to  a  great  extent,  from 
the  benefits  of  education,  and  from  the  right  of  enjoy- 
ing free  social  worship  and  religious  instruction  ! 
Like  the  slave,  he  is  required  to  be  passive,  without 
exercising  the  right  of  self-defense,  under  the  insults 
and  assaults  of  the  white  man !  Like  the  slave,  as 
will  be  shown,  he  is  denied  the  ordinary  safeguards 
of  an  impartial  trial  by  a  jury  of  his  peers.  Like  the 
slave,  he  has  no  vote  nor  voice  in  framing  the  laws 
under  which  he  is  governed.  Even  in  many  of  the 
free  States  he  exercises  this  right  only  on  unequal 
conditions,  or  coupled  with  invidious  distinctions ! 
And  yet  he  is  complimented  with  the  title  of  ^^freeP^ 
To  be  a  "  free  negro'''  differs  widely,  it  would  seem, 
from  being  a  free  man  I 

For  striking  a  white  man,  in  Maryland,  no  matter 
for  what  cause,  a  Justice  may  ^'direct  the  offender's 
earstobecropped,  thoughhebe  a ^ree  black."  (Stroud, 
p.  97.    Act  of  1723,  chap.  15.) 

Tn  Louisiana  it  is  gravely  set  forth,  by  express 
statute,  that  ^''free  people  of  color  ought  never  to  iasult 
or  strike  white  people,  nor  presume  to  conceive  them- 
selves equal  to  the  whites ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  they 
ought  to  yield  to  them  on  every  occasion^  and  never  speak 
or  answer  them  but  with  respect,  but,  under  penalty 
OF  IMPRISONMENT,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
offense."    (1  Martin's  Digest,  6-40-42.) 

*'In  some  of  the  States,  if  a  free  man  of  color  is 


358 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


accused  of  crime,  he  is  denied  the  benefit  of  those 
forms  of  trial  which  the  Common  Law  has  estabhshed 
for  the  protection  of  innocence.  Thus,  in  South 
Carolina,  it  is  thought  quite  unnecessary  to  give  the 
Grand  and  Petit  Jury  the  trouble  of  inquiring  into 
the  case :  he  can  be  hung  Avithout  so  much  ceremony. 
But  who  is  a  colored  man  ?  We  answer,  the  fairest 
man  in  Carolina,  if  it  can  be  proved  that  a  drop  of 
negro  blood  flowed  in  the  veins  of  his  mother." 
(Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  21-2.)  Judge  Jay  adduces  an 
instance.  William  Tann,  an  overseer  on  a  planta- 
tion, shot  a  slave.  He  was  supposed  to  be  a  white^ 
and  the  customary  forms  of  trial  before  the  Court 
OF  Sessions  were  in  preparation,  (before  whom,  as 
being  a  white  man,  he  would  undoubtedly  have  been 
cleared.)  But  ^'on  ^-n.  issue  ordered  and  tried  for 
ascertaining  his  caste^  it  was  decided  that  he  was  of 
MIXED  BLOOD."  So  he  was  turned  over  by  the 
Court  to  the  jurisdiction  of  magistrates  and  free- 
holders, by  whom  he  was  sentenced  to  be  hung. 
The  particulars  appeared  in  the  Charleston  Courier 
in  1835. 

The  Corporation  of  Georgetown,  in  the  District 
of  Columbia,  passed  an  ordinance,  making  it  penal 
for  any  free  negro  to  receive  from  the  Post-ofl&ce, 
have  in  his  possession,  or  circulate,  any  publication 
or  writing  of  a  seditious  character."  (Jay's  Inquiry, 
p.  23.) 

^'  In  North  Carolina,  the  law  prohibits  a  colored 
man,  whatever  may  be  his  attainments  or  ecclesias- 
tical authority,  to  preach  the  gospel."  (lb.) 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


35^ 


In  Georgia,  a  white  man  is  liable  to  a  fine  ot 
five  hundred  dollars  for  teaching  a  free  negro  to 
read  or  write.  If  one  free  negro  teach  another,  he 
is  fined  and  whipped,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Court ! 
Should  a  free  negro  presume  to  preach  to  or  exhort 
his  companions,  he  may  be  seized  without  warrant, 
and  whipped  thirty-nine  lashes,  and  the  same  num- 
ber of  lashes  may  be  applied  to  each  one  of  his  con- 
gregation, (lb.) 

"  In  some  States,  free  negroes  may  not  assemble 
in  greater  number  than  seven.  In  North  Carolina, 
free  negroes  may  not  trade,  buy,  or  sell,  out  of  the 
cities  wherein  they  reside,  under  penalty  of  forfeit- 
ing their  goods,  and  receiving,  in  lieu  thereof,  thirty- 
nine  lashes !  (lb.) 

In  Ohio,  [a  free  State,]  not  only  are  the  blacks 
excluded  from  the  benefit  of  public  schools,  but, 
with  a  refinement  of  cruelty  unparalleled,  they  are 
doomed  to  idleness  and  poverty  by  a  law  which  ren- 
ders a  white  man  who  employs  a  colored  one  to  labor 
for  him  for  one  hour,  liable  for  his  support  through 
life."    (lb.  24.) 

The  Ohio  law  is,  we  believe,  repealed.  But  in 
New- York,  and  some  other  Northern  cities,  colored 
persons  are  still  denied  licenses  to  drive  carts,  and 
pursue  other  similar  avocations  for  a  livelihood. 

In  Indiana,  a  free  State,  the  testimony  of  free 
negroes  and  mulattoes  is  not  received  against  a  white 
man.    (Child's  Appeal,  p.  66.) 

By  a  late  law  of  Maryland,  a  free  negro  coming 
into  the  State  is  liable  to  a  fine  of  fifty  dollars  for 


860  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

every  week  tie  remains  in  it !  If  he  cannot  pay  tlie 
fine,  he  is  sold  !"  (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  24.) 

^'•Should  a  colored  citizen  of  Maryland  cross  its 
boundary,  on  business  never  so  urgent  to  himself  and 
his  family,  on  returning  home,  more  than  a  month 
after,  he  is  liable  to  be  seized  and  SOLD,  unless,  pre- 
vious to  his  departure,  he  had  complied  with  certain 
vexatious  legal  formalities,  and  which,  from  igno- 
rance, he  would  be  extremely  likely  to  neglect,  or 
perform  imperfectly."    (Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  90.) 

"A  citizen  of  New- York,  if  he  happens  to  be 
colored,  may  not  visit  a  dying  child  in  Maryland 
without  incurring  a  penalty  of  fifty  dollars  for  every 
week  he  remains ;  and  if  he  is  unable  to  pay  the  fine, 
why,  then  he  is  to  be  sold  hy  the  sheriff  at  public  sale, 
for  such  a  time  as  may  be  necessary  to  cover  the 
aforesaid  penalty.  But  if  a  free  negro  is  sold  for  a 
limited  time,  he  is  in  reality  sold  for  life.  During 
the  term  for  which  he  is  sold,  he  is  sold  as  a  chattel^ 
and  maybe  transported  at  the  pleasure  of  his  master; 
and  when  the  expiration  of  his  term  finds  him  in  a 
cotton-field  in  Missouri,  or  a  sugar-mill  in  Louisiana, 
who  is  to  rescue  him  from  interminable  bondage  ?" 
(Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  90.) 

It  is  known  that  such  cases  have  occurred,  and 
that  free  negroes  taken  up  as  fugitives  in  the  Federal 
District  have  been  sold  to  the  slavetraders  and  sent 
to  the  far  South.  A  case  is  narrated  in  a  petition  to 
Congress,  signed  by  Judge  Cranch  and  nearly  eleven 
hundred  citizens  of  the  Federal  District  in  1828.  And 
the  advertisements  of  free  negroes  for  sale  by  the 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


361 


marshal  and  sheriflf,  appear  frequently  in  the  public 
journals.  Mr.  Miner,  in  the  U.  S.  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, in  1829,  stated  that  in  1826-7  no  less  than 
five  persons  in  the  Federal  District  were  thus  sold 
into  perpetual  bondage  for  jail  fees  !  (Jay's  Inquiry, 
p.  155.) 

^^A  free  colored  man  livino'  near  the  line  of  the 
District  of  Columbia,  petitioned  the  House  of  Dele- 
gates of  Maryland  for  leave  to  bring  his  grandchild 
from  the  city  of  Washington.  The  child  had  proba- 
bly been  left  an  orphan,  and  he  naturally  wished  to 
take  it  to  his  own  house.  The  petition  was  rejected." 
(Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  90.) 

''In  North  Carolina,  free  negroes  are  whipped, 
fined,  and  imprisoned,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Court, 
for  intermarrying  with  slaves."  (Child's  Appeal, 
p.  70.) 

In  Georgia,  "Any  person  of  color,  bond  or  free^ 
is  forbidden  to  occupy  any  tenement  except  a  Idichen 
or  outhouse^  under  penalty  of  from  twenty  to  fifty 
lashes.  Some  of  these  laws  are  applicable  only  to 
particular  cities,  towns,  or  counties ;  others  to  several 
counties."  (lb.) 

*'  Emancipated  slaves  must  quit  North  Carolina  in 
ninety  days  after  their  enfranchisement,  on  pain  of 
being  sold  for  life.  Free  persons  who  shall  '  migrate 
into '  the  State  may  be  seized  and  sold  as  runaway 
slaves;  and  if  they  ^migrate  ouV  of  the  State  foi; 
more  than  ninety  days,  they  can  never  return,  under  v 
the  same  penalty."  "A  visit  to  relatives  in  another 
State  may  be  called  '  migrating  ;'  being  taken  up  and 
16 


362 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


detained  by  kidnappers  over  ninety  days  may  be 
called  '  migrating.'^ "    (lb.,  p.  68.) 

In  all  the  seaport  cities  and  towns  of  the  slave 
States  there  are  regulations  forbidding  masters  of 
merchant-vessels  to  land  any  free  colored  person. 
And  if  any  seaman,  cook,  or  steward  in  such  vessel 
be  colored^  he  is  immediately  seized,  (though  a  citizen 
of  one  of  the  free  States,)  and  kept  in  jail  at  the 
expense  of  the  ship,  until  she  is  ready  to  sail.  This 
is  a  great  grievance,  not  only  to  such  colored  sea- 
men, but  to  the  ship  masters  and  ship  owners.  It  is 
also  a  direct  and  palpable  violation  of  the  Constitu- 
tion of  the  United  States. 

The  Legislature  of  South  Carolina,  in  Dec.  1822, 
by  express  statute,  ordained  the  enforcement  of  this 
usage,  by  providing  that,  in  case  the  ship  master 
should  refuse  paying  the  expense  of  the  seaman's 
imprisonment,  he  maybe  "indicted  and  fined  not 
less  than  one  thousand  dollars,  and  imprisoned  not 
less  than  two  months,  and  such  free  negroes  shall  be 
sold  as  slaves.  The  Circuit  Court  of  the  United 
States  adjudged  the  law  unconstitutional  and  void. 
Yet  nearly  two  years  after  this  decision,  four  colored 
seamen  were  taken  out  of  the  English  brig  Marmion. 
England  made  a  formal  complaint  to  our  Govern- 
ment. Mr.  Wirt,  the  Attorney-general,  gave  the 
opinion  that  the  law  was  unconstitutional.  This,  as 
well  as  the  above-mentioned  decision,  excited  strong 
indignation  in  South  Carolina.  Notwithstanding  the 
decision,  the  law  still  remains  in  force."  (Child's 
Appeal,  p.  63.) 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


363 


North  Carolina  has  made  a  law,  subjecting  any 
vessel  with  free  colored  persons  on  board  to  thirty 
days'  quarantine,  as  if  freedom  were  as  bad  as  the 
cholera !  Any  person  of  color  coming  on  shore  from 
such  vessels  is  seized  and  imprisoned  till  the  vessel 
departs,  and  the  captain  is  fined  five  hundred  dol- 
lars ;  and  if  he  refuse  to  take  the  colored  seaman 
away,  and  pay  the  expenses  of  his  imprisonment,  he 
is  fined  five  hundred  more.  If  the  sailor  do  not 
depart  Avithin  ten  days  after  the  captain's  refusal,  he 
must  be  whipped  thirty-nine  lashes ;  and  all  colored 
persons,  bond  or  free^  who  communicate  with  him, 
receive  the  same."    (lb.,  p.  69.) 

In  Georgia  there  is  a  similar  enactment.  The 
prohibition  is,  in  both  States,  confined  to  mercliant- 
vessels ;  (it  would  be  imprudent  to  meddle  with  ves- 
sels'of'War ;)  and  any  person  communicating  Avith 
such  seaman  is  whipped  not  exceeding  ihirUj  lashes. 
If  the  captain  refuse  to  carry  away  seamen  thus  de- 
tained, and  pay  the  expenses  of  their  imprisonment, 
he  is  fined  five  hundred  dollars,  and  also  imprisoned 
not  exceeding  three  months."  (lb.) 

The  State  of  Massachusetts  sent  an  agent  to  South 
Carolina,  and  another  to  Louisiana,  to  see  what  ad- 
justment could  be  made  of  the  difficulties  growing 
out  of  these  enactments.  But  they  were  both 
promptly  ejected  from  those  States,  laden  with  in- 
sults, and  gladly  hastened  their  escape,  to  save  their 
lives ! 

A  most  comprehensive  class  of  oppressive  enact- 
ments against  the  free  people  of  color,  are  those 


364 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


designed  and  operating,  directly  or  indirectly,  TO 

DRIVE  THEM  OUT  OF  THE  COUNTRY  !     SomC  of  the 

enactments  mentioned  already,  particularly  those  of 
Maryland,  are  known  to  have  had  this  end  in  view, 
and  to  have  been  instigated  by  the  leading  influences 
seeking  their  expulsion  to  Africa ! 

A  favorite  scheme  of  the  Virginia  slaveholders, 
at  an  early  day,  was  to  enlist  Congress  in  the  enter- 
prise of  colonizing  the  free  blacks  in  Africa,  for  the 
better  security  of  the  slave  system  at  home.  Soon 
after  the  alarms  of  a  suspected  or  attempted  insur- 
rection of  slaves,  the  proposition  was  formally 
brought  forward.  It  proved  a  failure ;  whereupon 
the  leaders  of  the  movement,  members  of  Congress 
and  others,  organized  the  American  Colonization 
Society,  which  has  its  auxiliaries  in  most  of  the 
States,  North  and  South.  At  the  North,  it  has  been 
advocated  as  an  ally  of  emancipation ;  at  the  South, 
as  the  grand  conservator  of  the  slave  system ;  in 
both  sections,  it  has  infused  the  sentiment  that  there 
must  or  can  be  no  emancipations,  unless  connected 
with  transportation  to  Africa ;  that  it  is  impossible 
for  the  colored  race  to  enjoy  the  rights  of  freemen 
in  this  country ;  and  that  the  whites  and  blacks  can- 
not live  together  in  peace,  in  the  enjoyment  of  equal 
rights !  Into  the  history  or  the  merits  of  this  So- 
ciety we  cannot  here  enter,  any  further  than  is 
necessary  in  order  to  understand  the  State  legisla 
tion.  Southern  and  Northern,  designed  to  harass  and 
oppress  the  free  blacks,  and  drive  them  out  of  the 
country.    The  constitution  of  the  Society  restricts 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


36c 


it  to  the  colonization  of  free  colored  people,  with 
their  o^yn  free  consent.  But  it  is  a  well-established 
fact,  that  many  of  its  leading  members  have  con- 
templated, whenever  practicable,  the  employment  of 
force.  The  reader  is  referred  to  Jay's  "Inquiry" 
for  abundant  evidence  of  this.  And  the  same  class 
of  persons  have  been  busily  engaged  in  promoting 
legislation  against  the  free  people  of  color,  both  in 
the  slave  and  the  free  States.  On  many  occasions, 
the  auxiliary  Colonization  Societies,  their  agents 
and  their  public  speakers,  have  explicitly  justified 
and  sanctioned  those  oppressive  enactments.  And 
the  official  organ  of  the  Parent  Society  (the  African 
Repository)  has  given  systematic  circulation  to  those 
injurious  and  slanderous  aspersions  of  this  much- 
injured  class,  upon  which  the  legislative  persecution 
of  them  has  been  based.  (See  Jay's  Inquiry,  p.  18, 
&c.)  In  the  preceding  chapter,  we  have  quoted  an 
instance  of  direct  approbation  of  those  laws  by  an 
auxiliary  Society,  and  will  here  add  one  more.  The 
New-York  State  Colonization  Society,  in  a  memorial 
to  the  State  Legislature,  said :  "  We  do  not  ask  that 
the  provisions  of  our  Constitution  and  Statute  Book 
should  be  so  modified  as  to  relieve  and  exalt 
the  condition  of  the  colored  people  ivliilst  iliey  re- 
main with  us.  Let  these  provisions  stand,  IN  all 
THEIR  RIGOR,  to  work  out  the  ultimate  and  un- 
bounded good  of  this  people!"  That  is,  by  com- 
pelling them  to  be  colonized,  or  remain  oppressed 
and  degraded ! 

In  Connecticut,  in  1833,  the  leading  colonization- 


366  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

ists  procured  a  legislative  enactment  against  schools 
for  colored  pupils,  avowedly  for  the  purpose  of 
breaking  up  the  school  of  Miss  Prudence  Crandall, 
at  Canterbury.  Under  that  enactment  she  was  prose 
cuted,  and  being  unable  to  procure  bail,  was  com 
mitted  to  prison,  but  was  bailed  out  the  next  day. 
At  her  trial,  before  Judge  Daggett,  a  verdict  was 
given  against  her.  "The  cause  was  removed  to  the 
Court  of  Errors,  where  all  the  proceedings  were  set 
aside  on  technical  grounds."  Miss  Crandall's  school 
was  afterwards  broken  up  by  a  mob ;  and  the  gen- 
tleman who  had  been  most  active  in  procuring  the 
passage  of  the  "black  act"  against  the  education  of 
free  negroes  (Mr.  A.  T.  Judson)  was  appointed  agent 
and  orator  of  the  Windham  County  Colonization 
Society.  We  record  the  facts,  in  evidence  that  en- 
actments against  the  free  people  of  color  are  not  a 
dead  letter,  but  are  procured  and  sustained  by  the 
leading  influences  in  the  Church  and  the  State,  at 
the  North  and  the  South. 

In  Philadelphia,  in  New- York  city,  and  in  other 
places,  meetings  of  the  Colonization  Society,  in  which 
Doctors  of  Divinity,  statesmen,  and  jurists  have 
declaimed  vehemently  against  the  free  people  of 
color,  denied  their  right  to  a  home  in  the  land  of 
their  birth,  and  justified  the  oppressive  statutes 
against  them,  have  been  immediately  followed  by 
frightful  riots  against  the  proscribed  class,  in  which 
their  dwellings  have  been  demolished,  their  churches 
broken  open  and  injured,  their  persons  assaulted, 
and  numbers  of  them,  in  one  instance,  killed !  And 


FEEE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


367 


no  legal  protection  nor  redress  has  been  extended  to 
them!  These  scenes  have  been  uniformly  followed 
by  special  efforts  to  induce  them  to  be  colonized 
in  Liberia  "with  their  own  free  consent"  ! ! ! 

The  Virginia  and  Maryland  auxiliaries  to  the 
American  Colonization  Society  have  sought  and  ob- 
tained appropriations  from  the  Legislatures  of  those 
States,  under  circumstances  that  virtually  involved 
compulsion.  The  original  bill  (in  the  Virginia 
Legislature)  making  the  appropriation  "contained 
a  clause  for  the  compulsory  transportation  of  free 
blacks."  (Jay's  Inq.,  p.  50.)  On  a  motion  to  strike 
out  the  compulsory  clause,  Mr.  Brodnax  opposed  it, 
saying:  " It  is  idle  to  talk  of  not  resortixo  to 
FORCE.  Every  body  must  look  to  the  employment  of 
force  of  some  kind  or  other  !  If  the  free  negroes  are 
willing  to  go,  they  will  go.  If  not  willing,  they  must 
he  oompelled  to  go.  Some  gentlemen  think  it 
not  now  to  insert  this  feature  in  the  bill,  though 

THEY  PROCLAIM  THEIR  READINESS  TO  RESORT  TO  IT 

WHEN  NECESSARY;  they  think  that  for  a  year  or  tw^o 
a  sufficient  number  will  consent  to  go,  and  then  the 
REST  CAN  BE  COMPELLED.  For  my  part,  I  deem  it 
better  to  approach  the  question  at  once,  and  settle  it 
openly.  The  intelligent  portion  of  the  free  negroes 
know  very  w^ell  what  is  going  on.  Will  thej^  not 
see  that  coercion  is  ultimately  to  be  resorted  to  ?  I 
have  already  expressed  my  opinion  that  few,  very 
few,  will  voluntarily  consent  to  emigrate  if  no  com 
pulsory  measures  be  adopted.  Without  it,  you  wall 
still,  no  doubt,  have  applicants  for  removal,  equal  to 


368  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


your  means.  Yes,  Sir.  People  will  not  only  consent, 
but  heg  you  to  deport  them !  But  ichai  sort  of  con- 
sent  ?  A  consent  extorted  by  a  species  of  oppression 
calculated  to  render  their  situation  among  us  insup- 
portable !  Many  of  those  who  have  been  already 
sent  off  went  with  their  avowed  consent,  but  under 
the  influence  of  a  more  decided  compulsion  than  any 
which  this  bill  holds  out:  I  will  not  express  in  its 
fullest  extent  the  idea  I  entertain  of  what  has  been 
done,  or  ivhat  enorraities  will  be  perpetrated  to  induce 
this  class  of  persons  to  leave  the  State." 

Mr.  B.  proceeded  to  describe,  at  length,  the  pro- 
cess of  obtaining  "  consent"  by  a  series  of  ^'  flagel- 
lations," and  then  said: 

'^I  have  certainly  heard  (if  incorrectly,  the  gen- 
tleman from  Southampton  will  put  me  right)  that  all 
the  large  cargo  of  emigrants  lately  transported  from 
that  country  to  Liberia,  all  of  whom  professed  to  be 
willing  to  go,  were  rendered  so  by  some  such  minis- 
tration as  I  have  described."   (Jay's  Inq.,  pp.  50-1.) 

Mr.  Fisher  expressed  similar  sentiments.  The 
compulsory  clause  was,  however,  stricken  out.  The 
result  justified  the  prediction  of  Messrs.  Brodnax 
and  Fisher. 

''I  warned  the  managers  against  this  Virginia 
business,"  (said  Rev.  E.  J.  Breckenridge,)  -'and  yet 
they  sent  out  two  ship-loads  of  vagabonds,  not  fit  to 
go  to  such  a  place,  and  that  were  coerced  away  as 
truly  as  if  it  had  been  done  by  a  cart- whip."  (Speech 
before  the  Society.  Jay's  Inq.,  p.  51-2.)  Dr.  Brecken- 
ridge, it  is  believed,  has  since  declared  himself  openly 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


869 


in  favor  of  compulsory  colonization,  with  a  view, 
perhaps,  of  avoiding  the  worse  ^'enormities''  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  Brodnax. 

The  Maryland  Colonization  Societj' having,  at 
length,  (in  1841,)  openlj^  defined  its  position,  we  let 
it  speak  for  itself,  in  its  o^vn  language.  We  have 
the  account  from  a  Baltimore  paper.  The  meeting 
was  held  in  the  Light  Street  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  Bishop  Waugh  in  the  chair,  and  the  meet- 
ing opened  with  prayer !  The  declaration  is  as  fol- 
lows : 

That  while  it  is  most  earnestly  hoped  that  the 
free  colored  people  of  Maryland  may  see  that  their 
best  and  most  permanent  interests  will  be  consulted 
by  their  emigration  from  this  State  ;  and  while  this 
Convention  would  deprecate  am^  departure  from  the 
principle  which  makes  colonization  dependent  upon 
the  voluntary  action  of  the  free  colored  people  them- 
selves ;  yet  if,  regardless  of  what  has  been  done  to 
provide  them  with  an  asylum,  they  continue  to  per 
sist  in  remaining  in  Maryland,  in  the  hope  of  enjoy 
ing  here  an  equality  of  social  and  political  rights, 
they  ought  to  be  solemnly  WARXED  that,  in  the 
opinion  of  this  Convention,  a  day  must  arrive  when 
circumstances  that  cannot  he  controlled^  and  which  are 
now  maturing,  WILL  DEPEIA^E  THEM  OF  THE 
FREEDOM  OF  CHOICE,  and  leave  them  no  alter 
native  but  removal." 

And  this  is  what  is  meant  by  colonizing  the  free 
people  of  color  with  their  own  consent !    The  Mary- 
land Colonization  Societv,  with  a  Bishop  presiding, 
16^ 


370 


THE  AMERICAX  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  with  its  meeting  opened  by  prayer,  have  openly 
taken  a  position  that  the  Legislature  of  Virginia, 
from  a  remaining  sense  of  decency,  could  not  be 
persuaded  to  avow ! 

A  Florida  slaveholder  wrote  ''A  Treatise  on  the 
Patriarchal  System  of  Slaver}^,"  in  which  he  says : 
^'Colonization  in  Africa  has  been  proposed  to  the 
free  colored  people,  to  forward  which,  a  general  sys- 
tem of  persecution  against  them,  upheld  from  the 
pulpit,  has  been  legalized  throughout  the  Southern 
States."  (Jay's  Inq.,  p.  49.)  That  Florida  slave- 
holder" (if  we  mistake  not  the  person)  has  good 
cause  to  feel  the  injustice  he  describes.  His  only 
heirs  are  "free  people  of  color,"  his  own  children, 
for  whom  he  has  obtained  an  education  among  the 
abolitionists  of  the  North !  "We  see  in  this,  one  of 
the  many  ways  in  which  the  wrongs  of  the  colored 
race  are  visited  upon  their  white  oppressors. 

The  constitutions  and  statutes  of  free  States  de 
barring  their  free  colored  citizens  from  eligibility  to 
office,  and  from  equal  access  to  the  ballot-box,  are 
among  the  most  marked  and  mischievous  specimens 
of  injury  to  the  colored  race.  It  is  this  that  sus- 
tains the  slave  States  in  their  oppression  of  both  the 
bond  and  the  free.  And  of  this  iniquitous  legisla- 
tion at  the  North,  the  negro  pew  and  the  correspond 
ing  treatment  of  negroes  in  seminaries  of  learning 
controlled  by  the  Church  are  the  principal  supports. 
A  Legislative  Committee,  in  the  State  of  New- York, 
alleged  this  as  the  reason  why  the  policy  of  the  State 
could  not  be  changed.     Social  customs,  placing 


FREE  PEOPLE  OF  COLOR. 


371 


colored  people  out  of  the  pale  of  refilled  society, 
come  under  tlie  same  censure.  How  much  better, 
on  the  whole,  are  the  people  than  their  laws, 
whether  at  the  North  or  at  the  South  ? 

The  picture  presented  in  this  chapter  contrasts 
strikingly  with  the  condition  of  the  free  people  of 
color  in  the  British  AVest  Indies  before  emancipation, 
and  at  the  time  it  took  place.  That  event,  if  we  are 
rightly  informed,  found  the  free  colored  peojDle  in 
the  enjoyment  of  civil  and  political  rights,  some  of 
them  editors  of  pubhc  journals,  and  holders  of  mu- 
nicipal office. 

But  such  a  condition  of  things,  it  may  be  said, 
could  not  consist  with  the  perpetuity  of  West  Indian 
slavery,  and  may  account  for  its  termination.  Be  it 
so.  Our  slaveholders  undoubtedly  think  so.  The 
whole  system  of  persecuting  and  of  attempting  to 
drive  away  the  free  peojole  of  color  to  Africa,  has 
its  origin  in  this  apprehension.  The  main  object  is 
the  perpetuity  of  slavery.  The  fugitive  slave  bill  is 
chiefly  designed  and  relied  upon  to  frighten  the  free 
colored  people  of  the  free  States  out  of  the  country!  This 
is  its  chief  power  ! 

The  "innocent  legal  relation  of  slave  ownership" 
comes  in  again  here,  as  the  responsible  parent  of  all 
the  o|)pressive  enactments  recorded  in  this  chapter. 


CHAPTER  11. 


LIBERTIES  OF  TfiE  WHITE  PEOPLE   OF  THE  SLAVE- 
HOLDING  STATES. 

The  White  People  of  the  Slaveholding  States,  whether  Slaveholders  or  Non- 
slaveholders,  are  deprived,  by  the  Slave  Code,  of  some  of  their  essential  rights, 
and  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  people  in  possession  of  civil,  religious,  and 
political  Freedom. 

The  usages  of  liuman  chattelhood  cannot  be  tol- 
erated in  any  community  without  impairing  the 
freedom  and  invading  the  rights  of  every  member  of 
that  community,  whether  slaveholder  or  non-slave- 
holder. The  fact  of  tolerated  human  chattelhood  is 
the  fact  of  constantly  violated  natural  laiv^  which  lies 
at  the  basis  of  all  law,  the  guardian  of  every  man's 
rights.  In  the  very  act  of  claiming  a  slave,  a  man 
denies  all  rights  of  property,  by  denying  the  inherent 
right  of  self-ownership  in  all  men,  upon  which  right 
all  other  rights  are  based.  All  rights  of  personal 
security  are  denied  by  the  same  claim.  Wherever 
"  the  innocent  legal  relation  "  of  slave  ownership  is 
witnessed  and  is  tolerated,  there  is  witnessed  the 
public  and  deliberate  denial  of  all  that  which  forms 
the  basis  of  human  laws,  and  upon  which  all  legis 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


873 


lative  enactments  for  the  protection  of  human  rights 
must  repose. 

One  necessary  consequence  must  be,  that  in  adjust- 
ing the  legislation  and  the  jurisprudence  of  a  country 
to  the  public  recognition  of  human  chattelhood,  the 
adjustment  must  inevitably  trench  upon  the  rights 
of  all  other  men,  as  well  as  upon  the  rights  of  the 
enslaved.  This  may  seem  to  some  a  mere  abstract 
speculation,  but  a  few  familiar  instances  will  make 
the  case  clear. 

We  will  take,  in  the  first  place,  the  case  of  the 
slaveholder  himself.  Assuredly,  it  will  be  said,  the 
slaveholder  is  sufficiently  free !  Let  us  examine. 
To  be  a  despot  is  a  very  different  thing  from  being 
free. 

Here  is  a  slaveholder  who,  as  a  thrifty  manager 
of  his  own  property,  wishes  to  make  the  best  and 
most  economical  use  of  his  slave  property,  according 
to  his  own  best  discretion.  Can  he  do  so  ?  Here 
is  Tom,  a  shrewd,  intelligent,  trustworthy  fellow, 
whom  he  would  gladly  make  overseer  "  of  his  plan- 
tation, as  is  indeed  sometimes  done.  He  wishes  to 
send  Tom  to  market  frequently  with  his  produce, 
and  to  buy  goods.  It  would  be  very  convenient  to 
have  Tom  read,  write,  and  cipher,"  which  ^'the 
law  "  will  not  allow  !  And  here  comes  the  new  law, 
requiring  each  planter  to  keep  ^'  at  least  one  "  white 
man  on  the  plantation,  (under  pretense  that  a  white 
'witness  must  be  there.)  This  one  white  man  must, 
of  course,  do  something  to  pay  his  way.  What  can  it 
be  but  to.  act  as  overseer,  in  which  double  capacity, 


874 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


if  need  be,  he  can  bear  witness  against  himself  or  his 
employer !  So  Tom^  in  whom  his  master  reposes  more 
confidence,  must  sink  back  into  the  station  of  a  mere 
field  hand. 

Here  is  a  waiting-maid,  discreet  and  pious;  or 
here  is  a  nurse,  whom  all  her  owner's  children  call 
^'  Mammy."  A  little  knowledge  of  letters  would 
qualify  one  or  both  of  them  to  teach  the  little  white 
masters  and  misses  their  alphabet.  Is  it  too  much 
to  suppose  that  there  is,  in  all  the  slaveholding 
South,  one  ^^good  Christian  slaveholder  "  (so  called) 
who  has  good  sense  and  humanity  enough  to  desire 
such  an  arrangement?  [If  there  is  not^  let  ^Hhe  in- 
nocent legal  relation  "  be  called  to  account  for  it.] 
If  there  he  such  an  one,  where  is  the  legal  protection 
of  his  right  to  select  a  teacher  of  the  alphabet  to  his 
own  children?  In  Louisiana,  he  would  be  subject 
to  one  year's  imprisonment  for  teaching  such  a  slave 
to  read!    He  enjoys  liberty^  does  he  ? 

But  here  is  a  master  whose  aspirations  for  freedom 
are  less  sublimated.  He  only  Avishes  to  make  money 
by  slaveholding.  And  the  best  way,  he  thinks — es- 
pecially as  he  has  not  the  land  for  them  to  cultivate, 
or  does  not  choose  the  vexation  of  attending  to  that 
business — is  to  let  them  '-hire  out"  in  the  neighbor- 
ing borough,  where  their  labor,  at  various  jobs,  is 
much  wanted  by  the  white  citizens.  A  "  peculium" 
of  their  earnings  would  greatly  stimulate  their  exer 
tions.  But  the  Slave  Code  forbids  it !  And  it  forbids 
the  wliite  citizens  of  the  borough,  including-  slave 
owners,  to  employ  them.     This  is  liberty  for  white 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


375 


people!  Forbidden  to  hire  their  work  done  for 
them  !  They  will  be  likely,  in  such  an  exigency,  to 
discover  that  there  is  "a  higher  law''''  than  the  Slave 
Code! 

Look  next  at  the  enactments  forbidding  emanci- 
pation on  the  soil,  or  obstructing  Or  forbidding  it 
altogether.  Those  slaveholding  Quakers  in  Xorth 
Carolina  that  emancipated  134  slaves  in  1776,  only 
to  see  them  reenslaved ! — where  were  their  rights  ? 
They  forfeited  them,  perhaps,  by  turning  aboli- 
tionists. 

Look  then  at  the  dying  Thomas  Jefferson,  the 
penman  of  the  declaration  that  "all  men  are  created 
eqiJ^l,"  now  penning  a  clause  of  his  last  will  and 
testament,  conferring  freedom  (as  common  report 
says)  on  his  own  enslaved  offspring,  so  far  as  the 
Slave  Code  permitted  him  to  do  it,  supplying  the 
lack  of  power  by  humhly''''  imi:>loring  the  Legisla- 
ture of  Virginia  to  confirm  the  bequests,  "with  per- 
mission to  remain  in  the  State,  Avhere  their  families 
and  connections  are  " — then  dying,  under  the  uncer- 
tainty whether  his  requests  would  be  granted  or  his 
children  sold  into  the  rice  swamps !  One  of  his 
daughters,  it  seems,  ims  afterwards  sold  at  auction 
in  New-Orleans,  at  the  harem  'price!  And  his 
granddaughter  was  colonized  to  Liberia — "coerced'^ 
perhaps  by  the  "cart- whip!"  A  land  of  liberty  for 
white  people  —  for  slaveholders,  is  it — where  a 
Jefferson  cannot  bequeath  liberty  to  his  own  children ! 
In  Georgia,  had  he  lived  and  died  there,  the  "a^- 
tempt''''  would  have  been  an    offense^''  for  which  his 


376 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


estate  would  have  been  subjected  to  a  fine  of  a  thou- 
sand dollars,  and  each  of  his  executors,  if  accepting 
the  trust,  a  thousand  more ! 

The  "  Florida  slaveholder"  before  mentioned,  with 
his  princely  fortune,  his  educated  and  accomplished 
heirs,  the  children  of  his  parental  affection,  his 
ONLY  ones,  but — under  the  ^'persecuting"  ban  of 
the  Colonization  Society,"  ^'the  pulpit,"  (Northern 
and  Southern,)  and  the  ''legislation"  approved  by 
them — outcasts,  unable  to  testify  in  a  Court,  against 
a  white  man  ;  liable  to  be  colonized  to  Liberia  under 
force  of  "flagellations"  and  untold  "enormities;"  or 
even  to  be  kidnapped  and  enslaved ! — the  Florida 
slaveholder,  we  say,  with  such  a  family  around  his 
board,  presents  another  specimen  of  the  liberty  and 
human  rights  enjoyed  by  the  slaveholder!  By  no 
means  so  rare  a  case  as  the  Northern  reader  would, 
perhaps,  imagine. 

Nor  is  it  on  the  plantation  alone  that  such  cases 
occur.  We  remember  a  thrifty  m-echanic  in  a 
Southern  city,  who  acquired  a  comfortable  estate,  and 
lived  more  elegantly  than  mechanics  in  Southern 
cities  commonly  do.  He  owned  several  slaves. 
But  his  family  was  of  the  mixed  race.  He  lived 
with  a  quadroon  woman,  without  marriage,  of  course, 
for  the  laws  would  not  permit  it.  His  daughters 
were  elegant,  beautiful,  and  nearly  white.  They 
were  free,  as  was  also  their  mother ;  but  they  were 
subject  to  the  vexations  that  harass  "/ree  people  of 
color."  The  father  sought  for  them  respectable  con- 
nections in  life,  and  nothing  but  the  laws  forbidding 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


377 


such  marriages  stood  in  the  way;  for  they  were 
much  admired,  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  and  one  of  them  was  loved  and  wooed  by  a 
white  member  of  the  same  church,  and  a  slaveholder ; 
but  the  laio  stood  in  the  way  of  their  marriage  !  She 
might  have  become  his  mistress  without  fear  of  the 
law,  and  almost,  perhaps,  without  scandal.  Whether 
she  afterwards  did  so,  we  cannot  tell.  We  call  atten- 
tion to  the  legal  rights,  not  of  slaves^  but  of  slave- 
holders^ to  the  holy  institution  of  marriage,  and  to 
the  sanctities  of  the  family  relation. 

Having  broached  the  "delicate  subject,"  we  will 
venture  one  other  illustration.  A  young  man,  a 
son  of  a  slaveholder,  a  graduate  of  one  of  our  North- 
ern colleges,  became  enamored,  on  his  return  home, 
of  a  beautiful  girl,  Tzear/?/  white,  who  Avas  the  property 
of  his  father.  She  had  been  piously  educated,  and 
had  become  a  member  of  a  church.  The  vouno^ 
man,  too,  had  made  a  profession  of  religion  at  the 
North.  They  had  played  together  in  childhood,  and 
were  affectionately  attached  to  each  other.  An  illicit 
or  secret  connection  was  not  to  be  contemplated. 
But  she  was  a  slave ;  and  whether  bond  or  free, 
she  could  not  legally  be  married  to  a  white  man  ! 
What  could  be  done?  If  they  eloped  without  her 
owner's  consent,  the  slave-catchers  and  their  blood- 
hounds might  be  after  them.  If  his  consent  and  her 
free  papers  could  be  obtained,  where  should  they  go  ? 
Not  to  the  "  free  North,"  for  the  exquisite  curl  of  her 
hair,  so  lovely  in  his  eyes,  would  attract  the  attention 
and  the  obloquy  of  the  children  of  the  Puritans. 


378.  THE  AMEEICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

The  sequel  we  cannot  tell,  further  than  that  the 
young  man  took  an  exploring  voyage  to  the  West 
Indies,  and  was  said  to  have  returned.  Whether 
they  emigrated  and  were  married,  or  whether,  re- 
maining in  this  '^free  Christian  country,"  they  fell 
into  the  current  of  prevailing  usages  around  them, 
we  cannot  tell.  The  imagination  of  a  Mrs.  Harriet 
Beecher  Stowe  may  fill  up  the  picture — a  subject 
worthy  of  her.  pencil. 

Are  we  dealing  in  romance  ?  Come,  then,  and  we 
will  introduce  you  to  a  Vice-President  of  the  United 
States — a  very  singular  man,  to  be  sure,  though  not 
singular  in  being  a  slaveholder,  nor  singular  in  hav- 
ing beautiful  colored  daughters,  to  be  sought  after 
(in  some  sort)  by  white  gentlemen ;  but  singular  in 
giving  his  colored  daughters  a  good  education,  at- 
tending them  in  public  as  a  father,  and  insisting  that 
whoever  admired  and  sought  them  should  do  so 
only  in  the  way  of  honorable  marriage  !  The  sin- 
gularity of  Colonel  Eichard  M.  Johnson  attracted 
the  nation's  attention.  He  was  so  very  singular  as  to 
treat  the  mother  of  his  colored  daughters  as  though 
she  were  his  wife,  to  give  her  the  charge  of  his 
household,  a  seat  by  his  side  at  his  table,  addressing 
!i8r  as  '^Mrs.  Johnson" — ^to  do  all  this,  instead  of 
selling  her  in  the  market,  as  some  other  great  states- 
men have  sold  the  mothers  of  their  colored  children. 
When  Mrs.  Johnson"  became  religious  and  wished 
to  unite  with  the  church,  the  good  minister  felt  it 
his  duty  to  tell  her  that  there  was  an  obstacle  in 
the  way — the  scandal  of  her  living  as  she  did  with 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


379 


Colonel  Johnson.  She  immediately  communicated 
the  fact  to  the  Colonel.  "  You  know,  my  dear,"  said 
he,  "I  have  always  been  ready  to  marry  you,  when- 
ever it  could  be  done.  I  am  ready  now,  and  will 
call  on  your  minister  about  it."  He  did  so,  and  re- 
quested the  minister  to  marry  them,  after  explaining 
the  facts  of  the  case.  The  good  minister  was  now 
in  a  worse  dilemma  than  before!  What!  marry 
Colonel  Johnson  to  a  colored  woman  !  What  con  Id 
he  say  ?  He  could  only  say  that  the  law  would  not 
permit  such  a  marriage.  "Very  well,"  retorted  Colo- 
nel Johnson,  (who  was  not  a  Christian,)  "if  your 
Christian  law  of  marriage  will  not  permit  me  to 
marry  the  woman  of  my  choice,  nor  permit  her  to 
marry  the  man  of  her  choice,  it  must  even  permit 
us  to  live  together  luithout  marriage."  So  saying,  he 
walked  away,  and  that  was  the  last  that  was  said 
about  the  marriage.  Whether  the  lady  was  received 
into*the  church,  we  cannot  tell. 

Before  the  outbreak  of  the  anti-abolition  excite- 
ment, and  the  consequent  clamor  about  amalgation, 
an  agent  of  the  New- York  State  Temperance  Society 
(Rev.  Mr.  Yale)  was  sent  to  New  Orleans  to  promote 
the  cause  of  temperance.  He  wrote  from  thence  a 
letter,  published  in  an  Albany  religious  paper,  con- 
taining a  graphic  picture  of  the  state  of  morals  and 
of  society  in  that  city.  The  cause  of  temperance 
could  make  little  progress  there  without  a  reforma- 
tion  in  other  respects:  the  uprooting  of  habits  of 
licentiousness,  the  restoration  of  the  family  institu- 
tion ;  but  this  can  never  be,  he  continued,  until  the 


380  THE  AMEKICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


laws  are  repealed  wliieli  forbid  the  intermarriage  of 
the  white  and  colored  races.  A  large  portion  of  the 
people  are  of  the  mixed  blood.  The  women  of  thh 
class  are  accounted  elegant  and  beautiful.  Many  ol 
the  first  gentlemen  of  JSTew-Orleans  will  live  witl 
them,  whether  with  or  without  marriage ;  the  conse 
sequence  of  which  is  a  general  depravity  of  morals. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  picture  is  truthful,  _ 
and  that  its  truthfulness  is  not  confined  to  New* 
Orleans.  One  iron  link  in  the  chain  of  the  slave  is 
the  denial  to  him  of  the  rights  of  the  family  relation, 
and  of  freedom  of  choice  in  marriage.  But  this 
badge  of  slavery  we  have  found  upon  the  neck  of 
the  slaveholder.  In  denying  free  marriage  to  his 
colored  brother,  the  white  man  has  denied  the  same 
right  to  himself! 

We  cannot  dismiss  this  branch  of  the  subject 
without  a  further  remark.  When  we  contemplate 
the  vast  and  raj)idly  increasing  extent  of  ifiter- 
mixture  between  the  races ;  when  we  remember 
that  "the  noblest  blood  of  Virginia"  and  of  all  the 
slave  States  "runs  in  the  veins  of  slaves,"  and  is  still 
more  widelj^  diffused  among  the  so-called  "free 
people  of  color ;"  and  when  we  remember  the  legalized 
persecutions^  inflictions,  and  liabihties  to  which  even 
this  latter  class  are  found  subject — hunted  back  into 
slavery,  or  driven  as  exiles  from  the  country  of  their 
birth — we  are  shut  up  to  one  of  two  conclusions : 
Either  the  Southern  slaveholders  must  be  almost 
universally  the  most  heartless,  barbarous,  and  brutal 
people  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  or  else  there  must 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


381 


be  tliousands  of  slaveholders  whose  hearts  are  wrung 
daily  with  anguish,  at  the  thought  of  the  murderous 
injustice  done  by  the  slave  laws  to  their  relations  and 
kindred — to  their  children,  to  their  sisters,  to  their 
brothers,  to  their  nephews,  to  their  nieces,  to  their 
cousins — for  of  such  are  a  large  portion  of  the  slaves 
and  free  colored  people  composed  ! 

We  take  the  most  charitable  supposition,  and  con- 
clude that  the  same  cruel  laws  that  wear  out  the 
lives  of  the  proscribed  race,  are  oppressive  likewise 
to  a  large  class  of  slaveholders,  who  see  their  near 
kindred  crushed  and  murdered  continually  by  them 

If  this  is  not  so^  then  the  pretense  of  humane 
and  Christian  slaveholders  "  is  all  a  delusion !  If  it 
is  not  so,  then  the  slave  system  has  extinguished 
human  nature  and  religion  at  the  South. 

If  slaveholders  are  not  themselves  oppressed  by  the 
Slave  Code,  it  can  only  be  because  they  have  become 
monsters  who  have  no  sensibilities  to  be  lacerated, 
no  hearts  capable  of  compassion,  no  unseared  con- 
sciences to  be  outraged.  We  should  be  sorry  to 
think  thus  of  the  majority  of  them. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  operation  of  those 
laws  and  usages  of  slavery  that  forbid  the  education, 
religious  instruction,  and  free  social  worship  of  the 
slaves  and  so-called  free  people  of  color.  The  pious 
white  people  of  the  South,  the  ministers  of  religion, 
churches,  and  church  members,  are  either  aggrieved 
and  oppressed  by  these  enactments  and  usages,  or 
else  they  are  not.  On  the  latter  supposition,  we  are 
presented  with  a  Church  and  ministry  disregardful  of 


382 


THE  aMEKICAN  slate  CODE. 


their  liigli  mission,  and  well-nigh  apostate.  On  the 
former,  we  see  a  Church  and  ministry  under  the  ban 
of  persecution,  and  crippled  in  their  operations  by 
the  strong  arm  of  despotic  power. 

Under  laws  by  which  colored  Methodists,  Baptists, 
and  Presbyterians  are  forbidden  the  free  exercise  of 
religion  and  religious  worship,  we  are  warranted  in 
assuming  that  white  Methodists,  Baptists,  and  Pres- 
byterians feel  themselves  insulted  and  aggrieved; 
that  when  they  see  them  dragged  from  the  house  of 
prayer  (or  on  their  return  home)  to  the  watch-house, 
or  writhing  under  the  lash  awarded  by  law  for  the 
offense,  they  sympathize  luith  them  under  their  'persecu- 
tions^ and  feel  themselves,  in  the  persons  of  their 
brethren  and  sisters,  under  the  same  ban.  Or  else^ 
if  it  be  not  so,  we  are  compelled  to  regard  them  as 
virtually  consenting  to  the  persecution  of  their 
brethren.  We  should  be  sorry  to  think  thus  of  all 
the  white  Methodists,  Baptists,  and  Presbj' terians  of 
the  South.  And  consequently  we  are  compelled  to 
consider  the  better  portion  of  them  under  persecu- 
tion along  with  their  colored  brethren. 

If  there  be  any  thing  that  Christianity  enjoins  on 
her  disciples — if  there  be  any  thing  in  which  they 
are  engaged — if  there  be  any  thing  from  which  they 
cannot,  Avithout  the  strong  arm  of  persecution,  be 
driven ;  it  is  the  free  assembling  of  themselves  to- 
gether for  social  worship  and  consultation,  for  mutual 
instruction  and  united  prayer;  and  especially  the 
communication  of  religious  knowledge  to  others, 
and  promoting  the  circulation  and  reading  of  the 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


383 


Holy  Scriptures  among  tliem.  If  there  are  professors 
of  the  Christian  rehgion  who  do  not  feel  themselves 
aggrieved  and  persecuted  under  enactments  or  usages 
which  restrain  or  forbid  these,  we  need  not  be  at  any 
great  doubt  where  to  classify  them. 

Eeligious  white  people,  at  the  South,'  are  either  in 
unity  with  persecutors,  or  else  they  are  under  perse- 
cution themselves. 

Where  were  the  religious  liberties  of  that  Methodist 
Home  Mission  Society  whose  missionaries  among  the 
colored  people,  Messrs.  Wightman  and  Turpin,  were 
driven  from  the  missionary  field  in  South  Carolina, 
in  1838,  as  related  in  a  previous  chapter  ? 

What  were  the  religious  liberties  of  those  ivhite 
Christians  in  Charleston,  (S.  C.,)  in  1818,  who  estab- 
lished a  Sabbath-school  for  the  instruction  of  colored 
children,  and  then  were  forbidden  (under  penalty  of 
fines,  imprisonment,  and  the  infliction  of  twenty- 
nine  lashes")  from  teaching  them  ? 

What  is  religious  liberty  in  New- Orleans  ? 

From  the  New-Orleans  Picayune,  Aug.  16,  1841 : 
"  Chauncey  B.  Blake  was  brought  before  Eecorder 
Baldwin,  charged  with  tampering  with  slaves.  It 
was  proved  that  he  was  seen  conversing  with  a 
number  of  them  in  the  street ;  that  he  asked  them  if 
they  could  read  and  write,  and  if  they  would  like  to 
have  a  Bible,  This  was  the  amount  of  the  testimony 
against  him.  In  palliation  of  his  conduct,  it  was 
shown  that  he  was  a  regular  appointed  agent  of  the 
Bible  Society  in  New-Orleans,  to  distribute  the  Bible 
to  such  as  would  accept  of  it.    The  Society^  however^ 


884  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

disclaimed  having  the  most  distant  intention  of  giving 
the  Scriptures  to  slaves^  and  it  Avas  said  Blake  had 
exceeded  his  commission  in  offering  it.  Bat  as  it 
appeared  to  be  a  misunderstanding  on  his  part,  and 
not  intentional  interference,  he  was  discharged  with 
a  caution  not  to  repeat  his  offense^  (Furnished  by 
Judge  Jay.) 

What  is  civil,  religious,  or  political  liberty;  oi 
where  is  the  independence  of  the  judiciary  under 
enactments  like  the  following  ? 

Louisiana. — ''If  any  person  shall  use  any  language 
from  the  bar,  bench,  stage,  pulpit,  or  in  any 
OTHER  place,  or  hold  any  conversation  having  a 
tendency  to  promote  discontent  among  free  colored 
people,  or  insubordination  among  slaves,  he  may  be 
imprisoned  at  hard  labor  not  less  than  three  nor 
more  than  twenty-one  years ;  or  he  may  suffer  death, 
at  the  discretion  of  the  Court."  (Child's  Appeal,  p. 
71.  See  also  Kent's  Commentaries,  vol.  II.,  part  IV., 
p.  268,  Note.) 

The  lawyer  cannot  effectively  plead  the  cause  of  a 
negro  claiming  his  liberty;  the  judge,  in  charging 
the  jury,  or  in  giving  his  judicial  decision,  cannot 
repeat  the  common  law  maxims  of  Blackstone, 
Littleton,  Coke,  and  Fortescue,  appropriate  to  the 
case;  the  actor  of  a  drama  cannot  repeat  the  best 
passages  in  Shakspeare ;  the  minister  of  the  gospel 
cannot  use  the  language  of  Bishop  Porteus,  of  John 
Wesley,  of  Jonathan  Edwards ;  nay,  of  St.  James 
or  Isaiah,  without  incurring  the  hazards  of  a  con- 
demnation under  this  statute !    When  one  reads  the 


LIBERTY  A:r  THE  SOUTH. 


38o 


labored  ''opinions"  of  Judge  Euffin  and  others,  in 
Wheeler's  Law  of  Slavery,  where  the  7nan  is  seen 
struggling  with  the  judge^  and  a  strong  sense  of  the 
wrong  of  slavery  betrays  itself  amid  forced  apologies 
and  decisions  in  its  favor^  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the 
impression  that  the  intelligent  judge  is  Mmself  under 
the  yoke  of  bondage  to  such  statutes  as  the  pre- 
ceding, or  to  the  proscriptive  temper  that  gave  rise 
to  them.  The  same  may  be  said  of  such  self-contra- 
dictory clerg3^men  as  Dr.  Fuller  and  others,  who,  on 
the  slave  question,  cannot  conceal  their  knowledge  of 
anti-slavery  truth,  nor  their  fear  of  giving  it  expres- 
sion. There  is  no  freedom  of  speech  nor  of  the 
press  on  this  subject  in  the  slave  States. 

''In  Mississippi,  a  white  man  w^ho  prints  or  cir- 
culates doctrines^  sentiments,  advice,  or  inuendoes^ 
LIKELY  to  produce  discontent  among  the  colored 
class,  is  fined  from  one  hundred  to  a  thousand  dol- 
lars, and  imprisoned  from  three  to  twelve  months." 
(Child's  Appeal,  p.  71.) 

In  North  Carolina,  '  for  publishing  or  circulating 
any  pamphlet  or  paper  having  an  evident  tendency 
to  excite  slaves  or  free  persons  of  color  to  insurrec- 
tion or  resistance,'  the  law  provides  imprisonment 
not  less  than  one  year,  and  standing  in  the  pillory 
and  whipping,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Court,  for  the 
first  offense,  and  death  for  the  second."   (lb.,  p.  67.) 

"  In  Georgia,  the  same  without  any  reservatioiu" 
(lb.) 

"  In  Virginia,  the  first  offense  is  punished  with 
thirty-nine  lashes,  and  the  second  with  death."  (lb.) 
17 


386  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

Mr.  Preston,  Senator  in  Congress,  declared,  in  his 
place  in  that  bodj^,  that  any  person  uttering  abolition 
sentiments  at  the  South  would  be  hanged. 

What  liberty,  then,  is  there  for  white  people  at  the 
South  ?  And  who  knows  how  much  would  be  said 
there  against  slavery  if  the  people  dared  to  speak 
their  thoughts  ?  Let  us  not  rashly  and  too  severely 
condemn  the  entire  South.  The  wJiite  people  there 
do  not  enjoy  freedom.  They  share  deeply  in  the 
bondage  of  the  blacks  ! 

^'Abolition  editors,  in  slave  States,  will  not  dare 
avow  their  opinions."    {Missouri  Argus,) 

Perhaps  the  editor  of  the  Argus  dares  not  avow 
liis.  Perhaps  he  penned  this  very  sentence  to  allay 
suspicions,  and  save  his  own  life, 

A  Southern  member  of  Congress  was  not  restrained 
by  manly  independence,  or  by  any  sense  of  shame 
for  the  lack  of  it,  to  avow  his  fears  of  punishment 
under  such  laws  as  have  been  quoted.  An  editor 
of  a  Northern  paper,  The  Friend  of  Man^''  at 
TJtica,  N.  Y.,  published  Mr.  Pinckney's  Eeport  in 
the  House  of  Eepresentatives,  on  a  subject  involving 
the  slave  question,  and  to  the  Eeport  he  appended  a 
review  of  its  positions.  He  sent  some  spare  copies 
to  members  of  Congress  at  Washington  City,  among 
whom  was  Hon.  Adam  Huntsman,  of  Tennessee, 
who  soon  after  wrote  a  letter  to  the  editor,  request- 
ing him  not  to  send  him  any  such  paper  (opposed 
to  slavery)  after  he  should  have  returned  to  Tennessee, 
lest  the  bare  reception  and  use  of  it  should  subject 
him  to  ^^an  infamous  punishment — a  penitentiary 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  SOUTH. 


887 


offense  of  five  3^ears'  confinement!"  The  request 
was  of  course  complied  witli,  and  the  legislator  re- 
mained unharmed. 

Where  are  the  liberties  of  the  citizens  of  the  slave 
States,  when  forbidden  to  "trade,  barter,  or  com- 
merce" with  one  third,  one  half,  or  twO' thirds  of  the 
inhabitants — forbidden  to  obey  God  by  hiding  the 
outcasts  —  forbidden  to  "entertain  strangers,"  to 
"give  food  to  the  hungry" — forbidden  to  convey 
their  persecuted  neighbors  to  a  home  of  security — ■ 
forbidden  to  ease  their  tortures  by  striking  off  their 
pronged  iron  collars  from  their  necks  ?  Who  will 
slander  the  South  by  saying  that  none  of  its  white 
citizens  feel  themselves  injured,  crushed,  persecuted, 
and  wronged  by  enactments  like  these  ?  Or  can  a 
people  be  said  to  enjoy  liberty  and  security  who  live 
under  such  a  code  as  this? 

There  can  be  no  liberty  where  there  is  no  security, 
no  protection,  no  law.  And  in  the  presence  of  such 
despotic  power  as  that  of  the  slaveholder,  there  can 
remain  very  little  of  these.  A  general  spirit  of  law- 
lessness pervades  the  slave  States. 

As  to  the  non-slaveholding  whites  in  the  slave 
States,  they  are,  as  a  class,  and  with  few  exceptions, 
in  an  abject  and  degraded  condition.  A  large  por- 
tion of  them  are  uneducated  and  poor.  In  the 
presence  of  slave  labor,  and  with  the  soil  in  the 
hands  of  slaveholders,  there  is  little  of  lucrative 
labor  within  their  reach.  And  labor  is  there  a  badge 
of  disgrace,  assimilating  tliem  with  the  slaves.  It  is 
not  strange  that  large  numbers  of  them  become  im- 


388  THE  AMERICAiS'  SLAVE  CODE. 

provident  and  idle.  Mechanics,  including  somci  frora 
the  North,  constitute,  to  a  considerable  extent,  an 
exception  to  these  remarks.  Even  these  are  looked 
down  upon  by  the  slaveholding  planters,  who  have 
contrived  to  monopolize  and  wield  nearly  all  the 
political  power. 

On  the  whole,  it  cannot  with  propriety  be  said 
that  civil,  religious,  and  political  liberty  exist  in  the 
slaveholding  States.  Nor  can  they  exist  there,  so 
long  as  "the  legal  relation  of  owner  and  slave"  re- 
mains. That  relation  blights  and  destroys  all  the 
natural  and  heaven-established  relations  of  life. 


CHAPTEE  III. 


LIBERTIES  OF  THE  WHITE  PEOPL^:  OF  THE  NON- 
SLAVEHOLDIXG  STATES, 

The  Rights  of  the  White  People  of  the  Non-slaveholding  States  are  directly 
and  indirectly  invaded  by  the  Slave  Code  of  the  Slave  States.  Their  Liberties, 
to  a  great  extent,  have  already  fallen  a  sacrifice,  and  can  never  be  secure 
while  Slaveholding  continues. 

We  open,  here,  upon  a  wider  field  than  our  hmits 
will  permit  us  to  explore  as  its  importance  demands. 
The  entire  political  history  of  the  country,  which 
might  occupy  volumes,  demands  attention  under 
this  head.  ^But  we  must  pass  it  by,  only  asking  of 
the  reader  that  he  examine  it  at  his  leisure.'^ 

The  topics  of  the  last  preceding  chapter  might, 
for  the  most  part,  be  introduced  here  again.  The 
white  people  of  the  Worth  and  of  the  South  suffer, 
in  common,  many  of  the  heavy  inflictions  of  the 
slave  master's  lash.  If  the  stroke  fall  less  heavily 
upon  the  citizens  of  the  free  States,  it  nevertheless 
falls,  and  none  the  less  really  because,  from  stupidity 
induced  by  long-standing  habit,  a  callous  insensibility 


*  Some  sketches  and  outlines  of  this  history  may  be  found  in 
the  Author's  "  Slavery  and  Anti-Slavery,  a  History,"  <fec. 


890  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


indicates  that  it  is  scarcely  felt  or  perceived.  In  no 
other  way  did  ever  a  people,  once  free,  submit  to 
part  with  their  freedom.  "  A  people,"  says  Montes- 
quieu, "  may  lose  their  liberties  in  a  day,  and  not 
miss  them  for  a  century."  Thus  it  was  with  the 
Romans,  who,  under  the  reign  of  the  tyrant  Nero, 
had  not  ceased  boasting  of  their  liberties  ! 

So  closely  connected  are  the  people  of  the  free 
and  of  the  slave  States,  that  whatever  affects  the  lat- 
ter can  scarcely  fail  to  affect  the  former. 

If  the  spectacle  of  human  beings  bereft  of  self- 
ownership  and  the  rights  of  property  is  found  to  un- 
dermine the  foundations  of  personal  security  and  the 
rights  of  property  at  the  South,  they  cannot  remain 
perfectly  stable  at  the  North. 

If  brutal  inflictions  on  the  slaves  beget  brutal  as- 
saults and  encounters  between  Southern  gentlemen, 
the  contamination  of  the  bad  example  cannot  but 
have  its  eflfect  at  the  North. 

If  slave  labor  at  the  South  makes  manual  labor  a 
badge  of  degradation  there^  such  labor  will  become 
less  respectable  in  the  free  States. 

If  the  whites  of  the  South  submit  to  the  tyranny 
that  forbids  them  to  hold  "  commerce,  trade,  or  bar- 
ter "  with  one  half  of  their  neighbors,  the  money- 
making  traffickers  of  the  North  will  scarcely  think 
of  the  indignity  or  the  immense  losses  they  suffer, 
in  being  shut  out  by  the  Slave  Code  from  their 
natural  and  political  right  of  commerce  with  millions 
of  their  fellow-countrymen. 

If  the  people  of  the  South  become  debased  and 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  NORTH. 


391 


servile,  by  submitting  to  the  loss  of  freedom  of 
speech  and  of  the  press,  those  inestimable  rights 
■will  become  less  prized  at  the  North,  and  the  natural 
attempts  of  slaveholders  to  extend  this  feature  of 
their  sway  over  the  North  will  not  lack  for  auxili- 
aries among  editors,  politicians,  statesmen,  lawyers, 
judges,  and  ministers  of  religion,  in  close  affinity 
with  those  slaveholders  at  the  North. 

If  the  whites  of  the  South  submit  to  enactments 
which  forbid  them  to  relieve  the  suffering,  to  feed 
the  hungry,  to  shelter  the  outcasts,  to  perform  the 
common  offices  of  humanity  to  those  most  in  need 
of  them,  the  same  ignoble  and  unmanly  servility 
will  be  likely  to  manifest  itself  at  the  North,  until 
the  despots  of  the  South  become  emboldened  to 
enact  statutes  for  extending  this  feature  of  their  sway 
over  the  entire  country. 

If  churches,  church  members  and  ministers  of  re- 
ligion at  the  South  (either  as  persecutors  or  as  per- 
secuted) submit  to  arrangements  by  which  the  rights 
of  free  social  w^orship,  religious  instruction,  and  mis- 
sionary labor  (including  the  distribution  of  Bibles 
and  the  teaching  of  the  people  to  read)  are  forbidden 
and  suppressed,  the  churches,  churcli  members  and 
ministers  of  the  North  connected  with  them,  will  be 
exposed  to  similar  indignities,  temptations,  and  dere- 
lictions. And  by  this  process  it  may  come  to  pass 
that,  while  compassing  sea  and  land  to  convert  the 
heathen  abroad,  and  give  to  every  family  on  the 
earth  a  Bible,  and  teach  them  to  read  it  in  Sabbath- 
schools,  admonishing  their  missionaries  not  to  heed 


392 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


the  prohibitory  decrees  of  civil  governments,  thej 
may,  nevertheless,  be  among  the  first  to  cry  out 
against  the  application  of  their  own  doctrine  to  the 
heathen  of  America,  made  such  by  the  slave  codes 
of  the  South. 

And,  finally,  if  the  non-slaveholding  whites  of  the 
South  submit  to  be  shorn  of  their  political  power, 
and  despoiled  of  their  civil  liberties  and  political 
rights,  the  non-slaveholding  whites  of  the  Isorth, 
equally  contemned  by  the  same  oligarchy  of  slave- 
holders, will  be  likely  to  imbibe  the  same  spirit  of 
pusillanimous  submission,  to  sink  into  the  same 
degradation,  and  share  the  same  fate. 

The  intelligent  reader  need  not  be  told  that  such, 
indeed,  are  the  facts  of  the  case,  as  already  developed 
and  incorporated  into  the  history  of  the  country. 
We  need  not  and  cannot  enter  here  into  the  details ; 
nor  is  it  necessary  to  cite  authorities  in  proof  Who- 
ever has  been  on  the  stage  of  action  in  this  countrj^, 
and  a  reader  of  the  public  journals  for  the  last 
twenty  years,  will  be  at  no  loss  for  the  particulars 
to  which  we  refer. 

What  has  been  now  witnessed  was  matter  of  in- 
telligent anticipation  and  prediction  before  it  took 
place.  Though  the  climax  of  disgrace  and  ruin  has 
not  yet  been  reached,  and  may  yet  be  averted  by 
prompt  efforts,  yet  we  have  come  suflficientl}^  near 
the  precipice  to  recognize  the  truthfulness  of  the 
picture  drawn,  long  since,  of  the  gulf  below,  by  one 
of  our  most  eminent  statesmen.  In  the  House  of 
Delegates  of  Maryland,  in  1789,  William  Pinck- 


LIBERTY  AT  THE  NORTH. 


393 


NEY  (a  member  of  the  Convention  that  had  just 
drafted  the  Federal  Constitution)  held  the  following 
remarkable  language : 

I  have  no  hope  that  the  stream  of  general  liberty 
will  flow  for  ever  unpolluted  through  the  mire  of 
partial  bondage^  or  that  those  who  ha^e  been  habitu- 
ated to  lord  it  over  others  will  not,  in  time,  become 
base  enough  to  let  others  lord  it  over  them.  If  they 
resist,  it  will  be  the  struggle  of  pride  and  selfishness, 
not  of  principle." 

If  the  relation  of  slave  owner  and  slave  is  to  be 
continued,  all  this  may  be  expected  to  follow,  as  the 
natural  if  not  necessary  result.  By  reverting  again 
to  the  facts  presented  in  the  latter  part  of  our  chap- 
ter on  the  origin  of  the  relation  and  its  subjects," 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  process  of  enslaving  ivhite 
people  has  already  commenced,  and  is  making  steady 
and  rapid  progress,  with  the  prospect  (according  to 
Henry  Clay)  of  becoming  prevalent  a  few  genera- 
tions hence,  when  the  slavery  and  the  existence  of 
the  black  race  shall  have  ceased. 


17^ 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTEK. 

Summary  Review  of  tlie  Slave  Code— Its  Character  and  Effects — Inquiriea 
concerning  the  Duties  of  Christians,  Churches,  and  Ministers— the  Responsi- 
bilities of  Citizens,  of  Society,  of  Civil  Governmeni,  of  Legislators  and 
Magistrates — Scrutiny  of  the  Legality  of  American  Slavery— The  Heaven- 
prescribed  Remedy — The  Worthlessness  of  Temporizing  Substitutes — Closing 
Appeal. 

If  the  reader  lias  attentively  considered  the  pre- 
ceding pages,  he  will  now  be  able  to  pass  an  intelli- 
gent judgment  upon  the  character  of  the  Slave  Code^ 
and  of  the  practice  of  slaveholding^  protected  and 
defined  hy  it.  The  so-called  ''^  legal  relation  of  master 
and  slave "  he  will  have  found  to  be  the  relation  of 
an  owner  to  a  human  chattel^  body  and  soul.  The 
verity  and  ine  efficacy  of  this  monstrous  claim  he 
will  have  traced  in  each  successive  chapter  and  topic 
of  the  entire  treatise.  He  will  have  witnessed  the 
legitimate  workings  of  this  claim  in  the  connected 
incidents  of  slave  traffic,  seizure  of  slave  property 
for  debt,  inheritance  and  division  of  slave  property, 
and  uses  of  slave  property.  He  will  have  seen  that 
in  the  presence  of  this  claim  slaves  can  possess 
nothing,  can  make  no  contract,  can  neither  enter 
into  the  marriage  relation,  nor  discharge  the  duties, 
nor  claim  the  rights,  nor  share  the  sanctities  of  the 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 


395 


Jamily  relation.  He  will  have  observed  how  this 
claim  of  absolute  proprietorship  in  the  slave  involves 
the  claim  and  virtually  secures  the  exercise  of  un- 
limited and  irresponsible  authority  on  the  part  of 
the  owner;"  the  enforcement  of  his  labor  without 
wages  ;  the  direction  of  his  food,  clothing,  and  shel- 
ter; the  infliction  of  discretionary  punishment  upon 
him,  virtually  amounting  (in  consequence  of  the  in- 
competency of  colored  witnesses)  to  the  power  of 
life  and  death  over  him.  This  despotic  power  of  the 
'^owners"  he  will  have  seen  delegated  to  overseers 
or  agents,  and  shared  by  the  members  of  their  fami- 
lies. The  same  relation  of  slave  ownership  he  will 
have  seen  substituting  the  legal  protection  of  slave 
property  for  the  personal  protection  of  the  slaves, 
leaving  them  exposed  to  the  most  frightful  barbari- 
ties, without  the  right  of  self-protection,  or  the  means 
of  redress  by  a  suit  against  the  "owner;"  without 
power  of  self-redemption,  or  even  a  change  of  mas- 
ters. This  "relation,"  hereditary  and  perpetual,  he 
has  found  to  include  the  most  crushing  spiritual 
despotism  over  the  rights  of  conscience  ever  claimed 
by  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth ;  and  he  has  seen  it 
hunting  its  fugitive  victims  as  if  they  were  brute 
beasts.  This  "relation,"  as  thus  developed  and  sys- 
tematized, he  has  found  to  have  been  originated  by 
the  piratical  African  slave-trade,  as  commenced  by 
the  infamous  John  Hawkins,  yet  extending  itself 
over  Indians  and  white  persons,  and  fostering  in  the 
heart  of  our  boasted  republic  a  slave-trade  more 
demoralizing  than  that  on  the  African  coast. 


896 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


This  so-called  ^'  legal  relation,"  as  tlius  defined  and 
described,  he  will  have  found  to  be  the  very  same 
that  is  daily  declared  to  be  a  blameless  and  innocent 
one,  involving  no  guilt  in  those  who  "hold"  and 
"sustain"  it. 

The  attentive  reader  has  farther  seen  how  this 
"relation"  of  slave  ownership  has  shaped  and  deter- 
mined the  "relation"  of  the  slave  to  society  and  to 
civil  government ;  how  it  bars  his  access  to  the  judi 
ciary,  denying  his  capacity  to  be  a  party  to  a  civil 
suit ;  how  it  bids  the  Courts  reject  the  testimony  not 
only  of  slaves^  but  of  free  colored  persons ;  how  it 
enforces  the  subjection  of  slaves  not  only  to  their 
"owners"  and  overseers,  bui  to  all  other  vjhite  per 
sons;  how  it  frames  and  executes  unjust  and  in- 
human penal  enactments  against  the  slaves ;  how  it 
forbids  their  education,  their  religious  instruction 
and  free  social  worship ;  and,  finally,  how  it  inter- 
poses obstacles  to  manumissions  by  the  master,  and 
to  acts  of  emancipation  by  the  State. 

The  same  "relation"  of  slave  ownership  he  has 
found  waging  successful  warfare  upon  the  liberties 
of  the  free,  degrading  the  free  people  of  color,  and 
dragging  them  back  into  chattelhood;  despoiling 
the  free  whites  of  the  South,  not  excepting  slave- 
holders themselves,  of  some  of  the  essential  rights 
of  humanity,  freedom  of  speech  and  9f  the  press, 
the  right  of  propagating  true  religion,  and  of  re- 
ducing it  to  practice  by  deeds  of  justice  and  mercy 
to  the  oppressed;  extending  the  same  iron  swaj^ 
over  the  free  citizens  of  the  North,  and  bidding  the 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 


397 


sons  of  the  Pilgrims  dishonor  their  sires,  by  joining 
in  the  hunt  after  fugitive  slaves. 

All  this  the  attentive  readers  of  the  preceding 
pages  have  witnessed.  The  writer  will  not  insult 
them  by  asking  them  ^vhether  they  consider  such  a 
"relation,"  with  such  a  paternity,  with  such  a  cha- 
racter, and  with  such  fruits,  an  innocent  one,  reposing 
upon  the  foundation  of  f>postles  and  patriarchs,  the 
Bible  its  charter,  the  Founder  of  Christianity  its  chief 
corner-stone!  But  he  wishes  to  propound  to  them, 
for  their  consideration  and  decision,  a  few  plain  and 
important  practical  questions. 

Is  it  not  high  time  that  the  churches  of  this  coun- 
try, of  all  sects,  their  members  and  ministry,  were 
purged  from  the  sin  of  slaveholding,  and  from  the 
taint  of  religious  fraternity  with  slaveholders? 

If  this  system  and  sum  of  abominations  is  to  be 
tolerated  in  the  Church,  what  description  of  prac- 
tices, what  crimes  should  be  excluded  from  her  pale 
and  debarred  from  her  communion?  Is  it  theft?  Is 
it  robbery  ?  Is  it  cruelty?  Is  it  murder?  Is  it  man- 
stealing?  Is  it  extortion?  Is  it  adultery?  Is  it 
bloody  persecution?  Is  it  using  a  neighbor's  service 
without  wages,  and  giving  him  naught  for  his  work? 
Is  it  violence?  Is  it  fraud?  Is  it  despising  the 
poor?  Is  it  taking  away  the  key  of  knowledge? 
Is  it  proscribing  Bibles,  and  forbidding  free  religious 
worship?  Is  it  upholding,  abetting,  and  sustaining 
all  these  combined  ? 

If  these  are  to  be  excluded  from  religious  com- 
munion and  fellowship,  must  not  the  so-called  '4egal 


398  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 

relation  of  master  and  slave"  be  excluded  likewise, 
by  excluding  those  who  resolutely  persist  in  sustain- 
ing it?  Can  the  former  be  done  without  doing  the 
latter  ?  And  if  it  be  left  undone,  what  must  become 
of  the  Church?  Will  not  the  salt  lose  its  savor? 
And  what  will  it  then  be  good  for,  but  to  be  cast  out 
and  trodden  under  foot  of  men  ?  Is  there  nothing 
in  the  signs  of  the  times  that  gives  significance  to 
these  questions  ?  How  long  shall  infidelity  be  armed 
with  the  most  powerful  of  all  weapons  against  the 
Bible  and  Christianity,  against  the  Ministry  and  the 
Church? 

If  the  reader  be  a  Christian,  will  not  his  regard  for 
Christianity  suggest  to  him  the  proper  answer  to 
these  inquiries  ?  And  if  he  be  not  a  Christian,  would 
he  not,  nevertheless,  desire  to  see  the  most  potent  of 
all  social  influences — that  of  the  prevailing  religion 
of  the  country — arrayed  against  this  stupendous  sys- 
tem of  inhumanity  and  wrong  ? 

If  the  Saviour  of  men  was  manifested  "  that  he 
might  destroy  the  works"  of  the  Devil,  and  "proclaim 
deliverance  to  the  captives if  his  disciples  are  his 
witnesses,  and  engaged  in  the  prosecution  of  his  work, 
are  they  not  bound  to  "have  no  fellowship  with  the  " 
works  of  darkness,  but  rather  reprove  them?"  Es- 
peciall}^,  are  not  his  ministers  bound  to  "cry  aloud 
and  spare  not ;  to  lift  up  their  voice  like  a  trumpet ; 
to  show  the  people  their  transgression,  and  the  house 
of  Jacob  their  sin  ?"  If  such  an  iniquity  as  the  hold- 
ing of  humanity  in  chattelhood  may  escape  their 
rebukes,  what  form  of  wickedness  may  not  claim 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 


399 


;^iial  exemption  ?  What  commandment  of  the  law, 
whst  precept  of  the  gospel,  what  principle  of  the 
?hri;::tian  theology  is  not  set  at  naught  by  the  en- 
^•idver?    What  meaning  can  there  be  in  the  words 
ristice  or  mercy ^  what  significance  in  the  doctrine  of 
human  brotherhood,  or  what  force  in  the  precepts, 
*^Love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself,"    Remember  them 
that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound  with  them,"  and  "Go  teach 
all  nations,"  if  the  practice  of  enslaving  immortal 
men,  for  whom  Christ  died,  and  cf  whose  nature  he 
is  partaker,  is  not  to  be  condem.ned ;  if  the  cause  of 
the  slave  is  not  to  be  vindicated ;  :f  the  oppressor  is 
not  to  be  called  to  repentance  ;  if  his  victim  is  not  to 
be  taught  and  disenthralled  ? 

Is  it  not  mockery  to  pray,  "Thy  kingdom  come," 
and  yet  neglect  engaging  in  labors  like  these  ?  If 
the  work  of  elevating  depressed  humanity  be  Christ's 
work,  should  not  the  "undoing  of  the  heavy  bur- 
thens," and  "letting  the  oppressed  go  free,"  be  the 
work  of  Christians,  the  mission  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  ? 

Turning  next  to  the  responsibilities  of  citizens,  of 
society,  of  civil  government,  of  legislators,  and  of 
magistrates,  we  demand  whether  the  crime  of  enslav- 
ing and  embruting  a  human  being  ought  not  to  be 
promptly  and  vigorously  suppressed  by  the  strong 
arm  of  penal  law  ?  Ifnot^  what  crime  or  what  out- 
rage against  humanity  ought  to  be  thus  suppressed  ? 
Shall  a  man  be  punished  for  stealing  an  ox^  or  for 
knowingly  receiving,  appropriating,  and  using  a 
stolen      and  yet  be  suffered  with  impunity  to  steal 


400  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


or  receive,  appropriate  and  use  a  stolen  man  ?  Will 
the  law  pretend  to  protect  my  rights  of  property^  and 
yet  refuse  to  ^mieQimj  personal  right  to  myself?  By 
what  authority,  by  what  rule,  on  what  principle,  with 
what  consistency,  and  with  what  ultimate  success, 
will  the  iaw,  or  the  administrators  and  expounders 
of  law,  attempt  to  maintain,  by  the  sanctions  of  penal 
infliction,  the  rights  of  white  men,  while  they  refuse 
thus  to  maintain  the  rights  of  black,  or  yellow,  or 
SWAKTHY,  or  BROWN  men  ?  Upon  what  maxims  of 
civil  law  or  of  the  science  of  jurisprudence  will  they 
proceed  in  doing  this  ?  Or  will  they  proclaim  to  the 
world  that  there  isno  such  thing  as  legal  science 
that  the  pretense  of  it  is  a  cheat ;  that  the  belief  in  it 
is  a  delusion ;  that  jurisprudence  is  a  game  of  chance ; 
that  law  rests  upon  caprice,  and  interposes  no  obsta- 
cle to  aggression,  no  protection  from  brute  force,  no 
guaranties  against  despotic  power  ?  If  this  be  the 
decision  of  grave  jurists,  who  will  care  to  have 
jurists?  Who  will  be  grateful  for  the  institution 
of  civil  government  ?  Who  will  respect  the  magis- 
tracy ?  Who  will  venerate  LAW  ?  How  shall  civil 
government,  jurisprudence,  and  law  be  vindicated 
from  aspersion  and  shielded  from  execration  and  con- 
tempt, but  by  wielding  them  for  their  high  and  holy 
ends  ?  How,  indeed,  shall  this  be  done  but  by  deny- 
ing to  the  American  Slave  Code  (instinct,  as  it  is, 
with  all  the  elements  of  inherent  lawlessness)  any 
just  claim  lo  the  honors  or  the  authority  of  valid 
law  ?  What,  after  all,  becomes  of  the  boasted  legality 
of  slave  ownership,  and  where  is  the  legal  validity 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 


401 


of  the  American  Slave  Code  in  the  presence  of  such 
legal  decisions  and  common  law  maxims  as  the  fol- 
lowing ? 

^^Statutes  against  fundamental  morality  are  void^ 
(Judge  McLean.  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States.)  * 

Is  not  the  Slave  Code  ^' against  fundamental  mo- 
rality ?"  If  it  is  notj  what  existing  or  conceivable 
statute  could  come  under  that  description,  or  of  what 
use  is  the  maxim  ?  But  if  the  Slave  Code  is  ^'  against 
fundamental  morality,"  have  not  the  people  a  claim 
upon  J udge  McLean  and  the  United  States  Supreme 
Court  for  a  decision  affirming  the  illegality  of  slave 
ownership,  whenever  a  suitable  case  shall  be  pre- 
sented for  their  consideration  and  action  ? 

''If  it  be  found  that  a  former  decision  is  manifestly 
absurd  and  unjust^  it  is  declared^  NOT  that  such  a  sen- 
tence was  BAD  law^  but  that  it  teas  NOT  law^  (Littleton.) 

Are  not  the  ^'decisions"  in  support  of  slavery,  as 
cited  in  this  volume,  "manifestly  absurd  and  un- 
just? "  If  not^  what  recorded  or  conceivable  decisions 
could  be  thus  characterized  ?  But  if  they  are  of  that 
character,  does  not  the  maxim  of  Littleton  call  for 
judicial  decisions  declarmg  "not  that  such  sentence 
was  BAD  laiv^  but  that  it  was  NOT  law 

Will  it  be  said  that  time  and  precedent  have  so 
settled  the  law  on  this  subject  that  it  must  not  or 
cannot  be  disturbed  ? 

"Where  the  foundation  is  weak,  the  structure 
falls."  "What  is  invalid  from  the  beginning  cannot 
be  made  valid  by  length  of  time."   (Noyes'  Maxims.) 


402 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


Will  it  be  said  that  statutes  and  judicial  decisions 
set  aside  or  modify  natural  or  common  law  ?  It  is 
of  the  very  nature  of  natural  or  common  law  to  con- 
tradict this  plea !    Hear  it : 

^^The  law  of  nature  being  coeval  with  mankind, 
and  dictated  by  God  himselfj  is,  of  course,  superior 
in  obligation  to  every  other.  It  is  binding  all  over 
the  globe,  in  all  countries,  and  at  all  times.  No  hu- 
man laws  have  ANY  VALIDITY  if  contrary  to  THIS; 
and  such  of  them  as  are  valid  derive  all  their 
force,  mediately  or  immediately,  from  this  original." 
(Fortescue.) 

"  The  inferior  must  give  place  to  the  superior ; 
man's  laws  to  God's  laws.  If,  therefore,  any  statute 
be  enacted  contrary  to  these^  it  ought  to  be  considered 
of  NO  AUTHORITY  in  the  laws  of  England."  (Noyes.) 

*^  If  any  human  law  shall  allow  or  require  us  to 
commit  crime,  we  are  bound  to  transgress  that  human 
law,  or  else  we  must  offend  against  both  the  natural 
and  the  divine."  (Blackstone.) 

When  an  Act  of  Parliament  is  against  common 
right  or  reason,  or  repugnant,  or  impossible  to  be 
performed,  the  common  law  will  control  it^  and  adjudge 
such  act  to  be  void."  (Coke.) 

Will  it  be  said  that  common  or  natural  law  may 
possibly  allow  the  practice  of  slaveholding  ? 

Those  rights  which  God  and  nature  have  estab- 
lished, and  which  are  therefore  called  natural  rights, 
such  as  life  and  liberty^  need  not  the  aid  of  human 
laws  to  be  more  effectually  vested  in  every  man  than 
they  are,  neither  do  they  receive  any  additionnl 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 


103 


Btrength  when  declared  by  the  municipal  law  to  be 
inviolable.  On  the  contrary,  no  human  legislation 
has  power  to  abridge  or  destroy  ihem^  unless  the  owner 
himself  has  committed  some  act  that  amounts  to  a 
forfeiture."  (Fortescue.) 

^'  The  law,  therefore,  which  supports  slavery  and 
opposes  libert}^,  must  necessarily  be  condemned  as 
cruel,  for  every  feeling  of  human  nature  advocates 
liberty.  Slavery  is  introduced  by  human  wicked- 
ness, but  God  advocates  liberty  by  the  nature  which 
he  has  given  to  man."  (Fortescue.) 

Much  more  might  be  quoted  from  the  great  lumi- 
naries of  common  law  to  the  same  point.  Can  there 
be  any  douht  on  the  question  of  the  legality  of 
slavery  ?  If  so,  the  common  law  rule  of  decision  is 
simple : 

Whenever  the  question  of  liberty  ^eer/zs  doubtful^ 
the  decision  must  be  in  favor  of  lihertyP  (Digest.) 

The  remedy  for  slavery  and  its  untold  abomina- 
tions and  horrors  is  simple.  It  is  so  simple,  that 
worldly  wisdom  (which  is  foolishness  with  God,  and 
which  bewilders  itself  in  its  own  never-ending  la 
byrinths)  thinks  it  complex  and  difficult.  It  is 
merely  to  cease  doing  evil,  and  to  commence  doing- 
right.  It  is  for  the  Government  to  break  every  yoke 
and  let  the  oppressed  go  free" — to  proclaim  liberty 
throughout  the  land  to  all  the  inhabitants  thereof" — 
to  execute  judgment  between  a  man  and  his  neigh- 
bor," and  deliver  the  spoiled  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  oppressor."  It  is  for  the  citizens  to  "bring  the 
poor  that  are  cast  out  to  their  own  house,  and  not 


404 


THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


hide  themselves  from  their  own  flesh  to  welcome 
them  to  a  residence  ''among"  them  "where  they 
shall  choose,"  "  where  it  liketh  them  best."  It  is  for 
the  "masters"  to  "render  unto  their  servants  that 
which  is  just  and  equal,"  "for  the  laborer  is  worthy 
of  his  reward."  It  is  for  the  voters,  who  are  the 
sovereign  people,  to  choose  "judges  and  ofl&cers" 
who  shall  "judge  the  people  with  just  judgment," 
remembering  that  "  he  that  ruleth  over  men  must  be 
just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  Grod."  If  the  tenure  of 
slave  property  be  illegal,  let  the  Courts  thus  decide. 
If  not,  or  if  the  judges  decline  doing  their  duty, 
let  the  legislators  abolish  slavery  by  statute.  In 
either  case,  let  them  repeal  their  own  unrighteous 
enactments.  Let  those  who  need  the  labor  of  the 
colored  people  employ  them  for  honest  wages,  and 
leave  off  living  by  plunder. 

This  is  God's  own  remedy  for  slavery.  Experi- 
ment has  fully  tested  its  safety  and  its  benefits,  till 
those  who  had  not  learned  to  confide  in  God  and 
walk  by  faith  have  been  compelled  to  recognize  his- 
torical facts,  and  may,  at  least,  walk  by  siglit 

A  moderate  measure  of  historical  information  and 
common  sense,  one  would  think,  might  suffice  (with 
the  single  eye  that  causes  the  whole  body  to  be  full 
of  light)  to  detect  the  folly,  the  absurdity,  and  the 
inefficiency  of  all  those  schemes  by  which,  on  this 
particular  subject,  men  have  sought  to  reach  the 
ends  or  results  of  justice  and  honesty  without  the 
task  of  their  self-denying  exercise.  The  attempt  to 
kill  the  poisonous  tree  of  slavery  by  lopping  off  a 


CONCLUDING  CHAPTER. 


405 


few  of  its  more  unsightly  branches — the  subtle  but 
short-sighted  diplomacy  that  seeks  to  outwit  the 
arch-enemy  of  humanity  and  fritter  away  his  power 
by  temporizing  expedients  and  conciliatory  compro- 
mises— the  policy  of  conceding  the  innocency  of  the 
so-called  legal  relation  while  raising  an  outcry  against 
its  component  parts,  the  particulars  in  which  it  con- 
sists, the  incidents  by  which  it  is  defined — the  in- 
veterate day-dream  of  stippressing  the  traffic  in  human 
beings  without  overturning  human  cliattelhood^  or  of 
preventing  the  extension  of  slavery  so  long  as  it  is 
suffered  to  exist — the  delusion  that  the  circumscrib- 
ing of  its  boundaries  (if  it  were  practicable)  would 
be  equivalent  to  its  abolition  or  secure  its  termina- 
tion— the  notion  that  national  neutrality  can  uproot 
a  national  sin,  or  excuse  from  its  abandonment ;  or 
that  there  can  be  such  a  thing  as  a  republican 
Government  maintaining  neutrality  concerning  the 
chattelhood  of  its  citizens — above  all,  the  expedient 
of  exporting  the  oppressed^  instead  of  ceasing  from 
and  overturning  oppression — these  are  some  of  the 
fallacies  of  our  times  which,  in  generations  to  come, 
will  be  cited  as  exemplifications  of  the  bewilderment 
introduced  by  the  presence  of  slavery. 

In  conclusion,  the  writer  would  urge  on  all  classes 
of  his  readers  the  claims  of  the  enslaved.  What 
portion  of  the  community,  or  what  description  of 
human  beings  should  be  exempted  from  the  appeal, 
or  excused  from  earnest  efforts  in  their  favor  ? 

Lives  there  the  man  who  could  justify  himself  in 
the  retirement  of  his  own  heart,  should  his  own  con- 


406  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


science  convict  liim  of  coldness  and  indiflference 
concerning  the  chattelhood  of  man  ?  Could  he  help 
despising  himself,  and  sinking,  in  his  own  estimate 
of  himself,  to  the  level  of  the  servile  slave,  or  the 
dulness  of  the  unthinking  brute  ?  Lives  there  the 
woman^  with  a  woman's  heart  and  a  woman's  love, 
whose  inmost  soul  does  not  bleed  at  the  wrongs  of 
the  slave?  How  could  the  woman  be  lovely  or 
attract  virtuous  love  who  should  fail  to  do  this? 
How  could  she  respect  herself,  how  could  a  wise  and 
manly  husband  confide  in  her,  or  how  could  she 
claim  for  herself  the  respect  due  to  a  woman,  should 
she  be  justly  charged  or  suspected  of  indifference 
when  woman  shrieks  under  the  lash,  when  woman's 
affections  are  outraged,  when  woman  is  torn  from 
husband  and  child,  when  woman  is  crushed  and 
polluted  by  lawless  and  domineering  lust,  when 
woman  is  transformed  to  a  beast  ?  Is  there  the  cir- 
camspect  and  self-respecting  woman  who  would  be- 
stow her  affections  and  repose  her  confiding  hopes 
upon  the  man  who  should  betray  an  indifference  to 
such  wrongs  inflicted  upon  woman  ? 

Is  there  a  patriot,  a  lover  of  his  country,  who  can 
be  indifferent  to  the  existence  and  the  sway  of  the 
Slave  Code ;  who  does  not  blush  at  the  national  dis- 
grace, and  tremble,  as  did  Jefferson,  in  view  of  im- 
pending judgments  incurred  by  the  national  sin  ? 

Is  there  a  wise  statesman  who  fails  to  foresee  the 
ruin  of  his  country  and  the  wreck  of  its  free  insti- 
tutions, unless  the  leprosy  can  be  healed  ? 

Can  the  political  economist  be  unconcerned,  when 


CONCLUDIIs^G  CHAPTER. 


407 


he  witnesses  this  incubus  upon  the  pecuniary  pros- 
perity of  the  republic — this  paralysis  of  the  nation's 
strength. 

Can  the  friend  of  education,  the  patron  of  intel- 
lectual progress,  neglect  to  protest  against  the  en- 
forcement of  ignorance,  the  proscription  of  letters, 
the  closing  of  every  avenue  to  the  intellects  of 
increasing  millions  of  his  countrymen  ?  Can  he  do 
otherwise  than  deplore  and  condemn  the  code  that 
prevents  the  establishment  and  prosperity  of  schools 
and  colleges  for  whites,  while  it  forbids  the  elements 
of'  literature  and  science  to  the  people  of  color  ? 

Is  there  the  wise  legislator,  civilian,  or  jurist, 
who  does  not  see  and  condemn,  in  the  Slave  Code, 
the  opprobrium  of  legislation,  the  disgrace  of  juris- 
prudence, the  subversion  of  equity,  the  promotion  of 
lawlessness,  the  element  of  social  insecurity,  and  the 
seeds  of  every  crime  which  legislation  and  juris- 
prudence should  suppress  or  restrain  ? 

Can  the  moralist  look  with  unconcern  upon  a  sys- 
tem that  fosters  every  vice,  and  represses  every 
virtue;  that  opens  the  flood-gates  of  immorality, 
and  shuts  up  every  fountain  of  enlightenment  and 
reformation  ? 

Can  the  patrons  of  Christian  missions  do  less  than  ' 
condemn  the  code  that  closes  the  avenues  of  mis- 
sionary enterprise  against  millions  of  their  own  coun- 
trymen? Can  distributors  of  Bibles  and  religious 
tracts  fail  to  remonstrate  with  the  supporters  of  a 
system  that  forbids  the  distribution  and  the  reading 
of  them?    Can  Christians,  can  Christian  ministers 


408  THE  AMERICAN  SLAVE  CODE. 


and  churches  be  silent  witnesses  of  all  this  enforced 
heathenism  in  our  midst?  Can  they  regard  with 
apathy  or  disfavor  the  effort  to  relieve  from  the 
condition  of  chattelhood  so  many  millions  of  pre- 
cious souls  for  whom  Christ  died  ? 

Every  dictate  of  our  common  humanity,  every 
impulse  of  unperverted  human  sympathy,  every  de- 
duction of  unsophisticated  reason,  every  monition 
of  enlightened  conscience,  every  maxim  of  soimd 
political  wisdom,  every  conclusion  of  a  far-reaching 
and  prophetic  prudence,  every  principle  and  pre- 
cept of  our  holy  religion,  every  aspiration  after  a 
likeness  to  the  blessed  Redeemer  and  the  Universal 
Father,  every  desire  and  hope  of  the  onward  pro- 
gress and  elevation  of  our  country  and  our  species, 
unitedly  impel  us  to  espouse,  earnestly  and  cour- 
ageously, the  cause  of  the  enslaved. 

Let  each  reader  be  persuaded  to  do  this,  by  con-  ^ 
siderations  derived  from  all  that  is  precious  in  human 
nature,  or  sacred  in  impartial  justice  ;  by  all  that  is 
binding  in  moral  obligation  and  law,  or  ennobling 
and  God-like  in  mercy ;  by  all  that  is  attractive  in 
human  virtue,  and  inestimable  in  human  freedom ; 
by  all  that  is  momentous  in  a  state  of  earthly  proba- 
tion, and  solemn  in  the  final  judgment,  when  it  will 
be  said  to  those  who  withhold  needed  kindness, 
"  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  unto  one  of  the  least  of 
these,  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  unto  me." 


APPENDIX  A. 


FUGITIVE  SLAVE  BILL  OF  1850. 

An  Act  to  amend,  and  Supplementary  to  the  Act  entitled, 
"An  Act  respecting  Fugitives  from  Justice^  and  Persons 

ESCAPING   FROM   THE  SeRVICE  OF   THEIR  MASTERS,"  APPROVED 

February  12,  1793. 

Be  it  enacted  lyy  the  Senate  awl  House  of  Representatives  of 
the  United  States  of  America  in  Congress  assembled^  That  the 
persons  who  have  been,  or  may  hereafter  be,  appointed  com- 
missioners,  in  virtue  of  any  Act  of  Congress,  by  the  Circuit 
Courts  of  the  United  States,  and  who,  in  consequence  of  such 
appointment,  are  authorized  to  exercise  the  powers  that  any 
justice  of  the  peace  or  other  magistrate  of  any  of  the  United 
States  may  exercise  in  respect  to  offenders  for  any  crime  or 
oflfense  against  the  United  States,  by  arresting,  imprisoning,  or 
bailing  the  same  under  and  by  virtue  of  the  thirty -third  section 
of  the  Act  of  the  twenty-fourth  of  September,  seventeen  hundred 
and  eighty-nine,  entitled,  "An  Act  to  establish  the  judicial 
courts  of  the  United  States,"  shall  be,  and  are  hereby  authorized 
and  required  to  exercise  and  discharge  all  the  powers  and  duties 
conferred  by  this  Act. 

Sec.  2.  And  lye  it  further  enacted.,  That  the  Superior  Court  of 
each  organized  Territory  of  the  United  States  shall  have  the 
same  power  to  appoint  commissioners  to  take  acknowledgments 
of  bail  and  affidavit,  and  to  take  depositions  of  witnesses  in 
18 


410 


APPENDIX. 


civil  causes,  which  is  now  possessed  by  the  Circuit  Courts  of  the 
United  States  ;  and  all  commissioners  who  shall  hereafter  be 
appointed  for  suth  purposes  by  the  Superior  Court  of  any 
organized  Territory  of  the  United  States  shall  possess  all  the 
powers  and  exercise  all  the  duties  conferred  by  law  upon  the 
commissioners  appointed  by  the  Circuit  Courts  of  the  United 
States  for  similar  purposes,  and  shall  moreover  exercise  and 
discharge  all  the  powers  and  duties  conferred  by  this  Act. 

Sec.  3.  And  he  it  further  enacted^  That  the  Circuit  Courts  of 
the  United  States,  and  the  Superior  Courts  of  each  organized 
Territory  of  the  United  States,  shall  from  time  to  time  enlarge 
the  number  of  commissioners,  with  a  view  to  aiFord  reasonable 
facilities  to  reclaim  fugitives  from  labor,  and  to  the  prompt  dis- 
charge of  the  duties  imposed  by  this  Act. 

Sec.  4.  And  he  it  further  enacted^  That  the  commissioners 
above  named  shall  have  concurrent  jurisdiction  wnth  the  judges 
of  the  Circuit  and  District  Courts  of  the  United  States,  in  their 
respective  circuits  and  districts  within  the  several  States,  and 
the  judges  of  the  Superior  Courts  of  the  Territories,  severally 
and  collectively,  in  term  time  and  vacation;  and  shall  grant 
certificates  to  such  claimants,  upon  satisfactory  proof  being 
made,  with  authority  to  take  and  remove  such  fugitives  from 
service  or  labor,  under  the  restrictions  herein  contained,  to  the 
State  or  Territory  from  which  such  persons  may  have  escaped 
or  fled. 

Sec.  5.  And  J/e  it  further  enacted^  That  it  shall  be  the  duty 
of  all  marshals  and  deputy  marshals  to  obey  and  execute  all 
warrants  and  precepts  issued  under  the  provisions  of  this  Act, 
when  to  them  directed ;  and  should  any  marshal  or  deputy 
marshal  refuse  to  receive  such  warrant  or  other  process,  when 
tendered,  or  to  use  all  proper  means  diligently  to  execute  the 
same,  he  shall,  on  conviction  thereof,  be  fined  in  the  sum  of  one 
thousand  dollars  to  the  use  of  such  claimant,  on  the  motion  of 
such  claimant,  by  the  Circuit  or  District  Court  for  the  district  of 
such  marshal ;  and  after  arrest  of  such  fugitive  by  such  mar- 
shal or  his  deput}',  or  whilst  at  any  time  in  his  custody,  under 
the  provisions  of  this  Act,  should  such  fugitive  escape,  whether 


APPEXDIX. 


411 


with  or  without  the  assent  of  such  marshal  or  his  deputy,  such 
nvivshal  shall  be  Hable,  on  his  oflBcial  bond,  to  be  prosecuted, 
for  the  benefit  of  such  claimant,  for  the  full  value  of  the  service 
or  labor  of  said  fugitive  in  the  State,  Territory,  or  district 
whence  he  escaped ;  and  the  better  to  enable  the  said  commis- 
sioners, when  thus  appointed,  to  execute  their  duties  faithfully 
and  efiSciently,  in  conformity  with  the  requirements  of  the  Con- 
stitution of  the  United  States  and  of  this  Act,  they  are  hereby 
authorized  and- empowered,  within  their  counties  respectively, 
to  appoint  in  writing  under  their  hands,  any  one  or  more  suita- 
ble persons,  from  time  to  time,  to  execute  all  such  warrants  and 
other  process  as  may  be  issued  by  them  in  the  lawful  perform- 
ance of  their  respective  duties;  with  an  authority  to  such  com- 
missioners, or  the  persons  to  be  appointed  by  them  to  execute 
process  as  aforesaid,  to  summon  and  call  to  their  aid  the  by- 
standers or  posse  comitatus  of  the  proper  county,  when  ne- 
cessary to  insure  a  faithful  observance  of  the  clause  of  the 
Constitution  referred  to,  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of 
this  Act :  and  all  good  citizens  are  hereby  commanded  to  aid  and 
assist  in  the  prompt  and  efficient  execution  of  this  law,  when- 
ever their  services  may  be  required,  as  aforesaid,  for  that  purpose  ; 
and  said  warrants  shall  run  and  be  executed  by  said  officers 
any  where  in  the  State  within  which  they  are  issued. 

Sec.  6.  And  be  it  further  enacted^  That  when  a  person  held 
to  service  or  labor  in  any  State  or  Tenitory  of  the  United 
States  has  heretofore  or  shall  hereafter  escape  into  another  State 
or  Territory  of  the  United  States,  the  person  or  persons  to 
whom  such  service  or  labor  may  be  due,  or  his,  her,  or  their 
agent  or  attorney,  duly  authorized,  by  power  of  attorney,  in 
writing,  acknowledged  and  certified  under  the  seal  of  some 
legal  office  or  court  of  the  State  or  Territory  in  which  the  same 
may  be  executed,  may  pursue  and  reclaim  such  fugitive  person, 
either  by  procuring  a  warrant  from  some  one  of  the  courts, 
judges,  or  commissioners  aforesaid,  of  the  proper  circuit,  district 
or  count}^  for  the  apprehension  of  such  fugitive  from  service  or 
labor,  or  by  seizing  and  arresting  such  fugitive  where  the  same 
can  be  done  without  process,  and  by  taking  and  causing  such 


412 


APPENDIX. 


person  to  be  taken  forthwith  before  such  court,  judge  or  com- 
missioner, whose  duty  it  shall  be  to  hear  and  determine  the 
case  of  such  claimant  in  a  summary  manner ;  and  upon  satis- 
factory proof  being  made,  by  deposition  or  affidavit,  in  writing, 
to  be  taken  and  certified  by  such  court,  judge,  or  commissioner, 
or  by  other  satisfactory^  testimony,  duly  taken  and  certified  by 
some  court,  magistrate,  justice  of  the  peace,  or  other  legal  officer 
authorized  to  administer  an  oath  and  take  depositions  under 
the  laws  of  the  State  or  Territory  from  which  such  person 
owing  service  or  labor  may  have  escaped,  with  a  certificate  of 
such  magistracy  or  other  authority,  as  aforesaid,  with  the  seal 
of  the  proper  court  or  officer  thereto  attached,  which  seal  shall 
be  sufficient  to  estabhsh  the  competency  of  the  proof,  and  with 
proof,  also  by  affidavit,  of  the  identity  of  the  person  whose 
service  or  labor  is  claimed  to  be  due  as  aforesaid,  that  the  per- 
son so  arrested  does  in  fact  owe  service  or  labor  to  the  person 
or  persons  claiming  him  or  her,  in  the  State  or  Territory  from 
which  such  fugitive  may  have  escaped  as  aforesaid,  and  that 
said  person  escaped,  to  make  out  and  deliver  to  such  claimant, 
his  or  her  agent  or  attorney,  a  certificate  setting  forth  the  sub- 
stantial facts  as  to  the  service  or  labor  due  from  such  fugitive  to 
the  claimant,  and  of  his  or  her  escape  from  the  State  or  Terri- 
tory in  which  such  service  or  labor  was  due  to  the  State  or 
Territory  in  which  he  or  she  was  arrested,  with  authority  to 
such  claimant,  or  his  or  her  agent  or  attorney,  to  use  such 
reasonable  force  and  restraint  as  may  be  necessary  under  the 
circumstances  of  the  case,  to  take  and  remove  such  fugitive 
person  back  to  the  State  or  Territory  from  whence  he  or  she 
may  have  escaped  as  aforesaid.  In  no  trial  or  hearing  under 
this  Act  shall  the  testimony  of  such  alleged  fugitive  be  admitted 
in  evidence ;  and  the  certificates  in  this  and  the  first  section 
mentioned  shall  be  conclusive  of  the  right  of  the  person  or 
persons  in  whose  favor  granted  to  remove  such  fugitive  to  the 
State  or  Territory  from  which  he  escaped,  and  shall  prevent  all 
molestation  of  said  person  or  persons  by  any  process  issued  by 
any  court,  judge,  magistrate,  or  other  person  whomsoever. 
Sec.  T.  And  he  it  further  enacted^  That  any  person  who 


APPENDIX. 


41^ 


sha/1  knowingly  and  willingly  obstruct,  hinder,  or  prevent  such 
claimant,  his  agent  or  attorney,  or  any  person  or  persons  law- 
fully assisting  him,  her,  or  them,  from  arresting  such  fugitive 
from  service  or  labor,  either  with  or  without  process  as  afore- 
said ;  or  shall  rescue,  or  attempt  to  rescue,  such  fugitive  from 
service  or  labor,  from  the  custody  of  such  claimant,  his  or  her 
agent  or  attorney,  or  other  person  or  persons  lawfully  assisting 
as  aforesaid,  when  so  arrested,  pursuant  to  the  authority  herein 
^iven  and  declared ;  or  shall  aid,  abet,  or  assist  such  person,  so 
owing  service  or  labor  as  aforesaid,  directly  or  indirectly,  to 
escape  from  such  claimant,  his  agent  or  attorney,  or  other  per- 
son or  persons,  legally  authorized  as  aforesaid;  or  shall  harbor 
or  conceal  such  fugitive,  so  as  to  prevent  the  discovery  and 
arrest  of  such  person,  after  notice  or  knowledge  of  the  fact  that 
such  person  was  a  fugitive  from  service  or  labor  as  aforesaid, 
shall,  for  either  of  said  offenses,  be  subject  to  a  fine  not  exceed- 
ing one  thousand  dollars,  and  imprisonment  not  exceeding  six 
months,  by  indictment  and  conviction  before  the  District  Court 
of  the  United  States  for  the  district  in  which  such  offense  may 
have  been  committed,  or  before  the  proper  court  of  criminal 
jurisdiction,  if  committed  within  any  one  of  the  organized  Ter- 
ritories of  the  United  States ;  and  shall  moreover  forfeit  and 
pay,  by  way  of  civil  damages  to  the  party  injured  by  such  ille- 
gal conduct,  the  sum  of  one  thousand  dollars  for  each  fugitive 
so  lost  as  aforesaid,  to  be  recovered  by  action  of  debt  in  any  of 
the  District  or  Territorial  Courts  aforesaid,  within  whose  juris- 
diction the  said  offense  may  have  been  committed. 

Sec.  8.  And  he  it  further  enacted^  Thsit  the  marshals,  their 
deputies,  and  the  clerks  of  the  said  District  and  Territorial 
Courts,  shall  be  paid  for  their  services  the  like  fees  as  may  be 
allowed  to  them  for  similar  services  in  other  cases ;  and  where 
such  services  are  rendered  exclusively  in  the  arrest,  custody, 
and  delivery  of  the  fugitive  to  the  claimant,  his  or  her  agent  or 
attorney,  or  where  such  supposed  fugitive  may  be  discharged 
out  of  custody  for  the  want  of  sufficient  proof  as  aforesaid,  then 
such  fees  are  to  be  paid  in  the  whole  by  such  claimant,  his 
agent  or  attorney ;  and  in  all  cases  where  the  proceedings  are 


APPENDIX. 


before  a  commissioner,  he  shall  be  entitled  to  a  fee  of  ten  dol- 
lars in  fall  for  his  services  in  each  case,  upon  the  delivery  of  the 
said  certificate  to  the  claimant,  his  or  her  agent  or  attorney  ;  or 
a  fee  of  five  dollars  in  cases  where  the  proof  shall  not,  in  the 
opinion  of  such  commissioner,  warrant  such  certificate  and 
dehvery,  inclusive  of  all  services  incident  to  such  arrest  and 
examination,  to  be  paid  in  either  case  by  the  claimant,  his  or 
her  agent  or  attorney.  The  person  or  persons  authorized  to 
execute  the  process  to  be  issued  by  such  commissioners  for  the 
arrest  and  detention  of  fugitives  from  service  or  labor  as  afore- 
said, shall  also  be  entitled  to  a  fee  of  five  dollars  each  for  each 
person  he  or  they  may  arrest  and  take  before  any  such  commis- 
sioner as  aforesaid  at  the  instance  and  request  of  such  claimant, 
with  such  other  fees  as  may  be  deemed  reasonable  by  such 
commissioner  for  such  other  additional  services  as  may  be  ne- 
cessarily performed  by  him  or  them  :  such  as  attending  to  the 
examination,  keeping  the  fugitive  in  custody,  and  providing  him 
with  food  and  lodgiug  during  his  detention,  and  until  the  final 
determination  of  such  commissioner;  and  in  general  for  per- 
forming such  other  duties  as  may  be  required  by  such  claimant, 
his  or  her  attorney  or  agent,  or  commissioner  in  the  premises; 
such  fees  to  be  made  up  in  conformity  with  the  fees  usually 
charged  by  the  officers  of  the  courts  of  justice  within  the 
proper  district  or  county,  as  near  as  may  be  practicable,  and 
paid  b}^  such  claimants,  their  agents  or  attorneys,  whether  such 
supposed  fugitive  from  service  or  labor  be  ordered  to  be  de- 
livered to  such  claimants  by  the  final  determination  of  such 
commissioners  or  not. 

Sec.  9.  And  be  it  further  enacted^  That  upon  affidavit  made 
by  the  claimant  of  such  fugitive,  his  agent  or  attorney,  after 
such  certificate  has  been  issued,  that  he  has  reason  to  apprehend 
that  such  fugitive  will  be  rescued  by  force  from  his  or  their 
possession  before  lie  can  be  taken  beyond  the  limits  of  the  State 
in  which  the  arrest  is  made,  it  shall  be  tlie  duty  of  the  officer 
making  the  arrest  to  retain  such  fugitive  in  his  custody,  and  to 
remove  him  to  the  State  whence  he  fled,  and  there  to  deliver 
him  to  said  claimant,  his  agent  or  attorney.    And  to  this  end 


.APPENDIX. 


415 


the  officer  aforesaid  is  hereby  authorized  and  required  to  employ 
so  many  persons  as  he  may  deem  necessary  to  overcome  such 
force,  and  to  retain  them  in  his  service  so  long  as  circumstances 
may  require ;  the  said  officer  and  his  assistants,  while  so  em- 
ployed, to  receive  the  same  compensation,  and  to  be  allowed  the 
same  expenses  as  are  now  allowed  by  law  for  the  transportation 
of  criminals,  to  be  certified  by  the  judge  of  the  district  within 
which  the  arrest  is  made,  and  paid  out  of  the  treasury  of  the 
United  States. 

Sec.  10.  And  he  it  further  enacted^  That  when  any  person 
held  to  service  or  labor  in  any  State  or  Territory,  or  in  the  Dis- 
trict of  Columbia,  shall  escape  therefrom,  the  party  to  whom 
such  service  or  labor  shall  be  due,  his,  her,  or  their  agent  or 
attorney,  may  apply  to  any  court  of  record  therein,  or  judge 
thereof  in  vacation,  and  make  satisfactory  proof  to  such  coui  t, 
or  judge  in  vacation,  of  the  escape  aforesaid,  and  that  the  per- 
son escaping  owed  service  or  labor  to  such  party.  Whereupon 
the  court  shall  cause  a  record  to  be  made  of  the  matters  so 
proved,  and  also  a  general  description  of  the  person  so  escaping, 
with  such  convenient  certainty  as  may  be  ;  and  a  transcript  of 
such  record,  authenticated  by  the  attestation  of  the  clerk,  and 
of  the  seal  of  the  said  court,  being  produced  in  any  other  State, 
Territory,  or  district  in  which  the  person  so  escaping  may  be 
found,  and  being  exhibited  to  any  judge,  commissioner,  or  other 
officer  authorized  by  the  law  of  the  United  States  to  cause  per- 
sons escaping  from  service  or  labor  to  be  dehvered  up,  shall  be 
held  and  taken  to  be  full  and  conclusive  evidence  of  the  fact  of 
escape,  and  that  the  service  or  labor  of  the  person  escaping  is 
due  to  the  part}^  in  such  record  mentioned.  And  upon  the  pro- 
duction by  the  said  party  of  other  and  further  evidence,  if 
necessary,  either  oral  or  by  affidavit,  in  addition  to  what  is 
contained  in  the  said  record,  of  the  identity  of  the  person  escap- 
ing, he  or  she  shall  be  delivered  up  to  the  claimant.  And  the 
said  court,  commissioner,  judge,  or  other  person  authorized  by 
this  Act  to  grant  certificates  to  claimants  of  fugitives,  shall,  upon 
the  production  of  the  record  and  other  evidences  aforesaid,  grant 
to  such  claimant  a  certificate  of  his  right  to  take  any  such 


416 


APPENDIX. 


person  identified  and  proved  to  be  owing  service  or  labor  as 
aforesaid,  which  certificate  shall  authorize  such  claimant  to 
seize  or  arrest  and  transport  such  person  to  the  State  or  Terri- 
tory from  which  he  escaped:  Provided^  That  nothing  herein 
contained  shall  be  construed  as  requiring  the  production  of  a 
transcript  of  such  record  as  evidence  as  aforesaid ;  but  in  its 
absence,  the  claim  shall  be  heard  and  determined  upon  other 
satisfactory  proofs  competent  in  law. 

HOWELL  COBB, 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Eepresentatives. 

WILLIAM  R  KING, 
President  of  the  Senate,  pro  tempore^ 

Approved  September  18th,  1850. 
MILLARD  FILLMORK 


APPENDIX  B. 


SLAVERY  AMONG  THE  CHEROKEES  AND  CHOCT<^Wa 

Since  the  body  of  the  preceding  work  was  mostly  in  type, 
the  author  has  met  with  a  volume  containing  the  Constitutions 
and  Laws  of  the  Cherokees  and  Choctaws,  which  embrace 
many  provisions  on  the  subject  of  Slavery,  very  similar  to  those 
of  our  American  Slave  States  in  their  vicinity,  and  evidently 
borrowed  from  them.  A  few  specimens  may  be  interesting, 
especially  as  .throwing  light  upon  the  question  whether  it  is 
proper  to  assist  in  building  up  churches  in  those  nations  that 
admit  and  retain  as  members  those  who  enact,  administer,  and 
support  such  laws,  or  who  uphold  them  by  claiming  and  sus- 
tainmg  the  relation  of  slave  owners. 

THE  CHEROKEES. 

The  "Constitution  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,"  formed  by  a 
Convention  of  Delegates  from  the  several  districts  at  New- 
Echota,  July,  1827,  contains  the  following  : 

"  No  person  shall  be  eligible  to  a  seat  in  General  Council  but 
a  free  Cherokee  male  citizen,  who  shall  have  attained  to  the 
age  of  twenty-five  years.  The  descendants  of  Cherokee  men 
by  all  free  women,  except  the  African  race,  whose  parents  may 
Piave]  been  living  together  as  man  and  wife,  according  to  the 
customs  and  laws  of  this  nation,  shall  be  entitled  to  all  the 
rights  and  privileges  of  this  nation,  as  well  as  the  posterity  of 
18* 


418 


APPENDIX 


Cherokee  women  by  all  free  men.  No  'person  icTio  is  of  negro 
or  mulatto  parentage^  either  l)y  the  father  or  mother  side  ^  shall 
l)e  eligible  to  hold  any  office  of  profit^  honor,  or  trust  in  this 
Government^    (Art.  IIL,  sect.  4.) 

The  same  provision  is  retained  in  the  New  Constitution  of 
the  Cherokee  Nation,  passed  at  Tah-le-quah,  in  Sept.  1839. 
(Art.  III.,  sect.  5.) 

Among  the  laws  of  the  Cherokees  we  find  one,  Sept.  1839, 
entitled,  "An  act  to  prevent  amalgamation  with  colored  persons," 
(meaning  descendants  of  Africans,)  just  as  if  Cherokees  were 
whites,  and  not  "  colored."  Penalty,  corporal  punishment,  not 
to  exceed  fifty  stripes,  and  such  intermarriages  declared  not  to 
be  lawful. 

Another  "Act,"  under  date  of  Nov.  15,  1843,  is  "  to  legalize 
intermarriage  with  tchite  men  !" 

Another  Act,  7th  Nov.  1840,  declares  that  "it  shall  not  be 
lawful  for  any  free  negro  or  mulatto,  not  of  Cherolcee  Hood,  to 
hold  or  own  any  improvement  within  the  limits  of  this  nation ; 
neither  shall  it  be  lawful  for  slaves  to  own  any  property  of  the 
following  description,  viz :  horses,  cattle,  hogs,  or  fire-arms.'' 
Provision  is  made  for  the  seizure  and  sale  of  such  property,  &c. 

Another  "Act,"  Oct.  19,  1841,  is  for  "authorizing  the  ap- 
pointment of  patrol  companies,"  who  "  shall  take  up  and  bring 
to  punishment  any  negro  or  negroes  that  may  be  strolling  about, 
not  on  their  owner's  premises,  without  a  pass  from  their  owner 
or  owners."  And  any  negro  not  entitled  to  Cherokee  privileges, 
if  found  armed,  may  be  whipped,  not  exceeding  thirty -nine 
lashes. 

Another  "Act,"  dated  22d  October,  1841,  is  for  "prohibiting 
the  teaching  of  negroes  to  read  and  write."  ''''Be  it  enacted  hy 
the  Rational  Council,  That  from  and  after  the  passage  of  this 
Act,  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any  person  or  persons  whatever 
to  teach  any  free  negro  or  negroes  not  of  Cherolcee  blood^  or 


*  ''Not  of  Cherokee  blood!"  It  would  be  quite  an  improvement^ 
should  our  Anglo-Saxon  slave  legislators  imitate  this  by  saying,  "  not 
of  English  blood,'*''  in  their  statutes  of  this  character. 


APPENDIX. 


419 


any  slave  belonging  to  any  citizen  or  citizens  of  the  nation,  to 
read  or  write."  The  penalty  annexed  to  a  violation  of  this 
enactment  is  a  fine  of  $100  to  $500,  at  the  discretion  of  the 
Court  trying  the  offense. 

**An  Act  in  regard  to  free  negroes,"  Dec.  2,  1842,  directs 
"the  sheriffs  of  the  several  districts"  to  notify  free  negroes  to 
leave  the  limits  of  the  nation  by  the  1st  of  Jan.  18i3.  If  they 
refused  to  go,  they  Were  to  be  immediately  expelled.  "  Sect.  4. 
Be  it  further  enacted.  That  should  any  free  negro  or  negroes  be 
found  guilty  of  aiding,  abetting,  or  decoying 'any  slave  or  slaves 
to  leave  his  or  their  owner  or  employer,  such  free  negro  or 
negroes  shall  receive  for  each  and  every  such  offense  one  hun 
dred  lashes  on  the  bare  back,  and  be  immediately  remove' 
from  this  nation." 

Bound  up  in  the  same  volume  with  these  Constitutions  and 
enactments,  we  find  the  "Constitution  of  the  Cherokee  Bible 
Society,"  in  which  is  the  follovring  :  "Art.  2.  The  object  of  the 
Society  shall  be  to  disseminate  the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  the 
English  and  Cherokee  languages  among  the  people  of  the 
Cherokee  nation ;  and  all  funds  collected  by  the  Society  shall 
be  expended  for  that  object." 

From  the  preceding  extracts  of  the  Constitutions  and  Laws 
it  would  seem  that  "free  negroes  and  mulattoes  not  of  Cherokee 
blood"  were  not  considered  as  "entitled  to  Cherokee  privileges," 
or  as  constituting  a  part  of  "  the  Cherokee  nation."  And  the 
teaching  of  them  or  the  slaves  to  read  or  write,  as  has  been 
shown,  fs  expressly  forbidden,  under  heavy  penalties.  So  that 
the  peculiar  phraseology  employed  by  the  Bible  Society  is 
readily  understood.  Its  object  did  not  include  the  supply  of 
such  persons,  and  it  was  intended  to  guard  against  any  such 
use  of  its  funds !  It  is  lamentable  to  see  a  nation  so  recentl}^ 
put  in  possession  of  the  Bible,  so  forward  to  withhold  it  from 
others,  even  forbidding  its  use  !  But  in  this  the  Cherokees  only 
imitate  our  own  nation  and  our  own  Bible  Societies,  from  whom 
they  have  received  the  Scriptures !  They  have  only  practised 
the  religion  they  have  received  from  us !    We  may  see  in  this 


420 


APPENDIX. 


the  fruit  of  sending  to  the  heathen  a  gospel  that  tolerates  slave- 
holding. 

CHOCTAWS. 

The  Constitution  of  the  Choctaw  Nation,  approved  October, 
1838,  embodies  a  "Declaration  of  Rights,"  the  first  article  of 
which  commences  with,  "All  freemen^  when  they  form  a  social 
compact,  are  equal  in  rights,"  &c.  It  is  not  difBcult  to  trace  the 
parentage  of  this  emendation  of  the  Declaration  of  '76.  It  is 
revealed  in  the  following : 

"From  and  after  the  adoption  of  this  Constitution,  no  free 
negro^  or  any  part  negro,  unconnected  with  Choctaw  or  Chich- 
asaw  blood,  shall  be  permitted  to  come  and  settle  in  the  Choc- 
taw nation."    (Art.  VIII.,  sect.  6.) 

"  No  person  who  is  any  part  negro  shall  ever  be  allowed  to 
hold  any  office  under  this  Government."    (Art.  VIII.,  sect.  14.) 

"The  General  Council,  when  in  session,  shall  have  the  power 
by  law  to  naturalize  and  adopt  as  citizens  of  this  nation,  any 
Indian,  or  descendant  of  other  Indian  tribes,  except  a  negro  or 
descendant  of  a  negro^    (Art.  VIII.,  sect.  15.) 

The  following  is  an  act  approved  5th  October,  1836 : 

^''Be  it  enacted,  &c.,  That  ft-om  and  after  the  passage  of  this 
Act,  if  any  citizen  of  the  United  States,  acting  as  a  missionary 
or  a  preacher,  or  whatever  his  occupation  may  be,  is  found  to 
take  an  active  part  in  favoring  the  principles  and  notions  of  the 
most  fatal  and  destructive  doctrines  of  Abolitionism,  he  shall 
be  compelled  to  leave  the  nation,  and  for  ever  stay  out  of  it. 

"j^g  it  farther  enacted,  Sc.,  That  teaching  slaves  how  to 
read,  to  write,  or  to  sing  in  meeting-houses  or  schools,  or  in  any 
open  place,  without  the  consent  of  the  owner,  or  allowing  them 
to  sit  at  table  with  him,  shall  be  sufficient  ground  to  convict 
persons  of  favoring  the  principles  and  notions  of  Abolitionism. 

It  was  provided  also  that  no  slave  should  "be  in  possession  of 
any  property  or  arms ;"  that  if  any  slave  infringed  any  Choc- 
taw rights,  he  should  "be  driven  out  of  company  to  behave 
himself ;"  and  in  case  of  his  return  and  further  intrusion,  "  he 


APPENDIX. 


421 


should  receive  ten  lashes."  But  '*any  good  honest  slave  shall  be 
permitted  to  carry  a  gun,  by  having  a  pass  from  his  master." 

In  1838  it  was  enacted,  "  That  from  and  after  the  passage  of 
this  law,  if  any  person  or  persons,  citizens  of  this  nation,  shall 
publicly  take  up  with  a  negro  slave^^  he  or  she  so  offending 
shall  be  liable  to  pay  a  fine  of  not  less  than  ten  dollars,  nor  ex- 
ceeding twenty -five  dollars,  and  t>Tiall  he  separated ;  and  for  a 
second  offense  of  a  similar  nature  the  party  shall  receive  not 
exceeding  thirty-nine  lashes  nor  less  than  five,  on  the  bare 
back,  and  shall  le  separated^  as  the  Court  may  determine." 

"  The  Constitution  and  Laws  of  the  Choctaw  Nation,"  from 
which  the  preceding  extracts  are  taken,  bears  the  imprint  of 
1840,  and  the  latest  enactments  it  contains  are  dated  Oct.  1839. 
But  the  "American  Missionary,"  New-York,  January,  1853, 
contains  an  account  of  some  later  enactments,  taken  from  a 
Report  made  in  1848  by  Mr.  Treat,  one  of  the  Secretaries  of 
the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions. 
The  following  is  an  extract  from  this  statement  of  the  "Ame- 
rican Missionary :" 

In  1840  "it  was  enacted  that  all  free  negroes  in  the  nation, 
unconnected  with  the  Choctaw  or  Chickasaw  blood,  *  should 
leave  the  nation  by  the  first  of  March,  1841,*  and  *for  ever 
keep  out  of  it'  In  case  of  their  infringing  this  law,  *  they 
were  to  be  seized  and  sold  to  the  highest  bidder  for  life.'  It 
was  also  enacted  that  if  any  citizen  of  the  nation  hired,  con- 
cealed, or  in  any  way  protected  any  free  negro,  to  evade  the 
foregoing  provision,  he  should  forfeit  from  $250  to  $500,  or  if 
unable  to  pay  this  fine,  '  receive  fifty  lashes  on  his  bare  back.' 

"In  1846  a  law  was  passed,  which  prohibited  all  negroes, 
whether  they  had  *  papers'  or  not,  from  entering  and  reoiain- 
ing  in  the  Choctaw  nation.  The  offenders  were  to  receive  *  not 
less  than  one  hundred  lashes  on  the  bare  back,'  besides  a  for- 
feiture of  all  property  found  in  their  possession,  one  third  '  to 

*  ''Publicly  take  up  with."  The  possibility  of  a  leyal  marriage 
with  a  slave  seems  not  to  have  been  recognized.  The  union  was  only 
** a  taking  up  with"  a  phrase  used  among  slaves. 


422 


APPENDIX. 


go  to  the  light  horsemen^  who  apprehended  them,  and  two 
thirds  'to  be  applied  to  some  beneficial  purpose/ 

The  most  objectionable  enactment,  says  Mr.  Treat,  which  he 
found,  having  any  bearing  upon  slavery,  was  approved  October 
]5th,  ISiG.    It  is  as  follows  : 

"  ''Be  it  enacted^  Sc.,  That  no  negro  slave  can  be  emancipated 
in  this  Nation  except  by  application  or  petition  of  the  owner  to 
the  General  Council ;  and  2^^ovided  also^  that  it  shall  be  made 
to  appear  to  the  Council  the  owner  or  owners,  at  the  time  of 
application,  shall  have  no  debt  or  debts  outstanding  against  him 
or  her,  either  in  or  out  of  this  Nation.  Then,  and  in  that  case, 
the  General  Council  shall  have  the  power  to  pass  an  act  for  the 
owner  to  emancipate  his  or  her  slave,  which  negro,  after  being 
freed,  shall  leave  this  nation  within  thirtj^  days  after  the  passage 
of  the  Act.  And  in  case  said  free  negro  or  negroes  shall  return 
into  this  Nation  afterwards,  he,  she,  or  they  shall  be  subject  to  be 
taken  by  the  light  horsemen  and  exposed  to  public  sale  for  the 
term  of  five  years ;  and  the  funds  arising  from  such  sale  shall 
be  used  as  national  funds.'  " 


LIST  OF  REPORTED  CASES 


CITED  IN  THIS  VOLUME. 


Allan  rs.  Young,  (La.)  188 

Banks,  Admr.,  vs.  Marksbury,  70 
Bazzy?;*.  Rose  and  child,  (Lou.)  149 
Beatley  vs.  Judy,  (Ky.)  70 
Beall  vs.  Joseph,  (Ky.)  348 
Berard  vs.  Berard  et  al.,  (Lou.)  241, 
295 

Bore  vs.  Bush,  (Lou.)  318 

Brandon  et  al    vs.   Merchants'  and 

Planters'  Bank,  (Ala.)  92,  293 
Butler  vs.  Boardm'U,  (Md  )  278 
Bynam  vs.  Bostwick,  (S.  C  )  29,  293 

Carroll  et  al.  vs.  Connet,  (Ky.)  71 
Commonwealth  (Va .)  vs.  Carver,  194, 
204 

Commonwealth  (Mass.)  vs.  Aves,  262 
Cooke  (colored)  vs.  Cooke,  (Ky  )  350 
Cornfute  vs.  Dale,  (Md  )  202 
Crawford  vs.  Cheney,  (La  )  205 

Davis  vs.  Curry,  (Ky.)  238 
Davis  vs.  Sandford,  (Ky.)  274 
Delphine  vs  Devise,  (La.)  650 
Dolly  Chappie,  Va.)  194 
Dorothee  vs.  Coquillon,  (La.)  125,  158, 
242 

Dunbar  vs.  Williams,  (N.  Y.)  148 

Enlaws  vs  Enlaws,  (Ky  )  71 
Emmerson  vs.  Howland,  93 

Fields  vs.  State  of  Tenn  ,  195 
Free  Lucy  vs.  Frank,  93 

George  et  al.  vs.  Corse,  (Md.)  345 
Glen  vs.  Hodges,  (N.  Y.)  235 
Givens  vs.  Mann,  (Va.)  349 
Girod  vs.  Lewis,  (Lou.)  107,  293-4 
Gomez  vs.  Bonneval,  iLou.)  280 


Hall  vs.  Mullen,  (Md.)  91,  93,  264,  349 
Hamilton  vs  Cragg  Md.)  349 
Harris  vs  Clarissa  et  al  ,  (Tenn.)  30 
Harvey  et  al  vs.  Decker  and  Hopkins, 

(Miss.)  262,  204 
Hilton  vs.  Caston,  68 
Hudgens  vs.  Wrights,  (Va.)  263,273-4, 

296 

Hutchins  vs.  Lee,  (Miss.)  235 

Icar  vs.  Suars,  (La.)  32 

Jarrett  vs.  Higbee,  (Ky.)  102 
Jennings      Furderburg,  (S.  C.)  188-9 
Johnson  et  al.  vs.  Barrett,  (S.  C  )  149 
Jourdan  vs.  Patten,  (La.;  205 

Kittletas  vs.  Fleet,  (N.  Y.)  347 

Labranche  vs.  Watkins,  (La  )  235 
Lewis  vs.  Fullerton,  iVa.>  349 
Lunsfordrs.  Coquillon,  (La.)  261-2 

Markham  vs.  Close,  (La.)  187,  195 
Marie  Louisa  vs.  Marriott  et  al.  (,La.) 
261-2 

Maria  vs.  Surbach,  (Va.)  278 
Mary  vs.  Morris  et  al.,  Lou.)  349 
McCutchen  et  al.  vs.  Marshall  et  al., 

<U.  Sj  278 
May  vs.  Brown  and  Boisseau,  (Va.) 

203-4 

Metayer  vs.  Metayer,  (Lou.)  266 
Moosa  vs.  Allain,  (Lou.;  350. 

Negro  Tom,  (N.  Y.)  348 
Negro  Cato  vs.  Howard  (,Md.)  349 
Negro  George  et  al.  vs.  Corse,  Md.) 
345 

People  vs.  Lervy,  93 


424 


LIST  OF  KEPORTED  CASES. 


Plumpton  vs.  Cook,  (Ky.)  70 
Prigg  vs.  Pennsylvania,  (U.  S.)  168 

Rankin  vs.  Lydia,  (Ky  )  261 
Richardson  vs.  Dukes,  (S.  C.)  189 

Sawney  vs.  Carter,  (Va  )  347,  349 
Scidmore  vs.  Smith,  205,  236 
Seville  vs.  Chretien  (La.)  263-4,  266 
SimsWhite  vs.  James  Chambers,(S.  C.) 

168,  202-3 
Smith  vs.  Rowzee,  51 
Smith  vs  Hancock,  (Ky.)  204 
Somerset,  James,  (slave)  259 
State  of  Miss.  vs.  Jones,  192,  204 
"     N.  J.  vs  Waggoner,  28,  265 
"     N.  C.  vs.  Mann,  32,  79,  126, 
J  54,  169,  204 
vs.  Reed,  19* 
vs.  Hale,  192,  204.  207 
vs.  Ben,  317 
vs.  Jim,  317 
va.  Charity,  317 


State  of  S.  C.  vs.  Maner,  453,  193,  204 
"       "    vs.  Cheatv^rood,  168,  191, 
204 

"      "   ws.  E.Smith  and  R.Smith, 

190 

"  vs.  Raines,  190 

"       "         McGee,  211 
"      "   vs.  Hannah  Elliott,  233, 
277 

"      "   vs.  Davis  and  Hanna,  277 
"     Va.  vs.  Carver,  194,  204 
Stevenson  vs.  Singleton,  (Va.)  347,  349 

Tate  vs.  O'Neill,  (N.  C.)  203 

Vaughan  vs.  Phebe,  (Tenn.)  266 
Victoire  vs.  Dissua,  (Lou.)  349 

Wells  vs.  Kennerly,  (S.  C)  149 
Westell      Earnest  and  Parker,  (S.C.) 
189 

White  vs.  Chambers,  (S.  C.)  168  202-3 
!  Will  vs.  Thompson,  348 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


Advertisements : 

Slaves  sold  for  distribution,  75 
"    wanted  by  dealers,  54 
"     for  sale  by  dealers,  54-5 
"    taken,  and  for  sale  for  debt, 
66-7 

"     "  acclimated,"  for  sale,  81-2 
"     "breeder"  for  sale,  84 
"     "  damaged"  wanted,  87 
"    fugitives  in  search  of  their 
families,  119 
Reward  for  evidence  to  convict  a 
mother  of  the  crime  of  "  harbor- 
ing" her  son,  119 
Of  a  wife  in  search  of  her  hus- 
band, 119 
Reward  offered  for  killing  a  slave 
for  running  off  with  his  wife,  120 
Describing  fuaitives  scarred,  bran- 
ded, cropped,  shot,  &c.,  219-20 
"  Negro  dogs"  and  slave  hunting, 
236-7 

"  White"  slaves,  284-5 

Agricultural  Societies,  Southern,  (testi- 
mony of,)  81 

Alabama  :  slaves  ill  clothed,  146  ;  le- 
galized slave  discipline,  165  ;  laws 
vs.  harboring  fugitives.  233  ;  mode  of 
testing  claims  to  freedom,  299  ;  laws 
vs.  preaching,  322;  laws  vs.  emanci- 
pation, 341-3 

Alarm  at  negroes  reading,  336 

Alexandria,  (D.  C.)  coroner's  inquest, 
>81 

A-llan,  Rev.  Wm.  T.,  (Testimony,)  39, 
148,  3-2 

Am.  Bible  Soc  and  slave  families,  115 
Amer.  Colonization  Soc.    {See  Coloni- 
zation Soc  ) 
Ameliorations  impracticable,  293 
Ancient  slavery,    peculium,''^  96  . 
An  aunt  in  Court,  claiming  nieces  as 

slaves  oi:  other  nieces,  241-2 
Appendix  A,  Fugitive  Slave  Bill,  409 
"        B,  Cherokecs    and  Choc- 
laws,  417 


Archer,  Judge,  345 

Avery,  George  A., (Testimony,)  148, 214, 
216 

Badger,  Judge,  317 

Baltimore  Advertiser,  (Testimony,  ^142 
Baptism  of  slaves,  253,  332 
Battery  on  a  slave,  32,  &c.,  168-9,  192 
Betting  on  a  negro's  life,  in  a  fit,  40 
Berry,  Mr.  ^Va.)  Testimony,  323 
Bibb,  Judge,  103 
Bible  prohibited,  321,  324 
Bible  Societies  do  not  supply  slaves, 
323 

Birney,  James  G.,  (Testimony,)  57 
Blackwell,  Samuel.  (Testimony,)  80 
Bliss,  Philemon,  (Testimony,)  143-4 
Bourne,  Rev.  Geo.,  (Testimony,)  111, 
141 

Boudinot,  Tobias,  (Testimony,)  141 
Boiildin,  Hon.  T.  T.,  (Testimony,)  145 
Boyle,  Judge,  275 
Branding  slaves,  219-20 
Breckenridge,  Dr.  R.  J.,  (Testimony,) 
368 

Breckenbrough,  Judge,  194 

"  Breeders,"  30,  55,  84-5 

Brougham,  Lord.    "  No  property  in 

man,"  270 
Brodnax,  Mr.,  (Va.)  .367 
Buctianan,  Dr.  Geo.,  (Testimony,)  145, 

222 

Butler,  Gov.,  (S.  C.)  210 
Burning  and  beheading  a  slave,  118 
"     a  free  negro,  316 

Calhoun,  John  C,  'Testimony,)  285 
Carey,  Matthew,  (Testimony,)  211 
Catechisms  "  incendiary,"  336 
Caulkins.Nehemiah,(Te'stimonv,)  142-3 
Charles  V.,  267 

Charleston,  (S.  C).  Bap.  Asso.  37-8,  40 
"  "     Observer,  (Testi- 

mony,>  335 
Channing,  Dr.  Wm.  E.,  (Testimony.) 

148 


426 


INDEX. 


Chattel  principle,  23^29 

Choules,  Rev.  J.  O.,  (Testimony,)  133 

Cherokee  slave  laws,  417 

i^hoctaw  slave  laws,  420 

Clay,  Henry,  on  slave  property,  34,  349 
slave  traffic,  48,  55 
"  slave  breeding,  84 

"  overtasking,  132 

"  slaves  "  fat  and  sleek," 

152 

"  perpetuity  of  slavery, 

249,  272 
"  future  slavery  of 

whites,  283 
Clay,  Thomas,  (Testimony,)  141-3 
Clarke,  Judge,  192 
Claims  to  freedom,  295 
Clothin;!;  of  slaves,  145,  &c. 
Code  Noir,  its  comparative  mildness, 

44-5,  68,  75 
Colcock,  Judge,  189,  190 
Colonial  Slavery,  260,  &c. 
Color  defmed,  277 

"  presumptive  of  slavery,  276-7, 
295 

Colored  testimony  excluded,  300,  &c. 
Colored  seamen  imprisoned,  362 
Colored  people,  (See  "  Free  People  of 
Color.'') 

Colonization  Society  vs.  manumission 
on  soil,  351  ;  origin  and  objects  of, 
364  ;  meetings,  effects  of,  366  ;  com- 
pulsion, 267  •  Maryland  Soc,  369-70  ; 
N  Y.  State  Auxiliary,  365  ;  American, 
(Testimony  of,)  222 
Connecticut,  slave  marriage,  106 
Contracts  of  master  and  slave  void, 
346,  &c. 

Const  itutions  (-^tate)  vs.  Abolition,  350 
Congress,  U.  S  vs.  slaves'  personality, 

106  ;  right  of  petition,  37  ;  Fugitive 

Slave  Bill,  168,  234,  409 
Cornelius,  Rev.  Elias,  (Testimony,) 

148 

Cost,  per  annum,  of  slaves'  support,  153 

Cousins  in  Court,  claiming  cousins  as 
slaves,  241 

Cranch,  Judge,  (Testimony,)  360;  peti- 
tion, 56 

Crandall,  Prudence,  366 

Craziness  or  idiocy  of  slave  property 
sold  and  warranted,  32 

Crenshaw,  Judge,  293 

Criminal  prosecutions  to  defend  slave 
property,  192,  204 

Cropping  ears  legal,  220 

Cruelty,  certain  kinds,  authorized,  159 
"      philosophy  of,  223-4 

Daggett,  Judge,  366 
Damaged  slaves,  uses  of,  86-7 
Damages  to  slave  property,  201,  &c. 
Dayton,  Col.  ^M.  C.)  36 


Dead  or  alive"  to  be  returned,  120 
Death  from  nakedness,  I45 

"       starvation,  141,  145 
"       "  moderate  correction,"  1 80 
Delegated  power  of  overseers,  97,  &c., 
204 

Delaware,  laws  to  prevent  escapes,  229 

Di-ming,  Dr  ,  (Testimony,)  79 

Derbigny,  Judge,  280 

Dew,  Prof,  (Testimony,)  84 

District  of  Columbia,  slave-trade,  57  , 
slaves  may  not  traffic,  100  ;  free  ne- 
groes sold,  227  ;  killing  authorized, 
230-1 

Distribution  of  slave  estates,  74-5 
Dorsey,  Judge,  345 

Dower  of  widows  in  slaves,  71-2,  346 
Drunkenness  of  slave  property  sold  and 

warranted,  31 
Dwellings  of  slaves  described,  147 

Earl,  Judge,  345 

Education,  slaves  no  right  to,  251 
"  prohibited,  319 

Edwards,  Dr.  Jonathan,  (Testimony,) 

141    143,  221  ;  accounted  slavehold- 

ing  man-stealing,  271 
Ervvin.  Mr.,  (,Ala.)  slave-trader,  59 

Facts,  reatment  of  slaves,  209,  &c. 
Family  relation,  slaves',  113,  &c. 
Fine  for  killini£a  negro,  191 
Fisher,  Mr.,  ^Va.)  Testimony,  368 
Florida,  clothing  of  slaves,  146 

"  laws  to  prevent  escapes,  229 
"  Florida  Slaveholder,"  (Testimony,) 

370  ;  his  liberties,  376 
Food,  clothing,  shelter,  135,  &c. 
Free  people  of  color  sold  for  jail  fees, 

227    enslaved,  274,  352  ;  liberties  of, 

355,  &c 
Free  worship  forbidden,  326 
French  slavery,  milder  type,  45 
Fugitive  slave;-,  225,  &c.,  227 
Fugitive  Slave  Bill  (of  1850,)  283-4,409 
Furman,  Rev.  Dr.,  sale  of  theological 

books  and  negroes,  38 

Gadsden,  T.  N.,  Esq.,  slave  auctioneer, 
60 

Georgetown,  (D.  C."*  ordinance,  358 
Georgia,  Presb.  Synod,  (Testimony,) 
111;  slaves  forbidden  to  traffic,  98 ; 
slaves'  labor,  130  ;  food,  36;  cloth- 
ing, 145  ;  murder,  182-3  ;  "  mode- 
rate correction,"  183;  slave  with- 
out "pass,"  228;  harboring,  232. 
slavery  perpetual  and  hereditary, 
249 ;  origin,  260  ;  free  negroes  en- 
slaved, 276:  claims  to  freedom, 
297-8  ;  punished  if  fails  to  prove  free- 
dom, 297  ;  death  to  strike  white  per- 
son, 305  ;  penal  laws  vs.  slaves,  .^15  ; 


INDEX. 


427 


education  prohibited,  319-22  ;  no  free 
worship,  328  ;  vs.  emancipation,  341, 
342  ;  whites  fined  for  te  aching,  35^  ; 
restriction  on  right  of  hiring  houses, 
361  ;  quarantine  of  freedom,  363;  no 
freedom  of  speech  or  of  tlie  pres;;, 
385 

Gholson,  iMr.,  (Va.)  30-1,  36,  55,  82, 
84,  272 

Gildersleeve,  W.  C,  i Testimony,)  142, 
144 

Gillmore,  Mary,  white,  Irish,  enslaved, 
285 

Girls,  mulatto,  high  price,  85-6 

Grand  Jury  of  Ch'eraw,  (S.  C.)  Testi- 
mony, 2  i  I 

Greenville  (S.  C  )  Mountaineer,  (Testi- 
mony,) 338 

Grimke,  S  irah  M.,  (Testimony,)  115, 
148,  154,  256 

Ground  of  slaves'  civil  condition,  289 

fill!.  Judge,  193,  317 

Hampton,  Gen  Wade,  feeding  slaves, 

coiton  seeii,  141-2,  218 
Hirboring  fugitives,  232-3,  236 
Hiwley,  Rev.  Francis,  cTestimonv.) 

213 

Hawkins,  Sir  John,  258,  271 

Hayne,  Gov.  R.  Y  ,  purchased  a  man's 

wife  and  children,  1 19 
Hel)rew  servitude,  2J2 
Hereditary  and  perpetual  slaverv,  248 
H.U,  John  W.,  (Testimony,  214^15 
History  of  S  C,  Testimony,)  132 
Hitchcock,  Judge  H.,  (Ala.;  concerned 

in  slave-trade,  53,  175 
Home  Mission,  Meth.,  put  down,  336-7 
Honesty  of  slave  property  sold  and 

warranted,  32 
House  slaves,  their  condition,  111,117, 

200 

Humanity  punished  more  than  cruelty, 
163 

Hunger  of  slaves,  141 
Huniing  slaves,  234 
Huntsman,  Hon.  Adam,  386 
Hymn  books,  incendiary,  324 

111  treatment,  no  legal  remedy  for,  125, 
242-3 

Illegal  importation  of  slaves,  260,  &c. 
Imprisonment  of  slaves  by  owner,  166-7 
Increase  of  slaves,  70,  72;  belong  to 
ulterior  legatee,  72;  may  be  sold  by  \ 
Orphans'  Court,  72  ;  subject  to  mort- 
gage, 64-5  ! 
Infants  cannot  be  emancipated,  (Md  )  ; 

349  I 
Indians  enslaved,  28,  267-8,  282,  298  i 
Indiana  excludes  colored  witnesses,  i 
359 

Inheritance  of  slave  property,  69 


Intermarrifige  with  slaves,  278 
Iron  collars,  according  to  lawr,  163 

Jackson,  Gen.  Andrev/,  a  slave-trader, 

00 

Jamaica,  (W.  I  •  mixed  breed  free,  249 
Jefferson,  Tnornas,  34,  38,  126-7,  218, 

his  will,  276,  375  ;  his  daughter  sold, 

85 

Johnson,  Col.  Richard  M.,  378-9 
.lohnson.  Judge,  94,  149,  264 
•Tones,  Rev.  C.  C,  of  Geo.,  Testimony,) 
335 

Judson,  A.  T.,  336 
Judiciary  perverted,  207 
Jury  trial,  why  denied,  261 

Kentucky  :  slave*  real  estate,  24  ;  but 
sold  as  chattels,  24  ;  Presb.  Synod, 
(Testimony,)  53,  55,  110,  222,  333; 
slaves  may  not  traffic,  98  no  •  hire 
out,  103  ;  nor  carry  weapons,  229  ; 
free  colored  degraded,  300  :  laws  vs, 
slaves,  3  2-15  ;  hopeless  ignorance, 
323—4  ;  laws  vs.  emancipation,  343 

Kidn  ipping,  279 

Knowledge,  incendiary,  337 

Labor  oi"  slaves,  78,  128,  &c..  150,  &c. 
Lidd,  W.lliam,  .Testimony,)  142,  146 
L  .dy  advertising  a  fugitive  lyi/e  in 

search  of  her  husband,  119 
Leftvvich,  Wm.,  (Testimony,)  144,  146 
Legality  of  slavery,  19,  262,  &c. 
Legislation,  none  creating  slavery 

261,  &c. 

Lewis  Lillburn,  his  barbarity,  88 
Lexingion    iKy.)  Luminary,  vTesti 

rnony,)  1 11 
Liberty  of  free  people  of  color,  355,  &c. 
"     of  wliites  at  the  South,  372,  &c. 
"     of  whites  at  the  North,  38J 
License  to  marry  emancipates,  106 
Licentiousness  produced  by  slavery, 
111 

Life  of  slave  in  his  owner's  hands,  125 
"        taken  without  jurv,  314 

Littleton,  Lord,  20,  401-2 

Louisiana  :  property  tenure  of  slaves, 
23  ;  held  as  real  estate,  24  ;  war- 
ranty of  slaves,  31  ;  ameliorated 
code,  46  ;  allows  a  pecuJiu/n,  90  ; 
slave  families,  114;  law  of  slaves' 
labor,  130;  food,  clothing,  <fec.,  135; 
of  punishments,  161  ;  iron  collars 
authorized.  163  ;  overseer's  author- 
ity, 198  ;  dam  iges  to  slave  property. 
203  ;  slaves  on  borse^ack,  229  ;  relief 
from  ill  treatm;3nt,  246  ;  peTial  laws 
vs.  slaves,  314-15 ;  vs.  free  snsech 
and  press,  322  ;  religious  privileges 
of  slaves,  322  ;  vs.  emancipation, 


i28 


INDEX. 


243-4  ;  subjection- of  free  blacks  to 

wliites,  357 
Lowry,  xNancy,  (Testimony,)  213 
Lynch  Committee,  ^^Mo.)  3i6 

Madison,  James,  sister  of,  ^Testimony,) 
111 

Madison,  James,  denied  the  right  of 
property  in  man,  270 

Maltby,  S.  E  ,  .Testimony,)  146 

Mansfield,  Lord,  259,  270 

Marriage  of  slaves  abrogated,  105,  &c. 
"      of  whites  restricted,  376,  &c. 

Martinique,  comparative  lenity  shown 
to  slaves,  45 

Martin,  Judge,  262,  248 

Maryland  :  chattel  tenure,  25  ;  issue  of 
female  slaves,  30  ;  bequests  to  slaves 
void,  91  ;  slaves  may  not  tr.ifRc,  99  ; 
naked  and  starved,  145  ;  damages  to 
slave  property,  202 ;  whites  and 
blacks  required  to  have  "passes," 
227-8;  slaves  rambling  or  riding, 
229  ;  killing  slaves  authorized,  230  ; 
slavery  hereditary  and  perpetual, 
248 ;  enslaving  white  women  and 
their  children,  273  ;  emancipated  ne- 
groes regnslaved,  275,  359  ;  trial  of 
claims  to  freedom,  298  ;  cropping 
free  blacks,  306 ;  penal  laws  vs. 
slaves,  2 '3 — 16  ;  laws  of  emancipa- 
tion, 343  ;  relig.  privileges  of  slaves, 
322 

Mason,  Mr.,  (Va.)  261 
Massachusetts,  submission  to  slave 
law,  363 

Matthews,  Judge,  (La.)  107,  188,  206, 
264,  266-7-8,  293 

Meade,  Bishop,  (Testimony,)  334 
Merciful  safety-valve,"  133-4 

Meth.  E.  Church,  exclusion  of  colored 
witnesses,  159 ;  class  imprisoned, 
226  ;  missions  suppressed,  336,  383 

Miner,  Mr.,  (M.  C.)  ^Testimony,)  361 

Ministry  for  slaves,  334 

Mississippi :  slave  importation,  48 ; 
constitutional  power  of  Legislature 
to  relieve  ill-treated  slaves,  not  exer- 
cised, 168,  246  ;  enslaves  free  ne- 
groes, 276;  penal  laws  vs.  slaves, 
312-13  ;  free  worship  forbidden,  331  ; 
laws  vs.  emancipation,  341-3  ;  ex- 
pulsion of  free  colored  people,  356  ; 
no  freedom  of  speech  or  of  the  press, 
385. 

Missouri :  si  ives  may  not  traffic,  99  ; 
laws  concerning  cruelty,  165,  &c.  ; 
masters  may  imprison  slaves,  166-7  ; 
slaves  forbidden  weapons.  229  ;  test- 
ing claims  to  freedom,  299  :  Lynch 
law,  burning  free  negro,  316;  no 
freedom  of  speech  or  of  the  press, 
386 


Missionary  Society  put  down,  336 
Mixed  race,  380,  &c. 
"Moderate  correction,"  "  death  under,' 
180 

Mortgage  of  slaves,  24,  63-4 

Mosely,  Rev.  Mr.,  (Conn.)  sale  of  wife 
from  husband,  114 

Mother  (free)  cannot  sue  for  relief  of  a 
slave  daughter  from  ill  treatment,  125 

Moulton,  Horace,  (Testimony,)  142-3 

Municipal  law,,  slavery  under,  >  262,  &c. 

Murders  of  slaves,  law  of,  177,  &c.  ; 
frequency  of,  210  ;  instances  of,  210 — 
12,  &c.  ;  of  a  s.ave  child,  88  ;  im- 
punity of  white  murderers,  88,  210  ; 
doubts  of  Judges  whether  the  murder 
of  a  slave  be  indictable,  192,  194; 
murders  punished  to  protect  slave 
property,  192-3  ;  virtually  commuted 
for  a  verdict  for  pecuniary  damages, 
208 

"  Negro's  head"  advertised,  39 
Negro  pew,  370 

"Negro  dogs"  (for  slave  hunting)  ad- 
vertised, 336-7 
New-Jersey,  Indians  enslaved,  28,  266 
New-Orleans  Argus,  Testimony,)  81 
New-Orleans  Bee,  (Testimony,)  285 
New-Orleans  Picayune,  (Testimony,) 
383 

New-Orleans  Bible  Society  disclaims 

the  intention  of  giving  Bibles  to 

slaves,  383 
Nieces  suing  their  aunt  for  their  free 

dom,  241-2 
Niles'  Register,  (Testimony,)  285 
No  appeal  of  a  slave  from  his  master, 

126 

No  prosecution  for  battery  on  a  slave, 
171 

No  right  of  redemption  from  slavery, 
245 

No  access  to  judiciary,  295,  &c 
No  statutes    creating   slavery,  258, 
268,  &c. 

North  Carolina  Baptist  Convention, 
•  Testimony,)  336 

North  Carolina  :  law  of  slave  legacies, 
69,  70  ;  "  slaves  cannot  take  by  de- 
scent," &c.,  91  ;  may  not  traffic, 
98-9  ;  law  of  food,  clothing,  &c., 
136  ;  of  killing  slaves,  180,  230-1; 
outlawry  of,  180  ;  damages  to  slave 
property,  203  ;  slaves  without  pass, 
229  ;  enslaving  free  colored  persons, 
276  ;  no  freedom  of  speech  or  of  the 
press,  385 ;  freedom  quarantined, 
363  ;  penal  laws  slaves,  312-13-14; 
education  prohibited,  321  ;  Bibles  for- 
bidden, 324  ;  laws  vs.  emancipation, 
341  ;  preaching  forbidden,  358  ;  free 
colored   people   legally  plundered, 


INDEX. 


429 


359  expatriation  or  reei.slavement, 
361 

Obsolete,  slave  laws  not,  20 
Obstructions   to  emancipation,  275, 

338,  &c. 
Ohio,  black  law,  359 
O'Niell,  Judge,  168 
"  Oral  instruction,"  324-5,  336 
Origin  of  the  "  legal  relation,"  258 
Ottley,  Chief  Justice,  302 
Ouachita  (La.)  Register,  (Testimony,) 

237 

Outlawry  of  slaves,  180 
Overseers  :   their  pow^er,  197  ;  their 
character,  200 

Parrish,  John,  (Testimony,)  145 

Patrols,  regulation  of,  329 

Paxton,  Mr.,  (Testimony,)  285 

Peculium  of  slaves,  26,  90 

Peg,  slave,  damaged,  52 

Penal  laws  vs.  slaves,  309,  &c. 

Persecution  for  religion,  250,  282 

Pickens,  Mr.,  (M.  C.  37 

Piety  of  slaves  advertised  for  sale,  42 

Pinckney,  Hon.  H.  L.,  sale  of  a  man's 

wife  and  children,  1 19 
Pinckney  and  Ford,  (Testimony,)  211 
Pinckney,  William,  (Testimony,)  221 
Pitt,  William,  259 

Portuguese  slavery,  milder  type  of,  45 
Powell,  Eleazer,  (Testimony.)  143 
Presby.  Church,  Gen.  Assembly,  funds 
loaned  and  used  in  slave-trade,  62  ; 
definition  of  man-stealing.  27 «  ;  Syn- 
od of  Ky.  (Testimony,)  53,  55,  110, 
222,  333  ;  Synod  of  S.  C.  and  Geo., 
(Testimony,)  111,  334 
"  Prescription"   no  valid  foundation 

for  slaveholding,  266-7 
Priestley,  Dr.,  maxim  of,  17 
Protection  of  slaves  in  fact,  209,  &c. 
Property  in  a  slave  adjudged  para- 
mount to  the  slave's  right  to  life, 
317-18 

Punishment  of  slaves  by  masters, 
155,  &c. 

Quakers  of  N.  Carolina,  emancipation 
by,  352 

Quarantine  of  freedom,  363 

Randolph,  Thos.  J.,  (Testimony,)  56 
Randolph,  John,  (Testimony,)  217 

"  "    will  of,  146 

Rankin,  Rev.  John,  (Testimony,)  141, 
145 

Rape  of  female  slave,  no  protection 

ugainst,  86 
Reed,  Rev.  Dr.,  (Testimony,)  80 
Relation  of  slave  to  Society,  287 
Religious  liberty  of  slaves,  251,  &c., 

326,  <&c 


Religious  Worship  prohibited,  326 
Renshaw,  Rev.  S.  C,  (Testimony,) 
143,  146 

Revolutionary  service  of  slave,  bounty 

belongs  to  his  masxer,  93-4 
Roane,  Judge,  296 
Robinson,  Judge,  (Ky.)  71  * 
Roman  Civil  Law,  25-6,  156,  264 
Ruffin,  Judge,  (of  N.  C.)  32,  79,  126, 
154,  i56,  165,  170,  317 

Sabbath-schools  for  slaves,  324 
Sale  of  slaves,  23,  25,  54,  66-7 
Safford,  Judge,  91 

Sapington,  L.,  (Testimony,)  118,  127 
Savery,  William,  (Testimony,)  145 
Savannah  River  Bap.  Asso.  vs.  mar- 
riage, 109,  127,  258 
Savannah  City  Ordinance  vs.  Schools, 
321 

Schools  broken  up,  320,  &c.,  366 
Self-defense  not  allowed,  306-7 
Separation  of  families,  53  ;  exceptions 

to  this,  73 
Severity  not  caused  by  abolitionists, 

20 

Sharp,  Granville,  259 
Sheriffs  obey  orders  of  slaveholders, 
167 

Seizure  of  slaves  for  debt,  63 
Slaves  :  not  considered  men,  35-7 ; 
no  right  of  petition,  37  ;  devisable, 
like  other  chattels,  72  ;  can  own 
nothing,  89,  &c.  ;  can  make  no  con- 
tract, 93  ;  can  be  agents  for  their 
masters,  94-5  ;  no  crime  to  gamble 
with  them,  95  ;  laws  forbidding  them 
to  hold  property,  96  ;  may  not  traf- 
fic, 95-7  ;  nor  hire  out,  98 ;  nor 
marry,  105  ;  nor  constitute  families, 
113;  nor  control  their  children, 
113-  7,  198;  nor  appeal  from  mas- 
ter, 126  ;  cost  of  their  support,  153  ; 
aged  sent  out  to  beg,  153-4  ;  punished 
at  will,  155  ;  cannot  testify,  159  ;  im- 
prisoned by  owners,  166-7  ;  battery 
of  them,  by  owners,  no  breach  of  the 
peace,  168;  not  even  by  shooting, 
170  ;  laws  concerning  murder  of, 
177  ;  outlawry,  of,  180  ;  controlled  by 
overseers  and  by  children,  198  ;  how 
protected,  as  property,  201-7  ;  brand- 
ed, cropped,  shot,  219-20, 231 ;  cannot 
sue  master,  239  ;  no  right  of  redemp- 
tion, 245  ;  nor  of  education,  251  ; 
nor  of  religion,  251  ;  whipped  to 
death  for  religion,  256  ;  follow  con- 
dition of  slave  mother,  273-4;  civil 
condition,  289;  no  access  to  judiciary, 
295  ;  whipped  by  law  for  failing  to 
sustain  suit  for  freedom,  297  ;  sub- 
jection to  all  w^hite  persons,  305  ; 
self-defense  not  allowed  to  colored 


430 


IXDEX. 


persons,  306-7;  penal  laws  vs.  slaves, 
309  ;  slave  tiunis,  231-4. 
SlaveLiolders  may  not  allow  slaves  to 
trarfic  or  hold  property,  97,  &c  ; 
authority  of,  162  ;  rights  not  to  be 
questioned  in  Courts,  173;  self-in- 
terest does  not  protect  the  slave,  195  ; 
not  bound  to  show  title  to  a  slave 
claiming  freedom,  241-2  ;  do  not  en- 
joy civil  and  religious  liberty,  372, 
&c. 

Smith,  Dr.  A.  G.,  (Testimony,)  143 
Sinythe,  Gen.  Alexander,  (Testimony,) 
132,  141 

Smylie,  Rev.  James,  (Testimony,)  50, 
58 

Somerset,  James,  (slave)  case,  259 

South  Carolina:  chattel  tenure,  23; 
warranty  of  slaves,  31-2;  slaves  can 
own  nothing,  91 ;  may  not  traffic,  97  ; 
law  of  labor,  128-9  ;  of  food  and 
clothing,  137  ;  laws  respecting  cru- 
elty, (59,  178,301  ;  damages  to  slave 
property,  202-3  ;  slaves  without  pass, 
228-9  ;  enticing  slaves,  232  ;  perpe- 
tuity of  slavery,  248  ;  imprisonment 
of  colored  seamen,  362  ;  laws  va*. 
emancipation,  341  ;  testing  claims  to 
freedom,  297  ;  owner  exculpated  by 
oath,  301  ;  death  for  striking  white 
person,  305-6  ;  penal  laws  vs.  slaves, 
312-15;  education  prohibited,  319, 
&c.,  329  ;  Methodist  Missions  sup- 
pressed, 338 

Spanish  slavery,  milder  type  of,  45, 
101,  131,  247,  292,  250,  344 

Spiritual  despotism,  124-5,  251,  &c. 

*'  Statu  liber,'"  no  relief  for  ill  treat- 
ment of,  125 

Stewart,  Mr.,  (111.)  Testimony,  58 

Stone,  A.  A.,  (Testimony,)  133, 141 

Siory's  '-Conflict  of  Laws,"  262 

Subjects  of  slavery,  251,  &c. 

Sugar  plantations  "  use  up"  slaves,  80 

Summers,  Mr.  (Va.)  35 

Swain,  Wm.  and  Moses,  (Testimony,) 
141 

Taylor,  Judge,  192 

Tennessee:  slaves  may  not  traffic, 
98;  ill  clothed,  145;  law  on  killing 
slaves,  182,  and  see  N.  Carolina, 
180  ;  slaves  without  pass,  229  ;  penal 
l:iws  vs.  slaves,  312-15  ;  laws  vs. 
emancipation,  342  3  ;  expatriation 
laws,  356 

Testimony  excluded,  159,  300,  <fcc. 

Thome,  Rev.  James  A.,  (Testimony,) 
223 

Torrey,  Dr.,  (Testimony,)  285 
Traffic;  in  slaves,  44,  &c. 
Treatment  of  sick,  infirm,  and  aged, 
147-9 


Tucker,  Judge,  (Testimony,)  237-8 
Turner,  L  ,  (  Testimony,)  38,  2  3 
Turpin,  Mr.,  (Missionary,;  336,  383 

Unlimited  power,  27,  122 

"  Unlawful  assemblies,"  204-5 

"  Unusual  punishments"  prohibited, 

161,  &c.  ;  detined,  162,  &c. 
"  Used  up"  in  five  to  eight  years,  133-4 
Uses  of  slave  property,  77,  &c. 

Vanderpool,  Hon.  Mr.,  36 
"  Verbal  instruction"  for  slaves,  324, 
336 

Violence  to  female  chastity,  220 
Virginia  :  slaves  chattels,  24  ;  may  not 
traffic,  98;  sold  for  tradmg,  101; 
clothing  of  slaves,  ;  145-6 ;  dam- 
ages to  slave  property,  203-4  ; 
weapons  forbidden,  229  ;  killing  law- 
fully, 231  ;  "  literary  fund,"  from  sale 
of  emancipated  negroes,  275-6  ;  test- 
ing claims  to  freedom,  298  ;  attorneys 
fined  for  pleading,  if  suit  fails,  298  ; 
free  colored  persons  striking  white 
persons,  306  ;  penal  laws  vs.  slaves, 
313-15;  education  prohibited,  320; 
religious  worship  forbidden,  330-1  ; 
emancipation  laws,  341-3;  no  free- 
dom of  speech  or  of  the  press,  385 

Wages,  slaves  receive  none,  150 
Wall,  Col.,  (Ky.)  Senator  and  slave 

dealer,  59,  60 
Warranty  of  slaves  sold,  31-2 
Washmgton  City  Corporation,  227 
Waugh,  Bishop,  369 
Weld,  Angelina  Grimke,  (Testimony,) 

93,  116,  127,  '44 
Western  Medical  Reformer,  (Testl 

mony,)  143 
Western  Luminary,  (Testimony,)  335 
Westgate,  G.  W.,  (Testimony,)  146 
West  Indies,  (Brit  )  slavery  was  illegal, 
270 ;  free  colored  people  less  op- 
pressed, 372 
Wesley,  John,  on  "  men-stealers,"  271 
Wheeler's  criticism  on  Siroud  exam- 
ined, 184-5 
White  men  on  plantations  required, 
302 

White  persons  enslaved,  282 
White  women  marrying  slaves,  273 
While  poor  supported  by  colored  poor 
99 

Whitefield,  Rev.  George,  ^Testimony,) 

131,141,221 
Wife  no  right  to  mannmit,  346 
Wills,  of  personal  estates,  embrace 
slaves,  70 ;  may  bequeath  unborn 
slaves,  and  sep irate  the  future  "in- 
crease" from  the  mother,  70 ;  for 
emancipation,  set  aside,  344-5,  &c. 


INDEX. 


431 


Wi- 1,  Wm.,  Attomey-Gen.,  his  opinion  i  Wives  of  slaves  appropriated  by  their 
of  certain  laws,  352  ;  his  description  |     owners,  118 

of  overseers,  200  i  Woman,  with  infant,  at  work  on  planta- 

Wilmington,  (N.  C.)  100,  226  tiou,  118 

Wise,  Hon.  Mr.,  36,  106  i  Woolman,    John,  (Testimony.)  114, 

j     132,  142,  145,  222,  323 


JUST  PUBLISHED, 


SLAYERY  AND  ANTI-SL AYERY: 

A 

History  of  the  Great  Struggle  in  both  Hemispheres ; 

WITH  A  VIEW  OF  THE  SLAVERY  QUESTION  IN  THE  UNITED 
STATES. 

BY  WILLIAM  GOODELL: 

Adthob  of   "Thb  Dsmocract   of  Christianity." 


This  work  is  designed  to  embody  a  great  amount  of  historical  information  In 
a  single  volume,  conveniently  arranged  for  reference.  It  contains  fifty  chapters 
on  as  many  distinct  topics,  embracing  the  most  important  facts  in  the  political 
and  ecclesiastical  history  of  the  contest,  together  with  an  account  of  the  Anti- 
slavery  agitjition  in  England  and  the  United  States,  up  to  the  present  time;  the 
divisions  among  American  Abolitionists,  and  the  various  measures  advocated 
among  them  ;  and  closing  with  a  brief  discussion  of  the  question,  '  What 
ought  to  be  done  The  book  is  an  abstract  of  several  volumes,  besides  the 
Anti-slavery  history  of  the  last  twenty  years,  a  great  part  of  which  has  never 
before  been  collected  into  any  volume,  but  lies  scattered  in  the  newspapers  of 
that  period.  The  Table  of  Contents  and  a  copious  Alphabetical  Index  will 
facilitate  a  reference  to  particular  facts,  and  to  dates  when  desirable. 

It  is  a  large  royal  12mo  volume,  of  about  six  hundred  pages,  well  printed,  on 
handsome  paper,  neatly  bound  in  cloth,  and  lettered.  Price  One  Dollar  per  copy, 
at  retail  ;  $9  per  dozen,  or  $65  per  hundred,  to  booksellers  and  book  pedlars  for 
cash. 

The  postage  on  a  single  copy  will  be  30  cents  to  any  part  of  the  United  States, 
and  must  be  pre  paid. 

For  sale  at  the  Office  of  the  American  and  Foreign  Anti-slavery  Society,  48 
Beekrnan  street.  New- York. 

The  work  has  been  favorably  noticed  in  the  New-York  Independent,  New 
York  Evangelist,  New- York  Advocate  and  Guardian,  Cleveland  True  Demo 
crat,  Frederick  Douglass's  Paper,  and  other  periodicals. 


THE  DEMOCRACY  OF  CHMSTIAnn, 

OR, 

An  Analysis  of  the  Bible  and  its  Doctrines,  in  their  Relation  to  the 
Principle  of  Democracy. 

BY  WILLIAM  GOODELL. 

In  2  vols.  12mo.  New-York,  Cady  &  Burgess.  Sold  at  the  Office  of  the 
A.merican  and  Foreign  Anti-slavery  Society,  48  Beekrnan  street,  New-York 
Price  $1.50  at  retail,  $12  per  dozen,  and  $90  per  hundred,  for  cash. 

Recommended  by  the  New-York  Tribune,  American  Statesman,  Democratit, 
Review,  Obtrlin  Evangelist,  Ohio  Star,  Boston  Chronoti/pe,  and  other  periodicals. 
Also  by  Rev.  Dr  Avdelott,  Cincinnati  ;  Hon.  Amasa  Walker,  of  Massachusetts ; 
Professor  T.  B.  Hudson,  of  Oberlin  ;  Gerrit  Smith,  of  Peterboro',  New- York,  «fec. 


